MAHABHARATA 


{Omnibus} 








Table of Contents 


The Complete Mahabharata Volume 1 
The Complete Mahabharata Volume 2 
The Complete Mahabharata Volume 3 
The Complete Mahabharata Volume 4 
The Complete Mahabharata Volume 5 
The Complete Mahabharata Volume 6 
The Complete Mahabharata Volume 7 
The Complete Mahabharata Volume 8 
The Complete Mahabharata Volume 9 
The Complete Mahabharata Volume 10 
The Complete Mahabharata Volume 11 
The Complete Mahabharata Volume 12 





The Mahabharata of Veda Vyasa is the 
longest recorded epic of the world. With 
almost 100,000 verses, it is many times as 
long as the Iliad and the Odyssey combined 
and has deeply influenced every aspect of 
the Indian ethos for some 4,000 years. 


The main theme is the Great War on 
Kurukshetra, but the epic teems with 
smaller stories, and other stories within 
these, all woven together with a genius that 
confounds comparison. As its heart, it 
contains Krishna’s immortal Bhagavad- 


Gita, the Song of God. 


The Mahabharata embodies the ancient and 
sacred Indian tradition, in all its earthy and 
spiritual immensity. Famously, “What is 
found here may be found elsewhere. What 
is not found here will not be found 
elsewhere.” 


Many believe this most magnificent epic to 
be the greatest story ever told. Yet, the only 
full Indian translation of the Mahabharata 
into English is the 19° century one by 
Kisari Mohan Ganguli. More than a 
hundred years have passed since Ganguli 
accomplished his task, and the language he 
used is now sadly archaic. 


This new 12 volume series retells the great 
epic, line by line, in fresh, easily readable 
English prose. With it, we hope to bring 
the Mahabharata alive again, for che 
contemporary and future reader. 





The Complete Mahabharata 
Adi Parva 


The Complete Mahabharata 
Adi Parva 


RAMESH MENON 





RUPA 


First published in 2009 by 
Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd. 
7/16, Ansari Road, Daryaganj 
New Delhi 110002 


Sales centres: 
Allahabad Bengaluru Chennai 
Hyderabad Jaipur Kathmandu 

Kolkata Mumbai 


Copyright © Ramesh Menon 2009 
Cover design: Moonis [jlal 
This digital edition published in 2012 
e-ISBN: 978-8 1-291-2173-8 


Ramesh Menon asserts the moral right to be identified as the author of this 
work. 


All rights reserved. 
This e-book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade 
or otherwise, be lent, resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated, without the 
publisher’s prior consent, in any form or cover other than that in which it is 
published. No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, or 
stored in a retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether 
electronic, mechanical, print reproduction, recording or otherwise, without 
the prior permission of the publisher. Any unauthorized distribution of this 
e-book may be considered a direct infringement of copyright and those 
responsible may be liable in law accordingly. 


For Sri RK Mehra, 
valued friend, great Publisher 


CONTENTS 


A Brief Introduction 
Acknowledgements 


Canto 1: 
Canto 2: 
Canto 3: 
Canto 4: 
Canto 5: 
Canto 6: 
Canto 7: 
Canto 8: 
Canto 9: 


Canto 10: 
Canto 11: 
Canto 12: 
Canto 13: 
Canto 14: 
Canto 15: 
Canto 16: 
Canto 17: 
Canto 18: 
Canto 19: 
Canto 20: 
Canto 21: 
Canto 22: 
Canto 23: 
Canto 24: 
Canto 25: 
Canto 26: 
Canto 27: 
Canto 28: 
Canto 29: 
Canto 30: 
Canto 31: 


Parva Samgraha 

Parva Samgraha Continued 
Paushya Parva 

Pauloma Parva 

Pauloma Parva Continued 
Pauloma Parva Continued 
Pauloma Parva Continued 
Pauloma Parva Continued 
Pauloma Parva Continued 
Pauloma Parva Continued 
Pauloma Parva Continued 
Pauloma Parva Continued 
Astika Parva 

Astik’ a Parva Continued 
Astika Parva Continued 
Astika Parva Continued 
Astika Parva Continued 
Astika Parva Continued 

S tika Parva Continued 

S tika Parva Continued 
Astika Parva Continued 
Astiki Parva Continued 
Astika Parva Continued 
Astika Parva Continued 
Astika Parva Continued 
Astika Parva Continued 
Astika Parva Continued 
Astika Parva Continued 
Astika Parva Continued 
Astika Parva Continued 
Astika Parva Continued 


Canto 32: 
Canto 33: 
Canto 34: 
Canto 35: 
Canto 36: 
Canto 37: 
Canto 38: 
Canto 39: 
Canto 40: 
Canto 41: 


Canto 42 


Canto 43: 
Canto 44: 
Canto 45: 
Canto 46: 
Canto 47: 
Canto 48: 
Canto 49: 
Canto 50: 
Canto 51: 
Canto 52: 
Canto 53: 
Canto 54: 
Canto 55: / 
Canto 56: 
Canto 57: 
Canto 58: 
Canto 59: 
Canto 60: 
Canto 61: 
Canto 62: 
Canto 63: 
Canto 64: 


Canto 65 
Canto 66 
Canto 67 
Canto 68 


Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Para Continued 

: Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parua continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

ka Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva Continued 

Astika Parva continued 
Adivamsavatarana Parva 
Adivamsavatarana Parva Continued 
Adivamsavatarana Parva continued 
Adivamsavatarana Parva Continued 
Adivamsavatarana Parva Continued 
Adivamsavatarana Parva Continued 
: S ambhava Parva 

S ambhava Parva Continued 

: S ambhava Parva Continued 

: S ambhava Parva Continued 











Canto 69: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 70: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 71: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 72: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 73: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 74: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 75: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 76: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 77: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 78: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 79: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 80: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 81: S ambhava Parva continued 
Canto 82: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 83: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 84: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 85: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 86: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 87: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 88: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 89: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 90: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 91: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 92: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 93: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 94: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 95: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 96: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 97: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 98: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 99: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 100: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 101: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 102: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 103: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 104: S ambhava Parva Continued 
Canto 105: S ambhava Parva Continued 


Canto 106: 
Canto 107: 
Canto 108: 
Canto 109: 
Canto 110: 
Canto 111: 
Canto 112: 
Canto 113: 
Canto 114: 
Canto 115: 
Canto 116: 
Canto 117: 
Canto 118: 
Canto 119: 
Canto 120: 
Canto 121: 
Canto 122: 
Canto 123: 
Canto 124: 
Canto 125: 
Canto 126: 
Canto 127: 
Canto 128: 
Canto 129: 
Canto 130: 
Canto 131: 
Canto 132: 
Canto 133: 
Canto 134: 
Canto 135: 
Canto 136: 
Canto 137: 
Canto 138: 
Canto 139: 
Canto 140: 
Canto 141: 
Canto 142: 


S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 


S ambhava Parva Continued 


S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 
S ambhava Parva Continued 


Canto 143: 
Canto 144: 
Canto 145: 
Canto 146: 
Canto 147: 
Canto 148: 
Canto 149: 


Canto 150: 
Canto 151: 
Canto 152: 


Canto 153: 
Canto 154: 
Canto 155: 
Canto 156: 
Canto 157: 
Canto 158: 
Canto 159: 
Canto 160: 


Canto 161: 
Canto 162: 
Canto 163: 
Canto 164: 


Canto 165: 
Canto 166: 


Canto 167: 


Canto 168: 
Canto 169: 
Canto 170: 
Canto 171: 
Canto 172: 
Canto 173: 
Canto 174: 
Canto 175: 
Canto 177: 
Canto 178: 


Canto 179: 
Canto 180: 


Jatugriha Parva 

Jatugriha Parva Continued 
Jatugriha Parva Continued 
Jatugriha Parva Continued 
Jatugriha Parva Continued 
Jatugriha Parva Continued 
Jatugriha Parva Continued 
Jatugriha Parva Continued 
Jatugriha Parva Continued 
Jatugriha Parva Continued 
Jatugriha Parva Continued 

H idimbavadha Parva 

H idimbavadha Parva Continued 
H idimbavadha Parva Continued 
H idimbavadha Parva Continued 
H idimbavadha Parva Continued 
Bakavadha Parva 

Bakavadha Parva Continued 
Bakavadha Parva continued 
Bakavadha Parva Continued 
Bakavadha Parva Continued 
Bakavadha Parva Continued 
Bakavadha Parva Continued 
Bakavadha Parva Continued 
Chaitraratha Parva 

Chaitraratha Parva Continued 
Chaitraratha Parva Continued 
Chaitraratha Parva Continued 
Chaitraratha Parva Continued 
Chaitraratha Parva Continued 
Chaitraratha Parva Continued 
Chaitraratha Parva Continued 
Chaitraratha Parva Continued 
Chaitraratha Parva Continued 
Chaitraratha Parva Continued 
Chaitraratha Parva Continued 
Chaitraratha Parva Continued 





Canto 181: 
Canto 182: 
Canto 183: 
Canto 184: 
Canto 185: 
Canto 186: 
Canto 187: 
Canto 188: 
Canto 189: 
Canto 190: 
Canto 191: 
Canto 192: 
Canto 193: 
Canto 194: 
Canto 195: 
Canto 196: 
Canto 197: 
Canto 198: 
Canto 199: 
Canto 200: 
Canto 201: 
Canto 202: 
Canto 203: 
Canto 204: 
Canto 205: 
Canto 206: 
Canto 207: 
Canto 208: 
Canto 209: 
Canto 210: 
Canto 211: 
Canto 212: 
Canto 213: 
Canto 214: 
Canto 215: 
Canto 216: 
Canto 217: 


Chaitraratha Parva continued 
Chaitraratha Parva Continued 
Chaitraratha Parva Continued 
Chaitraratha Parva Continued 
Chaitraratha Parva Continued 

S wayamvara Parva 

S wayamvara Parva Continued 
S wayamvara Parva Continued 
S wayamvara Parva Continued 
S wayamvara Parva Continued 
S wayamvara Parva Continued 
S wayamvara Parva Continued 
S wayamvara Parva Continued 
S wayamvara Parva Continued 
Vaivahika Parva 

Vaivahika Parva Continued 
Vaivahika Parva Continued 
Vaivahika Parva Continued 
Vaivahika Parva Continued 
Vaivahika Parva Continued 
Vaivahika Parva Continued 
Viduragamana Parva 
Viduragamana Parva Continued 
Viduragamana Parva Continued 
Viduragamana Parva Continued 
Viduragamana Parva Continued 
Viduragamana Parva Continued 
Viduragamana Parva Continued 
Viduragamana Parva continued 
Rajya-labha Parva 

Rajya-labha Parva Continued 
Rajya-lahba Parva Continued 
Rajya-labha Parva Continued 
Rajya-labha Parva Continued 
Arjuna-vanavasa Parva 


Arjuna-vanavasa Parva Continued 


Arjuna-vanavasa Parva Continued 


Canto 218: 
Canto 219: 
Canto 220: 
Canto 221: 
Canto 222: 
Canto 223: 
Canto 224: 
Canto 225: 
Canto 226: 
Canto 227: 
Canto 228: 
Canto 229: 
Canto 230: 
Canto 231: KI 
Canto 232: 
Canto 233: 
Canto 234: KI 
Canto 235: 
Canto 236: 


Arjuna-vanavasa Parva Continued 
Arjuna-vanavasa Parva Continued 
Arjuna-vanavasa Parva Continued 
S ubhadra-harana Parva 

S ubhadra-harana Parva Continued 
H aranaharana Parva 
Khandava-daha Parva 
Khandava-daha Parva Continued 
Khandava-daha Parva Continued 
Khandava-daha Parva Continued 
Khandava-daha Parva Continued 
Khandava-daha Parva Continued 
Khandava-daha Parva Continued 
handava-daha Parva Continued 
Khandava-daha Parva Continued 
Khandava-daha Parva Continued 





handava-daha Parva Continued 
Khandava-daha Parva Continued 
Khandava-daha Parva Continued 





A BRIEF INTRODUCTION 


The last complete version of the Mahabharata to be written in India in 
English prose was the translation by Kisar1 Mohan Ganguli in the late 19th 
century. He wrote it between 1883 and 1896. To the best of my knowledge, 
it still remains the only full English prose rendering of the Epic by any 
Indian. 

More than a hundred years have passed since Ganguli achieved his 
monumental task. Despite its closeness to the original Sanskrit and its 
undeniable power, in more than a hundred years the language and style of 
the Ganguli translation have inevitably become archaic. 

It seemed a shame that this most magnificent of epics, a national 
treasure, an indisputable classic of world literature, believed by many to be 
the greatest of all books ever written, is not available in complete form to 
the Indian (or any) reader in modern, literary and easily accessible English: 
as retold by Indian writers. 

So we, a group of Indian writers and editors, warmly and patiently 
supported by our publisher Rupa & Co, undertook a line-by-line retelling of 
the complete Mahabharata, for the contemporary and future reader. Our aim 
has not been to write a scholarly translation of the Great Epic, but an 
eminently readable one, without vitiating either the spirit or the poetry of 
the original, and without reducing its length. 

This is not a translation from the Sanskrit but based almost entirely on 
the Ganguli text, and he himself did use more than one Sanskrit version for 
his work. However, as will be obvious, the style of this new rendering is 
very much our own, and our hope is to bring as much of the majesty and 
enchantment of this awesome epic to you as is possible in English. 


Ramesh Menon 
Series Editor 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


Sanjana Roy Choudhury, Kadambari Mishra, Deepthi Talwar and Jayashree 
Kumar edited and proofread this first volume of the Mahabharata. I am 
most grateful to them for their fine, painstaking work. 


CANTO 1 
PARVA SAMGRAHA 


UM! I bow down to Narayana and Nara, the most exalted Purusha, 
Aw to the Devi Saraswati, and utter the word Jaya. Ugrasrava is the 

son of Romaharshana; he is a Suta and a master of the Puranas. One 
day, bowing reverently, he came to the great Rishis of flinchless austerity 
who sat at their ease after attending the twelve years’ yagna of Saunaka 
Kulapati, in the Naimisha vana. The Munis were eager to listen to the 
marvellous legends of Ugrasrava, who had come to their asrama in the 
forest. The holy ones welcomed him with respect. He greeted those Sages 
with folded hands and inquired after the evolution of their tapasya. 

When the Rishis all sat again, Romaharshana’s son also humbly sat upon 
the seat they offered him. Seeing that he was comfortable, and refreshed, 
one of the Rishis said, ‘From where are you coming, lotus-eyed Sauti, and 
where have you been spending your time? Tell me, who asks you this, in 
detail.’ 

The eloquent Sauti replied appositely and at length in that large conclave 
of illustrious tapasvins; the language he used was chaste and high, suited to 
their way of life. 

Sauti said, ‘I heard the diverse, sacred and marvellous tales, which 
Krishna Dwaipayana composed in his Mahabharata, and which 
Vaisampayana narrated at the sarpa yagna of the noble Rayjarishi 
Janamejaya, the son of Parikshit, foremost among Kshatriyas. 

Later, I ranged the Earth, visiting many tirthas and other shrines. I 
journeyed to Samantapanchaka, revered by the Dvijas, where the sons of 
Kuru and those of Pandu fought their Great War, with all the Kshatriyas of 
the land fighting for one side or the other. 

From there, being eager to meet you, I have come into your presence. 
Worshipful Sages, you are all like Brahman to me. Most blessed ones, you 
shine in this yagnashala with the splendour of the Sun. You have finished 


your dhyana and have fed the holy fire. Now you sit here, at your ease, with 
no cares. 

Tell me, greatest of Dvijas, what would you hear from me? Shall I 
recount the sacred tales of the Puranas, which tell of dharma and artha, or 
shall I tell you about the deeds of enlightened Rishis and of the kings of 
men?’ 

The Rishis replied, ‘The Purana that was first propounded by the great 
Dwaipayana. When both the Devas and the Brahmarishis had heard it, they 
said it was the foremost of all Itihasas, histories. It varies in both diction 
and divisions, has intricate and subtle meanings, logically combined and 
gleaned from the Vedas, and it is a most holy work. It is composed in 
elegant language and includes the subjects of every other book. Other 
Shastras elucidate this Purana, and it reflects the inmost meaning of the four 
Vedas. We want to listen to that Itihasa, which is also called the Bharata, the 
magnificent Vyasa’s holy masterwork, which dispels the fear of evil. We 
would hear it exactly as the Rishi Vaisampayana told it, joyously, under the 
direction of Dwaipayana himself, at the sarpa yagna, the snake-sacrifice of 
Raja Janamejaya.’ 

Sauti then said, ‘I bow to the Primordial Being, Isana, to whom the 
people all make offerings, whom the multitude adores. He is the true and 
immortal One — Brahman, manifest, unmanifest and eternal. He both exists 
and appears not to. He is the Universe and also distinct from the Universe, 
the creator of all things, high and low, the ancient, exalted, inexhaustible 
One. He is Vishnu, benign and benignity personified, worthy of all worship, 
pure, perfect. He is Hari, sovereign of the faculties, the mover of all things, 
mobile and motionless. 

I will now narrate the sacred thoughts of the illumined Muni Vyasa, of 
marvellous accomplishments, whom all here revere. Some pauranikas have 
already taught this Itihasa, some now teach it, and others will hereafter 
disseminate it across the Earth. It is a vast treasure of knowledge, and its 
fame is established through the three Lokas. The Dvijas, the twice-born, 
possess it both in detail and in full. The erudite delight in it for being 
adorned with elegance, with conversations human and divine and with 
myriad poetic metres. 

When this world was without light, plunged in absolute darkness, a 
Mighty Egg appeared, the First Cause of creation, the single, infinite, 
inexhaustible seed of all created beings. This is the Mahavidya, formed at 


the beginning of the Yuga, when, we hear, Brahman the true light, the 
eternal, inconceivable Being, was present equally everywhere, the unseen 
and subtle Cause, whose nature is both of being and nothingness. 

From this Egg, Pitamaha Brahma emerged, the first Prajapati, along with 
Vishnu Suraguru and Siva Sthanu. Then the twenty-one Prajapatis appeared 
— Manu, Vasishta and Parameshthi, ten Prachetas, Daksha, and the seven 
sons of Daksha. 

Then appeared the incomprehensible Purusha, whom all the Rishis 
know, and also the Viswedevas, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Aswin twins, 
the Yakshas, the Sadhyas, the Pisachas, the Guhyakas, and the Pitrs. 

After these, the wise and most holy Brahmarishis were created, and the 
numerous Rajarishis distinguished by every noble quality. So too, the 
waters, the heavens, the earth, the air, the sky, the cardinal points of the 
heavens, the years, the seasons, the months, the fortnights—called pakshas 
—with day and night, in proper succession. Thus, all things that are known 
to man were made. 

And when the Yugas end, whatever is seen in the Universe, animate and 
inanimate, will again be dissolved. When the next Yugas begin, all things 
will be renewed and like the many fruits of the Earth, succeed one another 
in the order of their seasons. So the Wheel revolves ceaselessly in the 
world, without beginning and without end, destroying all things. 

The generation of Devas, in brief, was thirty-three thousand, thirty-three 
hundred and thirty-three. The sons of Div were Brihadbhanu, Chakshus, 
Atma, Vibhavasu, Savita, Richika, Arka, Bhanu, Asavaha and Ravi. Of 
these Vivaswans of old, Mahya was the youngest, whose son was 
Devavrata. Devavrata’s son Suvrata had three sons—Dasajyoti, Satajyoti 
and Sahasrajyoti; each of them sired numerous offspring. The illustrious 
Dasajyoti had ten thousand progeny, Satajyoti ten times that number, and 
Sahasrajyoti ten times as many as Satajyoti. 

From these descended the clans of the Kurus, the Yadus, and of Bharata; 
the lineage of Yayati and of Ikshvaku, and also all the Rayarishis. 
Numerous, too, were their generations, and abundant were the creatures and 
their places of abode. The triune mystery—the Vedas, Yoga and Vijnana 
Dharma, Artha and Kama; the many books upon the subject of Dharma, 
Artha and Kama; rules for the conduct of humankind; also, histories and 
discourses upon various Srutis all these the Rishi Vyasa saw. They are here 
in their proper order, and mentioned as examples of the Shastras. 


The Rishi Vyasa promulgated this vast treasure of knowledge in both a 
comprehensive and an abridged form. The learned of this world always 
want to know both versions. Some read the Bharata from the invocatory 
mantra; others begin with the story of Astika, others with Uparichara; while 
some Brahmanas study the entire epic. 

Men of learning exhibit their different knowledges of the text when they 
comment upon the composition. Some are skilful at expounding its 
meaning, while others remember its contents in complete detail. 

Having, with penance and meditation, tapasya and dhyana, analysed the 
eternal Veda, the son of Satyavati later composed this sacred history. When 
that knowing Brahmarishi, of fierce vows, the noble Vyasa, son of Parasara, 
finished this greatest of all epics, he considered how he could transmit it to 
his disciples and leave it behind for posterity. And Brahma, who owns the 
six attributes, who is the Guru of the world, knew the anxiety of the Rishi 
Dwaipayana. Brahma appeared in the place where Vyasa was: to grant the 
Sage what he desired and thus benefit the people of the Earth. 

Vyasa sat lost in thought, surrounded by all the tribes of Munis. Seeing 
Brahma, he rose in astonishment, and standing with joined palms, the Rishi 
bowed low and ordered a darbhasana fetched for the Pitamaha. Vyasa 
circumambulated in pradakshina Him who is called Hiranyagarbha, seated 
upon that especial and lofty grass throne, and came and stood near Him. 
Brahma Parameshthi commanded him to sit near the asana, and Vyasa did 
so, his heart full of love, and smiling in joy. 

The glorious Vyasa said to Brahma Parameshthi, “Divine Brahma, I have 
composed a kavya, a poem, which is highly regarded. In it, I have explained 
the mystery of the Veda and the other scriptures; the rituals of the 
Upanishads with their angas; the Puranas and Itihasas that I have compiled 
and named after the three divisions of time, the nature of ageing and decay, 
of fear, disease, being and non-being; a description of different varnas and 
the various stages of life: laws for the four varnas, the true import of the 
Puranas; an account of sannyasa and the duties of a brahmacharin; the 
dimensions of the Sun and Moon, the planets, galaxies, and stars, along 
with the duration of the four ages; the Rik, Sama and Yajur Vedas; also, the 
Adhyatma; the sciences of Nyaya, the diagnosis and the treatment of 
disease; charity and Pasupatadharma; births heavenly and human, for 
different ends; a description of the tirthas and other holy places, of rivers, 
mountains, forests, the ocean, of the unearthly cities and the Kalpas; the art 


of war; the different nations and languages, the nature and customs of the 
people; and the All-pervading Spirit — all these I have told of in my poem. 
But now I cannot find anyone to be my scribe for this work, not on this 
Earth.” 

Brahma said, “In this gathering of Munis renowned for their sanctity, I 
honour you for your deep knowledge of divine mysteries. I know you have 
revealed the Divine Word, from its first utterance, in the language of truth. 
You have called your present work a kavya, a poem, and so it shall be a 
poem. No other poet’s work shall ever equal this kavya of yours, even as 
the other three asramas of life are forever lesser than the grihastasrama. O 
Muni, let us consider Ganesha to become your amanuensis, to write this 
epic poem down.” 

Sauti said, ‘Having spoken thus to Vyasa, Brahma left for his own realm, 
Brahmaloka. Vyasa now thought prayerfully of Ganesha; and Ganesha, 
remover of obstacles, always ready to fulfil the desires of his devotees, 
came immediately to the place where Vyasa sat. 

When he had been worshipped, welcomed and was seated, Vyasa said to 
him, “O Guru of the Ganas! I beg you, be the scribe for the Bharata, which I 
have conceived in my imagination, and which I shall narrate to you.” 

Ganesha answered, “I will be your scribe if my nib does not stop writing 
for even a moment.” 

Vyasa said to that Deity, “Wherever there is anything that you do not 
properly understand, you must stop writing.” 

Ganesha signified his assent by saying AUM! and was ready to begin. 
Vyasa began his narration; and to divert Ganesha, and to gain time, he wove 
the warp and weft of his legend exceedingly close, with many a diversion. 

By this ruse, he dictated his work and never allowed Ganesha’s nib, 
which was a tusk he took from his own face, to be still for a moment, for he 
was always ahead of his scribe.’ 

‘I am,’ continued Sauti, ‘acquainted with eight thousand and eight 
hundred verses, and so is Suka, and perhaps Sanjaya. From the 
mysteriousness of their meaning, O Munis, no one is able, to this day, to 
penetrate those close-knit and difficult slokas. Even the omniscient Ganesha 
took a moment to consider; Vyasa, however, continued to compose more 
verses, abundantly. 

As an instrument for applying kohl does, this awesome work has opened 
the eyes of the inquisitive world, blinded by the darkness of ignorance. As 


the Sun dispels the darkness, so does the Bharata by its treatises on dharma, 
artha, kama, and final moksha dispel the ignorance of men. As the full 
Moon unfurls the buds of the water lily with his soft light, so this Purana 
reveals the light of the Sruti, and makes the human intellect bloom. The 
torch of this Itihasa destroys the darkness of ignorance, and then the entire 
mansion of Prakriti becomes illumined. 

This work is a tree. The chapter of contents is its seed; the divisions 
called Pauloma and Astika are its root; the portion called Sambhava is its 
trunk; the books called Sabha and Aranya are roosting perches; the Parva 
called Arani, the knots on the bole; the Virata and Udyoga Parvas, the pith; 
the book named Bhishma, the main branch; the book called Drona, the 
leaves; the Karna Parva, the fair flowers; the book named Saya, their sweet 
fragrance; the books entitled Stri and Asthika, the refreshing shade; the 
book called Shanti, the mighty fruit; the book called Aswamedha, the 
immortal sap; the Asramavasika, the place where the tree grows; and the 
book called Mausala is an epitome of the Vedas and held in great reverence 
by virtuous Brahmanas. The tree of the Bharata, as inexhaustible to 
mankind as the clouds, shall be a source of livelihood to all poets of 
distinction.’ 

Sauti continued, ‘I will now tell you of the immortal flower and fruit of 
this tree, whose scent is pure and flavour delicious, and which not the Devas 
can destroy. 

Once, when implored by Bhishma, the wise son of Ganga, and by his 
own mother Satyavati, the spiritual and virtuous Krishna Dwaipayana 
fathered three sons, who were like three fires, upon the two wives of 
Vichitravirya; and having sired Dhritarashtra, Pandu and Vidura, he 
returned to his asrama to continue his tapasya. 

Not until after these three were born, grown and, even, departed on their 
final journey, did the great Vyasa make the Bharata known in this world of 
men. When Janamejaya and thousands of Brahmanas begged him, he 
commanded his disciple Vaisampayana, who sat next to him; and 
Vaisampayana, sitting with the sadasyas, the guests, recited the Bharata, 
during the intervals in the rituals of the snake sacrifice, for the others 
repeatedly urged him to do so. 

Vyasa has described exhaustively the greatness of the house of Kuru, the 
virtuousness of Gandhari, the wisdom of Vidura, and the constancy of 
Kunti. The noble Rishi has dwelt upon the divinity of Krishna, the dharma 


of the sons of Pandu, and the evil ways of the sons and confederates of 
Dhritarashtra. 

Originally, Vyasa composed the Bharata in twenty-four thousand verses, 
without the digressions and upakathas; the learned recognise only these as 
the Bharata. Later, he composed an outline in one hundred and fifty verses, 
comprising the introduction and the chapter of contents. This he first taught 
to his son Suka; and after, he gave it to some of his other sishyas, who 
possessed the same gifts as his son. 

After this, he composed another six hundred thousand verses. Of these, 
thirty lakhs are known in the world of the Devas; fifteen hundred thousand 
in the world of the Pitrs; fourteen lakhs among the Gandharvas, and one 
hundred thousand in the world of men. Narada recited these to the Devas; 
Devala to the Pitrs; and Suka to the Gandharvas, Yakshas and Rakshasas. In 
this world, they were recited by Vaisampayana, one of Vyasa’s disciples, a 
man of dharma and foremost among the knowers of the Veda. 

Know that I, Sauti Ugrasrava, have also repeated one hundred thousand 
verses. 

Yudhishtira is a vast tree, formed of adhyatma and dharma; Arjuna is its 
trunk; Bhimasena, its branches; the two sons of Madri are its fruit and 
flowers; and its roots are Krishna, Brahma, and the Brahmanas. 

After he had subdued many kingdoms by his wisdom and prowess, 
Pandu went to stay with some Munis in a forest. He came to hunt, but 
brought misfortune upon himself when he killed a stag in the act of mating 
with its hind. This became a warning that guided the conduct of the princes 
of his house, his sons, throughout their lives. 

To fulfil the laws of grihasta, Kunti and Madri invoked the Devas — 
Dharma, Vayu, Indra; and the divinities the twin Aswins, and these gods 
sired sons upon them. Their sons grew up in the care of their two mothers, 
in the society of hermits, in the midst of tapovanas and holy asramas of 
Rishis. Then the Rishis brought the sons of Pandu to Hastinapura, into the 
presence of Dhritarashtra and his sons; they came wearing the habits of 
brahmacharis, following their masters as students, with their hair tied in 
topknots on their heads. 

“These sishyas of ours,” said the Rishis, “are as your sons, your brothers, 
and your friends; they are Pandavas.” Saying this, the Munis vanished. 

When the Kauravas heard they were the sons of Pandu, the noble ones 
among them shouted for great joy. Others, however, said they were not the 


sons of Pandu; others said they were; while a few asked how they could be 
his sons, when he had been dead for so long. 

Yet voices on all sides cried, “They are welcome! Through divine 
Providence we see the family of Pandu again! Let their welcome be 
proclaimed!” 

When the people fell silent, a great applause of invisible spirits rang 
everywhere, so every direction of the sky echoed. Showers of divinely 
fragrant flowers fell upon the Earth, and the deep sound of conches and 
batteries of kettledrums was heard when the young princes arrived. The joy 
of all the citizens reverberated from Bhumi, the Earth, and reached back up 
into Swarga, the Heavens. 

The Pandavas had already imbibed the Vedas and the other Shastras, and 
they began living in Hastinapura, respected by all and fearing none. 

Men of influence in the city were pleased by the purity of Yudhishtira, 
the strength of Bhima, the valour of Arjuna, the submissiveness of Kunti to 
her elders, and the humility of the twins, Nakula and Sahadeva; and the 
people rejoiced in their noble traits. 

Later, Arjuna won the virgin Krishnaa ! at her swayamvara, in a great 
gathering of kings, by performing an incredibly difficult feat of archery. 

Then on, he was revered in this world as the greatest bowman; and upon 
fields of battle, too, like the Sun, his enemies could hardly face him: so 
brilliant was he, so superior. And having vanquished all the neighbouring 
Kshatriyas and every considerable tribe, he enabled the Raja Yudhishtira, 
his eldest brother, to perform the greatest martial sacrifice, the Rajasuya 
yagna. 

With the knowing and shrewd counsel of Krishna and by the valour of 
Bhimasena and Arjuna, Yudhishtira slew Jarasandha, the hitherto invincible 
king of Magadha, and the proud Chaidya Sishupala. Then, he had indeed 
gained the right to perform the grand and superabundant Rajasuya yagna, 
which bestows transcendent punya, spiritual merit. 

Duryodhana came to this sacrifice. He saw the vast wealth of the 
Pandavas, in evidence everywhere, the bounty of the offerings, the precious 
stones, gold and ornaments. He saw their wealth in the form of cows, 
elephants and horses; the rare silks, brocades, garments and mantles; the 
precious shawls and furs and carpets, made of the skin of the Ranku deer. 
Envy and grief welled up inside him. 


And when he saw the great and exquisite sabha of Mayaa Danava, the 
Asura architect, as wonderful as any unearthly court, he burned with rage 
and jealousy. When he was deceived by some cunning architectural 
illusions that Mayaa had created in his sabha, Bhimasena mocked him 
heartily in the presence of Krishnaa Draupadi; he laughed at his cousin as 
he might at a servant. 

News came to Dhritarashtra, that, though his son Duryodhana was 
surrounded by every luxury and indulging in every pleasure, and lived 
amidst untold riches, he was pale and wasting away, as if from some secret 
sickness. In a while, out of his excessive fondness for his eldest son, 
Dhritarashtra gave his consent to their playing a game of dice against the 
sons of Pandu. 

When Vasudeva Krishna heard about this, he was furious. Yet, he did 
nothing to prevent the game of dice, and the terrible consequences that 
accrued from it for the Pandavas. Despite Vidura, Bhishma, Drona, and 
Kripa, the son of Saradwan, Krishna stoked the fire that caused the 
awesome war that ensued, and consumed the very race of Kshatriyas. 

When Dhritarashtra heard the dreadful news that the Pandavas had won 
the war, he remembered the resolves of Duryodhana, Karna and Shakuni. 
He pondered in silence for a while, then, spoke to Sanjaya, his sarathy and 
counsellor. 

“Listen carefully, Sanjaya, to everything I am about to say, and let it be 
beneath you to treat me contemptuously. You know the Shastras well; you 
are intelligent and wise. I was never in favour of fighting the war, and I took 
no delight in the destruction of my race. I made no distinction between my 
own children and the children of Pandu. My sons were wilful and despised 
me because of my age and infirmity. Being blind and powerless, and 
because I loved my sons as every father does, I suffered it all. 

I was foolish, and my thoughtless Duryodhana’s folly grew day by day. 
In Indraprastha, he saw the wealth and incomparable power of the mighty 
sons of Pandu. They mocked him for his clumsiness in the Mayaa sabha. He 
could not bear it, and yet neither could he face the Pandavas in battle. 
Though he was a Kshatriya, he dared not attempt to find fortune by fighting 
an honourable war. Instead, he sought the help of the king of Gandhara and 
contrived a game of dice. It was not a fair game, for the dice Shakuni used 
were loaded. 


Hear, Sanjaya, all that happened thereafter and came to my knowledge. 
And when you have heard what I say, remember everything as it transpired, 
and you will know that I had prophetic foresight of what would happen 
finally. 

When I heard that Arjuna bent the bow, pierced the difficult target, 
brought it down, and took the young woman Krishnaa triumphantly, under 
the eyes of the assembled Kshatriyas, already, O Sanjaya, I knew we could 
never hope to prevail. 

Then I heard Arjuna had married Subhadra of the race of Madhu, in 
gandharva vivaha, by the rite of abduction, in the city of Dwaraka. I heard 
that her brothers, Krishna and Balarama, the two heroes of the race of 
Vrishni, went to Indraprastha, without any resentment and as friends of the 
Pandavas, and then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope that we could prevail. 

I heard that Arjuna, with uncanny archery, held up the storm sent down 
by his father Indra, king of the Devas. I heard that Arjuna had pleased Agni 
by giving him the forest of Khandhava to consume, and then, O Sanjaya, I 
lost hope of success. 

When IJ heard that the five Pandavas with their mother Kunti had escaped 
from the house of lac, and that Vidura had helped them effect their escape, 
then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. 

When I heard that, after having pierced the mark in the arena, Arjuna 
had won Draupadi, and that the brave Panchalas had joined the Pandavas, 
then, O Sanjaya, I knew we would never have victory. 

When I heard that Jarasandha, crown jewel of the royal line of Magadha, 
and sunlike among all Kshatriyas, had been slain by Bhima with his bare 
hands, then, O Sanjaya, I knew we had no hope of prevailing. 

When I heard that the sons of Pandu had vanquished the kings of all the 
kingdoms throughout the land and performed the imperial Rajasuya yagna, 
then, O Sanjaya, I knew our cause was lost. When I heard that Draupadi, 
her voice choking with tears, full of agony, and in her period, wearing a 
single cloth, had been dragged into our court, and though she had 
protectors, had been treated as if she had none, then, O Sanjaya, I had no 
hope of success. When I heard that my evil wretch Dushasana was trying to 
strip her of that single garment, but could only pull reams of many-hued 
cloth from her body into a heap, but not arrive at its end, then, O Sanjaya, I 
had no hope of success. When I heard that, beaten by Shakuni at the game 
of dice and deprived of his kingdom, Yudhishtira still had his invincible 


brothers with him, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of ever prevailing. When 
I heard that the righteous Pandavas wept in shame and torment, when they 
followed their elder brother into the wilderness and occupied themselves 
variously to lessen his discomfort, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of 
success. When I heard that Snatakas and other noble Brahmanas, who live 
by alms, had followed Yudhishtira into the wilderness, then, O Sanjaya, I 
had no hope of succeeding. When I heard that Arjuna had pleased the God 
of gods, Tryambaka, the three-eyed, who came disguised as a hunter, and 
that he received the Pasupatastra from Siva, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope 
of success. When I heard that the honest and renowned Arjuna had gone to 
Devaloka, and had obtained Devastras there from Indra himself then, O 
Sanjaya, I knew we could never win. When I heard that Arjuna had 
vanquished the Kalakeyas and the Paulomas, arrogant with the boon they 
had which made them invulnerable even to the Devas, then, O Sanjaya, I 
had no hope of victory. When I heard that Arjuna Parantapa, scourge of his 
enemies, had been to the realm of Indra to kill those Asuras, and had 
returned victorious, then, O Sanjaya, I knew we were doomed. When I 
heard that Bhima and the other sons of Pritha, accompanied by Vaisravana, 
had arrived in the country that is inaccessible to man, then, O Sanjaya, I had 
no hope of success. When I heard that my sons, misled by Karna’s advice, 
while on their Ghoshayatra, had been taken prisoners by the Gandharvas 
and then freed by Arjuna, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of succeeding. 
When I heard that Dharma, the God of Justice, came as a Yaksha and asked 
Yudhishtira some questions about dharma, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope 
of success. When I heard that my sons had failed to discover the Pandavas 
in disguise, while they lived with Draupadi in the kingdom of Virata, then, 
O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that the great Kshatriyas 
of my kingdom had all been vanquished by Arjuna, by himself, in a single 
chariot, in the country of Virata, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. 
When I heard that Vasudeva of the race of Madhu, who covered this Earth 
with one stride, was committed to the welfare of the Pandavas, then, O 
Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that the king of the 
Matsyas had offered his virtuous daughter Uttaraa to Arjuna and that 
Arjuna had accepted her for his son Abhimanyu, then, O Sanjaya, I had no 
hope of success. When I heard that Yudhishtira, beaten at dice, his wealth 
and kingdom snatched from him, exiled and his old connections severed, 
had still assembled an army of seven Akshauhinis, then, O Sanjaya, I had 


no hope of victory. When I heard Narada declare that Krishna and Arjuna 
were Nara and Narayana and that he, Narada, had seen them together in 
Brahmaloka, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of being victorious. When I 
heard that Krishna was anxious to make peace, for the good of humankind, 
and came to the Kurus, but went away without having been able to 
accomplish his mission, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I 
heard that Karna and Duryodhana resolved on imprisoning Krishna, but he 
revealed his Viswarupa, his body the Universe, then, O Sanjaya, I had no 
hope of success. When I heard that as he was leaving Hastinapura, Pritha 
stood, sorrowing, near his chariot and Krishna consoled her, then, O 
Sanjaya, I had no hope that we could have victory. When I heard that 
Vasudeva and Bhishma, son of Shantanu, counselled the Pandavas and that 
Drona, son of Bharadwaja, blessed them, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of 
succeeding. When Karna said to Bhishma, ‘I will not fight while you are 
fighting’, and left the field, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of winning the 
war. When I heard that Krishna, Arjuna, and the bow Gandiva of untold 
prowess these three of fearsome tejas, energy had come together, then, O 
Sanjaya, I had no hope of victory. When I heard that Arjuna was seized by 
compunction in his chariot and ready to abandon the war, but Krishna 
showed him all the worlds within his body, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope 
that we could prevail. When I heard that Bhishma, the desolator of our 
enemies, who killed ten thousand warriors every day in battle, had not slain 
any of the Pandavas, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope. When I heard that 
Bhishma, the righteous son of Ganga, himself told the sons of Pandu how 
he could be slain in battle, and that the Pandavas slew him joyfully, then, O 
Sanjaya, I had no hope of succeeding. When I heard that Arjuna placed 
Sikhandin before himself in his chariot, and shot the invincible Bhishma of 
boundless courage with a torrent of arrows, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope 
of success. When I heard that the aged Kshatriya Bhishma, having all but 
razed the race of Shomaka, was felled and lay upon a bed of arrows, then, O 
Sanjaya, I had no hope of being victorious. When I heard that upon 
Bhishma’s being thirsty and asking for water, Arjuna pierced the ground 
with the Parjannyastra and quenched his thirst, then, O Sanjaya, I had no 
hope of success. When Vayu, with Indra and Surya, united as allies for the 
success of the sons of Kunti, and beasts of prey terrified our legions by their 
inauspicious presence, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When the 
exceptional warrior Drona, though he showed a myriad marvellous varieties 


of the art of war, did not slay any of the Pandavas, then, O Sanjaya, I lost 
hope that we might win. When I heard that the Maharatha Samsaptakas of 
our army who meant to bring Arjuna down were all killed by Arjuna, then, 
O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that our impenetrable 
vyuha, guarded by the mighty Drona, had been cloven, singly, and entered 
by Subhadra’s valiant son, O Sanjaya, I lost hope of victory. When I heard 
that our Maharathas, unable to vanquish Arjuna, had surrounded and 
murdered the boy Abhimanyu, and crowed over this slaughter with beaming 
faces, then, O Sanjaya, I lost hope of success. When I heard that the foolish 
Kauravas shouted for joy after killing Abhimanyu and that the enraged 
Arjuna swore to kill Jayadratha, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of 
succeeding. When I heard that Arjuna fulfilled his vow in the face of all his 
enemies, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope. When I heard that when Arjuna’s 
horses were overcome with tiredness, Krishna unyoked them, made them 
drink and harnessed them again before he brought them back into battle, 
Sanjaya, I lost every hope. When I heard that while his horses were 
exhausted and went to drink, Arjuna remained in his chariot and held all his 
attackers at bay, Sanjaya, I knew our cause was lost. When I heard that 
Satyaki of the race of Vrishni struck panic into the invincible elephant 
legions of the army of Drona and rode easily to the side of Krishna and 
Arjuna, then, Sanjaya, I had no hope of victory. When I heard that after 
having Bhimasena helpless and in the eye of his arrow, Karna allowed him 
to escape with his life, only taunting him and dragging him a short way with 
the end of his bow, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard 
that Drona, Kritavarma, Kripa, Karna, Aswatthama, and the heroic Salya, 
king of Madra could not prevent the slaying of Saindhava Jayadratha, then, 
O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that Krishna’s cunning 
made Karna use the celestial Sakti, given him by Indra, against the 
Rakshasa Ghatotkacha of the dreadful visage, then, Sanjaya, I had no hope 
of success. When I heard that in the duel between Karna and Ghatotkacha, 
that Sakti, which could surely have slain Arjuna, had been cast at 
Ghatotkacha, Sanjaya, I lost hope again. When I heard that Dhristadyumna 
broke every law of honourable battle, and slew Drona who sat alone, 
unresisting and determined to die in his chariot, then, O Sanjaya, I lost 
every hope. When I heard that Madri’s son Nakula engaged Aswatthama in 
single combat before both armies, proved equal to Drona’s son and drove 
his chariot in circles around Aswatthama, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of 


victory. When, upon the death of Drona, his son invoked the Narayanastra 
but failed to consume the Pandavas, then, Sanjaya, I had no hope. When I 
heard that Bhimasena drank the blood of his brother Dushasana on the 
battlefield without anybody being able to stop him, then, O Sanjaya, I had 
no hope of victory. When I heard that the boundlessly valiant, invincible 
Karna was slain by Arjuna in that duel between brothers, mysterious even 
to the gods, then, Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. When I heard that 
Yudhisthira Dharmaraja defeated the tameless Aswatthama, Dushasana, and 
the fierce Kritavarma, too, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of victory. When 
I heard that Yudhishtira killed the brave king of Madra, who always dared 
Krishna to do battle with him, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success. 
When I heard that the evil Shakuni, who owned occult powers, who was the 
very root of the gambling, and indeed, all the bitter feud, was slain by 
Pandu’s son Sahadeva, then, O Sanjaya, I lost hope of success. When I 
heard that the exhausted Duryodhana fled to a lake and sought sanctuary in 
its waters, lying there alone, his strength gone and without a chariot, then, O 
Sanjaya, I had no hope of succeeding. When I heard that the Pandavas 
arrived at that lake with Krishna, and standing on its shore, called out 
contemptuously, tauntingly to my son, who could never tolerate an insult, 
then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of prevailing. When I heard that while, after 
showing in circles a dazzling array of innovative styles of gada yuddha, he 
was unfairly struck down, at Krishna’s behest, then, Sanjaya, I had no hope 
of victory. When I heard that Aswatthama and his confederates slaughtered 
the Panchalas and the sons of Draupadi in their sleep, a horrible and 
dastardly deed, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of victory. When I heard 
that, pursued by Bhima, Aswatthama discharged the first of weapons, 
Aishika, which direly wounded the embryo in the womb of Uttaraa, then, O 
Sanjaya, I had no hope of winning. When I heard that Arjuna repulsed 
Aswatthama’s astra, the Brahmashira, with another weapon over which he 
pronounced the word Sasti, and that Aswatthama had then to give up the 
jewel-like growth on his head, then, O Sanjaya, I lost all hope. When I 
heard that upon the embryo in the womb of Virata’s daughter being 
wounded by Aswatthama with a mahastra, Dwaipayana and Krishna 
pronounced curses on Drona’s son, then, O Sanjaya, I lost every hope. 

Alas! I must pity Gandhari, childless now, all her grandchildren slain, 
her parents, brothers and kindred gone. Oh, hard indeed has been the 


achievement of the Pandavas: they have recovered a kingdom and left no 
rival to challenge them. 

Alas! I have heard that the war has left only ten alive: three from our 
side, and from the Pandavas’, seven; that dreadful war has claimed eighteen 
Akshauhinis of Kshatriyas, all slain! All around me is darkness, and a 
swoon comes over me. Consciousness leaves me, Sanjaya, and my mind is 
far from me.” 

Suta said, “Thus bemoaning his fate, Dhritarashtra was overcome by 
anguish and swooned for a while; when he revived, he addressed Sanjaya 
again. 

“After what has happened, Sanjaya, I want to put an end to my life at 
once; I find not the slightest advantage in preserving it any longer.” 

Suta said, ‘Sanjaya, wise son of Gavalgana, now interrupted the 
distraught lord of Earth, who lamented thus and sighed like a serpent, 
repeatedly fainting. Words of deep import spoke Sanjaya. 

“You have heard, O Rajan, of the mighty men of immense valour, 
spoken of by Vyasa and the Rishi Narada: Kshatriyas born of royal families, 
splendid with every quality, versed in astras, glorious like amsas of Indra; 
men who conquered the world with dharma and performed sacrifices with 
offerings to Brahmanas, who having obtained renown in this world, at last 
succumbed to time. Such men were Saibya, the valiant Maharatha; Srinjaya, 
great amongst conquerors; Suhotra; Rantideva and the magnificent 
Kakshivanta; Balhika, Damana, Saryati, Ajita, and Nala; Viswamitra, 
destroyer of foes; Ambarisha, of matchless strength; Marutta, Manu, 
Ikshvaku, Gaya, and Bharata; Rama the son of Dasaratha; Sasabindu and 
Bhagiratha; Kritavirya, the fortunate, and Janamejaya; Yayati of untold 
punya who performed mahayagnas, in which the Devas themselves assisted 
him, and by whose vedis and stambas this entire Bhumi, with her peopled 
and uninhabited realms, is marked. The Devarishi Narada spoke of these 
twenty-four kings once to Saibya, when that king grieved over the loss of 
his children. 

Besides these, other rajas had gone before, still more powerful, 
Maharathas of noble mind, resplendent with every worthy quality: Puru, 
Kuru, Yadu, Sura and Viswasrava of great glory; Anuha, Yuvanaswa, 
Kakutstha, Vikrami, and Raghu; Vijaya, Vitihorta, Anga, Bhava, Sweta, and 
Vripadguru; Usinara, Sataratha, Kanka, Duliduha, and Druma; 
Dambhodbhava, Para, Vena, Sagara, Sankriti, and Nimi; Ajeya, Parasu, 


Pundra, Sambhu, and holy Devavridha; Devahuya, Supratika, and 
Brihadratha; Mahatsaha, Vinitatma, Shukratu, and Nala, the king of the 
Nishadas; Satyavrata, Santabhaya, Sumitra, and Subala; Janujangha, 
Anaranya, Arka, Priyabhritya, Chuchi-vrata, Balabandhu, Nirmardda, 
Ketusringa, and Brhidbala; Dhrishtaketu, Brihatketu, Driptaketu, and 
Niramaya; Abikshit, Chapala, Dhurta, Kritabandhu, and Dridheshudhi; 
Mahapurana-sambhavya, Pratyanga, Paraha and Sruti. These, O Rajan, and 
other kings, we hear enumerated in hundreds and thousands, and still others 
in millions, princes of power and wisdom, who renounced abundant 
kingdom and pleasures and met death just as your sons have done. Their 
dharma, valour and generosity, their magnanimity, faith, truth, purity, 
simplicity and mercy have been recorded for the world by holy pauranikas 
of bygone ages, men of great gyana. Though endowed with every noble 
virtue, they yielded up their lives. Your sons were malevolent, inflamed by 
passion, greedy and evil. You are versed in the Shastras, O Bharata’, and 
are intelligent and wise; those whose hearts are guided by the Shastras 
never succumb to misfortune. You, O Kshatriya, know both the kindness 
and severity of fate; this anxiety for your children does not become you. It 
does not befit you to grieve over the inevitable: for who can avert the 
dictates of inelucatable fate? No one can escape the path marked out for 
him by Providence. Existence and non-existence, pleasure and pain, all 
have Time as their root. Time creates all things and Time destroys all 
creatures. It is Time that burns living beings and Time that extinguishes the 
fire. All conditions, good and evil, in the three worlds, are caused by Time. 
Time cuts short all things and creates them anew. Time is awake when all 
other things sleep; Time cannot be overcome. Time passes over all things 
without being slowed by any. Knowing, as you do, that all things past and 
future and all that is in the present moment are children of Time, it does not 
befit you to cast aside your reason.’”’ 

Sauti said, ‘Thus, Sanjaya comforted the king Dhritarashtra, 
overwhelmed by grief for his sons, and restored some calm to his mind. 
And using these arguments of Sanjaya for his subject, Dwaipayana 
composed a holy Upanishad that has been given to the world by learned and 
holy Pauranikas in the Puranas they composed. 

The study of the Mahabharata is an act of piety. He that reads a mere 
foot of it, with faith, has his sins washed away entirely. Here, Devas, 
Devarishis, and immaculate Brahmarishis of punya have been spoken of; 


likewise, Yakshas and great Uragas, the Nagas. Here also the eternal 
Vasudeva, possessed of the six attributes, is described. He is the truth, and 
just, the pure and holy, the eternal Brahman, the Paramatman, the constant 
light, whose divine deeds the Sages recount; from whom the manifest and 
unmanifest Universe, with its principles of generation and evolution, and 
birth, death and rebirth issue. That which is called Adhyatma, the Sovereign 
Spirit of nature, that partakes of the attributes of the Panchamahabhuta, the 
five elements, is described here. Adhyatma has also been called Purusha, 
being above such names as ‘unmanifest’ and the rest; it is also that which 
the greatest Yatis, who are exempt from common destiny and endowed with 
the power of dhyana and tapas, behold abiding in their hearts, rather like a 
reflected image in a mirror. 

When the man of faith, devoted to piety, and constant in virtue, reads 
this canto, he is set free from sin. The believer who constantly hears this 
canto of the Bharata, the Introduction, being recited, from the beginning, 
never falls into difficulties. The man that repeats any part of the 
introduction during the two sandhyas of dawn and dusk is freed from the 
sins he commits during the day or the night. This canto, the very body of 
the Bharata, is truth and nectar. As butter is to curd, the Brahmana among 
bipeds, the Aranyaka among the Vedas, and Amrita among medicaments, as 
the sea is among water bodies, and the cow among quadrupeds, so is the 
Bharata among Itihasas, great legends. 

He that causes it, even a single metre of it, to be recited to Brahmanas 
during a sraddha, his offerings of food and drink to the manes of his Pitrs 
become inexhaustible. 

With the help of Itihasas and the Puranas, the Veda might be expounded; 
but the Veda fears the man of small intellect lest he should try to expound 
the scripture. The learned man who recites this Bharata Veda of Vyasa finds 
great gain; why, he is saved from the sin of killing a child in the womb, 
apart from other heinous sins. He that reads this holy chapter of the Moon 
as good as reads the entire Bharata. The man who listens daily, with 
reverence, to this sacred work acquires long life and renown, and finds 
Swarga for himself. 

In elder days, the Devas placed the four Vedas on one side of a balance 
and the Bharata on the other, and weighed them against each other. Since 
the Bharata was found to be weightier than the four Vedas with their 
mysteries, then on it was called the Mahabharata, the great Bharata. It has 


been judged to be superior to the Vedas both in substance and gravity. He 
who fathoms its meaning is released from all his sins. 

Tapa is innocent, study is harmless; the codes for living that the Vedas 
prescribe for all the tribes are harmless; the acquisition of wealth by 
exertion is not injurious; but when these are abused in their practice, they 
become sources of evil.’ 


'Krishnaa is Panchali, the Pandavas’ wife, while Krishna is the Avatara. 
Both are dark. 


*Bharata is used for the great king of that name, and Bharata for his 
descendants. Of course, the land of Bharata, Bharatavarsha, is named after 
King Bharata, the Great. 


CANTO 2 
PARVA SAMGRAHA CONTINUED 


he Rishis said, ‘O son of Suta, we want to hear in detail from you 
about the place that you called Samanta-panchaka.’ 

Suta said, ‘Listen, O Brahmanas, to these sacred descriptions. Best of 
men, you deserve to hear about the place known as Samanta-panchaka. In 
the hiatus between the Treta and Dwapara Yugas, the mighty Rama, son of 
Jamadagni, greatest among those that ever bore arms, was infuriated by the 
sins of the noble race of Kshatriyas and savaged them repeatedly. And when 
that meteorlike Brahmana annihilated the entire race of Kshatriyas, single- 
handedly, he formed at Samanta-panchaka five lakes of blood. We hear that 
he lost his reason from anger and offered oblations of blood to the manes of 
his ancestors, standing in the sanguine waters of those lakes. 

His Pitrs, of whom Richika was first, arrived there and said to him, 
“Rama, O blessed Rama, O scion of Bhrigu, we are appeased and gratified 
by the worship that you have offered your ancestors. We are pleased by 
your valour, O mighty one! Our blessings are upon you. Illustrious one, ask 
for any boon that you want.” 

Rama said, “If, O Sires, you are favourably disposed towards me, the 
boon I ask is that I be absolved from the sins born of my having slaughtered 
the Kshatriyas in fury, and that these lakes that I have made become famed 
in the world as holy tirthas.” 

The Pitrs said, “So be it, but now be pacified.” 

And Rama was pacified. From that time, the region around those lakes of 
blood has been Samanta-panchaka, a holy tirtha. The wise have said that 
every country must have a name significant of some special circumstance 
that might have made it renowned. The Great War between the armies of 
the Kauravas and the Pandavas was fought at Samanta-panchaka, on the 
cusp between the Dwapara and the Kali Yugas. In that holy place, even and 
without ruggedness of any kind, eighteen Akshauhinis of warriors gathered, 


eager for battle. And, O Brahmanas, having come there, they were all slain: 
hence the name Samanta-panchaka for that sacred and most delightful 
place, which is renowned and celebrated through the three Lokas.’ 

The Rishis said, ‘We want to know, O son of Suta, what the term 
Akshauhini means. Tell us in detail how many horses, footsoldiers, chariots 
and elephants comprise an Akshauhini, for you certainly know this.’ 

Sauti said, “One chariot, one elephant, five footsoldiers, and three horses 
form one Patti; three pattis make one Sena-mukha; three sena-mukhas are 
called a Gulma; three gulmas, a Gana; three ganas, a Vahini; three vahinis 
together are called a Pritana; three pritanas form a Chamu; three chamus, 
one Anikini; and ten anikinis form, as it is called by the experts, an 
Akshauhini. O Brahmanottama, best among Brahmanas, mathematicians 
calculate that the number of chariots in an Akshauhini is twenty-one 
thousand eight hundred and seventy. The number of elephants is the same. 
Pure ones, the number of footsoldiers is one hundred and nine thousand, 
three hundred and fifty; the number of horses is sixty-five thousand, six 
hundred and ten. These, O Brahmanas, are the numbers of an Akshauhini, 
as decided by those that know numbers. Best of Brahmanas, the eighteen 
Akshauhinis of the Kaurava and the Pandava armies were made up 
according to these numbers. Time, Kaala, whose acts are wonderful, 
gathered them in that place and, making the Kauravas the cause for the war, 
slew them all. 

Bhishma, master of astras, fought for ten days. Drona led the Kaurava 
Vahinis for five days. Karna, the desolator of his foes, was the Kaurava 
Senapati for two days; and Salya for half a day. Then, the gada yuddha 
between Duryodhana and Bhima lasted for half a day. When that day ended, 
Aswatthama and Kripa massacred the remnants of Yudhishtira’s army, 
while the Panchalas and Draupadi’s sons slept with no fear of danger. 

O Saunaka, this best of narrations called the Bharata, which I have 
begun to relate at your yagna, was once told at the sacrifice of Janamejaya 
by a most intelligent disciple of Vyasa. It is divided into many cantos. In the 
beginning are the Paushya, Pauloma and Astika Parvas, which describe in 
detail the valour and fame of kings. This is a work whose descriptions, 
diction and meanings are varied and extraordinary. It contains accounts of 
numerous customs and rituals. It is accepted by the Sages as the state called 
Vairagya by men who wish for mukti. As the Atman among things to be 
known, as life among things that are dear, so is this Itihasa, which provides 


the means of coming to the knowledge of Brahman, the first among all the 
Shastras. There is not a story that exists in this world that does not depend 
on this legend, even as the body depends upon the food that it consumes. As 
masters of noble lineage are always served by servants that desire 
advancement, so is the Bharata cherished by all poets. Words that form the 
numberless branches of knowledge that pertain to the world and the Veda 
show just vowels and consonants; this excellent legend displays only the 
highest wisdom. 

Listen, O Rishis, to the outlines of the several Parvas of this Itihasa 
called the Bharata, replete with deep wisdom, of chapters and meters that 
are varied and wondrous, of subtle meanings and logical interconnections, 
and embellished with the essence of the Vedas. 

The first Parva is called Anukramanika; the second, Sangraha; then 
Paushya; then Pauloma; then Astika; then Adivansavatarana. Then comes 
the Sambhava of enthralling events. Then comes the Jatugri-hadaha (the 
burning of the house of lac) and then the Hidimba-vadha (the killing of 
Hidimba) Parvas. Next comes Baka-vadha (the slaying of Baka) and then 
Chitraratha. The next Parva is called Swayamvara (where Panchali chooses 
a husband), in which Arjuna won Draupadi’s hand. Then comes Vaivahika 
(marriage), followed by Viduragamana (the advent of Vidura), Rajyalabha 
(the acquisition of a kingdom), Arjuna-vanavasa (the exile of Arjuna) and 
Subhadra-harana (the abduction of Subhadra). After these we find Harana- 
harika, Khandava-daha (the burning of the Khandava forest) and Mayaa- 
darshana (the meeting with Mayaa, the Asura architect). Then we come to 
Sabha, Mantra, Jarasandha, Digvijaya (the conquest of the four quarters). 
After Digvijaya come Rajasuyaka, Arghyaviharana (the theft of the Arghya) 
and Sisupala-vadha (the killing of Sisupala). After these, Dyuta (gambling), 
Anudyuta (the second game of dice), Aranyaka (in the forest), and Krimira- 
vadha (the killing of Krimira). The Arjuna-vigamana (the journeys of 
Arjuna), Kairati, in which the battle between Arjuna and Mahadeva in the 
guise of a Kirata hunter is described. After this Indraloka-vigamana (the 
journey to the realm of Indra); then follows that treasure trove of dharma 
and virtue, the Nalopakhyana (the story of Nala, full of pathos). After this, 
there follows Tirtha-yatra or the pilgrimage of Yudhishtira, the death of 
Jatasura, and the battle with the Yakshas. Then the battle with the 
Nivatakavachas, Ajagara, and Markandeya-samasya (the meeting with 
Markandeya). Then the meeting of Draupadi and Satyabhama, Ghoshayatra, 


Mriga-swapna (the dream of the deer). Then comes the story of 
Brihadaranyaka and then Aindradrumna; then Draupadi-harana (the 
abduction of Draupadi), Jayadratha-vimoksana (the release of Jayadratha). 
Then the story of Savitri, which illustrates the great punya and power of 
marital chastity. After this, we shall come to the story of Rama. The next 
Parva is called Kundala-harana (the theft of the earrings), and after that 
Aranya and then Vairata. Then the arrival of the Pandavas in the Matsya 
kingdom, and how they kept their ajnatavasa, of living undiscovered for one 
year. We come next to the killing of the Kichakas, then the attempt by the 
Kauravas to steal to take the cattle of Virata. The next Parva is named after 
the marriage of Abhimanyu to Uttaraa, the daughter of Virata. The next is a 
wonderful Parva called Udyoga, of deliberations, followed by Sanjaya-yana 
(the journey of Sanjaya). Then comes Prajagara (the insomnia of 
Dhritarashtra from anxiety). Then Sanatsujata, which contains the mysteries 
of spiritual philosophy. Then Yanasaddhi, and then the arrival of Krishna. 
Then the story of Matali and then of Galava. Then follow the stories of 
Savitri, Vamadeva, and Vainya; after which we find the story of 
Jamadagnya and Shodasarajika. Next, Krishna arrives in the Kuru court, 
and then Vidulaputrasasana. Then the mustering of the armies and the story 
of Sheta. Then comes the quarrel of the noble Karna with Bhishma, after 
which both armies march on Kurukshetra. The next has been named for the 
enumeration of the Rathis and Atirathas. Then the messenger Uluka comes 
to the Pandavas, bringing Duryodhana’s message that kindles the wrath of 
the sons of Pandu. Then we come to the story of Amba, followed by the 
enthralling description of the installation of Bhishma as the Kaurava 
Senapati. The next Parva deals with the creation of Jambudwipa; then of 
Bhumi; then the description of the formation of all the dwipas, the island 
continents. Then, the Bhagavad-Gita; followed by the fall of Bhishma. 
Drona is made Senapati; after which Arjuna razes the Samsaptakas. The 
death of Abhimanyu, followed by the vow of Arjuna to kill Jayadratha 
before the Sun sets. The death of Jayadratha is followed by the killing of 
Ghatotkacha. Then, you must know, comes the story of the extraordinary 
death of Drona, and after that the loosing of the Narayana astra. Then, as 
you know, is the command of Karna, and that of Salya. We come to 
Duryodhana’s immersion in the lake, and the gada yuddha between Bhima 
and Duryodhana. This is followed by Saraswata, then the descriptions of 
holy shrines and tirthas, and then genealogies. Then comes Sauptika that 


tells of events that bring disgrace upon the honour of the Kurus, followed 
by the Aisika of harrowing events in the night. Next comes Jalapradana, 
oblations of water offered to the manes of the dead, and then the 
lamentation of the women, in Stree Parva. The next Parva must be called 
Sraddha since it describes the funeral rites performed for the slain 
Kauravas. Next the Rakshasa Charvaka, who disguised himself as a 
Brahmana to deceive Yudhishtira, is slain. Then the wise and gentle 
Yudhishtira is crowned in Hastinapura. The next Parva is Grihapravibhaga, 
followed by Santi, Rajadharmanusasana, Apaddharma, and Mokshadharma. 
The Parvas that follow are Sukaprasna-abhigamana, Brahmaprasnanusana, 
the origin of Durvasa, and the disputations with Mayaa. The next is the 
Anusasanika Parva, which is followed by the ascension of Bhishma. Then 
the account of the Rajasuya yagna, listening to which all one’s sins are 
washed away. The next Parva is the Anugita. Those that follow are called 
Asrainvasa, Puttradarshana (meeting the spirits of the dead), and the arrival 
of Narada. The next Parva is Mausala, full of dreadful and savage 
happenings. Then comes Mahaprasthanika Parva and the ascension into 
Swarga. Then comes the Purana called Khilvansa, which contains 
Vishnuparva, Vishnu’s games and exploits as a child, the killing of Kamsa, 
and finally, the truly amazing Bhavishyaparva, with its uncanny prophecies 
about the future. 

The Maharishi Vyasa composed a hundred Parvas (the above are only 
some of them). Dividing them into eighteen books, large Parvas, Ugrasrava, 
the son of Suta Romaharshana narrated them in the Naimisha vana.’ 

Said Suta, “The Adi Parva contains Paushya, Pauloma, Astika, 
Adivansa-vatara, Sambhava, Jatugrihadahana, Hidimbavadha, Bakavadha, 
Chitraratha, Draupadi Swayamvara, Vaivahika, Viduragamana, Rajyalabha, 
Arjuna vanavasa, Subhadraharana, Harana harika, Khandava dahana, and 
Mayaa darshana. 

The Paushya Parva deals with the greatness of Utanka, and the Pauloma 
Parva, of the sons of Bhrigu. The Astika describes the birth of Garuda and 
of the Nagas, the churning of the Ocean, the birth of the celestial steed 
Uchchaishrava, and finally, the dynasty of Bharata: all as described during 
the Sarpa yagna of King Janamejaya. 

The Sambhava Parva describes the birth of numerous kings and heroes, 
and that of the Rishi Krishna Dwaipayana: the amsavataras of the devas, the 
generation of Danavas and Yakshas of great power, and Nagas, Gandharvas, 


Avians, and indeed of all creatures; and finally, the life and adventures of 
King Bharata— progenitor of the royal line named for him—the son born to 
Shakuntala in the asrama of the Rishi Kanva. This Parva also describes the 
greatness of Ganga, the births of the Vasus into the house of Shantanu and 
their ascension into heaven. This Parva also tells of the birth of Bhishma, 
who had in himself amsas of the divine energies of the other Vasus, his 
renunciation of the throne and his vow of brahmacharya, his guardianship 
of Chitrangada, and after the death of Chitrangada, his stewardship of the 
younger brother, Vichitravirya, and his crowning of Vichitravirya. This 
Parva tells of the birth of Dharma among men because of the curse of 
Animandavya; of the births of Dhritarashtra and Pandu through the seed of 
Vyasa, and the birth of the Pandavas. 

Jatugriha Parva decribes Duryodhana’s plot to send the sons of Pandu to 
Varanavata, and the evil intentions of the sons of Dhritarashtra towards the 
Pandavas. We shall hear the advice that Vidura, their well-wisher, gave 
Yudhishtira as the Pandavas left for Varanavrata, in the mlechchha bhasha. 
The Parva goes on to describe the excavation of a tunnel, the immolation of 
Purochana and the woman of the fowler caste, with her five sons, in the 
house of lac. 

Hidimba-vadha Parva continues with the Pandavas meeting Hidimbi in 
the dreadful jungle, and how Bhima of untold strength kills her brother 
Hidimba. The birth of Ghatotkacha follows; the meeting of the Pandavas 
with Vyasa, who sends them to the town called Ekachakra to live disguised 
as Brahmanas themselves in the house of a Brahmana. 

Baka-vadha Parva tells of the slaying of the Asura Baka, and of the 
amazement of the people at the sight of his corpse. The tale of the 
extraordinary births of Krishnaa and Dhrishtadyumna follows; upon hearing 
about the swayamvara from a wandering Brahmana, the Pandavas leave for 
Panchala, also at Vyasa’s behest, and equally because they are powerfully 
stirred to win Draupadi on learning the tidings of the swayamvara. 

Chaitraratha Parva tells of how, on the way, Arjuna defeats a Gandharva 
called Angaraparna on the banks of the Ganga; he befriends his adversary, 
and the Pandavas hear the history of Tapati, Vasishtha and Aurva from 
Angaraparna. 

Swayamvara Parva describes the journey of the Pandavas towards 
Panchala, how Arjuna pierces the matsya yantra, while all the rajas fail, and 
wins Draupadi; in the battle that follows, Salya, Karna and all the other 


crowned kings are routed by Bhima and Arjuna; Balarama and Krishna see 
this remarkable performance and realise that these are the Pandavas; the 
Yadava brothers come to the house of the potter, where the Pandavas are 
living. 

Vaivahika Parva tells how Drupada is horrified to hear that Draupadi will 
marry five husbands; consequently, Vyasa tells the wonderful story of the 
five Indras; the extraordinary wedding of Draupadi. 

Viduragamana Parva tells how Dhritarashtra’s sons send Vidura to the 
Pandavas as their messenger; Vidura arrives and is overwhelmed at seeing 
Krishna; the Pandavas in Khandavaprastha, from where they rule over half 
of the Kuru kingdom. 

Rajyalabha Parva tells of how Narada comes to Indraprastha and, at his 
advice, the Pandavas decide that each of them will spend a year, by turns 
and exclusively, as Draupadi’s husband. Here Narada tells the tragic tale of 
Sunda and Upasunda. 

Arjuna-vanavasa Parva then tells of Arjuna’s exile when he intrudes on 
the privacy of Yudhishtira and Draupadi, when he is forced to enter his 
brother’s apartment to fetch his bow to rescue the cattle of a Brahmana 
from some thieves. Arjuna meets Ulupi, the Naga Princess, on the way; 
Arjuna’s tirtha yatra; the birth of Babhruvahana; Arjuna delivers five 
Apsaras from the curse of a Rishi that turned them into ferocious 
crocodiles. 

Subhadra-harana Parva describes Arjuna’s meeting with Krishna at holy 
Prabhasa; encouraged by Krishna, he abducts Subhadra in a wondrous 
chariot that flies over sea and land, and through the air, at the very thought 
of the one that rides in it. 

Harana-harita Parva tells of how Arjuna leaves for Indraprastha with his 
wife and her dowry; Subhadra conceives Abhimanyu, the prodigy; 
Draupadi Yagnaseni gives birth to her children. 

Khandava-daha Parva tells how Krishna and Arjuna come to the banks 
of the Yamuna and acquire the Sudarshana Chakra and the famed bow 
Gandiva; Arjuna burns the Khandava vana; he rescues Mayaa; Aswasena 
the Naga escapses the inferno; the Rishi Mandapala fathers a son in the 
womb of the bird Saringi. Vyasa divided this Parva into two hundred and 
twenty-seven cantos, containing eight thousand eight hundred and eighty- 
four slokas. 


The second great Parva is the dense Sabha Parva. This Parva tells of the 
creation of the splendid Mayaa sabha in Indraprastha; Narada describes the 
Lokapalas and the realms of heaven, which he knows well; the Pandavas 
prepare for the Rajasuya yagna; the killing of Jarasandha; Krishna delivers 
the Kshatriyas incarcerated in the mountain-pass; the digvijaya; the 
Kshatriyas come to the Rajasuya yagna bringing tribute; the death of 
Sisupala during the sacrifice, over the dispute about the purodasa; 
Bhimasena ridicules Duryodhana in the sabha; Duryodhana’s grief and envy 
at seeing the grandeur of Indraprastha and the lavishness of the Rajasuya 
yagna; the preparations for the game of dice; the wily Shakuni beats 
Yudhishtira at dice; Dhritarashtra releases the grief-stricken Draupadi from 
the bondage of servitude that Yudhishtira incurs during the gambling; she is 
like a skiff in a tempest. Duryodhana contrives to engage Yudhishtira in a 
second game of dice; Yudhishtira loses again and is exiled, with his 
brothers. These events constitute what Maharishi Vyasa has named the 
Sabha Parva. This Parva is divided into seventy-eight cantos, O noblest of 
Brahmanas, of two thousand, five hundred and seven slokas. 

The third Parva is called Aranyaka, of the forest. This Parva tells of the 
Pandavas leaving for the forest; some Brahmanas follow them; at 
Dhaumya’s telling him to, Yudhishtira worships Surya Deva, God of Day, 
so he can feed the Brahmanas; the gift of the Sun: the magical platter; 
Dhritarashtra expels Vidura for speaking on the Pandavas’ behalf, and for 
his brother’s own good; Vidura goes to the Pandavas and returns to 
Dhritarashtra when the remorseful king calls him back; incited by Karna, 
the evil Duryodhana plots to kill the forest-dwelling Pandavas; Vyasa 
appears and frightens Duryodhana, prevents him from prosecuting his plan; 
the history of Surabhi; the arrival of Maitreya; Maitreya’s discourse to 
Dhritarashtra on dharma and karma; Maitreya curses the haughty 
Duryodhana; Bhima kills Kirmira in the forest; the Panchalas and the 
Vrishni princes learn of the false game of dice, rolled by the deceitful 
Shakuni, and arrive in the jungle to meet Yudhishtira; Arjuna allays the 
wrath of Krishna; Draupadi laments before Krishna; Krishna consoles her; 
the Rishi also describes the fall of Sauba here; Krishna takes Subhadra and 
her son to Dwaraka; Dhrishtadyumna brings the sons of Draupadi to 
Panchala; the sons of Pandu enter the charmed Dwaitavana; the exchange of 
words between Bhima, Yudhishtira, and Draupadi; Vyasa comes to the 
Pandavas and endows Yudhishtira with the occult power of Pratismriti; the 


Pandavas repair to Kamyakavana; mighty Arjuna goes in quest of astras; he 
duels with Siva who comes in the guise of a kirata; Arjuna meets the 
Lokapalas and receives divine weapons from them; he journeys to 
Devaloka to receive astras from Indra; the anxiety of Dhritarashtra when he 
hears this; Yudhishtira laments to the Maharishi Brihadaswa, who tells the 
sacred and sad story of the noble Nala and Damayanti, who is the very 
embodiment of patience. Yudhishtira learns the arcane secrets of dice-play 
from Brihadaswa; Rishi Lomasa arrives from Devaloka, bringing word of 
and from Arjuna to his noble brothers; the Pandavas journey to the various 
sacred tirthas across Bharatavarsha, at the word of Indra that Lomasa 
brings, during which pilgrimage they gain great punya; Narada’s pilgrimage 
to Putasta is described. The magnificence of Gaya; the story of Agastya, 
where the Rishi devoured the Asura Vatapi, and his union with Lopamudra 
from the desire for children. The story of Rishyasringa who was a 
brahmachari from his very boyhood; the legend of Jamadagni’s son Rama 
of untold glory and prowess, which tells of the slaying of Kartavirya and 
the Haihayas; the Pandavas and the Vrishnis meet at sacred Prabhasa; the 
story of Sukanya, where Bhrigu’s son Chyavana Maharishi makes the 
Aswini twins drink Soma rasa, during the sacrifice of king Saryati, while 
the other Devas had so far kept them away from it; the grateful Aswini 
twins bless Chyavana with permanent youth. The Parva then tells the story 
of King Mandhata; the tale of Prince Jantu, who was King Somaka’s only 
son, who his father offered in a sacrifice and received a hundred sons in 
return; the excellent story of the hawk and the pigeon; Indra, Agni and 
Dharma test King Sibi; the story of Ashtavakra, where a dispute arises 
during Janaka’s sacrifice, between that Rishi and the great logician, 
Varuna’s son Vandi; Ashtavakra has the better of Vandi, and releases his 
father from the ocean deep. There follows the story of Yavakrita, then of the 
great Raivya; the Pandavas leave for Gandhamadana and the asrama called 
Narayana; for Draupadi, Bhimasena goes after the saugandhika; he meets 
Vayu’s son the mighty Hanuman in a grove of banana trees; Bhima bathes 
in the pool on the river and devastates the flowers growing there to gather 
the exotic saugandhikas; he battles the powerful Rakshasas and _ the 
Yakshas, and Hanuman with them; Bhima kills Jatasura; the Pandavas meet 
the Rajarishi Vrishaparva; they depart for the hermitage of Arshtishena and 
live there for a time; Draupadi incites Bhima to revenge. Now Vyasa 
narrates how Bhima climbs Kailasa and his tremendous battle with the 


Yakshas headed by Hanuman; the Pandavas meet with Vaisravana Kubera. 
Arjuna returns after he has obtained many diverse devastras to use for 
Yudhishtira; he describes his encounters with the Nivatakavachas of 
Hiranyaparva, with the Paulomas and the Kalakeyas: how he slew them all; 
Arjuna is about to reveal the divine and awesome weapons for Yudhishtira, 
when Narada appears to prevent him from bringing disaster down upon 
them; the Pandavas come down from Gandhamadana; a python big as a 
mountain seizes Bhima in the jungle; Yudhishtira answers the great snake’s 
questions to secure his brother’s release; the Pandavas return to the 
Kamyaka vana. Krishna returns to meet the sons of Pandu; Markandeya 
arrives there, and regales them with many legends; the story of Prithu, son 
of Vena; the stories of Saraswati and the Rishi Tarkhya. The legend of 
Matsya; other ancient tales Markandeya tells: those of Indradyumna and 
Dhundhumara; then the story of the chaste wife; the story of Angira. 
Draupadi and Satyabhama meet and speak together; the Pandavas return to 
the Dwaita vana. Duryodhana’s ghoshayatra to gloat over the Pandavas’ 
plight; he is captured by the Gandharva and rescued by Arjuna: a terrible 
humiliation. Yudhishtira’s dream of the deer. The Pandavas return to the 
Kamyaka vana; the long story of Brihidraunika; the story of Durvasa; then 
Jayadratha abducts Draupadi from the asrama; Bhima, swift as the wind, 
chases Jayadratha, catches him and shames him dreadfully by shaving half 
his hair and moustache. Now follows the long story of Rama, during which 
that immaculate prince kills Ravana. The story of Savitri appears here; then 
Indra takes Karna’s golden kundala from him, and compensates Karna with 
an inexorable shakti, which, however, can be used only against one enemy, 
whom it will certainly kill; then comes the story called Aranya, where 
Dharma Deva advises his son Yudhishtira; the Pandavas receive a boon and 
journey towards the west. All these comprise the third Parva, called 
Aranyaka, of two hundred and sixty-nine cantos, and eleven thousand, six 
hundred and sixty-four slokas. 

The next great Parva is the Virata. The Pandavas arrive in the kingdom 
of Virata and see a great sami tree in a burial ground on the outskirts of the 
city. They hide their weapons in this tree, then enter the city in disguise. In 
Virata, Bhima kills the vile Kichaka, who, mad with lust, tries to molest 
Draupadi. Duryodhana sends forth his spies in every direction to scour the 
land for the Pandavas, but they fail to discover the mighty sons of Pandu. 
The Trigartas make off with Virata’s herd and a fierce battle is fought; 


Virata is taken by the enemy and rescued by Bhimasena; Bhima retrieves 
the herd, as well. The next day, the Kurus make off again with Virata’s kine; 
Arjuna vanquishes the Kuru host single-handed and releases the cattle; 
Virata offers his daughter Uttaraa to Arjuna, who accepts her to become the 
bride of his son and Subhadra’s: Abhimanyu, destroyer of his foes. These 
are the contents of the fourth Parva. The Maharishi Vyasa composed the 
Virata Parva in sixty-seven cantos, with two thousand and fifty slokas. 

Listen now to the outline of the fifth Parva, which is known as Udyoga. 
While the Pandavas stayed at Upaplavya in the Matsya kingdom and 
prepared for war, Duryodhana and Arjuna both went at the same time to 
Dwaraka, and said, “Fight on our side in the war”. The Mahatman Krishna 
replied, “Choose between me—and I will carry no weapon nor strike a 
single blow during the war—and one whole Akshauhini of my troops. 
Which of these shall I give to which of you?” The foolish Duryodhana 
asked for the troops, while Arjuna eagerly accepted just Krishna, as a 
counsellor who would not fight. We will see how, when the king of Madra 
rode to join the Pandavas, Duryodhana cunningly entertained him on his 
way, with lavish hospitality and gifts, never revealing himself until he asked 
for a boon: which was that Salya would fight for him. 

Having given his word, Salya cannot refuse. But he goes to the Pandavas 
and comforts them by recounting the tale of how Indra triumphed over 
Vritrasura. The Pandavas send a purohita to the Kauravas. Mighty 
Dhritarashtra listens to the message of the priest and to the story of Indra’s 
victory and sends Sanjaya to the Pandavas suing for peace. We shall see the 
terrible insomnia and anxiety that ravages Dhritarashtra, when he hears 
about the army that the sons of Pandu have collected and about their allies, 
Krishna and the others. Now Vidura expounds dharma to his brother. 
Sanatsujata appears and discourses on the atman and dharma for the benefit 
of the terrified and grieving sovereign. The next morning, Sanjaya speaks, 
in the court of the king, about Arjuna and Krishna being Nara Narayana. 
Moved by compassion, Krishna, the illustrious one, comes himself to 
Hastinapura, to sue for peace. Duryodhana dismisses the embassy of 
Krishna. The story of Dambodbhava is related, as well as that of the noble 
Matuli’s search for a husband for his daughter; then the story of the 
Maharishi Galava; the story of the training and discipline of the son of 
Vidula. Then, before the assembled kings, Krishna learns that Duryodhana 
and Karna are plotting to take him hostage and reveals his cosmic powers of 


Yoga. While leaving Hastinapura, Krishna takes Karna apart in his chariot 
and, telling him who he, Karna, truly is, asks him to join the Pandavas, who 
are his brothers. Karna refuses the offer, out of pride and loyalty to 
Duryodhana. Krishna, scourge of the evil, returns to Upaplavya, and tells 
the Pandavas everything that happened in Hastinapura. Then the Pandavas, 
having heard all, and having deliberated and discussed the matter deeply, 
begin to prepare in earnest for war. From Hastinapura, for battle, 
footsoldiers, horses, charioteers and elephants set forth. The legions of both 
sides are described. On the day before the commencement of battle, 
Duryodhana sends Uluka as his messenger to the Pandavas. The 
charioteers, rathikas, of different classes are described. The story of Amba 
is told. All this comprises the fifth Parva, Udyoga, of the Bharata, full of 
events relating to both peace and war. O Munis, the great Vyasa composed 
one hundred and eighty-six cantos in this Parva, with six thousand, six 
hundred and ninety-eight slokas. 

Then comes the Bhishma Parva, which abounds with marvellous events. 
Here Sanjaya describes the formation of Jambudwipa, followed by an 
account of the dejection of Arjuna before the battle, his crisis at the 
prospect of killing his own flesh and blood. Krishna expounds the Sanatana 
Dharma to him and the path to mukti, and reasons with him to discard his 
doubts and to fight. The first ten ferocious days of battle. Krishna sees 
Bhishma slaughtering the Pandava army, while Arjuna hardly fought him, 
and jumps down from their chariot, whip in hand, and runs at Bhishma to 
kill him himself. Krishna scathes Arjuna, bearer of the Gandiva, most 
valiant and gifted of all Kshatriyas, with a tirade. Greatest among archers, 
Arjuna sets Shikandin before him and shoots Bhishma with his most potent 
arrows, felling him. Bhishma falls onto a bed of arrows, upon which he lies. 
This is the sixth Parva of the Bharata, of one hundred and seventeen cantos 
and five thousand, eight hundred and eighty-four slokas, recited by 
Maharishi Vyasa, master of the Vedas. 

Next we recite the excellent Drona Parva, thick with incident. First, the 
great Acharya Drona is made Senapati of the Kaurava army; delighted, he 
vows, that master of arms, to take Yudhishtira his captive during the battle, 
to please Duryodhana; the Samsaptakas draw Arjuna away from the field; 
Arjuna kills Bhagadatta, who bestrode the field upon the elephant Supritika 
like a second Indra; the slaying of the teenaged Abhimanyu by Jayadratha 
and the Maharathas, while the heroic youth fought alone; Arjuna razes 


seven Akshauhinis of the enemy and fulfils his vow to kill Jayadratha; 
Bhima Mahabaho and that best of Maharathas, Satyaki Yuyudhana, 
penetrate deep into the Kaurava army, impregnable even by the Devas; the 
two come at Yudhishtira’s command, in search of Arjuna; the massacre of 
the remaining Samsaptakas. The Drona Parva tells of the death of 
Alambusha, of Srutayus, of Jalasandha, of Shomadatta, of Virata, of the 
Maharatha Drupada, of Ghatotkacha and countless others; in this Parva, 
stirred beyond reason by the death of his father, Aswatthama looses the 
dreadful Narayanastra. The glory of Rudra is told and the burning of the 
Tripura described. Vyasa arrives and sings the glory of Krishna and Arjuna. 
This is the seventh Parva of the Bharata, in which all the mighty Kshatriyas 
mentioned are slain. This Parva contains one hundred and seventy cantos, 
and eight thousand, nine hundred and nine slokas composed after much 
dhyana by Rishi Vyasa, son of Parasara, owner of true gyana. 

Then comes the truly exhilarating Karna Parva, in which Salya, wise 
king of Madra, is persuaded to become Karna’s sarathy. The history of the 
fan of the Anita Triputa is told. Karna and Salya favour each other with 
harsh words as they set out into battle; Salya makes the insulting 
comparison of the swan and the crow; the lofty Aswatthama kills the 
Pandya king; Dandasena dies; Darda dies; Yudhishtira’s duel with Karna 
before both armies, in which Karna shames the Pandava; Yudhishtira and 
Arjuna quarrel, and Krishna pacifies an angry Arjuna. In this Parva, Bhima 
keeps his vow by tearing open Dushasana’s chest and drinking the blood 
from his heart. Arjuna kills the great Karna in single combat. Those that 
know the Bharata call this eighth Parva the Karna Parva. It contains sixty- 
nine cantos and four thousand, nine hundred and sixty-four slokas. 

Next, the wondrous Salya Parva; after all the Maharathas are dead, the 
king of Madra becomes Senapati of the Kaurava army. One after another, 
the duels of the remaining rathikas are described. Yudhishtira Dharmaputra 
kills the great Salya. Sahadeva kills Shakuni. When a mere smattering of 
troops remained alive after the great slaughtering, Duryodhana went to the 
lake and submerging himself, as he knew how, lay underwater for a while. 
Bhima learns from the fowlers where Duryodhana is; the knowing 
Yudhishtira taunts the sensitive Duryodhana until he emerges from the lake. 
Duryodhana and Bhima fight the gada yuddha, a mace battle, during which 
Balarama arrives at Samanata-panchaka; a description of the sacred 
Saraswati; the mace fight continues; Bhima hurls his gada with tremendous 


force to break Duryodhana’s thighs. All this is contained in the ninth Parva, 
which Vyasa, who spread the renown of the Kauravas, composed in fifty- 
nine cantos and three thousand, two hundred and twenty slokas. 

Next I will relate the Parva called Sauptika, in which horrible incidents 
occur. When the Pandavas leave Duryodhana to die slowly, painfully, of his 
mortal injury, the Maharathas Kritavarma, Kripa and Aswatthama come to 
Samanta-panchaka in the evening and see King Duryodhana lying on the 
ground, his thighs broken, and covered with blood. Then Maharatha 
Aswatthama swears in terrible fury that he will never remove his armour 
until he has killed all the Panchalas and Dhrishtadyumna, and the Pandavas 
and all their allies. The three warriors leave Duryodhana and enter the great 
forest just as the Sun sets. They sit, shocked, under a large pipal tree in the 
night, when they see one great owl killing a number of crows asleep in the 
branches, one after the other. Taking this as an omen, Aswatthama, his heart 
full of rage to think of his father Drona’s death, decides to murder the 
Panchalas in their sleep. Arriving at the gates of the enemy camp, he sees 
there a Rakshasa of frightful countenance, the demon’s head in the very sky, 
guarding the entrance. The Rakshasa is proof against all the astras of 
Drona’s son, who then quickly worships three-eyed Rudra. And then, with 
Kritavarma and Kripa, he kills all the sons of Draupadi, all the Panchalas 
with Dhrishtadyumna and the rest of their kinsmen, all of whom slept 
unsuspectingly in the night, since the war was over. On that night, all of 
them perish except the five Pandavas and the Maharatha Satyaki. These 
escape because Krishna advises them to sleep away from the camp that 
night and to be on their guard. Dhrishtadyumna’s sarathy brings word of the 
night’s savage massacre to the Pandavas. Demented by the death of her 
sons, her father and her brothers, Draupadi sits before her husbands, 
resolved to fast unto death. Dreadful Bhima, stirred by what Draupadi says, 
hefts his mace and rides after the son of his Acharya, to take revenge on 
Aswatthama for Draupadi’s sake. From fear of Bhima and moved by fate 
and anger, Aswatthama looses a final astra, crying, “This will be the end of 
all the Pandavas”. But Krishna cries, “That shall not be!” and makes 
Aswatthama’s words ineffectual. Arjuna counters Aswatthama’s astra with 
an identical missile of his own. Seeing Aswatthama’s vile intention, 
Dwaipayana and Krishna curse him and he curses them back. The Pandavas 
take the jewel that grew in Maharatha Aswatthama’s head, and are 
delighted. Boasting of their triumph they come back to the battlefield and 


give it to Draupadi to assuage her grief. This is the tenth Parva, called 
Sauptika, which Maharishi Vyasa, peerless Pauranika of revelations, 
composed in eighteen cantos and eight hundred and seventy slokas. In fact, 
in this Parva he has combined two Parvas: Sauptika and Aishika. 

After these comes the heartrending Parva, Stri, in which stricken and 
enraged by the killing of his precious Duryodhana, blind Dhritarashtra 
crushes an iron statue of Bhima, adroitly given to him by Krishna. Vidura 
consoles the king with a discourse on dharma and moksha. Sad 
Dhritarashtra and the women of his house make their way to the tragic field 
of Kurukshetra. The wives of the dead Kshatriyas lament. Gandhari and 
Dhritarashtra swoon from grief and wrath. The Kshatriya women see their 
sons, brothers and fathers lying dead on the field, never to return to them. 
Krishna calms the wrath of Gandhari, raging when she sees the corpses of 
her sons and grandsons. Yudhishtira of dharma, best among men, has the 
bodies of the dead kings and princes cremated. While tarpana is being 
offered for the Kshatriya princes, Kunti confesses her long kept secret that 
Karna was her son. Maharishi Vyasa describes these events in the eleventh 
Parva, full of pathos, which moves any feeling heart and even brings tears 
to one’s eyes. It has twenty-seven cantos and seven hundred and seventy- 
five slokas. 

Twelfth is the Santi Parva, which deepens understanding and wisdom. It 
tells of the dejection of Yudhishtira at having killed his elders, cousins, 
nephews, uncles and relatives by marriage, at having seen his sons slain. 
Lying on his bed of arrows, Bhishma expounds Kshatriya dharma and the 
dharma of kings; he tells of how to deal with crises, in detail, discussing 
occasion and cause. Understanding these discourses can lead one to true 
gyana. The mysteries of moksha are delved into and expatiated upon. This 
twelfth Parva is the favourite Parva of wise men. It has three hundred and 
thirty-nine cantos, and fourteen thousand, seven hundred and thirty-two 
slokas. 

Next comes the fine and exalted Anusasana Parva. It describes how 
Yudhishtira, king of the Kurus, finds peace of mind and reconciliation upon 
hearing Bhishma, the son of Ganga’s exposition on dharma. This Parva 
deals in detail with the codes of dharma and artha; it deals with dana, 
charity, and its merits; it defines the qualities required to give charity and 
the laws pertaining to the giving and receiving of gifts. This Parva also 
describes the rituals of individual dharma, the codes of conduct and the 


unequalled punya of truth. This Parva dwells on the great merit of 
Brahmanas and sacred cows, and unravels the mysteries of dharma with 
relation to time and place. All this is enshrined in the excellent Parva 
Anusasana, of numerous tales and events. It goes on to narrate Bhishma’s 
ascension into Swarga. This thirteenth Parva, which lays down in detail the 
dharma for men, has one hundred and forty-six cantos, and eight thousand 
slokas. 

The fourteenth Parva is Aswamedhika. We will tell the fine tale of 
Samvarta and Marutta; then describe the unearthing of the golden treasure 
trove; the birth of Parikshit follows, and how Krishna revives the stillborn 
infant after Aswatthama’s astra had killed him in his mother’s womb. 
Arjuna, the son of Pandu, follows the sacrificial horse across Bharatavarsha 
and gives battle to the Kshatriyas who dared seize the animal. We shall 
describe the duel between Arjuna and his own son Babhruvaha by 
Chitrangada, daughter of the king of Manipura. There follows the story of 
the mongoose during the Aswamedha yagna. This Aswamedhika Parva 
contains one hundred and three cantos, and three thousand, three hundred 
and twenty slokas composed by the most knowing Vyasa. 

The fifteenth Parva is called Asramvasika. Here, Dhritarashtra abdicates 
his kingdom, and sets out for the forest with Gandhari and Vidura. The 
virtuous Kunti, who always loved and served her elders, also leaves the 
court of her sons, to follow the old couple. This Parva describes the 
supernatural meeting of Dhritarashtra with the spirits of his slain children, 
grandchildren and other princes, returned from the other world by the 
power and grace of Vyasa. Then the king abandons his grief and, with 
Gandhari, finds the highest punya of his good deeds. In this Parva, Vidura, 
who always lived in virtue, attains moksha in the forest. The learned son of 
Gavalgana, Sanjaya, also restrains his passions perfectly, and that foremost 
of ministers attains the blessed condition. Yudhishtira of dharma meets 
Narada, who tells him about the destruction of the Vrishnis. This wonderful 
Parva Asramvasika has forty-two cantos, and one thousand five hundred 
and six slokas composed by Vyasa who knows the highest truth. 

After this, as you know, comes the Maushala Parva, full of pain. The 
lion-hearted Vrishnis, who wore the scars from countless fields on their 
bodies, are cursed by a Brahmana. Drunk out of their wits, urged by fate, 
they slew one another on the shores of the salt sea with the eraka reeds, 
which turned in their hands into deadly thunderbolts. After provoking the 


extermination of their race, Balarama and Krishna, their own hour having 
come, succumb to all-consuming kaala. Arjuna, best of men, comes to 
Dwaravati and finds Dwaraka empty of Vrishnis. Grieftsricken, he performs 
the last rites for his uncle Vasudeva, noblest of the Yadus. Arjuna comes to 
the place where the Vrishnis had drunk and sees them lying in the postures 
of death. Arjuna cremates the bodies of Krishna the lustrous and of 
Balarama, as well as the other Vrishni chieftains. Taking the women and 
children, the old and the decrepit—all that remained of the Yadu race 
Arjuna journeys towards Indraprastha and meets disaster on the way in the 
form of murderous and rapacious highway bandits. He can no longer use 
the mighty Gandiva nor summon any astra to defend his wards. The 
downcast Arjuna goes to the Rishi Vyasa, and following his advice, comes 
home to Yudhishtira and seeks his leave to adopt sannyasa. This is the 
sixteenth, Maushala, Parva, which contains eight cantos and three hundred 
and twenty slokas, composed by the Muni Vyasa, who knows the supreme 
truth. 

Mahaprasthanika is next, the seventeenth Parva. Here, those greatest of 
men, the Pandavas, relinquish their kingdom and, taking Draupadi with 
them, set out on their final journey, Mahaprasthana. They arrive on the 
shore of the sea of red water, and meet Agni Deva. Agni tells Arjuna to 
worship him and to return the unearthly bow Gandiva to the Fire God, 
which Arjuna does. In this Parva, the Pandavas embark on their last journey 
up the great mountain. One by one, his brothers and his wife fall to their 
deaths, leaving Yudhishtira to climb on alone, never once looking back for 
them. This seventeenth Parva Mahaprasthanika has three cantos and three 
hundred and twenty slokas, composed by Vyasa, knower of the truth. 

The eighteenth Parva is the exceptional Swarga, in which celestial events 
are described, happenings in Devaloka. Seeing the heavenly vimana come 
to fetch him bodily to Swarga, Yudhishtira is full of pity for the brown dog 
that accompanied him through his journey from the gates of Hastinapura. 
He refuses to ascend in the vimana without his companion. Dharma Deva 
sets aside his canine form and reveals himself to his son of perfect virtue. 
Yudhishtira comes into Swarga and experiences a taste of hell. A celestial 
servitor takes him through an illusory naraka, where Yudhishtira, soul of 
righteousness, hears the heart-rending lamentations of his brothers and 
Draupadi, who appear to be dwelling in that realm, being tormented by 
Yama. Dharma and Indra show Yudhishtira the zone of sinners. Then 


Yudhishtira abandons his body by bathing in the Ganga as she flows 
through Swarga, and attains the heaven that his dharma deserves, where he 
lives in joy, honoured by Indra and the other Devas. This is the eighteenth 
Parva as told by the illumined Vyasa; it contains two hundred and nine 
slokas. 

Such in brief are the contents of the eighteen Parvas. The appendix 
(Khila) contains the Harivamsa and the Vavishya. The Harivamsa contains 
twelve thousand holy slokas.’ 

These are the contents of the canto called Parva-samgraha. 

Sauti continues, ‘Eighteen Akshauhinis of warriors came together for 
battle. The dreadful war lasts for eighteen days. He that knows the four 
Vedas with all the Angas and Upanishads but does not know this Itihasa 
cannot be regarded as having wisdom. Vyasa of fathomless intellect has 
called the Mahabharata a treatise on Artha, Dharma and Kama. Those who 
have listened to his awesome legend can never bear to listen to others, even 
as they who have heard the sweet song of the male kokila cannot stand the 
raucous cawing of the crow. As the Universe is formed from the 
Panchamahabhutas, the inspiration of every poet is derived from this 
wonderful Bharata. O Brahmanas, as the four kinds of creatures depend on 
space to exist, the Puranas depend upon this Itihasa. As the senses depend 
on the modes of the mind for their functioning, so does all karma and 
dharma depend upon this treatise. There is not a story in the world but it 
depends on this legend, even as the body does upon the food it consumes. 
All poets cherish the Bharata, even as servants that desire advancement 
serve masters of noble descent. Just as the blessed grihastasrama, of the 
householder, can never be excelled by the other three asramas, no poet or 
poets can surpass this poem. 

O Munis, shake off all inertia. Fix your hearts on punya, for virtue is the 
only friend that accompanies a man out of this world. The most intelligent 
man can never really possess wealth or wife, not by cherishing them to 
distraction; they are fleeting. The Bharata uttered from the lips of 
Dwaipayana is unequalled; it is, verily, dharma, and it is sacred. It destroys 
sins and generates goodness. He that listens to it being recited does not need 
to bathe in the holy waters of Pushkara. Whatever sensual sins a Brahmana 
might commit during the day, he is freed of them by reading the Bharata in 
the evening. Whatever sins he may commit in the night, of deed, word or 
thought, he is freed from those by reading the Bharata at dawn, during the 


first sandhya. He that gives a hundred cows, their horns covered in gold, to 
a Brahmana versed in the Vedas and all the Shastras, and he that daily 
listens to the sacred stories of the Bharata, acquire equal punya, spiritual 
gain. As ships help men who own them, easily cross the Ocean, so does this 
canto Parva-samgraha help those who study this extensive legend of great 
beauty and profound meaning.’ 


CANTO 3 
PAUSHYA PARVA 


uta said, ‘Once, Janamejaya, the son of Parikshit, and his brothers 
Geonaicea a great and extended yagna on Kurukshetra. His three 

brothers were Srutasena, Ugrasena and Bhimasena. And as they sat at 
the sacrifice, a whelp of Sarama, the celestial she-dog, arrived there. Beaten 
by Janamejaya’s brothers, he ran to his mother, crying in pain. And Sarama 
asked, “Why are you crying like this? Who beat you?” 

He replied, “The brothers of Janamejaya.” 

His mother said, “You have done something wrong that you were 
beaten.” 

He answered, “I have done no wrong. I did not lick the sacrificial ghee, 
nor did I even look at it.” Hearing this, his mother Sarama grew distraught 
and went to the place where Janamejaya and his brothers were at their 
extensive sacrifice. 

Angrily she cried to Janamejaya, “My son has done no wrong; he has 
neither looked at your sacrificial ghee, let alone lick it. Why, then, was he 
beaten?” 

They did not reply, at which she said, “You have beaten my son who 
committed no fault, and evil will come upon you when you least expect it.” 

Janamejaya was terribly alarmed and depressed to hear this imprecation. 
After he completed his yagna and returned to Hastinapura, he began to 
search high and low for a purohita who could absolve his brothers and 
himself of their sin and turn away the curse. 

One day, Janamejaya, while hunting in a forest that was part of his 
kingdom, saw the asrama of the renowned Rishi Srutasrava. Srutasrava’s 
son, Somasrava, was a most accomplished priest and sat in deep dhyana 
there. Wanting to make this Sage his purohita, Janamejaya, son of Parikshit, 
saluted the Rishi Srutasrava and spoke to him, “O owner of the six great 
qualities, let your son be my purohita.” 


The Rishi answered, “Janamejaya, my son of deep tapasya, a master of 
the Vedas, and blessed with the full potency of my sannyasa, was born of a 
Nagina, who drank my semen. He can free you from every sin except one 
committed against Mahadeva. Yet, he has one trait that he will never 
abandon: he must give a Brahmana whatever he asks for. If you can 
countenance that, certainly take him with you.” 

Janamejaya replied, “Let me then take him.” 

Accepting Somasrava as his purohita, he returned to his capital, where 
he said to his brothers, “This is the man that I have chosen for my Guru; 
you must do whatever he says, unquestioningly.” And his brothers did as 
they were told. The king marched to Takshashila and conquered that 
country. 

Around this time, there was a Rishi called Ayoda-Dhaumya, and he had 
three disciples, Upamanyu, Aruni and Veda. The Rishi told one of these 
sishyas, Aruni of Panchala, to go and stop a leak in the watercourse in a 
field. At his Guru’s command, Aruni of Panchala went to the place and saw 
that he could not stop the breach in the watercourse in any common fashion. 
He was distressed because he could not do his Guru’s bidding. 

He thought for a while and said, “Well, there is one way by which I can 
stem the leak.” 

He climbed down into the breach and lay there, and the water was 
contained by his body. After a while, the Guru Ayoda-Dhaumya asked his 
other disciples where Aruni of Panchala was. They replied, “Master, you 
sent him to stop the leak in the watercourse in the field.” 

Dhaumya remembered and said, “Let us all go to the place where he is.” 

Arriving there, he shouted, “Ho, Aruni of Panchala! Where are you? 
Come here, my child.” 

Hearing his Guru’s voice, Aruni quickly emerged from the watercourse, 
and stood before his master. Aruni said, “I lay in the breach where the water 
leaked, since there was no other way to do as you said. But now I heard 
your voice and came to you, allowing the water to escape again. I salute 
you, Guru, command me.” 

The Guru said, “Because you rose from the ditch at my command, I 
bless you to be called Uddalaka. Because you have obeyed me, you shall 
find great fortune. The Vedas shall shine in you and all the Dharmashastras 
also.” 

And blessed by his Guru, Aruni went to the country that he loved. 


Upamanyu was another of Ayoda-Dhaumya’s sishyas. Dhaumya said to 
him, “Go, Upamanyu my child, and tend the herd.” And Upamanyu took 
the cattle to pasture. Having watched and grazed them all day, he returned 
to his master’s house in the evening, and saluted him respectfully. 

His Guru saw him healthy and untired, and asked, “Upamanyu, my 
child, what did you feed on that you look so healthy and plump?” 

He answered, “Lord, I ate by begging alms.” 

His Guru said, “You should not eat the alms you get without first 
offering them to me.” 

The next day, Upamanyu brought the alms he begged to his master. His 
Guru took all the food and Upamanyu went to graze the herd. He watched 
the cattle all day and returned in the evening to his master’s asrama. He 
stood before his preceptor and saluted him with reverence. His Guru saw 
that he was still in fine fettle, and said, “Upamanyu, my child, I took all that 
you begged as alms from you, then how do you still look so healthy, even 
fat?” 

Upamanyu said, “Guru, I gave you all the alms I begged the first time, 
then went begging a second time for food.” 

His master then said, “This is not how you should honour my command 
to you. By begging alms twice, you are depriving someone else that lives by 
alms for their subsistence. You have proved yourself to be greedy.” 

Upamanyu bowed to acknowledge what his master said, and went away. 
The next morning, too, he took the herd out to pasture and was with them 
all day. In the evening, he returned to his Guru’s home and stood, hands 
folded reverently, before his master. His preceptor observed that he was still 
fat, and said, “Upamanyu my child, I take all the alms you beg and you do 
not go begging a second time, and you are still in robust health, and fat. 
How is this?” 

Upamanyu replied, “Master, I drink the milk of the cows now.” 

His Guru said, “You may not drink the milk without my permission.” 

Again, Upamanyu agreed to do what his Guru asked, and the next day 
took the herd to pasture. When he returned to his master’s dwelling in the 
evening, he stood before him and saluted him as usual. His master saw that 
he was still fat, and said, “Upamanyu my son, you do not eat the alms you 
beg anymore, nor do you go begging a second time, nor do you drink milk 
from the cows. How do you remain healthy and fat?” 


Upamanyu replied, “Master, I sip the froth that drips from the mouths of 
the calves as they drink from their mothers’ teats.” 

The master said, “The loving calves must drip a good deal of froth for 
you to drink. But you are depriving the young ones of their nourishment. I 
forbid you to drink the froth.’ And Upamanyu, bowing his assent, went 
away. 

The next day, he took the cows to graze. Obeying his Guru, he did not 
feed on alms, nor drink any milk or froth. Savaged by hunger in the forest, 
he ate the leaves of an arka*, which are pungent, saline and poisonous. He 
became blind. He crawled sightless on the forest floor and fell into a 
disused well. When he did not return to his Guru’s asrama by evening, 
when the Sun sank over the western mountains, his master asked his other 
sishyas where Upamanyu was. They said that he had gone out with the 
cattle. 

The Guru said, “I have prevented him from eating anything, and he must 
be annoyed. Let us then go looking for him.” The Guru went with his 
sishyas into the forest and began to shout, “Ho Upamanyu! Where are 
you?” 

Upamanyu heard his master’s voice and answered loudly, “Here I am at 
the bottom of this well.’ His Guru asked how he got there. Upamanyu 
replied, “I ate the leaves of an arka plant and they made me blind. I could 
not see anything and I fell into the well.” 

His Guru then said, “Give praise to the Aswin twins, who are the 
physicians to the Devas, and they will restore your sight.” At his master’s 
word, Upamanyu began to hymn the Aswini twins, in slokas from the Rig 
Veda. 

“You have existed since before creation! O first-born beings, it is you 
that are displayed in this marvellous Universe of five elements. I wish to 
attain to you by the faculty of hearing and of dhyana, for truly you are 
infinite. You are the very course of Prakriti and of the intelligent Purusha 
that pervades that unfolding. You are birds of exquisite plumage perched on 
the body that is like a tree. You are without the three attributes that are base 
in every soul. You are incomparable. Your spirit is in every created thing; 
you pervade the Universe. 

You are golden eagles! You are the divine essence into which all things 
dissolve! You are free from faults and know no decay. Your beaks are 
beauty embodied, and never strike unjustly. You are victorious in every 


battle. You are immortal, and prevail over time. Having created the Sun, 
you weave the wondrous cloth of the years with the white thread of day and 
the black thread of night. And with the cloth woven, you have established 
two ways of karma, one for the Devas and the other for the Pitrs. You set 
the bird of Life, seized by Time, which has the strength of the Infinite 
Atman, free and deliver her to endless joy. They that are plunged in 
ignorance, deluded by the senses, think of you, who transcend matter and its 
attributes, as having form. Three hundred and sixty cows that are three 
hundred and sixty days produce one calf between them: the year. That calf 
creates and destroys all things. Seekers of truth, treading myriad paths, 
draw the milk that is true knowledge from the calf. O Aswins, you are the 
creators of that calf! 

The year is just the hub of a wheel to which seven hundred and twenty 
spokes are attached: days and nights. The circumference of this wheel of 
twelve months is endless. The wheel is full of delusions and knows no 
decay. It affects all creatures, of this and the other worlds. Aswins, you set 
this wheel of time in motion! 

The wheel of Time, in the year, has a nave of six seasons. The spokes 
attached to that nave are twelve, the signs of the Zodiac. This wheel of 
Time manifests the fruit of all karma. The Devas who rule Kaala abide in 
the wheel. O Aswins, I am bound by the misery of the wheel; liberate me 
from the wheel of Time. Aswins, you are this Universe of the 
Panchabhutas. You are the objects that are enjoyed in this and in the next 
world. Set me free from the five elements! Though you are the Supreme 
Brahman, yet you move over the Earth with bodies and forms, enjoying the 
pleasures that the senses afford. 

In the beginning, you created the ten cardinal points of the Universe! 
Then you set the Sun and the sky on high. The Rishis perform their yagnas 
by the movement of the same Surya, and the Devas and men, as well, 
according to their svadharma, perform sacrifices and enjoy the fruit of those 
rites. You mixed the three colours, and produced all that is seen. From these 
creations the Universe issued, in which the Devas and men perform their 
svadharma, and, indeed, all creatures receive life! 

Aswins, I worship you! I also adore the Akasa, which you made. You are 
the bestowers of the fruit of karma, the laws of which bind even the Devas. 
Yet you yourselves are free from the results of whatever you do! 


You are the father and mother of us all! As male and female, you 
consume food, which then develops into life-creating seed and blood. The 
newborn drinks at its mother’s breast. You take the shape of the infant. O 
Aswins, return my sight to me that I may protect my life!” 

The twin Aswins appeared and said, “We are pleased. Here is a sweet 
cake for you. Eat it.” 

Upamanyu said, “Your words, O Aswins, have never proved untrue. But 
I cannot eat your cake without first offering it to my Guru.” 

The Aswins now told him, “Once, your Guru invoked us just as you 
have. We gave him a cake just like this one, and he ate it without offering it 
to his master. Do as your master did.” 

Upamanyu said to them, “Aswini Devas, I beg your forgiveness, but I 
cannot eat your cake without first offering it to my master.” 

The Aswins now said, “O, we are pleased by your Guru bhakti. Your 
master has iron teeth for eating the cake without offering it to his Guru. You 
shall have teeth of gold. Your eyes will see again and great fortune will 
attend upon you.” 

With this blessing from the Aswins, Upamanyu recovered his sight. He 
came before his master and, saluting him reverently, told him all that had 
happened. His Guru was pleased with him and said, “You shall have great 
fortune, as the Aswins have said. The Vedas shall illumine you, and all the 
Dharmashastras.” 

This was the trial of Upamanyu. 

Then Ayoda-Dhaumya called his third sishya, Veda, and said to him, 
“Veda, my son, stay awhile in my house and serve your Guru. You will gain 
from it.” 

Veda readily agreed, and remained in his master’s house, serving him 
and his family. Like an ox bearing its master’s burdens, he suffered heat and 
cold, hunger and thirst, always without a murmur of complaint. Before 
long, his Guru was satisfied and blessed Veda to have good fortune and 
universal knowledge. This was the trial of Veda. 

Taking his Guru’s permission, when he had finished his tutelage, Veda 
left his master’s house and entered grihastasrama, became a householder. In 
his own house, he had three sishyas. But he never treated them harshly, or 
had them obey him unquestioningly or perform rough tasks for him, but 
was the kindest master because of his own difficult experiences in his 
Guru’s house. 


The two Kshatriyas Janamejaya and Paushya came to this Veda’s home 
and asked him to be their Upadhyaya, their spiritual guide and mentor. One 
day, when he had to go out on some work, Veda told one of his disciples, 
Utanka, to take charge of his household. 

“Utanka,” said Veda, “you must do whatever needs to be done in my 
home without neglect, even as I would.” And he set out on his journey. 

Utanka began living in his Guru’s house and was heedful of his master’s 
command in every particular. One day, the women of the household came to 
Utanka and said, “Utanka, your mistress is in her fertile time. Your master 
is away, and it falls to you to take his place.” 

Utanka said to the women, “I cannot do this at you women’s bidding. 
My Guru did not tell me to commit a sin.” 

After a while, his Guru came home, and when he heard what had 
happened, Veda was pleased. 

He said, “Utanka, my child, what boon do you want from me? You have 
served me faithfully and my affection for you has grown. You may leave 
now, and let your every wish come true.” 

Utanka said, “Let me do something for you, Guru. For I have heard told 
of the master who teaches without receiving dakshina and the sishya who 
receives instruction without giving dakshina, that enmity springs up 
between them, and one of them dies. You have taught me and I must give 
you some gurudakshina.” 

His master replied, “Utanka, my son, wait a while.” 

Some days passed, then Utanka again asked his master, “Command me, 
Guru, what dakshina shall I bring for you?” 

His Guru said, “Dear Utanka, so often you have asked me what dakshina 
I want from you for what I taught you. Go inside then, and ask my wife 
what you should bring as dakshina. Bring whatever she says.” 

Utanka went to his master’s wife and said, “Mistress, my Guru has given 
me leave to go home, and I want to give you something as dakshina for the 
instruction I have received, something that will please you, so that I do not 
leave with a debt to my Guru. I beg you tell me what dakshina I should 
give.” 

His Guru’s wife replied, “Go to King Paushya and beg him for the 
earrings that his queen wears, and bring them here. The fourth day from 
today is a sacred day and I want to wear those earrings when I serve the 


Brahmanas who will dine with us. Do this for me, Utanka! If you succeed, 
you will find good fortune; if you fail, what fortune can you expect?” 

Utanka went away to fetch the earrings, if he could. As he went along, 
he saw a bull of extraordinary size and a man of huge stature mounted upon 
it. That man said to Utanka, “Eat the dung of this bull.” Utanka refused. 
The man said again, “Utanka, eat it. Your master ate it before you.” Now 
Utanka agreed and ate the dung and drank the urine of the bull. Then he 
rose respectfully, washed his hands and mouth, and went to meet King 
Paushya. 

Arriving at the palace, Utanka saw Paushya upon his throne. Utanka 
approached the king and greeted him by pronouncing formal blessings over 
him. He said, “I have come to you as a supplicant.” 

King Paushya returned Utanka’s greeting and asked, “Brahmana, what 
can I do for you?” 

Utanka said, “I have come to beg a pair of earrings for my Guru’s wife, 
to be my dakshina to my master. I ask you to give me the earrings that your 
queen wears.” 

King Paushya replied, “Go, Utanka, into the antahpura, and ask the 
queen for the earrings.” 

Utanka went into the harem, but he could not find the queen. He came 
back to the king and said, “It is not right that you treat me deceitfully. Your 
queen is not in the antahpura, I could not find her there.” 

The king thought a moment, then said, “Recollect, Brahmana, whether 
you have defiled yourself with something that you ate or drank on your way 
here. My queen is a chaste wife and cannot be seen by anyone who is 
sullied from partaking of leftovers. She will not appear before someone that 
is impure. 

Utanka now thought for a moment, then said, “Yes, it must be. Being in 
a hurry, I must have performed my ablutions while standing.” 

King Paushya said, “You cannot purify yourself properly while standing, 
not even while you are on a journey.” 

Utanka agreed. He sat down facing the east and washed his face, hands 
and feet thoroughly. Then, without making a sound, he thrice sipped clean 
water, free of froth and dirt, and not warm, in achamana: just enough to 
reach his stomach, and he wiped his face twice. He touched the apertures of 
his organs with pure water. 


Having done all this, he went to the women’s quarters again. Now he 
saw the queen. As soon as the queen saw him, she greeted him respectfully 
and said, “Welcome Brahmana, tell me what I can do for you.” 

Utanka said, “Give me your earrings, I wish to give them to my Guru’s 
wife as my daskhina to him.” 

The queen was pleased with Utanka’s deportment and his intentions. She 
felt that he was deserving of this charity, and immediately took off her 
earrings and gave them to him. 

The queen said, “Takshaka, the serpent king, has always coveted these 
earrings. So be very carfeul how you go with them.” 

Utanka said to the queen, “Lady, do not worry, Takshaka cannot catch 
me.” 

He took solemn and grateful leave of the queen, and went back into the 
presence of Paushya. Utanka said, “Paushya, I am gratified.” 

Paushya said to Utanka, “Someone truly deserving of daana comes along 
once in a rare while. You are a worthy guest, a qualified sadasya, and I want 
to conduct a sraddha. Stay a while with me.” 

Utanka replied, “I will stay, but I beg you to have the food for the 
sraddha fetched quickly.” 

The king assented readily and began to entertain Utanka as the atithi for 
his sraddha. Utanka saw that the food set before him had hair in it and felt 
that it was cold, and deemed it unclean. He said to Paushya, “You have 
given me unclean food and you will go blind for it.” 

Paushya retorted, “And because you say that clean food is unclean, you 
will have no children!” 

Utanka rejoined, “It does not become you to curse me back, after 
offering me unclean food. Look for yourself.” 

Paushya looked closely at the food and found that it was indeed unclean, 
being cold and mixed with hair, because it had been prepared by a woman 
with long braids. 

The king sought to pacify Utanka, “Brahmana, the food set before you is 
indeed cold, and does contain hair. It was prepared without proper care and 
I beg you, forgive me. Let me not become blind.” 

Utanka replied, “What I say must come to pass. However, though you go 
blind you can recover your sight soon, provided your curse does not affect 


99 


me. 


Paushya said to him, “I cannot revoke my curse, for my wrath is not 
appeased. But you cannot know this because a Brahmana’s heart is as soft 
as freshly churned butter, even if his words carry a sharp razor. But this is 
not so with the Kshatriya, whose words are soft as freshly churned butter, 
but his heart is like a razor, and hard. Because I am a Kshatriya and 
unforgiving, I cannot withdraw my curse. Go your way now.” 

Utanka said, “I showed you that the food was unclean, and just now you 
were pacifying me. Besides, you first said that because I said the food was 
unclean when it was in fact clean I would not have children. But the food is 
unclean, so your curse cannot affect me. Of this I am certain.” 

And Utanka left with the earrings. 

On the road, Utanka saw a naked beggar coming towards him, most 
strangely: for sometimes he was visible and at others he vanished. Utanka 
put the earrings on the ground and went to bathe in a wayside tank. The 
beggar flashed up, seized up the earrings and ran away. Utanka completed 
his ablutions, purified himself, bowed worshipfully to the gods and his 
Gurus and went after the thief as fast as he could. With some effort he 
overtook him and laid hold of the fellow. 

At once, the naked one was no longer a beggar but Takshaka, who dived 
down into a hole in a ground. Once in, Takshaka sped down into his realm, 
Nagaloka, the under-world of serpents. 

Utanka remembered what the queen had told him and tried to pursue the 
Naga. With a stick, he tried to excavate the hole into which Takshaka had 
vanished but could not make any headway. Indra saw his distress and sent 
his Vajra to help him. The thunderbolt entered the stick and plunged along 
the hole, tunnelling its way like lightning. Utanka went in and down after 
the Vajra. He saw Nagaloka, amazing and magnificent, seemingly infinite in 
extent, with hundreds of palaces and elegant mansions, with turrets, domes 
and high arched gates, full of the most enchanting parks and gardens for 
sport and for love. 

Awestruck, Utanka sang the praises of the serpents with these slokas: 

“O Nagas, subjects of King Airavata, splendid in battle, pouring forth 
astras in battle like clouds full of lightning driven by the winds! Many- 
formed, radiant and handsome, with ear-studs of many colours, O children 
of Airavata, you shine like the Sun in the sky! On the northern banks of the 
Ganga are many habitations of Nagas. I regularly worship the great serpents 
there. Who but Airavata would want to move about under the burning Sun? 


When Airavata’s brother Dhritarashtra goes forth, twenty-eight thousand 
and eight serpents follow him in train. You who move near him and you that 
remain at some remove: I worship all of you that have Airavata for your 
elder brother. 

I worship you also, O Takshaka, who once lived in Kurukshetra and the 
Khandava vana: to have the queen’s earrings from you! Takshaka and 
Aswasena, O constant companions that dwell in Kurukshetra on the banks 
of the Ikshumati! I worship Takshaka’s younger brother, the lustrous 
Srutasena, who lived in the tirtha Mahadyumna in order to become lord of 
the Nagas.” 

Though he paid homage to all the great Nagas, the Brahmana Rishi 
Utanka did not get the earrings. He fell thoughtful. He looked around and 
saw two young women at a loom weaving a piece of cloth with a fine 
shuttle, using black and white threads. He saw a wheel with twelve spokes, 
turned by six boys. And he also saw a man astride a blazing magnificent 
steed. And he addressed these mantras to them, resonantly: 

“This wheel that has twenty-four cantos, for the changes of the Moon, 
also has three hundred spokes! Six boys, the seasons, keep it always 
turning! These women are Prakriti, ceaselessly weaving their cosmic cloth 
with threads of black and white, creating countless worlds and the beings 
that live on them. And you who send down the thunder, who protect the 
Universe, who slew Vrita and Namuchi, O Illustrious one wearing a black 
robe, riding Uchchaisravas churned up from the bottom of the sea, the horse 
that is an amsa of Agni Deva Lord of Fire, I bow to you, Paramatman, Lord 
of the three worlds, O Purandara!”’ 

Then the man on the horse said to Utanka, “I am pleased with your 
worship. What boon shall I give you?” 

Utanka replied, “Let me have power over the Nagas.” 

The man said, “Breathe upon this horse.” 

Utanka blew his breath onto that horse. From every aperture of the 
horse’s body, dreadful flames and smoke issued to consume Nagaloka. 
Shocked, singed and terrified, Takshaka flew out from his palace with the 
earrings, and gave them to Utanka. 

“IT beg you,” said the Naga king, “take back the earrings.” And Utanka 
did. 

But having recovered his earrings, Utanka realised, “This is the holy day 
of which my Guru’s wife spoke. I am so far from their home; how will I 


give her the dakshina in time?” 

The man in black said to him, “Ride this horse, Utanka, and he will 
bring you to your master’s home in a moment.” 

Utanka mounted the horse and immediately arrived at his Guru’s house. 

It was morning. His master’s wife had bathed and sat combing her hair, 
thinking of how she would curse Utanka if he did not return in time with the 
earrings. Utanka entered his Guru’s home, greeted his master’s wife and 
respectfully gave her the earrings. 

“Utanka,” said she, delighted, “you have arrived at the right time in the 
right place! Welcome my child, you have done what you set out to do, and I 
will not curse you. Good fortune is written for you. Let all your wishes 
come true and success attend your every endeavour!” 

Utanka went to his Guru. His master said, “Welcome! Where were you 
all these days?” 

Utanka replied, “Master, Takshaka kept me from returning sooner. I had 
to go to Nagaloka, where I saw two women at a loom, weaving a fabulous 
cloth with black and white threads. What was it? I also saw a wheel with 
twelve spokes turned endlessly by six boys. What did that mean? Who was 
the man that I saw, mounted upon the horse of awesome size? 

And while I was on the road, I saw a man mounted on a gigantic bull. He 
said affectionately to me, ‘Utanka, eat of the dung of this bull, which your 
Guru also ate.’ So I ate the bull’s dung. But who was the man? I beg you, 
enlighten me about all these.” 

His Guru said to him, “The two young women you saw are Dhata and 
Vidhata; the black and white threads are nights and days; the wheel of 
twelve spokes was the year and the boys that turned it, the six seasons. The 
man was Parjannya, Lord of rain, and the horse was Agni, the Fire God. 
The bull on the road was Airavata, Lord of elephants; the man riding the 
bull was Indra; and the dung of the bull, which you ate, was Amrita, which 
saved you from certain death in Nagaloka. Indra is my friend and showed 
you favour. That is how you have come back safely with the earrings. Good 
child, I give you leave to go now. You will find fortune.” 

With his Guru’s leave and blessing, Utanka went grimly toward 
Hastinapura. Anger stirred his heart and he wanted to avenge himself on 
Takshaka. The excellent Brahmana soon reached Hastinapura. Utanka came 
into the presence of Raja Janamejaya, who had returned victorious from 


Takshashila some days ago. Utanka saw the triumphant king surrounded by 
his ministers. He blessed them all, formally. 

Utanka spoke to the king at an apposite moment, in fine language and a 
mellifluous voice. “Rajarishabha, best of kings! How is it that you waste 
your time childishly, when another critical matter demands your 
attention?’”’ 

Sauti said, ‘Janamejaya saluted the noble Brahmana and replied, “I am 
discharging the dharma of my royal line by spending time with my subjects. 
Tell me, what is the urgent matter which has brought you here?” 

The great Brahmana Utanka, distinguished by his fine deeds, replied to 
that munificent king, “O Raja! the matter is urgent because it concerns you. 
So make haste to attend to it. King of kings, Takshaka took your father’s 
life, and you must take revenge against the vile snake. The time has come, I 
believe, for the vengeance ordained by fate. So avenge the death of your 
great father whom the vicious Naga stung, without cause, and burned him 
into the Panchabhutas like lightning striking a tree. Takshaka, most evil of 
Nagas, is so drunk with power that he dared bite your godlike sire, scion of 
your race of Rayjarishis. 

Cunning beyind measure, he persuaded Kashyapa, prince among 
physicians, to turn back when that Rishi was on his way to save your father. 
It will be fitting for you to burn Takshaka in the fire of a sarpa yagna, a 
sacrifice of serpents! 

Rajan! Command the sarpa yagna to begin instantly, it is the only way to 
avenge your father. And with this sacrifice, you will do me also a great 
favour. For, most virtuous Kshatriya, the malignant Takshaka once 
obstructed me when I was on a crucial errand for my Guru.” 

Sauti continued, “Hearing this, the king’s fury against Takshaka was 
kindled. What Utanka said inflamed the Kshatriya like ghee poured into an 
agnikunda. Grief welled up inside Janamejaya, and he asked his ministers 
for an account of his father’s journey to Swarga. When he heard the 
circumstances of his father’s death from Utanka he was stricken with pain 
and sorrow.’ 

Here ends the canto named Paushya, of the Adi Parva of the blessed 
Mahabharata. 


>Asclepias gigantea 


CANTO 4 
PAULOMA PARVA 


uta Ugrasrava, son of Romaharshana and a master of the Puranas, stood 
Qreior the Rishis of Naimisha vana, during the twelve-year sacrifice of 

Saunaka Kulapati. He had studied the Puranas with meticulous devotion 
and knew them thoroughly. Hands folded, he said respectfully to the Sages, 
‘I have told you the story of Utanka in detail, and his tale was one of the 
reasons for King Janamejaya’s sarpa yagna, his snake sacrifice. What, holy 
ones, do you wish to hear now? What shall I narrate?’ 

The Rishis replied, ‘Son of Romaharshana, we will ask you whatever we 
most want to hear, and you must recount the stories, one by one. Our master 
Saunaka is at worship in the sacred agnigriha. He knows the divine legends 
of the Devas and Asuras. He knows well the Itihasas of men, the Nagas and 
Gandharvas. Further, Sauti, the learned Saunaka is the chief priest at this 
yagna. He is able, keeps his vratas faultlessly, he is wise, a master of the 
Shastras and the Aranyaka, speaks only the truth, is a lover of peace, 
mortifies his flesh, and performs tapasya by the laws laid down for austerity. 
All of us revere him. It is only proper that we wait for him. And when he 
sits upon this darbhasana, you shall answer whatever that best of Dvijas 
wants to know from you.’ 

Sauti said, ‘So be it. When that mahatman sits with us and asks me to, I 
will tell you sacred tales that deal with a variety of subjects.’ 

After a while, having finished all his karma, having worshipped the 
Devas with prayers and the Pitrs with tarpana, the great Brahmana Saunaka 
returned to the yagnashala, where the other Rishis of stern vows sat relaxed, 
with Sauti before them. And when Saunaka sat among the Ritviks and 
Sadhyas, he spoke to them. 


CANTO 5 
PAULOMA PARVA CONTINUED 


aunaka said, ‘Child, son of Romaharshana, your father studied all the 
Greranas and the Bharata, with Krishna Dwaipayana. Have you imbibed 

them, as well? Those ancient chronicles contain fascinating stories and 
the history of the first generations of Rishis, all of which we heard from the 
lips of your father. First of all, I want to hear the history of the race of 
Bhrigu. Recount that lineage, and we will listen carefully to you.’ 

Sauti said, ‘I have learnt everything that the noble Brahmanas of old, 
Vaisampayana among them, once studied and recounted. I have gleaned all 
the knowledge that my father possessed. O scion of the race of Bhrigu, 
listen then to everything that relates to that lofty race, honoured by Indra 
and all the Devas, by the tribes of Rishis and Maruts. Mahamuni, first of all, 
I will relate the history of this clan as told in the Puranas. 

The blessed Maharishi Bhrigu, we are told, was created by 
Swayambhuva Brahma from the agni during the sacrifice of Varuna. And 
Bhrigu had a son named Chyavana, whom he loved dearly. Chyavana had a 
virtuous son called Pramati. Pramati had a son named Ruru by Ghritachi the 
Apsara, and to Ruru, by his wife Pramadvara, was born a son named 
Sunaka. He, O Saunaka, was your great, exceptionally virtuous ancestor. He 
was devoted to sannyasa, had wide renown, was proficient in dharma, and 
pre-eminent among those that knew the Vedas. He was honest and self- 
controlled.’ 

Saunaka said, ‘O son of Suta, why was the illumined son of Bhrigu 
called Chyavana? Tell me all.’ 

Sauti answered, ‘Bhrigu had a wife named Pauloma, whom he loved. 
She became pregnant by him. One day, while the chaste Pauloma was in 
that condition, Bhrigu, foremost among those that are true to their dharma, 
left her at home and went out to perform his ablutions. 


At this time, a Rakshasa whose name was Puloma came to Bhrigu’s 
asrama. Entering, the Rakshasa saw Bhrigu’s irreproachable wife and was 
filled with lust, quite losing his reason on seeing her. The beautiful Pauloma 
entertained the Rakshasa with roots and fruit of the forest. The Rakshasa, 
aflame, was so delighted, good Rishi, he decided to carry her away, who 
was so pure and faithful. 

“T shall have what I want,” said the Rakshasa, and seizing the beautiful 
woman, carried her away. And it was true that her father had once betrothed 
her of the lovely smile to the same Rakshasa, though later he gave her to be 
Bhrigu’s wife with Vedic ritual. O Saunaka of the race of Bhrigu, this hurt 
rankled deep in the Rakshasa’s mind and he found the moment now to 
abduct her. 

The Rakshasa saw the agnishala in which the sacred fire always burned 
bright, and he asked the Fire God, the blazing elemental, “Tell me, O Agni, 
whose wife this woman is. You are the mouth of the Devas, you must 
answer me. Was this woman with skin soft as petals not first offered to me 
by her father? And did I not accept her? But then her father married her to 
the deceitful Bhrigu. Tell me truly if this beautiful woman is indeed the wife 
of Bhrigu, because I have found her alone today and mean to take her from 
this asrama by force, if she is the same woman. My heart burns to think that 
Bhrigu has this slender-waisted woman who was my betrothed.”’ 

Sauti continued, “Again and again, the Rakshasa asked flaming Agni if 
the woman was Bhrigu’s wife. And the god was afraid to answer. 

“O Agni,” said the Rakshasa, “you dwell within every creature, as the 
witness of their paapa and punya. Worshipful Agni, answer me truly. Has 
Bhrigu not stolen the woman that I chose to be my wife? Tell me truthfully, 
having been given first to me, is she not rightfully mine? When I have your 
answer, I will carry her away from this asrama, even before your eyes of 
fire. So answer me with the truth.” 

Sauti continued, “The Seven-flamed Deva listened to the Rakshasa and 
was dismayed, being afraid to tell a lie and equally afraid of being cursed 
by Bhrigu. At length, the god replied, hesitantly and slowly: 

“You did indeed first choose Pauloma, O Rakshasa, but you did not 
marry her with sacred rites and mantras. Her father gave this renowned 
beauty to Bhrigu because he wanted Bhrigu’s blessing. She was not 
formally given to you, Rakshasa; rather, Rishi Bhrigu made her his wife 
with Vedic ceremony and me for witness. This is she. Yes, I know her. I 


dare not tell a lie. O best of Rakshasas, lies never find honour in this 
world.” 


CANTO 6 
PAULOMA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, “O Brahmana, the Rakshasa heard what Agni said, in a flash 
Gssuned the form of a boar and carried Pauloma away as fast as the 

wind, even as quickly as thought. It was then that Bhrigu’s son, lying in 
his mother’s womb, was outraged by the violence and fell out of her body. 
For this he was called Chyavana. The Rakshasa saw the infant drop from 
his mother’s womb, shining like the Sun, and he instantly released Pauloma, 
fell down and became a mound of ashes. And the beautiful Pauloma, grief- 
stricken, O Brahmana of the race of Bhrigu, took up her child, Chyavana, 
the son of Bhrigu, and walked away. And Brahma, the Grandsire, Pitamaha 
of all, saw her, the blameless wife of his son, weeping pitiably. And Brahma 
comforted her, seeing how she loved her baby. The tears that streamed 
down Pauloma’s face became a great river. And that river followed the 
Maharishi Bhrigu’s wife. And the Pitamaha of the worlds saw that river 
flowing after Pauloma and he called it Vadhusara. And it flowed beside the 
asrama of Chyavana, her son. This was how Chyavana of great tapasya, the 
son of Bhrigu, was born. 

Bhrigu saw his child Chyavana and its beautiful mother. And the Rishi 
flew into a rage and demanded, “Who told the Rakshasa about you that he 
came to carry you away? O you with the sweet smile, the Rakshasa could 
not know that you were my wife. Tell me who told him, that I can curse the 
one who did.” 

Pauloma replied, “Owner of the six gunas! Agni Deva identified me for 
the Rakshasa, who carried me away, while I wailed like a kurari.* Your 
splendid son saved me, for when the Rakshasa saw him being born he 
released me, fell down and turned into ashes.” 

Bhrigu heard this and was furious. In rage, he cursed Agni, saying, “You 
shall eat all things, clean and unclean!” 


4 Female osprey 


CANTO 7 
PAULOMA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, ‘Enraged by the curse of Bhrigu, Agni Deva roared at the 
Grist “Brahmana, what is this rashness that you have shown me? What 

was my fault, who did everything, both to keep dharma and to speak the 
truth, impartially? The Rakshasa questioned me and I answered truthfully. 
A witness who lies about something that he knows ruins his ancestors and 
his descendants for seven generations, above and below. He who suppresses 
the truth that he knows is equally guilty. I could also curse you, except that I 
hold Brahmanas in high regard. You do know all about me, Bhrigu, yet I 
will tell you about my attributes again. So listen. 

Multiplying myself with tapasya, I assume myriad forms: at the daily 
hotra everywhere, at sacrifices that last for years, where any holy rites are 
performed: births, upanayanams, weddings, deaths, and at other yagnas. 
The Devas and Pitrs are worshipped and appeased by the ghee that is 
poured into my flames as offering, as prescribed in the Veda. The Devas are 
the sacral waters; the Pitrs are also the waters. The Devas and the Pitrs have 
equal rights to the Yagnas, Darshas and Purnamasas. The Devas are the 
Pitrs, and the Pitrs the Devas. They are identical beings, worshipped 
together and separately, too, during the different phases of the Moon. The 
Devas and the Pitrs consume what is poured into me. I am known as the 
mouth of the Devas and the Pitrs. On Amavasya, the new Moon, the Pitrs, 
and during Paurnima, the full Moon, the Devas are fed through my mouth, 
partaking of the ghee poured into me. Bhrigu, being as I am, the mouth of 
the Devas and Pitrs, how shall I then eat all things, clean and unclean?” 

Then Agni thought deeply for a while and withdrew from every place in 
which he burned: from the daily homa of Brahmanas, from all long 
sacrifices, from all holy rites, and every other ceremony. Deprived of their 
AUMS and Vashats, their Swadhas and Swahas, all the living were plunged 
in grief at losing their sacrificial fire. 


The panic-stricken Rishis went to the gods and said to them, 
“Immaculate ones! The three worlds are in turmoil that Agni has abandoned 
them and they cannot perform their sacrifices anymore. We beg you, say 
what must be done, without delay.” 

The Rishis and the Devas went together to Brahma. They told him about 
Bhrigu’s curse on Agni, and how the Fire God had withdrawn from every 
sacrifice and ritual. 

They said, “Master of Fortune, Bhrigu has cursed Agni to eat all things 
clean and unclean. But Agni is the mouth of the Devas and he first partakes 
of every sacred offering. He drinks the sacrificial ghee. How can he 
consume all things, clean and unclean?” 

The Creator of the Universe heard them and he summoned Agni. Gently, 
Brahma said to Agni, who was also the creator of all, and immortal, “You 
create and destroy the worlds. You preserve them. You support every 
sacrifice and ritual throughout the three worlds. You must not flout your 
dharma so the sacred rites are interrupted. You who consume the sacrificial 
ghee, who are the Lord of all things, why are you being so foolish? You 
alone are always pure in the Universe, and you are its only eternal 
foundation. I say to you, not all of you shall partake of all things, clean and 
unclean. Only the flames of your baser parts shall devour all things alike. 
Your body which, dwelling in the bellies of carnivores, devours flesh, shall 
also eat all things, clean and unclean. And as everything touched by the 
Sun’s rays becomes pure, so shall everything that is burnt in your flames be 
purified. O Agni, you are the supreme energy born from your own power. 
Then, O Deva, by your own tejas let the Rishi’s curse come to pass. 
Continue to receive the havis offered into your mouth: the offering that is 
yours and that which is for the other Devas.” 

Agni replied to the Pitamaha, “So be it,” and he left to follow Brahma’s 
dictate. The Devas and the Rishis also went to their homes, quite delighted. 
The Rishis performed their rituals and sacrifices as before. And the gods in 
heaven and all creatures of the world rejoiced. And Agni also rejoiced 
because he was free from having to sin. 

Thus, O Saunaka, owner of the six qualities, the Maharishi Bhrigu 
cursed Agni once in time out of mind. This is the ancient legend about 
Pauloma, the death of the Rakshasa, and the birth of Chyavana.’ 


CANTO 8 
PAULOMA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, “O Brahmana, Bhrigu’s son Chyavana Muni fathered a son by 
Sis wife Sukanya, and that was the illustrious Pramati of dazzling 

vitality. Pramati sired in Ghritachi a son called Ruru. Ruru begot on his 
wife Pramadvara a son called Sunaka. I will tell you in detail, O Rishi, the 
entire story of Ruru of boundless elan. Listen to it now, in full. 

Once there was a great Rishi called Sthulakesa of great tapasya shakti, 
deep gyana and compassion toward all creatures. Brahmana Muni, this was 
the time when Viswavasu, king of the Gandharvas, is said to have enjoyed 
sexual relations with the celestial Apsara Menaka. Bhargava, when her time 
came, Menaka delivered her child near the asrama of Sthulakesa. 
Abandoning the newborn baby on the banks of the river, O Brahmana, 
Menaka, who had neither pity nor shame, went away. 

The Rishi Sthulakesa, of great dhyana, found the infant lying forsaken in 
a lonely place on the riverside. He saw that it was a girl, bright as the child 
of an immortal, ablaze with beauty! Maharishi Sthulakesa, foremost of 
Munis, was filled with compassion. He took the child and raised her. The 
exquisite child grew up in his holy asrama, and the noble and blessed Rishi 
performed all the sacred ceremonies for her, beginning with the one at birth, 
as laid down in the divine Shastras. 

She excelled all those of her sex in goodness, beauty and every noble 
quality, so the maharishi called her Pramadvara. The pious Ruru once saw 
Pramadvara in Sthulakesa’s hermitage and his heart was pierced by Kama 
Deva’s arrow; he was stricken with love for her. Through his friends, Ruru 
told his father Pramati, son of Bhrigu, about his love. Pramati went to 
Sthulakesa of renown and asked for Pramadvara’s hand in marriage for his 
son. Her foster-father gave the maiden Pramadvara in betrothal to Ruru, and 
fixed the wedding for the day when the Varga-Daivata nakshatra, Purva- 
phalguni, was rising. 


A few days before the one appointed for the wedding, Pramadvara was 
at play with her sakhis and, her time come, stepped on a snake, which bit 
the lovely girl. She fell to the ground unconscious; colour drained from her 
face and all the vital signs of life fled her person, one by one, as she writhed 
in pain. Her hair limp and wild, she who had been so beautiful and 
attractive in life was the very opposite in death’s throes; her companions 
could hardly bear to look at her. 

In a while, calm came over her face and the reed-waisted girl, quelled by 
venom, lay as if asleep. Now she was even more beautiful in death than she 
had been alive. Sthulakesa and the other Rishis of the forest came and saw 
her lying there bright as a golden lotus. Many noted Brahmanas came to 
that place and they sat around the dead girl in pity and sorrow. 
Swastyatreya, Mahajana, Kaushika, Sankhamekhala, Uddalaka, Katha and 
Sweta of great fame; Bharadwaja, Kaunakutsya, Arshtishena, Gautama, 
Pramati, his son Ruru and other forest-dwellers came there as the news 
spread and, seeing Pramadvara lying dead, her life quenched by the snake’s 
poison, they sat there and wept. But Ruru could not stand the sight and 
stumbled away in agony.’ 


CANTO 9 
PAULOMA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, ‘While the illustrious Brahmanas sat around Pramadvara’s 
Scone Ruru ran deep into the jungle and he sobbed aloud; he wailed 
out his grief. 

Thinking of his love, he cried, “Ah, she that was so beautiful and 
delicate lies unmoving on bare ground. What could be more dreadful for us 
who knew her’? If I have been charitable, if I have performed any tapasya, if 
I have ever revered and served my elders, let all my punya be spent in 
bringing my love back to life. If since my birth I have restrained my 
passions, kept my vratas, let sweet Pramadvara rise alive from where she 
lies!” 

While Ruru lamented the loss of his bride to have been, a messenger 
from heaven came to him in the forest. Said the divine one, “O Ruru, you 
rail in vain against time. Blessed one, she whose days in this world have run 
out can never return. The mortal days of this daughter of a Gandharva and 
an Apsara are exhausted. So, child, snatch your heart back from sorrow.” 

Then he paused, before adding softly, “But, there are exceptions and the 
gods have already provided one condition by which life might be restored 
to her. If you can fulfil that condition, you might have your Pramadvara 
back.” 

Ruru asked, “Messenger from Swarga, what is the condition of the 
Devas? Tell me, tell me in detail, that I might fulfil it. Ah, good Duta, save 
me from this grief!” 

The divine messenger said to Ruru, “Ruru of Bhrigu’s clan, give up half 
your own life to her and Pramadvara shall live again.” 

Never hesitating, Ruru cried, “I gladly offer half my life if my bride 
returns to me, lovely as she used to be!” 

Then the Gandharva king and the divine messenger, both of them 
splendid and great, went to Dharmaraja, the Lord Death, and said to him, 


“If it please you, Lord, let Pramadvara’s life be restored with a portion of 
Ruru’s life.” 

Dharmaraja replied, “Devaduta, messenger of the gods, if it is your wish, 
let Pramadvara, Ruru’s betrothed, live again with a portion of Ruru’s life.” 

Even as Dharmaraja said this, Pramadvara of exquisite complexion rose 
from death as if from sleep: with a portion of Ruru’s life. Of course, his 
offering would shorten Ruru’s own life. 

On the auspicious day, their fathers joyfully married Ruru and 
Pramadvara with the proper rituals. The couple was devoted to each other. 
Ruru had a rare wife, lovely and bright as the filaments of a lotus, and he 
swore to wreak vengeance on all serpents for the snake that had bitten 
Pramadvara. Whenever he saw a snake, he would become furious and kill it 
with some weapon. 

One day, O Brahmana, Ruru went into a great forest, and he saw an aged 
serpent of the species called Dundubha lying on the ground. Ruru raised his 
staff in wrath, even like the Yama danda, to kill it, when the Dundubha 
spoke to Ruru, “I have done you no harm, O Brahmana! Why do you want 
to kill me in such anger?” 


CANTO 10 
PAULOMA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti continued, ‘When Ruru heard what the snake said, he answered, “A 
Grate bit my wife, dear to me as life. And I swore then that I would kill 
every serpent I saw. That is why I will now kill you with my staff.” 

The Dundubha said, “O Brahmana, the snakes that bite man are a 
different species from us. Why should you kill Dundubhas, who are 
serpents but in name? We are prey to the same misfortunes as other snakes 
but do not share their venom. We have the same sorrows but not the same 
strengths or joys. It is a mistake for you to kill the Dundubhas.” 

Rishi Ruru listened to the snake and saw how it trembled with fear, 
unlike a serpent, though it was indeed a snake, but more like a human; and 
he did not kill it. Ruru, owner of the six great attributes, asked the snake, 
“Tell me, O Dundubha, who are you really that lie here as a snake?” 

The Dundubha replied, “Ruru, I was once a Rishi and my name was 
Sahasrapat. The curse of a Brahmana transformed me into a snake.” 

Ruru asked, “O best of snakes, why did a Brahmana curse you? How 
long will you be a snake?” 


CANTO 11 
PAULOMA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti continued, ‘The Dundubha said, “Long ago, I had a friend called 
G kasama He had considerable spirtual power by his tapasya and was 

short-tempered and rash of speech. One day, while he performed the 
Agni-hotra, I made a snake of grass and playfully tried to scare him with it. 
He fainted from fright. But when he regained consciousness, that honest 
Rishi, who always kept his vows, cursed me in anger, ‘Since you made a 
snake of grass to frighten me, become a snake yourself, and as powerless as 
a grass snake, for you shall have no venom!’ 

O Muni, I knew how powerful he was by his penance. I bowed low 
before him, with folded hands and a pounding heart, and said, “My friend, it 
was only a jest to make you laugh. I beg you, pardon me and take back your 
curse.’ 

Seeing me desperate, the Sage was moved to pity. Still breathing hard he 
said, ‘I cannot revoke my curse and you must become a snake. But Muni, 
when Pramati’s pure-hearted son Ruru appears before you, the curse will 
end.’ 

You, my friend, are that same Ruru. When I have my true form back, I 
will tell you something that will benefit you.” The Dundubha was 
transformed before Ruru’s eyes and he was again an illustrious Brahmana, 
radiant as the day. 

He said to the powerful and peerless Ruru, “Best among created beings, 
sparing a life is the highest virtue, and a Brahmana should never kill any 
creature. A Brahmana should always be gentle and non-violent. This is the 
most sacred injunction of the Vedas. A Brahmana should be versed in the 
Vedas and Vedangas, and should inspire all men with faith in God. He 
should be kind to all creatures, truthful and forgiving. His prime dharma 
should be to study and remember the Veda. The dharma of the Kshatriya is 


not for you. To be stern, to wield a sceptre and to rule his subjects is the 
dharma of the Kshatriya. 

Listen, O Ruru, to how the race of serpents perished at Janamejaya’s 
sarpa yagna of old, and how a great Brahmana, Astika, master of the Vedas 
and potent with spiritual powers, delivered the Nagas.’”’ 


CANTO 12 
PAULOMA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti continued, ‘Ruru asked, “Best of Dvijas, why did King Janamejaya 
Gren to slaughter the race of serpents? Why did Astika save them, and 
how? Tell me in detail.” 

The Rishi replied, “Other Brahmanas will tell you the wonderful story of 
Astika.” Saying this, he vanished. 

Ruru ran here and there in the jungle looking for the disappeared Rishi. 
But he did not find him, though he ran far and hard; he fell exhausted on the 
ground. He thought of what the Rishi had said and was bewildered. The 
world spun round and he fainted. Regaining consciousness, he went home 
and asked his father to tell him the story of Astika. And his father told him 
that tale.’ 


CANTO 13 
ASTIKA PARVA 


Janamejaya, decide to sacrifice the race of snakes in the fire of a sarpa 

yagna? Suta, tell us every detail. Tell us why Astika, best among the 
twice-born, best among Rishis, rescued the Nagas from the blazing flames. 
Whose son was the king that undertook the terrible snake sacrifice? Whose 
son, also, was Astika?’ 

Sauti said, “Most eloquent Saunaka, the story of Astika is a long one. I 
will tell it in full, if you will listen.’ 

Saunaka said, “I am eager to hear every detail of the enchanted tale of 
the Rishi Astika, best among Brahmanas.’ 

Sauti said, “This tale was first told by Krishna Dwaipayana, and 
Brahmanas call it a Purana. Vyasa’s sishya, my Sage father Romaharshana 
once narrated the story when asked by the Munis of the Naimisa vana. I was 
there on that occasion and, great Saunaka, since you now ask me I will 
repeat the tale of Astika exactly as I heard it. Listen to the entire sin- 
destroying story. 

Astika’s father was as powerful as Prajapati. He was a brahmacharin, 
always in tapasya. He ate very little, was a great sannyasi, and his lust was 
under complete control. His name was Jaratkaru. Foremost among the 
Yayavaras, virtuous, keeping stern vratas, blessed with great taposhakti, 
Jaratkaru once went on a yatra through the world. Diverse places he visited, 
bathed in many sacred tirthas, and rested where night fell. Possessing 
enormous vigour, he practised such austerities as few men can, who are not 
souls of deep self-restraint. The Rishi lived imbibing only air, and he never 
slept at all. Ranging across the Earth like fire, one day he saw his ancestors, 
hanging in a great pit with their heads pointing down and their feet up. 

Jaratkaru addressed them, “Who are you that hang upside down by a 
rope of virana fibres being gnawed all round and all the time by the rat that 


Simm asked, ‘Why did that tiger among kings, the magnificent 


lives in this pit?” 

The ancestors said, “We are Rishis of stern vows; we are the Yayavaras. 
We sink down into the Earth because we have no descendants. We have a 
son named Jaratkaru. Alas, the wretched child lives a sannyasi’s life. He 
does not even think of becoming a grihasta, of taking a wife and having 
children! We fear that our clan will become extinct and that is why we are 
hanging in this hole. We have every wealth but live like indigents, in this 
misery. 

Noble stranger, who are you that grieve for us like a friend? Tell us who 
you are, best of men, that stands here and tell us why you grieve for us 
miserable ones.” 

Jaratkaru said, “You are my sires and grandsires, for I am Jaratkaru.Tell 
me how I can serve you.” 

The fathers answered, “Do everything in your power, child, to beget a 
son to continue our line. Then, noble boy, you will gain punya for yourself 
and for us. Not by good deeds or by long tapasya does a man acquire the 
punya that he does by becoming a father. Therefore, son, we command you: 
matry a wife and beget children. In this lies our highest welfare.” 

Jaratkaru said, “I shall not marry for my own sake, nor earn wealth for 
my enjoyment, but I will do both for your felicity. My condition, by the 
Shastras, is that I find a bride who bears my own name, and that her friends 
and family give her willingly to be my bride. But then, who will give his 
daughter to a poor man like me? I will cetainly accept any woman given to 
me as alms. O my fathers, I will do everything in my power to marry! I give 
you my word, and will not break it. Once I marry, I will have children so 
you might be saved and attain to the realms of eternal bliss.” 


CANTO 14 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, ‘Jaratkaru of great vratas ranged over the Earth in search of a 
Gores but found none. One day, he went into a jungle and, 

remembereing his ancestors, prayed thrice in a weak voice for a wife. 
Vasuki rose up before him and offered his sister to the Rishi. The Brahmana 
hesitated: did she have the same name as himself? Noble Jaratkaru thought, 
“T will not marry any woman that does not bear my own name.” 

The wise Rishi, of severe penance and great wisdom, asked mighty 
Vasuki, “Tell me, O Naga, the name of your sister.” 

Vasuki replied, “Jaratkaru, my younger sister is called Jaratkaru. I offer 
her to you; take the slender-waisted one to be your wife. I have kept her for 
you, O best among Brahmanas, so take her.” 

And he brought the lovely Jaratkaru, his sister, to the Rishi, who married 
her with proper rites.’ 


CANTO 15 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, ‘O foremost among the knowers of Brahman, the mother of 
Gite Nagas had cursed them once: “Agni, whose sarathy is Vayu the 

Wind, shall burn all of you at Janamejaya’s sarpa yagna!” It was in 
order to nullify that curse that Vasuki, king of snakes, married his sister to 
the Rishi Jaratkaru. When Jaratkaru had married the Nagina Jaratkaru with 
Shastraic rituals, a great soul was born to them, a son they named Astika. 
Astika was an illumined Rishi, who knew the Vedas and all their Angas. He 
regarded all beings with an equal eye, and allayed the anxieties of both his 
mother and his father. 

When, some time after Astika’s birth, a king from the Pandava line 
undertook a great sarpa yagna, it was Astika who delivered the Nagas, his 
brothers, maternal uncles and other serpents, too, from dying in the flames 
of Janamejaya’s snake sacrifice. 

Thus Jaratkaru delivered his father’s ancestors by begetting children. By 
his tapasya, O Brahmana, and by keeping many vratas and studying the 
Veda, he freed himself from all debt. Performing diverse yagnas, at which 
different kinds of offerings were made, he worshipped the Devas. By 
practising brahmacharya, he pleased the Rishis, and by fathering children, 
he gratified his Pitrs. 

Jaratkaru repaid the debt he owed his sires, who then rose into Swarga 
from the pit where they had hung. Acquiring profound spiritual merit, 
punya, after a long life of many years, Jaratkaru left his body and found 
heaven for himself, leaving Astika behind. 

This is the story of Astika. O Tiger of the race of Bhrigu, what would 
you hear from me next?’ 


CANTO 16 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


aunaka said, ‘Sauti, tell us in more detail about the life of the learned 
Si sage Astika. We are agog to hear more, for, O most pleasant one, 

you speak sweetly, with immaculate intonation, and your narration 
pleases us. Why, you speak as well as your father, who was always ready to 
please us. Tell us the whole story of Astika, even as your father told it to 
you.’ 

Sauti said, ‘O Chiranjivis, blessed with long lives, I will indeed tell you 
the story of Astika as I heard it from my father. Brahmana, in the Krita 
Yuga, the golden age, Prajapati had two daughters. Sinless Muni, the sisters 
were wonderfully beautiful. Kadru and Vinata became the wives of 
Kashyapa. Kashyapa found great pleasure in his two wives and he, who 
resembled Prajapati himself, granted them each a boon. 

When they heard this they rejoiced. Kadru wished for a thousand Nagas 
to be born as her sons, all of them equally splendid. Vinata wished for two 
sons stronger, greater, more powerful, having more vitality and splendour 
than Kadru’s thousand. 

Kashyapa said, “So be it!” granting Kadru her boon of a thousand sons, 
and Vinata hers for two. Vinata was delighted with her two superior sons, as 
was her sister with her thousand. “Carry the embryos carefully,” said 
Kashyapa, and then he went away into the forest, leaving his two wives 
pleased. 

Noblest of Dvijas, after a long pregnancy, Kadru brought forth a 
thousand eggs, and Vinata two. Their maidservants placed the eggs 
separately in warm vessels. Five hundred years passed; then one day 
Kadru’s thousand eggs cracked open, resonantly as thunder, and her 
thousand splendorous sons were born. But Vinata’s sons did not appear. 

Vinata was jealous, and she broke open one of her eggs before time. 
Inside, she found a child whose upper limbs were fully formed, but not the 


lower part of his body, which was still undeveloped, stunted. The child in 
the egg cursed his mother, “Since you broke my egg prematurely, you will 
be a slave. If you wait five hundred years and not try to crack open the other 
egg, the lustrous child within it will deliver you from slavery. If you truly 
want a strong child, you must lavish tender care on the egg for all these five 
hundred years.” 

Having cursed his mother, the child rose into the sky. Brahmana, he was 
Aruna, the charioteer of Surya, whom we see every morning at dawn. When 
five hundred years passed, the other egg burst open, and from it emerged 
magnificent Garuda, the serpent-eater. Bhriguvyaghra, as soon as he saw 
light of day, Vinata’s son left his mother. The Lord of all birds felt hungry 
and took wing in quest of the food that the Creator of all things had 
ordained for him.’ 


CANTO 17 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


jewel among horses, the calm and magnificent Uchchaisravas, whom 

the Devas worship. He arose when the Kshirasagara was churned for 
the Amrita, and he was divinely graceful, ever-young, Creation’s 
masterpiece, irresistibly vigorous and bearing every auspicious sign and 
mark upon his person.’ 

Saunaka asked, ‘Why did the Devas churn the Ocean for the nectar? 
How and when did the mighty and resplendent Uchchaisravas come forth 
from its waves?’ 

Sauti said, ‘There is a mountain called Meru, which appears like a great 
stack of blazing light, for its peaks reflect the golden rays of the Sun that 
fall upon them. Devas and Gandharvas come regularly to the Golden 
Mountain, past compare, immeasurable and unapproachable by men, to 
expiate their many sins. Terrible beasts of prey range over it, and numerous 
magically life-giving herbs illumine its sides. Meru is the first of mountains 
and stands towering, and kissing Devaloka, as it were. 

Ordinary folk cannot even dream of climbing Meru. Mystic trees of 
wishes and enchanted streams abound upon Meru, and its slopes and 
valleys ring with the songs of choirs of fabulous birds. Once the Devas met 
upon its jewelled peak in conclave. They had performed severe penance to 
obtain the Amrita, the nectar of immortality, and it seemed that the time had 
come for them to seek it. 

Seeing the celestial gathering’s anxiety, Narayana said to Brahma, “You 
must churn the Ocean with the Devas and the Asuras, and you will find 
divine medicament and jewels you cannot imagine, and many other 
wonders. O Devas, churn the Kshirasagara and you will discover the 
Amrita.” 


Se said, ‘Muni, about this time the two sisters saw the marvellous 


CANTO 18 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, “There is a mountain called Mandara whose peaks seem like 
Geioces It is the best of mountains, and cloaked by herbs growing 

thickly all over it. Countless birds sing their sweet songs upon it, and 
dangerous predators range its slopes. The Devas, Apsaras and Kinnaras 
come to sport and make love upon Mandara. It rises eleven thousand 
yojanas into the sky, and its roots plunge down as many yojanas into the 
earth. The Devas wanted to uproot it to use for their churning rod, but they 
could not. They came to Vishnu and Brahma, who sat together, and said, 
“Lords, tell us how we can dislodge Mandara to serve our purpose.” 

Son of Bhrigu, Vishnu and Brahma agreed. Lotus-eyed Vishnu gave the 
difficult task to the mighty Ananta, Prince of snakes. O Brahmana, Ananta 
tore up the mountain, with its forests and all the denizens of those forests. 

The Devas came to the shore of the Ocean with Ananta and said to the 
Sea of Milk, “Ocean, we have come to churn your waters to have the 
Amrita.” 

The Ocean replied, “Tathaastu! So be it, since I will have my share. I can 
bear the prodigious churning with the mountain.” 

The Devas went to the king of tortoises and said to him, “O Kuurmaraja, 
you must support the mountain on your back!” 

The Tortoise-king agreed, and Indra set the mountain on his shell. 

The Devas and the Asuras made a churning rod of Mandara, Vasuki their 
rope, and began churning deep for the nectar. The Asuras held Vasuki’s 
hood and the Devas held his tail. Ananta, who was with the gods, would at 
times suddenly lift the Naga’s hood and lower it as abruptly. Flames and 
black smoke spewed from Vasuki’s jaws. These turned into clouds, charged 
with lightning, and poured down rain that refreshed the tired Devas. 
Flowers also rained from every side over the gods, flying from the trees of 
whirling Mandara, covering them in cool fragrances. 


Then, O Brahmana, from the ocean deeps came a tremendous roar like 
the thunder of the clouds of the Pralaya, the Apocalypse. Countless fish and 
other creatures of the Sea were crushed by Mandara and perished in the salt 
water. Numberless denizens of Patala, the under-world, and of the world of 
Varuna, died. 

Great trees, with birds in their branches, upon spinning Mandara were 
torn up by their roots and flung into the water. Rubbing roughly against one 
another, many of these caught fire; fires broke out all round the churning 
and upon the mountain itself, licking through its forests. The mountain 
looked like a mass of black clouds veined with lightning. O Brahmana, the 
fire spread to the mountain, and immolated lions, elephants and the other 
creatures that lived on Mandara. 

Then Indra put out the fire with some lashing rain. 

After the churning had been underway for some time, O Brahmana, the 
extrusions of some herbs and treees, which were nectarine, mingled with 
sea-water, as did the liquid gold from the belly of the mountain. 

And the Devas drank this water and felt immortal. Slowly, the milky 
water of the churned Kshirasagara turned into ghee, because of those rare 
extrusions. But the Amrita itself still did not appear. 

The gods came before Brahma, Granter of boons, upon his Lotus throne, 
and said, “Sire, we are spent and have no strength left to continue churning. 
The Amrita has not yet surfaced and we must resort to Narayana to help us 
now.” 

Hearing them, Brahma said to Narayana, “Lord, bless the Devas with 
strength to churn on.” 

Narayana said, “Devas, I will infuse you with my own strength. Go, put 
the mountain back in place and churn the sea again.” 

Their strength renewed, the gods began churning again. In a while, the 
softly luminous Moon emerged, thousand-rayed, from the Ocean. Then the 
Devi Lakshmi, incomparable, clad in white, rose out of the waves, followed 
by the dazzling white Uchchaisravas, and the celestial ruby Kaustubha that 
Narayana wears upon his breast. 

Lakshmi, Soma and the Horse swift as the mind all came before the 
Devas. Now, the divine and original physician Dhanvantari rose from the 
waters, bearing a pale chalice with the Amrita. 

The Asuras saw him and roared, “It is ours!” 


Airavata, of mammoth body and with four gleaming white tusks, came 
forth. Indra who wields the Vajra, the thunderbolt, took him. The churning 
continued and, last of all, the dreaded poison Kalakuta appeared, smoking, 
staining the waves black. In a trice, it engulfed the Earth, blazing up like a 
fire. The toxic fumes of the Kalakuta stupefied the three worlds, Swarga, 
Bhumi and Patala. Brahma begged Siva to save the worlds, and Siva 
quaffed the poison to preserve creation. Maheswara held the Kalakuta in his 
throat, which was burnt blue, and from that time Siva is also called 
Nilakanta, blue-throated. 

Seeing all these wonders, the Asuras despaired, and prepared to fight the 
Devas for Lakshmi and the Amrita. Narayana summoned his Maya, his 
feminine power of illusion. He assumed the form of Mohini, a dark and 
irresistible seductress, and flirted with the Danavas, arousing them past 
reason. Enchanted by her, the Demons gave the chalice of Amrita, which 
they had snatched from Dhanvantri, into her hands.’ 


CANTO 19 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, ‘The Daityas and Danavas, the Asura sons of Diti and Danu, 
See in superb armour and bearing unworldly weapons, were ready to 

attack the Devas for the ambrosia. But Mohini, the Enchantress, 
deceived the Demons and gave the Devas all the Amrita, which they 
greedily drank, in their terror of the Asuras, and they became immortal. 

While the gods were drinking the nectar of immortality, a Danava called 
Rahu assumed the guise of a Deva and, sitting among them, he also drank 
the Amrita. But Surya and Soma discovered him and Vishnu lopped off 
Rahu’s head with the Sudarshana Chakra when the Amrita had only reached 
his throat. And the grisly head of the Demon Rahu, big as a mountain, rose 
into the sky and began to cry out dreadfully. 

The Danava’s headless body fell on the Earth, making her tremble, all 
her mountains, forests and islands. From that time, Rahu has hated Surya 
and Soma, and to this day he swallows them during the eclipses of the Sun 
and the Moon. 

Then Narayana was no more the Mohini of untold temptation, but 
Himself again, and cast inexorable astras at the Danavas, weapons that 
made them tremble, weapons that killed thousands of them in a wink. 

Thus, on the shore of the salt-water Sea, the dreadful battle between the 
Devas and Asuras, the Devasura yuddha broke out. Sharp javelins and 
spears, and thousands of every kind of weapon filled the air on every side, 
darkening the sky. Dismembered by the Sudarshana Chakra, mangled by 
swords, crushed by maces, pierced through by arrows, burned by astras, 
Asuras beyond count lay dead upon the Earth in pools of blood from their 
wounds and blood they had vomitted. A rain of heads glinting golden 
crowns and ornaments, hewn from their necks with razor sharp blades, fell 
onto the ground. Drenched in gore, great Asuras lay dead everywhere like 
ruddy peaks of mountains, so huge were they. 


And when the Sun rose in glory, thousands of warriors hacked at one 
another with diverse weapons. Screams rang out on all sides, and roars. 
Warriors that fought from a distance struck each other with arrows and iron 
javelins; those that fought hand to hand slew one another with blows of 
their fists. 

The air was thick with shrieks of pain. Everywhere deep voices roared, 
“Cut him down!”, “Run him through!”, “Off with his head!”, “At them!”, 
“Burn him!”’, “Kill!”, and “Forward!” 

As the battle raged, Nara and Narayana entered the fray again. Narayana 
saw the celestial bow in Nara’s hand and remembered his own weapon, the 
Sudarshana Chakra, scourge of the Danavas. No sooner did he think of it, 
that the Disc, bane of his enemies, bright as Agni, truly dreadful in battle, 
flared down from the sky. Receiving it, Narayana of limitless energy, his 
arms like the trunks of elephants, cast that blinding weapon, which could 
consume enemy cities in a flash, at the Asuras. Burning like the Fire that 
devours the world when the Yuga ends, the Chakra, wheeling everywhere, 
slew millions of Demons all around. 

At times it burnt them into ash mounds, at others desiccated them, 
flashing through phalanxes and whole legions in a wink; and sometimes, it 
went among them like an army of pisachas and drank their blood! 

On the other side, white as clouds from which the rain has fallen, having 
untold strength and fearless hearts, the Danavas flew up into the sky, and 
from a great height, hurled down a thousand mountain peaks over the 
Devas, harrying them constantly. Those huge mountains, like banks of 
thunderheads, flat-topped and mantled with trees, collided as they fell from 
the sky, with so many claps of thunder. 

And when a million warriors roared without pause and those wooded 
mountains clashed together, the Earth and all her forests trembled. 

Then Nara the divine appeared at the terrific battle between the Asuras 
and Siva’s Ganas. With golden-headed arrows, he smashed the falling 
mountains to dust, and covered the firmanent in a haze. Repulsed by the 
Deva legions, and seeing the blazing Sudarshana consuming their forces on 
every side and in the fields of heaven, many doughty Asuras plunged down 
into the Patalas in the bowels of the Earth, while others dove down deep 
into the salt-water Sea. 

The victorious Devas worshipped Mount Mandara and set him back in 
his place, so he was rooted again. Having the Amrita for themselves, the 


Devas shouted for joy, making Swarga echo with their shouts, and returned 
on high to their own realms. Great were their celebrations when they 
returned to Devaloka, and Indra and the other gods gave the chalice of 
Amrita to Narayana for safekeeping.’ 


CANTO 20 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


Ocean, and that was when Uchchaisravas, the original and peerless 
steed, also arose. It was this horse about which Kadru asked Vinata, 
“Tell me, good sister, briefly, what colour is Uchchaisravas?” 

Vinata answered, “The prince of all horses is perfectly white. What do 
you think, my sister? You say what colour he is, and let us make a wager 
upon it.” 

Kadru replied, “O my sister of the sweet smile, I think the horse has a 
black tail. Beautiful one, let us make a bet and let she that loses become the 
other’s slave!” 

Having made their wager, the sisters went to their homes, resolving to 
ascertain who was right about the colouring of Uchchaisravas the next day, 
by examining him closely. 

Kadru was bent upon winning the wager, and she commanded her 
thousand sons to become a thousand black hairs and immediately cover the 
divine steed’s tail. She would not become a slave! 

But when her sons, the Nagas, refused to do as she asked, she cursed 
them, “During the sarpa yagna of the wise Pandava king Janamejaya, Agni 
will devour you!” 

Brahma Pitamaha heard this savage curse of Kadru and knew that fate 
had subtly influenced the entire episode, for he saw that the race of serpents 
multiplied with alarming swiftness and threatened the rest of his creatures. 
Brahma and the other Devas gave their sanction to the curse of Kadru. The 
snakes were virulently poisonous, had great speed and strength and were 
vicious in the extreme; and it might be said that their own mother’s curse 
was for the good of the rest of creation. 

Fate punishes those that seek the death of other beings with death: with 
such observations, the Devas did not oppose Kadru’s curse, and went away 


So: said, ‘This is the tale of how the Amrita was churned up from the 


to their realms. 

Brahma called Kashyapa and said gently to him, “Pure one, vanquisher 
of all your enemies, their mother Kadru has cursed your sons the Nagas, 
huge and their venom virulent and always intent on biting other creatures. 
Do not grieve over the curse, my son, for the burning of the race of serpents 
in the sarpa yagna was written long ago.” 

The Creator of the Universe consoled Kashyapa and also taught him the 
secret vidya of rendering snakebites harmless.’ 


CANTO 21 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, “When the night ended and dawn broke, O you who are rich in 
Gecvassa Kadru and Vinata went impatiently to inspect Uchchaisravas. 

On their way, they saw the Ocean, into which all waters flow, vast and 
deep, rolling with waves, roaring mutedly, teeming with whale-eating 
timmingalas, monstrous crocodiles and thousands of other species, gigantic 
tortoises and other monsters of the deep. 

The Ocean was a veritable mine of all kinds of gems: the home of 
Varuna Deva, the wonderful abode of the Nagas, the Lord of all rivers, 
where the submarine fire of the Apocalypse slumbered, the refuge of the 
Asuras, the terror of all creatures, the majestic reservoir of water: the 
immutable Ocean. 

Holy is the Sea, benign to the Devas, the source of the Amrita, 
boundless, inconceivable, and altogether wonderful. Dark is the Ocean, 
subtly sounding with the speech of marine creatures, its waves roaring 
endlessly, and spinning with fathomless whirlpools. 

All creatures fear the Ocean. Stirred by the winds blowing from its 
shores, rising up agitatedly, it appears to dance with wave hands raised 
everywhere. Swelling and ebbing with the waxing and waning of the moon, 
father of Vasudeva’s mighty conch shell Panchajanya, treasure trove of 
jewels, the Ocean was once cloven and tossed about violently when 
Vasudeva of incalculable strength plunged into the depths of the Sea as 
Varaha, the Great Boar, to retrieve the Earth, Bhumi Devi, lying submerged 
on the bed of the Ocean, which is lower than the Patalas, the realms of 
nether. 

The Rishi Atri of vast tapasya and stern vratas could not fathom the 
deeps of the Ocean, not when he had toiled for a hundred years. Whenever 
a Yuga ends, the Ocean becomes the Ekarnava, the bed of Vishnu 


Padmanabha, while that God of measureless power lies plunged in Yoga 
Nidra, his plumbless sleep, his profound cosmic meditation. 

Sagara is the refuge of Mainaka, who fears Indra’s Vajra, and the 
sanctuary of the Asuras whenever they are vanquished in war. The Ocean 
offers water as ghee into the fire blazing out from the mouth of Badava, the 
Fire of the End, who has the form of a Sea Mare. Fathomless he is, and 
limitless, immense, immeasurable, the Lord of rivers. 

Kadru and Vinata saw thousands of mighty rivers plunging with haughty 
currents into the Ocean — even like rivals in love, each one wanting to be 
the first to unite with the beloved, each wanting to stop the others. 

They saw that the Ocean was always full, ever dancing with waves. 
They saw it was as deep as time and as wide as the sky, that awesome 
receptacle of water!’ 


CANTO 22 
ASTIKI PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, “The Nagas consulted among themselves and decided to do as 
Sie mother wanted, for if they did not she might well withdraw her 

love and burn them up. If, on the other hand, they pleased her, she 
might release them from her curse. They said, “We will make the horse’s 
tail black,” and they became the hairs on the tail of Uchchaisravas. 

Brahmanottama, best among Brahmanas, the sisters Kadru and Vinata, 
the daughters of Daksha, flew along in some delight to see the far shore of 
the Ocean. On their way they saw the calm, redolent and wonderful Ocean 
being suddenly agitated by the wind, and roaring. They flew quickly over 
it. 


CANTO 23 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, “Having crossed the Ocean swiftly, Kadru and Vinata alighted 
Sree Uchchaisravas. They saw that first of steeds, fleetest of all, was 

white as the rays of the Moon; however, its tail was black. Kadru made 
Vinata, who had lost their wager, her slave, and Vinata grieved very much 
and was dejected past telling. 

Meanwhile, when his time came, resplendent Garuda cracked open the 
egg in which he had lain so long and burst forth from it, dazzling the 
Universe. Ah, magnificent he was, beyond compare. He could assume any 
form at will, fly anywhere with a thought, and summon limitless strength 
and energy. 

He was like a mass of fire; he was terribly brilliant. His lustre was that of 
the fire at the end of the Yuga; his eyes were like streaks of lightning. As 
soon as he was born, he grew immeasurably and flashed up into the sky. 
Fierce he was, and his keening cries shook the firmament; he seemed as 
dreadful as a second Badava. 

When the Devas saw him, they were terrified and flew to Agni 
Vibhavasu. Bowing low to that deity of many forms upon his throne, the 
Devas said, “Agni, why have you spread your body out? The mass of 
flames you have extruded spreads everywhere to consume us!” 

Agni replied, “Enemies of the Asuras, it is not as you imagine. This is 
not I but great Garuda, as strong and as splendid as I am. He has been born 
to be the joy of Vinata and the mount of Vishnu. Why, the very sight of his 
refulgence has made you afraid! He is the son of Kashyapa, bane of Nagas, 
guardian of the Devas, and an enemy of the Daityas and Rakshasas. Come, 
let me show you.” 

The Devas said, “you are a Rishi, a knower of every mantra. You receive 
the largest portion of the havis from every sacrifice, always glorious.” 


Agni and the Devas cautiously approached Garuda. They worshipped 
him, the Lord of birds, why, the sovereign spirit of everything animate and 
inanimate in the Universe. 

“You are the destroyer of all things, the creator of all! You verily are 
Hiranyagarbha; you are Daksha and the other Prajapatis, the progenitors of 
creation; you are Indra; you are Hayagriva; you are the astra that Vishnu 
became in Siva’s hands when Rudra burned the Tripura; you are the Lord of 
the Universe; you are the mouth of Vishnu; you are the four-faced Padmaja; 
you are the Brahmana, wise; you are Agni, Vayu and the gods of everything 
in the Universe. 

You are gyana; you are maya, which binds us all; you are the pervasive 
Brahman; you are the Lord of the Devas; you are the great Truth; you are 
fearless; you are immutable; you are Nirguna Brahman; you are the energy 
of the Sun; you are the intellect; you are our great guardian; you are the sea 
of holiness; you are purity; there is no darkness in you; you own the sashta 
lakshana, the six lofty qualities; you are invincible in battle. 

All things came from you, O you of the magnificent deeds; you are 
everything that has been and all that has not yet been. You are pure 
knowledge; as Surya does the world with his rays, you illumine this 
Universe, animate and unmoving. You dim the splendour of the Sun, each 
moment, and you are the destroyer of all things. You are all that is mortal 
and all that does not perish as well. You are as splendent as Agni, and you 
burn up everything even as Surya burns the fallen creatures in anger when 
the age ends. 

O terrible one, you are proof against the fire that devours the Universe at 
the Dissolution, the Mahapralaya. Mighty Garuda, who range the 
firmament, we seek refuge in you. Lord of birds, awesome is your vitality, 
your irradiance that of fire, your brilliance that of lightning, which no 
darkness can approach. You are as lofty as the clouds; you are cause and 
effect, of matchless prowess and the granter of boons. 

Lord, the Universe is heated by your splendour of molten gold. Give 
refuge to the noble Devas, who are terrified by you and dash about hither 
and thither through the sky in their vimanas from that fear. Greatest of 
birds, Lord of all, you are the merciful Rishi Kashyapa’s son; be not wroth 
but take pity upon the Universe. You reign supreme; O, quieten your anger 
and watch over us. 


Your voice is like thunder and, at your cries, the ten cardinal points, the 
firmament, Swarga, Bhumi and our minds quail, O Avian. We beg you 
diminish your body that resembles Agni. Dim your lustre, which is like 
Yama’s when he is angry; for at the sight of your brilliance, our hearts lose 
their calm and pound out of all control. 

Lord of birds, be propitious to us that solicit your mercy. O lambent one, 
bless us with fortune and joy.” 

When the Devas and Rishis worshipped him, that bird of fair feathers 
dimmed both his energy and his fearsome brilliance.’ 


CANTO 24 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, ‘In truth, when it heard about its size and looked at itself, the 
Src made itself smaller. 

Garuda said gently, “Since you fear this dreadful form of mine, I will 
diminish myself. Let no creature be afraid.” 

Then Garuda, sky ranger, who could travel anywhere at will, who could 
call upon any degree of energy, set his brother Aruna upon his back and 
flashed away from his father’s asrama to his mother upon the far shore of 
the Ocean. He set the shining Aruna down in the east, just at a time when 
Surya had decided to consume the worlds with his blazing rays.’ 

Saunaka asked, ‘When did Surya want to burn the three worlds? What 
did the Devas do to provoke his wrath?’ 

Sauti said, ‘Anagha, sinless, Surya and Soma pointed Rahu out to the 
Devas, while he sat among them and drank the Amrita, when the Ocean was 
churned. Since then he hated them. When Rahu tried to devour Surya Deva, 
the Sun God became furious. He thought, “What I did benefited all the 
gods, but I alone must suffer for saving them, and no one comes to help me 
when the Demon is about to swallow me before their very eyes; instead, 
they watch calmly, as spectators. I will destroy the worlds for this 
callousness!” 

He journeyed to the western mountain. From there, he began to burn 
fiercely, to spew forth dreadful heat to consume the worlds. 

The great Rishis went to the Devas and said, “A terrible heat has arisen 
in the middle of the night, striking terror in every heart and threatening to 
destroy the three worlds!” 

The Devas and the Rishis went to Brahma and said, ““Pitamaha, what is 
this terrible heat at midnight that makes the worlds panic? Surya has not yet 
risen but it already seems as if the Apocalypse is here. Lord, what will 
happen when he rises?” 


The Grandsire replied, “Truly, Surya is preparing to rise today and burn 
the worlds. As soon as he rises, everything will become ashes. But I have a 
solution. We all know Kashyapa’s intelligent son Aruna. He has a vast body 
and great splendour. Let him sit before Surya as his charioteer, and he will 
absorb the dreadful heat of the Sun. By this the worlds, the Rishis and the 
dwellers in Swarga shall find their remedy.” 

At Brahma’s command, Aruna sat before Surya, and the Sun rose with 
his heat dimmed by Aruna’s huge form. This is the story of Surya’s wrath 
and how Garuda’s brother Aruna became his sarathy. Listen next to the 
answer to your other question.’ 


CANTO 25 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, ‘As I told you, the many-splendoured Garuda flew across the 
Sova to his mother’s side, where Vinata lived in misery, as her sister’s 

slave. Once Kadru called Vinata and said to her in the presence of her 
son, “Gentle Vinata, in the midst of the Ocean is an enchanting island where 
the Nagas dwell. Take me there!” 

Vinata, mother of the Bird of splendid feathers, carried her sister, the 
mother of the serpents, upon her shoulders to that island. Commanded by 
his mother, Garuda carried the Nagas on his back. Vinata’s sky-ranging son 
flew high, near the Sun, whose heat scorched the snakes and they fainted. 
Kadru saw her sons unconscious and began to pray to Indra. 

“I bow to you, Lord of all the Devas. I bow to you, slayer of Vritra. I 
bow to you, slayer of Namuchi. O thousand-eyed, O Consort of Sachi. I beg 
you to protect my sons from searing Surya with your rain! Best of the 
Devas, you are our great Guardian. Purandara, you pour down torrents. You 
are Vayu, the clouds, fire, and the lightning in them. You are the propeller of 
clouds, and you have been called the Great Cloud, which will darken the 
galaxies at the end of the Yuga. You are deafening thunder and the roaring 
thunderheads. You are the Creator of the worlds and their Destroyer. You 
are unvanquished. You are the light of all creatures, Aditya, Vibhavasu, and 
the Panchamahabhutas. You are the king of the Devas. You are Vishnu. 
With your thousand eyes, you are the final recourse. You are, O Deva, 
Amrita and the most precious Soma. 

You are the moment, the day, the bala, the kshana. You are the bright 
fortnight of the waxing Moon, and the dark fortnight, too. You are kaala, 
kashta, and truti. You are the year, the seasons, the months, the nights, and 
the days. 

You are the Earth with her mountains and forests. You are the sky, 
resplendent with the Sun. You are the vast Ocean, heaving with waves, 


teeming with whales, timmingalas that eat whales, and makaras, and 
countless fish. You have great fame, always worshipped by wise men and 
Maharishis, with their minds focused in dhyana. 

For the weal of all creatures, you drink Soma rasa at yagnas and the 
clarified butter offered with holy mantras. Brahmanas worship you with 
sacrifices to fulfil their desires. O incomparably strong one, the Vedas and 
Vedangas sing your praises, which is why wise Brahmanas who want to 
perform sacrifices study the Vedas carefully.” 


CANTO 26 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, ‘Upon having his praises sung by Kadru in worship, Indra, 
Sine of Devas, who rides Uchchaisravas, finest of steeds, covered the 

sky with bank upon bank of rainclouds, and commanded them, “Let fall 
your sacred and life-giving rain!” 

Crackling with lightning, roaring at one another in the firmament, the 
clouds loosed their rain in torrents. In that deluge, the sky looked as if the 
end of the Yuga had come. It seemed as if the sky danced madly with the 
waves risen into it, the roar of the clouds, the gashes of lightning, the 
violent winds that blew. Pitch darkness fell, which no ray of Sun or Moon 
pierced. Only the deluge raged on. 

The Nagas revived and were overjoyed by Indra’s downpour. The Earth 
was covered by water, and the cool, clear liquid flowed down into the 
Patalas. Bhumi Devi was covered by waves and waves of water, 
everywhere. 

The snakes and their mother arrived safely on the island called 
Ramaniyaka.’ 


CANTO 27 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, “Yes, drenched by Indra’s deluge, the Nagas felt cool and 
Graves Borne by the Eagle of white feathers, they arrived swiftly upon 

the island. The Creator had appointed that island to be the home of the 
makaras. 

First they saw the eerie Lavana Samudra, the Ocean of Salt. Then they 
beheld an exotic forest, washed by the waves of that Sea. They heard the 
heavenly music of Gandharvas and Apsaras. Wondrous trees grew thickly, 
bearing rare flowers and fruit. They saw magnificent mansions upon the 
island, with tanks brimming with lotuses. They saw shimmering, azure 
lakes, and scented fine breezes laden with the fragrance of incense. They 
saw that the trees here were those that grow only upon the Malaya 
Mountain, and they reached into heaven, so tall were they. Other trees, as 
lovely, had their vivid flowers blown everywhere by the breeze. 

That enchanted forest was dear to the Gandharvas, and they came to it 
always for it delighted them. The bees all around seemed drunk and 
maddened by the sweet honey they drank from the flowers. And the sight of 
all this was exceedingly delightful. In every way, that forest was charmed 
and full of rare delight and sacredness, and the sons of Kadru rejoiced to see 
it and to listen to the sweet songs of its birds. 

The Nagas commanded Garuda of great energy, “Fly us to another island 
as beautiful as this one and where the water sparkles pure. Sky ranger, you 
must have seen many exquisite places while flying through the air!” 

Garuda thought for a moment then asked his mother Vinata, “Why must 
I do the bidding of the snakes?” 

Vinata said to her son, who possessed every virtue, and enormous 
vitality and power, “Best of birds, I have fallen on bad times and become 
my sister’s slave. The snakes deceived me so that I lost my wager with my 
sister, which left me as her slave.” 


Hearing this, the dejected Garuda said to the serpents, “Tell me Nagas, 
what can we do to become free from our bondage to you?” 

The snakes replied, “Bring us the Amrita and then, O Bird, you will be 
free.” 


CANTO 28 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, ‘When the snakes said this to him, Garuda said to his mother, 
Sa will go and fetch the Amrita. But I want to eat something on my way. 
Tell me where I can feed.” 

Vinata replied, “On a remote island in the midst of the Ocean, the 
Nishadas have their beautiful home. Eat the thousands of Nishadas that live 
there, and then bring the Amrita. Remember never to harm a Brahmana, for 
of all creatures, a Brahmana must never be killed. An angry Brahmana is 
like Agni or Surya, like poison or a sword. A Brahmana is the master of all 
creatures, and is worshipped by the virtuous. Not even in anger must you 
kill a Brahmana; enmity with a Brahmana is a sin. My sinless child, neither 
Agni nor Surya is as devastating as an austere Brahmana when provoked to 
wrath. A good Brahmana can be known by various signs. He is the firstborn 
of all creatures, the foremost among the four varnas, the sire and master of 
all.” 

Garuda asked, “Mother, what is a Brahmana’s form, how does he behave 
and what is his strength? Does he blaze like fire, or is he of tranquil 
disposition? Mother, tell me the auspicious signs by which I can recognise a 
Brahmana.” 

Vinata replied, “My child, if you swallow a good Brahmana, he will 
savage your throat like a fish-hook or burn it like a live coal. O, never must 
you kill a Brahmana, not even in anger.” 

Out of her love for him, Vinata repeated herself to Garuda, “Your 
stomach will not receive or digest a good Brahmana.” 

Though she knew the incomparable strength of her son, she still blessed 
him with all her heart, for, having been deceived by the snakes, she was still 
grief-stricken. She said, “May Vayu protect your wings, and Surya and 
Soma your back; may Agni watch over your head, and the Vasus your 
whole body. 


I will also sit here, performing constant rituals for your wellbeing and 
success. Go, my son, and fulfil your mission.” 

Garuda spread his wings and flew up into the sky. Soon he fell upon the 
Nishadas on their island home, with terrible ferocity, like a ravenous Yama. 
He raised a squall of dust with his wingbeats, covering the sky; he drained a 
great part of the Sea, and lashed the forests of the mountains of that island 
with the waters. Then he spread his gigantic beak wide and blocked every 
highway of the Nishadas’ city. Not knowing where they ran, the panic- 
stricken Nishadas, blinded by the pall of dust, rushed into that yawning 
maw, even as birds in a forest swarm into the open sky when their trees 
shake in a gale. 

The hungry Lord of birds, serpent-eater, sky rover, of limitless strength 
and thought-like speed, clamped his beak shut, swallowing thousands of the 
Nishada fisherfolk in a blink.’ 


CANTO 29 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti continued, ‘Now it happened that a Brahmana and his wife also 
Gren down the throat of Garuda, and began to burn him like live coals. 
Garuda said to him, “O best of Brahmanas, I will open my beak and 
you must come out quickly, for I must never kill a Brahmana even if he 
sins.” 

The Brahmana said, “This Nishada woman is my wife. Let her come out 
with me.” 

Garuda said, “Bring the woman with you, but come out at once! Hurry, 
before the blazing juices of my belly digest you.” 

The Brahmana and his Nishada wife emerged in a trice and went their 
way, singing Garuda’s praises. Now Garuda spread his wings again and 
flew up once more into the sky, quick as a thought. 

He saw his father, and greeted him reverentially. The Maharishi 
Kashyapa asked him, “Are you well, my child? Do you have enough to eat 
daily? Is there enough food for you in the world of men?” 

Garuda replied, “My mother is well, as is my brother, and so am I. But 
father, I do not always get enough to eat, and am at poor peace for that. 
Now the Nagas have sent me to fetch the Amrita. I mean to find it and bring 
it back even today, so my mother’s slavery will end. My mother said to me, 
‘Eat the Nishadas.’ I ate thousands of them but my hunger is not appeased. 

Holy one, tell me what else I can eat to find the strength to wrest the 
Amrita away by force from the Devas. Tell me what I can consume, by 
which I can both satisfy my hunger and quench my thirst.” 

Kashyapa Muni replied, “This lake before you is sacred. It has renown 
even in Swarga. In it is an elephant, his head turned down, ceaselessly 
battling a great tortoise who is his elder brother. I will tell you about their 
enmity from another life. Listen to why they are here. 


Once, long ago, there was a great Rishi called Vibhavasu. He was a Sage 
with a quick and fiery temper. He had a younger brother called Supritika. 
Supritika did not want to hold his inheritance jointly with his brother and 
always spoke of partitioning it. 

Vibhavasu told Supritika, “Only fools who are blinded by the love of 
wealth ever think of partitioning their patrimony; for once the patrimony is 
divided the wealth will delude them and they will fight over it. After the 
division, invariably false friends will poison the selfish ones’ minds against 
one another, confirming their enmity. Further divided, they will surely fall, 
and complete ruin will swiftly overtake them. 

The wise never endorse the partitioning of a patrimony between 
brothers, because once that happens the brothers live in constant fear of one 
another and cease to honour the most sacred Shastras. But Supritika, you 
will not listen to my counsel but always want to cleave our inheritance. I 
say to you, you shall become an elephant!’ 

Supritika cursed Vibhavasu back hotly, “You will become a tortoise and 
live in water!’ 

And so, out of the love for wealth and property, these two have become 
an elephant and a tortoise. Both are proud of their great bodies and strength, 
and fight each other with unremitting hatred, without pause. Look, here 
comes the handsome and enormous elephant Supritika, as always in anger.” 

The giant tortoise heard him trumpeting and surfaced, agitating the lake 
violently. Seeing him, the elephant curled his trunk and rushed into the 
water. The mighty pachyderm beat the water roughly with his trunk, his 
head and tail; he stamped it angrily with his massive feet, so waves rose and 
the numberless fish in the lake were swept along upon them, panic-stricken. 
And the mountainous tortoise lifted his huge head high and, accepting the 
elephant’s challenge, swam eagerly forward for the encounter. 

The elephant was six yojanas tall and twice that measure around. The 
tortoise was three yojanas high and ten around. Wildly, full of wrath, the 
two began to butt and strike each other, their roars filling the air. 

Said Kashyapa Muni to his son Garuda, “Eat both these, bent upon 
killing each other. Eat that savage elephant who looks like a mountain and 
the ferocious tortoise like a bank of clouds, and then go forth to fetch the 
Amrita.” 

Kashyapa blessed Garuda, “I bless you for your battle against the Devas. 
May all things auspicious shower their blessings upon you — vessels brimful 


of holy water, Brahmanas, sacred cows, and everything else that can bless 
you. My mighty son, when you fight the Devas let the Riks, the Yajus, the 
Samas and all the profound mysteries of the Upanishads be your strength!” 

Garuda went to the side of the lake, and looked at the expanse of lucid 
water upon which waterbirds floated. Remembering what his father said, 
Garuda, swift as the mind, seized the elephant in one claw, the tortoise with 
the other, and soared into the sky. 

He came to a sacred place called Alamba, and saw many divine and 
lustrous trees there, kalpavrikshas. Those trees trembled in the gusts of 
wind that his wings raised. The trees of golden branches feared they would 
be broken. Seeing the kalpavrikshas shaking with fright, Garuda flew to 
some other trees, indescribably beautiful. They were gigantic, and their 
branches were made of many shimmering jewels and their fruits were of 
gold and silver. Water from the sea washed their trunks. 

Among these, and even loftier than the others, stood a great patriarchal 
Nyagrodha. Seeing Garuda flaring towards it, swift as the mind, that Pipal 
said, “Sit upon this branch of mine, a hundred yojanas long, and eat the 
elephant and the tortoise.” 

Garuda, best of birds, big as a mountain, alighted on that prodigious 
bough, and at once the great leafy branch, home to thousands of lesser 
birds, broke with a sound like a clap of thunder.’ 


CANTO 30 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, ‘As soon as Garuda’s feet rested upon it, that branch snapped 
Sie a twig. Garuda cast his gaze around him in wonder and saw 

Balakhilya Rishis hanging, head down, from the branch, in deep 
dhyana. Fearing that they would die if the branch fell on the ground far 
below, in a wink, still clutching the elephant and the tortoise in his claws, 
Garuda also seized the falling branch of a hundred yojanas in his beak. He 
rose into the sky with his new burden and the old one. The Rishis were 
wonderstruck at what the Avian had done, which no Deva could have 
achieved. 

They said, “Let this greatest of birds be called Garuda, for the 
impossible burden that he bears.” 

At his ease, Garuda flew through the sky and whenever he passed above 
a mountain it shook in the gusts from his wingbeats. Many lands and 
wonders he saw beneath him as he flew along at his great leisure. Then he 
spied a place where he could land softly, saving the tiny thumb-sized 
Balakhilyas: it was Mount Gandhamadana, dwarapalaka to the heavens. 

He saw his father Kashyapa sitting in tapasya upon the fragrant 
mountain. Kashyapa also saw his radiant and vital son, big as a peak, quick 
as light, deadly as a Brahmana’s curse, inconceivable, ineffable, fearsome, 
blazing like Agni, invincible so not the Devas, Danavas and the greatest 
Rakshasas could vanquish him; that sky ranger who could crush mountains, 
drain away whole seas, and, indeed, destroy the three worlds, looking as 
fierce as Yama. 

Seeing Garuda approach and knowing what his son wanted to achieve, 
the illumined Kashyapa warned him, “Be very careful, my son, for you 
might have to suffer if you are rash or impatient. If you annoy the 
Balakhilyas, who live by imbibing the rays of the Sun, they might smite you 
with their tapasysa shakti.” 


Then, for his son’s sake, Kashyapa addressed the Balakhilyas of great 
fortune, whose sins had been consumed in the fire of their asceticism. 

Kashyapa said, “You whose wealth is tapasya, Garuda is on a mission 
for the welfare of every living creature. Great is the task upon which he 
goes forth. Bless him, great ones.” 

When they heard what Kashyapa said, the little Munis relinquished the 
branch and went away to the sacred mountain Himavat to continue their 
tapasya. After the Rishis had gone, Vinata’s son spoke to his father, and his 
voice was unclear for the massive bough in his beak. 

Garuda asked, “Illustrious father, where shall I let down the arm of the 
tree? Show me a place where there are no men.” 

Kashyapa now told Garuda about a mountain, always covered with 
snow, full of sheer valleys and deep caves, where no ordinary creatures 
could go even in imagination. Kashyapa gave his son directions to find that 
mountain. Carrying the branch, the elephant and the tortoise, Garuda 
flashed away towards that inaccessible hidden mountain. The branch of the 
tree that he carried in his beak could not be circumscribed by a rope made 
from the stretched hides of a hundred cows. 

For lakhs of yojanas flew Garuda, in a mere moment. And following 
Kashyapa’s directions, he arrived over the isolated mountain and dropped 
the tremendous branch from his beak. It fell with a great sound, and that 
prince of mountains shook when the storm that Garuda’s spanless wings 
raised struck it. Its trees poured down their flowers in a helpless rain. Its 
jewelled peaks were themselves loosened and came crumbling down all its 
sides. 

The bough felled countless trees with dark leaves and golden flowers, 
which seemed like clouds with lightning in them. The fallen trees, dyed in 
mountain metals, shone as if the Sun bathed them in his light. 

Garuda now perched on the summit of that mountain, and ate both the 
elephant and the tortoise. Finishing his great meal, he spread his wings and 
rose into the sky, quick as a thought. 

In Devaloka, frightening omens appeared and the Devas trembled. 
Indra’s Vajra blazed as if in terror. Flaming meteors fell out of the sky, 
smoking, as plain by daylight as they might be in the night. The weapons of 
the Vasus, the Rudras, the Adityas, the Sadhyas, the Maruts and other 
Devas began to spend themselves in contention against one another. Why, 


nothing like this had happened even during the war against the Asuras, the 
Devasura yuddha. 

Rough winds blew, peals of thunder threatened to crack open the sky, 
and meteors continued to stream down in thousands. Without a cloud in its 
vacancy, the sky roared and roared. Blood flowed copiously from the body 
of the king of the Devas. The divine garlands the other Devas wore faded 
and they felt weak in all their limbs. 

Then clouds scudded into the sky and poured down a heavy rain of 
blood. The dust raised by the winds dimmed the lustre of the crowns the 
Devas wore. Indra, of a thousand yagnas, and the other gods trembled with 
fright and said to their Guru Brihaspati, “Master, what are these dreadful 
omens? I see no enemy on the horizon, then why do the very elements 
assail us?” 

Brihaspati replied, “O Indra of a thousand eyes, you have been careless 
and have sinned. And a being born by the tapas of the Balakhilyas, the 
mighty son of Kashyapa and Vinata, one who is a sky ranger and can 
assume any form he chooses, is coming to take the Amrita from you. The 
bird is the strongest of the strong and can do what seems impossible. He 
will indeed take the Amrita from you.” 

Indra said to the guardians of the Amrita, “Brihaspati says that a bird of 
measureless strength and energy is on his way to steal the Amrita. I am 
warning you, so he does not take it by force.” 

The Devas were amazed, but they prepared to defend the Amrita. All of 
them stood around the Nectar, and Indra who wields the Vajra of thunder 
stood with them. The Devas wore priceless golden breastplates, jewelled, 
and impenetrable armours of hide. They carried sharp blades and 
numberless other strange and powerful weapons, which gave off sparks of 
fire, and smoke. They carried chakras and spiked gadas, trisulas, 
khatvangas, all great and awesome: weapons suited to each great god, 
mystic astras: supernatural missiles. 

Wearing unearthly ornaments, splendid with the brilliant armour and 
weapons, the Devas waited, now calmly determined, those peerless ones, to 
protect the Amrita. They who could devastate the cities of the Asuras stood 
there in forms as awesome and bright as fire. The battlefield to be sparkled 
with thousands of spiked and jewelled maces, even as the sky was lit by the 
rays of the Sun.’ 


CANTO 31 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


aunaka asked, ‘Sauti, son of Suta, what was Indra’s sin, his 
Geetessness? How was Garuda born by the tapas of the Balakhilyas? 

How did Kashyapa Muni, a Brahmana, have the king of birds for his 
son? How was Garuda invincible and the strongest of creatures? How could 
he go anywhere at will? How did he have such boundless vitality? If the 
Purana has answers to these questions, I would hear them.’ 

Sauti said, ‘Indeed, the Purana deals with what you ask. Listen, O Dvija, 
to the answers to your questions. 

Once upon a time, Kashyapa Prajapati undertook a yagna to have 
children, a putrakama yagna, and the Devas, the Rishis and Gandharvas all 
came to help him. Kashyapa gave Indra charge of fetching the sacrificial 
fuel for the fire, and with him the Balakhilyas and all the other Devas. Indra 
of untold strength easily hefted a mountainous portion of firewood and was 
bringing it to the yagnashala. On his way, he saw a number of tiny, less than 
thumb-sized Rishis, who together carried along a single strand of a palasa 
leaf. Those Rishis were obviously starving, for they were skin and bones. 
Suddenly, they staggered into a pool of water collected in the indentation on 
the path made by the hoofprint of a cow. They flailed about and struggled in 
that minuscule pool. 

Purandara, Indra proud of his strength, looked at them bemused; then, 
laughing uproariously, calling out to the littke Munis in mockery, he left 
them there: why, he stepped right over their heads. Those Rishis blazed 
with sorrow and wrath. They prepared to perform a great yagna to have 
their revenge, and hearing about it Indra became terrified. 

Listen, O Saunaka, to what those excellent and austere Balakhilyas did. 
They poured ghee into a fire of sacrifice, chanting mantras loudly: 

“Let there be another Indra among the gods, who can fly anywhere at 
will, summon limitless strength and energy, and strike fear into the Deva 


king. By the fruit of our tapasya, let such a one arise, swift as the mind, and 
fierce!” 

And the king of the Devas, he of a hundred yagnas, heard about the 
Balakhilyas’ sacrifice, and flew to Kashyapa of the austere vrata for 
protection. When Prajapati Kashyapa heard what Indra said, he went to the 
Balakhilyas and asked them if their sacrifice had been successful. 

And those honest Rishis replied, “Let it be as you say!” 

Kashyapa pacified them, “At the word of Brahma, Indra has been made 
Lord of the three worlds. You Munis want to create another Indra, but it 
does not become you, noble Sages, to render Brahma’s word false. Yet, let 
not your sacrifice become futile: let there come into being another Indra, but 
a king of birds, a Pakshiraja of untold strength, vitality and speed. Indra 
begs you to take pity on him.” 

The Balakhilyas first offered Kashyapa Prajapati worship, then said to 
him, “Prajapati, our yagna is for an Indra! It is also a putrakama yagna for 
you to have a son. We leave its completion to you; do what you see as being 
proper and wise.” 

Meanwhile, Daksha’s chaste, fortunate, virtuous daughter Vinata wanted 
to have children and, having completed her worship and bathed, she came 
to her husband Kashyapa, in her fertile time. 

Kashyapa said to her, “Devi, the yagna I undertook has borne fruit, and 
you shall have what you want. Two heroic sons you will bear, who shall 
become lords of the worlds. Because of the tapasya of the Balakhilyas and 
by my own penance, your sons shall have great fortune and be worshipped 
throughout Swarga, Bhumi and Patala.” 

Kashyapa and Vinata came together and then he said to her, “Bear these 
auspicious seeds with great care. Your two sons will be the lords of all 
winged creatures. These valiant rangers of the sky will be revered in every 
realm, and have the gift of assuming any form they choose. 

The gratified Prajapati then said to Indra, “You will have two brothers of 
boundless tejas and strength, who will never harm you but be friendly 
towards you. Do not grieve anymore, you will continue to be Lord of the 
worlds. But never again slight those that worship the Brahman, nor dare 
insult the Munis, who are wrathful and whose curses are more potent than 
your thunderbolt.” 

Hearing this Indra’s fears were stilled, and he returned to Devaloka. 


Her purpose fulfilled, Vinata was also joyful, and, in time, she gave birth 
to two sons, Aruna and Garuda. And Aruna, of the flawed limbs, became 
the charioteer of the Sun. And Garuda was given sovereignty over the race 
of birds. O you of the line of Bhrigu, Bhargava, now hear about the great 
achievement of Garuda.’ 


CANTO 32 


ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, “Great Brahmanas, the Devas prepared for battle, and soon 
Geroceh Garuda appeared before those ones of light. When the gods saw 

how great he was, how bright and strong, they shook with fright; why, 
they began to strike one another with their weapons. 

Among those guarding the Soma was a certain Brahmana, the divine 
architect, measureless in might, bright as a bolt of lightning and terrifically 
vital. The encounter between Garuda and him lasted a mere moment, 
before, devastated by talons, beak and wings, the Deva lay dead on the 
field. 

Garuda raised such a squall of dust with his massive wings that the three 
Lokas were darkened by it, and the Devas swooned in that stormy darkness 
of dust. The immortal guardians of the Amrita were blinded and no longer 
saw Garuda. Then, freely, at his will, he raked them with beak and claw; he 
swatted them like flies with his wings; he mangled them as he chose in 
Swarga. 

Indra, God of a thousand eyes, commanded Vayu the Wind, “Scatter the 
dust quickly, Maruta, or we are lost!” 

Vayu blew away the pall of dust and, when they saw again, the Devas 
attacked Garuda. He began to roar like the stormclouds of the Pralaya, 
terrifying every creature alive. He spread his wings, and the king of birds 
rose into the sky, and the Devas armed with every conceivable weapon, 
including chakras bright as suns, saw him above them. Never pausing, 
Garuda attacked them from above, and indeed from every side, with a storm 
of many weapons, with talon, beak and wing. 

Raked by his claws, savaged by his beak, the Devas bled in rills. 
Overwhelmed by the lord of birds, the Sadhyas and the Gandharvas fled 
eastward, the Vasus with the Rudras to the south, the Adityas to the west, 


and the Aswins towards the north. Having great tejas, they retreated while 
fighting, always gazing back at their redoubtable enemy. 

Garuda battled the Yakshas, Aswakranda of great valour, Rainuka, the 
bold Krathanaka, Tapana, Uluka, Swasanaka, Nimesha, Praruja and Pulina. 
And the son of Vinata smashed them with wings, talons and beak, like 
punitive Siva himself, who wields the Pinaka in wrath when the Yuga ends. 
Those dreadful and fearless ones soon looked like great black clouds 
raining blood from all their limbs. 

Having slain the Yakshas or put them to flight, Garuda came to the 
chalice of Amrita. He saw that it was surrounded by fire on all sides. And 
the hissing flames of that fire covered the very sky and, fanned by gusts of 
wind, they seemed to want to devour the Sun himself. 

Shining Garuda sprouted ninety times ninety beaks, drained the waters 
of many rivers with them, flew back to the fire that guarded the Amrita, and 
doused it with those waters. 

Now he became diminutive, very small indeed, so he could enter into the 
niche where the chalice of Amrita was kept.’ 


CANTO 33 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, “Having assumed a golden body, bright as a Sundrop, the bird 
Sine flashed into the chamber of the Amrita like a cataract into a sea. 

He saw that a wheel, its edges sharp as razors, spun at great speed, 
endlessly around the Amrita. The Devas had created it to cut any hopeful 
thieves into slivers. Garuda made himself smaller still and easily flew 
through the deadly wheel. Now he saw two huge blazing serpents, forked 
tongues like streaks of lightning, jaws spewing fire, eyes aflame, restless 
and hissing like twin storms, their venom deadly. Their lidless unwinking 
eyes burned with quenchless ferocity. Either of them would have instantly 
made ashes of any intruder they spied. 

The bird of fair plumage threw dust into their eyes and, when they could 
not see, he set upon them, beak and talons flashing, from every side. In 
moments, Vinata’s son ripped those Nagas into shreds. 

Immediately, he took the chalice of Amrita from its niche, smashing the 
uncanny humming contrivance that surrounded it with a blow of his beak, 
and rose away with the nectar, at speed of thought. He emerged with the 
Amrita, but did not drink it, and tireless as ever, he flew homewards, 
dimming the light of the Sun in the sky. 

On his way, Vinata’s son met Vishnu in the firmament. Narayana was 
gratified that Garuda had not drunk the Amrita. That God who knows no 
decay said to the sky crosser, “I want to grant you a boon.” 

Garuda replied, “Let me then stay above you.” He said again, “Let me be 
immortal and free from every sickness without drinking Amrita.” 

Vishnu said to the son of Vinata, “So be it.” 

Garuda received the two boons, and said to Vishnu, “I also grant you a 
boon, so ask me for something, O owner of the six gunas.” 

Vishnu asked mighty Garuda to become his vahana, his mount. He made 
the Pakshiraja sit upon the flagstaff of his vimana, saying, “Even so you 


shall stay above me.” 

And King Bird replied to Narayana, “So be it,” and flashed away, racing 
the wind. 

As Garuda coursed along with the Amrita, Indra cast his Vajra at him. 
But Garuda only laughed when the thunderbolt fell on him. He said to 
Indra, sweetly, “I worship the Rishi Dadichi from whose bones the Vajra is 
made. I worship the Vajra and you, too, O Lord of the thousand yagnas. I 
feel no twinge of pain from your thunderbolt, but now I cast off one feather 
of mine, and you shall not find its end.” 

The Pakshiraja gave up one of his feathers and every creature saw that 
shining feather and felt incredibly glad, for it was so beautiful and radiant. 
They said, “Let this bird be called Suparna, he of the fair feathers.” 

Thousand-eyed Indra Purandara watched this magical happening and felt 
the bird was truly some very great Being, and spoke to him. Indra said to 
Garuda, “Pakshishreshta, O best of birds, I want to know the extent of your 
awesome strength, and I want to have eternal friendship with you.” 


CANTO 34 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti continued, ‘Garuda said, “Purandara, let there be friendship 
GQ pevscen us, just as you wish. You know my strength is hard to resist. 

Indra of a thousand yagnas, the virtuous never extol their own prowess, 
nor do they praise themselves. 

But since we are now friends and you ask me, I will tell you about my 
strength, though I repeat that never do the good speak of their own merits. 

O Sakra, I can bear the Earth, with all her mountains, forests, oceans and 
you yourself standing upon her, on a single feather of mine. I am blessed 
with such strength that I can bear the three worlds, and all they contain, 
mobile and unmoving, and never feel tired.” 

O Saunaka, when Garuda said this, Indra, king of the Devas, who wears 
the crown of the three worlds and always works for their weal, said, “Truly 
it must be as you say, for anything is possible with you. Accept my deep 
and heartfelt friendship now, and if you have no need for the Amrita, return 
it to me: for those to whom you are taking it will always be our enemies.” 

Garuda answered, “There is a reason why I am taking the Amrita. I shall 
not give it to anyone to drink, O thousand-eyed; as soon as I set it down you 
can make away with it again, O Lord of Swarga!” 

Indra said, “Greatest Avian, I am satisfied and I thank you. Ask me, O 
Pakshiraja, for any boon you want.” 

Garuda remembered how the sons of Kadru turned the tail of 
Uchchaisravas black, making his mother Vinata a slave. 

He said, “I will always do your bidding, O Indra. Let snakes become my 
food!” 

The slayer of the Danavas said to him, “So be it!” and flew to Hari, 
Devadeva, God of gods, Mahatman, and Lord of Yogins. Vishnu sanctioned 
everything Garuda had said. 


The lustrous King of Swarga said to Garuda, “I will bring away the 
Amrita as soon as you set it down,” and with that bid farewell to Suparna. 

Garuda flew like an arrow to his mother, and cried in joy to the serpents, 
his half-brothers, “I have brought the Amrita; let me set it down on some 
kusa grass. 

O Nagas, you must bathe and perform your worship, then come back 
here and sit down to drink it. And from today, as you promised, let my 
mother no longer be a slave, but free, for I have done what you asked, I 
have brought the Amrita.” 

The snakes said, “So be it,” and went to perform their ablutions. 

Meanwhile, Indra took the chalice of Amrita and flew back to Swarga. 
The Nagas bathed, performed their nitya karma, their daily devotions, and 
other sacred rites, and hurried back, in great excitement to drink the Amrita. 
They found the bed of kusa grass, on which the chalice had been placed, 
empty. In frenzy, they fell to licking the sharp grass and their tongues, 
bisected by the kusa blades, have been forked ever since. 

Having been touched by the Amrita, the kusa grass was sanctified and 
has been sacred ever after. This is how Garuda fetched the Amrita from 
Devaloka, and how the serpents had their tongues divided. 

Then Suparna sported in delight in the surrounding forest, in the 
company of his mother. Mighty and worshipped by all beings that traverse 
the sky, he further pleased his mother by feeding on the snakes. 

The man who listens to this story, or recites it to a gathering of pious 
Brahmanas, surely finds heaven for himself, for great is the punya to be 
gained by recounting the legend of Garuda.’ 


CANTO 35 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


aunaka said, ‘Son of Suta, you have told us why Kadru cursed her sons 
Sire serpents, and also why Aruna cursed his mother Vinata. You have 

told us how Kashyapa, their husband, blessed Kadru and Vinata with 
boons. You have told us the names of Vinata’s sons, but you have not told 
us the names of the sons of Kadru. We are keen to hear the names of the 
greatest among Kadru’s sons.’ 

Sauti said, ‘Great Munis, to name all the serpents would be a lengthy 
task, and I will tell you the names only of the main among them. Listen, O 
you whose wealth is tapasya. 

First born was Sesha, after him Vasuki. Then came Airavata, Takshaka, 
Karkotaka, Dhananjaya, Kalakeya, Mani, Purana, Pinjaraka, Elapatra, 
Vamana, Nila, Anila, Kalmasha, Savala, Aryaka, Ugra, Kalasapotaka, 
Suramukha, Dadhimukha, Vimalapindaka, Apia, Karotaka, Samkha, 
Valisikha, Nisthanaka, Hemaguha, Nahusha, Pingala, Vahyakarna, 
Hastipada, Mudgarapindaka, Kamvala, Aswatara, Kaliyaka, Vritta, 
Samvartaka, Padma, Mahapadma, Sankhamukha, Kushmandaka, 
Kshemaka, Pindaraka, Karavira, Pushpadanshtraka, Bilwaka, 
Bilwapandara, Mushikada, Sankhasiras, Purnabhadra, Haridraka, Aparajita, 
Jyotika, Srivaha, Kauravya, Dhritarashtra, Sankhapinda, Virajas, Subahu, 
Salipinda, Prabhakara, Hastipinda, Pitharaka, Sumuksha, Kaunapashana, 
Kuthara, Kunjara, Kumuda, Kumudaksha, Tittri, Halika, Kardana, 
Bahumulaka, Karkara, Akarkara, Kundodara, and Mahodara. 

These, O best of Dvijas, are the main Nagas. The sons of these and their 
sons are beyond counting: they are thousands of millions.’ 


CANTO 36 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


aunaka said, ‘Child, you have named many of the most powerful Nagas. 
What did they do when they heard about the curse?’ 

Sauti said, ‘Sesha, first among them, of great renown, left his mother 
and performed rigorous tapasya. Observing stern vratas, he sat in penance 
upon Gandhamadana, at Badari, at Gokarna, the forest of Pushkara, and the 
foothills of Himavat. He dwelt in those sacred places, some holy for their 
waters and others for their earth. 

Never swerving from his vows, single-mindedly, his passions under 
perfect control, he did tapasya. Brahma, Pitamaha of all, saw that ascetic 
with matted jata, wearing rags, and his body and skin shrivelled and 
parched by his severe austerities. 

Brahma said to the fortunate hermit of rare fortitude, “What are you 
doing, O Sesha? Think also of the well-being of the creatures of the worlds. 
Sinless one, you are afflicting every creature with your searing penance. 
Sesha, tell me what desire impels this tapasya.” 

Sesha replied, “All my full brothers are evil-minded, and I do not want 
to live among them. Grant me this boon, Lord. They are like enemies, 
always envious of one another, and that is why I am sitting alone in tapasya. 
I do not want to even see them. They are cruel to Vinata and her son. 

Is Vinata’s son, who ranges the sky, not another brother of ours? But 
they envy him. He is also much stronger than us through our father 
Kashyapa’s boon to him. Because of my brothers’ envy and _ their 
viciousness I am sitting here in tapasya, and I mean to cast off this body so 
that I never need to be with my evil brothers, even at another stage of our 
lives.” 

Brahma said, “Sesha, I know what your brothers are and they are in 
mortal danger from your mother’s curse: this I have ordained. Don’t grieve 
for them, but ask me for a boon. I am pleased with you and I will give you 


anything. You are set on the path of virtue; may your heart journey far down 
this high way and become ever more established in goodness and tapasya.” 

Sesha said, “Divine Pitamaha, Lord of all, this is the boon I want: that 
my heart always delights in goodness and in sacred tapas.” 

Brahma said, “Sesha, I am gratified with your self-denial and love for 
peace. But I have a task for you, O Naga: bear this world, unsteady with her 
mountains and forests, her seas, cities and asramas, so that she becomes 
stable.” 

Sesha said, “Lord of all creatures, bestower of boons, Lord of the Earth, 
Lord of the Universe, I will do as you say. Set Bhumi upon my head.” 

Brahman said, “Nagottama, best of snakes, burrow beneath the Earth; 
she will give you a tunnel to pass through. O Sesha, by bearing the Earth 
upon your head and holding her steady, you shall certainly do something 
that I will greatly value.” 

Then the elder brother of Vasuki, king of the snakes, entered a hole in 
the ground and passed through to the other side of the Earth. He supported 
the Goddess Bhumi Devi upon his head, with her girdle of seas. 

Brahma said, “Sesha, best of snakes, you are Dharma Deva himself, 
because you support the Earth, with all that she bears, by yourself, even as I 
might, or Indra.” 

The Naga Sesha, the Lord Ananta, of untold might, lives under the 
Earth, supporting her at the word of Brahma. The illustrious Grandsire, 
foremost of immortals, then gave Vinata’s son Suparna to Ananta, to help 
him.’ 


CANTO 37 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti continued, “Vasuki, best among Nagas, heard his mother’s curse 
Six wondered how to escape it. He consulted with his brothers, 
Airavata and the rest. 

Vasuki said, “Sinless ones, you know about the curse of our mother, and 
we must try to escape it. There is a remedy for every other curse, but none 
for one pronounced by one’s mother. 

When I think that this curse was spoken in the presence of the Almighty, 
Infinite and True One, my heart trembles. Ah, surely we are as good as 
dead. Otherwise, why did the Lord not prevent our mother from cursing us? 

We must waste no time, but think how we can escape the curse. You are 
all wise and intelligent. Together, we can surely find a remedy: why, even as 
the Devas found Agni of old, when the Fire God hid himself in a cave, we 
must find a way to stop Janamejaya from undertaking his sarpa yagna, a 
way to save our lives!” 

The assembled Punnagas, all wise sons of Kadru, then gave their counsel 
for avoiding death at the snake sacrifice. 

One group of serpents said, “We will disguise ourselves as lofty 
Brahmanas and go and tell Janamejaya, “This yagna of yours is sinful and 
you should not undertake it.’” 

Other Nagas said, “We should turn ourselves into his closest counsellors. 
He will certainly ask for our advice, and we shall tell him to avoid the sarpa 
yagna at all costs, listing the many evils it will bring down upon the world.” 

Another vicious Naga advised, “Let one of us bite the sacrificial priest 
who is to conduct the sarpa yagna. Indeed, let us kill every Brahmana alive 
that knows how to conduct a sarpa yagna and might become the Ritvik at 
the king’s sacrifice!” 

One more virtuous and kindly said, “This is evil counsel, and nothing is 
as dangerous as killing a Brahmana. When one’s life is threatened, one must 


depend on the ways of virtue to save oneself, for evil ways finally destroy 
the very world.” 

Another Naga suggested, “We will turn into clouds full of lightning, and 
pouring down rain onto the yagna fire, extinguish it!” 

Other snakes, the best of their kind, said, “Let us go in stealth by night 
and steal the vessel with the Soma rasa. That will interrupt the sacrifice.” 

“Let us unleash millions of our kind around the yagna, to bite men 
everywhere and spread terror and panic.” 

“Let us defile the sanctified offerings of food with excrement and urine.” 

“Let us become the king’s Ritviks, and ask for our dakshina when the 
yagna begins. He will be in our power and give us whatever we ask for. We 
can ask that the yagna be stopped.” 

“When the king swims in the river, let us bind him and carry him away 
to Patala. That way the yagna will never be performed.” 

Other Nagas, who thought themselves sage, said, “Let us go and bite 
Janamejaya. When he dies, the threat will have been torn up by its root. O 
you that hear with your eyes, this is our counsel, and let us decide on the 
best course and act immediately.” 

Now silence fell, and they waited for Vasuki to decide. After some 
moments’ thought, Vasuki said, “I do not like the counsel of any of you; I 
do not think any of it will benefit us. I think that only the grace of Kashyapa 
can save us. Nagas, my heart does not believe that there is another way that 
will truly bring welfare upon my race and me. I am anxious, for I am the 
one who must decide what to do, and I must take responsibility for the 
decision, the praise or blame for it.” 


CANTO 38 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, ‘When the other snakes and Vasuki had spoken, Elapatra said, 
Sve cannot prevent the sarpa yagna. Also, it is not from King 

Janamejaya of the Pandavas that this terror issues, so that we can avoid 
calamity by attacking him. O Vasuki, one cursed by fate has recourse only 
to fate; nothing else can save him. Fate is the root of our fear and anger. 

Listen to me. When she uttered her curse, I lay trembling in our mother’s 
lap. O Best among Nagas, O splendid Lord Vasuki, coiled there I heard 
what the shocked Devas said to Brahma Pitamaha. 

The Devas said, ‘Pitamaha, Devadeva, who but the vicious Kadru could 
give birth to such precious children and then curse them, even in your holy 
presence? And you, O Brahma, endorsed her curse, saying, “So be it.” Tell 
us why you did not prevent her, instead.’ 

Brahma replied, “The Nagas have multiplied. They are cruel, terrible and 
venomous. I did not stop Kadru because I wish the welfare of my other 
creatures. The serpents that are poisonous and those that otherwise sin, 
biting men and beasts for no reason other than the pleasure they take from 
inflicting pain and death, shall indeed be killed. But the serpents that are 
virtuous and harmless shall not be affected. 

Listen to how, when the time comes, the good snakes might escape 
death. In the race of the Yayavaras a great Rishi called Jaratkaru shall be 
born, wise and his passions controlled. Jaratkaru shall have a son called 
Astika. He will stop the sarpa yagna, and all the good snakes will escape 
death.’ 

The Devas said, ‘O knower of truth, on whom will the Mahamuni of 
great asceticism and virility father his illumined son?’ 

Brahma replied, “That best of Brahmanas shall beget a son of great tejas 
on a wife bearing the same name as him. Vasuki, king of the Nagas, has a 


sister called Jaratkaru. Astika shall be born to her, and he will save the race 
of snakes.’ 

Elapatra continued, “The Devas said to Brahma, ‘So be it then,’ and the 
Pitamaha returned to Brahmaloka, loftiest world. 

O Vasuki, I see your sister Jaratkaru here. I say to you, to save us all give 
her to the Rishi Jaratkaru as alms, to be his wife. For I heard that this shall 
be the means to our release from the curse, and the Sage is abroad seeking a 
wife who bears his own name.” 


CANTO 39 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, “‘Dvijottama, best of the twice-born, the serpents were 
Geeizntec when they heard what Elapatra said. 
“Well done!” they cried, and “Well said!” 

From that time, Vasuki raised his sister Jaratkaru with the greatest care 
and joy. Not long after, the Devas and Asuras churned the Kshirasagara 
together, Varuna’s domain. Vasuki, the mighty, became their churning-cord. 

As soon as the churning was over, the serpent king came before Brahma 
Pitamaha, with the Devas. The Devas said, “Lord, Vasuki suffers terribly 
for fear of his mother’s curse. He wishes for the deliverance of his race, and 
we beg you to remove his grief. This king of the Nagas has always been our 
friend and helpmate. Devadeva, be kind to him, assuage the fever in his 
heart.” 

Brahma replied, “Devas, let Vasuki do as Elapatra told him. The time 
has come, and only those that are evil shall die, not the good. Jaratkaru has 
been born, and the Brahmana sits in stern tapasya. At an auspicious time, 
Vasuki should give his sister to the Muni. Devas, Elapatra spoke the truth 
and nothing less.” 

Vasuki, king of the Nagas, ordered his people, who were gathered there 
in great numbers, “Keep a close watch on the Rishi Jaratkaru. As soon as he 
asks for a wife, come and tell me. The salvation of our people depends on 
its 


CANTO 40 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


aunaka said, ‘Son of Suta, tell me why the brilliant Muni whom you call 
Qoertiae was so named in the world. Tell us the etymology of that 

name.’ 

Sauti said, ‘Jara means to waste, and Karu implies vastness. This Rishi’s 
body was once enormous, and he gradually wore it away with relentless 
penance. O Brahmanas, Vasuki’s sister was called Jaratkaru for the same 
reason.’ 

Saunaka, the virtuous, said with a smile, ‘Yes, this is true, I have heard 
what you say before. But tell me how Astika was born.’ 

Sauti replied from what he knew from the Shastras. ‘After Vasuki 
commanded his Nagas to inform him the moment Rishi Jaratkaru asked for 
a bride, many days passed but the Sage continued his tapasya. His seed 
retained within his body in brahmacharya, he wandered the Earth without 
fear and showed no sign that he wanted to take a wife. 

Later, O Brahmana, a king named Parikshit was born into the race of the 
Kurus. Like his great-grandsire Pandu, he was mighty-armed, the greatest 
bowman of his time, and he was fond of the hunt. 

He ranged the jungles at will, hunting deer, boar, wolf, wild buffalo and 
many other beasts as well. One day, he shot a deer with an arrow and that 
creature ran from him, which no deer had ever done before. He chased it 
deep into the forest, even as Rudra once pursued the deer Yagna through the 
skies, bow in hand. 

This deer plunged deeper and deeper into the forest and the king after it. 
Exhausted and thirsty, Parikshit broke into a clearing and saw an emaciated 
Rishi who sat drinking the froth from the milk that some calves sucked 
from their mother’s teats. Running up to the Muni, and raising his bow, the 
tired and hungry king demanded, “Brahmana, I am Parikshit, son of 


Abhimanyu, and king of the Kurus. I shot a deer with my arrow and it 
escaped me. Have you seen the animal?” 

But that Muni had sworn a mowna vrata, a vow of silence, and did not 
reply. The king saw a dead snake lying nearby. In anger, he picked up the 
carcass with the end of his bow and draped it across the silent Muni’s 
shoulders. The Sage made no protest, and still spoke no word, good or bad. 
Parikshit’s anger left him; he was full of remorse. 

He turned back to his capital, while the Muni sat on in dhyana. The Sage 
knew that Parikshit was a tiger among kings, and a sovereign of dharma. 
Though he had been insulted, the Muni forgave the king and did not curse 
him. Parikshit of the race of Bharata did not know that the one he had 
insulted was a Rishi, otherwise he would never have behaved as he did. 

That Rishi had a son called Sringin, a youth gifted with great tejas, of 
solemn vows and profound penance, but easily angered and difficult to 
appease. He invariably sought to work for the good of all creatures and 
often sat rapt before his Guru, in dhyana and worship. 

At his Guru’s word, he was on his way home when, O Brahmanottama, a 
friend of his, another Sage’s son called Krisa told him what had happened 
to his father while he was away: how Parikshit had draped the dead snake 
round his neck. 

Sringin blazed up in anger, smoking like poison. 

Krisa said laughing, “Be not proud ever again, Sringin; though you are a 
Muni and have great tejas, your father wears a dead snake round his neck! 
Dare not speak haughtily to us true Rishis’ sons, ever again. You have lost 
your manhood today when you see your father with a dead snake round him 
and can do nothing about it. Ah, but your father has done nothing to deserve 
such humiliation, and that saddens me most of all, even as if I myself have 
been punished for some crime I did not commit.” 


CANTO 41 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, “Mighty Sringin’s eyes burned in wrath. He asked Krisa in a 
Sst dangerous voice, “How does my father wear a dead snake today?” 
Krisa replied, “King Parikshit draped the snake round your father’s 
neck.” 

Sringin asked, “What wrong did my father do that evil king? Krisa, 
answer me this, and I will show you the power of my tapasya shakti.” 

Krisa said, “The son of Abhimanyu was out hunting and wounded a stag 
with his arrow. The creature escaped him and he chased it through the forest 
and came upon your father sitting in dhyana. The excited and tired king 
demanded to know if your father had seen the wounded deer. 

Your father had taken a mowna vrata, and did not reply. Hungry, thirsty 
and tired, Parikshit repeatedly asked your father the same question and he 
got no reply. In anger, the king picked up the snake’s carcass with the tip of 
his bow and draped it round your meditating sire’s shoulders. Sringin, your 
father has yet to stir from his dhyana, and Parikshit has returned to his 
capital Hastinapura, city of elephants.” 

Sringin’s eyes turned red and, in the grip of fury, the Rishi’s son touched 
some holy water and cursed Parikshit. “In seven nights’ time, the serpent 
Takshaka will take the sinner Parikshit, who dares defile a Brahmana with a 
snake’s carcass, to the land of Yama!” 

When he had cursed the king, Sringin went home and saw his father 
sitting in dhyana, the dead snake still around him. Sringin’s anger and grief 
flared up again. He sobbed and said, “I have cursed the wretched Kuru king 
for what he dared do to you, and in seven days Takshaka’s bite will take 
him to the land of the dead.” 

But his father said, “My son, I am not pleased with you. Rishis should 
never give in to anger. We live in that great king’s country; he protects us 
with his dharma. We should forgive him any transgression. If you break 


dharma, my child, I say to you, dharma will break you. If the king did not 
protect us, we could never pursue our spiritual lives in peace and safety, and 
find the great punya that we do; he deserves a portion of our punya. 

Parikshit protects his subjects even as his great-grandsire did, and he 
should be forgiven anything he does. The Rajarishi was tired and hungry, 
and he did not know about my vow of silence. My son, a country without a 
king is plagued with all kinds of evil and disasters. 

The king punishes criminals, and the fear of punishment creates peace. 
In peace, the people pursue their svadharma, their natural duty, undisturbed, 
just as we do our spiritual lives and perform our sacred rites. The king 
establishes dharma; he brings Swarga to Bhumi. He protects yagnas from 
being desecrated or disturbed, and this pleases the Devas. They send down 
timely rains, which grow grains and herbs, which nourish and preserve 
men. 

Manu says that a sovereign Kshatriya ruler of the destinies of men is 
equal to ten Brahmanas who know the Veda. Parikshit did what he did 
because of exhaustion, hunger and ignorance of my vow. O, why have you 
cursed that great one in rash childishness? My son, in no way does the king 
deserve a curse from us.” 


CANTO 42 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, “Sringin said to his father, “Whether I have been rash or 
Gris, my father, whether you like it or not, whether what I have 

done is dharma or adharma, my curse shall not be proved vain. For I 
have never lied in my life, not even in jest.” 

His father Samika said, “My son, I know that you have great power and 
you are truthful. I know your curse will be fulfilled. Yet, even a grown son 
must always seek his father’s advice so the good son might find great fame. 
You are just a boy, how much more you need wise counsel. 

You are always at tapasya, but the wrath of even the illumined, who own 
the six lofty qualities, only grows. You do certainly keep your vows and 
observe dharma. But you are young, still rash and prone to anger, and I 
know that I must counsel you. 

You live eating the fruit and roots of the forest, and it is your nature to 
do so. You must not murder the punya that accrues from your asceticism, 
but kill this dreadful anger instead. You acquire your merit with great pain 
and effort; anger robs you of so much virtue. 

Those who lose their punya cannot find calm, and only calm bestows 
success on the long labours of Rishis. You must conquer your passions, 
especially your anger; you must become forgiving. With forgiveness a man 
gains worlds that even Brahma cannot have. 

I live the way of peace, and I must do whatever good I can. I must send 
word to the king and tell him that my son, a callow youth of undeveloped 
intellect, has cursed him in anger, at seeing what Parikshit did to me.” 

That Maharishi sent his disciple Gaurmukha of gentle manners and deep 
tapasya to Hastinapura, telling him that he must first enquire formally and 
politely after the king’s health and well-being, and only then deliver his 
dreadful message. 


Soon, Gaurmukha came to the city and the palace of the monarch of the 
Kuruvamsa. He first sent word of his arrival to Parikshit through a palace 
guard at the gate. 

When he entered the king’s sabha, Parikshit duly honoured the Dvija. 
When he had refreshed himself after his journey that Brahmana delivered 
his terrible message, exactly as his Guru Samika had instructed him to, in 
the presence of all the king’s ministers. 

Gaurmukha said, ‘Rajadhiraja, king of kings, in your kingdom there 
lives a Rishi called Samika, virtuous of soul, his passions controlled, 
peaceful, and given to stern penance. O tiger among men, while the Rishi 
kept a mowna vrata, you draped a dead snake around his neck with the tip 
of your bow. 

Samika himself forgave what you did, but not his son. Rajadhiraja, his 
son cursed you, without his father’s knowledge, that within seven nights the 
Naga Takshaka will kill you. Samika repeatedly asked his son to save your 
life, but, alas, there is no one who can undo the boy Sringin’s curse. 

Sringin still remains enraged, O King, which is why Samika has sent me 
to you, for your welfare.” 

The Kuru Rajarishi heard the savage message, and remembered his own 
angry sin. He became dejected and remorseful, especially when he heard 
that the Maharishi Samika had sworn a vow of silence. Parikshit felt doubly 
contrite when he realised how kindly and forgiving Samika was that he had 
sent Gaurmukha to warn him about the curse. 

The king, who looked like a Deva, did not grieve as much for his 
impending death, as he did for what he had done to the Rishi Samika. 

He sent Gaurmukha back, saying, “Let Samika Muni bless me.” 

When the messenger left, anxiety struck Parikshit like an arrow. He 
consulted his ministers and decided to immediately erect a mansion in the 
air, supported upon a single smooth column. Night and day, it would be 
closely guarded. All around it and within, too, there would be the finest 
physicians with the most potent herbs, and Brahmanas that were experts in 
the mantras of healing. 

Protected on every side, the king, surrounded by his ministers, 
discharged his dharma from that mansion. No one could approach him; 
why, they say the very air could not come near Parikshit. 

When the seventh day arrived, Rishi Kashyapa was on his way to 
Parikshit, to cure him after Takshaka inevitably struck: for the knowing 


Brahmana had heard all about the curse. 

The Prajapati thought, “I will cure the king after he has been bitten, and I 
shall gain punya by what I do and wealth also.” 

But Takshaka, who had assumed the guise of an aged Brahmana, 
accosted Kashyapa on his way. The prince among snakes said to that bull 
among Munis, “Where are you going in such haste? What urgent business 
makes you hurry so?” 

Kashyapa replied, “Today Takshaka will consume Parikshit of the House 
of Kuru, bane of his foes, with his venom. I am in haste because I am going 
to cure the great Pandava king after the snake, virulent as Agni, bites him.” 

Said Takshaka, “O Brahmana, I am the same Takshaka who will burn 
that Lord of the earth. Turn back Kashyapa, because you cannot cure one 
that I bite.” 

Kashyapa retorted, “I know the most powerful mantras for snakebite, 
and I will go to the king and cure him.”’ 


CANTO 43 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, ‘Takshaka said, “If what you say is true, let me see you revive 
Sirs pipal tree after I bite it. Brahmanashreshta, I will show you the 
power of my venom. You show me the potency of your mantras.” 

Kashyapa replied, “Bite the pipal then, O King of serpents, and I will 
bring it back to life.” 

Takshaka bit the tree, and his venom reduced the pipal to ashes. 
Takshaka said to Kashyapa, “First among Brahmanas, let me see you bring 
the lord of the forest back to life!” 

Kashyapa gathered the ashes in his hands and said, “By the power of my 
mantras, I will revive the nyagrodha before your eyes.” 

Chanting arcane incantations over the ashes, Kashyapa first sprouted a 
green shoot from the ashes; two leaves grew from the sprout. He set these 
down, and continued to chant. In no time, a full grown trunk appeared, 
branches, leaves and all, and the pipal, lord of the forest, stood there exactly 
as before. 

Takshaka breathed, “A miracle! O Mahamuni whose wealth is your 
tapasya, what other wealth do you desire that you go to cure the king? 
Difficult as it might prove, I will give you whatever you are after. 

Besides, remember that, because the king has been cursed by a Rishi to 
die of my bite, his lifespan has been shortened. O Kashyapa, your fame and 
honour pervade the three worlds. If you fail to restore Parikshit to life after I 
sting him, your fame will vanish like the splendour of the Sun during an 
eclipse.” 

Kashyapa said, “I am going for gold. If you give me the gold I seek, O 
Naga, I will not go to Parikshit for it.” 

Takshaka said, “Dvijottama, I will give you more gold than you expect 
from the king. So do not go to Hastinapura.” 


Kashyapa, best of Brahmanas, sat down for a moment and was plunged 
in dhyana. He meditated upon Parikshit and saw in his mystic heart that the 
lifetime of the Pandava monarch was indeed exhausted. He asked Takshaka 
for a great deal of gold and the serpent gave it to him. Taking the gold, 
Kashyapa turned back. 

Now Takshaka flashed on towards Hastinapura. On his way, he heard 
how Parikshit was living in a mansion in the air, protected by potent 
mantras and yantras that rendered snake venom ineffective, and by rare 
herbs and other specifics for curing snakebite. 

The snake thought, “I must use some deception to approach the king. 
What shall I do?” 

Takshaka sent some of his snakes disguised as Rishis to Parikshit. They 
brought gifts of fruit, kusa grass, and holy water. Takshaka said to these, 
“Go to the king, calmly, just as if you only want to give him the flowers, 
fruit and holy water. Show no anxiety or impatience.” 

Those snakes did as they were told; they brought those offerings to 
Parikshit, and he accepted the fruit, the grass and the water. Then he said to 
them, ‘““Now leave me.” 

When the snakes disguised as Rishis had left, Parikshit said to some 
ministers and friends that were with him, “Come, eat these excellent fruit 
that the Rishis brought.” 

Indeed, Fate impelled the king and his companions to eat those fruit. 
Fate made the king select for himself the fruit in which Takshaka had 
hidden himself. As the king bit into the fruit, O Saunaka, an ugly worm 
appeared from it, its eyes glittering black with coppery slits. 

The king saw the worm and laughed. Great Parikshit said, “The sun is 
setting on this seventh day, and I need not fear poison anymore. Takshaka 
has not come. Let this worm become the serpent king and bite me so the 
words of the Rishis are not proved false!” 

His time had come and his ministers laughed with him. Smiling, 
Parikshit put the tiny worm on his neck. In a flash the worm turned into 
gigantic Takshaka, eyes blazing, and wrapped his gargantuan coils around 
the king’s neck. With a roar, Takshaka bit that Kshatriya.’ 


CANTO 44 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, ‘The king’s ministers saw Parikshit in Takshaka’s coils and 
Sioned white with terror, and cried out. When Takshaka roared, they fled 

as a man. And as they ran, screaming, sobbing, they saw awesome and 
wondrous Takshaka flying through the sky above them, like the scarlet 
streak in a blue lotus, like the vermillion-filled parting that divides the hair 
on a woman’s head. 

The mansion in the air blazed up with Takshaka’s poison, and the king 
fell dead, burnt to ashes as if he had been struck by lightning. When 
Takshaka’s poison had consumed the king, his main minister and his royal 
priest, a most holy Brahmana, performed the last rites for him, though there 
was nothing left of the noble Parikshit for them to cremate. 

The citizens all gathered and crowned the dead sovereign’s minor son 
the new king. Janamejaya they called that scion of the race of Kuru. Though 
he was still a boy, Janamejaya was mature and wise in his mind. With the 
guidance of his counsellors and the royal priest, Parikshit’s eldest son ruled 
the kingdom even like his great-grandfather Yudhishtira. 

The ministers saw how he kept his enemies at bay, and went to 
Suvarnavarman, king of Kasi, and asked him for his daughter Vapushtama 
to be Janamejaya’s bride. Having made some enquiries about the young 
Kuru monarch, Kasiraja gave Vapushtama to be Janamejaya’s queen, with 
every proper ritual and ceremony. Janamejaya was delighted in his wife and 
he never gave his heart to any other woman, ever. 

Youthful and energetic, he ranged the world cheerfully with his lovely 
queen, journeying on rivers and lakes, and in forests and through fields of 
flowers, steeped in pleasure and joy. He enjoyed his life even as his ancestor 
Pururavas of old had, when the Apsara Urvashi became his. Vapushtama 
was the most beautiful of women and she pleased him in every way, as he 
did her.’ 


CANTO 45 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ eanwhile, the Rishi Jaratkaru ranged the Earth, making his home 

Me: the night wherever he found himself when the Sun set. He 

roamed at will, observing the most difficult vratas, which only 

evolved Sages can keep, and bathing at many holy tirthas. The Muni lived 

on just air for his food, and had no sensual desires of any kind. Daily, he 
grew more emaciated. 

One day, he saw the spirits of his ancestors, hanging heads down in a 
hole, by a cord of virana roots, of which only one strand remained 
unbroken. And that thread was gradually being eaten away by a large rat 
also living in that pit. And the Pitrs in the hole were starving, macilent, 
pathetic, and eager for salvation. 

Jaratkaru approached the pitiable ones humbly, and asked, “Who are you 
hanging by this cord of virana roots? Just one strand remains and the rat 
living in the hole gnaws away at it, and soon it will give way and you will 
plunge down into this bottomless pit, headfirst. 

Ah, my heart is moved to pity seeing you like this. Tell me how I can 
help you; I am prepared to sacrifice a quarter, nay a third, why a full half of 
my tapasya for you. No, take all my penance if you will, if that can save 
you from your plight.” 

His Pitrs said, “Brahmacharin, you want to save us but you cannot do 
that by your tapasya. Child, eloquent of speech, we have our own 
considerable tapasya, but we have no children, and that is why we are 
hanging here and shall soon plunge headfirst into hell. 

Brahma himself has said that having a son is great punya. We are 
bewildered as our time runs out swiftly. Child, we don’t know you though, 
no doubt, your fame is spread across the Earth. You are fortunate and 
venerable, who take such pity on us and grieve over our plight so sincerely. 


Brahmana, listen to who we are: we are Rishis of the Yayavara clan, of 
flinchless vratas. Muni, we have fallen into this pit from a lofty realm 
because we have no offspring. All our tapasya has not yet been consumed; 
we still have a single thread, by which we hang. 

Our one strand, our last hope, is called Jaratkaru. That unfortunate has 
mastered the Vedas and their Angas and he is a lone ascetic. He keeps lofty 
vows, engages in the most difficult penance, controls his desires perfectly, 
and has no desire for the fruit of his rigours. 

He just as well might not exist, as far as we are concerned: it is because 
of him that you find us in this condition. He has no wife, no son, no kin! 
And so we hang in this hole, barely sentient, men who have no one to look 
after them. 

If you ever meet him, be kind enough to tell him, ‘Your Pitrs hang head 
down in a hole in great sorrow. Jaratkaru, take a wife and beget children. 
Brahmana, you are the single thread by which your ancestors hang.’ 

Brahmana, the once many-stranded rope of virana roots by which we 
hang is the rope of our clan. The strands that have been eaten away are we 
whom time has devoured. The single root that remains is Jaratkaru, who has 
chosen brahmacharya. The rat you see is inexorable time. The rat gradually 
gnaws away at the wretched Jaratkaru, who thinks only of himself. 

Brahmana, his asceticism will not save us. Look how we have been 
uprooted from higher worlds and fallen down into this pit: barely conscious 
beings any more, gnawed incessantly by kaala, devolving like the worst 
sinners. And when the last strand gives way and we plunge into hell, 
Jaratkaru will go with us. Dear friend, no tapasya, yagna or any sacred 
pursuit can compare with a son. 

Child, you have seen us; we beg you, tell Jaratkaru about us in detail. 
Brahmana, since you are kindly disposed towards us, persuade him to marry 
and father children. Ah, we feel how lovingly you grieve for us, and we 
wonder who you are: a friend of Jaratkaru’s or, perhaps, even one of our 
own? Tell us, O fine one, who are you that remain here so patiently?”’ 


CANTO 46 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, “Hearing all this, Jaratkaru was plunged in gloom. His voice 
G choning tears in his eyes, he said to his Pitrs, “You are my sires and 

grandsires! I am the sinner Jaratkaru; so chastise me, wretch that I am, 
and command me what to do.” 

The Pitrs replied, “O son, son, truly it is our great fortune that you have 
arrived here on your wanderings. Brahmana, why have you not married?” 

Jaratkaru said, “My fathers, I have always wanted to keep my vital seed 
inside my body and thus take my body into the next world. So I decided 
that I would never marry, but always remain celibate. 

But now I have seen you hanging here like bats, I have turned my heart 
away from brahmacharya. I will do as you ask. I will marry if I can find a 
girl who has the same name that I do. She must give herself to me without 
my asking, as alms, and I should never have to maintain her. Sires, if I find 
such a woman I will marry, not otherwise. And the child that I beget on her 
shall be your salvation, O my fathers, and you shall live in grace forever, 
without fear.” 

Having given his word to his manes, Jaratkaru set out once more, 
wandering the face of the Earth again. O Saunaka, he was old and could 
find no wife, and he thought of his Pitrs hanging in their hole and he 
grieved terribly. However, he continued seeking a bride. 

Once, in a deep jungle, he was quite unmanned by sorrow and began to 
sob loudly. The Brahmana cried out loud, “I want a wife!” three times. “All 
of you that can hear, mobile and unmoving, and all that are here invisibly, 
hear me! My stricken manes have commanded me to marry and father a 
son. I range the world at my Pitrs’ word, in poverty and in dire sorrow, to 
find a wife who will be given to me as alms. 

If any among you has a daughter who bears the same name as I do, and 
one that I will not have to support, let him give her to me. O let him give 


her to me so I can save my fathers who hang precariously in the hole in the 
ground!” 

The snakes that had been following Jaratkaru, waiting for just this 
moment, sped back to Vasuki and told him what had happened. The Naga 
king took his sister Jaratkaru with him, decked in her finest ornaments, and 
went to the jungle where the Rishi was. 

Brahmana, there Vasuki offered his sister Jaratkaru as alms to the noble 
Sage. He did not accept her immediately: he was not certain that she had his 
name and also the matter of upkeep had not been settled. He was silent for a 
few moments, then, he asked, “What is the girl’s name? You must know 
that I shall not maintain her.’”’ 


CANTO 47 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, ‘Vasuki said to the Rishi Jaratkaru, “Best of Brahmanas, she 
Sie the same name as you do. She is my sister and has done tapasya. I 

will look after her, so take her for your wife. I swear that I will protect 
her with all my resources. Greatest of Maharishis, I have nurtured her 
carefully just for you.” 

The Rishi replied, “Do we agree that I shall not maintain her and also 
that she will always obey me? If she displeases me once, I will leave her.” 

Vasuki gave the Muni his solemn word on both counts. Jaratkaru now 
entered Vasuki’s home and took the hand of the serpent king’s sister, offered 
to him with all proper Shastraic ritual. Then, Jaratkaru Muni took his bride 
and went into the lavish apartment and bedchamber that Vasuki showed 
him. 

And in the private chamber was a great bed covered with priceless sheets 
of silk. The Rishi said to his wife Jaratkaru, “You must never say or do 
anything that is against my wishes or liking. If you ever displease me in the 
least thing, I will leave you and go away. Remember this well.” 

The Nagina princess, Vasuki’s sister, quickly agreed, in anxiety and 
some sadness, “So be it”. Wanting to be useful to her clan, for she knew 
why she had been married to the Rishi, that chaste princess served her 
husband with the wakefulness of a dog, the timidity of a deer, and the 
uncanny sensitivity to his mood, which a crow has. 

And one day soon, after her period was over, Vasuki’s sister purified 
herself with a ritual bath, went to her husband the Muni, and she conceived. 
The embryo was like a flame in her womb, of terrific tejas, and shone like 
fire. It grew inside her like the waxing moon. 

One afternoon, during her pregnancy, Jaratkaru of great renown, tiredly 
put his head in his wife’s lap and fell asleep. While he slept, the Sun entered 
his mansion in the Western Mountain and began to set. 


Brahmana, Vasuki’s sister became worried, she was afraid that her 
husband might lose his punya. She thought, “What should I do? Shall I 
wake my husband or not? He is exacting and meticulous in his rituals, and 
must say his twilight sandhya prayers before the Sun sets. But if I wake 
him, I risk his wrath. Which is worse: that he is angry with me or that he 
loses his punya?” 

Deciding that losing his punya was worse than risking his fury, Vasuki’s 
sister said in the softest voice to her great husband lying like a flame with 
his head in her lap, “Most fortunate, illustrious one, you must wake up. The 
Sun is setting and you must bathe, say the name of Vishnu, and perform 
your sandhya vandana. Twilight is upon us, my lord, awake.” 

Jaratkaru opened his eyes, his lips quivered in anger, and he said to his 
wife, “You have insulted me, O lovely Nagina, and I will no longer live 
with you but go back to where I came from. O woman of the soft thighs, the 
Sun cannot set while I am asleep in your lap. No one should continue to live 
where he has been insulted, least of all a Brahmana like me.” 

Jaratkaru, his wife, trembled with fear. She said to him, “Oh, Brahmana, 
I did not wake you from any wish to insult you. I only woke you so that you 
would not lose your punya by not observing your sandhya vandana.” 

Rishi Jaratkaru was furious and he wanted to abandon his wife. Said he, 
“Beautiful one, I have never spoken a lie, and leave you I shall. I have been 
happy with you but I did tell your brother that the day you displeased me I 
would go. When I have left, tell Vasuki that I have gone, and do not grieve 
for me.” 

Jaratkaru of faultless features was grief-stricken and terrified. Somehow, 
she mustered the courage to speak to her husband. Her heart trembled and 
she had gone pale. 

Folding her hands to him, tears streaming down her lovely face, she said, 
“It is not right that you leave me when I have done no wrong. You walk the 
way of virtue and so do I, with my heart set upon saving my race. Best of 
Brahmanas, the purpose for which I was given to you has not yet been 
fulfilled. What will Vasuki say to me? 

Brahmana, the son that my kinsmen want from me to save them from 
our mother’s curse is not yet born. I beg you do not leave me until you give 
me children. I am sinless, why are you being cruel to me?” 

The Muni Jaratkaru said to his wife, “You have conceived and the being 
in your womb is a Maharishi, brilliant as Agni himself, a master of the Veda 


and the Vedangas.” 
With that, Jaratakaru Rishi went away, his heart set on resuming his 
tapasya.’ 


CANTO 48 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, ‘O you that have such great punya, when her husband left, 
S aratkaru the Nagina went straight to her brother Vasuki and told him 

what had happened. Vasuki turned paler than his sister on hearing her 
news. 

He said in despair, “You know why you were given to be the Rishi’s 
wife. Only if a son is born to you by your husband can our race be saved 
from Janamejaya’s sarpa yagna. Brahma himself said so, with the Devas 
present. 

Sister, it is not proper for me to ask, but have you been with the Sage? 
Has he made you pregnant? I dare not follow the Rishi, for he might curse 
me if I do. But tell me everything that transpired between you two. Ah, 
remove the arrow of terror that has lain buried in my heart for so long.” 

Jaratkaru consoled her brother, saying, “My husband said to me that I 
have conceived, and then he went away. I have never known him to tell a 
lie, even jokingly. He would surely not have lied about such a grave matter. 
He said that I should not grieve, because I will have a son who blazes like 
Surya Deva. 

He said this much to me before he went away. So be comforted, my 
brother, and let the deep sorrow in your heart vanish.” 

Vasuki, king of snakes, cried in joy, “Tathaastu, so be it!” And he gave 
his sister the finest gifts and wealth, and praised her to the skies. Brahmana, 
the splendid foetus inside her grew like the Moon waxing during the bright 
fortnight. 

When her time came, the Nagina Jaratkaru gave birth to a child who was 
dazzling as a Deva child, and by his birth he assuaged the fears of his 
ancestors and his mother’s people. The child grew up there in the house of 
Vasuki, king of snakes. 


He studied the Vedas and their Angas from Chyavana Muni, Bhrigu’s 
son. And even when he was a mere boy, he kept the most stringent vratas. 
He was gifted with great intelligence, with virtue, knowledge and freedom 
from mundane indulgences. He was a saintly child. 

They called him Astika, which meant “There is”, for that was what his 
father had said before leaving, when his mother asked him if there was a 
child conceived in her. He was a solemn and grave child, endowed with 
exceptional intellect. The Nagas raised him with the greatest care, and they 
said that he resembled golden Mahadeva, who wields the trisula. As he 
grew, day by day, he was the delight of his entire clan.’ 


CANTO 49 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


aunaka said, ‘Tell me again in detail everything that King Janamejaya 
Sted his ministers about his father’s death.’ 

Sauti said, ‘O Brahmana, listen to what Janamejaya asked them and 
also to what they said in reply about the death of Parikshit. 

Janamejaya asked them, “You know what happened to my father. Tell 
me how that king of great renown met his end. Once I hear the truth from 
you I shall decide what is to be done, if it benefits the world. Otherwise, I 
will do nothing and let the matter pass.” 

One of the ministers replied, “Hear, O Rajan, about the life of your 
illustrious father, and also how he left this world. 

He was the most virtuous and noble Kshatriya, who always protected his 
people. Listen to how he conducted himself, why, like an embodiment of 
dharma, watching over the four varnas, each discharging their svadharma, 
and watching over Bhumi Devi. He was blessed with untold prowess and 
immense fortune. 

No one disliked Parikshit and he disliked no one. Like Brahma himself, 
he was equal-minded towards all the living. Rajan, your father protected 
Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Sudra, impartially. Widows and orphans, 
the deformed and the poor, he supported. 

He was as handsome as another Soma Deva. The matchless Saradwat 
was his Guru at arms. Janamejaya, your father was always dear to the Lord 
Govinda. He was born to Uttaraa when the Kuru race was almost extinct 
and, because he was tested with death while in his mother’s womb, 
Abhimanyu’s mighty son was named Parikshit. 

He knew the Shastras that describe the dharma of kings, in detail, and 
virtue was part of his nature. His passions were under his control; he had a 
profound and powerful intellect and a prodigious memory, the matchless 
Parikshit. 


He knew the nuances of dharma and politics as well, and he ruled over 
his people for sixty glorious years. Then he died tragically and was 
mourned by all his subjects. After him, you, great Janamejaya, were 
crowned when you were a mere child, and you have ruled the Kuru 
kingdom for a thousand years. Like your father, you are virtuous and 
protect every creature that lives in your land.” 

Janamejaya said, “Never has a king been born in the House of Kuru who 
did not seek the good of his people, or one that his people did not love. 
Consider especially my grandsires, the Pandavas of awesome deeds. 

But tell me again, how did my father, with all his virtues, meet his 
death? Describe everything to me as it happened. I want to hear it all.” 

Commanded by their sovereign, his councillors told him all that had 
happened. 

“Rajan, your father, guardian of the very Earth, foremost among those 
that live by the Shastras, became addicted to hunting, just like his ancestor 
Pandu Mahabaho, greatest among archers. He would leave the governance 
of the kingdom to us, from the most trivial to weighty matters, and be off 
hunting in the forest. 

One day, he shot a deer with an arrow and when it did not die, he 
followed it deep into the jungle, armed with his sword and his bow and 
quiver. However, he could not find the stag. Being sixty years old, he was 
soon tired and hungry. 

Suddenly, he saw in the heart of the forest a radiant Rishi. The Sage had 
sworn a mowna vrata, a vow of silence. The king asked him repeatedly if he 
had seen the deer, but the Muni made no reply. Suddenly, the king lost his 
temper at the Sage who sat like a block of wood. Parikshit did not, in fact, 
know that this was a Rishi observing a vow of silence. O Bharatarishabha, 
your father scooped up a dead snake that lay on the ground with the tip of 
his bow and draped it round the neck of the Rishi at his dhyana. The Sage 
still did not say a word, and no hint of anger touched his pure and tranquil 
heart. He sat on in silence, now with the dead snake around him.’ 


CANTO 50 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti continued, ‘The ministers said, “Maharaja Parikshit returned to 
G iiestnapura The Muni had a son, who was born of a cow; his name 

was Sringin. He was famed for his great spiritual powers and brilliance, 
and also his quick temper. 

He would go every day to the house of his Guru to worship and serve 
him. Released for the day by his master, Sringin was on his way home, 
when a friend of his told him what your father Parikshit had done to his 
father. Sringin heard that his sinless father now sat in meditation, as still as 
a statue, with a dead snake around his neck. Rajan, the Rishi whom your 
father mocked was a great Sannyasin, his passions restrained, always 
absorbed in tapasya and also performing many wonderful deeds. He was an 
illumined one, all his senses under perfect control. 

All that he did and said was invariably full of grace and sweetness. No 
greed or desire came near him; he was a contented one. No envy or 
pettiness touched him, or rage, never. He was old now and frequently kept a 
vow of silence. Most of all, he was a sea of kindness in whom any creature 
in distress could seek sanctuary. 

This was the Sage that your father insulted, and he did not react at all to 
what Parikshit did. However, when his son Sringin heard what had 
happened, he cursed your father in fury. Sringin was a mere youth, but he 
had potent spiritual powers. Touching holy water with his fingers, blazing in 
anger, he said, ‘Wretched king, behold the power of my tapasya shakti! I 
curse you that, within seven days, Takshaka will burn you with his poison, 
that you dared drape a dead snake around my father.’ 

Then Sringin went to where his father sat with the snake still around 
him. He told his father that he had cursed Parikshit. At once, his father sent 
a disciple of his, Gaurmukha, a good-natured, virtuous and well-mannered 
young man, to your father’s court, to warn him. 


Arriving in Hastinapura, Gaurmukha rested a while, and then delivered 
his master’s message to the king: ‘O Rajan, my callow son has cursed you 
that, in seven days, Takshaka will burn you with his poison. Be warned, 
Parikshit, take every care.’ 

Janamejaya, when your father heard the terrible message, he quickly 
made arrangements to take all precautions against Takshaka. 

When the seventh day arrived, Kashyapa Muni was on his way to your 
father, when Takshaka, disguising himself as a Brahmana, accosted him on 
the road. 

The Naga king said to Kashyapa, ‘Where are you going in such a hurry? 
On what business are you going?’ 

Kashyapa replied, ‘Brahmana, I am going to meet King Parikshit, best of 
the Kurus, for today Takshaka will burn him with his poison, and I shall 
restore him to life with my power.’ 

Takshaka said, ‘Why do you want to revive the king, Brahmana? I am 
Takshaka, and I say to you, you will fail to restore Parikshit to life after I 
have bitten him. You do not know how virulent my poison is. Let me show 
you.’ 

Takshaka buried his fangs in a great nyagrodha tree, a looming king of 
the jungle. At once, the tree was burnt to ashes. But Kashyapa, O King, 
revived it with his mantras. 

Takshaka was wonderstruck and said to the Sage, ‘Tell me what you 
want from Parikshit for saving his life.’ 

Kashyapa, said, ‘I am going to him for gold.’ 

Takshaka said softly, ‘Sinless, I will give your more gold than you 
expect from Parikshit. Take it and go home.’ 

Kashyapa Prajapati accepted a fair treasure from Takshaka, gold and 
jewels to his heart’s content, and turned back home. 

Takshaka disguised himself again, and going into the presence of your 
good father, who was living in a mansion in the air supported on a single 
column, blasted him with his poison, burning him to ashes. 

When your father’s last rites had been performed, O tiger among men, 
you were made the king. This is the story of how your father died, and we 
have told it to you as it happened, savage though it was. You have heard 
about how Maharaja Parikshit draped the snake around the Rishi Samika’s 
neck, how Sringin cursed him, and how horribly he died. Now you must 
decide what you want to do.” 


King Janamejaya, Parantapa, bane of his enemies, said to his ministers, 
“How did you know about the meeting between Takshaka and Kashyapa, 
about the pipal tree being burnt to ashes and then revived by the Muni? 

It is certain that Kashyapa could have saved my father’s life with his 
mantras. But fearing the world’s ridicule if he failed to kill noble Parikshit, 
the vile snake bribed the Rishi to return home. 

I have already thought of how I mean to punish Takshaka. However, the 
meeting between Takshaka and the Sage occurred in the heart of the jungle, 
on a lonely path. How do you know in such detail everything that was said 
and done on that occasion?” 

The ministers said, “Rajan, a Brahmana’s servant had climbed that pipal 
tree to break some dry branches for his master’s sacrificial fire. He told us 
about the meeting between the Sage and the Serpent king, and neither saw 
him. 

When Takshaka burned the tree, Rajadhiraja, this man was also reduced 
to ashes. When Kashyapa gave life to the tree, the fellow lived again, and 
came to tell us what had happened in the forest’s heart. Now you must 
decide what you will do to avenge your great father.” 

Janamejaya heard what his ministers said, and began to cry and to wring 
his hands in anguish on hearing how his father had died. The lotus-eyed 
king sighed and gasped; he sobbed and even screamed aloud. His eyes 
blazed, and he touched holy water with his fingers to sanctify what he was 
about to say. 

Composing himself somewhat, Janamejaya said to his ministers, “I 
thank you for telling me how my father perished. I have decided to take 
revenge on the malignant Takshaka. It is true that Sringin first cursed my 
father, but for what reason except the evil and pride in his heart did 
Takshaka turn Kashyapa back? If he had allowed the Sage to come to 
Hastinapura, my father’s life would have been saved. 

Takshaka did not know what my wrath would be when I discovered what 
he did. He gave gold to the Brahmana and turned Kashyapa back. In what 
way had my father offended Takshaka that he did this? Why, the Rishi 
Samika forgave my father easily. I will have terrible revenge on Takshaka, 
for my own satisfaction, for Samika’s and for the satisfaction of all of you 
that loved Parikshit.””’ 


CANTO 51 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti continued, ‘The ministers approved as a man, thunderously. 
S anamejaya, Lord of the Earth, that tiger of the race of Bharata, called 

his chief priest and his Ritviks. In chaste language, he said to them, “I 
must avenge myself on Takshaka for killing my father. Do you know how I 
can cast the low snake and all his clan into a fire? I want to burn the serpent 
just as he did my father.” 

The chief priest answered, “Rajan, there is a yagna by which you can 
accomplish your desire, a great sacrifice created by the Devas. It is called 
the sarpa yagna and has been described in the Puranas. Scholars that know 
the Puranas have told us that only you, mighty king, can perform the sarpa 
yagna.” 

O Saunaka, Janamejaya felt exhilarated as if Takshaka had already been 
burnt and flung into the blazing maw of Agni, which consumes the havis of 
every sacrifice. 

The king said to those Brahmana masters of mantras, “Let us prepare for 
the sarpa yagna! Tell me what you need for the snake sacrifice.” 

The king’s learned Ritviks measured out land for the yagnashala, as 
prescribed in the Shastras. The platform was adorned with auspicious and 
priceless articles required for the yagna, and with Brahmanas. 

Jewels in abundance, and paddy decked the yagnashala. The Ritviks sat 
upon it in comfort. When the dais was built, in strict accordance with 
Shastraic injunction, the Brahmanas installed Janamejaya as the Sacrificer, 
so that he could fulfil his purpose. 

Just before the sacrifice got underway, something happened that did not 
portend well for the completion of the sarpa yagna. As the yagnashala was 
being built, a professional Suta builder of great intelligence, an expert in the 
craft of laying foundations, and a master of the Puranas, declared, “The soil 
upon which this dais is erected and the time the measurements for it were 


taken both indicate that the yagna will not be completed, and a Brahmana 
shall cause its obstruction.” 

When the king heard this, he ordered his dwarapalakas not to let anyone 
enter the yagnashala without his permission.’ 


CANTO 52 
ASTIKA PARUA CONTINUED 


auti said, “The snake sacrifice began at the proper time, and the priests, 
Greate black robes and their eyes red from the smoke that issued from 

the agnikunda, poured ghee into the fire, chanting the prescribed 
mantras. 

They said the names of the Nagas aloud, as they poured clarified butter 
into the mouth of Agni, and chanted the dire incantations. Wherever they 
were, the hearts of the serpents quailed in fright. Drawn helplessly into the 
blazing fire, the snakes came from wherever they were, and piteously crying 
out to one another, fell into the flames. 

In millions, their bodies swollen, panting and hissing, they came and, 
twining around one another in their final moments, plunged headlong into 
the agni kunda. White, black, blue, old and young fell alike into the blaze, 
crying out in various voices. There were those measuring a krosa, others a 
yojana long, those of the length of a gokarna; and all of them fell in a 
torrent into that greatest of fires. 

Millions upon millions of Nagas died, with no control over their own 
bodies, pulled inexorably into the flames by the fell mantras of the priests. 
Amongst those that perished were some Nagas like horses, others like the 
trunks of elephants, and yet others as big as elephants and with the strength 
of pachyderms in musth. Varicoloured, their venom smoking and virulent, 
always vicious, looking like great maces with spikes, those Nagas cursed by 
their mother Kadru streamed into the leaping jaws of the flames and died.’ 


CANTO 53 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


aunaka asked, “Which Maharishis were the Ritviks during the sarpa 
Qyeem of Janamejaya of the line of the Pandavas? Who were the 

Sadasyas at the sacrifice so fearsome and tragic for the serpents? O son 
of Suta Romaharshana, tell us in detail so that we might discover which 
Rishis knew the rituals for that yagna.’ 

Sauti replied, ‘I will recite the names of the Sages who became 
Janamejaya’s Ritviks and Sadasyas. The Brahmana Chandabhargava was 
the Hotri. Great was his renown, and he was born into the lineage of 
Chyvana and was among the foremost masters of the Veda. 

The learned old Brahmana, Kautsa, was the Udgatri, and chanted the 
Vedic hymns. Jaimini was the Brahmana, and Sarngarva and Pingala the 
Adhvaryus. Vyasa with his son and disciples was present, and Uddalaka, 
Pramataka, Swetaketu, Pingala, Asita, Devala, Narada, Parvata, Atreya, 
Kundajathara, Kalaghata, Vatsya, old Srutasravas always absorbed in japa 
and the study of the Vedas. 

Kohala, Devasharman, Maudgalya, Samasaurava, and many other 
Brahmanas, all Vedic masters, became the Sadasyas, the guests of honour at 
that sacrifice of Parikshit’s son. 

When the Ritviks began to pour ghee into the fire, the most dreadful 
Nagas, who struck terror into every creature, began to pour into the flames. 
The fat and marrow of the snakes consumed by the fire flowed in streams. 
The air was filled with a fearful stench as the snakes burned. The screams of 
the snakes in the flames and those of the serpents about to fall into the 
flames were a single incessant cry. 

Meanwhile, Takshaka, prince of snakes, heard that Janamejaya had 
begun his sacrifice and he flew to Indra’s palace. Shaking in terror, 
confessing his sin, he sought sanctuary from Purandara. 


Indra said to him, ‘Takshaka, while you are here you have nothing to 
fear from the sarpa yagna. I worshipped Brahma for your sake, so have no 
fear.’ 

Sauti continued, “Taking heart from this, Takshaka began living in 
Indra’s realm, joyfully. But Vasuki, king of the Nagas, saw how his people 
died without let, how his family was being reduced moment by moment, 
and he was full of sorrow, his heart breaking. 

Calling his sister Jaratkaru, he said to her, “My body burns and I cannot 
see the cardinal points of the sky anymore. My mind is a whirl, my sight 
fails me, my heart is breaking and I am about to faint. I feel certain that 
Janamejaya’s fire, kindled to consume our race, draws me irresistibly, and I 
too will fall into it today. I feel certain that I will also find Yama’s realm for 
myself. The time has come, sister, for the purpose to be fulfilled for which 
you were married to the Rishi Jaratkaru. Best among Naginas, Astika must 
put an end to the sarpa yagna. Brahma himself told me this, long ago. Tell 
your son, my child, who is a master of the Vedas and so esteemed even by 
his elders, that he must save me and those that depend on me.””’ 


CANTO 54 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, ‘The Nagina Jaratkaru called Astika and said, “The time has 
Geom for you to fulfil your destiny, the reason why my brother gave me 
in marriage to your father. My son, do what you have to.” 

Astika asked, “Why did my uncle give you in marriage to my father? 
Tell me everything so that I might do what I feel needs to be done.” 

Jaratkaru, who remained calm though she was anxious for the lives of 
her people, said, “My son, Kadru is the mother of all the Nagas. Do you 
know that she cursed her sons in anger? She cursed them saying, “You have 
refused to become black hairs on the tail of Uchchaisravas, so that Vinata 
becomes my slave. I curse you that Agni, whose sarathy is Vayu, shall 
consume you all during Janamejaya’s sarpa yagna! And dying, you shall 
find hell for yourselves, where unredeemed souls dwell.’ 

And Brahma himself ratified her curse, saying, ‘So be it.’ 

Vasuki heard that curse and also Brahma approving it. My brother 
sought the protection of the Devas, by becoming their churning rope when 
they churned the Ocean for the Amrita. When they had the Amrita, the 
Devas took Vasuki to Brahma Pitamaha. They beseeched the Lotus-born 
One to nullify the curse of Kadru. 

The Devas said, ‘Lord, Vasuki, king of the snakes, is dejected for his 
people. How can his mother’s curse be turned away?’ 

Brahma replied, ‘Rishi Jaratkaru will marry a wife who bears his own 
name. The Brahmana born from her will save the Nagas.’ 

And so, Vasuki gave me to your noble father well before the sarpa yagna 
began. My child, radiant as a god, you were born from that union. That time 
of your destiny has come, and you must save my brother and me from 
Janamejaya’s fire. Tell me what you think, Astika my son.” 

Astika said simply to his mother, “Yes, I will.” 


He turned to the pale and terrified Vasuki and, as if breathing new life 
into him, said, “Great Vasuki, best of snakes, I will save you from the curse. 
Abandon your anxiety, there is nothing to fear anymore. Never have I 
spoken a falsehood, even in jest, so I certainly do not lie now. Let me go to 
Janamejaya’s sacrifice and pacify him with sweet words and blessings, too, 
and make him stop the sarpa yagna. O Nagaraja, trust me, for I will do as I 
have said.” 

Vasuki breathed, “Astika, my head spins and my heart is breaking. I 
cannot see the cardinal points anymore. Ah, my mother’s curse is upon 
me.” 

Astika said, “Nagottama, best of snakes, do not worry, for I will dispel 
your fear of Janamejaya’s fire. I will extinguish the flames of revenge that 
burn like the fire at the end of the Yuga.” 

Astika now sped away to the king’s sacrifice, taking, as it were, his 
uncle’s terror with him; the Nagas felt relieved. Arriving, Astika saw the 
wonderful yagnashala and the many Sadasyas seated upon the dais, holy 
men as bright as Surya and Agni. 

Janamejaya’s dwarapalakas refused to let Astika enter. Astika won them 
over with sweet words and blessings. Entering the yagnashala, that great 
Brahmana began to fulsomely praise the king of vast power and 
accomplishments, as well as the Ritviks, the Sadasyas, and the sacred fire.’ 


CANTO 55 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


stika said, “Soma, Varuna and Prajapati performed yagnas in time out 
Ac mind at Prayaga. O Bharatarishabha, son of Parikshit, your 

sacrifice is in no way inferior to theirs. Ah, may it bless those dear to 
me! 

Indra performed a hundred yagnas, but this one yagna of yours is equal 
to ten thousand of Sakra’s sacrifices, O Bharatarishabha, son of Parikshit. 
Ah, may it bless those dear to us! 

Your yagna is like the yagna of Yama, of Harimedha, or Rantideva, O 
Bharatarishabha, son of Parikshit. Let those dear to us be blessed! 

Like the sacrifice of Mayaa Danava, of King Sasabindu, or of King 
Vaisravana (at which he was himself the chief priest), is this sacrifice of 
yours, O Bharatarishabha, son of Parikshit. Let those dear to us be blessed! 

Your yagna equals the sacrifices of Nriga, of Ajamida, of Dasaratha’s 
son Rama, O Bharatarishabha, O son of Parikshit. Let those dear to us be 
blessed! 

Like the yagna of King Yudhishtira, the son of a Deva, of Ajamida’s 
race, renowned even in Swarga, is this sacrifice of yours, O 
Bharatarishabha, O son of Parikshit. Let those dear to us be blessed by it! 

Like the yagna of Krishna Dwaipayana, the son of Satyavati, in which he 
himself was the chief priest, is this sacrifice of yours, O foremost of 
Bharata’s race, O son of Parikshit. Let those dear to us be blessed by it! 

These Ritviks and Sadasyas who attend your yagna are as magnificent as 
Indra who slew Vritrasura, as splendid as Surya. There remains nothing that 
they do not know, and the gifts offered them produce inexhaustible punya. 

I am convinced that no Ritvik in the three worlds can equal your Ritvik 
Dwaipayana. Why, all his sishyas become matchless Ritviks and range the 
Earth performing their dharma. I see how Agni Deva—gold his seed and 
black smoke marking his path, Agni who is called Vibhavasu and 


Chitrabhanu—blazes with flames that sway to the right and bears your 
libations of ghee to the other Devas. 

O Janamejaya, no king on Earth protects his people as you do. O, I am 
pleased with your abstinence and your restraint. I feel that you are either 
Varuna or Yama the Lord of dharma. Why, you watch over the creatures of 
the Earth even like Indra, with his Vajra in hand. In this world, you have no 
equal for greatness and for sacrifice. I say that you are like Khatvanga, 
Nabhaga and Dilipa. 

You are as strong as Yayati and Mandhatri, as splendorous as Surya; 
your vows as stern as Bhishma’s, your hidden tejas like Valmiki’s, who sat 
covered by an anthill. Like Vasishtha you have mastered your anger. Your 
sovereignty is as Indra’s. Your grandeur and lustre are like Narayana’s. You 
dispense justice like Yama. Like Krishna, every virtue adorns you. 

You are as fortunate as the Vasus; you are the home of yagnas. You are 
as mighty as Dambodbhava. You are as much a master of the Shastras and 
arms as Jamadagni’s son Parasurama. Your tejas matches that of Aurva and 
Trita. Your gaze inspires terror even as Bhagiratha’s did.” 

With such fulsome adoration, Astika addressed Janamejaya, the 
Sadasyas, the Ritviks and the sacrificial fire. Janamejaya saw omens all 
around.’ 


CANTO 56 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


uta said, ‘Janamejaya said, “This is a boy, but he speaks like a wise old 
Sn He is not a boy but wise, an old soul. I think I want to grant him a 
boon. Brahmanas, I ask your leave to do that.” 

The Sadasyas said, “A Brahmana, even if he is a boy, deserves the 
respect of kings. A learned Brahmana more so. This boy deserves to have 
every desire of his satisfied, but not before Takshaka comes into your fire.” 

But the king was eager to grant the young Brahmana a boon. “Ask for a 
boon,” he said. 

The Hotri did not approve, “Takshaka has not yet come to our sarpa 
yagna.” 

Janamejaya said, “Let us strive to complete the yagna quickly. Takshaka 
must come and die, for he is my enemy.” 

The Ritviks said, “Rajan, the signs of the Shastras and the fire both say 
that Takshaka dwells in Indra’s realm, in fear for his life.” 

The illustrious Suta Lohitaksha, master of the Puranas, had already told 
the king this. 

When Janamejaya asked again why Takshaka had not appeared, the Suta 
replied, “Sire, the Brahmanas speak truly. I know the Puranas and I say to 
you that Indra has granted Takshaka a boon. Indra said to the Naga, 
‘Remain hidden with me and Agni will not burn you.’” 

Hearing this, Janamejaya the Sacrificer was dejected. He urged the Hotri 
to bend his will to his task. The Hotri chanted mantras, and poured more 
ghee into the fire, and Indra came there on high. 

The Deva came in his vimana, covered by thick clouds, with all the gods 
around him, and following him, Gandharvas and bevies of Apsaras. 
Takshaka, terrified, hid in Indra’s robe. 

In rage, Janamejaya cried again to his mantra-chanting Brahmanas, “If 
Takshaka hides with Indra, then cast him into the fire with Indra himself!” 


The Hotri poured more libations into the fire, calling Takshaka’s name. 
As the ghee fell into the flames, the terrified Takshaka was revealed in the 
sky with Indra. Purandara saw the yagna and grew afraid. He abandoned 
Takshaka in a trice and flew back to his world. Slowly, ineluctably, the 
potent maledictions drew the trembling Takshaka toward the flames.” 

The Ritviks said, “Maharaja, your yagna is complete. You may now 
grant the excellent Brahmana a boon.” 

Janamejaya said to Astika, “O Brahmana, so handsome and boyish, I 
want to grant you a worthy boon. Ask me for whatever you want, and I 
swear you shall have it even if it is something well nigh impossible to 
give.” 

The Ritviks said triumphantly, “Rajan, look how Takshaka draws close. 
Listen to his screams and roars as he nears the flames. Indra has forsaken 
him and, weakened by the mantras, he falls out of heaven. Look where he 
falls swooning, and hissing like a storm!” 

Just before Takshaka fell into the sarpa yagna fire, Astika asked 
Janamejaya for his boon. 

“O great King, if you want to grant me a boon, let this sacrifice of yours 
cease at once, and not another snake fall into the flames!” 

O Brahmana, Parikshit’s son was dismayed and pleaded with Astika, 
“Tlustrious one, I will give you gold, silver, cows, and whatever else you 
want, but don’t let my yagna stop.” 

Astika replied, “I do not want gold, silver, cows or anything else, O 
King, but only that this sacrifice ends and that my mother’s kinsmen are 
spared.” 

Again and again, Janamejaya begged Astika, “Brahmana ask me for 
another boon, and my blessings be upon you!” 

But, O Saunaka of Bhrigu’s race, he would not ask for another boon. 
Finally, the Sadasyas, all knowers of the Veda, said to Janamejaya in one 
voice, “Give the Brahmana the boon he wants!””’ 


CANTO 57 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


aunaka said, ‘Sauti, tell me the names of all the Nagas that fell into 
S anamejaya’s fire.” 

Sauti replied, “Billions of snakes fell into the fire, most excellent 
Brahmana, beyond count. But listen to the names of the main Nagas, as 
many as I can remember. 

First listen to the names of the kindred of Vasuki, who were coloured 
red, blue and white, all of them ferocious and their venom deadly. 
Helplessly afflicted by their mother’s curse, they poured into the flames and 
sizzled to death, just like libations of ghee. 

Kotisa, Manasa, Purna, Chala, Pala, Halmaka, Pichchala, Kaunapa, 
Chakra, Kalavega, Prakalana, Hiranyabahu, Charana, Kakshaka, 
Kaladantaka — all these sons of Vasuki fell into the fire. 

Brahmana, besides them, numberless other serpents, highborn, terrible 
and powerful, burned to ashes in the fire. Listen to those that died which 
belonged to Takshaka’s clan: Puchchandaka, Mandalaka, Pindasektri, 
Ravenaka; Uchochikha, Charava, Bhangas, Vilwatejas, Virohana; Sill, 
Salakara, Muka, Sukumara, Pravepana, Mudgara, Sisuroman, Suroman and 
Mahahami. 

Of Airavata’s kin, Paravata, Parijata, Pandara, Harina, Krisa, Vihanga, 
Sarabha, Meda, Pramoda and Sauhatapana perished. Brahmanashreshta, 
from the clan of Kauravya those that were burned to ashes were Eraka, 
Kundala, Veni, Veniskandha, Kumaraka, Vahuka, Sringavera, Dhurtaka, 
Pratara and Astaka. 

Of the kinsfolk of Dhritarashtra, who are as swift as Vayu and their 
poison virulent, Sankukarna, Pitharaka, Kuthara, Sukhana, Shechaka, 
Purnangada, Purnamukha, Prahasa, Shakuni, Dari, Amahatha, Kumathaka, 
Sushena, Vyaya, Bhairava, Mundavedanga, Pisanga, Udraparaka, Rishabha, 
Vegavat, Pindaraka; Raktanga, Sarvasaranga, Samhriddha, Patha, Vasaka, 


Varahaka, Viranaka, Suchitra, Chitravegika, Parasara, Tarunaka, 
Maniskandha and Aruni were consumed. 

Brahmana, these were the most prominent snakes that perished, known 
for their mighty deeds and accomplishments. I cannot begin to name all the 
snakes that died, for they were truly beyond count: the sons of the great 
Nagas that I have named died, and their sons. So many those flames 
devoured! 

Some had three heads, some had seven, others ten, and their poison was 
like the fire at the end of the Yuga and they were all dreadful to behold. 

There were others, immense, swift as lightning, lofty as mountain peaks, 
long as a yama, a yojana, even two yojanas, who could assume any form at 
will, and who were as strong as they wanted to be, their venom like Agni — 
all cursed by a mother, all of them became ashes in the flames of that great 
yagna.’ 


CANTO 538 
ASTIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, ‘Listen to something else rather wonderful that Astika did. 

When Janamejaya was about to grant Astika’s boon, Takshaka, 

abandoned by Indra and hurtling towards the Earth, suddenly stopped 
falling and remained suspended in the air. Janamejaya was puzzled by this 
since the Ritviks still chanted mantras and poured butter into the agni that 
blazed in his name.’ 

Saunaka asked, ‘Suta, were the mantras impotent that Takshaka stopped 
falling?’ 

Sauti replied, “While Takshaka plunged firewards, by now unconscious 
with weakness and fear, Astika said thrice, “Stay! Stay! Stay!” And at this, 
Takshaka remained suspended in midair. 

Then, urged repeatedly by his Sadasyas, Janamejaya said, “Let the yagna 
end and no more snakes perish. This is my boon to Astika.” 

Shouts of joy and praise rang through the air. Thus the sarpa yagna of 
the son of Parikshit, king of the Pandava race, stopped. Janamejaya, scion 
of the race of Bharata, was pleased with his sacrifice, and gave away untold 
wealth to the Ritviks and Sadasyas who had attended his great sacrifice. 

He also gave gold beyond count to the Suta Lohitaksha, the expert at 
building foundations, who had said before the yagna began that it would be 
interrupted by a Brahmana. The munificent king also gave Lohitaksha fine 
garments and food, and was gratified. 

Finally, that king concluded his yagna with the prescribed rituals. 
Showing Astika all reverence, Janamejaya sent him home in joy that his 
mission had been accomplished. 

Janamejaya said to Astika, “You must come again and be a Sadasya at 
my Aswamedha yagna, my imperial horse sacrifice.” 

Astika replied that he would, and returned home, the king and he both 
satisfied. Arriving home in delight, he touched the feet of his mother and his 


uncle, and he told them all that had happened. 

All the Nagas there heaved a great sigh of relief and were delighted with 
Astika that he had removed their fear. They said to him, “Gifted child, wise 
Astika, ask us for any boon.” 

Astika promptly said, “Let anyone who reads this holy story of what I 
did, either at dawn or dusk, with concentration and a cheerful heart, never 
have to fear anything from you.” 

The snakes said happily, “Let it be exactly as you want, nephew! 
Anyone that recalls the names of Astika, Artiman and Sunitha, by day or by 
night, shall have no fear of snakes. He who says, ‘I remember Jaratkaru’s 
son Astika, who saved the race of Nagas from perishing at the sarpa yagna, 
so do not harm me and go away, O Naga!’ shall be safe from every one of 
our kind. 

The snake that still bites such a man shall have his hood spilt in a 
hundred pieces like the fruit of the Sinsa tree.” 

That great Brahmana was satisfied and pleased. Now the Mahatman set 
his heart upon leaving the world, and when his time came, he rose into 
Swarga, leaving his son and grandsons behind. 

This is the tale of Astika, exactly as it happened. It is certainly true that 
relating this story dispels the fear of snakes. O Brahmanas, O Maharishi of 
Bhrigu’s line, I have told you the legend of the holy Astika just as your 
ancestor Pramati told it to his son Ruru. Listening to this tale fetches great 
punya, O Saunaka, and I hope that having told it from the beginning, I have 
satisfied your curiosity.’ 


CANTO 59 
ADIVAMSAVATARANA PARVA 


aunaka said, ‘Child, Suta, I am very pleased with you that you have told 
Sr this story beginning with the sons of Bhrigu. Now I ask you again, 

to narrate for us, O Ugrasravas, the Bharata that Vyasa composed. I 
want to hear all the myriad and exciting stories told among those illumined 
Sadasyas who came to Janamejaya’s sarpa yagna, during the intervals 
between the rituals they performed at the prolonged sacrifice — the tales and 
the lessons to be learnt from them: tell me both, O Sauti, in full.’ 

Sauti said, “Those Brahmanas spoke of many matters derived from the 
Veda, when they had the time, but Vyasa recited the magnificent Itihasa 
called the Bharata.’ 

Saunaka said, “I want to hear that sacred history called the Mahabharata, 
which has spread the fame of the Pandavas across the world, the Itihasa 
which Krishna Dwaipayana recited when Janamejaya asked him, after the 
Sarpa yagna was over. 

That legend was conceived in the oceanic mind of Maharishi Vyasa, his 
soul purified by yoga. You have whetted my thirst with whatever you have 
said so far, but not appeased it, O Suta.’ 

Sauti said, ‘I will narrate Vyasa’s great Itihasa, the Mahabharata, for you, 
from beginning to end. Nothing will give me more pleasure, O Saunaka.’ 


CANTO 60 
ADIVAMSAVATARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


auti said, “When the Rishi Krishna Dwaipayana heard that Janamejaya 
Sie been installed as the Sacrificer for the sarpa yagna, he came to that 

yagna. Vyasa, grandfather of the Pandavas, had been born on an island 
in the Yamuna, to the virgin Kali by Shakti’s son Parasara Muni. As soon as 
he was born, miraculously, he was a full-grown Sage, who already knew the 
Vedas and the Vedangas and all the Itihasas. 

Naturally he possessed vast inborn knowledge and illumination that no 
other could hope to have through tapasya, studying the Veda, keeping 
vratas, fasting, having sons or by performing yagnas. Greatest among those 
that knew the Veda, Vyasa divided the single Veda into four. The Brahmana 
had knowledge of the Parabrahman, knew the deep past by intuition, was a 
truly holy one, and treasured the truth. His ways sacred and his fame great, 
he sired Pandu, Dhritarashtra and Vidura, so that the line of Shantanu might 
not be extinguished. 

With his disciples, all knowers of the Vedas and their Angas, this 
Mahatman walked into the yagnashala of Rajarishi Janamejaya. He saw 
Janamejaya sitting there like Indra himself, surrounded by his Sadasyas, by 
numberless kings who had all performed sacred ablutions, and by masterly 
Ritviks who were like Brahma himself. 

When Bharatottama Rajarishi Janamejaya saw Vyasa Muni, he rose 
quickly and came with his guests and his kinsmen to welcome the Sage in 
great joy. With his Sadasyas’ warm approval, the king offered the Rishi a 
lofty golden seat, just as Indra had to Brihaspati. 

When Vyasa, who is worshipped by the Devas and can grant great 
boons, sat on the golden seat, the king of kings worshipped him with rites 
set down in the scriptures. The king offered his grandsire Krishna 
Dwaipayana water to wash his feet and rinse his mouth, arghya and gifts of 


sacred cows. Vyasa accepted the formal offerings, asked for the cows to be 
protected, and was pleased with the Pandava. 

After these adorations, Janamejaya bowed to his great grandsire, then sat 
down with him in joy and asked after his well-being. The illumined Muni 
looked at the king with love, asked in turn after his welfare, and offered 
homage to the Sadasyas who had all already adored him. 

When all this was done, folding his hand reverentially, Janamejaya asked 
that great Brahmana, “Lord you saw with your own eyes the lives of the 
Kurus and the Pandavas. I want to hear their story from you. What caused 
the enmity between them, which resulted in such extraordinary events? 

Also, what led to the Great War between my grandsires, which killed 
countless men? Why was their good sense dimmed by fate? Best among 
Brahmanas, I beg you, tell me in full all that happened.” 

Krishna Dwaipayana turned to his disciple Vaisampayana seated at his 
side, and told him, “You tell the king all about the enmity that sprang up 
between the Kurus and the Pandavas, exactly as I told it to you.” 

At his guru’s dictate, the blessed Vaisampayana narrated the entire story 
to Janamejaya, his Sadasyas and the other Kshatriyas and Brahmanas 
gathered there. He told them all about that enmity and the Great War that 
devastated the Kurus and the Pandavas.’ 


CANTO 61 
ADIVAMSAVATARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ aisampayana said, “I first prostrate in sashtanga namaskara, eight 
\V limbs touching the ground, before my guru, with absolute devotion 
in my heart. I also worship this sacred assembly of learned 
Brahmanas. I will now narrate all that I heard from the Mahamuni Vyasa, 
greatest among geniuses in the three worlds. O King, surely, since the 
Bharata has come to you, you deserve to hear the awesome epic. My heart 
might otherwise tremble to undertake this immense narration, but having 
my guru’s command I feel no trace of fear. 

Listen, O Janamejaya, to why discord broke out between the Kurus and 
the Pandavas; hear about the envious lust for kingdom that led to the game 
of dice and how the Kurus sent the Pandavas into exile in the forest. I will 
tell you everything that happened, O best among kings. 

When their father Pandu dies, those young Kshatriyas, the Pandavas, 
come home to Hastinapura. In quick time, they become masters of archery. 
The Kurus see that the sons of Pandu are exceptionally gifted with strength, 
vitality, intelligence and fortune, and that the people love them; and the 
Kurus are stricken with envy. 

The devious and perfidious Duryodhana, with Karna and Duryodhana’s 
uncle Shakuni, son of Subala, begins to persecute the sons of Pandu, and to 
plot to have them exiled. Swayed by Shakuni’s evil counsel, Duryodhana 
schemes to kill the Pandavas, so that he can have undivided sovereignty. 
Dhritarashtra’s demonic son feeds poison to Bhima, mixed in some sweets, 
but Bhima of the stomach of the wolf digests the poison, and only falls 
asleep from it on the banks of the Ganga. 

Duryodhana binds Bhima hand and foot and, casting him into the river, 
walks away. But Kunti’s enormously strong son awakes, easily breaks the 
thongs that bind him and Bheemasena Mahabaho surfaces, all his 
sluggishness gone. 


While he falls, sleeping, into the water, black watersnakes bite him all 
over his great body, their venom deadly. But that nemesis of his enemies 
still does not die. 

All the while that their cousins plot to murder them, their noble uncle 
Vidura helps the sons of Pandu in every way that he can, frequently saving 
their lives. As Indra watches over the world from Swarga does Vidura 
watch over the Pandavas and keeps evil away from them. 

By many means, covert and open, Duryodhana attempts to do away with 
his cousins. Time and again he fails, for the fates protect the Pandavas, 
keeping them safe for the great destiny they have been born to fulfil — the 
very annihilation of the race of kings. 

Duryodhana sits in dark conclave with his coterie— Karna, Dushasana 
and some others—and, with Dhritarashtra’s knowledge, has a house of lac 
built in Varanavrata, in Kasi. Out of inordinate love for his son, as well as 
blind ambition to keep the throne, Dhritarashtra colludes with Duryodhana 
to send the innocent Pandavas to Varanavrata. As the sons of Pandu are 
leaving Hastinapura with their mother Kunti, Vidura discreetly warns them 
of mortal danger and tells them how to escape it. 

Kunti and her sons arrive in Varanavrata and begin living in the lacquer 
palace; Duryodhana’s agent Purochana, who has built the edifice, takes 
them there. For a year they live in the deadly mansion, on their guard all the 
while, watching Purochana’s every move. 

Meanwhile, Vidura sends them an expert tunneller, who secretly 
excavates an underground passage leading out of the house of lac. One 
night, the Pandavas set fire to the palace, immolating Duryodhana’s spy 
within, and escape through the secret tunnel. 

In great anxiety at the murderous plot hatched against them, the sons of 
Pandu flee with their mother. In the forest, near a natural fountain, they see 
a Rakshasa, but do not slay him for fear of giving themselves away to their 
enemies, whom they want to think them dead, burnt alive in the lacquer 
palace at Varanavrata. Instead, they flee into the deep jungle, from fear of 
Duryodhana and his brothers. 

In that vana, Bhima takes Hidimbi for his wife, for some time, after 
killing her brother, the Rakshasa Hidimba. He sires Ghatotkacha on her. 
The Pandavas, knowers of the Vedas, observing their vratas, find their way 
to the town called Ekachakra. Disguising themselves as Brahmanas, those 


bulls among men live in the house of a Brahmana, begging alms for a 
living. 

Here the tigerish Bhima Mahabaho slays the ferocious Rakshasa Baka, 
the man-eater, and delivers the people of Ekachakra from their constant 
terror. Here, too, they hear about Krishnaa, the princess of Panchala, for 
whom her father is to hold a swayamvara, at which she would choose a 
husband for herself. 

The Pandavas go to Panchala and win the hand of Draupadi to be the 
wife of all five of them. After living in Panchala for a year, their presence is 
discovered and they return to Hastinapura with their bride. 

King Dhritarashtra and Shantanu’s son Bhishma say to them, ‘We have 
learned sadly of the rancour between yourselves and your cousins. We have 
decided to bestow ancient Khandavaprastha on you as your patrimony, half 
the kingdom, so there is no further cause for dispute. Go without envy in 
your hearts, for great is Khandavaprastha, its highways broad and its 
expanse wide.’ 

Without argument, the sons of Pandu leave for Khandavaprastha, with 
some friends and followers, taking many precious jewels, ornaments and 
gold with them. For many years, the Pandavas live in peace in 
Khandavaprastha which they now call Indraprastha. 

They subdue many kingdoms and Kshatriyas by force of arms, and live 
in constant dharma, and truth. Always serene and humble, unmoved by 
wealth, crushing many forces of evil in their kingdom, the Pandavas rise to 
great power. 

Now mighty Bhima conquers the kingdoms of the East, the heroic 
Arjuna, the North; Nakula, the West; Sahadeva, doom to his enemies, the 
South. When this is done, they hold sway over all of Bharatavarsha. Why, 
with the five Pandavas, the Earth seems as if six Suns shine upon her! 

Then, Yudhishtira Dharmaputra is forced to send his brother Arjuna, 
greatest and ambidextrous bowman, dearer to him than life, into the forest 
for twelve years. That Purushavyaghra, tiger among men, resolute, gifted 
with every virtue, lives in the wilderness for eleven years and as many 
months. 

During his exile, Arjuna visits Krishna in Dwaravati. In Dwaraka, Ocean 
City, he takes Krishna’s younger sister, the lotus-eyed Subhadra, her voice 
sweet like honey, to be his wife. She marries him joyfully, even as Sachi 


married Indra; she unites, in gladness, with Arjuna, the son of Pandu, as Sri 
did with Vasudeva. 

Later, O best of kings, Kunti’s son Arjuna and Krishna please Agni, who 
bears the havis from every yagna to the Devas, by burning the Khandava 
vana with its potent herbs, and that cures Agni of indigestion. Arjuna, with 
Kesava to help him, finds the task of burning the forest easy, for nothing is 
difficult for Vishnu of infinite resources. 

Agni gives Kunti’s son the divine longbow, the Gandiva, and an 
inexhaustible quiver, and a war-chariot that flies Garuda on its banner. It is 
then that Arjuna saves the great Asura Mayaa from being consumed by the 
fire. 

The grateful Mayaa builds an unearthly sabha for the sons of Pandu, 
adorned and encrusted with every kind of priceless jewel and gemstone. 
When the evil Duryodhana sees the Mayaa Sabha he wants to own that 
palace. 

Duryodhana arranges to play a game of dice with Yudhishtira, at which 
Subala’s son Shakuni uses loaded dice, rolling them with his cunning 
fingers. Beating the eldest Pandava at the false game of dice, Duryodhana 
sends the Pandavas into exile for twelve years and a thirteenth year to be 
Spent in disguise, so no one discovers them: on pain of going back into 
exile. 

In the fourteenth year, O King, the Pandavas return to claim their 
kingdom, but Duryodhana refuses to return it. War is declared, and the 
Pandavas regain their ravaged kingdom, but only after the very race of 
Kshatriyas perishes on the field of Kurukshetra, and finally Duryodhana 
also dies. 

This is the story of the Pandavas, who never allowed adharma, evil, to 
rule them, and of their enmity with their cousins the Kauravas, and of the 
Great War with which the sons of Pandu recover their kingdom,” said 
Vaisampayana,’ says Sauti to Saunaka and his rishis. 


CANTO 62 
ADIVAMSAVATARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ Tanamejaya said, “Most excellent Brahmana, you have now briefly told 
J ie the Itihasa known as the Mahabharata, which is about the great 
deeds of the Kurus. O Muni rich in tapasya, now narrate the entire epic 

in full, for I am desperately eager to listen to its every detail. 

Hearing an abbreviation of this awesome legend does not satisfy me. I 
feel certain that there must have been great cause for the virtuous and 
mighty Pandavas to kill their own kin, something for which they are still 
praised. 

Why did those tigerlike men, themselves innocent and capable of 
destroying their cousins, quietly suffer the persecution and ignominy dealt 
out to them? 

Why, O Brahmana, did the mighty-armed Bhima, strong as ten thousand 
elephants, restrain his anger, though he was so wronged? Why did 
Drupada’s daughter, the chaste Krishnaa, not consume the Kauravas with 
fire from her eyes? Why did Pritha’s sons Bhima and Arjuna, and Madri’s 
princes Nakula and Sahadeva, obey Yudhishtira, who had such a weakness 
for gambling? 

Why did Yudhishtira Dharmaputra, the very embodiment of rectitude, 
quietly endure the extravagance of injuries heaped upon himself and his 
family? Why did Dhananjaya, whose sarathy was Krishna himself, Arjuna 
who later sent teeming hosts of dauntless Kshatriyas to the next world, 
suffer in silence? 

O mighty Tapasvin, tell me everything that happened, exactly as it did, 
and describe whatever those Maharathas did.” 

Vaisampayana said, “O Rajan, appoint a time for the narration of the 
entire Mahabharata, for the legend wrought by Krishna Dwaipayana is long 
indeed; this is just the beginning. I will certainly recite the entire epic of the 


illumined Vyasa of fathomless intellect, who is worshipped in all the 
worlds. 

The Bharata contains a hundred thousand sacred slokas, composed by 
Satyavati’s son of untold genius. He that recites it, and they that listen to it, 
attain Brahmaloka and become like Devas. The Mahabharata is equal to the 
Vedas; it is sacred and beautiful; it is the most wonderful of all legends; it is 
a Purana, which the rishis worship. 

It dwells in depth on artha and kama, profit and pleasure. This sacred 
epic makes the heart yearn for mukti. Men that narrate this Veda of Krishna 
Dwaipayana to men of liberality, honesty and faith earn great wealth. The 
most grievous sins, even killing an embryo in the womb, are burnt to ashes 
by this Itihasa. However vicious and sinful a man might be, if he hears this 
legend, he escapes from his sins as the Sun does from Rahu when the 
eclipse ends. 

This Itihasa is called Jaya; those that wish for victory should listen to it 
or read it. A king who hears the Mahabharata with a heart full of faith 
vanquishes all his enemies and conquers the world. This history is a 
Mahayagna on its own, and yields the most auspicious and blessed fruit. 

A young king should always listen to it in the company of his queen, for 
the couple shall then beget heroic and noble children, heirs to the throne. 
This Bharata is the exalted and holy science of Dharma, Artha and Moksha, 
as well: Vyasa of immeasurable intelligence says so. 

This Itihasa is recited today and shall be told and read in the dim future. 
They that hear it or read it have children and servants who are always 
obedient to them. Every sin, of body, word or mind, immediately leaves 
them that listen to this legend. Those who hear, without mockery or 
criticism, the story of the birth of the Bharata princes will never have to fear 
any sickness, let alone fear dying or the world to come. 

Krishna Dwaipayana composed this epic to spread the fame of the 
Pandavas and of the other Kshatriyas, noble, learned, of great repute; he 
wished also to bring welfare to the world through his profound and 
monumental work. 

Reading the wonderful Bharata bestows fame and blesses a man with 
long life, for it is a divine and sacred legend. He that retells this epic to holy 
Brahmanas gains inexhaustible punya; he who recites the advent of the 
renowned Kuru generations is instantly purified, acquires a large family and 
honour in the world. 


The Brahmana who regularly studies the sacred Mahabharata during the 
four months of the monsoon is redeemed from all his sins. He who has read 
the Bharata can be regarded as knowing the Vedas. 

This epic contains accounts of the Devas, Rajarishis, Brahmarishis, the 
immaculate Krishna, of Mahadeva Siva, God of gods, and the Devi Parvati, 
of the birth of Karttikeya born from the union of Siva and Parvati and raised 
by six mothers. The Mahabharata tells of the greatness of Brahmanas and of 
the sacredness of cows. 

The Bharata is a compendium of all the Srutis and every virtuous person 
should listen to it. The learned man who recites it to Brahmanas during the 
sacred months is washed of all his sins; he ceases to care about the 
pleasures even of Swarga, and attains union with Brahman, the Ultimate 
Reality. 

He who tells even a single foot of this Kavya, this epic Poem, to 
Brahmanas performing a sraddha, makes the ritual immortal, since then the 
Pitrs become deeply gratified with all the offerings made to them. 

Listening to the Mahabharata destroys every sin, conscious and 
unconscious, which we commit daily with our senses or in our hearts. 

The legend of the lofty births of the Bharata princes is called the 
Mahabharata; he who knows the etymology of that name is saved from all 
his sins. Indeed, this Itihasa of the race of Bharata is so extraordinary that it 
purifies anyone, who hears it, of every sin. 

The Maharishi Krishna Dwaipayana took three years to compose his 
epic. Rising early, performing his sacred ablutions and daily worship, he 
would sit down to compose this Mahabharata. Therefore, Brahmanas must 
listen to it with the formal reverence of keeping a vow. 

He who narrates Vyasa’s sacred epic and those that hear it are all saved 
from being affected by the fruit of their karma, good and bad. He who truly 
wants to gain lasting punya should listen to the entire Bharata, for this 
single Kavya is equal to all the others, and hearing it purifies the heart. 

The joy and satisfaction that a soul experiences upon attaining Swarga is 
hardly equal to those to be had from hearing this holy legend. The virtuous 
man who narrates the Mahabharata with faith in his heart gains the punya 
derived from an Aswamedha or a Rajasuya yagna. 

The Bharata is a treasure trove of precious jewels to rival the endless 
Ocean and golden Meru. Surely, surely, this legend is sacred; it is exquisite 


and magnificent; it is equal to the Vedas; it must be heard; it is pleasing to 
the ear and the heart; it washes away every sin and confers great virtue. 

O King, he who gives a copy of the Mahabharata as a gift, gives the very 
Earth as a present with her girdle of seas. O son of Parikshit, this is the 
beautiful Poem, which bestows virtue and victory, which I am going to 
recite for you in full. Listen. 

Yes, the Rishi Krishna Dwaipayana woke early every day for three years 
and composed this epic full of wonders: the Mahabharata. O 
Bharatrishabha, bull among the Bharata kings, whatever has been said 
about dharma, artha, kama and moksha might surely be found elsewhere; 
but nothing that is not contained in the Mahabharata is to be found 
any where.’”’ 


CANTO 63 
ADIVAMSAVATARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ aisampayana said, “There is once a Paurava king of dharma called 

\V Uparichara. He is also called Vasu and is addicted to hunting. 

Commanded by Indra, he conquers the beautiful kingdom of Chedi. 

Later, he renounces the use of weapons and, living in an asrama, practises 

the most rigorous penance. Indra and the Devas, fearing that Uparichara’s 

tapa would make him king of Devaloka, manifest themselves before Vasu, 
and with honeyed words and flattery make him abandon his penance. 

The Devas say, “Lord of the Earth, you must protect this world lest 
dharma fades from her face while you sit here in tapasya. If you protect 
dharma in the world, dharma in return will protect the Universe.’ 

Indra says, “Rajan, be the vigilant guardian of dharma on Earth. You are 
virtuous and, after this life, you will discover many marvellous and sacred 
realms. Though I belong to Swarga and you to Bhumi, you are my friend 
and precious to me. 

Lord of men, you live in a land of many delights, sacred, abounding in 
game, fertile and rich, safe and well guarded even like Devaloka, its climate 
kindly, and furnished with every object of enjoyment and pleasure. 

King of Chedi, mines of gold and silver embellish your lands, as do a 
plenitude of precious stones of every kind. Your cities and towns live in 
dharma; your people are honest and contented; they do not lie even in jest. 

Sons never ask for their patrimony to be divided, and are always mindful 
of their parents’ welfare. Lean or weak cattle are never yoked or made to 
haul or bear burdens. They are first fed, kindly and generously. 

In Chedi the four varnas always adhere to the performance of their 
svadharma, their natural and inherent duties. 

Vasu, I mean to allow you to range the three worlds at will, for I will 
give you a crystal vimana such as only the Devas have. Among mortal men, 
only you shall own such a vimana and fly in it like a god. 


I will also give you a garland of unfading lotuses, which will make you 
invincible in battle, for, while you wear it no weapon shall injure you. And, 
O King, this holy and peerless garland, known in the world as Indra’s mala, 
shall be your emblem.’ 

Indra, slayer of Vritra, also gives Uparichara Vasu a bamboo staff with 
which to protect the good and men of peace. When a year passes, 
Uparichara plants this bamboo stick in the ground to worship the one that 
has given it to him. 

From then on, Rajan, every king of the Earth begins to plant a pole in the 
ground to worship Indra. Having erected the stamba, they adorn it with 
cloth made of gold thread, garlands and precious ornaments, and daub it 
with rare perfumes. This is how the Deva Indra comes to be worshipped 
with garlands and precious ornaments. 

Indra comes as a swan to accept the worship of Uparichara Vasu. 

Delighted with the adoration, Indra says, ‘All kings, and any men who 
worship me in the way the king of Chedi has done, and observe this festival 
of mine, shall bring glory and victory to their countries and kingdoms. 
Their cities shall grow and be prosperous, and their streets and homes flow 
with joy.’ 

Thus Indra blesses King Vasu; and it is true that all men who observe the 
festival of Indra with gifts of land, gold and precious stones, find success, 
honour and fame throughout the world. Vasu, Lord of the Chedis, is always 
magnanimous and performs countless great yagnas; and Indra honours him 
and blesses him generously so that he rules the world from Chedi, with 
dharma as his sceptre. And to worship Indra, he unvaryingly observes the 
festival that he himself has begun. 

Vasu has five sons of great strength and energy. He makes them rulers of 
various provinces of his boundless kingdom. His son Brihadratha becomes 
the ruler in Magadha; he is also known as Maharatha. His other sons are 
Pratyagraha, Rusamba—also called Manivahana—Mavella, and _ the 
invincible Yadu. 

These, O King, are the five sons of the Rajarishi of dazzling tejas. The 
five sons of Vasu founded kingdoms named after themselves and separate 
dynasties that endure through long ages. 

When Vasu sits in his crystal ship of the air, Indra’s gift to him, and flies 
through the sky, Gandharvas and Apsaras fly to greet him. It is because he 
ranges the higher realms that he is named Uparichara. 


The river Suktimati flows beside Uparichara, Vasu’s capital. An 
animated and lust-maddened mountain called Kolahala once attacks the 
gentle river, and forcibly embraces her. Vasu sees the attempted molestation 
and kicks the mountain. The river escapes from Kolahala’s sinister embrace 
through the hole in the mountain made by Uparichara’s kick. 

But Kolahala begets twin children, a boy and a girl, on the river he has 
forced. In gratitude, for having freed her from Kolahala, Suktimati gives the 
children to Vasu. That Rajarishi makes the boy the Senapati of his army, 
and the girl Girika he marries himself. 

One day, after her period is over, Girika bathes and comes alluringly to 
her husband wanting a child from him. However, that same day Vasu’s Pitrs 
have appeared to him and told him to kill a deer for their sraddha. 

Not wanting to disobey his ancestors’ spirits, the king goes into the 
jungle to hunt a deer, but his mind is full of thoughts of the luscious Girika, 
as lovely as Sri herself. It is spring, and the forest is as enchanting as the 
garden of the king of the Gandharvas. 

Asokas, Champakas, Chutas and Atimuktas abound, as do Punnagas, 
Karnikaras, Bakulas, Divya Patalas, Patalas, Narikelas, Chandanas and 
Arjunas, all sacred trees, ancestral plants splendorous with scented flowers 
and shining fruit. 

The sweet, haunting songs of the kokila hold the forest in thrall; the 
ecstatic drone of honeybees is their sruti. 

The king is stricken by desire and he sees his Girika before his mind’s 
eye, but not before him in the flesh. Maddened, he ranges that charmed 
forest and spots a lovely Asoka tree, its foliage rich and its branches 
covered in a riot of flowers. The king sits down at the foot of the tree, and 
excited beyond measure by the heady fragrances of spring all around him, 
by the caressing breeze that whispers through the forest aisles, his mind full 
of images of his wife, Uparichara Vasu spills his seed into the palm of his 
hand. 

He sees a falcon in a branch quite near him. Vasu, knower of the nuances 
of artha and dharma, says to the bird, ‘Friend, take this seed to my wife 
Girika, for her season has come.’ 

The falcon takes the precious semen in its beak and flashes away 
towards the king’s capital, quick as a thought. A fishing hawk, perched in a 
tree beside the Yamuna, sees the falcon winging along with the royal seed 
in its beak and thinks the falcon is carrying a shred of meat. 


The hawk flies at the falcon. Locking wings, they fight in the air and 
Uparichara Vasu’s seed falls from the falcon’s beak down into the waters of 
the Yamuna below. 

An Apsara called Adrika lives in the river; she has been turned into a 
fish by a Rishi’s curse. She sees Vasu’s shimmering seed strike the water, 
and swimming to it in a flash, she swallows the king’s semen. Ten months 
after she swallows the seed, she is taken by some fishermen. In their very 
boat, the great fish gives birth to resplendent human children: a boy and a 
girl. 

At once, the curse ends, just as the Brahmana who cursed her said it 
would, and the fish is a celestial nymph again. She rises into the sky along 
the path that Rishis, Siddhas and Charanas tread, and vanishes. 

The wonderstruck fishermen bring the children to King Uparichara and 
tell him what has happened. They cry, “My Lord, we found these two 
human children inside the body of a fish!’ 

Uparichara takes the male child and raises him. Later, he would become 
the King Matsya of great dharma. 

The king gives the girl child, who smells of fishes, to the fishermen, 
saying, ‘Let her be your daughter.’ 

The chief of those fishermen adopts the girl and calls her Satyavati. The 
Apsara’s daughter, and the king’s, grows into an exceptionally beautiful 
girl, with a lovely smile and a friendly nature, though she still smells of 
fishes. She plies a ferry across the Yamuna for her foster-father. 

One day, the Maharishi Parasara, abroad on his pilgrimage, sees the girl, 
and is struck by love’s thunderbolt, at least by irresistible desire. Riding in 
her ferry, Parasara Muni says to the girl with the smooth skin and exquisite 
thighs, “Lovely girl, give yourself to me!’ 

Satyavati replies, ‘Holy one, look at the Rishis standing on either bank 
of the river. How can I give myself to you with them watching?’ 

Parasara raises his hand in an occult mudra, and they are plunged in 
thick fog. It covers the river and both banks in darkness and fills Satyavati 
with awe. 

She blushes now, and says shyly, ‘Muni, I am a virgin living with my 
father. Sinless one, if I give myself to you, my virginity will be lost. Rishi, 
how will I face my father? Indeed, how will I live with that shame? I beg 
you, Holy One, think of this and then do as you decide.’ 


Parasara Maharishi replies, ‘You will have your virginity back after you 
grant my desire. Also, you shall have any other boon you want from me, 
bashful and beautiful girl, and my words have never proved false.’ 

Satyavati says, ‘Let my body smell sweet and not of fish anymore.’ 

‘So be it,’ says mighty Parasara. 

She is so pleased with her boon that Satyavati straightaway comes into 
season. She allows the Rishi to embrace her. She now becomes so 
wonderfully fragrant, that men calls her Gandhavati, and they can smell the 
heavenly scent of her body from a yojana away. She is also called 
Yojanagandha, while they had called her Matsyagandhi before. 

Having slaked his desire, Parasara goes away. 

Satyavati rows to an island in the Yamuna and gives birth immediately, 
magically, to Parasara’s child. He is splendid, and a full-grown Rishi as 
soon as he is born, and seeks his mother’s permission to go and perform 
tapasya. 

As he leaves, he says to her, ‘If you ever have need of me only think of 
me and I shall come to you.’ 

So it is that Vyasa is born to Satyavati and Parasara Muni. Because he is 
born on a dwipa, an island, he is called Dwaipayana, island-born, and 
Krishna because he is dark complexioned. 

The island-born Sage knows that dharma loses one leg in every yuga, 
beginning with four and finally standing on just one in the Kali Yuga. He 
knows that the lifespan, the strength and intellect of men also wane with the 
passing yugas. Having worshipped Brahma and the great Brahmarishis so 
he could divide the Veda to suit the coming age, Dwaipayana makes four 
Vedas out of one. For this he is called Vyasa, the arranger, or compiler, and 
Veda Vyasa, compiler of the Veda. 

The Maharishi teaches Sumanta, Jaimini, Paila, his own son Suka and 
Vaisampayana the four Vedas, and the Mahabharata is like the fifth. Of 
course, the Mahabharata is his own composition. 

Some years after this, Bhishma, of stunning vigour, fame and untold 
splendour is born to Ganga and his father is King Shantanu of the Kurus. 
He is an amsavatara of the Vasus of heaven. 

There is a renowned Rishi calls Animandavya. He is a master of every 
interpretation of the Vedas, an illustrious one of great tejas and high repute. 
Once, he is falsely accused of theft, and the old and innocent Muni is 
impaled upon a spike. 


He summons Dharma and says to the Deva of justice, “When I was a boy 
I pierced a little insect with a blade of grass. O Dharma, I remember that 
one sin I committed but cannot recall any other. But since then I have done 
penance, thousandfold. Has my sin not been removed by all that tapasya? 

Also, killing a Brahmana is the most heinous of all sins, and you, O 
Dharma, have sinned. You shall be born on Earth as a Sudra for this sin.’ 

From that curse Dharma is born as a Sudra —-the wise Vidura, pure in 
body and perfectly virtuous. 

The Sutaputra Karna is no Suta but born of Kunti while she is a maiden 
in her father’s house, and Surya Deva is his father. He comes out of his 
mother’s body wearing a natural coat of armour like his skin and golden 
earrings like sundrops: kavacha and kundala. 

Vishnu, worshipped by all the worlds, is born to Devaki and Vasudeva to 
bless the three Lokas. He is Un-born and immortal, of untold splendour, the 
Creator of the Universe and the Lord. 

He is the invisible cause of all things, undecaying, the pervasive Atman, 
the still universal centre around which everything revolves, the primal 
essence in which the three gunas of Nature, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, are 
born, the Viswatman, the unchanging One, the substance from which the 
Universe is made, the Creator of the Universe of the Panchamabhutas, the 
Sovereign, the Antaryamin who abides unseen in everything, who owns the 
six lofty qualities, who is Pranava, Aum of the Vedas, infinite, moved only 
by his own will, lustrous, the embodiment of Sannyasa, who floats upon the 
waters of eternity before the creation, who is the germ of this cosmic plant, 
the great combiner, Un-created, invisible essence of everything, 
transcendent, Nirguna who cannot be known by the senses, the Universe, 
who has no beginning, birth or decay, infinitely wealthy, the Ancestor of 
every creature He incarnates into the race of the Andhaka Vrishnis to 
promote dharma in the world. 

Satyaki and Kritavarman, masters of astras, warriors of fierce tejas, 
learned in the Shastras, servants of Narayana in all things: these two are 
born to Satyaka and Hridika. 

From the seed of Maharishi Bharadwaja (of profound tapasya), which he 
ejaculates into an earthen pot, a drana, Drona is born. The seed of Rishi 
Gautama, spilt into a clump of reeds, grows into twins the mighty and sage 
Kripa, and his sister Kripi, who will marry Drona and become the mother of 
Aswatthama. 


Dhrishtadyumna, blazing like Agni, born to become the nemesis of 
Drona, comes forth from a yagna fire, as does his sister Krishnaa: Draupadi 
whose dark and unrivalled beauty will cause the war upon the crack of two 
Yugas. 

Prahlada’s sishya Nagnajit, and Subala are born into the world. Subala’s 
son is Shakuni, who is cursed by the Devas and becomes the enemy of 
dharma in the world, and a slaughterer of men. Subala also has a daughter 
called Gandhari, who becomes the mother of Duryodhana and his brothers. 
Shakuni and his nephew are experts at amassing wealth, and inexhaustibly 
avaricious. 

Vyasa begets upon the widows of Vichitravirya the Kuru princes 
Dhritarashtra, who would become king, and the valiant and mighty Pandu. 
Dwaipayana also fathers, upon a Sudra woman, the sagacious and 
intelligent Vidura, sinless and a master of both artha and dharma. 

Pandu’s two wives, Kunti and Madri, give him five sons, like Devas. The 
eldest, Yudhishtira, is the natural child of Dharma: Yama who is the God of 
Justice. Bhima, his stomach a wolf’s, is the son of Vayu the Wind. Arjuna, 
Dhananjaya the fortunate, greatest of archers, is Kunti’s third son and Indra 
himself, king of the Devas, is his father. 

Nakula and Sahadeva, the handsome twins always obedient to their 
elders, are born to Madri, and their fathers are the Aswins. 

The wise Dhritarashtra sires a hundred sons, Duryodhana and _ his 
brothers, by Gandhari, and also Yuyutsu, who is born of a Vaisya woman. 
Among those hundred and one, eleven are Maharathas: Duryodhana, 
Dushasana, Duhsaha, Durmarshana, Vikarna, Chitrasena, Vivimsati, Jaya, 
Satyavrata, Purumitra and Yuyutsu. 

Krishna’s sister Subhadra gives birth to Abhimanyu; Arjuna is the 
prince’s father, making Pandu his grandfather. The five Pandavas each has a 
son by their wife Panchali. Radiant and handsome are these princes and 
masters of the Vedas and the Shastras. 

Yudhishtira’s son is Prativindhya; Bhima’s, Sutasoma; Arjuna’s, 
Srutakirti; Nakula’s, Shatanika; and Sahadeva’s son is the powerful 
Srutasena. In the forest, Bhima also begets Ghatotkacha, the Rakshasa 
prince, on Hidimbi. 

Drupada also has another daughter, Shikhandin, who later turns into a 
male child. Sthuna the Yaksha effects the transformation in the jungle to 
help Shikhandin accomplish her life’s obsession. 


Why, hundreds of thousands of Kshatriyas fight the Great War of the 
Kurus. Ten thousand years would be too few for me to name all their 
names. But the main protagonists, with whom this Itihasa deals, I have told 
you about.’”’ 


CANTO 64 
ADIVAMSAVATARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


named and those that you have not. Tell me what happened to those 

thousands of crowned kings, and why they are born into the world, those 
Maharathas.” 

Vaisampayana said, “It has been said, O King, that what you ask is 
mysterious even to the gods! However, I bow to Narayana, and shall do my 
best to answer your question. 

Jamadagni’s son Parasurama massacres the Kshatriyas in twenty-one 
savage encounters, so the Earth is rid entirely of the race of kings, and then 
he makes his way to Mahendra, most excellent mountain, and sits there in 
tapasya to expiate his sins of violence. 

When Parasurama has exterminated the Kshatriya men, thousands of 
women of the royal race resort to Brahmana men, austere Rishis, in order to 
have sons. It must be said that intercourse takes place between them only 
when the princesses and queens are ovulating, never otherwise or from 
mere lust. 

The Kshatriya women conceive and give birth to countless children, 
sons and daughters, of great vitality and lustre, and it seems that Kshatriya 
kind will flourish once more. This is the new generation of the Kshtariya 
race, sired by Brahmanas of mighty tapasya. 

Indeed, the new Kshatriyas thrive, and live in dharma, accumulating 
great punya. The four varnas, with the Brahmanas at their head, are re- 
established. During this time, lust vanishes and men go to their wives only 
when the women are in season, and never out of carnal desire. 

Why, O Bharatarishabha, at this time the same is true of every species on 
Earth, even birds of the air. Thus, O Protector of the world, lakhs and crores 
of creatures are born, all virtuous, living in a burgeoning swath of dharma, 
and free from sickness and sorrow. 


J named an said, “Brahmana, tell me in detail about those you have 


O King with the elephant’s gait, once more the Kshatriyas rule Bhumi, 
with her mountains, jungles and cities. They rule with dharma as their 
sceptre and joy is upon the world and the four varnas, of whom the 
Brahmanas are pre-eminent. 

Free from every vice generated by lust and anger, the Kshatriya kings 
rule justly, punishing those that deserve chastisement. Thousand-eyed Indra, 
of a hundred Mahayagnas, sees how righteously the Kshatriyas rule, and he 
sends down timely rains, which bless all creatures. 

Rajan, those are days when no one dies prematurely, but only in the 
fullness of time, and when no man knows a woman carnally before he has 
come of age Bharatrishabha, the Earth is filled from sea to sea, coast to 
coast, with long-lived men of dharma. 

The Kshatriyas perform great sacrifices and give away vast wealth as 
charity. All Brahmanas study the Vedas and the Vedangas religiously, 
Bharatarishabha, and the Upanishads, as well. In those days, no Brahmana 
ever teaches for gold, or ever reads the Veda aloud in the presence of a 
Sudra. 

The Vaisyas dutifully till the Earth with their bullocks, and they never 
yoke their beasts themselves, but their servants, the Sudras, do. The herd is 
cared for lovingly, and every cow and bull and calf fed well. Men never 
milk cows before their calves are weaned. 

No merchant ever tampers with his scales of measure in those days. 
Purushavyaghra, O tiger among men, all men cleave to dharma, and 
whatever they do, they do with dharma in mind. All the varnas live by their 
svadharma alone, and dharma is maintained and does not decay or diminish, 
but indeed only grows. 

Bharatarishabha, human women and cows give birth when their time is 
full, not before or after. Trees bear flowers and fruit in their proper season. 
Rajan, the Krita Yuga having begun, Bhumi teems with myriad species, all 
in harmony. 

Then, O Bull of the race of Bharata, the Asuras begin to take birth in the 
royal Houses. The sons of Aditi, the Devas, repeatedly crush the sons of 
Diti, the Daityas, and those of Danu, the Danavas, in battle. Their unearthly 
kingdoms lost, Swarga gone, the Demons begin to incarnate on Earth. 

The powerful Asuras, wanting sovereignty over Bhumi, begin to be born 
not only among Kshatriyas and other humans, but among all the species: as 
cows and bulls, horses, donkeys and asses, camels, buffaloes, among the 


Rakshasas and the other magical races, among elephants and deer. Through 
the passage of the Yugas, owing to these demonic births, Bhumi Devi’s 
burden of evil increases to the extent that she feels she cannot support the 
weight anymore and will plunge down into the Narakas, into hell. 

Some of the sons of Diti and of Danu, cast out of heaven, are born on 
Earth as kings of terrible hubris. With terrific energy, the forces of evil 
swarm over the Earth in various forms and shapes. They teem in the world, 
from sea to sea. 

With their undeniable strength, they begin to persecute Brahmana and 
Kshatriya, Vaisya and Sudra, and indeed every virtuous creature of the 
Earth. Striking terror into every heart, they go about committing rapine, 
pillage and murder. They range the world in great bands, of hundreds of 
thousands, veritable armies of the night. Mocking truth and virtue, 
intoxicated by their strength and arrogance, they even desecrate and 
slaughter holy Rishis in their asramas in the hearts of sacred forests. 

Oppressed and ravaged by these unrestrained, powerful, wealthy and 
daily swelling legions of evil, Bhumi Devi thinks in despair of Brahma. 
Only the combined strength of awesome ones like Sesha Naga, the Kuurma 
Avatara and the great Diggajas is able to continue to support the weight of 
the Earth with her mountains and oceans. 

O King, now terrified by the burden of the Asuras upon her, the dreadful 
load of their wantonness and savagery unleashed, Bhumi frantically seeks 
Brahma’s help to save her from plunging down into the void. 

She sees Brahma, the Creator, Pitamaha of all creatures, undecaying 
Grandsire, surrounded by the Devas, Brahmarishis of great fortune, being 
worshipped by Gandharvas and Apsaras, who are the eternal servitors of the 
gods. 

Wanting protection, the Earth begins to tell Brahma her woes, in the 
presence of those Regents of the worlds. Rajan, the omniscient, 
Svayambhuva, Self-created, and supreme Lord already knows her petition. 
Bharatarishabha, being the Creator and Sovereign of the Universe, shall He 
not always know whatever is in the hearts of his creatures, including the 
Devas and the Asuras? 

Rajan, the Lord of the Earth, the Creator of all creatures, who is calls Isa, 
Sambhu, Prajapati, speaks to Bhumi Devi. Brahma says, ‘Bhumi Devi, 
womb of wealth, I will appoint all the celestials to accomplish what you 
wish. Now go back.’ 


When she has gone, Brahma says to the Devas, “Go, be born in amsa on 
Earth and seek war with the Asuras who hold sway over her and torment 
her.’ 

The Creator calls all the Gandharva tribes and all the Apsaras and says 
to them, ‘Go be born into the world in amsa in whatever forms you like.’ 

Indra and his Devas decide they will do as Brahma commands. They 
first go to Narayana in Vaikuntha, He that bears the Chakra and the Gada, 
whose skin is the hue of a thundercloud, who wears pitambara robes, of 
blinding splendour, Padmanabha from whose navel the Lotus grows in 
which Brahma is born, whose lotus eyes gaze down at his great chest, 
looking within, ever in dhyana, who is the bane and the slayer of the 
Asuras, who is the Lord of Prajapati himself, Devadeva the mighty who 
bears the Srivatsa whorled upon his breast, who animates the faculties of all 
beings and whom all the Devas worship. 

Indra says to that most exalted Purusha, ‘Lord, be incarnate!’ 

Hari replies, “Tathaastu! Be it so.’” 


CANTO 65 
SAMBHAVA PARVA 


\ J aisampayana said, “Indra and Narayana speak together about how He 
would be born on Earth, and how the Devas, too, would incarnate in 
amsa. When every Deva knows his role, Indra returns from Vaikunta. 

One by one, over time, the Devas are born on Earth in amsa to kill the 
Asuras already born there and to remove the burden of Bhumi, Swarga and 
Patala. They incarnate as they please as Kshatriya kings, as Brahmarishis 
and Rajarishis, and they kill the Asuras born as Rakshasas and Gandharvas, 
as Nagas, and as other dreadful creatures. The Danavas cannot resist the 
avenging Devas, so mighty are the gods.” 

Janamejaya said, “I want to hear from the beginning about the births of 
the Devas, the Danavas, the Gandharvas, the Apsaras, the men who are 
more than men, the Yakshas and the Rakshasas.” 

Vaisampayana said, “I bow down to the Svayambhuva, and will tell you 
what you wish to know. 

Brahma has six sons born immaculately of his spirit: Marichi, Atri, 
Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha and Kratu. Marichi’s son is Kashyapa, and from 
Kashyapa all the creatures are born. 

One of the original Prajapatis, Daksha has thirteen daughters of great 
beauty and fortune. Tiger among men, O Scion of the race of Bharata, these 
thirteen are called Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kala, Danayu, Simhika, Krodha, 
Pradha, Viswa, Vinata, Kapila, Muni and Kadru. 

The sons and grandsons of these, all of burning tejas, are beyond count. 
Aditi gives birth to the twelve Adityas, Lords of the Universe. They are 
Dhatri, Mitra, Aryaman, Sakra, Varuna, Ansa, Vaga, Vivaswat, Usha, 
Savitri, Tvashtri and Vishnu. The youngest is the greatest of them all. 

Diti has one son called Hiranyakashyipu, and he has five sons, renowned 
throughout the worlds. The eldest is Prahlada, the next Sahradha, then 
Anuhrada, Sibi and Vashkala. 


O Bharata, Prahlada has three sons Virochana, Kumbha, and Nikumbha. 
Virochana’s son is Bali, the Great. And the son of Bali is the great Asura 
Bana. The blessed Bana is a bhakta of Rudra, and is also known as 
Mahakala. 

O Janamejaya, Danu has forty sons. The eldest of them is Viprachitti of 
great fame, then Sambara, Namuchi and Pauloman; Asiloman, Kesin and 
Durjaya; Ayahsiras, Aswasiras, and the powerful Aswasanku; 
Gaganamardhan, Vegavat and Ketumat; Swarbhanu, Aswa, Aswapati, 
Vrishaparvan and Ajaka; Aswagriva, Sukshama, Tuhunda of vast strength, 
Ekapada, Ekachakra, Virupaksha, Mahodara, Nichandra, Nikumbha, 
Kupata, Kapata; Sarabha, Sulabha, Surya, and then Chandramas these are 
the best known in the race of Danu. 

The Devas Surya and Chandramas, the Sun and the Moon, are different 
beings, not the sons of Danu of the same names. These other ten, also of 
untold strength and vigour, are also, O Rajan, the sons of Danu: Ekaksha, 
Amritapa of fathomless valour, Pralamba and Naraka, Vatapi, Satrutapana, 
the great Asura Satha; Gavishtha, Vanayu and the Danava Dirghajiva. 

Bharata, the sons and the grandsons of these are countless. Simhika 
gives birth to Rahu, the tormentor of the Sun and the Moon, and to three 
others: Suchandra, Chandrahantri and Chandra Pramardana. 

The numberless progeny of Krura, also called Krodha, are as devious 
and as vicious as she is. Hers is a clan full of wrath, and merciless to its 
enemies. 

Danayu has four sons who are bulls among the Asuras. They are 
Vikshara, Bala, Vira and Vritrasura the Great. The sons of Kala are all like 
Yama himself, boundlessly vigorous smiters of their foes. Kala’s sons are 
calls Vinasana, Krodha, Krodhahantri and Krodhashatru. 

Kala has many other sons, as well. Shukra, the son of a Rishi, is the 
chief priest and Acharya of the Asuras. Shukra has four sons, also priests of 
the Asuras. Tashtadhara and Atri are two, and there are two others, fierce 
tejasvins. They are like the Sun himself, and ambitious enough to want to 
conquer Brahmaloka. 

These are the sons of the Devas and the Asuras as told in the Purana. 
The progeny of these are past counting, O King. 

Vinata’s sons are Tarkhya and Arishtanemi, Garuda and Aruna, and 
Aruni and Varuni. 

Kadru’s sons are Ananta Sesha, Vasuki, Takshaka, Kumara, and Kulika. 


Bhimasena, Ugrasena, Suparna, Varuna, Gopati, Dhritarashtra, 
Suryavarchas, Satyavachas, Arkaparna, Prayuta, Bhima and Chitraratha - 
the famed, learned one, master of his passions - Kalisiras, Parjannya Kali 
and Narada these Devas and Gandharvas are the sons of Daksha Prajapati’s 
daughter Muni. 

Anavadya Manu, Vamsa, Asura, Marganapria, Anupa, Subhaga, Vasi are 
the daughters of Pradha, and her sons are Siddha, Purna, Barhin, Purnayus 
of wide renown, Brahmacharin, Ratiguna, Suparna, Viswavasu, Bhanu and 
Suchandra. All these are Gandharvas of heaven. 

Pradha also bears her husband Kashyapa the delectable Apsaras 
Alambusha, Misrakesi, Vidyutparna, Tilottama, Arunaa, Rakshita, Rambha, 
Manorama, Kesini, Subahu, Surata, Suraja and Supriya. Her most famous 
sons are Atibahu, Haha and Huhu, and Tumburu. 

The Amrita, Brahmanas, sacred cows, the Gandharvas and Apsaras, are 
born to Kapila Deva, as the Purana says. 

This account of the birth of the Gandharvas and Apsaras, of the Nagas, 
Suparnas, Rudras, and the Maruts, of cows, Brahmanas of great fortune and 
holy deeds, is sacred and extends the life of he that reads it, and delights the 
ear and the mind. 

He who reads or narrates the birth of the exalted beings in the presence 
of the Devas and Brahmarishis has many excellent children, finds fortune, 
fame, and attains to the best of worlds in the hereafter.” 


CANTO 66 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “We have seen how the six Maharishis are the 

\/ mind-born sons of Brahma. He has another son called Sthanu. 

Sthanu, of huge tejas, has eleven sons Mrigavayadha, Sarpa, Nirriti 

of great fame, Ajaikapat, Ahivradhna, Pinaki - bane of his enemies, 

Dahana, Iswara, the splendorous Kapali, Sthanu, and the illumined Bharga. 
These are the eleven Rudras. 

Marichi, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha and Kratu are the brilliant sons 
of Brahma. The world knows that Angiras has three sons—Brihaspati, 
Utathya and Samvarta, all profound tapasvins. 

Rajan, the sons of Atri are many, all of them Maharishis, masters of the 
Veda, Sannyasis, Atmaramas, their souls at perfect peace. 

Rajavyaghra, tiger among kings, the sons of the wise Pulastya are 
Rakshasas, Vanaras, Kinnara fauns and Yakshas. 

O King, the sons of Pulaha are the Salabhas (winged insects), lions, 
Kimpurushas (manticores), tigers, bears and wolves. 

The sons of Kratu, sacred as yagnas, are the devout Balakhilyas, mighty 
tapasvins, who are the companions of Surya. 

Protector of the Earth, the illustrious Rishi Daksha, peerless Sannyasi, 
his soul absorbed in infinite peace, springs from the big toe of Brahma’s 
right foot. And from the big toe on his left foot, Daksha’s chaste and noble 
wife emerges. The Muni begets fifty daughters upon her, all of them 
flawless of face and limb, their eyes like lotus petals. 

Having no sons, he makes Putrikas of his daughters, which meant that 
their sons would be his sons as well as the sons of his daughters’ husbands. 
Daksha marries, with sacred rites, ten of his daughters to Dharma, twenty- 
seven of them to Soma the Moon, and thirteen he gives to Kashyapa. 

The ten wives of Dharma are Kirti, Lakshmi, Dhriti, Medha, Pushti, 
Sraddha, Kriya, Buddhi, Lajja and Mali. 


Soma Deva’s twenty-seven wives are they that show the time they are 
the Nakshatras, the asterisms of the Moon. They are Yoginis because they 
help maintain the worlds. 

Brahma has another son called Manu. Manu has a son called Prajapati, 
who has eight sons, known as the Vasus. They are Dhara, Dhruva, Soma, 
Aha, Anila, Anala, Pratyusha and Prabhasa. 

Of these, Dhara and the enlightened Dhruva are born from Dhumra; 
Chandramas (Soma) and Swasana (Anila) are born to the intelligent Swasa; 
Aha is the son of Rata; Hutasana (Anala) is Sandilya’s son; Pratyusha and 
Prabhasa are the sons of Prabhata. 

Dhara has two sons, Dravina and Hutahavyavaha. Dhruva’s son is Kaala 
(Time) who devours the worlds. Soma’s son is the splendent Varchas. 
Varchas begets Sisira and Ramana on his wife Manohara. 

Aha’s sons are Jyotih, Sama, Santa, and also Muni. Agni’s son is the 
many-splendoured Kumara, born in a forest of sara reeds; he is Saradvata. 
He is also calls Karttikeya since the six Krittikas raised him. 

Agni’s other sons are Sakha, Visakha and Naigameya. Anila’s wife is 
Sivaa, and their sons are Manojava and Avijnataagati. 

The son of Pratyusha is the Rishi Devala. Devala has two sons, famed 
for their forbearance, forgiveness and their great intellects. 

Brihaspati’s sister, who always speaks the truth, performs tapasya and 
ranges over the Earth, becomes the wife of Prabhasa, the eighth Vasu. And 
she bears him the illustrious Viswakarman, from whom all the arts began: a 
thousand of them. He is the architect of the Devas, fashioner of the first and 
matchless ornaments among the stars; he is indeed the original artist. 
Viswakarman creates the celestial vimanas of the gods; and humankind 
lives on because of the countless precious inventions of Viswakarman, the 
universal artist. Men worship him for this reason, and he is an eternal one 
and changeless. 

Dharma, who bestows joy, takes a human face and emerges from 
Brahma’s right breast. Ahasta (Dharma Deva) has three sons who can 
enchant everyone; they are Sama, Kama and Harsha: Peace, Desire and Joy. 
They support the worlds with their activity. 

Kama’s wife is Rati, Sama’s is Prapti, and the wife of Harsha is Nanda. 
Yes, indeed, upon these the worlds depend. 

Kashyapa is the son of Marichi, and the Devas and Asuras are the sons 
of Kashyapa. Hence, Kashyapa is the Father of the worlds. 


Tvashtri, who assumes the form of Badava, a mare, becomes the wife of 
Savitri. She gives birth in the sky to twins of great fortune and fame: the 
Aswini Kumaras. 

Rajan, Aditi has twelve sons, Indra being the eldest. The youngest is 
Vishnu in whom the worlds are founded. 

There are thirty-three Devas eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas, 
Prajapati, and Vashatkara. 

Let me tell you about the sons of these, by their Pakshas, Kulas and 
Ganas. The Rudras, the Sadhyas, the Maruts, the Vasus, the Bhargavas and 
the Viswedevas are each reckoned as being one Paksha. Garuda the son of 
Vinata, the mighty Aruna, and the illustrious Brihaspati are counted among 
the Adityas. The Aswin twins, all perennial plants and the lesser animals 
are counted among the Guhyakas. 

These are the Ganas of the Devas, O King! Listening to this recitation 
washes away his every sin from a man. 

Lustrous Bhrigu comes forth, tearing open Brahma’s breast. Shukra, 
learned and wise, is Bhrigu’s son. Shukra becomes a Graha, a Planet, and, 
traversing the sky, commanded by Brahma, sends down and withholds the 
rain, looses and holds back calamities, and nurtures the lives of every 
creature in the three worlds. 

Shukra of unfathomed intellect and sagacity, of stern vratas, always a 
Brahmacharin, cleaves himself in two with his tapasya shakti, and becomes 
a spiritual Guru to both the sons of Diti and of Aditi. 

When Brahma has thus gainfully employed great Shukra, Bhrigu begets 
another son Chyvana who blazes like the Sun, and is virtuous and famed. 
He emerges from his mother’s womb in anger and rescues her from the 
clutches of the Rakshasas. 

Chyvana marries Manu’s daughter Arushi, and sires Aurva of matchless 
fame on her. Aurva tears open his mother’s thigh to be born. Aurva begets 
Richika, who, even as a child, possesses awesome spiritual power and 
brilliance, and every virtue as well. 

Richika’s son is Jamadagni, who has four sons, the youngest being 
Parasurama, who is his older brothers’ superior in every way, and a master 
of his passions. A master also of astras and of every weapon, he slaughters 
the race of Kshatriyas. 

Aurva has a hundred sons, Jamadagni being the eldest. These hundred 
father thousands of children, across the Earth. 


Brahma has two other sons, Dhatri and Vidhatri, who stay with Manu. 
Their sister is the auspicious Lakshmi, who dwells amidst lotuses. 
Lakshmi’s spiritual sons are the horses that go through the sky. 

Shukra’s daughter Divi becomes Varuna’s first wife. She bears him a son 
called Bala and a daughter Sura, the goddess of wine, much to the delight of 
the Devas. 

Adharma, Sin, is born when creatures felt hungry and began to eat one 
another. Adharma is a destroyer of every being. Adharma’s wife is Nirriti, 
and the Rakshasas that are their children are calls Nairritas. She has three 
other savage sons, always sinful and cruel: Bhaya who is fear, Mahabhaya 
who is terror, and Mrityu who is Death, forever killing. Because he is such 
a ceaseless killer, Mrityu has no wife or child. 

Tamra gives birth to five daughters, known throughout the worlds Kaki 
the crow; Shyeni the eagle; Phasi the hen; Dhritarashtri the goose, and Suki 
the parrot. Kaki generated crows, Shyeni eagles, falcons, hawks and 
vultures, Dhritarashtri ducks, geese, swans and the fabled chakravakas, and 
the sweet and auspicious Suki brings forth parrots and parakeets, and their 
ilk. 

Krodha gives birth to nine daughters, eight of them wrathful by nature 
Mrigi, Mrigamanda, Hari, Bhadramana, Matangi, Sarduli, Sweta, Surabhi, 
and the ninth, the virtuous and good-natured Surasa. 

King of men, Mrigi’s children are deer; Mrigamanda’s are bears and also 
srimaras, of the sweet feet. Bhadramana begets the celestial elephant 
Airavata. Hari’s children are monkeys, and also horses and all bovine 
creatures: golangulas, the cow-tailed ones. 

Sarduli begets lions and tigers in vast numbers, leopards and other 
powerful predators. Rajan, Matangi’s progeny are the elephants of the 
Earth. Sweta bears one elephant of extraordinary size and speed, named 
Sweta after her. 

Surabhi gives birth to two daughters, the sweet-natured Rohini and the 
famous Gandharvi. O Bharata, she has two other daughters, Vimala and 
Anala. 

Rohini is the mother of all kine, and Gandharvi of all equine beasts. 
Anala gives birth to the seven kinds of trees that yield soft fruit the date, the 
palm, the hintala, the tali, the little date, the nut and the coconut. She has 
another daughter called Suki, the mother of parrots. 


Surasa bears a son calls Kanka, a species of long-feathered birds. 
Shyeni, the wife of Aruna, gives birth to two sons of great tejas and 
strength: Sampati and the mighty Jatayu. Surasa also bears the Nagas and 
Kadru, the Punnaga snakes. Vinata has two sons, Garuda and Aruna, whose 
fame is limitless. 

Great King, of the mighty intellect, this is the genealogy of all the main 
species. Listening to this, a man is purified of his sins, finds great 
knowledge, and finally attains to the most exalted condition in the life to 
come.” 


CANTO 67 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


anamejaya said, “Holy One, I want to hear in detail about the advent as 
J ren of the Devas, the Asuras, the Gandharvas, Rakshasas, lions and 

tigers, the other animals, the Nagas, the Pakshis, and indeed all creatures. 
I want to hear everything that they did when they had human forms.” 

Vaisampayana said, “Lord of men, I will first tell you about the 
incarnations of the Devas and Danavas that were born as men. The great 
Danava Viprachitti is born as that bull among men, Jarasandha of Magadha. 

Diti’s son, the Daitya Hiranyakashyipu, is born as Sishupala of Chedi. 
Samhlada, the younger brother of Prahlada, comes down as Salya, that tiger 
amongst the Balhikas. The spirited Anuhlada, the youngest, becomes 
Dhrishtaketu. 

Rajan, the Daitya Sibi, incarnates as King Druma, while the great Asura 
Vashkala becomes the mighty Bhagadatta. The five ferocious great Asuras — 
Ayahsira, Aswasira, Aysanku, Gaganamurdhan and Vegavat are all born in 
the House of Kekaya and all become powerful kings. 

The other indomitable Demon Ketumat incarnates in the world as the 
terrible King Amitaujas. The Asura Swarbhanu becomes the fierce King 
Ugrasena. 

The Asura Aswa is born as the King Asoka, invincible in battle and 
choleric. Aswa’s younger brother, the Daitya Aswapati, is born into the 
world as the Kshatriya King Hardikya. 

The formidable and fortunate Asura Vrishaparvan becomes King 
Dirghaprajna. His younger brother Ajaka is born as Shalva, dark sorceror. 
The powerful Aswagriva comes to the world as King Rochana. 

Rajan, the Asura Sukshma, of subtle intelligence and_ great 
achievements, becomes the famous Brihadratha. 

The noted Demon Tuhunda becomes the King Senabindu. Ishupa 
becomes Nagnajita; Ekachakra becomes Pritivindhya; Virupaksha, master 


of a thousand arts of war, is born as Chitravarman. 

The valiant Danava Kara, who shatters the pride of his enemies, is born 
as Suvahu; Suhtra, of great energy, destroyer of his enemies, becomes the 
King Munjakesa of glowing fortune. Invincible, intelligent Nikumbha is 
born to become King Devadhipa. 

The Asura known amongst Diti’s sons as Sarabha becomes on Earth the 
Rajarishi Paurava, while Kupatha is born on Earth as the famed monarch 
Suparshva. The Asura Kratha incarnated as the royal Sage Parvateya, 
splendid as a golden mountain. 

The Asura called Salabha becomes the King Prahlada in the country of 
the Balhikas. Chandra, the Daitya who is as handsome as the Lord of stars 
who also has his name, the foremost among the sons of Diti known by the 
name of Chandra, becomes Chandravarman in this world, the Kambhoja 
king. 

Arka, Danavarishabha, becomes the Rajarishsi Rishika. That best of 
Asuras, Mritapa incarnates as Paschimanupaka; Garishtha becomes King 
Drumasena. Mayura becomes King Viswa; his younger brother Suparna 
becomes Kalakriti. 

Chandrahantri becomes the Rajarishi Sunaka; Chandravinasana comes 
as the king called Janaki. That bull among the Danavas, Dhirghajihva, 
becomes Kasiraja; Simhika’s son Rahu, tormentor of Surya and Soma, is 
born as Kratha. 

Danayu’s eldest son, Vikshara, becomes Vasumitra on Earth. Her second 
son Bala becomes the Pandya king; her third Vira, also called Balina, 
becomes Paundramatsyaka. Rajan, Danayu’s fourth son, the great 
Vritrasura, incarnates as the Rajarishi Manimat. Vritra’s younger brother 
Krodhahantri becomes known in this world as the King Danda. 
Krodhavardhana becomes Dandadhara. 

The eight sons of the Kaleyas are all born as kings, strong as tigers. The 
eldest becomes King Jayatsena in Magadha; the second, mighty as Indra, 
becomes Aparajita; the third is born a matchless king of the Nishadas, 
strong and devious; the fourth is to become the royal sage Srenimat. The 
fifth becomes King Mahanjas, destroyer of his enemies; the sixth, of huge 
intelligence, becomes Abhiru, another famed Rajarishi; the seventh has 
boundless fame and is the King Samudrasena, knower of the Shastras. The 
eighth of the Kaleyas becomes Brihat, a king of dharma, always working 
for the welfare of all beings. 


The mighty Danava Kukshi, incarnated as Parvatiya, is named for his 
lustre, which is that of a golden mountain. The Asura Krathana becomes 
King Suryaksha in the world; the handsome Demon Surya becomes a king 
of the Balhikas called Darada. 

Rajan, I told you about the tribe of Asuras called the Krodhavasas. Many 
fearless Kshatriya kings of the Earth are Demons of that tribe — Madraka, 
Karnaveshta, Siddhartha, Kitaka, Suvira, Subahu, Mahavira, Balhika, 
Kratha, Vichitra, Suratha, the handsome Nila, Chiravasa, Bhumipala, 
Dantavakra, Durjaya, Rukmi the tigerish Kshatriya, your namesake 
Janamejaya, Ashada, Vayuvega, Bhuritejas, Ekalavya the brilliant Nishada, 
Sumitra, Vatadhana, Gomukha, the Kshatriyas of the clan of Karushakas, 
Khemadhurti, Srutayus, Udvaha, Brihatsena, Kshema, Ugratirtha, the 
Kalinga king, Matimat, the King Iswara. Yes, all these are Krodhavasa 
Asuras, incarnated as human kings. 

A most powerful Demon called Kalanemi is born as the son of Ugrasena 
of Mathura, and he becomes Kamsa, the Great and the Terrible. 

The Asura Devaka, lustrous as Indra, is born into the world as a king of 
the Gandharvas. 

Rajan, you must know that Bharadvaja’s son Drona is not born from any 
woman, but is an amsavatara of Brihaspati. He is a peerless archer, with 
power over every astra, of great tejas and greater achievements. He is also a 
master of the Vedas, the pride of his kind. 

O King, Drona’s son is the heroic Aswatthama, his eyes like lotus-petals, 
a terror to his enemies, of tremendous energy, is an amsavatara of equal 
embodiments of Siva, Yama, Kama and Krodha. 

Because of Vasishta’s curse and also Indra’s dictate, the eight Vasus are 
born into the world as the sons of Ganga and Shantanu. The youngest Vasu, 
Prabhasa, is Bhishma, of the grand vow. He is the light of the House of 
Kuru, a knower of the Vedas, of lofty intellect, the most eloquent speaker, 
who melts the legions of his enemies in battle. Why, Jamadagni’s son 
Parasurama Bhargava could not vanquish Bhishma when he fought a duel 
with him. 

The Brahmana Sage Kripa, a man among men, is an amsavatara of the 
Rudras. 

Shakuni, O King, who crushed his foes, is none other than Dwapara, the 
third Yuga incarnate! 


Satyaki, pride of the Vrishnis, whose aim never falters, is an amsavatara, 
an incarnation of the Maruts, who are Vayu’s companions. The Rajarishi, 
the Panchala King Drupada, greatest among bowmen, is also an incarnation 
of the Maruts, as indeed is the Vrishni Kritavarman, that bull among bulls 
among Kshatriyas; so, too, is King Virata. 

Arishta’s son Hamsa is also born into the clan of the Kurus and becomes 
a king of the Gandharvas. 

Dhritarashtra, born of the seed of Krishna Dwaipayana, and blessed with 
long and mighty arms and unrivalled strength, he of prophetic vision, is 
blind because of his mother’s indelicacy and the consequent anger of the 
Rishi Vyasa. 

Pandu is Dhritarashtra’s younger brother, of prowess that defies 
description, devout and truthful; why, purity incarnate. Their brother 
Vidura, I have told you, O King, is an avatara of the son of Maharishi Atri: 
Dharma, Lord of Righteousness and Justice. 

As for Duryodhana, incalculably evil king, who ruins the honour of the 
Kuruvamsa, he is an amsavatara of the Kali Yuga, the Demon Kali. He is 
the cause of the Great War that devastated the Earth; he lit the fire that 
finally consumed everything. 

The Rakshasas, who are once born as the sons of Pulastya Muni, now 
take birth as Duryodhana’s hundred evil brothers, Dushasana being the first 
of them. Bharatrishabha, Durmukha, Duhsha and others of these hundred, 
who always supported Duryodhana’s most treacherous and murderous 
schemes, are all sons of the same Pulastya Muni. 

Of course, Dhritarashtra has another son, not by Gandhari but by a 
Vaishya woman in his palace, and we have seen that this is the virtuous 
Yuyutsu, who always sided with his cousins the Pandavas of dharma.” 

Janamejaya said, “Illustrious Suta, tell me the names of Dhritarashtra’s 
sons in order of birth, beginning with the eldest.” 

Vaisampayana said, “O King, Duryodhana is the first, then Yuyutsu, 
Dushasana, Duhsaha, Duhshala, Durmukha, Vivimsati, Vikarna, Jalasandha, 
Sulochna, Vinda, Anuvinda, Durdharsha, Subahu, Dushpradharshana, 
Durmarshana, Dushkarna, Karna, Chitra, Vipachitra, Chitraksha, 
Charuchitra, Angada, Durmada, Dushpradharsha, Vivitsu, Vikata, Sama, 
Drananabha, Padmanabha, Nanda, Upanandaka, Sanapati, Sushena, 
Kundodara, Mahodara, Chitrabahu, Chitravarman, Suvarman, 
Durvirochana, Ayobahu, Mahabahu, Chitrachapa, Sukundala, Bhimavega, 


Bhimabala, Balaki, Bhimavikrama, Ugrayudha, Bhimachara, Kanakayu, 
Dridhayudha, Dridhavarman, Dridhakshatra, Somakirti, Anadara, 
Jarasandha, Dridhasandha, Satyasandha, Sahasrabahu, Ugrasravas, 
Ugrasena, Kshemamurti, Aparajita, Panditaka, Visalaksha, Duradhara, 
Dridhahasta, Suhasta, Vatavega, Suvarchasa, Adityaketu, Bahvasin, 
Nagadatta, Anuyaina, Nishangi, Kuvachi, Dandi, Dandadhara, Dhanugraha, 
Ugra, Bhimaratha, Vira, Virabahu, Alolupa, Abhaya, Raudrakarman, 
Dridharatha, Anadhrishya, Kundaveda,  Viravi, Dhirghalochana, 
Dirghabahu, Mahabahu, Vyudhoru, Kanakangana, Kundaja and Chitraka?. 

Dhritarshtra also has a daughter by Gandhari called Duhsala, who is not 
of the hundred, and neither is Yuyutsu, the Vaishya woman’s son. I have 
recited the names of the hundred in order of their births. 

All these are mighty Kshatriyas, great warriors. All of them knew the 
Vedas, and, Rajan, all the other Shastras besides. They are invincible, in 
attack and defence, and truly learned besides. 

When they are of age, they marry suitably beautiful and accomplished 
princesses; and the Kaurava king gives his daughter Duhsala to be the wife 
of Jayadratha, king of the Sindhus. This is done on the advice of 
Dhritarashtra’s brother-in-law, Shakun1. 

O King, Yudhishtira is an amsa of Dharma; Bhimasena of Vayu; Arjuna 
of Indra; Nakula and Sahadeva, handsomest of men, their looks unrivalled 
on Earth, of the Aswin twins. 

Soma Deva’s son, Varchas the strong, becomes Arjuna’s son of stunning 
genius, the dashing Abhimanyu. When Varchas is to be born, Soma says to 
the other Devas, ‘I cannot live without my son. So let him incarnate on 
Bhumi, but live a short human life before returning to me after killing 
countless Daityas. 

Nara, whose companion is Narayana, will be born as Indra’s son Arjuna 
the Pandava. Let my Varchas be born as Arjuna’s son and become a 
Maharatha. Let him be away on Earth for sixteen years, and when he is 
sixteen the Great War shall be fought, and, Devas, all your amsavataras 
shall raze the Asuras and the very race of Kshatriyas. 

Yet, one day during the war, a great encounter will occur inside a 
cunning Chakravyuha. Krishna and Arjuna, Nara Narayana, will not have 
part in that battle, but my son shall pierce the impenetrable spinning wheel 
of warriors and take devastation to the enemy. 


On his own, my son will send a quarter of the entire enemy army to 
Yama’s realm, in the space of half a day. None will be able to stand before 
him, but finally, near dusk, a ring of Maharathas will combine to slay my 
mighty child with treachery, and Varchas shall return to me. 

Abhimanyu will beget the single heir to the Kuru throne, and prevent the 
royal line of Bharata from becoming extinct.’ 

The Devas assent, ‘So be it.’ Why, they applaud him all together and 
offer him worship, that Lord of the stars. This, Rajan, of course, is the story 
behind the birth of your father’s father. 

The fireborn Maharatha Dhrishtadyumna is an amsa of Agni. Prince 
Shikhandin, who was once a princess, is the amsavatara of a Rakshasa. 

Bharatarishabha, the celestial Rishis are born as the five sons of 
Draupadi — Prativindhya, Sutasoma, Srutakirti, Satanika, Nakula and 
Srutasena, endowed with terrific energy. 

Vasudeva’s father is Sura, a great Yadava chieftain. He has a daughter 
called Pritha, whose beauty is unmatched in this world. Sura has vowed, 
with Agni as his witness, that he would give his firstborn child to his cousin 
Kuntiboja, who is childless. 

He gives Pritha to Kuntibhoja, who adopts her as his daughter. She 
becomes a charming and attentive young hostess in the palace of her 
adoptive father, especially to visiting Rishis and Brahmanas. Once, she 
waits graciously upon the Rishi Durvasa, a master of the profoundest 
mysteries of the spirit, but his temper also a legend. 

Pritha, now called Kunti by her doting foster-father, looks after the 
irascible Sage’s every wish and whim with such affection and care, that, as 
he is leaving, he says to her, ‘I am pleased with you, my child. I am going 
to teach you a secret mantra with which you can summon any Deva you 
wish. By their grace, one day you shall bear divine children.’ 

He teaches her the recondite incantation, and then leaves. 

Some days pass; then seized by curiosity, the young Kunti, still a maiden 
living in her father’s home, chants Durvasa’s mantra one morning and 
summons Surya Deva, the Sun God. You might imagine her surprise when 
the blazing Deva actually appears before her and begets a child on her, a 
son who becomes without equal among the archers of the world. 

Kunti gives birth in magical secrecy, with Surya’s blessing, and from 
fear of the censure of the world and her relatives, she floats her Sun-child, 
irradiant and handsome as the Sun himself, and born wearing golden 


armour and earrings, his body of perfect proportions, away on the river that 
flows at the bottom of her father’s palace garden. 

The husband of Radha sees the wooden box of that shining infant 
floating downstream, and takes him home to his childless wife to be their 
son. They name him Vasusena, and when he grows up he becomes a master 
of weapons, of all the Shastras and sciences, learns the Veda, and, the truth 
being his strength, there is nothing he would not give away as alms to a 
Brahmana who comes begging to him, so generous is he. 

Then, Indra, who is the origin of all things, comes to that mighty son of 
Surya and asks him for his natural kavacha and kundala as alms. Indra 
wants to disadvantage Vasusena against Arjuna, who of course is Indra’s 
own son. 

Promptly, that unequalled warrior strips off his armour, removes his 
magical earrings, both of which are his father Surya’s protection to him, and 
gives them to Indra. Astonished by his truthfulness (for he has sworn not to 
refuse anyone that comes to him at high noon for whatever they ask of him 
as alms), and moved by his fearless generosity, Surya gives Vasusena his 
own Shakti, saying, ‘Invincible hero, anyone at whom you cast this Shakti 
will die, be he not a Deva, an Asura, a Manava, a Gandharva, Naga, 
Rakshasa or any other celestial or earthly being.’ 

Surya’s son is first called Vasusena, but later, because he has cut his coat 
of golden mail from his body to give it as alms to Indra, Surya’s prince, 
Kunti’s eldest son, is called Karna. 

However, that natural Kshatriya grows up in the home of a Suta; Radha 
and her husband are the only parents he ever knows. Later, O King, Karna, 
noblest of men, greatest of archers, slayer of his enemies, the finest amsa of 
the God of Day, becomes the closest companion and advisor of Duryodhana 
the Kaurava. 

Then there is born into the world Vaasudeva Krishna, indomitable and 
unrivalled in every way, an Avatara of Narayana, Devadeva the Eternal 
One. His brother Baladeva is an amsa of Sesha Naga. 

Rajan, mighty Pradyumna is Sanatkumara incarnate. Many other 
dwellers in Swarga incarnate themselves in the race of the Vrishnis, 
swelling its glory. 

And, O King, the portions of the tribe of Apsaras which I have 
mentioned already, also becomes incarnate on Earth according to Indra’s 
commands. And sixteen thousand portions of those goddesses become, in 


this world of men, the wives of Vasudeva. And a portion of Sri herself 
becomes incarnate on Earth, for the gratification of Narayana, in the line of 
Bhishmaka. She is the chaste Rukmini. 

And the faultless Draupadi, slender-waisted like the wasp, is born of a 
portion of Sachi (the queen of the Devas), in the line of Drupada. She is 
neither short nor tall; she is of the fragrance of the blue lotus, of eyes large 
as lotus-petals, of thighs fair and round, of dense masses of black curly hair. 
And endowed with every auspicious feature and her complexion like that of 
the emerald, she enchants and steals the hearts of the five Pandavas, greatest 
among men of the world. 

The two goddesses Siddhi and Dhriti are born as Kunti and Madri to 
become the mothers of those five. The Devi Mali incarnates as Gandhari, 
daughter of Subala, who becomes blind Dhritarashtra’s wife. 

This, Rajan, is the narration of the incarnation of the Devas, the Asuras, 
Gandharvas, Apsaras and Rakshasas as invincible kings and lovely queens 
of the Earth. 

I have told you about the exalted ones born as Yadavas and Vrishnis, the 
others born as powerful kings in other royal houses, and those who take 
birth as Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas. 

This account of the incarnation as amsavataras of the God and Demons 
can bestow wealth, fame, children, longevity and success, if one listens to it 
with faith. He that hears it learns the true nature of the creation, 
preservation and destruction of the world, and thus finding wisdom, he is 
never conquered even by the gravest sorrow.” 


> These do not add up to a hundred, and there seem to be two Mahabahus. 


CANTO 68 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


anamejaya said, “Brahmana, you have indeed told me about the 
J incarnation in amsa of the Devas, the Danavas, the Rakshasas, the 

Gandharvas and Apsaras. But I want to hear the genealogy of the 
Kuruvamsa again, from its inception. I beg you, Vaisampayana, relate this 
to me before all these auspicious and illumined Rishis.” 

Vaisampayana said, “O noblest of Bharata’s race, Dushyanta of blazing 
tejas is the founder of the Paurava line. He is the Guardian of the Earth 
bounded by four seas, and has complete sway over the Four Quarters of this 
world. Moreover, he is sovereign of myriad islands in the midst of the 
ocean. Bane of his enemies, he even holds sway over the distant countries 
of the Mlechchas. 

While Dushyanta rules, the varnas remain pure and there are no children 
born of mixed caste. No one tills the soil, because the Earth herself yields 
every manner of produce, spontaneously, as she does precious metals and 
gemstones: magically. 

There are no sinners and all men are good, and live in dharma and 
virtue; whatever they do their motives are pure and selfless. There is no fear 
from thieves, famine, or disease — for none of these exist. The four varnas 
delight in their svadharma, for its own sake, not performing any karma from 
desire for gain. 

His people feel perfectly secure during the golden reign of Dushyanta, 
and Indra sends down the rains in proper season and the Earth flourishes. 
Rich is the yield of the field and the bough. The world abounds in wealth of 
every kind and every species of animal, bird and plant, great and small. 

Brahmanas perform their sacred dharma punctiliously; they are truthful 
to a fault. The young king is marvellously strong, his body hard as Indra’s 
Vajra, and he can lift Mount Mandara, with all its forests, and hold it up, 
easily. 


He is a master of the four forms of gada-yuddha, mace fighting — hurling 
it from afar, striking with it at close quarters, whirling it around to strike 
many adversaries, and staving off a combatant with it. He is an expert at 
every form of warfare, a master of every weapon; he rides an elephant and a 
horse with equal skill. 

Dushyanta is as strong as Vishnu, brilliant as Surya, deep and grave as 
Varuna, and as patient as Bhumi Devi. His contented people love their king 
and he rules with dharma as his sceptre.” 


CANTO 69 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


anamejaya said, “Tell me now about the birth and the life of Mahatma 
J Bharata and about the birth of Shakuntala. Holy one, tell me how 

Dushyanta, that lion among kings, married Shakuntala. O most erudite 
among men, great Vaisampayana, tell me all.” 

Vaisampayana said, “Once, Dushyanta Mahabaho sets out for the forest 
with a large complement of soldiers. Hundreds of horses and elephants go 
with the king. Footsoldiers, chariots, cavalry and elephant mounted warriors 
travel with Dushyanta — Kshatriyas bearing swords and spears, maces and 
heavy cudgels. 

Yes, surrounded by hundreds of great warriors, that king sets out and the 
Earth and Sky echo with the tigerish roars of those warriors, and with 
booming conches, batteries of drumrolls, the clatter of chariot wheels, the 
trumpeting of elephants, the whinnying of horses, the din of weapons being 
clashed together and against breastplate and armour — it is deafening, the 
noise that force makes as it goes forth. 

Beautiful and noble women line their sprawling terraces to watch the 
grand march of mighty King Dushyanta. The women see how magnificent 
he is, like Indra himself. 

They say, “This tiger among men is a match for the Vasus in battle; no 
enemy can stand before him.’ 

The women shower flowers down on their king in joy. Followed by the 
greatest Brahmanas, chanting out their blessings ceaselessly, the king 
proceeds towards the jungle in some delight. He goes to hunt deer. Not only 
Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, but Vaishyas and Sudras follow Dushyanta who 
rides a haughty elephant even as the king of the Devas does. The people 
follow him until he forbids them to go with him any further. 

Then Dushyanta climbs down from his royal elephant and into his 
chariot, yoked to steeds swift as thoughts, and the sound of his chariot 


wheels fill Earth and Sky. Soon, he sees a great forest before him and, 
entering it, sees that it is like the heavenly garden Nandana. 

Bilwa, Arka, Khadira, Kapittha and Dhava trees he sees and that the 
ground is strewn with crags that have come loose and fallen from 
surrounding hills. He sees no water anywhere, no humans, and the jungle 
stretches away on every side for yojanas. There are deer in plenty in that 
forest, as well as lions and other fierce predators. 

Dushyanta and his men begin to hunt in that forest, slaughtering 
countless beasts. That tiger among kings kills many a tiger, within range, 
with unerring arrows; he wounds many others that he sees at great 
distances; then he leaps on other striped terrors that are too near to be slain 
by arrows and kills them with his sword. 

There are beasts he kills by casting spears at them that pierce their 
hearts, and others he fells with mace and club. Fearlessly, he ranges through 
that jungle, strewing carcasses everywhere. The forest is in turmoil. 

Lions flee that jungle in prides; elephant herds, their tuskers slain, crash 
away in panic in every direction, trunks raised high, screams filling the air, 
spraying urine and dung in terror, some vomiting blood. Some wounded 
beasts trample many of the king’s men who are not quick enough to escape 
their wild charges. 

Exhausted, the mastodons soon fall down, for there is no water 
anywhere to drink. The king’s hungry warriors eat many of those that have 
died, some raw and some roasted over spits. 

That jungle, which teemed with animals a short while ago, is quickly 
filled with dead beasts and hardly any that live, because those that do live 
flee for their lives, so savage is the hunt of Dushyanta and his men.” 


CANTO 70 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


beasts in that forest, until there is no game left in it to hunt, 
Dushyanta goes towards another forest, to hunt on. 

By now, his force has scattered and he has just two of his men with him 
— his priest and his minister. Tired, hungry and thirsty, the king stumbles 
upon a desert at the edge of the second forest. Crossing this plain of sand, 
where no green thing grows, Dushyanta and his men enter the second 
forest, like a garden in heaven, full of Rishis and their asramas. 

Dark, deep and enchanting this forest is, with cool and fragrant breezes 
whispering through stands of trees laden with flowers in every colour. 
Velvet grasses cover the ground, as far as they can see, and the sweetest 
songs of birds fill the air most of all, the inspired melodies of the male 
kokila and also the twanging of cicadas. 

Ancient and magnificent are the trees of this forest, their lofty branches 
entwining high above the jungle floor to form a verdant awning. Flowering 
vines cling to many of these and bees hum over them, drinking their nectar. 

No tree here but that which bears some luscious fruit; none without the 
bees swarming over its flowers; and none that has any thorns. Yes, truly the 
whole forest rings with the symphonies of feathered choirs. And the 
flowers? A carnival, a riot of them, from every season, in every colour, 
some from dreams. After the march through the arid sands, the green shade 
is like balm to the king and his men. 

The breeze seems to welcome Dushyanta, gently dislodging a small rain 
of flowers to fall over his head as if in benison. So lofty are those patriarchs 
of the jungle, clad in rainbow flower garments of every hue, honey-throated 
songsters perched on their branches, that their crowns surely must thrust 
themselves into Swarga above. 


‘ J aisampayana continued, “Having slaughtered thousands of innocent 


Their branches, though, are bent with the weight of the flowers they 
bear. Gazing at all this, hearing the drone of the bees like the sruti to the 
song of the birds, great Dushyanta is enchanted. 

Bands of Siddhas, Charanas, tribes of Gandharvas, Apsaras, Vanaras and 
Kinnaras come to this charmed forest, to sport, to make love and become 
inebriated with its enchantment. 

The soft breezes scented with flowers blow everywhere, with no method, 
as if they play with the trees. The king sees that this forest grows in a great 
loop of a river and, looking at a singularly lofty stand of trees, like some 
great and incredible column, he is reminded of a gaudy stamba erected at 
Indra’s festival. 

Wandering in that forest, Dushyanta comes closer to that auspicious 
grove of trees in which there is an asrama of some Rishis, serene and 
brimming, as it were, with the joy of the Spirit. A sacred fire burns 
solemnly in the agnikunda at its heart. The king sees that many Yogis, 
Balakhilyas and other Munis sit around the fire and offer worship there. 
There are many kutilas that comprise the hermitage, each with a holy fire 
alight within it. The flowers fallen from the trees form a thick bright carpet 
over the ground. 

Perhaps even more lovely than the rest of that forest is this asrama 
nestling in the grove of lofty trees, their boles so wide and great. The limpid 
river Malini flows beside that asrama, waterbirds of every kind swimming, 
playing, on her transparent current. 

The Rishis bathe in her, and she suffuses their hearts with bliss. On her 
banks Dushyanta sees herds of deer that seem fearless and even tame; he 
sees chakravakas on her wavelets crested with the purest white foam; he 
sees the abodes of Kinnara fauns on the far bank of the sacred Malini. 
Monkeys and bears he sees in large numbers, elephants, tigers and snakes. 

Of course, there are numerous asramas that dot the course of the river, 
where Rishis live in dhyana, imbibing the Scriptures. The fine asrama on 
the banks of that river, which Dushyanta sees first, belongs to the Maharishi 
Kashyapa, and many of his disciples live therein, Rishis of profound 
tapasya. 

Dushyanta sees the river, many islands on her stream, her banks 
gorgeous, and the asrama that seems truly like the hermitage of Nara 
Narayana upon the banks of the Ganga; and he decides he would enter that 
asrama. In some transport at everything he sees and feels, Dushyanta, 


whose chariot is inexorable to his enemies, walks into that sanctuary as 
lovely as a bit of Devaloka fallen into this world. 

The forest, which is even like the garden of Chitraratha, the Gandharva 
king, echoes with the cries of peacocks. Dushyanta wants to meet the 
Maharishi Kanva of the line of Kashyapa, a Sage whose lustre is such that it 
is difficult to even look at him. 

Earlier, when they rejoined him at the hem of the second forest, 
Dushyanta had said to his flagbearers, the horsemen and the elephant riders, 
‘I will go alone to see the mighty Rishi of Kashyapa’s race, the one without 
darkness. Wait here for me.’ 

Going into the blessed jungle with just his priest and his minister, 
Dushyanta immediately forgets his hunger and thirst; indeed they leave 
him. Great joy surges through him. He puts aside all his royal insignia, his 
armour and weapons, and goes forward without ornaments to see that Sage 
who is an immortal sea of the Spirit. 

The forest is like a piece of Brahmaloka. Above the birdsongs and the 
nectar-drunk bees, Dushyanta hears the chanting of Riks by sonorous and 
beautifully modulated Brahmana voices. Elsewhere, he sees Yagnas, and 
hears the Vedangas and the Yajur mantras being chanted. Other asramas 
resonate with the harmonies of the hymns of the Saman being sung by 
Rishis of deep tapasya. Still other zones of that jungle are adorned with 
Munis who are masters, obviously, of the Atharva Veda. 

The king walks on, in awe, and hears the Samhitas being recited, 
exquisitely. Other Brahmanas, healers, are chanting other arcane mantras. 
Truly, this is equal to being in Brahmaloka, thinks Dushyanta. 

He sees Brahmanas that are experts at creating yagnashalas; others that 
are masters of the rules of krama for sacrifices; others are master logicians 
and adept at all the sciences of the mind, all these fully knowing the Veda; 
masters of language and grammarians; those that know the most secret 
rituals; those that tread the path of Moksha Dharma; dialecticians and 
metaphysicians with minds like rapiers that quickly cut away any dross and 
arrive at the truth of a philosophical proposition. 

The king sees Brahmanas who know prosody, Nirukta; astrologers; men 
that know the nature of matter and its underlying illusion; those learned in 
the fruit to be obtained from various yagnas; those that can converse with 
birds and monkeys; those that know vast treatises on every subject, 
backwards — in short, men who know all there is to be known. 


Dushyanta hears their melodious and strong voices at japa, chanting the 
sacred names of God; he sees them performing homa, making burnt 
offerings in the holy fire. 

He is received respectfully wherever he goes, and he wonders at the 
delectable carpets those Brahmanas offer him to sit upon. Seeing and 
hearing all that he did in that forest, he truly feels that he has entered 
Brahmaloka. Yet, he wanders on because he has not found the asrama of the 
Muni Kanva. 

Finally, that tiger among kings arrives, with his minister and his priest, at 
the hermitage of Kashyapa, where the loftiest Sages of incomparable 
asceticism and vows live.” 


CANTO 71 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Now, the king leaves his two companions at the 
\/ entrance to that asrama and goes in alone. He does not see the Rishi 
Kanva or any other Sage, and calls out loudly, “Is anyone here?’ 

His deep voice echoes like thunder in that silent place. Then, a young 
woman, a girl as beautiful, surely, as the Devi Sri herself, appears. She is 
wearing the simple, rough clothes of a hermit’s daughter. She is fair and her 
eyes are black, and she receives the king with honour and welcomes him. 

She brings him a darbhasana to sit upon, gives him padya, water to wash 
his feet, and offers him arghya. Respectfully, she inquires after his health 
and his peace of mind. 

With utmost reverence she says, ‘O Rajan, tell me what I can do for you. 
I await your command.’ 

The king says to that flawless beauty, her voice and speech so sweet, ‘I 
have come to worship the most exalted Rishi Kanva. Lovely one, tell me 
where he is.’ 

Shakuntala replies, ‘He has gone into the forest to gather fruit. He will 
return shortly. I beg you, wait for him here.’ 

The king gazes at her, helplessly, and sees that she is beautiful past 
reason; her face and form are perfect. He sees how sweet her smile is, and 
how she is radiant with her tapasya, and her humility. Besides, she is in the 
bloom of lush youth. 

Captivated, Dushyanta says, ‘And who are you? Whose daughter are 
you? Why do you also live in the forest when you are so beautiful, and 
obviously so chaste? Ah, you have stolen my heart and I want to know all 
about you, everything.’ 

She smiles and says sweetly, ‘Rajan, I am the daughter of Maharishi 
Kanva.’ 


Dushyanta says, ‘That Sage, whom the Universe worships, is a 
Brahmachari. Dharma Deva might break a vow, but not the Rishi Kanva. 
How can you be his daughter, beautiful one?’ 

Shakuntala replies, ‘I will tell you, Rajan, how I became the Muni’s 
daughter. Once, another Rishi came here and asked the same question. I will 
tell you what my father said to him. 

My father Kanva said to that Rishi, “Once, long ago, Viswamitra 
performed such an awesome tapasya that Indra became anxious that the 
Rishi blazing with tejas would usurp his throne in Amaravati, and cast Indra 
down from Swarga. 

Indra called the Apsara Menaka and said to her, ‘You are the most 
beautiful of your kind, Menaka, and I want you to do me a small service. 
The Rishi Viswamitra blazes like the Sun with the power of his tapasya. I 
fear his penance will cast me down from my throne. 

Sweet Menaka of the slender waist, I want you to seduce the Sage from 
his dhyana, and interrupt his penance. Go and tempt him; use all your 
weapons: your youth, your beauty, your charms, your smile, your sidelong 
glances, your soft voice.’ 

Menaka replied, “Lord, you know how powerful Viswamitra is and he is 
quick to anger, too. Why, he has made even you anxious. Then shall I not 
fear him? He caused the death of Vasistha’s children. You know that 
Viswamitra is born a Kshatriya and only later became a Brahmana through 
tapasya. 

Why, when he wanted a holy river near him, in which to perform his 
ablutions, he created the deep and swift Kausiki. You know how the 
Rajarishi Trishanku, whom a father’s curse turned into a Vetala, fed 
Viswamitra’s wife during a famine, while Viswamitra was away at his 
penance. 

When Viswamitra returned after the famine was over, he changed the 
name of the Kausiki near his asrama to Para, and then became Trishanku’s 
priest to help him rise bodily into Swarga. 

Why, you refused to drink the Soma rasa from that yagna, O Indra, and 
when you commanded the rising Trishanku to fall back to the Earth, 
Viswamitra in fury created a second Universe (with all the stars beginning 
with Sravana), for Trishanku to rule. 

I am terrified of such a one, my Lord. If you want me to do what you 
ask, you must tell me how I can escape being consumed by his wrath. He 


can burn the three worlds with his tejas, or make the Earth quake with a 
stamp of his foot. He can pluck up Meru by his roots and cast him as far as 
he pleases. He can fly around the Earth, all her ten cardinal points, in a 
moment. 

How can even an Apsara like me hope to move such a one, alight with 
his tapasya like a fire, his virtue perfect, his passions controlled? His mouth 
is like Agni; the pupils of his eyes are like Surya and Soma; his tongue is 
like Yama. 

O Devendra, how will I dare touch him? Yama, Soma, the great Rishis, 
the Sadhyas, the Visis and Balakhilyas are terrified of Viswamitra! How can 
I dare even look at him? 

But because you command it, I will go to the dreadful Rishi, to 
accomplish your purpose. But O Indra, devise a plan by which you can 
protect me from his anger if it is roused. Vayu should go with me, as well, 
and fill the asrama with the scents of spring, snatch my garment from my 
body so that I stand naked before the Rishi, and let Manmatha, Kama, roiler 
of minds, be there as well to turn the Sage’s heart to me.’ 

When Indra gave her all that she asked for, and said that he would be at 
hand himself near Viswamitra’s asrama, invisibly, to rescue her if the Sage 
became angry, Menaka went to Kaushika’s hermitage to seduce Viswamitra 
from his penance.’” 


CANTO 72 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


CC hakuntala continues, ‘My father Kanva said, “Indra commanded 

Qiu who goes wherever he pleases, across the Earth, to be with 

Menaka when she approached Viswamitra, as also Kama Deva. 

Timidly, her heart pounding, the exquisite Menaka went into the Rishi’s 
asrama and saw Viswamitra sitting there in dhyana, bright as a fire himself, 
he that had burnt his sins to ashes in the other fire of his tapasya; and he still 
sat on, in intense dhayna. 

She folded her hands and greeted the Sage, then began to dance before 
him, and to sing softly. In a moment, Vayu whisked the single white 
garment from her body, leaving her bare. With a cry, as if in terrible 
bashfulness and annoyance, she ran after the flying cloth, white as the 
moon. 

Viswamitra, his tejas like cosmic fire, gazed upon her naked body and 
saw how perfect she was, and youthful, no blemish upon her ravishing 
nakedness. He saw how graceful she was, and shot by Kama Deva with one 
of his subtle flowery shafts of love, that bull among Sages was pierced 
through by lust. 

Hoarsely he called to her, and she went to him willingly and he took her 
ardently to himself. They were together for many years, and so happy were 
they that those years passed like a single day. 

Viswamitra begot a child on Menaka. As her time drew near, Menaka 
went to a secluded place on the banks of the Malini, gushing through a 
verdant valley of Himavat. There she gave birth to a daughter, and, Apsara 
that she was, she abandoned her child beside the river and went away. 

A flock of vultures saw that baby lying there helpless in a forest that 
teemed with lions, tigers and leopards, and the great birds flew down and 
sat around the infant in a protective ring, and no predator approached her, 
no Rakshasa or carnivore took her life. 


Later that day, I went to the river for my ablutions and saw the strange 
sight of the vultures guarding Menaka’s daughter in the heart of the 
wilderness. I brought her home and made her my daughter. 

You know that they who create the body, who protect life and who 
provide food are all fathers, according to the Shastras. Because birds, 
Shakuntas, protected her in the jungle, I named her Shakuntala. Brahmana, 
this was how Shakuntala became my daughter and the sinless child also 
looks up to me as being her father.” 

This, O King, is what my father said to the Rishi who asked him the 
question that you have asked me. I have never known my natural father and 
I do indeed think of Kanva Muni as being my only father. This is my story, 
O Dushyanta!’” 


CANTO 73 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “King Dushyanta says, “This is wonderful! I 

\/ love you Shakuntala, and want you to be my wife. Whatever your 

heart desires you shall have: golden necklaces and earrings, priceless 

robes of silk, great moon pearls from distant lands, golden coins, the finest 

carpets, and whatever else you want. Why, let all that I have, and my 
kingdom, be yours from today. 

Only come to me now, marry me in Gandharva vivaha, beautiful one. It 
is considered to be the first form of marriage and the best. Be mine now, 
this very moment!’ 

Shakuntala says, ‘O King, my father has gone to gather fruit in the 
forest. Wait but briefly and he will give me to you to be your wife.’ 

Beside himself, Dushyanta replies, ‘Flawless, perfect one, exquisite one, 
I want you to be my life’s companion. From now I live only for you and my 
heart is yours. 

One belongs first and last to oneself; each of us depends finally on 
himself or herself. And so it is lawful for you to give yourself to me. The 
eight kinds of marriages are Brahma, Daiva, Arsha, Prajapatya, Asura, 
Gandharva, Rakshasa and Paisacha. 

Brahma’s son Manu, the Lawgiver, has said that all these are proper 
depending on who one is. The first four are proper for Brahmanas, and the 
first six for Kshatriyas. For kings even Rakshasa vivaha is allowed. Asura 
vivaha is allowed only to Vaishyas and Sudras. 

Of the first five, three are sattvik, while two are not. The Paisacha and 
Asura vivahas are violent and unsafe. These are the laws of dharma, and 
they must be followed. 

To Kshatriyas, Gandharva and Rakshasa vivaha are allowed. You must 
not be afraid; for us either of these, or even a mixture of both, is perfectly 


lawful. Fair one, I am full of desire for you, and if you feel the same for me, 
let us marry now by Gandharva vivaha, and consummate our love!’ 

Shakuntala listens to the impatient king, then says, ‘If it is indeed true 
that we are allowed to marry by Gandharva vivaha, if I can truly give 
myself to you in dharma, listen O Purushottama, to my conditions, and you 
must swear solemnly to give me what I ask. 

The son that you beget in me must become the Yuvaraja and king after 
you. Grant this one condition, Dushyanta, and let us marry and be one 
flesh.’ 

The king does not think a moment before crying, ‘So be it! I will even 
take you, my beauty with the sweetest smile, to my capital. I swear this to 
you, lovely one, for you deserve no less.’ 

With that he takes her to be his wife in Gandharva vivaha, and possesses 
her immediately. Then he leaves her, after repeatedly reassuring Shakuntala, 
‘Beloved, I will send my finest legion, of the four varnas, to fetch you to my 
city.’ 

Having sworn this, Dushyanta leaves that asrama and that forest like a 
bit of heaven on earth. As he rides home, he begins to think of Kanva. He 
wonders, ‘What will the Rishi say when he discovers what happened?’ With 
this thought, he arrives in his capital. 

As soon as Dushyanta leaves the asrama, Kanva returns. Ashamed and 
feeling guilty, Shakuntala does not go out to meet him as she usually does. 
But that great Sage is a mystic and already sees everything that has 
transpired with his inner eye. 

Not annoyed, but pleased, he says, ‘My child, there is no sin in what you 
did today, secretly, without waiting for me to return. You have been with a 
man, but you have not broken dharma by giving yourself to him. Why, the 
Shastras say that Gandharva vivaha between a man and a woman who 
desire each other is the highest form of marriage for Kshatriyas. 

Dushyanta is a noble and virtuous king, and you have taken him for your 
husband with all your heart. Your son by him shall be mighty and 
illustrious. He will be invincible in battle and have sway over Earth and 
Sea.’ 

Shakuntala now goes to her tired father and washes his feet. She takes 
the load of fruit he has brought, and sets it down. She says softly, ‘I beg 
you, bless Dushyanta and his ministers, too.’ 


Kanva replies, ‘Sweet child, for your sake I will bless him. Also, ask me 
for any boon you want.’ 

Shakuntala thinks of Dushyanta whom she loves, and says, ‘May every 
Paurava king be virtuous and may they never lose their kingdom or their 
throne.’” 


CANTO 74 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana continued, “Dushyanta leaves the asrama, promising 
Shakuntala that he will send for her. But the months pass, her time 
comes and she delivers a magnificent child, a boy of shining tejas. 

When the child is three years, he blazes like agni. He is handsome, 

generous, and quickly, very accomplished as well. 

Kanva performs all his rites of passage and teaches the child of great 
intelligence everything that he needs to know, so day by day he grows more 
splendid. His teeth are pearls, his locks shine, and even as a young boy he is 
so strong that he can kill lions. He has every auspicious line and mark in his 
palms, his brow is broad and lofty, his beauty and strength swell like the 
Moon waxing during the bright fortnight. 

He grows like the son of a Deva. When he is just six, he seizes lions and 
tigers, bears, bison and even elephants and ties them to the great trees 
around the asrama. Some of these beasts he rides, and others he chases for 
sport. 

The Rishis in Kanva’s asrama name him Sarvadamana because he 
subdues any beast, however strong. Boundless are his strength and vigour. 
When Kanva sees all this, he tells Shakuntala that the time has come for 
Sarvadamana to be crowned the Yuvaraja of his father’s kingdom. 

Kanva says to his disciples, ‘Take Shakuntala and her son to her 
husband’s city. Women should not live so long in their parents’ homes, for 
it tarnishes their reputation, even their virtue. Take her to Dushyanta, 
without delay.’ 

The disciples set out with Shakuntala and her son for Hastinapura, city 
of elephants. Thus, the lovely forest woman and her son, handsome and 
radiant like a god, his eyes like lotus petals, leave the forest where both 
have grown, and where Dushyanata first met and knew Shakuntala. 


Arriving in Hastinapura, she enters the king’s palace and presents their 
son, who looks like the rising sun, to his father. Maharishi Kanva’s sishyas 
bring Shakuntala to the king and immediately return to their hermitage. 

Shakuntala greets the king, formally, love shining in her eyes. She says 
to Dushyanta, ‘My Lord, this is your son, now make him the Yuvaraja. You, 
Rajan, sired this child like a Deva in me, and it is time you fulfilled the oath 
you swore that he would become your heir. Remember, O Dushyanta, 
everything that you said to me in my father Kanva’s asrama.’ 

The king remembers her well, but he says harshly, ‘I do not remember 
anything. Who are you, evil woman, dressed as a Sannyasini? I do not 
recall having any relations with you, not of dharma, artha or kama. You 
may go or stay here, as you please. I have nothing to do with you.’ 

Stunned, stricken, Shakuntala stands as if she has turned to stone, or a 
wooden post. Then rage grips her and her eyes turn the colour of copper and 
her lips quiver. The looks she gives the king seem as if they would burn him 
to ashes. But she restrains herself and, with a great effort, quenches her 
rising fury. 

Composing herself, though her heart seethes with rage and sorrow, 
equally, she looks straight at Dushyanta and says to him in a quiet and 
dangerous voice, ‘Dushyanta, you remember very well everything that 
happened between us. How do you now say, like some lowborn man, O 
King, that you do not know me? Your heart is my witness, whether I speak 
truly or not. 

Do not demean yourself, for the liar is one who robs his own soul. He is 
capable of every sin. You think that you are the only one who knows what 
you did with me. Don’t you know that the Ancient, Omniscient Narayana 
dwells in every heart and every moment? 

He knows your every sin, and yet you dare to sin in his presence. Every 
sinner thinks that his sins pass unnoticed; but the Devas see everything as 
does He who lives in every heart. The Sun, the Moon, the Air, the Fire, the 
Earth, the Sky, Water, the heart itself, Yama, the day, the night, both 
sandhyas, and Dharma — all these witness everything that any man ever 
does. 

Surya’s son Yama ignores the sins of a man with whom Narayana, the 
omniscient witness, is pleased; but Yama torments the man with whom 
Narayana is not pleased. The Gods never bless those that degrade 
themselves with falsehood; why, his own soul will not bless such a man. 


I am a devoted wife. It is true that I come here myself; but do not insult 
me because of that, O King. I am your wife and I deserve respect from you. 
Dare you dishonour me because I come here myself? Dare you treat me like 
some prostitute in the presence of all your court? 

I want for nothing in the forest, and neither do I lead a sorry life. Do you 
hear me Dushyanta? If you refuse to do what I ask, my curse will burst your 
head open, in a hundred pieces. A husband enters his wife’s womb as seed, 
and emerges again as his son. This is why the Sages who know the Vedas 
call a wife Jaya: she of whom one is born. 

And a son born to those that know the mantras of the Veda becomes the 
saviour of departed ancestors. A son rescues his manes from the hell called 
Put, and so Brahma has named a son as Putra. Begetting a son, one 
conquers the three worlds; with a son’s son a man finds eternity. Through a 
great grandson, his grandsires obtain everlasting joy. 

A true wife is skilled in household matters: she who bears a son is a 
dharmapatni, a good wife, as is she who is devoted to her husband. The 
good wife is chaste and knows no man other than her husband. His wife is 
half of a man; she is his dearest friend; she is the very root of dharma, artha 
and kama; she is the seed of moksha. 

Married men perform their dharma, living contentedly in grihastasrama. 
They are cheerful that have wives; they find fortune. Sweet-spoken wives 
are like friends in whose company a man is joyful; in the performance of 
dharma, they are like fathers; when a man is ill or sad, they are like 
mothers. 

Even when he travels through deep and dangerous forests, a good wife is 
a man’s companion and solace. Everyone trusts a man who has a good wife. 
O Rajan, a wife is a man’s most treasured possession. Why, even when a 
man leaves this world for Yama’s realm, his wife, if she is devoted, goes 
with him. A wife who departs before her husband waits for him; but if the 
husband goes first, the chaste wife follows close. 

Rajan, this is why marriage exists; a man enjoys his wife’s 
companionship not only in this world but in the next. Then, the Rishis all 
say that a man himself is born as his son: so he whose wife bears him a son 
must look upon her as his mother. Why, when a man sees the face of his 
son, like looking into a magical mirror, he feels as joyful as a virtuous man 
who attains Swarga. 


Men suffering in the world, from all its trials of body and mind, feel as 
refreshed by their wives’ company as one does having a cool bath on a hot 
and sweaty day. Not in anger should a man ever displease his wife, for, 
everything his joy, fortune and virtue depend upon her. 

A wife is the sacred field in which the husband sows his seed and is born 
again. Not Rishis can procreate without having wives. Which happiness can 
match what a father feels when he sees his son running into his arms and 
hugging him, be the child covered in dust and dirt? 

Ah, then why are you so callous to your child who has come to you and 
looks with such longing at you, to take him onto your lap? Even ants 
nurture their eggs with tender care; then why do you, a great king of 
dharma, refuse to acknowledge your son? 

Not the touch of the softest sandalwood paste, of the most feminine 
woman, of the purest, coolest water on a hot day, can equal the feeling of 
clasping one’s child in one’s arms. A Brahmana is the first among all 
creatures that walk on two legs; the cow, the best of those that walk on four; 
a king, the foremost among one’s guardians; and one’s own son is the best 
of all beings and objects to touch and to hold. 

Embrace your beautiful son, O Dushyanta, and you will find no 
sensation on Earth can equal that joy. O Parantapa, I bore this child in my 
womb for a full three years before I brought him forth to become the 
dispeller of all your sorrows. O Paurava king, when I gave birth to him, an 
asariri from the sky said: “He shall perform a hundred Aswamedha 
Yagnas!” 

Why, men that travel to distant lands, take other men’s children onto 
their laps, sniff their heads and feel great joy. 

Dushyanta, you know the Vedic mantras that Brahmanas chant when a 
son is born: “You are born, O son, of my body. You have sprung from my 
heart. You are my own self come as my son. Live to be a hundred years. My 
life depends on you, and the continuation of my family. O son, live in great 
joy for a hundred years!” 

Yes, this lustrous child has sprung from your body; look at him and see 
yourself as you would your image in a still lake. He has been kindled by 
you: even as a Sacrificial fire is from a domestic one. You are but one; 
through him you have made yourself two. 

Rajan, you came hunting in the wilderness. I was a virgin living in my 
father’s asrama and you importuned me. The six most beautiful Apsaras are 


Urvasi, Purvachitti, Sahajanya, Menaka, Viswachi and Ghritachi. Among 
them, Brahma’s daughter Menaka is the first. She came down to the Earth 
and Viswamitra begot me on her. 

She gave birth to me in a valley of Himavat, and then, feeling no 
maternal love, she abandoned me as if I was someone else’s child. Ah, I 
wonder what sin I committed in some other life that first my parents 
abandoned me, and now you, my husband, do the same. For myself, I am 
content to return to my father Kanva’s asrama, but you must not renounce 
this child, your son.’ 

Dushyanta listens to all this, but then says savagely, ‘Shakuntala, women 
are given to lying, and I do not remember having begotten any child on you. 
Who will believe what you say? The promiscuous Menaka, who knows no 
affection even for her own child, is your mother, as you yourself say. She 
abandoned you upon Himavan’s slopes just as one discards the flowers 
offered to the Devas during worship, when the worship is over. 

Your father, the lustful Viswamitra, was a Kshatriya but chose to become 
a Brahmana; he, too, is cruel and heartless that he abandoned you. But it is 
true that Menaka is the first among the Apsaras, and your father foremost of 
Rishis. You are their daughter, yet you talk like a whore, obscenely. 

You do not deserve to be believed. Aren’t you ashamed of yourself, 
casting aspersions, especially against me? Leave at once, you harlot dressed 
as a Sannyasini. Where is the Maharishi Viswamitra and where is the 
Apsara Menaka? Why are you, deceiving, vile woman, dressed as an 
ascetic? As for your son, he is grown up, while you insist on calling him a 
child. 

You say he is a boy, but look how strong and powerful he is. If he is just 
six, as you claim, how is he so big, like a Sala tree? For sure, you are a 
lowborn, lying whore. You are begotten lustfully by Menaka, and not in 
love. 

I don’t know you or anything that you say. Go away, go wherever you 
like!’ 

Shakuntala replies, ‘O King, you see the faults of others, be they not as 
small as a mustard seed, but not your own which are bigger than a bilwa 
fruit! Menaka is an Apsara, indeed she is reckoned to be the most beautiful 
of the Apsaras, their queen. Dushyanta, I am of much nobler and higher 
birth than you. You walk upon the Earth, O Rajan, but I rove the Sky at 


will. The comparison between you and me is as between a mustard seed and 
a mountain. Such is my power, mortal king! 

I can fly to the worlds of Indra, Kubera, Yama and Varuna. What I came 
here to tell you, King of dharma, is from the purest motives and not from 
any greed. Listen to me and forgive me for these comparisons between 
yourself and me. 

But an ugly man thinks of himself as being better looking than other 
men and mocks them — until he looks at his own face in a mirror for the first 
time. Then he sees the truth, and the real difference of nature between 
himself and other men. The truly handsome man does not mock anyone. 

The evil man is always a reviler. Just as swine look for filth even in a 
garden of flowers, the mocker always hears only vileness in anything that 
another tells him, whatever it is. However, a wise man listens to the speech 
of others, good and evil mixed, but like the goose, which knows how to 
drink only the milk from a mixture of milk and water, he takes only the 
good. 

The honest man always hesitates to speak ill of others, but the evil ever 
delight to do so. The good always delight in showing regard to their elders, 
but the evil always find pleasure in disparaging the good. The good are 
happy in never seeking faults; the evil are happy only in finding them. The 
wicked always speak ill of the good and the honest; yet, even if hurt by 
them, the good do not wound the evil. 

What can be more absurd than those that are themselves evil accusing 
the good of being so? When even atheists grow angry at those that abandon 
truth and virtue, and become like virulent serpents, what shall I say about 
myself, who have grown in faith? 

He who begets a son who is his very image, and yet does not accept or 
love him, never attains to the worlds that he desires, for the Gods destroy 
his fortune and take his possessions from him. The Pitrs have said that a son 
continues the race and bloodline, and so a son is the greatest yagna and 
dharma. No man should abandon his son. 

Manu tells of five kinds of sons: a son begotten upon one’s own wife, 
one gained as a gift from another, one bought for a consideration, a child 
who becomes a son from love, and sons begotten upon women other than 
one’s wife. All these are sons. 

Sons support the dharma and the achievements of their fathers, enhance 
their joy, and save the spirits of dead ancestors from hell. So, O tiger among 


Kshatriyas, it does not become you to abandon a son like yours. Accept and 
cherish your child, O Dushyanta, like your own self. Lion among kings, you 
degrade yourself by being deceitful. 

The creation and dedication of a tank brings more punya that digging a 
hundred wells. Performing a yagna confers more merit than creating a 
sacred tank. A son is far more auspicious than a sacrifice, and the truth 
more sacred than a hundred sons. 

Once, the punya from a hundred Aswamedhas was weighed against the 
truth, and the truth was found to be immeasurably heavier. Dushyanta, the 
truth is equal to the study of all the Vedas and bathing at all the sacred 
tirthas together. There is no other virtue to equal the truth, and nothing 
superior to the truth. The truth is God himself, O Kshatriya; truth is the 
highest vrata. 

So do not break your word to me, and be one with the truth. If you set no 
value by what I say I will go away with no protest; indeed, I must avoid the 
company of a man like you. But, Dushyanta, when you die, this son of mine 
shall surely rule all this Earth surrounded by the four seas and be crowned 
by the king of mountains.’ 

With this, Shakuntala turns on her heel and walks out of the king’s 
presence. No sooner has she left, than a great asariri, a disembodied voice, 
speaks echoingly from the air to Dushyanta who sits amidst his priests, his 
Gurus and ministers. 

The voice says, ‘A mother is only the sheath of flesh; the son born from 
her is the father himself. O Dushyanta, cherish your son and do not demean 
Shakuntala. Best of men, a son is a form of the father’s seed and he rescues 
the spirits of the ancestors from the realm of Yama. 

You are this child’s father, and Shakuntala spoke the truth. The husband 
cleaves his body and is born from the wife as a son. Dushyanta, accept and 
love your son by Shakuntala. To try to live by forsaking one’s living son is 
a terrible misfortune. Paurava, cherish your lofty son born to Shakuntala. 
And because you will accept and nurture this child at our word, he shall be 
called Bharata, the precious and cherished one.’ 

In that voice the very gods speak thunderously to Dushyanta before all 
his court and people. Suddenly, Dushyanta’s face lights up with great joy. 

That king cries, ‘Did you all hear what the asariri says? The command of 
the Devas! I always knew that this child was mine. Yet, if I had accepted 


him merely at what Shakuntala said, my people would have been 
suspicious, and always harboured a doubt that the prince was not mine.’ 

O Bharatottama, once the heavenly voice has established that the child 
Bharata is indeed his son, Dushyanta is full of joy. He rises and clasps the 
powerful boy in his arms, and performs every ritual that a father should for 
his son. He never stops hugging him and sniffing his head in adoration. 

The Brahmanas shower their blessings over the child and the bards of 
the court, the Sutas, sing his praises. Dushyanta feels the unearthly delight 
that any father does when he touches his child. 

Dushyanta calls Shakuntala back and now welcomes her with fond and 
great love. Pacifying her for the ordeal he has subjected her to, he says, 
‘Devi, O Goddess, you and I were married in seclusion, with no witness. I 
was afraid that my people would think that it is no proper vivaha but a 
chance encounter of lust, and hence our son illegitimate. 

They would have resented him being crowned the Yuvaraja. Oh my love, 
I forgive everything you said to me in anger because I love you more than 
my life and have since I first saw you!’ 

The Rajarishi Dushyanta now welcomes his queen with offerings of 
perfumes, food and drink. Thus, the Paurava names his son Bharata, and 
crowns the magnificent child his heir. In time, the brilliant and famed 
wheels of the chariot of Bharata the Great would fill every corner of the 
Earth with their sound, even like the vimanas of the Devas. 

The son of Dushyanta subjugates every other King of the Earth, and he 
rules with dharma and unequalled is his fame. Becoming a king of kings, 
the invincible Bharata becomes known as Sarvabhauma, Lord of all the 
world, and Chakravarti. 

Countless sacrifices he performs, even like Indra, lord of the Devas. 
Maharishi Kanva is the chief priest at those Mahayagnas, at which Bharata 
gives bounteous gifts to Brahmanas. The Cow Sacrifice and the Horse 
Sacrifice Bharata performs, and gives Kanva a thousand coins of gold as the 
Ritvik’s dakshina. 

This is the mighty Bharata, of numberless great achievements, after 
whom the lordly race of kings into which you are born is named. And in 
that royal house, godlike kings of great lustre are born, kings like Brahma 
himself. Their number is past counting. But, Scion of the race of Rajarishi 
Bharata, I will name the main ones for you, kings blessed with fortune to 
rival that of the Devas, men of dharma, devoted to the truth.” 


CANTO 75 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana said, “Listen to this sacred genealogy of those 
Rajarishis, which enhances dharma, artha and kama. 

Daksha Prajapati, Manu, the son of Surya, Bharata, Ruru, Puru 
and Ajamidha. Sinless King, I will also recite the genealogies of the 
Yadavas, the Kurus and kings of the line of Bharata. These are sacred 
indeed, and their narration is an act of worship, which confers wealth, fame 
and a long life. Rajan, the men I have named are radiant as Maharishis, and 
as powerful. 

Prachetas has ten sons, all of them ascetics and righteous. In the most 
ancient times, they consume with fire from their mouths, forests of 
poisonous plants and fell trees that covered the Earth. 

Prachetas’ eleventh son is Daksha, and from him all the creatures 
originated, and so he is called Prajapati. 

The Muni Daksha takes Virini to be his wife and begets a thousand sons 
upon her, all great tapasvins. Narada teaches Daksha’s thousand sons the 
Samkhya marga as a way to moksha, and they never become creators or 
progenitors themselves, but wander the galaxies to find the ends of the 
Universe, for Narada Muni subverts their minds. 

O Janamejaya, Daksha Prajapati then begets fifty daughters, for his 
intention is to further creation, have it multiply and flourish. He says that 
their sons would belong to him as well as to their husbands. He gives ten of 
his daughters to Dharma, thirteen to Kashyapa and twenty-seven to Soma, 
and these Nakshatras chart the course of the Moon. 

Marichi’s son Kashyapa begets the Adityas, among whom Indra is the 
eldest and the Lord, on Daksha’s eldest daughter; he also fathers Surya, 
who is also called Vivaswat, in her. 

Vivaswat, who is also called Martanda, begets Yama. He then sires 
another son, of brilliant and fathomless intellect, called Manu. Manu 


possesses profound wisdom and is devoted to dharma. He becomes the 
father of the human race, and they are called Manavas or Manushyas after 
him. Be they Brahmanas, Kshatriyas or any other humans, they are called 
Manavas for they are all descended from Manu. 

Later, O King, the Brahmanas and Kshatriyas mix their races. Manu’s 
Brahmana sons devote themselves to studying the Veda. 

Manu sires ten other children: Vena, Dhrishnu, Narishyan, Nabhaga, 
Ikshvaku, Karusha, Saryati, a daughter named Ila, Prishadhru and 
Nabhagarishta. All these live as Kshatriyas. 

Manu has fifty other sons on Earth, but they die fighting one another. 
The learned Pururavas is Ila’s son, and it is told that Ila is both his father 
and his mother. Pururavas the Great holds sway over thirteen Dwipas, 
continents, and though he is a man, his companions are all celestials. 

Drunk with power, his reason lost, Pururavas crosses the Brahmanas and 
robs them of their wealth, without fearing their anger. Sanatkumara comes 
down from Brahmaloka to advise him against this rashness, but Pururavas 
ignores his counsel. The Maharishi grows angry and with a curse destroys 
that greedy king in a moment. 

Pururavas first brings from the realm of the Gandharvas the three kinds 
of sacred fires for worship. He also brings the Apsara Urvashi to be his 
wife, and the son of Ila fathers six sons on Urvashi — Ayus, Dhimat, 
Amavasu, Dhridhayus, Vanayus and Satayus. 

Ayus begets four sons, Nahusha, Vriddhasarman, Rajingaya and Anenas, 
on the daughter of Swarbhanu. Of all the sons of Ayus, Nahusha is the most 
intelligent and powerful, and rules his vast kingdom with dharma. 

Nahusha has the support of the Pitrs, Devas, Rishis, Brahmanas, 
Gandharvas, Nagas, Rakshasas, Kshatriyas and Vaisyas, for he is friendly 
towards all of them. He puts down crime and bands of brigands ruthlessly, 
and peace pervades his kingdom. 

But in his arrogance, he once commands the greatest Rishis to carry him 
upon their backs in his palanquin, like beasts of burden, and they curse 
Nahusha. Before that he fascinates the Devas themselves with his charm 
and beauty, his asceticism, his strength and his brilliance. He rules like 
another Indra. 

Nahusha begets six sons, all well-spoken, called Yati, Yayati, Sanyati, 
Ayati and Dhruva. Yati takes Sannyasa and becomes a Muni, like Brahma 
himself. Yayati becomes a sovereign of great power and dharma. He rules 


all of the Earth, performs innumerable sacrifices, worships his Manes and 
the Devas unfailingly, and is never vanquished in battle. 

Yayati’s sons are all great archers, and splendid with every virtue. He 
sires them in his two queens Devayani and Sarmishta. Devayani’s sons are 
the twins Yadu and Turvasu, and Sarmishta’s are Drahyu, Anu and Puru. 

When he has ruled wisely and justly for many many years, suddenly one 
day, through a curse, the infirmity of old age strikes Yayati like some dread 
disease: gone is his splendour, his handsomeness, his virility. 

He calls his sons Yadu, Puru, Turvasu, Drahyu and Anu, and says to 
them, ‘My sons, I want my youth back to enjoy the company of young 
women. You must help me.’ 

His eldest son by Devayani says, ‘What do you want us to do?’ 

Yayati replies, “Take my age and give me your youth, my son. Ah, Rishi 
Usanas cursed me and I have aged overnight. I have not satisfied my desires 
and they torment me. Oh, give me your youth to take my pleasures with it!’ 

At first, none of those sons would do what he asks. Then his youngest 
son Puru says, ‘I will take your infirmity upon myself and let you have my 
youth. I will rule your kingdom as you command, while you satisfy your 
every desire.’ 

The Rajarishi Yayati uses his tapasya shakti to take Puru’s youth and 
give the young man his own old age. Yayati is young again and Puru is an 
old man, and Puru rules the kingdom in his father’s name. 

A thousand years pass, and Yayati, Rajavyaghra, remains as strong and 
virile as a tiger. He enjoys his wives to his heart’s content, and in the 
gardens of the Gandharva king Chitraratha, he enjoys the Apsara Viswachi. 
But even after a thousand years and more, the king finds that his desires 
rage on, undimmed. 

Yayati remembers something he has read in the Purana: ‘Desire can 
never be quenched by indulgence. It is like pouring ghee into a fire to 
extinguish it; the flames only burn more fiercely. 

Not he that owns all the wealth in the world, all its gold, diamonds, 
beasts and women will find himself satisfied, but will only crave for more. 
Only the man who does not sin in thought, deed or word attains to the 
purity of Brahmana, and finds joy and peace in his own soul. 

When a man fears nothing, and is feared by nothing and no one, when he 
wishes for nothing but is content, when he harms no living thing, he attains 
eternal peace, Brahmanirvana.’ 


After his long years of every indulgence, Yayati is wise enough to realise 
that desire can never be satisfied with indulgence. Yayati stills his mind 
with dhyana. He takes his old age back from his son and returns Puru’s 
youth to him. He crowns Puru king, and says to him, “You are my true heir, 
my only real son. From now let our royal line be known by your name. Let 
my vamsa be called the Pauravas.’ 

Then Yayati leaves for the mountain of Bhrigu to devote himself to 
Sannyasa. After years of tapasya, and acquiring great spiritual punya, his 
wives and he fast until their spirits leave their bodies, and they attain 
Swarga.” 


CANTO 76 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


anamejaya said, “Profound Muni, rich with ascetic wealth, tell me how 
Jy ancestor Yayati, born in the tenth generation from Prajapati, manages 

to make the daughter of Shukra his wife. Tell me of this in detail. Also, 
tell me about all the kings that founded the different dynasties.” 

Vaisampayana said, “King Yayati is as splendid as Indra himself. I will 
tell you, O Janamejaya, how both Shukra and Vrishaparvan give him their 
daughters to be his wives; I will tell you especially about Devayani. 

Of old, the Devas and the Asuras fight for the sovereignty of the three 
worlds and everything in them. The Devas make Angiras’ son Brihaspati 
their priest to perform their yagnas for them, and the Asuras make Shukra, 
also called Usanas, theirs. Between the two Brahmanas there is always 
rivalry, each deriding the other and extolling himself. 

Shukra knows the Mritasanjivini vidya, the arcane art of bringing the 
dead back to life, and during any Devasura yuddha—a war between the 
gods and the demons—he would revive the Asuras that are slain, and the 
Danavas and Daityas would come roaring back to fight. 

The Asuras also kill many of the Deva warriors, but Brihaspati does not 
know the Sanjivini and cannot bring them back to life. The Devas despair; 
they are in terror of Usanas’ vidya. 

They go to Brihaspati’s eldest son Kacha, and say to him, “We bow to 
you, and ask you to do us a service that we consider a great one. We beg 
you learn the Mritasanjivini from Shukra Bhargava, O that mighty 
Brahmana. You will find him in the court of Vrishaparvan; he always 
protects the Asuras, but not us. 

You are younger than he is, and you can worship him reverently. You 
can also pay tribute to Devayani, who is Shukra’s favourite daughter. 
Surely, only you, Kacha, can please both of them, and by flattering 


Devayani with every sweetness, fawning on her, you can acquire the 
Sanjivini from her father.’ 

Brihaspati’s son says, ‘So be it,’ and goes to Vrishaparvan, the Asura 
king’s, capital. Seeing Shukra in the Danava’s lavish court, Kacha folds his 
hands and says humbly, ‘I am the grandson of Rishi Angiras and the son of 
Brihaspati. I am called Kacha; take me for your sishya. If you become my 
Guru, I will be a brahmacharin for a thousand years, and your disciple. 
Command me, O Brahmana!’ 

Shukra, who is called Kavya or Usanas as well, says, “You are welcome 
Kacha. I will take you to be my disciple and treat you with regard, for I will 
be showing Brihaspati regard if I do.’ 

Kacha says, ‘I thank you, my lord,’ and at once swears a vow of 
Brahmacharya, celibacy, for a thousand years. With that he becomes 
Shukra’s sishya and begins to serve and please both his master, as well as 
Shukra’s daughter Devayani. 

Kacha is young, as is Devayani, and he would sing and dance for her, 
and play on several instruments. O Bharatottama, devoting himself, he 
brings her flowers and fruit, and does her bidding with alacrity, whatever 
she wants done. She, too, sweet-natured maiden, would sing for him and 
look after his every need, when they are alone together, even as he kept his 
vow unflinchingly. 

When five hundred years pass, the Danavas learn Kacha’s true intention. 
They are furious, and seeing him alone in the forest one day with Shukra’s 
cows, they kill him, cut his body into pieces and feed him to wolves and 
jackals. They have no compunction about killing a Brahmana. They detest 
Brihaspati, and of course they want to keep Kacha from acquiring the secret 
of the Mritasanjivini, the art of reviving the dead. 

Come twilight and the cows return to their fold without Kacha. Devayani 
says to her father Shukra, ‘Your evening fire has been lit and the Sun has 
set, father. The cows have come home, but Kacha is not with them. He is 
either lost or dead, and I cannot live without him!’ 

Shukra says, ‘I will bring him back.’ 

With the Sanjivini vidya, Shukra calls Kacha to return. The shreds of the 
disciple’s body tear open the bodies of the jackals and wolves that have 
eaten him, and unite into a living Kacha, who, full of joy, appears before his 
Guru. 

Devayani demands of him, ‘Why are you so late?’ 


Kacha says to Bhargava’s daughter, ‘I was dead. I was coming home 
with fuel for the fire, with kusa grass and wood. I sat under a nyagrodha 
tree, and the cows also cropped grass in the shade. Some Asuras saw me 
and asked, “Who are you?” I replied, “I am Brihaspati’s son.” As soon as I 
said this, the Danavas killed me, cut my body into pieces and fed it to 
wolves and jackals. Then they went away, singing for joy. Sweet Devayani, 
then your father called out to me and I have returned to you from the dead.’ 

Another day, Kacha goes into the forest to gather flowers for Devayani. 
The Danavas see him, kill him again and, pounding him into a paste, 
dissolve him in the sea. 

When he does not come home, Devayani again goes in tears to her 
father. Once more, Shukra calls Kacha with his Sanjivini and the disciple 
appears whole and alive before his Guru, and recounts what had had 
happened. 

The third time the Asuras kill Kacha, they burn his body to ashes, and 
then mix those ashes in wine and give the wine to Shukra himself to drink. 

Come night, and when Kacha does not return, Devayani says to her 
father, ‘Father, Kacha went to pick flowers for me, but he has not come 
home. He is either lost or dead, and I will not live without him.’ 

Shukra says, “Child, Brihaspati’s son has been killed again. Each time I 
bring him back from Yama’s realm, and again he is killed. I am afraid I can 
do nothing for Kacha. 

Devayani, don’t cry. You should not grieve over a mortal. Why, because 
of my power, the Brahmanas, the Devas with Indra, the Vasus and Aswins, 
the Asuras, and indeed all the Universe worship you, during the three 
sandhyas. Forget Kacha now, because he is killed as often as I revive him.’ 

Devayani replies, ‘How can I forget him, and not grieve for him, whose 
grandfather is the ancient Angiras, whose father is Brihaspati, both great 
Rishis, and who is himself an ocean of tapasya. Kacha is a Brahmacharin 
and a Sannyasi, always caring, and skilled in everything that he does. I 
mean to fast to death and follow Kacha where he has gone. Oh father, I love 
the handsome Brahmana!’ 

Maharishi Shukra sees his daughter grief-stricken, and grows angry. He 
says, ‘The Asuras dare kill my sishya who lives in my house! Killing a 
Brahmana is the worst of all sins and would consume Indra himself. The 
Rudrabhakta Asuras make me a party to their crime when I revive Kacha 
and they kill him again. They want me to lose my character as a Brahmana.’ 


Compelled by Devayani, Shukra is about to call Kacha back again from 
the dead. But Kacha fears what might happen to his Guru, and says from his 
master’s belly, “O Master, I am Kacha who worships you. Treat me like 
your own son, be kind to me Lord.’ 

Shukra says, “How did you enter my stomach? I will leave the Asuras 
this moment and join the Devas!’ 

Kacha says, ‘By your grace, I remember everything that happened. My 
punya is intact, and my tapasya shakti. With these, I am able to endure the 
pain that savages me. O Guru, the Asuras killed me, burnt me to ashes, then 
mixed the ashes in your wine. That is how I am in your belly. But as long as 
you are alive, the craft of the Asuras will never prevail over the science of 
the Brahmana.’ 

Shukra says to Devayani, ‘My child, how can I help you now? Kacha is 
inside me. The only way he can live again is if I die. He cannot emerge 
unless he rends my belly and kills me.’ 

Devayani sobs, ‘Both your lives are equally precious to me, and both 
your deaths would savage me equally! If either of you dies, so will I.’ 

Then Shukra says, ‘O son of Brihaspati, you can count yourself 
successful in all your endeavours, because Devayani loves you well. If you 
are not Indra disguised as Kacha, learn the Mritasanjivini from me today. 
No one can come out alive from my stomach. But a Brahmana must not be 
killed. 

So learn the Sanjivini from me, then be born even as my son, rending my 
belly. But be sure that when you are alive again, you act with grace.’ 

Kacha learns the secret art of reviving the dead from Shukra; then he 
tears open his master’s belly and emerges as luminous as the Moon on the 
fifteenth day of the bright fortnight. He sees his Guru’s remains lying before 
him like a heap of tapasya, and using the Sanjivini, Kacha restores Shukra 
to life. 

Worshipping him with love, Kacha says to his Guru, ‘I was ignorant 
until you poured Gyanamrita, the nectar of knowledge, into my ears. You 
are my father and my mother, Lord. He who is ingrate enough to take 
knowledge from his Guru, who is the most precious of all precious things in 
the world, who must be worshipped, and then causes his master injury, shall 
be hated in the world and damned to find hell for himself.’ 

Shukra looks at the handsome Kacha, and thinks of how he had drunk 
him mixed with wine. He thinks furiously of how the Asuras had deceived 


him when he was drunk. 

Rising in anger, Mahatman Shukra cries, ‘From this day, any Brahmana 
who drinks wine shall lose all his punya and be considered as having 
committed Brahmahatya. He shall be despised in this world and all the 
others. 

I, Shukra Bhargava, declare this, and let the Brahmanas, honest men, the 
Devas, men that revere their superiors, and the three worlds hear this edict 
of mine, which shall regulate the conduct and preserve the dignity of 
Brahmanas everywhere.’ 

Then he summons the Asuras, whom fate has robbed of their reason. He 
says to them, ‘Foolish Danavas, Kacha has what he wants. He has learnt the 
Sanjivini Vidya and is now as powerful as Brahma himself. He will live 
with me.’ 

With that Shukra fell silent. In some disarray, the confounded demons 
return to their homes. Kacha has now spent a full thousand years with his 
Guru and prepares to return to Devaloka, with his master’s leave.” 


CANTO 77 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana said, “When the thousand years of his vow end, Kacha, 
with his Guru’s permission, is about to depart for Devaloka, when 
Devayani says to him, ‘O Kacha, grandson of Angiras Muni, 

resplendent are your birth and conduct, your learning, humility and your 

asceticism. Even as my father worships and honours the Muni Angiras, I 

adore and revere your father Brihaspati. 

Remember this and listen to what I have to say. Recall how I disported 
myself with you during the years of your vow of Brahmacharya. Now the 
time of your vrata is over. Now I ask you to turn your love towards me. I 
ask you to marry me with mantras from the Veda.’ 

Kacha replies, ‘I respect and worship you just as I do your father! Why, 
beautiful and faultless Devayani, I adore you even more than him. My Guru 
Shukra Bhargava loves you more than his own life. As his daughter, you 
merit my worship. I beg you do not ask me to marry you!’ 

Devayani replies, ‘You, also, are the son of a great father and deserving 
of my reverence and worship. O Kacha, best among Brahmanas, have you 
forgotten the love I showed for you when the Asuras killed you time and 
again? Recall that affection, and my devotion, and do not now abandon me 
for no fault of mine. I truly love you.’ 

Kacha says, ‘Punyavrata, do not ask me to commit such a sin! Lovely 
one, be kind to me instead. I hold you in higher esteem than I do my master. 
Virtuous one, your face like the moon, your eyes long as lotus petals, you 
are Shukra Kavya’s child; do not forget that I, too, was born from his body. 
You are my sister, and we have passed our days happily together. 

We understand each other perfectly and I now beg you to allow me to 
return to my home in the sky. Bless me that I have a safe journey. Whenever 
you think of me, or speak of me, you must remember me as one who did 


not break dharma. I ask you to always serve my Guru readily and single- 
mindedly.’ 

Devayani replies in anger, ‘If you refuse to make me your wife, even 
after I have begged you, O Kacha, may all your tapasya and gyana be 
fruitless!’ 

Kacha says, ‘I have refused you only because you are my Guru’s 
daughter, and not because you have any flaw or fault. Also, my Guru has 
not said anything to me about marrying you. If it pleases you, curse me. 

I have told you what I must do, being a Rishi. I do not deserve your 
curse, Devayani, but you have cursed me. You have cursed me from passion 
and not from any sense of dharma. What you want shall never happen, and I 
say to you that no Rishi’s son will ever marry you. You have said that my 
learning will prove fruitless. So be it. But I say that it shall prove fruitful to 
whomever I teach the Vidya.’ 

With that, Kacha flies back to Devaloka, where Indra and the other 
Devas come out to worship him, with padya and arghya. 

Indra says, “You have achieved what seemed impossible and you shall 
have immortal fame for this. O Kacha, you will have a share in the havis 
from every sacrifice.’” 


CANTO 78 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Indeed, the celestials are overjoyed that Kacha 

\/ has acquired the Sanjivini Vidya. Immediately, he teaches them the 

secret science of bringing the dead back to life, and the Devas are 
certain that they can vanquish the Asuras in battle. 

Gathering around Indra of a hundred Mahayagnas, they cry to him, “The 
time is here to show our might. Kill your enemies, O Purandara!’ 

Indra Maghavat roars, ‘So be it!’ and goes forth with his celestial army. 
On his way he sees some lovely women bathing in a lake in the charmed 
gardens of the Gandharva Chitraratha. Becoming invisible, he quickly 
mixes up the women’s clothes, which they have arranged neatly on the bank 
of the lake. 

When the women finish bathing, it happens that Vrishaparvan’s daughter 
Sarmishta mistakenly wears Devayani’s clothes. Devayani is furious. She 
cries at Sarmishta, ‘Asuraputri, daughter of an Asura, you are my sishya, 
my inferior. How dare you wear my clothes? You are presumptuous and no 
good will ever befall you.’ 

Stung, Sarmishta flashes back, “Your father is like a hired chanter of 
praises, a vabdhi in my father’s court! He fawns over my father, while 
Vrishaparvan sits at his ease or even lies stretched out upon his couch. You 
are just the daughter of a singer of the praises of my father, and one who 
lives on alms besides. 

My father, on the other hand, is the king whose praises your father sings. 
He is a giver of alms, not a receiver. You are a beggar’s daughter and a 
beggar yourself. Swear at me, if you like, swear to be my enemy; cry in 
anger, I do not care. You live by the alms of my father, and I can harm you 
if I choose, but not you me. You want to pick a fight with me, but I do not 
consider you my equal, beggar!’ 


Devayani is beside herself. She runs at Sarmishta and tries to tear her 
clothes from her body. The Asura princess pushes her into a well and goes 
home, fuming, believing that she has killed her friend and quite pleased 
with what she has done. 

Nahusha’s son Yayati is out hunting nearby. His horses are tired and 
thirsty, and so is he. He sees the well and rides up to it. Peering over its 
edge, he sees it is shallow and dry, but he also sees a young woman inside 
who is bright and beautiful as a flame, her skin shining like a goddess’. 

Gently, he says to her, ‘Who are you? Your fingernails gleam like 
burnished copper, and the jewels in your earrings are not of this world. Why 
are you crying? How did you fall into this well covered with grass and 
reeds? Say, slender-waisted beauty, whose daughter are you?’ 

Devayani replies, ‘I am the daughter of Shukra, who gives life again to 
the Asuras that the Devas kill in battle. My father does not know what has 
happened to me. O King, you are wellborn, wellbred and noble. Great are 
your prowess and your fame. Here is my right hand, its nails as you say like 
burnished copper. Take my hand and pull me out of the well.’ 

King Yayati hears that she is a Brahmana’s daughter and he draws her 
out of the well by her right hand. He gazes for a long moment at her long 
and fine legs, her soft thighs that are exposed; then bowing and smiling at 
her, he goes back to his capital. 

When Yayati has gone, Devayani sees her sakhi Ghurnika who has come 
in search of her. Sobbing, Devayani tells her what has happened, how 
Sarmishta pushed her into the well and left her for dead. 

‘Tell my father everything, Ghurnika, and tell him that I will never enter 
Vrishaparvan’s city again.’ 

Trembling with rage, Ghurnika stamps back into the Asura’s palace and 
finds Shukra there. Her mind clouded by anger, Ghurnika says to Kavya, 
‘Great Brahmana, Vrishaparvan’s daughter insulted Devayani in the woods 
and even tried to kill her!’ 

Shukra, who dotes on Devayani, hurries to the woods, and when he sees 
his daughter he clasps her in his arms. His voice choking, the wise Shukra 
Bhargava says, “My child, whatever fortune or misfortune befalls any of us 
is because of our own karma. You must have sinned at some time, and this 
has been the retribution and expiation for you.’ 

Her eyes still full of fire, Devayani replies, “Retribution or not, listen to 
me, father. Listen to what Vrishparvan’s daughter Sarmishta dared say to 


me. Her eyes red as plums, she says viciously that you, O my father, are 
only her father Vrishaparvan’s hireling, a chanter of his praises, a mere 
vabdhi. 

She said, “You are just the daughter of a singer of the praises of my 
father, and one who lives on alms besides. My father, on the other hand, is 
the one whose praises your father sings. He is a giver of alms, not a 
receiver. You are a beggar’s daughter and a beggar yourself.” 

Not once but many times she said this to me, that arrogant princess, her 
eyes burning. Father, if what she says is true and I am indeed the daughter 
of a hired chanter of praises, of one who lives on alms, then I must offer 
worship to Sarmishta and hope to receive her grace.’ 

Shukra says, ‘Devayani, you are no daughter of a hired adorer, and 
neither do I take alms or receive gifts. You are the daughter of one who 
worships none but is worshipped by everyone. Vrishaparvan knows this, as 
do Indra and Yayati also. The ineffable Parabrahman, the Ultimate and 
sovereign Godhead, is my support and strength. Brahma himself has said 
that I am the master of all things in Heaven and Earth. I send down the 
rains, Devayani, to nourish all creatures and green plants, to nurture 
everything that lives.’ 

Thus, Shukra tries to console his distraught daughter.” 


CANTO 79 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisapayana said, “Shukra continued, ‘Devayani, he who masters 

V/ anger and learns to ignore the meanest words of his enemies, 

conquers all. The Sages say that the true charioteer never gives slack 

to his reins. The true man or woman also never gives in to his or her anger. 
He who subdues his own anger conquers everything. 

A Mahatman always forgives, sloughing off his fury as a snake does its 
skin. He or she who never yields to rage, despite being provoked by evil 
words or deeds, certainly finds dharma, artha, kama and moksha. 

Between the man who ceaselessly performs penance and sacrifices every 
moon for a hundred years and he that never feels anger, the second is the 
superior. Children, boys and girls who do not know right from wrong, 
surely quarrel. The wise do not imitate them.’ 

Devayani responds, “Father, I also know the difference between anger 
and forgiveness and which is superior. But when a disciple is disrespectful, 
his Guru should never forgive him if the master truly wants his sishya to 
mend. Therefore, I do not desire to live any longer in a country where evil 
has such sway. The wise, who live in dharma, will not live among those that 
speak ill of noble birth and courteous conduct. Father, one should live 
where pure birth and noble conduct are both respected; indeed, the Rishis 
have said that this is the best kind of place in which to live. The vicious 
words of Vrishaparvan’s daughter burn my heart, like dry fuel that men use 
to kindle a fire. 

Nothing in the three worlds is more wretched than for a man to adore his 
enemies, when they are blessed with fortune and wealth while he himself 
has none. Why, the greatest Sages have said that death is preferable for such 


999 


a man. 


CANTO 80 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Now Shukra Kavya, greatest of Bhargavas, 

\/ becomes angry. Having lost his temper, he goes to Vrishaparvan, and 

without weighing his words, says irately, ‘O King, like the very 

Earth, sins do not bear fruit immediately. But gradually, secretly, they 
destroy the sinners. 

The fruit of sins are visited either upon oneself, one’s sons or 
grandchildren, even; for sin must bear fruit. Like heavy food, it cannot be 
digested. You killed the Brahmana Kacha, Angiras’ grandson, a virtuous 
man, a knower of dharma, again and again, while he lived in my asrama as 
my dutiful and loving disciple. 

O Vrishaparvan, for this crime and for your daughter Sarmishta’s 
intolerable abuse of my daughter Devayani, I am going to leave you and 
your race. Why do you stare at me, O King; do you think I am lying to you, 
or that I am a fool? I see that you want to make light of your sins, rather 
than correct them and find some forgiveness.’ 

Vrishaparvan says, ‘O Bhargava, I have never said that you are a liar or 
tried to find any fault with you. Indeed, you are the very embodiment of 
dharma and satya, virtue and truth. 

I beg you be merciful to me! O Bhargava, if you actually leave us, we 
shall plunge down into the Patalas and dwell there in the depths of the 
Ocean, for there is nothing else we could do.’ 

Shukra retorts, ‘Asuras, go to the bottom of the Sea or fly and scatter in 
every direction: I do not care! I cannot bear to see my daughter grieve. She 
is more precious to me than my life; why, my life depends on her. 

You must placate her. Even as Brihaspati always seeks the welfare of 
Indra, so have I always sought yours with my tapasya shakti.’ 

Vrishaparvan says, ‘O Bhargava, you are the absolute master of 
whatever the Asura lords of this world possess — their elephants, cows, 


horses, and even myself!’ 

Shukra says, ‘If you speak the truth then you will placate Devayani.’ 

Shukra goes and tells Devayani what Vrishaparvan said. But she answers 
him, ‘Bhargava, Father, if you are indeed the Lord of the Asura king and all 
his wealth, let Vrishaparvan come here and tell me so himself.’ 

Vrishaparvan comes to Devayani and says, ‘Lovely Devayani of the 
sweet smile, I will give you whatever you ask for, do whatever you want, 
however difficult it might be.’ 

Devayani says at once, ‘I want Sarmishta, with a thousand sakhis, to 
attend on me as my handmaiden. She must also come with me to my 
husband’s house, wherever my father chooses to give me.’ 

Vrishaparvan says to a maid that waits on him, “Go and fetch Sarmishta 
here at once. She will do as Devayani says from now.’ 

The sakhi goes to Sarmishta and tells her, ‘O Sarmishta, come with me 
and save our people. Shukra Bhargava has threatened to leave the Asuras 
unless Devayani is pacified. Princess, you have to become Devayani’s 
handmaiden from now, and serve her in everything.’ 

Sarmishta replies, ‘I will come happily. Shukra and Devayani must not 
leave the Asuras through any fault of mine. I will become Devayani’s 
handmaiden.’ 

At her father’s command, Sarmishta emerges from her father’s great 
palace in palanquin, with a thousand of her sakhis. She folds her hands to 
Devayani and says, ‘These thousand girls and I are all your servants. I will 
follow you wherever your father gives you away.’ 

Devayani replies tartly, ‘I am the daughter of one who chants your 
father’s praises and lives by the alms that your father gives him. You, 
Sarmishta, are the daughter of one whose praises my father sings, who 
gives alms to my father. How can you become my servant?’ 

Sarmishta murmurs, ‘One must always serve one’s family and one’s 
race, and I will do as my father asks, happily. I will be your handmaiden 
and go with you wherever you are given in marriage.’ 

When Sarmishta says this, Devayani turns to Shukra and says, ‘Father, 
greatest of Brahmanas, I am satisfied. I know now that your power and your 
wisdom are not in vain. I will enter the Asura’s city again.’ 

Happily, Shukra goes back into Vrishaparvan’s city and the Danavas all 
worship him, their Guru, devoutly.” 


CANTO 81 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “Some weeks pass, then Devayani goes to 

\/ the same woods to take her pleasure there. She goes with Sarmishta 

and two thousand sakhis attending on her. Happy together, the young 

women roam freely through the charmed garden of Chitraratha, drinking 

nectar from flowers, feasting on rare and delicious fruit. Joy goes with 
them. 

Nahusha’s son Yayati, out hunting deer again, arrives there once more, 
tired and thirsty again. That king sees Devayani, Sarmishta and the other 
sakhis, all wearing unearthly ornaments, and full of voluptuous languor 
because of the flower wine they have drunk freely. Devayani, the most 
beautiful among them, her smile dazzling, her skin the softest and fairest, 
lies stretched upon some lush grass, while Sarmishta gently massages her 
feet, 

Yayati sees all this, and says to the two of them, ‘Lovely ladies, tell me 
your names and whose daughters you are. It seems to me that these two 
thousand handmaidens all attend on the both of you.’ 

Devayani answers him, ‘Manavottama, best of men, I am the daughter of 
Shukra Bhargava, the Asura Guru. This is my sakhi and my handmaiden 
Sarmishta. She attends on me wherever I go and she is the daughter of 
Vrishaparvan, king of the Asuras.’ 

Yayati wants to know, ‘How is the lovely princess your handmaiden? I 
marvel at this.’ 

Devayani replies, ‘Fate is responsible for everything that happens. Do 
not marvel, because Fate has made Sarmishta my handmaiden. By your 
face, and from your attire, you seem to be a king. You speak chastely, and 
nobly; your language is of the Veda. Who are you, whose son, and where 
have you come from?’ 


Yayati says, ‘While I was a brahmacharin, I heard and studied all the 
Vedas. I am known as Yayati, a king’s son and a king myself.’ 

Devayani asks, “King, why have you come here? To gather lotuses, to 
fish, or to hunt?’ 

Yayati says, “Lovely one, I have been out hunting deer and felt thirsty. I 
came looking for water. I am exhausted, but say a word and I will leave.’ 

Devayani answers, ‘Leave? My two thousand sakhis and my 
handmaiden Sarmishta are here to serve you. I ask you to become my friend 
and my lord. And may fortune be with you.’ 

Yayati replies, ‘Beautiful Devayani, I do not deserve you. You are the 
daughter of a Brahmana, Shukra Bhargava, and you are immeasurably my 
superior by birth. Your father cannot give you away even to the greatest 
king.’ 

Devayani replies, ‘Brahmanas have married Kshatriyas before, and 
Kshatriyas have married Brahmanas. Your father is a Rajarishi and so are 
you. Son of Nahusha, marry me!’ 

But Yayati says, ‘Most beautiful one, it is true that the four varnas 
sprang from the same Body. But their dharma and natures are not the same. 
The Brahmana is the purest and the highest of the four.’ 

Devayani says, ‘No man other than you has ever touched my hand 
before. You took my hand once and I ask you to take me for your queen. 
For how will any other man ever touch this hand which you, a Rajarishi, 
have touched?’ 

Yayati says, ‘The wise know that a Brahmana is more dangerous than an 
angry snake or a blazing fire, and must be avoided.’ 

Says Devayani, ‘Purusharishabha, why do you say that a Brahmana 
should be avoided like an angry snake or a blazing fire?’ 

The king replies softly, “The snake kills one person, even as the sharpest 
weapon does. But an angry Brahmana consumes whole cities, why 
kingdoms, in a moment. Therefore, bashful one, a Brahmana is more 
dangerous than a snake or fire. I cannot marry you unless your father gives 
you to me.’ 

Devayani says, ‘I have chosen you to be my husband and you are saying 
that you will take me for your wife if my father gives me to you. Fear 
nothing and you will not even have to ask my father for my hand.’ 

Devayani despatches one of her sakhis to her father, to tell him 
everything. As soon as he hears what has happened, Shukra arrives in 


Chitraratha’s garden and sees Yayati, who worships him reverently and then 
stands with folded hands, awaiting the great Bhargava’s command. 

Devayani says, ‘Father, this is the son of Nahusha. He took my hand and 
saved me when I was in the well. I beg you give me to him to be his wife, 
for I will not marry any other man.’ 

Shukra exclaims, ‘Splendid Kshatriya, my daughter wants you for her 
lord. I give her to you freely. O son of Nahusha, take her for your wife.’ 

The cautious Yayati says, “O Brahmana, I want your blessing that I shall 
be spared the sin of begetting a half-breed child upon her.’ 

Shukra says, “I will absolve you of the sin. Do not be afraid to marry my 
exquisite child. Keep her well, and may you enjoy transports of joy in her 
company. 

You must also look after every need of the other young woman, 
Vrishaparvan’s daughter. But you must never call her to your bed.’ 

Yayati circumambulates the Brahmana in pradakshina, and he marries 
Devayani with every auspicious ritual prescribed in the Shastras. 

Honoured by the great Shukra and his disciples the Asuras, receiving in 
some joy the precious Devayani, and her sakhis, Sarmishta and the other 
two thousand, Yayati returns to his kingdom, at Shukra’s behest.” 


CANTO 82 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Yayati returns to a joyous welcome from his 

\/ people. His capital is even like Indra’s city, and he brings his wife 

Devayani into his private royal apartments, in his antahpura. 

Devayani then asks her husband to build a fine mansion for Sarmishta and 

her thousand sakhis in the asokavana in the palace garden. Yayati has such a 

mansion built in quick time, and spares no effort in seeing to Sarmishta’s 
every comfort and luxury. 

Nahusha’s regal son dallies only with Devayani, even like a Deva, for 
many years, in perfect bliss. Then, one day, Devayani conceives and gives 
birth to a fine son. A thousand more years pass—for the beings of those 
days are far longer-lived than in these dwindled times, they are indeed like 
gods in their years and days and nights—and Vrishaparvan’s daughter 
Sarmishta attains puberty and sees that she is in season. 

She becomes anxious, ‘My season has come, but I have not taken a 
husband. Whatever shall I do? My body yearns for a strong man and to 
have his child. Devayani has become a mother and my youth seems to be 
doomed. 

Shall I take Devayani’s husband for my own and bear his child? Yes, that 
is what I will do. I will ask to meet him in private and the great king will 
not refuse me.’ 

As fate is mysterious, just as she is thinking these forbidden thoughts, 
Yayati strolls through the asokavana, aimlessly. He sees Sarmishta appear 
from behind a tree and stops in his tracks. She stands silently before him, a 
flush on her fair cheeks. He sees how her womanhood has bloomed. 

Smiling bewitchingly, now that she is alone with him and nobody 
watching them, she folds her hands and says, ‘O son of Nahusha, I have 
heard that no one can see the women who live in the private chambers of 
Soma, Indra, Yama, Varuna, and in yours, O King. 


You know, Yayati, that I am wellborn and beautiful as well. I have seen 
you gaze at me. I am in my season, O Rajan. I beg you let my womanhood 
not be wasted; make a mother of me!’ 

Yayati replies, ‘I know very well how nobly born you are, in the proud 
race of the Danavas, and you are beautiful almost past compare; why, I see 
no hint of any flaw in your face or your form. It is true that I desire you 
powerfully, but you also know what Usanas’ command was when I married 
his daughter: that I would care for your every need, but I would never 
summon Vrishaparvan’s daughter to my bed.’ 

Sarmishta says, “O King, it is said that it is no sin to lie: in jest, about a 
woman a man wants to enjoy, to be married to, when in mortal danger, and 
if one’s entire fortune is about to be lost. A man who lies about these five 
incurs no sin. 

Devayani and I have both come here for your pleasure, and you have 
sworn to do everything in your power to please us both. When you said that 
only she would come to your bed, you lied, O King!’ says Sarmishta archly. 

Yayati replies, ‘A king should always be an example to his people. A 
king who lies will certainly sin, and find his destruction. As for me, I dare 
not lie, even if the greatest calamity threatens me.’ 

Says Sarmishta, ‘Rajan, a woman can look upon her dear friend’s 
husband as being her own. A friend’s marriage is one’s own. You have 
married my friend, and by doing so you have married me. You are my 
husband, too! Besides, you did swear to do everything in your power to 
keep me happy.’ 

Yayati says, still doubtfully, ‘I have indeed sworn to give you whatever 
you want. Tell me what I should do.’ 

Sarmishta then says, ‘Save me from sin, Yayati. Father a child in me, 
and let me fulfil a woman’s highest dharma, of becoming a mother. I am 
Devayani’s slave, and you are her lord and master. You are my lord and 
master, too, as much as you are hers. I beg you, make love to me, great 
King, and make me a mother.’ 

So enticing is she that Yayati allows her to persuade him. There beneath 
an asoka tree, he grants her wish. When he has made love to her several 
times, they part affectionately, Sarmishta returning to her mansion and 
Yayati to his palace. 

The lovely Sarmishta conceives, and in due course gives birth to a child 
as splendid as a Deva child, his eyes as long as lotus petals.” 


CANTO 83 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “When Devayani hears that Sarmishta has had a 
\/ baby, envy stings her like a serpent, O Bharata. Devayani goes to 
Sarmishta and says angrily, ‘You have sinned, lustful woman!’ 

Sarmishta replies, “A Rishi of great dharma and a knower of the Vedas 
came here and I asked him to grant me a boon, and father a child on me, for 
I was in my time. In dharma, he did as I asked and this child is his.’ 

Devayani says, ‘If this is true, then you have not sinned. But tell me the 
name and gotra of the Brahmana, if you know them.’ 

Sarmishta says, ‘He is as splendid as Surya Deva. Seeing him was 
enough; I felt no need to ask for his name or gotra.’ 

Calming down, Devayani smiles, ‘Well, if this is true and you have a 
child by a noble Brahmana, I have no reason to be angry with you, but to 
rejoice.’ 

They embrace and spend some time together happily, talking and 
laughing, then Devayani returns to her palace. Rajan, Yayati also begets two 
sons, Yadu and Turvasu, upon Devayani and they are like Indra and Vishnu. 

And that Rajarishi fathers three sons on Vrishaparvan’s daughter 
Sarmishta: Drahyu, Anu and Puru. 

One day, Devayani and Yayati go walking in a secluded part of the 
asokavana. Suddenly, they see three children of unearthly beauty playing 
there, innocently. 

Devayani asks in surprise, ‘Whose children are these, Rajan, who are so 
handsome that they seem like a Deva’s sons? Why, they are as resplendent 
and beautiful as you are!’ 

Without waiting for his reply, Devayani goes up to the trusting children 
and asks, ‘Who are you? Who is your father?’ 

The children point at Yayati, and say their mother is Sarmishta. They 
then run to their father and lovingly hug his legs. Yayati dares not caress 


them back before Devayani, but stands as if turned to stone. Crying that he 
ignored them, the boys run to their mother. 

But Devayani follows them, and rounds angrily on Sarmishta, ‘You have 
betrayed me, you have lied to me, even being my friend and dependent on 
me. How did you dare, Sarmishta? This is your Asura nature, to lie!’ 

Sarmishta says, ‘Sweet friend, I did not lie to you, what I said about a 
splendid Rishi is true. I have done nothing to break dharma and I do not 
fear you. 

When you chose the king to be your husband, so did I in my heart. My 
beautiful Devayani, a dear friend’s husband is one’s own, as well. You are 
the daughter of a great Brahmana and I love and respect you. But I love and 
revere this Rajarishi even more!’ 

Devayani now turns on Yayati, “You have betrayed me and I will not live 
here any more!’ 

Her tears flowing from eyes red with rage, she turns and walks away. 
Alarmed and sorry for her, Yayati goes after her. But try as he will to pacify 
her and persuade her not to leave, she will not listen. Soon enough she 
comes before Shukra, the son of Kavi, with Yayati right behind her. 

Devayani folds her hands to her father and takes the dust from his feet. 
Yayati does the same, worshipping the Bhargava. 

Then Devayani sobs, ‘Father, adharma has vanquished dharma. The 
lowly have scaled great heights and the noble have fallen. This King Yayati 
has fathered three sons on Vrishaparvan’s daughter Sarmishta, while I, my 
father, have just two. 

O Bhargava, Yayati is famed for his knowledge of dharma. But I say to 
you, O Kavya, he has left the path of righteousness.’ 

Shukra says angrily, ‘Kshatriya, you have embraced vice though you 
know dharma in every nuance. I curse you that infirmity paralyses you!’ 

Yayati says, “Holy One, the Danava king’s daughter asked me to make 
her womanhood fruitful, while she was in her season. I only did as she 
asked from a sense of dharma, and not from any wantonness or lust. The 
man who will not beget a child on a woman in her season, who asks him, is 
called an embryo-killer by those that know the Vedas. O Bhargava, when a 
man is approached by a woman in her time, full of desire, and he refuses 
her, surely he is a sinner. I went to Sarmishta in dharma and not from lust.’ 

Shukra replies, “Son of Nahusha, you should have first asked me and 
awaited my command. What you did is a betrayal of dharma, as well as 


theft. I curse you to lose your youth and become an old man!’ 

At once, Yayati becomes old and decrepit. 

Yayati says, ‘Bhargava, I am not yet satisfied with my manhood or with 
being with Devayani. I beg you, withdraw your curse.’ 

Shukra answers, ‘I can never lie. Even now, O King, my curse is upon 
you. But you can, if you wish, exchange your decrepitude for the youth of 
another.’ 

Yayati says, ‘Brahmana, say that whichever of my sons gives me his 
youth and takes my age shall be my heir and have great virtue and fame.’ 

Shukra replies, “So be it. Think of me, O son of Nahusha, when you 
exchange your age for your son’s youth, and he shall be your heir, have a 
long life, universal fame and many children!’” 


CANTO 84 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana said, “His youth gone, trembling with weakness and 
age from Shukra’s curse, he calls his eldest, and also the most 
accomplished son, Yadu, and says, ‘My child, look what Usanas’ 

curse has done to me. I am old and infirm, my skin is wrinkled and my hair 

all grey. 

But I have not yet satisfied the desires of my manhood. Yadu, take this 
age from me and give me your youth. When a thousand years have passed, I 
will return your youth to you and take back my age.’ 

Yadu replies, “With age one cannot eat and drink as one wants. O King, I 
cannot do what you ask. White hair, dejection, weakness, wrinkles, 
emaciation, not being able to work and being defeated by one’s companions 
— these are not for me, I could not bear them. 

Father, you have other sons, more precious to you than I am. You know 
all about dharma: ask one of them to take your age and give you his youth.’ 

Yayati says, ‘You are born from my heart, but you will not give me your 
youth. I curse you that your sons shall never be kings!’ 

He now calls Turvasu, ‘Turvasu, take this age of mine and give me your 
youth for a thousand years, for my desires are not fulfilled. After a thousand 
years, I will return your youth to you and take back my age and weakness.’ 

Turvasu replies, ‘I detest old age, father; it takes away every appetite and 
pleasure. It robs one of strength and beauty, of intellect and one’s very life.’ 

Yayati says to him, “You are born from my heart, my son, but you will 
not give me your youth. Turvasu, your race shall become extinct. Wretched 
prince, you will be a king of half-breeds, among whom lowborn men father 
children on blue-blooded women. You will rule tribes of meat-eaters, mean- 
spirited, who don’t think twice before sleeping with their masters’ wives, 
who live like animals and birds, sinners with no trace of nobility in them!’ 


Yayati now calls Sarmishta’s son Drahyu and says, “Drahyu, my child, 
take my age for a thousand years and give me your youth so I can satisfy all 
my desires. After a thousand years, I will return your youth to you and take 
back my infirmity.’ 

Drahyu replies, ‘Father, how can an old man enjoy riding on elephants 
and in chariots; how can he ride horses or women? I cannot take your age 
and give you my youth.’ 

Yayati says to him, ‘You are born from my heart, but you will not give 
me your youth. Your most ardent desires shall never be fulfilled! You will 
be a king, and only in name, of a land where there are no roads for men, 
horses, chariots and elephants; not even for mules and goats, or for bullocks 
or palanquins. You will be a king where the only paths are waterways and 
the only transport boats and rafts.’ 

Yayati calls Anu and says, ‘My son Anu, take my age and give me your 
youth for a thousand years. I will return your youth to you after a thousand 
years, and take back my age.’ 

Anu replies, “The old eat like dribbling children and are incontinent. 
They cannot offer libations into the sacred fire at yagnas. They are unclean 
and impure. Father, I cannot take your age from you.’ 

Yayati says to him, ‘You are born from my heart, but you will not give 
me your youth. You find so much wrong with old age that old age will 
overtake you anyway. Anu, your children shall die as soon as they become 
youths, and neither will you ever perform any yagna before a sacred fire.’ 

Finally, Yayati calls his youngest son Puru and says to him, ‘You are my 
youngest son, Puru, but it seems you shall become my heir. Look at this age 
that the curse of Kavya has brought upon me: my hair turned white, my skin 
wrinkled. But I have not satisfied the desires of my youth and manhood. 
Puru, my child, take my age from me and give me your youth. When a 
thousand years pass, I will return your youth to you and take back my old 
age.’ 

Puru replies without hesitating, “I will do whatever you say, father. O 
King, I will take your old age upon myself and do you take my youth and 
enjoy every pleasure of life with it. And I will live as you command.’ 

Yayati says, ‘Puru, I am well pleased in you. And for that I say to you, 
yours shall be a great reign and everyone in your kingdom will be happy 
and contented. They shall have their every desire fulfilled.’ 


The Rajarishi Yayati then thinks of Shukra Bhargava and takes his son 
Puru’s youth from him, giving the young prince his decrepitude.” 


CANTO 85 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “The great King Yayati begins to enjoy himself, to 
\/ indulge his every appetite, with his son’s youth. O Bharata, he lives 
in dharma while pursuing his pleasure, and never leaves the path of 

virtue and sanctity. 

Yayati worships the Devas with yagnas; he adores his Pitrs with 
Sraddhas; he pleases the poor with generous daana, charity; he gives 
munificently to deserving Brahmanas; he entertains everyone entitled to 
hospitality with a king’s food and drink. He protects Vaishyas; he is kind to 
Sudras. 

He puts down crime and criminals in his kingdom, so that it is a haven of 
safety and order. Yayati is like another Indra to all his subjects, high and 
low. Powerful like a young lion, he enjoys every happiness and pleasure, 
but never transgressing dharma; he sates his every desire. His only sorrow 
is that the thousand years of youth he has taken from his son must end one 
day. 

He is a master of the mysteries of time, its divisions — auspicious and 
otherwise. Reading the suitable kaalas and kaasthas, he dallies with the 
Apsara Viswachi, sometimes in Indra’s exotic garden Nandana; at others in 
Alaka, Kubera’s exquisite city; at times, on the peaks of Mount Meru in the 
North. 

When a thousand perfect years have passed, that king of dharma calls his 
son Puru, who is an aged man, and says to him, ‘My son, bane of your 
enemies, I have enjoyed every pleasure with the youth you gave me, each in 
its season, indulging my every desire as much I as could. 

But I have learnt that desires do not subside with indulgence; they burn 
more fiercely like fire fed with ghee. Why, if one man owned the Earth and 
everything that is in her—all her paddy and barley, her silver, gold and 
gems, her animals and women—he would still not be satisfied. 


One should renounce one’s very desire, the very hunger for enjoyment. 
Desire is the deadly enemy, the fatal sickness. Only he that has cast away 
his desires (hard indeed for sinners and the evil minded to do), which do not 
wane with age or infirmity, only such a man can be truly happy. 

For a thousand years, my heart was bent upon satisfying my every 
desire. The more I indulge my desires the stronger they grow. Now I mean 
to cast off desire itself and fix my mind on the Parabrahman. I will go away 
into the forest and pass the rest of my life among innocent deer, with no 
thought of possessions or enjoyments of the flesh. 

Puru my son, as for you I am well pleased in you, my child, very well 
pleased. Here, take back your youth. Take my kingdom, as well. You are 
my truest son, the one who has served me in every way; why, you sacrificed 
your youth for me.’ 

Nahusha’s son Yayati takes back his old age from Puru and restores his 
son’s youth to him. Now Yayati wants to crown Puru king. But the four 
varnas, led by the Brahmanas of the kingdom, protest. 

They say, ‘Lord, how can you make Puru the king, passing over 
Devayani’s son Yadu, who is the great Shukra’s grandson? Yadu is your 
firstborn son, after him Turvasu, and of Sarmishta’s sons the first is Drahyu, 
then Anu, and Puru is indeed the very youngest. How does the youngest 
prince deserve the throne over his elder brothers? This is not dharma as we 
see it, and we ask you to observe dharma in this momentous matter.’ 

Yayati then says to the four varnas, the Brahmanas at their head. ‘Listen, 
my people, to why Yadu, my eldest son, should not have the kingdom. I 
asked him to do something, but he would not; he disobeyed me. The Rishis 
say that a disobedient son is no son at all. 

But the son who obeys his parents, always seeking their welfare, being 
agreeable to them, is indeed the true son. Yadu did not do what I asked of 
him, nor did Turvasu; Drahyu and Anu showed scant regard for my wishes. 
Puru alone obeyed me; why he gave his youth to me for a thousand years, 
after Shukra cursed me. 

Therefore, my youngest son shall be my heir. He took my age upon 
himself; why, he is more than a son, he is a true friend. Also, Kavi’s son 
Shukra himself has said that the son that obeys me, and only he, shall 
become my heir. The Bhargava says that prince would bring the world 
under his sway. So, I beg you my friends, let Puru become your king. He is 


the most deserving and righteous among my sons, the only one truly fit to 
become king.’ 

The people then say, ‘You speak the truth, O King, and even if he is the 
youngest, the son that seeks the welfare of his parents and obeys them, 
deserves to prosper. From what you say, Puru deserves the crown; besides, 
if Shukra himself has commanded it, we have no further argument.’ 

His people content, Nahusha’s son Yayati crowns Puru king. Having 
made the kingdom over to his youngest, Yayati performs the ritual initiation 
to take Sannyasa and retires into the jungle. When he has taken the vows, 
he leaves his great city forever, accompanied by some Brahmanas and 
Rishis. 

The sons of Yadu come to be called the Yadavas; Turvasu’s sons become 
the Yavanas. Drahyu’s sons are the Bhojas, while the Mlechchas are the 
sons of Anu. 

However, the progeny of Puru are the noble Pauravas, into which royal 
house, O Rajan, you have been born: to rule with dharma as your sceptre, 
and your passions under perfect control.” 


CANTO 86 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


Nahusha’s son Yayati goes away into the vana and becomes a hermit. 

He lives in an asrama with some Rishis, keeps many severe vratas, 
eating only fruit and roots, subjecting himself to every privation; and finally 
Yayati ascends into Swarga. 

In Swarga, he spends some years in perfect bliss, but then Indra casts 
him down from his heaven. I have heard, Rajan, that though he is cast 
down, Yayati does not fall to the Earth but remains suspended in the 
firmament. I have heard that, later, he enters Devaloka again with Vasuman, 
Ashtaka, Pratardhana and Sibi.” 

Janamejaya said, “Tell me why Indra cast Yayati down from Devaloka, 
and how he enters Swarga again. O Brahmana, tell me this in the presence 
of all these Rishis. 

Yayati, lord of the Earth, is truly like the king of the Devas himself. The 
progenitor of the mighty race of the Kurus is as splendorous as the Sun. Tell 
me everything about his life in Swarga and Bhumi, for he is a lustrous one, 
his fame known throughout the world, and his deeds and achievements are 
matchless.” 

Vaisampayana said, “I will tell you the sacred tale of Yayati’s adventures 
on Earth and in Heaven. The legend consumes the sins of those that listen to 
it, for it is holy indeed! 

Having made Puru the king, Yayati, son of Nahusha, expels his other 
sons, Yadu the eldest of them, out among the Mlechchas. He then enters the 
forest and lives there as a Vanaprastha, subsisting on fruit and roots. 

He gains immaculate control over his mind and his passions, and 
performs many sacrifices to gratify the Devas and the Pitrs. He pours 
libations of ghee into the agni, according to the rites prescribed for 
Vanaprasthas. He entertains guests and strangers with roots and fruit, and 


aisampayana said, “Having crowned his precious son Puru as king, 
y. ) 


offerings of ghee, and then he himself eats the seeds of wild corn which he 
forages for in the forest. 

For a thousand years, Yayati lives as a forest-dwelling hermit. He keeps 
a mowna vrata, a vow of silence; and now, his mind perfectly controlled, he 
eats nothing and lives just on the air he breathes; neither does he sleep at 
all: for a whole year. 

For another year, he intensifies his austerities, sitting amidst five fires, 
four that he kindles around himself and the fifth is the Sun above. Then, still 
never eating or sleeping, only breathing (occasionally), he stands on one leg 
for six months, still as a stone. 

Thus, Yayati rises straight into Devaloka, and his sacred fame has spread 
across Bhumi and Swarga.” 


CANTO 87 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana said, “While Yayati, kings of kings, lives in Devaloka, 
the Devas, the Sadhyas, the Maruts and the Vasus revere him. 

His mind perfectly stilled, the king would, from time to time, 
journey from Devaloka to Brahmaloka. I have heard that long years he 
spent in the realm of the Devas. 

One day, while Yayati is with Indra, the Deva king asks the king of the 
Earth, ‘Yayati, what did you say to your son Puru when he took your 
decrepit age from you and gave you his youth? What did you say when you 
gave him your kingdom?’ 

Yayati replies, ‘I told him that all the lands between the Ganga and the 
Yamuna were his. This was the heart of the kingdom; while his brothers 
would rule the outlying countries. I also told him that those without anger 
are always superior to those under its sway; that those who forgive are 
always better than the unforgiving. 

Man, I said to my son, is superior to animals. Among men, the learned 
are higher than the ignorant. I said that if he was wronged, he should never 
wrong in return, for a man’s anger does not burn his enemy but only 
himself. Indeed, it takes away his every virtue and bestows it upon the one 
that he wounds with his fury. 

I said to him that he should never injure anyone with harsh or cruel 
words; never vanquish his enemies by vile means; never speak scornfully of 
anyone, or utter sinful words that might hurt another. 

He that wounds others with sharp words, as if with thorns, I said to my 
son, is a man that bears Rakshasas upon his tongue. Prosperity and fortune 
fly at his very sight. I said that he should make men of dharma his models, 
and always compare what he did with their exalted deeds, while ignoring 
whatever the evil say. 


He must imitate the deeds of the Sages; for those wounded by savage 
words weep day and night because cruel speech strikes at a man’s very 
entrails. Wise men, gentle men, never loose these barbs at anyone. 

Nothing in the three worlds surpasses kindness, friendship, charity and 
sweet speech to all. Always speak soothingly, never scorchingly. I said to 
my son that he should always revere those that deserve his reverence; that 
he should always give and never beg!’” 


CANTO 88 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Now Indra asks Yayati, ‘O King, after you had 

\/ performed your dharma, you became a Vanaprastha and a Sannyasi 

in the jungle and performed tapasya. Tell me, Yayati, son of 
Nahusha, who is your equal in penance and austerity?’ 

Yayati replies, ‘Vasava, in tapasya, I see no one who is my equal; not 
among men, the Devas, the Gandharvas or the Maharishis.’ 

Indra says sternly, “King! You disrespect your superiors, your peers and 
even your inferiors with this hubris. You do not know their true worth in 
punya or tapasya. Your own punya has dwindled by this and you must fall 
from my world.’ 

Yayati says, “Sakra, if my punya has indeed diminished and I must fall 
from Swarga, let me, O King of the Devas, fall among the good and the 
honest.’ 

Indra says, ‘Rajan, you will fall among the wise and the virtuous, and 
you will find great fame for yourself. But hereafter, Yayati, never 
underestimate or demean your equals or your superiors.’ 

Yayati falls from Devaloka. As he is falling, the Rajarishi Ashtaka, 
protector of dharma, greatest of royal Sages, sees him. 

Ashtaka asks, “Who are you, O youth whose beauty equals Indra’s, who 
blaze like Agni, falling from on high? Are you Surya Deva emerging from 
behind a cloudbank? Why, seeing you fall by the path of the Sun, brilliant 
as Agni or Surya, all creatures swoon, while wondering who you are. 

We see you upon the path of the gods, your tejas like Indra, Surya or 
even Vishnu’s, and we ask you: who are you? If you had greeted us, we 
would not have been rude enough to greet you first. But now tell us who 
you are and why you are falling into our realm. 

Ah, be without fear; may all your sorrow and afflictions be over! You are 
now with the virtuous and the wise; even Indra, who slew Bala, can do you 


no harm here. O you seem to be as mighty as Indra. We, the wise and the 
virtuous, always relieve those that are stricken by misfortune and grief. 

Everyone here is as wise and honest as you are. So remain here in peace. 
Only Agni can give heat; only Bhumi can make a seed germinate; only 
Surya can illumine all things; so, too, only the Sadasya, a Guest, can 
command the wise and the virtuous.’” 


CANTO 89 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


CC ayati says, ‘I am Yayati, son of Nahusha and the father of Puru. 
My punya is reduced because I showed disrespect for every 
creature, and I am cast down from the realm of the Devas, Siddhas 

and Rishis. I am older than all of you, which is why I did not greet you first. 

I know that a Brahmana always reveres his elders.’ 

Ashtaka says, “You say an elder is worthy of reverence, but the real elder 
is he that is one’s superior in gyana and tapasya.’ 

Yayati replies, “Sin devastates the punya from the four kinds of dharma. 
Vanity contains the seed that leads one to hell. The good never follow the 
evil, but always live in dharma so their punya increases. 

I had great punya myself, but I have lost it all now, and I will hardly be 
able to recover it, not with the severest tapasya. Seeing my fate, let anyone 
who seeks his own welfare abjure vanity. 

He who acquires great wealth should perform great sacrifices; he that is 
profoundly learned must remain humble; he who has studied the entire Veda 
must withdraw his mind from every sensual pleasure and devote himself in 
dhyana. Such men shall surely find heaven. 

Let him who acquires great wealth not exult; let not the man who has 
studied the Veda in full become proud. Men have different natures, and 
destiny reigns supreme. Power and effort are both in vain. Wise men know 
that Fate rules everything and they neither exult nor lament whatever fate 
might bring them, fortune or misfortune. 

When men truly realise that sorrow and joy depend not upon their 
exertions, nor are these in their power to control, but Fate bestows both, 
each in its season, they will learn to rise above exulting and grieving. 

The Sage is always contented, not celebrating at fortune nor lamenting 
over misfortune. Destiny is supreme; it is unbecoming to exult or grieve 
over anything. 


O Ashtaka, I never allow myself to yield to fear. I never succumb to 
grief. I know that I shall be exactly as the Great Lord of all things has 
ordained that I be. Insects and worms, all plants, snakes and other creatures 
that crawl, vermin, fish in the water, stones, grass, wood, indeed, all things 
moving and immobile shall be united with the Parabrahman once they are 
free from the results of their karma. 

Joy and sorrow are ephemeral. Hence, O Ashtaka, why should I ever 
grieve? We cannot fathom what we must do to avoid misfortune, or why it 
comes; but we can decide not to grieve over it!’ 

Yayati of great dharma is in fact Ashtaka’s maternal grandfather. Now, in 
the Sky, Ashtaka asks him, “Rajadhiraja, King of kings, tell me all about the 
worlds you have been in and enjoyed; tell me how long you were in each 
one. You speak of the precepts of dharma like the greatest masters who 
know the deeds and the teachings of the greatest Beings, intimately.’ 

Yayati says, ‘I was a great king on Earth, and the whole world was my 
domain. Leaving my kingdom to my son, I sat in tapasya for a thousand 
years and gained many lofty realms with my punya. I dwelt in these for 
another thousand years and then attained to a still more exalted realm: 
Indraloka, of untold beauty, a hundred yojanas on every side, realm of a 
thousand portals. 

There, too, I lived a full thousand years and then attained to a higher 
world yet: Brahmaloka, of perfect grace and bliss, where there is no ageing 
or decay. Here, too, I lived for another thousand years, and then ascended to 
a loftier world, Vishnuloka, realm of the God of Gods. There I spent 
another thousand years, blissfully. 

I have dwelt in countless worlds, which the Devas adore, and I was as 
powerful and lustrous as a Deva. I could assume any form I chose, and I 
spent a million years in the enchanted and incomparable Nandana, dallying 
with Apsaras under trees so grand and wondrous that I can hardly describe 
them. Their flowers are exquisite and the scents of these truly heavenly. 

After countless years, of unalloyed beatitude, one day a grim-faced 
messenger cried thrice to me in his voice of thunder, ‘Ruin! Ruin! Ruin!’ O 
lion among kings, immediately I fell from Nandana, for my punya was 
ruined. I heard the Devas crying in dismay, ‘Alas! Yayati’s punya is ruined 
and the king of dharma is falling.’ 

As I fell, I cried to them, ‘Where, O Devas, are the wise ones amongst 
whom I can fall?’ 


They pointed this sacred yagnashala out to me. I saw smoke rising from 
your fires, I smelt the ghee that is being poured ceaselessly into it; guided 
by these, I have fallen towards you, and my heart is glad to see you all.’””’ 


CANTO 90 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


CC shtaka says, “You lived in the Nandana for a million years and you 
A cots assume any form you chose. Then why, O greatest among 
the kings of the Krita Yuga, have you been forced from that world 

and come here?’ 

Yayati answers, “Just as, on Bhumi, family and friends forsake men who 
lose their wealth, in Swarga, Devendra and his Devas forsake those who 
lose dharma and their punya.’ 

Ashtaka says, ‘How can a man lose his dharma and punya in that realm? 
Also, tell me, mighty King, the various karmas that lead to the various lofty 
worlds. I know that you have intimate acquaintance with the lives and 
teaching of Great Beings.’ 

Yayati says, “Holy One, men that praise themselves find the hell called 
Bhauma. Though they are in fact macilent, they grow fat on Earth, and have 
sons and grandsons, all of whom become food for vultures, dogs and 
jackals. One should never praise oneself. Tell me, O King, what more you 
wish to hear.’ 

Ashtaka says, ‘When age kills the body, vultures, peacocks, insects and 
worms devour it. Where does the man go? How does he return to life? And 
I have not heard of this hell called Bhauma on Earth.’ 

Yayati answers, “When he quits one body the man enters a mother’s 
womb, according to his karma, and remains there formlessly, until his time 
comes and he becomes an embryo, and then is born again into the world 
and walks upon the surface of the Earth. 

This Earth is Bhauma, the hell into which he falls because he does not 
regard death or work toward attaining mukti. Some live in Swarga, by their 
punya, for sixty thousand years, others for eighty thousand; then, inevitably, 
they fall. When they fall, they suffer attacks from various Rakshasas, who 


appear as sons, grandsons, and other relatives. Finally, they withdraw their 
hearts and in despair seek moksha.’ 

Ashtaka asks, ‘For what sin do the Rakshasas attack the fallen? Why are 
they not destroyed? Why do they enter another womb, and grow organs and 
develop senses?’ 

Yayati replies, ‘Falling from heaven, the being becomes a subtle fluid. 
This fluid becomes semen, the seed. The seed enters the mother’s womb in 
her season, develops into an embryo and emerges as a child, just like a fruit 
from its flower. 

Entering trees, plants, water, air, earth and space, the spirit fluid becomes 
all the creatures that are to be seen.’ 

Ashtaka says, “Tell me, O Sire, for I do not know, does the being that is 
born human enter the womb in human form or some other? How does the 
foetus acquire its form, with eyes and ears, and the other senses, and 
consciousness as well? Father, you are one that knows the deeds and the 
thoughts of Great Beings.’ 

Yayati says, ‘Its karma is already inherent in the subtle being, the 
sukshma rupa, when he is seminal fluid. In the womb, what is latent 
develops into physical form, first as embryo, then as the infant born; later, 
he becomes conscious of himself as a human: the ears hear sound, the eyes 
see the world of forms and colours, the nose is sensible of various scents 
and smells, the tongue of taste, the body of touch, and the mind of ideas. 

Thus, O Ashtaka, the sthula rupa, the material body, develops from the 
sukshma, the subtle or spirit body.’ 

Ashtaka asks, ‘On death, the body is burnt or otherwise consumed. 
Reduced to nothing, how does it take rebirth?’ 

Yayati says, ‘Lion among kings, on dying the man assumes a subtle 
form, remembering all his deeds and life, as in a dream, and quick as a 
thought he enters into another body, as seed, then again a mother’s womb. 

If he has led a good life, he evolves to a higher form, and if he has 
sinned, a lower one. The worst sinners devolve into worms and insects. I 
have no more to say on this subject, O pure and noble-souled Ashtaka! 

I have told you how beings are born, live, die and are reborn as creatures 
four-footed, those with six and more legs. What else do you want to ask?’ 

Ashtaka says, ‘How, O Pitr, do men attain to the higher realms from 
where they do not return to life on Earth? Is it by tapasya or by gyana, 


asceticism or knowledge? Tell me, can one gradually evolve into these 
blissful realms? I beg you tell me everything there is to know about this.’ 

Yayati answered him, “The Rishis say there are seven gates through 
which a man may enter Swarga: asceticism, benevolence, tranquillity, self- 
control, modesty, simplicity and kindness to all creatures. The Sages also 
say that vanity robs a person of all these seven. 

The man who acquires knowledge, then begins to think of himself as a 
great scholar, and with his learning disparages or destroys the reputation of 
others, never finds the realms of immortal felicity; neither does his learning 
lead him to the Brahman. 

Study, humility, worshipping before a holy fire, and sacrifices — these 
four remove every fear. However, when they are contaminated by vanity, 
they create fear instead. The wise man never exults at being honoured, nor 
does he chafe at being dishonoured. For only they that are themselves wise 
honour the wise; the evil will never revere the virtuous, but will insult and 
try to destroy them. 

“I have given so much daana, so much charity; I have performed so 
many yagnas; I have studied so much; I have kept so many vratas” — this 
vanity is the very root of fear. Never indulge these feelings; do not entertain 
these thoughts. 

But learned men who know that the changeless, ineffable Brahman is 
their lone support, the Spirit who always showers his blessings on good 
men like yourself, such men find perfect peace, here and hereafter.’” 


CANTO 91 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


CC shtaka says, “Knowers of the Veda differ about how the four 

A waa should lead their lives, the Brahmacharins, the Grihasthas, 

the Bhikshus and the Vanaprasthas, so they might acquire punya.’ 

Yayati replies, ‘A Brahmacharin living in his Guru’s house must learn 
from his master only when he is called for a lesson; he must serve his Guru 
without being called or asked; he must rise before his Guru does, and sleep 
after his master sleeps. 

He must be humble, with his passions controlled, patient, vigilant and 
devoted to his studies. Only then will he succeed. 

The oldest Upanishads say that a Grihastha must acquire wealth 
legitimately and honestly, and perform sacrifices. He must always give 
some of what he earns in charity. He must be hospitable to anyone who 
comes to his home, and should never partake of anything without sharing 
some portion of it. 

A Bhikshu does not seek a forest to sit in tapasya. He roams the world, 
depends on his own strength, is never vicious, gives some charity always, 
and never causes pain to any living creature. Only then does he achieve 
SUCCESS. 

The true Bhikshu lives by alms, is very learned and accomplished, has 
his passions under perfect control, has no worldly desires, concerns or 
attachments, does not sleep under a Grihastha’s roof, and has no wife. 
Journeying a little every day, he travels over most of the country. 

A learned man becomes a Vanaprastha when he has truly mastered his 
desire for pleasure and his acquisitiveness; then he embarks upon the path 
after the prescribed rituals. He that dies in the forest while living the life of 
a Vanaprastha causes the mukti, the liberation and dissolution into the 
Brahman of ten generations of his ancestors and his progeny, himself 
included.’ 


Ashtaka asks, ‘How many kinds of Munis are there, who keep the 
mowna vrata of silence?’ 

Yayati answers, ‘He is a Muni who lives in a forest though he is near a 
town, as is he who lives in a town that is near a forest.’ 

Ashtaka asks, ‘What is a Muni?’ 

Yayati replies, “A Muni withdraws from the world and lives in a forest. 
He never seeks to possess worldly goods, but is able to obtain anything at 
all with his mystical powers. Thus, he lives in a forest with a town or city 
near him. 

Again, a Muni who has withdrawn his mind from all worldly things 
might well live in a town or village, as a Sannyasi. He never shows any 
pride of birth, family or learning. He wears threadbare clothes, yet he can 
imagine that he wears the richest garments. 

He eats just enough to support his life. Such a man, even if he lives in a 
town or village, in truth lives in a forest. 

He who restrains his senses and passions, and keeps a vow of silence, 
refraining from any karma, all action, and allowing no desire to capture his 
mind, surely succeeds. Why should we not worship a man who sustains 
himself on pure food, never injures any living being, whose heart is always 
pure, who is swathed in a halo of asceticism, who is free from the leaden 
weight of desire, who does not cause injury even when dharma sanctions it? 

Emaciated by penance, his very flesh, marrow and blood thinned, such a 
man conquers not just this world but the highest one. When this Muni sits 
absorbed in dhyana, indifferent to joy and sorrow, honour and insult, he 
leaves this world and communes with the Brahman. Why, when the Muni 
eats and drinks, even wine or the flesh of animals, without relish or desire, 
but like a baby feeding at his mother’s breast, he is still like the pervasive 
Brahman and one with the Universe. The Muni attains salvation.’” 


CANTO 92 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


cc shtaka asks, ‘O King, of the man of asceticism and the man of 

A\ knowtedee both working tirelessly toward moksha, even like the 

Sun and the Moon, which one first finds communion with the 
Brahman?’ 

Yayati replies, “The Vedas help the learned man quickly realise that the 
perceived universe is only illusion, maya. Upon this realisation, he 
immediately attains to the Supreme Brahman, the original font, the only 
blissful reality. 

Those that follow the path of dhyana and Yoga arrive at the same goal, 
but they usually take a longer time: for they depend upon experience alone 
to rid themselves of samsara. 

If a Yogi does not attain mukti in one lifetime (perhaps having been led 
astray now and then by the allurements of samsara), whatever evolution he 
achieves goes with him into his next life. But the Gyani always sees only 
Immortal Unity, and even if he is steeped in the enjoyments of the flesh, 
they never affect him or his heart. Nothing impedes his salvation. 

He that fails to find knowledge must resort to pious karma, to sacrifices. 
However, no man who performs a yagna with an eye on its fruit ever 
achieves moksha. His yagnas remain fruitless, and are indeed rajasic, even 
cruel by nature. 

But a man who performs his dharma seeking no gain, but in a spirit of 
immaculate detachment, his karma is Yoga itself: it is communion with 
God.’ 

Ashtaka says, “Rajan, you look like a young man; you are handsome and 
wear a heavenly garland. You are lustrous and splendid. From where are 
you coming and where do you go? Are you someone’s messenger? Are you 
going down to the Earth?’ 


Yayati says, ‘I have fallen from heaven, having lost all my punya. I am 
doomed to fall into Bhauma, the hell on Earth. Yes, as soon as I finish 
speaking with you, I will fall down into the world. Ah, even now the 
Lokapalas command me to hurry. O Ashtaka, I have a boon from Indra that 
though I shall fall into the Earth, I will fall among the wise and the virtuous, 
men of dharma. Surely, all of you here are men of dharma, both wise and 
virtuous.’ 

Ashtaka says, “You know everything. I want to know from you, O 
Yayati, are there any worlds that I might enjoy in Swarga or in Akasa? If 
there are, then I say to you, you shall not fall.’ 

Yayati says, ‘O King, there are as many worlds above for you to enjoy as 
there are cows and horses on Earth, and all the other beasts of the wild and 
the hills together!’ 

Ashtaka says, ‘Rajan, if indeed there are worlds on high for me to enjoy, 
as the fruit of my punya, I give them all to you. Thus, you shall not fall. 
Take all those worlds from me quickly, and grieve no more.’ 

Yayati replies, ‘Best of kings, a Brahmana who knows the Brahman may 
accept such a gift but not you or I. Rajan, I have myself given gifts to 
Brahmanas, even as one should. But let no man who is not a Brahmana 
bring dishonour upon himself by taking alms; let the wife of a learned 
Brahmana never take alms. While I am in the world below, I shall, as I have 
done before, perform much dharma. When I have never accepted a gift 
before, how can I take one from you now?’ 

Another Rajarishi there says, ‘Resplendent one, I am Pratardana. I ask 
you, are there any worlds in Swarga or Akasa for me to enjoy with my 
punya? Tell me, for you know everything.’ 

Yayati says, “Rajan, there are worlds beyond count, full of bliss, where 
sorrow and pain cannot enter, for you to enjoy; they are as bright as the face 
of the Sun. Live in each one for just seven days, and they shall yet never be 
exhausted.’ 

Pratardana says, “Then I give all those to you, so that you will not fall. 
Let the worlds that I have gained become yours, be they in Akasa or in 
Swarga. Take them quickly, and be sad no more!’ 

Yayati answered, ‘Rajan, no king should ever accept from an equal what 
he has earned by Yoga and Tapasya; that is not dharma. No wise Kshatriya 
should leave the path of dharma, particularly when fate visits him with 
calamity. A king must keep dharma in view always, and walk in dharma. I 


would debase myself if I take what you offer. There are others, who seek to 
acquire punya, who never accept gifts. How, then, shall I?’ 

Another of those kings of dharma now spoke to Yayati. ‘I am 
Oshadasva’s son Vasumat. Tell me, Yayati, are there any worlds that I can 
enjoy, by my accumulated punya, in Swarga or in Akasa? Mahatman, you 
know all those sacred realms!’ 


CANTO 93 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


ayati says, ‘There are as many realms for you to enjoy as there are 
! places in the sky, the ten directions of the Universe and on the Earth 
that the Sun illumines.’ 

Vasumat then says, ‘I give them all to you; let all the worlds meant for 
me become yours. And you shall not fall anymore. And if it is not proper 
for you to take them from me as a gift, O King, then buy them from me: 
their price is a straw.’ 

Yayati replies, ‘I do not remember ever having bought or sold anything 
usuriously. No king ever has; then how shall I now?’ 

Vasumat says, ‘If you consider buying them as being against dharma, 
then take them freely from me, as a gift, because I say to you that I will 
never go to those worlds myself. So let them be yours.’ 

Now Sibi says to Yayati, ‘I am Usinara’s son Sibi. O Pitr, are there any 
worlds in Swarga or Akasa for me to enjoy by my punya? You know all the 
worlds that a man might gain through tapasya.’ 

Yayati says, ‘You have never failed to help honest and good men who 
asked for your help. There are infinite worlds for you to enjoy in heaven, all 
bright as lightning.’ 

Sibi says, ‘If you think it wrong to buy them from me, I give them to you 
as my gift. Take them all, O King, for I will never go there, to those realms 
where the wise never feel any disquiet.’ 

Yayati says, ‘O Sibi, powerful as Indra, you have indeed earned an 
infinity of heavenly realms for yourself. But I have no wish to enjoy worlds 
given to me by others. I fear I cannot accept your gift.’ 

Now Ashtaka declares, ‘O Pitr, we have all offered you the higher 
realms that we have earned by our tapasya and dharma. You refuse to 
accept them. But we are going to leave them to you, and ourselves go down 
into Bhauma, hell on Earth.’ 


Yayati replies, ‘You are all wise and honest. Give me what I deserve; I 
cannot do what I have never done before.’ 

Ashtaka says, “Whose are these five golden chariots? Do men that fly to 
the realms of permanent bliss go in them?’ 

Yayati says, ‘Indeed, the five glorious chariots that blaze like fire would 
bear you to the realms of bliss.’ 

Ashtaka says, ‘Yayati, take the chariots and fly into Swarga. We can 
wait; we will follow later.’ 

Yayati says, “Look! The path to Swarga is revealed before us. We can all 
go together, for it seems that we have all conquered heaven.’ 

All those noble kings climb into the chariots of the Devas and fly up into 
Swarga, illumining all the sky with the radiance of their virtue as they go. 

Breaking the silence, as they flash along, Ashtaka asks, ‘I always 
thought that Indra is especially my friend, and that I would enter his realm 
first. But how does Usinara’s son Sibi leave the rest of us behind?’ 

Yayati says, ‘Usinara’s son relinquished his every possession to attain 
Brahmaloka. So he is the first among us. Besides, the liberality, asceticism, 
truth, virtue, modesty, forgiveness and friendliness of Sibi, as well as his 
burning desire to do good have been such that no one can measure them.’ 

Again curious, Ashtaka asks his mother’s father, Yayati, who is like 
Indra himself, “O King, tell me truthfully who you are, from where you 
come and whose son you are? Has any other Brahmana or Kshatriya on 
Earth done all that you did?’ 

Yayati replies, ‘Truly, I am Yayati, Nahusha’s son and Puru’s father. I 
was Lord of all the Earth. You are all my daughters’ sons, and I am your 
grandfather. I conquered the world, then gave rich garments to Brahmanas, 
and also a hundred pedigreed horses that are fit to be sacrificed at 
Aswamedha yagnas. 

Such sacrifices please the Devas and they bless those that perform them. 
I gifted the Earth that I had conquered to the Brahmanas, the world with all 
her horses, elephants, gold, every kind of treasure, and also a hundred 
arbudas of the finest milch cows. 

Why, Earth and Sky, Bhumi and Akasa, exist because of my dharma; 
Agni still burns in the world of men because of my dharma and my truth. I 
have never spoken a single word that is a lie; and for this the wise worship 
the truth. 


Ashtaka, everything that I have told Pratardana, Vasumat and you is true. 
I know beyond doubt that the Devas, the Rishis and all the realms and 
homes of the blessed are full of grace and bliss because they are all founded 
in Truth. 

He that reads or hears this account of our ascent into Swarga, with no 
evil in his heart, shall himself find the worlds to which we go.’ 

Thus did mighty King Yayati of old, saved by his grandsons, re-enter 
Swarga from where he fell, while his fame spread throughout the three 
worlds.” 


CANTO 94 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


anameyjaya said, “O Vaisampayana, worthy of worship, tell me about the 
J son of Puru, and the kings that descended from them. Tell me about the 

power and deeds of each one. I have heard that every king in the line of 
Puru is a man of dharma and great prowess, and that each one has excellent 
sons. O you, who are rich in tapasya, tell me the lives of those kings of deep 
learning and great achievements.” 

Vaisampayana said, “Listen then to the lives of the heroic kings born 
into the House of Puru, every one of them as strong as Indra, owning 
boundless wealth, and the adoration of all in consequence of their dharma 
and their awesome deeds. 

By his wife Paushti, Puru has three sons: Pravira, Iswara and Raudraswa, 
all of them redoubtable Maharathas. Of these, Pravira begets upon his wife 
Suraseni a son called Manasyu. 

Manasyu, whose eyes are as wide and long as lotus petals, holds sway 
over the world, bounded by the four seas. Manasyu’s wife is Sauviri, and he 
fathers three sons in her: Sakta, Sahana and Vagmi. And they are great 
Kshatriyas in battle and Maharathas. 

Puru’s son Raudraswa begets upon the Apsara Misrakesi ten sons, all 
great archers. They grow to be tremendous Kshatriyas, performing 
countless yagnas to worship the Devas. Each of them begets sons who 
acquire deep learning of every kind and are men of dharma. 

The ten sons of Raudraswa are Richeyu, Kaksreyu and Vrikeyu: of great 
strength; Sthandileyu, Vaneyu and Jaleyu: of great fame; Tejeyu of great 
strength and intellect; Satyeyu strong as Indra; Dharmeyu and Sannateyu 
both powerful as Devas. 

Of these, Richeyu becomes sovereign ruler of the Earth and is known as 
Anadhrishti. He is as strong as Indra among the Devas. Anadhristi’s son 


Matinara becomes a renowned king of dharma, who performs the Rajasuya 
and the Aswamedha yagnas. 

Matinara has four sons of untold prowess: Tansu, Mahan, Atiratha and 
Druhyu the glorious. Among these, the mighty Tansu becomes the 
perpetuator of Puru’s line. He subdues the Earth and gains great fame, 
honour and splendour. 

Tansu’s son is the mighty Ilina, who becomes the greatest among all 
conquerors, and also brings the whole world under his sway. Ilina begets 
five sons upon his wife Rathantara, and Drohmanta is the eldest; they are as 
mighty as the five elements, the Panchabhutas. 

Ilina’s sons are Dushyanta, Sura, Bhima, Pravasu, and Vasu. And, O 
Janamejaya, the eldest of them, Dushyanta, becomes king. 

By his wife Shakuntala, Dushyanta has a fine son, Bharata, who 
becomes king. The royal race that he founded bears Bharata’s name, and 
because of his greatness its fame spread across the Earth. 

Bharata marries three wives and begets nine sons by them. None of them 
is like his father and Bharata is not pleased. Growing angry, their mothers 
kill their sons. Finally, Bharata performs a great putrakama, with 
Bharadvaja as his priest, and begets a son called Bhumanyu. 

In this prince, Puru’s magnificent descendant Bharata is pleased; he feels 
that this boy is his worthy heir and crowns Bhumanyu Yuvaraja. Bhumanyu 
marries Pushkarini and sires six sons in her: Suhotra, Suhotri, Suhavih, 
Sujeya, Diviratha and Kichika. The eldest, Suhotra, inherits the throne and 
he performs many Rajasuyas and Aswamedhas. Suhotra brings the whole 
world, with her girdle of seas, her forests teeming with elephants, her lands 
with cows and horses, and her treasure troves of gold and jewels, under his 
sway. 

The Earth, burdened with numberless humans, elephants, horses and 
chariots seems as if she might sink down into Patala. During the reign of 
Suhotra of dharma, lakhs of yupastambas, stakes of sacrifice, cover the face 
of Bhumi. Suhotra begets upon his wife Aikshaki three sons: Ajamidha, 
Sumidha, and Purumidha. The eldest, Ajamidha, becomes king and he sires 
six sons: Riksha by Dhumini; Dushyanta and Parameshthin by Nili; and 
Jahnu, Jala and Rupina are born from Kesini. All the tribes of the Panchalas 
are descended from Dushyanta and Parameshthin. And the Kushikas are the 
sons of Jahnu of measureless might. 


Riksha, the eldest, becomes king and he begets Samvarana, who furthers 
the royal line. O King, I have heard that during the reign of Riksha’s son 
Samvarana, famine, pestilence, drought and disease sweep across the Earth, 
killing millions. For the first time, enemies defeat the Bharata princes. The 
Panchalas, with footsoldiers, cavalry, elephant warriors and chariot fighters, 
conquer the world. With ten Akshauhinis, the Panchala king vanquishes the 
Bharata king. 

Samvarana flees with his wife and ministers, sons and relatives, and 
hides in the forest on the banks of the river Sindhu, which extends to the 
foot of the Himalaya. The Bharatas live there for a full thousand years, in a 
fortress they build. 

When a thousand years pass, one day the illumined Rishi Vasishta comes 
to see the Bharatas in exile, and they come out to worship him with arghya. 
Welcoming him reverently, they tell him everything that has happened. 
When the Rishi sits in a lofty chair, Samvarana himself says to the sage, ‘Be 
our priest, O Holy One! For we wish to regain our kingdom.’ 

Vasishta replies, ‘Aum’, consenting. 

Vasishta makes Samvarana the sovereign of all the Kshatriyas in the 
world; with his recondite mantras, he makes the heir of Puru like the horns 
of the bison, the tusks of the elephant. Becoming Lord of the Earth once 
more, Samvarana performs many Mahayagnas and the gifts he gives the 
Brahmanas are magnanimous beyond description. 

Samvarana marries Surya Deva’s daughter, Tapati, and begets on her a 
son called Kuru. Kuru’s dharma is flawless, he is the soul of rectitude, and 
the people make him king. The field called Kurukshetra or Kurujungala, 
renowned in the world, is named after this great sovereign: for he sits in that 
field in tapasya for long years, and sanctifies it through his penance. 

Kuru’s wife, Vahini of the lofty intellect, bears him five sons: Avikshit, 
Bhavishyanta, Chaitraratha, Muni and the celebrated Janamejaya. Avikshit 
begets the mighty Parikshit, Savalaswa, Adhiraja, Viraja, Salmali of great 
strength, Uchaihsravas, Bhangakara, and Jitari is the eighth. 

From their dharma and tapasya seven Maharathas, Janamejaya their 
leader, are born into this royal House. Parikshit’s sons are masters of 
dharma and artha. They are Kakshasena, Ugrasena, Chitrasena of enormous 
vitality, Indrasena, Sushena and Bhimasena. 

The sons of Janamejaya are all endowed with inordinate strength and 
become celebrated the world over. They are Dhritarashtra — the eldest, 


Pandu, Balhika, Nishadha of tremendous tejas, the mighty Jambunada, 
Kundodara, Padati, and Vasati is eighth. They too are steeped in dharma and 
artha, and compassionate to all living creatures. 

Dhritarashtra becomes king, he has eight sons: Kundika, Hasti, Vitarka, 
Kratha, Havihsravas, Indrabha, and the invincible Bhumanyu. Numberless 
grandsons has Dhritarashtra, but only three of them acquire renown: 
Prateepa, Dharmanetra and Sunetra. 

Of these, Prateepa has no rival on Earth. O Bharatarishabha, Prateepa 
has three sons, Devapi, Shantanu, and the Maharatha Balhika. Devapi, the 
eldest, becomes a Sannyasi, for he wants his brothers to have the kingdom. 
Shantanu and Maharatha Balhika inherit the Earth. 

Rajan, besides all these, countless mighty, mighty Kshatriyas are born 
into the race of Bharata, each of them blessed with burning energy and like 
Devas in their dharma and tapasya. 

So, too, many Maharathas, great chariot-warriors, all as irresistible as 
Devas, are born into the race of Manu. Their numbers increase the Aila 
dynasty beyond calculation.” 


CANTO 95 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


ancestors, and about the great kings born into our royal line. However, 

you have only told me briefly about this ancestry. I beg you, O 
Vaisampayana, recount the lives of these great men in some detail, 
beginning with Manu, Lord of creation. 

Who would not be enchanted to listen to such a narration, for it surely is 
sacred? Why, the fame of these kings has spread across Swarga, Bhumi and 
Patala, such is their wisdom, their might, their lofty characters and their 
dharma. Your Itihasa is like Amrita; rare delight fills me when you speak of 
their liberality, power and strength, their intelligence, their vigour and 
fortitude!” 

Vaisampayana said, “Listen then, O Rajan, in full to the legends of your 
race, just as I heard it from my master Dwaipayana. 

Daksha begets Aditi, who begets Vivaswat, who begets Manu, who 
begets Ila, and Ila begets Pururavas. Pururavas begets Ayus, who begets 
Nahusha, and Nahusha begets Yayati. 

Yayati has two wives, Usasanas’ daughter Devayani, and Sarmishta the 
daughter of Vrishaparvan. Devayani gives birth to Yadu and Turvasu; and 
Vrishaparvan’s daughter Sarmishta gives birth to Druhyu, Anu and Puru. 

The descendants of Yadu are the Yadavas and those of Puru are the 
Pauravas. Puru has a wife called Kausalya, in whom he begets a son called 
Janamejaya, who performs three Aswamedhas and another great sacrifice 
calls Viswajit; after which he goes away into the forest and takes Sannyasa. 

Janamejaya has Ananta, the daughter of Madhava, and she bears him a 
son called Prachinvat. This prince has his name because he conquers all the 
eastern countries up to the very land where the Sun rises. Prachinvat 
marries Asmaki, a Yadava princess and fathers in her a son called Sanyati. 


J ancestors, said, “Brahmana, you have told me the history of my 


Sanyati marries Varangi, the daughter of Drishadwata, and she bears him 
a son called Ahayanti. Ahayanti marries Bhanumati, the daughter of 
Kritavirya, and she gives him a son called Sarvabhauma. 

Sarvabhauma marries Sunanda, the daughter of the Kekaya king, by 
abducting her. He fathers Jayatsena in her. Jayatsena marries the Vidarbha 
king’s daughter and she bears him Avachina. Avachina also marries another 
Vidarbha princess, Maryada. Her son is Arihan. Arihan marries Angi and 
their son is Mahabhauma. Mahabhauma marries Suyajna, the daughter of 
Prasenajit. She bears him Ayutanayi. He bears this unusual name because 
he performs a sacrifice for which the fat of an ayuta of male creatures is 
specified. 

Ayutanayi marries Kama, the daughter of Prithusravas, and their son is 
Akrodhana, who marries Karambha, the daughter of the king of Kalinga. 
Their son is Devatithi, who marries Maryada, the princess of Videha, and 
their son is Arihan. 

Arihan marries Sudeva, the princess of Anga, and he sires in her the 
prince Riksha. Riksha marries Jwala, the daughter of Takshaka, and their 
son is Matinara, who performs a twelve-year yagna on the banks of 
Saraswati, a great and potent sacrifice. When it is complete, Saraswati 
appears before the king and makes him her husband, and their son is calls 
Tansu. 

Tansu marries Kalingi and begets a son called Ilina. Ilina marries 
Rathantari and they have five sons, of whom Dushyanta is the eldest. 
Dushyanta marries Viswamitra’s daughter Shakuntala, and their son is 
Bharata the Great. 

‘The mother is only the receptacle in which the father begets the son. 
The father is himself the son. Therefore, O Dushyanta, accept your son and 
do not humiliate Shakuntala. God among men, the father becomes the son 
and rescues himself from hell. Shakuntala speaks the truth when she says 
that you are this child’s father.’ 

Thus the asariri, the divine voice, spoke in the court of Dushyanta, and 
Dushyanta then accepts his child; and Bharata has his name for that: the 
accepted one. 

Bharata marries Sunanda, the daughter of Sarvasena, king of Kasi; and 
their son is Bhumanyu. Bhumanyu marries Vijaya, the daughter of Dasarha, 
and their son is Suhotra, who marries Suvarna, the daughter of Ikshvaku. 


Their son is Hasti, who indeed founded this great capital of yours, and it is 
after him that it is named Hastinapura. 

Hasti marries Yasodhara, the princess of Trigarta, and their son is 
Vikunthana, who marries Sudeva, the princess of Dasarha. They have a son 
called Ajamidha. Ajamidha has four wives, Raikeyi, Gandhari, Visala and 
Riksha. And he begets two thousand and four hundred sons upon them. 

Of all these, Samvarana becomes king and perpetuates the dynasty. 
Samvarana marries Vivaswat’s daughter Tapati, and their son is Kuru, who 
marries the Dasarha princess Subhangi, and their son is Viduratha. 
Viduratha marries Supriya, a Madhava princess, and their son is called 
Anaswan. Anaswan marries Amrita, another daughter of the Madhavas, and 
their son is Parikshit, who marries Suvasa, a Bahuda princess, and their son 
is Bhimasena. 

Bhimasena marries the Kekaya princess Kumari, and begets upon her 
Pratisravas, whose son is Prateepa. Prateepa marries Sunanda, the daughter 
of Sibi, and they have three sons:Devapi, Shantanu and Balhika. When he is 
just a boy, Devapi goes away into the jungle and takes Sannyasa. Shantanu 
becomes king. 

Here is a sloka about Shantanu: 

‘Old men whom this king touched not only felt indescribable joy, but 
had their youth restored to them.’ 

Indeed, so is he named Shantanu. And Shantanu marries Ganga, who 
bears him a son Devavrata, who is later known as Bhishma, of the solemn 
vow. 

Wishing his father to find happiness (for Ganga has left him), Bhishma 
helps Shantanu marry Satyavati, who is also known as Gandhakali for the 
fragrance of her body. When she is a young virgin Satyavati bears the Rishi 
Parasara a son, upon an island in a stream of the Yamuna: he is my Guru 
Dwaipayana. 

She bears Shantanu two other sons, Chitrangada and Vichitravirya. But 
Gandharvas slay Chitrangada before he grows to manhood. Vichitravirya 
becomes king, and he marries the two daughters of the king of Kasi, 
Ambika and Ambalika. But Vichitravirya dies before they can bear him any 
children. 

Satyavati bends her mind to the task of how the race of Dushyanta can 
be continued. She remembers her first son, the Rishi Dwaipayana. He 
appears before her, and asks, ‘What shall I do for you, mother?’ 


She says, ‘Your brother Vichitravirya has left this world without 
fathering any sons. Beget sons of dharma for him.’ 

Dwaipayana fathers three children, Dhritarashtra, Pandu and Vidura, to 
continue the royal line. By his boon to his son, Dhritarashtra has a hundred 
sons by his wife Gandhari. Among those hundred, four achieve renown: 
Duryodhana, Dushasana, Vikarna and Chitrasena. 

Pandu has two jewels among women for his wives: Kunti (also called 
Pritha), and Madri. One day, while hunting in the forest, Pandu sees a stag 
covering its mate. Callously, the Kshatriya kills that deer with an arrow 
before its desire is slaked. 

Pierced by the king’s arrow, the deer suddenly changes into a Rishi (who 
has taken, with his wife, the form of deer to enjoy lovemaking),and says to 
Pandu, ‘O Pandu, you are a man of dharma and you also know the pleasure 
a man has satisfying his desire. My desire is not gratified and you have 
killed me. When you next make love to your wife, you will also die before 
finding fulfilment!’ 

With that the Rishi dies, and also his wife and mate as if they shared the 
same life. Pandu trembles at the curse and from then would not go to his 
wives. 

He says to them in that forest, ‘I am cursed through my own fault. But I 
have heard that the childless never find Swarga or any heaven at all.’ 

He begs Kunti to bear him sons. She acquiesces; by Dharma Deva, she 
bears him Yudhishtira; by Vayu, she bears him Bhimasena; and by Indra she 
gives him Arjuna. 

Pandu is delighted with his sons. He says to Kunti, ‘Madri has no sons; 
use your mantra to help her bear children as well.’ 

‘So be it,’ says Kunti and speaks the incantation for her husband’s 
second wife, and Madri bears him Nakula and Sahadeva, twin sons by the 
Aswins of heaven. 

One day, Pandu sees Madri wearing just her ornaments and bathing in 
the river, naked. His long repressed desire kindled, he thrusts himself upon 
her on the riverbank. Immediately as he does, he dies. Madri burns herself 
on her husband’s funeral pyre, to go with him into Swarga, for his desire 
remained unsatisfied. 

She says to Kunti, ‘Raise these twins of mine like your own sons, with 
love.’ 


After their father’s death, some Rishis of the forest bring Kunti and the 
five Pandavas to Hastinapura and present them to Bhishma and Vidura. 
Immediately, the Munis vanish before all eyes, while flowers fall out of the 
sky when those Sages name the sons of Pandu, saying whose natural child 
each one is, and divine drumrolls reverberate across the clear blue heavens. 

Bhishma takes the Pandavas in. They describe the death of their father, 
and perform the last rites for him in Hastinapura. When the evil, spoilt 
Duryodhana sees that his cousins are to be raised in the city, violent 
jealousy possesses him. Even like a Rakshasa, he does everything in his 
power to do away with them. But Fate will take its course inexorably, and 
all Duryodhana’s malignant schemes are frustrated. 

Finally, in despair, he has the Pandavas sent to Varanavrata by his doting 
father; they go willingly, and at first innocently. There he tries to immolate 
them in a cunningly built house of lac, but they are saved yet again by the 
warning and the help of their uncle Vidura. 

Later, the Pandavas kill Hidimba and then go to Ekachakra. Here Bhima 
kills the Rakshasa Baka, and after that they go to Panchala, where they win 
Draupadi for their wife, before returning to Hastinapura, and then going to 
Khandavaprastha, where they live in peace for a while, and beget children. 

Draupadi bears Yudhishtira a son calls Prativindhya; Bhima’s son is 
Sutasoma; Arjuna’s is Srutakriti; Nakula’s is Satanika; and Sahadeva’s son 
by Draupadi is Srutakarman. 

Yudhishtira also marries Devika, the daughter of Gobasana of the 
Saibyas, at her swayamvara, and their son is Yaudheya. Bhima also marries 
Balandhara, the daughter of the king of Kasi, by offering his strength as 
dowry, and has a son by her called Sarvaga. 

Arjuna goes to Dwaraka, Dwaravati, and carries away Subhadra, 
Krishna’s soft-spoken sister, and brings her home to Indraprastha. Arjuna 
and Subhadra have a son called Abhimanyu, a splendidly gifted prince and 
a favourite of Krishna’s. 

Nakula also marries Karenumati, princess of Chedi, and their son is 
Niramitra. Sahadeva marries Vijaya, daughter of Dyutimat, king of Madra, 
being chosen by her at her swayamvara, and they have a son called Suhotra. 

Of course, the firstborn of all the sons of the Pandavas is Ghatotkacha, 
Bhimasena’s son by Hidimbi. These are the eleven Pandavaputras, and 
among them Abhimanyu is the one that continues the royal line. 


He marries Virata’s daughter Uttaraa and she gives birth to a stillborn 
child, a premature baby who has been burnt in his mother’s womb by 
Aswatthama’s astra. Krishna tells Kunti to take the lifeless child onto her 
lap, and he says, ‘I will revive this child of six months.’ 

Krishna brings the infant back to life and gives him great strength, 
vitality and brilliance. Having restored him to life, Krishna says, “Because 
this child has faced death before being born, he shall be called Parikshit, the 
tested one.’ 

Parikshit marries Madravati, O King, and you, Janamejaya, are their son. 
You married Vapushtama, and have two sons called Satanika and 
Sankukarna. Satanika has married the princess of Videha and their son is 
Aswamedhadatta. 

This, Rajan, is the lineage of the House of Puru and the Pandavas. Let 
Brahmanas that keep vratas, devout Kshatriyas who practise svadharma and 
protect their subjects, attentive Vaisyas and reverent Sudras, who serve the 
three higher varnas, all listen to this sacred Itihasa, for it increases punya. 

Those that recite this sacred genealogy or listen to it with reverence find 
Swarga for themselves, and go to the realms of the blessed. The Devas, 
Rishis and all men honour them. 

The enlightened Vyasa composed this holy Itihasa, the Bharata. 
Brahmanas that know the Vedas and other men that listen to it with pure 
and worshipful hearts gain great spiritual reward and, it is told, conquer the 
heavens. 

Even if they sin, they find honour, for a sloka describes this Itihasa thus: 
‘This Bharatais equal to the Vedas; it is beautiful and it is sacred. It bestows 
wealth, fame and a long life. Let all men listen to it with absorption.’” 


CANTO 96 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “There is a king called Mahabhisha born into the 

V/ race of Ikshvaku. He is Lord of all the Earth, and always speaks the 

truth and is mighty indeed. With a thousand Aswamedhas and a 
hundred Rajasuyas he adores Indra, and finally attains Swarga. 

One day, the Devas have gathered to worship Brahma. Several Rajarishis 
are present at the yagna and so is Mahabhisha. Ganga, queen of rivers, also 
comes to offer adorations to the Grandsire. Suddenly a gust of wind blows 
her clothes, white as moonbeams, away from her body and she stands 
exposed. 

The Devas bend their heads, turning their eyes away from her. But 
Rajarishi Mahabhisha stares brazenly at the queen of rivers. 

Brahma curses Mahabhisha, ‘Wretch, you forget yourself at the sight of 
her! You will be born on Earth as a man. She shall also come to you as a 
woman in the world, and she will cause you anguish, repeatedly. Only when 
you lose your patience and turn on her in anger will you be free of this 
curse of her tormenting you. Finally, after a full life as a mortal, 
Mahabhisha, you will return to Swarga as yourself.’ 

King Mahabhisha thinks of all the great kings of the world and wishes to 
be born as the son of the awesome Prateepa. And, if truth be told, Ganga 
also desires Mahabhisha when she sees him stare at her unabashedly with 
such desire in his eyes. She, too, wants him, as she leaves that conclave of 
the Devas and journeys down towards the Earth. 

On her way, she sees the eight Vasus of heaven also travelling, forlorn, 
on the same path as herself. The queen of rivers asks them, ‘Why are you so 
dejected? O Swargavasis, heaven dwellers, is all well with you?’ 

The Vasus reply, ‘O Ganga, Rishi Vasishta has cursed us for a sin we 
committed against him. He sat at his sandhya vandana and we could not see 


him in the fading light. We crossed before him, disturbing his worship, and 
he cursed us in anger, “Be born as men!” 

We cannot escape the curse. We ask you, O Ganga, become a human 
woman and bear us as your children. Queen of all rivers, we cannot enter 
the womb of a mortal woman.’ 

Ganga says, ‘So be it.’ Then she asks them, ‘Which great man on Earth 
will you make your father?’ 

The Vasus replies, ‘Prateepa will have a son called Shantanu whose fame 
will mantle the Earth even as the rays of the Sun do. We wish to be born 
from his seed.’ 

Ganga smiles, ‘O Vasus, sinless ones, this is exactly as I wished. I will 
become Shantanu’s wife and you shall be our children.’ 

The Vasus says, ‘O Tripathagaa, who flow through Swarga, Bhumi and 
Patala, you of the three courses, cast us, as each one of us is born, into the 
water so we do not have to live long in the dreadful mortal world.’ 

Ganga says, ‘I will do as you ask, but let not my lovemaking with him 
be entirely fruitless. One of you must survive and live a full life as our son.’ 

The Vasus says, “We will each give up an eighth part of our life energy 
to create a single son for you, one to fulfil your every wish, who will live a 
full life as a man. But he himself shall beget no children.’ 

Making this pact with Ganga, the Vasus immediately go on their way; 
they are in a hurry to see an end to the curse of mortality.” 


CANTO 97 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “There is a king called Prateepa, who is 
\/ compassionate towards every living thing. He spent many years in 
tapasya at the source of the Ganga. 

One day, Ganga rises from her waters as a ravishing woman and 
approaches that king. She goes directly to the Rajarishi at his dhyana and 
sits upon his right thigh, which is as strong as the trunk of a Sala tree. 

Opening his eyes and seeing the beauty on his lap, the king says, 
‘Lovely one, what do you want from me?’ 

She says, ‘I want you for my husband, O King. Kurusthama, best of the 
Kurus, be mine, for to refuse a woman who offers herself to you is 
condemned by the Rishis. 

Prateepa answers, ‘Fair one, I never go to another man’s wife or women 
that are not of my varna from lust. This is my dharma vrata.’ 

Ganga says, ‘I am neither inauspicious nor ugly. I am worthy of being 
enjoyed. I am a celestial woman, and my beauty is unearthly. I want you for 
my husband; do not refuse me, Kshatriya.’ 

Prateepa answers, ‘I have sworn a vow of continence; if I break my 
vrata, sin will consume me. Besides, lovely one, you have sat on my right 
thigh and put your arms around me. But you must know that the right leg is 
the place for daughters, while the left lap is for wives. Peerless woman, I 
am forbidden to enjoy you as a lover, but shall indeed accept you: as my 
daughter-in-law, as my son’s wife.’ 

Ganga says, ‘King of dharma, let it be as you say: I will become your 
son’s wife. Out of my regard for you, I shall be a queen of the hallowed line 
of Bharata, whose kings are the sanctuary of every other king on Earth. 
Why, a hundred years would not suffice for me to count the virtues of your 
royal house. 


The majesty and dharma of the renowned kings of your royal line are 
beyond calculation or compare. But, Lord of the Earth, I must tell you that 
when I am your son’s wife, he shall not be the judge of what I do, be it 
anything at all. Be assured, though, that I will be a faithful wife to him and 
please him in every way. Finally, he will find heaven for himself because of 
the sons that I bear him, and because of his own dharma.’ 

Ganga vanishes, and Prateepa now waits for the birth of his son to keep 
the word he has given her. Indeed, at this very time, Prateepa, bull among 
Kshatriyas, and his wife are performing penance to have a son, for they are 
childless. 

They are quite old when a son is born to them, and he is Mahabhisha 
whom Brahma has cursed. They call him Shantanu, because his father has 
already calmed his passions with penance when he is born: Shantanu, the 
one born of serenity. 

Shantanu, finest among the Kurus, realises early that the realm of 
immortal bliss is gained only by one’s deeds; he treads the path of dharma, 
devoutly. 

When Shantanu grows into a youth, Prateepa calls him one day and says, 
‘Shantanu, some years ago, before you were born, a celestial woman came 
to me and I gave her my word that you would marry her and beget children 
upon her. If you happen to meet her, secretly, and if she asks you to sire 
children in her, take her for your wife. 

Also, my pure child, you must never judge what she does, whatever it 
might be, fair or foul, nor ask who she is, or where she comes from, but 
take her for your wife. This is my command to you.’ 

Prateepa makes Shantanu king, and goes away into the forest to become 
a Vanaprastha. Shantanu, blessed with great intelligence and as splendid as 
Indra, spends a great deal of his time in the forest: he is an avid hunter, 
addicted to the sport, numberless deer and bison he kills. 

One day, ranging the banks of the Ganga on his hunt, he comes to a 
place frequented by Siddhas and Charanas. He sees a woman there who 
seems to be as beautiful as the Devi Sri: faultless of face and form, her teeth 
like pearls, wearing unearthly ornaments and garments so fine and resonant 
that they might have been woven from the filaments of lotuses. 

Shantanu feels uncanny rapture surge through him; his hair stands on 
end for delight. He drinks in the sight of her, and, helplessly, drinks on. The 
woman sees Shantanu, magnificent and brilliant, and feels a pang of love. 


She also gazes helplessly at him, and gazes on as if she could never tear her 
eyes away from him. 

Shantanu says softly to her, “You with the waist like a lotus stalk, you 
whose beauty is divine, I do not know if you are a Devastri or a Danavi, a 
Gandharvi, an Apsara, a Yakshi, a Nagini or a mortal woman, a Manushi. 
But I want you to become my wife.’” 


CANTO 98 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “She sees his smile, she hears what he says, so 
V/ tenderly; she remembers her word she gave the Vasus; she 
remembers Mahabhisha, and she speaks to him, her voice perfect and 

her every word making his heart quiver in thrall. 

She says, ‘O King, I will be your wife and obey you in all things. But I 
have one condition: you must never question what I do, whatever it might 
be, good or bad, or ask me who I am. You must never say a harsh word to 
me. As long as you treat me kindly and never question me, I will be a 
devoted wife to you. But the moment you say a cross word to me or 
question me, I will leave you forever.’ 

Shantanu does not hesitate to agree, ‘So be it.’ He gives his solemn 
word. 

She is delighted to become his wife and he is ecstatic to be her husband. 
Great joy and pleasure they give each other. Shantanu keeps his word to 
her: he never asks her who she is, nor questions her ever. And she is a 
perfect wife to him, and Shantanu, Lord of the Earth, is more than content 
for she gratifies him in every way, by her beauty, her conduct, her 
generosity, her loving affection and her ardour, too. 

The Devi Ganga, Tripathagaa of the three courses, has assumed an 
exquisite human form, and she is entirely happy being the wife of that tiger 
among kings, Shantanu, who is as mighty as Indra himself; it is as if she 
now enjoys the fruit of all her past punya. 

In turn, she delights him, by her unearthly beauty and her love, her 
womanly wiles and her lovemaking, with her songs and by dancing for him; 
indeed, theirs is an almost unalloyed happiness, while months, seasons and 
years fly by and the king hardly notices them pass. 

But when Ganga first becomes pregnant and delivers a son as beautiful 
as a Deva child, she takes the newborn straight to the river and casts him 


into the foaming current. She says to Shantanu, who is aghast, “This is for 
your own good. Trust me, ask me nothing.’ 

Shantanu does not question his otherwise perfect wife for fear that she 
will leave him. Seven times this happens, and the king never says a word, 
though gradually he becomes a broken man, seeing his sons sink in the 
Ganga. 

But when the eighth child is born, and his wife, with a smile, is about to 
cast the baby into the river, Shantanu cannot bear it anymore. He cries to 
her, ‘Stop! You will not kill my son. Who are you? Whose daughter are 
you? What are you that can kill your own children? Murderess, your sins 
are too dreadful to even think of.’ 

She replies calmly, ‘If it is children you want, you are already the most 
blessed of fathers. I will not kill this child. But you have broken your word 
that you would never question me or say an unkind word to me and I must 
leave you now forever. I am Jahnu’s daughter Ganga. The greatest Rishis 
worship me. I lived with you for all these years to fulfil a purpose of the 
Devas. 

Vasishta cursed the eight Vasus to mortal births. On Earth there is none 
but you that deserved to become their father. Also, there is no one but I who 
could become their mother. I took this human form to give birth to them. 
Shantanu, by becoming the father of the eight Vasus you have gained many 
Swargas for yourself, realms of permanent bliss. 

The Vasus also made me swear that I would set them free from the 
darkness of mortal bondage as soon as they are born. I did not kill them, as 
you saw it, but only liberated them from the curse of Apava Rishi, Vasishta. 

I must leave you now, O King, my time with you is over. Be blessed and 
raise this child. Call him Gangadatta for me. He shall be great beyond all 
measure and bring fame and honour to your royal house.’” 


CANTO 99 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


CC hantanu asks, “Who was Apava Muni and what did the Vasus do, 
Sac he cursed them to human birth? What has this eighth child of 
yours done for which he must live a full human life? O Jaahnavi, 

tell me everything in detail.’ 

Ganga replies, ‘Bharatashreshta, Vasistha, the Sage who was later known 
as Apava, was the son of Varuna. He had his asrama on Meru, king of 
mountains, in a green forest. The place was sacred, with birds and animals 
of every kind abounding. Flowers of every season bloomed perennially in 
the magical place. Bharatottama, Varuna’s son, best among men of dharma, 
sat in tapasya in that forest, full of streams flowing with sweet water and 
with sweet roots and fruit aplenty. 

Daksha Prajapati had a daughter called Surabhi. Bharatarishabha, she 
bore her husband Kashyapa Muni a daughter, Nandini, who was born as a 
radiant and divine cow of wishes, who could fulfil any desire. Vasishta took 
Nandini to help him with his ritual homa. Nandini lived in his asrama and 
adored by all the Sages in that sacred forest, ranged through it at will. 

One day, O Bharatarishabha, the Vasus, with Prithu at their head, came 
to that forest which the Devas and Devarishis love. They ranged through 
that vana at their leisure, with their wives, all of them enchanted by the 
glorious mountain and the forest of delights. 

Then the slender, gorgeous wife of one of the Vasus saw Nandini, the 
cow of wishes, through the trees. She saw how lovely Nandini was, her 
eyes large, her teats ample and full of milk, her tail fine, her hooves as 
beautiful as jewels, bearing every other auspicious sign, and radiant. The 
Vasu’s wife pointed Nandini out to her husband Dyu. 

O King who are as strong as the elephant Airavata, Dyu saw Nandini 
and admired her many excellences. He said to his wife, “O my black-eyed 
beauty of the tapering thighs, the cow belongs to the Rishi who lives in this 


tapovana. My wasp-waisted one, do you know that a mortal who drinks 
Nandini’s milk does not age for ten thousand years?” 

Best of kings, the reed-waisted and beautiful Devi said to her irradiant 
husband Dyu, “I have a precious human friend in this world, her name is 
Jivati. She is so beautiful and young, that daughter of that Deva among 
Manavas, the Rajarishi of great dharma and intellect, Usinara. 

My lustrous husband, I want to give this cow and her calf to my friend. I 
want Jivati to drink Nandini’s milk and be free from age and death. My 
illustrious lord, grant me my wish, I beg you. Oh, nothing would please me 
more!” 

Dyu wanted to please his wife and, with the help of his brothers Prithu 
and the others, he spirited away Nandni and her calf. Indeed, when his wife 
batted her long eyes at him, Dyu forgot to whom Nandini belonged. He 
forgot dharma and that he might fall terribly through this crime. 

When Varuna’s son returned to his asrama in the evening with the fruit 
he had gathered, he did not see Nandini or her calf. Vasishta searched the 
charmed tapovana for her, high and low. When he could not find the cow, he 
used his mystic vision and saw exactly what had happened, how the Vasus 
had spirited her away. 

In rage he cursed the Vasus, crying, “They dared to steal my sweet 
Nandini with her lovely tail, and milk like Amrita. Let the arrogant Vasus 
be born into the world of men, on Bhumi!” 

Bharatrishabha, this was how the Rishi Apava cursed the eight Vasus. 
Having pronounced his curse, Vasishta sat down to meditate again. When 
the awesome Brahmarishi cursed them those celestials were instantly aware 
of it, and flew down to his asrama in distress. They did their utmost to 
pacify the Rishi, but Apava, knower of dharma, would not relent. 

However, the righteous and kindly one said, “Vasus, Dhava and you 
others, I have cursed you. Yet you shall be free from my curse within a year 
of being born into the world. But Dyu is he that led you to this sin, and he 
must spend a full human life in the world of men. 

Though I cursed you in wrath, my curse cannot prove vain. Dyu, you 
shall indeed live on Earth but you will beget no children. You shall know 
the Vedas and the Shastras and be a man of profound dharma. You will be 
an obedient son to your father, but you will never enjoy intimate relations 
with a woman and remain celibate all through your mortal life.” 


With that, Maharishi Vasishta left the Vasus. They then came together to 
me and, O King, they implored me for the boon that as soon as I gave birth 
to them I would set them free from Vasishta’s curse by casting them into the 
river. Best of kings, I only did what they asked so that they could be free 
from this world. Also, this eighth child, who is Dyu, must live a full mortal 
life from Vasishta’s curse.’ 

With that, she takes her child and vanishes; she would bring him back to 
his father when he is older. Shantanu’s son is called both Gangeya and 
Devavrata, and he excels his father in accomplishment. 

After Ganga leaves, Shantanu returns sadly to Hastinapura. Let me tell 
you now about the dharma and the fortunes of this great king of the House 
of Bharata. For this wondrous Itihasa is known as the Mahabharata.” 


CANTO 100 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana said, “Well loved by the Devas and all Rajarishis, 
Shantanu is famous in all the worlds for his wisdom, his dharma and 
his truthfulness: never would he tell a lie. He is self-controlled, 

liberal, forgiving, intelligent, modest, patient and energetic, that bull among 

men. 

Blessed with all these qualities, a master of dharma and artha, he 
protects the race of Bharata and indeed all men and women. His throat is 
marked with three lines, like a sankha, a conch; his shoulders are massive 
and wide and he is as strong as an angry elephant. It seems that every 
auspicious royal sign dwells in the person of Shantanu as if they consider 
him to be their choicest abode. 

Men who observe the deportment of Shantanu become convinced that 
dharma is infinitely superior to artha and kama, that rectitude is loftier than 
wealth and enjoyment. Truly, there is never another king like Shantanu. 
When the other kings of the Earth see his absolute devotion to dharma they 
make him an emperor, a king of kings, and then on, during the reign of 
Shantanu the Great, those kings are free from fear and sorrow. 

They sleep in peace and awake every morning having dreamt beautiful 
and joyful dreams. Because Shantanu is like Indra himself in tejas, vital and 
brilliant, every king of the Earth becomes a king of dharma, liberal and 
always performing yagnas and deeds of deep goodness. When Shantanu and 
other kings like him rule the Earth, the dharma of every varna, of men and 
women of every persuasion, grows incalculably. The Kshatriyas serve the 
Brahmanas; the Vaisyas wait upon the Kshatriyas; and the Sudras, 
worshipping the Brahmanas and the Kshatriyas, wait upon the Vaisyas. 

Shantanu lives in Hastinapura, the wonderful capital of the Kurus, and 
he holds sway over all the Earth, bounded by the four seas. He is honest and 
straightforward, and as much a master of dharma as the king of the Devas. 


He combines in his person such liberality, religion and austerity that great 
fortune comes to him and, through him, spreads in tides across the world he 
rules. He knows no malice or anger; he is as handsome as Soma Deva; he is 
as brilliant as Surya Deva; and as strong as Vayu the Wind God. His wrath, 
if roused, is like Yama’s, yet he is ordinarily as patient as Bhumi Devi, who 
bears all things upon herself. 

Rajan, while Shantanu rules the Earth, no deer, boars, birds, or other 
animals are killed wantonly. Great kindness towards all living creatures 
pervades his kingdom, and he himself is the very soul of mercy, knowing 
neither desire nor anger, but extending his protection to all creatures. 

He performs yagnas to the Devas, the Rishis and the Pitrs, and never is 
any creature killed in sin. Shantanu is king and father to all and, 
particularly, to those that are wretched, who have no one else to watch over 
them; a guardian of birds and beasts he is, indeed, of every created thing. 

And during the rule of the best of the Kurus, of that king of kings, 
speech and truth are the same thing, and men’s minds flow always towards 
liberality, virtue and love of their fellow beings. Shantanu enjoys domestic 
happiness for thirty-six years and then goes away into the forest to become 
a Vanaprastha. 

Shantanu’s son, the Vasu Dyu, born of Ganga and named Devavrata, is 
as handsome as his father and also like him in his dharma and his learning. 
He is a prodigy at every branch of knowledge, mundane and spiritual, 
skilful beyond description. Prodigious are his strength and vigour, too. He 
becomes a Maharatha, effortlessly; indeed, he becomes a great ruler, though 
he never actually becomes king. 

One day, some years after Ganga leaves him, taking their eighth infant 
with her, Shantanu follows a deer he has wounded with his arrow along the 
banks of the Ganga, when he suddenly sees the river turned to a mere 
trickle, indeed, run almost dry. Shantanu gazes at this in wonder: what 
could do this to that mightiest of rivers? 

Then he sees a youth as handsome and radiant as Indra, who holds up 
the river’s flow with his astra, an unearthly weapon. The king watches in 
astonishment. The youth is Shantanu’s son, but having last seen him as a 
babe in arms, Shantanu does not know him. 

However, the boy knows his father at once but he chooses to vanish 
using his maaya shakti, his power of illusion, making himself invisible. 


Shantanu now suspects that the boy is his son, and he speaks to the river 
that flows again, ‘Let me see that youth!’ 

Ganga assumes the form of a beautiful woman and appears before the 
king, holding the boy, wearing unearthly ornaments and raiment, with her 
right hand. Shantanu does not recognise the woman, clad in shimmering 
white robes and also wearing unworldly ornaments. She has been his wife 
for many years, but this is another form in which she appears. 

Ganga says, ‘Tiger among men, this is your eighth son that you begot on 
me. He is a master of astras, and of every other weapon. O King, take him 
with you now to your city of heroes. I have raised him with great love and 
care. 

Our brilliant son studied all the Vedas and the Vedangas with Vasishta; 
as an archer, he is Indra’s equal. O Bharata, the Devas and the Asuras have 
both blessed him. Whatever Shukra Bhargava knows, my son knows as 
well, having learnt from him; he also knows all the Shastras that Angiras’ 
son Brihaspati, whom the Devas and Asuras both adore, knows, having 
studied them from the Guru himself. 

He has learnt the use of weapons from Jamadagni’s son, the invincible 
Parasurama Mahabahu. O bravest of kings, I have brought your heroic son 
to you; he is a matchless bowman and knows the dharma of kings in its 
every nuance and detail.’ 

She gives the boy’s hand into Shantanu’s, and vanishes. Shantanu brings 
his son, glorious as Surya, back to Hastinapura. That scion of the line of 
Puru blesses his great fortune as he rides into his capital, which resembles 
Amaravati in heaven, bringing his radiant boy with him. He calls all the 
Pauravas together and formally crowns his son Devavrata as the Yuvaraja. 

Bharatarishabha, so noble and able is that prince that, quickly, his father 
and the other members of the Paurava clan, and also the people, see that he 
is certainly the jewel of that illustrious line, and they love him. As for 
Shantanu, he dotes on the youth; that powerful king’s joy at living with his 
son knows no bounds. 

Four years pass, then one day the king ranges through some woods on 
the bank of the Yamuna, when suddenly he smells a scent of heaven, and 
cannot tell what its source is. Here and there he goes, desperate to find what 
it is that smells so sweet. 

Finally, he sees a black-eyed young woman, her beauty unworldly: a 
fisherman’s daughter. 


Shantanu says to her, ‘Who are you, and whose daughter are you? What 
are you doing here?’ 

She answers him, “Be blessed, stranger! I am the daughter of the 
chieftain of the fishermen on this river. By his command, I ferry travellers 
across the river in my boat.’ 

Shantanu gazes at that beauty, friendly and so fragrant, and for the first 
time after Ganga left him, he feels desire stir in him, powerfully. He wants 
her for his wife. Shantanu goes to her father and asks for her hand. 

The fishermen’s chieftain says, ‘O King, I will gladly give my daughter 
to be your wife, but I have a condition. You are a man of dharma and you 
must fulfil my condition if you want to marry my daughter. If you give me 
your word on it, I will certainly give you my daughter for I could never 
hope to find another husband for her who is your equal.’ 

Shantanu says, “Tell me your condition, the word you want from me. If it 
is in my power to grant what you want, I certainly will. But unless I know 
what it is, how can I give you my solemn word?’ 

The fisherman says, “Rajan, what I want is that the son born to my 
daughter shall become king after you, and no other.’ 

O Bharata, Shantanu desires the fishergirl desperately, but he thinks of 
Devavrata and knows he cannot agree to the fisherman’s condition. Burning 
within himself to possess the fragrant girl, his mind full of just her, he sadly 
turns back to Hastinapura. 

Back in his capital, Shantanu is plunged in gloom. 

One day, Devavrata goes to his grieving father and says, ‘Why do you 
grieve like this? Every good fortune is yours; all the chieftains and kings 
obey you. Yet you shut yourself up alone and speak no word to anyone, not 
even to me. 

You do not go out riding anymore. You are pale and losing weight every 
day; despondency envelops you and you have lost the very spark of life. 
Father, I beg you, tell me what illness you are suffering from, so that I can 
find a cure for you.’ 

Shantanu says, ‘It is true what you say, my son, that I have become 
melancholy. I will also tell you why sorrow is upon me. Gangeya, you are 
my only son, the only heir to the throne of Bharata. You are a Kshatriya and 
are frequently at arms or sport with weapons. 

My child, human life is always uncertain. O Gangaputra, if some danger 
befalls you, we shall be heirless. To me, you by yourself are worth a 


hundred sons, and I have no wish to marry again. I only pray that fortune 
always attends on you, and that our dynasty continues. 

The Rishis say that he who has only one son has no son. Sacrifices 
performed before a holy fire and the knowledge of the three Vedas bestow 
immortal punya; but such punya does not have a sixteenth part of the 
spiritual merit that one gains by having a son. 

Why, men and beasts are hardly different from each other in this respect. 
My wise child, I have no shadow of doubt that a man finds Swarga for 
himself when he has a son. 

Even the Devas regard the Vedas, which are the root of the Puranas, as 
having scriptural authority and the Vedas are full of examples of this. O 
Bharata, you are a Kshatriya and bold and daring, and as I said, always at 
arms or in battle. I fear that you might be killed one day in battle. 

If that happens, my child, what will become of the royal house of 
Bharata? What will happen to our dynasty? Some pretender, some usurper 
will sit upon our hallowed throne. This is the thought that dejects me and 
fills me with sorrow and anxiety.’ 

Devavrata does not reply immediately, but that perspicacious young man 
suspects the truth, the real cause of his father’s misery. He goes to the old 
minister who has devoted his life to the king’s personal well-being and asks 
him what causes his father’s depression. 

Bharatarishabha, the aged minister tells Devavrata about the fisherman’s 
condition, for which he would give his daughter Gandhavati to Shantanu. 
Immediately, taking many venerable old Kshatriya lords with him, 
Devavrata goes to the home of the fisherman and begs him for his 
daughter’s hand for Shantanu. 

The fisherman receives him respectfully in his court of fishermen. When 
Devavrata sits comfortably, the fisherman says, ‘Bharatarishabha, you are 
Shantanu’s only son and the greatest warrior on Earth. Your prowess is 
great indeed. Let me say this to you: if Shantanu asks for the hand of the 
daughter of Indra himself, Indra could not dream of rejecting the proposal. 

Satyavati is not my natural daughter. The Rajarishi from whose seed she 
was born is your equal in birth and dharma. He has often told me about 
your father Shantanu and that only he is worthy of marrying my child. 

Why, the Brahmarishi Asita has asked me for her hand more than once, 
and I have refused him because I have believed that your father is destined 
to be her husband. However, there is one great fear I have in giving her to 


your father: that he already has a son and that son is you. If my daughter’s 
sons have you for a rival, how will they fare? 

Parantapa, scourge of your enemies, even if he was a great Asura or 
Gandharva no enemy could hope to prevail against you, mightiest of all 
Kshatriyas. Be blessed, great Devavrata. But understand clearly what I am 
saying, and that the decision of whether or not my daughter will marry your 
father does not rest with me.’ 

O Bharata, hearing this, Devavrata says in that rustic court of fisher- 
chieftains and Kshatriyas, ‘Honest friends, then listen to the vow that I 
swear. I agree to your condition, fisherman: your daughter’s son shall be 
king of Hastinapura. I renounce my right to the throne forever. No other 
man in this world, I tell you, would swear such an oath. But for my father’s 
sake, I will not break it!’ 

The fisherman’s eyes shine. This is good fortune that he could hardly 
credit. But that shrewd man now says, ‘Prince of dharma, you have come 
here on behalf of your father Shantanu, whose glory is beyond measuring. I 
ask you now to also represent my interest—you and you alone—in this 
matter of my Satyavati marrying the king. 

Most excellent Kshatriya, I have something to add, something else that 
you must consider. Parantapa, any father who has a care for his daughter 
would say what I am about to. You are certainly a man of dharma, 
Mahabaho, Mighty-armed, and I have no doubt that you will honour the 
solemn word you have just sworn before all these worthy ones. But what 
about your sons after you? How can I trust them?’ 

O King, Ganga’s son says, ‘O Fisherking, most worthy friends, listen to 
what I now swear in the presence of all of you. Kshatriyas, I have already 
relinquished the throne of my ancestors. I will now settle the question about 
my sons. Fisherman, from this day, I swear to remain a Brahmachari, a 
celibate all my life. Even if I die without having a son, I will find the 
highest heaven for myself, realms of eternal bliss.’ 

The hairs on the fisherman’s body stand on end in unbridled delight, he 
can hardly believe this great fortune. His eyes shining, he says, ‘I give my 
daughter to be your father’s wife!’ 

The Devas, Apsaras and myriad tribes of Rishis pour down a rain of 
flowers from the sky, over Devavrata’s head, and heavenly voices cry in 
awe, ‘Bhishma! Bhishma!’ , because his vow is so terrible. 


Bhishma, as we shall call him from now, bows to Satyavati, and says, 
‘Mother, come, climb into my chariot and let us go home to Hastinapura.’ 

Bhishma helps the beautiful and fragrant one into his chariot. Coming to 
Hastinapura he brings her straight to Shantanu and tells him everything. 
The great Kshatriyas who had gone with him say, ‘Truly he is Bhishma!’ 

When Shantanu hears what his son has done for his sake, he blesses him, 
saying, “Death will come to you only when you call him; otherwise no 
power of Heaven or Earth will end your life.’” 


CANTO 101 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “O King, Shantanu marries Satyavati with 
\/ all the prescribed and proper rituals. Then he takes her to himself 
with great delight. 

Soon, Satyavati bears an intelligent and heroic son and he is called 
Chitrangada. He is endowed with terrific vitality and strength and becomes 
a great man. Shantanu of untold prowess also begets on Satyavati another 
son: Vichitravirya, who becomes a mighty bowman and the king after his 
father. But before Vichitravirya grows to manhood, Shantanu the Great 
yields to Time. 

When Shantanu passes on to Swarga, Bhishma, with the support of 
Satyavati, installs Chitrangada on the throne. At an early age, Chitrangada, 
with Bhishma for his master, proves himself a matchless warrior, indeed no 
man other than his elder brother is his equal at arms. 

He vanquishes every king of the Earth, and when his namesake, the 
Gandharva king Chitrangada, sees that the prince of the world could easily 
subdue men, Asuras and even the Devas, the celestial challenges the Kuru 
prince before his power grows beyond controlling. 

They meet on the hallowed field of the Kurus, Kurukshetra, and the 
battle between them lasts a full three years, on the banks of the golden 
Saraswati. Fierce and dreadful is that battle and the sky is thick with banks 
of arrows and spears, and lusty mace blows ring out; but finally, with 
superior strategy, indeed with subtle deception, the Gandharva kills the 
human Chitrangada and flies up into heaven. 

When Chitrangada, tiger among men, of strength beyond all measure, is 
killed, Bhishma, son of Shantanu, performs his last rites. Then he crowns 
the young boy Vichitravirya as king, while he himself rules as regent in his 
younger brother’s name. Vichitravirya, for his part, worships his older 
brother, and Bhishma loves him like a son, that fine prince of dharma.” 


CANTO 102 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “O Scionof the House of Kuru, thus Bhishma 

\/ rules the kingdom with the support of Satyavati, when Vichitravirya 

is a boy. When his brother grows into a young man, the wise 
Bhishma decides to get him married. 

He hears that the king of Kasi is to hold a combined swayamvara for his 
three daughters, all said to be as beautiful as Apsaras. With Satyavati’s 
approval, Bhishma Maharatha, Parantapa, rides to Kasi in a single chariot. 

Shantanu’s son sees all the kings come from across the land, from every 
direction in the hope of winning one of the princesses’ favour; he sees the 
three exquisite Rajakumaris, each of whom would choose her own husband. 

As the names of the gathered kings are being recited, Bhishma declares 
that he chooses the three princesses to be his brother’s wives. In a flash, 
Ganga’s awesome son has the amazed young women in his chariot. He 
speaks to the assembled kings in a voice like the rumbling of thunderclouds. 

‘The Rishis have said a maiden may be given to an accomplished groom, 
by inviting him to the girl’s house and giving her away, decked in fine 
jewellery and with valuable dowry besides. 

Others might give their daughters away by accepting a pair of cows or 
bulls as brideprice. Yet others take gold for giving their daughters in 
matriage, while some men carry away their brides by force. 

Some men marry young women with their consent; others drug them 
into giving their consent; and still others by getting the permission of the 
girl’s parents. Some men marry wives for having sat or helped at yagnas. 

Of these, the Sages always laud the eighth form of marriage for 
Brahmanas. Kshatriyas however, approve of the fifth, swayamvara, where 
the girl consents herself and chooses her own groom. Kings marry by this 
custom. 


But the Rishis say that the wife taken by force, from a conclave of 
Kshatriyas invited to a swayamvara, after a battle, after slaying adversaries, 
is the most prized. Therefore, O Kshatriyas, look, I am taking these three by 
force for my brother. Do your best to stop me, if you dare; come, defeat me 
or be vanquished!’ 

With that the invincible Kuru prince Bhishma thunders away in his 
chariot with the three princesses. The challenged kings jump up, slapping 
their arms and their thighs in anger. Such a din they make, throwing down 
their fine ornaments in haste, and pulling on their armour. 

O Janamejaya, jewellery and armour being flung down and pulled on 
flashes like meteors in the night sky. Their great brows knit and eyes red 
with fury, the Kshatriyas rush towards the fine chariots that their sarathys 
bring, yoked to steeds of lofty pedigree. 

Weapons raised, and roaring, the magnificent Kshatriyas give hot chase 
to the great Kuru lord. Then, O Bharata, ensues the dreadful battle between 
all those warriors on one side and Bhishma on the other. Ten thousand 
arrows they shoot at him, at once, and he cuts them down with an incredible 
volley of shafts as numerous as the down on one’s body. 

The kings surround him and rain arrows on him like thunderclouds do 
upon the crest of a mountain. Bhishma not only stops that downpour of 
barbs, he pierces every king surrounding him with three arrows, in a flash. 
They strike him back with five arrows each. But the shafts fall off his 
mighty body like straws, Rajan, and he shoots each Kshatriya again with 
two arrows. 

The encounter swells and arrows stream around Bhishma’s chariot so 
that it becomes like the Devasura yuddha of old. Men that do not fight but 
only watch, brave men tremble. Bhishma breaks bows with his fusillades, 
cuts down flagstaffs, severs coats of armours and sloughs off human heads, 
in thousands. 

So light, swift and sure is his hand, so awesome his prowess and skill as 
he keeps them at bay, that soon the kings around him, their breath taken 
away, put down their weapons and begin to applaud him. With a quick bow, 
he turns his chariot and flashes away towards Hastinapura, capital of the 
Bharatas, taking the princesses with him. 

Suddenly, the Maharatha Salva roars out a challenge to Bhishma. He 
thunders towards Bhishma like a great tusker rushing at another and goring 


it with his tusks for the sake of a cow elephant in heat. Salva wants the 
princesses for himself and cries, ‘Stop and fight!’ to Bhishma. 

Bhishma, tiger among men, desiccator of enemy armies, blazes up in 
anger. He knits his great brow, reins in his chariot and, bow in hand, turns to 
face Salva: for this is Kshatriya dharma. The other kings grow still to watch 
this duel. 

The fight begins, and their roars are like the trumpeting of bull elephants 
that fight over a cow elephant in season. Salva shoots a hundred thousand 
arrows at Bhishma, quick as thinking. The other kings are wonderstruck by 
his archery and shout out their praise. 

Infuriated by the yells of the crowd of kings, Bhishma cries to his 
sarathy, “Ride at Salva! I will kill him as Garuda does a snake.’ 

Warding off Salva’s cloud of shafts, the peerless Kuru fits the Varunastra 
to his bowstring, and harries Salva’s four horses. And, O tiger among kings, 
in a flash Bhishma kills Salva’s charioteer, while he keeps his enemy’s fire 
at bay. Next moment, Shantanu’s son, fighting for the princesses, kills 
Salva’s pedigreed horses with the Aindrastra, Indra’s weapon. 

He shoots the bow out of Salva’s hands and has him in the eye of his 
arrow, but spares his life. Bhishma turns his chariot round and rides back 
towards Hastinapura. 

Bharatarishabha, the humiliated Salva returns to his kingdom, and rules 
again, justly. The other Kshatriyas who have come to the swayamvara do 
the same; they all go home empty-handed, and routed: those that do not die. 

Bhishma rides back like the wind, with his three prizes, towards 
Hastinapura, from where Vichitravirya, prince of dharma, rules the Earth as 
righteously as his father Shantanu had. Rajan, through many forests rides 
Bhishma; he fords many rivers, and arrives swiftly. 

The son of Ganga who flows into the Ocean, invincible Bhishma comes 
home to Hastinapura, having killed countless Kshatriyas; and not a scratch 
on him. He brings the daughters of the king of Kasi to the home of the 
Kurus, tenderly, as if they are his daughters-in-law, younger sisters, or his 
own daughters. Bhishma Mahabaho brings the lovely and accomplished 
princesses to Vichitravirya and offers them to his brother. 

Bhishma, knower of dharma, immediately begins to make preparations 
for a royal wedding. When all is ready and the arrangements have been 
made by Satyavati and Bhishma, the eldest princess from Kasi, Amba, says 
smiling shyly, ‘Long ago, I gave my heart to Salva, Lord of Saubha, and he 


too loved me. My father approved of our love and I would have chosen him 
at the swayamvara. Mighty Bhishma, you know dharma better than anyone. 
You decide what you must do.’ 

Bhishma falls thoughtful; he consults the Brahmanas present there, all 
knowers of the Veda; then he says to Amba, ‘Princess, you may do as you 
please.’ 

But he marries Ambika and Ambalika to Vichitravirya with every proper 
ritual. The handsome and youthful Vichitravirya is a virgin, a brahmacharin 
so far. But when he marries the exquisite princesses of Kasi desire seizes 
him powerfully. 

They are tall, these girls, their soft skin like liquid gold, their tresses 
thick and curly, their fingernails raised and red, their hips ample and 
rounded, and their breasts full and their cleavage deep. They bear every 
auspicious mark upon their ravishing bodies, and those young women of 
one of the oldest and noblest royal houses see the handsome Vichitravirya 
as being worthy of themselves in every way, and they love him 
passionately. For, indeed, he is as strong as a Deva and as handsome as the 
Aswin twins, and he could steal the heart of any woman. 

Seven rapturous years Vichitravirya spends with his two wives. Then, in 
the prime of his youth, he catches a galloping consumption. Those around 
him do everything in their power to effect a cure, but the Kuru prince dies, 
like the sun setting. 

Bhishma is stricken. Satyavati and he perform the last rites for the dead 
prince, solemnly, with many learned priests and all the great Kurus present, 
all of them shocked.” 


CANTO 103 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Grief-stricken herself, having lost her second 

\/ son, Satyavati performs the funeral rites for Vichitravirya, with her 

weeping daughters-in-law and the broken-hearted Bhishma, greatest 

of Kshatriyas. Then, summoning her great woman’s strength, she consoles 
them as best as she can. 

When the formal mourning is over, Satyavati thinks of dharma, she 
recalls the great ancestry of the Kuru line. She calls Bhishma and says, 
‘Now the pinda, the glory and the future of the line of the great Shantanu of 
the house of Kuru all depend on you. Just as Swarga and punya are 
inseparable, as longevity is inseparable from truth and faith, Bhishma and 
dharma are inseparable. 

Virtuous son, you know dharma in theory and in every detail of practice; 
you know all the Srutis, the Vedas and Vedangas. You are equal to Shukra 
and Angiras in steadfastness in dharma, in the knowledge of family 
tradition and customs, and you know that crises require unusual solutions. 
Therefore, O best of good men, I am relying on you to find a solution to our 
crisis. You must listen to me and then do as I say. Manavarishabha, your 
brother Vichitravirya, my son who you loved so much, has left us and gone 
childless to Swarga, when hardly more than a boy himself. 

Your brother’s wives, the young and lovely daughters of Kasiraja, want 
to become mothers. Mahabaho, mighty-armed, I command you to father 
children in your brother’s widows, so that the line of Kuru might have heirs. 
You must protect dharma from being lost. Crown yourself king now and 
rule the kingdom of the Bharatas. Take a wife and beget sons. Do not let 
your ancestors’ spirits fall into hell.’ 

Indeed, not only Satyavati but others in the palace, friends and kinsmen, 
say the same thing to Bhishma Parantapa. 


Bhishma replies, ‘Mother, what you are asking of me is certainly 
dharma. But don’t you know my vow that I will never beget children? 
Surely, you have not forgotten the brideprice that your father asked and 
which I readily gave: my solemn vow. 

Satyavati, I will renounce the three worlds, the empire of Swarga, 
anything that might exceed these, but I will never break my oath, or 
renounce the truth. The Earth may cease to be fragrant, Water might no 
longer be wet, Light may not illumine forms anymore, Air might relinquish 
its nature of touch, the Sun might cease to be glorious, the Moon might stop 
being cool, Agni might not burn anymore, Akasa might not create sruti, 
sound, Indra, who slew Vritra, might cease to be strong, Dharma may lose 
his impartiality, but I cannot abandon the truth or break my vow.’ 

Satyavati says to Bhishma, ‘Bhishma whose strength is dharma, I know 
that you never swerve from the truth. Why, with your dharma you can 
create another Swarga, Bhumi and Patala. 

Bhishma, I know that you swore your oath on my account. But now you 
must think of our crisis, and the dharma that you owe your ancestors. 
Parantapa, scourge of your enemies, you must ensure that the House of 
Kuru has an heir, that the line of father and son that has come down the ages 
since the dawn of time is not now broken. You must ensure that our well- 
wishers and kinsmen do not grieve, that our people do not grieve.’ 

Desperately, sobbing, she speaks, still pierced through by grief at the 
loss of her son, and it seems that she urges him to break his vow and 
dharma, too. 

Bhishma says, “O Queen, do not turn your face from dharma. Do not 
destroy us all. No Shastra ever tells a Kshatriya to break his solemn oath. 
Yet, I will tell you what Kshatriya dharma prescribes so that Shantanu’s 
bloodline does not become extinct. 

Listen to what I have to say, then consult with your learned and devout 
Brahmanas, and others who know the remedies that are allowed to alleviate 
a crisis, and also consider honourable social mores, before deciding what 
you will do.’” 


CANTO 104 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


Ce hishma continues, “In ancient days, wrathful at the death of his 

Ritter Jamadagni’s son Rama killed the Haihaya king Arjuna with 

his Parasu, his battle axe. Rama cut off the Haihaya’s thousand 

arms, which no one else could have hoped to do. Not content, he set out in 

his chariot to conquer the world. Bow in hand, spewing awesome astras, he 
ranged the Earth to raze the very race of Kshatriyas. 

Twenty-one times, single-handedly, he annihilated Kshatriya armies 
mustered to quell him, that illustrious Bhargava. And when he had indeed 
killed the last Kshatriya, Kshatriya women across the world resorted to 
Brahmanas, knowers of the Veda, to have children. 

The Vedas say that a son so begotten belongs to the man who marries the 
woman. The Kshatriya women went to the Brahmanas not from lust but for 
the sake of dharma. Indeed, the very Kshatriya race was thus revived. 

On this subject there is another olden tale, which I will tell you. In the 
most antique times, there was a great Rishi called Utathya. His wife was 
Mamata and he loved her dearly. One day, Utathya’s younger brother 
Tejasvin Brihaspati, Guru to the Devas, importuned Mamata. But she told 
that most eloquent of the great that she was pregnant by her husband, 
Brihaspati’s elder brother, and that he should not seek to lie with her. 

Mamata said, “Illustrious Brihaspati, the child in me has already imbibed 
the Vedas with their six Angas. How can my womb make space for another 
child? It does not become you to ask to satisfy your desire in me at this 
time.” 

But even the wise Brihaspati could not help himself and sought to thrust 
himself upon her. 

Then the child in her womb spoke to him, “Sire, stop! There is no room 
here for two, and I am already here. Wise one, do not make me suffer.” 


Brihaspati would not listen and still sought to have intercourse with 
Mamata of the most beautiful eyes. He grew enraged to hear what the child 
said, and cursed his brother’s Utathya’s son, “You dare speak to me from 
there at this moment of a pleasure that all creatures crave? I curse you to 
remain in darkness forever!” 

Because of Brihaspati’s curse Utathya’s child, whose tejas equalled 
Brihaspati’s own, was born blind. He was called Dirghatamas, enveloped in 
long darkness. Dirghatamas knew the Vedas, and was a true Sage, and 
though he was blind he married a beautiful Brahmana girl, Pradweshi. He 
fathered many children upon her, Gautama the eldest. But they were 
covetous and sinful. 

Dirghatamas, master of the Vedas, studied under Saurabhi’s son, and 
began to practise the rituals of that Tantrik order, fearlessly and reverently. 
The other Munis who lived in the asrama were outraged, seeing sin where 
none was, for Dirghatamas’ heart was pure, as were his intentions. 

Those Sages said, “This man has broken every law of dharma. He does 
not deserve to live among us anymore. Let us cast the sinner out!” 

They said worse about Dirghatamas, and then his wife turned on him as 
well. 

Dirghatamas said to Pradweshi, “Why do you also turn against me?” 

She replied hotly, “A husband is called the Bhartri because he supports 
his wife. He is called Pali because he protects her. But you neither support 
nor protect me, for despite all your tapasya, you are blind and it is I that 
support and protect you and your children. But from now I will not.” 

Dirghatamas was annoyed and said to her and her children, “Take me to 
the Kshatriyas and I will get you wealth.” 

His wife replied, “I do not want any riches that you get, for that will 
never make me happy. Brahmana, do what you like; I cannot look after you 
anymore.” 

Dirghatamas cried in rage, “I declare that from today all women shall 
have only one husband for life. Even if he dies, it shall be unlawful for her 
to take another man. The woman that breaks this law shall be a fallen 
woman. A woman without a husband shall always be inclined to sin. And 
even if she is wealthy she will not enjoy her wealth. Calumny and disrepute 
will darken her life.” 

Pradweshi screamed to her sons, “Throw him into the Ganga!” 


The evil Gautama and his brothers, slaves of greed and folly, said, “Why 
should we support this old fool?” 

They bound the Munito a raft, cast him to the mercy of the river, and 
came home with no twinge of conscience. The blind old man floated 
through the lands of many kings. One day, a king called Bali, a knower of 
dharma, went to the Ganga to perform his ablutions, when the raft bearing 
Dirghatamas floated up to him. Bali drew the raft ashore and untied the 
Sage. 

When he learnt who this Rishi was, the virtuous Bali said to him, 
“Maharishi, I am childless and I beg you to father some children of dharma 
and wisdom on my queen.” 

Dirghatamas of great tejas agreed. Bali built an asrama for the Rishi, 
installed him there and asked his queen Sudeshna to go to him. But when 
Sudeshna learnt that the Sage was old and blind, she did not go to him 
herself but sent her sakhi, a maidservant, in her place. 

Dirghatamas begot eleven children on that Sudra woman, Kakshivat the 
eldest. All eleven became masters of the Veda and chanters of the Brahman; 
all of them possessed great spiritual powers. 

One day, King Bali asked Dirghatamas, “Are these my children?” 

The Muni replied coldly, “No, they are mine. Your queen Sudeshna saw 
that I was old and blind and she insulted me by sending me her Sudra 
maidservant rather than coming to me herself. Kakshivat and his brothers 
are my sons begotten on the sakhi.” 

The king pacified Dirghatamas, begging his forgiveness. He sent his 
queen to the Sage. The Rishi only touched her with his fingers and said, 
“You will have five sons as glorious as Surya Deva. Call them Anga, Vanga, 
Kalinga, Pundra and Suhma. The kingdoms they found shall be known by 
their names.” 

Thus Bali’s lineage was continued by a Maharishi. So, indeed, many 
great warriors and Maharathas have been born to Kshatriya women by 
Brahmana fathers. 

You know my opinion now, mother; do as you see fit,’ says Bhishma to 
Satyavati.” 


CANTO 105 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


CC hishma continues, “Mother, this is how we can continue the royal 
line of Bharata. Let us offer substantial wealth to a great Brahmana 
Sage and have him father children upon Vichitravirya’s wives.’ 

Now smiling shyly, blushing, Satyavati says, ‘Bharata, Mahabaho, what 
you Say is true. I, too, have something to tell you in confidence. You are the 
punya of our House and its dharma, too; you will not refuse what I am 
going to ask you, when I have told you my secret, which no one else knows. 

My father was a man of dharma. For dharma he plied a ferry on the 
river, to help wayfarers make the crossing. One day, when I was in my early 
youth, the Maharishi Parasara wanted to cross the river and I was rowing 
him across. 

As we went, suddenly desire seized the Sage and he importuned me, 
softly. I was afraid of my father, but feared the Rishi’s curse more, if I 
refused him. He blessed me with a rare boon and then I could not refuse 
him. Parasara covered the river in thick fog, so that my father could not see 
us anymore and he took his pleasure of me in the boat. 

Until that day, my body had always smelled pungently of fish, but 
Parasara removed the stink and instead gave me the fragrance of heaven 
spreading on every side for a yojana. He also blessed me that though I 
would immediately give birth to his son upon an island in the stream, I 
would have my virginity restored to me. 

Bhishma, my son by Parasara Muni has become a great Sage of 
profound tapasya. For where he was born, he is called Dwaipayana. He has 
divided the Veda in four to suit our times; he is also called Vyasa, the 
arranger, or divider. He is dark of complexion and is also known as Krishna. 

He is perfectly truthful, free from passion, a mighty Yogin, who has 
made ashes of all his sins with tapasya. For, he went away with his father as 
soon as he was born. 


If I summon him here, and we both ask him to beget children on Ambika 
and Ambalika, he will not refuse us. He is a glorious one himself and will 
sire wonderful sons. 

When he left, that day, and he was full-grown as soon as he was born, he 
said to me, “Mother, think of me if you need me and I will come to you.” 

If you wish, O Bhishma, I will summon Dwaipayana even now. If you 
agree, Mahabaho, he will certainly sow his seed in Vichitravirya’s field.’ 

When he hears the Maharishi’s name, Bhishma joins his palms together 
and says, “The intelligent man regards dharma, artha and kama judiciously. 
He considers these patiently and carefully, then acts in a manner so that 
dharma leads to more dharma, artha to further artha, and kama to future 
kama: virtue, profit and pleasure. 

Mother, what you have suggested conforms to dharma and must lead to 
artha and kama. It is the best course, and you have my complete consent.’ 

O Kuru, Satyavati now thinks of her son Dwaipayana. The Muni has 
engaged himself in interpreting the Vedas, but as soon as he senses his 
mother summoning him, he appears before her in a moment. Satyavati 
greets her son, embraces him, bathing him in her tears, for the fisherman’s 
daughter has not seen him since he was born. 

Maharishi Vyasa sees his mother crying and tenderly washes her tears 
with cool water. Then, bowing to her, he says, ‘I have come, mother, to do 
your bidding. Tell me what you want that I may satisfy your wish.’ 

The family priest of the Bharatas now worships the Maharishi formally, 
and Vyasa accepts his offerings, chanting the apposite mantras. Gratified by 
that adoration, he sits in the high chair offered him. 

When he sits, Satyavati makes the customary inquiries about his well- 
being and his life, then says, ‘Most learned one, sons are born through both 
their mother and their father; they belong equally to both parents. The 
mother wields as much right and power over her son as his father does. 

By law, O Brahmarishi, you are my firstborn, my eldest son; and 
Vichitravirya is my youngest. Just as Bhishma is Vichitrvirya’s brother on 
his father’s side, you are Vichitravirya’s brother on his mother’s side, and 
yours. 

I am not certain what you will think or say but I am going to tell you 
what I think and want from you. Shantanu’s son Bhishma refuses, because 
of dharma and his vow that he once swore, either to become king or to 
beget children. So, out of love for your brother Vichitravirya, in order to 


continue this royal line come down from Bharata himself, because Bhishma 
asks you and because I command you as your mother, out of compassion 
for all the living, for the protection of the people and from the generosity of 
your heart, sinless one, you must do what I ask. 

Your younger brother has left behind two widows of youth, beauty and 
grace which compare with those of the Devastris. For the sake of dharma 
and moksha, they want to have children. You are the ideal person to make 
mothers of them. So, my child, beget sons on Ambika and Ambalika, sons 
worthy of this House and worthy to continue the royal lineage of Bharata.’ 

Vyasa listens to this quietly, then says, “Satyavati, you know what 
dharma is both in this life and the next. Also, you are devoted to dharma. 
So, at your command, with dharma as my motive, as well, I will do what 
you ask. 

Indeed, what you ask conforms to Sanatana Dharma, and I will beget 
sons on my brother’s wives, sons who shall be like Mitra and Varuna. I will 
give them a stern vrata to keep for a year, and then they shall be purified. 
For no woman who is not pure can come near me, let alone bear my sons.’ 

Satyavati says, ‘Anagha, sinless, do what is needed for the princesses to 
conceive immediately, for danger threatens. In a kingdom that has no king, 
the people are destroyed without protection; sacrifices no longer take place; 
evil holds sway; the clouds send down no rain and the gods vanish. A 
kingdom without a king is quickly destroyed. 

No, my daughters-in-law must conceive at once. Bhishma will watch 
over the children while they are in their mother’s wombs.’ 

Vyasa says, ‘If I am to impregnate my brother’s wives unseasonably, 
then let them bear my ugliness, and that shall be the sorest penance for 
them. Let the Kosala princess bear my smell, my grim and ugly face, my 
filthy clothes and my black body, and she will conceive an excellent child.’ 

Vyasa then says to Satyavati, ‘Let her wear clean clothes, put on her 
ornaments and wait for me in her bedchamber,’ and he vanishes before her 
eyes. 

Satyavati goes to her daughter-in-law Ambika, privately, and says to her, 
‘O Kosala princess, listen to me for what I have to say is dharma. From my 
ill fortune the race of Bharata has become extinct. Seeing me grieve and 
faced with the end of his father’s line, Bhishma has suggested a solution, 
which, however, depends on you. 


Do this for dharma, my daughter, and resurrect the lost lineage of 
Bharata. O child of the fair hips, bring forth a child as resplendent as the 
king of the Devas. Let him inherit the kingdom and bear its heavy burden.’ 

Ambika demurs at first, when she hears what is being asked of her, but 
Satyavati insists and finally, with great reluctance and anxiety, the chaste 
Ambika is persuaded that what she is being asked to do is no violation of 
dharma. To celebrate, Satyavati feeds Brahmanas, Rishisand numerous 
other Sadasyas who arrive for the occasion; she feeds them a banquet.” 


CANTO 106 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


cc hen, Ambika’s next period is over. Satyavati bathes her and takes 

her to the bedchamber. Making her sit upon the luxurious bed, 

Satyavati says to her daughter-in-law, ‘Kosala princess, your 

husband has an elder brother, my firstborn son. He will come to you tonight 
and enter your womb as seed. Do not sleep, but wait for him.’ 

Satyavati leaves and the beautiful princess lies back on the bed. In her 
mind, she prays to Bhishma and the other elders of the Kuru House. Then 
Dwaipayana enters that room in which a taper burns. Ambika sees him, 
dark as a moonless night, with coppery matted jata hanging down to his 
shoulders, his beard thick and unkempt, his eyes like fire, and with a shiver 
and a moan of terror Ambika shuts her eyes tightly. 

But having given his word to his mother, Dwaipayana takes her, while 
she lies beneath him trembling and never once opens her eyes. When he has 
finished he emerges from that chamber and immediately Satyavati accosts 
him. 

Excitedly she demands, ‘Will the princess have a great son?’ 

Vyasa replies, ‘He will be as strong as ten thousand elephants. He will be 
a Rajarishi, of great learning, intellect and energy. He will beget a hundred 
sons. But because of his mother’s sin against me, that she never opened her 
eyes when I was with her, he will be born blind.’ 

Dismayed, Satyavati says, “Muni, how can a blind man become a worthy 
king of the Kurus? How will he protect his clan and uphold the ancient 
glory of his father’s race? You must give the Kurus another prince, who can 
be king.’ 

Vyasa says, ‘So be it,’ and vanishes. In due time, Ambika gives birth to a 
blind son, a mighty boy. 

Now Satyavati goes to Ambalika, her younger daughter-in-law, and once 
more tells her what she wants from her — to conceive a child by Vyasa. 


Securing her consent, Satyavati summons Vyasa again. 

Dwaipayana comes again and goes in to Ambalika, who sees him and 
turns white as a sheet from fright and remains thus. O Bharata, Vyasa keeps 
his word to his mother and sows his seed in Ambalika, too. 

But as he is leaving, he says to her, ‘Because you turned pale to see my 
face, your son shall be born pale, an albino with no pigment in his skin. 
Beautiful princess, your son shall be called Pandu, the pale one.’ 

With that, he leaves the chamber, that best of Rishis. His mother is 
waiting for him in the corridor to ask about this child he has fathered. 
Dwaipayana tells her that he would be white and named Pandu. 

Satyavati begs him to father one more son, on Ambika again. 

‘So be it,’ Vyasa Muni gives her his word. 

Nine months pass and Ambalika gives birth to a son who is indeed 
without colour in his skin, a pale child, an albino. Yet he is radiantly 
handsome and bears every auspicious mark upon his body. Later, he, Pandu, 
would become the father of those five matchless bowmen, the Pandavas. 

Again, when Ambika has just finished her period and is in her fertile 
time, Sayavati goes to her and says that she must receive Vyasa once more. 
Ambika, as lovely as a Deva’s daughter, remembers how grim and fierce 
Vyasa had been; she remembers the strong smell of his body. 

She does not go to Vyasa herself, but sends a maid of hers instead. This 
woman is as beautiful herself as an Apsara and she waits for the Rishi, 
wearing her mistress’ ornaments. 

When Vyasa comes in, the maid rises and greets him reverently. She 
welcomes him and waits on him respectfully and when he calls her to him 
she does not demur but goes gladly. O King, that stern Rishi is well pleased 
with her. 

When he rises to leave, he says, “Beautiful, humble one, you will no 
longer be a slave. Your son will be the most intelligent of men, fortunate, 
wise, and of unswerving dharma. I, Vyasa, bless you.’ 

Rajan, that son of Krishna Dwaipayana begotten on a maidservant is 
Vidura. He is the brother of Dhritarashtra, the eldest, and the illustrious 
Pandu. 

Vidura is free from the bonds of desire and passion; he is a master of the 
laws of kingship and governance; why, he is Dharma Deva, God of Truth, 
born on Earth through the curse of the Rishi Mandavya. Emerging from his 
encounter with Ambika’s maid, Vyasa meets Satyavati again and tells her 


how her daughter-in-law has deceived her, and that he has begotten a son in 
the Sudra woman whom the princess sent to him. 

Then Vyasa vanishes before her eyes, just as he had come. Thus, in 
Vichitravirya’s field, his elder brother Dwaipayana sows his seed, and from 
him are born sons as splendid as children of Heaven, to continue the race of 
Kuru.” 


CANTO 107 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


anamejaya asked, “What did Dharma Deva do that he was cursed? Who 
Ji the Rishi who cursed him to be born a Sudra?” 

Vaisampayana said, “There was a Brahmana called Mandavya. He 
knew dharma and devoted himself to truth and tapasya. The Maharishi sat 
under a tree just outside his asrama, his arms raised skyward and keeping a 
vow of silence. 

For years he sat thus, when one day a band of thieves, laden with booty, 
arrived in his hermitage. Bharatarishabha, some of the king’s soldiers were 
hot on the heels of those thieves and in panic they ran into Mandavya’s 
asrama and hid there. 

Almost immediately, the pursuers arrived and saw the Rishi under his 
tree. 

They asked him, ‘O Muni, which way did the thieves go? Show us 
before they escape.’ 

Rajan, the Rishi made no response at all. The soldiers entered the asrama 
and discovered the robbers with their plunder. Now the king’s men 
suspected the Sage as well, and seized him and brought Mandavya before 
the king. The king sentenced him to be executed with the thieves. 

The king’s men impaled the renowned Muni with the bandits, and gave 
the king the gold they had recovered. Though impaled on a stake, and given 
neither food nor drink, the Rishi Mandavya did not die. 

With his tapasya shakti, his ascetic power, he summoned other Rishis to 
him. They came at night as birds, and saw him impaled but deep in dhyana. 
The Sages were grief-stricken. 

They spoke to Mandavya, telling him who they were. They asked, 
‘Brahmana, tell us what sin you committed that you are suffering this 
dreadful torture.’” 


CANTO 108 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “That tiger among Munis answered those Rishis 
\/ rich in tapasya, ‘Who shall I blame for this? Only myself.’ 

Hearing him speak after being impaled for so long, the king’s 
soldiers rushed to tell the king about the miracle. Now the king consulted 
his ministers and realised his folly: that he had impaled a true Sage. He ran 
to where the stake was planted and began to pacify the Rishi who hung on 
it. 

The king said, ‘O Mahamuni, I have done you great harm in my 
ignorance. I beg you, forgive me. I beg you do not be angry.’ 

Mandavya was pacified. When the king saw anger ebb from the Sage’s 
face, he had the stake taken down and attempted to remove it from the 
Rishi’s body. But he could not, so he cut it off where it entered the Sage’s 
person; and that greatest of Rishis continued his life with a portion of the 
stake inside him. He walked, performed the most rigorous tapasya, and 
attained countless lofty realms that others could not dream of. 

For the portion of the stake that remained inside his body, he became 
known through the three worlds as Ani Mandavya: Mandavya with the 
stake within. 

One day, that Brahmana who knew the highest dharma went to the home 
of Dharma Deva, God of Justice. Seeing Dharma upon his lofty throne, the 
Rishi asked reproachfully, ‘Tell me what sin I have committed that I am 
punished like this. Tell me now, and behold my tapasya shakti!’ 

Dharma Deva replied, ‘Once you impaled a little insect on a blade of 
grass; this is your payment for that sin. O Rishi, just as daana, charity, 
however small, bears great fruit, multiplied many times over, so does paapa, 
sin, bring pain in its wake, inexorably.’ 

Ani Mandavya asked, “Tell me when I committed this sin because I 
cannot remember.’ 


Said Dharma, ‘When you were a child.’ 

The Rishi said, “The Shastras do not recognise any sin done by a child 
until his twelfth year. The punishment you have inflicted on me is unjust, 
out of all proportion. 

Dharma Deva, Brahmahatya, killing a Brahmana, is a sin greater than 
killing any other living being. You have committed Brahmahatya, O God of 
Justice, and for that you shall be born as a Sudra in the world! 

Also, from today I declare that no sin committed by a child below 
fourteen years shall be any sin or punishable, but only by those above 
fourteen.’ 

Cursed by that illumined Rishi, Dharma Deva is born as Vidura to a 
Sudra mother. Vidura is learned indeed, with an uncanny knowledge of 
dharma, of politics, and of artha too. He is absolutely without greed and 
anger. Having deep foresight and an imperturbable mind, he is always 
selflessly devoted to the welfare of the House of Kuru.” 


CANTO 109 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “When those three children are _ born, 

\/ Kurujungala, Kurukshetra, knows untold prosperity. The Earth yields 

unprecedented harvests, and the bountiful crops are all uncommonly 

flavoursome. The clouds bring rains in season, and the trees bring forth 

flowers and fruit. Draught cattle are contented and the wild birds and beasts, 
too, are full of delight. 

Flowers are fragrant and fruit sweet; merchants, artisans, traders and 
artists of every kind teem in towns and cities, and thrive. The people are all 
brave, learned, honest and happy. There are no robbers then, nor does 
anyone sin. It seems as if a Satya Yuga, a golden age, permeates every 
corner of the kingdom. 

The people are devout, truthful, follow dharma, perform yagnas, are 
generous and charitable, and full of love for one another; and they prosper. 
They are free from pride, anger and greed; they are pure-hearted and find 
delight in natural and innocent things. 

Hastinapura, capital of the Kurus, is another Amaravati, as full of beauty 
and joy as the sea is with water. Hundreds of great palaces and mansions 
line its wide avenues and highways; its lofty gates and archways are dark as 
clouds. 

Elsewhere in the kingdom, the people swim and frolic in rivers, lakes 
and tanks; they roam and sport in charmed forests and airy woods. The 
southern Kurus, in virtuous rivalry with their northern kinsmen, keep 
company with Siddhas, Charanas and Rishis. 

Throughout the blessed kingdom, no Kuru man is miserly and no woman 
a widow. The wells and lakes are always full of sweet water; the forests are 
rich with wonderful trees; the homes of Brahmanas are full of riches, and 
life is a constant and joyful celebration. 


O King, Bhishma rules the kingdom with dharma and he covers it with 
hundreds of yupastambas, sacrificial posts. Indeed Bhishma’s rule brings 
such contentment to the Kuru kingdom that people from other kingdoms 
migrate to Kuru lands, swelling the population. 

And the people all watch the three splendid young Kuru princes grow 
and are full of hope for the future, as well. O Rajan, in the homes of the 
Kuru nobility you could always hear the words give and come eat with us. 

From their very births, Bhishma raises Dhritarashtra, Pandu and the 
exceptionally intelligent Vidura like his own sons. With every prescribed 
and successive ritual of their varna being performed timely for them, the 
princes devote themselves to vratas and study. 

They grow into truly exceptional youths, versed in the Vedas and skilled 
at all sports. They become excellent bowmen, horsemen, mace-fighters, 
swordsmen, elephant warriors, and deep scholars of dharma. They know 
Itihasa, the Puranas and all the arts and sciences. They know the great truths 
and wisdom enshrined in the Vedas and the Vedangas; their education is 
profound and extensive. 

Pandu is soon the best of all archers, while Dhritarashtra is the strongest 
man; and no one is Vidura’s equal in his knowledge of and devotion to 
dharma, to virtue and morality. Seeing the extinct line of Shantanu restored, 
people the world over begin to say that, among mothers of Kshatriyas, the 
princesses of Kasi are foremost; of kingdoms Kurujungala is the best; of 
men of dharma Vidura is the finest; and of cities Hastinapura has no rival. 

Dhritarashtra is blind and Vidura is the son of a Sudra woman, so Pandu 
becomes king. One day Bhishma, first among those that know the 
Rajaneeti, the code of kings, as well as the laws of dharma, calls Vidura, 
wise in matters of the spirit himself.” 


CANTO 110 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


cc hishma says, ‘Ours is an ancient and glorious royal line, shining 

Bitroust the ages with the lustre of countless magnificent kings of 

dharma. The enlightened Krishna Dwaipayana, Satyavati and I 

myself have raised you three princes, so that the royal lineage of Kuru does 
not become extinct. 

You and I must see to it, my wise Vidura, that our dynasty grows again 
and expands like the very sea. I have heard that there are three princesses 
worthy of being married into our house. The first is the daughter of 
Surasena of the Yadavas; the second is Subala’s daughter, the Gandhara 
princess; and the third is the princess of Madra. 

My son, all three are of the purest descent, beautiful and accomplished 
as well; truly, they are fit to marry into our royal house. Most intelligent 
child, I feel that we should make these princesses and no others our 
daughters-in-law, to continue our race. But tell me what you think, Vidura.’ 

Vidura replies, “You are our father and our mother, as well. You are our 
Guru. Do whatever you think is best for us.’ 

Soon after this, Bhishma hears from some Brahmanas that Subala’s 
lovely daughter Gandhari has worshipped Lord Siva, and Hara has granted 
her a boon that she would have a hundred sons. Bhishma, the Kuru 
patriarch, immediately sends his messengers to the Gandhara king, asking 
for his daughter’s hand for Dhritarashtra. 

At first, King Subala is reluctant because Dhritarashtra is blind. 
However, when he thinks of the prince’s ancestry, and the majesty and 
dharma of the House of Kuru, he agrees to give his devout daughter to 
become Dhritarashtra’s wife. 

When the chaste and deeply religious Gandhari hears that her husband to 
be is blind, she puts on a blindfold to share her husband’s disability, which 
she would never remove until the very end of her life. 


Subala’s son Shakuni brings his beautiful sister, in the flower of her 
youth, to Hastinapura and formally gives her away to Dhritarashtra. Under 
Bhishma’s watchful and loving eye, Gandhari is received with great honour, 
and the wedding ceremony is conducted with great pomp and celebration. 

The valiant Shakuni brings a fine dowry for his sister, and many costly 
garments and ornaments, and Bhishma welcomes him with respect. When 
the marriage has been solemnised, he returns to his own city. 

O Scion of the Bharatas, the beautiful Gandhari pleases all the Kurus 
with her demeanour, her affection and her reverent attention to her elders. 
She is a perfectly devoted wife, so chaste that she never so much as speaks 
another man’s name or refers to an elder by their name.” 


CANTO 111 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “There is a Yadava chieftain called Sura; he 

\/ is Vasudeva’s father. He has a daughter called Pritha who is the most 

beautiful young woman on Earth. O Bharata, the honest Sura gives 

this firstborn child of his to his childless cousin, his father’s sister’s son 
Kuntibhoja, whom he loves and to whom he has promised his first child. 

In the palace of her foster-father, where she is called Kunti because 
Kuntibhoja so dotes on her, Pritha has charge of the household, especially 
of looking after visiting Brahmanas and other guests. 

Once, the dreaded Durvasa Muni, famed as much for his quick and fierce 
temper as his spiritual greatness and profound knowledge of the recondite 
aspects of dharma, comes to visit Kuntibhoja. Pritha looks after him so well 
and worshipfully that the great Sage, who indeed has clear foreknowledge 
of the curse that Pandu would one day incur in the forest, teaches her a 
mantra by which she can summon any Deva she chooses to give her 
children. 

Durvasa says, “Any Deva you summon shall come and give you 
children.’ 

After the Rishi leaves, curiosity gets the better of Kunti. One day, she 
says the mantra thinking of Arka: Surya Deva, the Sun God. As soon as she 
says the secret words, the refulgent deity, witness of the world, appears 
before her. 

That exquisite princess, no flaw in her features, is awe-stricken. The Sun 
God Vivaswat comes near her and says, ‘Black eyes, here I am, now say 
what you want from me.’ 

Trembling, Kunti says, ‘O bane of your enemies, a Rishi taught me this 
mantra as a boon. Lord, I was curious and said it only to see if it actually 
worked. I beg your forgiveness; my lord, whatever her offence a woman 
must always be forgiven.’ 


Surya replies, ‘I know that Durvasa gave you this boon. But sweet, shy 
girl, do not be afraid and come to me. Lovely woman, you cannot summon 
a Deva in vain; my coming must bear fruit. You have called me and if it is 
for nothing, you shall incur sin for sure.’ 

Vivaswat says many sweet things to her, but, O Bharata, she would not 
go to him out of modesty and fear of her family. 

Bharatarishabha, blazing Akra says again, ‘Princess you will not sin if 
you come to me, for I desire you.’ 

Then he would not be resisted anymore, and the irradiant Tapana, who 
illumines the Universe, has his way with Kuntibhoja’s delicate daughter. 
From their union, immediately, is born a splendorous son, clad in natural 
golden armour and earrings, who would become renowned throughout the 
world as Karna. 

Karna is to be the greatest of all warriors, blessed with fortune and as 
handsome as a Deva child. As soon as he is born, the lustrous Tapana 
restores her virginity to Pritha and vanishes back into Devaloka. 

Now the Vrishni princess despairs that she has borne an illegitimate son 
and begins to think feverishly about what she should do. Out of her fear of 
her relatives and her father, and the censure of the world, she decides to 
keep her folly secret. She floats her divine child of supernatural prowess 
down the river in a wooden box. 

A famous Suta, whose wife is Radha, sees the shining infant floating 
upon the current and brings him home to his wife. The couple looks at his 
golden kavacha and kundala in wonderment, and names him Vasusena: he 
who is born with wealth. 

Blessed with prodigious strength and genius, as he grows, he becomes 
expert at wielding weapons of every kind. Owning terrific energy, he would 
worship the Sun from dawn to high noon, until his back is hot from the rays 
of Arka. During the hours of his worship, there is nothing on Earth that the 
valiant and brilliant Vasusena would not grant as a boon to any Brahmana 
who asks him for one. 

One day, knowing that this magnificent warrior could kill his son 
Arjuna, Phalguni, Indra comes to Vasusena during his time of worship. 
Indra comes as a Brahmana and asks for Vasusena’s kavacha, the golden 
armour with which he has been born: as alms. Vasusena folds his hands 
reverently, cuts the armour from his body and gives it to Indra. The king of 


the Devas is so moved by the generosity and the truth of Karna that he, in 
turn, gives Vasusena an irresistible weapon, a shakti. 

Indra says, ‘This shakti of mine will kill any Deva, Asura, Manava, 
Gandharva, Naga or Rakshasa, anyone at all that you use it against. But it 
will kill just one enemy and then return to me forever.’ 

Until that day, Surya’s son has been called only Vasusena, but when he 
cuts the natural kavacha from his body and gives it to Indra, he becomes 
Karna, he who cut the armour from himself.” 


CANTO 112 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Kuntibhoja’s daughter, Pritha of the large eyes, is 

V/ not only exquisite, she is a most accomplished and capable young 

woman. She is virtuous, youthful, and possesses every desirable 
feminine quality. Yet, strangely, no Kshatriya comes to ask for her hand. 

Kuntibhoja arranges a swayamvara for his princess, and invites kings 
and princes from across the length and breadth of Bharatavarsha to attend it. 
As soon as she enters the arena where her hopeful suitors have gathered, her 
eyes sees just one of them — Pandu, king of the Bharatas, tiger among kings. 

She sees him regal as a lion, his chest wide, eyes like a bull’s, rippling 
with tremendous strength, making all the other kings seem plain beside him, 
for he is as magnificent as Indra. Kuntibhoja’s lovely daughter, no trace of 
any flaw among her features, trembles to look at Pandu. It is as if the sight 
of him pierces her through. 

Going forward shyly, her head bent, her hands quivering with powerful 
emotion, she drapes the garland of flowers in her hand around Pandu’s 
neck. When the other kings see Kunti choose Pandu, they return to their 
kingdoms as they had come, on elephants, horses, and in chariots. When the 
others have gone, Kuntibhoja has the wedding ceremony performed. O 
King, the Kuru prince blessed with great fortune and the daughter of 
Kuntibhoja are as radiant a couple as Maghavat and Paulomi, Indra and his 
queen Sachi. 

Best of Kuru kings, when the wedding ceremonies are over, Kuntibhoja 
gives his son-in-law great wealth and sends the couple back to Hastinapura. 
The Kuru prince Pandu returns triumphantly to his capital, with his vast 
army holding aloft and waving bright and colourful flags and banners, with 
Brahmanas singing his praises, and Maharishis chanting benedictions. 

Entering his palace, Pandu ensconces his queen therein.” 


CANTO 113 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “A while later, Bhishma wants Pandu to 

V/ marry a second wife. Taking an army, with elephants, horses, 

chariots and footsoldiers, taking court elders, Brahmanas and great 
Rishis with him, he goes to the capital of the king of Madra. 

When the bull of the Balhikas, the Madra king, hears of Bhishma’s 
arrival, he comes out of his city gates to receive him. Welcoming him 
reverentially, he brings the great Kuru into his palace, where he offers him a 
chaste white carpet to sit upon, padya, water to wash his feet, arghya; and 
he pays him every customary and formal homage. 

Later, when they sit together at their ease, the king asks Bhishma why he 
has come. Bhishma, supporter of the honour of the Kurus, says to that king, 
‘Parantapa, I have come seeking the hand of a princess. We have heard that 
you have a sister called Madri, blessed with great beauty and every virtue, 
as well. I want my brother Pandu to marry her. 

O King, you are perfectly worthy of an alliance with us, as are we with 
you. Consider this, and accept my proposal.’ 

The sovereign of Madra replies, “To my mind, there is no other royal 
family on Earth with whom I can enter into an alliance. But in our family 
we have a custom, which all my ancestors observed, for good or bad. I 
cannot break the tradition, which is a well-known one and no doubt you are 
familiar with it. Bhishma, it is not apposite that you just say to me, Give me 
your Sister. 

You know the custom of which I speak, and that is our family tradition. 
For us that is dharma, and we must preserve it. This is the only reason why, 
Parantapa, I cannot accede unconditionally to your request.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘The custom to which you allude is certainly dharma. 
Why, Brahma himself has said so. Your ancestors upheld the tradition, and 
no fault can be found with it. It is established, O Salya, that the tradition 


relating to family honour finds approval with the Sages and all the 
virtuous.’ 

And Bhishma, of blazing tejas, gives Salya gold beyond count, coined 
and uncoined, jewels of every hue in thousands, numberless elephants, 
horses and chariots, rich cloths and incomparable ornaments, yes, great 
pearls and resonant corals from the sea as well. 

Salya receives these priceless gifts joyfully, and then gives his sister, 
wearing rich silk and jewellery past compare, to that bull of the House of 
Kuru. The sage Bhishma, son of the ocean-going Ganga, delightedly takes 
Madri back to Hastinapura, the city named for the elephant. 

There, on an auspicious day and time, chosen by the Brahmana 
astrologers, King Pandu marries the princess Madri. When the wedding 
ceremony is concluded, the Kuru king installs his second wife in regal 
apartments. 

Rajadhiraja, Pandu then enjoys his two lovely wives, why, unto the very 
limits of his desire. When thirty days have passed, Pandu goes forth from 
Hastinapura to conquer the world. 

He prostrates himself before Bhishma and the other elders of the Kuru 
clan, bids fond farewell to Dhritarashtra and to every other member of the 
family. With their blessings and leave, he sets out on his grand campaign, 
taking with him an immense force of elephants, horses and chariots. He 
goes well pleased by the blessings chanted over him and the auspicious 
rituals performed for his success by the priests and the people. 

Taking an awesome army with him, Pandu goes forth against myriad 
enemies. That tiger among men, who is to spread the fame of the Kurus 
across the world, first subdues the bandit tribes of Asarna. He next turns his 
army of countless elephants, horsemen, footsoldiers and charioteers, flying 
standards of many brilliant colours, against Dhirga, haughty king of 
Magadha, who has given offence to more kings than a few. 

Pandu attacks his capital and slays him. The Kuru empties Dhirga’s 
treasury, takes all his chariots and other vehicles, and his numberless beasts 
of burden. 

Pandu next marches to Mithila and subjugates the Videhas. Then, 
Manavarishabha, he leads his army against Kasi, Sumbha, and Pundra, and 
by his prowess spreads the fame and empire of the Kurus. 

Indeed, Pandu Parantapa is like some great conflagration sweeping 
across the Earth, its flames his arrows, its lustre the weapons of his legions, 


and consuming every king and Kshatriya who dares stand against him. 
Those whom he vanquishes, along with their armies, become vassals of the 
Kurus. 

Finally, every king is subdued and they all look upon Pandu as the Devas 
do Indra in Heaven. With folded hands, they pay him homage and bring 
him tribute of every rare kind: jewels and gold, pearls and corals from 
ocean deeps, silver and superior kine, exceptional steeds, chariots and great 
war elephants, donkeys, camels and buffaloes, goats and sheep, beautiful 
blankets and hides, and furs. 

The king of Hastinapura takes these offerings and returns to his capital, 
to the delight of his people. Joyfully, the citizens and the noblemen all now 
say, ‘The fame and achievements of the great Shantanu, tiger among kings, 
and indeed of Rajarishi Bharata were about to be extinguished. But Pandu 
has restored them; indeed, he has swelled the glory of the House of Kuru. 
He has crushed those that steal land and wealth from us, and they now pay 
him tribute.’ 

When Pandu returns from his expedition, Bhishma and all the people of 
Hastinapura come out of the city to receive him. They have not gone far, 
when they see the king’s servitors laden with the extravagant spoils of war 
—a train of every kind of conveyance, bearing wealth of every sort, 
elephants, horses, bullocks, camels and other beasts of burden—a train so 
long that they cannot see its end. 

Then Pandu sees Bhishma and comes to prostrate himself at the 
patriarch’s feet; he greets every other elder and citizen according to their 
status. Bhishma embraces Pandu, who is like a son to him, in great joy, for 
has he not ground the enemies of the Kurus underfoot? Bhishma weeps for 
Joy. 

Finally, borne upon a veritable tide of joy, Pandu enters Hastinapura 
triumphantly, to a resounding flourish of trumpets, conches and kettle- 
drums.” 


CANTO 114 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Then, at Dhritarashtra’s command, Pandu offers 

\/ the spoils of his conquests to Bhishma, to Satyavati, and to Ambika 

and Ambalika. He gives some of the wealth to Vidura, as well as his 

other kinsmen. All these are well pleased with him, and his great prowess. 

Especially his mother Ambalika is beside herself for joy, and embraces her 

peerless son, with delight equal to that of Sachi when she embraced 

Jayanta. Using the wealth that Pandu won, Dhritarashtra® performs five 

Mahayagnas that are like a hundred great Aswamedhas; the offerings made 

to the Brahmanas during these sacrifices are counted in hundreds and 
thousands, be it gold, jewels or sacred cows. 

Soon after, O Bharatarishabha, the triumphant Pandu goes into the forest 
with his wives Kunti and Madri. He leaves the luxury of his palace, with its 
soft beds, and devotes himself assiduously to the hunt. He begins living in a 
charmed jungle of great sala trees, on the southern foothills of the 
Himalaya, and ranges that forest in complete abandon. 

The handsome Pandu roams those pristine jungles with his two wives 
quite like Airavata with two she-elephants, grandly. The forest-dwellers see 
the magnificent Bharata prince, with his sword, his bow and arrows, his 
gleaming armour, with Kunti and Madri, and they feel certain that he is a 
Deva come amongst them. 

At Dhritarashtra’s command, his servants keep busy seeing that Pandu is 
supplied with everything he needs for his pleasure in the wilderness. 

Meanwhile, Bhishma hears that King Devaka has a young and exquisite 
daughter by a Sudra wife. Bhishma fetches her from her father’s home and 
marries her to the wise Vidura. Vidura begets many children upon her, all as 
virtuous and accomplished as himself.” 


© There seems to be some ambiguity about who was, in fact, the king, 
Pandu or Dhritarashtra 


CANTO 115 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “O Janamejaya, Dhritarashtra fathers a hundred 

\/ sons on Gandhari, and another son upon a Vaisya wife. Pandu has 

five sons by Kunti and Madri, all of them Maharathas, their natural 
fathers being Devas, invoked by Kunti to continue the Kuru lineage.” 

Janamejaya said, “Dvijottama, how did Gandhari give birth to a hundred 
sons? How many years did this take her? How long were they destined to 
live? Tell us how Dhritarashtra begot his son upon a Vaisya woman. How 
did Dhritarashtra treat his loving, always obedient, and chaste queen 
Gandhari? 

Tell us in detail how Pandu had five sons, the Maharathas, even after the 
Maharishi, whom he kills, cursed him. Ah, I am still athirst to hear 
everything about my sires.” 

Vaisampayana said, “One day, Dwaipayana comes to Hastinapura, tired 
and hungry. Gandhari lavishes her reverential hospitality upon him, and 
well pleased, the Rishi grants her the boon she wants from him: that she 
will bear a hundred sons, each one as strong and accomplished as 
Dhritarashtra. 

Soon after, Gandhari conceives and she carries the great burden in her 
womb for two years, but does not deliver. She is in anguish and pain, when 
she hears that Kunti has borne a son who is as radiant as the morning Sun. 

Demented by the news, especially after her long discomfort, Gandhari 
strikes herself in the belly, violently, without Dhritarashtra knowing. At 
once, she is delivered of a single mass of flesh, hard as a ball of iron. She is 
about to have it cast away, when Dwaipayana arrives there, having intuited 
what has happened. 

That Maharishi sees the solid ball of flesh and cries to Subala’s daughter, 
‘What did you do?’ 


Gandhari does not lie, but says, ‘I heard that Kunti has borne a son as 
splendid as Surya Deva, and struck my womb in grief. O Muni, you said 
that I would have a hundred sons but all I have is this lump of flesh.’ 

Vyasa says, ‘Gandhari, my words shall never prove false; no falsehood 
has ever left my lips, even in jest. Have a hundred pots full of ghee fetched 
at once. Meanwhile, let the lump of flesh be sprinkled with cool water.’ 

When the lump of flesh is sprinkled with cool water, Vyasa divides it 
into a hundred shreds and one, each about the size of a thumb. The Rishi 
has each bit placed in a separate pot of ghee, in a secret chamber, tightly 
sealed and carefully guarded. Vyasa says to Gandhari that the seals should 
be broken only after a full two years. 

With that, the enlightened Dwaipayana goes away to the Himalaya, to 
perform tapasya. 

When the time comes, first of all, Duryodhana is born from a piece of 
flesh slightly larger than the others in the hundred pots of ghee. Thus, 
Yudhishtira is the eldest in his generation. News of the haughty 
Duryodhana’s birth comes to Bhishma and Vidura. It is on the same day 
that, in the forest, Bhima Mahabaho of immeasurable strength is born. 

As soon as Duryodhana is born, he begins to cry horribly: he brays like a 
donkey. At these unnatural sounds, every donkey, vulture, jackal and crow 
for yojanas around, answer his weird cries in evil cacophony. Violent winds 
blow everywhere, crookedly, and dreadful fires spume up from the very 
Earth all across the land. 

Terrified, King Dhritarashtra summons Bhishma, Vidura and other 
friends and ministers. He calls all the great Kurus and their countless 
Brahmanas and says to them, ‘Pandu’s eldest son Yudhishtira is the heir to 
our line, for he is born first. | have no argument with this, but will my son 
Duryodhana, born next, succeed Yudhishtira as king? I want to know what 
is dharma in this matter.’ 

No sooner has he spoken, O Bharata, than the wild cacophony of 
hideous cries by jackals and other predators and scavengers, every fell 
creature of night, resounds all around; ominously they howl. 

Hearing and seeing the macabre omens, the Brahmanas and the wise 
Vidura say, ‘Rajan, Narapumgava, the omens at his birth all cry aloud that 
your eldest son shall be the nemesis of your race. If we are to prosper, no, 
even survive, you must kill him now. You will still have ninety-nine sons 
after his death. 


But if you let him live, calamity will strike the House of Kuru, why, the 
very Earth. O Bharata, if you wish for the welfare of your ancient race and 
the world, abandon this child, do away with him. 

O King, it has been said that an individual should be sacrificed for the 
sake of a family; a family for the sake of a village; a village for the sake of 
a country; and the very Earth for the sake of the Atman, the Soul.’ 

But from his love for his firstborn son, Dhritarashtra cannot bring 
himself to do what Vidura and the Brahmanas ask of him. In a month’s 
time, a hundred sons are born to Dhritarashtra from the hundred pots of 
ghee; and the hundred and first is a daughter. 

During the second year of Gandhari’s long pregnancy a Vaisya 
maidservant of hers would attend on Dhritarashtra. Dhritarashtra sires a son 
on her, a boy of great intelligence called Yuyutsu. 

Thus the wise Dhritarashtra has a hundred sons, all heroic Maharathas, 
and a daughter, all by Gandhari, and Yuyutsu, tejasvin, by a Vaisya 
woman.” 


CANTO 116 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


anamejaya said, ‘Sinless, you have told me in some detail about the 
J rishi boon, which led to the birth of the hundred sons of Dhritarashtra. 

But you have not said anything about how his daughter comes to be 
born, saying only that beyond the hundred, he has Yuyutsu by a Vaisya 
woman and a daughter. Maharishi Vyasa, of measureless energy, said to the 
Gandhara king’s daughter that she would have a hundred sons; illumined 
one, now you Say that she also has another child, a daughter. If the lump of 
flesh was divided only into a hundred parts, and if Gandhari did not 
conceive again, how was Duhsala born? O Rishi, I am curious, tell me how 
this happened.” 

Vaisampayana said, ‘O Scion of the Pandavas, your question is well 
asked and I will answer it. The illustrious Dwaipayana sprinkles cool water 
over the hard lump of flesh and begins to divide it in a hundred pieces; as he 
does this, the midwife takes each portion and places it in a pot of ghee. 

Even as this is being done, Gandhari feels the desire for a daughter and 
thinks, ‘I will surely have a hundred sons from the Rishi’s boon, but how 
wonderful if I also had a daughter younger than the hundred. Why, then my 
husband would attain to the realms that are conferred by the birth of a 
daughter’s sons. Besides, a mother-in-law has a special love for her son-in- 
law. Ah, if I have one daughter after my hundred sons, my joy will be 
complete.’ 

She made a fervent wish, ‘If I have ever done tapasya, if I have given 
charity, if I have performed homa through Brahmanas, if I have revered and 
served my elders, then let me have a daughter as well!’ 

Meanwhile, Dwaipayana continues dividing the lump of flesh. Finally, 
finishing, he says to Gandhari, ‘Here are your hundred sons; I, Vyasa, did 
not lie to you. However, there is a hundred and first part, smaller than the 


others, which shall bless you with a daughter and her sons. Yes, she will be 
a charming and fortunate girl.’ 

The Sage has a hundred and first pot of ghee fetched and immerses the 
last shred of flesh in his hands in it. From it, O Bharata, in time, Duhsala is 
born. Now tell me what you want to hear next.” 


CANTO 117 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


anamejaya said, “I beg you, recite the names of Dhritarashtra’s sons in 
Jin order of their birth.” 

Vaisampayana said, “Duryodhana, Yuyutsu, Dushasana, Duhsaha, 
Duhssala, Jalasandha, Sama, Saha, Vinda, Anuvinda, Durdharsha, Subahu, 
Dushpradharshana, Durmarshana, Durmukha, Dushkarna, Karna, Vivimsati, 
Vikarna, Sala, Satwa, Sulochana, Chitra, Upachitra, Chitraksha, 
Charuchitra, Sarasana, Durmada, Durvigaha, Vivitsu, Vilatanana, 
Urnanabha, Sunabha, Nandaka, Upanandaka, Chitravana, Chitravarman, 
Suvarman, Durvimochana, Ayobahu, Mahabahu, Chitranga, Chitrakundala, 
Bhimavega, Bhimabala, Balaki, Balavardhana, Ugrayudha, Bhima, 
Kanakaya, Dridhayudha, Dridhavarman, Dridhakshatra, Somakitri, 
Anudara, Dridhasandha, Jarasandha, Satyasandha, Sada, Suvak, 
Ugrasravas, Ugrasena, Senani, Dushparajaya, Aparajita, Kundasayin, 
Visalaksha, Duradhara, Dridhahasta, Suhasta, Vatavega, Suvarchas, 
Adityaketu, Vahvashin, Nagadatta, Agrayayin, Kavachin, Krathana, Kunda, 
Kundadhara, Dhanurdhara, Ugra, Bhimaratha, Virabahu, Alolupa, Abhaya, 
Raudrakarman, Dridharatha, Anadhrishya, Kundabhedin,  Viravi, 
Dhirghalochana, Pramatha, Pramathi, Dhirgharoma, Dirghabahu, Vyudhoru, 
Kanakadhvaja, Kundasi and Virajas. 

And then there is the daughter Duhsala. All hundred are heroes, 
Atirathas, and great warriors. All of them know the Vedas, and are masters 
of astras and every other kind of weapon. 

Rajan, in due course, suitable wives are chosen for them, with the utmost 
care. And when his daughter Duhsala comes of age, Dhritarashtra gives her 
to be the wife of Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu.” 


CANTO 118 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


anamejaya said, “O Chanter of Brahman, you have told us all about the 
J exceptional births of Dhritarashtra’s sons, through the boon of 

Dwaipayana. You have also told us their names, in the order of their 
births. Indeed, Brahmana, all this we have heard, but now tell me about the 
sons of Pandu. 

When you narrated the incarnations of the Devas, the Asuras and other 
unearthly beings into the world, you said that the Pandavas were the most 
illustrious, powerful as the Devas, and indeed amsas of the gods 
themselves. I want to hear everything about these extraordinary princes, 
from the beginning, the moments of their births. O Vaisampayana, tell us 
about their glorious achievements.” 

Vaisampayana said, “O King, one day Pandu ranges through the forests 
on the southern slopes of Himavat, which teem with both deer and 
predators, when he sees a great stag, seemingly the leader of his herd, in the 
act of mounting his hind. As soon as he sees them the Kshatriya strikes 
them with five arrows, plumed with golden feathers. 

Rajan, of course it is no stag but the son of a Rishi of profound tapasya, 
who assumed the form of a deer to enjoy his wife. Shot through by Pandu in 
the very act of coition, he falls onto the ground crying out in a human voice; 
bitterly he laments and sobs. 

The deer says to Pandu, ‘Kshatriya, even men that are slaves to lust and 
anger, and always sinning, do not commit such a savage crime. You, O 
Bharata, are the scion of a great house of dharma. How have you allowed 
passion and wrath to sway you, and make you lose your reason that you 
have done this dreadful thing?’ 

Pandu replies, ‘Mriga, O Deer, Kshatriyas are ruled by the same impulse 
when they slay deer that rules them when they kill their enemies. You must 


not blame me for what I did; it is my innate nature. We kill animals of your 
species openly or from hiding; and this is the way of kings, of yore. 

Of old, when he performed a Mahayagna, the Rishi Agastya hunted 
every deer in the forest and offered them to the Devas as part of his 
sacrifice. It is he that sanctioned the slaying of your kind; then why do you 
blame me now? For his most special sacrifices Agastya always uses the fat 
of deer, to perform the homa.’ 

The deer says, ‘King, men do not loose their arrows at unprepared 
enemies, but only after declaring themselves. Such killing is not censured.’ 

Pandu says, “But deer are killed openly or by stealth. Why do you blame 
me for what I did?’ 

The deer says, ‘Shura, I do not blame you for killing a deer, nor even for 
the pain you have caused me. But you killed me while I was mating; you 
should have waited until I had finished. Which wise man of dharma will kill 
a deer while it mates? Coition is an intense pleasure for every species, and 
brings goodness to all. 

Kshatriya, I was in the very act of satisfying my desire with my mate, 
and you have killed me before I finished. O King of the Kurus, you are a 
scion in the line of Pururavas, a house known for its dharma; what you have 
done is unworthy of you and your race. 

Bharata, what you have done is despicable, vile, cruel and sinful in the 
extreme, and deserves to be punished with hell. You know the pleasures of 
sexual intercourse; you know the dictates of dharma. Why, you are like a 
Deva, and this does not become you. 

Best of kings, it is your Kshatriya dharma to punish anyone who is cruel 
and sinful, anyone who abandons dharma, artha and kama, as they are laid 
down in the Shastras. Manavottama, what have you done by killing me, 
who gave you no offence? Raja, I am a Muni living on roots and fruit, 
though I have assumed this form of a deer. I lived peacefully in this forest, 
giving no offence to any living creature, rather, in harmony with all. 

Yet you have killed me and I will curse you for it. I curse you Kshatriya, 
that for your savagery towards a mating couple, you will die as soon as you 
indulge your own desire. I am the Muni Kindama of great tapasya. I was 
mating as a deer because I felt bashful to have intercourse in human form in 
this forest where other Rishis abound. I often roam deep in this forest in the 
company of other deer. 


You slew me without knowing that I am a Brahmana, so the sin of 
Brahmahatya shall not cling to you. But, O witless man, because you have 
killed me while I mated with my wife your fate shall be the same. When 
desire next takes you to your wife and you join with her, as I have with 
mine, you will leave your body and enter the world of spirits. And your 
wife, with whom you are having intercourse, will follow you out of this 
world, out of her love and adoration, to the realm of Yama. 

You brought me anguish when I was in transport; grief will visit you 
when you are in ecstasy.’ 

With this curse, the deer breathes its last, and Pandu stands stricken, 
staring at the corpses.” 


CANTO 119 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Long and bitterly Pandu and his wives grieve 
\/ over the deer. 

Pandu cries, ‘Ah, even if they are born into pure and noble 
families evil men are quickly brought to grief by their own sins, for their 
passions delude them into sinning violently. I have heard that, though he 
was the son of the noble Shantanu, Vichitravirya died young because he had 
become a slave to his lust. 

In the soil of the lustful Vichitravirya the enlightened Muni Krishna 
Dwaipayana, who has never told a lie, begot me. Though I am the natural 
son of such a Mahatman, my heart is evil: look at me, ranging the forest, 
daily killing innocent deer. Oh, the gods have forsaken me, and I mean to 
seek my redemption, mukti. 

The great obstacles on the path to salvation are the desire to father 
children, as well as other mundane attachments and concerns. I mean to 
swear a vow of brahmacharya and follow in my natural father’s immortal 
footsteps. I will perform stern tapasya and bring my lust and every other 
passion under control. 

I will abandon my wives and the rest of my kin, shave my head, and 
wander the Earth alone as a Bhikshu, begging fruit as alms from the trees I 
find. I will cover my body with dust, forsake every object of attraction or 
distaste, and shelter under trees or in deserted huts that I find. No joy or 
sorrow will move me; I will look upon blame and praise equally. I will not 
seek blessings or adoration. 

I shall be at peace with everything, and accept no gifts. I will never 
mock anyone, or frown at anyone, but always be cheerful and devote 
myself to the welfare of all creatures. I will do no injury to any of the four 
forms of life, mobile or unmoving, but treat them all as if they are my own 
children. 


Once a day I will visit five or ten families, at most, and beg for alms. If I 
receive none I will not eat. I will never beg from the same person twice. I 
will not go to more than ten homes, and shall remain as unmoved as a Rishi 
whether I get food or not. I will look equally upon someone who hacks 
away my arm with an axe and another who smears it with sandalwood 
paste. I will not curse the first or bless the second. 

I will not be pleased to remain alive or grieve if I am to die; I will look 
equally upon life and death. Cleansing my heart of every sin, I will rise 
above the sacred rituals that men perform, during auspicious times, in order 
to attain happiness. I will relinquish all dharma and artha, as well as rituals 
that gratify the senses. 

I will become as free as the wind, going where I please with no sin or 
attachment to bind me. Fearlessly shall I tread the path of Sannyasa, until 
the day of my death arrives. Now that I cannot father children, I shall walk 
in dharma, never leaving the golden path to walk the vile alleyways of the 
world, all of which lead to sorrow. 

Whether the world honours him or not, the man who begs from greed is 
certainly like a dog. I cannot have children and I must never ask another to 
give me sons.’ 

Wiping his tears, Pandu fetches a deep sigh and says to Kunti and Madri, 
‘Let my mother, my uncle Vidura, King Dhritarashtra, all our friends, the 
Devi Satyavati, Pitama Bhishma, our family priests, the Brahmanas who 
keep stern vratas and drink Soma rasa, and all the elders in our city be told 
that Pandu has taken Vanavasa and will lead the life of a Sannyasi.’ 

Kunti and Madri say, ‘O Bharatarishabha, there are other paths of 
Sannyasa that you can follow, and perform the sternest tapasya, in which 
we can join and serve you: paths that also lead to moksha and liberation 
from rebirth. We, too, shall control our passions, forsake every luxury, and 
be austere in all things. But, O king of great wisdom, if you abandon us, we 
will take our own lives this very day.’ 

Pandu replies, ‘If what you say is dharma, then I will tread the immortal 
way of my ancestors with both of you. I will renounce the comforts of 
towns and cities, wear valkala, eat only fruit and roots, and wander in the 
deepest jungles, performing tapasya. 

Bathing morning and evening, I will perform homa. I will wear animal 
hide, or rags, jata on my head, and emaciate my body by hardly eating. I 
will ignore hunger and thirst and expose myself to extremes of heat and 


cold; living in solitude, I will abandon myself to dhyana, a life of 
meditation. 

I will eat such fruit as I find, raw or ripe; I will make offerings to the 
Pitrs and the Devas, of mantras, holy water and the fruit of the jungle. I will 
not see any of the creatures of the wild, much less harm them; I will never 
again see any of my friends or kinsmen, or any that live in towns or cities. 

Until I leave this body, I will keep the most extreme observances of the 
Vanaprastha Shastras, always seeking out the most difficult and harsh ones.’ 

Pandu now gives away the large jewel in his crown to Brahmanas, as 
also his golden necklace, his bracelets, his heavy earrings, his opulent 
robes, along with all the jewellery of his wives. 

Calling his servants, he says, “Go back to Hastinapura and tell everyone 
there that Pandu has renounced wealth, every desire, pleasure, even his 
sexual life, and has become a Sannyasi in the forest.’ 

He speaks quietly, but when they hear him, his attendants set up a loud 
lament, crying, ‘Ah, we are ruined!’ 

Hot tears streaming down their faces, they leave their prince and, taking 
the gold and ornaments he has given them to be distributed as charity, 
return to the city of elephants. When Dhritarashtra, best among men, hears 
the news that those servitors bring, he weeps for his brother. He is plunged 
in gloom, and, now, hardly takes any delight in the pleasures of his palace, 
with its soft beds and seats, its exquisite cuisine. 

Pandu goes to the mountains called Nagasata, with Kunti and Madri. 
Eating fruit and roots, they cross the Chaitraratha, the Kalakuta, and finally 
crossing the Himalaya, they arrive on fragrant Gandhamadana. Watched 
over by Mahabhutas, Siddhas and Maharishis, Pandu lives at times in the 
plains and at others on mountains. 

He journeys to Lake Indradyumna, and then crossing the Hansakuta 
Mountains, arrives at the range of a hundred peaks, Satasringa, where he 
lives in tapasya.” 


CANTO 120 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


he becomes a favourite with all the great Siddhas and Charanas who 

live on that mountain. O Bharata, he serves his spiritual masters, 
with his mind perfectly controlled, with complete humility, and gains 
enormous ascetic powers. Some of the Rishis would call him their brother, 
others their friend, while others love him like a son. 

Bharatarishabha, pursuing his tapasya with intense devotion and 
singlemindedness, Pandu, though he is born a Kshatriya, soon becomes 
even like a Brahmarishi. 

On a day of the new moon, amavasya, some awesome Rishis gather to 
set out to see Brahma, in his lofty realm. Pandu asks them, ‘Great ones, 
where are you going?’ 

The Rishis reply, “There will be a great Satsangha today in the court of 
Brahma, of Devas, Pitrs and Maharishis. We want to see the Svayambhuva, 
the Self-Created Lord, and are going to the sacred conclave.’ 

Pandu jumps up in excitement; he wants to go as well. But as he is about 
to follow them with his two wives, the Munis who are travelling north of 
Satasringa say, “As we journeyed north, gradually climbing the King of 
Mountains, we have seen many marvellous realms, which are inaccessible 
to ordinary men. 

We have seen the worlds of Devas, Gandharvas and Apsaras, with 
hundreds of palaces, wondrous past describing, echoing softly with 
heavenly music; we have seen the enchanted gardens of Kubera, spread 
across plains and rising into mountain slopes, with mighty rivers flowing 
through, and deep and secret caves. 

Many of those heights are covered in perennial snow and ice, places 
where no animals live or plants grow. Other realms are uninhabitable, 
indeed inaccessible, for the torrential rains that pour down upon them. Why, 


\ J aisampayana said, ‘Pandu devotes himself to his austerities. Quickly, 


other beasts, even birds do not venture into these. Only the air dares go 
freely through those glacial realms, as do Siddhas and Rishis with great 
powers. 

O Pandu, how will your wives, these tender princesses, climb those 
pinnacles of the Lord of mountains? They are not used either to the 
hardship or the inevitable pain; they will not survive. Therefore, O 
Bharatarishabha, you must not come with us.’ 

Pandu replies, ‘Most fortunate ones, it is told that the sonless can never 
enter Swarga. I have no son! I speak to you in great grief for I have not been 
able to repay the debt I owe my manes. Ah, I feel certain that when this 
body of mine dissolves into its constituent elements, my ancestors, my Pitrs 
on high, shall fall into hell. 

Men are born into this world with four debts: those due to the Pitrs, the 
Devas, the Rishis, and to other men. In dharma these must be paid. The 
wise all agree that no blissful realms await those that do not discharge these 
debts. 

The Devas are paid with yagnas; the Rishis are paid by gyana, dhyana 
and tapasya; the Pitrs are paid by begetting children and by offering tarpana 
and pinda; and one’s fellow men by leading a blameless life that gives no 
injury. 

I have done my dharma by the Devas, the Rishis and toward my fellow 
men. But ah, my sires, my Pitrs will surely perish because I have not paid 
my dues to them; I have not fathered any children. O Munis, I am still in 
debt to my ancestors. The best men are born into this world to father 
children, so their ancestors are liberated. Wise ones, I ask you now, should 
children be begotten in my field, even as I was in my father’s, by the great 
Dwaipayana?’ 

The Rishis say, ‘Virtuous Kshatriya, you shall indeed have sons, sinless 
princes, blessed with fortune and brilliant like the Devas. We see this 
clearly with our eyes of prophecy. So, Purushavyaghra, O tiger among men, 
accomplish destiny’s purpose, for intelligent men act after clear and careful 
thought and invariably find great punya. We see the shining fruit that shall 
be your sons. Pandu, that is your direction.’ 

But Pandu remembers the curse of the stag and his enforced celibacy. He 
thinks hard and deep about what the Sages said to him before they departed 
towards the north. Then he calls the chaste Kunti and says to her privately, 
‘In this time of our distress you must try to bear children. Rishis who 


expound the Sanatana Dharma say that having a son fetches a man virtue 
and fame in the three worlds. 

No sacrifices, charity, penance, or the sternest vows can bestow punya 
on a man who has no son. O my Kunti of the sweet smile, I fear that I will 
never attain Heaven because I have no son. Ah, a vile and wretched sinner I 
was, addicted to violence and savagery, so the deer cursed me that I can 
never have children. 

The Shastras speak of six kinds of sons that are both kin and heirs, and 
six more that are not heirs but only kin. Pritha, the first of these is a son that 
a man begets upon his wife; the second is a son fathered by another sage 
and accomplished man upon one’s wife, out of kindness; the third is a son 
begotten by another upon one’s wife for money; the fourth a son begotten 
upon a wife after her husband’s death; the fifth a son born to an unwed 
mother; the sixth a son born to an unfaithful wife; the seventh is a son given 
as a gift; the eight is a son bought for money; the ninth is a son adopted; the 
tenth is a son that comes with an already pregnant bride; the eleventh is a 
brother’s son; and the twelfth a son begotten upon a woman of a lower 
caste. 

If a woman cannot conceive by her husband of her own varna, she must 
try to conceive with a man of the next varna. If a man cannot father a child, 
he may ask his younger brothers to father children for him. Manu himself 
has said that when a man cannot beget a son, he can have another good man 
father a son on his wife, because having a son is the highest punya. 

Kunti, I cannot sire a child in you, and I command you to conceive a 
child with a man who is either my equal or my superior. Let me tell you the 
story of the daughter of Saradandayana, whose husband asks her to bear 
him children by another man. 

When her period ended and she came into her fertile time, that Kshatriya 
woman bathed in the evening and went out at night to a crossroads. Soon 
enough, a Brahmana of tapasya came along and Saradandayana’s daughter 
asked him for children. He poured ghee as offering into a sacred fire, in the 
ritual called Pumsavana, and then sired three mighty Maharathas in her, 
Durjaya being the eldest. 

My precious and fortunate Kunti, I want you to follow that Kshatriya 
princess’ example. I want you to bear me a son by the seed of a Brahmana 
of lofty Sannyasa.’” 


CANTO 121 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Kunti says to her husband, that bull among the 

\/ Kurus, ‘O my lord, do not say this to me! Lotus eyed Pandu, I am 

your wife and I love you. Bharata Mahabaho, come and beget your 

children in me yourself, sons of great tejas! When they are born, I will 

follow you out of this world into Swarga. But not even in my imagination 
or dreams can I let myself be embraced by another man. 

Besides, which man in this world is your equal, let alone your superior? 
My husband of dharma, let me tell you a story from the Purana, O Pandu of 
the large eyes. 

Long ago, in ancient times, there was a Puru king calls Vyushitaswa. He 
was devout, truthful and a man of dharma. Once, while the mighty and pure 
Vyushitaswa was performing a sacrifice, Indra, the Devas and the 
Devarishis came to his yagna. Indra and the Devas were so drunk with the 
Soma rasa that the king offered them, the Brahmanas so delighted with the 
munificent gifts he gave them, that the Gods and the Sages began to 
perform the rituals at that Rajarishi’s yagna. 

Vyushitaswa shone as brightly as the Sun when he appears after the 
winter of snow; he was twice as splendid as before, more splendid than any 
other man. Soon, O best of kings, the magnificent Vyushitaswa, as strong as 
ten elephants, performed the Aswamedha yagna, vanquishing every other 
ruler of the East, the North, the West and the South, and received tribute 
from them all. 

Kurushreshta, all the Pauranikas sing a tale about that Manavottama, the 
brilliant Vyushitaswa. When he had conquered all the Earth, from Sea to 
Sea, that king protected his people, all the varnas, just like a father would 
his own children. He performed great yagnas, at which he gave away untold 
wealth to Brahmanas. 


When he gathered precious jewels past counting, he arranged to perform 
still greater sacrifices. He also performed the Agnishtoma,and other arcane 
Vedic sacrifices, extracting copious quantities of Soma rasa. 

Rajan, Vyushitaswa’s wife was the daughter of Kakshivat, Bhadra, 
whose beauty was unrivalled on Earth, and the two of them loved each 
other deeply. King Vyushitaswa seldom left his wife for any length of time, 
but united with her always, as frequently as he might. However, this 
excessive sexual indulgence caused a galloping consumption, which killed 
the king in a matter of days. He died like the Sun setting, in glory. 

The beautiful Queen Bhadra had no son and she was plunged in grief; 
day and night she wept. With tears streaming down her face, Bhadra said, 
“Women serve no purpose when their husbands are dead; she is a dead 
woman that survives her lord, dragging on a wretched misery that is no life, 
but a terrible death. Ah Bharatarishabha, my Lord Vyushitaswa, I have no 
wish to live without you. I beg you be merciful and call me to you. 

Every moment I live without you is a lifetime in hell. Oh, be kind, 
beloved King, call me to you quickly. O tiger among kings, I will follow 
you wherever you go, through rough and smooth. You have gone and will 
never return; let me come to you as your shadow. O I will be your slave, 
and do everything you want, whatever pleases you. 

O my lotus eyed husband, without you, day by day, anguish will 
overwhelm me; grief will consume my heart. Oh, I am a wretched sinner 
and must have been the cause of separating some loving couple in another 
life that I have to suffer being apart from you in this one. Rajan, Rajan, the 
woman who lives for even a moment after her husband’s death lives only in 
Naraka. My Lord, do you not see the torment I am in? 

I shall lay myself down on a bed of kusa grass, and neither eat nor drink, 
so that I might see you again soon. O tiger among men, show yourself to 
me! O my sweet lord, let me hear your voice again, commanding your 
wretched, grief-stricken wife!’”’ 

Kunti continues, ‘Pandu, thus the lovely Bhadra wept when her husband 
died. She clasped his corpse in her arms and sobbed. Suddenly, an asariri, a 
disembodied voice spoke to her, “Rise O Bhadra and leave this chamber of 
death. Woman of the sweet smiles, I grant you a boon: I will beget children 
in you. Bathe after your period on the eighth or fourteenth night of the 
waxing moon and wait for me in your bed, and I will come to you.” 


Bhadra did as the voice asked, so that she might have sons. The chaste 
Bhadra did as the voice said, and her husband’s corpse begot seven children 
upon her, three Salvas and four Madras. 

Bharatarishabha, you can do the same as Vyushitaswa, by using your 
occult siddhis, your mystical powers.’” 


CANTO 122 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Pandu says to Kunti, “Vyushitaswa of yore did 
\/ indeed do what you say; why, he was like a Deva. But let me tell you 
about a custom of old, of which the Rishis who know every nuance 

of dharma approve. 

Lovely Kunti of the sweet smile, in ancient times, women were not 
confined to their houses, nor did they depend upon their husbands or other 
male relatives; they were free, and indeed they took their pleasure where 
they pleased and were not faithful to a single man. And this was not 
considered sinful, but was perfectly lawful and sanctioned, of old. 

As the birds and beasts of the wilds do today, with no jealousy or 
possessiveness, the women of antiquity did, and the greatest Sages 
approved heartily. Why, even today, the Northern Kuru women live in the 
same manner and meet with no reproval. The very idea of a woman being 
bound for life to a single husband is a very recent one, and I will tell you 
how it came about, who is responsible for it and why. 

There was a great Sage, Uddalaka, whose son was the Rishi Swetaketu, 
who was also a Sannyasi of great punya. My lotus eyed Kunti, monogamy 
for women was first established by Swetaketu and he did it from wrath. 

Listen to the reason. One day, in the presence of Uddalaka, another 
Brahmana seized Swetaketu’s mother’s hand, and said, ‘Come with me!’ 
and she went with him. Thinking his mother had been taken by force, 
Swetaketu was furious. 

Seeing his son’s anger, Uddalaka said gently, ‘Do not be angry, my child. 
The women of every varna are entirely free, and their freedom is accepted 
since time out of mind. In sexual matters, they behave even like cows, and 
it is lawful and just.’ 

But Swetaketu would not listen to his father and pronounced that, from 
that day, women shall be faithful to their husbands and be considered 


sinners if they strayed. His law bound only human beings and not the other 
creatures of the Earth. From that time, women who were not chaste would 
be guilty of the sin of foeticide; and men who violated the chaste wife of 
another man would be condemned for the same sin. 

However, the woman who does not give her husband children, though he 
commands her, is also guilty of the same crime, O my Kunti of the tapering 
thighs. 

My timid wife, it was Uddalaka’s son Swetaketu who imposed 
monogamy on humans, in defiance of the freedom that women enjoyed 
since the dawn of time. I have also heard, my wife of the softest thighs, that 
when her husband Sadasa commanded her, his chaste wife Madayanti gave 
him a son called Asmaka, by the Rishi Vasishta. She did this out of her love 
for her husband. 

Why, lotus eyes, you know very well how my brothers and I were 
begotten by Krishna Dwaipayana to continue the Kuru line. Chaste 
Princess, consider these precedents, which do not violate dharma, and do 
what I ask. 

Of old it has been said that a devoted wife always seeks her husband 
during her fertile time, while at others she has her liberty. The Rishis say 
that this is the ancient way of dharma. Also, whatever a husband asks his 
wife to do, sin or not, the Veda says that she must obey him. 

Most of all, beautiful Kunti, I who cannot father children, long to see 
sons before me; you must not refuse to do what I ask. Look, sweet Kunti, I 
fold my red-fingered hands into a lotus-cup, and place them on my head to 
implore you. Beloved Kunti, I beg you, beget children for me by some lofty 
Brahmana. For only then, because of you, I will find my way into the 
Swarga meant for men that have sons!’ 

Having heard him out in silence, attentively, now Kunti says, ‘When I 
was a young girl, it fell to me to look after the most honoured guests who 
visited my father’s palace. Reverently I waited upon Rishis of vast tapasya. 
Once, I served the great Brahmana Durvasa, whose mind is perfectly 
controlled and who is a master of the deepest secrets of religion. 

He was pleased with my devotion and Durvasa Muni taught me a mantra 
with which I could summon any Deva I chose. 

The Rishi said, ‘Any Deva that you summon with this mantra shall 
perforce come to you and give you children.’ 


O Bharata, the Brahmana said this to me when I was a maiden in my 
father’s house, and surely Durvasa Muni could never tell a lie. It seems that 
the time has come when the Rishi’s boon might bear fruit. Rajarishi, if you 
command it I can summon any Deva and bear his children for you. Tell me, 
my lord, which god shall I call? I will do what you say.’ 

Pandu replies excitedly, ‘Exquisite Kunti, use the mantra even today! 
Woman of great fortune, summon Dharma Deva, who is the most virtuous 
of all the gods and can never stain us with any sin, the God of Truth. Also, 
then, the world shall never point a finger at us that we strayed from dharma. 

Besides, the son he gives us shall be a paragon of virtue, certainly the 
best of the Kurus. Dharma Deva being his natural father, his heart will 
never turn to the least sin. Sweet woman, keep dharma before your mind’s 
eye, purify yourself with the proper vratas, and waste no time in 
summoning the God of Justice with both your beauty and your mantra!’ 

Says Kunti, best among women, ‘So be it.’ She bows deeply to touch his 
feet, walks around him in pradakshina, and resolves to do what her husband 
asks.”” 


CANTO 123 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “O Janamejaya, Gandhari has already been 

V/ pregnant for a full year with her torpid conception, when on 

Satasringa, Kunti invokes the Deva Dharma, to have a son by that 

God. She makes various offerings to the God, and begins to chant the 
mantra that Durvasa had taught her. 

Compelled by her incantation, Dharma Deva flies down to Kunti in a 
vimana bright as the Sun. Smiling, he asks, ‘O Kunti, what would you have 
from me?’ 

Smiling, bashful, overwhelmed, she replies, “Give me a son.’ 

The beautiful Kunti and the God of Truth have intercourse between 
them, and in time Kunti gives birth to a shining son, who would be devout 
and devoted to the welfare of every living creature. This radiant child, who 
would acquire fame that would spread across the worlds, is born at the 
eighth muhurta, Abhijit, at high noon of a most auspicious day, the fifth of 
the bright fortnight, during Kartika, the seventh month, on that very 
auspicious day of the seventh month when the asterism Jyeshta is conjoined 
with the waxing Moon. 

As soon as he is born an asariri pronounces from the sky, “This child 
shall be the most virtuous of all men. He will have great strength, and 
perfect truthfulness, and he will surely rule the Earth. Let this first son of 
Pandu be called Yudhishtira, and his fame shall spread through the three 
worlds!’ 

Then Pandu goes to Kunti again, and says, “The Rishis have said that a 
Kshatriya must possess great physical strength or he is no Kshatriya. Beget 
another son, of immense strength, who can be Yudhishtira’s support.’ 

Kunti invokes Vayu, the Wind God, strongest of the Devas. He comes to 
her riding upon a deer, and says, ‘O Kunti, what is in your heart that you 
have called me. What would you have of me?’ 


Smiling bashfully, she says, ‘O best of Devas, give me a son endowed 
with great strength, great limbs, a great heart, and one that can humble the 
pride of anyone at all.’ 

The God of winds sires a child of untold strength and great arms upon 
her, who would be known as Bhima. As before, O Bharata, when Bhima is 
born, a disembodied voice speaks in thunder from the sky, “This child shall 
be the strongest of all men.’ 

O Janamejaya, I must tell you about something else very wonderful that 
happens after Vrikodara Bhima’s, birth. One day, he falls out of his 
mother’s lap onto the slope of the mountain, and the crag he falls upon far 
below is smashed to pieces, while his child’s body has no scratch or bruise, 
and he does not even cry. The reason he falls is that a tiger suddenly appears 
before Kunti, sitting at the edge of a sheer drop, with Bhima asleep in her 
lap. She jumps up in alarm and Bhima falls over the edge, onto a large rock 
many hands below. 

When Pandu sees how Bhima’s body, hard as adamant, crushes the rock 
and suffers no harm, he marvels. 

Also, it is on the same day that Bhima is born on Satasringa that far 
away, in Hastinapura, Duryodhana is also born, Duryodhana, who too, 
would one day rule the Earth. 

After the birth of Vrikodara, a persistent ambition begins to haunt Pandu: 
‘How shall I have a truly exceptional son, superior to every other man, and 
who will achieve everlasting fame? Everything in this world depends on 
both destiny and effort; but destiny by itself is fruitless without timely 
effort. 

‘Indra is the King of all the Devas; immeasurable is his strength, his 
power, his energy and his glory. I must worship him and persuade him to 
give me a son of matchless prowess. The son that he gives me must become 
the greatest Kshatriya on Earth, with no rival, and one who can vanquish 
every other man and every creature in this world. Yes, I will perform a stern 
tapasya, and be perfectly austere in thought, speech and deed.’ 

Pandu seeks the advice and guidance of the Maharishis of that forest, 
and then tells Kunti that she must observe a vrata of austerity for a full year. 
Then Pandu, O Bharata, begins to stand upon one leg, from dawn to dusk, 
his mind withdrawn in dhyana and worshipping the Lord Indra. Other 
rituals also he performs to please the Deva King. 


In some months, Indra becomes gratified with Pandu’s adorations and 
appears before him. 

Indra says, ‘O King, I will give you a son who will be the best of all 
men. Invincible in battle, he will be celebrated across the Earth. He will 
uphold dharma, be a guardian of Brahmanas, cows and all good men. He 
will be a Parantapa, the scourge of the evil, the joy of his friends and kin. 
He will become an inexorable slayer of his enemies.’ 

Overjoyed at what Indra says, Pandu goes to Kunti and cries, “Your vrata 
has borne fruit! The King of the Devas is pleased and has agreed to give us 
the son we want. Our child will be wise past compare, his achievements 
superhuman and his fame unequalled. 

‘He will be a Mahatman, the bane of his enemies and of the forces of 
evil. His splendour will be as the Sun’s, and he will be as handsome as a 
God. O Kunti of the swaying, fair hips, Kunti of the sweetest smile, the 
Lord of the Devas has become pleased with you! Call him to you with your 
mantra, and bear a son who will be the very embodiment of every Kshatriya 
virtue.’ 

Kunti invokes Sakra, Indra the Deva king, who comes to her and sires in 
her the one who would be known throughout the world as Arjuna. As soon 
as Arjuna is born, an asariri like the rumbling of thunderheads fills the sky 
with its echoing tones. 

The disembodied voice says to Kunti, and every creature in that forest 
hears it clear, “O Kunti, this son of yours will be as strong as Kartavirya and 
as powerful as Siva. Invincible like Indra himself, he will spread your fame 
across the Earth. Even as Vishnu, her youngest son, causes the joy of his 
mother Aditi to swell, so will this boy swell yours. 

He will subdue the Madras, the Kurus, the Somakas, the Chedis, Kasi 
and Karusha, and he will preserve the glory and prosperity of the House of 
Kuru. Agni will feast upon the fat of the fell creatures of the Khandava 
vana, by the might of your son’s arms, when your prince burns that forest. 

This mighty Kshatriya will vanquish all the kings of the Earth, 
effeminate before him, enabling himself and his brothers to perform three 
Mahayagnas. O Kunti, his prowess shall be no less than that of Jamadagni’s 
son Parasurama or Vishnu. By his extraordinary archery, he will find 
unparalleled fame. 

Why, he will delight the Lord Siva by having a battle with him, and the 
Lord Sankara Mahadeva will give him his own Pasupatastra, the greatest of 


all weapons. This mighty son of yours will also kill the Nivatakavacha 
Daityas, the enemies of the Devas. He will acquire every kind of Devastra 
and this Purusharishabha, this bull among men, will restore the very 
fortunes of his clan!’ 

Kunti lies in the room where she has given birth to Arjuna, and listens to 
these awesome prophecies. Hearing the divine asariri speak in thunder from 
the sky, the Rishis who live on the mountain of a hundred peaks, and all the 
Devas and Indra in their vimanas in the firmament are overjoyed. 

Celestial drumrolls fill the sky, as do divine cries of joy; all of Satasringa 
is covered by a deluge of unearthly flowers flung down by unseen hands. 
Many divine beings arrive on the mountain of a thousand peaks to adore the 
son of Pritha — the sons of Kadru, the sons of Vinata, the Prajapatis,the 
Lokapalas, the Saptarishis,Bharadwaja, Kashyapa, Gautama, Viswamitra, 
Jamadagni, Vasistha, and the irradiant Atri who lit up the world when once 
the Sun was lost. 

Marichi, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Daksha Prajapati, the 
Gandharvasand Apsarascome there as well. The many tribes of 
Apsaras,wearing unworldly ornaments and garlands, raiment past 
describing, arrive in the forest asrama and dance for joy, while they sing the 
praises of little Arjuna. 

All around, Rishis chant mantras of blessing, while Tumburu and his 
Gandharvas sing in their superlative voices. Among the celestial minstrels 
are Bhimasena, Ugrasena, Urnayus, Anagha, Gopati, Dhritarashtra, 
Suryavarchas, Yugapa, Trinapa, Karshni, Nandi, Chitraratha, Salisirah, 
Parjannya, Kali, Narada, Brihatta, Brihaka, Karala Mahatman, 
Brahmacharin, Bahuguna, Suvarna the famed, Viswavasu, Bhumanyu, 
Suchandra, Saru and the renowned people of Haha and Huhu — all come 
and sing in abandon, in divine voices. 

Among the Apsaras that dance to the music of the Gandharvas, O Rajan, 
are Anchana, Anavadya, Gunamukhya, Gunavara, Adrika, Soma, 
Misrakesi, Alambusha, Marichi, Suchika, Vidyutparna, Tilottama, Ambika, 
Lakshmana, Kshema Devi, Rambha, Manorama, Asita, Subahu, Supriya, 
Subapuh, Pundarika, Sugandha, Surasa, Pramathini, Kamya and Saradwati. 

Menaka, Sahajanya, Karnika, Punjikasthala, Ritusthala, Ghritachi, 
Viswachi, Purvachiti, Umlocha, Pramlocha and Urvasi, all with large and 
lustrous eyes, the nymphs of heaven, also come there and sing in their 
voices past all compare: choros nympharum. 


Dhatri, Aryaman, Mitra, Varuna, Bhaga, Indra, Vivaswat, Pushan, 
Tvastri, Parjanya and Vishnu: the twelve Adityas come to that hermitage to 
bless Pandu’s son. And, O King, Mrigavyadha, Sarpa, Niriti, Ajaikapada, 
Ahivradhna, Pinakin, Dahana, Iswara, Kapalin, Sthanu, Bhaga: these eleven 
Rudras also come to see and bless the glorious child. 

The Aswin twins, the eight Vasus, the mighty Maruts, the Viswedevas, 
and the Sadhyas come to Satasringa, too; as do Karkotaka, Vasuki, 
Kachchhapa, Kunda and the great Takshaka — mighty and fierce Nagas of 
immense tapasya. Tarkshya, Arishtanemi, Garuda, Asitadvaja, many other 
Nagas arrive upon the blessed mountain, as do Aruna and Aruni of Vinata’s 
race. 

Only the Maharishis of lofty spiritual evolution see all these divine 
beings who either walk upon the mountain or look down from their vimanas 
in the sky. Those great Munis see the Gods and the rest of the unworldly 
ones and are amazed, and their love for the sons of Pandu grows in tide. 

Some time passes, then Pandu wants to have more children. He asks 
Kunti to conceive again, but she says, ‘The Sages have not given their 
sanction to have a fourth child, not even in a crisis. The woman who sleeps 
with four men is a swairini, while she that has five is a whore. 

My most learned lord, you know very well what the Shastras say about 
this, then why do you allow your greed for children to make you forget 
dharma?’” 


CANTO 124 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, ‘After the birth of Kunti’s sons and the hundred 
V/ sons of Dhritarashtra, Madri comes privately to Pandu one day. 

She says, ‘Shatrughana, scorcher of your enemies, I never 
complain though you pay me scant attention. I do not mind that though I am 
higher born than Kunti her position is higher than mine. I do not grieve, O 
Kurusthama, that Gandhari has a hundred sons. However, I am terribly sad 
that while Kunti and I are both your wives, she has three sons and I have 
none for you. 

If Kuntibhoja’s daughter can help me also become a mother I would be 
beholden to her forever, and she would also be giving you more sons, as 
you want. She is my rival for your love, and I cannot ask her this myself. 
But if you want to be kind to me, O Purushavyaghra, tell her to grant me 
this boon.’ 

Pandu says eagerly, ‘Madri, I have often thought of exactly what you are 
saying. But I never mentioned it lest I offend you. Now that you say you 
want the very same thing, I will certainly speak to Kunti and she will not 
refuse me.’ 

Pandu speaks alone to Kunti, ‘O Kunti, give me more sons to increase 
my clan and to benefit the world. Sweet wife, let us make sure that my Pitrs 
and I, and your manes, too, always have pinda offered them. Be kind to me, 
Kunti, and in that be most kindly towards the very Earth. Let your heart be 
moved to find immortal fame, and do what you might find difficult to do. 

Though he is King of the Devas, Indra still performs yagnas: only to 
enhance his fame. O lovely Kunti, Brahmanas who know the Veda and have 
acquired lofty punya still approach their Gurus reverently: only for their 
fame. All the Rajarishis and Brahmarishis achieved their most strenuous 
accomplishments only out of a desire to have fame. 


I ask you, chaste Kunti, to help make Madri a mother, too, and save her 
like a raft from the sea of grief in which she is drowning, and so acquire 
undying fame for yourself!’ 

Kunti agrees readily, and calls Madri and says to her, “Think of any 
Deva you like and you shall have a child by him.’ 

Madri considers a few moments then thinks of the Aswini twins in her 
heart, as Kunti softly chants Durvasa’s irresistible mantra. As soon as Madri 
is alone the splendid Aswini Kumaras come to her and beget two 
incomparably handsome sons on her, also twins, who come to be called 
Nakula and Sahadeva. 

As soon as they are born, a disembodied voice speaks, “These children 
will surpass the Aswins themselves in tejas and beauty.’ And truly, the 
infants are so lustrous that they light up the mountain. 

Rajan, when these five children are born, the Rishis of Satasringa come 
to bless them, and lovingly perform their birth rites and name them. Kunti’s 
eldest son is named Yudhishtira, her second Bhimasena, her third Arjuna; 
Madri’s older child is called Nakula and the second Sahadeva. 

Those magnificent sons, born a year apart, look even like five years 
embodied. Pandu would look at his sons of divine handsomeness and 
boundless energy, of incalculable strength, of great generosity, and be 
overwhelmed with joy. Of course, those five become the favourites of all 
the Rishis of the mountain of a hundred peaks, and of their wives, all of 
whom dote on them. 

Some time passes, when Pandu asks Kunti to enable Madri to have 
another child. But Kunti says, ‘I chanted the mantra for her once and she 
deceived me by having two sons. If I say it for her again, I cannot tell who 
she will invoke but she will have more sons than me. She is always envious 
and this is the way of women like her. 

As for me, I am naive that I did not think to invoke the Aswins myself so 
that I could have had two sons. My lord, I beg you do not ask me to use the 
mantra for Madri again.’ 

Thus, Rajan, Pandu has five sons begotten by Devas: princes of immense 
strength, who achieve great fame and increase the glory of the House of 
Kuru. Each of them bears every auspicious mark upon their bodies; each is 
as handsome as Soma. As they grow, they are majestic as the lion — in gait, 
in the broadness of their chests, in the largeness of their hearts and their 


eyes, their powerful necks and vast strength; each becomes a master archer, 
and they are, all five, truly like Devas themselves. 

Watching them grow, seeing their virtues grow with them, the great 
Munis who live on that snowcapped and holy mountain are wonder- 
stricken. Swiftly they grow, the five sons of Pandu on Satasringa and the 
hundred sons of Dhritarashtra in Hastinapura, as swiftly as a bank of lotuses 
in a lake.” 


CANTO 125 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Watching his sons grow in the great vana upon 
\/ the charmed mountain, Pandu feels the final strength in his body 
assert itself again. 

One day in spring, which maddens every creature with desire, Pandu is 
out walking with Madri in the forest, where every tree is decked in fresh 
new blooms. He sees Palasas, Tilakas, Mango trees, Champakas, 
Parihadrakas, Karnikaras, Asokas, Kesaras, Atimuktas and Kuruvakas, all 
with swarms of inebriated bees humming over their blossoms. Parijatas are 
in full heady bloom, and the Koyals sing their hearts out, ah so sweetly, 
against their sruti of the humming of the black bees. 

Pandu sees other trees, branches bent with the weight of their abundant 
flowers and fruit. He sees crystalline pools brimming with delicately 
fragrant lotuses. Pandu looks at all this, he feels spring in his blood; he feels 
his blood quicken with soft desire. As Pandu ranges through that enchanted 
realm, like a god, the still youthful Madri beside him wears a single 
diaphanous garment. Pandu looks at her and suddenly the long suppressed 
desire of all the years of enforced celibacy flares up and overwhelms Pandu. 

She sees the look in his eye and cries out, but he seizes her roughly, her 
of the eyes like lotus petals. She does everything she can to resist him, for 
she has not forgotten the curse of the deer. O Kurusthama, compelled by 
fate, overpowered by lust, Pandu forces himself on Madri, just as if he 
wants to end his life. Her strength is as nothing before his, and he thrusts 
himself into her, and immediately becomes senseless. Pandu of dharma dies 
even as he is joined with Madri. 

Madri clasps her dead husband’s body and sets up a loud wailing. Kunti, 
her sons and Madri’s twins hear her cries and come running to the place. 
When Madri sees them some way off, she cries to Kunti, ‘Leave the 
children and come alone!’ 


Telling the princes to stay where they are, Kunti runs to Madri and sees 
what has happened. She sees Madri and Pandu as they are, and her husband 
dead. Dementedly, she cries, ‘Madri, what have you done? I watched over 
him all these years, my own passion controlled, so that he would be 
protected. How did he forget the Rishi’s curse, O how did you? How did 
you let him near you thus aroused? He always grieved over the curse, then 
how did he forget it? How did you allow him, how could you tempt him in 
solitude? 

Ah daughter of Bahlika, finally you have prevailed over me and proved 
yourself the more fortunate one, for you saw desire on his face and joy as 
he united with you!’ 

Madri sobs, ‘O my sister, I tried to stop him, but he could not control 
himself. It was as if he was determined to fulfil the Rishi’s curse.’ 

Kunti is quiet, then says, ‘I am the older of his wives; the first karma 
must belong to me. Madri, you must not try to stop me from doing what 
must be done. I must follow our husband to the land of the dead. 

Get up Madri, and let me have his corpse; and from now, you raise these 
children.’ 

Madri replies, ‘I still hold him within my body. My desire is unslaked, so 
I must be the one to follow him. You are my elder sister; I beg you, let me 
have this one boon from you. This Bharatottama was joined with me in 
intercourse when his spirit left his body. He died without having his desire 
satisfied; must I not follow him, as we are, to Yama’s realm so that he can 
satiate himself on me? 

Besides, O my adored sister, if I am the one to live and you die I shall 
not be able to treat your sons and mine equally, and you know that is true. I 
will sin and in all likelihood divide the princes among themselves. But you, 
Kunti, will raise my sons as your own, making no difference between them. 

Our lord Pandu sought me out and he remains within me. He has gone to 
the realm of the spirits; it is right in every way that my body is not 
separated at this time from his but that I am burnt with him. Kunti, my 
sweet sister, you were always his first wife in this world; let me be the one 
to go with him out of it. Do not deny me this, I beg you! 

I know that you will be the best of mothers to all the children; I have no 
other wish or request to make of you.’ 

So, indeed, the daughter of the king of the Madras is burnt upon the 
funeral pyre of her husband Pandu, that Purusharishabha, that bull among 


men, while he still lay in her arms.” 


CANTO 126 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Now the godlike Rishis see Pandu dead, consult 

\/ together, and declare, ‘Pandu relinquished power and throne to come 

among us to live in tapasya upon this mountain. He has left us and 

gone to Swarga, leaving his wife and sons as a sacred trust in our hands. It 
is our dharma now to take them to Hastinapura.’ 

The Maharishis decide to take Kunti and the sons of Pandu to the 
kingdom of elephants and deliver them into the custody of Bhishma and 
Dhritarashtra. They set out immediately, taking the woman and the children 
with them, as well as the unburnt remains of Pandu and Madri, which they 
wrap tightly and carefully so no portion of them is visible. 

She has always lived a life of comfort, yet now Kunti sees the long and 
arduous journey as a short and almost happy one. 

Arriving in Kurujangala, Kunti comes to the main gate of the great city 
and presents herself there. The Rishis command the dwarapalakas to inform 
the king within the city of their arrival. The excited guardsmen run into the 
court with their amazing message. When the citizens of Hastinapura hear 
about the arrival at their gates of thousands of Munis and Charanas they are 
wonderstruck, and soon after dawn begin to throng to those portals in 
crowds, with their wives and children. 

In chariots and other regal vahanas, in thousands, come the Kshatriyas 
with their wives; the Brahmanas arrive with their women; as do the Vaisyas 
and Sudras with theirs. It is a calm crowd, for the people of Hastinapura are 
all given to dharma; they are a pious people. 

Bhishma, son of Shantanu, comes to the city gates, as do Somadatta, 
Bahlika, Rajarishi Dhritarashtra whose vision is his wisdom, Vidura the 
sage, the venerable Satyavati, the princesses of Kosala, Ambika and 
Ambalika, Gandhari, and other noble women of the royal household. 


The hundred sons of Dhritarashtra, decked in lavish ornaments, also 
emerge from the gates of the ancient city. 

The Kauravas and their Kulaguru, the family priest, worship the Rishis 
from Satasringi by bowing low to them, and then they sit before the Sages. 
The citizens also bow to the hermits, touch the ground with their hands in 
reverence, and then they also sit down. 

When the great gathering is perfectly still and silent, Bhishma worships 
the Rishis, offering them padya, water to wash their feet, and arghya.He 
then speaks to them about the kingdom and the kingship. 

Then the eldest Rishi, jata piled on his head and animal hide covering his 
loins, stands up and speaks for all the Sages. ‘You all know that Pandu, 
sovereign of the Kurus, renounced the pleasures of this world and became a 
Sannyasi on Satasringa of a hundred peaks. He became a brahmachari, yet 
for some inscrutable reason of the Gods, Pandu’s eldest son Yudhishtira was 
born upon the mountain and he was begotten by Dharma Deva. 

Pandu’s second son, this Bhima, strongest among all men, is the son of 
Vayu, the Wind God. This third prince, begotten upon Kunti by Indra, is 
Arjuna who will one day be the greatest of all bowmen on Earth. 

Now look at these young vyaghras, tigerish twins, whose mother is 
Madri and their fathers the Aswins of heaven. They, too, are great archers. 
Living in dharma as a Vanaprastha in the forest, Pandu did thus revive the 
illustrious lineage of his grandsire, a line threatened with extinction. 

You will no doubt be delighted to learn of the birth, the growth and the 
Vedic education of these sons of Pandu. After cleaving unwaveringly to 
dharma, seventeen days ago, Pandu left this world, leaving these children 
behind. 

His wife Madri burnt herself with him on his funeral pyre; she too has 
gone with her lord to the realm of chaste wives. You must now perform 
whatever rites need to be done for the two of them. Here are their remains. 

Here also are their children, these Parantapas, and their mother Kunti. 
Welcome them now with honour. 

When the first funeral rites have been completed let the first annual 
sraddha, the sapindakarana, be performed for Pandu of dharma, who always 
defended and spread the honour and glory of the Kurus; let him thus find 
his formal place among the Pitrs of your royal clan.’ 

When the eldest Rishi has spoken, all those Rishis and Guhyakas vanish 
before the very eyes of the people of Hastinapura. Astonished to see the 


Munis and Siddhas dissolve even like wisps of cloud, which come and go in 
the sky, the people slowly return to their homes.” 


CANTO 127 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “Now Dhritarashtra says, ‘Vidura, arrange 

V/ for great royal funerals for my brother, the Rajasimha Pandu, and his 

wife Madri. Spare no expense, for these rituals are for the souls of 

our beloved departed. Let everyone that asks be given as much as they ask 
for — cattle, clothes, jewels, gold and every kind of wealth. 

Let Kunti arrange for the last rites for Madri, in whatever fashion pleases 
her. Let Madri’s remains be so closely wrapped that not Surya Deva or 
Vayu sees them. Do not mourn for Pandu; he was a great Kshatriya and has 
left behind five sons as magnificent as Devas.’ 

O Bharata, Vidura says, “Tathaastu, so be it,’ and consulting with 
Bhishma finds a sacred and auspicious place to perform the funeral rites for 
Pandu. Without delay the family priests go there, carrying the sacred agni 
from the palace, fragrant with the ghee they fed it. 

Now friends, kinsmen and followers bathe Pandu’s body, wrap it in 
cerement, sprinkle it with fine perfumes and strew flowers over it.’”” They 
set Pandu upon a hearse, which also they adorn with garlands and rich 
hangings. Madri’s body is placed beside Pandu’s and the colourful bier is 
lifted onto sturdy shoulders. 

The white parasol of state is unfurled over that hearse, yak-tail whisks 
waved over it, and hundreds of musicians play as the funeral procession 
makes its way through the streets, looking bright and festive: for death, 
after all, is a release. 

Hundreds of palace servitors give out precious jewels to the people who 
line the streets in crowds. Later, more beautiful robes, more sovereign white 
parasols, and larger yak-tail chamaras are fetched for the great ceremony. 

The priests, wearing white, walk at the head of the procession, ladling 
libations of clarified butter into the sacred fire burning in an ornamental 


vessel. Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras, in their thousands, 
follow the dead Pandu. 

They lament loudly, sobbing, “O Prince, where did you go, leaving us 
behind, wretched forever?’ 

Bhishma, Vidura and the Pandavas all weep. Finally, they come to a 
charmed glade in the forest on the banks of the Ganga. They set down the 
bier on which the lion-hearted Pandu and Madri lie. They bring sacred 
water in golden vessels, wash the Kshatriya’s body, which has been 
smeared with many kinds of fragrant unguents; they smear it again, all over, 
with sandalwood paste. 

They cover him in white homespun cloth, and now Pandu seems as if he 
is alive and asleep upon a luxurious bed. 

Guided by the priests, they proceed to perform the last rites 
meticulously. When these are over, the Kauravas touch the bodies of Pandu 
and Madri alight, and fetch lotuses, sandalwood paste and other fragrant 
substances to the blazing pyre. 

Seeing the bodies burning, Ambalika wails, ‘My son! My son!’ and 
faints. Seeing her fall, the people of Hastinapura and also the rustic people 
from the provinces set up a great lament. Why, even the beasts of the field 
and the birds of the air are moved to grief hearing the lamentation of Kunti. 
Bhishma, son of Shantanu, the sagacious Vidura — they too grieve. 

Weeping, Bhishma, Vidura, Dhritarashtra, the Pandavas and the Kuru 
women together perform tarpana for the departed Pandu. When this is done, 
the people, sorrowing, come up and, with touch, kind words, with embraces 
and their love, console the sons of Pandu. 

The Pandavas mourn and sleep on bare ground. Seeing this, the 
Brahmanas and indeed all the other citizens of the city of elephants do the 
same, giving up their beds. Young and old, they mourn the dead Kshatriya 
with his sons who weep ceaselessly for twelve days.” 


™ Tt is not clear how much of the bodies the fire in Satasringa consumed, 
since definitely Madri also comes as a corpse to Hastinapura. 


CANTO 128 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “At the end of twelve days, Bhishma and Kunti 
\/ with their kinsfolk and friends, perform the sraddha for the dead 
prince and offer the pinda for his soul. After this, they arrange for 

great feasts and give away vast pieces of land and great gemstones as gifts. 

The people return to Hastinapura with the sons of Pandu, now cleansed 
of the impurity that attends a father’s death. Again, the citizens weep for the 
departed Pandu, as if they have lost one of their kin. 

When the sraddha has been performed, Vyasa Muni sees how all the 
people are plunged in despair, and says quietly one day to Satyavati, 
‘Mother, the days of joy have left the world and those of danger and 
calamity have begun. The power of sin increases, day by day, for the world 
has become old. Because of the swelling force of evil, the Kuru empire will 
crumble. 

It is best that you retire to the forest and embark upon a life of dhyana 
and yoga. From now, human society will be full of deceit and treachery. 
Evil will have sway, and all goodness and dharma will cease to be. Do not 
stay here anymore, to watch the destruction of your clan.’ 

He prophesies more, and she sees her son, the Sage, means what he says, 
and Satyavati goes into the antahpura and says to her elder daughter-in-law, 
‘Ambika, your grandsons shall cause the ruin of the House of Kuru; the 
very race of Bharata and all its people will perish because of what they do. 
If you agree, I mean to take sannyasa in the jungle with Ambalika, who is 
heartbroken at the death of Pandu.’ 

Unexpectedly, Ambika says that she will also accompany the other 
women. In the vana, Satyavati practises rigorous penance and profound 
dhyana, and in time leaves her body and finds Swarga for herself, as do her 
daughters-in-law, later.’ 


Now, the sons of Pandu undergo the purificatory and initiatory rites 
prescribed in the Veda, and for the first time, begin to live as princes in their 
dead father’s house. 

Quickly, while the youngsters play together, it is obvious that the 
Pandavas are stronger than their cousins, the Kauravas. The ebullient 
Bhima by himself is more than a match for Dhritarashtra’s sons — he is 
faster and stronger than they are; his aim is truer, more unerring, his 
appetite grander. Vayu’s son pulls the Kauravas’ hair and drags them 
roughly on the ground; he mischievously makes them fight with one 
another, and kicks dust into their faces. The gardens of the palace ring with 
his loud laughter as he does all this. 

Vrikodara easily beats up the hundred and one sons of his uncle, as if 
they are not a hundred and one but just one. When he seizes their hair, flings 
them down and hauls them over the rough earth, he cuts open some knees, 
some heads, and dislocates some shoulders. 

At times, he holds ten Kauravas together under water, until they nearly 
drown. When Dhritarashtra’s sons climb a tree to pluck its fruit, Bhima 
delivers a tremendous kick to the tree and brings fruit-pluckers and fruit 
raining down from the branches. 

Yes, the king’s sons are no match at all for the son of the Wind, not in 
strength, speed or skill. However, Bhima is innocent and all the mischief he 
wreaks is out of a huge sense of playfulness and fun, and never seriously 
malicious. His heart is truly a child’s. 

But the king’s eldest son, the mighty Duryodhana, hitherto unchallenged 
in the palace, sees these marvellous feats of strength and swiftness from 
Bhima and begins to hate his cousin to distraction, seeing clearly and 
astutely that the young giant is the greatest threat to him in the future. And 
being neither innocent nor childlike in his heart, but already evil, the 
ambitious and ruthless Duryodhana conceives a sinister plot. 

He says to himself, “No one else is nearly as strong as Pandu’s second 
son Bhima. He is the main threat to me, so I will have to kill him with 
cunning. Perhaps I will push him into the Ganga and drown him. Later, I 
will imprison Yudhishtira and Arjuna, who are nothing without their 
brother’s strength, and rule as the only king of the Kurus, unopposed.’ 

Having decided on his course, Duryodhana is always on the lookout for 
an opportunity to do away with Bhima. O Bharata, the devious Duryodhana 
has a palace built in beautiful Pramanakoti on the banks of the Ganga. He 


has it furnished with fine tapestries and every other lavish embellishment. 
He has the palace provided with every manner of entertainment, the finest 
food, and of course it is ostensibly a place for the Kuru princes to visit so 
they can swim in the river, a retreat for water sport. 

Bright flags wave on this mansion, which is called the House of Water 
Sport. Master cooks prepare every kind of delicacy. When the preparations 
are complete, his men tell Duryodhana that everything is ready. That evil 
prince says to the Pandavas, “Let us all go to the banks of the Ganga, and 
swim and play in the water.’ 

Yudhishtira agrees, and the sons of Dhritarashtra set out from 
Hastinapura with the sons of Pandu, mounted on massive elephants born in 
the jungle and in chariots as big as towns. 

Arriving at the House of Water Sport, they dismiss their attendants, 
admire the fine gardens and groves of trees, created for their pleasure and 
their games, and enter the great mansion as a pride of young lions does a 
mountain cave. 

With perfect skill, the architects have designed the palace, and masons 
plastered and painted the walls and the ceiling. The windows are gracious 
and large, and the artificial fountains elegant, splashing softly. 

Both inside and out are tanks of clear water, in which banks of lotuses 
bloom, in regal profusion. Upon their banks grow numberless other flowers, 
whose scents fill the air headily. 

The Kauravas and the Pandavas begin to sport there and to enjoy 
themselves. As they play, in some delight, they feed each other small 
portions of the fine fare laid out for them by the cooks and servants. 
Meanwhile, Duryodhana mixes a potent poison into some food, to kill 
Bhima. Honey on his tongue and a razor in his heart, he is absolutely 
friendly towards his cousin today, and soon manages to feed him a goodly 
quantity of the poisoned food. Certain that he has achieved his purpose, he 
is glad. 

Soon the Pandavas and the Kauravas begin to swim and play in the river. 
When they finish, they put on white robes and fine jewellery. A little tired, 
they decide to rest in the pleasure-house in the garden. 

Bhima, who has exerted himself the most, swum the fastest and longest, 
feels most tired of all. He comes out of the river and flops down on its bank. 
The poison is taking effect and great exhaustion sweeps over the second 


Pandava. The cool evening breeze seems to enhance the effect of the 
poison, and Bhima immediately loses consciousness. 

Now Duryodhana, who has not gone with the others, quickly binds 
Bhima with some strong vines and creepers, and rolls him into the water. 
The unconscious Pandava sinks down into Nagaloka, the realm of the 
Nagas. Alarmed by the sinking titan, thousands of serpents, their venom 
virulent, bite him. 

The snake venom acts as an antidote to the vegetable poison in the blood 
of Vayu’s son. The serpents bite him all over his body, except for his chest, 
which their needle sharp fangs cannot pierce, so tough is its skin. 

Bhima awakes, and easily snapping the green thongs that hold him, falls 
upon the snakes, trampling hundreds of them. The rest flee to their King 
Vasuki, and cry, ‘Nagaraja, a human sank into the river, his arms bound 
with cords of vines and creepers. It seems he drank poison before he fell 
into the water, because he was unconscious when he fell among us. But 
when we bit him he awoke, broke his bonds and fell on us dreadfully. Lord, 
you must find out who he is.’ 

Vasuki goes to where Bhima is; with him is an aged Naga, Aryaka. 
Aryaka is Kunti’s great grandfather. Seeing Bhima, Aryaka knows him at 
once and embraces him fondly. 

When Vasuki realises who this magnificent youth is, he says to Aryaka, 
“We must please him. Let us give him vast gold and jewels.’ 

Aryaka says, ‘Nagaraja, he does not need wealth as long as you are 
pleased with him. Let him drink from the rasakunda, the chalices of 
nagamrita, and acquire immense strength. Each chalice contains the might 
of a thousand elephants. Let this prince drink as much as he can bear.’ 

Vasuki agrees, and the Nagas perform auspicious initiatory rituals for the 
nectar drinking. Purifying himself with care, Bhimasena faces the east and 
begins to drink the amrita of the snakes. In one gulp he drains the first 
chalice; in another, the next; and so on, until he drinks eight full chalices of 
nagamrita. 

Now, at last, he can drink no more and feels drowsy. The Nagas make a 
soft bed for him and he lies upon it and falls asleep.” 


CANTO 129 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Meanwhile, the Kauravas and the Pandavas 
\/ finish their games and swimming, and set out home for Hastinapura, 
without Bhima. Some princes ride horses, others elephants, while 

still others go in chariots. 

On the way, Bhima’s brothers and some others say, “Bhima must have 
gone alone before us.’ 

Duryodhana is the only one who knows the truth, and his heart is 
bursting for joy as he enters Hastinapura, but he says nothing, nor does he 
show what he feels. Of course, Yudhishtira is so virtuous that he thinks of 
everyone else as being as good-hearted as he is; he does not yet know what 
vice and evil are. 

Kunti’s eldest son goes straight to her, and after bowing to her, asks, 
‘Mother, has Bhima come home? I do not see him here. We searched for 
him on the banks of the river, in the garden and in the woods there, but he is 
nowhere to be found. We decided that he must have returned alone, before 
the rest of us. 

But mother, I do not see him here. Have you sent him on an errand? Ah, 
I am sick with worry. My mighty brother was asleep beside the river and 
now he has vanished. I fear for his life.’ 

Kunti gives a small scream, and says, ‘My son, I have not seen Bhima. 
He did not come to me. You must go back to Pramanakoti and look for him 
again. Go with your brothers, hurry!’ 

In great distress, she summons Vidura, and says, ‘Illustrious Kshattri, 
Bhima is missing. All his other brothers have returned from the pleasure 
house by the river, but not my Bhima. Where has he gone? 

O Vidura, Duryodhana hates my child. The Kaurava prince is evil and 
rash; he openly covets the throne. Oh, I am terrified that he has killed my 
Bhima out of his ambition. Vidura, my heart feels as if it is on fire.’ 


Vidura replies, ‘Say nothing Kunti, think of your other sons. You must 
protect them. If you accuse Duryodhana, he might kill your other boys as 
well. The great Dwaipayana has foretold that all your sons shall live long 
lives. The Sage’s words shall not be proved false. Bhima will come back 
safely to you.’ 

Vidura returns to his own palace, not wanting to arouse any suspicions, 
while Kunti remains in hers, in terrible anxiety, with her sons. 

Eight nightmarish days pass for Kunti and her sons in Hastinapura. On 
the eighth, Bhima awakes from his deep slumber after drinking the 
nagamrita. He feels awesome new strength in his body — strength past 
measure. 

Seeing him awake, the Nagas set up a cheer, crying, ‘Bhimasena, the 
nagamrita you have drunk has given you the strength of ten thousand 
elephants! No one will ever be able to vanquish you in battle now. 
Kururishabha, now bathe in this sacred water, and go back home. Your 
brothers are full of anxiety for you.’ 

Bhima bathes in those sacral waters, puts on white robes and garlands of 
white flowers. He eats the paramanna, of rice and sugar, which the Nagas 
give him.Wearing unearthly ornaments, he receives worship and blessings 
from the serpents, and saluting them, thanking them, he rises up from 
Nagaloka in Patala. 

The Nagas brings the lotus-eyed Bhima up from under the river and set 
him back in the same garden, on the bank where he had fallen asleep eight 
days ago. Then they vanish before his eyes. 

Great Bhimasena now runs back to his mother, as quickly as his father 
Vayu flies. He bows to her and to his eldest brother Yudhishtira, and sniffs 
the heads of his younger brothers. She, in turn, and those other rishabhas, 
his brothers, embrace him, the scourge of all his enemies. 

With boundless love, they cry repeatedly, ‘Ah, what joy today, what 
wondrous joy!’ 

Now Bhima, the mighty, tells his brothers about the murderous treachery 
of Duryodhana, and also everything that happened in the realm of the 
Nagas. 

Then Yudhishtira says, ‘Do not speak of this to anyone but be silent. But 
from today be vigilant and all of you watch over one another closely.’ 

And vigilant indeed they are from then. Lest they lapse into carelessness, 
Vidura is always cautioning the sons of Kunti. 


Some time passes, then again Duryodhana mixes some deadly poison in 
Bhima’s food. But Yuyutsu, Dhritarashtra’s son by a Vaisya woman, who 
loves the Pandavas, warns them. However, Bhima eats the food that 
Duryodhana gives him, and digests it, poison and all, with no ill effect at 
all. 

The poison failing to do its work, Duryodhana, Karna and Shakuni hatch 
many other plots to kill the second Pandava. The sons of Pandu know about 
every one of these, but having been warned by Vidura, they never let on 
that they do, and never show their anger in the least way. 

Meanwhile, Dhritarashtra sees the Kuru princes becoming idlers, and 
turning to mischief to pass their time, and appoints Kripa as their Guru, and 
sends them to him for instruction. Born in a bank of reeds, Kripa is a 
knower of the Vedas, and he becomes the Kuru princes’ first master at 
arms.” 


CANTO 130 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


anameyjaya said, “Brahmana, tell me everything about the birth of Kripa. 
J ios was he born in a bank of reeds, and where did he get his weapons 

from?” 

Vaisampayana said, “Rajan, Maharishi Gautama had a son called 
Saradwat, who was born holding some arrows in his hand. Parantapa, 
Saradwat showed an exceptional gift for mastering the use of weapons but 
no special genius for any other branch of learning. He acquired all his astras 
with the rigours with which other Brahmanas study the Vedas. 

Indra became afraid of the astras, the might and the tapasya of Saradwat. 
Kurusthama, the king of the Devas summoned an Apsara calls Janapadi and 
said to her, ‘Go and distract Saradwat from his tapasya.’ 

Janapadi went to Saradwat’s enchanting asrama, and proceeded to tempt 
the hermit armed with bow and arrows. Saradwat saw the nymph, who wore 
a single diaphanous robe over her peerless and unearthly body, and his eyes 
widened. His bow and arrows slipped from his hands, and his body shook 
with powerful emotion. 

Somehow, he summoned the strength to resist her temptation, but the 
initial surge of excitement that seized him at the sight of her made him 
ejaculate involuntarily. He sprang up, left his bow and arrows and his 
deerskin, and fled from Janapadi as if for his life. His seed, though, had 
fallen into a clump of reeds, where it was divided in two. From the two 
portions of semen, twin children, a boy and girl, were born. 

At that time, King Shantanu was out hunting in the same forest, and one 
of his soldiers came upon the magically born twins. The man saw the 
abandoned bow, quiver and deerskin, and felt the children might belong to a 
Brahmana who was a master at arms. 

He picked up the bow and arrows, and the twins, and brought them to 
Shantanu. Moved to pity, Shantanu said, ‘Let them be as my own children,’ 


and took them to his palace. 

Purushottama Shantanu, son of Prateepa, had the ritual karma performed 
for Saradwat’s twins. Because he had adopted them out of pity, and because 
he considered them to be God’s gifts of kindness to him, he called them 
Kripa and Kripi. 

Meanwhile, having left his old asrama, Saradwat continued earnestly 
with his study of the science of weapons. With occult vision, he learnt that 
his twins were growing in the palace of Shantanu. He went to the king and 
told him who he was, and then he taught his son Kripa the four branches of 
the science of arms, and also the Vedas and other secret and hermetic 
mysteries. 

In short time Kripa also became a master of the astra shastra. Later, 
Dhritarashtra’s hundred sons, the Pandavas, the Yadava princes, the 
Vrishnis, and indeed young Kshatriyas from many other kingdoms all learnt 
the arts of weapons and warfare from Kripa Acharya.” 


CANTO 131 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Then, Bhishma thinks it is time that his 
\/ grandsons receive a higher education than what Kripa can give them, 
and he begins to seek a Guru for his wards, a master of exceptional 

tejas and an even greater master of astras than Kripa. 

Deciding, Bharatottama, that only he is_ sufficiently intelligent, 
illustrious, a great enough master at arms and truly one that himself 
possesses godlike prowess, Ganga’s son, O Purushavyaghra, appoints 
Bharadwaja’s son Drona, who knows the Vedas deeply, to be the preceptor 
of Kuru princes. Drona, famed throughout the world as being the greatest 
master of weapons, is pleased by the warm welcome and the honour 
accorded him by Bhishma, and he accepts charge of the Kuru princes. 

He teaches them all the skills of weapons and warfare, and in quick time, 
the Kauravas and the Pandavas, all endowed with great strength and talent, 
become highly proficient in the use of every kind of weapon.”’ 

‘Janamejaya asked, “Brahmana, how was Drona born? How and where 
did he acquire his astras? Why did he come to the Kurus? Whose son was 
he, that he possessed such tejas? Also, tell us about Drona’s son 
Aswatthama, who was also a great warrior, and how he was born. 

All this I want to hear in detail, OO Muni. I beg you tell me about it all.” 

Vaisampayana said, “At the source of the Ganga, there lived a Maharishi 
called Bharadwaja, always at stern and ceaseless tapa. One day, long ago, 
he went with many other great Rishis to the river to bathe before 
performing the Agnihotra. Arriving on the banks of the river, he saw the 
beautiful and youthful Apsara Ghritachi in the water, bathing. 

Her lovely face was haughty, and now suffused with the languor of her 
bath, as, finishing, she rose from the water. As she stepped softly onto the 
bank, the single garment she wore parted, showing her shining nakedness. 


Seeing her like that the Rishi Bharadwaja was stricken by such desire that 
in a moment he ejaculated. 

Hastily the Sage caught his emission in the waterpot he carried, his 
drana. Later, a splendid son was born from his seed, and Bharadwaja called 
him Drona for the vessel from which he was born. 

Drona mastered the Vedas and all their angas. In the past, Bharadwayja, 
master of astras, had taught the secret of the fiery Agneyastra to the Rishi 
Agnivesha; now Agnivesha, the fireborn Sage, imparted the secret to Drona, 
the son of his Guru. 

King Prishata of the Panchalas was a great friend of Bharadwaja. 
Prishata had a son, whom he named Drupada. Every day that 
Kshatriyarishabha, Drupada, came to Bharadwaja’s asrama, to play with 
Drona and study with him. 

Rajan, when Prishata died, the mighty-armed Drupada became king of 
the northern Panchalas. About this time, the illumined Bharadwaja also left 
his body and rose into Swarga. 

Drona continued living in his father’s asrama and performing tapasya. 
He mastered the Vedas and Vedangas, made ashes of his sins with penance, 
and then married Saradwata’s daughter Kripi. She was chaste, always 
performing tapa and the agnihotra, and she gave birth to a son. As soon as 
he was born, he neighed delightfully, even like a small Uchhaisravas. 

An invisible being spoke from the sky, ‘Let the child whose cry has 
echoed everywhere be named Aswatthama,’ which, of course, means horse- 
voiced. 

Drona’s joy knew no bounds when little Aswatthama was born; the child 
was the very vision of his eye. He continued living in his father’s hermitage 
and devoted himself to the study of astra shastra, the science of weapons. 

Rajan, around this time, Drona heared that the great Brahmana 
Parasurama Jamadagnya, son of Jamadagni, slayer of his foes, greatest of 
all warriors, of incalculable learning of every kind, had declared that he 
meant to give away all his wealth to deserving Brahmanas. 

Drona had heard all about Rama’s unrivalled knowledge of arms and 
especially the Devastras, as well as his knowledge of dharma. Drona wished 
fervently for both, and set out with his disciples for the Mahendra 
Mountain. Arriving there, he saw the Bhargava, the radiant son of Bhrigu, 
sitting in dhyana with his mind perfectly controlled. 


Drona and his sishyas approached Rama, and Drona told the Avatara his 
name and that he was born into the line of Angiras. He laid his head on the 
ground at Parasurama’s feet in worship. 

Drona said, ‘I am the son of Bharadwaja, but I am not born of any 
woman. I am a highborn Brahmana, called Drona, and I have come to you 
for the wealth you want to give away.’ 

The illumined savager of the Kshatriyas replied, “You are welcome, 
Dvija! Tell me what you want from me.’ 

Drona replied, ‘I want your immortal wealth, O you of vratas beyond 
count!’ 

‘Tapasvin,’ replied Rama, ‘All my gold and other wealth I have already 
given away to various Brahmanas. This Earth also, adorned with towns and 
cities as with a garland, down to the very Sea, I have given to Kashyapa. I 
now have only this body and my astras. I can give you either of these. Say 
which you want, quickly!’ 

Drona replied, ‘O Bhargava, I beg you, give me all your astras, and the 
mantras to cast and recall them.’ 

Parasurama said, ‘So be it’ and gave all his astras to Drona; he made a 
gift to him of the very astra shastra, the science of weapons, with all its 
mysteries and laws. Drona received this greatest gift in joy, and prostrating 
gratefully at Bhargava’s feet, set out for the city of his childhood friend 
Drupada.” 


CANTO 132 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “O King, Bharadwaja’s mighty son presents 
V/ himself before King Drupada, and says joyfully, ‘I am your friend 
Drona!’ 

But the lord of the Panchalas does not like what he hears. Deluded by 
power and wealth, he knits his brows in anger, and his eyes turn red. 

Drupada replies, ‘Brahmana, surely you are dimwitted that you suddenly 
claim to be my friend! Fool, how can a great king like me and a pauper like 
you be friends? Yes, once we were both students in your father’s asrama 
and then we were equals and also friends. 

Time wears away all things and friendship as well. In this world, no 
friendship endures in any heart, for time gnaws at it and anger destroys it. 
Forget, Brahmanashreshta, that we were ever friends. That old friendship I 
had with you was for a specific purpose: you were my Guru’s son. 

Between a rich man and a poor one, between a learned man and an 
unlettered one, between a hero and a coward, how can there ever be 
friendship? Why do you want to be my friend? There can be friendship or 
even enmity between equals in wealth or in strength. A beggar and a king 
can neither have friendship nor enmity between them, for they are not 
equals but a superior and an inferior. 

A pure born man can never have friendship with a lowborn one. A man 
who is a Maharatha cannot be the friend of a man who is not a Maharatha; 
and a king cannot be the friend of one who is not a king! Tell me, foolish 
Drona, why do you invoke our old friendship and dream of renewing it?’ 

Drona trembles with wrath. He says nothing, but considers for a moment 
what he would do to Drupada, to humble the Panchala king. Turning on his 
heel, he strides out from Drupada’s court and makes his way towards the 
capital of the Kurus, named after the elephant.” 


CANTO 133 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Drona comes to Hastinapura and, without 

\/ disclosing his presence in the city, begins living in the house of his 

brother-in-law, Kripa. During the intervals between Kripa’s classes 

to the Kuru princes, Drona’s son Aswatthama gives Kunti’s sons some 

casual hints about the use of arms. But he does not reveal his true skills 
even to them, or how mighty he is. 

Drona has been living secretly in Kripa’s house for some time, when, 
one day, all the Kuru princes come out of the city together. They begin to 
roam about, in freedom, and to play with a ball, which soon enough falls 
down a well. The young Kshatriyas do their best to retrieve the ball, but in 
vain; they cannot fetch it out. 

They feel ashamed and begin to look at one another with some anxiety: 
Imagine, the great scions of the House of Kuru not being able to get a ball 
out of a well! Suddenly, they see a rather dark-skinned, lean Brahmana 
quite close to them; he has obviously just performed the Agnihotra and 
sanctified himself with it, and finished his nitya, his daily worship. 

The princes are drawn to the stranger and surround him. Smiling 
slightly, Drona says, ‘Well, Princes, a shame upon your Kshatriya prowess, 
and a shame also upon your skill at arms. To think that you are born in the 
race of Bharata and cannot retrieve a ball from a well. Promise to feed me 
tonight and I will fetch out your ball for you with these blades of grass. 
Look, I will throw my ring after your ball and fetch that as well.’ 

Drona pulls a valuable ring from his finger and throws it into the well. 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Brahmana, you ask for a trifle. With Acharya Kripa’s 
leave, ask us for something that will last you a lifetime.’ 

His smile widening, Drona says, “With mantras I will make astras of 
these long blades of grass. This grass will have powers that other weapons 


do not. One blade will pierce your ball, another my ring, and the rest shall 
form a chain and fetch both out of the well.’ 

Without a moment’s hesitation, Drona does exactly as he says. The 
princes goggle; they feel their chests will burst with wonder and disbelief. 

They whisper, ‘We bow to you, O Brahmana, no one on Earth has your 
skills. Tell us who you are, tell us whose son you are. Tell us what we can 
do for you.’ 

Drona replies, “Go to Bhishma, describe me to him and tell him what I 
did. He will know who I am.’ 

The princes cry, “We will!’ and run to their grandsire, and tell him about 
the extraordinary Brahmana’s feat. Bhishma knows at once that this is 
Drona they describe. He knows that this is the Guru he has been seeking for 
his grandsons, and goes out himself to welcome the Brahmana reverently, 
and brings him into the palace. 

Bhishma, greatest of warriors, asks Drona, ‘What brings a Mahapurusha 
like you to Hastinapura?’ 

Drona tells him his story. ‘Mighty Bhishma, I once went to the Rishi 
Agnivesha to learn the use of weapons and the astra shastra from him. I 
lived as a brahmacharin, with jata on my head, and served my Guru humbly 
for many years. 

At that time, the Panchala prince Drupada Yagnasena also lived in the 
same asrama, serving Agnivesha as I did for the same reason that I did. He 
and I became friends; he always looked after me and we grew close as 
brothers, loving each other dearly. As I said, many years we spent together. 

O Kurusthama, we were together from our early boyhood, studying 
together, and Drupada always did and said whatever he felt would please 
me. Once, O Bhishma, he said to me, “Drona, I am my great father’s 
favourite son. When I become king of the Panchalas, my kingdom shall be 
yours. My precious friend, this I swear. My kingship, my wealth and my 
happiness will all depend on you, O Drona.” 

Finally, we finished our tutelage, and he left for home. We parted 
warmly; he repeated what he had said to me, and ever since I have kept it in 
my heart. 

A while later, my father wanted me to marry and since I also wanted to 
have a son, I married Kripi of the short hair, of great intelligence, who kept 
many stern vratas and always performed the agnihotra and other austere 
rituals. 


In time, she gave birth to our son Aswatthama, who is as splendid as the 
Sun and as powerful. I was as delighted when my son was born as my 
father had been when I was born. I doted on him. 

One day, Aswatthama saw some rich men’s sons drinking milk, which 
we could not afford, and began crying. I felt so stricken that I lost my very 
reason, why, I could not have told east from west, or north from south, so 
sad did I feel. I could have begged for a cow, but it would have been of 
someone who had only a few cows himself and would have perhaps had to 
stop performing his sacrifices and lost punya because of that. 

Instead, I decided I would beg a cow from someone who had many cows 
and would not feel the loss of one. I wandered from country to country, 
kingdom to kingdom, but I could not get myself a milch cow. 

When I returned home, disappointed, I saw something that truly broke 
my heart. Some of my son’s playmates mixed powdered rice in water and 
gave it to my little Aswatthama, telling him that it was milk. My poor child 
drank it eagerly, and began to dance for joy, crying, “I have drunk milk! I 
have drunk milk today!’ 

His friends grinned at his naiveté. Then there were those that whispered, 
but within my hearing, ‘Drona claims to be the greatest master of weapons 
on earth. But he makes no effort to earn a livelihood and his son drinks rice 
powder mixed in water and dances for joy thinking that it is milk.’ 

I was desperate, but I still decided that even if I had to live as an outcast, 
I would not become anyone’s servant for the sake of wealth. Then I heard 
that Drupada, my old friend, had become king of the Somaka Panchalas. In 
great joy, the words he had once said to me ringing in my mind, fondly 
remembering our old friendship, I took my wife and my child and went in 
great hope to Drupada’s kingdom. 

He made me wait a day before he even allowed me into his court, but I 
never doubted him for a moment. Entering his grand sabha, I cried, 
‘Purushavyaghra, tiger among men, I am your friend Drona, to whom you 
promised your kingdom!’ 

I approached him confidently, as a friend should. But Drupada laughed 
in my face; he mocked me, saying, ‘Brahmana, surely you are dimwitted 
that you suddenly claim to be my friend. Fool, how can a great king like me 
and a pauper like you be friends? Yes, once we were both students in your 
father’s asrama and then we were equals and also friends. 


Time wears all things away and friendship as well. In this world, no 
friendship endures in any heart, for time gnaws at it and anger destroys it. 
Forget, Brahmanottama, that we were ever friends. The old friendship that I 
had with you was for a specific purpose. 

Between a rich man and a poor one, between a learned man and an 
unlettered one, between a hero and a coward, how can there ever be 
friendship? Why do you want to be my friend? There can be friendship or 
even enmity between equals in wealth or in strength. A beggar and a king 
can neither have friendship nor enmity between them, for they are not 
equals but a superior and an inferior. 

A pure born man can never have friendship with a lowborn one. A man 
who is a Maharatha cannot be the friend of a man who is not a Maharatha; 
and a king cannot be the friend of one who is not a king. Tell me, foolish 
Drona, why do you invoke our old friendship and dream of renewing it? 

I do not remember ever having promised you my kingdom, but 
Brahmana I will certainly give you shelter for a night, and food.’ 

With my wife and child, I left his palace and his city immediately, 
vowing in my heart to do what I certainly will, and soon. Anger seethes in 
me, O Bhishma, ever since Drupada humiliated me. His mockery rings in 
my ears. I have come to the Kurus to find gifted and obedient pupils; I have 
come to fulfil your wishes. Tell me what I should do now.’ 

Bhishma says to Bharadwaja’s son, ‘String your bow, Brahmana, and 
make the Kuru princes master warriors. You shall have honour and worship 
in Hastinapura, and a fine home filled with every luxury, which you must 
enjoy to your heart’s content. Drona, from now you are the lord of whatever 
wealth the Kurus own, and of their kingdom and sovereignty. 

From today, the Kurus belong to you, so whatever the wish that burns 
your heart: consider it already accomplished. You, O Brahmana are the fruit 
of our greatest punya and fortune. By coming here you confer the greatest 
favour upon me.’” 


CANTO 134 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Honoured by Bhishma, that Manavottama Drona, 

\/ tejasvin, now begins living openly among the Kurus, who duly 

revere him. When he has rested, Bhishma brings his grandsons to the 

Brahmana, and also many precious gifts. The mighty Bhishma joyfully 

gives Bharadwaja’s son a fine house in which to live, stocked with rice and 
furnished with every comfort and all manner of wealth. 

Drona, best of archers, now accepts the sons of Pandu and the sons of 
Dhritarashtra to be his sishyas. He takes them apart, makes them touch his 
feet, and then says to them with some emotion, “There is something that I 
want you to do for me when I have made you master warriors. Tell me, 
princes, that you will do what I want.’ 

All the other Kuru princes remain silent, but without a moment’s 
hesitation Arjuna says, ‘I will do whatever you want.’ 

Drona clasps Arjuna in an embrace, sniffs the top of the prince’s head 
repeatedly in affection, and tears roll down his cheeks. The princes’ tutelage 
begins, and he teaches them the use of weapons both mundane and 
unearthly. Bharatarishabha, apart from the young Kurus, many other 
Kshatriyas princes from other lands come to Drona for instruction, 
including the Suta’s son Karna.®” 

Karna is envious of Arjuna and frequently taunts the Pandava; 
Duryodhana befriends him and together they always mock all the sons of 
Pandu. But Arjuna is entirely devoted to the study of the astra shastra, and 
becomes like his master’s shadow. He excels all the rest in his natural gifts, 
his prowess especially with the longbow, and his dedication and 
perseverance. 

Drona teaches them all equally, but quickly Arjuna outstrips the others, 
and the master is soon convinced that none of the rest could ever hope to 
match the skills of this pupil, the son of Indra. 


Drona’s lessons continue, and one day he gives all his pupils earthen 
pots to fill with water from the river and bring back. To his own son 
Aswatthama he gives a pot with a larger mouth than all the rest. He says 
that the lesson would begin as soon as the first student arrives in his 
presence with a full waterpot. Of course, Aswatthama arrives earlier than 
the princes and his father imparts some choice secrets of the astra shastra to 
him. 

Arjuna chafes at this for some days, then, one morning, he arrives with a 
filled waterpot long before even Aswatthama, and in honour now, Drona 
teaches this exceptional pupil before the others; he shares his special secrets 
with Arjuna, who has used the Varunastra to fill his vessel. 

So, Aswatthama loses his advantage and Arjuna serves his Guru so 
diligently and lovingly that he becomes Drona’s favourite sishya, yes, as 
dear to him, at least, as his own son. 

One day, Drona summons the palace cook and says to him, ‘Never serve 
Arjuna his meal in the dark, and do not tell him that I said anything to you.’ 

However, just a few days later, while Arjuna is eating his night meal a 
sudden gust of wind blows out the lamp upon his table. Arjuna continues 
eating in the dark, by force of habit his hand taking the food to his mouth 
without the help of his eyes. That brilliant prince does not fail to notice this. 
It means that now he can continue to practise his archery at night! 

The same night, Drona hears the lone twang of a bowstring, and coming 
out embraces his favourite sishya. The Acharya cries, ‘I swear that you will 
be the greatest archer in the world, and no one shall be your equal.’ 

Now Drona teaches Arjuna the art of fighting from horseback, from the 
back of an elephant, from a chariot, and on the ground. He teaches Arjuna 
all about the mace, the sword, the lance, the spear and the dart; he teaches 
him how to fight many opponents simultaneously. 

Drona’s fame as an unrivalled master spreads across the land, and 
princes and even kings arrive in Hastinapura from the most far-flung places, 
in thousands, to have some instructions from the Acharya. Among those 
that come, in hope, O Rajan, is Ekalavya, son of Hiranyadhanush, king of 
the Nishadas. Drona senses the boy’s genius at once and refuses to take him 
as his pupil, saying that he is a Nishada. The master fears this youth might 
surpass all his highborn sishyas. 

But, O Parantapa, Ekalavya lays his head at Drona’s feet, makes his way 
into the deep jungle, where he fashions a lifelike image in clay of Drona, 


and begins to worship the statue as if this is Drona himself, whom the youth 
has taken in his heart for his Guru. 

Before that clay image Ekalavya ceaselessly practises with his bow and 
arrows. Such is his devotion to his master, his extraordinary talent, and the 
rigour of his discipline that he quickly becomes an exceptional archer. 
Effortlessly he fits arrows to his bowstring, aims and looses them with 
unerring accuracy: the three parts of archery. His skill is prodigious, 
matchless. 

One day, with Drona’s leave, the Kuru and Pandava princes go hunting 
in their chariots. A servant follows them, with a hunting dog and carrying 
whatever the princes might need in the wilderness. 

Arriving in the forest, the young Kshatriyas earnestly begin their hunt. 
The dog wanders off on its own and comes upon Ekalavya. It sees the black 
Nishada, covered in dirt, wearing a black hide, his hair tangled in wild jata, 
and barks at him. 

Quick as thinking, Ekalvya turns and shoots seven arrows into the dog’s 
mouth, silencing it. Whimpering, the dog runs back to its masters, the 
princes. They gape in wonder and disbelief at the beast. They feel humbled, 
for certainly none of them could have shot seven arrows into the dog’s 
mouth so swiftly and unerringly, when it must have turned to run after 
receiving the first one. 

The princes comb the forest for the hidden archer. Soon enough, they 
find him, shooting arrows from his bow in an incredible, endless stream. 
Seeing the grim faced stranger, they ask, ‘Whose son are you?’ 

He replies, ‘Kshatriyas, I am the son of Hiranyadhanush, king of the 
Nishadas. Know that I am the sishya of Drona, and I toil to become a 
master of the longbow.’ 

The Kuru princes learn all there is to know about Ekalavya, ride back to 
Hastinapura and go straight to Drona, to whom they describe the 
miraculous archery that the young Nishada in the forest displayed. 

Arjuna is terribly distressed, trembling with envy. He draws Drona aside 
privately and says accusingly, “Master, you clasped me in your arms with 
love and told me that no other pupil of yours would be my equal, and that I 
would be the greatest archer in the world. How, then, is the Nishada king’s 
son clearly better than I am?’ 

Drona thinks for a moment, and quickly decides what he must do. 
Taking only Arjuna with him, he goes into the jungle to where Ekalavya 


was. He sees the Nishada prince, wearing filthy rags, matted jata on his 
head, his body covered in dirt, with a bow in his hands from which the 
arrows flare in a ceaseless, effortless tide. 

When Ekalavya sees Drona, he runs to him, touches his feet and 
prostrates himself before the Brahmana. Worshipping Drona, the Nishada 
tells him that he is his sishya and then stands with folded hands, awaiting 
his Guru’s command. 

Rajan, now Drona says to Ekalavya, ‘If, O Archer, you are truly my 
sishya, then you must give me dakshina.’ 

Beaming to hear this, Ekalavya cries, ‘O my Guru, tell me what you 
want as dakshina, for there is nothing that I will not give my master.’ 

Drona says, ‘Ekalavya, give me the thumb of your right hand.’ 

Never pausing, the smile of joy still on his face, Ekalavya slices off his 
right thumb with a sharp arrow and hands it to Drona. When his wound 
heals, and he begins to shoot again without his thumb, he is not the archer 
he has been; he has lost his lightlike swiftness and sureness of hand. 
Arjuna’s feverish jealousy leaves him. 

Two of Drona’s pupils are masters of the mace: Duryodhana and Bhima, 
who, of course, are inveterate rivals, as well. Aswatthama excels all the 
others at the secrets of the most mysterious astras; Nakula and Sahadeva are 
the finest swordsmen; Yudhishtira is the best rathika, chariot warrior. 
However, as a complete warrior, Arjuna has no equal by a long way: he is 
the most intelligent, resourceful, tireless and persevering prince. 

A great master of every weapon, he outstrips the greatest of Maharathas, 
and his renown spreads across the world, from sea to sea. Though all the 
princes receive the same instruction, none can approach Arjuna at archery, 
or, indeed, in the devotion he bears to his Guru. 

Amongst all the princes, Arjuna alone becomes an Atiratha, a chariot 
warrior who can face sixty thousand enemies at once! Dhritarashtra’s fell 
sons see the awesome strength of Bhima and the matchless archery of 
Arjuna, and envy roils their very entrails. 

Narapumgava, one day, when their tutelage is complete, Drona wants to 
test the skills of his disciples, and gathers them together. Before this, he has 
a wooden bird, a vulture, made and perched on the highest branch of a lofty 
tree, to be a target. 

When the princes stand before him, Drona says crisply, ‘Pick up your 
bows and aim at the bird in the tree. As soon as I tell you, shoot to cut its 


head off. You will each have one shot, turn by turn.’ 

Drona, best among all Angira’s descendants, says first to Yudhishtira, 
“Yudhishtira, you will have the first chance.’ 

Yudhishitra picks up his bow and aims at the faraway wooden bird. 
Bharatarishabha, now Drona asks Yudhishtira, ‘Prince, do you see the bird 
on the treetop?’ 

Yudhishtira replies to his Guru, ‘I do.’ 

Drona now asks, ‘What else do you see? Do you see the tree, your 
brothers, and me?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘I see the tree, yourself, my brothers and the bird.’ 

Drona repeats his question, and Yudhishtira’s reply is the same. 
Apparently annoyed, Drona says, ‘Stand back, Yudhishtira; you will not 
strike the bird.’ 

Now Drona calls, one by one, the other princes, Duryodhana and his 
brothers, Bhima and also the princes from other lands who are his disciples. 
He asks each one the same question, and from each he has the same answer 
that Yudhishtira gives him: ‘I see the tree, yourself, my fellow sishyas, and 
the bird.’ 

Drona does not give any of them a chance to shoot at the wooden bird 
but reproachfully tells them all to stand down.” 


8" There is some doubt about Karna appearing here. It seems likely that he 
enters the picture only later, during the exhibition of arms. 


CANTO 135 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “When all the other princes have failed his test, 
\/ Drona, with a smile, calls on Arjuna. He says, ‘It seems you are the 
one to bring the bird down. Raise your bow and aim, my son.’ 

Arjuna raises his bow, bends it and takes aim. He stands very still, then 
Drona asks softly, ‘Arjuna, do you see the bird, the tree and me?’ 

Arjuna replies, “I only see the bird, master, not the tree or you.’ 

Drona seems pleased with Arjuna’s answer. He asks that Pandava 
Maharatha, ‘If you see only the vulture, describe it to me.’ 

Arjuna says, ‘I see only the head of the vulture, not its body.’ 

The hair on Drona’s body stands on end in delight. He says to Partha, 
‘Shoot it.’ Arjuna looses his arrow and neatly severs the wooden vulture’s 
head, bringing it down. Drona clasps Arjuna in his arms; he feels certain 
that Drupada and his allies are as good as vanquished. 

Some days after this, Bharatarishabha, Drona goes to bathe in the holy 
Ganga, taking all his pupils with him. As soon as Drona enters the water an 
enormous crocodile, which seems to have been sent by Yama himself, 
seizes him by the thigh. Now, the Brahmana is quite capable of killing the 
beast and saving himself. Instead, pretending to be helpless, he cries as if in 
a panic to his sishyas on the shore, ‘Save me! Save me!’ 

The words hardly leave his mouth, when Arjuna has shot the monstrous 
crocodile with five terrific arrows, cutting it in five pieces so it releases 
Drona’s leg and dies, while the others still stand dazed on the riverbank. 
Once again, seeing how vigilant Arjuna is, how quick his reflexes are, 
Drona is pleased no end. 

Bharadwaja’s illustrious son says to the irresistible rathika Arjuna, 
‘Powerful one, receive this ineluctable astra from me, and the mantras for 
discharging and recalling it. It is the Brahmasirsa, the weapon formed like 


the heads of Brahma. You must never cast it at any human adversary, for if 
invoked against an inferior enemy it can consume the very universe. 

Child, they say that this astra has no equal in the three worlds. Keep it 
with the utmost care. If ever a superhuman enemy threatens you, you can 
use the Brahmasirsa to kill him, and only then.’ 

Arjuna swears that he will do as Drona says, and then, folding his hands 
to his Guru, receives that Mahastra. 

Drona says to him, ‘No one on Earth shall become a better archer than 
you. No enemy shall ever vanquish you, and your achievements shall be 
unparalleled.’” 


CANTO 136 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana said, “O Bharata, when Drona sees that his pupils, the 
sons of Dhritarashtra and Pandu, are masters at arms, he goes to the 
blind king and speaks to him in the presence of Kripa, Somadatta, 

Bahlika, the sage Bhishma, Vyasa and Vidura. 

Drona says, ‘Greatest of the Kuru kings, your children’s tutelage is 
complete. I crave your leave for them to show their skills to the people, at 
an exhibition of arms.’ 

Dhritarashtra says in joy, ‘Brahmana, you have accomplished a great 
task. You decide the time, the place and the nature of the exhibition. Ah, 
today sorrow overwhelms me that I am blind and I envy those blessed with 
sight who can watch my children perform. Vidura, my brother, give Drona 
all the help he needs; nothing will make me happier.’ 

Vidura assures the king that he will, and goes with Drona. Drona selects 
a plot of land where no trees or bushes grow, but which has a good number 
of wells and small springs. Upon that land, he worships and offers a 
sacrifice to the Gods, on a day of an auspicious nakshatra, in the presence of 
the people. Bharatarishabha, the king’s artisans build a large and elegant 
arena and dais on that land, by the rules for such a construction laid down in 
the Shastras. They bring every kind of weapon to the dais. 

They build a separate, fine enclosure for the women, while the common 
citizens build themselves tiered stands from where to watch the princes’ 
display, while the richer ones pitch bright and luxurious tents for 
themselves around the arena. 

Comes the day of the tournament and Dhritarashtra arrives at the royal 
enclosure, of almost unearthly beauty, made from gold, adorned with strings 
of pearls, and with lapis lazuli. Bhishma and the great Kripa walk before 
Dhritarashtra, and his ministers come with him. 


Wearing rich finery, accompanied by their sakhis, Gandhari, of great 
fortune, Kunti and the other ladies of the royal household climb the steps to 
their platforms, even as the Devastris do the Sumeru Mountain, in joy. 

People of the four varnas throng the arena, to watch the princes show 
their skills. So impatient are they that the teeming crowd assembles there in 
what seems like a single moment. Trumpets blare, drums sound on every 
side, and the voices of the people echo as a single great voice. The arena is 
like a disturbed sea. 

Finally, Drona, wearing white, the sacred thread around his body white, 
his hair all white, and his beard, as also the garland he wears, and his body 
smeared with white sandalwood paste, enters the arena, with Aswatthama at 
his side. They appear like the full Moon in a clear sky with Mangala, Mars, 
beside him. 

Entering, the son of Bharadwaja performs the apposite worship, and 
other Brahmans, all knowers of mantras, perform every auspicious and 
solemn ritual. Melodious music is played on stringed and wind instruments, 
then some servitors enter, bearing armfuls of shining weapons, which they 
set down upon the dais. 

Now the Bharata princes, mighty Kshatriyas, file in, led by the eldest 
prince, Yudhishtira. They wear gauntlets, and carry bows and quivers, and 
march in, in order of their age, and begin a breathtaking display of their 
skills at arms. 

So powerful and swift is that exhibition that some of the people lower or 
cover their heads in fright, that arrows might fall upon them from the sky, 
while others watch calmly, but wonder-stricken. 

Targets are set up, each bearing one prince’s name. Flying around the 
arena on horseback every prince finds his own target, unerringly, with a 
clutch of arrows. So magnificent are they that the people feel they have 
been transported to a city of Gandharvas. 

And, O Bharata, suddenly hundreds of thousands of voices are raised, 
crying, ‘O well done! Well done!’ The people gape in wonder. 

Repeatedly, the princes show their mastery at the longbow, their 
stunning skills as charioteers. Then they pick up their swords and small 
shields, and begin to circle the arena, like a pride of young lions. The 
people stare unwinkingly at their magnificent physiques, their agility, grace 
and lightning-swift control over their weapons, with which they hew and 
strike at one another, but never once so much as nick their adversaries’ skin. 


Next, like two mountains Bhima and Suyodhana enter the arena, maces 
in hand, both of them inwardly delighted at the prospect of this duel. They 
gird their loins and, drawing deep breaths, roar like two elephants 
trumpeting against each other for the favours of a cow-elephant. 

Like two enraged elephants, the two awesome Kshatriyas circle each 
other, right and then left, and then they strike out like thunder and lightning 
at one another, while Vidura describes their duel to the blind Dhritarashtra 
and Kunti does the same for Gandhari, whose eyes are bound.” 


CANTO 137 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “When Duryodhana and Bhima, strongest of 
V/ all Kshatriyas, fight in the arena, they immediately divide the 
spectators between them. 

Some of the people cry, ‘Look at the mighty Suyodhana!’ 

Others shout, ‘Bhima! The invincible Bhima!’ 

There is great uproar, and seeing the crowd like an agitated sea, Drona 
immediately calls his son and says, ‘Stop them! They must not divide the 
people like this and provoke the fury of the crowd.’ 

Aswatthama comes between the combatants, who have their maces in 
the air and are like two swollen oceans agitated by the winds of the Pralaya. 
Reluctantly they stand apart. 

Now Drona walks into the arena himself and holds his hand up so the 
musicians stop playing and silence falls. Drona speaks in a voice like 
rumbling clouds, ‘Now you will see the skills of Arjuna, dearer to me than 
my own son. Partha is the son of Indra and a master of every weapon, like 
Vishnu’s younger brother himself!’ 

The young Arjuna performs the rites of propitiation, and walks into the 
arena wearing his finger-guards, carrying his bow and his quiver full of 
arrows, clad in golden mail. He appears like an evening cloud that reflects 
the sun’s last rays, and is lit by the colours of a rainbow, and also by streaks 
of lightning. 

The crowd is beside itself to see this prince, and conches resound all 
around the stadium, and the musicians take up again in celebration. There is 
a great roar in that place, for thousands of voices are raised at once in praise 
of Arjuna. 

‘Here is Kunti’s son, so full of grace!’ 

‘This is the third Pandava, the middle one!’ 

‘He is the son of Indra!’ 


‘The protector of the Kurus!’ 

‘The greatest warrior!’ 

‘The greatest man of dharma!’ 

‘No one is as dignified, respectful and well behaved as Arjuna!’ 

When Kunti hears all this, her breasts well with milk, and the tears of joy 
that stream from her eyes mingle with the milk. 

Dhritarashtra hears the uproar of affection for Arjuna, and in some 
delight asks Vidura, ‘Kshatri, what is this din, like an ocean suddenly risen 
to tear open the sky?’ 

Vidura replies, ‘Rajan, Arjuna, the son of Pandu and Pritha, has entered 
the arena wearing his kavacha. The crowd is shouting for him!’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Mahatman, I am blessed, favoured and protected by 
the three fires that have sprung from the sacred fuel which is Kunti!’ 

When the excited people are somewhat calm again, Arjuna begins an 
amazing display of his skills at arms. He makes fire with the Agneyastra, 
creates water with the Varunastra, winds with the Vayavyastra, and clouds 
in the sky with the Parjannyastra. 

With the Bhaumastra he creates land, earth, and with the Parvatyastra he 
makes mountains; then, with the Antardhana, he makes all these vanish in a 
wink. With other weapons, he makes himself great and minuscule; one 
moment, he appears at his chariothead; the next, he rides in the chariot; and 
the next instant he stands upon the ground. 

He strikes targets set up for him with dazzling volleys of different shafts, 
some soft, some slender and others thick. An iron boar flies, swift as time, 
around the arena, and the peerless bowman shoots five arrows, like a single 
shaft into its mouth, all five together from his bowstring. He looses twenty- 
one shafts into a hollow cow’s horn hung from a rope swaying wide. 

Sinless one, Arjuna shows his magical skills at the longbow, the sword 
and the mace, as he walks around the arena. 

Bharata, when Arjuna has almost finished his stunning display, when the 
crowd has fallen hushed by it, and the music, too, has stopped, suddenly, 
from the main gate to the arena comes a sound of someone slapping his 
arms against his shoulders and chest, like thunder, announcing himself and 
his might. 

O King, the people cower at that sound, thinking, “Are the mountains 
being riven, is the Earth herself cracking open, or are thunderheads roaring 
from a clear sky?’ 


Every eye is turned to the gate. Drona stands very still, with the five 
Pandavas around him, looking like the Moon surrounded by the five stars of 
the constellation Hasta. Duryodhana jumps up, surrounded by his hundred 
brothers and Aswatthama with them. The Kaurava prince and his brothers 
with their weapons raised looks like Indra, in the eldest days, surrounded by 
his celestial warriors just before the war against the Danavas.” 


CANTO 138 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “Slowly, wide-eyed, the people make way 

\/ for that Purandara, and Karna enters the arena majestically, a 

walking mountain of presence, with his natural golden armour, his 

golden earrings that he is born with, his sword at his waist and his bow in 
his hand. 

The great-eyed hero, who would become a razer of enemy armies, is 
Kunti’s son, born when she is a virgin in her father’s house. He is an amsa 
of the livid Sun, and his strength and his energy are those of a lion, a bull or 
of a tusker that leads his herd. He is as splendid as Surya, as handsome as 
Soma, and he blazes like Agni Deva. He is tall, like a golden palm tree, 
bursting with vital youth, and he can kill a lion with his bare hands, that son 
of Surya. 

Handsome is Karna, and beyond counting his gifts and 
accomplishments. He walks haughtily into the arena and bows cursorily to 
Drona and Kripa, barely inclining his head. No one in the crowd can take 
their eyes off him for a moment and a single impatient thought is in 
everyone’s mind: ‘Who is he, this godlike warrior?’ 

The Suryaputra says to Arjuna, his brother he does not know, in a voice 
deep as rumbling thunderheads, ‘I will better your every feat, O Partha, 
before this staring crowd, and you will be astonished.’ 

In a moment, that crowd is on its feet, as if compelled to rise by an 
unseen and irresistible force. O Purushavyaghra, suddenly Duryodhana 
feels a tide of joy in his blood, while Arjuna feels a rush of shame and 
anger. 

Taking Drona’s permission, formally, Karna proceeds calmly to perform 
every feat that Arjuna has; only he excels the Pandava’s exhibition, 
effortlessly. Duryodhana and his brothers run to embrace the golden 
warrior. 


Duryodhana cries in joy, ‘Welcome, O Mahabaho, great hero! It is my 
great fortune that has brought you here today. Live among us as long as you 
please, for Iam yours to command, as is this kingdom of the Kurus.’ 

Karna replies, ‘When you say it, I think of it as being already done. But, 
Suyodhana, I want only your friendship and your love. Also, my lord, I now 
challenge Arjuna to single combat, a duel.’ 

Duryodhana says, ‘Enjoy the best that life has to offer with me. Be my 
friend and my benefactor. O Parantapa, grind the heads of your enemies 
beneath your feet.’ 

Feeling humiliated, Arjuna says to Karna, who stands among _ the 
Kauravas like some shining cliff, ‘Karna, you shall find the fate of the 
unwelcome intruder and the uninvited speaker, for I will kill you.’ 

Karna replies, ‘This arena is not your private preserve, Arjuna, but 
meant for everyone to show their skills. The Kshatriya regards deeds not 
words. Argument is for the weak. Bharata, talk to me with arrows and I will 
strike your head off with arrows, why, in the very presence of your Guru.’ 

His brothers embrace Arjuna, one by one, and bowing to Drona, Partha 
stands forth, ready for the duel. On the other side, Duryodhana and his 
brothers embrace Karna, and he also stands forth with his bow and arrows. 
Suddenly the sky fills with dark clouds, gashed by lightning, and Indra’s 
bow, the rainbow, the Indradhanush, flashes its colours across the stadium 
and the arena. A flight of white cranes wings its way across the clouds, 
which seem to rumble with laughter at the pale birds. 

Seeing Indra looking down upon the arena of the Kurus, out of love for 
his son, Surya dispels the clouds above his son, bathing Karna in golden 
light. Arjuna is hidden by the darkness of clouds, while Karna shines in the 
rays of the Sun. 

Dhritarashtra’s sons stand with Karna, while Drona, Kripa and Bhishma 
stand behind Arjuna. The crowd is also divided in its loyalty, as are the 
women in their enclosure. Realising who the golden warrior is, Kunti faints. 
Helped by the women of the palace, Vidura revives her by sprinkling 
sandalwood paste mixed with water over her. 

Waking, Kunti sees her two sons, wearing armour, facing each other, and 
fear grips her. But she is helpless to do anything. Saradwat’s son Kripa sees 
the two warriors with their bows in their hands, strung, ready for the duel. 
He knows the rules for such an encounter and speaks to Karna. 


Kripa says, “This Pandava of the House of Kuru is the youngest son of 
Kunti, and stands ready to battle with you. Mahabaho, you must also 
declare yourself. Tell us your lineage, the names of your father and your 
mother, and of the royal line of which you are the jewel. When you have 
declared your ancestry, Arjuna will decide if he will fight you or not. For 
the sons of kings never engage lowborn men.’ 

Suddenly Karna’s face falls; he is like a brilliant lotus turned pale and its 
petals shredded by lashing rain. 

But now Duryodhana speaks. ‘Acharya, the Shastras clearly say that 
three kinds of men can claim royalty for themselves: those that are born 
royal, great heroes and men that lead armies. If Arjuna will not fight anyone 
that is less than a king, I say to you I will crown Karna king of Anga!’ 

Immediately calling for a golden throne to be fetched, with dry rice 
grains, flowers, urns with holy water, gold for daana, Duryodhana has his 
Brahmanas formally crown Karna king of Anga, which is part of the Kuru 
kingdom but has no ruler. The white sovereign parasol is unfurled over 
Karna’s head, and yak-tail chamaras waved around that most graceful and 
tremendous warrior. 

When the lusty cheering of the section of the crowd loyal to Duryodhana 
subsides, Karna, now a king, says to the Kaurava prince, “Tiger among 
princes, what can I give you in return for this gift of a kingdom? I will give 
you anything at all.’ 

Suyodhana says to him, “I want your friendship.’ 

Karna replies, ‘That is already yours.’ 

They embrace in joy, and feel untold delight.” 


CANTO 139 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, ‘Now Adhiratha walks into the arena, sweating, 
\/ trembling, and supporting himself with a staff.’ 
Karna sees his adoptive father, puts down his bow and bows his 
head still dripping with the waters of the abhisheka that has made him a 
king. The Suta charioteer quickly covers his feet with his cloth and clasps 
Karna in his arms, his son who has become a king! His tears of love and joy 
fall onto Karna’s head, mingling with the water of the coronation. 

Bhima sees Adhiratha and mocks Karna, ‘Suta putra, son of a charioteer, 
you do not deserve to die at Arjuna’s hands. Throw away your bow and take 
up a horsewhip; it better suits your birth and your station. Lowborn fellow, 
surely you deserve to be king of Anga as much as a dog deserves to feed on 
the ghee from a yagna fire!’ 

Karna fetches a resounding sigh and looks up in despair at the Sun God 
in the sky, for he cannot respond to Bhima’s taunts. But now, like a 
maddened elephant rising from a bank of lotuses, Duryodhana rises in 
wrath from amongst his brothers. 

He says to the mighty Bhima, ‘Vrikodara, your words demean you. A 
Kshatriya is always judged by just his prowess, and a Kshatriya even if he 
is a lowborn, deserves a fight if he is powerful. The origin of the greatest 
heroes is like the spring of a great river: unknown, hidden. 

The Badava that consumes the world in flames rises from the Sea; the 
Vajra that burns the Danavas is made from a bone of a mortal man: 
Dadhichi. The lineage of the lustrous God Kartikeya, who is an amsa of 
every other Deva, the deity Guha, remains a mystery. Some say he is the 
son of Agni; some say he is Krittika’s son; others say he is the child of 
Rudra, and yet others say he is Ganga’s son. 

We have all heard of men born as Kshatriyas becoming Brahmanas. 
Viswamitra and other Rayarishis, too, attained the Parabrahman. Our 


peerless Acharya Drona is born from a waterpot, and Kripa of the race of 
Gautama in a clump of reeds. O Pandavas, consider your own births! 

I ask you, can a doe bring forth a tiger like this Karna, as splendid as the 
Sun, and bearing every auspicious mark upon his body, and born with 
natural kavacha and kundala? I tell you this prince among men deserves to 
be not merely king of Anga but of the world! For he is so mighty, and I 
have sworn to obey him in all things. If there is anyone here who disagrees 
with what I have done for Karna, let him climb into his chariot and bend his 
bow with his feet!’ 

There is a loud and somewhat confused murmur among the crowd at 
what Duryodhana says. But now the Sun sets and Duryodhana takes 
Karna’s hand and leads him out of the arena, now being lit with countless 
lamps. Rajan, the Pandavas, with Drona, Bhishma and Kripa, also return to 
the palace. The people also go to their homes, some with Arjuna’s name on 
their lips, others with Karna’s and others praising Duryodhana’s deed. 

Kunti, who recognises her firstborn son from all the auspicious marks 
upon his body, is delighted to see him made king of Anga. As for 
Duryodhana, having made a friend of Karna, he banishes the fear of 
Arjuna’s stellar archery from his heart. Karna, great warrior, gives his 
wholehearted friendship and loyalty, and speaks sweetly and gently to the 
Kaurava prince, pleasing him in every way. 

Yudhishtira is certain that there is no warrior on Earth like Karna.” 


CANTO 140 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “Now that their education is complete and 

\/ the sons of Dhritarashtra and Pandu are proficient at arms, Drona 

feels the time has come to ask them for Guru dakshina. He calls them 

together one day and says, ‘It is time you gives me my dakshina for what I 

have taught you. I want you to vanquish the Panchala king Drupada in 
battle, bind him and bring him before me as a captive.’ 

Without hesitation, the young Kshatriyas reply, “We shall!’ They climb 
into their chariots and ride out of Hastinapura, taking Drona with them, to 
give their Guru the fee he wants. Those Purusharishabhas, bulls among 
men, sweep through Panchala lands, disdainfully razing any resistance they 
meet, and lay siege to Drupada’s capital. 

Duryodhana, Karna, mighty Yuyutsu, Dushasana, Vikarna, Jalasandha, 
Sulochana and so many other tremendous Kshatriya princes are now keen 
to lead the attack on the city. Riding in fine chariots, the princes follow the 
first charge of their cavalry, burst into the Panchala capital and thunder 
down the city streets. 

Drupada, meanwhile, sees the attacking force; he hears the din it makes 
as it breaches his city gates and emerges from his palace with his brothers to 
face the intruders. The great Drupada Yagnasena is mighty indeed, but the 
Kurus roar all together and cover him with their arrows. But Drupada is a 
quenchless Kshatriya, with hardly an equal on Earth at arms; he flies at the 
enemy in his flashing white chariot, flitting here and there, and assailing 
them with a veritable gale of arrows from his wizardly bow. 

Before this battle begins, and while the Kauravas are beating their chests 
to be at the city and its king, Arjuna does not string his bow but says quietly 
to his master, the great Brahmana, ‘None of these can ever hope to take 
captive Drupada in battle. Let him exhaust them and then we will ride.’ 


Thus, the Pandavas wait a yojana outside the city, while the Kauravas 
attack it. Inside Drupada’s capital, in the main city-square outside the 
palace, Drupada by now has the measure of the Kuru princes; his arrow 
storms steadily beat the marauders back, injuring almost every prince. So 
swiftly and adroitly does he manoeuvre his chariot that the Kurus feel that 
not one but a hundred terrible Drupadas harry them. 

From every side, that dauntless king’s shafts fly at the Kuru force, and 
then everywhere conches boom and drums are heard, in thousands and 
thousands, sounding the general alarm for the Panchalas to rouse 
themselves, for danger threatens. Quickly, a great Panchala force gathers 
and faces the enemy; from that teeming host there arises a roar like some 
mythic lion’s; the twanging of their bowstrings threatens to tear open the 
Sky. 

This only enrages the dauntless Duryodhana, Vikarna, Subahu, 
Dirghalochana, Dushasana and their brothers. They loose fierce volleys of 
arrows at the Panchalas, wounding even their king. 

But Prishata’s son, O Bharata, the invincible Drupada raises his own 
archery to another realm. He whirls across the field like a wheel of fire, and 
in the twinkling of an eye strikes Duryodhana, Vikarna and even Karna, as 
well as countless other enemy warriors, with his fierce barbs, as if to quench 
those shafts’ thirst for blood. 

And now the people of the Panchala capital attack the Kurus from every 
side, with any kind of weapon on which they can lay their hands. Young 
and old rush into the fray, hurling spears and staffs and pestles at the enemy 
like clouds pour raindrops upon the Earth. The Kauravas are overwhelmed; 
they panic, and flee howling back out of the city and to where Drona waits 
with the Pandavas. 

The Pandavas hear the wails and screams of their cousins, as they turn 
tail, and now the sons of Pandu calmly climb into their chariots. Arjuna 
quickly tells Yudhishtira that, as the heir to the throne of Hastinapura, he 
must not take part in this skirmish. Drona endorses the view, and 
Yudhishtira remains with his Guru. 

Bhima, mace in hand, leads the charge of four brothers, while Nakula 
and Sahadeva ride beside the chariot wheels of Arjuna following his titanic 
brother, whose roars shake the Earth and the Sky. The Panchalas roar back, 
but their yells are drowned by the thunder of the chariot wheels of Atiratha 
Arjuna. 


Like a great makara entering the Sea, Bhima Mahabaho rushes eagerly 
into the Panchala ranks, mace in hand, and he is like another Yama. His 
roars are like a tempest raging upon an ocean. Bhima first goes among the 
Panchala war elephants and smites them with his dreadful gada, like Death 
himself. 

The mountainous beasts fall all around him, their heads smashed like 
melons. Their blood spraying everywhere, running in streams down their 
own bodies the mastodons collapse like cliffs struck by thunder and 
crumbling. 

Meanwhile, the carnage Arjuna brings to the elephants is as savage as 
his mace-wielding brother’s: he fells them at will with searing fusillades of 
arrows. Nakula and Sahadeva are not far behind in the havoc they fetch. 
The Pandavas fell thousands of elephants and horses, shatter chariots 
beyond count, and kill as many footsoldiers and rathikas. 

Bhima drives the Panchalas before him, on pachyderms, horses or in 
chariots, as a herdsman in the forest does his cattle! 

Remembering the purpose of their mission, remembering the word he 
has given Drona, Arjuna shoots Drupada down from the back of the 
elephant that king now rides. Again, he turns his attentions to the rest of the 
Panchala army, and once more consumes them all around him, even like the 
fire at the end of the Yuga. In thousands upon thousands he razes the enemy. 

Roused, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas loose a gale of every manner of 
weapon at Arjuna. Roaring to shake the ground beneath their feet and 
chariot wheels, they fight frantically against the Pandava. A pitched, brutal 
battle breaks out. 

Hearing the enemy roar at him, the eyes of Indra’s son turn red and he 
charges at them, covering them with a dense swarm of deadly arrows, 
falling on them with renewed ferocity. Those that watch Arjuna, his body 
bright, see his hands as a blur; they see no pause in his archery: it is a 
single, constant stream, a thing of marvel. The screams of those that Arjuna 
slays mingle with the helpless cries of admiration that he draws from his 
enemies at his unearthly archery. 

Drupada, king of the Panchalas, with his Senapati Satyajit at his side, 
rushes at Arjuna, rather as the Asura Sambara did at Indra during their 
contention in time out of mind. Arjuna covers him in a cloak of brilliant 
arrows. A dismal cry erupts from the Panchala host, like that of a herd of 
elephants when a lion springs at the leader of the herd. 


Satyajit sees Arjuna bearing down on Drupada to seize him, and the 
mighty Panchala Senapati flies at the Pandava. They fight, circling in their 
chariots, like Indra and Virochana’s son Mahabali did of yore. Suddenly, 
Arjuna shatters Satyajit’s defences and strikes him with ten arrows, drawing 
a gasp from the watching army. 

But the doughty Satyajit looses a hundred shafts in reply at Arjuna. 
Quick as thinking, Maharatha Arjuna tightens his bowstring and raises his 
archery. He breaks the bow in Satyayjit’s hand and speeds towards Drupada 
again. But Satyajit seizes up a stronger bow and, in a flash, strikes Arjuna, 
his chariot, his horses and his sarathy with a cluster of arrows. 

Arjuna is not forgiving, but retorts with a rash of shafts that find 
Satyajit’s horses, charioteer, shred his banner, break his bow, pierce agony 
through his left hand that loosed fire, and shoots the warrior who guards his 
back. Finding his bows repeatedly cut in twain and his horses slain, Satyajit 
gives up the unequal fight and retreats. 

Drupada sees his Senapati beaten and looses a flurry of arrows at Arjuna, 
who breaks the Panchala king’s bow, also his flagstaff, and strikes his 
horses and his sarathy, all with five shafts each. Suddenly, with a roar, 
Arjuna throws down his bow and quiver, seizes up a curved sword, and 
leaps from his chariot into his adversary’s ratha. 

In a wink, he sets the sword to Drupada’s throat and seizes him, as 
Garuda does a great sea serpent after stirring the waves with his wings. The 
Panchala soldiers flee in every direction. 

Roaring still, triumphantly at having shown his prowess in his first actual 
battle, Arjuna issues from the Panchala army and the city gates, with his 
captive now in his own chariot. Seeing him, Bhima roars like ten lions and 
falls even more ferociously upon the hapless Panchala troops, while Nakula 
and Sahadeva also begin to raze the city. 

Arjuna cries to them, “This best of kings is related to the Kurus. Spare 
his men, Bhima. We come only to give our Acharya his dakshina, and that 
we have now.’ 

Reluctantly, for he has not had his fill of bloodshed, Bhima stops his 
slaughtering. The Pandava princes ride back to Drona with Drupada, whom 
they offer to their master for his fee. 

Drona sees Drupada his captive, to do with as he pleases; he sees the 
Panchala king humbled and helpless, and he remembers how his childhood 
friend had humiliated him. 


Says Drona, ‘I have laid waste your kingdom and your capital. But do 
not fear for your life, though it is now in your enemy’s hands. Tell me 
Drupada, do you now want to be my friend again?’ Drona smiles, “No, have 
no fear for your life, because we Brahmanas are forgiving by nature. 
Kshatriyarishabha, I have not forgotten our old friendship and love, from 
when we were boys together in our Guru’s asrama. 

And so, O King, I ask you once again for your friendship, and in return, 
as my gift to you, I will give you back half your kingdom, which is now 
mine. You once told me that only one king could befriend another; so, O 
Yagnasena, I will keep half your kingdom. 

You will be king of all the Panchala lands south of the Ganga, while I 
become king of those north of the river. Panchala, if it pleases you, be my 
friend again.’ 

Drupada replies, “You are a noble soul and mighty indeed, O Drona, and 
I am not surprised by your generosity. I wish for eternal friendship with 
you.’ 

Drona releases the Panchala king, O Bharata, and formally returns half 
his kingdom to him, believing innocently that the past is forgotten and they 
are both pleased. Thereafter, Drupada begins to live, in some sorrow, in the 
city of Kampilya in the province of Makandi on the banks of the Ganga. He 
still rules over many towns and cities. 

After Drona vanquishes him, Drupada also rules the southern Panchalas 
up to the bank of the Charmanwati, and he is utterly convinced that he can 
never hope to defeat the Brahmana in battle because Drona is immeasurably 
more powerful than he is: in Brahma shakti. 

But being a Kshatriya, Drupada is determined to have his revenge. He 
ranges the world, wishing for a son who will one day kill Drona. 

Meanwhile, Drona lives in Ahicchatra, ruling over the northern 
Panchalas. Thus, indeed, is the land of Ahicchatra, full of towns and cities, 
won in battle by Arjuna and given to Drona for his Guru dakshina.” 


CANTO 141 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “A year passes, then Dhritarashtra makes 

\/ Pandu’s son Yudhishtira the Yuvaraja, the heir apparent. It is the 

wish of the people and the eldest Pandava is an embodiment of 

dharma: in his rectitude, his firmness, fortitude, patience, kindness, 
frankness and perfect honesty. 

Very quickly, Kunti’s son overshadows even his father Pandu’s great 
deeds. So punctilious and righteous is Yudhishtira, so devoted to the 
kingdom and his people. 

At about the same time, Bhima Vrikodara receives further lessons from 
Balarama at mace fighting, and fighting with a sword and from a chariot. 
When he completes his tutelage, Bhima is as mighty as Balarama himself, 
and he is as devoted as ever to his brothers. 

Arjuna, of course, wins great renown for his archery: his swiftness of 
hand, the firmness of his grip, his incredible accuracy. Besides, he is a 
master of the kshura, the naracha, the bala and the vipatha; why, he is an 
expert at every weapon, be it straight or crooked, heavy or light. Drona 
openly endorses the belief that there is no archer, no complete warrior on 
Earth to rival Arjuna. 

One day, in the presence of all the Kuru princes, Drona says to Arjuna, 
‘Agastya Muni has a disciple in the astra shastra, and his name is Agnivesa. 
Agnivesa was my Guru, and I was his sishya. I performed tapasya and 
served my master diligently, so he gave me the Brahmasirsa, which never 
fails, which is like thunder, and which can consume the very Earth. 

O Bharata, that astra can now pass from one sishya to another. When he 
gave it to me, my Guru said, “O son of Bharadwaja, you must never cast 
this astra at any Manava, especially not at one who is not himself a great 
warrior.” Kshatriya, you and you alone have received that weapon from me, 
and no one else deserves to have it. But you must honour the command of 
the Rishi Agnivesha. Also, Arjuna, now swear in the presence of your 


brothers and cousins, and other kin, that you will give me whatever 
dakshina I demand from you.’ 

Arjuna says, simply, ‘I swear, Acharya.’ 

Drona says, ‘Sinless, if you ever meet me in battle, you must fight 
without giving me any quarter.’ 

Arjuna is startled, but he bows his head, swearing to do what his master 
asks. He then touches Drona’s feet for his blessing, and taking it, goes away 
to the north. 

Soon, a cry ranges through the world, a great shout that covers the Earth 
and her girdle of seas: that there is no bowman anywhere like Arjuna the 
Pandava. It is true; no one can face him in battle, with the mace, the sword, 
in a chariot, and especially with a bow. His skills and his prowess are 
unearthly. 

Sahadeva learns dharma, all the laws of morality and duty, from 
Brihaspati, and he continues living under the control of his elder brothers. 
Nakula, the favourite of his brothers, becomes a Maharatha, a master of 
chariot warfare, and his guru is Drona. 

Arjuna and the other Pandavas become so powerful that they kill the 
great Sauvira in battle, Sauvira who has performed a yagna that lasted three 
years, easily repulsing the constant raids of marauding Gandharvas. 

Arjuna subdues the king of the Yavanas, whom even Pandu had failed to 
conquer. The brilliant Arjuna makes Vipula, a Sauvira king, of great might, 
who had always shown disregard for the Kurus, feel the keen edge of his 
power. He humbles King Sumitra of the same race, who is also called 
Dattamitra, who had challenged him contemptuously. 

Bhima and Arjuna, by themselves, in a single chariot, subdue all the 
kings of the East, who have ten thousand chariots. Arjuna by himself 
conquers the entire South, and sends back vast wealth to Hastinapura; he is 
then called Dhananjaya, winner of wealth. 

Thus, the Pandavas extend the Kuru kingdom in every direction, with 
their unearthly, irresistible prowess. Seeing their astonishing achievements, 
suddenly Dhritarashtra is stricken by envy, which enters his heart like 
poison. Dreadful anxiety seizes the king in green talons and he can hardly 
sleep.” 


CANTO 142 
SAMBHAVA PARVA CONTINUED 


nephews become more powerful than he likes, and he calls his wily 
minister Kanika to him. This man is an expert politician and a trusted 
advisor. 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Brahmanashreshta, daily the Pandavas increase their 
power over the Earth, and envy stings my heart like a serpent. Shall I live in 
peace with them or become their enemy? Kanika advise me well, for I will 
do what you say.’ 

Kanika replies, ‘Listen carefully, sinless king, and, Kurusthama, do not 
be angry when you hear what I say. 

Kings should always increase their own power, and keep their maces 
raised always to crush anyone who threatens them. A king must be most 
discreet himself, and ever watchful of the indiscretions of his enemies. If a 
king is always prepared to strike, everyone fears him. So, a king must be 
ever ready to punish those that transgress his will, or threaten his power. 

He must conduct himself so he shows no weakness, ever, while he finds 
any chink in his enemy’s armour and then hunts him down and kills him. A 
king keeps his own weaknesses hidden, like the tortoise hides its soft body 
in its shell, as also his purposes and his means to achieve them. 

Once he sets a course for himself, he does not rest until his end is 
achieved; he never turns back. My lord, if you do not remove a thorn 
completely from your flesh, it festers and creates a sore. So, too, if a king 
has an enemy, he must not let him live, but kill him. If his enemy is 
powerful, he must watch and wait for his evil hour, his enemy’s time of 
misfortune, and then strike him down ruthlessly. 

Sire, you must never underestimate an enemy, however contemptible he 
might be; you must never mock him openly or show your enmity towards 


\ J aisampayana continued, “The wretched Dhritarashtra sees his 


him. A small spark can consume a great forest, if it can leap from one tree 
to the next. 

Kings must sometimes pretend to be deaf and blind to faults they most 
want to punish, enemies they most want to crush, especially when they are 
powerless to effect the killing they wish for in their hearts. When powerless, 
they must think that their bows are made of straw, while being always as 
vigilant as a herd of deer sleeping in a jungle. 

When the enemy is in your power strike and destroy him without mercy, 
openly or secretly, by fair means or foul. Why, he might seek your 
protection, but your heart must be like a stone, and you must not spare him, 
for then later he will surely take revenge on you. Spare no expense to kill 
your enemy, and then you will have peace, for the dead can never be a 
threat to you. 

You must destroy your enemy’s resources: the three, the five and the 
seven. You must destroy your enemies, root and branch. Then you must 
destroy their friends and allies, who cannot flourish anymore once their 
leader dies. If you tear up the root of the tree, the branches and twigs will 
wither and die of themselves. 

Keep your own purpose secret and hidden, and watch your enemy like 
an eagle, always watching for his weakness. A king must always be vigilant 
and watch his enemies anxiously. 

First win the confidence of your enemy by keeping the fire of sacrifice 
lit, by wearing valkala and jata, and sleeping on animal hide. And when he 
lets you near him, spring on him like a wolf! It has been well said that to 
acquire wealth and kingdom even a guise of holiness can be adopted, as a 
hooked staff to draw the branch down to you so you can pluck the ripe fruit 
from it. 

So, too, should you select the enemy that is ripe for killing. Support your 
enemy, carry him upon your shoulders, until the right moment arrives to 
fling him down and break him in pieces like an earthen pot hurled down on 
a rock. Let your enemy beg piteously for his life; you must not spare him. 

An enemy can be destroyed by artful conciliation, by lavishing money 
on him. Cause dissension among his friends and allies; poison their minds 
subtly against him. Yes, use whatever means you need to, that is in your 
power, do anything that you must to kill the enemy who is dangerous to 
you.’ 


Dhritarashtra says, ‘Tell me truly how an enemy can be destroyed by 
conciliation or gifts, by dissension and finally by the use of force.’ 

Kanika replies, ‘Listen, O King, to the story of the jackal who lived once 
in the forest and was a shrewd master of politics. Yes, he was a wise jackal, 
who lived with four friends in the jungle: a tiger, a mouse, a wolf and a 
mongoose. 

One day the five friends saw a powerful, well-fleshed stag in the forest, a 
leader of his herd, but they could not catch or kill him, so strong and so 
swift was he. They called a council to discuss how the stag could be hunted. 

The jackal said, “Tiger, many times you have tried to stalk and kill the 
stag, but you haven’t succeeded because he is young, quick and intelligent. 
Let the mouse go and gnaw his hooves while he sleeps, and when this is 
done, you, Tiger, will be able to seize him. Then all of us can feast on him.” 

They agreed with him, and the mouse ate into the deer’s hooves while it 
slept, weakening them, and then the tiger easily killed the stag. When the 
tiger had broken his neck and the stag lay motionless on the ground, the 
jackal said to his companions, “We are blessed today! Go now and bathe in 
the stream before we begin our feast. I will watch over the carcass until you 
return.” 

The others promptly went off to bathe and the jackal sat with the fat 
carcass of the stag, lost in thought about what he should do next. The 
mighty tiger returned first after bathing. He saw the jackal plunged in 
thought. 

The tiger said, “Wise one, why do you seem so sad? Most intelligent 
Jackal, let us feast on the stag.” 

The jackal said, “Mahabaho, listen to what the mouse said. He said, ‘Fie 
upon the strength of the king of beasts! I killed the deer, and because of me 
the tiger will eat his fill today.’ 

After hearing his brag, I have no wish to eat today.” 

The tiger said, “If this is what the mouse said, from today I will kill any 
creature I find in the jungle by myself and eat alone.” With that, the tiger 
left. 

Soon, the mouse arrived, and seeing him the jackal said, “Blessings, O 
Mouse, but have you heard what the mongoose said? He said, “The carcass 
of this stag is poisoned by the claws of the tiger and I will not eat it.’ But, if 
you allow me, O Jackal, I will kill the mouse and feed on his flesh.” 


The mouse heard this and fled down into his hole in the ground. And 
after the mouse had gone, O King, the wolf arrived there after his ablutions. 

The jackal said to him, “The king of beasts is angry with you, and I fear 
evil will overtake you. He is on his way here with his mate, and you must 
do as you please.” 

The wolf, of course, slunk away and, immediately after, the mongoose 
arrived. The jackal said, “I have vanquished the others who want to eat the 
stag, and they fled. You, too, must fight me first if you want to eat.” 

The mongoose replied, “When you have beaten the tiger, the wolf and 
the intelligent mouse, all heroes in their way, you must be truly strong. I do 
not want to fight you.” 

The mongoose also left. When the others had all gone, the jackal feasted 
alone on the stag. My lord, if kings would be as wily as that clever jackal, 
they would always prevail over their enemies, and always be happy. 

You must defeat the timid by playing on their fears, the brave and the 
strong by conciliation, the greedy by gifts, and your equals and your 
inferiors by an open show of strength.’ 

Kanika pauses before continuing, “Listen, O King, to something else. If 
your son, friend, brother, father, your Guru or anyone at all becomes your 
enemy, you must never hesitate to kill him, if you wish your own happiness. 
Never disdain to kill an enemy, whoever he might be. 

If two enemies are equally strong, and uncertain of success in an open 
encounter, the diligent one will prosper. If your Guru himself is vain, lacks 
discrimination about what needs to be done and what needs to be left alone, 
if he is cruel, even he must be punished. 

Even if rage burns your heart, never show your anger but always speak 
with a smile. Never reprove anyone angrily. O Bharata, instead speak most 
sweetly to the one you mean to strike down, why, even as you kill him! 
Once the killing has been done, then grieve loudly for the victim, shed 
copious tears in public. 

Lull your enemy into false security with conciliation and gifts, sweet 
words; the moment his guard is down, strike without scruple or mercy. As 
king, you must always strike down the sinner who dons a disguise of virtue, 
for being outwardly virtuous only hides his true nature, his sins, as dark 
clouds do a mountain. 

When you have killed an enemy, be sure you burn his house down, and 
his kin. Never let beggars, atheists and thieves live in your kingdom. Kill 


your enemy by a surprise attack, an ambush, by corrupting his allies with 
gifts and wealth; kill him secretly with poison. You can be as ruthless as 
you like, my lord; sharpen your teeth to deliver a fatal bite. 

And when you strike, be certain that you do so with finality, so that the 
one you strike can never raise his head again. Be ever vigilant; suspect even 
those from whom you apparently have nothing to fear, let alone those that 
are a known threat to you. For the one who apparently poses no threat can 
be the most dangerous enemy, especially if he is powerful and decides to 
strike at you, when you least expect it from him. 

Never trust those that are disloyal, and do not overly trust even those that 
are loyal. For, if a faithful one turns against you, you are certain to be 
destroyed. Employ spies, after making sure of their loyalty. Use them 
within your kingdom and in other kingdoms, in the courts of other kings. 
Your spies abroad must be masters of deception, preferably men that roam 
the Earth as Rishis. 

Deploy your secret agents in public gardens, places of amusement, 
temples and other holy places, drinking halls, in the streets, and close to the 
eighteen tirthas of your kingdom: your Prime Minister, the Chief Priest, the 
Yuvaraja, the Senapati, the Dwarapalakas of the court, those that work in 
your inner apartments, your Jailor, your Surveyor, your Treasurer, the 
General Executor of all your ordinances, the Head of your own Police, the 
Chief Architect, the Chief Justice, the President of your Council, the Chief 
of the Department of Punishment, the Commander of the Fort, the Chief of 
the Arsenal, the Commander of the Frontier Guards, and the Keeper of the 
Forests. 

Deploy your spies in places of sacrifice, near public wells, on mountains 
and at river ferries, in forests, and in every place where people congregate. 
Speak sweetly and humbly, my lord, but let your heart be sharp as a razor. 

Even while you do the most savage and vicious deed, wear a smile on 
your lips, while speaking. If you desire lasting prosperity, you must 
cultivate the arts of humility, of swearing falsely when required, of 
conciliation, of creating hope, why even of worshipping your enemies by 
bowing your head at their feet. 

A man who knows how to conduct himself politically is like a tree 
always adorned with flowers but never bearing fruit. If indeed there are any 
fruit they grow only from the loftiest branches, and if any of these do ripen, 
make sure that they look raw. 


A king who learns how to conduct himself thus will never wane. 
Dharma, artha and kama all bear fruit, both good and evil. The wise man 
knows how to take the good fruit and avoid the evil. 

Men that follow only dharma become unhappy for want of artha and 
kama, wealth and pleasure. Men who only pursue wealth become afflicted 
for want of dharma and kama. Those who chase only after pleasure suffer 
from not having virtue and wealth. 

You must pursue all three in a balanced fashion, never neglecting any of 
them, so that the lack of none afflicts you. Consult your Brahmanas, O 
King, but those that have humility and attention, no envy, and the utmost 
sincerity, if you wish to accomplish your most secret purpose. 

If you fall, raise yourself up again, by any means — fair or foul, gentle or 
violent; when you have resurrected your fortunes, then by all means 
practise dharma. One who has not suffered or experienced some calamity 
can ever hope to prosper. You can see this from the life of anyone who 
survives misfortune. 

If a man be grief-stricken, in dire straits, you should comfort him by 
narrating the olden legends to him, of others that suffered and then 
recovered good fortune: the tales of Nala and of Rama. He whose heart has 
been riven by sorrow should be consoled with hope of future prosperity. 

Comfort the learned and the wise with gifts and pleasing responsibilities. 
But remember that a man who makes peace with an enemy and then allows 
his guard to drop, as if the enmity itself is finished, is like one that chooses 
to fall asleep on the highest branch of a tree: he will surely fall! 

A king should always keep his own counsel. His scrutiny must always 
be on his enemies, gazing upon them through the eyes of his spies; and he 
must be careful to keep his own feelings hidden from the spies of his 
enemies. Even as a fisherman cannot prosper without killing and gutting his 
catch, a king cannot hope to prosper without ripping out the innards of his 
enemies, without committing some violence. 

You must raze the armies of your enemies, destroying them directly, or 
setting the scourges of disease, hunger and thirst upon them, mowing them 
down like weeds. A needy man never goes to a rich man out of love, but to 
gain from him; and when he has what he wants he will turn his back on the 
one whose help he sought when he was needy. 

So, when you help someone, never give him everything that he wants 
but leave something that he still desires, so that he will continue to serve 


you. 

The king who wishes to prosper must diligently seek out allies, and 
conduct his wars with their help, with the utmost care and careful 
preparation. He must be unwaveringly prudent, so that neither his friends 
nor his enemies know his true motives and purposes, before he actually 
acts. 

Only when the deed has begun or ended, must they discover your 
purpose. Until danger shows itself, you must behave as if you are afraid. 
But when it comes, you must face it fearlessly and only then reveal that you 
were always well prepared for it. He that trusts an enemy whom he has once 
subdued by force is like the she crab that calls her death to her when she 
conceives. 

You must always think of danger as having already arrived, and 
threatening you, otherwise you will not have the calm and _ perfect 
preparedness required for facing it when mortal peril actually does come. 
Prudence, O King, grave caution at all times, and the correct choice of time 
and place for action: these lead to prosperity. 

A king must know that destiny can be moderated by mantras and yagnas; 
the king must always have his eye on the proper balance of dharma, artha 
and kama. Time and place must always be carefully considered to reap the 
greatest benefit from one’s deeds. 

Even if an enemy is slight, you must not scorn or ignore him; he might 
grow swiftly to become dangerous, like the palm tree plunging its roots 
down with great speed and growing, or the spark in the forest that blazes up 
to become the devouring conflagration. Just as a small fire fed with faggots 
soon becomes great enough to devour the biggest blocks of wood, so does 
the power of the enemy that forms alliances and friendships grow apace, 
and he becomes a formidable adversary. 

Give hope to your enemy of great favour, but keep him hoping and 
postpone satisfying his wish; when the time comes to keep your word to 
him, defer its fulfilment again, find or create some excuse. Let that excuse 
appear to be founded upon some real reason, and that reason again upon 
another. 

In the matter of destroying their enemies, kings must be like razors, in 
every detail and particular: as ruthless as they are sharp and keen. They 
must keep their intentions hidden as blades in sheaths of leather, and strike 
when opportunity presents itself, razing their enemies with all their friends 


and families in a fell sweep — just as a fine razor blade will shave a face 
without leaving a single hair. 

O you who support the honour of the Kurus, you must behave with the 
Pandavas and others, too, in a manner that is politic, so you do not later 
regret what you do. You are blessed with every auspicious sign of fortune 
and grace. I say to you, O King, guard yourself against the Pandavas! 

The sons of Pandu are more powerful than your sons. So Parantapa, let 
me tell you plainly what you must do. Hear what I say, and let your sons 
listen to me as well, and having done so, move to achieve your purpose. 
Rajan, you must make sure that you have nothing to fear from the 
Pandavas. Yes, you must act in such a manner, which is perfectly politic, so 
that you do not grieve in the future.’ 

Having said so much, Kanika leaves the presence of Dhritarashtra and 
returns to his home, while the king is plunged in melancholy and dark 
brooding.” 


CANTO 143 
JATUGRIHA PARVA 


Dushasana and Karna are already conspiring in evil to do away with 
Kunti and her sons. They seek Dhritarashtra’s leave and hatch a plot 
to immolate the Pandavas and their mother, burn them to death. 

However, the wise and gifted Vidura, who can read men’s inmost 
thoughts and intentions by looking at their faces, sees what is afoot. Sinless 
Vidura, illumined by true knowledge, devoted to the sons of Pandu, decides 
that Kunti and her sons should fly from their deadly enemies. 

Arranging for a boat that can withstand wind and wave, he says to Kunti 
and her princes, ‘Dhritarashtra has been born to ruin the honour and the 
sons of the race of Kuru. His heart is evil, and he is about to abandon 
dharma. 

Dear Kunti, I have readied for you and your sons a boat that shall be 
stable in wind and against wave; escape in it from the net of death that is 
tightening around you.’ 

Kunti is stricken to hear what Vidura says, and she boards the boat with 
her sons and crosses the Ganga. Leaving the boat, as Vidura advised, taking 
the wealth their enemies had given them in Varanavrata, the Pandavas enter 
the deep emerald jungle on the other side. 

Meanwhile, in the house of lac, which the Kauravas built to immolate 
the Pandavas, a Nishada woman and her five sons are burnt to death, as is 
that vilest of mlechchas, Purochana, who has actually built the house of lac 
for Duryodhana. 

Believing the Nishada woman and her sons’ corpses to be Kunti and the 
Pandavas, the sons of Dhritarashtra and their conspirators are deceived. 
Thus, Vidura saves the lives of his nephews and their mother. But the 
people of Varanavrata also do not know that the Pandavas have escaped 


\ J aisampayana said, “Meanwhile, Subala’s son Shakuni, Duryodhana, 


secretly, and when they see the lacquer palace burn down, they are grief- 
stricken. 

They send messengers to Dhritarashtra, saying, ‘Evil King, your vile 
ambition has been achieved. The Pandavas have been burnt to death. Your 
wish has come true, and you and your murderous sons can now enjoy the 
kingdom.’ 

Hearing the message, Dhritarashtra and his sons make a great show of 
grief. With the Kshattri Vidura, Bhishma the Kuru patriarch, and the rest of 
the family, the blind king performs the last rites for the Pandavas and their 
mother, but, unknowingly, with the remains of the Nishada woman and her 
sons.” 

Janamejaya said, “Brahmanottama, I want to hear in full this story of the 
burning of the house of lac and how the Pandavas escaped the fire. Ah, that 
was a dire thing that the Kauravas tried to do, at the dark counsel of the evil 
Kanika. Tell me every detail of it, O Suta, for I burn with curiosity to hear 
that story from you.” 

Vaisampayana said, “Parantapa, O King, listen then to the tale of the 
burning of the house of lac and the escape of the sons of Pandu. 

The malignant Duryodhana sees that Bhima is stronger than everyone 
else; he sees Arjuna excel at arms, and he is envious and dejected. Karna 
Suryaputra and Subala’s son Shakuni try, in many ways, to kill the sons of 
Pandu. But the Pandavas escape every time, and, obeying Vidura’s counsel, 
avoid ever making these attempts on their lives public or accusing 
Duryodhana of trying to kill them. 

The people see how noble the Pandavas are and how accomplished, and 
they become the topic of conversation and praise at every street corner and 
public gathering. In open courtyards and other places where the citizens 
assemble all the talk is about how Yudhishtira should become king. 

The people say, ‘Dhritarashtra might have the eye of knowledge, but 
being born blind he is never truly a king. How can he rule now? Shantanu’s 
son Bhishma will never accept the kingship because of his solemn oath. 
Yudhishtira is young, a great warrior, versed in the Veda, honest and kind. It 
is time that the eldest Pandava becomes our king, and is crowned with 
every proper ritual and ceremony. 

He worships Shantanu’s son Bhishma, as well as Dhritarashtra; knowing 
dharma, Yudhishtira will care well for both these, as well as the sons of 
Dhritarashtra, and keep them in every luxury.’ 


When Duryodhana hears what the people are saying, he cannot bear it. 
Beside himself with jealousy, he comes to Dhritarashtra, alone. Greeting his 
father reverently, the evil prince says to the king, ‘Father, I hear fell words 
being spoken by the people. They want Yudhishtira to be king, not you 
anymore, or even Bhishma. Bhishma will agree because of his oath. 

The people wish to do us grave harm. Pandu ruled by his deeds and not 
you, because you are blind. If Pandu’s son inherits the kingdom, after him 
his son will rule, then his son, and so on, and theirs shall become the royal 
line, while we and our children will be inconsequential, minions at best, 
with neither power nor honour. 

We shall be dependants for our very food, and lowliness and distress be 
our lot. Rajan, you must prevent this from happening. You are the king and 
your son must rule after you, regardless of what the people say.’” 


CANTO 144 
JATUGRIHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “Dhritarashtra, whose eyes are his gyana, 
V/ remembers all that Kanika has said to him. Sorrow grips his heart 
and his mind falters. 

Duryodhana, Karna, Subala’s son Shakuni, and Dushasana have already 
plotted secretly before Duryodhana goes to the king. 

Duryodhana now says, ‘Father, somehow contrive to send the Pandavas 
to Varanavrata and we shall never have anything to fear from them again.’ 

Dhritarashtra falls thoughtful, then, says, ‘Pandu always walked the way 
of dharma and was dutiful to all our kinsmen, and most of all to me. He 
cared little for the pleasures of this world, but rather gave everything that 
was his to me, including the kingdom. 

Yudhishtira is as devoted to dharma as his father was; he is as gifted and 
accomplished as Pandu. His fame has spread across the world and the 
people all love him. He has powerful allies; how can we ever hope to banish 
him from his father’s kingdom? 

Pandu nurtured all the counsellors of the sabha, as well as the 
commanders of the army, and their sons and grandsons, too. The people 
loved him dearly. My son, will all these not kill us now for the sake of 
Pandu’s son?’ 

Duryodhana replies, ‘What you say my father is true. But take thought 
for the evil that looms for you and yours. Let us win the people over with 
lavish gifts and wealth, and being what they are they will stand with us. My 
lord, the treasury and the ministers of state are already under our control. 

Send the sons of Pandu away to Varanavrata, gently. And when, O 
Bharata, I have taken the reins of power firmly into my hands, let Kunti and 
her sons return.’ 

Dhritarashtra replies, ‘Duryodhana, you speak my very mind, but I dared 
not give in to this thought for its sinfulness. Also, Bhishma, Drona, Kshattri 


and Gautama Kripa would never countenance the Pandavas being exiled. 
My child, the wise ones see the Pandavas and ourselves as being equals in 
the House of Kuru. 

If we exile the sons of Pandu shall they not say that we deserve to die at 
the hands of the Kurus for our sin, why, to die by their very hands? Shall 
the whole world not say the same?’ 

Duryodhana says, “Bhishma has no partiality and will take no side in any 
dispute between the Pandavas and us. Aswatthama is on my side, and where 
the son is so shall the doting father be. Saradwat’s son Kripa will not 
oppose Drona and Aswatthama; he will never go against his sister’s 
husband and son. 

As for Kshattri Vidura, he is indeed our secret enemy, but he depends on 
us for his livelihood. Besides, even if he sides with the Pandavas, by 
himself he can do us no harm. 

So, my lord, banish the Pandavas to Varanavrata without fear. Indeed, I 
say to you, do it today and by this put out the grief that burns my heart like 
fire, pierces it through like an arrow, robs me of my sleep.”” 


CANTO 145 
JATUGRIHA PARVA CONTINUED 


assiduously to win over the people with liberal gifts of land and 
wealth. Honours and encomiums are bestowed, cannily. 

Then, instigated by Dhritarashtra, some of his chosen ministers one day 
begin to eulogise the town of Varanavrata in the royal sabha of Hastinapura. 
They say that the festival of Pasupati Siva has just begun in Kasi, and that it 
is indeed the most wonderful gathering of worshippers on Earth. It enchants 
all that are fortunate enough to witness it, for the people come wearing their 
finest attire and most precious ornaments. 

Listening to the fulsome and cunning praise of Kasi, the Pandavas feel 
stirred to visit the sacred city of Siva. When Dhritarashtra senses that his 
nephews’ curiosity and interest have been aroused, Ambika’s son, the blind 
king, says to them, ‘Ah, these men of mine always speak of Varanavata as 
being the most delightful town in the world. 

Children, if you feel the desire to attend the festival of Pasupati, with 
your friends and followers, by all means go and enjoy yourselves like the 
very Devas, to your hearts’ content. Take pearls and other jewels with you 
to give to the Brahmanas and the bards and musicians you find in Kasi. 

And when you have sported there like the gods, and satisfied yourselves 
with every pleasure, return to us in Hastinapura, in your own time, at your 
leisure.’ 

Yudhishtira immediately understands Dhritarashtra’s intention. Yet, he 
knows the king is powerful and he himself relatively weak. He says quietly, 
‘So be it.’ 

Turning to Shantanu’s son Bhishma, the sage Vidura, Drona, the Kuru 
Bahlika, Somadatta, Kripa, Aswatthama, Bhurisravas, the other ministers, 
Brahmanas and Rishis, the priests and the people and the regal Gandhari, he 
says slowly and humbly, ‘At my uncle’s command we will go to sacred 
Varanavrata with our friends and followers. I beg you, bless us that we go 
happily and incur no sin in Kasi.’ 


V essicously said, “Duryodhana and his brothers begin working 


The Kaurava chieftains all cheerfully bless them, saying, ‘Pandavas let 
the Panchamahabhutas themselves bless you on your way, and not the least 
evil befall you.’ 

The Pandavas perform the rituals so they will inherit their due share in 
the kingdom when they return, make their preparations, and set out for 
Varanasi.” 


CANTO 146 
JATUGRIHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana_ said, “Duryodhana, O Bharata, is delighted. 

V/ Bharatarishabha, he calls his trusted man Purochana, privately, seizes 

his right hand and says to him, ‘Purochana, this world, replete with 

wealth, belongs to me; and you share in it equally. So you must protect the 
world from our enemies. 

There is no one | trust more than you, my lord, and I rely on you to kill 
my enemies for me, cunningly. Dhritarashtra has sent the Pandavas to 
Varanavrata, to enjoy the festival of Pasupati. 

Take a cart drawn by our swiftest mules; fly to Kasi, and there build a 
square palace near the arsenal. Furnish it lavishly, watch over it keenly, and, 
Purochana, make it with hemp and resin and every flammable material you 
can find. Mix earth with ghee, lard, oil and fat, and all the lac on which you 
can lay your hands. With this deadly mixture plaster the walls of the palace. 

Strew and grease the precincts and the insides of the palace with more 
hemp, ghee, lacquer and wood, but so craftily that neither the Pandavas nor 
anyone else suspects a thing, for even a moment. 

When you have built the mansion, Purochana, go to the Pandavas, offer 
them every reverence and invite Kunti and her sons and all their company 
to come to stay in the palace of lac. 

Let the chairs and thrones, the beds and all the furniture be of the finest 
craftsmanship, things of beauty, so the Pandavas shall be well content, and 
Dhritarashtra receive no complaint from them. You must manage all this 
without anyone in Varanavrata suspecting anything until our aim is 
accomplished. 

When you are certain that the Pandavas sleep fearlessly, unsuspiciously, 
in the lacquer palace, Purochana, apply a torch to the outer door. When the 
palace burns and the sons of Pandu are immolated inside, the people will 
say that a terrible accident killed them.’ 


Purochana does not hesitate to say ‘So be it’ to his evil prince, and 
leaves immediately for Varanavrata in a swift mule cart laden with all the 
incendiary materials he will need for his dastardly mission. Arriving in the 
sacred city, he loses no time in doing what Duryodhana has asked of him.” 


CANTO 147 
JATUGRIHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Meanwhile, the Pandavas are about to climb into 

\/ their chariots, yoked to horses as fleet as the wind. They touch 

Bhishma’s feet, in sorrow, Dhritarashtra’s, their Acharya Drona’s, 
Kripa’s, Vidura’s and those of all the elders of the House of Kuru. 

Reverently saluting their elders and embracing their equals fondly, being 
hugged in farewell by the little children of the clan, and bidding sad 
farewell to the royal ladies of the palace, walking around them in 
pradakshina, taking loving leave of the people of Hastinapura, the sons of 
Pandu, men of dharma, set out for Varanasi. 

Vidura of untold wisdom, along with other bulls among the Kurus and 
the citizens, as well, all grieving, follow the Pandavas some way. 

In that grief, seeing the Pandavas full of sorrow, some of the citizens and 
the people from the countryside, too, begin to say aloud, ‘Dhritarashtra is 
evil and turns away from dharma. Not sinless Yudhishtira, not Bhima 
mightiest among men, not Kunti’s youngest son Arjuna will ever sin by 
revolting against this crime against them. Then how will the sons of Madri 
go against their older brothers’ wishes?’ 

‘Dhritarashtra inherited the kingdom from Pandu, and he could not bear 
his brother’s sons. But how does Bhishma sanction this crime and allow the 
Pandavas to be exiled to that wretched town? Shantanu’s son Vichitravirya 
and Rajarishi Pandu cared for us like their own children. But now that 
Purushavyaghra Pandu has left this world, Dhritarashtra cannot bear to see 
his sons beside his own vile princes. But we the people cannot tolerate this 
adharma and we will leave our homes and this great city and come with 
you, Yudhishtira Dharmaputra, wherever you go.’ 

Yudhishtira grows sad and thoughtful, then speaks to the distraught 
people. “The king is our father, worthy of worship. He is our Guru and our 
superior. It is our dharma to do his bidding, never suspecting his motives. 


You are all our friends. I beg you, walk around us in pradakshina, then give 
us your blessing and turn back to your homes. 

When the time comes for you to go with us or help our cause otherwise, 
we shall surely be grateful for your support. This is not that time.’ 

Gently he spoke, and his resolve they see is firm. The people do as he 
asks. They make a pradakshina around the sons of Pandu, bless them and 
then return to their homes. 

When the people no longer follow the Pandavas, Vidura, knower of 
dharma’s every nuance, speaks to Yudhishtira to make him sensible of the 
peril he is in. The learned Vidura speaks to Yudhishtira in the dialect of the 
mlechchas, which only they two understand. 

Vidura says, ‘He who knows that his enemies are plotting against him 
must take care to guard himself against danger. He who knows that there 
are weapons other than blades of steel, which can kill the body, and who 
knows how these can be rendered harmless, shall always be safe from his 
enemies. 

The wise man protects himself with the knowledge that neither the 
consumer of straw nor the drier of dew burns those that live in a hole in the 
heart of a jungle. The blind man does not see into the future; he has no 
sense of direction. He whose purpose is not firm, never finds prosperity. 

Remember this, and be vigilant. He who accepts the perfidious offering 
of a deadly weapon, not made of steel, from his enemy, to dwell in, escapes 
death by fire by burrowing like a jackal underground: a tunnel with many 
exits. Ranging over the world a man acquires knowledge of its ways; by the 
stars he finds his direction; and he that controls the five senses remains safe 
from his enemies.’ 

Yudhishtira says to Vidura, ‘I have understood you.’ 

Now Vidura walks around them in pradakshina, bids farewell to them 
and turns back into the city. When the people, Bhishma and Vidura have all 
gone back, Kunti goes up to Yudhishtira alone, and asks, ‘Kshattri spoke to 
you strangely and softly, and you replied in the same tongue which none of 
us understood. If I can know what he says, tell me.’ 

Yudhishtira replies, “The virtuous Vidura said to me that we should be 
warned that the mansion built to house us in Varanavrata has been built with 
incendiary materials. He said, ““The path to escape will be revealed to you,” 
and also “Those that can control their five senses shall gain sovereignty 


over the whole world.” What I said to the good Vidura is “I have 
understood you.” 

The Pandavas set out on the eighth day of the month of Phalguna, when 
the Rohini nakshatram is rising. Arriving in Varanavrata, they see the sacred 
town and its people.” 


CANTO 148 
JATUGRIHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “Full of joy, the people of Kasi come out to 

\/ greet the sons of Pandu, in crowds. They come on foot and in myriad 

vehicles, bringing everything auspicious that the Shastras 
recommend with them, to welcome those greatest among men. 

They approach Kunti’s sons, bless them, cry Jaya! and crowd lovingly 
around their chariots. Purushavyaghra Yudhishtira looks like Indra among 
the Devas, with the Vajra in his hands. 

Being adored and adoring in return, the Pandavas enter the town of Kasi 
that has been decked out for the great festival. The Kshatriyas first go to the 
homes of the Brahmanas of Kasi, who live by their svadharma. They go 
next to the homes of the officers of the town, then to the homes of the Sutas 
and the Vaishyas, and then also to the houses of the Sudras. 

Bharatarishabha, with Purochana leading the way, the Pandavas finally 
go to the old palace of the city. They see the fine seats, beds and carpets, the 
airy rooms full of light; they eat the delectable royal fare that Purochana 
serves them and drink the excellent wine. Thus arriving in Varanasi, clad in 
royal finery, the Pandavas live in that ancient palace, being served and 
adored by Purochana and the people of Kasi. 

When ten days pass, Purochana tells them about the ‘Blessed House’ 
that he has built for them. Wearing royal silks, those tigers among men go 
with Duryodhana’s man to the treacherous house of lac. They enter like 
Guhyakas entering Lord Siva’s palace on Mount Kailasa. 

Yudhishitra looks around the edifice, and drawing Bhima aside tells him 
that it has been built with every possible incendiary material. The eldest 
Pandava smells the fat mixed liberally with ghee and lac, and says to his 
brother, ‘Parantapa, our enemies have used clever artisans to create this 
palace. They have built it with hemp, resin, heath, straw and bamboos, all 
soaked in ghee. 


The villainous Purochana is Duryodhana’s man and he stays close to us 
because he wants to immolate me in this murderous palace. But, my 
brother, the keen Vidura knew about the danger and warned me of it. He 
warned me that Duryodhana has plotted to kill us all.’ 

Bhima says, “We must return to the old palace.’ 

Yudhishtira replies, ‘No. We must continue living here otherwise 
Purochana will know that we suspect him. They might kill us suddenly 
then, for surely Purochana has no conscience, and is his murderous master 
Duryodhana’s man. Yet, we must be constantly vigilant. 

If we die by fire, will our Pitama Bhishma be enraged? No, for what use 
will it be then to show his wrath to the Kauravas, and risk their anger in 
return? But, perhaps, he will be angry, outraged by such a sin. 

It will matter little if we are dead. If we flee this palace of lac, 
Duryodhana will certainly have us murdered by other agents, other 
assassins, for he wants to be king. 

Moreover, being the king’s son he has both influence and power today, 
while ours are small by comparison. He has allies and wealth, a full 
treasury; we have neither. Will he not easily manage to have us slain, by 
any means? 

Our way ahead is that of secrecy and stealth. We must escape from here 
without their knowing that we have fled; then, we must go disguised, living 
as nomadic hunters in the hearts of jungles, in remote places, while our 
enemies believe us to be dead. 

Only thus shall we effectively escape our enemies and become familiar 
with these parts of the world. Even today, we shall, in utmost secrecy, have 
an underground tunnel excavated out of our chamber, and this house of 
death, and when the time comes escape through that passage. 

Thus, no fire shall burn us and our enemies will remain in the dark. So, 
my brother, we must continue to live here and plan to make our way out in 
such privacy that not Purochana or indeed anyone in Varanavrata suspects 
anything of our intentions.’” 


CANTO 149 
JATUGRIHA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana continued, “The same day, a miner, a friend of 
Vidura’s, comes to the Pandavas and says to them in private, ‘I am a 
master tunneller, and your uncle Vidura sent me to you. Tell me what 

you want me to do. Vidura, who trusts me, said, “Go to the Pandavas and 

help them.”’ 

“Tell me what I can do for you.’ 

‘I have learnt that Purochana means to torch this house of lac on the 
fourteenth night of this dark fortnight. He will fire the front door and 
immolate the Purushavyaghras, the Pandavas, and their mother Kunti while 
they sleep.” 

The vile Duryodhana has plotted your murder, my lords. So that you 
believe me Vidura said these words to me in the mlechcha bhasha, the very 
ones he spoke to you as you left Hastinapura, and also the reply you made 
to him in the same tongue.’ 

The miner repeats Vidura’s conversation with Yudhishtira in the rare 
dialect. Hearing those words, Yudhishtira is satisfied. He says to the miner, 
“Welcome friend! I know now that you are indeed a true and trusted friend, 
devoted to my loving uncle Vidura, and that he has sent you. 

There is little the wise Vidura does not know. Make no difference 
between him and us: as you are to him, from now you are to us. We are as 
much yours as he is. Friend, protect us as our loving uncle always has and 
still does. 

I know that Purochana has built this deadly mansion at the command of 
Dhritarashtra’s son. Strong with allies and confident with wealth he hunts us 
relentlessly. Friend, save us from the fire that Duryodhana has planned, for 
if we die here his most cherished purpose will be fulfilled. 

Look how cunningly Purochana has built this great house of lac. It is 
Slick against the arsenal of Varanavrata, with its lofty ramparts and no 


escape on any side when the fire breaks out. Thus Vidura guessed at the 
murderous intention of Duryodhana; the mortal peril the Kshattri sensed is 
at our very door. You must save us, good friend, without Purochana 
suspecting a thing.’ 

The miner replies, ‘So be it,’ and immediately and carefully begins his 
excavation, to create a large subterranean tunnel leading out of the palace. 
The mouth of the tunnel is in the very heart of the palace, level with the 
floor, covered over by planks of wood and a carpet, so Purochana who is 
always at the front door never suspects a thing. 

The Pandavas sleep at night in their bedchambers with their weapons 
beside them, ready for use. During the day, taking Purochana with them, 
they go hunting afar, from forest to forest, to have some fair idea of the lie 
of the surrounding lands. O King, they live vigilantly in the palace of lac, 
with every show of friendship and trust in Purochana, while in fact they are 
anxious and intensely sensible of danger. 

The citizens of Varanavata never know anything, either, about the 
Pandavas’ plans. Indeed, apart from themselves, only Vidura’s trusted 
friend, the miner, has any inkling of what is afoot.” 


CANTO 150 
JATUGRIHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Purochana sees the Pandavas apparently 

\/ comfortable and unsuspicious in the house of lac, and he is glad. 

Seeing him relaxed, Yudhishtira says to Bhima, Arjuna and the 

twins, “We have deceived this ruthless fellow and his guard is down. I 

believe the time has come to escape. We must torch this deadly palace 

ourselves, with Purochana inside it, and flee through the tunnel. No one 
must know that we have gone, but believe us dead, too.’ 

On the day of an almsgiving, Kunti has a feast for Brahmanas, and a 
poor-feeding, as well. It is an extravagant feast, to which a large number of 
women come, and drink and eat to their hearts’ content and more, and 
finally leave, with Kunti’s permission. 

Among those that come, as if fetched by fate, are a Nishada woman and 
her five sons. Rajan, this woman and her youths drink so much wine that 
they fall asleep or unconscious inside the house of lac. 

A sharp wind blows through the night, and while Purochana also sleeps 
from a surfeit of wine with which Bhima plies him, Bhima sets fire to the 
room where Duryodhana’s man lies. He then sets his brand to the front door 
and to other parts of the deadly house, which blazes up fiercely, as it has 
been built to do. 

The Pandavas and their mother go down into the miner’s tunnel. As the 
palace burns, the heat and the roar of the towering flames awaken the 
people of Varanavrata, who come running out of their homes. 

Their hearts breaking to see the inferno, they cry, “Ah, Duryodhana’s 
evil man built the palace with incendiary materials under our very noses. 
And now he has murdered the sinless sons of Pandu, as if they are enemies. 
A curse be upon Dhritarashtra, who allowed this. Purochana has already 
paid with his life for his sin; one day the king and his demonic son will also 


pay.’ 


And they weep, helplessly, for by now the fire has all but consumed the 
great edifice. All night, the people stand around the blazing mansion, and 
lament. 

Meanwhile, Kunti and her sons emerge from the mouth of the tunnel, 
some way from the palace and melt away into the night, unobserved. But 
they are full of sleep and fear, and they cannot go as quickly as they want, 
since Kunti is with them. The others, too, are faint from exhaustion, all but 
one of them. 

Then, Rajan, Bhima of untold strength and the fleetness of his airy father 
picks up all his brothers and his mother, and carrying them easily, plunges 
along through the night. He sets Kunti upon his shoulders, the twins on his 
hips, and carries Yudhishtira and Arjuna in either arm. Vrikodara, son of the 
Wind, goes along like a strange gale, thrusting down trees that loom in his 
path with his brawny chest. His footmarks fall deeply upon the Earth.” 


CANTO 151 
JATUGRIHA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana said, “At this same time, Vidura has sent another man 
he trusted, a pure soul, into the forest surrounding Varanavrata. This 
man sees the Pandavas making their way through the trees with their 

mother. He sees them trying to measure the depth of the river in a certain 

place, obviously wanting to ford the water to safety on the other side. 

Vidura knows well how deep Duryodhana’s hatred runs and how 
murderous his agents are. He sends his trusted agent to the Pandavas to help 
them, and this man now brings the sons of Pandu to a boat tethered to the 
riverbank, an extraordinary craft with engines and sails, made by the finest 
shipwrights, one that is proof against wave and wind, a boat that flies across 
any current as swiftly as a thought. 

The man now says to the Pandavas, ‘O Yudhishtira, listen to what I have 
to say, so that you know that I am indeed sent by your uncle Vidura. “The 
wise man protects himself with the knowledge that neither the consumer of 
straw nor the drier of dew burns those that live in a hole in the heart of a 
jungle.” 

These are the very words Vidura said to you and by these know that I am 
his trusted man and his agent. Vidura, who knows all things, says to you, 
“Kuntiputra, you will one day surely prevail over Karna, Duryodhana and 
his brothers, and the evil Shakuni in battle.” 

My boat is ready to bear you away, far from these places of danger. It is 
a marvellous boat and goes softly and smoothly over the river.’ 

Then, seeing Kunti and her sons apprehensive and forlorn, the tall man 
goes on the boat with them himself. 

He says again to them, ‘Vidura, who sniffed your heads in love and 
embraced you fondly, says that you must be ever vigilant, for the peril to 
your lives is very real.’ 


With that, he takes the Narapumgavas and their gracious mother across 
the Ganga. He helps them ashore there and softly cries Jaya! Then he 
leaves them, that good man, who is yet so mysterious, and melts back to 
wherever he comes from. 

The Pandavas send a secret message through him back to Vidura, and 
then enter the great jungle that lies ahead of them on the far shore of the 
sacred river. They go quickly and stealthily.” 


CANTO 152 
JATUGRIHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “When day breaks, a great crowd of townspeople 
\/ converge at the house of lac. When they have put out the last flames, 
they see the edifice has indeed been built with hemp and lacquer. 

They find the corpse of Purochana. 

The people begin to wail loudly, ‘It is certain that Duryodhana had this 
treacherous palace built to murder the sons of Pandu. Surely, his father 
knew of the plot and acquiesced in it, or he would have prevented this dire 
crime.’ 

‘There is little doubt that even Shantanu’s son Bhishma, Drona, Vidura, 
Kripa and the other Kauravas did not follow dharma by sending the 
Pandavas here to die.’ 

‘Let us send word to Dhritarashtra saying, “You have achieved your 
heart’s great desire. You have immolated the noble sons of your brother 
Pandu in the house of lac.””’ 

They fetch water and put out the embers that still burn, and begin a 
search for the bodies of Kunti and her sons. They find the charred corpses 
of the poor Nishada woman and her five sons. Vidura’s miner, the tunneller, 
goes with the people and cunningly covers the mouth of the underground 
passage, which he has dug, with debris and ashes, so that no one discovers 
it. 

The people of Varanavrata send a message to Dhritarashtra that the 
Pandavas, Kunti and Purochana have perished in the fire in the palace. 
Dhritarashtra hears the message and begins to sob loudly. 

He says, “Today my magnificent brother has died in the persons of his 
wife and sons! O, go at once to Varanavrata and perform the funeral rites 
for the daughter of Kuntiraja and her great Kshatriya sons. Sanctify the 
bones of the dead with the proper rituals, and give alms, and do everything 
that is proper and sacred at such a grave occasion. 


Let all the relatives and friends of the dead go to Kasi. Let no expense be 
spared so that their spirits find peace.’ 

Surrounded by his kinsmen, Ambika’s son Dhritarashtra offers tarpana 
for his nephews. 

The Kurus weep, crying out the names of the princes whom they believe 
dead. 

Some cry, ‘Ah Yudhishitra, Yuvaraja, you have left us!’ 

Others sob, ‘Oh, magnificent Bhima!’ 

Yet others cry, ‘Phalguna, you have gone, and the Earth is dim!’ 

‘Ah, the twin sons of the Aswins, Nakula and Sahadeva, the young ones 
handsome as Devas!’ 

‘Oh Kunti, you have also gone!’ 

Thus they lament and offer tarpana, oblations of water to allay the thirst 
of the dead on their final journey. The people weep as well, only Vidura 
seems strangely composed, though he does shed some tears to show that he 
grieves. But then, he knows that the Pandavas are not dead. 

Meanwhile, Kunti and the Pandavas cross the Ganga swiftly, helped by 
the strength of the boatman’s sinews, the river’s rapid current and a timely 
wind that favours them. Leaving the boat, they go south, making their way 
through the moonless night by the light of the stars that fill the sky. 

They enter a deep and dense jungle. They are overcome by exhaustion 
and thirst; they can hardly keep their eyes open, for sleep comes strongly 
over them. 

Yudhishtira turns to Bhima in some despair, ‘My brother, this is terrible; 
we are in the deep jungle and cannot tell which way to turn. And fatigue 
numbs us. Ah, are we certain that the vile Purochana is dead? How shall we 
ever be safe again? Danger is still near us, my brother. Bharata, you are the 
only one among us that is not tired, for you are as strong and swift as the 
wind. Take us up again, Bhima, and fly through the forest.’ 

The mighty Bhimasena picks up Kunti and his brothers again, and once 
more, speeds through the trees.” 


CANTO 153 
JATUGRIHA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana said, “As the tremendous Bhima hurtles along, the 
entire forest seems to tremble at his footfalls; the trees that strike or 
brush his great chest shake and sway. His thighs churning the air 

raise a wind like the ones that blow during the months of Jyeshta and 

Ashadha. 

Bhima brings trees that stand in his path crashing down and tramples on 
them, rending the creepers and vines which clung to their branches, 
crushing their flowers and fruit. He goes through that jungle like the king 
bull of a great elephant herd, a musth maddened angry tusker of sixty years, 
in his prime and in rut, when the ichor bursts forth from his temples and 
trickles down his body. 

Indeed, so vigorously does Bhima, as swift as Garuda or Vayu, go, that 
his brothers swoon at his speed. Often he plunges headlong and easily 
across deep and swirling streams and rivers, difficult to cross. 

The Pandavas have cast away their royal finery and disguised themselves 
as hunters, for fear of the ubiquitous spies of the sons of Dhritarashtra. 
Bhima now carries just his delicate mother upon his shoulders across the 
undulating banks of rivers. 

O Bharatarishabha, towards evening, still carrying his mother, and now 
also his brothers, Bhima arrives in a dreadful jungle, where there seem to be 
no fruit, roots or even water, and where the cries of the birds and beasts are 
eerie and threatening. As twilight grows into night, these cries and roars 
grow fiercer and more ominous. 

Soon, the darkness is complete, and a howling gale blows out of 
nowhere, felling trees, big or small, in its path like straws. Exhausted 
beyond all measure and with raging thirst having its way with them, the 
princes collapse onto the jungle floor. They sit there panting, parched and 
also not having eaten. 


Kunti, who cannot bear her searing thirst anymore, cries weakly, ‘I am 
the mother of the five Pandavas, and I am with all five of them. Yet, I burn 
with thirst.’ Again and again, as if demented, she repeats this. 

Bhima cannot bear it. Springing up, picking up his brothers and mother 
again, he charges once more through that fearful jungle, out of love for 
them, in quest of water. No living soul does he see anywhere, indeed few 
beasts, which slink away through the undergrowth and vanish; until 
suddenly he arrives in a clearing and sees before him a great and beautiful 
pipal tree, with spreading branches. 

Gently he sets his family down beneath that tree, Bharatarishabha, and 
says softly to them, ‘Rest, while I go to search for water. I hear the sweet 
cries of waterbirds not far from here. There must be a lake or at least a large 
pool at hand.’ 

Yudhishtira whispers through arid lips, ‘Go.’ 

Bhima runs towards the dim squawking of the waterfowl, and soon 
enough comes upon a lovely lake into which he plunges, bathing and 
slaking his thirst. Quickly, then, he soaks his upper cloth with water and 
speeds back to Kunti and his brothers, half a yojana away. Tenderly he 
squeezes the precious life-giving water through their lips. They sigh to 
drink it and then sleep again. 

Bhima sits in vigil over them. He sees Kunti swooned, where she sits, 
and wilted, and seized by terrible grief, Bhima begins to sigh like a snake. 
His gaze roves over his regal mother and brothers asleep on bare ground in 
the midst of this wilderness, and tears trickle down the mighty Vrikodara’s 
great face. 

‘Ah, miserbale wretch I am that I have to see this sight today of my 
mother and my brothers asleep on bare forest ground. What can be more 
painful than this? In Hastinapura and even Varanavrata, they slept on the 
softest, costliest beds of down. 

I am a sinner that today my eyes see Kunti, Vasudeva’s sister, daughter 
of the formidable Kuntiraja, she who bears every auspicious mark upon her 
regal person, the daughter-in-law of Vichitravirya, wife of the incomparable 
Pandu, mother of the five Pandavas, she who is radiant as the filaments of a 
lotus, as tender and delicate, her body only fit to sleep on the softest bed. 
But today that Kunti lies on rough earth. 

She who has borne the sons of Dharma, Indra and Vayu, who has always 
slept in palaces, now lies exhausted, in a swoon, on the ground under a tree. 


Ah, what more terrible sight shall my eyes ever see than these 
Purushavyaghras, my noble brothers, asleep beside our mother? Yudhishtira 
Dharmaputra, who deserves to have sovereignty over the three worlds, lies 
on the crude ground. Arjuna, his skin the hue of thunderheads, who has no 
equal among men, lies like any common man on the ground. 

Oh, what can be more painful than this? And the young twins, handsome 
as their sires, the Aswins, also lie like ordinary men upon rough earth. 

Truly, truly, he that has no envious, evil kinsmen lives in this world like 
a lone tree in a village, happily. The tree that stands alone in a village, fruit 
and leaves, is worshipped by everyone. Yet, there are those that have noble 
and righteous kinsmen and live joyfully in their midst, depending on one 
another, giving each other strength and support. These grow day by day in 
prosperity and strength, like great trees growing together, in a stand, inside 
a jungle. 

But as for us, we are banished by the evil Dhritarashtra and his 
murderous sons, and narrowly escaped death by fire. Now here we are 
under this tree in the heart of a forest. After everything we have suffered, 
where do we go next? 

Ah, evil cousins, enjoy your success, for it will be short-lived! For now 
the gods certainly favour you, but I swear you still live only because 
Yudhishtira does not tell me to have done with you. Otherwise, 
Duryodhana, I would already have sent you to Yamaloka, with your 
brothers, your sons and your friends, with Karna and Shakuni. 

But I am helpless because my elder brother is a man of such dharma that 
his rage has not yet been roused.’ 

Full of grief and wrath, Bhima clenches his great fists and sighs. 
Vrikodara looks at his sleeping mother and brothers again, and his fury 
flames up like a fire fed with ghee. 

Then, calming himself with an effort, he says, ‘There is sure to be some 
town not far from here. Let them awake and we will slake our thirst 
together, and be refreshed. Afterwards, we can consider what to do next. 
Until then I must stay awake and watch over them.’ 

Bhima sits in vigil over his sleeping family.” 


CANTO 154 
HIDIMBAVADHA PARVA 


aisampayana continued, “Not far from the place where the Pandavas 
\/ sleep is a Rakshasa called Hidimba who lives in a lofty sala tree. 
Feral and ugly, his fangs are as long and sharp as daggers. 

Hidimba is hungry; he is filled with the yearning today to feast on some 
human flesh. Long are his legs, great and distended his belly, and his wild 
hair and beard are red. 

His shoulders are as wide tree boles; his ears are pointed like arrows; 
altogether, his face is savage and dreadful. Waking from a slumber in his 
branch, casting his crimson eyes around, the ravenous Hidimba sees the 
sons of Pandu sleeping in that jungle, some way off. 

He shakes his horrid head, scratches his tangled hair, with his talons 
pointing up, yawns, looks at the Pandavas, looks away, and back again at 
them. His skin is as dark as thunderclouds; he is quite enormous, and his 
body gives off a dull sheen. 

More than any other meat, Hidimba loves human flesh. He dilates his 
nostrils and sniffs the delectable scent upon the air: of the sons of Pandu. 

He turns to his sister Hidimbi and says languidly, ‘Ah, so long since I 
smelt sweet human meat. My mouth is watering. How long it is since I sank 
my eight fangs into the finest flesh of all. What can match sinking my fangs 
into a human throat, and drinking the blood as it sprays? Fresh, frothy 
human blood; and it seems that today I will drink to my heart’s content. 

Go and see, my sister, who these humans are. Oh, the scent of them 
invades me; it conquers me! Go, Hidimbi, kill all of them and bring them 
here. They are asleep in my jungle, in Hidimbavana. 

Have no fear but go quickly. Do what I say and we shall feast on them, 
tearing the meat from their bones as we please. And my sweet sister, when 
we have had our fill, we shall dance together to various songs!’ 


Bharatarishabha, Hidimbi the Rakshasi flies to where the Pandavas are 
under the tall and graceful pipal tree. Arriving near them, she sees four 
Pandavas sound asleep under the nyagrodha; she sees Kunti, also sleeping 
beside her sons, and then her eyes fall upon the mighty Bhima, awake and 
keeping watch over his family. 

Hidimbi sees Bhima, rugged and handsome, like a sala tree himself, full 
of raw vigour, and she falls immediately and hopelessly in love with him. 

The Rakshasi sighs. She tells herself, ‘Oh, look at him, his skin like 
molten gold, his arms like tree branches, his shoulders like a lion’s, his 
throat marked with three auspicious lines like a conch shell, his eyes like 
lotus petals, and altogether splendid. 

I want him for my husband. I will not kill him as Hidimba wants. A 
woman’s love for her husband is stronger than her fondness for her brother. 
If I do kill him, Hidimba and I will enjoy him briefly, momentarily. But if I 
marry him instead, I can enjoy him forever.’ 

The Rakshasi can assume any form she wishes, and now she turns 
herself into a stunning human beauty and walks slowly towards Bhima 
Mahabaho. She wears unworldly ornaments, a smile on her full lips; her 
gait is modest and she comes up to him and says, ‘Who are you, 
Narapumgava, and how did you come here? 

Who are these warriors of heavenly beauty that sleep beneath the tree? 
Who, Sinless, is this woman, her loveliness also unearthly, who sleeps here 
in this jungle as trustfully as she might in her own bedchamber? 

Do you not know that this jungle belongs to a terrible Rakshasa whose 
name is Hidimba? He is my brother and he sent me to kill you for his meal. 
But then I saw you, magnificent as a Deva, and I knew that I would have no 
one else for my husband. 

I love you, Manava; you surely know dharma and, knowing that I have 
given my heart to you, do as you see fit. Oh, Kama’s arrows have pierced 
my heart and my body. I want you for myself; I beg you, make me yours. 

Mahabaho, I will rescue you from my brother; Anagha, only become my 
husband. We will fly far from here and live together upon the breasts of 
great mountains where no ordinary men ever set foot: for I can fly through 
the sky at will. Mighty one, you will enjoy me in those secret realms, I will 
give you great joy and pleasure.’ 

Bhima replies, ‘Rakshasi, perhaps a Muni, who has all his passions 
controlled and no attachments whatever, could abandon his sleeping mother 


and brothers. But I certainly cannot go with you to satisfy my desire, 
leaving my brothers and my mother as food for a Rakshasa.’ 

Hidimbi says, ‘Then wake them up and I will bear you all away from 
danger.’ 

But Bhima says, ‘Rakshasi, I am not afraid of your vile brother that I 
will awaken my family that sleeps so peacefully under the tree. Timid one, 
no Rakshasa has ever resisted the strength of these arms. Beautiful-eyes, no 
Manava, Gandharva or Yaksha can withstand my might. Sweet one, ah your 
form so fine, stay or leave as you please. Or even send your brother here, I 
do not care.’” 


CANTO 155 
HIDIMBAVADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana said, “Hidimba Rakshasa finds that his sister has not 
returned. He clambers down from his tree, and stalks towards where 
the Pandavas lie asleep. 

His eyes are red, his arms powerful, the wiry hair on his head sticks out, 
his slavering mouth hangs open, his body is like a mass of dark clouds, his 
fangs are like great needles, and he is a terrifying sight. 

Hidimbi sees her brother climb down from his sala tree. She sees the 
anger on his face and trembles. She says to Bhima, ‘My evil brother comes 
in wrath. I beg you awaken your brothers and mother and we must fly. I am 
as strong as any Rakshasa, O Fearless, and I can go wherever I like. Climb 
onto my back and I will carry all of you away from here. 

Parantapa, wake them up quickly and let us fly!’ 

Bhima says, ‘O fair hips, fear nothing. As long as I am here no Rakshasa 
can harm any of us, slender waist. I will kill your brother in front of you. I 
tell you this scourge of the jungle is no match for me, why, not all the 
Rakshasas of this world together can stand the strength of these arms. 

Look at my arms, sweet one, each is like an elephant’s trunk! Look at 
my thighs, like iron maces; look at my chest, how wide it is, and hard like 
adamant. My beautiful one, today you shall see my strength like Indra’s. 
Fair hips, do not imagine that I am just an ordinary man. I beg you do not 
look upon me with contempt or dislike.’ 

Hidimbi says, ‘Purushavyaghra, who are as handsome as a Deva, I have 
no contempt or dislike for you, but only love. But I have seen what 
Rakshasas do to Manavas, how much stronger they are than men.’ 

Bharata, now that he is closer, Hidimba hears their conversation. He sees 
his sister has assumed a human form, her hair woven with jasmine garlands, 
her face like the full moon, her nose, her eyes and brows exquisite, her 


complexion fair and her skin soft, her nails of lovely hue, her ornaments 
beautiful, and wearing a flowing diaphanous robe. 

The Rakshasa suspects at once that she desires the human, and his eyes 
blaze. Glaring at his sister, he growls at her, “When I am so hungry what 
witless creature dares keep me from eating? Have you lost your mind, 
Hidimbi, that you do not fear my anger? Fie on you, disloyal Rakshasi. 

You are flushed with lust and do not think twice about hurting me. Why, 
you are ready to dishonour our very race and all your ancestors. I will kill 
you, wretched woman, and all these that are with you.’ 

Eyes smouldering, fang grinding against fang, Hidimba runs roaring at 
his sister to have done with her. But great Bhima jumps up in his way and 
cries, ‘Stop!’ 

Bhima smiles contemptuously at the Rakshasa. He says to him, 
‘Hidimba, why do you want to wake my brothers and mother, who sleep so 
peacefully? Evil one, you should not kill a woman, especially one that has 
not sinned. 

Rakshasa, fight me first. This young woman has not sinned that she 
desires me, for it is Kama Deva, the God of Love, who inflames her as he 
does all the living. Wretch, your sister came here at your command; she saw 
me and lusted after me. 

What harm has she done to you by desiring me? It is Kama that offends 
you, Rakshasa, and you will not hurt her while I am here; you will not kill a 
woman. Come, let us go some way off and fight, for, vilest of Rakshasas, 
today I mean to send you to Yamaloka. 

Rakshasa, I will crush your head today as if an elephant stamped it. 
When I have killed you, herons, jackals and kites will gleefully tear the 
flesh from your limbs and feast on your carcass. 

For too long you have ruled this jungle with terror, and it shall be rid of 
you in a few moments. Hidimba, you are as big as a hill but your sister will 
soon see you being dragged about like a fallen elephant by a great lion. 
Vilest of Rakshasas, when I have killed you, men shall pass in safety 
through this vana again, and without fear.’ 

Hidimba replies, ‘Manava, grand boasts indeed. But do what you say 
you will and then perhaps you might surely boast. Come, let us not waste a 
moment. You are strong indeed but today test your strength against me. 

I swear that I will not kill your brothers until I have killed you. Till then, 
let them sleep in peace. But when I have killed you, O fool and braggart, I 


will drink your blood and then kill your family, and finally my sister, as 
well, for she has betrayed me.’ 

Hidimba stretches out his huge arms and rushes at Bhima Parantapa. In a 
flash, almost playfully, terrible Bhimasena seizes the Rakshasa’s arms. 
Roughly, as easily as a lion might some small creature of the jungle, the 
Pandava drags Hidimba some krosas from that place where his brothers and 
mother sleep. 

Outraged, enraged, startled to feel the strength of the human, the 
Rakshasa gives an earthshaking roar. Bhima drags him farther away lest his 
roars and curses awaken Kunti and his brothers. 

Now they lock together, the Manava and the Rakshasa, and fight like 
two grown tuskers mad with rage. They uproot the trees that grow around 
them and strike each other with their trunks. Such a noise do they make that 
the other Pandavas and Kunti awake, and see Hidimbi sitting before them, 
disconsolately.” 


CANTO 156 
HIDIMBAVADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “Waking and seeing the extraordinary 
\/ beauty of Hidimbi, Kunti and her sons are full of wonder. Kunti 
speaks to her sweetly. 

“Who are you that are as beautiful and radiant as a child of the Devas? 
Fair one, whose daughter are you, where have you come from? If you are 
the Devi of this vana or an Apsara, tell me about yourself and why you are 
here.’ 

Hidimbi replies, “This great jungle, of the colour of a blue cloud, is the 
domain of a Rakshasa called Hidimba. Most beautiful and gracious lady, I 
am his sister and he, O blessed one, sent me to kill you and your sons. 

But when I arrived here I saw your mighty son who sat awake. Gracious 
lady, Kama, who pervades the nature of all the living, struck me with his 
flowery arrows, and I fell in love with your great son and chose him in my 
heart for my husband. 

I told your son that I would carry all of you away from this place, but he 
would not allow me. When I did not return to Hidimba, my brother came 
here and your son hauled him away. Now they fight, the Manava and the 
Rakshasa, both of them endowed with untold strength, and make the vana 
tremble with their dreadful roars and blows.’ 

Yudhishtira jumps up, as do Arjuna, Nakula and tejasvin Sahadeva, and 
they see that Bhima and the Rakshasa do indeed fight some way off, like 
two lions. The dust they raise with their flying heavy feet seems like the 
smoke from a forest fire. Covered by that dust, their massive bodies are like 
two cliffs shrouded in mist. 

Arjuna sees Bhima a little beleaguered by Hidimba, for the Vayuputra 
has not rested at all. With a smile, Arjuna says to his brother, “You are tired, 
Bhima. Let Nakula and Sahadeva watch over our mother, and you must rest. 
I am here now, I will kill the Rakshasa.’ 


Bhima retorts, “Look upon this fight as a spectator, Arjuna. For he has 
come within reach of my hands and he will not escape with his life.’ 

Arjuna says, ‘Then why, O Bhima, do you let him live so long? 
Parantapa, we must be on our way. He will become stronger with dawn, as 
his kind always do, during the three sandhyas. He will also use his maya 
shakti then. Do not toy with him any longer, but use all your strength now 
and kill him, my brother.’ 

Blazing up, Bhima summons the awesome strength that his father Vayu 
employs during the Pralaya. With a roar, he seizes Hidimba and lifts him 
easily into the air. He spins the Rakshasa’s great body, blue as 
thunderheads, around, a hundred times in a moment. 

Bhima says, ‘Rakshasa, you are blessed with intelligence in vain. You 
have fed for too long on unsanctified meat. You deserve an unholy death. I 
will rid this vana of you today, and make it a jungle without thorns. No 
more, Hidimba, will you feast on human flesh.’ 

Arjuna says again, impatiently, “Bhima, if you are finding it difficult to 
kill the Rakshasa, let me help you. Kill him quickly or let me do it. You are 
tired and must rest.’ 

Bhima flings Hidimba Rakshasa down savagely onto the ground. He 
plants his foot on the Rakshasa’s back and breaks his body in two like some 
twig. Hidimba lets out a dying cry that echoes through that vana, deep as 
the sound of a wet drum. 

His brothers crowd around Bhima, slayer of all his enemies, and 
embrace him. 

Then Arjuna says, ‘Jyeshta, I believe there is a town not far from this 
vana. Let us go and hide there, so Duryodhana’s spies do not find us here.’ 

His brothers, those Maharathas, those tigers among men, agree, ‘So be 
it.’ 

They set out, with Kunti, and Hidimbi the Rakshasi following them.” 


CANTO 157 
HIDIMBAVADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Bhima sees Hidimbi following them and turns on 
V/ her with a soft growl. 
He says, ‘Rakshasas avenge themselves on their enemies with 
impenetrable deception. So, Hidimbi, you must also go after your brother.’ 

He would have killed her, but Yudhishtira intervenes. ‘Bhima, 
Purushavyaghra, however angry you are you must never kill a woman. 
Pandava, dharma is more important than protecting one’s life. 

You have killed Hidimba who came to kill us. This woman is surely his 
sister, but what harm can she do us even if she wants to?’ 

Hidimbi folds her hands before Kunti and Yudhishtira as well. She says, 
‘Gracious lady, you know the pangs that Kama makes a woman feel. He 
torments me now with them, with love for your son Bhimasena. I live only 
for the moment when your son will soothe the fever that consumes me. The 
time has come, sweet lady, and I hope that he will make me glad. 

I abandoned my brother and my people only to have Bhimasena for my 
husband. Most illustrious lady, if he will not have me I will kill myself. Fair 
one, gracious, beautiful one, be merciful to me. Think of me as being either 
a fool or your slave, but let your son Bhima, handsome as a Deva, marry me 
now and let me take him with me, where I go, where I will. 

Noble lady, trust me, I will bring him safely back to you. Also, think of 
me at any time and I will come to you immediately and take you wherever 
you wish to go. I will protect you from every danger, and carry you over the 
most inaccessible and remote places, upon my back, through the sky. 

Ah, be merciful and tell your son to make me his wife. The Rishis have 
said that in times of peril one should protect one’s life by any means at all, 
without considering scruples. Yet, he that keeps to dharma in times of 
duress and trial is the best of men, for distress is the greatest threat to men 
of dharma. 


Dharma protects life; indeed, dharma is called the giver of life. Thus, 
nothing one does to keep dharma and save one’s life can be censured. I am 
the means to your safety; tell your son to make me his.’ 

Yudhishtira now says, “‘Hidimbi you speak truly. But slender-waisted 
one, you must keep your word. After his morning ablutions, his prayers and 
dawn rituals, Bhima shall be yours during the days, until the sun sets. Enjoy 
the days with him as you please and wherever you like. But Hidimbi, who 
can fly as swiftly as the mind, you must bring him back to us at nightfall of 
every day.’ 

Bhima bows his head to what Yudhishtira says, for he does indeed desire 
Hidimbi. He says, ‘Slim-waisted Rakshasi, I promise to remain with you 
and to be yours until you have a son.’ 

Joyfully Hidimbi cries, ‘So be it!’ She then picks Bhima up effortlessly, 
rises up into the sky with him and flashes away. She flies with him to lofty 
mountains, sacred to the Devas, of unearthly beauty, where nameless and 
rare birds sing as they do nowhere else in the world. 

Upon their peaks, on their sides where magnificent trees grow, great 
sires of their kind, and in their secret valleys, Hidimbi makes love with 
Bhima all day long. She assumes the most beautiful form for him, wears 
ornaments past compare, and often breaks into fine song herself, singing 
more sweetly than the birds. 

They take their deep pleasure of each other in the hearts of impenetrable 
forests, beside lakes like great jewels upon the Earth, fragrant and laden 
with lotus and lily, on exquisite islands that stand in the flow of great rivers, 
on soft sands and smooth pebbles, in caves hidden behind towering 
waterfalls, upon the sylvan Himalaya, in crystalline pools at the foot of 
these cascades, upon which, also, resplendent lotuses shine, on seashores, 
great and empty beaches where no man has ever set foot, where gold dust 
and nuggets sparkle and pearls shine like small moons, in great towns and 
cities, in sprawling gardens, in sacred tapovanas, upon myriad hills, in the 
hidden domains of the Guhyakas and Siddhas, on the banks of the 
Manasarovara, where flowers and fruit festoon the radiant giant trees 
perennially. 

Indeed, Hidimbi flies swiftly as the mind, and she makes love with 
Bhima in all these places, until she becomes pregnant and in her time 
delivers a mighty son. His eyes are fierce, his mouth wide, his ears long and 
pointed like arrows; he is altogether ferocious to behold. 


His lips are coppery, his teeth sharp fangs, his arms great, his strength 
greater, and that child quickly becomes a master archer. His nose is long 
and sharp, his chest wide as houses, his calves are tremendous, his swiftness 
incredible, and there is nothing human about his face or appearance though 
he is indeed the son of a man. 

As soon as that child is born, within an hour, he grows into a youth. He 
is stronger than any Pisacha, of any tribe, and any Rakshasa, too. 

Quickly, taught by his great uncles, he becomes a master of every 
weapon. Rakshasa women give birth the very day they conceive; it is an 
ancient blessing given them by the Devi Durga, so they do not have to forgo 
sexual pleasure for any length of time. Of course, they can assume any form 
they choose, terrible or beautiful. 

Bhima and Hidimbi’s son has no hair on his head. When he is born, he 
bends to touch the feet of his mother and his father. Hidimbi remarks that 
his head is as smooth as a Ghata, a waterpot, and his parents name him 
Ghatotkacha, the pot-headed. 

Ghatotkacha is devoted to his father and his uncles, and he is soon their 
favourite. But now Hidimbi knows that her time with Bhima has come to an 
end. She takes sad leave of them and goes away, to range the world as she 
pleases. 

Ghatotkacha, greatest among Rakshasas, takes their blessing, as well, 
and, promising to appear before them whenever they need him and summon 
him with a thought, also leaves them and journeys north. 

It is told that Indra gives an amsa of himself to create Maharatha 
Ghatotkacha. His reason for this is to create a worthy adversary for Karna, 
sadly one that he could finally kill with the deadly shakti, inexorable 
weapon which Indra himself gives that matchless warrior.” 


CANTO 158 
HIDIMBAVADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “The Pandava Maharathas wander from jungle to 

\/ jungle, hunting deer and other animals for their food. Their travels 

take them through the kingdoms and lands of the Matsyas, the 

Trigartas, the Panchalas and the Kichakas, with their emerald forests 
jewelled with lakes like the faces of the purest diamonds. 

The brothers all wear their hair in matted jata, and valkala for garments, 
or animal hides: those redoubtable Kshatriyas wear the garb of wandering 
Sannyasis; and Kunti goes with them, their mother. At times, the 
Maharathas carry her upon their backs, and hurry along their way when 
they fear that they might be discovered. They go in disguise across the 
world’s wild places. 

They study the Rik and the other Vedas, as well as the Vedangas, and the 
other Shastras that deal with dharma and politics, too. During their 
wandering, they meet their grandsire Krishna Dwaipayana, the Maharishi 
Vyasa. They prostrate at his feet, then stand before him with folded hands, 
the Pandavas and Kunti. 

Vyasa says, ‘Bharatarishabhas, I know everything that has happened, 
indeed I had foreknowledge of it during my dhyana. I have come to bless 
you and to tell you that all that has transpired, your suffering and exile, will 
finally turn out for the best, and you will benefit from it. Do not grieve over 
any of this; it is all for your final happiness. 

It is true that Dhritarashtra’s sons and you are all the same to me. Yet, I 
must be partial to those that have suffered during their tender years; so, 
certainly, my affection for you is now greater, and because of that love I 
want to bless you and do some great good to you. 

Not far from this place is a fine little town, where you will be perfectly 
safe. Take yourselves there, disguised, and wait for me to come to you 
again.’ 


Satyavati’s son Dwaipayana comforts the sons of Pandu and leads them 
to the township of Ekachakra. 

The Muni also consoles Kunti, ‘Live long, daughter! For your son 
Yudhishtira, devoted as he is to truth, this radiant Purusharishabha who has 
conquered the world with his dharma, will soon rule over all the rulers of 
the Earth and be a king of kings. 

Arjuna and Bhima will subdue the world in their brother’s name, the 
Earth with her girdle of seas, and Yudhishtira will rule as emperor. Your 
sons and Madri’s Maharathas, as well, will enjoy all power and every 
luxury and pleasure. 

These Purushvyaghras will perform many great sacrifices, including the 
imperial Rajasuya yagna and the Aswamedha yagna, and munificent shall 
be the gifts they bestow upon the Brahmanas of the world. 

Your sons will one day also rule over the kingdom of their ancestors, the 
Kuru kingdom, and they will keep their friends and kinsmen in great 
comfort, wealth and joy.’ 

Vyasa brings them into the home of a Brahmana in Ekachakra. Then the 
island-born Rishi says to Yudhishtira, ‘Live here and wait for my return. 
Adapt yourself to the place and your situation, and I, Vyasa, say to you that 
happiness waits for you around the corner of the days.’ 

The Pandavas fold their hands humbly to him, and say, ‘So be it.’ The 
illumined Dwaipayana then leaves them and returns to his asrama, from 
where he has come.” 


CANTO 159 
BAKAVADHA PARVA 


ing Janamejaya asked, “Dvijottama, best of Brahmanas, what did 
K those mighty Maharathas, those Kuntiputras, do in Ekachakra?”’ 
Vaisampayana said, “They live for a time in the home of a 
Brahmana, disguising themselves as Brahmanas, too. During the day they 
go begging for alms, and return at dusk with whatever they have received 
and give it all to Kunti, who divides the alms in two equal portions. Bhima 
eats one portion, while the other is shared by Kunti and her other sons. 

They range far, the sons of Pandu, wandering through enchanting 
forests, past crystalline lakes and frothing, clear rivers, and they become 
great favourites with the people of Ekachakra for the manner in which they 
deport themselves. Thus, O Bharatarishabha, some time passes. 

One day, while four of her sons are out begging alms, Bhima is in the 
room in the home of the Brahmana, their host, with his mother Pritha. 
Suddenly, Kunti hears piteous sobs echoing from within the Brahmana’s 
house. She hears the man, his wife and children all crying in the most 
heartbroken manner. 

Kunti cannot bear it and says to Bhima, ‘My son, we are living 
peacefully and happily in the house of this Brahmana, who shows us such 
kindness and respect. Duryodhana has no idea where we are, but believes us 
to be dead. 

My child, I am always blessing this Brahmana in my heart and 
wondering what great good I should do to him. The true man, my Bhima, 
always pays back more than he receives. Some terrible tragedy has 
overtaken our host. If we can be of any help at all to him, we must requite 
his generous hospitality.’ 

Bhima says at once, ‘Mother, find out what ails the Brahmana. Whatever 
it might be, I will do everything I can to remove his distress, however 
difficult that might prove.’ 


They hear more anguished cries from the Brahmana and his wife. Kunti 
rises and runs towards the inner chambers of the house of their host, even 
like a cow does to her tethered calf. She pauses at the door and sees the 
Brahmana, his wife, their son and daughter all sitting in utmost dejection, 
with tears streaming down their faces. 

The Brahmana says, ‘Oh, curse this worldly life! It is as hollow as a 
reed, pointless, and founded just on sorrow. It begins and ends in grief and 
knows no freedom. Life is a disease, a tale of misery. 

The Atman is one, but it must pursue dharma, artha and kama. And 
because it does so, and all at the same time, discord arises, and then untold 
grief. Some say that moksha is our final desire and goal, but I am certain 
that it can never be attained. 

The acquisition of wealth is hell; the pursuit of it attended by misery; 
and when one finally does acquire wealth one is even more miserable for 
one has grown attached to one’s hard-earned possessions and lives in 
constant anxiety of losing them. 

And today mortal danger has entered my life, and I cannot see how to 
escape it. Wife of mine, how often I told you let us leave this town and go 
somewhere else, where we would be happy. But you would not listen. 

You always replied, simple woman, “I was born here and have grown 
old here. This is my home, the place of my ancestors.” 

But your mother and father left this world a long time ago; all your 
relatives are also dead. Then why did you want to go on living in this 
wretched place? No, you would not listen to me, and now that terrible time 
has come for you to lose one member of your family. 

What could be more terrible for me? But no, it is I that will offer myself 
to death because I could never sacrifice any of you, while keeping myself 
alive. You have been such a good wife to me, a helpmeet in any punya that I 
undertook, always self-effacing, and always as loving as a mother. 

The Gods gave you to me as a true companion and you are my mainstay, 
my greatest support. My parents got us married. Your lineage is as pure as 
your nature is sweet. You are the mother of my children, devoted, chaste 
and innocent. I married you with every holy rite and I will not abandon you 
now, who have been so constant in your vratas. I will not sacrifice your life 
to save mine. 

Ah, how will I sacrifice my son who has not yet attained puberty? How 
will I sacrifice my daughter, my own child given to me by God to become 


the mother, one day, of my grandchildren, through whom my ancestors and 
I will attain those realms that only a daughter’s sons can bestow upon our 
souls? 

There are those that say that a father loves his son best, while others 
insist that a daughter is a father’s favourite. But for me both my children 
have always been equal and equally loved. 

It is plain that I cannot sacrifice the life of any of you, yet if I die myself 
who will look after you when I am gone? What peace will my spirit have 
even in the next world? You will certainly perish, as well, without me. 

Oh, there is no cure for the horrible tragedy that has overtaken us, no 
escape. I do not know what to do. It seems the only course is for all four of 
us to go and die together. Yes, that seems the only way.’” 


CANTO 160 
BAKAVADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “Hearing the Brahmana’s stricken words, 

V/ his wife says, “‘O Brahmana, you must not grieve like an ordinary 

man. This is no time for lamenting. You are learned and you know 

that all who are born must surely die; you must not grieve over the 
inevitable. 

A man seeks a wife, a son or daughter, all for his self. You are a wise 
man; kill your grief. I will go in your place, for it is the highest dharma of a 
woman to save her husband’s life by sacrificing her own. I could hope for 
no greater fortune. By doing this I will find joy and great fame in this world, 
and eternal bliss in the next. 

I tell you, my husband, this is a woman’s highest dharma, and by this we 
shall both find both punya and sukha. I have fulfilled my womanhood by 
bearing you our children; I owe you no further debt. You are able and can 
support and nurture our son and daughter; but not I. 

You are my life, my wealth, and my lord; without you, how will I feed or 
care for these young ones, why, how will I support myself? If I am a widow 
and without a lord, how will I keep the three of us alive and still lead a 
chaste and honest life? 

If arrogant or otherwise unworthy suitors come for your daughter’s hand, 
how will I protect her? My lord, even as birds fly hungrily at discarded 
meat, so do men seek out a woman who has lost her husband. 

Brahmanottama, my virtue might well falter if evil men repeatedly 
importune me. Then how will I be able to set this innocent daughter of 
yours upon the pure path which all her ancestors have walked? 

As for your son, how will I, as a widow, teach him everything that he 
should know, so that he becomes as accomplished and virtuous as yourself? 
Like Sudras that demand to hear the Veda, base men will come for your 
daughter’s hand, and how will I resist them? Even if I refuse, they might 


well take her by force, like crows stealing sacrificial ghee, this pure child 
blessed with all your qualities. 

And when the world sees your son become so unlike his father, and your 
daughter married to some low man, it will despise and dishonour me, even 
the worst in it, and I will certainly die. And when the both of us are dead, 
these children will also perish like fish when they have no water in which to 
live. 

So, O Brahmana, you must allow me to sacrifice myself. Also, those that 
know dharma always say that for a woman who has borne children to die 
before her husband is the greatest punya. Ah, I am more than ready to 
abandon my son and my daughter, all my kin, and life itself for your sake. 

For a woman to serve her husband is her highest dharma, loftier than 
yagnas, vratas, sannyasa or any kind of daana. So what I mean to do is the 
purest dharma and punya for you and your race. 

The Rishis say that a man treasures his wife, children, relatives and all 
his possessions to save himself from danger and sorrow. He watches over 
his wealth to keep danger away and with this wealth he supports and 
protects his wife. And himself he protects through both his wealth and his 
wife. 

The Sages truly say that a man acquires a wife, a son, wealth and a 
house in order to safeguard himself against any misfortune, expected or 
unforeseen. The ancients have also declared that all one’s relatives together 
are not equal to oneself. So, my lord, you must sacrifice me to save 
yourself. I beg you let me sacrifice myself so that you can care for these 
young ones of mine. 

Besides, those who know dharma always say that a woman must never 
be killed. Rakshasas also know the laws of dharma. It is certain that the 
Rakshasa will kill a man but not so that he will dare kill a woman. This is 
another reason for you to send me to the Rakshasa. 

My lord, I have enjoyed great happiness, so much joy and pleasure, and I 
have also acquired a good deal of spiritual punya. I have borne you these 
two children who are so precious to me. All my womanly wants and needs 
have been fulfilled, and I have lived a long life. I am not afraid to die. 

I am always eager to serve and please you, that is my nature; keeping all 
this in mind, I have arrived at my resolve. When I am gone, you can marry 
another wife, and through her find more religious merit. There is no sin in 
it. For a man to take a second wife is punya, while for a woman it is a sin to 


marry a second husband. Remember all this, my lord, and also that for you 
to sacrifice your life is sinful. 

And so, do not delay, but set us all free from our burden of grief: 
yourself, your family, and these children of ours.’ 

Bharata, the Brahmana embraces her emotionally, and tears stream down 
their faces, while grief and silence fill the room.” 


CANTO 161 
BAKAVADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “Listening to her parents, the daughter is 
\/ stricken and cries, “Why do you lament and cry like this, as if you 
have no one to care for you? Hear what I have to say, O my father 

and mother, before deciding what you are going to do. 

Is it not true that one day you will have to send me away, give me to 
someone to be his wife? Since you must sacrifice me one day, let it be 
today, and so save three lives for the price of one. 

Men wish for children, believing that they will save them in this world 
and the next. So, today, ford the river of your misfortunes by making a raft 
of me, your child. The Sages call a child a Putra, a saviour, because a child 
does indeed save its parents both in this world and the next. 

The Pitrs wish for grandchildren from me, to become their special 
saviours. But by saving my father’s life today, I will become a saviour to 
them myself. My brother, this little one is young and tender. There is no 
doubt that he will not survive if you die. If both my father and my brother 
perish, there will be no one left to offer the pinda and tarpana for the spirits 
of our manes. Nothing could be more terrible. 

And if you both leave me, and my mother will certainly not survive your 
deaths, I will sink into the deepest despair, and die myself, a heartbroken 
death. However, if you, my mother and father, and this little one continue to 
live, our family will continue and the ancestral pinda will also continue to 
be offered. 

A son is a man’s very soul; his wife is his dearest friend; but a daughter 
is only a burden. Rid yourself of this burden, father, and let me tread the 
high path of dharma. I am a girl; if you die, I will become helpless and 
certainly come to grief, one way or another. 

That is why I have decided to save our clan and gain the punya of this 
fearful sacrifice. Dvijottama, if you leave me and go to the Rakshasa 


yourself, I will never recover from the grief of it. Be merciful to me, 
Purushottama, for all our sakes, for the sake of dharma, and for our clan. 
You must sacrifice my life and live on. You must send me away one day 
soon, it is inevitable; let this be that day. 

What could be more terrible than if you are to die and we are forced to 
live on, begging for our food like dogs, at the mercy of any stranger who 
wants to take advantage of us? But if you live on, I will surely find great joy 
in Devaloka. 

I have heard that if a man sacrifices his daughter, offering her like an 
oblation to the Devas and the Pitrs, he and his shall find prosperity.’ 

Tears roll ceaselessly down her face as she speaks, and her parents are 
plunged deeper into despair. The three of them hug one another and sob. 

Seeing them, the son of the house, the little innocent, says in the 
sweetest lisp, and his eyed wide and shining, “Don’t cry, my mother, my 
father, my sister.’ 

He goes up to them smiling and brandishing a blade of grass in his small 
hand. Screwing up his face into a delightful snarl, he cries, ‘I will slay the 
Rakshasa who eats people!’ 

At which, despite their predicament and their terror, the other three burst 
out laughing. Kunti sees her moment and enters the room. She speaks to 
them and truly what she says revives their spirits as amrita does a dying 


99 


man. 


CANTO 162 
BAKAVADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


CC er says, “Tell me the cause of your grief and I will remove it if I 
can.’ 
The Brahmana replies, ‘Sannyasini, I thank you for your noble 
intention, but our grief cannot be removed by any human agency. 

Not far from our town there lives a Rakshasa calls Baka, and he is the 
lord and master of all these lands. He is inordinately strong and rules our 
country. He is also the lord of all the Rakshasas and thus he protects our 
town from the rest of them, and we fear no enemy at all. 

However, in return for his protection we must send him a regular 
offering of food: a cartload of rice, drawn by two buffaloes, and the human 
that drives the cart. Every family’s turn comes to send the Rakshasa his 
offering, and there being so many homes in our country, each one’s turn 
comes after many years. 

If any household tries to escape their turn when it comes, Baka descends 
on them and kills the entire family, men, women and children, and eats 
them. 

The king of this country lives in a city called Vetrakiya. He is a wanton 
and an imbecile, and does nothing to protect us. And continuing to live in 
the kingdom of such a weak and impotent monarch, we surely deserve our 
fate. 

No one can force a Brahmana to dwell permanently in any place, and 
they are like birds that migrate from kingdom to kingdom, in complete 
freedom. The Rishis have always maintained that one must first find a good 
king, then a good wife, and then seek wealth. Acquiring these three one 
becomes capable of saving oneself and one’s clan. 

But I have been foolish in my pursuit of the three, and today I find 
myself plunged in a sea of mortal danger and misery, for today it is my turn 
to send Bakasura his offering of food, which will destroy my family. 


I do not have the money with which I might buy a man willing to sell his 
life and take Baka his cartload of rice. I cannot think of sacrificing my wife 
or my children. I see no ray of hope or escape, and am sinking in the sea of 
dread. 

I have decided that the only course for us is to go all together to the 
monster and let him devour us all.”” 


CANTO 163 
BAKAVADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


for I have a way to save you from the Rakshasa. You have just 

one son, and besides he is a young child, and only one daughter, 
as well, also a tender girl. I see no reason why either of them, your wife or 
even you should sacrifice yourselves to satisfy the Rakshasa. 

Brahmana, I have five sons. Let one of them take the cart of rice to 
Baka.’ 

But the Brahmana is aghast at the idea, ‘I can never allow someone else 
to sacrifice his life for me! You are Brahmanas and my guests. Why, even a 
lowborn man would not accept your offer. It has always been said that one 
should sacrifice oneself and one’s children for the sake of a Brahmana, and 
certainly not the reverse. I believe this, and if I have to choose between the 
death of a Brahmana and my own, I will always choose to die myself. 

Brahmahatya is the most heinous sin of all, and there is no expiation for 
it. It is better to sacrifice one’s own life, however sadly, than a Brahmana’s. 
Noble, blessed lady, I will not be committing suicide if I go to the 
Rakshasa, and no sin will cling to me in my next life. But if I countenance a 
Brahmana giving his life for mine, I would sin grievously and would never 
escape the consequences. 

The Rishis have said that abandoning or betraying someone who comes 
to your home for protection, as well as participating in the death of one that 
seeks death at your hands are both dreadful sins. The Sages say this in the 
context of what is permissible in grave danger and distress. 

So, dear lady, it is far better for me that I die with my wife and children 
today than that I sacrifice a Brahmana’s life so that I can continue living.’ 

Kunti replies, “Brahmana, I also believe firmly that a Brahmana should 
never be sacrificed. And as for me, even if I had a hundred sons instead of 


CC Kix says with a smile, ‘Do not grieve anymore, good Brahmana, 


the five that I do, none of them would be any less dear to me than the 
others. But the Rakshasa will not kill my son because this son of mine is 
blessed with strength beyond your imagination. He is also a master of 
occult mantras. 

He will deliver the offering of food to the Rakshasa, but will escape with 
his life. It will not be the first time, either; I have seen, more than once, my 
son killing the most powerful Rakshasas, fiends big as hillocks. 

But Brahmana, you must not tell anyone this secret, for then those that 
want this secret power for themselves will never leave my sons in peace. 
The Rishis have said that if my son teaches his secret knowledge to anyone 
without his Guru’s leave, he himself will lose his strength.’ 

Hearing what Pritha says, incredulous joy fills the Brahmana and his 
wife, for surely her words are like amrita to them. Kunti takes the 
Brahmana to Bhimasena Vayuputra, and tells him about the Rakshasa and 
what she wants him to do. 

Bhima replies casually, as if this is nothing, ‘So be it. 


999 


CANTO 164 
BAKAVADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “After Bhima gives his word, O Bharata, saying ‘I 

\/ will’, the other Pandavas return with the alms they have begged 

during the day. Yudhishtira takes one look at Bhima’s delighted 
expression and guesses at what has transpired while he is out. 

Yudhishtira sits beside his mother and says quietly, ‘What task has 
Bhima undertaken? Did you command him or did he take it upon himself?’ 

Kunti replies calmly, ‘I told Bhima Parantapa to do this great thing for 
the sake of the good Brahmana and to liberate this lovely township from 
fear.’ 

Yudhishtira says sharply, ‘What rashness, mother. You do not know what 
you have done. This is like telling Bhima to commit suicide. The Sages 
never approve of abandoning one’s child. 

O my mother, why do you want to sacrifice your own son to save 
another’s life? This is not only unnatural for humans but against everything 
that the Veda teaches. 

We sleep peacefully at nights because of Bhima’s strength. We have 
some hope of recovering our kingdom from the envious sons of 
Dhritarashtra because we rely on Bhima’s strength. Duryodhana and 
Shakuni do not sleep at night because the thought of Bhima’s strength 
haunts them. 

We escaped from the house of lac because of Bhima’s strength; countless 
other perils he has saved us from. Bhima killed Purochana. Because of him 
we already think of ourselves as killing Dhritarashtra’s sons and ruling the 
Earth again very soon, and over all the wealth that is in her. 

Mother, what were you thinking when you decided to sacrifice Bhima to 
the Rakshasa today? Have you lost your reason Kunti, or have our recent 
trials clouded your mind?’ 


Kunti says, ‘I have not lost my reason, neither is my mind clouded, 
Yudhishtira, and you need have no fear for Bhima. We have been living 
safely in this Brahmana’s house, undiscovered by Duryodhana, and our host 
has shown us great respect and affection. 

We are in his debt, and gratitude is the mark of a noble man; indeed, the 
true man returns more than he receives. And it is to repay our debt to the 
good Brahmana that I decided to send Bhima to the Rakshasa. 

I have now seen Bhima’s strength, when we escaped from the house of 
lac, when he killed Hidimba, and I have complete faith in him. My son is as 
strong as ten thousand elephants; that is how he carried five of us, each one 
weighty as an elephant, from Varanavrata. 

No one on Earth is as strong as Bhima, why, I venture that he may well 
defeat Indra, who wields the Vajra and is the greatest warrior. Soon after he 
was born, he fell from my lap down onto the mountain below. The fall left 
no scratch on him, but the rock onto which he fell was shattered. Pandava, 
even then I knew my son’s matchless strength. 

No, neither rashness nor foolishness made me decide to send Bhima 
against the Rakshasa, or any ulterior motive. Deliberately, and after careful 
thought, I decided to do this thing. 

Yudhishtira, we shall repay our deep debt to our host by this deed as well 
as gain great punya by it. A Kshatriya who serves a Brahmana in any 
manner acquires many lofty realms of bliss in the hereafter. A Kshatriya 
who saves a Brahmana’s very life certainly finds great fame in this world 
and the next. 

A Kshatriya who helps a Vaisya becomes very popular, and a warrior 
must not hesitate to help even a Sudra who comes to him for refuge, for 
then he shall be born into the noblest of royal houses in his next life, and be 
prosperous and have great honour from other kings. 

O Scion of the House of Puru, the illustrious Dwaipayana himself told 
me all this once. Remembering what he said, I made my decision.’” 


CANTO 165 
BAKAVADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


CC ow, Yudhishtira is contrite. He says, ‘Mother, what you have 
| \ done is wise and excellent. Our Bhima will certainly kill the 
Rakshasa and come back alive, not only for his indomitable 

strength but for our mother’s unfaltering kindness towards Brahmanas. 

But, mother, you must get the Brahmana’s solemn pledge that he will 
say nothing of this to anyone else.’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “At dawn the next day, Bhimasena sets out for 
the Rakshasa’s lair, with the cartload of fine food which the Brahmana’s 
wife has prepared. As he goes towards the forest where the Rakshasa lives, 
Bhima himself begins to eat, and how he relishes the Brahmana woman’s 
cooking! 

As he eats, the great Pandava begins to roar out the Rakshasa’s name, to 
taunt him. Baka hears him, and flies out in a rage from his cave towards the 
impertinent cartman. He is immense, as is his strength; his eyes are red, and 
so are his hair and beard; he is altogether terrible as he strides along, his 
footmarks deep upon the earth. 

His maw stretches from one ear to the other, and his ears are sharp, 
pointed like arrowheads. Three deep furrows mark his thick brow. The 
Rakshasa arrives where Bhima sits contentedly eating the food; Baka bites 
his lip and glowers. 

Softly, in a voice full of menace, he says, “Who is this fool that dares eat 
my food before my very eyes? Who is this fool that wants to see Yamaloka 
at once?’ 

Bhima only smiles in contempt, and continues eating; he does not so 
much as turn to look at the Rakshasa. Baka gives the most dreadful roar, 
thrusts out his long hirsute arms and rushes at Bhima. 

Bhima Parantapa gives him just one brief glance, then goes back to 
eating the Rakshasa’s food with undimmed relish. Baka strikes Vrikodara a 


tremendous blow from behind, smiting him with two clenched fists. Kunti’s 
son does not stir; he still does not look at the Rakshasa, only continues to 
eat. 

Beside himself, Baka tears up a tree and advances upon Bhima again. 
Meanwhile, Vrikodara finishes the last of the great meal. He washes his 
hands and now turns with a smile to face the Rakshasa, ready at last to fight 
him. Baka casts the tree like a javelin at Bhima, who catches it in his left 
hand. 

More trees Baka tears up and casts them in a fair blizzard at the 
Pandava. Bhima also now pulls up trees and hurls them at the monster. 
Soon, the entire forest around the dreadful two is denuded of trees. 

Baka roars, ‘I am Baka!’ and he springs at Bhima and seizes him with 
his hands. Bhima seizes the Rakshasa, too, and they begin to drag each 
other about violently. The ground shakes beneath their great feet, and the 
trees they cast at each other snap in pieces and are crushed. 

Baka tires quickly, and Bhima flings him down on the ground, holds him 
down with his knees and begins to rain awesome blows on the supine 
Rakshasa. Then, in a flash, he turns Baka on his face, plants one knee on his 
spine and, seizing the Rakshasa’s neck in one hand and his waistcloth in the 
other, begins to bend him back in two. 

Baka’s screams and roars shake that place. Rajan, he vomits blood as 
Bhima inexorably breaks his back.” 


CANTO 166 
BAKAVADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana said, “Finally, with a resounding crack, Baka’s back 
breaks and, with a last scream, the Rakshasa, big as a hill, dies. 
Terrified by the sounds of that battle, Baka’s kinsmen run out, 
Rajan; they come with their servants to see what the matter is, and find their 
lord broken upon the ground and his slayer standing over him. 

Seeing them terror-stricken, trembling and grieving, Bhima comforts 
them. But he says, ‘Never again kill a Manava, for if you do, you will also 
die as Baka has died.’ 

Those Rakshasas say, ‘So be it,’ giving their solemn word. And indeed, 
from that day on, the people of Ekachakra and that entire region find those 
Rakshasas gentle towards humankind, those of the fiends that do not fly that 
country after they see Baka killed by the mighty Bhima. 

Bhima brings Baka’s corpse back to Ekachakra. Unobserved, he leaves 
the great carcass at one of the town gates, by dark, and returns to the house 
of the Brahmana, where he tells Yudhishtira what has happened. 

Next morning, some people of Ekachakra come out and see the hilly 
Rakshasa, covered in blood and dead. Seeing how he has been mangled by 
whoever killed him, their hair stands on end. 

They run back into the town and the news spreads like wildfire. Now the 
people come out in thousands, men, women and children, to the gate where 
the Rakshasa lies like a fallen cliff. They stand stunned by the sight, and at 
the thought of who could have done this thing. 

Rajan, those people give fervent thanks to all their gods, and then they 
begin to think whose turn it was to take the cart of food the previous day to 
Baka. Soon they arrive in the house of the good Brahmana, and demand to 
know what has happened. 

At first, he will say nothing. But when they press him repeatedly, that 
Brahmanarishabha says, ‘Yesterday, a Brahmana, a master of mantras, saw 


me crying with my family at the fate that had overtaken us. He asked why 
we wept and when I told him, he consoled me, smilingly, and said, “Fear 
nothing, for I will take his food to the Rakshasa.” 

At first I would not allow him, but he assured me that he would come to 
no harm. Surely, he slew Baka and has done us all a great service.’ 

All the Brahmanas and Kshatriyas of Ekachakra are wonderstruck, and 
the Vaisyas and the Sudras also rejoice. Indeed, they decide to mark that 
day with a festival to worship the Brahmana stranger who had freed them 
from the terror of Baka.” 


CANTO 167 
CHAITRARATHA PARVA 


aisampayana continued, “After the slaying of Baka, and the 

V/ ceremony they hold to celebrate the amazing feat by the unknown 

Brahmana, the people of Ekachakra go back to their homes and 
resume their daily lives.” 

Janamejaya asked, “Brahmana, what did the Pandavas, those 
Purushavyaghras, do after they kill Baka Rakshasa?” 

Vaisampayana said, “Rajan, they continue to live in the house of the 
good Brahmana, who constantly studies the Veda. A few days later, yet 
another austere Brahmana arrives in the home of the Pandavas’ host. 
Always generous to a fault, the Ekachakra Brahmanarishabha welcomes the 
visitor and makes him stay in his own home. 

Hearing from their host that the newcomer is a gifted raconteur, one 
evening Kunti and her sons ask him to tell them about his wanderings and 
experiences. The Brahmana begins by telling them about his journeys and 
pilgrimages through various lands, their holy shrines and tirthas and rivers. 
Of great kings that he has met he speaks, and describes many wonderful 
kingdoms and cities. 

When he has done this, O Janamejaya, the Brahmana begins to tell them 
about the forthcoming swayamvara of the daughter of Drupada Yagnasena 
of the Panchalas. He describes the unusual births of Dhrishtadyumna and 
Sikhandi, and of the princess Krishnaa Draupadi, who also is born not from 
a woman but from a holy fire during a great yagna that Drupada performs. 

Their curiosity aroused to hear about the extraordinary events in 
Drupada’s life, the Pandava Purusharishabhas ask the Brahmana, 
‘Brahmana, how was Dhrishtadyumna born from a yagna fire? How was his 
sister Krishnaa born from the heart of the yagnashala? How did 
Dhrishtadyumna acquire all the astras from the peerless Acharya Drona? 
And, O Brahmana, how did Drupada and Drona become enemies?’ 


And the itinerant Brahmana tells them about the exceptional birth of 
Draupadi.” 


CANTO 168 
CHAITRARATHA PARVA CONTINUED 


CC he Brahmana says, “Where the Ganga flows down into the plains, 
there lived a Maharishi called Bharadwaja, a great brahmacharin, 
who practised the most severe austerities. Stern were his vratas 

and profound his wisdom. 

One day, he came to the river to perform his daily ablutions and saw the 
Apsara Ghritachi, who had finished bathing and stood on the river’s bank, 
gazing across its flow. 

Just then a gust of wind blew her single garment from the Apsara and 
she stood entirely naked, and ravishing. Seeing her like that, Bharadwaja 
was stricken with lust. He was a brahmacharin, continent from puberty, but 
now he helplessly ejaculated. 

As soon as his semen spurted from him, Bharadwaja caught it in his 
drana, his waterpot. From the Sage’s seed in the pot there emerged a 
lustrous son, whom the Rishi named Drona, the one born from the pot. 
Drona mastered all the Vedas and Vedangas. 

Bharadwaja had a friend called Prihasta, who was king of the Panchalas. 
At almost the same time that Drona was born, Prihasta also had a son, 
whom he called Drupada. The Kshatriyarishabha Draupada would go daily 
to Bharadwaja’s asrama, to study and play with Drona. 

When Prihasta died, Drupada became king of the Panchalas. At this 
same time, Drona heard that the mighty Parasurama had decided to take 
final Sannyasa and had decided to give away all his wealth before doing so. 

Drona went to Parasurama and said, “Brahmanottama, I am 
Bharadwaja’s son Drona who has come to receive your wealth from you.” 

Rama replied, “I have already given away all my wealth. All that I now 
have are my body and my astras. Brahmana, ask me for either of these and I 
will give it to you.” 


Drona said, “I beg you, Lord, give me all the astras you have, and teach 
me how to loose and to recall them.” 

Parasurama Bhargava said, “So be it,” and bestowed all his astras upon 
Drona, including the great Brahmastra, loftiest among weapons. Drona 
thought of himself as being the most fortunate man alive, and indeed, 
having the Brahmastra did render him superior to almost every man. 

A master of untold prowess now, Bharadwaja’s son, tiger among men, 
went to Drupada and said to him, “I am your friend Drona.” 

But Drupada replied scornfully, “A lowborn man can never be the equal 
or friend of a king of pure lineage. A man who is not a Maharatha can never 
become the friend of a Maharatha. So, too, though once we might have 
been friends, Drona, a commoner can never hope to be the friend of a king. 
Our friendship is a thing of the past.” 

Shaken and humiliated, Drona, blessed with great intelligence, left the 
Panchala kingdom and came to the capital of the Kurus, the city named 
after the elephant. His heart was set on taking revenge on Drupada. 

In Hastinapura, Bhishma welcomed Bharadwaja’s mighty son, appointed 
him as Guru to his grandsons, the Kuru scions, and gave the Brahmana 
much wealth, as well. Drona called his disciples and said to them, “Sinless 
princes, when I have taught you the use of weapons, made master warriors 
out of you, you must give me the dakshina that I will ask for, for it is 
something I hold very dear.” 

Arjuna and others said to their Acharya, “We shall.” 

And when they did become proficient at arms, and their aim was true, 
Drona asked for his dakshina, “Prihasta’s son Drupada is king in Chatravati. 
Take his kingdom from him and give it to me!” 

The Pandavas defeated Drupada in battle, took him captive, and brought 
him with his ministers to Drona; they offered him to their master as 
dakshina. Drona looked at the humbled king and said, “Drupada, I still want 
your friendship. But you say that no man who is not a king can be the friend 
of a king. So, Yagnasena, I will divide your kingdom, which now is mine, in 
two. You shall rule the Panchala lands south of the Bhagirathi, while I will 
be king of the northern lands.” 

Drupada said to that best among Brahmanas and foremost among 
masters of astras, “Noble son of Bharadwaja, let us be friends forever!” 

With that they embraced and went to their separate abodes. However, 
while Drona naively believed that he had struck peace and friendship with 


Drupada, that Kshatriya never forgave him, and his every moment was full 
of the rancour of his humiliation. He wasted away, thinking of it 
ceaselessly,’ says the Brahmana at Ekachakra.” 


CANTO 169 
CHAITRARATHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “The Brahmana continues, ‘Drupada began to 

\/ roam the jungles in quest of Brahmanas that were masters of yagnas, 
who could relieve his terrible distress. He was grief-stricken and he 

had no children who were superior enough to avenge what Drona had done. 

Over and over Drupada would say, “Fie on my weakling children, none 
of them can avenge me. Fie on my kinsmen, weaklings all,” and he would 
hiss and sigh like a serpent, from dejection. 

O Bharata, that mightiest of kings never stopped thinking about it, but he 
saw no way by which he could, with all his Kshatriya might, defeat the 
discipline, prowess and the accomplishments of Drona. 

One day, as he ranged the banks of the Yamuna and the Ganga, Drupada 
came upon a sacred asrama of some Brahmanas, all of them Snatakas, of 
stern vratas and tapasya, and of deep dharma and lofty punya. There he saw 
two Rishis called Yaja and Upayaja, masters of the spirit, most evolved and 
powerful of Sages. 

They belonged to the race of Kashyapa and had devoted themselves to 
the study of the most ancient and arcane scriptures, arts and sciences. 
Drupada knew at once that, if anyone, those Brahamanashreshtas could help 
him. Assiduously, singlemindedly, he began to worship and to cultivate 
them. 

He found the austere Upayaja, the younger of the Rishis, possessed of 
great wisdom and power, and he offered him measureless wealth, privately. 
He served that Rishi like a common acolyte, always speaking the most 
flattering and sweet words to him, prostrating at his feet, and offering him 
everything that any man might desire. 

One day, after offering his usual worship, Drupada said to Upayaja, “O 
Brahmana, if you perform a putrakama yagna for me through which I have 


a son who will kill Drona, I will give you ten thousand cows, or whatever 
else you want from me.” 

But the Sage replied, “I cannot.” 

However, Drupada would not give up and continued to serve and 
worship the Rishi diligently. When a year passed, one day Upayaja said 
sweetly to Drupada, “One day, as he roamed in the heart of the forest, I saw 
my elder brother Yaja pick up a fruit which had fallen from a tree. He did 
not care to examine the purity of the ground on to which it had fallen. Why, 
he has no scruples about accepting impure gifts. He that can be impure in 
one instance can well be the same in others. 

While we were students in the home of our Guru, studying the Shastras, 
my brother had no compunction about eating the unclean leavings from 
feasts. He always delighted in food, and has no distaste for any kind of 
food. I would surmise from this that my brother Yaja would in general be 
fond of mundane acquisitions. 

O King, I suggest that you approach my brother; he will perform the 
yagna you desire.” 

Drupada heard this and surely had no great esteem for Yaja, but went to 
him nonetheless. He worshipped Yaja, and said, ‘Master, perform a 
putrakama yagna for me and I will give you ten thousand cows. Hatred for 
Drona consumes me; only his death can put out the fire that burns my heart. 

Greatest among those that know the Veda, Drona has the Brahmastara 
and I cannot vanquish him in battle. Bharadwaja’s son is a great genius and 
he is Guru now to the Kuru princes. No Kshatriya in the world is his equal. 

His formidable bow is twelve feet long and his arrows can kill every 
living thing. Bharadwaja’s son, awesome bowman born as a Brahmana, 
denudes the power of the Kshatriya the world over. Why, he is like another 
Parasurama, born to destroy the very race of kings. 

No man on Earth can withstand the ferocity of the astras of Drona. He is 
like a fire fed with ghee; he combines the power of the Brahmana with the 
prowess of a Kshatriya, and razes his adversaries. 

But, O Yaja, your Brahma shakti, by itself, is greater that Drona’s 
Brahma shakti and his Kshatriya shakti. As for me, I have only my 
Kshatriya shakti and I am no match for Bharadwaja’s son. I have come to 
beg for your help, using your Brahma gyana that is far superior to Drona’s. 

Great Yaja, perform a yagna for me by which I might have an invincible 
son who will kill Drona. I will give you ten thousand cows for this, or any 


wealth you wish.” 

Yaja said, “So be it,’and he turned his mind to remembering all the 
rituals for such a sacrifice. Realising that it was a weighty undertaking, he 
sought the help of his brother Upayaja, who had no desire for any worldly 
possessions. 

When Upayaja agreed to help, Yaja began the yagna that would one day 
kill Drona. Upayaja detailed everything that they would need for the fire 
sacrifice, by which the king would have a son. 

The Sage said, “Rajan, you will have a son such as you want, of 
matchless strength, vitality and valour.” 

Drupada began to make preparations for the great yagna. When 
everything was ready, Yaja poured libations of ghee into the sacred agni, 
and called Drupada’s queen, “Come here, O daughter-in-law of great 
Prihasta, for, look, a son and a daughter have arrived for you.” 

The queen said, “Great Brahmana, my mouth is still full of saffron and 
other sweet things. My body is still daubed with perfume; I am not pure or 
fit to accept your offering of ghee that will give me children. O Yaja, I beg 
you, wait a little for me.” 

But Yaja replied, “Queen, it matters littke whether you come or no. I 
have the oblation ready and Upayayja has sanctified it with his mantras. Let 
the object of the yagna be fulfilled!” 

With that, Yaja poured the sanctified libation into the fire, and 
immediately a resplendent and fierce looking prince arose from the flames, 
a youth who looked like a Deva and shone like fire himself. He wore a 
crown upon his head, and excellent armour upon his body, carried a bow 
and arrows, and let out resounding roars from time to time. 

As soon as he was born he climbed into a fulvid chariot, which also 
arose from the yagna flames, and dashed about in it for a while; and the 
overjoyed Panchalas shouted, “Jaya! Jaya!” They were so full of joy that it 
seemed the Earth at that moment could hardly contain them or bear them. 

Then, an asariri spoke from the sky, “This prince has been born to kill 
Drona. He will remove all the fear of the Panchalas, and spread their fame 
across the world. He shall dispel the anxiety of his father, the king.” 

As soon as the voice has spoken, from the heart of the yagnashala there 
arose a princess of unearthly beauty and great fortune, and she would be 
called Panchali. Her skin was dark, her eyes were black and long as lotus 
petals, and her hair was deep blue, a glossy cascade of curls. Her nails were 


curved, as brilliant as burnished copper, her eyebrows were fair, and her 
bosom was deep. She was like the daughter of a Deva born into the world 
of men. 

Her body was fragrant like a blue lotus, and this exquisite scent of her 
spread a full two miles. Her beauty had no equal on Earth. She was like a 
Goddess herself, and any Deva, Danava or Yaksha would gladly choose her 
for his wife. 

When this incomparable princess, her hips wide and delicate, was born, 
again a disembodied voice spoke out of the sky. “This dark girl will be the 
best of all women and she shall cause the destruction of Kshatriya kind. 
This slender-waisted one will fulfil the deep purpose of the Gods, and with 
her advent all danger shall overtake the House of Kuru.” 

All together, the mighty Panchalas gave a great lion’s roar, and the Earth 
trembled at that sound as if she would be cloven. Then, looking at the two 
fireborn children, Drupada’s wife wanted them for her own, and she said to 
Yaja, “Let these two never know any other mother except me.” 

Yaja said, “Tathastu. So be it.” 

Then the Brahmanas who were present named the two children, with 
whom they were absolutely gratified. “Let Drupada’s son be called 
Drishtadyumna for his terrific valour and because, like Dyumna, he has 
been born wearing armour and carrying weapons.” 

“Because the princess of matchless beauty is dark, let her be called 
Krishnaa.” 

Thus, from Drupada’s great yagna those splendorous twins were born. 
And when Drona heard the news, he brought Drishtadyumna to his own 
kingdom in northern Panchala and taught him all the astras: to pay, as it 
were, for half the kingdom that he had taken from Drupada. 

Bharadwaja’s son was a Mahatman enough to know that fate is 
ineluctable, and by what he did he swelled his fame,’ says the Brahmana at 
Ekachakra.” 


CANTO 170 
CHAITRARATHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Kunti’s sons listen to what the Brahmana says, 
V/ and it seems as if their hearts are pierced by subtle arrows; gone is 
their peace of mind. 

Honest Kunti sees her sons distracted and says to Yudhishtira, ‘Many 
days and nights we have lived here in Ekachakra and our time has passed 
pleasantly, living off alms that these good people have given us. 

Parantapa, we have ranged through all the fine woods and forests in this 
region of the Earth, and they hold no freshness for us anymore. Also, Scion 
of the House of Kuru, alms are not as easy to find as before. If you wish, I 
think we should now go to Panchala. We have never seen that country and, 
Kshatriya, we should find some delight in it. 

I have heard, O scourge of your enemies, that alms are not difficult to 
find in Panchala, and that King Drupada himself is a great patron of 
Brahmanas. I feel that it is never good to live too long in one place. So, my 
son, if you also agree let us leave for the Panchala country.’ 

Yudhishtira agrees immediately, ‘It is our dharma to do whatever you 
wish, mother. I am willing to leave at once, but I do not know what my 
brothers will say.’” 


CANTO 171 
CHAITRARATHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “Kunti speaks to Bhimasena, Arjuna and the 
\/ twins about going to the Panchala kingdom. Immediately, they agree, 
“Tathastu, so be it!’ 

Rajan, now Kunti and her sons bid farewell to their host, the Brahmana, 
and set out for Drupada’s wonderful city. 

While the Pandavas live disguised in the home of the Ekachakra 
Brahmana, Satyavati’s son Vyasa comes to see them one day. Those 
Kshatriyas see him coming and come out to receive him. They worship him 
with folded hands, and stand thus silently before him. 

The Maharishi is pleased by their welcome and asks them to sit down 
around him. When they do so, he speaks to them cheerfully, ‘Slayers of 
your enemies, are you living in dharma and the way of the Shastras? Do 
you worship the Brahmanas? I do hope that those that deserve your 
adoration duly receive it.’ 

He continues genially, but speaking of matters of great depth and import, 
words of dharma, and which dwell upon many a fascinating theme. 

Then Dwaipayana says, ‘Once, an illumined Rishi, who lived in his 
asrama, had a tender-waisted daughter, a girl of lovely lips, fine eyebrows, 
who was accomplished in every way. However, as a result of her karma 
from a past life, this maiden was taken by misfortune: she was chaste and 
she was beautiful, but she could not find a husband. 

In sorrow she began to perform tapasya so that she would find a man to 
marry her. So excellent was her penance that she quickly pleased the Lord 
Siva, who appeared before her and said, “Ask for the boon you want, for I 
am Sankara who will give you whatever your heart wishes for.” 

In transport she cried, “Lord, give me a husband. Give me a husband 
blessed with every quality and virtue!” Indeed, five times she repeated this. 


The Lord Isana said, “Blessed child, you will have five husbands from 
among the Bharata princes, and they shall be the best of men.” 

She was taken aback, “Lord, I want just one husband through your 
grace.” 

Siva said to her, “Five times, young woman, you asked me for a 
husband; so, in another life, five husbands you shall have.” 

Bharatarishabhas, that young woman of unworldly beauty has been born 
as the daughter of Drupada, and she, the flawless Krishnaa of the line of 
Prihasta, is destined to become the wife of all five of you. Mighty 
Kshatriyas, go to the capital of the Panchalas and live there, and when you 
have made Panchali your wife you will find untold joy.’ 

Saying this to the Pandavas, their august and illustrious grandsire bids 
them farewell, and the Maharishi returns to his asrama from where he had 
come.” 


CANTO 172 
CHAITRARATHA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana said, “After Dwaipayana leaves, the Pandavas bid their 
host the Brahmana a warm farewell, and set out for the Panchala 
kingdom, with Kunti walking at their head and joy brimming in their 

hearts. Those slayers of all foes go north towards their destination, walking 

by night and day, and arrive at a holy temple to the Lord Siva, with the 
crescent Moon upon his brow. 

Then the Pandava Purushavyaghras arrive on the banks of the Ganga. 
Maharatha Arjuna Dhananjaya now walks before them with a brand lit in 
his hand to show the way, and to protect them from wild animals. 

A haughty Gandharva king is in the river with his wives, at pleasure in 
that secluded place. The Gandharva hears the footfalls of the Pandavas as 
they near the river. He flares up in anger to see Kunti and her sons 
approach. 

Bending his terrible bow in a circle, he cries, “Apart from its first forty 
instants, it is known that the grey twilight which comes before nightfall has 
been kept for Yakshas, Gandharvas and Rakshasas to range the Earth; and 
all of these can go anywhere they wish. Manavas have been given the rest 
of the day for their work, but if mortal men dare approach us during the 
third sandhya, roaming the world for gain, both the Rakshasas and we 
Gandharvas kill the fools. 

No one who knows the Veda will ever approve of any human, be he not 
a king leading his army, daring to approach a pool or a river during this 
hour. Stay away, mortals; stay far and do not come near me. Can’t you see 
that I am bathing in the Bhagirathi? 

I am the Gandharva Angaraparna. Mighty I am, proud, and a friend to 
Lokapala Kubera. This forest on the banks of the Ganga, where I sport to 
please all my senses, belongs to me; it is calls Anagaraparna after me. Not 
Devas, Kapalikas, Yakshas, Gandharvas or Rakshasas dare come to this 


vana of mine, for I am the brightest jewel on the crown of Kubera. How 
dare you paltry Manavas approach me?’ 

Annoyed by the Gandharva’s arrogant tone, Arjuna replies, ‘Fool, be it 
day or night, dawn or dusk, who can prevent anyone from going to the 
Ocean, the Himalaya or to the banks of this holy river? Sky ranger, be one’s 
belly empty or full, be it day or night, there is no prescribed time when one 
might or not come to the Ganga, greatest of rivers. 

As for us, we are powerful and do not care that we disturb you. Vain 
Gandharva, only those that are weak will have any regard for you. This 
Ganga springs from the golden peaks of Himavan, and she flows into the 
Ocean in seven sacred streams. They that drink the waters of Ganga, 
Yamuna, Saraswati, Vitashtha, Sarayu, Gomati, and Gandaki are washed of 
all their sins. 

Gandharva, this most holy Ganga when she flows through the heavens is 
called Alakananda; in Pitriloka, realm of the manes, she is Vaitarani that no 
sinner can cross, Krishna Dwaipayana himself has said so. She is auspicious 
and blessed; there is no danger in her, and she can lead those that touch her 
waters to Swarga. Why do you want to keep us away from her? It is not 
dharma that you do. 

We will not obey you, Gandharva, but touch the holy waters of the 
Bhagirathi. No one shall prevent us.’ 

Angaraparna replies with a flurry of lightlike arrows, narachas like 
serpents. But, Arjuna easily strikes them aside with a shield in one hand and 
with the brand he carries in the other. 

Says Dhananjaya again to the raging Gandharva, ‘Gandharva, you 
cannot frighten those that know arms,for your weapons dissolve before me 
like wavefroth. Yet, I feel that you are a better archer than mortal men, and I 
will fight you, using astras and with no maaya or deceit. 

Look, this Agneyastra that I cast at you was given to Bharadwaja by 
Indra’s Guru Brihaspati. Bharadwaja taught it to Agnivesya, from whom 
my Guru had it. Drona gave this astra to me.’ 

With a roar, and in some fury, Arjuna casts the Agneyastra, weapon of 
fire, at Angaraparna. The astra burns the Gandharva’s chariot to ashes and 
flings him unconscious on to the ground. In a flash, Arjuna seizes his long 
hair, wreathed with fine garlands, and drags him toward his brothers. 

The Gandharva’s wife Kumbhinasi runs to Yudhishtira, wailing, ‘Noble 
one, I am Kumbhinasi and I am this Gandharva’s wife. I seek your 


protection, great one. I beg you spare my husband’s life!’ 

Seeing her terrified, Yudhishtira says to Arjuna, ‘Parantapa, child, who 
will kill a beaten enemy, whose honour is lost that a woman begs for his 
life, for he himself cannot defend himself anymore?’ 

At once, Arjuna says, ‘Keep your life, Gandharva. Leave us and go in 
peace, for Yudhishtira, lord of the Kurus, commands me to show you 
mercy.’ 

The Gandharva says, ‘You have vanquished me and consumed my 
chariot. I will give up my name Angaraparna, Blazing Chariot, for, O 
friend, I have no right left to it when you have humbled me. From now I 
shall call myself Burnt Chariot for what you did to my ratha. 

I am fortunate to have found you, O mighty Arjuna, for you have spared 
my life and there is no greater gift. In return, I would give you, O 
Astradhari, a power that only the Gandharvas possess. It is calls the 
Chakshushi, the art of creating illusions, and I acquired it through tapasya 
of old. 

Manu taught Soma the Chakshushi; Soma Deva taught it to Viswavasu, 
who gave it to me. Though my Guru gave me this potent gift, it withers now 
with me, who have been defeated in battle and have lost my tejas. 

I have told you only about some of the powers of the Chakshushi; he 
who owns it can see whatever he wishes to, anywhere, in any time, and in 
any manner that he chooses. Usually, the occult power can be had only after 
standing on one leg in tapasya for six months. But I shall give it to you 
freely, without your having to keep any vrata or perform any penance. 

Kshatriya, it is for this power that we Gandharvas are superior to 
Manavas: for using the Chakshushi, we see all things with spiritual sight 
and are equal to the Devas. 

Purushottama, I also mean to give each of your great brothers a hundred 
horses born in the realm of the Gandharvas. Their colouring is unworldly 
and their speed that of the mind. The Devas ride them and the Gandharvas. 
They are lean but they never tire or slow. 

In the olden days, the original thunderbolt was made for Indra to kill 
Vritrasura. But when he cast it at Vritra, it shattered in a thousand pieces. 
The Devas still worship those fragments of the thunderbolt. What is called 
glory in this world of men is just one fragment. The Brahmana’s hand, with 
which he pours libations into the holy fire, the Kshatriya’s chariot, the 


Vaisya’s charity, the Sudra’s service to the higher varnas, all these are 
fragments of the thunderbolt. 

Horses are a part of the chariot of the Kshatriya; for this, they are called 
immortal. Also, they are the children of Badava, the fire of the Pralaya 
which dwells beneath the Ocean, as a mare of flames. The steeds that are 
foaled in the land of the Gandharvas can go anywhere, at any speed their 
owners will, and assume any colour their masters choose. 

My horses will always obey your every wish.’ 

Arjuna says, ‘Gandharva, if you want to give me your mystic power and 
your horses because I spared your life, I will not accept your gifts.’ 

The Gandharva replies, ‘To meet a great man is always an honour and 
joy, and you have also given me the gift of my life. For this I will give you 
the Chakshushi. However, so that the obligation is not one-sided, I will also 
take something in return from you, O Arjuna: Bharatarishabha, give me 
your unearthly Agneyastra.’ 

Arjuna says, ‘I will accept your horses in return for my astra, and may 
we be friends forever. But friend, tell me why we Manavas must go in fear 
of the Gandharvas. We are virtuous, the terrors of our enemies and knowers 
of the Veda. Yet, Gandharva, by twilight, you censured and challenged us.’ 

Says the Gandharva, ‘You have no wives or asrama of life, though you 
have completed your tutelage. Pandavas, no Brahmana walks before you as 
your priest and mentor, and that is why I challenged you. 

The Yakshas, Rakshasas, Gandharvas, Pisachas, Uragas and Danavas are 
all wise and well acquainted with the history of the race of Kuru. Kshatriya, 
I myself have heard about the great dharma of your illumined ancestors, 
from Narada and other Devarishis. Why, while I ranged over the Earth, 
girdled by her oceans, I have seen with my own eyes the might and power 
of your great race of kings. 

Arjuna, I know Bharadwaja’s son, your Guru, who is renowned 
throughout the three worlds for his knowledge of the Vedas and for his 
mastery over the science of weapons. 

Kuruvyaghra, Prithaputra, I also know Dharma, Vayu, Sakra, the Aswins 
and Pandu, as well: your sires, divine and human. I know that you five 
brothers are learned and noble, greatest among warriors, brave, virtuous and 
keepers of your vratas. 

Knowing that your hearts and minds are pure and wise, and your 
conduct faultless, still I have censured you — because, O Kurus, no man 


who is honourable and a warrior will endure being slighted in the presence 
of his wife. Kuntiputra, the prowess of the Gandharvas increases during the 
hours of darkness, and for this reason also I challenged you, for my wife is 
with me and I was inflamed. 

Yet you vanquished me, O Pandava, and I will tell you why. Your 
brahmacharya, your continence, gives you great power; and with that 
strength you have defeated me. Parantapa, let any Kshatriya who is married 
fight a Gandharva by night, and he will not escape with his life. Yet, it is 
also true that a Kshatriya, be he married or not, who has been blessed by 
Brahman and who has given the burden of his kingdom into the hands of a 
Brahmana — such a one might indeed humble any ranger of the night. 

O Tapatya, son of Tapati, wise Kshatriyas should always have learned 
and self-controlled Brahmanas in their employ, so that fortune favours them 
and they acquire everything that their hearts wish for. 

The Brahmana who knows the Vedas and their six Angas, who is pure 
and honest, who is virtuous and restrained, is worthy of being the priest of a 
king. The king whose priest is a good Brahmana, who knows the laws of 
dharma, who is eloquent, pure and of taintless conduct: that king is always 
victorious and finally finds Swarga. 

A king must choose an accomplished Brahmana to gain what he does not 
possess and to protect what he does. The Kshatriya who wants to prosper 
must submit himself to the guidance of his priest, and then he can become 
lord of the sea-girt Earth. 

Tapatya, not through the noblest birth or by the most valiant or glorious 
deeds alone can a Kshatriya ever hope to gain a kingdom. He must have a 
Brahmana priest to guide him. For, O Scion of Kuru, the kingdom in which 
Brahmanas wield influence lasts forever.’” 


CANTO 173 
CHAITRARATHA PARVA CONTINUED 


CC rjuna says, “More than once you have called me Tapatya. Why, 
A exo Gandharva? As sons of Kunti, Kaunteyas we surely are, but 
who is Tapati that we should be called Tapatyas?’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Then the Gandharva tells Arjuna a tale 
known through the three worlds. 

‘Pandava, most intelligent of men, listen to the reason in full, for it is a 
charming story: the reason why I call you Tapatya. He in the sky who 
bathes this world in his light, had a daughter called Tapati, who was his 
very equal. Vivaswat’s daughter Tapati was the younger sister of Savitri, the 
Sannyasini renowned throughout the Trilokas and famed for her tapasya. 

No Asuri, Yakshi, Rakshasi or Gandharvi was as beautiful as Tapati. 
Flawless were her features, her black eyes large and lustrous, most 
elegantly attired, she was chaste, and immaculate were her deportment and 
character. 

When the Sun looked at his daughter Tapati, he thought that there was 
no one in Swarga, Bhumi or Patala fit to become her husband. She came to 
puberty and the Sun God had no peace for he was always thinking about 
who in the three worlds could be a suitable husband for his daughter. 

At this very time, O Kaunteya, the Kururishabha, mighty King 
Samvarana, son of Riksha, worshipped Surya Deva with arghya, vanamalas, 
fine perfumes, and vratas and tapasya of every kind. Indeed, Samvarana 
worshipped the glorious Sun constantly, with deep and humble bhakti. 

Surya saw Samvarana, unequalled for his beauty and his dharma, and 
felt he was the only man fit to marry Tapati. Vivaswat decided that he 
would give his precious daughter to King Samvarana to be his wife, for just 
as Surya himself filled the sky with his lustre, so too did Samvarana 
pervade every part of the Earth with the light of his dharma. 


Partha, all men, other than Brahmanas, worshipped Samvarana. He was 
blessed with great fortune and surpassed Soma the Moon in soothing the 
hearts of his friends, and Surya in searing the minds of his enemies. 
Kaurava, Tapana Surya did indeed decide to give his peerless daughter 
Tapati in marriage to Samvarana of matchless virtue and deeds. 

One day, Samvarana went hunting in the jungles on the foothills of the 
mountains. As he rode in quest of deer, his pedigreed steed fell and died 
under him, from hunger, thirst and exhaustion. Leaving the dead horse, 
Arjuna, Samvarana roamed the mountain, and he saw a young woman more 
beautiful than any other, and her eyes large. 

That Parantapa, Rajavyaghra Samvarana, was by himself, as was she; 
they stood transfixed, gazing at each other. She was so beautiful that the 
king felt sure that she was the Devi Sri Lakshmi. Then he thought of her as 
being the rays of Surya Deva, embodied. 

She was a brilliant flame, yet also soft and lovely as a clear digit of 
Soma. Black-eyed, she stood upon the mountain like a shining golden 
statue; why, the very mountain, with all its plants and vines and trees, 
seemed to be made of gold because of the beauty and raiment of Tapati. 

Samvarana looked at her and he felt contempt for every other woman he 
had seen before; seeing her he thought that the vision of his eyes had at last 
been blessed. Nothing he had ever seen, from the day he was born, could 
compare with the beauty of this young woman. 

His eyes were riveted to her, as was his heart, as if an unseen rope bound 
them to her; he stood transfixed, gazing, seeing nothing but her. Samvarana 
thought that he that had created such beauty could have done so only after 
he churned all the worlds of the Devas, Asuras and Manavas. 

His own mind churning within him, that king felt certain that no woman 
in any of the three worlds could rival this one for her abundance of beauty. 

The highborn Samvarana looked at Tapati and Kama Deva’s arrows 
pierced his heart and the king’s peace of mind left him. Burning with 
desire’s scorching flame, Samvarana asked that full-grown yet innocent 
young woman, “Who are you and to whom do you belong? Why are you 
here, sweet smiles, wandering in this lonely vana by yourself? 

Ah, you are flawlessly beautiful, in every feature, as are all the 
ornaments that you wear, which seem to covet you for their ornament. You 
do not seem to me to be a Devastri, an Asuri, a Yakshi, a Rakshasi, Nagini 


or a Gandharvi or a Manushi but from a race of your own, for none of the 
loveliest women that I have ever seen could remotely rival you for beauty. 

Ah, exquisite one, I look at you more beautiful than the Moon, your eyes 
like lotus petals, and Kama Deva has his way with me. Ah, he burns me 
with desire for you.” 

Samvarana’s voice quivered with desire, but the young woman made no 
reply to his ardent speech. Instead, like lightning in clouds, she of the great 
eyes vanished before the king. 

Samvarana staggered through that forest like a mad man, seeking her of 
the lotus eyes, desperately. He did not find her and his heartbroken cries 
echoed against the mountainside; he sobbed and fell unconscious.’” 


CANTO 174 
CHAITRARATHA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana said, “The Gandharvacontinues, “When that young 
woman vanished, Samvarana, razer of enemy armies, fell onto the 
ground, stricken by Kama. As he lay in a swoon, she of the wide 

round hips stood before him again. 

Favouring the king with her sweet smile, she said to the scion of the 
House of Kuru in her voice like honey, “Arise, arise Parantapa! 
Rajavyaghra, tiger among kings, it does not become a world renowned 
personage like you to faint.” 

Samvarana opened his eyes and saw her again, she of the full hips and 
breasts. Still blazing with desire, he spoke to her of the black eyes in a voice 
tremulous with emotion, “Be blessed, O most beautiful among all women. I 
burn for you, why my very life leaves me for what I feel for you. Black 
eyes, you who are as radiant as the filaments of a lotus, Kama strikes me 
with his arrows, mercilessly, every moment, one after the other, for your 
sake. He sinks a viper’s fangs into me. 

Lovely one, O you of the flaring hips, you of perfect features, you who 
are as lovely as the moon, soft as a lotus petal, whose voice is as sweet as a 
singing Kinnari’s, my life depends on you. I cannot live without you, O 
timid, bashful one. 

Ah, Kama strikes me relentlessly. Take pity on me, young woman whose 
eyes are like lotus petals. Big eyes, black eyes, it does not become you to 
abandon me, to cast me aside. Instead, save me. Grant me your love and 
soothe my anguish. 

You have taken my heart captive at first glance. My mind wanders 
wildly, madly. I look at you and never want to see another woman. O be 
merciful, for 1am your slave, your ardent servant. 

Accept me, peerless one, put out Kama’s terrible fire with the waters of 
your love. Be mine, O you beauty, and appease the God of Love who is 


here with his sugarcane bow and his flowery arrows, sharp as daggers. 
Marry me by Gandharva vivaha, O fair one with swaying hips, for it is said 
to be the finest form of marriage.” 

Tapati said, “I am not my own mistress, but a maiden commanded by her 
father. If you truly want to marry me, ask my father for my hand. O King, 
you say that I have stolen your heart, and I say to you that I have also fallen 
in love with you at first sight. 

But no woman is mistress of herself, and that is why I dare not make 
love to you. Ah, which woman in the three lokas would not want you for 
her husband, for not only are you most nobly born but you are like a father 
and kindly to all your people. 

So, Rajan, when opportunity presents itself, ask my father Aditya for my 
hand; worship him, perform tapasya and keep vratas so that I become yours. 
For if my father gives me to you I shall be your loving and obedient wife 
forever. 

I am _ Savitri’s younger sister and my name is  Tapati. O 
Kshatriyarishabha, I am the daughter of Surya who illumines Earth and 
Sky,” said she,’ says the Gandharva.” 


CANTO 175 
CHAITRARATHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “The Gandharva continues, ‘Saying this much to 
\/ Samvarana, Tapati rose straight up into the sky and disappeared. The 
king fell unconscious on the ground once more. 

Meanwhile, his ministers and soldiers combed the forest for him, and 
finally found him supine in that lonely place, that magnificent king, great 
archer, lying like a rainbow fallen on to the Earth. His chief minister was 
like a man scalded by fire. He rushed to his sovereign’s side, Samvarana 
who had fainted from desire. 

This minister was a man as advanced in age as wisdom, in achievements 
as in policy, and he gently roused his unconscious lord, and became 
reassured that he lived. 

Thinking that the mighty Samvarana had been felled by hunger, thirst 
and exhaustion, the minister said kindly, “Be blessed, sinless one. 
Rajavyaghra, tiger among kings, fear nothing.” 

The old man sprinkled cold water, made fragrant by lotus petals over his 
monarch’s crownless head. Slowly, Samvarana awoke and ordered all his 
men and companions away, keeping only the old minister with him. 

When they had all gone, the king rose and purified himself with a bath. 
He then sat upon that Lord of all Mountains, with his hands folded and his 
face turned heavenward. He sat worshipping Surya Deva. Samvarana, 
scourge of his enemies, also thought of his Kulaguru  Vasishta, 
Brahmanottama. Night and day, Samvarana sat thus in dhyana, unmoving. 

On the twelfth day, Brahmarishi Vasishta, priest to the Kuruvamsa, 
arrived on the mountain, and with mystic intuition he knew at once that 
Tapati was the cause of Samvarana’s condition, the cause for his tapasya. 
He comforted the king of unswerving vratas. 

Then, before Samvarana’s eyes, the illumined Sage rose up into the sky 
to meet Surya Deva; the Rishi was like a luminary himself. With folded 


hands, the Brahmana approached the God of a thousand rays, and said, “I 
am Vasishta.” 

Vivaswat of terrific tejas said, “Maharishi, be welcome! Tell me what 
brings you here, for, most blessed and eloquent one, I will give you 
whatever you ask of me, however hard I might find it to give.” 

Vasishta bowed to the splendid Deva and said, “Vibhavasu, I have come 
to ask for the hand of Savitri’s younger sister, your daughter Tapati’s hand, 
for Samvarana. Great are the dharma and the achievements of that king, he 
is a Mahatman. Sky crosser, he will make a worthy husband to your 
daughter.” 

Vibhakara Surya, who had already decided to give Tapati to Samvarana, 
says to Vasishta, “You are the greatest of Munis, Samvarana is the greatest 
of kings and Tapati the best of women. How can I refuse to give my 
daughter to him?” 

So saying, the Deva Tapana gave his blemishless Tapati into the hands of 
the Rishi, to convey her to Samvarana to be his bride. Accepting her 
formally, the Brahmarishi brought her back to the Earth, to the place where 
the Kururishabha, his accomplishments godly, sat in worship, waiting 
anxiously. 

The king saw Vasishta bring the unearthly Tapati to him and felt as if his 
heart would burst for joy. She came down from the sky like lightning from 
clouds, dazzling the ten cardinal points of the firmament. The twelve nights 
of King Samvarana’s vrata and tapasya had ended when the Rishi Vasishta 
brought Tapati to him. 

Samvarana, that Narapumgava, bull among men, took Tapati’s hand 
upon that mountain, where Devas and Gandharvas roamed. He sought 
Vasishta’s leave to be with his new wife in the wilderness, and he 
proclaimed Brahmarishi Vasishta to be regent of all of his kingdom, his 
capital and all his forests, mountains and plains. 

Vasishta blessed Samvarana and left him. For twelve years, that king 
then sported and made love with Tapati in the forests and foothills of the 
Himalaya. But Bharatottama, the thousand-eyed Indra sent no rain down on 
Samvarana’s kingdom for twelve years. 

Men perished in that drought, as did animals, trees and plants. No drop 
even of dew moistened the arid Earth and no ear of corn grew during that 
time. The people fled the kingdom to all parts. Men abandoned their wives 
and children, and lawlessness reigned. Those that survived were reduced to 


skin and bones, hardly more than skeletons, and Samvarana’s great capital 
resembled the city of Yama, full of ghosts. 

Vasishta saw the piteous condition of the people and fetched Samvarana 
back to his city, with Tapati, after twelve long years. As soon as the king 
returned, the thousand-eyed Deva, destroyer of Asuras, sent down copious 
rains. Corn sprouted everywhere, and with the drought and the famine 
ending, joy returned to the kingdom. 

Samvarana and his queen Tapati performed great yagnas for twelve 
years, sacrifices such as Indra and Sachi perform in Devaloka. Partha, such 
was the story of Tapati, the daughter of Vivaswat. Samvarana begot a son 
upon his beautiful queen. That prince was Kuru, greatest among Rayarishis. 
You have been born into the race of Tapati’s son Kuru, O Arjuna, and that is 
why I called you Tapatyas. And it was with the help of the Brahmarishi 
Vasishta that Samvarana gained his wife and continued his royal line,’ says 
the Gandharva to the Pandavas. 

Arjuna, mighty bowman, Kurusthama, best among all the Kurus, is 
deeply moved and stands with folded hands before the Gandharva. 

The Pandava is curious indeed about the Sage Vasishta. He says, ‘O 
greatest of Gandharvas, tell me everything about the Maharishi Vasishta, 
who was the priest of our ancestors.’ 

The Gandharva says, *Vasishta is Brahma’s son, born immaculately from 
his spirit. The Rishi was the husband of the chaste Arundhati. He has 
vanquished desire and wrath, kama and krodha, which hardly any man ever 
subdues; why, lust and rage washed Vaishta’s feet, for they were his 
servants. 

Once Viswamitra tempted Vasishta’s anger, but Muni Vasishta did not 
raze the race of Kaushikas to which Viswamitra belonged. His sons 
perished at Viswamitra’s hands, but Vasishta behaved like a powerless one, 
though truly he is far from that. Even as the Ocean does not transgress the 
shores of his continents, Vasishta did not bring his dead sons back from 
Yama’s realm, though he well could have with power such as his. 

Ikshvaku of yore and other awesome kings had Vasishta for their 
Kulaguru when they conquered all the Earth. Scion of Kuru, with Vasishta 
as their Ritvik, their chief priest, those kings performed many Mahayagnas. 
Pandavottma, he enabled those kings to perform their sacrifices even as 
Brihaspati does for the Devas. 


And that is why I say to you, Pandavas, find a lofty and accomplished 
Brahmana to become your priest, a man who knows the Veda, and whose 
heart is replete with dharma. For, O Partha, the Kshatriya who wants to 
conquer the world and have great kingdom must first have a fine and great 
Brahmana to be his spiritual guide. Arjuna, I say again to you, seek out a 
learned Brahmana, whose senses are under perfect control, who knows all 
about dharma, artha and kama, and set him before you as your priest.’” 


CANTO 177 
CHAITRARATHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “Arjuna asks, ‘Gandharva, both Viswamitra 
V/ and Vasishta dwell in unearthly asramas. Tell us, how was there 
hostility between these two?’ 

The Gandharva says, ‘Partha, the legend of Vasishta is thought of as 
being a Purana throughout the three realms. Listen and I will narrate it in 
full. 

Bharatarishabha, in Kanyakubja, there once was a king whose fame 
echoed throughout the world. He was Gadhi, the son of Kusika. Gadhi of 
dharma had a son called Viswamitra, who became king after his father. 
Viswamitra, bane of his enemies, lord of a great army comprising countless 
men, beasts and chariots, would range over the Earth with his ministers, 
through deep jungles in quest of deer and wild boar, killing them wherever 
he saw them. 

One day, while thus out hunting, the king was tired and thirsty and he 
came upon the asrama of Vasishta. The Brahmarishi saw him and welcomed 
him with great respect, offering him padya, water to wash his face and feet, 
and arghya, wild fruit and ghee. 

The Rishi had a cow of wishes, Nandini, who yielded anything that he 
asked of her. He would merely ask and she would give him whatever he 
wanted. Fruit and grain she gave, wild, or as are grown by men in orchards 
and fields. She gave milk like amrita, and every kind of unworldly delicacy 
to gratify the six tastes, by way of food and drink, ambrosial, and she gave 
incomparable ornaments, gemstones and raiment also, not of this world. 

Arjuna, Maharishi Vasishta made offerings of all these wonderful things 
to King Viswamitra and his men; and they were delighted and amazed. The 
king gazed in wonder upon the wondrous cow, with six long legs, her flanks 
glossy, her eyes bulging and utterly beautiful, her udders and teats full, high 


and perfect, her ears straight and erect, her horns beautiful, as also her head 
and her neck. 

Kshatriya, well pleased and praising the cow Nandini, Gadhi’s son said 
to the Rishi, “Brahmana, Mahamuni, I will give you ten thousand fine milch 
cows or my kingdom for your Nandini.” 

Vasishta replied, “Sinless one, I keep Nandini for the sake of the Devas, 
for honoured guests like you, and for the Pitrs, as well as for my yagnas. I 
cannot give her to you and take your kingdom.” 

Viswamitra said, “I am a Kshatriya, while you are a Brahmana, an 
ascetic devoted to meditation and study. You are a man of peace, with your 
senses and your mind perfectly controlled. If you do not give me what I 
want when I offer you ten thousand cows in exchange for her, why I will 
even take your Nandini from you by force, for that is the way of the 
Kshatriya, and you can do nothing to stop me, Brahmana.” 

Vasishta smiled. “You are indeed a mighty Kshatriya king. Why wait? 
Do what you will, but remember that you are not pausing to think of 
dharma.” 

Partha, Viswamitra had his men seize Nandini, white as the moon or a 
swan; they began to drag her away, injuring her smooth flanks, marking her 
with stripes of violence. Lowing piteously, Nandini broke free of her 
captors and ran to Vasishta and stood before him with her face raised and 
tears flowing down her cheeks. She would not leave the Sage’s hermitage. 

Vasishta saw her and said sadly, “O Susheela, sweet one. You cry, my 
Nandini, and I hear you. But I am a Brahmana, sworn to forgiveness and 
peace. How can I prevent Viswamitra from taking you from here forcibly?” 

Terrified by the threatening Viswamitra and his fierce soldiers, Nandini 
came still closer to the Rishi and said, “O illustrious one, are you not my 
master, do you not love me, that you can be so unmoved when Viswamitra’s 
cruel men beat me so savagely, marking me with their lashes, and when you 
hear me crying?” 

Still Vasishta did not lose either his patience or turn away from his 
sworn vow of non-violence. He said, “The Kshatriya’s strength lies in his 
might, the Brahmana’s in his kshama, his forgiveness and patience. I cannot 
renounce my kshama; so Nandini go with the king.” 

Nandini sobbed, “Do you then abandon me and cast me out, Illustrious? 
For, if you do not, O Brahmana, no one can take me from you, not with any 
force on Earth.” 


Vasishta said, “Blessed, I do not cast you out or abandon you. If you can, 
stay. But look, they have your calf tied with a thick rope and it is already 
weak by struggling against the noose around its neck.” 

Hearing the word “stay” from Vasishta’s lips, Nandini raised her head 
higher, tossed her horns and suddenly she was terrible. Her eyes crimson, 
lowing as if she roared, deafeningly, she flew at Viswamitra’s men on every 
side, a dreadful storm of wrath. 

They ran and they struck her again and again, and her anger grew, until 
she blazed with fury and was like the Sun at high noon, her eyes turning 
redder by the moment. From her rear she sprayed a shower of burning coals 
over Viswamitra’s soldiers. 

Next moment, she brought forth an army of Pallavas from her tail, and 
from her teats another of ferocious Dravidas and Sakas; and from her womb 
there issued a great force of Yavanas. She dropped dung and from that there 
sprang up an aksauhini of Savaras, while from her urine a legion of Kanchis 
arose and another army of Savaras from her flanks. 

Paundras, Kiratas, Yavanas and Sinhalas, and the barbarian tribes of 
Khasas, Chivukas, Pulindas, Chinas, Hunas, Keralas, and numberless other 
Mlechchas sprang forth from the foam of her mouth. The teeming host of 
Mlechchas wore motley garb, carried diverse and strange weapons, and as 
soon as they materialised they were deployed in battle formation and 
attacked Viswamitra’s legions with savage yells and roars. 

That king’s men were outnumbered by six and seven to one. Assaulted 
by a storm of weapons, Viswamitra’s men broke rank and fled, even as he 
watched in dismay. However, Bharatarishabha, Nandini only chased away 
the enemy troops; her Mlechchas did not kill a single man. 

Indeed, the wild horde chased the king’s men for a full three yojanas, 
and Viswamitra’s men fled shrieking and no one could help them. 

Viswamitra saw what happened, hung his head and raged, “O fie on the 
power of the Kshatriya, it is as nothing compared to Brahmana bala! The 
power of tapasya is the only true strength.” 

That king renounced his vast kingdom, all his regal glory, turned his 
back on every mundane pleasure, and sat in a searing tapasya. After a long 
time and many trials, his dhyana grew so awesome that it began to burn the 
three worlds with its heat, scorching every creature in them. Brahma 
appeared before the Kshatriya at his penance and declared him to be a 
Brahmana, a Brahmarishi and the equal of Vasishta. 


Finally, Kusika’s son drank Soma rasa with Indra himself in Swarga,’ the 
Gandharva says.” 


CANTO 178 
CHAITRARATHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “The Gandharva continues, ‘Partha, once 
V/ there was a king called Kalmashapada, of the race of Ikshvaku, and 
he had no equal for strength or power on Earth. 

One day, he went hunting in the forest and killed many deer and boar 
with his arrows; in open glades in the heart of the jungle, he killed many a 
great rhinoceros. Finally, tiring after a long hunt, the king decided that he 
would rest for a while. 

Some time ago, the great Viswamitra, of tremendous splendour, had 
wanted to make this king his disciple. Now, as Kalmashapada went weakly 
along a trail through that vana, hungry and thirsty too, he encountered 
Vasishta’s lustrous son Saktri, his firstborn of a hundred sons, upon that 
path. 

The invincible king saw the Muni coming towards him and cried 
haughtily, “Get out of my way!” 

The Rishi replied gently, in the sweetest tone, “Rajan, by dharma the 
right of way is mine. Every Shastra says that a Kshatriya must always make 
way for a Brahmana.” 

But Kalmashapada cried again, “Out of my way!” Vasishta’s son replied 
in the same words, but softly. 

The Rishi was in the right and so he would not give in; the king would 
not yield out of pride and anger. Suddenly, Kalmashapada lost control and, 
growling like a Rakshasa, lashed out at the Sage with his whip. 

At the lash, Saktri Muni also lost his temper and lashed out at the king 
with a curse. “Basest of kings, dare you strike a Brahmana! You have 
behaved like a Rakshasa, so become a Rakshasa from this moment and 
wander the Earth in a demon’s form, living on human flesh.” 

At this moment, Viswamitra arrived in that place. There was dispute 
between Vasishta and him about whose sishya Kalmashapada would be. 


Partha, Viswamitra knew with mystic insight that Vasishta’s son had cursed 
the king; he knew that Saktri was his father’s equal in spiritual power. 

Viswamitra made himself invisible. 

As soon as the Sage cursed him, the king began to beg Saktri for mercy. 
Kurusthama, Viswamitra feared that the two might make peace between 
them, and he sent a Rakshasa to enter Kalmashapada’s body. The Rakshasa 
Kinkara possessed the king, at Saktri Muni’s curse and Viswamitra’s 
command. Viswamitra melted away from the forest path. Saktri also left. 

Upon being possessed, Kalmashapada was no longer himself and 
another Brahmana came upon him in that condition. This Brahmana was 
tired and hungry and begged the king for some food, cooked with meat. 

The Rajarishi Kalmashapada, known for his generosity and kindness, 
said, “Brahmana, stay here for a while. I will go and bring you the food that 
you want.” 

Leaving the Brahmana in the vana, Kalmashapada returned to his palace 
and his royal chambers, but only after he had roamed the forest for some 
hours. Tired himself, he fell asleep. At midnight, he suddenly awoke and 
remembered his promise to the Brahmana. He summoned the palace cook. 

Said the king, “A Brahmana is waiting for me in the forest. He is hungry 
and wants some meat to eat. Hurry, cook some meat and take it to him.” 

The cook went looking for meat but could find none at that hour. He 
went back to the king, and said with some trepidation that he had not been 
able to find any meat. 

Now it was the Rakshasa Kinkara who spoke from the king’s mouth, 
‘Feed him human flesh.” 

Trembling, the cook said, “Tathastu, so be it.” 

He went to the king’s execution chamber, cut some flesh from a corpse 
there, washed it, cooked it, covered it with fragrant rice and ran to the 
waiting Brahmana with that meal. 

But the Brahmana, who had occult sight, immediately saw that the food 
was unclean. His eyes turning red, he cried, “This worst of kings sends me 
unholy food, so let him crave human flesh himself! Let the Rishi Saktri’s 
curse come true and let Kalmashapada wander the Earth as a fiend.” 

When the curse was repeated, it became twice as powerful. The 
Rakshasa within him gained complete control. A while later, Kalmashapada 
saw Saktri again, who had first cursed him and screamed, “You first cursed 
me to become a cannibal, so let me begin by eating you!” 


He pounced on Saktri Muni and devoured him like a tiger does its prey. 
Seeing Saktri killed, Viswamitra began to repeatedly instigate Kinkara to 
eat Vasishta’s other sons as well. Like an angry lion swallowing small 
animals, the Rakshasa quickly killed and ate all of Vasishta’s hundred sons. 

Vasishta knew that Viswamitra was responsible for the death of his sons, 
but he did nothing; only bore his grief as the Great Mountain does the 
Earth. He would rather sacrifice his own life than yield to anger and commit 
any violence against the race of Kusikas. That illumined Sage threw himself 
down from the summit of Meru but he fell on hard rock thousands of feet 
below as if onto a bed of cotton-wool. 

Pandava, when he did not die from his leap, Vasishta lit a forest fire, a 
blazing conflagration, with his power of yoga and walked into it. But the 
flames did not even singe him but were like cool water upon his skin. 

Next the grief-stricken Sage looked at the Sea, tied a heavy stone around 
his neck, and flung himself into the water. But the waves washed him gently 
ashore. Distraught that he could not even do away with himself, Vasishta 
returned to his asrama,’ says the Gandharva.” 


CANTO 179 
CHAITRARATHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “The Gandharva goes on, “The Rishi saw 

\/ his hermitage empty of his sons and again the tide of sorrow surged 

in his heart. He walked away from the asrama. Partha, Vasishta 

ranged over the Earth, dementedly, and one day, during the monsoon, he 

saw a river in spate sweeping away hundreds of trees and plants that grew 
on its banks. 

O Kurunandana, the Muni bound his own hands and feet firmly with 
strong rope and cast himself into that cataract. Parantapa, the river loosened 
the knots of the rope and tenderly set him ashore. Rising, Vasishta called 
that river Vipasa, the knot-severer. 

Restless with the sorrow which tore at his heart, Vasishta could never 
remain in one place. With no peace, he wandered along the banks of many 
lakes and rivers, through many deep forests and climbed more than one 
mountain. 

One day, he came to the banks of the river that is called Hymavati, she 
who flows from Himavan. He saw huge and ferocious crocodiles and other 
sharp-toothed predators in the water, and once more threw himself into the 
river, hoping to be devoured. However, the river mistook the tejasvin 
Brahmana for a mass of fire, and in terror split herself into a hundred rillets 
and plunged away in every direction. Since, she has been called Shatadru, 
river of a hundred courses. 

Vasishta found himself on dry land again and cried, “Ah, it is impossible 
for me to kill myself!” and he turned his face towards his asrama again. 
Back through many kingdoms, over mountains and through the forests of 
several countries, the Sage returned to his hermitage. 

Unknown to the Muni, a daughter-in-law of his, Adrishyanti, had been 
following him all the time, hiding herself so that he never saw her. Now, as 
he neared his asrama, suddenly he heard from behind his back the Veda 


being recited in the most chaste and erudite tones, embellished with the six 
graces of elocution. 

Turning, Vasishta asked, “Who follows me?” 

His daughter-in-law said, “It is Saktri’s wife Adrishyanti. Lord, I am 
chaste and ascetic, yet I find myself lost and without support.” 

Vasishta asked, “Daughter, who was just reciting the Veda and the Angas 
exactly in the voice and tone of my son Saktri?” 

Adrishyanti said, “Saktri’s son is in my womb. He has been there for 
twelve years, and it is his voice that you heard reciting the Veda.” 

Vasishta gave a cry of sheer joy, “A child of my race lives!” 

Now, Partha, every thought of killing himself left the Sage, and he 
brought his pregnant daughter-in-law into his hermitage. 

Then, one day, O Bharata, when Vasishta was out walking in the vana 
with Adrishyanti, he saw the King Kalmashapada, whom the Rakshasa 
Kinkara had possessed. The Rakshasa roared in rage, and rushed towards 
the Muni, to make a meal of him. 

Adrishyanti cried in terror, “O illustrious, look, the savage Rakshasa 
rushes at us, with his cudgel raised. He comes to devour us, Holy One, and 
no one in the world can save us today but you.” 

Vasishta said calmly, “There is nothing to fear, my child. This is no 
Rakshasa but the great and renowned King Kalmashapada, who now lives 
in this forest.” 

The king possessed by the Rakshasa ran on towards them, and then 
Vasishta stopped him in his tracks by uttering a resonant humakara, a 
ringing hummmm. The Muni then sprinkled holy water sanctified with 
mantras over the king and exorcised him of the Rakshasa. 

After twelve years of being possessed by Saktri’s curse, even like the 
Sun being seized by Rahu during an eclipse, Kalmashapada was free. Now 
his natural lustre lit up all that wild vana, as the sun’s rays do the clouds of 
dusk. 

Regaining his mind and his senses, the king folded his hands reverently 
to the Rishi, and said, “Munisthama, I am Sudasa’s son and I am your 
sishya. Command me, lord, I will do whatever you ask, give you whatever 
you want.” 

Vasishta replied, “I already have what I want. Go back to your kingdom 
now and rule your people. And, Purushottama, never insult a Brahmana 
again.” 


Kalmashapada said, “Never, my lord, shall I cross any Brahmana but 
worship them instead. However, Brahmanashreshta, greatest among all that 
know the Veda, let me be free from the debt I owe to the race of Ikshvaku. I 
beg you bless me with a worthy and splendid son, a prince of dharma to 
become king after me.” 

Vasishta answered that great archer and king, “I will.” 

Vasishta went with Kalmashapada to his capital, famed throughout the 
world, the city of Ayodhya. The people came out in crowds, in joy to 
welcome back their king; they were like the celestials of Swarga coming to 
receive Indra. 

With Vasishta going before him, Kalmashapada entered his capital after 
twelve years in the wilderness. The people gazed at him as if he was the 
rising Sun, for so radiant was he and so handsome; his splendour filled 
Ayodhya even as the glory of the autumn Sun does all the sky. 

Kalmashapada looked at his city, its streets swept and washed and bright 
with banners and arches, and he, too, was full of joy. O Prince of Kuru’s 
race, yes, truly, Ayodhya seemed wonderful as Amaravati does when 
Devendra is in his heavenly city. 

When the Rajarishi entered his palace, he ordered his queen to go to 
Vasishta. The Maharishi swore a solemn vow with her, and then he had 
congress with her. Shortly, she conceived and, having accomplished what 
he had come for and receiving Kalmashapada’s reverences, the Sage 
returned to his asrama. 

For a long time, twelve years, the queen carried her child within her. 
When she could not bear to wait any longer, she cut her belly open with a 
sharp stone and brought forth the Purusharishabha Asmaka, the Rajarishi 
who would one day found the city of Paudanya,’ says the Gandharva.” 


CANTO 180 
CHAITRARATHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “The Gandharva continues, ‘In Vasishta’s asrama, 

\/ O Partha, when her time came, Adrishyanti gave birth to a son who 

was verily like another Saktri in every way. Best of the Bharatas, 

Maharishi Vasishta performed the sacred ceremonies for his grandson. 

Because that child was responsible for Vasishta abandoning his resolve to 
take his own life, he was named Parasara, he who gives life to the dead. 

From the day he was born Parasara regarded Vasishta as his father and 
treated him as such. One day, O son of Kunti, the child called Vasishta, 
“Father”, while Adrishyanti was present. 

His mother’s eyes filled on hearing his sweet voice say that word. 
Adrishyanti said tearfully to her son, “My child, do not call your 
grandfather ‘Father’. My son, a Rakshasa ate your father in another forest. 
This holy one is your great father’s father.” 

Hearing this, Parasara flared up in terrible grief and wrath, and cried that 
he would burn up all of creation. Then Vasishta Muni, son of Mitravaruna, 
greatest among the knowers of Brahman, forbade his grandson with these 
arguments. Listen, O Arjuna, to what Vasishta Muni said to Parasara to 
change his mind. 

Said the Sage, “Once, there was a renowned king calls Kritavirya, and 
that Rajarishabha of the Earth was a sishya of the Bhrigus, who knew the 
Veda. After Kritavirya performed the Soma yagna, he gave immense 
wealth, grain past calculation and other incomparable gifts to those 
Brahmanas. 

Later, when Kritavirya left this world and rose into Swarga, there came a 
time when his descendents became impecunious. Knowing that the Bhrigus 
were wealthy, the princes went to those best among Brahmanas, even as 
beggars. 


Some Bhrigus buried their vast treasures under the ground; others gave it 
away to fellow Brahmanas, for they feared the Kshatriyas, while still others 
did give the Kshatriyas whatever they wanted. 

Some Kshatriyas dug the earth all around the house of one of the 
Bhargavas and uncovered a great and rich hoard. All the Kshatriyarishabhas 
saw that buried treasure and they grew furious because of what they thought 
of as being deceit and treachery by the Bhrigus. 

They seized their bows and slaughtered the Brahmanas in a hail of 
arrows, even while the Bhargavas begged for mercy. Why, those wrathful 
Kshatriyas wandered the Earth killing even unborn foetuses in the wombs 
of Bhrigu women. As they swept across the world, exterminating the very 
race of Bhrigu, many Bhrigu women fled to hidden fastnesses of the 
Himalaya. 

Among these women was one who bore an embryo of terrific tejas in her 
thigh. However, another Brahmana woman, from fear, told the Kshatriyas 
about her. The Kshatriyas swarmed to the cave where she was, going forth 
to kill her unborn child and her as well. 

Arriving at the cavemouth, the princes saw the woman ablaze with the 
splendour of her child. At that moment, the child came tearing its way out 
from her thigh. He was as refulgent as the noonday Sun and his light made 
the Kshatriyas blind. Sightless, they wandered, lost over those mountains 
for a long time. 

At last, the stricken princes decided they must beg the sinless Bhrigu 
woman to help them. Like a fire that has burnt out, they came in great 
softness and anxiety to her. 

They said to her, ‘Be gracious to us, O lady, and let us see again. We will 
go back peacefully and never again sin. Most beautiful one, we kings and 
princes beg mercy from you and your child,’” said Vasishta Muni to his 
grandson,’ the Gandharva says.” 


CANTO 181 
CHAITRARATHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “The Gandharva says, ‘Vasishta went on, 
V/ “The Bhrigu woman said to the Kshatriyas, ‘Young ones, I have not 
taken your sight from you, and I am not wroth at you either. 

However, this Bhrigu child is indeed wrathful at the massacre of his 
race. Princes, for a hundred years you killed even the embryos in the 
wombs of the Bhrigu women, and for those hundred years this child 
remained inside me. 

The Vedas and their Angas came to my child even while he lay in my 
womb, so that one day fortune would return to the race of Bhrigu. He 
wishes you ill, Kshatriyas, and it is his cosmic splendour that has made you 
blind. You have murdered his sires and he wishes for your death. 

Do not beg me, but this child for your sight. Pay him homage and 
appease his fury. Children, it is the only hope for you.’ 

The Kshatriyas turned to the thigh-born child, ‘Forgive us, we seek your 
mercy.’ 

At once, the marvellous child turned merciful; the Kshatriyas had their 
sight back and returned to their homes. Because he was born from his 
mother’s thigh, that splendid child is known as Aurva, thigh-born, 
throughout the three worlds. 

His wrath unappeased, Muni Aurva of the race of Bhrigu decided that he 
would destroy the whole world, and every creature in it; he would give this 
as havis, a burnt offering to his murdered ancestors. 

Aurva Sat in terrible tapasya, and soon the heat of his penance began to 
scorch the Devas, the Asuras and Manavas, too. Then the Pitrs, his manes, 
learnt what the child of their race intended and they came down to him from 
their lofty realm. 

The Bhrigus said, ‘Child, Aurva, your tapasya has been stern and fierce, 
and we have seen your power. But turn kindly towards the three worlds; 


restrain your anger. Son, we Bhrigus did not allow ourselves to be killed by 
the Kshatriyas because we could not defend ourselves. The truth is that we 
grew weary of the interminably long lives given to us, and we wanted to 
die. Indeed, we subtly used the Kshatriyas to accomplish our own end. 

We buried the treasure beneath one of our houses even so that the 
princes would discover it and become infuriated. Dvijottama, when we 
wished for Swarga, of what use could gold and jewels be to us? Kubera, 
Lord of Treasures, kept a great trove for us in Devaloka. But we found we 
could not die. 

It is then that we decided to have the Kshatriyas kill us, for we could not 
kill ourselves, either, since no suicide ever attains to realms that are blessed. 
The Kshatriyas only helped us achieve what we wanted, and we are not 
pleased at what you now mean to do. It is a great sin that you intend, to 
consume all of creation in the flames of your tapasya. 

Precious child, do not kill the Kshatriyas or burn the seven worlds; 
instead, quell your anger, which renders your penance sinful,’ say his Pitrs 
to Aurva,” Vasishta said to Parasara,’ the Gandharva tells Arjuna.” 


CANTO 182 
CHAITRARATHA PARVA CONTINUED 


‘Aurva heard what his manes said and spoke to them. 

Aurva Muni said, ‘O my Pitrs, how can the vow I swore, even in 
anger, to consume the worlds go in vain? I cannot become one whose anger 
is impotent and his oaths hollow. For, if I cease my penance, my fury will 
devour me as fire does dry wood. 

The man who represses rightful anger, provoked by grave injustice, 
becomes incapable of accomplishing the Purusharthas of dharma, artha and 
kama. The rage that kings use to conquer and rule the Earth is not a trifling 
thing; it keeps the evil in fearful restraint and protects good men of dharma. 

Whilst I lay in my mother’s thigh, I heard the screams of the Bhrigu 
women whom the Kshatriyas were slaughtering. O Pitrs, when the savage 
Kshatriyas began to murder the unborn children of our race, untold wrath 
filled my soul. 

My mother and our other women, all heavy with child, and my terror- 
stricken father could not find anyone in the wide world to protect them. In 
panic, my mother lowered me into her thigh and held me there, so that her 
pregnancy would be hidden. 

If there is justice and punishment for crimes in the world, then sinners 
hesitate to sin; if there is no chastiser, the numbers of criminals grow and 
their crimes become more terrible. The man who owns the power to punish 
and prevent crime but does not do so becomes a criminal and sinner 
himself; he shares in the sins of the sinners. 

When the kings that could have saved my sires from the fury of the 
Kshatriyas did not do so, but remained immersed in their pleasures instead, 
I have more than just cause to turn my fury upon them. I have the power to 
punish these criminals. I wield absolute power over the worlds; I cannot do 
what you ask. 


\ J aisampayana said, “The Gandharva continues, ‘Vasishta went on, 


I must have revenge on the sinners, for otherwise they will again commit 
heinous murdering. Besides, if I do not burn them with the fire of my wrath, 
it will consume me instead. 

Ah, my Sires, I know that all of you unswervingly wish for the weal of 
the worlds. Tell me what I should do, so that it benefits both creation and 
me.’ 

The Pitrs say, “Cast the fire of your rage, which would consume the 
worlds, into water, and in water let it dwell, consuming water. That will 
benefit you and the worlds as well, for it is said that the worlds are made of 
water, why, the very universe has emerged from primal waters. 

Brahmana, let the fire of your fury live in the Ocean, so that, sinless 
child, your vow is not proven false, so that you are not harmed by the fire, 
and neither the three worlds, or the Devas, Asuras and Manavas.’ 

The child Aurva cast the fire of his anger into the realm of Varuna, the 
Ocean. It lives there still, consuming the waters of the deeps, and there it 
has assumed the form of a great horse’s head, so that those that know the 
Veda call it Badavamukha. It flames forth from its own mouth and 
ceaselessly quenches itself with the waters of the fathomless Ocean. 

You, precious Parasara, wisest Muni, are like Aurva, a blessed one. You 
know the lofty realms of Swarga; it does not become you to destroy the 
worlds in anger,” said Vasishta to his grandson,’ says the Gandharva to 
Arjuna.” 


CANTO 183 
CHAITRARATHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “The Gandharva continues, ‘When his illumined 
V/ grandfather Vasishta spoke thus, gravely, to him, Parasara controlled 
his anger and refrained from destroying the worlds. 

However, that tejaswin Rishi, of terrific energy, the son of Saktri, 
performed a great Rakshasa yagna, and to avenge the killing of his father 
Saktri, he consumed Rakshasas, young and old, in the fires of his sacrifice. 
Now Vasishta did not attempt to restrain his grandson, because he did not 
want to force him to break a second vow. 

Mahamuni Parasara sat before three blazing fires, himself like a fourth 
one. Saktri’s son, bright as Surya emerging from behind clouds, poured 
copious libations of ghee into those tall flames and all the sky was lit up. 

Vasishta and the other Rishis of the worlds saw Parasara ablaze, truly 
like a second Sun, and it seemed no one could stop his yagna. The 
compassionate Maharishi Atri came to Parasara’s yagnashala. Parantapa, 
with him came the Devarishis Pulastya, Pulaha and Kratu, all to save the 
Rakshasas. 

Bharatarishabha, when Pulastya Muni saw how many Rakshasas had 
already been killed, he said to Parasara aflame, “Child, I hope nothing 
hinders your yagna! But what joy do you find in killing even those 
Rakshasas that have nothing to do with the death of your father? 

This is not the dharma of a holy Brahmana; it does not become you to 
take innocent lives. Peace is the highest punya. Parasara, make your peace, 
for you are a superior man and I wonder that you commit this dreadful sin. 

How can you do this, who are the son of Saktri, who was a man of 
unswerving dharma, a man of peace? How do you kill any living creatures 
at all? Scion of the race of Vasishta, your father died because he broke 
dharma in anger and cursed Kalmashapada. 


Saktri was taken to Swarga for his own fault. Parasara, no Rakshasa on 
Earth could kill the great Saktri, unless the Muni contrived his own death. 
Even Viswamitra was merely a tool in the hands of fate. 

Besides, know that both your father Saktri and King Kalmashapada have 
indeed found Swarga, and enjoy every felicity there. Your father’s brothers, 
Vasishta’s other sons, are in heaven also, and finding untold joy in the 
company of the celestials. 

Why, even you, Parasara, son of Saktri, son of Vasishta, are only a blind 
instrument of fate in this yagna of yours, which destroys countless 
Rakshasas. O be blessed, Parasara, and abandon your Rakshasa yagna. You 
have done enough killing.” 

Now Vasishta added his voice to what Pulastya Muni said, and Parasara 
ceased his fell sacrifice. He cast the fires that he had lit into the deepest 
vana north of the Himavat. To this day, that fire burns all year even in the 
dead of winter, even when rains lash the mountain, devouring trees and the 
very stones around it, and also any Rakshasas that come anywhere near its 
flames,’ the Gandharva says.” 


CANTO 184 
CHAITRARATHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said to Janamejaya, “Arjuna asks, ‘Gandharva, why did 

V/ the King Kalmashapada tell his queen to resort to Vasishta Muni, 

master of all the Vedas? And why did Vasishta, who knew all about 

dharma, agree to lie with a woman with whom he should not? Dear friend, 

did Vasishta not sin by what he did? I am full of dark doubt, and beg you to 
remove my fear.’ 

The Gandharva says, ‘Irresistible Dhananjaya, I will answer your 
question about the Sage and the King. Listen. 

Bharatottama, I have told you about how Vasishta’s radiant son Saktri 
cursed Kalmashapada. With the curse falling on him, that king, who 
crushed all his enemies, left his capital with his queen. His eyes were red 
and spun in their sockets from anger. Kalmashapada wandered dementedly 
through the wild forest, the curse roiling him. 

The vana teemed with deer and every other animal, and was thick with 
every plant and great tree. With hunger ravaging him, one day 
Kalmashapada ranged the jungle in search of food, uttering wild and 
terrible cries. Driven by hunger, he arrived in the very heart of the forest 
and suddenly came upon a Brahmana and his wife making love there. 

Terrified to see the possessed and wild looking king, the couple jumped 
up and ran from him, with their desire unsatisfied. Kalmashapada ran after 
them, growling, and seized the Brahmana. 

The Brahmani wailed, “Great King, the world knows that you are a 
sovereign of the Suryavamsa, devoted to your elders and betters, and a king 
famed throughout the world for his dharma. It does not become you to 
commit this sin, O invincible one, not though the Rishi’s curse has robbed 
you of your reason. 

I am in my season and was joined with my husband in desire. I am not 
satisfied yet; I beg you be merciful, O best of kings, set my husband free.” 


But Kalmashapada paid no heed to her pitiful entreaty and, ignoring her 
screams, devoured the Brahmana like a tiger does his prey. Her fury 
terrible, the tears of the Brahmani turned to drops of fire and burned up 
everything around her. 

In that rage, in her grief, she cursed Rajarishi Kalmashapada, “Vile 
King, for what you have done I curse you that if you ever go to your wife 
again you will instantly die. Wretched Raja, also let your wife conceive and 
deliver a child by the Rishi Vasishta whose sons you have killed and eaten. 
And that child, O worst of kings, shall be the one that continues your race.” 

Having pronounced her curse, that chaste Brahmani of the race of 
Angiras, every auspicious mark upon her body, walked into the fire kindled 
by her tears and became ashes before the king’s eyes. Parantapa, even as 
this happened, Vasishta knew about it with mystic intuition. 

The years passed. Kalmashapada was freed from his curse, and taken 
with desire one night, the king went to his queen Madayanati. However, she 
reminded him of the curse of the Brahmani and would not lie with 
Kalmashapada. Bitter tears of regret that king shed; bitterly he regretted 
what he had done. 

Purushottama, this is why King Kalmashapada asked Maharishi Vasishta 
to beget a son upon his queen,’ says the Gandharva.” 


CANTO 185 
CHAITRARATHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “Arjuna asks, “Gandharva, you know 
V/ everything; so you tell us which Vedagyani Brahmana we should 
make our priest.’ 

The Gandharva replies, ‘In this very vana there is a holy shrine calls 
Utkochaka. Devala Muni’s younger brother Dhaumya performs tapasya 
there. If you want a priest for yourselves, you will find no better Brahmana 
than him.’ 

Delighted with their encounter, Arjuna gives his Agneyastra to the 
Gandharva, with the proper rituals. The Pandava says, ‘Gandharvottama, let 
the horses that you wish to give us remain with you for a time, until we 
have need for them and then we shall take them from you. Be you blessed!’ 

The Pandavas and the Gandharva salute each other reverently and part 
ways upon the enchanted banks of the Bhagirathi. The Pandavas go to 
Utkochaka, to Dhaumya’s sacred asrama, and ask him to become their 
Kulaguru, their family priest. Best of those that know the Vedas, the 
profound Dhaumya receives the sons of Pandu with offerings of wild fruit, 
succulent roots, and he does agree to what they ask of him. 

When the great Dhaumya agrees to be their priest, the Pandavas and 
Kunti feel a stirring elation: they feel that that they have already regained 
their kingdom, as well as won the daughter of Drupada for their queen, at 
her swayamvara. Truly, the Bharatrishabhas feel that in Dhaumya they have 
found a powerful guardian of their future and their fortunes. 

Dhaumya, Mahatman, knower of the true meaning of the Veda, knower 
of every law of dharma, becomes the Guru of the Pandavas, and he makes 
them his Yajamanas, his spiritual disciples. The Brahmana sees those 
Kshatriyas endowed with strength, intelligence and fortitude such as the 
Devas possess, and he also feels that they have already regained their 
rightful kingdom. 


When Dhaumya has blessed them, by uttering holy mantras over them, 
they think it is time to set out for the Panchala kingdom, to the swayamvara 
of the Princess Panchali.” 


CANTO 186 
SWAYAMVARA PARVA 


aisampayana continued, “Those five Purushavyaghra brothers, the 

\/ Pancha Pandavas, tigers among men, set out for Drupada’s kingdom, 

to gaze upon that wonderful country, and especially its princess 
Draupadi. 

As they go along, their mother with them, they see some Brahmanas on 
the way. Those Brahmacharis see the sons of Pandu, O Rajan, and ask, 
“Where are you going? And from where do you come?’ 

Yudhishtira replies, “‘Brahmanarishabhas, we five are brothers and this is 
our mother. We are coming from Ekachakra.’ 

The Brahmanas say, ‘Take yourselves to the city of Drupada in the 
kingdom of the Panchalas, for there is a great swayamvara to be held there 
at which Drupada will give away great wealth. We are also going there and 
we can journey together. 

Exceptional celebrations will take place there for Yagnasena has a 
daughter who is born from the heart of an agnikunda during a yagna. Her 
beauty is past compare, her eyes like lotus petals, her features flawless, her 
intelligence and beauty legend. 

Why, Draupadi of the slender waist emanates a fragrance from her body, 
a scent as of a blue lotus, and it spreads around her a full yojana. Her 
brother is the mighty Dhrishtadyumna, who has been born to kill Drona. 
The prince is also born from the sacrificial flames, wearing natural armour 
and carrying a bow and arrows, and blazing himself like a second fire. 

Yagnasena’s daughter will choose a husband for herself from amongst all 
the Kshatriyas that have been invited to her swayamvara. And we are going 
there to witness the celebrations, which we believe will be like a festival in 
Devaloka. 

Kshatriyas, munificent kings and princes from diverse lands who 
perform great sacrifices at which they give untold wealth to Brahmanas, 


will attend the swayamvara of Draupadi. They are handsome Kshatriyas, 
full of vigour, brilliance and learning, Maharathas and masters of weapons. 
Wanting to win Draupadi’s favour, and so her hand, they will distribute 
great wealth, countless cows, wonderful food, and many other gifts to be 
enjoyed. 

Taking all this and witnessing the swayamvara, we will depart Drupada’s 
city and go our separate ways. 

Many actors and bards, Sutradharas and Pauranikas, champion athletes, 
heralds, entertainers and performers of every ilk and hue, from across the 
length and breadth of Bharatavarsha, will come to the swayamvara. You 
shall see many marvellous sights in the city of Drupada, receive many rich 
gifts, and then go your way, as you please, or come with us. 

Besides, you are all as handsome as Devas. Seeing you, perhaps the dark 
Princess Krishnaa will choose one of you for her husband!’ And pointing to 
Arjuna, “This brother of yours seems blessed with extraordinary fortune; he 
might well earn wealth past imagining in the city of Drupada.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Brahmanas, we will go with you to the princess’ 
excellent swayamvara.’” 


CANTO 187 
SWAYAMVARA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “O Janamejaya, the Pandavas go with those 

\/ Brahmanas towards the kingdom of southern Panchala, over which 

Drupada rules. On their way, those Kshatriyas see the luminous and 

sinless Dwaipayana. They worship him, and taking his blessing, continue 
their journey towards Drupada’s kingdom. 

The Maharathas go slowly on their way, often lingering to admire the 
fine forests and shimmering lakes that they see. Finally, the devout, taintless 
princes enter Panchala lands and come to Drupada’s capital, where they 
begin living in the home of a potter. 

Still disguised as Brahmanas, they go begging for alms and no man 
recognises them for who they are. 

Now, Drupada Yagnasena has always wanted to give his daughter 
Draupadi to the heroic Arjuna to be his wife. But he never speaks of this to 
anyone. O Janamejaya, thinking of Arjuna’s matchless archery, the 
Panchala king has an exceptionally inflexible and stiff bow fashioned, 
which he thinks that no one other than Arjuna will be able to bend. 

He also erects an unusual yantra, a device upon which he suspends an 
extraordinarily difficult target to shoot. 

Drupada declares, “The archer who can shoot the hanging target shall 
have Draupadi for his wife.’ 

Thus does the Panchala king proclaim his daughter’s swayamvara, and 
every worthy Kshatriya in Bharatavarsha arrives in his capital. Countless 
Rishis also arrive, to witness the swayamvara, for it promises wealth and 
excitement. 

Among the warriors that come, O King, are Duryodhana and the Kurus, 
and Karna with them. The highest born, most learned Brahmanas from 
every kingdom and land flock to Drupada’s city. The great Drupada 
receives every king and Sage reverently. 


Come the day of the swayamvara and the people of the city throng the 
tiers and platforms that have been raised around the arena for the 
swayamvara. The noise they make is like a sea roaring. That stadium has 
been erected upon a level and auspicious plain to the north-east of 
Drupada’s capital. Fine mansions, set in their sprawling grounds, surround 
the majestic construction. 

Lofty walls enclose the arena, as well as a deep moat circling it around, 
while fine archways at regular intervals lead into it, and a bright, many- 
coloured canopy covers the stands. The king enters the stadium through its 
north-eastern gate, to the resounding bass of a thousand conches. 

The stadium is fragrant with the scent of black aloe, and with the holy 
water mixed with sandalwood paste with which it has been liberally 
sprinkled, and also with the extravagance of garlands made with every 
flower, hanging everywhere. 

The lofty mansions that encircle it are snow-white and seem like the 
peaks of Kailasa that kiss the clouds. Their windows are filled by lattices of 
gold, their walls encrusted with diamonds, and priceless carpets of silk lie 
upon their gleaming floors. They are all adorned with garlands in every 
colour and of every fine fragrance, and they are indeed as radiantly white as 
the necks of swans. 

The scent of aloe and the other redolences that those mansions exude can 
be smelt a yojana away. Each one has a hundred doors, each of these wide 
enough for a small crowd to enter through them at once. They are furnished 
extravagantly, beautifully, and they are like the peaks of Himavan. 

The kings and princes, all the distinguished Kshatriyas coming from far- 
flung kingdoms, are housed in those seven-storied palaces. Invited by 
Drupada, each one has come to vie with the others for the hand of 
Draupadi, and they come wearing their finery and sparkling ornaments. 

When the people of the Panchala capital and countryside come to the 
grand stadium of the swayamvara, they see those leonine Kshatriyas within 
the white mansions, all of them strong and vital, as great souls are. Those 
magnificent kings all wear the fragrant paste of the black aloe upon their 
persons. Liberal and majestic they are, worshippers of Brahman, invincible 
guardians of their kingdoms against every invader, and loved throughout 
the world for their dharma. 

The Pandavas also enter the stadium, sit among the Brahmanas and see 
the unrivalled wealth of the Panchala king and the great and generous gifts 


that he gives. Lively troupes of actors, musicians and dancers perform daily, 
attracting more people, day by day. 

Bharatarishabha, on the sixteenth day, when the stadium is packed to 
capacity, Draupadi bathes, puts on the most resplendent clothes and 
jewellery and she enters the arena carrying a golden chalice with the arghya 
in it and also a garland of wildflowers. The Kulaguru of the House of the 
Moon, a holy Brahmana who knows all the apposite mantras, lights the 
sacrificial fire and pours libations of ghee into the flames. 

When Agni Deva has been appeased with ghee, the priest makes all the 
Brahmanas present utter auspicious mantras to bless the occasion. He raises 
his hand to stop the musical instruments that play all around the stadium 
and calls for silence among the people. When that vast crowd falls 
completely silent, Dhrishtadyumna takes his sister’s hand, steps into the 
middle of the arena, and speaks in a voice deep as bass drums or 
thunderheads. 

Sweetly, yet, he says, ‘O mighty Kshatriyas, here is the bow, these are 
five sharp arrows and above is the target. Find the target through the 
aperture in the yantra, the device above which it hangs, and I solemnly 
swear, upon my lineage, my honour and my strength, that my sister 
Krishnaa shall belong to the archer who succeeds.’ 

Dhrishtadyumna turns to Draupadi and begins to recite the names, 
lineages and achievements of the great Kshatriyas of the Earth who have 
come to her swayamvara.” 


CANTO 188 
SWAYAMVARA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana continued, “Dhrishtadyumna proclaims, ‘Duryodhana, 
Durvisaha, Durmukha, Dushpradharshana, Vivimsati, Vikarna, Saha, 
Dushasana; Yuyutsu,Vayuvega, Bhimavegarava; Ugrayudha, Balaki, 

Kanakayu, Virochana, Sukundala, Chitrasena, Suvarcha, Kanakadhwayja; 

Nandaka, Bahusali, Tuhunda and Vikata are all the mighty sons of 

Dhritarashtra. My sister, these and many other valiant brothers of theirs 

have come to vie for your hand; and with them the indomitable Karna. 

Many other great kings and princes, all Kshatriya bulls, have come for 
you. Sakuni, Saubala, Vrisaka, and Brihadbala, all sons of Gandhara are 
here. Aswatthama and Bhoja, best among masters of astras, are here, 
glittering in rare ornaments. 

Brihanta, Manimana, Dandadhara, Sahadeva, Jayatsena, Meghasandhi, 
Virata with his two sons Sankha and Uttara, Vardhakshemi, Susarma, 
Senabindu, Suketu with his two sons Sunama and Suvarcha, Suchitra, 
Sukumara, Vrika, Satyadhriti, Suryadhwaja, Rochamana, Nila, Chitrayudha, 
Agsuman, Chekitana, the mighty Sreniman, Chandrasena, powerful son of 
Samudrasena, Jarasahdha, Vidanda and Danda, father and son, Paundraka, 
Vasudeva, Bhagadatta of terrific vigour, Kalinga, Tamralipta, the Pattana 
king, Maharatha Salya king of Madra, and his valiant son Rukmangada, 
Rukmaratha, Somadatta of the Kurus and his three sons, all Maharathas and 
great Kshatriyas, Bhuri, Bhurisrava, Sala, Sudakshina, Kamboja all of the 
race of Puru, Brihadvala, Sushena, Sibi, son of Usinara, Patcharanihanta, 
the king of Karusha; Baladeva Samkarshana, Vasudeva Krishna, the 
matchless son of Rukmini, Samba, Charudeshna, son of Pradyumna, Gada, 
Akrura, Satyaki, the Mahatman Uddhava, Kritavarman, son of Hridika, 
Prithu, Viprithu, Viduratha, Ranka, Sanku, Givesshana, Asavaha, 
Aniruddha, Samika, Sarimejaya, the heroic Vatapi, Jhilli, Pindaraka, the 
powerful Usinara, all these Vrishnis, Bhagiratha, Brihatkshatra, Jayadratha 


son of Sindhu, Brihadratha, Balhika, Maharatha Srutayu, Uluka, Kaitava, 
Chitrangada and Suvangada, the most intelligent Vatsaraja, the king of 
Kosala, Sisupala, the awesome Jarasandha, and many more kings celebrated 
throughout the world, have come, my blessed sister, for you. 

All of them are great archers. They shall all shoot at the target, and he 
that brings it down will have you for his wife.’” 


CANTO 189 
SWAYAMVARA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “The Kshatriyas, young and not so young, their 

V/ earrings sparkling, each one feeling that he is mighty indeed, all 

brandish their weapons. Intoxicated with the pride of being 

handsome, powerful, learned, of noblest birth, wealthy, youthful and 

vigorous, they are like Himalayan elephants in musth, in the season of rut 
when their temples split open from an excess of ichor. 

Seized by Kama, God of Desire, viewing one another with extreme 
contention, they all rise up at the same moment and roar, ‘Krishnaa will be 
mine!’ 

The Kshatriyas gathered in that stadium look like the Devas of old did, 
when they gathered around Uma, the Mountain King’s daughter. Kama 
Deva pierces them all, subtly, with his invisible flowery arrows, and they 
are without exception lost in a dream of winning the exquisite Draupadi. 
They stride into the arena and now favour even their dearest friends with 
glares of competition and animosity. 

The Devas come to that stadium in their vimanas, with the Rudras and 
the Adityas, the Vasus and the twin Aswins, the Swadhas and all the 
Marutas, and Kubera with Yama at their head. 

The Daityas, Suparnas, the great Nagas, the Devarishis, the Guhyakas, 
the Charanas, Viswavasu, Narada, Parvata and the main Gandharvas with 
the Apsaras are all there. 

Halayudha Balarama and Janardana Krishna are there, as are the 
chieftains of the Vrishni, Andhaka and Yadava tribes, all of whom Krishna 
commands. Krishna sees the five Pandavas in disguise, like five elephants in 
rut drawn to Draupadi even as wild tuskers in season are to a lake blooming 
with lotuses; he sees them disguised as Brahmanas, covered with ashes, and 
he sees the great fires that those holy ashes conceal. 


Krishna says softly to his brother Rama, ‘Look, there is Yudhishtira; 
those are Bhima and Arjuna Jishnu; and there are the twins.’ 

Balarama sees the sons of Pandu and gives Krishna a look of great 
satisfaction. However, every other Kshatriya there, sons and grandsons of 
kings, their eyes bulging to see her unearthly beauty, many chewing their 
lips from intense desire, gaze only at the Princess Draupadi and see nothing 
other than her. The sons of Kunti and Madri’s twins also look at Panchali, 
and struck by Kama’s subtle shafts of love, they, too, see nothing else. 

The sky is so crowded with Devarishis, Gandharvas, Suparnas, Nagas, 
Asuras and Siddhas, so fragrant with the scents of Swarga, with heaven’s 
flowers cascading out of it, reverberant with deep conches, drums and the 
endless Pranava, the AUM, as well as softer, unworldly music from flute, 
lute and tabor, that the vimanas of the Devas find passage through those 
throngs difficult. 

Now the trial of the swayamvara gets underway. Karna, Duryodhana, 
Salwa, Salya, Aswatthama, Kratha, Sunitha, Vakra, the king of Kalinga and 
Vanga, Pandya, Paundra, the lord of Videha, the chief of the Yavanas, and 
countless other Kshatriya princes—sovereigns of great lands, their eyes like 
lotus petals— begin, one by one, to display their prowess in order to win the 
hand of the princess who so obviously has no remote rival on Earth for 
beauty. 

Yet, for all their fine crowns, necklaces, bracelets and all their 
ornaments, for their mighty physiques, their tremendous arms, bursting as 
they are with manhood, strength and vigour, most of those Kshatriyas 
cannot bend or string the great bow of the trial, not even in their dreams. 

As they make their attempts, one by one, muscles bulging, veins 
standing out upon them, each according to his ability, the great weapon 
flings the best of them—who do indeed bend it a littlke— violently onto the 
ground, where they lie senseless for some moments. 

Drained, their fine crowns askew, the garlands they wear ragged, 
panting, their ardour for the princess quickly cools; for they know that they 
can never hope to bend or string that dreadful bow. Mournful they are, those 
Kshatriyas, and give vent to their disappointment. 

Karna, of the Sutas sees the crestfallen Kshatriyas. That greatest of all 
archers rises, strides up to the bow, picks up that awesome weapon 
effortlessly, bends it with no more effort, strings it, sets an arrow to the 
string and draws the string back so that the bow forms a circle. 


The Pandavas look at that son of Surya, who is as bright as Agni, Soma 
or Surya Deva himself, and they quail, for they feel certain that the target 
has already been brought down. 

Suddenly, the princess Draupadi cries, ‘I will not marry a Sutaputra!’ 

Karna stops still. His lips curl in a sneer, he laughs bitterly and he flings 
the great bow down in disgust, in disdain, in anguish. 

Now Sishupala, son of Damagosha and king of the Chedis, mighty as 
Yama, comes forward to string the bow, but the weapon brings him to his 
knees instead. 

Jarasandha of Magadha, invincible king, walks up to the bow and stands 
before it like some mountain, as if to burn it up with his scrutiny. However, 
when he tries to bend it, the bow flings him down as well, on his knees. 
With a roar, he rises and stalks out of the stadium like a great wounded lion, 
to return to his kingdom. 

Now the magnificent Kshatriya Salya, king of Madra, tries to bend and 
string the bow, and it brings him also to his knees. Finally, it is plain that 
none of the Kshatriyas present are up to the task, and a wave of snickers 
ripples through the crowd. Arjuna Jishnu, son of Kunti, feels that he wants 
to make his attempt to win the dark Panchali’s hand.” 


CANTO 190 
SWAYAMVARA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana continued, “When all the Kshatriyas have given up and 
sit down, frustrated and fuming, Arjuna of the lofty soul rises from 
the enclosure of the Brahmanas. The foremost among the Brahmanas 

see him get up, his skin the colour of Indra’s banner, and they shake their 

deerskins and set up a loud noise: some of them are happy, while others 
shout their displeasure. 

Among the most intelligent of them say, ‘Brahmanas, how can a 
stripling of ours string the bow that the greatest Kshatriyas on Earth, men 
like Salya and the rest, equally powerful, and trained masters moreover in 
arms, failed?’ 

‘If this callow youth fails, he will bring ridicule upon all of us 
Brahmanas. The Kshatriyas will pour scorn over us. He is vain and 
immature, which is why he even dares think of attempting the impossible 
task. He must be prevented from this rashness.’ 

But others say, ‘No one shall mock at us even if he fails, and the kings 
will not be displeased.’ 

“Why, the handsome boy has a powerful physique, even like the trunk of 
some great tusker. He is as calm as Himavan. His gait is a lion’s. He is 
formidably determined, and he appears to be as strong as a bull elephant in 
musth. It is quite possible that he will succeed!’ 

‘He is strong and resolute. Otherwise would he dare rise up and 
approach the bow on his own? Also, remember that among all men it is the 
Brahmana who can accomplish anything to which he sets his mind. A 
Brahmana might not eat at all, or he might subsist on fruit and roots; he 
might become macilent and seem weak; but he will always be ablaze with 
the power of his own tejas. 

Let him appear to be right or wrong, no one should ever underestimate a 
Brahmana or consider him incapable of accomplishing anything at all, great 


or little, any task, be it fraught with joy or sorrow.’ 

‘Let us not forget how Jamadagni’s son Rama vanquished all the Earth’s 
Kshatriyas in battle, by himself. Agastya drained the very Ocean with his 
Brahma shakti. So let us all say in one voice, “May the youth bend the bow 
and bring the target down easily!” 

And many of the Brahmanas say, ‘Tathastu, be it so!’ 

As the Brahmanas continue with their debate, Arjuna comes up to the 
bow and stands before it like a mountain. After a long moment, he walks 
solemnly around the great weapon, with his head bent in prayer to the Lord 
Isana, granter of boons, and then with a fervent thought of Krishna, he picks 
up the bow. 

In a wink, effortlessly, Indra’s son Jishnu, as strong as Indra’s younger 
brother Vishnu, strings the weapon which so many mighty Kshatriyas like 
Rukma, Sunitha, Vakra, Duryodhana, Salya, and others could not manage to 
do though they poured every ounce of their strength into the effort. Quicker 
than the eye can see, he picks up all five arrows, in a blur, and shoots the 
target suspended above the yantra, so it falls onto the ground through the 
aperture in the uncanny device. 

A moment’s stunned silence, and then a huge shout from all the 
celestials shakes the sky, and the stadium reverberates with deafening cries 
and applause from the crowd. The Devas pour down a shower of unworldly 
blooms over Partha Parantapa. 

Thousands of Brahmanas wave their upper cloths in the air, and shout 
for joy, while the Kshatriyas cry out in disbelief and agony. Flowers 
continue to pour out of the sky over the stadium and the arena. The 
musicians strike up a celebrant song, while bards and heralds sing and cry 
out praises of him who has achieved the staggering feat. 

Drupada, slayer of his enemies, looks at Arjuna and is full of joy. If the 
need arises, he will deploy his army to help or protect this hero. While the 
uproar rises to a crescendo, the Brahmanas rapturous and the Kshatriyas 
furious, Yudhishtira Purushottama quickly leaves the stadium with the 
twins, to return to the potter’s house. 

The Princess Draupadi, Krishnaa, sees the target brought down, she 
looks at Arjuna who has found his mark, and joy sweeps through her. With 
a white silken robe and a garland of flowers in her hands, she walks up to 
the bowman as handsome as Indra himself. 


When Arjuna, who could do the impossible, wins dark Panchali’s hand, 
every Brahmana in the stadium rises to bow to him, to honour him. Like a 
lion, he walks out of the arena, with his newly won wife following him.” 


CANTO 191 
SWAYAMVARA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “Drupada rises to say that he will give his 
\/ daughter in marriage to the Brahmana archer, when suddenly all the 
other Kshatriyas look at one another and are seized by wrath. 

They say, “‘Drupada dares treat us lords of the Earth like wisps of straw, 
and he will give his daughter, best among all women, to a Brahmana! 
Having planted a lovely tree he wants to cut it down when it is about to bear 
fruit. He has humiliated us and we must kill him.’ 

‘He deserves neither respect nor reverence for his age; let us kill both 
him and his son, for they have insulted all the Kshatriyas of the Earth. He 
called us kings and princes here, fed us sumptuously, and finally he 
dishonours us. In this assembly of kings that is like a gathering of Devas, 
can the vile Drupada not see a single worthy Kshatriya, one that is fully his 
equal, that he gives Draupadi to a Brahmana?’ 

‘The Vedas clearly say that a swayamvara is only for Kshatriyas and no 
Brahmana may be chosen for a husband during a swayamvara. O Kings, if 
this princess cannot choose any of us Kshatriyas to be her husband let us 
throw her into the fire along with her father and her brother, and return to 
our kingdoms. 

But as for this Brahmana, either from arrogance or malice, he has indeed 
insulted us kings. Yet, being a Brahmana, he must not be killed, for our 
kingdoms, lives, wealth, sons, grandsons, and everything that we own exists 
because of and for the holy Brahmanas. 

Yet, we must not leave him unpunished, so that never does another 
swayamvara end in such disgrace. We must teach him a public lesson that 
will be remembered for all time, a lesson that will keep the varnas each in 
their proper place.’ 

When they have spoken amongst themselves, the incensed Kshatriyas 
seize up their weapons, iron maces with spikes among them, and rush 


towards Drupada to kill him at once. Drupada sees the Kshatriya horde run 
at him in rage, with bows and arrows, and he seeks refuge in the 
Brahmanas. 

Suddenly, Bhima and Arjuna stand between the charging Kshatriyas and 
Drupada, at whom they run like rut-maddened elephants. Raising their 
weapons in gloved hands, the kings turn roaring on the two Pandavas, now 
determined to kill them. 

In a flash the tremendous Bhima, powerful as thunder, tears up a big tree 
from the ground and strips its leaves away. Bhima Mahabaho, son of Pritha, 
decimator of his enemies, stands next to his brother Narapumgava Arjuna; 
Bhima is like Yama, the Lord Death himself with his mace. 

Jishnu wonders at his brother’s awesome strength, and now, mighty as 
Indra himself, Arjuna also stands forth fearlessly, bow in hand, ready to 
face their host of adversaries. 

Seeing them, Krishna Damodara of divine intellect, his deeds past 
understanding, murmurs to his brother Balarama, ‘If I am Vaasudeva, O 
Samkarshana, that shura there, whose tread is like a lion’s and whose bow is 
a full eight feet, is certainly Arjuna! The other hero who has torn up the tree 
to be his weapon is Vrikodara Bhima, for none but he can do such a thing. 

And that other prince, eight feet tall, his eyes like lotus petals, who just 
left the stadium, his gait like a lion’s yet full of humility, too, his skin fair, 
his nose prominent, is Dharma Deva’s son Yudhishtira. The twins who also 
left, each one like another Kartikeya, I feel sure are the sons of the Aswin 
twins. 

I did hear that Kunti and her sons escaped the fire that burnt down the 
house of lac.’ 

Balarama Halayudha, fair as rainless clouds, says joyfully to Krishna, 
‘My brother, how happy I am to hear that our father’s sister and her sons 
escaped death!’” 


CANTO 192 
SWAYAMVARA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Now all the Brahmana bulls there, those 
\/ Dvijarishabhas, wave their deerskins and shake their coconut-shell 
kamandalus, and cry to Arjuna and Bhima, ‘Fear not, we will fight 

the Kshatriyas!’ 

Arjuna smiles at them and says kindly, ‘Stand aside and be spectators, 
dear friends, while I turn back these angry kings with arrow storms, just as 
snakes are with mantras.’ 

Arjuna raises the bow with which he has shot the target, and stands 
calmly beside Bhima; they are like mountains. Then, next moment, the 
brothers attack the Kshatriya host led by Karna, like two elephants charging 
as one. 

Eager for battle, the kings roar, “It is permissible to kill anyone who is 
bent on a fight!’ and rush at Bhima and Arjuna disguised as Brahmanas. 

Tejasvin Karna faces Arjuna, while the great Salya, king of Madra, 
lumbers at Bhima truly like a tusker in musth charging another tusker for 
the right to mate with a cow-elephant in heat. Duryodhana and some others 
give light, playful fight to the general throng of Brahmanas. 

Arjuna sees Surya’s son Karna advance upon him and pierces him with a 
lightning swift flurry of arrows, and Radheya Karna faints. Recovering 
quickly, Karna now fights Arjuna with greater intent. Fiercely, intensely, 
they duel, those greatest of all archers. Such is their speed and skill that 
they shroud each other in showers of arrows so both become invisible to the 
spectator crowd. 

But what they roar at each is clearly audible: ‘See the strength of my 
arms!’ 

‘I have the answer for that!’ 

They say more, which is subtle, and only other great bowmen can 
fathom that exchange, full of the high secrets of archery. 


Karna finds Arjuna indomitable and the Suryaputra raises his own 
exceptional archery. Arjuna looses shafts like thunder at him, and Karna 
roars and parries them. The Kshatriyas all applaud. 

Karna cries to his opponent, “‘Dvijottama, you are a matchless and 
tireless bowman, and your arrows are tremendous. Are you an Avatara of 
the Astrashastra? Or are you Parasurama, Indra himself, or his younger 
brother Vishnu Achyuta, come in the guise of Brahmana? 

For I know that none but Indra or Pandu’s son Arjuna Kiriti can face me 
in battle when I am roused.’ 

Arjuna, Phalguna, replies, ‘Karna, I am not any Avatara of the 
Astrashastra, nor am I Parasurama of divine prowess. I am just a Brahmana 
but I am the greatest archer on Earth. Through my Guru’s grace, I have the 
Brahmastra and the Paurandarastra, and I am here to vanquish you, O 
Shura, in a very short while.’ 

Karna lowers his bow and stops fighting, for that Maharatha knows that 
the Brahmastra is irresistible. Meanwhile, nearby, Salya and Bhima fight 
like two elephants in musth, striking each other with fists and knees. They 
shove each other mightily, flinging one another down, and hauling the fallen 
adversary face down along the ground. 

Their blows are like granite blocks crashing together and the stadium 
echoes. After a brief struggle, Bhima Kurusthama picks Salya up bodily and 
hurls him down roughly, with enormous force, so that the crowd gasps. Yet, 
Bhimasena Purusharishabha flings Salya down subtly, too, so that he does 
not seriously injure the Madra king. 

Seeing Salya supine and Karna lowering his bow in fear, all the other 
Kshatriyas become alarmed. Quickly, they throng round Bhima and say in 
placatory tones, ‘These Brahmanarishabhas are certainly great warriors! We 
must know their gotra and where they live, for who can face Radha’s son 
Karna in battle other than Drona, Rama or Pandu’s son Arjuna? 

Who can withstand Duryodhana except Devakinandana Krishna and 
Saradwan’s son Kripa? Who also can hurl Salya down except the great 
Balarama, Shuravirya Duryodhana or the Pandava Bhimasena? 

Let us not fight these excellent Brahmanas anymore, for however much a 
Brahmana offends he must be protected. At least let us first discover who 
they are, if indeed they are Brahmanas, and later consider fighting them 
with clear hearts.’ 


Having watched Bhima throw Salya down, Krishna is convinced that the 
two Brahmanas are indeed Kunti’s sons. In his quiet but immediately 
arresting voice, he says to the Kshatriyas, “The Brahmana has won the 
princess’s hand fairly.’ 

He persuades the kings to abandon battle and to return peacefully, if 
amazed and wondering, to their kingdoms. 

The other Brahmanas who have come to the event are jubilant. ‘The 
Brahmanas have proved victorious and one of us has made the princess of 
Panchala his wife!’ 

They throng round Bhima and Arjuna, who wear deerskin, and now 
make their way with some difficulty through the rapturous crowd. Having 
been pressed hard by the Kshatriya enemy, blood upon them, the two 
shuras, those heroes, emerge from the milling crowd like the full Moon and 
the Sun emerging from behind dark clouds; Krishna follows them. 

Meanwhile, in the potter’s house, Kunti waits anxiously for her sons to 
return, for today they are late indeed. Her imagination conjures all sorts of 
fell happenings that might have overtaken her sons. One moment, she 
thinks that the sons of Dhritarashtra have recognised her princes and killed 
them. Next, she trembles to think that some powerful Rakshasa, with 
powers of maya, has slain them. 

She even thinks, ‘Ah, could Vyasa himself have been a victim of 
darkness of the mind when he told my sons to come to this city?’ 

Out of her love for her sons, Kunti’s anxieties grow moment by moment. 
Then, in the stillness of late afternoon, Arjuna walks into the potter’s house, 
like the Sun appearing from behind the clouds on an overcast day; 
following him comes a throng of festive Brahmanas.” 


CANTO 193 
SWAYAMVARA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Kunti’s splendid sons come to the potter’s house, 
V/ bringing Draupadi Yagnaseni with them. Kunti is in the inner 
chamber when they call to her, ‘Mother, come and see the alms we 

have brought today.’ 

From within, in great relief at their return, she replies, without seeing the 
alms that they mean, ‘Share the alms you have brought and enjoy it 
equally.’ 

Next moment, she sees Draupadi and cries, “What have I said?’ 

She clasps the lovely, ecstatic Panchali, but a shiver of fear runs through 
Kunti. Taking Draupadi’s hand in hers, Kunti says to Yudhishtira, ‘Your 
younger brothers called Drupada’s daughter the alms they had brought 
home, and without seeing her I replied, “Share the alms you have brought 
and enjoy it equally.” 

Yudhishtira, Kururishabha, how can what I say not become a lie and yet 
no sin touch the Princess Panchali?’ 

Yudhishtira thinks for a moment, then puts his arm consolingly around 
his mother, turns to Arjuna and says, ‘Phalguna, you won her at the 
swayamvara and it is only just that you should marry her. Parantapa let us 
light a holy fire and you must take her hand with all the sacred rituals.’ 

But Arjuna says, ‘Rajan, do not make me commit this sin, for what you 
are saying does not conform to dharma. You are the eldest and you must 
marry first; then Bhima, then I, then Nakula and finally the youngest of us, 
Sahadeva. 

Think well upon what would be the right thing to do, what would be just, 
honourable and also beneficial to King Drupada. Bhima and I, the twins and 
the Princess Panchali all wait for your decision. We will do what you say.’ 

Arjuna speaks with the utmost respect and affection. Now all the 
Pandavas turn to gaze upon the peerless princess, the dark Krishnaa; and 


she, in turn, looks at not just one but at all five of them. The sons of Pandu 
then look at one another, and they all sense one another’s fervent desire. 

They sit on the floor and are all plunged in a single absorption: of 
Draupadi, and her alone. Once they have gazed at her, Kama Deva easily 
captures their hearts, paralyses their senses, and fills them with one desire: 
easily, because Brahma himself has created this princess to be more 
beautiful than any other woman on Earth. Such is her beauty that she can 
enchant any man, why, any creature that lives. 

Kuntiputra Yudhishtira looks at his younger brothers and clearly sees 
what is in their hearts. Now he remembers clearly what Krishna 
Dwaipayana, their grandsire Vyasa had said to him. 

The bull among men fears that Draupadi will divide brother against 
brother unless he chose wisely for them all. Yudhishtira says quietly, “The 
auspicious princess shall become the wife of us all.’ 

Such joy breaks out upon the faces of his brothers. 

The great Shura of the Vrishnis, Krishna, now arrives at the potter’s 
house with Rohini’s Balarama. They see Yudhishtira Ajatashatru sitting 
there, his arms graceful, mighty and long; they see his younger brothers 
brighter than flames around him. 

Krishna goes up to Kunti’s eldest son, touches that Kshatriya’s feet and 
says, ‘I am Krishna.’ 

Rohini’s son Balarama does the same. The Pandavas cry out in delight to 
see the divine Yadava brothers, who then proceed to touch the feet of Kunti, 
who is their father’s sister. 

Kurusthama Yudhishtira formally and lovingly inquires about the health 
of Krishna and Baladeva, and then asks in some amazement, ‘O Krishna, 
how did you discover us when we are disguised as Brahmanas?’ 

Krishna says with a smile, ‘Rajan, even if it is covered by ashes, fire can 
be known. Who among Manavas other than the Pandavas could do what 
Bhima and Arjuna did today? Parantapas, O sons of Pandu, the greatest 
good fortune helped you escape the fire at Varanavrata which Duryodhana 
and his conspirators lit. 

Bless you! May your fortune increase like a fire that is lit inside a hidden 
cave and then spread out to cover the Earth. But now, lest we are seen here 
and you discovered, we must return to our own lodgings.’ 

Taking Yudhishtira’s leave, Krishna, whose fortune never wanes, quickly 
leaves the potter’s house with Balarama.” 


CANTO 194 
SWAYAMVARA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “When Bhima and Arjuna leave the arena of the 

V/ swayamvara and make their way towards the potter’s house, the 

Panchala prince Dhrishtadyumna follows them discreetly. He goes 

alone, dismissing his attendants, and hides himself in a dark corner of the 
potter’s dwelling. 

As dusk falls, Bhima and Arjuna return from their evening round of 
begging alms. They bring what they have received to Yudhishtira. 

Kunti says kindly to Draupadi, ‘Sweet child, take one portion of the 
alms, and having offered it to the gods, give it away to some Brahmanas. 
Give another portion to any other atithis, guests that have come to us to be 
fed. 

Divide what remains in two halves. Give one half to Bhima, for this fair 
son of mine, who is as strong as an elephant king, this shuravirya always 
eats well. Divide what remains into six portions, my child, four of them for 
my other sons and one each for you and for me.’ 

Happily, Draupadi does as her mother-in-law asks, and those heroes eat 
the food that the princess serves them. Dhrishtadyumna watches from 
concealment as Madri’s son Sahadeva now spreads a wide bed of kusa grass 
on the floor. Each brother spreads his deerskin upon the grass and they all 
lie down to sleep, with their heads facing south. 

Kunti lies crosswise above the heads of her sons, and the princess 
Panchali at their feet. The lovely princess Krishnaa lies at the feet of the 
Pandavas even as if she is their lowly foot pillow, but she feels no shame or 
sorrow, and neither does a wrong thought of those Kururishabhas cross her 
heart. 

Those shuras begin to speak softly among themselves, while 
Dhrishtadyumna listens avidly from his hiding place; he is intrigued and 
excited by what he hears, for those princes, each one capable of being a 


Senapati, speak of nothing but vimanas, astras, war elephants, swords and 
various kinds of arrows, and of battle-axes, too. He sees how his sister lies 
contentedly at the feet of the five. 

With dawn the potter opens his front door and the Panchala prince slips 
out quietly and runs to his father to report everything he has seen and heard. 
Drupada is dejected because he does not know that it is indeed the Pandavas 
that have taken his daughter. 

As soon as his son comes into his presence, he cries, “Where is my 
Krishnaa? Who are they that have taken her from us? Has a lowborn Sudra 
or a deceitful Vaisya stamped on my head and made off with my precious 
child? O my son, has our fragrant garland of flowers been cast into a 
cemetery? 

Or perhaps some noble Kshatriya or a Dvija has won her? Ah, has some 
mean fellow set his left foot upon my crowned head and taken my 
Panchali? Ah, my prince, I would not grieve at all but be so full of joy if 
Purushottama Arjuna had married my child today! Dhrishtadyumna, are 
Kurusthama Vichitravirya’s grandsons alive? Is it indeed Arjuna who bent 
the bow and brought the target down?’”’ 


CANTO 195 
VAIVAHIKA PARVA 


\ J aisampayana said, “Dhrishtadyumna, best among princes of the 
House of the Moon, says to his father, “The youth with long reddish 
eyes, who wore deerskin and is as handsome as a Deva, who strung 

that best of bows and shot the target, was quickly thronged by festive 

Brahmanas who all paid him homage for what he had done. He looked like 

Indra of the Vajra standing among the Devas and Devarishis. 

As for Krishnaa, she held onto the youth’s deerskin and followed him as 
joyfully as a she-elephant does the lord of a herd. When the incensed 
Kshatriyas advanced on them, another hero rose to stand beside the archer. 
He tore up a big tree and rushed at the kings and princes, smashing them 
down all around him even as Yama does all the living. 

Rajan, the Kshatriyas stopped their assault and stood still, while the two 
shuras, who are like the Sun and the Moon, took Krishnaa with them and 
left the arena. I followed them discreetly to the house of a potter in the 
suburbs of our city. Inside the potter’s house there sat a woman who is like 
a flame. I am sure that she is their mother, and around her there sat three 
other splendid heroes, each one like an Agni. 

The two shuras touched the woman’s feet and bid Krishnaa do the same. 
They left Panchali with the lady and went out to beg for alms. Returning, 
they gave what they had received to Draupadi, who offered one portion of it 
to the gods, gave away another as daana to Brahmanas, gave part of what 
remained to the noble woman, and divided the rest amongst the five young 
men. Finally, she kept a little for herself and ate when the others had all 
eaten. 

O Father, when they had eaten they lay down to sleep and Krishnaa lay 
contentedly at their feet, even like a foot pillow. They lay upon a bed of 
kusa grass on which they spread their deerskins. 


Before falling asleep the five spoke amongst themselves in voices deep 
as thunderheads rumbling, and from what they spoke about they are not 
Sudras or Vaisyas, nor even Brahmanas. I have no doubt that they are 
Kshatriyas, for they spoke knowingly of things that only bulls among 
warriors discuss. 

Father, it does seem that our hopes have not been in vain, and that what 
we heard about the Pandavas having escaped the fire in the house of lac is 
indeed true. From the manner in which the youth strung the great bow and 
shot the mark, and from what I heard them say to one another in the potter’s 
house, I am certain, O King, that these are the sons of Pritha disguised as 
Brahmanas.’ 

Drupada is overjoyed and he sends his priest to the brothers to discover 
if they are indeed the Pandavas. Coming to the potter’s house, the priest 
lauds them, and delivers Drupada’s message. 

‘Exalted ones, Drupada, most munificent king, has sent me to ask who 
you are. He saw the feat of this youth who shot the mark, and his joy was 
great. Tell us to which race, clan and family you belong, and trampling the 
heads of your enemies, complete the joy of the Panchala king and his kin, 
and mine as well. 

King Pandu was a dear friend of Drupada, who loved him as he did 
himself. Drupada always wanted to give his daughter in marriage to a son 
of Pandu. Flawlessly handsome Shuras, Drupada has long wanted Arjuna of 
the long and mighty arms to marry Panchali by winning her hand at the 
swayamvara. 

If that is what has happened, ah, nothing could be more auspicious or 
fortunate.’ 

Delivering his message, the priest falls silent and waits for their reply. 
Yudhishtira says to Bhima, ‘Offer the Brahmana padya and arghya; he is 
Drupada’s Kulaguru and deserves exceptional reverence and worship.’ 

Bhima washes the feet of the Brahmana and offers him arghya, while the 
priest sits there happily, at ease. 

Yudhishtira then says to him, ‘The Panchala king did not give his 
daughter away freely, by Kshatriya custom, but by a trial of skill. Drupada 
should ask no questions about the race, clan or family of this hero who won 
the princess’s hand fairly. Let us say that his every question has already 
been answered by the stringing of the bow and the bringing down of the 
target. 


This brilliant shura won Krishnaa amidst the gathered Kshatriyas and 
brought her away. After that, let not the king of the House of Soma 
entertain any regrets about what happened, for they will only serve to make 
him unhappy and not to answer any questions that he might have. 

Let it suffice to say that whatever the king wished for his beautiful 
princess, who bears every auspicious mark upon her person, will come to 
pass. No one weak or lowborn, none that is not a great master of arms could 
have strung that bow or shot that mark. Once done, the feat cannot be 
undone either, not by anyone in this world. 

It does not become the king to grieve for his daughter today, indeed to 
grieve over what is inexorable. Fate will take its course now.’ 

Even as Yudhishtira speaks, another messenger arrives hotfoot from 
Drupada and announces, ‘The banquet is ready!’” 


CANTO 196 
VAIVAHIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “The messenger says, ‘King Drupada has 

\/ prepared a grand feast for the bridegroom and his party. Finish your 

nitya karma, your daily rituals, and come quickly. The Princess 

Krishnaa’s wedding will be solemnised there. Do not delay. Look, Drupada 

sends these chariots adorned with golden lotuses and drawn by the noblest 
steeds for you. Ride in them to the palace of the king of the Panchalas.’ 

Soon, those Kuru bulls send Drupada’s Brahmana back. They help Kunti 
and Draupadi into one of the gleaming chariots and, climbing into the 
others themselves, drive to the palace. 

Meanwhile, O Bharata, his priest brings back Yudhishtira’s message to 
Drupada and that king prepares a subtle test of sorts to find out to which 
varna the five young men belong. He has fruit and sanctified garlands set 
out; he fetches shining coats of armour and war-shields, the keenest swords, 
fine horses and chariots, the best bows and arrows, and rare lances, battle- 
axes and spears worked with gold; he has carpets on view, fine bedsteads 
and other expensive furnishings and artefacts; and he also puts on show 
cattle, seeds for sowing and some farming implements. 

Arriving at Drupada’s palace, Kunti and her sons enter the king’s inner 
chambers. Joyfully the women of the palace welcome her, with honour and 
worship. Rajan, Drupada, his ministers, his sons, his friends and attendants 
all look at the Narapumgavas, the sons of Pandu, each one with the gait of a 
lion, wearing deerskin, their eyes like those of great bulls, their shoulders 
wide, their arms long and powerful, hanging at their side like great and 
sinewy snakes, and the Panchalas are delighted. 

They see how those shuras sit without hesitation and indeed with 
comfortable familiarity, upon the fine chairs to which they are shown, with 
silken footstools, in order of their ages at the king’s high table. When they 
sit, liveried servants, male and female, bring fare of kings to them, wine in 


crystal decanters and rare delicacies steaming on silver and golden platters. 
They eat and drink with relish and discerning appreciation: the wine and 
every kind of meat as well, again with easy familiarity. 

When they have dined, those young men look with keen interest at the 
weapons and the other warrior’s things that Drupada has shrewdly put on 
display, ignoring everything else which might have attracted a Brahmana or 
a Vaisya. Drupada and Dhrishtadyumna see all this, as do their ministers, 
and they are certain that the young men, those sons of Kunti, are Kshatriya 
princes. The Panchalas’ joy swells.” 


CANTO 197 
VAIVAHIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “A beaming Drupada now speaks to Yudhishtira, 
\/ in the form used to address a Brahmana. 

‘Should we know you to be Kshatriyas, Brahmanas, or as Devas 
who have disguised yourselves as Brahmanas to range over the Earth, and 
have come here to win our Krishnaa’s hand? We are full of uncertainty and 
beg you to tell us the truth! How happy you will make us by dispelling our 
doubts. 

Bane of your enemies, has fate been kind to us? Tell us the truth gladly, 
for the truth is better suited to Kshatriyas than sacrifices or the dedication of 
sacred tanks. Do not hide the truth from us any longer, O you who are as 
handsome as a Deva, O Parantapa. I must make arrangements for my 
child’s wedding in accordance with the varna to which you belong.’ 

Yudhishtira replies, smiling, ‘O King, let every anxiety leave your heart, 
and let it fill with joy. For your heart’s fondest desire has come true. My 
lord, we are Kshatriyas, we are the sons of Pandu. 

I am Yudhishtira, the eldest son of Kunti, and these are Bhimasena and 
Arjuna, who took your daughter from the swayamvara from amidst the 
gathering of kings. The twins and Kunti are with Krishnaa. Narapumgava, 
we are Kshatriyas, so banish the sorrow from your heart. O King, like a 
lotus, your daughter has only been moved from one lake to another. Rajan, 
you are our revered elder, our superior and our main sanctuary. I have told 
you the truth, the whole truth.’ 

Drupada is rapturous; his eyes shine and for some moments he is 
speechless for delight. Controlling himself with some effort, he finally asks 
Yudhishtira how they had escaped from Varanavrata. Yudhishitira describes 
their escape from the burning house of lac in detail. When Kunti’s son 
finishes, Drupada has stern censure for Dhritarashtra, and he has warm 


reassurance to offer Yudhishtira. Drupada swears to restore the Pandava to 
his ancestral throne. 

Drupada says that Kunti, the Pandavas and Krishnaa must live with him, 
and he shows his guests the greatest regard. The Panchala king then says to 
Yudhishtira, “Mahabaho, let Arjuna marry my daughter on this auspicious 
day. Let us begin the wedding ceremonies.’ 

Yudhishtira Dharmaputra replies, ‘Maharaja, I must also marry.’ 

Drupada says, “Then you take my daughter’s hand yourself, or let her 
marry any of your brothers that you choose for her.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘O King, we shall all marry your daughter and she 
shall become the wife of all five of us, even as our mother says she should 
be. I am not married, neither is Bhima. Arjuna won your jewel-like 
daughter’s hand. We have always shared every precious jewel that we have 
ever got; best of kings, we cannot make an exception for this the most 
priceless one. 

Krishnaa will become the wife of us all; one after the other, each of us 
shall take her hand before the sacred fire.’ 

Drupada cries, ‘O Scion of Kuru, it has been said that one man may 
matry many wives, but never that one woman can marry many husbands! 
Kaunteya, you are pure and you know the laws of dharma well. You cannot 
commit this sin, which mocks both common practice and the Vedas. O 
Kshatriya, why has your mind been darkened by this vile thought?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Rajan, dharma is subtle; we do not understand the 
course of fate. Let us follow the path that great men of bygone yugas did. 
My tongue has never spoken a lie, and my heart never turns towards a sin. 
My mother commands us to share Draupadi equally among ourselves, and 
my heart accepts it, as well. 

Hence, O King, for me what I propose is consonant with dharma. Let us 
do this without any fear; no sin will accrue from it.’ 

Drupada says, ‘Son of Kunti, let your mother, my son Dhrishtadyumna 
and you decide among yourselves what is proper. Tell me what you decide 
and tomorrow I will do what you say is dharma.’ 

O Bharata, even as Yudhishtira, Kunti and Dhrishtadyumna deliberate 
among themselves, Dwaipayana on his wanderings arrives in Drupada’s 
palace.” 


CANTO 198 
VAIVAHIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


everyone else present rises and pays homage to the enlightened Rishi 

Vyasa. The Mahatman greets them in turn, asks after their welfare 
and sits on the floor upon a golden carpet. He, of measureless tejas, asks the 
others to sit, as well, and those best of men do so, upon their costly chairs. 

In a while, Prihasta’s son gently brings up the matter at hand with the 
Sage, regarding the marriage of his daughter Draupadi. 

Drupada says, ‘Muni, how can one woman become the wife of five men 
without sinning? Is this possible? I beg you tell me the truth about this 
strangest thing.’ 

Vyasa replies, “Rajan, this ancient practice was discontinued since it is 
against both Vedic injunction and common custom. But I would like to hear 
what each of you thinks about it.’ 

Drupada speaks first, “To my mind it is a sin because it is against both 
the Veda and custom. Dvijottama, I have never seen, anywhere, one woman 
having many husbands. The great men of ages gone by also never did such 
a thing. No wise man ever dares to commit a sin. I cannot countenance this 
in good conscience. To me it seems immoral and adharma.’ 

After Drupada has finished, Dhrishtadyumna speaks. ‘Dvijarishabha, if 
an elder brother is a man of character how can he go to his younger 
brother’s wife? The ways of dharma are always subtle, and we cannot fully 
fathom them. In the most obvious things, we cannot say with conviction 
what is dharma and what is not. Then, how can we agree to this unusual 
proposal with a clear conscience? O Brahmana, how can I say, “Let 
Draupadi become the common wife of five brothers?” 

Now Yudhishtira says, ‘My tongue never speaks a lie and my heart never 
veers towards a sin. My heart approves of this, and it cannot be sinful. Also, 
I have heard in the Purana of Jatila, a woman of great virtue, of the race of 


\ J aisampayana said, “The Pandavas, the illustrious Panchala king and 


Gautama, who married seven Rishis. Another Sage’s daughter, born of a 
tree, married the ten brothers, all named Prachetas, all of them Mahatmas 
and illumined by great tapasya. 

Best of those that know dharma, to obey one’s elders and betters is 
always dharma. Among all elders and betters, there is none to equal one’s 
mother. Our mother has told us to share Draupadi whom we brought to her 
as alms, equally among ourselves. Most of all, Dvijottama, I consider the 
five of us marrying the princess to be the highest dharma.’ 

Kunti says, ‘I agree with my virtuous Yudhishtira. O Brahmana, I am 
terrified if what I say to my sons should prove a lie. Must I not be saved 
from the sin of falsehood?’ 

When they have all finished, Vyasa says, “Truly, Susheela, how will you 
be saved from the sin of untruth? For truth is Sanatana Dharma. O Panchala 
Pathe, Drupada, I will not speak of this ancient practice before all of you, 
but to you in private. I will tell you when this form of marriage was 
established and why it is ancient and eternal. But this much I will say here: 
Yudhishtira speaks the truth and what he says is dharma!’ 

The great master Krishna Dwaipayana, the illustrious Vyasa, rises, takes 
Drupada’s hand and leads him into a private chamber. Kunti, her sons and 
Dhrishtadyumna wait for them to return. Alone together in the other room, 
Vyasa begins his profound discourse to the great king on the subject of 
sacred polyandry, and why it is not sinful.” 


CANTO 199 
VAIVAHIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


the Devas once performed a Mahayagna in the Naimisa vana. During 
that sacrifice, Vivaswat’s son Yama, Death, was appointed to perform 
the animal sacrifices that were made as offerings. 

Long that yagna lasted and while it continued Yama slew the sanctified 
beasts, but during all that time he did not take the life of a single human. 
Death, O King, left humankind alone and their numbers swelled greatly on 
Earth; their population was enormous. 

Soma, Indra, Varuna, Kubera, the Sadhyas, the Rudras, the Vasus, the 
Aswin twins and the other celestial ones went in alarm to Brahma Prajapati, 
Creator of the universe. 

They said to the Lord of Creation, “The race of Manavas has increased 
frighteningly on Earth, and we have come to you for protection.” 

The Pitamaha said, “You have nothing to fear from the humans. You are 
all immortal, while they are not.” 

The Devas said, “The mortals have become immortal; there is no 
difference anymore between us and them. We are unhappy; we do not like 
them to be equal to us. Make some distinction between the races of Swarga 
and Bhumi.” 

Brahma said, “Vivaswat’s son is absorbed in the Mahayagna and that is 
why mortal men have stopped dying. But when Yama’s part in the great 
sacrifice is over, men will die again. Infused with the power of all of you, he 
will sweep away millions of Manavas, weakened by time and unduly long 
lives.” 

Reassured by what the First-born God said, the Devas returned to the 
Naimisa vana, where the yagna was underway. Sitting beside the 
Bhagirathi, they suddenly saw a great many golden lotuses being borne 
upon the river, and were wonderstruck. Indra wanted to discover from 


\ J aisampayana continued, “Vyasa says to Drupada, ‘In the elder days, 


where the golden blooms had come and he traced the river back to her 
source, from where the Ganga springs. 

He saw there a woman as splendid as fire, bathing in the stream and all 
the while she wept. As her tears fell into the water they turned into golden 
lotuses. The Vajradhari went up to the woman and asked, “Who are you, 
beautiful one? Tell me, why do you cry?” 

The woman replied, “O Sakra, you can only know who I am and why I 
am crying, if, O Devendra, you come with me. Follow me and you will 
know everything.” 

Indra followed her as she led the way. Soon, he saw a handsome youth 
and a young woman of great beauty sitting upon a throne and playing dice 
upon a peak of Himavat. 

Indra, king of the Devas, said to the youth, “Intelligent boy, I am the 
master of the universe.” 

However, the young man was so absorbed in the dice that he did not 
respond to Indra, who grew furious and cried again, “I am lord of the 
universe!” 

The youth was the Lord Mahadeva and only glanced at Indra and smiled 
to see him enraged. That momentary look froze Indra where he stood and 
he could not move but stood there like some stake. 

When the dice game was over, Isana Siva said to the weeping woman, 
“Bring Sakra here. I will make sure that pride never enters his heart again.” 

As soon as the woman touched Indra he fell upon the ground. The 
glorious Lord Isana said to him, “Never be arrogant again, Sakra. You have 
great strength and vigour. Roll this stone away from the cavern that it 
covers; enter the cave and you will see some others there, all of them as 
brilliant as the Sun, all of them your equals.” 

Indra rolled away the rock and saw a great cave upon the breast of that 
king of mountains. Within the cave were four others exactly like him. 

Seized by anxiety, Indra cried, “Shall I also become like these?” 

Then the Lord Girisha glared at Indra, and said in anger, “You of a 
hundred yagnas, down into the cave with you! You have insulted me from 
your pride.” 

His limbs turning weak with shock, Indra trembled like the leaf of a 
Himalayan fig-tree at Siva’s dreadful curse. His hands folded, shaking from 
head to foot, Indra said in a quivering voice to the God who rides the Bull, 


the fierce Lord of myriad manifestations, “O Bhava, you are the Lord of the 
universe!” 

The God of terrific tejas smiled, “Those that are vain like you never find 
my grace. Once, the four inside the cave were all like you. Down into the 
cave with you and lie there for a while. All your fates shall be the same. 
You will be born into the world of men, where you will face untold 
hardship, and with much effort and after much travail, you will kill 
thousands and thousands of Manavas, and by that punya, you will return to 
Indraloka. 

Yes, you will experience and accomplish everything that I have said and 
much more, besides.” 

Their glory lost, the four Indras in the cave said, “May we descend from 
on high to the world of men, where salvation is hard to gain. But let the 
Devas Dharma, Vayu, Maghavat and the Aswin twins become our fathers, 
and beget us upon our terrestrial mothers. We will fight the Manavas on 
Bhumi with weapons of men and the gods, and reclaim Indraloka.” 

The Vajradhari said to Mahadeva, “I will create a Manava with an amsa 
of mine, a man of great tejas, to become the fifth of these to be born on 
Earth to raze the humans.” 

The first four Indras were Vishwabhuk, Bhutadhaman, Sibi, Santi, and 
Tejaswin was the fifth Indra of yore. And Siva Pinakin, from his great 
mercy, granted the five Indras their wish. He also declared that the woman 
of exceptional beauty, she who had been weeping, who was none other than 
the Devi Sri herself, would become the wife in the world of all five of them. 

Taking the five Indras with him, Lord Isana went to Narayana of 
fathomless tejas, to the infinite, uncreated, eldest, eternal One, Soul of 
universes without limit or count. Narayana approved of what they meant to 
do. 

The five Indras were born into the world of men. Narayana plucked two 
hairs from his body, one black and the other white; he sent the two hairs 
down the mandalas and into the wombs of two women of the race of Yadu: 
Devaki and Rohini. The white hair became Balarama and the black one 
Krishna, who was Narayana himself. 

The Indras who had been sealed in the cave upon Himavat are none 
other than the sons of Pandu, of extraordinary energy. Amongst them 
Arjuna, who is Savyasachin the perfectly ambidextrous, is the amsavatara 
of Sakra. 


Rajan, these Pandavas are indeed those same Indras of old, and your 
daughter of matchless beauty, Draupadi, born to become their wife, is the 
Devi Sri herself. Otherwise, how could she have been born as she was, so 
exceptionally, rising out of the very Earth at your yagna, lustrous as the Sun 
or the Moon, and the fragrance of her spreading for a yojana on every side?’ 

Vyasa Muni pauses, then suddenly says, ‘Rajan, I now give you occult 
vision: see for yourself who these sons of Pandu actually are. See them in 
their sacred and unearthly forms of old!’ 

Vyasa of great spiritual power gifts mystic vision to the king and 
Drupada sees all five Pandavas in their pristine forms. He sees them with 
divine bodies of light, wearing golden crowns and unworldly garlands. 
Each one is an Indra, irradiant as Agni or Surya, shimmering with 
ornaments of heaven, ever-youthful and handsome past describing, their 
chests wide and great and all of them some twenty feet tall at least. 

Incomparable celestial raiment they wear, the most wonderfully fragrant 
garlands. Drupada sees them as three-eyed Sivas, or Vasus, Rudras or 
dazzling Adityas. The Panchala king sees Arjuna as Indra himself, in amsa, 
and is enthralled, as well as wonderstruck and bemused by the deep and 
subtle mystery of what he sees: that manifestation of the power of heaven. 

Drupada then turns to look, with mystic eyes, at his daughter, most 
beautiful of all women in the world, and now sees her truly as splendid as 
the Fire or the Moon, a Goddess; his heart knows beyond doubt now that 
she is indeed born to be the wife of the five Indras, for her beauty, her glory, 
and also her renown. 

When he sees that vision, Drupada touches Vyasa’s feet, crying, 
‘Maharishi, no miracle is beyond you!’ 

Dwaipayana continues merrily, ‘Once, in an asrama there lived a Rishi 
and his daughter, who was chaste, accomplished and beautiful but she has 
not found a husband. The young woman worshiped the Lord Siva with a 
stern tapasya. Pleased by her devotions, Mahadeva Sankara, the benign, 
appeared before her and said, “What boon do you want?” 

The young woman said over and over, “Lord, give me a great and 
worthy husband!” 

The best of Gods replied, “Susheela, you will have five excellent 
husbands.” 

She said, “Sankara, I want just one husband, Lord, who owns every 
virtue.” 


The God of gods said, “Kanye, you said five times to me, ‘Lord, give me 
a husband.’ You shall have five wonderful husbands: not in this life but in 
another one, in the future.” 

Drupada, this daughter of yours, of unearthly beauty, is that young 
woman, and the flawless Krishnaa born into the race of Prihasta, is destined 
to become the wife of five husbands. It is the Devi Sri herself, who 
performed intense penance for the sake of the Pandavas, who has been born 
as your daughter from the fire of your Mahayagna. 

Because of her own karma, the peerless Devi whom all the gods and 
other celestials serve, will marry five husbands; indeed, Brahma created 
Draupadi just for this. Now I have told you all there is to know, Raja 
Drupada, and now you must do as you want.’” 


CANTO 200 
VAIVAHIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Drupada says, ‘Mahamuni, I knew nothing of all 
\/ this when I objected to my daughter marrying all five Pandavas. Now 
that I know, how can I go against the will of the Gods? I will do as 

you say, for the knot of destiny cannot be undone. 

We do not decide anything that happens in this world, and while I had 
once thought that my child would marry one husband, she will now marry 
five. Draupadi herself said five times to Mahadeva, ‘Lord, give me a 
husband!’ Siva himself gave her the boon of marrying five husbands, and 
He knows the dharma or adharma of this. 

As for me, I cannot sin by doing what Sankara has ordained, be it right 
or wrong. I am content: let the five princes marry my daughter happily, with 
the appropriate rituals!’ 

Dwaipayana, the illustrious, comes to Yudhishtira and says, ‘Today is an 
auspicious day, O Pandava, for the Moon has entered the Pushyami 
nakshatra. Marry the Princess Krishnaa this very day, you first and then 
your brothers as well.’ 

When Vyasa has spoken, Drupada Yagnasena and his son 
Dhrishtadyumna quickly make preparations for the wedding. The king 
brings out numberless priceless wedding gifts. He then fetches his daughter 
Krishnaa, who has bathed and put on royal finery and ornaments past value, 
to the kalyana mantapa. 

All the king’s well-wishers, friends, kinsmen and relations, his ministers 
and countless Brahmanas and the common people of his city, besides, come 
to the princess’ unusual wedding. They are seated according to their 
respective stations. 

Graced by that assembly of great men, its sprawling courtyard strewn 
with lotuses and lilies, striking lines of warriors standing mighty around and 


within, diamonds and every other precious stone sparkling upon its walls, 
King Drupada’s palace looks like the sky with the stars shimmering in it. 

Having bathed, putting on earrings, the costliest silken robes, smearing 
their magnificent physiques with sandalwood paste, the Kuru princes 
perform their daily religious rituals; then, with their priest Dhaumya, bright 
as agni, they enter the wedding hall, one after the other, in order of age, 
their hearts alight, like great bulls going into a cowpen. 

Dhaumya, knower of the Veda, lights the sacred fire and, chanting the 
appropriate mantras, pours ghee as libation into the flames. First, he calls 
Yudhishtira and marries him to Draupadi. Taking each other’s hands, the 
bride and groom walk around the fire. 

When that ceremony is complete, Dhaumya takes his leave of 
Yudhishtira, jewel among Kshatriyas, and leaves the palace. After this, 
those Kuru Maharathas, richly clad and adorned, marry the Panchala 
princess, first among all women, one after the other, over the next four days, 
with Dhaumya as their priest for each wedding. 

Rajan, the Devarishi Dwaipayana told me a most wonderful thing which 
happens to Draupadi during those five nights, each spent with a different 
husband —that she of the slender waist is a virgin afresh on every one! 

When the five weddings are solemnised, Drupada gives those 
Maharathas, his sons-in-law, untold gifts and wealth. He gives them one 
hundred chariots with golden standards, each drawn by four horses of the 
noblest bloodlines, all of them with bridles of gold. He gives them a 
hundred elephants, all with the most auspicious marks upon their temples 
and faces, caparisoned richly, so they seem like a hundred mountains with 
golden peaks. 

Drupada gives the Pandavas a hundred women to serve them, all 
beautiful and in the prime of their youth, all richly attired, bejewelled and 
wearing wildflower garlands. Yes, with Agni as the sacred witness to his 
gifts, the king of the House of the Moon gives those princes of unworldly 
splendour gold, the rarest, finest, costliest garments, and invaluable 
ornaments of antiquity, craftsmanship and brilliance past compare. 

Having married Krishnaa, who is like another Sri, as well as incalculable 
wealth, the mighty Pandavas live happily, truly like five Indras, in the 
capital of the Panchala king.” 


CANTO 201 
VAIVAHIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “When the sons of Pandu have married his 

\/ daughter, all anxiety and fear leaves King Drupada; why, he does not 

fear the Devas anymore. After the weddings, the noble women of 

Drupada’s antahpura come to Kunti, and introducing themselves, telling her 
their names; one by one, they worship her by laying their heads at her feet. 

Wearing resonant red silk, and the auspicious and ceremonial thread 
around her wrists, Krishnaa also pays reverence to her mother-in-law and 
stands happily before her, with folded hands. 

Overwhelmed by affection, Pritha blesses Draupadi, of matchless beauty, 
who bears every auspicious mark upon her person, and has the sweetest 
nature and the noblest character. 

Kunti says, ‘May you be as precious to your husbands as Sachi is to 
Indra, Swaha to Agni, Rohini to Soma, Damayanti to Nala, Bhadra to 
Vasiravana, Arundhati to Vasishta, as Sri Lakshmi is to Narayana! Sweet 
child, may you become the mother of long-lived, heroic children, and may 
you have everything that will make you happy. 

May fortune and prosperity always wait upon you. May your husbands 
perform Mahayagnas, and may you always be devoted to them. Let your 
days pass in welcoming and caring for guests and strangers that come to 
your home, holy men and the elderly, children and betters. 

May you become Queen of Kurujangala in its capital, beside your 
husband King Yudhishitra Dharmaputra. My daughter, may you gift the 
whole world, subdued by your husbands of incomparable strength, to 
Brahmanas at an Aswamedha yagna. 

Accomplished child, may the rarest gemstones on Earth, those of great 
virtue, come to belong to you, fortunate one, and may you be joyful for a 
full hundred years. Daughter-in-law, as I rejoice today to look at you 


wearing the red silk of your wedding, I will rejoice again when I see you 
become the mother of a son!’ 

When the sons of Pandu are married, Krishna sends them lavish gifts of 
golden ornaments set with giant pearls and lapis lazuli, black gems. He 
sends rare and priceless robes made in many kingdoms, as well as the 
softest, finest blankets and skins of great value, and precious carpets and 
expensive bedsteads and palanquins. 

Hundreds of shining vessels, chalices, goblets, and other ware he sends, 
all encrusted with jewels. Krishna gifts them young, accomplished and 
beautiful women servants, thousands of them, also from diverse and far- 
flung countries: all these richly attired and wearing costly ornaments. He 
gives them masterfully trained elephants, all from the land of Madra, 
countless fine horses in golden harness, and chariots, too, with fine steeds, 
with large teeth, yoked. 

Madhava Krishna, of fathomless soul, sends them gold coins, crores and 
crores of them, in separate piles. Wanting to please Krishna, Yudhishtira the 
just accepts all his gifts joyfully.” 


CANTO 202 
VIDURAGAMANA PARVA 


aisampayana said, “Now their spies in Drupada’s city bring news to 
\/ all the Kshatriya kings and princes who had come to her swayamvara 
of how Draupadi has married the five Pandavas. They tell their 
masters that it was Arjuna, greatest of warriors and archers, who shot the 
target, and that he who had dashed Salya to the ground and terrified the 
others with the tree he pulled up, who had stood utterly fearless facing them 
all, was Bhimasena, razer of enemy armies, whose very touch is enough to 
kill his adversaries. 

The kings are amazed at how the Pandavas had managed to remain so 
long disguised as docile Brahmanas, and wonder how they are still alive for 
they have all heard how Kunti and her sons had been burnt to death in the 
house of lac. They even think of them as having returned from the dead. 

The kings of the Earth remember again Purochana’s vile treachery, and 
say, ‘A curse on Bhishma, a curse on Dhritarashtra of the race of Kuru!’ 

When the swayamvara is over and they hear the news that Draupadi has 
married the Pandavas, the kings that still remained in Drupada’s city set out 
each to his own kingdom. When Duryodhana hears that Arjuna of the white 
steeds has won Panchali’s hand, he falls into dark dejection. His heart 
heavy, he sets out with Sakuni, Asvatthama, Karna and Kripa for 
Hastinapura. 

Flushed with the humiliation of it, he says softly, feelingly, to his 
brother, ‘If Arjuna had not disguised himself as a Brahmana he could never 
have won Draupadi. No one recognised him. My lord, I fear that Fate rules 
supreme; all our efforts have been in vain, my brother, and the wretched 
Pandavas are still alive!’ 

Cursing Purochana for his ineptitude, they arrive in Hastinapura, utterly 
defeated and depressed. Now they see that the mighty Pandavas have 
escaped with their lives and are also bound by their marriage to the 


formidable Drupada. They think of the prowess of Sikhandin and the fire- 
born Dhrishtadyumna and their hearts quail. 

On the other hand, when Vidura hears that the Pandavas have won 
Draupadi and that Dhritarashtra’s son has returned humiliated to 
Hastinapura, he is delighted. Vidura Kshattri goes to Dhritarashtra and says, 
‘Great fortune has come to the Kurus!’ 

Dhritarashtra also cries gleefully, ‘Such great fortune, Vidura, such 
luck!’ 

Dhritarashtra orders fine ornaments to be wrought for Draupadi, and 
declares that Duryodhana and the princess must be received with 
unprecedented pomp and ceremony and festivity in Hastinapura. 

When he pauses to draw breath in his fervour, Vidura quietly tells him 
that the Pandavas have won Draupadi for their bride; he tells Dhritarashtra 
that the sons of Pandu are alive and that they now live with great honour in 
the palace of Drupada. He does not fail to mention that all Drupada’s 
powerful kinsmen and allies, every one the lord of a great army, and many 
other Kshatriya kings who had come to the swayamvara, have now aligned 
themselves with Kunti’s princes. 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Those children are as dear to me as they are to 
Pandu! No, they are dearer to me. Let me tell you why, Vidura. My heroic 
nephews are alive and well. They have garnered many friends and relations 
as allies, all these very powerful. Tell me who would not want the great 
Drupada and his kinsmen for an ally?’ 

Vidura says, ‘My lord may your wisdom not change for a hundred 
years!’ and returns to his own palace. 

Then, Rajan, Duryodhana and Radheya Karna come into the presence of 
the blind king. 

Duryodhana says, ‘Lord, we can never speak freely in Vidura’s presence. 
Now we have found you alone and shall speak our minds. We heard what 
you said, O King. What is this that you mean to do? Do you truly look upon 
the fortune of our enemies as if it was your own, that you spoke so lovingly 
and proudly to Vidura about the sons of Pandu? 

Sinless, you do not do what you should be doing — everything in your 
power to undermine the Pandavas, to destroy them. O my father, we must 
confer and act quickly before the Pandavas devour us all, with our friends, 
children and kinsmen!’” 


CANTO 203 
VIDURAGAMANA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Dhritarashtra replies, ‘I also want to do exactly 

\/ as you would have me but should I betray my intention to Vidura by 

even a muscle twitching? That is why, my son, I praised the 

Pandavas and spoke affectionately of them. I would not betray what is 
really in my heart to Vidura, by the smallest sign. 

Suyodhana, Vidura has gone, so now tell me what you think we should 
do, and Radheya, you also share your thoughts with me.’ 

Duryodhana says, ‘Father, let us use subtle and cunning Brahmanas to 
create division between the sons of Kunti and Madri’s twins. Or let us bribe 
Drupada, his sons, and all his ministers with vast wealth so that they 
abandon the cause of Kunti’s son Yudhishtira. 

Or let our agents persuade the Pandavas to remain in Drupada’s 
kingdom, convincing them, individually and separately, how dangerous it 
would be for them to return to Hastinapura. Let the best of our spies create 
dissension among the brothers, by sowing the seeds of envy among them. 

Better, let them incite Draupadi against her husbands; she has five of 
them, the task should not be difficult. Or let our secret men whisper such 
words that make the Pandavas displeased with Krishnaa; if they show 
displeasure, any of them, she will not be happy. 

Best of all, let us send our finest assassins to kill just Bhima. He is the 
strongest of them; without him, the rest are nothing. Since we were young, 
they always depended on his strength to fly in our faces as they chose. If 
Bhima dies, they will not have the nerve to try to regain their kingdom. 

My lord, Arjuna is certainly invincible in battle — as long as Bhima 
stands behind him! Without Bhima, Arjuna is not a fourth part of the archer 
that Radheya Karna is. If Bhimasena dies, the Pandavas will fear us and 
abandon every hope of recovering the kingdom. 


Or if they do come here and prove to be docile, we will grind them 
underfoot. Else, we can seduce them with the most luscious women, and 
turn Krishnaa against them. Or let us have them brought here, and then kill 
them all secretly. 

Father, choose whichever of these methods appears to you to be the best. 
Time flies, and we must strike quickly, one way or another, before their 
bonds with Drupada Rajarishabha grow even stronger, and their relationship 
with him takes deep root. Once that happens, we will not succeed. 

Father, this is how I think we should deal with the sons of Pandu. You be 
the judge of the worth of my thoughts. And now, Karna, tell us what you 
think.’” 


CANTO 204 
VIDURAGAMANA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana continued, “Karna says, ‘Duryodhana, I do not concur 

\/ with your thoughts. O Perpetuator of the Kuru race, none of these 

methods will succeed against the Pandavas. Shuraveerya, haven’t 

you tried such methods before and always failed to kill your enemies? That 

was when they lived here with you. That was when they were young and 
callow; and you still could not harm them. 

Now they are far away; they are full-grown men. You cannot hope to 
bring Kunti’s sons to grief with any of these subtle, underhand methods. 
This is my firm belief. It seems that Fate herself colludes with the 
Pandavas; they want to recover the kingdom of their fathers and no power 
in the world can hurt or stop them. 

You will never succeed in dividing them against one another. How can 
five brothers who have married the same woman ever be divided? No agent 
or spy of ours can hope to turn Krishnaa against them; do not forget that she 
chose them for husbands when they appeared before her as indigents. Will 
she abandon them now when she knows who they are, now that they 
prosper again? Besides, women always want to have many husbands and 
Krishnaa has five. You can never turn her heart against them. 

As for Drupada, the Panchala king is honest to a fault, and a man of 
dharma. There is no lust for wealth in him, or any greed. Even if you offer 
him the whole Kuru kingdom, he will not betray the Pandavas or turn 
against them. Drishtadyumna is no less than his father and has always been 
attached to Pandu’s sons. 

No, you cannot harm the Pandavas by any covert or cunning means in 
your power. However, Narapumgava, bull among men, we can attack them 
openly and kill them in battle when they are unprepared! We are stronger 
than the Panchala king; let us strike now when they do not expect us to. Let 
us strike and kill them all without mercy or scruple. 


Son of Gandhari, Gandhareya, before they muster their numberless 
chariots and allies, and loyal clansmen, strike! Before the mighty Panchala 
king and his sons decide to attack us, attack them first! Before the Vrishni, 
Krishna, comes to Drupada’s city with the Yadava host to help win back 
their kingdom for the Pandavas, my lord Dhritarashtra, strike! For there is 
nothing—wealth, every enjoyment, kingdom—that Krishna will not 
sacrifice for Pandu’s sons. 

The magnificent Bharata conquered all the Earth just by his own 
prowess. Indra won sovereignty over the three worlds just by his might. O 
King, prowess and valour are the ways of the Kshatriya; Kshtriyarishabha, 
might is the first virtue of a hero. 

So let us immediately take our great army, with its four kinds of forces, 
to the Panchala kingdom, crush Drupada and drag the Pandavas back here, 
powerless. The Pandavas cannot be subdued by conciliation, gifts or bribes, 
or by cunning division. You must vanquish them in battle, and having done 
so, Duryodhana, rule this Earth unopposed. 

I see no other means to achieve what we want.’ 

Dhritarashtra hears Karna out and praises him fulsomely. The king says, 
‘Sutaputra, you are not only a great warrior but have much wisdom, as well. 
Your view that we must take arms against the enemy suits you well, noble 
one. However, you both must consult Bhishma, Drona and Vidura, also, 
before deciding what must be done, which will benefit us.’ 

Dhritarashtra summons all those great ones and takes their counsel.” 


CANTO 205 
VIDURAGAMANA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “When Dhritarashtra asks Bhishma for his advice, 

\/ the patriarch says, ‘Dhritarashtra, I can never endorse a war with the 

sons of Pandu, for Pandu was as dear to me as you are, and Kunti’s 

sons are as precious to me as Gandhari’s. I must protect them exactly as I 
do your sons, Dhritarashtra. 

I love the Pandavas as well as all the Kurus do; nothing should lead us 
into battle against them. Rather, make peace with Kunti’s princes; bring 
them home and give them half the kingdom, for this is beyond doubt the 
ancestral kingdom of those best among the Kurus, as well. 

Duryodhana, if you look at this kingdom as belonging to your father so 
do the Pandavas see it as being their father’s. If Pandu’s magnificent sons 
do not inherit this kingdom, how can you, or indeed any other scion of the 
race of Bharata? 

If you think of yourself as having lawfully inherited this kingdom, I 
believe that they can also think the same, and before you. Quietly give them 
half the kingdom, keeping half for yourself. Narapumgava, this will be best 
for everyone. If you do otherwise, evil will befall each one of us, and you 
will cover yourself in shame and dishonour. 

Duryodhana, a good name and honour are the very root of one’s 
strength; do everything you can to maintain them. It is said that he who has 
lost his reputation lives in vain. Kaurava, as long as a man has fame and 
honour, he does not die. A man lives as long as his honour lasts, and dies 
when he loses his reputation. 

Son of Gandhari, act in accordance with your noble birth; act as a Kuru 
should. Mahabaho, do as your ancestors would have done. We are fortunate 
that the Pandavas did not die, that Kunti still lives. We are fortunate that the 
wretched Purochana died himself but did not succeed in his vile attempt on 
their lives. 


From the day that I heard Kunti’s sons had died in a fire, Gandhareya, I 
was sick at heart and hardly able to meet or speak to anyone. 
Purushavyaghra, when the people heard that Kunti had perished they did 
not blame Purochana as much as they did you. 

Now that the Pandavas have reappeared, obviously having escaped from 
the fire, Duryodhana, you must do away with your ignominy. And I say to 
you, O Scion of the Kurus, as long as Pandu’s sons live, not the Vajradhari 
Indra himself can prevent them from regaining their rightful share in this 
kingdom. 

The Pandavas are virtuous and united, and have been deprived of their 
birthright by adharma. If you want to make amends and do the right thing, 
seeking the welfare of everyone, yourself and your subjects, give them half 
of the kingdom.’” 


CANTO 206 
VIDURAGAMANA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana said, “When Bhishma has finished, Drona speaks. 
‘Dhritarashtara, Rajan, I have heard that a friend, asked for advice, 
should always speak truthfully, justly and in an honourable manner. 

My lord, I am entirely in agreement with the great Bhishma — a share of the 

kingdom must be given to the Pandavas. This is Sanatana Dharma. 

O Bharata, send a well-spoken messenger to Drupada immediately, 
taking with him a treasure for the sons of Pandu. Let this man carry 
priceless gifts for the bride and her husbands. He must tell Drupada that you 
are pleased and proud that your power and glory have increased vastly after 
this new alliance, by marriage, with him. 

O King, let your messenger tell Drupada how delighted both 
Duryodhana and you yourself are at what has transpired. Let him repeat this 
often to the Panchala king and to his son Dhrishtadyumna. He must say that 
the union is entirely agreeable to you and that you consider it as being 
fitting and a perfect and equal match. 

Let your messenger repeatedly conciliate Kunti and Madri’s sons. Rajan, 
order a bounty of the purest golden ornaments sent to Draupadi. Also, 
Bharatarishabha let excellent gifts be taken for all Drupada’s sons. And 
when all these have been given and he has spoken sweetly to everyone, let 
your messenger propose that the Pandavas return to Hastinapura. 

Once Drupada, mollified, gives them leave to return, Dushasana and 
Vikarna must go out with a handsome retinue to receive them. Once they 
enter Hastinapura, you must yourself welcome those Narapumgavas with 
the greatest affection. Then, Dhritarashtra, set them upon the throne of their 
fathers for that is what the people of the realm want. 

This, O King of the House of Bharata, is how I think you should behave 
towards the Pandavas, who are like your own sons.’ 


When Drona finishes, Karna rises and says hotly, ‘Dhritarashtra, you 
have lavished your wealth on both Bhisma and Drona! You have always 
thought of them as being your most trusted, closest friends and well- 
wishers. What could be more amusing, then, than to find them strongly 
urging you to act against your own interest? 

It can never be wise to approve of counsel given by those whose true 
intentions are evil, if well concealed. In a time of adversity, no friend can 
either help or harm a man: each one’s fortune or misfortune depends only 
on fate. Let him be wise or a fool, young or old, alone or with many allies — 
he will find joy and sorrow, alternately each in their season, regardless. 

I once heard of a king of old called Ambuvicha, whose capital was 
Rajagriha and he was king of all the Magadha chieftains. He never attended 
to affairs of the state: his only exertion was breathing! His minister 
Mahakarni effectually ruled the kingdom, and in time became so powerful 
that he had scant regard for the king. 

Indeed, the wretch took everything for himself — all Ambuvicha’s wealth 
and even his queens. However, these did not satisfy Mahakarni but only 
inflamed his greed. Now he began to hanker after the throne. But, this he 
could not get. 

Rajan, what else can we conclude from this other than that it was 
Ambuvicha’s destiny to remain king though he spent his time just breathing 
the air? Hence, O Dhritrashtra, if Fate has willed that the Kuru kingdom 
will remain with you, undivided, and pass on to your son, then that is what 
will happen, even if the whole world becomes your enemy. 

Equally, if fate has willed otherwise, whatever you do you will not keep 
your kingdom! Wise King, remember this when you gauge the sincerity or 
lack thereof of your advisors. Think carefully about which of them have 
spoken with evil in their hearts and which honestly, wishing your welfare.’ 

Drona retorts to Karna, ‘As you are full of adharma, it is plain that you 
speak with evil intentions. You want to harm the Pandavas and that is why 
you dare point your finger at us. But be certain Karna, that I spoke for the 
good of all the Kurus. If you consider what I say to be ill intentioned or 
evil, let us hear what you would have us do instead. 

I say to you that if the counsel that Bhishma and I have given is not 
heeded, it will not take long before the very race of Kuru is annihilated.’” 


CANTO 207 
VIDURAGAMANA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “After Drona finishes, Vidura speaks. He says, 

\/ ‘Dhritarashtra, King, I have no doubt that what your friends say is 

for your good. Yet, I fear you do not like to listen to what they tell 

you and their wise words fall on deaf ears. What that greatest among all the 

Kurus, Shantanu’s son Bhishma says is sagacious, excellent and will benefit 

you. But you do not listen to him. What Acharya Drona says is for your 
good, but Radha’s son Karna does not seem to think so. 

Yet, my lord, after deep thought I myself can think of no one who is a 
truer or wiser friend of yours than these two lions among men, old in years, 
in wisdom, and in learning, and always looking at you and at the sons of 
Pandu with equal eyes. 

I have no doubt, O Bharata, that these two great ones are both no less 
than Dasaratha’s son Rama or the great Gaya in their honesty and virtue. 
Have they ever given you evil counsel before? And you too, O King, have 
never done them any injury. Then why should these Purusharishabhas, who 
never have truck with falsehood, now advise you falsely, especially since 
you have not harmed them ever? 

My lord, these great and wise men will never give you evil counsel. 
They cannot be tempted by any wealth to offer you false advice, for they 
are both knowers of dharma. Everything they have said, O Bharata, is for 
your good and in your best interest. 

Be certain, my lord, that the Pandavas are as much your sons as 
Duryodhana and his brothers. Those that urge you to harm the sons of 
Pandu do not have your interest at heart. If you nurture partiality for your 
sons in your heart, they that seek to bring it out do you no favour. 

O King, these illustrious ones, these two splendid elders, have not said a 
false or evil word. Yet, you do not seem to realise it. What these 
Narapumgavas say about the Pandavas being invincible is the simple truth. 


Purushavyaghra, O tiger among men, do not deceive yourself for a moment 
that it is otherwise. 

A blessing be upon you, my lord! Can even Maghavat vanquish Pandu’s 
brilliant son Arjuna, who looses his arrows with both hands with equal ease 
and force? Can the Devas subdue Bhimasena, strong as ten thousand 
elephants in battle? Which man who values his life would dare face the 
twins, who are Yama’s very sons, in war? And how can the eldest, in whom 
patience, mercy, forgiveness, truth and might all find their home, be 
overcome? 

They that have Rama for their ally, Janardana Krishna for their mentor, 
and the dashing Satyaki for their friend have already vanquished all their 
enemies in battle. Drupada is their father-in-law; Drupada’s sons, 
Dhristadyumna and the others born into Prihasta’s race are their brothers-in- 
law: they are invincible, my lord. 

Remember all this, Duryodhana, and that their right to the kingdom is 
before yours. Dhritarashtra, treat them justly. Already your name is tainted 
by Purochana’s crime. Be kind and noble now to Pandu’s sons and wash 
that stain from yourself. If you behave righteously and mercifully towards 
the sons of Pandu, what you do will bring great punya down upon us all, 
powerful blessings that will protect everyone who belongs to the race of 
Kuru, why, it will nurture all Kshatriya kind. 

Once we fought against Drupada. If we can now make him our ally how 
much stronger we shall become. My lord, the Dasarhas are numerous and 
formidable; all of them will go where Krishna does. Also, know that where 
Krishna is, victory will certainly go. Dhritarashtra, only a man who has 
been cursed by the Gods would seek war when he can achieve his purpose 
and serve his best interest by conciliation. 

The people have heard that the Pandavas are alive, and they rejoice and 
are beside themselves to see their princes again. My lord, you must do as 
your people want. 

Duryodhana, Karna and Subala’s son Sakuni are untutored in dharma; 
they are brash and sinful. Do not listen to them, I beg you. Virtuous as you 
are, O King, think back to what I said to you many years ago, that because 
of the terrible sins that would be committed by your son Duryodhana, the 
very House of Kuru and the people of this kingdom shall perish!’” 


CANTO 208 
VIDURAGAMANA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana said, “When they have all finished speaking, 
Dhritarashtra says, ‘Shantanu’s son, the great Bhishma, the 
illustrious Rishi Drona, and you, my brother Vidura, have indeed 

spoken truly and given me the counsel that is in my best interest. 

By dharma, as Kunti’s sons, the Maharathas, are the sons of Pandu and 
they are my sons, also. And just as my sons should inherit this kingdom, so, 
too, must the Pandavas. So, hurry, my brother, go and fetch Pandu’s princes 
and their mother home; persuade them affectionately and kindly. 

Bharata, also bring Krishnaa, whose beauty is not of this world, here. 
Ah, it is such fortune that Pritha’s sons are still alive and greater fortune that 
the Maharathas have made Drupada’s peerless daughter their wife. Surely, 
we have become stronger than ever before with this alliance, and it also our 
good fortune from which the vile Purochana died. 

My resplendent Vidura, fortune has slain my grief and ended my 
mourning for my brother’s sons.’ 

At Dhritarashtra’s command, a joyful Vidura goes to Drupada Yagnasena 
and the Pandavas. Bharata, he takes a fair treasure of gold and ornaments 
and priceless jewels for Draupadi, the princes, and for Drupada, as well. 
Arriving in Drupada’s palace, Vidura, master of dharma, master of court 
etiquette, greets the king formally, properly and with honour; and Drupada, 
too, receives Vidura respectfully and both ask after each other’s health with 
every kindness. 

Then Vidura sees the Pandavas and with them Krishna of Dwaraka; 
embracing them in joy, tears in his eyes, he asks after their welfare. The 
Pandavas and Vaasudeva Krishna greet Vidura, of measureless intellect, 
with every reverence. As for Vidura, he is overcome, O King, and 
repeatedly asks his nephews how they are, and says that their uncle 
Dhritarashtra also asks warmly about them. 


Now he gives the Pandavas, Kunti and Draupadi, and Drupada and that 
king’s sons all the priceless gifts that he has brought from Hastinapura, 
from Dhritarashtra and the Kauravas. 

This done, the humble, soft-spoken Vidura speaks to the good King 
Drupada, in the presence of Kesava Krishna and the sons of Pandu. Vidura, 
of profound intelligence, says, ‘Great King, listen to what I have to say, 
you, your sons and ministers, as well. 

Overjoyed by this new alliance with you, my brother King Dhritarashtra 
repeatedly inquires after your welfare, and so do his sons and his ministers. 
Rajan, Bhishma the wise, son of Santanu, Drona, also of deep wisdom, the 
son of Bharadwaja and your dear friend, and also all the other Kurus ask 
after your welfare, in every particular. 

The learned Drona says that he embraces you in his mind and hopes that 
you are well in every way. Lord of the Panchalas, let me say again that 
Dhritarashtra and all the Kurus consider themselves greatly fortunate and 
blessed by this alliance with you. Yagnasena, they are more happy than they 
would be upon acquiring a whole new kingdom! Now that you know all 
this, I beg you, allow the sons of Pandu to return to their home, the 
kingdom of their fathers. 

Every Kuru is agog to see the princes again. These Narapumgavas have 
been away from Hastinapura for so long; I am sure that their mother and 
they must be as eager to see Hastinapura again as the people of the city are 
to see them. Also, all the royal Kuru ladies and the people are beside 
themselves to see the Panchala princess, the exquisite Krishnaa. 

O King, I ask your leave for the Pandavas to return to Hastinapura with 
their wife. If you give your leave, I will send word back to Dhritarashtra 
through my swiftest messengers. Then, O Drupada, the sons of Pandu can 
set out with Kunti and Krishnaa.’” 


CANTO 209 
VIDURAGAMANA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Drupada listens carefully to what Vidura says, 

V/ then he replies, ‘Wise Vidura, everything is as you say and I, too, am 

greatly pleased by our alliance. I agree with you that it is only just 

that these splendid princes return to Hastinapura. However, it is not for me 
to force a decision upon them. 

If Kunti’s valiant sons Yudhishtira, Bhima and Arjuna, as well as the 
Purusharishabhas, the twins, wish to return to the home of their fathers, if 
Baladeva and Krishna, both of whom know every nuance of dharma, are of 
the same mind, then by all means let Pandu’s sons return to Hastinapura. 
For, I do declare that the Purushavyaghras, Rama and Krishna, always have 
the best interest of the Pandavas at heart and always do their best for them.’ 

Now Yudhishtira says, ‘O King, my brothers and I are your dependants 
and we will happily do what you tell us.’ 

Then Krishna says, ‘I feel that the Pandavas should return, but we must 
do whatever Drupada decides, for he knows every aspect of dharma.’ 

Drupada says at once, ‘I agree with what this greatest of all men feels. 
Pandu’s great sons are now to me just as they are to Kunti, and I know that 
not Kunti’s son Yudhishtira himself can decide what is good for himself and 
his brothers as well as this tiger among men, Kesava, can.’ 

Thus, with Drupada’s leave, O King, the Pandavas set out with Draupadi 
and Kunti, with Krishna and Vidura for the city named after the elephant. 
On their leisurely way, they stop in many places of great beauty or sanctity, 
and take their pleasure as they please. 

When Dhritarashtra hears that those shuras are nearing his capital, he 
sends the Kauravas out to receive them. O Bharata, Vikarna of the great 
bow he sends, as he does Chitrasena, Drona, greatest of warriors, and Kripa 
of the line of Gautama. Those five mighty heroes enter Hastinapura 


majestically, surrounded by these and others, all of whom enhance their 
glory. 

Indeed, the entire city is radiant with the celebrant crowds that throng its 
streets to see the tigerish sons of Pandu return to them, and how they 
rejoice. All along their slow and triumphal progress towards the palace the 
Pandavas hear cries of affection from the people, who truly love their great 
and precious princes. 

Some say, “The Purushavyaghra of dharma who looks after us as if we 
are his nearest kin, has returned to us!’ 

Others cry, ‘Ah, it is as if Pandu has come home from the forest today, 
bringing our lost fortune back with him! For sure he comes to do us great 
good.’ 

‘What good remains to be done to us when Kunti’s heroic sons have 
returned to our city? If we have given daana, poured libations of ghee into 
the holy fire, if we have any punya, may the sons of Pandu remain in 
Hastinapura for a hundred years!’ 

Finally, the Pandavas arrive at the palace and prostrate at the feet of 
Dhritarashtra and of Bhishma. They touch the feet of everyone else present 
who are elders and worthy of worship. They ask, individually, after the 
welfare of everyone there. When all this is done, at Dhritarashtra’s 
command, they enter the apartments that have been kept for them. 

When the sons of Pandu have rested, King Dhritarashtra and Shantanu’s 
son Bhishma summon them to the royal sabha, the ancient court of 
Hastinapura. 

Dhritarashtra says to Yudhishtira, “Kaunteya, listen to what I have to say, 
your brothers and you. I want you to go to Khandavaprastha, so that never 
again does any dispute arise between your cousin and yourselves. If you 
live there, no one can or will do you any harm. Take half of the kingdom 
and, protected by Arjuna as the Devas are by the Vajra, live in peace in 
Khandavaprastha.’ 

The Pandavas accept what Dhritarashtra says, and paying him homage, 
those bulls among men set out from Hastinapura for Khandavaprastha, 
which is a desolate wilderness. 

Arriving in that desert, those brilliant shuras, with Krishna at their head, 
create a new city in the desolation, truly like another Swarga on Bhumi. 
Dwaipayana helps the Maharathas choose an auspicious place; he performs 
the sacred rituals and measures out the land for their city. 


When it has been built, some say by Indra’s command to Viswakarman, 
the divine artisan, and at Krishna asking for Indra’s help, that city has a 
moat encircling it, which is as wide as a sea. It has outer walls that touch 
the sky, walls white as rainless clouds or rays of the moon. Ah, the newly 
made city is as wondrous as Bhogavati in Patala, where the great Nagas 
dwell. 

Palatial mansions it has; many gates lead into it, gates as great and wide 
as the outspread wings of Garuda, gates that are as formidable as massed 
thunderheads, and as lofty as the Mandara Mountains. So great are the walls 
and so well stocked with myriad weapons that no enemy army could even 
dream of ever breaching them or making any impression on them with any 
astras. 

Those walls and gates are armed with thick banks of arrows and other 
missiles, narachas like twin-tongued serpents. The turrets along the walls 
are bursting with mighty warriors in superb condition and training; soldiers 
past counting line the entire length of those city walls. 

Deadly sharp hooks, satagnis that can raze a hundred enemies in a blink, 
and other machines of war are planted upon those walls. Great iron wheels, 
which can be whirled down upon the legions of any invader also deck those 
ramparts. Yes, truly, with all these and more is that best of cities protected. 

Within the walls, the streets are wide and excellently laid, so there is 
never any fear of accidents or collisions along their courses. And as 
numerous and so magnificent are the homes and mansions of the city of the 
Pandavas that it truly looks like another Amaravati on Earth, and some say 
that is why it is named Indraprastha. 

In the most choice and auspicious precinct of Indraprastha, 
Viswakarman creates a majestic palace for the sons of Pandu. It is filled 
with every kind of treasure, and is so opulent that it is like the palace of 
Kubera, Lord of Heaven’s Treasures, himself. Ah, it is like a great mass of 
cloud shot through with lightning. 

O King, when the city has been built, a host of Brahmanas arrives there, 
all of them masters of the Vedas, and begin living in Indraprastha. Vaisyas 
from across the length and breadth of Bharatavarsha come to Indraprastha, 
and thrive in trade and earn great wealth in the city of fortune. Artists, the 
finest and of every kind, flock to Indraprastha, and begin living there. 

Around the city are many enchanting gardens, with countless fruit-and 
flowering-trees — amras, amaratakas, kadambas, asokas, champakas, 


punnagas, nagas, kakuchas, panasas, salas, tola palms, tamalas, bakulas, 
ketakas with their fragrant blossom-loads. Great, gorgeous amalakas bend 
their branches down with the weight of their fruit; lodhras and akolas in 
bloom; jambus, pastalas, kunjakas, atimuktas, karaviras, parijatas, and 
many others all stand resplendent with flower and shining fruit, alive with 
birds and small creatures of every feather and species. 

The green vanas ring with the cry of the excited peacock and the kokila 
in love. Myriad pleasure-houses, bright like mirrors, dot these woods and 
gardens, as do fine bowers of creepers, charming man-made hillocks, and of 
course crystalline pools and lakes brimful with water. 

There are sparkling tanks perfumed by lotuses and lilies, jewelled with 
ducks, swans and chakravakas. The smaller pools are overgrown with 
water-plants, rare and exotic, and there are large ones, too, also of great 
beauty. 

Rajan, the Pandavas live in that blessed, auspicious kingdom, peopled by 
pious men of dharma, and their joy waxes day by day. 

And so it is that, because of the dharma shown them by Bhishma and 
also King Dhritarashtra, the sons of Pandu begin living in Khandavaprastha. 
With those five brothers living in it, each one equal to Indra himself, that 
best of cities truly resembles Bhogavati in Patala, the fabulous city of the 
Nagas. 

O King, when he sees the Pandavas settled into Indraprastha, Krishna 
the magnificent takes their leave and returns with Rama to Dwaraka.” 


CANTO 210 
RAJYA-LABHA PARVA 


anamejaya said, “O you possessed of ascetic wealth, what did those 

Mahatmans, my grandsires the Pandavas do when they had the kingdom 

of Indraprastha? How did their wife Draupadi serve and obey them all? 
Having one wife, Krishnaa, how is it that no dissension arose among those 
great Kshatriyas? O you of the wealth of asceticism, tell me in detail about 
how they are amongst themselves, after they marry Krishnaa.” 

Vaisampayana said, “Having gained their kingdom at the command of 
Dhritarashtra, those parantapas, the Pandavas, pass their days in great joy in 
Khandavaprastha, with Krishnaa. With his brothers beside him, Yudhishtira 
of tejas, always abiding by dharma, rules that kingdom. The sons of Pandu, 
endowed with wisdom, devoted to truth and virtue, and having vanquished 
their enemies, live there happily. 

Sitting upon invaluable thrones, the Purusharishabhas discharge the 
duties of state. One day, as they sit together in their royal sabha, the 
Devarishi Narada, on his eternal wandering, comes to them. When he sees 
the Sage, Yudhishtira rises and offers him his own throne. When the 
Maharishi sits, Yudhishitra offers him arghya with his own hands, and the 
king formally tells Narada Muni about the state of his kingdom. 

The Sage takes the offerings and is pleased. Showering his blessings on 
Yudhishtira, Narada asks him to sit beside him. The king sits and then sends 
word to the antahpura to Krishnaa, to inform her of the arrival of the 
illumined one. 

Bathing, putting on fresh clothes, Draupadi comes reverently into the 
sabha where the Rishi is with the Pandavas. The chaste princess of Panchala 
worships the Sage’s feet, and then stands before him with folded hands, her 
head bowed and her face veiled. 

Narada blesses her many times with a variety of blessings, and then tells 
her that she may leave. When Krishnaa has gone, the Rishi speaks privately 


to just Yudhishtira and his brothers. 

Narada says, “The princess of Panchala is the wife of all of you. You 
must create a law among yourselves, so that disunity never rears its head 
amongst you. Once, there lived two Asura brothers called Sunda and 
Upasunda, famed through the three worlds, and so mighty that none could 
kill them unless they slew each other. 

They ruled the same kingdom, lived in the same house, slept on the same 
bed, sat on the same throne, and ate out of the same plate. Yet, they killed 
each other for the sake of Tilottama. So, Yudhishtira, have a care to 
preserve your love for one another by making a rule for yourselves, which 
will keep you united forever.’ 

Yudhishtira asks, ‘Mahamuni, whose sons were the Asuras Sunda and 
Upasunda? How did they fall out, and how did they kill each other? Whose 
daughter was this Tilottama for whose love the brothers killed each other? 
Was she an Apsara or the daughter of some Deva? O you whose wealth is 
tapasya, we want, O Brahmana, to hear everything that happened in detail. 
Indeed, we are agog to hear this story.’” 


CANTO 211 
RAJYA-LABHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “To what Yudhishtira asks, Narada replies, ‘Son 
\/ of Pritha, listen, you and your brothers, to this olden tale; I will tell 
you everything exactly as it happened. 

In ancient days, a mighty Daitya called Nikumbha, of untold strength 
and vigour, was born into the race of the great Asura Hiranyakashyipu. 
Sunda and Upasunda were the sons of Nikumbha, both awesomely 
powerful Asuras. Fierce were those brothers and their hearts evil. 

They were as close as could be, sharing every resolve, striving together 
to achieve their common ends. They shared equally in each other’s joy and 
woe. They were always together, and always spoke lovingly and pleasingly 
to each other. They were alike in every way, and truly seemed like one 
individual divided in two. 

Slowly, they grew to manhood, and they had the same purpose — to 
conquer the three worlds. After being duly initiated, they went to the 
Vindhya Mountain and performed intense tapasya. Long they sat in 
penance, until, emaciated by hunger and thirst, their hair tangled in jata 
upon their heads and wearing valkala, treebark, they finally attained the 
ascetic power they wanted. 

They had smeared themselves with dirt from head to foot, lived on just 
the air they breathed, stood on their toes, and from time to time cut off and 
threw pieces of their flesh into the sacred fire. Their arms were upraised, 
and their eyes stared unwinkingly at one spot, and long they stood thus, 
keeping their terrible vows unflinchingly. 

While they performed tapasya, something marvellous happened — the 
Vindhya Mountain, at being heated by their rigours for so long, began to 
exude geysers of steam, from every slope and peak. The Devas watched the 
Asuras’ great tapasya and were alarmed. They sought to obstruct the 
penance of the brothers with all sorts of interruptions. 


Repeatedly, the gods tempted the Daityas, with the most enticing 
treasures and with the loveliest women. The brothers did not break their 
penance. The Devas now used their powers of maya, of creating illusions, 
on the brothers. The Asuras’ sisters, mothers, wives, and other kinswomen, 
their hair, clothes and ornaments in disarray and askew, seemed to run 
towards them in terror, pursued and often struck by a Rakshasa wielding a 
long spear. 

The women cried out to Sunda and Upasunda, “Save us! Save us!” 

To no avail, for the brothers did not stir from their rigid postures of 
penance; and the mayic women and the Rakshasa vanished. 

At last, the Pitamaha Brahma, the Lord who seeks the weal of all his 
creatures, appeared before the great Asuras and told them to ask for 
whatever boon they wanted. Now the mighty Sunda and Upasunda rose and 
stood with folded hands before the Grandsire of the worlds. 

Together, they said to the God, “Pitamaha, if you are pleased with our 
tapasya and would grant us a boon, give us knowledge of all the astras and 
mahamayas, and power over them all. Give us enormous strength, and the 
power to assume any form and shape we wish. Finally, Lord, let us also be 
immortal.” 

Brahma says, “You will have all that you have asked for, but not 
unconditional immortality. Name any one way in which you can be slain, be 
it not so unlikely that you do indeed become equal to the Devas. Because 
you have performed your tapasya purely from desire for sovereignty I 
cannot grant you immortality. You did your great penance to subdue the 
three worlds, and for that, mighty Daityas, I cannot make you immortal.” 

Sunda and Upasunda said, “Then, Pitamaha, let no creature or creation 
of yours, mobile or unmoving, be able to kill us but just we ourselves, one 
the other. Let us fear no one but each other!” 

Brahma said, “I grant everything that you have asked, and this last boon 
as well.” 

With that, the Pitamaha made them stop their penance and returned to 
Brahmaloka. With Brahma’s boons, the Daitya brothers became invincible, 
and they returned to their home. Their friends and kinsfolk saw those 
matchlessly intelligent Asuras, resplendent with the boons they now had, 
and rejoiced. 

Now Sunda and Upasunda sheared away their matted jata and wore 
golden crowns on their heads. Clad in priceless garments and wearing the 


richest ornaments, they were incomparably handsome. Why, the Moon rose 
full, nightly over their city, even when it was not his season to do so. 

Abandoned and joyous celebrations erupted, with great feasts, flowing 
wine, with singing and dancing, and lavish entertaining in every home. One 
could hear loud revelry, with ringing laughter and the happy clapping of 
hands echoing throughout the city of the Daityas. Of course, they could take 
any form they chose at will, and indulged in every manner of sport and 
gaiety, never noticing the passage of time; why, a whole year passed like a 
day,’ says Narada Muni in Indraprastha.” 


CANTO 212 
RAJYA-LAHBA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Narada continues, “When that great and 

V/ prolonged celebration ended, the brothers Sunda and Upasunda 

called a council of their greatest commanders, kinsmen and advisors, 

and then ordered their legions to be raised, for they wanted now to conquer 
the three worlds and have lordship over them. 

With the assent of their friends and relatives, of the great Daitya elders, 
and of their ministers of state, the brothers performed the initiatory rituals 
of departure and sallied forth at night, when the constellation Magha was 
rising. They went with a teeming force of Daityas, wearing mail, armed 
with maces, battle-axes, lances and cudgels. 

With joy in their hearts, the Daitya shuras set out with the charana bards 
chanting auspicious hymns that foretold their future triumphs. Ferocious 
and savage in battle, the brothers, who could go anywhere at will, flew 
straight up into the sky and arrived in Devaloka. When the Devas, who 
knew about all the boons that Brahma had granted them, learnt of their 
advent, they fled their realm and sought refuge in Brahmaloka. 

The fierce and tameless Asura heroes quickly subdued the world of 
Indra, and vanquishing and killing myriad clans of Yakshas and Rakshasas, 
and indeed every creature that ranged the sky, they came away from on 
high. Next those Maharathas plunged down into the Patalas and quelled the 
Nagas of the under-worlds. Then they tamed all the races of the Ocean, and 
then all the Mlechcha tribes. 

Now they wanted to conquer Bhumi, all the Earth. The inexorable 
brothers mustered their fell legions and issued this dire command: 

“Brahmanas and Rajarishis, who make offerings of ghee and havis at 
Mahayagnas, swell the power and energy of the Devas, and their prosperity 
too. Those who perform these sacrifices are the enemies of the Asuras. So 


let us all band together and kill them all, wipe them from the face of the 
Earth!” 

With that savage, ringing command to their legions swarming upon the 
eastern shore of the Great Ocean, the Asura brothers struck out in every 
direction with their terminal resolve. Anywhere they saw a yagna being 
performed, they instantly slew those engaged in the sacrifice and the 
Brahmanas who sat over them. The Asura brothers slaughtered them 
brutally and flew on again to their next quarry and prey. 

Meanwhile, their soldiers doused the sacrificial fires in the asramas of 
Maharishis, great men who were masters of their souls. However, the fiery 
curses of those Sages did not affect the Asura brothers in the least, for 
Brahma’s boon protected them. 

When the Brahmanas saw that their curses had about as much effect as 
arrows shot at rocks, they scattered and fled in every direction, abandoning 
their yagnas and their vratas. Even the greatest Rishis on Earth, perfect 
masters of their emotions, men absorbed in samadhi, ran in terror from the 
Daitya brothers, as serpents do at the approach of Vinata’s son Garuda. 

The Asuras overran and trampled the holy hermitages. The sacrificial 
urns were smashed and their sacred contents rudely scattered on the ground. 
The universe appeared empty, as if a Mahapralaya had come and swept 
away all its creatures. 

Rajan, when the Rishis all made themselves scarce or invisible, the two 
dreadful Asuras began to assume many different forms, for they were bent 
upon slaughtering the Sages. They became rut-maddened bull elephants, 
their temples cracked from a surfeit of, and oozing, the wild juice of musth; 
the demon pair rooted out the holy ones from caves in which they had 
hidden and despatched them to the land of Yama. 

At times, Sunda and Upasunda would become lions, then tigers, then 
they would vanish — with all these, and other means, too, the violent twain 
hunted the Sages and massacred them. Brahmanas and Kshatriyas were 
extirpated, and sacrifices and study of the Veda ceased in the world. The 
Earth became devoid of yagnas and every holy rite and festival. 

The people were terror-stricken, and screamed and wailed; all trade 
ceased, no one bought or sold anything anymore. The Earth was without 
religious rite and ceremony, and no marriages took place. Farming went to 
seed and nobody tended to their cows anymore. 


Strewn everywhere with skeletons and bones, Bhumi assumed a dreadful 
visage. No sraddhas were performed for the Pitrs; nowhere was the holy 
sound of Vashat to be heard: all sacred observances fell into desuetude. The 
Earth became a fearsome spectacle, and Surya and Chandra, the 
Navagrahas, the Nakshatras, the Mandalas and all those that dwelt in the 
heavens watched the atrocities of Sunda and Upasunda; and they grieved 
much. 

However, having violently subdued the three worlds, the Asura brothers 
began living in Kurukshetra, and nowhere had they any rival,’ Narada 
says.” 


CANTO 213 
RAJYA-LABHA PARVA CONTINUED 


CC arada continues, ‘The Devarishis, the Siddhas, the Mahatmans of 

| N sthitaprajna, all watched the universal slaughter perpetrated by 

the Daitya brothers, and they mourned deeply. Their passions, 

senses and minds perfectly controlled, they went to Brahmaloka, for they 
were stirred by mercy for the universe. 

Arriving, they saw the Pitamaha upon his throne, surrounded by the 
Devas, the Siddhas and Brahmarishis. Mahadeva, God of gods, was there, 
as were Agni, Vayu, Soma, Surya, Indra, all the Rishis that live absorbed in 
the dhyana of the Parabrahman: the Vaikhanasas, the Balakhilyas, the 
Vanaprasthas, Marichipas, Ajas, Avimudhas and other Yogins of immense 
tejas. 

All those Rishis sat around the Pitamaha, when the Devarishis and the 
other visitors came sadly to complain to Brahma about the relentless 
savagery of Sunda and Upasunda. In gory detail, they described everything 
that the Asuras had done, how they had done it, and in what order. All of 
them implored the Creator that He must put an end to the Asuras’ unholy 
reign of terror. 

Brahma listened to everything that they said, and thought for a mere 
moment before deciding what he would do to destroy the Asura brothers. 
Summoning Viswakarman to him, the Pitamaha of absolute Brahmattva 
said to the divine artisan, “Create a woman who can enchant every heart.” 

Bowing down to Brahma, receiving that command reverently, the great 
artificer of the universe carefully created an Apsara. First, he gathered 
individually every exquisite feature of that celestial nymph. Those shone 
like a mass of jewels. When he had put her together with his divine art, she 
was the most beautiful woman in the three worlds. 

There was no minute part of her, not the smallest portion, which was not 
so lovely that it could instantly fascinate anyone that looked upon her. She 


was like Sri herself; she stole the hearts of every creature whose gaze fell 
on her even for a moment. 

Because she had been fashioned with the highest essences of every 
gemstone in existence, used in minuscule measure, Brahma named her 
Tilottama. As soon as the Pitama breathed life into her, she bowed low to 
Brahma, and with folded hands, said, “Lord of all creatures, why have I 
been created, what task do you want me to accomplish?” 

The Grandsire answered her, “Tilottama, go to the Asuras Sunda and 
Upasunda. O Susheela, seduce them with your peerless beauty. Apsara, then 
do what you must to make the brothers fall out amongst each other, 
whenever they look at you.” 

She bowed to the Pitamaha, saying, “Tathaastu! So be it.” 

Then she walked in pradakshina around that divine congregation. 
Brahma sat facing the east, as did Mahadeva also; the Devas all faced north, 
and the Rishis in every direction. 

As Tilottama walked around the gathering of the celestial ones, only 
Indra and Sthanu Mahadeva remained still. Yet, Mahadeva was also so 
intent on watching Tilottama as she circled around the assembly of Gods 
and Sages, that when she was at his side, he sprouted a second radiant face 
on the southern side of his body, and it was like a full-blown lotus. When 
she was behind him, another face appeared on the western side of the Great 
God; when she had crossed to his left a fourth face appeared, on his 
northern side. 

Indra grew a thousand eyes, all large and reddish, all over his body. So it 
is that Sthanu came to have four faces and Sakra, the slayer of Bala, a 
thousand eyes. As for the rest of the Devas and the Rishis, they all turned 
their heads to watch Tilottama’s progress, as she walked around them. 
Apart from Brahma, they all gazed avidly at Tilottama’s body, and when 
she set out for the city of the Asura brothers, taking the shining wealth of 
her beauty, all of them felt certain that their purpose was as good as 
achieved. 

When Tilottama had left, Brahma, First Cause of the Universe, sent 
away the Devas and Rishis,’ Narada says.” 


CANTO 214 
RAJYA-LABHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Narada continues, ‘Meanwhile, the Daitya 

\/ brothers had quelled the Earth and ruled without any rival. The 

tiredness of their exertions left them, and having the triloka under 

their sway, they felt they had nothing more to accomplish. They had 

brought home as spoils the greatest treasures of the Devas, Gandharvas, 

Yakshas, Nagas, Rakshasas and Kshatriyas and they began to live in 
sumptuous luxury and untold pleasure. 

They had no fear of any enemy, and they lived in perpetual enjoyment, 
even as the Devas do. They gave themselves up to every kind of pleasure — 
indulging themselves in women, the finest perfumes, garlands, wine, rare 
delicacies of the table, and in every other conceivable object of desire. 

In mansions, fine woods, great gardens, on hills and in forests, wherever 
they liked the brothers spent their time at pleasure, like the immortals. One 
day they went to please themselves to a tableland of the Vindhya Mountain. 
It was a place of rock, smooth and flat, with flowering trees growing all 
around. When they had indulged in everything they cared to, the brothers 
sat upon a fine throne, joyful and surrounded by handsome women. Music 
played, and the women danced for the brothers and sang countless sweet 
songs praising the indomitable pair. 

Just then, wearing a single piece of red silk, which hid none of her 
charms, Tilottama arrived there, plucking wildflowers on her way. Slowly, 
she wended her way to where the brothers sat. The Asuras had drunk 
copiously, and with one look at the Apsara of unearthly beauty, were 
smitten. 

Getting up quickly, they rushed to her: both stirred by lust, each wanted 
her for himself. Sunda seized her of the fair face by her right hand, and 
Upasunda by her left. Intoxicated with the assurance of their boons, with 
their strength, unhinged with all the power and wealth taken from every 


quarter, and with all the wine they had drunk, maddened by all these, and 
most of all maddened by lust, they knit their brows and spoke angrily to 
each other, for the first time. 

“She is my wife and your superior,” growled Sunda. 

“She is my wife and your sister-in-law,” retorted Upasunda. 

Each said to the other, “She is mine, not yours!” 

Quickly anger seized them. Mad for her beauty, they forgot their deep 
love for each other. Losing their reason from lust, they seized up their 
dreadful maces. Each roared, “I was first!” and they struck each other at the 
identical moment, each a thunderous blow. 

Those savage Asuras fell on the ground, their bodies bathed in blood; 
they were like two Suns fallen from the sky. 

Seeing this, all the other Asuras there and the women fled trembling and 
shrieking, in grief and in terror, and plunged down into the Patalas. Now the 
taintless Brahma came to that place, with him the Devas and the 
Maharishis. The glorious Pitamaha acclaimed what Tilottama had done and 
granted her a boon. 

Before she could speak, he said, “Lovely one, you will range the realm 
of the Adityas, and so brilliant shall you be that no one will be able to look 
at you for long.” 

With that, the Grandsire of all the living returned sovereignty of the 
worlds to Indra and the others, and went back to Brahmaloka. So it was that 
the Asura brothers, always united before, killed each other in anger over 
Tilottama. So Bharatottamas, out of my affection for you, I say to you that, 
if you wish to do something to please me, have a care to make the most 
meticulous arrangement amongst yourselves, so that you five never fall out 
over Draupadi.’ 

The Pandavas take counsel among themselves and then lay down an 
inviolable rule with regard to Draupadi, in the presence of the Devarishi of 
measureless tejas. The covenant they make is that if any of them intrudes 
upon the privacy of another brother when he is alone and intimate with 
Draupadi, the intruder would spend twelve years in exile in the forest, as a 
brahmacharin. 

When the good Pandavas have established that law amongst them, the 
great Narada is pleased. Blessing them, he leaves their city and goes his 
way. Thus, O Janamejaya, Narada Muni persuades the Pandavas to create a 


law among them about how they would conduct themselves with their 
common wife. 

Indeed, this is the reason that no dispute ever arose among them over the 
exquisite Panchali.” 


CANTO 215 
ARJUNA-VANAVASA PARVA 


aisampayana said, “Having established the new code, the Pandavas 

\/ continue to live in Indraprastha. By the might of their arms they 

bring countless kings under their sway. Krishnaa becomes the loving 

and obedient wife of all five sons of Pritha, those lions among men, of 
incomparable energy. 

She is like the River Saraswati delighting in the great elephants that 
bathe in her — they repeatedly take their pleasure in her, and she from them. 
The sons of Pandu are men of exceptional dharma, and consequently, all the 
race of Kurus are sinless, happy and prosperous. 

Then, when some time has elapsed, one day, some robbers lift the cattle 
of a Brahmana of that realm. As the thieves make away with his herd, the 
Brahmana, beside himself with anger, comes to Khandavaprastha and 
begins to berate the Pandavas in stricken tones. 

The Brahmana cries, ‘Pandavas, in your very kingdom, my kine are even 
now being lifted by vile brigands. Give chase to them. Alas, wretched 
crows are going to eat the sacrificial ghee of a peaceful Brahmana. The 
Rishis have said that a king who takes a sixth part of the produce of his 
kingdom but does not protect his subjects is the greatest sinner in the world. 
A Brahmana’s wealth is being stolen by thieves. Dharma itself is being 
injured. Ah, take my hand and help me, Pandavas, for I am plunged in 
grief!’ 

Kunti’s son Arjuna hears the Brahmana sobbing bitterly and railing. At 
once, he reassures the man, ‘Do not fear.’ 

However, at that time, Yudhishtira Dharmaputra is alone with Krishnaa 
in the chamber in which the Pandavas keep their weapons. So, though the 
Brahmana continues to wail and to beg him, Arjuna cannot go with him for 
he cannot intrude upon his brother’s privacy. 


The Brahmana sobs on, and moved to pity, Arjuna decides that he must 
wipe the innocent man’s tears. He thinks, “The Brahmana has come to our 
gates and weeps without let. If I do not help him, my apathy will bring sin 
upon the king. Our adharma will be spoken of throughout the kingdom and 
we will all find great sin for ourselves. 

Yet, if I enter the room I will certainly insult my brother; also, I will 
have to serve a twelve years’ exile in the wilderness. But now, I must not let 
that stop me from helping the Brahmana, not if I have to go into the jungle 
and die there. Dharma is higher than the body and it lives on after the body 
dies.’ 

Arriving at this resolve, Arjuna Dhananjaya enters the private chamber 
and speaks softly to Yudhishtira. He emerges with his bow and quiver, and 
says cheerfully to the Brahmana, “Let us hurry, Brahmana, so the thieves do 
not escape. I will come with you and restore your herd to you.’ 

Armed with his bow, which the perfectly ambidextrous Arjuna uses with 
either hand with equal skill, wearing mail and riding his war-chariot that 
flies his standard, Arjuna gives chase to the cattle thieves. His arrows fly at 
them in a storm, and they instantly abandon the cattle and flee for their lives 
through the forest. 

Arjuna brings the herd to the Brahmana, now beside himself with 
gratitude, and having won great fame, the Pandava returns to his city. He 
pays homage to all the elders there, is applauded by everyone present, and 
finally comes before Yudhishtira. 

Arjuna says to his elder brother, ‘My lord, allow me to keep the vow that 
I swore. I saw you alone with Draupadi and I have broken the law we made 
for ourselves. I must go into exile in the jungle, for that is the covenant we 
swore.’ 

Suddenly hearing this, Yudhishtira is stricken and cries agitatedly, 
‘Why?’ 

He falls quiet for a while, then says sadly to Arjuna of the curly hair, 
who never swerves even by a hair’s width from his vows, “‘Anagha, sinless, 
if you consider me an authority worthy of your respect, then listen to what I 
have to say. Shura, I know why you came into my chamber and thereby did 
what you think of as being distasteful to me. But you did not displease me 
in the least. 

A younger brother may always, without fault, go into the room where his 
older brother is with his wife. It is only the elder brother who causes 


offence by entering a room where the younger brother is alone with his 
wife. Mahabaho, so you must not think of going into exile. Do as I say, your 
dharma has not suffered in the least. You have not disrespected me at all.’ 
Arjuna replies, ‘I have heard, even from you, one should not split hairs 
in discharging dharma. Truth is my weapon.’ 
Then, with Yudhishtira’s leave, Arjuna prepares to go into exile in the 
forest, for twelve years.” 


CANTO 216 
ARJUNA-VANAVASA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana said, “When Arjuna Mahabaho, who spread the renown 
of the race of Kuru throughout the world, sets out, Brahmanas who 
know the Vedas and the Vedangas, and are devoted to contemplating 

the Parabrahman, follow that great hero. Skilled musicians, many pious 

Devabhakta ascetics, masterly Pauranikas, and other narrators of sacred 

lore, all Brahmacharins, Vanaprasthas, other Brahmanas who told celestial 

Itihasas in mellifluous voices, and many other devotees, too, gifted bards 

from different varnas, go with Arjuna, and he journeys like Indra being 

followed by the Maruts. 

O Bharata, the Bharatarishabha travels through many pristine and 
enchanted forests, pausing beside sparkling lakes, gushing rivers, endless 
seas, passing through several countries and kingdoms. Finally, he arrives at 
the source of the Ganga and feels that he will settle there for some time. 

Listen, O Janamejaya, to something wonderful that happens while 
Arjuna lives there. In that holy place, Kunti’s son and the Brahmanas who 
have gone with him perform countless Agnihotras, sacrifices of the sacred 
fire. O Rajan, because those devout, illumined and learned Brahmanas, who 
never leave the path of dharma, daily worship beside the holy river, because 
of their lighting their sacrificial fires with mantras, after bathing, because of 
the oblations of ghee they pour into the fires, the flowers they offer before 
the flames, that entire place for yojanas around blooms and becomes 
lustrous in every way and full of grace. 

One morning, that Pandava bull goes as usual to the Ganga to perform 
his ritual ablutions. When he has finished, and has offered tarpana to his 
dead Pitrs, he is wading out from the water, when, suddenly, the Naga 
princess Ulupi, moved by Kama Deva, drags Arjuna down to the bed of the 
river, and indeed below it. 


Under the riverbed, Arjuna finds himself borne helplessly into the 
wondrous palace of the Naga King Kauravya. There he sees a fire of 
sacrifice already lit for him to worship. Arjuna performs his daily rites with 
deep bhakti, and seeing how calmly and fearlessly that hero offers his 
worship into the Fire God’s manifest flames, in the alien place, Agni is 
pleased with Arjuna. 

When he has finished worshipping the sacred fire, Kunti’s son sees the 
daughter of the Naga king, and says to her with a smile, ‘Lovely one, what 
is this rashness you have committed? Bashful one, to whom does this 
beautiful realm belong? Who are you, whose daughter?’ 

Ulupi replies, “There is a Naga called Kauravya born into the line of 
Airavata. O Kshatriya, I am Kauravya’s daughter and my name is Ulupi. 
Purushavyagra, I saw you bathing in the river and Kama Deva pierced me 
with desire which snatched away my reason. Anagha, sinless one, I am not 
married and Kama torments me with love for you. Scion of the Kurus, give 
yourself to me today, gratify my desire.’ 

Arjuna replies, “Susheela, gentle one, fettered by the command of King 
Yudhishtira, I have sworn to be a brahmacharin for twelve years and I am 
not free to do as I please. But, water ranger, I am still willing to please you 
if at all I can. I have never told a lie in my life. Naga Kanya, tell me how I 
can do as you want and still not break my dharma or be guilty of lying.’ 

Ulupi answers him, ‘O Pandava, I know why you are wandering the 
Earth and why your elder brother has told you to be a brahmacharin. Yes, 
this is the pact you made amongst yourselves, that he who goes into a room 
where his brother is alone with Draupadi must live in the forests as a 
brahmacharin for twelve years. 

But your exile, Kshatriya, is only from Draupadi, and also your 
brahmacharya only with regard to her, and that dharma you are already 
discharging. By slaking my desire you will not break your dharma in the 
least. Besides, large eyes, it is also your dharma to assuage a woman in 
distress. By relieving my pang for you, what diminution will your dharma 
suffer? 

Besides, Arjuna, even if your virtue does suffer some slight damage by 
satisfying my desire, you will find great punya for yourself by saving my 
life. Oh Partha, know me to be one that worships you, give yourself to me! 
My lord, the Rishis all say that a man must satisfy a woman who asks him 


to. If you do not come to me, be certain that I will take my life; so, 
Mahabaho, earn great punya by saving it. 

Purushottama, I seek sanctuary in you. Kaunteya, you always protect 
those that are persecuted and masterless. Look, in tears I seek your comfort. 
I am full of desire, and I importune you. Do what I want you to; you must 
give yourself to me!’ 

Making dharma his motive, and the Naga princess is surely most 
desirable, Arjuna does all that she wants. The mighty Pandava spends that 
night in the palace of Kauravya, and with dawn the next day, he returns 
with Ulupi to the sacral pool of the Ganga, from where she flows down to 
the plains. The chaste Ulupi bids farewell to him there and returns to her 
under-world. 

Bharata, before she goes she blesses Arjuna with a boon that he would 
be invincible in water, saying, “You will be able to prevail over all creatures 
of the water and all creatures that dwell both in the water and on land.’” 


CANTO 217 
ARJUNA-VANAVASA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “The son of the Vajradhari tells the Brahmanas 

\/ what has happened and then sets out for the slopes of Himavat. He 

first comes to the place that is called Agastyavata, then continues and 

arrives at Vasishta’s peak, from where Kunti’s son goes on to the summit of 
Bhrigu. 

Having purified himself with many rituals there, he ceremonially gives 
away thousands of cows and numberless homes to those Brahmanas and the 
others who have accompanied him; then, he goes on to the holy asrama 
calls Hiranyabindu. There, also, he performs ritual ablutions, and 
journeying, that Pandavottama sees many sacred places of unworldly 
beauty and sanctity. Finally, he comes down from the mountains, O 
Bharata, still accompanied by the Brahmanas, and that lord of men turns 
east, to see the realms that lay in that direction. 

The Kurusthama sees many holy tirthas, one after the other. In the 
Naimisa vana, he is enchanted to look upon the river Utpalini, flowing with 
a denseness of lotuses, the Nanda, the Aparananda, the Kausiki of wide 
renown, and the mighty waters of Gaya and Ganga. 

He bathes ritually in all those tirthas and gifts more cows to the 
Brahmanas. All the sacred fords in the lands of Vanga and Kalinga Arjuna 
visits, bathing in them all and giving away great wealth in solemn daana. 
Now, O Bharata, at the gates of the kingdom of Kalinga, all the Brahmanas 
who had followed Pandu’s son, bid him farewell and turn back. 

The valiant Dhananjaya, the son of Kunti, takes his leave of them and 
goes on towards the Ocean, just a very few servitors and companions going 
with him. The mighty warrior crosses the land of the Kalingas, and journeys 
on, passing through many kingdoms and countries, holy tirthas, seeing great 
and lovely cities and towns with their superb and varied mansions and 
palaces and homes. 


He sees Mount Mahendra adorned with Rishis, and travels leisurely on, 
along the sea-shore, to Manipura. Having gazed upon all the sacred waters 
and other shrines and naves of worship in that realm, the Mahabaho son of 
Pandu finally comes into the palace of Chitravahana, king of Manipura. 

This king has a remarkably beautiful daughter calls Chitrangada, and 
wandering through Chitravahana’s palace, Arjuna sees her one day and he 
desires her. The Pandava goes to the king and says to him, ‘Give your 
daughter to me, Rajan, I am a great Kshatriya’s son.’ 

The king asks, ‘Whose son are you?’ 

Arjuna replies, ‘I am Dhananjaya, the son of Pandu and Kunti.’ 

Taking brief pause, Chitravahana says gently and sweetly to Arjuna, ‘In 
our race, of old there was once a king calls Prabhanjana, who had no child. 
He performed a tapasya to have a child. Partha, he pleased Mahadeva, 
Umapati, God of gods, Paramatman, Pinakin, with the intensity of his 
penance. 

The refulgent Lord blessed him that every scion of his line would have 
just a single child. Because of Siva’s boon, one child is born into every 
generation of our royal House. All my ancestors each had a son, but I have 
only a daughter to continue our line. However, Bharatarishabha, I always 
look upon this daughter of mine as my son, and I have made her a Putrika. 

If you marry her, one of the sons that you beget upon her must become 
the heir to my throne and the one to perpetuate my race. Bharata, that son is 
the dower for which I will give my daughter to you. Pandava, if you agree, 
you can take her on this condition.’ 

Arjuna agrees immediately, saying, “Tathaastu, so be it.’ 

Making Chitravahana’s daughter his wife, Kunti’s son lives in that city 
for three years. Finally, Chitrangada gives birth to a fine son and Arjuna 
embraces the child lovingly. Then, taking his leave of Chitravahana, the 
Pandava sets out again on his wandering.” 


CANTO 218 
ARJUNA-VANAVASA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Now, that Bharatarishabha journeys down to the 

\/ holy southern Sea, her shore bejewelled with the Rishis that dwell 

there. Five great and holy rivers lie strewn in that realm, but the 

Sages shun all five. They are called the Agastya, Saubhadra, the most 

sacrosanct Pauloma, the greatly auspicious Karandhama, which yields the 

fruit of an Aswamedha yagna to those that bathe in her waters, and finally 
the Bharadwaja, ah, powerful washer of sins. 

The Kurusthama sees the five rivers, and also that they are deserted, 
avoided by the hermits who live near them. With folded hands he asks those 
Rishis, ‘Why O Sages, do the chanters of Brahman shun these holy waters?’ 

The Munis reply, ‘Five great crocodiles live in the rivers and they 
devour any of us that dares bathe in them. That is why, Kurunandana, we do 
not go to the rivers.’ 

Arjuna Mahabaho hears this and says he will go closer to see the rivers. 
The ascetics try to prevent him, but he walks directly up to the bank of the 
great river Saubhadra, and the Parantapa plunges straight into her current. 
Immediately a huge crocodile seizes his leg in its jaws, but Dhananjeya 
Kaunteya seizes the crocodile in his mighty arms and drags it ashore. 

No sooner has he hauled it onto land than the great lizard vanishes and a 
startlingly beautiful young woman, wearing unworldly ornaments and 
raiment, stands there in its place. O King, she is brilliant, her skin and her 
form shine! 

Wonder-stricken, Arjuna asks her, in some joy, “Lovely one, who are 
you? Why are you the water beast? What is your terrible sin?’ 

The beauty replies, ‘Mahabaho, I am an Apsara who once frolicked in 
these woods. Kshatriya, my name is Varga and I am the beloved of Kubera, 
Lord of Treasures. I have four other friends, and all of us are beautiful and 
could go wherever we wished. 


One day, we five were on our way to Kubera’s home, when we saw a 
strikingly handsome and solitary Brahmana, a tapasvin, who sat immersed 
in studying the Veda. All the vana in which he sat was radiant with his 
splendour; he illumined the forest even like a Sun. 

We flew down to where he sat, for both his fervid dhyana and his 
wonderful beauty drew us irresistibly. We meant to distract him from his 
tapasya. Saurabheyi, Samichi, Vudvuda, Lata and I approached that 
Brahmana, O Bharata, all together. We began to smile, sing and to 
otherwise tempt him. 

Kshatriya, he was not to be tempted; not for a moment did his heart 
sway towards us. Purusharishabha the only gaze he cast in our direction was 
one of anger. 

Glaring at us, he said, “Become crocodiles and swim in these waters for 
a hundred years!”’ says the Apsara.” 


CANTO 219 
ARJUNA-VANAVASA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Varga continues, ‘Bharatottama, we were 

\/ shocked by the curse and tried to mollify that Brahmana who would 

not swerve from his vows. We said to him, “Arrogant of our beauty 

and youth, and stirred by Kama Deva, we have behaved abysmally. O 
Brahmana, we beg you, forgive us. 

Surely, it is our very death which tempted us to try to tempt you. 
However, the Sages always say that women must never be killed. May your 
punya swell, Brahmana, do not kill us, it does not become you. O, you 
know dharma well, and it is a Brahmana’s dharma to always be a friend to 
every creature. Let what the Rishis say about Brahmanas be true of you: the 
superior man always protects those that seek refuge in him. We seek your 
protection; it becomes you to forgive us.” 

O Kshatriya, the high-souled and virtuous Brahmana, as bright as the 
Sun or the Moon, grew kindly towards us. He said, “The words hundred 
and hundred thousand all mean eternity. However, in this case I did not use 
the word hundred to mean time without end. 

So, you will indeed become crocodiles and seize and feed on men for a 
hundred human years. When those years end, a great man will come and 
drag you out from the water, and you will have your true forms back. I have 
never told the smallest lie, not even in jest, and everything that I say must 
come to pass. 

Once the hero delivers you five, the five sacred waters will be known the 
world over as the Naari-tirthas, the waters of the women, and the wise and 
the good shall know them as being holy and purifying.” 

We listened to what the Brahmana said, folded our hands to him and 
walked around him in pradakshina. Dejectedly, we left that place, thinking, 
‘Where will we meet the great man who will remove the curse from us?” 


At that moment, O Bharata, we saw the Devarishi Narada of measureless 
tejas and our hearts filled with joy. Saluting him reverently, Partha, we 
stood before him, with flushed faces. He asked us the cause of our grief and 
we told him everything. 

The Rishi said, “In the plains that lie alongside the southern Ocean are 
five realms of water, enchanting and deeply sacred. Go there, and soon, the 
Purushavyaghra Arjuna, Pandava Nishkalankaatma will rescue you from 
your sad plight.” 

Shura, at the Muni’s words we came here, and, Anagha, sinless, you 
have today delivered me from the curse. But my four friends are still bound 
by it and live in these rivers. Kshatriya, I beg you, save them as well.’ 

Rajan, that Pandavottama of untold prowess calmly does as Varga asks. 
Rising out of the water, the four other Apsaras have their true and beautiful 
forms back. Having freed the Apsaras from the curse and the holy rivers 
from the danger of the crocodiles, Arjuna allows the nymphs to go where 
they please. 

His heart turns once more to Chitrangada and he returns to Manipura. 
Arriving in the city, he sees the child he has sired on the princess seated 
upon the throne, the prince called Babhruvahana. Having seen Chintrangada 
again, O King, Arjuna sets out for the place known as Gokarna.” 


CANTO 220 
ARJUNA-VANAVASA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Now the mighty Arjuna sees all the holy rivers, 

\/ lakes and shrines on the shore of the western Sea. Vibhatsu arrives in 

sacred and wondrous Prabhasa, in disguise. Madhusudana Krishna, 

however, knows that he has come and goes to meet his friend and cousin, 
Kunti’s son. 

Meeting, they embrace fondly and ask after each other’s well-being. The 
two great friends, who are none other than the Rishis Nara and Narayana of 
old, sit down together. 

Krishna asks Arjuna, ‘Why, Pandava, do you wander the Earth, from 
tirtha to tirtha, shrine to shrine?’ 

Arjuna tells him all that has happened, and then the incomparable 
Vrishni hero says softly, “This is as it should be.’ 

When they have spent some time at Prabhasa, Krishna and Arjuna go to 
the Raivataka Mountain, to pass some days there. Before they arrive, 
Krishna has the mountain adorned by countless fine artisans. At his 
command, a goodly amount of food is laid out there. 

Enjoying everything, Arjuna sits with Vasudeva to watch the actors and 
dancers perform. Finally, the noble Pandava dismisses them all, with every 
courtesy, and stretches himself on a great and marvellous bed prepared for 
him. Lying there, he describes his travels to Krishna, telling him all about 
the holy rivers, the forests, lakes and mountains that he has seen. 

As he speaks, O Janamejaya, lying upon that unworldly bed, sleep steals 
over him. At dawn, he awakens to sweet songs, mellifluous vina naadam, 
and the praises and blessings of bards. When he has finished his morning 
ablutions and worship, the great dark Vrishni comes affectionately to him. 

Riding in a golden chariot they set out for Dwaraka, capital of the 
Yadavas. O Janamejaya, Dwaraka is brilliantly decked out, adorned to 


receive Kunti’s heroic son. Eager to set eyes on Arjuna, the people pour out 
into the streets and highways, in thousands upon thousands. 

In public squares and thoroughfares, countless women are out together 
with the men, in the teeming, milling crowd of Bhojas, Vrishnis and 
Andhakas. All the noble scions of those races welcome Arjuna reverently. 
He worships those that are his elders, receiving their blessings, and blesses 
those younger than him. 

The young Yadava men receive him excitedly and warmly, and he 
repeatedly embraces those that are his equals in age. Slowly, they make 
their way to Krishna’s marvellous palace, full of untold riches, rare 
gemstones and other indescribable treasures, replete with every object of 
enjoyment. Arjuna spends many days there with Krishna.” 


CANTO 221 
SUBHADRA-HARANA PARVA 


aisampayana said, “Best of Kings, a few days after Arjuna’s arrival, 

\/ a great festival begins upon the Raivataka Mountain, a festival of the 

Vrishnis, Andhakas and Bhojas, of all the Yadavas. During the 

mountain-festival, the Kshatriyas of those tribes give away untold wealth in 
charity, to thousands of Brahmanas. 

Rajan, all around that massif stand countless magnificent mansions of 
wondrous beauty, all embellished with jewels, as are the artificial trees in 
livid and fantastical colours. The musicians strike up their lively song, the 
singers sing and the gifted dancers weave their lively rhythms. How 
glowingly handsome are the Vrishni youths, majestic and vibrantly strong, 
wearing fine jewellery, riding in chariots chased with gold. 

Yes, the great citizens of Dwaraka turn out in hundreds of thousands, on 
foot, in fine chariots, with their wives and entourages. The Lord Balarama 
Halayudha is there roving where he pleases, inebriated with a surfeit of 
wine, his wife Revathi with him, and followed by numerous musicians and 
singers. 

The awesome king of the Vrishnis, Ugrasena, is there, with his thousand 
wives, also followed by sweet singers. 

Rukmini’s son Aniruddha and Shamba are also there, both tameless in 
battle, also flushed with drink, wearing the costliest garments and garlands 
of supernatural beauty, wandering about like two Devas. Akrura, Sarana, 
Gada, Babhru, Nisatha, Charudeshna, Prithu, Viprithu, Satyaka, Satyaki, 
Bhangakara, Maharava, Hardikya, Uddhava, and countless others whose 
names are lost — all adorn the mountain festival on the Raivataka, each with 
his wives and with bands of singers. 

When the festival of indescribable grandeur begins, Krishna and Arjuna 
range the place, arm in arm. As they roam together, gladly, they see 
Vasudeva’s exquisite daughter Bhadra, beautifully attired and bejewelled, 


surrounded by her sakhis. Arjuna takes one look at her and Kama Deva 
pierces his heart fairly through. 

Bharata, the Purushavyaghra Krishna sees Arjuna gaze adoringly at the 
princess, and says with a smile, ‘Ah, how can this be? That the heart of a 
vanaprastha, a forest-rover, is shaken by Kama? That girl is my half-sister, 
Partha, and Balarama Sarana’s sister. 

Be you blessed, her name is Bhadra and she is my father’s favourite 
daughter. So tell me if your heart is fixed upon her, and I will speak to my 
father Vasudeva myself.’ 

Arjuna replies, ‘She is Vasudeva’s daughter and Vaasudeva’s sister; she 
is so beautiful, who could resist her? Krishna, if this sister of yours, 
princess of the Vrishnis, becomes my wife, I will truly find fortune in all 
things. Tell me, Janardana, how can I make her mine? I will do anything 
that a man can possibly do to gain her.’ 

Krishna says, ‘Purusharishabha, for Kshatriyas the way of swayamvara 
is ordained. Yet it is uncertain, chancy, Partha, since we do not know the 
girl’s mind. For daring Kshatriyas, the Sages advocate marriage by 
abduction. Arjuna, carry my beautiful sister away forcibly, for who knows 
whom she might choose at a swayamvara.’ 

Having decided, Krishna and Arjuna send swift messengers to 
Yudhishtira in Indraprastha, telling him what they intend. Yudhishtira gives 
his consent immediately.” 


CANTO 222 
SUBHADRA-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


aismapayana said, “Arjuna receives news of Yudhishtira’s 

V/ concurrence, O Janamejaya. He goes to Krishna’s father, Vasudeva, 

and gets his consent as well. The bull of the race of Bharata learns 

that Subhadra has gone to the Raivataka and rides there in Krishna’s mighty 

golden chariot, upon which rows of little bells ring, in which every kind of 

weapon is stored, which is as bright as blazing fire, whose wheels rumble 

like thunderheads, to which the magnificent steeds Saibya and Sugriva are 
yoked, which ratha strikes terror in the hearts of all enemies. 

Wearing kavacha, carrying his sword, his fingers sheathed in gloves of 
leather, Arjuna sets out as if on a hunt! 

Meanwhile, Subhadra has worshipped Raivataka, prince among hills. 
She has worshipped the Gods and made the Brahmanas say blessings over 
her; she has walked around Raivataka in pradakshina and is on her way 
back to Dwaravati, when all on a sudden, Kunti’s son, shot through by the 
flowery shafts of Kama, swoops upon the flawless Yadava girl, hauls her 
into his chariot and flashes away towards Indraprastha, that tiger among 
men, with the girl of sweet smiles. 

When Subhadra’s armed guards see what has happened, and there is 
nothing they can do about it, they run shouting and crying out, back to 
Dwaraka. Arriving in the city, and rushing into the divine sabha, the 
Sudharma, hysterically they describe what has happened to the court’s chief 
official, telling of Partha’s inexorable prowess. 

That man sounds his golden trumpet echoingly, calling everyone to 
arms. From every side, the Vrishnis, Bhojas and Andhakas swarm in 
response to the clarion blast — those that had been eating leave their food 
and come, they that had been drinking fling aside their goblets and fly to 
answer the sound for danger. 


Those Purushavyaghras, irresistible Yadava warriors, fill the grand sabha 
and take their places upon the thousand golden thrones within the court, its 
floor covered by unworldly carpets, and its walls and seats sparkling with 
myriad jewels, with corals that blaze like red fire. Indeed, they take their 
places upon those thrones, like fires ablaze themselves, just fed with fresh 
faggots to burn more brightly. 

When they all sit in that sabha that is indeed like a court of the Devas, 
the chief official of the sabha relates what Arjuna has done, while those 
standing behind him, who bring the news, add details. Almost all of them 
red-eyed at that hour with drink, the haughty Vrishni heroes rise as a man in 
rage. 

Some cry, ‘Yoke our chariots!’ 

Others say, ‘Fetch our weapons!’ 

Others roar, ‘Get our bows and our armour!’ 

Some of them shout commands to their sarathies to harness their rathas, 
while some are so impatient that they run out to do it themselves, yoking 
their fine horses caparisoned in gold to their chariots. Such a din they make, 
while their chariots, mail and standards are being fetched. 

Fair and tall as the peak of Kailasa, wearing blue robes, colourful 
vanamalas of wildflowers from the forest, great, proud and drunkest of all, 
Baladeva, the mighty Balarama says, ‘Fools, what are you doing when 
Krishna sits silent? All of us rage and roar in vain until we know his mind. 
Let Janardana Mahatman tell us what he thinks we should do, and then do 
what he says.’ 

Immediately, the others all cry, as a man, “Excellent! Excellent!’ and 
then fall silent and sit down again in their places in the Sudharma. 

Decorum restored, Balarama Parantapa says to Krishna, ‘Why, Krishna, 
do you sit silently gazing? Achyuta, for your sake we welcomed and 
honoured Kunti’s son, but it seems that the wretch hardly deserved our 
adorations. What honourable or well-born man would break a plate after 
having eaten from it? Even if he did wish to marry her, should he not have 
remembered how well we treated him, and not acted so rashly? 

The Pandava has shown us and you his contempt today! He has dared 
outrage Subhadra: he has courted his own death. He has set his foot upon 
the crown of my head. Krishna, shall I bear this tamely? Shall I not resent 
it, even as a deadly snake does being trodden upon? Why, by myself I will 


rid the Earth of all the Kauravas today! I will not tolerate what Arjuna has 
done.’ 

To the last man, every Bhoja, Vrishni and Andhaka present approves of 
what Baladeva says: they roar all together, as reverberantly as a battery of 
deep drumrolls or thunderclouds.” 


CANTO 223 
HARANAHARANA PARVA 


aisampayana said, “When all the Vrishni heroes repeatedly echo 
\/ Balarama’s angry sentiments, Krishna speaks these words of true 
dharma, full of profound meaning. 

‘Arjuna has not insulted or dishonoured our clan by what he did, rather 
he has honoured us. Partha knows that we Satwatas are never mercenary. 
The Pandava also thought the outcome of a swayamvara was uncertain. 
Then, who could approve of being given a bride as a gift, just as if she were 
some animal? And what man on Earth worth his name would sell his child? 

I believe that Arjuna considered all these possibilities, saw their 
shortcomings, and only then decided to abduct Subhadra, as is consistent 
with the highest Kshatriya dharma. 

This is a proper and equal match. Subhadra is a well-renowned girl, and 
Partha also has great fame. Is it not possible that Arjuna thought carefully 
of all this before abducting her? 

Who would not want Arjuna, scion of the race of Bharata and Shantanu, 
son of Kuntibhoja’s daughter, besides, for his friend and ally? Other than 
the three-eyed Lord Mahadeva, no one in the three worlds, including Indra 
and the Rudras, can vanquish Partha in battle. 

His chariot has much fame, and yoked to it are my own horses. As a 
warrior, Partha has incomparable renown; his lightness of hand is legend. 
Who will defeat him? 

This is my opinion, and I think that you should go happily after Arjuna 
and bring him back to Dwaraka with conciliation. If he defeats us in battle 
and returns to his city, we will have lost our honour. But in conciliation 
there is no disgrace.’ 

O King, they listen to Krishna and do as he says. Accosted with respect 
by the Vrishnis, Arjuna returns to Dwaraka and is formally married to 


Subhadra. Adored by the sons of the House of Vrishni, steeped in every 
pleasure, in delight, Arjuna spends a full year in the Ocean city. 

Later, he leaves with Subhadra and spends the final year of his exile in 
sacred Pushkarakshetra. When he has served twelve years in exile, he 
returns home to Khandavaprastha and first of all comes before the king, and 
worships his elder brother. He next reveres the Brahmanas of the court. 
Only then, does he go to Draupadi. 

In the grip of jealousy, Draupadi flashes angrily at him, “Why are you 
here, Kaunteya? Go to the Satwata princess! A second knot always loosens 
the first one.’ 

And Krishnaa sobs piteously. Dhananjaya pacifies her, repeatedly asking 
her to forgive him. He then goes back to where Subhadra waits outside the 
city, wearing red silk. Arjuna brings her into the palace dressed not as a 
princess but as a simple cowherdess. However, she only looks more regal 
and beautiful than ever in that humble attire. 

Bhadra of great fame, of the big and slightly red eyes first goes to touch 
the feet of Kunti and have her blessing. Overwhelmed by affection, Kunti 
lovingly sniffs the head of the young woman of flawless features, and 
pronounces infinite blessings upon her. 

Then Subhadra, her face like the full moon, goes to Draupadi and says 
straightaway, ‘I am your daasi, your maid!’ 

Krishnaa jumps up and hugs Vaasudeva Krishna’s sister to her in love, 
crying, ‘May your husband be without an enemy!’ 

Delighted, Subhadra cries back, ‘Tathaastu! So be it!’ 

From that time, O Janamejaya, those great Kshatriyas, the Pandavas, live 
in great happiness together, and Kunti, too, is happy. 

When Krishna Parantapa, Nishkalankaatma, his eyes also pure as lotus 
petals, hears the Pandavottama Arjuna has returned to Indraprastha, he goes 
there with Balarama and other great shuras and Kshatriyas of the Vrishni 
and Andhaka tribes, and with his own brothers, sons and many magnificent 
heroes. 

Krishna comes with a great army to protect him; with him, comes the 
most liberal and intelligent Akrura, Senapati of the Vrishni legions. 
Anadhrishti of mighty prowess, Uddhava of great fame and wisdom, 
Mahatman and Brihaspati’s own sishya ride with Saurin Krishna, as do 
Satyaki, Salyaka, Kritavarman, Satwata, Pradyumna, Samba, Nisatha, 


Sanku, Charudeshna, Jhilli of untold might, Viprithu, Sarana Mahabaho, 
Gada, greatest among learned men. 

These and many other Vrishnis, Bhojas and Andhakas come to 
Indraprastha, bringing wedding gifts for Arjuna and Subhadra, past 
counting. When King Yudhishtira hears that Madhava has arrived, he sends 
the twins out to receive him. Received by Nakula and Sahadeva, the 
glittering Vrishni host, flying bright flags and _ standards, enters 
Khandavaprastha. 

The streets have been swept, washed, and decked with garlands and a 
profusion of flowers. They are again sprinkled with water mixed with 
sandalwood paste, which renders them cool and fragrant. The scent of 
burning aloe fills every corner of the city, which bustles with its healthy, 
happy people, with fine merchants and tradesmen. 

Purushottama Kesava Krishna, Mahabaho, enters Indraprastha, with 
Rama and many other great Vrishnis, Bhojas and Andhakas, and is 
worshipped by the people, and by thousands of Brahmanas. At last, Krishna 
arrives at the king’s palace, which is like the palace of Indra himself. 

Yudhishtira first welcomes Balarama, the eldest, with every ceremony. 
He then sniffs the top of Krishna’s head and embraces him. Krishna, 
gratified, humbly worships Yudhishtira. He pays homage to Bhima, that 
great tiger among men. Kunti’s son Yudhishtira now receives the other 
Vrishni, Bhoja and Andhaka chieftains with honour and appropriate 
ceremony: he reveres his elders and affectionately welcomes the rest as 
equals. In their turn, some of them worship him, while others greet him 
affectionately. 

Now, Krishna of immense fame gives the clan of Arjuna, the 
bridegroom, lavish wealth; he gives Subhadra the gifts that her kinsfolk 
have sent. Krishna gives the Pandavas a thousand chariots of gold, adorned 
with fine rows of bells, each yoked to four pedigreed horses, and driven by 
the finest charioteers. 

He gives them ten thousand cows from the land of Mathura, all of rich 
colouring and yielding copious milk. Happily, Janardana also gives a 
thousand mares, with golden harnesses, steeds white as moonbeams. He 
gives them a thousand mules, highly trained and obedient, and quick as the 
wind: these are white, as well, with black mane. 

He of the lotus petal-like eyes gives the Pandavas a thousand young 
girls, skilled at drawing baths and pouring wine and at every other form of 


personal service, all of them virgins yet to have their first period, each one 
beautifully clad and wearing a hundred bits of gold around their necks, their 
skins like satin. 

Janardana also gives them lakhs of draft horses from the land of the 
Bahlikas as part of Subhadra’s opulent dowry. Krishna, best of the 
Dasarhas, also gives Subhadra ten palanquins of gold, blazing like fire, 
some purified and some still ore. 

Balarama Halayudha, ever fond of battle and brave deeds, gives Arjuna 
a thousand war elephants — tuskers with ichor flowing in three streams? 
from their great bodies for a wedding gift. Each one is as big as a mountain 
peak, inexorable in battle, carrying fine thrones upon their richly 
caparisoned backs, adorned with golden ornaments, tinkling golden bells. 

It is a tide of treasures that the Yadavas give as Subhadra’s dower, and 
the fine silks, shawls and carpets are the foam of that great wave, the war 
elephants its crocodiles and sharks, and the banners and flags, its floating 
reeds! All these flow into the wealth of the Pandava ocean, filling it to the 
brim, so that their enemies grieve sorely. 

Yudhishtira accepts those gifts humbly and worships all the great 
warriors of the Vrishni and the Andhaka races. The shining heroes of the 
Kurus, the Vrishnis and the Andhakas spend their days together in 
uninterrupted revelry and enjoyment, even as good men do in heaven’s 
delights after they die. 

The Kurus and the Yadavas amuse themselves variously, at times their 
loud shouts of joy echoing against the sky, and the clapping of hands, too. 
Many days they spend together, in sport and merriment of every sort, the 
guests being honoured and adored by their hosts, until at last the Yadavas 
turn home towards Dwaravati upon the Sea. 

The great Vrishni and Andhaka warriors set out with Balarama at their 
head. They take with them the gemstones that shine with the purest rays, 
given them by the Kurusthamas. O Bharata, Krishna Mahatman remains in 
Indraprastha with Arjuna. They range the banks of the Yamuna together in 
quest of deer; Krishna hunts both deer and boar with Arjuna, piercing them 
with arrows. 

In a while, Krishna’s favourite sister Subhadra gives birth to a 
resplendent son, even as Puloma’s daughter, Sachi, queen of Devaloka, 
brought Jayanta forth. The child has long arms, a wide chest, and eyes as 


big as a bull’s. They name that little hero, that bane of his enemies to be, 
Abhimanyu, because he is both fearless and ferocious. 

Arjuna begets the magnificent prince in the Satwata princess, even as fire 
from a sami twig by friction. When Abhimanyu is born, Yudhishtira gifts 
ten thousand cows and golden coins past counting to holy Brahmanas. From 
his infancy, the boy is a favourite of Krishna, Arjuna and his uncles, even as 
the Moon is of all Manavas! 

When he is born, Krishna performs the rites of childhood for him, and 
Abhimanyu grows like the Moon waxing during the bright fortnight. 
Quickly, he masters the Vedas and the sastra shastra, the use of weapons 
both mundane and celestial, which has four great branches and ten smaller 
divisions, from his father Arjuna. 

Endowed with great strength, the boy also learns how to counter astras 
loosed at him by others; his lightness of hand, and his fleetness of foot in 
every direction, forwards and backwards, sideways and all around, 
wheeling, are past remarkable. Abhimanyu is his father’s equal in his 
knowledge of the Shastras and kriya-karmas. 

Arjuna looks at his boy and is filled with joy. As Indra Maghavat would 
become joyful whenever he gazes down upon Arjuna, so does Dhananjaya 
become delighted when he sees Abhimanyu, who has upon his body every 
auspicious sign and mark, and who is invincible in battle, and can kill any 
adversary that comes before him. 

He is broad-shouldered as a bull, great and wide is his face like a 
serpent’s hood, and he is as proud and magnificent as a lion. He wields a 
great bow, and his prowess is like that of an elephant in musth. Ah, he is as 
handsome as the Moon when he is full; his voice is as deep as booming 
drums or rumbling thunderheads; why, he is his uncle, Krishna’s, equal in 
courage and energy, in his sheer beauty and the perfection of his features. 

Meanwhile, Panchali also has five sons, one by each of her husbands, 
and those princes are all exceptional warriors, invincible in battle, 
unshakable as hills. She bears Prativindhya by Yudhishtira, Sutasoma by 
Vrikodara, Srutakarman by Arjuna, Satanika by Nakula, and Srutasena by 
Sahadeva — she brings forth those five shuras even as Aditi did the Adityas. 

Prescient and mystic Brahmanas say to Yudhishtira that because his son 
would bear the missiles of his enemies as the Vindhya Mountains do 
raindrops, he should be called Prativindhya.The son Draupadi bears 


Bhimasena is born after Bhima performs a thousand Soma yagnas, and so 
he should be named Sutasoma. 

Arjuna’s son is born after his return from his exile, during which he 
performs so many legendary feats, so that prince is named Srutakarman, for 
his father’s fame.Nakula names his son Satanika after an enlightened and 
great Rajarishi of yore, born in the line of Kuru. 

The son that Draupadi bears by Sahadeva is born under the constellation 
Krittika, or Vahni Daivata, and he is named after the Senapati of the army 
of the Devas: the Lord Srutasena, who is more commonly known as 
Kartikeya. 

Draupadi’s five sons are all born a year apart, and they grow to be 
famous and devoted to one another. Rajan, Dhaumya performs all their 
childhood rites in accordance with the Shastras — the chudakarana, when 
their heads are first shaved, and the upanayana — the investiture with the 
sacred thread. 

They are all princes of dharma, well behaved and of excellent vows; 
when they have studied the Vedas, they go on to learn archery and to 
acquire the astras, both mundane and celestial, from Arjuna. O Tiger among 
kings, the Pandavas see their broad-chested magnificent sons truly equal to 
Devaputras all turn into Maharathas, and they are filled with joy.” 


° From their temples, ears and anus. 


CANTO 224 
KHANDAVA-DAHA PARVA 


aisampayana said, “Living in Indraprastha, after having been sent 

\/ there by the command of Dhritarashtra and Bhishma, the Pandavas 

begin to bring other kings under their sway. Their subjects live in the 

realm of Yudhishtira Dharmaputra as happily as a soul does in a body that 
bears every auspicious mark and has great punya. 

Bharatarishabha, Yudhishtira lives by dharma, artha and kama, in due 
proportion, as if each of them is his friend dear to him as his own self. 
Indeed, it appears that these three purusharthas become personified on 
Earth, and King Yudhishtira shines among them as the fourth aim of life. 

With Yudhishtira for their king, his people find a ruler who devotes 
himself to the regular study of the Vedas, one who constantly performs the 
Mahayagnas, and one who is the guardian of all the good. Through 
Yudhishtira’s influence, all the kings of the Earth find unwavering good 
fortune; their hearts turn naturally in dhyana to the Parabrahman, and 
dharma swells in a tide everywhere, in every way. 

And with his four brothers around him, and helped by and depending on 
them, that king shines forth as a great sacrifice does, when the four Vedas 
attend upon it. Countless learned Brahmanas, with Dhaumya at their head, 
each one like a Brihaspati, wait upon Yudhishtira, just as the Devas and 
other celestials do upon Brahma. 

The people love Yudhishtira; their eyes and their hearts are full of him 
who is like a stainless full moon. They adore him not only because he is 
their king but for himself. On his part, he always does what is good for 
them, what delights them. Sweetly-spoken, intelligent and wise Yudhishtira 
never speaks a harsh word, nor a lie or anything hurtful or inappropriate. 

That best of all kings of the line of Bharata, blessed with unflagging 
vitality, passes his days in joy looking after his people as well as he looks 


after himself. With their dauntless prowess, his brothers bring other 
kingdoms under Yudhishtira’s power, and they also spend their days in 
blemishless happiness, without an enemy to threaten their peace. 

One day, Arjuna says to Krishna, ‘Summer is here, Madhusudana. Let us 
go to the banks of the Yamuna and sport there all day and return in the 
evening with our companions, Janardana.’ 

Krishna says, “Kaunteya, my very wish! Let us go and sport in the 
waters as we please, Partha, taking our friends with us.’ 

With Yudhishtira’s leave Arjuna and Krishna set out with many friends 
for the banks of the river. Arriving at a certain place, sylvan with tall trees, 
and with many fine and lofty mansions, furnished with rare food and drink, 
with dazzling garlands and scented with fine perfumes, all for the pleasure 
of Krishna and Arjuna, a place that looks like a city in Devaloka, the 
companions immediately go into the lavish apartments within, shimmering 
with precious jewels, and out of the heat of the day. 

Once inside, they begin to take their pleasure as they please, O Bharata. 
The women, all with full round hips, deep bosoms and large bright eyes, 
unsteady on their feet from the wine they have drunk, begin to cavort 
exactly as Krishna and Arjuna direct them to. 

Some women go into the woods and frolic there, others wade directly 
into the river, while the rest make merry inside the mansions. Draupadi and 
Subhadra, exhilarated with wine, begin to give away their costly robes and 
ornaments to those women, some of whom burst into joyful song while 
others dance in abandon; others joke and laugh loudly, all the while 
imbibing more drink. 

Soon, some of them argue and quarrel among themselves, while others 
speak intimately together in soft voices. Those mansions and the woods all 
around are full of the enchanting music of flute, lute and quiet drums; ah, it 
is a place of delight and fortune embodied. 

Things being so, Krishna and Arjuna go off by themselves into the 
nearby forest to another place also full of fascination. The great souled 
Krishna and Arjuna, conqueror of enemy cities, sit there upon two priceless 
thrones; they sit talking about many things, among these, of great heroes of 
the past and their legends. 

Suddenly, a Brahmana appears before Krishna and Arjuna, sitting there 
like the Aswin twins of heaven. The Brahmana is tall as a sala tree; his skin 


is like molten gold; his beard is bright yellow and tinged with green; and his 
body great and wide in proportion to his height. 

He wears jata on his head and rags upon his body, but he is as brilliant as 
the morning Sun. His eyes are wide and long as lotus petals and tawny; he 
truly blazes with splendour. Seeing this Brahmana coming towards them, 
Arjuna and Krishna quickly rise and stand respectfully, waiting for him to 
speak.” 


CANTO 225 
KHANDAVA-DAHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “That Brahmana speaks to Arjuna, and to Krishna 

\/ of the Satwatas, saying, ‘You, who are so near the Khanadava vana, 

are the greatest Kshatriyas on Earth. I am a voracious Brahmana and 

I always eat a lot. O Vrishni, O Partha, I ask you to appease my raging 
hunger: give me enough to eat!’ 

Krishna and the Pandava say, ‘Tell us what food you want and we will 
try to give it to you.’ 

The blazing Brahmana says, ‘I do not crave ordinary food. Know that I 
am Agni! Give me food that I can consume. Indra constantly protects this 
Khandava forest, and for that reason I cannot devour it. Deep in this vana 
there lives the Naga Takshaka, with his brood and his followers, and he is 
Indra’s friend. 

For his sake, the Vajradhari protects the forest and all the other creatures 
that live in it. Ah, I long to devour the Khandava vana, but the might of 
Indra prevents me every time I try. Whenever I blaze forth in flames, Indra 
pours down torrents of rain that extinguish them. Many attempts have I 
made to consume this vana and always I have failed. 

I cannot contain my hunger for this forest and I come as a supplicant to 
the both of you, who are masters of weapons. If you help me, I know that I 
can have the food that I want — this jungle. With your astras, keep Indra’s 
rains from falling and prevent any creature that dwells inside the Khandava 
vana from escaping, when I begin to feed!’ says Agni in his deep and 
crackling voice.” 

Janamejaya said, “Why did Agni want to devour the Khandava vana, full 
of all kinds of creatures and protected by the king of the Devas? Surely, 
there must have been some grave cause for him to want to do this thing. O 
Brahmana, tell me about it in detail. Tell me also, O Muni, how the 
Khandava vana was consumed of old.” 


Vaisampayana said, “Purushottama, I will tell you the tale of the 
conflagration that consumed the Khandava vana, as it has been told by the 
Rishis in the Purana.There was a king called Swetaki blessed with untold 
strength and valour, who was an equal of Indra himself. No one on Earth 
was his peer, in yagnas, in daana or gyana. 

Swetaki performed the five Mahayagnas and many others, too, at all of 
which he gave bountifully to the Brahmanas present. That king’s heart, 
Rajan, was always turned towards sacrifices, religious rites, and charity and 
gifts of every kind. 

King Swetaki of great intellect undertook an endless sacrifice, until the 
Ritviks who performed the rituals grew weak with exhaustion, their eyes 
sore from years of being exposed to smoke from the agnikunda, and they 
left that king, never wanting to participate in his yagnas anymore. However, 
the king never ceased asking his priests to return, which they refused to do 
because of their sore and painful eyes. 

Those Ritviks told him to ask other priests to complete the sacrifice that 
they had begun, which he did. After a short interval, the king wanted to 
perform yet another sacrifice, now one that would last a hundred years. But 
no priest could he find to help him with it. 

Taking his family and friends with him, that famed king went and 
repeatedly implored the Ritviks, bowing to them again and again, praising 
them with the sweetest words, and with more munificent gifts. All of them 
refused to undertake to perform the king’s grand yagna. 

Now that Rajarishi flew into a rage. He said to those Brahmanas in their 
asramas, “Brahmanas, if I were a sinner, or if I did not revere you properly 
or serve you as I have done, surely I would deserve to be abandoned by all 
of you, without scruple. But neither am I depraved, nor do I fail to pay 
unfailing homage to you. Brahmanottamas, it does not become you to 
abandon me and to prevent me from performing the Mahayagna on which I 
have set my heart. 

Brahmanas, I seek refuge in you! Bless me, be kindly towards me. If you 
do not help me, it would seem to be out of enmity, and without just cause; 
and I will then take my service, my homage and my gifts to some other 
Brahmanas, and beg them to perform my sacrifice.’ 

With this, the king fell silent. Parantapa, those priests knew very well 
that they could not sit at Swetaki’s yagna. So they pretended to be annoyed 
and said acerbically, “Best of kings, your sacrifices are incessant and 


endless! By performing them for years and years we have become tired and 
weak: in view of this, it becomes you to spare us. 

Anagha, sinless, you have lost your judgement and impatiently come to 
us again and again. Go to Rudra! He will help you with your yagna.’ 

Now King Swetaki became truly angry. He went away to the mountains 
of Kailasa, and sat there in tapasya. Rajan, keeping the sternest vratas, 
Swetaki worshipped Mahadeva Siva with fervid dhyana. For a long time, he 
ate only fruit and roots, at times at the twelfth hour, at others only at the 
sixteenth of the entire day. 

For six months, King Swetaki stood in meditation, with his arms raised 
skywards and his eyes unblinking, like the trunk of a tree or a stone column 
planted in the ground. O Bharata, finally Sankara became pleased with that 
tiger among kings, and appeared before him. 

The God spoke in a calm, solemn voice to Swetaki, “Rajavyaghra, 
Parantapa, I am pleased with your tapasya. Be you blessed. Ask me now for 
the boon that you want, O King.’ 

The Rajarishi bowed low before Rudra of measureless tejas, and said, 
‘Most Illustrious, O you whom the three worlds worship, if you are truly 
pleased with me, Mahadeva, then help me perform my sacrifice yourself, O 
Devadeva.’ 

The God smiled and replied gently, ‘We do not perform sacrifices 
ourselves, but since you have done such penance, Rajan, I will indeed help 
you with your yagna, but on one condition. 

Rajaadhiraja, King of kings, if you pour libations into a sacred fire 
without pause for twelve years, with perfect devotion, being celibate all the 
while, then you shall have what you have asked for.’ 

King Swetaki did what Rudra said, and when twelve years had passed he 
came back to the Trisulin, to Maheswara. When Sankara, Creator of the 
worlds, saw the most excellent King Swetaki, he said at once, gratified, 
“You have satisfied me, Rajottama, with what you have done. However, 
Parantapa, it is the Brahmana’s dharma to perform yagnas. So, scourge of 
your enemies, I will not help you myself with your yagna. 

On Earth, there lives a most pure and high Brahmana who is an amsa of 
mine. His name is Durvasa and that mighty tejaswin will help you perform 
your sacrifice. So, go and make all preparations.’ 

Swetaki heard what Rudra said and then returned to his capital, and 
began collecting everything he needed for his great sacrifice. When this had 


been done, he went again to Rudra and said, ‘Devadeva, by your grace I 
have gathered everything needed for the sacrifice: all my preparations are 
complete. Let me be installed as the Sacrificer tomorrow.’ 

Rudra summoned Durvasa, and said, ‘Durvasa, this is Swetaki, best 
among kings. Best of Brahmanas, at my command, you must help the king 
perform his yagna.’ 

The Rishi Durvasa said to Rudra, ‘So be it.’ 

The mahayagna of King Swetaki got underway, with every proper ritual 
ordained, each in its proper season. Profuse gifts were bestowed upon all 
the Brahmanas present, and when, at last, the yagna was completed, the 
other priests who had come there at Durvasa’s behest all went away, with 
the Muni’s leave. 

All the other Sadasyas, the resplendent guests who had been installed at 
the yagna, also departed. Now the noble king entered his own palace, 
adored by Brahmanas that were masters of the Vedas, and eulogised by 
panegyrics and warmly congratulated by the people. 

This is the story of the Rajarishi Swetaki, who, later, upon his time 
coming, rose into Swarga, leaving behind incomparable fame on Bhumi, 
and also accompanied by the Ritviks and Sadasyas who had helped him 
accomplish his great sacrifice. 

During Swetaki’s own worship, Agni drank ghee, uninterruptedly, for 
twelve years, the clarified butter being poured in a constant stream into his 
mouth for that period. Having drunk so much ghee, Agni was so full and 
tired that he could not drink ghee from any other hand, at any other yagna. 

Agni Deva became pale and wan, lost his colour, and he did not blaze as 
before. From that excess of twelve years, he lost his appetite, his vitality 
was sapped and he became sick. When he felt ill and weak, he went to the 
abode of Brahma, whom everybody worships. 

Approaching the great Deity upon his throne, Agni said, “Highest, I have 
drunk a surfeit of ghee at Swetaki’s yagna, and I suffer from that excess 
even now. Lord of the Universe, my splendour and my strength both wane 
daily, and I need your grace to regain my original nature.’ 

Hearing Agni Hutavaha, Brahma Pitamaha said with a smile, 
‘Mahatman, you drank a ceaseless stream of ghee for twelve years, and you 
have become ill from it. But do not despair, O Agni, you will soon have 
your health back and your pristine nature, for I will cure you of your 
sickness, the time has come. 


The fearful Khandava vana, home of the Asuras, which you once 
consumed with flames at the behest of the Devas, is now a home to myriad 
creatures. When you have devoured the fat of all those, you will have your 
glory back. So make haste, O Agni, consume the forest and all that live in 
it! That will be your cure.’ 

Hearing the Paramatman, Agni flew towards the Khandava vana. 
Arriving, he erupted, blazing forth in wrath, with his friend Vayu fanning 
his flames gustily. Seeing the forest on fire, those that dwelt within it strove 
hard to quell the conflagration. 

Hundreds of thousands of elephants, thundering about in fear and rage, 
fetched water from rivers, lakes and streams in their trunks and tried to 
douse the flames. Thousands of many-hooded snakes, panic-stricken, 
spewed water on the fire from their countless mouths. So, too, 
Bharatarishabha, every creature that lived in the forest, each in its way, 
joined in the effort, and they quickly extinguished the inferno. 

Agni flared forth again, and again the denizens of the jungle quenched 
his flames; yet again, Hutavaha burned, and yet again they put him out: all 
of seven times.” 


CANTO 226 
KHANDAVA-DAHA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana said, “Frustrated and raging, Agni Havyavahana, his 
ailment uncured, went bank to Brahma, and told the Pitamaha what 
had happened. 

The refulgent God thought for a moment, then said, ‘Anagha, I know 
how you can consume the Khandava vana even today and in Indra’s very 
sight. The ancient Gods Nara and Narayana have incarnated in the world of 
men to fulfil a purpose of the Devas. On Earth they are known as Arjuna 
and Krishna Vasudeva. 

At this moment, they are in the Khandava vana. Go to them and ask 
them to help you consume the forest. If they agree, you will succeed even if 
all the other Devas are arrayed against you. The two will surely keep the 
creatures of the Khandava from escaping, and even thwart Indra, if he 
comes to protect the ancient jungle. I assure you of this.’ 

Agni came speedily to Krishna and Partha. O King, I have already told 
you what he said to them. 

Rajavyaghra, when Arjuna Vibhatsu hears that Agni wants to consume 
the Khandava vana, against Indra’s will, he says to the blazing Deva, come 
as a Brahmana, ‘I have countless great Devastras, enough to battle with 
many Vajradharins, but, Lofty One, I have no proper bow from which to 
loose my astras, no bow strong and powerful enough to bear the prowess 
with which I infuse my archery. Also, so quicksilver is my archery that I 
will need an inexhaustible supply of arrows. 

My chariot, alas, is not mighty enough to bear the stores of shafts with 
which I would like to stock it. I wish for a chariot with the splendour of 
Surya, the thunder of whose wheels is like the roaring of stormclouds. I also 
wish for unearthly horses white as moonbeams, fleet as the wind. 

Then, Krishna has no weapon to match his tejas, no shastra with which 
Madhava can kill the Nagas and Pisachas of the vana.Exalted, you must 


provide us with these instruments with which we can thwart Indra when he 
sends his downpour to put out your flames. Pavaka, we are ready to do 
everything that manliness and strength can achieve, but you must give us 
what I have asked for,’ Arjuna says to Agni.” 


CANTO 227 
KHANDAVA-DAHA PARVA CONTINUED 


\ J aisampayana said, “When he hears what Arjuna says, the smoke- 
bannered Hutasana wants to see Varuna, who is one of the 
Lokapalas, who rules the element of water and dwells in the deeps. 

Agni turns his thought to that son of Aditi. Immediately, Varuna appears 

before Agni. 

The Fire God reverently greets the Lord of Seas, the fourth Lokapala, 
and says to him, ‘I want you to give me the bow and quiver and the chariot 
that flies the flag of Hanuman, which you got from Soma the Moon. Partha 
will accomplish a great task with the Gandiva, and Krishna with the 
Sudarshana Chakra. So give both to me today, O Varuna!’ 

Varuna immediately says, ‘Here, I do give them to you.’ 

He gives Agni the wondrous jewel of a bow, of incomparable energy, the 
bow that no weapon can withstand, which is the powerful enhancer of great 
deeds and renown. It is the lord of weapons, and the scourge of all the rest. 
It is equal to a hundred thousand other bows and it razes enemy armies. 
Brightly varicoloured is the Gandiva and it is the acquirer of kingdoms. 
Beautiful it is to behold, bejewelled, with no flaw, weakness or mark upon it 
anywhere. The Devas and the Gandharvas worship the Gandiva. 

Varuna also gives Arjuna two inexhaustible quivers, and a ratha, stocked 
with unearthly weapons, a chariot that flies a banner with a great Vanara 
upon it. Yoked to that chariot are horses as silvery as fleecy clouds, foaled 
in the realm of the Gandharvas, with golden harnesses, and as swift as the 
wind, why, even as the mind. 

Every implement of war that ratha bears, and neither Deva nor Asura 
can arrest its careen. Dazzling is its sheen and tremendous the sound of its 
wheels. It is a delight to the heart of every creature that sets eyes upon it, 
for it has been made by Viswakarman, Architect of the Universe, one of the 
Lords of creation, after great and intense tapasya. 


The chariot is as brilliant as the Sun, so that no one could gaze upon it 
for long. This is the very ratha, riding which Soma Deva had crushed the 
Danavas. Resplendent, glorious, it looks like an evening cloud reflecting the 
light of the setting sun. Golden and exquisite is its flagstaff, and the celestial 
Ape who adorns it is as fierce as a lion or a tiger. Flying high, he seems 
determined to burn up everything he sees. 

Upon other flags on the great chariot are other large creatures, whose 
yells make enemy soldiers faint. 

Accoutred in mail, armed with a sword, his fingers encased in leather 
fingerlets, Arjuna walks around that wonderful chariot in pradakshina; he 
bows to the Devas and then climbs up into the ratha like a righteous man 
does into the vimana that bears him into Swarga. 

Seeing the celestial Gandiva, eldest of bows, created of old by Brahma, 
Arjuna feels a thrill of joy. Bowing to Agni, Arjuna the powerful picks up 
the awesome weapon and strings it forcibly. Anyone who hears the echoing 
sound of the Gandiva being strung trembles. 

When he has the chariot and the bow, with the twin inexhaustible 
quivers, which well arrows ceaselessly, Kunti’s son is glad and feels equal 
to helping Agni. Now Agni Pavaka gives Krishna a chakra, a fiery disc with 
a hole at its heart, and it would become Krishna’s favourite weapon. When 
he has the chakra, Krishna becomes glad and feels that he, too, can help 
Agni. 

Pavaka says to Krishna, ‘With this chakra, Madhusudana, you can quell 
even enemies that are not human. Wielding this weapon, you will be greater 
than Manavas, Devas, Rakshasas, Pisachas, Daityas and Nagas, and you 
will surely vanquish all these in battle.Madhava, if you cast this wheel at 
any enemy, it will slay him and then fly back into your hands.’ 

Varuna Deva gives Krishna a mace known as Kaumodaki, which would 
shatter any Daitya; and when hurled in battle, it would roar loud as thunder. 

Joyful, Arjuna and Achyuta say to Pavaka, ‘Mahatman, we now have the 
chariot and weapons with which we can do battle against the Devas and the 
Asuras combined. What then of just the Vajradhari, Indra, who wants to 
fight for his friend the Naga Takshaka?’ 

Arjuna added, ‘Pavaka, when Krishna takes the field, chakra in hand, 
there is nothing in the three worlds that he cannot consume with it. With the 
Gandiva and these quivers, I, too, am prepared to conquer the trilokas. My 


lord, now blaze forth as you please, encircle this forest with your flames. 
We will help you accomplish your desire.’ 

When Arjuna and Krishna speak thus to him, Agni stands forth in his 
most incendiary form, and is ready to devour the vana. With his seven great 
flames he encircles the Khandava and begins to burn it, rather as he does the 
worlds in his apocalyptic form at the end of the yugas. Bharatarishabha, 
erupting in gigantic flames, which roar like thunderheads, Agni makes 
every creature of the jungle quail. 

Quickly, O Bharata, the forest ablaze looks even like golden, resplendent 
Meru, king of mountains, when the rays of the Sun fall upon his sides and 
summits.” 


CANTO 228 
KHANDAVA-DAHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Those two greatest among Maharathas ride to 

\/ opposite extremities of the Khandava vana and, positioning 

themselves at either end, commence a huge slaughter of all the 

creatures that dwell in the forest, on every side. Wherever either sees any 

creature trying to escape Agni’s conflagration, they flash towards them and 
cut them off. 

Why, the two chariots might have been just one, and the two warriors in 
them a single person. As the forest burns, hundred of thousands of birds and 
beasts, giving vent to frightening cries, dash about in every direction. Some 
have a limb charred, others are scalded all over, skins steamed off by the 
heat, some run towards the forest’s hem, while others just rush blindly from 
place to place in panic. 

There are those that clasp their mates and children, their parents and 
siblings, serenely and in a surfeit of love, and die thus. Some beasts leap 
high into the air or scramble up trees but quickly fall spinning into the 
blazing element below. Birds try to escape by flying but the fire catches 
them inescapably and they fall onto the ground, feathers and wings burnt, 
eyes and feet frizzled, gasping, crying out. 

All around, bird and beast die, quickly consumed. The lakes and pools in 
that forest soon begin to boil from the torrid heat, and the fish and tortoises 
in them perish. The burning bodies of the creatures of the vana look as if 
the very flames have assumed countless bestial shapes. 

Birds flash up above the flames but these Arjuna brings down with 
unerring archery, carving their bodies in pieces in the air, and they fall into 
the maw of the fire, some of them screaming. The animals of the forest 
struck by his shafts also cry out or roar, while dying. The clamour they raise 
resembles that which is heard when the Ocean was churned, in elder days. 


The towering flames reach into the sky, and the celestials are alarmed. 
The Swargavasis, the illustrious dwellers in heaven, go in a crowd to him of 
the hundred great sacrifices, the thousand-eyed, their king, that scorcher of 
Asuras. 

The heaven-dwellers say to Indra, ‘Lord of the Devas, why is Agni 
burning the creatures below? Has the time come for the world to end?’ 

Indra hears what the Devas say, he also sees what Agni is doing, and he 
who slew Vritrasura goes forth to save the Khandava vana. Indra Vasava, 
King of the Devas, fills the sky with banks and banks of thunderclouds, of 
every sort, and then lashes down awesome torrents of rain upon the burning 
forest. Hundreds of thousands of thunderheads pour down rain in streams 
thick as flagstaffs of chariots. 

The searing heat evaporates those cascades in the air before they reach 
the forest’s roof, or the flame-tips. Now Indra Namuchihara grows furious 
with Agni. An even greater mass of black cloud scuds into the sky at his 
command, and an even more copious and fierce rain flashes down on the 
burning forest. 

Roaring, hissing, flames and rainshowers battle on high, and filled with 
smoke and rent by lightning streaks, that forest is terrible, dreadful to 
behold.” 


CANTO 229 
KHANDAVA-DAHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Arjuna, son of Pandu, summons his astras and, 

\/ loosing them in a torrent at Indra’s downpour, holds the rain aloft, at 

bay. Quick as thinking, unfathomable Arjuna covers all the 

Khandava vana ablaze with a mantle, a cupola of arrows, as the Moon does 

the sky in fog, and no forest creature can penetrate that dome of arrows to 
escape. 

It transpires that, while the forest burns, the Naga King Takshaka is not 
in the Khandava vana at all, for he has gone to Kurukshetra. However, his 
mighty son Aswasena is in that jungle. Aswasena strives to escape Agni’s 
conflagration, but Arjuna’s dazzling archery prevents him. 

His mother, daughter of a Sea-Naga, is desperate to save her son. She 
thinks that she will do this by swallowing him. She swallows his head first, 
then, continues swallowing his long body. As she does this, she rises up into 
the air and seeks to flee the fire. But Arjuna sees her, and cuts her head off 
with a razor-like arrow. 

Indra is watching, and he wants to save his friend, the Naga’s, son. Indra 
blows a sudden mighty gust of wind on the forest floor, from which Arjuna 
faints briefly. Aswasena escapes. Arjuna wakes from his swoon in fury and 
begins to truncate every creature that seeks to flee the forest, into two, three 
and, some, into several pieces. 

Arjuna, Agni and Krishna curse the serpent who has escaped with 
trickery: “You will never find fame!’ 

Arjuna thinks of how Indra made him swoon and, growing angry, covers 
the sky in a cloud of arrows, seeking battle with the thousand-eyed one. The 
King of the Devas sees Arjuna’s fury and casts down fierce weapons of his 
own, also covering the firmament. 

Raging, roaring winds, which make the Seas tremble, blow great masses 
of thunderheads into the akasa, and they are heavy with rain. The 


cloudbanks vomit thunder and terrifying gashes of lightning. 

Arjuna looses the Vayavyastra, weapon of Wind, at those clouds; it 
scatters them and renders the power of Indra impotent. All the rain that the 
clouds bear evaporates, and the lightning that plays in them vanishes. In a 
moment, dust and darkness clear, and a fine, cool breeze begins to blow, 
while the Sun resumes his normal appearance. 

Agni, who drinks ghee, becomes delighted, and dripping with the fat of 
the numberless creatures he has devoured, erupts in all his flames again. He 
assumes different flame forms and his roaring fills the very universe. 

Suddenly, Eagles of the race of Garuda, richly feathered, see that Arjuna 
and Krishna protect Agni, and they fly down from the outer firmament, 
wanting to savage the two heroes with their wings like thunder, and their 
claws and beaks like daggers and swords. 

Countless Nagas, also, spitting the most virulent venom, flash at Arjuna, 
who cuts them in shreds with arrows dipped in the fire of his wrath. The 
birds also he slaughters, and Naga and Pakshi fall into the blaze below and 
are consumed. 

Now there comes a host of Asuras, Gandharvas, Yakshas, Rakshasas and 
Nagas, with terrific shouts and roars. Armed with uncanny devices that 
spew streams of deadly iron balls and pellets from their throats, catapults 
that hurl huge rocks, and fiery missiles, and propelled by their fury, these 
rush at Krishna and Arjuna. 

They rain a storm of weapons over Arjuna, but he mocks them and 
strikes their heads from their necks with a dazzle of arrows. Krishna 
Parantapa massacres the Daityas and Danavas with his chakra. Asuras of 
mountainous stature and untold might Krishna’s arrows pierce and his disc 
strikes deeply, and they are as still as little strays struck down by violent 
and mighty waves and stranded on a beach. 

Finally, Indra, riding his white elephant, thunders at those shuras and, 
raising his Vajra aloft, his inexorable thunderbolt, prepares to cast it at 
them. The scourge of the Asuras cries to his Devas, “These two are slain!’ 

Seeing the Vajra raised, all the Gods seize up their weapons. Rajan, 
Yama takes up his mace of death, Kubera his spiked cudgel, Varuna his 
legendary noose and the beautiful Varunastra. Skanda picks up his elegant 
and irresistible javelin and stands as motionless as Meru. 

The Aswins stand with shining plant weapons in their hands. Dhatri 
stands with a bow and Jaya with a thick club. Tvashtri, the powerful, in 


anger draws up a mountain by its roots, while Surya has a brilliant dart, and 
Mrityu his axe. 

Aryaman stalks the forest with a dreadful spiked bludgeon, Mitra stands 
forth with a chakra sharp as razors. O King, Pusha, Bhaga and Savitri dash 
enraged at Krishna and Partha, with bows and curved blades in their hands. 
The Rudras, the Vasus, the mighty Maruts, the Viswedevas and the 
Sadhyas, all splendent with their own lustre, and many other sky-dwellers, 
too, all armed with various weapons, run at Krishna and Arjuna, highest 
among men, to strike them down. 

During the battle that ensues, marvellous omens are seen all around, 
even like those that appear during the Pralaya, making many a creature faint 
in fright. But Arjuna and Krishna wait calmly, bows in hand, fearless and 
invincible; then they beleaguer the Deva host with astras like thunder and 
lightning, routing them repeatedly. 

The aerial legion flees to Indra, while the Munis who watch the battle 
from the sky are full of wonder to see the celestial ones beaten back 
effortlessly by Krishna and Arjuna. Indra is also pleased to witness the 
prowess of those two. 

He flies into the fray, lashing down a thick storm of stones over Arjuna, 
whose ambidextrous archery he wants to test. In a flurry of furious shafts, 
Arjuna shatters every stone. Perplexed, disbelieving, Indra of the hundred 
yagnas hurls down another gale of rocks, thicker than before. But his son 
pleases his father again by smashing this hail into dust, as well. 

Growing angry, Indra plucks a great peak from Mandara, with its stands 
of lofty trees, and flings it down whistling at Arjuna, who dissects it in a 
thousand slivers with his lightlike, fire-tongued missiles. The riven 
fragments of the mountain peak look like the Sun and the Moon dislodged 
from their places and falling to the Earth. Those still great pieces fall with a 
mighty reverberation, crushing numberless creatures of the Khandava vana 
beneath them.” 


CANTO 230 
KHANDAVA-DAHA PARVA CONTINUED 


Danavas, Rakshasas, Nagas, wolves, bears, other wild predators, 

elephants with rent temples, rut-juice flowing from them, tigers, lions 
with shaggy mane, deer, buffalo in hundreds, bird of every kind, and myriad 
other creatures fly in every direction from the falling stones and rocks. 

The forest burns, and Krishna and Arjuna stand impassive and 
impassable with weapons in hand. Dreadful sounds fill that blazing jungle, 
and the fleeing creatures stand still, trembling. Looking at the towering 
flames and Krishna — both waiting to devour them they scream and roar in 
numberless different voices. The sky shakes at that frightful sound and with 
the raging of Agni as if with deep and portentous thunder. 

Dark Krishna, Kesava Mahabaho casts his great and fierce chakra, 
burning with its own energy, at the denizens of the forest. It desiccates 
them, and they fall in pieces, Danavas and Rakshasas, too, into Agni’s maw. 
Mangled by Krishna’s disc, Asuras are painted with blood, smeared in their 
fat and look like clouds of dusk. 

Bharata, the dark Vrishni flares through the vana as death, despatching 
Pisachas, Pakshis, Nagas and every other living thing, in thousands. The 
wheeling chakra that he casts at them again and again, returns each time 
into his hands, after claiming innumerable wild lives. 

While he slays the Pisachas, Nagas and Rakshasas, the face of Krishna, 
soul of all that is created, is grim and terrible to look upon. None among the 
Devas gathered there can face Krishna or Arjuna in battle. When they 
realise that they cannot save the Khandava vana from burning, they 
withdraw, and, O King, Indra of a hundred sacrifices sees the immortals 
retreat and is filled with rarest joy; he applauds the two heroes of the Earth. 

When his gods flee the battle, an asariri, a disembodied voice, deep as 
the sky, speaks to Indra, “Your friend, the Naga King Takshaka, has not 
been killed, for he went to Kurukshetra before the fire began. Know, O 


\ J aisampayana said, “Now the creatures of the Khandava vana, the 


Indra, no one can vanquish Krishna and Arjuna in battle. They are Nara 
Narayana, those Gods of old whose fame is still told in Swarga. You know 
their strength and their valour. They are invincible; no one in the three 
worlds can vanquish these best of all the ancient Sages. They are worthy of 
being worshipped by all the Devas and Asuras, by the Yakshas, the Nagas, 
Rakshasas and Gandharvas, by Manavas, Kinnaras and Nagas. 

So, O Indra, leave this place with your celestials, for Fate has ordained 
that the Khandava vana will be consumed today.’ 

Leaving anger and envy, the Deva king returns to Devaloka; seeing him 
go, the other gods and their host follow. Arjuna and Krishna let out a lion’s 
roar, which rings through the forest. They celebrate their victory over Indra 
and his Devas. 

Having scattered the legions of heaven like clouds by the wind, the two 
now help Agni unhindered; countless creatures of the Khandava vana they 
slay with storms of arrows. Cut off by Arjuna’s dazzling archery, no 
creature escapes the burning forest. Let alone attack him, they dare not look 
at him, not the strongest and fiercest among them, for fear of his inexorable 
barbs. 

Flitting here and there in his chariot, at times he pierces a hundred 
creatures with a single arrow, then, shoots a single one with a hundred 
shafts. Dying as if felled by Yama himself, the birds, beasts and the rest fall 
into Agni’s blazing jaws. They flee to riverbanks, to hilly zones of the 
forest, to burning ghats, but nowhere do they find sanctuary from the flames 
or from the two warriors. 

Prides of lions roar in anguish. Elephant, tiger, deer and wolf scream and 
howl. The fish in the Ganga and the Sea hear that clamour and are afraid; 
Vidyadhara tribes living in the Khandava vana tremble. Mahabaho, it is true 
indeed that none of them could bear to even look at dark Krishna or Arjuna, 
so terrible are they. 

A few times, bands of Rakshasas, Danavas and tribes of Nagas rush at 
Krishna, and he promptly despatches them with his chakra. Beheaded and 
truncated by the blinding disc, their huge bodies fall into the flames raging 
everywhere. Gratified by the streams of melting flesh, fat and boiling blood 
they feed on, the flames rise unimaginably high, and they burn smokelessly. 

His eyes copper fire, his tongue a massive flame, his jaws agape, the hair 
on his head all fire, Agni Hutasana drinks what for him is that nectarine 


river of animal fat; he drinks because Arjuna and Krishna help him, and he 
is pleased indeed, he is delighted. 

Suddenly, Krishna Madhusudana sees an Asura called Mayaa fleeing the 
wild palace of Takshaka, in the heart of the forest. Vayu is Agni’s 
charioteer, and assuming a Form with jata on his head, roaring like thunder, 
the Fire God chases the Asura, wanting to devour him. Krishna sees 
Mayaasura and stands with his chakra raised, ready to kill him. 

With Agni behind him and Krishna before him, Mayaa calls out, 
‘Arjuna, fly here and save me!’ 

Hearing his terrified cry, Arjuna calls back, ‘Fear not!’ 

O Bharata, Arjuna’s very voice gives life and heart to the Asura. As soon 
as Pritha’s compassionate son speaks, telling Mayaa not to fear, Krishna of 
the Dasarhas no longer wants to kill the Asura, who is the brother of 
Namuchi. Agni, also, does not burn him anymore. 

With Krishna and Arjuna guarding him against Indra, Agni Mahamatim, 
the Fire God of immense intellect, rages, burning the Khandava vana for 
fifteen days. When that forest burns down, only six that dwelt in it escape 
with their lives: Aswasena, Mayaa Danava and four birds calls Sarngakas.” 


CANTO 231 
KHANDAVA-DAHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anamejaya said, “Brahmana, tell me, when that forest burned, why did 
J sen not consume the birds called Sarngakas? You have told us how 

Aswasena and Mayaa Danava escaped, but not yet about the Sarngakas. I 
am amazed these birds escaped, O Brahmana, tell me about them.” 

Vaisampayana said, “Slayer of all your enemies, I will tell you why Agni 
did not burn those birds when the Khandava vana burned. O King, there 
was a Maharishi calls Mandapala, who knew all the Shastras, who was 
devoted to austerity and asceticism, his vows stern and inviolable, among 
the best of all good men. He was a brahmacharin, who drew, like Rishis of 
yore, his semen virile up into his body, had perfect control of himself and 
his senses, and dedicated himself to a life of study and dharma. 

Having crossed the Sea of tapasya, O Bharata, he left his body and went 
up into Pitrloka, the realm of the Manes. However, there, he did not receive 
the fruit of his punya. 

He asked the celestials who sat around Yama, King of the Dead, ‘Why 
do the realms which I thought I had attained by my penance remain sealed 
to me? Have I not done enough punya so that the lofty realms become 
mine? Swargavasis, heaven dwellers, tell me what I must do to gain the 
fruit of my devotions.’ 

The celestials replied, ‘O Brahmana, karma causes men to be born in 
debt. There is no doubt that men are born to perform yagnas, to study the 
sacred Shastras, and to beget children. The debts of karma are paid by 
these. You are a learned Yogi of great tapasya, but you have no children. 

The higher realms are sealed for you because you are childless. So beget 
children, and you will inherit countless realms of untold felicity! The Vedas 
tell that only a son rescues his father from the hell called Put. 
Brahmanottama, strive to have sons.’ 


Mandapala listened to this and thought about how he could have the 
most number of children in the shortest possible time. The Rishi realised 
that among all creatures birds of the air are the most fecund. He took the 
form of a Sarngaka and mated with a female bird of that species, whose 
name was Jarita. He fathered four sons on her, all knowers of the Veda. 

Leaving the mother and her sons in that jungle, the Khandava, while the 
children were yet to hatch from their eggs, the Sage went to another mate 
calls Lapita, with whom he now ranged through the vana. Jarita grew 
anxious and sad, but she did not abandon her sons, the infant Rishis still 
inside their eggs. 

Later, as the Rishi ranged through the forest with Lapita, he saw Agni 
come towards the Khandava vana, to devour it. The Brahmana Mandapala 
knew what the Fire God intended, and for the sake of his unfledged children 
propitiated the blazing Deva, that Lord of the Universe, of terrific tejas. 

The Sage said to Agni, ‘O Agni, you are the mouth of all the worlds. 
You are the bearer of the sacrificial ghee. You are the purifier of every 
creature, latent and unseen inside each one. The wise speak of you as being 
One, and then again as having triune forms and natures. They make their 
offering to you, conceiving of you as having eight mouths. 

The great Rishis affirm that you created this universe, O Devourer of the 
havis, and that without you the universe would cease to exist in a day. By 
worshipping you, Brahmanas, with their wives and children, attain to the 
eternal realms that they have earned by their karma and punya on Earth. 

O Agni, the knowing speak of you as being like thunderclouds in the sky 
full of lightning. None can resist your flames, but are consumed. 
Splendorous One, you created this Universe. The Vedas are your word. 
Every creature, moving and unmoving, depends on you. Water depends on 
you, as does the Universe. 

All offerings of ghee, every ritual offering of food to the Pitrs, are 
founded in you. O Deva, you are the devourer, you are the creator, and you 
are as wise as Brihaspati. You are the twin Aswins; you are Surya; you are 
Soma; you are Vayu.’ 

Eulogised by Mandapala, Agni became pleased with that Rishi of 
measureless energy. 

The Deva said to him, ‘What good can I do for you?’ 

With folded hands, Mandapala said to the conveyor of the havis, ‘When 
you burn the Khandava vana, spare my children!’ 


Illustrious Agni replied, “Tathastu! So be it.’ 
So it was, O Rajan, that he did not consume the infant Sarngaka birds, 
when he burnt down the Khandava vana.” 


CANTO 232 
KHANDAVA-DAHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “When Agni blazed, licking up the Khandava, the 
V/ little birds were terrified and, not seeing any escape, began to 
scream. Their helpless mother Jarita wept. 

She cried, ‘Ah, the terrible inferno, which lights up the universe and 
devours the forest, flares towards us. My children are newborn and have 
neither feet not feathers with which to escape, and they are the only 
salvation of our dead ancestors. The tallest trees are consumed like wisps of 
straw and, licking up everything in his path with his great tongue of flame, 
Agni spreads fear on every side. 

Alas, neither my children nor I can escape. I cannot fly with them and 
my heart will not allow me to leave them either: which of my sons shall I 
leave and which shall I take with me? What is my dharma now? What do 
you say, my little ones, what do you think? Oh, I will cover you with my 
wings and we will perish together. 

When your cruel father left me, he said, “Upon Jaritari, my eldest son, 
shall my clan depend. My second Sarisrikka will beget children to further 
our race. My third, Stambamitra will be a Sannyasi and my youngest Drona 
will become the greatest of all knowers of the Veda.” 

But now doom is upon us, my sons. Which of you shall I take with me? 
What is my true dharma? I cannot see any way by which we will escape the 
dreadful flames!’ 

And she wailed and lamented. 

The infants spoke to their stricken mother, ‘Mother, sacrifice your love 
for us and fly to a safe place. For even if we die here, you can still bear 
other children. However, if you also die, that will be the end of our race. 
Your dharma is towards our clan, so fly! Your clinging love for us can 
destroy all of us and our hope, as well. But if you save yourself, our father, 


who is always anxious to attain the realms of heaven, can still have what he 
wishes for.’ 

Jarita said, “There is a mouse’s burrow in the ground near this tree. Go 
down into this hole at once and you will not need to fear the fire. Once you 
are inside, I will cover it with earth. I see no other way to save you from 
raging Agni. When the fire subsides, I will come back and uncover the hole 
again. You must do what I say if you are to save yourselves.’ 

The infant birds replied, ‘We have no feathers and are just four balls of 
flesh. If we go into the hole, the mouse is sure to kill us. We, also, see no 
way to escape, so that our father’s having begotten us might not be in vain, 
and our mother might also find salvation. If we go down the hole, the 
mouse will eat us; if we remain here, the sky-licking fire will consume us. 

We prefer to die by fire rather than have the mouse eat us, for the first 
death is noble and endorsed by the Sages, while the second is vile.’” 


CANTO 233 
KHANDAVA-DAHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Jarita listened to her sons and said, “The little 
\/ mouse came out from his hole and a hawk seized him in her talons 
and bore him away. You have nothing to fear in the hole.’ 

The young ones replied, “We did not see the hawk take the mouse, 
besides there might be other mice to fear in the burrow. As for the fire, it 
might not come here at all, for we see the wind blowing away from this 
place, bearing the flames with it. 

Inside the hole, we will surely die, while here there is some chance of 
escaping. Mother, it is better that we stay here. Your dharma is to escape, 
since if you live on you can have other children.’ 

Their mother said, ‘Sons, I saw the great hawk swoop down and carry 
the mouse away. While he flew, I flew behind and blessed him for having 
taken the mouse from his hole. 

I said, “King of hawks, you have taken our enemy the mouse away: may 
you live in Swarga with a golden body and without an enemy!” 

Later, when he had eaten the mouse, I returned here, taking his leave. So, 
my children, enter the hole trustfully, you have nothing to fear. I saw the 
hawk bear the mouse away and eat him.’ 

But the young ones said again, ‘Mother, we are not certain that the hawk 
took the mouse. We cannot enter this hole in the ground.’ 

Their mother said, ‘I know for sure that the hawk ate the mouse. You 
have nothing to fear, sons; go down into the hole.’ 

The young ones said again, ‘Mother, we do not say that you are lying to 
send us down into the hole. For no one can be held responsible for what 
they do when they are distraught. We have done nothing for you yet, why 
are you so keen to save us, at such cost to yourself? What are we to you? 

You are still young and beautiful, and you will find your husband again. 
Go seek him out. He will beget more fine children on you. We will find 


heavens of felicity if we die in the fire. However, if the fire does not 
consume us, you can return to claim us.’ 

The mother bird anxiously left her sons in the Khandava vana and flew 
away to safety. Agni rushed along, blazing ferociously, to where 
Mandapala’s sons were. The little birds saw the flames approach, and now 
the eldest of them, Jaritari, began to speak so that Agni heard him.” 


CANTO 234 
KHANDAVA-DAHA PARVA CONTINUED 


when death comes, he feels no pangs. The deluded soul, who is not 
heedful of death, succumbs to terror when death arrives and does not 
find salvation.’ 

The second brother, Sarisrikka, said, “You are patient and wise; the time 
has come when our lives are in danger. There is no doubt that only one 
among many has wisdom and courage.’ 

The third brother, Stambamitra, said, ‘The eldest brother is the protector; 
he will save us from danger. If he can do nothing, what can the younger 
ones achieve?’ 

The fourth and the youngest, Drona, said, ‘Seven-mouthed and seven- 
tongued, the voracious Fire God flares towards us, ablaze and licking up 
everything in his path.’ 

Haying spoken thus to one another, Mandapala’s sons now hymned 
Agni, with devotion. Listen, O King, to the praises they sang. 

Jaritari said, ‘O Agni, you are the soul of air! You are the body of the 
Earth’s plants! O Fire, water is your parent, just as you are the parent of 
water! Resplendent one, your flames are like rays of the Sun, extending 
above, below, behind and on every side!’ 

Sarisrikka said, ‘Smoke-bannered Deva, we do not see our mother and 
we do not know our father. Our feathers have not sprouted yet. You are our 
only refuge. O Agni, we are infants, protect us! O Agni, we are distraught, 
protect us with your auspicious and gentle form; protect us with your seven 
divine flames. We seek sanctuary in you. 

O Agni, you are the only one who gives heat. Lord, only you lend heat to 
the rays of Surya. We are infant Rishis, O Fire, save us. Havyavaha, bearer 
of the sacrificial ghee, we beg you, turn away from this place and take 
another path.’ 


\ J aisampayana said, “Jaritari said, “The wise person is aware of death; 


Stambamitra said, ‘O Agni, you are all things. This whole universe is 
established in you. You sustain every creature; you support the universe. 
You bear the havis, and you are the sacred havis. 

The wise know you as being one and many. You created the three 
worlds, and when the time comes, you will destroy them, Havyavaha, 
swelling forth in tides of flame. You are the cause of the universe, and you 
are the essence into which the universe dissolves.’ 

Drona said, ‘Lord of the universe, growing stronger within the bodies of 
living beings, you digest the food that they eat. So, everything is founded in 
you. O Sukra, you from whose mouth the Vedas emerged, you assume the 
form of the Sun and, evaporating and absorbing the waters of the Earth and 
every other juice of life, you send them back as rain that makes all the 
living grow. 

From you, come these green plants and trees, and these vines. From you, 
have come these lakes and pools, as well as the great and always blessed 
Ocean. Fierce-rayed, our bodies depend on Varuna for life, and we cannot 
bear your heat. Be our auspicious guardian, Agni, do not kill us! 

Coppery-eyed Deva of the scarlet neck, who leave a black wake behind 
you, burn along some other path, and save us just as the Sea might a house 
built on his shore.’ 

When Drona, chanter of Brahman, spoke thus, Agni was pleased by 
what he said. The Fire God remembered the promise he had made to 
Mandapala, and said, “You are truly a Sage, Drona! For what you say is 
Brahman. I will do as you ask. Never fear, because Mandapala has asked 
me to spare his sons when I burn the vana. What he said and what you have 
just said carries great weight with me. Tell me what to do, Brahmanottama, 
for Iam pleased indeed by your stuti. Be blest, Brahmana!’ 

Drona said, ‘O Sukra, look at these cats; they stalk us every day. 
Hutasana, devour them in your flames, all their kind.’ 

Agni did what the Sarngakas asked him to. Janamejaya, he swelled in 
tidal flames and consumed the Khandava vana.” 


CANTO 235 
KHANDAVA-DAHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “O Kurusthama, the Rishi Mandapala was very 
\/ anxious about his sons, although he had spoken to Agni to spare their 
lives. 

He had no peace, and spoke thus to his second wife Lapita, ‘Lapita, my 
children cannot walk or fly, how will they escape the fire as the wind fans 
its flames into an inferno? Their poor mother will be terrified and grief- 
stricken, when she finds that she can do nothing to save them. Ah, I can 
hear her lament in my mind. 

Oh, how is my son Jaritari? How are Sarisrikka, Stambamitra, Drona, 
and how is their helpless mother?’ 

O Bharata, stung by jealousy, Lapita said to the sobbing Mandapala, 
“You need not worry about your sons, since you say they are all Rishis 
endowed with great powers and energy. What do they have to fear from 
fire? Besides, you spoke to Agni in my presence, and did the illustrious one 
not promise to protect them? 

Agni is one of the sovereigns of the universe; he would never lie. You 
are not really anxious for your sons. I know that it is only because of Jarita 
that you have no peace. I am sure that you have never loved me as you do 
her. Oh, you so easily watch me suffer, but cannot bear to think of her in 
pain, for she dwells in your heart. 

Why don’t you go to Jarita, for whom your heart grieves so? As for me, I 
will wander alone from now, as my punishment for having given myself to 
a lustful, wayward man.’ 

Mandapala replied, ‘I am neither lustful nor wayward. I only roam the 
Earth to beget sons. Even those that I have sired are in mortal danger, and 
the evil man is he who casts away what he already has for the sake of what 
he might acquire. The world disregards and insults him. I must go to my 


children, and you can do as you please. This blazing fire that licks up the 
greatest trees makes my heart quail and fills me with ominous thoughts.’ 

Meanwhile, after the fire had left the place where the little Sarngakas 
were, Jarita flew back to her children. She found all of them safe and well. 
Seeing their mother, they began to cry, and seeing them alive she wept as 
well — tears of joy. One by one, she hugged her sons in her wings. 

Just then, O Bharata, the Rishi Mandapala arrived there. None of his 
sons showed any joy on seeing him. The Rishi spoke repeatedly to his sons 
and their mother, lovingly, but none of them made any reply. 

Mandapala said, “Which of these is my firstborn son, and who is second? 
Who is born third and which one is the youngest? I speak to you in sorrow, 
why don’t you answer me? It is true that I did leave you all, but I was not 
happy where I went.’ 

Jarita said, “What is it to you which of these is the eldest, or which 
second? What concern of yours is it who is third and who the youngest? Go 
to Lapita of the sweet smiles, lush in her youth, to whom you went, finding 
her better than me in all ways.’ 

Mandapala replied, ‘For women, nothing shatters their happiness as 
when their husband marries a second wife, or when he takes a lover. 
Nothing inflames rage and anxiety in a woman as these do. 

Even the gentle and chaste Arundhati, celebrated through the worlds, is 
intensely possessive of her husband, the great Vasishta, who is devoted to 
her happiness. Why, such is her jealousy that she once insulted that wisest 
of the Saptarishis, speaking harshly to him, and then she became a little star 
amidst the Seven Sages of the sky, at times bright and at others dim, like 
fire and smoke, and ominous. 

I look only to you for children. Like Vasishta Muni, I never wronged 
you. Yet, you insult me even as Arundhati did Vasishta of old, out of your 
insane jealousy. Men ought never to trust women, not even their wives. 
Only when they become mothers, do women serve their husbands.’ 

Hearing what their father said, his sons came forward, one by one, to 
worship him, and he spoke kindly to them, reassuring them of his love.” 


CANTO 236 
KHANDAVA-DAHA PARVA CONTINUED 


aisampayana said, “Mandapala said to his sons, ‘I spoke to Agni to 

\/ protect you, and the blazing Deva gave me his word that he would 

not harm you. It was only because of that, and knowing your mother 

is virtuous, and also knowing the great tejas which is in you four, that I did 
not come earlier. 

My sons, do not keep bitterness in your hearts towards me. You are all 
Rishis, and knowers of the Veda. Even great Agni knows you well.’ 

Having reassured them, the Brahmana Mandapala took his wife and 
sons, and leaving that charred forest, went away to another land. 

This is the tale of how Agni blazed forth, and with the help of Krishna 
and Arjuna, devoured the Khandava vana, for the weal of the world. Having 
drunk many rivers of fat and marrow, Agni is pleased, and appears again 
before Arjuna. 

Just then, Indra Purandara, surrounded by the Maruts, flies down from 
the sky and says to Partha and Kesava, ‘No Deva could do what you both 
have done. Ask me each for a boon that no man can otherwise have, for I 
am pleased with you.’ 

Arjuna asks Indra for all his weapons, his astras. Sakra of untold 
splendour says, ‘When illustrious Mahadeva becomes pleased with you, 
Pandava, I will give you all my weapons. Kurusthama, I will know when 
the time comes, and then for your stern tapasya you shall have all my astras 
of fire and of wind.’ 

Krishna asks that his friendship with Arjuna be eternal, and the king of 
the Devas grants that boon, and having given both those heroes what they 
asked, and speaking gently to Agni Hutasana, as well, Indra ascends into 
Swarga on high again, followed by the Maruts and the other celestials. 

Gratified with his mighty feast, having burned the Khandava for fifteen 
days, with all its denizens, birds, beasts and the rest, Agni is becalmed: he 


blazes no more. Having gorged abundantly on the flesh of all those 
creatures, the pleased Fire God says to Krishna and Arjuna, 
‘Purushavyaghras, I am delighted with you. I bless you heroes that you will 
be able to travel wherever you wish.’ 

Agni now vanishes, leaving Krishna, Arjuna and Mayaa Danava. Those 
three wander along a little, then come to the banks of an enchanting river 
and sit beside it.” 


END OF ADI PARVA 


Ramesh Menon was born in 1951 in New 
Delhi. He has also written modern 
renderings of the Mahabharata, 
Ramayana, Srimad Bhagavadgita, Siva 
Purana, Devi Purana and Bhagavata 
Purana, 


Cover art and design: Moonis Ijlal 





‘MK<& 


atts 
Rr AAA, 
Reef 
J as 


- - 

“Sd ~ 

” +e . a f 
-*,° OU 
AR PT 


a 
ee 





, i. rs 
; The Complete 


Mahabharata: 
7 


Volume Il 


Sabha Parva and 


Ve Vit: We oes tac) 
(Part One) 


Ramesh Menon 


as, <4 








THE COMPLETE 
MAHABHARATA 
Sabha Parva and Vana Parva (Part 1) 


THE COMPLETE 
MAHABHARATA 


Sabha Parva and Vana Parva (Part 1) 


RAMESH MENON 





RUPA 


PUBLICATIONS INDIA 


First published in 2011 by 
Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd. 
7/16, Ansari Road, Daryaganj 
New Delhi 110002 


Sales centres: 
Allahabad Bengaluru Chennai 
Hyderabad Jaipur Kathmandu 

Kolkata Mumbai 


Copyright © Ramesh Menon 2011 


The views and opinions expressed in this book are the author’s own and 
the facts are as reported by him/her which have been verified to the extent 
possible, and the publishers are not in any way liable for the same. 


This digital edition published in 2012 


Ramesh Menon asserts the moral right to be identified as the author of 
this work. 


e-ISBN: 


All rights reserved. 

This e-book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of 
trade or otherwise, be lent, resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated, 
without the publisher’s prior consent, in any form or cover other than that in 
which it is published. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
transmitted, or stored in a retrieval system, in any form or by any means, 
whether electronic, mechanical, print reproduction, recording or otherwise, 
without the prior permission of the publisher. Any unauthorized distribution 
of this e-book may be considered a direct infringement of copyright and 
those responsible may be liable in law accordingly. 


For Geetha Menon 


CONTENTS 


A Brief Introduction 


Acknowledgements 


SABHA PARVA 
Canto 1-4: Sabhakriya Parva 
Canto 5-13: Lokapala Sabhakhyana Parva 
Canto 14-19: Rajasuyarambha Parva 
Canto 20-24: Jarasandha-vadha Parva 
Canto 25-31: Digvijaya Parva 
Canto 32-34: Rajasuyika Parva 
Canto 35-38: Arghyaharana Parva 
Canto 39-44: Sisupala-vadha Parva 
Canto 45-80: Dyuta Parva 


VANA PARVA (PART I) 
CANTO 1-36: Aranyaka Parva 
CANTO 37: Arjunabhigamana Parva 
CANTO 38-41: Kairata Parva 
CANTO 42-51: Indralokabhigamana Parva 
CANTO 52-79: Nalopakhyana Parva 
CANTO 80-154: Tirtha-yatra Parva 


A BRIEF INTRODUCTION 


The last complete version of the Mahabharata to be written in India in 
English prose was the translation by Kisar1 Mohan Ganguli in the late 19th 
century. He wrote it between 1883 and 1896. To the best of my knowledge, 
it still remains the only full English prose rendering of the Epic by any 
Indian. 

More than a hundred years have passed since Ganguli achieved his 
monumental task. Despite its closeness to the original Sanskrit and its 
undeniable power, in more than a hundred years the language and style of 
the Ganguli translation have inevitably become archaic. 

It seemed a shame that this most magnificent of epics, a national 
treasure, an indisputable classic of world literature, believed by many to be 
the greatest of all books ever written, is not available in complete form to 
the Indian (or any) reader in modern, literary and easily accessible English: 
as retold by Indian writers. 

So we, a group of Indian writers and editors, warmly and patiently 
supported by our publisher Rupa & Co, undertook a line-by-line retelling of 
the complete Mahabharata, for the contemporary and future reader. Our aim 
has not been to write a scholarly translation of the Great Epic, but an 
eminently readable one, without vitiating either the spirit or the poetry of 
the original, and without reducing its length. 

This is not a translation from the Sanskrit but based almost entirely on 
the Ganguli text, and he himself did use more than one Sanskrit version for 
his work. However, as will be obvious, the style of this new rendering is 
very much our own, and our hope is to bring as much of the majesty and 
enchantment of this awesome epic to you as is possible in English. 


Ramesh Menon 
Series Editor 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


Jayashree Kumar and Kadambari Mishra edited and proofread this volume 
of the Mahabharata. I am most grateful to them for their fine, painstaking 
work. 


SABHA PARVA 


CANTO 1 
SABHAKRIYA PARVA 


UM I bow down to Narayana, and Nara, the most exalted Purusha, and 
also to the Devi Saraswati, and utter the word Jaya. 

Vaisampayana said, "Then, in Vasudeva's presence, Mayaa Danava 
worships Arjuna and, hands folded, says repeatedly to him, and feelingly, 
'Kaunteya, you have saved me from this Krishna in spate and from Agni 
Pavaka, who wanted to consume me. Say what I can do for you.’ 

Arjuna says, 'Great Asura, even by asking, you have already done 
everything. May you be blessed. Go wherever you please. Be kindly and 
well-disposed towards me, just as I am towards you!’ 

Mayaa says, 'Purusharishabha, what you say is worthy of you, exalted 
one. But Bhaarata, I am keen to do something for you, in joy. I am a great 
artist, a Viswakarman among the Danavas. Pandava, being so, I want to do 
something for you.' 

Arjuna says, 'Sinless one, you think that I have saved you from death. 
Even if this is true, I cannot ask you to do anything for me. However, I do 
not want to refuse what you ask. Do something for Krishna; that will be 
enough to requite what I did for you." 

Vaisampayana said, "Then, Bharatarishabha, urged by Mayaa, Krishna 
thinks for a moment about what he should ask Mayaa to do for him. Having 
reflected, Krishna, Lord of the Universe, Creator of everything, says to 
Mayaa, 'Build a palatial sabha, as you choose, O son of Diti, O best among 
all artists, for Yudhishtira Dharmaputra. Indeed, build such a palace that no 
one in this world of men will be able to imitate it even after the closest 
inspection, within and without. O Mayaa, build a mansion in which we 
might see a blend of Deva, Asura and Manava styles.' 

Mayaa becomes exceedingly pleased, and readily agrees to build a 
magnificent palace for the Pandava, one truly like a palace of the Devas. 
Returning, telling Yudhishtira everything that has transpired, Krishna and 
Arjuna bring Mayaa to him. Yudhishtira receives Mayaa respectfully, 
offering him the honour he deserves. Mayaa receives that honour, 
graciously, and holds it in high regard. 


O King of the Bhaaratavamsa, that great son of Diti narrates for the 
Pandavas the legend of the Danava Vrishaparva. Then, after he rests awhile, 
that greatest of artists, after deep thought and careful planning, sets about 
building a great palace for the illustrious Pandavas. 

In accordance with the wishes of both Krishna and Pritha's son, the 
Danava of untold prowess, on an auspicious day, performs the propitiatory 
rituals of laying the foundation. He also pleases thousands of learned 
Brahmanas with sweetened milk and rice, and with rich gifts of many kinds, 
then measures out a plot of land, five thousand cubits square, enchanting 
and beautiful, and suitable for building an edifice which would withstand 
every season's exigencies." 


CANTO 2 
SABHAKRIYA PARVA CONTINUED 


Veo said, "One day, when he had lived in Khandavaprastha 
for a while, happily, looked after with great love and affection by the 
Pandavas, Krishna, who is worthy of all worship, wants to see his father. He 
of the large eyes, who is due the worship of the universe, folds his hands to 
Yudhishtira and to Kunti, and lays his head at the feet of Kunti, who is his 
father's sister. So adored by Krishna, Pritha sniffs the top of his head and 
embraces him. Krishna, illustrious Hrishikesa, his eyes now filling, goes to 
his sister Subhadra, lovingly, and speaks to her — words true and excellent, 
succinct and apposite, and laden with goodness. The sweetly-spoken 
Subhadra, in turn, worships him repeatedly, her head bowed, and gives him 
many messages for her kinsfolk in her fathers home. 

Bidding farewell to her, blessing her, now Vaarshaneya comes to 
Draupadi and Dhaumya. The Purushottama pays obeisance to Dhaumya 
and, comforting Panchali, takes leave of her to depart. Then, mighty, wise 
Krishna, with Arjuna beside him, goes to his cousins. Surrounded by the 
five brothers, he is as radiant as Indra among the Devas. 

He who flies Garuda upon his banner now wants to perform the rituals 
undertaken before leaving on a journey and, purifying himself with a bath, 
puts on fine clothes and ornaments. The Yadavapungava, bull of the race of 
Yadu, worships the Devas and Brahmanas with garlands of flowers, 
mantras, prostrations, and with fine perfumes. 

When these are done, he, that best of the good and the steadfast, actually 
thinks of setting out. Krishna now emerges from the inner apartment and, 
coming out to the outer apartments, he offers Brahmanas, worthy of 
worship, vessels of curd, fruit and aval, parched-grain, making them bless 
him copiously. He gives them rich gifts, and walks around them in 
pradakshina. Finally, climbing into his exceptional golden chariot, of 
blinding speed, which flies the flag of Tarkhya Garuda and is laden with his 
mace, discus, sword, his bow Saringa and other weapons, and is yoked to 
his horses Shaibya and Sugriva, the lotus-eyed one goes forth at a most 
auspicious moment, on a fine lunar day, during a propitious conjunction of 
the stars above. 


Out of love, Yudhishtira climbs into that chariot after Krishna and, 
asking Daruka the sarathy to sit aside, takes the reins himself. Arjuna, also, 
of long arms, rides in that ratha; he walks around Krishna and fans him with 
a golden-handled, white, silken chamara whisk. Mighty Bhimasena, with 
the twins, Nakula and Sahadeva, and all the priests and the people of the 
city, follow behind Krishna's chariot. Kesava Krishna glows like a great 
Guru being followed by his favourite sishyas. 

Then, Govinda embraces Arjuna tightly, speaks to him, pays homage to 
Yudhishtira and Bhima, and embraces the twins. He is embraced in return 
by the three older Pandavas, while the twins salute him reverently. When 
they have gone half a yojana, Krishna, subduer of hostile cities, respectfully 
asks Yudhishtira not to follow him anymore. Knower of every nuance of 
karma, Govinda now humbly worships Yudhishtira and clasps his feet. 
Yudhishtira quickly raises him up and sniffs the top of his head with love. 

When he has raised up the lotus-eyed Krishna, Yudhishthira Dharmaraja, 
son of Pandu, gives him permission to leave, saying, Svasti! Krishna bids 
them kind farewell, promising to return soon. With difficulty, he keeps them 
from following him any further on foot, and then sets out for his home, 
Dwaraka, with joy in his heart, even like Indra returning to Amaravati. 
From their intense love for him, the Pandavas stand gazing at Krishna's 
chariot for as long as they can see it; later their hearts follow him, 
unsatisfied, when he is out of sight. Finally, Pritha's sons, those bulls among 
men, minds still fixed on Krishna, turn back to their city, unwillingly. 

Krishna swiftly reaches Dwaraka in his chariot, with the heroic Satyaki 
following him. Devaki's son, Sauri, with his charioteer Daruka, flies as 
swiftly as Garuda to Dwaraka. 

Meanwhile, Yudhishthira, with his brothers and friends, re-enters his 
splendid capital. That tiger among men dismisses all his relatives, brothers 
and sons, and seeks to comfort himself in Draupadi's company. Krishna, 
received with worship by the greatest Yadavas, including Ugrasena, happily 
enters magnificent Dwaraka. He worships his father, who is old now, and 
his radiant and gracious mother. He salutes his brother Baladeva, and then 
the lotus-eyed one sits down. Finally, embracing Pradyumna, Shamba, 
Nishatha, Charudeshna, Gada, Aniruddha and Bhanu, his sons and 
grandsons, Krishna goes in to Rukmini's apartment." 


CANTO 3 
SABHAKRIYA PARVA CONTINUED 


Yoo said, "Mayaa Danava says to Arjuna, best of warriors, 
'With your leave I must go now, but I will return soon. Upon the 
northern peak of Kailasa, near the Mainaka Mountains, once while the 
Danavas performed a great sacrifice on the banks of the Bindusaras, lake of 
waterdrops, I collected a treasure of varied jewels and gemstones, past 
compare. This I stored in the palace of Vrishaparva, ever devoted to 
dharma. If that treasure still exists, Bhaarata, I will bring it back, and then 
begin building the magnificent sabha of the Pandavas, which I will 
embellish with every manner of rare, precious jewel, so it shall be 
celebrated the world over. 

Also, Kurunandana, I believe there is a great and fierce mace which the 
Danava king kept beneath the surface of the Bindusaras after slaughtering 
his enemies with it. It is mighty and heavy, studded with golden knobs, 
capable of savaging armies, and equal to a hundred thousand other maces. 
As the Gandiva for you, this mace is a worthy weapon for Bhima. Also, in 
the lake is a powerful conch-shell, the reverberant Devadatta, which was 
once Varuna's. I want to bring all these for you.’ 

So saying, to Partha, the Asura goes from Khandavaprastha towards the 
north-east. North of Kailasa, amidst the mountains of Mainaka, is a massive 
peak of gems and jewels called Hiranyashringa. Next to that sparkling 
massif is the enchanting lake called Bindu. Upon the banks of the Bindu, 
long ago, King Bhagiratha sat in intense penance, for countless years, 
wanting to invoke the Devi Ganga; indeed, she is called Bhagirathi in the 
world, after that king. 

There, upon the banks of that sacred lake, Indra, irradiant lord of all 
created things, Bhaaratottama, once performed a hundred mahayagnas. He 
erected for their beauty, and not because it was ordained, yupastambhas, 
sacrificial stakes, made entirely of gold and encrusted with precious jewels. 
When he finished the hundred sacrifices, Indra, Lord of Sachi, had what he 
wanted. 

There, too, the fierce Siva Mahadeva, eternal Lord of every creature, 
dwelt, when he had created all the worlds, and is worshipped by thousands 


of ganas. There, indeed, Nara and Narayana, Brahma and Yama and Sthanu, 
being the fifth, perform their profound sacrifices when a thousand yugas 
come to an end. There, to establish punya and dharma, Vasudeva devoutly 
performed his sacrifices which lasted countless years. Tens of thousands of 
stambhas, embellished with golden garlands and vedis, altars of shimmering 
splendour, Kesava set there. 

Arriving in that place, Bhaarata, Mayaa retrieves the great sankha and 
the other crystalline and invaluable possessions of King Vrishaparva. The 
great Asura Mayaa takes Vrishaparva's entire hoard, guarded by Yakshas 
and Rakshasas, fetches it back to Khandavaprastha and there builds for the 
Pandavas a palace of incomparable loveliness, of unearthly craft, copiously 
encrusted with precious stones, which becomes renowned throughout the 
three worlds. 

He gives Bhimasena that best of maces, and to Arjuna the exceptional 
conch, at whose sound all living creatures tremble. The palace which 
Mayaa builds has golden columns and is spread over full five thousand 
cubits of land. It shines for leagues around, so it seems to dim even the 
lustre of the Sun, and it is like the palace of Agni, Surya or Soma. Its 
radiance, which is a mixture of Heaven's light and this Earth's, is such that 
the edifice appears to be on fire. 

Even like a bank of new clouds appearing in the sky, Mayaa's palace 
rises from the ground. The palace that Mayaa of untold genius built is 
fascinating; it is enchanting, built only with the rarest, most exquisite 
materials, with golden walls and arches, with the most beautiful paintings 
and hangings; why, it has been said that it excels the Sudharma of the race 
of Dasarhas, even the palace of Brahma himself. 

Eight thousand Rakshasas, called Kinkaras, fierce, with powerful bodies, 
blessed with untold strength, red eyes, ears pointed like arrowheads, well- 
armed and who can fly through the air, guard the Mayaa sabha. 

Inside the palace, Mayaa sets a lucid tank, in which he has lotuses, 
whose leaves are dark jewels and whose stalks are of clusters of bright 
gemstones, and other flowers with leaves of gold. Various waterbirds swim 
and frolic upon its water. Other resplendent lotuses adorn the tank, and 
golden fish and tortoises swim in it, and it is clear right to its bottom, where 
there is no trace of mud; its water is transparent like glass. A flight of 
crystal steps leads down to the water from its banks, which ripp'e in the 
gentle breezes that make the flowers quiver. 


The banks of that tank are paved with slabs of priceless marble, set with 
pearls, and it is told that many a king who comes to the banks of the water 
mistakes it for solid ground and falls in. 

Diverse lofty, great trees are planted all around the palace, verdant, their 
shade cool, and perennially in bloom, casting a spell of charm all around 
them. Mayaa creates artificial woods of scented trees, ever fragrant. 
Countless pools and tanks dot the great gardens, upon which chakravakas 
and karandavas swim. The breeze which wafts the fragrance of the lotuses 
that grow upon those waters, as well as of other flowers on land and tree, 
add to the joy of the Pandavas. 

Mayaa builds the palatial sabha in fourteen months, and informs 
Yudhishtira that it is complete." 


CANTO 4 
SABHAKRIYA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vow said, "Yudhishtira, best among men, feeds ten thousand 
Brahmanas payasa of sweetened milk and rice, mixed with ghee; 
honey mixed with fruit and roots; and with pork and venison. He pleases 
those holy ones, who have come from various lands, far and near, with 
delicacies seasoned with seasamum, prepared with rare vegetables called 
jivanti, rice mixed with clarified butter, and many different meat 
preparations, indeed with countless dishes, and every manner of fine drink. 

He gives them the most excellent robes and other garments, and fine 
garlands of flowers. The king gives them each a thousand cows, O 
Bhaarata, and the voices of the gratified Brahmanas can be heard saying, 
"What an auspicious day is this!' so loudly, all together, that what they say 
seems to resound even in heaven. 

Finally, having worshipped the Gods, with music and song, with many 
kinds of rare and wonderful perfumes and incense, the Kuru king enters the 
great sabha, where athletes, mimes, wrestlers, bards and panegyrists begin 
to perform, in turns, to please Dharma's illustrious son, with their skills and 
art. Thus, celebrating their entry into the unparalleled edifice, Yudhishtira 
and his brothers take their delight within like Indra himself in Swarga. 

Upon fine seats within that sabha, great Rishis and kings from other 
countries sit with the Pandavas. Asita and Devala are there; Satya, 
Sarpamali and Mahasira; Arvavasu, Sumitra, Maitreya, Sunaka and Bali; 
Baka, Dalvya, Sthulasira, Krishna Dwaipayana, and Suka Sumanta, Jaimini, 
Paila, and we the disciples of Vyasa - Tittiri, Yajnavalkya, and 
Lomaharshana with his son; Apsuhomya, Dhaumya; Animandavya, and 
Kausika are present, as are Damoshnisha and Traivali, Parnada, and 
Barayanaka, Maunjayana, Vayubhaksha, Parasarya, and Sarika; Balivaka, 
Silivaka, Satyapala, and Kritasrama; Jatukarna, and Sikhavat, Alamba and 
Parijataka; the lofty Parvata, and the great Muni Markandeya; Pavitrapani, 
Savarna, Bhaluki, and Galava; Janghabandhu, Raibhya, Kopavega, and 
Bhrigu; Haribabhru, Kaundinya, Babhrumali, and Sanatana, Kakshivat, and 
Ashija, Nachiketa, Aushija, and Gautama; Painga, Varaha, Sunaka, and 
Sandilya of great tapasya and punya; Kukkura, Venujangha, Kalapa and 


Katha - these learned and virtuous Sages, senses and minds completely 
controlled, and many others, as numerous as the above, all masters of the 
Vedas and Vedangas, knowers of the laws of dharma, pure, taintless in 
conduct, all attend upon Yudhishtira Dharmaputra and delight him with 
their sacred discourses. 

So, too, many great Kshatriyas are present in the splendent Mayaa sabha 
- the illustrious and virtuous Munjaketu, Vivardhana, Sangramjit, 
Durmukha, the powerful Ugrasena; Kakshasena, great lord of the world, 
Kshemaka the invincible; Kamatha, the king of Kamboja, and the mighty 
Kampana who alone made the Yavanas to ever tremble, at mere mention of 
his name, even as the Vajradhari does the Asuras known as the Kalakeyas; 
Jatasura, and the king of the Madrakas, Kunti, Pulinda the king of the 
Kiratas, and the kings of Anga and Vanga, and Pandrya, and the king of 
Udhara, and Andhaka; Sumitra, and Shaibya Parantapa; Sumanas the king 
of the Kiratas, and Chanur king of the Yavanas, Devarata, Bhoja, and 
Bhimaratha, Srutayudha the king of Kalinga, Jayasena the king of 
Magadha; Sukarman, Chekitana, and Puru that scourge of his enemies; 
Ketumata, Vasudana, and Vaideha and Kritakshana; Sudharman, Aniruddha, 
Srutayu of vast strength; the invincible Anuparaja, the handsome Karmayjit; 
Sisupala with his son, the king of Karusha; and the invincible princes of the 
Vrishni race, all as handsome as Devas - Ahuka, Viprithu, Gada, Sarana, 
Akrura, Kritavarman, Satyaka, the son of Sini; and Bhismaka, Ankriti, and 
the powerful Dyumatsena; those greatest of bowmen, the Kaikeyas; and 
Yagnasena of the Somaka race. 

All these Kshatriyas of untold prowess and might, vastly wealthy and 
well-armed, as well as many others, wait upon Kunti's son Yudhishtira in 
that sabha, all of them keen to minister to his happiness. 

Other great Kshatriya princes, who have put on deer-skin, and who 
learnt the astra shastra, the science of weapons under Arjuna, attend humbly 
on Yudhishtira. O Rajan, the princes of the house of Vrishni as well - 
Pradyumna and Samba, and Satyaki, Yuyudhana, Sudharman, Aniruddha 
and Saibya, best of men, and many other kings of the Earth, too, Lord of the 
World, wait upon Yudhishtira. 

Dhananjaya's friend Tumburu the Gandharva, as well as Chitrasena, with 
his Gandharva ministers, and many other Gandharvas and Apsaras, all 
skilled at music, song and dance, as also Kinnaras, masters of music, sing 
unearthly songs, perfectly, in beautiful voices, playing on unworldly 


instruments, for the pleasure of Yudhishtira, his brothers and the Rishis who 
grace that sabha. 

Truly, sitting in that great court, all these mighty heroes, 
Purusharishabhas of stern vows, men of unwavering dharma, wait upon 
Yudhishtira, even as the gods in heaven do upon Brahma." 


CANTO 5 
LOKAPALA SABHAKHYANA PARVA 


yo said, "While the splendid Pandavas sit in that sabha with 
the great Gandharvas, O Bhaarata, the Devarishi Narada arrives in that 
assembly, he who is a master of the Vedas and the Upanishads, he whom 
the Devas worship, he who knows the Itihasas and Puranas, why, who 
knows and is witness to all the Kalpas, who knows nyaya, logic, and the 
great and subtle truths of dharma, who knows exhaustively the six Angas.! 

He is an unequalled master at reconciling apparently conflicting texts, 
and applying general principles to specific practical instances, as in 
interpreting contraries by reference to situational differences. Eloquent is 
Narada Muni, resolute, intelligent, and he has a powerful memory. He 
knows the science of morals and politics; he is profoundly learned, skilled 
at distinguishing inferior things from superior ones, at drawing unerring 
inference from evidence, competent to judge the correctness or 
fallaciousness of syllogisms consisting of five propositions. 

Indeed, he can successfully debate with Brihaspati himself, with fine and 
decisive conclusions, accurately framed - about dharma, artha, kama and 
moksha; a Mahatman he is, and sees the entire universe, on every side, 
above and below and all around, even as if it is before his very eyes. 

He is a master of both Sankhya and Yoga, and he is always eager to 
humble both the Devas and the Asuras by stoking subtle dissention between 
them. He knows thoroughly the sciences of war and treaty, is a master at 
judging matters not within immediate ken, or obvious, as well as the six 
sciences of treaty, war, military campaigns, maintenance of posts against the 
enemy, and stratagems of ambuscades and reserves. Why, he is a perfect 
master of every branch of learning, fond of war and of music, would never 
shrink from any science or any deed; and possesses not just these but 
countless other accomplishments. 

Having ranged many other worlds, Narada Muni arrives in Yudhishtira's 
sabha. And the Devarishi, his splendour incomparable, his tejas 
immeasurable, comes, O King, with Parijata, Raivata the brilliant, Saumya 
and Sumukha. Swifter than the wind does he arrive there, flying by Rishi 
patha, and is full of joy to see the Pandavas. 


The Brahmana pays homage to Yudhishtira, by uttering blessings over 
him and wishing him success in every undertaking. Seeing the wise Narada, 
Yudhishtira, knower of every nuance of dharma, rises quickly from his 
throne, and his brothers as well. Bowing low, humbly, that king salutes the 
Muni, in delight, and offers him a lofty seat, with due ceremony. The 
Pandava king also offers him cows and arghya, honey and the other 
customary offerings. He adores Narada with gifts of gemstones and jewels, 
his heart full of joy. Receiving all this worship, appropriately, the Rishi is 
pleased. 

When the Pandavas and the other Sages there have all worshipped him, 
Narada, who knows the Vedas perfectly, speaks thus to Yudhishtira about 
dharma, artha, kama and moksha. 

Narada says, 'Is the wealth that you earn being spent righteously? Does 
your heart take pleasure in dharma? Do you also enjoy the pleasures of life? 
But does your mind sink under their weight? Lord of Men, do you continue 
the noble tradition of dharma and artha by which your sires lived and ruled 
the three kinds of subjects, the good, the middling and the evil? You must 
never wound dharma for the sake of artha, and never dharma and artha for 
the sake of kama, which so easily seduces. 

Best of victorious men, always devoted to dharma, knower of the 
timeliness of all things, do you divide your time judiciously between 
dharma, artha, kama and the pursuit of moksha? Anagha, sinless, with the 
six gunas of kings,’ do you attend to the seven ways which kings use to 
rule?* Do you, after carefully considering the strengths and weaknesses of 
yourself and your enemies, scrutinise the fourteen possessions of your foe - 
their country, forts, chariots, elephants, cavalry, foot-soldiers, the principal 
officials of state, the harem, store of food, their army's wealth, the religious 
beliefs of their soldiers, their accounts of state, their revenue, the wine- 
shops and other secret enemies? 

Having examined, best of kings, your own resources and your enemy's, 
and having struck peace with him, then do you attend assiduously to the 
eight everyday occupations — agriculture, trade and the rest? I hope, 
Bharatarishabha, that your seven principal officers of state have not 
succumbed to the influence or blandishments of your enemies, or become 
idle and complacent because of their wealth? I trust they are all loyal and 
obedient to you? 


I hope your secret counsels are never divulged by yourself or your 
ministers, or by your trusted spies who go disguised? I hope you are aware 
of what your friends and your enemies are engaged in? Do you strike peace 
and make war, each in its proper time? Are you neutral towards those who 
are neutral towards you? Kshatriya, have you made men like yourself, and 
old and sage, the restrained and continent, those who know what should and 
not be done, who are pure of blood and birth, and also devoted to you, your 
ministers? 

Bhaarata, the victories of kings are attributed to sage counsel. Child, is 
your kingdom protected by ministers who know the Shastras, and who keep 
their counsel to you close? Are your enemies helpless to harm you? You 
have not, I hope, fallen victim to sleep? Do you wake up at the proper time? 
Knowing what yields artha, do you consider in the small hours what you 
should and should not do the next day? 

I hope you neither take decisions by yourself nor consult with too many 
advisors. Do the secret decisions you take become known across the 
kingdom? Do you swiftly undertake such tasks, which are of great use and 
easy to accomplish? Are these measures never obstructed? You do not keep 
your farmers out of your sight? Do you achieve your purposes through 
agents who are experienced, incorruptible and trustworthy? Mighty King, I 
trust that the people only know about your undertakings that have already 
been accomplished, those that have been begun, and those that are partially 
completed, but nothing of those that are only being contemplated and have 
not been begun. 

Have you appointed seasoned masters, men who can explain the roots of 
events, and who know dharma and every branch of knowledge, to instruct 
your princes and the commanders of your army? You must buy one learned 
man in place of a thousand fools. It is the learned man who provides 
comfort in times of distress. 

Are your fortresses always stocked amply with gold, food, weapons, 
water, engines of war, arms and other tools, as with engineers and bowmen? 
Even one intelligent, brave minister, whose passions are under perfect 
control, and who has wisdom and judgement, can bring a king or the son of 
a king the highest prosperity. I ask you, do you have at least a single such 
minister? 

Do you seek to know everything about the eighteen tirthas® of your 
enemy and the fifteen which are your own, through thirty and three spies, 


all of whom who must not know one another? Parantapa, do you watch 
your enemies vigilantly, and without their knowledge? 

Is the priest whom you worship humble, pure in blood, renowned, and 
without either envy or illiberality? Have you engaged a Brahmana of 
faultless conduct, intelligence, and guileless, as well as thorough in the 
laws, to perform your daily rituals before the sacred agni? Does he inform 
you at the proper time when a homa needs to be performed? 

Is your astrologer skilled at reading physiognomy, interpreting omens, 
and competent to neutralise disturbances of nature? Have you engaged 
respectable servants to serve in respectable offices, indifferent ones in 
indifferent offices, and lowly ones in offices that are low? Have you 
appointed loyal, honest ministers, men born into bloodlines which are pure, 
superior and noble for generations? 

You do not, surely, oppress your people with harsh and cruel 
punishments? Bharatarishabha, do your ministers rule the kingdom in 
accordance with your dictates? Do your ministers ever slight you like 
sacrificial priests slighting men who have fallen and can perform no more 
sacrifices, or like wives slighting husbands who are haughty and incontinent 
in their behaviour? 

Is your Senapati confident, brave, intelligent, patient, of good conduct 
and noble birth, devoted to you, and able? Do you treat the chief 
commanders of your army with utmost consideration and regard? Are they 
men skilled in every kind of warfare, bold, well-behaved, and endowed 
with prowess? Do you give your soldiers their sanctioned rations and wages 
at the appointed time? You do not trouble them by withholding these? You 
do know that, when troops are plunged in misery by receiving irregular or 
insufficient wages and rations, they are driven to mutiny, which the wise 
regard as among the most dangerous harms in a kingdom? 

Are all the main noblemen devoted to you, and ready to lay down their 
lives, cheerfully, in battle for you? I hope that you do not allow any one 
man, of unrestrained passions, to rule many aspects of military concern, 
pertaining to your army. 

Do you have any excellent servants, especially accomplished and of 
exceptional ability, who are disgruntled about not receiving some extra 
remuneration from you, as well as some more regard? I hope that you 
reward men of learning, humility, and mastery over every branch of 
knowledge with gifts and honour appropriate to their merit? 


Bharatarishabha, I trust that you support the wives and children of men who 
have laid down their lives for you? 

Son of Pritha, do you cherish with a father's affection the enemy whom 
you have weakened or vanquished in battle, and the one who has sought 
refuge in you? Lord of the Earth, are you equal to all men? Can anyone 
approach you without fear, even as if you were their mother and father? 

O Bull of the race of Bhaarata, do you march against your enemy, 
immediately, having thought well about the three kinds of forces,’ when 
you hear he is weak? Subduer of all your enemies, do you go forth, when 
the right time comes, having carefully considered all the omens you see, the 
resolutions you have made, and that final victory depends upon the twelve 
mandalas?® Parantapa, do you give gems and jewels to the main officers of 
the enemy, as they deserve, without your enemy's knowledge? 

Son of Pritha, do you seek to conquer your inflamed enemies, slaves to 
passion, only after having first conquered your own mind and mastered 
your own senses? Before actually going to war against your enemy, do you 
correctly use the four arts of conciliation - with gifts, by creating dissent, 
with coercion, and only then with force? O King, do you march against 
your enemy only after first strengthening your own kingdom? And once 
having set out against them, do you then exert yourself to the utmost to 
triumph? Having conquered them, do you then protect them with every 
care? 

Does your army comprise the four kinds of forces — the regular 
soldiers, allies, the irregulars and the mercenaries? Is each of these 
furnished with the eight necessities for war - chariots, elephants, horses, 
officers, infantry, camp-followers, spies who have a thorough knowledge of 
the country, and ensigns led out against your enemies after being well 
trained by superior officers? 

Parantapa, I hope you kill your enemies, Great King, without regard for 
their seasons of harvest or famine? Rajan, I hope your servants and agents, 
in your own kingdom and in those of your enemies, attend diligently to 
their duties and watch over one another. 

O King, I hope you employ trusted servants to look after your food, the 
clothes you wear, and the perfumes you use. I hope your treasury, barns, 
stables, arsenals, and women's apartments are all protected by servants 
devoted to you, and always seeking your welfare. I trust that you first 
protect yourself from your domestic and public servants, and then from the 


servants of your relatives; and then your servants from the servants of these 
others. 

Do your servants ever speak to you, in the forenoon, about your 
extravagant spending on wine, sport, food and women? Are your expenses 
always covered by a fourth, a third or at least half of your income? Do you 
look after your relatives, superiors, merchants, the old and _ other 
dependants, and those in distress with gold and with food? 

Do your clerks and accountants come to you during the mornings, every 
day, and inform you of your daily income and expenditure? Do you ever 
dismiss, for no fault, servants who are good at their work, popular and 
devoted to you? Bhaarata, do you employ superior, average and lowly men, 
after examining them thoroughly, in offices they deserve? 

Rajan, do you employ men who are thievish, or susceptible to 
temptation, who are hostile to you, or minors? Do you oppress your 
kingdom with thieves, greedy men, minors or with women? 

Are the agriculturists in your kingdom contented? Have you caused large 
tanks and lakes to be created at fair intervals, throughout your lands, so that 
your farmers are never entirely dependent on the rains from heaven? Are 
the farmers in your kingdom wanting in seed or in food? Do you give loans 
generously to the tillers of the land, taking from them just a fourth of their 
produce in excess of each hundred measure? 

Child, are the four professions of agriculture, trade, cattle-rearing, and 
money-lending for interest conducted by honest men? For the happiness of 
your people depends on these. Rajan, do the five brave and wise men - 
those who watch over the city and the citadel, the merchants and the 
farmers, and those who punish criminals — always benefit your kingdom by 
working unitedly and closely with one another? 

To protect your city, have your villages been made like towns, the 
hamlets and the outskirts of villages, like villages? Are all these entirely 
under your sway? If thieves and robbers sack a town, do your police hunt 
them through the flat and difficult parts of your kingdom? 

Do you comfort the women in your kingdom and protect them? I hope 
that you never place any confidence in them, nor divulge any secret to 
them? O King, having heard of danger threatening, do you, after thinking 
deeply on it, still lie in your inner chambers enjoying every desirable 
object? 


Having slept through the second and third yaamas of the night, do you 
lie awake during the fourth division of night, reflecting on dharma and 
artha? Pandava, do you rise from bed at the proper time, clothe yourself 
royally, show yourself to your people with ministers, who know which 
times are auspicious and which otherwise? Bane of all enemies, do men 
wearing red, armed with swords and adorned with ornaments stand beside 
you to guard your person? 

Rajan, are you like Dharma Deva himself to those deserving 
chastisement, and to those that deserve worship, to those whom you love, as 
well as to those whom you do not care for? Son of Pritha, do you seek to 
cure yourself of bodily sickness with medicines and by fasting, and mental 
afflictions with the advice of the old and the wise? I trust that your personal 
physicians are well versed in the eight kinds of treatment and that all of 
them are attached and devoted to you. 

Does it ever transpire, O King, that, from pride, folly or greed, you fail 
to decide between a plaintiff and a defendant who come to you? From 
covetousness or neglect, do you ever deprive your dependants of their 
welfare or pensions, those who have sought refuge in you from love or in 
trust? 

Do the people who live in your realm, having been bought by your 
enemies and uniting against you, ever seek to oppose or raise dispute with 
you? Do you suppress your weaker enemies with stronger troops and wise 
counsel? Are all the main chieftains in your lands loyal to you? Are they 
ready to lay down their lives for you, at your command? 

Do you worship Brahmanas and Rishis according to their proficiency at 
the various branches of learning? I say to you, such reverence is of the 
highest benefit to you, beyond any doubt. Have you faith in the dharma 
based on the three Vedas, which was practised by men who lived before 
you? Do you meticulously follow the precepts by which they lived? 

Do you entertain accomplished Brahmanas in your home, with fine food, 
and give them rich gifts when these feasts conclude? Passions perfectly 
controlled, with undivided mind, do you strive to perform the Vajapeya and 
Pundarika yagnas, with their entire complement of rituals? Do you worship 
your relatives and superiors, the elderly, the Devas, Rishis, Brahmanas, and 
the lofty nyagrodhas which stand in villages and bless the people in so 
many ways? 


Sinless one, do you cause anger or grief to anyone? Do priests who are 
able to bestow auspicious fruit upon you always stand at your side? 
Anagha, are all your purposes and practices such as I have described, which 
inexorably increase the span of your life and spread your fame, and also 
further the cause of dharma, artha and kama? He who conducts himself 
thus, never finds his kingdom in distress or afflicted, and that king subdues 
the whole world and enjoys great felicity. 

Rajan, I hope that no man of good conduct, who is pure and respected, is 
ever ruined or has his life taken, on a false charge or through theft, by your 
ministers, either because they are ignorant of the Shastras or out of their 
greed? Purusharishabha, I trust that your ministers, from greed, never free a 
real thief, having caught him red-handed with his booty? O Bhaarata, I hope 
that your ministers can never be bought with bribes, and that they never 
decide unjustly in disputes between the rich and the poor? 

Do you keep yourself free from the fourteen vices of kings — atheism, 
untruthfulness, anger, carelessness, procrastination, not visiting the wise, 
idleness, restlessness of mind, taking counsel with only one man, consulting 
men unacquainted with the craft of artha, abandoning a project decided 
upon, disclosure of secrets, not accomplishing beneficial projects, and 
acting without reflection? These ruin even the most well established 
sovereign. 

Have your study of the Veda, your wealth, your knowledge of the 
Shastras, and your marriage proved fruitful?’ 

When the Rishi finishes, Yudhishtira asks, 'How, O Muni, do the Vedas, 
wealth, one's wife, and knowledge of the Shastras bear fruit?’ 

The Sage replies, "The Vedas bear fruit when he who has studied them 
performs the Agnihotra and other sacrifices. Wealth is said to bear fruit 
when he who has it enjoys it himself and also gives it away in charity. A 
wife proves fruitful when she is useful and when she bears children. 
Knowledge of the Shastras bears fruit when it results in humility and good 
behaviour.’ 

Having thus answered Yudhishtira, Mahamuni Narada asks that 
righteous king, 'Do your officers of government, who are paid from the 
taxes levied on the people, take only their just dues from merchants who 
come from distant lands to your kingdom, impelled by the desire to make 
profit? Are these Vaisyas, O King, treated with kindness in your capital and 


kingdom? Are they able to bring their merchandise here without being 
cheated either by the buyers or the officials of your government? 

O Monarch, do you always listen to the wise and righteous words of old 
men who know the profound doctrines of artha? Do you make the offerings 
of honey and clarified butter to Brahmanas, which make the harvest 
bounteous, swell the numbers of kine in the kingdom, yield an abundance 
of fruit and flowers, and increase virtue as well? 

Do you always give the artists and artisans whom you engage, the 
materials they need and their wages, for not more than four months 
together? Do you inspect their work and praise them before good men, and 
also reward and honour them? 

Bharatarishabha, do you live by the precepts and aphorisms of the 
Rishis, and particularly with regard to matters relating to elephants, horses 
and chariots? Are the sayings which relate to the science of arms, also those 
about the engines of war, so useful in towns and fortresses, studied in your 
court? 

Sinless, do you know the arcane mantras and all about the poisons which 
can kill your enemies? Do you protect your kingdom from fear of fire, 
serpents and other feral creatures, from disease and rakshasas? Knowing 
every dharma as you do, do you care like a father for the blind, the dumb, 
the lame, the deformed, the friendless, and for ascetics who have no homes? 
Have you banished the six evils, O King - sleep, idleness, fear, anger, 
weakness of mind, and procrastination? 

The illustrious Kurupungava Yudhishtira listens to what that 
Brahmanottama says, then bows down and worships at Narada Muni's feet. 
Delighted by everything he hears, the king says to Narada of celestial form, 
'T will do all that you say, for you have swelled my knowledge with your 
counsel.' 

Indeed, Yudhishtira does as Narada asks him to and, in time, becomes 
sovereign of all the Earth with her girdle of seas. 

Narada says, "The king who protects the four varnas - Brahmana, 
Kshatriya, Vaisya and Sudra - passes his days in this world happily and then 
attains the realm of Indra." 


} Pronunciation, grammar, prosody, the explanation of basic philosophical terms, description of 
religious rites, and astronomy. 


2 Systems of philosophy. 


3 Eloquence, generosity, adroitness in dealing with enemies, memory, knowledge of dharma, and 
knowledge of politics. 


4 Sowing dissension, chastisement, conciliation, gifts, mantras, medicine and magic. 


> The governor of the citadel, the commander of forces, the chief judge, the general in interior 
command, the chief priest, the chief physician, and the chief astrologer. 


6 Road; expedient; school of philosophy. 
7 Infantry, chariots and horse, and elephants. 


8 Reserves, ambuscades, payment given to the troops in advance, etc. 


CANTO 6 
LOKAPALA SABHAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


yoo] said, "When Narada Muni finishes speaking, Yudhishtira 
Dharmaraja worships him appropriately and then, commanded by the 
Sage, he begins to answer, briefly, the questions the Rishi has asked. 

Yudhishthira says, 'Holy One, the laws which you have enumerated are 
true and proper. As for me, I do observe those laws as best I can. For sure 
the karma done by kings of yore did bear fruit, and was undertaken from the 
purest motives to achieve the best possible objects. Master, we certainly 
wish to tread the same righteous path as those kings, who, besides, were 
men of perfect self-control.' 

Pandu's son, Yudhishtira of great glory, having reverently listened to 
Narada Muni, and having answered the Sage's question, now falls into a 
moment's thought. Then, sensing a fine chance, sitting beside the Rishi, the 
king asks Narada, who sits at his ease, and who can journey into any world 
at will, in that sabha of kings, 'With the speed of the mind, you range 
through numberless worlds created by Brahma of yore, seeing all things. 
Tell me, O Brahmana, have you ever seen, anywhere, a sabha to equal this 
one of mine, or any superior to it.' 

Narada replies, smilingly, sweetly, 'Child, O King, I have never seen or 
even heard before of a sabha among men built of jewels and gemstones like 
this one of yours. However, I will describe to you the courts of Yama, King 
of the Dead, of Varuna of vast intellect, of Indra, King of the Devas, and 
also of Kubera who has his home on Kailasa. I will also describe to you 
Brahma's celestial sabha, which dispels all unease. 

All these sabhas reflect both divine and human design, and use every 
form that exists in the universe. The Devas, the Pitrs, the Sadhyas, the 
Ganas, self-controlled Rishis offering sacrifices, tranquil Munis always at 
Vedic sacrifice, all offer worship to these sacred courts. All of them I will 
describe for you, Bharatarishabha, if you have a mind to listen.' 

Mahatman Yudhishtira, his brothers and the great Brahmanas present all 
fold their hands to beg Narada to do so. 

Yudhishtira says, 'Describe all the sabhas for us, for we surely wish to 
listen to you. O Brahmana, of what is each one made? How big is each 


sabha, how long and how wide? Who attends upon the Pitamaha in his 
court, and who upon Indra, Lord of the Devas, and who upon Vivaswan's 
son Yama? Who waits upon Varuna and upon Kubera in their sabhas? 
O Brahmarishi, tell us in detail, for all of us are agog to hear about them.' 
Narada replies, 'Listen, O King, all of you, about these sabhas of heaven, 
one by one." 


CANTO 7 
LOKAPALA SABHAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


cc arada said, 'Lustrous is the sabha of Indra, which he has Indra, got 

Nz the fruit of his punya. Splendid as the Sun, Sakra himself built 
his court. Indra's sabha can go anywhere at all, at his will; it is one hundred 
and fifty yojanas long, a hundred yojanas wide, and five yojanas high. It 
dispels the infirmities of age, grief, exhaustion and fear, and bestows great 
fortune. Fine and grand are its apartments, and beautiful the heavenly trees 
which surround it. Fine are its seats, and it is altogether delightful. 

Son of Pritha, in that sabha upon a magnificent throne sits the Lord of 
the Devas with his wife Sachi of great beauty and fortune. He assumes a 
form which defies description, a crown upon his head, bright bracelets on 
his arms, wearing pure white robes, garlands with flowers of many colours, 
and sits there with Beauty, Fame and Glory beside him. 

That illustrious Deva of a hundred sacrifices is waited upon in that 
sabha, O King, by the Maruts, who are all grihastas, the Siddhas, the 
Devarishis, the Sadhyas, the Devas, and by Marutas of shining skins, 
wearing golden garlands, with unearthly forms and shimmering ornaments. 
All these constantly attend upon Indra Parantapa. 

Kaunteya, the celestial Sages, also, all pure-souled, washed of all sin, 
resplendent like Agni, tejasvins, free of any sorrow, free of anxiety's fever, 
all performers of the Soma yagna, wait upon and worship Indra. 

Parasara and Parvata and Savarni and Galava; and Kankha, and the Muni 
Gaursiras, and Durvasa, and Krodhana and Swena and the Muni 
Dhirghatamas; and Pavitrapani, Savarni, Yagnavalkya and Bhaluki; and 
Udyalaka, Swetaketu and Tandya, and also Bhandayani; and Havishmat, 
and Garishta, and King Harischandra; and Hridya, Udarshanadilya, 
Parasarya and Krishibala; Vataskandha, Visakha, Vidhata and Kala; 
Karaladanta, Tvastri, and Vishwakarman, and Tumburu; and other Rishis, 
some born of women and others living on air, and others again living on fire 
- all these worship Indra, the Vajradhari, Lord of all the worlds. 

And Sahadeva, and Sunitha, and Valmiki of great tapasya; and Samika 
of truthful speech, and Prachetas who always keeps his word, and 
Medhatithi, and Vamadeva, and Pulastya, Pulaha and Kratu; and Maruta, 


and Marichi, and Sthanu of vast tapasya; and Kakshivat, and Gautama, and 
Tarkhya, and also the Muni Vaishwanara; and the Muni Kalakavrikshiya, 
and Asravya, and also Hiranmaya, and Samvarta, and Devahavya, and 
Viswaksena of great tejas; and Kanva, and Katyayana, O King, and Gargya, 
and Kaushika - all dwell there, with the celestial waters and plants; and 
faith, and intelligence, and the Devi Saraswati; and artha, dharma and 
kama; and lightning, Pandava; and rain-bearing clouds, and the winds, and 
all the thunder of heaven; the eastern point, the twenty-seven fires which 
convey the sacrificial butter, Agni and Soma, and the agni of Indra, and 
Mitra, and Savitri, and Aryaman; Bhaga, Vishwa; the Sadhyas, Brihaspati 
the Guru, and also Sukra; and Vishwavasu and Chitrasena, and Sumanas; 
and also Taruna; the Yagnas; the gifts to Brahmanas, the planets, and the 
stars, O Bhaarata, and the mantras which are chanted during sacrifices - all 
these dwell there. 

And, O King, many Apsaras and Gandharvas please the Lord of the 
Devas with various dances and music and songs; and with the performance 
of auspicious rites, and exhibitions of myriad feats of skill -they gratify 
Satakratu, the slayer of Bala and Vritra. 

Besides these, many other Brahmanas and Rayarishis and Devarishis, all 
splendent as fire, adorned in bright garlands and precious ornaments, 
frequently visit and leave that sabha, riding in unearthly chariots of diverse 
kinds. 

Brihaspati and Sukra are always present in Indra's sabha; and many other 
lustrous Rishis of stern vows, and Bhrigu and the Saptarishis, who are 
equal, O Rajan, to Brahma himself, come to and depart that sabha in 
vimanas as exquisite as the chariot of Soma, and themselves as brilliant as 
Soma himself. 

This, O Mahabaho, is the sabha of Indra, of a hundred yagnas, which is 
called Pushkaramalini, which I have seen. Listen now to a description of 
Yama's sabha.'" 


CANTO 8 
LOKAPALA SABHAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


Veo said, "Narada says, 'Yudhisthira, now I will tell you 
about the court of Yama, son of Vivaswat, which was built by 
Viswakarman. Listen. 

Shining like burnished gold, that sabha sprawls across more than a 
hundred yojanas. Splendid as the Sun, it yields one's every wish. It is 
neither too warm nor too cold, and it enchants the heart. No grief, no 
weakness of age, neither hunger nor thirst enter that sabha. Nothing 
inauspicious finds any place there, or even any ill feeling. 

Every object of desire, human or divine, can be found in that mansion - 
every manner of thing of delight. Sweet, succulent, delicious, pure things to 
eat, to drink and suck upon, are there in profusion, Parantapa. The 
vanamalas in that sabha are of unearthly fragrance, and the trees which 
surround the palatial court yield any fruit one wishes for. 

Both hot and cold water are to be found here, sweet and enjoyable. In 
that sabha, numerous Rajarishis, all most holy, and Brahmarishis of 
immaculate purity, O Child, happily attend upon and worship Vivaswat's 
son Yama. 

Yayati is there, Nahusha, Puru, Mandhatri, Somaka, Nriga; Rajarishi 
Trasadasyu, Kritavirya, Srutasravas; Arishtanemi, Siddha, Kritavega, Kriti, 
Nimi, Pratardana, Sibi, Matsya, Prithulaksha, Brihadratha, Varta, Marutta, 
Kusika, Sankasya, Sankriti, Dhruva, Chaturaswa, Sadaswormi and 
Kartavirya; Bhaarata and Suratha, Sunitha, Nishatha, Nala, Divodasa, and 
Sumanas, Ambarisha, Bhagiratha; Vyaswa, Sadaswa, Vadyaswa, 
Badhraswa, Prithuvega, Prithusravas, Prishadaswa, Vasumanas, Kshupa, 
and Sumahabala, Vrishadgu, Rusadru, Vrishasena, Purukutsa, Dhwajin and 
Rathin; Arshtisena, Dilipa, and the high-souled Ushinara; Ausinari, 
Pundarika, Saryati, Sarabha, and Suchi; Anga, Rishta, Vena, Dushyanta, 
Srinjaya and Jaya; Bhangasuri, Sunitha, and Nishadha, and Vahinara; 
Karandhama, Balhika, Sudyumna, and the mighty Madhu; Aila and the 
mighty king of the Earth Marutta; Kapota, Trinaka, and Sahadeva, and 
Arjuna also; Vyaswa; Saswa and Krishaswa and King Sasabindu; Rama, the 
son of Dasaratha, and Lakshmana, and Pratarddana; Alarka, and 


Kakshasena, Gaya, and Gauraswa; Jamadagnya's son Rama, Nabhaga, and 
Sagara; Bhuridyumna and Mahaswa, Prithaswa, and also Janaka; King 
Vainya, Varisena, Purujit, and Janamejaya; Brahmadatta, and Trigarta, and 
Uparichara also; Indradyumna, Bhimajanu, Gauraprishta, Nala, Gaya; 
Padma and Muchukunda, Bhuridyumna, Prasenajit; Aristanemi, Sudyumna, 
Prithulaswa, and Ashtaka also; a hundred kings of the Matsya race and 
hundred of the Nipa and a hundred of the Gaya races; a hundred kings all 
named Dhritarashtra; eighty kings named Janamejaya; a hundred sovereigns 
called Brahmadatta, and a hundred kings bearing the name Iri; more than 
two hundred Bhishmas, and also a hundred Bhimas; a_ hundred 
Prativindhyas, a hundred Nagas, a hundred Hayas, and a hundred Palasas, 
and a hundred called Kasa and Kusa; that king of kings Santanu, and your 
father Pandu, Usangava, Sataratha, Devaraja, Jayadratha; the most 
intelligent Rajarishi Vrishadarbha with his ministers; and a thousand other 
kings known by the name of Sasabindu, who have died, having performed 
many grand horse-sacrifices with munificent gifts to the Brahmanas - these 
holy Royal Sages of magnificent achievements and vast knowledge of the 
Shastras, O King, wait upon and worship the son of Vivaswat in that sabha. 

And Agastya and Matanga, and Kala, and Mrityu, performers of 
sacrifices, the Siddhas, and many Yogins; the Pitrs,! as also others who have 
forms; the Kalachakra, wheel of time, and Agni, the burning conveyer of 
the sacrificial butter; all sinners among human beings, as also those that 
have died during the winter solstice; the helpers of Yama have been 
appointed to count the allotted days of everybody and everything; the 
Singsapa, Palasa, Kasa, and Kusa trees and plants, in their embodied forms 
- all these, Rajan, wait upon and worship the God of Justice in his sabha. 

Many others, too, are present at the court of the king of the Pitrs. So 
numerous are they that I cannot tell you either all their names or their great 
deeds. This enchanting and vast sabha travels anywhere, at the will of its 
Lord. Viswakarman built it after a prolonged tapasya. And, O Bhaarata, 
brilliant with its own lustre, it stands beautiful, in all its glory. 

Sannyasis of stern tapasya, grave vratas, of truthful speech, serene, pure 
and of sacred karma, their bodies radiant, wearing spotless robes, bracelets, 
garlands of flowers, golden earrings, and adorned by their own holy deeds 
as with the marks of their order constantly visit that sabha. Many bright 
Gandharvas and Apsaras fill every corner of the court with music and 
songs, with dance and with their unearthly laughter. 


Fine perfumes, sweet sounds and garlands of celestial flowers make that 
an always supremely blest sabha. Hundreds of thousands of beings of 
dharma, of heavenly beauty and great wisdom, always attend upon and 
worship the illustrious Yama, Lord of the created, in that court. 

Such, Rajan, is the sabha of the lustrous king of the manes. Now I will 
describe for you the sabha of Varuna, also called Pushkaramalini." 


| Of the kinds known as called Agniswattas, Fenapa, Ushampa, Swadhavat, and Varhishada. 


CANTO 9 
LOKAPALA SABHAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


cC arada says, 'Yudhishtira, the celestial sabha of Varuna is unequalled 

N& its splendour. It is as large as Yama's hall, .A. its walls and 
arches all pure white. Viswakarman built it in the waters. Countless 
unworldly trees made of gemstones and jewels, yielding excellent flowers 
and fruit, surround it, as well as numerous fine plants laden with blooms, 
blue and yellow, black and grey, white and red. Within their bowers lakhs of 
birds of myriad species, beautiful and variegated, constantly sing their 
sweet songs. 

Salubrious is the air in and around that sabha, neither cold nor hot. 
Varuna's enchanting palace, blemishlessly white, contains numberless 
chambers, all furnished with fine seats. Within sits Varuna, wearing celestial 
raiment, ornaments and jewellery, with his queen, daubed with heavenly 
perfumes and smeared with sandalwood paste of unearthly redolence. 

The Adityas wait upon and worship the illustrious Varuna, Lord of 
Waters; and Vasuki and Takshaka, and the Naga Airavana; Krishna and 

Lohita; Padma and Chitra of great tejas; the Nagas called Kambala and 
Aswatara; and Dhritarashtra and Balahaka; Manimat and Kundadhara; and 
Karkotaka and Dhananjaya; Panimat and the mighty Kundaka, O Lord of 
the Earth; and Prahlada and Mushikada, and Janamejaya - all with 
auspicious marks, mandalas, and hoods extended. These and many other 
great snakes, Yudhishtira, without fear of any kind, wait upon and adore the 
illustrious Varuna. 

And, O King, Bali the son of Virochana, and Naraka, subduer of the 
whole Earth; Sanghraha and Viprachitti, and the Danavas called 
Kalakhanjas; and Suhanu and Durmukha and Sankha and Sumanas and also 
Sumati; and Ghatodara, and Mahaparswa, and Karthana and, also, Pitara 
and Viswarupa, Swarupa and Virupa; Mahasiras and Dasagriva, Bali, and 
Meghavasas and Dasavara; Tittiva and Vitabhuta, and Sanghrada, and 
Indratapana - these Daityas and Danavas, all wearing earrings, crowns and 
draped in garlands, wearing unworldly robes, all blessed with great boons 
and possessed of untold valour, and immortal, and all of fine conduct and 


excellent vows, wait upon and worship the illustrious Varuna, the Deva 
whose weapon is the paasa, in that sabha. 

And, O King, the four Oceans are there, the river Bhagirathi, the 
Kalindi, the Vidisa, the Vena, the swift-flowing Narmada; the Vipasa, the 
Satadu, the Chandrabhaga, the Saraswati; the Iravati, the Vitasta, the 
Sindhu, the Devanadi; the Godavari, the Krishnavena; and Kaveri, queen of 
rivers; the Kimpuna, the Visalya and the river Vaitarani, too; the Tritiya, the 
Jyeshtila, and the great Sona; the Charmanwati and the mighty Parnasa; the 
Sarayu, the Varavatya, and that river-queen, the Langali; the Karatoya, the 
Atreyi, the red Mahanada, the Laghanti, the Gomati, the Sandhya, and also 
the Tristrolasi - these and other rivers, all sacred and famed tirthas of 
pilgrimage, as well as other streams and holy waters, lakes and wells and 
springs, and tanks, large and small, all in their personified forms, O 
Bhaarata, wait upon and worship the Lord Varuna. 

The cardinal points of the heavens, the Earth, and all the Mountains, as 
also every species of aquatic creature, all worship Varuna in his sabha. 
Numerous tribes of Gandharvas and Apsaras, given to music and song, wait 
upon Varuna, singing hymns of praise to him. 

All the mountains which are known for being beautiful and jewel-rich, 
come, embodied, to that sabha and enjoy sweet converse with one another. 
Varuna's foremost minister, Sunabha, surrounded by his sons and 
grandsons, also attends upon his master, along with a sacred body of water 
called Go, personified. All these worship that Deva. 

Bharatarishabha, this is the sabha of Varuna, which I have seen during 
my wandering. Listen now to a description of the Hall of Kubera."" 


CANTO 10 
LOKAPALA SABHAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


cC arada says, 'The splendid court of Kubera Vaisravana, O Rajan, is a 

IN yojanas long and seventy yojanas wide. Vaisravana 
himself built this sabha, using his tapasya shakti. As brilliant as the peaks of 
Kailasa, this edifice eclipses the very Moon with its radiance. Supported by 
Guhyakas, that palace appears to be fixed to the sky. Of unearthly 
contrivance, it is exquisite, with lofty golden chambers, of all delights, 
scented with heavenly perfumes, and encrusted with priceless jewels past 
counting. 

It resembles the summits of massed white clouds, and truly seems to 
float on air. Painted in celestial gold, it appears to be adorned with streaks 
of lightning. Within that sabha, upon a beautiful throne bright as the Sun, 
covered with cloths of heaven, furnished with a peerless footstool, sits the 
Lord Vaisravana, handsome and pleasant, wearing fine robes, priceless 
ornaments, sparkling earrings, and surrounded by his thousand wives. 

Cool, delightful breezes, which murmur through forests of tall 
Mandaras, bear the scents of great jungles of jasmines and also the 
fragrance of the lotuses which float upon the river Alaka and those of the 
divine gardens of Nandana, and these always minister to the pleasure of the 
King of the Yakshas. 

Here the Devas, with the Gandharvas, and various troupes of Apsaras, 
sing in chorus, Rajan, songs of heavenly sweetness. Misrakesi and Rambha, 
and Chitrasenaa, and Suchismita; and Charunetra, and Ghritachi and 
Menaka, and Punjikasthala; and Viswachi, Sahajanya, and Pramlocha and 
Urvasi and Ira, and Varga and Saurabheyi, and Samichi, and Budbuda, and 
Lata - these and a thousand other Apsaras, and Gandharvas, all masters and 
mistresses of music and dance, attend on Kubera, Lord of Treasures. 

That sabha, always brimming with notes from divine instruments and 
voices, as with the sounds of many Gandharva and Apsara tribes dancing, is 
full of charm and joy. The Gandharvas called Kinnaras, others known as 
Naras, and Manibhadra, and Dhanada, and Swetabhadra and Guhyaka; 
Kaseraka, Gandakandu, and the mighty Pradyota; Kustumburu, Pisacha, 
Gajakarna, and Viskalaka, Varahakarna, Tamroshta, Falakaksha, and 


Falodaka; Hansachuda, Sikhavarta, Hemanetra, Vibhishana, Pushpanana, 
Pingalaka, Sonitoda and Pravalaka; Vrikshavasyaniketa, and Chiravasas - 
these, O Bhaarata, and lakhs of other Yakshas always wait upon Kubera. 

The Goddess Lakshmi ever remains there, also Kubera's son Nalakubara. 
I myself and many others like me, we go often to that Hall, as do many 
Brahmana Rishis and Devarishis. Numerous Rakshasas and Gandharvas, 
besides those I named, attend upon and worship, in that sabha, the 
illustrious Lord of all treasures. 

O tiger among kings, the lustrous husband of Uma, Lord of created 
things, the three-eyed Mahadeva, wielder of the trident, the slayer of the 
Asura Bhaganetra, the mighty God of the fierce bow, surrounded by 
Ganasanghas, spirits in thousands, some dwarfish, some of fierce mien, 
some hunchbacked, some with blood-red eyes, some of frightful yells, some 
feeding upon fat and flesh, and some too terrible to look at, but all armed 
with diverse weapons and blessed with the speed of wind, along with the 
Devi Parvathi, who is always cheerful and who knows no tiredness, all 
come to the court of their dear friend Kubera, the Lord of Treasures. 

Hundreds of Gandharva lords, with joyful hearts and wearing finery, and 
Viswavasu, and Haha and Huhu; and Tumburu and Parvarta, and Sailusha; 
and Chitrasena, musical genius, and also Chitraratha — these and countless 
other Gandharvas worship the Lord of Treasures. 

Chakradharman, Lord of the Vidyadharas, with his followers, wait in 
that Hall, upon the Lord of Treasures; and Kinnaras, in their hundreds, and 
innumerable kings, Bhagadatta their lord; and Druma, Lord of the 
Kimpurushas; and Mahendra, Lord of the Rakshasas; and Gandhamadana 
accompanied by so very many Yakshas, Gandharvas and Rakshasas wait 
upon the Lord of Treasures. 

Vibhishana of dharma, also, there worships his elder brother Kubera!. 
The Mountains Himavat, Pariyatra, Vindhya, Kailasa, Mandara, Malaya, 
Durdura, Mahendra, Gandhamadana, Indrakila, Sunabha, and the Sunrise 
and Sunset mountains - these and many other ranges, besides, all in their 
personified forms, with Meru standing before the rest, wait upon and 
worship the lambent Lord of Treasures. 

The illustrious Nandiswara, and Mahakala, and many spirits with arrowy 
ears and sharp-pointed mouths, Kasta, Kutimukha, Danti, and Vijaya of 
great asceticism, with the mighty white bull of Siva roaring deep, all come 


to that sabha. Besides these, many other Rakshasas and Pisachas worship 
Kubera in that Grand Hall. 

Kubera, son of Pulastya, once performed tapasya and worshipped Siva in 
all the known ways of adoration. He then sat by the very side of the 
Devadeva, God of Gods, creator of the three worlds, Mahadeva surrounded 
by his ganas. One day, Bhava, the most high, made Kubera his friend and 
then on, O King, Siva always dwells in the sabha of his friend, the Lord of 
Treasures. 

Those princes of all gemstones in the three worlds, Sankha and Padma, 
in their embodied forms, with all the jewels of the Earth, also personified, 
worship Kubera. 

I have seen Kubera's sabha of fascination, which can cross the 
firmament, and it is, Rajan, as I have described. Now listen to what I say 
about the sabha of Brahma, the Grandsire."" 


'Ganguli says Croesus! 


CANTO 11 
LOKAPALA SABHAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


cc arada sas, 'Listen to me, Child, and I will tell you about I the sabha 

N32 the Pitamaha, the House which none can describe adequately. 

In the Krita Yuga, of old, the exalted Deva Aditya once came down from 
heaven into the world of men. He had seen the sabha of Brahma 
Svayambhuva, and now joyfully ranged the face of the Earth, to see what he 
could here. Pandava, it was then that I met him and that God told me, 
Bharatarishabha, about the unearthly Hall of the Grands ire, which is 
immeasurable, subtle, and indescribable, in form and shape, and which 
enchants and delights the hearts of all who see it with its splendour. 

Bharatarishabha, when I heard about the glories of that sabha, Rajan, I 
wanted to see it. I asked Aditya, "Exalted one, I want to see the sacred 
sabha of the Pitamaha. Lord of Light, tell me, through what tapasya, karma, 
mantras or yagnas can I look upon that wondrous court, which washes 
every sin away?" 

Aditya, God of Day, Deva of a thousand rays, replied, "With your mind 
restrained in dhyana, keep the Brahmavrata of a thousand years." 

I went to the bosom of the Himavat and began that great vow. When I 
finished, the exalted and sinless Surya Deva of terrific tejas, who knows no 
tiredness, took me with him to the sabha of Brahma. Rajan, it is impossible 
to describe that sabha in words, for, in a moment it assumes a new and 
different form, which language cannot capture. 

Bhaarata, I cannot tell you how vast it is or what its shape is. I had never 
seen anything like it before. It brings joy to those within it, and it is neither 
hot nor cold. Hunger, thirst and every manner of unease vanish as soon as 
one enters that Hall. 

It appears to be made of scintillating jewels of countless kinds. No 
columns seem to support it, and being eternal, it knows no decay. It is self- 
refulgent, and with its numberless splendid lights it excels the Moon, the 
Sun and the Fire in lustre. Situated in Swarga, it blazes forth, as if it were 
chiding the illuminer of the day. 

In that sabha, the Supreme Deity, the Grandsire of all created things, 
who has made them all through his maya shakti, abides ever. And Daksha, 


Prachetas, Pulaha, Marichi, Kashyapa the master, Bhrigu, Atri, and Vasishta 
and Gautama, and also Angiras, and Pulastya, Kratu, Prahlada, and 
Kardama, these Prajapatis, and Angirasa of the Atharvan Veda, the 
Balakhilyas, the Marichipas; Intelligence, Space, Knowledge, Air, Heat, 
Water, Earth, Sound, Touch, Form, Taste, Scent; Nature, and the Gunas of 
Nature, and the elemental and primal causes of the world — all dwell in that 
sabha beside the Lord Brahma. 

And Agastya of great tejas, and Markandeya of great tapasya, and 
Jamadagni and Bharadwaja, and Samvarta, and Chyavana, and Durvasa the 
high, and the virtuous Rishyasringa, the illustrious Sanatkumara of great 
tapasya, master of all things regarding Yoga; Asita and Devala, and 
Jaigishavya who knows truth; Rishabha, Ajitasatru, and Mani of great 
vitality; and the science of healing with its eight branches - all in their 
personified forms, O Bhaarata; Soma with all the stars and _ the 
constellations; Aditya with all his rays; the Vayus; the Yagnas, the 
Declarations of intent in sacrifices, the vital principles - these luminous and 
vow-observing beings personified, and many others, too numerous to name, 
all attend upon Brahma in that sabha. 

Wealth, Religion, Desire, Joy, Aversion, Asceticism and Tranquillity -all 
wait upon the Supreme Deity in that palace. The twenty tribes of the 
Gandharvas and Apsaras, as also their seven other tribes, all the Lokapalas, 
Sukra, Brihaspati, Budha, Angaraka, Sani, Rahu, and the other Planets; the 
Mantras, the secret Mantras of that Veda; the rites of Harimat and Vasumat; 
the Adityas with Indra, the two Agnis, Agnisoma and Indragni, the Marutas, 
Viswakarman, the Vasus, O Bhaarata; the Pitrs, and every sacrificial 
libation, the four Vedas, Rig, Sama, Yajuh, and Atharva; all the sciences and 
branches of learning; the Itihasas and all the minor branches of learning; the 
several Vedangas; the planets, the Sacrifices, the Soma, all the Devas; 
Savitri, who is Gayatri, the seven kinds of metre; Understanding, Patience, 
Memory, Wisdom, Intelligence, Fame, Forgiveness; the Hymns of the Sama 
Veda; the Science of all hymns, all the kinds of Verses and Songs; various 
Commentaries with arguments — all in personified forms, O King; and 
various Plays and Poems and Stories - these also, and countless others wait 
upon the Supreme Deity in that sabha. 

Kshanas, Lavas, Muhurtas, Day, Night, Fortnights, Months, the six 
Seasons, O Bhaarata; Years, Yugas, the four kinds of Days and Nights, and 
that eternal, imperishable, undecaying, most excellent Kala Chakra, the 


Wheel of Time, and also the Wheel of Dharma, Virtue - these always wait 
there, O Yudhishtira; and Aditi, Diti, Danu, Surasa, Vinata, Ira, Kalika, 
Surabhi, Devi, Sarama, Gautami and the goddesses Prabha and Kadru - 
these mothers of the celestials; and Rudrani, Sree, Lakshmi, Bhadra, 
Shashthi, the Earth, Ganga, Hri, Swaha, Kriti, the goddess Sura, Sachi 
Pushti, Arundhati, Samvritti, Asa, Niyati, Srishti, Rati - these and many 
other Devis wait upon the Creator of all. 

The Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Marutas, Aswinas, the Viswadevas, 
Sadhyas, and the Pitrs blessed with the swiftness of the mind - these wait 
there upon the Grandsire. And, Bharatarishabha, know that there are seven 
classes of Pitrs, of which four have embodied forms and the remaining three 
dwell there without bodies or forms. 

It is known that the illustrious Vairajas, Agniswattas and Garhapatyas, 
three classes of Pitrs, range in heaven. And those amongst the Pitrs that are 
called the Somapas, the Ekasringras, the Chaturvedas and the Kalas are ever 
worshipped amongst the four varnas of men. Gratified first with the Soma 
rasa, these later gratify Soma. All these tribes of Pitrs wait upon the Lord of 
Creation and joyfully worship the Supreme God of measureless tejas. 

And Rakshasas, Pisachas, Danavas and Guhyakas; Nagas, Pakshis, and 
various beasts; and all the great beings, mobile and unmoving - all worship 
the Pitamaha. And Purandara, Lord of the Devas, and Varuna and Kubera 
and Yama, and Mahadeva with Uma, always go there. And, Rajadhiraja, 
Mahasena Kartikeya also adores the Grandsire there. Narayana himself, and 
the Devarishis, and the Rishis called Balakhilyas, and all beings born of 
female wombs and all those not womb-born, and whatever else there is in 
the three worlds, which moves and the immobile, I saw there, know, O 
King. 

And eighty thousand celibate Rishis, their vital seed indrawn, and O 
Pandava, fifty thousand Rishis, with sons - I saw all these there. The 
dwellers in heaven go to that sabha look upon the Supreme God, when they 
like, and worshipping him by bowing their heads, return to their abodes. 

King of men, the Grandsire of all created beings, the Soul of the 
Universe, the self-created Brahma of fathomless intellect and glory, equally 
merciful to all creatures, honours each as they deserve, and gratifies, with 
sweet speech and gifts of wealth and other things of enjoyment, the Devas, 
the Daityas, the Nagas, the Brahmanas, the Yakshas, the Pakshis, the 


Kaleyas, the Gandharvas, the Apsaras, and all the other lofty beings who 
come to him as his guests. 

And that sabha of delight, O Child, always throngs with those who come 
and go. Brimming with every kind of tejas, worshipped by Brahmarishis, 
that celestial Hall blazes forth with the divine and graceful possessions of 
Brahma and is enchanting to look at. Tiger among kings, even as this sabha 
of yours is unrivalled in the world of men, so is the sabha of Brahma, which 
I have seen, peerless in all in all the worlds. 

These sabhas I have seen, O Bhaarata, in the realm of the celestials. This 
sabha of yours is unquestionably the best in the world of men!'" 


CANTO 12 
LOKAPALA SABHAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ udhishtira says Best among all the eloquent, from your description 

Ys the different sabhas, it seems that almost all .A. the kings of the 
Earth are to be found in the sabha of Yama. And, O Master, almost all the 
Nagas, the main Daityas, Rivers and Oceans are to be found in Varuna's 
sabha. So, too, the Yakshas, the Guhyakas, the Rakshasas, the Gandharvas 
and Apsaras and the God who has the Bull for his vahana are to be found in 
the sabha of the Lord of Treasures. You have said that in the sabha of the 
Grandsire, all the great Rishis, all the Devas, all the branches of learning are 
present. For the sabha of Sakra, you have named, O Muni, all the Devas, the 
Gandharvas, and various Rishis. 

But, Mahamuni, you have named just a single king of the Earth as living 
in the sabha of the illustrious King of the Devas — the Rajarishi 
Harishchandra. What deed did that celebrated king do, or what great 
tapasya did he perform with what unwavering vratas, because of which he 
has become equal to Indra himself? 

O Brahmana, how did you also meet my father, the noble Pandu, who 
now dwells in the realm of the Pitrs? Lofty one, of pure vratas, did he say 
anything to you? Ah, tell me everything; I am agog.' 

Narada says, 'King of kings, I will tell you everything you want to know 
about Harishchandra, I will tell you of his matchless excellence. He was a 
powerful king, indeed, an emperor of all the kings of the Earth, and they 
obeyed him. Rajan, riding alone in a triumphal chariot, decked with gold, 
Harishchandra brought the whole world, with her seven dwipas, under his 
sway with the power of his arms. 

Having subdued the entire Earth, with her mountains, forests and rivers, 
he prepared to perform the great Rajasuya yagna, the imperial sacrifice, and 
at his command all the kings of the world brought untold wealth to that 
sacrifice. All of them agreed to be distributors of food and gifts to the 
Brahmanas who were fed on the occasion. 

During that sacrifice, King Harishchandra gave away to anyone that 
asked five times as much gold as they wanted. When the yagna was 
concluded, the king pleased the Brahmanas who came from many distant 


countries with bounteous gifts and wealth of many kinds. Delighted with 
the feasts of food and other gifts, given to their heart's content, and with the 
heaps of jewels, they began to say, "King Harischandra is greater than any 
king, ever, both in fame and splendour." 

Know, O Rajan, this was why Harishchandra shone more brightly than 
thousands of other kings. The mighty Harishchandra concluded his great 
sacrifice and was installed as sovereign emperor of the Earth, and he was 
radiant upon his throne. Bharatarishabha, every king who performs the 
Rajasuya yagna attains to the kingdom of Indra and passes his time in 
felicity in Indra's company. 

Those kings, too, who give up their lives on the field of battle, without 
ever turning their backs on the fight, find Indra's halls and live in joy with 
him. Those, again, who quit their bodies after stern tapasya, attain the same 
realm and shine there for many an age. 

King of the Kurus, O son of Kunti, seeing the good fortune of 
Harischandra and wondering at it, your father did tell me something. 

Knowing that I was coming to this world of men, he bowed to me and 
said, "O Rishi, you must tell Yudhishtira that, because his brothers all obey 
him, he can conquer the whole world. Once he does this, let him perform a 
Rajasuya yagna. He is my son; if he performs that sacrifice, like 
Harischandra I might also soon attain to Indraloka, and there in his sabha 
pass countless years in uninterrupted bliss." 

I replied to him, "O King, I will tell your son all this if I go to the world 
of men." 

Purushavyaghra, I have now told you what your father said to me. 
Pandava, fulfil your father's wishes. If you perform that sacrifice, you will 
then be able, along with your dead ancestors, to enter the realm of the king 
of the Devas. It is said that many obstacles and fears attend the performance 
of this great sacrifice. A race of Rakshasas called Brahma Rakshasas, whose 
task it is to obstruct every sacrifice, will do everything in their power to stop 
a Rajasuya yagna, once it has begun. 

When such a sacrifice is undertaken, there might be a war which could 
destroy the Kshatriyas and create an occasion for the destruction of the very 
world. Even a slight mischance during a Rajasuya yagna may bring the 
whole world to ruin. Reflect upon all this, O King of kings, and do what is 
good for you. 


Be vigilant in protecting the four varnas among your subjects. Grow in 
prosperity and enjoy every felicity. Please Brahmanas with gifts of wealth. I 
have now answered in detail everything which you asked. With your leave 
now, I will go to Dwaravati, city of the Dasarhas:.' 

O Janamejaya, having spoken thus to the son of Pritha, Narada goes 
away, accompanied by the Rishis with whom he had come. When Narada 
has left King Yudhishtira and his brothers begin to think about that greatest 
of sacrifices which is called the Rajasuya yagna." 


CANTO 13 
LOKAPALA SABHAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


yoo said, "After listening to Narada, Yudhishtira begins to 
sigh. O Bhaarata, plunged in thoughts of the Rajasuya, the king has no 
peace. Having heard about the glory of the illustrious kings of yore, 
knowing for certain now about attaining realms of grace through the 
performance of sacrifice and the resultant punya, and, especially, thinking 
of the Rajarishi Harischandra, who performed the great yagna, Yudhishtira 
wants to prepare to undertake a Rajasuya yagna. 

Offering worship to his ministers and others in his sabha, and being 
worshipped by them in return, he initiates discussions about that sacrifice 
with them. After deep reflection, that King of kings, Bull among Kurus, 
turns his mind towards preparing for the Rajasuya. However, then, 
considering dharma, that prince of magnificent energy and prowess sets his 
heart again on discovering what would be good for all his people. For 
Yudhishtira, best of all good men, is unvaryingly kind to his subjects, and 
works for the weal of all, without distinctions. 

Indeed, shaking off both anger and pride, Yudhishtira always says, 'Give 
each his due,' and the only words he likes to hear are, 'Blessed be Dharma! 
Blessed be Dharma! 

Thus Yudhishtira rules and is like a father to all his people; there is no 
one in his kingdom that bears any hostility towards him. Hence, he comes 
to be known as Ajatasatru - he without an enemy. The king cherishes 
everyone as belonging to his family, and Bhima rules justly over all. 
Arjuna, the perfectly ambidextrous bowman, protects the kingdom from 
outside enemies, while the wise Sahadeva administers justice impartially. 
Nakula shows great humility towards everyone, and this was his nature. 

Because of all this the kingdom is free from disputes and fear of every 
kind; and the people attend to their svadharma. The rain is plentiful, and 
none can ask for any more; the kingdom's prosperity grows. Because of the 
dharma and virtue of the king money-lenders, makers of articles needed for 
sacrifices, cattle-breeders, farmers and traders: why, all and everything, 
grow in prosperity. 


During the reign of Yudhishtira there is no extortion in the kingdom, no 
stringent realisation of arrears of rent, no fear of disease, of fire, or of death 
by poisoning and mantras. It is never heard during that time that criminals, 
thieves, cheats or royal favourites ever enjoy any liberties - with the king, or 
the people, or even amongst one another. 

Kshatriyas, kings conquered during the 'six occasions' wait on the king, 
to see to his welfare and to worship him always, while Vaishyas of the 
different classes come to pay him the taxes on their occupations. Thus 
during the reign of Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, his kingdom prospers. Why, the 
prosperity of the kingdom is swelled not only through these, but even by 
those who are addicted to voluptuousness and indulge in every luxury to 
their fill. 

Yudhishtira, King of Kings, whose sway extends everywhere, is 
possessed of every accomplishment and treats all things with forbearance. 
Rajan, whichever countries that celebrated and splendid king conquers, 
their people, from Brahmanas to Sudras, become more attached to him than 
to their own fathers and mothers. 

Now King Yudhishtira, most eloquent of men, calls together his 
ministers and his brothers and asks them repeatedly about the Rajasuya 
yagna. 

All the ministers speak solemnly to the wise Yudhishtira, who wants to 
perform the imperial sacrifice, 'He who already owns a kingdom wishes to 
become an emperor through the yagna that confers all the attributes of 
Varuna on a king. O Prince of the Kurus, all your friends believe that you 
are worthy of becoming an emperor, indeed, that the time is ripe for you to 
perform the Rajasuya yagna. 

Because of your possessions as a Kshatriya, we say the time has come 
for the performance of the sacrifice during which Rishis of austere vratas 
kindle six fires by chanting mantras from the Sama Veda. At the conclusion 
of the Rajasuya yagna, the sacrificer is installed as sovereign of the empire, 
and he is rewarded with the fruit of every other sacrifice, including the 
Agnihotra. For this, he is called the conqueror of all. 

Mahabaho, you are more than capable of performing this yagna. All of 
us obey you, and very soon you will be able to undertake the Rajasuya. So, 
Maharajan, resolve to do it without further discussion.' 

So say all his friends and ministers to the king, separately and together. 
Rajan, having heard these good, brave, agreeable and weighty words, 


Yudhishtira Parantapa, in his mind, is inclined to acquiesce. Having heard 
what his friends and counsellors say, and also knowing his own strength, O 
Bhaarata, yet the king reflects repeatedly on the matter. 

After this, Yudhishtira, intelligent and virtuous, wise in counsel, consults 
again with his brothers, with the illustrious Ritvijas around him, with his 
ministers, and with Dhaumya and Dwaipayana, and others. 

Yudhishtira says, 'How will this desire of mine to perform the Rajasuya 
yagna, which is worthy of an emperor, become fruitful through merely the 
consequence of my faith and speech?’ 

O you with eyes like lotus petals, asked this by the king, they reply then 
to Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, 'You well know the dictates of dharma, 

O King, and so you are worthy of performing the awesome Rajasuya 
yagna.' 

When the Ritvijas and the Rishis say these words to the king, his 
ministers and his brothers approve warmly of what they say. However, that 
most wise king, his mind perfectly controlled, wishing the weal of the 
world, yet again reflects on the matter and considers his own strength and 
his resources, all the circumstances of time and place, his income and 
expenditure. For, he knows that the wise never come to grief because they 
always act only after thorough deliberation. 

Yudhishtira thinks that he should not begin the sacrifice only by his own 
resolve; carefully considering the gravity of the yagna, he thinks of Krishna, 
scourge of sinners, to be the best one to decide, because he knows that 
Krishna is the greatest of all persons, of measureless tejas, mighty-armed, 
un-born, yet born among men purely from his own will. 

The Pandava thinks about Krishna's godlike deeds and decides that there 
is nothing unknown to him, nothing Krishna cannot achieve, nothing he 
cannot endure; and so concluding, Pritha's son Yudhishtira sends a 
messenger to that Master of all beings, sending through his man his 
blessings and greetings such as an older man does to one younger than 
himself. 

Riding in a swift chariot, that messenger arrives in Dwaravati among the 
Yadavas and approaches Krishna. When Achyuta Krishna hears that Pritha's 
son wants to see him, he, too, becomes desirous of seeing his cousin. In his 
chariot drawn by fleet horses, flashing through many lands, Krishna, with 
Indrasena, arrives in Indraprastha. 


Arriving in Indraprastha, Janardana comes directly to Yudhishtira. 
Yudhishtira receives Krishna with fatherly love, and Bhima also receives 
him likewise. Then Krishna comes in joy to greet his father's sister Kunti. 
When the twins have worshipped him, with reverence, he begins to speak in 
great delight with Arjuna, his friend, who is overjoyed to see him. When 
Krishna has rested awhile in a delightful apartment, and is refreshed, 
Yudhishtira comes to him at his leisure and tells him all about the Rajasuya 
yagna. 

Yudhishtira says, 'I want to perform the Rajasuya, but that yagna cannot 
be undertaken just by my wishing to perform it. Krishna, you know 
everything about the royal sacrifice and what is needed for its performance. 
Only he can accomplish it in whom everything is possible, who is 
worshipped everywhere and who is the King of kings. 

My friends and my ministers have come to me and said that I should 
undertake the yagna. But, Krishna, what you say about this will be my final 
guide. Some ministers do not see the true hazards of such an undertaking, 
out of their love; others from self-interest say only what is agreeable. Some, 
again, see what benefits them as being the course to follow. Thus, men give 
counsel of matters which await deciding. 

But you, O Krishna, are above these motives. You are beyond both 
desire and anger. You must tell me what is truly most beneficial for the 
world." 


CANTO 14 
RAJASUYARAMBHA PARVA 


c¢ rishna said, 'Maharajan, you are worthy and possess every quality 

| eae to perform the Rajasuya yagna. You know everything, O 
Bhaarata, yet let me tell you something: those who now go in the world as 
Kshatriyas are inferior in every way to the Kshatriyas that Rama, the son of 
Jamadagnya, exterminated. 

Mahipati, Lord of the Earth, Bharatarishabha, you know what kind of 
rule these Kshatriyas, guided by the laws and traditions handed down from 
generation to generation, have established amongst themselves, and how 
competent they are to perform the Rajasuya yagna. 

Many royal lines, as well as other ordinary Kshatriyas, say that they are 
descendants of Aila and Ikshwaku. The descendants of Aila, O King, as 
also the kings of Ikshwaku's race are, know, each divided into a hundred 
separate dynasties. The descendants of Yayati and the Bhojas are great, both 
in extent and achievements. These last today are scattered all over the 
Earth, and all Kshatriyas worship the prosperity of these kings. 

However, King Jarasandha has overwhelmed the power and prosperity 
enjoyed by their entire order and, overpowering them with his prowess, has 
set himself at the head of all these kings. Jarasandha enjoys sovereignty 
over the middle portion of the Earth, and he has resolved to create disunion 
amongst us. 

Rajan, a king who is the paramount lord of all kings, and in whom alone 
the dominion of the world is vested, deserves to be called an emperor. 
Sisupala of Chedi, of great vitality, has placed himself under Jarasandha's 
protection and has become his Senapati, the Commander of all his forces. 
The mighty Baka, king of the Karushas, who can do battle using maya, 
waits upon Jarasandha as his sishya. Besides, two others, Hansa and 
Dimbhaka, of great tejas and atman, have sought shelter with the mighty 
Jarasandha. 

There are others as well - Dantavakra, Karusa, Karava and 
Meghavahana, who serve Jarasandha. He, too, who wears upon his head the 
jewel known as the most wonderful on Earth, the king of the Yavanas, who 
has chastened Muru and Naraka, and whose power is unlimited, who rules 


the west like another Varuna, whose name is Bhagadatta, who is an old 
friend of your father, has bowed his head before Jarasandha, both by what 
he says and by what he does. However, in his heart he is bound by love for 
you, since he regarded your father as his son. 

O King, that Lord of the Earth whose dominions extend in the west and 
the south, your maternal uncle Purujit, that fearless perpetuator of the race 
of Kunti, that slayer of all enemies, is the one king who has regard for you 
only out of love. 

Then, he whom I did not kill, the vile wretch of the Chedis, who displays 
himself to the world as a divine one, and whom the world has also come to 
regard as such, who from his witlessness always carries the emblems of the 
Avatara, that king of Vanga, Pundra and the Kiratas, who is known in this 
world as Paundraka, and who also calls himself Vasudeva, has also allied 
himself with Jarasandha. 

Bhishmaka, the mighty lord of the Bhojas, friend of Indra, slayer of 
hostile Kshatriyas, Bhishmaka who governs a fourth part of the world, who 
with his knowledge conquered the Pandyas and the Kratha-Kausikas, whose 
brother, the brave Akriti, was like Jamdagni's son Rama, also serves 
Jarasandha, Master of Magadha. We are also Bhishmaka's relatives and so 
we do what is agreeable to him, but he does not respect us and always tries 
to do us harm. Rajan, he hardly seems aware of his own might or the 
honour of the great race to which he belongs; he is swayed just by 
Jarasandha's shining fame and has allied himself to the Magadhan. 

Also, noble one, the eighteen tribes of Bhojas, fearing Jarasandha, have 
all fled west, as have the Surasenas, the Bhadrakas, the Bodhas, the Salwas, 
the Patachcharas, the Susthalas, the Sukuttas, and the Kulindas, along with 
the Kuntis. The king of the Salwayanas, his brothers and followers, the 
southern Panchalas and the eastern Kosalas have fled to the land of the 
Kuntis; so also the Matsyas and the Sannyastapadas, overcome by fear, 
leaving their dominions in the north, have fled south. Terrified by 
Jarasandha's power, the Panchalas fled in all directions. 

Some time ago, the foolish Kamsa, who persecuted the Yadavas, married 
two of Jarasandha's daughters, Asti and Prapti, the sisters of his son, another 
Sahadeva. Strengthened by this alliance, the villainous Kamsa tyrannised 
his kinsmen and gained odium for himself. He also harried the old Bhoja 
kings, but they sought our help. 


We gave Ahuka's beautiful daughter to be Akrura's wife, and then 
Balarama and I killed Kamsa and Sunamana, to do our relatives a service. 
However, even after the immediate cause of fear was removed, his father- 
in-law Jarasandha took up arms against us. We decided that if even we, the 
eighteen younger branches of the Yadava tribes, attacked our enemy 
concertedly with great weapons, we would still not be able to vanquish him, 
not in three hundred years. 

Jarasandha had two friends who were like immortals and, in strength, the 
strongest among all men - they were called Hansa and Dimbhaka, both of 
whom no weapon could slay. With them for allies, the mighty Jarasandha, I 
believed, could not be killed even if the three worlds united against him. 
Most intelligent of men, this was not merely my opinion, but all the other 
kings also felt the same way. 

However, there was another king, also called Hansa, and Balarama 
engaged him in battle and killed him after eighteen days of fight. Bhaarata, 
when Dimbhaka heard the people saying that Hansa was slain, he felt could 
not bear to live without his friend and killed himself by throwing himself 
into the Yamuna. Later, when his friend Hansa, scourge of hostile armies, 
returned and heard that Dimbhaka had killed himself, he ran straight to the 
Yamuna and took his life by throwing himself into her waters. 

Then, O Bharatarishabha, Jarasandha heard that both Hansa and 
Dimbhaka were dead and he turned back home with a broken heart. When 
he retreated, we were delighted and lived joyfully and in peace in Mathura. 

Until Jarasandha's daughter, the lovely, lotus-eyed widow of Hansa, 
stricken by the death of her husband, went lamenting to her father and 
repeatedly begged him, that monarch of Magadha, "Parantapa, bane of all 
your enemies, kill the killer of my husband." 

Then, great King, we again remembered what we had concluded long 
ago, and in alarm we fled Mathura. We divided our great wealth among 
many, into small portions, so each could be easily carried, and we fled with 
our cousins and kinsfolk, in fear of Jarasandha. Having thought carefully, 
we fled west. 

In the west is a delightful city called Kusasthah, ringed by the Raivata 
Mountains; in that city, O King, we began living. We rebuilt its fort and 
made it so strong that even the gods cannot breach it; and from inside even 
our women can hold off any enemy, why speak of the Yadava heroes, who 
know no fear? Yes, Parantapa, we now live in that city, and because the 


great mountain is impregnable, the descendants of Madhu have become 
exceedingly glad, thinking that they have already passed beyond fearing 
Jarasandha. 

Thus, though strong and powerful, we have been obliged to seek refuge 
in the Gomanta Mountains, which are three yojanas long, from fear of 
Jarasandha. In each yojana, we have established twenty-one outposts of 
armed soldiers; every yojana has a hundred gates, guarded by great 
Kshatriyas, all invincible, who belong to the younger strains of the Yadavas. 

In our clan, O King, there are eighteen thousand brothers and cousins. 
Ahuka has a hundred sons, each like a god in strength. Charudeshna, his 
brother Chakradeva, Satyaki, myself, Rohini's son Baladeva, and my son 
Samba, who is my equal in battle - we seven, Rajan, are Atirathas. Besides, 
there are others, Rajan: Kritavarman, Anadhrishti, Samika, Samitinjaya, 
Kanka, Sanku and Kunti: these seven are Maharathas. 

Maharathas, also, are the two sons of Andhaka-bhoja, as is the old king 
himself. Endowed with great prowess, all these are great Kshatriyas, each 
as mighty as Indra's thunderbolt. These Maharathas chose the middle 
country and now live among the Vrishnis. Bharatottama, only you are 
worthy of being an Emperor; it will become you to establish your empire 
over all the Kshatriyas. 

However, in my judgement, you will not be able to perform the Rajasuya 
yagna as long as the powerful Jarasandha lives. As a lion keeps the 
carcasses of mighty elephants he has killed in his cave, Jarasandha has 
incarcerated many kings of the world inside his hill fortress. Parantapa, 
when they are a hundred in number he wants to sacrifice them to Umapati 
Siva, the illustrious Devadeva, whom he worships and who loves him for 
his fierce tapasya. 

So it is that he has vanquished the kings of the Earth, and he now has the 
means to keep the vow he swore to sacrifice a hundred kings. He has made 
his city populous by conquering the kings and bringing them and their 
troops to his fortress, as his captives. 

We, also, once fled Mathura to Dwaravati, from fear of Jarasandha. If, 
Maharajan, you want to perform this sacrifice, you must rescue the kings 
from Jarasandha and also bring about his death. Scion of the Kurus, 
otherwise you cannot undertake to perform a Rajasuya yagna: this is the 
only way you can succeed. 


Rajan, this is my view; do, Sinless, as you see fit. The circumstances 
being what they are, reflect upon everything, consider all causes and effects, 
and then tell us what you think is proper to do." 


CANTO 15 
RAJASUYARAMBHA PARVA CONTINUED 


6©\ J udhishthira says, 'Being as intelligent as you are, you have said what 

ye one else could; surely, no one but you can settle every doubt in 
this world. There are kings in every land, engaged in benefiting themselves, 
yet none amongst them has been able to become an emperor. Truly, the title 
is difficult of acquisition. 

He who is aware of the strength and courage of others never praises 
himself. He alone is worthy of praise who conducts himself honourably 
while engaging his enemies. O Bearer of the dignity of the Vrishnis, even 
like the wide Earth is adorned with great many jewels, myriad and countless 
are the desires and propensities of man. 

Even as experience can rarely be gained other than by journeying in 
lands far from one's home, so, too, salvation can never be gained other than 
by living by high principles, which are remote from one's desires and baser 
tendencies. I regard peace of mind as the highest goal here, for, from that 
alone comes true prosperity. In my view, if I undertake this sacrifice, I will 
never attain the highest goal. 

O Janardana, blessed with vitality and wisdom, the Kshatriyas born into 
our race, also thought that some day one of them would become the greatest 
Kshatriya of all. But, noble one, we too were all touched by the fear of 
Jarasandha and, O Sinless, by his evil. Invincible one, the strength of your 
arms is my refuge. When you take fright at Jarasandha's power, how shall I 
dare think of myself as being stronger than him? Madhava, O Vrishni, I feel 
plunged in dejection to think that not you, or Balarama, not Bhimasena or 
Arjuna can kill Jarasandha. 

But what shall I say, Krishna? You are my highest authority in all things. 

Hearing this, Bhima, skilled in speech, says, "That king who, being 
torpid, or weak and without resources, engages in battle with a strong 
enemy, perishes like an anthill. However, it is observed that even a weak 
king, with vigilance and the use of stratagem, can vanquish a strong enemy 
and gain the fruit of his every wish. 

In Krishna there is stratagem; in me, there is strength; and in Arjuna, 
victory. So, like the three fires which accomplish a sacrifice, we shall devise 


the death of the king of Magadha.' 

Now Krishna says, 'One whose understanding is immature seeks the fruit 
of his desire, without looking to what might happen to him in the future. We 
observe that nobody forgives an enemy for his callowness, one who is self- 
serving! We have heard that, in the Krita Yuga, having subjugated the entire 
world, Yauvanaswin, through the abolition of all taxes, Bhagiratha, by his 
kindliness towards his subjects, Kartavirya, by the force of his asceticism, 
the Lord Bharata through his strength and valour, and Maruta by his 
prosperity — all these five became emperors. 

But Yudhishthira, you, who wish for the imperial dignity deserve it not 
merely by one but by all these qualities: by victory, by the protection you 
give your people, by your virtue, your prosperity, and your policy. Know, O 
Bull of the Kurus, that Brihadratha's son Jarasandha is also, like you, one 
who wishes to and can become an emperor. A hundred dynasties of kings 
have not been able to subdue Jarasandha. 

Surely, for his might he can be regarded an emperor. Kings who wear 
royal jewels make offerings of these to Jarasandha, but being evil since he 
was a child, he is not satisfied with their worship. He has become the most 
powerful king, yet he savagely attacks other kings who wear crowns upon 
their heads. There is no king from whom he does not take tribute, and so he 
has brought almost a hundred kings under his sway. 

How, O son of Pritha, will any weak king dare confront him with hostile 
intentions? The kings whom he has locked up like so many animals in 
Siva's temple, to sacrifice them to that God, don't they experience abject 
misery? A Kshatriya who dies in battle is always honoured. So, why should 
we not combine to give battle to Jarasandha? 

He has already taken eighty-six kings his captives; he needs only 
fourteen more to make them a hundred. As soon as he has them, he will 
perform his brutal sacrifice. He who impedes that savagery will surely win 
blazing fame, and he who vanquishes Jarasandha will become emperor of 
all the Kshatriyas."" 


CANTO 16 
RAJASUYARAMBHA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ udhishtira says, 'Out of my selfish desire to perform the Rajasuya 

Yo and relying on just blind courage, how can I in conscience 
send you, O Krishna, to Jarasandha? Bhima and Arjuna I think of as my 
very eyes, and you, Janardana as my heart. How will I live without my eyes 
and my heart? 

Not Yama can conquer Jarasandha's awesome host in battle, his army 
endowed with dreadful valour, besides. What can you do against that force? 
I fear this will lead only to tragedy. I believe that we must not undertake 
this task. Listen, Krishna, to what I think. Janardana, desisting from this 
sacrifice seems to me to be best. Ah, today my heart is distressed; to me the 
Rajasuya appears hard to accomplish. ' 

Arjuna, who has received the Gandiva, best of bows, a pair of 
inexhaustible quivers, a chariot with Hanuman's banner, as also the great 
Mayaa sabha, now says to Yudhishtira, 'My lord, I have won a great bow, 
my quivers, astras, prowess, allies, dominions, fame and energy - all of 
which are difficult to gain, however one might wish for them. 

Learned men always praise, in fine society, nobility of birth. But nothing 
is equal to might, and, O King, there is nothing I prefer to strength. He who 
is born into a race noted for its valour, but who himself has none, is hardly 
worthy of respect; while he who is born into an inferior race but is valiant, 
is superior to the first. 

He, Rajan, is a Kshatriya in every way, who increases his fame and 
possessions by subjugating his enemies. He that is brave, even if he has no 
other merit, will conquer his enemies. However, he who has no courage, 
though he owns every other quality, can hardly achieve anything. Every 
other merit exists, latently, only beside valour. 

A focus of attention, exertion and destiny are the three causes of victory. 
He that is valiant but acts rashly does not deserve success; this is why a 
powerful man is sometimes killed by his enemies. As meanness overtakes 
the weak, so does folly at times overtake the strong. So, a king who wants 
victory must avoid both these causes of ruin. 


If we try to kill Jarasandha and rescue the kings incarcerated by him for 
a savage purpose, so that we might perform a Rajasuya yagna, there is 
nothing nobler that we could do. Equally, if we refrain from this task the 
world will forever think of us as being weak. We are surely capable, O 
King, so why should you think that we are not? 

Those who become Munis, wishing to attain the peace of their souls, 
easily gain ochre robes. So, too, if we vanquish the enemy, we shall easily 
perform the Rajasuya yagna. We must, therefore, fight Jarasandha."" 


CANTO 17 
RAJASUYARAMBHA PARVA CONTINUED 


eh rishna says, 'Arjuna has shown what the attitude should be of a 

Ke born into the race of Bhaarata, especially a JL, ak- son of 
Kunti. We do not know when death will overtake us - by night, or by day; 
neither have we ever heard that we can become immortal by evading a 
battle. So, this is the dharma of men - to attack the enemy by principles laid 
down in the law. For this satisfies the heart. 

With wise policy, any undertaking meets with success, unless destiny 
frustrates it. If two sides, both following precept, meet in battle, one must 
triumph for victory cannot belong to both. However, a battle influenced by 
bad policy, where one side is devoid of the renowned arts of war, must end 
in defeat or death. If, again, both sides are equal the outcome is in doubt. 
Yet both cannot win. When this is the case, why should we not confront the 
enemy, guided by wise policy, and destroy him as a river in spate uproots a 
tree? 

If we disguise our own weaknesses while attacking those of the 
adversary, why should we not succeed? Surely the policy of wise men has 
always been never to engage in open warfare against the very powerful 
enemy at the head of his formidable forces. This is my view, as well. 
However, if we achieve our purpose by secretly entering the home of our 
foe and attacking just him, we shall not find disgrace. 

That bull among men Jarasandha enjoys undimmed glory, indeed, even 
like him who is the atman in the heart of all the created. But I see his death. 
Wishing the welfare of our kinsmen, we will either kill him in a fight, or we 
will ascend into heaven being killed by him.' 

Yudhishtira says, 'Krishna, who is this Jarasandha? What is the secret of 
his power and his energy, that even having touched you he has not been 
consumed like an insect by the touch of fire?’ 

Krishna says, 'Hear, O King, who Jarasandha is - what his tejas is, what 
his prowess; and also why I have spared him, despite his giving me 
repeated offence. 

There was a mighty king called Brihadratha, Lord of the Magadhas. 
Invincible in battle, he had three Akshauhinis of men. Handsome he was 


and blessed with great vitality; he owned wealth and prowess beyond 
measure; always, upon his body, he bore the marks of having been installed 
as a Sacrificer at countless yagnas. He was like a second Indra. In splendour 
he was like Surya, in forgiveness like the Earth, in wrath like Yama and in 
wealth like Vaisravana. 

Bharatottama, the whole Earth was mantled by his great qualities, 
inherited from a long line of ancestors, covered as by rays from the sun. 
Endowed with great tejas, that king married the twin daughters of the king 
of Kasi, both blessed lavishly with the wealth of beauty. That bull among 
men made a secret pact with his wives that he would love them equally and 
would never show any preference for either. 

And, with his two precious wives, both of whom were perfectly suited to 
him, the lord of the Earth spent his days in great joy, even like a mighty 
king elephant with two cow-elephants, or like the ocean, embodied, with 
Ganga and Yamuna. Yet, though the king's youth passed thus in delight, he 
had no son to continue his line, although he performed countless auspicious 
rites, homas and yagnas to that end. 

One day, Brihadratha heard that the lofty-souled Chandakausika, son of 
Kakshivat of the illustrious race of Gautama, had ceased his tapasya and 
had come on his wanderings to the king's city, and now sat in the shade of a 
mango tree. Taking his wives with him, the king went to that Muni and 
worshipped him with offerings of jewels and other valuable gifts, which 
pleased the Sage greatly. 

That best of Rishis, always truthful, indeed devoted to the truth, said to 
Brihadratha, "King of kings, I am pleased with you. Ask me for a boon, O 
you of excellent vratas." 

Brihadratha and his wives prostrated before the Rishi and, his voice 
tearful from his despair at having no son, the king said, "Holy one, I am 
about to leave my kingdom and go into the forest to sit in tapasya. Ah, Iam 
a most unfortunate man that I have no son. So what will I do, O Maharishi, 
with a kingdom?" 

Hearing this, the Muni restrained his senses and entered into deep 
dhyana, where he sat in the shade of the mango tree. Into the Sage's lap 
there fell a juicy mango, untouched by the beak of a parrot, or any bird. 
That best of Munis took the mango and, breathing some silent mantras over 
it, gave the fruit to the king, so he could have a peerless child. 


The Mahamuni, of exceptional wisdom, said to Brihadratha, "Go back, 
O King, for your wish is fulfilled. Do not leave your kingdom and go into 
the forest." 

In joy, Brihadratha worshipped the feet of the Sage and returned to his 
palace. He remembered his old promise to his wives that he would never 
make any difference between them and, Bharatarishabha, the king gave that 
mango to them both. His exquisite queens divided that fruit in two halves 
and ate it. 

Because of the Muni's power, because he could never utter a lie, both 
queens became pregnant after eating the mango, and Brihadratha's joy knew 
no bounds. When their time came both queens gave birth: each to a divided 
child. Each half had one eye, one arm, one leg, half a stomach, half a face 
and half an anus. 

The mothers looked at what they had brought forth and shivered in fear. 
In great sorrow, the mothers decided to abandon the stillborn halves of a 
child. Their two midwives carefully swaddled the two lifeless pieces and, 
leaving the palace in stealth through a back door at dead of night, left the 
parcels outside at a crossing of streets and hurried back. 

Purushvyaghra, a while later, a Rakshasi called Jara, a cannibal who 
lived on human flesh and blood, found the two halves of the abandoned 
child and picked them up to take them outside the city. She put them 
together so she could carry them more easily, when, O Bull among men, 
there was a flash of light and the two halves were united into a magnificent, 
now breathing child! 

Now her eyes wide with amazement, the Rakshasi found that she could 
not make off with the human child, whose body was as hard and powerful 
as the Vajra, the thunderbolt of adamant. That infant clenched his hands into 
fists, red as copper, thrust them into his mouth and began to roar as 
dreadfully as rain-charged thunderheads. Alarmed by the sound, the king 
and others living in his palace came out. 

The dejected and grieving queens emerged, as well, their breasts 
suddenly welling with milk to have back their child. The Rakshasi saw the 
queens who wanted their child back, she saw the king who was desperate 
for a son, she felt the strength of the child in her arms, and she thought, "I 
live in the domain of this king who is so anxious to have a son, and it does 
not become me to kill the infant of such a great and good king." 


The Rakshasi held the child in her arms even as clouds enfold the sun 
and, quickly assuming a human form, came before the king and said to him, 
"Brihadratha, this is your child; I give him to you; here, take him. He has 
been born through the virtue of your wives and the blessing of the great 
Brahmana. The midwives abandoned him in the night, but I have given him 
refuge." 

Receiving their son, the lovely daughters of the king of Kasi soon 
drenched him in mother's milk. When the king knew everything that had 
happened he was full of joy, and he spoke to the Rakshasi, who had 
assumed the form of a human woman with a golden complexion. 

"O you who have the complexion of a lotus' filament, who are you that 
returns my son to me? Auspicious one, to me you seem like a goddess 
ranging the Earth at your whim!'"" 


CANTO 18 
RAJASUYARAMBHA PARVA CONTINUED 


cc rishna continues, 'Hearing this, the Rakshasi answered, "May you 

Ke blessed, O King of kings! I am the Rakshasi Jara, who can take 
any form that I choose. I live contentedly in your realm and am revered by 
everyone: for I go from house to house, of men, and bring them fortune. 
The Svayambhuva Brahma created me of old, and I was called Grihadevi, 
the goddess of hearth and home. 

I had celestial beauty, and I was sent to the world to destroy the 
Danavas. He who draws a likeness of me upon the walls of his house, a 
likeness full of youth and in the midst of children, shall indeed have 
prosperity in his home; otherwise, his household will suffer decay and ruin. 
O King, on a wall of your palace is a picture of me surrounded by children, 
which is worshipped daily with flowers and perfumes, with incense, 
offerings of food and other things of enjoyment. 

Since I am so adored in your home, I think daily of doing you some 
great good in return. It happened, good king, that I saw the halves of your 
child born in two pieces. When I put them together, a living child was 
made. Great king, this transpired only because of your good fortune, and I 
was merely its instrument. 

I can swallow Mount Meru if I choose; what then to say of this child? 
But you have gratified me with the worship, which you offer me in your 
home, and so I give you back your son." 

With these words, Rajan, the Rakshasi vanished. Having received his 
son, Brihadratha returned to his palace, where he had all the rites of infancy 
performed. He ordered his people to observe an annual festival to honour 
the Rakshasi. Then, that king, who was as Brahma's equal, named his son 
Jarasandha - he who had been joined by Jara. 

Jarasandha of Magadha grew in size and strength like a fire fed with 
libations of ghee. Growing, day by day, even like the moon waxing during 
the bright fortnight of the month, the child swelled his parents' joy.'" 


CANTO 19 
RAJASUYARAMBHA PARVA CONTINUED 


eh rishna says, 'Some time later, the noble Maharishi Chandakausika 

Ko again to the land of the Magadhas. Joyful at his advent, King 
Brihadratha went out to welcome him, taking his ministers and priest and 
wives and son. O Bhaarata, he worshipped the Sage with padya and arghya, 
and then offered his entire kingdom to him, and also his son. 

Receiving, graciously, the king's worship, and well pleased with it, that 
holy Rishi said to the sovereign of Magadaha, "I know everything that has 
happened with spiritual vision. But listen, O King of kings, to what this son 
of yours will become, and also what his beauty, excellence, strength and 
valour shall be. 

Have no doubt that, blessed with fortune and growing in prowess, he 
will have all these. Just as other birds can never match the speed of Vinata's 
son Garuda, the other kings of the world will never be able to equal the 
tejas of your heroic son. All that stand in his way he will raze. Even as the 
force of a cataract makes no dent upon a mountain's breast of rock, weapons 
cast at him, even by the Devas, with cause him no injury or pain. 

He will blaze forth over the heads of all that wear crowns. As the Sun 
dims the lustre of the stars, your prince will rob the glory of every other 
monarch. Even the mighty kings, who own great armies and countless 
chariots and beasts, will perish like moths in a flame when they confront 
your son. 

This child will seize the burgeoning fortune of every other king, as the 
ocean receives the swollen waters of rivers during the monsoon. As the vast 
Earth bears all manner of thing, this child of inordinate strength will support 
the four varnas. Even as every creature born with a body depends on 
precious vayu, dear as their atman, to live, so will the kings of the world 
depend on your son. 

This prince of Magadha, mightiest of all men in the world, will see with 
his human eyes the God of gods - Rudra, Hara destroyer of the Tripura. 

Parantapa, with this, Chandkaushika dismissed King Brihadratha and 
turned back to his own ascetic pursuit. The lord of the Magadhas went back 
into his capital, and gathering all his friends and kinsfolk, installed 


Jarasandha upon his throne. Very soon, King Brihadratha began to feel a 
sharp aversion for all worldly pleasures. When he had made Jarasandha 
king, he and his two wives went away into the forest and began living in an 
asrama. 

Rajan, once his father took sannyasa, Jarasandha, through his matchless 
valour, brought many kings under his sway. 

King Brihadratha lived for some years in the forest, in tapasya, before 
finally rising into Swarga with his wives. King Jarasandha had all the boons 
that Chandakausika foretold, and ruled his people like a father. Some years 
later, when I, Krishna, killed Kamsa, enmity arose between Jarasandha and 
me. O Bhaarata, from his city, Girivraja, the king of Magadha whirled a 
great mace ninety-nine times over his head and flung it at Mathura. 

I lived in Mathura then. The beautiful mace, which Jarasandha hurled all 
the way from Girivraja, flew ninety-nine yojanas and landed near Mathura. 
Seeing it, the people rushed to me to tell me about the fall of the mace. The 
place where that mace fell, next to Mathura, is called Gadavasan. 

Jarasandha had two staunch supporters, Hansa and Dimbhaka, both 
invincible to all weapons. They were masters of politics and dharma, and in 
counsel they were the most intelligent among all men. | have already told 
you all about that awesome pair. The two of them and Jarasandha, together, 
I believe, were more than a match for the three worlds. This was why the 
powerful Kukkura, Andhaka and Vrishni tribes, out of discretion, did not 
consider it wise to fight Jarasandha."" 


CANTO 20 
JARASANDHA-VADHA PARVA 


eh rishna says, 'Hansa and Dimbhaka have both fallen; Kamsa and all 

| Gs followers have been slain. So, the time has come to kill 
Jarasandha. But he cannot be killed in battle even by the Devas and the 
Asuras, even if they combine. However, I think that he can be vanquished 
in single combat. In me there is policy; in Bhima is strength, and in Arjuna 
there is victory; so, as prelude to your performing the Rajasuya yagna, we 
will surely destroy the king of Magadha. 

We three shall go to him, secretly, and he will certainly fight one of us. 
Because he is proud and fears ignominy he will choose to fight Bhima. And 
like Death himself, who kills a man swollen with pride, the long-armed and 
mighty Bhima will kill the king of Magadha. 

If you know my heart, and if you have any faith in me, then give me 
Arjuna and Bhima, without delay.’ 

Yudhishtira sees how cheerfully Bhima and Arjuna stand beside him, 
and cries, Achyuta, O Achyuta Parantapa, do not say this to me! You are the 
lord of the Pandavas, and we depend only on you. What you say, Govinda, 
is always wisdom. You never walk at the head of those whom Fortune has 
abandoned. I, who am yours to command, consider Jarasandha already dead 
and the kings he holds captive already set free, and that I have already 
performed the Rajasuya. 

Lord of the Universe, Purushottama, go forth vigilantly so that this 
mission is accomplished. I cannot live without you - like a man stricken by 
disease and deprived of dharma, artha and kama. 

Arjuna cannot live without Sauri, nor can Krishna live without Partha; 
neither is there anything in this world which these two cannot conquer. 
Then, this handsome Bhima is the strongest man in the world. Of great 
renown, what is there that he cannot achieve with the two of you? 

When well led, troops excel in war; an army without a leader is lifeless, 
say the wise. So, armies must always be led by commanders of experience. 
The wise channel water into low-lying lands; even fishermen cause water to 
leak out through holes in the tank. We, too, shall attempt to achieve our 
purpose under the leadership of this Krishna, who knows politics, whose 


fame spreads through the world. Indeed, to succeed at any venture one 
should always set Krishna in the van, this Purushottama whose power 
consists of both wisdom and strategy, and who knows both methods and 
means. 

So, to achieve our purpose, let Pritha's son Arjuna follow Krishna, best 
of the Yadavas, and let Bhima follow Arjuna. Through wise policy, good 
fortune and prowess, we will find success in this purpose which needs great 
valour.’ 

When Yudhishtira says this, Krishna, Arjuna and Bhima, all mighty 
tejasvins, set out for Magadha, their splendid bodies clothed in the garb of 
Snataka Brahmanas, and with the blessings and encouraging words of 
friends and kinsmen. Great is their splendour anyway; and their bodies, 
already like the Sun, the Moon and Fire, blaze brighter for being inflamed 
by wrath at the plight of the kings, their kin, imprisoned by Jarasandha. 

The people see Krishna and Arjuna, neither of whom have ever been 
defeated in battle, with Bhima at their head, all three going forth to 
accomplish one mission, and they think of Jarasandha as being already 
dead. For the illustrious two are Masters, who direct everything that 
happens in all the worlds, as well as all things concerning the dharma, artha 
and kama of every creature. 

Setting out from the land of the Kurus, they pass through Kurujangala 
and arrive at the charmed lake of lotuses. Crossing the hills of Kalakuta, 
they then passed over the Gandaki, the Sadanira, the Sarkaravarta and the 
other rivers, all of which spring from the same mountains. They then cross 
the lovely Sarayu and see the country of Eastern Kosala. Passing through 
that kingdom, they come to Mithila, then, crossing the Mala and 
Charamanwati, the three heroes ford the Ganga and the Sona, and continue 
eastwards. 

Finally, those shuras, heroes of undimmed glory, arrive at Magadha at 
the heart of Kushamba. Coming to the hills of Goratha, they see below them 
the capital city of Magadha, always replete with cows, wealth, water and 
beautiful with the countless trees which grow there." 


CANTO 21 
JARASANDHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


eh rishna says, 'Look, Partha, at the great capital of Magadha in all its 

| Gea Rich are its flocks and herds, and inexhaustible its store 
of water. The finest mansions adorn its streets, free from all calamities and 
evil. 

The five mountains Vaihara, Varaha, Vrishabha, Rishigiri, and the 
enchanting Chaitya, all with towering peaks, overgrown with great and lofty 
trees, intertwined and of cool shade: all these seem to protect this city of 
Girivraja together. The breasts of these hills are covered by delightful trees 
of Lodhra forests, fragrant, their branch ends profuse with flowers. 

Here the lustrous Gautama, of stern vows, begot on Ausinari, the Sudra 
woman, Kakshivat and other sons of great renown. It only goes to reflect 
Gautama's mercy on human kings that the race sprung from him still lives 
under their mortal sway. Arjuna, it was here that, in elder days, the mighty 
sovereigns of Anga, Vanga and other lands came to the asrama of Gautama, 
and spent their days in joy. 

Look, Partha, at these enchanting forests of Pippalas and lovely Lodhras, 
which surround the hermitage of Gautama Muni. Long ago, the Nagas 
Arbuda and Sakrapavain lived here, those Parantapas, as did the excellent 
Nagas Swastika and Mani. Manu himself had ordained that the land of the 
Magadhas would never feel the scourge of any drought; and Kaushika and 
Manimat also blessed this country. 

Being master of this beautiful and impregnable city, Jarasandha, unlike 
other kings, is bent on fulfilling his vile purpose. But we will kill him, and 
crush his pride. 

With that, those mighty tejasvins, the Vrishni and the two Pandavas 
approach Girivraja, impregnable capital of Magadha, teeming with cheerful, 
well-fed people of all the four varnas: Girivraja of perennial festivities. 
Upon arriving at the city-gates, instead of entering peaceably, the cousins 
assault the sacred Chaityaka peak, which the race of Brihadratha as well as 
the people of Girivraja worship, and which gladdens the hearts of all 
Magadhans. 


Once, Brihadratha killed the Rakshasa Rishabha upon that peak and 
made three great drums out of his hide, which he set up in Girivraja. Those 
drums, once struck, resound for a full month after! Krishna and the 
Pandavas tear down the peak of Chaityaka, the joy and pride of the 
Magadhas, and bring it down over those drums covered by the blooms of 
heaven, the drums which never stop reverberating. They, who have come to 
kill Jarasandha, it seems set their feet upon their enemy's head by what they 
do. 

Having attacked that celebrated, ancient, immovable massif, always 
adored with perfumes and garlands, with awesome arms, breaking it down, 
the three heroes joyfully march into Girivraja. The Brahmanas inside the 
city see many evil omens, which they hasten to report to Jarasandha. 

The chief priest makes the king mount an elephant and, blessed by 
lighted brands around him, Jarasandha of untold prowess, wanting to keep 
the evil omens signified at bay, enters into a yagna with every apposite vow; 
he fasts. 

Meanwhile, Bhaarata, the brothers, unarmed, rather with their own bare 
arms their only weapons, enter the city disguised as Snataka 

Brahmanas; they come seeking single combat with Jarasandha. They see 
how marvellously elegant are the shops, full of garlands and various 
delicacies to eat, indeed replete with everything that any man's heart could 
desire. 

Looking at those affluent and excellent shops, the Purushottamas 
Krishna, Bhima and Dhananjaya walk along the public highway. Suddenly, 
they of untold strength begin to forcibly snatch the garlands that the flower- 
vendors have hung up for sale. Wearing colourful robes and earrings, 
putting on the garlands, the heroes walk into the abode of Jarasandha of 
lofty intellect, even like Himalayan lions eyeing cattle-folds. 

Rajan, smeared with sandalwood paste, the arms of those Kshatriyas 
look like the trunks of Sala trees. The people of Magadha see those 
magnificent three, powerful as elephants, their necks thick as Sala trees, 
chests wide, and are wonderstruck. The Purusharishabhas pass through 
three crowded gates, where men throng, and in great heart and cheer 
approach Jarasandha, haughtily. 

Jarasandha gets up in haste and receives them with padya, madhurpaka 
and other ingredients of arghya; he offers them gifts of kine, and shows 
them every reverence. 


Says that great king to them, 'Be welcome! 

O Janamejaya, Partha and Bhima remain silent, while Krishna replies, 
'King of kings, these two have sworn a vow of silence and they will not 
speak until midnight. After that hour, they will talk to you.’ 

Jarasandha houses his guests in the apartments of sacrifice and returns to 
his royal chambers. At the midnight hour, the king returns to his guests who 
wear the attire of Brahmanas. For, that invincible monarch keeps strictly his 
vow that, even if it be the midnight hour, he would grant audience to any 
Snataka Brahmanas who arrive in his court. 

O Bhaarata, seeing the extraordinary attire of his guests, that best among 
kings is puzzled. Yet, he waits upon them patiently, respectfully, silently. 
Those Purusharishabhas, the three Parantapas, on the other hand, see 
Jarasandha and say, 'O King, may you attain moksha without any great 
effort!" 

Tiger among kings, with that they fall silent, staring. Rajadhiraja, 
Jarasandha says to those Pandavas and the Yadava, all disguised as 
Brahmanas, 'Pray, be seated.' 

Those Narapungavas sit themselves down, and they blaze with beauty 
like the three main priests of a great sacrifice. 

Jarasandha, always devoted to truth, now softly censures his guests in 
disguise, saying, 'Well do I know that, throughout the world, Brahmanas 
who keep the Snataka vrata never deck their persons with garlands and 
fragrant paste, unseasonably. 

So who are you, adorned with flowers, and your hands bearing the marks 
of the bowstring? Wearing coloured robes, wearing flowers and sandalwood 
paste, out of season, you tell me that you are Brahmanas although you have 
the bearing of Kshatriyas. 

Tell me truly who you are. Truth embellishes even kings. Why, breaking 
the peak of the Chaityaka, have you come in here, disguised, and through 
an unlawful gate, without fear of my royal wrath? The Brahmanas tejas 
dwells in his speech; what you did is not suited to the varna to which you 
profess to belong. 

Therefore, tell me what is your purpose? You have arrived here 
unlawfully; why do you disdain the worship that I offer you? What motive 
have you for coming here?’ 

Thus addressed by the king, Krishna Mahatman, that most eloquent one, 
replies calmly and gravely. 


Krishna says, 'O King, know we are Snataka Brahmanas. Brahmanas, 
Kshatriyas and Vaishyas are all allowed to observe the Snataka vrata. 
Besides, this vow has numerous rules governing it, both general and 
particular. A Kshatriya who keeps this vow with special observances finds 
great prosperity. Therefore, we have decked ourselves in flowers. 

Also, Kshatriyas sow their prowess not with words but deeds. That is 
why, O son of Brihadratha, a Kshatriya never speaks audaciously. Brahma 
has invested in the Kshatriya his own tejas, implanted it in the purpose of 
the warrior. If you wish to see it today, you shall. 

This is the code of the Kshatriya: that the house of an enemy must be 
entered through the unlawful gate, and a friend's house through the proper 
one. Know, also, that having entered our enemy's house through the illegal 


gate to accomplish our purpose, we are sworn not to accept the worship 
offered us.'" 


CANTO 22 
JARASANDHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


iad ee says, 'I do not remember having ever done you an I injury! 
Even after thinking carefully about it, I do not recall 1 what harm I ever 
did you. When I have never wounded you, Brahmanas, why do you think of 
me as your enemy? Answer me honestly, for that is the way of the 
righteous. 

The mind feels pain at any harm done to one's artha or dharma. The 
Kshatriya who injures an innocent man's pleasure or morality, let him not be 
a great warrior otherwise, and a master of every aspect of dharma, he, 
beyond doubt, finds the fate of sinners and falls away from fortune and 
grace. 

The ways of the Kshatriyas are the noblest among all men of dharma in 
the three worlds. Indeed, all who know dharma acclaim the code of the 
Kshatriya. I follow the laws of my varna and never harm any who live 
under my rule. So, by bringing this charge against me, it seems that you 
speak in error.' 

Krishna says, 'Mahabaho, there is one in this world who is sovereign of a 
certain royal line, and who upholds the honour of his race. We have come 
against you at his command. You have brought many Kshatriyas of the 
world here to your city as your prisoners. How can you still think of 
yourself as a man of dharma after what you have done? Best of kings, how 
can one king sin thus against other righteous kings? 

But you treat other kings savagely and seek to offer them as human 
sacrifice to the Lord Rudra! O Son of Brihadratha, the sin you have 
committed touches me, as well, for I am with dharma and I can protect 
dharma. Killing human beings as a sacrifice to the gods is unheard of. So 
why do you wish to offer the lives of a hundred kings to the Lord Sankara? 

You are treating noble men, who belong to your own varna, like animals. 
You are a fool, Jarasandha, for who else would behave in this wise? One 
always finds the fruit of whatever one does, under whatever circumstances. 
Therefore, since we are sworn to protect and help all those in distress, we 
have come here, for the weal of our kind, to kill you and prevent the 
slaughter of the captive kings, our kinsmen. 


You believe that there is no man among the Kshatriyas who can match 
you; you are gravely mistaken in this. Rajan, there is no Kshatriya born who 
would not, thinking of his noble ancestry and birth, gladly ascend into 
heaven, which has no like anywhere on earth, by dying in battle. 

Know, Purusharishabha, that Kshatriyas fight battles like men 
performing yagnas, with Swarga as their goal, and thus quell the whole 
world. Studying the Vedas, performing tapasya and dying in battle are all 
deeds which lead to heaven. Finding Swarga through the first two might not 
be certain, but for those who die in battle heaven is assured. 

Death in battle inexorably brings triumph to equal Indra's. Countless 
gains accrue from dying in battle. It is through battle that Indra of the 
thousand yagnas became who he is; it is why he vanquishes the Asuras and 
rules the three worlds. You are so full of hubris about the untold might of 
your Magadha host; open hostility against you must surely lead only to 
heaven. 

Do not underestimate other men, for valour dwells in everyone. Rajan, 
there are many whose valour might well equal or even exceed your own. It 
is only because they are not as renowned as you that your valour is noted. 
We can bear your strength. So, I say to you, King of Magadha, do not act 
like a superior: you are in the presence of your peers. 

Do not tempt fate and go, along with your children, your ministers and 
your legions into Yama's land. Dambhodhbhava, Kartavirya, Uttara and 
Brihadratha were kings who met death, with all their forces, because they 
underestimated their superiors. 

We who have come to liberate the kings you hold as captives, know, are 
surely not Brahmanas. I am Hrisikesa, also called Sauri, and these two 
heroes among men are the sons of Pandu. Lord of Magadha, we challenge 
you - stand before us and fight. Either free all the kings or go to Yamaloka!' 

Jarasandha says, 'I never make a captive of a king without vanquishing 
him in battle. Who have I held here whom I have not first defeated in war? 
Krishna, it has been told that this is the dharma which every Kshatriya must 
follow: to bring others under his sway by force of arms, and then to treat 
them as his slaves. 

I have collected these kings in order to sacrifice them to God. How will I 
now free them out of fear today, especially after I have told you what 
Kshatriya dharma is? With troops against troops, arrayed in battle 


formation, or alone against one of you, or alone against two or all three of 
you, simultaneously or separately, I am ready to fight!' 

Saying this, and eager to have battle with those three warriors of 
dreadful achievements, Jarasandha has his son, another Sahadeva, installed 
upon his throne. Then, Bharatarishabha, on the brink of battle, that king 
remembers his two generals Kausika and Chitrasena. These two were once 
known through the world, reverentially, as Hansa and Dimbhaka. 

And, Rajan, that tiger among men, the Lord Sauri, who is always 
devoted to the truth, that slayer of Madhu, Haladhara's! younger brother, 
Krishna greatest of men who have perfectly controlled their senses, 
remembering Brahma's command and knowing that the lord of Magadha is 
destined to be killed in single combat by Bhima, and not by any Yadava, 
does not wish to himself kill Jarasandha, most powerful of men blessed 
with strength, that hero endowed with the strength of a tiger, that Kshatriya 
of terrible valour." 


! Balarama's ploughshare weapon is the Halayudha, so he is Haladhara, bearer of the plough. 


CANTO 23 
JARASANDHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


yous said, "Then, that best of orators, Krishna of the Yadava 
clan, says to Jarasandha who is resolved to fight, 'Rajan, which of us 
three will you fight? Which of us should prepare for combat with you?’ 

The splendid king of Magadha says that he will do battle with Bhima. 
Now, his priest fetches the yellow pigment got from the cow, garlands of 
flowers and every other auspicious thing, as well as the best specifics for 
restoring consciousness and relieving pain, to Jarasandha, eager for combat. 

A celebrated Brahmana performs initiatory rites for Jarasandha, with all 
blessings, and, thinking of the dharma of a Kshatriya, the king readies 
himself for battle. He takes off his crown, ties up his hair and rises like an 
ocean which would burst apart its continents. 

That sovereign of dreadful prowess says to Bhima, 'I will fight you, for it 
is honourable to be vanquished by a superior man.' 

With that, Jarasandha rushes at Bhima even as the Asura Bala of old did 
at the king of the Devas. Krishna invokes the gods on behalf of the mighty 
Bhimasena, his cousin. Having taken counsel with Krishna, Bhima also 
advances upon Jarasandha, keen for battle. Then the two Purushavyaghras, 
those Kshatriyas of untold prowess, their bare arms their only weapons, 
joyfully lock in combat, each one eager to quell the other. 

Grasping each other's arms, locking legs, at times slapping armpits in 
self-exhortation, they make the arena where they face each other tremble. 
Often they lay hold of each other's necks and push and heave violently, this 
way and that; they press every limb against a limb of the adversary; they 
continue to slap their own armpits in exultation and defiance. 

At times extending their arms, at others withdrawing them, now lifting 
them high, now dropping them low, they circle and seize each other. Neck 
thrust against neck, brow striking brow, roughly, they make sparks fly from 
armour and headpieces, like flashes of lightning. 

Grasping each other with many holds with their arms, lashing out with 
kicks violent enough to reach their inmost marmas, they also strike each 
other's chests with clenched fists. Roaring like thunderheads, they fight as 
two maddened elephants might with their trunks. Incensed by each other's 


blows, on they fight: hauling, pulling, dragging, ferociously, glaring like 
two angry lions. 

Every limb of the other each one strikes, using arms, mighty legs; 
seizing one another by the waist, they fling each other far with awesome 
force. Accomplished wrestlers both, the two Kshatriyas pull and shove and 
clasp each other with violent force. 

Then, those heroes perform the most difficult of all feats in wrestling: 
prishtabhanga, where they throw each other face down onto the ground and 
keep the fallen antagonist so for as long as possible. With their arms, they 
also perform the sampurna-murchcha and purna-kumbha. 

At times, they wring each other's arms and other limbs as if these are 
vegetable fibres to be twisted into cords. At others, fists clenched, they 
strike thunderous blows upon other parts of their opponent's bodies than 
those at which they appear to aim. 

So battle those heroes and the citizens, thousands of Brahmanas, 
Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras, and even women and the old, O 
Purushvyaghra, come out and gather around to watch the titanic duel. 
Quickly, the crowd swells, until it is great, and a single solid mass of 
humanity, no space between body and body. 

The sounds the wrestlers make, while slapping their arms, seizing each 
other's necks to throw one another down, grabbing each other's legs also to 
fling the adversary to the ground - all these are so loud that they resemble 
the roar of thunder or of cliffs breaking and falling. 

Both of them are the greatest among the strong and delight greatly in this 
encounter. Keen to prevail, each watches alert to take advantage of the 
slightest lapse by the other. And, O King, the awesome Bhima and 
Jarasandha fight ferociously in those lists, at times driving the crowd back 
by waving their hands; they fight even like Indra and Vritra did of old. 

Dragging forward, thrusting back, and with sudden twists flinging each 
other down, onto face or side, they wound each other savagely. At times, 
they strike with bent and vicious knees, while roaring at each other: stinging 
taunts and insults. They strike each other with fists, the blows descending 
like the weight of rocks. With bull-like shoulders, long arms, and both 
masters of wrestling, they strike each other with those arms that are like 
maces of iron. 

On the first day of the lunar month of Kartika begins that duel between 
the two heroes, and the lustrous Kshatriyas battle on, never pausing, not to 


eat; they battle on by night and day, until the thirteenth day of the Moon. 
However, on the night of the fourteenth day, the lord of Magadha calls a 
halt from fatigue. 

And Krishna says bitingly to Bhima of terrible deeds, 'Kaunteya, an 
enemy who is tired must not be pressed, for if he is he might even die of 
exhaustion. So, Son of Kunti, you must not press this king while he is tired. 
Bhima, put forth only as much strength as he can now summon into his 
arms; fight him only with such strength as he has, Bull of the Bhaaratas.' 

Bhima Parantapa understands at once what Krishna means, and he 
knows the time has come to kill Jarasandha. Bhima, strongest of all strong 
men, gathers himself, all his strength and valour, that prince of the Kurus, to 
bring down the hitherto unvanquished Jarasandha." 


CANTO 24 
JARASANDHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


yo said, "Deciding to kill Jarasandha, Bhima answers 
Krishna, 'Yaduvyaghra, O Krishna, I will not relent against this wretch 
among kings, who yet stands before me, strong enough and bent upon the 
fight; I will no show him mercy.’ 

Krishna, who wants to exhort that hero to kill Jarasandha swiftly, says, 
'Bhima, today show some of the strength, which you have from your father 
Maruta Deva!’ 

Bhima Parantapa seizes Jarasandha, lifts him above his head and begins 
whirling that king round dizzily. Bharatarishabha, having whirled him 
round fully a hundred times, Bhima thrusts his knee into Jarasandha's spine 
and breaks his body in two. Killing the Magadhan thus, Vrikodara gives a 
dreadful roar, which mingles with Jarasandha's roars as his back snaps; at 
which there is a loud uproar which strikes fear into every creature's heart. 
The people of Magadha are speechless for fear, and many women even give 
birth prematurely. 

Hearing those roars, the people think that either Himavat is crumbling or 
even the Earth herself is being rent asunder. Then, those scourges of all 
their enemies leave the lifeless body of Jarasandha at the palace gate, where 
he lies as one asleep, and they go out of the city. Krishna has Jarasandha's 
chariot, of the fine flagstaff, readied and makes Bhima and Arjuna ride in it. 
Together they go and set the imprisoned kings, their kinsmen, free. 

Saved from certain death, those kings come to Krishna and offer him 
priceless gifts of jewels, every manner of gemstone. Having vanquished his 
enemy, Krishna, unscathed, bearing every kind of weapon, and 
accompanied by the kings he had freed, emerges from Girivraja riding in 
Jarasandha's unearthly chariot. 

The ambidextrous Savyasachi, whom not all the kings of the world can 
contain, the extraordinarily handsome and inexorable Arjuna, with Bhima 
of untold strength, also comes out of the citadel of Magadha. Krishna drives 
the chariot in which the brothers ride, and it is splendid, for it is the very 
ratha in which, of old, Indra and Vishnu fought against the Asuras because 
of Brihaspati's wife Tara, and great blood was spilt. 


Riding in that chariot, now Krishna comes out of the hill-fort. That ratha 
has the lustre of molten gold; it is lined with rows of tinkling, exquisite 
bells; and its wheels clatter as thunderclouds rumble; it is always 
triumphant, always vanquishes the enemy against which it is driven; it is the 
same chariot riding in which Indra slew ninety-nine great Asuras in the 
elder days. 

The three Purushavyaghras are delighted to have that chariot. The people 
of Magadha see long-armed Krishna and the two brothers with him in the 
chariot and are wonderstruck. Bhaarata, that ratha is yoked to celestial 
steeds, which own the speed of the wind; and with Krishna driving it, it is 
indescribably beautiful. 

Upon that best of all chariots is an uncanny flagstaff which stands 
without being physically or visibly attached: for it is a thing created with 
the art of heaven. It can be seen, glorious as a rainbow, from a yojana away. 
While emerging from Girivraja, Krishna thinks of Garuda; remembered by 
his master Garuda arrows down to him in a wink, and he is like a great tree 
of vast proportions standing in the heart of a village and being worshipped 
by all. 

Garuda, of untold heaviness, who preys on snakes, sits upon that finest 
of chariots, alongside numberless open-mouthed and frightfully roaring 
creatures, upon its flagstaff. At which, that greatest of chariots is even more 
resplendent, so brilliant that it is impossible to be looked upon by any 
being: even as is the midday Sun of a thousand rays. 

And, O King, that best of flagstaffs, of unearthly creation, is such that 
never would it strike any tree, and nor could any weapon ever pierce it, 
even though all men see it plain. Achyuta, tiger among men, riding with the 
two sons of Pandu in that divine chariot, whose wheels sound like spring 
clouds rumbling, emerges from Girivraja. 

The ratha which Krishna drives had once been received by King Vasu 
from Vasava, and from Vasu by Brihadratha, and from him by Jarasandha in 
course of time. Coming out of Girivraja, he of the long arms, eyes like lotus 
petals and luminous fame stops on a level plain outside the city. Then, all 
the people rush there, O Rajan, with the Brahmanas at their head, hurrying 
there to worship him with every religious ritual. 

The kings who have been freed adore Madhusudana, reverently, and 
eulogising him, say, 'O Long-armed, we were plunged in the deep mire of 
grief in this land of Jarasandha, and you have saved us. Devakinandana, 


how extraordinary is this deed of yours, with Arjuna and Bhima to help 
you. 

O Vishnu, we languished in the fell hill-fortress of Jarasandha; surely, it 
was only by our greatest good fortune that you rescued us, O Scion of the 
Yadavas, and swelled your fame by this deed. Purushavyaghra, we bow to 
you; your wish is our command. Say what you want us to do, and however 
difficult it might be, O Lord, we shall do it.' 

When the kings speak thus to him, the Mahatman Hrishikesa reassures 
them and then says, 'Yudhishtira wishes to perform the Rajasuya yagna; that 
king who always walks the way of dharma, wants to acquire imperial 
dignity. I say to you, help him in his endeavour.' 

Joyfully, those kings accept what Krishna says, crying, 'So be it!' 

Saying this, those lords of the Earth give gifts of jewels to him of the 
Dasarha race. Moved by their kindness, Govinda takes but a portion of 
them. 

Then, Jarasandha's son, the noble Sahadeva, accompanied by _ his 
kinsmen and main officers of state, and with his priest going before him, 
comes to that place. Bending low, offering lavish gifts of jewels and 
precious gems, he worships Krishna, god among men. Krishna gently 
reassures the weeping prince and accepts those priceless gifts. Joyfully, 
there and then, Krishna installs Sahadeva as king of Magadha. 

Having been made king by the greatest of men and having gained 
Krishna's friendship, Jarasandha's mighty-armed and illustrious son is 
shown every kindness and respect by the two sons of Pritha; he re-renters 
his father's city. Laden with jewels, Krishna, the sons of Pandu with him 
and great fortune attending upon him, leaves the capital of Magadha. 

And with the two Pandavas, Achyuta arrives in Indraprastha and, going 
to Yudhishtira, says in joy to that king, 'Rajottama, by good fortune Bhima 
has killed the mighty Jarasandha, and all the kings imprisoned in Girivraja 
have been freed. From good fortune, also, these two, Bhima and 
Dhananjaya, are well and have returned to their city, O Bhaarata, without 
injury.' 

Yudhisthira worships Krishna, as he deserves, and embraces Bhima and 
Arjuna in joy. Ajatasatru, the king who has no enemy, has found victory 
because of his brothers and the death of Jarasandha, and he gives himself up 
to celebration in the company of all his brothers. 


Pandu's eldest son, with his brothers, greets the kings who have come to 
Indraprastha, welcoming and honouring each according to his age. After the 
kings have been entertained duly, they depart immediately in fine chariots, 
with joyful hearts and the leave of Yudhishtira. 

Thus does Janardana, tiger among men, of fathomless intellect, cause the 
death of his enemy Jarasandha at the hands of the Pandavas. O Bhaarata, 
having seen Jarasandha slain, that Parantapa, scourge of every foe, takes his 
leave of Yudhishtira and Pritha, Draupadi and Subhadra, Bhimasena and 
Arjuna, and the twins, Nakula and Sahadeva. 

When he finally bids farewell to Dhananjaya, again, he sets out for his 
own city, Dwaraka, riding in that best of chariots, of unearthly craft, swift 
as the mind, given to him by Yudhishtira, the ratha which fills the ten points 
of the horizon with the rumble of its wheels. 

O Bharatarishabha, just before Krishna goes forth, the Pandavas, with 
Yudhishtira at their head, walk around him in reverent pradakshina. 

When Devaki's illustrious son leaves Indraprastha, after his magnificent 
triumph, and having dispelled the terror of the kings, that feat swells the 
renown of the Pandavas. Rajan, the sons of Pandu pass their days, always 
gladdening Draupadi's heart. And during that time, all that is just and in 
accordance with dharma, kama and artha are practised piously by 
Yudhishtira, while attending to his duty of protecting his people." 


CANTO 25 
DIGVIJAYA PARVA 


Vo said, "Having acquired that highest of bows, the 
inexhaustible twin quivers, the chariot and flagstaff, as well as the 
great sabha, Arjuna says to Yudhishtira, A great bow, weapons, great 
energy, allies, territory, fame, a vast army - all these, which, O King, are 
difficult to gain, I have won. 

I think that what we should now do is fill our treasury. Noblest of kings, 
I would like to make all the other kings of the world pay us tribute. I want 
to set out on an auspicious moment of a holy day of the Moon, when a 
favourable constellation is rising, to conquer the direction of the North, over 
which the Lord of Treasures, Kubera, reigns.’ 

When Yudhishtira Dharmaraja hears what Dhananjaya says, he replies in 
a grave and solemn tone, 'Bharatarishabha, make righteous Brahmanas 
chant blessings over you, to plunge your enemies in grief and to bring joy to 
your friends, then go forth. Partha, victory will surely be yours and your 
wishes will be fulfilled.' 

When Yudhishtira has said this, Arjuna sets out in the unearthly chariot, 
which he got from Agni, and with a large host going with him. 

Commanded by Yudhishtira lovingly, Bhimasena, also, as well as the 
twins set out, each at the head of a great army. 

Arjuna, son of the chastiser of Paka, brings the North under his sway, the 
direction ruled by the Lord of Treasures. Bhimasena, with force, quells the 
East, while Sahadeva does the South, and Nakula, master of every weapon, 
conquers the West. 

While his brothers are so engaged, the lofty Dharmaraja Yudhishtira 
remains in Khandavaprastha, enjoying great affluence, surrounded by 
friends and relatives." 


CANTO 26 
DIGVIJAYA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vous continued, "In the North, Arjuna comes to 
Pragjyotishapura where Bhagadatta rules, and tells the king what he 
intends and asks for his fealty. 

Bhagadatta says, 'O you who have Kunti for your mother, as you are to 
me, so is Yudhishtira. I will do all that you ask. Tell me, what else shall I do 
for you?’ 

Dhananjaya replies to Bhagadatta, 'If you give your word to do all this, 
you have done what I wish. 

Having thus subdued the king of Pragjyotishapura, Dhananjaya of the 
long arms, Kunti's son, marches further north - the direction ruled by 
Kubera. That Purusharishabha, the Kaunteya, conquers the mountainous 
regions and their hems, as also the realms of the hills and foothills. Having 
subdued all the mountains and the kings who reign there, bringing them 
under his sway, he takes tribute from them all. 

Winning their affection, allying himself to them, O King, he next rides 
against Brihanta, the king of Uluka, making this Bhumi tremble with the 
sound of his drums, the rumble of his chariot-wheels, and the trumpeting of 
the elephants in his train. However, Brihanta swiftly emerges from his city 
with his army that comprises four kinds of troops, and gives battle to 
Phalguna. 

Fierce is the battle between the two, but Brihanta cannot bear the 
prowess of the Pandava. When that invincible king of the mountain realm 
realises that Kunti's son is irresistible, he yields and comes to Arjuna with 
great wealth. Arjuna takes his kingdom from Brihanta, but then, making 
peace with that king, marches with him at his side against Senabindu, 
whom he drives out of his kingdom without ado. 

After this he quells Modapura, Vamadeva, Sudaman, Susankula, the 
Northern Ulukas, and all the kings of those countries and their peoples. 
Fettered by the command of Yudhishtira, O Rajan, Arjuna does not stir 
from the city of Senabindu, but only sends forth his legions to fetch those 
five realms under his sway. 


Having arrived at Devaprastha, the capital of Senabindu, Arjuna stations 
himself there, along with his army consisting of four kinds of forces. Then, 
surrounded by the kings and the peoples he has subjugated, the Kshatriya 
marches against King Viswagaswa, that bull of the race of Puru. He defeats 
the bold mountain men, all great warriors, and the Pandava with his legions 
takes the city ruled by the Puru king. 

Having vanquished the Puru king in battle, as also the robber tribes of 
the mountains, the Pandu brings under his sway the seven tribes known as 
Utsavasanketa. 

The Kshatriyarishabha goes on to vanquish the heroic warriors of 
Kashmira, as well as the King Lohita and ten minor chieftains. Then, Rajan, 
the Trigartas, the Daravas, the Kokonadas, and many other Kshatriyas, 
together, advance against the Pandava. 

The Kurunandana now takes the enchanting town of Abhisari and, later, 
defeats Rochamana who ruled in Uraga. Next, putting forth his great might, 
Indra's son Arjuna conquers the fine city of Singhapura, which is well 
guarded with every kind of weapon. 

Arjuna leads his legions to fiercely attack the realms of Suhma and 
Sumala. Indra's son, of untold prowess, after pressing on direly, brings the 
Bahlikas, always so tameless, under his sway. Pandu's son Phalguna, with a 
small select force, vanquishes the Daradas and the Kambojas, and follows 
that by crushing the bandit tribes of the north-eastern frontier, and those that 
live in the forests. 

Maharajan, Indra's son also subdues the allied tribes of the Lohas, the 
eastern Kambojas, and the northern Rishikas. The battle against the 
Rishikas is fierce in the extreme; why, the fight between Pritha's son and 
them is equal to that between the Devas and the Asuras, during which 
Brihaspati's wife Tara became the cause for so much slaughter. 

Quelling the Rishikas, O King, on the field of battle, Arjuna takes from 
them as tribute eight horses which are the colour of the parrot's breast, and 
also other steeds of the hues of the peacock, born in northern climes, and 
endowed with great swiftness. Finally, having conquered all the Himalayas 
and the Nishkuta Mountains, that Purusharishabha, bull among men, arrives 
at the White Mountains, and camps upon its breast." 


CANTO 27 
DIGVIJAYA PARVA CONTINUED 


yo said, "That valiant Pandava, blessed with majestic force, 
crossed the White Mountains and subdues the land of the 
Kimpurushas, ruled by Durmaputra, after a great massacre of Kshatriyas, 
and brings the country under his control. 

Having quelled that realm, Indra's son, with a calm mind, marches at the 
head of his legions to the country of Hataka, ruled by the Guhakas. He 
adopts a policy of conciliation with them and wins their alliance. In that 
realm, the Kuru prince sees the fine lake Manasa, and other sparkling water 
bodies, too, all sacred to Rishis. 

Arriving at the Manasa sarovara, Arjuna conquers the lands ruled by the 
Gandharvas, which surround the Hataka territories. Here the conqueror 
takes, as tribute, countless superb horses called Tittiri, Kalmasha, and 
Manduka. At last, the son of the slayer of Paka comes to the country of 
North Harivarsha, and wants to conquer it. Thereupon, some formidable 
great-bodied frontier guardsmen come, with gallant hearts, to him. 

They say, 'O son of Pritha, you can never conquer this land; if you seek 
your own good, go back from here. Any human who enters this country will 
die. We are pleased with you, Kshatriya; you have conquered enough and 
there is nothing here, Arjuna, for you to conquer. 

The Northern Kurus live here, and there can be no war here. Even if you 
enter this land, you will see nothing; for there is nothing here which can be 
seen by human eyes. However, if you seek something else, anything, tell us, 
O Purushavyaghra, so that we can do your bidding. 

When they say this to him Arjuna replies, smiling, 'I seek that my 
brother Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, of great intellect, becomes emperor. If 
your land is shut to humans, I will not enter it. But pay some tribute to 
Yudhishtira.' 

Hearing this from Arjuna, they give him many exquisite cloths and 
ornaments of unearthly make; silks of celestial texture and skins of 
unworldly origin. 

So it is that tiger among men subjugates the realms of the North, fighting 
countless battles both against Kshatriyas and bandit tribes. Having 


vanquished those chieftains, bringing them under his sway, he takes great 
wealth from them, gems and jewels past counting, the horses known as 
Tittiri and Kalmasha, as also those of the colour of the parrot's breast and 
those coloured like peacocks, all endowed with the speed of the wind. 

Surrounded, O King, by a huge army comprising the four kinds of 
forces, the hero returns to Sakraprastha, and Partha offers all that untold 
wealth and the animals he has brought to Yudhishtira Dharmaputra. Then, at 
his king's command, the Kshatriya retires to a private apartment in the 
palace to rest." 


CANTO 28 
DIGVIJAYA PARVA CONTINUED 


Veo said, "Meanwhile, Bhimasena, also blessed with great 
tejas, marches east with Yudhishtiras leave. That Bharatavyaghra, of 
fathomless valour, always the bane of his enemies, goes with a vast host, 
with a full complement of elephants, horses and chariots; well-armed he 
goes forth, and he can crush any enemy kingdom. 

Bhima comes first to the great land of the Panchalas, and begins to 
conciliate them with all the means at his disposal. Next, he effortlessly 
vanquishes the Gandakas and the Videhas. 

The lofty one then subdues the Dasarnas. In the land of the Dasarnas, 
their King Sudharman fights a ferocious duel with bare hands against 
Bhimasena. Seeing how mighty Sudharman is, Bhima makes him the chief 
commander of all his legions. 

Then, Bhima of terrible prowess marches east, making the very Earth 
tremble with the tread of the awesome host which follows him. Now that 
hero, who is the strongest of all strong men, defeats Rochamana, king of 
Aswamedha, who confronts him with his army. Having vanquished that 
king with feats of terrific ferocity, Kunti's son subdues the east. 

The prince of the Kurus, blessed with great strength, enters the country 
of Pulinda in the south, and brings Sukumara and the king Sumitra under 
his sway. Next, O Janamejaya, that Bharatapungava, fettered by the 
command of Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, rides against Sisupala of great 
vitality. Hearing what the Pandava intends, the king of Chedi comes out of 
his city, and that Parantapa receives Pritha's son with respect. 

Having met, those bulls of the lines of Kuru and Chedi enquire after 
each other's welfare. 

Then, O Rajan, the king of Chedi offers his kingdom to Bhima, and says 
smilingly, 'Anagha, sinless, what is your purpose?’ 

At which Bhima tells him about the intention of Yudhishtira. For thirty 
nights, O King, Bhima stays there being entertained by Sisupala. Then he 
sets out again from Chedi with his troops and chariots." 


CANTO 29 
DIGVIJAYA PARVA CONTINUED 


yee said, "That punisher of all enemies then vanquishes King 
Shrenimat of the Kumara country, and then Brihadbala, King of 
Kosala. Now, the Panadavottama, with deeds of exceptional ferocity 
vanquishes the virtuous and mighty King Dirghayagna of Ayodhya; he then 
subdues the country of Gopalakaksha, the northern Kosalas and also the 
king of the Mallas. 

Arriving next at the foot of the Himalaya, he quickly brings all that land 
under his sway. Thus, that Bharatarishabha conquers myriad countries. 
Endowed with great energy, and the strongest of all strong men, the son of 
Pandu next subdues the country of Bhallata, as also the Mountain 
Shuktimanta beside Bhallata. 

Then Bhima of long arms and terrible prowess defeats the unretreating 
Subahu, the king of Kasi, and brings him under complete sway; after which, 
with awesome prowess he overwhelms the great King Kratha who reigned 
in the region which lies around Suparsa; he defeats the Matsyas and the 
powerful Maladas, and conquers the country called Pasubhumi, which has 
neither fear nor oppression of any kind. 

The long-armed Kshatriya conquers Madhahara, Mahidhara, and the 
Somadheyas, and turns towards the north. With terrific force, the mighty 
Kaunteya subdues the kingdom of Vatsabhumi, and the king of the Bhargas, 
as also the ruler of the Nishadas, and Manimat and countless other kings. 

Effortlessly, swiftly, Bhima overcomes the southern Mallas and the 
Bhogavanta mountains. Next, just through policy and conciliation, the hero 
vanquishes the Sharmakas and the Varmakas. With some ease, he defeats 
that Lord of the Earth, Janaka king of the Videhas. 

With strategy, the Kshatriya then subdues the Sakas and the barbarians 
who live in that part of the country. Sending forth expeditions from Videha, 
where he remains, Bhima conquers the seven kings of the Kiratas who live 
around Indrakila, Indra's mountain. He vanquishes the Suhmas and the 
Prasuhmas. With them at his side, Kunti's son marches against Magadha. 

On his way, he subdues the kings Danda and Dandadhara; taking them 
with him, he marches on Girivraja. Peacefully, he brings Jarasandha's son 


under his sway and takes tribute from him. Then, with the kings he has 
conquered going with him, Bhima marches against Kama, making the Earth 
tremble at the advance of his legions consisting of the four kinds of forces. 

The Pandava faces Kama Parantapa and brings him under his power. O 
Bhaarata, having subdued Karna, he quells the powerful king of the 
mountain realms. Then, Pandu's son, with the strength of his arms, slays the 
king of Modagiri. 

Next, the Pandava vanquishes those valiant and powerful Kshatriyas, 
Vasudeva king of Pundra and Mahaujah who rules in Kausika-kachcha, 
before attacking the king of Vanga. Defeating Samudrasena, the kings 
Chandrasena and Tamralipta, and also the sovereign of the Karvatas and the 
ruler of the Suhmas, as also the kings who live upon the sea-shore, that 
Bharatarishabha conquers all the Mlechcha tribes. 

Having subjugated numerous kingdoms and countries, extracting tribute 
from them all, the son of Vayu advances towards Lohita. Now 

Bhima makes all the Mlechcha kings who rule the marshlands of the 
coast pay him tribute, various kinds of wealth, sandalwood, aloe, fine 
clothes and gemstones, pearls and shawls, gold and silver, and priceless 
dark corals. 

The Mlechcha kings shower untold wealth upon the son of Kunti, gold 
coins and precious stones counted in hundreds of millions, tens of crores. 

Returning to Indraprastha, Bhimasena of dreadful prowess offers all 
those treasures to Yudhishtira Dharmaraja." 


CANTO 30 
DIGVIJAYA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vor said, "Sahadeva, also commanded affectionately by 
Yudhishtira Dharmaputra, marches towards the south, taking a great 
host with him. That great prince of the Kurus first routs the Surasenas, 
bringing the king of Matsya under his sway. 

Then he crushes Dantavakra, powerful king of the Adhirajas and, taking 
tribute from him, reinstates him on his throne. The Kshatriya then brings 
Sukumara and, then, King Sumitra under his sway, before vanquishing the 
other Matsyas and the Patacharas. 

Blessed with great intelligence, the Kuru warrior now swiftly overruns 
the country of the Nishadas and also the lofty hill Gosringa, after which he 
subdues King Srenimat. He then subdues the country called Nararashtra, 
and the Kshatriya marches against Kuntibhoja who, with utmost 
willingness, accepts the sway of the conquering hero. 

Marching to the banks of the Charmanwati, the Kuru warrior meets the 
son of King Jambaka who has, because of an old enmity, been defeated 
before by Krishna Vasudeva. O Bhaarata, Jambaka's son gives battle to 
Sahadeva, who overpowers that prince and presses on south. 

The great warrior vanquishes the Sekas and others, and exacts tribute 
from them, many kinds of wealth and jewels. Making the vanquished tribes 
his allies, the Kshatriya marches on the countries that lie on the banks of the 
Narmada. There he defeats the two valiant kings of Avanti, Vinda and 
Anuvinda, who lead a teeming host, and the powerful son of the twin Devas 
takes great treasure from them. 

After this, the Kshatriya comes to Bhojataka, and there, O King of 
unfading glory, is engaged in a fierce battle by the king of that city, which 
lasts two days. Madri's son vanquishes the invincible Bhismaka. He then 
overcomes the king of Kosala in battle, and the monarch of the lands which 
lie on the banks of the Vena, as also the Kantarakas and the kings of the 
eastern Kosalas. 

Conquering both the Natakeyas and the Herambakas, quelling the 
kingdom of Marudha, he subdues Munjagrama by sheer strength. The 


Pandava overwhelms the mighty kings the Narhinas and the Arbukas and 
the myriad forest kings of that region of the country. 

Endowed with huge prowess, Sahadeva makes a subject of King 
Vatadhipa. Defeating the Pulindas, he marches on south. Nakula's younger 
brother fights the Pandya king for an entire day; having quelled him, he 
goes south again, that long-armed Kshatriya. 

Now he sees the celebrated caves of Kishkindha and there fights seven 
days against the monkey-kings Mainda and Dwivida. Those magnificent 
Vanaras, though not bested in battle, nor tired, are, however, delighted with 
Sahadeva. 

Joyfully, they say to the Kuru prince, "Tiger among Pandu's sons, go 
now, taking whatever tribute you desire from us, and may the purpose of 
Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, of great intelligence, be accomplished without 
obstacle.' 

Taking precious gems and jewels from them, Sahadeva marches towards 
the city of Mahishmati, and there that Narapungava does battle with King 
Nila. Fierce and terrific is the encounter between the powerful Pandava, 
slayer of hostile heroes, and Nila. Exceedingly bloody it is, and with Agni 
Deva himself helping King Nila, Sahadeva's very life is in danger. 

Suddenly, the chariots, horses, elephants, and soldiers in their coats of 
mail in Sahadeva's army all appear to be on fire. Seeing this, the Kuru 
prince becomes fearful, and O Janamejaya, he does not know what to do." 

Janamejaya said, "Dvijottama, why did Agni Deva become inimical 
towards Sahadeva in battle when the Pandava was fighting to accomplish a 
yagna, which would gratify Agni himself?" 

Vaisampayana said, "It is said, O Janamejaya, that while the Lord Agni 
lived in Mahishmati, he earned a reputation as a lover. King Nila had an 
exceptionally beautiful daughter. She always remained next to her father's 
sacrificial fire, stoking it vigorously, making it blaze up. Soon, King Nila's 
fire would not burn at all until it was fanned by the soft breath from that 
girl's lips. 

It was told in Nila's palace and in the homes of all his subjects that Agni 
Deva wanted the exquisite princess for his bride. The girl accepted him, and 
one day, having assumed the form of a Brahmana, the Fire God was 
enjoying the princess when he was discovered by King Nila. 

The king of dharma ordered the Brahmana be punished by law. At this, 
the lustrous deity flamed up in wrath; seeing which, the king was amazed 


and bent his head down and set it on the ground. Bowing low, in a while, 
Nila gave his daughter to Agni come in the guise of a Brahmana. The Deva 
Vibhavasu Agni took the fair-browed daughter of Nila, and turned kindly 
towards the king. 

Agni, the shining gratifier of all desires told the king to ask him for a 
boon. Nila begged that his legions never become panic-stricken in battle. 
From that time, any king who dares attack Nila's city is struck by fear by 
Agni Hutasana. 

From that time, also, the girls of the city of Mahishmati became 
unacceptable to marry, to men from outside the city. Then, Agni gave them 
sexual liberty so the women could roam at will, none bound to any single 
man. Bharatarishabha, indeed, from that time kings of other lands avoid 
Mahishmati from fear of Agni. 

Virtuous Sahadeva sees his troops stricken with fear and surrounded by 
flames, but stands unmoved as a mountain. Purifying himself, touching holy 
water, the hero speaks to Agni, the Deva who sanctifies all things: 

'I bow to you, whose trail is always marked by smoke. All these 
exertions of mine are for you, O sanctifier of everything. You are the mouth 
of all the gods; you are the sacrifice embodied. You are called Pavaka 
because you sanctify all things, and you are Havyavahana because you 
convey the clarified butter which is poured into you to the other Devas. 

The Vedas have come to be to minister to you and so you are called 
Jataveda. Being great among the gods, you are called Chitrabhanu, Suresa, 
Anala, Vibhavasu, Hutasana, Jvalana, Sikhi, Vaiswanara, Pingesa, 
Plavanga, Bhuritejasa. You are he from whom Kumara had his origin; you 
are holy; you are called Rudragarbha and Hiranyakrit. 

O Agni, you give me energy; let Vayu grant me life; let the Earth grant 
me nurture and strength, and let Water bless me with prosperity. O Agni 
who are the first cause of the waters, you who are of immaculate purity, you 
for ministering to whom the Vedas have come to be, you who are the 
foremost of the Devas, who are their mouth - O purify me with your truth. 

Rishis and Brahmanas, Devas and Asuras pour clarified butter every day 
into you during their sacrifices, according to law. Let the rays of truth, 
which you exude while you show yourself at these yagnas, purify me. 
Smoke-bannered as you are, having many names, O great purifier of all 
sins, born of Vayu and ever present in all creatures, O purify me through the 
rays of your truth. 


I have cleansed myself, lofty one, and happily do I worship you. O Agni, 
grant me contentment and prosperity, knowledge and joy.’ 

He who pours ghee into Agni chanting these mantras shall always be 
blessed with prosperity; having his spirit under perfect control, he will also 
be purified of all his sins. 

Sahadeva addresses Agni again, 'O bearer of the sacrificial libations, it 
does not become you to obstruct a sacrifice!" 

Saying this, that Purushavyaghra, Madri's son, spreads some kusa grass 
on the ground at the head of his terrified legions and calmly sits down to 
face the approaching fire. 

And Agni, too, like the ocean which never transgresses its continents, 
does not sweep over him. Instead, approaching Sahadeva quietly, Agni, 
Lord of Men, reassures that Kuru prince, 'O Kuru, arise; I was only testing 
you. I know your purpose entirely, as also that of the Dharmaputra. But, O 
Bharatottama, as long as this city is ruled by a descendant of the line of 
King Nila, I will protect it. However, O Pandava I will fulfil your hearts 
desire. 

Hearing this, Madri's son arises cheerfully and, folding his hands, 
bowing his head, worships the Fire God, sanctifier of all creatures. When 
Agni has vanished King Nila comes there and, at the command of that 
Deva, worships Sahadeva, tiger among men, master of battle, with proper 
ritual, and pays him tribute. 

Having thus brought Nila under his sway, the victorious son of Madri 
goes further south. The long-armed Kshatriya subdues the king of Tripura, 
of measureless tejas. He turns his forces against the Paurava kingdom, and 
makes a subject of the king of the land. After vanquishing that king, the 
prince, with some effort, brings Akriti, the king of Saurashtra and preceptor 
of the Kausikas under his sway. While staying in the kingdom of 
Saurashtra, the good prince sends an ambassador' to King Rukmin, son of 
Bhishmaka, in the city of Bhojakata, who, wealthy and wise, is a friend of 
Indra himself. 

Thinking of their relationship with Krishna, O Rajan, the king and his 
son gladly accept the sway of the Pandava. Taking jewels and wealth from 
King Rukmin, Sahadeva proceeds further south. Blessed with terrific tejas 
and awesome strength, he now reduces Shuparaka and Talakata, and the 
Dandakas also, to subjection. 


The Kuru warrior subdues numberless kings of the Mleccha tribes, 
which live on the sea coast; and the Nishadas and the cannibals and even 
the Karnapravarnas, and also the tribes called the Kalamukhas who are a 
cross between humans and Rakshasas, and all the Kole Mountains; and also 
Surabhipatna, and the copper Island, and the Mountain Ramaka. 

Having quelled King Timingila, the noble warrior conquers the wild 
tribe, the Keralas, who are men with one leg. Just through emissaries, the 
Pandava also conquers the town of Sanjayanti and the country of the 
Pakhandas and the Karahatakas, and makes them all pay tribute. 

The Kshatriya also quells and exacts tribute from the Paundravas, the 
Dravidas, the Undrakeralas, the Andhras, the Talavanas, the Kalingas and 
the Ushtrakarnikas; he takes the enchanting city of Atavi, and also the cities 
of the Yavanas. And, O King of kings, arriving at the seashore, that 
Parantapa, Madri's most virtuous and brilliant son, slayer of all foes, 
confidently sends messengers to the illustrious Vibhishana, grandson of 
Pulastya. That sovereign willingly accepts the sway of the son of Pandu, 
because that sage and great-souled king thinks of it all as being providence. 

He sends the Pandava a myriad of jewels, and sandalwood, many 
celestial ornaments, and reams of priceless apparel, as well as countless 
invaluable pearls. Taking all these, Sahadeva the intelligent returns to his 
own kingdom. 

So it is, O King, that through conciliation and with battle, having 
subdued many kings and exacting tribute from them, Sahadeva comes home 
to Khandavaprastha. Giving all that wealth to Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, O 
Janamajeya, that bull of the Bhaaratas, Sahadeva, considers his purpose as 
being successful and is glad." 


CANTO 31 
DIGVIJAYA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vo said, "I will now tell you about the adventures and 
triumphs of Nakula, and how he, exalted one, conquers the direction 
which Vasudeva once subjugated. At the head of a great host, making the 
Earth tremble with the shouts and lion's roars of his warriors and the 
rumbling of their chariot wheels, Nakula, the intelligent, sets out west. 

First, that Kshatriya attacks the mountain country of Rohitaka, 
delightful, prosperous, rich with cattle, every other kind of wealth and 
produce, and dear to the Lord Kartikeya. Fierce is that encounter between 
the Pandava and the Mattamayurakas of that country. 

Next, the illustrious Nakula overcomes the entire desert and the rest of 
the realm of Sarishaka, land of plenty, as also Mahetta. A savage battle the 
hero has with Rajarishi Akrosa. Having overwhelmed the Dasarnas, the 
Sibis, the Trigartas, the Ambashtas, the Malavas, the five tribes of the 
Karpatas, and the twice born Madhyamakas and Vatadhanas, the Pandava 
leaves that country. 

Going circuitously through their territory, that Narapungava quells the 
Utsava-tanketa tribes. The luminous Kshatriya quickly conquers the mighty 
Gramaniya who dwells on the shore of the sea; and the Sudras and the 
Abhiras that live on the banks of the Saraswati; and all the tribes that lived 
by fishing, and also those who dwell upon the mountains; and all of the 
country named after the five rivers; and the Amara mountains; and the land 
called Uttarajyotisha; and the city Divyakata, and the tribe called 
Dwarapala. 

Through sheer force, the Pandava reduces the Ramatas, the Harahunas 
and numerous kings of the west. While there, O Bhaarata, Nakula sends 
messengers to Vasudeva, and Vasudeva, along with all the Yadavas, accepts 
his sway. 

The mighty Nakula goes on to Sakala, city of the Madras, and persuades 
his uncle Salya to accept, out of love, the Pandava sway. And, Rajan, his 
uncle lavishly entertains that noble and deserving prince. Nakula, master of 
war, receives a great quantity of jewels and gems from Salya, and leaves his 
kingdom. 


Then the son of Pandu reduces the ferocious Mlechchas of that sea coast, 
as also the wild tribes of the Pahlavas, the Barbaras, the Kiratas, the 
Yavanas and the Sakas. Having conquered many kings, making them all pay 
him tribute, Nakula, Kurusthama, laden with wealth, turns back the way he 
came, homewards. 

O King, so vast is the treasure Nakula brings that ten thousand camels 
carry it upon their backs with difficulty. Arriving in Indraprastha, the valiant 
and blessed son of Madri offers up all those treasures to Yudhishtira. 

Thus, O Rajan, Nakula subdues the countries of the west, the direction 
over which Varuna Deva rules, which once Vasudeva himself had 
conquered." 


CANTO 32 
RAJASUYIKA PARVA 


Vo said, "Because of the protection given them by 
Yudhishtira Dharmaputra, his unwavering righteousness, and because 
he always keeps his enemies at bay, his subjects cleave to the swadharma of 
their respective varnas. His rule is virtuous, the taxes he levies fair and 
kind; the clouds bring as much rain to his kingdom as the people want and 
prosperous indeed are his cities, towns and villages. 

Truly, because of his dharma all in his kingdom prosper, especially the 
herds, the farms with their fields, and trade. O Rajan, even thieves and 
cheats never lie amongst themselves, nor do men who are the king's 
favourites. There are no droughts, floods, plagues or fires, and no one dies 
before their time in those days of Yudhishtira of dharma. 

Never for battle or from enmity do other kings come to Yudhishtira but 
only to serve him, offer him worship or tribute which puts no strain upon 
them. The capacious treasury of that king becomes so full of every manner 
of virtuously obtained wealth that it cannot be emptied in a hundred years. 

When he knows the extent of his possessions, the son of Kunti sets his 
heart upon the celebration of a sacrifice. Friends and officials, individually 
and together, come to him and say, 'Mahatman, the time has come for your 
yagna. Let arrangements be made without delay.' 

Whilst they speak thus, that omniscient and ancient one, that soul of the 
Vedas, the one described by the wise as being invincible, that foremost of 
all lasting existences in the universe, that origin of all things, as also that in 
which all things come to be dissolved, that Lord of the past, the future and 
the present, Kesava slayer of Kesi, the strength of the Vrishnis, dispeller of 
every fear, smiter of all enemies, having made Vasudeva senapati of the 
Yadava army, and bringing with him great treasures for Yudhishtira - 
Krishna, Hari, enters Khandava, city of cities, bringing with him a mighty 
host and filling the air with the thunder of his chariot wheels. 

With the ocean of invaluable gemstones that he brings, Madhava 
Purashavyaghra swells the Pandavas already limitless wealth; he enhances 
the sorrows of the enemies of the Pandavas. Even as a land of darkness is 


made joyful by the Sun, or a still place by a soft breeze, Krishna's presence 
gladdens the Bhaaratas city. 

Welcoming him with delight, showing him every due reverence, 
Yudhishtira asks after his welfare. And when Krishna sits at his ease, the 
Pandava, bull among men, along with Dhaumya, Dwaipayana, the other 
sacrificial priests, with Bheema, Arjuna and the twins, speaks thus: 

'O Krishna it is for you that I have brought the world under my sway. O 
Vrishni, it is through your grace that I have won vast wealth. 
O Devakinandana, O Madhava, I want to devote my wealth, by the law, to 
great Brahmanas and the bearer of the libations of the yagna. 

And, O Dasarha, it becomes you, Mahabaho, to allow me to perform a 
sacrifice along with you and my brothers. So, O Govinda, if you permit my 
yagna, go and install yourself as the sacrifices and I will be washed of all 
sin. Otherwise, Mahatman, give me leave to become the sacrificer myself, 
together with these my younger brothers: for with your blessing 1 will 
surely enjoy the fruit of an immaculate sacrifice.’ 

When Yudhishtira says this, Krishna replies, 'Rajavyaghra, you deserve 
the imperial dignity. So, you be the sacrificer. If you perform the yagna and 
gain the fruit thereof, I will think that I have done so myself and been 
triumphant. 

I always seek your fortune, so perform the yagna which is close to your 
heart. Engage me, as well, in some task, for I will obey your every 
command.' 

Yudhishtira replies, 'Krishna, I am already successful that you have come 
here, happily, at my wish. 

At Krishna's command, Yudhishtira and his brothers begin to collect 
whatever they need for the Rajasuya yagna. That Parantapa, the eldest 
Pandava, says to Sahadeva, best of warriors and ministers, 'Let us lose no 
time in gathering everything that the Brahmans have asked for to perform 
this sacrifice, and all that Dhaumya might want, all the auspicious materials, 
one by one, in their proper order. 

Let Indrasena, Visoka and Puru, with Arjuna for his charioteer, gather 
the food we need, if they agree. Let these Kurusthamas also collect all such 
things of fine taste and scent, which will delight the hearts of the 
Brahmanas.' 

Immediately as Yudhishtira Dharmaputra speaks, Sahadeva, foremost of 
warriors, goes forth to accomplish his tasks and, having done so, comes and 


informs the king. Now, O Rajan, Dwaipayana appoints pure and great 
Brahmanas, who are even like the Vedas embodied, to be sacrificial priests. 

Satayavati's son himself becomes the Brahma of that yagna; Susama, 
bull of the race of Dhananjayas, becomes the chanter of the Sama hymns; 
Yagnavalkya, who is devoted always to Brahma, is the Adharyu, while 
Paila, son of Vasu and Dhaumya, becomes the Hottri. 

Bharatarishabha, the sons of these Mahatmans, all masters of the Veda 
and the Vedangas, are the Hotragis. 

Having chanted blessings and uttered the purpose of the yagna, they 
worship the large sacrificial arena, the yagnashala. At the Brahmanas' 
command, builders and artificers erect numerous edifices there, all 
capacious and perfumed like temples of the gods. 

When all this has been done Yudhishtira, best of kings, commands his 
main advisor Sahadeva, 'Send forth messengers without delay to invite 
everyone to the sacrifice.' 

Hearing this, Sahadeva dispatches the messengers, saying to them, 
‘Invite all the Brahmanas in the kingdom, all the Kshatriyas, who are 
landowners, all the Vaisya traders and merchants and every honourable 
Sudra, and bring them here yourselves.’ 

Thus commanded, and blessed with great speed, those messengers go 
abroad and invite everyone, as the Pandava told them, with no loss of time; 
and they all come accompanied by many friends and relatives, and strangers 
join them, as well. 

Then, O Bhaarata, at the proper muhurta, the Brahmanas_ install 
Yudhishtira, the son of Kunti, as the sacrificer at the Rajasuya. After the 
ceremony of installation, Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, even like Dharma Deva 
himself in human frame, enters the yagnashala, surrounded by thousands of 
Brahmanas, his brothers, relatives, friends, counsellors, and by a large 
number of Kshatriya kings come from various countries, and by the officers 
of State. 

Countless Brahmanas, skilled in all areas of gyana, versed in the Vedas 
and their many angas, begin pouring in from various countries. At the 
command of Yudhishtira, thousands of artisans create separate dwellings for 
those Brahmanas and their attendants, all well stocked with food, clothes 
and flowers and fruit of every season. 

O King, having been duly worshipped, the Brahmanas start living in 
those dwellings, passing their time in spiritual and other converse, and 


watching the performances of actors and dancers. Without let or pause, the 
commotion of their cheery eating and talking together is heard there. 'Give' 
and 'Eat' are the words heard most often, incessantly, every day. And, O 
Bhaarata, Yudhishtira gives thousands of cows, bedsteads, gold coins and 
nubile young women to those Brahmanas. 

Thus, on Earth commences the sacrifice of that peerless Kshatriya, 
Pandus illustrious son, even like the yagna in Heaven of Sakra himself. 
Then, that Purusharishabha, Yudhishtira, sends Nakula, son of Pandu, to 
Hastinapura to fetch Bhishma and Drona, Dhritarashtra, Vidura, Kripa and 
those among his cousins who are affectionate towards him." 


CANTO 33 
RAJASUYIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vo said, "The always victorious Nakula arrives in 
Hastinapura and formally invites Bhishma and Dhritarashtra. Invited 
with due ceremony, the Kuru elders, with the Acharya at their head, come 
with joyful hearts to that yagna with Brahmanas walking before them. 

Also, Bharatarishabha, hearing of Raja Yudhishtiras sacrifice, hundreds 
of other Kshatriyas, all of them knowing the nature of this yagna, come 
joyfully from numerous countries, wanting to behold Yudhishtira, the son of 
Pandu, and his yagnashala; they come bringing priceless jewels with them, 
of many kinds. 

And Dhritarashtra and Bhishma and Vidura of the lofty intellect; and all 
the Kaurava brothers with Duryodhana at their head; and Subala the king of 
Gandhara, and Sakuni endowed with great strength; and Achala, and 
Vrishaka, and Kama greatest of all rathikas, and Salya of awesome might 
and Bahlika the strong; and Somadatta, and Bhuri of the Kurus, and 
Bhurisravas and Sala; and Aswatthama, Kripa and Drona; and Jayadratha, 
the king of Sindhu; and Yaksasena with his sons, and Shalva, that lord of 
the world, and that Maharahika, King Bhagadatta of Pragjyotisha, and all 
Mlechcha tribes that dwell in the marshlands of the sea-shore; and many 
mountain kings, and King Brihadbala; and Vasudeva king of the Paundras, 
and the kings of Vanga and Kalinga; and Akarsa and Kuntala; and the kings 
of the Malavas and the Andhrakas; and the Dravidas and the Sinhalas and 
the king of Kashmira; and Raja Kuntibhoja of great tejas and King 
Gauravahana, and all the other heroic kings of Balhika; and Virata with his 
two sons, and Mavella endowed with great prowess; and many kings and 
princes ruling in various countries; and, O Bhaarata, King Sisupala blessed 
with terrific tejas and invincible in battle, accompanied by his son - all of 
these come to the sacrifice of the son of Pandu. 

And Rama and Aniruddha and Kanka and Sahasarana; and Gada, 
Pradyumna, Samba, and Charudeshna of great energy; and Ulmuka and 
Nishata and the bold Angavaha; and innumerable other Vrishnis, all mighty 
Maharathikas, come there. 


These and many other kings from the middle country come, O King, to 
that great Rajasuya yagna of the son of Pandu. Rajan, at the command of 
Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, mansions are assigned to all those monarchs, full 
of every kind of viand, set among tanks and tall trees. Dharma's son 
worships all those illustrious sovereigns, as they deserve; revered by him, 
they retire, each to the mansions given to them. 

Those edifices are lofty like the cliffs of Kailasa, beautiful, lavishly and 
elegantly furnished. They are surrounded by lofty, strong white walls; their 
windows are covered by fine mesh of gold, and their interiors adorned with 
strings of pearls; gradual and easy to climb are the flights of steps inside, 
and the floors are covered with costly carpets. 

Everywhere inside those palatial homes, garlands of fresh flowers hang, 
and the rooms are perfumed with fine aloe. White as snow or the moon, 
they appear enchanting even from a yojana away. Wide and high are their 
gates and doors, wide enough to admit a crowd. The mansions are 
embellished with every kind of invaluable jewel, fashioned with precious 
metals, and they look like the peaks of Himavat. 

When they have rested a while in those palaces, the kings emerge to see 
Yudhishtira surrounded by numerous Sadasyas, and his sacrificial priests; 
they see him performing sacrifices distinguished by the munificent gifts he 
makes to Brahmanas. 

O King, the yagnashala where the Kshatriyas, Brahmanas and 
Maharishis sit is as handsome as Swarga athrong with Devas!" 


CANTO 34 
RAJASUYIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vaisampayana said, "Then, O King, Yudhishtira approaches and worships 
his Pitamaha and his Acharya, and he says to Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, 
Aswatthama, Duryodhana and Vivimsati, All of you must help me with this 
sacrifice. All the treasures which you see here belong to you. Consult with 
one another and guide me as you decide:' 

Having been made the sacrificer, Pandu's eldest son says this and then 
appoints each of them to worthy and suitable offices. 

He gives Dussasana charge of food and other items of enjoyment. 
Aswatthama is asked to look after the Brahmanas. Sanjaya is appointed to 
offer worship to the kings. Bhishma and Drona, both endowed with great 
intelligence, are given overall charge to decide what should be done and 
what should not. 

The king appoints Kripa to look after the diamonds, gold, pearls and 
gemstones, as also the distribution of gifts to Brahmanas. So, too, are other 
tigers among men given various offices and tasks to discharge with honour. 

Balhika and Dhritarashtra and Somadatta and Jayadratha, fetched by 
Nakula, move about, enjoying themselves as lords of the sacrifice. Vidura, 
also called Kshatta, knower of every nuance of dharma, becomes the 
disburser. Duryodhana is the receiver of the tributes brought by other kings. 
Krishna, focus of the worlds, around whom every living being turns, who 
wishes for the best karmaphala, at his own wish engages in washing the feet 
of the Brahmanas. 

No one who comes to see the yagnashala or Yudhishtira Dharmaputra, 
does so without bringing tribute of less than a thousand, in number, weight 
or measure. All honour Yudhishtira with bounteous gifts of jewels. Each 
Kshatriya king comes with gifts in the conceit that his particular 
contribution would enable the Pandava, Kuru king, to complete his 
sacrifice. 

O King, beautiful and magnificent indeed is the yagnashala of Kunti's 
son, with the plethora of palaces built to last for ever, thronging with 
guardsmen and warriors. So lofty are these that their tops touch the vimanas 
of the gods who come to witness the yagna. Wondrous are the chariots of 


the Devas, and wonderful the mansions created for the Brahmanas to stay 
in, which resemble those vimanas, and which are adorned with gems and 
filled with every kind of wealth. 

Fine indeed are the crowds of kings who come here, all blessed with 
noble beauty and vast wealth. As if vying with Varuna himself in riches, 
Yudhishtira begins the sacrifice distinguished by six fires; he gives lavish 
gifts to Brahmanas. The king gratifies everyone with gifts of great value 
and, indeed, with every manner of object they can possibly desire. 

An abundance of rice is served, as well as all other delicacies, then 
masses of jewels brought as tribute are distributed; that immense concourse 
consists only of those sated to surfeit. The Devas are worshipped at this 
yagna with the Ida, ghrita, homa and libations poured into the agni by the 
Maharishis, masters of mantras, their enunciation faultless. 

Like the gods, the Brahmanas are also adored with sacrificial offerings, 
with food and wealth past calculation. The other varnas are also gratified at 
that yagna, and filled with joy." 


CANTO 35 
ARGHYAHARANA PARVA 


Veo said, "On the last day of the sacrifice, when the king is to 
be sprinkled with holy water, the Brahmana Maharishis, who always 
deserve worship, enter the inner enclosure of the yagnashala all together. 
With Narada at their head, those lustrous Sages sit at their ease with the 
Rajarishis within the enclosure, and together they look like the Devas in 
Brahma's sabha, sitting with the Rishis of Heaven. 

Endowed with boundless tejas, and at their ease now, those Rishis begin 
a host of discussions and arguments. 

"This is so.' 

"This is not so.' 

"This is even so.' 

"This cannot be otherwise.' 

Thus, they speak animatedly among one another. Some of them, the 
skilled debaters, make the obviously weaker viewpoint seem stronger than 
the better one. Some, blessed with great intellects, fall upon the views urged 
by others like hawks darting at meat thrown up into the air, while those 
among them who are versed in the interpretations of religious treatises, and 
others of stern vratas, who know every commentary and glossary, engage 
themselves in sweet converse. 

Rajan, that yagnashala, crowded with Devas, Brahmanas and 
Maharishis, is wonderful indeed, even like the wide sky studded with stars. 
O King, no Sudra approaches that yagnashala in Yudhishtiras palace, nor 
anyone who had not sworn severe vows. 

Seeing the prosperity of Yudhishtira the fortunate, sprung from that 
sacrifice, Narada becomes exceedingly glad. Looking at that great assembly 
of Kshatriyas, the Muni Narada falls to thought. Purusharishabha, Narada 
recalls some words he heard of old in Brahma's Sabha, which prophesied 
the incarnation in amsa on Earth of every Deva. Knowing, Kurunandana, 
that this is a concourse of Devas born as men, Narada, in his heart, thinks 
about Hari, whose eyes are like lotus petals. 

The Sage knows that the creator of all things, that highest of Gods, 
Narayana, who once ordered the Devas, 'Be you born on Bhumi and kill one 


another before returning to Swarga,' that slayer of all the enemies of the 
Devas, that queller of all hostile towns has, in order to keep his own word, 
taken birth himself among the Kshatriyas. 

Narada knows that the most holy and high Narayana, Lord of the 
Universe, having so commanded the Devas, has himself been born into the 
race of Yadava; that the greatest of all perpetuators of races has been born 
among the Andhaka Vrishnis on Bhumi and, graced by the highest fortune, 
now shines like the Moon herself among the stars. 

Narada knows that Hari, Parantapa, whose might Indra and all the Devas 
always eulogise, is now living in the world in human form. Ah, Narada 
knows that the Svayambhu will himself remove from the Earth the great 
throng of Kshatriyas of such prowess. 

Such is the vision of Narada, the omniscient, who knows Hari Narayana 
to be that Supreme Lord whom everybody worships with sacrifice. And 
Narada, blessed with vast intellect, best of all that know dharma, sits 
pondering this at the sacrifice of the wise Yudhishtira, and he is filled with 
awe. 

Then, O King, Bhishma says to Yudhishtira, 'O Bhaarata, let arghya be 
offered to each of these kings, exactly as each one deserves. Yudhishtira, 
the master, the sacrificial priest, the relative, the Snataka, the friend and the 
king, it has been told, are the six who deserve arghya. 

The Sages have said that when any of these six live in one's house for a 
year, he deserves to be worshipped with arghya. These kings have been 
with us for a while, hence, O King, let arghya be procured to be offered 
unto each of them. And let an arghya be given first of all to him among all 
present who is the foremost of them all.' 

Hearing these words of Bhishma, Yudhishtira says, 'O Pitamaha of the 
Kurus, tell me who you deem to be foremost among all these, to whom the 
first arghya should be offered.' 

Then, O Bhaarata, Bhishma, son of Santanu, judges by his intellect that 
on Earth Krishna is foremost of all. He says, As is the Sun among all 
luminaries, so is this Krishna among us, because of his energy, his strength, 
his majesty. This our yagnashala is illumined by him and filled with joy by 
him, even as a sunless land is by the Sun, or a deathly still realm by a breath 
of breeze.' 

Thus commanded by Bhishma, Sahadeva of great prowess offers the first 
arghya of most excellent ingredients to Krishna of the Vrishnis. Krishna, 


too, receives it with grave propriety, by the law. 

However, Sisupala cannot bear to see that worship being offered to 
Vasudeva. That mighty king of Chedi censures both Bhishma and 
Yudhishitra in the midst of that assembly." 


CANTO 36 
ARGHYAHARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


€¢ Cisupala says, 'O you of the House of Kuru, this Vrishni does not 

Ss royal worship, as if he were a king, in the midst of all these 
illustrious sovereigns. Pandava, it is not worthy of you to worship this 
lotus-eyed one like this; it is not becoming of the sons of Pandu. 

Pandavas, you are children. You do not know what dharma is, for it is 
most subtle. This son of Ganga, this Bhishma, is also of small wit and 
transgresses dharma by giving you such counsel. O Bhishma, if one like 
you, virtuous and knowing dharma, behaves like this from self-interest, you 
surely deserve reprimand among the pious and the wise. 

How does the Dasarha, who is not even a king, accept your arghya 
before all these kings, and how is it that you offer him this worship? O Bull 
of the race of Kuru, if you regard Krishna as being the eldest, here is 
Vasudeva, his father: how can his son be older than him? 

Perhaps you think of Krishna as being your well-wisher, your supporter. 
But here is Drupada; how can Madhava deserve your worship before him? 
Or do you consider Krishna as being your Guru? But how can you worship 
the Vrishni first, when Drona is here? 

Or, Kuru, do you regard Krishna as the Ritvija? How can you worship 
him first as such when old Dwaipayana is here? When this ancient Bhisma 
is present, the son of Santanu, foremost among men, he who cannot die 
except by his own wish, how, Rajan, have you offered Krishna arghya 
before him? 

When the brave Aswatthama who knows all the angas of knowledge is 
here, why have you worshipped Krishna, O Kuru Raja? When that king of 
kings, Duryodhana Purushottama is here; when Kripa, Guru of the Bhaarata 
princes is here, how do you worship Krishna? 

How, O Pandava, do you worship Krishna, while passing by Druma, 
Guru to the Kimpurushas? When the invincible Bhishmaka and King 
Pandya, who bears every auspicious sign upon his person, when Rukmi, 
best of kings, and Ekalavya and Salya, lord of the Madras, are here, how, O 
son of Pandu, have you offered Krishna the first worship? 


Here, too, is Kama, always boasting of his strength among all the other 
kings, and who is endowed with immense prowess, who is the favourite 
disciple of the Brahmana Jamadagnya, the archer who vanquished everyone 
in battle by the strength of just his own arms. How, O Bhaarata, do you pass 
him over and offer Krishna first worship? 

Madhusudana is neither a Ritvik, nor an Acharya, nor a king. That you 
adore him first, despite all these, could only be from some motive of gain. 
If, O Bhaarata, you always meant to offer the Purodasa to Krishna, why did 
you bring all these other kings here to be insulted? 

We did not pay you tribute, illustrious Kaunteya, from fear, any desire 
for gain, or having been won over through conciliation. On the other hand, 
we paid you tribute because you wished to perform the Rajasuya yagna for 
the sake of dharma. But you have insulted us. 

Rajan, it is only to insult us that you offered Krishna, who owns no 
insignia of royalty, the arghya in the midst of all these kings of the Earth. 
Surely, the renown you, Dharmaputra, have for your virtue is baseless, for 
who would offer such undeserved worship other than a man who has fallen 
away from dharma? 

This Vrishni wretch treacherously killed the noble Jarasandha. 
Yudhishtira, you have abandoned dharma today; you have shown us 
baseness by offering Krishna the arghya. 

If Kunti's helpless sons were afraid, disposed to baseness, should you, 
Madhava, not have enlightened them that you have no right or claim to this 
first worship? Janardana, why did you accept the arghya of which you are 
unworthy, even though it was offered you by these low-minded princes? 
But then you think highly of this worship of which you are not worthy: like 
a dog which laps up, by itself, some ghee it has chanced upon. 

Krishna, in fact these Kurus have not insulted these assembled kings, but 
you. Indeed, as a wife is to an impotent man, a fine play to a blind man, so 
is this royal arghya to you who are not a king. We have seen what 
Yudhishtira is; what Bhishma is we have seen; and we have seen what this 
Krishna is. Yes, they have all been seen for what they really are.’ 

Saying this, Sisupala rises from his excellent seat and, accompanied by 
the rest of the kings, stalks out of the yagnashala." 


CANTO 37 
ARGHYAHARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vor said, "Yudhishtira runs after Sisupala and speaks sweetly 
and conciliatingly to him: 

'Lord of the Earth, what you have said hardly becomes you; it is 
needlessly cruel and sinful. Do not insult Bhishma, Rajan, by saying that he 
does not know what dharma is. Look, all these kings, who are older than 
you, approve of Krishna receiving the Purodasa. You, too, should bear it 
patiently, as they do. Lord of Chedi, Bhishma knows who Krishna really is. 
You do not know him as the Kuru patriarch does.' 

Now Bhishma says, 'He who does not approve of the worship offered 
Krishna who is the eldest in the universe, deserves neither soft words nor 
conciliation. The greatest warrior among Kshatriyas is he who defeats his 
enemy in battle and then sets him free; he becomes a Guru to the one he 
frees. I do not see in this assembly even one king whom Krishna, son of the 
Satwatas, has not vanquished. 

Krishna of untainted glory deserves to be worshipped not just by us; this 
mighty-armed one deserves the adoration of the three worlds. Numberless 
great Kshatriya warriors Krishna has quelled in battle. Why, all the universe 
is founded in this Vrishni. So it is that we worship Krishna before all the 
rest, all the eldest. 

What you say does not become you, Sisupala, do not think like this. 
Rajan, I have waited upon many who are truly old in gyana. I have heard 
from all those men of wisdom about the countless transcendent and much 
honoured attributes of this Sauri. 

How often I have listened to all the awesome deeds that Krishna of 
matchless intellect has performed since he was born. Also, O master of 
Chedi, it is not from caprice, neither thinking of our relationship to him or 
what gains he might bestow upon us, that we worship this Janardana, whom 
all the good on Earth worship and who is the source of the happiness of 
every creature. 

We have offered the first arghya to him because of his fame, his heroism 
and his success. There is no one here, even of tender years, whom we have 
not considered before doing as we did. We have passed over many who are 


famed for their dharma, before deciding that Krishna alone deserves this 
worship. 

Among Brahmanas he who excels in knowledge, among Kshatriyas he 
who has boundless strength, among Vaisyas he who has the most 
possessions and wealth, and the eldest among the Sudras deserve worship. 
We worshipped Govinda because no one knows the Vedas and Vedangas as 
he does, and no one is as strong as him. 

Who in the world of men is as distinguished as him? Liberality, 
cleverness, knowledge of the Vedas, bravery, modesty, achievement, 
intelligence, humility, beauty, firmness, contentment and prosperity — all 
abide eternally in Achyuta. Hence, O Kings, it behoves you to endorse the 
worship which we have offered Krishna of great accomplishments, who, as 
the Acharya, the Father, the Guru, deserves everyone's worship. 

Hrishikesa is the Ritvik, the Guru, worthy of being approached to give 
him one's daughter in marriage; he is the Snataka, the lord, the friend: so 
have we worshipped Achyuta. Krishna is the origin of the universe and that 
into which the universe will dissolve. Truly, this entire universe of creatures 
mobile and unmoving has sprung just from Krishna. 

He is the unmanifest primal cause, the Avyakta Prakriti, the creator, the 
eternal, and beyond the ken of all creatures. Therefore does he of unfading 
glory deserve the highest worship. The intellect, the seat of sensibility, the 
five elements — air, heat, water, ether, earth - and the four species of beings 
are all founded in Krishna. The Sun, the Moon, the Constellations, the 
Planets, all the principal directions and the intermediate directions are all 
established in Krishna. 

As the Agnihotra is foremost among all Vedic sacrifices, as the Gayatri 
is foremost among mantras, as the King is the first among men, as the 
Ocean is foremost among all rivers, as the Moon is foremost among planets, 
the Sun foremost among luminaries, as Meru is foremost among mountains, 
as Garuda is foremost among all birds, so, as long as the upward, downward 
and sideways course of the universe lasts, Kesava is foremost in all the 
worlds, including the realm of the gods. 

This Sisupala is just a boy, and so he does not know Krishna and goes 
about everywhere disparaging Krishna. This king of Chedi will never see 
dharma in that light in which one who wants to gain great punya will. Who 
among the old and the young, or among these illustrious lords of the Earth 


does not regard Krishna as deserving worship, or does not worship 
Krishna? 

If Sisupala considers this worship undeserved, he should do what he 
thinks is proper.'" 


CANTO 38 
ARGHYAHARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


Yeas said, "Saying this, the mighty Bhishma stops. Then 
Sahadeva answers Sisupala grimly, 'If there is any king amongst you 
who cannot bear to see Krishna, of dark hue, the slayer of Kesi, the 
possessor of immeasurable energy, whom I worship, I set my foot on the 
head of that king and all others like him! 

I wait for a reply from you. And let those kings who own intelligence 
approve our worship of Krishna, who is the Acharya, the Father, the Guru, 
and deserves the arghya and the worship.' 

When Sahadeva shows his foot none of those intelligent, wise, proud 
and mighty kings says anything. A shower of flowers falls on Sahadeva's 
head, and an asariri, an incorporeal voice, says, 'Excellent, excellent!' 

Then Narada, who wears black deer-skin, who speaks of both the future 
and the dim past, dispeller of all doubts, who intimately knows all the 
worlds, says in the midst of numberless creatures, these words of the 
clearest import: 

'Men who will not worship the lotus-eyed Krishna should be considered 
dead though they move, and they should never be spoken to on any 
occasion. ' 

Then that god among men, Sahadeva, who well knows the difference 
between a Brahmana and a Kshatriya, having worshipped those that 
deserved worship, completes the arghya ceremony. 

But upon Krishna receiving the first worship, Sunitha Sisupala, 
Parantapa, his eyes red as copper with rage, says to those lords of men, 
"Why do you sit thinking, still, when I am here to lead you all? Let us stand 
together in battle against the Vrishnis and the Pandavas! 

Thus stirring the kings, the Bull of the Chedis holds counsel with them 
how to obstruct the completion of the sacrifice. All the invited kings who 
had come for the yagna, now with Sisupala leading them, look angry and 
their faces become pale. 

They all say, 'We must make certain that it is clear we have not 
acquiesced in Yudhishtira's sacrifice or to Krishna receiving the first 
arghya.' 


Impelled by hubris and belief in their power, the kings, robbed of reason 
by anger, speak thus. Moved by arrogance, smarting under the insult offered 
them, the kings repeat this loudly. Though their friends seek to pacify them, 
their faces are suffused with rage, even like those of roaring lions driven 
away from their prey. 

Krishna understands that the sea of kings, countless its waves of troops, 
is preparing for a terrific attack." 


CANTO 39 
SISUPALA-VADHA PARVA 


Vea said, "Seeing that great assembly of kings agitated with 
wrath, like the tremendous Ocean by the winds that blow during the 
Pralaya, the universal dissolution, Yudhishtira says to the aged Bhishma, 
most intelligent of men and grandsire of the Kurus, even like Puruhuta 
Indra, slayer of foes, of boundless energy, addressing Brihaspati, 'This vast 
sea of kings is stirred by wrath. Tell me, Pitama, what shall I do that my 
sacrifice is not obstructed and my people are not harmed?' 

When Yudhishtira, knower of dharma, says this, Bhishma, the Kuru 
grandsire, replies, 'Fear not, Kuruvyaghra. Can the dog kill the lion? I know 
of a solution which is both peaceable and easy. 

These lords of the earth are barking all together even as a pack of dogs 
does at a sleeping lion. My child, truly like dogs at the lion, these are barks 
in anger at the sleeping Vrishni lion. 

Yes, Krishna now is like a lion that is asleep. Until he wakes, this lord of 
the Chedis, this bull among men, makes these kings seem like lions. My 
child, best of all kings, this Sisupala of little wit wants to carry these kings 
with him, through the very will of Him that is the soul of the universe, to 
Yama's realm. 

Surely, O Bhaarata, Vishnu wants to take back into himself the life that 
dwells in Sisupala. Wisest of men, O Kaunteya, the intelligence of this evil 
king of the Chedis, as also of all these Kshatriyas, has become perverted. 
Why, all these kings' minds have become as perverse as that of the Chedi. 

Yudhishtira, Krishna is the progenitor as also the destroyer of all created 
beings - of the four species which exist in the three worlds. 

O Bhaarata, when Sisupala hears Bhishma, he retorts roughly, rudely." 


CANTO 40 
SISUPALA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


€¢ Cisupala says, 'Old and infamous wretch of your race, are you not 

S of trying to frighten these kings with these false terrors? You 
are the foremost of the Kurus, and living as you do in the third state, of 
celibacy, does it become you to give counsel like this, which is so far 
removed from dharma? 

Like one boat tied to another, or the blind following the blind, are the 
Kurus who have you for their guide. More than once you have pained us by 
eulogising the deeds of this Krishna - the slaying of Putana and all the rest. 
You are arrogant and ignorant, always praising this Yadava; why does your 
tongue not split into a hundred parts? 

How can you, who have such superior gyana, want to extol this cow- 
boy, whom even men of little intelligence might berate? If in his childhood 
Krishna did kill a vulture, O Bhishma, what was so remarkable in that, or in 
his slaying later of Aswa and Vrishabha, both of whom were untutored in 
battle? 

What is so wonderful in his bringing down a wooden cart with a kick? 
Bhishma, what is so remarkable in his holding Govardhana, which is like an 
anthill, aloft for a week? 

"While he sported upon a mountain he ate a vast quantity of food" - 
listening to these words of yours, many have wondered. But, O you who 
knows dharma, is it not still more of a crime that Krishna killed the great 
one, Kamsa, whose food it was that he ate? 

Ah base Kuru, you do not know dharma! Have you never heard from 
Sages who spoke to you the very things which I will now tell you? The wise 
and virtuous always teach the honest that weapons must never be made to 
use against women, cows and Brahmanas, nor against those whose food one 
has eaten, or whose shelter one has enjoyed. 

Bhishma, it seems you have cast away all these teachings. Infamous 
Kuru, in your desire to praise Krishna you say to me that he is grand and 
has the highest knowledge and age, as if I know nothing at all. If at your 
word, O Bhishma, he who has killed a woman, Putana, must be worshipped, 
then what will become of this great teaching? 


How can anyone like Krishna deserve such praise, Bhishma? 

"This one is the foremost of all wise men; He is the Lord of the 
Universe". 

Janardana listens to what you say and he believes it all to be true, while 
surely they are lies. The words of praise which a vabdhi, a chanter, sings, 
leave no impression upon him, however often he croons them. Every 
creature acts according to his nature, even like the bhulinga bird, which 
forever preaches against rashness and then picks shreds of meat from 
between the lion's teeth. 

Your nature is low, Bhishma; it is mean, there is no doubt about it. So, 
too, it seems that the Pandavas, who consider Krishna as deserving of 
worship, who have you for their mentor, are also sinners by nature. 
Knowing dharma as you do, you have still fallen away from the way of the 
wise. And so, you are sinful. 

Who, Bhishma, knowing himself to be virtuous and superior in 
knowledge, will do what you have done from motives of gain? If you know 
dharma's ways, if your mind is guided by dharma, then be you blessed. But 
then, why, Bhishma, did you carry the chaste Amba, who had already given 
her heart to another, forcibly from her swayamvara, if you are so full of 
virtue and wisdom? 

Although you brought her forcibly, your honest and virtuous brother 
Vichitravirya did not marry her when he knew her condition. You boast of 
dharma, yet under your very eye, were sons not begotten upon your dead 
brother's wives by another; true, in accordance with dharma. Where, O 
Bhishma, is your own dharma? 

I say that this great celibacy of yours, the brahmacharya that you observe 
either from foolishness or impotence, is in vain. O Bhishma of dharma, I do 
not see your wellbeing; you who preach virtue have never, as I see it, served 
the old, your ancestors. 

Worship, charity, scriptural study, sacrifices distinguished by generous 
gifts to Brahmanas - all these together do not amount to a sixteenth part of 
the punya a man obtains by having a son. The punya acquired by fasts and 
vows beyond count are all fruitless to him who has no child. You are 
childless and old, and the dharma you preach is false. 

Like the swan in the story, you will now die at the hands of your own 
kinsmen. Other men of knowledge have of old told this tale. I will now 
relate it in full for you to hear. 


Of yore there lived a swan on the sea-coast. He always preached dharma 
to his feathered clan, while not following dharma in his life. Practise 
dharma and abjure sin — this was what all the other honest birds 
constantly heard him preach. And I have heard that the other birds that 
ranged the sea brought him food: for the sake of dharma. 

O Bhishma, all those other sea-birds left their eggs with him and dived 
among the waves, and the sinful old swan would eat the eggs with which 
those other foolish avians trusted him. After a while, when the eggs 
decreased alarmingly, another wise bird became suspicious and one day 
actually saw what the old swan did. 

Having witnessed the old swans crime, the other bird spoke in great 
sorrow to his fellow birds. Then, all the other birds also saw the old swan at 
his sin and they descended on the evil wretch and killed him. 

Your conduct, Bhishma, is just like the old swan's, and these kings of the 
Earth might kill you in anger even as the other birds did the sinful old swan. 
Men who know the Puranas have an old saying about the swan, and, 
Bhaarata - O you that support yourself on your wings, though your heart is 
driven by lust, yet you preach dharma. But this your sin of eating the eggs 
transgresses what you preach."" 


CANTO 41 
SISUPALA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢¢ Cisupala says, 'That mighty king, Jarasandha, who had no wish ever to 

Ss Krishna, saying He is a slave, deserved my deepest esteem. Who 
can commend what Kesava, Bhima and Arjuna with him, did when they 
killed Jarasandha? 

Entering through the unlawful gate, disguised as a Brahmana: thus 
Krishna spied on the might of King Jarasandha. And when that great 
sovereign first offered this wretch padya to wash his feet, only then did he 
confess to not being a Brahmana, apparently from motives of dharma. 

When Jarasandha, O Kuru, asked Bhima and Arjuna to take padya it was 
Krishna who refused for them. If this fellow is Lord of the Universe, as this 
other fool says he is, why does he disclaim being a Brahmana? 

Ah, I am so surprised that, while you lead the Pandavas astray from the 
path of the wise, they regard you as being honest. Or, perhaps, it is hardly 
surprising from those who have you, O Bhishma, womanish in nature, bent 
with age, for their main counsellor in all things. 

Hearing these, Sisupala's words, harsh both in import and sound, 
Bhimasena, mightiest of strong men, of terrific energy, becomes enraged. 
His eyes, large and expanded like lotus leaves, dilate still more; they grow 
red as copper. Upon his brow the assembled kings see three deep furrows, 
even like the Ganga of three paths upon the mountain of three peaks. 

When Bhimasena begins to grind his teeth in rage the kings see that his 
face resembles that of Yama himself at the end of the Yuga, ready to devour 
every creature. Just as that furious Kshatriya is about to spring up, Bhishma 
Mahabaho catches hold of him even like Mahadeva seizing Mahasena, the 
divine Senapati. 

O Bhaarata, Bhishma, Pitamaha of the Kurus, quickly pacifies the raging 
Bhima, with different kinds of gentle counsel. Bhima Parantapa cannot 
disobey Bhishma, even as the Ocean can never break his shores, not during 
the monsoon. 

However, Rajan, even while Bhima rages, the bold Sisupala, depending 
just on his own manliness, does not tremble or grow afraid. Though Bhima 


leaps up every second moment in fury, Sisupala does not bestow a thought 
on him, just as a lion pays no heed to a small animal which is angry. 

Seeing the dreadful Bhima in such frenzy, the powerful king of Chedi 
says with a laugh, 'Let him go, O Bhishma. Let all these kings watch me 
burn him with my prowess like a moth in a fire!' 

Hearing this from the Chedi king, Bhishma, Kurusthama, best of all wise 
men, speaks thus to Bhima." 


CANTO 42 
SISUPALA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ lp oats says, 'This Sisupala was born in the line of the kings of 

hedi; he was born with three eyes and four arms. As soon as he 
was born he screamed, and brayed like a little donkey. His father and 
mother, and all his kinsfolk were terrified. 

Seeing the extraordinary child and these ominous signs, his parents 
decided to abandon him, but then an asariri, a disembodied voice, spoke to 
the king, his wife, their ministers and their priest, who stood stricken with 
anxiety: 

"O King, this son of yours will be both fortunate and of superior 
strength. You have nothing to fear from him; indeed cherish him, nurture 
him without fear. His time has not come and he will not die yet. Besides, 
the one who will kill him with a weapon has also been born." 

When the mother heard this, she cried anxiously to the invisible being, "I 
bow with folded hands to him that spoke these words! Be he a lofty god or 
any other, let him tell me one more thing — I want to know who will be my 
son's killer." 

The invisible one then said, "When this child is placed upon the lap of 
his killer to be, his superfluous arms will fall onto the ground like a pair of 
five-headed snakes and his third eye on his forehead will vanish 
tracelessly." 

When the kings of the Earth heard about the child's three eyes and four 
arms and what the unseen being had said about him, they all went to Chedi 
to see the infant. Worshipping each one as he deserved, the king of Chedi 
gave his son to be placed upon the laps of each of those kings. Though that 
child was set upon the laps of a thousand kings, one after the other, yet what 
the asariri foretold did not come to pass. 

Hearing about all this in Dwaravati, the mighty Yadava heroes 
Sankarshana and Janardana also went to the capital of the Chedis to see 
their father's sister - the Chedi queen was a daughter of the Yadavas. When 
they had greeted everyone present according to his rank, and the king and 
queen, too, and asked after their welfare, Rama and Krishna sat upon fine 
seats. 


After those heroes had been worshipped, the queen, with great joy, 
herself brought her child and set him in Damodara Krishna's lap. As soon as 
the child was placed on his lap, his extra arms fell off and the third eye in 
his brow disappeared. 

When the queen saw this, she anxiously begged Krishna for a boon. She 
cried, "Krishna, fear afflicts me and I want a boon from you! You reassure 
all who are afraid; you dispel their fears." 

Krishna, scion of the Yadavas, said, "Revered one, fear not! You know 
dharma and you need have no fear of me. What boon shall I give you? 
What shall I do, Matuli, O my aunt? I will do what you ask, why, whether I 
can or not!" 

The queen Srutakirti said, "Mighty, mighty Krishna, for my sake you 
must pardon every offence of my child Sisupala, O Yaduvyaghra. O Lord, 
this is the boon I ask of you." 

Krishna said, "Aunt, even when he deserves to be killed, I will pardon a 
hundred offences of his, so do not grieve.'" 

Bhishma continues, 'It is thus, O Bhima, that this wretched king, this 
evil-hearted Sisupala, haughty with the boon which Krishna granted his 
mother, dares summon you to battle."" 


CANTO 43 
SISUPALA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ hishma says, "The will which moves the lord of Chedi to call you to 

an though he knows how strong you are, of strength which knows 
no exhaustion, that will is not his own but surely the purpose of Krishna 
himself, of Jagannatha. O Bhima, which king on Earth would dare abuse me 
as this wretch of his race, already in death's clasp, has done today? 

There is no doubt that this mighty-armed one is an amsa of Hari's tejas, 
and I am certain that the Lord wants to take back unto himself that energy 
of his. That is why, O Kuruvyaghra, this tiger-like Chedi king, so vile his 
heart, roars as he does, caring nothing for all of us. 

The Chedi king hears what Bhishma says and can bear no more. In fury 
he responds, 'May our enemies, O Bhishma, be endowed with whatever 
prowess this Kesava has, whom you praise like a hymn chanter, rising 
repeatedly from your seat. 

If, Bhishma, you find such delight in giving praise, then praise these 
kings, not Krishna. Praise this Darada, most excellent ruler of Balhika, who 
rent this very Earth as soon as he was born. Praise, O Bhishma, this Kama, 
king of Anga and Vanga, who is equal in strength to him of a thousand 
eyes; who draws a great bow; this mighty-armed one who wears celestial 
kundalas with which he was born, and this coat of mail splendid as the 
rising sun; who vanquished Jarasandha, Vasava's equal, at wrestling, almost 
mangling that king. 

Bhishma, praise Drona and Aswatthama, father and son, mighty 
warriors, worthy of praise and the best of Brahmanas, either of whom, I am 
certain, if angered could destroy this Earth with all its mobile and unmoving 
beings. I do not see any Kshatriya who is the equal in battle of Drona or 
Aswatthama. 

Why don't you want to praise them? You pass over Duryodhana, most 
mighty-armed king, unequalled in this whole sea-girt world, and King 
Jayadratha master of weapons, blessed with great prowess, and Druma, 
Guru of the Kimpurushas, renowned for his untold might, and old Kripa, 
Acharyar of the Bhaarata princes, also endowed with vast prowess: you 
ignore all these and praise Krishna? 


You pass over that best of bowmen, Rukmin of blazing energy, and 
praise Kesava? You ignore Bhishmaka of prodigious might, and King 
Dantavakra, and Bhagadatta famed for his numberless sacrificial stakes, and 
Jayatsena king of the Magadha, and Virata and Drupada, and Sakuni and 
Brihadbala, and Vinda and Anuvinda of Avanti; Pandya, Sweta, Uttama and 
Sankha of great prosperity, the proud Vrishasena, the powerful Ekalavya, 
and the great warrior Kalinga of abundant energy, and praise just Krishna? 

And, Bhishma, if your mind is always inclined to sing the praises of 
others why do you not praise Salya and the other kings of the Earth? What 
can I do when it seems that you have not heard anything before from 
virtuous old men about teaching dharma? Have you never heard that both 
the reproach and glorification of either oneself or others are not practised by 
honourable men? 

There is no one who approves of what you do, when you ceaselessly 
praise, with such adoration, and out of sheer ignorance, this Krishna so 
unworthy of praise. How do you, from your mere wish, establish the entire 
universe in the servant of the Bhojas, this cowherd? 

O Bhaarata, this is not your true nature as a man, but more like that of 
the bhulinga bird, of whom I already spoke. On the far side of Himavat 
there lives a bird called bhulinga, who never utters a word of evil import. 
Never do anything rash — this is what she always cries, but never 
understanding that, she herself always acts rashly. 

Having little intelligence, this birds pecks out the shreds of meat sticking 
between the lion's teeth, and at that always while the lion is eating. 
Assuredly, that bird lives at the lion's pleasure. O wretched Bhishma, O 
sinner, you always speak like that bird, just as surely as you are alive only 
at the pleasure of these kings. 

Yet, there is no one like you to serve the worst interests of these same 
kings!' Hearing these harsh words from the king of Chedi, O Rajan, 
Bhishma says to him, ‘Truly I am alive at the pleasure of these lords of the 
Earth, but I do not consider these kings as being even equal to a straw.' 

No sooner does Bhishma say this than the kings become inflamed! The 
hairs on the bodies of some stand on end, and some begin to reproach 
Bhishma. Some, who wield large bows, cry, "The wretched Bhishma is old 
but he is boastful and does not deserve our forgiveness. Kings, mad with 
anger as this patriarch is, it is just that we kill him like an animal. Let us 
together burn him in a fire of grass or straw! 


Bhishma hears this, and the Kuru grandsire, great his intelligence, says 
to those lords of the world, 'I see no end to our talk, for words can always 
be answered with more words. So, O lords of the Earth, listen to what I 
have to say, all of you. Whether you kill me like an animal or burn me in a 
fire of grass or straw, I set my foot on all your heads! 

Here is Krishna, Govinda who knows no decay. We have worshipped 
him with the first arghya. Let him who wishes for a swift death call the dark 
Madhava, the Chakra-bearer, the Gadadhari, to a fight, and dying at his 
hands, enter into and become one with the being of this Devadeva, this God 
of gods."" 


CANTO 44 
SISUPALA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


yoo said, "Hearing these words of Bhishma, the Chedi king, 
endowed with great prowess, says to Krishna, 'Janardana, I challenge 
you! Come fight me and I will kill you and all these Pandavas, too. For, O 
Krishna, the sons of Pandu have dishonoured all these kings by 
worshipping you who are no king, and they also deserve to die. 

Yes, I am convinced that these who have adored you, who are a slave, a 
wretch and no king, surely deserve death at my hands:.' 

Saying this, that tiger among kings stands there roaring in anger. After 
Sisupala has stopped ranting, Krishna speaks in the mildest voice to all the 
assembled kings and the Pandavas, 'O Kings, this evil one is the son of a 
daughter of the Satwatas, yet he is a terrible enemy to all of us Satwatas. 

Although we never seek to harm him, he always seeks our ill. When this 
ruthless fellow heard that we had gone to Pragjyotishapura, though he is my 
father's sister's son, this villain came and burnt Dwaraka. 

While King Bhoja sported upon the Raivataka hill, this vile Chedi 
attacked the attendants of that king, slew many and led many others away to 
-his city in chains. 

His every motive sinful, this wretch stole my father's sacrificial horse, 
which had been loosed across the lands with an armed guard: so that he 
could obstruct my father's yagna. 

This sinner ravished the wife of the pure Akrura, while she was on her 
way from Dwaraka to the Sauvira country. This injurer of his uncle 
disguised himself as the king of Karusha and ravished the chaste Bhadra, 
princess of Visala, whom Karusha was meant to marry. 

Patiently have I borne all these sorrows for the sake of my father's sister. 
It is fortunate that today this has happened before all of you kings. You have 
all seen the hatred and enmity this Sisupala bears me. You also know 
everything that he has done to me behind my back. 

For the arrogance he has shown me in the presence of you lords of the 
Earth, he deserves to be killed by me, and today I find myself ill able to 
forgive him. Wishing for a swift death this fool dared desire Rukmini for 


himself. But like a Sudra failing to hear the Vedas being recited, he did not 
get her.' 

Listening to Krishna, all the gathered kings begin to reprove the king of 
Chedi. But the mighty Sisupala laughs aloud and says, 'Krishna, are you not 
ashamed to say in this sabha, especially before all these kings, that I desired 
your wife Rukmini? Madhusudana, who other than you, calling himself a 
man, would declare in the midst of honourable men that his wife was 
intended for someone else? 

Krishna, pardon me if you please, or do not. But angry or friendly, what 
can you do to me anyway?’ 

While Sisupala says this, Kirshna thinks of the Chakra which humbles 
the hubris of the Asuras. As soon as the discus appears in his hands, the 
eloquent and illustrious one says loudly, 'Lords of the Earth, hear why I 
have always forgiven this Sisupala in the past. It is because of the boon I 
gave his mother that I would pardon a hundred offences of his. This was the 
boon she asked me for and this was the boon that I granted her. 

But today, O Kings, that number has become full, and now in your 
presence I will kill him.’ 

With that, and a growl, the Lord of the Yadus sloughs off Sisupala's head 
with the Chakra, and the mighty-armed king of Chedi falls like a cliff struck 
by thunder. Rajan, the gathered kings see a fierce light, pulsing, bright as 
the Sun in the sky, issue from the body of Sisupala. The spirit light 
worships Krishna of the lotus-leaf eyes, whom all the worlds worship, and 
melts into the Lord's body. 

The kings are wonderstruck to see that light entering Krishna 
Purushottama. When Krishna kills the Chedi king the cloudless vacant sky 
pours down showers of rain; peals of thunder echo; the Earth herself 
trembles. 

Some kings never say a word during those dreadful moments but merely 
sit gazing at Janardana; others rub their palms in fury with their forefingers; 
yet others are beside themselves with rage and bite their lips; while some in 
their hearts approve entirely of what Krishna does. Some are there who are 
moved by anger, while others turn pacifiers. 

The great Rishis are profoundly pleased; they praise Krishna warmly 
before departing. Indeed, all the high-souled Brahmanas and many of the 
mighty Kshatriyas, too, who are there, are overjoyed to witness the prowess 
of the Vrishni. They eulogise him. 


Yudhishtira now commands his brothers to perform the funeral rites for 
Sisupala, bold son of Damaghosha, without delay and with proper honour. 
The sons of Pandu obey the behest of their brother, and then Yudhishtira, 
along with all the others kings, makes Sisupala's son king of the Chedis. 

Then, O Rajan, the yagna of the Kuru king of great tejas, Yudhishtira 
blessed with every kind of prosperity, becomes exceptionally beautiful and 
pleases all the young men there. Begun auspiciously, every obstacle 
removed, replete with an abundance of wealth and corn, with rice and every 
other kind of food, Kesava watches over the sacrifice. 

In due course, Yudhishtira completes the yagna, while Janardana 
Mahabaho, the lofty Sauri, guards it until the end, armed with his bow the 
Saringa, his Chakra and Gada. 

When the good Yudhishtira has had his ritual bath after the sacrifice, all 
the Kshatriyas come to him and say, "Through good fortune you have 
gained imperial dignity. O you of the race of Ajamida, you have spread the 
fame of your entire race. 

King of kings, you have gained profound religious merit by what you 
have done. You have worshipped us all to our hearts' content, and we now 
say to you that we wish to return to our own kingdoms. It becomes you to 
give us leave. 

The just Yudhishtira hears what the kings say, worships each one as he 
deserves, then commands his brothers, All these kings came to us at their 
pleasure. These Parantapas now wish to return to their own kingdoms, and 
to bid me farewell. Be blessed, my brothers, escort them to the frontiers of 
our kingdom. 

Listening to their brother, the other Pandavas follow the kings, one after 
the other, as each deserves. Without delay, the powerful Dhrishtadyumna 
escorts King Virata; Dhananjaya follows the illustrious Maharatha 
Yagnasena; the mighty Bhimasena goes with Bhishma and Dhritarashtra; 
Sahadeva, master of battle, follows the brave Drona and his son; Nakula, O 
King, follows Subala and his son; the sons of Draupadi along with the son 
of Subhadra follow the mighty warriors-kings of the mountain countries. 

Other Kshatriyarishabhas escort other Kshatriyas, while the Brahmanas 
in their thousands also depart, duly worshipped. 

When all the Kshatriyas and Brahmanas have left, Krishna says to 
Yudhishtira, 'O son of the Kurus, with your leave, I, too, wish to return to 


Dwaraka. Through great good fortune, you have performed the greatest of 
all sacrifices, the Rajasuya yagna!' 

Yudhishtira replies, 'By your grace, Govinda, I have accomplished this. 
Because of your grace alone all the world of Kshatriyas is now under my 
sway, and all the kings came here with tribute. 

Lord, without you my heart never feels any joy. So how can I, O 
Anagha, give you leave to go? Yet, I know that you must go home to 
Dwaraka.' 

The great Hari, his fame worldwide, now goes with his cousin to his 
aunt Kunti, and says cheerfully, 'Matuli, your sons have performed the 
Rajasuya yagna and gained imperial dignity. Vast wealth they have 
obtained, and their endeavours have all been crowned with success. Be 
pleased with all this, and now, with your leave, I wish to return to Dwaraka.' 

After this, Krishna bids farewell to Draupadi and Subhadra. Coming out 
of the inner apartments accompanied by Yudhishtira, he performs his 
ablutions and goes through the daily rites of worship, and then has the 
Brahmanas utter their blessings. 

Now the mighty-armed Daruka arrives in a chariot of wondrous design, 
its body like clouds. Krishna Mahatman, his eyes like lotus leaves, looks at 
that Garuda-bannered chariot, walks around it in reverent pradakshina 
before climbing into it and setting out for Dwaraka. 

Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, blessed with prosperity, along with his brothers, 
follows the mighty Krishna on foot. Then Hari of the eyes like lotus leaves 
stops that best of rathas for a moment, and speaks to the son of Kunti. 

'King of kings, cherish your subjects with indefatigable vigilance and 
patience. As the clouds are to all creatures, as the great tree of spreading 
boughs is to birds, as he of a thousand eyes is to the immortals, you be the 
refuge and support of your kin.’ 

With this, Krishna and Yudhishtira take leave of each other and return to 
their respective homes. Rajan, after the lord of the Satwatas has gone back 
to Dwaravati, only King Duryodhana, with King Subala's son Sakuni, bulls 
among men, continue staying in that unearthly sabha." 


CANTO 45 
DYUTA PARVA 


yoo said, "When that greatest of sacrifices, the Rajasuya, so 
difficult of accomplishment, was completed Vyasa, surrounded by his 
disciples, presents himself before Yudhishtira. Upon seeing him, 
Yudhishtira rises quickly from his throne, and surrounded by his brothers, 
worships his grandfather, the Rishi, with water to wash his feet and offers 
him a fine place to sit. 

Having sat on a costly carpet inlaid with gold, the illustrious one says to 
Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, 'Sit yourself down.' 

When the king and his brothers sit, the illumined Vyasa, always truthful 
in speech, says, 'Son of Kunti, your fortune swells and you with it. You 
have gained empire, so difficult to acquire. And, O furtherer of the race of 
Kuru, the Kauravas have all prospered because of you. 

O Chakravartin, I have been duly worshipped, and with your leave I now 
wish to go.' 

Yudhishtira salutes the dark Rishi, his grandfather, touches his feet and 
says, 'Greatest of men, a doubt has arisen in my mind, hard to dispel. O Bull 
among the regenerate, none but you can remove it. 

The illumined Narada said that, in consequence of the Rajasuya yagna, 
three kinds of omens, celestial, atmospheric and terrestrial, occurred. 
Grandsire, has the death of Sisupala caused evil fortune?’ 

The exalted son of Parasara, the island-born Vyasa of dark hue, says, 
'For thirteen years, O King, those omens will bear momentous 
consequences, ending in the absolute destruction, Rajadhiraja, of all 
Kshatriya kind. At that time, with you as sole cause, O Bharatarishabha, all 
the Kshatriyas of the Earth shall be annihilated: because of the sins of 
Duryodhana and through the prowess of Bhima and Arjuna. 

Towards the end of this night, in your dream you will see the blue- 
throated Bhava, annihilator of Tripura, always absorbed in dhyana, the Bull 
his emblem, drinking from a human skull, and fierce and terrible, Lord of 
all creatures, God of Gods, Umapati, called Hara and Sarva also, and 
Vrisha, armed with the trident and the bow Pinaka, and wearing tiger skin. 


You will see Siva, tall and white as the Kailasa cliff, seated upon his 
Bull, gazing unwinkingly towards the south, the direction presided over by 
the king of the Pitrs. King of kings, this shall be your dream tonight. Do not 
grieve for dreaming such a dream, for no one can escape time. 

Be you blessed! I now will go towards Kailasa. You must rule the Earth 
with vigilance and steadfastness, patiently bearing every privation!' 

Saying this, the illustrious Krishna Dwaipayana, accompanied by his 
disciples, who always follows the dictates of the Vedas, goes away towards 
Kailasa. When his grandfather has gone, the king is gripped by anxiety and 
grief and thinks ceaselessly of what the Sage said. 

He tells himself, 'Surely, what the Rishi foretold must come to pass. 
Who can keep Fate at bay by effort alone?’ 

Then Yudhishtira, endowed with great energy, says to his brothers, 
'Tigers among men, you have heard what the Dwaipayana said to me. 
Having heard him, I have resolved that I must die, since I alone, otherwise, 
am ordained to be the cause of the death of all Kshatriya kind. 

Ah, my precious brothers, if this is what time has in store for me what 
need is there for me to live?’ 

Hearing the king, Arjuna replies, 'Rajan, do not yield to this manic 
dejection, which destroys reason. Summon your courage and do what 
would truly be good for us all.' 

Yudhishtira, resolute in truth, thinking all the while of what Vyasa Muni 
said, replies to his brothers, 'Be blessed and listen to the vow I swear from 
this day. For thirteen years, what ever be the purpose for which I must live, 
I will never speak a harsh word to you my brothers or to any king of the 
Earth. 

Commanded by my kinsmen, I will observe dharma and exemplify my 
vratas. If I live thus, making no distinction between my own children and 
others, there cannot be any disagreement between me and anyone. 
Disputation causes war in this world. If I keep war at bay, always doing 
what is agreeable to everyone, infamy shall never be mine, O 
Purusharishabhas .' 

The other Pandavas listen to what their brother says, and being ever 
engaged in doing his will, they approve. Having sworn this oath, 
Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, together with his brothers, gratifies his priests as 
also the Gods with due ceremonies, in that sabha. 


Bharatarishabha, when all the kings have gone Yudhishtira performs the 
customary rituals and then returns to his palace with his ministers. King of 
men, Duryodhana and Sakuni, son of Subala, continue to stay in the Mayaa 
sabha of fascination." 


CANTO 46 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


vo said, "That bull among men, Duryodhana, continues to 
live in the Mayaa Sabha. With Sakuni, the Kuru prince slowly 
examines the entire edifice, and sees many an unearthly design in it, which 
he has never seen in Hastinapura, the city named after the elephant. 

One day, while walking through the mansion, Raja Duryodhana comes 
upon a crystal surface. Mistaking it for a pool of water, he draws up his 
clothes, only to find it is solid floor; he continues in some shame and 
SOrrow. 

Sometime after, mistaking a lake of crystalline water adorned with 
lotuses of crystal petals for solid ground, he falls into it with his clothes on, 
drawing peals of laughter from the mighty Bhima, as also from the servants 
of the palace. 

At Yudhishtira's command, the servants quickly bring Duryodhana fine 
fresh clothes. Yet, seeing Duryodhana like that, Bhima, Arjuna and the 
twins all laugh out loud. Unused to being insulted, Duryodhana cannot bear 
that laughter. He hides his feelings and does not even look at them. 

Yet again, he draws up his clothes to cross some dry ground which he 
once more mistakes for water and again they all laugh. Soon, Duryodhana 
mistakes a solid crystal door for being open space, walks straight into it and 
stands stunned, his head reeling. Then, he thinks an open door is shut and 
cautiously reaches out his hands to feel empty space, and tripping, falls 
down. 

Coming to yet another door, which is ajar, but thinking it closed, he turns 
away from it. Finally, O King, having seen the staggering wealth of the 
Pandavas during the Rajasuya yagna, and having humiliated himself 
repeatedly inside the Mayaa Sabha, Duryodhana takes his leave of the 
Pandavas and returns to Hastinapura. 

Dwelling darkly in his mind on everything that he has seen, which has 
made him burn with envy, and all that has happened to shame him, his heart 
turns to dire thoughts of sin even while riding home. 

He has seen the Pandavas full of joy, with all the kings of the Earth 
paying them homage; he has seen young and old serving the sons of Pandu; 


he has seen the splendour and prosperity of his illustrious cousins, and 
Duryodhana, son of Dhritarashtra, is pale with jealousy. 

While riding home, his heart sorely afflicted, Duryodhana thinks of little 
other than the grand sabha, and the unmatched prosperity of the wise 
Yudhishtira. Dhritarashtra is so absorbed by these thoughts that he says not 
a word to Subalas son, even when Sakuni repeatedly addresses him. 

Seeing him plunged in dejection, Sakuni asks, 'Duryodhana what afflicts 
you like this?! 

Duryodhana replies, 'Uncle, seeing all the world under the sway of 
Yudhishtira from the power of the weapons of the mighty Arjuna, seeing the 
glory of the yagna of Pritha's son being equal to that of the sacrifice of 
Sakra himself, I am filled with flaming envy, burning me night and day, 
drying me up like a shallow tank in summer. 

When Sisupala was killed by the lord of the Satwatas, there was no man 
to take the side of Sisupala. Consumed by the fire of the Pandava, they all 
forgave that crime; else, who could ever condone such a thing? Because of 
the power of the son of Pandu, Krishna got away with his heinous offence. 

And so many kings brought myriad and untold wealth for Kunti's son: 
even like tribute-paying Vaisyas! Seeing Yudhishtira's fortune, his 
resplendent prosperity, my heart burns with envy, although this does not 
become me.’ 

Truly as if flames burn him, Duryodhana says again to the Gandhara 
king, 'I will cast myself into a fire, swallow poison or drown myself. I 
cannot live. Which man of vigour in the world can bear to see his enemies 
prosper, while he himself is destitute? 

I who watch my enemy prosper am neither a woman, nor yet not a 
woman; neither am I a man, nor one who is not a man. Seeing the Pandavas' 
sovereignty over the Earth, their vast affluence, ah, watching that Rajasuya 
yagna of theirs, who is there in the world who would not be aggrieved? 

By myself I can never hope to gain such empire or wealth, and I see no 
allies who would help me acquire them. This is why I think of killing 
myself. I see the unparalleled and serene prosperity of Kunti's son, and I 
know that Fate is supreme and all effort pointless. 

Son of Subala, once I strove ceaselessly to effect his death. But he 
baffled all my attempts and look at him now bloomed fully like a lotus from 
a pool of water. Surely, Fate is supreme and effort in vain: behold, day by 
day, the sons of Dhritarashtra decay and the sons of Pritha wax. 


Ah, my heart burns as if it were on fire to look at the fortune of the 
Pandavas, that sabha of theirs, to think of their servants laughing at me. O 
Uncle, know that I am grief-stricken and fit to burst with envy, and I will 
speak of it to Dhritarashtra." 


CANTO 47 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


€¢ Cakuni says 'Duryodhana, you must not be jealous of Yudhishtira. 

S hrough their own good fortune the sons of Pandu are only enjoying 
what they deserve. Parantapa, O great King, with all the numberless plots 
you hatched to do away with them you could not. Providence saw the 
Purushavyaghras escape all your machinations. 

They have Draupadi for their wife, and Drupada, his sons and Vasudeva 
Krishna of immense prowess are their allies, with whose help they can 
subdue the very world. They inherited their patrimony and have grown 
immeasurably through their own vitality. 

Why should you be aggrieved at this? Gratifying Agni Hutasana, 
Dhananjaya has got the bow Gandiva, the pair of inexhaustible quivers and 
many celestial astras. With that peerless bow and the strength of his arms, 
as well, he brought all the kings of the world under his sway. Why should 
you grieve over this? 

Arjuna Parantapa, Savyasachin, saved the Asura Mayaa form the forest 
fire and Mayaa built that grand sabha out of gratitude. Commanded by 
Mayaa, the grim Rakshasas, the Kinkaras, support the sabha. What is there 
in this to cause you grief? 

You said, O King, that you have no allies. Bhaarata, this is not true. 
These brothers of yours are obedient to you. Drona of great prowess, who 
wields a great bow, his son Aswatthama, Radha's son Kama, the Maharatha 
Kripa Gautama, I with my brothers and King Saumadatti - these are your 
allies. Unite yourself with these, and conquer all the Earth. 

Duryodhana says, 'O King, if it pleases you, with your help and that of 
the other great warriors you mention, I will defeat the Pandavas. If I can 
subdue them now, the world will be mine and all her kings, and that sabha 
so replete with wealth.' 

Sakuni replies, 'Dhananjaya and Krishna, Bhimasena and Yudhishtira, 
Nakula and Sahadeva, and Drupada with his sons - these cannot be 
vanquished in battle even by the Devas, such great warriors are they, 
wielding the greatest bows, masters of astras, and delighting in battle. 


However, I know how Yudhishtira himself can be vanquished. Listen to 
me and do as J say.' 

Duryodhana says, 'Uncle, tell me if there is any way by which I can quell 
Yudhishtira without endangering our friends and these other illustrious 
Kurus.' 

Sakuni says, "The son of Kunti loves dice-play although he does not 
know the art of the game. If that king is asked to play dice, he cannot 
refuse. I am a master of dice, why there is no one in the world to match me 
at rolling the dice, why, no one in the three worlds, O son of Kuru. 

Therefore, ask him to play dice. With my skills at dice, I will win his 
kingdom and all his vast fortunes for you. Duryodhana, tell all this to your 
father the king. If he commands me, I will definitely win all of Yudhishtira's 
kingdom and possessions for you. ' 

Duryodhana says, 'Son of Subala, you tell all this yourself to 
Dhritarashtra, king of the Kurus. I will not be able to."" 


CANTO 48 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vor said, "Rajan, impressed by the great Rajasuya yagna of 
Yudhishtira, and knowing Duryodhana's heart during their journey 
home from the Mayaa Sabha, and wanting to gratify the Kuru prince's 
desire, Sakuni, son of Subala, goes to Dhritarashtra, of great wisdom, and 
finding the blind king seated upon his throne, speaks these words to him. 

'Know, Maharajan, Bharatarishabha, that Duryodhana has grown pale, 
emaciated, dejected and fallen prey to great anxiety. Why don't you, 
through due inquiry, discover the grief which is in the heart of your eldest 
son, the sorrow caused by the enemy’? 

Dhritarashtra says, 'Duryodhana, what is the cause of your great sorrow, 
Kurunandana? If it is fit for me to hear, tell me the reason for your 
affliction. Sakuni here says that you have lost colour, become pale and thin, 
and fallen prey to anxiety. I do not know what the reason for this sorrow 
can be. All my vast wealth and power are yours to control. Your brothers 
and all our kinsmen never do anything disagreeable to you. 

You wear the finest clothes; eat the best food, all the most excellent 
meats. The best horses carry you. So what is it that makes you pale and 
thin? Rich beds, beautiful damsels, mansions with the costliest furniture, 
every sport to delight you - all these are at your disposal, even as with the 
gods themselves. Proud one, O my son, why do you grieve as if you are 
destitute?’ 

Duryodhana says, 'I eat and dress myself like a wretch, and I spend my 
time burning with savage envy. He is indeed a man who cannot bear the 
fortune and pride of his enemy, and lives only after vanquishing his enemy 
and liberating his own subjects from the tyranny of his enemy. 

Contentment and pride, O Bhaarata, destroy prosperity, and also those 
other two: compassion and fear. He that acts under the influence of these 
never achieves anything great. 

Having seen Yudhishtira's prosperity, whatever I enjoy brings me no joy. 
So splendid is the prosperity of Kunti's son that what I have is as nothing 
before it. Knowing the affluence of my enemy and my own relative poverty, 
even though that affluence is not before me, yet I see it constantly. This is 


why I am pale and lean, why the colour has drained from me and I am 
melancholy. 

Yudhishtira supports eighty-eight thousand Snataka Brahmanas, giving 
thirty slave-girls to each one. Besides these, a thousand other Brahmanas 
eat daily at his palace: the best food on golden plates. 

The king of Kamboja sent him innumerable skins, black, dark, and red, 
of the kadali deer, as also countless shawls of the softest texture, as tribute. 
Hundreds of thousands of she-elephants and thirty thousand she-camels 
wander within the palace: the kings of the Earth brought them all as tribute 
to the capital of the Pandavas. 

Lord of the world, the kings also brought to this greatest of yagnas piles 
and piles of jewels and great gemstones for the son of Kunti. Never before 
did I see or even hear of such immense wealth as was brought to the 
sacrifice of the intelligent sons of Pandu. 

Rajan, after seeing that treasure past imagining, which belongs to my 
enemy, I have no peace of mind. Hundreds of Brahmanas supported by the 
wealth which Yudhishtira gave them, and now owning great wealth of kine, 
waited with tribute of thirty crores of gold coins, but the dwarapalakas at 
his palace gates did not allow them to enter. Bringing with them the finest 
ghee in handsome kamanadalus made of gold, yet they could not gain 
admission into the palace. 

The Ocean himself brought, in vessels of white copper, the nectar that is 
created within his waters, which is far superior to what flowers and plants 
produce for Sakra. 

And at the end of the sacrifice, Vaasudeva bathed Pritha's son with sea 
water fetched in a thousand bejewelled jars of gold, which he poured over 
Yudhishtira from his own rarest conch shell. 

Ah, seeing all this I became feverish with envy. Those golden urns had 
gone to the Eastern and the Southern Oceans upon the shoulders of men, 
and to the Western Ocean, O Bull among men. O Father, though none but 
birds only can go to the Northern realms, Arjuna went there and brought 
back untold wealth which he extracted as tribute. 

Let me tell you about another wonderful thing which happened; listen to 
me. It was arranged that when a hundred thousand Brahmanas were fed, 
each day, conches would be blown in unison. O Bhaarata, I heard conches 
sounding there almost ceaselessly, and my hair stood on end to listen to 
their bass. 


Maharajan, how can I describe how magnificent was that palatial 
compound, filled with countless kings come to witness the yagna, except to 
say that it was like a cloudless sky with stars? Each of the kings came to the 
sacrifice bringing untold and variegated wealth as tribute for the wise son of 
Pandu. 

The kings who came, besides, became like Vaisyas, distributing food to 
the Brahmanas who were fed. The prosperity I saw of Yudhishtira was such 
that neither Indra himself, nor Yama or Varuna, nor Kubera, Lord of the 
Guhyakas, owns. 

Oh, my father, my heart burns after seeing the awesome treasures of the 
son of Pandu, and I have no peace. ' 

When Duryodhana has spoken thus, Sakuni says, 'O you who have truth 
as your strength, listen to how you can have for yourself the unmatched 
prosperity which you saw with the son of Pandu. 

O Bhaarata, I am a master of dice, the best player in the world. I know 
beforehand the success or failure of every throw of the dice, and when to 
wager and when to refrain. I have special, occult knowledge of the game. 
The son of Kunti is also fond of playing dice, but he has small skill at the 
game. 

If you summon him either to battle or to a game, he will certainly accept. 
If he and I play dice I will beat him again and again, with sleight of hand, 
with subtle deception in my fingers. 

I swear that I will win all his wealth and kingdom for you, Duryodhana, 
and you will enjoy everything the Pandava has.’ 

When Sakuni says this, without a moment's lapse, Duryodhana says to 
Dhritarashtra, 'Sakuni, master of dice, is ready to win all the fortune of the 
Pandavas at the game. You must give him leave to do this for me. 

Dhritarashtra replies, 'I always follow the advice of Kshatta, Vidura my 
minister of deep wisdom. Let me consult with him, and I will tell you what 
I decide about this matter. He has great foresight, and he will keep dharma 
squarely before him and tell us what is best for both parties, and what 
should be done.' 

Duryodhana says, 'If you consult Kshatta he will persuade you to desist, 
and if you do not allow this, O King, I will surely kill myself. When I am 
dead, Rajan, you can be happy with your Vidura. You will enjoy the whole 
world, what need will you have of me?’ 


Dhritarashtra hears this dire threat from his son and, indeed, being in his 
own heart quite prepared to do what Duryodhana asks, calls a servitor and 
commands him, 'Let artisans be engaged immediately to build a capacious 
and beautiful palace of a thousand columns and a hundred doors. Fetch the 
finest masons, carpenters and joiners and encrust the edifice's walls with 
precious stones, all over. 

Let it be grand and handsome; make it easy of access. When it is 
completed come and inform me:' 

After King Dhritarashtra resolves to please his Duryodhana, he sends 
messengers to Vidura to summon him. For it is true that the king never 
takes a decision without first consulting Vidura. However, in this matter, 
although he well knows the evils of gambling, Dhritarashtra is drawn 
irresistibly to the plot. 

However, as soon as the wise Vidura hears of it, he knows that the Kali 
Yuga is at hand. Seeing the gates to perdition about to open, Vidura rushes 
to Dhritarashtra. Bowing at his elder brother's feet, Vidura says, 'Great 
King, I cannot endorse this resolve of yours. It becomes you to act in a 
manner by which no dispute arises between your children caused by this 
gambling.' 

Dhritarashtra replies, 'O Kshatta, if the gods are kind to us no dispute 
will ever arise between our children. So, auspicious or not, good or 
otherwise, let the friendly dice game be played, for beyond doubt this is 
what fate has ordained for us. 

Besides, when I am present, and Drona, Bhishma and you, as well, no 
evil which even fate has decreed is likely to occur. So, take a chariot yoked 
to horses swift as the wind, so that you will reach Khandavaprastha even 
today and bring Yudhishtira back with you. 

Vidura, this is my final decision. Say nothing to me, for I believe that 
supreme fate brings this upon us.' 

Listening to Dhritarashtra, Vidura feels certain that his race is doomed. 
In great sorrow, he goes to Bhishma of profound wisdom." 


CANTO 49 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


gl epee says, "O best among all those who know the Veda, I how was 
that game of dice played? It was always fraught with I such evil and 
brought heartbreak to the cousins, and because of it my grandsires, the sons 
of Pandu, were plunged into grief. 

Tell me which Kshatriyas were present in that sabha, and which of them 
approved of the gambling and which would have forbidden it. Anagha, 
Sinless, best among the twice-born, I want to hear you narrate all this in 
detail: that which indeed brought about the ruin of the very world." 

Sauti says, "Thus addressed by the king, the disciple of Vyasa, blessed 
with great tejas and a master of the entire Veda, related everything that had 
happened. 

Vaisampayana said, "O Bharatottama, Maharajan, if you wish to hear it 
all, listen while I tell it to you in detail. 

Having confirmed the opinion of Vidura, Ambikas son Dhritarashtra 
calls Duryodhana to him again, in private. 

'Son of Gandhari, I say to you, do not have anything to do with this 
game of dice. Vidura does not speak well of it. He is wise beyond all 
common measure, and he would never counsel me against my best interest. 
I, too, think that what Vidura says is true and best for me. Do as I say, my 
son, for I am convinced that it is in your best interest also. 

Vidura knows dharma, all its mysteries, even as the illustrious, learned 
and wise Brihaspati, the Devarishi who is Indra's preceptor, unfolded 
dharma to the king of the Devas. My son, I never fail to take Vidura's 
advice. Suyodhana, even as the wise Uddhava is revered among the 
Vrishnis, so is Vidura among the Kurus: as the most intelligent of us. 

So, my son, have nothing to do with dice; for it is plain that gambling 
sows dissension, and discord is the ruin of the kingdom. Duryodhna, 
abandon this very thought of playing dice. 

My child, you have received everything from us, which a father and 
mother should give their son. You have rank and you have possessions. You 
are learned and astute in every branch of gyana. You have been raised with 


love in your father's house. You are the eldest among all your brothers; you 
live in your own kingdom: why are you unhappy? 

Mahabaho, you eat such food and wear such clothes that common men 
cannot even dream of. Why, still, do you grieve? My son, O mighty-armed, 
yours is a great ancestral kingdom, brimming with people and with wealth, 
and you shine forth as gloriously as the king of the Devas in Swarga. 

You have wisdom. Tell me what lies at the root of this despondency of 
yours, the terrible melancholy.' 

Duryodhana replies, 'I am a wretch and a sinner, O King, for I can 
neither eat not clothe myself regally, having seen the prosperity of my 
enemy. Indeed, it has been said that the man who is not filled with envy at 
seeing the good fortune of his enemy is truly a wretch. 

Exalted, the wealth and power which I have mean nothing to me, for I 
have seen the resplendent glory of Kuntis son and I am full of pain. Why, I 
say to you that I must be strong, indeed, that I continue to live when all the 
world is under the sway of Yudhishtira. 

The Nipas, the Chitrakas, the Kukkuras, the Karaskaras, and the 
Lohajanghas all live like bondsmen in the Pandavas palace. Himavat, the 
Ocean, the rich realms upon the shores of the sea, the countless other lands 
which yield precious jewels and gems have all admitted that Yudhishtira's 
palace is superior to them in the treasures it houses. 

Rajan, welcoming with honour me as the eldest among my brothers, 
Yudhishtira gave me charge of receiving the jewels which came as tribute. 
Bhaarata, nowhere have such treasures, without limit, been seen; my hands 
grew tired receiving that incalculable wealth. And when I was tired they 
who brought those treasures from distant lands would wait until I could 
resume my task. 

Fetching jewels from the Bindusaras, the Asura architect Mayaa created 
a lake-like surface of crystal for the sons of Pandu. Looking at the artificial 
lotuses which adorned it, I mistook it, O King, for water. I drew up my 
clothes to cross it and seeing this Vrikodara laughed at me: surely, thinking 
that I have no jewels myself and that I had been deranged by the sight of the 
affluence of my enemy. 

If I could, my father, I would immediately kill Bhima for that laughter. 
But if we try to kill Bhima now I have no doubt that we will meet the same 
fate as Sisupala did. Yet, that insult scathes me. 


Then again, O King, I saw a similar looking water body, and now I felt 
certain that this was crystal again, solid ground. I stepped forward and fell 
into water. Bhima and Arjuna laughed mockingly, as did Draupadi and the 
other women of their palace. Ah, how that sears my heart. 

My clothes were drenched, and at Yudhishtira's command his servants 
brought me fresh clothes. Even that humiliated me. Rajan listen to yet 
another blunder of mine. I tried to pass through what I was certain was an 
open door, but there was no passage beyond, and I struck my head painfully 
against strange stone and injured myself. Nakula and Sahadeva saw me 
from a distance and, full of apparent solicitude, came to lend me arms of 
support. 

Smiling, Sahadeva said again and again to me, "Rajan, this is the door, 
come this way." 

Bhimasena laughed aloud and said, "Dhritarashtraputra, the door is 
here." 

Also, my lord, I had not even heard the names of many of the gemstones 
which I saw sparkling in that sabha. Ah, these are the reasons for the 
anguish which rends my heart.'" 


CANTO 50 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ uryodhana says, 'Listen, O Bhaarata, to everything about I the most 

Dre treasures that I saw, brought to the Pandavas by the kings 
of the world. Oh, seeing that wealth of the enemy I lost my reason and 
hardly knew myself. Let me describe for you those treasures, both man- 
made and produce of the earth. 

The Kamboja king gave countless skins of the rarest quality, shawls 
made of wool, of the soft fur of rodents and other burrowers, of silky hair of 
cats, all inlaid with golden threads. He gave three hundred Tittiri and 
Kalmasha horses, with snouts like parrots. Three hundred camels he gave 
and as many she-asses, all fattened with the olives and the pilusha. 

Numberless Brahmanas, rearing cattle and performing lowly tasks for 
the illustrious Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, waited at the gates with three 
hundred millions worth of tribute, but they were denied admission into the 
palace. 

Hundreds and hundreds of Brahmanas, wealthy in kine and living on 
lands which Yudhishtira had given them, came there with their beautiful 
golden kamandalus full of ghrita. Although they brought such tribute, they 
were refused admission into the palace. 

The Sudra kings, who live along the sea-coast, brought lakhs of serving 
girls of the Karpasika country, all beautiful, slender-waisted, with luxuriant 
tresses, decked in golden ornaments. They also brought many skins of the 
ranku deer, worthy even for Brahmanas, as tribute to King Yudhishtira. 

The Vairama, Parada, Abhira and Kitava tribes, who live on crops that 
depend on rain, water from rivers, as well as those born beside the sea, in 
woodlands, or countries beyond the Ocean, all waited at the gate, bringing 
goats, kine, asses, camels and vegetables, honey, blankets, jewels and 
gemstones of diverse kinds, but were refused entry. 

That mighty Kshatriya king, Bhagadatta, the valiant sovereign of 
Pragjyotisha, the powerful monarch of the Mlechchas, at the head of a vast 
horde of Yavanas, waited at the gate, unable to enter, though bringing 
considerable tribute of horses of the best breed, swift as the wind. 
Bhagadatta was forced to leave the gates after making over a number of 


swords with handles of the purest ivory and richly inlaid and adorned with 
diamonds and every kind of jewel. 

Many strange tribesmen came from diverse realms: some had two eyes, 
some three and some with one eye on their foreheads; those called the 
Aushmikas came, Nishadas and Romakas, and some cannibals with just one 
leg. I say to you, my father, they all stood at the gates and were refused 
entry. 

Their extraordinary rulers brought tribute of ten thousand varicoloured 
asses, with black necks, huge bodies, great speed, all very docile, these 
animals being famed the world over. All of them, indeed, were large and 
their colouring attractive, and they were all bred on the coast of Vankhu. 

So many kings gave Yudhishtira much gold and silver, and giving thus 
they gained entry into the palace of the Pandava. 

The one-legged tribesmen brought innumerable wild horses for him, 
some red as cochineal, some white, some rainbow-hued, some like evening 
clouds, and some of many colours besides all these. All these had the 
swiftness of the mind. 

The kings also brought the purest gold for the son of Pandu, vast 
quantities of it. I also saw countless Chins and Sakas and Uddras and many 
barbarian tribesmen who live in forests, and many Vrishnis and Harahunas, 
and the dark tribes of the Himavat, and many Nipas and folk who live on 
the sea-coast, all waiting at the gates for leave to enter. 

And the people of Balhika gave Yudhishtira ten thousand asses as 
tribute, all of goodly size and black necks, which could run a hundred 
yojanas in a day. These beasts were of myriad shapes, well-trained and 
famed the world over. Superbly built they were, their colours resonant and 
their skins velvet to the touch. 

The Balhikas also gifted many, many woollen blankets woven in Chin, 
and skins of the ranku deer past counting, and clothes made from jute, and 
others made from the threads spun by insects. They also gave thousands of 
other garments, none cotton, but all the colour of the lotus, and all so 
smooth. They gave soft sheep-skins by the thousands. 

Many sharp and great swords and scimitars, hatchets and fine-edged 
battle-axes fashioned in the western countries they gave. Having sent in rare 
perfumes, diverse glittering jewels and gems in thousands as tribute, they 
waited at the gates, being refused admission into the palace. 


The Sakas and Tusharas and Kankas and Romasas and men with horns 
on their heads brought very many great elephants as tribute, and ten 
thousand horses, and hundreds and hundreds of millions of gold coins, and 
waited at the gates, being refused permission to enter. 

The kings of the eastern countries brought uncountable costly carpets, 
and fine bedsteads, and armour of many colours adorned with jewels, gold 
and ivory, and weapons of different kinds, and chariots of different shapes, 
elegant and chased with gold, drawn by superbly trained horses of 
handsome make and adorned with gold, drawn by well-trained horses, tiger- 
skins upon their backs, and rich and varied cloths to caparison elephants, 
and again a myriad manner of jewels and gems, arrows long and short and 
many other weapons, and they received permission to enter the sacrificial 
palace of the illustrious Pandava!'" 


CANTO 51 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ uryodhana says, 'Anagha, listen to me describe the vast mass I of 

hoe a. the many kinds of tribute given to Yudhishtira by the kings 
of the Earth. They who live beside the River Sailoda, which flows between 
the Mountains Meru and Mandara, who enjoy the delightful shade of the 
groves of the kichaka bamboo, they who are called the Khashas, Ekasanas, 
Arhas, Pradaras, Dirghavenus, Paradas, Kulindas, Tanganas, and the other 
Tanganas brought as tribute mounds of gold sealed in great dranas, which 
are raised from under the earth by ants and are hence named after those 
creatures. 

The mountain tribes of great strength brought tribute of countless soft 
chamara whisks, some black, others white as moonrays; sweet honey they 
brought, distilled from flowers which grow upon the Himavat, as well as 
from the mishali champaka; they brought masses of garlands of flowers 
from the lands of the northern Kurus, and diverse plants from the north, 
even from Kailasa, and waited with their heads bent at the gates of 
Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, and were refused permission to enter. 

I also saw there numberless Kirata chieftains, armed with cruel weapons 
and always engaged in savage deeds, who eat fruit and root and wear skins 
and live on the northern slopes of the Himavat and upon the Udaya 
Mountain from behind which the Sun rises, and also in the realm of 
Karusha on the sea-coast and on both sides of the Lohitya Mountains. 

My King, they brought as tribute load upon load of sandalwood, aloe, 
also black aloe, and heap upon heap of valuable skins and perfumes, and ten 
thousand serving-girls of their race, and many exotic animals and birds of 
remote countries, and so much gold of shining splendour, and the Kiratas 
waited at the gate, being refused permission to enter. 

The Kairatas, the Daradas, the Darvas, the Suras, the Vaiyamakas, the 
Audumbaras, the Durvibhagas, the Kumaras, the Paradas along with the 
Bahlikas, the Kashmiras, the Ghorakas, the Hansakayanas, the Sibis, the 
Trigartas, the Yauddheyas, the ruler of the Madias and the Kaikeyas, the 
Ambashtas, the Kaukuras, the Tarkshyas, the Vastrapas along with the 
Palhavas, the Vashatalas, the Mauleyas along with the Kshudrakas, and the 


Malavas, the Paundryas, the Saundikas, the Kukkuras, the Sakas, the 
Angas, the Vangas, the Punras, the Sanavatyas, and the Gayas, all good men 
and wellborn, divided into their respective clans, all proficient at arms, 
brought tribute to Yudhishtira, all of it countable in lakhs. 

The Vangas, the Kalingas, the Magadhas, the Tamraliptas, the 
Supundrakas, the Dauvalikas, the Sagarakas, the Patrornas, the Saisavas, 
and innumerable Karnapravaranas, who presented themselves at the gate, 
were told by the gate-keepers, at the command of the king, that if they 
brought proper tribute and waited at the gates, they could possibly gain 
entrance. 

Then the kings of those nations each gave a thousand elephants with 
tusks like the shafts of ploughs, adorned with golden girdles, covered with 
fine cloths and so resembling the lotus in complexion, while they were all 
dark as rocks and always in musth, captured from around the Kamyaka 
lake, and covered in armour, too. Of the highest breed were these, and 
exceptionally patient. 

When they had made these gifts those kings were allowed to enter. 
Rajan, these and many others, hailing from diverse lands, and numberless 
other illustrious sovereigns brought jewels and gems to the sacrifice. 

Chitraratha, king of Gandharvas, friend of Indra, gave four hundred 
horses blessed with the speed of the wind. The Gandharva Tumburu 
joyfully gave a hundred horses, the colour of the mango leaf and decked in 
gold. 

O Kurusthama, the celebrated king of the Mlechcha tribe, the Sukaras, 
gave hundreds of the finest elephants; Virata, king of Matsya, gave two 
thousand elephants decked in gold, while King Vasudana of the Pansu 
kingdom gifted the son of Pandu with twenty-six elephants and two 
thousand horses, all decked in gold and endowed with speed and strength 
and in the full vigour of youth, as well as many other kinds of wealth. 

Drupada Yagnasena gave the Pandavas fourteen thousand serving-girls 
and ten thousand serving-men with their wives for the sacrifice, hundreds of 
magnificent elephants, twenty-six chariots with elephants yoked, and also 
his entire kingdom. 

To enhance the dignity of Arjuna, Vaasudeva of the Vrishnis gave 
fourteen thousand fine elephants. Surely, Krishna is the soul of Arjuna as 
Arjuna is the soul of Krishna, and whatever Arjuna asks Krishna is certain 


to do. Why, Krishna will forsake Swarga for Arjuna, just as Arjuna will 
gladly give his life for Krishna. 

The Chola and Pandya kings, though they brought numberless golden 
jars filled with fragrant sandalwood juice from the hills of Malaya, and 
heaps of sandal and aloe wood from the Dardura hills, and many gemstones 
of great brilliance and fine cloths chased with gold, did not gain entry into 
the palace. 

The Sinhala king brought those best of sea-born jewels, the lapis lazuli, 
and heaps of pearls, also, and hundreds of coverlets for elephants, and 
uncountable dark-skinned men, the tails of whose eyes were red as copper, 
wearing bejewelled clothes, and waiting at the gates with these gifts. 

Countless Brahmanas, and Kshatriyas who had been vanquished, and 
Vaisyas and serving Sudras, brought tribute to the son of Pandu out of love 
for Yudhishtira; even the Mlechchas, all of them came to Yudhishtira out of 
love and respect. All orders of men - good, indifferent and base, belonging 
to numberless races, coming from diverse lands -made Yudhishtira's city the 
focus of the world. 

Seeing the kings of the world bring such fabulous and invaluable gifts to 
my enemies, I wished for death from anguish. 

O King, I will now tell you about the servants of the Pandavas, for 
whom Yudhishtira Provides food, cooked and uncooked. There are a 
hundred thousand crores of mounted elephants and cavalry, and a hundred 
million chariots and foot soldiers past counting. In one place, raw 
provisions were being measured out; at another they were being cooked; at 
another the food was being distributed. 

Everywhere, one heard the sounds of festivity. Among men of all the 
varnas, I did not see a single one in the palace of Yudhishtira who had not 
food and drink and rich ornaments. 

Eighty-eight thousand Snataka Brahmanas, grihastas all, Yudhishtira 
supports, with thirty serving-girls given to each, and gratified by the king, 
these always pray with tranquil hearts for the destruction of his enemies. 
Ten thousand other ascetics, brahmacharins, their vital seed indrawn, eat 
daily from golden plates in Yudhishtira's palace. 

Rajan, without eating herself, every day Draupadi Yagnaseni first sees to 
it that everyone else, why even the deformed and dwarfs, has eaten. O 
Bhaarata, only two peoples do not pay tribute to the son of Kunti: the 


Panchalas because of their being related through marriage, and the Vrishnis 
in consequence of their friendship." 


CANTO 52 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


|B ee says, &Every king on Earth who is respected the world 
over, devoted to dharma, sworn to unflinching vratas, deeply learned 
and eloquent, who knows the Vedas and their Angas as well as all about 
yagnas, who is pious and modest, who is a dharmatma, who owns great 
fame, and who has been anointed with the majestic rites of coronation, 
waits upon and worships Yudhishtira. 

Rajan, I saw thousands of wild cows, and as many white copper vessels 
into which to milk them, brought there by those kings of the world as 
sacrificial gifts for Yudhishtira to gift to the Brahmanas. For Yudhishtira's 
ceremonial bath at the conclusion of the sacrifice, a hundred kings rushed to 
purify themselves and fetched the finest urns full of holy water. 

King Bahlika brought a chariot made of pure gold, while King 
Sudakshina with his hands yoked four white Kamboja horses to it, and the 
mighty Sunitha fitted the lower shaft and the king of Chedi, also with his 
own hands, fixed the flagstaff. The Dravida king stood with the Pandavas 
kavacha; the sovereign of Magadha held the garlands of flowers and the 
helmet; the great Kshatriya Vasudana stood by with a sixty year old 
elephant; the Matsya had the side-fittings of the chariot, all sheathed in 
gold; King Ekalavya of the Nishadas held the sandals for his feet; the king 
of Avanti fetched different kinds of water for the final ablution; King 
Chekitana held Yudhishtira's quiver; the king of Kasi, held his bow; Salya 
had his sword whose hilt and straps were adorned with gold. 

Then, Dhaumya and Vyasa, of great tapasya, with Narada and Asita's son 
Devala performed the ceremony of sprinkling sacred water over the king. 
Joyfully sat the greatest Rishis where the sprinkling ceremony was 
performed. Other illustrious Munis, knowers of the Vedas, Jamadagni's son 
among them, approached Yudhishtira, the munificent giver of sacrificial 
gifts, chanting mantras all the while, even as the Saptarishis approach Indra 
in Devaloka. 

Satyaki of untold prowess held the royal white parasol over the king's 
head. Dhananjaya and Bhima fanned him, while the twins held silken 
chamaras in their hands. 


In a sling, the Ocean himself brought Varuna's great conch, which the 
heavenly artificer Viswakarman created with a thousand nishkas of gold, 
and which Prajapati gave to Indra in a previous Kalpa. It was with that 
conch that Krishna bathed Yudhishtira when the yagna was concluded, and 
seeing that, I swooned. 

Men travel to the Eastern, the Western and also to the Southern Seas, but 
Father, only birds can ever go to the Northern one. But the Pandavas have 
extended their dominion even there, for I heard hundreds of conches, which 
had been brought from those waters, being sounded at that sacrifice, 
celebrant and auspicious. 

While those exceptional conches blew all together, my hair stood on end, 
and the weaker kings there fell down from the reverberation. Seeing me 
turn pale and the other kings faint, Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki, the Pandavas 
and Krishna - those eight, all mighty and handsome, laughed aloud. 

Then, O Bhaarata, Arjuna Bibhatsu joyfully gave the main Brahmanas 
five hundred bullocks each, their horns plated with gold. Having completed 
the Rajasuya yagna, Yudhishtira, the son of Kunti, gained such wealth and 
fortune, even like the great Harischandra: such prosperity that not 
Rantideva, Nabhaga, Yauvanaswa, not Manu, nor Vena's son King Prithu, 
not Bhagiratha, Yayati or Nahusha had seen its like. 

And seeing this fortune of Pritha's son, equal to what Harischandra had, I 
do not see the least point in continuing to live! King of men, a yoke tied by 
a blind man comes loose. So it is with us: the younger ones are growing 
while the elder are diminishing. Seeing all this, O Lord of the Kurus, I can 
find no peace, not even after deep thought. 

This is why, Rajan, I am plunged in grief and have become pale and 
wasted.'" 


CANTO 53 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


cc hritarashtra says, 'You are my eldest son and also born to my first 

Dew My child, do not envy the Pandavas. The jealous man is 
always unhappy and suffers pangs even like those of death. 

Bharatarishabha, Yudhishtira is not deceitful, he owns wealth equal to 
yours, his friends are your friends, and he feels no envy towards you. So 
why should you be envious of him? My son, you have as many friends and 
allies as Yudhishtira does. So, why, from folly, must you covet the wealth of 
your brother? 

Do not be like this; abandon your envy. Do not grieve, O Bull of the 
Bhaaratas, if you wish for the honour attached to the performance of a 
sacrifice, let our priests arrange to perform the Saptatantu mahayagna for 
you, and then the kings of the Earth will happily and with respect bring you 
great wealth, jewels and ornaments. 

My child, it is lowly to covet another's possessions. On the other hand, 
he who is content with what he has, and engages in his svadharma 
diligently, he is the happy man. Never attempting to gain what others own, 
persevering in one's own affairs and protecting what one has earned - these 
are the signs of true greatness. 

He who is unmoved in calamity, skilled in his own work, always at 
work, vigilant and humble: he always finds prosperity. The Pandavas are 
like your very arms; do not seek to cut off those arms. No, nor create 
internal strife for the sake of your brothers’ wealth. 

Do not envy the sons of Pandu; you are as rich as they are. There is great 
sin in falling out with friends. They who are your grandsires are also theirs. 
Give charity during sacrifices, satisfy every desire which is dear to your 
heart, disport freely in the company of women, and be at peace, 
Duryodhana." 


CANTO 54 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ uryodhana says, 'He who has no intelligence himself but I has 

merely heard many things can hardly understand the true meaning 
of the scriptures, even like a spoon which does not know the taste of the 
soup it touches. You know everything, yet you confound me. 

Like boats fastened, one to the other, you and I are bound to each other. 
Are you mindful of your own interests, or are you hostile towards me? 
Having you for their king, your sons and your allies are condemned to be 
destroyed, for you speak of having in the future what can be had even now! 

The man who acts under the counsel of others, frequently trips and falls. 
Then how can his followers expect to tread the right path? Rajan, you have 
maturity and wisdom; you have heard the ancient truths, and you have 
restrained your senses. It does not become you to confound us who are 
eager to seek our own interest. 

Brihaspati himself has said the ways of kings differ from those of 
commoners, and so kings must always vigilantly attend to their own 
interests. Finding success must be the only criterion which guides the way 
of the Kshatriya. So, what does it matter if the means are virtuous or sinful, 
what place for scruples in performing one's svadharma? 

He who wants to snatch the blazing prosperity of his enemy, O 
Bharatarishabha, must tame all the directions, even as the sarathy does his 
horses with his whip. Those who wield weapons always say that a weapon 
is not merely a sharp instrument, but a means to vanquish an enemy, 
whether covertly or openly. 

Who is an enemy and who a friend does not depend on one's size or 
strength. He who causes pain is an enemy to the one whom he hurts. 
Discontent is the root of prosperity; and so, O King, I want to be 
discontented. 

The truly politic man is he who strives after property. None should be 
attached to property or wealth, for both these, once having been acquired 
and hoarded, can be plundered. This is the way of kings. 

Sakra cut off Namuchi's head after pledging peace with him, and this 
was because he endorsed this eternal way with an enemy. Like a snake 


swallowing frogs and other creatures which live in holes, the Earth 
swallows kings who are peaceful and Brahmanas who do not stir from their 
homes. 

Rajan, merely by nature no one is anybody's enemy; only he who has 
common purposes as oneself is one's foe. He who is foolish enough to 
neglect an infected toenail has his vitals excoriated by a disease that he 
himself nurtured without treatment. If an enemy, however insignificant, is 
allowed to grow in might, he swallows one like termites at the roots of a 
tree, felling the tree itself. 

O Bhaarata, O Ajamida, never acquiesce in your enemy's prosperity: this 
is a policy that the wise must always bear upon their heads even like a load. 
He who always desires and seeks his own prosperity grows among his 
kinsmen even as the body does, naturally, from the moment of its birth. 

Prowess confers rapid growth. I covet the wealth of the Pandavas, but I 
have not yet made it my own. So, I doubt myself, my ability, and I am 
determined to lay my doubt at rest. I will either have what belongs to them 
or die in battle trying to have it. 

When this is my state of mind, what do I care anymore for my life, as the 
Pandavas' fortunes swell daily while ours know no increase?" 


CANTO 55 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


€¢ Cakuni says, 'Best of men of victory, I will take this great wealth of 

ee son Yudhishtira from him, the sight of which aggrieves you so 
much, and give it to you. Therefore, O Rajan, let Kunti's son Yudhishtira be 
summoned here. By throwing dice a man of skill can vanquish an unskilled 
opponent, while remaining uninjured himself. O Bhaarata, know that 
wagering is my bow, the dice are my arrows, the marks on them is my bow- 
string, and the dice-board my chariot.’ 

Duryodhana says, 'Rajan, this Sakuni, master of dice, is ready to take the 
wealth of the Pandavas from them at a game. It becomes you to give him 
leave to do so.' 

Dhritarashtra says, 'I follow the advice of my wise brother Vidura. I will 
consult him and then tell you what to do.' 

Duryodhana says, 'Vidura always has the welfare of the sons of Pandu at 
heart, while, O Kaurava, his feelings towards us are different. I have no 
doubt that he will turn your mind from what we propose. No man must let 
another man decide for him what he must do, for, O Kurusthama, two 
minds rarely agree upon any enterprise. 

The fool who lives his life avoiding any fear wastes himself like an 
insect during the rains. Neither sickness nor death waits for prosperity to 
visit one of its own accord. So, as long as we have life and health, we must 
strive to accomplish our purpose.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, 'My son, I never see wisdom in seeking hostility of 
any kind with those who are powerful. Hostility changes the heart and is a 
weapon by itself, if not made of steel. O Prince, you think of as a great 
blessing what will bring dreadful war in its wake, while in fact what you 
wish to do is fraught with danger. If you set yourself on this course, it will 
inexorably fetch out keen swords and sharp arrows:.' 

Duryodhana replies, "The most ancient men invented the game of dice 
precisely because there is no bloodshed in it or any striking with weapons. 
So, listen to what Sakuni says, and quickly order the sabha to be built. The 
gambling will open the door of heaven, the way to great happiness for us. 


Why, those who gamble for such stakes deserve the fortune which comes to 
them. 

The Pandavas, who are now your superiors, will become your equals; so 
play dice with them, O King.' 

Dhritarashtra says, 'Your words do not find favour with me. Do as you 
please, ruler of men, but you will repent choosing this path, for a way of 
such adharma can never fetch enduring prosperity, only disaster. 

Vidura, who has profound wisdom, who always lives in dharma, has 
already foreseen the calamity which will destroy Kshatriya kind itself, 
coming towards us brought by fate.' 

Saying this, the weak-minded Dhritarashtra yields to Fate as being 
supreme and inexorable. Indeed, his reason taken from him by Fate, 
submitting to his son's wish, the king commands his men in stentorian 
tones, "With every care, with no delay, immediately build a magnificent 
sabha. Call it the palace of crystal arches and a thousand columns; let it be 
adorned with gold and lapis lazuli; let it have a hundred gates, and be full 
two miles in length and width.' 

At his command, thousands of brilliant artificers swiftly raise that 
edifice, and having built it, furnish it with every manner of exquisite 
artefact. When they finish, they come in joy to the king to inform him that 
the grand sabha is complete and that it is beautiful and lavish and adorned 
with everything that he might wish it to have: priceless jewels upon the 
walls, invaluable carpets in every hue, gold-chased, upon its floors. 

Now Dhritarashtra, the learned, summons Vidura and says, 'Go to 
Khandavaprastha and fetch Yudhishtira here immediately. Let him come 
with his brothers to see my grand sabha of gemstones past counting, 
priceless beds and carpets. And let a friendly game of dice be played in our 
city." 


CANTO 56 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


yoo said, "Knowing that Fate is ineluctable and what his 
son's heart is set upon, Dhritarashtra does as I have said. However, the 
most intelligent Vidura does not approve of what his brother intends and 
says, 'My King, I do not like this command which you give me. Do not do 
this thing, for I fear it will end in the annihilation of our very race. Terrible 
dissension will result from this game of dice and lead inevitably to great 
tragedy.' 

Dhritarashtra says, 'If Fate is not hostile to us, such a falling out will not 
grieve me. All the Universe moves at its Creator's will, and through Fate. It 
is not free. Therefore, Vidura, I command you, go to Yudhishtira and fetch 
Kunti's invincible son here quickly." 


CANTO 57 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vo said, "Against his will, ordered by Dhritarashtra, Vidura 
sets out, taking the finest, swiftest and strongest horses, steeds that are 
quiet and patient as well, for the home of Pandu's wise sons. 

Vidura of lofiy intellect rides to Khandavaprastha and, arriving in 
Yudhishtira's city, enters it and goes straight towards the palace, being 
worshipped by many Brahmanas on the way. Coming to that palace, which 
is even like that sabha of Kubera himself, the virtuous Vidura approaches 
Yudhishtira Dharmaputra. 

The illustrious Yudhishtira Ajamida, devoted to dharma, who is without 
an enemy in the world, reverently salutes Vidura, and asks after 
Dhritarashtra and his sons. Then Yudhishtira says, 'O Kshatta, your mind 
seems cheerless. Do you come here in peace and happiness? I hope 
Dhritarashtra's sons are obedient to their old father. I hope the people also 
are obedient to Dhritarashtra's rule?' 

Vidura says, "The illustrious king and his sons are well and happy, and 
surrounded by his kinsmen, Dhritarashtra rules even like Indra. The king is 
happy with his sons, who are all obedient to him, and he has no grief. 

That great sovereign is bent upon his own aggrandisement. The king of 
the Kurus commands me to enquire after your peace and prosperity, and he 
asks you to come to Hastinapura with your brothers to inspect the new 
palace he has built there and then say if it is equal to your own. 

Coming to the city of elephants with your brothers, O son of Pritha, 
enjoy a friendly game of dice in the new sabha. The other Kurus have all 
arrived there already, and we shall be glad if you come at once. And there 
you will see the gamblers and cheats that the illustrious King Dhritarashtra 
has brought to his home. 

It is for this, O Rajan, that I have come here. May you heed my king's 
command.' 

Yudhishtira says, 'O Kshatta, if we sit down to a game of dice, we might 
well quarrel amongst ourselves. Well knowing this, what man will agree to 
gamble? What do you think we should do? We all are obedient to your 
counsel.' 


Vidura says. 'I know that gambling is a root of misery, and I strove to 
dissuade the king. However, he has sent me to you. Knowing Yudhishtira, 
keep this in mind and do what you think best.' 

Yudhishtira says, 'Besides Dhritarashtra's sons what other gamblers are 
there, prepared to play, who cheat? Who are they, Vidura, whom we will 
have to contend with, wagering our wealth in hundreds and thousands?’ 

Vidura says, 'Sakuni, king of Gandhara, who is a master of dice, whose 
sleight of hand is legend and whose stakes are extreme; Vivimsati, King 
Chitrasena, Satyavrata, Purumitra and Jaya - these, Yudhishtira, are there.' 

Yudhishtira says, 'Ah, it seems that some of the most crooked, skilled 
and wild gamblers are there! But by the will of its Maker, the universe is 
under Fate's control. It is not free. 

Most learned Vidura, I do not wish to gamble at Dhritarashtra's 
command, for he always wants to benefit only his son. You are our master, 
O Vidura; you say what I should do. I am loath to gamble, and unless the 
vile Sakuni does not call me to the sabha I will not do so. However, if he 
challenges me, I will never decline, for I am so sworn, eternally.’ 

Having said this, Dharmaraja Yudhishtira orders preparations to be made 
immediately for his long journey. The next day, with his relatives and 
attendants, and also taking with him the women of his household, with 
Draupadi among them, he sets out for the capital of the Kurus. 

Yudhishtira says, 'Fate deprives us of reason, like some brilliant body 
falling before our eyes, and man, as if bound with a cord, submits to 
providence,’ and that Parantapa, chastiser of his enemies, goes forth with 
Kshatta, without even reflecting upon Dhritarashtra's cunning summons. 
With his brothers, that slayer of hostile heroes, the son of Pandu and Pritha, 
riding in the chariot given him by the king of Balhika, he goes forth. 

He wears royal robes; he is, as it were, ablaze with regal splendour; 
Brahmanas walk before him, as Yudhishtira sets out from his city: 
summoned by Dhritarashtra and impelled by what Time has ordained. 

Arriving in Hastinapura, he goes to Dhritarashtra's palace. He 
approaches Bhishma, Drona, Kama, Kripa, Drona's son, and embraces and 
is embraced by them all. The Mahabaho, endowed with immense prowess, 
comes to Somadatta, then to Duryodhana and Salya, and to the son of 
Subala, and also to those other kings who have arrived there before him. 

The Pandava emperor approaches the bold Dussasana, then all his 
brothers, then Jayadratha, and then all the Kurus, one after another. Then, 


surrounded by his brothers, the mighty-armed one enters the apartment of 
the wise Dhritarashtra. There Yudhishtira see the revered Gandhari, always 
obedient to her lord, and surrounded by her daughters-in-law, like Rohini by 
the nakshatras. Saluting Gandhari, being blessed by her in return, Pandu's 
great son sees his old uncle, that illustrious king whose wisdom is his eye. 
Dhritarashtra sniffs the top of his head, as also the heads of his brothers, the 
other Kuru princes, Bhimasena's first among them. 

Rajan, all the Kuru Purushavyaghras are delighted to see the handsome 
Pandavas. Then, at the king's command, the sons of Pandu retire to the 
lavish chambers given to them, all furnished with jewels and gems. 

When they are ensconced, the women of Dhritarashtra's household, 
Dussala leading them, visit the Pandavas. When the daughters-in-law of 
Dhritarashtra see the blazing, awesome beauty of Draupadi Yagnaseni, and 
her incomparable attire and ornaments, jealousy attacks them and they lose 
their cheer. 

The Pandavas speak gently to those women. They go through their daily 
regimen of physical exercise and then perform their daily religious rites, 
their nitya karma. Finishing their devotions, they anoint their bodies with 
the most fragrant sandalwood paste, and the Brahmanas chant blessings 
over them for their good fortune. 

They now partake of the finest delicacies prepared in the palace, then 
retire again to their apartments, where they are entertained with music by 
beautiful women and by other diversions. Happily those subduers of hostile 
cities pass that night, until they fall asleep. 

At dawn, bards wake them with sweet music again; they rise from their 
beds and perform their morning rituals, before coming into the sabha, where 
they are greeted by those who have already gathered there for the 
gambling." 


CANTO 58 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vor said, "Yudhishtira leads his brothers into the sabha, 
where they approach the other kings present. Worshipping their elders 
who deserve to be worshipped, saluting the others as each deserves, by age, 
they seat themselves on fine thrones covered with costly cloths. 

When they have sat, and also the other kings, Subala's son Sakuni says 
to Yudhishtira, "Rajan, the sabha is full; we have all been waiting for you. 
Let the rules of play be decided upon and the dice be cast, Yudhishtira.' 

Yudhishtira replies, 'Deceitful gambling is a sin; there is no Kshatriya 
prowess in it. There is surely no dharma in it. Why, then, do you favour 
gambling so? The wise never approve of the pride that gamblers take in 
cheating. Sakuni, do not vanquish us like a wretch, with deceit.’ 

Sakuni says, "The noble player, who knows the secrets of winning and 
losing, who is skilled enough to confound his adversaries' deceit, who 
indeed knows all the subtleties of gambling, he is the true player, and he 
endures everything which results from gaming. Son of Pritha, it is the 
stakes at dice, which might be lost or won, that could injure us, and this is 
why gambling is regarded as a sin. But let us play, O King. And do not fear, 
for let the stakes be fixed. Let us play now!' 

Yudhishtira says, 'Devala, best of Munis, the son of Asita, who always 
teaches us all what deeds lead us to heaven, to hell, or to other realms, has 
declared that it is a sin to play dice with a gambler, for there is deceit in it. 
To have victory in open battle, with neither cunning nor stratagem: that is a 
noble sport. But gambling is not. 

Honourable men never use the language of the Mlechchas, nor do they 
use deceit. War waged without crookedness and treachery is the way of the 
honest man. Sakuni, playing with cunning, do not take from us the wealth 
with which we seek to support Brahmanas. Even enemies must not be 
vanquished by wild stakes in a game of cheating. I have no wish either to 
earn wealth or to gain pleasure through vile means. 

Besides, the way of the gambler, even if he does not cheat, is never 
lauded.' 


Sakuni says, 'Yudhishtira, impelled by the desire for victory, which is not 
an honest motive, one Kshatriya confronts another. So, too, from a desire to 
prove superiority in learning, does one scholar face another in a debate. But 
these are hardly regarded as being adharma. 

A skilled dice player confronts one who is less skilled than himself from 
the desire to vanquish him even as a superior warrior does one of lesser 
prowess, or a superior man of knowledge does an inferior. At dice too the 
strong confront the weak. So how is the dice player's motive any more or 
less dishonest? 

The motive is the same: victory, and in any contention this is so. 
However, if you still regard dice as being more dishonest than other 
contests, or if you are afraid, then do not play.' 

Yudhishtira says, 'I never retreat from a challenge, this is my dharma. 
Besides, O King, Fate is all powerful and we are all controlled by destiny. 
Whom shall I play against in this sabha? Who is here who can match my 
stakes? Let play begin.' 

Duryodhana says, ‘Rajan, I will stake every manner of jewel and 
gemstone, and gold. And this Sakuni, my uncle, will play for me.' 

Yudhishtira says, 'I believe that it is unlawful for one man to play for 
another, and you also, learned cousin, will grant this. However, if you still 
wish it, let play begin." 


CANTO 59 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


Veo said, "When play begins all the kings present, 
Dhritarashtra at their head, take their places in that sabha. O Bhaarata, 
Bhishma and Drona and Kripa and the Vidura Mahatman sit at the back 
with forlorn hearts. 

The other kings, their necks like those of lions, endowed with mighty 
power, sit singly or in pairs upon lofty seats of wonderful make and hue. 
Rajan, that assembly is as splendid as Heaven with a conclave of the Devas 
of great fortune. And they all know the Vedas; they are valiant and radiant 
of countenance. And, O great King, the friendly match at dice then begins. 

Yudhishtira says, 'Here is my stake: this string of invaluable pearls set in 
gold, and exquisite, which was once churned up from the Ocean of old. 
What is your stake with which you will match mine and play against me?’ 

Duryodhana says, 'I have many jewels and great wealth, but I am not 
vain because of them.' He tells Sakuni, 'Win these pearls, Uncle.' 

Then Sakuni, master of the game, takes up the dice and, casting them 
perfectly, says to Yudhishtira, 'I have won!" 


CANTO 60 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vee says, 'You have won this wager unfairly, but do not preen 
Sakuni. Let us raise the stakes to thousands upon thousands. I have 
many beautiful jars in my treasury, each one full of a thousand nishkas; I 
have gold past exhausting, and silver and other precious metals. O King, I 
will wager all this wealth with you!’ 

Sakuni says to the eldest Pandava, Yudhishtira, whose glory can sustain 
no diminution, 'Look, I have won!' 

Yudhishtira says, 'My sacred and triumphant royal chariot, which 
delights the heart and has borne us here, which is equal to a thousand 
chariots, which is perfectly wrought, covered with tiger-skin, which has 
immaculate wheels and flagstaffs, which is beautiful, decked with strings of 
little bells, whose sound clatters like the roar of thunderheads or the ocean, 
which is drawn by eight noble steeds renowned through the land, white as 
moonbeams, whose hooves no earthly creature can escape - this, O Rajan, is 
my next wager with you!’ 

Sakuni throws the dice, deceitfully, with sure sleight of hand and says to 
Yudhishtira, 'Lo, I have won!' 

Yudhishtira says, 'I have a hundred thousand serving-girls, all young, 
and adorned with golden bracelets on their wrists and arms, with necklaces 
of nishkas around their necks, and other ornaments, wearing priceless 
garlands, rich robes, anointed with sandalwood paste, wearing jewels and 
golden ornaments, skilled in the sixty-four elegant arts, especially versed in 
singing and dancing, who wait upon and, at my command, serve the Devas, 
the Snataka Brahmanas, and kings: this wealth my next stake!’ 

Sakuni hears this, and ready with his crafty dice, rolls and says to 
Yudhishtira, 'I have won!' 

Yudhishtira says, 'I have thousands of serving-men, skilled at waiting 
upon guests, always wearing silken robes, blessed with wisdom and 
intelligence, young but their senses restrained, and decked in golden 
earrings, who serve all my guests night and day with plates and dishes in 
hand. This wealth I wager!’ 

Sakuni, ready with his loaded dice, says to Yudhishtira, 'I have won!' 


Yudhishtira says, 'Son of Subala, I own one thousand elephants with 
golden girdles and other ornaments, with the mark of the lotus upon their 
temples, necks and other parts, adorned with golden garlands, with white 
tusks long and thick as plough-shafts, worthy of bearing kings on their 
backs, which can bear every dread sound of battle, their bodies huge, which 
can batter down the walls of enemy cities, their colour of freshly formed 
clouds, and each possessing eight cow-elephants. 

This wealth I wager, O King:' 

Subala's son Sakuni, rolling the dice, laughs, 'Yudhishtira, I have won 
your elephants!' 

Yudhishtira says, 'I have as many chariots as elephants, all fitted with 
golden poles and fiagstaffs, trained horses and warriors who fight 
magnificently, each receiving a thousand coins as his monthly wage, 
whether he fights or not. 

This wealth I wager, Rajan!' 

When these words have been said, the vile Sakuni, sworn to enmity, rolls 
the ivory dice, and says to Yudhisthira, 'Ah, I win!' 

Yudhishtira says, 'When Arjuna vanquished him in battle, Chitraratha 
joyfully gifted my brother who wields the Gandiva horses of the Tittiri, 
Kalmasha and Gandharva breeds, all decked in unearthly ornaments. 

This wealth, Rajan, I wager.’ 

Sakuni, master cheat, says to Yudhishtira, 'I have won!' 

Yudhishtira says, 'I have ten thousand chariots and carriages yoked to the 
finest draught animals. I have sixty thousand broad-chested warriors, all 
valiant and heroic, handpicked from the rest of my forces, all fed on milk 
and fine rice. 

This wealth, O King, is my stake. 

Sakuni, ready, always cheating, says to Yudhishtira, 'I have won!' 

Yudhishtira says, 'I have four hundred nidhis, jewels of incomparable 
value, in caskets of copper and iron. Each one is worth five draunikas of the 
most pure and expensive leaf gold of the jatarupa variety. 

This wealth, O King, shall be my wager.’ 

Sakuni, ready with his cunning dice, always cheating at the roll, says to 
Yudhishtira, 'I have won!'" 


CANTO 61 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vea said, "While the ruinous gambling is underway, Vidura, 
dispeller of doubts, says to Dhritarashtra, 'Great king of the race of 
Bhaarata, listen to what I have to say, though my words might not be 
agreeable to you even like bitter medicine to a man who is ill and dying. 

When this evil-minded Duryodhana howled abysmally like a jackal soon 
after he was born, we knew that he would fetch destruction upon the race of 
Bhaarata. Rajan, know that he will be the cause of the death of all of you. A 
jackal lives in your house and he has the form of Duryodhana, but in your 
dotage you do not realise it, you do not know what the consequences of 
your folly will be. 

Listen to what Sukra Kavi said. They who gather honey on mountains, 
take what they desire but do not notice that they are about to fall. Climbing 
perilous heights, distracted by their avid pursuit, they fall and die. 

Like the honey gatherer, this Duryodhana, also, is maddened by this 
game of dice and is not mindful of the dire consequences that will visit him. 
Making enemies of these great Kshatriyas, he does not notice the certain 
fall to death which lies before him. 

You well know, O King of much wisdom, that the Bhojas abandoned an 
unworthy son for the sake of their people. The Andhakas, the Yadavas, and 
the Bhojas, uniting, abandoned Kamsa. Later, when, at their very command, 
Krishna Parantapa killed Kamsa, all the men of those tribes became joyful 
for a full hundred years. 

Even so, at your command, let Arjuna kill this Suyodhana. And let the 
Kurus rejoice at the death of this sinful wretch and pass their days in joy. In 
exchange for a crow, O great King, buy these peacocks: the Pandavas; in 
exchange for a jackal, buy these tigers. 

For the sake of a family, one of its members can be sacrificed; for the 
sake of a village, a family may be sacrificed; for the sake of a province, a 
village may be sacrificed, and for the sake of one's own soul, the whole 
earth can be sacrificed. 

This is what the omniscient Sukra himself, who knows the thoughts of 
ever creature, who is a terror to all his enemies, said to the great Asuras to 


persuade them to abandon Jambha at the moment of his birth. 

I have heard that once a king kept a flock of wild birds in his house 
because they vomited gold from their beaks, and later, killed them. O 
Parantapa, blinded by temptation and the lust for pleasure, for the sake of 
gold that king destroyed both his present and future gains. 

Rajan, do not, like the king in the tale, persecute the Pandavas from your 
lust for wealth. For, this blind folly will make your repent sorely later, just 
like the one who killed the birds. 

Like a flower-seller who, over long years, plucks countless flowers from 
the trees in his garden which he nurtures carefully, you also pluck flowers 
gently from the Pandavas, daily, O Bhaarata. 

Do not burn them at their roots like a fiery wind which makes black char 
of all things. O King, do not go to the realm of Yama with your sons and all 
your soldiers, for who is there in this world who can defeat the sons of 
Pritha in battle? Why speak of the rest, can the king of the Devas himself 
contain them?" 


CANTO 62 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ BV Ae says, 'Gambling is the root of dissension; it fetches deep rifts. 
Its consequences are dreadful. Yet, Duryodhana T creates terrible 
enmity for himself with what he is doing. 

The descendants of Pratipa and Santanu, with all their valiant troops and 
their allies, the Bahlikas, will be destroyed for Duryodhana's sins. 
Duryodhana is drunk with avarice and he will force fortune and prosperity 
out of this kingdom, like an angry bull breaking its own horns. 

The brave and learned man who ignores his own foresight and follows 
the bent of another's dark heart is plunged into dreadful calamity, rather as a 
man who goes out to sea in a boat guided by a child. 

Duryodhana is gambling with the son of Pandu, and you are in raptures 
that he is winning. And it is such success, which begets war and ends in the 
death of men. This gambling which you have so cunningly abetted can only 
lead to dire disaster. Your heart is dark and sick, Rajan, and it is death that 
you court. 

Yudhishtira is so closely related to you, and even if you do not foresee 
the extent of the damage which would be done, you are still an accomplice 
in it: it has your approval. 

O listen, you sons of Santanu, you scions of Pratipa who now sit in the 
sabha of the Kauravas, to these words of wisdom. Do not walk into these 
dreadful flames which blaze forth, following this vile wretch Suyodhana. 

When Ajatasatru, the son of Pandu, now intoxicated with dice, gives in 
to his anger, when Vrikodara and Arjuna and the twins do, who will be your 
refuge in that terrible hour? 

Great King, you are already a mine of wealth yourself, and you can earn 
as much more as you want to by this gambling. What will you gain by 
taking the immense wealth of the Pandavas from them, when you can win 
over the sons of Pandu themselves, who will be far more valuable to you 
than all that they own? 

We all know the mastery of Subala's son at dice, for this hill-king knows 
numberless ways to cheat at gambling. Let Sakuni go back to where he 
came from. O Bhaarata, do not seek enmity with Pandu's sons. 


CANTO 63 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ uryodhana says, 'Ksharta, you are always praising our enemies, and 
oe the sons of Dhritarashtra. We know, O Vidura, of 
whom you are truly fond, for you never think of us as your own children. 

A man wishes for the success of those that are dear to him and the defeat 
of those whom he does not love. His praise and blame are accordingly 
given. Your tongue and your mind betray your heart, yet the hostility which 
you show with your words is even greater than what is in your heart. 

We have nurtured and cherished you like a serpent in our lap. Like a cat, 
you wish evil upon those that keep you. The wise have said that there is no 
graver sin than harming one's master. How is it, O Kshatta, that you do not 
fear this sin? 

By vanquishing these enemies of ours, we have gained great advantage. 
Speak not harshly of us, and always be so willing to make peace with the 
enemy. A man becomes an enemy by speaking inexcusably of another, and 
this is how you have come to detest us, always. 

Also, while praising an enemy one must never divulge the secrets of 
those that are one's own. But you willingly break this law. Why do you 
come in our way, O parasite? You say whatever you like. Do not insult us; 
we know your heart. 

Go sit at the feet of the old and the sage and learn more wisdom. 
Maintain the great repute which you have won for yourself. Do not meddle 
in the affairs of other men. Do not imagine that you are our lord. Do not 
dare speak cruelly to us always, O Vidura, for we do not ask you what is 
good for us. 

Stop now. Do not annoy those who have already borne too much from 
you. There is only one Lord, no second. He controls even the child that is in 
its mother's womb. I am ruled by Him. Like water, which always flows 
downwards, I am doing precisely what he wants me to. 

He who breaks his head against a stone wall and he who feeds a serpent 
are moved by their own minds. He becomes an enemy who seeks to control 
others through force. When advice is offered in the spirit of friendship, the 
wise listen and tolerate it. 


Who sets camphor alight does not even see its ashes, not if he runs to put 
it out. One should never shelter a man who is a friend to one's enemies, or a 
man who is always envious of his protector and whose mind is thus full of 
evil. 

So, Vidura, go wherever you please. However well treated in her duties, 
an unchaste wife will abandon her husband.' 

Vidura says to Dhritarashtra, 'O King, tell us, as an impartial witness, 
what you think of those who abandon their servants so for giving them 
counsel. Truly, the hearts of kings are fickle. They first give you protection 
then finally strike you down with a bludgeon. 

Duryodhana, you think that you have a mature intellect, and, evil prince, 
you think that I am a child. But know that he is the child who first accepts a 
man for his friend and then finds fault with him. An evil-hearted man can 
never be brought to the path of dharma, just like an unchaste wife in the 
house of a wellborn husband. 

Surely, being advised is as disagreeable to this Bharatarishbaha as a 
husband of sixty years is to a young woman. After this, O King, if you want 
to hear what is pleasing to you at all times, regardless of what you do, good 
or bad, go and ask women, idiots, cripples or similar folk to speak to you. 

A sinful man speaking agreeable words is easy to find in this world, but 
the man who speaks the truth, whether it be pleasing or distasteful, and the 
man who listens to him are both rare indeed. A king's true ally is his man 
who will speak dharma to his master, regardless of whether what he says 
pleases him or no. 

Great King, drink the drink called humility, which honest men imbibe 
and evil ones shun, which is like bitter medicine, pungent, burning, 
distasteful, revolting, on which you cannot get drunk. Drinking it, regain 
your sobriety. 

I always wish Dhritarashtra and his sons prosperity and fame. Whatever 
now happens to you, I bow to you. Let the Brahmanas here wish me well. O 
Son of Kuru, this is the lesson that I teach with care: the wise should never 
anger snakes like cobras, which have venom in their very glances!'" 


CANTO 64 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


€¢ Cakuni says, 'Yudhishtira, you have lost a lot of the wealth of the 
~ If you still own anything which you have not lost, 
Kaunteya, tell us what it is.’ 

Yudhishtira says, 'Son of Subala, I own untold wealth. Why do you 
speak to me of wealth, Sakuni? Wager lakhs and crores and crores of crores 
of crores and arabs, and arabs of arabs, and I will match your stake. I have 
as much. 

With that wealth, King, I will play with you.' 

Sakuni, ready with his loaded dice, always cheating, says to Yudhishtira, 
'T have won!' 

Yudhishtira says, 'Son of Subala, I have uncountable cattle and horses, 
and milch cows with calves, and goats and sheep in the lands that extend 
from the Parnasa to the eastern bank of the Sindu. 

With this wealth, O King, I will play. 

Sakuni, ready with his loaded dice, always cheating, says to Yudhishtira, 
'T have won! 

Yudhishtira says, T have my city, my country, land, the wealth of all who 
live there other than the Brahmanas, and all those people themselves except 
the Brahmanas, who will remain with me. 

With this wealth, O King, I will play with you.' 

Sakuni, ready with his loaded dice, always cheating, says to Yudhishtira, 
T have won!' 

Yudhishtira says, 'King, these princes here, resplendent in their royal 
ornaments, earrings and nishkas are now my wealth. This wealth, Rajan, I 
will wager with you.' 

Sakuni, ready with his loaded dice, always cheating, says to Yudhishtira, 
'T have won them already. Play!' 

Yudhishtira says, 'This Nakula, mighty-armed, his neck a lion's, his eyes 
red, youthful, I wager. Know him to be my wealth. 

Sakuni says, O Yudhishtira, Nakula is dear to you. He is already our 
subject. Who will you wager next?’ 


Saying this, Sakuni casts his dice, and says to Yudhishtira, 'We have won 
him!' 

Yudhishtira says, "This Sahadeva administers justice. He has gained 
great renown through the world for his learning. He does not deserve to be 
my wager, yet with such a dear one I will play you, though I fervently wish 
that I did not!' 

Sakuni, ready with his loaded dice, always cheating, says to Yudhishtira, 
'T have won him! O King, I have won both Madri's sons, so dear to you. It 
seems that Bhimasena and Dhananjaya are too dear for you to wager.’ 

Yudhishtira cries, 'Wretch! You want to make dissension among those 
that are one at heart? You ignore dharma, serpent.' 

Sakuni says, 'He who is drunk falls into a pit and stays there unable to 
move. Yudhishtira, you are older than the Kauravas and have the highest 
accomplishments. O Bharatarishabha, I bow to you. You know, Yudhishtira, 
that while in the grip of the game, gamblers rave as they never do 
otherwise, awake or even in their dreams. 

Yudhishtira says, 'He who bears us like a boat across the sea of battle, he 
who always triumphs over enemies, this prince of mighty vigour, this 
greatest Kshatriya in the world: this Phalguna, who does not deserve this, I 
wager against you.' 

Sakuni, ready with his loaded dice, always cheating, says to Yudhishtira, 
'I have won! This greatest bowman, this son of Pandu who is perfectly 
ambidextrous in his archery I have won. Now, Pandava, stake your 
remaining wealth, your beloved brother Bhima.' 

Yudhishtira says, 'King, however undeserving he is of becoming my 
wager, I will play against you with Bhimasena as my stake: this prince who 
is our leader, who is the mightiest warrior, who is even like the Vajradhari, 
the single enemy of the Danavas, himself, this high-souled one of leonine 
neck, his brows arched, his eyes looking askance, who brooks no insult 
ever, who has no equal on Earth for strength, who is the greatest among all 
mace-wielders, this grinder of his enemies:.' 

Sakuni, ready with his loaded dice, always cheating, says to Yudhishtira, 
'T have won. Kaunteya, you have lost great wealth, horses, elephants and 
your brothers as well. Tell us if you have anything which you have not lost 
yet.' 

Yudhishtira says, 'I alone, eldest of all my brothers and precious to them, 
remain unwon. If you win me, I will do whatever I must.' 


Sakuni, ready with his dice, cheating, casts them and says to Yudhishtira, 
'[T have won. You have let yourself be won and that is a sin, for you still 
have wealth left to lose, O Rajan.’ 

Sakuni, master of dice, boasts to the kings gathered there of how he has 
won all the Pandavas. Subala's son then says to Yudhishtira, 'O King, there 
remains one possession dear to you, which is still unwon. Stake Krishnaa, 
princess of Panchala, and through her win yourself back!’ 

Yudhishtira says, 'Draupadi is neither too short nor tall, not lean or fat, 
and her tresses are blue and wavy. Her eyes are like the leaves of the 
autumn lotus, and she is fragrant, also, as the autumn lotus, and her beauty 
equal to Lakshmi who delights in the lotuses of autumn. Her form is as 
perfect as that of Sri herself, as is her grace. 

She is a woman that any man would want for his wife, for the softness of 
her heart, the wealth of her beauty and her virtues. She owns every 
accomplishment; she is compassionate and sweetly-spoken; truly, she is a 
woman whom a man might want for his wife, for with her he could indeed 
have great dharma, artha and kama. 

She goes to bed last of all and wakes first. She cares for everyone, down 
to the shepherds and cowherds. Ah, when her face is filmed with sweat she 
looks like the lotus or the jasmine. Her waist is as slender as a wasp's, her 
locks long and flowing, her lips red, and her body without so much as 
down: this is the Princess Panchali. 

I wager this slender-waisted Draupadi to play against you, son of 
Subala!' 

When Yudhishtira Dharmaputra says this, cries of 'Fie!' are heard from 
all the elders in that sabha. The entire conclave grows distraught, and the 
kings there yield to grief. Bhishma, Drona and Kripa are bathed in 
perspiration. Vidura holds his head between his hands and sits like one who 
has lost his reason. He sits face turned down, plunged in despair, sighing 
like a snake. 

But Dhritarashtra is glad and asks repeatedly, 'Has the stake been won? 
Has the stake been won?' and he cannot hide his excitement. 

Kama, Dussasana and some others laugh aloud, while tears flow down 
the faces of everyone else in the sabha. 

And Subala's son, flushed with success, cries again and again, T have 
won! I have won your precious stake. 

He picks up the dice and flings them into the air in evil excitement." 


CANTO 65 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ uryodhana says, 'Kshatta, go and fetch the Pandavas' most beloved 
| Bes Draupadi here. Let her sweep the chambers, force her to, and 
let the unfortunate woman live among our serving women. ' 

Vidura cries, 'Don't you know, O wretch, that with these words you are 
tying a noose around your neck? Don't you realise that you are hanging over 
the edge of a cliff? Being a deer yourself, dare you provoke so many tigers 
to anger? Snakes of deadly venom, stirred to fury, are upon your head! Vile 
Duryodhana, do not provoke them further lest you go straight to Yama's 
land. 

I say that no slavery attaches to Krishnaa because Yudhishtira staked her 
after he lost himself and ceased to be his own master. Dhritarashtra's son 
wins treasure at dice even like the bamboo which fruits only when it is 
about to die. Intoxicated, he does not see in his final moments the enmity 
and terrors that this gambling brings. 

No man should speak so viciously and pierce the hearts of others. No 
man should subdue his enemies through dice and other contemptible 
methods. No one should speak such harsh words, of which the Vedas 
disapprove and which wound others and lead one straight to hell. One 
speaks cruelly, and stung by his words, another burns day and night, for 
such words pierce the very heart. So, the wise man never lets fly these barbs 
from his lips, aiming them at anyone. 

Once a goat swallowed a hook, and when the hook pierced it the hunter 
set the animal's head upon the ground and tore the hook out rending its 
throat fearfully. Duryodhana the Pandavas' wealth is a similar hook: do not 
swallow it and imperil yourself. Do not make enemies of them. 

Pritha's sons never speak such savage words. Only base men, who are 
like dogs, use such speech, and towards all classes of men: vanaprasthas, 
grihasthas, sannyasins and muktas. Alas that Dhritarashtra's son does not 
know that dishonesty is one of the dreadful doors which leads into hell. 
Alas that so many of the Kurus, Dussasana among them, followed him 
eagerly down the path of adharma in this game of dice. 


Gourds may sink and stones float, boats might also sink in water, always, 
but this foolish king, Dhritarashtra's son, will not listen to what I say, which 
might save him. I have no doubt that he will cause the destruction of the 
Kurus. 

When friends and well-wishers speak words of wisdom and these go 
unheeded, and when, rather, only temptation waxes, devastation is bound to 
overtake all the heirs of Kuru." 


CANTO 66 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


yoo said, "Drunk with pride, Dhritarashtra's son hisses, 'Fie 
on you, Kshatta!' and his gaze moving to the Pratikamin in attendance, 
in the midst of all those revered elders, commands that man, 'Go 
Pratikamin, and fetch Draupadi here. You have no fear of the sons of the 
Pandavas. Vidura raves because he is afraid. Besides, he never wishes for 
our prosperity.’ 

The Pratikamin, a man of the Suta caste, hears the words of the king and 
hurries to the apartments of the Pandavas, and entering like a dog a lion's 
den, approaches the queen of the sons of Pandu. 

He says, 'Yudhishtira became intoxicated with dice play, C) Draupadi, 
and Duryodhana has won you. So come now to Dhritarashtra's palace. I will 
take you there and put you to some menial task-.' 

Draupadi says, 'Pratikamin, what are you saying? Which Kshatriya will 
wager his wife at dice? Surely Yudhishtira was drunk with the play; could 
he find nothing else to stake?’ 

The Pratikamin says, 'When he had nothing else to stake, Pandu's son 
Ajatasatru staked you. He first wagered his brothers, then himself, and at 
last you, O Queen.' 

Draupadi says, 'O Sutaputra, go and ask that gambler in the sabha if he 
lost himself first or me. After that come back here and I will go with you.’ 

The messenger returns to the court and repeats what Draupadi said for 
all to hear. He says to Yudhishtira, sitting among the kings, 'Draupadi asks 
you, "Whose lord were you when you lost me at dice? Did you lose 
yourself first or me?'" 

But Yudhishtira sits like a man demented, one who has lost his reason, 
and makes no reply to the Suta, good or ill. 

Then Duryodhana says, 'Let the Panchala princess come here and ask her 
question. Let all in this sabha listen to the exchange between Yudhishtira 
and her.' 

Obedient to Duryodhana's command, though himself distrait, the 
messenger returns to the palace and says to Draupadi, 'Princess, they 
summon you to the sabha. It seems the end of the Kurus has drawn near. 


When Duryodhana orders you to appear in the court how will that witless 
king save his fortunes?’ 

Draupadi says, 'The Great Ordainer of the world has decreed that joy and 
misery attend on both the wise and the witless, equally. Yet, it is told that 
dharma is the one highest thing in this life, which if cherished will surely 
bless us. Let the Kauravas not abandon dharma now. 

Go back to the sabha and tell them what I have said about dharma. I am 
prepared to do what the wise elders of the court, men that know dharma 
well, tell me to.' 

The Suta returns to the court and repeats Yagnaseni's words. But no one 
says anything; they all sit with their faces turned down for they know the 
lust and resolve of Dhritarashtra's son. 

However, O Bharatarishabha, Yudhishtira sends his own trusted 
messenger to Draupadi, ordering her to appear, even if crying bitterly, 
before her father-in-law Dhritarashtra, though she wore but a single piece of 
cloth upon her body and her navel was exposed, for she has her period. That 
intelligent messenger, O Rajan, goes quickly to Draupadis chambers and 
gives her Yudhishtira's message. 

Meanwhile, the stricken Pandavas cannot decide what they should do. 
Duryodhana, his heart bursting with joy, lets his eyes range over them, and 
says to the Suta, 'Pratikamin, fetch her here. Let the Kauravas answer her 
question to her face.' 

Bound by his master's command, yet terrified of Draupadi's wrath, the 
Suta musters the courage to address the sabha again, 'What shall I say to 
Krishnaa?' 

Duryodhana says, 'Dussasana, this son of my Suta, of little intelligence, 
fears Bhima. So, my brother, go yourself and bring Panchali here, by force 
if need be. Our enemies now depend on our will, they belong to us. What 
can they do to you?’ 

Dussasana rises, his eyes blood-red, stalks into the apartments of the 
Pandavas and says to Draupadi, 'Come, come, O Krishnaa, princess of 
Panchala, we have won you. O you whose eyes are as big as lotus leaves, 
you must now accept the Kurus for your new lords. You have been won 
fairly, come now to the sabha.' 

Hearing him, Draupadi, trembling, jumps up in anguish, covers her face 
gone pale with her hands in distress and runs towards Dhritarashtra's 
antahpura, where the women of his household are. Roaring, Dussasana runs 


after her and seizes that queen by her tresses, so long and blue and wavy. 
Alas! Those locks that had been sprinkled with holy water during the great 
Rajasuya, and sanctified with mantras, Dhritarashtra's feral son now seizes, 
forgetting the prowess of the Pandavas; by her hair he drags Krishnaa into 
the sabha, while she shakes like a banana plant during a storm. 

Hauled along by him, she cries, 'Wretch, it degrades you to take me like 
this before the sabha! I have my period and I am wearing just a single 
cloth.' 

But Dussasana drags Panchali mercilessly, while she prays in despair to 
Krishna and Jishnu, who are Nara Narayana upon the Earth. 

He roars at her, 'Whether you have your period or not, whether you wear 
a single cloth or are naked, you have been won at dice and you will live 
among our serving women!' 

Her hair in disarray, half her single cloth come loose, modest Panchali, 
dragged into the sabha, consumed by rage, protests weakly, 'In this sabha 
are great men, all equal to Indra, men who know all the Shastras, who 
devotedly perform yagnas, some of whom are truly my superiors and others 
who deserve to be revered as such. I cannot stay before them in this state. 

Vile, cruel wretch, do not drag me like this! Do not uncover me so. My 
husbands will not forgive you, not if Indra and all the Devas be your allies. 
Dharma Deva's son is bound now by the dictates of dharma. But dharma is 
subtle, and only men who have great clearness of vision can know it. 

I will not blame my lord with a word to say that he has broken dharma 
by an atom. O you have dragged me before these Kuru heroes when I am in 
my season, and this is surely a great sin. Yet no one here rebukes you. 
Surely, they are of the same mind as you. 

O, truly, truly, the dharma of the Bhaaratas is lost! Truly, the dharma of 
the Kshatriya is gone! Else these Kurus in this sabha would never silently 
look on at this vile thing which you have done. 

Oh, Drona and Bhishma have lost their tejas, and so also has the 
renowned Kshatta, and this king. Otherwise why do these greatest of Kuru 
elders look silently on this great crime?’ 

So does Krishnaa of the slender waist wail out her anguish in that sabha. 
She looks at her already angry lords with her teary eyes, and inflames them 
further with that glance of hers. They are not so distressed at having been 
robbed of their kingdom, their wealth, of their costliest jewels, as by that 
look from Krishnaa moved by modesty and rage. 


Dussasana sees her gaze at her husbands and drags her more roughly 
still, crying ‘Slave! Slave!' while he laughs aloud. Kama hears him and 
laughs loudly as well. And Subala's son Sakuni, Gandhara king, applauds 
Dussasana. But all else in that sabha, other than these three and Duryodhana 
are filled with sorrow at seeing Krishnaa dragged about coarsely in sight of 
everyone. 

Bhishma says, 'Blessed one, dharma is subtle and I find myself unable to 
answer your question with any certitude, for though it is true that he who 
has lost himself owns nothing anymore, yet a wife is always at the disposal 
of her husband. Yudhishtira will renounce the whole world with all the 
wealth in it but he will never abandon dharma. The son of Pandu said, "I am 
lost" and so I cannot decide this thing. Sakuni has no equal among men at 
dice play, still Kunti's son played willingly against him. Yudhishtira himself 
does not think that Sakuni cheated. No, I cannot decide this matter. 

Draupadi says, 'My king was summoned to this sabha, and though he has 
no skill at dice, he was made to play against a masterly, base, deceitful and 
desperate gambler. How can you say that he played willingly? Acting in 
cohort, these wretched, sinful ones deprived Pandu's eldest son of his reason 
and then vanquished him. At first, he did not suspect their motives but now 
he has understood. 

Here in this sabha are Kuru elders who are lords of both their sons and 
their daughters-in-law. Let them all think about what I say and then answer 
my question of dharma.’ 

Krishnaa sobs piteously, looking from time to time at her helpless 
husbands, while Dussasana says many cruel, vile things to her. Seeing her 
dragged thus into that sabha during her period, with her single cloth come 
loose, seeing her in that state which she little deserves, Bhima is stirred 
beyond endurance and, looking straight at Yudhishtira, gives way to fury."" 


CANTO 67 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ hima says, 'Yudhishtira, gamblers keep many loose women in their 

be but even they do not wager their women, good or shameless, 
at gambling. Our enemies won all the wealth, all the precious things, which 
the king of Kasi gave us, jewels and animals, gold, coats of fine mail; they 
won all the excellent weapons which other kings of the world gave us; they 
won our kingdom, your brothers and yourself. 

Not all this stirred my anger, for you are our lord. But this, the wagering 
of Draupadi, is a dreadful sin; our innocent wife does not deserve this. The 
Pandavas are her lords, yet just because of you these villainous Kauravas 
are tormenting her. For her sake, O King, my anger falls on you and I mean 
to burn those hands of yours which wagered Panchali. Sahadeva, bring me 
fire!’ 

Arjuna says quickly, 'Bhimasena, you have never spoken like this 
before! For sure these vile enemies have destroyed your high dharma. You 
must not fulfil the wishes of the enemy. Remain with dharma; do not cross 
our virtuous elder brother. 

The enemy summoned the king, and remembering Kshatriya dharma, he 
played dice against his will. That can only add greatly to our honour and 
fame.' 

Bhima relents and says, 'Dhananjaya, if you did not remind me that our 
brother acted in accordance with Kshatriya dharma, I would have taken his 
hands by force and burnt them in a fire.’ 

Seeing the Pandavas distraught and Panchali in anguish, Dhritarashtra's 
son Vikarna says, 'O Kings, answer Yagnaseni's question, for if we do not, 
all of us will surely go to hell. How is it that Bhishma and Dhritarashtra, the 
eldest of the Kurus, and also Mahatma Vidura do not say anything? 
Bharadwaja's son, Acharya to us all, and Kripa are here. Why do these 
Brahmanotti mas not answer the question? 

And the other kings gathered here, from all parts of the land, give a reply 
to Draupadi, each according to his judgement and with no thought towards 
anger or gain. Kings, answer the question asked of you by Drupada's 
blessed daughter, declare which side each of you takes. 


Vikarna repeatedly appeals to those present in that sabha, but none of the 
kings says a word to answer him, good or ill. Vikarna begins to rub his 
hands together loudly and to sigh like a snake. 

Finally, the prince says, 'You kings of the Earth, you Kauravas, you may 
or not answer Draupadi but I will say what I think is just. Purushottamas, it 
is said that hunting, drinking, gambling and over indulgence in women are 
the four vices of kings. The king who is addicted to these lives without 
dharma, and men do not take what such a king says or does seriously. 

Urged on by deceitful gamblers, Pandu's son Yudhishtira was absorbed 
in one of these vices when he made Draupadi his stake. Besides, innocent 
Draupadi is also the common wife of all the sons of Pandu. Then, 
Yudhishtira had already lost himself when he wagered her. Finally, Sakuni 
persuaded him to wager the queen. Considering all these, I believe that 
Draupadi has not been won.' 

The sabha roars its approval to hear what Vikarna says; all the kings 
praise him and censure Sakuni. But Kama jumps up in a froth, and waving 
his mighty arms, cries, 'Vikarna, it seems this sabha is full of contradictions! 
As for your anger, it is like fire kindled from a faggot, which consumes the 
faggot itself. 

These great personages here have not said a word, though repeatedly 
asked by Krishnaa. They all regard Drupada's daughter to have been fairly 
won. You, O son of Dhritarashtra, are immature and bursting with outrage. 
You are just a boy but you speak in this sabha as if you were an old man. 
You do not know what dharma truly is, and like a fool you insist that 
Krishnaa who has been fairly won has not been won at all. 

Dhaartarashtra, how do you say she is not won when the eldest Pandava 
staked all he owned in this sabha? Bharatarishabha, Draupadi is part of 
what Yudhishtira owns. So how do you say that what has been justly won 
has not been won at all? Yes, Sakuni asked for her to be wagered and the 
Pandava agreed. Then how do you say she was not won? 

And if you think that her being fetched here wearing a single cloth is a 
crime, let me dispel your callowness. Kurunandana, the Gods have ordained 
only one husband for every woman, but Draupadi has many. It is certain 
that she is far from chaste. To bring her in this sabha wearing one cloth, or 
even to strip her naked here is no crime at all, for she is already such a 
woman. 


Whatever wealth the Pandavas had - she herself and these sons of Pandu, 
too — have all been justly won by Sakuni. 

Dussasana, this Vikarna who seems to speak like a wise man is only a 
boy. I say strip the Pandavas of their robes and strip Draupadi of her cloth, 
as well!' 

Hearing this, O Bhaarata, the Pandavas take off their upper garments and 
throw them down. Then, O Rajan, Dussasana lays hold of Draupadi's cloth 
and begins to pull it away from her body roughly, before all the sabha. 

Draupadi, in despair, thinks of Hari, and cries aloud, 'Govinda, you who 
dwell in Dwaraka, O Krishna, lover of the gopis! Kesava, don't you see how 
the Kauravas shame me? Lord, Lakshmipathe, Lord of Vraja, destroyer of 
sorrow, Janardana, save me from drowning in the Kaurava sea. Krishna, 
Krishna, Mahayogin, Soul of the Universe, Creator of all things, save me, I 
am in dire trouble and losing my mind here among these Kurus!' 

Covering her face, still so stunningly beautiful, thinking of Krishna, of 
Hari, Lord of the three worlds, Draupadi's cries these words out to him. 
Krishna hears her and is moved. 

At which, while Yagnaseni still wails out to him, as also to Vishnu and 
Hari and to Nara for protection, invisible Dharma Deva covers her in fine 
cloths of many colours. Each layer of cloth which Dussasana tears from her 
reveals another below it, as exquisite and lustrous. Quickly, hundreds and 
hundreds of robes of many hues lie piled on the floor. 

A deep roar of many voices rises from the sabha, and all the kings begin 
to applaud the amazing spectacle, to applaud Draupadi and to censure 
Dussasana. Then Bhima, clenching his great fists, his lips quivering in 
anger, swears a terrible oath in the midst of all those kings, an oath in a loud 
and echoing voice. 

Bhima cries, 'Hear me, you Kshatriyas of the world! Words that I will 
speak now have never been spoken by another man, nor will anyone in the 
future ever speak them. Lords of earth, if after what I say I do not do what I 
swear I will, let me find the realm of my dead ancestors. 

I swear that I will tear this beast Dussasana's breast open with my hands 
and drink his blood. If I do not let me die! 

Hearing Bhima's dreadful oath, their hair stands on end and everyone in 
that sabha applauds him and curses Dussasana. Masses of bright coloured 
cloth, all dragged from Draupadi's body, are piled on the floor of the sabha, 
and finally, exhausted and defeated, Dussasana gives up and sits down in 


shame, while again those gods among men gathered in that court cry 'Fie!' 
at him, to see the plight and disgrace of the sons of Pandu. 

So loudly do those Kshatriyas roar that anybody who hears them 
trembles. Now every honest man in that sabha begins to say, 'Alas! The 
Kauravas still do not answer the question which Draupadi asked.’ 

Now they blame Dhritarashtra, all together, making a loud clamour. 
Then Vidura, master of dharma, waves his hands, silencing them, and says, 
'O you who sit in this sabha, Draupadi sobs helplessly having asked her 
question. Yet you do not answer her and you betray virtue and dharma with 
your silence. 

Like one being burnt by fire does a woman in distress seek the mercy of 
a conclave of righteous men. With truth and dharma does such an assembly 
quench that fire. The aggrieved woman asks the sabha what her rights are, 
according to dharma, and those in the sabha must answer, without prejudice 
or self-interest. 

O Kings, Vikarna has answered Panchali, as he knows dharma, and you 
must also answer her. He who knows dharma and attends a sabha incurs the 
sin of lying if he fails to do so, just as he who replies falsely, or with 
prejudice, gains the same sin. The knowing tell the ancient tale of Prahlada 
and Angiras's son to illustrate this. 

Long ago, there was a king of the Daityas called Prahlada. He had a son 
named Virochana. To marry a wife, Virochana quarrelled with Angiras' son 
Sudhanwan. Each staked his life, saying "I am superior to you!" for the sake 
of the woman, and they made Prahlada their arbiter to decide between them. 

They said to him, "Which of us is superior? Answer this without 
falsehood." 

Prahlada was afraid and looked at Sudhanwan, who, blazing in anger 
even like Yama's danda, said, "If you answer falsely or do not answer, your 
head will be split in a hundred pieces by Indra's thunderbolt!" 

Trembling like a leaf of a fig tree, Prahlada went to Kasyapa of great 
tejas. The Daitya said to the Sage, "Most illustrious and exalted one, you 
know dharma entirely and you guide the Devas, the Brahmanas and the 
Asuras, too. 

I find myself on the horns of a great dilemma regarding dharma. I ask 
you, what realms are found by one who does not answer a question or 
answers it falsely?" 


Kasyapa replied, "He who knows but does not answer a question, from 
temptation, anger or fear, casts a thousand nooses of Varuna upon himself, 
just as he does who answers falsely. At the end of each year one paasa shall 
be loosened. So, he who knows should answer truthfully and not hide 
anything. 

If virtue, struck by sin, comes to a sabha for help, it is the duty of 
everyone in that assembly to remove the barb, else they themselves shall be 
pierced by it. In a sabha where a truly censurable act is not rebuked, half the 
sin of that omission attaches to the head of the sabha, a fourth to the one 
who has sinned and another fourth to those who held their peace and did not 
speak out against the crime. 

However, in a sabha where the sinner is reprimanded, the lord of the 
sabha is freed from all his sins and the others also incur none. Then, only 
the sinner finds sin for himself and pays alone for it. 

Prahlada, they who answer falsely those who ask them about dharma, 
destroy the punya of seven generations before and after them. 

The grief of one who loses all his wealth, one who loses a son, one who 
is in debt, one who is separated from his friends, that of a woman who has 
lost her husband, of one who loses his all through the king's demand, of a 
sterile woman, of one who is being eaten by a tiger, a woman who is one of 
two wives, and of one who is deprived of his wealth by false witnesses: all 
these the Devas have declared to be equal. 

All these combined accrue to one who speaks falsely. A man becomes a 
witness by his having seen, heard, and understood a thing. So, a witness 
must always tell the truth. A witness who speaks truly never loses his punya 
or his worldly possessions." 

Hearing Kasyapa, Prahlada told his son, "Sudhanwan is superior to you, 
just as his father Angiras is my superior. Sudhanwan's mother is also 
superior to your mother. So, O Virochana, this Sudhanwan is now the lord 
of your life." 

Sudhanwan said, "Because you have kept dharma, unmoved by love for 
your child, I say let your son live for a hundred years."" 

Vidura continues, 'So, let all those in this sabha think carefully, deeply 
on what answer they should make to Draupadi's question.' 

The other kings do not say a word. But Kama says loudly to Dussasana, 
'Take this serving woman away into the antahpura.' 


Dussasana begins to haul away the helpless and chaste Draupadi, who is 
trembling and crying piteously to her lords, the Pandavas." 


CANTO 68 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


cc raupadi cries, 'Wait a little, O worst of men, evil-hearted I 

Lea I have something to do, a dharma which I have not yet 
done because I was hardly in my senses after this wretch dragged me from 
my chambers. I fold my hands and salute these venerable elders in the Kuru 
sabha. That I could not do this before cannot be my fault.’ 

Dussasana hauls her more savagely than before, and Draupadi falls to 
the ground and wails in that great sabha, 'Only once in my life, during my 
swayamvara, did such a gathering of kings ever see me, never before or 
after, until today when I have been dragged here. She whom even the winds 
and the Sun never saw before, even in her palace, is today exposed to the 
gaze of this host of men. 

Alas, in my palace, the sons of Pandu could not suffer me to be touched 
even by the wind, and today they can stand my being seized by this dog. 
Alas, these Kauravas also suffer their daughter-in-law, who is unworthy of 
such treatment, to be tormented before them. Surely, it seems that the age 
has grown dark. 

I am high-born and chaste. What can wound me more than being forced 
to come into this public court? Where is that dharma for which these kings 
were noted? We all know that the kings of old never brought their wives 
into their courts. Oh, that ancient custom has vanished from among the 
Kurus, or how has the wife of the Pandavas, the sister of Prihasta's son, she 
who is Krishna's sakhi, been dragged into this sabha? 

O you Kauravas, I am the wife of Yudhishtira Dharmaputra, who hails 
from the same line as your king. Now tell me if I am your serving maid or 
not, and I will cheerfully accept your answer. This vile destroyer of the 
honour of the Kurus, hurts me sorely and, O Kauravas, I cannot bear it 
anymore. 

You Kings, I want to hear your answer to my question: am I won or not? 
Whatever you say, I will accept your verdict.' 

Bhishma answers her, ‘Blessed child, I have already said that the course 
of dharma is subtle, and even the most enlightened in this world cannot 
always fathom it. 


In this world, whatever a strong man calls dharma others accept as being 
so, even if the truth is very different. But what a weak man calls dharma is 
hardly regarded, even if it is indeed the highest virtue. What you ask is deep 
and grave, intricate and subtle, and I find myself unable to answer with any 
certainty. 

However, there is no doubt that all the Kurus have become slaves to 
greed and folly, and our race shall very soon find its destruction. Blessed 
child, the family into which you have come as a daughter-in-law never 
abandons dharma, whatever calamities it faces. Panchali, you are plunged in 
grief, yet you also keep your eyes on dharma. 

These elders here, Drona and the others, of mature years and knowers of 
dharma, sit with their heads bent down even like dead men, from whose 
bodies life has gone. I feel that Yudhishtira is the one best suited to answer 
your question. Let him say if you have been won or not." 


CANTO 69 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


Yoo said, "From fear of Duryodhana, the kings present in that 
sabha do not say a word, good or ill, although they see Draupadi 
crying piteously, like a female osprey, and hear her appealing to them 
repeatedly. Duryodhana sees those kings, their sons and grandsons all 
keeping quiet, and smiles. 

He says to Draupadi, "Yagnaseni, let your husbands Bhima of mighty 
strength, Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva answer your question. Panchali, for 
your sake let them declare in the midst of these honourable men that 
Yudhishtira is not their lord, and let them thus make great Yudhishtira a 
common liar. If they do, you will be free from the bondage of slavery. 

Let the illustrious son of Dharma, who always keeps dharma, who is like 
Indra himself, declare whether or not he is your lord. And at what he says, 
accept either the Pandavas or ourselves. Indeed, all the Kauravas in this 
sabha float upon the sea of your distress. They are kind and generous and, 
looking at your pitiable husbands, cannot answer your question.' 

Everyone in that court applauds loudly, while surreptitiously making 
signs to one another through movements of their eyes and lips. Some cry, 
'Oh!' and 'Alas!' The Kauravas hear what their brother says and are 
overjoyed, and the other kings look sidelong at Yudhishtira, waiting to hear 
what he will say. All are curious to hear what Arjuna, Pandu's son never 
defeated in battle will say, and Bhimasena, and the twins. 

When the hum of many voices ceases, waving his mighty arms smeared 
with sandalwood paste, Bhima says, 'If this Mahatman Yudhishtira 
Dharmaraja, our eldest brother, had not been our lord, we would never have 
forgiven the Kurus. He is the lord of all our dharma and punya, the lord of 
our lives. If he regards himself as won, all of us have also been won. If this 
were not so, which creature whose feet touches this Earth and is mortal 
would escape me alive after touching Panchali's precious tresses? 

Look at these arms of mine, like iron maces. Even he of a hundred 
sacrifices could not escape their clasp. Bound by the ties of dharma and 
bhakti owed to our eldest brother, and urged repeatedly by Arjuna to be 
silent, I restrain myself from doing terrible things. But if Yudhishtira 


commanded me, I would kill these vile sons of Dhritarashtra, making blows 
do the work of swords, why, like a lion killing a herd of small animals. 

When Bhima says this, Bhishma, Drona and Vidura say to him, 'Forbear, 
O Bhima, for you can do anything." 


CANTO 70 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


eh arna says, ‘Among all in this sabha, three - Bhishma, Vidura, and 

Ko - seem to be independent indeed, for they speak ill of their 
master, censure him and never wish for his prosperity. 

Excellent Panchali, the slave, the son and the wife are always dependent. 
They cannot earn wealth, for whatever they earn belongs to their master. 
You are the wife of a slave, who cannot own anything. Go now to 
Dhritarashtra's antahpura and serve the king's relatives. That is now your 
proper place, for O Princess, all the sons of Dhritarashtra and not the sons 
of Pritha are now your masters. 

Beautiful one, choose another husband for yourself, one who will not 
gamble you away to become a slave. It is known that women, especially 
slaves, are not to be censured if they freely choose husbands for themselves. 
So, you do so now. 

Nakula has been won, as have Bhimasena, Yudhishtira, Sahadeva and 
Arjuna. And, Yagnaseni, you are now a slave, and your husbands who are 
also slaves cannot be your husbands anymore. 

Ah, does Pritha's son think of life, prowess and manhood as being 
useless that he offers this daughter of Drupada, the king of Panchala, in the 
presence of this entire sabha, as a stake at dice?’ 

Bhima, a picture of misery, breathed hard, but obedient to his king and 
bound by dharma, he can only blaze at everything around with his eyes, and 
say, 'Rajan, I cannot even be angry at what this son of a Suta says, for we 
have truly become slaves. But Yudhishtira, could our enemies dare say this 
to me if you had not wagered Draupadi?’ 

Duryodhana says to Yudhishtira who is silent, as if he has lost his mind, 
'O King, Bhima and Arjuna, and the twins also, are under your sway. You 
answer the question. Say if you think that Krishnaa has been won or not:' 

Saying this to Kunti's son, and wanting to encourage Karna and taunt 
Bhima, Duryodhana suddenly bares his left thigh, his thigh like the stem of 
a plantain tree or the trunk of an elephant, his thigh graced with every 
auspicious sign and endowed with the strength of thunder, and shows it to 
Draupadi. 


Bhima's red eyes bulge, and he says to Duryodhana in the midst of all 
those kings, words like arrows, 'Let not Bhima Vrikodara never attain the 
realms gained by his sires if he does not break that thigh of yours during the 
Great War!' 

And sparks of fire come forth from Bhima's wrathful body, like those 
which fly from every crack in a tree on fire. 

Vidura now says, addressing the entire sabha, 'You kings of Pratipa's 
race, behold the great danger which rises from Bhimasena. Know for 
certain that this great calamity that threatens to overtake the Bhaaratas has 
been sent by Destiny itself. 

Dhritarashtra's sons have gambled, ignoring every tenet of dharma. Even 
now they insist that a queen of our royal house is their slave, and here will 
the good fortune of your kingdom end. Look, how they consult evilly 
among themselves. Kauravas, take into your hearts what I am saying. If you 
corrupt dharma here, this sabha will be ruined. 

If Yudhishtira staked Yagnaseni before he lost himself, he would then 
certainly have been her master. However, if man who is himself lost and 
cannot own any possession wagers something, it is like wealth won or lost 
in a dream. Do not, all of you, listen to this Gandhara king and fall away 
from the indubitable truth. 

Duryodhana says, 'I am content to abide by what Bhima, Arjuna and the 
twins say. Let them declare that Yudhishtira is not their master, and 
Yagnaseni will be free from bondage: 

Arjuna says, "This illustrious Kaunteya, Yudhishtira Dharmatma, was 
certainly our master before he began to play. But when he had lost himself, 
let all the Kauravas judge whose master he could be after that.' 

Just then, a jackal begins to howl dismally in the very homa-chamber of 
King Dhritarashtra's palace. Rajan, donkeys bray in response to the jackal's 
ululating howls. Then dreadful birds also join the cacophony from every 
side with their various screeches and cries. 

Vidura, who knows all things, and Subala's daughter Gandhari, also, 
understand what those terrible sounds portended. Bhishma, Drona and the 
wise Gautama cry, 'Swashti! Swashti! ’ Gandhari and Vidura anxiously 
explain the wild omens to the king. 

Dhritarashtra says, 'Evil-hearted Duryodhana, ruin has already come to 
us when you speak in such vile language to a wife of these Kururishabhas, 
especially to Draupadi herself.’ 


The wise Dhritarashtra, wanting to save his kin from disaster, begins to 
console Krishnaa. He says to her, 'Ask me for any boon you want, O 
Panchali. So chaste and devoted to virtue, you are the first among all my 
daughters-in-law.' 

Draupadi says, 'O Bharatarishabha, if you will grant me a boon, I ask 
that the handsome Yudhishtira Dharmatma be freed from slavery, for let no 
thoughtless child call my son Prativindhya, of great tejas of mind, the son of 
a Slave, for my prince is a superior boy and has been raised by kings:.' 

Dhritarashtra says to her, 'Auspicious Panchali, let it be as you want. 
Excellent princess, ask for another boon for my heart is inclined to grant 
you a second wish. You deserve more than one. 

Draupadi says, 'O Rajan, let Bhimasena, Dhananjaya and the twins have 
their liberty back, and their chariots and bows.' 

Dhritarashtra says, 'Blessed daughter, let it be as you wish. Ask me for a 
third boon, for just two boons do not sufficiently honour you. You are 
virtuous, the best of all my daughters-in-law.' 

Draupadi says, 'Best of kings, most illustrious one, greed always fetches 
the loss of dharma. I do not deserve a third boon, and so I dare not ask for 
one. O King of kings, it is said that a Vaisya may ask one boon, a Kshatriya 
woman two boons, a Kshatriya man three, and a Brahmana a hundred. 

Maharajan, now that my husbands are free from ignominious bondage, 
they can achieve their own prosperity through their dharma and deeds." 


Ia blessing. 


CANTO 71 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


eh arna says caustically, 'Never have we heard of such a wonderful 

| Gee being accomplished by any woman famed through the world 
for her beauty. When both the sons of Pandu and Dhritarashtra's princes 
were stirred by anger, this Draupadi has become the Pandavas' salvation. 
The sons of Pandu were drowning in a sea of distress and Panchali became 
a boat to them and has brought them safely ashore.' 

Hearing this in the midst of all the Kurus, the angry Bhimasena says 
desperately to Arjuna, 'Devala Maharishi has said that three lights live in 
every person, their children, their deeds and their knowledge, for from these 
three all creation springs. 

When life comes to an end and the body decays and a man is cast off by 
his relatives, these three become useful. But the light in us has been 
dimmed by the humiliation of our wife. How, Arjuna, can a son born from 
this shamed queen ever be useful to us?’ 

Arjuna replies, 'Bhima, superior men never react to the harsh words with 
which inferior men might pierce them. Men who have earned honour for 
themselves, even if they can retaliate, forget the hostility shown them by 
their enemies and only treasure their good deeds:.' 

Bhima says, 'Yudhishtira, shall I kill all these enemies, even here in this 
sabha, or shall I tear them up by their life-roots outside the palace? Ah, 
what need have I for words or your command? I will kill them at once and 
then you will rule over the whole world, without a rival.’ 

Saying this Bhima and the twins, like lions in the midst of a herd of 
lesser beasts, glare angrily around them. However, Arjuna Swetakarma, he 
of white deeds, tries to pacify his older brother with appealing looks. But 
Bhima Mahabaho blazes again in wrath. Rajan, fire issues from Vrikodara's 
ears and nostrils with flames, sparks and smoke. 

His brow is knit and furrowed, his face is terrible, and he is like Yama 
himself during the Pralaya. Then Yudhishtira puts his arms around Bhima 
and forbids him, saying 'Do not be like this. Be silent and peaceful.' 

Having restrained red-eyed Bhima, Yudhishtira, with folded hands, 
approaches his uncle Dhritarashtra." 


CANTO 72 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ udhishtira says, 'O King, you are our master. Command us what we 

Vo do. O Bhaarata, we want to always remain obedient to you. 

Dhritarashtra replies, 'Be blessed, O Ajatasatru. Go in peace and safety. I 
command you to go and rule your own kingdom with your wealth. And, my 
child, I have another command for you which, I beg you, take to your heart. 
It is the plea of an old man and will provide nurture to you. 

Yudhishtira, child, you know the subtle path of dharma. You own great 
wisdom, yet you are humble and you wait upon your elders. Where there is 
intelligence, there is forbearance; so, O Bhaarata, follow the counsels of 
peace. 

The axe sinks into wood but not stone, and you will listen while 
Duryodhana will not. The best of men never remember the hostile actions 
of their enemies, they see only the good and not the evil even in those that 
harm them. And they never seek enmity or revenge. 

Also, the good do good without expecting anything in return. 
Yudhishtira, only the worst men speak harshly during a quarrel; while 
mediocre men reply in kind when spoken to harshly. But the good and the 
wise never pay heed to or retort in kind to harshness. 

The good know themselves and understand the feelings of others; hence, 
they think only of the goodness in other men not the darkness. You have 
always been honourable, never breaking the bounds of dharma, artha, kama 
and moksha. My son, forget Duryodhanas harshness. 

Look at your mother Gandhari and at me, if you wish to remember only 
what is good. O Bhaarata, look at me, who am a father to you, and am old 
and blind, and still alive. It was only to see our friends and also to examine 
the strengths and weaknesses of my children that I allowed the game of 
dice. 

Rajan, those among the Kurus who have you for their king and the wise 
Vidura, who knows every Shastra deeply, for their minister, surely have 
nothing to grieve over. In you is virtue, in Arjuna patience, in Bhimasena 
might, and in the twins, those best of men, is pure reverence for their elders. 


Be you blessed, O Yudhishira! Return to Khandavaprastha, and let there 
be brotherly love between you and your cousins. Let your heart always be 
fixed on dharma.' 

When his uncle speaks thus to him, Yudhishtira Dharmaraja then pays 
every homage and courtesy to his elders, and sets out for Khandavaprastha 
with his brothers. Their hearts glad now, and Draupadi with them, they 
climb into their chariots, which are all the colour of clouds, and ride 
towards the city called Indraprastha." 


CANTO 73 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


face says, "How did Dhritarashtra's sons feel when they learnt that, 
with Dhritarashtra's leave, the Pandavas had left Hastinapura with their 
kingdom, all their wealth and jewels returned to them?" 

Vaisampayana says, "O King, when he learns that wise Dhritarashtra has 
given the Pandavas leave to return to their capital, Dussasana hurries to his 
brother. O Bharatarishabha, arriving in Duryodhana's presence, the stricken 
prince cries, 'Great Kshatriyas, the old man has thrown away what we won 
with so much trouble! He has given back everything to our enemies, all 
their kingdom and wealth.' 

Duryodhana, Kama and Subala's son Sakuni, all of them ruled by hubris, 
come together in some haste, and privately, to Vichitravirya's son 
Dhritarashtra. They speak sweetly and artfully to him. 

Duryodhana says, 'O King, have you not heard what Brihaspati the 
Devaguru said to Indra about mortals and politics? Parantapa, these were 
Guru's words: "Enemies who harm you by stratagem or by force must be 
killed." 

If we used the Pandavas' wealth to please the kings of the earth and then 
fight the sons of Pandu, how could we lose? Ah, but if a man wraps angry 
poisonous serpents around his neck and back, how can he take them off? 
My father, in their chariots and armed, the angry sons of Pandu are like 
venomous snakes and they will certainly kill us. 

Even now Arjuna rides in his chariot, wearing mail, his twin quivers 
strapped on, often picking up the Gandiva, while he breathes hard and casts 
blazing looks around him. Bhima rides in wrath, whirling his mace in his 
great hands. Nakula rides with his sword and his half-moon shield in his 
hands, and Sahadeva and Yudhishtira also have made clear what they mean 
to do. 

Whipping their horses, they go like five winds in their chariots towards 
Khandavaprastha to muster their forces. They will never forgive us for 
humiliating them. Which of them will forget what we did to Draupadi? 

Be you blest, my father, we must gamble again with the Pandavas, this 
time to send them into exile. Purusharishabha, only thus can we conquer 


them again. The wager shall be that either we or they will live in the forest 
for twelve years wearing deerskin, and a further thirteenth year in some city, 
in ajnatavasa, undiscovered, unrecognised. Either we or they will live so. 

Let us cast the dice immediately, let the sons of Pandu play against us 
once more. Bull of the race of Bhaarata, O King, this is our highest dharma 
and Sakuni is a master of the rolling dice. Even if the Pandavas survive 
their exile, during those thirteen years we will take deep root in the 
kingdom and, making many allies, collect a vast and invincible army, so if 
the sons of Pandu reappear we will vanquish them. 

Let this plan recommend itself to you, O Parantapa.' 

Dhritarashtra says, 'Bring the Pandavas back even if they have gone a 
good way. Let them come back at once to cast the dice again.' 

Drona, Somadatta and Balhika, Gautama, Vidura, the son of Drona, 
Dhritarashtra's great son by his Vaisya wife, and Bhurisravas, Bhishma and 
the mighty Vikarna all say, 'Let there be no more dice, let there be peace. 

But Dhritarashtra is partial to his sons. He ignores the counsel of his 
wise friends and kinsmen and summons the Pandavas back." 


CANTO 74 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


yo said, "Rajan, now Gandhari, in great distress for her 
sons, says to Dhritarashtra, "When Duryodhana was born the wise 
Vidura said, "It would be well for us to send this disgrace to our race to the 
next world. Look how he howls again and again like a jackal; it is certain 
that he will cause the destruction of the Kurus." 

Take what Vidura said to heart, O King of the Kurus. O Bhaarata, do not 
drown, from your own fault, in a sea of calamities. My lord, do not listen to 
these evil and foolish princes. Do not become the instrument of the brutal 
end of this noble House. 

Who can break an embankment once it has been built, or rekindle a 
forest fire which has been extinguished? O Bharatarishabha, who lives that 
will provoke the peaceful sons of Pritha? 

Ajamida, you remember all things, but still let me remind you that no 
scripture can restrain those that have evil hearts from doing evil. An 
immature man will never do as one of mature years will. Let your sons 
follow you, and not the other way. Let death not take them from you for 
ever. 

I say to you today, my husband, abandon this vile prince of mine, this 
evil Duryodhana. From fatherly love you could not do it before, but now 
you must, for the time is here when, if you do not, our very race will be 
annihiliated. 

Do not err in this, my lord, let your mind be guided by counsels of 
peace, virtue and true policy, and be what it naturally is. The fortune won 
through evil means is quickly lost, while that acquired gently takes root and 
swells and goes down from generation to generation.’ 

The king replies to Gandhari who pointed out the path of dharma to him, 
'If the destruction of our race has come, let it takes its course freely, for I 
cannot prevent it. Let my sons' wish be granted and the Pandavas return to 
play another game of dice." 


CANTO 75 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


yo 2 said, "A royal messenger, sent by Dhritarashtra, rides 
like the wind to Pritha's Yudhishtira, who by then has come a good 
way from Hastinapura. The messenger says, 'Your uncle, who is like a 
father to you, says, "The sabha is ready, O Pandava, come and cast the 
dice!" 

Yudhishtira says, 'All creatures find fruit, good and ill, by the will of the 
Creator. They are inevitable, if I play or not. This is a summons to dice; it 
is, besides, the command of the old king. Although I know that it will prove 
ruinous to me, I cannot refuse. 

Although a golden living animal could not exist, Rama allowed himself 
to be tempted by a golden deer. Truly, minds of men over whom calamities 
hang, become unhinged. So, Yudhishtira returns to Hastinapura with his 
brothers. Knowing full well how Sakuni cheated, the son of Pritha comes 
back to sit at dice with him again. 

Those mighty Kshatriyas enter that sabha once more, while their friends 
grieve for them. Compelled by fate, they sit down again to gamble and, 
indeed, to ruin themselves. 

Sakuni says, 'The aged king has given you back all your wealth. That is 
well. But, Bharatarishabha, listen to me, here is a stake of great value: either 
defeated by you at dice, we will enter the forest, wearing deerskin, and live 
there for twelve years, and then spend a thirteenth in a place of men, 
undiscovered. And if we are discovered during the thirteenth year, we will 
spend another twelve years in exile. However, if you lose, you, along with 
Krishnaa, will spend twelve years in the vana and pass the thirteenth in a 
place of men, in ajnatavasa. If you are found during the thirteenth year, you 
will go back into exile for another twelve years. 

When the thirteenth year is over each one will give his kingdom back to 
the other. Yudhishtira, for this stake, play with us, O Bhaarata. Cast the 
dice.' 

The other noble ones in the sabha raise their arms up in alarm and cry 
anxiously, and feelingly, 'Alas, Duryodhana's friends do not warn him of his 


great danger. Dhritarashtra, whether he understands the peril or not, it is 
your duty to tell him plainly.’ 

Yudhishtira hears this, but from a sense of shame and dharma, sits again 
to play dice. Though he is most intelligent and knows the consequences 
well, he begins to play, as if he knows that the end of the Kurus is near and 
it is ineluctable. 

Yudhishtira says, 'Sakuni, how can a king like me, who always observes 
Kshatriya dharma, refuse to play when he has been summoned to dice? And 
so I will play with you.’ 

Sakuni replies, 'We have many horses and milch cows, an infinite 
number of goats and sheep, and elephants and treasuries and gold, and 
slaves both male and female. We staked all these before but now let this be 
our one stake: exile into the forest. If you beat us we will live in the vana 
for twelve years and the thirteenth in ajnatavasa. Purusharishabhas, with 
this determination, will we play. 

O Bhaarata, only once does he speak about the exile in the jungle. 
Yudhishtira accepts it and Sakuni takes up the dice. Casting them, he says to 
Pritha's son, 'I have won!" 


CANTO 72 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


ves said, "The vanquished Pandavas prepare for their exile in 
the forest. One after another, in order of age, they cast off their royal 
robes and clothe themselves in deerskin. 

Seeing those Parantapas wearing deerskin, their kingdom taken from 
them and ready to go into exile, Dussasana cries, 'The absolute sovereignty 
of the illustrious King Duryodhana has begun. The sons of Pandu have been 
vanquished, and plunged into ruin. 

We have achieved our goal, be it by the broad or the narrow way. Today, 
we have more wealth and kingdom than our enemies, and we have become 
worthy of the praise of men, while Pritha's sons are plunged in everlasting 
hell. For ever, they have lost their kingdom and their happiness. 

Arrogant of their wealth, they once laughed derisively at Duryodhana. 
Now, beaten by us and their wealth lost, they must go into the vana and 
exile. Let them take off their armour, their resplendent robes of celestial 
make; let them put on deerskins, according to the stake of Sakuni, which 
they accepted. 

These who always boasted that they had no equals in the world will now 
see themselves like grains of sesame without a kernel. Though in this new 
garb, Pandu's sons seem like wise and powerful men installed in a sacrifice, 
yet they do not look men entitled to perform yagnas. 

When the wise Yagnasena of the Somakas gave his daughter Panchali to 
the Pandavas he made a great mistake, for these sons of Pritha are like 
eunuchs. Yagnaseni, what joy will you have in the forest seeing your 
husbands wearing deerskin and threadbare valkala, impoverished, all their 
wealth lost? 

Choose a husband for yourself from this sabha. The Kurus here are all 
great and self-restrained, and all of them are vastly wealthy. Choose one of 
them for your lord, so that the calamity which has overtaken you does not 
drag you into wretchedness. The Pandavas are now like sesame seeds 
without a kernel, like stuffed animals, or grains of rice without a husk. 
When they have fallen, why should you wait on them anymore? Ah, vain is 
the labour which seeks to press the sesame without a kernel!’ 


So does Dussasana, the son of Dhritarashtra, speak viciously again in the 
hearing of the Pandavas. At which, Bhima suddenly rushes at him in fury, 
like a Himalayan lion at a jackal, and roars, 'Villain, do you rave like this as 
only sinners do? Dare you brag in this sabha of kings after your cause has 
been advanced by the cheating skill of Sakuni? 

As you pierce our hearts with your words like arrows, I will remember 
these words and pierce your heart and shed your blood in battle. And I will 
also send to Yamaloka those who stand behind you today, from their anger 
or their greed, as your protectors. Yes, them and all their sons and kin!' 

But Dussasana begins to dance rudely around Bhima, clad in deerskin, 
who is restrained by dharma from doing him any harm, crying, 'Cow! O you 
cow!' 

Bhima fumes, 'Dare you, wretched Dussasana? Dare you preen and brag 
after winning our wealth by the basest means? I say to you that if this 
Vrikodara, son of Pritha, does not tear open your breast and drink your 
blood, may he never find heaven for himself. 

I say to you all that, before a great host of Kshatriyas, I will kill all these 
sons of Dhritarashtra and quench my wrath!' 

As the Pandavas leave the sabha, the joyful Duryodhana mimics Bhima's 
leonine gait with mincing steps. 

Vrikodara turns to that king and says, 'Fool, you think to put me down 
with these vile tricks? I will kill you and all who follow you soon enough, 
and that will be my answer to your strutting. 

With that, controlling the great anger which surges in him, the mighty 
and proud Bhima turns to follow Yudhishtira from the Kaurava court again. 
Going, he says, 'I will kill Duryodhana, and Dhananjaya will slay Kama. 
Sahadeva will kill Sakuni the gambler. 

And hear again, all of you in this sabha, the oath I swear, and the Gods 
will surely make my oath come true. If we ever meet the Kurus in battle, I 
will kill this dog Duryodhana with my mace, and laying him on the ground 
I will stamp on his head with my foot. As for this other evil one, so brave 
with his words, I will drink his blood like a lion!' 

Arjuna says, ‘Bhima, the resolutions of superior men are not known only 
by their words. On the fourteenth year from this day, these will see what 
happens. 

Bhima says, 'The earth will drink the blood of Duryodhana, Kama and 
the evil Sakuni, and Dussasana will be the fourth.' 


Arjuna says, 'Bhima, as you have sworn, I will kill this malicious, 
envious, harsh-tongued and vain Kama. To please Bhima, Arjuna vows that 
he will kill Kama and all his followers with arrows in battle. Yes, and I will 
send to Yama's realm all the other foolish kings who dare face me in war. 

The Mountains of Himavat might move from where they are, the Sun 
who makes the day might lose his lustre, the Moon his coolness, but I will 
keep my vow. All that I have sworn will happen if, on the fourteenth year 
from today, Duryodhana does not return our kingdom to us with proper 
respect.' 

After Arjuna, Madri's handsome son Sahadeva, of great tejas, eager to 
kill Sakuni, waves his arms and, red-eyed and sighing like a snake, cries, 'O 
you disgrace of the Gandhara kings, those whom you think of as defeated 
are not really so. You have risked death by arrows in battle, and I will do as 
Bhima has sworn by killing you and all your followers in war. 

So, if there is anything at all that you wish to do, do it before that day 
comes, for then I will kill you if you keep Kshatriya dharma and do not flee 
the field like a dog, O son of Subala!' 

Now Nakula, handsomest of all men, says, T will kill all these sons of 
Dhritarashtra, who have dared insult Draupadi in this sabha. They have 
wished for death and are moved by Fate and the desire to please 
Duryodhana. I will remember what they have said today and they will find 
death at Yudhishtira's command. The Earth will be devoid of Dhritarashtra's 
sons. 

Having sworn these oaths, those Purushavyaghras, tigers among men, all 
blessed with long arms, approach King Dhritarashtra." 


CANTO 77 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


KC udhishtira says, 'I bid farewell to all the Bhaaratas, to my V Pitama, 

Y: King Somadatta, the great Bahlika, Drona, Kripa, all the other 
kings, Aswatthama, Vidura, Dhritarashtra, all the sons of Dhritarashtra, to 
Yuyutsu, Sanjaya and all the courtiers. I bid you all farewell, and returning, 
I will see you again. 

Overcome by shame, none of those men can make any reply to him. In 
their hearts, though, they pray for the welfare of that good and wise prince. 

Vidura now says, 'Pritha is a princess by birth. It does not become her to 
go into the forest. She is old, delicate and used to luxury. She will live in 
my home. Know this, O sons of Pandu, and let safety always be yours.’ 

The Pandavas say, Anagha, sinless one, let it be as you say. You are our 
uncle and so even like our own father. We are all obedient to you, and you 
are, O learned one, our most revered elder. We must always obey you and, 
Mahatman, command us, what else shall we do?' 

Vidura replies, 'Yudhishtira, in my opinion a man vanquished by foul 
means need feel no pain at his defeat. You know every law of dharma; 
Arjuna is ever victorious in battle; Bhimasena is the slayer of enemies; 
Nakula is the gatherer of wealth; Sahadeva is a great administrator; 
Dhaumya is the foremost of all who know the Vedas; and Draupadi knows 
both virtue and frugality well. 

You are devoted to one another, feel delight in each other's company, 
enemies cannot divide you and you are contented. Who is there that will not 
envy you? O Bhaarata, this patient abstraction from the possession of the 
world will be of great benefit to you. No enemy, even if he were equal to 
Indra himself, will be able to withstand it. 

Once, on the mountains of Himavat, beside Meru, Savarni taught you; in 
the town of Varanavata, Krishna Dwaipayana did; upon the cliff of Bhrigu, 
Rama; and on the banks of the Dhrishadwati, Siva himself. Maharishi Asita 
gave you instruction on the hills of Anjana; and you became a disciple of 
Bhrigu on the banks of the Kalmashi. 

Narada and your priest Dhaumya will now become your Gurus. In the 
matter of the next world, never abandon these profound lessons you have 


had from the Munis. O Pandava, your intelligence is greater than even that 
of Ila's son Pururavas; in might, you exceed all other kings, and in virtue, 
even the Rishis. 

Therefore, resolve earnestly to win victory, which belongs to Indra; to 
control your wrath, which belongs to Yama; to give charity, which belongs 
to Kubera; and to restrain all passions, which belong to Varuna. O Bhaarata, 
from the Moon take the power to please; the power to sustain from Water; 
patience from the Earth; energy from the Sun; strength from the Wind, and 
affluence from the other elements. 

May walfare and immunity from disease be yours; I hope to see you 
return. Yudhishtira, act righteously and duly in all seasons: those of distress, 
those of difficulty, indeed, in all things. 

O Son of Kunti, go forth with our leave. O Bhaarata, my blessings be 
upon you. No one can say that you have sinned, and so we do earnestly 
want to see you return, crowned with success. 

Bowing low to Bhishma and Drona, Yudhishtira, the son of Pandu, of 
prowess incapable of being baffled, says, 'Tathastu, so be it!' and departs." 


CANTO 78 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


vos said, "When Draupadi is about to set out she goes to the 
illustrious Kunti and solicits her leave. She takes her leave of the other 
ladies of the household, all of them plunged in grief. Saluting and 
embracing every one of them, as each deserves, she asks them to permit her 
to go away. 

Then, within the inner apartments of the Pandavas, a loud wail of grief 
arises. Kunti, in terrible distress to see Draupadi about to go, says, her voice 
choking, 'My child, do not grieve that this calamity has overtaken you. You 
know well the dharma of women, and your behaviour and conduct are as 
they should be. O my princess of sweet smiles, I need not teach you your 
duty towards your husbands. 

You are chaste and accomplished, and your qualities have adorned the 
race of your birth, as also the House into which you have come through 
marriage. Ah, the Kauravas are fortunate that your wrath has not burnt them 
to ashes. My daughter, go safely, blessed by my prayers. Good women 
never allow their hearts to come unstrung at what is inevitable. Protected by 
dharma, which is superior to everything, you will soon find good fortune 
again. 

While living in the vana, keep your eye on my child Sahadeva. See that 
his heart does not sink under the weight of this tragedy.' 

Bathed in tears, still wearing her single cloth stained with her woman's 
blood, her hair in disarray, saying, "Tathastu,' Draupadi leaves her mother- 
in-law. As she goes, sobbing, Pritha follows her in grief. Kunti does not go 
far, when she sees her sons, shorn of their ornaments and royal robes, clad 
in deerskin, and their heads bent down with shame. She sees them 
surrounded by rejoicing enemies and pitying friends. 

Filled by a tide of mother's love, Kunti approaches her sons. Embracing 
them, tears in her eyes and voice, she says, 'You are virtuous and decorous; 
you own every noble quality, and you are respectful towards all. You are all 
high-minded and serve your elders, and you are also devoted to the Gods 
and the performance of yagnas. Ah, then why has such disaster overtaken 
you? 


From where this sudden reversal of fortune? I do not see through whose 
villainy this sin has come over you. Alus, I gave birth to you, this must be 
my ill luck visited on your innocent lives, for you are all blessed with the 
finest virtues, great vitality and prowess, strength, fortitude and power. 

Oh, how will you now live in penury in the pathless forest? If I knew 
that one day this would be your fate, I would never have left the mountains 
of Satasringa to come to Hastinapura when Pandu died. 

Your father was a fortunate man, as I see now, and reaped every fruit of 
his asceticism. He was gifted with foresight, and he rose into Swarga 
without feeling any pain on his sons' account. Fortunate, too, was Madri, as 
I look at it today. She, also, it seems, knew what the future held and chose 
the high path of freedom from this life, and every blessing which comes 
with it. Ah, Madri looked on me as her support, and her heart and her love 
were always fixed upon me. 

I curse my desire to live, which makes me suffer like this today. My 
children, all of you are exceptionally worthy and dear to me. I had you all 
after long suffering. Oh, I cannot leave you. I will also go with you! 

Oh Panchali, why do you leave me? All that lives is sure to die. Has 
Brahma forgotten to ordain this Kunti's death? Perhaps it is so, and that is 
why life does not quit me. 

Krishna! O you who dwell in Dwaraka, O Sankarshana's younger 
brother, where are you? Why don't you deliver me and these Purushottamas 
from such misery? They say that you, who are without beginning and 
without end, save those that think of you. Why is this being proved false? 

These sons of mine have always cloven to virtue, nobility, honour and 
prowess. They do not deserve this suffering. Oh, show them mercy! When 
there are such elders in our race like Bhishma and Drona and Kripa, all of 
whom know dharma and the world well, how does this tragedy overtake us? 

O Pandu, where are you? How do you countenance your good princes to 
be sent into exile, defeated at dice? Sahadeva, do not go! You are my 
dearest child, dearer to me, O Son of Madri, than my body. Do not forsake 
me. You must show me some kindness. Let dharma bind your brothers to go 
into the vana, but you stay with me, my child, and earn your punya through 
serving me.' 

The Pandavas console their weeping mother and, also plunged in grief, 
set out for the forest. Though grief-stricken himself, Vidura consoles Kunti 
as best he can and slowly leads her back into his home. 


The women of Dhritarashtra's household hear about all that happened, 
about Draupadi being dragged into the sabha, about the exile of the 
Pandavas, and they weep and blame the Kauravas openly. Then they sit 
sunk in gloom, many with their lotus-like faces buried in their fair hands. 

Dhritarashtra begins to think of the danger, which his sons now face, and 
he has no peace of mind but is a prey to constant anxiety. Utterly distraught, 
he sends a messenger to Vidura, saying, 'Let Kshatta come to me without a 
moment's delay.' 

Vidura comes immediately to Dhritarashtra's palace. As soon as he 
arrives, the king questions him about how the Pandavas left Hastinapura." 


CANTO 79 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


yo said, "As soon as Vidura of great foresight enters his 
presence, Ambika's son, the King Dhritarashtra, asks his brother 
nervously, 'How did Dharmaputra Yudhishtira leave? And how Bhima and 
Arjuna? And how Madri's twins? How, O Kshatta, did Dhaumya proceed? 
And the lustrous Draupadi? I want to hear everything, Vidura, tell me 
everything they did.' 

Vidura replies, 'Kunti's son Yudhishtira went forth covering his face with 
a cloth. Bhima, O King, went staring at his own mighty arms. Arjuna threw 
pieces of earth around him as he followed Yudhishtira. Madri's son smeared 
his face darkly when he went, and Nakula, also, covered his handsome face 
with dirt, and he was full of sorrow. 

The large-eyed and beautiful Krishnaa's hair was loose and dishevelled, 
and she covered her face as well, following the king, and she wept 
ceaselessly. Rajan, Dhaumya walked with kusa grass in his hands, and he 
chanted the ominous mantras from the Sama Veda which are for Yama, the 
God of Death.' 

Dhritarashtra asks, "Tell me, O Vidura, what does all this mean, the 
manner of the Pandavas' going forth?! 

Vidura replies, 'Although your sons persecuted him, robbed him of his 
kingdom and wealth, the mind of Yudhishtira Dharmatma has not yet 
deviated from the way of dharma. O Bhaarata, Yudhishtira is always kindly 
towards your sons. 

Though he has been deprived of his kingdom and possessions by vile 
means, and wrath fills his heart, he does not open his eyes. Thinking, "I will 
not burn the people by looking at them with angry eyes," Pandu's royal son 
went forth covering his face. 

Let me tell you now why Bhima went forth as he did. 

"I have no equal in the strength of my arms": this is what Bhima thought, 
as he repeatedly flexed his mighty arms. He is proud of his strength, 
Vrikodara, and he flexed and stretched them to show what he would like to 
do to his enemies with those arms. 


And Kunti's son Arjuna Savyasachin, who is perfectly ambidextrous, 
followed Yudhishtira, scattering bits of earth which shall be as the arrows 
he will loose in battle. Bhaarata, he showed the ease with which he will 
despatch his arrows by what he did. 

Sahadeva had darkened his face, thinking that none should recognise 
him on this dreadful day. 

Exalted one, Nakula had smeared himself with dirt, for he thought, "I 
must not steal the heart of any woman who sees me". So handsome is he. 

Draupadi wore one piece of stained cloth, with her hair loose and crying. 
She meant that the wives of those who had reduced her to this will lose their 
husbands, their sons and all their kinsmen when thirteen years have passed. 
And they shall enter Hastinapura, during their periods, smeared with blood, 
their hair loose and forced to offer tarpana to their dead. 

O Bhaarata, the learned Dhaumya, his passions restrained, held the kusa 
grass in his hand, its blades pointing to the south-west, and walked before 
the sons of Pandu, singing the mantras of the Sama Veda, which belong to 
Yama. 

What that Brahmana meant is that, when the Kurus are slain their priests 
will sing the Sama mantras for their dead as he was doing. 

As for the people, they are grief-stricken and repeatedly they cried out, 
"Alas, alas, our lords are going away! Fie on the Kuru elders that, from base 
greed, they acted like foolish children by banishing the heirs of Pandu. 
Alas, we shall all be masterless without Pandu's eldest son. 

What love can we ever have for the avaricious and evil Kurus?" 

Thus, O King, did the sons of Kunti, of great tejas leave, showing by 
their manner and with signs the resolutions that are in their hearts. As those 
Purushottamas left Hastinapura, gashes of lightning crackled in a cloudless 
sky and the Earth herself trembled. Rahu came to devour the Sun, although 
it was not the day of the eclipse. Meteors fell, keeping the city to their right. 
Jackals, vultures, crows and other carnivorous beasts and birds shrieked and 
cried aloud from the temples of the Gods and from the tops of sacred trees 
and walls and from house-tops. 

All these awful omens we saw, O King, portending the destruction of the 
Kurus as a result of your evil counsels:.' 

While Dhritarashtra and Vidura speak thus together in the Kaurava 
sabha, before the eyes of all appears Narada, best of Devarishis. 


He says direly, 'Because of Duryodhana's sins, fourteen years from now 
the mighty Arjuna and Bhima will kill all the Kauravas.' 

Saying this, that greatest of divine Sages, adorned with transcendent 
Vedic grace, rises straight into the air and vanishes. 

Then, Duryodhana, Karna and Sakuni think of Drona as their only hope 
and refuge and offer him the kingdom. Drona says to the envious and 
choleric Duryodhana, Dussasana, Kama and indeed all the Bhaaratas, 'The 
Brahmanas all say that the Pandavas are born of the Devas and they cannot 
be killed. Yet, since Dhritarashtra's sons and these kings seek my protection 
with reverence, I will protect them to the best of my power. Destiny is 
supreme, and I cannot abandon the Kauravas. 

Beaten at dice, the sons of Pandu have gone into exile in the forest for 
twelve years. They will practise brahmacharya during these years, return in 
anger and take revenge on their enemies. 

Once, I took his kingdom from Drupada, and he performed a yagna to 
have a son who would kill me. Helped by the Rishis Yaja and Upayaja, 
Drupada did have a son, Dhrishtadyumna, born from the sacrificial fire, and 
also a faultless daughter, Krishnaa. Dhrishtadyumna is now the brother-in- 
law of the Pandavas and dear to them. It is him that I fear. 

No mortal woman bore him; he is resplendent, born with a bow and 
arrows and clad in armour. I am a mortal, and I do fear him. That Parantapa 
has taken the side of the Pandavas, and I will lose my life if I ever 
encounter him in battle. 

O Kauravas, the world says, "Dhrishtadyumna is destined to kill Drona". 
What can be more painful to me? Because of you, Duryodhana, the dread 
time of war and death has almost come. You must prepare yourself for 
every exigency. 

Do not think that you have achieved everything you wanted by sending 
the Pandavas into exile. This happiness will last just a moment, for as long 
as in winter a palm tree's shadow rests at its base. Perform every yagna that 
you can, Bhaarata, enjoy your life while you are still able and give generous 
charity. When thirteen years have passed great tragedy will overwhelm 
you.' 

Dhritarashtra says, 'Kshatta, the Acharya speaks the truth. Go and bring 
back the Pandavas. If they do not come back, let them go with our respect 
and affection. They are like my sons, let them be given weapons, chariots, 
footsoldiers and the means to enjoy every luxury in the wilderness.'" 


CANTO 80 
DYUTA PARVA CONTINUED 


yo said, "When, beaten at dice, the Pandavas leave for the 
forest Dhiratarashtra is overcome by anxiety. While he sits restless and 
sighing in sorrow, Sanjaya approaches him and says, 'Lord of the earth, you 
have gained the whole world with all its wealth, and you have sent Pandu's 
sons into exile. Why, O King, are you grieving now?’ 

Dhritarashtra says, 'Who are they that would not grieve who must face 
those Kshatriyarishabhas in battle? Fighting from their great chariots, with 
their allies around them!’ 

Sanjaya says, 'Rajan, this terrible enmity is because of what you did, and 
it will surely fetch the destruction of the world as we know it. Although 
Bhishma, Drona and Vidura forbade him, your evil, shameless Duryodhana 
sent his Suta messenger to bring the chaste Draupadi into court. 

The gods first deprive the man of his reason, to whom they wish to send 
defeat and disgrace. Then, that man sees everything in strange light. When 
doom is near, evil appears as good to his mind corrupted by sin, and he 
clings firmly to it. Adharma appears to be dharma and dharma as adharma 
to the doomed man, and invariably he chooses to tread the path of sin, for it 
attracts him inexorably. 

The time of doom does not arrive with a cudgel upraised to smash a 
man's head. No, the mark of impending doom is that it makes a man see 
good in evil, and evil in good. 

The wretches have brought unthinkable nemesis upon us all by dragging 
the helpless Panchali into our sabha. Who but Duryodhana, cheating at dice, 
could even think of bringing chaste, beautiful and intelligent Draupadi, born 
from no woman's womb but from the sacred fire, she who knows dharma, 
and shaming her in this court? 

In her period, wearing only a single cloth, when the lovely Krishnaa was 
dragged here she looked at the Pandavas. She saw them robbed of their 
kingdom, their wealth, even stripped of their robes; she saw them as slaves. 
Bound by dharma, they could do nothing to protect her, and before these 
assembled kings Duryodhana and Kama spoke vile, savage words to her, 
while she wept in grief and anger. 


All this surely portends fearful consequences: 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Sanjaya, the angry look of Drupada's daughter could 
consume the world. Will even a single son of mine escape death? 

The wives of the Bhaaratas and Gandhari set up a great lament, wailing 
in grief to see the young, virtuous and beautiful Krishnaa dragged into our 
court. Even now, they and all my subjects weep every day. 

Enraged by what was done to Draupadi, the Brahmanas, in a body, did 
not perform their Agnihotra that evening. The winds blew in awesome gusts 
even as they do at the time of the Pralaya, and there was a fearsome 
thunderstorm. Meteors fell from the sky, and Rahu swallowed the Sun 
unseasonably, terrifying the people. 

Suddenly war-chariots took fire and their fiagstaffs fell down, foreboding 
evil to the Bhaaratas. Jackals began to howl frightfully from Duryodhana's 
sacred fire-chamber, and asses brayed in response from all directions. 
Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Somadatta and Mahatama Bahlika all left the 
sabha. 

It was then that, at Vidura's advice, I said to Draupadi, "I will grant you 
boons, O Krishnaa, whatever you ask." 

Panchali begged me to set the Pandavas free, and I did, commanding 
them to return to their capital in their chariots with their bows and arrows. 

Vidura told me, "This will prove to be the end of the race of Bhaarata. 
This Panchali is the faultless Sri Lakshmi herself. She is divinely born and 
the wife of the sons of Pandu. The angry Pandavas will never forgive this 
insult to her, nor will the mighty Vrishni bowmen or the dauntless Panchala 
warriors suffer this. 

With Krishna of invincible prowess to support him, Arjuna will 
assuredly return, surrounded by the Panchala host. Prodigious Bhimasenaa 
of unequalled strength will come back, whirling his mace like Yama himself 
with his cudgel. These kings will never be able to bear the force of Bhima's 
mace. 

Therefore, Rajan, to me not hostility but peace for ever with the sons of 
Pandu seems the best course. The Pandavas have always been mightier than 
the Kauravas. You know that Bhima killed the great Jarasandha with his 
bare hands. O Bhartarishabha, make peace with the sons of Pandu. 

Without any scruple or favour, unite the cousins. If you do that, you will 
surely find good fortune." 


So Vidura said to me, speaking words of both dharma and artha. But, 
moved by love for my son, I did not listen to him!" 
So said Vaisampayana to Janamejaya. 


End of Sabha Parva 


VANA PARVA 


(Part 1) 


CANTO 1 
ARANYAKA PARVA 


UM! I bow down to Narayana, and Nara, foremost of Purushas, and 
the Devi Saraswati, and utter the word Jaya! 

Janamejaya said, "O Dvijottama, having been beaten at dice by 
Dhritarashtra's sons and their counsellors, incensed by those evil ones who 
so created a fierce enmity, having been spoken to so harshly, what did my 
ancestors, Pritha's sons, do? 

Equal to Sakra in prowess, deprived suddenly of their wealth and 
plunged into misery, how did the Pandavas pass their days in the forest? 
Who followed them? How did those Mahatmas bear themselves, how did 
they sustain themselves and where did they live? Most illustrious 
Brahmanottama, how did those Kshatriyas pass twelve years in the vana, 
those Parantapas? 

How did the princess, best among women, devoted to her husbands, so 
virtuous, always speaking the truth, and surely deserving no such trial, 
endure the exile? Tell me all this in detail, O Brahmana, for I want to hear 
the story of those heroes of abundant prowess and lustre. Ah, great is my 
curiosity." 

Vaisampayana said, "Defeated at dice and incensed by Dhritarashtra's 
evil sons and their counsellors, Pritha's princes set out from Hastinapura 
through the Vardhamana gate of the city, bearing their weapons and 
accompanied by Draupadi; they go in a northerly direction. Indrasena and 
others, with their wives and servants, all together fourteen, follow them in 
swift chariots. 

When the people hear of their leaving, they are grief-stricken and 
censure Bhishma and Vidura, Drona and Gautama. Gathering, they speak 
fearlessly to one another, 'Alas, our families, we ourselves, and our homes 
are all lost, when the malignant Duryodhana, supported by Sakuni, Kama 
and Dussasana, aspires to this kingdom. 

Oh, our families, our customs, our virtue and prosperity, are all doomed, 
where this sinner, supported by wretches as sinful as him, aspires to the 
throne. And where can there be happiness, where these are gone? 


Duryodhana bears malice towards all his superiors; he has left dharma, and 
fights with his own kin. 

Covetous, vain and mean, his nature is cruel. The very Earth is doomed, 
when Duryodhana rules. So let us go with the kind and noble Pandavas, 
who are self-controlled, victorious over their enemies, who are humble, 
honourable, and devoted to dharma!' 

The people follow the Pandavas, and with folded hands say to the sons 
of Kunti and Madri: 

'Be you blest! Where are you going, leaving us in sorrow? Wherever you 
go, we will follow you. We are distraught to hear how ruthless enemies 
vanquished you with deceit. We are your loving subjects, your devoted 
friends who always serve and wish you well, and it does not become you to 
forsake us. 

We do not want to be plunged into ruin, living under the rule of the Kuru 
king. Purusharishabhas, listen while we describe the punya and paapa 
which accrue from associating with the good and the evil. As cloth, water, 
the ground, and sesame seeds are perfumed by contact with flowers, so are 
the qualities of men always produced through their associations. 

Associating with fools creates illusions which entangle the mind, just as 
keeping company with good men, daily, leads to the practice of virtue. 
"They who wish for moksha must associate with the wise, the old, the 
honest and the pure - ascetic men. They must serve such men, for the 
knowledge, the birth and the deeds of such men are all pure, and associating 
with them is superior even to studying the scriptures. 

Though we have no religious merit ourselves, we will find punya if we 
keep the company of the good, just as we will find sin by serving sinners. 
The very sight and touch of the dishonest, conversation with them and their 
company, all cause diminution of dharma, and such men never find purity 
of mind. 

Associating with the base impairs the understanding, and with the 
mediocre makes the mind mediocre, while communion with the good exalts 
the heart. All the attributes which are spoken of as sources of dharma, artha 
and kama, and which men esteem and which the Vedas extol, dwell in you, 
individually and jointly. 

So, for our own welfare, we want to live amongst you, who possess 
those qualities!’ 


Yudhishtira says, 'We are blessed that the people, led by the Brahmanas, 
moved by kindness and love, credit us with merits which we do not have. 
But my brothers and I ask all of you to do just one thing, and you must not 
do otherwise, because of your affection or your pity for us. 

Our grandfather Bhishma, King Dhritarashtra, Vidura, my mother and 
most of my well-wishers are all in Hastinapura. So, if you seek our welfare, 
unite together, and care for them, for they are plunged in sorrow. 

Grieved by our leaving, you have come far! Go back, and let your hearts 
be directed with tenderness towards the relatives I entrust to you as pledges. 
This is the one thing upon which my heart is set, and by doing this you will 
do me great service and give me much satisfaction. 

When Yudhishtira Dharmatma says this the people set up a loud lament, 
crying, 'Alas, O king!' 

Sorrowing deeply when they think of the virtues of Pritha's son, 
reluctantly they take leave of the Pandavas and turn back towards the city. 

When the people followed them no longer, the Pandavas climb into their 
chariots, and riding, reach the mighty banyan tree called Pramana on the 
banks of the Ganga. It is dusk and Pandu's heroic sons purify themselves, 
touching the river's holy water, and pass the night in that place. They spend 
that night, only drinking water. 

Some Brahmanas, both those that kept the sacred fire and those who did 
not, with their disciples and kin, have followed the Pandavas out of love; 
they, too, spend the night there with them. Surrounded by those 
Brahmavadis, the king shines resplendent in their midst. 

And that evening, at once beautiful and terrible, those Brahmanas, 
having lit their sacred fires, begin to chant the Vedas and they speak among 
themselves. Those Brahmanottamas with swan-sweet voices spend the night 
comforting that best of the Kurus, the king." 


CANTO 2 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vere said, "When night passes and day breaks, the mendicant 
Brahmanas stand before the Pandavas of lofty deeds, who are about to 
enter the forest. 

King Yudhishtira, the son of Kunti, says to them, 'We have been robbed 
of our kingdom and wealth, robbed of everything, and we are about to enter 
the deep vana in sorrow. We will eat fruit and roots, and what the hunt 
fetches. The forest is full of danger, abounding in snakes and beasts of prey. 

You will suffer privation and misery there. The sufferings of Brahmanas 
can overpower even the gods. That they will overwhelm me is certain. 
Therefore, O Brahmanas, turn back, go wherever you will.' 

The Brahmanas reply, 'O King, our path is yours. We are your devotees, 
you who practise true dharma; do not forsake us. The very gods are 
compassionate to their worshippers, especially Brahmanas of self-restraint!' 

Yudhishtira says, 'Regenerate ones, I am also devoted to Brahmanas. But 
destitution has overtaken me, and I am confused. My brothers who will 
gather fruit and roots and hunt deer are stupefied with the shock of losing 
our kingdom and the grief of Draupadi. I cannot employ them in painful or 
demanding tasks. 

The Brahmanas say, 'Dharmaraja, have no care about supporting us. We 
will follow you, providing for our own food. Through our dhyana and our 
prayers we will care for you, and cheer you and ourselves with pleasant 
conversation. 

Yudhishtira says, 'Indeed nothing pleases me more than the company of 
good Brahmanas. Yet, in my fall I see myself as deserving reproach. How 
then will I bear to look at all of you feeding yourselves, while you follow 
me out of your love? Ah, I curse Dhritarashtra's evil sons!' 

Sobbing, the king sits upon the ground. Then a learned Brahmana, 
Saunaka versed in the knowledge of the Atman and skilled in Sankhya 
yoga, says to him, 'Day after day, causes of grief in thousands, and causes 
of fear in hundreds overwhelm the ignorant, but not the wise. Surely, 
sensible men like you never allow themselves to be deluded by actions 


which are contrary to true knowledge, which are fraught with every kind of 
evil, and which destroy moksha. 

In you there dwells the understanding furnished with the eight attributes, 
the gyana which comes from studying the Sruti! and the Shastras, which 
knowledge provides against all evils. And men like you are never 
confounded, not upon finding themselves impoverished or at the affliction 
of their friends, either through mental or bodily unease. 

Listen, and I will repeat the slokas told of old by Janaka, which deal with 
the subject of controlling the self. This world is afflicted with both bodily 
and mental suffering. Hear now the means of allaying the twin torments, 
both in brief and in some detail. 

Disease, contact with things of pain, toil and being deprived of objects of 
desire cause bodily suffering. Disease is allayed with medicines, ailments of 
the mind through yoga and meditation. Good physicians first seek to allay 
the mental sufferings of their patients with pleasant conversation and 
offering them desirable objects. 

Even as a hot iron rod immersed into a jar heats the water inside, even so 
mental grief brings bodily agony; and as water quenches fire, so does true 
knowledge allay mental disquiet. When the mind finds ease, the body finds 
ease also. 

Affection seems to be the root of all sorrow; affection makes every 
creature miserable and brings on every kind of woe. Affection is the root of 
misery and of all fear, of joy and grief of every kind, of pain. From 
affection spring all motives to action, and the love of worldly goods. Both 
these are sources of evil, though the first is worse than the second. 

As a spark fire lit in the hollow of a tree consumes the tree to its very 
roots, even so affection, be it ever so little, destroys both dharma and artha. 
A man who has merely withdrawn from worldly life cannot be said to have 
renounced the world. However, he who, while in active contact with the 
world, clearly sees its flaws, may be said to have truly renounced the world. 
Freed from every evil passion, his soul dependent on nothing, such a man 
has indeed relinquished the world. 

No one should seek to attach his affections either on friends or the 
wealth he has earned. So, also, must attachment and affection for one's own 
person be extinguished through knowledge. Like the lotus-leaf, which is 
never wetted by water, are the souls of men who can distinguish between 
the ephemeral and the everlasting. 


Men devoted to the pursuit of the eternal, who know the scriptures and 
are purified by knowledge, can never be moved by affection. The man 
influenced by affection is tortured by desire; from the desire that springs up 
in his heart, his thirst for worldly possessions increases. This thirst is sinful 
and is the source of all anxiety. This terrible thirst, fraught with evil, leads 
men to sin. 

Those who can renounce this thirst, never the wicked, find the happiness 
which does not decay with the decay of the body, which is truly the fatal 
disease. That joy has neither beginning nor end. 

Abiding in the heart, desire destroys creatures, like an incorporeal fire. 
As a faggot of wood is consumed by the fire that it feeds, even so an impure 
man finds death from the covetousness born in his heart. As all living 
creatures always have a dread of death, wealthy men live in constant dread 
of the king and the thief, of water and fire and even of their relatives. 

A morsel of meat, if in the air, can be devoured by birds; if on the 
ground, by beasts of prey; if in water, by fish: even so a man of wealth is 
exposed to danger wherever he is. To many the wealth they own is their 
bane, and he who sees happiness in wealth and becomes wedded to it, never 
knows true happiness. 

So, the accession of wealth is seen as what increases covetousness and 
folly; wealth alone is the root of niggardliness and boastfulness, pride, 
anxiety and fear. These are the miseries of men that the wise see in owning 
riches. Men undergo infinite miseries in the acquisition and the retention of 
wealth. Its expenditure is also fraught with grief. Why, sometimes life itself 
is lost for the sake of wealth. 

Loss of wealth brings misery, and even those whom a man nurtured with 
his wealth become enemies for the sake of that wealth. When owning 
wealth is ridden with such sorrow, one should not mind its loss. 

Only the ignorant are discontented; the wise are always content. The 
thirst for wealth can never be slaked. Contentment is the highest happiness; 
so it is that the wise regard contentment as the highest goal worth striving 
for. 

The wise know the evanescence of youth and beauty, of life and treasure, 
of prosperity and the company of loved ones, and never covet these. A man 
must refrain from acquiring overmuch wealth, for none who is rich is free 
from trouble; this is why the virtuous laud those who are free from the 
desire for wealth. 


And for those that pursue wealth for dharma, it is better for them to 
desist, since, surely, it is better not to touch dirt at all than to wash it off 
after having been besmirched by it. Yudhishtira, do not covet anything, and 
if you seek dharma, free yourself from the desire for possessions.' 

Yudhishtira says, 'Dvija, my desire for wealth is not for enjoying it, but 
only to support you Brahmanas. I am not driven by greed. Why, O 
Brahmana, do I lead the life of a grihasta, if I cannot cherish and support 
those who follow me? All creatures divide the food they procure amongst 
those that depend on them. 

A grihasta should share his food with yatis and brahmacharins who have 
renounced cooking for themselves. The houses of good men must never 
want for grass, beds, food, water and, fifthly, sweet words. For the standing 
a seat of grass, for the weary a bed, water for the thirsty, and food for the 
hungry. 

Kind looks, a cheerful heart and sweet words are always due to a guest. 
Rising, the host must go up to welcome a guest, offer him a seat, and 
worship him. This is Sanatana Dharma. They who do not perform the 
Agnihotra,” do not care for their cows and bulls, cherish their kinsmen, 
guests, friends, sons, wives and servants, are consumed by sin for their 
neglect. 

None should cook food just for himself; none should slay an animal 
without dedicating it to the gods, the manes, and guests. Nor should one eat 
food which has not been duly offered to the Devas and the Pitrs. One must 
set food on the earth, morning and evening, for dogs and Chandalas, scatter 
grain for birds, and then perform the Viswadeva sacrifice.* 

He who eats the vighasa, what has first been offered during a sacrifice to 
the gods and the manes, eats ambrosia; what remains after feeding a guest is 
vighasa and equal to amrita. Feeding a guest is equal to a sacrifice, and the 
pleasant looks the host casts upon the guest, the attention he pays him, the 
sweet words in which he addresses him, the respect he pays by following 
him, and the food and drink which he serves him are the five dakshinas of 
that sacrifice. 

He who gives food, unstintingly, to a tired wayfarer whom he has never 
seen before, finds great punya. 

The grihasta who follows these practices, I have heard, gains great 
religious merit. 0 Brahmana, what do you say about this?’ 


Saunaka says, 'Alas, this world is full of contradictions! He who blames 
the good pleases the evil. Moved by ignorance and passion, and being 
slaves to their senses, even fools perform many acts of apparent punya, but 
only to gratify their appetites in the after-life! 

With eyes open, their seducing senses lead these men astray, rather like a 
charioteer who has fallen, by having restive and wicked horses. When any 
of the six senses finds its particular object, desire springs up in the heart to 
enjoy that particular object. When the heart begins to enjoy the object of a 
sense, it entertains a wish, which then spawns a resolve. 

Finally, pierced by the shafts of the objects of enjoyment set loose by the 
desire which constitutes the seed of the resolve, like an insect falling into a 
flame from its love of light, the man falls into the fire of temptation. 
Thereon, blinded by sensual pleasure which he seeks without stint, steeped 
in dark ignorance and folly, which he mistakes for joy, he does not know 
himself. 

Like a wheel which incessantly turns, every creature, from avidya, 
karma and kama, falls into various states in this world, wandering from one 
birth to another, and ranges the entire range of existences from Brahma to 
the point of a blade of grass, now in water, now on land, and again in the 
air! 

This is the careen of those who are without knowledge. Listen now to 
the course of the wise, they who are intent on dharma, artha, and who wish 
for moksha. The Vedas enjoin that we act but renounce action's fruit. You 
must perform karma, but without ahamkara, ego. 

The performance of sacrifices, study of the Vedas, gifts, penance, truth in 
both speech and act, forgiveness, subduing the senses, and renunciation of 
desire - these have been declared to be the eight cardinal duties which make 
up the true path. 

Of these, the four first pave the way to the world of the Pitrs, and these 
must be practised without abhimana, pride. The last four are observed by 
the pious, to attain the heaven of the Devas. The pure in spirit must always 
follow these eight paths. Those who wish to subdue the world for moksha, 
must engage in karma, entirely renouncing motives, subduing their senses, 
unswervingly observing some vratas, devotedly serving their Gurus, 
austerely regulating their food, diligently studying the Vedas, relinquishing 
action as mean and restraining their hearts. 


By renouncing desire and aversion, have the gods attained prosperity. 
Through the wealth of Yoga, the Rudras, the Sadhyas, the Adityas, the 
Vasus, and the Aswin twins rule other creatures. Therefore, Kaunteya, like 
them, O Bhaarata, you also refrain from karma with motive; strive towards 
attaining Yoga through austerities. 

Already, you have paid your debts to your ancestors, both male and 
female; you have successfully performed yagnas and good karma; now in 
order to serve the Brahmanas, strive to attain success in tapasya. For those 
who find success at penance can do whatever they like. So, through tapasya 
gain whatever you wish. " 


! The Vedas. 


2.4 form of sacrifice which consists of pouring oblations of clarified butter accompanied by prayers 
into a blazing fire. It is obligatory for Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, except those that take certain vows 
of great austerity. 


3 The Viswadeva sacrifice is the offering of food to all creatures of the Earth. 


4A gift. It may be of various kinds. The fees paid to Brahmanas assisting at sacrifices and religious 
rites, such as offering oblations to the dead, are dakshinas; as also gifts to Brahmanas on other 
occasions particularly when they are fed, it being to this day the custom never to fete a Brahmana 
without paying him a pecuniary fee. There can be no sacrifice, no religious rite, without dakshina. 


CANTO 3 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


yoo said, "Thus addressed by Saunaka, Yudhishtira 
approaches his priest, and in the presence of his brothers says, 'The 
Brahmanas versed in the Vedas mean to follow me into the forest. I am 
beset by misfortune and cannot support them. I cannot abandon them either, 
but I have no power to offer them sustenance. Holy One, tell me what I 
should do.’ 

Dhaumya uses his yogic powers to reflect a moment, then that 
Dvijottama says to Yudhishtira, 'Once, long ago, all living creatures were 
sorely afflicted by hunger, and Savita the Sun took pity upon them, even 
like a father. First, he went north and drew up water through his rays; 
returning south, he remained above the world, with his heat indrawn. 

While the Sun remained thus poised, the Moon made the vapour within 
the solar orb into clouds, poured them down as rain and created plants. 
Thus, it is the Sun himself who, drenched by the Moon's influence, is 
transformed, upon the sprouting of seeds, into holy nutriments furnished 
with the six tastes. And these constitute the food of all creatures upon the 
Earth. 

So, the food which supports the lives of creatures is infused with solar 
energy, and hence the Sun is the father of all creatures. Yudhishtira, you 
must also seek refuge in Surya. 

Many illustrious and high-born kings, of mighty deeds, delivered their 
people through tapasya. The great Kartavirya, Vainya and Nahusha, all, 
saved their people from calamities by practising dhyana after swearing stern 
vratas. Virtuous Bhaarata, you also purify yourself with dhyana and 
vigorously support the Brahmanas."" 

Janamejaya said, "How did that Bull among the Kurus, Yudhishtira 
Dharmaraja, adore the lustrous Sun for the sake of the Brahmanas?" 

Vaisampayana said, "Listen carefully, O King, purify yourself and 
withdraw your mind from every other thought. King of kings, appoint an 
hour for it and I will tell you everything in detail. 

Listen to the one hundred and eight names of the Sun as Dhaumya 
disclosed them of old to Pritha's son, the Mahatman. 


Dhaumya spoke these names, ‘Surya, Aryaman, Bhaga, Twastri, Pusha, 
Arka, Savitri, Ravi, Gabhastimat, Aja, Kala, Mrityu, Dhatri, Prabhakara, 
Prithivi, Apa, Teja, Kha, Vayu, Parayana, Soma, Brihaspati, Sukra, Budha, 
Angaraka, Indra, Vivaswat, Diptanshu, Suchi, Sauri, Sanaischara, Brahma, 
Vishnu, Rudra, Skanda, Vaisravana, Yama, Vaidyuta, Jatharagni, Agni, 
Aindhna, Tejasampati, Dharmadhwaja, Vedakarta, Vedanga, Vedavahana, 
Krita, Treta, Dwapara, Kali, full of every impurity, Kala, Kashta, Muhurta, 
Kshapa, Yama, and Kshana; Samvatsarakara, Aswattha, Kalachakra, 
Vibhavasu, Purusha, Saswata, Yogin, Vyaktavyakta, Sanatana, 
Kaladhyaksha, Prajadhyaksha, Viswakarma, Tamounda, Varuna, Sagara, 
Ansu, Jimuta, Jivana, Arihan, Bhutasraya, Bhutapati, Srastri, Samvartaka, 
Vahni, Sarvasyadi, Alolupa, Ananta, Kapila, Bhanu, Kamada, 
Sarvatomukha, Jaya, Visala, Varada, Manas, Suparna, Bhutadi, Sighraga, 
Prandharaka, Dhanvantari, Dhumaketu, Adideva, Aditisuta, Dwadasatman, 
Aravindaksha, Pita, Mata, Pitamaha, Swargadwara,  Prajadwara, 
Mokshadwara, ‘Trivishtapa, Dehakarta, Prasantatman, Viswatman, 
Viswatomukha, Characharatman, Sukhsmatman, the merciful Maitreya.! 

These are the hundred and eight names of Surya of measureless energy, 
as told by the Swayambhuva. 

For prosperity I bow down to you, O Bhaskara, who blaze like gold or 
fire, who is worshipped by the Devas, the Pitrs and the Yakshas, who is 
adored by Asuras, Nisacharas, and Siddhas. 

He who with fixed attention recites this hymn at sunrise, gains a wife 
and children, riches and the remembrance of his former life; by reciting this 
hymn a person attains patience and memory. Concentrating his mind, let a 
man recite this hymn, for he shall become proof against grief, forest-fire 
and ocean; and every object of desire shall be his.' 

Hearing this from Dhaumya, Yudhishtira absorbs himself in dhyana, so 
he can support the Brahmanas. Worshipping the maker of day with flowers 
and other offerings, the king performs his ablutions. Standing in the river, 
he turns his face towards the god of day. Touching the water of the Ganga, 
the virtuous Yudhishtira, his senses perfectly controlled, the air his only 
sustenance, stands there, his soul rapt, his breath regulated in pranayama. 
Having purified himself and restrained his speech, he begins to sing the 
hymn of praise to the Sun. 

Yudhishtira says, 'You are, O Surya, the eye of the universe. You are the 
soul of all corporeal existences. You are the origin of all things. You are the 


embodiment of the deeds of all religious men. You are the refuge of the 
Sankhyas and the support of the Yogins. 

You are a door without bolts. You are the sanctuary of those who seek 
moksha. You sustain and light the world, sanctify and support it out of pure 
compassion. Appearing before you, Brahmanas versed in the Vedas worship 
you with hymns from the Vedas. 

The Rishis adore you. Wanting boons from you, the Siddhas, the 
Charanas, the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the Guhyakas and the Nagas follow 
your chariot coursing through the sky. The thirty-three Devas, with Upendra 
and Mahendra, and the order of Vaimanikas, have attained success by 
worshipping you. 

By offering you garlands of the celestial mandaras, the best of the 
Vidyadharas have had all their wishes fulfilled. The Guhyas and the seven 
orders of the Pitrs—both divine and human—became superior only by 
adoring you. lhe Vasus, the Marutas, the Rudras, the Sadhyas, the 
Marichipas, the Balakhilyas, and the Siddhas became pre-eminent by 
bowing down to you. 

I know there is nothing in all the seven worlds, including that of 
Brahma, which is beyond you. There are other beings both great and 
endowed with tejas; but none of them has your lustre and energy. All light 
is in you, indeed, you are the lord of all light. 

In you are the five elements and all intelligence, knowledge, asceticism 
and the ascetic qualities. The Chakra with which the wielder of the Saranga 
humbles the pride of Asuras, the disc with the beautiful nave, was forged by 
Viswakarman from your tejas. 

In summer, through your rays, you draw moisture from all corporeal 
beings, from plants and fluid things, and pour it down during the monsoon. 
Your rays warm and scorch, and, becoming clouds, roar and flash with 
lightning and pour down showers when each season comes. Not fire, 
shelter, or woollen cloths give greater comfort against the cold than your 
rays. 

With your rays you illumine all the Earth, with her thirteen Dwipas. You 
alone engage yourself constantly in the welfare of the three worlds. If you 
do not rise, the universe becomes blind and the wise cannot strive to attain 
dharma, artha and kama. Through your grace the three varnas, the 
Brahmanas, the Kshatriyas and the Vaisyas, perform their various duties 
and sacrifices. 


Those who fathom time say that you are the beginning and the end of a 
day of Brahma, which lasts a full thousand Yugas. You are the lord of 
Manus and the sons of the Manus, of the Universe and of man, of the 
Manvantaras, and their lords. 

When the time of Pralaya comes, the fire Samvartaka, born of your 
wrath, consumes the three worlds and exists alone. Born of your rays, 
clouds of many hues, along with Airavata and the Vajra, bring the appointed 
deluges, and dividing yourself into twelve parts, becoming as many Suns, 
you drink up the ocean once more with your rays. 

You are called Indra, you are Vishnu, you are Brahma, you are Prajapati. 
You are fire and you are the subtle mind. You are the Lord and the eternal 
Brahman. You are Hansa, you are Savitri; you are Bhanu, Ansumalin, and 
Vrishakapi. You are Vivaswan, Mihira, Pusha, Mitra, and Dharma. You are 
thousand-rayed; you are Aditya, Tapana, and the lord of rays. 

You are Martanda, Arka, Ravi, Surya, Saranya and the maker of day. 
You are Divakara, Saptasaspti, Dhamakesin and Virochana. They say you 
are swift as light and the destroyer of darkness, the owner of golden steeds. 

He who reverentially adores you on the sixth or the seventh lunar day, 
humbly and with tranquillity of mind, finds the grace of Lakshmi. They that 
single-mindedly worship you are delivered from all dangers, agonies and 
afflictions. They who hold that you are everywhere, being the soul of all 
things, live long, are freed from sin and are immune to all disease. 

O Lord of all food, it becomes you to grant abundant food to me, for I 
wish to feed my atithis, my guests, with every reverence. 

I bow also to all your followers, who have taken refuge at your feet— 
Matara, Aruna, Danda, Asani, Kshubha and the others. And I bow to the 
celestial mothers of all creatures: Kshubha, Maitri and the rest. 

O let them deliver me, their supplicant!' 

Thus, O Maharajan, Yudhishtira adores the Sun, purifier of the world. 
Pleased with the hymn, the maker of day, self-luminous, and blazing like 
fire shows himself to the son of Pandu. 

Vivaswan says, 'You will have everything that you want. I will provide 
you with food for five and seven years. O King, take this copper vessel 
from me, and as long as Panchali holds this vessel, without partaking of its 
contents, or fruit, roots, and meat and vegetables cooked in your kitchen, 
these four kinds of food shall well inexhaustibly from it from today. 

On the fourteenth year from this, you will regain your kingdom. 


Saying this, the Deva vanishes. He who wants a boon and recites this 
hymn with his mind absorbed in dhyana, will have whatever he wishes for 
from the Sun, however difficult of acquisition what he asks for might be. 

And the one who hears or chants this stotra, day after day, wanting a son, 
he or she gets one; and if riches, gets those; and if learning, acquires that 
too. And the man or woman who chants this hymn every day, during the 
two sandhyas, is delivered from all danger and bonds. 

Brahma himself taught this hymn to the illustrious Sakra; Narada had it 
from Sakra, and Dhaumya from Narada. Dhaumya gave it to Yudhishtira, 
and the Pandava got whatever he wished for. Through this hymn a man can 
always be victorious at war and acquire immense wealth, too. It leads the 
one who recites it from all sins, to the realm of the Sun. 

With the Sun's boon - the copper vessel - Yudhishtira comes out of the 
water, clasps Dhaumya's feet and embraces his brothers. Going into their 
kitchen with Panchali, then, Pandu's son begins to cook the day's food. That 
food, though minuscule in quantity, clean and furnished with the four tastes, 
increases and becomes inexhaustible. 

With it, Yudhishtira begins to feed the Brahmanas; and when they have 
eaten, he feeds his brothers and eats what remains himself, the portion 
called vighasa. After Yudhishtira has eaten, Prihasta's daughter Draupadi 
eats what remains. And when she has eaten, the food for that day is 
exhausted and the copper vessel empty. 

Thus, with his boon from the maker of day, the son of Pandu, himself as 
splendid as that Deva, begins to feed his Brahmanas the finest fare. 

Obedient to their priest, Pritha's sons, on auspicious lunar days, 
constellations and conjunctions, perform sacrifices according to the 
ordinance, the scriptures, and the mantras. After the sacrifices, the 
Pandavas, blessed by the auspicious rites which Dhaumya performs, and 
accompanied by him, and surrounded also by the Brahmanas, set out for the 
Kamyaka vana." 


I Not exactly 108 names in the KMG text! 


CANTO 4 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


y= said, "After the Pandavas have entered the forest, 
Ambika's son Dhritarashtra, whose knowledge was his eye,! grows 
exceedingly sorrowful. Sitting at his ease, the king says to the virtuous 
Vidura of profound intelligence, 'Your understanding is as clear as 
Bhargava's. You know all the nuances of dharma, and you look at all the 
Kauravas equally. 

Tell me what is right for them and for me, as well. Vidura, things having 
this course, what should we do now? How can I secure the goodwill of the 
people so that they do not uproot us? Tell us all, for you know every 
excellent expedient. 

Vidura says, 'My King, artha, kama and moksha are all founded in 
dharma, and the Sages say that a kingdom also stands if it is based on 
dharma. So, Rajan, cherish your son and Pandu's son equally, in dharma. 

Evil souls, with Subala's son Sakuni leading them, subverted that 
dharma when your son called the righteous Yudhishtira here and 
vanquished him at dice. I see one expiation for this base act, by which your 
son can be freed from his sin and win back his place among good men. 
Give back to the Pandavas what you first returned to them; give 
Indraprastha back to them. For, a king's highest dharma is that he must 
remain content with his own possessions and never covet another's. Thus 
your honour will remain and nor will dissension arise in your family, and 
nor any sin attach to you. Your first duty now is to disgrace Sakuni and to 
satisfy the Pandavas. If you want to restore your sons to the good fortune 
that they have lost, do this immediately. 

If you do not, the Kurus will surely be destroyed because neither 
Bhimasena nor Arjuna, if angry, will leave any of their foes unslain. What 
is there in this world that they cannot attain, who have Savyasachin among 
their warriors, the Gandiva, most potent of weapons his bow, and also the 
inexorable Bhimasena? 

Once, as soon as your son was born, I said to you, Abandon this 
inauspicious child, for in that lies the good of your clan. But you did not do 


as I said then. Now, also, I am showing you the way to your salvation. If 
you do as I say, you will not have to repent later. 

If your son agrees to rule jointly with the sons of Pandu, and in peace, 
you will pass your days in joy. If he will not, forsake Duryodhana for the 
sake of your own happiness. Cast him aside and crown Yudhishtira 
Ajatasatru, who is free from passion, king of all the Kurus, and let him rule 
the Earth with dharma. And then all the kings of the world will quickly pay 
homage to us, even like Vaisyas. Let Duryodhana, Sakuni and Kama wait 
upon the Pandavas; let Dussasana, in the open sabha, ask Bhimasena's 
forgiveness and the forgiveness of Draupadi also; and pacify Yudhishtira by 
setting him upon the throne with every show of respect. 

You have asked me, and what other counsel can I give you? By doing 
this, O King, you will do what is right, and keep dharma. 

Dhritarashtra says, 'You said the same thing in this sabha, Vidura, but 
what you say is only beneficial to the Pandavas, not to me. My heart does 
not like what you say. 

How have you decided all this in your mind? You speak only for the 
good of the Pandavas and I see that you are not friendly towards me. How 
can I abandon my son for the sake of the sons of Pandu? Doubtless they, 
too, are my sons, but Duryodhana has sprung from my body. Who, speaking 
impartially, will ever advise me to renounce my own body for the sake of 
another's? 

Vidura, though I hold you in high esteem, everything that you say is 
crooked. Stay here or go as you please. However much he might humour 
and please her, an unchaste wife will always forsake her husband!’ 

Saying this, Dhritarashtra rises abruptly and goes into his antahpura. 

Vidura says, "This race is doomed', and he goes away to where the sons 
of Pritha are." 


| Being blind, Dhritarashtra is described as Pragnachakshu, having knowledge for his eye. It may 
also mean, 'Of the prophetic eye'. 


CANTO 5 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


yoo said, "Wanting to live in the forest, those bulls of the race 
of Bhaarata, the Pandavas, with their followers, set out from the banks 
of the Ganga and journey to the field of Kurukshetra. Performing their 
ablutions in the Saraswati, the Drisadwati and the Yamuna, they go from 
one forest to another, travelling in a westerly direction. 

Finally, they see the Kamyaka vana before them, favourite haunt of 
Munis, looming beside a level and wild plain on the banks of the Saraswati. 
In that forest, abounding in birds and deer, those heroes begin to dwell, 
entertained and comforted by the Munis. Always yearning to see the 
Pandavas, Vidura rides in a single chariot to the Kamyaka aranya, abundant 
with all things good and auspicious. 

Arriving in the Kamyaka in his chariot drawn by swift steeds, he sees 
Yudhishtira Dharmatma, sitting with Draupadi in a secluded spot, 
surrounded by his brothers and the Brahmanas. Seeing Vidura approach 
from a distance with swift steps, the king says to his brother Bhimasena, 
"With what message does Kshatta come to us now? Does he come sent by 
Sakuni to invite us to another game of dice? Does the vile Sakuni intend to 
win back our weapons by gambling? 

O Bhima, I cannot refuse anyone who asks me for anything. And if we 
lose the Gandiva at dice, how will we regain our kingdom?’ 

The Pandavas rise to welcome Vidura, and he, descendant of Ajamida, 
sits down among them and makes the customary enquiries after their 
welfare. When Vidura has rested awhile, those bulls among men ask him 
the reason for his coming, and he tells them in detail everything that 
transpired with Ambika's son Dhritarashtra. 

Vidura says, Ajatasatru, Dhritarashtra called me, his dependant, to him 
and honouring me duly, said, "Things have taken their course, Vidura. Now 
tell me what I should do which will benefit both the Pandavas and myself." 

I told him what was dharma and also good for both yourselves and him. 
But Dhritarashtra did not relish what I said to him, and I could not see what 
other counsel to offer. 


What I advised, O Pandavas, was truly beneficial, but Ambika's son 
would not listen to me. My words failed to please him, even as good 
medicine does not recommend itself to one that is ill. And, O Yudhishtira, 
as an unchaste wife in the family of a man of pure descent cannot be 
brought back to the path of virtue, so did I fail to bring Dhritarashtra back 
to dharma. 

Indeed, as a young woman does not like a husband of three score years, 
even so Dhritarashtra did not like what I said. Surely, doom will overtake 
the Kuru race; surely Dhritarashtra will never find good fortune. For, as 
water dropped on a lotus-leaf does not remain there, my counsels will have 
no effect upon my brother. 

The incensed Dhritarashtra told me, O Bhaarata, "Go where you like! I 
will never again seek your help in ruling the earth or my capital." 

Best of kings, forsaken by Dhritarashtra, I have come to you. What I said 
in the open court, I will now repeat. Listen, and bear my words in mind: 

The wise man who bears all the gross wrongs heaped upon him by his 
enemies, who patiently bides his time, and multiplies his resources even as 
men turn a small fire into a large one by degrees, will rule the whole world. 
He who shares his substance with his followers in prosperity will find in 
them sharers of his adversity. This is the best means of securing followers, 
and he who has followers wins the sovereignty of the world. 

O Pandava, divide your prosperity with your followers, be honest with 
them, and speak to them agreeably. Share your food with them, and never 
boast in their presence. Such conduct increases the prosperity of kings!’ 

Yudhishtira says, 'You have such a lofty intelligence, undisturbed by 
passion, and I will do as you say. Whatever else you advise, in time and 
place, I will follow carefully and entirely." 


CANTO 6 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vo said, "O King, after Vidura leaves Hastinapura and goes 
to the Pandavas, Dhritarashtra repents. Thinking of Vidura's great 
intelligence in matters of both war and peace, and also of the rise of the 
Pandavas in the future, Dhritarashtra, grieving for Vidura, comes to the 
door of the great sabha and falls senseless in the presence of the waiting 
kings. 

Regaining consciousness, the king rises from the ground and says to 
Sanjaya standing by, 'My brother is even like Dharma Deva himself. I think 
of him today and my heart burns in grief. Go Sanjaya, fetch my brother to 
me, my Vidura master of dharma.' 

And the king weeps. Scalded by remorse, overwhelmed with sorrow to 
think of Vidura, Dhritarashtra, full of brotherly love, says again, 'Sanjaya, 
go and find out if my brother, whom I so cruelly cast out in my anger, is still 
alive! He is wise, immeasurably intelligent, and he has never been guilty of 
the slightest transgression; yet it is him that I have wronged so grievously. 

Seek him, wise Sanjaya, and bring him back here. Otherwise, I will kill 
myself!’ 

Sanjaya hears the king and approves heartily. Saying, "Tathastu!' he sets 
out for the Kamyaka forest. Arriving swiftly in the vana where the 
Pandavas dwell, Sanjaya sees Yudhishtira clad in deerskin, sitting with 
Vidura, in the midst of thousands of Brahmanas - Yudhishtira guarded by 
his brothers, even like Purandara amongst the celestials! 

Approaching Yudhishtira, Sanjaya duly worships him and is received 
with respect by Bhima and Arjuna and the twins. Yudhishtira makes the 
customary inquiries after his welfare. When he has been seated at his ease, 
Sanjaya discloses the reason for his visit, 'O Kshatta, Ambika's son 
Dhritarashtra remembers you, he grieves terribly for you! Return to him 
immediately, and restore the king's spirits. 

O best of men, I say that, with the leave of the Kuru princes, these 
Purushottamas, it becomes you to return to that lion among kings, your 
brother, at his command.' 


The wise Vidura, always loving towards his kin, hears what Sanjaya 
says, and with Yudhishtira's leave, he goes back to the city named for the 
elephant. He comes into the king's presence and Ambika's son, 
Dhritarashtra of bright tejas, says to him, Ah Vidura, it is my great fortune 
that you, sinless one, knower of dharma, have come back, thinking of me! 
Bharatarishabha, while you were away I could not sleep by day or night, 
like one who had been lost in the world.' 

The king takes his brother onto his lap and sniffs the top of his head in 
love, saying, 'Forgive me, Anagha, sinless one, for what I said to you!’ 

Vidura says, 'My King, I have already forgiven you. You are my 
superior, worthy of the highest reverence. Here I am, and I came back eager 
to see you. Purusharishabha, all men of dharma are naturally partial towards 
those in distress and this is hardly because of any deliberation. Your sons 
are as dear to me as the sons of Pandu, but the Pandavas are in trouble and 
that is why my heart goes out to them. 

Thus conciliating each other, the two illustrious brothers, Vidura and 
Dhritarashtra, feel happy." 


CANTO 7 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vere said, "Hearing that Vidura had returned, and that the king 
had consoled him, Dhritarashtra's evil son burns with grief. His mind 
clouded with ignorance, he summons Sakuni, Kama and Dussasana, and 
says to them, 'The learned Vidura, the minister of the wise Dhritarashtra, 
has returned! He is partial to the Pandavas, and always seeks to favour 
them. 

I hope he does not persuade the king to bring them back. If ever I see 
Pritha's sons return to this city, I will starve myself to death, take poison, 
hang myself, immolate myself or kill myself with my own weapons. But I 
can never see the sons of Pandu prosper again! 

Sakuni says, 'Lord of the earth, what folly takes hold of you? The 
Pandavas have gone into the forest, having sworn an oath not to return for 
thirteen years, so what you fear will never happen. Bharatarishabha, the 
Pandavas always keep dharma and their word. Even if your father calls 
them back they will not return. 

Yet, if they do, perchance, come back at the king's command, breaking 
their vow, we must remain calm, keep our own counsel, and be seemingly 
obedient to the king's wishes, while we watch the sons of Pandu carefully.' 

Dussasana says, 'I agree with you, O most intelligent uncle. You always 
speak words of wisdom which recommend themselves to me!' 

Karna says, ‘Duryodhana, all of us seek to do your will, O King, and I 
see that we are unanimous in this thing. The self-controlled sons of Pandu 
will not return during their time of their exile, and thereby break their 
solemn word. But if they do, from foolishness, I say beat them again at 
another game of dice!’ 

But Duryodhana is cheerless and turns his face away from _ his 
confederates. Kama marks this, expands his beautiful eyes, gesticulates 
angrily, and says vehemently, haughtily, to Duryodhana, Dussasana and 
Subala's son, 'Kshatriyas, know my mind! We are all servants of 
Duryodhana, and wait upon him with folded hands. We must always do 
what pleases him, yet we are not always able to please him promptly 
because of his father Dhritarashtra. 


I say let us put on our armour, take our weapons, mount our chariots and 
ride at once to kill the Pandavas in the forest. When Pandu's sons have been 
silenced and sent on the unknown journey, both Dhritarashtra and we will 
find peace. As long as they are in distress, as long as they are plunged in 
sorrow, as long as they are without help, we are a match for them. This is 
my mind!’ 

They loudly applaud what the Sutaputra says, and finally cry all together, 
"Yes, let us do what you say!’ 

Each of them mounts his chariot, and confident of success, rush forth in 
a body to kill the sons of Pandu. However, Krishna-Dwaipayana, of pure 
soul, divines their intention, appears before them and sternly commands 
them to desist. Sending them back, the holy one, worshipped by all the 
worlds, quickly appears before the king, whose sight is his knowledge, 
sitting upon his throne. 

The Maharishi Vyasa speaks thus to that sovereign." 


CANTO 8 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ yasa says, 'Dhritarashtra, listen to what I have to say, for I will tell 

Vo what is good for all the Kauravas. 

Mahabaho, I am not pleased that, deceitfully beaten at dice by 
Duryodhana and the others, the Pandavas have gone into exile. O Bhaarata, 
at the end of thirteen years, recollecting all their travail, they may well 
shower astras of death, even like virulent poison, upon the Kauravas. 

Why does your sinful son, always inflamed by anger, seek to kill the 
sons of Pandu for the sake of their kingdom? Let the fool be restrained; let 
your son remain quiet. If he tries to kill the Pandavas in exile, he will only 
lose his own life. 

You are as honest as the wise Vidura, Bhishma, or I, as Kripa or Drona. 
O you of profound wisdom, dissension within one's family is forbidden, 
sinful and reprehensible. O King, you must refrain from such folly. 

Bhaarata, Duryodhana looks upon the Pandavas with such envy that 
great harm will come of it, if you do not interfere. Otherwise, let this evil 
son of yours go, alone and unaccompanied, to the forest and live with the 
sons of Pandu. For then, if the Pandavas, from association, begin to feel 
attachment for Duryodhana, then good fortune may be yours. 

Ah, but this cannot be, for it is said that a man's congenital nature does 
not leave him, not until his death. But what do Bhishma and Drona and 
Vidura think? What do you think? 

You must do what is beneficial while there is time, or all your purposes 
will remain unrealised." 


CANTO 9 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ hritarashtra says, 'Holy one, I did not favour the gambling, I but, O 

Muni, I believe that fate made me consent to it. Neither Bhishma 
nor Drona, Vidura nor Gandhari, liked the game of dice. No doubt, it was 
folly. And, illustrious one, you who delight in keeping vratas, I know this is 
folly, yet I am ruled by fatherly love and I am unable to cast off my 
senseless son Duryodhana.' 

Vyasa says, 'Son of Vichitravirya, what you say is true! I well know that 
a son is the best of all things and there is nothing as good as a son. Taught 
by Surabhi's tears, Indra learnt that a son surpasses every other possession, 
however valuable, in worth. 

Rajan, let me tell you that best of stories, which deals with a 
conversation between Indra and Surabhi. In elder days, Surabhi, the mother 
of cows, was once crying in Devaloka. Indra felt compassion for her, and 
asked her, "Auspicious one, why are you crying? Is everything well with the 
Devas? Has any misfortune, ever so little, befallen the world of the 
Manavas or Nagas?" 

Surabhi replied, "No evil which I perceive has befallen you. But I am 
aggrieved because of my son, and that is why I weep! Look, O Lord of the 
Devas, where yonder cruel farmer belabours my weak son with a wooden 
stick, and oppresses him with a plough, so my son is in agony and falls onto 
the ground. 

At this sight, O Devendra, pity fills me and my mind is agitated. The 
stronger of the pair bears his burden easily, but the weaker, O Vasava, is 
lean, a mass of skin and bones, with veins and arteries showing. He bears 
his load with great hardship and it is for him that I grieve. 

Look where lashes of the whip mark his hide and he staggers. It is for 
him I am grief-stricken and these tears flow from my eyes." 

Sakra said, "Fair one, when thousands of your sons are daily oppressed, 
why do you grieve for one?" 

Surabhi replied, "Although I have a thousand offspring, my affections 
flow equally towards them all! But, O Indra, I feel great love and pity for 
one who is weak and innocent." 


Vyasa continues, 'Indra was greatly surprised to hear these words of 
Surabhi; he became convinced that a son is dearer than one's life. The 
illustrious chastiser of Paka suddenly poured a heavy rain and obstructed 
the farmer's work. As Surabhi said, your affections, O King, flow equally 
towards all your sons. Let them be greater towards those that are weak! 

As my son Pandu is to me, so are you, my child, and so also Vidura of 
profound wisdom. I say all this to you out of my love. Bhaarata, you have a 
hundred and one sons, but Pandu has only five. And they are in a sad plight 
and pass their days in sorrow. 

How can they save their lives, how will they thrive - such thoughts about 
Pritha's sons constantly agitate my soul. King of the earth, if you want all 
the Kauravas to live, let your son Duryodhana make peace with the 
Pandavas! " 


CANTO 10 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


cc hritarashtra says, 'Muni of profound wisdom, it is even I as you say. 

LD know it well as do all these kings. Indeed, what you consider 
beneficial for the Kurus was pointed out to me by Vidura, Bhishma and 
Drona. And, if I deserve your favour, and if you bear kindness for the 
Kurus, I beg you speak to my sinful son Duryodhana.' 

Vyasa says, ‘The holy Rishi Maitreya comes here, after visiting the 
Pandavas. This mighty Rishi will admonish your son for the weal of this 
race. Kauravya, what he says must be followed implicitly, for if it is not, the 
Sage will curse your son in anger.’ 

Saying this, Vyasa leaves and Maitreya makes his appearance. 
Dhritarashtra and his son receive that travel-worn lord of Munis 
reverentially, with offerings of arghya and other rituals. 

Ambika's son Dhritarashtra says respectfully to the Sage, 'Holy one, has 
your journey from Kurujangala been a pleasant one? Are those heroes, the 
five Pandavas, living happily there? Do those bulls of the Kuru race intend 
to serve their exile in full? Will the brotherly affection of the Kauravas be 
impaired?’ 

Maitreya says, ‘Setting out on a pilgrimage to the different tirthas, I 
arrived at Kurujangala, and there, to my surprise, I saw Yudhishtira 
Dharmaputra in the Kamyaka vana. Many other Munis had come there to 
see Yudhishtira, living in an ascetic asrama, clad in deer-skin and wearing 
matted jata. 

There, King of kings, I heard of the grave sin which your sons 
committed, and the disaster and danger they have brought upon themselves 
through the game of dice. So, I have come to you for the good of the 
Kauravas, because my affection for you is great and I am pleased with you. 

O King, it is not fit that your princes should fall out amongst one another 
for any cause, while Bhishma and you are alive. You, Rajan, are the stake to 
which all these bulls are tied, and you have the power to reward and to 
punish. Why do you ignore this great evil that is about to overtake all of 
you? 


The Rishis do not think well of you for the crimes that were committed 
in your court, sins which are like the deeds of vile chandalas!' 

Then, turning to the choleric Duryodhana, the lustrous Rishi Maitreya 
says softly to him, 'Duryodhana Mahabaho, most eloquent of men, 
illustrious one, pay heed to what I say, for I speak for your good. Do not 
seek enmity with the Pandavas! 

Purusharishabha, think of your own weal, as also the good of the 
Pandavas, of all the Kurus, and of the world. All those tigers among men 
are Kshatriyas of invincible prowess in war, strong each one as ten thousand 
elephants, their bodies hard as the adamantine Vajra, who never swerve 
from their vows, and who are proud of their manliness! 

They have killed Rakshasas who could assume any form at will, demons 
like Hidimba and Kirmira. When the noble sons of Pandu went forth from 
here, the fierce Rakshasa Kirmira stood in their way at night like a hill. As a 
tiger kills a little deer, Bhima, strongest of all the strong, always delighting 
in battle, killed that monster. 

Do not forget how Bhima killed the mighty Jarasandha, who was himself 
as strong as ten thousand elephants. The Pandavas are related to Krishna; 
Drupada's sons are their brothers-in-law; who among mortals will dare face 
Pandu's sons in battle? 

O Bull of the Bhaaratas, let there be peace between you and the 
Pandavas. Do not yield to envy and anger, listen to what I say. 

Even as Maitreya admonishes him, Duryodhana slaps his own thigh 
which is like the trunk of an elephant, and, smiling insolently, scratches the 
ground with his foot, as if he cares nothing for what the Sage says. The vile 
prince does not say a word but looks down, away from the Rishi. 

Rajan, when Maitreya sees Duryodhana slighting him, he becomes 
angry. As if urged by fate, that best of Munis decides to curse Duryodhana. 
His eyes red, Maitreya touches holy water and curses Dhritarashtra's evil 
son. 

"You dare slight me, and pay no mind to what I say? You will swiftly 
reap the fruit of your insolence! During the Great War which will spring 
from your sins, the mighty Bhima will smash that thigh of yours with a 
stroke of his mace!’ 

When the Muni curses Duryodhana, Dhritarashtra hastily tries to placate 
the Sage, so that his curse does not come true. 


Maitreya says, 'If your son makes peace with the Pandavas, my curse 
will not take effect. Otherwise it must be as I have said!' 

Wanting to gauge the strength of Bhima, that foremost of kings, 
Duryodhana's father asks, 'How did Bhima kill Kirmira?' 

Maitreya says, 'I will say no more to you, for your son disregards my 
words. When I have left, Vidura will tell you everything. 

Saying this, Maitreya leaves and returns to where he had come from. 
Duryodhana is shaken to hear about the slaying of Kirmira and he also 
leaves the sabha." 


CANTO 11 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


cc hritarashtra says, 'O Kshatta, I want to hear about the I death of 

La Tell me about the encounter between Bhima and the 
Rakshasa.' 

Vidura says, ‘Listen, then, to the tale of that feat of Bhimasena of 
superhuman achievements. I heard it often during my stay with the 
Pandavas. 

Beaten at dice the Pandavas went from here, and, after journeying for 
three days and nights, they arrived in the forest known as Kamyaka. Rajan, 
after the midnight hour, when nature sleeps, terrible man-eating Rakshasas 
range that vana, and no ascetic, cowherd or other forester dares go near the 
Kamyaka aranya for fear of the fiends. 

At that very hour, as the Pandavas entered that jungle, a fearsome 
Rakshasa, a lit brand in his hand and his eyes aflame, appeared in their path. 
His face terrible, his arms outstretched, he stood barring their way. Eight 
fangs bared on his face, his eyes coppery, his hair like flames standing erect, 
he seemed like a great cloud mass reflecting the Sun's rays, or streaked with 
lightning gashes with flights of cranes below them. 

With frightful yells and roaring like a mass of thunderheads charged 
with rain, the monster began to the use the maya which is typical of his 
kind. Crying out in fear, birds and other little creatures dropped senseless or 
dead when they heard that terrible roar. Deer, leopard, bison and bear fled in 
every direction, so it seemed the whole forest was in motion. 

Swayed by the wind raised by the Rakshasa's great sighs, creepers 
growing leagues away seemed to fling their arms of auburn leaves around 
the trees and embrace them. At that moment, a violent wind began to blow, 
and the sky was dark with dust covering it. Even like grief, the worst enemy 
of the five senses, that unknown enemy appeared before the five Pandavas. 

Seeing from a distance the sons of Pandu clad in black deer-skins, the 
Rakshasa blocked their path through the forest even like the Mainaka 
Mountain. The lotus-eyed Krishnaa looked at him and shut her eyes in 
fright. Standing among the five Pandavas, she whose tresses had been 


dishevelled by the hand of Dussasana looked like stream chafing among 
five hills. 

Even as the five senses cling to their objects of desire, the sons of Pandu 
supported the shaking Draupadi. Dhaumya of great tejas dispelled the wild 
illusions created by the Rakshasa's maya; he chanted powerful mantras to 
kill the devil. 

Seeing his illusion dispelled, the mighty Kirmira, who could assume any 
form he chose, dilated his eyes in wrath and seemed like Death himself. 

Yudhishtira said to him, "Who are you, and whose son? Tell us what we 
can do for you." 

The Rakshasa replied, "I am the brother of Baka, I am the renowned 
Kirmira. I live at my ease in this empty Kamyaka vana, and daily I eat by 
killing men in fight. Who are you that have come to me as my food? I will 
crush you all and feast on your flesh." 

Yudhishtira announced his own name and lineage, saying, "I am 
Yudhishtira, the son of Pandu, of whom you might have heard. Losing my 
kingdom, I have come with my brothers Bhimasena, Arjuna and the others 
into this dread jungle, your domain, intending to spend my exile here." 

Vidura continues, 'Kirmira said to Yudhishtira, "Ah, great fortune! Today 
fate has accomplished my long-cherished desire. With weapons raised, I 
have ranged the world with the single purpose of killing Bhima. But I did 
not find him. 

But today, it is my great good fortune that my brother's killer, whom I 
have sought so long, has appeared before me. Bhima, disguised as a 
Brahmana, slew my brother Baka in the Vetrakiya forest through some 
sorcery. He has no real strength! 

This evil one is he who also once slew my precious friend Hidimba, and 
ravished his sister. And the fool has now come into this deep forest of mine, 
when the night is half spent, even at the time when our kind is abroad. 
Tonight, at last, I will have vengeance on him, and gratify Baka with his 
blood in plenty. 

By killing this enemy of the Rakshasas, tonight I will free myself from 
the debt I owe my friend and my brother, and thereby find supreme 
happiness. Baka once let Bhimasena escape, but tonight, O Yudhishtira, I 
will devour him in your sight. Even as Agastya ate and digested the mighty 
Asura Vatapi, will I this Bhima!" 

Yudhishtira said angrily, "You cannot!" 


Bhima tore up a tree ten vyamas long, and stripped it of its leaves. In a 
flash, Arjuna strung the Gandiva, powerful as a thunderbolt. O Bhaarata, 
Bhima stopped Arjuna and strode towards the Rakshasa, who still roared 
like thunderclouds, crying, "Stop! Stop!" 

Bhima tightened his waistcloth, rubbed his hands together, bit his lower 
lip, and tree in hand rushed at the demon. Even like Indra casting his Vajra, 
Bhima crashed that tree, which was like Yama's danda, down on the fiend's 
head. The Rakshasa was unmoved by the blow, and hurled his flaming 
brand at Bhima like a streak of lightning. 

But the Kshatriya deftly struck it with his left foot and the burning thing 
flew back at Kirmira. Now Kirmira drew up a tree and rushed into the fray 
like Yama himself with his mace. Quickly, the forest around them was 
denuded of trees and looked like the place where once, ages by, the Vanara 
brothers Vali and Sugriva fought for possession of a woman. 

Striking the adversaries' heads, the trees broke into slivers, and were like 
lotus stalks flung at the temples of mating elephants. All around, 
numberless trees lay strewn like so many crushed reeds. However, the duel 
between that greatest of Rakshasas and Bhima did not last long, O 
Bharatarishabha. 

The raging Kirmira snatched up a great rock from the ground and flung 
it squarely at Bhima standing before him, but the Pandava did not flinch. 
Then, like Rahu flying to devour the Sun, the Rakshasa, arms outstretched, 
flew at Bhima and they locked together, grappling and pulling and 
dragging, like two infuriated bulls; or like two mighty tigers, fighting tooth 
and claw - the encounter between them waxed fierce and hard. 

Bhima thought of the humiliation by Duryodhana, he thought of 
Draupadi watching him, and Vrikodara found the true strength of his arms, 
strength which swelled in tide. Bhima seized the Rakshasa by his arms, as 
one elephant in rut seizes another. The powerful Rakshasa also clasped his 
antagonist, but Bhimasena, strongest of all strong men, flung the monster 
down violently. 

The sounds that the interlocked fingers of the two made echoed like 
splitting bamboos. Bhima hurled the Rakshasa down, seized him by the 
waist, and began to whirl him around, like some ferocious hurricane shakes 
a tree. The Rakshasa was tired, he felt faint; yet, trembling all over, he still 
pressed the Pandava with all his strength. 


Seeing that Kirmira was tiring, Vrikodara twined his great arms around 
him, even as one binds an animal with rope. The monster began to roar 
frightfully, like some dissonant trumpet. Bhima whirled him round until the 
Rakshasa seemed to lose consciousness and then threw him on the ground, 
where his body shook in convulsions. Bhima swiftly seized him again and 
killed him like an animal. He planted his great knee on Kirmira's belly and 
wrung his neck. As the fiend's eyelids closed, Bhima hauled his bruised 
body savagely across the earth roaring, "Sinful wretch, you will not have to 
wipe your tears for Hidimba and Baka because you are also bound for 
Yama's halls!" 

Bhima saw the Rakshasa naked, his ornaments torn from his great body; 
he saw that Kirmira was dead and left him there. When the Rakshasa of the 
hue of clouds died, Yudhishtira embraced Bhima and praised him joyfully.' 

Vidura says, 'So it was, O lord of men, that at Yudhishtira's command, 
Bhima killed Kirmira the Rakshasa. 

Having rid the jungle of its menace, the Pandavas entered the now 
peaceful vana, and comforting the frightened Draupadi, began living there. 
In some joy, the Bharatarishabhas often praised Bhima's magnificent deed. 

When I passed through the Kamyaka vana, I saw Kirmira's huge corpse 
lying there, and when I reached the Pandavas' asrama I heard about Bhima's 
prowess and how he killed the Rakshasa from the Brahmans who live there 
with the sons of Pandu.' 

Dhritarashtra hears about the slaying of Kirmira, he sighs and plunges 
into deeper gloom." 


CANTO 12 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


yoo said, "Hearing that the Pandavas have been banished, the 
Bhojas, the Vrishnis, and the Andhakas come to those heroes living in 
sorrow in the great forest. The Panchalas, Dhrishtaketu the king of Chedi, 
and those celebrated and powerful brothers, the Kaikeyas, their hearts fired 
by anger, come to the forest to see the sons of Pritha. 

They reproach the sons of Dhritarashtra, and say, "What shall we do?! 

With Vasudeva Krishna at their head, those Kshatriyarishabhas sit 
around Yudhishtira. 

Krishna reverently salutes that Kurusthama and says in some rage, 'The 
Earth shall drink the blood of Duryodhana and Kama, of Dussasana and the 
vile Sakuni! We will kill all these and all who are their allies and follow 
them and set Dharmaraja Yudhishtira upon the throne of Hastinapura. The 
evil deserve killing - this is Sanatana Dharma.'" 

Seeing Krishna wrathful, why, even bent upon consuming all created 
things, Arjuna attempts to pacify him by reciting the Lord's own great feats 
of his past lives, what He, Vishnu of fathomless wisdom, immeasurable 
one, eternal one, Soul of all things, his tejas infinite, the Lord of Prajapati 
himself, final sovereign of all the worlds had done in lives and ages gone 
by. 

Arjuna says, 'In olden days, you, O Krishna, wandered upon the 
Gandhamadana Mountains for ten thousand years as a Muni, whose home 
was wherever he found himself at dusk. Living on just water, Krishna, you 
also lived beside the Pushkara Lake for another eleven thousand years! 

Madhusudana, your arms upraised and standing on one leg, you passed a 
hundred years on the high hills of Badari, imbibing just air! Your body bare, 
emaciated, a mass of veins, you lived on the banks of the Saraswati, 
engaged in a yagna which lasted twelve years. 

And, Krishna of boundless tejas, keeping a vrata you stood upon one leg 
for a thousand years of the Devas, on the plains of Prabhasa which virtuous 
men visit in pilgrimage. 

Vyasa has told me that you are the cause of the creation and its course. O 
Kesava, as the Lord of Kshetra,! you are the mover of all minds, and the 


beginning and end of all things. Ail tapasya rests in you, and you are also 
the embodiment of all sacrifices, and the eternal one. 

Killing Narakasura, son of Bhumi, your first begotten, you took his 
earrings and performed the first aswamedha, offering the Asura as the 
sacrificial horse. Lokarishabha, O Bull of all the worlds, with that Yagna 
you triumphed over all things. 

Killing all the Daityas and Danavas mustered in battle, you gave Sachi's 
Lord Indra sovereignty over the universe, and you have now, O Mahabaho, 
been born into this world of men. 

Parantapa, who once floated upon the primal waters, you later became 
Hari, Brahma, Surya, Dharma, Dhatri, Yama, Anala, Vasu, 
Vaisravana,Rudra, Kala, Akasa, Bhumi and the ten directions. Un-born 
yourself, you are the lord of all the moving and unmoving universe, O First 
of all existences. 

Slayer of Madhu, O you of boundless energy, in the forest of Chitraratha, 
Krishna, you worshipped the God of gods with your yagnas. Janardana, at 
each sacrifice you offered gold, in measures of hundreds of thousands. 

Yadava, being born as Aditi's son, you became Indra's younger brother. 
Parantapa, even a child, you traversed with just three strides Swarga, Bhumi 
and Patala. When you were thus transformed, you entered into the body of 
the Sun and paled his splendour with your light. 

Highest, during a thousand incarnations you slew Asuras past count. You 
killed the Mauravas and the Paashas, Nisunda and Naraka, and the road to 
Pragjyotishapura was safe again. You killed Ahvriti at Jaruthi; Kratha and 
Sisupala and his followers, Jarasandha, Saibya and Satadhanwan! 

Riding your chariot, roaring like thunderheads and brilliant as the Sun, 
you took Bhojas daughter Rukmini for your wife, vanquishing her brother 
Rukmi in battle. In anger, you slew Indradyumna and the Yavana called 
Kaseruman. You killed Salva, the lord of Saubha, and destroyed his city. 

All these you killed in battle; let me tell of others you despatched. At 
Iravati, you slew King Bhoja equal to Kartavirya in battle; and both Gopati 
and Talaketu you killed! Janardana, you have taken for yourself sacred 
Dwaraka, of measureless wealth and which the Rishis all adore, and finally 
you will submerge Dwaravati in the Sea! 

Madhusudana, how can any crookedness dwell in you, when, Dasarha, 
you have no anger, envy, untruth or cruelty? O You without decay, all the 
Rishis come to you, seated in glory upon sacrificial ground, and seek your 


protection. You alone remain at the end of the Yuga, contracting all things 
and withdrawing this universe into yourself, Parantapa! 

O Vrishni, at the beginning of the Yuga, Brahma himself sprang from 
your lotus-like navel, Brahma lord of all mobile and immobile things, to 
whom this entire universe belongs. 

When the dreadful Danavas, Madhu and Kaitabha, were bent on killing 
you, you were infuriated and from your forehead, O Hari, sprang Sambhu, 
Trilochana. Thus these two greatest of Gods issued from your body, to do 
your work. Narada told me this. 

Narayana, in the Chaitraratha vana, you performed a multitude of 
yagnas, marked by a plenitude of gifts. Lord, you with eyes like lotus 
leaves, what you have done while still a mere boy, along with Baladeva, no 
one else has ever done, nor will in the future. 

Why, you went and stayed on Kailasa with some Brahmanas!' 

Saying all this to Krishna, Arjuna who was Krishna's soul, falls quiet. 

Janardana says to him, 'You are mine as I am yours, and he who hates 
you hates me as well, as he that follows you follows me, too. Irrepressible 
one, you are Nara and I, Narayana; we are those two Rishis born into the 
world of men for a great purpose. Partha, you are of me, and I of you. 
Bharatarishabha, who can fathom any difference which exists between us?’ 

When the illustrious Kesava says as much in that conclave of valiant 
kings, all excited with anger, Panchali, along with Dhrishtadyumna and her 
other heroic brothers, approaches him of eyes like lotus leaves, seated with 
his cousins, and, wanting his protection speaks angrily to that Sanctuary of 
all beings. 

'Asita and Devala have said that in the creation of all things, you are the 
only Prajapati, Creator of all the worlds. Irrepressible one, Jamadagnya says 
that you are Vishnu, O Madhusudana, and that you embody the sacrifice, 
the sacrificer and He for whom the sacrifice is performed. 

Purushottama, the Rishis say that you are Forgiveness and Truth. 
Kasyapa has said you are Sacrifice sprung from Truth. Exalted one, Narada 
calls you the God of the Sadhyas, and of the Sivas, the only final Creator 
and the Lord of all things. 

Purushavyaghra, you sport repeatedly with all the Gods, including 
Brahma, Sankara and Sakra even as children play with their toys. Loftiest, 
your head covers Swarga, your feet Bhumi, and all these worlds are as your 
womb, O Eternal! 


For Rishis sanctified by the Vedas and by tapasya, their souls purified 
through penance, who are contented with visions of the soul, you are the 
best of all things. Purushottama, you are the refuge of Rajarishis of dharma 
who never turn their backs on the field of battle, men possessed of every 
accomplishment. 

You are the Lord of all, you are Omnipresent, you are the Soul of all 
things, and you are the active power pervading everything. The rulers of all 
the worlds, the worlds themselves, the stellar conjunctions, the ten points of 
the horizon, the firmament, the Moon and the Sun are all founded in you. 

Mahabaho, the dharma of mortal creatures and the immortality of the 
universe are established in you. You are the Supreme Lord of all creatures, 
celestial or human. 

And so, O Madhusudana, impelled by the love you bear for me, will I 
tell you of my sorrows! Krishna, how could I, the wife of Pritha's sons, the 
sister of Dhrishtadyumna, and your sakhi, your friend, be dragged into the 
Kuru sabha as I was? Ah, du.ing my period, bleeding, wearing just a single 
cloth, trembling and weeping, I was dragged into the court of the Kurus. 

Seeing me, stained with blood in the presence of those kings in the 
sabha, the vicious sons of Dhritarashtra laughed at me. While the Pandavas, 
the Panchalas and the Vrishnis lived, Dhritarashtra's sons dared say they 
wanted me to be their slave. 

By law, Krishna, I am both Dhritarashtra and Bhishma's daughter-in-law, 
yet they wanted to forcibly make me a slave. I accuse the Pandavas, who 
are the greatest warriors in the world, because they watched their wife being 
treated so savagely and did not stir. 

Fie on the might of Bhimasena, fie on Arjuna and his Gandiva, for both, 
O Janardana, suffered me to be shamed by small men. Men of dharma, 
regardless of however weak they might be, have always protected their 
wives. By protecting his wife a man protects his children, and that is to 
protect oneself. 

A man begets himself upon his wife, as his children, and that is why she 
is called Jaya. A wife also must protect her lord, remembering that he takes 
birth in her womb. The Pandavas never forsake anyone who seeks their 
protection, yet they forsook me when I turned to them in my dire need. 

Through my five husbands five sons of exceptional tejas I have borne: 
Prativindhya by Yudhishtira, Sutasoma by Vrikodara, Srutakirti by Arjuna, 
Satanika by Nakula and Srutakarman by the youngest - all of them 


dauntless, invincible. For their sake, Janardana, my husbands should have 
protected me! 

My sons are all mighty Kshatriyas, even like your own Pradyumna. My 
husbands are the greatest archers, and no enemy can defeat them in battle. 
Why do they bear what Dhritarashtra's sons made me endure, those princes 
of such negligible prowess? 

Deprived of their kingdom through deception, the Pandavas were made 
bondsmen and I was dragged to the sabha while in my season, and wearing 
just one cloth! 

Fie on the Gandiva, which none else can string save Arjuna, Bhima and 
you. Fie on the strength of Bhima, and fie on the prowess of Arjuna, 
because, Krishna, after what he dared do Duryodhana has drawn breath 
even for a moment! 

He once drove the guileless Pandavas and their mother from the 
kingdom, while my lords were boys, students still, and young 
brahmacharins. That sinner mixed poison into Bhima's food, but Bhima ate 
the poison with the food and came to no harm, for his days in the world had 
not ended. 

Krishna, Duryodhana bound the unconscious Bhima hand and foot and, 
below the house at Pramana, rolled him into the Ganga. But Bhima 
Mahabaho awoke, tore off his bonds and rose from the river. Duryodhana 
was responsible for black cobras biting Bhima all over his body, but this 
Parantapa did not die. Waking, Kunti's son killed all the snakes with his left 
hand, and he also killed Duryodhana's favourite sarathy, who was the agent 
for the dastardly crime. 

Again, while the Pandavas slept at Varanavata with their mother, 
Duryodhana had that house set on fire, intending to immolate them inside. 
Who else could do such an evil thing? Kunti, surrounded by flames, cried 
out in terror to her sons, "Ah, I am undone! How will we escape? Alas, my 
children and I will die today." 

Then Bhima Mahabaho, mighty as the wind, comforted his mother and 
his brothers, "I will leap into the air even like Vinata's son Garuda, king of 
birds. We have no fear from this fire." 

Taking up his mother onto his left side, Yudhishtira on his right, the 
twins on each shoulder, and Arjuna on his back, the mighty Vrikodara 
cleared the towering flames with one leap. Setting out that night, they came 


to the Hidimba vana, and while Kunti and her sons slept the Rakshasi 
Hidimbi approached them. 

She looked at Bhima and desired him. She took Bhima's feet onto her lap 
and began to press them with soft hands. Bhima tejasvin awoke and asked 
her, "Faultless featured, what do you want?" 

The Rakshasi, who was beautiful, and could also assume any form she 
chose, replied to the Mahatman Bhima, "Fly from this place. My mighty 
brother will come to kill you. Do not tarry, fly!" 

Bhima said haughtily, "I do not fear him. If he comes here, I will slay 
him." 

Hearing this conversation, her brother Hidimba, vilest of Rakshasas, 
arrived there. He was terrible to behold, and came roaring. The Rakshasa 
said, "Hidimbi, who are you talking to? Bring him to me, let me eat him. 
Quickly, Hidimbi, do not delay." 

But moved by compassion, the Rakshasi, whose heart was pure, made no 
reply. Then the monster, man-eater, rushed roaring at Bhima. He seized 
Bhima's hand and clenching his own hand into a fist as hard as Indra's 
thunderbolt, struck Bhima a blow like lightning. 

Vrikodara flew into a rage, and a fearful fight erupted between 
Bhimasena and Hidimba. Both were skilled in the use of weapons, and their 
duel was even like the one between Indra and Vritra, of old. 

Sinless Krishna, Bhima toyed with the mighty Rakshasa, wearing him 
down, and when Hidimba was exhausted Bhima Mahabaho killed him. 
Then, setting Hidimbi before them, Bhima, his brothers and Kunti Devi left 
that forest. Later, Hidimbi would give birth by Bhima to Ghatotkacha. 

After that, surrounded by Brahmanas, these Parantapas went towards 
Ekachakra with their mother. Meanwhile, Vyasa met them and became their 
counsellor. At Ekachakra, the Pandavas of stern vratas killed another 
mighty Rakshasa called Baka, as savage as Hidimba. 

When he had killed Baka, Bhima went with his brothers to the capital of 
Drupada. And there, O Krishna, even as you won Bhishmaka's daughter 
Rukmini, Arjuna Savyasachin won me! Arjuna won me during my 
swayamvara, first performing an incredibly difficult feat of archery and then 
defeating all the other kings gathered there. 

O Krishna, innumerable griefs afflict me now and we live here, with 
Dhaumya for our priest and guide, but separated from our beloved Kunti. 
Why do these, who are gifted with such strength, who have the prowess of 


lions, sit here indifferent, doing nothing, after they have seen me humiliated 
by vile and despicable enemies? 

Am I born to suffer such searing indignity at the hands of base sinners, 
men of little strength beside? Am I to burn endlessly with grief? I was born 
into a great race, and came into this world in an extraordinary manner. 
Besides, I am the beloved wife of the Pandavas, and the daughter-in-law of 
the illustrious Pandu. 

I, who am called the best of women, I who am devoted to my husbands, 
even I, O Krishna, was seized by my hair, and in the sight of the Pandavas, 
each of whom is like an Indra!’ 

Draupadi hides her face in her soft hands like lotus buds and sobs. Her 
tears flow down and wash her deep, full and graceful breasts, which bear 
every auspicious mark. 

Wiping her eyes, sighing frequently, her voice choked, she says, 'No, I 
have no sons, husbands, friends, brothers or father, I have no one! I do not 
even have you, Krishna, for all of you see me having been savaged by vile 
men and you sit here and do nothing. 

How will my grief at Kama's ridicule ever be assuaged? Krishna, I say to 
you that I deserve your protection always: because of our being related, 
because of your respect for me, because of our friendship and because you 
are the Lord!' 

In that gathering of Kshatriyas in the forest, Krishna says to the weeping 
Panchali, 'Beautiful One, the wives of those who have angered you will 
weep even as you do, seeing their husbands lying dead on the ground, 
covered in blood and pierced by Arjuna's arrows. 

Do not cry, for I will do everything in my power to help the sons of 
Pandu. I swear to you that you will again be a queen of kings. The Heavens 
may fall, or Himavat split open, the Earth might be rent, or the waters of the 
Ocean dry up, but my words shall never prove to be in vain!' 

Draupadi listens to what Krishna says and looks sidelong at Arjuna. 
Mighty king, Arjuna says to her, 'You with the lovely copper eyes, do not 
grieve, it will be even as Krishna has said! Beautiful Panchali, it can never 
be otherwise. 

Dhrishtadyumna says, 'I will kill Drona, Sikhandin will kill the Pitama, 
Bhimasena will kill Duryodhana, and Dhananjaya will kill Karna. My 
sister, with Balarama and Krishna on our side, even Indra himself could not 
vanquish us in battle, then what are these sons of Dhritarashtra?’ 


Now, all the Kshatriyas there turn to Krishna, who then speaks to them." 


| Nilakantha explains kshetra as including Mahabhuta, consciousness, intellect, the unmanifest 
(primordial elements), the ten senses, the five objects of the senses, desire, aversion, pleasure, pain, 
the combinations of elements, and chaitanya. 


CANTO 13 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


CC rishna says, 'Yudhishtira, lord of the earth, if I had been in Dwaraka, 

Gee evil would not have befallen you. Irrepressible one, I would 
have come to the game of dice, even if Ambika's sons had not asked me, or 
the other Kauravas. I would have called upon Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and 
Bahlika to help me, and prevented the game from being played. 

Noble one, for your sake I would have said to Dhritarashtra, "Best of 
kings, let your sons have nothing to do with dice!" Yes, 1 would have 
spoken at length on all the evils of gambling, through which once Virasena's 
son lost his kingdom and through which you have now fallen into such 
distress. 

Rajan, unthought-of evils befall a man from playing dice. I would have 
told how a man plays in compulsion, even if he wishes to stop. Women, 
dice, hunting and drinking, to which men become addicted from temptation, 
are regarded as the four evils that deprive a man of his prosperity. Those 
who know the Shastras say that evil attends upon all these. 

Those who are addicted to dice also know all its evils. Mahabaho, 
appearing before the son of Ambika, I would have told him that through 
dice men lose all their possessions in a day and exchange harsh words. I 
would have named innumerable other ills which attend on dice. 

If Dhritarashtra had accepted what I said, both the weal of the Kurus and 
dharma itself would have been secured. If he had rejected my gentle 
counsel, offered like a specific, then, Bharatasreshta, I would have 
compelled him with force. If those who sit in his sabha, professing to be his 
friends but who are actually his enemies, had supported him, I would have 
slain them all, along with the gamblers. 

Kauravya, it is because I was away from Anarta! then that you played 
dice and have fallen into woe. Kurusthama, when I returned to Dwaraka, 
Yuyudhana told me about the disaster. As soon as I heard, my heart pierced 
by grief, I came here to you. 

Alas, Pandava, such dire distress has overtaken you and I see you 
brothers and you plunged in misfortune." 


! Krishna's country, of which Dwaraka is the capital. 


CANTO 14 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


&C udhishtira says, 'Krishna, where were you, away from Dwaraka? 
What did you do while you were away?’ 

Krishna says, 'Bharatarishabha, I went forth to raze the city of Salva. 
Best of the Kurus, listen to why I did this. 

At your Rajasuya yagna, I slew Damaghosha's son Sisupala, mighty- 
armed and of great energy, because that evil one could not bear to see me 
being given the purodasa. 

Hearing that Sisupala was slain, Salva, burning with anger, went to 
Dwaraka while I was away in Indraprastha with you. Arriving in a chariot 
made of precious metals, the Saubha, he engaged the young Vrishni princes, 
bulls of our line. Without mercy he slaughtered many young Vrishni heroes, 
and devastated all the gardens of our city. 

Mahabaho, he roared, "Where is Krishna, that wretch of the Vrishni race, 
Vasudeva's evil son? I mean to humble his pride in battle. Tell me, O 
Anartas, where he is. I will go and kill him who slew Kamsa and Kesin, and 
then return. 

By my weapons I swear I will not return without slaying him!" 

Roaring again and again, "Where is he? Where is he?" the lord of the 
Saubha dashed here and there, wanting battle with me. Salva also raged, 
"He has dared kill Sisupala, and I will send him to Yama's halls today! I 
must kill Janardana for he slew my brother who was just a boy of tender 
years, and not on a field of battle, but while my brother was unprepared!" 

Raging and howling thus, abusing me vilely, he flew up into the sky in 
his magical chariot, the Saubha which could fly anywhere at his very will. I 
returned to Dwaraka and heard what the evil king of Martika had said about 
me.I grew angry, O King, and considering his attack on Anarta, his abuse 
of me and his intolerable arrogance, I decided to kill him. 

I set out from Dwaravati to slay the lord of the Saubha. I looked for him 
and found him on an island in the sea. I blew on my Panchajanya, 
challenging Salva to battle. However, at that moment, a host of Danavas 
attacked me and I slew them all. 


Mahabaho, it was because of this that I could not come to you then. As 
soon as I heard about the game of dice at Hastinapura, I have come to see 
you and comfort you in your distress." 


CANTO 15 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


ee says, Krishna, tell us in detail about the death of V the 
lord of the Saubha. You have whetted my curiosity!' Krishna says, 
"When Salva heard that I had killed Sisupala, he came to Dwaravati, and 
with his army besieged that city from above and around. Keeping himself in 
the sky, he began his assault with a heavy shower of weapons of every kind. 

Bharatarishabha, Dwaraka was fortified on all sides with pennons, 
arches, soldiers, walls, turrets, miners; her streets were barricaded with 
spikes; she had towers, storehouses full of provisions, engines for hurling 
burning brands and other fiery missiles, and vats of scalding oil and water; 
there were skins for carrying water to drink; trumpets, tabors we had, drums 
by thousands, lances and pitchforks, sataghnis, halayudhas, rockets, balls of 
stone, battle-axes, iron shields, and other engines for flinging iron balls, 
bullets and steaming fluids. 

Many chariots defended Dwaraka, Kuruvyaghra, with maharathas like 
Gada, Samba, Uddhava and other great heroes, all nobly born, tried in 
battle, and who could resist any enemy. All these positioned themselves at 
their commanding posts, with horsemen and standard-bearers, and began to 
defend the city. 

Ugrasena, Uddhava and others ordered that no one should drink 
throughout the city, to prevent any folly or carelessness. Knowing that 
Salva would destroy them if they were in the least careless, all the Vrishnis 
and Andhakas remained sober and watchful. 

The soldiers made all the mimes, singers and dancers of Anarta leave 
Dwaraka, and they sank the bridges leading to the Sea city; boats were 
forbidden to ply, and long spikes raised upright in the moats which ring 
Dwaravati. The land around the city, for two yojanas, is always dug up, in 
pits and holes, in which explosives are hidden. 

Anagha, our city-fortress is naturally protected, and well-defended and 
stocked with all kinds of weapons. Because of all this, Dwaraka was well 
prepared to counter any attack; why, she resembled Indra's own Amaravati. 
When Salva came, no one could enter or leave the city of the Vrishnis and 
Andhakas without giving a pre-arranged secret signal. 


All the streets of the town and the open spaces, too, were filled with 
numberless elephants and horses. Mahabaho, all our soldiers were paid 
handsomely and given plentiful rations, weapons and clothes. All of them 
were paid in gold; all of them were in some way obliged to us, and all were 
of tried valour. 

Yudhishtira of eyes like lotus-leaves, so, comprehensively, did Ugrasena 
defend Dwaraka!'" 


CANTO 16 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


cc rishna. continues, 'King of kings, Salva, master of the Saubha, great 

Ko, and city of the air, came towards our city with an immense 
force of infantry, cavalry and elephants. His army, led by four other kings of 
great power, occupied a level ground commanding a plentiful water-supply. 

Apart from cemeteries, temples dedicated to the gods, sacred groves of 
trees, and grounds covered by ant-hills, that host occupied every other place 
around Dwaraka. Divisions of that army barred all the roads into our city, 
and the secret entrances also were all blocked by the enemy. 

O Kauravya, even like Garuda, Salva flew towards Dwaraka, with his 
host bearing all kinds of arms, skilled at all weapons, a dense array of 
chariots, elephants and cavalry, flying a sea of banners - well-paid and well- 
fed warriors, of great strength, bearing every mark of heroism, riding those 
wonderful chariots, armed with magnificent bows. 

The young Vrishni princes saw Salvas army and sallied forth from our 
gates to face it. Charudeshna, Samba, the mighty Pradyumna, all put on 
mail, mounted their chariots, and decked with ornaments, their colours 
flying, rode to fight Salvas teeming legions. 

Fiercely, Samba attacked Kshemavriddhi, the Senapati of Salva's forces, 
and struck his chief counsellor too with gusts of arrows. Why, Jambavati's 
son showered arrows upon the enemy in a river even as Indra does the rain. 
Kshemavriddhi stood unmoved as Himavan in that deadly storm. 

Using maya, Kshemavriddhi discharged an even mightier tide of shafts 
at Samba. Samba dispelled the sorcery with his own maya and loosed a 
thousand arrows at his adversary's chariot. Now, pierced by Samba's barbs, 
overwhelmed, Kshemavriddhi fled in his fleet chariot. 

When Salva's evil general left the field, a mighty Daitya called Vegavat 
rushed at my son. Samba stood his ground calmly. Kaunteya, Samba 
whirled a flashing mace and cast it at Vegavat, who fell on the ground like a 
mighty, faded patriarch of the forest whose roots have rotted away. 

Upon the death of that ferocious Asura, Samba was at the enemy, 
spilling blood all around. 


Another renowned Danava, Vivindhya, mighty warrior wielding a 
menacing bow, faced Charudeshna. And, O monarch, the encounter 
between Charudeshna and Vivindhya was as fierce as the one in olden days 
between Vritra and Vasava. 

In fury, roaring like two great lions, they struck each other with arrows. 
Rukmini's son fitted a mighty astra, splendid as fire and the sun, to his 
bowstring; he chanted mantras over it and it could raze every enemy. 
Yudhishtira, my son loosed that weapon at Vivindhya, and the Danava fell 
dead. 

Seeing Vivindhya slain, and his entire army wavering, Salva advanced 
again in his beautiful chariot, which could go anywhere. Mahabaho, seeing 
Salva in his chariot the fighters of Dwaraka trembled and began to retreat. 

Then Pradyumna sallied forth, crying to the Anartas, "Do not fear! 
Watch me, I will drive back Salva in his chariot. Yadavas, today my astras 
will be like serpents and consume this entire host of the lord of the Saubha. 
I will kill Salva today and smash his fine Saubha." 

Pandava, when Pradyumna spoke to them, fear left the Yadavas and they 
stayed to fight." 


CANTO 17 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


eh rishna continued, 'Bharatarishabha, Pradyumna climbed into his 

Ko chariot, drawn by the finest steeds covered in mail. Over it 
flew a standard bearing a Makara, a fierce crocodile with jaws agape and 
dreadful as Yama. His horses more flying than running on the ground, he 
charged the enemy. 

Pradyumna bore quiver and sword, his fingers were encased in leather, 
and switching his bow, brilliant as lightning, from hand to hand, he twanged 
its string resoundingly, laughing in the enemy's face, spreading panic 
through their ranks. 

He slew them all around him, contemptuously, and no one could mark 
any interval between the shafts he loosed. No colour rose into his face, his 
limbs did not so much as quiver; only his leonine roars rang across the field, 
while the sea monster's image on his golden flagstaff struck terror in his 
enemies' hearts. 

Pradyumna, destroyer of his enemies, flew at Salva, himself eager for an 
encounter. But Salva could not bear Pradyumna's assault; he leapt down 
from his beautiful chariot of untold speed. Ihose watching, the people, saw 
the duel between Salva and the Vrishni hero which was even like that 
between Bali and Vasava, of old. 

Kshatriya, Salva, mighty and lustrous, climbed back into his chariot and 
beset Pradyumna with a storm of arrows. Pradyumna fought back, briefly 
overwhelming Salva, who now shot arrows of blazing fire at my son. But 
Pradyumna easily parried that burning shower. Salva rained more shafts 
afire over him. 

Best of kings, wounded by Salvas arrows, Pradyumna loosed an astra 
which could pierce the entrails of any enemy. That winged shaft pierced 
Salva's armour and entered his heart, at which he fell in a swoon. Seeing 
their lord fall, the Danava chieftains all fled the field. 

Lord of the earth, cries of Oh! and Alas! arose from Salva's army. But 
Salva regained his senses, jumped up and suddenly loosed a clutch of 
savage barbs at Pradyumna. Pierced about his throat, Pradyumna staggered 
in his ratha. Wounding Rukmini's son, Salva roared like a lion, filling the 


world with that great sound. O Bhaarata, when my son fell senseless, Salva 
did not lose a moment but shot him with more deadly arrows. Pierced by 
numberless arrows, Pradyumna became motionless on the field of battle." 


CANTO 18 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


eh rishna continues, ‘Seeing Pradyumna felled by Salva, the Vrishnis 

| grew disheartened and stricken. Their fighters broke into loud 
cries of Oh and Alas! while joy swept through the enemy ranks. Daruka's 
son, his sarathy, bore him swiftly from the field. 

The chariot had not gone far when Pradyumna regained his senses, 
picked up his bow and said to his charioteer, "Sutaputra, what have you 
done? Why do you leave the battlefield? This is not the custom of the 
Vrishni heroes in battle! 

Were you confounded by the sight of Salva? Or frightened by our duel? 
Tell me truly, I must know your mind." 

The charioteer answered, "O son of Janardana, I am not confounded or 
afraid. On the other hand, I saw that it was difficult for you to vanquish 
Salva, and so I left the field. The wretch is stronger than you, and besides a 
sarathy must protect his warriors, especially when his Kshatriya faints. 

Long-lived, I must always protect you even as you must always watch 
over me. Besides, you are alone while the Danavas are legion. I felt, O 
Rukminiputra, that you are not equal to them in this fight and began to leave 
the field." 

Krishna continued, 'When the charioteer said this, he who bears the 
Makara on his banner, retorted, "Turn the chariot around! O son of Daruka, 
never do this again, never flee the field, not while I am alive. No son of the 
House of Vrishni ever forsakes battle or kills an enemy fallen at his feet, 
crying I am yours! No Vrishni ever kills a woman, a boy, an old man, or a 
warrior in distress, who has lost his chariot or has had his weapons broken. 

You are born a Suta and are well trained in your craft. O son of Daruka, 
you know the customs of the Vrishnis in battle. Never again fly from the 
field as you have done today. What will the irrepressible Krishna say to me 
when he hears that I left the field in bewilderment or that I was struck in the 
back, as I fled from battle? 

What will Krishna's elder, the mighty-armed Baladeva, wearing blue and 
drunk on wine, say when he returns? What, O Suta, will that lion among 


men, Sini's grandson Satyaki, that great warrior, say when he hears I 
abandoned the fight? 

Sarathy, what will the ever-victorious Samba, the invincible 
Charudeshna, Durdarsha, Gada, and Sarana, and Akrura of mighty arms say 
to me? What will the wives of the Vrishni heroes say to one another of me, 
who have so far been considered brave of noble conduct, honourable and 
manly? 

They will even say, This Pradyumna is a coward who leaves the battle 
and comes here. Fie on him! They will never say, Well done! Ridicule, O 
Suta, is worse than death to someone like me. So never again leave the field 
of battle! 

Leaving Dwaraka in my charge, Krishna has gone to the yagna of the 
Bhaarata lion. I cannot be a bystander now. Suta, when the brave 
Kritavarman was sallying out to face Salva, I stopped him, saying, You stay, 
I will fight Salva. And to honour me, Hridika's son desisted. If I leave the 
field of battle, what will I say to that mighty warrior when I meet him? 

When Krishna, wielder of the sankha, chakra and gada, returns, what 
will I tell him of the eyes like lotus leaves? Satyaki, Baladeva and all the 
other Vrishnis and Andhakas always boast about me. What will I say to 
them? 

Having left the field of battle and with wounds of arrows on my back, as 
you bore me away, I will not be able to live! O son of Daruka, turn the 
chariot around at once, and never flee again during battle, for I do not 
consider the life worth living which was gained by fleeing the field like a 
coward. 

Sutaputra, have you ever seen me fly in fear from an enemy? It does not 
become you to leave the battle while my desire to fight on remains 
unquenched. Hurry, turn back!" 


CANTO 19 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUE 


cc rishna continues, 'His charioteer replied hastily to Pradyumna, in 

he tones, "O son of Rukmini, I am not afraid to guide your 
horses on the field, and I know well the customs of the Vrishnis in war. But, 
O long-lived, the sarathy is taught that his warrior s life is always to be 
safeguarded by his charioteer. 

You were sorely wounded by Salva's arrows, you fell unconscious, O 
Kshatriya. Only then did I leave the field. But, O lord of the Satwatas, now 
that you have regained consciousness, watch my skill in driving your 
horses! Daruka is my father and he has taught me chariotry. Watch me 
pierce Salva's army, O Hero!" 

Saying this, that sarathy snapped his reins and turned back to the field of 
battle. Struck by his whip, deftly manoeuvred, those fine steeds seemed to 
fly through the air; beautifully they ran, in circles, now to the left then to the 
right, in even paths, then uneven. Truly, so light, so deft was the artistry of 
Daruka's son, his horses blazed along, and it seemed their hooves did not 
touch the ground, it seemed they read the sarathy's very thoughts. 

So effortlessly and swiftly did that chariot dart through and wheel 
around Salvas force that they who watched were wonderstruck. Salva could 
not bear this and shot three arrows at Pradyumna's charioteer. But he sped 
on to the right, taking no notice of the shafts which pierced him. 

Salva again loosed a shower of every kind of missile at Pradyumna. But 
that Parantapa, Rukmini's son, smiled, and with breathtaking lightness of 
hand cut them all down in flight. Salva used maya now and attacked 
Pradyumna more savagely still. Using the Brahmastra, Pradyumna again 
stopped those fell and powerful weapons, all the while shooting a stream of 
winged arrows at Salva. 

And delighting in blood, these shafts truncated Salvas missiles, and 
flashed on to pierce his head, breast and his face. Salva fell senseless, and 
Pradyumna aimed another arrow at him, one which could kill any enemy. 

Seeing that great astra, which all the Dasarhas worship, burning like fire 
and deadly as a serpent, fitted to Pradyumna's bowstring, the air was filled 
with cries of Oh! and Alas! 


Now, the Devas, led by Indra and the Lord of treasures, Kubera, sent 
Narada down, and Vayu, the Wind God, whose speed is that of the mind. 
Coming to Pradyumna, they gave him this message: "Kshatriya, you must 
not kill Salva. Do not draw your astra, for you cannot kill him. 

There is no man whom that arrow will not kill, but, Mahabaho, Brahma 
has ordained his death at the hands of Devaki's son Krishna. Do not let what 
Brahma has ordained be proved false." 

Happily, Pradyumna withdrew that best of astras and thrust it back into 
his quiver. Then, best of kings, wounded sorely by Pradyumna's arrows, the 
mighty Salva rose, disheartened, and sped away. Afflicted by the Vrishnis, 
Salva mounted his magical chariot and, leaving Dwaraka, flashed away into 
the sky." 


CANTO 20 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


cc rishna said, 'When Salva had left Dwaravati, I returned to it, O 

Ker upon the completion of your great Rajasuya yagna. On my 
arrival, I found Dwaraka shorn of its splendour, and there were no sounds of 
Vedic chanting or sacrificial offering. 

All the lovely young women wore no ornaments, and the gardens were 
desolated, no longer beautiful. Alarmed, I asked Hridika's son, "Why are 
the men and women of the city woebegone, O tiger among men?" 

Kritavarman then told me in detail about Salva's invasion of Dwaraka, 
and also how he fled. Bharatottama, I decided to kill Salva. Cheerfully, I 
said to King Ahuka and Anakadundubhi, and the other great Vrishni heroes, 
"Yadavarishabhas, stay in the city, taking every care, for I now go forth to 
kill Salva and I will not return to Dwaravati until I have. 

I will come to you again when I have destroyed both Salva and his 
precious Saubha. Now strike up the sharp, middle and flat notes of the 
Dundubhi, which so terrifies our enemies!" 

O Bharatarishabha, those Kshatriyas cried joyfully to me, "Go and slay 
the enemy!" 

Taking their blessings and having the Brahmanas chant auspicious 
mantras, while I bowed down to those Dvijottamas, and to Siva also, I set 
out in my chariot, yoked to my great steeds Saibya and Sugriva, filling all 
the world with the clatter of my wheels and blowing on the Panchajanya, 
best of all sankhas! 

I set out accompanied by my redoubtable and ever victorious army, 
consisting of the four kinds of forces and steadfast in battle. Passing over 
many countries, mountains crowned with trees, and water bodies, lakes, 
rivers and streams, I arrived at last in the country of Matrikavata. 

There, Purushavyaghra, I heard that Salva flew in his aerial chariot, 
which was also his township, his city, near the sea and I pursued him there. 
Parantapa, I found him right in the midst of the billowing, heaving waves. 
Seeing me from a distance, Yudhishtira, that evil one challenged me 
repeatedly to fight. I loosed many arrows at him, great missiles, but they did 
not penetrate his Saubha. 


I grew angry, and the evil, powerful son of a Daitya began to shoot 
thousands of arrows at me in a torrent. He covered my warriors, my sarathy 
and my horses with arrows, but we fought on. 

Salva's legions loosed more arrows, again in thousands, over me. They 
mantled my ratha, my horses and Daruka with astras which could pierce 
one's very entrails. Then, I could no longer see my chariot, horses or even 
Daruka; my army and I were both shrouded in arrows. 

Kaunteya, I chanted mantras to summon astras, and loosed tens of 
thousands of them at the enemy. But the Saubha was far away, two yojanas, 
and my warriors could not see it. They could only stand below on the 
battlefield and, like spectators in an arena, cheer me with lions' roars and 
loud handclapping. 

My tinted arrows, meanwhile, pierced Danava bodies like fierce insects, 
and there arose cries from within the Saubha of those who died by them, 
and fell into the sea below. Arm and necks cut off, Danavas looking like 
dismembered kabandhas fell, roaring horribly. Carnivores of the deep 
devoured them hungrily. 

I blew an echoing blast on the Panchajanya, which once rose from those 
waters, and which is as graceful as a lotus-stalk, and white as milk, the 
kunda flower, the moon, or as silver. Seeing his soldiers die, Salva began to 
fight using maya, illusion. 

He cast a tirade of maces, ploughshares, winged darts and lances, 
javelins, battle-axes, daggers, arrows blazing like thunderbolts, nooses, 
swords, bullets from barrels, other strange shafts, and missiles. I allowed 
them to fly towards me, then dispelled the sorcery of which they were 
made. 

Salva now cast mountain peaks of maya at me. Then he created uncanny 
weather changes - darkness and light, alternately, the day was now fair, and 
now gloomy, now hot, and now cold. He caused a fierce shower of live 
coals, hot ash and arrows to pour down over me. 

With these illusions, he duelled with me; and I dispelled all his maya 
with my own power, and also continued to loose thousands of shafts at the 
Saubha. Suddenly, the dome of heaven blazed as with a hundred suns and 
with a hundred moons, too, and millions of stars; and no one could tell if 
this was day or night; no one could distinguish the points of the horizon. 

Perplexed myself, I fitted the Pragnastra to my bowstring. That weapon 
blew away Salva's sorcery in the sky even as the wind does wisps of cotton 


wool. Now we had light again, and we fought fiercely once more, so those 
who watched had their hair stand on end." 


CANTO 21 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


eh rishna says, 'Tiger among men, Salva flew high into the sky again 

| eee cast down blazing sataghnis, and mighty maces, and flaming 
lances, and thick cudgels. I shot them all down as they flew at me, and the 
sky echoed. 

Salva covered Daruka, my horses and ratha with hundreds of straight, 
deadly shafts. Daruka seemed about to faint and said to me, "Ah Krishna, I 
am sorely wounded. I have not left the field only because it is my dharma to 
stay. But my limbs turn weak and I cannot continue." 

Hearing his piteous voice, I looked at him and saw he was wounded by 
countless arrows. There was no place on his chest, his head, his arms or the 
rest of his body from which fell arrows did not protrude. Blood flowed 
profusely from his wounds, and he looked like a mountain of red chalk after 
heavy rain. 

Mahabaho, seeing Daruka wounded, I tried to embolden him and make 
him cheerful. 

Just then, a man from Dwaraka came running to my chariot with a 
message from Ahuka. He seemed to be one of Ahuka's followers, and said 
in a voice choking with sorrow, "Ahuka, the lord of Dwaraka, sends you 
this message. Krishna, listen to what your father's friend says. O Vrishni, 
irrepressible one, while you were away today, Salva came to Dwaraka, 
seized your father Vasudeva by main force and killed him. No need for you 
to fight anymore. Cease, Janardana, you must return to Dwaraka now; to 
defend her is your only dharma." 

My heart grew heavy, and I could not decide what to do. Inwardly I 
blamed Satyaki, Baladeva, and the mighty Pradyumna, for when I left to 
attack Salva I had given them charge of protecting Dwaraka and Vasudeva. 

In grief I asked myself, "Does the mighty-armed Baladeva live, and 
Satyaki, and Rukmini's son and Charudeshna of great prowess, and Samba 
and the others? For, if they did, even Indra himself could not kill Vasudeva. 
Ah, if Vasudeva is dead, surely all these others and Balarama, too, must also 
be dead." 


Yudhishtira, I was overwhelmed by grief, and in that condition I 
encountered Salva again. And now I saw Vasudeva himself falling from the 
Saubha! Oh, my father seemed like Yayati falling down to the earth when 
he lost his punya; I saw my father fall like a luminary whose punya was 
exhausted, his clothes in disarray, his helmet loose and his hair flowing free 
and wild, and I swooned away. 

The bow Saranga dropped from my hand and I had to sit down abruptly 
in my chariot. My legions saw me thus, and their cries rent the air. Ah, my 
father fell like a dead bird, and Salva's soldiers on the ground hewed 
savagely at him with sword and axe. 

At this my heart shook violently and I regained consciousness. O 
Kshatriya, nowhere did I see my father or Salva or his Saubha made of 
precious metals. I knew that it had all just been maya, the enemy's illusion, 
and recovering quickly, I began to loose my arrows again, in hundreds." 


CANTO 22 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ rishna continues, ‘Seizing up my beautiful bow, I began to 

Ka the Danavas who rode in the Saubha. My Saranga 
streamed arrows formed like serpents, of intense energy and which could fly 
up to great heights. 

Then, I did not see the Saubha anymore, for it had vanished through 
maya. I was filled with wonder. However, the frightful Danava host set up a 
loud and joyful howling. I fitted an astra to my bowstring, a missile which 
would bury itself in an invisible enemy if only his voice was audible. 
Immediately, their shouting stopped. However, those who had howled were 
already slain by my arrows blazing like the sun. 

When the shouts and yells stopped in one place, they broke out in 
another, and there too I loosed my arrows. Bhaarata, the Asuras roared from 
the ten directions, as well as from above and below, and all those who did 
roar I slew: those that were in the sky and invisible, all with arrows of 
diverse forms, and astras summoned with mantras. 

Suddenly, the Saubha reappeared, of all places at Pragjyotishapura, 
dazzling my eyes. The monstrous Danavas showered a lashing rain of great 
rocks over me, covering me entirely, even like some vast anthill. Mighty 
crags covered my horses, my charioteer and flagstaffs, and I could not be 
seen anymore. 

The Vrishni army panicked and fled in every direction. Seeing me 
covered over with the massive stones, heaven and earth resounded with 
shocked cries; all my kinsmen and comrades began to weep and wail aloud, 
while grief tore at their hearts. 

My enemies were delighted, so I heard after I had defeated the enemy! 
Then, I wielded the Vajra, Indra's thunderbolt, which can rive the hardest 
stone, and smashed the mountain of rocks. However, my horses could 
hardly bear the weight of the rocks, and seemed on the point of death. They 
trembled. 

When my watriors saw me again they rejoiced as men do when the Sun 
breaks out from behind dark clouds, dispelling darkness. Seeing my horses 
almost at last gasp, sorely wounded by the mass of stones, my sarathy 


Daruka said to me, "O Vrishni, look where Salva sits in his Saubha. Kill 
him, Krishna! Abandon your mercy and mildness, Mahabaho, do not let 
him live. 

Parantapa, you must do everything in your power to kill your inveterate 
enemies. A strong man should not disregard even a weak enemy who is 
under his foot, then what to say of someone like Salva, who dares us to 
fight? Tiger among men, Lord, exert yourself and kill him! 

Do not delay any longer, this one cannot be vanquished with milder 
methods. And surely, he that is fighting you so savagely, he who has 
devastated Dwaraka, cannot be your friend!" 

Kaunteya, listening to Daruka and knowing that what he said was true, I 
turned my attention back to the battle, now meaning to kill Salva and 
destroy his Saubha. 

I said to Daruka, "Stay here a moment!", and I summoned my favourite 
weapon, of fire, chakra of blazing energy, irresistible and splendid disc. I 
cried to that great wheel, "Consume the Saubha and all the enemies inside 
it!" 

In anger, chanting mantras of power, I loosed the inexorable Sudarsana 
Chakra, which makes ashes of Yakshas, Rakshasas, Danavas and kings born 
into fell tribes, the disc sharp as a razor, stainless, which is even like Yama 
the destroyer, and incomparable. 

Spuming up into the sky, it seemed like another Sun of the blinding 
fulgurance with which the yuga ends. Flashing at the airborne township, the 
marvellous Saubha, whose glory vanished in a moment, the Chakra scythed 
right through it, even as a saw divides a tree. 

Cut in two by the Sudarsana, the Saubha fell like the city of Tripura 
cloven by the shafts of Maheswara. When the Saubha fell, the Chakra flew 
back into my hands. I cast it again, crying, "Go now to Salva!" 

Salva was about to hurl a sorcerer's mace at me, when the Sudarsana 
struck him, cut him in half and set him ablaze. When that fierce and valiant 
Danava died, Asura women lamented everywhere, and were led away 
sobbing. 

I brought my chariot before the townlike vimana Saubha and joyfully 
blew my conch, gladdening the hearts of my friends. Seeing their city, lofty 
as the peak of Meru, with its palaces and gateways ruined, and all ablaze, 
the Danavas fled in fear. Having thus destroyed the Saubha and slain Salva, 
I returned to the Anartas and my kin and friends were delighted. 


Rajan, this is why I could not come to Hastinapura. If I had come, 
Suyodhana would not be alive nor would the game of dice have been 
played. What can I do now? It is hard to confine the waters after a dam is 
breached! " 

Vaisampayana continued, "Having addressed the Kaurava thus, Krishna 
Purushottama, Mahabaho, Madhusudana, owner of all grace, salutes the 
Pandavas, and prepares to depart. 

Reverently, he salutes Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, and in return the king 
and Bhima, also, sniff the crown of his head affectionately. Arjuna 
embraces Krishna, and the twins salute him with reverence. Dhaumya duly 
honours Krishna, and Draupadi, in tears, worships him. 

Making Subhadra and Abhimanyu climb into his golden chariot, Krishna 
mounts it himself. After consoling Yudhishtira, Krishna sets out for 
Dwaraka in his ratha resplendent as the Sun, chariot to which the horses 
Saibya and Sugriva are yoked. 

After the Dasarha has left, Dhrishtadyumna also sets out for his own 
city, taking Draupadi's sons with him. Bidding farewell to the Pandavas, 
Dhrishtaketu, king of Chedi, sets out for his beautiful city Suktimati, taking 
his sister with him. The Kaikeyas, too, with leave from Yudhishtira of 
immeasurable tejas, reverentially salute all the Pandavas, and depart. 

But the Brahmanas, the Vaisyas and the other people of Yudhishtira's 
kingdom will not leave the Pandavas, though asked repeatedly to do so. 
Best of kings, extraordinary is the multitude that surrounds those 
Mahatmans in the Kamyaka vana. 

Yudhishtira honours those high-minded Brahmanas, then commands his 
men, 'Prepare my chariot!" 


CANTO 23 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


vos continued, "After Krishna leaves, Yudhishtira, Bhima, 
Arjuna, and the twins, each of them as magnificent as Siva, with 
Draupadi and their priest, climb into fine chariots yoked to pedigreed 
horses, and drive into the jungle together. 

As they go, they distribute nishkas of gold, clothes and cows to 
Brahmanas versed in siksha, akshara and mantras, and twenty attendants 
follow them, all carrying bows, more gleaming weapons, astras and other 
engines of war. With the princess's clothes and ornaments, her maids and 
her sakhis, Indrasena follows speedily in another chariot. 

Approaching the best of Kurus, the noble-minded citizens walk around 
him. The principal Brahmanas of Kurujangala cheerfully salute him, and 
Dharmaraja Yudhishtira and his brothers salute them back in joy. The 
illustrious king stops there a while, looking at the concourse of the 
inhabitants of Kurujangala. 

Yudhishtira feels for them as a father for his sons, and they also feel for 
him what sons feel for their father. Coming up to the great Kuru, they stand 
around him. 

Taken with shyness, tears in their eyes, they all exclaim, "Alas, O Lord! 
O Dharma!" And they say, "You are the lord of the Kurus, our king, and we 
are your subjects. Where are you going, O king of dharma, leaving all these 
your people, like a father leaving his sons? 

Fie on the cruel son of Dhritarashtra! Fie on the evil-minded son of 
Subala! Fie on Karna! For, O best of kings, who are steadfast in dharma, 
these wretches always wish you ill. 

Having established the unrivalled city of Indraprastha, splendid as 
Kailasa itself, where do you go leaving it? O illustrious and just king, O 
Dharmaptura, where do you go, leaving the peerless Mayaa Sabha, as 
resplendent as the palace of the Devas, which is even like some divine 
illusion, always guarded by the gods?" 

Arjuna, who knows the ways of dharma, artha and kama, says to them in 
a loud voice, "By living in the forest, the king means to take away the 
honour of his enemies. O you with these Brahamans at your head, who 


know dharma and artha, ask them privately what they believe will fetch us 
supreme felicity." 

When the Brahmanas and the other varnas hear what Arjuna says, they 
salute Yudhishtira, that best of men. Walking reverently around the king— 
Bhima, Arjuna, Yagnaseni, and the twins—and commanded by Yudhishtira, 
they return to their homes in the kingdom with heavy hearts." 


CANTO 24 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vos said, "After they have gone, Yudhishtira says to his 
brothers, 'We must live in the forest for twelve years. So, search this 
mighty vana for some spot which abounds in birds, deer, flowers and fruit, a 
place that is beautiful, auspicious, and also where Sages dwell, so we might 
live there pleasantly all those years.' 

Arjuna says to his elder brother, as reverently as to a Guru, 'You have 
worshipfully served all the great and old Rishis, and there is nothing in the 
world of men that you do not know. Bharatarishabha, with the utmost 
respect, you have waited upon great Brahmanas, Dwaipayana and others, 
and Narada of great punya, who with their senses perfectly controlled, 
journey freely from the gates of this world to those of the realms of the 
Devas, the Gandharvas and the Apsaras, and even to Brahmaloka. 

Beyond doubt, you know the mind of the Maharishis, as well as their 
power. You also know, O King, what is best for us. We will live wherever 
you say. Here in this forest called Dwaitavana is a lake full of holy water, 
enchanting to look at, with its profusion of flowers and every kind of bird. 

Rajan, if this place pleases you, shall we remain there for twelve years? 
Or are you of a different mind?" 

Yudhishtira replies, "Partha, what you say recommends itself to me. Let 
us go the famed, great and sacred Dwaitavana." 

Pandu's son goes towards the sacred lake known as Dwaitavana. 
Yudhishtira is surrounded by many Brahmanas, some of whom sacrifice 
with fire and some without it; some are devoted to the study of the Vedas, 
living on alms and they are Vanaprasthas, forest-dwellers. The king is also 
surrounded by hundreds of Mahatmans, of stern vows, their tapasya 
crowned with success. 

Those Bharatarishabhas, the Pandavs, and their Brahmanas, enter the 
sacred and enchanting vana of Dwaita. At summer's end, Yudhishtira sees 
the great jungle full of salas, palms, mango trees, madhukas, nipas, 
kadambas, sarjas, arjunas and karnikaras, many of them covered with 
flowers. 


Flocks of peacocks, datyuhas, chakoras, varhins and kokilas sit on the 
tops of the tallest trees, pouring down mellifluous songs. Mighty herds of 
gigantic elephants, big as hills, he sees, with the juice of rut trickling down 
their temples, accompanied by herds of cow-elephants. 

Approaching the beautiful Saraswati, the king sees many Sannyasins, 
and other ascetics, within that vana, all wearing valkala, with matted jata 
upon their heads. 

Alighting from his chariot, Yudhishtira enters the forest even like Indra 
entering Devaloka. Hosts of Charanas and Siddhas, wanting to see that king 
of dharma, come towards him. Quickly, the dwellers of the Dwaita throng 
around that lion among kings, of the great intellect. 

Saluting all the Siddhas, and saluted by them in return as a king or a god 
should be, that best of men walks into the forest with folded hands, along 
with those Dvijottamas. Yudhishtira sits down in the midst of those good 
ascetics, at the foot of a magnificent tree, adorned with flowers, even as his 
father Pandu had once. 

All of them tired, Bhima, Dhananjaya, the twins, Panchali and their 
followers, leave their chariots and sit around their king. And that mighty 
tree, bent with the weight of thick creepers, with those five illustrious 
bowmen sitting beneath it, looks like a mountain with five noble elephants 
resting upon its side." 


CANTO 25 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


Yous said, "In their distress, the exiled princes find a pleasant 
place to live in the vana. And there in that jungle of plentiful Sala 
trees, forest washed by the Saraswati, they who are like five Indras begin to 
besport themselves. 

The king devotes himself to befriending, serving and pleasing all the 
Yatis, Munis and the main Brahmanas in that forest, with offerings of fine 
fruit and roots. Dhaumya, their priest of tremendous tejas, and like a father 
to the princes, begins to perform the sacrificial rites of Ishti and Paitreya for 
the Pandavas in that great forest. 

One day, the ancient Rishi Markandeya, of intense and abundant tejas, 
arrives as a guest in the Pandavas' asrama. Yudhishtira pays devout homage 
to the great Muni, revered by the devas, by Rishis and by men, and who is 
as splendid as blazing fire. 

Seeing Draupadi, Yudhishtira, Bhima and Arjuna living amongst ascetics 
of the vana, the lustrous and all-knowing Sage smiles. Yudhishtira asks, 
'Muni, all these hermits feel sad to see us here in the wilderness, but you 
smile as if in joy. Why is it that you alone seem pleased?’ 

Markandeya replies, 'My child, I too feel sad and do not smile in any joy, 
nor do I feel any satisfaction to see you here. But seeing you today I am 
reminded of Dasaratha's son Rama, who lived in the forest at his father's 
command. 

Son of Pritha, I saw him in those olden days, ranging through the jungle, 
his bow in his hand and Lakshmana beside him. I saw him on the hill of 
Rishyamooka. Rama was like Indra, the lord of Yama himself, and the 
slayer of Namuchi. Yet, that sinless one had to live in the forest at his 
father's command, and he accepted that as his dharma. 

Yes, Rama was Sakra's equal in prowess; he was invincible in battle. Yet, 
abandoning all luxury and pleasure he went to live in the vana. So no one 
should sin, or leave dharma thinking J am mighty! 

The king Nabhaga, Bhagiratha and others, too, subdued the Earth 
bounded by seas, only through dharma, and finally gained the realms 
beyond. Child, no one should leave dharma, thinking J am mighty! 


Noblest of men, the virtuous and honest king of Kasi and Karusha was 
called a mad dog for relinquishing his kingdom and his wealth. No one 
should sin, saying J am mighty! 

Best of men, O son of Pritha, the Saptarishis blaze in the sky for having 
followed the eternal dharma which the Creator has laid down in the Vedas. 
Ah, no one should leave dharma, thinking J am mighty! 

Behold, O King, mighty elephants, tusked and great as mountain cliffs 
do not transgress the laws of the Creator. So, too, no man should break 
dharma thinking Might is mine! Best of kings, look how every creature and 
species follows its own nature and law, as created by God. Surely, no one 
should break dharma saying Might is mine! 

Prithaputra, in truth, in virtue, in righteous conduct and in humility you 
have surpassed all creatures, and your fame and brilliance are as those of 
Agni or Surya. You are steadfast in keeping your word, and when you have 
passed your painful exile in the forest you will take back your lambent 
fortune from the Kauravas, through your own might!’ 

Saying this much to Yudhishtira, who sits among his friends and the 
ascetics of the forest, the Maharishi Markandeya salutes Dhaumya and the 
Pandavas and walks away towards the north." 


CANTO 26 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vee said, "While the Pandavas live in the forest, the 
Dwaitavana teems with Brahmanas. The lake always resounds with 
Vedic chanting, and is like a second holy Brahmaloka, as the very air thrills 
to the sounds of the Yajus, the Riks, the Samas, and other incantations. 
These chants mingle with the twanging of the bowstrings of the sons of 
Pandu, creating a union of Brahmana and Kshatriya customs, noble and 
beautiful. 

One evening, the Rishi Baka of the Dalbhya clan says to Yudhishtira 
who sits among the Brahmanas, 'Look, lord of the Kurus, it is the time of 
the homa and the sacred fires have been lit. All these Brahmanas of stern 
vows sanctify this place with their rituals. 

The descendants of Bhrigu and Angiras, along with those of Vasishta 
and Kasyapa, the illustrious sons of Agastya, the offspring of Atri, indeed 
all the foremost Brahmanas of the world are here with you! Listen, O 
Kaunteya, you and your brothers, to what I have to say to you. 

As fire helped by the wind consumes a forest, so will Brahmana tejas 
combining with Kshatriya might consume all enemies. My child, he who 
wants to subdue this world and the next must never be without Brahmanas 
beside him. A king vanquishes his enemies only when he has for his priest a 
Brahmana who knows dharma, worldly affairs, and is free from passion and 
folly. 

King Bali, who loved his subjects, performed his dharma, which led to 
moksha, knowing of no other means to achieve his ends other than the 
Brahmanas. For this alone all the wishes of Virochana's son, the Asura, 
were always gratified, and his wealth was inexhaustible. 

He gained the whole world with the help of Brahmanas, and found 
destruction when he wronged them. This Earth, with her treasures, never for 
long adores as her lord a Kshatriya who lives without a Brahmana. The 
same sea-girt Bhumi, however, bows to him who is ruled by a Brahmana 
and taught his dharma by a Brahmana. Like an elephant in battle without 
his mahout, a Kshatriya destitute of Brahmanas dwindles in power. 


The Brahmanas vision is without compare, and the Kshatriyas might is 
also unparalleled. When these combine, the whole world joyfully yields to 
the twain. As fire becomes stronger blown by the wind, and consumes straw 
and wood, so do kings with Brahmanas consume all foes. 

To gain what he has not, and to increase what he has, a Kshatriya should 
take the counsel of Brahmanas. Therefore, O son of Kunti, you also keep a 
Brahmana of repute with you, one who knows the Vedas, a man of wisdom 
and experience. Yudhishtira, you have always had the highest regard for 
Brahmanas. It is because of this that your fame is great and blazes through 
the three worlds.’ 

All the Brahmanas there are delighted to hear Baka of the Dalbhya clan 
praise Yudhishtira and they, in turn, worship Baka. Dwaipayana, Narada, 
Jamadagnya and Prithusravas; Indradyumna and Bhaluki and Kritachetas 
and Sahasrapat; and Karnasravas and Munja and Lavanaswa and Kasyapa; 
and Harita and Sthunakarna and Agnivesya and Saunaka; and Kritavak and 
Suvaka, Brihadaswa and Vibhavasu; and Urdhvaretas and Vrishamitra and 
Suhotra and Hotravahana - these and many other Brahmanas, too, then 
adore Yudhishtira even like Rishis adoring Purandara in heaven!" 


CANTO 27 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


yoo said, "Exiled to the forest, one evening as they sit 
together, in some sorrow, the sons of Pritha and Draupadi speak to one 
another. 

Beautiful, knowing, beloved of her lords and devoted to them, Panchali 
says to Yudhishtira, 'Ah, when Dhritarashtra's cruel, sinful son could send 
us into the vana wearing deerskin, surely the evil one feels no twinge of 
remorse. His heart is made of iron, that he could speak to you, his elder 
brother, as harshly as he did. 

No, causing you, who deserve every happiness, such distress, the evil 
one rejoices with his friends. O Bhaarata, when you were sent into exile 
only four men did not shed a tear: Duryodhana, Kama, the vile Sakuni and 
the beast Dussasana. All the other Kurus grieved and they wept. 

Seeing this harsh bed on which you sleep, I think of what you had before 
and I grieve for you, O King who were raised in every luxury and do not 
deserve the least hardship. I think of the jewelled ivory throne in your court, 
and now I see you on this seat of kusa grass, and grief devours me. 

Rajan, I saw you surrounded by kings in your sabha. What peace can my 
heart know seeing you like this today? I have seen your body anointed with 
sandalwood paste, and now I see you smeared with dust and mud. I saw you 
clad in royal silken robes, and now I see you wearing rags. 

Once, the purest, finest food was carried from your palace in golden 
plates to thousands of Brahmanas, and you fed delicacies to ascetics, both 
homeless and grihastas. You lived in your palace once and worshipped the 
Brahmanas of the earth, satisfying their every wish. 

Yudhishtira, what peace can my heart now have, seeing all this? These 
brothers of yours, young and wearing the costliest ornaments, were once 
clad in the most expensive clothes and fed by the greatest cooks. Alas, I see 
them all now, none deserving sorrow, living in the wild, upon what the 
wilderness yields. 

O King, my heart knows no peace! Thinking of this Bhimasena living in 
sorrow in the vana, does your anger not blaze up? Why are you not wrathful 
seeing Bhima, who always did everything for us all, now plunged in grief, 


though it is every happiness that he deserves? Why does your fury not blaze 
seeing Bhima, who once lived amidst every luxury, with countless chariots 
and wearing the most superior clothes, like this today, in this jungle? 

This noble one is ready to kill all the Kurus, but he contains his rage and 
his grief to keep your solemn word. 

Arjuna, O Rajan, has but two hands, but he is equal to Kartaviryarjuna of 
a thousand arms in his prodigious archery. To his enemies, he is even like 
Yama himself. Was it not through his prowess that all the kings of the Earth 
waited upon the Brahmanas at your Rajasuya yagna? 

How is it that seeing Arjuna, tiger among men, whom both men and the 
gods worship, in this wretchedness, you anger does not blaze up? I grieve, 
O Bhaarata, that you are not wrathful at seeing this son of Pritha in exile - 
Arjuna who deserves no such misery, who had been raised in the lap of 
every luxury. 

Why are you not furious, seeing Arjuna in exile, Arjuna who in a single 
chariot vanquished the Devas, the Manavas and the Nagas, all? Why are 
you not furious seeing Arjuna in exile, Arjuna who was honoured with 
offerings of chariots, horses and elephants, who forcibly took from the 
kings of the Earth their treasures, who is the conqueror of all foes, who in 
one moment can loose five hundred arrows? Why are you not furious seeing 
Nakula in exile, Nakula so fair, able-bodied and young, who is foremost 
among swordsmen? How can you pardon your enemy, O Yudhishtira, 
seeing Madri's son, the handsome and brave Sahadeva, in exile? Why are 
you not furious seeing both Nakula and Sahadeva overwhelmed by grief, 
though so undeserving of it? 

How can you pardon your enemy while seeing me in exile, I who am 
Drupada's daughter, Dhrishtadyumna's sister, illustrious Pandu's daughter- 
in-law and the devoted wife of the Pandavas? Truly, O Bhaarata, you are 
incapable of anger, for how else is it that you are not moved seeing your 
brothers' distress and mine? It is said that there is no Kshatriya in the world 
who is free of anger, that the Kshatriya who does not find his anger when 
the need arises is forever disrespected by all creatures. 

O King, you should not forgive your enemies. With your power, you can 
defeat them all. Know also that the Kshatriya who does not forgive when 
the time for forgiveness comes is cursed by every creature and meets with 
destruction both in this world and the next.'" 


CANTO 28 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


cc raupadi continues, 'Once, Vali, son of Virochana, questioned his 

Le Prahlada, the chief of the Asuras and the Danavas, 
possessed of great wisdom and versed in the subtleties of dharma, saying, 
"Sire, is forgiveness greater, or strength and anger? I am unsure, Pitama, 
enlighten me! Tell me, since you know dharma so well, which is better? I 
will do whatever you command." 

Prahlada said, "Know this truth with certainty - neither anger nor 
forgiveness is invariably greater! He that forgives suffers many ills. 
Servants and strangers and enemies disrespect him. No creature bows down 
to him. So it is that the learned do not approve constant forgiveness. 

The servants of an ever-forgiving person will seek to deprive him of his 
wealth and belongings. They do not give others the things that they are 
directed to by their master, nor do they give their master the respect that is 
his due. Dishonour is worse than death. My child, sons, servants, attendants, 
and even strangers speak harshly to the man who always forgives. 

Disregarding this man, people even desire his wife, and his wife also 
behaves as she pleases. Servants who are not punished by their master 
acquire all sorts of vices, and some even injure such a master. These and 
many other ills afflict the ever forgiving. 

Listen now, O son of Virochana, to the troubles of those that never 
forgive. The man of wrath who, surrounded by darkness, uses his strength 
to constantly inflict punishment on others, whether deserved or not, is 
separated from his friends. Such a man is hated by both relatives and 
strangers. Such a man, because he insults others, loses his wealth and reaps 
disregard, sorrow, hatred, bewilderment and enemies. 

Because of his ire, the man of wrath listens to harsh words, is parted 
from his friends, relatives, prosperity and his very life. He who uses his 
strength against both his friend and his foe, is an object of alarm to the 
world, as a snake who has taken shelter in a house is to its residents. What 
prosperity can he have who alarms the world? People will hurt him 
whenever they have an opportunity. 


So, men should never use strength in excess, nor forgiveness on all 
occasions. One should use might and show forgiveness when appropriate. 
He who forgives at the proper time and is angry at the proper time finds 
happiness both in this world and the next. 

I will now tell you in detail about the occasions prescribed by the Sages 
for forgiveness, which everyone should observe. Listen carefully. If 
someone who has once done you a service wrongs you, even grievously, he 
must be forgiven in remembrance of the old service. Those who offend 
because they are ignorant or callow should be forgiven because not all men 
are learned or wise. 

However, those who wrong you knowingly, even if their offence be 
trivial and they plead ignorance, must be punished. Such false, crooked men 
should never be pardoned. Although every man's first offence should be 
forgiven, the second you must punish, even if it is trivial. 

But if a man offends you unwittingly, and his plea of ignorance is found 
to be true after a judicious and thorough enquiry, he should be pardoned. 
Humility will vanquish might; humility will also vanquish weakness; there 
is nothing which humility cannot accomplish. Truly, humility is fiercer than 
it seems! 

One must act in accordance with place and time, taking note of his own 
strength or weakness. No undertaking which does not take place and time 
into account can succeed; always wait upon place and time. Sometimes, 
offenders should be forgiven from fear of the people. These have been 
declared to be times for forgiveness, while on other occasions force should 
be put forth against offenders." 

"Draupadi continues, 'O King, I believe that this is the time to use your 
strength and force. Dhritarashtra's greedy sons always seek to harm us, and 
this is no time to forgive them but to use your power against them. 

The ever humble and forgiving person is disregarded; while those that 
are always fierce and persecute others are despised. But he is indeed a king, 
who takes recourse to both, each at their proper time."" 


CANTO 29 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


&¢ udhishtira says, 'Anger is the slayer of men and is again V their 

ve Wise one, know that anger is the root of all prosperity 
and all adversity. Beautiful one, he who restrains his anger prospers, while 
he who gives in always to his rage reaps adversity. 

In this world, anger is the cause of the destruction of every being; then 
how can one like me indulge my anger, when it can destroy the very world. 
The angry man commits sin. The angry man kills even his Gurus. The angry 
man insults even his elders with harsh words. 

The man who is angry cannot distinguish between what he should and 
should not say. There is nothing that an angry man will not do, no vile word 
that an angry man will not utter. In anger a man might kill someone who 
does not deserve killing, and he might worship another who deserves to die. 

The angry man might even send his own soul to the land of Yama. 
Seeing all this clearly, the wise control their anger, wishing for great 
prosperity both in this world and the next. This is why serene souls banish 
anger, then how can I indulge in wrath? 

Draupadi, I reflect on this, and do not allow my anger to be excited. He 
who does not respond to an angry man saves himself and others from great 
fear. Indeed, he can be regarded as the physician of both himself and the 
angry man. 

If a weak man is persecuted by men who are stronger than himself, and 
foolishly turns his anger on them, he causes his own downfall. Such a one 
who deliberately throws away his life gains no realms of felicity in the 
hereafter. So, Draupadi, a weak man should always suppress his anger. And 
the wise man who, even though wronged, does not allow his anger to be 
roused, passing over his persecutor in indifference, enjoys great happiness 
in the next world. 

This is why it has been said that, be he strong or weak, the wise man 
forgives his enemy. Panchali, this is why the good applaud those who have 
conquered their wrath. Sage men believe that the honest and forgiving man 
is always victorious. 


Truth is ever more beneficial than falsehood, and gentleness than cruelty. 
Then how can one like me show anger even to kill Duryodhana, when anger 
has so many faults, anger which men of dharma banish from their souls? 
The wise surely regard those who only outwardly show anger as being men 
of character. Men of learning and true insight call him who can control his 
provoked anger, through his wisdom, a man of character. 

O you of the fair hips, the angry man does not see things in their true 
light. He does not see his way or respect anyone. The angry man kills even 
those that do not deserve killing. The man of wrath kills even his 
preceptors. So, the man of character must always banish wrath to a distance. 

The man who is overwhelmed by anger does not easily acquire 
generosity, dignity, courage, skill, and the other qualities which belong with 
true character. By forsaking anger a man can show his strength and energy 
at the proper time, while this is very difficult for the angry man to do. 

Fools regard anger as being equivalent to strength, but wrath has been 
given to man for the destruction of the world. So, the man who wishes to 
live in dharma must always forsake anger. For sure, those who abandon the 
virtues of their svadharma indulge anger. 

Faultless one, if fools, their minds full of darkness, trangresss dharma in 
every way, should I be like them and do the same? If there were none 
among men equal to the Earth in forgiveness, there would be no peace in 
the world, but ceaseless strife caused by wrath. 

If the injured return their injuries, if one chastised by his superior were 
to chastise his superior in return, the consequence would be the destruction 
of every creature, and sin would prevail throughout the world. 

If the man who is spoken harshly to speaks back savagely in turn, if 
fathers kill sons and sons their fathers, if husbands kill wives, and wives 
husbands, Draupadi, how can there be any births into such a world where 
anger held such sway? For, lovely one, know that men are born because 
there is peace. 

Panchali, if kings yield to wrath, their subjects quickly find death. The 
consequence of anger is distress and destruction for the people. It is because 
there are men who are as forgiving as the Earth that all beings live and 
prosper. One should forgive every injury, for every species and race 
continues because man is forgiving. 

Truly, the wise and excellent man, who has conquered his anger, is he 
who forgives even when he is insulted, persecuted and infuriated by a 


strong enemy. The man of power who controls his anger enjoys countless 
everlasting realms, while the angry man is known to be a fool and finds 
destruction both in this and the other world. 

O Krishnaa, the illustrious and forgiving sang this of men who are 
always forgiving: 

"Forgiveness is virtue; forgiveness is sacrifice; forgiveness is the Vedas, 
forgiveness is the Sruti. He who knows this can forgive anything. 
Forgiveness is Brahman; forgiveness is truth; forgiveness is punya; 
forgiveness protects the punya of the future; forgiveness is sannyasa; 
forgiveness is holiness; and by forgiveness the universe is held together. 

Men of forgiveness attain the realms gained by those who perform great 
tapasya, or those who are masters of the Vedas, or those that have great 
ascetic merit. Those who perform Vedic yagnas, as also those who perform 
other sacred karma obtain lesser realms, while men of forgiveness find the 
adored realms which are in Brahmaloka. Forgiveness is the might of the 
mighty; forgiveness is sacrifice; forgiveness 1s quiet of mind." 

How, Krishnaa, can someone like me abandon forgiveness, in which 
Brahman, truth, wisdom and the worlds are founded? Kasyapa said, "The 
man of wisdom should always forgive, for when he is capable of forgiving 
everything, he attains Brahman. 

This world belongs to those that are forgiving; the other world is also 
theirs. The forgiving find honour here, and a state of blessedness hereafter. 
Men who subdue even their anger through forgiveness gain the loftiest 
realms. So has it been said that forgiveness is the highest virtue." 

So did Kasyapa sing of those who are ever forgiving. Panchali, having 
heard what he said, content yourself. Do not give way to your anger! 

Our Pitama, Santanu's son Bhishma, will worship peace; Krishna, the 
son of Devaki, will worship peace; Acharya Drona and Vidura will both 
speak of peace; Kripa and Sanjaya also will preach peace; and Somadatta 
and Yuyutsu and Drona's son and our grandsire Vyasa, every one of them 
always speaks of peace. 

Urged constantly by these towards peace, I believe that Dhritarashtra 
will return our kingdom to us. However, if he yields to temptation, he will 
meet with destruction. Panchali, a crisis has entered the history of the 
Bhaaratas to plunge them into doom. For some time now, I have been 
convinced of this. 


Suyodhana does not deserve the kingdom, and that is why he has not 
discovered forgiveness; I, however, do, and for that, forgiveness has 
possessed me. Forgiveness and gentleness are the qualities of the reposed 
man. They represent eternal virtue, and I will embrace these gunas.'" 


CANTO 30 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ raupadi says, 'I bow down to Dhatri and Vidhatri who have so 

Le your good sense! You think differently from your sires and 
grandsires about the burden you bear. 

Influenced by karma, men find themselves in various circumstances of 
life. Karma produces inevitable consequences; we wish for emancipation 
from mere folly. 

It seems that man can never attain prosperity in this world through 
virtue, gentleness, forgiveness, honesty and fear of censure. If this were not 
so, O Bhaarata, this intolerable calamity would never have overtaken you, 
who are so undeserving of it, and your brothers of great tejas. 

Neither in your days of prosperity nor in these of adversity, O Bhaarata, 
have you held anything as dear as dharma, which you hold even dearer than 
life. The Brahmanas, your elders, even the Devas know that your kingdom 
and your life are for dharma alone. 

You will abandon Bhimasena, Arjuna, these twin sons of Madri and me, 
but you cannot leave dharma. I have heard that the king protects dharma, 
and dharma protects him in return. But I do not see that dharma protects 
you. 

Like his shadow pursues a man, your heart, O Purushavyaghra, single- 
mindedly always seeks dharma. Never have you disregarded your equals, 
your inferiors or superiors. Even gaining the whole world, pride never 
touched you. 

O son of Pritha, you always adore the Brahmanas, the Devas and the 
Pitrs, with swadhas, and other forms of worship. Kaunteya, you gratify 
Brahmanas by fulfilling their every wish. Yatis, Sannyasins and Grihastas 
have always been fed in your house from plates of gold, and I served their 
food. 

You always give gold and food to Vanaprasthas. Why, there was nothing 
in your house which you would not give away to Brahmanas. During the 
Viswadeva sacrifice, conducted for your peace, in your palace, the 
consecrated offerings were always first given to sadasyas and every other 
living being, while you contented yourself with whatever was leftover. 


Ishti Pasubandhas, sacrifices for obtaining fruition of desires, the 
religious rites of domesticity, Paka sacrifices, and sacrifices of other kinds 
were constantly performed in your royal house. 

Even in this great forest so solitary and haunted by robbers, living in 
exile, divested of your kingdom, your dharma has sustained no diminution. 
You performed the Aswamedha, the Rajasuya, the Pundarika, and Gosava, 
the grandest yagnas which demand prodigious gifts and charity. 

Rajan, yet during the dire game of dice, perversity moved you to wager 
me as a stake? You lost your kingdom, your wealth, your weapons, your 
brothers, and me! You are simple, gentle, liberal, modest and truthful; how, 
Rajan, could your mind be attracted to the vice of gambling? 

Ah, grief overwhelms my heart and I am losing my mind to see this 
distress of yours, this calamity. Surely, it is true that men are subject to the 
will of God and never to their own wishes. The Supreme Lord and Ordainer 
of all things ordains every joy and sorrow, all the happiness and misery of 
all creatures, even before they are born, in accordance with their karma 
which is like a seed destined to sprout into this tree of life. 

O Kshatriya, God moves men as a puppeteer does his wooden puppets 
with his wires. Even as akasa covers everything, God pervades every 
creature, and ordains its weal or woe. As a bird tied with a string, every 
creature depends on God. Everyone is subject to God and none else. No one 
can decide his own fate. 

Like a pearl on its string, or a bull held by the rope through its nose, or a 
tree fallen from the bank into the river, every creature follows God's 
command because they are imbued with His Spirit and because they are 
established in Him. 

Dependent on the Universal Soul, man cannot pass a moment 
independently. Enveloped in darkness, creatures are not masters of their 
own joy or sorrow. They go to heaven or hell urged by God Himself. 

Like light straws fly on strong winds, all creatures, O Bhaarata, fly on 
God's will. And God pervades all creatures, engaged in deeds right and 
wrong; He moves in the universe, but none can say This is God. 

This body is only the means through which God causes every creature to 
reap fruits of karma, good and bad. Ah, look at God's maya which 
confounds men and makes them kill their fellows. 

Truth-knowing Munis see these bodies differently, as rays of the Sun, 
which is the Lord, while ordinary men see the things of the Earth otherwise. 


God creates them all, each one uniquely born and destroyed. O Yudhishtira, 
Brahma the Pitamaha spreads his maya and kills his creatures through the 
agency of other creatures, even as one might split a piece of wood with 
another, crack a stone with another stone or break a piece of iron with an 
iron rod. 

Lord sports with his creatures, creating and destroying them at his 
pleasure, like a child with his toy. O King, it does not seem to me that God 
treats his creatures as a father or a mother does their children. Rather, like a 
vicious man, he seems to treat them with anger, maliciously. 

Ah, I am deeply troubled seeing good, superior men persecuted, while 
sinners thrive and are happy I cannot think or speak well of the Great 
Ordainer seeing your distress and Suyodhana's prosperity. How can God 
suffer such iniquity? 

What does He gain by allowing Duryodhana, who breaks every sacred 
law, who is greedy and crooked, who grievously harms dharma, to prosper? 
If a deed done pursues the doer and none else, then certainly it is God 
himself who is stained with the sin of every act. If however, the sin of an 
action does not attach to the doer, then might and not God is the true cause 
of whatever happens, and I grieve for those who are weak and have no 
prowess!" 


CANTO 31 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ be says, 'You speak beautifully, Yagnaseni, your words 

smooth, your phrases delightful. I have listened carefully to what 
you say, but you speak the language of atheism. Princess, I never do 
anything for the fruits of what I do. I give because it is my duty to give; I 
sacrifice because it is my duty to sacrifice. Krishnaa, I do to the best of my 
ability whatever a grihasta should do, regardless of whether what I do 
benefits me or not. 

Round-hipped one, I act virtuously not from the desire to reap the fruits 
of virtue, but so that I do not break the ordinances of the Veda, and also 
with an eye on the conduct of the good and wise. Krishnaa, my heart is 
drawn naturally towards virtue. 

The man who wishes to reap the fruit of virtue is a trader in virtue. His 
nature is base, and he can never be counted among the virtuous; nor does he 
ever gain the fruit of his actions. 

The man of sinful heart, who does a virtuous thing, but doubts dharma in 
his mind - he, too, does not obtain the fruits of his deed, because of his 
scepticism. I speak to you by the authority of the Vedas, which constitute 
the highest proof in these matters - you must never doubt dharma. 

The man who doubts dharma is destined to be born into bestial species. 
The man of weak understanding who doubts religion, virtue or the words of 
the Rishis, is excluded from the realms of immortality and bliss, even as are 
Sudras from the Vedas! 

Intelligent one, if a young child born into a noble race studies the Vedas 
and conducts himself virtuously, great Rajarishis regard him as a mature 
Sage, notwithstanding his years. But the sinner that doubts dharma and 
transgresses the scriptures, is regarded as even lower than Sudras and 
robbers. 

With your own eyes, you have seen the Maharishi Markandeya of 
immeasurable soul come to us. Through dharma alone did he acquire 
immortality in his very body. 

Vyasa, Vasishta, Maitreya, Narada, Lomasa, Suka and other Rishis have 
all been purified through dharma alone. You see them with your own eyes 


as having the power of divine asceticism, able to curse or bless, and 
superior to the Devas themselves. 

Anagha, sinless one, all these, equal to the Devas, look at what is written 
in the Vedas and describe virtue as the foremost dharma. Sweet Queen, so it 
does not become you to either doubt or censure God, or to act rashly. 

The fool that doubts religion and disregards virtue, being proud of his 
own reasoning, does not regard other great reasons, and thinks of the Rishis, 
who see into past, present and the future, as being madmen. 

The fool regards only the external world as being capable of gratifying 
his senses, and is blind to everything else. He who doubts religion finds no 
expiation. The miserable one is full of anxiety and gains no realms of bliss 
hereafter. A heretic, a slanderer of the Veda, a sinner moved by lust and 
greed, he goes to hell. 

On the other hand, he who always cherishes dharma with faith finds 
eternal bliss in the other world; while the fool who not does keep dharma, 
disregarding all the proofs which the Rishis offer, does not prosper in any 
life. Have no doubt, lovely one, that he who pays no heed to what the Rishis 
say, and to their lives as living proof, he finds no joy in this world or the 
next. 

Draupadi, do not doubt the ancient dharma which good men live by, the 
religion framed by Sages of universal knowledge, who can see all things. 
Dharma is the only raft for those who want to find heaven, even as a ship is 
to merchants who want to cross the sea. 

Faultless one, if the dharma by which men of dharma live were fruitless, 
all the universe would be shrouded in infamous darkness. No one would 
then pursue moksha; no one would seek to acquire knowledge or even 
wealth, but men would live like beasts. If sannyasa, the austerities of 
brahmacharya, sacrifices, study of the Vedas, charity, honesty were all 
fruitless, men would not have practised dharma and virtue, generation after 
generation. 

If all karma was fruitless, dreadful chaos would prevail. Think, why do 
Rishis and Devas and Gandharvas and Rakshasas, all of whom are not 
human, treasure dharma with such love? Knowing for certain that God 
rewards the practise of dharma, they all observe dharma. Dharma, Panchali, 
is eternal prosperity. 

While we see the fruit of both gyana and tapasya, dharma and adharma, 
virtue and sin, cannot be without their fruit. Krishnaa, just think of the 


circumstances of your own birth, as you have heard of it, and the birth of 
the mighty Dhrishtadyumna. O you of the sweet smiles, what better proof 
of the value of dharma? 

They that have their minds under control reap the fruit of their actions, 
and are content with little. The ignorant are not content with what they 
receive here, however much it might be, because they have no joy born of 
virtue to inherit in the hereafter. 

When dharma and adharma appear to prove fruitless, and the very origin 
of all karma - why, my beautiful one, these are mysterious even to the gods. 
Not everyone knows these things, certainly not ordinary men. The Devas 
preserve the mystery, for the maya which obscures what the gods do is 
inscrutable. 

Those regenerate ones who have destroyed all desire, who have founded 
their aspirations on vratas, sannyasa and tapasya, who have burnt up all 
their sins, and in whose minds and hearts quietness, peace and holiness 
dwell - they understand all these. 

So, though you might not see the fruits of dharma, you must never doubt 
dharma or the gods. You must perform sacrifices with a will, and practise 
charity without insolence. All karma in this world has its fruit, and dharma 
is eternal. Brahma himself told this to his sons, as Kasyapa has said. So, let 
your doubts be dispelled like mist, Draupadi. Reflecting on all this; let your 
scepticism give way to faith. 

Do not slander God, who is the lord of all creatures. Learn how to know 
him. Bow down to him. Do not let your mind be sad, and never disregard 
the Supreme Being through whose grace mortal men, with piety, find 
immortality!" 


CANTO 32 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ raupadi says, 'Son of Pritha, I never disregard or slander dharma. 

Why would I disregard God, the lord of all creatures? O Bhaarata, I 
am griefstricken and ranting. Yet, I will lament again, and you must listen to 
me. 

O Parantapa, every conscious creature must certainly perform karma in 
this world. Only the immobile, not other beings, may live without doing. 
Immediately after its birth the calf sucks its mother's teat. Why, men feel 
pain when fell mantras are chanted using their statues. 

So, O Yudhishtira, it seems that beings derive the character of their lives 
from their karma of past births. Among the mobile, man differs from the 
rest in that he aspires to affect the course of his life in this and the other 
world through his deeds. 

All creatures visibly reap the fruit of their karma of past lives. Indeed, all 
creatures exist because of past karma, even Brahma, the Creator and the 
Ordainer of the Universe, even as a crane lives, untaught, in water. If a 
creature does nothing, it cannot live; all beings must act. 

You must also act, and not incur censure by abandoning karma. Cover 
yourself with deeds, as with armour. Among a thousand men, there is 
perhaps one who truly knows the worth of karma, of action. One must act to 
protect oneself, and to increase one's wealth, for if a man only spends 
without earning, even if he owns a hoard as great as Himavan, it will 
quickly be exhausted. 

But for karma, doing, all the creatures of this world would have become 
extinct. If karma bore no fruit, the created would never have multiplied. We 
see that at times men perform karma even though it bears no fruit, for 
without doing, life's course itself would be impossible. 

Those in this world who believe in destiny, and those again who believe 
in chance, are both the worst among men. Only those that believe in the 
efficacy of karma are laudable. He who does nothing, believing just in 
destiny is soon destroyed, even like an unburnt earthen pot in water. Also, 
he that believes in chance and sits idle though he can act, does not live long, 
for his life is one of weakness and helplessness. 


If a man gains wealth without effort, it is told that he does so by chance; 
if he acquires fortune through religious rites, it is deemed providential. But 
the fruit gained through his own actions is proof of his ability. 

Best of men, wealth gained through chance is called spontaneous 
acquisition; wealth thus gained is through the karma of a previous life. God 
dispenses the fruit of the karma of past lives to men in this world -good and 
bad. 

This body is only the instrument in God's hands for the performance of 
karma; inert of itself, it does what God urges it to. Kaunteya, it is the 
Supreme Lord of all who makes every creature do what it does. The 
creatures themselves are inert. 

O Kshatriya, deciding upon some purpose in his mind, man 
accomplishes it, working with his intelligence. Thus we say that man 
himself is the cause of what he does. Purusharishabha, it is impossible to 
count the deeds of men, for mansions and cities are the result of man's 
deeds. 

Intelligent men know that oil may be had from sesame, curds from milk, 
and that food can be cooked by igniting fuel. They also know the means for 
accomplishing all these; and knowing them, they use the required 
appliances to accomplish them. Through what they do, men support their 
lives. 

If a skilled workman does something, it is well executed; and the 
opposite happens if a thing is done by an unskilful hand. In karma, if a man 
was not himself his own karma's doer and cause, then no sacrifice would 
bear any fruit for him, and nor would anyone be a Guru or a sishya. 

It is because a man himself is the cause of his work that he is applauded 
when he achieves success; and he is censured when he fails. If this were not 
so, how would praise and blame be justified? 

Some say that everything is the result of Providence; others, that this is 
not so, but that everything is the result of the karma, good and bad, of past 
lives. Chance fetches possessions, as also does destiny; some things are 
gained through exertion; there is no fourth cause — so say those who know 
the truth, men of gyana. 

However, if God himself did not dispense good and bad fruit, then there 
would be no misery among the created. If the effects of past karma are a 
myth, then a man would achieve everything for which he strives. So, those 
who believe that chance, destiny and effort are the only causes of success, 


and who deny the effects of karma from past lives, are dull, why, inert as 
the body itself. 

Yet, a man must act; Manu himself has said so. He who does not act, 
surely succumbs, O Yudhishtira. While the man of action usually finds 
success in this world, the idle never succeed. If success becomes 
impossible, one seeks to remove the obstacles on one's path to it. 

Rajan, if a man works, his debts of karma are paid, whether he succeeds 
or not. Adversity overtakes the idle man, while the active, skilful one will 
certainly prosper. Intelligent men, who engage confidently in karma, regard 
others as being faithless and failures. They think of the confident and the 
faithful as being men of success. 

Misery has found us now, but if you act against it, it will surely be 
removed. If you fail, it will prove that Bhima, Arjuna and the twins cannot 
take the kingdom back. But since the efforts of most men meet with 
success, it is likely that we shall also have what we strive for. 

How can anyone predict whether we shall win or lose? Only if you act 
will you know what fruit your action will bring. The tiller tills the soil with 
his plough and sows seeds. He then sits quiet, for only the clouds can bring 
the rain which will make his seeds grow into plants. If the clouds do not 
favour him, he is absolved from blame. 

He says to himself, "I have done what others do. If despite this I have 
failed, the fault is not mine," and he does not reproach himself. 

O Bhaarata, no one should despair saying, "Oh, I am doing what I 
should yet success is not mine!" 

For there are two other causes, besides exertion, for success. One should 
never despair about the success or failure of any undertaking because both 
depend upon the concatenation of many circumstances. If one important 
element is wanting, success does not come immediately, sometimes not at 
all. But without exertion there can never be any success. 

Nor is there anything to applaud in abstaining from action. The 
intelligent put forth all their might, bringing together time, place, means and 
auspicious rites to acquire prosperity. With care and vigilance a man must 
set himself to his task, his main strength being his prowess. In the union of 
qualities needed to succeed in any undertaking prowess, ability, seems to be 
the main. 

When the intelligent man sees that his enemy is superior to himself in 
many ways, he should seek success through conciliation. But he must wish 


his enemy ill and seek his banishment. Why speak of mortal men, even if 
his enemy were the ocean or the mountains, these motives should guide 
him. 

A man who seeks to strike at his enemy's weaknesses discharges his 
dharma to himself and his own. No man should ever disparage himself, for 
he who does, never finds great prosperity. O Bhaarata, only through such 
endeavour can success be found in this world. Indeed, success in the world 
depends on acting when the time and circumstances are ripe. 

My father used to keep a learned Brahmana with him. Bharatarishabha, 
he said all this to my father. My brothers first heard these tenets of dharma, 
uttered by Brihaspati himself. It was from them that I heard these, later, in 
my father's house. Yudhishtira, whenever I had time, I would go and sit on 
my father's lap, and that knowing Brahmana would recite these truths to me, 
sweetly consoling me by what he said!" 


CANTO 33 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


yoo = said, "Bhimasena listens to Draupadi, and sighing in 
anger, approaches the king and says to him, 'Walk, O Rajan, on the 
ancient path trodden by great kings who went before you! What do we gain 
by living in an asrama of Sannyasins, deprived of our own dharma, kama 
and artha? 

Duryodhana took our kingdom not by dharma, nor by might, but through 
a game of dice at which he cheated. Like a weak, offal-eating jackal 
snatching their prey from mighty lions, he has taken our kingdom from us. 
Why, Rajan, just for the trite merit of keeping your given word, do you 
suffer such distress, abandoning our wealth, the source of both dharma and 
kama? 

He who wields the Gandiva protected our kingdom, and not Indra 
himself could take it by force; yet taken it was, because of your 
carelessness. Because of you our kingdom was taken like some fruit from a 
man who has no arms, or cattle from one who has no legs. 

You are faithful in dharma. To please you, Bhaarata, we allowed 
ourselves to be overwhelmed by such a calamity. It is because we are 
obedient to you that today we rend the hearts of our friends and gratify our 
enemies. 

Ah, how it grieves me that, just to obey you, we did not kill 
Dhritarashtra's son even then. This is your home in the forest, where you 
live like a wild animal. Only a weak man would bear this, surely no strong 
one would ever lead such a life. 

Not Krishna, Arjuna, Abhimanyu, the Srinjayas, Madri's sons or I 
myself, approve of this life you have chosen. Bound by your vows, you 
always cry Dharma! Dharma! Has despair deprived you of your manliness? 
Only cowards, who cannot win back their lost wealth, cherish despair - vain 
despair which destroys one's purposes. 

You have ability and eyes; you see that manliness dwells in us. But you 
have accepted a life of peace, and feel no distress. The Dhartarashtras think 
of us, who are in truth forgiving, as being weak, inept. This hurts me more 
than dying in battle. 


Even if we all die in fair fight, without showing our backs to our 
enemies, that would be better than this shameful exile, for then we would 
find realms of bliss in the next world. Or if we slay them and gain the whole 
world, that would be wealth well won, and worth the attempt. 

We always keep Kshatriya dharma; we always seek grand achievements; 
we always avenge injustice; it is our bounden duty to win our kingdom back 
with battle. Then our fame would mantle the world, not our shame. 

Rajan, the dharma which torments oneself and one's near and dear ones 
is no dharma at all; rather, it is evil, fetching calamities. Sometimes, dharma 
becomes the weakness of a man; and though such a man might always 
cleave to dharma, yet both dharma and artha forsake him even like pleasure 
and pain forsaking a dead man. 

He who clings to dharma for dharma's sake always suffers. He can 
hardly be called a wise man, for he does not know the very ends of dharma, 
like a blind man who cannot see the light of the Sun. He who uses his 
wealth only for himself does not understand the meaning or purpose of 
artha. He is really like a servant who tends cows in a forest. 

Again, he who hankers only after artha, ignoring dharma and kama 
deserves censure and killing. He who pursues only pleasure, without 
seeking dharma and artha, quickly loses his friends and also his virtue and 
wealth. Without dharma and artha, only indulging indiscriminately in kama, 
a man exhausts his pleasures and finds death, like a fish when the water in 
which it lives runs dry. 

For these reasons, the wise always cherish both dharma and artha, 
because a union of these is essential to pleasure, even as fuel is to fire. The 
root of kama is dharma, and dharma, too, is not apart from pleasure. The 
two depend on each other as the ocean and the clouds, the ocean causing the 
clouds and the clouds filling the ocean. 

Pleasure, kama, is the joy that one feels from contact with the objects of 
the senses or from the possession of wealth. It exists in the mind, having no 
corporeal existence which one can see. 

He who desires wealth, first seeks a large share of dharma to have his 
desire fulfilled. He who wishes for kama, first seeks artha, wealth. But 
pleasure, in its turn, yields nothing. One pleasure cannot lead to another, 
being its own fruit - as ashes may be had from wood, but nothing from 
those ashes in their turn. 


As a fowler kills the birds we see, so does sin slay the creatures of the 
world. So, he who is misled by pleasure or covetousness, and does not see 
the true nature of dharma becomes wretched both here and hereafter, and 
deserves killing. 

Rajan, you know that pleasure is to be had from possessing the various 
objects of enjoyment. You also know well the changes these objects of 
desire and enjoyment undergo. At their loss or disappearance, occasioned 
by decrepitude or death, there arises distress. That distress has now 
overtaken us. 

The joy which comes from the five senses, the intellect and the heart, all 
being directed to the objects proper to each, is called kama, pleasure. I 
believe that pleasure is one of the best fruits of our karma, our actions. 

So one must respect dharma, artha and kama, one after the other. One 
should not devote oneself just to dharma, or think of wealth as the highest 
object of one's wishes, nor pleasure; one should always pursue all three. 

The Shastras ordain that one should seek dharma in the morning, artha at 
noon, and kama in the evening. The scriptures also say that one should seek 
pleasure in the first part of life, wealth in the second, and virtue in the last. 
And the wise pursue all three, dividing their time equally. 

Kurunandana, you must think carfeully whether these three should be 
independent or interwoven, for those that seek happiness. Then you must 
unhesitatingly act either to acquire them, or abandon them all. For he who 
lives wavering in doubt between two paths, leads a wretched life. 

The world knows that you always live by dharma. Knowing this, still 
your friends tell you to act. Charity, sacrifice, respect for the wise, study of 
the Vedas, and honesty - these constitute the highest dharma, and are 
efficacious both here and hereafter. Yet, these virtues cannot be attained by 
one who has no wealth, not, O Purushavyaghra, if his _ other 
accomplishments are infinite. 

All the universe depends upon dharma; there is nothing higher than 
virtue. And he who has great wealth can attain to virtue. Wealth cannot be 
earned by leading a mendicant life, nor by a life of feebleness. Wealth can 
be earned by using intelligence, directed by dharma. 

For you, begging alms, which is allowed Brahmanas, is forbidden. So 
strive to acquire wealth by exerting your might and energy. Neither 
mendicancy nor the life of a Sudra is proper for you. Might and energy 


constitute the special dharma of the Kshatriya. So, adopt your swadharma 
and kill your enemies. 

Destroy the power of Dhritarashtra's sons, with my prowess and 
Arjuna's. The learned and the wise say that sovereignty is virtue. So acquire 
sovereignty, for it does not become you to live in this wretched condition. 
Awake, O King, and understand the Sanatana Dharma. By birth you belong 
to a varna whose deeds are violent and cause pain to men. 

Cherish your subjects and reap the fruit thereof; for that you can never 
be reproached. This is the dharma ordained by God himself for the 
Kshatriya! If you fall away from it, you will make yourself ridiculous. 
There is no praise for leaving the path of one's swadharma. Therefore, set 
your heart where it ought to be, in concord with the varna to which you 
belong, cast away this course of feebleness, summon your energy, and bear 
your burden manfully, as you should. 

No king ever gained sovereignty of the earth, prosperity or affluence 
through dharma alone. As a fowler snares small game by offering them 
food, so does an intelligent man acquire a kingdom by offering bribes to 
base and greedy enemies. The Asuras, though elder to the Devas and more 
powerful and wealthy, were vanquished through stratagem by the gods. 

Everything belongs to the mighty. Mahabaho, kill your enemies who 
used vile strategy to vanquish us. No one can equal Arjuna at wielding a 
bow in battle; none is my equal with a mace. Depending on their own 
prowess, strong men fight battles; they care little for the numbers ranged 
against them, or on information gleaned from spies. 

O Pandava, exert your might. Might is the only root of wealth; whatever 
else is said to be its root is not really so. As in winter the shade of a tree 
counts for nothing, so also without might everything else becomes fruitless. 
A man who wants to increase his wealth should spend it, O Kaunteya, in the 
manner of scattering seeds on the ground. 

Have no doubt about this. However, unless the returns from what you 
spend are not more than or at least equal to what you spend, you must not 
invest your wealth. For the man who spends wealth unreasonably is like the 
donkey scratching itself - pleasurable at first but painful afterwards. 

So, too, the man who scatters a little of his seeds of dharma to gain 
greater dharma is considered wise. Have no doubt, it is as I say. 

The wise man alienates his enemies' friends by scattering seeds of 
wealth; once the enemy's friends abandon him, the intelligent man brings 


him to subjection. Even the strong engage in battle depending on their 
courage. Without courage, neither ceaseless efforts nor the arts of 
conciliation can always win a kingdom. 

Sometimes weak men, uniting in great numbers, kill even a powerful 
enemy, like bees killing a honey-gatherer through the sheer power of 
numbers. Yudhishtira, adopt the ways of the Sun - who nurtures as well as 
kills through his rays - to protect our kingdom and the people, as our 
ancestors did; Rajan, I have heard that this is a sannyasa which even the 
Veda speaks about. 

A Kshatriya cannot acquire the realms of blessedness through asceticism 
as he can by honourable battle, regardless of whether he wins or loses. 
Seeing you in this condition, the world has concluded that light may well 
forsake the Sun and the Moon; good men come and go from here, singly or 
in groups, and all of them praise you and blame our enemies. 

Moreover, the Kurus and the Brahmanas, together, always speak of your 
absolute truthfulness, how you have never told a lie, from ignorance, from 
meanness, from greed, or from fear. 

Whatever sins a king commits to gain kingdom he later consumes them 
through sacrifices distinguished by bountiful charity. Like the Moon 
emerging from behind clouds, a king is purified from all sins by gifting 
villages to Brahmanas, and cows by thousands. 

Almost all the people of the country, young or old, praise you, 
Yudhishtira. They also say that sovereignty vested in Duryodhana is as milk 
in a bag of dog-hide, as the Vedas in a Sudra, as truth in a robber, as 
strength in a woman. Even women and children say this repeatedly, as if it 
were a lesson they seek to commit to memory. 

Parantapa, you have not fallen by yourself; all of us are also lost with 
you. So, climb into your chariot laden with every weapon, make superior 
Brahmanas utter benedictions over you, and fly, this very day, at 
Hastinapura, so that you can give the spoils of victory to your Brahmanas. 

Surrounded by your brothers who are great archers, and by other 
Kshatriya heroes who are like snakes of virulent poison, set out even like 

Vritra's slayer surrounded by the Marutas. Kaunteya, you are powerful; 
decimate your weakling enemies, crush them like Indra did the Asuras; and 
snatch the prosperity he enjoys from Dhritarashtra's son. 

There is no mortal who can even bear the touch of the vulture-feathered 
arrows, like vicious serpents, loosed from the Gandiva. Bhaarata, there is no 


warrior, no horse or elephant which can withstand the blows of my mace 
when I am enraged in battle. 

With the Srinjayas, the Kaikeyas, and the Vrishni Bull fighting for us, 
why should we fail to wrest the kingdom from the enemy? How will we not 
take back the Earth, with our allies, if only we put forth our might?" 


CANTO 34 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vo said, "Yudhishtira is silent for a few moments after 
listening to Bhimasena; he gathers his patience. Then he says, 
'Bhaarata, all this is no doubt true. I cannot reproach you for savaging me 
with your arrow-like words, This disaster has overtaken you solely through 
my fault. I cast the dice wanting to take Dhritarashtra's son's kingdom from 
him. But Subala's son, that expert gambler, played against me on 
Suyodhana's behalf. 

Sakuni is from the hill country, and is exceptionally artful, while I am 
innocent of any artifice; and he routed me in the presence of all the sabha. 
Bhimasena, this is why distress and calamity have overtaken us. 

I saw how the dice rolled invariably, odds and evens, as Sakuni wished. I 
could have controlled myself, and stopped playing. But anger drives away a 
man's patience. Child, when the mind is influenced by arrogance or vanity, 
it cannot be restrained. I do not reprimand you for what you say to me, or 
for the harsh words you use. 

I believe that what has happened to us is fate, and pre-ordained. When 
for his greed for our kingdom, Dhritarashtra's son Duryodhana made slaves 
of us at first; then, O Bhima, it was Draupadi who rescued us. When we 
were summoned again to the sabha to play dice again, you know, as Arjuna 
does, what Dhritarashtra's son told me, before all the Bhaaratas, what stakes 
we would play for. 

He said, "Ajatasatru, if you lose, you and all your brothers must live in 
the forest of your choice for twelve years, then spend a thirteenth year in 
ajnatavasa. If my spies discover you in the final year, you must live another 
twelve years in the vana and yet another in ajnatavasa, without being 
discovered. 

Think about this and pledge yourself to it. As for me, I, Duryodhana, 
swear solemnly in this august sabha that if my agents cannot find you 
during the thirteenth year, this kingdom of the five rivers shall once again 
become yours. 

And if we lose the game of dice, instead, we will abandon all our wealth 
and pass the same years in the wilderness, the same rules applying to us." 


I replied to him, in the midst of all the Kurus, "So be it!" 

The wretched game began; we were beaten and have been exiled. This is 
why we range in misery and discomfort through these forests. But 
Suyodhana was not satisfied and, giving himself up to anger, made the 
Kurus and everyone one else whose allegiance he enjoys express joy at our 
misfortune. 

Having entered into such an agreement in the presence of good men, 
who dares break his word for the sake of a kingdom on Earth? I think, for 
an honourable man, death is preferable to gaining a kingdom after breaking 
one's word. 

During the game of dice you wanted to burn my hands, but Arjuna 
stopped you and you only wrung your own hands. If you had done what you 
wanted, would this tragedy have overtaken us? You well knew your 
prowess, Bhimasena, then why did you not object to the second game of 
dice? 

Now it is too late and we are plunged in distress by the word we gave; 
what use is it for you to berate me now? Bhima, my greatest grief lies in the 
fact that we saw Draupadi shamed and could do nothing to stop her 
humiliation. My heart burns as if I have drunk poison. 

But having given my word in the midst of the Kuru heroes, I cannot 
break it now. Bhima, wait for better days to return to us, like the scatterer of 
seeds waiting for the harvest. When he who has been done an injury 
succeeds in avenging himself when his enemy's designs have borne flowers 
and fruit, that man accomplishes a great thing through his prowess. That 
brave man earns undying fame; he finds immense fortune and prosperity. 
His enemies bow down to him, and his friends gather round him, like the 
Devas do around Indra for protection. 

But Bhima, know that I will never break my word. I consider dharma as 
being superior to life itself, I think of it as a divine condition. Kingdom, 
sons, fame, wealth - all these together do not equal even a sixteenth part of 
truth." 


CANTO 35 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


cc hima says, 'O King, being insubstantial as froth, impermanent as a 

Pi falling from a tree, dependent on time, mortal, you have given 
your word on a matter of time, which is infinite, immeasurable, quick as an 
arrow, or flowing like a stream, carrying all before it as Death. How can you 
consider time to which you are subject to be available for you to keep your 
word? 

Kaunteya, how can a mortal man whose life is shortened with each 
moment, even as some collyrium is reduced each time a grain of it is taken 
up by a needle, wait for the future? Only an immortal, or he who knows 
how long he will live, who knows the future as if it were before his eyes, 
can wait for time, for an exact period of time to arrive. 

If we wait thirteen years we will be thirteen years closer to death, which 
takes us all. We must strive to recover our kingdom before we die. He who 
does not achieve fame by punishing his enemy is an unclean thing. He is a 
useless burden upon the Earth, like a castrated bull, and he dies 
ingloriously. He who has no strength and courage, who does not chastise his 
enemy, lives in vain; I think of such a man as lowborn. 

Your hand can rain gold; your fame can cover the whole world. So kill 
your enemies in battle and enjoy the wealth won through the might of your 
arms. Parantapa, if a man kills his enemy who has done him injury and goes 
that same day to hell, hell turns into heaven for him. 

The pain I feel from having to suppress my anger is worse than burning 
fire; I cannot sleep for it, day or night. This Partha, this Arjuna, is the 
greatest archer; he, also, surely burns with grief although he lives here like a 
lion in his den. Like some mighty tusker, he who wants to kill every other 
bowman in the world single-handedly, represses his wrath. 

Nakula, Sahadeva are all silent, to please you; as are all our friends, 
including the Srinjayas. Only I and Prativindhya's mother burn so much that 
we speak to you in grief. The rest agree with everything that I say to you, 
for they are all plunged in sorrow and eagerly wish for battle. 

What more wretched catastrophe can overtake us than that our kingdom 
should be taken from us by weak and contemptible enemies, and enjoyed by 


them? You have a weak nature and you feel ashamed to violate your given 
pledge. But no one lauds you for suffering like this out of your kindliness. 

Rajan, your mind does not seem to see the truth - like that of a highborn 
but foolish man, who commits the hymns of the Veda to memory but does 
not understand their meaning. 

You are kind, like a Brahmana; how have you been born a Kshatriya? 
Kshatriyas have devious hearts. You have heard the dharma of kings, as 
taught by Manu, full of crookedness, unfairness and everything opposed to 
peace and virtue. Then why do you forgive Dhritarashtra's sons? 

You have intelligence, prowess, learning and are nobly born. Why are 
you like a great snake which cannot move? Kaunteya, whoever wishes to 
hide us will be like one trying to conceal the mountains of Himavat with a 
handful of grass. 

All the world knows you, O son of Pritha; you will no more be able to 
live undiscovered than the Sun can course through the sky unseen. Like a 
great tree in a well-watered land, with spreading branches and flowers and 
leaves, or like Indra's elephant - how will Arjuna live unknown? 

How, also, will these children, Nakula and Sahadeva, who are like a pair 
of young lions, both live undiscovered? How will Drupada's daughter 
Krishnaa, our princess and mother of heroes, of great virtue and famed 
throughout the world, live unnoticed? 

All the world knows me, as well, from my boyhood; I do not see how I 
can live unknown anymore than the mountains of Meru can seek 
concealment. 

Then, we expelled many kings from their kingdom; these Kshatriyas will 
all become the evil Duryodhana's followers and allies, for we robbed them 
of their wealth and drove them into exile. How will they ever be our 
friends? 

They will join Dhritarashtra and wish to do us harm. They will certainly 
send countless spies to seek us out. If these find us, great danger will come 
to us. We have already spent thirteen months in these forests. Rajan, 
consider them to be thirteen years, for the wise have said that a month is a 
substitute for a year even as a pot-herb is for Soma. 

Otherwise, Rajan, free yourself from the fetter of your pledge by 
offering savoury food to a quiet bull which bears sacred burdens. Thus, 
decide to kill your enemies - for the Kshatriya has no higher dharma than 
battle!" 


CANTO 36 
ARANYAKA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vere said, "Listening to Bhima, Yudhishtira Purushavyaghra, 
Parantapa, begins to sigh, and to reflect silently. 

Within himself, he thinks, 'I have heard the dharma of kings recited, and 
also the dharmas of the other varnas. Only he who always keeps these 
tenets before his eyes can regulate his conduct both in the present and the 
future. 

I know the true way of dharma, so difficult to know; then how can I use 
force to try to grind it down, even like trying to crush Meru?’ 

Thinking thus for a moment, deciding what he should do, he replies 
firmly to Bhima, without allowing his brother to say another word. 

Yudhishtira says, 'Mahabaho, what you say is true, but, my eloquent 
brother, listen once more to me. Bhima, whatever sin one seeks to commit, 
rashly, depending purely on one's strength and courage, invariably ends up 
as a source of failure and pain; while whatever is begun with deliberation, 
with well-directed prowess, after much thought, inevitably succeeds - the 
gods themselves favour such designs. 

Bhima, you are proud of your strength, and restless, but listen to what I 
think of what you think we should do immediately. Bhurisravas, Sala, 
Bhishma, Drona, Karna, the mighty son of Drona, Dhritarashtra's powerful, 
invincible sons are all great warriors and even now prepare for battle 
against us. 

The kings and chieftains of the Earth, also, whom we have injured, are 
all on the side of the Kauravas, bound to them by ties of affection. O 
Bhaarata, they seek Duryodhana's good, not ours. With full treasuries and 
allied to great forces, they will all surely give their all in battle. 

Also, Duryodhana has given much largesse, wealth and every luxury, to 
the warriors of the Kuru army, their sons and relatives. He honours those 
heroes and holds them in high regard. I am certain that they will give their 
lives for him in battle. 

Although Bhishma, Drona, and the illustrious Kripa love us as much as 
we do them, I am also certain they, too, will sacrifice their very lives, than 
which there is nothing dearer, in return for the royal favours they enjoy in 


Hastinapura. All of them are masters of the devastras, and devoted to 
dharma. Why, I believe even the Devas led by Vasava himself cannot 
vanquish these three. 

Then they have Kama with them, the impetuous, always angry Kama, 
master of astras, invincible, he who wears impentrable armour. 

Without first killing all these awesome warriors, Bhima, how will you 
kill Duryodhana? Ah, Vrikodara, I cannot sleep when I think of the 
swiftness of the Sutaputra's hand; to me he is the greatest of all archers!’ 

Bhima hears what Yudhishtira says and, slightly taken aback, falls silent. 

While the Pandavas speak thus among themselves, Satyavati's son, the 
Maharishi Vyasa arrives there. The sons of Pandu receive him with due 
worship. 

Then Vyasa, most eloquent among all speakers, says to Yudhishtira, 
"Yudhishtira Mahabaho, with spiritual vision I saw what was passing 
through your heart, and I have come to you, Purusharishabha. 

I will dispel this fear in your heart of Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna, 
Drona's son, Duryodhana, and Dussasana. I will dissolve your fear through 
a secret enjoined in the Veda. Parantapa, hear it from me, acquire it 
patiently, and having done so, O King, quell this fever of yours quickly. 

Parasara's son, the Muni, takes Yudhishtira apart and speaks words of 
deep import to him. 

Vyasa says, 'Best of the Bhaaratas, when the time of your fortune arrives, 
Arjuna will kill all your enemies in battle. Now learn this arcane Pratismriti 
from me, for you are worthy and capable of receiving it. You must then 
teach it to Arjuna, and with it he will be able to accomplish what needs to 
be done. 

Pandava, let Arjuna go to Mahendra and Rudra, and to Varuna, and 
Kubera, and to Yama, and from them receive their astras. For his asceticism 
and prowess, he is fit to look upon the gods. Why, this Arjuna is in truth a 
Rishi of immense tejas, he is Narayana's friend Nara, the ancient, a god 
himself, invincible, always attended on by success, knowing no decay. 

He will perform mighty deeds, once he receives their weapons from 
Indra, Rudra and the Lokapalas. 

Also, think of leaving here and going to another forest in which to live. 
It is hardly pleasant to live in one place for too long a time. In your case, it 
might also cause the hermits here some anxiety. And as you maintain so 


many Brahmanas, knowers of the Vedas and their angas, for you to live here 
too long might deplete the forest of its deer, and its creepers and plants.' 

Now, Yudhishtira purifies himself, and Vyasa, of great wisdom, who 
knows the mysteries of the world, teaches him the Pratismriti, best of 
hermetic mantras. Then, quickly bidding farewell to Kunti's son, Vyasa 
vanishes before his eyes. 

Having received the Pratismriti, the virtuous Yudhishtira treasures it 
carefully in his mind and always chants it at the proper times. Glad of 
Vyasa's advice, the son of Kunti now leaves the Dwaitavana and goes to the 
Kamyaka forest on the banks of the Saraswati. 

Rajan, numberless ascetic Brahmanas follow him as Rishis do Indra. 
Arriving in the Kamyaka, those illustrious Bharatarishabhas begin living in 
that vana, along with their friends and attendants. Listening all the while to 
the Vedas being chanted, devoting themselves to the practice of archery, 
those mighty Kshatriyas live in that forest for some length of time. 

Every day, armed with pure arrows, they go deep into the jungle in seach 
of deer. And they dutifully perform all the rites in honour of the Pitrs, the 
Devas and the Brahmanas." 


CANTO 37 
ARJUNABHIGAMANA PARVA 


Vow said, "After some time, Yudhishtira rememebers the 
command of Muni Vyasa and calls Arjuna, bull among men, possessed 
of great wisdom, to him privately. 

Taking Arjuna's hands, with a smile, Yudhishtira appears lost in thought 
for a moment, before saying gently to Arjuna, 'Bhaarata, all of the astra 
shastra, the sciene of warfare, dwells in Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna and 
Aswatthama. They are masters of every sort of Brahmastra, Devastra, 
Manavastra and Vayavyastra, as well as the means to loose and repel them. 

Dhritarashtra's son conciliates, honours and pleases all of them; he treats 
them all as a sishya his gurus. Why, Duryodhana treats all his warriors with 
great affection; all his allied chieftains he honours and gratifies, and in turn 
they seek his weal. They will not fail to put forth their might on his behalf. 

Besides, remember, the whole world, all its cities, towns and villages, all 
its seas, forests and mountains, are now under Duryodhana's sway. Arjuna, 
you are our only refuge and a great burden rests on you. Parantapa, I want 
you to do something for me now. 

Vyasa Muni taught me a secret science. If you use it, the very universe 
will lie revealed before you. Child, receive that Pratismriti from me, and 
through it, in due course, find the grace of the gods. Bharatarishabha, first 
you must devote yourself to a fierce tapasya. 

Taking your bow and your sword, wearing mail, keeping stern vows, 
travel north without giving way to anybody. Arjuna, Indra has all the 
Devastras because, when they feared Vritrasura, the other gods all invested 
their might in Sakra. Indra has all the weapons of heaven; go to him and he 
will give them to you. 

Take your bow, and set out even today to see Indra Purandara.' 

Yudhishtira Dharmatma teaches Arjuna the Pratismriti, with all the 
proper rituals. Having communicated the secret gyana to his heroic younger 
brother, restrained in speech, action and mind, Yudhishtira commands him 
to go forth. Arjuna takes up the Gandiva and his inexhaustible twin quivers, 
puts on his kavacha, and his finger guards made of the skin of the iguana. 


Pouring oblations into a sacred fire and giving gifts to the Brahmanas 
and having them utter blessings over him, Arjuna sets out from the 
Kamyaka vana to find Indra. As he goes, bow in hand, that Kshatriya 
heaves a sigh and casts a look heavenwards so that he might kill 
Dhritarashtra's sons. 

Seeing Kunti's son, armed and about to go forth, Siddhas and invisible 
spirits say to him, 'Kaunteya, may you get what your hearts desires .' 

The Brahmanas also bless him, 'Achieve your purpose, let victory truly 
be yours!' 

And seeing heroic Arjuna, his thighs like trunks of Sala trees, about to 
set out, and taking with him the hearts of all, Draupadi says fervently, 
'Mahabaho, let everything that Kunti wished for when you were born, and 
everything that you wish for be yours, Dhananjaya! 

Let none among us ever be born again into Kshatriya kind. I always bow 
down to Brahmanas, who live through mendicancy. 

Ah, my great sorrow is that, seeing me in the sabha of Kshatriyas, the 
wretched Duryodhana called me a cow! Many other savage things he said 
to me in that assembly of princes, and they are raw wounds. But the grief 
and pain that I experience at parting from you makes all those insults seem 
as nothing. 

Surely, while you are gone your brothers will spend their days 
recounting your deeds. Certainly, in your absence, your brothers will while 
away their waking hours in recalling your heroic deeds, over and over. But 
Arjuna, if you stay away for long, we will have no pleasure or any joy in 
our lives. Why, our very lives will become despicable. 

Partha, our weal and woe, life and death, our kingdom and prosperity all 
depend on you. Bhaarata, I bless you, let success be yours! Sinless one, you 
will accomplish your mission even against the most powerful enemies. 
Mahabaho, go swiftly and win success. Let no danger be yours. 

I bow to Dhatri and Vidhatri! I bless you, let prosperity be yours. 

Dhananjaya, let Hri, Sri, Kirti, Dhriti, Pushti, Uma, Lakshmi and 
Saraswati, all protect you on your way, for you always worship your elder 
brother and always obey his commands. 

I pray to the Vasus, the Rudras and Adityas, the Marutas, the 
Viswadevas, and the Sadhyas, for your welfare. O Bhaarata, be safe from 
all evil spirits of earth, sky and heaven, and from all evil spirits in general! 


Crying out these blessings, Yagnasena's daughter Krishnaa stops. Arjuna 
walks in pradakshina around his brothers, and around Dhaumya, and again 
taking up his beautiful bow, sets out. 

Every creature moves hastily out of the path which the Pandava takes, 
on his way to meet Indra. Many mountains, homes to countless sannyasis, 
the bane of his enemies passes over and arrives at the sacred Himavat, 
resort of the Devas. The Mahatman reaches the holy mountain in a single 
day, for like the wind he is gifted with the mind's very speed due to his 
asceticism and the Pratismriti he received from his brother. 

Having crossed Himavat, as also Gandhamadana, he passes through 
diverse uneven and dangerous places, walking night and day without 
fatigue. And reaching Indrakila, Dhananjaya halts, for he hears a voice in 
the sky, saying, 'Stop!' 

The Pandava looks around him and Arjuna Savyasachin sees a hermit 
sitting under a tree, an ascetic quite ablaze with Brahmic lustre, his skin 
tawny, his hair matted into jata, an emaciated sannyasi. 

Seeing Arjuna, the ascetic says to him, 'Who are you, child, come here 
with a bow and arrows, wearing kavacha, a sword, and obviously a 
Kshatriya? There is no need of weapons here. This is the abode of peaceful 
Brahmanas devoted to tapasya, who have no anger or pleasure. 

There is no use for your bow here, for here there is no dispute of any 
kind. Child, throw away that bow of yours. You have found grace by 
coming here, Kshatriya, for truly no man is your equal in energy and 
prowess. 

Smiling, that Brahmana says this repeatedly to Arjuna. But Arjuna, set 
firmly on his course, is unmoved. 

Then, smiling even more, the Brahmana says, 'Parantapa, be you blest! I 
am Indra, ask for the boon you want.' 

Arjuna bends his head, folds his hands, and replies to him of a thousand 
eyes, ‘Illustrious, give me all your astras, that is the boon I want.' 

The king of the Devas, still smiling, says, 'Dhananjaya, when you have 
come to this blessed place what need have you of astras? You have already 
found beatitude. Ask me for any realms of bliss that you want.' 

Arjuna replies to the thousand-eyed Sakra, 'I want no realms of bliss, nor 
even to become a god, then why speak of joy? Lord of the Devas, I do not 
wish for the prosperity of even all the gods. 


For if I leave my brothers in the forest, and not avenge myself on our 
enemies, I will earn infamy forever throughout the world, through all the 
ages. ' 

Now, the slayer of Vritra, whom the worlds worship, says gently to the 
Pandava, 'Child, I will give you all the devastras when you can see the 
three-eyed Trisulin, Siva, Lord of all creatures. So, seek a vision of 
Mahadeva, greatest of Gods, because it is only after you have seen him, 
Kaunteya, that you will have everything you wish for.’ 

Saying this to Phalguna, Indra vanishes and Arjuna sets himself to 
tapasya, staying in that very place." 


CANTO 38 
KAIRATA PARVA 


eee said, "Illustrious one, tell me every detail of how the taintless 
Arjuna acquired the devastras. Tell me how Arjuna, Purushavyaghra, the 
mighty-armed, entered that solitary forest without fear. Also, Best among 
those who know the Veda, what did he do whilst he lived in that forest? 

How did he gratify Siva Sthanu and Indra, as well? Dvijottama, bless me 
by telling me all this. You are omniscient; you know all about the gods and 
about men. O Brahmana, I have heard that the battle that look place of old 
between Arjuna and Bhava was most extraordinary and without parallel. 

I have heard it makes one's hair stand on end to listen to it. Even the 
hearts of those lions among men—the valiant sons of Pritha—trembled to 
hear about it, in wonder, joy, and a sense of their own inferiority. 

O tell me everything else that Arjuna did. I do not see even the most 
trivial thing about Jishnu which is censurable. So, narrate in full the legend 
of that Kshatriya, that hero." 

Vaisampayana said, "Tiger among Kurus, I will narrate the story of that 
peerless Kshatriya to you, a tale excellent, extensive and unrivalled. Sinless 
one, hear in detail about Arjuna's meeting with the three-eyed God of gods, 
and his contact with the illustrious God's person! 

At Yudhishtira's command, Dhananjaya of immeasurable prowess sets 
out from the Kamyaka to see Sakra, lord of the Devas; and Sankara, the 
God of gods. Arjuna Mahabaho sets out armed with his unearthly bow, his 
golden-hafted sword; north he goes towards the summit of the Himavat. 

Rajan, the best of all warriors in the three worlds, Indra's son, firmly 
committed to his mission, calms his mind and losing no time devotes 
himself to fervid tapasya. All alone, he enters that terrible forest full of 
thorny plants and trees, dense with flowers and fruit of every kind, 
swarming with wild animals and birds of many species, a vana where 
Siddhas and Charanas went. 

When Arjuna enters that forest, where no human being goes, heaven 
resounds with conches and drumrolls, and a rain of flowers falls upon the 
earth, while clouds spread across the sky darkening the earth below. Passing 
through the dense jungles at the foot of the great mountains, Arjuna soon 


reaches the breast of the Himavat; staying there for some time at penance, 
he shines forth with his dhyana. 

He sees great trees, their branches alive with the songs of countless 
birds. He sees rivers flowing like fluid lapis lazuli, their currents broken by 
fierce eddies here and there, and echoing with the calls of swan, duck and 
crane. The banks of those rivers echo with the mellifluous songs of the male 
kokila and the cries of peacocks. 

Seeing those sacred rivers, their waters, pure and sweet, their banks 
enchanting, the mighty warrior is filled with delight. Arjuna of fierce energy 
and high soul then performs a stern tapasya in that charmed place. 

Wearing valkala and a black deerskin, he holds a stick in his hand and 
eats only dry leaves fallen onto the ground. The first month, he also eats 
some fruit once every three nights; the second month he eats fruit once 
every six nights; and the third month, only once a fortnight. 

When the fourth month comes, that Bharatottama, Pandu's mightiest son, 
does not eat at all but subsists on just the air he breathes. His arms raised 
up, standing on tiptoe, he continues his penance. Because he bathes 
frequently, his hair assumes the sheen of lightning, or of the lotus. 

Now all the great Rishis go together to the God of the Pinaka, Siva, to 
inform him of Arjunas tapasya. 

Bowing to the God of gods, they say, 'Pritha's son, of great tejas, 
performs the most difficult penance upon the breast of the Himavat. Heated 
by his tapasya, the Earth issues smoke all around, O Devadeva. We do not 
know what his tapasya is for, but he causes us distress. You must make him 
stop, Lord!" 

Pasupati, Umapati, Siva listens to those Munis of perfect self-restraint, 
and says, 'It does not become you to grieve over Phalguna's tapasya. Return, 
all of you, to where you came from; go in peace. I know the desire that is in 
Arjuna's heart. He does not want heaven, wealth or a long life. I will give 
him, even today, everything he wishes for!' 

The Rishis of truth hear what Mahadeva says and go back to their 
respective asramas and dwellings." 


CANTO 39 
KAIRATA PARVA CONTINUED 


Yeas said, "When the illustrious Munis have left, Siva, who 
cleanses all sins, the lustrous Hara, assumes the form of a Kirata, a 
huntsman as resplendent as a golden tree, with a great and stalwart form 
like a second Meru, and taking up a handsome bow and arrows resembling 
snakes of virulent poison, and looking like an embodiment of fire, comes 
quickly down onto the breast of Himavat. 

The beautiful Lord comes with Uma in the guise of a Kirata woman, and 
also with a motley swarm of merry spirits, his ganas, of various forms and 
attire, and thousands of women also in the form and garb of Kiratas. 

Rajan, all that forest suddenly blazes up in splendour, at the arrival of 
Siva and his company; soon enough, a solemn stillness pervades the place. 
The sounds of springs, and rivers and birds all suddenly cease. 

As Mahadeva approaches Pritha's irreproachable son, he sees an 
extraordinary thing — the Danava Muka, taking the form of an enormous 
boar, has come to kill Arjuna. Seeing the demon, Arjuna picks up the 
Gandiva and some arrows like serpents. 

Stringing his bow and filling the air with its twang, he says to the boar, 'I 
have come here but done you no harm. But you want to kill me, so I will 
send you to Yama.' 

Seeing Phalguna about to kill the boar, Siva disguised as the Kirata 
suddenly says, 'Stop! I aimed first at the beast the colour of the Indrakila 
mountain.’ 

Ignoring him, Arjuna shoots the boar; at the same moment the splendid 
Kirata also lets fly an arrow like fire at the boar. Both shafts strike Muka's 
massive body, hard as adamant, at the same instant. 

The two astras strike Muka with a sound like Indra's Vajra and the 
thunder of clouds falling together upon a mountain. Each astra emits 
countless arrows like snakes with mouths ablaze, and Muka dies, and 
assumes again his dreadful Rakshasa form in death. 

Arjuna now sees the Kirata before him, the mountain hunter whose form 
blazes like a God's, surrounded by many women. His heart strangely joyful, 
Kunti's son says smilingly, 'Who are you that wander in this solitary forest, 


surrounded by women? O you of the splendour of gold, are you not afraid 
of this terrible forest? 

Why did you shoot the boar? This Rakshasa came here to kill me and I 
aimed at him first. You will not escape with your life. You have flouted the 
law of the hunt, and so, O Kirata, I will take your life. 

The Kirata says to the Pandava, softly, 'Kshatriya do not fear for me in 
this forest, which is our home. But why are you here amidst its danger? 
Yogi, we live here amongst all the wild creatures, but why are you, who are 
delicate, raised in luxury, and splendid as agni, here in this lonely place?’ 

Arjuna says, 'Depending on this Gandiva and arrows which are like fire, 
I live here like a second Indra. You saw how I despatched the monstrous 
Rakshasa who came as a boar.’ 

The Kirata replies, 'I shot the Rakshasa first. I killed him and sent him to 
Yama. It was my arrow which slew him. You are arrogant of your strength, 
and blame others for your own faults. Wretch, you are the guilty one and 
shall not escape with your life today. 

Come, I will loose my arrows at you. You do the same! 

Arjuna becomes angry and attacks the Kirata with fierce arrows. 
However, the Kirata cheerfully receives those deadly shafts upon his breast, 
saying all the while, 'Wretch, come shoot your most terrible astras at me, 
shafts which can consume a man's very entrails!’ 

Arjuna looses a rain of missiles at him. Now the Kirata also shoots back 
fiercely at Arjuna, storms of barbs, each one like a virulent serpent. Arjuna 
looses a perfect volley which falls out of the sky over the huntsman, who 
stands unmoved, unharmed, like some invincible mountain. 

Seeing this, Arjuna is full of awe and thinks, 'Wonderful! Wonderful! 
Ah, a delicate-limbed mountaineer who lives on the heights of Himavat 
calmly bears arrows shot from the Gandiva. Who is he? Is he Rudra 
himself, or some other Deva, or a Yaksha, or an Asura? 

The Devas do sometimes come down to the summits of Himavat, but 
only he that wields the Pinaka can stand a thousand arrows shot from the 
Gandiva. Let him be a Deva or a Yaksha; unless he is Rudra himself, I will 
send him to Yamaloka!' 

Arjuna looses hundreds of arrows, resplendent as sunrays. The lustrous 
Creator of the worlds, the Trisulin, calmly bears those shafts as a mountain 
might a shower of stones. Suddenly, Arjuna finds he has no arrows left! In 


some alarm, now, he thinks of Agni who gave him his inexhaustible quivers 
when the Khandava vana burned. 

Arjuna thinks, 'My arrows are exhausted. Now what shall I shoot from 
my bow? Who is this who consumes all my astras? But I will kill him with 
the tip of my bow, as elephants are killed with spears, and send him to land 
of the mace-wielding Yama!’ 

Arjuna rushes at the Kirata, and strikes him some thunderous blows with 
the Gandiva, at which the mountaineer deftly snatches the divine bow out of 
the Pandavas hands. Arjuna draws his sword and with all his might, 
wanting to end this duel, brings it down squarely on the Kirata's head. That 
blade cuts the hardest rocks like pats of butter, but that best of swords 
shatters into bits when it touches the Kirata's crown. 

The desperate Arjuna now attacks the Kirata with trees and stones; the 
mountain huntsman bears these rough weapons as calmly as he had arrows, 
bow and sword. Frothing at the mouth, Arjuna strikes the Kirata some 
dreadful blows with his fists, blows like thunderclaps. Now the Kirata 
strikes Phalguna back, and the sounds they make are truly fearsome. 

That battery of blows exchanged, which resembles the fight of old 
between Vritra and Vasava, lasts only moments. The mighty Jishnu clasps 
the Kirata to him and presses him hard with powerful arms, while the 
huntsman presses back, so their bodies burn like charcoals in fire, and 
smoke. 

Abruptly, Mahadeva strikes the already beaten Pandava and makes him 
unconscious, and the bruised and battered Arjuna falls down as one dead. 
However, he regains consciousness, and rising, his body covered in blood, 
he is filled with despair. 

He prostrates in his mind before Siva, and fashioning an earthen linga of 
that God, he worships it with a vanamala, a wildflower garland. But he sees 
the garland he offered the linga of clay decking the crown of the Kirata! Joy 
surges through the Pandava and he prostrates at the feet of the Kirata. Siva 
becomes pleased with Arjuna. 

Seeing the wonder of Pandu's son, seeing his body emaciated by long 
austerities, Rudra says to him in a voice deep as rumbling clouds, 
'Phalguna, I am pleased with you, for what you just did is without parallel. 
No Kshatriya is your equal in courage, and patience; and, sinless, why your 
strength and valour are almost equal to mine! 


Mahabaho, I am pleased with you. Behold me, O Bharatarishabha! I will 
give you sight to see my true form. You were a Rishi before. You will 
vanquish all your enemies, even those that dwell in heaven. Since I am 
pleased with you, I will give you an inexorable astra, my own astra. You 
shall have it soon. 

Then Arjuna sees Siva, God of ineffable splendour in his true form — 
Mahadeva, who wields the Pinaka, who dwells on Kailasa, with Uma at his 
side. Falling onto his kness, bowing his head, that conqueror of hostile 
cities, Pritha's son worships the Lord Hara. 

Arjuna says, 'O Kapardin, O Devadeva, O You who put out Bhaga's 
eyes, Nilakanta, O You with matted jata, I know you are the Cause of all 
causes, O Three-eyed, O Lord of all! 

You are the sanctuary of all the gods; this universe has sprung from you! 
Not the three worlds of Devas, Asuras and Manavas together can vanquish 
you. You are Siva in the form of Vishnu and Vishnu as Siva. 

Of old, you razed Daksha's great yagna. O Hari, O Rudra, I bow to you! 
You have a third eye on your brow. O Sarva, who shower the objects of 
desire, O Trisulin, O Pinakin, O Surya, O You of the pure body, O Creator 
of all, I bow to you! 

Lord of all creatures, I crave your grace with my worship. You are the 
Lord of the Ganas, the Source of every blessing in the universe, the Cause 
of the causes of the universe. You are beyond the greatest Purusha, you are 
the highest, you are the subtlest, O Hara! 

Lustrous Sankara, I beg you to forgive my offence. I came to this great 
mountain, so dear to you, home of Yogis, to have a vision of you, whom all 
the worlds worship. 

Lord, I worship you to have your grace. Rashly and in ignorance did I 
dare to fight you. O Sankara, I seek your protection, forgive me for what I 
did!' 

Mighty Siva, whose emblem is the Bull, takes Arjuna's handsome hands 
into his own, and says smilingly to him, 'I have already forgiven you!’ 

Brilliant Hara clasps Arjuna lovingly in his arms and consoles him 
again." 


CANTO 40 
KAIRATA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ ahadeva says, 'You were Narayana's friend Nara in your past life. 

Mx sat in fierce tapasya in Badarikasrama for many thousands of 
years. In you dwells great might, even as it does in Vishnu, that 
Purushottama. You both, through your might, are the holders of the 
universe. 

During Indra's coronation, with your great bow whose twanging is like 
the roar of thunderheads, you and Krishna, as well, chastened the Danavas. 
The Gandiva is that bow, O Partha, it belongs in your hands. I took it from 
you with my maya, and your twin quivers shall again be inexhaustible! 

Partha, Kurunandana, the bruises will leave your body, and it shall be 
free forever from pain and disease. Your prowess shall be invincible. I am 
pleased with you, ask me, best among all men, for the boon you want. 

Parantapa, you who worships me, not in heaven is there anyone who is 
your equal, nor any Kshatriya who is your superior.' 

Arjuna says, ‘Illustrious Vrishabhdhvaja, if you would grant my wish, 
Lord, give me your own Pasupatastra of dreadful power, which destroys all 
the universe at the end of the Yuga; that weapon through which, Devadeva, 
with your grace, I can be victorious over Karna the vile-tongued, Bhishma, 
Kripa and Drona; with which I can kill Danavas, Rakshasas, Pisachas, 
Gandharvas and Nagas; the astra which when loosed with the proper 
mantras emits thousands of arrows, fierce maces, narachas like serpents. 

O Destroyer of the eyes of Bhaga, this is my first wish so that I can 
prevail over our powerful enemies:.' 

Siva replies, 'Mighty one, I will give you my favourite astra, the 
Pasupata. Pandava, you are capable of bearing, loosing and withdrawing it. 
Not Indra, Yama, Kubera king of the Yakshas, Varuna, or Vayu know it — 
then how could man know anything of it? 

But, Partha, this astra must not be loosed without adequate cause, 
because if it is loose against an enemy of small might it can consume the 
very universe. In the three worlds, with all their mobile and immobile 
creatures, there is no one whom this astra cannot consume. You can cast it 
with your mind, your eye, through words and with your bow: ' 


Arjuna now purifies himself, comes to the Lord of the universe and says 
with rapt attention, 'Instruct me!' 

Mahadeva gives that best of Pandu's sons the knowledge of that weapon, 
which looks like an embodiment of Yama, together with all the mysteries 
about loosing and withdrawing it. Now that astra begins to wait upon 
Arjuna as it does on Sankara. Gladly, too, does Arjuna receive it. 

At that moment all the Earth trembles — its mountains, forests, trees, 
seas, villages, towns, cities, mines. Thousands of conches, drums and horns 
resound. Whirlwinds and hurricanes sweep land and sea. 

The Devas and the Danavas see that terrible weapon stay beside Arjuna 
of measureless tejas, in its embodied form. Whatever evil there had been in 
the body of Phalguna is all dispelled by the touch of the three-eyed God. 

Three-eyed Siva commands Arjuna, 'Go into Swarga!' 

Bending his head, Arjuna worships the God, then gazes at him with 
folded hands. The Lord of all who dwells in heaven, He who dwells upon 
mountains, Uma's lord, the Mahayogin whose passions are under perfect 
control, the source of all blessings, gives Arjuna, best of men, back the 
Gandiva, bane of Danavas and Pisachas. 

As Arjuna watches, Siva, Uma beside him, ascends into the sky, 
vanishing from that blessed mountain with snowy tablelands, valleys and 
caves, favourite haunt of sky-ranging Maharishis." 


CANTO 41 
KAIRATA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vere said, "Siva, whose emblem is the Bull, who wields the 
Pinaka, vanishes from Arjuna's sight even as the Sun sets on the 
world. 

Arjuna Parantapa is full of awe. He exults, Ah, I have seen the God of 
gods. Fortunate indeed am I, and greatly favoured, for I have both seen and 
touched with my hands the three-eyed Hara, in his boon-giving form. 

I will win success. I am already great. My enemies have already been 
vanquished by me. My purposes have already been achieved!’ 

As he stands thinking all this, suddenly Varuna, Lord of waters, appears 
before Arjuna, handsome and splendid beyond belief and of the hue of lapis 
lazuli, surrounded by all manner of aquatic beings, and filling all the points 
of the horizon with blazing effulgence. 

Varuna Deva, lord of all creatures of water, comes with the Rivers— 
male and female—and Nagas, and Daityas and Sadhyas and lesser deities. 

Then Kubera, whose body is like the purest gold, arrives in his splendent 
vimana, numerous Yakshas coming with him. The most beautiful Lord of 
treasures, also illumining the sky with his lustre, comes to see Arjuna. 

Yama himself, also magnificently beautiful, mighty destroyer of all the 
worlds, comes to that place, and with him those lords of creation, the Pitrs, 
both embodied and disembodied. Yama of inconceivable soul, dispenser of 
justice, destroyer of all enemies, the son of Surya, also flies here in his 
vimana, mace in hand, lighting up the three worlds, and the realms of the 
Guhyakas, the Gandharvas and the Nagas even like a second Sun, rising at 
Yuganta. 

Arriving there, upon three refulgent summits of the great mountain, 
those Lokapalas see Arjuna at his tapasya. 

Next moment, the blindingly bright Indra also arrives, with his queen 
Sachi, upon his mount Airavata, and with all the Devas around him. With 
the sovereign white parasol unfurled over his head, he looks like the full 
moon among fleecy clouds. 

Eulogised by Gandharvas, and Rishis endowed with a wealth of tapasya, 
the king of the Devas alights upon a peak of that mountain, like another 


Sun. 

Now Yama of fathomless intelligence, who knows the depths of dharma, 
says from his peak in a cloud-deep voice, these auspicious words, Arjuna, 
look, we the Lokapalas have come here! We will grant you spiritual vision, 
for you deserve to behold us. 

In a past life you were the Rishi Nara of immeasurable soul, of 
plumbless might. Child, at Brahma's command, you have been born among 
men. Anagha, sinless, you will vanquish that most righteous grandsire of 
the Kurus in war, Bhishma of tameless energy, born of the Vasus. 

You will also defeat all the ferocious Kshatriyas commanded by the son 
of Bharadwaja. Besides, you will quell all the terrible Danavas who have 
incarnated as men, as well as the Danavas on high called the 
Nivatakavachas. 

Dhananjaya, Kurunandana, you will also kill the mighty Karna, who is 
an amsa of my father Surya, his tejas celebrated throughout the worlds. 
Kaunteya, Parantapa, you will also kill all the amsavataras of the Danavas 
and Rakshasas who have been born into the world as men; and slain by you, 
these will attain the realms they have earned through their karma. 

And, O Phalguna, the legend and fame of your achievements will last for 
ever in the world, for you have pleased Siva himself with your prowess. 
With Krishna, you will lighten the burden of the Earth. 

Here, take this mace, this inexorable danda of mine. With this weapon 
you will accomplish great things.' 

Pritha's son receives that weapon from Yama, and the secret mantras for 
casting and withdrawing it. 

Now Varuna, Lord of all water beings, blue as seas, says from a peak on 
which he has perched towards the west, 'Son of Pritha, you are the greatest 
Kshatriya, and you engage in Kshatriya dharma. 

Look at me, O you with the large coppery eyes! I am Varuna, the lord of 
waters. No one can resist my fluid pasas, my weapons that are deadly 
nooses. Kaunteya, receive these Varunastras and the secrets of casting and 
withdrawing them. During the Devasura yuddha of old, which began 
because of Brihaspati's wife Tara, these pasas seized and bound thousands 
of mighty Daityas. 

Here, take them from me. With these in your hands, even if Yama 
himself is your adversary, he will not escape you. When you range over the 


field of war with my pasas, be certain that the land will become destitute of 
Kshatriyas .' 

When Varuna and Yama have given Arjuna their weapons, Kubera, lord 
of treasures, who dwells on the heights of Kailasa, says, 'O mighty and wise 
Pandava, I am also pleased with you, and this meeting with you gives me as 
much pleasure as a meeting with Krishna. 

Savyasachin, Mahabaho, once you were a Deva, eternal and immortal. 
On ancient Kailasa, you performed tapasya with the rest of us. Best of men, 
I grant you celestial vision. Mighty-armed, you will vanquish even 
invincible Daityas and Danavas. 

Here, take from me, also, a great weapon with which you will consume 
the legions of Dhritarashtra. Take then this favourite weapon of mine, the 
Antardhana of awesome energy, power and splendour. It will make your 
enemies sleep. 

When the illustrious Sankara razed Tripura, he loosed this astra and 
consumed countless great Asuras. Magnificent Arjuna, as dignified as 
Meru, you are capable of wielding this weapon. 

Arjuna the Kuru prince duly receives that celestial weapon from Kubera. 

Now the king of the Devas himself, great Indra, speaks to Pritha's son 
sweetly, in a voice deep as thunderheads rumbling or a battery of great bass 
drums. 'Kaunteya, Mahabaho, you are an ancient God. Already, you have 
achieved the highest success, and acquired the status of a Deva. But, O 
Parantapa, scourge of your enemies, you have yet to accomplish a mission 
for the Devas. 

You must ascend into Devaloka. So, prepare yourself, splendid 
Kshatriya! My own chariot, with Matali its sarathy, will soon fly down to 
the earth. I will bring you to Devaloka in it, and there give you all my 
Devastras |! 

Arjuna is wonderstruck to see the four Lokapalas together upon the 
summits of Himavat. He worships them with japa, water, and fruit. The 
Devas return his worship, then vanish, going back to their abodes. 

Arjuna, Bull among men, is full of joy to have received the astras of 
Varuna, Yama and Kubera. He considers himself one whose tapasya has 
been fulfilled and crowned with success." 


CANTO 42 
INDRALOKABHIGAMANA PARVA 


Vo said, "After the Lokapalas leave, Arjuna Parantapa 
begins to think of the chariot of Indra. Even as he does, that vimana of 
tremendous resplendence, Matali its sarathy, comes, dividing the clouds and 
illumining the sky, and filling all the firmament with a roar deeper than 
those of massed thunderclouds. Across its form are gleaming swords, astras 
with dreadful forms, maces too frightful to be described, winged arrows of 
unearthly splendour, streaks of dazzling lightning, thunderbolts, whirling 
propellors and jets, all creating that deafening sound. 

Also in that chariot are fierce and immense Nagas with flaming mouths, 
with precious gemstones on their hoods white as fleecy clouds. Tens of 
thousands of golden coloured horses, swift as the wind, draw that chariot. 
Endowed with maya, so swift is that chariot that the eye can hardly mark its 
flight. 

Arjuna sees the flagstaff Vaijayanta, effulgent, of the hue of the emerald 
or the deep blue lotus, decked with golden ornaments and straight as a 
bamboo stalk. Seeing a charioteer wearing gold sitting in that ratha, the 
mighty Partha knows this is a chariot of the Devas. 

As he stands thinking about this, the sarathy Matali descends from the 
ratha, and bending down, says, 'Most fortunate son of Sakra! Sakra himself 
wishes to see you. Come now, Indra has sent this chariot. 

Your father, the God of a hundred yagnas, king of the Devas, said to me, 
"Fetch Kunti's son here, and let the Devas see him." 

Sakra himself, surrounded by the Devas, Devarishis, Gandharvas and 
Apsaras, waits to see you. At the command of the chastiser of Paka, 
therefore, come with me to Devaloka. You will return after receiving the 
astras of Indra.' 

Arjuna replies, 'O Matali, lose no time but mount your wondrous ratha, 
which cannot be attained even after hundreds of Rajasuya and Aswamedha 
yagnas. Not kings of great wealth who performed Mahayagnas 
distinguished by vast gifts to Brahmanas, why, not the Devas and Danavas 
do not ride in this vimana. 


He who does not have the wealth of tapasya cannot see or even touch 
this chariot, far less ride in it. Blessed Matali, after you have climbed into it 
and the horses have become still, I will follow you like a virtuous man 
stepping onto the high path of dharma.' 

Indra's sarathy climbs back into the marvellous ratha and makes his 
horses still. His heart full of joy, Arjuna purifies himself with a bath in the 
Ganga; Kunti's son silently says his daily prayers and makes water 
offerings, tarpana, to his Pitrs. 

Finally, he prays to Mandara, that king of mountains, 'O you who are the 
sanctuary of holy, heaven-seeking Sages, it is through your grace, O 
Mountain, that Brahmanas and Kshatriyas and Vaisyas attain Swarga, and 
then, their anxieties gone, sport with the gods. 

O King of mountains, you are the refuge of Munis, and bear many most 
sacred tirthas upon your breast. Happily have I dwelt upon your heights. I 
leave you now, bidding you farewell. How long my eyes have dwelt on 
your tablelands and bowers, your sparkling springs and brooks, and your 
sacred shrines. 

I have eaten the delicious fruit which grow upon your trees, and slaked 
my thrist with the scented, nectarine water of your streams, sweet as amrita. 
O Mandara, as a child sleeps happily on the lap of his father, so have I, 
King of mountains, dwelt and slept upon you, in woods that ring with the 
songs of Apsaras and the chanting of the Vedas. 

O Mountain, every day I have spent upon you I have spent in joy!' 

Thus bidding farewell to the mountain, Arjuna, slayer of foes, bright as 
the Sun himself, climbs into the celestial chariot. Joyfully, then, he courses 
through the sky in that divine and extraordinary vimana, brilliant as a star. 

Once he has vanished from the sight of mortals of the Earth, Arjuna sees 
thousands of sky ships of extraordinary beauty. And in that realm, there is 
no Sun, Moon or Fire to give light, but it is lustrous of itself, lit by tapasya! 
The Pandava sees that the stars, which appear like minuscule lamps from 
the Earth are in fact great and huge, of exceptional beauty and brilliance. 

There he sees Rajarishis, in hundreds upon hundreds, whose lives had 
been crowned by ascetic success; he sees them ablaze, and also heroes who 
had given their lives in battle; and men who had gained Swarga through 
tapasya. 

And there are also Gandharvas, illustrious as suns, thousands and 
thousands of them, as also Guhyakas, Rishis and numerous tribes of 


Apsaras. Arjuna is wonderstruck, exhilarated, seeing these self-luminous 
realms and beings, and asks Matali about them. 

And Matali answers gladly, "These, O son of Pritha, are virtuous beings 
stationed in their places. It is these whom you have seen, great one, as stars 
from the Earth. 

Now Arjuna sees the gates to Indra's own realm, and standing there, the 
magnificent, always triumphant elephant Airavata, four-tusked, and 
resembling the Mountain Kailasa with its peaks. Coursing along that path of 
the Siddhas, that best of the Kurus, that son of Pandu, sits in beauty even 
like Mandhata, greatest of the kings of old. 

He of the eyes like lotus leaves passes through that realm set apart for 
kings of dharma. Thus flying through many regions of Swarga, Arjuna of 
great renown finally sees Amaravati, the city of Indra." 


CANTO 43 
INDRALOKABHIGAMANA PARVA CONTINUED 


yoo said, "Indra's city, resort of Siddhas and Charanas, is 
beautiful past describing. Flowers of every season adorn it, and sacred 
trees of all kinds. Arjuna sees the divine garden Nandana, favourite haunt of 
Apsaras. Fanned by fragrant breezes charged with the scents of unearthly 
flowers, the trees of that garden and their lord of celestial blossoms seem to 
welcome him among them. 

This is a realm that none can see who has not performed tapasya or 
poured libations on sacred fire. Only the virtuous ever come here, and none 
that ever turn their backs on the field of battle. None who have not 
performed sacrifices, kept stern vows, or who are not knowers of the Veda, 
or who have not bathed in sacred waters, or who are not distinguished for 
sacrifices and gifts can ever see this realm. 

None can ever see this place who ever disturbed a yagna, or who are 
base, or who drink intoxicating liquor, or who violate their Guru's bed, or 
who eat unsanctified meat, or who are evil can ever come to the enchanted 
Nandana. 

Having seen those celestial gardens full of soft divine music, the strong- 
armed son of Pandu enters Indra's city. He sees vimanas here, in thousands, 
which can fly anywhere at all at will, each kept in its place; he also sees tens 
of thousands of more such craft flying in every dircetion. 

Fanned by flower-scented breezes, Apsaras and Gandharvas sing the 
Pandavas praises. Along with the Siddhas and Maharishis, the Devas 
joyfully welcome Pritha's son of white deeds, pouring blessings over him, 
while divine music plays. 

Arjuna hears conches and drums, and eulogised all round, at Indra's 
behest, the Pandava goes to the great starry way known as Suravithi, where 
he meets with the Sadhyas, the Viswas, the Marutas, the twin Aswins, the 
Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Brahmarishis of great splendour, and 
numerous Rajarishis with Dilipa at their head, and Tumburu and Narada, 
and that pair of master Gandharvas known as Haha and Huhu. 

Having met and duly worshipped all these, the Kuru prince finally sees 
before him the king of the Devas, Indra of a hundred yagnas. Arjuna alights 


from the chariot and approaches the Deva king—his father—the chastiser 
of Paka. 

A great and beautiful white parasol, with a golden staff, is unfurled over 
Devendra's head; he is fanned by a chamara whisk scented with the 
perfumes of heaven. Many Gandharvas, led by Viswavasu and others, hymn 
Indra, as do bards and singers, while the loftiest Brahmanas chant Rik and 
Yajur mantras. 

Kunti's son approaches Indra and bends his head down to the ground 
before him. Whereupon, Indra embraces him with round, mighty arms. 
Taking Arjuna's hand, Sakra makes him sit beside him on a part of his own 
throne, that sacred throne which the Devas and Rishis worship. 

Indra, Parantapa, sniffs the top of his son's head in affection, and even 
took him onto his lap. Sitting on Sakra's throne, at the command of that God 
of a thousand eyes, Pritha's son of immeasurable tejas begins to blaze in 
splendour, like a second Indra. 

Moved again by love, Indra, slayer of Vritra, comforts Arjuna, touching 
his handsome face with his scented, beautiful hands. Repeatedly patting and 
stroking with his hands, which bear the sign of the thunderbolt, Arjuna's 
mighty arms, which are like two golden columns, hardened by years of a 
bowstring being drawn across them, Indra and his son appear like the Sun 
and the Moon illumining the beauty of that divine sabha, as they do the sky 
on the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight. 

A band of Gandharvas headed by Tumburu, masters of music both 
sacred and profane, sing many rapturously melodious songs. Ghritachi and 
Menaka and Rambha and Purvachitti and Swayamprabha and Urvasi and 
Misrakesi and Dandagauri and Varuthini and Gopali and Sahajanya and 
Kumbhayoni and Prajagara and Chitrasena and Chitralekha and Saha and 
Madhuraswara — these and thousands of others, all with eyes like lotus 
leaves, who engage in seducing the hearts of men at tapasya, dance there. 

Slim are their waists and ample and fair their hips, as they dance, their 
bodies twisting sinuously, with astonishing suppleness and agility, and deep 
bosoms shaking, casting their alluring glances around, and otherwise 
enticing those that watch them." 


CANTO 44 
INDRALOKABHIGAMANA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vee said, "Knowing Indra's wishes, the Devas and the 
Gandharvas procure a most excellent arghya and worship the son of 
Pritha. Giving him water to wash his feet and his face, they bring the 
Kshatriya into Indra's palace. 

Thus worshipped, Jishnu begins to live in his father's home, and while 
he is there, he acquires the Devastras, and the secrets of loosing and 
withdrawing them. From Sakra's hands he receives Indra's favourite 
weapon, the inexorable Vajra, and other astras too, all awesome — heaven's 
very gashes of lightning, vari-coloured as clouds and dancing peacocks' 
fans. 

When he has all these astras, Arjuna remembers his brothers and misses 
them. However, at Indra's command he spends full five years in Devaloka, 
ensconced amidst every comfort and luxury. 

After some time, Indra says to him, "Kaunteya, learn music and dancing 
from Chitrasena. Learn the instrumental music of the gods, which does not 
exist in the world of men, for, O son of Kunti, it will benefit you." 

And Purandara gives Chitrasena as a friend to Arjuna, who lives happily 
and in peace with that Gandharva. All the while, Chitrasena teaches Arjuna 
music, both singing and the instruments; he teaches him dancing. 

However, Arjuna is restless and has no peace, because thoughts of 
Subala's son Sakuni, the game of dice, angry thoughts of Dussasana and of 
killing him, roil the Pandava. But his friendship with Chitrasena ripens and 
he does learn the unrivalled dance and music of the Gandharvas. 

Finally, even after having learned all the various forms of song and 
instruments, and dance as well, that Parantapa still finds no peace of mind, 
thinking constantly of his brothers and his mother Kunti." 


CANTO 45 
INDRALOKABHIGAMANA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vea said, "One day, knowing that Arjuna's glances turn 
repeatedly to the Apsara Urvasi, Indra calls Chitrasena to him 
privately and says, 'King of Gandharvas, go as my messenger to that best of 
Apsaras, Urvasi, and let her wait upon my son Arjuna, tiger among men. 

Tell her that I said, "Even as I have caused Arjuna to learn the secrets of 
all the astras, as well as all the arts, worshipped by everyone, so should you 
make him conversant with the arts of disporting himself in feminine 
company!" 

Chitrasena goes at once to Urvasi, most beautiful among Apsaras. She 
honours and delights him with her welcome and the worship she offers him. 

When he sits at his ease, he says to Urvasi, who sits relaxed in his 
company, 'O You of the fair hips, know that I come here at the word of the 
only Lord of Swarga, who asks a favour of you. 

You do know Arjuna, who is known among the gods and men for his 
many natural virtues, for his grace, his conduct, the beauty of his person, his 
vows and self-control; who is noted for might and prowess, and respected 
by the virtuous, and quick-witted; who is endowed with genius and splendid 
energy, is of a forgiving temper and without malice of any kind; who has 
studied the four Vedas with their angas, the Upanishads, and the Puranas, 
also; who is blessed with devotion to his preceptors and with an intellect 
possessed of the eight attributes; who by his abstinence, ability, origins and 
age, is by himself capable of protecting Devaloka like Maghavat himself; 
who is never boastful; who shows proper respect to all; who sees the 
minutest things as clearly as if those were gross and large; who is sweet- 
spoken; who showers diverse kinds of food and drink on his friends and 
dependants; who is truthful, worshipped by all, eloquent, handsome, and 
without pride; who is kind to those devoted to him, and universally pleasing 
and dear; who is firm in keeping his promises; who is equal even to 
Mahendra and Varuna for owning every worthwhile quality and attribute. 

Know, Urvasi, that Kshatriya is to taste the joys of heaven! Commanded 
by Indra, let him today find your favours. Do this, O sweet one, for 
Dhananjaya is inclined towards you, he desires you.' 


Urvasi of faultless features smiles; her heart glad to hear the Gandharvas 
words, she says, 'I would bestow my favours on anyone who owns such 
qualities. Then why should I not choose Arjuna for a lover? Indeed, at 
Indra's command, for the sake of my friendship with you, and stirred by 
Arjuna's numerous virtues, I am already under the spell of the god of love. 

O Chitrasena, go where you will now, and I will go to Arjuna. 


CANTO 46 
INDRALOKABHIGAMANA PARVA CONTINUED 


yoo said, "Having thus sent away the Gandharva, who has 
succeeded in his mission, Urvasi of the luminous smiles, moved by the 
desire of possessing Arjuna, bathes luxuriantly. She decks herself in 
wonderful ornaments and garlands of heaven's fragrances. Inflamed by the 
god of love, her heart pierced through by Kama's flowery shafts to think of 
Arjuna's beauty, her mind entirely absorbed in thoughts of him, she already 
makes love to him in her imagination, on a wide and fine bed covered with 
celestial linen. 

When twilight deepens and the moon rises, that Apsara of the high hips 
sets out for Arjuna's palace. In that mood and her soft long tresses adorned 
with flowers, she is exquisite, absolutely graceful. The movements of her 
eyebrows, her soft accents are full of enchantment. Her own face like a full 
glowing moon, she goes forth as if challenging the moon for beauty. 

As she goes, her deep, finely pointed breasts, smeared with unworldly 
unguents and sandalwood paste, covered by a golden chain, begin to 
tremble. So heavy are they that with each step she takes she seems to bend 
forward slightly at her lovely waist with three folds. 

Faultless are her loins, ah, elegant abode of Kama Deva; her hips are 
fair, round and wide at their base. Wearing the sheerest clothes, decked in 
golden ornaments, she could shake the sainthood of any yogi. 

Fine are her ankles, flat the soles of her feet, straight her toes the hue of 
burnished copper, and dorsum high and curved like the back of the tortoise; 
she wears anklets with little bells tinkling. 

She has drunk some wine, she is flushed with desire; soft anticipation 
and delight course through her; she sways slightly from all these and is 
more beautiful than ever. And though Devaloka abounds in wonders of 
every kind, when Urvasi goes to Arjuna as she does, the Siddhas and 
Charanas and Gandharvas think that she is the most beautiful thing on 
which they ever laid eyes. 

Dressed exquisitely in a fine, cloud-coloured garment, she is surely as 
lambent as a digit of the moon in the sky with fleecy clouds across his face. 


Swiftly as the wind or the mind goes she of the luminous smiles, and soon 
arrives at Arjuna the Pandavas mansion. 

Purushottama, at the gates Urvasi sends word in through the 
dwarapalaka, and quickly she is inside the splendid and elegant palace. O 
Rajan, when Arjuna sees her in his palace at night he feels anxiety grip him, 
but then he comes forward to welcome her respectfully. However, when he 
sees her as she is, the Pandava shuts his eyes out of modesty. 

Saluting her, he offers the Apsara worship that is given to an elder, a 
superior. 

Arjuna says, 'O best of the Apsaras, I bend my head down before you. 
Command me, for I am your servant.’ 

Hearing this, and his reverential tone, Urvasi is distraught. She tells 
Arjuna how Chitrasena the Gandharva came to see her, and of their 
meeting. 

She says, 'Best of men, I will tell you everything which passed between 
Chitrasena and me, and why I have come here. 

Arjuna, because of your coming to this realm, Mahendra called together 
a large and charming sabha, where celestial festivities were held. The 
Rudras, the Adityas, the Aswins and the Vasus came to that gathering, as 
did a number of Devarishis, Rajarishis, Siddhas, Charanas, Yakshas and 
great Nagas. 

O large eyes, when the members of that gathering, all splendid as fire, 
the Sun or the Moon, all sat according to rank, honour, and prowess, O son 
of Sakra, the Gandharvas began to play on their vinas and sing songs of 
divine enchantment. And, Kurupravira, the main Apsaras also began to 
dance. 

Then, O son of Pritha, you looked at me, gazed at me, why, stared only 
at me. When that assembly of the celestials broke, at your father's 
command, the gods went away to their respective abodes. The Apsaras also 
went away to their homes, and the others also, O Parantapa, with your 
father's leave. 

It was then Sakra sent Chitrasena to me, and arriving in my home, O you 
of the eyes like lotus leaves, he said to me, "Fairest, the king of the Devas 
has sent me to you. Do something which would please Mahendra, and me, 
and yourself as well. 

O fair hipped, go and please Arjuna, who is as brave in battle as Sakra 
himself, and is always magnanimous and great-hearted." 


Even these, Partha, were his words to me. So, Anagha, commanded by 
Chitrasena and by your father I have come to serve you, Parantapa. My 
heart has been attracted by your virtues, and I am already under the 
influence of the god of love. 

Kshatriya, this is also my own fervent wish, and I have cherished it since 
I first saw you." 

Vaisampayana continued, "Listening to this, Arjuna is overcome by 
bashfulness. He stops his ears with his hands, and says, 'Devi, I curse my 
hearing that you speak to me like this! For, O beautiful one, I think of you 
as the wife of an elder. Auspicious one, you are even like Kunti to me, or 
Indra's queen Sachi. 

This is the only way I have always thought of you, and that is why I 
gazed at you and no one else, most blessed one. I have my particular reason 
for this and I will tell you what it is, O you of luminous smiles. 

I stared at you in Indra's sabha, my eyes wide with delight, thinking, 
"This most exquisite woman is the mother of the race of Kuru!" O Apsara, 
it does not become you to have other feelings for me, because you are 
superior to all my superiors — you are the mother of my race! 

Urvasi says, 'O son of Indra, we Apsaras are free and bound to no one; 
we choose whom we will. You must not think of me as your elder or 
suprior. The sons and grandsons of Puru's race who came here through their 
punya have all sported freely with us, without incurring any sin. 

So, relent, Kshatriya, it does not become you to send me away. I am afire 
with desire for you. I am devoted to you. Accept me, take me if you would 
properly adore me.' 

Arjuna replies, 'Listen to me, O you of fautless, perfect features. I speak 
truly, and let the four directions and the gods hear me as well. Sinless one, 
as Kunti, Madri or Sachi is to me, so are you, the mother of my race, an 
object of reverence to me. Return, O fairest, I bend my head down to you 
and prostrate at your feet. You deserve my worship as a son, and I your love 
as a mother.’ 

Hearing this, Urvasi is beside herself with rage. Trembling with it, 
knitting her brows, she curses Arjuna, 'Since you spurn a woman come to 
your palace at your father's command and of her own will, a woman, 
besides, who is pierced by the shafts of Kama, O Partha, you will spend 
your time among women as a dancer, your manhood gone and scorned as a 
eunuch!' 


With this curse, her lips still pale and quivering, her breasts still heaving 
in wrath, Urvasi walks out of Arjuna's palace and returns home. Arjuna, 
Parantapa, desparate, immediately seeks out Chitrasena, and finding him, 
tells him everything that passed between Urvasi and himself in the night, 
anguishing repeatedly over the Apsaras curse. 

Chitrasena goes to Sakra and tells him everything. Indra calls Arjuna to 
him privately, and consoles him. 

Indra says gently, 'O greatest of all men, today Pritha has truly become a 
blessed mother for having you as her son. Mahabaho, you have excelled 
even the Rishis in your self-control. 

Do not fear, the curse of Urvasi will benefit you, it will prove a blessing. 
Anagha, back on Earth you must spend the thirteenth year of your exile in 
ajnatavasa, unrecognised, undiscovered. That is when you will suffer the 
curse of Urvasi, and when you have spent one year exactly as a eunuch and 
a dancer, you will have your manhood back.’ 

When Indra says this to him, great relief and delight wash over Arjuna; 
he no longer anguishes over the curse. Pandu's son Dhananjaya spends his 
time pleasantly in Devaloka in the company of the celebrated Gandharva 
Chitrasena.' 

The desires of the man that listens to this story of Arjuna never turn 
towards blind lust. The best men who listen to this tale of the awesome 
purity of Phalguna, son of the lord of the Devas, become devoid of pride, 
arrogance, anger and every other fault, and ascending into Swarga, sport 
there in bliss." 


CANTO 47 
INDRALOKABHIGAMANA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vos said, "One day, during his wanderings, the great Rishi 
Lomasa comes to Indra's abode, wanting to meet the king of the 
Devas. The Mahamuni approaches the Lord of the gods and bows 
reverentially to him. He sees Pandu's son occupying half of Vasava's throne. 

Having been worshipped by the Devarishis, that Dvijottama, invited by 
Indra, sits in a most excellent seat. He wonders how Arjuna, who was a 
Kshatriya, has attained to the throne of Sakra himself. What great deeds of 
punya has he performed, what lofty realms has he conquered, that he sits 
upon the throne which the gods themselves worship? 

As these thoughts engage the Rishi, Sakra, slayer of Vritra, reads the 
Muni's heart. With a smile, Indra says to Lomasa, 'Brahmarishi, I see what 
you are thinking — this one is no mortal though he has been born among 
men. Mahamuni, this mighty-armed Kshatriya is my own son born to Kunti. 

He has come here to acquire astras, for a great purpose. Alas! Don't you 
recognise him as an ancient Rishi of the highest punya? Listen to me, O 
Brahamana, I will tell you who he is and why he has come to me. 

Know, those magnificent Rishis of antiquity, Nara and Narayana, are 
none other than Dhananjaya and Hrishikesa. Nara and Narayana, celebrated 
throughout the three worlds, have been born on Earth for the sake of 
dharma. 

That sacred asrama, which even Devas and Maharishis never see, which 
is known through the world as Badari, which nestles by the source of the 
Ganga, which is worshipped by the Siddhas and the Charanas, was the 
hermitage, O Lomasa, of Vishnu and Jishnu. 

Brahmarishi, at my wish, the two Sages of blazing splendour have been 
born into the world of men, and endowed with awesome tejas, they will 
lighten the burden of Bhumi Devi. 

Besides this, the Asuras known as Nivatakavachas, arrogant of the boon 
they have, are constantly engaged in doing us harm. They boast of their 
power, and are even now plotting to destroy the Devas, for with their boon 
they no longer fear us. They are fierce and mighty Danavas, who live in the 
Pataias, and not all the Devas together can withstand their might. 


The blessed Vishnu, slayer of Madhu, Kapila who made ashes of the 
sons of Sagara with just his look when they attacked him roaring in the 
bowels of the Earth, can indeed quell the Nivatakavachas. Either Hari or 
Partha, or both, can slay those Asuras. 

Just as he subdued the Nagas in the great lake, the lustrous Hari can 
surely consume the Nivatakavachas and all their followers, with just his 
look. But the task is too insignificant for Madhusudana himself, for being 
the awesome mass of energy which he is, if incensed, his wrath might 
consume the very universe. 

This Arjuna can also kill our enemies, and having killed them he will 
return to the world of men. Now you must go to the Earth, for my sake. You 
will find the brave Yudhishtira living in the Kamyaka vana. For me, you 
must tell Yudhishtira of unbaffled prowess in battle that he should not be 
anxious about Arjuna, because this hero will return as a great master of 
astras, for without being a complete and perfect master he will not be able 
to face Bhishma, Drona and the others in battle. 

You must also tell Yudhishtira that the mighty Arjuna has not only 
acquired the devastras, he has also mastered the arts of celestial music, both 
singing and of instruments, and dancing as well. 

You will also tell Yudhishtira that, taking all his brothers with him, and 
yourself, O Muni, he should set out on a pilgrimage and visit all the sacred 
tirthas of the holy land. Bathing in the various sacred waters, he will be 
washed of all his sins, and the fever in his heart will abate. Then, he will be 
able to enjoy his kingdom, in the knowledge that his sins are gone. 

Dvijottama, you must protect Yudhishtira during his wandering over the 
Earth. Fierce Rakshasas live in mountain fastnesses and rugged plains. 
Protect the king from those eaters of men.' 

When Mahendra has said this much to Lomasa, Arjuna also speaks 
reverently to that Rishi. 'O, always bless and protect the son of Pandu, and 
with your protection, Maharishi, the king will undertake his tirtha yatra and 
give charity to Brahmanas across the land.' 

The mighty Sage Lomasa says to them both, 'So be it,' and sets out for 
the Earth and the Kamyaka aranya. Arriving in that jungle, he sees that 
Parantapa, Kunti's son Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, surrounded by Rishis and 
his younger brothers." 


CANTO 48 
INDRALOKABHIGAMANA PARVA CONTINUED 


lees said, "Surely, the feats of Partha of measureless energy were 
certainly marvellous. O Brahmana, what did Dhritarashtra of great 
wisdom say, when he heard about these?" 

Vaisampayana said, "When Ambika's son Dhritarashtra hears about 
Arjuna's arrival and stay in Indra's realm from Dwaipayana, first among 
Rishis, he says to Sanjaya, "O Sarathy, do you know everything about what 
Arjuna did, from beginning to end, all that I have just heard? 

Sanjaya, my wretched, sinful son even now pursues the most base and 
vulgar policy. Ah, his soul is evil and he will surely unpeople this very 
Earth. The illustrious man, who speaks the truth even when he speaks in 
jest, and who has Arjuna to fight for him, is certain to win the three worlds. 

Who that is even beyond the influence of death and decay will be able to 
stay before Arjuna, when he looses his barbed arrows whetted on stone? My 
wretched sons, who must fight the invincible Pandavas are all doomed. I 
think about it night and day but do not see the warrior amongst us who can 
withstand the wielder of the Gandiva. 

If Drona, Karna or even Bhishma advance against him in battle, a great 
calamity is likely to befall the Earth. Even then, I do not see the way to our 
victory. Kama is kind and forgiving. Acharya Drona is old, and besides he 
is Arjuna's teacher. 

But Arjuna is wrathful, strong, proud, and of firm and steady prowess. 
All these warriors are invincible and a terrible battle will take place 
between them. All of them are heroes skilled in weapons and of great 
repute. They would not wish for the sovereignty of the world, if it was to be 
bought by defeat. Indeed, peace will be restored only after the death either 
of these or of Phalguna. 

But there is no one who can kill Phalguna, no one who can vanquish 
him. Oh, now I am the object of his anger; how will that rage be quenched? 
Equal to the king of the Devas, that Kshatriya gratified Agni at Khandava; 
he subdued all the monarchs of the Earth during the occasion of the great 
Rajasuya. 


O Sanjaya, the thunderbolt falling on the mountain top leaves a portion 
unconsumed; but, child, the shafts shot by Kiriti leave no rack behind. As 
the rays of the Sun heat this mobile and immobile universe, so will Arjuna's 
shafts scorch my sons. It seems to me that the legions of the Bhaaratas, 
terrified by the clatter of Arjuna's chariot wheels, are already broken 
through on all sides. 

Vidhatri has created Arjuna as an all-consuming Destroyer. He stays in 
battle as an enemy, spewing swarms of arrows. Who will defeat him?'" 


CANTO 49 
INDRALOKABHIGAMANA PARVA CONTINUED 


€¢ Canjaya says, 'All that you say about Duryodhana is entirely true. 

Su. that you have said is untrue, O Lord of the Earth. 

The sight of their pure wife Krishnaa dragged into the sabha has filled 
the Pandavas with rage. They have been so incensed to hear the cruel words 
of Dussasana and Karna that they will never forgive the Kurus. 

I have heard how Arjuna pleased the God of Gods in battle with his bow 
— Sthanu of eleven forms. Wanting to test Phalguna, the illustrious Kapardin 
assumed the guise of a Kirata and fought him. 

And there it was that the Lokapalas revealed themselves to that 
Kururishabha, and gave him their weapons. What other man on earth, 
except Phalguna, would strive to see these gods in their own forms? Rajan, 
who will weaken Arjuna in battle, when the eight-formed Maheswara could 
not do so? 

By coarsely dragging Draupadi into this sabha and shaming her, and 
enraging the Pandavas, your sons have brought this terrifying calamity upon 
themselves. When Bhima saw Duryodhana bare both his thighs to Panchali, 
with quivering lips Vrikodara said, "Wretch! I will smash those thighs of 
yours with my mace when thirteen years have passed." 

All the sons of Pandu are the greatest warriors; all of them have 
immeasurable energy; all of them are masters of every kind of weapon; not 
the gods can vanquish them. Incensed at the insult to their wife, Pritha's 
sons will kill all your sons in battle.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, '0 Sarathy, what mischief Karna did by speaking 
savage words to the sons of Pandu! Was not enough enmity provoked by 
bringing Krishnaa into the sabha? 

How can my evil sons live, whose eldest brother and preceptor does not 
walk the way of dharma? Seeing me blind, Sanjaya, and incapable of 
exerting myself actively, my son believes me to be a fool, and does not 
listen to what I say. The wretches who are his counsellors, Kama, Sakuni 
and the others, always pander to his vices, because he does not see light. 

Arjuna's arrows, even if he shoots them lightly, can consume all my 
princes; what then when he looses them in anger? Why, arrows shot by 


Arjuna's mighty arms, from his great bow, with mantras spoken over them, 
can turn themselves into astras which can punish the Devas themselves. 

He who has for his counsellor, protector and friend that scourge of 
sinners, the lord of the three worlds, Hari himself, encounters nothing that 
he cannot conquer. O Sanjaya, we have heard that the Lord Siva himself 
clasped Arjuna in his arms. 

All the world knows what Phalguna did, with Krishna beside him, to 
help Agni in the Khandava vana. So, when Bhima, Partha and Vaasudeva of 
the Satwatas are enraged, surely my sons, with their allies and the Subalas 
are no match for them in battle." 


CANTO 50 
INDRALOKABHIGAMANA PARVA CONTINUED 


lees said, "O Muni, surely, after sending Pandu's heroic sons into 
exile, these lamentations of Dhritarashtra were perfectly futile. Why did 
the king allow his foolish son Duryodhana to incense the mighty Pandavas? 

O Brahmana, tell us now what did the sons of Pritha eat while they lived 
in the forest? Was it produce of the wilderness or of cultivation?" 

Vaisampayana said, "Those bulls among men gather fruit and roots and 
also hunt deer with purified arrows. They first dedicate a portion of the food 
to the Brahmanas, and then eat the rest themselves. 

For, O King, while those heroes with great bows live in the forest, 
Brahmanas of both classes follow them, those that worship with fire and 
those that do not. Ten thousand illustrious Snataka Brahmanas, all knowers 
of the means to moksha, Yudhishtira supports in the vana. 

Killing Rurus and the black deer with arrows, as well as other clean 
animals of the wild, fit for eating, he gives them to those Brahmanas. None 
who stays with Yudhishtira looks pale or ill, or is lean or weak, or 
melancholy or afraid. Yudhishtira, lord of the Kurus, looks after his brothers 
as if they are his sons, and his other kinsmen as if they are his brothers. 

The chaste Draupadi feeds the Brahmanas and her husbands, even as if 
she is their mother, and only after they have eaten, does she herself eat. 

Daily, bows in hand, the king himself goes east, Bhima to the south, and 
the twins west and north, and kill deer for meat. Thus do the Pandavas 
spend five years in the Kamyaka vana, in some anxiety at the absence of 
Arjuna, and engage all the while in study, prayers and sacrifices." 


CANTO 51 
INDRALOKABHIGAMANA PRAVA CONTINUED 


Vo said, "Ambika's son, Dhritarashtra Purusharishabha 
listens to this account of how the Pandavas live in exile, and is filled 
with grief and dread. Overwhelmed by dejection, sighing heavily and 
sweating, that king says to Sanjaya, 'Sarathy, I have not a moment's peace, 
day or night, thinking of my son's terrible conduct during the gambling, and 
also thinking of the heroism, the patience, the high intelligence, the 
unbearable prowess, and the extraordinary love for one another of the sons 
of Pandu. 

Among the Pandavas, the lustrous Nakula and Sahadeva, born of Devas 
and as splendid as the king of the Devas himself, are invincible in battle. 
They wield their weapons powerfully, loose their arrows over great 
distances, are resolute in battle, of remarkable lightness of hand, of 
quenchless wrath, possessed of great steadiness, and blessed with terrific 
energy. They have the strength of lions and are as inexorable as the Aswins 
themselves. 

When they take the field with Bhima and Arjuna before them, I see, 
Sanjaya, that my soldiers will all be slain without a remnant. Those mighty 
warriors, all Devas' sons, unrivalled in battle by anybody, filled with anger 
at the memory of Draupadi's humiliation, will show no mercy. 

The awesome Vrishni warriors, also, the Panchalas of tameless tejas, and 
the sons of Pritha, led by Krishna of unbaffled prowess, will raze my 
legions. All the warriors on my side together cannot bear the might of just 
the Vrishnis, for Balarama and Krishna command them. 

Then, Bhima of dreadful prowess, his iron mace raised, he who can kill 
any Kshatriya, will prowl among my soldiers like Death himself. High 
above the din of the field, the twang of the Gandiva will resound, loud as 
heaven's thunder. No king who is with us can withstand the force of 
Bhima's mace and the mere sound of the Gandiva's bowstring. 

And then, Sanjaya, obedient as I have been to the voice of Duryodhana, I 
will have to recall all the rejected counsels of those who were truly my 
friends and well-wishers, counsels which I should have attended to more 
timely. 


Sanjaya says, 'This was your grievous mistake, O King, that although 
you could have stopped your son from doing what he did, you did not, out 
of your love for him. 

Hearing that the Pandavas had been defeated at dice, Krishna of 
unfading glory went to the Kamyaka vana and consoled them there. 
Draupadi's sons, too, led by Dhrishtadyumna arrived in that vana, as did 
Virata, Dhrishtaketu and the mighty Kekayas. 

Through our spies, I learnt everything those Kshatriyas said there, when 
they saw the Pandavas after they were beaten at dice. I have told you 
everything I know. When Krishna met the Pandavas, they asked him to be 
Arjuna's charioteer in battle. Hari replied, "So be it." 

Seeing Pritha's sons clad in deer-skins, Krishna was full of rage, and said 
to Yudhishtira, "During the Rajasuya yagna, in Indraprastha, I saw the 
prosperity you sons of Pritha had, which no other king of the world could 
acquire. I saw all the other kings, even those of the Vangas, Angas, 
Paundras, Odras, Cholas, Dravidas and Andhakas subservient to you at the 
great sacrifice, as were the chieftains of many islands and countries on the 
sea-board as also of frontier kingdoms, including the rulers of the Sinhalas, 
the barbarous Mlecchas, the natives of Lanka, and all the kings of the West, 
by hundreds, and the kings of the Pahlavas and the Daradas, and the many 
tribes of the Kiratas, Yavanas and Sakas; and the Harahunas and Chinas; the 
Tusharas and the Saindhavas and the Jagudas; and the Ramatas and the 
Mundas and the inhabitants of the kingdom of women; and the Tanganas 
and the Kekayas and the Malavas and the inhabitants of Kasmira — all 
officiated as your vassals at the Rajasuya yagna, obedient to your summons, 
afraid of your prowess. 

O King, I will restore that prosperity to you, which is so unstable now 
and waits upon the enemy! I will take your enemies' lives from them. Lord 
of the Kurus, with Rama and Bhima and Arjuna and the twins and Akrura 
and Gada and Samba and Pradyumna and Ahuka and _ the heroic 
Dhrishtadyumna and the son of Sisupala, I will kill Duryodhana and Kama 
and Dussasana and Subala's son and any others who face us in battle, in a 
single day! 

And, O Bhaarata, you will rule from Hastinapura, with your brothers; 
taking from Dhritarashtra's sons and their allies the prosperity they are 
enjoying, you will rule this Earth." 


Rajan, these were Krishna's words to Yudhishtira. When Krishna had 
finished, Yudhishtira spoke to him in that conclave of heroes, within hearing 
of all those valiant Kshatriyas led by Dhrishtadyumna, saying, "O 
Janardana, I accept what you say as truth. But, Mahabaho, kill my enemies 
and all that follow them when thirteen years have passed. Kesava, promise 
me this much, because I gave my word in the presence of the king that I 
would spend thirteen years in exile, in the wilderness." 

Consenting to these words of Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, his counsellors 
led by Dhrishtadyumna and the others pacified the furious Krishnaa with 
sweet words. Within Krishna's hearing, they said to Draupadi, "Because of 
your anger, Duryodhana will lose his life. We swear it, most beautiful one, 
SO grieve no more. 

Panchali, those that mocked you will reap the fruit of what they dared 
do. Beasts of prey and birds of carrion shall eat their flesh, and thus mock 
them. Jackals and vultures will drink their blood. And, Panchali, you will 
see the corpses of the wretches who dared drag you into the sabha lying on 
the ground, being dragged about and devoured by wild carnivores. 

They also that gave you pain and ignored you will lie headless upon the 
Earth and the Earth herself will drink their blood." 

Those bulls of the Bhaaratas said all this and more in that place, O King 
— all of them endowed with boundless prowess and valour, all of them 
marked with the scars of battle. At the end of thirteen years, those mighty 
Kshatriyas, chosen by Yudhishtira, led by Krishna, will come to the field of 
battle. 

Rama and Krishna, Dhananjaya and Pradyumna, Samba and Yuyudhana, 
Bhima and the sons of Madri, the Kekaya and the Panchala princes, with 
their Matsya kinsmen — all these, illustrious, celebrated and invincible 
heroes, with their allies and their troops, will come. Who is there, who 
wishes to live, that will encounter these in battle, these like angry lions with 
manes erect?’ 

Dhritarashtra says, 'What Vidura told me during the game of dice is 
about to be realised. He said, "O King, if you try to vanquish the Pandavas 
at dice, it will end in great bloodshed, a war which will destroy all the 
Kurus." It is true what he said, a terrible war will be fought as soon as the 
thirteen years of the Pandavas' exile is over.’ 


CANTO 52 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA 


d heeee said, "What did Yudhishtira and the other Pandavas do when 
Arjuna went into Indra's realm to acquire the astras?" Vaisampayana said, 
"When Partha goes to Devaloka, those other ratarishabhas continue to live 
in the Kamyaka, with Draupadi. One day, those best of men, full of sorrow, 
sit with Panchali upon a clean and solitary rock; they grieve for Arjuna, 
they weep for him, all of them equally afflicted by his absence. 

Full of anguish at both Arjuna being away and at losing their kingdom, 
the mighty Bhima says to Yudhishtira, At your command, great King, 
Arjuna, on whom our lives depend, as well as those of our son, and the 
Panchalas, and Satyaki and Krishna, has gone away. 

What can be sadder than this, that Fe has gone bearing so much grief in 
his heart? Depending upon the might of his arms, think of our enemies as 
being already dead and the whole world as belonging to us again. 

Why, it was for his sake that I restrained myself from despatching all the 
Dhartarashtras and the Saubalas, there in that sabha. We are mighty, we 
have Krishna's support, yet we must perforce suppress the wrath which has 
been kindled in our hearts because you are the root of that anger. 

With Krishna's help, slaying our enemies we can even today rule the 
world, conquering it through the might of our arms. Manliness we possess, 
yet we are overwhelmed by calamity, because of your vice of gambling, 
while the foolish sons of Dhritarashtra grow stronger every day with the 
tribute they receive from other kings. 

Great King, you should keep Kshatriya dharma in your sight. It is not the 
dharma of a Kshatriya to live in the forest; the first dharma of a Kshatriya is 
to rule. You know Kshatriya dharma, so do not leave the path of your duty. 

Turn away from the forest and let us summon Partha and Krishna, and 
kill the sons of Dhritarashtra, even before twelve years are over. Illustrious 
king of kings, even if the Dhartarashtras are surrounded by soldiers in battle 
array, I will send them to the next world with just my own strength. 

IT will kill all the sons of Dhritarashtra, along with the Saubalas, 
Duryodhana, Karna, and anyone else who fights me. After I have killed all 
our enemies, you can return to the vana, and so no sin will attach to you. 


And Parantapa, even if any sin does cling to you, we will wash it away 
through great yagnas and find a lofty heaven for ourselves. 

Yes, we might have such a consummation if our king is not unwise or 
procrastinating. But you are too virtuous, and the deceitful must be 
destroyed with deceit. O Bhaarata, there is no sin in killing the deceitful 
with deceit. Also, those who know dharma all say, great Kshatriya, that one 
day and one night are equal to a full year. 

The Veda also frequently declares that a day passed in keeping difficult 
vratas equals a year. Glorious brother, if the Vedas are an authority for you, 
think of the time we have spent in the wilderness as being equal to thirteen 
years, more. 

Parantapa, this is the time to kill Duryodhana and his followers, 
otherwise he will soon bring the whole world under his sway. Ah 
Yudhishtira, all this is the result of your addiction to gambling. 

Already we live in grave peril because of your word given — to go 
undiscovered during the thirteenth year. I can think of no land where the 
evil Suyodhana's spies will not track us down. Once we are found, the evil 
one will send us into exile for another thirteen years. 

Or if, perchance, we pass the ajnatavasa undiscovered, the sinner will 
challenge you to play dice again, and once more you will lose everything. 
You are no dice-player, and once you sit down to play you will lose control 
of yourself again, and yet again you will find exile for yourself. 

If you do not want to ruin all our lives, follow what the Veda says — that 
the deceitful must be killed with deceit. If you only command me, I will go 
straightaway to Hastinapura, and as fire falling upon a heap of dry grass 
consumes it, I will put forth my strength and kill Duryodhana. It becomes 
you, my lord, to give me leave. 

Thus addressed by Bhima, Dharmaraja Yudhishtira sniffs the top of his 
brother's head affectionately, and pacifying him, says, 'Mahabaho, beyond 
doubt, along with Arjuna who wields the Gandiva, you will kill Suyodhana, 
when thirteen years have passed. 

But, O son of Pritha, as for your assertion that the time is complete, I 
will not dare tell a lie, for falsehood is not in me. Kaunteya, you must kill 
the evil and powerful Duryodhana, and his confederates, but without using 
deceit.’ 

While Yudhishthira is speaking to Bhima, the great and illustrious Rishi 
Brihadaswa appears before them. Seeing the virtuous Sage, the king 


worships him with the offering of madhuparka. When the Muni is seated 
and refreshed, the mighty Yudhishtira sits at his feet, and looking up at 
Brihadaswa, speaks to him in a piteous tone. 

'Holy one, challenged by cunning gamblers skilled at dice, I have lost all 
my wealth and kingdom at gambling. I am no adept at dice, and am 
unacquainted with deceit. Sinful men vanquished me at dice, by cheating. 
'They even brought my wife, dearer to me than life, into the public sabha. 

Defeating me a second time, they have sent me into exile in this great 
forest, clad in deer-skin, and I live here with my heart heavy, full of grief. 
The harsh and cruel words they pierced me with, and what my friends and 
kin later said about the game of dice are all fresh in my memory. 

Thinking of these, I cannot sleep at nights but lie awake in anxiety. I am 
also without Arjuna, upon whom all our lives depend, and that is like being 
dead. Oh, when will I see the sweet-spoken and large-hearted Bibhatsu, so 
full of kindness and vitality, return to us, having acquired all the astras? 

Is there a king on this Earth who is more unfortunate than me? Have you 
ever seen or heard of one? To my mind, there is no man more wretched than 
Tam. 

Brihadaswa says, 'Great king, O Pandava, you say that there is no man 
more miserable than you are. Sinless monarch, if you will listen, I will tell 
you the tale of a king more wretched than yourself. 

Yudhishtira says to the Rishi, 'Illustrious one, tell me, I want to hear the 
story of the king who fell into such misery.’ 

Brihadaswa says, 'O King who has never fallen, listen attentively, with 
your brothers. I will narrate the story of a Kshatriya more miserable than 
yourself. There was a celebrated king among the Nishadhas, named 
Virasena. He had a son called Nala, versed in ways of dharma and artha. I 
have heard that Nala was vanquished through deceit by his brother 
Pushkara, and overtaken by calamity, lived in the forest with his wife. 

While he lived in the vana, he had neither servants nor chariots, neither 
brothers nor friends with him. But you are surrounded by your heroic 
brothers, who are like Devas, and also by magnificent Brahmanas who are 
like Brahma himself. Therefore, it does not become you to complain. 

Yudhishtira says, 'I am anxious to hear in detail, O foremost of eloquent 
men, the tale of Nala. You must tell me his story.' 


CANTO 53 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


bo says, "There was a king named Nala, the son of Virasena. He 
as strong, and handsome, a master of horses, and possessed of every 
accomplishment. A king of kings, he was even like the lord of the Devas. 
Exalted above all others, he resembled the Sun in glory. 

And he was the king of the Nishadhas, intent on the welfare of 
Brahmanas, versed in the Vedas, and possessed of heroism. He always told 
the truth, he was master of a mighty army, and he was fond of dice. Men 
and women loved him; he was a great soul, his passions subdued. He was 
the greatest bowman, protector of his people, and like Manu himself. 

And among the Vidarbhas, there was another king like him called 
Bhima, of terrible prowess, heroic, kindly towards his subjects and 
possessed of every virtue. However, he had no children. Single-mindedly, 
he did his best to have a child. 

O Bhaarata, one day a Brahmarishi named Damana came to Bhima. 
Desperate to have children, Bhima, versed in dharma, and his queen 
received the lustrous Rishi with every reverence. Well pleased, Damana 
granted the king and his consort a boon in the form of a jewel of a daughter, 
and also three sons of lofty soul and great fame. 

These were named Damayanti, Dama, Danta, and Damana after the 
Sage. The three sons were accomplished in every way; they were fierce to 
behold and fierce in prowess. The slender-waisted Damayanti became 
celebrated the world over for her beauty and radiance, her good nature, her 
grace and fortune. Upon her coming of age, hundreds of sakhis and female 
slaves, all decked in precious ornaments, waited upon her as if she were 
Sachi herself, while Bhima's daughter shone amongst them like the 
luminous lightning of the clouds. 

Damayanti of large eyes was as beautiful as Sri; not among the Devas, 
the Yakshas or among men had such beauty ever been seen or heard of 
before. She filled even the Devas' hearts with joy. 

So also, Nala was peerless in the three worlds, for he was as handsome 
as Kandarpa himself. Admiring heralds sang Nala's praises before 
Damayanati and Damayanati's praises before the king of the Nishadhas. 


Hearing over and over about each other's virtues the two conceived an 
attachment towards each other, though neither had seen the other. 

That affection grew, and then Nala could not contain the love which was 
in his heart. He began to pass much of his time alone, in the wooded 
gardens which adjoined his royal apartments in his palace. There he saw a 
flock of golden-winged swans, wandering among the trees, and one he 
caught in his hands. 

The sky ranging avian said to Nala, "I do not deserve to be killed by you, 
O King. Let me do something for you instead — lord of the Nishadas, I will 
speak to Damayanti about you in such a way that she will never want any 
other man for her husband." 

The king let the swan go, and the flock rose in flight and winged its way 
to the land of the Vidarbhas. Arriving, the birds alighted before Damayanti 
and her sakhis, and seeing the extraordinary swans, she was full of delight 
and, along with her maids, tried to catch the sky-coursers. 

The swans fled in all directions pursued by that bevy of beautiful young 
women, while each maiden ran after one bird. The one that Damayanti 
chased led her to a secluded place, and then spoke to her in human speech. 

"Damayanti, there is a king of the Nishadhas called Nala. He is equal to 
the Aswins in beauty, and has no remote peer among men. Indeed, he is as 
handsome as Kama Deva. Fair one, slender-waisted one, if you become his 
wife, your own beauty and your life will become fruitful. 

We have seen Devas and Gandharvas, Nagas and Rakshasas, and the 
best among men, but never have we seen anyone like Nala. You, also, are 
an incomparable jewel among women, even as Nala is among men. Happy 
is a union between the best and the best!" 

Damayanti said to the swan, "Go and say the same thing to Nala!" 

The swan replied, "So be it," and flew back to the land of the Nishadhas, 
and told Nala everything.' 


CANTO 54 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


bh says, 'O Bhaarata, after hearing what the swan said about 
Nala, Damayanti lost all peace of mind. Sighing repeatedly to think of 
him, she became full of anxiety and melancholy, she was pale and grew 
lean. Kama, god of love, seized her heart; she grew paler by the day, and 
her gaze turned skywards; her mood always abstracted, she seemed to be 
quite deranged. 

She lost all her taste for fine beds and seats, and every object of 
enjoyment. Night and day, she would not lie down, but always wept, with 
soft and loud exclamations of despair. 

Seeing her like that, her sakhis went and hinted about her condition to 
her father, the king of the Vidarbhas. King Bhima realised that Damayanti's 
condition was serious and he asked himself, "Why does my daughter seem 
to be so ill now?" 

Reflecting by himself, the king thought that his daughter had attained 
puberty and decided that he should hold a swayamvara for Damayanti. That 
monarch invited all the lords of the Earth, saying, "Kshatriyas, know that 
Damayanti's swayamvara is at hand!" 

When they heard this, all the kings came to Bhima, filling earth and sky 
with the clatter of their chariot wheels, the trumpeting of their elephants, 
and the whinnying of their horses, and bringing their magnificent legions 
decked in ornaments and beautiful garlands. The mighty-armed Bhima paid 
due homage to those illustrious sovereigns, and honoured by him, they 
began living in his city. 

At this time, those best of Devarishis, Narada and Parvata, both of 
untold splendour, wisdom and stern vows, arrived during their wanderings 
in Indra's realm and entered the palace of the Deva king, where they were 
received with reverence. Indra Maghavat worshipped the two, and asked 
after their welfare and peace. 

Narada said, "Divine one, peace attends on us in every way, and, O 
Maghavat, peace attends also upon the kings of the whole world." 

Indra, slayer of Vritra, said, "Those righteous kings of the Earth who 
fight leaving all desire to live, and who die by weapons when their time 


comes, never fleeing the field of battle — theirs is this Swarga, everlasting 
for them and granting all desires, even as it is for me. 

Where are those Kshatriya heroes? I do not see those kings coming here 
to me. Where are my favourite guests?" 

Narada replied, "0 Maghavat, I will tell you why you do not see those 
Kshatriyas now. The king of the Vidarbhas has a daughter, the renowned 
Damayanti. In beauty she excels all the women of the Earth. O Sakra, her 
swayamvara is to take place shortly and every king and prince from every 
direction and land is going to that swayamvara. 

All the lords of the Earth desire that pearl of the Earth for themselves, O 
slayer of Bala and Vritra." 

While they sat talking together, those greatest of the Devas, the 
Lokapalas, and Agni with them, appeared before the lord of the celestials, 
and they all heard what Narada said, which was of grave import. As soon as 
they heard him, they exclaimed in excitement, "We will also go there!" 

Mounting their various vahanas and vimanas, taking their attendants 
with them, the gods set out for the land of the Vidarbhas where all the 
Kshatriyas of the world had gone. 

Kaunteya, meanwhile, Nala also heard of the swayamvara and set out for 
it, his heart full of joy and love for Damayanti. On his way, the goas saw 
Nala, as handsome as Kama Deva. Seeing him splendid as the Sun, the 
Lokapalas were astonished at his wealth of beauty. 

Leaving their chariots in the sky, the gods flew down to Nala, king of the 
Nishadhas, and said to him, "Greatest of the Nishadha kings, O Nala, you 
are devoted to dharma. You must help us. Best of men, be you our 
messenger.'" 


CANTO 55 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


bo continues, '0 Bhaarata, Nala pledged his word to the gods 
saying, "I will do what you ask." 

Then, approaching them with folded hands, he asked, "Who are you? 
And who is he that wants me to be his messenger? And what must I do for 
you? Tell me!" 

Maghavat said, "We are the Devas come here for Damayanti's sake. I am 
Indra; this one is Agni; this the Lord of waters, and this, O King, is even 
Yama, destroyer of the bodies of men. 

You must inform Damayanti of our coming, saying, "The Guardians of 
the world, great Indra and the others, are coming to your swayamvara. The 
Devas Sakra and Agni and Varuna and Yama want to have you for their 
wife, so choose one of them for your lord." 

Nala said with joined hands, "I too have come here for the same reason. 
It does not become you to send me on this errand. How can a man who is 
himself smitten by love bring the suit of another to the woman that he 
loves? So, spare me, O Devas!" 

But the gods said, "King of the Nishadhas, having sworn that you will do 
what we ask, will you now break your word? Tell us quickly, O Nala!" 

The Nishadha king said, "Those palaces are well guarded, how can I 
hope to enter them?" 

Indra replied, "You will be able to enter." 

Saying, "So be it," Nala went to Damayanti's palace. Arriving there, he 
saw, surrounded by her sakhis, the daughter of the king of Vidarbha ablaze 
with beauty, her form of exquisite symmetry, her limbs so delicate, her 
waist slender, and her eyes lage and lovely. And she seemed to rebuke the 
light of the moon with her own luminosity. 

As he gazed upon that young woman of the sweet smiles, Nala's love 
grew, but wanting to keep his dharma, he suppressed his passion. And when 
they saw the Naishadha, all those finest among women were overpowered 
by his radiance and rose to their feet in amazement. Full of wonder, they 
praised Nala in joy, silently in their minds. 


"Oh, what beauty, what gentleness belongs to this Mahatman! Who is 
he? Is he some Deva or Yaksha or Gandharva?" 

Quite confounded by Nala's splendour, and full of bashfulness, those 
best among women did not speak to him at all. But, although stricken by 
amazement herself, Damayanti spoke smilingly to Nala, who also gently 
smiled at her. 

"What are you, O you of faultless features, who have come here 
awakening my love? O Sinless, O Hero of celestial form, I am anxious to 
know who you are, and why you have come here. And how have you come 
undiscovered into my apartments, when the king's mandates are stern?" 

Nala replied, "Beautiful one, my name is Nala, and I come here as a 
messenger of the gods. The Devas Sakra, Agni, Varuna and Yama want you, 
lovely one, choose one of them for your lord. It is through their power that I 
have entered here unobserved, and unobstructed. Gentle one, the gods have 
sent me here on this mission. I have given you their message, most 
fortunate one, now do as you please." 


CANTO 56 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


bo says, 'Damayanti bowed to the Devas, then said to Nala with 
a smile, "O King, love me with proper regard, and command me what I 
should do for you. I myself and everything precious which I own are yours. 
Magnificent one, grant me your love in complete trust, for what the swan 
said burns in my heart. 

Kshatriya, it is for your sake that I called this swayamvara, and for your 
sake I, who adore you, will take my life with poison, immolate myself in 
fire, drown or hang myself." 

Nala replied, "When the Lokapalas ask for you, you would choose a 
man? Turn your heart to those great gods, I am not equal to the dust on their 
feet. If a mortal displeases the gods he certainly finds death. Save me, O 
you of faultless limbs! Choose the all-excelling Devas. By accepting the 
gods, enjoy wearing incomparable garments, unearthly garlands of myriad 
hues, and divine ornaments. 

What woman would not choose Hutasana for her lord, he who devours 
the Earth? What woman would not choose Yama for her lord, from dread of 
whose danda all creatures tread the way of dharma? What woman would 
not choose for her lord the virtuous and high-souled Mahendra, the king of 
the Devas, the scourge of Daityas and Danavas? Or, if you choose Varuna in 
your heart among the Lokapalas, do so without hesitation. 

Lovely one, I beg you, accept my friendly advice!" 

Her eyes by now swimming with tears, Damayanti said to Nala, "Lord of 
the earth, bowing to all the gods, I choose you for my husband. Truly do I 
tell you this." 

The king, who had come as the messenger of the gods, replied to the 
trembling Damayanti standing before him folded hands, "Sweet one, do as 
you please. Having pledged my word to the very Devas, how can I dare 
seek my own interest? If seeking my own interest coincides with dharma, I 
will seek it, and beautiful one you must also do the same." 

Her voice choked with tears, Damayanti of luminous smiles said slowly 
to Nala, "Lord of men, I see a blameless way, by which no sin whatever will 
attach to you. Best among men, come to the swayamvara with all the Devas 


led by Indra. There, O Kshatriya, in the presence of the Lokapalas I will, 
tiger among men, choose you, and then no blame will be yours." 

Having heard this from Damayanti, Nala returned to where the Devas 
were. Seeing him, the gods asked him eagerly about what had happened. 

"Kshatriya, have you seen Damayanti of the sweet smiles? What did she 
say to us? Sinless king, tell us all." 

Nala replied, "At your command I entered Damayanti's palace of lofty 
portals, guraded by veteran guardsmen with wands in their hands. By your 
power, no one saw me as | went in, other than the princess. I saw her hand- 
maidens, and they also saw me. Most exalted Devas, they saw me and were 
filled with wonder. 

And even as I pressed your suit to her, O you best among gods, that 
beautiful princess said she had her heart set on me and chose me for her 
husband. She said to me, 'Purushavyaghra, let the Devas come with you to 
the swayamvara, and in their presence I will choose you for my lord. At 
this, Mahabaho, no blame will attach to you.' 

O Devas, this is all that transpired, and now everything depends upon 
you." 


CANTO 57 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


b continues, 'At the sacred hour of the holy lunar day of the 
auspicious season, King Bhima summoned the kings to the 
Swayamvara. All the lords of the Earth came with alacrity to his city, all of 
them keen to have Damayanti. The Kshatriyas entered the great hall 
decorated with golden pillars and a lofty portal arch, like mighty lions 
entering the mountain wilds. 

Wearing fragrant garlands and polished earrings hung with jewels, the 
kings and princes sat down on the fine seats provided. And that sacred 
assembly of kings, graced by those tigers among men, resembled the 
Bhogavati swarming with Nagas, or a mountain cave with tigers. 

They were mighty, resembling iron maces, and well-shaped, and 
graceful, and looked like five-headed snakes. With lustrous locks, fine 
noses, eyes and brows, the faces of the kings shone like the stars in the sky. 

And when the muhurta arrived, the exquisite Damayanti entered that 
great hall, dazzling the Kshatriyas, stealing their gazes and hearts. The 
gazes of those illustrious kings were riveted to those parts of her person 
where they had chanced to fall first, and never moved. 

O Bhaarata, when the names of the monarchs were proclaimed, Bhima's 
daughter saw five men all identical in appearance. Seeing them sitting there, 
no difference whatever between the five, doubt filled her mind for she could 
not tell which one was Nala. All five looked exactly the same and all of 
them seemed to be the king of the Nishadhas. 

Anxiety sweeping through her, the princess thought, "How will I know 
which are the Devas and which my love?" 

Grief had its way with her. She thought of the signs and marks attributed 
to each of the Devas but saw none of these upon the five who sat before her. 
Long she thought, and hard, and then decided to seek the help of the 
Lokapalas themselves. 

She folded her hands, and bowing down to them, mind and body, the 
trembling Damayanti said piteously, "Since I heard what the swan said, I 
chose the king of the Nishadhas as my lord. For the sake of dharma, and as 
I have never swerved from my love in my heart or speech — for that truth, 


let the Devas themselves reveal him to me. The gods have decided that Nala 
will be my lord; for that truth, let them show him to me. 

Since I have taken this vow to pay homage to Nala, for that truth let the 
gods reveal him to me. O, let the exalted Guardians of the worlds assume 
their own forms, so that I may know the good king." 

When the Lokapalas saw how firm her resolve was, how fervent her love 
for Nala, how pure her heart, the gods reassumed their natural forms which 
they had hidden. She saw the awesome ones, skins untouched by human 
sweat, eyes winkless, garlands unfading, no speck of dust upon them, feet 
never touching the ground. Nala Naishadha stood revealed mortal, his 
garlands fading, himself stained with dust and sweat, feet resting on the 
ground, and his eyes blinking from time to time. 

O Bhaarata, when she saw which of the five were the gods and which 
Nala, Bhima's chaste daughter chose Nala for her lord. Bashfully, she seized 
the hem of his robes and draped a bright and graceful garland of flowers 
around his neck. A great outcry of regret arose from the other Kshatriyas, 
while the Devas and Rishis cried out in wonder and approval. 

O Kauravya, the royal son of Virasena, Nala, his heart filled with joy, 
said to the beautiful Damayanti, "You have chosen a mortal while you could 
have had a god. From this day you shall have a husband obedient to your 
every wish and command. And, O you of sweet smiles, I swear that as long 
as there is life in this body, I will be yours and yours alone." 

Damayanti, also, with folded hands, paid homage to Nala in similar 
words. Seeing Agni and the other Devas, the happy couple sought their 
protection, in their minds. When the daughter of Bhima had chosen 
Naishadha for her husband, the Lokapalas, of blinding effulgence, their 
hearts pleased, bestowed eight boons on Nala. 

Sakra, the lord of Sachi, blessed Nala with the boon that he would be 
able to see his Deity during sacrifices and that he would attain blessed 
realms after this life; Agni Hutasana blessed him with the boon of his own 
presence whenever Naishadha wished, and realms, also, bright as himself; 
Yama granted him subtle taste in food as well as pre-eminence in dharma; 
and Varuna, the lord of waters, granted Nala his own presence whenever the 
Naishadha desired, and also garlands of heavenly fragrance. Thus, each 
Lokapala blessed Nala with two boons each, and having blessed him the 
gods returned to Swarga. 


Having witnessed, with wonder and delight, Damayanti's choosing of 
Nala, the kings of the world also returned to their kingdoms. When they had 
gone, Bhima, well pleased, celebrated the wedding of Nala and Damayanti. 
Nala remained in the Vidarbha city for some while, to please Bhima, and 
then returned to his own home. 

Having married that pearl of a woman, Nala now passed his days in joy 
with Damayanti, even as Indra does with Sachi. Like the Sun in glory, that 
king ruled with dharma and his people were all satisfied and happy. Like 
Nahusha's son Yayati, the brilliant Nala performed the Aswamedha yagna 
and many other great sacrifices, and gave abundant gifts to Brahmanas. 

Truly like a Deva, Nala dallied with Damayanti in romantic woods and 
charmed groves, and he begot on his lovely wife a son named Indrasena, 
and a daughter named Indraseni. Thus, performing countless sacrifices, and 
making love with Damayanti, Nala ruled the world, and it was a time of 
grace and plenitude.’ 


CANTO 58 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


io says, 'When the blazing guardians of the worlds were 
eturning to their homes after the swayamvara, they saw Dwapara and 
Kali approaching them. Seeing Kali, Sakra said, "O Kali, say where you are 
going with Dwapara." 

Kali replied, "Sakra, I am going to Damayanti's swayamvara, and I will 
have her for my wife, for my heart is fixed upon that young woman." 

Hearing this, Indra said with a smile, "That swayamvara is already over, 
and she has chosen Nala for her husband." 

Kali, vilest of the celestials, was filled with wrath, and said to the gods, 
"Since she dared chose a mortal when the Devas were present, she must 
suffer a heavy consequence." 

The Devas replied, "It is with our sanction that Damayanti chose Nala. 
What young woman would not choose Nala, who is blessed with every 
virtue? He knows his dharma, always conducts himself with rectitude, he 
has studied the four Vedas together with the Puranas that are regarded as the 
fifth. He harms no living creature, speaks only the truth, keeps his vows 
faithfully, and worships the gods with sacrifices in his house. 

In that tiger among men, that king who is like a Lokapala, dwell truth, 
forbearance, knowledge, asceticism, purity, self-control and perfect 
tranquillity of spirit. O Kali, the fool that wants to curse Nala, who has such 
character, curses only himself and destroys himself by what he does. Kali, 
he who seeks to curse Nala of such immaculate virtue sinks into the wide, 
bottomless pit of hell, rife with torments." 

Saying this to Kali and Dwapara, the Devas went to their heavens. And 
when the gods had gone, Kali said to Dwapara, "Dwapara, I cannot contain 
my anger. I will possess Nala, deprive him of his kingdom, and he shall not 
sport anymore with Bhima's daughter. Enter into the gambling dice; you 
must help me." 


CANTO 59 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


|S eee says, 'Having made this compact with Dwapara, Kali came 
o the city of the king of the Nishadhas. Always watching for an 
opening, the slightest lapse from Nala, he continued to dwell in the country 
of the Nishadhas for a long lime. In the twelfth year, Kali saw his chance. 

One day, after answering the call of nature, Naishadha touched water and 
said his twilight prayers, but without having washed his feet. Through this 
ritual lapse, Kali entered into him, and having possessed Nala, he appeared 
before Nala’s brother Pushkara, and said to him, "Come and play dice with 
Nala. I will help you and you will certainly win. Defeat Nala and, winning 
his kingdom, rule the Nishadhas!" 

Exhorted by Kali, Pushkara went to Nala; and Dwapara also came to 
Pushkara and became the main dice called vrisha. Appearing before the 
warlike Nala, that slayer of hostile heroes, Pushkara repeatedly said, "Let us 
play dice together." 

Thus challenged in the presence of Damayanti, the lofty-minded 
Naishadha could not refuse for long. He fixed a time for the game. 

Possessed as he was by Kali, Nala began to lose all his stakes — in gold, 
silver, chariots with their teams of horses, costly garments. And maddened 
by the dice, none amongst his friends could make him stop playing. 

O Bhaarata, the citizens in a body, with the chief councillors, came to 
see the king and make him stop. The charioteer came to Damayanti and 
said, "O Queen, the people and the officers of the state are waiting at the 
gate. You must tell the king that they cannot bear the calamity which has 
overtaken him." 

Overwhelmed by grief, almost mad from it, Bhima's daughter spoke in a 
choked voice to Nala, "Rajan, the loyal people and the councillors are at the 
gates, waiting to see you. You must grant them audience." 

But possessed by Kali, the king did not reply to his desperate wife. At 
this, the people and the officials returned to their homes, in shame and 
sorrowing, saying among themselves, "He does not live!" 

Yudhishtira, for many months Nala and Pushkara gambled, and the 
viruous Nala always lost.' 


CANTO 60 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


|S ee says, 'Bhima's daughter, the calm Damayanti, saw her 
husband maddened by the dice, and she was full of alarm; she saw how 
ciritical the situation was, for he had lost almost everything. She said to her 
nurse and maid-servant Brihatsena, "Go and summon the councillors in the 
name of Nala, and tell them also what wealth has been lost and what 
remains." 

The councillors heard Nala's summons and said, "This is fortunate for 
us". They came to the king, along with all the people, for the second time. 
Damayanti informed Nala of their coming, but he ignored her and she 
returned in shame to her apartments. 

Hearing that the dice rolled constantly against Nala, and that he had lost 
everything, she said again to her nurse, "Brihatsena, go again in Nala's 
name and fetch the charioteer Varshneya. For this is a crisis." 

Brihatsena had Varshneya summoned by trusted servants, and the 
blameless Damayanti said softly to the sarathy, "You know how good the 
king has always been to you. He is in trouble now, and you must help him. 
The more the king loses to Pushkara, the more ardently he wants to play on. 
The dice fall obedient to Pushkara, and roll against Nala. 

He is so possessed by the game that he does not listen to his friends and 
family, not even to me. O Sarathy, I seek your protection; my heart is weak 
within me and I fear the king will come to grief. I beg you, yoke Nala's 
favourite horses, swift as the mind, and take these twins, my son and 
daughter, in the royal chariot to Kundina. Leave them there with my kin, 
Sarathy, and then do as you will — either remain there yourself or go 
anywhere else that you please." 

Nala's charioteer reported what Damayanti said to the chief officers of 
the king. With their assent, he then set out for Vidarbha, taking the children 
in his ratha. Leaving the boy Indrasena and the girl Indraseni, and also that 
best of chariots and those finest of horses with Bhima, and his heart full of 
sorrow for Nala, Varshneya the sarathy wandered here and there for some 
time, then arrived in Ayodhya and entered the service of King Rituparna, as 
his charioteer.' 


CANTO 61 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


bo says, 'After Varshneya left, Pushkara won Nala's kingdom 
and what remained of his wealth. Then, laughing, he said to Nala, "Let 
us play on! But what will you stake now? You have lost everything you 
own except Damayanati. I am prepared to accept her as a wager, if you will 
put her up." 

Nala listened to Pushkara and felt his heart would burst in anger, but he 
did not say a word. Only gazing at his adversary in anguish, Nala stripped 
all the precious ornaments from every part of his body. Wearing just a 
single piece of cloth, his body uncovered, all his wealth lost, having brought 
great grief to all his friends, the king set out from his city. Damayanti, also 
clad in one piece of cloth, followed him. Coming to the outskirts of the city, 
Nala stayed there for three nights with his wife. But Pushkara had it 
proclaimed that anyone who gave shelter to Nala or paid him the least 
attention would be put to death. No citizen, O Yudhishtira, dared show Nala 
any regard or hospitality. 

Nala passed three nights upon the city's hem, living just on water. Roiled 
by hunger, the king went in search of fruit and roots, Damayanti following 
him. After many days, in agony from starving, Nala saw some birds of 
golden plumage and the mighty lord of the Nishadhas thought, "These will 
be my banquet today and also my wealth." 

He covered them with the single cloth which he wore, but in a flash the 
birds rose up into the sky with that last garment. They looked down at Nala, 
now standing naked and stricken, his face turned down in shame, and those 
rangers of the sky said to him, "O you of small sense, we are the dice with 
which you played. We came here to take away your cloth, for we wanted to 
see you go naked from here!" 

Nala now said to Damayanti, "They whose anger took my kingdom from 
me, they who have ravaged me with hunger, they who keep me from finding 
food, who kept the Nishadhas from offering me any hospitality have now 
come as birds and taken away my last cloth. 

Ah, I have plunged into disaster, and my mind and senses reel with grief. 
Iam your lord still, so listen to what I say and do as I ask; it is for your own 


good. These many roads lead to the southern country, passing by the city of 
Avanti and the Rikshavat Mountains. This is the mighty Vindhya; yonder, 
the river Payasvini runs seawards, and there are the asramas of the Rishis, 
where many roots and fruit grow. 

This road leads to the country of the Vidarbhas, and beyond that is the 
land of the Kosalas. Beyond these roads, to the south, is the Dravida 
country. Leave me and go there." 

Over and over, the almost deranged Nala repeated these words to 
Damayanti. At which, in grief, her voice full of tears, Damayanti said 
piteously to the Naishadha, "O King, my heart trembles and my limbs turn 
weak to think of your purpose. How can I go, leaving you alone in this 
forest, having lost your kingdom and wealth, naked, worn with hunger and 
exhausted? 

When you think of your old felicity in this deep vana and grieve, I will 
soothe your sorrow, great king. All the physicians say that in every sorrow 
there is no physic equal to a wife. It is the truth, O Nala, that I speak." 

Nala replied, "Slender-waisted Damayanti, it is even as you say. To a 
man in distress, there is no friend or medicine that is equal to his wife. But I 
do not seek to renounce you, so why are you in dread? Faultless one, I can 
forsake myself but you I can never leave." 

Damayanti said, "Mighty King, if you do not intend to forsake me, then 
why do you point out the way to the country of the Vidarbhas? I know, my 
lord, that you would not desert me. But, Lord of the Earth, your mind is 
sorely disturbed and you might desert me. Best of men, repeatedly you 
point out the road which leads out of here, and you swell my sorrow, O 
godlike. 

If you intend that I go to the country of my kin, then let us both go the 
land of the Vidarbhas. The king of the Vidarbhas will receive you with 
honour, and you will live happily in our home." 


CANTO 62 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


cC Ni said, "Surely, your father's kingdom is as my own. But I will 

not go there in this condition. Once I appeared there in glory, 
increasing your joy. How can I go there now in misery, augmenting your 
grief?" 

Saying this again and again to Damayanti, King Nala, wrapped in half a 
garment now, comforted his wife. Both of them sharing her single cloth, 
weary with hunger and thirst, they wandered on weakly, and at last came to 
a wayside shelter for travellers, a meagre shed. 

Arriving there, the king of the Nishadhas sat down on the bare earth with 
the princess of Vidarbha. Sharing the same piece of cloth, dirty and 
haggard, stained with dust, exhausted, they fell on the ground. Plunged so 
abruptly in distress, the delicate and innocent Damayanti, every mark of 
fortune upon her body, fell into a deep slumber. 

But Nala, his heart and mind distraught, could not sleep as he used to. 
He thought about losing his kingdom, the desertion by his friends, and his 
distress in the wilds. 

He thought to himself, "To what avail my living on? Is death better for 
me now? But can I desert my wife, who is so devoted to me and suffers this 
hardship for my sake? But if I leave her, she might find her way to her 
relatives. 

She is absolutely loyal and if she stays with me distress can be her only 
lot; while, if I leave her, she might find fortune and even happiness again 
someday." 

Reflecting upon this repeatedly, he concluded that he should leave 
Damayanti. He also thought, "She has lofty fame, auspicious fortune; she is 
devoted to me, her husband, and no one will harm her on her way, such is 
her tejas." 

It was the evil Kali influencing his mind to desert Damayanti. Nala then 
thought that they were sharing her single cloth, and he wanted to cut half of 
it away for himself. He thought, "How shall I divide this garment, so that 
my beloved does not awaken?" 


Thinking of this, he paced that shelter and, O Bhaarata, he found a 
handsome sword lying nearby, unsheathed. That Parantapa used the blade to 
shear away one half of the cloth, then throwing the weapon aside, he left the 
daughter of Vidharbha asleep and walked away. 

But his heart failed him, and he returned to the shelter, and seeing 
Damayanti again, burst into tears. He said, "Alas! My beloved, whom not 
the Wind or the Sun has seen before, lies forsaken and wretched on bare 
ground, wearing a single cloth. Ah, what will she of the luminous smiles do 
when she awakens alone? How will Bhima's beautiful daughter find her 
way through this forest full of wild animals and snakes? 

O blessed one, may the Adityas and the Vasus, and the twin Aswins 
together with the Marutas protect you, your virtue being your best guard." 

Saying this softly to his wife, whose beauty was unmatched in the world, 
Nala, deranged by Kali, tried to leave again. He came back again and again, 
helplessly, hauled away by Kali but pulled back by love; and it seemed as if 
the heart of the wretched king was torn in two, and like a swing, he kept 
going out from the shelter and coming back into it. 

At length, after lamenting long and piteously, Nala, entirely stupefied by 
Kali, went away, forsaking his sleeping wife. Bereft of reason through 
Kali's touch, the king left in sorrow leaving Damayanti alone in that solitary 
forest.’ 


CANTO 63 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


ba says, 'O King, some time after Nala had left, the exquisite 
and timorous Damayanti awoke in that lonely forest. Not finding her 
lord Naishadha, she screamed in fright, "My husband, have you abandoned 
me? I am lost, undone, oh, I am terrified in this dreadful jungle. Illustrious 
Kshatriya, you are always truthful and you know dharma well. Then how 
have you deserted me while I slept in this wilderness? Oh, why have you 
left your wife, who is devoted to you, who has never wronged you, even 
when everyone else has abandoned you? 

King of men, you said in the presence of the Lokapalas that you would 
always be true to me. Purusharishabha, it is only because mortals die when 
their time comes that I am alive for even a moment after you have left me. 

Ah, Bull among men, enough of this joke! Irrepressible one, I am 
terribly afraid. Lord, show yourself to me. I see you! I see you hiding in the 
bushes, why don't you answer me? You are being cruel, Nala, that you see 
me in this plight but do not come to comfort me. 

I do not grieve for myself, nor anything else. I only grieve to think how 
you will pass your days alone. In the evening, savaged by hunger, thirst and 
tiredness under the trees, how will you live without seeing me, without 
having my comfort?" 

The anguished Damayanti began to dash here and there, sobbing and 
wailing. Now the helpless princess would spring up, then sink down to the 
ground again; now she shrank in terror, and then she wept aloud. Sighing, 
burning with grief, Bhima's daughter sobbed, "He through whose curse 
Nala suffers this grief will suffer torment worse than ours! May the evil one 
who has reduced the sinless Nala to this lead a life of greater misery than 
ours, bearing greater ills." 

So lamenting, the crowned queen of Nala began to seek her husband in 
that forest, which teemed with predators. Crying bitterly, the daughter of 
Bhima wandered dementedly, like a madwoman, exclaiming, "Alas! O 
King!" 

As she wailed loudly like a female osprey, and grieved unceasingly and 
lamented piteously, she came near a gigantic serpent. The huge and hungry 


snake suddenly seized Bhima's daughter, who had come within its striking 
range. Folded in serpent's coils, in pain, she still wept not for herself but for 
her Naishadha. 

She cried, "O Nala, why don't you rush to me now that this snake has 
seized me in this wild place? Naishadha, how will you bear it when you 
think of me? O lord, why have you gone away, abandoning me in this 
jungle? When you are freed from your curse and regain your mind and your 
wealth, what will you do when you remember me? 

Sinless one, who will comfort you when you are tired, hungry and feel 
faint, O tiger among kings?" 

As she cried all this aloud, a hunter ranging through the deep vana heard 
her and ran to the place. Seeing the doe-eyed beauty in the coils of the 
snake, he cut off the serpent's head and freed Damayanti. He sprinkled 
water over her, fed and consoled her, O Bhaarata. 

Then the vetala asked her, "Who are you, O gazelle-eyed, and why have 
you come into the jungle? Beautiful one, how did you fall into this extreme 
misery?" 

Damayanti told him everything. Looking at her wearing half a cloth, her 
breasts deep and her hips round, her limbs flawless and delicate, her face 
like the full moon, her long lashes curved, her speech as sweet as honey, the 
hunter became inflamed. In the grip of Kama Deva, he began to console her 
in a soft voice, with smooth words. 

The chaste Damayanti immediately understood his intentions; she blazed 
up in anger. The wild fellow, in the grip of lust, also grew angry and tried to 
force himself on her who was fierce as a flame. Already stricken past 
endurance, Damayanti cursed him in fury, "I have never even thought of 
another man other than Naishadha, so let this wretch who subsists on the 
hunt fall dead!" 

As soon as she said this, the hunter fell lifeless on the ground, like a tree 
consumed by fire.' 


CANTO 64 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


|S eae continues, 'Having killed the hunter, Damayanti of eyes like 
lotus leaves walked on through that fearful and solitary forest, which 
rang with the chirping of crickets. The vana abounded with lion, leopard, 
ruru, tiger, bison, bear and deer. It swarmed with birds of various species, 
and was, besides, infested by bandits and mlechcha tribes. 

Sala trees grew there, bamboo, Dhavas and Aswatthas, Tindukas and 
Ingudas, Kinsukas and Arjunas, Arishtas, Sanchanas, Nimbas and Tinisas, 
Syandana, Salmalas and Jambus, and mango trees, and Lodhras, and 
Khadiras, and the cane, and Padyakas, and Amalakas, and Plakshas, and 
Kadambas, and Udumvaras and Badaris, and Bilvas, and banyans, and 
Priyalas, and palms, and date-trees, Haritakas and Vibhitakas. 

The princess of Vidarbha saw many mountains with lodes of precious 
minerals of diverse kinds, and groves resounding with the music of winged 
choirs, and many glades of great beauty, and many rivers and lakes and 
tanks and all manner of birds and beasts. She saw numberless Nagas and 
Pisachas and Rakshasas of grim visage, and pools and rillets and hillocks, 
and brooks and fountains of wonder. 

Herds of bison Damayanti saw, sounders of boar and solitary bears and 
snakes in that pristine wilderness. Safe in her virtue, glory, good fortune and 
patience, Damayanti wandered through those forests alone, in search of 
Nala. Bhima's royal daughter was not frightened by anything—feral 
creature or sight—in the fearsome vana; she only grieved at being apart 
from Nala. 

O King, she sat down upon a flat stone, full of sorrow, her every limb 
trembling, and she lamented, "O King of the Nishadhas, you with the 
mighty arms and broad chest, where have you gone, leaving me in this lone 
forest? O Kshatriya, you performed the Aswamedha and other sacrifices, 
gave profuse gifts, then why have you betrayed me, Purushavyaghra? 

Best of men, O you of great splendour, O auspicious one, don't you 
remember what you swore to me, Rajarishabha? Remember what the swan 
said to both of us! Tiger among men, all the four Vedas together, with the 


Angas and the Upangas, mastered, are only equal to a single truth spoken 
and honoured. So, Parantapa, honour the oath you swore to me. 

Alas, O Kshatriya! O Nala! Sinless one, being yours, I am about to die 
alone in this dreadful forest. Oh! Why don't you answer me? This terrible 
lord of the forest, of grim face and gaping jaws, and famished with hunger, 
fills me with fear. Should you not deliver me? 

You would always say, 'Other than you there is no one that I love. 

O blessed king, keep your word to me now. Nala, why don't you come 
back to your wife, who is demented with grief, and wailing here, she that 
you love and who loves you in return? Lord of the earth, O large-eyed, 
honoured one, bane of your enemies, don't you see me here, emaciated, 
distraught and pale, wearing a half piece of cloth, alone, crying, desolate, 
and like a solitary doe separated from the herd? 

Nala, it is I, Damayanti, devoted to you, who, alone in this great forest, 
that speaks to you. Why don't you reply? Oh, I do not see you today upon 
this mountain, lord of men, you of noble birth and character, your every 
limb so full of grace! Whom shall I ask in this terrible forest, full of lions 
and tigers, O King of the Nishadhas, foremost of men, enhancer of my 
sorrows, if you are lying down, sitting or standing nearby, or gone? 

Griefstricken as I am, whom shall I ask, 'Have you seen Nala in this 
jungle? Do you know where the noble and handsome Nala, scourge of his 
enemies, has gone?’ 

From whom shall I hear the sweet words, 'The royal Nala is here!' 

Look, here comes the king of the jungle, the lordly tiger, his cheeks high 
and four fangs showing. I will accost even him fearlessly, and say, 'You are 
the lord of all beasts, and king of this vana. Iam Damayanti, daughter of the 
king of the Vidarbhas, and the wife of Nala, Parantapa, king of the 
Nishadhas. I am distrait and griefstricken, seeking my husband alone in this 
forest. King of beasts, comfort me with news of Nala, if you can, or best of 
animals, free me from my misery by devouring me. 

Alas, he stalks away without responding. 

Look! This king of mountains, this lofty and sacred hill crested with 
countless peaks hears my piteous appeal and seems to loll towards the sea. 
Let me, then, ask the mountain king for tidings of my Nala, this lord of 
mountains with so many heaven-kissing and many-hued and beautiful 
peaks, abounding in precious ores, decked with gemstones of diverse kinds, 
and rising like a banner over this great forest, the mountain upon whom 


lions and tigers and elephants and boars and bears and stags roam, the 
mountain which echoes with the songs of birds of every kind, mountain 
adorned with Kinsukas and Asokas and Bakulas and Punnagas, with 
blossoming Karnikaras, and Dhavas and Plakshas, and with streams 
teeming with waterfowl of every kind. 

O sacred one! O best of mountains! O you wondrous spectacle! O 
celebrated massif! O refuge of the distressed! O most auspicious one! I bow 
to you, O pillar of the earth! Approaching, I bow to you. 

Know me for a king's daughter, and a king's daughter-in-law, and a 
king's wife. Iam Damayanti, daughter of Bhima, mighty warrior king of the 
Vidarbhas, protector of the four varnas. That best of kings performed the 
Rajasuya and Aswamedha yagnas, with bountiful gifts to Brahmanas. 
Bhima of the beautiful and large eyes, distinguished for his devotion to the 
Vedas, of blemishless character, always truthful, devoid of guile, gentle, 
powerful, lord of immense wealth, versed in dharma, and pure, has 
vanquished all his enemies and protects all the people of Vidarbha. Holy 
Mountain, I am that Bhima's daughter, come to you in direst straits. 

That best of men, the renowned king of the Nishadhas, Virasena of 
towering fame, was my father-in-law. His heroic and beautiful son, of 
invincible prowess, who rules well the kingdom he inherited from his 
father, is called Nala. Know, O Mountain, that I am the wife of that golden- 
complexioned slayer of foes, devoted to Brahmanas, versed in the Vedas, 
gifted with eloquence, that righteous and Soma-drinking and fire-adoring 
king, who performed great sacrifices and is both liberal and warlike, who 
punishes evil men — I am his innocent queen who stands before you. 

Having lost all that we owned and also my husband now, I have no one 
to protect me anymore, and I have come before you in deep distress. I have 
come seeking my husband. O foremost of mountains, with your hundreds of 
peaks towering into the sky, have you seen Nala in this fearful jungle? Have 
you seen my husband, that king of the Nishadhas, the lustrous Nala with the 
tread of a mighty elephant, blessed with great intelligence, long-armed, and 
of fiery tejas, possessed of prowess and patience and courage and high 
fame? 

Ah, best of mountains, you see me lamenting alone, overwhelmed by 
sorrow, then why don't you comfort me with your voice, as your own 
daughter in distress? 


O mighty Kshatriya, O warrior of truth and prowess, O you who know 
every particular of dharma, O lord of the earth — if you are in this forest, O 
King, show yourself to me. Ah, when will I hear the voice of Nala again, 
gentle, and deep as that of the clouds, that voice sweet as amrita, of my 
illustrious king calling me Vidarbhas daughter, in accents clear, rich and 
holy, and musical as the chanting of the Vedas, and soothing all my 
sorrows? Nala, I am frightened. Virtuous one, comfort me." 

Having said all this to that greatest of mountains, Damayanti walked 
towards the north, and having gone three days and nights, she came to an 
incomparable tapovana of Rishis, as beautiful as a grove in heaven. She saw 
great Sages that adorned that asrama— Valmiki, Bhrigu and Atri—all holy 
men, at stern tapasya, their senses and minds restrained, some living on 
water, some on air, and some on fallen leaves, passions in check, eminently 
blessed, clad in barks of trees and deer-skins, seeking the way to salvation. 

Damayanti's spirits revived seeing that charmed hermitage of Munis, 
where herds of deer grazed and monkeys frolicked in the trees. That best of 
women, her eyes large and black, her brows graceful, her tresses long, her 
hips wide, her bosom deep, her face perfect, her teeth like pearls, her form 
lustrous and noble, entered the hermitage. She saluted those ascetics, grown 
old practising their austerities, and stood humbly before them. 

They said to her, "Welcome! Sit down and tell us what we can do for 
you." 

Damayanti said, "Sinless and most blessed Munis, is all well with your 
tapasya, your sacrificial fire, religious observances, and your svadharma? 
And is all well with the beasts and birds of this asrama?" 

They answered, "Beautiful, illustrious woman, prosperity attends us in 
every way. But O you of faultless limbs, tell us who you are, and what you 
seek. Seeing your lovely form and your bright splendour, we are amazed. 
Do not grieve. Blameless, blessed one, tell us, are you the Devi of this 
forest, or of this mountain, or of this river?" 

Damayanti replied, "Brahmanas, I am not the goddess of this forest, or 
of this mountain, or of this stream. O Rishis of ascetic wealth, I am a human 
woman. I will tell you about my life in detail. I beg you, listen to me. 

There is a king called Bhima, the mighty ruler of the Vidarbhas, and O 
Dvijottamas, I am his daughter. Nala, wise ruler of the Nishadhas, heroic, of 
great renown, always victorious in battle, and learned, is my husband, the 
large-eyed Nala, his face like the full moon, who always worships the gods, 


who is devoted to Brahmanas, guardian of the line of the Nishadhas, of 
mighty energy, of great strength, truthful, conversant with dharma, wise, 
unwavering in keeping his word, crusher of his foes, devout, graceful, 
conqueror of hostile towns, foremost of kings, equal in splendour to the 
king of the Devas. 

He performs great sacrifices, knows the Vedas well, and their Angas, 
destroys his enemies in battle, is as splendid as the Sun and the Moon. That 
king devoted to truth and dharma was summoned to play dice by some 
deceitful and evil ones, skilled at gambling, and he had his kingdom and his 
wealth taken from him. 

Munis, I am the wife of that Rajarishabha, and my name is Damayanti. 
My lord has gone missing and I am desperate to find him. I am wandering 
through forests and among mountains, lakes, rivers and tanks, in sorrow, in 
search of my husband — Nala, skilled in battle, high-souled, and a master of 
weapons. 

O Rishis, has Nala, lord of the Nishadhas, come to this beautiful asrama 
of yours? It is for him, O Brahmanas, that I have come to this forest full of 
terror, haunted by tigers and other beasts. If I do not see King Nala in a few 
days, I will seek my weal by leaving this body. Of what use is my life 
without that bull among men? How will I live tormented by grief at being 
without him?" 

The Rishis said to the forlorn Damayanti, "Blessed and beautiful child, 
with our mystic powers, we see that the future holds joy for you and that 
you will soon find Nala. O daughter of Bhima, you will see the lord of the 
Nishadhas, slayer of his enemies, foremost of the virtuous, freed from 
distress. You will see the king, your husband, freed from all sin, wearing 
precious jewels, again ruling his own city, punishing his enemies, striking 
terror into their hearts, and gladdening the hearts of friends, while all 
success and every blessing crown him." 

When they had said this to the princess, Nala's beloved queen, those 
Sages and all that asrama vanished before her eyes! Damayanti of faultless 
limbs stood wonderstruck. She asked herself, "Was it a dream that I saw? 
Ah, what a marvel! Where are all those Brahmanas? Where is that asrama? 
Where is that sparkling river of sacred water, on which so many kinds of 
waterbirds swam? Where are those enchanted trees laden with flowers and 
fruit?" 


After wandering for some time, Damayanti was melancholy again and 
the colour drained from her face from grief for Nala. She went to another 
part of the forest and saw a great asoka tree. Going up to that first of trees, 
blossom-laden and full of leaves, resounding with birdsong in its branches, 
Damayanti, with tears in her eyes and her voice choking, said, "Oh, this 
graceful tree in the heart of the forest, decked in flowers, is so beautiful, like 
some charming king of hills. O beautiful Asoka, quickly set me free from 
sorrow! 

Have you seen King Nala, Parantapa, the beloved husband of 
Damayanti? Have you seen my precious husband, the king of the 
Nishadhas, clad in half a piece of cloth, his skin delicate, hero plunged in 
woe who came into this wilderness? O Asoka, free me from my grief! 
Vindicate your name, for Asoka means destroyer of grief." 

Thrice she walked around that tree, then entered an even denser part of 
the jungle. Wandering in quest of her lord, Bhima's daughter saw many 
unusual, majestic trees, lovely rills, towering mountains, and beasts and 
birds, and caves, and cliffs, many rivers of wonderful beauty. 

As she went, she came upon a wide path where, in some amazement, she 
saw a mighty group of merchants, with their horses and elephants, on the 
banks of a river full of clear and cool water, and lovely to behold, and wide, 
the banks overgrown with bamboo clumps, echoing with the cries of cranes 
and ospreys and chakravakas, the river itself full of tortoises, crocodiles and 
fish, and studded with innumerable islets. 

As soon as she saw that caravan, Damayanti, dishevelled, lean, her hair 
tangled and filthy, wearing half a cloth, went towards the merchants like 
some madwoman, that lovely queen. Seeing her some of the Vaisyas fled in 
fear, some grew anxious, while some cried out, and others laughed at her, 
and yet others despised the very sight of her. 

However, some felt pity, O Bhaarata, and asked her, "Blessed one, who 
are you, and whose? What do you seek in this forest? We are frightened of 
you, tell us truly are you human or the Devi of this jungle, or this mountain, 
or of the points of the sky? We seek your protection. Are you a Yakshi or a 
Rakshasi, or a Devastri? Anyway, bless us, O you of faultless features, and 
protect us so our caravan passes through this place safely, with ourselves 
and our goods secure." 

Damayanti said, "O leader of the caravan, merchants, youths, old men, 
children, I am a human woman. I am the daughter of a king, the daughter 


in-law of a king, and the consort, also, of a king, eager for the sight of my 
lord. The king of the Vidarbhas is my father; my husband Nala is the lord of 
the Nishadhas, and even now I am looking for him. 

If you have seen my beloved Nala, tiger among men, razer of hostile 
armies, tell me quickly!" 

At which the leader of that great caravan, Suchi, said to Damayanti of 
faultless limbs, "Blessed one, you of sweet smiles, I am a Vaisya and the 
leader of this caravan. Lovely lady, I have not seen any man called Nala. In 
this great forest, where no men live, there are only elephants, leopards, 
bison, tigers, bears and other beasts. Other than you I have met no human in 
this vana, may Manibhadra, king of the Yakshas, help us now!" 

She asked, "Tell me where this caravan is bound." 

The leader of the band said, "O daughter of a great king, we are bound 
for the city of Subahu, the honest sovereign of the Chedis, to make some 
profit from our goods. " 


CANTO 65 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


5b said, 'Damayanti went with that caravan, and she was 
anxious to see her Nala. After travelling for many days, the merchants 
saw a large lake fragrant with lotuses in the midst of that dense and terrible 
forest. Its banks adorned with velvet grasses, with plenty of wood to burn as 
fuel, and with flowers and fruit, it was a charmed place indeed. 

The shimmering water abounded with birds of many kinds; it was cool, 
clear and sweet, and captivated the heart. Worn with their long journey, the 
merchants of the caravan decided to halt there and spread themselves 
through the fine woods surrounding the lake. It was dusk. 

At midnight, when all was still and quiet, when the tired caravan had 
fallen asleep, a herd of wild elephants, the juice of rut flowing down their 
temples, and going to drink from a mountain stream, saw the caravan of 
sleeping Vaisyas, and also the many tame elephants which went with the 
merchants. Seeing the domesticated elephants, the wild herd, maddened by 
musth, rushed at them, meaning to kill them; they came like great boulders 
loosed down a mountain slope. 

The charging wild elephants found their way to the lake of lotuses and 
the elephants of the caravan barred by sleeping merchants and they 
trampled the Vaisyas. Many died, while others awoke and fled screaming in 
all directions, into the deeper forest. Some were gored to death, others 
scooped up in massive trunks and dashed on the ground, while more were 
crushed under massive feet. 

The wild elephants killed many camels and horses, as well, while in 
panic the fleeing merchants with weapons drawn even killed one another in 
the dark. Some fell on the ground, others scrambled up trees, while yet 
others jumped down into deep pits. O King, great losses that caravan 
suffered when the wild herd attacked it. 

An uproar broke out, for precious jewels the Vaisyas were carrying 
scattered on the ground. 

"Save us!" they screamed. 

"Pick up the jewels!" 

"Leave them. What do the jewels matter when our lives are in danger?" 


"Fly! " 

"Where to fly?" 

And they dashed about blindly in complete terror. Damayanti awoke in 
fear, while the slaughter held sway around her; she awoke trembling and 
panting. 

Finally, the elephants lumbered away and those merchants who had 
escaped with their lives met together, and they asked "What have we done 
that this disaster has overtaken us?" 

"Surely, we did not worship the Manibhadras, and the exalted and 
graceful Vaisravana, the king of the Yakshas." 

"Perhaps, we have not worshipped the gods who fetch calamities, or 
perhaps we did not pay them the first homage. Maybe, this evil follows the 
birds we saw on our way." 

"Our stars are not unpropitious. From what other cause, then, has 
disaster come?" 

Some, who had lost their wealth and relatives, and were distraught, 
cried, "This mad looking woman came among us and she was strange and 
hardly human. Surely she has brought this on us. She must be a Rakshasi, a 
Yakshi or as Pisachi! Beyond doubt, this evil is her doing. 

"If we see that evil creature again, we will kill her!" 

Damayanti heard what they said and fled into the forest. She said 
desperately to herself, "Alas! Fierce and great is the wrath of God upon me. 
Peace does not follow my paths. What have I done to deserve this? I do not 
remember that I ever harmed anyone in the least, in thought, word or deed. 
Then why such terrible consequences? 

Surely, some great sins from a past life are being visited on me that my 
husband has lost his kingdom, and his own kinsmen turned against him and 
vanquished him. I have been separated from my son and daughter, and my 
lord, and find myself alone in this dreadful jungle full of savage beasts." 

O King, the next day, what remained of the once mighty caravan of 
merchants left that place, loudly lamenting their lost wealth and their dead 
brothers, fathers, sons and friends. 

And the princess of Vidarbha also lamented, "Ah, what have I done? 
Surely, it is my misfortune which has devastated the company of men with 
whom I took refuge. Now, surely, I will have to suffer for a long time. I 
have heard wise old men say that no one dies before their time; surely, that 
is why the elephants did not trample me while I slept. 


Everything which has happened to me is only because of something I did 
in a past life, for not even as a child did I commit any such sin in thought, 
word, or deed, which could bring such tragedy as this one as its 
consequence. Oh, I do believe that I have been parted from my Nala 
because I chose him over the all-powerful Lokapalas who came to my 
swayamvara. It is their power which has brought calamity into my life." 

Thus grieving, pale as the autumn moon, Damayanti now attached 
herself to the Brahmanas, knowers of the Vedas, who had survived the 
night's massacre. Travelling briskly, towards evening she came to the 
mighty city of Subahu, king of the Chedis. Wearing half a garment, she 
entered that magnificent city. 

The citizens saw her, full of fear, lean, melancholy, her hair dishevelled 
and soiled with dirt, and altogether like a madwoman. In curiosity, the boys 
of that city began following her. Surrounded by them, she came to the 
palace of the king. 

The queen-mother saw her from a terrace, surrounded by the crowd of 
youths. She said to her nursemaid, "Go and bring that woman to me. She is 
forlorn and the crowd troubles her. She is in distress and in need of succour. 
I find her beauty such that it illumines my house. Though she looks like a 
madwoman, with her large eyes, the fair one is as lovely as the Devi Sri 
herself." 

The woman went out and, dispersing the crowd, brought Damayanti to 
that fine terrace. O King, wonderstruck, that nursemaid asked Damayanti, 
"You are plunged in misfortune, yet you are so very beautiful. You shine 
like lightning in the clouds. Tell me who you are, and whose. Your lustre is 
celestial; surely you are not merely human. You wear no ornaments, and 
although you are helpless, you are unmoved by the coarseness of these 
men." 

Damayanti said, "I am a human woman, devoted to my husband. I am a 
serving woman from good stock. I live wherever I like, eating fruit and 
roots, and without a companion, and sleep where night overtakes me. My 
husband is a man of countless virtues and was always devoted to me. I was 
also deeply attached to him, following him like his shadow. 

Once he became involved in a desperate game of dice. Beaten, losing 
everything, he came into the wilderness. I came with him into the forest, 
comforting that hero clad in a single piece of cloth, who was demented by 


his sudden adversity. Afflicted by hunger, thirst and grief, he was forced to 
relinquish even his last cloth. 

Naked and deranged as he was, I still followed him, myself in a single 
garment. For nights together, I did not sleep. Many days passed, until, once 
while I slept, he cut away one half of my garment and abandoned me, who 
had done him no wrong. 

I am seeking my husband but cannot find him, who has the complexion 
of the filaments of a lotus. Without seeing him who delights my heart, my 
beloved lord who owns my heart, for he is like a Deva to look at, I am 
consumed by grief by night and day." 

Now the queen-mother herself said to the tearful Damayanti, "Blessed 
one, you stay with me. I am well pleased with you. Lovely one, my men 
will search for your husband, or he might come here on his wanderings. 
Remain here with me and you will have your lost lord back." 

Damayanti replied, "Mother of heroes, I can only stay with you on some 
conditions. I will not eat the leavings of any food, nor will I wash anyone's 
feet, nor must I have to speak to any other man. If anyone tries to make me 
his wife or mistress, he must submit to my punishment; more, if he solicits 
me repeatedly, he must be punished with death. 

This is the vow I have sworn. I also want to speak to the Brahmanas who 
will go forth to seek out my husband. If you can do all this for me, I will 
certainly live with you. But if you cannot, I also cannot remain here with 
you." 

The queen-mother answered her gladly, "I will do all this. I approve of 
the vow you have taken." 

O Bhaarata, the queen-mother now said to her daughter Sunanda, 
"Sunanda, take this woman who is like a goddess to be your Sairandhri. She 
is the same age as you are, let her be your companion, and enjoy her 
company." 

Sunanda cheerfully accepted Damayanti and led her to her own 
apartments, along with her sakhis. Treated with respect, Damayanti was 
satisfied and she lived there without any anxiety, for all her wishes were 
met.' 


CANTO 66 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


| eae says, 'Rajan, after deserting Damayanti, Nala saw a mighty 
conflagration that raged in that dense forest. From the great fire, he 
heard some creature crying repeatedly to him, "O righteous Nala, come 
here!" 

Answering, "Fear not!" he ran into the fire and saw a mighty Naga king 
in coils. Trembling, with folded hands, the Naga said to Nala, "O King, I 
am a snake and Karkotaka is my name. I once deceived the Maharishi 
Narada and he cursed me in anger: 'Stay here immobile as if graven of 
stone, until one Nala takes you out from this place. And at the very place to 
which he bears you, you will be free from my curse. 

For that curse, I canot move. I will tell you how to save me, and I will be 
your friend. There is no Naga to equal me, but I will be light in your hands. 
Pick me up, Nala, and hurry from here!" 

Saying this that prince of snakes became as small as a man's thumb. 
Picking him up, Nala took him out of the forest fire. Coming to an open 
glade, Nala meant to set the Naga down, when Karkotaka said again to him, 
"King of the Nishadhas, go on a little further, a few steps more. Mahabaho, 
I will do you great good." 

As Nala walked on, the snake bit him at the tenth step. As soon as he 
was bitten, Nala found himself transformed; he saw the snake also resume 
his own massive form. 

Karkotaka comforted Nala, "I have taken your beauty from you so that 
people will not recognise you. And, Nala, he who has deceived you and 
plunged you in despair will continue to dwell inside you, but now tortured 
by my venom. As long as he does not leave you, he will be in agony in your 
body, its every limb filled with my venom. O King, I have saved you from 
the one who has destroyed you out of anger and hatred, though you are 
perfectly innocent and undeserving of wrong. 

Also, tiger among men, from now through my grace you will feel no fear 
from any fanged creature, from other enemies as well as Brahmanas who 
know the Vedas. Nor will you feel any pain from my poison. Kshatriya, you 
will always be victorious in battle. 


Lord of Nishadhas, go to the wondrous city of Ayodhya even today and 
present yourself before King Rituparna, who is a master of gambling, and 
say to him, 'I am Bahuka, a charioteer.' In return for your knowledge of 
horses, he will teach you the skills of dice. He is of the line of Ikshvaku, 
and prosperous; he will be your friend. 

When you are an adept at dice you will have your fortune back. You will 
find your wife and children and have your kingdom again. I say this to you 
in truth, so do not let sorrow cloud your mind. 

Lord of men, when you want to have back your own form, think of me 
and put on this garment." 

That Naga gave Nala two pieces of celestial cloth, and the king of snakes 
vanished. 


CANTO 67 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


| See says, 'After the snake disappeared, Nala made his way 
owards Ayodhya and entered Rituparna's city on the tenth day. 

He went to the king and said, "My name is Bahuka. There is no one in 
this world to equal me in tending to horses. My counsel is also valued in all 
difficult problems, and I have many other skills besides. I am also a most 
excellent cook. Why, for you I will excel at every art which exists in this 
world, and accomplish everything difficult. O Rituparna, keep me in your 
palace." 

Rituparna replied warmly, "Bahuka, stay with me! May fortune befall 
you, for I believe what you say. I have always particularly wanted to be 
driven fast; I leave it to you to make my horses swift. I give you charge of 
my stables, and I will pay you ten thousand coins for that. 

Varshneya and Jivala will always be under your direction, and you will 
spend your time pleasantly with them. So, Bahuka, do stay with me!" 

Nala began to live in Rituparna's city, and was treated with respect, 
while Varshneya and Jivala were his companions. Living there, he thought 
of Damayanti and every morning and evening he would sing aloud to 
himself, even like a sloka, "Where is that helpless one, afflicted by hunger 
and thirst, worn with toil, thinking of that wretch. Ah, on whom does she 
now wait?" 

Once as the king was chanting this in the night, Jivala asked him, 
"Bahuka, for whom do you so lament daily? I am curious. O you who are 
blessed with a long life, whose wife is she for whom you so grieve?" 

Nala replied, "There is a certain foolish man who had a wife known to 
all. However, the wretch proved false in his vows to her. He was separated 
from her and wandered the earth, tormented by sorrow, without rest by day 
or night. At nights, he remembers her, and he sings this verse. Having 
wandered over all the world, he has finally found a refuge, and undeserving 
of the suffering which has overtaken him, he passes his days thinking of his 
wife. 

When calamity overtook this man, his wife followed him into the jungle. 
Deserted by him of small virtue, her very life is in danger. Alone, with no 


knowledge of the ways of the world, ill able to bear grief, faint with hunger 
and thirst, she can hardly protect herself. And, O friend, that man of small 
sense and little fortune has abandoned her in that terrible forest, teeming 
with predators." 

Thus always remembering Damayanti, Nala, king of the Nishadhas, 
continued to live, unknown, in the palace of Rituparna of Ayodhya." 


CANTO 68 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


yoo said, "Brihadaswa says, "After Nala lost his kingdom and 
became a bondsman, while Damayanti entered the service of a queen- 
mother, Bhima wanted to see Nala and he sent out Brahmanas to search for 
him. Giving them profuse wealth, Bhima said, "Seek out Nala and also 
Damayanti. He who finds the Naishadha and my daughter, and brings them 
to me, shall have a thousand cows from me, and fields and a village as big 
as a town. Even if he does not fetch Damayanti and Nala here, he that 
discovers where they are will have wealth equal to a thousand cows." 

The Brahmanas happily went forth in every direction, combing cities 
and provinces. But nowhere did they find Nala or his queen, until, at last a 
Brahmana called Sudeva came to the city of the Chedis, and there, during 
the time of the king's prayers, saw Damayanti in the king's palace, sitting 
with Sunanda. Lean and soiled as she was, her incomparable beauty glowed 
like fire hidden in curls of smoke, and he felt certain she was the princess of 
Vidarbha. 

Sudeva said to himself, "I am blessed, that my eyes behold the princess 
who is like Sri herself, delighting the worlds! Her face is like the full moon; 
she is in the fullness of her youth, her breasts round and high, illumining 
this place with her lustre like moonrays, her eyes like lotus petals, 
fascinating as Kama's Rati herself, although, alas, she seems like a lotus 
stalk transplanted by ill fortune from the Vidarbha lake, and covered with 
mire in the process. 

Grieving for her husband, she looks like the paurnima night when Rahu 
swallows the Moon, or like a river which has run dry. Ah, she is like a lake 
of lotuses, whose blooms have been ravaged by the trunks of elephants, a 
lake whose birds are terrified by the rampaging herd. Surely, this delicate 
girl of exquisite limbs, who deserves to dwell in a jewelled palace is indeed 
like a lotus uprooted and scorched by the sun. 

She is beautiful past compare, she is generous; she should wear 
ornaments but has none, and is like the moon covered by black clouds. 
Deprived of every comfort and luxury, torn away from her friends, she is in 
distress, supported only by the hope of seeing her lord, for truly her 


husband is the best ornament of a woman, even if she has no other. Without 
her husband beside her, this lady, though beautiful, does not shine forth as 
she should. 

As for Nala, how does he remain alive separated from such a wife? Why, 
I look at her, black-haired, her eyes like lotus leaves, unhappy though she 
deserves to be joyful, and even my heart is pained. When will this girl, 
graced by every auspicious mark and devoted to her husband, cross this 
ocean of woe, and be with her lord again, even like Rohini regaining the 
Moon? 

For sure, when Nala finds her again, he will experience the delight of a 
king regaining his lost kingdom. He is her equal in nature, in age and 
lineage; Nala deserves Damayanti and this black-eyed beauty deserves the 
Naishadha. I see how she pines for him, and I should comfort the queen of 
that hero of immeasurable prowess, energy and might. Let me console this 
distraught girl, her face like the full moon, and suffering as she never has 
before, and always thinking only of her husband." 

The Brahmana Sudeva approached Damayanti, and said, "Princess of 
Vidarbha, I am Sudeva the Brahmana, your brother's dear friend. I have 
come here seeking you at the behest of King Bhima. Your father is well, 
and also your mother, and your brothers. Your son and daughter, blessed 
with length of days, live in peace. However, your kinsfolk, though living 
are almost as dead on your account, and hundreds of Brahmanas range the 
world in search of you." 

Damayanti recognised Sudeva, and asked about all her family, one after 
the other. O King, then, overwhelmed, the princess began to sob bitterly at 
unexpectedly seeing that best of Brahmanas, her brother's friend. Sunanda 
saw Damayanti crying, and speaking privately to Sudeva, and went in some 
distress to her mother and said, "Sairandhri is sobbing in the presence of a 
Brahmana. Come and see." 

The mother of the king of the Chedis came out of the inner apartments of 
the palace, to where Damayanti was with the Brahmana. Calling Sudeva, 
the queen-mother asked him, "Whose wife is this fair one, and whose 
daughter? How has she of beautiful eyes lost the company of her relatives 
and of her husband as well? How do you know her? Tell me all this in 
detail, about this girl of unearthly beauty." 

Then, O Bhaarata, Sudeva, that best of Brahmanas, sat at his ease and 
began to tell the story of Damayanti.' 


CANTO 69 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


cc deva said, "There is a virtuous and illustrious king of the Vidarbhas 

ete Bhima. This young woman is his daughter Damayanti. She is 
also the wife of the wise and righteous Nala, king of the Nishadhas, the son 
of Virasena. Defeated at dice by his brother, and deprived of his kingdom, 
that king, taking Damayanti with him, left his city. 

We have been ranging the earth in search of Damayanti, and at last we 
have found her in the palace of your son. No woman exists who can rival 
her beauty. From her infancy she has had a fine birthmark between her eye- 
brows, a mark like a lotus. It now seems to have all but vanished, for her 
face is covered by dust, even as clouds hide the moon. Put there by Brahma 
himself, to be a mark of fortune and wealth, that lotus is still faintly visible, 
like the cloud-covered crescent moon of the first day of the bright fortnight. 

And though her body, too, is covered with dirt, her beauty has not 
disappeared. Though she is careless of her person, her beauty still shines 
through like gold. Ah, by her birthmark and her mole I have recognised her, 
even as one discovers a covered fire by its heat!" 

O King, hearing what Sudeva said, Sunanda washed away the dust that 
covered the mark between Damayanti's eye-brows, whereupon it became 
clear like the moon appearing from behind clouds. When they saw the lotus 
mark, Sunanda and the queen-mother began to cry; they embraced 
Damayanti and stood silent for a time. 

Still shedding tears, the queen-mother said gently, "Through this mark I 
know that you are my sister's daughter! Lovely one, your mother and I are 
both daughters of the high-souled Sudaman, king of the Dasarnas. She was 
given to King Bhima, and I to Virabahu. I witnessed your birth in our 
father's palace in the kingdom of the Dasarnas. My beautiful child, my 
house is as your own father's house to you; all my wealth, Damayanti, is 
yours as much as mine." 

At this, Damayanti, her heart glad, bowed down to her mother's sister 
and said, "Even before you knew me, you took me in and cared for me. I 
have already been happy in your house, and now I am sure I| will be still 


happier. But, mother, I have long been an exile and so, I beg you, give me 
leave to go. 

My son and daughter live in my father's palace. Deprived of both their 
father and mother, they must pass their time in great sorrow. If you want to 
please me, give me an escort even now and let me go to the Vidarbhas." 

Rajan, Damayanti's aunt agreed happily, "So be it." 

And with her son's permission, she sent Damayanti in a handsome 
palanquin, carried by sturdy servitors, protected by a large escort and 
provided with food and drink and the finest garments. Soon enough, she 
reached the country of the Vidarbhas, where all her family received her in 
great joy, while she worhipped the Gods and Brahmanas and gave thanks at 
seeing her relatives, her children, both her parents, and all her old sakhis 
well. 

King Bhima gave Sudeva a thousand cows and much wealth and a whole 
village. 

Having slept the night in her father's palace, and having recovered 
somewhat from her exhaustion, Damayanti said to her mother, "O mother, if 
you want me to live, you must find Nala and bring him to me." 

At which, the queen, her mother, began to cry but could give her 
daughter no reply. Seeing her like that all the women of the harem began to 
lament and weep loudly. Then the queen went to the mighty Bhima and 
said, "Your daughter Damayanti grieves heartbroken for Nala. She told me 
so herself. Let all your men do their utmost to find the Naishadha." 

Bhima sent his Brahmanas in all directions, saying, "Do everything you 
can to find Nala!" 

Before going forth, those Brahmanas came to Damayanti and told her of 
their mission. Bhima's daughter said to them, "Go and cry out in every 
realm, 'Beloved gambler, where have you gone cutting away half my 
garment, and abandoning your devoted wife while she slept in the jungle? 
That girl waits for you, consumed by grief. Relent, O King, O Kshatriya, 
and answer her, for she weeps incessantly for you!’ 

Say all this and more so that he is moved by pity. Say, 'Helped by the 
wind, fire consumed the forest. A husband must always protect and provide 
for his wife. Why then, good as you are and acquainted with every duty, 
have you neglected to do both? You have fame, wisdom, lineage, and 
kindness; why have you been unkind? 


I fear that all this is because of my good fortune being lost! O tiger 
among men, take pity on me, O bull among men! You always said to me 
that kindness is the highest virtue, why are you not kind now?’ 

If anyone answers you when you say all this, find out who he is and 
where he lives. Dvijottamas, come and tell me what that man says who 
answers you. You must be careful that no one knows that the words you 
speak are at my behest, nor that you will come back to me. You must 
discover everything about him who answers you — if he is rich or poor, 
powerful or powerless, everything about him." 

With these instructions from Damayanti, the Brahmanas set out in all 
directions in search of Nala overtaken by misfortune. They looked for him 
in kingdoms, cities and villages, in Rishis' asramas and cowherd 
settlements. Wherever they went they repeated aloud what Damayanti had 
told them to say. 


CANTO 70 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


bo says, 'After a long time, a Brahmana named Parnada 
eturned to the city of the Vidarbhas, and said to the daughter of Bhima, 
"Damayanti, seeking Nala, king of Nishadhas, I went to the city of 
Ayodhya, and appeared before the son of Bhangasura, where I repeated 
your words in the presence of the blessed Rituparna. However, neither that 
king of men nor any of his courtiers said anything in reply, although I 
uttered them over and over. 

Then, after I had been dismissed by the king, a man in Rituparna's 
service, a certain Bahuka, accosted me. Bahuka is that king's charioteer, of 
unseemly appearance and short arms. He is skilled at driving chariots and 
riding horses very fast, and is also a master cook. 

I found that he sighed often, and wept, as he asked about my welfare. 
Then he said, Although they might fall into great distress, chaste women 
protect themselves and so secure heaven. Although their lords might 
abandon them, yet they do not become angry, for women that are chaste 
lead their lives encased in the armour of virtue. It becomes her not to be 
angry since he that abandoned her was overcome by calamity, and deprived 
of everything. 

A beautiful and virtuous woman should not be angry with one whom 
birds deprived of his single cloth, while he went looking for food, with one 
who, besides, is being consumed by grief. Regardless of whether she is 
treated well or ill, a chaste wife should never succumb to anger, seeing her 
husband in such a plight, having lost his kingdom, destitute of prosperity, 
ravaged by hunger and overwhelmed by disaster.' 

After hearing what he said, I returned quickly to you, and now I have 
told you what transpired. Tell your father the king about it and then do as 
you see fit." 

Tears in her eyes, Damayanti went to her mother and spoke to her in 
private, "Mother, you must not under any circumstances tell my father King 
Bhima of what I intend. In your presence, I will send Sudeva, that best of 
Brahmanas, to Ayodhya immediately, to fetch Nala here just as he did me." 


When Parnada had refreshed himself and recovered from his tiredness, 
the princess of Vidarbha worshipped him with profuse wealth. She also 
said, "When Nala comes here, O Brahmana, I will give you abundant 
wealth again, for you have done me a great service by which I hope to see 
my lord again quickly." 

That high-minded Brahmana uttered blessings over her, auspicious 
mantras, and went home, regarding his mission as accomplished. When he 
had left, Damayanti, still in the clutches of grief, called Sudeva and, in her 
mother's presence, said to him, "O Sudeva, go to the city of Ayodhya, 
straight as a bird, and say there to King Rituparna, 'Bhima's daughter 
Damayanti will hold another swayamvara. All the kings and princes are 
going to it. Calculating the time, I find that the ceremony will take place 
tomorrow. O Parantapa, if it is possible for you, go there without delay. 

Tomorrow, after the Sun rises, she will choose a second husband, since 
she does not know whether King Nala still lives or not.'" 

Sudeva went to Ayodhya and declared what Damayanti had told him to 
King Rituparna.' 


CANTO 71 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


5 continues, "When he heard what Sudeva said, King 
Rituparna called Bahuka and said gently to him, "O Bahuka, you are a 
master of horses. I want you to take me to Damayanti's Swayamvara in a 
single day." 

When he heard this, Nala thought his heart would burst with grief that 
seared his very entrails. 

He thought to himself, "Perhaps Damayanti is deranged by sorrow that 
she is doing this; or, perhaps, she has conceived this wonderful plan for my 
sake? Alas, I senselessly abandoned the innocent princess of Vidarbha and 
this is a cruel thing that she plans. The world knows that the nature of 
women is fickle. Besides, I have wronged her grievously, and she might 
well be doing this because she has no love for me anymore. 

But then, how will the slender-waisted one do this thing when she is the 
mother of my children? The only way to discover the truth is by going 
there, and I will go, to accomplish both Rituparna's purpose and my own." 

Bahuka folded his hands to Rituparna and, though his heart was full of 
sadness, said, "Purushavyaghra, I will take you to the city of the Vidarbhas 
in a single day!" 

At the command of Bhangasura's son, Nala went to the stables to choose 
his horses. Rituparna called repeatedly to him to hurry, and after some 
scrutiny and carfeul deliberation. Bahuka chose some lean steeds, of high 
pedigree, docile, strong and which could go a great distance. They had wide 
nostrils, outthrust cheeks, no inauspicious marks, or ten curls which are 
considered unfortunate; they were all born in the land of Sindhu and were 
fleet as the wind. 

But when Rituparna saw those horses, he cired, "What are you doing? 
This is no time for jesting. How can such weak horses bear us to the 
Vidarbha city in a day?" 

Bahuka replied, "Each of these horses has one curl on his forehead, two 
on his temples, four on his sides, four on his chest, and one on his back. 
Have no doubt they will go to the country of the Vidarbhas. If, O King, you 
want to choose some others, point them out and I will yoke them for you." 


Rituparna replied, "Bahuka, you know about horses and are a master of 
driving them. Quickly yoke the ones you think best." 

Nala yoked the four fine steeds he had chosen to the king's chariot. 
Rituparna climbed into the chariot and at once all the horses fell down on 
their knees! Then, O King, Nala began to soothe those beasts endowed with 
speed and energy. He lifted them again to their feet by their reins and made 
the charioteer Varshneya sit beside him at the chariot head; Nala prepared to 
ride at great speed. 

Now, urged by Bahuka, those horses rose into the sky! The king of 
Ayodhya and his sarathy were dumbstruck; they went at the speed of the 
wind. 

The astonished Varshneya thought, "Is this Matali, the charioteer of 
Deva king? For the magnificent Bahuka's skills are no less than his. Or, has 
Salihotra taken human shape? Or is this King Nala who has come here? Or 
it may be that this Bahuka knows whatever Nala does about horses. 

Bahuka and Nala are of the same age; yet, this might not be Nala, only 
someone who knows as much about horses as he does. However, when 
misfortune strikes them, the most illustrious men walk this earth in disguise, 
as ordained by the scriptures. True, he is ugly, but then Nala might even 
have changed his features. Bahuka and Nala are of similar age, but they are 
unlike in appearance. 

Yet, Bahuka is as accomplished, in every way, as Nala and I feel certain 
that he is indeed the Naishadha." 

Thus, long thought Varshneya, who was once Nala's own sarathy. King 
Rituparna delighted in the marvellous skills of Bahuka. He looked at how 
Bahuka held his reins and how he made his horses fly and he was full of 


' 


JOY. 


CANTO 72 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


5b says, 'Like a bird coursing through the sky, Nala crossed 
ivers and mountains, forests and lakes. Suddenly, Rituparna's upper 
garment peeled away from his body and fell to the earth below. 

Rituparna said to Nala, "I must have my royal garment back. Restrain 
your steeds, most intelligent one, and let Varshneya bring my cloth back." 

Nala replied, "The cloth has fallen far down, and we have come a yojana 
since. We cannot recover it now." 

When Nala said this to him, Rituparna saw a Vibhitaka tree laden with 
fruit, in a forest. The king said quickly to Bahuka, "Sarathy, observe my 
extraordinary skill at counting. There is no one who is a master of every art 
or science. Knowledge in its entirety is not found in any one person. O 
Bahuka, the leaves and fruit of this tree which are lying on the ground 
exceed those that are still upon it by one hundred and one. The two 
branches of the tree have fifty million leaves, and two thousand and ninety- 
five fruit. Examine the two branches and all their boughs." 

Bahuka stopped his chariot and said to the king, "Parantapa, you take 
credit for yourself in a matter that is beyond my perception. But, O King, I 
will cut down the Vibhitaka and count the leaves and fruit. Let Varshneya 
hold the reins of the horses for a while." 

The king replied, "We have no time to lose." 

But Bahuka replied humbly, "Stay awhile, otherwise make Varshneya 
your charioteer. The road lies straight and even." 

Rituparna said, "Bahuka, you are the only charioteer, there is no other in 
this world like you. I place myself in your hands, only you can take me to 
the Vidarbhas. If you make me see the Sun rise in the land of the Vidarbhas, 
I will give you anything you wish for." 

Bahuka said, "Let me count the leaves and fruit of the Vibhitaka and 
then I will take you to the Vidarbha country." 

Reluctantly the king said, "Count, and upon counting the leaves and 
fruits of a portion of this branch, you will be satisfied with what I said." 

Bahuka quickly got down from the chariot and felled the tree. He was 
amazed to find the fruit to be exactly as many as the king had said. He said 


to Rituparna, "This power of yours is extraordinary. O King, I want to learn 
this art from you." 

Wanting to ride on swiftly, the king said, "Know that apart from the art 
of reckoning, I am also a master of dice." 

And Bahuka said to him, "Bull among men, teach me that art and in 
return receive my knowledge of horses and kine." 

Knowing that he depended on Bahuka's goodwill to arrive in the 
Vidarbha land, and also tempted by the horse-lore that his charioteer 
possessed, Rituparna said, "So be it. Receive the art of dice from me, O 
Bahuka, and let the equine science remain with you in trust." 

Rituparna imparted that art to Nala, and immediately Kali came out of 
his body incessantly vomiting the virulent poison of Karkotaka. As soon as 
he left Nala, the fire of that curse left Kali. 

Nala, who had been possessed and tormented for so long, wanted to 
curse Kali, when terrified and trembling, Kali said with folded hands, 
"Control your anger, O King! I will make you lustrous. When you 
abandoned her, Indrasena's mother cursed me and, ever since, I have lived 
in your body in torment. Unconquered one, miserable and scalded night and 
day by the venom of the snake prince, I lived inside you. 

I seek your protection. If you do not curse me, who am frightened and 
seek refuge in you, then anyone who attentively recites your story will 
never have to fear me." 

Nala controlled his wrath, and Kali swiftly entered into the Vibhitaka 
tree. All the while that Kali spoke with Nala, he remained invisible to the 
others. Delivered from his travail, and having counted the fruits of that tree, 
Naishadha, filled with great joy and of terrific energy, climbed back into the 
chariot and urged his fleet horses on. 

From that hour, the Vibhitaka tree fell into disrepute because of the 
touch of Kali. 

Nala's horses flew up again into the air even like winged creatures, and 
he drove them in the direction of the Vidarbha country. When he had gone 
far, Kali crept out of the tree and returned to his own abode. 

O King, when Kali left Nala, that lord of the earth was free again from 
calamity, though he did not yet assume his natural form.' 


CANTO 73 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


a says, ‘Rituparna arrived that same evening at the gates of the 
city of the Vidarbhas; the people brought news of his coming to King 
Bhima. And at the invitation of Bhima, the king of Ayodhya entered the city 
of Kundina, filling the ten cardinal points with the sound of his chariot 
wheels. 

The horses of Nala who were in that city heard that sound and were as 
delighted as they used to become in the presence of Nala himself. 
Damayanti also heard the sound of that chariot driven by Nala, like the deep 
roar of clouds during the monsoon. Bhima and Nala's horses inside Bhima's 
city felt they were hearing the chariot wheels of Nala himself, as of old. 

Like the horses, the peacocks on the terraces and the elephants in their 
stables heard the rumble of Rituparna's chariot, like that of thunderheads, 
and they all began to cry out and trumpet, full of joy such as they 
experience when they hear the actual roar of clouds. 

Damayanti said, "The rumble of this chariot fills all the world and 
gladdens my heart, so it must be Nala. If I do not see Nala, his face bright 
as the moon, the Kshatriya of countless virtues, I will surely die. If today I 
am not clasped in that hero's arms, his thrilling embrace, I shall cease to be. 

If Naishadha, whose voice is as deep as that of the clouds, does not come 
to me today, I will walk into a pyre of golden brilliance. If that best of 
kings, strong as a lion, mighty as a bull elephant in musth, does not appear 
before me, I will not live anymore. I do not remember a single untruth in 
him, or a single wrong done by him to anyone. He has never told a lie even 
in jest. 

Ah, my Nala is noble, forgiving, heroic, magnificent, superior to all 
other kings, faithful to his marriage vow and like a eunuch to other females. 
Night and day my heart is full of him, and if I do not see him quickly, my 
heart will burst." 

So she spoke to herself, as one devoid of sense, and climbed up to her 
terrace to catch a glimpse of the righteous Nala. In the central courtyard of 
the main palace she saw Rituparna in the chariot with Varshneya and 


Bahuka. Varshneya and Bahuka climbed down from that fine ratha and 
unyoked the horses, then left the chariot itself in a proper place. 

Rituparna climbed down and presented himself before King Bhima of 
terrible prowess. Bhima received him with great respect, for without a due 
occasion, a great man cannot be received as a guest. Honoured by Bhima, 
Rituparna looked around him again and again, but saw no sign of any 
swayamvara. 

O Bhaarata, the Vidarbha king approached Rituparna, and _ said, 
"Welcome! What is the occasion for this visit of yours?" 

Bhima asked this without knowing that Rituparna had come to obtain the 
hand of his daughter. Rituparna saw that there were no other kings or 
princes here; nor did he hear anything of the swaymvara; nor did he see any 
concourse of Brahmanas. 

The most intelligent Kosala king thought for a while, then said, "I have 
come here to pay my respects to you." 

Bhima was astonished and tried to fathom why Rituparna had come a 
hundred yojanas. He thought, "It is unlikely that he has passed through so 
many kingdoms and by countless kings just to pay his respects to me. But I 
will learn the truth by and by." 

Bhima said to Rituparna summarily, "Rest now, you are tired." 

Honoured thus by the pleased Bhima, King Rituparna, his heart glad, 
went to his appointed quarters, followed by the servants of the royal 
household. 

When Rituparna had gone with Varshneya, Bahuka took the chariot to 
the stables. He freed his horses there, rubbed them down, soothed them with 
his own hands, and sat down at one end of the ratha. 

Meanwhile, having seen the royal son of Bhangasura, and Varshneya of 
the Suta race, and also Bahuka as a Suta, Damayanti was forlorn and asked 
herself, "Whose is this chariot-rumble? It was as loud as Nala's, but I do not 
see the lord of the Nishadhas. 

Varshneya has learnt the art from Nala, and that is why this chariot 
rumbled as Nala's did. Or is Rituparna as skilled as Nala so the sound of his 
chariot wheels is as that of Nala's?" 

Thinking all this, that blessed and beautiful woman sent a female 
messenger in search of the Naishada.' 


CANTO 74 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


c¢ amayanti said, "O Kesini, go and find out who that ugly and I 

| B ete sarathy is, sitting beside the chariot. Faultless one, 
approach him cautiously, with sweet words, showing him courtesy and 
discover everything about him. Ah, from what my mind feels and the joy in 
my heart, I fear that he is King Nala. 

Kesini, after asking about his welfare, say the words of Parnada to him 
and, my beautiful one, listen carefully to his reply." 

While Damayanti watched from the terrace, Kesini softly approached 
Bahuka and said, "Best of men, you are welcome here. I wish you 
happiness. O bull among men, now listen to what Damayanti says. When 
did you all set out, and with what object have you come here? Tell us truly, 
for the princess of Vidarbha wishes to know." 

Bahuka replied, "The king of Kosala heard from a Brahmana that 
Damayanti will hold a second swayamvara, and Rituparna flew here in this 
chariot yoked to horses swift as the wind, steeds which could fly a hundred 
yojanas. I am his sarathy." 

Kesini then asked, "Who is the third among you, whose son? And whose 
son are you, and how have you become a charioteer?" 

Bahuka replied, "The third one was the charioteer of Nala, and his name 
is Varshneya. Beautful one, after Nala left his kingdom, Varshneya came to 
the son of Bhangasura. I am skilled in horse-lore, and so I have been made 
charioteer. Indeed, King Rituparna himself chose me as his charioteer and 
cook." 

Kesini said, "Perhaps Varshneya knows where King Nala has gone, and, 
O Bahuka, he may also have spoken to you about his master." 

Bahuka said, "Varshneya brought the children of Nala here and then left. 
He does not know where Naishadha is, nor does anybody else know Nala's 
whereabouts, for the king wanders over the world in disguise and despoiled 
of his natural beauty. Only Nala knows who Nala is, for he does not seem 
like himself anymore, not in the least particular." 

Kesini said, "The Brahmana who went to Ayodhya repeated these words 
suitable to female lips, 'O beloved gambler, where have you gone tearing 


off half my piece of cloth, and abandoning me, your devoted wife, asleep in 
the woods? Your wife waits for you in half a garment still, burning with 
grief day and night. 

'O Kshatriya, relent towards her that weeps ceaselessly for you and give 
her a reply. Illustrious one, send her a soothing message, for she hungers for 
your words.' 

When you heard what the Brahmana said in Ayodhya, you made a reply. 
The princess of Vidarbha wants to hear again the words you then spoke." 

Hearing Kesini, Nala's heart ached and his eyes filled with tears. 
Steadying his voice that choked, restraining his grief, that king repeated 
what he had said to the Brahmana, "Though overtaken by calamity, chaste 
women still protect themselves, and thereby secure heaven. Even when 
deserted by their lords, chaste women never become angry, but continue to 
live sheathed in virtue's mail. Deserted by one fallen into calamity; bereft of 
sense, and deprived of bliss, it still does not become her to grow angry. 

A virtuous woman must not be angry with one that had his garment 
taken by birds, as he strove to find food, one who, besides, burns in misery. 
The chaste woman would never be angry, after seeing her husband in that 
plight, despoiled of his kingdom, bereft of prosperity, oppressed by hunger, 
and overwhelmed by catastrophe." 

Nala could not contain his grief anymore and began to cry. Kesini went 
back to Damayanti, and told her everything, also about the outburst of 
Sorrow. 


CANTO 75 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


oo says, 'Damayanti heard everything and sorrow overwhelmed 
her, too. She suspected the man beside the chariot was Nala. 

She said, "O Kesini, go again and study Bahuka; staying silent beside 
him, mark his conduct. Lovely one, whenever he does anything skilful, 
mark it well, how he does it. And, Kesini, whenever he asks for water or 
fire, be in no hurry to give it to him. Study him carefully and come and tell 
me how he is and what he does, all that is human and also whatever is 
superhuman. Everything." 

Kesini went to Bahuka and having observed him, that master of horses, 
with great care, she returned to Damayanti. She told Damayanti all that had 
happened, everything both human and superhuman that she had seen in 
Bahuka. 

Kesini said, "Damayanti, I have never seen or even heard of a person of 
such control over the elements. Whenever he comes to a low passage, he 
never stoops down, but seeing him, the passage itself grows in height so 
that he may pass through it easily. At his approach, impassable narrow 
openings open wide. 

King Bhima sent diverse kinds of meals, of various meats, for 
Rituparna's food. Many vessels have been set down there for washing the 
meat. As Bahuka looked at them, the vessels were full of water. Having; 
washed the meat, he set himself to cook. He took up a handful of grass and 
held it in the sun, and fire blazed up all on a sudden. 

I saw this marvel and came here amazed. Further, I witnessed other great 
wonders in him. Most beautiful one, he put his hand into the fire and was 
not burnt. And at his will, falling water flows in a stream. 

Another still greater wonder I saw. He took some flowers and kneaded 
them slowly with his hands; they were not crushed but became brighter and 
more fragrant. 

All these I saw and hurried back to you." 

Damayanti heard all this and knew this was Nala and felt she already 
had him back. Suspecting that Bahuka was her husband, tears in her eyes, 


she said to Kesini softly, "My beautiful one, go out again and, without 
Bahuka knowing, fetch some meat that he has cooked." 

Always eager to please Damayanti, Kesini went to where Bahuka was, 
and without him noticing, took some hot meat which he had prepared and 
took it back to Damayanti, who immediately tasted it. Having eaten meat 
cooked by Nala before, she felt even surer that Bahuka was her husband, 
and wept. 

O Bhaarata, overwhelmed by grief, she then washed her face and sent 
her two children with Kesini, to Bahuka. Recognising Indrasena and her 
brother, he ran to them, embraced the children and took them onto his lap 
even as if they were children of the Devas. Shaken by deep sorrow, he wept 
aloud. 

Naishadha then suddenly put them down and said to Kesini, "Fair 
maiden, these twins are so like my own children that seeing them suddenly 
made me cry. If you come often to me like this, people may think evil 
thoughts, for we are guests from another land. Therefore, blessed one, go at 
your ease." 


CANTO 76 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


| 5 eee says, ‘Seeing the agitation of the virtuous and wise Nala, 
Kesini went back to Damayanti and told her everything. 

Sorrowing, eager to see Nala, Damayanti sent Kesini now to her mother, 
with this message: "I suspect that Bahuka is Nala and I have tested him in 
various ways. The only doubt which remains with me is his appearance, and 
I mean to examine him myself. Mother, either let him into the palace, or 
give me leave to go to him. Arrange this either with the knowledge of my 
father or without." 

Her mother told Bhima of Damayanti's intention and he gave his 
consent. Bharatarishabha, with both her parents' consent, Damayanti had 
Nala fetched to her apartments. When he saw her, suddenly before him, 
Nala was overwhelmed and he sobbed and tears streamed down his face. 
Damayanti, best among women, saw him like that and she was also 
griefstricken. 

O King, wearing a strip of red cloth and her hair matted in jata, covered 
with dust and dirt, Damayanti said, "O Bahuka, have you ever seen a man 
that knows dharma abandoning his sleeping wife in the heart of a jungle? 
Who but the virtuous Nala could desert his exhausted wife in the vana? 

Of what offence was I guilty in his eyes, that my lord since my early 
youth should leave me like that and go away while I slept? Why did he 
whom I chose over the Devas abandon his devoted and always loving wife, 
and the mother of his children besides? 

Before the sacred fire, and in presence of the gods, he took my hand, 
vowing, 'J will be yours.' Oh, Parantapa, what happeed to that vow when he 
left me?’ 

As she spoke, tears flowed down her face. Nala also shed tears, black as 
of those of the gazelle with extremities of red. 

He said, "Soft, gentle one, neither losing the kingdom nor abandoning 
you was my doing, but both were because of Kali. Best of chaste women, 
you cursed Kali in the forest and he possessed me, and began dwelling in 
my body. Burning with your curse, he lived in me like fire within fire. 


Through vratas and tapasya, blessed one, I have vanquished that wretch 
so that our grief might end. The sinful spirit has left me and that is how I 
have come here. I have come here only for you and nothing else. 

But, gentle one, will any other woman forsake her loving, devoted 
husband and seek a second lord as you have? At the command of the king, 
messengers are ranging this earth, crying, 'Bhima's daughter will choose a 
second husband worthy of her." 

Immediately on hearing this, the son of Bhangasura has arrived here." 

When she heard Nala lament thus, Damayanti, frightened and trembling, 
said with folded hands, "It does not become you, blessed one, to suspect 
any fault in me. King of the Nishadhas, I ignored the Devas themselves and 
chose you as my husband. It was to bring you here that the Brahmanas went 
forth in all directions, to every horizon, singing my words, as ballads. 

Rajan, at last a learned Brahmana called Parnada found you in Kosala, in 
the palace of Rituparna. When you answered the message he carried, O 
Naishadha, I devised this plan to get you back. 

Lord of the earth, there is no one in the world who can cover a hundred 
yojanas in a day with horses. O King, touching your feet, I can swear that I 
have never sinned, not even in thought. 

May the all-witnessing Air that courses through this world take my life, 
if I have sinned. May the Sun that courses through the sky take my life, if I 
have sinned. May the Moon, that dwells within every creature as a witness, 
take my life, if I have sinned. 

May these three Gods who sustain the three worlds in their entirety, 
declare that I speak the truth, or let them forsake me today." 

The Wind-god said from the sky, "O Nala, I tell you truly, she has done 
no wrong. O King, Damayanti has protected your family honour, she has 
enhanced it. Of this we are the witnesses, as we have been her protectors for 
these three years. It is for your sake alone that she devised this unrivalled 
scheme, for, other than you, none on earth can travel a hundred yojanas in a 
single day. 

O Naishadha, you have found Bhima's daughter, and she has found you. 
You have no cause to be suspicious but be united with your wife." 

When the Wind-god had spoken, flowers fell from the sky and drums of 
heaven sounded and auspicious breezes blew. Seeing those wonders, Nala 
Parantapa cast away all his doubts about Damayanti. He remembered the 
serpent king, put on the pure garment and regained his native form. 


Seeing him back to himself, Bhima's daughter of faultless limbs 
embraced him and wept. Nala also clasped her, his devoted wife, and his 
children, and knew great joy. Burying her face in his chest, the lovely doe- 
eyed Damayanti began to sigh heavily, remembering her griefs. 
Overwhelmed, that tiger among men stood for some time, clasping the dust- 
covered Damayanti of sweet smiles. 

Rajan, the queen-mother joyfully told Bhima everything that had passed 
between Nala and Damayanti. That mighty monarch said, "Let Nala pass 
this day in peace. I will see him tomorrow, after his bath and prayers, with 
Damayanti by his side." 

Pleasantly the couple passed that night, also telling each other all about 
what had chanced with them in the forest. So, their hearts full of joy, Nala 
and the princess of Vidarbha passed their days in the palace of King Bhima, 
intent upon making each other happy. 

It was four years after losing his kingdom that Nala was reunited with 
his wife and, all his desires gratified, once more experienced the highest 
bliss. Damayanti rejoiced at having recovered her lord even as fields of 
tender plants on receiving a shower of fine rain. Having Nala back, Bhima's 
daughter blazed forth in beauty, her weariness gone, her anxieties dispelled 
and welling over with joy, even like a night that is lit by the bright disc of 
the full moon!'" 


CANTO 77 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


cc rihadaswa says, 'Having passed that night, Nala, wearing royal 
ba and with a radiant Damayanti by his side, presented 

himself before the king. Nala saluted his father-in-law with becoming 

humility; after him, the fair Damayanti paid her respects to her father. 

With untold joy, the noble Bhima received him as a son, and honoured 
him duly with his devoted wife, and comforted them. Accepting the homage 
paid to him, Nala in return offered Bhima his services, as became him. 

When the people saw Nala, they were overjoyed; an uproar of delight 
arose in the city. The citizens decorated the city with flags and standards 
and garlands of flowers; the streets were watered and decked in garlands. 
The people piled flowers at their gates, and all the shrines and temples were 
adorned with flowers. 

Rituparna heard that Bahuka was united with Damayanti, and he was 
glad. He called Nala and begged his forgiveness. The intelligent Nala also 
asked Rituparna's forgiveness, for diverse reasons. After being honoured by 
Nala, Rituparna said to the Naishada, "Through good fortune you have been 
re-united with your own wife and you have found happiness. O Naishadha, 
while you lived in my house I hope I did not wrong you in any way, O lord 
of the earth! If I did knowingly do you any wrong, forgive me!" 

Nala replied, "O King, you have never done me the slightest injury, and 
even if you did, you did not rouse my anger because you deserve to be 
forgiven. You were my friend and also, ruler of men, you are related to me. 
Now on, I will find greater delight in you because I lived so happily in your 
house, all my desires satisfied, indeed, more happily than in my own home. 

This Aswa shastra, knowledge of horses, is something I have. If you 
wish, I will give it to you." 

Saying this, Naishadha gave Rituparna that secret science and the latter 
took it with the ordained rites. Bhangasura's son thus received the mysteries 
of horses and taught Nala those of dice play; then, taking another charioteer, 
he returned to his own city. 

Rajan, after Rituparna had gone, Nala did not stay long in the city of 
Kundina.' 


CANTO 78 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


bo says, 'Kaunteya, Nala lived in Bhima's city for a month, 
hen, with Bhima's leave, he set out from Kundina taking just a few 
men with him. With a single white chariot, sixteen elephants, fifty horses, 
and six hundred footsoldiers, that illustrious king swiftly entered the 
Nishadha kingdom, his anger swollen and making the earth tremble. 

Virasena's mighty son went to his brother Pushkara and said to him, "Let 
us play again, for I have earned vast wealth. Let Damayanti and everything 
else that I own be my stake, Pushkara, and let the kingdom be yours. 

Let the play begin; I am determined. Let us stake everthing that we own 
along with our lives. Having won another's wealth or kingdom, it is high 
dharma to wager it again when the owner demands. 

If you do not care to play with dice, let us contend with weapons instead. 
O King, let one of us, either you or I, find peace through single combat. The 
Rishis have all said that a lost ancestral kingdom must be recovered under 
all circumstances and by any means. 

Pushkara, choose one of the two — gambling with dice or bending the 
bow in battle!" 

The arrogant Pushkara answered laughingly, "Naishadha, it is good 
fortune that you have earned wealth enough to gamble, good fortune also 
that Damayanti's ill-luck has at last come to an end. O King, it is good 
fortune that you are still alive with your wife, Mahabaho. 

IT will win all your newfound wealth, and your Damayanti will wait upon 
me as an Apsara does upon Indra in heaven. O Naishadha, I think of you 
every day and have been waiting for you, for I find no pleasure in gambling 
with anyone not related to me by blood. 

Today, I will win the exquisite Damayanti of faultless features and 
consider myself fortunate indeed, for she has always dwelt in my heart!" 

Nala's eyes turned red with anger and he wanted to cut off Pushkara's 
head. However, instead, he said with a smile, "Let us play. You have 
vanquished me and you can say what you like. But come, let us play." 

The game began between Pushkara and Nala, and in a single throw Nala 
won back everything that he had lost, along with the life of his brother, 


which had also been wagered. 

Smiling, Nala said to Pushkara, "This whole kingdom is now mine, and, 
worst of men, you cannot even dare look at the princess of Vidarbha now. 
Fool, you and all your family shall now be her slaves. 

But, though you did not know it, whatever you did was never your own 
doing, but Kali did it all. So, I shall not impute another's crime to you. Live 
happily, as you choose, I spare your life. 

I also grant you your share in the kingdom and its wealth. Kshatriya, 
have no doubt that my affection for you is as before, undiminished, as is my 
brotherly love. You are my brother, Pushkara, live in peace and joy for a 
hundred years!" 

Nala embraced Pushkara repeatedly and gave him leave to return to his 
own city. And Pushkara saluted his brother of dharma and said to him with 
folded hands, "O King who grant me both life and refuge, let your fame be 
immortal and may you live happily for ten thousand years!" 

Entertained by the king, Pushkara lived there for a month and then went 
home to his own city, taking his kindred with him, as well as many obedient 
servants and a large force of soldiers; his heart was full of joy and that bull 
among men blazed forth in splendour like a second Surya. 

Thus establishing Pushkara, giving him wealth and freeing him from his 
debt, Nala entered his own magnficent palace. The king of the Nishadhas 
now comforted his people; citizens and people from the countryside were 
awash with joy. Led by the officers of state, the people said with folded 
hands, "O King, throughout the city and the rest of the country your people 
rejoice today that we have our sovereign back, even like the Devas their 
Lord of a hundred yagnas!'" 


CANTO 79 
NALOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


|G eae says, 'Fear of every kind left the city; it welled with joy. Nala 
ook a large force with him and fetched Damayanti from her father's 
home. Bhima of awesome prowess, slayer of enemies, of immeasurable 
soul, sent his daughter back after honouring her duly. 

When the princess of Vidarbha arrived, with her son and daughter, King 
Nala began to pass his days in delight even like the king of the Devas in the 
gardens of Nandana. Having regained his kingdom and shining forth among 
the kings of Jambu Dwipa, Nala ruled again. Numerous sacrifices he 
performed, with abundant gifts to Brahmanas. 

Maharajan, Yudhishtira, you also will soon blaze forth in glory with your 
brothers and your kin. For, O best of men, it was through dice that great 
Nala and his wife fell into distress. Lord of the earth, Nala suffered direly, 
and all alone, before he recovered his prosperity, while you, Pandava, your 
heart set on dharma, sport in joy in this great forest, not alone but with your 
brothers and Krishnaa. 

You keep the company of blessed Brahmanas who know the Vedas and 
their angas — you have small cause for sorrow. Besides, this itihasa of the 
Naga Karkotaka, of Damayanti, of Nala and of that Rajarishi Rituparna 
destroys evil. This tale of unfading glory banishes the influence of Kali, and 
it comforts those like you who listen to it. 

Reflect upon the uncertainty of all human endeavour; it does not become 
you to exult or grieve at prosperity or adversity. Having listened to this tale, 
be comforted, O King, and do not yield to sorrow. A great king like you 
should not succumb to calamity. 

Men of self-possession reflect upon the caprice of destiny and the futility 
of labour, and they never allow themselves to be dejected. Adversity will 
never lay its hand upon those who repeat the noble history of Nala, as well 
as those who listen to it. 

He that listens to this old and excellent itihasa has his purposes crowned 
with success and, without doubt, finds fame, besides sons, grandsons, a high 
position among men, wealth and animals, health and happiness. 


Also, Rajan, let me dispel forever the fear you keep in your heart that 
someone might summon you to another game of dice. Invincible 
Yudhishtira, I know the science of dice-play in its entirety. I am pleased 
with you, Kaunteya, take the arcane science from me.'" 

Vaisampayana continued, "Gladly, then, Yudhishtira says to Brihadaswa, 
Illustrious one, I want to learn the science of dice play from you.' 

The Rishi imparts that art to the high-souled son of Pandu, and having 
done so, the great Sage leaves for the sacred waters of Hayasirsha for his 
ablutions. 

After Brihadaswa has gone, some Brahmanas and asetics, who come to 
him from various parts, from holy tirthas of pilgrimage, from mountains 
and forests, tell Yudhishtira Dridavrata that Arjuna of lofty intelligence, 
Savyasachin, still sits in the most austere tapasya, living only upon air. 

Yudhishtira hears that Arjuna performs penance so fierce that none else 
has done before him. His mind controlled, his vows unfaltering, sworn to 
perfect mowna, Pritha's son Dhananjaya, through his tapasya, blazes forth 
like Dharma Deva himself in his embodied form. 

O King, the Pandava hears that his precious brother sits in such a terrible 
penance in the great jungle, and grieves for him. His heart burning with 
sorrow, the eldest son of Pandu seeks consolation in that deep vana from the 
Brahmanas there, men of diverse and profound knowledge." 


CANTO 80 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA 


d aaeee said, "Holy one, after my great-grandfather Partha left the 
forest of Kamyaka, what did the sons of Pandu do? It seems to me that 
mighty ambidextrous bowman, vanquisher of armies, was their refuge, as 
Vishnu of the Devas. How did my heroic grandsires pass their time in the 
forest, without the company of that hero who was like Indra himself in 
prowess, and who never turned his back in battle?" 

Vaisampayana said, "After Arjuna of unbaffled prowess leaves 
Kamyaka, the sons of Pandu, child, are filled with sorrow. The cheerless 
Pandavas are like pearls unstrung from their string, or birds shorn of their 
wings. Without that Kshatriya of the white horses, that forest is like the 
Chaitraratha vana without Kubera. 

O Janamejaya, those Purushavyaghras continue to live in that forest, in 
sorrow. Those mighty Kshatriyas kill many kinds of sacrificial animals for 
their Brahmanas, with arrows purified with mantras. Daily they hunt those 
wild beasts and offer them to the Brahmanas after sanctifying them. 

O King, those bulls among men continue to live in that vana, their hearts 
empty of all cheer after Dhananjaya's departure. Panchali, in particular, 
misses her third husband. 

She says to the anxious Yudhishtira, "Without Arjuna, who with two 
arms rivals the thousand-armed Arjuna of old, this forest has not beauty in 
my eyes. Without him, whenever I look, this earth seems forlorn. Even this 
vana with its blossoming trees and so full of marvels, holds no delight as it 
did before, without Arjuna. 

Without him who is like a mass of blue clouds, who has the prowess of 
an infuriated elephant, and whose eyes are like the leaves of the lotus, ah, 
this Kamyaka does not seem beautiful in the least. I think of Savyasachin, 
the twang of whose bow is like thunder, and all that I feel is sorrow, O 
King!' 

Hearing her, Bhimasena says, 'Blessed one of the slender waist, your 
words are like nectar to me. Without him, whose mighty arms adorned with 
golden bracelets, like a pair of five-headed snakes, are long and powerful as 
iron maces, round and marked by the abrasions of bowstrings, whose hands 


wield a bow and a sword and other weapons, without that tiger among men 
the sky itself seems to be without the sun. 

Without that mighty-armed one, relying on whom the Panchalas and the 
Kauravas fear not the hosts of the Devas themselves, without that lustrous 
Kshatriya relying on whose arms we consider all our enemies already dead 
and the earth conquered, without our Phalguna I find no moment's peace in 
this Kamyaka vana. 

Wherever I turn my gaze, the ten directions also seem to be empty!’ 

When Bhima finishes, Nakula, his voice choking with tears, says, 'What 
pleasure can we find here without him of whose extraordinary deeds on the 
field of battle even the gods speak, that greatest of warriors? Without him, 
who went north and vanquished hundreds of great Gandharva chieftains, 
and who having taken numberless magnificent horses of the Tittiri and 
Kalmasha breeds, all endowed with the speed of the wind, and gifted them 
in love to his brother, the king, during the Rajasuya Yagna; without that 
beloved and luminous warrior, that terrible bowman born after Bhima, 
without that Kshatriya equal to a god, I have no wish to remain any longer 
in this Kamyaka aranya.' 

After Nakula's lamentations, Sahadeva says, 'He vanquished mighty 
warriors in battle, won wealth and virgins and brought them unto the king 
on the occasion of the great Rajasuya. That immeasurably splendid 
Kshatriya singe-handedly vanquished all the Yadavas assembled together, 
and then took Subhadra for himself with Krishna's consent. He invaded 
Drupada's kingdom and gave Acharya Drona his dakshina. Ah, seeing his 
bed of grass empty in this asrama, my heart is breaking. 

Bhaarata, Parantapa, I would prefer to leave this forest, for without 
Arjuna, there can be no trace of joy here.'" 


CANTO 81 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vows said, "Yudhishtira's dejection deepens on hearing what 
his brothers and Panchali say, all of them distraught over the absence 
of Arjuna. Just then he sees the Devarishi Narada, ablaze with Brahmic 
beauty, like a fire flaming up at being fed sacrificial libations. Seeing 
Narada come, Raja Yudhishtira and his brothers stand up and duly worship 
the illustrious one. Himself blessed with great tejas, the handsome king of 
the Kurus shines forth like the God of a hundred sacrifices surrounded by 
the Devas. In obedience to the dictates of dharma, Yagnaseni follows her 
lords, the sons of Pritha, like Savitri follows the Vedas, or the rays of the 
Sun the peak of Meru. 

Accepting their worship, Narada comforts Dharma's son. The Rishi says 
to Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, 'Tell me, O foremost of virtuous men, what it is 
you want and what I can do for you.' 

Yudhishtira and his borthers bow reverently to Narada, whom the Devas 
worship, and Dharma's son, with folded hands, says, 'Lord, most blessed 
one, whom all the worlds worship, when you are pleased with me, I regard 
all my wishes as already fulfilled. If, O Sinless, my brothers and I deserve 
your favour, I beg you, answer the question, the doubt, even, which is in my 
mind, O best of Munis. Tell me in detail what punya belongs to the man 
who travels the earth to visit the sacred waters and the shrines that are upon 
her.’ 

Narada says, 'O King, listen carefully to what the intelligent Bhishma 
heard from Pulastya. Once, that best of men, Bhishma, while keeping the 
Pitriya vrata, lived in the company of Munis in the auspicious and sacred 
tapovana near the source of the Ganga, where Devarishis, Gandharvas and 
the Devas themselves come. 

Living there, the splendid Bhishma gratified the Pitrs, the Devas and the 
Rishis with oblations, according to the rites inculcated in the scriptures. One 
day, while he sat doing silent japa, he saw Pulastya, best of Rishis, 
altogether marvellous in appearance. Seeing that austere Sage, blazing with 
beauty, Bhishma was filled with great delight and wonder. O Bhaarata, 
Bhishma worshipped the blessed Rishi according to the rites of the Veda. 


Purifying himself and with rapt attention, he approached that best of 
Brahmarishis, with the Arghya on his head. And uttering his name aloud, he 
said, "O you of excellent vows, be blessed! I am Bhishma, your slave. At 
the sight of you, I am set free from all my sins." 

Saying this, Bhishma stood in silence and with joined hands. Seeing 
Bhishma, that greatest of the Kurus, reduced and emaciated by the 
observance of vows and the study of the Vedas, the Muni was filled with 


joy." 


CANTO 82 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


© Ppulastya said, "O you of excellent vows, I am very pleased with your 

ya your self-control, and your truth, blessed one, knower of 
dharma. Sinless one, it is the punya which you have acquired through your 
devotions to your ancestors that has pleased me and, O child, given you 
sight of my person. 

Bhishma, my sight penetrates all things. Tell me what I can do for you. 
Anagha, Kurusthama, I will give you whatever you ask for." 

Bhishma said, "O most blessed one, when you, whom the three worlds 
worship are pleased with me and I have seen you with my eyes, I think of 
myself as being already crowned with success. Yet, if I have deserved your 
favour, most virtuous and holy one, allow me to tell you some religious 
doubts I have in regard to the tirthas, and dispel them for me. 

Tell me in detail about the tirthas. O you who are like a Deva, what is the 
punya of a man who goes round the earth visiting the sacred tirthas and 
shrines? O answer me this with certainty." 

Pulastya said, "O son, listen with attention, I will tell you about the 
punya which is attached to the tirthas and which is the refuge of the Rishis. 
He whose hands and feet and mind and knowledge and asceticism and 
deeds are under wholesome control, enjoys the fruit of the tirthas. He who 
has ceased to accept gifts, he that is contented, he that is free from pride 
enjoys the fruits of the tirthas. He that is without sin, he that acts without 
desire, he that eats light, he that has his senses under control, he that is free 
from every sin, enjoys the fruits of tirthas. 

O King, he that is free from anger, he who cleaves to truth, he that is 
firm in his vows, he that regards all creatures as his own self, enjoys the 
fruit of the tirthas. In the Vedas, the Rishis have declared in due order the 
sacrifices and also their fruits, here and hereafter truly. O lord of the earth, 
those yagnas cannot be accomplished by him that is poor, for those 
sacrifices require diverse materials and offerings in large measures. These, 
therefore, can be performed by kings or sometimes by other men of 
prosperity and wealth. 


However, O lord of men, best of warriors, let me now declare to you that 
rite which men without wealth, without allies, singly, without wife and 
children, and destitute of means, can accomplish, whose punya is equal to 
the sacred fruit of sacrifices. O Bharatottama, visiting the sacred tirthas, 
which constitute one of the high mysteries of the Rishis, is superior even to 
sacrifices. 

He is a poor man who goes to a tirtha without fasting for three nights, 
without giving gold as alms, without distributing kine. Why, not by the 
performance of the Agnishtoma and other sacrifices distinguished by large 
gifts, does a man acquire the punya which visiting a tirtha confers. 

In the world of men, there is that tirtha of the God of gods, celebrated 
throughout the three worlds by the name Pushkara. One that journeys there 
becomes equal to Brahma. O noble son of the Kurus, during the three 
sandhyas — dawn, noon and dusk — there is the presence of a hundred 
thousand million of tirthas in Pushkara. The Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, 
the Sadhyas, the Maruts, the Gandharvas, and the Apsaras are always 
present in Pushkara. It was there, O King, that the Devas, the Daityas and 
Brahmarishis performed tapasya and gained vast punya, and attained 
godhood. 

Men of self-control are purified of their sins by merely thinking of 
Pushkara, and find high regard in heaven. Rajan, the illustrious Pitamaha, 
who has the Lotus for his throne, once dwelt with great joy in this tirtha. 
Having of old acquired great punya, it was in Pushkara that the Devas and 
the Rishis found moksha. 

The wise say that one who is devoted to the worship of the Devas and 
the Pitrs, and bathes in this tirtha, gains punya which is equal to ten times 
that of the Aswamedha Yagna. Having gone to the forest of Pushkara, he 
that feeds even one Brahmana becomes happy here and hereafter, O 
Bhishma, for that single act. He who lives on vegetables, roots and fruits, 
may, with pious regard and without disrespect, give even such fare to a 
Brahmana, and he will gain the punya of a horse-sacrifice. 

Illustrious Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas or Sudras that bathe in 
Pushkara are set free from rebirth. In particular, that man who visits 
Pushkara on the full moon of the month of Kartika acquires everlasting 
regions in Brahmaloka. O Bhaarata, he who remembers Pushkara with 
folded hands, morning and evening, as good as bathes in every tirtha. 


Man or woman, one's every sin since being born is destroyed as soon as 
one bathes in Pushkara. As Madhusudana, the slayer of Madhu, is the first 
among all the gods, so is Pushkara, the foremost of all tirthas. He who lives 
a pure life, regulated by vratas, for twelve years in Pushkara gains the merit 
of all the sacrifices, and goes to the abode of Brahma. The punya of one 
who performs the Agnihotra for full one hundred years is equal to that of 
him who spends the single month of Kartika in Pushkara. 

There are three white hillocks and three springs known from the 
remotest times which, we do not know why, go by the name of Pushkara. It 
is difficult to go to Pushkara; it is difficult to do tapasya at Pushkara; it is 
difficult to give alms in Pushkara; and it is difficult to live in Pushkara. 

Having stayed twelve nights at Pushkara, with regulated diet, and vows, 
and having walked in pradakshina around the place, one should then go to 
Jambumarga. He that travels to Jambumarga, where the Devas, the Rishis 
and the Pitrs go, acquires the punya of the Aswamedha and the fruition of 
all his wishes. The man who remains there for five nights has his soul 
cleansed from all sins. He never sinks into hell, but acquires lofty success. 

Leaving Jambumarga, one should journey to Tandulikasrama. He who 
visits this tirtha never devolves into Naraka but rises into Brahmaloka. He 
that goes to the lake of Agastya and, fasting for three nights, worships the 
Pitrs and the Devas, acquires the merits of the Agnishtoma. He who subsists 
there on fruit or plants gains the condition known as Kaumara, lasting 
youth. 

Next, the pilgrim should take himself to the beautiful asrama of Kanva, 
which is worshipped by the whole world. That sacred forest has existed, 
Bharatarishabha, from the most ancient times. As soon as a man enters it, 
he is freed from all his sins. He who controls what he eats and observes 
vratas, while worshipping the ancestors and god there, obtains the fruit of a 
sacrifice which can bestow all desires. 

Having circumambulated this asrama, the pilgrim must then go to the 
place where Yayati fell from heaven. He who comes to this place gains the 
merit of a horse-sacrifice. 

Next, one must journey to Mahakala, with senses; bathing there in the 
tirtha called Koti, one gains the punya of another Aswamedha. Next, a 
virtuous man should go to the tirtha of Sthanu, the husband of Uma, the 
sacred place known through the three worlds as Bhadravata. The man who 
visits Bhadravata has a vision of Isana and gains the punya of making a gift 


of a thousand holy cows. Through the grace of Mahadeva, he acquires the 
state of Ganapatya, blessed with peace, prosperity and great auspiciousness. 

He that then comes to the Narmada, the river celebrated throughout the 
three worlds, and offers oblations of water to the manes and the gods, 
acquires the punya of an Aswamedha. 

He who keeps bramacharya and goes into the Southern Ocean, his senses 
subdued, gains the fruit of the Agnishtoma yagna and ascends into Swarga. 

Food and senses controlled, he who journeys to Charmanwati, also gains 
the merit of the Agnishtoma, at the command of Rantideva. One must next 
go, O virtuous lord of Kshtariyas, to Arbuda, the son of Himavat, where 
there was a hole right through the earth in days of yore. Here there is the 
asrama of Vasistha, renowned through the three worlds. Spending one night 
here, one gains the punya of giving a gift of a thousand cows. 

Kshatriyavyaghra, the brahmacharin who bathes in the tirtha called 
Pinga obtains the merit of having made a gift of a thousand Kapila cows. 
One must go next, O King, to that excellent tirtha called Prabhasa. There 
Agni Hutasana is always present in his own person. He, the friend of 
Pavana, O hero, is the mouth of all the gods. The man who, with his souls 
subdued and sanctified, bathes at that tirtha finds punya greater than even 
that of the Agnishtoma or Atiratra sacrifices. 

Journeying next to the place where the Saraswati mingles with the sea, 
one obtains the fruit of the gift of a thousand kine and heaven also besides, 
O Bharatarishabha, blazing forth for all time like Agni himself. His mind 
and heart subdued, he who bathes in the tirtha of the King of waters, and 
offers oblations of water to the manes and the gods, remaining there for 
three nights, blazes forth like the Moon, and also gets the punya of the 
Aswamedha. 

The pilgrim must continue, Bharatasreshta, to the tirtha known as 
Varadana, where Durvasa gave Vishnu a boon. A man by bathing in 
Varadana obtains the fruit of a thousand kine. Next, he should procceds to 
Dwaravati, where by bathing in Pindaraka he can gain an abundant gift of 
gold. Blessed one, wonderful to tell, to this day in that tirtha, coins with the 
mark of the lotus, and lotuses also with the mark of the trident, are seen, O 
Kshatriyavijaya! Bull among men, the presence of Mahadeva is there. 

Then, O Bhaarata, arriving at the place where the Sindhu flows into the 
sea, one should with subdued soul, bathe in that tirtha of Varuna. Bathing 
there and giving oblations of water to the Pitrs, the Rishis, and the Devas 


one acquires the realm of Varuna, and blazes forth in effulgence. Men of 
wisdom say that by worshipping the God known as Shankukarneswara a 
man acquires ten times the merit of the horse-sacrifice. 

Bharatarishabha, having walked round that tirtha, one should go on to 
Drimi, another tirtha celebrated throughout the three worlds. This tirtha 
cleanses from every sin, and it is here that the gods, including Brahma, 
worship Maheswara. Having bathed there and worshipped Rudra, 
surrounded by the other gods, one is freed from all sins since birth. It was 
there, O best of men, that Drimi was adored by the Devas. Bathing there, 
Purushottama, one surely gains the fruit of the horse-sacrifice, for O you of 
great intelligence, after killing the Daityas and Danavas, Vishnu the creator 
of the universe went there to purify himself. 

Virtuous, the pilgrim goes next to Vasudhara adored by all. The moment 
one arrives at that tirtha, one acquires the fruit of the horse-sacrifice. 
Kurusthama, by bathing there with subdued soul and rapt attention, and 
giving oblations of water to the Devas and Pitrs, one ascends into 
Vishnuloka and is adored there. 

In that tirtha, O Bharatarishabha, there is a lake of the Vasus. By bathing 
there and drinking its water, a man becomes honoured by the Vasus. 

There is a famed tirtha of the name Sindhuttama, which destroys every 
sin. By bathing there, one gains gold in plenitude. By going in a state of 
purity to Bhadratunga, one gains Brahmaloka and a condition of great 
blessedness. 

Then there is the tirtha of the Kumarika of Indra, much resorted to by the 
Siddhas. O best of men, bathing there, a pilgrim obtains Indraloka. In 
Kumarika there is another tirtha called Renuka, which also the Siddhas go 
to. A Brahmana who bathes there becomes as lustrous as the Moon. 

Journeying next, senses subdued and food regulated, to the tirtha called 
the Panchananda, one obtains the fruit of the five sacrifices that have been 
mentioned one after another in the scriptures. Then one should go to the 
excellent realm of Bhima. Best of the Bhaaratas, bathing in the tirtha there, 
which is called Yoni, a man, in his next birth, becomes the son of a goddess, 
wearing earrings adorned with pearls, and also gains the punya of making a 
gift of a hundred thousand cows. 

Going next to Srikunda, celebrated through the three worlds, and 
worshipping the Pitamaha, one obtains the fruit of the gift of a thousand 
kine. After this, one should go to the excellent tirtha called Vimala, where 


to this day fish of golden and silver hues can be seen. Bathing there, one 
quickly acquires the region of Vasava, where one's soul being cleansed of 
every sin, one attains a high state of blessedness. 

O Bhaarata, going next to Vitasta and offering oblations of water to the 
manes and the gods, a man is purified of all his sins, gains the fruit of the 
Vajapeya sacrifice and a high state of blessedness. That sin-destroying tirtha 
known as Vitasta is in the country of the Kasmiras and is the abode of the 
Naga Takshaka. 

One should next travel to Badava famed throughout the three worlds. 
Bathing there with due rites in the evening, one should offer rice boiled in 
butter and milk, according to the best of his might, to the deity of seven 
flames. Men of wisdom say that a gift made here in honour of the Pitrs, 
becomes inexhaustible. 

The Rishis, the Pitrs, the Devas, the Gandharvas, several tribes of 
Apsaras, the Guhyakas, the Kinnaras, the Yakshas, the Siddhas, the 
Vidhyadharas, the Rakshasas, Daityas, Rudras, and Brahma himself, with 
their senses subdued, performed tapasya for a thousand years at Badava in 
order to move Vishnu to grace. 

They cooked rice in milk and butter and gratified Kesava with oblations, 
each offered with seven Riks at which, the gratified Kesava conferred on 
them the eight-fold attributes called Aiswarya and other objects that they 
desired. Having bestowed these, that God disappeared from their sight like 
lightning in the clouds. And it is for this, O Bhaarata, that that tirtha became 
known as Saptacharu, and if one offers Charu there to the seven flamed god, 
one obtains punya superior to that of the gift of a hundred thousand cows, to 
that of a hundred Rajasuya sacrifices, as also of a hundred Aswamedhas. 

Leaving Badava, the pilgrim travels to Raudrapada, and seeing 
Mahadeva there, obtains the merit of the Aswamedha. Then, soul subdued, 
observing brahmacharya, he goes to Manimata, and staying there for one 
night, acquires the merit of the Agnishtoma. 

One should then go to Devika celebrated throughout the world. It was 
there, O Bharatarishabha, that, as I have heard, the Brahmanas first sprang 
into existence. This is also the realm of the Trisulin, a place famed 
everywhere. Having bathed in Devika and worshipped Maheswara by 
offering him, to the best of one's means, rice boiled in milk and butter, a 
man obtains the merit of a sacrifice that can fulfil every desire. 


There also is another tirtha of Rudra's, Kamakhya, which is much 
resorted to by the gods. Bathing there, a man swiftly finds success. By 
touching the waters of Yajana, Brahmavaluka, and Pushpamba, one 
becomes free from sorrow in the afterlife. The learned have said that the 
sacred tirtha of Devika, resort of the Devas and the Rishis, is five Yojanas in 
length and half a Yojana in breadth. 

The pilgrim next, in due order, journeys to Dirghasatra. There the gods 
with Brahma at their head, the Siddhas, and the greatest Rishis, with 
regulated vows and the chanting and acceptance of the initiatory pledge, 
perform the long-extending sacrifice. By going only to Dirghasatra, O 
Parantapa, one gains punya which is superior to that of the Rajasuya or the 
Aswamedha. 

Senses restrained, diet controlled, one should next go to Vinasana, where 
the Saraswati disappearing on the breast of Meru, reappears at Chamasa, 
Shivodbheda and Nagodbheda. Bathing in Chamasodbheda, one gets the 
punya of the Agnishtoma sacrifice. Bathing in Shivodbheda, one acquires 
the merit of the gift of a thousand kine. And bathing in Nagodbheda, one 
gains the realm of the Nagas. 

One should go on to the well-nigh inaccessible tirtha of Shasayana, 
where the cranes, O Bhaarata, disappearing in the forms of sasas, reappear 
every year in the month of Kartika, and bathe in the Sarsawati. Bathing 
there, Naravyaghra, one shines forth like the Moon, and gains the merit of 
the gift of a thousand kine. 

Next the pilgrim must go to Kumarakoti, with subdued senses, and 
bathing there, worship the gods and the manes. By doing this, he gains the 
punya of the gift of ten thousand kine, and raises all his ancestors into 
higher realms. 

After this, virtuous one, proceed with subdued soul to Rudrakoti, where 
in olden days ten million Munis gathered. Filled with great joy at the 
prospect of beholding Mahadeva, the Rishis each cried, 'I will be the first to 
see the God!' And, in order to prevent disputes amongst those Rishis, the 
Lord of Yoga multiplied himself into ten million forms and appeared 
simultaneously before every Sage, so every one cried, 'I have seen Him 
first! 

Gratified with the deep devotion of those self-controlled Munis, 
Mahadeva granted them a boon, saying, 'From this day your dharma shall 


grow' O tiger among men, he that bathes, with a pure mind, in Rudrakoti 
obtains the merit of the horse-sacrifice and delivers his ancestors. 

One should next go to that most sacred and famed confluence where the 
Saraswati enters the sea. There, the Devas with Brahma at their head, and 
Rishis with a wealth of asceticism, repair to adore Kesava, on the fourteenth 
day of the lighted fortnight of the month of Chaitra. Bathing there, O tiger 
among men, one obtains the merit of giving away an abundance of gold; 
and his soul cleansed from every sin, he ascends into Brahmaloka. It is 
here, O Kshatriya, that the Rishis have performed numberless yagnas. A 
pilgrimage to this place confers the punya of giving away a thousand holy 
cows." 


CANTO 83 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


| Baraat said, "One should next travel to the adored Kurukshetra, the 
sight of which can free any creature at all from all sins. Why, a man 
who says 'I will live in Kurukshetra, constantly, is set free from his sins. 
The very dust of Kurukshetra, blown by the wind, leads a sinful man to a 
blessed course in life and the afterlife. 

They that dwell in Kurukshetra, which lies to the south of the Saraswati 
and to the north of the Drishadwati, are said to dwell in heaven. O greatest 
of Kshatriyas, one should remain there for a month. There, lord of earth, the 
gods with Brahma at their head, the Rishis, the Siddhas, the Charanas, the 
Gandharvas, the Apsaras, the Yakshas and the Nagas, come often, O 
Bhaarata, to the most holy Brahmakshetra. 

The sins of one who merely wishes fervently to visit Kurukshetra are all 
destroyed, and he finally goes into the world of Brahma. Kurunandana, by 
visiting Kurukshetra in a pious frame of mind, one obtains the fruit of the 
Rajasuya and Aswamedha Yagnas. 

Next, the tirthayatri salutes the Yaksha Mankanaka, Kubera's mighty 
dwarapalaka, and gains the punya of giving away a thousand holy cows. 

After this, one should repair to the excellent realm of Vishnu, where Hari 
is always present. Bathing there and bowing down to Hari, the Creator of 
the three worlds, one obtains the fruit of the Aswamedha and goes to the 
abode of Vishnu. One should next go to Pariplava, that tirtha celebrated 
across the three worlds, and bathing there, O Bhaarata, one finds punya that 
is greater than that of the Agnishtoma and the Atiratra sacrifices. 

Journeying next to the tirtha called Prithivi, one gets the fruit of a gift of 
a thousand kine. The pilgrim should next travel to Shalukini and bathing 
there in the Dasaswamedha one gains the punya the merit of ten horse- 
sacrifices. Going on to Sarpadevi, most excellent tirtha of the Nagas, one 
acquires the merit of the Agnishtoma Yagna and attains to the realm of the 
Nagas. 

After this, the pilgrim goes on to Tarantuka, the gate-keeper, and staying 
there for one night he gains the merit of giving away a thousand sacred 
cows. On he goes, with subdued senses and his food regulated, to 


Panchananda and bathing in the tirtha there, called Koti, one gains the fruit 
of the horse-sacrifice. 

Proceeding to the tirtha of the twin Aswins, he gets great personal 
beauty. Virtuous one, one should next go to the fine tirtha called Varaha, 
where Vishnu once stood in the form of a boar. Bathing there, O best of 
men, one gains the merit of the horse-sacrifice. 

One should next repair to the tirtha called Soma in Jayanti. Bathing there 
one acquires the merit of the Rajasuya sacrifice. By bathing in Ekahamsa, a 
man obtains the punya of giving away a thousand cows. A pilgrim who 
goes to Kritasaucha gains the lotus-eyed Lord Vishnu and perfect purity of 
soul. 

After this, he should go on to Munjavata, a place sacred to the 
illuminous Sthanu. Remaining there without eating for one night, he 
acquires the condition of Ganapatya. Then there is the celebrated tirtha 
Yakshini, bathing at which a man attains the fruition of all his desires. 
Bharatarishabha, that tirtha is regarded as the gateway of Kurukshetra. His 
mind absorbed in dhyana, the pilgrim should walk around it. Equal to the 
Pushkaras, it was created by the high-souled Rama, the son of Jamadagni. 
Bathing there and worshipping the ancestors and the gods, one gains the 
punya of the horse-sacrifice and becomes successful in everything. 

Next, the rapt pilgrim goes on the Ramahrada. There, as we have heard, 
the heroic Rama of resplendent energy exterminated the Kshatriyas with his 
might, dug five lakes and filled them, O tiger among men, with the blood of 
his victims. And having filled those lakes with Kshatriya blood, Rama 
offered oblations of blood to his sires and grandsires. 

Gratified, those Rishis then addressed Rama, 'O Rama, Rama, O you of 
great good fortune, we are pleased with you, O you of the Bhrigu race, for 
this your regard for the Pitrs, and for your prowess, O exalted one! Be 
blessed, and ask for the boons of your choice. What is it that you want, O 
you of great splendour?' 

Rama folded his hands to the manes in the sky, and said, 'If you are 
pleased with me and I deserve your favour, O Pitrs, let me have the joy of 
doing tapasya again. Let me also, through your power, be freed from the sin 
of wrath I have committed of exterminating the Kshatriya race. Also let 
these my lakes become tirthas celebrated the world over.' 

Gratified, joyful to hear him, the Pitrs answered him, 'Let your tapasya 
increase because of the regard for the Pitrs. You have exterminated the 


Kshatriyas in wrath. You are already free from that sin for they perished 
from their own crimes. Have no doubt, these lakes of yours shall become 
tirthas. And if anyone bathed in these lakes, offering tarpana to the manes, 
they will grant him his desire in this world, however difficult it might be, 
and also eternal bliss. 

Having granted him these boons, the Pitrs joyfully saluted Rama of the 
Bhrigus and vanished. It was thus that the lakes of the illustrious Rama 
became sacred. 

Keeping Brahmacharya and observing sacred vows, one should bathe in 
the lakes of Rama. Bathing there and worshipping Rama, one obtains the 
merit of a gift of gold in abundance. 

The pilgrim next takes himself, O Kurunandana, to Vamsamulaka, and 
by bathing there uplifts and exalts all his race. Going after this to the tirtha 
Kayasodhana, and bathing there, he purifies his body, and ascends to the 
realm of unrivalled grace. 

He next repairs to that tirtha, celebrated across the three worlds, called 
Lokodwara, where once Vishnu of great prowess created the worlds. 
Arriving at that tirtha, which is adored by the three worlds, and bathing 
there one earns many lofty worlds for oneself. 

Mind subdued, he goes next to the tirtha known as Sri; bathing there, 
worshipping the gods and manes, he acquires great felicity. Sworn to 
Brahmacharya, absorbed in dhyana, he should next take himself to Kapila 
tirtha. Bathing there and worshipping one's own ancestors and the Devas, a 
man earns the fruit of the gift of a thousand Kapila cows. 

Repairing next to the tirtha called Surya and bathing there, heart 
quietened and worshipping the Pitrs and the Devas, fasting all the while, he 
gains the punya of the Agnishtoma sacrifice and goes finally to the 
Suryaloka, realm of the Sun. 

The pilgrim travels next to Gobhavana and bathing there obtains the 
merit of the gift of a thousand kine. O son of the Kurus, he next journeys to 
the tirtha called Shankhini and bathing in the Devi-tirtha that is there, gains 
awesome prowess. 

O Kshatriya, he should go next then to the tirtha called Tarandaka 
situated in the Saraswati and belonging to the lustrous chief of the Yakshas 
who is one of the gate-keepers of Kubera. Bathing there, he gains the punya 
of the Agnishtoma Yagna. 


Virtuous Kuru, one should next go to the tirtha called Brahmavarta. 
Bathing in Brahmavarta, one ascends to the abode of Brahma. After this, he 
seeks the sacred tirtha Sutirtha. Here, the Pitrs are ever-present along with 
the Devas. One should bathe here and worship the manes and the gods. By 
so doing, one acquires the punya of the horse-sacrifice and goes into the 
realm of the Pitrs. This is why the Sutirtha in Ambumati is regarded as 
being so auspicious. 

And, Bharatottama, bathing in the Kasiswara tirtha, a man is set free 
from every disease and is adored in Brahmaloka. There, in that tirtha, is 
another called Matri; one who bathes in the Matri tirtha has many children 
and finds great fortune. 

The pilgrim next goes, in self-restraint, to the tirtha called Sitavana, 
whose punya has been observed to be rare and such as hardly any other 
owns. He who merely goes there becomes holy. O Bhaarata, by offering his 
hair in that tirtha, the pilgrim acquires great sanctity. In that tirtha, is 
another called Swavillomapaha, where, O tiger among men, learned 
Brahmanas go to obtain profound satisfaction by bathing in its waters. 
Offering their hair in this tirtha, too, good Brahmanas acquire holiness 
through pranayama and attain a lofty spiritual state. 

In that tirtha is also another called Dasaswamedhika, by bathing in 
which too an exalted spiritual condition can be attained. 

One should next proceed to the famed tirtha called Manusha where, 
once, a herd of black antelope wounded by a hunter's arrows, plunged into 
its waters, and they were transformed into human beings. Bathing in that 
tirtha, while observing continence and with one's mind focused in dhyana, a 
man is freed from all his sins and is worshipped in heaven. 

A krosa to the east of Manusha is the renowned river Apaga that the 
Siddhas resort to. The man who offers syamaka grain here, in honour of the 
gods and the manes acquires great religious merit; if one Brahmana is fed 
here, it is equal to feeding ten million Brahmanas. Having bathed in that 
tirtha and worshipped the Devas and the Pitrs, and staying there for one 
night, a man gains the merit of the Agnishtoma. 

Then, O Bhaarata, the pilgrim should go to that auspicious tirtha of 
Brahma, known as Brahmodumbara. Bathing in the tank of the seven Rishis 
which is there, O bull among men, with his diet and mind restrained, as also 
in the tirtha Kedara of the great-souled Kapila, and beholding Brahma who 


is there, the pilgrim's soul is purified of every sin and he goes to the abode 
of Brahma. 

Also, by burning his sins through performing tapasya at the almost 
inaccessible Kedara tirtha of Kapila, he acquires the siddhi of being able to 
vanish at will. 

The pilgrim continues his journey and goes to the renowned tirtha called 
Saraka, and seeing Mahadeva there on the fourteenth day of the dark 
fortnight, he gets everything he might wish for and also goes to heaven. O 
son of the Kuru race, in Saraka and Rudrakoti and in the well and the lakes 
that are there, thirty million tirthas are present. 

In that place is another tirtha called Ilaspada. After bathing there and 
worshipping the gods and the ancestors, one will never sink into hell but 
gain the merit of the Vajapeya Yagna. 

Repairing next to Kindana and Kinjapya, the pilgrim gains the punya of 
giving away boundless charity as also an infinite recitation of prayers. Once 
he journeys to the Kalasi tirtha, and bathing there devoutly, his senses under 
control, he gains the fruit of the Agnishtoma. 

To the east of Saraka, is an auspicious tirtha, Ambajanma, of the 
Mahatman Narada. He that bathes there, O Bhaarata, finds, after dying, 
many unrivalled realms of glory, at the command of Narada Muni. 

Next, on the tenth day of the lighted fortnight, the pilgrim should go to 
the tirtha called Pundarika. Bathing there, he gains the merit of the 
Pundarika Yagna. After this, he must go to the tirtha called Trivishtapa, 
famed through the three worlds. In that tirtha flows the sin-destroying river 
Vaitarani. Bathing there and adoring the god known by the mark of the bull 
who holds the trident in his hand, the pilgrim's soul is washed of every sin 
and he attains to the highest state. 

Then, he proceeds to the excellent Phalakivana. In this holiest tirtha the 
Devas performed a tapasya of many thousand years. One should then go on 
to the Dhrishadwati. Bathing there and worshipping the gods, one obtains, 
O Bhaarata, punya which is superior to that of both the Agnishtoma and the 
Atiratra sacrifices. 

Bathing in that Sarvadeva tirtha, a man acquires the punya of giving 
away a thousand cows. Bathing next in the Panikhata tirtha and 
worshipping all the gods, a man finds punya superior to that of both the 
Agnishtoma and the Atiratra sacrifices, besides acquiring that of the 
Rajasuya Yagna; and finally, he attains the realm of the highest Rishis. 


Dharmatma, after this, one must visit the Misraka tirtha. There, O tiger 
among kings, as I have heard, the great-souled Vyasa, for the sake of the 
Brahmanas, has mingled all the tirthas. He, therefore, that bathes in Misraka 
bathes in all the tirthas. 

Mind and senses restrained, the yatri goes next to the tirtha Vyasavana. 
Bathing in the sacred waters of Manojava there, he gains the punya of the 
gift of a thousand cows. He goes on to the Devitirtha which is in 
Madhuvati; whoever bathes here and worships the manes and the gods 
receives the spiritual merit of a gift of a thousand cows, through the grace 
of the Goddess. 

He who then bathes at the confluence of the Kausiki and the 
Dhrishadwati is freed from all his sins. He proceeds to Vyasasthali where 
Vyasa of great intelligence, burning with grief for his son, had resolved to 
cast off his body but was put in good heart again by the gods. Here the 
pilgrim gains the merit of the making a gift of a thousand kine. 

Journeying on to the sacred well called Kindatta, he who casts a measure 
of sesame into it is freed from all his debts and finds success. Bathing in the 
tirtha called Vedi, one obtains the merit of making a gift of a thousand 
cows. There are two other celebrated tirthas called Ahas and Sudina. 
Bathing there, Purushavyaghra, one goes to the realm of the Sun. 

The pilgrim continues to the tirtha called Mrigadhuma that is celebrated 
throughout the three worlds. Here he bathes in the Ganga, worships 
Mahadeva, and gains the punya of the Aswamedha Yagna. Bathing next in 
the Devitirtha there he obtains the merit of the gift of a thousand sacred 
COWS. 

He goes on to Vamanaka, also celebrated across the three worlds. 
Bathing there in Vishnupada and worshipping Vamana, his soul is purified 
from every sin, and he goes to the abode of Vishnu. 

Bathing next in Kulampuna, one sanctifies one's race. Going after this to 
the Pavana-hrada, that great tirtha of the Marutas, and bathing there, O tiger 
among men, one becomes adored in the realm of the Wind-god. Bathing in 
the Amara-hrada and worshipping Indra with devotion, the pilgrim becomes 
adored in Devaloka and he will sit in a scintillating vimana and course 
through the sky in the company of the immortals. 

Best of great men, bathing next with due rites in the tirtha called Sali 
surya, of Salihotra, he acquires the punya of the gift of a thousand kine. 


Bhaaratottama, there is another tirtha called Srikunja in the Saraswati. 
Bathing there, one gains the merit of the Agnishtoma sacrifice. 

The pilgrim goes next to Naimishakunja. In days of yore, the Rishis who 
performed tapasya in the Naimisha vana took the vows of pilgrimage and 
went to Kurukshetra. There, on the banks of the Saraswati a tapovana was 
created, which served as a resting place for them and which pleased them 
greatly. Bathing in the Saraswati in that sacred grove, one obtains the merit 
of the Agnishtoma sacrifice. 

O Virtuous, one should go after this to the excellent Kanya tirtha. 
Bathing there one obtains the merit of the gift of a thousand kine. Then, on 
to the tirtha of Brahma. Bathing here, a person of the inferior varnas 
becomes a Brahmana, and if he is already a Brahmana, his soul is purified 
of every sin, and he attains moksha. 

After this, the pilgrim journeys to the auspicious Soma tirtha, bathing at 
which place, he gains the world of Soma. The yatri now proceeds to the 
tirtha called Saptasaraswata, where the renowned Rishi Mankanaka found 
ascetic success. As I have heard, in olden days, Mankanaka cut his hand 
with a pointed blade of Kusa grass, upon which, from his wound flowed not 
blood but vegetable sap. Seeing this, his eyes wide with wonder, the Sage 
began to dance. And as the Rishi danced, all the mobile and immobile 
creatures, overwhelmed by his power, began to dance with him. 

Then, the Devas with Brahma at their head, and Rishis of vast tapasya 
said to Mahadeva, 'Lord, you must stop the Sage from dancing:' 

His heart full of joy, Siva went to the dancing Rishi and said, 'Maharishi, 
most virtuous one, why do you dance? O bull among Munis, what can be 
the reason for this great joy?’ 

The Rishi answered, 'O best of Brahmanas, I am an ascetic who treads 
the path of dharma. Do you not see that vegetable sap flows from the wound 
in my hand? This fills me with great joy and I dance. 

To the Rishi blinded by emotion, the God laughingly said, 'O Brahmana, 
I do not wonder at this. Look at me! 

Mahadeva made a cut on his own thumb with the nail of his forefinger, 
and lo, from the wound there came ashes white as snow. Seeing this, the 
Muni became ashamed and fell at Siva's feet, and believing that there was 
nothing better and greater than the God Rudra, he began to hymn him: 'O 
Trisulin, you are the refuge of the Devas and the Asuras, of, indeed, the 
universe. You have created the three worlds with all their beings, mobile 


and unmoving. It is you again that swallow everything at the end of the 
Yuga. Not the gods themselves can know you, far less me. O sinless one, 
the Devas with Brahma at their head are all revealed in you. You are all, the 
Creator himself and the Ordainer of the worlds. It is by your grace that all 
the gods sport without anxiety or fear. 

Devadeva, God of gods, grant me your grace, so that my tapasya may 
not diminish. 

The God replied, 'Brahmana, let your tapasya increase a thousandfold 
through my grace. Great Muni, I will dwell with you in this your asrama. 
Those who bathe here in Saptasaraswata, and worship me, will attain 
everything here and hereafter. And without doubt they shall all attain finally 
to the realm of Saraswata.' 

With that, Mahadeva vanished. 

After visiting Saraswata, one should travel on to Ausanasa, also famed 
throughout the three worlds. There, Bhaarata, the gods with Brahma before 
them, and Rishis endowed with the wealth of asceticism, and the illustrious 
Kartikeya, are always present during the two twilights and midday, 
impelled by the desire to do good to Bhargava. 

In that tirtha is another called Kapalamochana, which cleanses one from 
every sin. O tiger among men, bathing there the taint of all one's sins 
vanish. 

The pilgrim should then proceed to the tirtha called Agni. Bathing there, 
Purusharishabha, one obtains the worlds of Agni and exalts his very vamsa. 
There in that tirtha is another, O lord of the Bhaaratas, that belongs to 
Viswamitra. Bathing there, best of men, one gains the status of a true 
Brahmana. 

Purushavyaghra, the pilgrim, his body pure and his mind subdued, goes 
on to Brahmayoni, and bathing there at the abode of Brahma, he sanctifies 
his race for seven generations before and after. 

Next, he travels to another tirtha renowned through the worlds, 
Prithudaka, which belongs to Kartikeya. He bathes there, worshipping the 
Devas and the Pitrs. Whatever evil any man or woman has committed, 
knowingly or otherwise, is destroyed by a bath in that sacred tirtha, which 
also confers the punya of an Aswamedha and Swarga, as well. The learned 
say that Kurukshetra is holy; holier than Kurukshetra is the Saraswati; 
holier than the Saraswati are all the tirthas together, and that holier than all 
the tirthas together is Prithudaka. 


He who casts off his body at Prithudaka, while chanting holy mantras, 
becomes an immortal. Sanatkumara and the high-souled Vyasa have sung, 
and it is in the Vedas also, that one should indeed go to Prithudaka, with 
soul subdued. O son of the Kurus, there is no tirtha which is superior to 
Prithudaka. Without doubt, that tirtha is purifying, holy and sin-destroying. 
The most sinful man who bathes in Prithudaka goes to heaven. 

O best of the Bhaaratas, in that tirtha is another called Madhustrava; 
bathing there, one acquires the merit of giving away a thousand cows. 

After this, the pilgrim must proceed to the calebrated and sacred tirtha 
where the Saraswati unites with the Aruna. Bathing there, after fasting for 
three nights, one is cleansed of even the sin of killing a Brahmana, and 
obtains punya that is superior to that of either the Agnishtoma or Atiratra 
sacrifice, and redeems his race to the seventh generation, up and down. 

In that tritha is another called Ardhakila. From compassion for the 
Brahmanas, Darbhi created that tirtha in days of old. Without doubt, by 
vows, by investiture of the sacred thread, by fasts, by rites and by mantras, 
one becomes a Brahmana. However, Bharatarishabha, wise men of old have 
observed that even a man who is without ritual and mantras becomes 
learned and blessed with the punya of vratas — merely by bathing at 
Ardhakila. 

Darbhi also brought the four oceans there. Best of men, he that bathes 
there never meets distress again and also gains the punya of giving away 
four thousand cows. 

The tirtha-yatri goes on to Satasahastraka, next to which is another 
sacred tirtha also called Sahasraka. Both are renowned, and bathing in 
them, one obtains the merit of giving away a thousand kine. Fasts and gifts 
here multiply a thousandfold. 

Then, on he must go the wonderful tirtha Renuka, bathe there and 
worship the Pitrs and the Devas. By this, cleansed of every sin, he receives 
the merit of the Agnishtoma sacrifice. Bathing next in the tirtha called 
Vimochana, with passions and senses under control, he is cleansed from all 
the sins which accrue from accepting gifts. 

Senses controlled and observing Bramacharya, he must then go to the 
forest of Panchavati. A sojourn there brings great virtue and he becomes 
adored in all the realms of the good and godly. 

After this, one should travel to the tirtha of Varuna called Taijasa, 
blazing with its own effulgence. In that tirtha the lord of Yoga, Sthanu 


himself dwells, the bull his mount. He that stays there finds success by 
worshipping the God of gods. It was here that the Devas, with Brahma at 
their head, and Rishis endowed with the wealth of asceticism, installed 
Guha as the Senapati of the celestials. 

To the east of that tirtha is another, which is called Kuru tirtha. With 
senses controlled and keeping brahmacharya, he that bathes in Kuru tirtha is 
cleansed of all his sins and gains Brahmaloka. 

He must go next to Swargadwara. Staying there, the pilgrim finds the 
merit of the Agnishtoma sacrifice and goes to the abode of Brahma. 

After this, he must take himself to the the tirtha called Anaraha. Bathing 
there, he will never meet again with distress, for there Brahma himself and 
the other gods with Narayana at their head are always present, O tiger 
among men. O royal son of the race of Kuru, the wife of Rudra is also 
present there. Beholding the Goddess, one never meets with any sorrow 
thereafter. In that tirtha is also an image of Visweswara, the lord of Uma; 
seeing the God of gods there, one is cleansed of all one's sins. Also, seeing 
the idol of Narayana, from whose navel the Lotus sprang, the tirthayatri 
blazes forth, O Parantapa, and goes to the abode of Vishnu. 

Bull among men, he that bathes in the tirtha of all the gods is redeemed 
from all his sins and shines like the Moon. 

The pilgrim goes next to Swastipura. By walking in pradakshina around 
that place, one gains the punya of giving away a thousand holy cows. 
Arriving next at the tirtha called Pavana, one should offer oblations to the 
Pitrs and the Devas; with this, he gets, O Bhaarata, the merit of the 
Agnishtoma sacrifice. 

Near Pavana is Ganga-hrada, and another tirtha, O Bhaarata, called 
Kupa. Thirty million tirthas are present in that Kupa. Bathing there, a 
person finds heaven. Bathing also in the Ganga-hrada and adoring 
Maheswara, one finds the condition of Ganapatya and redeems his race. 

One should next travel to Sthanuvata, celebrated all over the three 
worlds. Bathing there, also, one finds heaven. The pilgrim goes on to 
Badaripachana, the asrama of Vasishtha. Having fasted there for three 
nights, one should eat the badari fruit. He that lives on badari for twelve 
years, and he that fasts at that tirtha for three nights acquires punya which is 
eternal. 

Journeying then at Indramarga, and fasting there for a day and night, the 
pilgrim becomes adored in the realm of Indra. Going on to the Ekaratra 


tirtha, he who spends a single night there, with vratas and with perfect truth, 
becomes adored in Brahmaloka. One should next go to the asrama of 
Aditya, that lustrous god who is a mass of effulgence. Bathing in that tirtha 
famed through three worlds, and worshipping the god of light, one goes to 
the realm of Aditya and saves his own race. 

The pilgrim then goes on to bathe in the Soma tirtha and without any 
doubt finds the realm of Soma for himself. 

Next, he must visit the most sacred tirtha of the illustrious Dadhicha, that 
sanctifying tirtha which is celebrated all over the world. It was here that 
Angiras of the Saraswatas, that ocean of tapasya, was born. Bathing in that 
tirtha, one gains the punya of the Aswamedha, and without doubt, also the 
realm of Saraswati. 

With senses subdued observing brahmacharya, the pilgrim goes on 
Kanyasrama. Staying there for three nights, with subdued senses and a 
regulated diet, he acquires a hundred Apsaras, and also goes to Brahma's 
realm. 

O Virtuous, he continues his yatra, now to the tirtha called Sannihati. 
Living there, the gods with Brahma at their head, and Rishis endowed with 
the wealth of asceticism earn great punya. Bathing in the Saraswati during a 
solar eclipse, one gains the merit of a hundred Aswamedhas, and any 
sacrifice that one might perform there produces merit that is eternal. 
Whatever tirthas exist on earth or in the firmament, all the rivers, lakes, 
pools, springs, tanks large and small, and places sacred to particular gods all 
come, O tiger among men, month after month, and mingle with Sannihati! 
It is because all the other tirthas are united together here, that this tirtha is 
so named. Bathing here and drinking of its water, one becomes adored in 
heaven. 

Listen to the punya acquired by a mortal who performs a Sraddha there 
on the day of the new moon during a solar eclipse, after bathing in this 
tirtha. He gains the punya of one who assiduously and thoroughly performs 
a thousand Aswamedhas. Whatever sins a man or woman commits are, 
beyond doubt, all destroyed as soon as one bathes in that tirtha. Bathing 
here one also ascends to the abode of Brahma in the lotus-coloured vimana. 

Bathing next in Koti-tirtha, after having worshipped the Yaksha 
dwarapalaka Machakruka, one gains the merit of giving away a bounty of 
gold. 


Best of the Bhaaratas, near this is a tirtha called Ganga-hrada. Mind 
subdued, keeping brahmacharya, and bathing here, a pilgrim acquires punya 
which is greater than that of the Rajasuya and the Aswamedha Yagnas. 

The Naimisha tirtha confers its fruit on earth; Pushkara confers punya in 
the realms of the firmament; Kurukshetra, however, confers felicity in all 
the three worlds. Even the dust of Kurukshetra, carried by the wind, leads 
sinful men to a highly blessed state. They that live in Kurukshetra, which 
lies to the north of the Drishadwati and to the south of the Saraswati, really 
reside in heaven. 

'T will go to Kurukshetra. I will dwell in Kurukshetra,' he that utters these 
words even once, becomes cleansed of all sin. Sacred Kurukshetra, 
worshipped by Brahmarishis, is regarded as the Vedi, the sacrificial altar of 
the Devas. Mortals that dwell there have nothing to grieve for at any time. 
That which lies between Tarantuka and Arantuka and the lakes of Rama and 
Machakruka is Kurukshetra. It is also called Samanta-panchaka and is said 
to be the northern sacrificial altar of the Grandsire." 


CANTO 84 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


| Death said, "Then, O great Kshatriya, one should journey on to the 
excellent tirtha of Dharma, where the illustrious god of justice once 
performed an austere tapasya. And it is for this that he made the place a 
sacred tirtha which would be known after his own name. Bathing there, a 
virtuous man with his mind concentrated in dhyana certainly sanctifies his 
family to the seventh generation. 

Next, the pilgrim goes to the wonderful Jnanapavana. Staying there, he 
acquires the merit of the Agnishtoma, and goes to Muniloka, the realm of 
the Munis. 

Then, he must travel to the Saugandhika-vana. There the Devas dwell, 
with Brahma at their head, Rishis with a wealth of asceticism, the Siddhas, 
the Charanas, the Gandharvas, the Kinnaras and the Nagas. As soon as he 
enters these woods, he is cleansed of all his sins. 

After this, he goes on to visit the stream of the Devi Saraswati, known 
here as the Devi Plaksha. There he must bathe in the water issuing from an 
anthill, worship the manes and the gods, thereby gaining the punya of the 
Aswamedha. At a distance of six throws of a heavy stick from the anthill, 
there is a rare tirtha called Isanadhyushita. The Puranas say, 
Purushavyaghra, that bathing here a man obtains the merit of giving away a 
thousand Kapila cows, and also of the Aswamedha Yagna. 

Journeying next to Sugandha and Satakumbha and Pancha-yagna, a man 
becomes adored in heaven. He must visit another tirtha there called 
Trisulakhata, bathe and set himself to worship the Pitrs and the Devas. 
Doing so, without doubt, he finds, after his death, the condition of 
Ganapatya. 

The pilgrim travels on to the glorious tirtha of the Devi known through 
the three worlds as Sakambhari. There, for a thousand celestial years, she of 
the fervent vow, had subsisted, month after month, only upon herbs. Drawn 
by their reverence for the Goddess, many Rishis of great tapasya came 
there, O Bhaarata, and she entertained them with herbs; it is for this that 
they named her Sakambhari. Bhaarata, the man who comes to Sakambhari, 
observing brahmacharya and rapt in dhyana, and passes three nights there in 


purity, eating only herbs, obtains, at the will of the Goddess, the punya of 
one who lives on just herbs for twelve years. 

From there he goes on to the tirtha called Suvarna, famed through the 
three worlds, where in days of old Vishnu paid his adorations to Rudra for 
his grace, and obtained many boons difficult of acquisition even by the 
gods. And, O Bhaarata, the gratified destroyer of Tripura said, 'Krishna, you 
will be much beloved in the world, and the foremost of everything in the 
universe.’ Worshipping the God having the bull for his mark, in that place, 
the tirthayatri gains the punya of the Aswamedha and also the state of 
Ganapatya. 

After this, he goes on to the tirtha of Dhumavati. Fasting there for three 
nights, he has his every wish fulfilled. In the southern part of this tirtha of 
the Goddess, there is another tirtha called Rathavarta. With a devout heart 
and senses controlled one should visit this sacred place, and, through the 
grace of Mahadeva, attain a lofty condition of grace. 

After circumambulating this tirtha, Bharatarishabha, the pilgrim 
continues his pilgrimage going to the tirtha named Dhara, which, O you of 
great wisdom, washes away every sin. Bathing there, tiger among men, a 
man is freed from every sorrow. 

Bowing to the Great Mountain Himavat, the pilgrim now takes himself 
to the source of the Ganga, which is beyond doubt the very gateway to 
heaven. There, his mind fixed in dhyana, he bathes in the tirtha called Koti, 
thereby gaining the punya of the Pundarika sacrifice; and he delivers all his 
race. Spending one night there, one acquires the merit of giving away a 
thousand cows. 

By offering oblations of water to the gods and the manes at Saptaganga, 
Triganga and Sakravarta, all of which are here, one becomes adored in the 
realms of the virtuous. 

Bathing next at Kanakhala, and fasting there for three nights, a man 
reaps the punya of the horse-sacrifice and goes to heaven. 

After this, O lord of men, the pilgrim should repair to Kapilavata. 
Fasting for one night there, he acquires the merit of giving away a thousand 
cows. This tirtha of the illustrious Kapila, king of the Nagas, is celebrated, 
O best of Kurus, over all the worlds. Bathing at the Nagatirtha, one gains 
the merit of giving away a thousand Kapila kine. 

After this the pilgrim journeys to the most excellent tirtha of Santanu, 
called Lalitaka. Bathing there, one never sinks into distress thereafter. The 


man who bathes at the confluence of the Ganga and the Yamuna obtains the 
punya of ten horse-sacrifices, and also redeems his race. 

Next, the pilgrim should go to Sugandha, celebrated over the world. 
Here, cleansed of every sin, he becomes adored in the abode of Brahma. 
Then, on to Rudravarta, where bathing, one ascends to heaven. Bathing at 
the confluence of the Ganga and the Saraswati, a man finds the merit of the 
Aswamedha and also heaven. 

Going on to Bhadrakarneswara and worshipping the gods, the pilgrim 
ensures that he will never be in distress again and will be loved in heaven. 
Then, lord of men, he goes to the Kubjamraka tirtha, and gains the merit of 
giving away a thousand cows, and swarga also. 

From there he journeys to the Arundhativata, observing brahmacharya 
and his mind fixed in dhyana. Bathing there in Samudraka and fasting for 
three nights, he acquires the punya of the Aswamedha, that of giving away 
a thousand cows, and also redeems his entire clan. 

One should next go to Brahmavarta, soul concentrated and locked in 
brahmacharya vratas. By this, one obtains the merit of the horse-sacrifice, 
and goes to the world of Soma. 

The man who goes on to the Yamuna-prabhava, the source of the 
Yamuna, and bathes there, finds the punya of the Aswamedha and is 
worshipped in swarga. Arriving after this at Darbisankramana, a tirtha 
worshipped in the three worlds, a person acquires the merit of the horse- 
sacrifice and finds paradise. 

Repairing next to Sindhu-prabhava, he source of the Sindhu, which is 
worshipped by Siddhas and Gandharvas, and staying there for five nights, 
one obtains the merit of giving away an abundance of gold. Going next to 
the almost inaccessible Vedi tirtha, the pilgrim finds the punya of the 
Aswamedha and ascends into swargaloka. 

Then, O Bhaarata, one should travel to Rishikulya and Vasishtha. By 
visiting the latter, all varnas attain to Brahmanahood. Bathing at Rishikulya, 
while living a month eating just herbs, and worshipping the gods and 
manes, one is cleansed of all one's sins, and obtains the realm of the Rishis. 
Going next to Bhrigutunga, a pilgrim acquires the merit of the horse- 
sacrifice. 

Going on to Virapramoksha, one is freed from every sin. Travelling then 
to the tirtha of Krittika and Magha, one, O Bhaarata, gains punya superior 
to that of the Agnishtoma and Atiratra sacrifices. The man who goes to the 


most excellent tirtha called Vidya and bathes there in the evening, becomes 
a master of every kind of knowledge. 

Next, the pilgrim must stay for one night at Mahasrama, capable of 
destroying every sin; and eat only a single meal. By this, he gains many 
auspicious realms, and delivers ten preceding and ten succeeding 
generations of his vamsa. 

Dwelling next for a month in Mahalaya, and fasting there for three 
nights, one's soul is purged of all sin, and one acquires the punya of giving 
away gold in abundance. Proceeding to Vetasika, worshipped by the 
Grandsire, the tirtha-yatri obtains the merit of the Aswamedha and the state 
of Usanas. 

He goes on to the tirtha Sundarika, worshipped by the Siddhas, and 
obtains radiant personal beauty, as witnessed by the ancients. Proceeding to 
Brahmani, with subdued senses and observing the brahmacharya vrata, a 
person rises into Brahmaloka in a lotus-hued chariot. 

The yatri journeys next to the sacred Naimisha, worshipped by the 
Siddhas, where Brahma dwells with the Devas. Just the intention of visiting 
Naimisha, destroys half one's sins; by entering it, one is cleansed of all 
one's sins. The pilgrim of subdued senses should stay in Naimisha for a 
month; for, O Bhaarata, all the tirthas of the earth are present in Naimisha. 
Bathing there, with restrained senses and regulated fare, one obtains the 
merit of the cow-sacrifice, and also sanctifies his race for seven generations, 
before and after himself. The wise have always said that he who renounces 
his life at Naimisha by fasting, enjoys bliss in the heavenly regions, for 
Naimisha is ever sacred and most holy. 

Travelling next to Gangodbheda and fasting there for three nights, a man 
obtains the merit of the Vajapeya sacrifice, and becomes like Brahma 
himself. Journeying to the Saraswati, one should offer oblations to the 
Devas and the Pitrs; with this, the pilgrim will surely enjoy bliss in the 
regions called Saraswata. 

After, he wends his way to Bahuda, with soul subdued and keeping the 
brahmacharya vrata. Staying there for one night, one becomes beloved in 
heaven, and also gains the punya of the Devasatra sacrifice. On then he 
must go to Kshiravati, frequented by the most holy men. By worshipping 
the gods and the manes there, he acquires the punya of the Vajapeya. 

Travelling next to Vimalasoka, mind subdued and_ keeping 
brahmacharya, and remaining there for one night, one is adored in heaven. 


After this, he must go the exalted Gopratara in the Sarayu, where Sri 
Rama, with all his attendants and animals, abandoned his body, and 
ascended to heaven through the power of this tirtha. Bathing in that tirtha, O 
Bhaarata, through Rama's grace and by virtue of his own karma, one is 
washed of one's every sin and becomes adored in heaven. 

Going next, O son of the Kurus, to the Rama-tirtha on the Gomati, and 
bathing there, one gains the merit of the Aswamedha, and also sanctifies his 
race. There, Bharatarishabha, is another tirtha called Satasahastrika. 
Bathing in it, with senses restrained and fasting, a person reaps the merit of 
giving away a thousand sacred cows. 

Now he should go to the unrivalled tirtha called Bhartristhana, where he 
finds the merit of the Aswamedha. Bathing next in the tirtha called Koti, 
and worshipping Kartikeya, a man reaps the punya of giving away a 
thousand kine, and acquires great energy. 

Going next to Varanasi, and worshipping the God having the bull for his 
mark, after a bath in the Kapilahrada, the pilgrim obtains the merit of the 
Rajasuya Yagna. 

Journeying then to Avimukta, and seeing there the God of gods, he is 
instantly cleansed of even the sin of killing a Brahmana. By giving up one's 
life there, one attains moksha. 

Arriving next at the rare tirtha Markandeya, celebrated over the world 
and situated on the Ganga, a person obtains the merit of Agnishtoma 
sacrifice, and delivers his race. On next to Gaya, with subdued senses and 
observing brahmacharya, one obtains the punya of the horse-sacrifice and 
also redeems his race. In that tirtha is the Akshaya-vata, celebrated 
throughout the three worlds. Whatever is offered here to the Pitrs is said to 
become inexhaustible. Bathing there in the Mahanadi, and offering 
oblations to the gods and the manes, a man acquires eternal regions, and 
also saves his race. 

Then the pilgrim travels to Brahmasara in the forest of Dharma, and 
passing one night there, he attains Brahmaloka. In that lake, Brahma raised 
a sacrificial pillar; by walking round this stamba, a man acquires the punya 
of the Vajapeya sacrifice. 

After this, mighty Kshatriya, the tirtha-yatri should go to Denuka, famed 
the world over. Staying there for one night and giving away sesame and 
cows, one's soul is cleansed of every sin, and one ascends into the world of 
Soma. Here, of yore, the cow Kapila ranged over the mountains, with her 


calf. O Bhaarata, her great hoof-prints and her young ones can be seen in 
that place even today. By bathing in those hoof-prints, whatever sin a man 
may have incurred is washed away. 

Then should one go to Gridhravata, consecrated to the trident-bearing 
God. Approaching the Deity having the bull for his mark, the pilgrim 
should rub himself with ashes. If a Brahmana, he gains the merit of 
observing the twelve-year vow and if he belongs to any of the other varnas, 
he is freed from all his sins. 

After this, on to the Udyanta mountains, which resound with great and 
mysterious songs. There, Bharatarishabha, you can still see the the 
footprints of Savitri. The Brahmana of rigid vows who says his morning, 
noon and evening prayers here, for a day, finds the punya of performing that 
service for twelve years. 

The famous Yonidwara is in this place; going there one is set free from 
the pain of rebirth. The person who stays at Gaya during both the dark and 
lighted fortnights, certainly sanctifies his own kula, up and down, to the 
seventh generation. One should wish for many sons so that at least one of 
them might go to Gaya, or celebrate the horse-sacrifice, or offer a Nila bull. 

Then, the pilgrim should proceed to Phalgu, where he acquires the punya 
of the Aswamedha, and finds great success. After this, the pilgrim, his mind 
quietened, should travel to Dharmaprastha. There, O foremost of Kshatriya, 
Dharma dwells for ever. Drinking of the water of a well, which is there, and 
purifying one's self with a bath, he who offers oblations to the Devas and 
the Pitrs is cleansed of all his sins and ascends into swarga. 

In that tirtha is the hermitage of the great Rishi Matanga of the perfectly 
restrained soul. By entering that beautiful asrama, which can soothe fatigue 
and sorrow, one earns the merit of the Gavamayana sacrifice, and by 
touching the image of Dharma, which is there, one obtains the fruit of the 
horse-sacrifice. 

One should next go, O Kshatriya, to the excellent Brahmasthana. 
Approaching Brahma, that bull among male beings, who is present there, 
one acquires the merit of the Rajasuya and Aswamedha Yagnas. 

The pilgrim should then repair to Rajagriha. Bathing there, one lives as 
happily as the Rishi Kakshivan. Purifying himself, the pilgrim should 
partake here of the offerings daily made to the Yakshini. By this, one is 
freed even from the sin of killing a Brahmana, through the Yakshini's grace. 


Going on to Maninaga, one finds the punya of giving away a thousand 
kine. O Bhaarata, he that eats anything at all offered at the tirtha of 
Maninaga, becomes immune to the venom of the most deadly serpents. 
Staying there for one night, one is cleansed of one's sins. 

Then should the pilgrim continue to the favourite forest of the 
Brahmarshi Gautama. There, bathing in the lake of Ahalya, he attains to an 
exalted slate. After this, seeing the image of Sri, he acquires great 
prosperity. There in that tirtha is a well famed through the trilokas. Bathing 
in it, one acquires the merit of the Aswamedha. Here is also a well sacred to 
the Rajarishi Janaka, a well that the gods worship. Bathing in this well, one 
rises into Vishnuloka. 

Then should one repair to Vinasana that destroys every sin. By going 
there, one acquires the punya of a Vajapeya sacrifice, and also gains 
Somaloka. Travelling next to Gandaki, which is created by the waters of 
every tirtha, a person acquires the merit of the Vajapeya, and ascends into 
Suryaloka. 

The pilgrim journeys next to the Visala, river celebrated across the three 
worlds, and gains the merit of the Agnishtoma and also rises into Swarga. 
After this, virtuous one, he goes to the tapovana of Rishis called Adhivanga, 
and finds great happiness amongst the Guhyakas. 

Continuing to the river Kampana, visited by the Siddhas, one obtains the 
merit of the Pundarika sacrifice, and also ascends into heaven. Arriving 
then, O lord of earth, at the stream called Maheswari, one acquires the 
punya of the horse-sacrifice and also redeems his own race. 

Journeying after this to the realm of the Devas, the pilgrim earns 
freedom from misfortune and also the merit of the horse-sacrifice. Next, he 
must go to Somapada, with subdued soul and keeping brahmacharya. 
Bathing in Maheswarapada there, one reaps the merit of the Aswamedha. In 
that tirtha, O Bharatarishabha, it is well known that ten millions of tirthas 
exist together. 

Once a fiendish Asura, in the shape of a tortoise, attempted to carry it 
away, but the mighty Vishnu recovered it from him. There in that tirtha one 
should perform ablutions, for by doing this one acquires the punya of the 
Pundarika sacrifice and ascends into Vishnuloka besides. 

Then, O best of kings, one should proceed to the Narayana tirtha, where, 
O Bhaarata, Narayana is always present and dwells for ever. The Devas 
with Brahma at their head, Rishis endowed with the wealth of asceticism, 


the Adityas, the Vasus, and the Rudras, all adore Janardana in that tirtha, 
and Vishnu of wonderful deeds has come to be known as Salagrama. 
Approaching eternal Vishnu, Lord of the three worlds, giver of boons, one 
gains the merit of the horse-sacrifice, and goes to Vishnuloka. 

In that place is a sacred well, capable of destroying every sin; the four 
seas are ever present in that well. He that bathes in it will be free from 
misfortune. Beholding the image of the boon-giving, eternal, and fierce 
Mahadeva who is also there, the pilgrim glows like the moon emerging 
from behind a cloud. 

Bathing then in Jatismara, with a pure mind and subdued senses, one 
acquires, without doubt, the recollections of his past life. Going on to 
Maheswarapura, and worshipping the God having the bull for his mark, 
fasting the while, one gets the fruition of all one's desires. 

Journeying, after this, to Vamana, which destroys every sin, and 
beholding the Lord Hari, the pilgrim is set free from all misfortune. He goes 
on to the asrama of Kusika that can remove every sin. Going then to the 
river Kausika, which cleanses even great sins, mahapaapas, one should 
bathe in it. By this one obtains the merit of the Rajasuya Yagna. 

Next, best of Kshatriyas, he should go to the sacred Champaka forest. 
By spending one night there, he will acquire the merit of giving away a 
thousand cows. Arriving next at Jyeshtila, tirtha of rare worth, and passing 
one night there, one reaps the fruit of the gift of a thousand cows. Seeing 
the image of Visweswara of great splendour there, with his consort the 
Devi, a person obtains, O bull among men, the world of Mitra-Varuna. By 
fasting there for three nights, a man acquires the merit of the Agnishtoma. 

By visiting Kanya-samvedya, with senses restrained and fasting, the 
pilgrim gains the region of Manu, the lord of creation. Rishis of stern vows 
have said that he that gives away rice or makes any gift at the tirtha called 
Kanya, renders such a gift eternal. 

Arriving next at Nischira, celebrated through the three worlds, he gains 
the merit of the horse-sacrifice and goes to Vishnuloka. Those that give 
daana at the confluence of Nischira, ascend into blessed Brahmaloka. In that 
tirtha is the asrama of Vasishtha, known in the three lokas; bathing there, 
one obtains the merit of the Vajapeya. 

Going on to Devakuta, to which Devarishis resort, one acquires the 
punya of the Aswamedha, and also delivers his vamsa. After this, the tirtha- 
yatri should go to the lake of the Muni Kausika, where Kausika's son, 


Viswamitra, found grace. Bathing there, a man acquires the merit of the 
Vajapeya. O Kshatriya, at Kausika, the pilgrim should spend one month and 
reap the punya of an Aswamedha Yagna. 

He that lives in that best of tirthas, Maha-hrada, enjoys immunity from 
misfortune, and also gains the merit of giving away gold in abundance. 
Next, seeing Kartikeya who dwells at Virasrama a man surely reaps the fruit 
of the horse-sacrifice. Proceeding to Agnidhara, celebrated across the three 
worlds, and after a bath there, beholding the eternal and boon-giving 
Vishnu, that God of gods, the pilgrim acquires the punya of the 
Agnishtoma. 

Journeying on to the pool of Brahma, near the mountains with peaks of 
snow, and bathing in it, a man gets the merit of the Agnishtoma. Falling 
from the Grandsire's pool, is that world-sanctifying stream, celebrated 
through the three worlds, called Kumara-Dhara. Bathing there, one has all 
his purposes fulfilled. Fasting in that tirtha for three days, one is cleansed 
even of the sin of slaying a Brahmana. 

The pilgrim should go on the peak of the great Goddess Gauri, also 
renowned across the three worlds. Climbing it, O best of men, one should 
approach Stana-Kunda. By touching the waters of Stana-Kunda, a person 
gains the merit of the Vajapeya sacrifice. Bathing in that and worshipping 
the Devas and Pitrs, one acquires the merit of the horse-sacrifice and also 
rises into Indraloka. 

Arriving next at the well of Tamraruna, frequented by the gods, one 
acquires, O lord of men, the merit which attaches to human sacrifice. 
Bathing next at the confluence of the Kalika with the Kausiki and the 
Aruna, and fasting there for three nights, a man of learning is cleansed of all 
his sins. 

Going on to the Urvasi tirtha, and then to Somasrama, a wise man, by 
bathing next at Kumbhakarnasrama, becomes loved through the world. The 
ancients knew that by touching the waters of Kokamukha, while observing 
steady vows and bramacharya, a man revives the memory of his former life. 

The pilgrim goes quickly next to the river Nanda, where a regenerate 
man becomes free from all his sins and, soul controlled, rises into 
Indraloka. Then, on he goes to the island called Rishabha, where cranes die, 
and bathing in the Saraswati he blazes forth in heaven. 

Continuing to the tirtha Auddalaka, frequented by Munis, and bathing 
there, one is cleansed of all one's sins. Repairing next to the sacred tirtha 


Dharma, where Brahmarishis come, one acquires the merit of the Vajapeya 
and becomes respected in Swargaloka. 

Proceeding to Champa and bathing in the Bhagirathi, he who goes to 
Dandaparna, finds the punya of giving away a thousand kine. After this, he 
must go on to sacred Lalitika, graced by the presence of the virtuous. By 
this the tirtha-yatri acquires the merit of the Rajasuya sacrifice and is 
regarded in heaven." 


CANTO 85 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


| Darth said, "Arriving next at the excellent Samvedya tirtha in the 
evening, and touching its waters, the pilgrim surely gains knowldge and 
wisdom. Created a tirtha in days of old by Rama's power, at Lauhitya one 
obtains the merit of giving away a bounty of gold. 

Then, on to the river Karatoya; and fasting there for three nights, a man 
acquires the merit of the horse-sacrifice. 

This is the injunction of the Creator himself. It has been said by the 
wisest, O Kshatriya, that if a person goes to the place where the Ganga 
mingles with the sea, he reaps merit which is ten times that of the 
Aswamedha Yagna. Crossing over to the opposite bank of the Ganga, he 
that bathes there, having spent three nights in the place, is cleansed of all 
his sins. 

The pilgrim must next go to the Vaitarani capable of destroying every 
sin. Arriving after this at the tirtha named Viraja he like the moon, and 
sanctifying his vamsa, rescues it and is himself purified of all his sins. He 
that bathes in Viraja further reaps the punya of giving away a thousand 
COWS. 

Living in purity at the confluence of the Sona and the Jyotirathi, and 
offering oblations of water to the gods and the manes, a man reaps the merit 
of the Agnishtoma sacrifice. Touching the waters of the Vamsagulma, 
constituting the sources of both the Sona and the Narmada, one obtains the 
punya of the Aswamedha. 

Travelling on to the tirtha called Rishabha in Kosala, O lord of men, and 
fasting there for three nights, one earns the merit of the Vajapeya sacrifice, 
and of the gift of a thousand kine, and also delivers his race. Arriving at 
Kosala, a man should bathe in the tirtha named Kala, and by this he surely 
obtains the merit of giving away one and ten sacred bulls. 

By bathing in Pushpavati and fasting there for three nights, one sanctifies 
one's own race, besides earning the merit of the gift of a thousand cows. O 
foremost of the Bhaaratas, by bathing in the tirtha called Badarika, one 
obtains long life, and also goes to heaven. 


Arriving next at Champa, and bathing in the Bhagirathi, and seeing 
Danda one earns the punya of giving away a thousand kine. Then the 
pilgrim should go to the sacred Lapetika, graced by the presence of the 
pious; there he reaps the punya of the Vajapeya and also becomes regarded 
by the gods. 

Proceeding next to the mountain Mahendra, where Jamadagnya lived, 
and bathing in Rama's tirtha, a person acquires the fruits of a horse- 
sacrifice. Here is Matanga's tirtha, Kedara, O son of the Kurus; bathing in it, 
aman gains the merit of giving away a thousand kine. 

Going on to the mountain Sri, he who touches the waters of the stream 
there, worshipping the God who has the bull for his mark, obtains the merit 
of the horse-sacrifice. On the mountain Sri the effulgent Mahadeva dwells 
in joy with the Goddess, as also does Brahma with the other gods. By 
bathing in the lake of Beva, with purity and mind restrained, one gets the 
merit of the horse-sacrifice, and also attains the highest success. 

Proceeding next to the mountain Rishabha in Pandya, worshipped by the 
gods, he finds the merit of the Vajapeya and rejoices in heaven. After this, 
he must go to the river Kaveri, frequented by Apsaras. Bathing there, he 
gains the merit of giving away a thousand cows. 

After this he must touch the waters of the tirtha called Kanya on the 
shores of the sea, and be cleansed of every sin. 

Going next to Gokarna, celebrated across the three worlds, which is 
situated in the midst of the deep, and is reverenced by all the lokas, and 
where the gods headed by Brahma, and Rishis endowed with the wealth of 
asceticism, and Bhutas and Yakshas and Pisachas, and Kinnaras and the 
great Nagas, and Siddhas and Charanas and Gandharvas, and men and 
Pannagas, and Rivers, Seas and Mountains worship the lord of Uma, one 
should worship Isana, fasting there for three nights. By this, one acquires 
the merit of the horse-sacrifice, and the state of Ganapatya. By staying there 
for twelve nights, one's soul is cleansed of all sin. 

One should go to the tirtha known as Gayatri, renowned across the 
worlds. Staying there for three nights, one acquires the punya of giving 
away a thousand cows. A strange phenomenon is seen to occur there, O lord 
of men. If a Brahmana, whether born of a Brahmani or any other woman, 
recites the Gayatri there, the recitation becomes rhythmic and musical, 
while, O Kshatriya, one who is not a Brahmana cannot chant it adequately 
at all. 


Going next to the well nigh inaccessible tank of the Brahmana Rishi 
Samvarta, one acquires personal beauty and prosperity. Repairing next to 
Vena, he that offers oblations of water to the gods and the manes, gains a 
chariot drawn by peacocks and cranes. 

Going next to the Godavari, ever frequented by the Siddhas, one earns 
the merit of the cow-sacrifice, and goes to the wondrous realm of Vasuki. 
Bathing next at the confluence of the Vena, one obtains the punya of the 
Vajapeya sacrifice. 

Bathing next at the confluence of Varada, one acquires the punya of 
giving away a thousand kine. Arriving next at Brahmasthana, he that stays 
there for three nights acquires the merit of giving away a thousand kine, and 
also ascends into swarga. 

Coming next to Kusaplavana, with a subdued mind and keeping 
brahmacharya, and staying there for three nights, he that bathes in that tirtha 
obtains the merit of the Aswamedha. Bathing next at the romantic Deva- 
hrada, fed by the waters of the Krishna-Vena, and also in the Jatismara- 
hrada, one regains the memory of one's former life. It was here that Indra 
celebrated a hundred sacrifices and ascended to heaven. By visiting only 
this tirtha, one acquires the punya of the Agnishtoma. 

Bathing next in the Sarvadeva-hrada, the pilgrim obtains the merit of 
giving away a thousand sacred cows. 

Going on to the most holy tank Payoshni, best of waters, he that offers 
oblations of water to the gods and the manes acquires the merit of the gift of 
a thousand kine. Arriving next at the sacred forest of Dandaka, a person 
should bathe in the waters there, and immediately gain the punya of giving 
away a thousand cows. 

Journeying next to the asrama of Sarabhanga and that of the illustrious 
Suka, one acquires immunity from all misfortune, besides sanctifying his 
race. Then should one travel to Surparaka, where Jamadagni's son lived of 
old. Bathing in that tirtha of Rama, one acquires the merit of giving away 
gold in abundance. 

Bathing next in the Saptagodavara, with senses subdued and food 
regulated, one earns great merit, and also goes to Devaloka. 

Going on to Devahrada, a man gains the merit of the Devasatra sacrifice. 
After this, the pilgrim should journey to the forest of Tungaka, in self- 
restraint and keeping bramacharya. It was here that, in olden days, the Muni 
Saraswata taught the Vedas to other ascetics. When the Vedas had been lost, 


in consequence of the Munis having forgotten them, Angirasa's son, seated 
at his ease upon the upper garments of the other Munis, duly spread out, 
pronounced the sacred syllable AUM, and at this the Sages again 
remembered all that they had learnt before. 

It was there that the Rishis and the Devas Varuna, Agni, Prajapati, 
Narayana who is also called Hari, Mahadeva and the lustrous Pitamaha of 
great splendour, appointed the resplendent Bhrigu to officiate at a sacrifice. 
Gratifying Agni with libations of ghee, poured according to the law of 
ritual, the illustrious Bhrigu performed the Agnidhana sacrifice for all those 
Rishis, after which both they and the gods went away to their respective 
homes, one after another. 

One who enters the forest of Tungaka, man or woman, is cleansed of 
every sin. In that tirtha, O Kshatriya, one should remain for a month, with 
senses and food controlled; by this, one ascends into Brahmaloka, and also 
delivers one's race. Arriving next at Medhavika, one should offer oblations 
of water to the gods and the manes, and so acquire the merit of the 
Agnishtoma sacrifice, and also memory and intellect. 

In that tirtha is the mountain famed the world over, called Kalanjara. 
Bathing in the unwordly lake that is there, one acquires the merit of giving 
away a thousand kine. He who, after a bath, offers oblations on the 
Kalanjara mountain is, without doubt, regarded in heaven. 

Going on to the river Mandakini, which can destroy every sin, and which 
flows on that best of mountains, Chitrakuta, he that bathes there and 
worships the gods and the manes, receives the punya of the horse-sacrifice 
and attains to an exalted state. 

After this, virtuous one, the pilgrim should visit the excellent tirtha 
Bhartristhana, where Kartikeya, Senapati of the Devas, is ever present; by 
going to just this tirtha a man finds success. 

Bathing next at the tirtha called Koti, he earns the merit of giving away a 
thousand cows. Having walked around Koti, he must go on to 
Jyeshtasthana. Looking at the image of Mahadeva there, the tirtha-yatri 
shines like the moon. There is a renowned well in that place, 
Bharatarishabha, in which are the four seas. He that bathes there, and with 
mind subdued, worships the gods and the ancestors, is cleansed of all his 
sins and attains to an exalted state. 

Then, one should journey to the great Sringaverapura, where once 
Dasaratha's son Rama crossed the Ganga. Bathing in that tirtha, Mahabaho, 


one is exorcised of all one's sins. Bathing with subdued senses in the 
Ganga, while observing brahmacharya, one is washed of every sin, and also 
receives the punya of the Vajapeya. 

After this, the pilgrim goes on to Mayuravata, consecrated to Mahadeva 
of awesome intelligence. Seeing the image of the God there, bowing down 
to him and walking around the place in pradakshina, one acquires the 
condition of Ganapatya. Bathing in Ganga at that tirtha, all one's sins are 
washed away. 

Then, O Kshatriya, one should go on to Prayaga, whose praises have 
been sung by Rishis and where the gods dwell with Brahma at their head, 
the cardinal directions with their presiding deities, the Lokapalas, the 
Siddhas, the Pitrs adored by the worlds, the Maharishis — Sanatkumara and 
others, stainless Brahmarshis — Angiras and others, the Nagas, the 
Suparnas, the Siddhas, the Rivers, the Seas, the Gandharvas, the Apsaras, 
and the Lord Hari with Prajapati. 

In that tirtha are three fiery caverns between which the Ganga, that 
foremost of tirthas, rushes. There in that place the world-purifying daughter 
of the Sun, Yamuna, celebrated across the three worlds, unites with the 
Ganga. The country between the Ganga and the Yamuna is regarded as the 
yoni, mons veneris, of the world, and Prayaga as the foremost point of that. 

The tirthas Prayaga, Pratishtana, Kambala, Aswatara and Bhogavati are 
the sacrificial altars of the Creator. In those places, O Kshatriyottama, the 
Vedas and the Yagnas, in embodied forms, and the Rishis blessed with the 
wealth of asceticism, adore Brahma, and there the gods and kings of the 
world also celebrate their sacrifices. The learned however, say that of all 
these tirthas Prayaga is the most sacred, in fact, the foremost of all tirthas in 
the three worlds. 

By going to that tirtha, by singing its praises, or by taking a little earth 
from it, one is purified of every sin. He who bathes in that confluence, 
celebrated the world over, acquires all the punya of the Rajasuya and the 
Aswamedha Yagnas. The gods themselves worship this tirtha. 

If a man gives ever so little here, it increases, O Bhaarata, a 
thousandfold. Child, do not let the texts of the Veda, nor the opinions of 
men turn your mind from the desire to die at Prayaga. O son of the Kurus, 
the wise say that six hundred million and ten thousand tirthas exist at 
Prayaga. Bathing in the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna, one obtains the 


merit that attaches to the four kinds of knowledge and the merits also of 
those that are founded in the truth. 

At Prayaga is the excellent tirtha of Vasuki, called Bhogavati. He that 
bathes in it, obtains the merit of the Aswamedha. There in the Ganga is also 
the tirtha famed throughout the three worlds, called Hamsaprapatana, which 
confers the merit of ten Aswamedhas. 

O Kurunandana, wherever a person bathes in the Ganga, he earns merit 
equal to that of a visit to Kurukshetra. An exception, however, is made in 
regard of Kanakhala, while the punya attaching to Prayaga is the greatest. 
Having committed a hundred sins, he that bathes in the Ganga, has all his 
sins washed away by the waters, even as fuel is consumed by fire. 

It has been said that in the Satya-yuga all the tirthas were sacred; in the 
Treta, Pushkara alone was holy; in Dwapara, Kurukshetra; and in the Kali- 
yuga, the Ganga alone is sacred. In Pushkara, one should practise 
austerities; in Mahalaya, one should perform charity; in the Malaya 
mountains, one should ascend the funeral pyre; and in Bhrigutunga, one 
should renounce one's body by forgoing food. 

Bathing in Pushkara, in Kurukshetra, in the Ganga and in the confluence 
of the Ganga and the Yamuna, one sanctifies seven generations of one's 
vamsa up and down. He that recites the name of the Ganga is purified; he 
that sees her, receives prosperity; while he that bathes in her and drinks of 
her waters sanctifies seven generations of his race, above and below 
himself. 

As long as one's bones lie touching the waters of the Ganga, so long 
does one live regarded in swarga, even as one lives in heaven in 
consequence of the merit he earns by pious pilgrimages to all the sacred 
tirthas and other holy places. There is no tirtha like the Ganga, there is no 
god like Kesava, and there are none superior to Brahmanas — this has been 
said even by Brahma, the Grandsire. 

The land through which the Ganga flows must be regarded as a sacred 
asrama, and any place on the banks of the Ganga should be regarded as one 
favourable to the attainment of ascetic success. 

One should narrate this description of the tirthas only to the regenerate, 
to those that are pious, to one's son and friends and disciples and 
dependants. This narrative, without a rival, is blessed and holy and leads to 
heaven. Sacred, enlivening and sanctifying, it bestows merit and high 
worth. Destructive of every sin, it is a mystery that the great Rishis cherish 


with care. By reciting it in the midst of Brahmanas, one is cleansed of every 
sin, and ascends to paradise. 

Truly, this description of the tirthas is auspicious and heaven-giving and 
sacred indeed; ever blessed as it is, it destroys one's enemies; foremost of 
all accounts, it sharpens the intellect. By reading this narrative the sonless 
obtains sons, the destitute obtains riches, the Kshatriya conquers the whole 
world, the Vaisya comes by great wealth, the Sudra has all his desires 
fulfilled, and the Brahmana crosses the ocean of samsara. 

Purifying himself, he that listens daily to the merits of the different 
tirthas, recollects the incidents of many previous births and rejoices in 
swargaloka. Of the tirthas that have been named here, some are easily 
accessible, while others are difficult of access. But he who is inspired with 
the desire of beholding all the tirthas, should visit them even in imagination. 

Wanting to obtain punya, the Vasus, the Sadhyas, the Adityas, the 
Maruts, the Aswins, and the Rishis equal to the Devas, all bathed in these 
tirthas. O Kuru, observe the vows I have explained, and with subdued 
senses, visit these tirthas, increasing your punya. Because of their pure 
senses, their belief in God, and their knowledge of the Vedas, pious men are 
able to visit these holy tirthas. 

O Kauravya, he who does not observe vows, he whose mind is not 
conrolled, he that is impure, he that is a thief, and he that is of crooked 
mind, does not bathe in any tirthas. You always keep dharma, and are of 
pure character. By your virtue, you have always gratified your father, your 
grand-father, and great-grand-fathers, and the gods with Brahma at their 
head, and the Rishis also. 

O Bhishma, who resembles Vasava, you will attain to the world of the 
Vasus, and also find eternal fame on earth!'" 

"Narada continues, 'With this, the illustrious Rishi Pulastya, well- 
pleased, bid Bhishma farewell and vanished before his eyes. And Bhishma, 
O tiger among men, well knowing the import of the Shastras, wandered 
over the world at the behest of Pulastya. Bhishma ended his great 
pilgrimage to all these tirthas, which destroy every sin, at Prayaga. 

The man that ranges the earth in accordance with these injunctions, 
obtains the highest fruit of a hundred horse-sacrifices and earns salvation 
thereafter. O son of Pritha, you will acquire punya consisting of the eight 
attributes, even as Bhishma, foremost of the Kurus, did of yore. And since 
you will lead these ascetics to those tirthas, your merit will be much greater. 


These tirthas are infested by Rakshasas, and no one but you, O 
Kauravya, can go to them. He who rises early and recites this narrative by 
the Devarishis on the subject of the tirthas becomes free from all sins. 
Those best of Rishis, Valmiki, and Kasyapa, and Atreya, and Kundajatara, 
and Viswamitra, and Gautama, and Asita, and Devala, and Markandeya, 
and Galava, and Bharadwaja, and Vasishtha, and the Muni Uddalaka, and 
Saunaka with his son, and Vyasa, best of Sages, and Durvasas, foremost of 
Munis, and Jabali of great austerities — all these lustrous Rishis, endowed 
with the wealth of tapasya, are waiting for you. Mighty king, meet with 
these by undertaking a tirtha-yatra to all the tirthas. 

A great Rishi of immeasurable tejas, Lomasa, will come to you. Follow 
him, and me, and visit the tirthas one by one. By this, you will acquire great 
fame, even like King Mahabhisha! O tiger among kings, even as the 
virtuous Yayati and King Pururava, you blaze forth with your own virtue. 
Like King Bhagiratha and the illustrious Rama, you shine among kings 
even as the Sun himself. And you are, Maharajan, celebrated in the world 
even as Manu or Ikshvaku, or the famed Puru or Vainya! 

As in days of yore, the slayer of Vritra, after burning all his enemies, 
ruled the three worlds, his mind freed from anxiety, so will you rule your 
people, after killing all your enemies. And, O you of eyes like lotus leaves, 
having conquered the earth according to the customs of your varna, you will 
have renown by your dharma, fame even like Kartaviryarjuna."" 

Vaisampayana continued, "O great King Janamejaya, having comforted 
and advised the monarch thus, the illustrious Rishi Narada bids him 
farewell and vanishes before Yudhishtira's eyes. And the virtuous 
Yudhishtira, reflecting upon what Narada Muni said, begins to describe to 
his Brahmanas and Rishis the great spiritual merit attaching to the tirthas." 


CANTO 86 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


vos continued, "Having ascertained the opinion of his 
brothers, and of the intelligent Narada, Yudhishtira says to Dhaumya, 
who was even like the Pitamaha himself, 'I have sent Purushavyaghra 
Jishnu away to acquire the Devastras. Arjuna, whose prowess can never be 
baffled, whose arms are long and his intelligence immeasurable — that hero 
of immense ability and a master of weapons, who is like the peerless 
Vasudeva himself, is devoted to me. 

O Brahmana, I know both Krishna and Arjuna, those destroyers of 
enemies, endowed with untold prowess, even as the puissant Vyasa knows 
them. I know Vasudeva and Dhananjaya to be none else than Vishnu 
himself, possessed of the six gunas. And this is what Narada also knows, 
for he has always spoken so to me. I also know the two to be the Rishis 
Nara and Narayana. 

I have sent Arjuna on this mission, knowing that he will accomplish it. 
Not inferior to Indra and entirely capable, I have sent that son of a god to 
meet the king of the Devas and to receive astras from him. 

Bhishma and Drona are Atirathas. Kripa and the son of Drona are 
invincible; Dhritarashtra's son has made these mighty warriors the 
commanders of his army. All of them are versed in the Vedas, they are 
heroic, and possess of the knowledge of every weapon. Endowed with great 
strength, they always want to face Arjuna in battle. 

And the Sutaputra Kana is also a mighty warrior, a master of celestial 
astras. As far as the swiftness of his missiles is concerned, he owns the 
strength of Vayu. Himself a fire, his arrows are like great tongues of flame; 
the sound his left hand cased in leather makes, when he looses these shafts, 
are like those flames crackling. The dust of the battlefield is the smoke of 
the fire. Spurred on by the son of Dhritarashtra, even as the wind urges agni, 
Kama is like the all-consuming apocalypse at the end of the Yuga, which 
Death himself sends. He will consume my troops like straw. 

Only that awesome thunderhead called Arjuna, helped along by Krishna 
like a powerful wind, with devastras its fierce lightning, the white steeds the 
rows of white cranes coursing below it, and the unbearable Gandiva the 


rainbow ahead, can extinguish the conflagration that is Kama with arrowy 
showers loosed with unflagging consistency. 

I have no doubt that that conqueror of hostile cities, Bibhatsu, will 
acquire all the celestial astras, with their awesome might and energy, from 
Indra himself. I believe that Arjuna by himself is equal to all the great 
heroes that oppose us; otherwise, we could never hope to vanquish them. 

We shall see Arjuna, Parantapa, entirely armed with devastras, for once 
he undertakes a task he never droops under its weight. 

However, without him here in the Kamyaka, Draupadi and we can find 
no peace. So, tell us of some other vana, which is sacred and full of delight, 
where game and fruit abound, where pious Munis live in tapasya, and 
where we can pass our days waiting as eagerly for mighty Arjuna as the 
Chataka birds do the gathering of rainclouds. Tell us of some asramas; tell 
us where we can find lakes and streams and beautiful mountains. 

O Brahmana, I cannot stay on in this Kamyaka without Arjuna. All of us 
want to leave and go elsewhere." 


CANTO 87 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vo said, "Seeing the Pandavas so anxious and dejected, 
Dhaumya, who resembles Brihaspati, comforts them, 
'Bharatarishabha, sinless one, listen to me and I will tell you about some 
holy asramas and lands and tirthas and mountains of which the great 
Brahmanas approve. Listen to me, yourself, your brothers and Drupada's 
daughter, and you will find relief from your sorrow. Son of Pandu, by 
merely hearing of these places, you will acquire punya; by visiting them, 
you will gain merit a hundred times greater, O best of men! 

First, O King, I will, as far as I recall, speak of the beautiful eastern 
country, much adored by Rayarishis. In that direction, O Bhaarata lies a 
place called Naimisha which is regarded by the Devas. There, in that land, 
are several tirthas belonging to the gods. There, too, flows the sacred and 
beautiful Gomati, worshipped by Devarishis; and there, as well, stands the 
sacrificial stake of Surya. 

In that quarter is also that best of hills, Gaya, and much regarded by 
royal Sages. On that hill, is the auspicious lake called Brahmasara, which is 
adored by celestial Rishis. The ancients say that one should wish for many 
sons, so that at least one among them might visit Gaya, perform the 
Aswamedha or give away a Nila bull, and thereby deliver ten generations of 
his clan, up and down. 

There, O Yudhishtira, is a great river and a particularly auspicious spot 
called Gayasira. In Gayasira is a nyagrodha, a banyan tree, which the 
Brahmanas call the Eternal banyan: for, food that is offered there to the 
Pitrs becomes eternal, O Mahatman! The great river that flows by the tree is 
known by the name of Phalgu, and its waters are most sacred. 

Bharatarishabha, in that place is also the Kausiki, whose basin abounds 
in various fruit and roots, and where Viswamitra, his wealth his tapasya, 
acquired Brahmanahood. 

Towards that direction also is the Ganga, on whose banks Bhagiratha 
performed many sacrifices with profuse gifts to Brahmanas. 

They say that in the country of Panchala there is a forest called Utpala, 
where Viswamitra of Kausika's race performed sacrifices with his son, and 


where, seeing the relics of Viswamitra's superhuman power, Rama, the son 
of Jamadagni, recited the praises of his ancestry. At Kamyaka, Kausika's 
son once quaffed the Soma rasa with Indra. Then, abandoning the Kshatriya 
varna, he said, "I am a Brahmana!" 

In that quarter, O hero, is the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna, which is 
celebrated the world over. Holy and sin-destroying, that tirtha is much 
reverenced by the Rishis. It is here that the soul of all things, Brahma the 
Grandsire, in olden days, performed his sacrifice; and it is for this, O lord of 
the Bhaaratas, that the place has come to be called Prayaga. 

In this direction, O foremost among kings, lies the beautiful asrama of 
Agastya, and the forest called Tapasa, which many Rishis adorn. And there 
also is the great tirtha called Hiranyabindu on the Kalanjara hills, and that 
best of mountains called Agastya, which is sacred and auspicious. 

In that quarter, O scion of the Kurus, is the mountain called Mahendra, 
sacred to the illustrious Rama of the Bhrigus. There, Kaunteya, the 
Grandsire performed sacrifices of yore. There, O Yudhishtira, the sacred 
Bhagiratha enters a lake and there also, O King, is that holy river, the 
punya-giving Brahmasara, on whose banks live men whose sins have been 
washed away, whose very sight bestows great grace. 

In that direction, also, lies the high-souled Matanga's fine asrama, 
Kedara, which is holy and auspicious and renowned through the world. 
There is also the mountain called Kundoda, so delightful and abounding in 
fruit and roots and waters, where Nala, king of the Nishadhas, slaked his 
thirst and rested a while. 

In that quarter, also, is the delighltful Deva-vana, graced by ascetics; 
there, too, are the rivers Bahuda and Nanda on the mountain's crest. Mighty 
king, I have described to you all the tirthas and other sacred places in the 
eastern quarter. 

Hear now of the tirthas, and rivers and mountains and holy places in the 
other three quarters.'" 


CANTO 88 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


cc haumya continues, 'Listen, O Bhaarata, and I will now I tell you 

Diner the holy tirthas of the south. In that quarter flows the sacred 
and auspicious Godavari, full of crystalline water, abounding in tapovanas 
and frequented by ascetics. 

In the south also are the rivers Vena and Bhimarathi, both of which 
destroy sin and fear, and their banks abounding in birds and deer, and 
graced with the hermitages of Munis. In that part, too, O Bharatarishabha, is 
the tirtha of the Rajarishi Nriga — the river Payoshni, enchanting and 
brimfull of water and visited by Brahmanas. There the lustrous 
Markandeya, of lofty ascetic merit sang the praises, in verse, of King 
Nriga's line. 

We have heard what happened to King Nriga while performing a yagna 
at the auspicious Varaha tirtha on the Payoshni. Indra became intoxicated 
by drinking the Soma rasa during the sacrifice, and the Brahmanas, with the 
gifts they received. The water of the Payoshni, taken up in a vessel or 
flowing along the ground, or as spray blown by the wind, can cleanse a 
person from whatever sins he may commit until the the day of his death. 

Higher than heaven itself, and pure, and created and given by the 
Trisulin, in that tirtha is an image of Mahadeva, seeing which a mortal 
attains to Sivaloka. Placing on a scale Ganga and the other rivers with their 
waters on one side, and on the other the Payoshni, in my opinion the latter 
would outweigh all the other tirthas in terms of punya. 

Then, O Bharatottama, upon the mountain called Varuna-strotasa is the 
auspicious vana Mathara, with its plenitude of fruit and roots, and 
containing a sacrificial stake. In the land north of the Praveni, and around 
the holy asrama of Kanva, are many tapovanas of Rishis. 

And, O child, in the tirtha called Surparaka are two sacrificial platforms 
of the illustrious Jamadagni, known as Pashana and Punaschandra. And, O 
son of Kunti, in that place is the tirtha Asoka, also with an abundance of 
hermits' tapovanas. 

And, O Yudhishtira, in the country of the Pandyas are the tirthas named 
Agastya and Varuna. Bull among men, there, amongst the Pandyas, is the 


tirtha called the Kumaris. 

Listen, O son of Kunti, I will now describe Tamraparni. In that asrama, 
the Devas, impelled by the desire of obtaining salvation, performed tapasya. 
In that country, also, is the lake of Gokarna, celebrated across the three 
worlds, which is full of cool, pure water, and which is auspicious, and can 
bestow great punya. That lake is extremely difficult of access to men of 
unpurified hearts and souls. 

Near that tirtha is the asrama of Agastya's disciple, the mountain 
Devasabha, which abounds in trees and grass, and fruit and roots. And there 
also is the Vaidurya mountain, delightful, replete with gemstones and which 
bestows great spiritual merit. There on that mountain is the hermitage of 
Agastya, rich with fruit and roots and water. 

Lord of men, I will now describe the tirthas, asramas, and holy rivers 
and lakes that belong to the Surashtra country. O Yudhishtira, the 
Brahmanas say that on the sea-coast is the Chamasodbheda, and also 
Prabhasa, that tirtha which is highly regarded by the gods. There also is the 
tirtha called Pindaraka, frequented by ascetics and which can bestow great 
punya. 

In that region is a mighty hill named Ujjayanta, which is conducive to 
quick success, about which Devarishi Narada of great intelligence has 
composed an ancient sloka. By performing tapasya on the sacred hill of 
Ujjayanta in Surashtra, which abounds in birds and animals, a person 
becomes honoured in heaven. 

Dwaravati is also in this region, producing great merit, where 
Madhusudana dwells, who is the Ancient One, in embodied form, and the 
Sanatana Dharma. Brahmanas versed in the Vedas, and men who know the 
Atma Vidya say that the illustrious Krishna is eternal Virtue. Govinda is 
said to be the purest of all pure things, the most righteous of the righteous 
and the most auspicious of the auspicious. 

In all the three worlds, He of eyes like lotus-leaves is the God of gods, 
and is eternal. He is the pure soul and the Life of life, the Supreme Brahman 
and the lord of all. That slayer of Madhu, Hari of inconceivable soul, dwells 
in Dwaravati!' 


CANTO 89 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


| @ seer continues, 'O Bhaarata, I will describe to you the holy tirthas, 
which lie in the west, in the land of the Anartas. There, in a westward 
course the sacred river Narmada flows, graced by priyangu and mango 
trees, and garlanded with thickets of bamboo. All the tirthas and rivers and 
woods and foremost of mountains that are in the three worlds, all the gods 
with the Grandsire, along with the Siddhas, the Rishis and the Charanas, 
Kurusthama, always come to bathe in the sacred waters of the Narmada. 

And I have heard that the holy asrama of the Muni Visravas once stood 
there, and that there was born the Lord of treasures, Kubera, who has men 
for his vahanas. There also is that best of hills, the auspicious Vaidurya peak 
with abundant trees that are evergreen and always graced with flowers and 
fruit. Lord of the earth, on the top of that mountain is a tank laden with full- 
blown lotus, to which the Devas and the Gandharvas come. Many are the 
wonders, O mighty King, that can be seen on that holy mountain, which is 
like swarga itself and which is visited by celestial Rishis. 

There, O subduer of hostile cities, is the sacred river called Viswamitra, 
which belongs to the Rajarishi of that name and which teems, O Rajan, with 
tirthas. It was on the banks of this river that Yayati, the son of Nahusha, fell 
from heaven among the virtuous, and also obtained once more the eternal 
regions of the righteous. 

In this region also are the famed lake called Punya, the mountain called 
Mainaka, and that other mountain Asita, rich with fruit and roots. And here 
also is the hermitage of Kakshasena, and O Yudhishtira, the asrama of 
Chyavana, also, which is famed in every country, O son of Pandu. In that 
place, O noble one, men attain to moksha without performing severe 
austerities. 

Here, also, Maharajan, is the land called Jambumarga, inhabited by birds 
and deer, where Sages of self-restraint dwell, O foremost of those that have 
subdued their senses. 

Next, lie the exceedingly sacred Ketumala and Medhya, always graced 
by Munis, and, O lord of earth, Gangadwara, and the renowned vana of 
Saindhava, most holy, where the regenerate ones dwell. Here also is the 


celebrated lake of Brahma, called Pushkara, the favourite abode of the 
Vaikanasas, and Siddhas and Rishis. 

Moved by the desire of having its protection, the Creator sang this verse 
at Pushkara, O lord of the Kurus and most virtuous of men — If a man of 
pure soul ever imagines a pilgrimage to the Pushkara, he is purged of all his 
sins and rejoices in swarga!' 


CANTO 90 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


| @ ee continues, 'O tiger among kings, I will now describe the 
tirthas and sacred places that lie in the north. Do you, O exalted one, 
listen to me attentively. By hearing this narration, O Kshatriya, one acquires 
a reverential frame of mind, which is conducive to great good. 

In those parts, flows the most sacred Saraswati, abounding in tirthas and 
her banks easy of descent. There, also, O son of Pandu, is the impetuous 
ocean-going Yamuna, and the tirtha called Plakshavatarana, which bestows 
high merit and prosperity. It was there that the Brahmanas bathed after 
having performed the Saraswata Yagna. 

Sinless one, in the famed celestial tirtha called Agni-siras, which 
generates great punya, the King Sahadeva once performed a sacrifice, after 
measuring out the sacrificial ground by a throw of the Samya. It is for this 
reason, Yudhishtira, that Indra sang the praises of Sahadeva in verses, 
which are still current in this world, and recited by the Dvijas — On the 
Yamuna Sahadeva worshipped the sacrificial fire, with gifts in a hundred 
thousands to Brahmanas. 

There, too, the illustrious king, the imperial Bharata, performed thirty- 
five horse-sacrifices. 

O child, I have heard that Sarabhanga once used to fully gratify the 
desires of the Brahmanas. In this region is his celebrated asrama, which 
produces great merit. In that land also, O son of Pritha, is the river 
Saraswati, which is ever worshipped by the gods, where, in elder days, the 
Balakhilyas, O great king, performed sacrifices. 

In the northern region, also, O Yudhishtira, is the renowned river 
Drishadwati, which bestows great punya. Then, O chief of men, are 
Nyagrodhakhya, and Panchalya, and Punyaka and Dalbhyaghosha, and 
Dalbhya, which are, O son of Kunti, the sacred resort in this world of 
illustrious Anantayasas of excellent vows and great energy, and which are 
celebrated over the three worlds. 

Here, too, O lord of men, the illustrious Etavarna and Avavarana, versed 
in the Vedas, learned in Vedic lore, and proficient in the knowlegde of Vedic 
rites, performed sacrifices of great merit, O king of the Bhaaratas. 


Here in the north, is also Visakhayupa to which, in days of yore, came 
the Devas with Varuna and Indra, and performed tapasya. And that is why 
the place is so eminently auspicious. 

Here, also, is Palasaka, where the great and lustrous and most blessed 
Rishi Jamadagni performed sacrifices, and all the great rivers, in their 
embodied forms, each bringing their own holy waters, stood surrounding 
that best of sages. And there also, O king, Viswavasu, Agni himself, at 
seeing that Mahatmans initiation, sang this sloka — The rivers, coming to the 
illustrious Jamadagni, who was sacrificing to the gods, gratified the 
Brahmanas with offerings of honey. 

O Yudhishtira, the place where Ganga rushes past, cleaving that king of 
mountains, which is frequented by Gandharvas and Yakshas and Rakshasas 
and Apsaras, and inhabited by hunters, and Kinnaras, is called Gangadwara. 
Sanatkumara regards that place visited by Brahmarshis, as also the tirtha 
Kanakhala that is near it, as being sacred. 

There, as well, is the mountain named Puru to which great Rishis come, 
and where Pururavas was born, and Bhrigu performed tapasya, for which 
that asrama has become known as Bhrigutunga. 

Near that peak is the sacred and extensive Badari, most auspicious 
asrama, famed over the three worlds, of Him, O Bharatarishabha, who is the 
Present, the Past and the Future, who is called Narayana and Lord Vishnu, 
who is eternal and the best of purushas, and who is pre-eminently 
illustrious. 

Near Badari, the cool current of Ganga was once warm, and her banks 
there were covered with golden sands. There the Devas and Rishis of high 
fortune and great effulgence, approach the divine Lord Narayana, always, 
and worship him. All the universe, with all its tirthas and other holy places, 
is there where the divine and eternal Narayana, the Supreme soul, dwells, 
for he is Punya, he is the Parabrahman; he is the tirtha, he is the asrama; he 
is the First, he is the foremost of gods, and he is the great Lord of all 
creatures. He is eternal, he is the great Creator, and he is the highest state of 
blessedness. 

Learned men, versed in the scriptures, attain to great happiness by 
knowing him. 

In that place are the Devarishis, the Siddhas, and, indeed, all the Rishis, 
where the slayer of Madhu dwells, that primeval Deity and mighty Yogin. 
Let no doubt enter your heart that this place is the first of all holy places. 


These, O lord of the earth, are the tirthas and other sacred places in the 
world. These are all visited by the Vasus, the Sadhyas, the Adityas, the 
Marutas, the Aswins and the illustrious Rishis who resemble the celestials 
themselves. By journeying, O son of Kunti, to those places, with your 
Brahmanas and ascetics, and with your blessed brothers, you will be set free 
from fear!' says Dhaumya." 


CANTO 91 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vea continued, "O son of the Kurus, even as Dhaumya 
speaks, Rishi Lomasa of great tejas arrives there; and Yudhishtira, 
with his followers and his Brahmanas sits around that most righteous Sage, 
even as the celestials in heaven do around Indra. And having received him 
with reverence, Dharmaraja Yudhishtira enquires after the reason of his 
arrival, and the object of his wanderings. 

Well-pleased with his welcome, the illustrious Muni replies in sweet 
words which delight the Pandavas, 'Travelling at will, O Kaunteya, over all 
the realms, I came to Indra's abode and saw the lord of the Devas there. 
There, I saw your heroic brother, who can wield the bow with both hands, 
seated on the same throne with Sakra. Seeing Partha in the lofty place, I 
was greatly astonished, O tiger among men. 

Indra then said to me, "Go, Lomasa, to the sons of Pandu." At his behest, 
as also that of the noble Arjuna, I have come swiftly here to you, wanting to 
see you and your younger brothers. Child, I will relate something that will 
please you greatly, O son of Pandu. Listen to it, O king, with Krishnaa and 
the Rishis that are with you. 

Bharatarishabha, Partha has got that peerless weapon from Rudra for 
which you sent him on his journey. That fierce astra, the Brahmasira, which 
arose after the Amrita, and which Rudra once gained through stern tapasya. 
Arjuna now has that astra, along with the mantras to loose and withdraw it, 
and the rites for expiation and revival. 

Yudhishtira, Arjuna of immeasurable prowess has also acquired Vajras 
and Dandas and other celestial weapons from Yama and Kubera and Varuna 
and Indra. He has also music, both vocal and instrumental, thoroughly, and 
dancing and the art of the proper recitation of the Sama, from Vishwavasu's 
son. And having thus acquired weapons and mastered the Gandharva Veda, 
your third brother lives happily in Devaloka. 

Listen now Yudhishtira to the message of Indra. He commanded me, 
"You will go to the world of men. O best of Brahmanas, tell Yudhishtira that 
I said, 'Your brother Arjuna will soon return to you, having acquired the 
astras and also having accomplished a great deed for the Devas, which they 


themselves cannot accomplish. Meanwhile, devote yourself to sannyasa, 
along with your brothers. There is nothing superior to asceticism, and it is 
through sannyasa that a person achieves great results. 

And, O Bharatarishabha, I well know that Kama is endowed with great 
ardour and energy and strength and prowess, all incapable of being baffled. 
Well do I know that, skilled in fierce battle, he has no rival in war; that he is 
a mighty bowman, a hero who is a master of great weapons and cased in the 
best mail. Well do I know that that lofiy son of Aditya resembles Siva's son 
Kartikeya himself. 

I also well know the awesome natural prowess of the broad-shouldered 
Arjuna. In battle, Kama is not even a sixteenth part of Pritha's son. And as 
for the fear of Kama which is in your heart, O Parantapa, I will dispel that 
when Savyasachin leaves Devaloka. 

As for your intention, Kshatriya, to set out on a pilgrimage to the tirthas, 
Maharishi Lomasa will speak to you about that. And whatever that 
regenerate Sage says to you about the great merits of sannyasa and the 
tirthas, you must receive with respect and not otherwise,’ said the Lord 
Indra," Lomasa says. 


CANTO 92 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


- continues, "Listen now, O Yudhishtira, to what Dhananjaya said 
— 'Cause my brother Yudhishtira to attend to the practice of dharma, 
which leads to prosperity. Blessed with the wealth of asceticism, you are 
conversant with the highest dharma, with ascetic austerities of every kind, 
with the eternal duties of kings blessed with prosperity, and the high and 
sanctifying merit that men obtain from the tirthas. Persuade my brothers, 
the sons of Pandu, to acquire the punya attaching to the tirthas. With all 
your soul persuade the king to visit the tirthas and to give away kine. 

This is what Arjuna said to me. Indeed he also said, 'Protected by you, 
let Yudhishtira visit all the tirthas. You must also protect him from 
Rakshasas, watch over him in inaccessible regions and upon rugged 
mountain breasts. And as Dadhichi protected Indra, and Angiras protected 
the Sun, so must you, O Dvijottama, protect the sons of Kunti from demons. 
Along the way are many Rakshasas, big as mountain-cliffs, but with your 
protection, these will not be able to approach the sons of Kunti.' 

Obeying the command of Indra and the request of Arjuna, and also 
safeguarding you from all danger, I will come with you on your pilgrimage. 
I have visited the tirthas twice before, O Kuru, and with you I will go to 
them a third time. 

O Yudhishtira, Manu and other Rajarishis of great deeds journeyed to the 
tirthas. Indeed, a tirtha-yatra can dispel all fear. They that are crooked- 
minded, who do not have their minds under control, who are ignorant and 
perverse, do not, O Kauravya, bathe in tirthas. But you are ever virtuous 
and conversant with dharma and firm in keeping your promises. You will 
certainly free yourself from samsara, for, O Pandava, you are even like 
King Bhagiratha, or Gaya, or Yayati, or any one, O son of Kunti, that is like 
them." 

Yudhishtira replies, 'I am so overwhelmed with delight, O Brahmana, 
that I cannot find words to answer you. Who can be more fortunate than he 
who is remembered even by the lord of the Devas? Who can be more 
fortunate than he who has been favoured with your company, who has 
Dhananjaya for a brother, and who is thought of by Vasava himself? 


As for what you say, illustrious one, about a tirtha yatra, my mind had 
already been made up at what Dhaumya said to me. O Brahmana, I will set 
out at whatever hour you may be pleased to appoint, on the pilgrimage. This 
is my firm resolve!' 

Lomasa then says to Yudhishtira, who has made up his mind to go on the 
yatra, 'O mighty king, be light in your retinue, for so you will travel more 
easily.' 

Yudhishtira then says, 'Let those mendicants and Brahmanas and Yogis 
that cannot bear hunger and thirst, the fatigues of travel and toil, and the 
severity of winter, desist from coming with us. Let those Brahmanas also 
not come that live on sweetmeats, and they also that desire cooked food that 
is sucked or drunk, as well as meat. And let those also remain behind that 
are dependent on cooks. 

Let those citizens that have followed me from loyalty, and whom I have 
hitherto suppported, go back to King Dhritarashtra. He will give them 
succour and allowances. If, however, that king refuses to grant them proper 
allowances, the king of the Panchalas will, for my satisfaction and welfare, 
surely maintain them.' 

And now, though stricken with grief, the citizens and the prinicipal 
Brahmanas and Yatis set out for Hastinapura, and out of affection for 
Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, the royal son of Ambika receives them properly, 
and gratifies them with proper allowances. 

And the royal son of Kunti, with only a small band of Brahmanas, stays 
for three nights in Kamyaka, consoled by Lomasa." 


CANTO 93 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


yoo said, "The Brahmanas, who have been living with him in 
the forest, see the son of Kunti about to set out on his tirtha yatra, 
approach him, O King, and say, 'You are about to set out on your journey to 
the sacred tirthas, along with your brothers and the Rishi Lomasa. O King, 
O son of Pandu, take us with you, for without you we will never be able to 
visit them at any time. Surrounded by dangers and difficult of access, they 
are infested by beasts of prey. 

Those tirthas, O lord of men, are inaccessible to small bands of men. 
Greatest among bowmen, your brothers are always valiant; and with your 
protection, we also wish to visit the sacred places. Help us also, O lord of 
the earth, to acquire the punya of the tirthas. Protected by your valour, let 
us, as well, be cleansed of all our sins by visiting the sacred fords and 
bathing in their waters. 

Bathing in the tirthas, O Bhaarata, you will certainly gain the realms so 
difficult of acquisition, which only Kartavirya and Ashtaka, the Rajarishi 
Lomapada and the imperial and heroic Bharata earned for themselves. 
Rajan, we want to behold Prabhasa and the other tirthas, Mahendra and the 
other mountains, Ganga and the other rivers, and Plaksha and the other 
giant trees. 

If, O lord of men, you have any regard for Brahmanas, do our bidding; 
you will surely gain prosperity from this. Mahabaho, the tirthas swarm with 
Rakshasas that ever obstruct ascetic penances. It falls to you to protect us 
from them. Watched over by Lomasa and taking us with you, go to all the 
tirthas of which Dhaumya and the wise Narada spoke, as also to all those of 
which the celestial Lomasa, blessed with great ascetic wealth, told; and by 
this, be cleansed of all your sins.' 

Thus addressed respectfully by them, the king, that bull amongst the 
sons of Pandu, surrounded by his heroic brothers led by Bhima, with tears 
of joy in his eyes, says to all those ascetics, 'Let it be so.' 

So, at Lomasa's behest and Dhaumya's urging, that best of the Pandavas, 
his soul perfectly restrained, resolves to set out, along with his brothers and 
Draupadi of faultless features. Just then, the blessed Vyasa, as also Parvata 


and Narada, all of lofty wisdom, come to Kamyaka to meet the son of 
Pandu. Seeing them, Yudhishtira worships them with proper rites. 

Thus worshipped by the king, those blessed ones say, 'O Yudhishtira, O 
Bhima, and you twins, banish all evil thoughts from your minds. Purify 
your hearts and then set out for the tirthas. The Brahmanas have said that 
the observance of regulations for the body are called earthly vows, while 
efforts to purify the heart, so that it may be free from evil thoughts, are 
called spiritual vows. 

O King, the mind that is free from all evil thoughts is most pure. 
Purifying yourselves, therefore, harbouring only friendly feelings for all, go 
and see the tirthas. Observing earthly vows with your bodies and purifying 
your minds through spiritual vows, obtain all the fruit, as told to you, of 
pilgrimages: 

Saying, 'So be it,’ the Pandavas, with Krishnaa, have those celestial and 
human Rishis perform the customary propitiatory rituals. And having 
worshipped the feet of Lomasa and Dwaipayana and Narada and the divine 
Rishi Parvata, and accompanied by Dhaumya as also the ascetics that had 
been living with them in the forest, the Pandavas set out on the day 
following the full moon of Agrahayana in which the constellation Pushya is 
ascending. 

Dressed in bark and hides, and with matted locks on their heads, they are 
all cased in impenetrable mail and armed with swords. And, O Janamejaya, 
the heroic sons of Pandu, with quivers and arrows and swaords and other 
weapons, and accompanied by Indrasena and other attendants, with fourteen 
and one chariots, a number of cooks and servants of other classes, set out 
with their faces turned towards the east! 


CANTO 94 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


GC udhishtira says, 'O best of Devarishis, I do not think that I am 

Vou merit. Yet I am afflicted with so much sorrow that there 
never was a king like me. I think, however, that my enemies have no good 
in them, nor even any dharma. Then why, O Lomasa, do they prosper in this 
world?" 

Lomasa says, 'Do not grieve, O son of Pritha, that sinful men often do 
prosper as a consequence of the sins they commit. A man may be seen to 
prosper by his sins, obtain good therefrom and vanquish his enemies. 
However, destruction overtakes him to his very roots. 

O King, I have seen many Daityas and Danavas prosper through sin but I 
have also seen doom overtake them. O exalted one, I have seen all this in 
the Krita Yuga. 

The Devas practised dharma, while the Asuras abandoned it. The gods 
visited the tirthas, while the demons did not. And at first the sinful Asuras 
were possessed by pride; pride begot vanity and vanity begot wrath. And 
from wrath there arose every kind of evil propensity, and from these sprang 
shamelessness. And in consequence of shamelessness, good conduct 
disappeared from amongst them; and because they had become shameless 
and devoid of virtue and good conduct and virtuous vratas, forgiveness and 
prosperity and morality forsook them in no time. 

And then, O King, prosperity sought the Devas, while adversity found 
the Asuras; and when the Daityas and the Danavas, deprived of good sense 
by pride, were possessed by adversity, Kali also sought to possess them. 
And overwhelmed by pride, and destitute of rites and sacrifices, and devoid 
of reason and feeling, and their hearts full of vanity, destruction soon 
overtook them. Covered with infamy, the Daityas were quickly 
exterminated. 

However, the Devas, who were virtuous in their practices, going to the 
seas, the rivers, the lakes and the holy spots, cleansed themselves of all sins, 
O son of Pandu, through ascetic penances and sacrifices and gifts and 
blessings, and found prosperity. And because the gods always performed 


sacrifices and holy deeds abandoning every practice that was evil, and 
visited the tirthas, they acquired great good fortune. 

Be guided by this, O King; and you also, with your brothers, bathe in the 
tirthas, for then you will regain prosperity once more. This is the eternal 
road. As King Nriga and Sibi and Ausinara and Bhagiratha and Vasumanas 
and Gaya and Puru and Pururavas performed tapasya and, visiting the 
tirthas, touched sacred waters and saw illustrious Rishis, gained fame and 
sanctity and merit and wealth, so will you find fortune that is great. And as 
Ikshvaku with his sons, friends and followers, as Muchukunda and 
Mandhatri and King Marutta, as the Devas, through the power of asceticism 
and the Devarishis also, all gained fame, so will you also find great 
celebrity. The son of Dhritarashtra, on the other hand, enslaved by sin and 
ignorance, will, without doubt, soon be destroyed like the Daityas.'" 


CANTO 95 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Voor said, "The heroic sons of Pandu, accompanied by their 
followers, travelling from place to place, at last arrive at Naimisha. O 
King, reaching the Gomati, the Pandavas bathe in the sacred tirtha of that 
river, and having performed their ablutions there, they give away, O 
Bhaarata, both kine and wealth. Repeatedly offering oblations of water to 
the Devas, the Pitrs, and the Brahmanas, in the tirthas called Kanya, Aswa, 
and Gaya, and staying in Kalakoti and the Vishaprastha hills, the Pandavas 
then come to Bahuda and perform their ablutions in that stream. 

Going next, O lord of earth, to the sacrificial realm of the gods known as 
Prayaga, they bathe at the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna and living 
there, perform tapasya of great merit. And bathing in that tirtha, the 
Pandavas, of firm vratas, cleanse themselves of every sin. 

The sons of Pandu, accompanied by those Brahmanas, travel next to the 
tirtha called Vedi, sacred to the Creator and adored by ascetics. Staying 
there for some time and gratifying the Brahmanas with the fruit and roots of 
the wilderness and with ghee, those Kshatriyas begin to perform tapasya of 
deep punya. 

They next journey to Mahidhara consecrated by the great Rajarishi Gaya 
of unrivalled splendour. In that land is the mountain called Gayasira, as well 
as the enchanting river Mahanadi, her fine banks graced by thickets of 
bamboo. On that divine mountain of holy peaks is another tirtha, the 
Brahmsaras, adored by Rishis. On the banks of that lake, of old, Dharma 
Deva, eternal god of justice himself dwelt, and it was there that the 
illustrious Rishi Agastya went to see that deity. 

From that lake, all those sacred rivers arise, and in that tirtha, Mahadeva, 
wielder of the Pinaka, is present for ever. 

Arriving there, the Pandavas keep the vrata called Chaturmasya, 
observing all the rites of the great sacrifice called Rishiyagna. There that 
mighty tree called the Eternal Banyan stands; any sacrifice performed there 
produces merit that is eternal. In that sacrificial dais of the gods producing 
eternal punya, the Pandavas begin to fast with concentrated souls. And 
there, Brahmanas, by hundreds, endowed with the wealth of tapasya, come 


to them; these Brahmanas also all perform the Chaturmasya sacrifice 
according to the rites prescribed by the Rishis. 

In that tirtha, those Brahmanas old in knowledge and ascetic merit and 
masters of the Vedas, become the court of the lustrous sons of Pandu, and 
they discourse upon various subject of sacred import. And it was in that 
place that the wise and holy Shamata, who leads a life of celibacy, speaks to 
them, O King, of Gaya, the son of Amurtaraya. 

Shamata says, 'Gaya, the son of Amurttaraya, was one of the greatest of 
all Rajarishis. Listen to me, O Bhaarata, I will tell of his deeds of dharma. It 
was here, O King, that Gaya performed many sacrifices distinguished by the 
vast quantities of food he distributed and the profuse gifts he gave. Those 
yagnas had hundres of thousands of hills of cooked rice, lakes of clarified 
butter and rivers of curds, in many hundreds, and streams of rich curries, in 
thousands. 

Day after day, these were prepared and given to all comers, while, over 
and above this, Brahmanas and others, received more food that was clean 
and pure. During the conclusion of every sacrifice, when gifts were 
dedicated to the Brahmanas, the chanting of the Vedas reached the heavens. 
And so loud, indeed, was the sound of the Vedic mantras that nothing else, 
O Bhaarata, could be heard, for these sacred sounds filled the earth, the 
points of the horizon, the sky and heaven itself. 

Such were the wonders that people observed on those occasions. 
Gratified with the excellent food and drink that the illustrious Gaya 
provided, men, O Bharatarishabha, went about singing these verses: 


At Gaya's great sacrifice, who is there today, amongst creatures, that 
still wants to eat anymore? There are yet twenty-five mountains of food 
there after everyone has been fed! What Rajarishi Gaya of untold 
splendour has achieved in his sacrifice has never been achieved by men 
before, nor will be by any in the future. The gods have been so surfeited 
by Gaya with ghrita that they are unable to take anything that anybody 
else offers. As sand grains on earth, as stars in the firmament, as 
raindrops showered by clouds cannot ever be counted by anyone, so, 
too, can no one count the gifts given during Gaya's sacrifice! 


O son of the Kurus, many times did King Gaya perform such yagnas 
here, by the side of this Brahmasaras!" 


CANTO 96 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


vo said, "After this, the royal son of Kunti, who always gave 
profusely to Brahmanas, goes to the asrama of Agastya and takes up 
his abode in Duryjaya. It is here that that best of speakers, King Yudhishtira 
asks Lomasa why Agastya slew Vatapi in this place. And the king also 
enquires after the extent of that man-killing Daityas prowess, and the 
reason, also, why the illustrious Agastya's wrath was stirred against that 
Asura. 

So questioned, Lomasa says, 'O son of the Kurus, there was in the city 
called Manimati, in days of yore, a Daitya named Ilvala, whose younger 
brother was Vatapi. One day that son of Diti said to a Brahmana endowed 
with tapasyashakti, "Holy one, grant me a son equal unto Indra." 

The Brahmana, however, did not grant the Asura a son like Indra. At 
this, the Asura was inflamed with wrath, and from that day, O king, the 
Asura Ilvala became a killer of Brahmanas. And blessed with the power of 
maya, the angry Asura would transform his brother into a ram. And Vatapi, 
who could also assume any form at will, would assume the shape of a ram; 
and the flesh of that ram, after being properly cooked, was offered to 
Brahmanas as food. And after they ate, they were killed, for whoever Ilvala 
summoned with his voice would come back to Ilvala, re-embodied, even if 
he had gone to the land of Yama, and show himself to IIvala. 

So, tranforming Vatapi into a ram and cooking his flesh and feeding 
Brahmanas therewith, he would summon Vatapi. And the mighty Asura 
Vatapi, that enemy of Brahmanas, endowed with great strength and the 
power of illusion, upon hearing, the loud voice of Ilvala calling, would tear 
open the belly of the Brahmana and come out chortling! So it was that the 
evil Daitya Ilvala, having fed unsuspecting Brahmanas, frequently took 
their lives. 

Meanwhile, the illustrious Agastya saw his departed ancestors hanging 
in a pit with their heads downwards. He asked them, "What is the matter 
with you?" 

Those Brahmavadins replied, "We are your manes, and it is to have 
offspring that we hang in this pit. Agastya, if you can beget a good son, we 


can be saved from this hell and you will also find the blessed state of having 
a child." 

Blessed with great energy and observant of truth and dharma, Agastya 
replied, "O Pitrs, I will accomplish your desire. Let this anxiety of yours be 
dispelled." 

And the lustrous Rishi then began to think of perpetuating his race. But 
he did not see a wife worthy of him, from whom he himself could take birth 
in the form of a son. Then he took every part considered most beautiful 
from many who possessed these individually, and created an exquisite 
woman. 

That Muni, endowed with great tapasyashakti, gave that girl created for 
himeslf to the king of the Vidharbhas who was then performing tapasya to 
have children. Through Agastya's power, the lovely girl he had created was 
born into Vidarbhas royal line and, beautiful as effulgent lightning, she 
grew day by day. And as soon as that lord of earth—the king of the 
Vidarbhas—saw her ushered into life, he joyfully gave the news, O 
Bhaarata, to the Brahmanas. The Brahmanas blessed the girl and they 
named her Lopamudra. 

Possessed of great beauty, she began to grow as quickly as a lotus in the 
water or the flame of a fire. And when she attained puberty, a hundred 
virgins decked in ornaments and a hundred maids waited in obedience upon 
her; she shone in their midst, brilliant as she was, like Rohini in the 
firmament amidst an inferior multitude of stars. And possessed as she was 
of good conduct and excellent manners, none dared ask for her hand even 
when she attained puberty, through fear of her father, the king of the 
Vidharbhas. 

Lopamudra, devoted to truth, surpassing even the Apsaras in beauty, 
gratified her father and relatives with her deportment. Seeing his daughter 
turn into a young woman, her father began to think, "To whom should I 
give this daughter of mine?" 


CANTO 97 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Lo continues, 'When Agastya thought that that girl was competent 
or domesticity, he approached the king of the Vidharbhas, and said, "I 
ask you, O king, to give me your daughter Lopamudra." 

The king swooned; yet, though unwilling to give the Muni his daughter, 
he dared not refuse. Going to his queen, he said, "This Rishi has great 
power. If angered, he may consume me with the fire of his curse. O you of 
the sweet face, tell me what you wish." 

His queen did not say a word. Lopamudra saw them both distraught and 
came to them. She said, "O king, do not grieve on my account. Give me 
away to Agastya, and, O father, save yourself." 

So, the king gave Lopamudra to the illustrious Agastya with due rites. 
When she was his wife, Agastya said to Lopamudra, "Cast away these 
costly robes and ornaments." 

At the word of her lord, that large-eyed young woman, of thighs tapering 
as the stem of the plantain tree, put aside her fine and costly robes, and she 
dressed herself in rags and tree-bark and deer-skin, and became her 
husband's equal in vrata and karma. 

Going then to Gangadwara that best of Rishis began to practise the 
severest penances along with his dutiful and helpful wife. Lopamudra, 
herself well pleased, began to serve her lord from the deep respect that she 
bore him. The lofty Agastya also began to show great love for his wife. 

After a considerable time, O king, the Rishi one day saw Lopamudra, 
blazing in ascetic splendour, emerge from the stream after the bath, in her 
season. And pleased with the girl, for her services, her purity, and self 
control, as also with her grace and beauty, he called her to him for marital 
intercourse. 

However, the girl, folding her hands, said bashfully but lovingly to the 
Rishi, "The husband, without doubt, weds the wife for offspring. But, O 
Muni, I beg you show me the same love which I bear for you. O Dviyja, it 
becomes you to approach me on a bed like the one I had in the palace of my 
father. I also want you to be decked in garlands of flowers and other 


ornaments, and that I should come to you adorned in the celestial ornaments 
that I like. 

Otherwise, I cannot come to you, dressed in these rags dyed in red. Nor, 
O regenerate Rishi, is it sinful to wear ornaments on such an occasion." 

Agastya replied, "O blessed girl, you of the slender waist, I do not have 
wealth like what your father has, Lopamudra!" 

She said, "You who have the wealth of tapasya can certainly fetch 
anything that exists in the world of men, in a moment, by your power." 

Agastya said, "It is even as you say, but that would exhaust my punya. 
O bid me do what may not make me lose my ascetic merit." 

Lopamudra then said, "O Muni, my season will not last long, but I do 
not wish to come to you otherwise, nor do I wish to diminsh your punya in 
any way. You must do as I wish, without injuring your virtue." 

Agastya then said, "O blessed one, if this is your resolve, upon which 
you have set your heart, I will go out in quest of wealth. Meanwhile, you 
stay here, as it pleases you." 


CANTO 98 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


| Bees continues, 'Agastya went to King Srutarvan who was regarded as 
icher than other kings, to beg for wealth. And that monarch, learning of 
the arrival of the pot-born Rishi on the frontiers of his kingdoms, went out 
with his ministers and received the holy one reverentially. The king duly 
offered the Sage arghya, submissively and with folded hands and then 
enquired after the reason for the Rishi's coming. 

And Agastya answered, "Lord of the earth, know that I have come to 
you for wealth. Give me what you can afford and without doing injury to 
anyone." 

The king, then, told the Rishi how his income and his expenditure were 
equal, adding, "Learned one, take from my possessions the wealth you 
please." 

Seeing however that the king's income and what he spent were equal, the 
Sage thought that if he took anything, he would deprive someone by what 
he did. So, taking Srutarvan with him, the Rishi went to Bhadhnaswa, who, 
hearing of their arrival on his frontiers, went forth to receive them. 
Bhadhnaswa also offered them the arghya and padya, water to wash their 
feet. Then, with their leave, he asked after the reason for their coming. 

Agastya said, "Lord of the earth, know that we have come to you for 
wealth. Give us what you can, while doing no injury to any of your 
subjects." 

That king informed them of how his income and his expenditure, also, 
were equal, and said, "Knowing this, take whatever you want." 

The Rishi, who saw all things with equal eyes, thought that if he took 
anything under the circumstances, what he did would injure all creatures. 
Agastya and Srutarvan, with King Bhadhnaswa then went to Purokutsa's 
son, Trasadasyu, of enormous wealth. The high-souled Trasadasyu learnt of 
their arrival on the border of kingdom, went out and received them with 
reverence. And that best of kings, in Ikshvaku's line, having worshipped all 
of them duly, asked why they had come. 

And Agastya said, "Lord of earth, know that we have all come to you for 
wealth. Give us what you can, while doing no creature any harm." 


That monarch then, also, told them how his income and his expenses 
were equal, and added, "Knowing this, take what you wish." 

However, seeing how that king's expenses were equal to his income, the 
Rishi, who saw all things with equal eyes, thought that if he took anything, 
he would harm all creatures. 

Now, Rajan, those kings looked at one another, and together said to the 
Rishi, "O Brahmana, there is a Danava called Ilvala, who of all beings on 
earth has the most wealth. Let us go together to him today and beg wealth 
of him." 

This suggestion, O king, of begging wealth of Ilvala appeared to them to 
be proper; and all of them went together to Ilvala.' 


CANTO 99 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Lo says, 'When Ilvala learnt that those kings along with the 
Maharishi had arrived on the confines of his domain, he went out with 
his ministers and worshipped them duly. And that prince of Asuras received 
them hospitably, entertaining them, O son of the Kuru race, with well 
cooked meat, which was that of his brother Vatapi, transformed into a ram. 

When those Rajarishis saw the mighty Asura Vatapi, who had changed 
into a ram, thus cooked for them, they became disconsolate and were 
almost senseless with grief and fear. 

But Agastya , best of Rishis, said to those royal sages, "Do not worry, I 
will eat the Asura." 

And the mighty Rishi sat himself down on an excellent chair, and the 
prince of Asuras, Ilvala, began to serve the food, smiling. Agastya ate up all 
of the meat of the ram which Vatapi had turned into. When the meal was 
over, Ilvala began to call out to his brother. But only a great belch of air 
issued from the belly of Agastya, with a sound, O child, as loud as the 
rumbling of clouds. 

Repeatedly, Ilvala called, "Come out, O Vatapi!" 

Then that best of Munis, Agastya, burst out laughing, and said, "How 
can he come out, I have digested him?" 

Ilvala was stricken, and folding his hands, along with his ministers, said, 
"What have you come here for? What can I do for you?" 

Smiling, Agastya replied, "We know, O Asura, that you have great 
power and great wealth, as well. I have great need of wealth and these kings 
cannot give it to me, being needy themselves. Give us what you can, 
without depriving anyone." 

Ilvala saluted the Rishi and said, "Say what I should give, and I will." 

Agastya said, "O great Asura, give each of these kings ten thousand 
cows and as many gold coins; and to me give twice as much, as well as a 
golden chariot and a pair of horses fleet as thought. Why, if you look even 
now you will find that your chariot has become made of gold." 

At which, O son of Kunti, Ilvala made enquiries and learnt that the car 
he intended to give away was really a golden one. His heart sad, the Daitya 


then gave away much wealth and that ratha, to which two steeds called 
Virava and Surava were yoked. Those steeds, O Bhaarata, took the kings 
and Agastya and all that wealth to the Sage's asrama, in the twinkling of an 
eye. Taking Agastya's leave, the Rajarishis went away to their respective 
cities. 

Agastya, using the wealth of the Asura, did all that Lopamudra wanted. 
And Lopamudra said, "Most illustrious one, you have given me everything 
I wanted. Now beget a son on me, a child of immense tejas." 

And Agastya replied, "Blessed and beautiful one, you have pleased me 
greatly with your conduct. Listen now to what I have to say with regard to 
your offspring. Would you have a thousand sons, or a hundred sons each 
equal to ten, or ten sons equal each to a hundred, or only one son who may 
vanquish a thousand?" 

Lopamudra answered, "Let me have one son equal to a thousand! One 
good and wise son is preferable to many evil ones." 

Saying, "So be it," that pious Muni took his chaste wife to himself, and 
after she had conceived, he retired into the forest. After Agastya Muni had 
gone away, the foetus grew inside Lopamudra for seven years. At the end of 
seven years, from her womb there issued the wise and learned Dridasyu, 
blazing, O Bhaarata, in his own splendour. He came forth auspiciously, as if 
chanting the Vedas, with the Upanishads and the Angas. 

Endowed with great energy while yet a child, he would carry loads of 
sacrificial fuel into his father's asrama, and so he was called Idhmavaha — 
the bearer of sacrificial wood. 

When Agastya saw his son, with such virtue, he was greatly pleased. So 
it was, O Bhaarata, that Agastya begot a splendid son, as a result of which 
his ancestors, O king, gained the realms they desired. And it is from that 
line that this place has become known in the world as Agastyasrama. 

Indeed, Rajan, this is the asrama of great beauty, of the Rishi Agastya 
who consumed Vatapi of the race of Prahlada. The sacred Bhagirathi, 
adored by Devas and Gandharvas, gently flows by this hermitage like a 
breeze-shaken pennon in the sky. Yonder also she flows over craggy crests, 
descending lower and lower, and looks like an affrighted she-snake lying 
along the hilly slopes. Issuing out of the matted locks of Mahadeva, she 
passes along through the southern country nurturing it like a mother; and 
ultimately flows into the ocean as if she were his favourite bride. 


Bathe as you like in this sacred river, you son of Pandu! And behold 
there, O Yudhishtira, the tirtha of Bhrigu that is celebrated throughout the 
three worlds and adored, O King, by Maharishis. Bathing there, Rama, of 
Bhrigu's race, regained his might, which had been taken from him by 
Dasaratha's son. Bathing here, O son of Pandu, with your brothers and 
Krishnaa, you will certainly regain that power of yours, which has been 
taken by Duryodhana, even as Parasurama regained his, which Dasaratha's 
son took from him during their hostile encounter:' 

At this, Yudhishtira bathes there with his brothers and Krishnaa, and 
offers oblations of water, O Bhaarata, to the Devas and the Pitrs. And, O 
bull among men, after Yudhishtira has bathed in that tirtha, his body blazes 
forth in brighter effulgence, and he becomes invincible to all his enemies. 

The Pandava asks Lomasa, 'Illustrious one, why were Rama's energy and 
might taken away? And how did he regain them? Mahatman, I beg you, tell 
me everything .' 

Lomasa says, ‘Listen, O king, to the tale of Dasaratha's son Rama and 
Rama of Bhrigu's line, of great intelligence. To kill Ravana, Vishnu 
incarnated himself as the son of Dasaratha. We saw Dasaratha's son in 
Ayodhya after he was born. It was then that Rama of Bhrigu's line, the son 
of Richika by Renuka, heard of Dasaratha's son Rama, of immaculate 
purity, and impelled by curiosity, he went to Ayodhya, taking with him the 
divine bow which had been the scourge of the Kshatriyas, to test the 
prowess of Dasaratha's son. 

Hearing that Rama of Bhrigu's race had arrived at the borders of his 
dominion, Dasaratha sent his own son Rama to receive the great one with 
reverence. Seeing Dasaratha's son approach and stand before him with his 
weapons, Rama of Bhrigu's line said challengingly, sneeringly, to him, "O 
king, O lofty one, if you can, with all your might, string this bow, which in 
my hands became the instrument of the destruction of the race of 
Kshatriyas." 

Dasaratha's son answered, "Illustrious one, it does not behove you to 
insult me like this. I do not lack the virtues of the Kshatriya varna, and the 
descendants of Ikshvaku, in particular, never boast of their prowess." 

Rama of Bhrigu's line replied, "Be done with clever talk and take the 
bow!" 

At this, Rama the son of Dasaratha, angered, took that celestial bow 
from the hands of Rama of Bhrigu's, that weapon which had killed the 


greatest Kshatriyas. And, O Bhaarata, the mighty prince smilingly strung 
that bow, effortlessly, and with its twang loud as thunder, terrified all 
creatures. 

Dasaratha's son Rama said to Parasurama Bhargava, "Here, I have strung 
this bow. What else, O Brahmana, shall I do for you?" 

Jamadagni's son Rama handed Dasaratha's Rama a heavenly arrow, and 
said, "Fit this to the bow-string and draw it to your ear, O Kshatriya!" 

Dasaratha's son blazed up in wrath and said, "I have listened to whatever 
you said and even forgiven you; O Bhargava, you are full of vanity. 
Through Brahma's grace you have got prowess superior to that of the 
Kshatriyas, and it is for this that you insult me. But behold me now in my 
pristine form — I give you sight." 

Then Rama, the Bhargava, saw in the body of Dasaratha's son the 
Adityas with the Vasus, the Rudras, the Sadhyas with the Marutas, the Pitrs, 
Hutasana, the stellar constellations and the planets, the Gandharvas, the 
Rakshasas, the Yakshas, the Rivers, the tirthas, those eternal Brahmarishis 
called the Balakhilyas, the Devarishis, the Seas and Mountains, the Vedas 
with the Upanishads and Vashats and the Yagnas, the Samans in their living 
form, the Science of weapons, O Bhaarata, and the Clouds with rain and 
lightning, O Yudhishtira! 

And lustrous Vishnu then loosed that arrow, and the earth was filled with 
sounds of thunder, and burning meteors began to flash through the sky; and 
showers of dust and rain fell upon the earth; and whirlwinds and frightful 
reverberations convulsed everything, and the earth herself began to quake. 

And shot by the hand of Rama, that shaft, confounding the other Rama, 
came back blazing into Rama's hands. Bhargava, who had fainted, regaining 
consciousness, now bowed to Rama -that manifestation of Vishnu's power. 
Then, commanded by Vishnu, he went away to the mountains of Mahendra, 
and then onwards that great ascetic began to live there, in terror and shame. 

When a year passed, the Pitrs, seeing Rama there, bereft of all vitality, 
his pride quelled, and sunk in affliction, said to him, "O son, having 
approached Vishnu, you did not behave properly towards him. He deserves 
worship for ever and reverence in the three worlds. Go, O child, to the 
sacred river Vadhusara. Bathing in all the tirthas of that stream, you will 
regain your vigour. There in that river is the tirtha Diptoda where your 
grandsire Bhrigu, O Rama, performed great tapasya in the Krita Yuga." 


Rama, O son of Kunti, did as the Pitrs asked, and at this tirtha, he 
regained the powers he had lost. This, O Pandava, was what befell the great 
Rama in days of yore, after he met Vishnu incarnate as Dasarathas son. 


CANTO 100 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Ve says, 'Dvijottama, I want to listen again in detail to the 
achievements of Agastya Rishi, of awesome glory.' 

Lomasa says, 'Listen then, O king, to the excellent and wonderful and 
extraordinary story of Agastya, as also about the prowess of that Rishi of 
immeasurable tejas. 

In the Krita Yuga there were some tribes of fierce Danavas that were 
invincible in battle, and they were called the Kalakeyas and possessed 
dreadful prowess. Banding together under Vritra and arming themselves 
with diverse weapons they hunted the Devas with Indra at their head, in all 
directions. 

The gods decided that Vritra must be killed, and went with Indra to 
Brahma. Seeing them standing before him with folded hands, Parameshti 
addressed them all, saying, "I know everything, O Devas, and why you 
have come. I will tell you how you can kill Vritra. 

There is a high-souled and great Rishi called Dadhicha. Go, all together, 
and seek a boon from him. He will become pleased, and that virtuous Rishi 
will grant you the boon. If you want victory, go and say to him: For the 
good of the three worlds, give us your bones. 

Renouncing his body, he will give you his bones. With these bones of 
his, make a fierce and powerful weapon, which will be called Vajra, with 
six sides, and a terrible roar, and capable of destroying even the most 
powerful enemies. With that weapon, Indra of a hundred sacrifices shall kill 
Vritra. 

This is all I have to say; see you do as I have told you, quickly." 

Taking his leave, the gods came away, and with Narayana at their head 
went to Dadhicha's asrama, which stood on the banks of the Saraswati, in an 
entwinement of many diverse trees and vines. The hermitage resounded 
with the hum of bees as if they were reciting Samans; it echoed with the 
melodious songs of the male kokila and the chakora. Bison and boar and 
deer and chamaras wandered there at their pleasure, free from the fear of 
tigers in this holy place; and tuskers with the juice of rut trickling down 


from rent temples, plunged in the stream, sported with she-elephants and 
made all the place resound with their trumpeting. 

The place also echoed with the roars of lions and tigers, while at times 
those grisly monarchs of the forest could be seen lying stretched in caves 
and glens, adorning them with their presence. Such was the asrama of 
Dadhicha, like a bit of heaven, which the gods entered. And there they saw 
Dadhicha looking like the Sun in splendour and ablaze with grace like the 
Grandsire himself. 

The Devas prostrated at the feet the Rishi, and bowing low before him, 
begged the boon that Brahma had told them to. 

Well pleased, Dadhicha said to those greatest of gods, "Devas I will do 
anything for your good, even give up this body of mine." 

Saying this, that greatest of men, his soul under perfect restraint, 
suddenly renounced his life. The gods then took the bones of the deceased 
Rishi as they had been directed to. Glad at heart, the Devas went to 
Tvashtri, the celestial Artificer, and told him about the way in which they 
could defeat the Asuras. 

Tvashtri was filled with joy, and, with great attention and care, he 
fashioned the awesome weapon called the Vajra. And having made it, he 
said happily to Indra, "Great One, make ashes of the terrible enemy with 
this ayudha; and having slain him, rule all the domains of swarga in joy, 
with all who follow you." 

Purandara took the Vajra from Tvashtri's hand, joyfully and with proper 
reverence. 


CANTO 101 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


| eee says, ‘Armed with the Vajra, and with the mighty Deva host 
behind him, Indra confronted Vritra, who was then ruling all of Swarga 
and Bhumi, heaven and earth. Kalakeyas, of immense bodies, guarded 
Vritra on every side, with upraised weapons and resembling great 
mountains with towering peaks. 

The battle between the Devas and the Danavas lasted for a short while 
and was, O lord of the Bhaaratas, terrific in the extreme, appalling the three 
worlds. Thunderous was the clash of swords and scimitars, wielded by 
heroic hands. Heads that had been severed fell down from the sky onto the 
earth like fruits of the palmyra falling onto the ground, when loosened from 
their stalks. 

Armed with iron-mounted bludgeons and cased in golden mail, the 
Kalakeyas ran against the gods, like moving mountains afire. And unable to 
stand the shock of that ferocious and haughty host, the Devas broke ranks 
and fled in fear. Purandara of a thousand eyes saw his gods flying in terror 
and Vritra growing in boldness, and Indra was dejected. 

Now, terrified himself by the Kalakeyas, Indra, king of the Devas, 
sought refuge with Narayana, the Supreme One. Seeing Indra so distraught, 
eternal Vishnu infused the Deva with a part of his own infinite prowess; and 
when the Devas saw that Vishnu now protected Sakra, each of them also 
transferred a portion of his prowess to Indra. 

The taintless Brahmarishis also imparted their mystic energies to the lord 
of the celestials. Indra was mightier than ever, and when Vritra learnt that 
the Deva king was infused with powers of others, he sent forth some terrific 
roars. At these, the earth, the directions, the firmament, heaven, and the 
mountains, all began to tremble. 

Hearing this awful sound, Indra was filled with fear and, wanting to kill 
the Asura quickly, cast, O king, the mighty Vajra at the Demon. Struck by 
Indra's Vajra, the great Asura, decked in gold and garlands fell headlong, 
like the great mountain Mandara hurled of old by Vishnu's hands; and 
although the prince of Daityas was slain, yet Indra ran in panic from the 
field, and took shelter in a lake, thinking the Vajra had not killed Vritra. 


However, the Devas and the Maharishis were filled with joy, and all of 
them began to joyously sing Indra's praises. Mustering their forces again, 
the gods began to slaughter the demons, now dispirited at the death of their 
leader. The Danavas fled into the depths of the sea; and having entered the 
fathomless deep teeming with fish and crocodiles, the Asuras assembled 
together and arrogantly began to conspire to destroy the three worlds. 

Those among them that were deemed wise suggested different courses of 
action, each according to his judgment. In course of time, however, the 
dreadful resolution those sons of Diti arrived at was that they should, first of 
all, compass the destruction of all men of knowledge and ascetic virtue: for, 
the worlds are all supported by tapasya. 

Therefore, they said, "Lose no time in wiping out dhyana and yagnas. 
Kill all those on earth who have ascetic virtues, those who know the ways 
of karma and dharma, and especially those that have knowledge of 
Brahman; for when these are dead, the very universe will be destroyed." 

Arriving at this decision to destroy the universe, the Danavas were 
pleased. They made the ocean—that realm of Varuna—with waves high as 
hills, their fortress, from which to make their attacks.' 


CANTO 102 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


| Pavia says, 'The Kalakeyas began to put their plan to destroy the 
niverse in motion. During the darkness of night, the angry Daityas 
would issue from the Sea and devour all the Munis they found in wooded 
asramas and other sacred places. 

In Vasishta's asrama, the evil ones ate a hundred and eighty Brahmanas, 
besides nine other ascetics. Going on to Chyavana's hermitage, home to 
many Brahmacharis, they devoured another hundred Brahmanas who lived 
on just fruit and roots. 

While these depredations continued through the nights, they returned to 
safety under the sea by day. In Bharadwayja's asrama, they killed a score of 
Brahmanas of subdued souls, Brahmacharis who lived just on air and water. 
So, the Kalakeyas, intoxicated with power and their lives nearly run out, 
invaded every Rishis asrama, one by one, during the hours of darknes, and 
slaughtered numberless holy Brahmanas. 

And, O best of men, though they continued with these savage attacks, 
killing so many Sages in their asramas, no one could find them, or where 
they hid. Every morning dead bodies of fragile Munis were found, many of 
them without flesh and without blood, without marrow, without entrails, and 
with limbs torn from one another; here and there, bones were heaped like 
conch shells. 

And the earth was strewn with the contents of broken sacrificial urns and 
shattered ladles for pouring libations of clarified butter and with the ruins of 
sacred fires once kept burning with care by the ascetics. 

And the universe, afflicted with terror of the Kalakeyas, and without the 
Vedas being chanted or vashats or sacrificial festivals or religious rites, was 
dreary and without any joy. O king, when men began to perish in this way, 
the survivors, taken with fear, fled for their lives in all directions; some fled 
to caverns and some hid behind mountain-streams and springs, while others 
just died of fight. 

But some that were brave and mighty bowmen, spiritedly, cheerfully, 
went out and took great pains to track the Danavas to their lair; however, 


they did not find them because the demons hid beneath the sea. The valiant 
bowmen returned to their homes, at least satisfied that they had searched. 

And, O lord of men, while the universe was being ruined, and when 
sacrificial festivals and religious rites had all ceased, the gods became 
deeply perturbed. Gathering together around Indra, they held council; and 
then going to the exalted and un-born Narayana—that unvanquished God of 
Vaikunta—the celestials sought his protection. 

Bowing to Madhusudana, the Devas said, "O Lord, you are the creator, 
the protector, and the destroyer of ourselves, as well as of the universe. It is 
you who have created this universe with its mobile and immobile creatures. 
O lotus-eyed one, in days of old, you took the form of the Varaha and raised 
the sunken earth out of the Sea, to benefit all beings. 

Purushottama, you assumed the form of the Narasimha, and, in ancient 
times, killed the mighty Asura Hiranyakasipu; taking the form of the 
Vamana, you subdued the invincible Bali, and thrust him down into Patala. 
Lord, it was you who killed the evil Jambha, who was a matchless bowman 
and who always desecrated and obstructed sacrifices. 

Achievements like these, beyond count, belong to you. O slayer of 
Madhu, we are taken with terror and have only you for our refuge. 
Devadeva, protect the worlds, the gods, and Sakra also, from this terrible 
fear." 


CANTO 103 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


he Devas said, "Through your grace everything is born and the four 

kind of beings increase. And being created, they worship the 
swargavasis with offerings made to the gods and the manes of departed 
fathers. 

So, protected by you and free from troubles, they live depending on one 
another, and increase. Now this peril has befallen the people. We do not 
know who is killing the Brahmanas during the night. But if the Brahmanas 
are destroyed, the earth itself will cease to exist, and if the earth comes to an 
end, heaven also will cease to exist. 

Mahabaho, O lord of the universe, we beg you to save all the worlds!" 

Vishnu said, "Devas, I know the reason why these Brahmanas die; I will 
tell of it, listen to me with calm minds. There exists a savage and ferocious 
host of demons called Kalakeyas. Led by Vritra, these were devastating the 
very universe. 

When the thousand-eyed Indra slew Vritra, to save their lives these 
Kalakeyas submerged themselves in Vaurna's domain, the ocean. Making 
the ocean deeps, which abound with sharks and crocodiles, their refuge, 
they come out at nights, and kill the holy sages, with a view to ending the 
worlds. 

But they cannot be killed, since they have made the sea deeps their 
sanctuary. Think of some way to dry up the ocean, and I say to you -who 
but Agastya can achieve this thing? Without drying up the sea, you have no 
way to attack these Asuras. 

The gods listened to Vishnu, then sought leave from Brahma, who lives 
in the best of all lokas, and then went to the hermitage of Agastya. They 
saw the high-souled Agastya, the son of Varuna, of resplendent mien, 
waited upon by sages, even as Brahma is by gods. 

Approaching that son of Mitra and Varuna in his asrama, that 
magnanimous and unswerving one, who looked like an embodiment of 
pious karma heaped together, they glorified him by reciting his deeds. 

The deities said, "You were once the refuge of the gods when Nahusha 
oppressed them. Thorn of the world that he was, he was cast down from his 


throne in swarga — from the very celestial realms. 

Vindhya, foremost of mountains, suddenly began to increase his height, 
due to an angry competition with the Sun, but you commanded him to stop 
and he could not refuse you and stopped growing. 

And when darkness covered the world, the created were all threatened 
by death, but having gained you for a protector, they found utmost security. 
Whenever peril besets us, you are always our refuge; this is why we have 
come to ask a boon from you, and we know that you always grant any boon 
for which you are asked." 


CANTO 104 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


vo says, 'O Maharishi, I am eager to know in detail how 
Vindhya became so incensed that he began to grow.' 

Lomasa says, 'Between his rising and setting, the Sun used to revolve 
around that monarch of mountains — the great Meru of golden lustre. Seeing 
this, the Mountain Vindhya said to Surya, "As you go every day round 
Meru and honour him with your pradakshinas, do the same to me, O maker 
of light!" 

The Sun replied to the great mountain, "I do not honour Meru by my 
own will. Those who have made this universe have assigned my path to 
me." 

Wrathful in a moment, the Vindhya mountain suddenly began to increase 
his size, for, O Parantapa, he wanted to obstruct the paths of the Sun and the 
Moon. All the Devas assembled and came to Vindhya, that mighty king of 
mountains, and tried to dissuade him from this. But he paid no heed to their 
entreaties. 

Then the gods went to the Sage in his asrama, at his tapasaya, the very 
best and most powerful of those who are devoted to dharma, and told 
Agastya Muni what had happened. 

The Devas said, "This king of hills, Vindhya, has yielded to anger and 
stops the paths of the Sun and the Moon, and also the course of the stars. O 
best of Brahmanas! O most gifted one! None but you can make him desist; 
we beg you, make him stop." 

Hearing what the Devas said, the Brahmana came to the mountain; and, 
with his wife, he said to the Vindhya, "O best of mountains, give me a path, 
for I need to go south for a purpose of mine. Until my return, wait for me; 
and when I have come back grow on as much as you please!" 

Parantapa, having made this compact with Vindhya, Varuna's son has 
not, until today, returned from the southern region. So it is that, by 
Agastya's power, the Vindhya has not grown any further. 

Now, O king, listen to how the Devas killed the Kalakeyas, after getting 
their boon from Agastya Muni. 


Having heard what the gods said, Agastya, the son of Mitra and Varuna, 
said, "Why have you come here? What boon do you want from me? 

The Devas replied, "0 Magnanimous, we beg you to drink up the ocean 
and drain it, for then we shall be able to kill the Kalakeyas, and all their 
allies." 

The Sage said, "So be it. I will do what you wish, and that will bring 
great happiness to all men." 

Saying this, O virtuous one, Agastya went to the ocean, lord of rivers, 
and with him went Rishis of great tapasya, and the Devas as well. And 
Manavas and Nagas, Gandharvas, Yakshas and Kinnaras followed the 
awesome Sages, wanting to witness the event of wonder. 

Together they came to the sea, which roared, dancing with its waves, 
leaping in the wind, and laughing with masses of froth, and gushing into 
caves on the shore, the ocean thronging with all kinds of sharks, and flocks 
of diverse birds above and upon his waters. 

The Devas, along with Agastya and the Gandharvas and huge Nagas and 
most gifted Munis, approached the immense waters.' 


CANTO 105 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


[ons says, 'Varuna's son, that blessed saint spoke to the assembled 
gods, and the sages, "I am going to drink up the ocean, abode of the god 
of waters. You be ready with whatever preparations you need to make." 

With these few words, the unswerving son of Mitra and Varuna, now full 
of wrath, began to drink up the sea, while all the worlds watched. Indra and 
the Devas were awestruck and began to give praise to mighty Agastya: 

"O you are our protector, and Providence itself for men, why, the very 
creator of the worlds. By your grace, possibly, the universe with its gods 
might be saved." 

Glorified by the Devas, while the musical instruments of Gandharvas 
played all around, and while celestial blossoms were showered upon him, 
the great Agastya drained the vast ocean and it was dry! 

Seeing the ocean rendered devoid of water, the host of gods rejoiced; 
taking up diverse weapons of celestial forge, they fell to slaughtering the 
demons. Assailed by the Devas of untold strength and speed, who came 
roaring at them, the Asuras could not stand before the heaven dwellers, O 
Bhaarata! Only for a moment, did the demons last before the onslaught of 
the gods, and return battle. 

Moreover, the evil ones had already been consumed by the tapasya 
shakti of the greatest Rishis; the Devas quickly massacred the Kalakeyas. 
Decked with brooches of gold, wearing ear-rings and armlets, the demons, 
when slain, looked beautiful indeed, like palasa trees in full crimson bloom. 

Then, O best of men, a few of the Kalakeyas who remained alive rent the 
goddess Earth, and took refuge at the bottom of the Pataias. 

When they saw that the demons were slain, the gods gave praise to the 
mighty sage: 

"O Mahabaho, through your grace, all men have found a great blessing, 
and the ruthless Kalakeyas have been killed by your power, O creator of 
beings! Now, mighty-armed, fill the ocean again, give up once more the 
waters that you drained." 

The blessed and mighty Muni replied, "I have digested that water, so if 
you wish to fill the ocean again, you must think of some other expedient." 


Great king, the assembled gods were struck with both wonder and 
sadness. Now, after bowing to the Maharishi and saying farewell to one 
another, they all went away to their respective homes. 

The Devas, with Vishnu, came to Brahma; they consulted again now 
about how to fill the empty sea. They stood with folded hands, and forlorn. 


CANTO 106 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


omasa says, ‘Brahma Pitamaha said, "Go, O Devas, where your pleasure 

ay lead you, or your desire takes you! It will take a long course of 

time for the ocean to resume its original state; the occasion will be 
furnished by the ancestors of the great king Bhagiratha." 

Hearing what the Pitamaha said, all those main gods went to their 
homes, and would bide their time until the day when the ocean was filled 
again | 

Yudhishtira says, 'What was that occasion, O Muni? And how did 
Bhagiratha's ancestors furnish it? And how was the ocean filled again 
through Bhagiratha's efforts? O Sage, who deem your tapasya as your only 
treasure, O Brahmana, I want to hear the achievements of that king, in 
detail, from you.’ 

Thus addressed by the magnanimous and virtuous king, Lomasa, best of 
Brahmanas, narrates the achievements of the high-souled king, Sagara. 

Lomasa says, 'Into the clan of the Ikshvakus, was born a ruler of the 
earth named Sagara, endowed with beauty and strength. And that king was 
sonless, O Bhaarata! He brought havoc through the tribes of the Haihayas 
and the Talajanghas, all of Kshatriya kind under his rule, and then reigned 
over his own kingdom. 

And, O most praiseworthy of the scions of Bhaarata, O chief of the 
Bhaarata race, Sagara had two wives, proud of their beauty and of their 
youth — one a princess of the Vidarbhas, and the other of the royal line of 
Sibi. 

Best of kings, Sagara and his wives went to Mount Kailasa, and sat in 
severe tapasya in order to have a son. Practising rigid penance, and locked 
in Yoga, Sagara had a vision of three-eyed Siva, who made ashes of the 
Tripura, who is the Eternal One, the bestower of blessings to all beings, the 
Great Sovereign, who wields the bow Pinaka, with the Trisula in his hand, 
in whom infinite peace resides, the lord of all those that are fierce, who can 
assume any form; and who is the Lord of the Goddess Uma. 

Mahabaho, as soon as Sagara saw that God, the giver of boons, he and 
his two queens fell at Siva's feet, and offered him a prayer to have a son. 


Well pleased, Siva said to that most just king and his wives, "Lord of 
men, considering the moment at which you have offered your prayer to me, 
sixty thousand sons, valiant and exceedingly proud, will be born in one of 
your two wives. But they will all perish together. 

In the other wife, a single brave son will be born, who will perpetuate 
your race." 

Having said this to him, the God Rudra vanished, and king Sagara came 
home with his queens, all of them delighted with what had transpired. And, 
O best of men, there, the two lotus-eyed queens—the princess of Vidarbha 
and the princess of Sibi— soon became pregnant. 

When her time came, the princess of Vidarbha brought forth something 
shaped like a gourd while the princess of Sibi gave birth to a boy as 
beautiful as a god. Sagara decided to throw away the gourd, when he heard 
an asariri speak gravely from the sky, "O King, do not be hasty, you must 
not become guilty of abandoning your sons! Take the seeds out from the 
gourd and let them be preserved with care in steaming vessels partly filled 
with ghrita. Then thou will get, O scion of Bharata's race, sixty thousand 
sons. 

King of men, Mahadeva Siva has decreed that your sons are to be born 
in this fashion, so do not turn your mind away from what must be." 


CANTO 107 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Lo says, 'Most righteous king, when he heard the voice speak from 
he sky, he believed what it said and did as it asked. Sagara took each 
seed from the gourd, separately, and immersed it in a vat of ghee. Intent on 
the survival of his sons, he provided a nurse for every receptacle. 

Then, after a long time, there arose sixty thousand immeasurably strong 
and powerful sons from those vessels of ghee, sons born to the Rajarishi 
Sagara through Siva's grace. 

And they were terrible and their deeds were ruthless. They could fly and 
range through the sky, and being as many as they were, they were unafraid 
of anyone, including the gods. They would chase even the Devas, the 
Gandharvas, and the Rakshasas and all the born, for they were mighty and 
addicted to fighting. 

Harassed by the dull-headed sons of Sagara, all men and the gods with 
them went to Brahma, as their refuge. 

The Grandsire of all beings said to them, "Go your way, Devas, and take 
these mortal men with you, for very soon the sons of Sagara will find death 
for all their sins, and a terrible end will they find." 

The Devas and the Manavas bade farewell to the Pitamaha, and went 
back to where they had come from. Then, O Bhaarata, when many days had 
passed, the mighty king Sagara took the consecration for performing the 
rites of a horse-sacrifice, an Aswamedha yagna. 

Protected by his ferocious sons, the king's sacrificial horse ranged across 
the earth; when it reached the sea, waterless and frightful to behold, 
although the horse was guarded with great care it suddenly vanished from 
where it stood. 

Sagara's sons thought that fine steed had been stolen; they returned to 
their father and told him how it had disappeared. 

He said to them, "Go and look for the horse in all the cardinal points." 

Great king, at their father's command, his sons began their quest for the 
horse in all the cardinal points and throughout the surface of the earth. But 
even all together, those sixty thousand could not find the horse, nor the one 
who had stolen it. 


Returning home, they stood with folded hands before their father, and 
said, "O Protector of men! O ruler of the earth! O king! At your command, 
we combed all this world, with all its hills and its forests, with its seas, and 
its woods, and its islands, with its rivulets and rivers and caves. But we did 
not find either the horse, or the thief who stole it." 

Sagara was insensate with anger, and stirred by destiny, too, he said to 
them in wrath, "Go again and seek the horse and never return until you find 
it!" 

Again obedient to their father's command, his sons, those awesome 
Kshatriyas, once more searched the earth and they found a cleft upon her 
surface, upon the dried up sea-bed. The sons of Sagara began to excavate it. 

Exerting themselves to the utmost, with spades and pickaxes they dug 
the bed of the sea. At their violent excavation, Varuna's abode writhed in 
agony, and Asuras, Nagas, Rakshasas and all living beings began to cry out 
in distress, while Sagara's sixty thousand sons slaughtered them. 

Hundreds of thousands of living creatures could be seen with severed 
heads and trunks and with their skins and bones and joints rent asunder and 
broken. 

They went on digging up the ocean, abode of Varuna, and a vast amount 
of time went by but they still did not find the horse. Then, lord of earth, 
towards the north-eastern region of the sea, the incensed sons of Sagara dug 
down as far as Patala, and there they saw the animal, roaming about as it 
pleased. 

And they saw the magnificent Kapila, looking like a perfect mass of 
splendour. Seeing him shining even as fire does with flames and seeing the 
horse, as well, they became flushed with joy. Having been sent by fate, and 
after their fervid exertions, they paid Kapila Muni no heed but ran forward 
to seize the horse. 

Maharajan, Kapila, most righteous of Munis, whom the great sages 
name Kapila Vasudeva, assumed a fiery look, and the mighty ones loosed 
flames at Sagara's sons, and burnt them to ashes. 

Narada, of vast tapasya, saw Sagara's sons reduced to ashes and he came 
to that king and told him what had happened. When Sagara heard the 
terrible news from the Rishi's lips, he was plunged in grief for an hour, until 
he recalled what Siva had said. 

Sending for his grandson Ansuman, the son of Asamanyjas, he said, 
"Because of me, my sixty thousand sons of measureless strength 


encountered Kapila's wrath and have met their death. My pure child, 
taintless Ansuman, I have also forsaken your father for the sake of my 
Rajadharma and for the weal of my people." 

Yudhishtira says, 'O Muni, whose only wealth is your tapasya, tell me 
why Sagara, foremost of kings, abandoned his own son, endowed with 
valour — something so diffcult for other men to do.' 

Lomasa says, A son was born to Sagara, by the princess of Sibi, and he 
was called Asamanjas. The prince would seize the weaker children of the 
townspeople and throw them into the river. Outraged, and stricken by grief 
and fear, the townsmen met together, and came, hands folded before Sagara, 
and implored him, "Great king, you protect us from invasions by hostile 
enemies. Now you must protect us from the peril of Asamanjas." 

Hearing the fearful news of his son's doings, the king fell sad and silent 
for almost an hour, and then he said to his ministers, "Let my son 
Asamanjas be driven out of our city from this day. If you wish to please me, 
do it quickly!" 

And, O King, the ministers did what he asked without delay. So did the 
great Sagara banish his son for the welfare of his people. Now listen in full 
to what Sagara said to his grandson Ansuman of the powerful bow. 

Sagara said, "O my child, my heart is broken from having banished your 
father and now from having sent your uncles to their deaths. Besides, I have 
not recovered the horse for my sacrifice. 

My grandson, grief tears at me and my mind is confounded that I cannot 
complete my Aswamedha yagna. Your must fetch the horse back and 
deliver me from hell." 

Ansuman went with sorrow to the place where the earth had been 
excavated; he went down by the same tunnel beneath the dry sea bed, and 
saw the illustrious Kapila and the horse. Seeing the ancient Sage, most 
righteous of his kind, who looked like a mass of light, the prince bowed 
touching his head to the ground, and told the Rishi why he had come. 

Maharajan, Kapila was pleased with Ansuman, and told him to ask for a 
boon. Ansuman first asked to have the horse back for the sacrifice, and then 
he prayed for the purification of his uncles. 

The mighty Kapila said, "I will grant you all that you desire, stainless 
prince. May good fortune be with you! In you I see forbearance, truth, and 
righteousness. By you Sagara shall have his wishes fulfilled; you are truly a 


grandson to your sire. Through your goodness, the sons of Sagara will find 
redemption and heaven. 

Your son's son will find Mahadeva Siva's grace so your ancestors might 
be purified of their sin. He will perform a great tapasya that will bring the 
river of three streams down into this world — the Ganga, O lord of men! 

May good fortune be yours! Here, take this sacrificial horse with you 
and complete the Aswamedha yagna of the great Sagara." 

Ansuman took the horse with him, and returned to mighty king Sagara's 
yagnashala. He prostrated at the feet of the high-souled Sagara, who sniffed 
the top of his head lovingly; Ansuman told him everything, all that he had 
seen and heard, and all about the death of Sagara's sons. He also announced 
that he had brought back the horse. 

When Sagara heard all this, he no longer grieved on account of his dead 
sons. He praised and honoured Ansuman, and completed his sacrifice. 
When this was done, all the Devas greeted him with honour, and Sagara 
made the sea, where Varuna dwells, his son. 

The lotus-eyed Sagara ruled his kingdom for a great length of time, and 
then he set his grandson Ansuman upon his throne, laden with 
responsibility, and ascended into Swarga. 

Like his grandsire, the virtuous Ansuman ruled over the world with 
dharma, as far as the edge of the sea, following in the footsteps of his 
father's father. His son was named Dilipa, versed in virtue. Finally, 
Ansuman gave his throne to Dilipa and he also left this world. 

When Dilipa learnt of the awful fate that had overtaken his forefathers, 
he grieved and thought of the means to redeem their souls. That king of 
men did his utmost to bring the Ganga down into the world, but he did not 
succeed. 

A son was born to him, and known by the name of Bhagiratha, who was 
beautiful, and devoted to a virtuous life, and truthful, and free from all 
malice. Dilipa made his son the king, and took to vanaprastha himself. And, 
O best of all the scions of Bhaarata's race, Dilipa devoted himself to a long 
tapasya, at the end of which he, too, rose from the forest into heaven. 


CANTO 108 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


| eee says, 'Bhagiratha, of the mighty bow, Maharatha, lord of all he 
surveyed, became the delight of the eyes and the soul of the world. He, 
the Mahabaho, learnt how his ancestors had met an awful end from Kapila, 
and how they had been unable to attain the realm of the gods. 

With a sorrowful heart, he made over his kingly duties to his minister, 
and, O lord of men, he went to the Himalayas, mountains of snow, to sit in 
tapasya, and by leading the most austere life, to gain the favour of the Devi 
Ganga. 

He saw Himavana, adorned with peaks of diverse forms, full of bright 
minerals, strewn on all sides with raindrops from clouds resting upon the 
breeze; beautiful with rivers and groves and rocky spurs, looking like so 
many palaces in a city, attended upon by lions and tigers that had hidden 
themselves in its caves; and also inhabited by birds of myriad species, 
uttering diverse sounds — bhringarajas, and ganders, and datyuhas, and 
water-cocks, and peacocks and birds with a hundred feathers, and 
jivanjivakas, and blackbirds, and chakoras with black-cornered eyes, and 
the koyals that love their young. 

He saw the mountain abounding in lotus plants that grew in enchanted 
lakes. And kraunchas, cranes, rendered it charming with their sounds; and 
Kinnaras and Apsaras sat upon its stone slabs. 

And the Diggajas, the elephants of the cardinal points, had marked the 
trees growing there with their tusks; and Vidyadharas frequented the 
mountain, which was replete with treasures of jewels, as it was infested by 
serpents with glowing tongues and virulent venom. 

In places the mountain seemed to be made of gold, while in others it was 
silver, and yet other peaks were like massifs of kohl. So was the snowy 
mountain where the king now found himself. 

There, that best of men sat in a fierce tapasya. For one thousand years, 
he sustained himself on just water, fruit and roots. When a thousand years 
of the Devas passed, the great Devi, the divine river Ganga, manifested 
herself before him, embodied and shimmering. 


Ganga said, "Great king, what do you want from me? What boon must I 
bestow upon you? I will do what you ask." 

Bhagiratha replied to Himalaya's daughter, "Grantress of boons, O great 
River, when my father's fathers went in search of their sire's sacrificial 
horse, Kapila sent them to the land of Yama; in an instant, those sixty 
thousand perished. 

Since then, there has been no place for them in Swarga. O great river, as 
long as you do not wet their ashes with your water, they will not find 
moksha. Blessed Devi, I beg you, redeem my ancestors, Sagara's sons, lead 
them into heaven. I am here to beg you to save their souls." 

Ganga, the goddess whom the worlds worship, was pleased to hear what 
Bhagiratha said, and she said to him, "Great King, I am prepared to do what 
you ask. But when I descend from the sky to the earth, the force of my fall 
will be impossible to bear. 

Protector of men, in the three worlds none but Siva, greatest of Gods, the 
Lord Nilakanta whose throat is sable blue, can break my falling into the 
world. 

Mahabaho, with tapasya gain the grace of the Lord Siva, river of boons. 
He will bear my descent upon his head; he will fulfil your desire, and save 
your sires, O King." 

Maharaja Bhagiratha went to Mount Kailasa and undertook another 
great penace, and after a long tapasya, he gained the grace of Lord Siva, 
worker of blessings. Protector of men, that king secured from Mahadeva a 
boon that the Ganga might fall safely upon his head, and flow into the 
world. 


CANTO 109 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Le sayas, 'The blessed Siva listened to Bhagiratha's petition, and, 
also, in order to fulfil the wishes of the dwellers in Swarga, said, 
"Tathastu! So be it, O guardian of men, O Mighty-armed. For your sake I 
will contain the descent of the pure and blessed and divine river of heaven, 
O King!" 

Saying this, The Lord came to the snowy mountain, surrounded by his 
ganas, of awful mien, who bore uplifted weapons of diverse forms. 
Standing there, he said to Bhagiratha, most praiseworthy of men, 
Mahabaho, you pray to the river who is the daughter of the king of 
mountains. I will contain her when she falls down from Swarga." 

Reassured by Siva, Bhagiratha made obeisance with utmost devotion, 
and directed his thoughts again towards Ganga. Seeing that Mahadeva stood 
to receive her fall, Ganga flashed down suddenly in a pure and crystal 
torrent from the sky, and the Devas, the Maharishis, the Gandharvas, the 
Nagas, and the Yakshas, assembled there as witnesses. 

Down from the sky came the snow mountain, Himavan's daughter; her 
whirpools raged and she teemed with fish and sharks. O King, directing her 
course towards the sea, she separated herself into three streams; and her 
water was strewn with piles of froth, which seemed like so many rows of 
white ganders. 

Sinuous and twisting, at times, at others stumbling, as it were; covered in 
foam as with a robe; she came down like a woman drunk. Elsewhere, by 
virtue of the roar of her waters, she gave vent to loud sounds. 

Thus assuming many different aspects, when she fell from the sky, she 
reached the surface of the earth, and said to Bhagiratha, "Great King, show 
me the path I must take! Lord of the earth, for your sake I have come down 
into the world." 

Bhagiratha made a course towards where the dead sons of mighty Sagara 
lay, so that the sacred waters might drench their ashes. Having borne and 
contained the fall of Ganga, Siva, saluted by all men, went back to Kailasa, 
best of mountains, accompanied by the Devas. 


With Ganga following him, Bhagiratha reached the sea; and the sea, the 
abode of Varuna, was quickly filled! The king adopted Ganga as his own 
daughter, and at that spot offered libations of water, tarpana, to the manes of 
his ancestors; thus was his heart's wish fulfilled. 

At your asking me, I have narrated the whole story of how Ganga, 
running in three streams, was brought down to the earth to fill the sea; how 
the mighty Sage drained the sea for a particular reason, and how Vatapi, 
slayer of Brahmanas, was destroyed by Agastya."" 


CANTO 110 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


vo said, "O lord of the Bhaaratas, next the son of Kunti goes 
leisurely to the two rivers Nanda and Aparananda, which have the 
virtue of destroying the dread of sin. Reaching a great mountain Hemakuta, 
he sees many strange and inconceivable sights there. When their party 
merely speak among themselves, clouds rumble into the sky and a thousand 
volleys of stones fall, so they cannot climb the mountain. 

Here the winds blow incessantly, and the heavens forever lash down 
rain; they also hear the chanting of the Veda, yet they see nobody. In the 
evening and in the morning they see the blessed fire that carries offerings to 
the gods, and there sharp insects sting them to interrupt their tapasya. 

An unaccountable sadness overtakes the soul, and men fall sick. Seeing 
all these uncanny phenomena, Yudhishtira asks Lomasa what they are and 
what causes them. 

Lomasa says, "Parantapa, Rajan, I will tell you about this as we heard it 
of old; listen carefully to what I say. 

Upon this peak of Rishabha, there was once a Rishi of that name, who 
lived for hundreds of years. He was devoted to penance and was also 
wrathful. When some men came and spoke to him, interrupting his dhyana, 
he said in anger to the mountain, "If any man speaks in this place, cast 
stones at him and summon the winds to prevent him from making any 
sound." 

This was what the sage said; and so, in this place, as soon as a man utters 
any words, he is forbidden by a roaring cloud. Rajan, in anger he also 
forbade other deeds in this place, that Maharishi. 

Yudhishtira, tradition has it that, when of old, the Devas came to the 
Nanda, suddenly a number of men arrived there to look at the gods. 
However, the Devas, at whose head Indra stood, did not want to be seen; 
and so they rendered this place inaccessible, by raising obstructions in the 
form of mountains. From that day, O Kaunteya, men could not cast their 
eyes, at any time, upon what looked like this mountain, far less climb it. 

No one who has not led an austere life can see this mountain, or ascend 
it. 


Therefore, O son of Kunti, keep your tongue under control. Here, at that 
time, all those gods performed the most sacred yagnas. O Bhaarata, even to 
this day the marks of those sacrifices can be seen. This grass here has the 
form of the sacred kusa grass; the ground here seems to be covered by the 
sacred grass; and, O lord of men, so many of these trees here look as if they 
are ideal for tying up yagnapasus. 

O Bhaarata, the Devas and the Rishis still dwell here and one can see 
their sacred agni burning in the morning and in the evening. If one bathes 
here, one's sins are immediately destroyed, Kaunteya! So, best of the Kurus, 
you and your younger brothers, perform your ablutions here. 

Having bathed in the Nanda, you must journey to river Kausiki, to the 
place where Viswamitra performed his great tapasya." 

Yudhishtira, and all that are with him, bathe in that river, and then go on 
to the Kausiki, crystalline, her waters cool and delightful. 

Lomasa says, "This is the pure and divine Kausiki. Lord of the 
Bhaaratas, here is the enchanting asrama of Viswamitra; and there is the 
hermitage of the mighty-souled Kasyapa, whose son was Rishyasringa, 
devoted to tapasya, his passions under control. Through the rigours of his 
penance he forced Indra to pour down his rain during a drought, for the 
Deva, slayer of Bala and Vritra, was in dread of Rishyasringa's penance. 

That powerful son of Kasyapa was born of a hind. He worked a great 
marvel in the kingdom of Lomapada; and when the rains brought forth 
crops in his lands, Lomapada gave his daughter Shanta in marriage to 
Rishyasringa, even as the Sun gave away his daughter Savitri." 

Yudhishtira says, "How was Kasyapa's son, Rishyasringa, born of a 
hind? And how was he endowed with such holiness, being the offspring of a 
sinful sexual union? Why did Indra fear this Rishi, so he poured down his 
rain during a time of drought? 

Tell us about the beauty of the princess Shanta, pure in life, she who 
captivated his heart when he had turned himself into a stag? And since the 
Rajarishi Lomapada was as virtuous as he is known to have been, why was 
it that over his lands, Indra, scourge of Paka, withheld rain? 

Most holy one, I beg you, relate all this to me in detail, exactly as it 
happened, for I want to know everything about Rishyasringa's life." 

Lomasa says, 'Listen to how Rishyasringa, of dreaded name, was born as 
the son of Kasyapa Muni's son Vibhandaka, a Brahmana Rishi who had 
evolved through tapasya, of unfailing seed, who was learned and bright like 


the Lord of beings. And the father was honoured, and the son was possessed 
of a mighty spirit, and, though a boy, he was respected by old men. 

Vibhandaka went to a great lake and devoted himself to the practice of 
austerities. He who was like a Deva performed a long penance. One day, 
while he was washing his mouth in the water, he saw the Apsara Urvasi, at 
which he ejaculated his seed. 

Rajan, a hind was drinking from the lake and she lapped up his seed, 
floating on the water, and at once she became pregnant. That hind was, in 
fact, a Devaputri, and Brahma had once told her, "You will be a hind; and 
while you have that form, you will give birth to a Rishi; then you will be 
free." 

As fate would have it, and as the word of the Creator can never prove 
untrue, that female deer bore Vibhandaka's son, a mighty sage, 
Rishyasringa. 

Rishyasringa, devoted to tapasya, always passed his days in the forest, 
and there was a horn on his head and for this he came to be known as 
Rishyasringa. Apart from his father, he had never seen any other man; and 
so, his life was entirely absorbed in brahmacharya. 

During this same time, there was a king of the land of Anga known as 
Lomapada, who was a friend of Dasaratha. We have heard that, from his 
love of pleasure, he had been guilty of telling a lie to a Brahmana; and for 
that Lomapada was shunned by all men of the priestly varna, and he had no 
priest to perform his religious rites. 

And Indra of a thousand eyes abruptly withdrew the rains from his 
kingdom and his people suffered. He asked a number of Brahmanas, 
devoted to austerities, of cultivated minds, "How will the heavens send us 
rain? Think of some expedient." 

Each of them gave their view, and among them, the best, said to the 
king, "King of kings, the Brahmanas are angry with you, so you must do 
something to appease them. Send for Rishyasringa, the Muni's son, who 
lives in the forest and knows nothing of women, who is the epitome of 
simplicity. 

O King, if he whose tapasya is so great, shows himself in your kingdom, 
I have no doubt that the rain will also come." 

Lomapada made atonement for his sins, and he went away. When the 
Brahmanas had been pacified, he returned and his people were glad. The 
king of Anga convened a meeting of his ministers, men who were expert at 


giving counsel, and he sought their counsel to devise a plan to fetch 
Rishyasringa into his lands. 

Finally, with the advice of those men versed in all branches of 
knowledge, very proficient in worldly matters, he settled on a plan. He sent 
for a number of courtesans, women of the town, all clever. 

When they came, Lomapada said to them, "Lovely ones, you must find a 
way to entice Rishyasringa into my kingdom." 

Those women, on the one hand afraid of the king's wrath and on the 
other dreading a curse from the Rishi, were alarmed and declared the 
business to be beyond their power. 

However, one among them, a seasoned and forward woman, said to the 
king, "Maharajan, I will try to fetch him whose wealth consists solely of 
tapasya, into your lands. However, there are some things I will need to put 
my plan into action. If you can give me these, I might be able to bring 
Rishyasringa here." 

The king gave an order that all that she might ask for should be 
procured. He also gave her a good deal of wealth and jewels of various 
kinds. Then, Lord of the earth, taking a number of young and beautiful 
women with her, she went to the forest. 


CANTO 111 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Lo says, 'O Bhaarata, she prepared a floating hermitage, both 
because the king had ordered so, and also because it exactly accorded 
with her plan. Delightful it was, the floating asrama, with artificial trees 
adorned with various flowers and fruit, with diverse shrubs and creepers, 
and it provided delicious fruit. It truly looked as if it had been created by 
magic. 

She moored this great craft very near the hermitage of Kasyapa's 
grandson, then sent emissaries to survey the places that that Rishi habitually 
frequented. Then she saw her opportunity, and sent forth her daughter, also 
a courtesan and of smart sense. That clever woman went to the vicinity of 
the Rishis's hermitage, and she saw Rishyasringa. 

Approaching him, she said, "Muni, I hope that all is well with you and 
the other tapasvins. I trust that you have a plentiful store of fruit and roots 
and that you take delight in this hermitage. 

I have come to visit you, and I hope the tapasya of the Rishis waxes, 
daily. I trust your father's spirit has not slackened and that he is well pleased 
with you. O Rishyasringa, I hope that you pursue the studies that are 
appropriate for you!" 

Rishyasringa said, "You shine with lustre, as if you were made of light; 
and I say you are worthy of worship. I will give you padya to wash you feet 
and such fruit and roots that you might like, for this is what my dharma 
says. 

This darbhasana is made of kusa grass and covered with a black deerskin 
to make it comfotable. Sit upon it, OO Brahmana who resembles a Deva, and 
tell me where is your asrama. And what is this vrata called, which you now 
seem to be observing?" 

The courtesan said, "O son of Kasyapa, my asrama is on the other side 
of yonder hill; it covers three yojanas and is full of delight. There, it is my 
faith not to receive obeisance or to touch water to wash my feet. I am not 
worthy of being worshipped by men like you, rather I must make my 
obeisance to you. 


O Brahmana, this is the vrata that I must observe — to clasp you in my 
arms!" 

Rishyasringa said, "Let me give you ripe fruits, gallnuts, myrobalans, 
karushas, ingudas from sandy soil, and figs. Be pleased to taste them and 
find some pleasure." 

She, however, flung aside all those pure things he offered and instead 
gave him unclean things to eat, but deliciously prepared and fine to look at; 
and the innocent Rishyasringa found them most agreeable. 

She gave him the most fragrant garlands, exquisite and shimmering 
garments to wear, and fine drink; they talked and laughed and played 
together. In his sight she played with a ball, sinuously, and seemed like a 
creeping plant broken in two, her lissom body. 

Repeatedly she touched his body with her own, and clasped him in her 
arms. She took flowering twigs from sala, asoka and tilaka trees. Drunk, 
assuming a bashful look, she continued tempting Rishyasringa; and when 
she saw that she had touched his heart, she pressed his body with her own, 
again and again, and with sidelong, seductive glances, slowly wandered 
away, saying that she was going to make offerings to the fire. 

When she left him, Rishyasringa was frantic with desire, and could think 
of nothing else but her. His mind turned constantly to her and felt empty. He 
began to sigh and seemed to be in great distress. 

At that moment, Kasyapa's son Vibhandaka, whose eyes were tawny like 
a lion's, whose body was covered with hair down to the tips of his nails, 
who was devoted to Brahmana dharma, whose life was pure and spent in 
dhyana, came and saw his son sitting alone, pensive and sad, obviously 
distraught, and sighing again and again with upturned eyes. 

Vibhandaka said to Rishyasringa, "My child, why are you not chopping 
firewood for the agni. I hope that you have offered havis, the burnt offering, 
today? I hope you have polished the sacrificial ladles and spoons and 
brought the calf to the milch cow whose milk gives us all we need to make 
our sacrificial offerings to the fire? 

Surely, you are not yourself, my son. You are pensive, why, you seem to 
be terribly disturbed. Why are you so sad today? Who has come here this 
day?" 


CANTO 112 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Ke said, "A Brahmachari with a mass of jata on his head came 
i here today. He was neither short nor tall. He had a spirited look, a 
golden complexion, and eyes large as lotuses; and he was shining and 
graceful as a god. 

Rich was his beauty, alight like the sun; and he was exceedingly fair, ah 
his eyes graceful and black. His twisted hair was blue-black and neat and 
long and fragrant and tied up with strings of gold. A beautiful ornament 
glittered at his throat, like lightning in the sky. 

And under the throat he had two balls of flesh without a single hair upon 
them, and oh an exceedingly beautiful form, with such a slender waist and a 
deep navel; and the skin upon his chest was smooth. A golden string shone 
from under his cloth, just like this waist-string of mine. 

There was something on his feet of a wonderful shape which gave forth 
a lovely tinkling. His wrists, likewise, bore a pair of ornaments that made a 
similar sound and looked just like these prayer beads. And when he walked, 
his ornaments sounded like delighted ganders upon a sheet of water. 

He wore garments of wonderful make upon his person; these clothes I 
wear are by no means beautiful like those. His face was was also so 
wonderful to behold; and his voice was modulated to gladden the heart, just 
as his speech was as sweet as the song of the koyal; while I listened to him, 
I felt stirred in my inmost heart. 

As a forest in spring is most graceful when swept by a breeze, even so, 
my father, that fragrant sage is most beautiful when the air fans him. His 
mass of hair is neatly tied and is slick againt his head and brow, divided 
evenly by a parting. 

His eyes seemed to be covered with chakravaka birds of exceptionally 
beautiful forms. In his right hand he held a wonderful round fruit, which 
falls to the ground and again leaps up to the sky, in the strangest way; and 
he beats it and turns himself round and whirls: like a tree moved by the 
breeze. 

When I looked at him, O father, he seemed to be a son of the Devas, and 
my joy was extreme, and my pleasure unbounded. He clasped my body, 


seized my matted hair, and bent me down, and mingling his mouth with my 
own, uttered a delightful sound I have never heard. 

He does not care for padya or the fruit I offered him, and said to me that 
this was his vrata. But he gave me many fruit, and these we have do not 
match those nearly for taste. They have no rind nor any stone within them, 
like these. 

That noble-formed one gave me water of such flavour that I have never 
drunk before; it was exquisite and having drunk it, I felt uncanny pleasure; 
why, the ground seemed to move under my feet. 

These redolent garlands, entwined with silken threads, belong to him. 
And he, bright with fervent piety, scattered these garlands here, then went 
back to his own asrama. His going has saddened my heart; and my body 
seems to burn all over. 

My desire is to go to him as soon as I can, and to have him walk about 
here every day. O father, let me go to him this very moment. Ah, what 
tapasya does he practise? As he, that pious one, is performing tapasya, I 
want to go and live with him, and share his penances. My heart yearns for 
his unusual mode of practising austerities; my soul will be in torment if I 
cannot see him." 


CANTO 113 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


yo said, "My child, these are Rakshasas, who walk about in 
wonderful forms. Their strength is unrivalled and their beauty great, 
and they always strive to obstruct the practice of true austerities. They 
assume lovely forms and try to seduce by various means. 

Those fierce beings hurled the Rishis, the dwellers in the forest, down 
from blessed regions won through their piety. And the Muni who has 
control over his soul, and who wants to gain the realms where the righteous 
go, must have nothing to do with them. 

They are vile creatures, who obstruct tapasya and delight in that, and a 
Rishi should never look at them. 

O my son, those were drinks unworthy to be drunk; they were spirits that 
sinners consume. And these garlands, bright and fragrant and of many hues, 
are not intended for sannyasis." 

Having thus forbidden his son, saying that those were evil demons, 
Vibhandaka went in quest of her. When, after a three days' search he could 
not find her, he returned to his asrama. 

In the meanwhile, when Rishyasrinuga went out to gather fruit, the 
courtesan returned to tempt him. 

And as soon as Rishyasringa saw her, he was ecstatic and ran to her, 
crying, "Let us go to your asrama before my father returns!" 

Rajan, those courtesans made Rishyasringa board their floating 
hermitage. As soon as he was aboard, they unmoored the vessel and cast 
off. With a myriad of pleasures they kept him engaged and delighted, until 
they arrived in the kingdom of Anga. 

Then, leaving the floating vessel, of dazzling white, upon the water, they 
fetched the innocent Rishi, Vibhandaka's son, to the king Lomapada, who 
kept him in his antahpura, among his women. Suddenly, the heavens 
opened and it poured over the kingdom, why, the very world seemed to 
become flooded with water. 

His fervent wish fulfilled, Lomapada bestowed his daughter Shanta on 
Rishyasringa in marriage. 


With a view to appease the wrath of his father, he ordered kine to be 
placed, and fields to be ploughed, by the road that Vibhandaka would take 
to come to his son. He also set stout cowherds along the route, with a 
plenitude of cattle, and ordered them: 

"When the Maharishi Vibhandaka asks you about his son, you must fold 
your hands and say to him that all these cattle, all these fields belong to his 
son, and that you yourselves are his slaves, ready to obey his every wish." 

Now, having gathered roots and fruit, the Rishi Vibhandaka, whose 
temper was fierce, returned to his hermitage, and looked for his son; not 
finding him, he became fiercely angry. He was beside himself with fury and 
he suspected king Lomapadas hand in what had befallen Rishyasringa. 

He set out for the city of Champa, having made up his mind to burn the 
king, his city, and his whole kingdom. On the way, he was tired and hungry, 
when he reached the cleverly placed and opulent cowherd settlements, rich 
with cattle. He felt honoured at the way in which the cowherds welcomed 
and feted him; and he spent that night in a manner befitting a king. 

Having partaken of their great hospitality, he asked them, "To whom, O 
cowherds, do you belong?" 

They surrounded him and said, "All this wealth has been provided for 
your son." 

Vibhandaka continued his journey, and along his way he was similarly 
honoured, frequently. Finally, arriving, he saw Rishyasringa, his son, who 
looked like the god Indra in heaven. He also saw his daughter-in-law, 
shanta, looking like lightning springing from a cloud. Having seen 
everything provided for Rishyasringa, as well as the exquisite princess 
shanta, Vibhandaka was appeased. 

Rajan, he expressed his satisfaction with Lomapada. The Maharishi, 
whose powers rivalled those of Surya and Agni, said to Rishyasringa, "As 
soon as a son is born to you, and having done all that this king wants from 
you, you must return immediately to the forest." 

Rishyasringa did exactly as his father said, and he returned to 
Vibhandaka's asrama. Rajan, shanta obediently waited upon him, as in the 
firmament Rohini waits upon the Moon, or as the fortunate Arundhati waits 
upon Vasishta, or as Lopamudra waits upon Agastya. Just as Damayanti 
was an obedient wife to Nala, or as Sachi is to the god who wields the 
thunderbolt, or as Indrasena, Narayana's daughter, was always obedient to 


Mudgala, so did shanta wait lovingly upon Rishyasringa, while he lived in 
the forest. 

This is the holy hermitage that was Rishyasringa's; ennobling the great 
lake here, it bears sacred fame. Perform your ablutions here and have your 
desire fulfilled. And having purified thyself, direct your course towards 
other holy tirthas."" 


CANTO 114 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


yo said, "Then, O Janamejaya, the son of Pandu sets out 
from the river Kausiki and journeys in succession to all the sacred 
shrines; and he comes to the sea where the river Ganga flows into it. There, 
at the nave of five hundred rivers, he performs the holy ceremony of an 
ablution. 

Then, O ruler of the earth, accompanied by his brothers, the valiant 
Kshatriya goes along the shore towards the land where the Kalinga tribes 
dwell. 

Lomasa says, 'This is the land, Kaunteya, where the Kalinga tribes live. 
The river Vaitarani passes through it, upon the banks of which river Dharma 
Deva performed a tapasya, having first placed himself under the protection 
of the celestials. 

This is the northern bank, with its charmed mountain, inhabited by 
Rishis, ideal for the performance of religious rites, and frequented by 
Brahmanas. This place rivals the path by which a virtuous man, fit for 
heaven, repairs to Devaloka. Here, in days of yore, other sages worshipped 
the Gods with austerities. 

It was here, O King, that the Lord Rudra seized the sacrificial beast and 
cried, "This is my share!" Bharatottama, when Siva carried away the 
yagnapasu, the Devas said to him, "Do not covet the property of others, 
flouting the laws of dharma." 

They eulogised the Lord Rudra, and pleased him with the offering of a 
sacrifice, and honoured him duly. Thereupon he gave up the beast, and left 
by the path trodden by the gods. 

Hear what happened to Rudra, O Yudhishtira! Influenced by their dread 
of him, the Devas forevermore set apart the best of all shares of their 
offerings, what was fresh and not stale for him. 

Whoever performs ablutions at this spot, while reciting this ancient 
story, will see, with his mortal eyes, the path that leads to Devaloka.' 

All the sons of Pandu and the daughter of Drupada—all of whom were 
the favoured by fate—descend to the river Vaitarani, and offer libations in 
the names of their fathers. 


Yudhishtira says, '0 Lomasa, how great must be the force of a pious 
deed! Having bathed here, I feel as if I am no more in the world of men! 
Maharishi, I see all the worlds! And I hear the holy Munis of the forest 
chanting the Veda.' 

Lomasa says, 'Yudhishtira, the place from where the chanting comes is 
three hundred thousand yojanas from here. Lord of men, be quiet and utter 
no word. This is the divine forest of the Swayambhuva, which has now 
come to our view. There Viswakarma, whose name is dreaded, performed a 
yagna. 

During that mighty sacrifice, the Self-existent One made a gift of this 
entire earth, with all its hilly and forest tracts, to Kasyapa, by way of 
dakshina, for serving as a priest. As soon as Bhumi Devi was given away, 
she became sad, and spoke in anger to that great lord, the ruler of the 
worlds. 

"O Mahadeva, it is unworthy of you to give me away to an ordinary 
mortal, and this daana of yours will come to nothing. For I mean to plunge 
down into the bottom of Patala!" 

When the blessed Rishi Kasyapa saw the goddess Earth despondent and 
angry, he performed a propitiatory ritual to appease her. Pandava, Bhumi 
Devi was pleased with his worship and she rose again from within the 
waters, and showed herself in the form of a sacred altar. 

This, O king, is the place which distinctly manifests the form of a vedi. 
Walk over it, and you will gain valour and strength. Rajan, this is the very 
altar which reaches as far as the sea, and rests itself upon its bosom. 

May good fortune be yours; climb here and by yourself walk out into the 
sea, while I perform the ritual for averting all evil from you. For, as soon as 
it receives a mortal's touch, this vedi at once enters into the sea. 

Salutation to the God who protects the universe! Salutation to You that 
are beyond the universe! O Lord of gods, vouchsafe your presence in this 
sea. 

Pandava, you must swiftly climb the vedi, while chanting this mantra: 
"The god of fire, and the sun, and the organ of generation, and water, and 
goddess and the seed of Vishnu, and the navel of nectar. The god of fire is 
the organ that generated the ocean; the earth is your body; Vishnu deposited 
the seed that caused your being and you are the navel of nectar!" 

Chant these words aloud, Pandava, and plunge into the sea even as you 
do so. Otherwise, O best of Kunti's son, this lord of waters of divine birth, 


this most auspicious of all waters of the earth, must not be touched, not 
even with the tip of a blade of sacred grass. 

When the ritual for averting evil has been completed, Yudhishtira enters 
the sea, and having done everything that the Rishi had asked of him, repairs 
to the foothill of the Mahendra mountain, and spends the night in that 
place." 


CANTO 115 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


yoo said, "The king of the earth spends a single night there, 
and, with his brothers, pays the highest homage to the Rishis. And 
Lomasa acquaints him with the names of all of them — the Bhrigus, the 
Angiras, the Vasishtas, and the Kasyapas. 

And the Rajarishi visits them all and makes obeisance to them, with 
folded hands. 

And then he asks the valiant Akritavrana, who is a follower of 
Parasurama, 'When will the worshipful Parasurama show himself to the 
Rishis here? I, too, wish to have a darshana of the Bhargava.' 

Akritavrana says, 'Rama already knows about your coming here, for his 
soul spontaneously knows all things. He is in every way well-pleased with 
you, and he will show himself readily to you. 

The Rishis who perform tapasya here are allowed to see him on the 
fourteenth and the eighth day of the lunar month. When this night ends, 
tomorrow, the fourteenth day of this moon will begin; and you shall see 
him, clad in a sable deerskin, and wearing his hair in a mass of jata.' 

Yudhishtira says, 'You have long been a follower of the mighty Rama, 
Jamadagni's son; you must have been an eye-witness to all his awesome 
deeds of yore. 

I beg you, tell me how Rama vanquished all the Kshatriyas on the field 
of battle, and tell me also what the original cause of the conflict was. 

Akritavrana says, 'Bhaarata, gladly, I will narrate that great tale to you, 
the legend of the the godlike deeds of Rama, the son of Jamadagni, who 
belongs to the race of Bhrigu. 

I will also relate the achievements of the great king of the Haihaya tribe; 
his name was Arjuna, and Parasurama killed him. He, O Pandava, was 
endowed with a thousand arms; and through the grace of Dattatreya he also 
had a golden, heavenly vimana. 

His sway extended over all the worlds, and his vimana could go 
anywhere at his very thought. Become invincible with the boon, he went 
everywhere in that vimana, and rode rough over the Devas, Yakshas and 
Rishis, wherever he pleased; he tyrannised all the created. 


Finally, the Devas and the Rishis of austere tapasya went together to 
Vishnu, slayer of demons, God of gods, of inexorable prowess, and said to 
him, "Blessed and revered Lord, if creation is to be saved, you must kill 
Kartaviryarjuna." 

The mighty king of the Haihayas, riding his vimana, rudely affronted 
Indra, while that Deva was alone with his queen Sachi. At this, O Bhaarata, 
the Lord Vishnu consulted with Indra with a view to killing Kartavirya's son 
Arjuna. 

Indra told Vishnu all about Arjuna's depredations and sins, and the God 
whom the worlds worship went to the enchanted Badari forest, which was 
his own chosen tapovana. 

At this very time, there lived on the earth a mighty sovereign, monarch 
in the land of Kanyakubja, a king with a vast army. His name was Gadhi 
and his fame resounded through the world. He, however, retired into the 
forest, becoming a vanaprastha. 

While he lived in the vana, a daughter was born to him, as beautiful as 
an Apsara was she. And Richika, the son of Bhrigu, asked for her to be his 
wife. 

Gadhi said to that Brahmana, who led a most austere life, "We have a 
family custom in our race, founded by our most ancient ancestors -know, O 
Brahmanottama, that he who wishes to marry a princess of our clan must 
offer a dowry of a thousand fleet horses, whose colour must be brown and 
every one of which must have a single sable ear. 

But, son of Bhrigu, a reverend Muni like you cannot be asked to make 
the same offering, neither can I refuse to give my daughter to an exalted and 
holy one like you." 

Richika said, "I will give you a thousand fleet steeds, brown in hue and 
each one with a single black ear; give me your daughter." 

Richaka went to Varuna and said, "Give me a thousand swift horses, 
brown in colour, and each with one black ear. I want them as the dowry for 
my marriage." 

Varuna gave him a thousand steeds. These steeds had issued out of the 
river Ganga; and so the place has been named Aswatirtha. 

In the city of Kanyakubja, the daughter of Gadhi, the princess Satyavati 
was given in matriage; and the gods themselves were in the bride's party. 
Thus, Richaka, best of Brahmanas, procured a thousand horses, and saw the 


dwellers of heaven and won a wife. And he enjoyed the girl of the slender 
waist, and gratified all the desire that he ever had. 

When the marriage had been celebrated, O king, his father Bhrigu came 
on a visit to see him and his wife; and he was glad to see his son. The 
husband and wife together paid their respects to him, who was worshipped 
by all the gods. Bhrigu sat, and they stood near him with folded hands, 
waiting to do his bidding. 

Maharishi Bhrigu, glad at heart, said to his daughter-in-law, "Lovely 
child, ask me for a boon, I will give you anything you want." 

And she asked that a son might be born to both herself and her mother. 
And he granted her wish. 

Bhrigu said, "During the days that your season lasts, you and your 
mother must bathe, observing the vrata to bear a son. Then you must both 
separately embrace two different trees — she a peepal tree, and you a fig 
tree. 

Dutiful child, here are two pots of payasa, rice and milk, which I have 
prepared with great care. I have combed the universe to find the 
medicaments that I have blended into this payasa. With great care must you 
both drink this." 

Saying this, he vanished. However, the two women interchanged not 
only the vessels of payasa that he gave them but also the trees that they 
embraced. After many days, the Sage appeared again, and he already knew, 
through his mystic vision, what had happened. 

The mighty Bhrigu said to Satyavati, his daughter-in-law, "Dharmaputri, 
you ate the wrong pot of payasa and you embraced the wrong tree. It was 
your mother who deluded you. You will have a son who, though born a 
Brahmana, will have the character and nature of a Kshatriya. Your mother 
will have a Kshatriya son who will live the life of a Brahmana, and great 
shall be his power and he will walk the path trodden by the righteous." 

She begged repeatedly, "O let my son not be so but my grandson!" 

And, O Pandava, Bhrigu replied, "Tathastu, so be it!" and he was pleased 
to grant her wish. 

On the expected day, she gave birth to a son, who was called Jamadagni, 
endowed with both splendour and grace. As he grew in years and in 
strength, he excelled all the other Sages in his knowledge of the Vaidik lore. 
Bhaarata, he rivalled the Sun in lustre and the entire astra shastra, the 


martial science, and the fourfold Devastra gyana came to him 
spontaneously, with no instruction.’ 


CANTO 116 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


kritavrana says, 'Jamadagni devoted himself to the study of the Veda 

and the practice of tapasya, and became famous for his .great 
austerities. He pursued a deep and systematic course of study and gained 
mastery over the entire Veda. 

Then, O king, he went to Prasenajit and sought the hand of Renuka in 
matriage. That king happily gave the Sage his daughter, and having got 
Renuka for his wife, the Bhrigunandana, delight of Bhrigu's race, began 
living with her in his asrama; now, he performed tapasya and she helped 
and looked after him. 

Four boys were born to her, Rama the fifth. Although the youngest, he 
was superior to all his brothers. 

One day, when her sons had gone into the forest to gather fruit, the pure 
and austere Renuka went to bathe in the river. While bathing, she happened 
to see the king of Martikavataka, who was known as Chitraratha. This 
Kshatriya, wearing a lotus wreath upon his chest, was sporting with his 
wives in the water. 

Seeing his magnificent form, Renuka was touched by desire that she 
could not contain, and she sinned in thought in the very river and was 
polluted. She returned to the hermitage, trembling in her heart. Her husband 
instantly saw the condition she was in, and seeing that the lustre of chastity 
had abandoned his wife, he cried out in anguish and anger. 

At that very moment, the eldest of Jamadagni's sons, Rumanvan arrived 
there; and then, Sushena, and then, Vasu, and Viswavasu also. One by one, 
the Maharishi ordered them to kill their mother. However, they could not 
find the heart to do so; they stood silent. He cursed them in anger, and they 
lost their reason, and became like senseless things, dull as inanimate 
objects, and in conduct like beasts and birds. 

Now, Rama arrived in the asrama, last of all. The mighty-armed 
Jamadagni, of great austerities, said to him, "Kill this evil mother of yours, 
without compunction, O my son." 

Rama immediately took up an axe and cut off his mother's head. The 
wrath of Mahatama Jamadagni was appeased; and well-pleased, he said, 


"My child, knower of dharma, you have done this most difficult thing at my 
bidding. Ask me for whatever your heart wishes for and I will give you 
everything you want." 

At which, Rama asked that his mother be restored to life, and that he 
himself not be haunted by the remembrance of his savage deed and that he 
might not be affected by any sin, and that his brothers might recover their 
former condition, and that he might be unrivalled on the field of battle, and 
have a long life. 

Bhaarata, Jamadagni of awesome tapasya granted all those wishes of 
Rama. 

Then, one day, when the Sage's sons had all gone out again, the valiant 
son of Kartavirya, the lord of the country near the shore of the sea, came to 
Jamadagni's hermitage. The Sage's wife received him hospitably. However, 
intoxicated with a Kshatriya warrior's pride, he was; not pleased with the 
reception given to him, and forcibly seized and carried off the foremost 
among the cows whose milk supplied the sacral butter, heedless of its loud 
lowing. 

He wantonly tore down the great trees of the forest. When Rama came 
home, his father told him all that had happened. When Rama saw how the 
cow lowed for its calf, anger arose in his heart and he rushed towards 
Kartavirya's son, whose last moments had drawn near. 

Then Bhargava, scourge of the Kshatriyas, put forth his valour on the 
field of battle, and with flat-tipped, sharp arrows loosed from a beautiful 
bow, cut away Kartaviryarjuna's thousand arms, which were as massive as 
great door bolts. Touched by the hand of death, Kartavirya's son died at 
Rama's hands. 

Their wrath stirred against Rama, Arjuna's kinsmen rushed at Jamadagni 
in his hermitage, while Rama was still away. They slew him there; for 
although his strength was great, he was at tapasya and would not fight. 
Helplessly, repeatedly, he cried out Rama's name in a piteous voice. 

And, O Yudhishtira, the sons of Kartavirya shot Jamadagni dead with 
their arrows, and left the asrama. When they had gone, and when Jamadagni 
had breathed his last, Rama Bhrigunandana returned to the hermitage, 
bearing fuel for the sacred agni in his arms, and saw his father lying slain. 
He was stricken and railed against the grievous fate that had caused this 
tragedy.' 


CANTO 117 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Re cried, "The blame is mine, O father, that the wretched sons of 
Kartavirya have shot you dead with arrows, like a stag in the woods. O 
father, you were always virtuous and never swerved from the path of 
dharma, nor harmed any living creature. How did Fate bring you such a vile 
death? 

What an awful sin they have committed, who have killed you with 
hundreds of arrows, although you were an old man and performing tapasya 
and would not fight them! With what face will those shameless ones speak 
of this deed of theirs to their friends and servants? That they have murdered 
an unassisted and unresisting holy man?" 

O King, thus Rama of great penance wailed, piteously, and then, at last, 
performed the obsequies for his dead sire. Rama, conqueror of hostile cities, 
cremated his father on a pyre, and vowed, O scion of Bharata, to annihilate 
the very race of Kshatriyas. 

Of awesome strength, with the valour of a great warrior, and comparable 
to the god of death himself, he took up his weapon in wrath, went forth and 
singlehandedly put Kartavirya's sons to death. In three encounters, he struck 
down all the Kshatriya followers of Kartavirya's sons. 

And seven times, that powerful one exterminated the warrior tribes of 
the earth. In the land called Samanta-panchaka, he made five lakes of their 
blood. 

There the mightiest scion of Bhrigu's race offered tarpana to his 
ancestors, and Richika appeared to him in a visible form, and spoke words 
of counsel to him; after this, Jamadagni's son performed a mighty sacrifice 
and gratified the king of the Devas, and gifted the Earth to the ministering 
priests. 

Lord of men, he raised a golden altar there, ten vyamas in breadth and 
nine in height, and gifted that vedi to the great Kasyapa. At Kasyapa's 
bidding, the Brahmanas divided the altar into a number of shares, and so 
they became known as as the Khandavayanas, the share takers. 

The exterminator of the Kshatriyas bestowed the earth upon Mahatma 
Kasyapa, then engaged himself in an atikatora tapasya. He now dwells upon 


this Mahendra, monarch of hills. 

So it was that there were hostilities between Rama and all the Kshatriyas 
of the world; and killing them, Rama conquered all the earth,’ says 
Akritavrana. 

Then on the fourteenth day of the moon, at the appointed hour, the 
mighty-souled Rama shows himself to those Brahmanas and also to the 
virtuous Yudhishtira and his younger brothers. And, O king of kings, the 
Pandavas worship Rama, and also all the other Dvijas. After worshipping 
Jamadagni's son and receiving words of praise from him, at Parasurama's 
behest, Yudhishtira spends the night on the Mahendra Parvata, and then sets 
out on his journey towards the southern lands." 


CANTO 118 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Voor said, "The great king pursues his journey, and at different 
places on the sea shore he visits all the auspicious tirthas to which 
Brahmanas went. And O son of Parikshit, Yudhishtira bathes in them all, 
and his brothers with him. 

Later, they come to a sacred river, holiest of them. There, also, the king 
performs his ablutions and offers libations to his ancestors and the gods, 
and distributes riches to the leaders of the dvijas. 

Next he comes to the Godavari, river that falls direcdy into the sea. 
There he is freed from his sins. He reaches the sea in the Dravida land, and 
visits the holy tirtha bearing Agastyas name, which is exceedingly sacred 
and exceptionally pure. The valiant king visits the feminine tirthas, of the 
crocodiles who were Apsaras; here he listens to the story of Arjuna's feat, 
which no other mortal man could have performed. 

Here, the Pandava is praised by the highest men among all Brahmanas, 
and Yudhishtira experiences the greatest delight. And, O Lokarakshaka, 
along with Krishnaa, Pandu's son bathes in those tirthas, and lauding 
Arjuna's valour, spends some delightful time there. 

Yudhishtira gives away thousands of cows at those tirthas on the coast of 
the sea; and with his brothers tells, with pleasure, of how Arjuna had made 
a gift of kine here. Rajan, one after another, they visit those holy places, 
both on the coast and many other sacred spots, as well, fulfiling their hearts' 
desire, until they come to that holiest tirtha known as Surparaka. 

Crossing over a stretch of the sea coast, they arrive at a forest celebrated 
over the world. Here the Devas had performed tapasya in the elder days, 
and so had the great Rajarishis of dharma undertaken yagnas. Here, 
Yudhishtira, of long and mighty arms, sees the celebrated altar of Richaka's 
son, who had been the greatest of archers. 

And the vedi is surrounded by hosts of ascetics, altar fit to be 
worshipped by men of dharma. The king sees the holy, and beautiful, and 
delightful shrines of all the Devas and of the Vasus, and of the Maruts and 
of the Aswin twins, the celestial physicians, and of Yama, son of Surya, and 
of Kubera, the lord of riches, and of Indra, and of Vishnu, and of Brahma 


and of Siva, and of Soma the Moon, and of Surya, author of day, and of 
Varuna, lord of waters, and of the host of Sadhyas, and of the Pitrs, and of 
Rudra together with all his ganas, and of Saraswati, the goddess of learning, 
and of the host of Siddhas, and of many other immortal holy gods besides. 

In all those shrines the king observes various vratas, and gives away 
countless gemstones. He bathes in all the tirthas, then returns to Surparaka, 
from where, with his brothers, he crosses to Prabhasa, whose fame great 
Brahmanas have spread throughout the world. 

There Yudhishtira, of the large reddish eyes, bathes with his brothers and 
offers libations to the Pitrs and the Devas, as do Krishnaa and all the 
Brahmanas travelling with them, and Lomasa as well. For twelve days he 
subsists upon air and water, and performs ablutions during those days and 
their nights, surrounding himself with kindled fires. 

Thus that greatest of all virtuous men engages himself in asceticism, 
while word reaches Balarama and Krishna in Dwaraka of Yudhishtira's 
severe penance, and those two lords of all the Vrishnis, bring a large 
complement of soldiers with them, and come to meet the Pandava of the 
race of Ajamidha. 

When the Vrishnis see the sons of Pandu lying upon the ground, their 
bodies covered in dirt, when they see the daughter of Drupada in a piteous 
condition, their grief is great and they cannot stop themselves from 
breaking out into loud lamentation. 

Now the king, whose courage is such that no misfortune can ever prevail 
over his heart, rises and lovingly meets Rama and Krishna and Krishna's 
son Samba, and the grandson of Sini and other Vrishnis, and pays his 
respects to them, suitably. In return, they also honour him and all the sons 
of Pritha, who in turn honour them. 

And they seat themselves around Yudhishtira, as the Devas sit around 
Indra, O king! He describes the machinations of his enemies to them, and 
how he has spent his years in the forest, and how Arjuna has gone to Indra's 
realm to acquire the Devastras; he is joyful in their company and relates all 
this with a light and glad heart. 

And they are happy to learn all this news from him; but when they see 
the Pandavas so emaciated, the majestic and kindly Vrishnis cannot stanch 
their tears, gushing from their eyes for the anguish they feel." 


CANTO 119 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


fae said, "O you of ascetic wealth, when the sons of Pandu and 
the Vrishnis reach holy Prabhasa, what do they do and whatconversation 
do they have between them? For all of them were such Mahatmans, and 
held each other in high esteem." 

Vaisampayana said, "When the Vrishnis arrive in holy Prabhasa, the 
sacred landing on the coast of the sea, they surround the sons of Pandu and 
wait upon them. 

Then, Balarama, whose complexion is as fair as the milk of the cow, the 
kunda flower, the moon, silver and the lotus root, Balarama who wears a 
vanamala and whose weapon is the ploughshare, speaks to the lotus-eyed 
Panchali, 'Krishnaa, I do not see that the practice of dharma leads to any 
good or that sin fetches evil upon the sinners, for I see the godly Yudhishtira 
in this miserable condition, with matted hair, a vanaprastha, and wearing 
valkala; while Duryodhana rules the earth, and the ground does not open to 
swallow him. 

It would seem that a life of viciousness is more rewarding than a 
virtuous one. All ordinary men wonder that the sinner Duryodhana 
flourishes while the righteous Yudhishtira Dharmaputra, who cleaves to 
justice, is always honest and liberal has been robbed of his throne. 

Why, this son of Pritha would give up his kingdom and his pleasure but 
would not swerve from the path of dharma. How do Bhishma and Kripa and 
the Brahmana Drona and the old king Dhritarashtra live happily after 
banishing the sons of Pandu into exile? Ah, fie on the sinful lords of 
Bharata's race! 

What will Dhritarashtra say to the Pitrs of his noble line when the wretch 
meets them in the next world? He has cast his sinless sons from their 
throne; how can he ever claim that he is not guilty of the worst crime? 

At this time he does not see with his mind's eye that he has acted blindly, 
and truly gone blind in the sight of the kings of the earth. It is because he 
has banished Kunti's son from his kingdom! I have no doubt that, when he 
with his sons perpetrated this inhuman act, Vichitravirya's son saw the 
dread smasana where bodies are burnt with flowering trees of a golden hue. 


Surely, when these stooped towards him, the evil dead with great 
crimson, staring eyes, he must have heeded their vicious counsel, since he 
so fearlessly sent Yudhishtira to the forest, even while this son of Pandu had 
all his weapons with him and his brothers, as well. 

This Bhima here, whose voracious appetite is like that of a wolf, can 
decimate a formidable army just with the strength of his arms and bearing 
no weapon. The forces on the battlefield were unmanned just to hear his 
war-cry. And now this mighty one suffers from hunger and thirst, and is 
emaciated with toilsome journeys. 

But when he takes up his arrows and other weapons, and meets his 
enemies on the field, he will remember the suffering of his wretched forest- 
life, and kill them to the last man — of this I have no doubt. 

Throughout the whole world no one can boast of strength and prowess 
equal to his. Alas, his great body is denuded by the cold, and heat and the 
winds. But when he stands up to fight, he will not spare a single enemy. 

This mighty Kshatriya is inexorable when he rides a chariot — this 
Vrikodara single-handedly conquered all the rulers of the east, together with 
ther armies; and he returned from those wars uninjured. And that same 
Bhima, clad miserably in the bark of trees, now leads a sorry life in the 
vana. 

This powerful Sahadeva vanquished all the kings of the south; those 
lords of men who amassed on the sea coast — look at him now in 
tapasavesham, an anchorite's garb. Valiant Nakula singe-handedly 
vanquished the kings of the west; and he now roams the jungles, subsisting 
on fruit and roots, with a matted mass of jata on the head, and his body 
covered with dirt. 

This daughter of a king who is a maharatha, rose from the flames during 
a sacrifice. She has always known a life of luxury and happiness; how does 
she now endure this sorry existence in a forest? 

And the son of the god of virtue—dharma which stands at the head of 
the three purusharthas—and the son of the wind god and the son of the lord 
of the Devas, and these two sons of the Aswini Kumaras — how do they live 
in the forest deprived of all comforts? 

When Dharmaputra was beaten at dice, and when he, his wife, his 
brothers and his followers were all driven into exile, and Duryodhana began 
to flourish, why did the very earth not perish with all her mountains?" 


CANTO 120 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Ss says, "Rama, this is not the time to lament. Although Yudhishtira 
oes not say a single word, we must do what the time and occasion 
demand. Those who have others to look after their welfare do not need to 
undertake anything themselves; others do their work, as Saibya and the rest 
did for Yayati. 

So, too, Rama, those who have friends, patrons who, of their own 
accord, fight their causes meet with no trials, as if they are helpless. How is 
it that when the sons of Pritha have Balarama and Krishna for friends and 
patrons, as well as Samba and Pradyumna and myself—we who can protect 
the three worlds—how is it then that Yudhishtira lives in the forest with his 
brothers? 

Even today our army of Dasarhas, fully armed and wearing chequered 
mail, should march on Hastinapura, and the Vrishnis should send 
Dhritarashtra's sons and their allies to Yamaloka. If roused, Krishna by 
himself, Krishna who wields the bow made of horn, could subdue all the 
world. Krishna, I ask you to kill Dhritarashtra's son, with all his men, even 
as Indra did Vritra. 

Pritha's son Arjuna is my brother, and my friend, and my guru; he is like 
another Krishna. It is for this that men wish for a worthy son, and that a 
guru seeks a pupil who would never contradict him. It is for this that the 
time has come for that best of all tasks, difficult to perform. 

I will baffle Duryodhana's volleys of weapons with my archery. I will 
overpower them all on the field of battle. In my wrath, I will strike him 
down with my fine shafts that are no less than snakes, poison and fire. And 
with the keen edge of my sword, I will cut his head from his trunk, on the 
battlefield. 

After this, I will kill his followers, and annihilate all of Kuru's race. O 
son of Rohini, let the followers of Bhima look at me with joy in their hearts, 
when I wield my weapons on the field of war, when I slay all their best 
warriors, just as fire consumes the worlds like bales of straw, when time 
ends. 


Kripa and Drona and Vikarna and Karna will not stand against 
Pradyumna's fierce arrows. And I know the power of Arjuna's son — he is 
like the son of Krishna in battle. Let Samba punish Dusasana; let him kill 
Dusasana and his charioteer and destroy his ratha, for on the field of battle 
Jamabavati's son is irresistible and nothing can withstand him. Why, when 
he was a mere boy he routed the Asura Sambaras army; he slew 
Asvachakra, whose thighs were like pillars, and whose muscular arms were 
of great length. 

Who can even approach Samba's chariot? Even as all mortals that are 
born do not escape death, so, too, whoever meets Samba on the battlefield 
will die. 

As for Krishna, he will burn up the enemy troops with his astras of fire; 
he will kill the maharathas Bhishma and Drona, and Somadatta surrounded 
by all his sons. Who or what is there in all the world, including the gods, 
that Krishna cannot vanquish in battle when he takes up arms? 

Then let Aniruddha also take up his bow and sword, and let him cover 
the earth with Dhritarashtra's sons, their heads hewn from their trunks, even 
as a Sacrificial vedi is strewn with blades of kusa grass. 

And Gada and Ulmuka, and Bahuka and Bhanu and Nitha and the young 
Nishatha, so valiant in battle, and Sarana, and Charudeshna, inexorable in 
war — let them all perform feats that befit their race. 

Let the united army of the Satwatas and Suras, together with the best 
warriors of the Vrishnis, the Bhojas, and the Andhakas slay the sons of 
Dhritarashtra upon the field of war, and swell their great fame throughout 
the world. 

Then let Abhimanyu rule the world as long as this best of virtuous men, 
Yudhishtira, is away fulfilling the vow that he swore during the game of 
dice. After that time expires, he will rule the world again, unchallenged, for 
we would have slain all his enemies already. No son of Dhritarashtra will 
remain on earth, neither the Sutaputra. 

This is the vital mission before us, which we must accomplish without 
delay." 

Krishna says, "O scion of the race of Madhu, what you say is true and 
we accept and honour your words, always valiant one! But this bull of the 
Kurus would never accept sovereignty of the earth, unless it were won by 
the prowess of his own arms. Neither for the sake of pleasure, nor from fear, 
nor from greed would Yudhishtira ever renounce Kshatriya dharma; and nor 


would these two heroes, the maharathas Bhima and Arjuna; nor the twins, 
and neither Drupada's daughter Krishnaa. 

Vrikodara and Dhananjaya have no equals or rivals in battle throughout 
the word. And why will this king not rule the whole world when he has 
Madri's twin sons to fight for him? 

The noble king of Panchala, together with the Kekaya king, and we 
ourselves shall put forth our might, and at that time the enemies of 
Yudhisthira shall be annihilated." 

Yudhishtira says, "It is not strange that you should say this, Satyaki! 
However, to me dharma must be the first consideration, above that of 
sovereign power. 

But only Krishna knows what I am, just as I alone know who he truly is. 
Scion of Madhu, most valiant of Sini's race, when Krishna knows that the 
time for war has come, he, Kesava of the beautiful hair, will also help 
vanquish Suyodhana. 

But today let the Dasarha heroes go back; they are my patrons and the 
greatest of all men, who have visited me here. O you of immeasurable 
strength, never fall away from the path of dharma, and I will see you again 
and that shall be a joyful occasion." 

Then, after exchanging mutual greetings and paying obeisance to their 
elders, and having embraced the youthful, the Yadavas and the Pandavas 
part. The Yadus return to their home, and the Pandavas continue their 
tirthayatra. 

Leaving Krishna, Yudhishtira, accompanied by his brothers and servants, 
and also by Lomasa, goes to the sacred river Payoshni, with its fine landing- 
ford that had been built by the king of Vidarbha. The Pandavas begin living 
on the banks of the Payoshni, whose waters are mixed with Soma rasa. 

There, Yudhishtira is greeted with praise and affection by very many 
Brahmanas, who are delighted to see him in that place. 


CANTO 121 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


= says, "Rajan, King Nriga performed a sacrifice here, he gratified 
Indra Purandara with the offering of Soma rasa. Indra was refreshed and 
very pleased. Here, Indra and the Devas and the protectors of all born 
beings celebrated Mahayagnas of diverse kinds, and gave abundant wealth 
to the ministering priests. 

Here King Amurtarayasa, lord of the earth, gratified Indra Vajradhari, 
also with Soma rasa, when that king performed seven aswamedha yagnas. 
All things which in other sacrifices are made of wood and earth, were made 
of gold at those seven horse sacrifices. 

And he himself fashioned for all the rites seven sets of stakes, the rings 
for the sacrificial stambas, the pots, the ladles, utensils, and spoons. On top 
of each sacrificial stake, seven rings were fastened, and, O Yudhishtira, 
Indra and the Devas themselves erected the stakes of shining gold which 
had been prepared for that king's sacred rites. 

In all the magnificent yagnas of Gaya, protector of the earth, he 
delighted Indra by giving him Soma rasa to drink, and the ministering 
priests were gratified with the untold wealth the king gave them. As no one 
can count the sand-grains of the earth, or the stars in the sky, or rain-drops 
when it rains, so, too, the wealth Gaya gave away was beyond calculation, it 
was past anything given before, even during the seven aswamedhas. 

And Viswakarman created golden images of Saraswati, Goddess of 
speech, and Gaya gave these away to the Brahmanas who attended his 
sacrifice, coming from all the directions and cardinal points. 

Lord of men, when King Gaya, Mahatman, performed his sacrifices, he 
erected sacrificial mounds at so many different places that but little space 
was left upon the surface of the earth. Bhaarata, through this Mahayagna, 
Gaya attained Devaloka, Indra's realm. 

Whoever bathes in the river Payoshni goes to the realms which Gaya 
attained, so, Rajadhiraja, prince of dharma, you and your brothers must 
bathe in this river; and, O protector of the earth, you will be freed from all 
sin.’ 


Purushottama, Yudhishtira and his brothers perform ablutions in the river 
Payoshni, after which they journey on to the hill of sapphires and the great 
river Narmada, where Lomasa names all the sacred tirthas for the Pandava 
and all the holy shrines of the Devas, as they visit each of these, one after 
the other, at their leisure. 

At each of them, Brahmanas by thousands receive gifts from 
Yudhishtira. 

Lomasa says, 'Kaunteya, he who visits the Vaidurya Parvata, the 
sapphire mountain, and immerses his body in the river Narmada, attains the 
lokas of the Devas and the Rajarishis. This is the cusp of the Dwapara and 
the Kali yugas; this is the time when a man rids himself of all his sins. 

This is where Saryati performed sacrificial rites, at which Indra appeared 
and drank Soma rasa, along with the Aswini Kumaras. And here Bhrigu's 
son of great tapasya became angry with Mahendra, and the mighty 
Chyavana paralysed Indra, and gained the princess Sukanya for his wife. 

Yudhishtira says, 'How did Chyavana paralyse the Deva of the six gunas, 
the scourge of Paka? Why did the Maharishi become angry with Indra? And 
how, O Brahmana, did Chyavana enable the Aswini Kumaras to drink the 
Soma rasa? I beg you, tell me about all this exactly as it happened.’ 


CANTO 122 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Lo says, "A son was born to the Maharishi Bhrigu, and he was 
called Chyavana. He was respelendent and sat in tapasya on the banks 
of the lake you see there. Pandava, Chyavana of great tejas sat in the 
posture called Vira; he sat quiet and still as a post, for a very long time, in 
the same place. 

An anthill covered him, and creepers the hillock. Swarms of ants 
enveloped him, and he looked just like a mound of earth, but he continued 
his tapasya, lost to the world. 

When a long time passed, King Saryati came to this fine lake for his 
amusement. With him, came four thousand women, his wives all, O 
Bhaarata! Also with him came his only daughter, Sukanya of the beautiful 
brows. 

She wore jewels fit for the Apsaras, was surrounded by her sakhis, and 
while wandering here, came to the anthill inside which Bhrigu's son sat in 
dhyana. She looked around her, enchanted by the beauty of the place, the 
grand and lofty trees. 

Ah, she was exquisite and in the prime of her youth. She was playful and 
began to break the twigs of the forest trees bearing blossoms. Bhrigu's son 
of awesome intelligence saw her roaming about bright like a streak of 
lightning, now having left her maids behind, and wearing just a single cloth 
and her ornaments. 

The Muni was stricken with desire, and he called out to her in a low 
voice, but she did not hear him. Then she saw his eyes shining through the 
anthill, and not knowing what they were, and becoming curious, she pierced 
those eyes with a twig of thorns. From that searing pain of being blinded 
Chyavana in anger cursed Saryati and his party -freezing their bowels! 
Unable to answer the calls of nature, the men suffered direly. 

Seeing their agony, the knowing king asked, "Who has offended the 
illustrious son of Bhrigu? He is old and always at tapasya, and he is 
wrathful. Tell me quickly if you know who has wronged him." 

His soldiers replied, "We do not know who has wronged the Rishi. We 
ask you to inquire into this thing." 


At which, using both menace and conciliation, Saryati asked his advisors 
and friends about what had happened, but they did not know anything 
either. 

When Sukanya saw the distress of the army and her father aggrieved, 
she said, "Roving in the forest, I lighted upon this anthill and saw 
something shining inside it. Taking it for glowworms, I pierced the anthill 
with thorns." 

Saryati immediately came to the anthill, and there he saw Bhrigu's son, 
old both in years and tapasya. With folded hands, the lord of the earth 
begged the Sage, "My daughter did this atrocious thing in ignorance and 
youth, it becomes you to forgive her." 

Bhrigu's son Chyavana said, "Full of pride, she pierced my eyes. O 
King, I will forgive you only on one condition — that you give me your 
beautiful, ignorant and arrogant daughter for my wife." 

Saryati never paused but bestowed Sukanya on Mahatama Chyavana. 
Now the holy one was pleased with the king and withdrew his curse. 
Having won the Rishi's grace, the king went home to his city, with his 
troops. 

Having become the Muni's wife, the lovely Sukanya quickly proved 
herself to be dutiful — in tending to his needs, in keeping vows and 
practising austerities herself, in observing dharma. She was graceful, 
guileless and she worshipped her husband Chyanava, she looked after his 
guests, whenever they came, and she kept the sacred fire burning." 


CANTO 123 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


omasa says, "One day the Aswin twins saw Sukanya, when she had just 
nished bathing and she was naked. They approached her, who was as 
beautiful as the daughter of the king of the Devas, and they said, 'You of the 
shapely thighs, whose daughter are you? And what are you doing in this 
forest? Auspicious, most graceful one, tell us who you ae." 

She replied shyly, "I am Saryati's daughter, and Chyavana's wife." 

At which, the Aswins smiled, "Why, most fortunate one, has your father 
given you to a man who is near death? Ah, timid girl, you shine like 
lightning in this jungle. Why, not in Devaloka have we seen the likes of 
you. Even wearing no ornament and neither any costly garment, you light 
up this vana! 

Still, faultless limbs, you cannot be as beautiful here as you would 
decked in every ornament and wearing gorgeous apparel. Why, exquisite 
one, do you serve a decrepit old husband, who is incapable of satisfying you 
or even maintaing you, O luminous smiles? Divine beauty, leave Chyavana 
and take one of us for your husband. You must not lay waste your youth." 

Sukanya replied, "I am devoted to my husband, do not think for a 
moment that I would betray him." 

They said to her, we are the Aswins, the legendary physicians of heaven. 
We will make your lord as young and handsome as ourselves, but then you 
must choose one among us to be your lord. Swear you will do this and 
having sworn go and fetch your husband here." 

Rajan, Sukanya went and told Bhrigu's son what the Aswin Kumaras 
proposed. Chyavana Muni said to her, "Do as they ask." 

She went back with him to the Aswins and said, "Do what you said." 

They said, "Let your husband enter into this lake." 

Chyavana, who wanted beauty and youth, quickly walked into the water. 
The twin Aswins also, O king, sank into the sheet of water. Next moment, 
all three emerged with surpassingly beautiful forms, and young, and 
wearing burnished earrings. But all three looked exactly alike, 
indistinguishable from one another. 


They said to Sukanya, "Fortunate one, choose one of us to be your lord, 
whichever of us takes your fancy." 

Finding all three of them identical, she deliberated; and at last her heart 
discovered who her husband was, and she chose him for her lord. 

Having become young and radiantly handsome, and his wife having 
chosen him, as well, Chyavana of geat tejas was pleased and said to the 
Aswini Kumaras, those nose-born twins, "You have given me youth and 
beauty, and I will make you drink Soma rasa in the very presence of Indra. 
This I solemnly swear." 

The Aswins were delighted and flew up into Devaloka. Chyavana and 
Sukanya passed their days in fine joy, even like a Deva and his wife.' 


CANTO 124 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Le says, 'Now the news came to Saryati that Chyavana had been 
urned into a youth. Well pleased, he went with his troops to the 
hermitage of the son of Bhrigu. And he saw Chyavana and Sukanya, like 
Devas' children, and his joy and that of his wife were as great as if the king 
had conquered the whole world. 

The Sage received the king and queen with honour. Saryati sat next to 
the Rishi, and entered into a happy and auspicious conversation with him. 

Bhrigu's son said, "O King, perform a yagna at which I shall be the 
priest. Procure everything that we need for the sacrifice." 

At which, Saryati was overjoyed and expressed whole-hearted approval. 
On an auspicious day, Saryati ordered a most excellent sacrificial shrine to 
be erected, provided with all that was needed for the yagna. 

Chyavana, the son of Bhrigu, was the king's priest; and listen to the 
wonderful events which unfolded there. Chyavana took up some Soma rasa 
to offer it to the Aswini Kumaras, who are physicians to the Devas. 

Even as the Rishi was doing this, Indra declared, "These Aswins have no 
right to receive an offering of the Soma rasa. They are the physicians to the 
Devas in heaven — their vocation does not permit them to drink the Soma." 

Chyavana said, "These two are of mighty enterprise, possessed of 
mighty souls, and endowed with uncommon beauty and grace. Besides, 
Indra, they have given me eternal beauty, even as of a Deva. Why should 
you and the other Devas have a right to drink the Soma juice, and not they? 

Lord of the Devas, Puranadara, know that the Aswins are also Devas!" 

At this, Indra said, "These two practise the healing arts, they are but 
servants; assuming different forms at their pleasure they roam the world of 
mortal beings. How can they justly claim the juice of the Soma?" 

Indra spoke these words again and again, but setting him at naught, 
Bhrigu's son still took up the offering he meant to make. As he was about to 
offer a sizeable portion of Soma rasa to the Aswins, Indra said, "If you offer 
the Soma to the Awins, I will burn you with my thunderbolt!" 

But Chyavana only gave Indra a smile and took a a goodly portion of 
Soma rasa to offer it to the Aswins. Indra began to cast the dreadful Vajra as 


the Sage, but found his arm frozen by Bhrigu's son. 

Chyavana continued to chant mantras and made his offerings into the 
sacred fire. Through the Rishi's tapasakti, an evil spirit, an immense and 
mighty demon called Mada sprang forth from the flames. So great was he 
that neither the Devas nor the Asuras could measure his body. 

His mouth was terrifying, chasmal, with rows of razor sharp teeth; one 
of his jaws rested on earth while the other stretched up into heaven. Four 
fangs he had, each a hundred yojanas, while his other teeth were ten yojanas 
each and like the towers of a palace, all pointed and sharp as spears. 

The demon's arms were like hills, both of equal bulk, stretching ten 
thousand yojanas each. His two eyes resembled the sun and the moon; and 
the fire of his face rivalled the conflagration at the dissolution of the 
universe. 

He licked his lips with his tongue like a gash of lightning, without pause; 
his maw gaped wide, his gaze was frightful, and it seemed that he meant to 
swallow the every earth. 

This demon rushed at Indra of a thousand yagnas, and he meant to 
devour that Deva. The world rang with the terrifying roars of the Asura." 


CANTO 125 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


| eee says, "When Indra saw the Asura Mada, looking like Yama 
himself, rushing at him, jaws agape, certainly meaning to devour Lhim, 
whle the Deva's arms remained frozen, that god could only lick the corners 
of his mouth in terror. 

Frightened past endurance, Indra cried to Chyavana, "O Bhargava, 

O Brahmana, I swear to you in the name of truth itself that from today 
the Aswini Kumaras shall partake of the Soma rasa! Be merciful to me, for 
I can never forswear myself. 

May your yagna be fruitful; these Aswins shall drink Soma rasa from 
now because you, most holy one, have entitled them to it. O Bhargava, I did 
all this to spread the renown of your powers, my purpose being to provide 
an occasion for their display. My other object was to spread the fame of 
Sukanya's father Saryati. 

So be merciful to me." 

Mahatama Chyavana's wrath was quickly appeased and he freed Indra 
from the spell that held the Deva frozen. As for the Asura Mada, whose 
name means intoxication, the Rishi divided the demon and put his spirit into 
drink, into women, into gambling, into field sport. 

Having lessened Mada, Chyavana now gratified Indra with a draught of 
Soma and helped Saryati worship the entire host of Devas, and now the 
Aswins with them, equally, thereby truly covering the earth with the fame 
of that king. His yagna complete, Bhrigu's son, best among those blessed 
with speech, passed his days happily in the forest, in the company of 
Sukanya, his loving wife. 

This is his lake, shining before you, O Yudhishtira, and echoing with the 
voices of birds. Here you and your brothers must offer tarpana to your Pitrs 
and to the Devas. 

Sovereign of the earth, scion of Bharata, you must go to Sikataksha, as 
well, then to the Saindhava vana, where you will find a number of small 
rivers and lakes. You must touch the waters of all these, while chanting 
mantras to Lord Siva; and so you will find success in every endeavour of 
yours. 


For this is the conjunction of two yugas, the Dwapara and the Kalli. It is 
a time, O Kaunteya, in which a man's every sin can be destroyed. 

Perform ablutions here, for this place can take all his sins from a man. 
And yonder is the Archika hill, where men of evolved souls live; fruit of all 
seasons grow here perennially and the streams run always full. 

Why, this is a place fit for the Devas and indeed they have erected 
various holy images of diverse forms, which you see. Look, Yudhishtira, 
here the gods built the bathing tank of the Moon. 

Rishis dwell here on every side, in the forest, as do the Balakhilyas and 
the Pavakas, who live just on air. Here are three peaks and three springs; 
you can walk around them in pradakshina, one by one; then you may bathe 
at your leisure. 

Santanu, and Sunaka, the sovereign of men, and both Nara and Narayana 
attained everlasting realms from this place. Here the gods constantly come, 
as also the manes, together with the greatest sages. 

All of them have performed tapasya upon this Archika Parvata. Sacrifice 
to them, Yudhishtira; here the Devas and the Rishis eat payasa. 

And here is the Yamuna, her spring exhaustless; here Krishna sat in 
tapasya. O Pandava, you who drag the dead bodies of your enemies across 
the ground, the twins, Bhimasena, Panchali and all of us will come with you 
to the river. 

Lord of men, this is the holy spring that belongs to Indra. Here Varuna 
Deva also rose up, and here they sat with faith, in dhyana. This sacred hill 
welcomes kindly and honest folk. This is Yamuna of renown, frequented by 
hosts of mighty sages, and the setting for diverse religious rituals; she is 
most holy and destroys the fear of sin. 

Here Mandhata himself, of the mighty bow, performed yagnas to the 
gods; and so did Somaka, the son of Sahadeva, and a most munificent giver 
of gifts." 


CANTO 126 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


udhishtira says, "Great Brahmana, how was that tiger among kings, 

Mandhata, Yuvanaswa's son, born, that best of monarchs, celebrated 
across the three worlds? And how did he of unmeasured lustre attain the 
very pinnacle of regal power, since all the three worlds were as much under 
his subjection as they are under that of Vishnu of mighty soul? 

I am eager to hear all about the life and achievements of that Rajarishi. I 
would also like to hear how he was named Mandhata, he whose lustre 
rivalled that of Indra himself. Tell me also how he was born, for you are a 
master of narration." 

Lomasa says, "Listen attentively, Rajan, to how the name of Mandhata, 
of the great soul, came to be celebrated throughout all the worlds. 
Yuvanaswa, ruler of the earth, was born into Ikshvaku's race. That protector 
of the world performed many sacrifices, noted for their magnificent gifts. 

A thousand times, that most virtuous of men performed the Aswamedha 
yagna. He also performed other sacrifices of the highest order, wherein he 
gave abundant daana. But that saintly king had no son; and he of mighty 
soul and rigid vows made over the duties of the state to his ministers, and 
went away to dwell in the forest. 

There, he undertook a stern tapasya during which, once, he kept a fast. 
Pangs of hunger tormented him and his very soul seemed parched with 
thirst. In this state, he came to the asrama of Bhrigu. That same night, king 
of kings, the Maharishi who was the joy of Bhrigu's race had overseen a 
sacrifice devoted to a son being born to Saudyumni. 

In the place where the rituals had been performed stood a great urn filled 
with holy water, consecrated with mantras; and that water was imbued with 
the virtue that when Saudyumni's wife drank it she would give birth to a 
godlike son. Those great Sages had left the blessed water on the altar and 
had gone to sleep, for they were exhausted after the nightlong ritual. 

As Yuvanaswa passed by them, his mouth was dry, and he was in the 
grip of an agony of thirst; ah, he was desperate for a drink of water. The 
king entered that hermitage and asked for water, but his voice was feeble 


with weakness, and coming from an arid throat the sound he made was like 
the inarticulate cry of a bird. Nobody heard him. 

Then the king saw the jar full of water and he ran to it, and drank deeply, 
thirstily, emptying the vessel. The water was cool and appeased his thirst. 
Then, the Rishis there awoke and found that the jar of water had been 
disturbed from its place and it was empty. 

They gathered together and asked who had drunk the water, at which 
Yuvanaswa confessed that it had been he. The revered son of Bhrigu said to 
him, 'It was not right. This water was infused with an occult siddhi and had 
been placed there so that a son could be born to you. I invested the water 
with the power of my tapasya. 

Mighty Rajarishi, you would have had a son of great strength and valour, 
why a prince who could have despatched even Indra to Yamaloka. So much 
power had I infused into this water, and now look what you have done. 

It is impossible to undo what has been done, and surely what you did 
was fate's own fiat. Great king, you were thirsty and you drank the water 
consecrated by my mantras of power and blessed with the punya of my 
tapasya; there is only one course ahead — you must bring forth the splendid 
child I have described from your own body! 

We will perform a sacrifice to that end, of wonderful effect, and brave as 
you are, you will bring forth a son as great as Indra. Nor will you 
experience any pain of labour.' 

When a hundred years passed, a son brilliant as Surya burst out from the 
king's left side, and he was mighty indeed; and neither did Yuvanaswa die, 
which was also strange. 

Indra came to visit the child and the Devas asked great Indra, "What will 
this boy suck to feed?’ 

Indra put his own forefinger into the child's mouth and the Vajradhari 
said, 'Mandhata — me he shall suckle on.' 

The dwellers of heaven and Indra as well named the boy Mandhata. He 
tasted Indra's forefinger and grew instantly to be thirteen yojanas, and he 
was incomparably powerful. Rajan, the prince acquired all sacred 
knowledge, all the Shastras, along with the holy science of arms, just 
through the power of his thought and intuition, unassisted. 

That same day, the renowned bow Ajagava and a host of arrows made of 
horn, an impenetrable coat of armour, all these came magically into his 
possession! Indra himself set Mandhata on the throne and that king 


conquered the three worlds, always with dharma, even as Vishnu did with 
his three strides. 

Mandhata's chariot was inexorable on its course through the world; and 
the greatest jewels came of their own accord into that Rajarishi's keep. 

Lord of the earth, this is Mandhata's land; it abounds in wealth. Here he 
performed a number of diverse yagnas, during which vast bounties were 
given to the officiating priests. 

Mandhata of immense power and measureless lustre erected sacred 
shrines, performed countless deeds of untold piety, and he attained the 
honour of sitting by Indra's side. 

That wise king of dharma sent forth his command and just by its virtue 
conquered the earth, together with the sea—source of gems—and all the 
cities of the world. The yagnashalas that he made covered the very face of 
Bhumi, on all sides. 

That great sovereign gave ten thousand padmas of cows to Brahmanas. 
Once, there came a drought of twelve years and Mandhata made it rain over 
the parched earth, while Indra could not prevent it but only stared. 

Mandhata slew the powerful Gandhara king, born into the House of the 
Moon, who was dreadful like a thundercloud full of lightning and who 
wounded Mandhata sore with arrows. 

Rajan, he led a virtuous and austere life and with his untold might 
protected the worlds from all evil, and nurtured the four varnas equally. 
This is where, lustrous like the Sun, he sacrificed to God. Look at the place 
—here it is, in the very midst of the field of the Kurus, holiest of holies! 

Master of the world, I have told you how Mandhata was born, 
extraordinarily, and also about his magnificent life." 

Yudhishtira immediately asks Lomasa fresh questions, now about 
Somaka. 


CANTO 127 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Ve says, "O best of masters, how strong and powerful was King 
Somaka? I want to hear a detailed account of his might and his deeds." 

Lomasa says, "Yudhishtira, Somaka was a most virtuous king. He had a 
hundred wives, all chaste and noble, but he did not have a son by any of 
them, for a long, long time. 

Then one day, when he had become old, a son was born to him, and 
called Jantu. All day long, the prince's hundred mothers would sit around 
their child, every one giving him whatever he wanted or whetever they 
thought would please him. 

One day, an ant stung the boy on his leg and he screamed. His mothers 
were so distressed that they stood around him and set up a chorus of cries of 
their own — a tumult of shrieks. 

That great outcry reached the ears of the king, where he sat in his court 
among his ministers, with his family priest at his side. He sent forth to 
discover what had caused the agitation. A royal guard brought him the news 
of how his son had been bitten by an ant. 

Somaka rose and, with his ministers, hurried to the antahpura, and there 
he tenderly comforted his child, Parantapa. 

When the prince grew quiet, the king came out from his harem and sat 
again in his sabha with his family priest and his council of ministers. 

Somaka said sombrely, 'Fie on having a single son! I had rather been a 
sonless man, for if one thinks of how vulnerable to sickness all men are, to 
have just one son is only a trouble and a heartache. 

O Brahmana, I married a hundred wives so that I might have many sons. 
But they gave me none, until at last this single boy was born, this prince 
Jantu. 

What grief can be greater than this? Dvijottama, I have grown old and so 
have my wives; yet, this child is like our very prana, our life-breath. But, 
tell me now, is there any yagna, performing which one can get a hundred 
sons? Tell me if the sacrifice is great or small, easy to perform or difficult.’ 

The family priest, the kulaguru, said, "There is indeed a yagna by which 
a man may get a hundred sons. If you can perform it, O Somaka, I will 


explain it to you.' 

Somaka said, 'Whether it be a good or an evil rite, take it that I have 
already performed the yagna for a hundred sons. Explain it to me.' 

The Brahmana said, 'I will begin a yagna and at it you must sacrifice 
your son Jantu. Then, very soon, you will have a hundred splendid sons. 
When Jantu's fat is offered into the fire to the gods, the queens must inhale 
the smoke of the burning flesh and they will bring forth a hundred radiant 
princes, brave and powerful. Why, and Jantu himself will be born again, of 
himself, svaymbhuva, and upon his back there will be a golden mark.' 


CANTO 128 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


— said, 'Brahmana, do whatever you must. I want to have many 
sons and I will do as you say.’ 

The priest commenced the sacrifice at which Jantu was to be the 
offering. But the hundred wailing mothers snatched at their son and tried to 
save him. 

'Ah, we are lost!' they cried, and held the boy's right arms, but the priest 
snatched him back, while the queens screamed like female ospreys. The 
Brahmana killed Jantu and offered his flesh as havis, the burnt offering into 
the sacred agni. 

Kurunandana, while the prince's fat burned, the agonised mothers 
whiffed its smell and fell in a swoon all together. At once, all those women 
became pregnant, and when ten months passed they delivered a hundred 
sons to Somaka. 

Lord of the earth, Jantu was also born again, to his own mother, and he 
was the eldest of the hundred princes and the most beloved of all his 
mothers; not so their own sons. And upon his back there was the mark of 
gold, and of those hundred sons he was the superior one. 

Somaka's kulaguru left this world after a time, and so did that king. After 
they died, Somaka saw his priest being tortured with fire in a dreadful hell. 

Somaka asked him, 'Why are you being roasted in this naraka? 

In searing pain, the priest gasped, "This is my punishment for performing 
that sacrifice for you.’ 

Rajarishi Somaka said to Dharmaraja, who punishes dead sinners, 'Lord, 
free my priest. I am to blame for the torment he suffers; burn me in the fire 
instead. ' 

Dharmaraja replied, 'No one can suffer for another's sins or enjoy the 
fruit of anyone else's good deeds. Look, here is the fruit of all the punya you 
have done.’ 

Somaka said, "Without this, I have no wish to go to the blessed realms. I 
want to remain with this man, either in heaven or here in hell, for I have 
done what he has and we should share an identical fate.' 


Dharmaraja said, 'O King, if this is what you want, then taste the fruit of 
his sin for the same time that he does. After that you will find the realms of 
heaven.' 

That lotus-eyed king did exactly that, and when his sins were paid for he 
and his kulaguru were set free together. Fond as Somaka was of his priest, 
he shared all the fruit of his punya, his great good deeds, with the 
Brahmana. 

This is his enchanting asrama, which is so lovely before your eyes. 
Anyone who spends six nights here, with his passions controlled, will attain 
the blessed realms of heaven. King of kings, let us rid ourselves of all 
excitations, and spend six nights in this sacred place!’ 


CANTO 129 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


| Bees says, 'O King, in this place Narayana himself performed a 
sacrifice of old, the yagna called Ishtikrita, which lasted a thousand 
years. 

Nabhaga's son Ambarisha sacrificed near the Yamuna river; and he gave 
away ten padmas of gold coins to the attendant priests; and he attained the 
final felicity through sacrifices and austerities. 

Kaunteya, this is the place Nahusha's son, Yayati, lord of all the world, 
man of dharma, his power measureless, performed his sacrifice. He was as 
mighty as Indra and performed his yagna here. Look how the ground is 
strewn with fire pits of diverse kinds, and how the earth seems to subside 
here under the weight of Yayati's pieties. 

Look, here is the Sami tree, which has just one leaf, and look at this 
sparkling lake. Why, behold all these lakes of Parasurama, and the asrama 
of Narayana. Rajan, here is the path that Richaka's son of untold tejas trod, 
who ranged over the world, and practised rites of yoga in the river Raupya. 

Kurunandana, listen to what a Pisachi, who wore pestles for her 
ornaments, said to a Brahmana woman, as I once sat here chanting the 
timeless lineages. 

Having eaten curd in Yugandhara, and stayed in Achutasthala, and also 
bathed in Bhutalaya, you must remain here with your brothers. Having 
passed one night here, if you stay another, what happens during the night 
will be very different from the events of the day, O most righteous of 
Bharata's race. 

We will spend tonight here; this is the threshold of Kurukshetra, field of 
the Kurus. In this very place did Nahusha's son Yayati perform a yagna and 
gave gifts of a bounty of gemstones. Indra was pleased with those sacred 
rites. 

This is a most auspicious tirtha along the Yamuna, called Plakshava- 
tarana, the descent of the banyan tree. Evolved men call it the entrance to 
Swarga. Here the greatest Rishis performed the sacrificial rites of the 
Saraswata king, using the sacrificial stake for their pestle, and when the 
sacrifice ended they performed their ablutions in the river. 


Rajan, King Bharata undertook his sacrifice here, sending forth the 
sacrificial horse for his Aswamedha yagna, the animal which would be 
sacrificed. Through dharma that king won sovereignty over the earth by 
righteousness. The horses that he sent forth, many times, were mottled with 
black. 

Purushvyaghra, it was here that Samvarta, greatest among Rishis, helped 
Marutta perform his renowned yagnas. 

Bathing in this tirtha one can see into all the worlds, and is purified of all 
one's sins. Therefore, you, too, must bathe here, Yudhishtira.' 

Yudhishtira, best of Pandu's sons, bathes there with his brothers while 
the mighty Munis chant his praises. 

Yudhishtira says to Lomasa, 'O0 Rishi whose power is dharma, bathing 
here I see all the worlds! Ah, from here I see Arjuna, who rides the white 
charger!' 

Lomasa says, 'Mahabaho, the greatest Rishis see all realms even so! This 
is holy Saraswati, thronged by those that regard her as their sole refuge. You 
have bathed here and you shall be free of all your sins. 

Kaunteya, the Devarishis performed sacrifices for the Saswata king here, 
as did the Rishis and Rajarishis. This is the Vedi of Brahma Prajapati, 
extending five yojanas on every side. And this is the field of the magnificent 
Kurus, who always undertake great yagnas.' 


CANTO 130 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


omasa says, 'Bhaarata, if any of the mortals breathes their last here, they 

nd Swarga. Thousands upon thousands of men come to this place to 

die. Daksha pronounced a blessing on this place, while he performed his 
yagna here, saying, "Whoever dies in this place will win a place in Swarga." 

Look at this beautful and sacred Saraswati full of crystalline water; and 
here, lord of men, is Vinasana, where the Saraswati disappeared. Here is the 
gate of the kingdom of the Nishadas and it is from hatred for them that the 
Saraswati entered into the earth, so that the Nishadas might not see her. 

Here, too, is the sacred land of Chamasodbheda, where the Saraswati 
became visible to them again. And here she is joined by other sacred rivers 
flowing seawards. Parantapa, here is the sacred Sindhu — _ where 
Lopamudra accepted the Maharishi Agastya for her lord; and, you of 
sunlike lustre, here is the holy tirtha Prabhasa, which Indra favours and 
which removes all sins. 

Yonder is Vishnupada, and here is the sacred river Vipasa. Grieftsricken 
at the death of his sons, Maharishi Vasistha bound himsef hand and foot and 
cast himself into this river. But he rose out of the waters and was unfettered. 

Look, O king, with your brothers, at the sacred land of Kasmira, 
frequented by holy sages. Here, O scion of Bharata, is the place where Agni 
Deva and Maharishi Kasyapa conferred; and also Nahusha's son and the 
sages of the north. 

Yonder, Kshatriya, is the gateway to the Manasa-sarovara, where Sri 
Rama opened a gap in the mountain with his astra. And there is the 
renowned realm of Vatikhashanda, which, although adjacent to the gate of 
Videha, lies to its north. 

There is something else very remarkable about this place- that on the 
waning of every yuga, the Lord Siva, who can assume any form at will, can 
be seen here with Uma and his ganas. 

In the holy lake, also, those wanting the weal of their familes worship 
Siva Pinakin with sacrifices during the month of Chaitra. Devoted folk, 
their passions restrained, who bathe in the Manasa-sarovara are freed from 
their sins, and attain the holy realms. 


And here is the tirtha called Ujjanaka, where the Maharishi Vasistha, his 
wife Arundhati and also the Muni Yavakri found peace. 

Yonder is the lake Kusava, where the lotuses called Kusesaya grow; and 
here also is the sacred hermitage of Rukmini, where she attained mukti, 
after conquering that evil passion, anger. 

I think, O prince, that you have heard something about that mountain of 
meditation, Bhrigutunga; look, that is the lofty peak. And there is Vitasta, 
the sacred stream that absolves men from all sins; its water is cool and 
limpid, and used mainly by the great sages. 

Kshatriya, behold the holy rivers Jala and Upajala, on either side of the 
Yamuna. By performing a sacrifice here, king Usinara surpassed Indra 
himself in greatness; wanting to test Usinaras merit and also wanting to 
bestow boons on him, Indra and Agni came to his yagnashala. 

Indra took the form of a hawk, and Agni that of a pigeon, and they flew 
to the king. In apparent fear of the hawk, the pigeon fell upon the king's 
thigh, seeking his protection. 


CANTO 131 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ gles hawk said, "The kings of the earth all say that you are a righteous 

sovereign. Why, O Kshatriya, have you stooped to this adharma? I 
am afflicted with hunger, do not keep me from my prey which God has 
given me to be my food. You think that you serve dharma by this, while, in 
fact, you forsake it." 

The king said, "Best of avians, this pigeon is terrified of you and for its 
life. It has flown to me to escape you, and to beg for its life. How do you 
not see that my highest dharma is to give it my protection? 

It trembles in fear and I would surely find sin if I abandon it. He that 
slays a Brahmana, he that slaughters a cow—the common mother of all the 
worlds —and he that forsakes one seeking protection are equally sinful." 

The hawk replied, "O King, all beings live through food, which 
nourishes and sustains them. A man can live long even after relinquishing 
what is dearest to him, but he cannot live without food. 

If you deprive me of my food, my life will leave this body and find 
realms where such troubles are unknown. But at my death, pious king, my 
mate and children will also surely perish, and by protecting this single 
pigeon, you will take many lives. 

The virtue that stands in the way of another virtue is certainly no virtue 
at all, but in reality is sin. O King, whose prowess consists of truth, only the 
dharma which does not conflict with a greater dharma is worthy of being 
called dharma. Compare the conflicting costs in lives; you should not do 
what you mean to. Take the course of the lesser evil." 

The king said, "O best of birds, you speak words fraught with wisdom, 
and I suspect that you are Suparna, monarch of birds. I have no hesitation in 
declaring that you are fully conversant with the ways of dharma. You 
disclose wonders about dharma so that I must believe there is nothing that 
you do not know about it. 

So, then, how can you say that abandoning a creature that seeks my 
protection is dharma? Sky ranger, you are in quest of food; surely, you can 
assuage your hunger with some other food, more copious than this pigeon. I 


am willing to procure any kind of food for you, which is even more to your 
taste, even if it be an ox, or a boar, or a deer, or a buffalo." 

There hawk said, "Great king, I have have no wish to eat a boar or an ox 
or any other animal; they are not my natural prey. So, O bull among 
Kshatriyas, give me this pigeon that heaven has ordained to be my meal 
today, for, that hawks will eat pigeons is the law of nature. Do not cling to a 
plantain tree for support, O king; it is not strong enough to support you." 

The king said, " Sky rover, I will give you this rich kingdom of my race, 
or anything else you want; anything other than this pigeon, which has flown 
to me for my protection. Ah, tell me what I should do to save this bird 
because I do not mean to give him to you under any circumstance." 

The hawk said, "Rajan, if you have such love for this pigeon, then cut 
off some of your own flesh and weigh it upon a scale until it equals the 
pigeon's weight. And when it does, give me that flesh and I will be 
satisfied." 

The king said, "I will do so gladly and consider this a favour to me. 

The Rajarishi Usinara cut off some of his flesh and weighed it in a 
balance against the pigeon. He found the pigeon heavier and cut off another 
piece of his flesh, and still the bird weighed more. Portion after portion of 
his flesh he cut and added but the scale remained tilted on the side of the 
bird. 

At last there was no flesh left upon Usinaras body and he mounted the 
scale himself. 

Now the hawk said, "King of dharma, I am Indra and the pigeon is Agni, 
who bears the havis to the gods. We came to your yagnashala to test your 
merit. You cut all the flesh from your body and your glory shall be 
resplendent, and will surpass that of all others in the world. 

As long as men speak of you, your glory will endure and you will dwell 
in Swarga, in the holiest realms." 

Saying this to the king, Indra flew up into Devaloka. And, after having 
filled heaven and earth with the punya of his great and pious deeds, Usinara 
also ascended into heaven in a radiant form. 

Look, O King, at the asrama of that noblest-hearted sovereign. Here the 
Devas and Maharishis come, along with the purest Brahmanas:' 


CANTO 132 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


| oe says, 'And look here, lord of men, at the holy asrama of 
Uddalaka's son Swetaketu, whose fame as an expert in the sacred 
mantras is spread across earth. Coconut trees grace this hermitage. Here 
Swetaketu saw the Goddess Saraswati in her human shape, and said to her, 
"Bless me with the gift of speech!" 

In that yuga, Swetaketu, the son of Uddalaka, and Ashtavakra, the son of 
Kahoda, who were uncle and nephew, were the greatest masters of the 
sacred lore. Those two Brahmanas, of matchless tejas, went to King 
Janaka's yagnasala and bested Vandin in a debate. 

Kaunteya, you and your brothers worship the holy asrama of him whose 
grandson was Ashtavakra, who, even as a child, drowned Vandin in a river, 
after having vanquished him in a metaphysical debate.' 

Yudhishtira says, "Tell me, O Lomasa, all about the power of this man, 
who vanquished Vandin. Why was he born as Ashtavakra, crooked in eight 
parts of his body?’ 

Lomasa says, "The Rishi Uddalaka had a disciple named Kahoda, of 
subdued passions, and entirely devoted to the service of his guru, who had 
studied long. The Brahmana had served his master for many years, and 
recognising his service, his preceptor gave him his own daughter, Sujata, in 
matriage, as well as a mastery over the Shastras. 

And she conceived a child, radiant as fire. 

One night, while his father was reading the scriptures aloud, the child 
spoke from his mother's womb, "Father, you have been reading all night but 
it seems to me that not everything you recite is correct. Through your study, 
I have become versed in the Shastras and the Vedas, and their Angas. I say 
to you that what comes from your mouth is inaccurate." 

Insulted in the presence of his disciples, the Maharishi cursed the child 
in the womb in anger, "Because you speak even from the womb, you shall 
be crooked in eight parts of your body!" 

The child was born crooked, and he was known as Ashtavakra. Now, he 
had an uncle named Swetaketu who was the same age as himself. 


Anxious about the child growing in her, one day Sujata said to her 
impoverished husband, "Maharishi, the tenth month of my pregnancy is 
near. You have nothing to sustain us once our child is born." 

Kahoda Muni went to King Janaka for wealth. In that Rajarishi's court, 
Vandin, master of dialectics, defeated Kahoda in a debate and drowned him 
in a river. Hearing of this, Uddalaka said to his daughter Sujata, "You must 
keep this secret from Ashtavakra." 

She did so, and when Ashtavakra was born, he heard nothing about the 
matter; and he regarded Uddalaka as his father and Swetaketu as his 
brother. One day, when Ashtavakra was in his twelfth year, Swetaketu saw 
him sitting in Uddalaka's lap and pulled him roughly down. 

Ashtavakra began to cry and Swetaketu said, "It isn't your father's lap!" 

Ashtavakra was devastated. He went home and asked his mother, 
"Where is my father?" 

Sujata was stricken by his question and she was also afraid that he might 
curse her; she told him what had happened. 

At night Ashtavakra said to his uncle Swetaketu, "Let us go to the 
sacrifice of King Janaka, where we might see many wonderful things. We 
will listen to the debate between the Brahmanas and partake of excellent 
food. Our knowledge will increase. The recitation of the sacred Vedas is 
sweet to hear and is fraught with blessings." 

Uncle and nephew went to Janaka's splendid sacrifice. Upon being 
turned away from the entrance to the yagnasala, Ashtavakra spoke to the 
great king inside.' 


CANTO 133 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


fs leas said, "Where no Brahmana is encountered, the right of way 
belongs to the blind, the deaf, the women, carriers of burden, and the 
king. But when a Brahmana is on the way, the path belongs to him alone.' 

King Janaka said, "I give you the right to enter; go in by whichever 
entrance you choose. No fire, be it ever so small, is to be slighted. Even 
Indra bows to the Brahmanas." 

Ashtavakra said, "Ruler of men, we have come to witness your sacrifice 
and our curiosity is great. Besides we have come here as guests, sadasyas; 
we want your permission to enter. And, O son of Indradyumna, we have 
come to meet King Janaka and to speak to him. But your gatekeeper 
obstructs us and for this our anger burns us like fever." 

The gatekeeper said, "We carry out the orders of Vandin. Listen to what I 
have to say. Boys are not allowed to enter here, only learned old 
Brahmanas." 

Ashtavakra said. "If this is the condition, dwarapalaka, that the door is 
open only to those that are old, then we have a right to enter. We are old and 
we have observed sacred vratas and possess energy which comes from the 
Vedas. We have served our elders and subdued our passions, and have 
mastered the scriptures. 

It is said that even boys are not to be slighted, for a fire, small though it 
be, burns on being touched." 

The gatekeeper replied, "Young Brahmana, I consider you a boy. But if 
you are a gyani, then recite, if you know it, the mantra that demonstrates the 
existence of the Supreme Being, the hymn adored by the Devarishis, which, 
although composed of one letter, is yet multifarious. Make no vain boast, 
learned men are really very rare." 

Ashtavakra said, "True growth cannot be inferred from the mere 
development of the body, even as the growth of the knots of the Salmali tree 
cannot signify its age. That tree is full-grown, which although slender and 
short, bears fruits, while the tree, however large, which does not bear fruit, 
is not mature." 


The gatekeeper said, "Boys receive instruction from the old and in time 
they also grow old. Knowledge certainly cannot be attained in a short time. 
Why, then, being a child, do you talk like an old man?" 

Ashtavakra said, "One is not old because his head is grey. But the gods 
regard him as old who, although a child in years, is yet possessed of 
knowledge. The sages have not laid down that a man's merit consists in 
years, or grey hair, or wealth, or friends. To us, he is great who is versed in 
the Vedas. 

I have come here, O gatekeeper, to see Vandin in the sabha. Go and 
inform King Janaka, who has a garland of lotuses around his neck that I am 
here. Today you will see me enter into dispute with all the learned men, and 
defeat Vandin in a debate. And when the rest have been silenced, the 
Brahmanas of mature learning and the king also, with his principal priests, 
shall bear witness to the superior or the inferior quality of my attainments." 

The dwarapalaka said, "You are just ten; how can you hope to enter this 
yagnasala? Only great scholars can go in here. But I will try to let you in, 
and you yourself also try." 

Then Ashtavakra said to the king, "O Janaka, best of your race, you are 
the greatest sovereign and all power reposes in you. In times of old, King 
Yayati was the celebrator of sacrifices, and in this yuga you. 

We have heard that the learned Vandin bests the most expert debators 
and then has your loyal servats drown them. Hearing this, I have come to 
these Brahmanas, to expound the doctrine of the unity of the Brahman. 

Where is Vandin? Tell me so that I can face him, and eclipse him even as 
the sun does the stars." 

Janaka said, "Brahmana, you hope to defeat Vandin without knowing his 
power of speech. None who knows his powers will dare say what you do. 
The greatsest masters of the Veda have faced and been vanquished by him; 
you only say what you do because you do not know how mighty he is. 

So many Brahmanas have wilted before him even as the stars before the 
sun. Countless scholars, arrogant of their learning, merely saw Vandin and 
lost all their pride. They left my sabha, shamed, without uttering a word." 

Ashtavakra said, "Vandin has never debated against a man like me; only 
so does he look upon himself as a lion, and goes about roaring like one. But 
meeting me today he will fall dead, even like a cart whose wheels have 
come loose on a highway." 


The king said, "Only he is a truly learned man who understands the 
significance of the thing that has thirty divisions, twelve parts, twenty-four 
joints, and three hundred and sixty spokes." 

Ashtavakra said, "May that ever-moving wheel that has twenty-four 
joints, six naves, twelve peripheries, and sixty spokes protect you!"! 

The king said, "Who amongst the gods bears those two which go 
together like two mares yoked to a chariot, and sweep like one hawk, and to 
what also do they give birth?" 

Ashtavakra said, "May God, O king, forfend the presence of these two” 
in your house; yes, even in the house of your enemies. He who appears, 
having the wind for his charioteer,> begets them, and they also produce 
him." 

Thereupon the king said, "What does not close its eyes even while 
sleeping; what is it that does not move, even when born; what is it that has 
no heart; and what increases even in its own speed?" 

Ashtavakra said, "It is a fish* that does not shut its eye-lids while 
sleeping; and it is an a egg” that does not move when born; it is stone®that 
hath no heart; and it is a river’ that increases in its own speed." 

The king said, "It seems, O Tejasvin, that you are no human being. I do 
not consider you a boy, but a matured man; there is no other man who can 
compare with you in the art of speech. I therefore give you admittance. 
There is Vandin."' 


| This wheel is the wheel of Time—i.e., measured according to the solar, lunar and astral revolutions. 
The significance of Ashtavakra's reply is: May the meritorious deeds performed at proper times 
during the revolution of this wheel of Time protect you. 


2 Thunder and lightning or misery and death. 

3 The male being that is ever conscious. 

+ Cloud or the mind. 

5 The mundane egg. 

6 The soul that has renounced connection with the body. 
’ The heart of a Yogi. 


CANTO 134 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


© A shtavakra said, "O king, O leader of fierce legions, in this assembly of 

monarchs of unrivalled power who have met together, I cannot 
recognise Vandin, master of the controversialists. But I am searching for 
him, even as one does for a swan on a vast expanse of water. 

O Vandin, you regard yourself as the foremost of debators; yet, when 
you debate against me you will hardly flow like the current of a river. I am 
like a fire in full flame. Be silent before me, Vandin! Do not awaken a 
sleeping tiger. Know that you will not escape unstung, after trampling on 
the head of a venomous snake licking the corners of its mouth with its 
tongue. That weak man who, in pride of strength, attempts to strike a blow 
at a mountain, only gets his hands and nails broken, but no wound is left on 
the mountain itself. 

As the other mountains are inferior to the Mainaka, and as calves are 
inferior to the ox, so are all other kings of the earth inferior to the lord of 
Mithila. And as Indra is the foremost of Devas, and as the Ganga is the best 
of rivers, so you alone are, O king, the greatest of monarchs. O king, have 
Vandin brought into my presence." 

O Yudhishtira, when Vandin stood forth, Ashtavakra thundered at him in 
wrath, "You answer my questions, and I will answer yours!" 

Vandin said, "Only one fire blazes forth in various shapes; only one sun 
illumines this whole world; only one hero, Indra, the lord of the Devas, 
destroys all enemies; and only one Yama is the sole lord of the Pitrs."! 

Ashtavakra said, "The two friends, Indra and Agni, ever move together; 
the two Devarishis are Narada and Parvata; the twins are the Aswini 
kumaras; two is the number of the wheels of a chariot; and it is as a couple 
that husband and wife live together, as ordained by God."” 

Vandin said, "Three kinds of born beings are produced by acts; the three 
Vedas together perform the Vajapeya; at three different times, the 
Adhwaryas commence sacrificial rites; three is the number of worlds; and 
three also are the divine lights."* 


Ashtavakra said, "Four are the Asramas of the Brahmanas; the four 
varnas perform sacrifices; four are the cardinal points; four is the number of 
letters; and four also, as is ever known, are the legs of a cow."* 

Vandin said, "Five is the number of fires; five are the feet of the metre 
called Punki; five are the sacrifices; five locks, it is said in the Vedas, are on 
the heads of the Apsaras; and five sacred rivers are known in the world."> 

Ashtavakra said, "Some assert that six cows are given while first lighting 
the sacred fire; six are the seasons belonging to the wheel of time; six is the 
number of the senses; six stars constitute the constellation Kirtika; and six, 
it is found in all the Vedas, is the number of the Sadyaska sacrifice."® 

Vandin said, "Seven is the number of the domesticated animals; seven 
are the wild animals; seven metres are used in completing a sacrifice; seven 
are the Rishis; there are seven forms of paying homage in the world; and 
seven, it is known, are the strings of the Vina." 

Ashtavakra said, "Eight are the bags containing a hundred fold; eight are 
the legs of the Sarabha, which preys upon lions; eight Vasus, as we hear, are 
amongst the Devas; and eight are the angles of the yupastamba in all 
sacrificial rites."/ 

Vandin said, "Nine is the number of the mantras used in kindling the fire 
in sacrifices to the Pitrs; nine are the appointed functions in the processes of 
creation; nine letters compose the foot of the metre, Brihati; and nine is also 
always the number of the figures in calculation."® 

Ashtavakra said, "Ten are the cardinal points, entering into the cognition 
of men in this world; ten times hundred make up a thousand; ten is the 
number of months of a woman's gestation; and ten are the teachers of true 
knowledge, and ten, the haters thereof, and ten again are those capable of 
learning it." 

Vandin said, "Eleven are the objects that beings can enjoy; eleven is the 
number of the yupas; eleven are the changes of the natural state of those 
that have life; and eleven are the Rudras among the gods in heaven."!° 

Ashtavakra said, "Twelve months compose the year; of twelve consists a 
foot of the metre Jagati; twelve are the minor sacrifices; and twelve, 
according to the learned, is the number of the Adityas."!! 

Vandin said, "Unaffected by happiness and misery, the Paramatman does 
exist, but His existence is not susceptible of being proved, nor can the 
ignorant ever perceive Him. Men attain that condition through these twelve 


- virtue, truth, self-restraint, penance, good-will, modesty, forgiveness, 
freedom from envy, sacrifice, charity, concentration and control over the 
senses. 

The thirteenth lunar day is considered the most auspicious; thirteen 
islands exist on earth."!*Saying this much, Vandin stopped; he could not go 
on. Ashtavakra completed the sloka, "Thirteen sacrifices are presided over 
by Kesi; and thirteen are devoured by Atichhandas, the longer metres, of 
the Veda."!° 

And seeing Ashtavakra speaking and the Suta's son silent and pensive, 
and with his head hung down, the assembly broke into a loud uproar. 
Delighted, the Brahmanas at king Janaka's splendid sacrifice rose as a man, 
and, with folded hands, paid Ashtavakra homage." 

Ashtavakra said, "Before today, this man would best all Brahmanas in 
debate and cast them into water. Let Vandin meet the same fate today. Seize 
him and drown him in water!" 

Vandin said, "O Janaka, I am the son of King Varuna. Simultaneously 
with your sacrifice, there also began another twelve years' yagna. It was to 
that sacrifice that I despatched the principal Brahmanas; they have gone to 
witness Varuna's sacrifice. 

Look! There they are returning. I pay homage to the worshipful 
Ashtavakra, by whose grace today I shall join him who begot me." 

Ashtavakra said, "Defeating the Brahmanas either with straight debate or 
sophistry, Vandin had cast them into the waters of the sea. That Vedic truth 
which he had suppressed by false arguments I rescued by dint of my 
intellect today. 

Now let honest men judge. As Agni, who knows the character of both 
the good and the bad, leaves the bodies of those whose designs are honest, 
untouched by his heat, and is thus partial to them, so, too, good men judge 
the assertions of boys, and are favourably disposed towards them. 

O Janaka, you listen to me as if you have been stupefied by eating the 
fruit of the Sleshmataki tree; as if flattery has robbed you of your good 
sense; and this seems why, although my words pierce as hooks do an 
elephant, you do not heed them." 

Janaka said, "Listening to you, I find your words extraordinary, more 
than merely human. Your form is also superhuman. You have vanquished 
Vandin in debate and I put him at your disposal." 


Ashtavakra said, "O king, Vandin remaining alive will serve no purpose 
of mine. If Varuna really is his father, let Vandin be drowned in the sea." 

Vandin said, "I am King Varuna's son. I have no fear of being drowned. 
Even at this moment, Ashtavakra shall see his long-lost sire, Kahoda." 

Then all the dead Brahmanas appeared before Janaka, after having been 
duly worshipped by the magnanimous Varuna. 

Kahoda said, "It is for this, O Janaka, that men pray for sons, by 
performing deeds of punya. That in which I failed has been achieved by my 
son. Weak persons may have sons endowed with strength; fools can have 
intelligent sons; and the illiterate may have learned sons." 

Vandin said, "It is with your sharpened axe, O monarch, that even Yama 
severs the heads of foes. May prosperity attend upon you! In this sacrifice 
of King Janaka, the principal hymns of the Uktha rites are being chanted, 
and the Soma rasa is also being amply quaffed. And the gods themselves 
come to accept their sacred shares of the sacrifice, with joyful hearts." 

When the dead Brahmanas rose up, their splendour enhanced, Vandin 
took his leave of King Janaka and entered into the waters of the sea. 

Then Ashtavakra worshipped his father, and he himself was worshipped 
by the Brahmanas. And thus having defeated the Suta's son, Ashtavakra 
returned to his own fine hermitage, and his uncle with him. 

Then, in the presence of his mother, his father said to him, "Hurry, son, 
and enter this river, Samanga." 

Ashtavakra did so, and as he submerged himself beneath the water all his 
crooked limbs were instantly made straight. And from that day 

that river is called Samanga and she became invested with the virtue of 
purifying. He that bathes in her is set free from his sins. 

Therefore, O Yudhishtira, do you, with your brothers and wife, enter the 
river and perform your ablutions in her. Kaunteya, scion of the race of 
Ajamidha, we will remain here with the Brahmanas, and you will perform 
other deeds of punya with me, for you are bent upon doing good.’ 


! Ashtavakra comes to Janaka's sacrifice with the object of proving the unity of the Supreme Being. 
Vandin avails himself of various System of Philosophy to combat his opponent. The iterative form of 


the dialogue is unique in being that of enigmas, and the latent meaning is in a queer way hidden 
under the appearance of puerile and heterogeneous combinations of things. 

Vandin opens the debate by saying that as the number of each of these is one, so one only 
intellect is the lord, leader and guide of the senses. 


2 There is a Vedic revelation that two birds live together on a tree as friends—one of these eats the 
fruits and the other looks at the former. From this it is manifest that these two are the lords, leaders 
and guides of the senses. That there is a second faculty besides the intellect is also proved by the fact 
that in sleep when the intellect is inactive that faculty continues in action, for if it were not so we 
could not remember having slept, nor connect the state after awaking with that preceding sleep. 
Accordingly by citing the number two Ashtavakra asserts that besides intellect there is another 
faculty —conciousness, and that these two are jointly the lords, leaders and guides of the senses and 
that they act together as Indra and Agni, etc. 


3 By citing the number three Vandin means to say that as it is deeds that produce the three kinds of 
born beings, etc., so deeds are supreme and that everything else be it intellect alone, or intellect and 
conciousness together is subservient to Karma. 


4 Ashtavakra here advances the thesis that even if Karma be supreme, still when the Fourth or 
Supreme Being (Turiya) becomes manifest to the soul, it stands in no further need to act or perform 
any karma. 


5 By bringing in the quinquennial series, Vandin wants to assert that the five senses are competent to 
cognise their respective objects and that besides these senses and their objects there is neither any 
other sense to perceive nor any other object of perception. He also cites the authority of the Veda 
according to which the Apsaras (or consciousnesses) have five locks on their heads —i.e., five objects 
of perception. 


© Vandin admits the existence of the six senses but says that the soul experiences happiness and 
misery through those as well as through the intellect. 


7 Ashtavakra advances an eighth element, namely, the knowledge of these. 


8 Each of the three qualities (existence, foulness and ignorance) of prakriti (the passive or material 
cause of the world) mixing with each of the three corresponding qualities of pradhana (the active or 
spiritual cause of the world) in various proportions produces the mundane order of things. Thus is 
proved the eternity of prakriti or nature and so, also, established the doctrine of duality. 


° Prakriti does not really create. It is the Supreme Being who through the medium of illusion in 
contact with the ten organs (the five locomotive organs and the five organs of sense) makes manifest 
the System of things. Prakriti therefore has no real existence—her existence is only apparent in the 
real existence of the soul. 


10 Yupas (stakes) mean here, feelings, etc., which keep men bound to the world. Rudras are those 
who makes others cry. 


!l Vandin means to say that the soul is not essentially free from the fetters of happiness and misery 
arising from the eleven objects of perception. In this world all men are subject to happiness and 
misery. We also hear that there are Rudras in heaven. 


12 According to some, endeavours to attain emancipation can be successful not in this world but in 
the world of Brahma. Others say that to that end a special yoga is necessary. By bringing forward the 
objects numbering thirteen, Vandin advances the opinion that, virtue, etc., are not sufficient to attain 
moksha but that a suitable time and place are also essential. 


13 Ashtavakra concludes by citing the same number thirteen. The soul, which is essentially 
unaffected, becomes subject to happiness and misery through the thirteen: the ten organs of 
locomotion and sense, and intellect, mind and egoism. But Atichhanadas, i.e., those that have 


surmounted ignorance, namely, the twelve, virtue, etc., destroy those thirteen and that is 
emancipation. 


CANTO 135 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


| ee: says, 'Here, of yore this Samanga was called Madhuvila, and 
onder is Kardamila, the bathing place of Bharata. When misery struck 
Sachi's lord, after he killed Vritra, Indra bathed in this Samanga and was 
freed from his sin. 

Here, Purusharishabha, is where the Mainaka mountain sank his roots 
into the earth, and so it is called Vinasana. 

Once, it was here that Aditi cooked her offering of sacred food to the 
Brahman, so that she might have sons. Climb this lofty hill, O you bulls 
among men, and put an end to your inglorious, unreliable sorrow. 

Here before you, O king, is the Kanakhala mountain range, a favourite 
resort of sages. Yonder is the mighty Ganga. In ancient times, the Rishi 
Sanatkumara found mukti by performing ablutions here in this river. 

You will also be freed from all your sins, son of Kunti, if you and your 
brothers touch the waters of this lake called Punya, and this mountain 
Bhrigutunga and also the waters of these two rivers, called Ushniganga. 

Look, here is the asrama of the Rishi Sthulasiras; here renounce your 
anger and sense of self-importance. And there, Pandava, is Raibhya's 
beautiful asrama, where Bharadwajas son, Yavakrita, profound in Vedic 
lore, perished.' 

Yudhishtira says, 'How did the mighty Yavakrita, son of Bharadwaja, 
acquire profundity in the Vedas? And how also did he perish? I am eager to 
hear all this, just as it happened. I find great delight in listening to the deeds 
of such godlike men.' 

Lomasa says, 'Bharadwaja and Raibhya were two friends. And they lived 
here, ever taking the greatest pleasure in each other's company. Raibhya had 
two sons, named Arvavasu and Paravasu, while Bharadwaja had an only 
son, named Yavakrita. Raibhya and his two sons were versed in the Vedas, 
while Bharadwaja practised tapasya. But, O Bhaarata, from their boyhood, 
the friendship that existed between these two was unequalled. 

Sinless, the highspirited Yavakrita found that brahmanas slighted his 
father, who practised asceticism, while they revered Raibhya and his sons; 
Yavakrita was overwhelmed with sorrow, and became sorely aggrieved. He 


embarked upon severe austerities, in order to obtain knowledge of the 
Vedas. 

He exposed his body to fire. He made Indra anxious with his terrific 
penance. 

Indra went to him and said, "Why, O sage, do you sit in such a dreadful 
tapasya?" 

Yavakrita said, "O you whom the Devas adore, I sit in penance to gain 
such gyana of the Vedas as no Brahmana has ever had before. O conqueror 
of Paka, my tapasya is to have the Vedas manifest themselves in me; why, I 
mean to acquire every manner of knowledge through my tapasya. 

Lord, learnt through gurus, the Vedas take a long time to be known. I 
perfom my austerities to have them in a short while." 

Indra said, "Brahmana, the path you tread is not the proper way. Why do 
you want to destroy yourself? Go and learn from the lips of a preceptor." 

Saying this, Sakra went away and Yavakrita of immeasurable energy fell 
once more to his tapasya. O king, I have heard that by continuing his stern 
penance he greatly agitated Indra, who came again to that Maharishi and 
forbade him, saying, "You strive so that the Veda manifests both in yourself 
and in your father; but your exertions can never be fruitful, nor is this 
tapasya of yours well-advised." 

Yavakrita said, "Lord of the Devas, if you do not give me what I want, I 
will perform even more stringent tapasya. Indra, if you do not grant me 
what I want, I will cut off my limbs and offer them as a sacrifice into a 
blazing fire." 

Indra realised how determined the sage was and decided to use some 
guile to dissuade him. Indra assumed the guise of an ascetic Brahmana, 
hundreds of years old, and infirm, and suffering from consumption. And he 
fell to throwing up a dam with sand, at the very place along the Bhagirathi 
to which Yavakrita used to come to bathe. 

Unceasingly, Sakra began to fill the Ganga with sand, and he attracted 
Yavakrita's attention. When that bull among the sages saw Indra earnestly 
building his dam, he broke into laughter, and said, 'What are you doing, O 
Brahmana, and what is your object? Why do you undertake this mighty 
endeavour for no good reason?" 

Indra said, "My child, I am trying to dam the Ganga so that there may be 
a commodious passage across the water. People experience considerable 
difficulty in crossing and recrossing the river by boat." 


Yavakrita said, "O you of ascetic wealth, you cannot dam this mighty 
current. O Brahmana, desist from what is impracticable, and take up 
something that you can achieve." 

Indra said, "Rishi, I have imposed this weighty task upon myself just as 
you have undertaken your tapasya, which can never be fruitful, in order to 
know the Vedas." 

Yavakrita said, "If, Lord of the Devas, my penance is doomed to fail, be 
pleased to grant me something that I can achieve. Bless me with boons by 
which I can excel other men." 

Indra said, "The Vedas will be manifest in you, and in your father as 
well; and all your other desires will also be fulfilled. Return home, 
Yavakrita." 

Having thus got the object of his desire, Yavakrita came to his father and 
said, "Father, the Vedas will be manifest in you as well as myself, and I 
have obtained boons whereby we shall excel against all men." 

Bharadwaja said, "O my son, because you have obtained the objects of 
your desire, you will become proud. And when you are puffed up with pride 
and have also become uncharitable, destruction will soon overtake you. 

There is a tale that the gods themselves tell. In ancient times, there lived 
a sage named Baladhi, possessed of great energy. And in grief over the 
death of a child, he practised the severest penance to have a child that 
would be immortal; and he got a son even as he desired. But though they 
were favourably disposed towards him, the gods did not yet make his son 
immortal. 

They said, 'No mortal can be deathless, without some condition by 
which he can die. 

Baladhi said, '0 Devas, these mountains have always existed and are 
invincible; let their destruction be the condition of my son's death.' 

Baladhi's son was called Medhavi, and he was highly irascible. When he 
learnt of the only way in which he could die, he grew haughty and began to 
insult the sages of the earth. And he ranged over the world, doing mischief 
to the Munis. 

One day, he met the Maharishi Dhanushaksha of immense tejas and the 
arrogant Medhavi insulted him. The Rishi cursed him, 'Be you ashes!' 

But Medhavi was not reduced to ashes. Then Dhanushaksha had a vast 
herd of buffaloes shatter the mountain, which stood as the condition of 
Medhavi's immortality. The young man instantly died. 


Taking his son's corpse in his arms, Medhavi's father began to bewail his 
fate. Now listen, my child, to what the Rishis, who were masters of the 
Vedas, chanted when they found the sage mourning: Never can a mortal 
overcome what Fate ordains. Lo! Dhanushaksha shattered even the 
mountain with a herd of buffaloes. 

So do young ascetics, who are puffed up with the pride of the boons they 
have received, swiftly perish. You do not want to be one of them. 

This Raibhya, O my son, is possessed of great tejas, and his two sons are 
like him. Therefore, be vigilant - never approach him. My child, Raibhya is 
a Maharishi of short temper; if angered, he can do you harm. 

Yavakrita said, "I will do as you say. Do not be anxious, father, for 
Raibhya deserves my reverence even as you do.' 

Yet, after placating his father with sweet words, Yavakrita, fearing 
nothing and nobody, began to take his delight in wantonly offending other 
munis." 


CANTO 136 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


oa says, 'One day in the month of Chaitra, while wandering 
earlessly, Yavakrita approached the asrama of Raibhya. In that 
beautiful hermitage, adorned with trees rich with flowers, he saw the 
daughter-in-law of Raibhya, sauntering about like a Kinnara woman. 

Smitten by swift passion, deprived of his good sense, Yavakrita said 
shamelessly to the bashful young woman, "Be mine!" 

At which, knowing his nature, and afraid of a curse, and also thinking of 
Raibhya's power, she said to him, "I will, wait for me here", promising him 
everything and, tying him up with vines, sweetly, she went back into her 
dwelling. 

When Raibhya returned to his asrama, he found his daughter-in-law, 
Paravasu's wife, in tears. Consoling her with soft words, he asked what was 
the cause of her grief. 

Thereupon, the beautiful girl told him what Yavakrita had said to her, 
and also how she had adroitly kept him at bay. 

Raibhya's mind flared up in wrath. He tore off a matted lock of his jata, 
and with holy mantras offered it to the sacred fire. At this, a woman who 
resembled his daughter-in-law in every particular, sprang out of the flames. 

The Rishi plucked out another dreadlock from his head, and again 
offered it to the fire. Now a terrible demon leapt forth from the flames, his 
eyes fiery. 

The two said to Raibhya, "What shall we do?" 

The angry sage said to them, "Go and kill Yavakrita." 

They said, "We shall!" and flew to do as he bid them. 

Using her charms, the lovely woman spirit took Yavakrita's sacred 
water-pot from him. Then, spear upraised, the demon flew at Yavakrita, 
when he had been deprived of his water-pot and rendered unclean. 

Yavakrita jumped up and fled towards a tank. He found it empty of water 
and flew towards all the rivers, but found them dry too. Threatened 
repeatedly by the Rakshasa with his spear, the terrified Yavakrita tried to 
enter his father's Agnihotrasala. But there a blind Sudra seized and 
prevented him. 


Now the demon cast his spear at Yavakrita and struck him through the 
heart, and Yavakrita fell dead. After killing Yavakrita, the Rakshasa went 
back to Raibhya, and with the permission of that sage, began to live with 
the female spirit.’ 


CANTO 137 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


| ee says, 'Kaunteya, Bharadwaja returned to his hermitage after 
erforming the nitya karma of the day and having collected wood for 
the sacred fire of sacrifice. But since his son had been slain, the sacrificial 
flames that came to welcome him every day, did not come forth to greet the 
Rishi. 

Seeing this change in the Agnihotra, the Mahamuni asked the blind 
Sudra, "Why, O Sudra, do the fires not rejoice at sight of me? You, also, do 
not welcome me gladly, as you usually do. 

Is all well in my asrama? I hope my son of little sense did not go to 
Raibhya. Answer me quickly, Sudra, my heart misgives me." 

The Sudra said, "Your foolish son did go to the Rishi Raibhya, and that 
is why he lies dead on the ground, slain by a mighty demon. Attacked by 
the Rakshasa holding a spear, he tried to force his way into this room, and I 
barred his way. 

Then, wanting holy water while he was unclean and stood hopeless, he 
was slain by the Rakshasa." 

Bharadwaja, griefstricken, took his dead son in his arms and began to 
lament. He cried, "O my son, you did tapasya for the weal of all 
Brahmanas, so that the Vedas, which had not been studied by any Brahmana 
at all, might become manifest in you. 

You were always kindly and reverent towards any Brahmana, why 
towards all creatures.* But, alas, you did lapse into arrogance and rudeness. 
O my son, I warned you never to go to Raibhya's arama, but even there you 
went like Yama himself. 

Evil is that man, who, knowing that I am an old man, and also that 
Yavakrita was my only son, gave way to wrath and killed my child. My son, 
without you, the most precious thing in the world, I will give up my life as 
well. 

Yes, in grief at the death of my child I renounce my life; but this I say, 
that Raibhya's eldest son will soon kill him, although he be innocent. 

Blessed are those to whom children have never been born, for they lead 
a happpy life, without having to experience this dreadful grief. Who in this 


world can be more vile than they, who made senseless with sorrow at the 
death of a child, curse even their dearest friend? Finding my son dead I 
cursed my dearest friend. 
Ah, which other man in this world has ever suffered such misfortune!" 
After lamenting long, Bharadwaja cremated his son and then consigned 
himself to a full-blazing fire.' 


CANTO 138 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


oo says, 'At this very time, the mighty king Brihadyumna, of great 
ortune, who was the Yajamana of Raibhya, began a sacrifice. The two 
sons of Raibhya, Arvavasu and Paravasu, were engaged by that wise 
sovereign to assist him in the performance of the yagna. 

Kaunteya, with their father's leave, the two went to the sacrifice, while 
Raibhya remained in their asrama, with Paravasu's wife. One day, wanting 
to see his wife, Paravasu returned home alone. He met his father in the 
vana, wrapped in the skin of a black antelope. The night was far advanced 
and dark; Paravasu, blinded by drowsiness in that deep forest, mistook his 
father for a wild stag, and fearing for his own safety, killed his father. 

Then, after performing the funeral rites for his father, he returned to the 
sacrifice and said to his brother, "You will never be able to perform this task 
unassisted. And I have killed our father, mistaking him for a deer. My 
brother, keep a vrata of expiation for the sin of killing a Brahmana, and I, O 
Muni, shall complete the yagna by myself." 

Arvavasu said, "Do then fulfil this sacrifice of the gifted Brihadyumna; 
and for you, bringing my senses under perfect control, I will observe the 
vow to expiate the sin of a Brahmahatya." 

Having kept the vrata for that sin, the Muni Arvavasu came back to the 
sacrifice. Seeing his brother, Paravasu, in a voice choked with malice, cried 
to Brihadyumna, "O king, see that this slayer of a Brahmana does not enter 
your yagna, or even look upon it. Even by a glance, the killer of a 
Brahmana can harm you immeasurably. 

The king ordered his attendants to turn Arvavasu out. As they drove him 
out the king's men repeatedly cursed Arvavasu, crying, "Brahmana killer!" 

More than once Arvavasu protested, "It is not I that have killed a 
Brahmana!" 

He said he had not kept the vrata for his own sake, but to free his brother 
from the sin that Paravasu had committed. 

Having said this in anger, and being reprimanded by the attendants, the 
Brahmana sage of austere penance retired silently into the forest. There he 
sat in fierce tapasya, worshipping the Sun. The Surya mantra was revealed 


to him, and then Agni Deva, immortal god who has the first share of the 
havis from any yagna, appeared, embodied, to the Rishi. 

The Devas were well pleased with Arvavasu for what he had done; they 
had him made chief priest at Brihadyumna's sacrifice, and Paravasu 
dismissed from it. 

Agni and the other celestials bestowed boons on Arvavasu, without his 
asking. He prayed that his father might be restored to life. He prayed that 
his brother might be absolved from his sin; that his father might have no 
recollection of his having been slain; that Bharadwaja and Yavakrita might 
both be restored to life; and that the solar revelation would find celebrity on 
earth. 

The god said, "Tathastu, so be it," and conferred other boons on him 
also. Yudhishtira, all those who had died were restored to life. 

Yavakrita now said to Agni and the other deities, "I gained knowledge of 
all the Vedas, and also performed tapasya. How, then, did Raibhya manage 
to kill me as he did, O best of the gods?" 

The Devas said, "Yavakrita, never again do what you did. You could be 
killed because you acquired the Vedas without studying them and without 
learning from a guru. But Raibhya bore many trials, he satisfied his 
preceptor with his conduct, and gained the Vedas through great exertion and 
in a long time." 

Having said this to Yavakrita, and having given life back to the dead, the 
Devas with Indra at their head ascended into heaven. 

Look, Yudhishtira, here is the sacred asrama of that sage, with trees that 
bear flowers and fruit in all seasons. O tiger among kings, by staying here 
for a while you will be exorcised of all your sins.’ 


CANTO 139 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Lo says, 'O Bhaarata, O king, now you have crossed the mountains 
Usirabija, Mainaka and Sweta, as well as the Kala hills, and look, O son 
of Kunti, O Bharatarishabha, here before you flow the seven Gangas! 

This is a most pure and holy place. Here Agni blazes forth without 
pause. No son of Manu can see this wonder. So, Pandava, concentrate your 
mind in dhyana so that you can behold all these tirthas. 

Now you will see the playground of the gods, marked with their 
footprints. Since we have passed the mountain Kala, we will now cilmb 
Mandara, the white mountain, inhabited by the Yakshas, by Manibhadra, 
and Kubera, lord of the Yakshas. 

Rajan, here eighty thousand fleet Gandharvas, and four times as many 
Kimpurushas and Yakshas of various shapes and forms, holding various 
weapons, attend upon Manibhadra, king of the Yakshas. Great indeed is 
their power in this realm, and their swiftness is like the very wind. 

Why, they can unseat Indra himself from his throne. Protected by them, 
and also watched over by the Rakshasas, these mountains are inaccessible. 
Therefore, son of Pritha, fix your mind in dhyana for, besides these, Kubera 
dwells here with his ministers and his Rakshasa kindred. We will have to 
encounter them, so muster your energies. 

O king, the mountain Kailasa is six yojanas high; upon it grows a 
gigantic nyagrodha tree. Kaunteya, numberless Devas and Yakshas and 
Rakshasas and Kinnaras and Nagas and Suparnas and Gandharvas pass this 
way, going towards Kubera's palace. With my protection, as well as the 
might of Bhimasena, and also the virtue of your own asceticism and self- 
command, today you must mingle with them. 

May Lord Varuna and Yama, conqueror of battles, and Ganga, and 
Yamuna, and this mountain, and the Maruts and the twin Aswins, and all 
rivers and lakes, vouchsafe your safety. And, O effulgent one, may you be 
safe from all the Devas and the Asuras, and the Vasus. 

Devi Ganga, I hear your roar from this golden mountain, sacred to Indra. 
O Goddess of high fortune, in these mountains, protect this king, 
worshipped by all of the race of Ajamidha. O daughter of Himalaya, this 


king is about to enter into this realm; do you confer your protection upon 
him. 

Having invoked the protection of the river, Lomasa says to Yudhishtira, 
'Be careful.' 

Yudhishtira says to his brothers, 'I have never seen Lomasa so anxious, 
so watch carefully over Krishnaa, and do not be careless. Lomasa knows 
this place is surely difficult of access. Therefore, observe utmost purity 
here. 

He now says particularly to his brother Bhima, of vast prowess, 
'Bhimasena, watch intently over Draupadi. Whether Arjuna be near or 
away, in times of danger she always seeks only your protection.' 

Then Yudhishtira goes to Nakula and Sahadeva, and after lovingly 
sniffing the tops of their heads, and embracing them, he says with tears in 
his eyes, 'Do not be afraid, yet go cautiously in this place.' 


CANTO 140 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


beara says, 'Vrikodara, there are mighty and powerful invisible 
spirits in this place. We shall, however, pass safely through it with the 
punya of tapasya and Agnihotra sacrifices. So, Kaunteya, restrain your 
hunger and thirst by collecting your energies, and also, O Bhima, keep both 
your strength and your wits at the ready. 

You heard what Rishi Lomasa said about Mount Kailasa; so think how 
Krishnaa will pass this place. Or, mighty Bhima of the large eyes, return 
from here, taking Sahadeva with you, and all our charioteers, cooks, 
servants, chariots, horses, and our Brahmanas worn out with travel; while 
Nakula and I, together with Muni Lomasa of great tapasya go on, subsisting 
on the lightest fare and observing vows. 

You await my return at the source of the Ganga, protecting Draupadi till 
I come back.' 

Bhima replies, 'Bhaarata, although this blessed princess has been sorely 
afflicted by toil and sorrow, yet she travels on easily in the hope of seeing 
Arjuna of the white steeds. Your grief also is great at not seeing the noble 
Arjuna, who never flees a battle. 

It goes without sayng that your sorrow will only increase if you do not 
see me, Sahadeva and Krishnaa, as well. 

It is best that the Brahmanas turn back, with our servants, charioteers, 
cooks, and whoever else you command. I will never leave you in these wild 
and inaccessible mountain realms, infested by Rakshasas. 

And, O tiger among men, this princess of great fortune, always devoted 
to her lords, does not want to turn back without you. Sahadeva is ever 
devoted to you; he too will never turn back, I know him well. 

Rajan, we are all eager to see Arjuna, and so we will all go on together. 
If we cannot pass over this mountain in our chariots, because it abounds in 
defiles, we will go on foot. Do not worry, O King, I will carry Panchali 
wherever she cannot walk. 

This is what I have deceided, so do not be anxious or distracted. Over 
impassable places, I will also carry our tender-bodied heroes, the twins, the 
delight of their mother, wherever they cannot walk." 


Yudhishtira says, 'May your strength increase, O Bhima, for what you 
say, that you will carry the illustrious Panchali and these twins. Bless you! 
No man is as brave as you are. May your strength, fame, merit and 
reputation increase! O long-armed one, since you offer to carry Krishnaa 
and the twins, exhaustion and defeat will never be yours.' 

Now the enchanting Krishnaa says with a smile, '0 Bhaarata, I will be 
able to go, so do not be anxious on my account:' 

Lomasa says, 'Access to the Mountain Gandhamadana can only be 
gained through asceticism. So, Kaunteya, we must all do tapasya; and then, 
O King, Nakula, Sahadeva, Bhimasena, you and I will all see Arjuna 
Swetavahana:' 

Thus speaking together, journeying on, they see with delight the great 
domains of Subahu, situated on the Himalayas, abounding in horses and 
elephants, densely inhabited by the Kiratas and the Tanganas, crowded by 
hundreds of Pulindas, frequented by the Devas, and rife with wonders. 

King Subahu, the lord of the Pulindas, receives them joyfully at the 
frontier of his realms, paying them proper respect. Being received with 
honour, and dwelling in comfort in that place, they set out for the Himalaya, 
when the sun shines brightly in the sky. 

They entrust the care of all their servants—Indrasena and the others, and 
the cooks and the stewards, and Draupadi's accoutrements, and everything 
else those Maharathas, the mighty scions of the Kurus, and Krishnaa with 
them, go forth from that land, cautiously, all of them glad at heart at the 
prospect of seeing Arjuna. 

Yudhishtira says, 'Bhimasena, Panchali, and you twins, listen to me. The 
karma done in previous births does not perish, but surely produces its fruit, 
sooner or later. Look how even we have become rangers of the wilderness! 

Exhausted and distressed as we are, we have to support one another, and 
pass through well-nigh impassable places, so that we might see Arjuna. 
Kshatriya, I do not see Dhananjaya beside me and this burns me even as fire 
does a heap of cotton. 

I live in the forest with my younger brothers, anxious to see Arjuna 
again. This thought, as also the memory of the grave insult to Yagnaseni, 
consumes me. 

O Vrikodara, I do not see the invincible Partha of the great bow and 
incomparable energy, who is younger than you and older than Nakula. For 
this, Bhima, I am miserable. 


Just to see my Arjuna again, I have been wandering to various tirthas for 
five years, passing through charmed jungles, passing lovely lakes; yet I do 
not see him. For this, Vrikodara, I am miserable. 

I do not see the long-armed Gudakesa, of the dark blue skin, and the 
lion's gait. For this, Vrikodara, I am miserable. I do not see that 
Kurusthama, master of weapons, most skilful in battle, and matchless 
among bowmen. For this, Vrikodara, I am miserable. 

I am distraught because I do not see Pritha's son Dhananjaya, born under 
the nakshatra Phalguni, who goes amongst his enemies even like Yama 
during the Pralaya; Partha who has the prowess of an elephant in musth, 
with the juice of rut trickling down its temples; Arjuna of the leonine 
shoulders; not inferior to Sakra himself in strength and energy; elder in 
years to the twins; of white steeds; unrivalled in heroism; invincible; and 
wielding an awesome bow. For this, O Vrikodara, I am miserable. 

And he is always of a forgiving temper, even when insulted by the 
meanest man; and he confers benefit and protection to the righteous; but to 
a perfidious one who tries to do him harm with treachery, Dhananjaya is 
like virulent poison, be not the one Sakra himself. 

And the mighty Vibhatsu of immeasurable soul and strength shows 
mercy and extends protection even to a foe, when fallen. He is the refuge of 
us all and he crushes his enemies in battle. He owns the power to garner any 
treasure whatever, and he ministers to our happiness. 

It was through his prowess that I owned measureless precious jewels of 
myriad kinds, which now Suyodhana has usurped. It was through his might, 
O Kshatriya, that I owned the palatial Mayaa Sabha, embellished with every 
manner of gemstone, and celebrated throughout the three worlds. 

Pandava, in prowess Phalguni is like Krishna, and in battle he is 
invincible and unrivalled, even like Kartavirya. Alas, I do not see him, 
Bhima, Arjuna who in might is like Krishna and Balarama! 

In strength of arms and spirit, he is like Purandara himself; in swiftness, 
he is like the wind; in grace, like the moon, and in wrath he is like eternal 
Yama. 

Mahabaho, to see that warlike Purushavyaghra, tiger among men, we 
will go to Gandhamadana, where the hermitage of Nara and Narayana is, 
beneath the celebrated nyagrodha tree, the asrama inhabited by Yakshas. 

We will see that best of mountains, and by doing stern tapasya, we shall 
walk to Kubera's beautiful lake guarded by Rakshasas. That place cannot be 


reached by chariots or carts, Vrikodara, and neither can cruel, greedy or 
choleric men ever go there, Bhaarata. 

Bhima, in order to see Arjuna, there shall we journey, in a company, with 
Brahmanas of strict vows, girding on our swords, and wielding our bows. 
Only those who are impure meet with flies, mosquitoes, tigers, lions, and 
reptiles, but never the pure. 

Therefore, controlling our diet, and restraining our senses, we shall go to 
the Gandhamadana, to see Arjuna Dhananjaya.' 


CANTO 141 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


| Rese says, 'Pandavas, you have seen many a mountain, and river and 
own and forest and beautiful tirtha; you have touched their sacral 
waters with your hands. 

Now this way leads to the devine Mount Mandara; therefore be you 
attentive and composed. You will now climb to the dwelling place of Devas 
and Devarishis of great punya. Here, O King, there flows the mighty and 
lovely river Alakananda, of holy water adored by hosts of celestial ones and 
sages, and we will trace its source to the great nyagrodha tree. 

High-souled Vaihayasas, Balakhilyas and Gandharvas of mighty spirits 
frequent this holiest asrama. Those unmatched singers of the Sama hymns, 
the Rishis Marichi, Pulaha, Bhrigu and Angiras chanted them here. 

Here the king of the Devas performs his nitya puja, along with the 
Maruts; and the Sadhyas and the Aswins attend on him. The Sun, the Moon 
and all the luminaries with the planets come to this river, alternately by day 
and by night. 

Most fortunate king, Mahadeva, protector of the world, the Bull his 
emblem, received the descent of the Ganga from the sky here, where now 
her source is. 

My children, approach this Goddess of the six attributes and bow down 
before her with your minds concentrated in dhyana. 

Having listened to the Maharishi Lomasa, the sons of Pandu 
reverentially worship the Ganga, who flows through the firmament. And 
after having adored her, the pious Pandavas resume their journey, 
accompanied by the sages. 

And in a while, those best of men behold at a distance a white massif of 
vast proportions, even like Meru, and stretching on all sides. 

Knowing the question in the hearts of Pandu's sons, Lomasa master of 
speech, says, 'Listen, O sons of Pandu! Purushottamas, what you see before 
you, vast as a mountain and beautiful as the cliffs of Kailasa, is a mound of 
the bones of the mighty Daitya Naraka. Being heaped, they resemble a 
mountain! 


The Daitya was slain by that Paramatman, the eternal Lord Vishnu, to 
help Indra, king of the Devas. 

Wanting to usurp Indra's position, Narakasura, of the mighty mind, 
acquired knowledge of the Vedas and performed a dread tapasya, which 
lasted ten thousand years. And through this penance, as also by the force 
and might of his arms he became invincible and forever harassed Indra. 

Anagha, Sinless, knowing the might of the Demon and his great 
penance, Indra became agitated and fear overwhelmed him. In his heart he 
thought fervently of Vishnu, the eternal One. At which, the gracious Lord of 
the universe, who is present everywhere, appeared and stood before Indra. 

The Devas and Rishis began to sing hymns to Narayana, and to 
propitiate him with prayers. In his presence even Agni of the six attributes 
and of blazing beauty was overpowered by his effulgence, and was shorn of 
radiance. 

Seeing Mahavishnu before him, the king of the Devas, the Vajradhari 
bowed his head low and told Narayana what the source of his fear was. 

Vishnu said, "I know, O Sakra, that your fear is from Naraka, lord of the 
Daityas. He aims for your throne through his tapasya. And so, to please 
you, I will sever his soul from his body, despite his great tapasya. King of 
the Devas, wait a moment." 

Vishnu then struck Naraka with a blow of his hand; the Asura fell to the 
ground even like the lord of mountains struck by cosmic thunder. So he 
died, and his bones gathered in this place. 

Another miracle of Vishnu's is also manifest here. Once, when all the 
Earth was lost, having sunk into Patala, Narayana assumed the form of the 
Varaha, a Boar with a single tusk, and raised her up. 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Worshipful one, tell me in detail how Vishnu, 
Devadeva, raised up the Earth which had sunk a hundred yojanas. How was 
Bhumi Devi, of lofty fortune, support of all created things, who dispenses 
blessings and brings forth all manner of grain, rendered stable? 

Through whose power had she sunk a hundred yojanas? And how did 
the Paramatman come to rescue her with this great exploit? Dvijottama, you 
certainly know all about what transpired and I want to hear it all from you.' 

Lomasa says, 'Yudhishtira, listen to that tale at length. 

My child, in ancient days, there came a time of dread in the Krita Yuga, 
when the eternal and primeval Deity assumed the dharma of Yama; and 


when the God of gods began to do the work of Yama, not a creature died, 
while the births were as usual. 

Birds and beasts and kine, and sheep, and deer and all kinds of 
carnivores multiplied, Parantapa, and the race of humans also swelled in 
tide, in millions. 

My son, when the population multiplied to a frightening extent, the 
Earth, oppressed with her intolerable burden, sank a hundred yojanas. 
Agony lanced through all her limbs, and barely conscious from the vast 
pressure upon her, Bhumi Devi in great distress sought the protection of the 
Lord Narayana, the foremost of the gods. 

The Earth said, "It is through your grace, O possessor of the six 
attributes, that I was able to remain so long in my position. But now I have 
been overcome with burden which I cannot sustain any longer. 

Most adorable One, relieve me of my burden. I seek your protection, 
Lord, give me your favour." 

Hearing her, the eternal Lord, possessor of the six attributes, Vishnu, 
said calmly, his words distinct in their every syllable, "Do not fear, O 
afflicted Bhumi devi, bearer of all treasures. I will relieve you of your 
burden." 

Thus consoling Bhumi, who has the mountains for her earrings, and then 
sending her away, Vishnu suddenly turned into a refulgent boar with one 
tusk. Striking terror with his glowing red eyes and his blazing lustre 
smoking, fuming, he began to grow amazingly. 

Kshatriya, then bearing the Earth upon his single radiant tusk, that Being 
who pervades the Vedas raised her up a hundred yojanas. And while she 
was being so raised, there was a terrific agitation and all the Devas, and all 
the Rishis of great tapasya became distraught. 

Heaven, and the sky, and the earth, as well, were filled with 
exclamations of alarm and neither the gods nor men could find any peace. 
Then countless celestials and sages went to Brahma, who sat blazing with 
his own lustre. 

Approaching Brahma, the lord of every celestial, and the witness of the 
deeds of all beings, they said to him with folded hands, "Devadeva, all the 
created are agitated and every being, mobile and immobile, are distraught. 

Lord of the Devas, even the oceans are fraught and this whole world has 
sunk a hundred yojanas. What is the cause of this ferment in the universe? 
We are bewildered and dismayed; we beg you tell us what is happening." 


Brahma replied, "Devas, do not be afraid of the Asuras, in any matter or 
place. Listen, O celestials, to the reason for all this commotion. The 
illustrious One, who is omnipresent, eternal and the never-pershiing Soul is 
responsible for this agitation. 

The Paramatman Vishnu has raised up Bhumi, who was submerged a 
hundred yojanas; the great disturbance is in consequence of the Earth being 
lifted up. Know this and dispel your doubts." 

The Devas said, "Where is that Being who joyfully raises up the Earth? 
O you who possess the six attributes, tell us where this is happening, so we 
might go to that place." 

Brahma said, "Go, and may good befall you! You will find him resting in 
the gardens of Nandana. Look, there is the glorious and worshipful Garuda. 

After having raised up the Earth, the God from whom the world became 
manifest, flames forth in the shape of a boar, even like the all-consuming 
apocalypse during the pralaya. Upon his breast the Srivatsa shines. Go and 
behold that Being who knows no decay." 

Setting Brahma, the Grandsire, at their head the Devas came to that 
infinite Soul, and having sung his praises, bade him farewell, and went back 
to where they had come from,' says Lomasa. 

Having heard this story, all the Pandavas go with all haste towards the 
place to which Lomasa pointed." 


CANTO 142 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vos said, "O King, those foremost of bowmen, of 
immeasurable prowess, holding bows strung tightly, carrying quivers 
brimful of arrows, wearing fingerlets made of iguana-skin, and their swords 
at their sides, go, with Panchali, towards the Gandhamadana, also taking 
with them the best of their Brahmanas. 

On their way, they see lakes and rivers and mountains and forests, and 
trees of wide-spreading shade upon mountain summits; and places 
abounding in trees bearing flowers and fruit in all seasons, and frequented 
by Devas and Rishis. 

Restraining their senses within the inner self, subsisting on fruit and 
roots, the heroes pass through rugged realms, craggy and difficult of 
passage, seeing diverse and numerous birds and beasts as they go. 

Thus those high-souled ones enter the mountain of Rishis, Siddhas and 
Devas, of Gandharvas, Kinnaras and Apsaras. And, O lord of men, as those 
mighty Kshatriyas first set foot upon Gandhamadana, a violent wind blows 
there, bringing a torrent of rain with it. Great clouds of dust, bearing dry 
leaves, rise up, and all on a sudden cover earth, air and the firmament. 

When the heavens are obscured by dust nothing can be seen, and neither 
can the Pandavas speak to one another. Eyes full of darkness and stung by 
the wind that carries rock particles, they cannot see one another. 

Trees split open, cracking in the gale; towering trees crash down to the 
ground with force of the wind. 

Dismayed by the storm, they think, 'Are the heavens falling down or is 
this mountain and the very earth cracking open?’ 

Terrified by the storm, they grope in the pitch darkness with arms 
outstretched, and shelter under trees, inside large anthills, and in caves. 

Holding his bow and supporting Krishnaa, the mighty Bhimasena stands 
under a tree; Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, with Dhaumya, scurries into some 
heavy woods; Sahedeva, carrying the sacred fire, takes shelter under a huge 
rock. Nakula, with Lomasa and the other Brahmanas of great tapasya stand 
trembling, each one under a tree. 


Then when the wind abates and the dust subsides, the sky opens and 
down comes a cascade of rain. The heavens shake with shocking batteries 
of thunder, each like Indra's Vajra being cast; and quick-flashing lightning 
begins to play vividly through the clouds. Without pause it rains, and 
everything is a solid sheet of water, until rivers of hurtling water rush all 
around, foam-crested and turbid with mud. These roaring cataracts uproot 
the greatest trees and plunge them down the mountain like twigs. 

As suddenly as it began, the storm ceases, and when the wind is still and 
the air is clear, each of them comes out cautiously from their places of 
hiding, and they met together again. 

Again, those Kshatriyas and their party set foot upon Mount 
Gandhamadana." 


CANTO 143 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


yo said, "When the noble sons of Pandu have gone a mere 
two yojanas, Draupadi, unaccustomed to walking for long, cannot go 
on. She is weary, Panchala's most delicate daughter, and faint, and the storm 
has also terrified her. 

The black-eyed Krishnaa supports herself with her graceful arms on her 
thighs, clenched together, for just a moment, before she collapses trembling 
onto the ground. Seeing her fall like a severed vine, Nakula runs forward 
and holds her. 

The distrait Nakula cries, '0 King, Panchali has fallen down from 
tiredness. Tend to her, O Bhaarata. She deserves no such misery and has 
borne long hardship; she is exhausted from our journey. Comfort her, O 
mighty king.' 

Hearing Nakula, Yudhishtira, and Bhima and Sahadeva, as well, rush to 
Panchali in alarm. They see her pale and drained, and, taking her onto his 
lap, Yudhishtira laments, 'Ah, accustomed to ease, used to sleeping in 
luxurious chambers, on beds spread over with fine sheets, how does this 
beautiful one lie on rough, bare ground now? 

Alas! Only because of me, the soft feet and the lotus-like face of she 
who deserves all the finest things in life are callused pale. O what have I 
done! 

Fool that I am, being addicted to dice, I have been wandering in forests 
full of wild beasts, taking Krishnaa with me. Her father King Drupada gave 
this doe-eyed one to me, trusting that his blessed child would be happy by 
having the Pandavas for her husbands. But because I am a wretch, today she 
lies on the rough earth, exhausted with every hardship, sorrow and 
wearying travel.’ 

As Yudhishtira Dharmaraja laments, Dhaumya and all the other principal 
Brahmanas come to him, and begin to console him and to honour him with 
their blessings. 

They recite mantras to keep Rakshasas away and also perform some 
holy rites to restore Panchali's health and spirits. At this, and also at being 


stroked soothingly by her husbands' palms, as well as by a cool, moist 
breeze, she slowly recovers consciousness. 

The sons of Pritha now lay her down upon a deerskin, and make her rest. 
Taking her red-soled feet, bearing auspicious marks, the twins begin to 
press them gently with their hands scarred by bowstrings. Yudhishtira, 
foremost of the Kurus, also comforts her. 

Dharmaraja says to Bhima, 'Bhima, before us lie so many rough and 
rugged mountains, full of ice and snow, inaccessible. How, long-armed one, 
will Krishnaa pass over these?’ 

Bhima says, 'Rajan, I will carry you, our princess, and _ these 
Purusharishabhas the twins; so do not be anxious. Or, Anagha, at your 
command, with your leave, Hidimba's son, the mighty Ghatotkacha, who is 
as strong as I am and can fly through the sky, will carry us all to our 
destination. 

With Yudhishtira's permission, Bhima thinks of his Rakshasa son; and in 
an instant, the pious Ghatotkacha appears, salutes the Pandavas and the 
Brahmanas, and stands before them with folded hands. And they also caress 
him of the mighty arms. 

Ghatotkacha says to his father, Bhimasena of dreadful prowess, "You 
thought of me and I came at once to serve you. Command me, O long- 
armed, and I will do whatever you wish.' 

Hearing this, Bhimasena hugs the Rakshasa to his breast. 


CANTO 144 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


vee says, ‘Bhima, let this mighty and heroic Rakshasa lord, your 
son, devoted to us, truthful and conversant with dharma, carry his 
mother Draupadi without delay. Owner of dreadful prowess, depending on 
the strength of your arms, I will reach the Gandhamadana unhurt, with 
Panchala's daughter.’ 

Hearing his brother, that Purushavyaghra Bhimasena commands his son 
Ghatotkacha Parantapa, ‘Invincible son of Hidimba, this mother of yours is 
exhausted. You are strong and can go wherever you wish. So, sky-ranger, 
do you carry her. 

May good fortune attend upon you! Carry her on your shoulders, and go 
with us, flying not too high so that she is not frightened.’ 

Ghatotkacha says, 'Single-handed, I can bear Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, 
and Dhaumya, and Krishnaa, and the twins. Then what wonder that today I 
will carry them, where there are others to help me? And, O sinless one, 
hundreds of other valiant Rakshasas, all of whom can fly, and assume any 
shape they wish, will together carry you all, and all the Brahmanas:.' 

Saying this, Ghatotkacha picks up Krishnaa, and the other Rakshasas, 
the Pandavas, while by virtue of his inherent power, Lomasa of 
incomparable effulgence courses along the path of the Siddhas, even like a 
second Sun. And at the command of the lord of the Rakshasas, the other 
Rakshasas of terrific strength bear all the other Brahmanas. 

Flying above enchanted forests, they fly towards the gigantic Nyagrodha 
tree. Going at great speed, borne by the Rakshasas, the Kshatriyas pass over 
long distances as if over a few steps. 

On their way they see below them lands crowded with Mlechha tribes, 
rich with mines of diverse gems. They see hills glittering with precious 
metals, where Vidyadharas throng, and Vanaras and Kinnaras and 
Kimpurushas and Gandharvas, and full of peacocks, and chamaras, and 
monkeys, and rurus, and bears, and gavayas, and bison, latticed with 
networks of rillets, full of countless species of bird and beast, handsome 
with lordly elephants, the birds all full of rapture in their trees. 


Passing over many lands and kingdoms, including that of the 
Uttarakurus, they see that foremost of mountains, the Kailasa, replete with 
all wonders, and beside it, they behold the hermitage of Nara and Narayana, 
with unearthly trees hearing flowers and fruit in all seasons. 

They also see the exquisite and mighty Nyagrodha, of the round trunk, 
fresh and so alive, its shade wide and deep, its foliage thick, soft and sleek; 
full of health; its boughs enormous and _ wide-spreading and of 
incomparable lustre; and bearing full, delicious and holy fruit, dripping 
nectar. 

And this celestial tree is visited by hosts of mighty sages, and its 
branches teem with birds maddened by spirits; it grows in a grove where no 
mosquito or fly comes, a spot abundant with fruit, roots and sprakling 
water, covered in velvet green grasses, where Devas and Gandharvas come. 

Its trunk is smooth, cool, its bark delicate and lovely. Reaching that 
ancestral tree, along with the Brahmanarishabhas, those mahatmans alight 
from the shoulders of the Rakshasas, and they see the charmed, most holy 
asrama of Nara-Narayana, where no sorrow comes, nor the rays of the Sun; 
where no hunger, thirst, heat or cold venture; where all grief melts away; 
where hosts of Maharishis throng; which hermitage is adorned by the grace 
of the Vedas, Saman, Rik, and Yajus; asrama inaccessible to men who have 
no devotion; asrama beautiful with offerings, and homas; and most sacred; 
and well-swept and fragrant; and shining all around with offerings of 
celestial blossoms; and spread over with altars of sacrificial fire, and holy 
women and water-pots and urns of holy waters and baskets, this refuge of 
all beings; and echoing with the chanting of the Vedas; and heavenly and 
most worthy of being dwelt in; where all tiredness disappears; and 
splendent and full of incomprehensible grace; and majestic, divine. 

The Maharishis who live in that asrama subsist on fruit and roots, their 
senses perfectly restrained; they wear black deer-skins; they are effulgent 
like the Sun and Agni; their souls have been made great through tapasya 
and they are intent on mukti, while they lead the lives of Vanaprasthas, in 
communion with the Paramatman; and constantly the sound of Vedic hymns 
fill that place. 

Then, having purified himself, and restraining his senses, Dharmaputra 
Yudhishtira of great tejas, together with his brothers, approaches those 
Rishis. And knowing him, for they are all blessed with supernatural 
knowledge, all the great sages receive him joyfully. 


And those Munis, chanters of the Veda, themselves like fire, bless 
Yudhishtira; they give him holy water and flowers and roots. And 
Yudhishtira Dharmaraja receives these with reverence and joy. 

Now, O sinless one, Pandu's son, along with Krishnaa and his brothers, 
and thousands of Brahmanas versed in the Vedas and the Vendangas, enters 
that most sacred asrama, which is like the abode of Sukra himself, and 
which pleases the mind with scents of heaven, which resembles heaven 
itself, so beautiful is it. 

There Yudhishtira sees the hermitage of Nara and Narayana, made 
enchanting by the Bhagirathi and worshipped by the Devas and the 
Devarishis. Seeing that hermitage where Brahmarshis dwell, where fruits 
dripping ambrosia grow all around, the Pandavas are filled with rare delight. 

Having reached that place, those high-souled Kshatriyas begin living 
with the Brahmanas. There they see the holy lake Vinda, and the mountain 
Mainaka, of golden summits, where so many species of birds live, and those 
magnanimous ones live there happily. 

The sons of Pandu and Krishnaa delight in ranging through charmed 
woods and forests, bright with flowers of every season; exquisite on every 
side with trees bearing full-blown blossoms, and bending with the weight of 
fruits, and with countless male kokilas among their glossy leaves; and 
growing thickly and their shade cool and lovely to behold. 

They delight in coming upon diverse lakes of limpid water, shimmering 
with lotuses and lilies. And there, O lord, the balmy mountain breeze blows, 
bearing the purest fragrances, gladdening their hearts. 

And hard by the gigantic nyagrodha, the mighty sons of Kunti see the 
Bhagirathi falling down, crystalline, cool, bearing fresh lotuses, softly over 
a gentle descent of steps made of ruby and coral, and graced on both sides 
with celestial trees and her waters strewn with celestial flowers, and 
enchanting the mind and heart. 

In that place, frequented by Deva and Rishi, and so hard of access, they 
make themselves pure and offer oblations to the manes, the gods and the 
great sages in the sacred waters of the Bhagirathi. 

Thus those bulls among men, the heroic Kurupraviravas, begin to dwell 
there with the Brahmanas, making their offerings and practising dhyana. 
The Purushavyaghras feel particularly joyful to watch the various 
amusements of Draupadi." 


CANTO 145 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Vos said, "There, in purity, those tigers among men remain 
for six nights, waiting to see Arjuna. One day, a gust of wind blows 
from the north-east bringing a heavenly lotus of a thousand petals, effulgent 
as the Sun. Panchali sees that bloom of unearthly fragrance, brought by the 
wind and left on the ground; she picks it up and is enraptured. 

She cries to Bhimasena, 'Look, Bhima, this unearthly flower has the 
quintessential source of all redolence within it! Parantapa, it makes my 
heart soar in joy. 

I will give this bloom to Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, so you must fetch 
some more for me, so that I can take them to our asrama in the Kamyaka. If, 
O Pandava, you do love me, bring me many, many of these wondrous 
flowers. 

Saying this, that chaste queen of the beautiful glances approaches 
Yudhishtira with the flower. Bhima Purusharishabha, mightiest of all men, 
sets out to satisfy her wish; intent upon bringing her the flowers, he goes 
swiftly, facing the wind, in the direction from which the flower had come. 
With his bow and mace inlaid with gold, with his arrows like venomous 
serpents, he goes forth like an angry lion or an elephant in rut; and all 
creatures on his way gaze at him with the powerful bow and arrows. 

He felt no exhaustion, no languor, no fear or confusion, as that son of 
Vayu and Pritha. Up the peak he climbs, with the strength of his arms, to 
please Draupadi. That slayer of his foes ranges that finest mountain covered 
with trees and creepers, its ground black rock; and frequented by Kinnaras; 
and with all manner of mineral, plant, beast, and birds of various hues; and 
appearing like an upraised arm of the Earth adorned with an entire set of 
omaments. 

His eyes fixed on the slopes of Gandhamadana, fragrant mountain, 
various thoughts swirling through his mind, his ears thrilling with the sweet 
songs of male kokilas and the ubigitous hum black bees, and his eyes 
enchanted by the vivid colours of the profusion of flowers of all seasons, he 
of unmatched prowess goes along even like an elephant in musth ranging 
mad through a forest. 


And fanned by the fresh breeze of the Gandhamadana, bearing the scents 
of myriad blossoms and cooling like a father's touch, Bhima goes along 
sniffing the bright and perfumed air. The hairs on his body stand on end 
with delight, as he surveys all of that mountain for the flowers for which he 
has come, Gandhmadana home to Yakshas and Gandharvas and Devas and 
Brahmarshis. 

Brushed by the leaves of Saptachchada tree, besmeared with fresh red, 
black and white minerals, he looks as if decorated with lines of holy 
unguenta drawn by uncanny fingers. With clouds stretching away at its 
sides, the mountain seems as if it were dancing with outspread wings; with 
its spring and streams flowing and sparkling, it seems to be decked with 
necklaces of pearls. 

Upon its slopes are romantic caves and groves and waterfalls; brilliant 
peacocks dance to the chiming of the anklets and bangles of Apsaras; the 
mountain's jagged surfaces have been worn smooth by the tusks of the 
Diggajas; with the rivers cascading down, Gandhamadana looks as if its 
clothes are being loosened. 

Cheerfully, playfully, that graceful son of the wind-god hies on, forcing 
his way through countless intertwined creepers. Great stags gaze curiously 
at him, with lush grass in their mouths; never having known fear before, 
they do not flee. 

Determined to fulfil the wish of his love, Pandu's mighty and youthful 
son, stalwart and of splendour like that of gold, his body strong as a lion's, 
crashing along like a maddened elephant, and with the force of an elephant 
in rut, and his eyes coppery like those of a musth-stirred elephant, and able 
to stop the charge of a maddened elephant, ranges the enchanting 
Gandhamadana with his beautiful and extraordinary eyes upraised - 
presenting a most novel and unusual spectacle. 

The wives of Yakshas and Gandharvas sitting invisible beside their 
lords, stare at him, turning their faces as he storms past. Intent upon 
gratifying Draupadi exiled into the forest, as he traverses wondrous 
Gandhamada, Bhima remembers all the grief and pain that Duryodhana has 
inflicted upon them. 

Bhima thinks, 'What will Yudhishtira do now, with Arjuna not returned 
from Devaloka and with me here looking for Draupadi's flowers? Surely, 
out of love and uncertainty about their prowess he will not send Nakula and 
Sahadeva to look for us. Ah, how can I find these flowers quickly?’ 


Worried, his mind and eyes fixed to the mountains lovely slopes, that 
tiger among men goes along as swiftly as the lord of birds, as the wind, with 
Draupadi's wish his provender, making the earth tremble with his tread, he 
goes like the wind, even like a hurricane at the equinox; and frightening 
herds of elephants and prides of lions and lone tigers, and deer; and 
uprooting and smashing great trees and tearing up plants and creepers, he 
goes like some wild tusker, climbing higher and higher towards the summit 
of a mountain, and now roaring fiercely even like a cloud full of thunder. 

Awakened by Bhima's dreadful roaring, tigers come out of their dens, 
while other rangers of the forest hide. The coursers of the skies spring up 
from their perches and wheel into the air. Deer herds run away in panic; 
mighty lions awake from their slumber and forsake their caves. Huge bison 
stand and stare. Terrified elephants, along with their mates, flee that forest 
and lumber away to more open spaces below. 

And the boars and the deer and the lions and the bison and the tigers and 
the jackals and the gavayas of the forest wood all together set up a dismal 
outcry of fear; and geese, and gallinules and ducks and karandavas and 
piavas and parrots and kokilas and herons all fly frantically in every 
direction. 

Some haughty elephants, goaded by their mates, as also some enraged 
lions fly at Bhimasena, but in their hearts they are afraid and they rush at 
him spraying urine and dung, and trumpeting and roaring only to embolden 
themselves. 

The wind-god's lustrous and graceful son, the mighty Pandava, promptly 
begins to kill them all, why he hefts one elephant and swinging it through 
the air kills another with it; he does the same with some lions; while others 
he despatches with mere slaps! 

At being struck by Bhima, all the elephants, lions, tigers and leopards 
that come yelp and scream in terror, and discharge more dung and urine. 
Quickly, he kills them all, those that do not flee, and the majestic and 
awesomely strong son of Pandu enters the jungle, now roaring and shouting 
aloud himself, making the forest echo. 

Then that long-armed one sees upon the slopes of the Gandhamadana a 
beautiful and extraordinary grove of plantain trees, spreading over some 
yojanas. Like some crazed lion, he rushes towards it trampling countless 
plants on his way. That strongest of men begins to tear up the plaintain 
trees, each as tall as many palmyras, and flings them all around him like so 


many blades of grass. All the while his shouts and yells resound through the 
forest. 

Forging on, he encounters countless beasts of gigantic size, and stags, 
and monkeys, and lions, and bison, and great fish in the streams; with the 
cries of these, and the roars of Bhima, even animals and birds in the 
remotest parts of the jungle all tremble and cry out. 

At their cries, a great flock of waterfowl suddenly rise up into the sky on 
wet wings. Seeing these, that bull of the Bhaaratas now goes towards them, 
and he sees a great and lovely lake, rippled by soft breezes, fanned by the 
golden leaves of the plantain tree which grew upon its banks. 

Immediately plunging into the water, abounding in lotuses and lilies, 
Bhima begins to sport lustily just like an elephant in rut. Having thus 
pleased himself for a long while, the bright one climbs out again, to make 
his way deeper into the thick jungle. 

Filling his great lungs he blows a thunderous blast on his conch; striking 
his arms with his hands, the mighty Bhima makes all the points of heaven 
reverberate. Filled by the sounds of the shell, and by the shouts of 
Bhimasena, and also with the reports of his striking his own arms, the caves 
of the mountain seem as if they are roaring. 

Hearing him smite his arms like thunderclaps, the lions asleep inside 
those caves howl] like terrified cats. Frightened by the lions, the elephants of 
this deeper forest set up an awful trumpeting, which also echoes upon the 
mountain. 

Hearing those sounds, and also knowing that this was Bhimasena his 
brother, the Vanara Hanuman, greatest of monkeys, wanting to meet and to 
bless Bhima, lays himself across the Pandavas path. Not wanting Bhima to 
go on, Hanuman lies squarely across the narrow way, flanked by plantain 
trees, obstructing it to keep Bhima safe. 

So that Bhima does not face curse or defeat by entering the plantain 
forest, Hanuman lays his huge body down; he begins to yawn, and lashes 
the earth with his great tail first, raising it even like a stambha raised to 
Indra, and that sound is thunder. All around, the maintain caves echo those 
great reports, like a cow lowing. 

As the tail lashes and the mountain quakes, it also begins to crumble on 
every side; the reverberations drown the trumpeting of frightened elephants 
and spread across every slope of Gandhamadana. 


Bhima hears the sounds and the fine hairs on his body stand on end; he 
begins to range through that plantain wood in search of the source of the 
crashes. Upon a raised rocky base, he sees Hanuman, whose body is as 
brilliant as a streak of lightning and difficult to even look at; his fur is 
coppery, like the lightning-flash; the whiplashes of his tail are like 
lightning; the Vanara's waist seems slender for his shoulders are so vast; his 
neck his thick and short. 

Long hairs cover his tail, which is a little bent at the end, and raised like 
some flag. Bhima sees Hanuman's coppery face, and his tongue between 
small lips, his ears red, his eyes bright and brisk, and his white sharp teeth. 

Hanuman's head glows like the full moon ashine; his mane is tousled 
wild around it, like a pile of asoka flowers. Amidst the golden plantain 
trees, that refulgent one lies like some blazing fire, his body radiant, at 
times looking around him with eyes red as if with wine. 

The most intelligent Bhima sees that mighty Vanara chieftain lying like 
the Himalaya, obstructing the path of heaven. Seeing him alone in that 
mighty forest, the dauntless Bhima approaches him with rapid strides, and 
gives a loud shout like thunder. 

Birds and beasts are alarmed by that shout and scatter, but the great 
Hanuman only half opens his eyes, and looks at Bhima with disregard, 
through his eyes red as if with intoxication. 

Then, with a smile, Hanuman says, "I was sleeping sweetly. Why have 
you awakened me? You have reason, surely, and you must show kindness to 
all creatures. We belong to the animals and are ignorant of dharma, but 
possessing reason, men show kindness towards creatures. Then why does a 
reasonable man like you do things which contaminate body, speech and 
heart, alike, and destroy virtue? 

You do not know what dharma is and neither have you taken the counsel 
of the wise. Is it that from ignorance, and childishness, that you kill the 
animals? 

Say, who are you, and for what have you come to this forest devoid of 
humans? And, O foremost of men, tell me also, where you are going today. 
You cannot go any further, for the hills ahead are inaccessible. 

Shura, save the passage gained through tapasya there is no path to that 
place. This is the path of the celestials; mortals can never go this way. Out 
of kindness, O hero, I dissuade you. Listen to me, you cannot go on from 
this place, so desist. 


Lord of men, you are welcome here in every way; so rest here and 
partake of fruits and roots, sweet as amrita and do not go on and have 
yourself killed for no reason.' 


CANTO 146 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Veo said, "O Parantapa, hearing what the wise Vanara says, 
Bhima asks, 'Who are you? And why have you assumed the form of a 
monkey? It is a Kshatriya—one of the varna next to the Brahmanas— that 
asks you; and he belongs to the Kuruvamsa and the House of the Moon, and 
was borne by Kunti in her womb, and is one of the sons of Pandu, and is the 
offspring of Vayu, and is known by the name of Bhimasena. 

Hanuman smiles to listen to the Kurupravira; that Vayuputra says to the 
other Vayuputra, his brother Bhimasena, 'I am a Vanara, and I will not allow 
you the passage that you desire. It is best that you return; do not go on to 
meet your death.' 

Bhimasena replies, 'O Vanara, arise and let me pass; do not come to grief 
at my hands:' 

Hanuman says, 'I have not the strength to arise; I am ill and suffering. If 
you must go on, step over me and do so.' 

Bhima says, "The Nirguna Paramatman pervades every body. I cannot 
disrespect Him that is knowable only by gyana. So, I will not step over you. 
If I had not known Him from whom all creatures manifest, I would have 
leapt over you and even the mountain, even as Hanuman once leapt across 
the ocean. 

At which, Hanuman says, 'Who is this Hanuman, who leapt across the 
ocean? Best of men, tell me about him if you can.' 

Bhima replies, 'He is even my brother, excellent with every perfection, 
and endowed with intelligence and strength of both mind and body. He is 
the most illustrious lord of monkeys, renowed in the Ramayana; and for 
Rama's queen, that lord of the Vanaras crossed the ocean of over a hundred 
yojanas with a single leap. 

That mighty one is my brother. I am his equal in energy, strength, and 
prowess, and also in battle. And I can chasten you, monkey; so get up. 
Either give me passage or witness my might today. If you do not listen to 
me, I will send you to halls of Yama.' 

Realising that Bhima is intoxicated with his own strength, and full of 
pride of the might of his arms, Hanuman chides him in his heart, and says, 


'Relent, sinless one. I am so old and weary that I do not have the strength to 
get up. Take pity on me; move my tail aside and pass.' 

Bhima, proud and by now angry, believes Hanuman and thinks, I will 
seize the weakling monkey by his tail and send him to Yamaloka!' 

With a mocking smile, he takes hold of the tail with his left hand; but he 
cannot move that monkey's tail. Bhima seizes the tail, straight and stiff like 
a stambha erected for Indra, with both hands; he still cannot shift it at all. 

Quickly, the Panadava's brows are knit, his face wrinkled with effort, his 
eyes roll in their sockets, but he cannot budge the Vanara's tail. 

Defeated, Bhimasena returns to the old monkey's side, and stands 
crestfallen and ashamed. Folding his hands, bowing low, Bhima says in a 
faltering voice, 'Relent, O Vanarottama, forgive me for the harsh words I 
spoke to you! Are you a Siddha, a Deva, a Gandharva, or a Guhyaka? I ask 
you out of curiosity. If it is not a secret and if I may hear it, tell me who you 
are that have assumed the shape of monkey, O long-armed. I ask you even 
as a disciple his master, and I, O Anagha, seek your protection!’ 

Hanuman says, 'O Parantapa, I will satisfy your curiosity fully, and tell 
you all that you want to know. Listen, O son of Pandu! 

Lotus-eyed one, I was begotten by Vayu Deva, life of the world, upon 
the wife of Kesari. 1am a Vanara and my name is Hanuman. All the greatest 
monkey-kings, and monkey-chieftains once used to wait upon Surya's son 
Sugriva and Indra's son Vali. Scourge of your enemies, Sugriva and I were 
friends even as the wind and fire. 

Driven out from their kingdom by his brother Vali, Sugriva lived for a 
long time on Rishyamukha, and I with him. And the mighty son of 
Dasaratha, the heroic Rama, who is Vishnu's own self in human form, was 
born into the world. 

His great bow in his hand, and his wife and his brother with him, Rama, 
greatest among archers, began to dwell in the Dandaka vana, to preserve his 
father's dharma. 

From Janasthana, in that forest, the awesome Rakshasa King, the evil 
Ravana carried Rama's queen away, deceiving, O sinless one, that 
Purushottama through the agency of a demon, Maricha, who assumed the 
form of a golden deer marked with gem-like spots. 


CANTO 147 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


anuman continues, 'After his wife was carried away, Rama, scion of 
the Raghuvamsa, with his brother Lakshmana, searched for his queen 
on that mountain, and there met Sugriva, lord of the Vanaras. He made a 
pact of friendship with the noble Sugriva; Rama slew Vali and installed 
Sugriva as king of the Vanaras. 

Having the kingdom, Sugriva sent forth his monkeys, hundreds and 
thousands of them, in search of Sita. I, too, with numberless monkeys, set 
out towards the south in quest of Sita, O Mahabaho. 

On our quest, a mighty vulture called Sampati informed us that Sita was 
in the palace of Ravana. Then, to serve Rama, I leapt across the ocean of a 
hundred yojanas, the abode of sharks and crocodiles. 

In Lanka, I saw in Ravana's palace the daughter of king Janaka, Sita, like 
the daughter of a Deva. I spoke with Vaidehi, Rama's beloved, and then I 
burnt Lanka with its towers and ramparts and lofty gates, and proclaimed 
my name there, and then I returned to Bharatavarsha. 

I told Rama everything, and that lotus-eyed immediately set out to 
rescue his wife. He created a bridge across the ocean for his army of 
monkeys and we crossed over it. In Lanka, Rama slew the Rakshasas in 
battle; he killed Ravana, oppressor of the worlds, and all his demons. 
Having slain the king of the Rakshasas, his brother, his sons and other kin, 
Rama crowned the pious and kindly Rakshasa lord Vibhishana as king. 

Rama recovered his wife, even like the lost Vaidik revelation. Then 
Raghu's scion and his devoted Sita returned to Ayodhya, inaccessible to 
enemies; and that lord of men was crowned and began to rule from there. 

Then, I asked a boon of the lotus-eyed Rama, saying, "Parantapa, Rama, 
let me live for as long as the story of your deeds is told in the world!" 

Rama said, "So be it." 

Bhima, through the grace of Sita, also, in this place I have everything I 
need or want, every rare luxury, as do all that dwell in this place. Rama 
reigned for ten thousand and ten hundred years; and then he ascended to his 
own abode. Ever since, Apsaras and Gandharvas delight me here, singing 
the pure and mighty deeds of that hero. 


Sinless one, Kurunandana, this path is impassable to mortals. For this, O 
Bhaarata, and also to ensure that noone vanquishes you, or curses you, have 
I obstructed your passage to this path that the immortals tread. For the 
celestials, this is one of the paths to heaven; mortals cannot pass this way. 

But the lake in search of which you have come lies in that direction." 


CANTO 148 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


yo continued, "The powerful Bhimasena Mahabaho bows 
lovingly, and with a cheerful heart, to his brother Hanuman, the Vanara 
lord, and says in the mildest voice, 'Noone is more fortunate than I am, now 
that I have seen my elder brother! Fortune has been so kind to me, and I 
cannot express my delight. 

But now I have a wish that I pray you will fulfil. Shura, I want to see that 
incomparable form you had when you leapt across the ocean full of sharks 
and crocodiles, ocean of a hundred yojanas. If you show me that form I will 
be satisfied, I will believe everything that you have said.' 

The mighty Vanara replies with a smile, 'No one today can see that form 
of mine, not you or anyone else. In that yuga, all things were different, not 
as they are today, dwindled. 

In the Krita yuga, the state of things was one; and in the Treta, another; 
and in the Dwapara, still another. Diminution is sweeping through this age; 
and I do not have that form now. Why, the earth, rivers, plants, and rocks, 
and Siddhas, Devas and Devarishis conform to Time, according to the 
yugas. 

Therefore, do not wish to see my old form, O Kurupravira. I am bound 
by the nature of this age; time is irresistible. 

Bhimasena says, "Tell me about the duration of the different yugas, and 
of the varied manners and customs and of dharma, kama and artha, and of 
karma, of tejas, and of life and death in the different yugas.' 

Hanuman says, 'Child, that yuga is called Krita when the one eternal 
religion existed, the Sanatana Dharma. In that best of yugas, everyone 
owned spiritual perfection and, therefore, there was no need for religious 
deed or rituals. Dharma knew no deterioration, and neither did anyone die. 
For this, that yuga is called Krita, the perfect. 

But in time the Krita yuga has come to be considered as an inferior one. 
In the Krita, there were neither Devas nor Asuras, nor Gandharvas, nor 
Yakshas, nor Rakshasas, nor Nagas. 

There was no commerce, no buying and selling. And the Sama, the Rik, 
and the Yajus did not exist. And there was no manual labour. All the 


necessaries of life were obtained merely by being thought of, and the only 
punya lay in renouncing the world. 

During that yuga, there was neither disease nor decay of the senses. 
There was neither malice nor pride, nor hypocrisy, nor discord, nor ill-will, 
nor cunning, nor fear, nor misery, nor envy, nor covetousness. 

And for this, that prime refuge of Yogis, the Supreme Brahman, was 
attainable to all. Narayana, wearing a white complexion, was the soul of all 
creatures. In the Krita Yuga, the distinctive characteristics of Brahmanas, 
Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras were natural and these always adhered to 
their respective dharmas. 

Brahman was the sole refuge, and their manners and customs were 
naturally adapted to the attainment of Brahman; and the objects of their 
knowledge was the sole Brahman, and all their karma also had reference to 
Brahman. In this way, all the varnas attained punya. 

One uniform Soul was the object of their meditation; and there was only 
one mantra, the Pranava, AUM, and there was one law. And although they 
had different natures, all of them followed a single Veda; and they had one 
dharma, one religion. 

And according to the divisions of time, they lived the four asramas, 
without any desires, and so they attained moksha. The dharma which 
comprises of identifying the Atman with the Brahman is the sign of the 
Krita Yuga. 

In the Krita Yuga, the dharma of the four varnas is universal, entire; thus 
the Krita Yuga is devoid of the three gunas. 

Now listen to the character of the Treta Yuga. In this age, sacrifices are 
introduced, and dharma decreases by a fourth part. And Narayana, who is 
the Soul of all creatures, assumes a red colour. And men practise truth, and 
devote themselves to religion and religious rites; sacrifices and various 
religious observances come into existence. 

In the Treta Yuga, people begin to devise means for the attainment of 
objects, for possession; and they attain it through karma and dana. 
However, they never deviate from dharma, and they are devoted to 
asceticism and to the giving of gifts. 

The four varnas adhere to their respective swadharmas, and perform 
rituals. Such are the men of the Treta Yuga. 

In the Dwapara Yuga, the Sanatana Dharma decreases by one half. Now 
Narayana wears yellow; and the Veda becomes divided into four parts. Now 


some men retain the knowledge of the four Vedas, and some of three Vedas, 
and some of one Veda, while others do not even know even the Riks. 

Upon the Shastras becoming so divided, karma multiplies. And largely 
influenced by passion, men still engage in tapasya and dana. But from their 
incapacity to study the entire Veda, it becomes divided into several parts; 
and in consequence of the intellect having decreased, few are established in 
truth. 

And when people fall away from the truth, they become subject to 
myriad diseases; and then lust and natural calamities ensue. Afflicted by 
these, some men perform penance, while others celebrate sacrifices, yagnas, 
wishing to enjoy the good things of life, or to attain heaven. 

Upon the coming of the Dwapara Yuga, men become degenerate, in 
consequence of their impiety. 

O son of Kunti, in the Kali Yuga only a quarter of dharma survives. And 
in the beginning of this iron age, Narayana wears a black hue. And the 
Vedas and the Shastras, and dharma, and yagans, and every religious 
observance, all these fall into disuse. 

Then Iti'! reigns, and disease, and lassitude, and anger and deformities, 
and natural calamities, and anguish, and fear of scarcity. As the yugas wane, 
dharma dwindles, and all creatures degenerate. As creatures degenerate, 
their natures deteriorate. 

The religious rites performed at the waning of the yugas produce 
contrary effects. And even those that live for several yugas conform to these 
changes. 

Parantapa, as for curiosity to know me, I say this —why should a wise 
person be eager to know a superfluous thing? O long-armed, I have told you 
in full what you asked me regarding the nature of the different yugas. 

May good fortune befall you! Now return from where you came: ' 


‘hei: six pernicious things for crops: excessive rain, drought, vermin, locusts, birds, and a 
neighbouring hostile king. 


CANTO 149 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


bh says, 'I will not leave without seeing your olden form. 
If I have found favour with you, show me your pristine self.' 

With a smile, the Vanara shows Bhima the form in which he, Hanuman, 
once leapt across the sea. Wanting to gratify his brother, Hanuman assumes 
a gigantic body of immeasurable effulgence; the Vanara stands there, 
covering all the plantain grove, and as lofty as the Vindhya. 

Great as a mountain, with coppery eyes and sharp teeth, and a face 
marked by a dreadful frown, Hanuman stands covering all that grove and 
lashing his long tail. Bhima sees that gigantic form of his brother, and his 
hair stands on end in wonder. 

Seeing the great monkey ablaze like the Sun, like golden Meru, 
splendent as the sky, Bhima cannot look upon him and shuts his eyes. 

Smiling again, Hanuman says to his brother, 'Anagha, you are able to see 
my form to this extent. But I can grow on for as long as I wish. Bhima, 
amidst enemies, my size increases through its own tejas.' 

Seeing that wondrous and dreadful body of Hanuman, like the Vindhya 
mountain, Bhima Vayuputra is bewildered. 

Folding his hands, the Pandava says to Hanuman, 'Lord, I have seen the 
immense dimensions of your body. Awesome one, I beg you make yourself 
small again, for I cannot look at you, like the sun risen, of measureless 
power, irrepressible, and resembling the Mountain Mainaka. 

O Hero, great is the wonder in my heart today that with you by his side 
Rama himself needed to encounter Ravana. With your might, you could 
have annihilated Lanka and all its warriors in an instant, all its horses, 
elephants and chariots. 

Surely, O Vayuputra, there is nothing that you cannot achieve; and in 
battle, I am certain that Ravana, together with all his Rakshasas, was no 
match for you, by yourself.' 

Hanuman replies in affectionate words, solemnly spoken, 'Mahabaho, 
O Bhaarata, it is as you say; Bhimasena, that worst of Rakshasas was no 
match for me. But if I had slain Ravana—that thorn of the worlds—the 


glory of Raghu's son would have been obscured; and it is for this that I left 
him alive. 

By killing that lord of the Rakshasas and his demons, and bringing back 
Sita unto his own city, Rama established his fame among men. 

Now, O wise one, since you are intent on the welfare of your brothers, 
and protected by Vayu, travel on a fortunate and auspicious path. 
Kurusthama, this path will lead you to the Saugandhika forest. 

You will see Kubera's gardens, guarded by Yakshas and Rakshasas. Do 
not pluck the flowers there, for the gods deserve reverence, especially from 
mortals. Only if they are worshipped with offerings, and homas, and 
salutations, and the recitation of mantras, do the Devas confer their favour 
upon men. 

So, do not, my child, be rash; do not deviate from your svadharma. Be 
faithful to your duty, understanding what the highest dharma is. Without 
knowing your duty and serving the old, even great ones like Brihaspati 
cannot understand artha and dharma. 

One should ascertain with discrimination that circumstance in which 
vice goes under the name of virtue, and virtue under the name of vice — 
circumstances in which men who are without intelligence become 
perplexed. 

From religious observances merit ensues; and in merit are the Vedas 
founded; and from the Vedas, sacrifices come into being; and through 
sacrifice the gods are established. The Devas are maintained by yagnas 
prescribed by the Vedas and the Shastras; while men maintain themselves 
by following the ordinances of Brihaspati and Sukra; and also by these 
avocations, by which the world is maintained — serving for wages; 
receiving taxes; merchandise; agriculture and tending kine and sheep. 

The world subsists through profession. The study of the three Vedas and 
agriculture and trade and government constitutes, say the Rishis, the 
professions of the twice-born; and each varna maintains itself by following 
the profession prescribed for it. And when these callings are properly 
pursued, the world itself is maintained with ease. 

However, if the people do not lead righteous lives, the world becomes 
lawless, in consequence of the lack of Vedic merit and government. If the 
people do not follow their prescribed vocations, they perish; but by 
regularly following the three professions, they bring about dharma. 


The dharma of Brahmanas consists in the knowledge of the soul; and the 
hue of only that varna is universally the same. The celebration of sacrifices, 
and study and bestowal of gifts are well-known to be the three duties 
common to all the orders. 

Officiating at sacrifices, teaching and the acceptance of gifts are the 
duties of a Brahmana. To rule is the dharma of the Kshatriya; and to tend 
cattle, that of the Vaisya; while to serve the twice-born varnas is said to be 
the duty of the Sudra. 

The Sudras cannot beg alms, or perform homas, or keep vratas; and they 
must dwell in the homes of their masters. 

Your vocation, O son of Kunti, is that of the Kshatriya, which is to 
protect. Perform your svadharma, with humility and restraining your senses. 
That king alone can rule who takes the counsel of experienced men, and is 
helped by honest, intelligent and learned ministers; a king who is addicted 
to vices meets with defeat. 

Only when the king justly punishes and confers favours is order secure 
in the world. Therefore, it is needful to ascertain, through spies, the nature 
of a hostile country, its fortified places and the allied forces of the enemy, 
and their prosperity and decay and the way in which they retain the 
adhesion of the powers they have drawn to their side. 

Spies are among the important instruments of the king; and tact, 
diplomacy, prowess, chastisement, favour and cleverness lead to success. 
And success is to be attained through these, either in separation, or 
combined - namely, conciliation, gifts, sowing dissensions, chastisement, 
and might. 

And, O Bhaarata, politics has for its root diplomacy; and diplomacy is 
also the main qualification of spies. Politics, if well judged, confers success. 
Therefore, in matters of polity the counsel of Brahmanas should be taken. 

In secret affairs, these should not be consulted - namely, a woman, a 
fool, a boy, a covetous person, a mean-minded individual, and one that 
betrays signs of insanity. Wise men only should be consulted, and affairs 
are to be despatched through officers that are able. 

Policy must be executed through persons that are friendly; but fools 
should be excluded from all affairs. In matters religious, pious men; and in 
matters of gain, wise men; and in guarding families, eunuchs; and in all 
crooked affairs, crooked men must be employed. The dharma or adharma of 


the resolve of an enemy, as also his strength or weakness, must be gauged 
through one's own as well as hostile spies. 

Favour should be shown to honest persons who have prudently sought 
protection; but lawless and disobedient individuals should be punished. And 
when the king justly punishes and shows favour, the dignity of the law is 
well maintained, O son of Pritha. 

These are the hard duties of kings, difficult to comprehened. Observe 
them with equanimity, even as they are prescribed for your Kshatriya varna. 

Therefore, heroic Kaunteya, let your meeting with me not be fruitless. 
As my brother, ask me for a boon. If you wish, I can go to Varanavrata, 
even now, and kill all Dhritarashtra's insignificant sons. Or if you like I can 
raze that entire city with rocks; I can bind Duryodhana and bring him before 
you today, mighty one. 

Listening to that Mahatman, Bhima replies happily, 'Vanarottama, I will 
think that you have already done all this! May every good fortune befall 
you, Mahabaho. But what I ask of you is this - be well pleased with me. 
Mighty one, upon your having become our protector, the Pandavas have 
found help. Even through your prowess, we will conquer all our enemies. 

Hanuman says to Bhimasena, 'From brotherly love, I will do good to you 
by diving into the army of your enemies armed with arrows and spears. 
And, O Kshatriya, when you roar like a lion, I will lend force to your roars. 

I will set myself on the flagstaff of Arjuna's chariot and give fierce yells 
that will terrifry your enemies, so that you can kill them easily. 

Saying this to the Pandava, and also pointing the way ahead, Hanuman 
vanishes before Bhima's eyes." 


CANTO 151 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


yous said, "When that greatest of Vanaras has gone, Bhima 
treads the path across the mighty Gandhamadana. And as he goes 
along, he thinks of Hanuman's vast body and splendour unrivalled on earth, 
and also of the greatness and dignity of Dasaratha's son Rama. 

Going on in quest of the place of the saugandhikas, Bhima sees 
enchanting forests, groves, rivers, and lakes whose banks are graced with 
trees, blossom-laden, and woods of countless flowers and colours. 

Bhaarata, he sees herds of wild elephants smeared with mud, resembling 
massed thunderheads. Graceful Bhima lopes ahead with speed, seeing 
among the trees around him deer of quick glances, with their mates, and 
long tufts of grass in their mouths. 

Fearless because of his strength, as if invited by the breeze-shaken trees 
of the forest always fragrant with flowers, bearing delicate coppery twigs, 
Bhimasena plunges into mountain realms inhabited by bison, bear and 
leopard. 

And on his way, he passes lotus-lakes over which maddened black bees 
swarm; on those waters it seemed as if the lotus buds were hands reverently 
folded to him. His provender for his journey is what Draupadi said, and 
Bhima speeds on, his mind and his gaze fixed upon the slopes of the 
mountain abloom. 

When the Sun passes his zenith, Bhima sees a mighty river in the deer- 
filled jungle, a river full of fresh golden lotuses, a river crowded with hamsa 
and karandava, and graced with chakravakas, river which looks like a 
garland of fresh lotuses put on by the mountain. 

In this river, that mighty Kshatriya found banks after banks of 
Saugandhika lotuses, brilliant as the rising Sun, and absolutely delightful. 
Seeing the flowers Bhima thinks that he has attained his objective, and in 
his heart he thinks of Panchali and presents himself before her in his 
thought, his beloved Krishnaa worn out by their exile." 


CANTO 152 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


yoo said, "In that place, Bheema sees, near the Kailasa 
massif, that beautiful lotus lake surrounded by lovely woods, and 
guarded by Rakshasas. He sees that it is fed by waterfalls next to the abode 
of Kubera. Great flowering trees shade its banks, and green water-lily pads 
cover its surface. 

This unearthly lake is filled with golden lotuses, and swarms with 
diverse birds; its shallows are crystalline, with no mud at all. This lake is a 
wonder of the world, health-giving and enchanting. Kunti's son sees that the 
ambrosial water is cool, lucid, bright and fresh; the Pandava drinks thirstily, 
profusely, from it. 

The lake is covered over with celestial Saugandhika lotuses, and other 
golden lotuses with stalks of sapphire. Swayed by swans and karandavas 
brushing past them, the lotuses scatter fresh glimmering pollen. 

This lake is where the great-souled Kubera, king of the Yakshas, comes 
to sport; the Gandharvas, the Apsaras and the Devas hold it in high regard; 
Devarishis, Yakshas, Kimpurushas, Rakshasas and Kinnaras frequent it. 
And it is well-protected indeed by Kubera. 

Feverish delight sweeps over Bhima as soon as he lays eyes on those 
waters. Thousands of Rakshasas called Krodhavasas, armed with every kind 
of weapon, guard that lake, by the command of their lord Kubera. 

Bhima of awesome prowess, wearing deerskin, golden armlets, his 
sword strapped to his side, plunges fearlessly ahead to gather the 
Saugandhikas. 

The Rakshasas see him and shout to one another, 'Let us ask why this 
man has come here, wearing deerskin and carrying weapons!’ 

They approach the lustrous Vrikodara of mighty arms and ask, 'Who are 
you? Answer us! We see you wearing a hermit's garb yet bearing weapons. 
Intelligent one, tell us why you have come here:' 


CANTO 153 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


5 says, I am the son of Pandu, and next by birth to Yudhishtira 
Dharmaraja, and my name is Bhimasena. Rakshasas, I came with my 
brothers to the Nyagrodha which is called Visala. There, Panchali saw a 
most excellent Saugandhika, which, of a certainty, was borne thence by the 
wind from this lake. She wishes to have the flowers in some abundance. 
Know, Rakshasas, that I have come to fulfil the wish of my wife of faultless 
features; I have come here to gather flowers for her.' 

At which, the Rakshasas say, 'Purushottama, this place is dear to Kubera; 
he comes to sport here. Mortal men cannot enjoy this place. Vrikodara, the 
Devarishis and the Devas ask Kubera's leave before they drink this water or 
swim in it. Pandava, the Gandharvas and the Apsaras also come to please 
themselves in this lake. 

The wicked man who, disregarding the lord of treasures, seeks to enjoy 
himself here surely meets his death. With no regard for Kubera you seek to 
take away the Saugandhikas from here by force. How then do you claim to 
be the brother of Yudhishtira Dharmaraja? 

First, seek the permission of the lord of Yakshas, only then drink and 
pluck the lotuses. If you do not do this, you will not be able to have even a 
single Saugandhika.' 

Bhimasena says, 'Rakshasas, I do not see the lord of wealth here. And 
even if I did see that Lokapala I would not beg him, for Kshatriyas never 
beg. This is the eternal dharma, and I have no intention of abandoning 
Kshatriya dharma. 

Moreover, this lotus lake has been formed from the waterfalls of the 
mountain; it has not been excavated in the palace of Kubera. And so, it 
belongs as much to every creature as it does to Kubera Vaisravana. Who 
goes to beg another for such a thing?’ 

With this, the impatient Bhima wades into the lotus lake. 

The Rakshasas, forbid him, crying, 'Desist!' and abuse him roundly from 
every side. Bhima ignores them, and continues wading into the water. 

Their eyes rolling in anger, they arms upraised, they rush at him, roaring 
variously, ‘Seize him! Bind him! Hew him! We will cook this Bhima and eat 


him!' 

Bhima raises his great mace, inlaid with golden plates and like the mace 
of Yama himself, and turning back to face them, roars, 'Stay!' 

Brandishing lances and axes, and other weapons, they run at him. The 
dreadful Krodhavasas surround Bhima. But he is Kunti's son begotten by 
Vayu, and he is mighty beyond reckoning and heroic, the slayer of his foes, 
and always devoted to dharma and satya, no one can vanquish him. 

Swiftly, the great Bhima crushes those Rakshasas, beginning with their 
leader, breaking their arms, killing more than a hundred on the banks of that 
lake. When they see how strong he is, and that they cannot resist him, the 
rest of those powerful Rakshasas run in all directions, in bands, so many of 
them pierced and bleeding. 

They fly through the air towards Mount Kailasa. Having beaten his 
enemy, even as Indra did the armies of the Daityas and Danavas, Bhima 
plunges into the lake again and begins to gather the golden lotuses as he 
pleases. 

And as he drinks the waters, like nectar, his energy and strength surge 
back, and he falls to plucking and gathering the fragrant Saugandhikas. 

Meanwhile, the Krodhavasas, driven away and terrified by Bhima's 
onslaught, flee to Kubera, Lord of treasures, and tell him everything that 
transpired at the lake and especially about Bhima's might. 

The Deva smiles, then says, 'I already know what you have told me. Let 
Bhima take as many lotuses as he likes for Krishnaa.' 

Those Rakshasas return to the Pandava and see him alone, enjoying 
himself in the lake of lotuses." 


CANTO 154 
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


Ye said, "Bhima gathers the rare, unearthly and fresh flowers 
as he pleases, in abundance. 

Now a high and violent wind begins to blow, blowing up sand and earth, 
and portending battle. Ominous meteors fall from the sky, and thunder 
echoes everywhere. Enveloped in darkness, the Sun grows pale, his rays 
being obscured. 

At Bhima displaying his prowess, dreadful explosions ring through the 
sky; the earth trembles, and dust falls in showers. The cardinal points of the 
heavens grow red, and beasts and birds begin to cry out in shrill tones. 

All things are enfolded in darkness, and indistinguishable; other evil 
omens appear there. Yudhishtira Dharmaputra sees the strange phenomena, 
and says, ‘Someone means to attack us. Arm yourselves Pandavas, and may 
good fortune befall you! From what I see, I believe that the time has come 
for us to show our strength.’ 

The king looks around and does not see Bhima. He turns to Panchali and 
the twins, 'Panchali, has Bhima gone to perform some great feat, or has he 
done so already? These omens surely portend some grave danger; they 
foretell a great battle.' 

To allay his anxiety, Krishnaa of the sweet smile says, 'Rajan, I showed 
the Saugandhika which the wind blew here to Bhima. I said to him that if he 
could find more for me he should bring back as many as he could. Pandava, 
he must have gone looking for the golden lotuses for my sake. He must 
have gone north-east.’ 

Hearing her, Yudhishtira says to the twins, 'Let us follow Vrikodara's 
path. Let the Rakshasas carry those Brahmanas who are tired and weak. 
Ghatotkacha, you carry Krishnaa. 

I am convinced that Bhima has gone into the jungle, for it is long since 
he has been gone. He travels as swiftly as the wind, or as Vinata's son, and 
he will even leap into the sky and alight at his will. Rakshasas, we will 
follow him through your prowess. He will not do any wrong to the Siddhas 
in the forest, who are versed in the Vedas.' 


Saying, 'So be it,’ Hidimba's son and the other Rakshasas, who know the 
lotus lake of Kubera, set out cheerfully with Lomasa, carrying the 
Pandavas, and many of the Brahmanas. 

Soon arriving at the lake, they see it covered with Saugandhika and other 
lotuses and surrounded by ethereal woods. On its shores they see the noble 
and fierce Bhima, as also the slaughtered Yakshas of large eyes, with their 
bodies, arms and thighs smashed, and their heads crushed. 

Upon seeing Bhima standing there like an angry lion, his eyes staring, 
biting his lip, his mace upraised in both hands, even like Yama at the 
Mahapralaya, Yudhishtira Dharmaraja runs to his brother and embraces him 
repeatedly. 

Gently Yudhishtira says, 'Kaunteya, what have you done? Ah, may good 
fortune be with you, but if you love me and wish my welfare never again be 
so rash, nor offend the Devas!’ 

Now those godlike ones all begin to sport in those waters and to pluck 
the Saugandhikas as they please. Suddenly, the immense guardians of the 
gardens, with rocks for their weapons, arrive there. 

Seeing Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, Maharishi Lomasa, Nakula, Sahadeva 
and the other great Brahmanas, those guardian Rakshasas bow down low in 
humility. 

Yudhishtira pacifies them, and they are gratified. Thus, with Kubera's 
knowledge, for a short time, those Kurusthamas dwell there in those 
gardens upon the slopes of the Gandhamadana, waiting for Arjuna," said 
Vaisampayana to Raja Janamejaya. 


End of Vana Parva (Part 1) 











THE COMPLETE MAHABHARATA 
Vana Parva (Part 2) 
and 
Virata Parva 


THE COMPLETE 
MAHABHARATA 


Volume 3 


Vana Parva (Part 2) 
and 


Virata Parva 


Jayashree Kumar 
with 


Katya Osborne 





RUPA 


Published by 
Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd 2013 
7/16, Ansari Road, Daryaganj 
New Delhi 110002 


Sales centres: 

Allahabad Bengaluru Chennai 
Hyderabad Jaipur Kathmandu 
Kolkata Mumbai 
Copyright © Jayashree Kumar 2013 
All rights reserved. 

No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, or stored in a retrieval system, in any 
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the 
prior permission of the publisher. 

ISBN: 978-81-291-1959-9 
10987654321 


The moral right of the author has been asserted. 


Typeset in Adobe Garamond Pro 12/16.2 


For Kumar, my husband and best friend 


CONTENTS 


A Brief Introduction 
Acknowledgements 

VANA PARVA (PART 2) 
Canto 155 Tirthayatra Parva continued 


Canto 156 

Canto 157-163 
Canto 164-174 
Canto 175-180 
Canto 181—230 
Canto 231-233 
Canto 234-255 
Canto 256 

Canto 257-259 
Canto 260-269 
Canto 270 

Canto 271-290 
Canto 291-297 


Jatasura Vadha Parva 
Yaksha Yuddha Parva 
Nivatakavacha Yuddha Parva 
Ajagara Parva 
Markandeya Samasya Parva 
Draupadi Satyabhama Samvada Parva 
Ghosha Yatra Parva 
Mrigaswapnodbhava Parva 
Vrihidraunika Parva 
Draupadi Harana Parva 
Jayadratha Vimokshana Parva 
Ramopakhyana Parva 
Pativrata Mahatmya Parva 


Canto 298-308 Kundala Harana Parva 
Canto 309-313 Araneya Parva 


VIRATA PARVA 


Canto 1-12 Pandava Pravesha Parva 
Canto 13 Samayapalana Parva 
Canto 14-24 Kichaka Vadha Parva 
Canto 25-69 Go Harana Parva 

Canto 70-72 Vaivahika Parva 


A BRIEF INTRODUCTION 


The last complete version of the Mahabharata to be written in India in 
English prose was the translation by Kisar1 Mohan Ganguli in the late 19th 
century. He wrote it between 1883 and 1896. To the best of my knowledge, 
it still remains the only full English prose rendering of the Epic by any 
Indian. 

More than a hundred years have passed since Ganguli achieved his 
monumental task. Despite its closeness to the original Sanskrit and its 
undeniable power, in more than a hundred years the language and style of 
the Ganguli translation have inevitably become archaic. 

It seemed a shame that this most magnificent of epics, a national 
treasure, an indisputable classic of world literature, believed by many to be 
the greatest of all books ever written, is not available in complete form to 
the Indian (or any) reader in modern, literary and easily accessible English: 
as retold by Indian writers. 

So we, a group of Indian writers and editors, warmly and patiently 
supported by our publisher Rupa Publications India, undertook a line-by- 
line retelling of the complete Mahabharata, for the contemporary and future 
reader. Our aim has not been to write a scholarly translation of the Great 
Epic, but an eminently readable one, without vitiating either the spirit or the 
poetry of the original, and without reducing its length. 

This is not a translation from the Sanskrit but based almost entirely on 
the Ganguli text, and he himself did use more than one Sanskrit version for 
his work. However, as will be obvious, the style of this new rendering is 


very much our own, and our hope is to bring as much of the majesty and 
enchantment of this awesome epic to you as is possible in English. 


Ramesh Menon 
Series Editor 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


Ramesh Menon: he offered me this work; he believed in me even when I 
did not. Thank you. 

Katya Douglas: my friend and first editor; she taught me how to 
appreciate the beauty and precision of the English language, that less is 
often more, all this with kindness and generosity. Thank you. 

My mother Kausalya: her long discussions with my grandmother and 
aunt about the Mahabharata and its characters, as if they were familiar 
people they knew personally, gave me valuable insights into the meaning of 
honour, integrity and honesty; her joy in what I was doing encouraged me. 

My aunt Radha: she shares my sense of devotion to the spirit of the epic 
and faith in its essence, The Bhagavad Gita; she shared with me her 
knowledge, gained from years of reading and re-reading this wonderful 
work; we had some wonderful discussions. 

My son Govind: he made none of the demands that a mother expects of 
a son living on his own in a foreign country, but provided me with a haven 
in which I did some of my best writing. 

My daughter Anuradha: she upheld me and encouraged me, especially 
at times when I despaired of being able to continue; made molehills of 
mountains, as is her wont, and made the impossible seem within reach. 

My friends in Kodai, particularly Lathika, Zai, Aruna, Minoo, Shezarin, 
Saku, Radha, Khokon, Shewli, Philippe and Tiku: their broad shoulders, 
that I often leaned on, their encouragement and their unconditional 
friendship meant a lot to me whilst I worked on this volume. 


VANA PARVA 
(PART 2) 


CANTO 155 
TIRTHAYATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “In Gandhamadana, Yudhishtira says to Krishnaa, 
his brother Bhima and the Brahmanas, ‘We have seen a succession 
of sacred tirthas and enchanting forests, which until now only the Devas 
and Devarishis have visited; and where Brahmanas have worshipped. We 
performed pujas with our Brahmanas in many hallowed places and heard 
them tell of the lives of great sages. In various tirthas, we performed 
ablutions with the Brahmanas and heard them narrate many tales of ancient 
Rishis and Rajarishis. We worshipped the Devas with water and flowers, 
and the Pitrs with whatever fruit and roots we could find. With the exalted 
ones, we performed ritual purification in the holy mountains, in the lakes 
and in the sacred ocean. We bathed in the Ila, in the Saraswati and in the 
Sindhu, in the Yamuna and in the Narmada, and in various other tirthas. As 
we passed the source of the Ganga, we saw splendid mountains and the 
Himalayas, inhabited by myriad species of birds, and also the yellow- 
flowered badari tree Visala, where Nara and Narayana have their asrama. 
And finally, we have set our eyes on this unearthly lake that is worshipped 
by the Siddhas, the Devas and the Munis. In fact, we have seen one by one 
all the most famed tirthas with the illustrious Lomasa. 
Now, Bhima, how will we come to the sacred home of Vaisravana, 
where the Siddhas live? Think of how you will take us there.’ 
When the king says this, an asariri, a heavenly voice, speaks, saying, 
“You will not be able to go to that inaccessible place. Return from this land 


of Kubera to the place from which you came to Badari—Nara and 
Narayana’s asrama. From there, Kaunteya, go to the hermitage of 
Vrishaparva, abundant in flowers and fruit, where Siddhas and Charanas 
dwell. Once you have passed that, go to the asrama of Arshtisena. From 
there you will be able to see the home of Kubera.’ 

As this voice speaks, the breeze freshens—cool, redolent with joy and 
an unearthly fragrance. Flowers rain from the sky at the sound of the 
celestial voice, and all are amazed, especially the Rishis and _ the 
Brahmanas. 

The Brahmana Dhaumya says, “We must do as the voice tells us.’ 

Yudhishtira returns to the asrama of Nara and Narayana and lives there 
in contentment, surrounded by Bhimasena, his other brothers, Panchali and 
the Brahmanas.” 


CANTO 156 
JATASURA VADHA PARVA 


V aisampayana continued, “There in the mountains, the Pandavas and 

their Brahmanas live in contented expectation of Arjuna’s return. 
All the Rakshasas have left with Bhima’s son when, one day while 
Bhimasena is away, a Rakshasa suddenly carries off Yudhishtira, the twins 
and Krishnaa. This demon has been living amongst the Pandavas in the 
guise of a high Brahmana, claiming that he is an experienced advisor and 
well-versed in the Shastras. He wants the bows, quivers, the other weapons 
and belongings of the Pandavas, and has been waiting for an opportunity to 
abduct Draupadi. He is the evil Jatasura. 

Yudhishtira encouraged him, little knowing that he is like a fire hiding 
under ashes. And one day when Bhima is out hunting, and seeing that 
Ghatotkacha and his followers have gone and that those great Rishis of 
austere tapasya—Lomasa and the others—have gone to bathe and collect 
flowers for worship, the Rakshasa reveals a monstrous form. He gathers all 
the weapons of the Pandavas, seizes Draupadi and the three Pandavas, and 
flees. 

Somehow, Sahadeva manages to struggle free and wrenches the sword 
named Kausika from the Rakshasa. He calls out, running in the direction in 
which his mighty brother Bhima went. 

While being carried off, Yudhishtira Dharmaraja says to the Rakshasa, 
‘Foolish one, you have lost all the punya you earned. You do not respect 
dharma. Whether human or of a lower species, everyone is mindful of 


dharma, particularly Rakshasas because they know virtue better than others. 
You ought to live by dharma. 

O Rakshasa, the Devas, the Pitrs, the Siddhas, the Rishis, the 
Gandharvas, the animals and even the worms and ants depend for their lives 
on men; and you do, too. If the human race prospers, your race will, also; if 
humans suffer, so will you, and even the Devas. The gods thrive on the 
offerings we make. Rakshasa, we are the guardians, rulers and guides of 
kingdoms. If kingdoms are unprotected, how can prosperity and happiness 
exist? 

Unless a king offends him, a Rakshasa should not harm one. Cannibal, 
we have committed no sin. We live on vighasa, the leftovers from oblations, 
and serve the gods and others as best we can; we are always respectful of 
our superiors and Brahmanas. A friend, a confidant, he whose food one has 
shared, and he who has given one shelter, these should never be injured. 
You have lived happily with us, been duly honoured and, evil one, shared 
our food. How can you abduct us? 

What you are doing is sinful; your maturity in years has given you so 
little wisdom, and your nature is so evil that you deserve to die; and die you 
shall today. You are a sinner, so give us back our weapons and fight us; and 
bear Draupadi away if you win. However, if you are fool enough to do this 
vile thing without a fair fight, you will reap only curses and infamy. 
Rakshasa, abducting this woman is like shaking the pot to drink the last 
drop of poison in it.’ 

Yudhishtira makes his body heavy, weighing the Rakshasa down, and 
slowing his pace. To Draupadi and Nakula, and to Sahadeva, who has 
turned back, Yudhishtira says, “Do not be afraid of the demon. The son of 
the Wind is near, and he will be here shortly and the evil one will die.’ 

Staring at the Rakshasa, Sahadeva says, ‘There is nothing more 
honourable for a Kshatriya than to fall in fight or to defeat an enemy. 
Parantapa, we will fight; and either this Rakshasa will kill us or we shall kill 
him. This is the place and the time, Rajan. You of limitless prowess, the 
time has come for us to display our Kshatriya dharma. We shall either find 
Swarga through victory, or death in defeat. 

This I swear—if the Rakshasa is still alive at sunset, I will not call 
myself a Kshatriya anymore. Rakshasa, I am Pandu’s son Sahadeva. Kill 
me before you abduct our queen, or be killed and lie dead.’ 


Madri’s son Sahadeva is still speaking when Bhima appears with a 
mace in his hand, like Vasava himself with his thunderbolt. He sees his two 
brothers and, on the shoulders of the demon, chaste Draupadi. He hears 
Sahadeva challenge the Rakshasa, and Jatasura hesitates, perplexed. Bhima 
sees his brothers and Draupadi in the demon’s clutches and wrath surges in 
him. 

He says to the Rakshasa, ‘I already knew that you were an evil one 
when I saw how you looked at our weapons. But I did not kill you because 
you were no threat to me. You appeared to be a Brahmana, and you said 
nothing harsh to us. Indeed, you seemed to like pleasing us, and did us no 
wrong. Furthermore, you were our guest. How could I kill you, who were in 
the guise of a Brahmana and innocent of offence? He who kills one like 
this, even while knowing he is a Rakshasa, falls into hell. Besides, no one 
dies before their time comes. 

And for you it has come today—wondrous fate made you think of 
abducting Krishnaa, and you have taken death’s bait. Hoping to live now is 
as futile for you as for a fish whose mouth is already hooked. You will not 
go where you intended but to the place where Baka and Hidimba have 
gone.’ 

Listening to Bhima, the Rakshasa sets the other Pandavas and Draupadi 
down and, compelled by inexorable fate, prepares to fight. His lips quiver in 
anger as he says to Bhima, ‘Wretched Bhima, I slowed down for you. 
Today I will offer your blood to all the Rakshasas you have killed.’ 

Bhima’s rage erupts and, like Yama at the time of the pralaya, wetting 
the corners of his mouth and staring at Jatasura as he strikes his own arms 
with his fists in challenge, he rushes at the Rakshasa, who also runs at him, 
yawning wide his fanged maw, even as Mahabali once flew at Indra. 

A dreadful battle begins, and when Madri’s twins rush forward in fury, 
Vrikodara forbids them with a smile, “Watch me! I swear by my brothers, 
myself, my punya, and my sacrifices, that I will kill this devil.’ 

The two grasp each other’s arms. Unforgiving, the battle between the 
enraged Bhima and the red-eyed Rakshasa is like that between a Deva and 
an Asura. They uproot trees and strike each other with them, roaring like 
two cloud masses clashing against each other. Both are magnificently strong 
and charge at each other ferociously, breaking tree after tree over their 
thighs. The duel continues relentlessly, like the long-ago one between Vali 


and Sugriva who fought over a woman. They pound each other with 
massive boles, roaring all the while. 

O Bhaarata, when all the trees in that place have been uprooted and 
smashed to pulp, the two of unbridled strength take up rocks and continue 
to fight. They are like a mountain and a mighty mass of clouds. Fiery is 
their wrath, as they cast rocks that resemble brutal thunderbolts. They head- 
butt each other and seize each other’s arms, like two elephants, each raining 
thunderous blows on the other. They gnash their teeth, like thunder 
crackling. 

Then, with his clenched fist like a five-headed snake, Bhima delivers a 
mighty blow to the Rakshasa’s neck, and Jatasura’s knees turn weak. 
Bhimasena seizes his exhausted adversary. 

The godlike son of Pandu lifts him high and smashes him onto the 
ground, breaking all his limbs. He strikes the Rakshasa’s body with his 
elbow and wrenches his head off, with its bloodied, bitten lips and rolling 
eyes, like a fruit from its stem. Beheaded by Bhima Mahabaho, Jatasura 
dies, spouting gore from his open neck. 

Bhima presents himself before Yudhishtira, and all those best of 
Brahmanas begin to praise him, even as the Maruts eulogised Vasava.” 


CANTO 157 
YAKSHA YUDDHA PARVA 


V aisampayana continued, “After the Rakshasa’s death, Yudhishtira 

returns to the hermitage of Narayana and lives there. One day, 
thinking of his brother Arjuna, Yudhishtira calls all his brothers and 
Draupadi together and says, “We have passed these four years peacefully, 
wandering in these woods. Bibhatsu has said that in the fifth year he would 
come to that king of mountains, Sweta, always festive with blossoming 
plants, singing kokilas and humming black bees, peacocks and chatakas, 
and inhabited by tigers, boars and buffaloes, gavayas, deer and other wild 
animals. This sacred mountain is lovely with lotuses of a thousand and one 
hundred petals, bright with lilies blooming and blue lotuses, and frequented 
by Devas and Asuras. 

In eager anticipation of meeting our brother, we, too, have decided to go 
there. Partha of matchless strength said to me, “I will stay abroad for five 
years and hone my skills at arms.” It will be in a place resembling Devaloka 
that we will see the wielder of the Gandiva, when he returns with the 
Devastras.’ 

The Pandava summons the Brahmanas, and the sons of Pritha walk 
around these ascetics of unflinching austerity, in pradakshina. They tell 
them their plan to meet Arjuna, to which the Brahmanas give their 
approval, saying ‘You will prosper. Bhaaratottama, your troubled time will 
have a happy ending. You will overcome your difficulties and regain the 
Earth, and rule over her with Kshatriya dharma as your sceptre.’ 


Bowing to the ascetics, Yudhishtira, scourge of his enemies, sets out 
with his brothers and the Brahmanas, followed by Ghatotkacha and his 
Rakshasas, and protected by Rishi Lomasa. With his brothers, Yudhishtira 
of the dazzling tejas and austere vratas goes on foot wherever he can, and 
the Rakshasas carry him where he cannot. 

The king overcomes every obstacle and travels north, where lions, tigers 
and elephants roam; on the way, they see Mainaka parvata, the foothills of 
Mount Gandhamadana, and Sweta, rocky massif. They also see crystal 
rivulets as they climb to the higher reaches of the mountains, and on the 
seventeenth day they reach the holy Himalayas. 

Rajan, not far from Gandhamadana, on the sacred slopes of Himavan, 
covered with trees and creepers, Pandu’s son sees the holy asrama of 
Vrishaparva, surrounded by flowering trees that grow near waterfalls. And 
when those Parantapas have rested and recovered from their tiredness, they 
go to the Rajarishi Vrishaparva, and greet him. The royal sage receives 
them as lovingly as if they are his own sons. 

Those Kshatriyas spend seven nights here, and are treated with respect 
and affection. On the eighth day, they take the exalted Vrishaparva’s leave 
to resume their journey. One by one, they introduce all the Brahmanas, who 
had stayed as friends under his protection in the hermitage. The sons of 
Pandu entrust all their belongings to Vrishaparva—their sacrificial vessels, 
their ornaments and jewels. The wise and devout sage, well versed in 
dharma, and a trikalagyani who sees the future as clearly as he sees the past 
and the present, advises the Pandavas and the Brahmanas as he would his 
own sons. 

Those heroes set out towards the north. Vrishparva goes a short distance 
with them, giving the Brahmanas detailed directions of the route they must 
take; he entrusts the Pandavas into their care and blesses them all before he 
turns back to his asrama. 

Then Yudhishtira of endless might and his brothers set off along the 
mountain path alive with all kinds of animals. After four days of traversing 
slopes dense with trees, the sons of Pandu, like a cloud mass, reach the 
Sweta mountain that flows with countless streams and rich with an 
abundance of gold and gems. 

They follow the route Vrishaparva showed them and pass all the 
landmarks he mentioned, one after the other. On the way, they see 
mountains, they cross inaccessible peaks and impregnable caves. 


In a group they walk—Dhaumya, Krishnaa, Lomasa and the sons of 
Pritha—strangely tireless, and finally arrive at the sacred mountain which 
echoes with the cries of birds and animals. Trees and creepers cover the 
ground, monkeys are everywhere; enchanting lakes are covered over with 
lotuses; marshes appear here and there; and the forests are vast. 

Thus, their hair standing on end, the Pandavas see Mount 
Gandhamadana, the home of Kimpurushas, where the Siddhas and 
Charanas visit, where Vidyadharis and Kinnaras wander, where herds of 
elephants roam freely, where lions and tigers and wild beasts throng, where 
the roars of sarabhas fill the air. They enter the denseness of 
Gandhamadana, as if it were the inviting Nandana grove that delights the 
soul. 

As the Kshatriyas, Draupadi and the Brahmanas enter, they hear bird- 
song, indescribably sweet and graceful notes, broken only by the sound of 
animals at play. They see trees heavy with fruit and bent by their weight, 
and bright with flowers—mango, hog-plum, bhavya and pomegranate; 
citron, jack, lakucha and plantain; water reed; parvatam, champaka and the 
lovely kadamba; bilva, wood-apple, rose-apple and kasmari; jujube, fig and 
cluster fig; banyan, aswattha, kshirika and bhalla; ataka, amalaka and 
bibhitaka; inguda and karamarda and giant-fruited tinduka; and countless, 
nameless others clustered with sweet, nectarine fruit, on the slopes of 
Gandhamadana. 

Besides fruit trees, they see champakas, asokas, ketakas and bakulas; 
punnagas and saptaparnas; karnikaras and petals; beautiful kutajas and 
mandaras; and lotuses; and parijatas; kovidaras and devadarudras; salas, 
palmyra palms, tamalas and pippalas; salmalis and kinsukas; sinsapas and 
saralas. And on these trees live chakoras, woodpeckers, chatakas and 
various other birds, singing sweetly to please the green world. 

They see lakes with water-birds flying overhead, surrounded by 
kumudas, pundarikas, kokanadas and utpalas; and kalharas and kamalas, 
and crowded on all sides with mandrakes and red geese; ospreys and gulls; 
karandavas and plavas; swans; and cranes and cormorants and other aquatic 
birds. 

Those Naravyaghras, tigers among men, see these lakes adorned with 
endless banks of lotuses, and ringing with the sweet hum of happy bees 
intoxicated on their nectar and reddened with the pollen falling from lotus 
cups. In the groves they see peacocks with their hens, driven mad with 


monsoon lust by the trumpeting of the clouds; and drowsy with desire, 
dancing with tails spread in iridescent glory, and crying in plaintive, 
melodious voices. Some of the peacocks sport with their mates on kutaja 
trees covered by creepers; some sit on the branches, spreading the gorgeous 
fans that make the trees look as if they are wearing jewelled crowns. 

In the glades they see graceful sindhuvaras looking like Kama’s arrows. 
And on the peaks of the mountain they see karnikara trees in bloom, heavy 
with their yellow flowers that look like golden eardrops. And in the forest 
they see flowering kurubakas with their cupid’s-dart blossoms that strike 
feverish desire and restlessness into a man. And they see tilakas that look 
like the sacred mark painted on the forehead of the forest. They see mango 
trees with their lacy blossoms, and humming black bees hovering over 
them, and infusing desire. 

On the mountain slopes are diverse flowering trees, wild bouquets of 
blossoms—some golden, some flame orange, some red, some brown and 
some still blue-green like lapis lazuli. There are rows and rows of sala and 
tamala, patala and bakula trees—garlands adorning the peaks. They see on 
the slopes of the mountain so many lotus-laden lakes, transparent like 
crystal, swans gliding on them, their waters echoing with the cries of 
cranes, and sensuous to the touch. 

Everywhere are delicately fragrant flowers, luscious fruit, romantic 
pools and rivers and captivating trees; and the Pandavas’ eyes widen in 
wonder at the sights they see as they penetrate into the fastness. As they go, 
breezes fan them, perfumed by kamalas and utpalas, and kalharas and 
pundarikas. 

A deeply moved Yudhishtira says in some rapture to Bhima, ‘Ah, 
Bhima, beautiful indeed is this forest of the Gandhamadana. Look at these 
celestial trees and creepers, decked with foliage and fruit; and every tree 
bears flowers. On this Gandhamadana the leaves and fruit of all the trees are 
so bright and glossy. And look! See how these lakes, filled with lotuses 
unfurled and ringing with the hum of black bees, are churned by elephants 
with their mates. Look at that lake ringed by rows of lotuses, like a second 
Sri wearing garlands. Bhima, this is such a forest, rich with the heady scent 
of flowers and the buzzing of black bees. Behold, all around you, the 
playground of the Devas! 

By coming here, we have attained an extra-human condition, and been 
blessed. Son of Pritha, look how exquisitely flowery creepers embrace the 


mighy trees. Listen, Bhima, to the notes of the peacocks calling to their 
hens on the mountain slopes. Watch the birds—chakoras, satapatras, lust- 
maddened kokilas, and parrots—alight gracefully on branches, where, 
among the twigs are myriad jivajivakas of scarlet, yellow and red, looking 
at one another; and the cranes in the green and reddish grass and beside the 
waterfalls. Bhringarajas, upachakras, and herons pour forth their notes to 
charm all creatures. 

And look! With their mates, four-tusked elephants, pale as cream 
lotuses, agitate that lake of the colour of lapis. See how torrents as high as 
several palmyra palms placed one upon another cascade from the cliffs. Ah, 
brilliant silvery minerals, shining like the Sun, and like autumnal clouds, 
adorn this incomparable mountain. In some places, the minerals are as black 
as kohl, in some they are like burnished gold, in others pale yellow, and in 
some vermilion. 

I see caves of red arsenic that look like dark, evening clouds, in some 
places the caves of red chalk are the colour of the hare. There are places 
where the minerals are like white and grey clouds; and in others, they are 
radiant as the rising Sun. 

My brother, it is all exactly as Vrishaparva said: Gandharvas and 
Kimpurushas, with their lovers, are visible on the peaks. And listen, Bhima! 
Hear the songs in myriad ragas and Vedic hymns that all creatures delight 
in. Look at heaven’s river, the sacred and graceful Mahaganga, with swans 
upon her, and visited by Rishis and Kinnaras. O Slayer of your foes, behold 
this mountain with its mines, rivers, forests, beasts, Nagas of different 
shapes and a hundred heads, Kinnaras, Gandharvas and Apsaras.’ 

The valiant Parantapas, who have attained a spiritually elevated state, 
Draupadi and the peerless Brahmanas are enraptured, and cannot have their 
fill of looking at that greatest of mountains. 

Soon they come to the hermitage of the royal sage Arshtisena, and they 
approach the skeletal form of this bare-bodied Rishi of great tapasya.” 


CANTO 158 
YAKSHA YUDDHA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana continued, “On entering the presence of the venerable 

one whose sins have been expiated by his penance, Yudhishtira 
announces himself and joyfully greets the sage, bowing his head in 
reverence. Krishnaa, Bhima and the twins do the same, and they all stand 
around the Rajarishi. The priest of the Pandavas, the virtuous Dhaumya, 
also approaches the sage who, with his all-seeing mind, already knows that 
it is the Pandavas who stand before him. 

This sage of lofty vows invites them to be seated and receives the king 
of the Kurus with due respect. After Yudhishtira enquires about his well- 
being, and the brothers are seated, the Muni says, ‘Do your minds turn 
away from dharma, or are you inclined towards virtue? Kaunteya, has your 
devotion to your parents decreased? Do you honour all your superiors, the 
aged and those who know the Vedas? And, O Son of Pritha, do you lean 
towards sinful deeds? Do you, best of the Kurus, perform spiritually 
beneficial karma and avoid evil? Are you conceited? Do you gratify the 
pious and honour them? And even while living in the forests, did you cling 
to dharma? 

Yudhishtira, does Dhaumya ever grieve at how you treat him? Do you 
follow the customs of your ancestors, in charity and religious rites, in 
asceticism, purity, truthfulness and forgiveness? And do you follow in the 
footsteps of the Rajarishis of old? On the birth of a son in their lineage, the 
Pitrs in their regions, laugh and cry at the same time, thinking Will the sins 


of this son of our house harm us, or will his righteous deeds augment our 
welfare? 

He that pays homage to his father, his mother, his Guru, Agni and, 
fifthly, the Atman, conquers both this world and the next.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Worshipful one, the duties you speak of are 
exemplary and, to the best of my knowledge, I can say that I do discharge 
them properly.’ 

Arshtisena says, ‘During the parvas, full moons, sages subsisting on air 
and water come unto this best of mountains, flying through the sky. And on 
the summit of the mountain one sees amorous Kimpurushas and their 
lovers, entwined, as well as Gandharvas and Apsaras clothed in white silk, 
and Vidyadharas wearing garlands, and mighty Nagas, and Suparnas, and 
Uragas, and other wondrous beings. 

And there on the summits, one hears the sounds of kettle-drums, tabors, 
conch-shells and mridangas. Bhaaratottama, you will hear these from here; 
do not be tempted to climb all the way there. In fact, it is impossible to go 
any further. That place is the playground of the Devas and mortals do not 
have access to it. Bhaarata, there all creatures are hostile to mortals, and 
guardian Rakshasas punish humans that are presumptuous enough to 
venture into that place. Beyond the summit of Kailasa is the path of the 
Devarishis, the celestial sages. If anyone is impudent enough to go beyond 
this, the Rakshasas will kill him with savage weapons. 

There, my child, during the parvas, one can see Vaisravana, who is 
always borne on the shoulders of Yakshas and Guhyakas, in all his pomp 
and grandeur, surrounded by Apsaras. And when that lord of all the 
Rakshasas is seated on the summit, all creatures see him as the rising Sun, 
O Best of Bhaaratas. That peak is the home of the Devas, the Danavas, the 
Siddhas, and of Kubera. During the parvas, full moons, the sweet notes of 
Tumburu, as he entertains Kubera, the lord of treasures, are heard all over 
Gandhamadana. 

Child, Yudhishtira, here, when the moon is full, all creatures see and 
hear marvels such as these. Pandavas, stay here until you meet Arjuna. Eat 
luscious fruits and the food of the Munis. Child, having come here, do not 
show any restlessness. Live here at ease, amusing yourself in any way you 
choose. Eventually, having first conquered it by the strength of your arms, 
you will rule the Earth.’ ” 


CANTO 159 
YAKSHA YUDDHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anamejaya said, “How long did my great-grandfathers live on the 

Gandhamadana mountain? What did those splendid Kshatriyas do? 
What did they eat while they lived there? O excellent Vaisampayana, tell 
me about these things. Describe Bhimasena’s valour and what that 
Mahabaho did upon the Himalaya mountain. Surely, Brahmanottama, he 
did not fight with the Yakshas again. Did my grandfathers meet Vaisravana? 
As Arshtisena said, the lord of wealth must have gone there. Great tapasvin, 
I want to hear all the details, for I have not had my fill, hearing of their 
exploits.” 

Vaisampayana continued, “When the Pandavas hear Arshtisena’s 
peerless advice, they do as he says. They live on Mount Himavan, eating 
the same food that the Munis do—delicious fruit, various kinds of pure 
honey and the flesh of deer killed with venomless arrows. In this way they 
pass the fifth year, listening to sacred legends that Rishi Lomasa narrates. 
Rajan, Ghatotkacha has already left with the other Rakshasas, saying, ‘I 
will return when you need me again.’ 

The princes pass many months in the asrama and see many wondrous 
sights. 

One day, as the Pandavas are amusing themselves, some devout and 
stern ascetics and blessed Charanas of pure souls come to see them. 
Yudhishtira speaks with them of things lofty and spiritual. A few days pass 
in this way, when Garuda suddenly seizes a mighty Naga living in the lake 


in his talons and bears it away. The mountain trembles, and gigantic trees 
snap in the gale raised by Suparna’s awesome wings. The Pandavas and all 
the creatures there witness the wonder that takes place. 

From the crest of that mountain the wind blows in all kinds of fragrant 
and lovely flowers, and the Pandavas and Krishnaa, with their companions, 
see some other-worldly five-coloured blossoms. 

Krishnaa says to Bhima, as he sits relaxed, ‘Best of the Bhaaratas, all 
the creatures on this mountain see these five-hued flowers, carried by the 
wind raised by Suparna, raining into the river Aswaratha. In the Khandava 
vana, your brother Arjuna thwarted Gandharvas and Nagas and Vasava 
himself and killed fierce Rakshasas, and obtained the Gandiva. You, too, 
have unquenchable strength and the might of your arms is as irrepressible 
as Sakra’s. 

O Bhimasena, terrify all the Rakshasas with the might of your arms, so 
that they leave the mountain and flee to the ten cardinal points. Only then 
will we all be free from fear and see the sacred summit of this best of 
mountains, adorned with the flowers of five hues. O Bhima, I have long 
cherished the thought of seeing the summit, protected by the might of your 
arms.’ 

Like a mettlesome bull wounded, Bhima is stung by what she says; he 
cannot bear it. And that Pandava who has the gait of a lion, who is graceful 
and generous, who blazes in golden splendour, who is intelligent and 
strong, proud, sensitive and heroic, who has red eyes and broad shoulders, 
who is gifted with the strength of an elephant in musth, who has leonine 
teeth and a heavy neck, who is tall as a young sala tree, who is honourable, 
who is handsome in every limb, whose neck has whorls like a shell, whose 
arms are inexorable, takes up his bow inlaid with gold and his sword. He 
who has never known fear charges towards the cliff. 

All the mountain creatures see him with his bow and arrows, rushing at 
them like a lion, like a maddened elephant. To Draupadi’s delight, Bhima, 
mace in hand, runs towards that monarch of mountains. Neither exhaustion 
nor fatigue, nor lethargy, nor the ill-will of others affects the son of Pritha 
and Vayu as he goes. 

He arrives at a rugged pass through which only one person can go. By 
this narrow way, the irresistible Bhima climbs to the top of the mountain, as 
high as countless palmyra palms set one on top of the other, and makes 
Kinnaras, Nagas, Munis, Gandharvas and Rakshasas joyful. 


From that summit he sees the home of Vaisravana adorned with gold, 
and other crystal palaces encircled by golden walls inlaid with radiant 
gems. So many gardens surround this place taller than a mountain peak, 
splendid with ramparts and towers, gates and gateways, and row upon row 
of fluttering flags. Graceful maidens dance while the pennants wave in the 
breeze. 

He leans against his bow and he gazes with wonder at the city of 
Kubera Vaisravana, lord of treasures. A fine breeze blows gladness into the 
hearts of all the creatures, wafting sweet perfumes everywhere. Unearthly 
trees of many colours echo with mellifluous birdsong as the Pandava 
surveys the palace of the lord of the Rakshasas, which is scattered with 
piles of gemstones and where many-hued garlands hang in profusion. There 
stands Bhima Mahabaho, his mind empty of mundane thoughts, steadfast as 
a rock, with his mace, sword and bow. 

Then he blows his conch-shell, making the hair on the bodies of his 
enemies stand on end; he twangs his bow-string and slaps his arms with his 
hands, striking terror into the hearts of one and all. Following the direction 
of the tremendous sounds, the hairs on their bodies standing on end, the 
infuriated Yakshas and Rakshasas rush at the Pandava. The maces and 
clubs, swords, spears, javelins and axes in the hands of the Yakshas and 
Rakshasas blaze and, O Bhaarata, the battle between the Rakshasas and 
Bhima erupts. 

Bhima uses his arrows to cut off the darts, javelins and axes hurled at 
him by the Rakshasas, who are great mayavis, illusionists. Bhima pierces 
the bodies of the screaming Rakshasas—those that fly in the sky and the 
ones that stand on the Earth. Blood sprays from the bodies of Rakshasas 
and Yakshas and soaks mighty Bhima. Their limbs and hands are struck 
cleanly off by Bhima’s driving weapons. 

All the creatures there see the regal Pandava surrounded by the 
Rakshasas like the Sun darkened by clouds. And just as the Sun sheds his 
rays over all the Earth, Bhima Mahabaho, of untold prowess, sends his 
arrows in all directions, decimating his enemies. The Rakshasas still roar 
menacingly, but Bhima prevails. The terrified Yakshas, their bodies 
mangled, utter horrible cries and, in sheer dread, fling down their weapons 
and flee southwards, leaving behind maces, spears, swords, clubs and axes. 

Eventually, there is only one warrior left of the Rakshasas—mighty- 
chested, mighty-armed Maniman, friend of Kubera, his weapons in his 


hands. He is majestic as he calls out to the fleeing armies, ‘When you come 
before Vaisravana, what will you say to the lord of wealth, when he asks 
how so many of his warriors were defeated by a single mortal?’ 

And, truly like an angry elephant, he charges the Pandava, attacking 
him with all his weapons. Bhimasena stabs his sides with three arrows, and 
Maniman casts his mace at the human like a thunderbolt. Bhima catches 
that baleful mace and throws it into the sky. It looks like a shield of 
lightning and deflects the searing salvo of arrows with which Maniman 
showers him. The Rakshasa launches an iron club with a golden arrowhead 
at its tip. It spews flames and roars as it pierces Bhima’s arm, felling him. 

Wounded sore, Kunti’s son takes up his own mace, his eyes now rolling 
in his head from rage. Taking up his gold-inlaid mace, which terrorises his 
enemies and crushes them, Bhima flings it surely at Maniman, who cries 
out in pain at being struck. Roaring, Maniman draws a fiery astra and looses 
it at Bhima. But Bhima breaks the shaft with a swing of his mace, and that 
Pandava, best of all mace-fighters, rushes at the Rakshasa, as intent on 
killing him as Garuda swooping down on a snake. 

Then, suddenly, Bhima springs into the sky. He brandishes his mace 
and, with a reverberant shout hurls it down on his enemy. Like a 
thunderbolt cast by Indra, the mace flashes; it strikes the Rakshasa squarely 
on his head, so it bursts apart, and Maniman falls dead. All the others see 
how Bhima kills the Rakshasa, as a lion does a bull. The other Rakshasas 
still left alive see their leader slain and run towards the east crying out in 
fear.” 


CANTO 160 
YAKSHA YUDDHA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Below, Yudhishtira, Madri’s twins, Dhaumya, 

Krishnaa, all the Brahmanas and other friends of the Pandavas hear 
the caves around them echo with awful sounds; they do not see Bhima 
anywhere and are worried. Leaving Draupadi in the charge of Arshtisena, 
the maharathas climb the mountain, carrying their weapons. 

On reaching the summit, they see Bhima and, all around, the great 
Rakshasas whom he has felled lying unconscious. Holding his mace and 
sword and bow, Bhima Mahabaho looks like Indra after he razed the 
Danava hosts. In exultation, the other Pandavas run to embrace Bhima and 
then sit on the mountain-top, making the peak look like swarga graced by 
the Lokapalas. 

Yudhishtira sees the abode of Kubera; he sees the slain Rakshasas on 
the ground, and he says to his brother, ‘Either rashness or ignorance has 
made you commit this sin. Kshatriya, this indiscriminate slaughter is 
uncharacteristic of you, especially since you now lead the life of a sannyasi. 
The wise, who know about dharma, say that one must never do anything to 
provoke the displeasure of a king. But you have, O Bhimasena, you have 
perpetrated a deed that will offend even the gods. The man who turns to sin, 
ignoring artha and dharma, reaps the harvest of his wrongdoing. If you love 
me, never do such a thing again.’ 

Saying this to his brother, the virtuous Yudhishtira, of the ineffable tejas 
and unshakeable resolve, well-versed in every detail of artha, sinks into 


thoughtful reflection. 

In the meanwhile, the Rakshasas who survived Bhima’s assault have 
fled to the abode of Kubera, and these swift beings quickly reach 
Vaisravana’s palace, crying in distress, and trembling still in fear of Bhima. 

Bereft of their weapons, exhausted, their armour streaked with blood 
and hair dishevelled, they say to Kubera, “Lord, all your best Rakshasas 
have been killed, though they fought with maces, clubs and swords, and 
with lances and barbed arrows. O lord of treasures, a mere human scaled the 
mountain, and single-handedly massacred all your Rakshasas of the 
Krodhavasa clan. And, Lord, all the best of your Yakshas and other 
Rakshasas are also dead. Only we few escaped, while even your friend 
Maniman was slain. A mere mortal did all this, O Kubera. Now do what 
you think is right.’ 

The lord of all the Yakshas and Rakshasas hears this and his eyes 
redden. The enraged Kubera says, ‘Yoke my horses!’ 

At once, his attendants yoke the horses adorned with golden ornaments 
to a chariot big as a hill and the colour of dark clouds. Yoked to the chariot, 
his superb steeds, each endowed with every noble quality and the 
auspicious ten curls of hair, of incredible strength and speed, decked with 
various gems and looking splendid, impatient to be off and fly like the 
wind, begin to neigh to each other as if they are already victorious. 

And the king of the Yakshas rides forth, to the singing of his praises by 
Devas and Gandharvas. 

A thousand foremost Yakshas of huge bodies, red eyes and golden 
lustre, gifted with enormous strength, strap on their swords and follow their 
lord Kubera. So swift is the flight of those horses that when they arrive at 
Gandhamadana it appears as if they have hauled the sky back with their 
speed. 

The hair on the bodies of the Pandavas stands on end when they see the 
lord of wealth’s horses and then the graceful and lustrous Kubera 
surrounded by the Yaksha host. 

Kubera sees the sons of Pandu, maharathas armed with bows and 
swords, and he, too, is delighted, eager to fulfil the task at hand. The 
Yakshas, swift as the fastest birds, alight on the summit of the mountain and 
stand before the Pandavas, with their Lord at their head. 

Then, O Bhaarata, because their master is pleased to see the Pandavas, 
the Yakshas and the Gandharvas stand there calmly. Knowing themselves to 


be transgressors, the noble Pandavas bow their heads and stand surrounding 
Kubera with folded hands. 

The lord of treasures sits on the remarkable vimana, the elegant 
Pushpaka, made by Viswakarman and colourfully painted. Thousands of 
Yakshas and Rakshasas—some with gigantic bodies, some with pointed 
ears —hundreds of Gandharvas and hosts of Apsaras sit around him, like the 
Devas surrounding Indra, performer of a hundred sacrifices. 

Kubera wears a golden garland around his neck, and has his paasa—his 
divine noose, his sword and his bow in his hands. Bhima stands gazing at 
the Lokapala and the sight of the god removes all the pain of the wounds 
the Rakshasas inflicted on him. 

He, who is carried on the shoulders of Yakshas, sees Bhima’s naturally 
warlike stance and his battle-ready weapons, and says to Yudhishtira, 
‘Kaunteya, all creatures know you as one who wants their welfare. You may 
live on this summit with your brothers, without any fear. O Pandava, do not 
be angry with Bhima. These Yakshas and Rakshasas were destined to die; 
your brother was merely the instrument of their death. There is no need to 
be ashamed of his impetuousness. The slaying of the Rakshasas was 
foretold by the gods. I am not angry with Bhimasena. In fact, I am rather 
pleased with him, Bhaaratottama. What Bhima did has made me happy!’ 

Now Kubera addresses Bhimasena, ‘Child, best of the Kurus, I do not 
mind what you have done. Since you did it to please Krishnaa and because 
you depended only on your own strength, even though you disregarded the 
Devas and me, as well, when you did this reckless thing, I am pleased with 
you. Vrikodara, today you have freed me from an old curse. The Maharishi 
Agastya once cursed me in anger for an offence of mine; by what you did, 
you have liberated me. Pandava, my disgrace at a mortal’s hands has long 
been destined. No offence attaches to you in any way.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Divine one, why were you cursed by the exalted 
Agastya? I am surprised that you were not consumed in an instant, along 
with your armies and companions, by the Muni’s wrath.’ 

Kubera says, “At Kusavati, O King, once a conclave of the Devas was 
held. I was on my way there with three hundred fierce Mahapadma 
Yakshas, all carrying various weapons, when we came upon that best of 
Rishis, Agastya Muni, engaged in severe tapasya on the banks of the 
Yamuna, where birds sing and trees are full of flowers. We saw him, a mass 
of blinding light, where he sat facing the Sun with his arms upraised. Out of 


foolishness, ignorance and arrogance, my friend, the elegant Rakshasa lord 
Maniman spat on the head of the Maharishi. 

The sage’s anger blazed up as if to consume the Earth, and he said to 
me, “Lord of treasures, your friend has insulted me in your presence. So, 
he, together with your forces, will meet their deaths at the hands of a 
mortal. And, evil one, you will grieve when they die, but shall be absolved 
from this curse when you come face to face with that same mortal. 
However, this curse will not affect the descendants of those of your people 
who are obedient to you.” 

This is how I was cursed by the Maharishi, and now, O great king, your 
brother Bhima has freed me.’ ” 


CANTO 161 
YAKSHA YUDDHA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ ae he lord of treasures says, ‘Yudhishtira, five qualities lead to 
success — patience, ability, awareness of the right time and the 
right place, and resolve. O Bhaarata, in the Krita Yuga, men were steadfast 
and skilled in their respective occupations, and they knew the laws that 
dictated the wielding of power. And, foremost of Kshatriyas, only a king 
who is blessed with patience, who understands the importance of place and 
time, and who is well-acquainted with the laws of dharma, can rule the 
world for any length of time. In any transaction, he who conducts himself 
with dharma acquires fame in this world and a lofty place in the next. By 
having displayed his prowess at the proper place and time, Sakra, with the 
Vasus, gained sovereignty in Swarga. 

He whose vision is clouded by anger and cannot see his coming fall, he 
who is addicted to sin because of his evil nature, and he who does not know 
the appropriateness of the time and place for action will meet with 
destruction both in this world and the next. All the efforts of such a stupid 
man are futile, because he does not know the when and where of his 
actions, and he will not escape doom in this world and the next. 

Evil and deceitful men, who commit rash deeds, aiming to gain mastery 
over everything, are actually committing a sin. Bhimasena is fearless, 
ignorant of his dharma, haughty, immature and impetuous. You must check 
him. 


Return to the asrama of the pious Arshtisena and stay there during the 
dark fortnight, free of anxiety. Lord of men, at my command, all the 
Gandharvas living in Alaka, as well as those living on this mountain, will 
protect you and these good Brahmanas. 

Rajan, upbraid Vrikodara for the rashness that led him here. Now on, O 
King, beings living in the forest will come to you; they will wait upon you 
and always watch over all of you. My servants will procure delicious meats 
and drinks for you. Yudhishtira, my son, just as you were born of a Deva, 
Arjuna was, too, entitling him to the protection of Indra. So, also, is 
Vrikodara protected by Vayu and the powerful twins by the Aswins. In the 
same way, now you are all entitled to my protection. 

Phalguna, next in line to Bhimasena, and versed in artha and dharma, is 
well in Devaloka. Dhanajaya was born with all the perfect attributes that are 
recognised in the world as leading to Swarga. Self-restraint, generosity, 
strength, intelligence, modesty, fortitude and boundless energy are all found 
in this one man of the fathomless soul. Jishnu never commits any 
dishonourable act, even through ignorance. No one can ever say that Partha 
has uttered a lie. 

And now, Bhaarata, honoured by the Devas, the Pitrs and the 
Gandharvas, that enhancer of Kuru glory is learning the Astra Shastra, the 
science of weapons, in Sakra’s abode. Santanu, who ruled so justly over all 
the rulers of the Earth, that boundlessly powerful and wise king, your 
father’s grandfather, dwells in Swargaloka and he is extremely gratified in 
Arjuna, wielder of the Gandiva and the best of his clan. 

Living in Indra’s celestial abode, your grandsire Santanu, emperor of 
the unflinching vratas, who worshipped the Devas, the Pitrs and the 
Brahmanas on the banks of the Yamuna by performing seven Aswamedha 
yagnas, who has attained Swarga, asks after your welfare.’ 

The Pandavas are happy to hear Kubera. Bhima lowers his club and 
mace, his sword and bow, and he bows down low before Kubera. Seeing 
Bhima prostrate before him, the lord of treasures says, “May you be the 
destroyer of the pride of your foes, and the enhancer of the delight of your 
friends. 

Parantapas, live in our beautiful country. The Yakshas will bring you 
everything you need. Arjuna will return soon, after mastering the Astra 
Shastra. Indra Maghavat will bid him farewell and Dhananjaya will join 


’ 


you. 


After speaking to Yudhishtira, the lord of the Guhyakas vanishes from 
the mountain-top. Thousands of Yakshas and Rakshasas follow him in 
chariots spread with decorated cushions and ornamented with jewels. As the 
swift horses fly towards Kubera’s abode, they are like flocks of birds 
coursing across the sky. Indeed, these horses are so swift that it seems as if 
they suck the sky and swallow it as they go. 

At Kubera’s command, the corpses of the slain Rakshasas are removed 
from the summit of the mountain. The curse of Maharishi Agastya has 
ended and, having died in battle, the Rakshasas are freed. The Pandavas 
remain there for many nights, honoured by the liberated Rakshasas.” 


CANTO 162 
YAKSHA YUDDHA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana continued, “O Parantapa, at sunrise Dhaumya finishes 

his daily devotions and comes to the Pandavas with Arshtisena. The 
sons of Pandu touch the feet of Dhaumya and Arshtisena, and pay homage 
to all the Brahmanas. 

Then, facing the east, Dhaumya takes Yudhishtira’s right hand in his 
and says, ‘O Great King, Mandara, the king of mountains, is vast and spans 
the earth right down to the ocean. Indra and Vaisravana protect this place 
graced with airy woods, forests and mountains. My child, the wisest sages, 
who know all about dharma, say that this realm is the abode of Indra and 
Vaisravana. Dvijas versed in varna dharma, Siddhas, Sadhyas and the Devas 
worship the Sun as he rises from here. Righteous Yama, lord of all living 
beings, presides over that southern region where the souls of departed 
beings go. 

And this is Samyamanam, the abode of the lord of departed spirits, 
sacred and wonderful to behold, and crowned with bliss. The all-knowing 
ones have named this monarch of mountains Asta, and Surya arrives here, 
always abiding by the truth. Lord Varuna, dwelling here on this king of 
mountains as well as in the ocean, protects all living beings. 

O blessed one, lighting up the northern point is the mighty mountain 
Mahameru, auspicious and the refuge of those who have attained the 
Brahman. That is where Brahma holds court, and from where Prajapati 
created all moving and immobile things of the Earth. Meru is the blissful 


abode of the seven mind-born sons of Brahma, of whom Daksha is the 
seventh. Child, it is here that the seven divine Rishis, the Saptarishis with 
Vasishta at their head, rise and set. Look at the matchless, radiant summit of 
Meru, where the Pitamaha Brahma sits with the celestials absorbed in the 
bliss of self-knowledge. 

Next to Brahma’s dwelling, you can see the home of Narayana, from 
whom all creation originated, and who has neither beginning nor end. 
Rajan, that holy place is so concentrated with divine energy that even the 
gods cannot look at it. By its very nature the abode of Vishnu Mahatman is 
full of splendour more brilliant than the Sun or Fire, and no one can look at 
it, not even the Devas or the Danavas. This place lies resplendent, to the 
east of the Meru, and it is here that the Lord of all creatures, the self-created 
Creator of the universe, in whom everything is manifested, dwells in a state 
of illumined grace. 

Neither Maharishis nor Brahmarishis have access to this place, only 
Yatis do. Son of Pandu, in his presence here, the bodies of light cannot 
shine, because He alone, who is beyond understanding, shines in supreme 
transcendent lustre. 

Here, by virtue of their tapasya and purified by their piety, the Yatis are 
able to approach Narayana Hari. And, O Bhaarata, once they reach this 
place and attain the eternal God of Gods, Hari the Self-creator, these 
spiritual beings, who are free from ignorance and pride, and who have 
attained perfection through yoga, never return to the mortal world. 

Yudhishtira, this place is without a beginning, it does not decay, nor 
does it end, for it is the very being of Vishnu Narayana. And, O sinless son 
of the Kurus, the Sun and the Moon circumambulate Meru everyday in 
pradakshina, in opposite directions. The other planets and bodies of light 
also travel around this king of mountains. 

The Sun God, who dispels darkness, revolves around Sumeru, 
obscuring other light-giving bodies. The maker of day sets and passes the 
evening, then takes a northerly course. Always mindful of the welfare of all 
beings, he turns eastwards again as he nears Meru. 

In the same way, the divine Moon goes round this mountain, with the 
stars, and accurately divides the month into several cantos, marked by his 
arrival at each parva, each full moon. Unerringly does he circumambulate 
the mighty Meru and, nourishing all creatures, the Moon returns to 
Mandara. 


The divine Surya Deva, the destroyer of darkness, also moves 
unfettered on his path, giving life to the universe. When he takes to the 
south with the intention of causing the rain to fall, winter ensues. And then, 
when he turns back towards the north, his rays draw out the energy from all 
beings, mobile and rooted. He makes men perspire, making them tired, 
lethargic and drowsy. All living things feel drowsy at this time. From here, 
moving through the mysterious sky, the sacred Sun brings rain and revives 
the Earth. Having nourished all beings with soothing showers, warmth and 
winds, majestic Surya begins his course all over again. Kaunteya, with his 
movements, the Sun unerringly turns the Kaalachakra, wheel of time, with 
mastery over all created things. His course is unceasing; he never stops to 
rest, O Pandava. He takes away energy and gives it back again and, dividing 
time into day and night, kaala and kastha, that Lord, the Sun, gives life and 
motion to all creation.’ ” 


CANTO 163 
YAKSHA YUDDHA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana continued, “The noble Pandavas live on this peerless 
mountain, engaging in the most stringent vratas, enchanted by the 
place, and diverting their minds while they wait impatiently to see Arjuna 
again. Many Gandharvas and Maharishis visit these indefatigable ones, of 
the pure hearts, of immense prowess: embodiments of truth and courage. 

Those maharathas are delighted with this wonderful place so full of 
flowering trees, as pleased as the Marutas were when they arrived in 
Swarga. In great joy they live on these blossom-rich, colourful slopes that 
resonate with the cries of peacocks and cranes. 

On this peerless mountain, they see lotus-heavy lakes, their shores thick 
with trees, and haunted at night by karandavas and swans. His luxuriant 
leisure-grounds, glimmering with gems of many kinds, are enchanting 
enough to captivate Lord Kubera himslf, and, roaming at will here, the 
tapasvin Pandavas cannot fathom the awesome significance of the summit, 
with gigantic trees growing under fleeting clouds. 

Here, O Kshatriya, due to its innate magnificence and the brilliance of 
its plants and trees, there is no difference between night and day. The Sun 
does not leave this place; he sheds his rays of immeasurable energy over 
everything, nurturing it all. Because they live on this mountain, where 
Surya Deva always shines to nourish all things, moving and still, those 
Kshatriyas see the Sun rise and set in the same place. The Pandavas are 
inspired by the rising and setting points of the ever-beaming Surya and their 


locations on the mountain, and the way the Sun’s rays fill every little 
crevice as well as the expansive cardinal points, and all that lies between. 

They await their brother, the supreme archer devoted to truth; they chant 
the Vedas, faithfully perform their nitya karma, and fulfil their holy vratas. 

They say, “Let us all be made joyful by our reunion with the mighty 
Arjuna!’ and become absorbed in yoga. Although they are in charmed 
forests, every day seems like a year to them, so intensely do they think of 
him. From the moment when, with Dhaumya’s leave, virtuous Jishnu 
matted his hair and left them to live in the forests, they have known no joy. 
With thoughts of him filling their minds, how could they know happiness 
even in this most blessed place? 

They were overwhelmed by grief from the moment when, at 
Yudhishtira’s command, Jishnu of the gait of an elephant left for the 
Kamyaka vana. O Bhaarata, it is with difficulty that the sons of Pandu pass 
the month on the mountain, thinking constantly of Arjuna Swetavahana, 
who has gone to Vasava’s palace to master the art of weaponry. 

Arjuna has now lived five years in the abode of thousand-eyed Indra, 
and has obtained astras from all the Devas—Agni, Varuna, Soma, Vayu, 
Vishnu, Indra, Pasupati, Brahma, Parameshti, Prajapati, Yama, Dhata, 
Savita, Tvashta, and Vaisravana. He bows to Indra of the hundred sacrifices 
and takes leave of him to come to Gandhamadana.” 


CANTO 164 
NIVATAKAVACHA YUDDHA PARVA 


V aisampayana continued, “One day, as those mighty Kshatriyas are 

thinking of Arjuna, they see Indra’s chariot, yoked to horses as 
bright as lightning, suddenly arrive. Matali drives this vimana that lights up 
the sky like a great flame, like a meteor flashing down through the clouds. 
Wearing heaven’s garlands and sparkling ornaments, Arjuna Kiriti sits in it. 
Dhananjaya, equal in prowess to Indra, alights from the chariot, and blazes 
in beauty. 

Wearing his crown, Arjuna bows down at the feet of Dhaumya and then 
at the feet of Ajatasatru; he touches Vrikodara’s feet in respect, while the 
twins bow to him. He greets Krishnaa, beside herself with joy, and then he 
stands humbly before his elder brother. Great is the delight of the brothers 
on being re-united with the resplendent Arjuna. He, too, rejoices at meeting 
them and praises the king. 

The sons of Pritha walk around that chariot, from which the slayer of 
Namuchi annihilated seven divisions of Diti’s progeny, in pradakshina, and 
honour Matali as if he is Indra himself. Yudhishtira enquires about the well- 
being of all the Devas; Matali greets him and, having spoken words of 
advice to them, as a father to sons, he climbs back into the supreme vimana 
and flies back to the Lord of the Devas. 

After Matali has left, Indra’s son, first among all Kshatriyas, the noble 
destroyer of all foes, gives Krishnaa, the mother of Sutasoma, unearthly 
precious gems and jewellery, that Indra has sent, and which dazzle like the 


Sun. Then, sitting in the midst of those best of Kurus and Brahmanas, he 
recounts all that has happened, and he is as bright as Fire or the Sun. 

He says, ‘I acquired astras from Sakra, Vayu, and Siva himself; and all 
the Devas were pleased with my humility and concentration.’ He tells them 
of his stay in Devaloka, and that night Kiriti of the unblemished deeds 
sleeps contentedly with the sons of Madri.” 


CANTO 165 


NIVATAKAVACHA YUDDHA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “When day breaks, Dhananjaya and his brothers 

pay homage to Yudhishtira Dharmaraja. As they do, O Bhaarata, 
they hear resonant music from the sky, the rumbling of chariot-wheels and 
the ringing of bells. All the wild beasts and birds echo a chorus in their own 
voices. Hosts of Gandharvas and Apsaras appear in their vimanas from all 
around and follow Indra, king of the Devas, in procession. That Lord of all 
celestials, Purandara, flies down in his chariot decorated with gold and 
yoked to incandescent horses, landing near the sons of Pritha. He of the 
thousand eyes descends from his vimana, and as soon as Yudhishtira sees 
the exalted one, with his brothers he comes before the king of the 
immortals. 

Magnanimous Yudhishtira worships Indra of the immeasurable soul 
with ceremony that befits his pre-eminence. Then mighty Arjuna bows to 
Purandara and stands humbly before him, like a servant. Seeing the pure 
Dhananjaya of lofty punya, with his matted hair, stand in humility before 
the Lord of gods, Yudhishtira of fearsome tejas sniffs the top of his 
brother’s head in affection. He is overjoyed to see Phalguna like this, and 
feels utterly glad as he worships Indra. 

The Lord of the Devas says to Yudhishtira, “You shall rule the earth, O 
Pandava; I bless you with prosperity. Return to Kamyaka Vana, O son of 


Kunti. The learned man who leads a life of brahmacharya for a year, with 
his senses under control and observing vratas, and keeping in mind this 
meeting with me, will live in unalloyed happiness for a hundred years, with 
no anxieties.’ ” 


CANTO 166 


NIVATAKAVACHA YUDDHA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


V aisampayana continued, “When Sakra has gone back to his own 

dominion, Bibhatsu, with his brothers and Krishnaa, pays obeisance 
to Yudhishtira, son of Dharma Deva, who lovingly sniffs the top of Arjuna’s 
head. 

Yudhishtira’s voice chokes with emotion as he says to Arjuna, ‘Oh, how 
did you spend your time in Indraloka? How did you acquire the weapons, 
and what did you do to please the Lord of the Devas? Pandava, have you 
now gained a thorough knowledge of the astras? Did Indra and Rudra give 
them to you gladly? 

How did you see the divine Siva, the Pinakin? How did you get the 
Devastras? How did you worship them? What service did you perform for 
that worshipful one of a hundred sacrifices, that he said to you, You have 
gratified me? 

O radiant one, I want to hear about all this, as well as how you pleased 
Mahadeva and Indra. Tell me, also, about the service you rendered to the 
wielder of the thunderbolt. Dhananjaya, tell me everything.’ 

Arjuna says, ‘Mighty king, listen to how I saw him of a hundred 
sacrifices and the divine Sankara too. O Parantapa, I acquired the Astra 
Shastra that you instructed me to learn when I went into the forest to 


perform tapasya. From Kamyaka I went to the Bhrigutunga and spent one 
night there. 

While I sat in dhyana the next day, I saw a Brahmana, who asked me, 
“Son of Kunti, where will you go?” I told him everything that had happened 
and he was pleased with me. He praised me and said, “Bhaarata, perform 
your tapasya, and soon you will see the king of the Devas.” 

I climbed to the top of Mount Saisiram in the Himalaya, where I began 
my austerities. For the first month I ate fruit and roots; the second month, I 
took only water; during the third, I fasted; and the fourth month, I stood 
with upraised arms. I am amazed that I did not lose any strength. 

Rajan, at the end of the first day of the fifth month, there appeared 
before me a being in the form of a boar, digging the earth with his tusks, 
stamping his feet and rubbing his belly on the ground, and running here and 
there in a frightful way. Following him came a hunter, a Vetala with bow 
and arrows and a sword, and he was surrounded by dark and beautiful 
women, and the one at his side was especially so. 

I took up my bow and my two inexhaustible quivers; and I shot that 
terrible boar. Simultaneously, that hunter raised his bow and struck the beast 
even more forcefully, making my heart tremble. 

Rajan, he said to me, “Why have you broken the laws of hunting by 
shooting a beast that was my quarry? I will crush your pride with my 
arrows.” 

That great black Vetala rushed at me with his bow stretched. He covered 
me completely with his arrows, even as a cloud does a mountain with rain; 
and I enveloped him with a shower of my own shafts. I recited mantras and 
shot flame-tipped barbs, piercing him as Indra would cleave a mountain 
with his Vajra. 

The Vetala multiplied his body a hundred times, and a thousand times, 
but I pierced them all with arrows. Then, again, all those forms merged into 
one, O Bhaarata, and at once, I struck it. He began changing shapes—now, 
a small body with a huge head, and now a huge body with a small head. 
Finally, he took his original form and came at me ready to fight. 

Invoking the potent Vayavyastra, weapon of the Wind God, I affixed it 
to my bowstring. Amazingly, even this weapon had no effect on him. With 
more vigour, I covered that hunter with a profusion of mighty astras. I 
inundated him with the weapons of Sthunakarna, Varuna, Salabha and 
Asmavarsha. But, Rajan, he swallowed them all. 


When all those had been consumed, I loosed the Brahmastra at him. 
Arrows of light and flames piled over him, he began to expand. The world 
was in the grip of that weapon and all the points of the compass were lit up 
by its brilliance; but that hunter frustrated even the Brahmastra. O Rajan, 
when Brahma’s weapon was quelled, I became afraid. 

I took up my bow and my two inexhaustible quivers and shot at him 
again, but he devoured all those arrows as well. And when he had subdued 
all my weapons, he and I wrestled. We fought with blows, but I could not 
defeat him and fell bewildered and senseless on the ground. 

That wonderful Vetala laughed delightedly and vanished before my 
eyes, together with the woman; and my Gandiva and two quivers also 
disappeared. 

Now, that godlike hunter assumed another form, unearthly and wearing 
shining raiment. He renounced the form of a hunter, that Devadeva, and 
took his own divine Form, and that God stood there, with his Goddess 
beside him. The Divine One— whose emblem is the Bull, who wields the 
Pinaka, who wears coiled serpents for his ornaments, and who can assume 
any form—appeared before me with Uma. Parantapa, he came towards me 
while I was preparing to fight on, and the bearer of the trident, Trisulin, 
said, “I am so pleased with you!” 

The Divine One held up my bow and my pair of ever-filled quivers and 
returned them to me, saying, “Ask for a boon, O son of Kunti. I am 
delighted with you. Tell me, what shall I do for you? Kshatriya, tell me your 
wish and I will grant it. Other than immortality, I can give you anything 
your heart desires.” 

I was intent on having the astras, so, I bowed down to Siva and said, “O 
Divine One, if you are pleased with me, grant me this—I wish to acquire 
mastery of all the weapons that the gods command, the Devastras.” 

Lord Tryambaka of the three eyes said, “So it shall be. Pandava, my 
own weapon, Raudra, will always await your call.” Now Mahadeva gave 
me the greatest of all astras, his own Pasupata, and having bestowed it, said, 
“This must never be used against mortals, for if it is loosed at one of small 
strength it will consume the very universe. It should be used only in a 
desperate predicament, when all your other weapons have failed you. Only 
then may you use my Pasupatastra.” 

When he that uses the insignia of the Bull had been gratified, there 
appeared at my side the Devastra of the irresistible power, which can 


consume all other weapons, kill any truly mighty enemy and raze hostile 
armies; it is without equal, and even the Devas, Danavas and Rakshasas 
cannot withstand it. 

At Siva’s command, I sat down there and, even as I gazed at him, in 
adoration, the God vanished.’ ” 


CANTO 167 


NIVATAKAVACHA YUDDHA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


-< A rjuna says, ‘Bhaarata, by the grace of Devadeva, God of gods, 

the Paramatman Siva, I spent the night in that place; and when 

day broke and I had finished my morning rituals, I saw the Brahmana whom 

I had seen before. I told him everything that had happened, about my 
meeting with Mahadeva. 

This pleased him, and he said, “Since you have seen the great God, 
which no one else can do, you will soon meet Vaivaswata and the other 
Lokapalas, and the Lord of the Devas, too; and Indra will also grant you 
astras.” 

He said this, O King, he embraced me again and again, and that radiant 
Brahmana went away. Parantapa, that evening, a pure breeze began to blow 
and seemed to renew the Earth. Near where I was, at the foothills of the 
Himalaya, all at once fragrant, lovely flowers began to bloom. All around 
me I could hear an enchanting chorus of hymns being sung in praise of 
Indra. Hosts of Apsaras and Gandharvas sang to that Lord of celestial hosts. 
The Maruts and the followers of Mahendra, and other Swargavasis, heaven- 
dwellers, came in their divine vimanas. 

Soon after, Indra Marutvan, accompanied by Sachi and all the 
immortals appeared in chariots yoked with elegantly caparisoned horses. 


He that is carried on the shoulders of men manifested himself in front of 
me.I saw Yama seated in the south and Varuna and the Lord of the Devas in 
their respective places. 

They greeted me and said, “Savyasachi, look at us seated here. You 
have been granted this vision of the Lokapalas so that you can perform a 
task for us. Now receive our astras.” 

Lord, I bowed to those foremost of the Devas in reverence and took 
those divine weapons, upon which they accepted me as one of them. Then, 
the gods went back to the place from which they had come. 

The Lord of the immortals, the divine Maghavat, ascended his glorious 
chariot and left, saying, “Phalguna, you must visit Devaloka. Even before 
your arrival I knew that you would come here. I manifested myself to you, 
O best of the Bhaaratas; and because you have purified yourself with 
ablutions in many holy tirthas and strengthened yourself with unflinching 
austerities, you will gain admittance to Devaloka. You will have to practise 
severe penance again, for you will have to stay there for a time as a mortal. 
I have told Matali to bring you to our world. All the Devas and great Rishis 
have already granted you recognition.” 

I said, “Divine one, look kindly on me. I wish to learn the Astra Shastra, 
and beseech you to be my Guru.” 

Indra replied, “My child, you will achieve terrible feats with the Astra 
Shastra, but I will fulfil your desire to acquire this knowledge.” 

To this I said, “O Lord, I will never use the Devastras against mortals 
except when all my other weapons have been repulsed. Therefore, King of 
gods, grant me the Devastras so that I may attain the realms reserved for 
Kshatriyas.” 

Indra said, ““Dhananjaya, it is to test you that I said these words to you. 
You are my son, and your reply becomes you. Go now, Bhaarata, to my 
abode and learn all the weapons of Vayu, Agni, the Vasus, Varuna, the 
Maruts, the Siddhas, Brahma, the Gandharvas, the Uragas, the Rakshasas, 
Vishnu and the Nairitras. Learn to use all the astras that are mine, as well, O 
perpetuator of the house of Kuru.” 

Saying this, Sakra vanished from where he had stood. Then, Rajan, I 
saw the fabled and sacred chariot of heaven arrive, drawn by unearthly 
horses and driven by Matali. 

When the Lokapalas had gone, Matali said to me. “O splendid one, the 
king of the Devas wants to see you. Mighty-armed, achieve supreme 


competence before you perform your task. Come and see the realms that 
can only be attained through dharma; enter heaven in your human body. 
Bhaarata, the thousand-eyed Lord of the celestials wishes to see you.” 

I took my leave of the Himalaya by walking around the mountain in 
pradakshina and climbed into the magnificent chariot. The generous Matali, 
expert sarathy, drove these steeds gifted with the speed of thought or the 
wind. 

When the chariot began to move he saw that I sat steadily and, looking 
at me in wonder, said, “I find it wonderfully strange that, although seated in 
this divine vimana, you have not stirred even a little. Bhaaratottama, I have 
seen that, at the first pull of my horses, the Lord of the Devas sways where 
he sits. But you have sat unshaken all the while. In this, you are greater than 
Sakra himself.” 

Matali soared into the sky and showed me the realms of the Devas and 
their palaces. The horse-driven chariot flew up, and the celestials and the 
sages of heaven worshipped it. Manavottama, I saw whole worlds moving 
anywhere at will; I saw the grandeur of the tejasvins—the Gandharvas, 
Apsaras and the Devarishis. Sakra’s sarathy Matali showed me the Nandana 
and other magical gardens and groves of the gods. 

Then, I beheld Indra’s city, Amaravati, adorned with jewels and shining 
kalpa-vrikshas, trees that bear any sort of fruit that one desires. There the 
Sun is not hot; no one is affected by heat, cold or fatigue, Rajan. The gods 
feel neither sorrow nor dispiritedness, nor weakness, nor apathy, Parantapa. 
Those who live in that place have neither anger nor greed; all are perfectly 
contented. 

There, the leaves on the trees are always green, the branches laden with 
flowers and fruit; the fragrance of lotuses pervades the numerous lakes. 
There the breeze is cool and delicious, fragrant and pure, and invigorating. 
The ground is strewn with all kinds of jewels and with divine blossoms. 
There countless exotic beasts and birds live, none of our world. 

I saw the Vasus, the Rudras, the Sadhyas with the Maruts, the Adityas 
and the two Aswins, and I worshipped them. And they gave me their 
blessings, granting me strength and prowess, energy and fame, skill at arms 
and victory in battle. 

Then, I entered that fabled city, so loved by Gandharvas and Devas, and 
with joined hands I stood before the thousand-eyed Lord of the gods. Sakra, 


ever generous, offered me half his throne; and Vasava put his hand on me in 
affection. 

Thus, Bhaarata, with the intention of acquiring astras and learning to 
master them, I began to live in Indraloka, in the company of Devas and 
Gandharvas of bountiful souls. Viswavasa’s son Chitrasena became my 
friend, and he imparted the entire body of Gandharva gyana to me. I lived 
happily in Sakra’s home, well cared for, having all my desires gratified, 
learning about the astras, listening to divine songs and music, and watching 
the most alluring Apsaras dance. 

Without neglecting to study the arts, which I did carefully, I devoted my 
attention to the acquisition of arms. And that Lord of a thousand eyes was 
pleased with my sense of purpose. Living in Devaloka, O king, thus did I 
pass my time. 

When I had mastered the Devastras and gained the confidence of Indra, 
whose mount is Uchchaisravas, one day he said, “Now even the gods 
themselves cannot conquer you, let alone the mortals of the Earth. You have 
become irrepressible in strength and invincible in battle.” 

The hair on my body stood on end as Indra continued, “O Kshatriya, 
you have no equal in battle. You are ever-vigilant, dexterous, truthful, and 
have your senses under perfect control. You are the protector of Brahmanas; 
you are a master of weapons, and warlike. Partha, you have obtained the 
fifteen great Devastras, as well as the five ways of using them. You now 
stand alone and without any peer. You have perfected the skill of releasing 
these weapons and their withdrawal. 

You have perfected the Prayaschitta, the revival of harmless beings 
killed by these weapons, and also how to revive the astras themselves if 
they are rendered ineffective. Now, Parantapa, the time has come for paying 
the Gurudakshina. Promise to pay it and I will tell you what you have to 
do.” 

Rajan, I said to the king of the Devas, “If it is in my power to do what 
you ask, consider it already done.” 

At my words, Indra smiled and said, “There is nothing in the three 
worlds that is beyond your power. My enemies, the Danavas called the 
Nivatakavachas, live in the depths of the ocean. There are thirty million of 
them; they are dishonourable, all identical to look at and equally strong and 
splendid. Destroy them there, Kaunteya, and that will be your Gurudakshina 
to me.” 


Saying this, he gave me his resplendent vimana, with Matali driving it, 
and cushioned with down as soft and lustrous as peacock-feathers. He set 
this exquisite kirita, this crown, on my head and gave me glittering 
ornaments like his own for my body. He gifted me an impenetrable armour 
—the best of its kind and comfortable to wear. Then, he strung the Gandiva 
with this everlasting bowstring. 

I set out in that marvellous chariot from which, in days gone by, the 
king of the Devas defeated Bali, the son of Virochana. O ruler of men, 
startled by the rumbling of the ratha, all the celestial ones came out, 
thinking that I was the Deva king. Seeing me, they asked, “O Phalguna, 
what are you going to do?” 

I told them everything, adding, “I will go into battle. Auspicious ones, I 
am going forth to kill the Nivatakavachas. Give me your blessings.” 

They began to praise me in the same way that they eulogised Purandara. 
They said, “Riding this chariot, Maghavat conquered in battle Sambara, and 
Namuchi, and Bala, and Vritra, and Prahlada, and Naraka. From this 
vimana, Maghavat has vanquished thousands of millions of Daityas. O 
Kaunteya, riding in this chariot even as Indra did long ago, you, too, shall 
conquer the Nivatakavachas in battle. 

Here is the best of all conches; Sakra used it to conquer the worlds, and 
blowing on it you will also triumph.” 

Saying this, the gods offered me this shell, the Devadatta, born in the 
deep; and I took it for the sake of victory. The gods began to extol me then, 
and impatient for battle, armed with my conch, my armour, my bow and 
arrows, I flew towards the sinister home of the demonic Nivatakavachas.’ ” 


CANTO 168 


NIVATAKAVACHA YUDDHA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


=s A rjuna continues, ‘I passed all the places that the Maharishis had 

spoken highly of and, at last, saw the ocean of Devaloka—the 
inexhaustible Lord of waters. I saw upon it swelling waves that looked like 
mountains of water, crashing against each other and then rolling away. I 
saw thousands of ships filled with gemstones. I saw those great, fabulous 
fish, timingilas, and tortoises that looked like submerged stone hills. And 
everywhere in the water were thousands of shells, like stars in a lightly 
clouded night sky. Thousands upon thousands of jewels floated in clusters 
and a violent wind whirled them about. O, this was rare and wonderful to 
see. 

As I looked upon the marvellous ocean of the mighty tides, I saw the 
city of the Danavas, not too far away. Matali, expert sarathy, guided the 
chariot, and it submerged, and all its embellishments smoothly slid under 
water. But he sat firmly in his seat and drove the craft with force, 
frightening all who heard its rumble. 

The Danavas heard that sound like clouds rumbling in the sky, and, 
thinking I was the Lord of the gods, were panic-stricken. They all stood 
with their bows and arrows, javelins and axes, maces and clubs, terrified. 
Quickly making arrangements for the defence of their city, the alarmed 
Danavas clanged shut the gates, hiding everything inside. 


I took up my conch, Devadatta of the deafening roars, and blew 
gleefully on it many times. That sound filled the sky and rang everywhere. 
Even the mightiest beings were terrified and hid. And then, O Bhaarata, all 
the Daityas, the children of Diti, the Nivatakavachas shining with 
ornaments, appeared in their thousands, wearing all kinds of armour, with 
myriad weapons in their hands. 

They had iron javelins, maces and clubs, hatchets, sabres and discs, 
sataghnis and bhusundis, and colourfully streaked and bejewelled swords. 
After thinking a moment about which way to go, Matali steered the vimana 
on to level ground. 

O best of the Bhaaratas, the horses were so swift that everything we 
passed went by in a blur; I could see nothing, and I found this strange. Then 
the Danavas began to play thousands of oddly-shaped musical instruments, 
making a discordant, nerve-wracking cacophony. At the awful noise, 
thousands of enormous fish, that were like hills, streaked away. The 
stupendous force of demons flew at me, loosing hundreds of thousands of 
arrows. 

O Bhaarata, a savage battle followed between the Danavas and me; I 
was ready to annihilate the Nivatakavachas. Devarishis, Danavarishis, 
Brahmarishis and Siddhas came to witness the contention. Eager for my 
victory, the Munis praised me with the same sweet speeches they had used 
for Indra in the war of old fought over Tara.’ ” 


CANTO 169 


NIVATAKAVACHA YUDDHA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


66 A rjuna continues, “Bhaarata, the Nivatakavachas, armed to their 
teeth, rushed ferociously at me. They blocked the path of the 
chariot and, roaring loudly, surrounded the chariot and covered me with 
their arrows. Other demons flung darts and hatchets, spears and axes at me. 
My chariot was enveloped in a blizzard of arrows, maces and clubs. Some 
truly dreadful-looking Nivatakavachas, armed with bows and heavy arrows, 
ran at me. I shot ten swift, sure shafts from my Gandiva into each of them, 
driving them back with those stone-sharpened darts. 

My horses, in the skilful hands of Matali, moved like the wind, with 
incredible agility and speed, trampling the sons of Danu and Diti 
everywhere. Although thousands of horses were yoked to my ratha, 
Matali’s masterly chariotry made it seem they were only a few, so smoothly 
did our chariot fly. Hundreds of Danavas fell dead by being trampled under 
the horses’ hooves, by being run over by the chariot wheels, and by my 
blistering arrows. There were others who, though dead, lay in their chariots 
with their weapons still strapped on; and their charioteers slain, the horses 
dragged the chariots chaotically here and there. 

Now the greatest Danava warriors came to fight, using sorcerous 
weapons to cover all sides and directions, and I was hard-pressed. I saw 
Matali’s incredible prowess then, as he steered his fiery steeds, breaking 


through the net of demon arrows with such ease. Heartened, I killed 
hundreds of thousands of Danavas with my astras. Parantapa, seeing me 
range the field and putting forth all my prowess, Sakra’s charioteer was 
pleased. 

Some Nivatakavachas were crushed to death by the horses and chariot, 
some gave up the fight, but others battled on, shooting storms of arrows. I 
began to kill them with the hundreds of thousands of weapons I could 
command with mantras of the Brahmastra. Harried by me, enraged, those 
Asuras attacked me with a torrent of clubs, arrows and swords. 

Then, Bhaarata, I invoked Indra’s favourite weapon, supreme astra of 
breathtaking urjas, and loosed it at the attacking Tomara horde, and 
desiccated the swords and tridents they hurled. When I had destroyed their 
weapons, I pierced each of them with ten arrows. 

Arrows flew from the Gandiva like rows of black bees; and Matali was 
jubilant. The Danavas showered me with dark shafts, but I deflected them. 
The Nivatakavachas smothered me in a fog of arrows, and I contained them 
again with superior astras, swift and fiery, which could baffle other astras; 
and I killed thousands of demons more. Blood flowed from their torn 
bodies, like a monsoon waterfall down a mountain slope. My arrows struck 
them like Indra’s thunderbolt, and inflamed them. Their wounds bled 
copiously; the power of their weapons was diminished; and _ the 
Nivatakavachas began to use maya to fight me.’ ” 


CANTO 170 


NIVATAKAVACHA YUDDHA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


=s A rjuna says, ‘A sudden shower of rocks big as trees rained down 

on me, but I blasted those boulders with a volley from 

Mahendra’s weapon, almost equal to his Vajra. When the rocks had been 
powdered, a fire sprang up, and the dust fell like sparks. 

A cataract of water now fell, each stream of it as thick as an axle-rod; its 
massive torrents filled the sky in all the directions. Confusion gripped me at 
the downpour and the howling of the wind and the roaring of the Daityas. 
The water fell without pause, filling all the space between earth and sky, 
and for a moment I stood rooted. 

Recovering quickly, I discharged another Devastra I had received from 
Indra, the Visoshana of fire, and all the water was instantly vapourised. O 
Bhaarata, when the rocks had been pulverised and the water dried up, the 
Danavas created illusions of fire and wind. I used a weapon of water to put 
out the flames, and one that made a wall of stone to shield me from the 
wind. 

Now the Nivatakavachas besieged me with a myriad weapons, of stone, 
water, fire and wind all together. All around, a thick, gloomy darkness 
spread and, enveloped in that black night of the world, our horses reared, 
whinnying in terror; Matali fell from his place, and the golden horsewhip 
from his hands. 


He cried, “Where are you? Where are you?” and dread gripped me as 
well to see him panic. 

Then, he said to me, “Partha, the Devas and Danavas once fought a 
mighty war over the amrita, and I witnessed that battle. Again, when 
Sambara was killed, there was a dreadful war; then, too, I was charioteer to 
the king of the Devas. I was Indra’s sarathy when Vritrasura was killed. I 
also saw the savage encounters with Virochana’s son Bali, Prahlada and the 
rest. Oh, I saw all those fearful battles, Pandava, but never before did I lose 
my senses. Pitamaha Brahma must have ordained the destruction of the 
universe, for I can see no other purpose for this battle of battles.” 

When I heard Matali, I made a great effort to calm myself and thought 
of how I would dispel the illusions that beset us. I said to the frightened 
charioteer, “Look at the strength of my arms, the power of my astras and of 
my Gandiva. I will use magical weapons to dispel this turgid darkness and 
the other sorceries of the Danavas. Fear not, sarathy; calm yourself.” 

Fighting for the Devas, I made an illusion that could stupefy all beings. 
This dispelled the Danavas’ maya, but some of their most powerful demons 
attacked me with fresh spells, of different kinds. The world seemed to 
disappear and appear in flashes; it seemed to be swallowed by darkness, or 
submerged in water. When the world became visible again, Matali sat in his 
seat in the chariot with the reins of the horses in his hand, and he began to 
range across the field, like lightning, making everyone’s hair stand on end. 
The ferocious Nivatakavachas still assailed me but, seizing every 
opportunity I found, I sent them, one by one, to Yamaloka. 

In the midst of the battle that raged, suddenly the Danavas vanished, 
cloaked in maya.’ ” 


CANTO 171 


NIVATAKAVACHA YUDDHA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


=< A rjuna continues, ‘Now the Daityas fought unseen, their weapons 

unseen, while I battled on with weapons in plain sight. Wherever 

I sensed they were, I sloughed off Asura heads with arrows from the 
Gandiva. The Nivatakavachas withdrew their maya, and fled into their city. 

When the Daityas fled and the world was visible again, I saw that the 
dead numbered many hundreds of thousands. Near the slain demons lay 
their splintered weapons, ornaments, armour and severed limbs. The field 
was so crowded with bodies that our horses could not move freely, and they 
took to the sky. 

Some Nivatakavachas were still hidden from view, and these filled the 
sky with rock masses. Bhaarata, other Danavas burrowed underground and 
seized our horses’ legs and chariot-wheels. From above and below, they 
cast down a barrage of rocks on the horses and attacked me and my chariot. 
The rocks that lay around us and those that continued to fall hemmed me in 
as if sealing me into a mountain cave. 

Matali saw me oppressed by the rocks that fell and his horses being 
crushed under their weight. He saw that I was afraid and said, “Arjuna, do 
not be frightened. Loose the Vajra, Purushottama.” 

I invoked Indra’s favourite weapon, the inexorable thousand-jointed 
thunderbolt. Saying its mantra over the Gandiva, I aimed at the battery of 


falling crags and loosed iron arrows that bore the Vajra. As they issued from 
that astra, the iron shafts turned into individual thunderbolts. They pierced 
the demons’ sorcery and struck the Nivatakavachas. From the sky, Danavas 
big as cliffs fell to the earth, cloven by the fervid power of the Vajra. The 
thunderbolts blasted the Danavas who had dragged our horses into the 
entrails of the earth, and despatched them to Yama. 

All that place was covered with the mountainous bodies of 
Nivatakavachas—the dead, the wounded and the unconscious lay there like 
scattered crags. 

Strangely, neither I, nor the horses and chariot, nor Matali were in the 
least injured. Matali smiled and said, “Not even in the Devas, Arjuna, have 
I seen prowess such as yours.” 

When the demon hosts had been destroyed, their women began to wail 
in their city, like cranes in autumn. Matali and I entered that city, terrifying 
the Nivatakavacha wives with the rumble of our chariot. The women fled in 
crowds when they saw our ten thousand horses, lustrous as peacocks, and 
the dazzling chariot, bright as the Sun. The women’s ornaments, falling as 
they ran, made a sound like that of rocks tumbling down a mountain. The 
panic-stricken wives of the Daityas fled into their golden palaces that were 
adorned with countless jewels. 

Seeing that incomparable city, even grander than the city of the gods, I 
asked Matali, “Why do the Devas not live in a place like this? This city 
seems to be superior to Purandara’s Amaravati.” 

Matali replied, “In days gone by, O Partha, this was the city of our Lord 
of the Devas. Later, the gods were driven from here by the Nivatakavachas. 
The Nivatakavachas performed the most stringent tapasya and, when they 
had pleased Brahma, they asked him for a boon—that they might live here, 
invincible to the Devas. 

Then Sakra addressed Brahma saying, O Lord, do what you consider 
proper, but keep our welfare in mind. Then, O Bhaarata, the Lord 
commanded Indra, saying, O slayer of foes, using another body, you will 
become the nemesis of the Danavas. It was to make this possible that Sakra 
gave you all the astras. The gods could not themselves slay the demons that 
you have today. The time had come for you to kill them, and you have done 
so. Foremost of men, Mahendra gave you these supremely potent Devastras 
so that you could annihilate the Nivatakavachas.” 


After killing the Danavas and subduing their city, I returned to 
Amaravati with Matali.’ ” 


CANTO 172 


NIVATAKAVACHA YUDDHA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


-s A rjuna says, ‘On my way back, I saw an unearthly city, moving at 
will, radiant like Fire, or the Sun. In this city were trees made of 
gems, and sweet-voiced birds of many colours. It had four gates, many 
gateways and towers, and in that impregnable city lived Paulomas and 
Kalakanjas. It was exquisitely wrought from all manner of jewels, and was 
ethereal and wonderful to look at. The trees of jewels bore flowers and fruit; 
extraordinary celestial birds sang from their branches. Blithe Asuras 
wandered its streets and gardens, wearing garlands and carrying double- 
edged swords, bows, arrows, maces and clubs. 

Rajan, on seeing that city of Daityas, I asked Matali, “What is this place 
that looks so marvellous?” 

Matali replied, “Once, long ago, a Daitya’s daughter named Puloma, 
and Kalaka, a mighty female of the Asura race, preformed tapasya for a 
thousand celestial years. At the end of their penance, Brahma, the self- 
created one, conferred boons on them—that their children would never 
suffer misfortune; that they cannot be slain, even by the Devas, the 
Rakshasas and the Pannagas; and that they be given a radiant and 
incomparable aerial city, furnished with all kinds of gemstones, and 
impregnable by the Devas, the Maharishis, the Yakshas, the Gandharvas, 
the Pannagas, the Asuras and the Rakshasas. 


Bhaaratottama, this is that flying city, devoid of Devas, which was 
created by Brahma himself for the descendants of Kalaka—the Kalakeyas. 

The city has everything one could ever want, and no illness or grief 
enters here. It is filled with all things desirable, and disease and suffering 
are unknown. This celebrated city is called Hiranyapura, peopled by the 
Paulomas and the Kalakanjas, guarded by those mighty Asuras. And, O 
King, since they cannot be killed by the Devas, they live happily, free from 
anxiety and having all their desires fulfilled. 

But Brahma has ordained their destruction by a mortal. O Partha, it is 
you who must use the Vajra and destroy the very race of Kalakanjas.” 

O lord of men, having found out that they could not be touched by the 
Devas and the Asuras, I cheerfully said to Matali, “Fly into that city. I will 
obliterate them that hate the king of the gods. I consider it my dharma to 
kill any enemy of the Devas.” 

Matali took me near Hiranyapura in the heavenly horse-driven chariot. 
Seeing me, those sons of Diti, wearing diverse kinds of clothes, ornaments 
and armour, charged at me in their chariots. They attacked me with arrows, 
clubs and double-edged swords, with prowess that defies description. 

Rajan, using my knowledge of the Astra Shastra, I resisted the great 
volley of weapons with a wild shower of arrows, and all the Danavas, 
attacking me from every side, were bemused. Confounded, they began to 
attack one another. I struck off hundreds of heads with flaming arrows. 

The sons of Diti fled into their city and, with their magical powers, flew 
high into the sky. I barred their way with a vast web of arrows. However, 
the Danavas stood firm in their city, which flew wherever they willed, 
radiant as the Sun. The city plunged down to Earth; it took off again; it flew 
in an arc; it went underwater. 

Parantapa, I never paused my attack on that incredible city that was like 
Amaravati to behold. I stormed Hiranyapura, and all the Daityas in it, with 
legion Devastras. Broken by my volleys, the city of the Asuras fell to the 
earth. Grievously wounded by my weapons of the speed and the sound of 
thunder, demons wandered about in a daze, without will of their own, as if 
moved only by destiny. 

Matali flew our chariot of solar effulgence into the sky, and then down 
to land on earth. O Bhaarata, surrounding me were sixty thousand war 
chariots, with enraged Daityas in them, eager for battle with me, but I killed 
them all with vulture-feathered arrows. Confident that a mortal could hardly 


vanquish them, their attack swelled in a surging tide. I loosed the Devastras, 
one by one. But those Maharathas restrained each one, and on the field I 
saw hundreds and thousands of mighty demons moving about in their 
chariots in diverse manoeuvres. They were splendid with the sheer variety 
of their armour, their ornaments and their flags; they were a delight to the 
eyes. 

Set upon by the innumerable warriors, heavily armed and skilled in 
battle, I was overwhelmed and fear gripped me. I invoked Rudra, the 
supreme God and, saying, May welfare attend on all beings, I chanted the 
mantra for the Raudrastra, scourge of all enemies. 

At once, I saw a being with three heads, nine eyes, three faces, and six 
arms. His hair blazed like Fire or the Sun and, O Parantapa, on his body he 
wore huge snakes darting out their tongues. Seeing Rudra the Eternal before 
me, my fear melted away and I set his weapon on the Gandiva, bowed to 
the three-eyed One of the measureless tejas and released it, willing it to 
consume the Danavas. 

Lord of men, as soon as it was loosed, a multitude of forms were 
manifested—deer, lions, tigers and bears; buffaloes, snakes and cows; and 
sarabhas; and elephants, apes, bulls and boars; cats and dogs; ghosts; all the 
Bhurundas; vultures and Garudas, Chamaras and leopards; mountains and 
seas; Devas, Rishis and Gandharvas; Pisachas and Yakshas; Asuras, 
Guhyakas and Nairitras; elephant-mouthed sharks; owls; creatures with the 
forms of fish and horses, other macabre beings bearing swords and other 
weapons; and Rakshasas brandishing maces and clubs. 

When that weapon was loosed, the whole universe appeared, filled with 
all these and other beings. These multifarious beings—some had pieces of 
flesh, fat, bones and marrow sticking to them, others had three heads, or 
four tusks, or four mouths, or four arms—attacked the Danavas again and 
again, and held them at bay. 

Then, my brother, in a single moment I slew all those Danavas with a 
swarm of arrows imbued with the hardness of rocks, flaming like Agni or 
Surya, and lethal as thunderbolts. I saw the Danavas, brought down by the 
Gandiva, fall from the sky, and bowed once more to the Supreme God, 
destroyer of the Asuras of Tripura. 

The celestial sarathy Matali was delighted to see those Daityas, adorned 
with ethereal ornaments, annihilated by the Raudrastra. Having witnessed 


my feat, which even the celestials could not accomplish, Sakra’s charioteer 
paid me homage. 

With joined hands, he said, “The gods could not have done what you 
have today. Indeed, not even the king of Devas himself could have 
accomplished this. Hiranyapura was invincible, it could not be touched by 
the Devas or Asuras, but you have destroyed it with your strength and the 
power of your tapasya, O Kshatriya.” 

When that ethereal city had been ruined and its demons slain, their 
wives came streaming out, their hair dishevelled, and keening loudly, like 
kurari birds. They wailed in grief for the loss of their sons, brothers and 
fathers; they fell on the ground, crying hoarsely. They beat their breasts for 
having been widowed, and their garlands and jewellery fell from them. 

The golden city of the Danavas, which once looked like a Gandharva 
city, resounded with lamentation and was denuded of beauty, like a lake 
without elephants, or a forest stripped of trees. Deprived of its masters, it 
lost its lustre, and it disintegrated, as if it had been made of clouds. 

My task accomplished, Matali took me back to Amaravati, the deathless 
abode of Indra. Having vanquished and killed the Nivatakavachas, and 
destroyed Hiranyapura and its Kalakeyas, I came and stood, my head 
bowed, before Indra. Matali described to him all that I had done, in detail. It 
was with great delight that the Maruts heard about the destruction of 
Hiranyapura, the undoing of the illusions and the slaughter of the 
Nivatakavachas in battle. 

Thousand-eyed Purandara was pleased no end, and cried, Well done! 
and Indra and the Devas applauded, even cheered me for a long time. 

Indra said, “You have achieved a feat that neither the Devas nor the 
Asuras could. O Partha, by slaying my enemies, you have paid my 
Gurudakshina. Therefore, Dhananjaya, I grant that in battle you will always 
stay calm and discharge your weapons unerringly, and you will be 
irresistible to Devas, Danavas, Rakshasas, Yakshas, Asuras, Gandharvas, 
Pakshis and Nagas. 

Through the might of your arms, Kunti’s son Yudhishtira will conquer 
the Earth and rule it,” ’ says Arjuna.” 


CANTO 173 


NIVATAKAVACHA YUDDHA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


° A rjuna continues, ‘As I stood there, my wounds still bleeding, 

Indra, king of the Devas, acknowledged me as his own, and said, 

“Arjuna, all the Devastras are with you, and no man on earth will be able to 

overpower you. My son, when you are on the battlefield, Bhishma, Drona, 

Kripa, Karna and Sakuni, together with all the other Kshatriyas, will not be 
equal even to a sixteenth part of what you are.” 

The lord Maghavat gave me this golden garland and this conch-shell, 
Devadatta of the mighty roars, and also his unearthly, impenetrable mail. 
With his own hands, he set this crown on my head. Sakra presented me with 
these heavenly garments and with rare ornaments of unearthly craft. Thus 
was I honoured, Rajan, and I lived joyfully in Indra’s sacred abode with the 
children of the Gandharvas. Sakra was pleased, as were the Devas. One day 
he said to me, “O Arjuna, your brothers pine for you; the time has come for 
you to leave.” 

O king, this is how I spent my five years in Devaloka, thinking all the 
while of the troubles that we now endure because of the gambling. Here I 
am now, come to the foothills of the Gandhamadana and united again with 
my brothers.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Dhananjaya, we are fortunate that you have acquired 
the astras and that you have worshipped the king of the Devas. Parantapa, it 


bodes well that the Lord Sthanu and his Goddess appeared before you and 
that you gratified them in battle. You are fortunate to have met the 
Lokapalas. Partha, we are lucky to have prospered and that you have come 
back to us. Today I feel elated, as if Dhritarashtra’s sons have already been 
quelled and the Earth, with all her cities, has already become ours. 

Bhaarata, I am curious to see these Devastras with which you killed the 
Nivatakavachas.’ 

Arjuna says, ‘Tomorrow morning, you will see all the divine weapons 
with which I slew the fierce Nivatakavachas.’ 

Having thus related all that transpired before his return, Dhananjaya 
passes the night with his brothers.” 


CANTO 174 


NIVATAKAVACHA YUDDHA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


V aisampayana continued, “When day breaks, Dharmaraja Yudhishtira 

rises and, together with his brothers, performs the dawn rituals, then 
says to Arjuna, the joy of his mother, ‘Kaunteya, show me the weapons 
with which you slew the Danavas.’ 

Arjuna observes all the proper rites of purification and then displays the 
Devastras that the gods gave him. Dhananjaya has the Earth for his chariot, 
the mountain for its central pole, the base of the mountain for its axle and 
the clump of elephant-bamboo for its socket-pole. He is resplendent in his 
unearthly armour as he takes up the Gandiva and Devadatta, and invokes 
the astras, one by one. 

As each weapon is set on the bow, the Earth trembles under the weight 
of Arjuna’s feet; trees shudder; rivers and the immense ocean churn; rocks 
burst apart; the Sun stops shining; fires stop burning; Brahmanas stop 
reciting the Vedas; and the very air is hushed. 

O Janamejaya, the creatures that live under the earth’s crust rise to the 
surface and surround the Pandava, their faces contorted and their hands 
folded, quivering in fear. The astras scorch them and they pray to Arjuna to 
spare their lives. The Brahmarishis, the Siddhas and the Maharishis, indeed, 
all mobile beings arrive there. The foremost Devarishis, the Devas, the 
Yakshas, the Rakshasas and the Gandharvas; the Garutmats and other 


beings of the air also appear. The Pitamaha, the Lokapalas and the divine 
Mahadeva come with their retinues. Then, O great king, Vayu, the Wind 
God, comes bearing unearthly flowers and strews them over the Pandava. 
The Gandharvas sing and Apsaras dance. 

Then, Narada arrives and addresses Partha in gentle words, saying, ‘O 
Arjuna, do not loose the Devastras. They should never be released without a 
proper target; and even when there is one, they should not be used unless 
every other weapon has failed you. O son of the Kurus, to discharge these 
astras without legitimate cause is fraught with great evil. Dhananjaya, 
keeping these weapons as you have been instructed will add to your 
strength and happiness; but if they are not properly revered, they will 
become the instruments of the destruction of the three worlds. So, Pandava, 
never do this again. Yudhishtira, you will see these astras when Partha uses 
them in battle to raze his adversaries.’ 

Having stopped Partha from what he was about to do, the immortals and 
the others who came there go their separate ways. The Pandavas and 
Krishnaa continue to live in that same forest, in joy and contentment.” 


CANTO 175 
AJAGARA PARVA 


anamejaya said, “When that best among Kshatriyas returned from 
Indraloka, after having mastered the Devastras, how did the sons of 
Pritha spend their time?” 

Vaisampayana said, “Peerless among men and equal to Indra, those 
Kshatriyas enjoy the pleasure gardens of the lord of treasures, spread over 
the woods on that incomparable mountain. Kiriti, best among men, wanders 
through charming glades, full of trees of all kinds, but with his bow in hand 
and his mind always on the war ahead. 

With Vaisravana’s generosity and favour, the princes live in that 
beautiful place, their minds detached from material pleasures. Rather, they 
enjoy the simple peace of their lives. Having Arjuna back with them makes 
the time pass quickly; four years seem like one night. For the Pandavas, ten 
years — these four years and the previous six —drift smoothly by. 

One day, at the end of ten years of exile, the impetuous Bhima, son of 
Vayu, sits with Jishnu and the godlike twins before Yudhishtira, and in 
pleasing, earnest words says to him, ‘It is only to keep your word that we do 
not leave the forest to kill Suyodhana and his followers. He has deprived us 
of our happiness. 

This is the eleventh year of our exile in the wilderness; it will be easy to 
go undiscovered by that evil man. Led by you, we have wandered through 
these jungles, giving no thought to our condition, and free from anxiety. 
Suyodhana will not believe that we have left this place for a distant land. 


Once we have lived there for a year, we can avenge ourselves on that 
evil one and his followers. We will easily kill that most malignant of men, 
and reclaim our kingdom. 

O Dharmaraja, you must now return to the world below. If we stay on in 
this heavenly place, we will forget our sorrows, and your fame will wither 
away like a wilting flower’s fragrance and disappear. By gaining the 
kingdom of the Kuru sires, you will attain glory and perform many yagnas. 
What Kubera has given you here you can have on your own, Purushottama, 
and at any time. 

Now, O Bhaarata, it is time to concentrate on punishing the enemies 
who wronged us grossly. Rajan, the wielder of the thunderbolt himself 
cannot withstand your power. Arjuna has only universal welfare at heart. He 
has Krishna, whose emblem is Suparna, for his friend, and Sini’s grandson 
Satyaki as well. Arjuna feels no pain, ever, not even in battle against the 
Devas. He has no equal in strength, and neither do I. 

O Yudhishtira, I am as devoted to your good as Krishna and the 
Yadavas. And the heroic twins are masters of war. When we meet the 
enemy, we will extinguish him and ensure your return to wealth and 
prosperity.’ 

When he hears the course of action they prefer, the bountiful and 
peerless son of Dharma, who knows all about dharma and artha, whose 
prowess is limitless, walks around Vaisravana in reverent pradakshina. 
Dharmaraja Yudhishtira bids farewell to the palaces, rivers, lakes and all the 
Rakshasas; and he faces the path they took to come here. 

Yudhishtira Mahatman looks at the supreme mountain and says, “O lord 
of mountains, grant that I, together with my friends, see you again after I 
have killed my enemies and regained my kingdom; grant that I perform 
tapasya here with my senses controlled.’ 

With his brothers and the Brahmanas, the king of the Kurus will return 
by the same path that brought them to the holy mountain; and Ghatotkacha 
and his companions will carry them over the mountain’s cascades. As they 
are about to begin their journey, Rishi Lomasa advises them, as a father 
would his sons, and he departs for Devaloka. Arshtisena, too, gives them 
wise counsel, and the sons of Pritha begin their journey, and they see many 
sacred tirthas, asramas and great lakes on the way.” 


CANTO 176 
AJAGARA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “When they leave their home in the mountain of 

a thousand waterfalls, and birds, and eight-legged elephants, and 
Kubera’s supernatural attendants, sadness goes with those best of the 
Bhaaratas. When they have gone some distance, they see Kubera’s favourite 
mountain, Kailasa, like a great white cloud in the sky; and their hearts surge 
with elation. 

Armed with swords and bows, they continue on their way, and they see 
hills and narrow gorges, dens of lions and craggy pathways, more waterfalls 
and the plains below. They see other great forests where deer, birds and 
elephants throng in great numbers. They come upon blithe woods, turquoise 
rivers, lakes and mountain caverns, which often become their home during 
the day as well as at night. 

After living in all kinds of inhospitable places and crossing Kailasa of 
the untold majesty, they reach the asrama of Rajarishi Vrishaparva. He 
receives them warmly and, shedding their fatigue, they tell him the story of 
their sojourn in the mountains. They stay only one night in this sacred 
hermitage, which Maharishis and Devas visit, then travel on to the great 
badari tree Visala. 

Here, at Badarikasrama where Narayana dwells, they remain happily for 
a time, within sight of Kubera’s lake that Devas and Siddhas frequent. Just 
as blemishless Brahmana Rishis attain bliss on reaching the gardens of 
Nandana, so do the Pandavas shed all grief when they see that lake. The 


Kshatriyas spend a happy month in Badari, and then resume their journey 
towards the dominions of Subahu, king of the Kiratas, still treading the path 
by which they came. They have to cross the difficult terrain of the 
Himalayas, the countries of Pina, Tushara, Darada, pass through all the 
provinces of Kulinda, rich in treasures, before they reach Subahu’s capital. 

Subahu is excited when he hears of their arrival and comes out to meet 
them. Yudhishtira greets him, and here the Pandavas are joined by all their 
charioteers led by Visaka, their attendants, Indrasena and the others, their 
personal servitors and kitchen servants. The company breaks journey here 
for a night. 

Then, giving Ghatotkacha and his followers leave to go, they take their 
chariots and sarathys and head towards the king of mountains, near the 
Yamuna River. The range of Himavan abounds in waterfalls, silvery against 
grey slopes and snow-covered summits. The Pandavas find their way to the 
great forest of Visakhayupa, which is like the forest of Chitraratha. Here, 
where wild boars and a variety of deer and birds live, they decide to make 
their home. 

Hunting for their food, the sons of Pritha peacefully live in this forest 
for one year. 

In a cavern of the mountain, Vrikodara’s heart fills with grief and he 
panics, when he comes upon a massive, fierce-looking snake, obviously 
starving and looking like death itself. Yudhishtira, most virtuous of men, of 
boundless strength, frees Bhima from the coils of the mighty serpent that 
holds him fast, when he goes near it. 

And so the twelfth year of their sojourn in the forests begins. The scions 
of the Kuru, blazing in splendour, engaging in the most rigid tapasya, 
devoted to their daily practice of archery, leave that forest—that is like the 
Chaitra—and go to the edges of the desert, and from there to the river 
Saraswati, on whose banks they want to live awhile. 

From the Saraswati, they go to the lake in the Dwaita vana. The 
inhabitants of the Dwaita vana are all ascetics of various religious orders, 
who practise self-restraint, sitting in deep dhyana and, being toothless, 
subsist on food ground with stone. On the arrival of the Pandavas, these 
sadhus bring grass mats and water-pots, and come forward to greet them. 

On the banks of nearby golden Saraswati grow myriad trees—the holy 
pipal, the rudraksha, the rohitaka, the plaksha, the badari, the khadira, the 
sirisha, the bilva, the inguda, the karira, the pilu and the sami. Wandering 


contentedly about in the vicinity of the Saraswati, a home of the Devas and 
the favourite resort of Yakshas, Gandharvas and Maharishis, the princes are 
at some peace.” 


CANTO 177 
AJAGARA PARVA CONTINUED 


anamejaya said, “How is it, wise one, that Bhima of the mighty 

prowess, who was strong as ten thousand elephants, was stricken with 
panic at the sight of that snake? You have described how he was horrified 
and alarmed, this man who slew hundreds of Yakshas and Rakshasas by the 
lotus-filled lakes of Kubera’s forests, and who, in arrogant defiance, dared 
Kubera to fight him? I am curious and want to hear about this.” 

Vaisampayana said, “Rajan, in Vrishaparva’s hermitage, those fearful 
warriors live amidst enchanting glades. Roaming about carefree, bow and 
sword in hand, Vrikodara comes upon an emerald forest, frequented by 
Devas and Gandharvas. He sees secret places upon the Himalaya, 
frequented by Devarishis and Siddhas, and inhabited by Apsaras. 

These echo with the sweet warbling of birds—the chakora, the 
chakravaka, the jivajivaka, the kokila and the bhringaraja—and are lush 
with shady trees clothed in snow-soft leaves, which bear perennial fruits 
and flowers. He sees mountain streams whose waters glisten like lapis 
lazuli, with ten thousand perfectly white ducks and swans upon them, and 
surrounded by forests of deodar trees that seem to form a net to trap the 
clouds. He sees other trees—tunga and kaliyaka, interspersed with yellow 
sandalwood trees. Measurelessly strong, he ranges these uninhabited forests 
in pursuit of game, shooting animals with purified arrows. 

Mighty Bhimasena, strong as a hundred elephants, kills huge wild boar 
with his bare hands. Blessed with dreadful strength, like some lion or tiger, 


he who can fight a hundred at once kills antelope and boar and bison and 
many elephants whose strength is as his own. He uproots trees and breaks 
them, filling the forests with noise. Ever youthful, proud and fearless, 
Bhimasena happily rampages through the woods, bellowing his war-cry, 
striking his arms and clapping his hands. Fierce lions and great tuskers flee 
in terror at the sound of this boldest of men fearlessly prowling their home 
in search of game. He penetrates into the depths of the vast forest and 
terrifies all the animals with his shouts. 

Snakes slither into caves for shelter. The godlike Bhimasena sees an 
enormous Naga coiled in a cave, its gigantic body filling it entirely, so big 
that it makes one’s hair stand on end. Its colossal body is like a yellow and 
speckled hill; its cave-like mouth is red and has four fangs; its eyes bulge 
and its forked tongue darts in and out, licking the corners of its mouth. 
Looking like Yama, it strikes terror into all living creatures, as it hisses at 
any intruder. 

Seeing him approach, in a flash the infuriated snake seizes Bhimasena 
in its coils. This serpent has a boon, which makes Bhimasena lose 
consciousness in its clasp. Although Bhima is supremely strong, the Naga 
overpowers him and he trembles feebly in its gargantuan coils. His 
shoulders are like a lion’s, his strength is that of ten thousand elephants, but 
Mahabaho Bhima is overpowered by the snake with the boon and, seized by 
it, all his strength drains from him. He struggles desperately to extricate 
himself, but cannot.” 


CANTO 178 
AJAGARA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana continued, “Bhima says to the prodigious snake, ‘O 
Naga, tell me who you are. O foremost of reptiles, what are you 
going to do with me? I am Bhima, the son of Pandu, and next by birth to 
Dharmaraja Yudhishtira. I am as strong as ten thousand elephants; how 
have you overpowered me? I have killed innumerable lions, tigers, bison 
and elephants; mighty Rakshasas, Pisachas and Nagas cannot withstand the 
force of my arms. Do you have magical powers, or have you been given a 
boon, that although I put forth all my strength, you still hold me helpless? 
Ah, the strength of men is nothing, for, O serpent, you have proved it so.’ 

When Bhima says this, the snake, which has coiled its body around him 
and has him at its mercy, releases just his arms and says, ‘It is my lucky day 
that the gods offer you to me as food to appease my hunger after a very long 
time. Life is dear to all the living; so I will tell you how I came to have this 
snake’s form. Hear, O strongest of men, how I fell into this plight from the 
wrath of the Maharishis. I want to be rid of the curse, so I will tell you all 
about it. 

You must surely have heard of the Rajarishi Nahusha. He was the son of 
Ayu, and an ancestor of yours. I am that very man. And today I am a sarpa 
because Agastya Muni cursed me for, in my hubris, I once insulted the 
Brahmanas of heaven. 

You are my descendant and a joy to see, and I ought not to kill you. 
Still, I will eat you today. You are fated to die. No creature that comes 


within my reach at this time of day, be it a bison or an elephant, escapes. It 
is no Naga that has taken you; I have this form only because of the Rishi’s 
curse. 

As I changed form and slid from Sakra’s throne, on which I once sat, I 
said to the worshipful Agastya, “Free me from this curse!” 

The compassionate Maharishi said to me, “O king, you will be free after 
a long time has passed.” 

I fell down to the Earth as a snake, but I did not lose the memory of my 
former life. This happened a very long time ago, indeed, but I remember 
everything that was said. 

The Rishi said, “A man who has realised the relationship of his Atman 
to the Brahman, and who can correctly answer the questions you put to him, 
will deliver you from my curse. Taken by you, even creatures that are 
stronger than you will immediately lose their strength.” 

I heard these words of that kindly sage, who felt affection for me, and 
immediately, all the Brahmanas vanished. 

Having become a serpent, I have lived in hell for an age, waiting for the 
time of my release to come.’ 

Bhimasena says to the snake, ‘I am not angry, mighty Sarpa, nor do I 
blame myself. Men are not always in control of their own lives; at times, 
they have the power to bring about joy or sorrow, and at others, not. There 
is no point fretting over this. Who can divert destiny, even by the greatest 
effort? Karma is supreme, and effort is useless. Struck by fate, I lost the 
might of my arms today. 

Look at me; for no apparent reason I have become helpless. However, I 
am not as sorry for myself that I will die as for my brothers who have been 
deprived of their kingdom and exiled into the forest. 

The Himalaya is inaccessible and crawls with Yakshas and Rakshasas. 
My brothers will be distracted from their purpose by their search for me. If 
they know that I am dead, they will give up all their efforts, for, although 
they are determined, in my desire to regain our kingdom, it is I who keep 
their resolve alive by my insistent urging. 

It may be that Arjuna alone will not grieve for me, because he is 
intelligent, a great master of astras and cannot be vanquished by Devas, 
Rakshasas or Gandharvas. By himself, that Mahabaho can defeat even a 
Deva in battle. 


What can I say of the deceitful gambler, the haughty and foolish son of 
Dhritarashtra, the most detested of all men? I grieve for my poor mother, 
who loves her sons, who is always eager that we should rise above our 
enemies in fame. O Naga, all the hope that my sorrowing mother vested in 
me will be dashed if you devour me. 

My twin brothers, the manly Nakula and Sahadeva, follow me, their 
elder brother, and rely on the strength of my arms for their protection. If I 
die, they will be grief-stricken and lose their will to fight. This is what I 
think.’ 

Such is Vrikodara’s heartfelt lament; caught in the coils of Nahusha the 
snake, all his strength is sapped from his body. 

In the meanwhile, Yudhishtira sees sinister omens and is alarmed. The 
cardinal points blaze, weird jackals come to the hermitage and howl. 
Horribly deformed vartikas, with one wing, one eye and one leg, face the 
Sun and vomit blood. Dry winds blow and whip up stony eddies. 

In the east, all the beasts and birds begin to cry out; behind him black 
crows caw, Go! Go! Yudhishtira’s right arm, his chest and left leg twitch. 
His left eye tics in spasms, auguring some great evil. 

O Bhaarata, sensing some calamity, Yudhishtira asks Draupadi where 
Bhima is. She replies that he has been gone for some time. Dharmaraja tells 
Arjuna to watch over Draupadi, he tells Nakula and Sahadeva to protect the 
Brahmanas, and sets out with Dhaumya. They leave the asrama and, 
following Bhima’s wild, brash trail, look for him in the dense forest. 

Going east, they come across the dead bodies of bull-elephants, leaders 
of their herds, and see Bhima’s footprints on the ground. They see the 
carcasses of thousands of deer and hundreds of lions, and they know they 
are on Bhima’s trail. They see trees uprooted by him on his heedless way in 
pursuit of deer. 

The trail leads them to a desolate spot. Dry winds blow; the plants are 
all leafless and thorny; the air is salty; there is no water anywhere; stones, 
tree-stumps and scrub cover the rough, uneven ground; and a sharp sense of 
danger invades them. And here, in a mountain cave, Yudhishtira sees his 
younger brother, held fast by that most powerful of snakes.” 


CANTO 179 
AJAGARA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana continued, “Yudhishtira finds his beloved Bhima in the 
coils of the serpent and says, ‘O Son of Kunti, how did this happen? 
Who is this remarkable Naga, whose body is like a mountain?’ 

Bhimasena says, ‘My brother, this mighty serpent has caught me for his 
food. He is the Rajarishi Nahusha cursed to be a Naga.’ 

Yudhishtira says to the snake, ‘Chiranjeevi, long-lived, free my brother 
of the immeasurable strength. We will give you some other food to satisfy 
your hunger.’ 

The serpent says, ‘This prince came to me of his own accord and 
provided me with my meal. Go away. You should not stay for, if you do, 
you will be my meal tomorrow. Mahabaho, this has been ordained—he who 
comes to where I live becomes my food. You are in my dwelling. I have 
waited a long time for the meal that is your younger brother. I will not let 
him go, and I do not fancy any other food.’ 

Yudhishtira responds, ‘O Sarpa, tell me truly who you are—a Deva, an 
Asura, an Uraga? I, Yudhishtira, ask this. Why have you taken Bhimasena? 
What object or knowledge will satisfy you? And what food shall I get you, 
O Snake? How can I secure my brother’s release?’ 

The serpent says, “‘O sinless, I am king Nahusha, your ancestor and the 
son of Ayu, in the fifth generation of descent from Soma, the Moon. By 
virtue of my tapasya, my yagnas, my spiritual discipline and steadfastness, I 


earned dominion over the three worlds. But with this authority came 
arrogance. 

I engaged thousands of Brahmanas as my _ throne-bearers and, 
intoxicated by power, I insulted them by kicking them with my feet and 
crying sarpa, sarpa! Hurry, hurry! When my foot touched him, Agastya 
Muni cursed me, You be a sarpa! and I fell down to the Earth in this form in 
which you find me. 

Even now, I cannot forget my past life. This evening, Agastya’s 
goodwill brought your brother to me for my meal. I have no wish to set him 
free, and I do not want to eat anything else. However, if you answer my 
questions, I will let Vrikodara go.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘O Serpent, ask whatever you like. I will try to please 
you with my answers. You have the knowledge of the truly learned. 
Therefore, Nagaraja, king of snakes, ask and I will answer.’ 

The serpent says, ‘O Yudhishtira, tell me, who is a Brahmana and what 
knowledge should he have? You speak so eloquently and I can tell that you 
are highly intelligent. Tell me, who is a Brahmana and what is the final 
object of all knowledge?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Foremost of serpents, the wise say that he in whom 
we see truth, charity, forgiveness, good conduct, benevolence, observance 
of his svadharma and mercy is a Brahmana. The object of knowledge is the 
Supreme Brahman, the state devoid of joy and sorrow, attaining which frees 
man from misery.’ 

The Naga says, “Yudhishtira, even in a Sudra we find truth, charity, 
forgiveness, good conduct, benevolence, devoutness, kindness and 
knowledge of the Veda that regulates the four varnas and provides guidance 
in religious matters. As for what ought to be known, which you say is a 
state of no pain or pleasure, it does not exist.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘The Sudra who has these qualities is not a Sudra, and 
the Brahmana who lacks these is not a Brahmana. Sudras and Brahmanas 
are not classified by birth alone. The wise say that anyone who has these 
qualities is a Brahmana, and one who does not is a Sudra, even if he is born 
a Brahmana. Your assertion that all things that exist must feel either misery 
or happiness, because without both there is nothing, is erroneous. This is 
only how it seems. Think of this—cold is the absence of heat; and heat is 
the absence of cold. Therefore, can there not be a state in which both are 
absent, and a similar state for joy and grief?’ 


The serpent says, ‘O king, if a man is recognised as a Brahmana 
because he possesses these characteristics, caste distinctions become 
relevant only in relation to these qualities.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Mighty and most intelligent serpent, in human 
society it is difficult to ascertain a person’s caste because of 
promiscuousness among the four varnas. This is my opinion. Men of all 
castes have children by women of all castes. Four aspects of life that all 
people have in common are language, sexual intercourse, birth and death. 
Even Rishis have testified to the difficulty of distinguishing caste, by using 
this sentence at beginning of every sacrifice—‘Whatever caste you may 
belong to, we celebrate this sacrifice.’ The learned have asserted that 
character is the only essential requisite for caste distinctions. 

The birth ceremony of a male child is performed before the cutting of 
the umbilical cord. The mother acts as Savitri and the father officiates as 
priest. The child is considered a Sudra until he is initiated in the Vedas. 
Because of doubts that have arisen on this point, O prince of serpents, 
Swayambhuva Manu declared that the mixed castes are better than the 
upper castes that do not live according to dharma even after undergoing the 
rituals of purification. Any man who lives by the laws of dharma, I have 
always considered a Brahmana.’ 

The serpent replies, ‘O Yudhishtira, you do indeed know what needs to 
be known and, after having heard you speak, how can I eat your brother 
Vrikodara?’ ” 


CANTO 180 
AJAGARA PARVA CONTINUED 


-: Y udhishtira says, ‘In this world, you are most learned in the Vedas 
and Vedangas; tell me what one should do to attain moksha.’ 

The serpent replies, ‘O scion of the Bhaaratas, I believe that the man 
who gives alms to deserving people, the man that speaks kindly, the man 
that tells the truth and the man that abstains from doing injury to any 
creature attains salvation.’ 

Yudhishtira asks, ‘Which, O Naga, is the higher of the two—truth or 
charity? Tell me also, which is more important—kindness or the avoidance 
of doing harm.’ 

The snake replies, ‘The relative merits of the qualities of truth and 
benevolence, kind words and abstention from harmful behaviour are 
measured by their results. Truth is sometimes more praiseworthy than some 
acts of charity; some daana is more laudable than speaking the truth. 
Similarly, abstaining from causing injury can be more, or less, important 
than kind speech. It all depends on the effect your actions have. 

Ask me anything more you want, and I will clear your doubts.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Tell me, O Naga, how to understand the soul’s 
transition to Swarga, about its enjoyment of the rewards it has gained and 
how it perceives through the senses.’ 

The snake replies, “By dint of his own karma, a soul takes birth in one 
of three conditions —as an animal, as a human, or as a heavenly being. Man 
leaves his human life and attains Swarga by being diligent and 


hardworking, by not harming any creature, by being charitable and virtuous. 
Through the opposite conduct, Rajan, people are reborn as baser humans or 
as animals. This is particularly true of one who is ruled by anger, lust, greed 
and malice. This person leaves his human life and is reborn as an animal. 
Animals can be transformed into the human state, too. The cow, the horse 
and other beasts have been seen to attain even the divine condition. 

My son, living beings transmigrate from one state to the other because 
of their actions, but the wise man’s soul rests permanently in the 
indestructible Brahman. The embodied spirit, bound by destiny, and reaping 
the fruits of its karma, undergoes birth after birth; but he that is distanced 
from his own actions is conscious of the destiny of all beings.’ 

Yudhishtira asks, ‘O Snake, tell me truly and clearly how the spirit that 
is detached from the body recognises sound, touch, shape, smell and taste. 
Does one perceive sensations simultaneously? Best of snakes, answer my 
questions.’ 

The snake replies, “The spirit, called Atman, taking existence within a 
physical body and, manifesting itself in the sense organs, enjoys the 
perceptions of all objects. Bharatarishabha, the senses, the mind and the 
intellect, which help the Atman in perception, are called karanas. The 
eternal spirit leaves its proper place and, assisted by the mind and acting 
through the senses, perceives all objects with sensory properties. The mind 
of living creatures is the cause of all perception and, therefore, it cannot 
recognise more than one thing at a time. This spirit, which resides in the 
space between the eyebrows, directs the high and low intellect to different 
objects. The knowledge that Yogis gain from constant use of the higher 
intellect causes them to finally perceive the Atman. 

Yudhishtira says, “Tell me the distinguishing characteristics of the mind 
and the intellect. Gaining this knowledge is the chief aim of those who 
meditate on Brahman, the Supreme Spirit.’ 

The snake replies, “Through improper understanding, the Soul becomes 
subservient to the intellect, which, though inferior to the Soul, directs and 
controls it. The intellect is moved by perception, but the Soul is 
independent and exists by itself. The intellect does not cause sensation, such 
as pain or pleasure, the mind does. This, my son, is the difference between 
the mind and the intellect. You, too, are learned in this; what is your 
opinion?’ 


Yudhishtira says, ‘Most intelligent one, you have a superior intellect and 
know all there is to be known. Why do you ask me this question? You are 
all-knowing; you have performed wonderful deeds; and you have lived in 
Swarga. How could illusion overpower you? I wonder greatly at this.’ 

The snake replies, ‘Prosperity intoxicates even wise and valiant men. 
Those who indulge in luxurious lives lose their intellect. I, too, Yudhishtira, 
was drunk and infatuated with prosperity, and fell from my height. 

Having recovered my reason, I speak to you in this manner. O 
Victorious, you have done me a favour. Conversing with one as virtuous as 
you has lifted my painful curse. 

In the days of old, when I used to live in heaven and ride in a celestial 
chariot, I was swollen with pride and, unthinkingly, I would accept tribute 
from Brahmarishis, Devas, Yakshas, Gandharvas, Rakshasas, Pannagas and 
all who lived in the three worlds. Lord of Earth, such was the spell of my 
eyes that I instantly destroyed the power of any creature on which I fixed 
them. 

I had thousands of Brahmarishis draw my carriage, and this sin caused 
my fall. One day Agastya Muni was drawing my carriage when my feet 
touched his body. He cursed me in anger, saying, “You will be ruined. You 
will become a snake.” 

At once, I lost my glory and fell from the chariot, watching myself turn 
into a snake as I fell. I implored the Brahmana, “I beg you, remove this 
curse, O divine one. Forgive my foolishness.” 

Moved by pity as he watched me hurtling down from heaven, he said, 
“The virtuous king Yudhishtira will release you from my curse. O Nahusha, 
when you rid yourself of the sin of pride, you will attain redemption.” 

I was wonderstruck to see the power of his tapasya. That is why I have 
asked you these questions about the Brahman and Brahmanas, about truth 
and charity, about self-restraint and penance, about not doing injury to any 
creature and adhering to dharma. Rajan, it is these qualities, and not the 
race or family into which he is born, by which a man may attain mukti. May 
your brother, the mighty Bhimasena, enjoy good fortune; may you be 
happy, O Dharmaraja. I must leave you now and return to Swarga.’ 

With these words, king Nahusha sheds his serpentine form and, 
assuming his celestial one, ascends into heaven. Dharmatma Yudhishtira 
returns to his asrama with Dhaumya and Bhima, and there he narrates all 
that has transpired to the Brahmanas, his brothers and Draupadi. They are 


ashamed when they hear how Bhima behaved. The Brahmanas, with the 
welfare of the Pandavas in mind, admonish Bhima for his foolhardiness and 


tell him never to be so rash. 
The Pandavas are elated that Bhima has been saved from danger, and 


they continue to live there happily.” 


CANTO 181 
MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 


V aisampayana said, “While they live in that place, the monsoon sets 

in. It cools the air, bringing delight to all the living. Dark clouds 
rumble and cover the skies entirely, forming an opaque cupola; they pour 
down rain day and night. The light of the Sun is replaced by the stainless 
lustre of lightning. The Earth turns fecund and mellow—lush grass grows, 
insects multiply and abound joyfully, and the world is washed clean and 
spread over with serenity. Water covers the ground, so that the tallest trees 
and entire hills are submerged and indistinguishable. 

At summer’s end, swollen rivers augment the beauty of the forest, 
looking like snakes as they hiss and turn along their courses. Boars, stags 
and birds are drenched in the rain and chortle in delight, from within the 
vana. Chatakas, peacocks, kokilas and frogs are all athrob with excitement. 

The Pandavas enjoy the monsoon, in its seething richness, and the 
sound of thunder above and the lashing rain below, while they live on the 
higher reaches of the mountain. 

Autumn sets in—its floor coverd over with thick new grass, the forest 
teems with swans, ducks, geese and cranes; rivers flow lucid again and the 
stars shine brightly in the sky. This is a blissful season for the sons of 
Pandu, crowded as it is with bright and feral birds and beasts. They revel in 
the clear night air, cooled by clouds, and the sky adorned by glowing 
planets, stars and the radiant moon. They see cool rivers and ponds 
ornamented with lilies and white lotuses. 


They roam the river Saraswati’s majestic banks, thick with bamboo, and 
dotted with sacral pools; and great is their exhilaration. Those Kshatriyas 
are especially glad to gaze at the golden Saraswati, brimming with limpid 
water, and they spend the holy night of Karthika Poornima beside her. The 
sons of Pandu spend that auspicious day with pure and benevolent Rishis 
devoted to tapasya and, as soon as the dark fortnight sets in immediately 
after, they enter the Kamyaka vana, with their charioteers, cooks and the 
rest of their entourage.” 


CANTO 182 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “O Scion of Kuru, on arriving at the Kamyaka 

vana, the Rishi of that jungle warmly receives them, and there they 
live with Krishnaa. While the Pandavas dwell in safety here, many 
Brahmanas come to visit them. 

One of them says, ‘Arjuna’s beloved friend, Krishna of the lofty 
intellect, mighty arms and perfect self-control, the Saurin, will come to this 
asrama. Hari knows that you have arrived here; he always wishes for your 
welfare and longs to see you. Markandeya, who has lived many ages, who 
is devoted to profound study and tapasya, will also come to you.’ 

No sooner are the words spoken than they see Krishna coming towards 
them in a chariot yoked with the horses Saibya and Sugriva. With 
Satyabhama beside him, Devaki’s dark blue son is like Indra with 
Pulaman’s daughter Sachi, as he comes to visit the Pandavas of dharma. 

The omniscient Krishna alights from his ratha and prostrates before 
Yudhishtira, and then before Bhimasena. He pays his respects to Dhaumya, 
and the twins prostrate before him. He embraces Arjuna of the curly hair; 
and speaks comfortingly to Drupada’s daughter. Again and again does 
Krishna, son of the Dasarhas, the slayer of his foes, clasp Arjuna in his 
arms; it is so long since he has seen his precious friend. Satyabhama 
embraces Draupadi. The sons of Pandu, with their wife and priests, worship 


Krishna, of the eyes like the white lotus, and crowd around him in 
adoration. 

Krishna glows at being re-united with Pritha’s son Arjuna, Dhananjaya 
the winner of wealth; the terror of Asuras acquires the radiant beauty of 
Siva, the magnanimous Lord of all creatures, when Mahadeva is united with 
his son Kartikeya. Arjuna Kiriti tells Krishna all that has transpired in the 
jungle, and asks after Subhadra and Abhimanyu. After he pays due 
reverence to Yudhishtira and the Brahmanas, Krishna sits down and praises 
Yudhishtira. 

He says, ‘O King, dharma is superior to conquering kingdoms, because 
it is acquired through tapasya. By your adherence to the truth, and with your 
honesty, you have conquered this world and the next. Through study and 
faultlessly performing your svadharma, you have mastered the Astra 
Shastra. You have gained wealth in accordance to the dictates of Kshatriya 
dharma, and correctly performed the ancient yagnas. You are not addicted 
to sensual pleasures, nor do you act, Purushottama, from selfish motives. 
You do not swerve from the path of dharma out of greed for wealth. You are 
aptly called Dharmaraja, the righteous king. 

Even though you have won wealth and kingdoms, you find your greatest 
joy in charity, truth, penance, forbearance, meditation and patience. When 
Krishnaa was humiliated in the Kuru sabha, in a shocking and shameful 
manner, who but you could have silently borne it? You will soon rule justly 
over men, and all your desires will be fulfilled. We are here and ready to 
punish the Kurus, as soon as your obligation to them is completed.’ 

Krishna says to Dhaumya, Bhima, Yudhishtira, the twins and Krishnaa, 
“You are all blessed with good fortune to have Arjuna Kiriti, the crowned, 
back with you after he has mastered the Astra Shastra in Devaloka.’ 

Krishna now turns to Yagnaseni, “How fortunate that you are united 
again with Dhananjaya! Krishnaa, you have the most excellent sons. They 
are diligent sishyas; they are well-behaved and emulate the conduct of their 
virtuous friends. Although your father and brothers offered them their 
kingdom to tempt them to stay with them there, they declined and preferred, 
instead, to live with us in Anarta, where, in the city of the Vrishnis, they 
study the Astra Shastra and live happily amongst our people. Subhadra 
guides them in the same way that you or Kunti would, perhaps with even 
more love and care. 


Rukmini’s son Pradyumna, master to Aniruddha, Abhimanyu, Sunitha 
and Bhanu, is your sons’ guru as well. As a good preceptor would, he gives 
these valiant young lions lessons in the use of maces and swords, in astras, 
in charioteering and riding horses. Pradyumna is delighted that his training 
manifests itself in the brave deeds that your sons and Abhimanyu perform. 
And when your sons go forth in pursuit of sport, chariots, horses and 
elephants form their retinue.’ 

Krishna says to Yudhishtira, ‘The fighting men of the Dasarha clan, the 
Kukuras and the Andhakas are at your command, to do whatever you wish. 
Lord of men, the army of the Madhus, whose bows are as powerful as the 
wind, led by Balarama, whose weapon is the halayudha, the plough, is 
eminently prepared for battle. O Pandava, its cavalry and infantry, horses, 
chariots and elephants are ready to do your bidding. Drive Dhritarashtra’s 
son Duryodhana, the vilest of sinful men, his followers and friends down to 
the path of the lord Yama, son of the Earth. You, Rajan, can keep the vow 
you swore in the sabha, but let the city be prepared for your triumphant 
return when the Dasarha forces have razed your enemies. 

Live wherever you please, visit all the places you want to see, be rid of 
your grief and wash away your sins; you will go to Hastinapura, and rule 
from there.’ 

The noble king listens attentively to Krishna and, after some 
deliberation, folds his hands in reverence and says ‘O Kesava, you are the 
refuge of the sons of Pandu; in you we have our protector. When the time 
comes, I am certain that you will do as you have said, and even more. We 
have spent twelve desolate years in the forest, without breaking our oath. 
We have yet to complete the thirteenth year, of ajnatavasa, and now we 
place ourselves under your protection, as is right for those who are your 
friends. 

The sons of Pandu and Pritha do not swerve from the path of dharma. 
We are charitable and pious, and we lay ourselves and our people, our 
wives and our friends at your feet.’ 

Bhaarata, while Krishna of the Vrishnis and the pure-hearted 
Yudhishtira talk, the venerable Rishi Markandeya arrives in their midst. He 
is many thousands of years old, and has spent his life in the practice of 
dharma and tapasya. His age is not visible on him and he is immortal. He 
radiates the beauty of grace, goodness and benevolence, which make him 
look like a young man of some twenty-five years. When the aged, ageless 


Markandeya, who has seen thousands of yugas, arrives, all the Brahmanas 
pay him deep homage, as do Krishna and Pandu’s sons. 

Having been duly honoured, the Muni sits down, and Krishna says to 
him, ‘The sons of Pandu, these Brahmanas, Draupadi, Satyabhama and I are 
all anxious to listen to you speak, O Markandeya! Tell us the holy stories of 
ancient times and the abiding laws of dharma which guide kings, women 
and sages.’ 

When they had all taken their seats, Devarishi Narada arrives there. The 
noble Kshatriyas receive him, washing his feet and offering him arghya. 
The godlike Narada realises that Markandeya is about to speak and shows 
his eagerness to do the same. 

Immortal Krishna, who knows when the time is ripe for all things, says, 
‘O Brahmarishi, tell us what you were about to say to the Pandavas.’ 

Markandeya replies, ‘Be patient and I will tell you many things.’ 

And Pandu’s sons and the Dvijas wait silently, watching the Rishi who 
is as bright as the Sun at noon.” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Pandu’s eldest son realises that the great 
Markandeya is willing to speak, and begins to put questions to him. 

Yudhishtira says, ‘You, who are venerable in age, know of the legendary 
deeds of Devas and Asuras, those of exalted sages and kings. You are 
worthy of worship, and long have we yearned to see you. We also have with 
us Devakinandana Krishna. I look at myself, bereft of happiness from no 
fault of mine; I think of Dhritarashtra’s evil sons revelling in my misery; 
and it strikes me that man is the doer of all things, good or bad, and it is 
man who reaps the fruit of his actions. I wonder, then, how God becomes an 
agent. 

Brahmanasreshta, how does a man’s karma affect him? Is it in this 
world, or in some future existence? O Dvijottama, how is man connected to 
his good and evil actions? Is it after death, or in this life? Is what we 
experience in this lifetime the result of our deeds of this same life? Or will 
the acts of this life bear fruit in lifetimes to come? Where do the actions of 
one who is dead find their resting place?’ 

Markandeya answers, ‘Purushottama, this is a worthy question. You 
know all there is to know; and you ask me this question for the sake of 
edifying some others who are here. Listen attentively and I will explain how 
a man experiences pleasure and pain in this lifetime and in those to come. 


Prajapati, the Lord of all created beings, first created himself, and then, 
for all embodied beings, created bodies which were blemishless and 
virtuous. The men of ancient times had all their desires fulfilled, were given 
to noble deeds, and were truthful, godly and pure. All were equal to the 
Devas; they could rise to the heavens and come down again, and go 
wherever they wanted to, at their pleasure. 

They had control over life and death; they had but few sufferings and no 
fear; their wishes were always fulfilled and they lived trouble-free lives. 
They could visit the Devas and the Rishis; they were versed in all the 
religious rites and laws; they were self-disciplined and free from envy. They 
lived many thousand years and had many thousand sons. 

In time, they were restricted to walking only on the surface of the Earth 
and, overpowered by lust and anger, began to employ lies and deceit to 
garner what they desired. Greed, envy and ignorance overwhelmed them. 
Because of their evil deeds, when these men died they went to Naraka, to 
hell. Again and again, they suffered birth and lived miserable lives in this 
world. 

Their desires remained unfulfilled, their aims unaccomplished, and their 
knowledge was useless to them. Their minds were clouded by tamas; they 
were full of fear; and they became the instruments of suffering. Their lives 
were a Series of evil deeds; they were born into despicable families; their 
minds and bodies were diseased and in a constant state of terror. They did 
not live long and, during their short lives, paid the price for their sins. They 
coveted all they saw; and they became Godless and cynical, Kaunteya. 

The fate of every being after death is determined by what he does in this 
world. You have asked me where the repository of the karma of the wise 
and ignorant is, and where they enjoy the fruit of their good and evil deeds. 
Listen to the laws that govern this matter. 

Man accumulates a great store of good and evil karma in his subtle 
body, his sukshma sarira created by God. When he dies he leaves his sthula 
sarira, his gross flesh, and is immediately born again into another order of 
beings. He is never without a body, not for a single moment. Into this new 
life, his karma follows him like a shadow, inexorably, making him happy or 
miserable. 

The wise man with spiritual insight knows that all beings are tied by the 
Destroyer to an unchangeable destiny and that they cannot escape the 


consequences of their good or evil karma. This, O Yudhishtira, is the fate of 
all creatures that are steeped in spiritual ignorance. 

I will tell you now of the perfection attained by men of spiritual 
awareness. Such men have great tapasyashakti; they know about all things 
sacred and are deeply liberal. They are unswerving in their religious duties 
and devoted to the truth. They honour their Gurus and elders with 
reverence; they practice yoga; they are forgiving, have their passions and 
minds under firm control, and are men of extraordinary lustre, piety and 
energy. In short, they are endowed with all the virtues. They have 
conquered their passions and subdued their minds; by practising yoga they 
are freed from disease, fear and sorrow; and their hearts are at peace. 

While they are being born, be it premature or in full term, and while 
they are still in the womb, they see, with the inner spiritual eye, the 
relationship of the soul to Brahman, the Supreme Spirit. Those high-minded 
Rishis who were gifted with intuitive knowledge passed through the world 
of men and returned to Devaloka, home of the gods. O King, it is by destiny 
or by their actions that men attain joy or sorrow. Do not think otherwise. 
Yudhishtira, I consider this the highest truth. 

Some attain happiness in this world, but not in the next; others do so in 
the next, but not in this one. Some attain happiness in this as well as in the 
next world, and others neither here nor in the next world. Those that have 
vast wealth glitter in their rich ornaments. O slayer of mighty enemies, 
these are addicted to pleasures of the flesh; they enjoy happiness only in this 
world but not in the next. 

Those who meditate and study the Vedas, who are firm in their 
asceticism, who use all their energies in the performance of their duties, 
who have their senses under perfect control, who refrain from killing 
animals, those men, O Parantapa, attain bliss in the next world but not in 
this one! 

Those who first live a chaste life, then virtuously acquire wealth in due 
time, and then marry and perform sacrifices find felicity both in this and the 
next world. However, foolish men who do not acquire gyana, who do not 
practice dhyana or daana, who do not marry and have children and who do 
not enjoy the joys this world has to offer, do not attain joy either in this or 
the next world. 

All of you have great knowledge, awesome prowess and celestial 
energy. You have come from the other world and taken birth in this one to 


fulfil the purpose of the gods, to exterminate evil. You, who are so valiant, 
who practice stern tapasya and exercises of self-control, who observe 
dharma, who are tireless, who have pleased the Devas, the Pitrs and the 
Maharishis by performing great deeds, will eventually attain rapture in 
Swarga by virtue of your own actions. 

O jewel of the Kurus, do not let your sufferings create any doubt about 
this in your heart; your afflictions are for your own good.’ ” 


CANTO 183 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


V aisampayana continued, “The Pandavas say to Markandeya 
Mahatman, “We are eager to hear of the greatness of the Brahmanas. 
Tell us of it, O Mahamuni!’ 

Markandeya replies, ‘A strong, handsome young prince of the Haihaya 
clan, a conqueror of hostile cities, once went hunting. While roaming in a 
wilderness of great trees and thickets of tall grass he saw, not far from him, 
a Muni wearing black antelope skin and, mistaking him for a deer, killed 
him. When he realised what he had done, he was paralysed with horror and 
grief. He went to the Haihaya elders and this lotus-eyed prince told them 
what had happened. 

Child, when they heard his story and saw the body of the sage who had 
subsisted on fruit and roots, they were distraught. They all set out, enquiring 
everywhere they went, whose son the Muni might be. They reached the 
asrama of Arishtanemi, son of Kasyapa. They reverently greeted the great 
sage, who sat in resolute tapasya, and remained standing while he received 
them formally. 

The Haihaya elders said to the illustrious Muni, “By a freak of fate, we 
are no longer worthy of your welcome, because we have killed a 
Brahmana!” 


The illumined Rishi said to them, “How did you happen to kill a 
Brahmana? Tell me where he is, and you will see the power of my tapasya!” 

The Haihayas related everything to him, exactly as it had occurred. 
They went back but did not find the body of the dead Rishi where they had 
left it. They scoured the place, without success, and, ashamed and dazed, 
returned to the Muni. 

The son of Kasyapa said to them, “O Ksatriyas, could this be the 
Brahmana that you killed? This Brahmana, who has acquired great power 
from his tapasya, is my son.” 

When they saw the Brahmana, they were astonished, and said, “This is 
incredible! How has one who was dead come to life again? Is it the power 
of his tapasya that has revived him? We are agog to hear this, O Rishi, if it 
can be explained.” 

The Rishi replied, “Death has no power over us. I will explain why this 
is so. We perform our sacred dharma and so we have no fear of death; we 
speak well of Brahmanas and never think ill of them and so death holds no 
terror for us. We entertain our guests with food and drink, make sure our 
dependants eat well and we, finally, eat what is left. Therefore, we are not 
afraid of death. We lead strict and peaceful lives, we are charitable and 
tolerant, we visit holy shrines and live in sacred places; thus, we have no 
fear of death. We live amongst people of great spirituality and so death 
holds no dread for us. This is only a brief explanation. Now return to your 
home, without vanity and fear of sin.” 

Saying Tathaastu, so be it, and saluting the great Muni, the princes 
returned to their country, Bhaaratottama.’ ” 


CANTO 184 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya continues, ‘I will tell you more about the glory of 

the Brahmanas! The Rajarishi Vainya was once performing an 
Aswamedha yagna, when Atri decided to go to him for alms. However, 
later, Atri of shining tejas renounced his desire for wealth and wanted to 
live in the forest. 

He called his wife and sons together and said to them, “We will attain 
perfect tranquillity and fulfilment if we live in the forest. I hope you will 
agree to live like that and earn spiritual merit.” 

His wife, a woman of dharma, said to him, “Go to Rajarishi Vainya and 
beg him for wealth. The royal sage is performing the Aswamedha yagna, 
and will give you what you ask. Once you have the wealth, you can 
distribute it amongst your sons and those who serve you and then go 
wherever you please. Men who are wise in matters of religion say that this 
is the highest dharma.” 

Atri replied, “Virtuous one, the exalted Gautama has told me that 
Vainya is a pious man, devoted to Truth, but there are Brahmanas in his 
asrama who are jealous of me. So I had better not go to Vainya. If, while I 
am there, I speak pious words that promote spiritual liberation, they will 
contradict me with arguments that have no substance or goodness. Yet, I see 


the wisdom of what you say, and I will go to Vainya; he will give me cattle 
and riches.” 

Atri of great punya went straight to Vainya’s sacrifice and, reaching the 
yagnasala, he paid obeisance to the king, praised him with eulogies and 
said, “Blessings be upon you, O king! You are the best of the rulers of the 
Earth. Sages admire you; there is no one who knows as much about dharma 
as you.” 

Rishi Gautama, lustrous tapasvin, indignantly responded, “Atri, you 
seem to have lost your reason. In this world, Mahendra alone is the 
foremost of all sovereigns!” 

Atri said to Gautama, “Just as Indra, the lord of all creatures, controls 
our destinies, so does this king! It is you whose mind has been clouded by 
ignorance.” 

Gautama replied, “I know that I am right and that you are mistaken. You 
flatter the king in the presence of his courtiers only to please him. You have 
no idea what the highest dharma is, nor do you feel the need for it. Despite 
your great age you are like an ignorant child.” 

While these two were arguing before the Munis who were conducting 
the yagna, Vainya asked, “Why do they speak so fiercely?” 

Kasyapa, irradiant in his piety and learned in all things religious, 
approached the disputants and asked them what the problem was. Gautama 
addressed that assembly of great Munis, “Listen, O Dvijottamas, to the 
point of dispute between us. Atri says that Vainya is the ruler of our 
destinies, and I doubt this greatly.” 

The sages went to Sanatkumara, who was a master of dharma, to clear 
their doubt. This sage, of fathomless spirit, heard about the dispute and, in 
words laden with significance, said to those sages, “The power of a 
Brahmana combined with that of a Kshatriya is as potent as the fire fanned 
by wind, which burns down forests; it can consume all enemies. Like Indra, 
the king is the giver of laws and the protector of his subjects; like Sukra, he 
establishes the code of dharma; like Brihaspati, he is a counsellor. 
Therefore, he is indeed the ruler of men’s destinies. 

Is there a man who thinks he is above worshipping Prajapati— Creator 
of all beings; or Virata—royal emperor; or Kshatriya—lord and protector of 
the Earth, ruler of men? 

Because he is the law-giver the king is the guardian of the order of the 
varnas. He is the upholder of honour in battle and the keeper of peace; he is 


the ever-vigilant, the contented, the sovereign, the guide to spiritual bliss, 
the easily victorious, Vishnu-like, and of effective anger. He is the winner 
of wars and the embodiment of devotion to sanatana dharma. The Rishis 
entrusted Kshatriyas with temporal power because they were afraid of 
committing sin. 

Even as the Sun destroys evil in heaven, the king burns sin on this earth. 
The king’s greatness is confirmed by the Shastras, and I must rule in favour 
of those that give praise to the king.” 

Greatly pleased, Vainya said to Atri, who had praised him, “O illumined 
sage, you have declared me the greatest and most excellent of men, and 
compared me to the gods. I will give you vast and varied wealth, for to me 
you seem all-knowing. I will give you, O well-clad and well-adorned one, a 
hundred million gold coins and ten bharas of gold.” 

Thus feted, Atri of the stern tapasya and vast spiritual power humbly 
accepted all the gifts and returned home. He gave the wealth to his sons and 
went carefree to the forest to live the life of a sannyasi.’ ” 


CANTO 185 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


¢ “MI arkandeya continues, ‘O conqueror of hostile cities, listen to 
what Saraswati said when the illumined Tarkshya asked her 
about how a man may acquire punya through his actions. 

Tarkshya asked, “Great Devi, what is the best thing for a man to do, and 
how must he do so, that he may live a virtuous life? Tell me, most beautiful 
one, so that I can live by your advice and not fall from the high path of 
truth. When and how must one offer oblations to the sacred fire, and when 
must one worship so that dharma remains intact? Tell me this, so that I can 
live in this world, free of passion, craving and desire.” 

Saraswati saw that Tarkshya was sincere, and also intelligent. 

She said to him, “He who devotes himself to studying the Vedas and, 
while in a state of purity and equanimity, sees the Brahman, attains the 
supreme bliss of the immortals and attains Swarga. There, he sees that great 
and sacred lakes abound, full of fish, flowers and golden lilies. They are like 
shrines and to look at them suffices to remove all grief. Holy men live in 
peace on their shores, worshipped by golden-skinned Apsaras. 

He who gifts cows to Brahmanas attains the highest spiritual state; by 
giving bullocks he reaches the solar regions; by giving clothes he goes to 
the lunar world; and by giving gold he attains the world of the immortals. 


He who gifts a beautiful cow with a fine calf, and plentiful in milk, and 
which will not run away, will live in celestial realms for as many years as 
there are hairs on the body of that animal. 

He who gives a strong, powerful, young bullock that can pull a plough 
and carry heavy burdens reaches the realms attained by men who give ten 
cows. When a man bestows a well-caparisoned kapila cow with a bronze 
milk-pail, along with gold, he will find that the cow will return to him, 
because she is the giver of boons. 

He who gives away cows reaps the rich harvest of his daana, which is 
measured by the hairs on the body of the animal. He also saves his sons, 
grandsons and his descendants for seven generations from damnation. He 
who gives a Brahmana sesame seeds formed in the shape of a cow with 
golden horns, with a bronze milk-pail, and gold as well, easily attains the 
realm of the Vasus. 

Through his own actions a man descends into the dark, lower regions, 
infested by the evil spirits of his own passions, and lives in turmoil like a 
ship tossed by a storm on the high seas; but the gift of cows to Brahmanas 
saves him in the next world. He who gives his daughter in marriage to a 
Brahmana, in Brahma vivaha, who bestows land on Brahmanas, and who 
gives other gifts, goes to the world of Purandara. O Tarkshya, the virtuous 
man who offers oblations to the sacred fire for seven years, without remit, 
sanctifies seven generations above and below him by what he does.” 

Tarkshya said, “Lovely Devi, tell me about the laws for keeping the 
sacred fire lit, as dictated by the Vedas. I want to learn those timeless laws 
from you.” 

And the Mahadevi Saraswati expatiated on those laws from the Vedas, 
in detail.’ ” 


CANTO 186 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


=s Y udhishtira asks the Brahmana Markandeya, ‘Will you now tell us 
the story of Vaivaswata Manu?’ 

Markandeya replies, “Rajan, there was a great Rishi named Manu. He 
was the son of Vivaswan and was equal to Brahma in glory. He was 
stronger, more powerful, wealthier and more spiritually disciplined than his 
father and grandfather. Manu performed the most stringent tapasya in the 
forest of badari trees known as Visala. There, with head bowed down, and 
unblinking eyes, he sat in unflinching penance for ten thousand years. 

One day, while he was at tapasya, wearing wet clothes and matted hair, 
a fish swam up to the banks of the river Chirini and spoke to him. It said, 
‘Rajarishi, I am a helpless little fish and afraid of the larger fish. Would you 
be my protector, great and pious sage, since big fish devour smaller ones? 
Will you save me from drowning in this river of terrors? I will repay you for 
your help.” 

Vaivaswata Manu was overcome by pity and he took the fish out of the 
water with his hands and put it into a clay water-pot. The fish’s body 
glistened as if it was the reflection of the moon he had taken from the river. 
Manu reared it lovingly as if it was a child, and that fish grew apace. After a 
time, it became so big that the water-pot could not contain it. 

It spoke to Manu again, “O Rajarishi, please me find a bigger home.” 


Manu took it out of the clay pot and put it into a large tank. There, too, 
the fish continued to grow rapidly. Although the tank was two yojanas long 
and one yojana wide, soon there was no room in it for the fish to swim and 
frolic. 

It saw Manu and spoke to him once more. It said, “Holy and adored 
father, take me to the Ganga, the favourite wife of Sagara the Ocean, or take 
me elsewhere, as you like. O Anagha, because of you I have grown so 
much, and I will gladly go wherever you take me.” 

Manu took the fish to the Ganga and slipped it into the river. There, O 
desiccator of your enemies, the fish grew again and, after a very short time, 
said to Manu, “Lord, my body is so big that I find the Ganga restricts me. I 
beg you, take me to the sea!” 

Son of Pritha, Manu took it out of the Ganga and had it borne to the sea. 
Despite its great size, Manu moved it easily, and its touch and smell were 
pleasant to him. When Manu cast it into the sea, it said to him, with a smile, 
‘Revered one, you have protected me with such love; listen while I tell you 
what you should do in the future. O most blessed one, a Pralaya is at hand, 
the dissolution of the world is near. What I am going to tell you is for your 
weal. 

Mobile and motionless creation faces doom. You must build a strong, 
vast ship and tie a long rope to it. OQ Mahamuni, you and the Saptarishis 
must take all the seeds that the Brahmanas of antiquity listed, preserve them 
separately and carefully in this boat. In it, you must all wait for me and I 
will appear to you as a horned creature. That is how you will know me. I 
leave you now. Do as I tell you because, without my help, you cannot save 
yourself from the Pralaya.” 

Manu said to the fish, “I will do as you say, great one.” 

They both went their separate ways. Manu procured all the different 
seeds, as the fish said, and set sail in a most excellent ship on the billowing 
sea. He thought of the fish. Knowing his thought, the fish appeared before 
him, with horns on its head. Purushavyaghra, Manu saw the horned fish 
rising from the ocean like a sculpted mountain and he lowered a noose 
around its head. Yoked to the ship, the fish easly towed the craft through the 
salt waters and took them across the roaring, heaving sea. 

O Parantapa, tossed by the tempestuous ocean, the vessel reeled like a 
drunken tramp. There was no land to be seen anywhere. There was only 
water; it covered the sky and heaven too. And, O bull of the Bhaaratas, 


when the world was inundated, none but Manu, the seven Rishis and the 
fish were visible. 

Rajan, the fish untiringly pulled the ship through the flood for countless 
years and then it towed the vessel towards the highest peak of the Himavat 
and told the Rishis to tie it to the summit. Obedient to the fish, they moored 
the ship on the peak of the mountain. That peak, Kaunteya, is still called 
Naubandhanam, or harbour. 

The fish addressed the Rishis, “I am Brahman, the Lord of all creation; 
there is none greater than I. Assuming the form of a matsya, I have saved 
you from the Pralaya. Manu will create all beings again—Devas, Asuras 
and Manavas; and all the animate and inanimate things of the universe. He 
will find the power to do this through tapasya, and my blessing will protect 
him. Maya will assail him but I will protect him from it.” So saying, the fish 
vanished. 

Vaivaswata Manu felt the urge to create the world. During this act of 
creation, illusion affected him but he overcame it with his tapasyashakti and 
resumed his task of creating all the beings of the world, in their proper 
order. 

This legend that I have just told you, which destroys sin, is the legend of 
the Fish, the Matsya Avatara. The man who listens every day to this 
primeval tale of Manu attains happiness and everything he wants, and then 
Swarga.’ ” 


CANTO 187 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


¢ oY udhishtira humbly asks the illustrious Markandeya, ‘Mahamuni, 

you have seen many thousands of yugas. Best of Mahatmas, 
there is no one in this world who has lived as long as you, other than 
Brahma of the fathomless mind, who lives in the holiest of realms. 

Only you, O Brahmana, will worship Brahma at the time of the 
dissolution of the universe, when this earth is without a sky and without 
Devas and Danavas. And when that Pralaya ends and Narayana awakes, 
you alone, O enlightened one, will see Brahma re-create the four orders of 
beings after filling the void with air and restricting the endless waters with 
shores. 

You, Brahmanottama, have worshipped Brahma in his body, your soul 
rapt in dhyana, and have been lost in him. You have often been witness to 
the primeval acts of creation; you have surpassed the Prajapatis in the depth 
of your tapasya; in the next world, you are revered as one who is nearest to 
Narayana. 

Long ago, you beheld Mahavishnu, not with your bodily eyes but in a 
pure state of the Spirit, with your blemishless, lotus-like heart—the only 
way in which the manifold Vishnu of universal knowledge can be seen! 

This is why, most learned Rishi, God’s grace is upon you, and neither 
Death the universal destroyer nor old age, the cause of bodily decay, has 


any power over you. 

When neither the Sun nor the Moon, nor Fire, nor Earth, nor Air, nor 
Sky remains; when the world, on the brink of extinction, is one vast ocean, 
Ekarnava; when the Devas and Asuras and the great Nagas are gone; and 
when Brahma of the fathomless mind, Lord of all creatures, sleeps in a 
lotus, you alone will remain to worship him. 

Brahmanottama, you have seen all that has happened before. You alone 
have seen many things with your mind’s eye. Indeed, there is nothing you 
do not know, and I want to hear you explain why all things happen as they 
do.’ 

Markandeya replies, ‘I am happy to tell you what you want to know. 
First, I must worship the Svayambhuva, the self-existent, primordial Being, 
who is undecaying, indestructible and inconceivable, and who is saguna and 
nirguna, both possessed of and without attributes. 

Janardana, who wears golden raiment, this Pitambara, is the creator and 
mover of all things; he is within and outside all things, and he is the Lord of 
all. He is also called the Great, the Incomprehensible, the Wonderful and 
the Immaculate. He has no beginning or end; he pervades all the world; he 
is constant, unchangeable and ageless. He is the creator of all, but is himself 
Un-created; he is the source of all power. His knowledge is greater than that 
of all the gods together. 

O best of kings and men, after the dissolution of the universe, all this 
wonderful creation again comes to life. The Krita yuga comes first, and 
lasts for four thousand years of the Devas, including four hundred years of 
rising and setting. The Treta yuga is next and lasts three thousand years of 
the gods, three hundred being its rising and setting. Next is the Dwapara 
yuga, which is for two thousand years; its rising and setting take two 
hundred years. The next is the Kali yuga, which is one thousand years long, 
and its rising and setting take one hundred years. After the Kali yuga is 
over, the Krita yuga dawns again. 

A yugachakra consists of twelve thousand years of the Devas. One 
thousand such cycles constitute one day of Brahma. Naravyaghra, when the 
universe is withdrawn into its home, which is the body of Brahma, that 
withdrawal of all things is called Pralaya, the dissolution. 

In the last and short Kali yuga, men become addicted to lying; yagnas, 
gifts and vratas are performed by representatives rather than by the ones 
who should be performing them. Brahmanas do work meant for Sudras, and 


Sudras begin earning wealth. Kshatriyas conduct religious rites in the Kali 
yuga, while Brahmanas abandon the performance of yagnas and Vedic 
study; they give up their deer-skin, their staffs and begin eating meat. In the 
Kali yuga, Brahmanas neglect their japa and dhyana, and Sudras undertake 
to do them. Everything is lopsided in the world order, and this foreshadows 
the apocalypse. 

O lord of men, in that time, Mlechcha kings rule over the earth! Those 
sinful monarchs reign using false precepts. The Andhras, the Sakas, the 
Pulindas, the Yavanas, the Kambojas, the Bahlikas and the Abhiras become 
bold sovereigns of the earth. This is the state of the world by the end of the 
Kali yuga! 

Not a single Brahmana adheres to his dharma; the Kshatriyas and the 
Vaisyas also follow practices contrary to their svadharma. Men have short 
lives, are weak, with little srength and small bodies, and are dishonest in the 
extreme. 

Human population dwindles, great tracts of the Earth become deserts, 
and wild animals and beasts of prey roam everywhere. During this age, the 
recitation of the Vedas is futile; Sudras address Brahmanas with a 
disrespectful “Bho”, while the Brahmanas speak to the Sudras with respect. 
At the end of the yuga, animals increase in vast numbers, perfumes do not 
please the senses, and food lacks all taste. 

Rajan, women have many children at each birth, and these are 
physically small, coarse and ill-behaved. Men and women use their mouths 
for sexual intercourse, famines ravage the country, women of vile character 
haunt the roads, and all women are immodest and disobedient to their men. 

In this Kali yuga cows give little milk; trees swarm with crows and do 
not produce full yields of flowers and fruit. Dvijas tainted with the sin of 
killing Brahmanas accept gifts from dishonourable kings. These Brahmanas 
are greedy and ignorant and, wearing religious symbols, harass and threaten 
the people while begging for alms. 

Grihastas, householders, find the burden of taxes impossible to bear, and 
resort to deception, and the basest Brahmanas don the garb of ascetics, let 
their nails and hair grow long, but earn riches by trade. Narapumgava, from 
their lust for wealth, so many Brahmanas become false Sannyasis. 

At this time, men behave in ways that go against their svadharma. They 
become addicted to intoxicating drinks and violate the beds of even their 
gurus. Their desires are worldly, and they avidly pursue sensual pleasures. 


Hermitages are full of sinful, insolent men who advocate a life of 
dependence. 

Indra does not send down rain in its season, and seeds that are sown do 
not sprout, O Bhaarata. Men of unholy thoughts and deeds take pleasure in 
indulging envy and malice. And, Anagha, all the earth is a hotbed of sin. 

In the Kali yuga, the virtuous do not live long, and the Earth is amost 
entirely bereft of dharma. Dishonest merchants and traders sell large 
quantities of goods, using false scales and measures. The good do not 
prosper; only the sinful succeed. Dharma has no value, while sin waxes day 
by day. Men that are devoted to truth and virtue become poor and die 
young; those that lead immoral lives prosper and live long. 

Sin is seen everywhere, even in public places. Men use only evil means 
to achieve their ends. Even small fortunes intoxicate them with pride. O 
king, many appropriate wealth that has been left with them for safe- 
keeping, and then deny that it was given to them at all. 

Wild animals and birds of carrion live in public places and in temples. 
Girls of seven and eight years of age conceive, and boys of ten or twelve 
years become fathers. By the age of sixteen, men begin to age and soon die. 
Living such short lives, boys act like old men, indeed bearing all their 
characteristics. Women become immoral; they deceive even the best of 
husbands and have sexual relations with servants, slaves and even animals. 
Even the wives of Kshatriyas form friendships with other men and have 
liaisons with them while their husbands still live. 

Towards the end of the thousands of years that make up the four yugas, 
and when the lives of men have become short, a drought comes that lasts 
for many years. Men and creatures of little strength and vitality die of 
hunger, in their millions. 

And then, lord of men, seven blazing Suns appear in the sky and suck 
up all the waters of the Earth—from the rivers and seas. All things made of 
wood or grass— wet and dry—are reduced to ashes. 

Fanned by high winds, the fire called Samvartaka flares up on an Earth 
already dried by the seven Suns. In moments, Samvartaka rages through the 
Earth and deep into it, terrorising the Devas, the Danavas and the Yakshas. 
In a flash, the fire destroys everything upon and below the Earth’s surface. 

Samvartaka, fanned by ill winds, consumes this world, all the hundreds 
and thousands of yojanas. Lordly in its power, and blazing in brilliance, it 


consumes the universe—all the Devas, the Asuras, the Gandharvas, 
Yakshas, Nagas and Rakshasas. 

Cloud masses like herds of elephants decked with garlands of lightning 
fill the sky, and they are wonderful to see. Some are the hue of the blue 
lotus, some pale like the water-lily, others resemble lotus stamens, yet 
others are purple, or turmeric yellow, or crow’s-egg blue. Some are bright 
as lotus petals, and some red as vermillion. Some look like the skylines of 
palaces and cities, some like herds of elephants; some are shaped like 
lizards, or crocodiles, or sharks. And, O King, these clouds are terrifying to 
behold and, streaked with lightning, roar frightfully. 

These rain-charged masses quickly cover all the sky and flood the Earth 
—her mountains, forests and mines—with water. Impelled by the Supreme 
Lord, the clouds inundate the entire surface of Bhumi with great downpours 
and douse the raging fire. 

The clouds bring rain without let for twelve years, flooding the Earth. 
And then, Bhaarata, the Ocean breaks his shores, flashing over the 
continents; the mountains shatter into fragments and the Earth sinks under 
the Deluge. 

A sudden mighty wind springs up, and the clouds scud swiftly across 
the sky and disappear. The Self-created Lord, the origin of everything, 
whose home is the Lotus, swallows that frightful wind and now falls into 
sleep, O Bhaarata! 

When the universe becomes one vast expanse of water, when all mobile 
and motionless creatures have been destroyed, when the Devas and the 
Asuras cease to be, when the Yakshas and the Rakshasas are no more, when 
man is gone, when trees and beasts of prey have disappeared, when the 
firmament itself has ceased to exist, I alone, O Lord of the Earth, wander in 
affliction. And wandering over that dreadful expanse of water, my heart is 
sore from not being able to see another living being. 

I roam without stopping, for a long, long time, and become exhausted, 
but find no resting place. Then, in that single unending expanse of waters, I 
see a vast and spreading banyan tree, and a boy sitting on a cot overlaid 
with celestial bedclothes and attached to a long branch of the tree. His face, 
great king, is as fair as the lily, as radiant as the moon, and his eyes are as 
large as petals of a fully-opened lotus blossom! 

My heart fills with wonder at this sight, Rajan, and I ask myself, How 
does this boy sit here when the world has been destroyed? Although I know 


all there is to know about the past, the present and the future, I still cannot 
understand this, even with deep meditation. 

The boy glows with the lustre of the atasi flower and bears the hallowed 
mark of the Srivatsa. He seems to embody the Devi Lakshmi. That boy with 
the Srivatsa, of the lotus-petal eyes and dazzling radiance speaks to me with 
sweet words. 

He says, “Sire, I know that you are tired and need to rest. O 
Markandeya of Bhrigu’s race, rest here as long as you wish. Best of Munis, 
enter into me and rest there. I have assigned my body to be your home, for I 
am pleased with you.” 

When the boy speaks, I feel a complete disregard for my life as a man. 
The boy opens his mouth and, powerless to stop myself, I enter into it. 

I enter the boy’s belly and see the Earth there, all her cities and 
kingdoms. And, Purushottama, while wandering through the belly of that 
exalted One, I see the rivers Ganga, Satudru, Sita, Yamuna and Kausiki; the 
Charmanwati, Vetravati, Chandrabhaga, Saraswati, Sindhu and Vipasa; the 
Godavari, Vaswokasara, Nalini, Narmada and Tamra, the beautiful and 
sacred Vena, the Suvena, the Krishnavena, the Irama and the Mahanadi; the 
Vitasti, the great Kaveri, the Visalya and the Kimpuna I see. 

I see all these and many other rivers that flow across the Earth. And, 
Parantapa, I also see the Ocean, home of all waters, with its crocodiles and 
sharks and its precious gems. I see the Sky, too, adorned with Sun and 
Moon, and it blazes with the brilliance of fiery Surya. 

And I see Bhumi as well, graced with woods and forests. I see many 
Brahmanas busy with their yagnas, Kshatriyas fulfilling their 
responsibilities to the other castes, Vaisyas farming, and Sudras devoted to 
the service of the higher varnas. 

Rajan, while wandering through the belly of the boy, that Mahatman, I 
also see the mountains Himavat, Hemakunta, Nishada and silver-rich 
Sweta. I see the mountains Gandhamadana, Mandara and the massive Nila; 
golden Meru and Mahendra and the excellent Vindhyas; Malaya and 
Pariyatra. These and many other mountains, all bejewelled, do I see within 
the boy’s stomach. 

While wandering through his belly, I see lions, tigers, boars and, indeed, 
all the Earth’s other animals. Naravyaghra, as I roam I see the whole 
pantheon of Devas, with their king Sakra; I see the Sadhyas, the Rudras, the 
Adityas, the Guhyakas, the Pitrs, the Uragas and the Pannagas, all the 


Garutmats of the air, the Vasus, the Aswins, the Gandharvas, the Apsaras, 
the Yakshas, the Rishis, the hordes of Daityas and Danavas, and the Nagas. 
I see the sons of Simhika and all the other enemies of the gods; I see 
everything that exists on Bhumi, mobile and immobile. 

I eat fruits and live inside the boy’s body for many centuries, but despite 
wandering over the entire universe inside it, I cannot see how far it extends. 
When I fail to measure the limits of that sacred body, I prayerfully invoke 
the boon-bestowing Paramatman and bow to his preeminence. No sooner 
have I done this than I am shot out of his mouth by a gust of wind. 

And, Rajan, I find myself outside once more, looking at the branch of 
the same banyan tree, at the same being, the boy of blinding tejas and with 
the sacred mark of the Srivatsa, who has swallowed the universe. And that 
boy of blinding radiance, clad in fulvid robes, enthralls me with what he 
smilingly says. 

“Markandeya, best of Munis, wandering inside my body has exhausted 
you, but still, I will speak to you.” 

At the very moment that he says this to me, I acquire a new sight, which 
enables me to realise that I have gained true knowledge and been freed from 
illusion. And, having witnessed the inexhaustible power of that Being of 
energy beyond measure, I worship his hallowed, beautiful feet—their soles 
bright as burnished copper, their reddish toes—by placing them carefully on 
my head and joining my palms together in humility. Then I look up at him 
with utmost reverence, that Divine Being who is the soul of all things and 
whose eyes are like lotus petals. 

With hands still folded, I address him, “O Divine One, I wish to know 
you and this wondrous illusion. I saw the entire universe in your belly. The 
Devas, the Danavas, the Rakshasas, the Yakshas, the Gandharvas and the 
Nagas, indeed the whole universe of mobile and immobile creation, are all 
within your body! Although I travelled all through your body at great speed, 
by your grace, I have not forgotten anything I saw. And, Great Lord, I have 
come out of your body because you willed it, not because I wanted to. 

O lotus-leaf eyed, I want to know about you, who are perfect! Why do 
you sit here in the form of a boy after having swallowed the universe? You 
must explain it to me. Why, O Anagha, is all the universe inside you? How 
long will you stay here? Lord of gods, my curiosity is not improper for a 
Brahmana, and I would so like to hear all this from you, in detail and 


exactly as it happens. What I have seen is wonderful and 
incomprehensible!’ 

The Devadeva, of the refulgent splendour and ineffable beauty, that 
most eloquent among of all speakers, pacified me with these words.’ ” 


CANTO 188 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya continues, ‘The hallowed being said, “O Brahmana, 

even the gods do not really know me! However, since I am 

pleased with you, I will tell you how I created the universe. Regenerate 

Rishi, not only are you devoted to your ancestors, you have also sought my 

protection. You have, besides, seen me with your eyes, and your punya is 
great. 

In time before memory, I gave the waters the name Naara; and because 
the waters have ever been my ayana, or home, I am called Narayana. 
Brahmanottama, I am Narayana, the source of all things, the eternal, 
unchangeable One. I am the creator of all things, as well as the destroyer of 
all. 

I am Vishnu, I am Brahma and I am Sakra the king of the Devas. I am 
Vaisravana, and I am Yama the lord of the dead. I am Siva, I am Soma, and 
I am Kasyapa the lord of the created. I am Dhatri, and also Vidhatri, and I 
am Yagna embodied. 

Fire is my mouth, the Earth my feet, and the Sun and the Moon are my 
eyes; Heaven is the crown of my head, the Sky and the Cardinal Points are 
my ears; the Waters are born of my sweat. Space is my body, and Air is my 
mind. 


I have performed many hundreds of yagnas at which I have given 
bountiful gifts. I am always present at the sacrifices of the gods; and all 
those who perform Vedic sacrifices make their offerings to me. On Earth, it 
is me that the Kshatriyas and Vaisyas worship at the yagnas they perform to 
attain Swarga, heavenly bliss. 

Assuming the form of Sesha, I hold upon my head this Earth bounded 
by the four seas and adorned by Meru and Mandara. O Dvija, long ago I 
took the form of a Boar and raised this Bhumi that had sunk in the water. It 
is I who, becoming the fire that spews out of the horse’s mouth, drain the 
waters of the ocean and create them again. 

It is from my vitality that Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras 
sprang from my mouth, my arms, my thighs and my feet. It is from me that 
the Rig, the Sama, the Yajur, and the Atharva Vedas arose, and it is into me 
that they all merge when the time comes. 

Brahmanas devoted to sannyasa, who value peace as the highest 
attribute, who have their souls under complete control, who yearn for 
knowledge, who have shed lust, anger and envy, who are detached from the 
material things of the earth, whose sins have been washed away, who are 
gentle and virtuous, who have no pride and who truly know the Self, they 
worship me with profound dhyana. 

Named Samvartaka, I am the Flame, the Fire, the Wind and the Sun. 
Dvijottama, what you see and know as stars in the sky are the pores of my 
skin. The gem-rich Ocean and the four Cardinal Points are my robes, my 
bed, and my home. I have distributed them over the Earth in order to serve 
the purposes of the gods. 

Manavottama, lust, anger, joy, fear and confusion, which cloud the 
intellect, are all different forms of me. I reward men for practising satya, 
daana, tapasya, shanti and ahimsa towards all creatures, and for other 
benign deeds. Men wander within my body, under my control, their senses 
overwhelmed by me. They move not by their will but by mine. 

Brahmanas who have thoroughly studied the Vedas, who have tranquil 
minds, and who have subdued their anger earn great rewards through their 
numerous sacrifices. These rewards, however, are unattainable by evil men 
who are overtaken by covetousness, men with dark souls, unblessed and 
impure. 

Know, therefore, Brahmana, that the benefits obtained by men who have 
disciplined their souls bear great merit, and they are out of the reach of the 


ignorant and the foolish. 

At the times in human history when dharma and truth wane and sin and 
adharma rise, I incarnate myself in new forms. O Muni, when fierce and 
malicious Daityas and Rakshasas, who cannot be slain by even the Devas, 
are born on Earth I am born in human form into the families of virtuous 
men and restore dharma by exterminating evil. 

Powered by my own maya, I create Devas and Manavas, Gandharvas 
and Rakshasas, and all unmoving things, and then destroy them all at the 
appropriate time. For the preservation of righteousness and honour I assume 
a human form, and keep that form until the time for deeds comes, when I 
assume my incomprehensible, inconceivable Viswarupa. 

In the Krita yuga I am white, in the Treta yuga I am golden-yellow, in 
the Dwapara I am red and in the Kali yuga I become dark in hue. In the Kali 
yuga, evil is four times as powerful as goodness. At the end of the yuga I 
assume the form of Death and destroy the three worlds, with all their 
moving and motionless things. With three steps I cover the entire universe. 

I am the essence of the Universe; I am the source of all happiness; I am 
the humbler of pride; I am omnipresent; I am infinite; I am lord of the 
senses; and great is my power. O Brahmana, it is I that set the Kaalachakra, 
the wheel of time, in motion. Foremost of Rishis, I am formless; I am the 
Destroyer; and I am the impetus of any effort in all my creatures. 

My spirit infuses all beings, but none know me. It is me that the pious 
and the devout worship in all the worlds. 

Sinless one, whatever pain you felt while inside my belly was for your 
future happiness and good fortune. Whatever mobile and immobile objects 
you have seen in the world, all that was ordained by my Soul, which is the 
well-spring of all existence. 

The progenitor of all creatures is half my body. I am called Narayana, 
and I am bearer of the conch-shell, the discus and the mace. Great Rishi, for 
a period equal to a thousand yugas, I, the universal Soul, sleep, drawing all 
creatures into that same nidra. I remain here through all time in the form of 
a boy, though I am the most ancient One, until Brahma awakes. 

I am pleased with you and I, who am Brahman, have granted boons to 
you who are worshipped by revered sages. You were struck by melancholy 
when you saw the vast expanse of water and realised that all mobile and 
immobile beings had been destroyed. I knew this, and I showed you the 
universe within my body. 


And while you were inside my body beholding all creation, you were 
filled with a wonder that stabbed your senses. O Rishi, that is why I 
expelled you through my breath. 

I have now told you about the Soul which cannot be fathomed, even by 
the Devas and the Asuras. And as long as that glorious tapasvin, holy 
Brahma, remains asleep, you can live here in peace and bliss. When that 
ancestor of all creatures awakens, I will then create all creatures with 
physical bodies, the Sky, Earth, Light, Air, Water and, indeed, everything 
else that you may see!” 

My son, with these words, that wonderful, hallowed Being vanished 
from my sight, and I then saw this varied and wondrous universe begin to 
take birth. O best of the Bhaaratas, most virtuous among men, I witnessed 
this wonder at the end of the yuga. 

The Deity, of the eyes as large as lotus leaves, whom I saw so long ago, 
is this tiger among men, this Janardana who has become your kinsman. It is 
because of the boon he granted me that I remember everything clearly, and 
also why my life is so long and death under my control. 

That ancient and supreme Lord Hari of mysterious soul has been born 
as Krishna of the Vrishnis. This Mahabaho seems to sport playfully in this 
world. He is Dhatri and Vidhatri, the destroyer of the eternal, the bearer of 
the Srivatsa mark on his breast, the Lord of the lord of all creatures, the 
highest of the high, also called Govinda! Seeing him, this greatest of all 
gods, this ever-victorious one clad in yellow robes, this lord of the Vrishnis, 
my memory returns to me. 

Krishna is the father and mother of all creatures. O bulls of the race of 
Kuru, seek refuge in him, the Protector!’ 

The sons of Pritha, the twins and Draupadi bow deeply to Krishna; and 
that tiger among men speaks words of great sweetness to them.” 


CANTO 189 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Yudhishtira repeats his question to Markandeya 
about how the Earth will be ruled. 

He says, ‘Most eloquent of all speakers, O Muni of Bhrigu’s race, 
amazing indeed is what you have told us about the destruction and re- 
creation of all things at the end of the yugas. Now I am eager to know what 
will happen in the next age, the Kali yuga. 

When dharma no longer exists, what will remain? What will men be 
capable of in that yuga? What will people eat? How will they entertain 
themselves? What will man’s longevity be at the end of the yuga? And how 
long will the yuga last, after which another Krita yuga dawns? 

Tell me as much as you can, O Muni; what you say is so fascinating.’ 

That best of sages begins his discourse again, much to the delight of the 
tiger of the Vrishnis, and of the sons of Pandu as well. Markandeya says, 
‘Listen, Rajan, and I will tell you all that I saw and heard; Yudhishtira, 
listen to everything that, by the grace of God, I gained intuitive knowledge 
of. Listen while I tell you the way the world will be during the Kali yuga. 

The Krita yuga was free from deceit, guile, avarice and acquisitiveness; 
dharma was a bull with four strong legs, and it walked among men. In the 
Treta yuga, sin deprived the bull of dharma of one of its legs. In the 
Dwapara yuga, evil and goodness reigned equally, and dharma was left to 


limp on two legs. In the dark age, the Kali yuga, dharma is made of three 
parts of evil and one part of goodness, and exists thus amongst men. 
Dharma now depends on man as it cannot support itself on its one 
remaining leg. 

Man’s lifespan, his energy, his intellect and his strength dwindle with 
each yuga. Pandava, in the Kali yuga, Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and 
Sudras will make a hollow show of being virtuous, only to deceive the 
world. Men with false reputations of being learned will constrict and hide 
the truth. 

The shortened lifespan of man will prevent him from gaining true 
knowledge; and because he has little gyana, he will lack wisdom. 
Covetousness and greed will overwhelm him. Under the sway of avarice, 
wrath, lust and ignorance, men will hate and want to kill each other. 

With their virtue reduced, and without austerity and truth, Brahmanas, 
Kshatriyas and Vaisyas will be like Sudras. Men of the lowest varnas will 
rise to displace those higher-born than themselves, who then sink to the 
bottom of the social order. Yudhishtira, this will be the state of the world at 
the end of the yuga. 

Flax will be the best material for clothing, and koradusaka, wheat, the 
best grain. In the Kali yuga man’s only friend will be his wife. The people 
will live on fish and the milk of goats and sheep, for cows will be extinct. 
Towards the end of the yuga, even those who observe religious rituals and 
vows will only do so to gain material wealth. 

Animosity will prevail between men and they will be filled with 
murderous intent towards one another. Without yoga, communion, men will 
become atheists and thieves. The land will lose its fertility and, in 
desperation, men will dig the banks of streams with spades and sow seeds 
there. But even those places will prove barren for them. 

Even devout men who perform ceremonial rites to honour the Pitrs and 
the Devas will become avaricious and take what belongs to others. The 
father will enjoy what belongs to the son; and the son, what belongs to the 
father. Men will take pleasure from things forbidden by the scriptures. 
Brahmanas will speak contemptuously of the Vedas and will not keep any 
vratas; their understanding will be clouded by disputation and dialectical 
sophistry, and they will no longer perform yagnas or homas. Deceived by 
false teachings, they will be attracted to all things base and low. 


Men will till low-lands for cultivation and use cows and yearling calves 
as beasts of burden and to draw the plough. Sons will kill fathers, and 
fathers their sons, with impunity. They will revel in these killings, which 
will frequently become the means of assuaging anxiety. 

The whole world will be filled with the coarse ways of the Mlechchas, 
their ideas, laws and rituals. Yagnas will no more be performed, and joy 
will disappear. Men will steal from the weak, friendless and helpless, as 
well as from the wise. Evil men will give gifts with contempt, which the 
people of the Kali yuga will readily accept, reduced as they are in gyana 
and tejas, and prone to greed, folly and sin. The kings of the earth, their 
hearts in thrall to sin, ignorant while boasting of wisdom, will constantly 
challenge one another from naked bloodlust. 

At the end of the Kali yuga, Kshatriyas will become as thorns of the 
Earth. They will be filled with greed and puffed up with pride and vanity. 
Unable and unwilling to protect their subjects, they will revel in inflicting 
savage punishments on them. The Kshatriyas of this age will repeatedly 
attack the good and the honest and, pitiless even in the face of their grief- 
stricken cries, they will forcibly seize their wives and their wealth. 

No one will ask for or give a girl’s hand in marriage, but girls will 
choose their own husbands, when the end of the yuga comes. And the kings 
of the earth, their souls steeped in ignorance, and their hearts in discontent, 
will rob their subjects in every way they can. 

The whole world will be reduced to the level of the Mlechcha. When 
the end of the yuga comes, the right hand will deceive the left, and the left, 
the right. Vile men pretending to be learned will abbreviate Truth; the old 
will exhibit youthful folly, and the young will not respect age. Cowards will 
be known as brave men, and the courageous will be cast down as cowards. 

Towards the end of the yuga men will stop trusting one another; the 
greedy world will live on one kind of food; sin will increase and prosper, 
while dharma will fade away; Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and Vaisyas will 
disappear, leaving no trace of their castes; all men will become members of 
one common order, without distinction; fathers will not forgive sons the 
least folly, and sons will not forgive their fathers. 

As the end draws near, wives will not wait upon and serve their 
husbands; men will want to live in countries where wheat and barley form 
the staple food; both men and women will become entirely licentious and 
intolerant. 


O Yudhishtira, all the world will be a Mlechcha universe. Men will no 
longer please the gods by offerings of sraddhas; no one will listen to the 
words of another because none will see another as his Guru. Ruler of men, 
intellectual darkness will envelop the Earth; sixteen years will be man’s 
span on earth, after which he will die. Five- and six-year old girls will give 
birth, and boys of seven and eight will be fathers. Tiger among kings, when 
the end of the yuga comes, wives will never be content with their husbands, 
nor husbands with their wives. 

Men will possess little; they will wear the marks of religion outwardly, 
while their hearts are full of darkness; envy and malice will fill the world; 
men will not give each other anything. Drought and famine will stalk the 
land; lustful men and wanton women will wander the streets; and wives will 
abhor their husbands. 

All the people will adopt the ways of the Mlechchas—they will become 
omnivorous without distinction; their actions will be infused with cruelty — 
when the end of the Kali yuga comes. 

Bhaaratottama, urged by avarice, men will be deceitful in trade and 
commerce. Without any knowledge of the laws that govern rituals, men will 
perform ceremonial rites and then behave in any way they please. When the 
end of the yuga comes, the dispositions of men will be such that they will 
tend naturally towards cruelty; they will speak ill of one another; and they 
will fell trees and despoil gardens without a thought. Men will be constantly 
anxious about their livelihood. 

O King, greed will rule all of mankind and make men kill even 
Brahmanas in order to have their possessions. The twice-born varnas, 
oppressed by the Sudras, will wander in fear over the face of the earth, 
unprotected and crying Oh! and Alas! When men begin to kill one another, 
when they become utterly evil and violent, when they have no regard for 
animal life, then the yuga’s end nears. 

The best of high-born men will cry like crows and fly in terror when set 
upon by robbers, and seek refuge beside rivers and on mountains and in 
other inaccessible places. The first among the twice-born will, Bhumipala, 
lose his fortitude and become a servant of Sudras, in those terrible times. 

Sudras will interpret the scriptures, while Brahmanas wait upon them 
and accept their duties as guided by these base interpretations. The low will 
become the high, and everything will be the opposite of what should be. 


Men will renounce the gods and will worship bones and other occult 
relics in secret, inside their homes. At the end of the yuga, Sudras will not 
wait on Brahmanas. In the asramas of great Rishis, in the gurukulas of 
Brahmanas, in places sacred to the gods, in sacrificial compounds and in 
holy tanks, the Earth will be disfigured with tombs, with pillars containing 
skeletal relics, rather than graced with temples dedicated to the Devas. 

All this will come to be at the end of the yuga, and they are the signs 
that the yuga draws to a close. 

When all men become vicious, destitute of virtue, carnivorous and 
addicted to intoxicating drinks, the yuga comes to an end. O Monarch, 
when flowers form within other flowers, and fruit within other fruit, then 
will the yuga come to an end. The clouds will pour rain out of season as the 
end of the yuga approaches. 

The ceremonial rites of passage will not follow one after the other in the 
proper order; Sudras will take up arms against Brahmanas as the end of the 
yuga draws near. 

The Earth will be full of Mlechchas, and Brahmanas will flee in all 
directions to escape having to pay inordinate taxes. All men will conduct 
themselves uniformly; and the people will flee into woods and forests, to 
escape from the work assigned to them, and subsist on fruit and roots. 

The world will be so diseased that honourable conduct will not be seen 
anywhere. Sishyas will not value the teachings of their Acharyas, and even 
try to harm them. And men will take no notice of true teachers, all of these 
by now impoverished. Friends and relatives and kinsmen will offer false 
friendship for the sake of the person’s wealth. When the end of the yuga 
comes, everybody will be direly needy. 

All the points of the horizon will be ablaze, the stars and constellations 
will no longer shine, and the planets and all their movements will turn 
inauspicious. Wild winds will blow chaotically, at all times, and countless 
meteors will flash across the sky, foreboding the darkest evil. 

Seven suns will appear in the sky. Bedlam and anarchy will be 
everywhere, and fires will abound. And the Sun will be in eclipse from 
dawn to dusk, in an unnatural, perennial night. And the god of the thousand 
eyes will lash down unseasonable rains. 

When the end of the Kali yuga comes, crops will be sparse. Women will 
speak sharply; they will be hard-hearted, prone to weeping, and they will 
disobey their husbands in all things. And at the end of the yuga, sons will 


kill their fathers and mothers; women, living uncontrolled lives, will kill 
their husbands and sons. And, O King, at the end of the yuga, Rahu will 
swallow the Sun, causing eerie and untimely eclipses. 

Fires will burn all around. Unable to find food, drink or shelter, even 
when they ask for these, wayfarers will lay themselves down in resignation, 
on roadsides, and ask for nothing anymore. 

When the end of the yuga comes, crows, snakes, vultures, kites and 
other animals and birds of prey and carrion will utter frightful cries. When 
the end of the yuga comes, men will shun their friends, relatives and 
followers. Men will leave the towns and cities where they live and work, 
and go in search of new ones. And the people will wander over the Earth, 
calling out heartrendingly to their loved ones whom they have lost. 

When those terrible times are finally over, creation will begin anew. 
Men will be created again and divided into the four varnas, beginning with 
the Brahmanas. And, to make men prosper, Providence will smile on them. 
When the Sun, the Moon and Brihaspati enter the same sign of the zodiac, 
with the nakshatra Pushyami, the Krita yuga will begin again. 

Once more, the clouds release their waters in proper season, and the 
stars and their movements become auspicious. The planets revolve in their 
true orbits, and turn gentle and benign. There will be prosperity and 
plenitude, health and peace everywhere. 

In time, a Brahmana named Kalki will be born. He will worship and 
glorify Vishnu, and have untold energy, great intelligence and mighty 
prowess. He will be born in the town of Sambhala, into a devout Brahmana 
family. Chariots and weapons, warriors and arms, and coats of mail shall be 
available to him as soon as he thinks of them. 

By dint of his dharma, he will be a king of kings and ever-victorious. 
He will restore peace and order to a world thronging with fell creatures and 
plunged in chaos. Kalki of dazzling tejas will first destroy all things—he 
will be the universal Destroyer, and only then will he inaugurate a new 
yuga. 

Surrounded by Brahmanas, he will seek out and kill all evil men and 
women, wherever they may try to hide.’ ” 


CANTO 190 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “VI arkandeya continues, ‘Having annihilated thieves and bandits, 

Kalki will, at a great horse-sacrifice, make a gift of the Earth to 

the Brahmanas and, having established again the sanatana dharma ordained 

by the Self-Created One, illustrious Kalki, of the sacred deeds, will retire 
into a mystic forest. 

The people of this world will emulate whatever he does and, when the 
Brahmanas have finally rid the Earth of criminals and sinners, prosperity 
will sprout everywhere. The countries of the Earth will be subjugated one 
after the other, and then, that tiger among Brahmanas, Kalki, will shed his 
deer-skins, lances and tridents, and roam the world, adored wherever he 
goes by the greatest sages, showing his reverence for them, while doing 
away with sinners of every kind. Kalki will kill the evil ones amid piteous 
cries like Oh, father! Oh, mother! Oh, son! 

Bhaarata, when sin has been rooted out and dharma re-established at the 
beginning of the Krita yuga, men will begin to observe true religious rites 
once more. In the second Krita yuga that sets in, lush gardens, ponds, large 
tanks, temples, yagnasalas and centres of teaching devoted to the study of 
Brahmanical lore, will reappear and flourish, everywhere. 

Ceremonial rituals and sacrifices will be performed. Brahmanas will 
return to the ways of goodness and honesty, and the Dvijas—the three 


twice-born varnas—will once again devote themselves to austerities and 
become true Munis. The asramas of Rishis, hitherto filled with vile men, 
will become homes to men devoted to truth. All the people will begin to 
live honourable lives in perfect dharma. 

All seeds sown in the ground will sprout and every kind of crop will 
grow all year round. Men will be charitable and observe stern vratas; and 
the Brahmanas, devoting their lives to meditation and sacrifice, will be 
pure-hearted and always happy. 

The sovereigns of the earth will rule their kingdoms with dharma. In the 
Krita yuga, Brahmanas will adhere to their six-fold duties—to study, teach, 
perform sacrifices, officiate at sacrifices performed by others, and to give 
and receive charity; Kshatriyas will devote themselves to acquiring strength 
and performing feats of prowess; Vaisyas will till the land and engage in 
honest trade, and Sudras will occupy themselves in serving the other three 
castes. 

These, O Yudhishtira, are the ways of the Krita, Treta, Dwapara and 
Kali yugas. I have now told you everything about the yugas. I have also told 
you, O Son of Pandu, the span of each of them. So, you know all that I do, 
pertaining to the past and the future, as narrated by Vayu Deva in his 
Purana, which is revered by the wisest sages. My immortality has allowed 
me to see, many times, the birth, life and death of the world; and all that I 
have seen and know I have shared with you. 

Now, glorious one, with your brothers, listen to something else I have to 
say, to clear any doubts you may have about dharma. You should always 
focus your soul on virtue because, Rajan, a man of high principles attains 
bliss in his lifetime and after. 

Anagha, listen also to these other propitious words—never humiliate a 
Brahmana, for an angry Brahmana can destroy the three worlds with a 
curse.’ 

Hearing Markandeya’s words, the king of the Kurus, Yudhishtira of the 
great intellect and radiant lustre, says to the illumined sage, ‘O Muni, by 
what code should I live if I want to protect my subjects? And how should I 
conduct myself so that I do not stray from the dharma of a Kshatriya?’ 

Markandeya says, “Be merciful to all creatures and devote yourself to 
their welfare. Love all creatures and scorn none. Speak only the truth, be 
humble, keep your senses under control and always concern yourself with 
the protection of your people. 


Be ethical, abjure sin, and worship your ancestors and the gods. If you 
have been guilty of wrongdoing from ignorance or carelessness, give 
charity to wash away your sins. Renounce arrogance and vanity; clasp 
humility and goodness to you. Gain control over all the Earth; rejoice and 
be happy. This is the virtuous life. 

What I have told you was true in the past and holds good for the future. 
There is nothing of the past or the future that you do not know. Therefore, 
child, do not let your hardships shake you. The wise are never crushed by 
time’s trials and persecutions. Mahabaho, even the Swargavasis, the 
heaven-dwellers, are not impervious to time. Kaala afflicts all the created. 

Sinless, do not doubt the truth of what I have told you; if you let doubt 
enter your heart, your high-mindedness_ will be diminished. 
Bharatarishabha, you are born into the illustrious family of the Kurus and 
should do as I have told you, in thought, word and deed.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Brahmanasreshta, I will do as you command and live 
by the wisdom that you have given me, in words so pleasing to hear. 
Dvijottama, of avarice and lust I have none, and no fear, pride or vanity. 
Lord, I shall keep dharma close and do whatever you have told me to.’ 

Having listened to the enlightened Markandeya, the Pandavas and 
Krishna, wielder of the bow Saranga, all those bulls among Brahmanas, and 
the others that are there, are filled with joy. Having heard hallowed words of 
great antiquity from the Muni, they are full of wonder.” 


CANTO 191 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


anamejaya said, “O Vaisampayana, mighty pauranika, I beg you, relate 
in full the greatness of Brahmanas, just as Markandeya told it to 
Pandu’s sons.” 

Vaisampayana said, “The eldest son of Pandu asks Markandeya, ‘Tell us 
more of the greatness of Brahmanas.’ 

Markandeya says, “Listen, O King, to how the Brahmanas conducted 
themselves in ancient times. 

In Ayodhya, there was once a king of the Ikshvaku dynasty named 
Parikshit. One day, Parikshit went hunting and was in pursuit of a deer, 
which led him deep into the forest, far from human habitation. Tired by the 
long ride, hungry and thirsty, he saw a pool in the dark, dense jungle in 
which he found himself. He led his horse to it and refreshed himself and his 
mount. Then, he laid some lotus fibres and stems on the ground by the side 
of the pool and sat down on them. 

While he rested there, he heard melodious strains of music and 
wondered where the music came from and who sang, as he had not seen any 
evidence of people near the pool. The king then saw a most beautiful 
maiden, gathering flowers and singing. 

She came before him, and he asked her, ‘Blessed one, who are you, and 
to whom do you belong? 


She replied, ‘I am a kanya.’ 

And the king said, “Will you be mine?’ 

The maiden answered, ‘I will agree only if you promise me one thing.’ 

The king asked what it was, and the girl said, ‘Promise me that you will 
never make me cast my eyes on water.’ 

The king agreed, saying, ‘So it shall be,’ and he married her and knew 
her with profound rapture. Later, as he sat quietly with her, his soldiers 
arrived in that place and, seeing their king, stood surrounding him. The king 
was happy to see his men and, escorted by them, he rode home with his new 
bride in a grand chariot. 

On arriving at his capital, he secluded himself with her, completely 
obsessed. Even those closest to the king could not get an audience with him, 
or speak to him. His chief minister asked the women who attended on the 
royal couple, “What goes on here?” 

And the women replied, “The queen is a devi of unparalleled beauty. 
The king married her with a promise that she would never look at water, 
and he is joyful with her.” 

On hearing this, the minister had a forest created, full of trees with a 
profusion of flowers and fruits, and on one side of it, in a secluded place, he 
had a large pond dug and filled with water as sweet as nectar. He had the 
pool covered with a net of pearls. 

One day he managed to see the king privately, and said to him, “There 
is a fine vana with no water in it. Enjoy yourself there.” 

The king took him at his word and went into the forest with his adored 
wife, and they sported together in that delightful place. Tired and spent with 
lovemaking, hungry and thirsty, the king went into an arbour of fragrant 
Madhavi creepers that he saw nearby. 

Entering that bower with his beloved, he saw a pond full of water that 
was transparent and bright as nectar. The king sat on its bank with her and 
encouraged her to bathe in that lovely pool. At his word, she plunged into 
the water, but then she did not surface again. The frantic king dove in and 
sought her under the water, but he found no trace of her. 

He ordered the waters of the tank drained and, at the bottom, sitting at 
the lip of a hole in the ground, was a frog. The king was furious when he 
saw the frog, and issued a dreadful edict againt their species. 

“Let every frog in my kingdom be killed! Anyone who wants an 
audience with me must come with a tribute of dead frogs.” 


When frogs began to be killed everywhere, the terrified creatures told 
their king what had happened. The king of the frogs assumed the 
appearance of a sadhu and came to Parikshit of Ayodhya. 

He said, “O King, do not let anger rule you; instead, be inclined to 
grace. It is not right that you kill innocent frogs.” 

The king of the frogs, in sadhu’s guise, chanted in a low voice: 
“Unfadingly glorious, slay not the frogs; pacify your wrath; the artha and 
punya of ignorant souls will diminish. Swear you will renounce your wrath 
against frogs. Why do you sin? Slaying these creatures serves no purpose.” 

King Parikshit, who was broken-hearted because of the vanishment of 
his wife, whom he had loved so dearly, answered the frog king, “I will not 
forgive the frogs. I will kill them. The wretched frogs swallowed my wife, 
and all frogs deserve death at my hand. Do not intercede on their behalf, 
learned one.” 

Hearing Parikshit’s words, the king of the frogs said in a voice filled 
with pain, “Be gracious, O King. I am Ayu, the king of the frogs. Your wife 
was my daughter, Susobhana. What she did to you was not dharma. She has 
deceived many kings in the same way.” 

The king said to him, “I desire her. Give her to me.” 

The king of the frogs then bestowed his daughter on Parikshit with the 
injunction that she wait upon and serve him. He said angrily to her, “You 
have deceived many kings, and because of your sin your children will 
disgrace themselves by being disrespectful to Brahmanas.” 

Regaining her, Parikshit was so overwhelmed by infatuation that he felt 
as if he had conquered the three worlds. He bowed down to the king of the 
frogs and worshipped him. Crying for joy, he said, “Truly, have I been 
blessed.” 

The king of the frogs bid his daughter farewell and returned to where he 
had come from. Time went by and king Parikshit and his queen had three 
sons, whom they named Sala, Dala and Bala. In due course, the king 
installed the eldest of them on the throne and, setting his heart on tapasya, 
retired into the forest. 

One day when Sala was out hunting he saw a deer and pursued it in his 
chariot. The king urged his sarathy to go faster, but the charioteer said to his 
king, “It is pointless chasing the deer; you cannot catch it. If your chariot 
had been drawn by horses of the Vami breed, you could have overtaken it.” 

The young king said, “On pain of death, tell me all about Vami horses.” 


The charioteer became alarmed. He was afraid of the king but on the 
other hand he was more frightened of Vamadeva’s curse and would not tell 
the king anything. The king lifted his sword and said to him, “Tell me now, 
or I will kill you.” 

Fear overcame him, and the sarathy said, “The Vami horses belong to 
Vamadeva; they are swift as the mind.” 

Immediately, the king ordered him to take him to Vamadeva’s asrama, 
and when they arrived there, he said to the Rishi, “Holy one, I am in pursuit 
of a deer that I wounded. You must help me catch up with it by giving me a 
pair of Vami horses.” 

The Rishi replied, “I will give you my pair of Vami horses but, when 
you have achieved your purpose, you must return my horses to me.” 

The king took those horses and, taking his leave of the Rishi, pursued 
the deer in his chariot now drawn by Vami steeds. After he left the 
hermitage he said to his charioteer, “Brahmanas do not deserve to possess 
such horses. We need not return these two to Vamadeva.” 

He now easily overtook the deer, slew it and, returning to his capital, 
stabled those horses in his palace. 

Meanwhile, the Rishi reflected, “The prince is young. Having obtained 
the two excellent steeds, he rides them happily and will not return them to 
me. What a pity.” 

After a month elapsed, he said to one of his disciples, “Go, Atreya, and 
say to the king that if he has finished with the Vami steeds he should return 
them to me.” 

Atreya went to the king and spoke to him as he had been instructed; and 
the king replied, “These horses, jewels of great value, deserve to be owned 
by a Kshatriya, and not a Brahmana. What need do Brahmanas have of 
horses? Return in peace.” 

Atreya went back and told his Acharya what had happened, and 
Vamadeva was enraged. He went himself to the king and demanded that his 
horses be returned to him. 

The king refused, and the Rishi Vamadeva said, “Bhumipala, give me 
back my Vami horses. You have used them to accomplish a task which was 
otherwise impossible for you. O Kshatriya, do not break both Brahmana 
and Kshatriya dharma and invite death to yourself by Varuna’s curse.” 

The king answered, “Vamadeva, this pair of excellent and docile bulls 
are suitable animals for a Brahmana like you. O Rishi, you are great indeed. 


Take them; you can ride them to any place you choose. What need do you 
have of horses when the Vedas themselves would carry a saintly man like 
you.” 

Vamadeva said, “O king, the Vedas do, indeed, carry ones like us, but 
that is in the hereafter. In this world, animals like my Vami horses carry me, 
men like me, and others as well.” 

The king said, “Let four donkeys carry you, or four mules of the best 
kind, or even four horses that are as swift as the wind. Take any of these. 
These Vami horses, however, deserve to be owned by a Kshatriya. Accept 
that these are not for you.” 

Vamadeva said, “O king, stern vows have been ordained for Brahmanas. 
This I swear, that if I have lived in their observance, four dreadful 
Rakshasas, their bodies like iron, will hunt and kill you, and bear you on 
their lances, after cutting your body into four parts.” 

The king said, “Vamadeva, these soldiers of mine, armed with bright 
spears, know that you are a Brahmana who wants to take a king’s life. They 
will bring you and your disciples to your knees before me.” 

Vamadeva said, “O king, when you received my horses you swore you 
would return them. You must give them back to me to save your life.” 

The king said, “Hunting deer is not an occupation fit for Brahmanas, but 
I will not punish you for straying from your svadharma. From this day, by 
obeying all your commands, I will, O Brahmana, attain bliss in Swarga. But 
the Vami horses remain with me.” 

Vamadeva said, “A Brahmana cannot be punished in thought, word or 
deed. The man who learns that a Brahmana has strayed from his dharma 
does not achieve a lofty position in this world. But now meet your death.” 

When Vamadeva said this, Rajan, four Rakshasas of horrible 
appearance, with lances in their hands, set upon the king, to kill him. 

The king cried out, “O Brahmana, even if all the descendants of the 
Ikshvakus, my brother Dala, and all these Vaisyas tell me to, I will not yield 
the Vami steeds to you, for then these men will be stripped of their 
dharma.” 

Even as these words came out of his mouth, the Rakshasas killed king 
Sala, and the lord of the Earth lay on the ground. The Ikshvakus installed 
Dala on the throne. 

The Brahmana Vamadeva went to the court of the Ikshvakus and 
addressed the new monarch, “O king, all the sacred books declare that men 


should give freely to Brahmanas. If you fear sin, give me the Vami horses 
without delay.” 

Angrily did the king hear these words of Vamadeva’s, and he said to his 
charioteer, “Bring me an arrow from my quiver, one which is beautiful to 
look at and tipped with poison. Let it strike Vamadeva and let him fall down 
in agony and be torn apart by our dogs.” 

Vamadeva responded, “I know that you have a ten-year-old son named 
Senajita, by your queen. My word can command your arrow to kill the 
boy!” ’ 

Markandeya continues, ‘Rajan, the fierce arrow that the king shot flew 
to the inner apartments of the palace and killed the prince playing there. 

When Dala heard of this, he said, “People of the Ikshvaku race, I will 
deliver you by killing this Brahmana and grinding him into the Earth. Bring 
me another arrow of blazing energy. Lords of the world, witness my might.” 

Vamadeva said, “This venomous arrow that you aim at me will not fly a 
true path; why, you will not be able to release it from your bow.” 

Now the king confessed, “O Ikshvakus, I find I cannot loose the arrow I 
have in my hand, and I have failed to kill this Brahmana. Let Vamadeva live 
and be blessed with a long life.” 

Vamadeva said, “You may expiate your sin of trying to take the life of a 
Brahmana by touching your queen with this arrow.” 

King Dala did as he was told, and the queen then said to the Rishi, “O 
Vamadeva, give me leave to teach this ignorant and foolish husband of mine 
daily, and give him wisdom. O Dvija, let me always wait upon and serve 
Brahmanas and thus acquire sacred realms after I die.” 

Hearing the queen, Vamadeva said, “Beautiful-eyed one, you have 
saved this royal race. Ask me for an exceptional boon, for I will grant 
whatever you ask for. Faultless one, rule over your clan and this great 
kingdom of the Ikshvakus!” 

The queen said, “O lambent one, free my husband from his sin, and 
direct your mind to the well-being of his son and kinsmen. This is the boon 
I ask, Brahmanottama.” 

The Muni said, “Zathaastu, so be it.” 

King Dala was extremely glad and, bowing in reverence, gave the Muni 
his Vami steeds,’ says Markandeya.” 


CANTO 192 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “The Rishis, the Brahmanas and Yudhishtira then 
ask Markandeya, ‘How did the Rishi Baka have such a long life?’ 

Markandeya says, ‘The Rajarishi Baka is a great tapasvin and was, 
indeed, blessed with long life; but do not ask why.’ 

Hearing this, O Bhaarata, Yudhishtira Dharmaraja and his brothers say 
to Markandeya, ‘We have heard that Baka, as well as Dalbhya, both 
illumined souls, are immortal and that they, who are universally revered, are 
dear to the king of the Devas. We would like to hear about the meeting of 
Baka and Indra, the story that is, at once, sad and happy. Tell it to us in 
brief.’ 

Markandeya says, ‘When the great war between the Devas and the 
Asuras was over, Indra became sovereign of the three worlds. The clouds 
brought plentiful rain and the people on Earth enjoyed rich harvests; they 
became contented and lived virtuous, peaceful lives. 

Everyone lived according to their svadharma, at peace with each other 
and the world; and seeing serenity prevail, Indra, slayer of Bala, was filled 
with joy. 

Seated on his elephant Airavata, he of the hundred sacrifices surveyed 
his subjects. He looked at the Rishis’ asramas, at the sacred rivers, at 
prosperous towns and villages, at the plenitude of the countryside. He saw 


kings, living by dharma, ruling justly over their subjects. He looked at tanks 
and reservoirs, wells, lakes and ponds full of water, beside which devout 
Brahmanas lived, keeping excellent vratas. 

And Indra came down to the felicitous Earth, Rajan, and went to a 
blessed asrama set in a charming grove on the eastern shore. There, in that 
asrama, where many animals and birds lived, and trees grew in profusion, 
Indra saw Baka. Overjoyed to see Indra, Baka received him worshipfully — 
he washed his feet with water, offered him arghya, spread a carpet for him 
to sit on and served him fruit and roots to eat. 

When he was comfortably seated, the divine ruler of the immortals 
asked Baka, ‘Sinless Muni, you have lived for a hundred years. Tell me, O 
Brahmana, what are the sorrows of those that are immortal?’ 

Baka answered, saying, “Living with those one dislikes, separation from 
loved ones and good men, living amongst the wicked—these are the evils 
that the immortals have to bear. Among the worst sorrows they have to 
endure is the death of sons, wives, relatives and friends; and the pain of 
dependence on others. In my opinion, there is nothing more pitiful than a 
poor man being insulted by a rich one. 

Other iniquities that the immortals have to witness are the acquisition of 
high status by those that do not have or deserve it; the loss of it by those 
that do; disharmony and discord; how the wealthy gain all that they want 
despite not having honour—those that live forever have to see all this, O 
Lord of the hundred yagnas. 

What can be sadder than the calamities and reverses experienced by 
Devas, Asuras, Gandharvas, Manavas, Nagas and Rakshasas? Those of 
noble birth suffer by becoming subjects of the low-born, the poor are 
humiliated by the rich—these are distressing conditions. 

The world is replete with such injustices. The foolish and the ignorant 
are cheerful and glad while the learned and the wise endure misery. There is 
so much sorrow and pain, and the deathless have to see it all and they 
suffer.” 

Indra said, “Blessed one, tell me, what are the joys that the immortals 
enjoy, which are also enjoyed by the gods?” 

Baka answered, “There is none happier than the man who cooks, even a 
scanty meal, in the eighth or twelfth hour of the day, and the man who has 
no evil friends. True happiness belongs to one who does not eat too much, 


or voraciously, the man who cooks even a few meagre vegetables and fruit 
that he has earned through his own effort and prepared in his own house. 

Such a man is worthy of respect. A man who eats food in another’s 
house, given to him in contempt, does a despicable thing, even if the fare is 
rich. That is why the wise never touch the food of men that eat in another’s 
house, like dogs or Rakshasas. 

There is no better thing than for a good Brahmana to eat what remains 
after feeding his guests and servants and offering food to his ancestors. No 
food is sweeter or more sacred. There is nothing more delicious or more 
sacred than food of which the first serving is given to a guest. Every 
mouthful of rice that the Brahmana eats after having served his guest is as 
blessed as giving away one hundred cows, and will wash away whatever 
sins he committed in his youth. If a Brahmana sprinkles water over the one 
who serves him such food, that person is cleansed of his sins.” 

After speaking of these and other matters with Baka, the Lord of the 
Devas returns to Indraloka.’ ” 


CANTO 193 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “The sons of Pandu say to Markandeya, ‘You 
have told us of the greatness of Brahmanas. Now we want to hear of 
the glory of the royal caste, the Kshatriyas.’ 

Maharishi Markandeya says to them, “Listen while I tell you of the 
eminence of the Kshatriyas. 

A king named Suhotra, of the Kuru clan, went on a journey to visit the 
great Rishis. As he was returning, he came upon king Sibi, the son of 
Usinara, riding in his chariot. As they approached one other, each greeted 
the other in a way he thought most fitting; but neither would give way to the 
other’s chariot as each considered himself the other’s equal. 

At this moment, the Devarishi Narada appeared there and, seeing them, 
demanded, “Why are you both blocking each other’s way?” 

The kings said to Narada, “Holy One, do not ask. The sages of old have 
declared that the one who is superior or more able should have right of way. 
We are equal to each other in every respect and neither of us can be judged 
to be superior to the other.” 

Hearing this, Narada recited three slokas—“O Kurunandana, the 
arrogant man treats everyone, even humble folk, with cruelty; one who is 
humble behaves with modesty and candour to all, even to those who are 
unprincipled. He who is honest behaves honestly, even towards the 


dishonest; why then would he not behave honestly with those who have 
integrity? The honest man thinks of any service done to him as being a 
hundredfold. Is this not how the gods are? 

It is the royal son of Usinara who is a better man than you. One should 
win over the mean-minded with charity, the untruthful with truth, the 
wicked with forgiveness, and the dishonest with honesty. 

You are both large-hearted. Keeping these slokas in mind, one of you 
must give way to the other.” 

Narada fell silent and, hearing what the Rishi said, the king of the Kurus 
walked around Sibi in pradakshina, praised his many achievements and 
allowed him to pass. Then he went on in his way. Narada uses this story to 
illustrate the greatness of the Kshatriyas.’ ” 


CANTO 194 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya continues, “Listen now to another story. One day, as 

king Yayati, the son of Nahusha, was sitting on his throne, 

surrounded by his people, there came to him a Brahmana begging for alms 
on behalf of his guru. 

He approached the king and said, “O king, because of my vow to him, I 
beg for alms for my guru.” 

The king said, “Holy one, tell me what your vow is.” 

The man said, “O king, in this world, men are contemptuous of one who 
begs them for alms. With what feelings will you give me what I ask for, on 
which I have set my heart?” 

The king replied, “Once I give something away, I never boast of it. I do 
not entertain requests for things I cannot give, but I do hear requests for 
those that I can; and giving them makes me glad. I will give you a thousand 
cows. The Brahmana that asks me for a gift is always dear to me. I am 
never angry with the man who begs alms of me and I am never sorry for 
having given away anything!” 

And the Brahmana then got one thousand cows from the king and went 


9 99 


away. 


CANTO 195 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “The Pandavas address the Rishi once more and 
say, ‘Tell us more about the honour of the Kshatriyas!’ 

And Markandeya says, ‘There were two kings, named Vrishadarbha and 
Seduka, and both of them were learned in dharma and in the Astra Shastra, 
and the ways of attack and defence. Seduka knew that Vrishadarbha had 
sworn a silent vow in his childhood, to give no metal to Brahmanas other 
than gold and silver. 

One day, a Brahmana who had completed his Vedic studies came to 
Seduka and, blessing him, begged him for alms for his guru, saying, “Give 
me a thousand horses.” 

Seduka said to him, “I cannot give your guru what you ask. Go to Raja 
Vrishadarbha, O Brahmana. He is a virtuous king. If you ask him, he will 
give you a thousand horses, for that is his vow.” 

The Brahmana went to Vrishadarbha and begged him for a thousand 
horses. The king responded by striking the Brahmana with a whip, at which 
the Brahmana said, “Why do you attack an innocent man?” 

The Brahmana was on the point of cursing him, when the king said, “O 
Brahmana, do you curse the man who does not give you what you ask for? 
Is this the dharma of a Brahmana?” 


And the Brahmana said, “Rajadhiraja, king of kings, I came to beg from 
you because Seduka sent me here.” 

The king said, “I will give you whatever tribute I receive today. How 
can I send away empty-handed the man I have whipped?” 

And the king gave that Brahmana all the proceeds of the day, which was 
more than the value of a thousand horses.’ ” 


CANTO 196 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya says, ‘One day the gods decided to come down to 

Earth and test the dharma of king Sibi, the son of Usinara. Agni 

and Indra descended to Bhumi, and Agni took the form of a pigeon flying 

away from Indra, who pursued him as a hawk. And the pigeon fell into 
King Sibi’s lap while he sat on his throne. 

The Rajapurohita, the royal priest, said to the king, “This pigeon is 
afraid of the hawk and has come to you for refuge. Wise men say that a 
pigeon falling on one’s lap is a bad omen and forewarns of some grave 
danger. You are a king and understand signs; so, give the pigeon to the 
hawk in charity and save yourself from the danger indicated.” 

The pigeon spoke to the king, “I am afraid of the hawk and have come 
to you to save my life. I am, actually, a Muni; I have taken the form of a 
pigeon and come to you for protection. You hold my life in your hands. 

I am learned in the Vedas, I am a brahmachari with self-control, and a 
tapasvin. Further, I have never spoken disrespectfully to my guru, and I 
possess every quality of the pure-hearted. I chant the Vedas; I know the 
poetic form and metre of all their verses; I am letter-perfect in the Vedas. 
And I am not a pigeon. 

Oh, do not give me up to the hawk. Giving up a learned and chaste 
Brahmana never makes a good gift.” 


Now the hawk addressed the king, and said, “Creatures are not always 
born on the Earth in the same form. In some former life you may have been 
a child of this pigeon. It is not proper for you, O king, to interfere with my 
procuring food by protecting the pigeon, even though he might have been 
your father.” 

The king said, “Has any one ever heard birds speak the pure language of 
men? Hearing what the pigeon and hawk had to say, how can we tell what 
is the right thing to do? He that surrenders a frightened creature, which 
seeks his protection from its enemy, does not get protection when he 
himself needs it. Indeed, the clouds do not send rain for him; the seeds he 
sows do not sprout for him. 

He that gives up an afflicted creature seeking protection from its 
enemies will see his children die in their infancy. The ancestors of such a 
man will never attain bliss in heaven. The gods do not accept the libations 
of ghee that such a man pours into the sacred fire. He that gives up a 
frightened creature which has come to him for refuge from its enemies is 
struck by a thunderbolt cast by the gods, with Indra at their head. 

The food he eats is unclean and he, of the small soul, falls from grace. O 
hawk, let the people of the Sibi clan place before you a bull cooked with 
rice, in place of this pigeon. And let them carry an abundance of meat to 
your home, wherever you live.” 

The hawk said, “O king, I do not ask for a bull or for any other meat, 
nor do I ask for anything more than this pigeon, which the gods have given 
me. The pigeon’s death has been ordained and it is my meal for today. So, 
O Rajan, give it to me.” 

The king replied, “My men will bring a live bull to your home. 
Consider the bull the ransom for this terrified bird, and I will myself 
supervise its being fetched to your dwelling. Don’t kill the pigeon. I will 
surrender my own life before the pigeon’s. 

Do you not see how like a sacrifice dabbed with Soma juice this pigeon 
looks? Blessed one, do not be obstinate. I can in no way give the pigeon to 
you. 

Command me to do something else that pleases you and satisfies you, 
something which I am able to do, of which the men of the Sibi clan will be 
proud and praise me for. I promise to do what you ask.” 

The hawk said, “Rajan, if you give me flesh cut from your right thigh, 
that is equal to the weight of the pigeon, you can save him. This would 


please me and be praiseworthy.” 

The king agreed to this and, cutting a piece of flesh from his right thigh, 
weighed it against the pigeon. But the pigeon was heavier. The king carved 
out another piece of his flesh, but still the pigeon was heavier. Then the king 
cut pieces of flesh from all parts of his body and placed them on the scale, 
but the pigeon continued to weigh more than all of them. Finally, the king, 
cheerfully and without a trace of regret, climbed bodily onto the scales, and 
the hawk vanished from there, exclaiming, Saved! 

The king said to the pigeon, “O pigeon, tell us who the hawk is. No one 
other than the Lord of the universe could do as he did. Exalted one, answer 
me.” 

The pigeon said, “I am the smoke-bannered Agni, also called 
Vaiswanara. The hawk is Sachi’s lord, the wielder of the thunderbolt. Son of 
Suratha, you are a bull among men. We came to test you. These pieces of 
flesh, Rajan, that you have cut from your body with your sword to save my 
life, have made deep wounds. I will sanctify them; your scars will be the 
colour of gold and fragrant. You will earn great fame and the gods will 
honour you. 

Long will you reign over your subjects, and you will father a son who 
will be called Kapotaroma. O King, this child will be born from your body, 
and you will see him become the best of the Surathas, a prince who will 
blaze with fame, valour and beauty,” says Markandeya.’ 


CANTO 197 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “The son of Pandu addresses Markandeya once 
again, saying, “Tell us more about the greatness of the royal caste of 
kings.’ 

And Markandeya says, ‘King Ashtaka, descendant of Viswamitra, 
conducted an Aswamedha yagna, which many kings attended, including his 
brothers, Pratardana and Vasumanas, and Usinara’s son Sibi. After the 
sacrifice was completed Ashtaka was travelling in his chariot with his 
brothers when they met Narada coming towards them. They greeted the 
Devarishi and said to him, “Come; ride on our chariot with us.” 

Narada agreed, saying, Zathaastu, and climbed into the chariot. After 
paying their respects to Narada, one of the kings said to him, “O Illustrious, 
I want to ask you something.” 

The Rishi gave him permission and that king said, “All four of us are 
blessed with long lives and every virtue. We shall, therefore, go to heaven 
and live there for a long time. Which of us will be the first to fall?” 

The Rishi Narada said, ““Ashtaka will be the first to come down.” 

And the king who had asked the question said, “For what reason?” 

And the Rishi answered, “I lived for a few days in Ashtaka’s palace. 
One day, he took me out of the city in his chariot and, there, I saw 
thousands of cows, all of different colours. I asked him whose they were 


and he told me that they were cattle he had given away, thus praising 
himself. It is because of his answer that he will have to come down from 
Swarga.” 

One of the kings, again, asked Narada, “Of the three of us who remain 
in heaven, who will be the first to fall to Bhumi?” 

And the Rishi answered, “Pratardana’’. 

When asked why, the Rishi related this incident. He said, “I lived for 
some days in Pratardana’s household. One day, when I was riding with him 
in his chariot, a Brahmana stopped him and asked for a horse. Pratardana 
said he would give him one when he returned home, and the Brahmana 
urged him to do it soon. Because the Brahmana was impatient, the king 
gave him the horse that was yoked to the right wheel of the chariot. 

We met another Brahmana who, also, wanted a horse. The king said the 
same thing to him and, in response to the Brahmana’s impatience, gave him 
the horse that was yoked to his chariot’s left wheel. The king continued on 
his way and soon came upon a third Brahmana, who asked him for a horse. 
The king gave him one more of his horses, and we proceeded on our 
journey. We met a fourth Brahmana who asked for a horse, and the king 
gave him the one that was yoked to front left of his chariot. A fifth 
Brahmana came to the king as we rode along and asked for a horse. This 
time, the king said he would give him one as soon as he returned home. 
But, because the Brahmana urged him to do this soon, the king gave him the 
last horse, unyoking it, and leaving the chariot horseless. The king picked 
up the yoke of his chariot himself and began to pull it along. 

As he pulled his chariot, he said, “Now I have nothing to give 
Brahmanas.” The king had, no doubt, given all his horses away, but his 
charity was diminished somewhat by his less than wholehearted attitude. 
Therefore, he is the next to come down from heaven. 

Of the two kings who would remain in heaven, one asked, “Which of 
the two of us will fall first from heaven?” 

Narada said, “Vasumanas,” and when the king asked for the reason, 
narrated another incident. He said, “In course of my roving, I arrived at the 
home of Vasumanas, at the time when the Brahmanas were performing the 
ceremony of Swativachana on a flower chariot. I came, unseen, into the 
king’s presence and, after the Brahmanas had completed the ceremony, 
made myself visible. When I praised the chariot, the king said to me, Holy 
one, you have admired this chariot, so let it be yours. 


Sometime later, when I needed another chariot, I went once more to 
Vasumanas. Again, the king gave me the chariot I admired. I went to the 
king a third time and admired one of his chariots. This time the king 
showed the chariot to his Brahmanas and, looking at me, said, Sublime 
Sage, you have been generous in your praise, but did not give me the 
chariot. For this he will fall down from heaven.” 

One of them said, “One of us will go with you to heaven. Of the two of 
us, who will come down to earth, and who will continue to dwell in 
Swarga?”’ 

Narada answered, saying, “Sibi will be the one who stays in heaven, 
and I the one who falls.”” When asked the reason for this, Narada said, “I am 
not the equal of Sibi. Hear why I say this. One day a Brahmana came to 
Sibi and said, O Sibi, I come to you for food. 

Sibi responded, Tell me what to do; I am yours to command. 

The Brahmana answered, Kill your son, named Brihadgarbha, and cook 
him for my meal. 

I waited to see what would happen. Sibi killed his son and cooked his 
flesh, then, putting the food into a serving dish, carried it on his head and 
went in search of the Brahmana. While he was looking for him, someone 
told him that the Brahmana he was searching for had gone to the city and, 
in a frenzy of rage, was setting fire to his house, to his treasury and arsenal, 
to the women’s apartments and to the elephants’ and horses’ stables. Sibi 
heard all this, calmly. 

He went into his city, found the Brahmana and said to him, Holy one, 
the food is ready. The Brahmana became speechless with surprise and 
lowered his gaze in discomfiture. Sibi, trying to please the Brahmana, said, 
Holy one, here, eat this. 

The Brahmana glanced at Sibi and said, Eat it yourself. Promptly, Sibi 
took the serving dish from atop his head and was about to eat, when the 
Brahmana caught hold of his hand and said, You have conquered anger. 
There is nothing that you will not give a Brahmana. 

Saying this, that Brahmana worshipped Sibi, and when Sibi looked up 
he saw his son standing before him like a divine child, decked in ornaments, 
and a heavenly fragrance emanating from his body. Finally, the Brahmana 
revealed his true self; he was none other than Vidhata, who had come in that 
guise to try the king. 


When Vidhata had left, the king’s ministers said to Sibi, When you know 
everything, why did you do all this? 

And Sibi answered, It was not for fame, wealth or from the desire to 
acquire material enjoyment that I did all this. What I did is not sinful, 
therefore I did it. The path taken by the righteous is praiseworthy, and I 
have always leaned towards the virtuous course of action. *” Narada said. 

I know this instance of Sibi’s goodness, and I have narrated it,’ says 
Markandeya.” 


CANTO 198 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “The Pandavas and the Rishis then ask 
Markandeya, “Is there anybody blessed with longer life than you?’ 

And Markandeya answers them, “There was a Rajarishi named 
Indradyumna, whose virtue had diminished. He fell from heaven, crying, 
‘All that I have achieved is for nothing.” 

He came to me and asked, “Do you recognise me?” 

I said, “From our anxiety to acquire religious merit, we do not have 
permanent homes. We stay for only one night in any village or town. People 
like us, therefore, cannot possibly know who you are. The fasts and vows 
we observe make us physically weak and unable to follow any worldly 
pursuits.” 

He then asked me, “Is there anyone who has a longer life than you?” 

I answered him, “On Himavat Mountain there lived an owl by the name 
of Pravarakarna. He is older than me; he may know you. The place on 
Himavat where he lives is very far from here.” 

At this, Indradyumna became a horse and carried me to where that owl 
lived. And the king asked the owl, “Do you know me?” 

The owl reflected for a moment and then said to the king, “No, I do not 
know you.” 

Indradyumna asked the owl, “Is there anyone who is older than you?” 


And the owl answered, “There is a lake called Indradyumna, in which 
there lives a crane named Nadijangha. He is older than me. Ask him.” 

King Indradyumna took me and the owl to that lake where the crane 
Nadijangha lived, and we asked, “Do you know Raja Indradyumna?”’ 

The crane thought for a while and then said, “I do not know king 
Indradyumna.” 

We asked the crane, “Is there anyone who is older than you?” 

And he answered, “There lives, in this very lake, a tortoise named 
Akupara. He is older than me. He may know something of this king. Ask 
Akupara.” 

The crane spoke to the tortoise and said, “We want to ask you 
something. Please come to where we are.” 

Obligingly, the tortoise came out of the lake to the bank where we were, 
and we asked him, “Do you know this king Indradyumna?” 

The tortoise reflected for a moment. His heart was moved and his eyes 
filled with tears; he trembled all over with powerful emotion and nearly lost 
consciousness. He joined his hands and said, “Do I not know this king! He 
has planted the sacrificial stake a thousand times for kindling the sacrificial 
fire. It is the cows that this king gave to Brahmanas that were used to 
excavate this lake. I have lived here ever since.” 

No sooner had the tortoise said this, than a chariot flew down from 
heaven and a voice spoke from the skies to Indradyumna, “Come! Take 
your rightful place in heaven. Great are your achievements. Come joyfully 
to your place in Swarga.” 

Listen to these slokas— Reports of virtuous actions spread over the earth 
and reach heaven. The doer of these actions stays in heaven for as long as 
these reports last. The man whose evil deeds are talked about will descend 
to the lowest regions and live there for as long as this talk goes on. 
Therefore, a man who wants to go to Swarga should be honourable and 
ethical. He should shun evil and seek refuge in goodness. 

Hearing these words, the king said, “Let the chariot remain here and 
take these old people back to where they came from.” Then, he took the owl 
and me back to our homes and returned to his own place. 

Because I have lived for so long, I saw all this,’ says Markandeya. 

Markandeya tells these stories to the Pandavas and, when he has 
finished, they say to him, ‘Blessings be upon you. You did the right thing to 


make Indradyumna regain his rightful place in Swargaloka, from which he 
had fallen.’ 

Markandeya says, ‘Similarly, Devaki’s son Krishna raised the Rajarishi 
Nriga, who had sunk into Naraka, and restored him to Swarga.’ ” 


CANTO 199 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Yudhishtira hears the illustrious Markandeya’s 

story of how the Rajarishi Indradyumna regained his place in 
heaven, and he asks the Muni, ‘Mahamuni, how should a man practise 
charity in order to gain admission into Indraloka? Is it by practising charity 
while leading a domestic life, in boyhood, in youth, or in old age that he 
goes to Indraloka? O, tell me what each is worth.’ 

Markandeya says, “There are four kinds of life that are useless. So too, 
there are sixteen kinds of charity that are futile. These men live in vain—he 
who has no son; he who is corrupt; he who lives on food made by others; he 
who cooks but does not give first to the Devas, Pitrs and Sadasyas. 

The first two kinds of gifts that are worthless are these—those given to 
a sinful person; and those which have been earned wrongfully. The gift to 
an adharmic Brahmana, to a thief, to a teacher who is false—these gifts are 
worthless, too. Also worthless are gifts to a liar, to a sinner, to an ingrate, to 
one who officiates at sacrifices performed by all classes of people in a 
village, to one who teaches the Vedas for a fee, to a Brahmana who cooks 
for a Sudra and to a Brahmana who does not follow the svadharma of a 
Brahmana. The gift given to one who has married a girl after she has 
attained puberty, to a female, to one who plays with snakes and to one who 


is employed in a menial job, is also in vain. These sixteen kinds of charity 
earn the giver no punya. 

The distressed man who gives from fear or anger enjoys the merit of 
such gifts while he is in the womb of his mother. The man who makes gifts 
to Brahmanas, under circumstances other than those listed earlier, enjoys 
the fruit of his charity in old age. Therefore, O king, the man who wishes to 
pave his way to heaven should, under all circumstances, give everything he 
wants to give away to Brahmanas.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘How do Brahmanas, accepting gifts from people of 
all four castes, save others as well as themselves?’ 

Markandeya says, ‘They do this by japa, mantras, homa and the study 
of the Vedas. With these as tools, the Brahmanas construct a Vedic boat in 
which they rescue others and themselves from the sea of samsara. The gods 
are pleased with the man who gratifies the Brahmanas, and a man may 
attain Swarga at the command of a Brahmana. 

You will, Rajan, certainly gain the place of everlasting bliss by virtue of 
your worship of the Pitrs and Devas, and by your reverence for Brahmanas, 
even though your body may be filled with contagious phlegm, and be dull 
and lethargic! 

He who wants to be virtuous and find Swarga should worship 
Brahmanas. He should feed Brahmanas with care during sraddhas. On such 
occasions, he should exclude those that are cursed or have lapsed in 
dharmic ways; who are very fair or very dark; have dirty nails; are lepers; 
are deceitful; have been born illegitimately to widows or married women; 
and who live as mercenaries. 

An impure sraddha consumes the performer like fire consuming fuel. If 
blind, deaf or dumb people are to be employed at sraddhas, care should be 
taken to employ them along with Brahmanas conversant with the Vedas. 

Yudhishtira, listen now while I tell you who the deserving recipients of 
your gifts are. He that knows all the Vedas should give only to a Brahmana 
who has merited the ability to save himself and the giver, for only such a 
man can be thought of as truly able. Son of Pritha, the attentive care of 
Sadasyas gratifies the sacred fire more than does the pouring of ghee or 
offering of flowers and sandalwood paste. Therefore, strive to look after 
your guests. Rajan, they that give guests water to wash their feet, butter to 
rub on their tired legs, light during the night, food and shelter, do not have 
to face Yama. 


The removal, after worship, of flowers offered to the gods; the removal 
of the remnants of a Brahmana’s feast; waiting upon a Brahmana with 
scented pastes; and the massaging of a Brahmana’s limbs are each more 
deserving of merit than the gift of cows. 

The gift of a Kapila cow saves the giver from sin. So, foremost among 
kings, one should gift a Kapila cow decked with ornaments to Brahmanas. 
Bhaarata, these are the kinds of people one should give to—a person of 
good lineage who has knowledge of the Vedas; the poor; a grihasta, a 
householder burdened with the care of a wife and children; a person that 
worships the sacred fire every day; and a person who has not done you any 
service. You should always give to such people, not to them that have 
wealth, for there is no point in it, Bhaaratottama. 

One cow must be given to one Brahmana, and not to be shared by many 
because, if this shared cow is sold, the giver’s family will suffer for three 
generations. Such a gift would definitely not save the giver or the recipient. 

Giving eighty ratis of pure gold is as beneficial as giving a hundred 
pieces of gold, into eternity. He that gives away a strong bull capable of 
drawing the plough is rescued from all difficulties and finally goes to 
Swarga. He that gives away land to a learned Brahmana has all his desires 
fulfilled. 

That man who, when asked by an exhausted traveller with tired legs and 
dusty feet, tells him the name of a person who will feed him, gains as much 
merit as the giver of food himself. Therefore, give food, rather than any 
other gift. There is no better gift than food. The man, who, according to his 
means, gives well-cooked and clean food to Brahmanas, earns the 
companionship of Prajapati Brahma. 

There is nothing superior to food. Thus, food is seen as the first and best 
of all things to give away. It has been said that food is Brahma. Prajapati is 
regarded as the year; and the year is yagna. Everything begins with 
sacrifice, for it is from sacrifice that all creatures, animate and inanimate, 
are created. That is why food is the foremost of all things. 

They who give lakes, tanks, wells, shelter and food; they who speak 
sweetly to everyone will not hear Yama’s accusing voice. Bhumi Devi, the 
Earth, is pleased with him who gives wealth, earned by his labour, and rice 
to pious Brahmanas; and She showers him with wealth. The giver of food 
walks first, next the speaker of truth, and next the one who does not beg, 
although all three go to the same place.’ 


Hearing all this, Yudhishtira and his brothers are curious and ask the 
high-souled Markandeya, ‘Great Muni, how far is Yamaloka from Bhumi? 
How large is it? How do men escape going there? O, tell us all this.’ 

Markandeya says, ‘O king, most virtuous of men, your question is 
related to a great mystery. It is sacred and treasured by the Rishis. As it has 
to do with dharma, I will tell you about it. 

The distance of Yama’s world from the world of men is eighty-six 
thousand yojanas. The way is over waterless space, and is terrible to behold. 
Nowhere on that road is there the shade of a tree, any water, or any resting- 
place for the weary traveller. Men, women and all beings that live on Earth 
are forcibly led along this way by Yama’s messengers, his dutas. 

Yama’s servitors and they that have given horses and other means of 
transport to Brahmanas ride on horseback and on chariots. They that have 
given parasols have parasols to protect them from the sun’s rays as they 
walk to Yamaloka. They that have given food walk without hunger, while 
they that have not go hungry. They that have given clothes go clothed, 
while they that have not go naked. They that have given gold go cheerfully, 
decked in ornaments; they that have given land proceed with all their needs 
gratified; and they that have given grain go along the way without any 
wants. 

They that have given houses go on chariots; those men that have given 
something to drink go cheerfully, unaffected by thirst; and they that have 
given lights go happily, the way lit before them. They that have given cows 
go in good cheer, freed from all their sins; they that have fasted for a month 
go on acraft drawn by swans; and they that have fasted for six nights, ride 
on blithe chariots drawn by peacocks. And, Pandava, he that has fasted 
three days, on only one meal, goes to a realm free from disease and anxiety. 

Water possesses the uncanny quality of creating happiness in Yamaloka, 
and they that give water on earth find themselves by a river there, named 
Pushpodaka. These people drink cool, ambrosial draughts from that stream, 
while they that are evil only have recourse to flowing pus. That river serves 
all purposes. Therefore, Rajan, show due reverence to the Brahmanas that 
are with you. 

His legs fatigued by the distance he has walked, his body covered in the 
dust of the highway, the wayfarer asks for the name of the man who will 
give him food and goes expectantly to his house. Attend to him reverently 
because he is a guest and a Brahmana. Indra and the Devas walk behind 


him and, if he is cared for, they are pleased. If he is not, the celestials and 
their Lord are unhappy. Therefore, O best of kings, worship these 
Brahmanas. 

I have spoken on a hundred subjects. What else do you want to hear 
from me?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Mahamuni, you know all there is to know about 
dharma and punya. I do not want to stop listening to you speak of them.’ 

Markandeya says, ‘Rajan, I will now tell of another sacred subject of 
eternal interest, which is capable of washing away all sins. Listen 
attentively to me. 

Bhaaratottama, merit equal to that of giving away a Kapila cow in the 
tirtha called Jyeshtha-Pushkara accrues from washing the feet of 
Brahmanas. As long as the earth is wet with water in which a Brahmana’s 
feet have been washed, so long do the Pitrs drink water out of lotus-leaf 
cups. 

If a guest is welcomed, the deities of fire become glad; and if he is 
offered a seat, it is the god of the hundred sacrifices who is gratified. If a 
guest’s feet are washed, it is the Pitrs who are delighted; and if he is fed, it 
is Prajapati who is pleased. 

One should whole-heartedly give away a cow while she is giving birth, 
when the feet and head of her calf are visible, and before her delivery is 
complete. A cow with her calf in the air, in the course of falling from the 
womb to the earth, is equal to the Bhumi Devi herself. The man who gives 
away such a cow reaps the benefit of giving away the Earth. And he is 
adored in Swarga for as many thousands of yugas as there are hairs on the 
bodies of the cow and her young one together. 

Bhaarata, the man who, having accepted a gift, gives it away 
immediately to a good and honest person, gains great merit. Indeed, he 
reaps the benefit of giving away all the earth with her oceans and seas, 
caves and mountains, forests and woods. 

A Brahmana who eats in silence, keeping his hands between his knees, 
gains the ability to save others. A Brahmana who abstains from drink and is 
regarded as faultless, and who reads the Samhitas everyday, also gains this 
ability. Butter and food given to a Brahmana who is learned in the Vedas are 
as beneficial as when they were poured into fire. 

A Brahmana’s weapon is anger, not arms made of iron. A Brahmana can 
kill a man with his anger as effectively as Indra slays Asuras with his 


Vajra.’ 

Markandeya’s discourse on the twin themes of punya and dharma is 
finished, and the Munis of the Naimisha vana are filled with joy on having 
heard it. They are freed from grief and anger by listening to it, and also 
purged of their sins and liberated from the cycle of birth and rebirth. 

Yudhishtira asks, ‘What does a Brahmana have to do to become, and 
remain, pure? I want to hear about this from you, most virtuous one.’ 

Markandeya answers, ‘There are three kinds of purity—purity of 
speech, purity of action and purity achieved through the use of water. The 
man who practises all three surely attains Swarga. 

Brahmanas who adore the goddess Sandhya in the morning and 
evening, and meditatively recite the sacred mantra of Gayatri, who is the 
mother of the Vedas, are sanctified by her and freed from all their sins. Even 
if they accept the very Earth and her oceans as gifts, they do not suffer the 
least unhappiness. Inauspicious conjunctions of the Sun and other planets 
become favourable, and auspicious conjunctions become even more 
propitious to such Brahmanas, because of their conduct. 

Fearsome Rakshasas, gigantic and savage, that subsist on the flesh of 
animals, are unable to defeat the Brahmanas who practise these 
purifications. These Brahmanas are like blazing fires. They do not acquire 
the blemishes of teaching, of officiating at sacrifices, and of accepting gifts 
from others. 

Whether a Brahmana knows the Vedas or is ignorant of them, whether 
his soul is pure or tainted, you should never insult him, for Brahmanas are 
like fire. Just as the fire that burns on a funeral pyre is not considered 
impure despite its function, so too is the Brahmana considered pure even if 
he is ignorant. He is great and godlike. 

Cities that are adorned with numerous walls, gates and palaces are 
bereft of beauty if they have no Brahmanas in them. O king, only a city 
where Brahmanas, accomplished in the Vedas, duly observing their dharmic 
duties, and possessing learning and tapasya-shakti reside, is really a city. 
Son of Pritha, any place where learned Brahmanas live, be it a forest or 
pasture, is a city. Why, that place becomes a tirtha. 

By going to a king who offers protection and to a Brahmana of ascetic 
merit, and by offering worship to both, a man instantly gets rid of his sins. 
Wise and learned men have said that bathing in the sacred tirthas, reciting 
the names of the great Rishis, and talking with good and pure-hearted 


people, are all acts worthy of praise. They that are virtuous and honest 
consider themselves sanctified by the holiness of companionship of others 
like themselves, satsangha, and by the holy water of pure and godly 
conversation. 

The carrying of three staffs, the vow of silence, matted hair, the shaving 
of the head, the wearing of bark and deerskin, the practice of vows and 
ablutions, the worship of fire, living in the forest, the emaciation of the 
body —all these are useless if the heart is not pure. The indulgence of the 
Six senses is easy if purity is its aim. Abstinence, however, which is difficult 
anyway, is even more so without purity of aim. Rajan, among the six senses 
the mind is the most dangerous! 

True tapasya is purity of heart and soul, thought, word and action, rather 
than fasting and penances that result in a wasted body. He who has no 
compassion for relatives cannot be freed from sin even if his body is pure. 
His hard-heartedness is the enemy of his asceticism. 

I say again, asceticism is not mere abstinence from worldly pleasures. 
He that is always pure and decked with virtue, he that practises kindness all 
his life, is a Muni even though he may lead a domestic life. Such a man is 
purged of all his sins. Fasts and other penances cannot destroy the effect of 
sin, however much they may weaken and dry up the body. 

The man whose heart is without piety suffers torture by undergoing 
penances in ignorance of their meaning. He is never freed from sin by such 
hollow acts of reparation. The fire he worships does not consume his sins. It 
is only piety and virtue that give men access to the hallowed regions, and 
make fasts and vows effective. 

Subsistence on fruit and roots, the vow of silence, living on mere air, 
tonsuring the head, giving up a fixed home, wearing matted locks, sleeping 
out in the open, daily fasts, the worship of fire, immersion in water and 
lying on bare ground—these by themselves cannot produce results. Only 
they that have true piety succeed, through knowledge and their actions, in 
conquering disease, decrepitude and death, and acquire spiritual elevation. 

Just as seeds that have been scorched by fire do not sprout, so 
discomforts that have been burnt by knowledge cannot affect the soul. The 
body is like a block of wood and, when destitute of a soul, is as 
impermanent as foam in the ocean. 

The man who catches a glimpse of the universality of his own soul by 
reciting one or even half a line of the Vedas needs nothing more. Some 


succeed in identifying themselves with Brahman, the Supreme Soul, from 
just two letters, and some from hundreds and thousands of verses. The 
knowledge of one’s identity with the Parabrahman is the route to salvation. 

Men of ancient times, who were distinguished for their knowledge, have 
said that a man who is plagued by doubt can never attain bliss, in this world 
or the next. The belief of oneness with Brahman is the way to mukti. He 
that knows the true meaning of the Vedas and understands their true 
purpose fears mere Vedic ritual, like a man at the sight of a forest fire. 

Give up dry debate, take up the study of sacred knowledge by way of 
Sruti—recitations of sacred sounds, and Smriti—reading sacred texts; use 
your intellect, and seek knowledge of the eternal Brahman. One’s search 
becomes futile from lack of means. Therefore, one should carefully strive to 
obtain that knowledge with the help of the Vedas. The Vedas are Brahman 
—they are His body; they are the Truth. The soul that is restricted by its 
bodily confines cannot know Him in whom all the Vedas merge; He can 
only be known by the pure intellect. 

The existence of the gods as taught in the Vedas, the power of action 
and physical prowess are distinct in every yuga. One can gain freedom from 
these by purifying the senses. So, the suspension of sensory function is true 
fasting. One may attain Swarga through asceticism, one may obtain objects 
of enjoyment by the practice of charity and one may purge himself of his 
sins by bathing in hallowed tirthas, but it is knowledge alone that can confer 
complete emancipation.’ 

When Markandeya has said this, Yudhishtira of great renown says, ‘O 
illustrious one, I want to hear about the laws that govern charity, which 
make it meritorious.’ 

Markandeya says, *Yudhishtira, I highly regard the laws of charity that 
you wish to hear from me. Listen now to their mysteries, as expounded in 
the Sruti and the Smritis. 

A man who performs a sraddha in the place called Gajachaya, at a spot 
fanned by the leaves of the aswattha tree, enjoys its rewards, Yudhishtira, 
for a hundred thousand kalpas. He that establishes a dharmasala and 
appoints a person to look after all who come there is crowned with the 
benefits of all the sacrifices. He that gives away a horse at a tirtha where the 
current of the stream runs in the opposite direction to the river’s course 
gains unending merit. 


The guest that comes to one’s house for food is none other than Indra 
himself. If he is entertained with food, Indra bestows an excellent and 
inexhaustible reward. Just as boats take men safely across the water, the 
givers I have spoken of are saved from retribution for their sins. What is 
given to Brahmanas produces, like a gift of curds, endless punya. 

A gift given on particular phases of the Moon’s orbit results in twice the 
reward as on other days; given in a certain season it is ten times as 
powerful; and in a particular year its value is increased a hundredfold. The 
rewards earned by a gift made on the last day of the last month of the year 
never expire. The gift made on the days of the Sun’s solstice, one made on 
the last day of the Sun’s path through the constellations of Thula, Mesha, 
Mithuna, Kanya and Meena!, and the gift made during eclipses of the Moon 
and the Sun reap limitless merit. 

Learned men say that gifts given during the seasons produce merit that 
is multiplied ten times, a hundred times if made during the cusp of the 
seasons, and a thousand times if made when Rahu appears in the sky, and 
greater than at any other time. The gift made on the last day of the Sun’s 
course through Thula and Mesha produces merit that never decreases. 

Rajan, one cannot enjoy owning land unless one gives away land, and 
one cannot enjoy travelling in chariots and other vehicles unless one gives 
these away. A person is reborn with the enjoyment of the goals he had in 
mind at the time he gave a gift to a Brahmana. 

Gold has sprung from Fire, the Earth from Vishnu and the cow from the 
Sun. So, he that gives away gold, land and cows reaches the abodes of 
Agni, Vishnu and Surya Deva. Nothing is as eternal as the act of giving a 
gift. What can be more auspicious, in all the three worlds? That is why, O 
king, those of fathomless intelligence say that there is nothing nobler or 
greater in the three Lokas as a gift.’ ” 


1. Libra, Aries, Gemini, Virgo and Pisces. 


CANTO 200 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Glorious king, Yudhishtira hears from 
Markandeya the story of how Indradyumna attains heaven and asks 
that magnificent, blemishless Muni, ‘Virtuous one, you know the entire 
pantheon of the Devas, the Danavas and the Rakshasas. You can trace the 
genealogies of kings and Rishis. Brahmanottama, there is nothing in this 
world that you do not know! You also know, Mahamuni, many delightful 
stories about Manavas, Nagas and Rakshasas; about Devas, Gandharvas and 
Yakshas; and about Kinnaras and Apsaras. I long to hear these from you. 

Why did Kuvalaswa, the unvanquished king of the Ikshvakus change 
his name to Dhundhumara? Best of the descendants of Bhrigu, I want to 
know in detail how and why the intelligent Kuvalaswa changed his name.’ 

The Maharishi Markandeya begins the tale of Dhundhumara. 

Markandeya says, ‘Yudhishtira, listen and I will tell you everything you 
wish to know. The story of Dhundhumara is a moral one, so listen to how 
king Kuvalaswa of the Ikshvaku dynasty came to be known as 
Dhundhumara. 

Bhaarata, there was a well-known Rishi named Utanka, whose asrama 
was set in a charming wilderness. Rishi Utanka performed a most severe 
tapasya, and for countless years, with the aim of obtaining the favour of 
Vishnu. Pleased with his tapasya the illustrious Lord Vishnu appeared 


before Utanka. Beholding the Deity, the Rishi in all humility began to 
glorify Him with hymns of adoration. 

He said, “O Effulgent Lord, you have made all creatures - the Devas, 
Asuras and Manavas, all things mobile or immobile, even Brahma himself, 
the Vedas and all things that can be known. The Sky is your head, O Lord, 
the Sun and the Moon are your eyes. You who know no decay, the Winds 
are your breath and Fire your energy. The directions of the horizon are your 
arms and the great Ocean your belly. The hills and mountains are your 
thighs and the Air your hips, Madhusudana. The Earth makes up your feet, 
and plants the hair on your body. 

O Lord, Indra, Soma, Agni and Varuna, indeed all the Devas, Asuras 
and great Nagas humbly wait upon you and sing hymns in adoration of you. 
Lord of the Universe, you pervade all creation. The great Rishis of immense 
tejas, endlessly plunged in dhyana, always worship you. When you are 
gratified the Universe is at peace; when you are angry terror grips every 
soul. You are the dispeller of fear. 

You are the one, supreme Purusha. You are the cause of happiness of 
gods and men. O Lord, you covered the three Lokas with three strides. It 
was you that destroyed the Asuras when they were at the height of their 
power; it is your prowess that brought peace and joy to the Devas; it was 
your anger that destroyed hundreds of great Daitya lords. You are the Maker 
and Destroyer of the world’s creatures. It is by worshiping you that the gods 
attain felicity.” 

Thus, Yudhishtira, the high-souled Utanka praised the Lord of the 
senses. And Vishnu said to Utanka, “I am pleased with you. Ask for a 
boon.” 

Utanka said, “Seeing you before me is the greatest boon, Hari, Eternal 
Being, Lord of the Universe.” 

Vishnu said, “I am happy with your lack of desires and with your 
devotion, Manavottama, best of men. But, Brahmana, you must let me give 
you some boon.” 

When Lord Vishnu insisted, Utanka said with folded hands, “O 
illustrious, lotus-leaf eyed Lord, if you are pleased with me, then let my 
heart always dwell on virtue, truth and contentment. And let my heart 
always turn to you in bhakti.” 

Hearing Utanka’s words, Vishnu said, “Brahmana, by my grace, I grant 
all you have asked for. I also bestow on you yogic power, with which you 


shall achieve a great thing for the Devas as well as for all the inhabitants of 
Triloka. Even as I speak, a great Asura named Dhundhu is performing a 
tapasya of fierce austerity with the object of destroying the three worlds. 

Let me tell you who will kill that Asura. A king of invincible energy 
and prowess will be born into the Ikshvaku line, and he will be known by 
the name of Brihadaswa. He will have a son named Kuvalaswa, who will be 
endowed with great piety, self-control and fame. This best of kings will be 
blessed with yogic power that springs from me and, commanded by you, O 
Rishi, that king will be the slayer of the Asura Dhundhu.” 

Having spoken to the Brahmana, Vishnu vanished.’ ” 


CANTO 201 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya says, ‘O king, after the death of this king of the 
Ikshvakus, a king of great dharma named Sasada ascended the 
throne of Ayodhya and ruled the earth. Sasada’s son was the powerful 
Kakutstha, and Kakutstha’s son was Anenasa. Anenasa had a son named 
Prithu, whose son was Viswagaswa, and from Viswagaswa was born Adri. 

Adri’s son was Yuvanaswa, Sravastha was born to Yuvanaswa and it 
was he who built the city of Sravasthi. Sravastha had a son named 
Brihadaswa to whom Kuvalaswa was born. Kuvalaswa had twenty-one 
thousand sons and all these sons were fierce and powerful, and mastered 
every skill. 

Kuvalaswa himself excelled his father in every way and, when the time 
came, his father Brihadaswa installed the brave and exemplary prince on 
the throne. Having handed over the throne to his son, king Brihadaswa 
retired to a life of sannyasa in the forest.’ 

Markandeya continues, “When Rajarishi Brihadaswa was preparing to 
retire into the vana, Utanka heard of it, and the sage of the dazzling tejas 
and immeasurable soul came to see Brihadaswa, that best of Kshatriyas. 
Rishi Utanka tried to persuade him to refrain from taking sannyasa. 

Utanka said, “O king, it is your dharma to protect your people. Free us 
from our anxieties by being our protector. Because you are a great soul, the 


Earth will be safe under your guardianship. It is not right for you to take up 
sannyasa in the forest. Great merit attaches to the karma of protecting the 
people of this world, punya which you cannot have by living as a sannyasin. 
Turn your heart away from this course. 

Brihadaswa, the merit that the Rajarishis of old acquired was 
incomparable. The king should always protect his subjects, and it is what 
you should do. Bhumipala, I cannot perform my tapasya in peace these 
days. Near my asrama there is a desert named Ujjalaka, which is flat and 
arid and many yojanas in length and width. In it dwells Dhundhu, a Danava 
chieftain, the son of Madhu and Kaitabha. 

He is savage and powerful, and lives under the ground. You must first 
kill him before taking to sannyasa. 

The Asura is quiet now because he is engaged in the most fierce 
tapasya; his aim is to rule over the Devas as well as the three worlds. 
Because of a boon granted to him by the Pitamaha, the Grandsire of all 
creatures, Dhundhu cannot be slain by Daityas, Rakshasas or Gandharvas. 
Kill him, Rajan, and be blessed; set your heart firmly on this deed. By 
killing the Asura you will achieve unequalled greatness and enjoy undying 
fame. 

When, at the end of every year, that malignant Asura, who lies covered 
with sand, wakes up and begins to breathe, all the Earth with her mountains, 
forests and woods begins to tremble. His breath blows up clouds of sand 
and shrouds the Sun; for seven days without let does Bhumi Devi quake; 
sparks and tongues of smoky flame are everywhere. O king, I have no peace 
in my asrama. Kill Dhundhu for the good of the world. When that Asura 
dies the three Lokas will have peace and joy again. 

I believe that you have the power to kill this Asura. Vishnu will infuse 
you with his energy, for long ago Vishnu swore that the king who killed this 
great Demon would have Narayana’s own strength to use. Rajan, imbued 
with Vishnu’s inexorable might, slay the savage Daitya. Dhundhu is so 
powerful that no one who has any less prowess than the Lord’s own, can 
destroy him, even if he were to try for a hundred years,’ ’ says 
Markandeya.” 


CANTO 202 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya says, ‘Kurusthama, at Utanka’s words, that 

unvanquished royal sage joined his palms and said to him, 

“Your visit will not be in vain. Holy one, this is my son Kuvalaswa, who is 

strong and steadfast. His prowess is unsurpassed on earth. He will 

undoubtedly accomplish what you ask, with the help of his heroic sons 

whose arms are like iron maces. Give me leave to go to sannyasa, 
Brahmana, for I have given up my weapons.” 

The Muni replied, saying, “Jathaastu, so be it.” 

Rajarishi Brihadaswa commanded his son to fulfil Utanka’s plea and, 
saying Do what needs to be done, he retired to the forest.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Holy one, who was this powerful Daitya? Whose son 
and whose grandson was he? I have not heard of this mighty Daitya before. 
I want to know everything, and in detail, O illumined Sage.’ 

Markandeya says, “Then listen to everything just as it happened, O ruler 
of men! 

When the world became one immense expanse of water and all the 
mobile and immobile creatures were destroyed, when all creation ended, 
Vishnu the Eternal, the Ever-lustrous, the Source of the universe, He whom 
sages have named the Supreme Lord of the Universe, that sacred Being, lay 
in Yoganidra, yogic sleep, upon the coils of the Naga Sesha. Vishnu of the 


infinite tejas, that blessed and holy Hari, who knows no decay, lay on coils 
that encircled the Earth and, as the Deity lay asleep on his serpentine bed, a 
lotus of shimmering beauty, radiant as the Sun, sprang from his navel. 

And from that sublime lotus emerged Pitamaha Brahma, the Lord of the 
worlds, the embodiment of the four Vedas, four-formed and four-faced, 
invincible by his own energy, mighty of strength and prowess. Lord Hari of 
the wondrous body, lustrous, adorned with a crown and the Kaustubha 
jewel and clad in fulvid silk, lay with his body stretched across many 
yojanas on the superlative snake bed, protected by the hood of the snake 
that extended wide and far, O king, ablaze with beauty, illustrious as a 
thousand massed Suns. 

When he had been in repose for some time, two mighty Danavas named 
Madhu and Kaitabha saw him and, seeing Hari in that posture, and seeing 
lotus-leaf-eyed Brahma sitting on the lotus, Madhu and Kaitabha were 
excited. Brahma became terrified at their boisterousness and trembled on 
his seat. The stalk of the lotus on which he sat began to quiver, waking the 
sleeping Kesava. 

Awakened from his slumber, Govinda saw those awesome Danavas and 
said to them, “Welcome, mighty ones. I am pleased with you, and I will 
grant you excellent boons!” 

Rajan, the proud and mighty Danavas laughingly replied to Hrishikesa, 
“You may ask boons of us, O Divine! Supreme God, we would like to grant 
you a boon. In fact we will indeed grant a boon. Therefore, ask us for 
anything that comes to your mind.” 

Hari said, “Valiant ones, I will accept a boon from you. There is 
something I want. Both of you have ineffable tejas. There is no man to 
equal either of you. Submit yourselves to be killed by me—that is the boon 
I ask for the good of the world.” 

At this, Madhu and Kaitabha said, “We have never before told a lie, 
even in jest, let alone seriously. Purushottama, we have always been 
steadfast in the path of truth and morality. In strength, in physique, in 
beauty, in virtue, in asceticism, in charity, in conduct, in goodness and in 
self-control we have no equal. Kesava, we face grave danger; accomplish 
what you have said. 

No one can prevail over destiny but, Lord, there is one thing that we ask 
you to do. Best and first of all Gods, you must kill us at a place that is 
absolutely uncovered; and O Lotus-eyed, we also wish to be born as your 


sons. This is the boon that we ask, O Devadeva! Do not break the promise 
you first made to us.” 

The Divine One replied, “I will do as you ask. Everything will be as you 
wish.” ’ 

Markandeya continues, ‘Govinda searched in his mind for a suitable 
place, but he could not think of any uncovered space. Failing to discover an 
absolutely open place, he noticed that his thighs were uncovered and cut off 
Madhu and Kaitabha’s heads on them with his Sudarshana Chakra.’ ” 


CANTO 203 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya says, ‘Dhundhu was the son of Madhu and Kaitabha. 

He was a Demon of immense energy and prowess, and he 

performed austere tapasya. He stood on one leg and reduced his body to a 

mass of only veins and arteries, and Brahma, gratified with him, gave him a 

boon. The boon he asked of Prajapati was that no one would be able to kill 

him, not the Devas, the Danavas, the Rakshasas, the Nagas or the 
Gandharvas. 

The Pitamaha granted him his wish and the Danava went his way, after 
reverently worshipping Brahma by placing the God’s feet on his head. With 
this boon in hand, Dhundhu hurried to Vishnu, thinking of how Vishnu had 
killed his father. Wrathfully, he began wreaking havoc, first conquering the 
Gandharvas and then the Devas with Vishnu at their head. Finally, O bull of 
the Bhaaratas, that black-souled Asura arrived at the Ujjalaka desert and 
began to violate Utanka’s asrama. 

The fierce Dhundhu, son of Madhu and Kaitabha, lay in his cave under 
the sands in dread tapasya with the object of destroying the three worlds. It 
was during this time that the Rajarishi Kuvalaswa set out for that asrama 
with his troops, accompanied by all his sons and by the Brahmana Utanka. 

When Kuvalaswa embarked on his campaign with his twenty-one 
thousand sons, Lord Vishnu filled him with his own energy, at the command 


of Utanka and impelled by the desire to render a service to the three worlds. 
As Kuvalaswa proceeded, a loud voice spoke from the sky, repeatedly 
saying, “Blessed and unslayable, you will become the destroyer of 
Dhundhu today.” 

The gods showered divine flowers on him; and the celestial drums 
began to sound reverberantly, although none played upon them; and during 
the march, cool breezes began to blow; and the king of the gods sent down 
gentle rain to moisten the dust on the roads; and, Yudhishtira, the chariots of 
the celestial ones hovered high over Dhundhu’s subterranean cavern of 
tapasya. 

The Devas, Gandharvas and great Rishis, urged by curiosity, came there 
to watch the encounter between Dhundhu and Kuvalaswa. Kuvalaswa, 
bristling with Narayana’s urjas, and his sons with him, soon surrounded the 
desert and ordered that it be excavated. After seven days of digging in the 
sand, the king’s sons unearthed the mighty Asura Dhundhu, whose massive 
body lay nestled, radiant with his own energy, like the Sun himself. He 
covered the entire western quarter of the desert as he lay. 

Kuvalaswa’s sons encircled him and attacked him with arrows and 
maces, with short, heavy clubs and axes, with iron spikes and darts and with 
glistening, keen-edged swords. The towering Danava rose in rage from his 
supine position and began to swallow all the weapons that were hurled at 
him, and then spat flames from his mouth, flames like those of the fire 
called Samvartaka that burns at the end of the yuga. The Asura consumed 
all the king’s sons in his flames, even like the Lord Kapila burnt the sons of 
king Sagara long ago. 

In a mere moment, the furious Asura engulfed the three worlds with the 
flames that shot out of his mouth in endless tongues. 

Bhaaratottama, when all those sons of Kuvalaswa were consumed by 
the Asura’s angry fire, the king, filled with divine power, approached the 
Danava, who confronted him, like mighty Kumbhakarna on waking from 
his slumber. 

From the body of the king a jet of water gushed, which quickly 
extinguished the flames loosed by the Asura. The royal Kuvalaswa, filled 
with yogic power, slew the Demon with the Brahmastra, which is invoked 
to relieve Triloka of its fears. Once Rajarishi Kuvalaswa had killed the 
immense Asura, that foe of the Devas and slayer of all his enemies, with the 
exceptional weapon, he became like a second king of the three worlds. And 


from then on the noble Kuvalaswa came to be known by the name of 
Dhundhumara for having slain Asura Dhundhu, and came to be regarded as 
being invincible in battle. 

The Devas and the Rishis who had come to witness the encounter were 
so delighted with him that they said to him, “Ask us for a boon.” 

The king bowed to them and, filled with joy, said with hands joined in 
reverence, “Let me always be able to give wealth to devout Brahmanas. Let 
me be invincible to all my enemies. Let Vishnu always be my friend. Let 
me love all creatures. Let my heart always turn towards dharma, and let me 
live in Swarga forever.” 

The Devas, the Rishis and the Brahmana Utanka were extremely 
pleased and said, “It shall be as you wish.” O king, they bestowed many 
other blessings on him, and the Devas and Maharishis went away to their 
respective abodes. 

Yudhishtira, after the slaughter of his sons, king Kuvalaswa had only 
three sons left, and they were called Dridaswa, Kapilaswa and Chandraswa. 
It is from them, Rajan, that the illustrious line of Ikshvaku kings, all of 
immeasurable prowess, has sprung. 

This was how the great Daitya Dhundhu, the son of Madhu and 
Kaitabha, was killed by Kuvalaswa, and this was why that king came to be 
known as Dhundhumara. 

I have now told you all that you asked—about the One whose deeds 
made the story of Dhundhu’s death famous. He that listens to this sacred 
narrative of Vishnu’s glory becomes virtuous and is blessed with children. 
By listening to this story on particular days of the month, one is blessed 
with longevity and prosperity, and is freed from all anxiety and fear of 
disease.” ” 


CANTO 204 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Yudhishtira then asks the illustrious Markandeya 
a difficult question about dharma. 

He asks, ‘Holy one, I want to hear about the high and excellent virtue of 
women. I want you to tell me, Brahmana, about the subtle truths of dharma. 
By divine ordinance, the Sun, Moon, Wind, Earth, Fire, one’s father and 
mother, and one’s guru appear to us as living embodiments of God. All 
these are worthy of our reverence. So, too, is the woman who faithfully 
adores one lord. The worship that chaste wives offer to their husbands 
seems to be fraught with great difficulty. 

Worshipful one, speak to us of the virtue of chaste wives, who have 
their senses and hearts under perfect control and look on their husbands as 
gods. This cannot be easy to do. The worship that sons offer to their parents 
and that wives offer to their husbands seems difficult. I do not think there is 
anything more formidable than the stern virtue of chaste women. 
Brahmana, the dharma that good women discharge with care and the 
conduct of good sons towards their parents must be the hardest to observe. 

A woman who is devoted to only one lord, a woman who always speaks 
the truth, a woman who carries a child in her womb for a full ten month 
term - there can be no conduct more arduous, O Brahmana, than hers. 


Women give birth to their children at great risk to themselves and with 
intense pain, and then raise them with great love. 

Even persons who invoke hatred in others because of their cruelty do 
succeed in accomplishing their svadharma, which, in my opinion, is a 
difficult thing. Dvija, tell me the true duties of Kshatriyas. It is not easy for 
high-souled men to acquire virtue when their dharma obliges them to 
perform inhuman acts. Holy one, you have the knowledge to answer all 
questions; and I wish to hear you speak on these subjects. Best of Bhrigu’s 
clan, you of the lofty vows, I wait respectfully to listen to what you say.’ 

Markandeya says, “Bhaaratottama, I will tell you all this, however 
complex the answers to your questions may be. Listen well. 

Some regard the mother as the superior parent, some the father. It is the 
mother that gives birth to and rears the child, which is more demanding 
than the father’s role. Fathers wish for children by observing vratas and by 
tapasya, by worshipping the gods, by the reverence shown to them, by 
bearing cold and heat, by mantras and by other means. 

When they have children, after these painful observances, they, too, O 
Kshatriya, are always anxious about their sons’ futures. Bhaarata, both 
parents desire fame, success, prosperity, progeny and virtuousness for their 
sons. The good son is he who realises these hopes of his parents. Great 
king, that son with whom his father and mother are gratified achieves 
eternal fame and everlasting virtue in this world and the next. 

When it comes to women, neither yagnas, nor sraddhas, nor vratas are 
of any use. The only way they can attain the bliss of Swarga is by serving 
their husbands. Yudhishtira, bear this in mind while I tell you about the 
chaste woman’s dharma.’ ” 


CANTO 205 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya says, ‘There was, Bhaarata, a pious ascetic named 

Kausika, who had great tapasyashakti and who was devoted to 

the study of the Vedas. He was an excellent Brahmana, and studied all the 

Vedas with the Angas and the Upanishads. One day as he sat reciting the 

Vedas at the foot of a tree, a female crane that was on that tree sullied him 

with her droppings. He looked at the crane in anger, and this was enough to 
make the crane fall dead to the ground. 

Seeing the fallen krauncha under the tree, the Brahmana was moved to 
pity and began to lament the dead crane saying, “Alas, urged by anger and 
malice, I have done a sinful thing!” 

Having repeated this lament many times, that learned Brahmana went to 
a village to beg for alms. Bharatarishabha, in course of making his rounds 
of the houses of noble families, the Brahmana entered one such house that 
he knew. As he entered the house he said, Give, and a woman from inside 
answered, Wait. 

Bhaaratottama, while the housewife was cleaning the vessel from which 
alms are given, her husband suddenly came home and he was very hungry. 
The chaste housewife saw her husband and, ignoring the Brahmana, gave 
her lord water to wash his feet and face, and a seat. After that the black- 


eyed lady served him savoury food and drink, and humbly stood beside him 
in ready attendance. 

Yudhishtira, that woman was an obedient and chaste wife. She always 
ate the leftovers from her husband’s plate, she was ever respectful of her 
lord’s wishes and commands, and she was devoted in her love for him. Her 
conduct was always pious; she was skilful in all domestic duties, attentive 
to all her relatives and always did what was pleasing and beneficial to her 
husband. She was devout in the daily puja and heedfully saw to the wants of 
guests and servants, as well as of her mother-in-law and father-in-law. 

While this woman of the lovely eyes was busy waiting on her husband, 
she noticed the Brahmana waiting for alms and remorsefully remembered 
that she had asked him to wait. This lady, who was well known for her 
chasteness, took something to give the Brahmana and went out to where he 
stood. 

When she came before him the Brahmana said, “Best of women, 
blessed one, I am surprised at your behaviour. Having asked me to wait you 
did not dismiss me, but kept me waiting!” 

Lord of men, seeing the Brahmana blazing in anger, the chaste woman 
tried to pacify him. She said, “O Learned one, it is proper for you to forgive 
me. My husband is my supreme god. He came home hungry and tired, and I 
was serving him.” 

Hearing this, the Brahmana said, “You do not seem to consider that 
Brahmanas deserve more respect. Do you dare to exalt your husband above 
them? Are you so involved in your life as a wife that you disregard 
Brahmanas? Indra himself bows down to them, let alone humans on Earth. 
Proud woman, do you not know this? Have you never heard that Brahmanas 
are like fire and can consume all the earth?” 

The woman answered, “I am no she-crane, O Rishi! You that are 
endowed with the wealth of tapasya, cast off your anger. Enraged as you 
are, what can you do to me with your angry looks? I do not disrespect 
Brahmanas; blessed with great souls, they are like gods. O Sinless, if I have 
been remiss, you must forgive me. 

I know the mental energy and pride of wise Brahmanas: their anger 
made the waters of the ocean salty and undrinkable. I know also the power 
of Munis whose souls are under complete control: they are aflame with 
tapasyashakti. The fire of their wrath has still not been extinguished in the 
forest of Dandaka. 


It was because of his disrespect towards Brahmanas that the great 
Asura, the evil Vatapi, was eaten by Agastya. I have heard that the powers 
earned by high-souled Brahmanas are great indeed, but, O Brahmana, they 
are as great in forgiveness as they are in anger. Therefore, O Anagha, it is 
proper that you forgive me my offence. 

I favour the punya that serving my husband, whom I consider the 
highest god, gives me, and what you see is my worship of him and the 
virtue that accrues from it. I know that you have scorched a she-crane with 
your anger; Dvijottama, best of the twice-born, a man’s greatest enemy is 
his anger. 

The gods only consider a Brahmana the man who has shed his anger 
and passion, who always speaks the truth, who always pleases his teacher 
and who, though wounded by another, never retaliates. The gods consider a 
Brahmana the man who has his senses under control, who is virtuous, pure 
and devoted to the study of the Vedas, and who has mastered anger and lust. 

The gods consider a Brahmana the man who knows dharma and is rich 
in tejas of mind, who is devout, who looks upon all as his equals, who 
studies and teaches others, who performs sacrifices himself and officiates at 
the sacrifices of others, and who gives as much charity as his means allow. 
The gods consider a bull among the Dvijas, a Brahmana who practices 
brahmacharya, who has liberated his soul, who is devoted to the study of 
the Vedas and who always begins his studies with a recitation of the ideals 
of Brahmanas. The hearts of such men only ever find joy in truth, but never 
in falsehood. 

O Dvijottama, they say that the study of the Vedas, tranquillity of soul, 
simplicity of living and repression of passion are the eternal duties of the 
Brahmana. Those that know about dharma have said that truth and honesty 
are the highest virtues, and that they are not easy to comprehend. Virtue is 
eternal and is difficult to attain, but whatever kind it is, it is based on truth. 
The ancients have declared that dharma, because it depends on Sruti, is of 
many kinds and too subtle to understand. Holy one, you are virtuous, pure 
and devoted to Vedic study. I think, however, that you do not know the real 
essence of dharma. 

Go to the city of Mithila, where a virtuous butcher lives, and ask him if 
indeed you really understand true goodness. This butcher is truthful and 
devoted to the service of his parents, and has his senses under complete 
control. He will tell you about dharma. Go there if you like, O faultless one. 


Forgive me if what I have said is distasteful, for those who are earnest about 
acquiring dharma must never injure women.” 

The Brahmana replied, “I am pleased with you; blessings be upon you. 
My anger is gone, beautiful one. Your censure serves me well. I will go now 
and do what is good for me.” ’ 

Markandeya continues, “Dismissed by her, Kausika, that best of 
Brahmanas, left her house and, berating himself, returned home.’ ” 


CANTO 206 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya says, ‘Reflecting upon that wonderful discourse of 
the woman, Kausika began to reproach himself and, meditating 
on the subtleties of dharma, felt guilty. 

He said to himself, “I should respectfully accept what the good woman 
said and go to Mithila. I am certain that there lives in that city the butcher 
who has his soul under control and has fathomed the mysteries of dharma. I 
will go there this very day and ask that great tapasvin about virtue.” 

He was convinced by the chaste woman’s words because she knew 
about the she-crane, and because of the import of her words. So, Kausika 
set out for Mithila, humbly contemplating all that she had said, and filled 
with curiosity. On the way he passed through forests, villages and towns, 
and at last, reached Mithila, which was ruled by Janaka. 

He saw the magnificent city adorned with the flags of various clans and 
it echoed with the sounds of yagnas and festivities. There were splendid 
gateways and palaces, many marvellous buildings, and it was protected by 
walls on all sides. 

The city was full of chariots on its many well laid roads and streets, 
which were lined with a variety of shops. Warriors, horses and elephants 
shared the roads with the chariots, and everywhere healthy, happy people 


thronged the streets in festive mood. And there the Brahmana saw many 
other things. 

He enquired about the virtuous butcher and two Brahmanas directed 
him to his house. He went there and the Brahmana saw the shaunika in his 
yard, selling venison and buffalo meat. Because there was such a crowd of 
people waiting to be served, Kausika waited at a distance, but the meat 
vendor, realising that the Brahmana had come to see him, rose from his seat 
and went to where the Brahmana stood. 

He said, “Salutations, holy one! Welcome, O best of Brahmanas! I am 
the butcher. Blessings be upon you. Tell me what I can do for you. I know 
that the good lady told you to come to Mithila, and also why you have 
come.” 

The Brahmana was surprised at these words and thought, “O this is the 
second wonder that I see!” 

The butcher said to the Brahmana, “You are standing in a place that is 
scarcely proper for you, Anagha. Come, let us go to my house.” ’ 

Markandeya continues, ‘Saying Tathaastu, so be it, the Brahmana 
gladly walked ahead as the butcher led him to his home. Entering his 
pleasant house, the butcher reverently offered his guest a seat and gave him 
water to wash his feet and face, which the Brahmana accepted and then sat 
at ease. 

He said to the butcher, “Your profession does not seem fitting for you. I 
feel sad that you practise such a cruel trade.” 

The butcher said, “This is the profession of my family, which I have 
inherited from my father and grandfather. Dvija, do not grieve; I am only 
living by the dharma of my birth. By discharging the duties preordained for 
me by the Creator, I serve my superiors and the elders. Brahmanottama, I 
always speak the truth, I never envy others and I give to the best of my 
ability. I live upon what remains after serving the gods, my guests and my 
dependants; I never speak ill of any creature, big or small. Best of 
Brahmanas, the actions of your former life always follow you into 
subsequent lives. In this world there are three main professions— 
agriculture, cattle-rearing and trade. In the other world the three Vedas, 
knowledge and morality are important. Service to the three superior castes 
is assigned to the Sudra, agriculture to the Vaisya, battle to the Kshatriyas, 
and the practice of brahmacharya, celibacy, asceticism, recitation of mantras 
and truthfulness to the Brahmanas. 


The king should rule justly over his subjects who adhere to their proper 
duties, and should return those that have fallen from their dharma to it. The 
king must inspire fear, as he is the lord of his people. He checks his subjects 
who neglect their dharma, just as he would stop a deer with his arrows. 

O Rishi, Janaka is such a king; there is not one subject of his who does 
not live according to the dharma of his birth. Best of Brahmanas, here all 
four orders rigidly adhere to their respective duties. King Janaka punishes 
evil, even if the criminal is his own son, but he never inflicts pain on the 
virtuous. He uses reliable and good scouts and keeps an impartial eye on all. 
Prosperity, dominion and the power to punish rest with Kshatriyas. A king 
who is virtuous craves prosperity. The king is the protector of the four 
varnas. 

As for me, O Brahmana, I always sell pork and buffalo meat without 
slaughtering the animals myself. I sell the meat of animals that have been 
killed by others. I never eat meat myself; I never go to my wife except in 
her season; I always fast during the day and eat at night. Even though the 
actions expected of a man by his dharma are cruel, the man can be good. A 
man can be virtuous, although he may be a slayer of animals by profession. 

Virtue diminishes and evil prospers because of the sinful deeds of the 
king; his subjects become corrupt, and they decline. It is then, O Brahmana, 
that ugly monsters and dwarves, hunch-backed and huge-headed people, 
men that are blind or deaf, those that are cross-eyed or impotent are born. 

It is because of the sins of the king that his subjects suffer. But our king 
Janaka virtuously watches over his subjects and is always compassionate. 
On their part, his people always keep to their svadharma. As for me, I try to 
please everyone, regardless of whether they speak well of me or not. The 
king that lives in accordance to his dharma, who is always righteous and 
honest, who has his soul under control and who is always prepared and 
earnest need not depend on anyone for support. 

There are certain attributes that find their place only in a man who 
desires worldly detachment: giving of food to the extent that one can afford, 
endurance of heat and cold, steadfastness in virtue and compassion for all 
creatures. One should avoid telling lies and should do good deeds without 
being asked. 

One should never allow lust, anger or malice to get the better of virtue; 
one should never give in to extremes of joy and sorrow in good times and 
bad; one should never feel depressed or abandon the path of righteousness 


when overtaken by poverty. One must never repeat a wrong; one should 
always turn to conduct that benefits others; one should never repay wrong 
with wrong, but behave honestly with those that have wronged him. 

The wretch, who leans towards sin, destroys himself. By doing wrong, 
one only imitates those that are evil, who abandon dharma and mock the 
good and the pure in the belief that there is no goodness, and who, 
therefore, will surely be destroyed. The sinful man bloats like a leather bag 
puffed up with wind. 

The thoughts of these vain and stupid ones are feeble and worthless. 
The inner soul recognises his foolishness as easily as sunlight reveals 
everything. The fool does not shine merely because he praises himself; the 
learned man, however, even if he is not good-looking, shines by not 
speaking ill of others and well of himself. However, there is no person in 
this world who has all these attributes. 

Repentance washes away the sin of the wrong-doer. The determination 
never to repeat the sin saves him from future sin as surely as the methods 
prescribed by the scriptures. This is the Sruti of virtue—the sacred, recited 
strictures. The good man who commits a sin unknowingly can destroy the 
sin, for his virtue cleanses him of the sin committed in ignorance. 

After committing a sin, a man should no longer consider himself a man. 
Man cannot conceal his sins: the gods and the man’s conscience see what he 
does. The person, who, with piety and without hatred, conceals the errors of 
honest and wise men, as he would hide the holes in his clothes, finds 
salvation. 

If a man seeks redemption after having committed a sin, he is purged of 
all his sins; he looks bright, like the moon emerging from behind clouds. A 
man who truly wants redemption is washed of all his sins, and, renewed, 
shines again like the rising sun dispelling the darkness of the night. 

O Dvijottama, it is temptation that is the basis of sin. Men that are 
ignorant commit sin by giving in to temptation. Sinful men generally put on 
a cloak of virtue, like a well whose mouth is hidden by grass. Outwardly 
they seem to be self-controlled and devout; they preach virtue which, 
coming from them, is meaningless. In fact, they are anything but virtuous.” 


Markandeya continues, ‘At the butcher’s words, that wise Brahmana 
asked, “How will I recognise true dharma? You are blessed, and I want to 
hear this from you, best of virtuous men. Tell me what you know.” 


The butcher replied, “Five sacred ingredients make up dharma: yagna— 
sacrifice, daana—charity, tapasya—asceticism, the Vedas, and satyam— 
truth. Having quelled lust and anger, pride, avarice and crookedness, they 
that delight in dharma for dharma’s sake are the truly virtuous and 
praiseworthy. Those who perform sacrifices and study the Vedas have no 
other way of life other than dharma. They follow only righteousness, and 
this is the second attribute of the virtuous. 

Waiting upon superiors, truth, freedom from anger, and charity —these 
four, O Brahmana, are integral to dharma. The only way a person can lead a 
righteous life is by practising these four. The essence of the Vedas is Truth; 
the essence of Truth is self-control; and the essence of self-control is 
abstention from worldly pleasures. One sees all these in the conduct of a 
good man. 

They that follow fools who mock men’s virtue walk a sinful path and 
are dragged down to perdition. They that are virtuous and conscientiously 
observe vratas, who are devoted to the Srutis, who abstain from worldly 
pleasures, who tread in virtue’s path and follow the true dharma; they that 
are obedient to their gurus, and who contemplate the meaning of the 
scriptures with patience and concentration, are the truly virtuous. 
Brahmana, these qualities guide their intellect. 

Avoid atheists and men that live on the edge; stay away from wicked 
and sinful men; rather, acquire knowledge and revere good men. Lust and 
temptation are like sharks in the river of life, whose waters are the five 
senses. Cross to the other side of this river in the boat of patience, avoiding 
the shoals of rebirth into this world. 

The supreme dharma, consisting of the exercise of the higher intellect 
and dhyana, when gradually added to virtuous conduct, becomes revealed 
in beauty, like coloured dye on white fabric. Truthfulness and non-violence 
are benign qualities. Of these, non-violence is a cardinal virtue, and based 
in Truth. The mind works effectively when the foundation of its activity is 
Truth, the noblest value. Pure conduct is the characteristic of all good men; 
they that are distinguished for saintliness are men of dharma. 

All creatures set principles for themselves based on their inherent 
nature. The sinful man, who has no control over himself, acquires lust, 
anger and other vices. It is an immortal truth that virtuous actions are those 
that are founded on justice; also, sages have declared that all deviant 
conduct is sin. 


Those who are not swayed by anger, pride, haughtiness and envy, and 
those who are quiet and straightforward, are naturally virtuous in conduct. 
Those who are diligent in performing the rites prescribed in the three Vedas, 
who are wise and of pure and good conduct; those who exercise self- 
restraint and are attentive to the needs of their superiors, are men of dharma. 

The ways of great men like these are difficult to emulate. Their sins are 
washed away by the sanctity of their actions. This piety is wonderful; it is 
ancient, immutable and eternal; and wise men who lead lives of dharma 
attain Swarga. Men who believe in God, who have no false pride, who are 
well-versed in the scriptures, and who respect Dvijas, the twice-born, find 
heaven for themselves. 

Among holy men, dharma is threefold—the supreme dharma that the 
Vedas teach; the dharma that the Dharmashastras preach; and good conduct. 
Good karma is the acquisition of knowledge, making pilgrimages to sacred 
tirthas, truthfulness, forbearance, purity and honesty. 

Virtuous men are always kind to all creatures and hold Brahmanas dear; 
they practise ahimsa by abstaining from doing injury to any creature; and 
they are always polite. Wise men who know the consequences of their good 
and evil karma are held in high esteem by the sages. Those who are just and 
good-natured, and blessed with virtue, who wish all creatures well, who 
walk steadily on the path of righteousness, conquer Swargaloka. 

Godly people praise those who are charitable, unselfish and of 
unblemished character, who help the distressed, who are learned and 
respected, who practise stern tapasya, and who are kind to all creatures. 

The generous man earns prosperity in this world and bliss in the next; 
so does the man who, when asked by good men, gives as much as he can, 
even depriving his family and dependants. Good men act in this way, 
thinking about dharma and their own welfare, and knowing the ways of the 
world; and their goodness grows, endlessly. 

The good, who are wedded to Truth, who try not to injure any creature, 
who are honourable, who avoid evil, who are humble, modest and self- 
restrained; they who are accepting of destiny, wise, free from malice and 
lust: these are the witnesses of the world. 

These three conditions are said to be the perfect way of dharma: a man 
must not wrong another, he must bestow alms, and he must always be 
truthful. High-souled men of honourable convictions and righteous conduct, 


who are kind to all and full of compassion, leave this world with 
contentment. 

Freedom from malice, patience, peace of mind, contentment, pleasant 
speech, renunciation of desire and anger, conduct and actions disciplined by 
the dictates of the scriptures, make for pure goodness. Those who are steady 
in virtue follow these ways and, having reached the pinnacle of knowledge, 
and having learnt how to distinguish good from bad, escape putting their 
souls in grave danger. 

O Great Brahmana, I have told you about dharma, as I know it and as I 
have heard,” said the butcher,’ says Markandeya.” 


CANTO 207 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


¢ “MI arkandeya continues, “Yudhishtira, the pious butcher then said 

to the Brahmana, “My actions are cruel but, Brahmana, destiny 

is powerful and it is difficult to evade the consequences of your past 

actions. This is karmic evil arising out of sins I committed in a previous 
life. O Brahmana, I am always punctilious in avoiding evil. 

God takes away life; the executioner is merely an instrument; and we, 
too, are karmic agents. The animals whose meat I sell also acquire karma, 
because they give pleasure to gods, guests and servants when they are 
served as well-prepared dishes, thereby propitiating the spirits of their 
ancestors. 

It is said authoritatively that herbs and vegetables, deer, birds and wild 
animals are the food of all creatures. King Sibi, the son of Usinara, of great 
forbearance, reached heaven, which is not easy, by giving away his own 
flesh. 

In olden times, two thousand cows and two thousand other animals 
were slaughtered every day in King Rantideva’s kitchen, and he acquired 
unrivalled fame by distributing food with meat, daily. Animals have to be 
sacrificed for the performance of the quarterly rites. The saying that the 
sacred fire is fond of animal flesh has come down to us from ages past. At 
yagnas, animals are invariably killed by Brahmanas, and these animals, 


purged of sin by the chanting of mantras, find Swarga. O Dvija, if the 
sacred fire had not been so fond of animal flesh in ancient times, meat could 
not have become a part of our diet. 

As regards meat, this rule has been laid down by sages: whoever 
partakes of animal food after having first offered it respectfully to the Devas 
and the Pitrs, is not polluted by what he does, and such a man is not 
considered to have partaken of the meat in the same way that a 
brahmacharin who has intercourse with his wife during her menstrual 
period is nevertheless considered to be a good Brahmana. This law has been 
declared after deliberations on its propriety, Dvijottama. 

King Sudasa, when suffering from a curse, often used to prey upon 
men; what is your opinion of this? And, good Brahmana, I know that my 
life is a consequence of my own karma, and I obtain my livelihood from 
this profession. To forsake one’s inherent occupation is considered a sin; 
whereas pursuing one’s svadharma is, definitely, meritorious. 

The karma of a former life is inescapable, and in determining the 
consequences of one’s karma, the Creator has maintained this law. A person 
living out the results of his evil karma must always think about how he can 
atone and extricate himself from doom. The karma that follows evil can be 
expiated in many ways. Accordingly, Brahmanasreshta, I am charitable, 
truthful, and assiduously do I serve my superiors; I am respectful and 
devoted to Brahmanas, and do not indulge in pride or idle gossip. 

Farming is considered a praiseworthy occupation, but it is well-known 
that even there, great harm is done to animal life because, in the process of 
ploughing the earth, numberless small creatures living underground are 
killed. Do you not agree? O Brahmana, vrihi and other types of rice are all 
living organisms. What is your opinion? 

Men hunt wild animals, kill them and eat their meat; they cut down 
trees and herbs; but, Brahmana, there are countless living things in trees, in 
fruits and in water. Do you not think so? 

All creation, Dvija, is full of animal life, sustaining itself with food 
derived from living organisms. Have you not noticed that fish prey upon 
fish, that animals prey upon other species, and that other species eat their 
own kind? While walking, men trample and kill uncountable living 
creatures. Even wise and enlightened men destroy life in various ways, 
while sleeping or resting. What do you say to this? The earth and the air 


swarm with living creatures, which are unknowingly killed by men. Is this 
not so? 

The injunction that people should not harm any creature was ordained 
long ago by men who were ignorant of the true facts. Brahmana, there is not 
a man on the face of this earth who is innocent of injuring living creatures. I 
have thought deeply about this and have come to this conclusion. Even the 
Rishi, good Brahmana, whose vow is to do no harm to any creature, inflicts 
injury on animal life, except that the harm is less. 

Kshatriyas of great qualities defiantly do evil, of which they are not 
ashamed. Good men acting in an exemplary way are not praised by other 
good men; nor are bad men acting in evil ways praised by their evil peers; 
friends are not pleasant to friends, despite their noble qualities; and foolish 
pedants denigrate the virtues of their teachers. This reversal of the natural 
order of things, O excellent Brahmana, is common. What do you think 
about all this? 

There is much that one can say about the integrity or vileness of our 
actions. All said and done, whoever adheres to his dharma surely acquires 
renown,’ says Markandeya.’ ” 


CANTO 208 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


¢ “MI arkandeya continues, ‘O Yudhishtira, the good and 

compassionate butcher then said to the Brahmana, “Our elders 

have handed down to us, by word of mouth, the wisdom of the Sruti, which 
says that the ways of dharma are subtle, diverse and infinite. 

When life is at stake and in the matter of marriage, one is permitted to 
tell an untruth. Untruth sometimes leads to the triumph of truth but, 
conversely, truth can also maintain lies. Whichever is most conducive to the 
good of all creatures is considered the truth. Dharma is thus perverted; mark 
its subtle ways. 

Man’s actions are either good or bad, and he surely reaps their fruits. 
The ignorant man, having reached a miserable state, abuses the gods, not 
knowing that his condition is the consequence of his own evil karma. The 
foolish, the scheming and the fickle, good Brahmana, always attain the 
opposite of happiness; they find misery. Neither learning nor morals, nor 
personal exertion can save them. If the fruits of our efforts were not 
dependent on anything else, people would gain the object of their desire 
merely by striving for it. 

Able, intelligent and diligent persons are frustrated in their efforts and 
do not obtain the fruits of their actions. On the other hand, those who live 
by deception, and who harm others, thrive. There are some who achieve 


prosperity without trying too hard; and there are others, who, even with the 
utmost effort, are unable to achieve their ends. 

Misers worship the gods and practise severe austerities with the object 
of having sons, and those healthy sons, born in full term, turn out to be a 
disgrace to their family; whereas others born under the same circumstances 
live decent and comfortable lives, enjoying the wealth passed down to them 
by their ancestors. 

The diseases that a man suffers from are undoubtedly the result of his 
own karma, which traps him, like a small deer in a hunter’s hands; and he 
suffers agony. And, O Brahmana, just as a hunter cuts off the flight of his 
quarry, skilful physicians check the progress of the disease with their 
medicines. 

The most devout and knowledgeable men say that those who have the 
wherewithal to enjoy the good things that life has to offer are prevented 
from doing so because of chronic bowel disorders; they say that many that 
are strong and powerful suffer and have great difficulty earning a 
livelihood; they say that every man is helpless, overcome by sorrow and 
illusion, and repeatedly tossed about and dragged under by the powerful 
current of his own actions, his karma. 

If there were absolute freedom of action, no creature would die, none 
would decay, none would have to await his doom, and every man would 
attain the object of his desire. Everyone wants to outdistance his neighbours 
in the race of life, and men strive to the utmost of their power to this end; 
but the result is unpredictable. 

Many are born under the influence of the same star and the same 
astrological concatenations; but there is great diversity in the maturity of 
their actions. Dvijottama, no person can be the dispenser of his own lot. The 
actions done in a previous existence bear fruit in our present life. The soul 
is eternal and everlasting, but the physical body is impermanent and is 
destroyed in this world. So, when life is extinguished it is only the body that 
is destroyed; the soul, bonded to its actions, lives on to take birth in another 
body.” 

The Brahmana replied, “O learned one, you have grasped the mysteries 
of karma, and are expert at discourse. I want to know how the soul becomes 
immortal.” 

The butcher replied, “The spirit does not die, it only rehouses itself. 
Those who foolishly say that all creatures die are mistaken. The soul fits 


itself to another frame, and its change of home is called death. In the world 
of men, no man lives the consequences of another man’s karma; he reaps 
the consequences of what he does. 

The consequences of actions, once done, cannot be avoided. The 
virtuous become endowed with great virtues, and sinful men become the 
perpetrators of evil deeds. Men’s karma follows them and influences the 
conditions of their rebirth.” 

The Brahmana asked, “Why does the spirit take its birth, and how does 
it become sinful or virtuous? And how, excellent one, does it come to 
belong to a sinful or virtuous man?” 

The butcher replied, “This mystery has to do with procreation. I shall 
briefly describe to you, Brahmanottama, how the soul is born again with its 
accumulated load of karma, the righteous soul in the virtuous and the evil 
soul in the sinful. Through the performance of virtuous actions it reaches 
the state of the celestials, and by a combination of good and evil it acquires 
the human condition; by indulging in sensual and base ways it is born into 
the lower species of animals; and by outright sin it goes to naraka, to hell. 

Afflicted with the miseries of birth, death and old age, man is fated to 
rot from the consequences of his own actions. Passing through thousands of 
births, and through naraka, our spirits wander, bound by ropes of their own 
karma. 

Animate beings become miserable in the next world because of their 
own actions, and as a result of those miseries, they assume lower births and 
go on to accumulate new karma. They suffer again, like sickly men eating 
unwholesome food; and although they are thus afflicted, they think they are 
happy and at ease, and consequently their fetters remain in place and more 
fresh karma builds. Suffering from all kinds of grief, they spin about dizzily 
in this world like a loose wheel. 

If they shrug off their bonds and purify themselves by their actions, and 
if they practise penance and tapasya, then, O Brahmanottama, they attain 
mukti. By casting off their karmic fetters and through purifying deeds, men 
reach that blissful state where misery is unknown. The sinful man, who is 
addicted to vice, never stops being iniquitous. So, must we strive to do what 
is good and desist from doing what is wrong. 

The person who, with whole-hearted gratitude and free from malice, 
strives to do good attains the four purusharthas: dharma, artha, kama and 
moksha. Those who are purified of sins, wise, forbearing, steadfast in 


dharma and self-restrained enjoy uninterrupted well-being in this world and 
the next. Man must live by the standards of the good and emulate the 
righteous: there are many learned and virtuous men who are versed in the 
Shastras. It is man’s dharma to follow his own inherent vocation, his 
svadharma, which prevents confusion. 

The wise man delights in virtue and lives by righteousness. 
Brahmanottama, such a man, with his acquired wealth of righteousness, 
waters the root of the particular plant of dharma in which he finds the most 
virtue. Thus does the godly man calm and still his mind. He is pleased with 
his friends in this world and also attains happiness in the next. Virtuous 
persons, excellent one, acquire authority and enjoy the pleasures of beauty, 
flavour, sound and touch as they wish. These are the rewards of dharma. 

However, excellent Brahmana, the enlightened man is not satisfied with 
reaping the fruits of righteousness. Not content with that, and with the light 
of spiritual wisdom that resides in him, he becomes indifferent to pain and 
pleasure; and he is unaffected by evil. He chooses to give up worldly 
pursuits, but he does not forsake dharma. 

Realising that everything in the world is transient, he attempts to 
renounce it all. He does not rely on chance, but designs the means of 
attaining his salvation. So, renouncing all worldly pleasures and avoiding 
sin, he becomes pure and, at last, attains moksha. 

Spiritual wisdom is the main requirement for man to attain salvation, 
and surrender and patience are its roots. By this means he achieves all that 
he desires. By subduing the senses and by a life of truthfulness and 
fortitude, he attains, O Brahmana, the supreme state of Brahman.” 

The Brahmana asked, “O most devout of men, what are these senses 
you speak of, and how are they subdued? What does one gain by subduing 
the senses, and how does one get the benefits of it? I want to know about 
these things,” ’ says Markandeya.” 


CANTO 209 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


¢ “MI arkandeya continues, ‘Hear, O Yudhishtira, what the virtuous 
butcher said when the Brahmana questioned him. 

He said, “Men begin by bending their minds to the acquisition of 
knowledge. Once that end is met, they work on great tasks and then indulge 
their desires and the pleasures of the senses—beauty, taste, and so on. 
Dharma, artha and kama. 

Attachment follows, then envy, then avarice, and the light of spirituality 
is extinguished. When men are influenced by avarice, and overcome by 
envy and attachment, dharma no longer guides their minds, and their lives 
become a mockery of virtue. Practising dharma with hypocrisy, they are 
content to acquire wealth dishonourably and, with this ill-gotten wealth, 
their minds become enamoured of evil ways, and they are filled with a 
desire to sin. And, good Brahmana, when their friends and wise men try to 
dissuade them, they answer with sophistry, neither sound nor convincing. 

Their addiction to evil makes them sin in thought, word and deed, and 
kills all their good qualities, and these evil men cultivate other evil ones as 
friends. They suffer misery in this world as well as in the next. This is the 
sinful man’s nature. 

Now hear about the man of virtue. He discerns evil with spiritual 
insight, and is able to discriminate between joy and grief; he is respectfully 


attentive to men of wisdom and from practising virtue, his soul leans 
towards dharma.” 

The Brahmana said, “You have explained dharma to me in a way that no 
one else could. Your spiritual power is great; you seem to be a great sage.” 

The butcher replied, “We worship the great Brahmanas with the same 
honour that we give our ancestors, and we always propitiate them, before 
anyone else, with offerings of food. In this world, wise men put their hearts 
into doing what pleases them. I will now describe to you what pleases them. 
But first I will bow in reverence to Brahmanas as a varna. Learn the 
Brahmana dharma from me. 

This whole Universe is unconquerable in its totality and is made of the 
panchamahabhutas, the five great elements; it is Brahman, and there is 
nothing higher. The Earth, Air, Water, Fire and Sky are the mahabhutas; and 
form, odour, sound, touch and taste are their characteristic properties. These 
properties, too, have their own properties. 

Three qualities characterise each property and, of them, consciousness, 
also called the mind, is the most important. In seventh place is intelligence 
and after that comes egoism; then come the five senses, then the soul, then 
the moral gunas—sattva, rajas and tamas. These seventeen are the abstract, 
or incomprehensible, qualities. 

Now that I have described all this to you, is there anything else you 
want to know?” said the vendor of meat.’ ” 


CANTO 210 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


¢ “VI arkandeya continues, ‘O Bhaarata, the Brahmana, who found 

the meat-seller’s discourse so pleasing, said, “Devout one, you 

said that there are five great elements; do describe fully all the lakshanas or 
properties of any one of the five.” 

The butcher replied, “Earth, Water, Fire, Air and Sky all have properties 
that overlap each other. I will describe them to you. Earth, O Brahmana, has 
five qualities; Water has four, Fire three and Air and Sky together have 
three. Sound, touch, shape, smell and taste are the five lakshanas of Earth; 
sound, touch, shape and taste belong to Water; sound, touch and shape are 
the three properties of Fire; Air has two properties—sound and touch; and 
sound alone is the Sky’s. 

O Brahmana, these fifteen properties that are inherent in the five 
elements exist in everything of which this Universe is made. They are not 
opposed to one another, but co-exist in combinations. When the Universe is 
cast into chaos, then every physical being, in its proper time, assumes a new 
physical body. Each of these bodily receptacles come to life and die in their 
due order. 

There are five elementary substances of which all the mobile and 
immobile world is composed. Whatever the senses can perceive is called 
vyakta, knowable or comprehensible, and whatever is beyond the reach of 


the senses and can only be perceived by the imagination is known as 
avyakta. 

When a person sets out on the quest for Atma gyana, knowledge of the 
Self, after having subdued the senses, which have their own roles to play in 
relation to the external world, then he sees his own soul pervading the 
Universe, and the Universe reflected in himself. The man who is bound to 
his previous karma, though learned in the highest spiritual wisdom, can 
only know his soul’s objective existence; but he whose soul is unaffected by 
the conditions around him is never subject to sorrow, because his soul has 
absorbed the spirit of Brahman. 

When a man has overcome the influence of illusion, his human virtues, 
consisting of the essence of spiritual wisdom, turn to spiritual 
enlightenment, which illumines the minds of all beings. The omnipotent 
Spirit regards such a man as one who is without beginning or end, who is 
self-existent, unchangeable, without material form, and incomparable. 

This, O Brahmana, is the result of self-discipline; and this self- 
discipline can only be acquired by subduing the senses. It cannot be 
otherwise, because heaven and hell are both dependent on our senses. When 
subdued they lead to Swarga; when indulged in they lead to ruin. This 
subjugation of the senses is the highest path to spiritual enlightenment. 

Our senses are at the root of our spiritual advancement as well as of our 
spiritual downfall. By indulging them, a man becomes addicted to vice, and 
by subduing them, he attains salvation. The self-restrained person who 
acquires mastery over the six senses is never tainted with sin, and evil has 
no power over him. 

Man’s physical body has been compared to a chariot, his soul to a 
charioteer and his senses to horses. A dexterous man drives about without 
confusion, like a confident charioteer with well-broken horses. That man 
who knows how to wield the reins of spirited horses—the six senses 
inherent in our nature —is an excellent charioteer. 

When our senses become uncontrollable, like swift horses given their 
heads on the open road, we must patiently rein them in for, with patience, 
we can bring them under control. When a man’s mind is overpowered by 
any one of the senses, running wild, he loses his reason and becomes like a 
ship tossed by storms on the high seas. 

Men allow illusion to deceive them, with the hope of reaping the fruit of 
those six senses. The effects of these six are studied by men of spiritual 


insight, and they are the ones who reap the rewards of their clear 
perception,” said the meat vendor.’ ” 


CANTO 211 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


¢ “MI arkandeya continued, ‘Bhaarata, the Brahmana_ listened 
attentively to the meat-seller’s discourse and asked him, 
“Describe the qualities of sattva, rajas and tamas to me.” 

The butcher replied, “I will describe each of their characteristics 
separately. Listen. 

Tamas is characterised by spiritual delusion; rajas incites men to action; 
sattva is of great splendour and the greatest of the three. 

He who is spiritually ignorant, foolish and a dreamer, who is idle, 
apathetic and swayed by anger and arrogance, is under the influence of 
tamas. The man who speaks pleasantly, who is thoughtful and free from 
envy, and who is industrious because he wishes to benefit from his hard 
work, and who is compassionate, is influenced by rajas. He who is resolute 
and patient, who has no anger, who is free from malice, and who is wise 
and forbearing, who does not work out of a desire to benefit from his work, 
is said to be under the influence of sattva. 

When a sattvic man allows himself to be influenced by worldliness he is 
unhappy; but he shuns it when he realises its significance. Then, he begins 
to feel indifferent to worldly matters; his pride decreases, and righteousness 
increases; and he reconciles the values that are in conflict within him. 
Conscious self-restraint becomes unnecessary. A man may be born a Sudra, 


but if he has sattva, he can attain the level of a Vaisya or of a Kshatriya; and 
if he is steadfast in dharma, he can become equal to a Brahmana. 

I have described the gunas to you; is there anything else you wish to 
know?” said the meat vendor.’ 


CANTO 212 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


¢ TT he Brahmana asked, “How does Fire, the vital force, combine with 

Earth, matter, to become the physical body which houses living 

spirits? And how does prana, the life-force, give the parts of the body in 
which it resides impetus to act?” 

The butcher replied, “Prana, the vital spirit, manifesting itself in the seat 
of consciousness, sparks the body into action. It is the soul, which is present 
in both, that acts. The past, the present and the future are inseparable from 
the soul, and it is the highest aspect of any being. It is the essence of the 
Supreme Spirit, and we adore it. It is the life-giving principle of all 
creatures, and it is the eternal spirit— Purusha. It is splendid. 

It is the intelligence and the ego; it is the seat of all elements. It is 
sustained by that subtle life-force, prana, while it inhabits a corporeal 
frame, in all its internal and external interactions with mind or matter. 

Each being, however, goes its own way by the action of another subtle 
force called samana. Samana transforms itself into apana, or air, and, 
supported by the top of the stomach, carries the body’s waste to the kidneys 
and intestines. 

This same force is present in the three elements—effort, exertion and 
power—and men learned in science have named it udana. When it 
manifests itself at the energy centres of the human system it is known as 


vyana. Vyana disperses heat into the tissues and muscles of the body to 
transform food and fluids into energy. Vyana combines with prana and the 
other forces to produce heat, the body’s internal energy, which causes 
digestion. 

The energy produced by the combination of prana and apana reacts 
within samana and udana to generate the physical growth of the body that 
consists of the seven substances — bones, muscles and the rest. 

Apana is that portion of its seat extending as far as the rectum; from 
there, arteries spread in the five forces, of which prana is one. Heat acts on 
prana, which strikes the extremity of the apana region and recoils, to react 
on the heat. 

Above the navel is the region of undigested food and below it the area 
of digestion. Prana and all the other forces of the body are seated in the 
navel. The arteries coming from the heart run upwards, downwards and 
obliquely, carrying the essence of our food. The arteries are controlled by 
the ten pranic forces. 

Yogis, who have overcome every obstacle, and who view all things 
objectively and impartially, whose souls are in their intellect, find the 
Supreme Spirit. 

Prana and apana are present in beings. The soul or atman is clothed in 
corporeal disguise, and is present in the eleven elemental physical aspects 
of life forms. Although eternal and undying, its normal state is altered by its 
habitat, just as fire burns in a fireplace, constant, yet taking the shape of its 
container. 

The soul, which is divine, is related to the body in which it lives in the 
same way as a drop of water that rolls on the sleek surface of a lotus leaf. 

Sattva, rajas and tamas are the attributes of all life; life is the attribute of 
the soul; and the soul is an attribute of the Supreme Brahman. This living 
principle, which is active in itself and induces activity in its attributes of 
sattva, rajas and tamas, is anchored in inert matter. It is that Brahman by 
which the seven worlds are incited to action and is called the most high by 
men of spiritual insight. 

In all these elements, the eternal spirit does not show itself, but can be 
known by those who are learned in Atma gyana, who have extraordinary 
vision. A pure-minded man, by purifying his heart, can destroy the good 
and evil karmic effects of his actions and attain eternal bliss by the 
enlightenment of his inner spirit. That state of peace is compared to the 


sound sleep of an innocent, happy person, or the steady light of a lamp 
trimmed by a skilful hand. 

A pure man, living on a frugal diet, perceives the Supreme Spirit in his 
own soul, and by meditating in the evening and the small hours of the night, 
he sees the Nirguna Paramatman, the Supreme Spirit, by the light of his 
heart, shining like a bright lamp, and so he attains moksha. 

Greed and anger must somehow be subdued, because self-restraint is 
the most sacred virtue that a man can practise. It is considered the means by 
which a man can cross the sea of misery. A man must protect his 
righteousness from being swallowed by the evil consequences of anger; he 
must safeguard his virtues from his pride; he must protect his learning from 
vanity, and his own spirit from illusion. 

Liberality is the best of virtues, and forbearance is the most powerful; 
the knowledge of our inner spiritual nature is the best of all knowledge, and 
truthfulness the best of all religious duties. Speaking the truth is good and 
so is the knowledge of truth, but the greatest good of all creatures is brought 
about by what we know as the Highest Truth. 

He whose actions are not performed for the sake of reward or blessing, 
he who has sacrificed everything to achieve renunciation—this man is a real 
Sannyasin and is truly wise. No one can teach a man to commune with 
Brahman, not even his spiritual Guru. To solve the eternal mystery the Guru 
can only set us on the path, which is to renounce the material world through 
yoga. 

We must not harm any creature and must live in peace and friendship 
with all. In our present existence, we must not avenge ourselves on any 
creature. Self-denial, peace of mind, renunciation of hope, and equanimity 
are the ways by which enlightenment can be reached. The knowledge of the 
Self is the highest knowledge. 

In this world as well as hereafter, a man must fulfil his dharma by 
renouncing all worldly desires and developing an attitude of stoicism and 
detachment, by which suffering is stilled. 

The Muni who wants to have Moksha, salvation, which is so difficult to 
attain, must observe constant austerities, patience and self-restraint; he must 
give up attachment, which binds him to people and material things. These 
practices are the attributes of the Brahman. The gunas that we are conscious 
of reduce themselves to agunas, non-attributes, in Him, the Supreme Spirit. 


He is not bound by anything, and is seen only by the development of 
spiritual vision. As soon as the illusion caused by ignorance is dispelled, 
supreme unalloyed joy is attained. By giving up the objects of pleasure and 
pain, and by severing the bonds to the things of this earth, a man may attain 
Brahman, and Moksha. 

Brahmanottama, I have explained this to you in brief, as I have heard it. 
What else do you wish to know?” said the meat-seller.’ ” 


CANTO 213 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya says, ‘Yudhishtira, when the Brahmana heard the 

explanation of this subtle mystery of Mukti he was overjoyed, 

and he said to the butcher, “All that you have explained is sound, and it 

seems to me that there is nothing you do not know about the mysteries of 
true religion.” 

The butcher replied, “Good and great Brahmana, you will see for 
yourself the truth of all that I have told you, because of which I have 
attained this blissful state. Come into the inner apartment of my home; you 
should meet my parents.” 

The Brahmana went in and saw a fine, beautiful mansion. It was a 
magnificent house divided into four suites of rooms. The Devas had 
admired this house and indeed it looked like one of their own palaces. It 
was furnished with fine chairs and beds, and sweet perfumes hung in the air. 
The meat-seller’s parents, clad in white robes, had finished their meal and 
were seated at ease. The butcher prostrated himself before them and 
touched his head to their feet. 

His elderly parents said to him, “Rise, O pious one; may dharma shield 
you. We are always pleased with your goodness; may you be blessed with a 
long life, knowledge and keen intelligence; may all your desires be fulfilled. 


You are a good and dutiful son, and you look after us so well. Indeed, you 
do not worship any god as you do us. 

By constantly controlling yourself, you have gained the discipline and 
power of a Brahmana. Your ancestors are gratified by your self-restraint and 
by the way you worship us. In thought, word and action, your attention to 
us never flags and it seems that you never have any thought in your mind 
except how to please us. Son, you work as hard to please us as Rama, the 
son of Jamadagni, did to please his old parents, even more.” 

Then the butcher introduced the Brahmana to his parents, and they 
received him with the customary salutation of welcome. The Brahmana, 
accepting their welcome humbly, enquired if they, their children and 
servants were in good health, and happy. 

The aged couple replied, “O Brahmana, we are all well. Were you able 
to reach this place without much difficulty?” 

The Brahmana replied that he had. Now the meat vendor said to the 
Brahmana, “Worshipful one, my parents are the idols that I worship; 
whatever is due to the gods, I do for them. Just as men worship the thirty- 
three Devas with Indra at their head, I worship my aged parents. Just as 
Brahmanas strive to procure offerings to make to their gods, I work 
diligently to make offerings to these two deities of mine. 

My father and my mother, O Brahmana, are my supreme gods, and I 
want to please them always, with offerings of flowers, fruit and jewels. To 
me they are like the three sacred Agnis that learned men speak of, like the 
Yagnas, or the four Vedas. 

My five pranas, my wife, children and friends are all dedicated to their 
service. With my wife and children, I always attend on them. 
Brahmanottama, with my own hands I assist in their bathing; I wash their 
feet and give them food; and I speak to them only of pleasant matters and 
never what is unpleasant. I consider pleasing them to be my highest 
dharma, even if what that entails might not be justifiable. And I am always 
diligent in serving them. 

One’s parents, the sacred fire, the soul and the spiritual Guru—these 
five, good Brahmana, are worthy of the highest reverence by a person who 
seeks prosperity. By serving them properly, one acquires the punya of 
perpetually keeping the sacred fire burning. It is the eternal duty of all 
grihastas,” said the vendor of meat.’ 


CANTO 214 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “VI arkandeya continues, ‘Having introduced his parents to the 

Brahmana as his highest gurus, the butcher said, “Now you see 

the power of my dharma, which has enhanced my inner spiritual vision. It is 

for this purpose that the lady, who is self-restrained, truthful and devoted to 

her husband, told you to come to Mithila to meet the butcher who would 
explain the mysteries of religion to you.” 

The Brahmana said, “Pious one, so steadfast in fulfilling your dharma, I 
remember what that chaste devi said, and I am convinced that you are truly 
endowed with every fine quality.” 

The butcher replied, “I have no doubt that the good woman explained 
all this to you. Now listen to me and I will tell you what will benefit you. 

Brahmana of impeachable character, you have wronged your father and 
mother by leaving home without their permission, in order to study the 
Vedas. You have not acted properly in this matter, because your sannyasin 
parents are old and have been blinded by their grief at losing you. Return 
home to console them, and may this always stand you in good stead. You 
have a noble mind and great tapasyashakti, and you are devout; but these 
qualities have not benefitted you. Go back immediately and comfort your 
parents. 


Take my advice seriously, because what I say is for your weal. 
Brahmana, go home today.” 

The Brahmana said, “Surely, you speak the truth. May you prosper, 
pious one; I am pleased with you.” 

The butcher said, “Brahmana, your perseverance in the practice of the 
divine and ancient sanatana dharma, which even the pure-minded find so 
difficult to attain, makes you seem like a god. Return to your parents’ side 
and waste no time in adoring them. I do not know of any higher dharma 
than this.” 

The Brahmana said, “It is my singular good fortune that has brought me 
here, and I am lucky to have met you. It is very difficult to find, in our 
midst, one who can explain the mysteries of dharma; there is hardly even 
one man in a thousand who is so knowledgeable about dharma. 

I am glad, O great one, to have your friendship. May you prosper. You 
have pulled me back from the brink of hell. I know this is my destiny 
because of the manner in which you came into my life. 

You have saved me just as his grandsons saved the fallen king Yayati. I 
will follow your advice and honour my father and mother. I know you are 
pure-hearted because no man whose heart is sullied could unravel these 
subtle intricacies of dharma. It is difficult indeed for a Sudra to understand 
these profound and complex concepts; and this puzzles me. You must have 
been born a Sudra because of your past karma. Most generous one, I am 
eager to know the truth about this. Tell me about it, as you see fit.” 

The butcher replied, “Good Brahmana, I revere Brahmanas. Listen, 
sinless one, to the story of my previous life. In my last life, I was a 
Brahmana, well-read in the Vedas, and an accomplished student of the 
Vedangas. It is my own fault that I have been degraded to my present 
condition. 

A king, a skilled archer who was accomplished in dhanurveda, the 
science of archery, was my friend; and from being his companion, O 
Brahmana, I, too became a good archer. One day, the king, with his 
ministers and best warriors, went hunting. He killed a large number of deer 
near a hermitage. 

I, too, good Brahmana, shot a swift, fierce arrow, which wounded a 
Rishi while his head was bent in prayer. He fell down on the ground, 
screaming, and he cried, ‘I have done no harm to anyone. What sinful man 
has done this to me?’ 


My lord, I assumed I had shot a deer and went up, only to find the Rishi, 
his body pierced by my arrow. I was dismayed by the evil thing I had done, 
and said to that sage of great punya, who lay wailing on the ground, ‘I did 
this unwittingly, O Rishi. You must forgive me my sin.’ 

But, O Brahmana, the Rishi said to me, ‘You will be born as a cruel 
butcher in the Sudra caste,’ ” said the meat-seller.’ 


CANTO 215 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


: T he butcher continued, “Cursed by the Muni, I tried to pacify him, 
‘Forgive me, O Muni, I did not do this on purpose. Worshipful 
one, do not be angry.’ 

The Rishi replied, ‘I cannot withdraw the curse I have pronounced, but 
out of compassion for you I will do you a favour. Though born in the Sudra 
varna, you will be a pious man and worship your parents. And, by 
worshipping them, you will attain great punya. You will remember your 
past life, and you will go to Swargaloka. When you have been redeemed 
from this curse, you will become a Brahmana once more.’ 

Manavottama, thus did the powerful Rishi curse me and thus did I atone 
for my sin and placate him. 

Then, excellent Brahmana, I drew out the arrow from his body and took 
him into the asrama; he was alive and he recovered. This is what happened 
to me long ago, in my last life, and I have told you how I will find heaven in 
the hereafter.” 

The Brahmana said, “O knowing one, do not grieve, for all men are 
subject to joy and sorrow. It is in keeping with your dharma that you 
slaughter animals and sell their meat, but you are always devoted to the 
path of virtue and learned in the mysterious ways of the world. What you do 
is your duty, and the taint of evil karma will not attach to you. After a short 


time, you will regain your Brahmanic status. In fact, I consider you a 
Brahmana even now. I have no doubt about this. 

The Brahmana who is vain and haughty, who is addicted to vice and 
wedded to evil, shameful practices, is like a Sudra. On the other hand, a 
Sudra who wears virtue, self-restraint and truth like ornaments is like a 
Brahmana. A man becomes a Brahmana by dint of his character; and by his 
own evil karma, a man invites doom. | believe that your sin has now been 
wiped away. You must not grieve, for men like you, who are so good, and 
learned in the subtleties of philosophy and the ways of the world, can have 
no cause for grief.” 

The butcher replied, “Physical illnesses should be cured with medicines, 
and mental ones with spiritual wisdom. This is the power of knowledge. 
Knowing this, wise men should not behave like callow boys. Only men of 
little intelligence are overpowered by grief when something unpleasant 
happens to them, or when something desirable does not. 

All beings are subject to feelings of grief or joy; it is not unique to any 
single species of creature or class of men. Knowing that this is so, people 
quickly change their ways; and if they recognise it early, they can cure 
themselves of it altogether. 

Men who worry about this make themselves unhappy. Wise men, whose 
knowledge has made them contented, and who are indifferent to sorrow and 
joy alike, are truly happy. The wise are always contented and the foolish 
always discontented. There is no end to discontentment; contentment is the 
highest form of happiness. People who have found the perfect path do not 
grieve; they are aware of the final destiny of all creatures. 

One must not give way to discontent. It is a noxious poison: it kills 
those who have not developed their intellect, like a snake kills a child. The 
man who lacks wisdom, and who is confused when he finds himself in a 
situation where he has to exercise his intellect, is hardly a man. 

All our actions have their consequences. The man who lives a life of 
passive indifference to what happens around him achieves nothing. Instead 
of merely grumbling, one must try to find the way to gain freedom form 
spiritual bondage; and when the means to salvation are found, he must free 
himself from his dependence on the senses. 

The man who has attained a high state of spiritual knowledge is always 
conscious of the impermanence of all phenomena. He keeps the final 
destruction of everything in mind and never grieves. I, too, O sage one, do 


not grieve; I am biding my time while I live out this present life. 
Purushottama, that is why I am not plagued by uncertainty.” 

The Brahmana said, “You are wise and evolved; great is your intellect. 
You, who know the sacred scriptures, are content with your spiritual 
wisdom. I can see no faults in you. Farewell, O best of the pious; may you 
prosper; may righteousness be your armour; and may you be constant in 
dharma.” ’ 

Markandeya continues, ‘The butcher said to the Brahmana, “Tathaastu, 
so be it.” 

The Brahmana walked around the meat-seller in pradakshina and left. 
The Brahmana went back home and was conscientious in his attention to 
his elderly parents. 

This story I have told you, and which you wanted to hear, Yudhishtira 
my son, is replete with wisdom: the virtues of women’s devotion to their 
husbands and of filial worship.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Mahamuni, you have narrated this wonderful story 
and, listening to you made the hours pass as if they were a mere moment. 
But, I am not yet satiated with listening to your discourse.’ ” 


CANTO 216 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


V aisampayana continued, “The noble Yudhishtira listens to this 

superb religious discourse, and he says to Rishi Markandeya, “Why 
did Agni Deva, the Fire God, hide himself in water, and why did the 
splendid Angirasa become Agni to convey the oblations when Agni had 
disappeared into the water? Fire is one, but it seems to divide itself and 
become many. Worshipful one, I want to know about this and other things, 
as well. 

How was Kumara born? How did he come to be known as the son of 
Agni? How was he born to Rudra, Ganga and Krittika? Holy 
Bhrigunandana, I am eager to learn how these things happened. Great 
Muni, I am curious about all this.’ 

Markandeya replies, “There is an ancient tale told, about how Agni 
Deva, the conveyor of oblations, went in a temper to the forest in order to 
perform a penance. Angirasa transformed himself into Agni and freed the 
world from darkness and anguish with his warmth. 

Long, long ago, Mahabaho, the great Angirasa performed a wonderful 
tapasya in his asrama. He was more splendid than the bearer of oblations, 
Agni Deva, and lit up the Universe. Agni was performing a penance at the 
same time and was annoyed by Angirasa’s brilliance. Depressed and not 
knowing what to do, that god thought to himself, “Brahma has created 


another Agni for the world. Because I have been at tapasya, my services as 
the Deity of fire have been dispensed with.” 

He thought about how he could re-establish himself as the god of fire. 
He saw the great Muni Angirasa warming the whole Universe, as fire does, 
and approached him slowly and fearfully. 

Angirasa said to him, “Re-establish yourself quickly as the life-giving 
fire of the Universe. Everyone in Triloka knows that you were created by 
Brahma to dispel the primeval darkness. O Destroyer of darkness, occupy 
your proper place.” 

Agni replied, “My reputation is tarnished now, and you have become 
the Fire God. People will know you, and not me, as Agni. I have 
relinquished my status of being Fire God. You be the primeval fire, and I 
shall officiate as the second, or Prajapatyaka Agni.” 

Angirasa said, “You must re-instate yourself as the God of fire and the 
Destroyer of darkness, and resume your duty of ensuring that the people 
have a clear path to Swarga. Lord, make me have your first child.” ’ 

Markandeya continues, “Hearing Angirasa’s words, Agni complied and 
Angirasa had a son named Brihaspati. The Devas knew that he was 
Angirasa’s first son, born of Agni, and, O Bhaarata, they came to probe the 
mystery; and they accepted Angirasa’s explanation of how this had 
happened. 

Now I will name and describe all the different types of fire, as the 
Brahmanas know them, and their uses.’ ” 


CANTO 217 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya continues, “O gem of the Kurus, Angirasa was the 

third son of Brahma and he had a wife named Subha. Hear 
about the children he had by her. Rajan, his son Brihaspati’s fame was 
legend; he was generous and powerful. His intelligence and learning were 
profound, and he had a great reputation as a counsellor. 

Angirasa’s eldest daughter was Bhanumati; she was the most beautiful 
of all his children. His second daughter was called Raga, so named because 
she was loved by all creatures. Sinivali was his third daughter; her body 
was so slender that she was visible from certain angles and invisible from 
others; and for this reason she was compared to Rudra’s daughter. 
Archishmati was his fourth daughter, and she was so named because of her 
radiance. His fifth daughter was Havishmati, so named because she 
accepted havis, oblations. The sixth daughter of Angirasa was called 
Mahishmati, and she was very devout. The intelligent Mahamati was his 
seventh daughter; she is always present at sacrifices of great grandeur. This 
revered daughter of Angirasa, who is known to be without rival, and about 
whom people utter the words kuhu kuhu, is also known as Kuhu Kuhu.’ ” 


CANTO 218 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya continues, ‘Brihaspati had a wife named Tara, who 
was from the Moon. She had six of his sons, born of six 
different fires, and one daughter. 

Brihaspati’s son Sanju was a great tapasvin; he is the fire in whose 
honour ghee is offered at the Paurnamasya yagna and other sacrifices. At 
the Chaturmasya yagna and Aswamedha yagna, animals are offered in his 
honour, and we know him by the way he manifests himself in multiple 
flames. Sanju’s wife was called Satya; she was of matchless beauty and was 
born from Dharma, to embody truth. Sanju’s son was the whole, blazing 
fire, and he had three deeply religious daughters. 

The fire which is honoured with the first oblations at all sacrifices is his 
first son, named Bharadwaja. Sanju’s second son is called Bharata, in whose 
honour ghee is offered with the sacrificial ladle, the sruk, at all the full- 
moon—Paurnamasya— sacrifices. Beside these, there were other sons of 
whom Bharata was the eldest; and he had a daughter called Bharati. 

Bharata is the son of Prajapati Bharata Agni. And, Bhaaratottama, 
because of the honour accorded to him, he is also called “Great”. 

Vira is Bharadwaja’s wife; and her son is also named Vira. The 
Brahmanas say that he is worshipped with the same hymns as Soma is, and 
with offerings of ghee. Joined with Soma during the second round of ghee 


oblation, he is also called Rathaprabhu, Rathadhwana and Kumbhareta. He 
had a son named Siddhi by his wife Sarayu, who outshone the Sun in 
splendour. As the presiding deity of the fire sacrifice, he is always named in 
the hymns of praise to Fire. 

The fire named Nischayavana only praises the Earth; his good name, 
splendour and prosperity never wane. The sinless fire, named Satya, blazing 
with pure energy, is Nischayavana’s son. He is free from all impurities and 
is not defiled by sin; he is the regulator of time. This fire has another name, 
Nishkriti, because he brought about the Nishkriti, redemption, of all 
creatures. When properly worshipped, he guarantees good fortune. His son 
is Swana, the generator of all diseases; he inflicts intense suffering, making 
his victims cry out aloud. He lives in the intelligence of the Universe. 

Brihaspati’s third son is called Viswajit by men of spiritual wisdom. The 
fire that manifests as the internal heat of the body, which digests the food of 
all creatures, is the fourth son of Brihaspati, known throughout all the 
worlds, O Bhaarata, as Viswabhug. He is self-restrained, of great dharma, 
and a brahmacharin; Brahmanas worship him at the Paka yagna. The sacred 
river Gomati is Viswabhug’s wife, and all pious men perform their sacred 
rites on her banks. 

That apocalyptic water-drinking sea fire called Badava is Brihaspati’s 
fifth son. This Brahmic agni has a tendency to move upwards and is, 
therefore, called Urdhvabhaga. Its home is the vital air, the life force called 
Prana. The sixth son is Svishtakrit; through him oblations became svishta, 
or properly offered. The udagdhara oblation is always made in his honour. 
The fire called Manyuti becomes enraged when the Earth’s beings become 
peaceful. 

The inexorable and most volatile fire is Brihaspati’s daughter, and is 
known as Swaha; she is present in all matter. Swaha had three sons by the 
three gunas, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. By Sattva she had a son whose 
beauty had no equal in Devaloka. The gods named him Kama Agni. By 
Rajas she had a son named Amogha, the invincible fire, the destroyer of his 
enemies in battle. He is sure of victory, and so, he curbs his anger. He is 
armed with a bow and sits adorned with flower garlands on a chariot. 

By Tamas also Swaha had a son, the great Uktha, the means to 
salvation, who is praised by the three Ukthas. He is the originator of the 
sacred words of the Veda, and is, therefore, Samaswasam, or the means to 
Moksha,’ says Markandeya.” 


CANTO 219 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “VI arkandeya continues, “‘Uktha performed a severe penance 

lasting for many years, with the aim of having a son as pious as 

a Brahmana. He invoked, with Vyahriti hymns, the five sacred fires— 
Kasyapa, Vasistha, Prana, Angirasa’s son Chyavana, and Shuvarchaka. 

The flames emitted a form of bright and vivacious energy in five 
different colours. The head of this form was the colour of a raging fire; its 
arms dazzled like the Sun; its skin and eyes were tawny gold; and its feet 
were black, O Bhaarata. The five who were invoked were of great 
tapasyashakti and gave the form its five colours, and that is why the 
celestial being that emerged from the fire is described as being one with 
these five. This being, Tapa, is the progenitor of the five tribes. 

The penance continued for ten thousand years and an awesome, 
dreadful fire blazed forth, that was born of the Pitrs in order to begin the 
work of creation. From his head and mouth he created day and night— 
Brihad and Rathantara—who are the thieves of life. He created Siva from 
his navel, Indra from his strength, Vayu and Agni from his soul, and from 
his two arms the hymns Udatta and Anudatta. He produced the mind, and 
the five senses, and everything else as well. 

Next, he created the five sons of the Pitrs: Pranidhi was the son of 
Brihadratha, who was Kasyapa’s son. Bhanu was the grandson of 


Chyavana; Saubhara was Suvarchaka’s son; and Anudatta was the son of 
Prana. He is said to have created these twenty-five beings. 

Tapa created fifteen other gods who obstruct sacrifices. They are 
Subhima, Atibhima, Bhima, Bhimabala and Abala, Sumitra, Mitravanta, 
Mitragna, Mitravardhana, Mitradharma and Surapravira, Vira and Suresha, 
Suvarchasa and Surahantara. These are divided into three classes of five 
each and, living in this world, they destroy the sacrifices of the Devas in 
Devaloka. They frustrate their goals and spoil their oblations of ghee. They 
do this only to spite the sacred fires that convey these offerings to the gods. 

If the officiating priests are watchful, they place oblations in honour of 
these despoilers outside the sacrificial altar, and this prevents them from 
entering the place where the sacred fire is lit. They convey the oblations on 
wings. When appeased with hymns, they do not spoil the sacrificial rites. 

Brihadukta, one of Tapa’s sons, belongs to the Earth. He is worshipped 
here in this world by pious men performing Agnihotra sacrifices. Another 
son, Rathantara, accepts oblations on behalf of Mitravinda. The renowned 
Tapa was very happy with his sons.’ ” 


CANTO 220 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya continues, “The fire named Bharata was governed by 

strict laws of tapasya. He is also called Pushtimati because, 

when he is propitiated satisfactorily, he guarantees Pushti, prosperity. He is 
called Bharata because he nurtures all creatures. 

The other fire is named Siva because he is devoted to the worship of 
Shakti, the feminine energy of the forces of Nature; and because he always 
alleviates the sorrows of all creatures that are troubled, he is called Siva, the 
giver of weal. 

When Tapa had acquired great ascetic wealth by his tapasya, he had an 
intellectually brilliant son named Purandara, to inherit this wealth. He had 
another son named Ushma, who is the fire that is present in matter when it 
vaporises. A third son was Manu, who officiated as Prajapati. Brahmanas 
who are learned in the Vedas speak of the exploits of his sons, the fires 
Sambhu and the effulgent Avasathya. 

Thus did Tapa give birth to five Urjaskara agnis, all bright as gold, that 
take the Soma rasa during sacrifices. 

The great Sun God, when tired after his day’s labours, is the fire known 
as Prasanta. He created the Asuras and other terrible creatures. Angirasa 
created Prajapati Bhanu, one of Tapa’s sons. Brahmanas learned in the 
Vedas refer to this son as Brihadbhanu, the great Bhanu. Bhanu married 


Supraja, the daughter of Surya Deva. She and Brihadbhanu gave birth to six 
sons. Let me describe their children for you. 

There is the fire who gives strength to the weak, and he is called Balada, 
the giver of strength. He is the first son of Bhanu. Then there is the fire that 
looks dreadful when the world is in a state of tranquillity. He is called 
Manjuman, and he is the second son of Bhanu. Next is the fire in whose 
honour oblations of ghee are poured during the Darsa and Paurnamasya 
yagnas, who is known to the people of the world as Vishnu. He is the third 
of Bhanu’s sons, and he has two names, Angirasa and Dhritiman. 

Then there is the fire to whom, with Indra, the Agrayana oblation is 
given. He is named Agrayana, and he is Bhanu’s fourth son. The fifth son of 
Bhanu is Agraha, from whom the daily oblations made for the performance 
of the Chaturmasya yagna are taken. And Stubha is the sixth son of Bhanu. 

Nisa was another wife of Manu’s, and she, too, is named Bhanu. She 
had one daughter, two Agnishomas, and also five other agnis, fire gods. The 
effulgent Fire God who is honoured with the first offerings, along with 
Indra, god of the clouds, is Vaiswanara. The second son of Manu and Bhanu 
is the agni called Viswapati, the lord of all the worlds. The daughter of 
Manu is called Svishtakrit, because one earns great punya by offering 
oblations to her. Rohini is her other name, and though she was the daughter 
of Hiranyakasipu, she became his wife because of her evil deeds. She is, 
however, one of the Prajapatis. 

And that other fire which inhabits the life-breaths of all creatures, and 
which gives them life, is called Sannihita. He makes our senses recognise 
sound and shape. Then comes the divine spirit, whose path is stained with 
black and white marks, who fans fire, and who, though sinless, is 
responsible for evil karma. The wise regard him, the fire Kapila, as a great 
Rishi. Kapila is the propounder of the system of Yoga called Sankhya. 

The fire through which the elemental spirits always receive Agra, or 
offerings, which people make at the performance of all special rites, is 
called Agrani. 

There are the bright fires, known the world over, which were created for 
the rectification of the Agnihotra rites when they were marred by any 
defects. If fires overlap because of the wind, they must be set right by 
performing Ashtakapala puja in honour of the fire Suchi. 

If the southern fire comes in contact with the two other fires, then the 
rectifying Ashtakapala rites must be performed in honour of the agni Viti. If 


the fires called Nivesa, burning in its allotted place, comes into contact with 
the fire called Devagni, then the Ashtakapala rites must be performed in 
honour of the fire Suchi. 

If the constant fire is touched by a woman during her menstrual period, 
then the Ashtakapala rites must be performed in honour of the agni called 
Vasuman. If, during the performance of Agnihotra pujas, anyone speaks of 
the death of any creature, or if an animal dies, the rites can be purified by 
means of the Ashtakapala rites in honour of the Surabhiman agni. 

The Brahmana who, because he is ill, is unable to offer oblations to the 
sacred fire for three nights, must make amends by performing the 
Ashtakapala rites in honour of the northern fire. He who has performed the 
Darsa and the Paurnamasya rites must make any necessary rectifications 
with the performance of the Ashtakapala rites in honour of the Patikrit fire. 

If the fire of a birthing room comes in contact with the undying sacred 
fire, it must be purified by performing Ashtakapala rites in honour of the 
Agniman agni,’ says Markandeya.” 


CANTO 221 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya continues, ‘Mudita was the favourite wife of the fire 
Saha. She used to live in water. And Saha, who was the lord of 
earth and sky, had a son, the sacred fire named Adbhuta, with her. Learned 
Brahmanas believe that this fire is the ruler and inner soul of all creatures. 
He is worthy of worship, resplendent, and the lord of all the mahabhutas, 
the elements. And this fire, also called Grihapati, is worshipped at all 
sacrifices and is the instrument by which all oblations made in this world 
are conveyed to the gods. 

This son of Saha, Adbhuta, the great fire, is the soul of the waters; he is 
the prince and ruler of the sky and the lord of everything great. His son, the 
Bharatagni, consumes the dead bodies of all creatures. His first offering, 
Kratu, is known as Niyata at the performance of the Agnishtoma yagna. 
That mighty elemental fire, Saha, is always missed by the Devas because 
when he sees Niyata approaching him he hides in the sea from fear of 
contamination. 

On one occasion, the Devas searched for him everywhere but could not 
find him. 

The fire saw Atharva and said to him, “Valiant being, perform the 
oblations for the Devas. I am disabled and weak. Take the form of the red- 
eyed fire and do me this favour!” 


Having made this request of Atharvan, the fire went away to hide. But 
the fish revealed his hiding place and the furious fire cursed them in anger, 
saying, “You shall be the food of all creatures in various ways.” 

Then that fire, Saha, the conveyor of oblations, spoke to Atharva again 
and made the same request. The Devas pleaded with him, but he refused to 
bring them their havis. He lost consciousness and died. 

Leaving his material body, he entered the bowels of the earth, and 
wherever he met the earth, he created different metals. Energy emanated 
from him: earthly perfumes were created from his pus; the deodar, the 
cedar, sprang from his bones; glass emerged from his phlegm; the emerald 
came from his bile, and iron from his liver. Ever since, the Earth has been 
enriched with these three substances, wood, stone and metal. The clouds 
were made from his nails, and corals from his veins. And various other 
metals were produced from his body, O king. 

After shedding his physical body, he remained absorbed in dhyana. 
When Bhrigu and Angirasa performed their penance, they succeeded in 
waking him and, gratified by their tapasya, he burned with intensity. But as 
soon as he saw Rishi Atharva, he dove into his watery hideout again. 

At this extinguishing of the fire, the whole world was frightened, and 
sought the protection of Atharva. The Devas and other beings began to 
worship him. Atharva searched the sea while those anxious beings looked 
on in eager anticipation. He found the fire and began the work of creation. 
This is the story of how the fire was destroyed and then called back to life 
by the venerable Atharva. Now he carries the offerings of all creatures; and, 
living in the sea and always on the move, produced the various fires 
mentioned in the Vedas. 

The mothers of the fires are the rivers: Sindhu, and the five rivers; 
Devika and Saraswati; Ganga, Satakumbha, Sarayu, and Gandaki; 
Charmanwati, Mahi, Medha and Medhatithi; the three, Tamravati, Vetravati, 
and Kausiki; Tamasa, Narmada and Godavari; Vena, Upavena, Bhima and 
Vadava, O Bhaarata; Bharati, Suprayoga, Kaveri and Murmura; Tungavena, 
Krishnavena, Kapila and Sona: these rivers are said to be the mothers of the 
fires. 

The Adbhuta agni had a wife called Priya, and Vibhu was the eldest of 
his sons by her. 

There are as many kinds of Soma yagnas as the number of fires. All this 
race of fires, first born of the spirit of Brahma, also sprang from Atri. Atri 


conceived them as his sons, in his own mind, out of a desire to enhance 
creation. By this act, the agnis emerged from his Brahmic body. 

I have told you the story of the origin of these fires. They are great, 
glorious and unrivalled in power; they are the dispellers of darkness. The 
powers of these fires are equal to that of the Adbhuta, as the Vedas tell us, 
because all these fires are one and the same. The adored and exalted being, 
the first Agni, must be thought of as the unity of all fires because, like the 
Jyotishtoma yagna, he issued from Angirasa’s body in myriad forms. 

This, that I have narrated to you, is the history of the great race of Agni 
who, when worshipped with various hymns, carries the offerings of all 
creatures to the gods.’ ” 


CANTO 222 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya continues, ‘Sinless scion of the Kurus, I have given 

you a detailed history of the many branches of the Agni clan, 

and I will now tell you the story of the birth of Kartikeya of the great 

intelligence. I will tell you about that wonderful and illustrious tejasvin, the 
son of the Adbhuta agni, born to the wives of the Brahmarishis. 

In ancient times, the Devas and Asuras were always at war, and the 
terrible demons always defeated the gods. Indra saw how the Asuras 
decimated his armies and made up his mind to identify a leader for the 
armies of Devaloka. 

He thought to himself, “I must find a powerful one who can rally and 
lead Swarga’s army that has been devastated by the Danavas.” 

He went to the Manasa mountains and was absorbed in thought when he 
heard the heartrending cries of a woman, who said, “May someone come 
and save me by finding me a husband, or let him be my husband himself.” 

Purandara said to her, “Have no fear, devi,” and, at once, he saw a 
Kesin, an Asura, wearing a crown and holding a mace in his hand, standing 
by her, and her hand in his rough grip. And he looked like a distant hill clad 
in metallic armour. 

Indra addressed the Asura, saying, “Why do you behave so insolently 
towards this lady? Be aware that I am the god who wields the thunderbolt. 


Desist from doing her any violence.” 

Kesin replied, “You leave her alone, Sakra; I want her for myself. Do 
you really think, O Slayer of Paka, that you will return home alive today?” 

And he hurled his mace at Indra. Vasava dissected it in flight with his 
thunderbolt. Kesin, furious, flung a huge rock at him, which he of the 
hundred sacrifices shattered with his Vajra. A large piece of the rock fell on 
Kesin and, grievously injured, he fled, leaving the woman. 

When the Asura had gone Indra said to the woman, “Who are you, and 
whose wife are you, beautiful one? What brings you here?” 


CANTO 223 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


TT he woman replied, “I am a daughter of Prajapati Brahma, Lord of all 

creatures, and my name is Devasena. My sister Daityasena has been 
ravished by Kesin. We sisters would both take our father’s permission and 
come regularly, with our sakhis, to these Manasa mountains. 

The Asura Kesin used to court us every day. My sister Daityasena 
succumbed to him, but I did not. He took her away, but you have rescued 
me with your might. And now, Lord of Devas, I want you to find an 
invincible husband for me.” 

Indra replied, “You are my cousin—your mother and my mother 
Dakshayani are sisters. Tell me about your strengths.” 

The woman replied, “Mahabaho, I am Abala, weak, and so my husband 
must be powerful. The strength of my father’s boons will ensure that Devas 
and Asuras will respect him.” 

Indra said, “Faultless creature, tell me, what sort of power do you want 
your husband to have?” 

The devi said, “My husband must be a manly and celebrated one, who 
is devoted to Brahma, and who is able to conquer all the Devas, Asuras, 
Yakshas, Kinnaras, Uragas, Rakshasas and evil Daityas, and subdue all the 
worlds with you.” ’ 


Markandeya continues, ‘Indra was troubled when he heard this, and he 
thought, “There is no one who fits this description, to be this woman’s 
husband.” 

Just then Indra, resplendent as the Sun, saw Surya Deva rising on the 
Udaya mountain and radiant Soma Deva merging into him. It was the day 
of the new moon, and the inauspicious moment of Raudra. He of the 
hundred sacrifices, Satakratu, saw the Asuras and Devas battling for 
dominance on the Udaya Mountain. 

He noticed that the dawn was tinged with red clouds, and saw that 
Varuna’s oceanic abode had turned the hue of blood. He saw Agni entering 
the orb of the Sun, conveying the oblations that Bhrigu, Angirasa and others 
had offered, to the accompaniment of hymns. 

He also saw the twenty-four parvas, the hours adorning Surya Deva, 
and the fearsome Soma also present in the Sun. 

Sakra looked at the awesome union of the Sun and the Moon and he 
thought, “This terrible conjunction of Soma and Surya forebodes a fearful 
battle tomorrow. The river Sindhu flows with fresh blood, and red-faced 
jackals drink her waters and how! to the Sun. 

This conjunction of Sun, Moon and Agni is as dreadful and powerful as 
it is wondrous. If Soma gives birth to a son now, that child can become a 
suitable husband for this woman. Agni has a lineage similar to Soma’s, and 
he, too, is a Deva. If these two have a son together, that boy can surely 
become this woman’s husband.” 

Thinking thus, Indra took Devasena with him and went to Brahma. He 
greeted the Pitamaha and said to him, “Find an illustrious warrior to be this 
woman’s husband.” 

Brahma replied, “Danavasudana, slayer of Danavas, it shall be as you 
wish. The children born of such a marriage will be mighty and ever- 
victorious. Her husband will be joint leader of your forces with you.” 

Indra and Devasena bowed to Brahma and went, then, to where those 
great Brahmanas, the powerful Devarishis, Vasistha and the others, lived. 
Other Devas followed Indra to the Rishis’ asramas, where they were 
conducting their yagnas, to have a share of the Soma rasa that would be 
offered. Those exalted Maharishis performed the yagna with towering fires 
and offered the burnt offerings to the gods. 

They invoked Adbhuta, the agni that carries the havis, with mantras. 
That great fire emerged from the Sun and silently appeared at the yagna. 


Bhaaratottama, Adbhuta entered the sacrificial flames that the Rishis had lit, 
and into which they had poured various offerings to the chanting of hymns, 
and he took these offerings to the Swargavasis, the dwellers of heaven. 

On his return, he saw the wives of those Devarishis sleeping peacefully 
on their beds. These finest of women had skins that shone like altars of 
gold, and the blemishless radiance of moonbeams. They sparkled like fiery 
stars. Adbhuta looked at the wives of the illustrious Brahmanas with lustful 
eyes; his mind became agitated, and their beauty stabbed him with desire. 

Considering it improper for him to be in such turmoil, he quieted his 
heart, saying to himself, “The wives of these great Brahmanas are chaste 
and faithful, and beyond the reach of other men’s desires. I long to possess 
them, but since I cannot look at them in this way or touch them, I will 
become their household fire, Grihapatya and gratify myself by being able to 
see them every day.” ’ 

Markandeya continues, “Adbhuta transformed himself into a household 
fire, and was glad indeed, seeing those gold-complexioned women and 
touching them with his flames. In thrall to their beauty, he lived there for a 
long time, filled with intense love for them and giving them his heart. 
Eventually, unable to win the hearts of those Brahmanastris, his own heart 
tortured by love, he made his way to a forest with the intention of killing 
himself. 

Just before this, Swaha, the daughter of Daksha, had lost her heart to 
him, and she waited to catch him in a weak moment. She could not find any 
chink in the cool and apparently passionless Agni. 

But now that the god had gone into the forest, tormented by pangs of 
love, she thought, “I am in an anguish of love; I will assume the guise of the 
wives of the Saptarishis and, in that guise, go to the Fire God who is so 
smitten with their charms. He will be gratified, and my desire, too, will be 
slaked,” ’ says Markandeya.” 


CANTO 224 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya continues, ‘Lord of Men, the beautiful Sivaa was the 
wife of Angirasa, one of the Saptarishis, and she had a virtuous, 
unblemished character. 

Swaha disguised herself as Sivaa and went to Agni and said, “O Agni, I 
am tortured with love for you. You must satisfy my passion. If you do not, I 
will kill myself. I am Sivaa, the wife of Angirasa, and I have come here on 
the advice of the wives of the other Rishis, who have sent me to you after 
much thought.” 

Agni replied, “How did you know that I was suffering with love, and 
how could the others, the beloved wives of the seven Rishis, know this?” 

Swaha replied, “You are a favourite with us, but we are in awe of you. 
The other wives guessed what was in your heart and sent me to you. I have 
come here to satisfy my desire. Make me happy quickly; my sisters-in-law 
are waiting for me to return.” ’ 

Markandeya continues, ‘Filled with delight, Agni and the disguised 
Swaha made rapturous love together. While having intercourse, she caught 
and held some of his seed in her hand. To avoid bringing disgrace to the 
Brahmana women and Agni if she was seen in that disguise while she 
walked back through the forest, she turned herself into a bird and flew 
through the forest. 


She came to Sweta, the White Mountain. Here the land was covered 
with grass, shrubs, plants and trees, and the mountain was guarded by 
strange seven-headed, venomous serpents. There were Rakshasas, male and 
female Pisachas, dreadful spirits and all kinds of birds and animals. Swaha 
quickly climbed a peak and dropped Agni’s seed into a golden lake. 

After this, she took the form of each of the wives of the illustrious 
Saptarishis, one by one, and had intercourse with Agni. The only one she 
could not disguise herself as was Arundhati, whose devotion to her 
husband, Vasistha, protected her. O Kurusthama, on days of the new moon, 
the Devi Swaha cast Agni’s semen six times into the golden lake, and a boy 
child of great prowess was born from it. Because the Rishis considered him 
as “cast off’, this baby was named Skanda. 

The child had six faces, twelve ears, eyes, hands and feet, one neck and 
one stomach. On the second day after the semen was thrown into the water, 
it took the form of a baby; he grew into a boy on the third; and Skanda’s 
limbs developed on the fourth day. Red clouds flashed with lightning over 
the lake and the boy shone like the Sun rising in the midst of a mass of red 
clouds. 

He grasped the wonderful, immense bow that Siva, Destroyer of the 
Tripura, used to destroy the enemies of the Devas, and that mighty being 
uttered such a terrible roar that the three worlds, with their animate and 
inanimate beings, were struck with terror. 

The great Nagas, Chitra and Airavata, heard the sound that was like the 
thundering of massed thunderheads, and trembled with fear. Seeing how 
distraught they were, the radiant, sun-like boy held them in two of his 
hands. In one hand he held a spear and in another a sturdy, red-crested 
rooster, and with these the mighty-armed son of Agni romped noisily. 

Holding a beautiful conch in two of his hands, that mighty one blew on 
it, terrorising even the most powerful creatures. He swatted the air with two 
hands and played on the hilltop, and Mahasena of unmatched prowess 
looked as if he was about to devour the three worlds. He shone like Surya 
Deva at his zenith in the sky. 

This wonderful, incomparably strong being sat on the top of the 
mountain and, with each of his many faces pointing in different directions, 
roared again and again. All kinds of creatures heard those roars and fell to 
the ground in fear and, terrified, they begged for protection. All those of 


different castes, who asked this great god for refuge, and who followed him, 
became Brahmanas. 

The God rose from his seat and reassured all of them; then, he drew his 
bow and shot his arrows in the direction of the White Mountain. The arrows 
split Krauncha Hill, the son of Himavat, in two, making the swans and 
vultures that lived there fly away to the Sumeru Mountains. 

Sorely wounded, the Krauncha fell, groaning fearfully in agony. Seeing 
him fall, the other hills began to scream, and that mighty being of unrivalled 
prowess heard the groans of the wounded hills but was unmoved. Instead, 
he lifted his mace and, with a war cry, hurled the lustrous weapon at the 
White Mountain and cleaved one of its peaks. 

The Sweta, pierced by him, became frightened and, with other 
mountains, uprooted himself from the earth and fled. The wounded earth 
gaped, bereft of her ornaments and, in her distress, went to Skanda, who 
granted that the mountains may return without fear. 

Once more Bhumi Devi shone in splendour, and the mountains bowed 
to Skanda and returned to take their old places. Since then, all creatures 
celebrate the worship of Skanda on the fifth day of the lunar month.’ ” 


CANTO 225 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya continues, ‘When great Skanda was born all kinds of 

strange phenomena were seen. There was an uncanny reversal 

in nature: of male and female, of heat and cold, and of other pairs of 

opposites. The Planets, the Cardinal Points and the Sky shone with light, 

and the Earth began to rumble. The Rishis, always working for the world’s 

welfare, saw these signs and were worried. Anxiously, they began to restore 
equilibrium. 

Those who lived in the Chitraratha vana were convinced that the 
unnatural conditions were the consequence of Agni’s intercourse with the 
six wives of the Saptarishis. Others, who had seen the goddess as a bird, 
said that the evils were the work of the bird. No one imagined that Swaha 
was the author of that mischief. 

Swaha heard that the child was hers, and she went to Skanda and told 
him that she was his mother. The seven Rishis heard that a son of great 
power had been born to them, and they abandoned their wives, except the 
adored Arundhati, because all the forest-dwellers said that these six women 
had been instrumental in the birth of the child. 

O king, Swaha protested that this was not so, and tried, repeatedly, to 
convince the seven Rishis that the child was hers and not their wives’. 


Earlier, when the seven Rishis had concluded their yagnas, the great 
sage Viswamitra had followed the god of fire, unknown to him, and had 
seen how he had been roiled by lust. So, he knew everything, just as it had 
happened, and he was the first to seek the protection of Skanda Mahasena. 

He offered divine prayers to Mahasena and performed all the thirteen 
rites of passage, such as the Jatakarma, for him. For the good of the world 
he proclaimed the virtues of the six-headed Skanda and performed 
ceremonies in honour of the rooster, the Devi Shakti and Skanda’s first 
followers. For this reason, Viswamitra became a great favourite of the 
divine youth. 

Viswamitra told the seven Rishis how Swaha had transformed herself 
and declared the innocence of their wives; nonetheless, the Rishis 
abandoned their spouses unconditionally.’ 

Markandeya continues, “The Devas heard of Skanda’s might and said to 
Vasava, “O Sakra, Skanda’s prowess is unbearable; you must kill him 
immediately. If you do not, he will conquer the three worlds and us; he will 
overpower you and make himself king of the Devas.” 

Sakra said to them, “This child is endowed with unmatched prowess; he 
can defeat the Creator himself in battle. I dare not fight him.” 

The Devas said, “You are cowardly, Sakra! Let the Mothers of the 
Universe go to Skanda. They can summon endless shakti at will. Let them 
kill this terrible child.” 

The mothers agreed and left; but when they saw the incomparable boy, 
they were disheartened. Convinced that he was invincible, they asked for 
his protection, “Mighty One, become our son. We love you and want to 
suckle you. See how the milk flows from our breasts.” 

Hearing this, Mahasena Skanda wanted to feed at their breasts and, 
receiving them with respect, drank. Then, he saw his father Agni coming 
towards him. Along with his mothers, Skanda honoured him who is the 
doer of all that is good; and Agni Deva and the mothers remained by their 
son’s side to look after him. 

The devi who, amongst the Matrikas, was born of Anger, watched over 
Skanda with a spear in her hand, just as a mother would guard her own 
child. And that moody, red-hued daughter of the Sea, who lived on blood, 
hugged Mahasena to her breast and nursed him, tenderly as a mother would. 

Agni transformed himself into a goat-faced teacher of the Vedas and, 
followed by many children, delighted his son with marvellous toys, in their 


mountain home,’ says Markandeya.” 


CANTO 226 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


¢ “MI arkandeya continues, “The Planets with their satellites, the 

Rishis and the Matrikas, Agni and numerous other brilliant 
courtiers, and many other fearsome looking Swargavasis waited on 
Mahasena, along with his mothers. Indra, Lord of the gods wanted to 
vanquish Skanda. But, being unsure of victory, he mounted his elephant 
Airavata and, accompanied by the other Devas, he advanced cautiously 
towards Skanda. 

The mighty Indra, followed by all the Devas, and armed with his Vajra, 
wanted to kill Mahasena. He marched with the splendid celestial army, 
flying a variety of standards and sounding a shrill war cry. The warriors 
wore armour of different kinds; they were armed with bows and rode many 
different mounts. 

When Mahasena saw the gloriously decked Sakra, wearing his best 
raiment, coming to kill him, he went forward to meet the king of the Devas. 
O Kaunteya, the mighty Vasava shouted to exhort his warriors. He now 
rode swiftly with his forces, death to Agni’s son on his mind; all this to the 
praises of the Tridasas and the great Rishis. 

At last, he reached the home of Kartikeya, and he and the other gods 
shouted out to him. In response Guha roared deeply like the roaring of the 


sea. On hearing that sound, the Deva army became agitated, like a churning 
ocean, and stood stunned and rooted. 

The son of the Fire God saw the Devas coming to kill him and was 
filled with rage. He breathed flames from his mouth onto the celestial 
legions, leaving them writhing on the ground. Their heads, their bodies, 
their arms and the animals they rode were all consumed by that fiery breath, 
flaring briefly like stars removed from their proper places. The gods 
abandoned Indra and took refuge with Skanda, instead, and peace was 
restored. 

Forsaken by his Devas, Sakra hurled his thunderbolt at Skanda. It 
pierced him in his right side, Rajan, and passed through his body. From 
where the Vajra struck, there sprang from Skanda’s body another being—a 
youth with a club in his hand, and adorned with a divine amulet. 

Because he was born from the piercing of the thunderbolt, he was 
named Visakha. When Indra saw that another being, as fierce as the God of 
Fire, had been created, he was afraid and, with his hands joined together in 
worship, asked Skanda for refuge. Skanda told him to cast off his fear, and 
all the gods were joyful.’ ” 


CANTO 227 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya continues, ‘Now hear about those macabre and 

grotesque followers of Skanda. Skanda gave birth to a number 
of male progeny when Indra’s thunderbolt struck him, horrific creatures that 
spirit away little children, whether born, or still in their mother’s womb. 
Skanda had a great many incredibly strong daughters, too. These children 
adopted Visakha as their father. 

The agile, goat-faced Bhadrasakha was surrounded by all his sons and 
daughters, whom he protected carefully, along with their mothers. It is this 
quality of his that earned Skanda the name Kumarapitra, or father of 
children. Those who want to have a son worship Rudra, in his form of Agni, 
and Uma, in her form of Swaha. This ensures the birth of a son to them. 

The daughters, who were born to Tapa, also named Hutasana, went to 
Skanda, who asked what he could do for them. 

Those girls replied, “Bless us so that we may become good and 
respected mothers of the world.” 

The generous one replied, “Jathaastu, so be it,’ and repeatedly said, 
“You shall be divided into Sivas and Asivas, good and evil.” 

The mothers left after establishing Skanda as their son. They were seven 
mothers — Kaki, Halima, Malini, Brihata, Arya, Palala and Vaimitra—who 
gave birth to Sisu through Skanda’s blessings. Sisu was red-eyed, fearful 


looking and volatile. He is known as the eighth hero born of the mothers of 
Skanda, but he is sometimes considered the ninth when the Goat-faced is 
counted as one. 

Skanda’s sixth face was that of a goat. That face, O king, is in the 
middle of the six, and his mother looks at it constantly. That head, by which 
Bhadrasakha created divine energy, is meant to be the best of all his heads. 
Rajan, these great and wonderful events occurred on the fifth day of the 
bright half of the lunar month and, on the sixth, a fierce and terrific battle 
was fought in the same place.’ 


2There are many stories about the birth of Skanda. One of the most popular is that he was born to kill 
Tarakasura, who had a boon that only a son born to Siva (who has lost Sati and not yet married 
Parvati) could kill him. So the Devas persuade Sati to be born as Himavan’s daughter. 


CANTO 228 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya continues, ‘Skanda was adorned with a golden 

amulet and wreath; his forelock and crown were of gold; his 

eyes were golden-hued; his teeth were sharp; and he wore a red garment. 

He was handsome and cut the most splendid figure. Endowed with all the 

noblest qualities, he was the favourite of the three worlds. He granted boons 
to anyone who asked; he was brave, youthful, and wore bright earrings. 

One day, when he was resting, the goddess of wealth, Sri, looking like a 
lotus and taking a human form, came to him and gave herself to him. On 
possessing the Devi, the slender Skanda glowed with the beauty of the full 
moon. 

Exalted Brahmanas worshipped him, and Maharishis said, “O you born 
of the golden seed, may you prosper, and may you be the instrument of the 
welfare of the Universe. Devottama, best of gods, although you were born 
only six days ago, the Universe has already come under your dominion, and 
you have removed its fear. Therefore, you have become the Indra of the 
three worlds, and they have no cause to be afraid anymore.” 

Skanda replied, “Mighty Tapasvins, what does Indra do with the three 
worlds? How does the king of the Devas constantly protect all the other 
gods?” 


The Rishis replied, “Indra is the giver of strength, power, children and 
happiness to all creatures and, when propitiated, bestows his devotees with 
all they wish for. He destroys the wicked and fulfils the desires of the 
righteous; the slayer of Bala allots their svadharma to all creatures; he acts 
as Sun and Moon in places where they are absent; and when the occasion 
demands it, he even assumes the roles of Fire, Air, Earth, and Water. These 
are Indra’s tasks, and great are his capabilities. You, too, are mighty. 
Therefore, Sreshta, great one, become our Indra.” 

Sakra said to Skanda, “Mighty one, make us glad by becoming our 
king. You are worthy of that honour and we will anoint you today.” 

Skanda replied, “You must continue to rule over the three worlds with 
equanimity and with your heart set on conquest. I will remain your humble 
servant; I do not want sovereignty.” 

Sakra replied, “Your prowess is unrivalled; O heroic one, defeat the 
enemies of the Devas. People are wonderstruck by your strength, especially 
since you vanquished me and stripped me of my power. If I were to be 
Indra now, I will not command the respect of all creatures, and they would 
split their loyalties between us and causing dissent. When they have formed 
themselves into two factions, they will have war between them. And in that 
war, you would undoubtedly defeat me easily and become the Lord of all 
worlds.” 

Skanda said, “Sakra, you are my lord, as well as Lord of the three 
worlds. May you prosper. Command me and I will obey.” 

Indra replied, “At your behest, I will continue as Indra. If your purpose 
is true and what you said is in earnest, I will tell you how you can fulfil 
your wish to serve me. Mighty one, be the Senapati of the armies of 
Devaloka.” 

Skanda replied, “Install me as Senapati, for the demolition of the 
Danavas, the welfare of the Devas, and for the well-being of Brahmanas 
and sacred cows.” ’ 

Markandeya continues, ‘Skanda was anointed by Indra and all the other 
Devas; the Maharishis honoured him, and he looked splendid. The golden 
parasol that was held over his head looked like a halo of fire. The lustrous 
Indra, the conqueror of the three worlds, fastened the celestial garland of 
gold, created by Viswakarman, around his neck. 

Conqueror of your enemies, Mahadeva Vrishadhwaja—the one with the 
emblem of the Bull—arrived with his consort, Parvati, and honoured 


Skanda with a jubilant heart. 

The Fire God is also called Rudra, and, therefore, Skanda is called the 
son of Rudra. The White Mountain was formed from Rudra’s semen, and 
the sexual indulgences of the Fire God with the Krittikas took place on that 
same Sweta parvata; all the dwellers of heaven saw Rudra heaping honours 
on Skanda. For these reasons he was known as the son of Rudra. 

The child Skanda was born by Rudra entering into the being of the Fire 
God, and this is also why Skanda is known as the son of Rudra. And, 
Bhaarata, because Skanda was born of the union between Rudra and Swaha 
and the six wives of the seven Rishis, he is known as the son of Rudra. 

This son of Agni was clad in red cloth and looked resplendent, like the 
Sun emerging from behind a mass of red clouds. The Fire God assigned the 
red rooster as his mascot, and perched on the top of his chariot, it blazed 
like the fire of the Pralaya. His vanguard was the embodiment of the power 
that is invested in the Devas to give them victory, which is the impetus of 
all creatures, and which is their glory, their support and their refuge. 

A mysterious enchantment entered into his very being, whose prowess 
is manifested in battle. Beauty, righteousness, strength, vigour, might, 
radiance, truthfulness, rectitude, devotion to Brahmanas, freedom from 
illusion, absence of perplexity, protection of his followers, destruction of his 
foes, and care of all creatures—these, great lord of men, are the intrinsic 
qualities of Skanda. 

Anointed by all the gods, he looked pleased and contented; grandly 
attired, he was as beautiful as the radiant full moon. The sacred incantation 
of Vedic hymns, the music of the celestial musicians and the songs of the 
Devas and Gandharvas filled the air. 

The son of Agni, surrounded by Apsaras, many joyful Pisachas and 
hosts of gods, shone in splendour. Mahasena, anointed as Senapati of the 
Devas, looked like the Sun rising to extinguish darkness. The forces of 
Swarga, looking upon him as their leader, surrounded him in_ their 
thousands. All creatures followed him in adulation, eager to obey his 
commands, praising and worshipping him, and he responded with 
encouraging words. 

The performer of a thousand sacrifices then remembered Devasena, 
whom he had rescued earlier and, considering Skanda as destined by 
Brahma himself to be the husband of this devi, summoned her to come 
there, wearing her best ornaments. Indra said to Skanda, “Best of Gods, 


even before you were born, Brahma ordained that this devi was to be your 
bride. Accept her lotus-like right hand with the invocation of the marriage 
mantras.” 

Accordingly Skanda married Devasena, and the learned Brihaspati 
performed the necessary prayers and oblations. She, who is named Shashti, 
Lakshmi, Asha, Sukhaprada, Sinivali, Kuhu, Sadvritti and Aparajita, is 
Devasena, the wife of Skanda. Then Skanda was united with Devasena by 
the indissoluble bonds of matrimony, and the goddess of prosperity 
faithfully served him, embodied in her own form. 

Because Skanda’s anointing occured on the fifth day of the moon, that 
day is called Sripanchami, the auspicious fifth day, and because he obtained 
his goal on the sixth day, that lunar day is considered to be entirely 
auspicious.’ ” 


CANTO 229 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


. “MI arkandeya continues, ‘The six wives of the Saptarishis went to 

Skanda’s abode as soon as they heard about his good fortune 

and that he had been made General of the celestial armies. These virtuous 

women of great punya had been disowned by the Rishis and they lost no 
time in calling on Mahasena, the Senapati of the divine forces. 

They said to him, “Son, we have been unjustly cast out by our godlike 
husbands. Some persons spread the rumour that we had given birth to you 
and, believing this, they were angry and banished us from our rightful 
places. Now you must redeem us from our disgrace. We want to adopt you 
as our son and secure eternal bliss. You must do this for us.” 

Skanda replied, “Good Devis of unblemished character, I hereby declare 
that you are my mothers. I am your son and you shall attain all that you 
desire.” ’ 

Markandeya continues, ‘Sakra indicated that he wanted to say 
something to Skanda and, when Skanda asked what it was, Vasava said, 
“Devi Abhijit, the younger sister of Rohini, was jealous of her elder sister 
and has gone into the forest to perform tapasya. I cannot find a substitute for 
my fallen star. 

Skanda, ask Brahma about how we can fill the empty space created by 
the absence of this nakshatra. Brahma created Dhanishta and the other 


asterisms, and Rohini used to be one of them, making their number 
complete.” 

Accordingly, Skanda sent Krittika to a place in the heavens, and there 
she shines with Agni’s grace as if she has seven faces. 

Vinata said to Skanda, “To me you are the son who performs the funeral 
rites. I want to live with you always, my son.” 

Skanda replied, “So be it. 1 honour you as my mother. Guide me with a 
mother’s love and, honoured by your daughter-in-law, you shall always live 
with me.” ’ 

Markandeya continues, ‘The great Matrikas said to Skanda, “Learned 
men have described us as the mothers of all creatures. However, what we 
want really is to be your mothers. Do us the honour of accepting us.” 

Skanda replied, “You are all mothers to me, and I am your son. Tell me 
what I can do to please you.” 

The Matrikas said, “In days of old, the Devis Brahmi, Maheswari and 
others were appointed as universal mothers. Sreshta, we want them to be 
removed from that position and for us to have their places; we want to be 
worshipped in their stead by the world. Restore those children of ours that 
they made you deprive us of.” 

Skanda said, “I cannot take back what I have given away, but I can give 
you other children, if you wish.” 

The mothers said, “We want to live with you and we want to be able to 
assume different shapes and to devour the children of those mothers as well 
as their guardians. Grant us this.” 

Skanda said, “I can grant you progeny, but I am pained by what you 
ask. May you be prosperous! I honour you, Devis, and promise to protect 
your children. I leave them in your care. 

The mothers declared, “We shall protect them, Skanda, as you want. 
May you prosper! Still, we want to live with you, always, mighty one.” 

Skanda said, “Until human children are sixteen years old, you shall be 
able to afflict them in your various forms. I hereby confer on you a fierce 
and inexhaustible energy, with which you shall live happily, worshipped by 
all.” 

And from Skanda’s body emerged a powerful, fiery being whose 
purpose was to devour the children of mortals. This being fell on the 
ground, unconscious and hungry. Skanda gave the evil force a horrific form, 
known by Brahmanottamas as Skandapasmara. 


Vinata takes the form known as Sakuni Graha, or evil spirit. She, who 
the learned Brahmanas know as Putana Rakshasi, is the evil force Putana. 
The fierce and hideous Rakshasa is the pisacha form, Sita Putana. That 
terrible spirit causes abortions in women. Aditi takes the form known as 
Revati, and her evil spirit is called Raivata; she is a dreadful Graha that 
afflicts children. Diti, the mother of the Daityas, is the form called 
Mukhamandika; and this terrible creature is partial to the flesh of little 
children. 

O Kuru, male and female children, who are said to have been fathered 
by Skanda, are spirits of evil, and they kill the foetus in the womb. They, 
the Kumaras, are the husbands of these devis, and children are caught 
unawares by these evil spirits. Rajan, the wise say that Surabhi, the cow 
mother, has the evil spirit Sakuni as her rider; and the two of them together 
devour children on this Earth. Sarama, the dog mother, habitually kills 
human beings while they are still in the womb. 

She who is the tree mother, who lives in a Karanja tree, grants boons; 
she has a pleasant face and is always kind to all creatures. They that want to 
have children bow down to her. 

These eighteen evil spirits are fond of meat and wine, and haunt 
birthing rooms for ten days. Kadru introduces herself in a sukshma rupa 
into the body of a pregnant woman and there she destroys the foetus and 
makes the mother give birth to a Naga instead. The mother of the 
Gandharvas takes away the foetus, and that is how women have abortions. 

The mother of the Apsaras removes the foetus from the womb, and such 
conceptions are said to be still-born. 

The daughter of the goddess of blood is said to have nursed Skanda, and 
she is worshipped as Lohitayani, on kadamba trees. The role of this 
goddess, Arya, is the same for women as Rudra’s is for men. She is the 
mother of all children and is especially worshipped for their well-being. 

These that I have described are the evil spirits presiding over the 
destinies of young children and, until children reach their sixteenth year, 
these spirits wield their dark powers, but after that their influence works for 
the good. 

All the male and female spirits that I have described are always counted 
as the spirits of Skanda. One propitiates them with burnt offerings, 
ablutions, salves, and sacrifices and other offerings, and by worshipping 


Skanda. O king, when one reverently honours and worships them they 
bestow on men whatever is good for them, as well as courage and long life. 

I bow now to Maheswara, before I describe the nature of those spirits 
that affect the destinies of men after they are sixteen years old. 

The man who sees gods, whether while asleep or awake, loses his 
sanity, and the spirit who is responsible for these hallucinations is called the 
Deva bhuta. When a person sees his dead ancestors while he is seated at 
ease, or lying in his bed, he loses his mind, and the spirit which causes this 
illusion is called the ancestral or Pitr bhuta. 

The man who shows disrespect to the Siddhas, and who is cursed by 
them in return, soon goes mad; the evil force which makes this happen is 
called the Siddha bhuta. The spirit which makes a man smell a sweet scent 
and recognise various tastes is a tortured spirit called the Rakshasa bhuta. 

And that spirit, which gives Gandharvas, the minstrels of heaven, the 
ability to insinuate themselves into the bodies of human beings, is called the 
Gandharva bhuta. The evil spirit, in the form of a Pisacha that torments men 
is called the Paisacha bhuta. The Yaksha spirit, that accidentally enters a 
human being, making him lose his mind, is known as the Yaksha bhuta. 

The man, who loses his senses on account of a demoralising addiction 
to vices, becomes quickly insane, and his illness must be remedied 
according to methods prescribed in the Shastras. Men also turn mad from 
confusion, from irrational fear and from having seen ghastly sights. The 
cure for them lies in quieting their minds. 

There are three classes of spirits: some are playful, some are greedy and 
some sensual. Until men attain the age of seventy, these evil spirits have the 
power to plague them, and after that, fever is the only evil spirit that afflicts 
them. These evil spirits always avoid those who have subdued their senses, 
who are self-restrained, who have good habits, who are god-fearing, and 
who are free from sloth and the touch of evil. 

I have now described to you the evil spirits that mould the destinies of 
men. Rajan, you who are ever devoted to Maheswara, are immune to them.’ 


99 


CANTO 230 


MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


¢ “MI arkandeya continues, ‘When Skanda had bestowed these 
powers, Swaha appeared to him and said, “You are my natural 
son and I want you to grant me great happiness.” 

Skanda replied, “What kind of happiness do you wish to enjoy?” 

Swaha said, “I am Daksha’s favourite daughter Swaha. From the time I 
was young, I have been in love with Hutasana, the Fire God, but, my son, 
he does not know of my feelings. I want to live with him as his wife, 
forever.” 

Skanda said, “From this day, Devi, all offerings that good men, who 
adhere to the path of dharma, make to the Devas or the Pitrs to the 
accompaniment of purifying mantras chanted by Brahmanas will be made 
jointly to Agni and Swaha. In this way, Devi, you always live with Agni 
Hutasana.” ’ 

Markandeya continues, ‘Swaha was immensely pleased with the boon 
that Skanda had given her, and with her husband Pavaka, the Fire God, she 
worshipped Skanda in return. 

Then Brahma, the Lord of all creatures, said to Mahasena, “Go and visit 
your father Mahadeva, the conqueror of Tripura. Rudra, Agni, Uma and 
Swaha have worked together for the welfare of all creatures and made you 
invincible. The hiranyaretas of Rudra, the highest, cast into Uma’s yoni, 


was cast back onto this hill, and the twins, Minjika and Minjika came into 
being. A portion of it fell into the Sea of blood, another fell into the rays of 
the Sun, another fell upon the Earth, and thus it was distributed in five 
portions. These fierce-looking followers of yours, who live on the flesh of 
animals, were born from that golden semen.” 

Saying, “It shall be done”, Mahasena worshipped his father Siva with a 
son’s affection.’ 

Markandeya continues, ‘Men who want to acquire wealth and those 
who wish to alleviate illness should worship these five kinds of spirits, born 
from Mahadeva, with offerings of the sunflower. Those that desire the well- 
being of their children should worship the twins, Minjika and Minjika, also 
fathered by Rudra; and those who want children born to them must always 
worship the female spirits that live in trees, eating human flesh. All 
Pisachas are divided into innumerable types. 

And now, O king, listen and I will tell you how the banners and bells of 
Skanda came into being. Indra’s elephant Airavata had two bells, both 
named Vaijayanti. The clever Sakra had them brought to him, and 
personally gave them to Guha. Visakha took one of those bells and Skanda 
Kartikeya the other. Both standards, Kartikeya’s and Visakha’s, were red. 
Mahasena was pleased with what the gods had given him. Surrounded by 
hosts of Devas and Pisachas, and seated on the Golden Mountain, he was 
radiant in the splendour of his prosperity. 

The mountain was covered with lush forests and, like Mandara with its 
abundance of caves, shone in the rays of the Sun. This mountain’s lustrous 
beauty was enhanced by Mahasena’s presence. The White Mountain, 
Sweta, was adorned with vast woodlands and covered with blossoming 
santanaka trees, forests of karavira, parijata, papa, asoka and kadamba trees. 
Herds of unworldly deer roamed its hillsides, and flocks of celestial birds 
flew overhead. The rumble of clouds sounded like musical instruments, like 
the soft murmur of the sea, and to this the Gandharvas and Apsaras danced. 
A joyous sound of merriment rose from the creatures there. 

The whole world, with Indra himself, seemed to have moved to the 
White Mountain. Everyone was satisfied and none tired of looking at 
Skanda.’ 

Markandeya continues, ‘After installing the lambent son of Agni as the 
leader of heaven’s army, joyous Siva, shining like the Sun, rode with 
Parvati on his chariot and went to Bhadravata. Kala was his charioteer and 


thousands of lions drew it. They flew swiftly through akasa, as if they 
would devour the sky. Striking terror into the hearts of all the animate 
beings of the worlds they passed, the maned beasts growled ferociously. 
Mahadeva, Lord of all creatures, sat in that chariot with Uma, like a flare of 
lightning flashing in a mass of clouds arched over by the rainbow, the 
Indradhanush. 

Before him went the venerable Lord of wealth, riding on the backs of 
his human bearers, with his attendant Guhyakas riding in his exquisite 
vimana, the Pushpaka. Bringing up the rear was Sakra, the granter of boons, 
on his elephant Airavata, accompanied by the Devas and marching at the 
head of his celestial army. On Mahadeva’s right flank was the great Yaksha, 
Amogha, with his attendants, the Jambhaka Yakshas, and accompanied by 
Rakshasas wearing flower garlands. Also on the right flank were many 
Devas of wonderful battle prowess, along with the Vasus and the Rudras. 

Beside him marched the terrible Yama, with his companion, Mrityu, 
death, followed by hundreds of dreadful diseases. Behind Mahadeva, the 
sharp-pointed, adorned Vijaya, Siva’s trisula, was borne; and Varuna, Lord 
of the waters, marched slowly alongside the Vijaya, carrying his own 
weapon, the Paasa, and surrounded by his aquatic subjects. Immediately to 
the rear of the trident, Rudra’s other weapon, the Pattisa, was carried, 
guarded by maces, marvellous cudgels and other weapons. Following the 
Pattisa was Rudra’s brilliant parasol and his Kamandalu with their attendant 
Maharishis, and with Bhrigu, Angirasa and others. Behind all these rode 
Rudra in his white chariot, providing heartening cheer with a display of his 
powers. 

In his train were the rivers, lakes and seas; Apsaras, Rishis, Devas, 
Gandharvas and Nagas; the stars and planets; the children of the gods; and 
many women. The women scattered flowers around them as they walked; 
and the clouds bowed in obeisance to Mahadeva, who was armed with his 
bow, the Pinaka. Some of the clouds held a white parasol over his head; and 
Agni and Vayu waved feathery chamaras. 

Mahadeva, the God with the Bull for his emblem, was followed by the 
glorious Indra, accompanied by the Rajarishis singing his praises. Gauri, 
Vidya, Gandhari, Kesini, Mitra and Savitri made up Parvati’s train, along 
with all the Vidyas—the deities of all the branches of knowledge. 
Advancing ahead of the whole formation was the standard-bearer, the 


Rakshasa spirit that delivers, to all the different aksauhinis, commands that 
Indra and the other Devas implicitly obey. 

And skipping merrily, in and out and through the procession, was that 
best of Rakshasas, Pingala, who is Rudra’s friend, always busy in smasanas, 
crematoria, and charming to everyone. 

Good deeds are the offerings with which mortals worship Rudra, who is 
also called Siva. He is the omnipotent Deity, the wielder of the bow Pinaka; 
he is worshipped in his many forms; he is Maheswara. 

Mahasena, the son of Krittika, the Senapati of the Deva army, who 
reveres Brahmanas, followed the Lord of gods, surrounded by the deva 
legions. Mahadeva said to Mahasena, gravely, “Command the seventh 
aksauhini of the army with careful attention.” 

Skanda replied, “My lord, I will command the seventh legion. Is there 
anything else you would have me do?” 

Rudra said, “You will always find me in the field of war. You will gain 
great punya by looking up to me and serving me with devotion.” 

Then Maheswara embraced him and gave him leave to go. Rajan, after 
Skanda left, the Devas were shaken by many fell omens. The sky and its 
stars blazed with fire, and all the Universe was plunged in chaos. The Earth 
quaked and rumbled, and darkness covered the whole world. Seeing these 
terrible phenomena, Sankara, the blessed Uma, the Devas and the great 
Maharishis were distressed. 

While they were bewildered, there appeared before them a savage host 
of mighty Danavas, armed with a myriad of weapons and looking like a 
mass of thunderheads and hills. Those Demons could not be counted and 
spoke legion languages. They moved purposefully to where Sankara stood 
with the Devas, and into the ranks of the army of Swarga they shot flights of 
arrows in all directions, masses of rock, maces, sataghnis, prasas and 
parighas. 

The onslaught threw heaven’s army into disarray and their ranks 
wavered. The Danavas fetched havoc by hewing down soldiers, horses, 
elephants, chariots and weapons. The disheartened troops of the gods 
seemed as if they were about to turn their backs upon the enemy. Vast 
numbers of them fell, slain by the Asuras, like large trees burnt down in a 
forest fire. The Swargavasis fell with their heads separated from their 
bodies. There was no one to lead them in that fearful battle, and they were 
mown down by the enemy. 


Indra, the slayer of Bala, saw his forces besieged and tried to rally them. 
He said, “Do not be afraid, O Heroes. May success reward your efforts! 
Take up your weapons and keep your courage. You will not face any further 
misfortune. Crush these evil ones. Come, let us attack the Danavas together 
and may we find success!” 

The dwellers of heaven were reassured and, under Indra’s lead, rushed 
against the Danavas. Thirty-three thousand gods, all the powerful Maruts 
and Sadhyas, and all the Vasus returned to battle. They loosed arrows that 
drew blood from the Daityas, their horses and their elephants. The sharp 
shafts penetrated their bodies and fell on the ground, looking like snakes 
dropping down the hillside. Pierced by those arrows, the Daityas fell on all 
sides, and they looked like many small banks of clouds. The Danava host 
was panic-stricken at the charge of the Devas; they withered before that 
attack. 

Their weapons still at the ready, the gods gave loud vent to their 
exhilaration; and the heavenly bands struck up joyful music. 

The encounter took a dreadful toll on both sides. The battlefield was 
covered over with blood and strewn with the bodies of Devas and Asuras. 
The victory of the Devas was short-lived, because the Danavas rallied and 
flew back into battle, bringing bloody havoc to the forces of Devaloka. This 
time, the Asuras beat their drums, blew ringing blasts on their bugles and 
roared their nerve-shattering war cry: Boomba! Boomba! 

Now a mighty demon, the greatest of them, seized a great crag in his 
hands and rushed out of that dreadful Daitya army, looking like the Sun 
flaring out from behind dark clouds. The Devas saw that he was about to 
hurl that enormous rock at them and fled. The Danava, Mahisha, pursued 
them and flung the crag at them. Lord of the world, ten thousand warriors of 
the Deva army were crushed under that immense stone. So Mahisha struck 
terror into the hearts of the Devas and, with his Danavas, he fell upon them 
like a lion at a herd of deer. 

When Indra and the other gods saw Mahishasura leading the charge 
against them they abandoned their banners and their weapons and fled. 
Mahisha, full of wrath swiftly caught up with Rudra’s chariot and seized its 
central pole with both his hands. 

When he had seized Rudra’s chariot, the Earth began to groan and the 
great Rishis fell unconscious. Massive Daityas, like thunderheads, became 
boisterous with joy, thinking that victory was theirs. Although Rudra, 


highest of the high, was in that plight, he did not think it worthwhile to kill 
Mahisha, for he remembered that Skanda would deal that deathblow. 

Meantime, the fiery Mahisha, contemplating his prize of Rudra’s chariot 
with satisfaction, sounded his war-cry, terrorising the Devas but filling the 
Daityas with joy. 

The Devas were in this plight when the mighty Mahasena, burning with 
anger, and ablaze with Sun-like splendour, came to battle. He wore fiery red 
and was bedecked with a wreath of red flowers. Encased in golden armour, 
he rode in a golden chariot, bright as the Sun and drawn by glossy chestnut 
horses. At the sight of him, the Daityas army grew instantly dispirited. 

Skanda discharged one blinding shakti at Mahisha, which beheaded the 
Demon, and he fell dead. His massive head, as big as a small hill, fell to the 
earth and, extending sixteen yojanas in length, barred the entrance to the 
country of the Northern Kurus. Now, however, people of that country pass 
easily by that way, for flesh and gristle have long since turned to bones, and 
Earth has covered them. 

The Devas and the Danavas saw Skanda hurl his shakti again and again 
on the field of battle, and it returned to his hands after killing thousands of 
the enemy’s forces. The wise Mahasena’s arrows brought down numbers of 
Danavas beyond count, and they were seized by panic. Skanda’s followers 
killed them, then drank their blood and ate their flesh. Joyfully, they 
exterminated the Danavas in a short time, just as quickly as the sunrise does 
darkness, or as a great fire consumes a forest, or as the wind drives away 
clouds. 

Thus did the illustrious Skanda slaughter all his enemies. The Devas 
eulogised him and he, in turn, paid his respects to Siva Maheswara. And 
Krittika’s son shone in glory, like Surya Deva at his zenith. 

When Skanda had completely annihilated the enemy and when 
Maheswara had left the battlefield, Purandara embraced Mahasena and said 
to him, “You have slain Mahisha, who was made invincible by the grace of 
Brahma. First of warriors, to him the Devas were as easy to mow down as 
blades of grass. Mahabaho, you have removed a thorn from the flesh of the 
gods. 

You have killed hundreds of Danavas, all equal in valour to Mahisha, all 
hostile to us and who always harassed us. And your followers have 
devoured hundreds of them. You are, O mighty one, invincible in battle, 
even like Uma’s lord; this victory will be celebrated as your first 


achievement. Your fame will last forever in the three worlds; all the Devas 
will pledge their fealty to you.” 

Saying this to Mahasena, the husband of Sachi left, accompanied by his 
Devas, and with the leave of Siva, the three-eyed Devadeva. Rudra returned 
to Bhadravata and all the celestial ones to their respective homes. 

Rudra addressed the gods, saying, “You must give your allegiance to 
Skanda just as you do to me.” 

The son of Pavaka the Fire God slaughtered the Danavas and conquered 
the three worlds in a single day; and the greatest Rishis worship him. The 
Brahmana who reads this story of Skanda’s birth gains untold prosperity in 
this world and the companionship of Skanda in the next,’ says Markandeya. 

Yudhishtira says, “O most venerable Brahmana, I want to know the 
different names of this loftiest of gods, by which he is celebrated through 
the three worlds.’ ” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Thus addressed by the Pandava in that 
conclave of Rishis, the worshipful Markandeya of great tapasyashakti 
responds by listing the sacred names of Kartikeya. 

He says, ‘Agneya, son of Agni; Skanda, the cast off; Diptakirti, of 
blazing fame; Anamaya, always healthy; Mayuraketu, the one with the 
peacock banner; Dharmatma, the one with the noble soul; Bhutesa, Lord of 
all beings; Mahishardana, slayer of Mahisha; Kamajit, one who has 
conquered desire; Kamada, fulfiller of desires; Kanta, the handsome one; 
Satyavak, speaker of truth; Bhuvaneswara, Lord of the jungle of the world; 
Sisu, child; Sighra, the swift; Suchi, the pure; Chanda, the fiery; Diptavarna, 
the bright-complexioned; Subhanana, the beautiful; Amogha, who cannot 
be baffled; Anagha, sinless; Rudra, the terrible; Priya, the loved; 
Chandranana, of the face like the moon; Diptasakti, wielder of the burning 
shakti; Prasantatma, tranquil-souled; Bhadrakrit, doer of good; 
Kutamohana, holder of even the wicked; Shashthipriya, the favourite of 
Shashthi; Pavitra, holy; Matrvatsala, one who adores his mother; 
Kanyabharta, protector of virgins; Vibhakta, diffused over the universe; 
Swaheya, son of Swaha; Revatisuta, child of Revati; Prabhu, the Lord; 
Neta, the leader; Visakha, raised by Visakha; Naigameya, born of the Veda; 
Suduschara, difficult to propitiate; Suvrata, of excellent vows; Lalita, the 
beautiful; Balakridanakapriya, fond of toys; Khachari, ranger of the skies; 
Brahmacharin, chaste; Shura, the hero; Saravanodbhava, born in a clump of 
reeds; Viswamitrapriya, the favourite of Viswamitra; Devasenapriya, the 


lover of Devasena; Vasudevapriya, beloved of Vasudeva; and Priyakrit, doer 
of pleasing deeds. 

These are the divine names of Kartikeya. Whoever repeats them will 
secure fame, wealth and salvation.’ 

Markandeya continues, ‘Valiant son of the Kurus, listen to me sing the 
other names of the mighty, six-faced, valiant Guha, who has no rival, whom 
Devas and Rishis venerate. Listen well to my stuti. 

O devoted to Brahman, born from Brahman, learned in the mysteries of 
Brahman, Brahmesaya, foremost of those in whom Brahman resides, fond 
of Brahman, austere like the Brahmanas, knowledgeable in the great 
mystery of Brahma, leader of Brahmanas! You are Swaha; you are Swadha; 
you are the holiest of the holy. O invoked in mantras, celebrated as the six- 
flamed Fire. 

You are the year, the six seasons, the months, the fornights, the solar 
declinations and the cardinal points of space. O Lotus-eyed, O Lotus-faced, 
O thousand-faced, thousand-armed, Ruler of the Universe, great oblation, 
life-giving soul of the Devas and Asuras, mighty Leader of armies; 
Prachanda—furious, Lord, master and conqueror of your enemies; 
Sahasrabhutva—of many forms; Sahasratushti—content a thousand-fold; 
Sahasrabhuk—devourer of everything; and Sahasrapad—thousand-legged. 

You are the very Earth; you are the one of infinite forms, of one 
thousand heads and of awesome strength. You can appear, at will, as 
Ganga’s son, as Swaha, as Mahi, or as Krittika. O Six-faced God, your 
playmate and mount is the rooster; you can assume different forms at will. 

You are Daksha, Soma, Maruta, Dharma, Vayu, the prince of 
mountains, and Indra, for all time. O most eternal of all the eternal ones, O 
Lord of all lords, you are the mainspring of Truth, the destroyer of Diti’s 
progeny, and the great conqueror of the enemies of the gods; you are the 
personification of dharma; you are, at once, vast and minute; you know the 
highest and the lowest of virtuous actions; the mysteries of Brahma reside 
in you. 

O first among Gods, O exalted Lord of the Universe, your tejas 
pervades creation. 

With this prayer, made as best I can, I salute you of the twelve eyes and 
many hands. All the rest of your attributes defy the scope of my intellect.’ 

The Brahmana who reads this story of Skanda’s birth, or narrates it to 
Brahmanas, or hears it being told by twice-born men, gains wealth, long 


life, fame, children, victory, prosperity, contentment and the companionship 
of Skanda,’ says Markandeya,” said Vaisampayana. 


CANTO 231 
DRAUPADI SATYABHAMA SAMVADA PARVA 


V aisampayana continued, “When the Brahmanas and the noble sons 

of Pandu are seated, Draupadi and Satyabhama enter the hermitage. 
Their hearts filled with rare bliss, the two princesses laugh merrily and sit 
together at their ease. Rajan, these devis, who always speak sweetly to each 
other, are meeting after a long time and begin to exchange many heroic and 
delightful tales of the Kurus and the Yadus. 

The slender-waisted Satyabhama, favourite wife of Krishna, and 
daughter of Satrajit, speaks privately to Draupadi and says, ‘Daughter of 
Drupada, how do you manage to rule the sons of Pandu, the strong and 
handsome Kshatriyas who are like lords of the Earth? Lovely one, how are 
they so obedient to you and never angry with you? Pandu’s sons are always 
submissive to you and ever eager to do your bidding. Tell me how this is so. 

Do you practise vratas, or tapasya; do you chant mantras or take secret 
herbs during your menstrual period; is there something that you do; or is it 
the effect of your youthfulness? Do you chant hermetic incantations and 
bewitchments, or perform special homas, or use medicated salves and 
potions? Tell me, princess of Panchala, what auspicious means I can use to 
make Krishna ever obedient to me?’ 

Chaste Draupadi says to the illustrious Satyabhama, “You asked me, 
Satyabhama, about the means that base women use. How can I tell you 
what these are? It is not fitting, devi, to answer these questions or for you to 
doubt me, because you are intelligent and Krishna’s favourite wife. The 


husband who discovers that his wife uses incantations and intoxicating 
physics begins to be in dread of her, as if she were a serpent hiding in his 
bedchamber. How can a man who is beset with fear have peace, and how 
can one who has no peace have happiness? A wife can never ensure her 
husband’s obedience by chanting mantras. 

We hear of painful diseases being transmitted by our enemies. Indeed, 
they that want to kill others send poison disguised as gifts, so that the man 
who imbibes the drug so sent, by tongue or skin, soon dies. Women have 
been known to cause the body to bloat through the retention of fluids, 
leprosy, anaemia, impotence, insanity, blindness and deafness in men by 
administering drugs to them. These evil and sinful women sometimes 
disable their husbands for good. The wife should never do the least injury to 
her lord. 

But listen now to the way I conduct myself with the great-souled sons 
of Pandu. I set aside vanity and, controlling desire and anger, I serve them 
with devotion. I control my envy and, with deep, heartfelt love, and without 
feeling that the duties I perform are degrading in any way, I wait upon 
them. I never say anything that is evil or false, I am careful never to sit or 
look or walk with impropriety; I am always careful never to let my eyes 
reveal what is in my heart. This is how I serve Pandu’s sons, my Kshatriya 
husbands who are like the Sun or Fire; they are radiant as the Moon, and 
they are endowed with fierce energy and prowess and can kill their enemies 
with a mere look. 

My heart does not turn towards any other, be he Deva, Manava or 
Gandharva; whether he is young or decked with ornaments, wealthy or 
handsome. I never bathe or eat or sleep before my husbands have, in fact, 
not until after our attendants have done so. Wherever they may be returning 
from, be it field, forest or town, I quickly get up and greet my husband with 
water to wash and a seat to rest on. 

I always keep the house and all the things in it, and the food, tidy and 
clean. I am careful in preparing the rice and serve them food at the proper 
time. I never use angry words or sulk, and I never imitate women that are 
wicked. Setting aside sloth, I always do what pleases them. I never laugh 
falsely, but only at something genuinely amusing, and I never loiter by the 
gate. I never stay long in the bathing room or in the gardens attached to the 
house. I always refrain from laughing too loudly; I never indulge in 
uncontrolled passion; I avoid everything that may offend. 


Satyabhama, I am in constant attendance on my lords. I am never happy 
when apart from them. When my husband leaves home to see a relative, I 
renounce flowers and perfumes and keep vratas. Whatever my husband 
does not drink or eat, or enjoy, I do not either. Beautiful princess decked in 
ornaments, guided constantly by the instruction imparted to me by my 
elders, I devotedly seek the welfare of my lords. 

My mother-in-law Kunti told me of my duties with regard to many 
aspects of married life: with regard to relatives, alms-giving, offering 
worship to the gods, oblations to the diseased, boiling food in pots on 
auspicious days to offer to ancestors and guests. She taught me about 
reverence and service to those that deserve our attention. These and all else 
that I know about, I observe and practice conscientiously, day and night. 
Fixing my heart on humility and the lawful path of dharma, I serve my 
gentle, truthful and virtuous husbands, thinking of them as snakes that can 
flare up in anger at the least provocation. 

The wife’s virtue is based on her devotion to her husband. The husband 
is the wife’s god and her refuge. Indeed, there is no other refuge for her. 
Under these circumstances, how could a wife hurt her lord, even in the 
smallest way? 

I never act against the wishes of my husband, in sleeping or eating or in 
the way I adorn myself; I am always guided by them and never speak ill of 
my mother-in-law. Blessed one, my husbands have become obedient to me 
because of my diligence, my alertness, and because of the humility with 
which I serve my betters. 

Every day, I myself serve Kunti, revered and truthful mother of these 
Kshatriyas, with food and drink, and fetch her clothes for her and help her 
dress. Never do I indulge in my own preferences over hers in food or in 
dress; never do I reprove that princess who is as forgiving as the Earth 
herself. 

Yudhishtira used to feed eight thousand Brahmanas every day in the 
palace, on golden plates. He used to care for eighty thousand Snataka 
Brahmanas leading the lives of grihastas, with thirty serving-maids assigned 
to each. Besides these, he used to send sattvic food, in plates of gold, to ten 
thousand celibate Yatis. I would worship all these Brahmanas who recited 
the Vedas, with food, drink and clothing, taken from our stores after 
dedicating a portion to the Viswadeva. 


The illustrious son of Kunti had a hundred thousand finely attired 
personal serving-maids, wearing lambent bracelets and golden necklaces, 
colourful garlands and a profusion of resonant jewellery, and anointed with 
sandalwood paste. The gold-bedecked maids were all skilled in singing and 
dancing. I knew their names and recognised them all; I knew who they were 
and what their duties were. Kunti’s most inelligent and brilliant son also had 
a hundred thousand maid servants to take care of feeding his guests, with 
plates of gold in their hands. 

While Yudhishtira lived in Indraprastha a hundred thousand horses and 
as many elephants would follow him in his entourage. These were the 
possessions of Yudhishtira when he ruled the world. 

It was I, princess, who regulated their number and framed the rules by 
which they lived. I listened to any complaints about them. I knew 
everything that the maid-servants of the palace did or did not do, and about 
the other servitors, including the royal cowherds and shepherds. Blessed 
and noble one, I alone kept the accounts of the king’s income and 
expenditure and the sum of his wealth. Those bulls among the Bhaaratas 
gave me the responsibility of looking after all their dependants, who paid 
me their respects. 

This burden, which was heavy and could not be borne by someone with 
an evil heart, I shouldered day and night, sacrificing my own ease and 
remaining lovingly devoted to my husbands all the while. And while my 
husbands were engaged in the pursuit of dharma, I managed their treasury 
that was as inexhaustible as Varuna’s ever-brimming ocean. 

Often knowing hunger and thirst, all day and night I would serve the 
Kuru princes, and I knew no difference between night and day. I was the 
first to awake and the last to sleep. This, O Satyabhama, is the charm I used 
to make my husbands obedient to me. This is what I know. Never have I 
resorted to the spells or intoxicants of wicked women, nor do I ever wish to 
use them.’ 

Quickly contrite now, Satyabhama says, ‘O Panchali, among friends, 
light-hearted conversations happen naturally and without forethought. Yet, I 
am to blame. Yagnaseni, forgive me!’ ” 


CANTO 232 


DRAUPADI SATYABHAMA SAMVADA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


“T) raupadi says, ‘I will teach you how to capture your husband’s 
heart without deceit. Beloved friend, if you do as I say, you will 
draw your lord away from other women. 

In all the worlds, including Devaloka, there is no god equal to one’s 
husband. When he is pleased with you he will grant you all your wishes, but 
when he is angry you will lose them all. It is the husband that gives the wife 
her children, and he gives her the things that she enjoys. He gives soft beds 
and comfortable chairs, clothes and garlands, perfumes, great fame, and 
heaven itself in the hereafter. 

As a wife, it is not easy to find happiness. Indeed, the chaste woman 
always gains happiness through hardship. Always adore Krishna by offering 
him your friendship and love, and by cheerfully accepting physical 
hardship. Make him sit comfortably in a well-wrought seat, bring him the 
best garlands and perfumes, serve him promptly, and by this he will devote 
himself to you, realising that you love him truly. 

As soon as you hear your lord’s voice at the gate, rise from your chair 
and stand in readiness in your chamber; and as soon as you see him enter, 
worship him by leading him to a soft chair and fetching him water to wash 
his feet. Even when he commands a maidservant to do something, get up 


and do it yourself. Let Krishna understand your mind and know that you 
love him with all your heart. 

Satyabhama, do not talk to others of anything your lord says to you, 
even if it is nothing that needs to be kept secret, for if any of the other wives 
were to speak of it to him, he might become annoyed with you. Do 
whatever is in your power to make those he loves happy, and always work 
for his benefit. Take care to stay away from those who oppose him, who 
want to hurt him and from deceitful persons in general. 

Remain composed and alert at all times, without showing any emotion, 
in the presence of men. Mask your feelings with silence; do not stay alone, 
or have private conversations with any man, not even your sons Pradyumna 
and Samba. You should cultivate friendships only with women that are of 
noble birth and pure hearts, who are devoted to their lords; shun women 
that are bad-tempered, addicted to wine, gluttonous, who are prone to 
stealing, or wicked and fickle. 

Such conduct is reputable and augurs prosperity. It can allay hostility, 
and it leads to Swarga. So, deck yourself in garlands and ornaments, rub 
unguents and perfumes on your body, and worship your husband.’ ” 


CANTO 233 


DRAUPADI SATYABHAMA SAMVADA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “By this time, having spoken of many pleasant 
matters with the noble Pandavas and the Brahmanas_ with 
Markandeya at their head, and having bid them farewell, Krishna mounts 
his chariot and calls for Satyabhama. 

Satyabhama embraces Draupadi lovingly and says to her, ‘Krishnaa, let 
there be no anxiety or grief for you! You have no reason to spend sleepless 
nights, because you will surely regain the Earth that your godlike husbands 
will subdue. O black-eyed one, women who have your character and the 
auspicious marks that you do, can never suffer misfortune for long. I have 
heard it said that you and your husbands will surely enjoy this Earth, in 
peace and freed from all troubles! 

Draupadi, you will see Yudhishtira ruling the world after he has slain 
the sons of Dhritarashtra and avenged their cowardly deeds. You will soon 
see those Kuru wives, who laughed shamelessly at you when you were 
going into exile, reduced to helpless despair. Be aware, Krishnaa, that all 
those that hurt you in any way while you were in that miserable condition 
have already died. 

Your valiant sons, Yudhishtira’s Prativindhya, Bhima’s Sutasoma, 
Arjuna’s Srutakarma, Nakula’s Satanika and Sahadeva’s Srutasena are well 
and have become skilled warriors. Like Abhimanyu they all live happily in 


delightful Dwaravati. Subhadra cares for them with all her heart and 
rejoices in them even as you do. She grieves when they are sad and she is 
joyful when they are. Pradyumna’s mother, too, loves them dearly. 

Krishna and his son Bhanu, and all the others, watch over them with 
special affection. My mother-in-law Devaki does not spare any effort in 
feeding and clothing them; the Andhakas and Vrishnis, including Rama and 
others, have great fondness for them. Lovely one, all these love your sons 
as much as they love Pradyumna.’ 

Having spoken thus, with warm sincerity, Satyabhama makes her way 
to Krishna’s chariot. She first walks around the Queen of the Pandavas in 
pradakshina and then climbs into the wonderful ratha. The greatest of the 
Yadavas comforts Draupadi with a smile and, bidding the Pandavas to 
return to their house, sets out for his own city, in his chariot yoked to swift 
horses.” 


CANTO 234 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA 


anameyjaya said, “After they reached the lake in Dwaita vana, how do 

those best of men, Pritha’s sons, pass their days in that forest, exposed 
to the inclement winter and summer, and to the Wind and the Sun, O 
Brahmana?” 

Vaisampayana said, “When the sons of Pandu arrive at that lake, they 
choose a place to set up their dwelling far from human habitation. They 
explore the delightful woods, pristine mountains and picturesque river 
valleys. Once they have established their dwelling, many venerable Rishis, 
learned in Vedic lore, visit them regularly. Those Purushottamas always 
receive these Rishis with the utmost reverence. 

One day, there comes to the home of the Kaurava princes a certain 
Brahmana who is known for his eloquence. He converses with the Pandavas 
for a while, and then, leaves them and goes to the court of the Dhritarashtra, 
son of Vichitravirya. The old king of the Kurus receives him with respect, 
and when the Brahmana is seated, asks him about the sons of Dharma, Vayu 
and Indra, and about the twins, sons of the Aswins. 

The Brahmana tells him of their pitiful state, emaciated from their 
hardships and by the wind and Sun. The Brahmana also tells the king about 
Krishnaa, how intense her suffering is, and says that she is bereft of 
protection although she has those splendid Kshatriyas for husbands. 

When he hears what the Brahmana says Dhritarashtra’s soul contracts in 
grief at the thought of those royal princes drowning in a river of sorrow. 


Trembling and sighing, he calms himself with great effort, and remembers 
that he himself is responsible for their plight. 

Dhritarashstra says, ‘O, how does Yudhishtira, the eldest of our sons, 
who is truthful and pious, who is righteous in all that he does, Ajatasatru 
who has not a single enemy, who is accustomed to sleeping on beds made 
of soft Ranku skins, sleep now on bare ground? O, he who used to be 
woken every morning by the melodious sound of sutas and magadhas 
singing his praises, that prince of the Kurus who is like Indra himself: he 
now rises from his rough bed, woken in the small hours by the harsh- 
throated birds of night. 

How does Vrikodara, reduced by exposure to the elements, and full of 
rage, sleep on the floor in the presence of the princess of Panchala? He 
should not suffer so. Perhaps, the intelligent Arjuna does not sleep at night 
although he is one who can bear any pain, and who, though obedient to 
Yudhishtira, is pierced to the core by the memory of his elder brother’s 
mistakes. I am certain that, seeing the twins and Krishnaa and Yudhishtira 
and Bhima plunged in misery, Arjuna sighs deeply, like a fierce serpent, and 
that his anger keeps him awake through the night. 

The twins, too, who are like a pair of gods, and who deserve great 
happiness, are plunged in woe and pass their nights in restless wakefulness, 
only prevented by dharma and satya from avenging the wrongs done to 
them. The mighty son of Vayu, who is equal to his father in strength, no 
doubt sighs like a serpent as well, and restrains his fury, held fast by his 
elder brother with bonds of truth. The mightiest of warriors in battle, he 
now lies quietly on the ground, though fury roils his tameless heart. 
Burning to kill my children, he bides his time. 

The cruel words that Dussasana spoke after Yudhishtira was deceitfully 
beaten at dice have sunk deep into Vrikodara’s heart and consume him, as a 
bundle of straw set alight engulfs a faggot of dry wood. 

Dharmaputra never acts sinfully, and Dhananjaya always obeys him; but 
Bhima’s wrath, stoked by his life in exile, flares up like flames fanned by 
the wind. That Kshatriya wrings his hands and breathes hot, fierce breath, as 
if to consume my sons and grandsons with them. 

When they are angry, Arjuna and Vrikodara are like Yama and Kaala. 
They loose their swift arrows like so many thunderbolts, in all directions 
and raze their enemies in battle. Sadly, when Duryodhana, Sakuni, the 
Suta’s son and evil Dussasana robbed the Pandavas of their kingdom by 


cheating at dice, they saw only the honey on the tree and not the terrible 
ruin what they did would inexorably bring. 

Man knows that his actions, good and evil, will bear their different fruit, 
but he is sometimes confouded by fate. How, then, can man, find salvation? 
Even if the earth is well tilled and the seed sown in it, and even if Indra 
sends his showers at the right time, the crop may still not grow. This is what 
we often hear. How could this saying be true unless, as I have come to 
realise, Destiny is the ultimate master? 

The gambler Sakuni cheated the son of Pandu, who is always honest; 
and out of blind affection for my sinful sons, I, too, was guilty of vile 
deceit. It is for this that the Kurus now face their hour of nemesis. Or, 
perhaps, the inevitable must come to pass, for it is fated and more myterious 
than we can know. The wind blows, whether made to or not; the woman 
that conceives will have a child; darkness will be dispelled at dawn; and 
daylight vanishes at dusk! 

When the time comes, whatever material wealth we earn, whether it is 
spent or saved, brings us misery. Why, then, are men so anxious to garner 
wealth? If what we acquire is the result of fate, do we need to safeguard it 
from being divided, or from being frittered away, or from being spent all at 
once? If left unprotected, it may dwindle into a hundred portions. But 
whatever the nature of our possessions, our actions in the world are never 
lost. 

Think of the power of Arjuna, who went to Indraloka from the forest. 
Having mastered the four kinds of Devastras, he has come back into this 
world. What man is there who, having gone to Indra’s world in his human 
form, wishes to come back? He has returned because he sees that the 
destruction of the Kurus is imminent. Destiny’s instrument is Arjuna, the 
ambidextrous archer. His bow is the Gandiva, which has no equal, besides 
which he now has other unearthly weapons. Who is there that can withstand 
the might of these three?’ 

After listening to the king, Subala’s son goes to Duryodhana, who is 
sitting with Karna, and tells them all that he has heard. And even the 
heedless Duryodhana is filled with grief.” 


CANTO 235 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “After hearing what Dhritarashtra says, Sakuni 
waits for his opportunity and, advised and abetted by Karna, speaks 
to Duryodhana. 

He says, “You have, with your power, sent the heroic Pandavas into 
exile. Bhaarata, you rule this earth unchallenged, just as the slayer of 
Sambara rules Devaloka. The kings of the East, the South and the West pay 
tribute to you. Prosperity once paid court to Pandu’s sons, but now she is 
the vassal of you and your brothers. My king, not so long ago, with heavy 
hearts we saw Prosperity sitting beside Yudhishtira in Indraprastha, but 
today she is yours. You have snatched her away from Yudhishtira by dint of 
your intelligence. All the kings of the earth are now your subjects and at 
your command, even as they were previously Yudhishtira’s and waited on 
his word. 

Boundless Bhumi Devi, girdled by her seas, adorned by her mountains 
and forests, her towns, cities and mines, and decked with woodlands and 
hills, is now yours! 

Brahmanas adore you; kings worship you; and you blaze, Rajan, with 
the splendour of your prowess, like the Sun among the Devas. Surrounded 
by the Kurus, like Yama by the Rudras, or like Vasava by the Maruts, you 
shine, like the radiant Moon among the stars. Suyodhana, let us go and look 
at the sons of Pandu, who never obeyed anyone’s commands and who never 
owed you subjection, who are now divested of their prosperity. 


We have heard that the Pandavas are living on the shore of the lake in 
Dwaita vana, with many Brahmanas; the wilderness is their home. Go there, 
vested in great fortune, and scorch the sons of Pandu with the brilliance of 
your glory, just as the Sun burns everything with his hot rays. Enjoy the 
sight of yourself as a king and of them stripped of their sovereignty; of 
yourself in opulence and of them divested of it; of yourself with wealth and 
of them in poverty. Let Pandu’s sons see you, looking like Yayati, the son of 
Nahusha, accompanied by a multitude of followers and enjoying great bliss. 

O king, true prosperity is that which both friends and foes see. What 
jubilation can be more complete than that which a man enjoys when he 
himself is prosperous while his enemies are plunged in adversity? It is like 
the man, who from his position on the mountain-top, looks down on the 
man that grovels on the plain below. Tiger among kings, the exhilaration 
that a man derives from seeing his enemies in grief is greater than what he 
does from acquiring wealth or dominion. 

How euphoric is he who looks upon Dhananjaya wearing tree-bark and 
deer-skin, while he himself is cloaked in robes of richness. Let your wife, 
grandly attired, go and see the woeful Krishnaa clad in bark, and add to 
Draupadi’s sorrow. Let Drupada’s impoverished daughter be filled with 
regret, seeing your wife decked in priceless ornaments, grief far greater than 
what she felt in the sabha when Dussasana dragged her there.’ 

Having spoken thus to Duryodhana, Karna and Sakuni both fall silent, 
O Janamejaya, their counsel ended.” 


CANTO 236 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Duryodhana is delighted with what Karna says. 

But quickly, he becomes melancholy again and says, ‘O Karna, I 
have been thinking about what you said, but I will not be allowed to go 
where the Pandavas live. Dhritarashtra grieves for those Kshatriyas. Indeed, 
he thinks the sons of Pandu have become more powerful than before 
because of their austere lives and their tapasya. Even if the king understands 
my motives, he will think of future consequences, and never grant me leave. 
He will know that we have no other business in that forest than the 
humiliation of the exiled Pandavas. 

You know what Kshatta Vidura said to me, to you and to Subala’s son 
Sakuni during the game of dice. Bearing his words in mind, as well as the 
lamentations that he and others indulged in then, I am doubtful about 
whether or not to go and ask the king. I shall most certainly be gratified to 
see Bhima and Phalguna living in misery with Krishnaa in the jungle. The 
joy that I will feel in gaining sovereignty of the whole world is nothing 
compared to the rapture that will be mine on seeing Pandu’s sons wearing 
tree-bark and deer-skin. Is there a greater joy than will be mine, Karna, on 
seeing Draupadi in the wilderness, dressed in rags? 

Only when Yudhishtira and Bhima see how I am graced with vast 
wealth, will my life’s ambition be fulfilled. Yet, I do not see a way in which 
I can convince the king to let me go to the forest. 


You, Subala’s son and Dussasana must devise a clever plan by which 
we can go. I, too, will decide today, whether or not I should go, and see the 
king tomorrow. When I am sitting with Kurusattama Bhishma, it is then that 
you and Sakuni must propose the plan you have concocted. I will listen to 
what the king and Bhishma have to say and settle the matter by pleading 
with our grandfather for permission.’ 

Saying So be it, they all go away to their respective mansions. 

In the morning, Karna comes to Duryodhana and, with a smile, says to 
him, ‘I have a plan. Listen to it, O lord of men. Our herds of cattle are in the 
woods that fringe Dwaita vana. I am sure that we can go there under the 
pretext of inspecting the herds, for it is fitting for kings to go frequently to 
their cattle stations. If you give this as a reason, your father will surely give 
you leave to go.’ 

Sakuni says to them, “This is the simple, cunning plan that I, too, had in 
mind. The king will definitely give his approval for our visit to Dwaita 
vana. Our herds all wait there, expecting you. We will surely be able to go 
to the cattle station, on the pretext of inspecting our herds and counting 
their numbers.’ 

The three men laugh in glee and clasp each others’ hands. Having 
decided on this plan, they go to meet the king of the Kurus.” 


CANTO 237 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Janamejaya, as planned, they go to see king 

Dhritarashtra, and when they are in his presence they ask 
solicitously about his welfare. In return, he asks after theirs. The three 
connivers have enlisted the services of a cowherd named Samagna to help 
them and, as instructed, Samagna approaches the king and tells him about 
the cattle, and that they need to be counted. 

At this point, Karna and Sakuni say to Dhritarashtra, ‘O Kaurava, our 
herds are kept in a most pleasant place. This is the time for branding the 
calves; it is also an excellent time for the prince to go hunting. You must 
give him leave to go.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘A deer hunt and an inspection of our cattle are 
excellent ideas, my child; it is not wise to trust the herdsmen completely. 
But we have heard that those Purushavyaghras, the Pandavas, now live in 
the vicinity of our herds. I think it is best that you do not go on your own. 

The Pandavas live in the forest because they were defeated deceitfully 
at dice, and they suffer greatly. Karna, they are mighty warriors and they 
have devoted themselves to severe tapasya. Yudhishtira will not allow his 
anger to flare, but Bhimasena is naturally volatile and Yagnaseni is fire 
personified. You are proud and foolhardy, and are bound to offend them. 
She will burn you with the power of her tapasyashakti, and make ashes of 
even armed Kshatriyas. 


I am also of the opinion that injuring them using a large force of 
warriors is sinful, besides I do not think you will succeed. Arjuna has 
returned to join them in the forest. Even before he had acquired mastery of 
the divine Astra Shastra, he subdued the earth. Mighty Kshatriya that he is, 
and now a master of the Devastras, will he not slay you all? 

Even if, in obedience to my words, you conduct yourselves carefully 
while you are there, you will have no peace of mind because you will be 
constantly watchful. Or, some soldier of yours may, even unwittingly, do 
some harm to Yudhishtira, for which you will be held responsible. 

No, let some of our trusted men go for the inspection and see to the 
branding of the calves. Bhaarata, you must not go there yourself.’ 

Sakuni says, ‘Pandu’s eldest son is well-versed in dharma. He made a 
pledge, which our entire sabha witnessed, that he would live for twelve 
years in the forest; and the other sons of Pandu are obedient to Yudhishtira. 
Yudhishtira will never be angry with us. We want, very much, to go hunting 
and we will use that opportunity to supervise the counting of our cattle. 

We have no intention of seeing the Pandavas. We will be careful not to 
go near their dwelling; there will be no misdemeanour on our part.’ 

Now Dhritarashtra gives his consent, albeit unwillingly, for Duryodhana 
and his companions to go to the forest. Permission gained, the son of 
Gandhari sets out, accompanied by Karna and a large army. Also with him 
are Dussasana, many of his other brothers, Subala’s son, the clever Sakuni, 
and thousands of princesses. 

And as this prince of the mighty arms sets out for Dwaita vana, the 
citizens of Hastinapura, accompanied by their wives, follow him. Eight 
thousand chariots, thirty thousand elephants, nine thousand horses and 
many thousands of foot-soldiers are in his train, as well as moving shops 
and pavilions, traders, bards and hundreds of thousands of trained hunters. 

As Duryodhana begins his journey followed by this massive entourage 
the uproar they make resembles the roaring of stormy monsoon winds. 
When they reach the forest, Duryodhana, with his followers, his chariots 
and laden carts, makes camp four miles from the lake in Dwaita vana.” 


CANTO 238 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Duryodhana passes through different parts of 

that forest and finally arrives at the cattle station and settles his 
troops there. His attendants select a familiar and pleasant wood that has 
plentiful water and is lush with trees, a place convenient for constructing 
living quarters for the king. Not too far from the royal residence, they also 
erect separate dwellings for Karna, Sakuni and the king’s brothers. 

The king sees his cattle, hundreds and thousands of them; he examines 
their legs and their identifying marks, and supervises their counting. He 
supervises the branding of the calves and makes a note of those animals that 
need to be broken in; and he counts those cows whose calves have not yet 
been weaned. 

Once he has marked and counted every calf less than three years old, 
the Kuru prince, surrounded by the cowherds, begins to amuse himself in 
the forest. His people and his soldiers enjoy themselves, even like the 
Devas, doing as they please. The herdsmen, who are skilled in singing, 
dancing and playing instruments, and young maidens decked in ornaments 
pander to the pleasures of Dhritarashtra’s son, who, surrounded by the 
women of the royal household, cheerfully distributes wealth, food and drink 
amongst those who minister to him. 

The king and his followers hunt and kill hyena, bison, deer, ox, bear and 
wild boar. The king shoots thousands of those animals in the deep forest, 
and he snares deer in the more light woods. Bhaarata, drinking milk and 


enjoying all kinds of delicious food, and travelling through many charming 
groves and woods swarming with bees drunk on the honey of flowers and 
echoing with the cries of the peacock, Duryodhana eventually reaches the 
sacred lake of Dwaita vana. 

The place where the king arrives is full of bees inebriated with 
pushpamrita, flower nectar, and resounds with the sweet notes of the blue 
jay; the glade is shaded by saptacchadas and punnagas and bakulas. The 
King, mantled in his bounty, enters that place looking like Indra, the wielder 
of the Vajra and king of the Devas. 

O Kurusattama, Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, of the mighty intellect, is at 
the time living close to that lake and is, with his wife Draupadi, celebrating 
the daily sacrifice called Rajarishi in accordance with the precepts laid 
down for Devas and forest dwellers. 

Duryodhana arrives near this very spot and commands his men, “Build 
pleasure palaces here without delay.’ 

The king’s loyal servants say Tathaastu and come to the lake’s shore to 
build the edifices that the king wants. As these hand-picked soldiers reach 
the shore of the lake and are about to enter the forest, a number of 
Gandharvas, led by their lord, appear before them and bar their way. 

Rajan, the Gandharva with his followers has already come here from 
Kubera’s kingdom; and, accompanied by the several tribes of Apsaras and 
by the sons of the Devas, he has come for his own entertainment. He has 
occupied the vana and closed it to all others. 

The attendants of the Kuru king, finding that the Gandharva king has 
barred entry to the lake, go back to Duryodhana. Haughty Duryodhana 
hears what they say and despatches a troop of his best warriors, difficult to 
defeat, and commands them to drive the Gandharvas away. 

These warriors, who form the vanguard of the Kuru army, come to the 
lake and say to the Gandharvas, ‘The mighty king Duryodhana, son of 
Dhritarashtra, is coming here. Make way for him.’ 

The Gandharvas laugh in their faces and reply roughly, ‘Your evil king 
must have lost his mind. Why else would he command Swargavasis, as if 
we were his servants? How foolish of you to rush here at his word to meet 
your deaths; you are impetuous fools to dare to bring us his message. 
Return at once to the king of the Kurus, or else go even now to Yamaloka.’ 

Frightened by the majesty and brilliance of the Gandharvas, that force 
flees back to where Dhritarashtra’s son Duryodhana waits impatiently.” 


CANTO 239 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Rajan, those soldiers return to Duryodhana and 
tell him what the Gandharvas said. Dhritarashtra’s powerful son is 
furious. 

He growls, ‘Even if they have come to sport with all the Devas and with 
him of the hundred sacrifices, kill the impudent Gandharvas.’ 

Dhritarashtra’s sons and the commanders of his army— mighty warriors 
all—and thousands of foot-soldiers arm for battle. They fill the air in the ten 
directions with loud roars and, rushing at the Gandharvas who guard the 
entrance, enter the vana. Even as the Kuru soldiers step into the forest, the 
fallen guards are replaced by other Gandharvas, who appear as if by magic 
and forbid them to advance. 

Although the Gandharvas speak politely, the Kuru soldiers disregard 
them and begin to make their way into that deep vana. 

When the sky-rangers find that Dhritarashtra’s warriors and their king 
cannot be stopped by words they go to their king Chitrasena and tell him 
what has happened. In rage, Chitrasena commands his followers, ‘Punish 
these wretches!’ 

The Gandharvas take up their weapons and charge Dhritarashtra’s 
troops. Seeing the celestial elves rushing towards them, weapons raised, the 
Kuru warriors flee in all directions, even as Duryodhana looks on. Only 
Karna remains, undeterred, while all the others turn their backs on the 
enemy and fly from the field. 


Karna stops the Gandharva force with a perfect storm of arrows. With 
amazing lightness of hand, the Sutaputra strikes hundreds of Gandharvas 
with kshurapra arrows, bhallas and weapons made of bone and iron. In no 
time, mighty Karna makes the heads of many Gandharvas roll, and 
Chitrasena’s forces begin to scream in anguish, in their musical voices. 

They are slaughtered in great numbers by Karna of the great intellect, 
but the Gandharvas return in hundreds of thousands. Swarms of 
Chitrasena’s warriors, rushing headlong into battle, soon cover the field, and 
the Earth itself seems to be filled by the unearthly host. 

Then, led by Karna, prince Duryodhana, Sakuni, Dussasana, Vikarna 
and the other sons of Dhritarashtra, riding chariots, the clamour of whose 
wheels is like the raucous cries of Garuda, attack the elves and begin to raze 
the Gandharva host. Eagerly behind Karna, these princes assault the 
Gandharva army with a great force of chariots and cavalry. 

Now all the Gandharva forces come to the fight against the Kauravas, 
and the encounter that takes place between the opposing armies is so fierce 
that it makes one’s hair stand on end. 

At last, afflicted by the arrows of the Kuru army, the Gandharvas appear 
to be exhausted, and seeing how spent the enemy is, the Kauravas send up a 
loud cheer. 

Chitrasena sees his host yielding to fear, and angrily leaps up, 
determined to annihilate the Kuru army. Using his sublime mastery at arms 
and his powers of maya, he continues the battle. The Kaurava warriors are 
bewildered by the illusions that Chitrasena invokes, which, Bhaarata, makes 
them believe that they are being attacked by ten Gandharvas each. 

The Kuru host is struck by panic, and all those who want to live, run 
from the field. While the entire Kaurava army breaks up and flees, Karna, 
son of Surya Deva, stands resolute, as immovable as a hill. 

Duryodhana, Karna and Sakuni also fight the Gandharvas, although 
every one of them has been sorely wounded. The Gandharvas rush in one 
massed force of hundreds of thousands against Karna, bent on killing him. 

They surround the Sutaputra and assail him with swords, battle-axes 
and spears. Some dissever the yoke of his chariot, some bring down his 
flagstaff, some his ratha’s shaft, some cut down his horses and some strike 
his sarathy. 

Some fell his regal parasol, some pulverise the wooden fender around 
his chariot, and some its joints. Thousands of Gandharvas attack his ratha in 


unison and smash it into little pieces. With his sword and shield, Karna 
leaps out of that ruined ratha, mounts Vikarna’s chariot and lashes the 
horses away to save himself.” 


CANTO 240 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “O king, when the Gandharvas succeed in 

chasing great Karna from field, the Kuru army scatters in panic, in 
the very sight of Dhritarashtra’s son. Although he sees his troops fleeing the 
battle, their backs to the enemy, Duryodhana stands his ground. He sees the 
mighty Gandharva warriors rushing towards him and showers them with a 
deluge of arrows. But the Gandharvas unconcernedly brush off his shafts 
and surround his chariot. 

With their own arrows, they chop its yoke into pieces; they shatter the 
shaft, the fenders, the flagstaff, the triple bamboo poles and the axle of his 
ratha; and they kill his charioteer and horses. 

Chitrasena sees Duryodhana flung from his ruined chariot onto the 
ground. The Gandharva king rushes at him and seizes him with such 
violence as if to wring life out of him. The Kuru king taken, the Gandharvas 
surround Dussasana and capture him. Some Gandharvas seize Vivimsati, 
some take Vinda and Anuvinda, while others take all the Kuru princesses 
and women of the royal household. 

Duryodhana’s personal guard quickly joins the men who have already 
fled the battle, and together they hasten to the Pandavas, who are living 
nearby. After Duryodhana’s capture by the Gandharvas, his men who are 
left alive place the Kuru chariots, mobile shops, pavilions, carriages and 
draught animals under the protection of the Pandavas. 


The Kaurava soldiers sob, ‘The handsome, mighty-armed son of 
Dhritarashtra has been taken captive by the Gandharvas. The Gandharvas 
are hauling away Dussasana, Durvisha, Durmukha and Durjaya in chains, 
and taking all the royal Kuru women as well. O sons of Pritha, rescue 
them!’ 

Wailing, Duryodhana’s attendants go to Yudhishtira and beg him to save 
their king. 

Bhima says to Duryodhana’s men, who are bowed with grief, ‘The 
Gandharvas have done our work for us. They have done what we should 
have done. The Kurus came here with some other vile purpose in mind but 
have been thwarted by circumstances they did not foresee. This is the result 
of the evil intention of a deceitful king. 

It is said that the enemy of a powerless man is overthrown by others. 
The Gandharvas have, in an extraordinary way, illustrated the truth of this 
adage before our eyes. It appears that someone in this world still wants our 
welfare, and has assumed that pleasant responsibility, though we sit doing 
nothing. 

The wretch came here to gloat over us—he wallowing in prosperity, and 
we sunk in poverty and emaciated by our austere life and the harsh 
elements. Those who behave like the evil-souled and wretched Kaurava are 
now witness to his disgrace. And he who persuaded Duryodhana to come 
also sinned. I say to you, it is not the sons of Kunti who are evil or sinful.’ 

Yudhishtira says sharply to Bhima, ‘This is not the time for such cruel 
words.’ ” 


CANTO 241 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “VY udhishtira says to his wild brother, ‘Child, why do you speak so 

harshly to the frightened Kurus, who are now in adversity and 

who have come to us for protection? Vrikodara, dissent and dispute often 

happen between blood relatives; hostilities such as these do go on, but the 
honour of the family must never suffer. 

If a stranger insults the honour of a family, good men do not tolerate it. 
The king of the Gandharvas knows that we have been living here for some 
time. Yet, he chooses to ignore us and does something that we abhor. My 
brother, Duryodhana’s capture and the insult to the women of our house by 
a stranger have tarnished our family honour. 

Tigers among men, rise and arm yourselves without delay, we must 
rescue our kin, who ask for our protection, and protect the honour of our 
kula. Purushavyaghra, Arjuna, the twins and you, all valiant and 
undefeated, must free Duryodhana who has been taken prisoner. 

These grand chariots, equipped with golden flagpoles and with weapons 
of all kinds that belong to Dhritarashtra’s sons are here. Take them, and use 
Indrasena and the other skilled sarathys to drive them; use all your might to 
quell the Gandharvas and rescue Duryodhana. 

Even an ordinary Kshatriya would do his utmost to protect one who 
comes to him for refuge; Vrikodara, from you I can expect no less. Who 
amongst us is so ignoble as to ignore the plea of even our enemy when we 
find him begging for help with joined hands? The bestowal of a boon, 


sovereignty and the birth of a son are sources of great joy. But, Pandavas, 
rescuing an enemy from peril is equal to all three put together. 

What can be a source of greater joy to you than Duryodhana, plunged in 
distress, depending on your prowess for his life? Vrikodara, if the tapasya 
that I am now engaged in had been complete, I would have rushed to help 
him myself. Do your very best, O Bhaarata, to rescue Duryodhana by 
placating the Gandharvas. If, however, the king of the Gandharvas spurns 
your efforts at conciliation, then you must free Suyodhana by means of a 
small fight. If the lord of the Gandharvas does not release the Kurus even 
then, you must rescue them by crushing the enemy by any means at your 
disposal. 

Bhima, I cannot say anymore, for my tapasya has begun and has not 
ended yet.’ ” 

Hearing Ajatasatru, out of reverence for his elder brother, Arjuna 
instantly swears to liberate the Kauravas. He says, ‘If the Gandharvas do 
not free the sons of Dhritarashtra peacefully, the Earth will drink the blood 
of their king today!’ 

When the Kauravas hear Arjuna, they regain their composure.” 


CANTO 242 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Listening to Yudhishtira, those bulls among 

men, led by Bhimasena, arise, their faces beaming. Those mighty 
warriors put on impenetrable armour inlaid with gold, and arm themselves 
with unearthly weapons of all kinds. The Pandavas mount the Kaurava 
chariots with their flagstaffs, and with their bows and arrows they blaze in 
fiery splendour. 

Riding those chariots drawn by the swiftest steeds, those tigers among 
warriors ride forth. Seeing the Pandavas riding to rescue Duryodhana, the 
Kuru army lets out a great cheer. 

Soon, the Gandharvas, the sky-rangers flushed with victory, see the sons 
of Pandu coming after them fearlessly through the forest. The Gandharvas 
see the four sons of Pandu riding to battle on their chariots, and they turn 
back to face the Kshatriyas. The residents of Gandhamadana see the 
Pandavas like the radiant Lokapalas, guardians of the world, inflamed and 
eager for a fight. 

O Bhaarata, in obedience to the wise Yudhishtira’s command, the first 
encounter is a mere skirmish. Arjuna Parantapa realises that it has not 
succeeded. He says to the Gandharvas in a conciliatory tone, ‘Release my 
brother Suyodhana.’ 

The Gandharvas laugh aloud and reply, ‘Young man, there is only one 
lord whose orders we obey, and under his rule we pass our days happily. 
Bhaarata, we do only what he says, and none can command us except him.’ 


Arjuna says to them, “Contact with other men’s wives and a fight with 
mortal men are reprehensible in a king of Gandharvas. Release the mighty 
sons of Dhritarashtra. Set the women free as well, as Yudhishtira 
Dharmaraja commands. If you Gandharvas do not release the sons of 
Dhritarashtra peacefully, I will use all my prowess to rescue Suyodhana and 
his people.’ 

With that the ambidextrous Arjuna unleashes a shower of arrows on the 
Gandharvas. The Gandharvas respond with an equal torrent of shafts, and 
the Pandavas retaliate in return. 

Bhaarata, fierce is the battle that rages between the agile and 
effervescent Gandharvas and the now impetuous sons of Pandu.” 


CANTO 243 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Decked in golden garlands, and masters of the 

astra of heaven, the Gandharvas blaze their arrows at the Pandavas 
from every side. Since the sons of Pandu number only four and the 
Gandharvas are thousands, the battle that ensues is extraordinary. The 
Gandharvas try to shatter the chariots of the four Pandavas as they did the 
Kauravas’. But these tigers among men easily resist the hosts of elves who 
rush at them. 

Those formidable rangers of skies are arrested on all sides and cannot 
come near the Pandavas. 

Arjuna, provoked, prepares to loose his Devastras at the enraged and 
frustrated Gandharvas. His Agneyastra sends a hundred thousand 
Gandharvas to Yamaloka. Bhima, foremost of all warriors in battle, kills 
hundreds of elves with razorlike arrows. And the powerful sons of Madri, 
battling with scarcely credible energy, encounter hundreds of Gandharvas, 
O king, and kill them all. 

As the Gandharvas are razed by the Pandavas with divine astras, they 
fly up into the sky, taking the sons of Dhritarashtra with them. But seeing 
them go, Arjuna shrouds them with a net of magic arrows, trapping them 
like birds in a cage. In fury, they cast maces, spears and swords down at 
Arjuna, but he, the master of astras, easily repels the attack; Dhananjaya 
retaliates, mangling Gandharva limbs with his crescent-tipped barbs. 


Heads, legs and arms begin to fall from the sky in a cascade, and the 
sight strikes the enemy with panic. The Gandharvas now rain a downpour 
of shafts on Arjuna, who stands on the ground. That Kshatriya stills the 
elven shower of arrows with his own, also gravely wounding the 
Gandharvas. 

Arjuna summons all his famed astras: Sthunakarna, Indrajala, Saura, 
Agneya and Saumya. The Gandharvas are consumed by the fiery weapons 
of Kunti’s son and suffer great losses even as the sons of Diti did when they 
were torched by Sakra’s thunderbolt. When they attack Arjuna from above, 
his thick mesh of arrows contains theirs; when they attack him from all 
sides on the ground, his crescent-tipped arrows hold theirs off. 

Chitrasena sees that the Gandharvas are terrified by Kunti’s son and, 
Bhaarata, rushes at Dhananjaya with his mace. 

As the king of the Gandharvas hurtles down on Arjuna from above, 
mace in hand, Arjuna splits that mace into seven pieces with his immaculate 
archery. Chitrasena resorts to maya and continues the fight, now invisible to 
the Pandava. Arjuna uses many a Devastra to repel all the unworldly 
weapons that the Gandharva casts at him and, when Chitrasena, mantled in 
maya, now appearing, now disappearing, sees that the son of Kunti still 
confounds him, the Gandharva vanishes entirely. 

Seeing the lord of the Gandharvas vanish, Arjuna, chanting the proper 
mantras, invokes an astra to rend Chitrasena’s cloak of invisibility. 
Dhananjaya of the many forms, full of rage, fetches the Gandharva lord 
back into plain sight with the weapon Sabdaveda. 

Assailed by the illustrious Arjuna, his beloved friend Chitrasena reveals 
himself and says, ‘Behold, it is your friend who fights you!’ 

Arjuna sees that Chitrasena is tired and withdraws his astras. Seeing 
this, the other Pandavas hold their wind-swift horses and check their 
weapons, and put away their bows. 

Chitrasena, Bhima, Arjuna and the twins sit on their chariots and 
solicitously enquire about one another’s welfare.” 


CANTO 244 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Arjuna smiles and says to Chitrasena who now 

stands in the midst of his Gandharva host, ‘My friend, what do you 
achieve by punishing the Kauravas? Why do you chastise Suyodhana and 
his wives?’ 

Chitrasena replies, ‘Dhananjaya, long before I arrived here, I knew why 
the evil Duryodhana and the wretched Karna were coming here. They knew 
that you are exiles in the forest and that you suffer, as if you had no one to 
protect you. These vile men wanted to enjoy the sight of your adversity 
while they themselves are flush with prosperity. They came here to mock 
you and the chaste Draupadi. 

The Lord Indra divined their purpose, too, and he said to me, “Go and 
bring Duryodhana to me in chains, along with his confederates. Always 
protect Dhananjaya and his brothers in battle, for Arjuna is your dear friend 
and disciple.” 

At the behest of the king of the Devas I came here at once. I have the 
unscrupulous prince in chains, and I will take this sinner now to Devaloka, 
to Devendra.’ 

Arjuna says, ‘O Chitrasena, if you want to please me, set Suyodhana 
free, for this is the wish of my brother Yudhishtira Dharmaraja.’ 

Chitrasena says, “This sinner is always full of vanity. He does not 
deserve to be released. Arjuna, he has deceived and wronged both 


Yudhishtira and Krishnaa. The Dharmaraja does not know why this wretch 
came here. Let the king do as he likes, but only after he knows everything.’ 

All of them go to Yudhishtira Dharmaraja and tell him about 
Duryodhana. Ajatasatru hears everything that the Gandharvas say and asks 
them to set the Kauravas free. 

He says, ‘How fortunate we are that you did not kill the son of 
Dhritarashtra and all his advisors and kin, though, with your powers you 
could easily have done so. O Gandharvas, you have done me a great 
kindness; you will restore the honour of my clan by releasing this evil man. 

I am happy to see you. Command me; tell me what I can do for you. 
You can return to your home on high once you have what you wish.’ 

The Gandharvas are pleased with what the wise Pandava says and 
Chitrasena leads his Gandharvas and Apsaras home. The Lord of the Devas 
comes there and revives the Gandharvas that the Kauravas killed in battle 
by sprinkling divine amrita over them. 

The Pandavas are gratified that they have freed their cousins, their other 
relatives and the women of the royal household. Those awesome Kshatriyas 
glow in splendour, like fires blazing in a yagnasala, as the Kurus, their 
wives and sons pay homage to them. 

Yudhishtira then addresses Duryodhana in the midst of his brothers, 
saying affectionately, ‘Child, never do such an imprudent thing again. 
Bhaarata, a rash man never achieves happiness. Kurunandana, may you and 
your brothers be blessed! Go back to your capital whenever you wish, 
without sorrow or despair.’ 

When the son of Pandu gives him leave to go, Duryodhana salutes 
Yudhishtira Dharmaraja and, his heart torn with shame, sets out woodenly 
for Hastinapura, like one whose very life has left him. After the Kaurava 
prince has gone, the Brahmanas adulate the noble Yudhishtira and his 
heroic brothers, even like the Devas worship Sakra; and surrounded by 
those Brahmanas rich in tapasyashakti, Yudhishtira passes his days 
contentedly in Dwaita vana.” 


CANTO 245 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


anamejaya said, “After his defeat and capture by the Gandharvas, and 

his rescue by the illustrious sons of Pandu, it seems to me that the 
entry into Hastinapura of the proud, evil, vicious, insolent Duryodhana, 
who so enjoyed insulting the Pandavas and bragging about his own 
superiority, must have been difficult. Describe it to me in detail, O 
Vaisampayana. How did that prince enter his city, overwhelmed as he was 
with shame and unmanned by grief?” 

Vaisampayana_ said, “Dismissed by Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, 
Dhritarashtra’s son Suyodhana bends his head in shame and, tormented by 
shame and melancholy, sets out slowly. He rides towards his city, 
accompanied by his four forces, his heart ruptured by sorrow and his mind 
filled with the memory of his defeat. 

Along the way, in a place lush with grass and plentiful water, the king 
makes camp, with his elephants, horses, foot-soldiers and chariots. 

Duryodhana is seated on a raised bedstead that is as magnificent as a 
burning fire, looking like the eclipsed moon, when, towards the small hours 
of the morning, Karna arrives there and says to him, ‘Son of Gandhari, it is 
fortunate indeed that you are alive, and fortunate, too, that we meet again. It 
is by great fortune that you vanquished the Gandharvas, who can assume 
any form at will. And, Kurunandana, it is by good fortune alone that I see 
that your mighty brothers have vanquished their foes and emerged 
victorious. 


As for myself, assailed by the Gandharvas, I fled before your very eyes 
and could not rally our terrified forces. My body mangled by enemy arrows, 
I sought safety. Bhaarata, I marvel at seeing all of you emerge safe and 
sound, with your wives, troops and chariots, out of that superhuman 
encounter. 

No other man in this world could do what you, O king, with your 
brothers, have achieved in battle today.’ 

But Duryodhana replies to the king of the Angas in a voice choked with 
tears.” 


CANTO 246 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) uryodhana says, ‘O Radheya, you do not know what happened 

and so I am not upset by what you say. You think that it is with 
my prowess that I killed the hostile Gandharvas. Mahabaho, my brothers 
and I did indeed engage in a long battle with the sky-rangers. Both sides 
suffered heavy casualties. But when the Gandharvas took to the air with 
their magical powers and began to fight us from there, our contention 
became unequal. We were defeated and taken captive. 

The Gandharvas took us, snared like animals in a net and in agony; they 
carried away our troops, our chariots, our wives and our children through 
the skies. It was then that some of our bold men went in despair to the sons 
of Pandu, those Kshatriyas that never refuse help to those that ask for it. 

They said to the Pandavas, “Duryodhana, the son of Dhritarashtra, with 
his younger brothers, his friends and wives, has been captured and is being 
borne away through the sky by Gandharvas. Blessings be upon you! 
Liberate the king and the women of the royal household. Do not allow the 
royal ladies to be insulted.” 

When they said this, Pandu’s eldest son, that virtuous soul, pacified his 
brothers and commanded them to free us. Those four bulls among men 
overtook the Gandharvas and asked them gently to release us, although they 
could have easily secured our freedom with their prodigious strength. 

Though addressed in conciliatory words, the Gandharvas refused to 
release us. Then Arjuna, Bhima and the twins shot arrows at the sky- 


rangers, who abandoned the fight and fled through the sky, gleefully 
dragging us behind them in our stricken state. Immediately, we saw 
Dhananjaya spread a net of arrows all around and, at the same time, loose 
his Devastras at the enemy. Seeing all the horizon covered by Arjuna’s 
arrowy net, Arjuna’s friend, the Gandharva king, revealed himself. 

Chitrasena and Arjuna embraced each other and enquired after each 
other’s welfare. The other sons of Pandu also embraced the lord of the 
Gandharvas and were embraced by him in return, and warm and courteous 
civilities passed between them as well. The Gandharvas threw down their 
weapons and armour and mingled in friendship with the Pandavas. And 
Chitrasena and Dhananjaya lovingly worshipped each other.’ ” 


CANTO 247 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) uryodhana says, ‘Arjuna smilingly said to Chitrasena, “Best of 
Gandharvas, you must release my brothers. They will not be 
humiliated as long as the sons of Pandu live.” 

O Karna, the lord of the Gandharvas then disclosed our reason for 
having gone there: that we went there to feast our eyes on the plight of the 
Pandavas and their wife. 

When the Gandharva exposed us, I was so ashamed that I wished the 
earth would open and swallow me. The Gandharvas and the Pandavas went 
to Yudhishtira and, after telling him why we had gone there, handed us over 
to him. What greater sorrow could be mine than that I should be offered as a 
tribute to Yudhishtira in the very sight of the women of our household, 
bound in chains and miserable, a prisoner of my enemies. They that I have 
always maligned and tormented, to whom I have always been an enemy, 
released me and, wretch that I am, I owe them my life. It would have been 
far better to have died in battle than for my life to have been spared in this 
way. If the Gandharvas had killed me, my fame would have spread across 
the Earth and I would have attained eternal bliss in Indraloka. 

Listen, O Manavarishabhas, to what I intend to do next. I will remain 
here, not eating, while you return home. Let all my brothers also go to 
Hastinapura; let all our friends, including Karna, and all our relatives led 
now by Dussasana return to the city of the elephant. 


My enemies have shamed me, and I will not go to Hastinapura. I, who 
stripped my adversaries of honour, who always enhanced the esteem of my 
friends, have now become a source of shame to my own and one of joy to 
my enemies. 

What will I say to the king if I go to Hastinapura? What will Bhishma, 
Drona, Kripa, Drona’s son, Vidura, Sanjaya, Bahuka, Somadatta and other 
revered elders say to me? What will the elders of the other varnas and the 
prominent men of independent professions say to me, and how will I 
answer them? 

Until now, I have stood over the heads of my enemies and planted my 
feet on their breasts, but now I have fallen. How can I ever face or speak to 
them? Insolent men who become prosperous and gain knowledge and 
affluence are rarely blessed for long, even like me who was puffed up with 
vanity. Alas, folly led me to a vile path, and because of my foolishness, I 
have sunk to these depths. 

And so, I will starve myself to death for my life has become unbearable. 
What man wants to drag out his days after he has been saved by his enemy? 
Proud as I am, my enemy stripped me of my dignity and laughed at me. The 
Pandavas have seen me plunged in wretchedness.’ 

Now Duryodhana turns to Dussasana, “‘O Dussasana, listen to me. 
Bhaarata, be king in my place. Rule the earth, protected by Karna and 
Subala’s son. Just as Indra looks after the Maruts, take care of your brothers 
in such a way that they will rest their faith and confidence in you. Let our 
friends and relatives depend on you, like the gods depend on him of the 
hundred yagnas. 

Always bestow wealth on Brahmanas, promptly, and always be the 
refuge of your friends and family. As Vishnu looks after the Devas, you 
must look after all your relatives. You must always cherish your gurus. Go, 
rule the earth; gladden your friends and chastise your foes.’ 

And embracing Dussasana, Duryodhana says, “Go!” 

Dussasana is overwhelmed by sorrow when he hears this; his voice 
choked and with hands joined prayerfully, he bows his head and says to his 
elder brother, ‘Relent.’ 

His heart so heavy, he falls on the ground; in searing grief, that tiger 
among men sheds tears on his brother’s feet and says, “Never! This will 
never be. The Earth may split, the vault of the Sky may shatter, the Sun may 
cast off his splendour, the Moon abandon his coolness, the Wind forsake his 


speed, Himavat may move from his place, the waters of the Ocean may dry 
up and Fire renounce his heat; but I, O king, will not rule the earth without 
you.’ 

Repeatedly saying, ‘Relent, Rajan, you alone shall be king of our race 
for a hundred years’, Dussasana weeps at the feet of his elder brother, 
whom he adores, O Bhaarata. 

Seeing Dussasana and Duryodhana sobbing, Karna says to them, ‘O 
Kuru princes, why do you give in to sorrow like children, like ordinary 
men? Crying can never ease a man’s grief; what do you gain by giving way 
to sorrow? Summon patience; do not give your enemies cause to be joyful. 

Suyodhana, the Pandavas only did their duty by freeing you. The 
subjects of a king must always do what is pleasing to the king. The 
Pandavas are living happily in your kingdom and under your protection. It 
is not fitting for you to indulge your anguish, like any common man. Look, 
how despondent your brothers are to hear that you want to put an end to 
your life. May you be blessed! Arise! Return to your city and console your 
brothers.’ 


CANTO 248 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


= K arna says, ‘O king, your conduct is immature. Kshatriya, what is 

sO surprising in the Pandavas saving you when you were 

defeated by the enemy? Those that live in the dominions of a king, 

especially those who are warriors, must always do what is good for the 
king, whether their monarch knows them or not. 

Often, Kshatriyas who raze the ranks of an enemy are finally 
vanquished by them, and are then rescued by their own troops. Warriors 
living in a king’s realm should always unite and do their utmost for their 
king. 

If the Pandavas, who live in your kingdom, freed you, why should you 
grieve? Indeed, that the Pandavas did not follow you when you went into 
battle is unforgivable. They live under your authority and have become your 
slaves. They are honour-bound to help you, who are brave and strong and 
never turn away from the field of battle. 

You now own the Pandavas’ wealth. They are still alive; they have not 
resolved to fast to their deaths! 

Rise up, my king. It is not fitting for you to indulge in such despair for 
long. It is the bounden duty of everyone in the kingdom to do what is in the 
king’s best interest. Where is the cause for distress in what happened? 

If you do not do as I say, I will remain here by your side, worshipping 
your feet. Purusharishabha, I have no wish to live without you. If you 


decide to kill yourself by fasting, you will only become the laughing-stock 
of other kings.’ 

Even after hearing what Karna says, Duryodhana remains unmoved and 
does not stir from where he sits.” 


CANTO 249 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Normally incapable of tolerating an insult, 
Duryodhana sits resolutely determined to fast to death, and seeing 
this, Subala’s son Sakuni consoles him. 

Sakuni says, “Scion of the Kurus, you heard what Karna said. He speaks 
wisely. Why would you so foolishly throw away the enormous wealth I won 
for you by giving up your life today, Rajan, through this silliness? 

It seems to me that you have never paid heed to what wise old men say. 
He who cannot control sudden occurrences of joy or sorrow is lost even 
though he may have prospered, even like an unfired earthen vessel filled 
with water. Subjects seldom respect the king who is destitute of courage, 
who has no spark of manliness, who is the slave of procrastination, who is 
indiscreet, or who is addicted to sensual pleasures. 

With all the good fortune you enjoy, where does this unreasonable grief 
of yours spring from? Do not negate this graciousness of Pritha’s sons by 
indulging your grief. Why do you grieve, and reward the Pandavas, when 
you should be joyful? Ah, your behaviour is inconsistent. Be cheerful; do 
not throw your life away; instead, remember with a grateful heart the favour 
they have done you. 

Return their kingdom to Pritha’s sons, and thereby win honour and 
fame. In that way, you can show your gratitude. Establish brotherly 
relations with the Pandavas, in friendship, and give them back their father’s 
kingdom. Then you will be happy!’ 


Hearing what Sakuni says, and seeing the valiant Dussasana lying 
prostrate before him, and overcome by fraternal love, the king raises 
Dussasana up and, clasping him in his mighty arms, sniffs his head in 
affection. Karna and Saubala’s words move Duryodhana to shame, and utter 
dejection grips his soul. 

Sorrowfully, he responds to his friends, ‘I have no more need of virtue, 
wealth, friendship, affluence, sovereignty or pleasure. Do not try to move 
me; leave me, all of you. I am firmly resolved to fast to my death. Return to 
Hastina and pay your respects to our elders.’ 

They reply to that grinder of his foes, “Whatever course you take, we 
shall, too, Bhaarata. How can we enter the city without you?’ 

Whatever his friends and advisors say to him, the king does not waver 
in his determination. Dhritarashtra’s son spreads kusa grass on the ground, 
purifies himself with water and sits down. He casts away his royal robes, 
covers himself in rags and grass, and vows to observe Atikatora, the most 
difficult tapasya. Falling silent, that tiger among kings, his mind focused on 
Swarga, begins to pray, shutting out the outside world. 

Meanwhile, the fierce Daityas and Danavas, whom the Devas defeated 
long ago, and who live in Patala, the nether realms, find out about 
Duryodhana’s vow and, knowing that if he dies they will be immeasurably 
weakened, begin a yagna with fire, to fetch Duryodhana into their presence. 

Demons, masters of dark mantras, using the methods declared by 
Brihaspati and Usanas, conduct rites prescribed in the Atharva Veda and the 
Upanishads. Brahmana Asuras of rigid vows, versed in the Vedas and their 
many branches, prayerfully pour libations of ghee and milk into the fire 
whilst chanting mantras. After those rituals have been completed, O king, a 
macabre and dreadful female spirit, with a yawning maw, rises from the 
sacrificial fire and asks to be commanded. 

The Daityas command her, “Bring the royal son of Dhritarashtra here 
from where he keeps a fast to end his life.’ She vanishes, saying, So be it. 

She goes in an instant to where Suyodhana sits, picks the king up bodily 
and carries him back to Patala, to the great Danavas. The Danavas see the 
king, who is brought into their midst in the night, and together they address 
Duryodhana with flattery, their hearts full of hope and their eyes wide with 
delight.” 


CANTO 250 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


: a he Danavas say, ‘O Suyodhana, great king, perpetuator of the 
Bhaaratas, you are living in the company of heroic and illustrious 
men. Why have you sworn this harsh vow of fasting to the death? The man 
that commits suicide sinks into hell and everyone speaks ill of him. 
Intelligent men like you never commit such sins, which are contrary to their 
own interests and that strike at the very root of their purpose. Set aside your 
resolve: it is against dharma, destroys profit, happiness, fame, prowess and 
energy, and enhances the joy of your enemies. 

Rajan, realise the truth of the divine origin of your soul and your body; 
summon patience to your aid. 

Long ago, Maheswara gave you to us as a reward for our tapasya. 
Anagha, your upper body is composed entirely of thunder, Vajra, and is 
invulnerable to any weapon. The lower part of your body, which can 
captivate a woman’s heart by its physical beauty, was made of flowers by 
Mahadeva’s wife, the Devi herself. Best of kings, your body is the creation 
of Maheswara and his consort. Purushavyaghra, you are not of human 
origin, but celestial. 

Other brave Kshatriyas of mighty energy, headed by Bhagadatta, all of 
whom have knowledge of Devastras, will kill your enemies. Let this grief 
of yours end now. You have no need to be afraid. There are countless heroic 
Danavas who have been born into the world with the sole purpose of 
helping you. 


Other Asuras will insinuate themselves into the atmas of Bhishma, 
Drona, Karna and the rest. Possessed by them, these heroes will shed their 
dharma and fight your enemies. When the Danavas enter their hearts and 
possess them completely they will cast aside their compassion and, 
becoming savage and cruel, these warriors will strike down everybody who 
stands against them, not even sparing sons, brothers, fathers, friends, 
disciples, relatives, nor even children and old men. As destined by Brahma, 
ignorance and rage will drive these tigers among men. Their hearts steeped 
in sin, they will, O Kurusattama, depopulate the earth with all kinds of 
weapons, with manly prowess and strength, all the while boasting to their 
victims, You will not escape me with your life. 

These are the men that the Pandavas, who are just five, will face. Vested 
with uncanny strength and favoured by Destiny, the Danavas will entirely 
destroy the sons of Pandu. Rajan, many Daityas and Rakshasas have been 
born as Kshatriyas, and they, too, will fight your enemies, with arrows, 
maces, swords, spears and astras as well. 

As for the fear that rests in your heart because of Arjuna, we have 
already decided how to kill him. The atma of the slain Narakasura has 
assumed the form of Karna. In this form, he will remember his ancient 
hatred and he will kill both Krishna and Arjuna. This Maharatha and best of 
all warriors, who is proud of his ability, will vanquish Arjuna and all your 
enemies in battle. 

Knowing all this and wanting to save Arjuna, Indra, the wielder of the 
Vajra, will disguise himself as a Brahmana and take from him Karna’s 
kavacha and kundala, the golden armour and earrings that make Karna 
invincible. 

Also, to this end we have sent hundreds of thousands of Daityas and 
Rakshasas into the world. They shall be known as Samsaptakas, and these 
inexorable warriors will slay the heroic Arjuna. 

Therefore, Rajan, grieve not. You will rule the earth without a rival. Do 
not yield to despondency; it does not suit you. If you die, all our kind will 
be weakened. Come, Kshatriya, do not even think of anything other that 
annihilating your enemies. You are our refuge, in the same way that the 
Pandavas are the refuge of the Devas.’ 

The Daityas embrace that best of kings, and the Danavarishabhas, bulls 
among Danavas, cheer that irrepressible hero as if he is a son. Bhaarata, 


they steady his mind with soft words of deep enchantment and then allow 
him to leave, saying, ‘Go and be victorious!’ 

The female spirit bears Duryodhana back to the place where he sat. She 
sets the Kshatriya down and pays him homage. Then she vanishes. 

Bhaarata, when she has gone, Duryodhana reflects on all that has 
happened, as if it were a dream. He says within himself, ‘I shall defeat the 
Pandavas in battle,’ and convinced that Karna and the Samsaptaka legions 
will kill Arjuna, Dhritarashtra’s evil son becomes strong with hope. 

At this very hour, Karna is possessed by the soul of Narakasura and his 
heart hardens further in determination to kill Arjuna. The Samsaptakas, 
their souls taken by the Daityas, and under the control of fell influences, 
also become intent on slaying Phalguna. Bhishma, Drona and Kripa, they 
too possessed by the Danavas, lose their fondness for the Pandavas. And 
Suyodhana does not reveal what he now knows to anyone. 

When the night has passed Suryaputra Karna says Duryodhana, with his 
palms folded in respect, ‘A dead man never conquered his enemies. It is 
only alive that he achieves anything. Of what use is a dead man? O 
Kaurava, where is his victory? I say to you, this is no time for grief, or fear, 
or death.’ 

He embraces his beloved friend, ‘Arise, O king! Why do you lie down? 
Why do you grieve, Parantapa? Having afflicted your adversaries with your 
strength, why do you wish for death? Does fear grip you at the sight of 
Arjuna? I promise you this: I will slay Dhananjaya in battle. Lord of men, I 
swear by my sacred bow that before the thirteen years are over, I will bring 
the sons of Pritha to their knees before you.’ 

When he hears what Karna says, he remembers the words of the 
Daityas, as well as the pleas of his brothers, and Suyodhana rises. The 
Demons’ words have given this Purushavyaghra strength of resolve. He 
arrays his army, of vast numbers of horses, elephants, chariots and foot- 
soldiers. With great, royal white parasols, flags and white chamara whisks, 
with chariots, elephants and foot-soldiers, that army moves like the majestic 
Ganga, looking as glorious as the sky after the monsoon, when the clouds 
have dispersed and autumn has signalled its arrival. 

Rajadhiraja, king of kings, Brahmanas bless Suyodhana to be victorious 
and sing his praises. Dhritarashtra’s son leads his army, receiving the 
honour of uncountable hands joined in homage to him, flaming in splendour 
and flanked by Karna and that gambler Sakuni. All his brothers with 


Dussasana at their head, and Bhurisrava, and Somadatta, and the dauntless 
king Bahlika follow that lion among kings as he marches with a multitude 
of chariots, horses and the strongest, most massive elephants. Best of kings, 
shortly the Kauravas enter Hastinapura.” 


CANTO 251 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


anamejaya said, “What did sons of Dhritarashtra, those best of men, 

superb archers, do while the Pandavas lived in the forest? And how 
did Karna, Sakuni, Bhishma, Drona and Kripa occupy themselves during 
that time? Tell me all this.” 

Vaisampayana said, “O Maharajan, after the Pandavas have freed him, 
Suyodhana goes to Hastinapura, where Bhishma says to him in the Kuru 
sabha, ‘Child, I told you when you were determined to go to the forest that I 
was not happy with your plan. You went anyway and you were taken 
captive by the Gandharvas and then rescued by the honourable Pandavas. 
Still, you are not ashamed. 

O son of Gandhari, you saw how the Suta’s son panicked and fled from 
the Gandharvas with your army. In your distress, you saw for yourself the 
prowess of the noble Pandavas, and also that of Karna, the sinful Sutaputra. 
Karna cannot measure up to a quarter of even one Pandava, be it in the 
Astra Shastra, in courage, or in dharma. For the weal of this house of Kuru, 
it is best you make peace with the Pandavas.’ 

Dhritarashtra’s son laughs impudently at Bhishma and abruptly walks 
out with Sakuni. His brothers, mighty bowmen all, with Karna and 
Dussasana at their head follow Duryodhana, not knowing where he goes. 
Pitamaha Bhishma, the grandsire of the Kurus, hangs his head and retires 
sadly to his apartments. 


After Bhishma has left, Dhritarashtra’s son returns to the sabha and 
consults his advisors. He says, “What is the best course for me to adopt? Is 
there something else I should do? Let us discuss how we can achieve what 
is best for us.’ 

Karna says, ‘Duryodhana, take to heart what I am going to say. 
Bhishma always blames us and praises the Pandavas because he dislikes 
you. He hates me as well; he always insults me in your presence. I will 
never forget what Bhishma said to you, when he extolled the Pandavas and 
berated you, Parantapa. My king, give me command of your men, your 
armies and your chariots, and I will conquer the Earth with her mountains, 
woods and forests. It took four powerful Pandavas to subdue Bhumi, but I 
will do it single-handedly. 

Let that dreg of the Kuru race, the evil-minded Bhishma, who reproves 
the innocent and praises the undeserving, witness my might and feel 
ashamed of himself. O Rajan, only command me; and victory will surely be 
yours. This I swear to you by my bow.’ 

Listening to Karna, Duryodhana is delighted and says to him, ‘I am 
blessed with the wealth of your friendship! You are endowed with 
unrivalled strength and devoted to me. My life has borne fruit today. Go, O 
valiant one, and vanquish all my enemies as you intend. May good fortune 
follow you! Command me; what shall I do for you?’ 

Karna loses no time in gathering all that he needs for his expedition. 
Then, on a good day of the lunar calendar, at an opportune moment, and 
under the influence of a nakshatra presided over by an auspicious deity, he 
sets out. The Dvijas honour him, the Brahmanas pour auspicious and holy 
water over him in blessing, and all who are gathered sing his praises as he 
goes forward, filling the three worlds, its mobile and immovable beings, 
with the rumble of his chariot wheels.” 


CANTO 252 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana continued, “With a teeming army, Karna besieges 

Drupada’s beautiful city. After a hard-fought battle, Karna quells 
Drupada, makes him surrender his gold, silver and jewels, and also makes 
him pay a tribute to Duryodhana. Once he has defeated Drupada, he goes on 
to subdue the vassal kings and extracts tribute from them as well. 

He turns northwards and brings those kings under his sway. After 
defeating the unvanquished Bhagadatta, Radheya Karna climbs to the top of 
the colossal Himavat, crushing all whom he encounters on the way. He 
conquers all the kings living on the Himavat Mountain and makes them all 
pay him rich tributes. 

Descending from the mountain and moving to the east, he subdues the 
Angas, and the Vangas, the Kalingas and the Shundikas, the Magadhas and 
the Karkakhandas, Avasiras, Yodhyas and the Ahikshatras. Having 
conquered all the east, Karna goes on to subdue Vatsabhumi, Kevala, 
Mrittikavati and Mohana; and Pattana, Tripura and Kosala, and forces 
tribute from them, as well. 

He turns his attention to the south, where he vanquishes the Maharathas 
of those kingdoms. There, the Sutaputra encounters Rukmi. 

After a dreadful battle, Rukmi says to Karna, ‘Rajendra, foremost of 
kings, I am impressed by your strength. I will do you no wrong; I have only 
fulfilled Kshatriya dharma. I will gladly give you as many gold coins as you 
wish.’ 


Karna proceeds, then, to the Pandya kingdom and to the Mountain Sri. 
Defeating king Nila of Kerala, Venudari’s son and other mighty kings of the 
southern kingdoms, he extracts tribute from all of them. The Sutaputra goes 
on to crush Sisupala’s son, and brings all the neighbouring rulers under his 
dominion. 

Bharatarishabha, he subjugates the Avantis and makes peace with them; 
he defeats the Vrishnis and conquers the west. He goes to the sea kingdoms 
of Varuna and makes the Yavana and Barbara kings pay him tribute. 

Thus, the peerless Karna conquers all the kingdoms of the north, south, 
east and west. That hero single-handedly subdues all the Mlechcha nations, 
the mountain kingdoms, the Bhadras, the Rohitakas, the Agreyas and the 
Malavas. He defeats the mightiest chariot-warriors and the Sasakas and the 
Yavanas. 

Having conquered the whole world, this Maharatha, Purushavyaghra 
Karna returns to Hastinapura. 

Dhritarashtra’s son, with his father and his brothers and friends, comes 
out of his gates and greets Karna; and he pays homage to the warrior 
crowned with victory. The king proclaims his feats and says, “You have 
given me what no one else has, not even Bhishma, Drona, Kripa or Bahlika. 
May God bless you! 

What need is there for lengthy speeches, when in you, Karna, 
Janeswara, god among men, I have my refuge? Mahabaho, Narapumgava, 
neither all the Pandavas nor any of the other prosperous kings measures up 
to a sixteenth of you. Karna, look on Dhritarashtra and the illustrious 
Gandhari as the Vajradhari does upon Aditi.’ 

A great uproar rises in the city of Hastinapura; a great clamour and cries 
of both Oh! and Alas! fill the air. Some of the kings praise Karna, while 
others censure him, and some say nothing. 

In such short time, Karna has conquered the Earth, replete with her 
mountains, forests and skies, her oceans and islands, her fields, highlands 
and lowlands, and her cities. Lord of Earth, he has brought kings under his 
control and garnered endless wealth. Thus does the Suta’s son present 
himself to the king and, entering the palace, the hero stands before 
Dhritarashtra and Gandhari. Karna, learned in dharma, takes Dhritarashtra’s 
feet in his hands, as a son would; and Dhritarashtra embraces him 
affectionately before allowing him to leave. 


From then on, Rajan, king Duryodhana and Subala’s son Sakuni 
consider that Pritha’s sons have already been defeated and slain by Karna.” 


CANTO 253 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Lord of men, the Suta’s son, slayer of hostile 

Kshatriyas, says to Duryodhana, “‘Suyodhana, keep the words that I 
now say to you close to your heart, because, Parantapa, after having heard 
me, you must do as I say. I have rid the Earth of your enemies. Now rule 
her as Sakra does Devaloka after destroying his enemies.’ 

The king replies, ‘Nothing is unattainable to him who has you at his 
side, to whom you are devoted and whose welfare you have at heart. I have 
a plan which I want you to hear. Listen. 

Ever since I saw the Pandavas performing the wonderful Rajasuya 
yagna, I have wanted to celebrate that very yagna. You must make this wish 
come true.’ 

Karna says to the king, ‘Now that you have conquered all the rulers of 
the Earth, you may summon the chief Brahmanas and, procuring whatever 
you need for the sacrifice, undertake it in glory, O Best of Kurus. Let the 
Ritwiks celebrate the Rajasuya yagna in accordance with the rules laid 
down in the Vedas. Begin your great yagna, Bharatarishabha; let it be grand, 
abounding in meat and drink, and indeed an abundance of all things rare 
and desirable.’ 

Duryodhana summons the priest and says to him, ‘I want you to 
celebrate that greatest of sacrifices, the Rajasuya yagna, with abundant 
gifts.’ 


The Brahmanottama says to the king, ‘Lord of the Kauravas, as long as 
Yudhishtira lives, this sacrifice cannot be performed in your clan. 
Furthermore, your father, too, is still living. Rajottama, you cannot 
undertake this yagna. 

There is another great sacrifice that is similar, even equal to the 
Rajasuya. Perform that yagna, Rajan. Listen to me. 

All the rulers of the Earth who have become your vassals will pay you 
tribute in gold, in various degrees of purity. Use that gold to make the 
sacrificial plough and, Bhaarata, plough the site for the yagnashala with it. 
There, with the proper rituals, and undisturbed, begin your sacrifice, 
Rajadhiraja. Sanctify it with mantras and serve all manner of delicious food 
in plenty. 

This sacrifice, worthy of the most virtuous men, is called the Vaishnava. 
No one other than the ancient Vishnu himself has ever performed it before. 
This wondrous sacrifice compares with the Rajasuya. Moreover, it will 
prove most beneficial to you. You can celebrate it without any obstacles, 
and your desire will be fulfilled.’ 

When the Brahmanas say this, Dhritarashtra’s son says to Karna, his 
brothers and Sakuni says, ‘I like what the Brahmana says. Tell me if you 
also approve.’ 

They all say, ‘Tathaastu, so be it’. 

Duryodhana appoints his people, one by one, to various tasks; he 
arranges for artisans to make the sacrificial plough; and all that needs to be 
done is gradually accomplished.” 


CANTO 254 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “All the sculptors, the chief advisors and the wise 

Vidura approach Dhritarashtra’s son and say to him, ‘The 
preparations for the great sacrifice are complete; the time is right, Bhaarata. 
The precious golden plough is ready.’ 

Duryodhana commands the commencement of that mahayagna. The 
Vaishnava yagna begins, sanctified by mantras, and with an abundance of 
food being served. The son of Gandhari is initiated as the sacrificer; and 
Vidura, Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna and Gandhari are happy indeed. 
Duryodhana sends swift messengers to invite Kshatriyas and Brahmanas 
from across Bharatavarsha and they go forth on fleet chariots with the 
king’s invitation. 

Then, to one of the messengers about to set out, Dussasana says, “Go to 
Dwaita vana and invite the Brahmanas and the black-hearted Pandavas.’ 

That man comes to the hermitage beside the lake and, bowing to the 
Pandavas, says, ‘Having acquired immense wealth through his prowess, the 
Kuru prince Duryodhana is performing a yagna. Kings and Brahmanas from 
all over the holy land will attend his great sacrifice. The noble Duryodhana 
has sent me to invite you. You must come to his Vaishnava mahayagna.’ 

Having heard the messenger out, that tiger among kings, Yudhishtira, 
says, ‘It is fortunate that Suyodhana, the enhancer of his ancestors’ glory, is 
performing this best of sacrifices. We would surely have come but we are 
bound by our vow for thirteen years.’ 


Bhima adds, *Yudhishtira Dharmaraja will go there only when he can 
cast Duryodhana into the sacred fire that is kindled by weapons. Go and tell 
Suyodhana that when the thirteenth year is complete, that lord of men, the 
son of Pandu, will pour his anger as a libation over the sons of Dhritarashtra 
at the yagna of war. I will also come to that sacrifice in blood.” 

The other Pandavas, Rajan, say nothing unpleasant and, on his return, 
the messenger reports everything to Dhritarashtra’s son. 

Many lords of men, kings of countless countries and great and pure 
Brahmanas come to Dhritarashtra’s city. All of them are pleased with the 
reception they receive in Hastinapura, with due ceremony. Dhritarashtra is 
surrounded by all the Kauravas and is at the pinnacle of his joy. 

He says to Vidura, ‘Kshatta, make haste and serve everyone who has 
come with food and delicacies, to their heart’s content.’ 

The learned, honourable Vidura cheerfully entertains all the different 
people from various ranks in society with meat, rice and drink, after 
welcoming them with fragrant garlands and a variety of clothing. Opulent 
pavilions have already been raised to accommodate them. Duryodhana 
entertains thousands of his Sadasyas and Brahmanas and gives them all 
kinds of rich gifts, before he takes his leave of them and enters Hastinapura, 
surrounded by his brothers, and with Karna and Sakuni.” 


CANTO 255 
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Duryodhana enters his city to the sound of 
eulogies being sung to his endless strength, his might as an archer 
and his fame as the greatest of kings. The citizens fling fried paddy over 
him, sprinkle him with sandalwood paste, and say, ‘O king, it is by good 
fortune that you completed your sacrifice without facing any obstacles.’ 

Some that are bolder, more reckless and caring little for the 
consequences, say, “Your sacrifice cannot be compared with Yudhishtira’s; 
indeed, it does not measure up to a sixteenth part of that Rajasuya.’ 

His friends, however, say, ‘Your yagna has surpassed all others. Yayati, 
Nahusha, Mandhata and Bharata, all performed this very yagna; they were 
purified and have all found Swarga.’ 

Hearing his friends’ pleasing words, the king happily enters the city and 
goes to his palace, Bharatarishabha. There he worships the feet of his father 
and mother, and of others, like Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, and the wise Vidura. 
In turn, his younger brothers pay their reverences to him, and that giver of 
joy to his bothers sits on his throne, surrounded by them. 

Karna stands and says, ‘With good fortune, Bhaaratottama, you have 
completed your great yagna. I will honour you once again, as I do today, 
when you have killed Pritha’s sons in battle and have performed the 
Rajasuya yagna.’ 

Dhritarashtra’s mighty son replies, “Well said, O Purushottama! When I 
have killed the lowly Pandavas, and when I celebrate the Rajasuya yagna, 


you shall, indeed, O Hero, honour me again.’ 

Saying this, the Kaurava embraces Karna and begins to dream about 
performing the Rajasuya, best of all yagnas. He declares to the assembled 
Kurus, ‘Kauravas, when I have slain all the Pandavas, I shall celebrate that 
foremost of yagnas, the Rajasuya!’ 

Now Karna says to him, ‘I vow, O most majestic of kings, that until I 
have killed Arjuna I will allow no one to wash my feet, nor will I eat meat. I 
will observe the Asura vrata: I swear that I will never refuse anything to 
anyone who asks.’ 

When Karna makes his vow to kill Arjuna in battle, those Maharathas 
and virile bowmen, the sons of Dhritarashtra, set up a loud cheer, almost as 
if that the Pandavas have already been killed. The magnificent Duryodhana 
leaves the others and goes to his apartment, like the Lord Kubera entering 
the garden of Chitraratha. Bhaarata, all the rest also return to their 
apartments. 

Meanwhile, the Pandavas are distressed by what the messenger said. 
Then, some spies come and tell them of Karna’s vow to kill Arjuna, and 
Yudhishtira is deeply troubled. Thinking of Karna of the impenetrable mail 
and of his superb prowess, he knows no peace. The Dharmaraja is full of 
anxiety and makes up his mind to leave Dwaita vana, emerald forest that 
teems with game and other creatures of the wild. 

Meanwhile, Dhritarashtra’s royal son rules the world with his brothers, 
and with Bhishma, Drona and Kripa, all with the support of Karna crowned 
in martial glory. Duryodhana bends his mind to the welfare of the kings of 
the earth. He worships Brahmanas by celebrating sacrifices and giving 
bountiful gifts; and occupies himself with promoting his brothers’ welfare, 
in the firm conviction that the best use of wealth, its true joy, lies in sharing 
it.” 


CANTO 256 
MRIGASWAPNODBHAVA PARVA 


anamejaya said, “After saving Duryodhana’s life, what did Pandu’s 
mighty sons do in the forest? Tell me about them.” 

Vaisampayana said, “Once, as Yudhishtira lies asleep at night in the 
Dwaita vana, some deer, their voices choked with tears, appear in his 
dream. Their bodies tremble as they stand before him with their forelegs 
reverently folded. 

Yudhishtira says to them, ‘What do you want to say? Who are you? Tell 
me what you want.’ 

Those deer, which are the ones that remained after the herd had been 
slaughtered, reply, “O Bhaarata, we are the deer left alive after the rest of 
our herd was killed. Soon, we will all be dead. We want you to move to 
another part of the forest. Great king, all your brothers are Kshatriyas, and 
skilled archers. They have thinned the ranks of our herd of forest-dwellers. 
The few remaining of us are left like seed, mighty one. By your grace and 
favour we can increase again.’ 

Seeing these deer, which remain like seed stock after a crop has been 
harvested, shaking in fear, Yudhishtira is grief-stricken. Always mindful of 
the welfare of all creatures, the king says to them, ‘I will do as you say,’ and 
wakes from his dream. 

Moved to pity, he says to his brothers, ‘The deer that remain alive after 
our slaughter of their herd came to me in my dream and told me that the 
few who remained were like the seed of a new herd. They blessed me and 


begged me to be compassionate to them. What they say is true. We ought to 
take pity on the animals of the forest. We have been feeding on them for a 
year and eight months. 

Let us move to the charming Kamyaka vana, that most beautiful forest 
at the head of the desert near the lake Trinabindu. It has plenty of game and 
we can live there for the remainder of our exile, until we go into ajnatavasa 
for its final year.’ 

The Pandavas gather their spare belongings and, accompanied by the 
Brahmanas and all the others who live with them, with Indrasena and their 
other retainers following behind, they move the very next day. They go 
along roads where excellent corn and clear water are available to travellers, 
and at length see the sacred asrama of Kamyaka, steeped in the aura of 
tapasya. Surrounded by their excellent Brahmanas, the sons of Pandu enter 
the Kamyaka vana, much as pious men enter Swarga.” 


CANTO 257 
VRIHIDRAUNIKA PARVA 


V aisampayana continued, “The noble Pandavas live in the forests for 
eleven years, in poverty, Bharatarishabha. Although they deserve 

happiness, they pass their days in some misery, brooding on the 

circumstances that have overtaken them, and living on fruit and roots. 

Rajarishi Yudhishtira thinks about the suffering his brothers endure, and 
remembering that all this is a result of his gambling, he cannot sleep. He 
feels as if his heart has been pierced with a lance. He remembers the harsh 
words of the Suta’s son, and repressing the venom of his wrath, he passes 
his time, outwardly calm, but in anguish all the time. 

Arjuna, the twins, Draupadi and that strongest of all men, Bhima, are 
wracked with heartache when they look at Yudhishtira. Knowing that only a 
short time remains of their exile, and sustained by rage and hope, those 
bulls among men submit their bodies to the most rigorous and exacting 
discipline. 

Some time elapses, and one day the great tapasvin, Satyavati’s son 
Vyasa, comes to the Pandavas. Seeing him approach, Yudhishtira goes to 
receive the Mahamuni reverentially. He bows down to Vyasa, pleasing him; 
and after the Rishi is seated, the self-retrained Yudhishtira sits down, 
waiting for the sage to speak. At the sight of his grandson emaciated and 
living on the wild produce of the forest, the Maharishi is moved to pity. 

His voice choking, he says, ‘Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, those who do not 
perform rigorous tapasya do not attain happiness. Joy and sorrow come in 


turns; no man enjoys uninterrupted happiness. A wise man, knowing that 
life has its ups and downs, neither overly celebrates nor grieves. When 
happiness comes one should enjoy it and when misfortune comes, one 
should endure it, in much the same way as the farmer lives by the seasons. 

Nothing is superior to tapasya; with tapasya one gains great rewards. 
Bhaarata, there is nothing that asceticism cannot achieve. Truth, sincerity, 
freedom from anger, justice, self-control, restraint of the mind, avoidance of 
malice, innocence, sanctity, and subduing of the senses: these purify a man 
whose deeds are pure. 

Foolish ones addicted to vice and bestial ways merit birth as animals in 
the next life, and they are never happy. The fruit of what one does in this 
world is reaped in the next. Even so, one must discipline oneself by 
performing tapasya and keeping vratas. 

Cheerfully and without ulterior motives, a man must give gifts that he 
can afford, after humbly paying his respects to the recipient. The man who 
always tells the truth gains a trouble free life; the man who has no anger 
attains sincerity; and one who is free from malice acquires supreme 
contentment. 

The man who has subdued his senses and controls his mind never 
knows tribulation, nor does he feel envy or sorrow at another’s prosperity. 
The man who gives everyone his due, and who bestows boons, attains 
felicity and possesses every object of enjoyment; the man free from envy 
reaps the reward of perfect health. 

He who gives honour to one to whom it is due attains birth in an 
illustrious house; and he who has subdued his senses never sees misfortune. 
The man whose mind is inclined to good, after paying his debt to nature, is 
born again with a righteous mind.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘O mighty Sage, which has greater benefits in the next 
world - giving gifts or performing tapasya? And which is more difficult? 

Vyasa says, ‘Child, there is nothing harder than giving charity. Men 
thirst for wealth, which is not easy to earn. Magnanimous one, brave men 
renounce comfort and go deep into the sea or the forest in order to acquire 
wealth. Some take to farming and cattle-rearing, and some become the 
servants of others. It is difficult to part with wealth that is obtained with 
such difficulty. Since nothing is harder to practise than charity; I think that 
bestowing a boon is superior to everything. 


Especially bear in mind that hard-earned wealth should, in the proper 
time and place, be given away to pious men; but that the giving away of ill- 
gotten riches can never liberate the giver from the evil of rebirth. 

It has been said, Yudhishtira, that by giving even a small gift in a spirit 
of pure-mindedness to a deserving person a man gains inexhaustible 
rewards in the next world. There is a story in this connection, about how 
Mudgala was rewarded for having given a bucket of vrihi, corn.’ ” 


CANTO 258 
VRIHIDRAUNIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “VY udhishtira says, ‘Why did that Brahmana give away a drona of 

vrihi? To whom and how did he give it? Tell me all this. I think 

of the life of a virtuous man as being worthwhile, whose conduct pleases 
Him of the six attributes who sees and knows everything.’ 

Vyasa says, “Rajan, there lived in Kurukshetra a man of dharma named 
Mudgala. He was truthful, free from malice and had subdued his senses. He 
lived by the dictates of sila and unchha. Although he lived a life of pigeon- 
like frugality, that Mahatapasvin entertained his guests, celebrated the 
sacrifice called Ishtikrita and performed other rituals. 

This sage, his wife and son ate during one fortnight and spent the next 
fortnight collecting a drona of corn, like a pigeon would. This innocent and 
guileless Rishi celebrated the Darsa and Paurnamasya yagnas and passed 
his days by taking the food that remained after the Devas and his guests had 
eaten. 

On auspicious lunar days, Trilokapati Indra, accompanied by the 
celestials, would partake of the food offered at this sage’s yagnas. And so, 
great king, this man lived the life of a Muni and cheerfully entertained his 
guests on such days. As that pure man happily gave away his food, what 
remained of the drona of corn increased with the arrival of each new guest! 

By dint of the purity of soul with which Mudgala gave food, it increased 
so much that he fed hundreds of learned Brahmanas with it. 


O king, it came to pass that Durvasa Muni heard of the virtuous, vrata- 
observing Mudgala. The half-naked sage, looking like a madman in his 
sparse, ragged clothing, his head hairless, came to Mudgala’s kutila, 
Pandava, muttering all kinds of insults. 

The Muni said rudely to the Brahmana, “Best of Brahmanas, I have 
come here in search of food!” 

Mudgala said to the sage, “Welcome!” and offered the hunger-crazed 
ascetic water to wash his mouth and feet and, accustomed as he was to 
feeding his guests, placed excellent food before Durvasa. 

The hungry Rishi frantically ate the food. Mudgala then gave him more 
and, having again eaten it all, Durvasa smeared his body with the unclean 
scraps and went away as abruptly as he had come. 

He came again, in the same way, during the next season, and again ate 
all the food that Mudgala gave him. After Durvasa left, Mudgala, without 
having eaten anything himself, gathered corn, as prescribed by the unchcha 
vrata. Hunger did not shake his equanimity, nor did anger or guile; nor did a 
sense of degradation or agitation enter into the heart of that Brahmanottama 
who, with his son and wife, led the unchha way of life. 

Durvasa appeared six times at Mudgala’s asrama. Never was he able to 
detect even the slightest distress in Mudgala’s heart; instead, he saw only 
Joy. 

Extremely pleased, the Muni said to Mudgala “There is not another 
being on earth as pure-hearted and charitable as you. Pangs of hunger drive 
away dharma and rob men of patience. The tongue, which loves delicacies, 
lures men towards them. Life is sustained by food and the mind is fickle and 
hard to control. 

Dhyana consists of concentrating the mind and the senses. To renounce 
in a pure spirit something painfully earned is difficult indeed. Yet, pious 
one, you have achieved this. 

In your company we feel grateful and happy. You possess self-restraint, 
fortitude, justice, control of body and mind, mercy and virtue. By what you 
have done, you have conquered all the worlds and gained admission into 
realms of beatitude. Even the Swargavasis proclaim the greatness of your 
daana. Most holy one, you will go to heaven in your own body.” 

Whilst the Muni Durvasa was speaking, a Devaduta appeared before 
Mudgala on a vimana yoked with swans and cranes, hung with a network of 


bells, scented with an unearthly fragrance and colourfully painted; and it 
had the power of going anywhere at will. 

The divine messenger said to the Brahmana, “O Rishi, climb onto this 
chariot; you have earned the right by your deeds. You have attained the 
reward of your tapasya.” 

The sage said, “Devaduta, please describe to me the attributes of those 
who live in Swarga. What are their austerities, and to what end do they 
practice them? What constitutes happiness in heaven? What sorrows are 
there? High-born men have declared that one has friendship with the pious 
by merely walking seven paces with them. Lord, I ask you these things in 
the spirit of that friendship. Tell me the truth, without hesitation. And tell 
me what is good for me. After I hear what you say, I will decide what to 
do,” ’ says Vyasa.” 


CANTO 259 
VRIHIDRAUNIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: °V yasa continues, ‘The messenger of the gods said, “Maha Muni, 
you are a simple man. Having been offered heavenly bliss, 
which brings great honour, you still deliberate like a person of little 
wisdom. The realms known as Swarga exist above. They tower high and 
have excellent paths that the chariots of the Devas traverse. Atheists, 
dishonest people, those that have not practised tapasya and those that have 
not performed great yagnas cannot go there. Only men of pure souls and 
subdued minds, who have their bodies and senses under control, who are 
free from malice, who are intent on the practice of charity, heroes and men 
with battle scars who have, with subdued minds and senses, performed the 
most worthy rites, attain these realms, O Brahmana, which are gained only 
by dharmic deeds, and where only the pious live. 

Mudgala, in Swarga are myriads of exotic, resplendent worlds that 
bestow everything one can want, what the celestial beings—the Devas, the 
Sadhyas, the Viswas, the Maharishis, Yama, the Dharmas, the Gandharvas 
and the Apsaras—have. There is that monarch of mountains, golden Meru, 
extending over thirty-three thousand yojanas. 

Mudgala, there are the sacred gardens of the Devas, Nandana the best of 
them, where the deserving enjoy themselves. 

There is no hunger, no thirst, no weariness, no fear, or anything 
unpleasant or inauspicious in Swargaloka. Delightful perfumes pervade, 
delicious breezes waft and captivating sounds are everywhere, enchanting 


the heart. There is no grief, no old age, no effort and no regret. One attains 
this world as a reward for one’s actions. People go there by virtue of their 
good deeds. 

Everyone who lives there shines in splendour, and this, too, is because 
of their own karma, not because of anything their fathers or mothers have 
done. Here, there is neither sweat, nor any excrement nor urine, O Muni. 
There is no dust to soil one’s garments; garlands, redolent with divine 
fragrance, never fade; and all their vimanas are like this one that I have 
brought. 

Mighty sage, devoid of envy, grief, fatigue, ignorance and malice, men 
who have reached heaven live there in perfect happiness. 

O bull among Munis, above this realm are others with superior celestial 
qualities. Of these, the beautiful and glorious realms of Brahma are the best. 
Brahmana, that is where Rishis go, who have been sanctified by the most 
meritorious deeds. 

Beings named Ribhus live there; they are the gods of the gods. Their 
realms are supremely blessed and adored even by the Devas. These beings 
shine with their own lustre and bestow every object of desire. They do not 
suffer from the pangs that women might cause; they do not possess material 
wealth; and they are free from guile. Unlike the Devas, the Ribhus do not 
live on havis or amrita, yet their forms are so divine that they cannot be 
perceived by the senses. 

These eternal gods of the Devas have no desire for happiness for 
happiness’ sake, nor do they change at the completion of a revolution of a 
Kalpa. Indeed, they suffer no changes of age or decay. They feel neither 
happiness nor sorrow. Then how could they be affected by anger or hatred? 
Mudgala, the gods covet their state of supreme, blissful freedom, Moksha, 
that beings who have desires can never achieve. 

There are thirty-three Ribhus. To their realms wise men go, after having 
observed the most excellent vratas or given charity according to the laws of 
dharma. You have succeeded in acquiring this state by your acts of charity; 
enjoy the glory of your merit. 

Such, O Brahmana, is the bliss of Swarga, with all its worlds. I have 
described the blessings of heaven. Now let me tell you some of its 
drawbacks. While living in Swarga and enjoying the fruits of his good 
deeds, a man cannot perform more actions with a view to increasing his 
punya. He must first enjoy all the benefits that he has already accrued, until 


they are exhausted. The great shortcoming of Devaloka is that once a man’s 
punya has run out, he will fall from there. 

The fall of a person whose mind is soaked in bliss has to be counted as 
the greatest defect of Swarga. The discontent and sadness that result from a 
life less blissful than one has lived in the bright and blessed kingdom will 
be hard to bear. Those who are about to descend from Swarga have stunned 
minds and agitated emotions. As the garlands they wear are about to fade, 
fear begins to invade their hearts. These are terrible experiences, Mudgala, 
and extend even to Brahmaloka. 

In Swarga, men who have earned their places there are godlike; their 
virtues cannot be counted. O Muni, yet when their punya karma is 
exhausted, they are born again as human beings. And in that form, they can 
acquire much fortune and happiness. However, if they are unable to acquire 
knowledge here, they devolve to bestial states. 

The consequences of karma done in this world are felt in the next. This 
world has been ordained to be one of deeds; the other is one of fruit. 
Mudgala, I have described everything to you. Now, if it pleases you, we 
must go quickly.” ’ 

Vyasa continues, ‘Mudgala began to think about everything the 
Devaduta had said. After some thought that best of Munis said to the divine 
messenger, “O Devaduta, I bow to you. Venerable one, depart in peace. I do 
not want to have anything to do with Swarga, which has great bliss from 
which one must inevitably fall. Those that enjoy heaven are doomed to 
suffer the deprivation of its joys. 

I do not desire Swarga. I will strive for that enduring realm where you 
do not have to lament, or be troubled or agitated ever again, when you are 
there. You have told me of the great defect of Swarga. Now describe to me 
a realm that has none.” 

To that the divine messenger said, “Above the abode of Brahma, there is 
the supreme seat of Vishnu, pure, eternal and luminous, known as 
Parabrahman. It is not possible for those attached to material things to go 
there; nor can those who are arrogant, greedy and ignorant, or those who 
feel anger or envy. This place is only for those that are free from 
attachment, pride and conflicting emotions; those that have restrained their 
senses; and for those given to dhyana and yoga.” 

Hearing this, the Muni bade farewell to the Devaduta, and that sage 
continued living by the unchha code and, in time became perfectly content. 


Praise and disapproval became equal to him; a brick, a stone and gold were 
equal in his eyes. With pure Gyana yoga, the Brahmana began to meditate, 
setting his soul on the path to Brahman. He gained the power of knowledge 
and understanding and did attain that supreme state of emancipation, 
Moksha, which is eternal. 

Therefore, son of Kunti, you must not grieve. By your stern tapasya you 
will regain your flourishing kingdom. Sorrow and joy revolve around a 
man, like the points on a wheel turning on its axle. When the thirteenth year 
of your exile has ended, you will get back the kingdom that was yours, and 
your father’s and grandfather’s before that. So, cool the fever of your heart.’ 

Saying this to Yudhishtira, the Muni Vyasa returns to his asrama and to 
his relentless tapasya.” 


CANTO 260 
DRAUPADI HARANA PARVA 


anamejaya said, “While the Pandavas live in the forest, enjoying the 
company of the Munis, sharing the ambrosial food they got from the 
Sun’s platter and various kinds of venison with the Brahmanas and others 
who came to them for food all day until it was time for Krishnaa’s meal, 
what did Duryodhana and his sinful brothers, advised by Dussasana, Karna 
and Sakuni, have to do with them? Worshipful one, tell me about this.” 
Vaisampayana said, “Great king, when Duryodhana hears that the 
Pandavas are living as happily in the vana as in a city, he, Karna, Dussasana 
and the others long to do them harm. While those malignant men hatch evil 
schemes, the celebrated Durvasa arrives in Hastinapura with ten thousand 
sishyas. Duryodhana and his brothers welcome the choleric sage with great 
humility, self-abasement and gentleness, and Duryodhana personally waits 
upon the Rishi, as a servant would. The illustrious Muni stays there for a 
few days and, fearing his curses, Duryodhana attends on him day and night. 
At times, Durvasa says, ‘I am hungry, O king; give me food at once.’ At 
others, he goes for a bath, returns late, says, ‘I do not want to eat anything 
today; I am not hungry,’ and vanishes. Sometimes he appears suddenly and 
asks for food. At others, he wakes at midnight and demands fresh food to be 
prepared at that hour; then he complains about it and does not touch it. In 
this way, he tries the prince and, finding that Duryodhana does not get angry 
or annoyed, he turns kindly towards him. 


Then, Bhaarata, the intractable Durvasa says to Duryodhana, ‘I have the 
power to grant you boons. Ask me for whatever is closest to your heart. 
May you be blessed! I am pleased with you, and I will give you anything I 
can, as long as I don’t break dharma.’ 

Hearing the great ascetic, Suyodhana’s spirit fills with new vigour. 
Karna, Dussasana and he have already decided what boon he should ask for 
if the Muni is sufficiently pleased to grant him one. 

The evil prince says to Durvasa, *Yudhishtira is the eldest and the best 
of our clan. That dharmatma now lives in the forest with his brothers. You 
must go there with your disciples, as a guest, as you came here to us. The 
favour I ask is that you arrive when their lovely wife, the famed Panchali, 
lies down to rest after having served the Brahmanas and her husbands, and 
after she has eaten her own meal.’ 

The Rishi replies, “I will do as you wish,’ and goes away in much the 
same way as he came. 

Suyodhana thinks that he has achieved what he wanted; and happily he 
clasps Karna’s hand. 

Karna, too, is pleased and says to the king, who is with his brothers, “By 
singular good fortune, you have got all that you wanted. It is fortunate, too, 
that your enemies, struggling to stay afloat on a sea of danger, have to face 
the fire of Durvasa’s anger. They have fallen into a dark abyss.’ 

Rajan, Duryodhana and others return to their respective homes, full of 
vile delight.” 


CANTO 261 
DRAUPADI HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “One day, having made sure that the Pandavas are 

all lounging relaxed and that Krishnaa is resting after her meal, the 
Maharishi Durvasa, with ten thousand sishyas, arrives in that forest and the 
Pandavas’ asrama. The noble Yudhishtira sees that a guest has come and 
goes with his brothers to receive him. Joining his hands together in worship 
and offering the sage a comfortable seat, he welcomes him respectfully. 

The king says to the sage, ‘Venerable one, perform your nitya karma 
and come back soon, while we prepare a meal for you.’ 

With his disciples, the Muni goes to bathe in the nearby river, 
wondering how the king will be able to provide food for them all. 
Meanwhile, Rajan, the lovely Draupadi, ever devoted to her husbands, is 
stricken by fear; she has eaten and does not know how she will feed the 
Munis. She knows that there is no earthly way in which she can provide 
Durvasa and his sishyas with a feast, and she prays in her mind to Krishna, 
the slayer of Kamsa. The princess says, ‘Krishna, Krishna, Mahabaho, 
Devakinandana, whose power is inexhaustible; Vasudeva, Lord of the 
Universe, who wipes away the tribulations of those that worship you; you 
are the soul, the creator and the destroyer of the Universe. O Lord, you are 
eternal; you are the saviour of the afflicted. 

You are the preserver of the Universe and of all created beings; you are 
the guardian of cows. You are the highest of the high, and the wellspring of 
the mind’s activities—akuti and chitti. O supreme and infinite One, giver of 


all good, you are the refuge of the helpless. Primordial Being, you cannot 
be perceived by the soul, the mind, or in any other way. You are the ruler of 
all and the Lord of all. I seek your protection. 

Mahaprabhu, you are always compassionate to those that take refuge in 
you. Be kind to me, take care of me. You, of the complexion as dark as the 
leaves of the blue lotus, and of eyes as red as the corolla of the lily; 
Pitambara, clad in yellow, adorned with the bright jewel Kaustubha—you 
are the beginning and the end of creation, and the sanctuary of all. 

You are the supreme light and essence of the Universe. Your face is 
turned in all directions at once. You are called the supreme seed and the 
storehouse of all treasures. With your grace, O Devadeva, all evils lose 
their terror. You protected me before from Dussasana; save me now from 
this terror.’ 


Thus adored by Panchali, Krishna of the mysterious ways, who is always 
kind to his bhaktas, leaves Rukmini’s side, and instantly appears before the 
Pandavas’ queen. Draupadi gasps, bows down to him in great joy and tells 
him about the arrival of Durvasa. 

Krishna says to her, ‘I am very hungry. Give me some food, and then 
carry on with your chores.’ 

Draupadi replies, “The vessel that Surya Deva gave me remains full 
until I finish my meal. But I have already eaten, and it is empty now.’ 

The lotus-eyed Avatara says to her, ‘Krishnaa, I am starving. Bring the 
Sun’s vessel and show it to me.’ 

Krishnaa doubtfully brings the vessel to him, and he sees in it a shred of 
rice and vegetable, stuck to the rim. He swallows that morsel and says to 
her, ‘May the Lord Hari, the soul of the Universe, that God that shares in 
every sacrifice, be satiated with this!’ 

Krishna, remover of misery, turns to Bhimasena, ‘Hurry, call the sages 
to dinner.’ 

Rajan, Bhimasena sets out for the cool, transparent river where Durvasa 
and the others have gone to perform their ablutions. These ascetics have 
entered the river and, as they scrub their bodies, they suddenly find that 
their stomachs feel full to bursting. Coming out of the lucid water, they look 
at one another. They turn to Durvasa and say, ‘We have come here for our 
baths, having told the king to prepare a meal for us. But, O Dvijottama, we 


cannot eat a thing now because our bellies are full. The feast that has been 
prepared will go waste. What shall we do?’ 

Durvasa says, “By arriving unannounced and making him prepare food 
that will be not be eaten, we have done a great wrong to Rajarishi 
Yudhishtira. The Pandavas might well burn us with the fire from their eyes. 
I know that Yudhishtira has immense tapasyashakti. Brahmanas, I am afraid 
of men that are devoted to Hari. The noble Pandavas all devout men, 
learned, warlike, diligent in tapasya and every religious observance, all of 
them devoted to Vasudeva. They follow dharma punctiliously. If provoked, 
they can consume us with their anger, as fire would a bale of cotton. My 
sishyas, you must all flee from here without returning to their asrama.’ 

The disciples waste no time but run in all directions, and Durvasa with 
them. 

Not finding the sages in the river, Bhima searches for them everywhere, 
at all the landings. He discovers from other ascetics in the forest that they 
have fled, and he goes back and informs Yudhishtira. The Pandavas, of the 
subdued senses, continue to wait for a while, expecting the sages to return. 

Then, Yudhishtira says, ‘The Rishis will trick us by coming in the 
middle of the night. What is our way out of this plight fate has landed us 
in?’ 

While they are absorbed in such dismal thoughts and sighing frequently 
with long, deep breaths, Krishna suddenly appears before them and says 
with a smile, ‘Sons of Pritha, Draupadi knew of the danger you were in 
from the possible wrath of the Rishi and called me in her mind. So, here I 
am, speedily arrived. 

Now you have no need to fear Rishi Durvasa. Afraid of your ascetic 
powers, he made himself scarce some time ago. Good men never suffer. I 
beg your leave to let me return home. May you always prosper!’ 

His words reassure Pritha’s sons and Draupadi, and their fever of 
anxiety leaves them. They say to him, ‘Just as people who are drowning in 
the ocean reach the safety of the shore in a ship, we have, Lord Govinda, 
escaped from our danger through you. Go in peace, and may prosperity be 
yours.’ 

Krishna goes back to Dwaraka, and the Pandavas, wandering from 
forest to forest, pass their days happily with Draupadi. Rajan, this is the 
story you asked me to tell you, and this is how the evil plot of 
Dhritarashtra’s son fails.” 


CANTO 262 
DRAUPADI HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Those great Kuru warriors wander about and 

hunt, like Devas, in the deer-rich forest of Kamyaka, gratified by the 
sights of deep and vast wilderness and broad swathes of woodland resonant 
with flowers in bloom. The sons of Pandu, each like an Indra, and each the 
terror of his enemies, remain in that vana for some time. 

One day, when they go out in search of game, they leave Draupadi alone 
in the asrama, with the permission of Maharishi Trinabindu, resplendent 
with tapasyashakti, and of their spiritual mentor Dhaumya. 

At this very time, the king of Sindhu, the son of Vriddhakshatra is on 
his way to the kingdom of Salva, to be married. He wears his best princely 
attire and is accompanied by many princes. He stops in the Kamyaka vana, 
and in that secluded hermitage, comes upon the beautiful Draupadi, 
standing at the threshold of the Pandavas’ asrama. 

She is splendid in her beauty and seems to light up the woodland with 
lustre, as lightning illuminates dark clouds. Those who see her ask 
themselves, “Is this an Apsara, or a daughter of the Devas, or some other 
divine spirit?’ and gaze at her perfect and faultless beauty, their hands 
joined in stunned reverence. 

Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu, is struck through by her beauty, and lust 
ingites in his mind. Inflamed with desire, he says to the prince Kotika, 
“Whose is this perfect woman? Is she human? I have no need of my 
marriage if I can have this lovely creature. I will take her back home with 


me. O, find out who she is and where she comes from, and also why this 
exquisite, most delicate one is in this forest. 

Will this ornament of womankind, this beauty with the slender waist, 
who has lovely teeth and big eyes, take me for her lord? I will think of my 
life as being complete in every way if I win the hand of this devi. Go, 
Kotika, and ask who her husband is.’ 

Kotika, wearing one kundala, jumps down from his chariot and goes up 
to Panchali, just as a jackal approaches a tigress, and speaks to her.” 


CANTO 263 
DRAUPADI HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “kK otika says, ‘Most beautiful one, who are you, standing alone in 

this hermitage, leaning against a kadamba tree and holding onto 

one of its branches, and blazing like a night fire fanned by the wind? O 
incomparable one, how is it that you are not afraid to be in the forest? 

Surely, you are a Devi, a Yakshi, a Danavi, an Apsara or the wife of a 
Daitya, a daughter of the Naga king or a Rakshasi, the wife of Varuna or 
Yama or Soma or Kubera. You must have taken human form to wander in 
these forests. Or, have you come from the heavenly palace of Dhatri, 
Vidhatri, Savitri, Vibhu or Sakra? 

You do not ask us who we are, nor do we know who protects you here. 
Respectfully we ask you, devi, who is your father, and tell us the names of 
your husband, your clan and your family. Tell us also what you are doing 
here. 

I am king Suratha’s son and my name is Kotika. That man, with eyes as 
large as lotus petals, sitting on the golden chariot, and looking like 
sacrificial fire on an altar, is the warrior Kshemankara, king of Trigarta. The 
man who stands behind him and gazes at you is the famous son of the king 
of Kulinda. He is armed with a mighty bow, has large eyes and is adorned 
with flower garlands. He always lives in the mountains. The dark and 
handsome young man, the scourge of his enemies, standing at the edge of 
that tank, is the son of Subala of the Ikshvaku dynasty. 


And if, devi, you have ever heard the name of Jayadratha, king of 
Sauviras, he is here, leading six thousand chariots, horses, elephants and 
footsoldiers, and followed by twelve Sauvira princes as his standard- 
bearers, whose names are Angaraka, Kunjara, Guptaka, Satrunjaya, 
Sanjaya, Supravriddha, Bhayankara, Bhramara, Ravi, Sura, Pratapa and 
Kuhana. They are all mounted on chariots drawn by chestnut steeds, and all 
of them blaze in splendour, like sacrificial fires. 

The brothers of the king, the mighty Balahaka, Anika, Vidarana and 
others, are among his followers. These noble youths are the flowers of the 
Sauvira chivalry. The king travels among his friends, like Indra surrounded 
by the Maruts. 

O you of the beautiful hair, who was unknowing of this, tell us whose 
wife and daughter you are.’ ” 


CANTO 264 
DRAUPADI HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Thus addressed by that ornament of Sibi’s race, 
the princess Panchali looked at him gently and, letting go of the 
kadamba branch and arranging her apparel, says, ‘I am aware, O prince, 
that it is not proper for one like me to speak to you, but there is no other 
man or woman here just now to convey my words. I will speak, respected 
one, but understand that I am aware that, being alone, I do remember the 
proper way for a woman to conduct herself and that I should not talk to you. 
Prince of the Sibis, I know now that you are Suratha’s son Kotika. So, I 
will tell you of my lineage and my kin. I am the daughter of king Drupada, 
and my name is Krishnaa. I have five men for my husbands, of whom you 
might have heard while they were living at Khandavaprastha. Those 
Manavottamas are Yudhishtira, Bhimasena, Arjuna and the two sons of 
Madri. 

They have left me here and gone hunting, each in a different direction. 
The king has gone to the east, Bhimasena south, Arjuna to the west and 
Nakula and Sahadeva towards the north. 

Dismiss your carriages; wait here until they come back so that they can 
welcome you properly. Yudhishtira Dharmaputra likes having guests and 
will be happy to see you.’ 

And Draupadi, of the face as radiant as the moon, goes into her kutila, 
thinking fondly of her husband’s hospitable nature.” 


CANTO 265 
DRAUPADI HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “O Bhaarata, Kotika tells the other waiting 
princes of his conversation with Krishnaa. 

Jayadratha hears this and says to the Sibi hero, ‘I have only heard what 
she said and already my heart is full of love for this jewel among women. 
Why have you returned without carrying out your mission? Mahabaho, now 
that I have seen her, other women seem like monkeys. She has captured my 
heart. Tell me, Saibya, is this woman a human being?’ 

Kotika replies, ‘She is the famed princess Krishnaa, the daughter of 
Drupada, and the celebrated wife of the five sons of Pandu. She is the 
greatly respected, beloved and chaste wife of Kunti’s sons. Take her away 
with you to Sauvira.’ 

The evil Jayadratha, king of Sindhu, Sauvira and other lands, needs no 
further encouragement, and saying, ‘I must see Draupadi,’ enters the asrama 
with six of his men, like a wolf going into a lion’s den. 

He says to Krishnaa, ‘Greetings, devi. Are your husbands well, whose 
well-being you always wish for?’ 

Draupadi replies, ‘Kaunteya Yudhishtira of the Kurus, his brothers, I, 
and all those you ask about, are well. Is all well with your kingdom, your 
treasury and your army? Do you, as king, rule justly over Saibya, Sibi, 
Sindhu and your other dominions? O Kshatriya, accept this water to wash 
your feet, and this seat. Accept these fifty animals for your entourage’s 
breakfast. In addition, Kuntiputra Yudhishtira will give you tusked deer, 


nanku deer, doe and antelope, sarabhas and rabbits, rurus, bear, sambara and 
gayal. He will give you wild boar, buffalo and other four-legged animals as 
well.’ 

Jayadratha says, “All is well with me. Your offer of food is as good as 
having eaten it already. Come! Ride in my chariot and be perfectly happy. It 
is not fitting that you should still bear any love for the miserable sons of 
Pritha. They live in the jungle; they are powerless and impotent; they have 
lost their kingdom; and they are at the lowest ebb of their lives. 

A sensible woman does not attach herself to an impoverished, destitute 
husband. She should follow her lord when he is prosperous but leave him in 
adversity. The sons of Pandu have lost their prosperity for ever. There is no 
need for you to share their hardships. 

O you of the flaring hips, leave Pandu’s sons; be my wife and share the 
kingdoms of Sindhu and Sauvira with me.’ 

Hearing the king of Sindhu, Krishnaa turns away, her eyes troubled. 
Contemptuously ignoring his lustful offer, she of the slender waist rebukes 
the king of Sindhu. ‘Do not dare to speak to me like that again. Are you not 
ashamed? Be careful.’ 

And Krishnaa of the blemishless character, anxiously awaiting her 
husbands’ return, begins to speak at length in order to keep Jayadratha at 
bay.” 


CANTO 266 
DRAUPADI HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana continued, “Drupadi’s lovely face is flushed in anger. 
Her eyes are inflamed and her brows contract in fury as she speaks 
to the lord of Sauvira. 

She says, ‘Are you not ashamed, fool, to speak so insultingly of those 
Kshatriyas, each of whom is like Indra himself, who are all true to their 
dharma, and who never waver in battle even if it be against hosts of 
Yakshas and Rakshasas? O Sauvira, good men never speak ill of the 
learned, who are devoted to austerities and blessed with wisdom, regardless 
of whether they live in forest huts or in great palaces, but only sinful 
wretches like you. 

I do not think there is anyone among the Kshatriyas here who can save 
you from falling into the pit you dig for yourself under your very feet. You 
have as much hope of vanquishing Yudhishtira Dharmaraja as of separating 
from his herd a mammoth leader of elephants in the Himalayas, the juice of 
musth trickling from his temples, with a stick in your hand. Childish folly 
prods you to awaken a mighty sleeping lion to pluck the whiskers from his 
face. 

You will run when you see Bhimasena in a rage. Courting a fight with 
the furious Jishnu will be like kicking a powerful, ferocious lion asleep in a 
mountain cave and waking him. Contention with the two superb youths, the 
youngest Pandavas, is the act of the fool who knowingly stamps on the tails 
of two venomous black, fork-tongued cobras. The bamboo, the reed and the 


plantain bear fruit once and die. The crab, too, conceives young ones whose 
birth destroys her. So do you dare try to lay your hands on me, whom these 
great Kshatriyas protect.’ 

Jayadratha says, ‘I know all this, Krishnaa, and I am aware of the 
prowess of those princes, but you cannot frighten me with your threats. We, 
too, are born into the seventeen noble clans and are endowed with the six 
royal qualities. In fact, we look down on the Pandavas as our inferiors! So, 
Draupadi, do not waste time, but ride this elephant or this chariot; mere 
words cannot stop us from taking you. Talk less boastfully and throw 
yourself at the mercy of the king of the Sauviras.’ 

Draupadi says, “Why does the king of the Sauviras not take my power 
seriously? I do will not demean myself before you, out of fear. Even Indra 
himself cannot abduct her who is protected by Krishna and Arjuna, who 
would follow her together in the same chariot. What more can I say of a 
mere man’s chances! 

When Arjuna Kiriti cleaves your legions in his chariot, he will strike 
terror into every heart and consume everything around him like fire burning 
a stack of dry grass in summer. The warlike Andhaka and Vrishni princes, 
with Janardana at their head, and the mighty Kaikeya bowmen will follow 
me tirelessly. Dhananjaya’s fearsome arrows, shot from the Gandiva and 
propelled by his powerful arms, will fly at you, roaring like thunder. 

When you face Arjuna shooting dense locust-swarms of arrows from his 
Gandiva, you will repent this folly of yours. Imagine how you will feel 
when, armed with the Gandiva and blowing his conch, his gloved hands 
making his bowstring thrum, he pierces your breast again and again with his 
arrows. When Bhima rushes at you with his mace, and the two sons of 
Madri range in all directions, spewing the venom of their wrath, you will 
feel pangs of untold regret for daring to accost me like this. 

I vow by my faithfulness to my husbands that I will have the pleasure of 
seeing Pritha’s sons crush you in battle and drag you along the ground. 
Cruel as you are, you cannot frighten me by forcefully seizing me, because 
those Kuru warriors will bring me back to the Kamyaka vana as soon as 
they see me.’ 

Then the devi of the large eyes, realising that they are about to seize her, 
cries, ‘Do not sully me with your touch!’ In panic, she calls out to 
Dhaumya. 


Darting forward, Jayadratha seizes her upper garment, but she pushes 
him away violently, so that sinner falls to the ground, like a tree severed 
from its roots. But he takes hold of her once again, while she pants in fear. 
Even as she clings to Dhaumya’s feet, Jayadratha drags Krishnaa on to his 
chariot. 

Dhaumya says, ‘Jayadratha, take heed of the ancient dharma of the 
Kshatriya. You cannot carry her off without first defeating her husbands in 
battle. You will reap the painful fruit of your despicable deed when you 
meet the sons of Pandu with Yudhishtira Dharmaraja at their head.’ 

Dhaumya says this and, entering into the massed ranks of Jayadratha’s 
footsoldiers, follows the princess as she is borne away by her abductor.” 


CANTO 267 
DRAUPADI HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Meanwhile, having gone in separate directions, 

and each having killed many deer, bear and buffalo, the Pandavas 
meet in that same mighty forest, crowded with deer, which suddenly echoes 
with the ominous calls of birds and the cries of other wild creatures, as if 
some great danger threatens. 

Yudhishtira says to his brothers, ‘These birds that fly into the sunlight 
shriek harshly and the other wild beasts seem agitated. I feel certain that 
there are hostile intruders in the jungle. We must not waste a moment but 
find them. We have enough game. 

My heart clenches in fear and my soul wants to fly out of my body. The 
Kamyaka vana seems strangely bereft, almost like the lake which Garuda 
rid of the snake that lived in it, like a pot that thirsty men have drained of 
water, like a kingdom that has lost its king and prosperity.’ 

Those Kshatriyas ride towards their asrama in their chariots drawn by 
hurricane-swift Saindharva horses. As they fly back they see a jackal 
howling hideously to their left. 

Yudhishtira looks intently at it and says to Bhima and Dhananjaya, 
‘This jackal belongs to a lowly species. It is an evil omen that it is on our 
left, and howling. Ah, the Kaurava sinners are surely here and bent on 
doing us some great harm.’ 

The sons of Pandu enter the grove where their asrama is situated. Here 
they find their beloved’s maid Dhatreyika sobbing piteously. 


Indrasena leaps down from the chariot and anxiously questions her, 
“Why are you lying on the groung and crying? Why is your face so sad and 
pale? I pray that no evil has befallen princess Draupadi, who is the very 
soul of the Pandavas? Dharmaputra is so distraught that if the princess has 
entered the bowels of the earth or flown into heaven, or dived to the bottom 
of the ocean, he and his brothers will follow her there. 

What fool would dare abduct that priceless jewel of these Parantapas, to 
whom her life is as dear as their own? Who would think of carrying away 
this princess who has such awesome protectors, and who is like an 
embodiment of the Pandavas’ hearts? The breast of the man that has done 
this will be pierced by dreadful arrows today. 

Do not weep for her, timid girl; Krishnaa will return this very day, and 
the sons of Pritha will again be united with Yagnaseni after killing their 
enemies!’ 

Dhatreyika wipes her face and says to the sarathy Indrasena, ‘With no 
regard for the five Indra-like sons of Pandu, Jayadratha has carried Krishnaa 
away. The traces of his tracks have not yet been covered over, because the 
tree branches he broke on his wild way have not yet dried. Turn your 
chariots around and follow her; the princess cannot have gone far. 

O Kshatriyas mighty as Indra, arm yourselves with your glorious bows, 
take up your quivers and hurry after her, before, overpowered by threats or 
violence and losing heart and courage, she gives herself up to an 
undeserving sinner as wastefully as sanctified libations poured onto a pile of 
ashes. 

O, see that the ghee is not poured into paddy husks that will not catch; 
see that the vanamala is not cast away in a cemetery. O, take care that the 
Soma rasa of a yagna is not licked up by a dog through the carelessness of 
the officiating priests; let not the lily be recklessly torn up by a jackal 
searching for its prey in the thick forest. O, let no man, like a dog licking 
the ghee in the sacrificial pot, touch with his lips the perfect face of your 
wife, who is as lovely as moonbeams. Oh, go swiftly after her and do not let 
time steal a march on you!’ 

Yudhishtira says, “Go away, woman; control your tongue. Do not speak 
thus before us. King or prince, whoever he is, drunk with power, will come 
to grief.’ 

And they go forth, following the trail pointed out to them, frequently 
giving vent to deep sighs that sound like the hissing of snakes, and 


twanging the strings of their great bows. In time, they see a cloud of dust 
that the horses of Jayadratha’s army raise; and they see Dhaumya in the 
midst of the abductor’s footsoldiers, crying out to Bhima to ride more 
swiftly. 

The exhilarated Pandavas tell Dhaumya to take heart and return to the 
asrama. They charge the enemy in fury, like hawks swooping down on their 
prey. And they, who are like Indra himself, are filled with rage at the insult 
to Draupadi, and the sight of Jayadratha sitting smugly in his chariot with 
their beloved queen fans the flames of their fury. 

And those mighty bowmen—Bhima, Dhananjaya, the twins and the 
king—roar at Jayadratha to stop; the enemy legions are panic-stricken.” 


CANTO 268 
DRAUPADI HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Enraged at the sight of Bhimasena and Arjuna, 

the enemy Kshatriyas roar aloud in the forest. The evil Jayadratha 
sees the flags of those bulls of the Kurus and says to Yagnaseni, ‘Krishnaa, I 
believe these five great warriors that come towards us are your husbands. 
You know the sons of Pandu well, so, O you of the lovely tresses, describe 
them one by one and point out which one rides each chariot. 

Draupadi replies, ‘Having done me such violence that is sure to shorten 
your life, of what use is it to you now to know who is who? Foolish man, 
my husbands have come, and none of you will be left alive. But since you 
are about to die, I will tell you about them. I see Yudhishtira Dharmaraja 
and his younger brothers and I am not afraid any longer. 

That warrior, on whose flagstaff are two beautiful and melodious 
mridangams called Nanda and Upananda, that sound constantly, is one who 
knows his svadharma well. God and successful men always walk in his 
footsteps. With golden skin, a prominent nose and large eyes, that slim man 
is my husband Yudhishtira, the son of Dharma. He is the best of the Kurus, 
and grants life to the enemy who surrenders. So, foolish one, throw down 
your weapons, fold your hands to him and surrender yourself into his 
protection. 

That other man you see, long-armed and as tall as a full-grown sala tree, 
who sits on his chariot, biting his lips and frowning, is my husband 
Vrikodara. Steeds of the noblest pedigree, powerfully built and well-trained, 


draw his chariot. His feats are superhuman, and he is known as Bhima. 
Anyone who offends him does not live. He never forgets an enemy and, on 
some pretext, he will exact bloody vengeance, and remain dissatisfied even 
after. 

That greatest of bowmen you see there, of great intelligence and fame, 
who has his senses under complete control, who worships his elder brother 
Yudhishtira, and is his disciple, is my husband Arjuna. He never forsakes 
dharma, not from lust, not from fear or anger. He is never cruel. His energy 
is like fire, and he can withstand every enemy. That parantapa is also 
Kunti’s son. 

The youth you see, who is versed in every aspect of dharma and artha, 
who dispels the fear of the frightened, who is wise, and who is the most 
handsome of all men on earth, is utterly devoted to his brothers. Dearer to 
them than their own lives, the other sons of Pandu protect him. He is my 
husband Nakula. This intelligent and wise man, whose twin is Sahadeva, is 
dexterous with his sword, and you, foolish one, will see his skills in battle. 
He will be among you like Indra among the Daityas. 

And that fifth Kshatriya, a master of the Astra Shastra, also brilliant and 
wise, always intent on pleasing Yudhishtira Dharmaputra in all that he does, 
the youngest of the Pandavas and their favourite, is my husband Sahadeva. 
Heroic, brilliant, sagacious and quick-tempered, there is not another man as 
intelligent or as eloquent as he is. He is dearer to Kunti than her own soul; 
he is always conscious of Kshatriya dharma; and he would sooner jump into 
a fire or sacrifice his own life than say or do anything that is dishonourable 
or sinful. 

When the sons of Pandu have killed your warriors in battle, you will see 
your army in the same plight as a ship laden with a cargo of jewels wrecked 
at sea by a whale. You have acted rashly with little regard for the prowess 
of the Pandavas. If you escape from them alive, you will indeed have been 
blessed.’ 

The five sons of Pritha, each like Indra, are filled with rage. Sparing the 
panic-stricken infantry who beg them for mercy, they charge the 
charioteers, attacking them from all sides and darkening the air with 
barrages of arrows.” 


CANTO 269 
DRAUPADI HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana continued, “The king of Sindhu issues commands to 

the princes who are with him, crying Halt! Strike! and so on. When 
they see Bhima, Arjuna and the twins with Yudhishtira, the soldiers send up 
a loud clamour on the field of battle, and the Sibi, Sauvira and Sindhu 
warriors quail at the sight of these Kshatriyas who look like ferocious 
tigers. 

Armed with a mace made entirely of Saikya iron and embossed with 
gold, Bhimasena rushes towards the doomed Sindhu king. But Kotikasya 
deftly surrounds Vrikodara with a formation of Maharathas, effectively 
separating him from his quarry. Bhima is assailed with countless spears, 
clubs and arrows but he does not waver for a moment. Instead, with his 
mace, he kills an elephant, its mahout and fourteen foot-soldiers in front of 
Jayadratha’s chariot. 

Arjuna, too, eager to capture the Sauvira king, slays five hundred bold 
Maharathas from the mountains, the vanguard of the army, fighting in the 
front. Yudhishtira kills a hundred of the best Sauvira fighters, in the 
twinkling of an eye. Nakula, sword in hand, leaps down from his chariot 
and, like a tiller sowing seeds, scatters heads of the soldiers in the rear. 
From his chariot, Sahadeva brings down so many elephant-mounted 
warriors with his iron shafts, and they drop from their lofty seats like birds 
from the trees. 


Bow in hand, the king of the Trigartas leaps down from his great chariot 
and kills Yudhishtira’s four horses with his mace. But seeing the enemy 
closing in and fighting on foot, the Dharmaraja pierces his chest with a 
crescent-tipped arrow, so that he vomits blood and falls at his feet, like an 
uprooted tree. Yudhishtira, his horses slain, takes this opportunity to leave 
his chariot and climb with Indrasena into Sahadeva’s. 

Kshemankara and Mahamukha attack Nakula from both sides, like two 
great clouds, with telling showers of the sharpest arrows, but the son of 
Madri swiftly kills both. Suratha, king of the Trigartas, an expert in fighting 
from an elephant’s back, lumbers upto Nakula’s chariot and makes his 
elephant seize it with is trunk and drag it about here and there. A little 
daunted by this, Suratha jumps off his ratha, and then, sword and shield in 
his hands, stands immovable as a mountain. 

Suratha wants to kill Nakula immediately, and he prods his mammoth, 
excited elephant towards him. When the great beast is near enough, Nakula 
severs its head, trunk and tusks from its body, and the mail-clad elephant 
gives a dreadful wail and falls, crushing its riders to crimson pulp. Madri’s 
son quickly climbs into Bhima’s chariot and has some respite. 

Bhima sees Kotikasya rush into the fray and cuts off his sarathy’s head 
with a horseshoe-shaped arrow, so swiftly that the prince does not even 
realise his charioteer has been killed, and his driverless horses careen 
chaotically across the field. Seeing the driverless prince retreating, Bhima 
storms up to him and kills him with a feathered arrow. 

Dhananjaya uses razor-sharp, crescent-tipped arrows and cuts off the 
heads of all the twelve Sauvira heroes; Maharatha Arjuna kills the Ikshvaku 
leaders and great numbers of Sibis, Trigartas and Saindhavas. He fells 
banner-bearing elephants and flag-adorned chariots. Heads and headless 
bodies lie on the field, covering it entirely. Dogs, herons, ravens, crows, 
falcons, vultures and jackals feast on the flesh and blood of the dead. 

When Jayadratha, king of the Sindhus, sees his soldiers all slain, he is 
terrified, and eager to be rid of Krishnaa and flee. In the general bedlam, the 
wretched man quickly leaves Draupadi and runs for his life, following the 
same forest path by which he came. 

Yudhishtira sees Draupadi walking with Dhaumya before her, and lifts 
her onto the chariot of Madri’s valiant son Sahadeva. 

A great slaughter follows Jayadratha’s unseemly flight. As they run 
away, Bhima mows down all Jayadratha’s men with iron shafts, calling out 


their names as he strikes them down, one by one. 

Arjuna sees that Jayadratha has fled and asks his wild brother to refrain 
from killing the rest of the Saindhava army. He says, ‘Jayadratha is to 
blame for all this, and he does not seem to be here anymore. It is him you 
must seek out and I will pray for your success. What is the point of 
slaughtering his soldiers? Why are you bent on this useless bloodshed?’ 

Admonished by the wise Arjuna, Bhima turns to Yudhishtira and says, 
“We have killed a great many enemy warriors, and the rest run. My brother, 
take Draupadi, the twins and Dhaumya with you, and comfort the princess 
when you return to the asrama. I will hunt down the witless Jayadratha, 
even if he hides in Patala, or is protected by Indra himself.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Mahabaho, even if the king of Sindhu is evil, for the 
sake of our sister Dussala, his wife, and the pious Gandhari you must not 
kill him.’ 

Draupadi becomes very agitated when she hears this, and bashfully, but 
in anger, says to her two husbands, Bhima and Arjuna, ‘If you want to do 
what pleases me, you must kill that despicable man. The enemy who 
abducts a wife or takes a kingdom should never be forgiven in battle, even 
if they beg for mercy.’ 

Bhima and Arjuna, admonished, fly in search of the Saindhava king, 
and Yudhishtira takes Krishnaa and Dhaumya back to the asrama. On 
entering the hermitage, he finds it covered with darbhasanas for sadhus, and 
crowded with their disciples. Markandeya and other Brahmanas grace the 
asrama, and the Brahmanas are lamenting what has befallen Draupadi when 
the ineffably wise Yudhishtira and his brothers arrive. 

Great is the joy of all who are there for the Saindhavas and the Sauviras 
have been vanquished, and Panchali rescued. The king sits among the 
sages, while Krishnaa goes into their kutila with the twin brothers. 

Meanwhile, Bhima and Arjuna see Jayadratha fleeing some two krosas 
ahead of them and urge their horses to greater speed. Effortlessly, Arjuna 
shoots down Jayadratha’s horses from that distance with astras which 
weave their way through intervening trees and surely find their target. 

Bhima and Arjuna rush on towards the terrified king of Sindhu, who 
finds himself alone and bewildered, and also gripped by sorrow to see his 
horses killed before his eyes. Seeing Arjuna’s unearthly archery, Jayadratha 
decides to run, and takes the same track that brought him through the forest. 
Phalguna overtakes the petrified Saindhava king and says, ‘What a petty 


man you are! How did you dare abduct a queen? Turn around, Kshatriya; it 
is not right that you flee. How can you run like this, leaving your men to 
face the enemy?’ 

The king of Sindhu does not look back at all. Bhima impatiently 
overtakes him, but the compassionate Arjuna begs him not to kill the black- 
hearted fellow.” 


CANTO 270 
JAYADRATHA VIMOKSHANA PARVA 


V aisampayana said, “Jayadratha still runs headlong from the terrible 

brothers who come at him with weapons raised and ready to strike. 
The furious Bhimasena jumps down from his chariot and runs after him. He 
seizes him by his hair and, hefting him aloft, slams him down on the 
ground. He holds the prince’s head and rains blows on him, until Jayadratha 
faints. 

When the Saindhava recovers consciousness, he groans aloud and 
attempts to get up, but Bhima Mahabaho kicks his head, felling him. He 
kneels squarely on Jayadratha’s chest and rains dreaful blows on his face, 
and that prince faints again. 

Arjuna now intervenes and persuades the enraged Bhimasena to stop 
punishing Jayadratha anymore; he reminds his brother of what Yudhishtira 
has said about their sister Dussala. 

Bhima says, ‘This wretch has done great injury to the blameless 
Krishnaa. He deserves to die! Ah, but I am helpless because our brother 
overflows with mercy and you, too, from a misplaced sense of dharma, 
constantly stop me from having a Kshatriya’s just revenge.’ 

With his crescented arrow, Vrikodara shaves Jayadratha’s head, leaving 
five symbolic tufts of hair. Silently Jayadratha submits to this and Bhima 
says to him, ‘If you want to live, listen to me, fool, and I will tell you how 
you can save your worthless life. In public meetings and in open sabhas you 


must declare for all to hear, J am the slave of the Pandavas! On this 
condition, I spare your life. This is the dharma of victory in battle.’ 

Jayadratha, in a swoon, trembling, and covered in dust, says meekly to 
that ferocious one, ‘So be it.’ 

Arjuna and Vrikodara bind him with rope and bundle him into their 
chariot. Bhima mounts the chariot and, with Arjuna, rides to the asrama. He 
comes to Yudhishtira and shoves Jayadratha down to the ground before his 
elder brother. 

The Dharmaraja smilingly tells him to set the Sindhu prince free, and 
Bhima says to the king, “Tell Draupadi that this dog is now the slave of the 
Pandavas.’ 

His brother says affectionately, ‘If you have any regard for me, you will 
set this man free.’ 

And now Draupadi, too, urges Bhima to do so. She says, ‘Let him go. 
He has become the king’s slave and you have disfigured him by shaving his 
head and leaving five tufts of hair on it.’ 

Now at liberty, Jayadratha approaches Yudhishtira and bows low to him. 
He bows to all the Munis. Seeing the abject Jayadratha, so weak that Arjuna 
has to support him, the compassionate Yudhishtira says, ‘I release you; you 
are a free man now. Go, and be careful never to commit such folly again. It 
is shameful that you meant to take a woman by force; no man less vile 
would think of such a thing.’ 

Yudhishtira looks with some pity at the Sindhu king and says, ‘May 
your heart grow in dharma, so that such a base thought never enters it again. 
Go in peace now with your charioteers, cavalry and footsoldiers..’ 

O Bhaarata, when Yudhishtira says this, Jayadratha is overcome with 
shame and, bending his head, he silently and sadly makes his way to 
Gangadvaram, the place from where the Ganga comes down to the plains. 
He implores Trilochana, Uma’s consort, for protection and does severe 
penance. Siva, the three-eyed One, is so pleased with Jayadratha’s tapasya 
that he comes down to the Earth to accept his offering of penance and tells 
him to ask for a boon. 

Listen, Rajan, to the boon that Jayadratha asks Mahadeva for. The 
Saindhava says, ‘Grant that I am able to defeat all the five sons of Pandu, 
mounted on their chariots, in battle!’ 

Lord Siva tells him this is not possible. ‘None can slay or conquer them 
in battle. However, except for Arjuna, I grant that you will be able to 


contain them, but only once, on the battlefield. Arjuna is Nara, and Vishnu’s 
own Avatara. He performed an impossibly austere tapasya in the Badari 
vana, and Lord Narayana supports him, so that even the Devas cannot 
defeat him. I myself have given him the divine astra called Pasupata. The 
Lokapalas have given him the Vajra and other Devastras. 

Vishnu Devadeva, Hyanantatma the Infinite Spirit, Suraguru Prabhu the 
Lord Preceptor of all the Devas, Pradhana Purusha the Supreme Being 
without attributes, Viswatma the Soul of the Universe, Viswamurtiman is 
embodied in all creation. At the end of a great cycle of time, he assumed the 
form of the all-consuming Fire and devoured the Universe, with its 
mountains and seas, islands, hills, woods and forests. After he destroyed the 
subterranean Naga world as well, huge, many-hued clouds, clashing and 
flashing with thunder and lightning, spread over the sky and poured water in 
torrents as thick as chariot axles, filling space and dousing the raging 
apocalypse. 

This happened at the end of four thousand yugas, when the Earth was 
flooded with water and had become one vast sea, the ekarnava. All was 
hushed: mobile creatures were dead; the Sun, the Moon and the winds were 
all gone; and the Akhanda was without stars and planets. It was then that 
the Paramatman Narayana, unperceivable by the senses, Sahastraksha 
Sahastrapata—thousand-headed and thousand-limbed— wanted to rest. The 
serpent Sesha, awesome with his thousand hoods and shining with the 
splendour of ten thousand suns; white as the Kunda flower, or the Moon, or 
pearls, or the white lotus, or milk or the fibres of a lotus stalk, served as his 
couch. That adorable and omnipotent God slept on lap of the fathomless 
Ocean, enveloping all space with the blackness of night. 

When, finally, the urge to create stirred in him he awoke and found the 
Universe empty. There is, in this connection, a sloka that describes and 
explains the word Narayana: Nara created water and it formed his body, 
therefore, it is called Nara. It was his Ayana, or resting place, and, 
therefore he is known as Narayana. As soon as that Eternal Being began to 
meditate in order to create the Universe again, a lotus sprang spontaneously 
from his navel, and the four-faced Brahma emerged from that lotus. Brahma 
Lokapitamaha, the ancestor of all creatures, sat on that flower and, finding 
that all the Universe was a void, created in his own likeness, and from his 
mind, the nine great Rishis— Marichi and others. 


These nine also became creators and brought Yakshas, Rakshasas, 
Pisachas, reptiles, men and all mobile and immobile creatures into being. 

Brahman, the Supreme Spirit, exists in three states: in the form of 
Brahma he is the Creator; as Vishnu he is the Preserver; and as Siva he is 
the Destroyer of the Universe. 

O king of Sindhu, have you not heard of the wondrous achievements of 
Vishnu, which the Munis and the Brahmanas who know the Vedas 
describe? 

When the world was reduced to one vast Sea with only the heavens 
above, the Lord, like a firefly on a monsoon night, searching hither and 
thither for a patch of stable ground from where he could begin the act of 
creation, decided to raise the submerged Earth out of the water for his 
purpose. He wondered what shape he should take to rescue Bhumi Devi 
from the flood and, after some contemplation, he chose the form of a wild 
boar, sporting in the water. He assumed the shape of a sacrificial boar, 
radiant and aglow with intuitive knowledge of the Vedas. The Varaha was 
ten yojanas long; it had sharp tusks and was cloud dark. Its body was as 
massive as a mountain and, roaring like tumultuous rain-clouds clashing, it 
dove deep and lifted up the Earth with one of its tusks and set Bhumi back 
in her proper place. 

At another time, the Mahatman assumed the marvellous form of a half- 
man, half-lion—Narasimha, the Manticore. Joining his hands together in 
supplication, he went to the court of the king of the Daityas. That progenitor 
of the Daityas, the son of Diti, was the enemy of the Devas, and flared up in 
rage when he saw this peculiar beast. Eyes inflamed, adorned with garlands 
and looking like a mass of black thunderheads, this warlike son of Diti, 
Hiranyakasipu took up his trident and, roaring like thunderclouds, rushed at 
the Manticore. The Narasimha leapt into the air and tore the Daitya apart 
with his claws. 

Having slain the Daitya king for the sake of the well-being of all 
creatures, the radiant, lotus-eyed Lord of great effulgence, was born again 
from the womb of Aditi as the son of Kasyapa. 

At the end of a thousand years she delivered him, a Being of 
superhuman conception, short, dark-skinned, and bright eyed. He held a 
Rishi’s staff and kamandalu in his hands, and the mystic birthmark of 
Srivatsa, shaped like a curl of hair, on his chest. He had tangeld locks of jata 


and wore the sacrificial thread across his chest; he was strongly built and 
handsome, and shone with lustre. 

Arriving at the yagnasala of Bali, king of the Danavas, Vamana the 
dwarf entered the assembly with the help of Brihaspati. 

Bali was pleased to see him and said, “I am happy to see you, O 
Brahmana. What can I do for you?” 

The dwarf replied with a smile, “Lord of Danavas, give me land to 
cover three paces of my legs,” and Bali consented happily to give the 
Brahmana what he wanted. 

As he was measuring the three paces, Hari the dwarf assumed his 
Viswarupa, and with just three steps, covered the Earth; and then immortal 
Vishnu gifted it to Indra. 

What I have just told you is the famous story of the Vamana Avatara, 
the incarnation of the dwarf. From him all the gods were created, and from 
this incarnation onwards, the world is said to be Vaishnava, or pervaded by 
Vishnu. Vishnu has now been born into the world again, in the race of the 
Yadavas, to destroy evil and preserve dharma. In this Avatara he is called 
Krishna. 

Saindhava, these are the achievements of the Brahman, whom all the 
worlds worship and whom the learned describe as without beginning or 
end, as un-born and divine. They call him Yamahurajitam -_ the 
unconquerable; Sankachakragadhadharam—who holds the conch-shell, 
discus and mace in his hands; Srivatsadharinam Devam - the Lord who is 
marked with the mystic Srivatsa; Pitakausheyavasasam - attired in yellow 
silk, and who is the best of all who are skilled in the Astra Shastra. 

It is this same Krishna who protects Arjuna. That glorious and lotus- 
eyed One of infinite power, that slayer of hostile heroes, rides in Partha’s 
chariot and defends him. Thus, Arjuna is invincible. The gods cannot resist 
him, to say nothing of a mere mortal being able to vanquish Partha in battle. 

Therefore, O king, Arjuna you must leave well alone. You shall, 
however, be able to quell, for a single day only, the rest of Yudhishtira’s 
forces, as well as your enemies, the other four sons of Pandu!’ 

Having spoken thus to Jayadratha, the Divine Hara, Sarvapaapa Haro 
Hara—the destroyer of all sins, Umapati—the consort of Uma, Pasupati— 
the Lord of wild beasts, Yagnaha—the despoiler of Daksha’s sacrifice, 
Tripurardana— He who destroyed the Tripura, He that plucked out the eyes 
of Bhaga, He who is surrounded by his dwarfish, hunchbacked and dreadful 


entourage of ganas that have frightful eyes and ears and uplifted arms - 
Siva vanishes from that place, O Narashardula, with his beloved Uma. 

Jayadratha returns home and the sons of Pandu continue to live in the 
Kamyaka vana.” 


CANTO 271 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA 


anamejaya asked, “What did those Naravyaghras, the Pandavas, do 
after the trial of Draupadi’s abduction?” 

Vaisampayana said, “After he has defeated Jayadratha and rescued 
Krishnaa, Dharmaraja Yudhishtira sits down with that Brahmanottama 
Markandeya. Hearing the words of sympathy that all the Rishis express, 
Yudhishtira says to Markandeya, ‘Worshipful one, you are known amongst 
the gods and the ascetics to have the fullest knowledge of the past and the 
future. I have a doubt that I would like you to clear. 

This devi is the daughter of Drupada; she was born from the sacrificial 
fire and not from a woman’s womb; she is highly blessed and is the 
daughter-in-law of the illustrious Pandu. I know that all creatures are 
subject to the influences of kaala and kalpa—time and destiny —that were 
established by Brahman, and to the karma of one’s actions. If this is true, 
how could such misfortune afflict this wife of ours who is so faithful and 
pure, even like an honest man being falsely accused of theft? 

Draupadi has never committed any sin. Indeed, she has never done 
anything that is not praiseworthy; she has treated Brahmanas with the 
utmost dharma. Yet, Jayadratha carried her away by force; and as a 
consequence, he and his allies were defeated in battle, and he had his head 
shaved. 

No doubt, we slaughtered the Sindhu troops and rescued her, but we are 
tainted by the disgrace of our wife being abducted because of our 


carelessness. This life in the wilderness is full of sorrow. We live by hunting 
and we are forced to kill the animals with whom we share the vana as a 
home. This exile that we suffer is because of deceitful kinsmen. Is there 


anyone who is more unfortunate than I am? Have you ever seen or heard of 
such a man?’ ” 


CANTO 272 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “MI arkandeya says, ‘Bharatarishabha, even Rama _ suffered 

unequalled torment because of the evil Rakshasa king Ravana, 

who used maya and, overpowering the vulture Jatayu, forcibly carried away 

Rama’s wife Sita from their asrama in the forest. With Sugriva’s help, Rama 

brought her back by building a bridge across the sea and burning down 
Lanka with his fiery arrows.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘In what dynasty was Rama born, and how great was 
he? Whose son was Ravana, and what quarrel did he have with Rama? O 
Illustrious, tell me all this in detail, for I long to hear the story of Rama of 
the great deeds.’ 

Markandeya says, ‘Listen, prince of the Bhaaratas, to this ancient 
Itihasa, exactly as it happened. I will tell you about the suffering that Rama 
and his wife endured. 

There was a great king named Aja in the Ikshvaku dynasty. He had a 
son named Dasaratha, who was devoted to the study of the Vedas and was 
pure of heart and mind. Dasaratha had four sons, who were knowledgeable 
about dharma and artha; they were Rama, Lakshmana, Satrughna, and the 
mighty Bharata. Rama’s mother was Kausalya, Bharata’s was Kaikeyi, and 
those twin scourges of their enemies, Lakshmana and Satrughna, were the 
sons of Sumitra. 

Janaka was the king of Videha, and Sita was his daughter. Tvashta 
himself created Sita with the intention of making her the beloved wife of 


Rama. This was the lineage of Rama and Sita; and now listen to how 
Ravana was born. 

That Lord of all creatures and the Creator of the Universe— 
Sarvalokanam Prabhu Swayambhu Prajapati, that Rishi-like Deva, was the 
grandfather of Ravana. He had a beloved son named Pulastya who, in turn, 
had a mighty son called Vaisravana, who was born of a cow. But Vaisravana 
left his father and went to live with his grandfather. Rajan, his furious father 
created another exactly like himself to take revenge on his son Vaisravana, 
and he called this one Visrava. 

Pleased with his grandson Vaisravana, the Pitamaha Brahma gave him 
these gifts: immortality, the ownership of all the wealth in the Universe, the 
guardianship of one of the cardinal points, the friendship of Isana Siva, and 
a son named Nalakubara. He gave him Lanka for his capital, which was 
guarded by legion Rakshasas; a chariot called Pushpaka that could go 
everywhere, at the will of he who sat in it; and kingship over the Yakshas, 
and sovereignty over other kings.’ ” 


CANTO 273 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “MI arkandeya continues, “The Muni named Visrava, replicated in a 

moment of rage from the soul of Pulastya, began to look at 

Vaisravana with great anger. But Kubera Vaisravana, king of the Rakshasas, 
knew that his father was angry with him and always tried to please him. 

Bhaaratottama, that Rajarajan who lived in Lanka sent three Rakshasa 
women, borne on men’s shoulders, to wait on his father. Their names were 
Pushpotkata, Raka and Malini; they were accomplished singers and 
dancers, and attentive to that Mahataman Rishi. Those slender Rakshasis 
vied with one another in making the Rishi happy, and that worshipful being 
was pleased with them. He granted them boons, and to every one of them 
he gave princely sons according to their wishes. 

Pushpotkata had two sons, both most magnificent Rakshasas and 
unequalled in prowess. They were Kumbhakarna and Dasagriva Ravana. 
Malini had a son named Vibhishana, and Raka had twin children named 
Khara and Surpanakha. Vibhishana was the most handsome of them all. He 
was pious and conscientiously performed every religious rite. 

The first of Rakshasas, Dasagriva the ten-headed, the eldest, was 
devout, vivacious and strong beyond belief. Kumbhakarna was the most 
powerful in battle, for he was a fierce and terrible warrior and a master of 
maya. Khara was a skilled archer; he hated Brahmanas and lived on human 
flesh. And the fierce Surpanakha was a constant bane to tapasvins in the 
vana. 


And learned in the Vedas and diligent in ceremonial rites, all these lived 
with their father on the Gandhamadana mountain. There they saw 
Vaisravana, owner of great wealth, always borne on men’s shoulders, with 
their father. Gripped by envy, they decided to perform the most severe 
tapasya to please Brahma. 

Dasagriva, subsisting on air alone and surrounded by the five sacred 
fires, meditated while standing on one leg for a thousand years. 
Kumbhakarna performed his tapasya with bowed head and hardly ate at all. 
The wise and magnanimous Vibhishana, undertaking fasts and subsisting 
only on dry leaves, also sat in dhyana and practised severe tapasya for a 
long time. Khara and Surpanakha cheerfully protected and attended on them 
while these others were at their penance. 

At the end of a thousand years, the invincible Dasagriva cut off nine of 
his heads and offered them to Agni. Brahma, Lord of the Universe, was 
pleased and, appearing to the Rakshasa tapasvins, told them to stop their 
tapasya and promised to grant boons to each of them. 

Brahma said, “I am pleased with you, my children. Stop your tapasya 
and ask me for boons. I will give you anything you ask for, except 
immortality. Ravana, your heads, which you offered to me in the great fire, 
will adorn your body as before, in whatever way you like. Your body will 
not be disfigured; you will be able to assume any form at will, and conquer 
your enemies in battle. This is my promise.” 

Ravana said, “May I never be defeated by a Gandharva, a Deva, a 
Kinnara, an Asura, a Yaksha, a Rakshasa, a Naga or any other creature!” 

Brahma said, “You will never have cause to fear any of those you have 
named, except man. May good fortune attend you! This is my command.” 

Ten-headed Ravana was jubilant, for, being an eater of men, he 
dismissed humans as being of no consequence. The Pitamaha spoke to 
Kumbhakarna in the same way, and being dull-witted, Kumbhakarna asked 
for the boon of long sleep, which Brahma granted. Then Brahma addressed 
Vibhishana and told him to ask for any boon he wanted, as he was pleased 
with him. 

Vibhishana replied, “Lord, grant that even when I am in grave danger, I 
never swerve from the path of dharma and, that being ignorant, I may be 
enlightened by the light of divine knowledge!” 

Brahma replied, “Parantapa, although you are born a Rakshasa, your 
soul does not lean towards adharma. And so, I grant you immortality.” 


Markandeya continues, “Having obtained his boon, the ten-headed 
Rakshasa defeated his half-brother Kubera Vaisravana in battle and wrested 
the kingdom of Lanka from him. The noble Kubera left Lanka and, 
followed by his Gandharvas, Yakshas, Rakshasas and Kinnaras, went to live 
on the Gandhamadana mountain. 

Ravana forcibly took the Pushpaka vimana from him, and for this, 
Kubera cursed him, saying, “This chariot shall never carry you; it will bear 
the man who will kill you in battle. And because you have insulted me, 
your elder brother, you will soon die!” 

Rajan, the devout and splendid Vibhishana, who always walked the path 
of dharma, followed Kubera. That divine Lord of wealth was pleased with 
his younger brother and gave him command of the Yaksha and Rakshasa 
armies. 

In the meantime, the mighty and man-eating Rakshasas and Pisachas 
came together and made Dasagriva their king. He could take any form at 
will and his powers were terrifying. Able to fly through the air, he attacked 
the Devas and the Daityas and took their most valuable possessions from 
them. Because he terrified all creatures, he was called Ravana; and with the 
power to muster as much strength as he wanted, without limit, he struck 
terror into the hearts of the Devas,’ says Markandeya.” 


CANTO 274 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “MI arkandeya says, ‘When terror gripped the worlds, the 
Brahmarishis, the Siddhas and the Devarishis, with Havyavaha 
as their spokesman, asked Brahma for protection. 

Agni said, “Dasagriva, the powerful son of Visrava, cannot be killed 
because of your boon. Endowed with limitless strength, he oppresses the 
earth’s creatures. Protect us, Bhagavan. We have no other refuge but you.” 

Brahma said, “Vibhavasu, neither the Devas nor the Asuras can conquer 
him in battle. I have already ordained the means of his death, and that is 
imminent. At my command, the four-headed Deva has already incarnated 
for this. Vishnu Mahatman will accomplish what you want.” 

The Pitamaha said to Sakra, “You and all the Devas must be born on 
Earth in amsa as sons born of monkeys and bears: heroic, powerful beings 
who can take any form at will, who will be Vishnu’s allies.” 

At his word, the Devas, the Gandharvas and the Danavas quickly 
assembled to decide how they should each be born on Earth. Brahma 
commanded a Gandharvi named Dundubhi to go to the Earth and 
accomplish his task. Dundubhi was born in the world of men as the 
hunchbacked Manthara. All the chief Devas, including Sakra and others, 
sired children on the wives of the best of vanaras and reekshas. And these 
sons equalled their fathers in strength and glory. 

They could split mountain peaks, and their weapons were rocks and sala 
and tala trees. They were wonderfully strong and their bodies were hard as 


diamonds; they were accomplished in battle and could call on unlimited 
energy whenever they wished. They were each equal to a thousand 
elephants in might, and they were as swift as the wind. Some of them lived 
anywhere, while others lived in forests. 

Having contrived all this, Brahma Prajapati instructed Manthara about 
what she must do. Manthara of the mind quick as lightning understood 
immediately and, from then on, went here and there, busying herself with 
creating and fanning quarrels,’ says Markandeya.” 


CANTO 275 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ = udhishtira says, ‘O luminous one, you have told me about the 

birth of Rama and the others in detail. I want to know the reason 

for Rama’s exile. Brahmana, tell me why the sons of Dasaratha, the brothers 

Rama and Lakshmana, went to the forest with the renowned Maithili, 
princess of Mithila.’ 

Markandeya says, “The pious king Dasaratha, who was always attentive 
to the needs of his elders, and devout in performing religious kriyas, was 
joyful when his sons were born. They grew up, strong and learned in the 
Vedas and their mysteries, and in the Astra Shastra. After they had 
completed their Brahmacharya vows, the princes were married; and 
Dasaratha’s cup of joy overflowed. 

The intelligent Rama, the eldest son, became his father’s favourite, and 
delighted the people with his charming nature. Then, Bhaarata, the wise 
king thought that he was getting old, and consulted his ministers and his 
kulaguru Vasishta about installing Rama as Yuvaraja of the kingdom. All 
those devoted men agreed that the time was ripe for this. Dasaratha looked 
at his splendid son Rama, the enhancer of Kausalya’s joy, of the red eyes 
and sinewy arms, of the gait like an elephant’s, of the long arms and curly 
black hair, who was courageous and glowed in splendour, and equal to 
Indra himself in battle, who was versed in the Shastras, as wise as 
Brihaspati, and a master of all the arts and sciences. Everybody loved him. 


Rama’s senses were under complete control, and even his enemies felt 
happy to see him. He was the terror of the unrighteous and protector of the 
good. With a sparkling mind, he was irresistible; he was ever-victorious and 
undefeated. O Kurunandana, Dasaratha looked at his son who flooded 
Kausalya with joy, and was gratified. 

Thinking about Rama’s qualities, the mighty king said to the Purohita, 
“Blessed Brahmana, tonight the Pushya nakshatra will rise in a most 
auspicious conjunction. Have preparations made for the coronation and call 
Rama. This auspicious time lasts until tomorrow. My ministers and I will 
invest Rama as Yuvaraja of all my subjects.” 

Manthara, Queen Kaikeyi’s maid, heard the king, went to her mistress 
and slyly said to her, “Kaikeyi, today the king has made a proclamation that 
does not augur well for you. Unlucky one, it is better that you are bitten by 
an angry and fiercely venomous snake. But Kausalya is fortunate, for it is 
her son who is to become Yuvaraja. Where is good fortune when your own 
son does not inherit the kingdom?” 

The slender-waisted Kaikeyi put on all her ornaments and sought out 
her husband in private. Lovingly and with alluring smiles she said to him, 
“Rajan, you are always true to your word. You swore, once, to give me 
something I desired. I ask you to keep that oath now and save yourself from 
the sin of breaking your sacred word.” 

The king said, “I will give you what you ask for. Ask for anything you 
like. What man, undeserving though he may be of death, shall I kill today? 
What man that deserves to die shall I set free? Who shall I give wealth, 
whose wealth shall I confiscate? Whatever wealth there is in this world, 
except that which belongs to Brahmanas, is mine. I am the king of kings 
and the protector of the four varnas. Tell me quickly, blessed devi, what 
does your heart desire?” 

Kaikeyi heard the king and knew that she had bound him to his pledge, 
and that her power over him was strong. She said, “I want Bharata be made 
Yuvaraja, and Rama to be sent into exile for fourteen years in the Dandaka 
aranya, Wearing matted jata on his head and clad in rags and deerskin.” 

Bhaaratottama, the king heard her words like daggers and was 
speechless with grief. But learning of his father’s pledge and Kaikeyi’s 
demand, the noble Rama went into the jungle so that his father’s dharma 
was preserved. His wife Sita, the princess of Videha and daughter of 
Janaka, and Lakshmana, that best of archers, followed Rama into the forest. 


After Rama left, king Dasaratha died, as was destined. Queen Kaikeyi 
called her own son Bharata to her and said, “Dasaratha has departed for 
Swarga, and both Rama and Lakshmana are in the forest. Take this vast 
kingdom that has no rivals to disturb its peace.” 

But noble Bharata cried, “You have done an evil thing by killing your 
husband and having Rama sent into exile. From lust for wealth and power, 
mother, O accursed woman, you have piled sin on my head.” 

And the prince wept bitterly. He proved his innocence before all the 
subjects of the kingdom and set out after Rama, to bring him back. With 
Kausalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi in chariots going before his retinue, and 
with a heavy heart, he set out with his brother Satrughna. 

Accompanying him were the Rishis Vasishtha, Vamadeva and 
thousands of other Brahmanas, and the people of the cities and the 
provinces, all wanting to bring Rama back. 

On the Chitrakuta mountain, Bharata saw Rama and Lakshmana, 
dressed like sadhus, with bows in hand. Rama, however, was determined to 
keep his father’s word and dismissed Bharata. Bharata returned and ruled 
from Nandigrama, keeping his brother’s wooden sandals in front of him 
always. Rama was afraid that the people of Ayodhya would come again to 
Chitrakuta, and made his way through the dense vana to the asrama of Rishi 
Sarabhanga. 

There he paid homage to Sarabhanga and, entering the forest of 
Dandaka, set up his dwelling on the banks of the Godavari. While he lived 
there, through the wiles of Surpanakha, Rama was forced to fight Khara, 
who lived in nearby Janasthana. That righteous son of the Raghuvamsa 
killed fourteen thousand Rakshasas in order to protect the Rishis at their 
tapasya, whom the demons preyed on and ate. 

By killing mighty Rakshasas like Khara and Dushana, the wise Rama 
restored the peace of that sacred forest. 

After these Rakshasas had been slain, Surpanakha, her nose and lips 
mutilated by Laksmana, flew to Lanka, to her brother Ravana. When the 
Rakshasa woman, demented with grief, and dried blood staining her face, 
saw Ravana she fell at his feet. He was overpowered by anger at seeing how 
horribly she had been disfigured and, grinding his teeth, sprang up from his 
throne. 

He dismissed his ministers, and when they were alone he asked his 
sister, “Who has done this to you, forgetting that you are my sister? Who is 


he that calls my vengeance and his death so ardently to him? Who is he that 
sleeps happily with a fire lit so near his head? Who is he that steps on a 
vicious serpent? Who is he that stands with his hand thrust into the mouth 
of a lion?” 

Flames of fury burst from his body, as a night fire spews out of the 
hollows in a dry tree. 

His sister told him about Rama’s prowess and about the defeat of the 
Rakshasas with Khara and Dushana at their head. Impelled by destiny and 
the slaughter of his kinsmen, Ravana thought of using Maricha to kill 
Rama. He resolved on the course he would follow and arranged for Lanka 
to be ruled by his ministers while he was away. 

After consoling Surpanakha as best as he could, he set out on a journey 
across the sky. He crossed the Trikuta and the Kala mountains and saw the 
vast ocean of unplumbed waters —the home of makaras. 

Crossing the ocean, ten-headed Ravana reached Gokarna, the favoured 
place of the illustrious Deva armed with the Trisula. And there Ravana met 
his old friend Maricha who, out of fear of Rama, had become a sannyasin.’ 


CANTO 276 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana continued, “Markandeya says, ‘Maricha received 
Ravana with a respectful welcome and offered him fruit and roots. 

When Ravana was seated and at ease, the eloquent Maricha sat beside 
him and said to Ravana, “Your skin looks unnaturally pale. Is all well in 
your kingdom, O king of Rakshasas? What brings you here? Are your 
subjects as loyal to you as ever? Whatever it is that has brought you here, 
consider it already done, even if it be difficult to accomplish.” 

Ravana, his heart in turmoil from anger and humiliation, told him about 
what Rama had done and that he, Ravana, wanted the prince dead. 

An alarmed Maricha said, “You must not provoke Rama; I know his 
prowess. No one can withstand his arrows. That great one is the reason for 
my taking sannyasa. What evil creature has instigated you to follow a 
course that will surely bring ruin upon you?” 

Ravana replied simply, “If you do not do as I say, you will die.” 

Maricha thought within himself, “Since death is inevitable, I will do as 
he says, because it is better to die at the hands of Rama, who is superior.” 
And he says to Ravana, “I will do whatever I can to help you.” 

Dasagriva Ravana said to him, “Take the shape of a deer with golden 
skin and antlers of gold, and go and enchant Sita. When she sees you she 
will send Rama to hunt you, and then she will be mine to carry away. 
Losing his wife, the villainous Rama will die of grief. This is what you 
must do to help me.” 


Maricha performed his own funeral rites in anticipation of his death and 
unhappily followed Ravana. They reached Rama’s asrama and both did as 
planned. Ravana took the guise of a sadhu, with a shaven head and carrying 
a kamandalu and a three-pronged staff. 

Maricha took the form of a golden deer. He appeared before Sita and, 
spurred by her own destiny, she sent Rama after the deer. 

Eager to please her, Rama took up his bow, left Lakshmana to protect 
Sita, and set off in pursuit of the deer. Armed with bow and arrows and his 
sword, his fingers cased in lizard-skin gloves, Rama went after that deer, 
even as Rudra followed the astral deer as told in the Purana. 

Ravana lured Rama a great distance away by appearing and 
disappearing from sight, and leading him on. Finally, when Rama realised 
that the deer was a Rakshasa, the illustrious scion of Raghu shot the golden 
creature with an unerring arrow. Struck with Rama’s arrow, the Rakshasa 
Maricha cried out in agony, pefectly mimicking Rama’s voice and calling 
out to Sita and Lakshmana. Vaidehi heard the cry and told Lakshmana to 
hurry to the spot from where the cry came. 

Lakshmana said, “Gentle princess, have no fear. Who can harm Rama? 
O Sita of the sweet smiles, you will see your husband Rama return any 
moment now.” 

When Lakshmana said this, the chaste, naturally timid Sita was 
suspicious of the innocent Lakshmana’s motives and began to cry. 

She, who was devoted and faithful to her husband, scolded Lakshmana, 
“Foolish one, what you secretly yearn for can never be yours. I would rather 
kill myself with a weapon or throw myself from the top of a hill or walk 
into a blazing fire than forsake my Rama and live with a sorry wretch like 
you, like a tigress with a jackal.” 

The good-natured Lakshmana, who was devoted to his brother, covered 
his ears in anguish and set off on the path that Rama had taken, without a 
single look at that devi with lips as soft and red as the bimba fruit. 

Now Ravana, wearing a gentle guise that hid the great evil that he was, 
like ashes covering a smouldering fire, came to the asrama. He came in the 
form of a hermit to carry away that princess of the blemishless character. 
Sita saw him and welcomed him with fruit and roots, and offered him a 
seat. Ignoring these that tiger among Rakshasas showed his own form. 

He said, “O Sita, I am Ravana, king of all Rakshasas. My peerless city, 
Lanka, lies across the great ocean. There, among lovely women, you will 


live with me and be radiantly happy. O you with the beautiful lips, leave 
your ascetic Rama and be my wife!” 

Janaka’s daughter shut her ears and cried, “O do not speak like this. The 
vault of heaven with all its stars may fall down, the earth may shatter into 
fragments, fire may change its nature and become cold, but I could never 
leave Raghunandana. How can a she-elephant who has lived with the 
mighty leader of a herd, with rent temples, forsake him and live with a pig? 
Having once tasted the sweet wine prepared from honey or flowers, how 
can a woman relish coarse arrack made from rice?” 

Saying this, she went inside her hut, her lips quivering and her arms 
trembling with rage. Ravana followed her inside and he seized her by her 
hair, took her in his arms and flew into the air with her. 

A great and noble vulture, Jatayu, who lived on a mountain peak, saw 
that helpless devi in the Demon’s grasp and heard her wailing out to Rama 
in anguish as she was carried away by Ravana.’ ” 


CANTO 277 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


“MI arkandeya says, ‘Jatayu, heroic king of the vultures, whose 

brother was Sampati and whose father was Arjuna, was a friend 
of Dasaratha’s. Seeing his friend’s daughter-in-law on Ravana’s lap, that 
sky-ranger attacked the Rakshasa in fury. 

He cried, “Leave the princess of Mithila! Rakshasa, how can you ravish 
her when I am alive? If you do not release my daughter, you shall not 
escape from me with your life.” 

And Jatayu began to tear at the king of the Rakshasas with his talons. 
He lacerated Ravana with a hundred wounds by striking him with his wings 
and beak. Blood flowed from Ravana’s body, as freely as water from a 
mountain spring. Attacked by this vulture who fought for Rama’s sake, 
Ravana drew his sword and hacked away Jatayu’s two wings and, as the 
immense avian fell to the earth below, the Rakshasa soared into the air, 
shooting out above the clouds with Sita in his grasp. 

As they flew, whenever Vaidehi saw an asrama of Rishis, a lake, a river, 
or a tank, she threw down one of her ornaments. She saw five great 
monkeys on a mountain-top, and that intelligent princess threw down a 
piece of shimmering cloth torn from her garment. That strip of yellow cloth 
fell, fluttering through the air and flashing like lightning from the clouds, 
amongst those five foremost of vanaras. 

With dazzling speed, the Rakshasa flew a long way through the sky like 
a great swift bird, and soon he saw his enchanting city of the many gates, 


which was enclosed on all sides by lofty walls, and built by Viswakrit 
himself. And the king of the Rakshasas entered Lanka, with Sita. 

Whilst Sita was being abducted, Rama was walking back to the asrama 
after killing the deer, when he met his brother Lakshmana. Rama scolded 
him, “How could you leave Vaidehi alone in this Rakshasa-infested forest?” 

He realised that he had been purposefully lured away a great distance by 
the deer, which was a Rakshasa in disguise, and his heart misgave him 
sharply when he saw his brother and knew that Sita was alone. 

Rama breathed, “Ah Lakshmana, is the princess of Videha still alive? I 
fear I shall never see her again.” 

Lakshmana told him everything that Sita had said, especially the harsh 
words with which she had rebuked him. His heart on fire, Rama and 
Lakshmana ran back towards the asrama. On the way they saw the vulture, 
big as a hill, lying on the ground in the throes of death. Suspecting that he 
was a Rakshasa, Rama and Lakshmana rushed at him, drawing their bows 
into circles. 

The mighty vulture, however, addressed them, “Be blessed! I am Jatayu, 
king of vultures, and a friend of Dasaratha.” 

Rama and his brother lowered their great bows and wondered who it 
was that spoke their father’s name in the wilderness. They saw that the 
speaker was the vulture, who had lost his wings and how blood spouted 
from his wounds. That hulking bird told them how Ravana had seized Sita 
and how the Rakshasa had cut off his wings. 

Rama asked Jatayu which way Ravana had taken, and the vulture 
indicated the direction with his grandly crested head, and then Jatayu was 
dead. 

Rama understood that Ravana had gone south. Rama paid his respects 
to his father’s friend and performed his funeral rites. Then those Parantapas, 
Rama and Lakshmana, filled with grief, took a southern course through the 
Dandaka aranya. 

On their way they saw many uninhabited asramas, with kusa grass 
cushions scattered about, and leaf umbrellas and broken water-pots, and 
overrun by jackals. In the depths of that forest Rama and Saumitra saw 
herds of deer roaming at will. They heard the terrible voices of many 
predators and other fell beings, and they sounded like a roaring fire 
devouring the forest. 


Shortly, they saw a hideous, headless Rakshasa, dark as rain-clouds and 
big as a mountain, his shoulders broad as a sala tree, and his arms long and 
massive. On the creature’s chest was a pair of staring eyes, and his mouth 
was on his bloated belly. 

In a trice the headless Rakshasa seized Lakshmana in a giant hand, 
holding him helpless and, O Bhaarata, the son of Sumitra was confounded. 
His eyes on Rama, the headless Rakshasa began to slowly draw Lakshmana 
towards the yawning maw on his belly. 

Lakshmana said to Rama in dismay, “Look at my fate! I cannot bear it: 
your losing your kingdom, the death of our father, then the abduction of 
Sita and now this. O, I am sure I will not see you return with Vaidehi to 
Kosala and sitting on our ancestral throne as sovereign of the Earth. Only 
the very fortunate will see your face, radiant as the moon emerging from 
behind clouds, after your ritual coronation bath and sanctification with kusa 
grass, fried paddy and black peas.” 

The sensitive Lakshmana gave vent to his anguish and lamented in this 
way for a time. 

However, Rama, always unperturbed in the face of danger, said, 
“Narapumgava, do not give way to grief. What is this creature, when I am 
here? You cut off his right arm and I will his left.” 

Even as he spoke, Rama hewed off the Rakshasa’s left arm with his 
sword, as if it was a stalk of corn. The mighty Saumitra did the same to the 
Rakshasa’s right arm, and then struck him time and again in his belly, blows 
like thunder, and the headless monster fell dead, making the ground shake. 

Then, as if in a dream, the brothers saw a divine being rising from the 
dead Rakshasa’s body and hovering in the air, shimmering like the Sun in 
the sky. 

The eloquent Rama asked him, “Who are you? Tell me, what miracle is 
this? How can such a thing happen? I am struck with wonder!” 

That being said, “O Kshatriya, I am a Gandharva and my name is 
Viswavasu. A Brahmana cursed me and I became a Rakshasa both in 
appearance and nature. Rama, Sita has been taken by king Ravana of 
Lanka. Go to Sugriva; he will be your friend. His lives on the mountain 
peak of Rishyamuka, by lake Pampa of the sacred water, where cranes 
flock. Sugriva, the brother of the Vanara king Vali, adorned with a golden 
garland, lives there with four of his counsellors. Go to him and tell him the 
reason for your grief; he is in a similar plight and will help you. That is all I 


can say. You will surely see Janaki, because the king of the Vanaras knows 
Ravana and the others.” 

With these words, the radiant, divine being vanished, leaving Rama and 
Lakshmana marvelling at what had happened.’ ” 


CANTO 278 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “MI arkandeya says, ‘In a torment of grief at Sita’s abduction, Rama 

hurried to Pampa, which was only a short distance away. The 

lake was lush with lotuses of different kinds, and cool, fragrant breezes 

fanned the woodland air. Rama remembered his wife, O king, and was 
suddenly overwhelmed by utter sadness, and he wept. 

Lakshmana said to him, “You, who are always respectful to those that 
deserve it, you should not have to suffer such anguish. Suffering should stay 
away from you, like illness does from the man who leads a disciplined life. 
You have found out about Ravana and Vaidehi. Rescue her now, using your 
intelligence and might. 

Let us approach Vanarottama Sugriva, who is on the mountain peak. Be 
strong and cheerful; I, your disciple, slave and friend, am here.” 

Rama regained his composure at what his brother said, and turned his 
mind to what he needed to do. The brothers Rama and Lakshmana bathed in 
the waters of Lake Pampa and offered oblations to their ancestors; then they 
set out for Rishyamuka. On arriving there, they saw on the summit of the 
mountain, whose slopes were adorned with bounties of trees, fruits and 
roots, five monkeys. 

Seeing them approach, Sugriva sent his advisor, the wise Hanuman, 
large like Himavat, to receive them. The brothers exchanged greetings with 
Hanuman, who then took them to Sugriva. Rajan, Rama immediately struck 
up a friendship with the good Vanara. When Rama told Sugriva about Sita, 


Sugriva showed him the piece of cloth that she had dropped while Ravana 
was carrying her away. 

Rama received this token of faith from Sugriva and installed him as 
king of all the monkeys on Earth. Rama also vowed to kill Vali. With this 
compact, and with utmost confidence in each other, they made their way to 
Kishkindha, to do battle with Vali. Sugriva announced his arrival in 
Kishkindha with a roar as thunderous as the sound of a towering waterfall. 

Vali could not abide this challenge, and was about to rush out, when his 
wife Tara stood in his way. Wise Tara pleaded, “From the sound of 
Sugriva’s confident roars, I feel sure that he has found a great ally. Do not 
go out, my lord.” 

The Vanara king, the eloquent Vali, wearing a golden garland, said to 
Tara of the face as bright as the moon, “You recognise the voice and 
language of every creature from afar. Listen carefully and tell me who helps 
this brother of mine, brother in name only.” 

Tara said, “Listen, O Kapiswara, and I will tell you. Dasaratha’s son 
Rama, greatest of arhcers, mightiest of Kshatriyas, whose wife has been 
abducted, has made a pact of friendship with Sugriva. Rama’s brother, the 
intelligent Lakshmana, also mighty-armed, the unvanquished son of 
Sumitra, stands beside him to ensure Sugriva’s success. Mainda, Dwivida, 
Hanuman the son of Pavana, and Jambavan the king of bears are Sugriva’s 
ministers; they, too, stand by his side. All these illustrious ones are blessed 
with vast strength and intellect, and they all want you dead. So do not 
venture out, my lord.” 

But the king of the monkeys ignored her advice. He suspected that she 
had lost her heart to Sugriva, and was filled with raging envy. He upbraided 
her harshly and came out of his palatial cave to face Sugriva, who stood on 
the slope of the Malyavat mountain. 

Vali said to Sugriva, “Often have I defeated you and, because life is so 
precious to you and because we are brothers, I have spared you each time. 
What makes you wish for death again?” 

Sugriva answered Vali in such a way as to inform Rama of all that had 
transpired between him and his brother. He said gravely, “You have robbed 
me of my wife and my kingdom. What need have I of life? I have come to 
you in search of death.” 

The Vanara brothers spat venom with vicious words, then flew at each 
other in wrath. Fighting with sala and tala trees, and stones, they struck 


each other down; they leapt high into the air; they struck with their fists; 
they raked each other with nails and bit with long sharp fangs. Covered in 
blood, the two heroes shone like a pair of red-blossomed kinsuka trees. 

As they fought, they looked identical and no one could tell them apart. 
Now Hanuman draped an elephant-flower mala around Sugriva’s neck, and 
that Vanara shone with it, like the Malaya mountain with its circlet of 
clouds. 

Rama could now identify Sugriva by the gajapushpi garland. He raised 
his best of bows, and aimed his arrow at Vali. The twang of Rama’s bow 
was deafening as his arrow pierced Vali’s breast. Vali trembled in fear and, 
his heart pierced, began to vomit blood. He saw Rama standing before him, 
Lakshmana at his side. He chastised that prince, for having taken his life 
without just cause, and fell dead to the ground. And Tara saw him lying on 
the bare earth, her lord who was as radiant as the Sun. 

After Vali was killed, Sugriva regained possession of Kishkindha, and 
along with it, also of the widowed Tara, of the face as lovely as the moon. 
Rama of the sparkling intellect lived on the lush Malyavat hill for four 
months, with Sugriva in worshipful attendance. 

Meanwhile, the lust-driven Ravana reached Lanka and ensconced Sita 
in an asrama-like arbour, in a wood of asoka trees as lovely as the Nandana 
vana. Sita put on valkala and passed her days in distress, living on fruit and 
roots, practising tapasya and keeping vratas, and wasting away day by day, 
pining for her Rama. 

The king of the Rakshasas appointed some Rakshasa women armed 
with bearded spears and swords, lances and battle-axes, maces and flaming 
brands, to guard her. Some of these had two eyes and some three; some had 
eyes on their foreheads; some had long tongues lolling down to their 
throats, and some had none. Some had three breasts and some only one leg; 
some had three matted braids on their heads; some had only one eye. There 
were those who had blazing eyes and hair as stiff as the camel’s; and they 
all stood watchfully, surrounding Sita night and day. 

And those fearsome Pisacha women with dreadful voices always spoke 
savagely to her. “Let us eat her, a dainty morsel she will make; let us 
mangle her and tear her into little pieces. This woman has no regard for our 
master.” 

Filled with grief at being separated from Rama, Sita sighed and said to 
the Rakshasa women, “Devour me at once, good women. I have no desire 


to live without my husband who has eyes like lotus leaves and wavy blue- 
black hair. Else, I will go without food and become emaciated, like a she- 
snake hibernating in a tala tree; I have no will to live. Know for certain: I 
will never live with any man other than Raghava, the descendant of Raghu. 
And knowing this, do what you like with me.” 

Hearing her, those raucous-voiced Rakshasis went to the king of the 
Rakshasas and reported what she had said. When the Rakshasis were 
speaking to Ravana, one of them, Trijata, kind-hearted and pleasantly- 
spoken, consoled the princess of Videha. 

She said, “Listen, O Sita, to what I tell you, for I believe completely in 
what I am about to say. O you of the lovely hips, cast away your fear and 
listen. There is an intelligent and old chieftain of the Rakshasas known as 
Avindhya. He always wishes Rama well and he said this to me. 

‘Reassure and console Sita. Tell her that her husband the mighty Rama 
is well and that Lakshmana serves him faithfully. Raghunandana has struck 
up a friendship with Sugriva, the king of monkeys, and is ready to come to 
your rescue. Timid one, have no fear of Ravana, whom the world despises. 
O Daughter, Nalakubara’s curse will keep you safe from him. Brahma 
cursed Ravana once for having ravished his daughter-in-law Rambha, and 
the Rakshasa’s ten heads will blow apart in shreds if he ever forced himself 
on another woman. 

Sita, your husband will come soon, with Sugriva and Lakshmana, and 
he will take you away from here. 

Devi, I have had a terrible dream of evil omen, in which I saw the death 
of this wretch of Pulastya’s race. Vicious and brutal is this night-ranger. His 
evil nature and ways inspire terror in one and all. Fate has taken good sense 
away from him, and makes him defy the gods and dharma. In my dream I 
saw omens that portend his end. 

I saw Dasagriva, the ten-headed, with his head shaved, his body 
smeared with oil and covered in filth, dancing on a chariot drawn by 
donkeys. I saw Kumbhakarna and other Rakshasas, stark naked and also 
with shaven heads, and smeared all over with blood and excrement, running 
southwards. 

Vibhishana was alone, with a royal white parasol unfurled over his 
head, and wearing a turban; his body was adorned in white garlands and his 
skin anointed with the finest unguents; and I saw him climb to the summit 


of the Mountain Sweta. I also saw four of Vibhishana’s ministers, similarly 
adorned, ascending the summit of that hill along with him. 

These signs mean that only these five will survive the impending 
holocaust. Bhumi with her oceans and seas will be enveloped by Rama’s 
arrows. Princess, your husband’s fame will fill the earth. In my dream I saw 
Lakshmana’s arrows devouring everything, in all directions; I saw him 
climbing onto a pile of bones and drinking rice and honey boiled in milk. 
And I saw you running northwards, weeping and covered in blood, and 
protected by a tiger. O Vaidehi, very soon you will be united with your lord 
Raghava and his brother.” 

The princess with eyes of the gazelle heard what Trijata said and hope 
woke again in her heart of seeing Rama again. And when the Pisacha 
women came back, they saw her sitting with Trijata, just as they had left 
her” 


CANTO 279 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “MI arkandeya says, “The chaste Sita languished in Lanka, sunk in 

melancholy and filled with grief for her husband, wearing 

ragged clothes, with only a single jewel on the marital thread on her wrist, 

weeping constantly as she sat on a rock, and waited upon by Rakshasis. 
While she was in this state, Ravana, tormented by desire, came to her. 

Inflamed by lust, clad in divine attire, decked with jewelled earrings, 
and wearing a beautiful garland and crown, that virile conqueror of the 
Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Yakshas and Kimpurushas, arrived in the 
asoka vana, like an embodiment of spring. Ravana had dressed with care 
and looked like the kalpa-vriksha in Indra’s garden. But though he adorned 
himself with every embellishment, she saw him only as an evil spectre, like 
a glorious banyan tree in a cemetery. 

The night-ranger came near the slender-waisted Devi, like Saturn 
approaching Rohini. Pierced by the arrows of the god of the flower emblem 
he accosted that woman of the perfect hips, startling her like some helpless 
doe. 

He said to her, “O Sita, you have shown your devotion to your husband 
for long enough. Delicate-limbed one, take pity on me. Let these 
maidservants of mine bathe and adorn you now, and take me for your lord. 
Put on rich clothes and ornaments, and be the first among all my women. 
Many daughters of Devas and Gandharvas are mine. I am lord of countless 
lovely Danava and Daitya women. 


One hundred and forty million Pisachas, twice as many man-eating 
Rakshasas of terrible deeds, and three times as many Yakshas are at my 
command. Only some of these are ruled by my brother Kubera, who is the 
lord of all treasures. In my drinking hall, lovely one of the beautiful thighs, 
Gandharvas and Apsaras wait on me and my brother. 

I am the son of that Brahmanottama, Rishi Visravasa, of the immense 
tapasya. I am celebrated as the fifth Lokapala. Beautiful one, I enjoy the 
finest food and drink in all the worlds; why, I have as much wealth as the 
Devadeva himself. Let me put an end to your life of misery in the forest. O 
you of the fair hips, be my queen, equal to Mandodari.” 

The exquisite Vaidehi turned away, dismissively, as if he was as 
insignificant as a piece of straw, and replied to that night wanderer. The 
princess of Videha, who considered her husband her god, her deep, firm 
breasts drenched by her unending tears, said to that degenerate Demon, “It 
is my misfortune, O king of Rakshasas, that I am forced to listen to such 
noxious words. Blessings be yours, Rakshasa, lover of sensual pleasures. 
But turn your mind away from me; I am the wife of another and am faithful 
to my husband. You can never possess me. In this helpless state, I am not a 
fit wife for you. What joy will you find by forcing yourself on an unwilling 
woman? 

Your father is a wise Brahmana, born of Brahma and equal to Prajapati. 
Being a Lokapala, why do you not live by dharma? How can you feel no 
shame for having disgraced your brother, the worshipful Lord of the 
Yakshas and the nine treasures, Kubera who is the friend of Maheswara 
himself?” 

And Sita began to weep, her breasts trembling in agitation, and she 
covered her neck and face with her garment. Her long, black, glossy braid 
tumbled from her head, like a black snake. 

Having heard Sita’s sharp admonition, Ravana said sadly, “Devi, let the 
Deva who has a makara for his emblem burn me if I come near you, when 
you are unwilling. What can I do to you, who still adore Rama, a mere 
man?” 

Saying this to that princess of blemishless character, the Rakshasa king 
made himself invisible and went away to a favoured spot, alone, to console 
himself. And Sita, surrounded by the Rakshasa women, and treated with 
gentleness by Trijata, continued to live there in sorrow.’ ” 


CANTO 280 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “MI arkandeya continues, ‘Meanwhile, Rama and Lakshmana 

continued to live under the clear blue sky, on the hillside of the 

Malyavat mountain. One night, while gazing from the mountain-top at the 

bright moon surrounded by planets and stars in the cloudless sky, cool 

breezes, redolent with the scent of lilies, lotuses and other lily-like flowers 
blew, and Rama was reminded sharply of Sita. 

Dejected at the thought of Sita in the home of the Rakshasa, Rama 
spoke to the heroic Lakshmana in the morning. “Go, Lakshmana, to 
Kishkindha and find that ungrateful king of the Vanaras, that selfish and 
licentious wretch, whom I set upon the throne of Kishkinda to rule over all 
apes, monkeys and bears. Mahabaho, look for that ingrate, for whose sake I 
killed Vali. Lakshmana, that worst of Vanaras has forgotten me in my time 
of anguish. 

I think he will not fulfil his pledge, and out of foolishness, he disregards 
the one who has done him these favours. If you find him apathetic and 
indulging himself in pleasure, you must send him on the same path that we 
did Vali. It will be for the good of all creatures. 

If, on the other hand, you find that he happily espouses our cause, bring 
him here at once. Hurry now and return quickly.” 

At once, the ever obedient Lakshmana, always mindful of his elders, set 
off, taking his beautiful bow and arrows with him. He entered the gates of 
the city of Kishkindha unchallenged. The Vanara king Sugriva came out to 


meet him, realising that he had come in anger. He and his wife received 
Lakshmana in honour and with genuine humility. The heroic Saumitra then 
repeated Rama’s words to him. 

Great king, after hearing everything, Sugriva reverently folded his 
hands and, joined by his wife and servants, said joyfully to that most valiant 
Kshatriya, “Lakshmana, I am neither wicked, nor ungrateful, nor destitute 
of dharma. Let me tell you what efforts I have made to discover where Sita 
is being held captive. I have despatched intelligent monkeys in all 
directions and instructed them to return within a month. They will search 
the entire Earth—her forests, hills and seas, and her villages, towns, cities 
and deep mines. In five days, that month will end, and Rama and you will 
hear happy news.” 

Noble Lakshmana was pacified and he, in turn, paid his respects to the 
king of the Vanaras. They both went back to Malyavat, where Rama waited, 
and Lakshmana told him that the mission to rescue Sita had already begun. 
Soon, having meticulously sought Sita, thousands of monkey lords began to 
return from the three quarters of the earth—the north, the east and the west; 
only the ones that had gone south were yet to return. 

Those that came back reported that although they had searched 
everywhere—on earth as well as across the seas, they had not found any 
trace of Vaidehi or Ravana. By now in an anguish of despair, Rama pinned 
his hopes on the monkeys that had gone south, and somehow eked out the 
days. 

Two months went by, when several monkeys hurried to Sugriva and, in 
urgent voices said to him, “O king, Pavana’s son and Vali’s son Angada, 
along with the other great Vanaras that you sent to the south, have returned 
and are wrecking your madhuvanam, the vineyard that first Vali and then 
you nurtured so lovingly.” 

Sugriva, hearing this, knew that they had succeeded in their mission, for 
success often leads to such exuberance. Vanarottama Sugriva shared his 
thought with Rama. Rama, too, felt that Sita had been found. Then, rested 
and refreshed, Hanuman and the other monkeys came to their king, who 
was with Rama and Lakshmana. Bhaarata, Rama saw Hanuman’s bearing 
and the colour of his face, and he was sure that this Vanara had actually 
seen Sita. Those successful monkeys, with Hanuman at their head, bowed 
low to Rama, Lakshmana and Sugriva. 


Rama took up his bow and quiver of arrows and said to the monkeys 
who stood before him, “Have you accomplished your mission? Are you 
going to breathe life into me again? Are you going to enable me to reign in 
Ayodhya after killing my enemy in battle and rescuing Janaki? As long as 
Vaidehi is a captive, and as long as Ravana remains alive, I do not care to 
live, robbed of both my wife and my honour.” 

The son of Vayu said to Rama, “I bring you good news, O Rama: I have 
seen Janaka’s daughter! After searching all the lands of the south for a long 
time, its hills, forests and mines, we became weary. At last, we saw a great 
tunnel, many yojanas in length, and went into it. It was dark and deep, 
overgrown with tree-roots and infested with worms. 

We went deep into the tunnel and suddenly emerged into sunshine, and 
we saw a beautiful palace. Raghava, it was the home of the Daitya Mayaa. 
There we saw a female Muni named Prabhavati at tapasya. She gave us 
food and drink and, refreshed, we continued our journey along the way she 
pointed to us. 

At long last, we came out of the interminable tunnel and heard ocean 
waves; and we saw the Sahya, the Malaya and the great Dardura mountains. 

We climbed the mountains of Malaya and saw the vast ocean below us. 
In pain and tormented by hunger, despairing of ever returning alive, we lost 
heart at the sight of it. Scanning the great ocean that extended over many 
hundreds of yojanas, that abounded in whales, crocodiles and other marine 
creatures, we grew dejected and grieved at our failure. We sat together and 
decided to starve ourselves to death. 

In the course of conversation, we happened to speak of the vulture 
Jatayu, and just then we saw a bird, as big as a hill, so frightful so as to 
strike terror into every heart, and like a second son of Garuda Vinata. 

Swooping down to devour us, the enormous avian said, ‘Who are you 
that speak of my brother Jatayu? I am his elder brother Sampati, and I am 
the king of birds. Once, long ago, we both flew in a race towards the sun. 
My wings were burnt, but not Jatayu’s. That was the last time I saw my 
beloved brother, the king of vultures! With my wings burnt, I fell onto this 
great mountain, and here I still am.’ 

We told him briefly of the heroic death of his brother and told him, also, 
of the calamity that struck you. Rajan, the mighty Sampati grieved and said, 
‘Who is this Rama, and why was Sita carried away, and how was Jatayu 
slain? O best of monkeys, I want to hear everything in detail.’ 


We told him everything, about what had befallen you and the reason for 
our vow of starvation. The king of birds then persuaded us to abandon our 
vow. He said, “I know Ravana. The city of Lanka is his home. I saw it on 
the other side of the sea in a valley of the Trikuta hills. Vaidehi must be 
there, I am sure of it.’ 

Parantapa, we arose and excitedly began to discuss how we could cross 
the ocean. None dared to cross it, but I invoked the power of my father 
Vayu and crossed the ocean, which is a hundred yojanas wide. I slew some 
Rakshasis on the way, and finally I saw the chaste Sita in Ravana’s asoka 
vana. She was at tapasya, and yearning for her lord; her hair was matted; 
her thin body was covered with dirt; and she sat there broken-hearted and 
hopeless. 

I recognised her as Sita by these unusual signs and, after waiting for a 
moment when she was alone, I approached that worshipful Devi and said, 
‘O Sita, I am Rama’s messenger; I am a Vanara and Pavana’s son. I have 
flown through the sky to find you, and here I am. The Kshatriya brothers 
Rama and Lakshmana live in safety, protected and cared for by Sugriva, the 
king of monkeys. Rama and Saumitra are anxious about you, as is their 
good friend Sugriva. Your husband will soon be here with an army of 
Vanaras. Trust me, precious Devi; I am a monkey and not a Rakshasa.’ 

Sita seemed to meditate for a moment and then replied, ‘From what 
Avindhya told me, I know that you are Hanuman. Mahabaho, Avindhya is 
an old and respected Rakshasa. He told me that Sugriva is surrounded by 
faithful advisors like you. You may leave now.’ 

And she gave me this jewel as a token of proof that I had met her; 
indeed, this jewel helped the blemishless Sita muster the strength to live. 

As further proof, Janaki told me that you once used mantras and turned 
a blade of grass into a deadly astra, with which you shot a crow, which was 
no crow but Indra’s son, while you lived on Chitrakuta. She said this would 
confirm that I had really met her and that she truly was Vaidehi herself. 

I then allowed myself to be seized by Ravana’s soldiers, and I set fire to 
the city of Lanka,” said Hanuman,’ says Markandeya.” 


CANTO 281 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “MI arkandeya says, “At Sugriva’s command, all the best of 
monkeys and the Vanara chieftains assembled on_ the 
mountainside where Rama sat. 

Vali’s father-in-law, the illustrious Sushena, accompanied by a thousand 
crores of powerful jungle-folk, came there; those two foremost of monkeys, 
Gavaya and Gaja, each accompanied by a hundred crores of monkeys, came 
there. Rajan, the fearsome Gavakshya, with the tail of a bull, came with 
sixty thousand crores of monkeys; the renowned Gandhamadana, who lived 
on the mountain of the same name, came, bringing a hundred thousand 
crores of monkeys; the intelligent and mighty Panasa mustered fifty-two 
crores of monkeys, and came to Rishyamuka; that best and most illustrious 
of monkeys, Dadhimukha of the unquenchable energy gathered a large 
army of powerful monkeys, and came; Jambavan came, with a hundred 
thousand crores of ferocious black bears with tilaka marks on their 
foreheads. 

All these and countless other great monkey chieftains came there, O 
king, to help Rama in his mission. With bodies like mountains, roaring like 
lions and leaping about everywhere in excitement, these monkeys set up a 
deafening commotion. Some of the Vanaras looked like mountain peaks; 
some looked like buffaloes; some were as dark as autumnal clouds; and 
some had faces as bright red as vermillion. Monkeys swarmed in from all 
directions, some leaping about, some falling down, and some scattering the 


dust as they came. And that monkey army, vast as the sea at full tide, 
camped there at Sugriva’s command. 

Once the force of monkeys had gathered, Rama and Sugriva chose a 
good day, when the stars were in auspicious conjunctions, and led forth that 
massive host, eager for battle, their minds set on destroying the very world. 

Hanuman, the son of Vayu, went in front, while the rear was guarded by 
the fearless son of Sumitra. Surrounded by the monkey lords, the two 
princes of Raghukula, with their fingers in lizard-skin gloves, shone as they 
rode out; and they were like the Sun and the Moon in the midst of the 
planets. 

The monkey host, armed with rocks, and sala and tala trees, was like a 
vast cornfield under the morning sun. And that mighty army, protected by 
Nala and Nila, by Angada and Kratha, and by Mainda and Dwivida, 
marched to accomplish Raghava’s purpose. The army made many peaceful 
overnight camps on their way, in wide, lush fields and valleys rich with 
fruit, roots and honey, where there was plentiful water and meat. Finally, the 
Vanara legions reached the shores of the ocean, and looking a sea itself, the 
jungle army brilliant with countless colours, camped there. 

The noble son of Dasaratha called Sugriva to him alone and said, “This 
army is vast, and the ocean is, as well. How shall we cross the endless 
waves?” 

At this, many vain monkeys said confidently that they could easily cross 
the ocean. But this was not of much use as they could not all cross on their 
own. Some of the monkeys proposed that they cross in ships, some in boats 
and some on rafts of various kinds. 

However, appeasing them all, Rama said, “The sea here is a full 
hundred yojanas wide. O heroes, all the Vanaras will not be able to cross it. 
Besides, we do not have enough boats to carry across all the troops. It is not 
dharma for us to interfere with trade by commandeering merchant ships, or 
fishing boats or rafts. 

Our army is immense, and the enemy will use any little weakness to 
wreak havoc on us. I do not recommend crossing the sea in ships, boats and 
rafts. I will pray to the Lord of the waters to show us the way. I will fast and 
lie on this shore. He will certainly show himself to me. If he does not, I will 
punish him with astras that blaze brighter than fire and are unquenchable.” 

Both Rama and Lakshmana touched the water in ritual purification and 
lay down on a bed of kusa grass, spread upon on the sand. The divine 


Sagara, the lord of all rivers, surrounded by his aquatic creatures, appeared 
to Rama in a vision. 

The Ocean, surrounded by innumerable gem-filled mines, spoke sweet 
words to Rama. He said, “O Son of Kausalya, Manavarishabha, tell me how 
I can help you. I, too, am from the Ikshvaku dynasty, and your kinsman.” 

Rama said, “O Lord of male and female rivers, I want you to create a 
pathway for my troops, using which, I can reach Lanka and kill Dasagriva 
Ravana, that dreg of the Pulastyas. If you do not make me the way I ask of 
you, I will dry you up with my divine astras.” 

Hearing what Rama said, the Ocean joined his hands in respect and said 
in distress, “I do not want to put any obstacles in your way. I am no enemy. 
Listen, Rama, to what I say and then do what is fitting. If I give your army 
passage at your command, others will threaten me with their weapons and 
order me to do the same. 

In your army there is a monkey named Nala, who has boundless 
strength and skills. He is the son of Tashtri, the architect of the Devas. 
Whatever he throws into my waters, be it wood, grass or stone, I will hold it 
up on the surface, and you will have a bridge to cross on.” Saying this, 
Sagara disappeared. 

Rama arose, called Nala to him and said, “Build a bridge across the sea. 
You are the only one who can.” 

It was thus that Rama, scion of the Kakutsthas, had a bridge built, which 
was ten yojanas wide and a hundred yojanas long. And to this day that 
bridge remains famed and is known as Nalasetu, Nala’s bridge. Only when 
the bridge was completed did Nala, of the mountainous body, come out of 
the water, at Rama’s command. 

While Rama was still on this side of the ocean, the virtuous Vibhishana, 
brother of the king of Rakshasas, accompanied by four of his ministers, 
came to him. The noble Rama welcomed him with affection. Sugriva, 
however, feared that he might be a spy, but Rama was convinced of his 
good intentions because of his transparent sincerity and demeanour, and he 
honoured the good Rakshasa. He installed Vibhishana as the sovereign of 
all the Rakshasas and made him his own counsellor and a friend of 
Lakshmana’s. It was under Vibhishana’s guidance, Rajan, that Rama and his 
troops crossed the great ocean by means of that bridge; and it took them a 
month. 


As soon as they arrived in Lanka, Rama ordered the monkey army to 
wreck the numerous and expansive gardens. While Rama’s troops were thus 
engaged, Vibhishana captured two of Ravana’s ministers and spies, Suka 
and Sarana, who had disguised themselves as monkeys and come among 
the Vanaras. When those night-rangers assumed their real forms, Rama 
showed them around his troops and dismissed them quietly. Then, after 
creating camps for his legions in the gardens of that verdant island, he sent 
the wise Angada as his envoy to Ravana.’ ” 


CANTO 282 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “MI arkandeya says, ‘He settled his army in Lanka’s groves, 
abundant in food and water, fruit and roots; and Rama, 
descendant of the Kakutsthas, took loving care of them. 

Ravana’s city was magnificent and fortified, with many contrivances 
built to prevent the entry of enemies. Impregnable with formidable ramparts 
and gateways, it was circled by seven deep moats that were full of fish, 
sharks and crocodiles; into these moats pointed stakes of khadira wood had 
been driven. 

The ramparts, heaped with stones for the great catapults that were used 
to protect them, were unassailable. The warriors who guarded the walls 
were armed with earthen pots filled with venomous snakes and toxic 
powders of many kinds; they also had fire-brands, arrows, lances, swords 
and battle-axes; and satagnis and sturdy maces covered in wax so they 
could be set alight. 

At all the lofty gates of the city were both mobile and fixed 
encampments manned by large numbers of infantry, supported by countless 
elephants and horses. 

Angada reached one of the gates of the city and announced himself to 
the Rakshasas. He entered the town without suspicion or fear and, 
surrounded by Rakshasas, that handsome Vanara prince looked like the Sun 
amidst dark clouds. He approached that scion of Pulastya’s race, who sat in 


the midst of his counsellors, and saluting Ravana, the eloquent Angada 
delivered Rama’s message. 

He said, “O king, Rama, the descendant of Raghu, who rules in Kosala, 
and whose fame has spread throughout the world, says these words to you: 

Kingdoms are corrupted by sinful kings who cannot control their souls 
and are ruined by their sins. You have attacked me by abducting Sita, and 
you will cause the death of many innocent people. Inflated with power and 
pride, you have killed numberless Rishis living in the jungle and you have 
insulted the Devas. You have killed great kings and sorrowing women. 
Retribution for those vicious sins is about to overtake you, for I will kill you 
and all your advisors. 

Fight! Show me your valour. O wanderer of the night, although I am a 
mere mortal, behold the power of my bow. Release Janaka’s daughter Sita. 
If you do not set her free, I will rid the Earth of all her Rakshasas with my 
arrows.” 

The defiant message was intolerable to Ravana, and he became 
incoherent with rage. Four Rakshasas, adept at reading every nuance of 
their master’s body and face, seized Angada, like four eagles taking a tiger. 
Held fast in the grip of those four, Angada sprang up and landed on the 
terrace of the palace with such velocity that the Rakshasas lost their hold on 
him and fell down to the flagstones below, bruised and their ribs broken. 
From the golden terrace on which he had alighted Angada leapt down, and 
out over the walls of Lanka, and flew to his comrades. 

He went to Rama and, after relating all that had happened, and with 
Rama’s permission, Angada of the magnificent tejas retired to rest before 
battle. 

Then Rama used all those monkeys, who were as swift as the wind, in a 
single action, and stormed the walls of the city, bringing them crashing 
down. With Vibhishana and Jambavan, king of bears, marching ahead of 
him, Lakshmana blasted down the southern gate of the city that was once 
impregnable. Rama attacked Lanka with a hundred thousand crores of 
monkeys, skilled warriors all, and ruddy-skinned like young camels. Crores 
of grey bears with long limbs and huge paws also rushed forward to support 
the Vanara forces. The monkeys leapt up and down everywhere, and raised 
such a pall of dust that the bright orb of the Sun was invisible. 

The people of Lanka saw their city-walls turn a tawny colour, covered 
as it was by monkeys, some as golden as stalks of ripe paddy, some grey as 


shirisha flowers, some red as the rising Sun, and some pale like bleached 
flax or hemp. The Rakshasas, with their wives and elders, marvelled at that 
wondrous sight. 

The monkey warriors pulled down pillars made of precious stones, and 
wrecked the terraces and roofs of palatial mansions. They shattered the 
catapults and their missiles into fragments and scattered them everywhere. 
They flung the sataghnis, the discs, clubs and stones down into the city, 
with great violence and explosions. The Rakshasas that had been stationed 
on the walls as guards took to their heels and fled, in their thousands. 

Hundreds of thousands of dreadful Rakshasas, who could assume any 
form at will, came to battle at the command of the king. With a barrage of 
arrows they drove the forest-dwellers away and the demons stood on the 
ramparts in a display of strength. Those massive Rakshasas forced the 
monkeys off the walls and, struck by enemy lances, many monkey 
chieftains fell from the ramparts. Crushed by falling columns and gateposts, 
many Rakshasas, too, fell to their deaths. 

The monkeys and the dreadful Rakshasas, who began to eat them, 
locked in a bloody struggle. They seized one another by the hair and tore 
each other apart with their claws and fangs. The roars of Vanaras and 
Rakshasas filled the air, and so many on both sides fell to rise no more. 
Neither side was willing to yield. 

All this time, Rama poured a thick stream of arrows on Lanka, like 
clouds do rain, and his arrows inundated the city, killing innumerable 
Rakshasas. The mighty Saumitra, Lakshmana, untiring in battle, picked 
particularly strong Rakshasas on the ramparts and killed them one by one 
with narachas, iron arrows ablaze. And when the monkey army had pulled 
down the fortifications of the city of Lanka, making easy targets of 
everything within, Rama called a halt and commanded his simian forces to 
desist.’ ” 


CANTO 283 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “MI arkandeya said, “While the withdrawn troops were resting, 

many small Rakshasas and Pisachas, loyal to Ravana, 

insinuated themselves invisibly amongst them. Among these infiltrators 

were Parvana, Patana, Jambha, Khara, Krodhavasa, Hari, Praruja, Aruja and 

Praghasa. But Vibhishana knew them and undid the maya which made them 

invisible; the Vanaras leapt on them and killed them all. Ravana could not 
bear this, and he marched out at the head of his troops. 

Ravana, who was as expert in the art of warfare as Usana, marched out, 
surrounded by his fearsome army of Rakshasas and Pisachas in a vyuha 
known as Usana, and fell on the monkeys. Seeing Ravana come, with his 
army arrayed in that formation, Rama deployed his jungle legions in the 
apposite counter formation recommended by Brihaspati. And the battle 
between Rama and Ravana began. 

Lakshmana faced Indrajit; Sugriva fought Virupakshya; Nikharvata 
fought Tara; Nala fought against Tunda, and Patusa engaged Panasa. Each 
warrior on the battlefield fought against one that he considered a match for 
him. That encounter, so frightful to the timid, became unbearably fierce, 
like that between the Devas and the Asuras in the days of old. 

Ravana covered Rama with a storm of arrows, lances and swords; and 
Rama tormented Ravana with stone-whetted iron arrows. Lakshmana struck 
Indrajit with arrows that would penetrate the body’s most vital organs; and 
Indrajit responded with an arrowy deluge. Vibhishana showered arrows on 


Prahasta, who countered with a like shower, both fighting recklessly with 
winged arrows sharpened to deadly points. 

And then, between those mighty warriors there followed a duel with 
awesome Devastras, and the three worlds with their mobile and immobile 
creatures were terror-stricken.’ ” 


CANTO 284 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “MI arkandeya says, ‘Prahasta suddenly rushed against Vibhishana 
and, with a roar, fetched him a staggering blow with his mace. 
Despite being struck with such force, the mighty-armed and wise 
Vibhishana held his ground and stood firm, like the Himavat mountain. He 
took up a javelin adorned with a hundred bells and, investing it with the 
power of mantras, hurled it at Prahasta’s head. Like a thunderbolt, that 
weapon sloughed off Prahasta’s head, and he looked like a mighty tree 
felled by the wind. 

When he saw Prahasta killed, Dhumraksha charged the Vanara host in 
fury. And when the monkey leaders saw Dhumraksha’s soldiers flying 
towards them like swift, dark storm-clouds, they broke ranks and fled. And 
when that tiger among Vanaras, Pavana’s son Hanuman, saw those best of 
monkey warriors lose heart, he came forward to take up the fight. And, 
Rajan, when the retreating jungle warriors saw how fearlessly Pavana’s son 
stood on the battlefield they turned back at once to support him. 

Fearful was the din that arose from Rama and Ravana’s forces clashing; 
the field was soon a quagmire of blood. 

Leading the demon onrush, Dhumraksha attacked the monkey host with 
volleys of winged shafts; then Hanuman confronted him. Fierce was the 
contention between the Vanara and the Rakshasa heroes, like the one of 
long ago between Indra and Prahlada. 


The Rakshasa struck the Vanara with maces and spiked clubs, and the 
monkey struck the demon with uprooted trees. Finally, the enraged 
Hanuman slew the Rakshasa along with his charioteer and horses, and 
smashed his chariot into little pieces. 

Seeing Dhumraksha killed inspired the monkeys with courage, and 
abandoning all fear, they charged the Rakshasa army, with whoops and 
roars. They slaughtered countless Rakshasas, and the remaining fled back 
into Lanka. The remnants of the Rakshasa host came to their kng and told 
Ravana of everything that had happened. When he heard how Prahasta and 
Dhumraksha had been killed and their armies destroyed, Ravana sighed 
deeply and rose from his throne. 

“The time has come for Kumbhakarna to come to battle,” he said, and 
awoke his brother from his long, deep slumber with noisy instruments being 
blown into that monster’s jug-like ears. In an anguish of anxiety, Ravana 
said to Kumbhakarna, now awake and sitting relaxed on his bed, “How 
fortunate, my brother, that you can enjoy profound and undisturbed sleep, 
unknowing of the calamity that has overtaken us. Rama and his monkey 
army have crossed the ocean by a bridge and, with scant regard for our 
might, wage a terrible battle against us. 

I stole his wife Sita from him, and he has come to rescue her. He has 
already killed our kinsmen Prahasta and some others. Parantapa, there is no 
one alive, other than you, who can vanquish Rama. O bravest of all, put on 
your armour and go at once to dispatch Rama and his followers. Dushana’s 
two younger brothers, Vajravega and Pramathina, will join you with their 
forces.” 

After Kumbhakarna, the Rakshasa king gave Vajravega and Pramathina 
their orders; and the warrior brothers marched out of the city behind 
Kumbhakarna.’ ” 


CANTO 285 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “MI arkandeya says, ‘Kumbhakarna set out from the city with his 

legion, and soon saw before him the victorious monkey troops. 

He scrutinized the monkey army, looking for Rama, and saw Sumitra’s son 
Lakshmana standing at his post, bow in hand. 

Seeing the titanic Kumbhakarna, the Vanara warriors rushed at him and, 
surrounding him, cast great trees at him. Fearlessly, many began to tear at 
his body with their nails, while other monkeys fought in more conventional 
ways. They mantled that lord of the Rakshasas with a shower of myriad 
weapons, but Kumbhakarna only laughed and began to devour them. He ate 
those best of the monkey-folk —Chala, Chandabala and Vajrabahu. 

The other monkeys saw this and they howled long and loud with fear. 
Hearing the screams of the monkey chieftans, Sugriva, the noble king of the 
Vanaras, charged Kumbhakarna and struck the Rakshasa a stunning blow on 
his head with the trunk of a sala tree. The agile Sugriva broke the tree on 
Kumbhakarna’s head, but it made no impression on the gigantic demon. 
Indeed, as if roused from his torpor by that blow, Kumbhakarna stretched 
his arms and seized Sugriva, and dragged him away towards the city. 

Seeing Sugriva being hauled away, Lakshmana, the heroic son of 
Sumitra, the giver of joy to his friends, and the slayer of hostile heroes ran 
at Kumbhakarna and shot an astra embellished with golden wings at him. 
The arrow pierced the Rakshasa’s coat of mail and passed cleanly through 
his body, and embedded itself in the earth, stained with his blood. 


Kumbhakarna, his chest bored through, released Sugriva and, picking up a 
great boulder, charged at Lakshamana. 

As the Rakshasa rushed towards him, Lakshmana cut off his upraised 
arms with two shafts whose tips were like razors. As soon as the Rakshasa’s 
two arms were severed, twice that number of arms appeared on his body. 
The hands on every arm scooped up huge rocks, but Lakshmana, masterly 
bowman, cut them off, as well. 

That Rakshasa assumed a stupendous form with many heads, arms and 
legs; but Saumitra sent forth a Brahmastra and blew the mountainous body 
apart. 

Struck by that divine weapon, the Rakshasa fell on the field of battle, 
like a huge tree with spreading branches struck by a thunderbolt from 
heaven. The Rakshasa warriors saw the mountainous Kumbhakarna of the 
dazzling tejas, who was like Asura Vritra, lying lifeless on the field and ran 
in terror. 

Seeing the Rakshasa warriors flee, the younger brothers of Dushana, 
rallied them and rushed at Saumitra in fury. However, with a roar, 
Lakshmana easily deflected the winged arrows with which the enraged 
Vajravega and Pramathina attacked him. 

O Prithaputra, fercious was the battle that ensued between Dushana’s 
brothers and the sparkling Lakshmana, and it made the hairs of the 
onlookers stand on end. Lakshmana shrouded the two Rakshasas with 
arrows, and the two enraged Rakshasa heroes covered Lakshmana with a 
storm of stinging shafts. 

That encounter between Vajravega and Pramathina and Mahabaho 
Lakshmana lasted only a short while, when Pavanaputra Hanuman, an 
entire mountain peak in his hand, ran at Vajravega and flattened him with it; 
and the mighty Nala crushed Dushana’s younger brother Pramathina, also 
with a massive crag. 

Still, the deadly struggle between Rama and Ravana’s soldiers raged 
unabated. The Vanaras killed hundreds of Rakshasas, and just as many of 
them were slain, as well. However, the Rakshasa lives that were lost far 
outnumbered the number of simian dead.’ ” 


CANTO 286 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “MI arkandeya says, ‘Ravana learned of the deaths of Kumbhakarna 
and his followers; he heard that the great Prahasta and 
Dhumraksha had been killed, and he said to his son, the heroic Indrajit, “O 
Parantapa, you must go to battle against Rama, Lakshmana and Sugriva, 
and kill them all. My son, I had fame because you vanquished the wielder 
of the Vajra, the thousand-eyed husband of Sachi. My son, use maya to 
become invisible, use the divine astras you received as a boon from the 
Devas and annilhilate my enemies, O best of warriors. 

Not Rama, Lakshmana or Sugriva will withstand even a mere touch of 
your weapons, let alone their followers. Let the victory that eluded Prahasta 
and Kumbhakarna be yours, Mahabaho. Raze, burn my enemies and their 
jungle legions and enhance my joy, my son, just as you did once by 
humiliating Indra.” 

Indrajit put on his armour, mounted his chariot and drove to the 
battlefield, O king. That Rakshasa loudly announced himself and challenged 
Lakshmana, the bearer of auspicious marks, to single combat. Lakshmana 
rose and rushed at that Rakshasa with his bow and arrows, striking fear into 
his opponent by twanging his bow-string against the leathern glove of his 
left hand. Awesome and dreadful was the duel between those warriors, both 
masters of the Devastras, each defying the other to match his prowess, and 
both desperate to win. 


When Ravana’s son found that his arrows did not harm Lakshmana, 
Indrajit summoned his vast energy and hurled countless spears at him with 
blinding force. The son of Sumitra effortlessly clove the lances with his 
arrows, and the shredded weapons fell impotent to the ground. 

Then the handsome Angada, the son of Vali, pulled up a huge tree and 
charged Indrajit, and struck him on his head with the bole. Undaunted, 
Indrajit cast a lance of sorcery at Angada but Lakshmana shattered that 
weapon. 

Undeterred, Indrajit struck Angada, who stood close to him, on his left 
side with a mace. Warding off the blow, the enraged and vigorous son of 
Vali flung a massive sala tree at Indrajit. O son of Pritha, pitched with 
vicious force, the tree smashed Indrajit’s chariot and slew his horses and 
charioteer. 

Ravana’s son leapt down from his ruined chariot and, using maya, 
vanished. When Rama saw the Rakshasa, that illusionist, vanish so 
suddenly, he ran forward to protect his troops. The invisible Indrajit, using 
Devastras, now freely pierced Rama and Lakshmana all over their bodies; 
but the brothers were never gravely injured; they fought on against 
Ravana’s son cloaked in maya. 

The raging Indrajit besieged those Narapumgavas with thousands of 
razor-tipped shafts; the Vanara troops, armed with rocks, swarmed around, 
seeeking the invisible warrior who scorched them with an endless firestorm 
of arrows, even as he continued to attack the Kosala brothers. Pierced all 
over with fell arrows, Rama and Lakshmana suddenly fell, like the Sun and 
the Moon fallen from the sky.’ ” 


CANTO 287 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “MI arkandeya says, ‘Seeing Rama and Lakshmana lying unmoving 

on the ground, Ravana’s son created a mesh of subtle astras and 

encased them inside it. Snared in Indrajit’s arrowy net, those Naravyaghras 

looked like caged hawks. Sugriva and his Vanaras surrounded the brothers, 

who lay wounded and captive on the ground. The king of the jungle stood 

there, stunned, with Sushena and Mainda, Dwivida, Kumuda and Angada, 
Hanuman, Nila, Tara and Nala. 

Meanwhile, Vibhishana, who had secured victory in another part of the 
field, arrived there and, using an astra called prajna, awakened the brothers 
from their swoon. Carefully, Sugriva drew Indrajit’s arrows from their 
bodies and applied the miraculous herb Visalya to their wounds, while 
chanting divine mantras. The Kshatriya brothers arose, their pain gone, and 
full of vitality again. 

Prithaputra, seeing that Rama of the Ikshvakus was quite restored, 
Vibhishana joined his palms together and said, “O Parantapa, Kubera, king 
of the Guhyakas, has sent one of his people to you from the Sweta 
mountains; and with him he has sent a gift of water from his enchanted 
gardens. Rajan, if you, or anyone you choose to give it to, wash your eyes 
with the water, you will be able to see anyone who has become invisible.” 

Saying Tathaastu, Rama took that sacred water and washed his own 
eyes with it; and the noble Lakshmana did the same. Then Sugriva and 


Jambavan, Hanuman and Angada, Mainda, Dwivida and Nila, and many 
other important Vanaras cleared their eyes with that water. 

Exactly as Vibhishana had said, O Yudhishtira, now they could all see 
much that they could not before: worlds and beings hidden to ordinary 
sight. 

Meanwhile, flushed with his success, Indrajit went to his father and, 
after telling Ravana of his feats, quickly returned to the field of battle and 
placed himself at the van of his army. Then, urged by Vibhishana, 
Lakshmana ran towards Ravana’s choleric son, who had returned lusting for 
battle. 

Incensed by what had transpired earlier, Lakshmana came to kill the 
arrogant Indrajit who had not completed his nityakarma, and struck the 
conqueror of Indra with a torrent of arrows. 

The duel between those two, both intent on killing the other, was like 
the long ago battle between Indra and Prahlada; it defied the imagination. 
Indrajit struck Sumitra’s son with shafts that pierecd deep into his body, and 
Sumitra’s son retaliated with his own fiery arrows. Wounded by 
Lakshmana, Ravana’s son was beside himself and shot Lakshmana with 
vicious, venom-tipped barbs. 

Now listen, Yudhishtira, to how the heroic Saumitra took his 
adversary’s life with three final arrows, burning with energy. With the first 
one, he severed from Indrajit’s body the arm with which the demon prince 
grasped his bow. With the second arrow he hewed away the other arm, 
which held arrows, and it fell to the ground. With the third, the last one, a 
bright and crescent-tipped shaft, he cut off Indrajit’s haughty, handsome 
head with its fine nose and glittering earrings. 

Shorn of arms and head, Indrajit’s torso was frightful to look at. Thus, 
Lakshmana killed his greatest adversary and then, that mightiest of mighty 
men easily dispatched Indrajit’s sarathy. The dead prince’s horses galloped 
back to Lanka, dragging an empty chariot behind them. 

Ravana saw the chariot without his son on it, and when he heard that his 
son had been killed his heart was gripped by a pang of intolerable grief. In 
his anguish, the lord of all Rakshasas wanted to kill the princess of Mithila. 
Seizing up a sword, Ravana ran to asoka vana, where Sita pined for her 
husband. 

Avindhya saw what Ravana intended to do and tried to pacify him. 


Listen, Yudhishtira, to the ways in which Avindhya tried to stop Ravana 
from the murder he was bent on. The wise Rakshasa said, “You sit on the 
glorious throne of an empire, and it is not fitting for you to kill a woman. 
Besides, being your prisoner, this woman is as good as dead. Destroying her 
body will not kill her spirit; kill her husband and she, too, will die broken. 
Not even Indra of the hundred sacrifices is your equal. In battle you have 
often chased away the gods with Indra at their head, as if they were a pack 
of jackals.” 

Seaking eloquently, and at some length, Avindhya succeeded in 
pacifying the seething Ravana, who grew calmer and abandoned his mad 
resolve. The Rakshasa king sheathed his sword and ordered his chariot to be 
readied for battle against Rama and his army of the wilds.’ ” 


CANTO 288 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “VI arkandeya says, “Smouldering with rage and grief at the death 

of Indrajit, the ten-headed Ravana climbed into his chariot, 

inlaid with gold and priceless gemstones. The most terrible Rakshasas, 

bearing all kinds of weapons, followed him, as the Rakshasa king steamed 
towards Rama, at whose side the monkey generals fought. 

Seeing Ravana flying in high dudgeon towards Rama and the Vanara 
army, Mainda, Nila, Nala, Angada, Hanuman and Jambavan surrounded 
him with all their troops. Those foremost of monkeys and bears pounded 
Ravana’s soldiers with tree-trunks, mashing them before their king’s eyes. 
And seeing the enemy slaughtering his troops, Ravana, unparalleled master 
of sorcery, began to use dark spells against the forest warriors. 

He extruded hundreds and thousands of Rakshasas from his body, all 
armed with spears and double-edged swords. Rama killed all those demons 
in a flash with Devastras, at which, O Bhaarata, the king of the Rakshasas 
resorted to more fell wizardry. 

Now thousands of dire warriors, all replicas of Rama and Lakshamana, 
all armed with bows and arrows, sprang forth from his body, and rushed at 
the brothers from Ayodhya. Lakshmana cried out to Rama to raze that 
sinister legion. And Rama killed them all. 

Now Indra’s sarathy Matali came to Rama on the battlefield in a chariot 
that dazzled like the Sun, and was yoked with tawny horses. He said, “Son 
of the Kakutsthas, this victorious ratha drawn by this team of chestnuts 


belongs to the Lord of the Devas. Purushavyaghra, it is from this chariot 
that Indra killed hundreds of Daityas and Danavas. Rama, climb into my 
chariot, and kill Ravana.” 

But Rama did not believe Matali; he suspected that this was also 
Ravana’s sorcery. Vibhishana said to him, “Narapumgava, this is no maya 
of Ravana. Climb into the chariot, for it is indeed Indra’s.” 

Rama did so and flew at Ravana, who also flashed forward to meet him. 
All the Earth’s creatures howled loudly, and in Devaloka the gods roared to 
the beating of drums. And the battle between the ten-headed Rakshasa and 
the prince of Ayodhya began. 

So fierce was it that the like had never been seen before. The Rakshasa 
hurled a sizzling javelin at Rama, which resembled Indra’s thunderbolt, and 
was powerful as the potent curse of a Brahmana. In a blink, Rama cut that 
javelin into shards with his arrows. Seeing this, fear lanced briefly through 
Ravana. 

The ten-headed one began to storm Rama with tens of thousands of 
weapons of all kinds—spears, maces, battle-axes, darts, sataghnis and 
stone-whetted arrows. With maya, the Rakshasa created monstrous 
illusions, and the monkeys fled in terror. 

Then, from his quiver, Rama took a wonderful arrow, flighted with 
wings and golden feathers, and with a bright and beautiful head. He fitted it 
to his bowstring and invoked the Brahmastra. Seeing Rama chant mantras 
to transform the arrow into the Brahmastra, the Devas, the Gandharvas and 
the Kinnaras, with Indra at their head, rejoiced, knowing that the Rakshasa 
was as good as dead. 

Rama invoked Ravana’s death and loosed that weapon of unrivalled 
ferocity. Bhaarata, the instant the arrow left the bow, drawn almost into a 
circle, and found its mark, the Rakshasa, his ratha, his sarathy and horses 
erupted in fire and were consumed in a flash. The Devas, the Gandharvas, 
the Charanas and all the other celestial ones were celebrant. 

The five vital elements of life left Ravana; the Brahmastra deprived him 
of earthly dominion and incinerated him. His body was reduced to 
nothingness, not even his ashes could be seen.’ ” 


CANTO 289 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “MI arkandeya says, ‘Having killed sinister Ravana, king of the 

Rakshasas and enemy of the Devas, Rama, Lakshmana and 
their jungle army rejoiced. The Devas with the Rishis at their head paid 
homage to Rama Mahabaho. They blessed him fervently and shouted Jaya! 
The Devas, the Gandharvas and the Swargavasis delighted the lotus-leaf- 
eyed Rama with hymns in his praise and showered him with unearthly 
flowers. After worshipping him so, those ones of light returned to 
Devaloka, while the sky looked as if a great and joyous festival was being 
celebrated in its vaults. 

Having killed Ravana, Rama of universal fame, conqueror of hostile 
cities, bestowed Lanka on Vibhishana. Then Ravana’s wise old minister 
Avindhya, walking behind Vibhishana and with Sita before him, came out 
of the magnificent city. 

Humbly, Avindhya said to Rama, “O illustrious one, take this Devi, 
Janaka’s daughter of the unblemished character, to yourself.” 

Rama of the Ikshvakus alighted from the shining chariot and saw the 
tear-drenched Sita. Seeing that faultless one crushed by grief, her hair 
matted, her body covered in dirt, and wearing unwashed clothes, Rama 
seemed to quiver in fear: that her virtue had been lost. 

He said harshly to her, “Vaidehi, you may go wherever you wish, for 
you are a free woman now. I have done my duty: I killed the Rakshasa 
because you are my wife, and he kept you forcibly in his home. But 


knowing dharma as I do, how, for even a moment, can I take back a woman 
who has been enjoyed by another? Maithili, whether you are chaste or 
impure, I dare not touch you; you are like sacrificial butter that has been 
licked by a dog.” 

Hearing these heartless words, the princess swooned in grief, like an 
uprooted plantain tree. The colour that had suffused her face in joy 
disappeared, as quickly as breath that mists a mirror. The monkeys and 
Lakshmana, too, grew very still, as if in death, when they heard Rama. 

Then, all at once, the Deva who is the embodiment of purity, Brahma of 
the four faces, Prajapati who sprang from a lotus, flew down on his 
heavenly Swan before Rama. Sakra, Agni and Vayu; Yama and Varuna; 
Kubera, Lord of the Yakshas, the holy Rishis and king Dasaratha, radiant in 
their divine forms, appeared as well, in a chariot drawn by swans. The sky 
was luminous, crowded with Devas and Gandharvas, as if the brightest in it 
had drawn near the Earth. 

Sita arose from where she had fallen and, in the midst of all those who 
were there, said to the broad-chested Rama, “O Kshatriya, I do not blame 
you; you know dharma well, and how to conduct yourself with both men 
and women. But listen now to what I have to say. 

Ever-moving Prana lives in the hearts of all creatures. If I have sinned, 
let my life-breath leave my body. O, if I have sinned, let the other four 
mahabhutas—fire, water, earth and ether—also forsake my body. All this 
while in Lanka, I have thought of none other than you, even in my dreams. 
Therefore, be my lord as God has ordained.” 

When Sita spoke, a sacred voice, resounding throughout the Earth, was 
heard speaking from the skies, bringing untold joy to the Vanaras. Vayu 
Deva said, “Sita speaks the truth, Rama. I am the Wind God, the witness of 
all things. The princess of Mithila is sinless. Therefore, O king, be united 
with your wife.” 

Now Agni Deva said, “Raghava, I dwell within the bodies of all 
creatures. Maithili is not guilty of the smallest transgression.” 

Varuna Deva said, “Rama, every creature’s breath originates in me, and 
I tell you to take Maithili back.” 

Then, Brahma himself said, “Scion of Kakutstha, my son, I do not find 
this conduct of yours strange, knowing as I do how honest and pure you are, 
and how well you know the dharma of a Rajarishi. Yet, listen to what I have 
to say. You killed the invincible Rakshasa, enemy of the Devas, the 


Gandharvas, the Nagas, the Yakshas, the Danavas and the great Rishis. It 
was because of my boon to him that, until now, none could kill him; and 
because, though he was evil, he was also so very great, I let him live a long 
life. But his abducting Sita was the sign that his end was near. 

As for Sita, I protected her through the curse of Nalakubara, who said 
that if ever Ravana ravished an unwilling woman, his head would shatter in 
a hundred pieces. Rama, you have no need to be suspicious. Glorious one, 
take your wife back to yourself. You have achieved a mighty feat that 
benefits the Devas, radiant one.” 

Finally, Dasaratha said, “I am pleased with you, my child; bless you. I 
am your father Dasaratha. I command you to take back your wife and rule 
your kingdom, O Maryadapurusha.” 

Rama replied, “If you really are my father, I salute you with reverence, 
Rajarajan! At your command, I will return to wonderful Ayodhya.” 

Bhaaratarishabha, pleased with Rama, the corner of whose eyes were 
red, his father said, “Return to Ayodhya and rule your kingdom. My 
splendid son, your fourteen years of exile have ended.” 

Rama bowed to the gods, and with his friends’ felicitations, was united 
again with his wife. And they looked like Mahendra, the Lord of the Devas, 
and Puloma’s daughter. That chastiser of his enemies gave a boon to 
Avindhya; and he bestowed riches and honours on the Rakshasi Trijata. 

Brahma, with all the Devas led by Indra, said to Rama, “Son of 
Kausalya, what boons does your heart desire that we can grant you?” 

Rama prayed to him to grant him devotion to dharma, victory over his 
enemies, and the restoration to life of all the Vanaras that the Rakshasas had 
killed. Brahma did as he asked, and all the jungle-folk killed in battle came 
to life again and stood up on the battlefield, as if they awoke from a dream. 

Sita granted Hanuman a boon, saying, “May you live for as long as the 
fame of Rama’s achievements does, O Hanuman of the golden eyes; by my 
grace, may you always enjoy divine food and drink.” 

Then, even as the warriors of the immaculate deeds looked on, the 
Devas with Indra at their head disappeared. Seeing Rama united with 
Janaki, Sakra’s sarathy Matali was delighted and addressed Rama as he 
stood in the midst of his friends. 

Matali said, “Invincible Rama, you have dispelled the sorrow of the 
Devas, the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the Asuras, the Nagas and Manavas. 


As long as the Earth remains, so long will all creatures—Devas, Asuras, 
Gandharvas, Yakshas, Rakshasas and Punnagas— sing your praises.” 

Matali worshipped Raghava, the scion of Raghu; then, with his leave, 
climbed onto that chariot of Sun-like brilliance and flashed away. 

With Saumitra and Vibhishana, accompanied by all the monkeys of 
Sugriva, Rama set Sita before all the rest and, after making arrangements 
for Lanka’s security, crossed the ocean, home of the crocodiles, over the 
same bridge they had built. Rama rode in the flying vimana, Pushpaka, 
which could go anywhere at the will of he who rode in it. Rama, of the 
controlled senses, surrounded by his counsellors, in their order of 
importance, arrived at the same part of the seashore where he had earlier 
lain down in prayopavesa; and there, with the Vanaras in attendance, the 
virtuous king halted. 

Raghunandana brought the monkeys before him, one by one, and 
venerated them all, giving them gifts of jewels and magical gemstones, and 
then sent them home. When the monkey lords, the bears and the bull-tailed 
apes had left, Rama went back to Kishkindha with Sugriva and Vibhishana, 
riding in the Pushpaka, and showing Vaidehi the sights of the forests in 
which they had been, as they flew over them. 

When they arrived at Kishkindha, Rama, that best of warriors, installed 
the victorious Angada as Yuvaraja of the kingdom. Then, accompanied by 
the same friends, Sita and Lakshmana, taking them along the same path by 
which he had come, Rama flew back towards the city of his fathers. 

On reaching Ayodhya, he despatched Hanuman as an envoy to Bharata. 
After careful observation, Hanuman made certain of Bharata’s loyalty to 
Rama and then gave him the good news of his brother’s return. 

Rama went to Nandigrama, where he saw Bharata covered in dirt and 
clad in rags, seated with his brother’s sandals before, him, talking to them 
even as if to Rama. O Bull of the Bhaaratas, indescribable was Rama and 
Lakshmana’s joy at being united with Bharata and Satrughna; and great, 
too, was Bharata and Satrughna’s rapture at being united with their brothers 
and at seeing Sita again. 

Bharata worshipped his brother and gladly returned the kingdom that he 
had held as a sacred trust into Rama’s hands. At the auspicious eighth hour 
of the day, under the Sravana nakshatra, Vasishtha and Vamadeva together 
crowned Rama as king of Ayodhya. 


After his investiture, Rama gave leave to Sugriva, the Vanara king, and 
all his followers, as well as to Vibhishana of the Pulastyas, to return to their 
own kingdoms. Having paid homage to them with gifts and due rituals, it 
was with tears in his eyes and a heavy heart that Rama bid them farewell. 
He worshipped the Pushpaka Vimana, and sent it home to Vaisravana. 

Later, assisted by Devarishi Vasishtha, Rama performed on the banks of 
the Gomati ten Aswamedha yagnas, with no hindrances of any kind, and 
with three times as many gifts to Brahmanas as before.’ ” 


CANTO 290 
RAMOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “MI arkandeya says, ‘Mahabaho, that was how Rama of the 

ineffable tejas suffered during his exile in the forest. O Tiger 
among men, do not grieve; you are a Kshatriya, a slayer of your enemies. 
You walk the same path of dharma, dependent on the strength of your arms, 
which is sure to lead to success. You are sinless. 

Even the Devas, with Indra at their head, and the Asuras will follow you 
in dharma. It was after similar tribulations that Indra, with the help of the 
Maruts, slew Asura Vritra, the invincible Namuchi and Dirghajihva, the 
Rakshasi with the long tongue. The man who has support fulfils all his 
goals. 

What obstacle is there that cannot be overcome in battle by him who 
has Dhananjaya for his brother? Bhima of the awesome prowess is the 
strongest of the strong, and the young sons of Madri are mighty bowmen. 
With brothers like these, why do you despair, Parantapa? They can 
vanquish the combined armies of the Vajradhari and the Maruts. 

Having such brothers, Bharatarishabha, you are sure to conquer all your 
enemies. 

Look how these Kshatriyas performed incredible feats of valour to bring 
back Drupada’s daughter Krishnaa, whom the sinful, arrogant Saindhava 
abducted. They overpowered Jayadratha, who then lay helpless and pitiful 
at your feet. Rama had only an army of Vanaras and Reekshas, when he 
rescued Vaidehi by killing Ravana in battle. 


Rajan, bear all this in mind, and do not grieve. Noble souls like you 
never give in to sorrow, Parantapa.’ 

So Markandeya comforts the king, and that Kshatriya Mahatman shrugs 
off his melancholy and speaks once more to Markandeya.” 


CANTO 291 
PATIVRATA MAHATMYA PARVA 


: “VY udhishtira says, ‘Mighty sage, I do not so much grieve for 

myself, for my brothers or for the loss of my kingdom as I do for 

Draupadi. When our evil cousins tormented us at the game of dice, it was 

Krishnaa who saved us; and it is she that Jayadratha carried off from our 

forest asrama. Have you seen or do you know of any woman as faithful and 
devoted as this beloved daughter of Drupada?’ 

Markandeya says, “Listen, Yudhishtira, to the story of the princess 
Savitri and how she attained the highest faithfulness. There was once a 
pious and virtuous king of Madra, who was devoted in his care of 
Brahmanas, who was pure-souled and true to his word, who was devout in 
performing yagnas, and who had his senses under firm control. He was the 
most generous of men and everyone loved him, in towns and villages alike. 
This lord of the Earth, ever committed to universal welfare, was called 
Aswapati. 

This king, of the honest, self-controlled and forgiving nature, had no 
children. When he grew old, he was sorrowed over this. With the object of 
having children, he observed rigid vows and began to live frugally and with 
his senses subdued, like a brahmachari. Every day, this best of kings offered 
ten thousand oblations to the fire, recited mantras in honour of the Devi 
Savitri, and ate a small meal at the sixth hour of the day. He lived in this 
way for eighteen years. 


After eighteen years of his life of austerity, the Devi Savitri was pleased 
with him and appeared in her physical form before him, from the fire. 

The Goddess said to him, “I am pleased, O king, with your 
brahmacharya, your purity and self-restraint, your observance of vratas, and 
with all your penance and worship. Mighty king Aswapati, ask for the boon 
that you desire, bearing dharma in mind.” 

Aswapati said, “It is to attain dharma that I have striven all these years. 
O Devi, grant that I will have many sons worthy of my race. If you are 
pleased with me, grant me this boon. The Dvijas have told me that having 
children brings great punya.” 

Savitri replied, “O king, I knew what you wanted and I have spoken to 
the Pitamaha about your wanting sons. By the grace of Brahma, you will 
soon have a daughter of vibrant tejas. Brahma told me to give you this glad 
news, to which you need make no reply.” ’ 

Markandeya continues, ‘The king accepted Savitri’s boon, and when he 
had worshipped her and said, “May this happen soon,” she vanished. 

The king went back to his city, and ruled his subjects justly. Some time 
elapsed, and the eldest queen of Aswapati became pregnant with his child. 
Bhaaratarishabha, the embryo in the womb of that princess of Malava grew 
like the Moon in the night sky during the waxing fortnight; and when the 
time came, she gave birth to a lotus-eyed daughter. 

Aswapati joyfully performed the life-passage rituals for her, and 
because Devi Savitri had rewarded his offerings by blessing him with this 
child, he and the Brahmanas of his court named her Savitri. 

The princess grew in the likeness of Devi Sri herself in an earthly, 
human form and, in the course of time, attained puberty. Seeing that 
graceful maiden, of the slender waist and flaring hips, who looked like a 
living golden statue, the people thought she was a goddess. Intimidated by 
her blazing energy, none could marry this lotus-leaf-eyed girl who pulsated 
with splendour. 

One day, on the occasion of a parva, Savitri, having fasted and washed 
her hair, came before the family deity and had the Brahmanas offer the 
havis and other oblations to Agni. She took the flowers that had been 
offered to the sacred fire and, looking as beautiful as Lakshmi, went to her 
noble father. 

She paid reverence at her father’s feet and offered him the flowers she 
had brought, and that lovely maiden joined her hands together and stood 


beside the king. The king was sad to see that although his divinely beautiful 
daughter had attained puberty, she had no suitors. 

He said, “My child, the time has come to give you in marriage, yet none 
asks for your hand. Therefore, you must select a husband whose qualities 
match your own and inform me of your choice. Choose anyone you wish 
for your husband, and I will, after deliberation, give you to him. 

O blest one, listen to what I have heard Brahmanas quote from the 
Shastras. The father that does not give his daughter in marriage faces 
disgrace. The husband that does not enjoy his wife in her fertile season 
faces disgrace. The son that does not look after his widowed mother faces 
disgrace. 

Take heed of what I say and find a husband. Ensure by your actions that 
the Devas have no cause to chastise us.” 

Having spoken thus to his daughter in the presence of his faithful 
ministers, the king instructed his attendants to make preparations to 
accompany her wherever she chose to go. Bashfully bowing down to touch 
her father’s feet, the gentle girl set out without hesitation, to do her father’s 
will. 

In her golden chariot, and accompanied by her father’s aged 
counsellors, she visited the delightful asramas of Rishis and the splendid 
palaces of Rajarishis. Everywhere, my son, she worshipped the feet of the 
venerable sages, and she travelled through all the forests one by one, 
distributing wealth in all the sacred tirthas where Dvijottamas lived.’ ” 


CANTO 292 
PATIVRATA MAHATMYA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “MI arkandeya continues, ‘“Bhaarata, one day the king of the Madras 

was seated in the midst of his courtiers, conversing with 

Narada, when, accompanied by his ministers, Savitri returned after visiting 

various tirthas and asramas. Seeing her father with Narada, she worshipped 
both of them by bowing her head down to their feet. 

Narada said, “Where has your daughter been, Rajan, and from where 
has she come now? Why do you not give her in marriage, now that she has 
attained puberty?” 

Aswapati answered, “It was on this very quest that I sent her, and from 
which she returns now. Devarishi, let us hear whom she has chosen as her 
husband.” 

Savitri took her father’s command to be a divine request, and the 
blessed girl related in detail all that had happened, and at last she said, 
“There was, amongst the Salvas, a virtuous Kshatriya king named 
Dyumatsena, who was blind. This wise king had only one infant son, and an 
old enemy took advantage of the king’s disability and seized his kingdom. 
With his wife and their infant held to her breast, he went to live in the 
forest, where he observed rigid vratas and practised austere tapasya. His 
son, though born in the city, grew up in an asrama. That youth Satyavan is 
the right husband for me, and I have given my heart to him.” 

Narada said, “Ah, Rajan, Savitri has erred gravely, she has made an 
ignorant choice. Satyavan, to whom she has give her heart, does have 


excellent qualities. It is because his parents are both so truthful that the 
Brahmanas gave him his name. When he was a child he loved horses and 
used to sculpt steeds out of clay and paint pictures of horses. For this, he is 
sometimes called Chitraswa.” 

Raja Aswapati then asked, “Is prince Satyavan, who is devoted to his 
father, endowed with tejas, wisdom, a forgiving nature and courage?” 

Narada replied, “In energy Satyavan is like the Sun; in wisdom he is 
like Brihaspati; in courage he is like the Lord of the Devas; and in 
forgiveness he is like Bhumi Devi, the Earth herself.” 

Aswapati then said, “And is prince Satyavan devoted and generous to 
Brahmanas? Is he handsome and charitable, and pleasant?” 

Narada said, “In generosity within his means the mighty son of 
Dyumatsena is like Sankriti’s son Rantideva; in truthfulness of speech and 
devotion to Brahmanas he is like Sibi, the son of Usinara; in magnanimity 
he is like Yayati; in beauty of face he is like the Moon; and in beauty of 
form he is like the twin Aswins. He has his senses under control; he is 
gentle, brave and honest. He is self-restrained, faithful to his friends, free 
from malice, modest and patient. In short, the exalted sages of tapasyashakti 
say that his conduct is impeccable in its dharma, and he wears honour like a 
crown.” 

Hearing this, Aswapati said, “Lord, you have described him as one who 
has every noble virtue. Tell me now of his defects, if he has any.” 

Narada said, “He has only one, and it overwhelms all his virtues. He, 
who cannot be conquered by any means, has only one defect, and no other. 
Within a year from today, Satyavan, granted with a short life, will cast off 
his mortal body.” 

Hearing these words of the Muni, the king said, “Come, Savitri, choose 
another for your lord, my lovely child. The single great blemish that this 
young man has eclipses all his virtues. The illustrious Narada, whom even 
the Devas honour, says that Satyavan will leave this earthly life in exactly a 
year from today.” 

Savitri said, “A die can be cast but once; a daughter can be given away 
but once in marriage; and only once can a person say, J give. These three 
things can happen only once. Whether he lives long or dies young, whether 
he is virtuous or bereft of virtue, I have chosen and will not choose a second 
time. A decision is first made in the mind, then it is declared and, finally, 
executed in action. Let my decision be proof of this.” 


Narada said, “Aswapati, your daughter is firm in her resolve and will 
not swerve from the path of dharma. No one else has Satyavan’s goodness. I 
give my approval to this union.” 

The king said, “Your words must be obeyed, illustrious one, for you 
speak the truth. You are my Guru, and I shall do as you say.” 

Narada said, “May peace reign over the bestowal of your daughter 
Savitri. I leave you now with my blessings.” 

Saying this, Narada rose into the sky and went to Devaloka, and on 
Earth, king Aswapati began to make preparations for his daughter’s 
wedding.’ ” 


CANTO 293 
PATIVRATA MAHATMYA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “VI arkandeya continues, “With Narada’s words echoing in his 

mind, the king began to make preparations for the wedding. He 

summoned all the old Brahmanas, the Ritvijas and the other priests, and set 

out with his daughter on an auspicious day. On arriving at Dyumatsena’s 

asrama in the sacred forest, he approached the Rajarishi on foot, 
accompanied by his Brahmanas. 

He saw the blind monarch of great wisdom seated on a cushion of kusa 
grass under a sala tree. After paying his homage in proper fashion, king 
Aswapati humbly introduced himself, and in response the blind king 
welcomed him with arghya, a darbhasana to sit on and the gift of a cow. 

Then he asked his royal guest the reason for his visit. The king told him 
why he had come. 

Aswapati said, “Rajarishi, this beautiful girl is my daughter Savitri. I 
ask that you, who are learned in dharma, accept her as your daughter-in-law 
in accordance with Kshatriya custom.” 

Dyumatsena said, “Deprived of my kingdom, and living in the forest, 
we live the disciplined life of tapasvins. Your daughter is not used to this 
life of hardship, nor does she deserve it. How will she cope?” 

Aswapati replied, “My daughter knows, as well as I do, that joy and 
sorrow are both fleeting; so, do not speak to me of these things. I have come 
here with my mind made up. I have greeted you in friendship, and you 
should not crush my hope. It is love that has brought me here and you ought 


not to refuse me. We are equals in lineage and an alliance between us is 
fitting. Accept my daughter as your daughter-in-law and the wife of prince 
Satyavan.” 

Dyumatsena said, “For many years, I wanted such an alliance with you, 
but I hesitated to ask after I lost my kingdom. Let my long-cherished wish 
be fulfilled today. You are very welcome, indeed.” 

The two kings summoned all the Dvijas who lived in the asramas of that 
forest, and he solemnised the marriage with the traditional rites. Having 
bestowed his daughter, with rich clothes and ornaments, Aswapati went 
back in great joy. 

Having gained a wife graced with every noble quality and 
accomplishment, Satyavan was happy indeed, and Savitri, too, rejoiced at 
having got the husband of her heart’s desire. 

When her father left, she took off all her ornaments and put on valkala 
and clothes dyed red. By her service and virtue, her affection and 
selflessness, and by the care she gave so willingly to all, she was a source of 
delight to all. 

She pleased her mother-in-law by attending to her comforts and by 
adorning her in fine clothes and ornaments. She gratified her father-in-law 
by worshipping him as a god and controlling her speech before him. She 
made her husband happy by speaking sweetly to him, by her skill in all 
kinds of work, by her sweet nature and by demonstrations of her love in 
private. 

They continued to live in the forest asrama, practising tapasya, but 
Narada’s words were never far from the mind of the inwardly sorrowful 
Savitri.’ ” 


CANTO 294 
PATIVRATA MAHATMYA PARVA CONTINUED 


°° arkandeya says, ‘O king, a year flitted by and the time of 

Satyavan’s death arrived. Ever conscious of what Narada had 

said, Savitri had been counting the days as they passed. On a day when she 

knew that only four days remained for her husband to live, she fasted day 

and night in observance of the Triratra vrata. Hearing of the vow she kept, 
the king was grieved and went to console Savitri. 

He said, “Princess, this vrata that you have taken, to fast three nights in 
a row, is harsh and trying.” 

Savitri said, “Father, do not be sorry; I can keep the vow. I have 
undertaken it with firm resolve, and determination brings success.” 

Dyumatsena said, “I should not ask you to break your vrata. On the 
contrary, I ought to encourage you to fulfil it.’ And he said no more to 
dissuade her. 

Savitri continued to fast and began to look wan and thin, like a wooden 
doll. And, Bharatarishabha, convinced that her husband would die the next 
morning, the griefstricken Savitri spent the night in anguish while she 
fasted. When the Sun had risen about two hands into the sky, Savitri, 
thinking that Satyavan’s end was at hand, finished her morning rites and 
offered oblations to the fire. 

She bowed down to the elderly Brahmanas and to her father- and 
mother-in-law, and she stood humbly before them with joined hands. All 
the Munis living in that asrama blessed her that she would never suffer 


widowhood. Savitri, immersed in dhyana, accepted the words of the 
tapasvins in her mind, silently saying, Tathaastu, so be it. 

The princess reflected on Narada’s words and sat still, in expectation of 
the hour and the dreaded moment. 

Then, Bhaaratottama, her father- and mother-in-law said to the princess, 
“You have completed the vrata successfully, and it is time for you to break 
your fast. You must do what is proper.” 

Savitri said, “Now that I have completed the vow, I will eat when the 
Sun goes down. This is my resolve and the vow of my heart.” ’ 

Markandeya continues, ‘When Savitri spoke thus of her first meal, 
Satyavan hefted his axe onto his shoulders and was about to go into the 
forest for wood and fruit, when Savitri said to her husband, “It is not proper 
for you to go alone. Let me come with you; I cannot bear to be apart from 
you.” 

Satyavan said, “You have never gone into the forest before. My love, 
the paths are rough and you are weak from your fast. How will you be able 
to walk?” 

Savitri said, “I feel neither weak nor tired from fasting. I have decided 
to go, and you must not stop me.” 

Satyavan said, “If you wish to come with me, I will not prevent you, but 
take my parents’ leave so that I will not be held responsible.” 

Savitri bowed to her father- and mother-in-law and said to them, “My 
husband is going into the forest to gather fruit. With your permission, 
revered father and mother, I will go with him, for I cannot bear to be 
separated from him today. 

Your son is going to the forest for wood to feed the sacrificial fire and 
fruit to feed his elders, and you must not stop him. Indeed, he might have 
been persuaded not to go had it been on some other errand. Do not stop me 
either; I will go into the forest with him. It is almost a year since I have 
been outside the asrama. I am so looking forward to seeing the forest in 
bloom.” 

Dyumatsena said, “From the time that her father gave Savitri to me as 
my daughter-in-law, I do not remember her asking for anything. Let her 
have her wish. My daughter, do not in anyway distract Satyavan from his 
work.” 

Having received the permission of her husband’s parents, the illustrious 
Savitri went with her husband, smiling on the outside in seeming happiness, 


but her heart torn in grief. As that princess of large eyes went along, she 
passed through picturesque and charmed glades inhabited by swarms of 
peacocks, but did not notice them. 

Satyavan said sweetly to Savitri, “Look at these rivers of sacred waters 
and these lovely flower-decked trees.” 

Looking only at him, the blemishless Savitri continued to watch her lord 
in all his moods, and remembering Devarishi Narada’s words, thought of 
her husband as already dead. Her heart breaking, she followed him, 
responding softly to all he said, dreading the final hour.’ ” 


CANTO 295 
PATIVRATA MAHATMYA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “MI arkandeya says, ‘With Savitri helping him, the mighty 

Satyavan plucked fruits and filled his bag with them. Then he 

began to cut branches from trees, and as he did so, he began to sweat 
profusely and his head ached from the exertion. 

Exhausted, he came to Savitri and said to her, “The work has made my 
head ache; my body trembles strangely and my limbs and my heart also 
hurt. Mithibhashini, you of restrained speech, I feel unwell; oh, my head 
feels as if it has been pierced by a hundred arrows. I want to sleep, Savitri, 
for Iam too weak to stand.” 

Savitri quickly went to him, sat on the forest floor, and took his head on 
her lap. Narada’s words still clear in her mind, she began to calculate the 
arrival of the moment of his death, by the day, the hour and the minute. The 
next instant, she saw a great being, clad in red, with a crown on his head. 
He was huge and shone like the Sun. He was dark-skinned, had red eyes, 
and held a noose in his hand. And he was altogether dreadful to behold. 

He stood beside Satyavan, gazing steadily at him. Savitri gently placed 
her husband’s head on the ground. She got up and, her heart trembling, said 
in an anguished voice, “From your appearance, you must be a Deva. If it 
pleases you, tell me, great one, who you are and what you intend.” 

Yama Deva, the Lord of Death, replied, “Savitri, you are devoted to 
your husband and blessed with tapasyashakti. That is why you see me and 
why I am talking to you. Blessed one, Iam Yama. Prince Satyavan’s time to 


live has ended, and I must bind him in my noose and take him away. This is 
why I have come.” 

Savitri said, “I have heard that your emissaries come to take away 
mortals, O worshipful one. Why then, have you come in person?” 

The great lord of Pitrs found himself captivated by her purity, and 
wanting to oblige her with a reply. Yama said, “This prince is endowed with 
dharma and physical beauty. He is a sea of accomplishments and he does 
not deserve to be taken away by mere dutas. That is why I have come.” 

Saying this, Yama drew a thumb-sized Satyavan out of his body and 
bound him firmly in his noose. His linga sarira removed, Satyavan’s body, 
deprived of life-breath, shorn of lustre and motionless, was unsightly. And 
binding Satyavan’s pranatma, Yama went away in a southerly direction. 

Overwhelmed by grief, the chaste Savitri, ever devoted to her lord and 
crowned with the success of her vratas, followed Yama. 

Yama said, “Stop, Savitri. Go back and perform your husband’s funeral 
rites. You are freed from all your wifely duties. You have come as far as 
you may.” 

Savitri said, “Wherever my husband is taken, or wherever he goes of his 
own will, I will follow him. This is the eternal dharma. By my 
tapasyashakti, out of my respect for my elders, from my love for my 
husband, by the strength of my vratas, and with your favour, my course is 
clear. Wise men learned in truth have declared that by walking just seven 
paces with another, one makes a compact of friendship with that person. As 
your friend now, I will say something to you, to which you must listen. 

They that have their souls under control do not acquire punya by merely 
following the four varnasramas—brahmacharya, grihasta, vanaprastha and 
sannyasa. Spiritual merit is said to consist of true knowledge. And all the 
greatest sages have said that it is punya and not the passage of the four 
stages of life that is important. 

By discharging the duties of just one of these four, Grihastasrama, we 
attain true punya and do not need the two that come after. It is for this that 
the wise have declared the punya gained in domesticity to be the highest of 
all.” 

Yama said, “What you say is true, Savitri, and I am pleased with you. 
Ask for any boon except the life of your husband, perfect one, and I will 
give you whatever you ask.” 


Savitri said, “Deprived of his kingdom and bereft of sight, my father-in- 
law leads a hermit’s life in our asrama. Give that king back his vision and 
let him be as powerful as Agni or Surya.” 

Yama said, “Faultless one, I grant you this boon. It will be as you have 
said. You seem to be tired by your journey. Stop following me and turn 
back. Do not exhaust yourself any more.” 

Savitri said, “What weariness can I feel when I am with my husband? 
My husband’s lot is mine too. Wherever you carry my husband, there I will 
also go. Best of Devas, hear what I have to say. Even a single conversation 
with one like you is a great blessing; friendship with such a one is greater 
still, and always fruitful. Therefore, one should live in the company of the 
righteous.” 

Yama said, “Your words, so full of import, delight the heart and enhance 
the wisdom of even the learned. Savitri, ask for a second boon, anything 
other than the life of Satyavan.” 

Savitri said, “My wise and intelligent father-in-law was deprived of his 
kingdom. May he regain it, and may he always adhere to his svadharma.” 

Yama said, “The king will regain his kingdom, and never will he 
abandon his dharma. Princess, I have fulfilled your second wish. Now you 
must return. Do not trouble yourself anymore.” 

Savitri said, “You control all creatures by your laws, and it is by your 
laws that you take them away, not according to your whims. That is why, 
Lord, you are called Yama, or the one who upholds the law. I beg you, listen 
to me. 

The eternal duty of the righteous towards all creatures is never to injure 
them in thought, word or deed, but to show them love and give them their 
due. For me now everything in this world is like my husband - lifeless. 
Good men show mercy even to their enemies when these seek their 
protection.” 

Yama said, “Your words are like water to a thirsty soul. Beautiful one, 
ask for one more boon, anything but the life of Satyavan.” 

Savitri replied, “My father Aswapati has no sons. Grant that he may 
have a hundred natural sons, so that his line is perpetuated. This is the third 
boon I ask of you.” 

Yama said, “Your father will have a hundred illustrious sons, who will 
perpetuate and increase their father’s line. Now, princess, you have your 
wish. Turn back now, you have come far enough.” 


Savitri said, “Because I walk close to my husband, I am not conscious 
of how far I have come. Indeed, my mind travels a greater distance. Please 
listen, as we walk, to what I have to say. 

You are the powerful son of Vivaswata, and the wise call you 
Vaivaswata. Lord, you dispense justice impartially to all beings, and so you 
are Dharma, the Lord of justice. People do not have as much faith in 
themselves as they do in those that are righteous. That is why all men aspire 
for close contact with men of dharma. It is purity of heart alone that inspires 
the confidence of all beings, and that is why they rely on those that live by 
dharma.” 

Yama said, “I have never heard anyone speak as you do, devi. I am so 
pleased with what you say. Other than the life of Satyavan, ask for a fourth 
boon, and then go your way.” 

Savitri said, “I wish for a hundred strong and powerful sons born to me 
of Satyavan, who will perpetuate our line. This is the fourth boon that I ask 
of you.” 

Yama replied, “Devi, you shall have a hundred sons, strong and 
powerful, and the cause of your delight. Princess, do not tire yourself any 
more. Stop now. You have already come too far.” 

Savitri said, “They that are righteous always practise eternal dharma. 
The communion of the pious with the pious is always fruitful. There is 
never any danger to the righteous from those that are righteous. It is the 
righteous who by their truth make the Sun move in sky, it is the righteous 
that support the Earth with their austerities, and, O Lord, it is the righteous 
upon whom both the past and the future depend. Therefore, they that are 
righteous are always happy in the company of the righteous. Knowing this 
to be the sanatana dharma, they that are righteous do good to others without 
expecting any benefit in return. 

A good deed is never wasted on the virtuous, and such actions never 
injure honour or welfare. Since good conduct attaches to the righteous, they 
often become the protectors of all.” 

Yama said, “The more you speak to me with words of deep meaning, in 
language so sweet to hear, the more I am taken with you. O you who are so 
devoted to your lord, ask me for some incomparable boon.” 

Savitri said, “Bestower of honour, the boon you have already given me 
cannot be fulfilled without with my husband being alive. So, I ask that you 
restore Satyavan to life. Without my husband, I am as good as dead; 


without my husband, I have no desire for happiness; without my husband, I 
do not wish for Swarga itself; without my husband, I do not want 
prosperity; without my Satyavan, I have no wish to live. You yourself 
granted me the boon of a hundred sons fathered by him, yet you are taking 
my husband away from me. 

I ask for this boon: let Satyavan be restored to life, because only by that 
can your boon prove true.” 

Defeated, saying So be it, Vivaswata’s son Yama, the dispenser of 
justice, untied his noose and said to Savitri, “Auspicious and chaste devi, I 
set your husband free. You may take him back whole and healthy. He will 
achieve great success and he will live with you for four hundred years. He 
will perform great yagnas and achieve unmatched fame in this world. 

Satyavan will give you one hundred sons. And these Kshatriyas with 
their sons and grandsons will all be kings, and will always bring honour to 
your name. 

Your father, too, will have a hundred sons with your mother Malavi. 
Known as Malavas, your godlike Kshatriya brothers will be renowned, as 
will be their sons and daughters.” 

Having bestowed these boons on Savitri, Yama left for his abode. After 
the Lord of death had gone, Savitri went back to the place where her 
husband’s grey corpse lay. She went to him, sat down on the ground and 
took his head onto her lap. Satyavan awoke and gazed long and lovingly at 
her, like one who has come home after a long journey through an alien land. 

He said to her, “I have slept long. Why did you not wake me? And 
where is that dark being who was dragging me away?” 

Savitri said, “Manavarishabha, you have been asleep on my lap for a 
very long time. That ruler of the destiny of all beings, Yama Deva, has gone 
away. You are refreshed now and awake, O Prince. If you feel able, rise. 
Look, night is upon us.” 

Having awoken, Satyavan got up as if he had enjoyed a refreshing sleep 
and, seeing that they were in a thick forest, said, “My slender-waisted one, I 
came here with you to collect fruit. While I was cutting wood I felt a pain in 
my head and could not stand anymore. So I lay on your lap and slept. I 
remember all this, Savitri. Then, in your embrace, as sleep stole my senses, 
I saw that it was dark all around. In the darkness I saw a being of 
incandescent radiance. 


If you know what happened, tell me whether what I saw was only a 
dream or if it was real.” 

Savitri said to him, “The night deepens. I will tell you everything 
tomorrow. Rise now, and may God bless you always. You of the excellent 
vows, come and see your parents! The Sun set a while ago and night 
advances. Creatures with fell voices are out. I hear the sounds of predators, 
rustling through the woods; and the awful howls of jackals that come from 
the south and east make me tremble in fear.” 

Satyavan said, “In this absolute darkness the forest is dreadful to see. 
You will not be able to see the path, and we cannot go now.” 

Savitri said, “A fire burned in the forest earlier today, and there is a 
withered tree that still burns. I see its flames every time the wind fans them. 
Let me fetch some twigs from there and light a fire here. Do not be anxious; 
I can do this even if you are too tired. You are still weak and will not be 
able to find your way through the blackness that cloaks the forest. 
Tomorrow, when we can see our way clearly, we will leave this place. 
Anagha, tonight let us stay here.” 

Satyavan said, “The pain in my head has gone and my limbs feel 
stronger. I want to see my father and mother. I have never returned late to 
the asrama; my mother keeps me within its enclosure before dusk. Even 
when I go out during the day my parents become anxious about me, and my 
father and other asramavasis come in search of me. Often, in their anxiety, 
my parents have rebuked me for going home late. How they must worry 
now because of me; they will surely be distraught. 

One night, the old couple, who love me dearly, wept from deep sorrow 
and said to me, “Without you, son, we cannot live for even a moment. We 
will live only as long as you do. You are our staff; without you we are blind. 
The continuance of our race, our funeral oblations, our fame and our 
descendants, all depend on you.’ 

My mother and father are old, and I am their crutch. If they do not see 
me return at night, what will their plight be? I blame myself for having 
slept, and causing my parents agony. I cannot bear to live without my father 
and mother. I am certain that by now my blind father, his mind crazed with 
grief, is asking everyone who lives in the hermitage about me. I am not 
worried for myself, but for my father and for my feeble mother who 
depends on him. Ah, they must surely be demented with anxiety about me. I 


will live as long they live, and live for them. I know that I must take care of 
them and do only what pleases them.” 

The virtuous Satyavan, who loved and revered his parents, began to 
weep with his arms raised in a paroxysm of grief. Savitri wiped the tears 
from his eyes and said, “By the virtue of my tapasya, because of whatever I 
have done that is charitable and my sacrifices, may this night be a benign 
and peaceful one for my father-in-law, mother-in-law and husband. I do not 
remember ever having told a single lie, even in jest. Let my father-in-law 
and mother-in-law remain alive tonight by my truthfulness.” 

Satyavan said, “I long for the sight of my father and mother. Savitri, let 
us go immediately. Beautiful one, I swear on my own self that if I find any 
evil to have befallen my father and mother, I will not live. If you care about 
dharma, if you want me to live, if it is your dharma to do what pleases me, 
then go with me now to the asrama.” 

The lovely Savitri got up, knotted her hair and helped her husband up. 
Satyavan stood and rubbed his arms and legs briskly with his hands. As he 
looked about he noticed his bag, and Savitri said to him, “You can gather 
fruit tomorrow, and I will help you now by carrying your axe.” 

She hung the bag on the branch of a tree and, picking up the axe, went 
to her husband. The princess of the shapely thighs placed her husband’s left 
arm on her left shoulder, and holding him with her right, she set out, with 
the swaying gait of an elephant. 

Satyavan said, “Timid one, I know the forest paths well, for I use them 
regularly. I can also see them by the moonlight that shines from between the 
trees. We have reached the same path that we took this morning. Blessed 
girl, go by the way we came, rather than by some uncertain way. Near that 
glade of palasa trees the path forks. Take the path that goes north. I feel well 
and strong again, and eager to see my parents.” 

Saying this, Satyavan hurried towards the asrama.’ ” 


CANTO 296 
PATIVRATA MAHATMYA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “MI arkandeya says, ‘Meanwhile, the mighty Dyumatsena had 

regained his vision and could see everything around him. 
Bharatarishabha, he took his wife Saibya with him and went to all the 
neighbouring asramas in search of their son, becoming increasingly 
distressed by the moment. 

The old couple searched in asramas, by rivers and lakes, and in the 
woods. Whenever they heard any sound, they stood with their heads raised, 
anxiously anticipating the return of their son, and saying, O here come 
Satyavan and Savitri. Soon, they rushed from place to place in a frenzy, 
their feet torn and bleeding, and pierced with thorns and sharp kusa blades. 

All the Brahmanas living in their hermitage came to them and, 
surrounding them, comforted them and brought them back to their own 
asrama. There the old sadhus diverted Dyumatsena and his wife with stories 
of kings of the olden days. Although that aged couple yearned for their son, 
they were consoled, but grew disconsolate again when they began to think 
of his childhood. 

They began to cry heartrendingly, “Ah, Satyavan my son, O chaste 
Savitri, where are you?” 

A pious Brahmana named Suvarcha said to them, “Considering the 
austerities, self-restraint and purity of Savitri, there can be no doubt that 
Satyavan is alive.” 


Another mighty Brahmana, Gautama, said, “I have studied all the Vedas 
and their many angas, and I have acquired great punya. I have led a celibate 
life as a brahmachari, and I have pleased Agni and my superiors. With 
disciplined soul I have observed all the vows, living at times on air alone. 
By the strength of my tapasya, I know what everyone is doing. I tell you 
that I am certain Satyavan lives.” 

His sishya said, “The words that my Guru has spoken can never be 
false. Satyavan is definitely alive.” 

And the Rishi said, “His wife Savitri has auspicious marks on her body 
that show she will never be widowed. There is no doubt that Satyavan 
lives.” 

Bharadwaja said, “Savitri’s conduct, self-restraint and tapasyashakti 
convince me that Satyavan is alive.” 

Dalbhya said, “Because you have regained your sight, and because 
Savitri completed her vow of fasting before she left, I am certain that 
Satyavan lives.” 

Apastamba said, “We hear birds and wild animals all around us in the 
stillness; miraculously you have got your vision back, and can involve 
yourself again in worldly matters. These are indications that Satyavan 
lives.” 

Dhaumya said, “Your son is graced with every noble quality and is 
loved by one and all; he has the marks that indicate a long life. I, too, am in 
no doubt that Satyavan lives.” 

At what those knowing sages said, Dyumatsena’s heartache eased a 
little. A short while later that night, Savitri and Satyavan reached the 
hermitage and entered it joyfully. 

The Brahmanas said, “Lord of the Earth, greetings to you on being 
united with your son and on regaining your vision. Being able now to see 
your son and your daughter-in-law make your blessing manifold. What we 
have said must come to pass; there can be no doubt of this. From now on, 
your good fortune will grow rapidly.” 

Partha, the Dvijas lit a fire and sat down before Dyumatsena, after 
which, Saibya, Satyavan and Savitri, who stood apart, sat with their 
permission, their hearts light. Then all the forest-dwellers who sat with the 
king, prompted by curiosity, asked Satyavan, “Illustrious prince, why did 
you not return sooner with your wife? Why have you come so late in the 


night? What kept you? We want to know why you alarmed us and your 
parents so. Tell us what happened.” 

Satyavan said, “Savitri and I went into the forest with my father’s 
permission. There, as I was chopping wood, I felt a sharp pain in my head, 
which made me fall into a deep sleep. This is all I remember. I have never 
slept so long before, and I have come home so late at night so that you will 
not worry about me anymore. There is no other reason.” 

Gautama said with a smile, “Then you do not know about your father’s 
vision having returned? I think Savitri should tell us about that. I want to 
hear about it from you, for you know all the subtleties of dharma. 

Savitri, you are like the Goddess Savitri herself in splendour. You must 
know how this happened. So, tell us truly; if it is no secret, tell us 
everything.” 

Savitri said, “I have no secret to keep, so listen to the truth of what 
transpired. Devarishi Narada predicted the early death of my husband, and 
today was the appointed day and I could not bear to be separated from him. 
After he had fallen asleep, Yama came and, tying my husband in his noose, 
began to take him away towards the abode of the Pitrs. 

I followed that Deva and began to eulogise him, and he granted me five 
boons, of which I will tell you. 

For my father-in-law I obtained two boons: the restoration of his sight 
and his kingdom. For my father I asked for a hundred sons. For myself I 
asked for a hundred sons and a life of four hundred years for my husband 
Satyavan. It was for my husband’s life that I kept that vrata. 

I have told you in detail how my enormous misfortune turned into great 


joy.” 
The Rishis said, “Chaste and gentle devi of the stern vows, graced with 
every noble quality and born of a noble line, you have rescued this best of 
dynasties, which was overwhelmed by adversity and sinking into an ocean 
of darkness.” 

The Rishis applauded her and paid their respects to that holy woman, 
and taking leave of the king and his son, they left for their homes, with 
peace and good cheer in their hearts.’ ” 


CANTO 297 
PATIVRATA MAHATMYA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “MI arkandeya says, ‘When the night passed and the Sun rose in the 
sky, the tapasvins performed their morning rites and 
congregated at Dyumatsena’s asrama. However much those mighty sages 
talked with Dyumatsena of Savitri’s greatness and good fortune, they were 
never satisfied. 

And it happened, O king, that there came to that hermitage a large group 
of people from Salva. They brought news that Dyumatsena’s enemy had 
been killed by his own minister: how the minister had slain the usurper and 
all his friends and allies; how all the enemy’s people had fled and how all 
the subjects were unanimous that their legitimate king be restored to the 
throne. 

The emissaries from Salva said, “We have been sent to you with that 
message. This chariot and this army consisting of four kinds of forces have 
arrived for you. May God bless you, O king. Come! Your accession has 
been proclaimed in the city. Occupy forever the throne that belonged to 
your father and grandfather.” 

Seeing the king with his vision restored and looking strong, they bowed 
their heads and their eyes were round with wonder. After worshipping the 
elderly and the Brahmanas living in the hermitage, and being honoured by 
them in return, the king set out for his capital. With a force of soldiers 
protecting them, Saibya rode with Savitri in a golden palanquin, spread with 
splendid sheets and borne on the shoulders of men. 


Arriving in the city, the priests joyfully installed Dyumatsena on the 
throne, also crowning Satyavan as Yuvaraja. In time, Savitri gave birth to a 
hundred sons, all warlike and steadfast in battle, who enhanced the fame of 
the Salvas. She also had one hundred powerful brothers, born to Malavi by 
Aswapati, the lord of the Madras. 

This is the story, Yudhishtira, of how Savitri emerged from a desperate 
plight and took herself, her father and mother, her father-in-law and mother- 
in-law, as well as the dynasty of her husband to lofty heights. Like the 
gentle Savitri, the auspicious Draupadi, graced with a noble character, will 
save you all,’ says Markandeya.” 

Vaisampayana said, “Encouraged by what the Mahatman Rishi says, the 
son of Pandu continues to live, now without anxiety, in the Kamyaka vana. 
The man who listens reverently to the blessed story of Savitri attains 
happiness, success in all his endeavours, and is never touched by misery.” 


CANTO 298 
KUNDALA HARANA PARVA 


anamejaya said, “O Brahmana, why was Yudhishtira so afraid of 

Karna that Rishi Lomasa conveyed a message to the son of Pandu 
from Indra, who promised to remove that fear after Dhananjaya had left? 
And, Sreshta, why was it that the noble Yudhishtira never spoke of his fear 
to anyone?” 

Vaisampayana said, “Rajashardulam, tiger among kings, listen and I 
will tell you. 

After twelve years of their exile have passed and the thirteenth year has 
begun, Sakra, who is always a friend of the Pandavas, decides to ask Karna 
to give him his earrings. Vibhavasu, the Sun God, whose wealth is his light, 
finds out what Indra intends, great king, and goes to see Karna. Best of 
kings, one night, when that hero, devoted to Brahmanas and truthful in 
speech, is sleeping peacefully on his luxurious bed, covered by a silken 
sheet, the radiant Deva, moved by compassion and a father’s love, comes to 
him in a dream. 

He assumes the form of a handsome Brahmana, learned in the Vedas. 
Surya says sweetly to Karna, ‘O best of truthful men, Mahabaho, listen to 
what I say now for I speak from affection and for your good. Karna, with 
the welfare of Pandu’s sons in mind, Sakra wants to have your kundalas. He 
will come to you disguised as a Brahmana. He knows, as all the world does, 
of your vow that you will always give away anything the pious ask you for 
but never demand a thing in return. My son, you give Brahmanas wealth or 


whatever they ask; indeed, you never refuse anyone. Indra is well aware of 
your oath and will come to beg you for your kavacha and kundala, as alms. 

When he asks for the kundalas, you must not give them away, but 
instead appease him as best you can, for your own good. When he begs for 
them you must deflect him with many excuses, cite various precedents and 
refuse him the earrings; instead, offer Purandara other kinds of wealth, 
gems, women and cattle. 

Karna, if you give away your golden earrings, which you were born 
with, your life will be shortened and you will soon meet your death. 
Wearing your kavacha and kundala, you are invincible to your enemies in 
battle. Take what I say to heart. Both your armour and earrings were made 
from the Amrita of immortality, and you must guard and keep them, if you 
value your life.’ 

Karna says, ‘Who are you that tells me this and shows me such 
kindness? Please tell me, O lustrous one, who you truly are, in the guise of 
a Brahmana.’ 

The Brahmana says, ‘Son, I am the Deva of the thousand rays. I say 
what I do out of love. Do as I say because it is to save your life that I have 
come to you.’ 

Karna replies, ‘I am fortunate that the god of splendour is considerate of 
my welfare, and speaks to me. But listen to what I say; for I, too, speak 
from love. If you love me, you should not dissuade me from keeping my 
vow. O Vibhavasu, you are rich with the wealth of effulgence. The whole 
world knows that I have solemnly sworn to give anything, even my life, to a 
chaste Brahmana who comes to me for alms. 

If Sakra comes disguised as a Brahmana, to beg so he can benefit the 
sons of Pandu, I will give him my kavacha and kundala, so that my fame, 
which has spread across the three worlds, does not diminish. It is not 
honourable for me to save my life by breaking my sworn oath; rather, it is 
my dharma to die earning the praises of the world. And so, I will give Indra 
my earrings and armour. 

Besides, if the slayer of Bala and Vritra comes to ask for the kundala to 
help the Pandavas, it will enhance my fame and, also, put Indra to shame. 
Glorious Surya Deva, I wish for fame and honour in this world, even if it is 
to be bought with my life, because those who have fame enjoy Swarga, 
while those who have none are lost. 


Renown keeps men alive in this world even as a mother does, while 
dishonour kills them even though they be physically healthy. Lord of the 
worlds, greatness is the very life of man, as is told in an ancient sloka that 
Prajapati Brahma himself sang: In the next world his fame supports a man, 
and in this world it lengthens life. 

So, by giving away my earrings and mail, both of which I was born 
with, to a Brahmana, according to the laws that govern the giving of gifts; 
by offering up my body as a gift to the gods in the sacrifice of war; by doing 
what is hard to do and conquering my enemies in battle, I will acquire 
nothing but renown. By sparing frightened warriors who beg for their lives, 
and by dispelling the fears of old men, young boys and Brahmanas, I will 
win the highest fame and attain the loftiest heaven. I will guard my honour 
even with my life. This I swear. 

By giving away such a valuable gift to Indra Maghavat, I will become a 
legend in this world.’ ” 


CANTO 299 
KUNDALA HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


oe S urya says, “Karna, never do anything that is harmful to yourself, 

your friends, your sons, your wives, your father or your mother. O 

best of this Earth’s creatures, men wish for renown in this world and for 

lasting fame in heaven, but without having to sacrifice themselves. But you 

want undying fame at the expense of your very life, and fame will snatch 
your life from you. 

Purusharishabha, in this world the father, the mother, the son and other 
kin are useful only to the man who is alive. A king’s power is useful to him 
only as long as he lives. Don’t you understand this? 

O splendid warrior, fame benefits only those that are alive to enjoy it. 
Of what use is fame to the dead, whose bodies have been burnt to ashes? A 
dead man cannot enjoy his renown, but only while he lives. The fame of a 
dead man is like a garland of flowers draped around the neck of a corpse. 

Because you worship me daily, I tell you this for your good, for I 
always protect those that worship me. Mahabaho, your worship is profound 
and inspires my love for you. Do not doubt me, but do as I say. Besides, 
there is a deep mystery attached to all this, ordained by fate, which is also 
why I say this to you. You must trust me. O bull among men, you cannot be 
told this secret, which even the gods do not know. I cannot reveal it to you 
now, but you will understand it in time. 

I repeat what I have already said, Radheya. Take my words to your 
heart. When the wielder of the Vajra asks for them, do not give him your 


kundala. Ah, with your shimmering earrings you look so radiant, like the 
Moon himself in the clear sky, amidst the stars of the Visakha nakshatra. 

You know that fame helps only he that is living. When the king of the 
Devas asks for the earrings you should refuse him, my son. Repeat, over 
and over, different explanations for your refusing him and, in that way, 
Anagha, you will be rid of Indra’s eagerness to have the kundala. Using 
pleasant and subtle arguments, Karna, remove his desire with reasoning of 
grave import. 

O tiger among men, you always taunt and challenge the ambidextrous 
Savyasachi, and you will undoubtedly meet him in battle. As long as you 
wear your kundala Arjuna can never vanquish you, even if Indra himself 
comes to help him. Karna, if you want to kill Arjuna, you must never give 
these exquisite earrings of yours to Sakra.’ ” 


CANTO 300 
KUNDALA HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: K arna says, ‘Lord of splendour, knowing me as one who worships 
you, you also know that there is nothing I would not give away 
as daana in charity. Not my wives, not my friends, not my sons or my own 
self are as dear to me as you, because of the adoration I have for you. You 
know, maker of light, that exalted beings love their worshippers dearly. 
Thinking, Karna is my faithful devotee and is dear to me; and he knows no 
other God in heaven, you have told me what you think is good for me. 
Effulgent one, again I beseech you with bended head, once more I place 
myself in your hands, and I repeat the response I have already given you. I 
beg you, forgive me for refusing to do what you ask. 

Death itself is not fraught with such terror for me as to break my vow. 
Especially when it comes to Brahmanas, I do not hesitate to give even my 
life for them. O Deva, I understand what you have said to me about 
Phalguna. Shed your anxiety about him; I will conquer Arjuna in battle. 
Jamadagni and Drona have both given me weapons of great power. 

Permit me now, Devottama, to adhere to my vrata, so that to him of the 
Vajra coming to beg of me, I may give even my life.’ 

Surya says, ‘If, my son of the mighty strength, you give your kundala to 
the Vajradhari, to ensure victory you must tell him of the hundred sacrifices 
that you will give him the earrings on a condition. Remember that with 
these earrings you are invincible to one and all. It is to see you killed in 


battle by Arjuna that the enemy of the Danavas wishes to take your earrings 
away from you. 

Adulate Indra with truthful words, praise Purandara who has irresistible 
weapons, and plead with him, saying, “Give me an infallible astra which 
can slay any enemy and I will, O thousand-eyed Lord, give you my kavacha 
and kundala.” 

Only on this condition should you give the earrings to Sakra. With that 
astra, Karna, you will slay your enemies in battle. Mahabaho, that singular 
weapon of the Lord of Devas does not return to the hand that casts it 
without killing enemies by the hundreds and thousands.’ 

The Lord of the thousand rays vanishes. The next day, after his prayers, 
Karna relates his dream to Surya Deva and tells him all that passed between 
them in the night. After hearing everything, that enemy of Svarbhanu, the 
resplendent and divine Surya, says to Karna, with a smile, ‘That is so.’ 

And Radha’s son, the slayer of hostile heroes, knowing his dream to be 
true, and wanting to have Indra’s astra, waits for Vasava.” 


CANTO 301 
KUNDALA HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


anamejaya said, “What was the secret that the lord of the fiery rays 

would not tell Karna? What were the kavacha and kundala like? From 
where did the armour and those earrings come? I want to hear all this, O 
you of the mighty austerities, tell me everything.” 

Vaisampayana said, “Rajan, I will tell you the secret which the lord of 
the wealth of radiance does not reveal. I will also describe to you that coat 
of mail and those earrings. 

A long time ago, there appeared before Kuntibhoja a Brahmana of fierce 
tejas. He was tall, with a beard and matted locks, and he carried a staff in 
his hand. He was handsome; his form was perfect and blazed in splendour. 
He had honey-coloured, yellowish-blue skin and his voice was melodious. 
He shone with tapasyashakti and Vedagyana. 

This person said to Kuntibhoja, ‘O you who are free of pride, I would 
live as a guest in your house, eating food that you give me as alms. Neither 
you nor your people must ever displease or anger me. If, Anagha, this suits 
you, I will live in your house in this way. I will come and go as I wish, and 
no one should disturb me when I am eating or sleeping.’ 

Kuntibhoja cheerfully agreed and said, “Yathaastu; so be it, and even 
more. Wise one, I have an illustrious daughter named Pritha. She has an 
excellent character, she observes vows, is chaste, and of subdued senses. 
She will attend on you and take care of you with all reverence. You will be 
pleased with her disposition.’ 


Having said this to that Brahmana and paid him homage, the king went 
to his daughter Pritha of the large eyes and said to her, ‘My daughter, this 
eminent Brahmana wishes to live in our house. I have agreed, my child, and 
I count on your skills in caring for Brahmanas. You must look after him 
with honour and reverence, to keep my word. Be prompt in giving this 
venerable one, who is engaged in the deep study of the Vedas, whatever he 
may want. Cheerfully give him everything he asks for. 

A Brahmana is the embodiment of the highest tejas and also of the 
highest punya. It is because of the tapasya of Brahmanas that the Sun shines 
in the heavens. It is because of their cruelty and disrespect to Brahmanas 
that the Asuras Vatapi and Talajangha were killed by the curses of the holy 
ones. 

And now, my child, I am entrusting the care of a most virtuous 
Brahmana to you. You must always attend on him with the utmost care. 
Daughter, I know that since your childhood you have always been attentive 
to Brahmanas, elders, relatives, servants and friends, and to your mother 
and me. I know how exemplary your conduct is, how you give due respect 
to all the deserving. My faultless one, because of your gentleness, there is 
not one person in the antahpuram of my palace, or even one among the 
servants, who is displeased with you. That is why I saw fit to have you wait 
upon the short-tempered Brahmana. 

Pritha, you are still a girl; and you are my adopted daughter. You were 
born in the House of the Vrishnis, and you were Sura’s favourite daughter. 
Your father himself gladly gave you to me because I had no child of my 
own. You are the natural sister of Vasudeva, and by adoption, the first of my 
daughters. 

Your father promised me his firstborn child, and gave you to me when 
you were just a baby; and now you are my daughter. Born into a noble line 
and raised in one, you have come from one royal house to another, like a 
lotus taken from one lake to another. 

My beautiful child, despite being disciplined with difficulty, low-born 
women develop perverted characters because their hearts are immature. But 
you are born in a royal race and you are extraordinarily lovely. You are 
graced with every accomplishment. Renounce pride, hauteur and self- 
importance, and worshipfully wait upon the boon-giving Brahmana; and 
you will be blessed, Pritha, and surely attain the realms of bliss. If, 


however, you provoke the anger of the Dvijottama, he will destroy my 
entire race.’ ” 


CANTO 302 
KUNDALA HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “kK unti said, ‘Father, I will keep your promise and serve the 

Brahmana with devotion. Foremost of kings, these are not empty 
words. It is my nature to worship Brahmanas, and because in this case my 
doing so will please you, it will surely lead me to good fortune. Whether 
that worshipful one comes in the morning, evening, or at night, even at 
midnight, I will not give him cause for anger. 

I both benefit and derive joy from serving the twice-born ones, and 
obeying all your commands. Dispel your anxiety; you can rely on me. 
Truly, that best of Brahmanas shall never have cause for dissatisfaction 
while living in your house. I will pay particular attention to what pleases the 
Brahmana, and also to what will bring punya and his blessings upon you. 

Anagha, I know full well that, when pleased, such eminent Brahmanas 
bestow even moskha, but when offended they can destroy the one who 
offends them. I will take great care to please this best among Brahmanas. 

You will not come to grief from him through any fault of mine. The 
hubris of kings resulted in Brahmanas bringing about their downfall. This is 
what happened with Chyavana as a result of what Sukanya did. Father, as 
you wish, I will diligently serve the Brahmanottama.’ 

After she had spoken at length to reassure the king, he embraced her, 
and gave her detailed instructions about her duties towards the Brahmana. 
And the king said, “You will conduct yourself in this way, gentle one, 


without fear, for my good as well as your own, and for the good of our 
dynasty, my perfect-limbed child.’ 

Saying this, the noble Kuntibhoja, who was devoted to Brahmanas, 
brought Pritha to that Brahmana and said, “This is my daughter, O Dvija. 
She is very young and accustomed to luxury. Make allowances for her if 
she makes any mistakes. Great Brahmanas are never angry with old men, 
children and ascetics, even if these frequently err. Even a serious 
wrongdoing deserves forgiveness from a Brahmana. Brahmanottama, you 
must aceept the best worship and service that my child is able to offer you.” 

The Brahmana said, ‘So be it,’ and the happy king showed him to his 
apartments, that were bright and white, like swan down, or moonbeams. In 
the yagnasala the king placed a grand throne that had been especially made 
for the Brahmana. The food and everything else that he provided were 
equally excellent. And casting aside idleness and self-importance, the 
princess devoted herself with all goodwill to serving the Brahmana. 

And the chaste Kunti, of the pure character, moved to these apartments 
to wait upon the sage. Serving him faithfully, as if he was a Deva, she made 
him happy indeed.” 


CANTO 303 
KUNDALA HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana continued, “That young princess of the rigid vows 

succeeded in pleasing the Brahmana by serving him devotedly. 
Foremost of kings, sometimes, saying he would be back in the morning, he 
would return in the evening or at night. Regardless, the girl worshipped him 
at all hours with offerings of delicious food and drink, and a comfortably 
made bed. 

Days passed, and her attention to his needs only grew instead of 
diminishing. Even when the Brahmana reproved her, finding fault with any 
of her arrangements, at times speaking harshly, Pritha never showed any 
displeasure or did anything that was disagreeable to him. 

On many occasions, the Brahmana came after the appointed hour had 
long passed; and on others, in the dead of night, when it was difficult to 
serve him food, he would demand a meal. At all those times, Pritha would 
give him whatever he asked for. Like a sishya, daughter or young sister, that 
blemishless jewel of a girl devotedly served that Brahmana, who was 
pleased with her conduct and her caring attention, and he valued her service 
highly. 

Bhaarata, every morning her father asked her if the Brahmana was 
happy with her ministrations, and every day the girl replied that he was. 
And at that, the noble Kuntibhoja was delighted. 

A whole year went by without that Muni being able to find any fault 
with Pritha. One day, he said to her, ‘Gentle maiden, I am pleased with you. 


O lovely girl, blessed one, ask me for boons that are difficult for people of 
this world to obtain, which will make you more famous than all the women 
on Earth.’ 

Kunti said, ‘I have everything I want because I have made you, who are 
learned in the Vedas, happy; and my father is pleased with me. I consider 
every boon I could wish for as having already been given to me, O 
Brahmana.’ 

The Brahmana said, ‘Susheela of the sweet smiles, if you do not want 
any boon from me, let me give you this mantra to invoke the Devas. Any of 
the gods whom you call by chanting this mantra will appear before you and 
do as you tell them. Willing or not, by virtue of this mantra, the particular 
deity will become your meek and obedient slave, under your control.’ 

That faultless princess could not, for fear of incurring a curse, refuse the 
Brahmana a second time. O king, the Brahmana taught the girl of the tender 
limbs the invocations that are recited in the beginning of the Atharva Veda. 

Then he said to Kuntibhoja, ‘Rajan, I have lived happily in your house, 
always worshipped and lovingly cared for by your daughter. I am going 
now.’ 

And saying this, he vanished from where he stood, leaving the king 
amazed. Kuntibhoja praised his daughter Pritha and looked on her with 
even more affection.” 


CANTO 304 
KUNDALA HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “One day, after that great Brahmana had gone, 

the young Kunti began to think about the efficacy of mantras she 
had learnt, and she said to herself, ‘I wonder what the mantras that the 
Mahatman taught me can achieve. Let me chant them now and discover for 
myself.’ 

Even as she thought this, she noticed the signs in her body that signalled 
the onset of puberty; she saw that she was menstruating. She was in her 
room sitting on her luxurious bed, and she saw the Sun rising in the eastern 
sky. Her eyes and her mind were riveted on Surya pulsing with light, and 
the slender girl gazed at him in fascination and could not tear her eyes away 
from the beauty of the Sun at dawn. Hardly aware of what she did, she 
mumrmured the mantra the Brahmana had taught her. 

Suddenly, a celestial vision appeared within her and she saw, with her 
inner eye, the Sun embodied in a divine form, wearing blazing kavacha and 
kundala. 

At the sight of Surya Deva, her curiosity to test the mantra was aroused, 
and she decided to try it on him. First she went through her pranayama and 
then invoked the Maker of Day. Instantly, he presented himself before her. 
His skin was golden like honey; his arms were powerful; his neck was 
marked with lines as on a conch-shell; he wore glittering bracelets on his 
arms and a crown on his head. 


And he came to her, smiling and lighting up the chamber with his 
brilliance. With his yogic power he divided himself, setting to one side his 
burning half, and the other part of him standing before her. 

He addressed Kunti in sweet words. The Deva said, ‘Gentle one, I am 
bound by your mantra, and I have come to you in obedience. I am yours, to 
do whatever you command, princess. Tell me what you would have me do.’ 

Kunti said nervously, ‘Worshipful one, you may go back to where you 
came from. It is only from curiosity that I invoked you. Forgive me, Lord.’ 

Surya said, ‘O slender-waisted, I will return to where I have come from, 
as you command. However, you may not invoke a Deva in vain. Graceful 
one, your heart’s intention was to have a son from Surya, a splendid son, 
born with kavacha and kundala, and with incomparable prowess. Give 
yourself to me, maiden with the swaying gait of a she-elephant. You shall 
have a son, just as you wished for. 

Gentle girl of the sweet smiles, I will go back only after enjoying you. If 
you do not gratify me today, I will curse you in anger and your father and 
that Brahmana, as well. I will consume them all, and you will be to blame. I 
will exact retribution from your foolish father, who knows nothing of your 
wrongdoing, and from that Brahmana, who bestowed mantras on you 
without knowing your true character. 

Purandara and all the Devas are watching me, and they laugh at me for 
having been deceived by you. Look, you can see them with your celestial 
vision, which I gave you so that you would be able to see me.’ 

The virgin princess saw the Devas standing in the heavens, each in his 
proper place, and in front of her was the resplendent Suryadeva of the 
blinding rays. The girl was frightened when she saw them all, and she 
blushed in mortification. 

She said to Surya, ‘O Lord of Light, please return to your own place. I 
am horrified at the outrage you propose, for I am still a maiden. Only a 
father, a mother and other elders can give their daughter’s body away. I will 
not sacrifice my virtue; chastity is a woman’s highest dharma. O splendid 
one, I called you because I was childishly eager to test the mantras. 
Consider that this is the act of a girl of tender years; you must forgive me, 
Lord.’ 

Surya said, “Kunti, it is only because you are a young girl that I am 
speaking so gently to you. I would not make such concession to any one 
else. Surrender, Kunti; you will be happy. Because you have summoned me 


with mantras, perfect-limbed one, I cannot leave without achieving my 
purpose, for if I do, I will be the laughing-stock of the world and ridiculed 
by the Devas. Give in to me; you will have a son in my image, and you will 
be praised by the whole world.’ ” 


CANTO 305 
KUNDALA HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Try as she might, speaking sweetly, the princess 
could not dissuade the Deva of the thousand rays. Afraid of a curse, 
she began to reflect on what she ought to do. 

She thought, ‘How can my innocent father and that Brahmana be saved 
from the angry Vibhavasu’s curse, for which I am to blame. Although tejas 
and tapasya can destroy sins, even honest people should avoid them, 
particularly if they are young. Because of my youthful folly, I am in a 
terrible predicament. I have put myself in the hands of this Deva. Yet, how 
can I do what is wrong by giving in to him?’ 

Wracked by the fear of his curse, and by her own anxiety, a languid 
torpor crept over her. She was so confused that she did not know what to 
do. Afraid, on the one hand, Rajan, of the reproach of her loved ones if she 
yielded to the deity and, on the other, of his curse if she did not, at last the 
girl said to the Deva, in a voice trembling and shy, “O Lord, as my father 
and mother and my friends are still living, I cannot violate my dharma. If I 
commit this sin with you, I will sacrifice the honour of this family. If, O first 
among heat-givers, you consider this union to be worthy, I will give myself 
to you, even though my family has not bestowed me. By the truth that every 
being’s virtue, reputation, fame and life are established in you, may I 
remain chaste after having surrendered my body to you.’ 

Surya replied, ‘Neither your father nor your mother, nor any of your 
elders has the right to give you away. Blessings be upon you, beautiful girl. 


Listen to me: 

The word kanya is derived from the root kama, which means desire, and 
it is used to denote a virgin because she desires everyone. Therefore, lovely- 
hipped one of the finest complexion, a virgin is free to do as she pleases. 
You will not, in any way, be committing a sin by giving what I ask. Would 
I, who am devoted to the well-being of all creatures, ever do anything that 
violates dharma? 

Nature’s law dictates that men and women should not be bound by any 
restraints. Anything to the contrary is a perversion of nature. 

You shall remain a virgin even after having gratified me, and your son 
shall be illustrious.’ 

Kunti said, ‘If, O destroyer of darkness, I have a son from you, grant 
that he is born with kavacha and kundala, and that he is mighty-armed and 
great.’ 

Surya answered, ‘Gentle princess, your son shall indeed be mighty- 
armed, and decked with divine kavacha and kundala. His armour will be 
invulnerable and his earrings made of Amrita.’ 

Kunti said, ‘If the armour and earrings of the son you will have with me 
are truly made of Amrita, then fulfil your desire, O Deva! May my son be 
powerful, strong, vigorous and beautiful, like you, and may he be blessed 
with virtue.’ 

Surya said, ‘Noble girl, these kundala were a gift to me from Aditi. 
Timid one, I will bestow them and this wonderful armour on your son.’ 

Kunti then acquiesced, ‘O Lord of light, if I have such a son, I will do 
as you say and satisfy your desire.’ 

Surya Deva said, ‘Tathaastu, and that sky ranger, the enemy of 
Svarbhanu, with his soul absorbed in yoga, entered into Kunti and touched 
her on her navel. Immediately, she lost consciousness and fell onto her bed. 

Surya said to her, ‘I leave you now, you of the graceful hips. You shall 
give birth to a son who will become the best of all warriors; and you shall 
remain a virgin.’ 

Then, Rajarajan, as the blazing Deva was about to leave, the girl 
bashfully whispered to him in her swoon, ‘So be it.’ 

It was thus that the daughter of king Kuntibhoja, having invoked Surya 
and then asked for a son, fell down in a stupor on her bed, like a broken 
creeper. And it was thus that, after stupefying her, the god of fierce rays 


entered into her through the power of his yoga and impregnated her without 
breaking her virginal seal and dishonouring her. 
When Surya had gone, the young girl regained consciousness.” 


CANTO 306 
KUNDALA HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Lord of the Earth, Pritha’s son was conceived on 

the first day of the bright fortnight, in the tenth month of the year. 
Carrying a child as radiant as the lord of the stars, the maiden of the shapely 
hips hid her pregnancy from fear of disapproval, and no one knew of her 
condition. Living as she did in a virgin princess’ apartments, and using all 
her guile to carefully conceal her condition, only her nursemaid knew the 
truth. 

In due time and by the grace of Surya Deva, the young Kunti gave birth 
to a godlike son. The baby was clad, like his father, in a coat of mail and 
adored with glittering earrings. His eyes were tawny, like a lion’s; and his 
shoulders were broad, like a bull’s. 

As soon as he was born, with the help of her nurse, Kunti placed the 
infant in a spacious and smooth wicker basket cushioned with silk sheets 
and a soft pillow. They coated it with wax, so it would not sink, and 
wrapped it in a rich cover. Then, with tears in her eyes, Kunti carried her 
baby to the river Aswa and set the basket upon the current. 

She knew that an unwed girl should not have a child, yet she wept 
piteously, as her son was about to be borne away by the river. Listen to what 
she said, as she surrendered the precious basket to the Aswa. 

‘My child, may all who live on this Earth—on land, in water, in the sky 
and in the heavens—do good to you. May all your paths be blessed. May 


you face no obstacles. My son, may all whom you meet be your friends and 
bear you no enmity. 

May that Lord of all waters, Varuna, protect you in the water. May the 
Deva that wanders the skies protect you in the sky. May Surya Deva, first of 
heat-givers, your father who gave you to me through destiny, protect you 
everywhere. May the Adityas and the Vasus, the Rudras and the Sadhyas, 
the Viswas, the Devas and the Maruts, the Cardinal Points with the great 
Indra and their guardians presiding over them, and all the heavenly ones 
protect you! 

Wherever you may be, I will recognise you by your kavacha and 
kundala. Your father, the glorious Surya Deva, is fortunate indeed, for, with 
his celestial vision, he will watch over you as you float down the river. 
Blessed also is that woman who will, O Devaputra, take you for her son, 
and who will give you her breast when you are hungry. What a dream she 
has dreamed, that woman who adopts you who are as splendid as the Sun, 
who wear divine armour and earrings, with your lotus eyes and skin as 
lustrous as burnished copper, your lofty, powerful brow and hair ending in 
silken curls. Lucky is the woman who will see you crawl on the ground, 
covered in mud and uttering the sweetest inarticulate words of infancy. 
Blessed is she who will see you reach manhood like a maned Himalayan 
lion.’ 

Rajan, Pritha cried over the basket for a long time before she set it afloat 
down the Aswa, in the dead of night, with only her nursemaid beside her. 
Though she longed to keep standing there forever, she was afraid that her 
father might discover what had happened, and she returned to the palace. 
Meanwhile, the basket floated down the Aswa to the river Charmanwati, 
and from the Charmanwati into the Yamuna, and then on to the Ganga. 
Borne by the Ganga, the basket came at dawn to the city of Champa, which 
was ruled by a Suta, a charioteer. 

The wonderful coat of mail and earrings, made of Amrita, and destiny, 
kept the child safe and alive.” 


CANTO 307 
KUNDALA HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “It happened that at this time a Suta named 
Adhiratha, who was a friend of Dhritarashtra, came to the river 

Ganga along with his wife Radha of great beauty. Parantapa, that otherwise 

blessed woman had done all she could to have a child, but without success. 

Coming that day to the Ganga, she saw a large wicker basket drifting on 
Jahnavi’s current. It veered towards the bank where she stood, as if moved 
by some unseen hand, and the woman bent to arrest it. She called her 
husband Adhiratha the Suta, and he lifted the basket out of the water and 
prised it open. 

Inside, he saw a boy, dazzling like the morning Sun. The infant wore 
golden armour, as if it was his very skin, and his stunningly beautiful face 
was adorned with earrings. The Suta and his wife were wonder-struck. 

Taking the baby onto his lap, Adhiratha said to his wife, ‘I have never in 
my life seen anything so wonderful. This child must be of divine birth. 
Surely, seeing us childless, the gods have taken pity on us and sent him to 
me.’ 

Saying this, O Bhumipala, he gave the infant into Radha’s eager arms. 
And in accordance with divine law, Radha adopted the child of unearthly 
origin and form, who shimmered like lotus-stamens and was handsome past 
describing. She lavished him with all her love and care and, naturally 
endowed with more than human strength, the child grew apace. 


After adopting Karna, Adhiratha had other natural children, and seeing 
the child adorned with shining mail and golden earrings, the Brahmanas 
named him Vasusena. That is how this resplendent Suryaputra of 
immeasurable prowess became the son of a sarathy, and came to be known 
as Vasusena and Vrisha. 

Pritha discovered through some spies that her child was growing up 
amongst the Angas as the eldest son of the sarathy Adhiratha. 

When the boy grew into a youth, Adhiratha sent him to Hastinapura. 
There, Karna lived with Drona, to learn the Astra Shastra, and the powerful 
youth befriended Duryodhana. He acquired all the four kinds of astras from 
Drona, Kripa and Parasurama, and achieved renown throughout the world 
as a mighty bowman. His friendship with Duryodhana ignited in him a 
hatred of the sons of Pritha, his brothers, though he did not know they were 
that, and he became obsessed with fighting the noble Phalguna. 

O king, from the first time they met, Karna and Arjuna always 
challenged each other. 

That Karna, born to Kunti of Surya Deva, was being brought up as a 
Sutaputra was Surya Deva’s secret. Seeing Karna with his kavacha and 
kundala, Yudhishtira was troubled by the thought that he would be 
invincible. When, after bathing, Karna worshipped the irradiant Deva at 
high noon, Brahmanas came to beg alms of him, and, at that time of his 
fervent prayers, there was nothing that he would not give away to them. 

And so, one day at that hour, assuming the guise of a Brahmana, Indra 
appears before Karna, and says, ‘Give me alms,’ to which Radha’s son 
replies, ‘You are welcome.’ ” 


CANTO 308 
KUNDALA HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Karna first sees Indra as just another Brahmana 

and welcomes him. Adhiratha’s son says to the Brahmana, ‘What 
shall I give you—a necklace of gold, beautiful damsels, cattle-rich 
villages?’ 

The Brahmana replies, ‘I do not want you to give me either a golden 
necklace or pretty girls, or any other such thing. Give those to men that ask 
for them. If you are true to your vow, cut the golden kavacha and kundala 
you were born with from your body, and give them to me. Parantapa, I want 
you to do this at once; for me this one gift is better than all others.’ 

Karna says, ‘O Brahmana, I will give you land for a house, beautiful 
virgins, cattle and fields; but I cannot give you my kavacha and kundala.’ 

Despite Karna trying to deflect him in so many ways, that Brahmana 
does not want anything else. Although Karna tries his best to placate him 
and though he pays him much homage, that Brahmanottama refuses to 
compromise on what he wants. 

When that Dvijottama refuses to accept anything else, Radha’s son says, 
‘Dvijottama, I was born with this kavacha as part of my body, and my 
kundala were created from Amrita. They make me invincible in this world, 
and I cannot part with them. Brahmanarishabha, let me give you the entire 
kingdom of the Earth, with no enemies, and full of prosperity, but not my 
kavacha and kundala. Without them, I can be killed by my enemies.’ 


When the illustrious Brahmana refuses to take any other gift, Karna 
says, now with a smile, ‘Devadeva, I have recognised you already. O Lord 
Sakra, it is not right that I give you a gift which will bring ignominy upon 
you. 

You are the king of the Devas, and it is you who should be bestowing 
boons on me. If I give you my kavacha and kundala, I will surely meet my 
end, and you will as surely be ridiculed. Therefore, O Sakra, take my mail 
and my earrings but give me something in return, so that you are not 
demeaned. Otherwise, I will not give the kavacha and kundala to you.’ 

Sakra replies, “Even before I came, Surya Deva knew what I intended 
and told you about it. Karna, let it be as you wish. Except for the Vajra, tell 
me what it is you wish to have.’ 

Indra’s words fill Karna with delight; his purpose is about to be 
accomplished. Intent upon procuring an inexorable astra, he says to Indra, 
‘O Vasava, in exchange for my kavacha and kundala earrings, give me a 
weapon that cannot be defied, one which will devour enemy armies in battle 
array.’ 

Concentrating his mind to summon that weapon, Indra says to Karna, 
‘Give me your kavacha that is your skin, and your kundala, and take this 
shakti, but on one condition. When I meet Daityas in battle and loose this 
invincible astra, it annihilates the mightiest enemies in their thousands and 
flies back to my hand after it has achieved its task. In your hand, however, 
Sutaputra, this shakti will slay only one enemy of yours, and having done 
so, it will return to me, roaring and ablaze.’ 

Karna says, “There is only one enemy that I wish to slay in battle; he 
burns bright and fierce, like a fire, and I am afraid of him.’ 

Indra says, ‘You shall indeed slay such an enemy in battle, but the one 
you wish to kill is protected by an exalted One. Those that are learned in the 
Vedas call this One “Invincible Varaha” and “Incomprehensible Narayana’. 
Krishna himself protects your sworn enemy.’ 

Karna says, ‘Even if this is so, O Illustrious, give me the weapon that 
will destroy only one powerful enemy, and I will cut the kavacha and 
kundala from my body and give them to you. However, grant that my body, 
thus wounded, will not be scarred or ugly to behold.’ 

Indra says, ‘Karna, because you are devoted to the truth, your body will 
not be disfigured, and it will not have any scars. O Karna, finest among the 
eloquent, you shall be graced with the brilliance and prowess of your father. 


Here is my Vasavi shakti; and remember that if you loose this astra in a fit 
of anger, while there are still other weapons available to you and your life is 
not in immediate danger, it will turn on you.’ 

Karna says, “O Sakra, I will use this Vasavi astra only when I my life is 
in imminent peril. This I swear.’ 

Rajan, Karna accepts the smouldering weapon, and he begins to peel 
away the natural kavacha that coats his body. And the entire host of Devas 
and Danavas roar aloud to see him paring his own skin. Karna’s face does 
not betray his pain, instead he still smiles. Celestial kettle-drums begin to 
beat, and heavenly flowers rain down on him. 

Karna cuts his golden kavacha from his body and gives it, still dripping 
blood, to Indra. From his ears, he cuts his beautiful kundala and gives them, 
too, to the Deva king. And for this deed of his, he is called Karna. 

Thus tricking Karna, but so giving him immortal fame, Indra is pleased 
that he has accomplished the Pandavas’ goal, and he ascends into Devaloka. 
Hearing that Karna had been deceived, Dhritarashtra’s sons are dismayed. 
On the other hand, learning of what has happened to the Sutaputra, Pritha’s 
princes are filled with joy.” 

Janamejaya said, “Where were those Kshatriyas, the sons of Pandu, at 
that time? Who gave them this welcome news? And what did they do when 
the twelfth year of their exile was over? O Illustrious one, tell me all this.” 

Vaisampayana said, “By this time, the heroic Pandavas have defeated 
the Saindhava king and rescued Krishnaa. They have lived out the entire 
term of their painful exile in the jungle; they have heard ancient legends 
about Devas and Rishis from Markandeya. 

Now those heroes return from their asrama in Kamyaka vana to the 
sacred Dwaita vana. With them are all their chariots, their sarathys, their 
followers, citizens of their kingdom and their cattle.” 


CANTO 309 
ARANEYA PARVA 


anamejaya said, “What did the Pandavas do after they had endured 
such anguish on the kidnapping of Krishnaa, and after rescuing her? 

Vaisampayana said, “After their difficult time, when Krishnaa was 
abducted, the ever-glorious Yudhishtira and his brothers leave the Kamyaka 
vana and return to the lush Dwaita vana. The sons of Pandu live there with 
their wife, frugally, eating fruit, and engaged in their vratas. During their 
stay in Dwaita vana, Yudhishtira, Bhimasena, Arjuna and Madri’s sons 
undergo a great trial for the sake of a Brahmana. However, their troubles 
turn out to be the very means to their future weal. I will tell you of the 
strange difficulty that those foremost of Kurus face while living in those 
woods, which in the end brings them good fortune. Listen. 

Once, as a deer is frolicking about, it happens that two arani sticks, 
which a devout Brahmana used to light his daily fire, and his churning-staff 
become entangled in its antlers. In alarm, the stag runs out of the asrama, 
swiftly and with long leaps, with the sticks and staff still caught on his head. 

Kurusthama, the Brahmana sees his most precious possessions, which 
he uses to light his sacred fire, being carried away and, utterly distraught, 
comes running to the Pandavas. 

He goes to Ajatasatru, who is sitting in the forest with his brothers, and 
cries, ‘A deer was playing near my asrama, O king, and my fire-sticks and 
churning-staff, which I had tied to a tree, got caught in its antlers. That swift 
creature fled with great leaps, taking my sticks and staff. Pandavas, you 


must follow its tracks and retrieve them for me, so that my agnihotra does 
not pause.’ 

Yudhishtira is concerned. He takes up his bow, and the son of Kunti sets 
out at once. His brothers pick up their bows and follow him in search of the 
deer, all of them eager to help the Brahmana. The Maharathas spot the deer 
quite close by and shoot it with arrows, but, however they try, they cannot 
wound the animal at all, and it runs from them. 

As they go after it, a long way, the fine stag suddenly vanishes. 
Dispirited at having lost their quarry, tired, thirsty and hungry, the Pandavas 
sit down in the shade of a banyan tree deep in the forest. 

Here, Nakula, who is both disheartened and impatient, says to 
Yudhishtira, ‘In our clan, Rajan, we never abandon our dharma, nor do we 
ever lose our wealth from idleness. We never refuse or fail anyone who asks 
for our help, least of all a Brahmana. Why then have we met this fate 
today?’ ” 


CANTO 310 
ARANEYA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 Y udhishtira says, “There is no limit to troubles, nor is it possible to 
determine their final outcome. The Lord Dharma is solely 
responsible for giving out the fruits of both punya and paapa.’ 

Bhima growls, “This is the bitter fruit of my not having killed the 
Pratikamin on the spot, when he dragged Krishnaa into the Kuru sabha like 
a slave.’ 

Arjuna says softly, ‘We have met with this failure today because I did 
nothing to answer the vicious words of the Sutaputra, words that pierced me 
to my bones.’ 

Sahadeva says, ‘Surely, Bhaarata, this calamity has befallen us because 
I did not kill Sakuni when he cheated you at dice.’ 

Yudhishtira says to Nakula, ‘Climb this tree and look around at the ten 
points of the horizon. Can you see water or water-plants anywhere near us? 
Child, your brothers are tired and thirsty.’ 

Nakula quickly climbs the tree and, after looking all around, says, 
‘Rajan, I see many trees that grow beside some large body of water, and I 
hear the cries of cranes. There must surely be water somewhere neat.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “Handsome one, go and fetch water in these quivers.’ 

At his elder brother’s command, Nakula hurries towards the trees he 
saw, and soon sees a lake of crystallline water, on whose banks cranes live, 
and he wants to drink from it. Just then he hears a voice from the sky, which 
says, ‘O child, do not drink, for this lake belongs to me. Son of Madri, you 


must first answer my questions, and then you may drink to your heart’s 
content and also take as much water as you need with you.’ 

Nakula, however, is parched with thirst and, ignoring the asariri from 
the sky, he kneels and drinks the cool water. Immediately he keels over, 
dead. 

Parantapa, seeing that Nakula is late, Yudhishtira says to Sahadeva, 
‘Our brother has been gone a long time. Go and bring your twin back, and 
fetch the water, too.’ 

Sahadeva sets out in the same direction, and soon he comes to the lake 
where his brother lies dead on its bank. In shock, and in an agony of thirst, 
he goes towards the water, when he hears a voice saying, ‘O child, do not 
drink, this lake belongs to me. First answer my questions and then you may 
drink and take away as much water as you want.’ 

But Sahadeva is also parched and, disregarding the disembodied voice, 
drinks the water; and immediately he also falls dead. 

When Sahadeva does not return, Yudhishtira says to Arjuna, ‘It is a long 
time since your brothers went, Bibhatsu. Go and bring them back, as well as 
water. You are the one we always turn to when we are in trouble.’ 

Accordingly, Arjuna takes his bow and arrows, as well as_ his 
unsheathed sword, and goes towards the lake. Arriving, Svetavahana sees 
his two younger brothers who had come to fetch water, lying dead. Seeing 
them, that lion among men is heartbroken. He raises his bow and looks 
around but sees no one in the thick forest that surrounds the lake. He, too, is 
tired and goes towards the water. 

As he nears it, he hears a voice speaking from the sky, “Why are you 
going to the water? I am a Yaksha and this lake is mine. I forbid you to 
drink from it. O Kaunteya, if you can answer the riddles I will ask you, only 
then may you drink and take away as much water as you want.’ 

Arjuna says, ‘Show yourself and then try to stop me. When my arrows 
pierce you, you will never speak again.’ And he sprays his mantra-invoked 
arrows all around, displaying his expertise at shabdavedi: shooting an 
invisible target, tracking it only by sound. Annoyed by thirst and fatigue, he 
looses a towering fountain of countless arrows into the sky. 

Then, the invisible Yaksha says, ‘Why do you go through all this 
trouble, Partha? You need only answer my questions to drink from the lake. 
However, if you drink without doing so, you will also die.’ 


Arjuna ignores the asariri and helps himself to the water. Immediately, 
he drops dead. 

On not seeing Arjuna return, Yudhishtira says to Bhimasena, 
‘Parantapa, it is such a long time since Nakula, Sahadeva and Bibhatsu 
went to fetch water, and they have not yet come back. Bhaarata, bless you, 
go and bring them back, and the water, too.’ 

Bhima sets out at once for the lake where those tigers among men, his 
brothers, lie dead. And seeing them, Bhima, afflicted though he is with 
thirst, is horrified. The mighty-armed hero thinks that this must be the work 
of some Yaksha or Rakshasa. Vrikodara thinks, ‘I will surely have to fight 
today. So let me first quench my thirst.’ And he goes quickly towards the 
lake to drink the water. 

The unseen Yaksha says, ‘O child, do not drink; this lake belongs to me. 
First answer my questions, then drink and take away as much water as you 
like.’ 

Bhima does not bother to reply, but bends and drinks from the lake; and 
as soon as he does so, he also falls dead. 

Yudhishtira waits a little longer, saying to himself, “Why are the two 
sons of Madri so late? Why does the wielder of the Gandiva delay? And 
what keeps mighty Bhima away so long? Ah, I will go and search for 
them.’ 

Tiredly, Yudhishtira gets up, his body burning with thirst and his mind 
with some dismay. 

Yudhishtira thinks, ‘Is this forest enchanted by some evil spell, or is it 
infested by deadly predators? Have they all vanished because they have 
disregarded some mighty being? Perhaps they did not find water where they 
went and are scouring the forest in search of some? Why have those bulls 
among men not returned?’ Thinking these thoughts, the illustrious 
Yudhishtira, foremost of monarchs, enters the thick forest where no human 
sound is heard, where deer, bears and birds live, where bright green trees 
grow like ornaments, where black bees hum and birds warble sweetly. 

He comes upon the lovely lake, which looks as if it has been created by 
Brahma himself. It is adorned with golden-hued flowers, lotuses and 
sindhuvaras, and encircled by dense woods of ketaka, karavira and pipala 
trees. The exhausted Yudhishtira sees the lake and is speechless with 
wonder.” 


CANTO 311 
ARANEYA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Yudhishtira sees his brothers, all as glorious as 

Indra, lying dead, as if they are the Lokpalas fallen from their places 
at the end of a yuga. He sees Arjuna’s body, his bows and arrows strewn on 
the ground; he sees Bhimasena and the twins lying still; and the king sighs 
deeply and tears of sorrow bathe his face. 

Dharmaputra, his heart torn in grief, mourns his dead brothers, sobbing, 
‘Noble Vrikodara, you swore to smash Duryodhana’s thighs with your mace 
in battle. O Mahabaho, you who enhance the glory of the Kurus, your death 
has made everything meaningless. The promises that men make may be 
futile, but why has the word of God been rendered impotent? 

Arjuna, when you were born, while our mother was still in labour, the 
gods said to her that you would be the equal of the Deva of the thousand 
eyes. And all the beings in the northern Pariyatra mountains sang your 
praises, saying that you would be the one who restored their prosperity, 
which had been stolen by their enemies. They said that you are invincible in 
battle. Why then has the mighty Jishnu succumbed to death? O, why does 
Dhananjaya, on whom we pinned our hopes and thus endured all our 
misery, lie lifeless on the ground, shattering my faith? 

Why have the heroic and mighty sons of Kunti—Bhimasena and 
Dhananjaya— who always killed their adversaries and who are irresistible in 
battle been overpowered by an enemy? 


This vile heart of mine must be made of stone that it does not burst 
when I see these twins lying on the forest floor. You bulls among men, who 
are versed in the Shastras and learned in the proprieties of time and place, 
who are rich in the wealth of tapasya, who are devout in the performance of 
all sacred rites, why do you lie so still and not speak to me as you ought? 
Ah, undefeated one, how do you lie insensible on the earth although your 
bodies are whole and show no injury or wound?’ 

Looking at his brothers, seeming as if there are in their usual blissful 
sleep on the hillside, that king is heartbroken. Sunk in a bottomless well of 
grief, he begins to think about what caused their deaths. Although the 
virtuous and mighty-armed king, who is learned in the laws that govern 
time and place, thinks long and hard, he can come to no conclusion about 
what he should do. 

After lamenting a long time, Yudhishtira restrains his sorrow and thinks 
about who might be responsible for the deaths of his brothers. 

He says, “There are no marks of weapons on them, nor are there any 
footprints on the ground. Whoever has killed my brothers must be powerful 
indeed. I will think about this seriously, but first let me drink some water 
before I try to discover what happened. 

Perhaps the evil Duryodhana arranged for this lake to be created here by 
the king of the Gandharvas. No sensible man would trust that vile and 
vicious man who sees no distinction between good and evil. Or perhaps, his 
own agents have done this awful thing.’ 

The king reflects in this manner, his mind flying in different directions. 
Yudhishtira does not believe that the water is poisoned because he sees that 
the bodies have no grey pallor and that the faces are still bright, as if with 
life, though they do not breathe. 

The king continues his reflections, “Each of these Manavottamas is as 
potent as a great waterfall. Who but Yama himself, who destroys all things 
when their time comes, could have laid my brothers low?’ 

Coming to this conclusion, he begins to perform his ritual ablutions in 
the lake. 

As he steps into the water, he hears a voice in the sky, saying, “I am a 
crane, living on tiny fish. It is I who have brought your brothers under the 
reign of the Lord of departed spirits. O Kshatriya, if you do not answer the 
questions I ask, you will become the fifth corpse. Do not do anything rash. 


This lake belongs to me. Answer my questions first, Kuntiputra, then drink 
and take away as much water as you like.’ 

Hearing this, Yudhishtira says, ‘Are you the Lord of the Rudras, or of 
the Vasus, or of the Maruts? Which Deva are you? This could not have been 
done by a bird! Who are you that have conquered the four mighty 
mountains — Himavat, Pariyatra, Vindhya and Malaya? Great is your feat, O 
strongest of the strong. You have killed my brothers whom the Devas, 
Gandharvas, Asuras and Rakshasas feared. What you have done is hard to 
believe. 

I do not know what your intentions are, and I am curious but also 
frightened that you have possessed me. My mind is roiled and my head 
aches. I ask you, therefore, worshipful one, who are you that live here?’ 

The voice says, ‘I am a Yaksha, not a krauncha. It is I who killed all 
your brothers.’ 

Hearing these wretched words spoken in a harsh voice, Yudhishtira 
approaches the Yaksha and stands before him. That Bharatarishabha sees 
the Yaksha—he has strange eyes and a huge body with a tail as big as a 
palmyra tree; he blazes like the Sun, like Fire; he is as indomitable as an 
immense mountain. He stands on a tree and growls as loudly and deeply as 
black clouds. 

The Yaksha says, “O king, your brothers ignored my warning and drank 
from my lake. That is why I killed them. He who wants to live should not 
drink this water. Prithaputra, be warned again. This lake belongs to me. 
First answer my questions and then take as much water as you want.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘O Yaksha, I do not want what you own. Virtuous 
persons do not approve of a man who praises himself. Therefore, humbly, 
and to the best of my knowledge, I will answer your questions. Ask me.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘What makes the Sun rise? Who stays by him? Who 
makes him set? And in who is he established?’ 

Yudhishtira says, “Brahma makes the Sun rise; the Devas keep him 
company; Dharma makes him set; and he is established in Truth.’ 

The Yaksha says, “How does one become learned? How does one attain 
greatness? How can one have a second self? And, O king, how can one 
acquire wisdom?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘It is by the study of the Srutis that a person becomes 
learned; it is by tapasya that one acquires greatness; it is by intelligence that 


a person can have a second self; and it is by serving the old that one 
becomes wise.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘What is the divine attribute of Brahmanas? What 
practices of theirs are pious? What is the human attribute of the 
Brahmanas? And what practices of theirs are sinful?’ 

Yudhishtira says, “The study of the Vedas is their divine attribute; their 
tapasya is their pious behaviour; their vulnerability to death is their human 
attribute; and slander is their inherent tendency to sin.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘What is the divine quality of Kshatriyas? What 
conduct of theirs is pious? What is their human attribute? What practices of 
theirs are sinful?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Arrows and weapons form their divine aspect; 
celebration of yagnas is their piety; fear is their human attribute; and a 
refusal to give protection is their sin.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘What does sacrificial Sama consist of? What makes 
the sacrificial Yaju? What is the last resort and essential element of a 
yagna?’ 

Yudhishtira says, “Life is the Sama of the yagna; the mind is the Yaju; 
the Rik is the essential element, which the sacrifice cannot do without.’ 

The Yaksha says, “What is of most value to one that cultivates crops? 
What is of most value to the one who sows? What is of most value to one 
who desires prosperity in this world? And what is of most value to those 
that give birth?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Rain is of most value to those that cultivate; seeds are 
of most value to those that sow; the cow is of most value to those that desire 
prosperity; and a child is of most value to those that give birth.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘Is there a person, who is intelligent, who has the 
respect and affection of the world, who enjoys sensual pleasures, and who 
though he breathes, is not alive? 

Yudhishtira says, “The man who makes no offerings to Devas, guests, 
servants, Pitrs and to himself, does not live, although he breathes.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘What is heavier than Bhumi herself? What is higher 
than the Swarga? What is swifter than Vayu? And what is more numerous 
than grass?’ 

Yudhishtira says, “The mother is weightier than the Earth; the father is 
higher than heaven; the mind is swifter than the wind; and our thoughts are 
more numerous than grass.’ 


The Yaksha says, ‘What does not close its eyes when asleep? What does 
not move after being born? What has no heart? And what swells with its 
own power?’ 

Yudhishtira says, “A fish does not close its eyes when it sleeps; an egg 
does not move after being laid; a stone has no heart; and a river swells with 
its own power.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘Who is the friend of the exiled? Who is the friend of 
the householder? Who is the friend of the ailing? And who is the friend of 
one about to die?’ 

Yudhishtira says, “The friend of the exile in a distant land is his 
companion; the friend of the householder is his wife; the friend of one who 
is ill is the physician; and the friend of one who is about to die is his 
charity.’ 

The Yaksha says, “Who is the guest of all creatures? What is the eternal 
dharma? What, O king of kings, is Amrita? And what is this entire 
Universe?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Agni is the guest of all creatures; cow’s milk is 
Amrita; oblation of Amrita is the eternal dharma; and this Universe is just 
space.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘What is that which journeys alone? What is that 
which renews its birth? What is the antidote for cold? And what is the 
largest field?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘The Sun journeys alone; the Moon takes birth anew; 
Fire is the remedy against cold; and the Earth is the largest field.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘What is the highest sanctuary of dharma? What of 
fame? What of Swarga? What of happiness?’ 

Yudhishtira says, “Liberality is the highest sanctuary of virtue; a gift, of 
fame; truth is the sanctuary of heaven; and a good character that of 
happiness.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘What is the soul of a man? Who is the friend 
bestowed on him by the Devas? What is a man’s chief support? And what is 
his chief refuge?’ 

Yudhishtira says, “The son is a man’s soul; the wife is the friend 
bestowed on man by the gods; the clouds are his chief support; and charity 
is his chief refuge.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘What is the best of all that is praiseworthy? What is 
the most valuable of all possessions? What is the best of all gains? And 


what is the best of all the kinds of happiness?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘The best of all praiseworthy things is skill; the best of 
all possessions is knowledge; the best of all gains is health; and 
contentment is the best of all the kinds of happiness.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘What is the greatest dharma in the world? What 
virtue always bears fruit? What is that which, if controlled, does not lead to 
regret? And who are they with whom a friendship cannot break?’ 

Yudhishtira says, “The greatest dharma is non-violence; the rituals 
ordained in the three Vedas always bear fruit; the mind, if controlled, does 
not lead to regret; and friendship with the good never breaks.’ 

The Yaksha says, “What, if renounced, makes one likeable? What, if 
renounced, causes no regret? What, if renounced, makes one wealthy? And 
what, if renounced, makes one happy?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Pride, if renounced, makes one likeable; anger, if 
renounced, causes no regret; desire, if renounced, makes one wealthy; and 
avarice, if renounced, makes one happy.’ 

The Yaksha says, “Why does one give to Brahmanas? Why to players 
and dancers? Why to servants? And why to a king?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘It is for punya that one gives to Brahmanas; it is for 
fame that one gives to players and dancers; it is to support them that one 
gives to servants; and it is for relief from fear that one gives to kings.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘What is the world wrapped in? What prevents a thing 
from showing itself? Why are friends forsaken? And why does one fail to 
attain heaven?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘The world is enveloped in darkness; darkness does 
not permit a thing to show itself; it is from avarice that friends are forsaken; 
and it is attachment to the world that prevents one from finding Swarga.’ 

The Yaksha says, “When is a person considered dead? When is a 
kingdom considered dead? When is a sraddha considered dead? And when 
is a sacrifice considered dead?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘A man without wealth may be regarded as dead; a 
kingdom without a king may be regarded as dead; a sraddha performed 
without a learned priest may be regarded as dead; and a sacrifice without 
gifts to Brahmanas may be regarded as dead.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘What is the way? What is water? What is food? And 
what is poison? Tell me also what the proper time is for a sraddha; and then 
you may drink and take away as much water as you like.’ 


Yudhishtira says, “The virtuous are the way; the sky is water; the cow is 
food; and a request is poison. The availability of a Brahmana is regarded as 
the proper time for a sraddha. What do you think of all this, O Yaksha?’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘What is the sign of asceticism? What is true 
restraint? What is forgiveness? And what is shame?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Faithfulness to one’s dharma is asceticism; the 
restraint of the mind is true restraint; forgiveness is the ability to endure an 
enemy; and shame is refraining from evil actions.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘O king, what is knowledge? What is tranquillity? 
What is mercy? And what is simplicity?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘True knowledge is knowledge of divinity; true 
tranquillity is that of the heart; true mercy is the desire for universal 
happiness; and true simplicity is equanimity.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘What enemy is invincible? What is an incurable 
disease for man? What sort of man is honest; and what man is dishonest?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Anger is the invincible enemy; covetousness is the 
incurable disease; the honest man is the one who wants the well-being of all 
creatures; and the dishonest man is one who has no compassion.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘O king, what is ignorance? What is pride? What is 
idleness? And what is grief?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Ignorance is not knowing one’s svadharma; pride is 
having a high opinion of oneself; idleness is not doing one’s duty; and grief 
is ignorance.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘What do the Rishis refer to as steadfastness? What do 
they consider patience to be? What do they think of as a proper ablution? 
And what do they say is charity?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Rishis say that steadfastness is adherence to one’s 
own religion; patience is subduing the senses; washing the mind clean of 
impurities is the proper bath; and protecting all creatures is charity.’ 

The Yaksha says, “Who is a learned man? Who is an atheist? Who is an 
ignorant man? What is desire and where does it spring from? And what is 
envy?’ 

Yudhishtira says, “He that knows his dharma is learned; he that is 
ignorant is an atheist, and the atheist is ignorant, too; desire springs from 
possessions; and envy is nothing but grief.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘What is pride? What is hypocrisy? What is the grace 
of the gods, and what is wickedness?’ 


Yudhishtira says, ‘Stolid ignorance is pride. Hypocrisy is to wave the 
banner of religion; the grace of the gods is the fruit of one’s charity; and 
wickedness is speaking ill of others.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘Dharma, artha and kama are opposed to one another. 
How can these exist together?’ 

Yudhishtira says, “When a man’s wife and his dharma do not oppose 
each other, then all the three you mention can exist together.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘O Bharatarishabha, what man is condemned to 
everlasting naraka? Tell me this quickly.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “He who calls a poor Brahmana with the promise of a 
gift and then tells him there is none lives in hell forever. He who gives false 
meaning to the words of the Vedas, of the Dharma Shastras, of Brahmana’s 
and of Devas, and of rituals that honour the Pitrs also goes to hell 
everlasting. He that is wealthy but never gives any charity, nor enjoys his 
possessions because of miserliness and greed, saying he has none, also lives 
in eternal hell.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘O king, how does a person become a Brahmana— by 
birth, by conduct, by learning or by study? Tell me this with certainty.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Listen, O Yaksha, it is neither birth, nor study, nor 
learning that makes a Brahmana. Without doubt, it is good character that 
makes one a Brahmana. Good conduct should always be maintained, 
especially by a Brahmana. One who is constant in good conduct is always 
strong. Masters and disciples, and all who study the scriptures, are 
considered illiterate if they have bad habits. The truly learned man is one 
who performs his duties faithfully. Even the man who has studied the four 
Vedas is regarded as vile and wretched, scarcely distinguishable from a 
Sudra, if his behaviour is unbecoming. Only he who performs the agnihotra 
and has his senses under control is a Brahmana.’ 

The Yaksha says, “What does the man who speaks pleasantly gain? 
What does the man who acts judiciously gain? What does the man who has 
many friends gain? And what does he who is devoted to dharma gain?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘He who speaks pleasantly is liked by all; he who acts 
judiciously gets whatever he wants; he who has many friends lives happily; 
and he who is devoted to dharma gains bliss in the next world.’ 

The Yaksha says, “Who is truly happy? What is most wonderful? What 
is the path? And what are the perennial tidings? Answer these four 
questions of mine and your dead brothers will return to life.’ 


Yudhishtira says, ‘O amphibious one, a man who cooks in his own 
house during the fifth or the sixth part of the day, with few vegetables, who 
is not in debt and who does not leave home, is truly happy. Day after day, 
countless creatures go to Yamaloka, yet those that remain behind believe 
they are immortal. What can be more wonderful than this? Argument never 
to any certain conclusion; the Srutis are all different; there is no Rishi 
whose opinion everybody accepts; the truth about dharma is hidden in 
caves; therefore, that is the path that the great have taken. This world, full 
of ignorance, is like a pot; the Sun is fire, the days and nights are fuel; the 
months and the seasons make up the wooden ladle; time is the cook that 
stirs all creatures in that pot. These are unchanging tidings.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘Parantapa, you have answered all my questions, and 
correctly. Tell me now, who is truly a man; and what man truly possesses 
every kind of wealth?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Reports of one’s good deeds reach Swarga and spread 
across Bhumi. As long as these reports are alive, so long does a man, to 
whom persons pleasant or otherwise, happiness and sorrow, past and future 
are the same, possess every kind of wealth.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘O king, since you have correctly told me who is a 
man and what man has every kind of wealth, one of your brothers may live 
again.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Let this dark-skinned one, whose eyes are red, who is 
tall like a large Sala tree, whose chest is broad and arms long, let Nakula, O 
Yaksha, rise and live.’ 

The Yaksha says, “Bhimasena is very dear to you, and Arjuna is the one 
on whom you all depend. Why, then, do you wish to give life to a half- 
brother? How can you forsake Bhima, who is as strong as ten thousand 
elephants, for Nakula? Everyone says that you love Bhima dearly. Then 
why do you ask for Nakula’s life? Why do you sacrifice Arjuna, of the 
mighty arms, whom all the Pandavas idolise, for Nakula’s sake? 

Yudhishtira says, “If dharma is sacrificed, he that sacrifices it is lost; 
virtue cherishes the man who cherishes it. So I am careful that dharma, by 
being sacrificed, does not sacrifice us. I never abandon dharma. Abstention 
from doing injury is the highest dharma, even higher than the most valuable 
object. I try to practise that virtue. Therefore, revive Nakula, O Yaksha. Let 
men know that the king is always virtuous. I will never deviate from 
dharma. Let Nakula, therefore, live. 


My father had two wives, Kunti and Madri. Let both of them have 
living children. This is what I wish. Madri is as much a mother to me as 
Kunti; I make no difference between them. I wish to act equally towards my 
mothers. Therefore, let Nakula live.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘Since you consider non-violence to be more 
important than artha and kama, I will restore the lives of all your brothers, 
O bull among the Bhaaratas.’ ” 


CANTO 312 
ARANEYA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “At the Yaksha’s words, the Pandavas awake and 
get up, as if from a deep slumber. They are no longer hungry or 
thirsty. 

Yudhishtira says, ‘What Deva are you, invincible one, who stands on 
one leg in a lake? I cannot believe that you are a Yaksha. Are you a chief of 
the Vasus or of the Rudras, or the Lord of the Maruts? Or are you the Lord 
of the Devas, the wielder of the Vajra? Each of my brothers is capable of 
fighting like a hundred thousand warriors, and I do not see a warrior who 
could kill them all. They have woken up refreshed, as if from a pleasant 
sleep. Are you a friend of ours, or our father himself?’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘Child, I am your father Dharma Deva. 
Bharatarishabha, I came here from a desire to see you. Fame, truth, self- 
restraint, purity, candour, modesty, steadfastness, charity, tapasya and 
brahmacharya are my physical body. Non-violence, impartiality, peace, 
penance, sanctity and freedom from malice are the doors through which I 
can be reached. You are always dear to me. Fortunately, you are devoted to 
the practice of the five virtues—equanimity of mind, self-control, 
abstinence from sensual indulgence, forgiveness and yoga. Fortunately, too, 
you have conquered the afflictions of hunger, thirst, sorrow, delusion, 
decrepitude and death. Of the six, the first two manifest themselves in the 
first part of life, the second two in the middle and the last two at the end in 
order to send men to the next world. 


I bless you, my son! I am Dharma, the Lord of Justice. I came here to 
test you, and I am pleased to see your spirit of compassion. Anagha, I will 
grant you boons. Rajarajan, ask what you wish for and I will grant it. Those 
that are devoted to me never suffer.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘A deer carried away a Brahmana’s fire-sticks; so the 
first boon I ask is that the Brahmana’s worship of Agni is not interrupted.’ 

The Yaksha says, ‘Kuntiputra, it was I in the form of a deer who carried 
away the Brahmana’s fire-sticks, to test you.’ That Deva says, ‘I grant you 
the boon you ask, and I bless you again. Godlike, ask for another boon.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘We have spent the past twelve years in jungles and 
are now in the thirteenth year of our exile. Grant that no one will recognise 
us, wherever we choose to spend this year.’ 

The Deva says, ‘I grant this boon,’ and reassuring Kunti’s son whose 
strength is truth, he says, ‘Bhaarata, I grant that even if you range all the 
Earth in your own forms none in the three worlds shall recognise you. You 
perpetuators of the Kuru line, by my grace, you will spend this thirteenth 
year disguised and unrecognised in Virata’s kingdom. You will all be able, 
at will, to assume any form you like. Now give the Brahmana his fire-sticks. 
It was only to test you that I carried them away as a deer. 

Noble Yudhishtira, ask for another boon of your choice, and I will give 
it to you. I have not had my fill of giving you boons. Take a third boon that 
is great and incomparable. Rajan, you are my son, and Vidura is an amsa of 
me.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “Eternal Devadeva, it is enough that I have seen you in 
your physical form. Father, I will gladly accept whatever boon you give me. 
May I always conquer greed, folly and anger, and may my mind be always 
devoted to daana, satya and tapasya.’ 

Dharmadeva says, ‘Pandava, you are naturally endowed with these 
qualities, because you are dharma embodied. However, since you ask, I give 
you what you ask for.’ 

With these words, Dharma, on whom all the worlds meditate, vanishes. 
The noble Pandavas are united with each other after their plumbless sleep. 
No longer tired, the Kshatriyas return to the asrama and restore his fire- 
sticks to the Brahmana. 

The man who listens to this great and fame-enhancing story of how the 
Pandavas are revived, and of the meeting of father and son, earns perfect 
tranquillity of mind, and he gets sons and grandsons, as well as a long life 


of more than a hundred years. The mind of the man who takes this story to 
heart never delights in adharma, in discord among friends, in theft, in taking 
other men’s wives, or in evil thoughts.” 


CANTO 313 
ARANEYA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “In obedience to Dharma’s bidding to spend their 

thirteenth year, the one of ajnatavasa, in disguise, the Pandavas, 
observant of vows and with truth as their strength, sit with the learned 
Munis who, out of love, share their exile in the forest. With their hands 
joined in reverence, they speak to the tapasvins to have their blessings to 
spend the thirteenth year in this way. 

They say, ‘You all know that the sons of Dhritarashtra deceitfully 
deprived us of our kingdom and wronged us in many other ways. We have 
passed twelve years of privation in the forest. The thirteenth year, which we 
have to spend undiscovered, still remains. We ask your permission to spend 
this year in hiding. If they discover us, Suyodhana, Karna and Subala’s vile 
son will make our friends and our people pay dearly. So, we must part ways 
here, O adored Djivas, for when our ajnatavasa ends, must we not establish 
ourselves in our own kingdom again?’ 

That pure-hearted son of Dharma is overwhelmed with grief at the 
thought of parting from the loyal Brahmanas and, breaking into loud sobs, 
he faints. The Brahmanas and his brothers revive him and try to cheer him. 

Then, Dhaumya says with some gravity, ‘Rajan, you are learned, 
capable of withstanding great privation, firm in promise, and of subdued 
senses. Men like you do not crumble in the face of misfortune. The very 
Devas have wandered the worlds in disguise so they might prevail over 
their enemies. 


Indra lived disguised in the Giriprastha’s asrama in the Nishada 
kingdom and achieved his goal. Before he was born from Aditi, Vishnu 
spent a long time disguised as Hayagriva, the horse-headed, in order to 
vanquish the Daityas. You know that He disguised himself as a dwarf and 
deprived Mahabali of his kingdom. And you have heard how Hutasana 
went into the water and remained hidden in order to achieve a purpose of 
the gods. 

O Dharmatma, you have heard that, wishing to vanquish his enemies, 
Vishnu entered Sakra’s Vajra and lay hidden there. You have heard of the 
task that the Rishi Aurva once performed for the gods, by staying concealed 
in his mother’s womb. Living hidden in every part of the Earth, Vivaswata 
used his energy and consumed his enemies with fire. And living disguised 
in the home of Dasaratha, Vishnu of the dreadful deeds slew Ravana 
Dasagriva in battle. 

Many exalted ones have conquered their enemies by going for some 
time disguised, and so you will you.’ 

Encouraged by Dhaumya’s words, Yudhishtira, relying on his own 
wisdom and knowledge gleaned from the scriptures, recovers his 
composure. 

Now Mahabaho Bhimasena, that strongest of the strong, boosts the 
king’s spirits. 

He says, “The wielder of the Gandiva looks to you for permission to 
have our revenge and, duty-bound, he has not done anything impulsive. 
Although Nakula and Sahadeva of the fearful prowess can raze our 
enemies, I have restrained them from doing so. We shall never swerve from 
our obedience to your will. Tell us what we should do. We shall conquer our 
enemies very soon.’ 

When Bhimasena says this, the Brahmanas bless the Bhaaratas, take 
leave of them and return to their homes. All those foremost of Yatis and 
Munis, versed in the Vedas, go back, but in excited expectation of seeing 
the Pandavas return to the home of their sires. The five Pandavas, equipped 
with their bows, and accompanied by Dhaumya, set out with Krishnaa. 

Each of them is accomplished in a different shastra; all of them are 
proficient in mantras and know when to make peace and when to wage war. 
Those Purushavyaghras, who are about to start living in disguise the next 
day, go a krosa from their asrama and sit down to seek one another’s 
counsel,” said Vaisampayana. 


The End of Vana Parva 


Virata Parva 


CANTO 1 
PANDAVA PRAVESHA PARVA 


A UM! Having bowed down to Narayana and Nara, foremost of 
Purushas, and to the Devi Saraswati, I invoke the spirit of Jaya! 

Janamejaya said, “Brahmana, how did my great-grandfathers live 
undiscovered in the city of Virata, fearful as they were of Duryodhana? 
How did their devoted wife, the most blessed Draupadi, unswerving in her 
faith in God, and in the grip of misery, spend her days without being 
recognised?” 

Vaisampayana said, “Hear, O lord of men, how your great-grandfathers 
pass the period of their exile in King Virata’s city without being discovered. 
Having obtained boons from Dharma Deva, Yudhishtira returns to the 
asrama and tells the Brahmanas all that has befallen them. Then, to the 
Brahmana who followed him, he restores the fire sticks and the churning 
staff that he had lost. 

After that, O Bhaarata, Yudhishtira Dharmaputra calls together all his 
younger brothers and says, ‘We have passed twelve years in exile from our 
kingdom. This, our thirteenth and most difficult year has come. Arjuna, you 
choose a suitable place where we can spend our days undetected by our 
enemies.’ 

Arjuna says, ‘Lord of men, Dharma Deva’s boon will enable us to go 
where we please and yet escape discovery. Still, I will suggest some 
pleasant and secluded places where we can live and you can choose one of 
them. 


Surrounding the kingdom of the Kurus are many beautiful and bountiful 
lands such as Panchala, Chedi, Matsya, Surasena, Pattachchara, Dasarna, 
Navarashtra, Malla, Salva, Yugandhara, Saurashtra, Avanti, and the 
expansive Kuntirashtra. Which of these would you choose, Rajan? Where 
shall we spend this year?’ 

Yudhishtira says to his brothers, ‘Mahabahos, whatever the Lord of all 
creatures has decreed must come to pass. Even so, after consulting together 
we must choose an agreeable and auspicious place where we can live free 
from fear. The aged Virata, king of the Matsyas, is virtuous, powerful and 
charitable. All men like him, and he is fond of us Pandavas. In his city then, 
let us spend this year and enter his service. Tell me, sons of Kuru, in what 
guises will you each present yourselves before king Virata of the Matsyas?’ 

Arjuna says, ‘God among men, what service will you perform in 
Virata’s kingdom? In what role will you live in the city of Virata? You are 
mild and kind-hearted, modest and virtuous, and a man of honour. Rajan, in 
your present adversity, what will you do? A king has to face troubles just 
like everyone else. How will you rise above yours?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Purusharishabhas, hear what I will do when I appear 
before king Virata. I will present myself as Kanka, a Brahmana skilled in 
the game of dice who enjoys playing, and become a courtier in Virata’s 
sabha. I will entertain the king, his courtiers and his friends by astute moves 
of ivory chessmen—blue and yellow, red and white—on chessboards, and 
by clever throws of the black and red dice. Nobody will succeed in 
discovering me. And should the monarch be curious about me, I will say 
that I used to be a close friend of Yudhishtira’s. This is how I intend to pass 
my days. 

What work will you do, Vrikodara, in the city of Virata?’ ” 


CANTO 2 
PANDAVA PRAVESHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: ‘RB hima says, ‘I will present myself before lord Virata as Ballava, a 

cook. I am skilled in the culinary arts; I will prepare food for the 

king that is better than anything his best cooks have ever set before him and 

thus charm him. I will carry mighty loads of wood and, seeing that amazing 

feat, the king will be pleased. O Bhaarata, the servants of the royal 

household will honour me when they see my superhuman abilility, and I 
will gain control of the royal storerooms. 

I will be commanded to subdue powerful elephants and mighty bulls, 
which I will do. I will entertain the king by defeating anyone who 
challenges me in combat. However, I shall not take a life; I will only bring 
the man down without killing him. And if I am asked about my past, I will 
say that I was a wrestler and cook in Yudhishtira’s court. Rajan, that is how 
I will spend our thirteenth year.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘And, Bhima, what occupation will Dhananjaya have, 
this mighty scion of the Kurus, son of Kunti, best of men, long-armed, 
invincible in battle; to whom, while he was with Krishna, the divine Agni 
himself, wanting to consume the Khandava vana in flames, appeared 
humbly in the guise of a Brahmana? What can Arjuna undertake, this 
mightiest of Kshatriyas who pleased Agni by killing huge Nagas and 
Rakshasas from a single chariot, and who married the sister of the Naga 
king Vasuki? 


Even as the Sun is the lord of all heat-givers, the Brahmana the best 
among all humans, the cobra the foremost of all serpents, Fire the first of all 
things of energy, the Vajra the most powerful of all weapons, the humped 
bull the greatest among bovines, the Ocean of all water-bodies, as rain- 
clouds are the best of all clouds, as Ananta is the chief of all Nagas, 
Airavata the mightiest of all elephants, as a son is the most beloved of loved 
ones and the wife the best of all friends, so is young Gudakesa the supreme 
bowman. 

Bhaarata, what calling will he pursue, Bibhatsu the wielder of the 
Gandiva; whose chariot is drawn by white horses; who is equal to Indra and 
Krishna? What career will he have, who lived five years in the abode of the 
thousand-eyed Indra? He shines in celestial splendour and has mastered the 
Devastras. In my eyes he is the tenth Rudra, the thirteenth Aditya, the ninth 
Vasu and the tenth Graha. 

The skin on his long, ambidextrous arms has become callused and 
scarred, as on the humps of bulls, by constant wielding of the bow. He is the 
greatest of Kshatriyas: he is as Himavat among mountains, as Varuna 
among water-bodies, as Sakra among the Devas, as Agni among the Vasus, 
as the tiger among beasts, as Garuda among birds!’ 

Arjuna says, ‘Lord of the Earth, I will declare myself a eunuch. It is 
surely difficult to hide the marks of the bowstring on my arms, but I will 
cover both my scarred arms with bangles. I will adorn my ears with earrings 
and my wrists with bracelets of conch-shells. I will wear my hair in a long 
braid and pose as one of the third sex. 

Brihannala will be my name, and passing for a hermaphrodite, I will 
entertain the king and the women of the harem by telling them stories. I will 
instruct the ladies of Virata’s palace in singing and dancing and teach them 
to play musical instruments. I will also tell of great men’s feats of valour, 
and so hide in disguise. 

Should the king enquire, I will say that I worked in Yudhishtira’s palace 
as Draupadi’s sairandhri, her main waiting-maid. Best of kings, concealing 
myself like this, as fire is covered by ashes, I will pass my days quite 
happily in Virata’s palace.’ ” 


CANTO 3 
PANDAVA PRAVESHA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Arjuna falls silent and Yudhishtira addresses 
another of his brothers. 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Gentle Kshatriya Nakula, your tender nature deserves 
a life of ease. What career will you follow whilst living in the dominions of 
king Virata? Tell me what you plan.’ 

Nakula says, ‘I will take the name Granthika and become the keeper of 
the king’s horses. I have a deep knowledge of horses; I am skilful in caring 
for them and enjoy the work. I am good at training them and very fond of 
them, even as you are, O my brother. In my hands even high-spirited colts 
and fillies become docile and carry their riders and draw their chariots 
gently. 

And if anyone in Virata’s city should ask about me, I will say that I was 
once employed by Yudhishtira and given charge of his stables. In this 
disguise, Rajan, I will spend my days happily in the city of Virata. No one 
will discover my true identity, for I will please the king with my work.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘How will you, Sahadeva, present yourself before the 
king? And what will you do, child, in order to go undiscovered?’ 

Sahadeva replies, “Rajan, I will become a keeper of Virata’s cattle. I am 
skilled at milking cows and know all about their pedigrees, and I am also 
good at taming bulls. I will call myself Tantripala and perform my duties 
ably. Let your anxiety be stilled, Bhumipala; I used to look after your herds 
and have deep knowledge of the work. 


I know a great deal about cattle, their markings, and also much else 
about them. I can recognise bulls with certain auspicious marks, the scent of 
whose urine can make a barren woman fertile. I have always enjoyed this 
work, so that is how I will live. I will please the king and certainly no one 
will recognise me.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Draupadi is our beloved wife, dearer to us than our 
lives. She deserves to be cherished by us like a mother and respected as an 
elder sister. Unacquainted as she is with any womanly chores, what service 
will Krishnaa perform? Delicate and young, she is a princess whose virtue 
and devotion to her lords is well known. How will she live, who from the 
time of her birth has enjoyed nothing but fragrant flower garlands and 
perfume, ornaments and fine clothes?’ 

Draupadi says, ‘There is a class of women known as sairandhris, who 
serve as important waiting-maids. Usually, women from respectable 
families do not become sairandhris, but some do. I will pose as one of these 
few. I shall be a sairandhri skilled in dressing hair, and if questioned I will 
say that I served in Yudhishtira’s household as Draupadi’s main waiting- 
woman. And in this way I will pass my days in disguise, serving the famous 
Sudeshna, king Virata’s queen. Surely, she will be pleased with my services. 
Do not grieve so, Rajan.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “Krishnaa, your words are sweet but, beautiful one, 
you are born into royalty. Chaste and always true to your vows, you have 
always lived a virtuous life and do not know what sin is; therefore conduct 
yourself in such a way that sinful men may not cast their eyes on you for 
their pleasure.’ ” 


CANTO 4 
PANDAVA PRAVESHA PARVA CONTINUED 


=: Y udhishtira says, “You have all decided how to occupy yourselves 

sensibly, and I have, too. Our priest, the charioteers and cooks 

must go to Drupada’s palace and keep our sacrificial fires burning. 

Indrasena and the others will take the chariots and leave at once for 

Dwaravati. Draupadi’s maids can go to the Panchalas with the sarathys and 

our cooks. All of them must say that they do not know where the Pandavas 
went after leaving them at the lake in Dwaita vana.’ 

Now the Pandavas ask Dhaumya for his counsel. Dhaumya says, ‘Sons 
of Pandu, the arrangements you have made for the Brahmanas, your friends, 
the chariots, weapons and the sacred fires are excellent. But, Yudhishtira 
and Arjuna, you must be particularly watchful of Draupadi’s safety. You 
know what men are like. 

However knowledgeable you are, as your friend I take the liberty of 
telling you what you already know, which is in the eternal interest of 
dharma, kama and artha. Listen to me carefully and remember my words. 

To live in the court of a king is difficult, but I will tell you how you can 
be ideal members of a royal household. O Kurunandanas, you must 
somehow spend this year in the palace without being discovered; only thus 
will you be able to peacefully live out the final year of your exile. 

Pandavas, the king, under whose protection everyone comes, is God in 
human form; he is like a fire sanctified by mantras. 


First of all, only present yourselves before the king after obtaining 
permission at the gate. None of you should have any contact with royal 
spies; nor should any of you try to have a court position that someone else 
aspires to. If you find the king’s favour, you must never use the king’s 
personal chariot, sit on his throne or ride on his elephant. Also, avoid 
important positions whose occupation alarms envious and malevolent men. 
Only conducting yourselves thus, will you deserve to live in the king’s 
household. 

Offer the king advice only when he asks for it. Praise and pay homage 
to him at the appropriate time; at other times sit silently and respectfully 
beside him. Kings get annoyed with babblers and courtiers who speak ill of 
others. 

Be wise; don’t initiate friendship with the queen or ladies of the 
antahpura, or with anyone that the king dislikes. Whatever you do must be 
with the king’s knowledge, and you must be willing to perform even the 
most trivial task for him. If you behave in this way you will not come to any 
harm. 

Even if one of you attains the highest office, you should always uphold 
the king’s dignity by your silence: consider yourself born blind, unless you 
are commanded by him. Parantapas, if their pride is wounded, the rulers of 
men do not forgive even their sons, grandsons and brothers. Kings should 
be served with the same attentiveness with which you serve Agni and the 
other Devas. If you are disloyal to your sovereign, he will destroy you. 

Renounce anger, pride and indiscretion, and always be obedient to the 
king. After a careful study of various matters at hand, present to the king 
only those that are both beneficial and gratifying. If there happens to be 
something that is definitely beneficial, you must tell the king of it, even if it 
is unpleasant. You must always put the interests of the king first and never 
speak offensively or unnecessarily. 

Be alert and never become complacent in the king’s affection. Always 
focus on his happiness and prosperity, remain steadfast and do not swerve 
from your allegiance to him. Do not befriend the king’s enemies. Never 
wrong the king. This is the way to succeed in a royal household. 

A wise man sits beside the king, on his right or left; he should not sit 
behind him, for that is the place for his armed guards; and to sit in front of 
him is forbidden. None of you should ingratiate yourselves with the king by 


intervening while he is dealing with his subjects’ grievances. Even if the 
supplicant is poor and needy, such behaviour is inexcusable. 

Never reveal a falsehood that the king may have spoken, because the 
king will hate those who expose his lies. Remember that kings distrust men 
who show themselves as being clever. You should not be vain about your 
bravery or intelligence. You will earn the monarch’s respect and enjoy a 
prosperous life by being humble and subservient to the king’s wishes. And 
Bhaaratas, even when you acquire wealth—which is not easy—and lead a 
comfortable life, you should continue to work towards the king’s advantage 
and pleasure. Which man who is held in high regard would even think of 
displeasing the one whose anger results in the worst failure and whose 
favour brings great rewards? 

You should always sit still in the king’s presence. Speak mildly and use 
your spittoon softly when you are with the king. Do not laugh loudly or 
uproariously, nor be unnaturally grave when you see something amusing. 
Show your interest by smiling discreetly. If you are always conscious of the 
king’s welfare, if you do not allow rewards to elate you or sorrows to deject 
you, then you will thrive in the king’s court. 

If you are wise and make the king and his princes happy by speaking 
pleasantly, you will become the king’s favourite. And if, as the favourite 
courtier, you should then lose royal favour for a good reason, yet still do not 
speak ill of the king, you will regain it in time. If you are astute, you will 
speak only in praise of the king, both in his presence and out of it. 

If you manipulate the king in order to achieve your own objective, you 
will jeopardise your position in court and risk death. Never initiate 
communications with the king’s enemies with a view to furthering yourself. 
You should never try to best the king at any skill or talent. Be cheerful and 
mild-mannered, honest, strong and courageous; but live in the king’s 
shadow. These qualities will make you worthy of living in the royal 
household. 

When you are given a responsibility, accept it readily. This will make 
you deserving of living in the king’s palace. If you are entrusted with a task, 
either within or outside the king’s dominion, undertake it boldly for then 
you will deserve to live in the royal household. Although you are far away 
from home, do not show your grief at the absence of loved ones; show that 
you are willing to endure deprivation in expectation of future happiness. 
This is how you will succeed in living in the king’s household. 


You should not dress as grandly as the king; you should not laugh 
loudly in his presence; you should never divulge royal secrets. This is how 
you will win the king’s favour. You should never be tempted by bribes to 
complete work that is assigned to you. This could lead to imprisonment, 
even death. You should always use the clothes, jewels and chariots that, in 
his magnanimity, the king gives you. This will please him. 

My children, Pandavas, discipline yourselves during this year. Once you 
regain your kingdom, you can live as you please.’ 

Yudhishtira says to Dhaumya, ‘You have tutored us well, O Dhaumya. 
May you be blest. No one could have advised us as you have, other than our 
mother Kunti and the wise Vidura. Now, you must perform the needful 
ceremonies for our departure, to help us come safely through our 
difficulties, and finally to vanquish our enemies.’ 

Dhaumya, the best of Brahmanas, performs the proper rites of leave- 
taking. He lights the fires and offers oblations accompanied by mantras. He 
prays for the prosperity and success of the Pandavas and for their re- 
conquest of the world. The Pandavas walk in pradakshina around sacred 
Agni and the holy Brahmanas, and set out with Yagnaseni at the head of 
their little procession of six. 

When the noble Kshatriyas have left, Dhaumya takes their sacred fires 
and sets out for the Panchala kingdom. Indrasena and the others go to the 
Yadavas and live there in contentment, looking after the Pandavas’ horses 
and chariots.” 


CANTO 5 
PANDAVA PRAVSEHA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “The princes strap their swords around their 

waists, put on their lizard-skin finger guards and arm themselves 
with their other weapons. Closing the chapter of their life in dense forests 
and inaccessible mountain ranges, impatient to end their exile and recover 
their kingdom, the mighty warriors stride towards the southern bank of the 
river Kalindi. 

Those Kshatriyas, who have been living like forest-dwelling deer 
hunters, pass through Yakriloma and Surasena. They pass the Panchala 
kingdom on their right and the Dasarna kingdom on their left. Now pale and 
bearded from their years in the forest, they finally emerge from it and enter 
the Matsya kingdom, still in the guise of hunters. 

Here Krishnaa says to Yudhishtira, ‘O look at these footpaths and fields. 
It seems the city is still some distance away. I am tired; let us break our 
journey and spend the night here.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Arjuna, carry Panchali in your arms. We have just 
this forest to cross and we shall arrive at the city.’ 

Like the bull-elephant of the herd, Arjuna picks Draupadi up in his arms 
and sets her down only when they near the city. 

On reaching the city, Yudhishtira says to Arjuna, ‘Where shall we leave 
our weapons before we enter? If, my brother, we go in armed, we will cause 
alarm. Also, everyone will recognise the Gandiva and it will not take them 


long to know who we are. Remember that if even one of us is discovered, 
by our oath we must pass another twelve years in the forest.’ 

Arjuna says, ‘Close to that smasana you see over there, near that steep 
hill, is a huge sami tree, difficult to climb because of its wildly spreading 
branches. Nobody will see us hiding our weapons there, or discover them 
when they are hidden, Pandava. The tree stands in the heart of a remote 
forest full of predators and crawling with snakes; and the gloomy cemetery 
is right beside it. Let us store our weapons in the sami tree and then, without 
anxiety, go to Virata’s city.’ 

Saying this to Yudhishtira, Arjuna prepares to conceal the weapons in 
the tree. He loosens the string of the great and dreadful Gandiva, the bow 
whose twang fills the air like thunder, which razes enemies, with which 
Arjuna has single-handedly conquered Devas, Manavas, Nagas and entire 
kingdoms. 

Then Yudhishtira unties the wondrous, undecaying string of his bow, 
with which he defended Kurukshetra. And the illustrious, pure-hearted 
Bhimasena unstrings his bow, with which he defeated the Panchalas and the 
lord of Sindhu, with which he singly opposed countless enemies who only 
had to hear the deafening mountain-splitting sound of his weapon to make 
them flee in panic from the battlefield. 

Nakula, the copper-skinned, soft-spoken son of Pandu, named for his 
exceptional handsomeness, unfastens the string of his bow, with which he 
conquered all the western lands. The heroic but mild-mannered Sahadeva 
undoes the string of his bow with which he subjugated the southern 
countries. 

With the bows, they place their flashing swords and quivers of razor- 
sharp arrows. Nakula climbs the tree and fastens this armoury in it, tying 
the weapons securely on high sturdy branches sheltered from the rain. 

The Pandavas take a corpse from the neaby cemetery and hang it from 
the sami tree, knowing that anyone who even whiffs the stench of rotting 
flesh will avoid that place. 

Just at that time, some cowherds happen to pass by and ask about the 
corpse. The Pandavas say to them, “This is our mother, who was a hundred 
and eighty years old. We have hung her body from the tree, according to our 
ancient custom.’ 

At last, those slayers of their foes approach the city. Yudhishtira gives 
himself and his brothers other names to be part of their disguise: Jaya, 


Jayanta, Vijaya, Jayatsena, and Jayatbala. They go towards the great city to 
pass the thirteenth year of their exile undiscovered, as they vowed they 
would to Duryodhana.” 


CANTO 6 
PANDAVA PRAVESHA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “As he nears Virata’s city, Yudhishtira meditates 

on the divine Devi Durga and salutes her in praise. She is the 
supreme Goddess of the universe, born from the womb of Yasoda, font of 
the boons bestowed on her by Narayana, sprung from the race of the 
cowherd Nanda, giver of prosperity, enhancer of the glory of his bhaktas, 
nemesis of Kamsa, destroyer of Asuras. She, who flew into the deepest 
skies when Kamsa dashed her against a rock, is Krishna’s sister; she is 
adorned in celestial garlands and attired in heavenly raiment; she is armed 
with sword and shield. 

This eternal bestower of blessings always rescues the devotee who, 
when stuck and drowning like a cow in a quagmire, calls out to her in 
distress to free him. It is She that Yudhishtira invokes, in his yearning to see 
her, by chanting her various names in praise and devotion. 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Salutations, O giver of boons. You are one with 
Krishna. Devi Brahmacharini, you have observed the vow of brahmacharya. 
Your being blazes like the Sun at dawn. Your face is as radiant as the full 
moon. 

I salute you! Four-handed, four-faced, round-hipped and deep-breasted, 
you wear bangles made of emeralds and sapphires, and exquisite bracelets 
adorn your upper arms. You shine, O Goddess, as Padma, the consort of 
Narayana. You that roam the akasa, your form and chastity are immaculate. 
Your face, as dark as black clouds, is beautiful like Sankarshana. Your two 


great arms you hold upright in praise of Indra; in your six other arms you 
hold a vessel, a lotus, a bell, a noose, a bow, a discus and myriad weapons. 

I salute you! You are the only truly pure female being in the universe. 
Your shapely ears are adorned with rings. O Devi, the radiance of your face 
challenges the Moon in lustre. Wearing a wondrous crown, with braided 
hair, in snake-skin robes and glittering waistlet you shine like snake-girdled 
mount Mandara. Iridescent peacock feathers decorate your head. You have 
sanctified Devaloka with your vow of celibacy. O Slayer of Mahishasura, 
you are praised and worshipped by the Devas themselves for the protection 
of the three worlds, Swarga, Bhumi and Patala. 

I salute you! First of all Deities, give me your grace, show me your 
mercy, and bless me. You are Jaya and Vijaya; it is you who gives victory in 
battle. Grant me victory and boons, O Devi, in this my hour of distress. 

I salute you! You are resplendent in your eternal abode on Vindhya 
parvatam, best of mountains. O Kali, Kali, Mahakali, wine, meat and 
animal sacrifice please you. You who can go anywhere at will, you who can 
bestow boons on your devotees, Brahma and the other gods are always with 
you on these journeys. There is nothing that cannot be had, children or 
wealth, by supplicants who call upon you for relief from their burdens and 
by those who bow to you at daybreak on Earth. 

You are called Durga because you rescue those who are in distress, 
whether they are in a wilderness or sinking in an ocean. You are the sole 
refuge of men when they are attacked by robbers, when they flounder in 
rivers and seas, when they are oppressed in the wilderness and evil forests. 
Mahadevi, Great Goddess, men who meditate on you are never struck 
down. 

I salute you! You are Keerti—fame, Sri— prosperity, Dhriti— constancy, 
Siddhi—success, Neera—modesty, Vidya—learning. You are man’s wife 
and his offspring. You are knowledge and the intellect. You are Sandhya— 
the two twilights, Ratri—the dark night, Prabha—light, Nidra—sleep, and 
Jyotsna Kanti—the light of the Sun and the Moon. You are Kshama— 
forgiveness, Daya—mercy, and every virtue besides. 

From those who worship you, you remove their fetters of ignorance, 
childlessness, poverty, disease, death and fear. I, who have been deprived of 
my kingdom, beg for your protection. I worship you with bowed head, 
Sureshwari, Goddess of the gods of light. O Devi Padmapatrakshi—lotus- 
leaf-eyed one, watch over me. 


O Durga, to us who uphold dharma by our actions, be Truth incarnate 
and the granter of wishes. In your compassion for all who seek refuge in 
you, in your love for your devotees, give me your protection.’ 

Hearing these stutis, the Goddess appears before Yudhishtira and says, 
‘O Rajan, Mahabaho, hearken to me! My grace will help you vanquish the 
Kaurava army and will give you victory in battle. You will again be lord of 
the Earth and rid her of evil. And through my grace, you and your brothers 
will enjoy great felicity; every joy and prosperity will be yours. 

All who chant praises of my attributes and victories shall be freed from 
their sins and made happy. I will bless them with lands, long life, physical 
beauty and children. They who invoke me as you have done, be they in 
exile or in their homes, in the midst of battle or in unseen danger from their 
enemies, in forests or in deserts, in seas or on mountains, will want for 
nothing in this world. Pandava, those who devotedly recite this powerful 
hymn of yours, or even listen to it, will enjoy success in all that they do. 

My grace will ensure that neither the Kaurava spies nor the people of 
the Matsya kingdom will recognise you all as long as you live in Virata’s 
city!’ 

Having spoken to Yudhishtira Parantapa, and having granted her 
protection to the Pandavas, the Goddess Durga disappears.” 


CANTO 7 
PANDAVA PRAVESHA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Yudhishtira wraps in brocade his dice of gold set 

with blue sapphires, tucks it under his arm and walks towards 
Virata’s court. This illustrious lord of men, noble scion of Kuru, honoured 
by kings, mighty, irrepressible, as deserving of wariness as a venomous 
snake, a bull among men, powerful and beautiful, blessed with greatness 
and godlike in form is now like the Sun shrouded by thick clouds, like fire 
covered by ashes, when he appears before the famed king Virata in his 
court. 

Virata and his courtiers see Yudhishtira, looking like the full moon 
veiled by clouds, his face as radiant as Soma Deva’s. 

The king says to his ministers, the Brahmanas, the Maharathas and the 
Vaisyas in his court, “Who is this kingly man who enters my sabha? He 
cannot be a Brahmana. He looks like a lord among men, a lord of the Earth. 
He has no slaves, chariots or elephants with him, yet he has the majesty of 
Indra. I think the marks on his body indicate that he has been crowned at a 
sacred rite. He approaches me boldly much like an elephant walking 
towards a bed of lotuses!’ 

Yudhishtira comes before Virata and says, ‘Maharajan, I am a 
Brahmana. I have lost all my possessions and come to beg you for the 
means to sustain myself. O Anagha, I will live here and serve you faithfully, 
my lord.’ 


The king is pleased and replies, ‘You are welcome here. Consider 
yourself appointed to whatever position you seek.’ Happily he gives 
Yudhishtira the appointment he asks for and says, ‘I ask you in affection, 
what kingdom do you come from? What is your name? Which family do 
you belong to? What skills and knowledge do you have?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘My name is Kanka, and I am a Brahmana belonging 
to the Vaiyaghra family. Iam good at throwing dice, and I was once a friend 
of Dharmaputra Yudhishtira’s.’ 

Virata says, ‘I will grant you whatever you wish. You can even rule the 
Matsyas and I will be your subject. I like gamblers, even cunning ones. 
You, on the other hand, are like a Deva and deserve not a mere position in 
my court, but an entire kingdom.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘My first request, lord of Earth, is that my play should 
not be disputed by any low-born man. Further, I will keep my winnings at 
dice, whosoever I play against. Honour me by granting me these wishes.’ 

Virata says, ‘I will kill anyone who crosses you; if he be a Brahmana, I 
will banish him from my kingdom. Let all that are assembled here mark my 
words: from this day, Kanka is as much lord of this realm as I am! Kanka, 
you will be my companion and ride with me in my chariot. You will not 
lack for clothes; you shall have abundant food and drink. You will supervise 
my transactions, both at home and abroad; and for you my doors will be 
always open. When the destitute or job-seekers approach you, you will 
inform me immediately, whatever the hour, and I will help them. As long as 
you live with me, you need have no fear.’ 

Having received these assurances from Virata, Yudhishtira settles down 
to a happy life and quickly earns the respect of all. And during that time, no 
one suspects who he is.” 


CANTO 8 
PANDAVA PRAVESHA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “In a short while, another of blazing beauty and 

strength comes before Virata. Holding a cook’s ladle, a spoon and a 
gleaming, unsheathed sable-hued sword in his hands, he walks toward the 
king like a lion. Even in the guise of a cook, he lights up the court like the 
Sun shining on the world at daybreak. This man, strong as Himavat king of 
mountains, dressed in black, comes forward and stands at a small remove 
from the king of the Matsyas. 

Virata looks at this regal one and says to his courtiers, ‘Who is this 
extraordinarily handsome young man with the shoulders of a lion, this 
Manavarishabha? The stranger is like the resplendent Sun. Try as I might, I 
do not recognise him and cannot guess why he is here. His appearance 
suggests that he is either the king of the Gandharvas or Purandara himself. 
Find out who he is, and let his wishes be granted at once.’ 

Virata’s messengers go quickly up to Bhimasena, and give him the 
king’s message. 

The noble Pandava approaches Virata and says in a cook’s humble way, 
‘O best of kings, I am a cook. My name is Ballava and my skill lies in 
cooking the most exotic dishes. I beg you, employ me in your kitchen!’ 

Virata says, “I cannot believe, Ballava, that cooking is your true calling. 
You resemble Indra the thousand-eyed; your strength, beauty and grace 
make you seem like a king.’ 


Bhima replies, ‘King of kings, first and foremost I am your cook and 
servant, but in truth it is not only cooking that I am expert at, although I 
used to prepare food for Yudhishtira himself at one time. Lord of the Earth, 
I am also a wrestler. There is no one as strong as me: I can fight lions and 
elephants, O Anagha, and entertain you otherwise.’ 

Virata says, “I will grant your wish; you may have the job you ask for, 
since you say you are skilled at it. Yet, I do not think that this is work 
worthy of you. You deserve the Earth with her girdle of seas, but it shall be 
as you wish. You will oversee my kitchens and have authority over 
everyone there.’ 

Once he is established in the kitchen, Bhima soon becomes the favourite 
of king Virata; he continues to live there unrecognised by the servants and 
others of the court.” 


CANTO 9 
PANDAVA PRAVESHA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Her incomparable hair—fine, soft, long and 
black, ending in curls—is plaited. Dark-eyed, dark-skinned 
Draupadi of the sweet smiles throws her braid over her right shoulder and 
conceals it under the end of her upper cloth. As befitting her guise of a 
sairandhri, she is dressed in just a single piece of grand, but old, black cloth. 
She wanders here and there inside the palace grounds in apparent distress. 

Seeing her drifting aimlessly, men and women hurry to her side and ask, 
“Who are you? And what are you looking for?’ 

And she says, ‘I am a royal sairandhri. I am looking for someone whom 
I can serve, who will take care of me.’ 

So lovely is she, so rich her clothes, so sweet her speech, that people 
cannot believe she is a maidservant in search of a job. While looking out 
from her terrace, Virata’s beloved queen, the king of Kekaya’s daughter, 
happens to notice Draupadi. 

Seeing her forlorn appearance and shabby attire, Queen Sudeshna calls 
out to her, “O Sundari, beautiful one, who are you, and what do you want?’ 

Draupadi answers, ‘Foremost of queens, I am a sairandhri, willing to 
serve anyone who will take care of me.’ 

Sudeshna says, “What you say does not match the beauty I see. You 
might well be the mistress of servants rather than a servant yourself. 

Your heels are slim, your thighs rounded, and your navel is deep; you 
seem intelligent and your words are solemn. Your body is both young and 


exquisite: your toes, breasts and hips, your back and sides, your toe-nails, 
your palms. The palms of your hands, the soles of your feet are the colour 
of the deep-red wild rose; your voice is sweet like a swan’s; your hair is 
lovely; your breasts are shapely and graceful. 

Like a Kashmiri mare you bear the marks of lofty lineage. You have 
curled eyelashes, pink lips, a slender waist, a neck with conch-like lines, 
delicate veins, and a face like the full moon. Your eyes are like lotus leaves; 
your body is fragrant like the lotus blossom. Indeed, you look like Lakshmi, 
whose best-loved seat is that autumnal flower. 

Tell me who you are, incomparable one; you cannot be a sairandhri. Are 
you a Yakshi, a Devi, a Gandharvi or an Apsara? Are you the daughter of a 
Deva, or are you a Nagina? Perhaps you are the guardian goddess of some 
city? A Vidyadhari or a Kinnari? Are you Rohini herself? Or are you 
Alambusha, or Misrakesi, Pundarika, or Malini, or Indra Deva’s queen, or 
Varuna’s? Or are you the wife of Visvakarma, or the consort of Lord Vishnu 
himself? Of these goddesses who are celebrated in Devaloka, which one are 
you, most graceful one?’ 

Draupadi says, “Revered queen, I am neither a goddess nor a Gandharvi, 
neither a Yakshi nor a Rakshasi. I am, truly, a maidservant of the sairandhri 
class. I know how to dress a royal lady’s hair; I can make fragrant lotions 
and colourful malas of jasmines, lotuses, blue lilies and champakas. 

At one time, I served Krishna’s beloved queen Satyabhama; and I was 
once maid to Draupadi, most beautiful of Kurus and wife of the Pandavas. I 
wander about alone now, living as long as I can in any place where I can 
earn a good meal and fine clothes in exchange for my services. Draupadi 
used to call me Malini, maker of garlands.’ 

Sudeshna says, ‘I would so love to take you into my care and pamper 
you if it were not for the anxiety that the king may lose his heart to you. 
Even the women and maids of the antahpura are drawn by your beauty and 
cannot take their eyes off you. What man could resist you? Surely, exquisite 
one of rounded hips, my husband Virata will see your supernatural 
loveliness and forsake me for you. 

You of the perfect limbs, whose large eyes cast darting sidelong 
glances, any man you look at with desire will be struck by love. You of the 
sweet smiles and the perfect body, he whose eyes linger on you will be 
seared by desire. Like the man who risks his life by climbing a lofty tree, 


even as the crab conceives her young ones who will kill her by their birth, I 
may destroy myself by giving you a home.’ 

Draupadi says, ‘Lovely devi, neither Virata nor any other man will have 
me, for my five Gandharva husbands, sons of a powerful Gandharva king, 
protect me. No one can injure or dishonour me. My husbands have 
forbidden me to work for anyone who makes me wash their feet, and I am 
not allowed to eat food from another’s plate. Any man who attempts to have 
me like a common woman will die that very night. My beloved and mighty 
Gandharvas protect me silently and at all times.’ 

Sudeshna says, ‘You who gladden hearts, if that is the way of it, I will 
take you into my household, and you shall not be required to touch food 
that has been served to another person, nor wash another’s feet.’ 

Janamejaya, with these words of queen Sudeshna, Krishnaa, devoted to 
her husbands, begins her life in the city of Virata, and no one knows who 
she really is!” 


CANTO 10 
PANDAVA PRAVESHA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Sahadeva, dressed like a cowherd and speaking 

in Yadava dialect, makes his way to king Virata’s cowsheds. 
Amazed to see this splendid bull among men, Virata instructs his men to 
summon the disguised Pandava to his presence. 

When Sahadeva appears before him, the king says, ‘Whose service are 
you in and where do you come from? What work are you looking for? I 
have never seen you before, Purusharishabha. Tell me about yourself.’ 

That distresser of his foes, Sahadeva, stands before the king, and in a 
voice as deep as thunder says, “I am a Vaisya, and my name is Arishtanemi. 
I served those bulls of the Kuru race, the Pandavas, as a cowherd, but I 
want to live in your service now, Purushottama, because I no longer know 
where those lions among kings are, the sons of Pritha. I need a livelihood 
and I do not want to work for anyone but you.’ 

Virata says to him, “You must either be a Brahmana or a Kshatriya. You 
look as if you are lord of all Bhumi and her seas. Be honest with me, you 
who mow down your foes. The work of a Vaisya is not fit for you. Whose 
kingdom do you come from? What knowledge and skills do you have? In 
what capacity would you like to stay here with us? And what payment 
would you accept?’ 

Sahadeva says, ‘Yudhishtira, the eldest of Pandu’s five sons, has many 
herds of cattle. One numbers ten thousand and eight hundred heads; one 
numbers ten thousand, another is twenty thousand strong; and I helped tend 


all those cows and bulls. People call me Tantripala. I know the pedigrees of 
all cows living within ten yojanas. Raja Yudhishtira was familiar with my 
gunas, and he was very pleased with me. 

I also know how to increase the fertility of cows and how to prevent 
diseases. I can distinguish bulls that have the auspicious marks that make 
them worthy of worship by men, and by the scent of whose urine barren 
women can conceive.’ 

Virata says, ‘I have a hundred thousand cattle divided into separate 
herds. I give you charge of them all; and their keepers too will be under 
your authority. Henceforth my livestock will be in your care.’ 

From this day Sahadeva lives contentedly in the Matsya kingdom, 
working for Virata, his true identity unknown to the king or anyone else, 
except his brothers.” 


CANTO 11 
PANDAVA PRAVESHA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana continued, “The next to appear at the gates of the 

palace ramparts is a great and exquisitely beautiful man decked in 
women’s ornaments. He wears large earrings and the finest conch-shell 
bracelets set in gold. He has powerful arms and his long, lush hair tumbles 
about his neck. He walks with the graceful gait of an elephant, and he 
makes the earth tremble as he comes into the sabha and stands before 
Virata. 

Seeing the lustrous son of Indra, Arjuna Parantapa, disguised as a 
eunuch, enter the sabha with his magnificent gait and walk towards him, the 
king says to his courtiers, “Where does this person come from? I do not 
recognise him.’ 

And when the courtiers say they do not know who the stranger is, the 
king says to Arjuna in wonderment, ‘You look amazingly strong, like a 
Deva, and your youth and dark skin make you look like a bull-elephant, the 
leader of a herd. Wearing your seashell-and-gold bangles and earrings, 
decked with flower garlands, and with your soft hair, you shimmer like a 
fully-armed Kshatriya in his chariot. 

I am old and want to give up my burden of kingship. Be like a son to me 
and share my burden, or even rule the kingdom of the Matsyas by yourself, 
as I do now. You are surely some great man and not a eunuch.’ 

Arjuna says, ‘I sing, dance and play musical instruments, and I do all 
these very well. Lord of men, send me to princess Uttaraa to be her dance 


teacher. As to how I became a eunuch, is there any point in telling the story 
when the memory of it only brings me pain? Suffice it to say, O king, that I 
am Brihannala, son or daughter without father or mother.’ 

Virata says, ‘Brihannala, I will give you the position you ask for. Teach 
my daughter and the other princesses to dance. To me, however, this 
occupation seems too lowly for you. You deserve the Earth and her girdle of 
seas.’ 

The king of the Matsyas verifies Brihannala’s gifts in dancing, music 
and other fine arts by watching him perform. He consults his ministers and 
immediately sends Brihannala to be examined by women, who confirm that 
he is indeed a eunuch and quite impotent. Virata sends him to princess 
Uttaraa’s apartments. And there, Arjuna begins giving lessons in singing 
and instrumental music to the daughter of Virata, to her sakhis and 
sairandhris, and he captures their hearts. 

In this way, Arjuna lives confidently in disguise, enjoying the pleasure 
of the princess’ company, unrecognised both by those inside the palace and 
outside it.” 


CANTO 12 
PANDAVA PRAVESHA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “After a few days, citizens of the Matsya 

kingdom see Nakula purposefully making his way towards king 
Virata’s palace. Looking like the Sun pushing its way through the clouds as 
he comes, he keenly inspects the horses he sees in the royal stables. 

Noticing this, the king of the Matsyas says to his entourage, “I wonder 
where this man, who glows like a Deva, comes from. He looks so intently at 
my horses; he must be very knowledgeable about them. Bring him to me at 
once. He seems to be a Kshatriya; truly, he looks like a god!’ 

Splendid Nakula Parantapa goes up to the king and says, ‘Victory to 
you, O Rajan! May you be blest. I am a horse-trainer who has earned the 
respect of kings. I will look after your horses with great care.’ 

Virata says, ‘I will give you chariots, wealth and spacious living 
quarters, and you shall have charge of my stables. But first tell me, where 
do you come from? Who are you? And what brings you to my kingdom? 
What other skills do you have?’ 

Nakula replies, ‘Bane of your enemies, I used to work for the eldest of 
the Pandavas, Yudhishtira. I was in charge of his stables. I am sensitive to a 
horse’s every mood and have mastered the art of breaking them in. I can 
calm wild or violent horses and know how to treat their diseases. No animal 
in my care becomes weak or ill. With my training, stallions and mares 
become docile. Everyone, including Yudhishtira, knows me as Granthika.’ 


Virata says, ‘From today I put all the horses in my stables in your care. 
From now, all those who work in the stables and my charioteers, as well, 
shall be answerable to you. What remuneration will you accept for this? 

But you are kingly, almost godlike, and the occupation of an equerry is 
not worthy of you. You look like a king and I am filled with respect for you. 
Your presence makes me as happy as if Yudhishtira himself was here. Ah, I 
wonder how he who is so scrupulously principled passes his time in the 
forest without anyone to serve him?’ 

From then on, Nakula, looking like a Gandharva lord, is shown great 
respect by the delighted Virata and, by his conduct, he makes himself well- 
liked by everyone in the palace, and no one recognises him while he lives 
under Virata’s protection. 

In this way, the Pandavas, the very sight of whom is a blessing, live in 
the realm of the Matsyas. With great forbearance in their time of distress, 
these lords of the earth and seas remain true to their pledge and pass their 
days unknown.” 


CANTO 13 
SAMAYAPALANA PARVA 


anamejaya said, “While living disguised in the Matsya kingdom, what 
did the mighty Kuru princes do, Dvijottama?” 

Vaisampayana replied, “Listen, O king, and I will tell you what those 
sons of Kuru do while they live disguised in the city of the Matsyas and 
serve that king. 

By the grace of Rishi Trinabindu and of the sublime Dharma Deva, the 
Pandavas continue to live in Virata’s city, undiscovered and in peace. Virata 
and the other nobles find in their new courtier, Kanka, a most congenial 
companion. An expert in the intricacies of the game of dice, this son of 
Pandu orchestrates dice games according to his will and makes players sit 
in the gaming hall like a row of birds on a wire. 

Unknown to the king, Yudhishtira divides his winnings amongst his 
brothers. Bhima sends Yudhishtira meat and other food that he gets from the 
king. Arjuna distributes the used clothes that he is given in the antahpura of 
the palace. The Gopa, Sahadeva, gives them milk, curds and ghee. And 
Nakula shares the wealth that the king rewards him with for managing his 
stables. Carefully staying away from the gaze of men, forlorn Panchali 
keeps a watchful, loving eye on her husbands. 

Whilst taking care of each other, those mighty Kshatriyas live in 
Virata’s capital, hidden from view as if they are once more in their mother’s 
womb. Ever vigilant of danger from Duryodhana, the Pandavas continue to 
live in hiding and watch over their wife. 


Three months pass, and the grand festival of Lord Brahma is celebrated 
with pomp in the country of the Matsyas. Athletes from all parts of 
Bharatavarsha arrive in their thousands, like hosts of Devas flocking to the 
abode of Brahma or of Siva. They have mighty bodies and great strength, 
like the Kalakhanja Asuras. Virata honours them and they are proud indeed 
of their strength and achievements. Their necks, shoulders and waists are 
leonine. They are pure of body and heart and have already won many royal 
tournaments. 

Amongst them there is one, Jimuta, who towers above the rest, and he 
challenges them all to a wrestling match. None dares approach him as he 
proudly stalks the arena. Seeing the dispirited wrestlers, the king of the 
Matsyas orders his head cook to meet the challenge. 

Bhima reluctantly agrees, since he cannot openly disregard the royal 
request. Ballava the cook bows to the king and enters the capacious 
stadium, striding in with tigerish fearlessness. Then to the delight of the 
spectators, the son of Kunti roars a challenge to the towering Jimuta, whose 
strength and skill are as famed as the Asura Vritra’s. 

The awesome combatants are like two maddened bull-elephants in their 
prime. Those tigers among men begin their wrestling match, each one 
determined to crush the other. The very first clash between them sounds like 
a thunderbolt striking a stony mountain. 

Delighted that they are evenly matched, each will take advantage of his 
opponent’s slightest lapse. The excited adversaries are like elephants in 
musth. With clenched fists, they crash staggering blows into each other; 
they hurl each other away; each slams the other on to the ground; each 
holds the other down on the stadium floor. They get up again and squeeze 
each other’s bodies in bone-crushing grips, in iron arms. 

With stunning punches, they throw each other off balance; each grasps 
the other’s legs and whirls him round before ramming him onto the ground. 
Their open palms strike like thunderclaps. They jab the nails of taut fingers 
into each other’s bodies like spearheads. They kick; they dash head against 
head like the crash of granite against granite. 

To the endless delight of the spectators, the furious hand to hand combat 
of the two titans rages on, kept up by the strength of their arms and the 
energy of their minds and bodies. Rajan, all are absorbed by the contention 
between the two, who battle like Indra Deva and Vritrasura, and they cheer 
them on with shouts of praise and applause. 


The two long-armed, mighty-chested wrestlers heave, thrust, hurl, strike 
with their knees, all the while yelling taunts at each other. Their bare, 
glistening arms are truly like spiked iron maces. Then, finally, Bhima roars 
like some unimaginable lion and seizes his unyielding adversary, as a lion 
does an elephant. He picks him up, holds him aloft and, as the spectators — 
athletes and citizens of Matsya—watch in astonishment, he whirls him 
round and round over his head a hundred times until Jimuta is unconscious. 
And Mahabaho Vrikodara smashes him to death on the arena floor. 

Virata and his friends rejoice at Jimuta’s defeat and, in the exuberance 
of his elation, the king rewards Ballava with the legendary generosity of 
Kubera. 

Bhima goes on to defeat and kill many other wrestlers, pleasing the king 
enormously. And when there is no one left who dares face him, Virata 
makes him fight with tigers, lions and elephants, not only in the public 
arena, but also in the antahpura for the entertainment of the women of the 
harem. 

Arjuna sings and dances and, in his own way, entertains the king and 
those women of the inner apartments. Nakula keeps the king’s stables full 
of well-trained, swift horses for the king and his men. Virata is pleased and 
gives Nakula rich rewards. Seeing the goshala filled with healthy bullocks 
and cows, Purusharishabha Virata makes gifts of all kinds of treasures to 
Sahadeva. And, O Rajan, poor Draupadi sighs in constant distress at seeing 
her Kshatriya husbands suffer. 

It is in this way that the illustrious exiles render services to king Virata 
and live in disguise in the Matsya kingdom.” 


CANTO 14 
KICHAKA-VADHA PARVA 


V aisampayana said, “Living in their disguises, those mighty 
Kshatriyas spend ten months in the Matsya city. 

Rajan, accustomed herself to being waited on, Draupadi serves 
Sudeshna in her apartments and lives in some anguish, even though Virata’s 
queen and the other ladies are delighted with their sairandhri. 

One day, towards the end of that year of exile, Sudeshna’s brother 
Kichaka, fearsome commander of Virata’s forces, happens to catch sight of 
Draupadi. Seeing that woman of ethereal beauty, so like the daughter of a 
Deva, like a goddess who has stepped out of Devaloka to walk on Earth, he 
is struck by a shaft of Kama and he yearns for her. 

The flame of lust burns high in him, and Senapati Kichaka comes to 
Sudeshna and says to her, ‘I have not seen this woman in the palace before, 
and the sight of her intoxicates me like the fragrance of fresh wine. Tell me, 
who is this bewitching Apsara, as beautiful as a goddess? Whose is she and 
where has she come from? She maddens my heart and has enslaved me, and 
only she can heal me. 

Ah, your sairandhri is as beautiful as a Devi. Surely, she is not fit to be 
your servant. Let her rule over me and whatever is mine. Let her grace my 
jewelled palace; let her enjoy the abundance of rich food and drink served 
in fine dishes and goblets. I have a surfeit of everything she could want, 
besides my countless elephants, horses and chariots.’ 


Having spoken to Sudeshna, Kichaka goes to Draupadi, like a jackal to 
a lioness, and says to Krishnaa in a disarming voice, “Who are you, 
exquisite one; and whose are you? Sundari, from where have you come to 
this city of Virata’s? Tell me, dark and exquisite one. Your beauty and grace 
are incomparable, and your face is peerless and radiant as the luminous 
Moon. O you of the high-arched brows, your eyes are like lotus petals; your 
voice is sweet like the koyal’s song, you of the slender arms. O beautiful- 
hipped, faultless one, I have never seen any woman as perfect as you. 

Are you the Goddess Lakshmi who lives in the midst of lotuses? Or are 
you Bhuti, O slender-waist? Perhaps you are Hri, Sri, Kirti or Kanti? Or 
maybe you are Rati, the beloved of Manmatha. 

The celestial lustre of your face is like moonlight. What man could 
resist you once he has seen your face? Your beauty is supreme, your grace 
divine; your face is lovely as the full Moon, your smile like his soft light, 
and your eyelashes like the delicate rays of his beams. Your soft, rounded, 
deep breasts, set close together, should be adorned with garlands of gold. 
The sight of your lotus-bud breasts stings me with desire and lashes me like 
Kama Deva’s whip. 

O sweet-smiling and slender-waisted, when I see your belly, marked 
with four lines and measuring but a span of my hand, bent forward by the 
weight of your breasts, when I see your hips flare from your body like the 
banks of a river, a fever of longing torments me. Ah, its flames ravage me, 
fierce as a forest-fire, fanned by the hope of possessing you. Sublime one, 
cool the fever kindled by Manmatha. My desire is the rain-cloud and your 
surrender its cooling shower. 

Sharpened by my need for you, Kama’s arrows recklessly stab my heart. 
Black-eyes, they pierce deep and torture me past endurance. You must 
release me from this. Embrace me and give yourself to me. Adorn yourself 
in the finest robes, garlands and jewellery, my sweet one, and enjoy with me 
all the pleasures you could desire. 

You who walk with the swaying gait of an elephant in rut, in this place 
you are deprived of the happiness that you deserve. You should not have to 
live in hardship; let me give you joy. Drink nectar-like wines, enjoy myriad 
entertainments and be joyful, O blessed devi. Your loveliness, youth and 
purity are being wasted, while you are like a spring vanamala cast aside and 
unworn. 


I will forsake all my wives; let them be your servants. And I too will 
stay by your side, your obedient slave, exquisite creature.’ 

Hearing his passionate declarations, Draupadi says, ‘Sutaputra, I am a 
lowborn sairandhri, a mere hair dresser. I am not worthy of your desire. 
Besides, I am already married. These overtures do not become a man of 
your stature. I beg you to remember dharma: men should only delight in 
their wives. Do not let temptation lead you to adultery. Refraining from 
adharma is the way of good men. Ignorant, sinful men who give in to lust 
are doomed to shame or some worse disaster.’ 

Hearing the sairandhri, the lecherous Kichaka loses control of himself 
and, though aware of the danger of sinning, he is overcome by his lust. 

He says to Draupadi, ‘It is not right for you to disregard me, for it is 
you, graceful and bewitching temptress, who have lured me into 
Manmatha’s spell. If you reject one who is enchanted by you and who 
speaks so adoringly to you, you will regret it later, timid, black-eyed one. 

You of the flowing brows and waist like a lotus stalk, know that I am the 
real master of this kingdom. The people of this land depend on me for their 
lives. In ardour and vigour I have no rivals on this earth; and there isn’t 
another man on earth as handsome, as virile, wealthy or rich in treasures as 
I am. Fortunate devi, why do you choose to be a servant when you can bask 
in luxury and have everything your heart desires? Accept me and I will 
make you mistress of this kingdom; anything you want will be yours for the 
asking.’ 

Draupadi answers Kichaka’s wretched proposition, ‘Sutaputra, do not 
be so rash and throw your life away. I am protected by my five husbands. 
You cannot have me; my husbands are Gandharvas and will kill you if you 
try. Do not bring death upon yourself. You have embarked on a path that no 
wise man should take. Fool, you are like an ignorant child on the seashore 
who wants to cross the waves. Even if you dive to the core of the earth, or 
fly deep into the sky or cross the ocean to the other shore, you cannot 
escape my divine Gandharvas who slaughter their enemies. 

Kichaka, why do you pursue me so persistently, almost like a sick man 
who is impatient for death? Why do you yearn for me, like a baby lying on 
its mother’s lap reaching for the moon? For you who crave their beloved 
wife there is no haven from my Gandharva husbands either on earth or in 
the heavens. Kichaka, for your own good, be wise and save your life.’ ” 


CANTO 15 
KICHAKA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Rejected by Draupadi, the lust-crazed Kichaka 

abandons good sense and says to Sudeshna, ‘Daughter of Kekaya, O 
my sister, do whatever you must to make your sairandhri mine. Somehow 
see that this woman with the swaying gait of a she-elephant accepts me, for 
I am dying from wanting her, Sudeshna.’ 

Kichaka’s ardent distress moves Virata’s gentle queen to pity. She thinks 
deeply about what her brother wants and about Krishnaa’s fears. 

She says to her brother, the Sutaputra, “On a festival day arrange for 
some special food and wine. I will send my sairandhri to you on the pretext 
of bringing me wine. When she comes to your home, make sure you are 
alone with her and undisturbed; then woo her in whatever way you think 
best. If her mind is soothed, she may be persuaded to give herself to you.’ 

Kichaka leaves his sister’s apartments and in a few days begins his 
preparations. He procures wines fit for a king’s table; he has expert cooks 
prepare every kind of delicacy, including superb meat dishes. When all is 
ready, Sudeshna sends Krishnaa to Kichaka’s palace. 

She says, ‘My lovely Malini, go to my brother Kichaka’s house and 
fetch me some wine for I am terribly thirsty.’ 

Krishnaa replies, “My queen, I cannot go to Kichaka’s home. You know 
how bold he is. Beautiful devi of the perfect arms, while I work for you in 
this palace I will not sin by being unfaithful to my husbands. O gentle 
queen, remember the conditions I made before entering your service. You of 


the tresses ending in soft curls, foolish Kichaka is under Kama’s spell and 
will dishonour me. You have so many maids; send any of them, for if I go, 
Kichaka will surely ravish me.’ 

Sudeshna says, ‘You are going at my behest and from my house; he will 
surely not hurt you,’ and hands her sairandhri a golden flask. 

Her eyes full of tears, the helpless Draupadi prays for protection as she 
sets out for Kichaka’s apartments. She prays, “I have not been with any man 
other than my husbands; by virtue of my chastity grant that Kichaka be 
unable to overpower me even while I am in his presence.’ 

And she invokes Surya Deva. The Sun God hears her and commands a 
Rakshasa to protect her. The unseen Rakshasa follows the chaste Draupadi. 

Seeing Krishnaa enter his presence like a frightened doe, the Suta rises 
from his chair, jubilant as a man who, desperate to cross a river, manages to 
acquire a boat.” 


CANTO 16 
KICHAKA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


= K ichaka says, ‘O welcome, you of the shimmering tresses that end 

in curls of such beauty! Dawn has brought me an auspicious day 

for you are here today to be mistress of my house. Make me happy. I will 

have golden necklaces, conch-shells, bright gold earrings, precious jewels 

from distant lands, rubies and other gems, as well as silks and the softest 

deer-skins to be brought for you. I have a luxurious bed prepared. Come; sit 
on it and share this honey wine with me.’ 

Draupadi says, “The queen sent me here to fetch wine. I beg you, give it 
to me quickly, for she is thirsty.’ 

Kichaka says, ‘Gentle one, someone else will take the princess what she 
wants,’ and seizes Draupadi’s arm. 

She cries, ‘I have never been unfaithful to my husbands, even in my 
mind. Vile man, you have laid hands on me and I swear I shall see you 
dragged down to the ground and lying powerless.’ 

Provoked by the reproof of that large-eyed beauty, Kichaka suddenly 
takes hold of the end of her upper garment, even as she tries to escape. His 
brutishness is unbearable; Krishnaa’s breath quickens, and her body 
trembles in rage as she thrusts him away from her, making the evil one fall 
like a tree whose roots are cut. Having flung Kichaka down, Draupadi, 
shaking, runs for refuge to the sabha where Yudhishtira sits. Kichaka jumps 
up and pursues her, catches her by her long hair in the very sabha, throws 
her down before the king himself, and kicks her savagely. 


Then, O Bhaarata, the invisible Rakshasa, whom Surya Deva sent to 
protect her, attacks Kichaka forcefully as a gale-wind; and Kichaka reels 
and falls like an uprooted tree. 

Yudhishtira and Bhimasena are both in that royal court, and they watch 
Kichaka’s outrage of Krishnaa in fury. Bhima wants to kill Virata’s 
senapati; he gnashes his teeth and beads of sweat break out on his heavy 
brow. His eyes darken as if with smoke, his eyelashes stand on end, and that 
slayer of enemies buries his head in his hands. 

He is about to fly at Kichaka when, in fear of being discovered, 
Yudhishtira presses down hard on Bhima’s thumbs, restraining him. And 
looking like an infuriated elephant eyeing a large tree, Bhima stays where 
he is, prohibited by his elder brother. 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Are you looking for trees for fuel, O cook? If you 
need kindling, go to the forest.’ 

Through her tears Draupadi of the graceful hips sees her enraged 
husbands, and she remembers their pledge and her duty to maintain her 
disguise. Her eyes flash fire as she says to the king of the Matsyas, “Today 
this son of a Suta has insulted the proud and beloved wife of powerful 
beings; he will find no sanctuary, even if he puts four kingdoms between 
himself and them. O, this son of a Suta kicked the wife of great beings of 
truth who are devoted to Brahmanas and whose charity is unconditional. 
This son of a Suta has kicked the chaste wife of beings whose drums and 
bowstrings are never silent. This son of a Suta has dishonoured the dearly- 
loved wife of heroes who are mighty and vigorous, who are generous and 
proud. O, this son of a Suta has kicked the wife of beings who could destroy 
the whole world if they were not bound by ties of dharma. 

Ah, where are those warriors now who, though living unknown, always 
grant protection to those who ask for it? Why do these fiery conquerors 
allow their wife to be abused by a Suta’s son, as if they are eunuchs? Where 
is that rage of theirs, their power, their ardour? How can they stand by and 
watch a base wretch humiliate their wife? What can I do when 
dishonourable Virata calmly watches an evil man abuse an innocent 
woman? 

You do not deal with this Kichaka as a king should. Your behaviour is 
that of a common criminal; it does no credit to this royal sabha. It is not 
dharma that I have been vilely abused in your presence and you do nothing 
to redress the wrong. 


Let all who are present here see this outrage. Kichaka has ignored 
dharma; and Virata has done the same. You courtiers who wait upon such a 
king are equally lacking in honour,’ rages Krishnaa, her eyes streaming. 

Virata says, “I did not see what quarrel led to this. Without knowing the 
truth how can I rule in one person’s favour?’ 

When the courtiers hear what took place they support Krishnaa with 
applause saying, Well done, and condemn Kichaka. 

They say, ‘The husband who possesses this lovely-eyed and graceful 
woman of inestimable worth is a most fortunate man. Rare indeed is a 
woman of such extraordinary and flawless beauty. Why, she seems to be a 
goddess.’ 

Meanwhile, as the courtiers praise Krishnaa, Yudhishtira’s brow 
perspires in anger, and that bull of the Kurus says to his wife, ‘Do not stay 
here, sairandhri; return to Sudeshna’s apartments. Wives must endure 
torment for the sake of their husbands; they attain swarga by suffering great 
hardships while serving their lords. Your Gandharva husbands, radiant as 
suns, do not consider this an apt occasion for unleashing their anger, which 
is why they do not rush to your side. 

You weep theatrically in distress because you do not know the deeper 
significance of all things. Besides, you interrupt the play of dice in the 
king’s court. Leave, sairandhri; the Gandharvas will do what you want. 
They know of your troubles and will kill the man who has wronged you.’ 

Krishnaa says, ‘My husbands are loving, but they are controlled by one 
among them and cannot act freely, for that eldest of them is addicted to 
dice.’ 

And Krishnaa goes back to Sudeshna’s apartments, her hair dishevelled, 
her eyes blazing and her face flushed and swollen from weeping; she 
returns like the moon breaking out from behind clouds. 

Seeing her like that, Sudeshna asks, ‘Ah lovely one, who has hurt you? 
Why do you cry? Who has upset you, gentle one? Why this grief?’ 

Draupadi says, ‘When I went to fetch wine for you, Kichaka attacked 
me in the very presence of the king, in his sabha, as if in an unpeopled 
forest.’ 

Sudeshna says, ‘Lust-maddened Kichaka abused you because he cannot 
have his way with you. I will have him killed if that is what you wish.’ 

Draupadi says to her, ‘There are others, whom he has wronged, who 
will kill him. He will go to Yamaloka this very day.’ ” 


CANTO 17 
KICHAKA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Incensed by what the Suta’s son did to her, 

Krishnaa, fervently praying for the death of Virata’s senapati, goes 
to her room. Drupada’s dark-eyed daughter bathes herself. She cries as she 
washes her body and she wonders how she can wash away her grief. 

She says to herself, “What am I to do? Where can I go?’ Then she 
remembers Bhima and says, ‘There is no one except Bhima who can do 
what my heart is set on.’ 

That night, griefstricken and wrathful Krishnaa, protected by her 
powerful, unseen Rakshasa guardian, leaves her bed and hurries to 
Bhimasena’s apartment. 

She glides into her second husband’s chambers and says, ‘How can you 
sleep while Kichaka, Virata’s wretched senapati, my enemy, still lives after 
the vile thing he did to me today?’ 

The room where Bhima sleeps, his breath loud like a lion’s, is lit by 
Draupadi’s beauty and his own magnificence. Krishnaa goes to him in his 
cook’s apartments, eagerly as a young untamed cow in her first heat to a 
bull, like a heron by the water-side to her mate in season. The princess of 
Panchala embraces the second son of Pandu as a frail creeper hugs the great 
sala tree on the banks of the Gomati. Krishnaa takes him in her arms and 
rouses him, as a lioness does a sleeping lion in the forest. 

Embracing Bhimasena as a she-elephant does her mighty mate, Panchali 
says in a voice as alluring as a celestial veena playing a Gandharva raga, 


“Wake up, Bhimasena! Why do you lie so still, as if you are dead? Surely, 
one who is alive would not allow the wretch who disgraced his wife to 
live.’ 

Bhima Mahabaho wakes up; he sits up on his couch and says to his 
precious wife, ‘What brings you here in such anxiety? You look pale and 
worn. What has happened? Tell me everything. I must know the truth, 
happy or painful, pleasant or unpleasant, and I will find a solution to your 
distress. Krishnaa, of all your husbands I am most worthy of your trust; for 
it is I who always save you from danger. Tell me what you want and why; 
then return to your bed before others awake.’ ” 


CANTO 18 
KICHAKA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


°*T) raupadi says, “How can a woman who has Yudhishtira for a 

husband be free from sorrow; and knowing all that I have sufferd 
how can you ask me this question? That Pratikami dragged me to the Kuru 
court and called me a slave before all the sabha. That agony, Bhaarata, still 
consumes me. Which other princess could suffer such misery and still live? 

Who else but I could have borne what the evil lord of Sindhu did to me 
while we lived in the forests? Which other queen could live after being 
kicked by Kichaka in full view of the honourless king of the Matsyas? What 
is the point of my living, Bhima, when despite all this, you ask me why I 
am miserable? 

The evil Kichaka is Virata’s brother-in-law and commands his armies; 
he accosts me daily and propositions me, and asks me to be his wife. Like 
an over-ripe fruit, my heart is bursting from that wretch, who deserves to 
die, constantly importuning me. 

Chastise your elder brother who is addicted to dice; my unhappiness is 
his doing. Only a reckless gambler stakes his kingdom and everything he 
owns, including his wife, on one throw, against a life in the forests. If he 
had gambled day and night for years and wagered thousands of nishkas and 
other precious possessions, his wealth: silver and gold, costly robes, cattle, 
sheep, goats and innumerable horses, would still be past reckoning. But 
now, stripped of everything by a single throw of the ivory dice, he sits mute 
and ponders his foolishness. 


It is pitiful that he, who travelled with ten thousand elephants adorned 
with golden garlands in his retinue, now supports himself by throwing dice. 
Kings idolised Yudhishtira and hundreds of thousands of people worshipped 
him in Indraprastha. In his halls legions of serving-maids attended on 
countless guests day and night. That most generous of men, who gave 
thousands of nishkas in charity every day, is now fallen because of his 
gambling, that root of all evils, and has sunk to earning his livelihood by 
daily casting dice. 

Throngs of poets and rich admirers decked in jewelled earrings once 
sang melodious praises and paid homage to him all day long. Sadly, the 
great Yudhishtira, whom a thousand holy sages, all Vedic scholars, served, 
and whose every wish he granted; Yudhishtira, who maintained eighty-eight 
thousand Snatakas with thirty servants each; Yudhishtira, who looked after 
ten thousand Yatis who had forsaken worldly life—this Yudhishtira now 
lives ajnatavasa, in pathetic disguise. 

Yudhishtira is kind, without malice, and gives every man his due; he 
who has such admirable qualities now lives behind a mask. He of 
unquestionable power and steadfastness, who is fair-minded; compassionate 
Yudhishtira, who tends to the blind, the old, the helpless, the orphaned and 
the distressed—he is now a servant who calls himself Kanka, a thrower of 
dice in the Matsya king’s court and dependent on him. 

He, to whom kings of the Earth used to pay tribute in Indraprastha, now 
begs for subsistence. He, under whose dominion all the lords of the Earth 
came, has lost his sovereignty and is the subject of another. 

Yudhishtira, who blazed over the world like the Sun, is now a liege of 
Virata. Pandava, look how your brother, whom kings and sages revered, 
now waits upon another, lesser king. 

How can anyone who sees Yudhishtira fawning on Virata and making 
adulatory speeches as his courtier, not be heartbroken? How can anyone 
who sees the wise and noble Yudhishtira waiting on another for sustenance 
not be griefstricken, undeserving though my lord may be of that sorrow. 

O Kshatriya, that Bhaarata whom the entire world worshipped is the one 
you now see adulating another man. When you can see all this, Bhimasena, 
why are you not able to see me in my misery, drowning in a sea of sorrow?’ 


CANTO 19 
KICHAKA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) raupadi continues, ‘O Bhaarata, I am going to tell you of another 
great sadness of mine. Do not be upset with me, for I say this out 
of grief. 

Who would not be sad to see you, O Bhima, Bharatarishabha, doing the 
work of a cook, so entirely beneath you, and pretending to belong to the 
Ballava caste? What can be sadder than people knowing you only as one 
who is plunged in servitude as Virata’s cook, and called Ballava? When 
your work in the kitchen is over, you wait on Virata, and despondency grips 
my heart. When that king makes you fight elephants for his amusement, and 
the women of the inner apartments titter in enjoyment, oh, I am sorely 
distressed. 

When you wrestle with lions, tigers and bulls for the entertainment of 
princess Kaikeyi in the antahpura, I almost faint away. Kaikeyi and her 
maids come to help me and finding that it is only a swoon the princess says 
to her serving women, “It is the intimacy she has with this man and her love 
for him that agitates this sweet-smiling sairandhri when she sees the 
powerful cook wrestling with beasts. She is lovely and Ballava is 
handsome. It is difficult to know what is in her heart, but they seem to suit 
each other well. Very likely, she sheds tears for him because they are lovers. 
They did both enter into our service at the same time.” 

She scolds me and, when she sees that I am upset, suspects that we are 
lovers. When she speaks like that, my anguish is terrible. Even though I am 


already sunk in grief because of Yudhishtira, in truth, it is when I see you, 
my awesome Bhima, enduring such torment that I want to end my life. 

And he, who on his chariot single-handedly defeated all the Devas and 
Manavas, is now the dancing-master of Virata’s daughter Uttaraa. This son 
of Pritha, the fathomless soul who pleased Agni in Khandava vana, now 
lives in the antahpura of the palace like fire hidden in a well. That bull 
among men, ah, the very same Dhananjaya who was the terror of his 
adversaries, now pretends to be that which all men abhor: a eunuch! 

He, whose mace-like arms have been marked by the strokes of his 
bowstring, covers his wrists with conch-shell bracelets and lives in grief. 
Arjuna, the thunderous twang of whose bowstring on his gloves made 
enemies tremble, now entertains pampered women with his songs. 
Dhananjaya, who wore a crown of brilliant splendour, now wears braids 
ending in tawdry curls. 

Oh Bhima, when I see that matchless archer wearing braids and living 
in the midst of women, I am weighed down by despair. That noble 
Kshatriya, master of all the Devastras and storehouse of all the shastras, 
now wears women’s earrings. The man whom the greatest kings could not 
contain in battle, just as the waters of the oceans cannot cover the 
continents, is now dancing-master to Virata’s daughter and waits on her in 
disguise. 

My heart clenches in grief for Arjuna, the rumble of whose chariot- 
wheels made the Earth with all that rests on her tremble, whose birth 
banished Kunti’s sorrows, that most honoured Kshatriya who is your 
younger brother, when I see him coming towards me with golden earrings 
and conch-shell bracelets, Bhimasena. 

Dhananjaya, whom no bowman in this world can match, spends his 
time singing and surrounded by women. When I see Partha, peerless in 
virtue, truth and honour, the most admired man in the world, dressed as a 
woman, sorrow overwhelms me. The sight of the godlike Arjuna in the 
midst of women in the hall of music, like a bull-elephant surrounded by 
she-elephants, waiting on king Virata of the Matsyas, makes my mind reel. 

My mother-in-law Kunti does not know that Dhananjaya is in such 
distress, nor does she know that the son of Kurus, Ajatasatru, thanks to his 
disastrous addiction to dice, is plunged in misery. 

Bhima, when I see the youngest of you all, Sahadeva, disguised as a 
gopa and tending cattle, I grow pale. Sahadeva’s plight is always on my 


mind and robs me of sleep; what can I say about the rest of you? Mighty- 
armed, I do not know what sin Sahadeva, Kshatriya of perfect purity, 
committed that he suffers like this. 

Bhaaratottama, when I see your beloved brother serving the king of the 
Matsyas as his cowherd, sadness floods my heart. When I see that proud 
Kshatriya, wearing clothes dyed red, giving his all to please Virata, a fever 
consumes me. 

My mother-in-law Kunti always praised the nobility and unassailable 
integrity of Sahadeva. She, who is passionately fond of her sons, wept as 
she embraced him when we were about to set out for the forest, and she 
consigned him to my care. “Sahadeva is shy, soft spoken and virtuous. He is 
also my favourite child. Yagnaseni, watch over him day and night. He is 
delicate and brave, devoted to his elder brother the king and worships him. 
Panchali, tend to him yourself,” she said. 

Pandava, how can I bear to live whilst looking at this best of Kshatriyas 
tending cows and sleeping on a bed of calf-skins? 

And then, he who wears like a crown the three qualities—beauty, 
strength and intelligence—is now the steward of Virata’s stables. How 
destiny has changed Nakula! At the sight of him hosts of enemy forces 
would flee from the battlefield; now he trains swift horses for the Matsya 
king; and sad am I to see that handsome young man wait upon the 
gorgeously bedecked Virata and parade his horses before him. 

O my Bhima, beset as I am with untold misery on account of 
Yudhishtira, how do you, slayer of foes, even dream that I could be happy? 
Listen to me, Kaunteya, while I tell you all my other heartaches, which are 
worse than these and which cause me to grow emaciated with anxiety, 
although you are alive.’ ” 


CANTO 20 
KICHAKA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) raupadi says to Bhima, ‘Alas, because of that reckless gambler, I 
am now under Sudeshna’s command and live in the palace as a 
sairandhri. Parantapa, it is a pitiable condition that I, a princess and a queen, 
am now forced to endure. I wait in torment for the end of our exile while I 
cling to the belief that success, victory and defeat are not permanent; and I 
live in hope that my husbands will rise up again. Prosperity and adversity 
rotate like a wheel; and so I live in expectation of my husbands’ return to 
prosperity. The same fate that brings victory also fetches defeat. This hope 
keeps me alive. 

Perhaps, Bhimasena, you should think of me as being dead? I have 
heard that those who give great charity, may, in time, have to beg; those 
who kill may themselves be killed; and those who vanquish others may 
themselves be overthrown by their enemies. Destiny will prevail and is 
inexorable. And so, like a once dry tank filling again, I await the return of 
good fortune. All the same, when a trade that has flourished by dint of hard 
work fails, a truly wise person should never try to make it prosper again. 

Whether or not you want to hear it, I will explain why I say these 
things, for my sorrow is great. Who else but I, Drupada’s daughter and 
queen of Pandu’s sons, would want to live after sinking to such depths? My 
desolation is a shame upon the entire Kuru race, as well as the Panchalas 
and the Pandavas. There is no other woman who has so much to be joyful 


about, having a father, brothers, a father-in-law and sons, who finds herself 
in a state such as mine is today. 

I must have done something to anger Dhatri when I was young to 
deserve this. Yes, see how pale and worn I am; even a life of hardship in the 
forests did not have this effect. Bhima, you know how sublimely happy I 
used to be, but now I am reduced to servitude and I have no peace. 

The awesome archer Dhananjaya now lives like a fire that has been 
extinguished; I attribute this to destiny. It is impossible for men to know the 
karma of living beings, O Prithaputra. Your fall could not have been 
averted. 

She who has you and your brothers to care for her, men who are like 
Indra himself; she who is chaste and noble by birth and nature, has now to 
attend to the comforts of her inferiors. Pandava, look at my plight; I do not 
deserve this. You can see how kaala has inverted the just order of things. 

Ah, she who had the whole Earth to the edge of the sea under her sway 
is now the sairandhri of Sudeshna and lives in fear of her. She who had 
protectors to walk before and behind her now walks before or behind 
Sudeshna. This wrteched servitude is something else that I cannot bear, 
Kaunteya. Listen to me; she who had never, not even for her own use, 
ground ointments, except for Kunti, now makes sandalwood paste for 
others. Look at my hands; oh, they were never like this.’ 

She shows him her callused hands and continues, ‘She who had no fear, 
not of Kunti or of you and your brothers, now lives as a slave in fear of 
Virata; she worries about what that king might say to her about the 
preparation of the salves, for he does not like sandalwood ground by 
others.’ 

And Krishnaa begins to sob, her streaming eyes on Bhima’s face. With 
tear-choked sighs, she stirs his heart powerfully, saying, ‘Bhima, I must 
have offended the gods so terribly that, in my misery, I am still alive when I 
would rather be dead.’ 

Then that slayer of Kshatriya foes, Vrikodara, puts his face in his wife’s 
delicate, scarred hands and begins to weep bitterly. He holds her hands in 
his and speaks to her through his tears,” said Vaisampayana. 


CANTO 21 
KICHAKA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


“RB himasena says, ‘Fie on the might of my arms and fie on the 
Gandiva of Phalguna, for as your hands, once soft and smooth, 
are now covered with calluses. I would have brought carnage to Virata’s 
court if Yudhishtira had not forbidden me. Like an elephant a melon, I 
would have crushed Kichaka’s head, drunk with his own power as he is. 

Krishnaa, when I saw Kichaka kick you, in my mind I slaughtered the 
Matsyas. Yudhishtira forbade me with a look and pressing down on my 
thumbs; I understood and stayed my hand. 

Our kingdom has been taken from us and I have not yet killed the 
Kurus; I have still to collect the heads of Suyodhana, Karna, Subala’s son 
Sakuni and the bestial Dussasana. And this eats away at my very entrails 
and turns constantly in my heart like a dagger’s point. 

Noble one of the graceful hips, do not sacrifice your virtue at the altar of 
wrath; suppress your anger instead. If Yudhishtira hears your rebuke, he 
will take his own life. If Dhananjaya and the twins hear you say what you 
have to me, they will do the same. And if they kill themselves, I could not 
bear to live. 

In olden days Sarjati’s daughter, the beautiful Sukanya, followed 
Chyavana of Bhrigu’s race into the forest; that sage’s mind was under such 
control that ants built a hill over him while he was lost in dhyana. 

You may have heard of how Indrasena, beautiful as Narayani, followed 
her thousand-year-old husband. 


You have surely heard about Janaka’s daughter Sita, the princess of 
Videha, who followed her lord when he went to live in the forest; and how 
that lovely one, Rama’s beloved wife, was beset by calamities and 
persecuted by Ravana, but was finally reunited with him. 

Then, there was the young and captivating Lopamudra, who renounced 
all pleasures of the material world and followed Agastya Muni. 

Lofty-minded and flawless Savitri followed Dyumatsena’s brave son 
Satyavan into Yamaloka. 

You have all the virtues that these chaste women possessed, my adored 
Krishnaa. Be patient for just a little longer; in a fortnight the thirteenth year 
will be over, and you will be Queen again.’ 

Draupadi says, ‘I cannot bear my sorrows, and grief alone makes me 
weep; mighty Bhima, I do not condemn Yudhishtira for there is no point 
brooding over the past; instead one should live for today. I am pained by the 
efforts that the jealous Sudeshna makes to keep the king far from me. 
Knowing her anxiety, vile Kichaka constantly propositions me. 

Subduing my anger and disgust, I said to the lustful wretch, “Kichaka, 
be warned. I am the beloved wife of five Gandharvas, and they will kill you, 
brazen one.” 

The arrogant son of a Suta replied, “I am not in the least bit afraid of 
Gandharvas, O sairandhri of the sweet smiles. I can mow down a hundred 
thousand of them in battle. So, timid one, give yourself to me.” 

I said to the lust-maddened Suta, “You are nothing before my illustrious 
Gandharvas. I am virtuous and born of noble blood so I never wish death on 
anyone. Kichaka, that is the only reason you are still alive!” 

The fiend just laughed loudly. Constantly entreated by her brother and 
moved by her love for him, Sudeshna sent me to him saying, “O sairandhri, 
bring me wine from Kichaka’s palace.” 

When he saw me, the Suta’s son first tried to woo me with cunning 
flattery and, when that failed, he grew furious and was about to ravish me. I 
pushed him down and ran to the king, but Kichaka followed me into the 
royal court; ah, he flung me to the ground and kicked me in Virata’s very 
presence and in full view of Kanka and many others, including charioteers, 
royal courtiers, elephant-riders and merchants. I rebuked the king and 
Kanka repeatedly, but Virata did nothing to stop Kichaka, nor did he punish 
him. 


Kichaka’s influence over Virata is powerful indeed. He is cruel and 
bereft of dharma. The queen and king are very fond of him although he is 
fearless, proud, sinful, adulterous and obsessed with pleasure; he has 
amassed vast wealth from the king and he forcibly takes anything he likes 
from other men, even if they cry in distress. 

He does not walk the path of dharma, nor does he do anything virtuous. 
He is black-hearted, vicious, haughty, debased and licentious. Although I 
have rejected him repeatedly, if he sees me again he will violate me; and if 
that happens, I will take my life. Bhima, all your dharma and restraint will 
become meaningless if I die. You might keep your pledge to Yudhishtira, 
but you will lose your wife. 

By protecting a wife, the children are protected, and by protecting the 
children, one’s soul is preserved. In a wife one’s own self is born, and that 
is why wise men call her Jaya. A wife must also protect her husband, 
thinking, “How else will he be born from me?” 

I have heard Brahmanas declare the duties of the different varnas, and 
they say that a Kshatriya has no other duty than to put down his enemies. 
Kichaka kicked me in the presence of Yudhishtira and you. 

Mighty Bhima, it was you who saved me from terrible Jatasura; with 
your brother’s help, you defeated Jayadratha. Now kill this evil Kichaka 
who has humiliated me. Confident of being the king’s favourite, Kichaka 
swells my sorrows. Break this lust-driven creature’s body like a pot of clay 
against a stone. 

Be warned, O Bhaarata, if another day dawns on this man who is the 
source of my grief, I will drink poison and put an end to my life. Before I 
am forced by Kichaka, I think it would be better that I die here in your 
presence.’ 

Krishnaa hides her face in Bhima’s chest and weeps. And he holds her 
close and tries to console her as best he can. Soothing the slender daughter 
of Drupada with words of good sense and reason, he wipes her streaming 
face with his hands. Thinking of Kichaka, Bhima is dry-mouthed with rage; 
he moistens his lips and speaks to the distraught Draupadi.” 


CANTO 22 
KICHAKA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


“BR hima says, ‘I will do as you wish, my gentle one; I will kill 
Kichaka and all his men. Yagnaseni, tomorrow evening, put aside 
your sorrow and arrange to meet Kichaka in the dance-hall. The king of the 
Matsyas had it built for the princess and her companions to use during the 
day; the girls return to their homes at night, and there is a finely wrought 
wooden couch there. From that couch I will send Kichaka to his ancestors. 

My slender Panchali, you must bring him there and be careful that no 
one sees you.’ 

Having spoken thus to each other and having shed tears, they wait 
impatiently for the night to end. The next morning Kichaka rises and goes 
to the palace, where he accosts Draupadi again. 

He says, ‘I threw you down in the court and kicked you in the presence 
of the king, and no one did anything because none dare face my wrath. This 
should show you that Virata is king of the Matsyas only in name. As 
senapati of the forces of the realm, I am the real lord of the Matsyas. Gentle 
one, yield willingly to me and I will be your slave. You of the graceful hips, 
I will give you a hundred nishkas even now; I will employ a hundred 
eunuchs and a hundred women to attend on you; I will give you chariots 
drawn by mares of the finest pedigree. Let us be together, timid one.’ 

Draupadi replies, ‘O Kichaka, I have one condition. Neither your 
friends nor your brothers should know of your relations with me. I am 


mortally afraid of being found out by my great Gandharvas. Promise me 
this, and I will give myself to you gladly.’ 

Kichaka cries, ‘Let it be as you wish! I am lost in love of you of the 
shapely legs that taper like the stem of a plantain tree. I will come alone to 
your apartments to be with you so that your Gandharvas will know 
nothing.’ 

Draupadi says, ‘No! When it is dark, go to the dance-hall that the 
Matsya king has built. The girls who use it during the day return to their 
homes at night. The Gandharvas do not know that place, and we will escape 
their notice.’ 

Dwelling on her conversation with Kichaka, impatient for revenge, the 
rest of the day seems as long as a month to Krishnaa. Not dreaming that it 
was Death who had assumed the perfect form of a sairandhri, Kichaka goes 
home in a fog of delight. His mind athrong with images of passion, he 
anoints his body with fragrant oils and adorns himself with jewels and 
garlands. All the while absorbed with thoughts of that doe-eyed beauty, he 
waits for the interminable day to end. 

The magnificent Kichaka, who is about to lose his beauty forever, seems 
to shine more radiantly, like the flame of a lamp before it dies. Deceived by 
lust into trusting Draupadi, absorbed in lascivious imaginings of his tryst 
with her, Kichaka hardly notices the day pass. 

Meanwhile, Draupadi goes to Bhima, stands before him in the kitchen, 
and she of the raven-black tresses says, ‘O Parantapa, I have asked Kichaka 
to meet me in the hall of dance. He will come there alone at midnight. Kill 
him there, Bhima, this Sutaputra Kichaka who is so vain that he dares mock 
my Gandharva husbands. O strongest of all Kshatriyas, despatch him from 
the world, just as Krishna did the Naga Kaliya from the Yamuna. Pandava, 
dry my tears; and may you be blessed by protecting your own and Kshatriya 
dharma.’ 

Bhima says, ‘Lovely one, this good news you bring is all I need to hear. 
I feel as elated as I did when I killed Hidimba. I swear by truth itself, by the 
lives of my brothers and by dharma that I will kill Kichaka even as Indra 
did Vritrasura. I will tear him apart, out in the open if I need to, and if the 
Matsyas fight on his part, I will kill them too. 

And when that is done, I will kill Duryodhana and win back the Earth. 
If he wants to, let Yudhishtira continue to pay homage to the king of 
Matsyas.’ 


Knowing Bhima and the danger his unleashed fury could put them in, 
Draupadi says, ‘My Bhima, kill him in secret so that you do not break your 
word to me.’ 

Bhima reassures her, “I will kill Kichaka and all his friends tonight, but 
secretly and under cover of darkness. Perfect one, like an elephant crushes a 
mango, I will crush the vile Kichaka’s head, for daring to crave the 
unattainable.’ 

When night falls, Bhima covers himself in a silken sheet and goes in 
advance to the meeting-place where he lies on the fine couch like a lion 
waiting to ambush a deer, waiting for Kichaka. The Matsya senapati arrives 
at the appointed time, perfumed and adorned and quivering in anticipation 
of meeting the sairandhri of his dreams. 

Instead, in that pitch-black hall the evil one encounters Bhima of the 
matchless prowess, who is already there, waiting on the couch. Like a moth 
to a flame, or a small animal to a lion, Kichaka comes to Bhima, death 
personified, lying covered on the couch, smouldering at the thought of what 
the Matsya senapati said and did to Krishnaa. 

Filled with ecstatic expectation, lecherous Kichaka comes near Bhima 
and says, smiling, ‘O you of the arched brows, I have given you all kinds of 
precious things from my store-houses, a hundred maids, many beautiful 
clothes and a fine mansion with an antahpura full of lovely young sakhis, 
and furnished with everything to amuse and entertain you. Having arranged 
all these for you, I have come running to your side. You must know that 
women admire me, saying that no one is as handsome as I or as richly 
clothed.’ 

Pretending to be Draupadi, Bhima whispers, ‘I am glad that you are so 
handsome and it is just that you praise yourself. But I do not think you 
would ever have felt a touch as pleasurable as mine. You are gallant and 
strong, and your fingers burn my skin. You are an artist at lovemaking and a 
favourite with women, and surely there is none other like you in this 
world!’ 

Then, suddenly, mighty-armed, splendid and terrifyingly powerful 
Bhimasena, son of Kunti, rises from the couch and says with a laugh, 
‘Wretch, today your sister will see me drag you along the ground, as lion 
does an elephant he has killed. With you dead, the sairandhri and we, her 
husbands, will live in peace.’ 


Saying this, Bhima takes Kichaka by his flower-decked hair. But the 
strong Kichaka pulls loose from Bhima’s grasp and seizes Bhima’s arms. 
Full of fury, those two lions among men fight like two bull-elephants over a 
female in season, why, bringing to mind the long-ago titanic battle between 
the Vanara brothers Vali and Sugriva. 

Their arms raised like five-hooded snakes, Bhima and Kichaka tear at 
each other in a frenzy of fury. Kichaka’s onslaught takes Bhima by surprise, 
but the Pandava does not falter. 

Fiercely they fight, locked together, dragging each other this way and 
that, like two humped bulls, like snarling tigers. With teeth and nails, they 
fight unarmed; like elephants with temples cracked and oozing the wild 
juice of musth, they fling each other down. When Bhima seizes Kichaka, 
Kichaka the strong hurls him violently to the ground. The crash of arm 
against arm resounds like splitting bamboo. 

Then summoning all his great strength, Vrikodara hurls Kichaka across 
the dance hall; he tosses him about like a tree in a hurricane. Besieged by 
Bhima, Kichaka begins to tremble with weakness but then he repels the 
Pandava and even Bhima stumbles. Kichaka strikes him with his knees and 
fells him, but Bhima gets up quickly, like Yama himself with mace in hand. 

At midnight in that lonely place, intoxicated with their own strength, the 
Suta and the Pandava battle; and the whole edifice shudders with their roars. 

Bhima clenches his great fist and strikes Kichaka squarely on his chest, 
but his lust for Panchali gives Kichaka unnatural strength and he stands his 
ground, but only for a moment. The Suta is exhausted; Bhima is 
overpowering and, seeing Kichaka weaken, Bhima pulls him to his chest 
and begins to crush him in iron arms. Panting in rage, Vrikodara seizes 
Kichaka’s hair and roars like a hungry tiger that has killed some massive 
prey. Knowing his enemy is near the end, Vrikodara holds him fast, as if 
trussing an animal with rope. 

The dazed Kichaka roars horribly like a broken trumpet as Bhima 
whirls him round and round; and then, to appease Krishnaa’s anger, 
Vrikodara grasps his enemy’s neck and squeezes it with his hands. By now 
all Kichaka’s limbs are broken, and his eyelids are swollen shut, but 
Vrikodara smashes his knees into Kichaka’s belly and unrelentingly crushes 
the body of that man, the worst of his clan, and kills him as if he is an 
animal. 


At last, seeing that his prey lies motionless, Bhima rolls the inert 
Kichaka on the ground and, with a heartfelt sigh of deep release, says, ‘This 
dog who wanted to ravish our wife, this thorn in the flesh of the sairandhri 
is dead. I have discharged my debt to my brothers, and I am at peace.’ 

Then, still red-eyed, Bhima rises away from Kichaka, whose clothes 
and ornaments have been torn off but whose eyes roll in his head as his 
blood-drenched body still twitches in spasms. Wringing his hands and 
biting his lip in undiminished fury, Bhima launches himself once more upon 
his enemy. 

He thrusts Kichaka’s head, neck, arms and legs into his torso and 
reduces him to a shapeless mass, as the wielder of the Pinaka once did the 
deer which Yagna became to escape his ire. Having crushed him to pulp, 
Bhima rolls Kichaka into a ball of flesh, and he calls out to Krishnaa, hiding 
in a corner, watching riveted, her breast heaving in excitement. 

Mighty Bhimasena grinds Kichaka’s body under his feet and says to 
Draupadi, ‘Come, Panchali, and see what has become of the lecher!’ 

And, showing Kichaka’s body to Draupadi by the light of a lamp, he 
says to her, ‘Gentle, chaste one, I will kill anyone who lusts after you, 
exactly as I have done Kichaka.’ 

Having accomplished his difficult task to please Krishnaa, and having 
pacified his own rage, Bhima leaves Krishnaa, and hurries back to his 
kitchen. Her torment assuaged by Kichaka’s death, Draupadi, best among 
all women, is ecstatic. 

She calls to the guards of the dance-hall, “Come all of you and look at 
Kichaka who lusted after other mens’ wives; look where he lies slain by my 
Gandharva husbands.’ 

The guards of the dance-hall hear her and rush in, torches in hand. They 
see Kichaka’s bloodied, dismembered body on the ground. They gaze at 
him in shock and say in amazement, ‘Where is his neck and where are his 
legs?’ 

When they see how their general has been slain, surely by superhuman 
forces, they decide that he has indeed been killed by a Gandharva.” 


CANTO 23 
KICHAKA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Kichaka’s kinsmen rush to the dance-hall, see 

him there and gather round his body, wailing loudly. The sight of 
him lying there mangled, like a dead tortoise dragged out of the water on to 
dry ground, is too much for them; the hair on their bodies stands on end in 
horror. They take his body, crushed by Bhima like a Danava by Indra, and 
prepare it for the funeral rites. 

The Suta clansmen assembled there then notice Krishnaa of the perfect 
body leaning against a pillar and exclaim, ‘This loose woman, for whom 
Kichaka has given his life, must die. Or even better, instead of killing her 
here, let us cremate her alive on the pyre of the one who desired her. It is 
our dharma to do what the dead Sutaputra would have wanted.’ 

They go to Virata and say, “It is because of her that Kichaka has died. It 
is only right that she is cremated along with him, and you must give us 
leave to do this.’ 

Virata is aware of the extent of the power the Suta wields and agrees to 
let the sairandhri be burnt alive with the body of the Suta’s son. Kichaka’s 
clansmen violently seize lotus-eyed Krishnaa, who is paralysed with terror. 
They tie up the slender-waisted one, haul her onto the funeral cart and set 
off excitedly for the smasana. 

O King, as she is forcibly carried to the burning ground by the Sutas, 
the chaste Krishnaa, who is protected by her husbands, cries out aloud to 
them, ‘Jaya! Jayanta! Vijaya! Jayatsena! Jayadbala! The Sutas are taking 


me away! O swift Gandharvas, whose chariot-wheels rumble and whose 
bowstrings sound like thunderclaps, hear me. Oh, the Sutas are going to 
burn me alive!’ 

Bhima hears Krishnaa’s cries, leaps out of his bed without a moment’s 
thought and roars, “I hear you, sairandhri! Have no more fear of the Sutas, 
gentle one.’ 

Bhima of the mighty arms stretches his body and dresses with care. He 
creeps out of the palace, climbs a tree and vaults over the lofty city wall. He 
runs to the smasana, where Kichaka’s kinsmen have gone, and he charges 
the Sutas with dreadful roars. 

On his way, he sees a large tree, tall as a palmyra, with a gigantic trunk 
and withered top-branches. Bhima grasps this tree that spans ten vyamas 
and uproots it as easily as an elephant would. With that tree across his 
shoulders, looking like Yama with his mace, the Kshatriya runs at the Sutas. 
In his wake, banyans, pipals and kinsukas crash to the ground. 

The Sutas see Bhima rushing towards them like a furious lion; they 
tremble in panic and say fearfully to each other, ‘Look! The Gandharva 
comes full of rage, with an uprooted tree in his hands. It is the sairandhri 
who has put us in danger; let us set her free.’ 

Staring at the tree uprooted by Bhimasena, they release Draupadi and 
run frantically back towards the city. Seeing them run away, Vayu’s mighty 
son flings the tree at the fleeing Sutas and, just as Indra killed the Danavas, 
despatches a hundred and five of them to Yamaloka. O King, he frees 
Draupadi from her bonds and comforts her. 

Irrepressible Vrikodara says to the agitated Panchali, her face bathed in 
tears, ‘See, gentle one, I have killed those that wronged you. Krishnaa, 
return to the city; you need no longer be afraid. I will take another way back 
to the palace kitchens.’ 

Bhaarata, this is how one hundred and five Kichaka clansmen are slain; 
and their corpses lie on the ground like a copse of trees felled by a 
hurricane. The slaughtered Sutas number one hundred and five; including 
Virata’s senapati Kichaka they number one hundred and six. The men and 
women gathered there watch the incredible feat and are all spellbound, O 
Bhaarata, speechless.” 


CANTO 24 
KICHAKA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “The citizens witness the massacre of the Sutas 

and report back to Virata, ‘O great king, the mighty sons of Sutas 
have all been killed by the Gandharvas and lie scattered on the earth like 
mountain peaks fractured by thunder. The sairandhri has been released and 
is returning to the palace. Her presence here will endanger your kingdom. 
The sairandhri is unnaturally beautiful, and her Gandharvas are as powerful 
as she is lovely. Men are irresistibly drawn to her. O Virata, protect your 
kingdom from the vengeance of the Gandharvas for the wrongs done to 
her.’ 

Virata, lord of vast hosts, says, ‘Perform the last rites of the Sutas. Let 
all the slain men of Kichaka’s clan be cremated on one pyre with gemstones 
and frankincense.’ 

Then, fearful of what might happen, the king says to his queen 
Sudeshna, ‘When the sairandhri comes back, say to her from me, 
“Blessings upon you, my beautiful sairandhri. You are free to go wherever 
you wish. You of the graceful hips, what your Gandharva husbands did has 
alarmed the king. Because these Gandharvas watch jealously over you, he 
dares not say this to you himself. A woman, however, cannot give offence 
by speaking to you; and so, he speaks through one.” ’ 

Saved by Bhimasena’s slaughter of the Sutas, now the intelligent 
Krishnaa has no cause for fear. However, after she bathes her body and 
washes her clothes, she approaches the city, still nervous, like a doe 


frightened by a tiger. Rajan, terrified of the Gandharvas, the people run in 
all directions when they see her. Some even shut their eyes! 

Panchali sees Bhima standing at the palace-gates like an infuriated 
tusker. With eyes wide in adoring wonder, Draupadi whispers to him so no 
one else can hear, ‘I salute you, O prince of Gandharvas, my saviour!’ 

Bhima declares loudly, “All who have been living in servitude or debt, 
who hear these words of hers, are hereby freed from all their obligations.’ 

Draupadi sees Arjuna in the dance-hall teaching Virata’s daughters 
dance. When Krishnaa arrives there, all the girls come out with Arjuna to 
meet her. 

They say, ‘Sairandhri, it is fortunate indeed that you have been rescued 
from danger, and you are lucky to return safe. We are glad that the Sutas 
who abused you are dead.’ 

Brihannala says, ‘How were you saved, sairandhri? And how did those 
sinful men die? I want to hear exactly what happened.’ 

The sairandhri replies, ‘Brihannala, you live contentedly in the women’s 
apartments. Why do you concern yourself with what has happened to a 
mere sairandhri? You do not face the trials that I have been through. Your 
questions are only to ridicule me in my distress.’ 

Brihannala says, ‘Blessed one, Brihannala, too, has sorrows of her own. 
She has become as low as an animal. Dear sairandhri, you do not 
understand this. I have lived with you and you with us; when you are beset 
with sorrow, who does not grieve for you? But no one can read another’s 
heart, and you do not know what I feel, gentle Malini.’ 

Draupadi then goes with the girls to the antahpura to see Sudeshna. 
When she comes before the queen, Virata’s wife says to her, ‘Sairandhri, I 
set you free this moment to go wherever you wish. The king is fearful 
because of what your Gandharvas have done. Lovely one, you are young 
and your beauty is without compare in this world. Besides, you are an 
object of desire for all men, and the Gandharvas are easily provoked to 
anger.’ 

The sairandhri says, ‘O gracious queen, I beg that the king allow me to 
live here for just another thirteen days. The Gandharvas, too, will be 
grateful to him for this. Then they will do what the king asks of them and 
take me away from here. Virata will reap great benefits if he agrees.’ ” 


CANTO 25 
GO-HARANA PARVA 


V aisampayana said, “O Rajan, the slaughter of Kichaka and _ his 

kinsmen fills people with awe. The talk in the city and provinces is 
that the king’s cook Ballava is as brave and mighty a warrior as Kichaka but 
with the notable difference that Kichaka was cruel, lecherous and 
dishonoured the wives of other men; and that this was why that sinner was 
killed by the Gandharvas. In provinces all across the kingdom people say 
this of the hitherto invincible Kichaka, scourge of his enemies. 

Meanwhile, the spies sent by Dritarashtra’s son comb villages, towns 
and kingdoms. They fulfil their assignment and return to Nagarupa, pleased 
with at least one thing they have learnt. 

Dhritarashtra’s son, Duryodhana of the Kurus, sits in his court with 
Drona, Karna, Kripa, noble Bhishma, his own brothers and the great 
warriors the Trigartas, when his spies return to him. 

Their leader says ‘O Lord of men, we have searched meticulously for 
the Pandavas. We scoured unpeopled jungles full of deer and other animals, 
and thick with all kinds of trees and plants; we looked in wooded glades, 
but we did not discover where Pritha’s sons may have gone. We searched 
everywhere for their footprints—in the mountains and on their unscaleable 
peaks, in every kingdom, in provinces and towns and in densely peopled 
cities. We found no sign of the sons of Pandu; bull among men, they seem 
to have vanished without a trace. 


Although we followed those Kshatriyas like shadows we lost them 
suddenly and do not know where they are now. We even followed their 
chariots and gleaned some information. The charioteers reached Dwaravati 
without the sons of Pritha. Rajan, neither the Pandavas nor the chaste 
Krishnaa are in that Yadava city. 

Since, we have not been able to discover where they went or where they 
are now. We must inform you that the sons of Pandu have disappeared 
without trace. We know what the Pandavas are like and the feats of which 
they are capable. Lord of men, tell us what more we should do to discover 
them.’ 

The man pauses, then continues, ‘However, we do have some news 
which might please you. The senapati of the Matsya king, evil Kichaka who 
repeatedly vanquished and brutally killed the Trigartas, is dead along with 
all his kinsmen. They were killed by invisible Gandharvas. We were 
delighted to hear this news, O Kaurava. 

Lord, now command us what we should do next. 


3:99 


CANTO 26 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Duryodhana reflects a while on what his spies 
tell him and then addresses his courtiers. 

He says, ‘It is a difficult task but you must find the sons of Pandu, at any 
cost, in this the thirteenth year, which they must pass undiscovered by us. 
Most of their ajnatavasa is already over; only a short time of it remains. If 
the Pandavas, who are punctilious about keeping their word, can stay 
hidden for the rest of this year, they will have fulfilled their oath. They will 
then return like mighty elephants with rent temples, or like venomous 
snakes; and filled with wrath as they will be, their vengeance on the Kurus 
will be terrible. 

Do whatever is necessary, and immediately, to find the Pandavas and 
make them go back into the forest, swallowing their rage like the bitterest 
bile. Use any means; make this kingdom peaceful and harmonious with no 
discontent, rebellion or enmity anywhere, and secure our borders.’ 

Karna adds to this, saying, “Let better, more cunning spies be sent out 
immediately, Bhaarata. Let them disguise themselves well and travel 
throughout the land, through every populous kingdom and province. Let 
them make their enquires wherever learned men gather; in pleasant rural 
retreats; in the inner apartments of palaces; in shrines and holy tirthas; in 
deep mines and other secret places. The search for the disguised sons of 
Pandu must be exhaustive and carried out by an army of expert spies who 
are able, conscientious, and who keep themselves hidden and know the 


Pandavas and their ways well. Let them search river banks, holy tirthas, 
villages and towns, asramas, in mountains and caves.’ 

The bestial Dussasana says to his elder brother, ‘Lord of men, this time 
send out only those spies in whom we have complete confidence and pay 
them in advance. We approve of Karna’s plan as well. Let these spies renew 
their search but more rigorously. Let others, too, go from province to 
province, combing every village and town, every forest and hill. 

Yet, I do not believe that we will discover the Pandavas. They are surely 
well concealed; perhaps they have crossed the ocean. Or it may be that, 
despite their strength and courage, wild animals have devoured them. 
Possibly they have died in some rare, unforeseen circumstance. Therefore, 
O my brother, do not be anxious but do the best you can to achieve what 
you want.’ ” 


CANTO 27 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Drona says, ‘Men like the Pandavas do not die 

in the ways you imagine. They are masters of all sciences and arts; 
they are brave, intelligent and have all their senses under control; they are 
humble and honest; they obediently follow Yudhishtira Dharmaraja. He is 
knowledgeable about neeti, artha and dharma; he loves them like a father; 
he is unswervingly truthful and lives strictly by the dictates of dharma. 

The Pandavas are devoted to their illustrious elder brother, who is gifted 
with great intelligence, who never knowingly harms anyone and who, in 
turn, listens to his younger brothers: such men never die in the ways that 
you so fondly hope. 

Why should Yudhishtira not be able to restore the prosperity of his 
noble and devoted brothers? They are only waiting for their exile to end. To 
my mind men like these never perish misfortunately. Therefore, without 
wasting time and with careful thought, do what has to be done. 

Also, think hard and deeply where the Pandavas might have hidden 
themselves. They are spiritually disciplined, pure and heroic Kshatriyas, 
and it will be difficult indeed to find them. Yudhishtira is intelligent, 
possesses every virtue, is devoted to truth, principled, a holy man and the 
embodiment of immeasurable tejas. This son of Pritha can make ashes of 
his enemies with a mere glance. 

Knowing all this, do what you think you should. Let us search for them 
once more by sending out holy Brahmanas and well-schooled Charanas, 


and others who know about those peerless Kshatriyas.’ ” 


CANTO 28 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Shantanu’s son Bhishma, great uncle to the 
Kurus, who is well-versed in the Vedas, who is conscious of the 
appropriateness and timeliness of things, and who has a deep knowledge of 
the dictates of dharma applauds Acharya Drona’s words. He speaks to the 
Bhaaratas with sage advice that would beneift them; what he says is dharma 
and expresses his fondness for Yudhishtira. His words are honest and 
commendable; impartial and revered by the wise are the words of Bhishma. 
The Kuru pitama says, ‘I approve of what Acharya Drona says; he 
knows everything that has transpired. I say this without hesitation. The 
Pandavas are blessed with every auspicious mark; they are strict in their 
observance of dharma-vratas and have studied the Vedas; they are devout 
and know all the sciences; they obey their elders and are always truthful. 
They know how to use time wisely; they have been true to the oath they 
have sworn; they are honourable and principled; and they live by Kshatriya 
Dharma. They are always obedient to the exalted Kesava; they are above 
reproach and have prowess beyond compare; and they are the guardians of 
Rishis. Misfortune can never put down those noble Kshatriyas. 

Their noble qualities support the sons of Pandu who live in hiding, as 
they vowed to; and they will not die; of this I am convinced. Therefore, 
Bhaarata, let us be thoughtful about how we should deal with them. It 
would not be wise to use spies to discover where they are. I will tell you 
what I think we ought to do about the Pandavas. 


Understand that what I say is not from ill-will towards you. I would 
never offer devious advice to anyone, for one should only ever offer honest 
counsel. My child Suyodhana, regardless of circumstances, the wise man 
who is devoted to dharma and respects the wisdom of elders should always 
speak the truth if he wants to acquire virtue. And so, I am bound to say that 
I disagree with the rest of you about where Yudhishtira spends the thirteenth 
year of his exile. 

Child, the ruler of the city or province where Yudhishtira Dharmaraja 
lives will suffer no misfortune. The people of that kingdom will be 
charitable, generous, humble and modest. Their speech will be pleasing; 
they will be moderate, truthful, cheerful and healthy. Their conduct will be 
virtuous, and they will be skilled at what they do. The people who live 
where Yudhishtira is, will be without envy, malice, vanity or pride; and all 
will faithfully keep their svadharma. 

Where king Yudhishtira lives, Vedic hymns will be chanted everywhere 
and yagnas performed; the last libations will always be fully poured, and 
gifts to Brahmanas will be generous. The clouds will bring abundant rain, 
the harvests will be plentiful and safety will prevail. Every grain of paddy 
will be full, every fruit juicy, flower garlands fragrant and the conversation 
of the people will be friendly. 

Where Yudhishtira lives, the breezes will be fragrant, the meetings of 
men always congenial, and never will there be any cause for fear. Cattle 
will thrive in that kingdom, in robust health and numbers; milk, curds and 
butter will be sweet and nutritious. Every kind of grain will be wholesome, 
and all food will be full of taste. 

Where Yudhishtira Dharmaraja dwells the five senses will be finely 
tuned, the lands all around beautiful and the Dvijas virtuous and steadfast in 
their duties. 

Indeed, in the place where the Pandavas spend this thirteenth year of 
their exile the people will be contented, cheerful and free of sorrow and 
suffering. They will be devoted to the gods and guests, and worship them 
with equal reverence. They will be generous, tireless and assiduously 
practice all the virtues. 

Where Yudhishtira is, the people will avoid evil and only strive for what 
is good. They will conduct yagnas and observe appropriate vows. They will 
hate lies and always work for what is auspicious and beneficial. They will 
only aspire to achieve what is honourable; they will be principled and, 


because they observe proper vows, they will constantly acquire spiritual 
merit and great punya. 

O child, even keen Brahmanas will not discover Yudhishtira 
Dharmaraja, who is a repository of intelligence, charity, tranquillity of soul, 
forgiveness, modesty, prosperity, fame, great vitality and compassion for all 
living things; how, then will your common spies find him, when he wants to 
remain hidden? Yudhishtira lives disguised in a place such as I have 
described. I need say no more about his exemplary life. 

If you have any faith in me, O prince of Kurus, think carefully about 
what I have said and do what you think best.’ ” 


CANTO 29 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Now Saradvata’s son Kripa says, ‘What 

Bhishma pitama says is full of good sense; it is in keeping with 
dharma and artha, reasonable and worthy of him. But listen to my views as 
well. 

You owe it to yourself to put forth your agents and discover where the 
Pandavas are and then to do whatever benefits you. My child, anyone who 
is concerned about his own welfare should not disregard even an ordinary 
enemy. What can I say then about the sons of Pandu who are master 
Kshatriyas? When the time comes for the return of the Pandavas who, 
having lived twelve years in the forest, now hide in disguise, you should 
assess your own military strength and that of other kings, both those allied 
to you and those who are loyal to Yudhishtira. The return of the sons of 
Pandu is imminent. 

When their term of exile ends, the illustrious and infinitely powerful 
sons of Pritha will come back full of vigour and with vengeance on their 
minds. Be clever, Duryodhana; increase your armed forces and build up 
your treasury so that you can make a treaty with them that is to your 
advantage. Estimate your power by assessing the strengths and weaknesses 
of your allies, and the contentment and dissatisfaction, willingness or 
otherwise of your own forces. And then we must either fight the enemy or 
negotiate a treaty of peace with Yudhishtira. 


You have studied diplomacy; you are experienced in dealing with 
rebellion, corruption and loyalty, and you know when to reward or to 
punish. Attack your enemies and subdue those that are weak, and then win 
over your allies and their troops with persuasion. When you have 
augmented your army and filled your treasury, you will be able to fight any 
enemy at all, let alone the sons of Pandu who have few troops, horses or 
elephants. Follow this strategy with dharma and you will attain lasting 
happiness, Purushottama.’ ” 


CANTO 30 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Susarman, powerful king of the Trigartas, who 

has a large force of chariots of war, who suffered many and frequent 
defeats at the hands of the Matsya’s senapati Kichaka and his allies the 
Salyas, sees that the circumstances are advantageous for him and loses no 
time in speaking up. 

Susarman lets Karna see scepticism in his eyes and says to Duryodhana, 
‘My kingdom has been invaded many times by the king of the Matsyas, 
with the mighty Kichaka his senapati. The perfidious and violent general, 
whose prowess was universally famed, who was cruel and sinful in all he 
did, has been killed by unknown Gandharvas. With Kichaka’s death, Virata 
has been stripped of his strength and pride, and has no reason left to be 
courageous. Sinless friend, I think this is a good time to invade his 
kingdom, if it pleases you, the noble Karna and all the Kauravas. 

Destiny has favoured us, so let us invade Virata’s bountiful kingdom. 
We will take his jewels and other wealth, empty his coffers and share all his 
lands and villages amongst us. Let us plunder his city and seize his superb 
herds of cattle. If the Kaurava and Trigarta forces unite, we can have all his 
cattle for ourselves. Together, we can force him to beg for peace after we 
can destroy his armies. We will defeat him in fair fight, and then return 
happily to our kingdoms, and your might will surely increase by acquiring 
the Matsya kingdom.’ 


Karna says, ‘Susarman is right. The circumstances are favourable and 
promise us great profit. So, if it pleases you Anagha, let us marshal our 
forces for battle, array our divisions and set out at once. Or let Saradvata’s 
son Kripa, Drona and the wise Bhishma tell us how better to plan our 
strategy. Lord of the Earth, we must confer together and carry out our plans 
swiftly. 

Why should we worry about the sons of Pandu? They have no wealth or 
power and have either disappeared for ever or are dead. Without misgivings 
or qualms, let us go forth and forcibly take the Matsya cattle for ourselves 
and the wealth of Virata’s city.’ 

Duryodhana agrees with Karna and says to his brother Dussasana, next 
in line and always obedient to him, ‘Consult the elders and gather our 
forces without delay. We will take the Kaurava armies and march on the 
Matsya kingdom. Let king Susarman precede us, with all the chariots and 
horses he needs, as well as the Trigarta legion of foot-soldiers. 

Let Susarman attack with stealth, and we will follow closely the next 
day and pillage the prosperous Matsya lands. The Trigartas must enter the 
Matsya city without warning, surprise the cowherds and seize their fine 
herds; we will do the same the next day, swooping down from another 
direction, and together we will seize thousands of those invaluable Matsya 
cattle with the auspicious marks.’ 

The Trigarta warriors march to the south-east with their powerful foot- 
soldiers, full of hostile fervour, intent on taking Virata’s herds. Susarman 
sets out on the seventh day of the dark fortnight when the moon wanes; and, 
on the eighth day, the Kauravas and their troops capture thousands of 
Matsya cattle.” 


CANTO 31 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “O great king, the Pandavas of fathomless souls 
and measureless might, who have entered into king Virata’s service 
and live disguised in his city, reach the end of their exile. After Kichaka is 
killed, Virata, bane of his enemies, begins to rely greatly on the sons of 
Kunti. O Bhaarata, it is on the very day that the thirteenth year of the 
Pandavas’ exile ends that Susarman seizes thousands of Virata’s cattle. 

When the cattle are taken, Virata’s chief herdsman comes running into 
the city and its palace, where the king of the Matsyas sits on his throne 
surrounded by his ministers, jewel-adorned warriors all; those bulls among 
men, the Pandavas, are also present. 

In the sabha, the cowherd bows to king Virata, enhancer of his 
kingdom, and says, ‘O foremost of kings, the Trigartas have defeated us in 
battle and taken hundreds of thousands of your cattle. You must rescue our 
herds as soon as you can. O, my lord, do not lose them.’ 

The king immediately assembles the Matsya force of chariots, 
elephants, horses, foot-soldiers and flag-bearers in battle array. The kings 
and all the noblemen put on armour that gleams in beauty and in worthiness 
of its heroic owners. 

Virata’s beloved brother Satanika, next in line to him, puts on his coat 
of unyielding mail decorated with burnished gold. The second brother 
Madiraksha wears his gilded coat of mail, which can withstand every kind 
of weapon. The king himself dons his splendid kavacha, impenetrable, 


adorned with a hundred suns, a hundred circles, a hundred auspicious 
tilakas and a hundred eyes. 

The golden plating of the armour that Suryadatta puts on dazzles like 
the Sun and is as broad as a hundred fragrant kalahara lotuses. The mail of 
Virata’s eldest son, Sankha, is made of inviolable polished steel and decked 
with a hundred golden eyes. 

Thus do hundreds of godlike, mighty warriors arm and _ protect 
themselves with weapons and armour, and eagerly prepare for battle. They 
yoke their armoured horses to handsome white chariots. They hoist the 
king’s glorious Matsya standard onto his radiant ratha, adorned with gold 
and incandescent as a heavenly body. 

The other Kshatriya warriors also raise their banners of many shapes, all 
with gold thread woven into them, each with its own device. 

When all is ready, the king of the Matsyas says to Satanika, ‘Kanka, 
Ballava, Tantripala and Damagranthi—these men of the dazzling tejas, will 
surely fight for me. Give them chariots with banners; let them have 
comfortable, impervious mail and arm themselves with suitable weapons. 
They have such powerful arms, like the trunks of mighty elephants, and 
warriors’ bearing. I do not believe that they cannot fight.’ 

O Rajan, Satanika immediately orders chariots for the royal sons of 
Pritha— Yudhishtira, Bhima, Nakula and Sahadeva—and the king’s 
charioteers swiftly ready them in obedience to his command. Those 
Parantapas put on the fine coats of mail that the king gives them, those 
Kshatriyas of legendary fame in disguise. The four sons of Pritha, crushers 
of their enemies, best among all men, climb onto their chariots yoked to 
excellent horses, and their hearts sing within them. In their gold-decked 
rathas, the four master Kshatriyas, bulls of Kuru’s race, the sons of Pandu 
of undiminished might, follow Virata into battle. 

Awesome elephants in their prime—huge tuskers, wild juices of musth 
trickling from their cracked temples and making them look like dark clouds 
pouring rain—skilled and accomplished warriors mounted on them, amble 
behind the king like mountains on the move. The principal Matsya warriors 
who follow the king have eight thousand chariots, a thousand elephants and 
sixty thousand horses. 

And, O Bharatarishabha, as it follows the trail of the hoof-marks of the 
seized cattle, Virata’s army of fighting men who carry shining, powerful 
weapons, accompanied by majestic elephants, steeds of the purest 


bloodlines and glittering chariots, is extraordinary and beautiful; it is 
splendid indeed.” 


CANTO 32 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “The valorous Matsya legions leave the city and 

overtake the Trigartas in the afternoon. The two impassioned armies 
do fervid battle, and they roar in fury as weapons clash and spraks fly 
everywhere, while the Trigartas are as intent on capturing king Virata as the 
Matsya are on taking Susarman. Warriors riding enraged elephants 
manoeuvre them with spiked goads. And O Rajan, when the setting Sun is 
low on the horizon, the battle between the opposing infantries, cavalries, 
chariots and elephants is like the long ago one between the Devas and 
Asuras. The bloody encounter makes brave men’s hair stand on end, dyes 
the earth red and adds to the numbers in Yama’s kingdom. 

The two armies loose arrows, hurl spears and slash each other with 
swords, spraying gore everywhere. A cloud of dust rises in a heavy fog, 
obscuring vision and even settling on birds, which fall to the ground under 
its weight. Arrows fly so thickly that they block out the Sun, and the sky is 
lit up as if by myriad swarms of fireflies. The archers spin around and move 
their gold-inlaid bows from one hand to the other to release their arrows in 
all directions. Chariots, horsemen, foot-soldiers and elephants crash against 
each other in the dark. Warriors hew viciously at their enemies with sword 
and axe and iron club; they shoot feathered shafts, cast long, slender 
javelins, all with utmost force. But, O King, for all their fercotiy, neither 
army prevails. 


Severed heads roll in the dust, some with handsome noses divided, 
some with lips cleft, some with crimson gashes in well-tended black hair. 
And soon the battlefield is covered with the limbs of Kshatriya warriors, cut 
off and strewn everywhere like the trunks of sala trees. Beheaded faces 
glitter with earrings, and severed arms smeared in sandalwood paste 
resemble snakes as they lie on the ground, and they make the field of 
carnage eerily beautiful. 

As chariots, horsemen, foot-soldiers and elephants fight, rivulets of 
blood soak the frightful dust, and even hardened soldiers faint at the 
horrible spectacle. Warriors abandon compassion, friendship and fairness, 
and fight ferally. Though blinded by the unending deluge of arrows, 
vultures swoop down to land on the field. Still, the armies fight on, and still 
neither side can vanquish the other. 

Satanika has killed a hundred of the enemy; Visalaksha has claimed 
four hundred lives; and both these penetrate deep into the heart of the 
Trigarta formations. There, in close combat, the two Kshatriya heroes 
escalate the battle to even more savagery, as the men of both sides seize 
each other by the hair and tear at each other with their nails. 

Turning away, Satanika and Visalaksha storm a dense cluster of Trigarta 
chariots. With Suryadatta and Madiraksha behind him, Virata kills five 
hundred of the enemy, as well as eight hundred horses and five Maharathas 
fighting from great chariots. Expertly manoeuvring his own chariot, at last 
the Matsya king encounters Susarman of the Trigartas, mounted on his 
golden ratha of war. Eager for this duel, the two kings roar to drown every 
other sound on that field and rush against each other like two bulls in a cow- 
pen. Truly a bull among men, Susarman meets Virata in single combat on 
chariots. 

The enraged twain warriors shower arrows at each other even like 
clouds do torrents of rain. Both are masterly and, flitting here and there on 
the battlefield, attack each other with swords, short and bearded darts, 
maces and arrows from every direction. Virata pierces Susarman with ten 
shafts and each of his four horses with five. Irrepressible Susarman, as 
skilled in war, wounds Virata with fifty whetted shafts. In the swirling dust 
of that contention, Susarman’s and Virata’s men cannot distinguish one king 
from the other.” 


CANTO 33 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Dust and nightfall envelop the world, and the 

warriors of both sides rest awhile. When the moon emerges to dispel 
the gloom on the field and in their hearts, the Kshatriyas resume the battle 
with greater ferocity than ever, by silvery moonlight. 

With his younger brother and all his chariots, Susarman charges king 
Virata of the Matsyas. Maces in hand, the Trigarta brothers, bulls among 
Kshatriyas, leap down from their rathas and mount a furious attack on the 
enemy chariots. Savagely, the hostile legions fall at each other with maces 
and swords, scimitars and battle-axes and sharply-tempered darts. 

Routing the entire Matsya army, Susarman and his brother rush towards 
Virata. The Trigarta brothers kill Virata’s chariot horses, his charioteer and 
his two bodyguards; and, when he is stranded and alone, they capture him. 
Susarman attacks Virata brutally, much as a lust-driven man might a 
defenceless woman, flings the Matsya king into his own chariot and races 
off the field. 

The Matsyas see Virata captured and flee in terror, chaotically. 
Yudhishtira sees that panic-stricken flight and says to Bhima, ‘The Trigartas 
have taken the Matsya king. O Mahabaho, rescue him from the enemy’s 
clutches. We have lived happily in Virata’s city and wanted for nothing. You 
must free him, Bhimasena, and thereby repay our debt to him.’ 

Bhimasena replies, “My brother, I will do what you say. Watch me fight 
the enemy with my bare hands. Stand aside with our brothers and witness 


my might today. I will uproot this great tree and, using its trunk as a mace, 
rout the Trigartas.’ 

Yudhishtira sees Bhima eyeing the tree like an angry elephant and says, 
‘Bhima, do not be rash. Leave the tree alone. You must not use the tree as is 
your wont, or the people will know who you are. Instead, take some 
ordinary weapon—a bow, a spear, a sword or an axe—and rescue Virata 
without being recognised. Nakula and Sahadeva will defend your chariot, 
and together you can free the king of the Matsyas.’ 

Without more ado, Bhimasena takes up his bow and lets fly a gale of 
arrows, thick as a torrent of rain from a thundercloud. Red-eyed, he goes in 
pursuit of Susarman, roaring, ‘Stop, coward!’ at Susarman, and so 
reassuring Virata. 

Susarman sees and hears Bhima, like Yama behind him, crying, ‘Stop! 
And see what I do to you.’ 

The Trigarta king quickly takes up his bow and turns back with his 
brother. In an instant Bhima shatters all the chariots that face him. Virata 
watching, awesome Bhima demolishes thousands of chariots and slaughters 
elephants, horses, brave and skilled bowmen; this done, he pounds the foot- 
soldiers to death with his mace. 

The irrepressible Susarman sees this fearsome onslaught and thinks, 
‘My brother seems to have succumbed with his vast legion. Shall my army 
also be annihilated?’ And he draws his bowstring to his ear and shoots a 
rich salvo of keening arrows. 

Seeing the Pandavas on their chariots come to help them, the Matsya 
warriors are encouraged; they urge their horses forward and grind the 
Trigarta army into the earth. Now Virata’s son performs brave and quite 
amazing feats on the field. Yudhishtira kills a thousand hostile warriors, and 
Bhima despatches seven thousand to Yamaloka. Nakula slays seven 
hundred and Sahadeva three hundred fighting men. 

Yudhishtira attacks Maharatha Susarman with a sizzling volley of 
shafts. The enraged Susarman strikes Yudhishtira with nine arrows and 
draws blood from the Pandava’s four horses, piercing them with four barbs 
each. 

But then Kunti’s great and mercurial son Bhima kills Susarman’s horses 
and bodyguard with bloody strokes of his mace, and drags his charioteer to 
the ground. Madiraksha, defender of the Susarman’s chariot, sees his king 
without a sarathy and rides swiftly to help him, but Virata seizes 


Susarman’s mace, and though he is old, leaps down from the chariot to 
chase Madiraksha away with all the vigour and fierceness of a young man. 

Bhima calls out to Susarman, who is now fleeing, ‘Stop, Kshatriya! It is 
not dharma for a warrior to flee from battle. How could a mighty king like 
you stoop to lifting cattle? How can you abandon your companions and lose 
face before your enemies?’ 

Provoked by this son of Pritha’s, Susarman, lord-commander of 
countless chariots, roars at Bhima, ‘Stay!’ and turns around and rushes at 
him. Bhima leaps down from his ratha and attacks the Trigarta king like a 
lion may a small deer. Titanic Bhima seizes Susarman by his hair and, 
raising him high, dashes him to the ground. As he lies crying in agony, 
Bhima kicks his head, then plants his great knee on the fallen king’s chest 
and rains blows on him until he is senseless. 

The fall of Susarman strikes panic into the Trigarta army, and his men 
flee in all directions, in perfect confusion. 

The Pandavas have vanquished Susarman, retrieved the Matsya cattle, 
and saved Virata’s life. They now stand before the Matsya king. 

Bhimasena says, “Wretched Susarman does not deserve to live but what 
can I do when the king is so forgiving!’ 

Picking up the dazed Susarman from the dust by his throat and tying 
him up, Pritha’s son Vrikodara takes him in a chariot to Yudhishtira at the 
heart of the battlefield and displays him to his elder brother. 

Seeing Susarman’s plight, Yudhishtira smiles and says to Bhima, ‘Let 
this worst of men be set free.’ 

Bhima says to Susarman, ‘If you want to live, dog, listen carefully to 
me. You must declare in every court and assembly of men, “I am a slave.” 
Only if you do this will I grant you your life. This is the law of the victor 
and the vanquished.’ 

His elder brother affectionately says to Bhima, ‘If you respect my 
authority, liberate this evil man. He has already become king Virata’s slave.’ 
Turning to Susarman he says, ‘You are a free man. Go now, and never 
repeat what you did today.’ ” 


CANTO 34 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “On being spoken to thus by Yudhishtira, 
Susarman hangs his head in shame. He goes to Virata, salutes him 

wretchedly and leaves, a free man. Having routed the enemy and freeing 

their captive Susarman, the Pandavas spend that night on the battlefield. 

Virata showers these mighty sons of Kunti with wealth and honours. He 
says to them, ‘From now, all my treasures are as much yours as mine. If it 
pleases you, continue to live happily with me. Parantapas, I will give you 
maidens decked with ornaments, riches in plenty and whatever else you 
want. I am victorious today because you four saved me from defeat. Be 
lords of the Matsyas beside me.’ 

The Pandavas join their hands in salutation and Yudhishtira says, ‘We 
thank you, O Rajan, but for us it is enough that your enemies have been 
defeated and that you are free.’ 

Virata says to Yudhishtira, ‘Come, we will install you as king of the 
Matsyas; we will bestow on you rare and coveted treasures of the earth, for 
you deserve everything we can give. O Kanka, foremost of Brahmanas of 
the Vaiyaghra family, I will give you gems and cattle, gold, rubies and 
pearls. I bow to you. It is because of you that I see my sons and my 
kingdom once more. I was attacked and my very life threatened, and you 
saved me.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘We are delighted at what you say. May you always be 
happy and compassionate to all the living. Send your messengers back to 


the city to give the good news of your victory to the people.’ 

The Matsya king commands his messengers, ‘Go to the city and 
proclaim my victory. Let young girls and mature courtesans, duly bedecked 
with ornaments, come out of the city and welcome us with music and 
dance.’ 

At the king’s word, his men leave at once for the city to joyfully carry 
out his command. They arrive there by nightfall and, at daybreak, proclaim 
the king’s victory all over the Matsya capital.” 


CANTO 35 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “When the king of the Matsyas leaves the city to 

recover his stolen herd of cattle from the Trigartas, Duryodhana and 
his allies invade Virata’s kingdom from another direction. In this army are 
Bhishma and Drona, Karna and Kripa, Drona’s son Aswatthama, Subala’s 
son Sakuni and Dussasana, Vivimsati and Vikarna, Chitrasena, Durmukha 
and Dussaha and many other great rathikas. They quickly enter the Matsya 
lands, drive off king Virata’s cowherds and lift the rest of his magnificent 
herds. 

The Kauravas come with a multitude of chariots and seize sixty 
thousand head of cattle. Loud is the wail set up by the cowherds when they 
are attacked by the matchless Kuru warriors. In terror for his life, the chief 
among the cowherds hastily climbs into a chariot and rides to the city, 
crying in fear. 

He drives straight to the palace, jumps off the chariot and runs inside. 
He sees the proud younger son of the Matsya king, prince Uttara, also 
called Bhuminjaya, and tells him about the seizing of the royal herd. 

He says, ‘The Kauravas have taken sixty thousand cows. Rise, O 
enhancer of the kingdom’s fame, and bring back your herd. O prince, do not 
waste a moment, set out yourself! The king of the Matsyas has left you in 
the empty city, and as he went your father boasted, “My son Bhuminjaya is 
my equal; he is a Kshatriya and the upholder of our glory. He is a great 


warrior, skilled with a bow and every other weapon, and he is brave as a 
lion.” 

O, may what the king said be true; best of all owners of cattle-herds, 
defeat the Kurus and their troops with your arrows and bring back our 
cows. Just as a mighty bull-elephant charges a herd, cut down the enemy 
with gold-feathered arrows from your bow. 

Your bow is like a veena—its two ends the ivory rests; its string the 
main chord; its staff, the finger-board and the arrows its notes. Let your bow 
sing in the midst of the enemy. Lord, yoke your silvery horses to your 
chariot, hoist your standard with its golden lion; let your razor-sharp and 
gold-winged arrows flay the Kuru host and eclipse the very Sun. 

Vanquish all the Kurus in battle, as the wielder of the thunderbolt did 
the Asuras of old; return victorious to the city and achieve great fame. O 
prince of Matsyas, you are the sole refuge of this kingdom even as the great 
Arjuna is the guardian of the sons of Pandu. As his brothers look to Arjuna 
for sanctuary so do we look to you. We, the people of this kingdom, look 
upon you as our protector and saviour.’ 

The prince’s courage is boosted by what the cowherd says to him in the 
antahpura in the presence of the women of the harem, and he responds 
valiantly.” 


CANTO 36 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: ‘Pp rince Uttara says, ‘I am a master archer and I would set out at 

once after our herd if only I had an expert charioteer. But I do not 

know of such a man. I am ready to leave, so look for a sarathy for me. My 

own sarathy was killed in the great battle that raged for twenty-eight days. 

The moment you find me an able charioteer, I will hoist my flag and ride 

forth. I will cut a swath in the enemy’s force of elephants, horses and 
chariots; I will rout the ill-armed, feeble Kurus and bring back our cows. 

Like a second Indra, and as he did the Danavas, I will strike terror into 
Duryodhana and Bhishma, Karna and Vikartana’s son Kripa, Drona and his 
son, and all the others who have dared come to our kingdom. The Kurus 
seized our cattle because there was no one to oppose them. I could do 
nothing for I was not there. Today the Kurus will see my prowess and 
wonder if it is Arjuna himself who stands against them.’ 

Arjuna, who is in the antahpura, hears the prince and, well aware of the 
danger the moment is fraught with, quickly says to Krishnaa of the perfect 
form, Drupada’s slender daughter born from the sacrificial fire, the 
sairandhri who is virtuous, chaste, truthful and entirely devoted to her 
husbands. 

He says, ‘My beautiful one, go at once and say to prince Uttara, 
“Brihannala was once Arjuna’s own charioteer. He has seen many battles; 
he is a master sarathy and can drive your chariot.” ’ 


Panchali cannot bear to hear Arjuna saying this about himself, over and 
over, in the midst of the women. Shyly the princess of Panchala steps 
forward and softly she says to the prince, ‘This handsome youth Brihannala, 
who looks like a mighty elephant, used to be noble Arjuna’s charioteer. He 
was that illustrious Kshatriya’s disciple and as good an archer as any 
Kshatriya in the world. I knew him when I lived with the Pandavas. It is he 
who held the reins of Arjuna’s fine steeds when Agni consumed the 
Khandava vana. It was with him as his sarathy that Partha slew all the fell 
creatures in Khandavaprastha. In fact, there is no charioteer equal to 
Brihannala.’ 

Uttara says, ‘Sairandhri, you know this young eunuch and what he is, or 
not, capable of. However, I cannot myself beg Brihannala to drive my 
chariot.’ 

Draupadi says, ‘O Kshatriya, Brihannala will surely obey your younger 
sister, she of the graceful hips. If he agrees to be your sarathy, you will 
certainly defeat the Kurus and rescue your herd.’ 

Uttara is persuaded by Draupadi and says to his sister, ‘Go yourself, 
blemishless beauty, and fetch Brihannala to me,’ and at her brother’s 
request, she hurries to the dance-hall where the mighty-armed son of Pandu 
lives in disguise.” 


CANTO 37 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Wearing a gold necklace, her waist slender as a 

wasp’s, she who has the splendour of Devi Lakshmi, her slim and 
graceful form decked in peacock-feathers, her hips girdled by strings of 
pearls, she of the curled eyelashes, that enchanting princess of the Matsyas 
flies to the dance-hall like a streak of lightning to a dark cloud. Like a she- 
elephant her mate, Virata’s faultless daughter seeks out the son of Pritha. 
Like a precious gem, the embodiment of Indra’s wealth, her loveliness 
enhanced by her great, shining eyes, the adored and celebrated princess 
greets Arjuna. 

He says to this golden-skinned girl of the closely set thighs, ‘What 
brings you here, O devi wearing a golden necklace? Why have you come in 
such haste, gazelle-eyed one? Why the solemn face, lovely child? Tell me.’ 

Thus Arjuna demands to know why she, his pupil at dancing, has come 
to him in such distress. 

Accompanied by her sakhis, the princess approaches that bull among 
men and says to him, ‘The Kurus are driving away our cows, Brihannala, 
and my brother wants to ride after them and rescue our herd. His charioteer 
was killed in battle recently, and there is no one to drive my brother’s 
chariot. 

The sairandhri told my brother of your skill with horses and even said 
that you were Arjuna’s favourite sarathy. She says it was with you in his 


chariot that the mighty Arjuna single-handedly subjugated the Earth. 
Brihannala, I beg you, drive my brother’s horses! 

The Kurus must already have taken our cattle far away. I will die if you 
refuse this favour I ask of you with affection.’ 

Implored by his friend and disciple of the graceful hips, Arjuna, scourge 
of his foes, accedes and goes to the prince. As he strides along like an 
elephant in musth with rent temples, the young princess of the large eyes 
follows the Kshatriya with quick steps, like a mother elephant running 
behind her young one. 

The prince sees him and says, ‘With you as his charioteer, Kuntiputra 
Dhananjaya pleased Agni in the Khandava vana, why, he conquered the 
whole world! The Sairandhri, who knows the Pandavas, has spoken of you 
to me. So Brihannala, take the reins of my horses as you did Arjuna’s, for I 
am eager to fight the Kurus and rescue my cattle. You were Arjuna’s 
favourite sarathy and it was with you that that Pandavarishabha conquered 
the Earth.’ 

Brihannala replies, ‘What qualifies me to be your charioteer on the field 
of battle? Yes, I can entertain you with song, dance and music, but what 
skills do I have to drive your chariot?’ 

Prince Uttara holds out a coat of armour and says, ‘O Brihannala, you 
may be a singer and a dancer, but for now, don this kavacha, mount my 
chariot and take the reins of my superb horses.’ 

Now Arjuna pretends to fumble and be clumsy as he does what the 
prince asks. He puts on the armour back to front much to the amusement of 
the wide-eyed women, who burst out laughing. Impatiently prince Uttara 
himself fastens the rich coat of mail to Brihannala’s rippling, powerful 
body. Then donning his own armour that shines like the Sun, and hoisting 
his lion-emblazoned standard, the prince hands the reins of his yoked and 
eager horses to Brihannala. With Brihannala at his chariot-head, the 
splendid young Kshatriya arms himself with many fine bows and beautiful 
quivers of arrows, and goes forth to face the Kurus. 

Princess Uttaraa and her sakhis say to their friend and teacher, 
‘Brihannala, when you have defeated the Kurus led by Bhishma and Drona, 
bring back some special and fine silks for us to make clothes for our dolls.’ 

Brihannala smiles at their request and says in a voice deep as thunder, 
‘If prince Uttara can vanquish those mighty warriors in battle, I will 
certainly bring back some exquisite fabric.’ 


Heroic Arjuna flicks his reins expertly and urges his horses towards the 
Kuru army, its countless banners shimmering above a sea of chariots. But 
before they leave, the older women, young girls and Brahmanas of stern 
vows see Uttara on his chariot, his leonine standard hoisted high and 
Brihannala for his sarathy. They walk around the chariot in pradakshina and 
call down blessings upon them, saying, ‘Let victory like Arjuna had when, 
treading like a bull, he burnt Khandava vana be yours, O Brihannala, when 
prince Uttara and you meet the Kurus today.’ ” 


CANTO 38 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “As they leave the city, Virata’s brave son says to 

his charioteer, ‘Ride swiftly to where the Kurus are. They have 
come certain of victory, but I will crush them, rescue my herds and return to 
the city.’ 

Brihannala urges his horses forward; and with their reins in his hands, 
the wind-swift steeds, caparisoned in chains of gold, seem to fly through the 
air. They have not gone far when Dhananjaya and the Matsya prince see the 
awesome Kuru army arrayed in battle formation near the cemetery; it looks 
like an ocean or a forest of countless trees, its warriors silhouetted against 
the horizon. 

O Kurusthama, the cloud of dust that army raises obscures everything 
around it. Virata’s son sees the mighty force of elephants, horses and 
chariots led by Karna and Duryodhana, Kripa and Bhishma, the great Drona 
and his son Aswatthama, and he begins to tremble with fear and the hair on 
his body stands on end. 

He whispers to Arjuna, ‘I dare not fight the Kurus. Look how the hair 
on my body stands on end. I cannot fight this Kuru host, ah, with its fierce 
and heroic warriors that even the Devas would find difficult to vanquish. I 
could never hope to penetrate this great Bhaarata army of bowmen, horses 
and elephants, chariots, foot-soldiers and flag-bearers. 

My mind trembles at the very sight of the enemy, with Drona and 
Bhishma, Kripa and Karna, Vivimsati, Aswatthama and _ Vikarna, 


Saumadatti and Bahlika, Maharatha Duryodhana and countless other 
splendid archers amidst their heroic legions. O! I feel faint with fear at the 
sight of the Kurus in battle array.’ 

The weak-minded and callow Uttara begins to whimper like a child 
before the battle-ready Arjuna, his charioteer. He says, ‘My father took our 
whole army to meet the Trigartas, leaving me alone in the city. There are no 
troops to fight for me, and I am alone, a mere boy with little experience of 
battle. I cannot face these matchless warriors. Brihannala, stop the chariot!’ 

Brihannala says, “Why do you add to the joy of your enemies by 
showing them your fear? You have not yet engaged the enemy. It was you 
who ordered me to bring you to the Kauravas, and I will take you where 
their flags fly. I will bear you, Kshatriya of the mighty arms, into the very 
midst of the hostile Kurus, who will fight for mere cattle like pariah kites 
over meat, though I would face them even if I thought they fought for the 
sovereignty of the Earth. 

As we set out, you boasted of your manliness before the women of the 
harem; now why do you shy away from this fight? If you return without the 
cattle, all men and even women will ridicule you for ever. 

As for myself, having been praised so highly by the sairandhri for my 
skills as a charioteer, I cannot go back to the city without rescuing the 
livestock. It is the sairandhri’s praises and your asking me that made me 
come. So why should I not fight the Kurus? Control your fear, mighty 
prince.’ 

Uttara says, ‘Let the Kurus rob the Matsyas of all their wealth; let men 
and women laugh at me, Brihannala; let my cattle die; let the city be a 
desert; let me stand stripped of honour before my father; but I shall not go 
into battle against these dreadful Kurus.’ 

And the terrified prince, who wears gleaming earrings, jumps down 
from his chariot, flings down his bow and arrows and, abandoning honour 
and pride, takes to his heels. 

Brihannala cries, “Fleeing a battle is not Kshatriya dharma. Even death 
while fighting is better.’ 

Arjuna climbs down from the glorious chariot and runs after the fleeing 
prince, his long braided hair and red clothes streaming behind him. Some 
Kuru soldiers, who are unaware that this is Arjuna himself, laugh at the 
sight of his plait flapping in the air as he goes. 


The greater Kurus see him and say among themselves. ‘Who is this 
person, disguised like fire hidden in ashes? He is part man and part woman; 
but even in this form, he resembles Arjuna. He has the same head and neck, 
the same mace-like arms, the same tigerish stride. He can be none other 
than Dhananjaya. As Indra is among the Devas, is Dhananjaya among men. 
Who in this world other than Arjuna would dare ride against us by 
himself?’ 

‘Virata left only one son of his in the empty city. Childish bravado and 
not heroism brought him here. This must be Uttara who has come from the 
city; he must have made Pritha’s son Arjuna, who is in disguise, his 
charioteer. 

But seeing us, he runs in panic and beyond doubt Arjuna pursues him to 
bring him back.’ 

And thus, O Bhaarata, the Kauravas speculate on seeing the disguised 
son of Pandu, but they cannot be certain that the strange figure is indeed 
Arjuna. 

Meanwhile, Brihannala runs after the fleeing Uttara, and within a 
hundred paces seizes him by his hair. Virata’s son wails loudly, as if from 
some great affliction. He cries, “Listen to me, O Brihannala of the 
handsome waist; turn the chariot around! He who chooses to live will 
prosper. I will give you a hundred coins of pure gold, eight brilliant 
gemstones of great clarity and chrysoberyls, cat’s-eyes, set in gold, a chariot 
with a golden flagstaff and drawn by the finest horses, and also ten royal 
elephants. I beg you, release me, Brihannala.’ 

In reply, Arjuna, tiger among men, laughingly drags the sobbing, 
incoherent Uttara back to the chariot. 

The son of Pritha says to the prince who is almost fainting from fear, ‘If, 
O Parantapa, you are afraid to fight the enemy, take the reins of your 
chariot-horses and I will fight them. With the might of my arms you will 
easily penetrate the formidable array of chariots in which the Kuru heroes 
ride. 

Fear not, O punisher of your enemies, you are a Kshatriya and the 
bravest of princes. Why do you yield to fear when faced with the enemy, 
Purushavyaghra? I will break open this seemingly impenetrable formation 
of chariots, vanquish the Kurus and recover the herds. Purushottama, you 
be my charioteer; I will fight the Kurus.’ 


Speaking thus to Virata’s son Uttara, the unconquered Bibhatsu calms 
him down. Arjuna, greatest of all warriors, soothes and exhorts the timid, 
collapsing prince and helps him back onto his chariot.” 


CANTO 39 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “The great Kuru warriors led by Bhishma and 

Drona watch that bull among men in a eunuch’s guise persuade 
Uttara back onto the chariot; they watch the chariot drive into the forest and 
to the sami tree in it, and growing ever more certain that this eunuch is 
Arjuna, their skins crawl with fear. 

Bharadvaja’s son Drona, first among Acharyas of weaponry, sees the 
distraught Kurus; he also notices extraordinary omens all around them. 

He says, ‘Hot and wild gusts of wind raise palls of gravel and blow 
them about. The sky is overcast with an ashen gloom; dark clouds are all 
dry; our weapons magically unsheathe themselves; and jackals howl 
hideously in fear of the fires that spring up with no apparent cause and 
proliferate. Our horses weep and our banners wave as if from their own 
volition. 

We must be vigilant of the danger that these fell omens portend. Arm 
yourselves and prepare the troops for battle. Expect a terrible slaughter and 
guard the cattle well. 

This mighty bowman, this best of all warriors, this Kshatriya who 
comes disguised as a eunuch is Pritha’s son Arjuna. Of this there is no 
doubt.’ 

Then to Bhishma the Acharya says, “O Gangeya, this man is he who has 
been named after a tree; he is the son of the enemy of the mountains and 


has on his banner the form of the ravager of the lord of Lanka’s gardens. He 
will defeat us and take back the Matsya herd. 

This slayer of foes is Pritha’s inexorable Savyasachi. He does not shy 
away from battle even against the gods and demons combined. Having 
endured hardships in the forest he comes in anger. In war, he is like his sire 
and teacher Indra. O Kauravas, I do not see anyone here who can withstand 
him. This son of Kunti held up the Lord Mahadeva himself, who came as a 
hunter to test him in battle, on the slopes of Himavat.’ 

Stung to hear this praise for Arjuna, Karna says, “You always demean us 
by speaking of Phalguna’s great qualities. But Arjuna does not measure up 
to even a sixteenth part of Duryodhana or me.’ 

And Duryodhana says, ‘Karna, if this eunuch is indeed Arjuna, I will 
have achieved my purpose. For, if they are discovered during this thirteenth 
year, the Pandavas must go into exile for another twelve years. And if this 
eunuch is someone else, I will soon bring him down with my arrows.’ 

Parantapa, hearing what Dhritarashtra’s son says, Bhishma, Drona, 
Kripa and Aswatthama, his son, applaud his manliness.” 


CANTO 40 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “By the time they reach the sami tree, Arjuna 

realises just how young and inexperienced Virata’s son is. He says 
to the prince, ‘Do as I say, Uttara. Climb this sami and bring down the stash 
of weapons that you will find in it. Your weapons will not compass the span 
of my arms or withstand my strength when I attack horses and elephants. O 
Bhuminjaya, on that leafy branch, you will find a bundle secured, and in it 
are the bows and arrows, the banners and armour of the sons of Pandu— 
Yudhishtira, Bhima, Arjuna and the heroic twins. 

In it, also, is that mighty bow, Arjuna’s Gandiva equal to thousands of 
other bows and which by itself extends kingdoms. It is heavy as a palmyra 
tree and stands the utmost strain. It is the greatest of all weapons and will 
stop our enemy. It is radiant, smooth and broad, unblemished and inlaid 
with gold; it is truly a thing of beauty and without equal in prowess. The 
other bows in the bundle belong to Yudhishtira, Bhima and the twins, and 
are just as splendid and strong.’ ” 


CANTO 41 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: ‘U ttara says, ‘We have heard that there is a corpse tied high in this 

tree. Being a prince by birth, how can I touch it? It will pollute 

me for I am a Kshatriya, the son of a great king and I observe daily vratas 

and chant sacred mantras. Why do you want to make me an unclean bearer 
of corpses, by forcing me to handle a rotten body, Brihannala?’ 

Brihannala says, “You will not be tainted, great Kshatriya; have no fear, 
there is no corpse in the tree, but only weapons. Why would I make an heir 
to the Matsya throne do such a vile thing?’ 

Hearing this, the prince gets down from the chariot and reluctantly 
climbs the sami tree. 

Waiting in the chariot, Arjuna says to him, ‘Fetch the bows down 
quickly, prince, our time is short.’ 

When the prince cuts away their wrappings and removes the ropes that 
bind the bundle, he sees the Gandiva and four other shimmering bows. 
Even as they are being uncovered, the bows radiate splendour like the Sun 
and blaze like the planets at their birth. At the sight of the awesome 
weapons like hissing serpents, prince Uttara is afraid. His hands trembling 
to touch those glorious bows, Virata’s son speaks to Arjuna and his voice is 
also unsteady.” 


CANTO 42 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ ‘U ttara breathes, “To which illustrious warrior does _ this 
magnificent weapon belong, which has a hundred golden studs 
and shines blindingly at both its ends? Whose is this that has such wide and 
smooth sides and such an excellent grip, this bow that is embossed with 
golden elephants that glisten so brightly? And whose is this bow decorated 
with sixty, evenly-spaced golden dragonflies, indragopakas? Whose is this 
that has on it three golden suns that blaze with brilliance? And whose is this 
beautiful bow inlaid with gold and gemstones, and with figures of insects of 
gold and priceless jewels? 

Whose are these thousand gold-tipped, winged arrows in their golden 
quivers? Who owns these great shafts, so thick and flighted with vulture 
feathers, stone-sharpened, yellowish in hue, with razor-sharp points made of 
tempered iron? Whose is this quiver of fur with images of five tigers that 
holds ten arrows including some boar-eared ones? Whom do these seven 
hundred arrows belong to, that are long and thick, with ends like the 
crescent moon and which can surely drink the blood of enemies? Whose are 
these gold-feathered arrows whetted on stone, winged with parrot-green 
feathers and their shafts made of tempered steel? 

Whose is this remarkable sword, invincible and surely terrible to 
enemies, with a frog engraved on it and pointed like a frog’s head? Whose 
is this large sword with its exquisite blade embossed with gold and its hilt 
tinkling tiny golden bells and encased in tiger-skin? And whose is this 


beautiful one with a blade polished like a mirror and a golden haft? Whose 
is this surely unbreakable and irresistible one made in the Nishada country 
with its blade gleaming in a leather scabbard? And whose is this wonderful, 
long, cloud-hued sword chased in gold and sheathed in goat-skin? Who 
owns this heavy, tempered sword, longer than thirty fingers, that shines 
from many battles and is kept in a case of fiery gold? Whose is this 
beautiful grey sword covered with golden studs that will cleanly divide an 
enemy’s body with a single stroke, whose touch is as fatal as the bite of a 
king cobra, and which is inexorable and invokes terror in any adversary? 

Answer me, Brihannala; tell me truly. I am awestruck at the sight of 
these wondrous weapons.’ ” 


CANTO 43 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: ‘RB rihannala says, ‘The first that you asked about is Arjuna’s 
celebrated bow, called Gandiva, which devastates hostile armies. 
It is embellished with gold; it is the best and the biggest of all weapons, this 
bow of Arjuna’s. It alone is equal to a hundred thousand others and can 
conquer kingdoms. It is with this bow that Partha defeated all the world’s 
kings and even the Devas in battle. It is worshipped by the Devas, Danavas 
and Gandharvas; it is great and smooth, many-hued and flawless. It first 
belonged to Siva for a thousand years; then Prajapati owned it for five 
hundred and three. Later, Sakra had it for eighty-five years, then Soma for 
five hundred and Varuna for a hundred years. Now it is Partha 
Swetavahana’s and it has been his for sixty-five years. This divine bow of 
dazzling tejas is the best of all bows. Partha was given this bow by Varuna. 
The golden-hafted bow of the beautiful sides is Bhima’s, with which 
that son of Pritha, chastiser of his foes, conquered all the eastern kingdoms. 
The exquisitely shaped bow adorned with figures of indragopakas belongs, 
O Virataputra, to Yudhishtira Dharmaraja. This one here, sparkling in 
splendour with golden suns on it, and radiating blinding light all round, 
belongs to Nakula. And this bow inlaid with golden figures of insects and 
set with gemstones is Madri’s son Sahadeva’s. 
O Uttara, these feathered arrows, numbering one thousand, sharp as 
razors and deadly as venom, belong to Arjuna. When loosed in battle, these 
blaze more brilliantly still and become inexhaustible. The long, thick, 


crescent-headed shafts, keen and capable of thinning enemy ranks, belong 
to Bhima. This quiver with five tigers on it, full of yellowish stone- 
sharpened arrows with golden wings, belongs to Nakula. And this is the 
quiver of Madri’s son Sahadeva of the lofty intellect, with which he 
conquered all the western realms; his vari-coloured arrows, bright as the 
Sun, can raze enemies by the thousands. These short, thick, finely-honed 
shafts with long feathers, golden heads and three knots, belong to king 
Yudhishtira. 

The long-bladed sword, with a frog carved on it and its tip like a frog’s 
head belongs to Arjuna. Sheathed in tiger-skin, this other huge, wonderful 
and fearsome sword, the longest of all, belongs to Bhimasena. The exquisite 
sword with a golden hilt and an exquisitely decorated scabbard belongs to 
the wise Dharmaraja. This next versatile sword with its strong flexible blade 
and sheath of goat-skin belongs to Nakula. And this long one, encased in 
goat-leather and irresistible, is Sahadeva’s.’ ” 


CANTO 44 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: ‘U ttara says, “Ah, these weapons adorned with gold and belonging 
to the heroic, light-handed and exalted Partha are handsome 
indeed. But where are Arjuna and Yudhishtira of the Kurus, and Nakula, 
Sahadeva and Bhimasena, the sons of Pandu? The noble Pandavas, who can 
vanquish any foe, have not been heard of since they lost their kingdom at 
dice. And where is Draupadi, princess of Panchala, famed as a jewel among 
women, who followed the Pandavas into the forest after their defeat at 
dice?’ 

Arjuna says, ‘I am Arjuna, also called Partha. Your father’s courtier is 
Yudhishtira, and your father’s cook Ballava is Bhimasena; Virata’s chief 
equerry is Nakula, and Sahadeva is his cowherd. The sairandhri is 
Draupadi, for whose sake the Kichakas were killed.’ 

His eyes growing ever wider, Uttara whispers, ‘I will believe you if you 
can tell me the ten names of Arjuna, which I already know.’ 

Arjuna says, ‘I will name you my ten names, son of Virata; compare 
them with what you know. Listen carefully. My names are are Arjuna, 
Phalguna, Jishnu, Kiriti, Swetavahana, Bibhatsu, Vijaya, Krishna, 
Savyasachi and Dhananjaya.’ 

Uttara says, “Tell me why you are called Vijaya and why Swetavahana. 
Why are you named Kiriti and Savyasachi? Why are you Arjuna, Phalguna 
and Jishnu? And why Krishna, Bibhatsu and Dhananjaya? I know the 


meanings of all the names of that peerless Kshatriya and I will believe what 
you say if you do, as well.’ 

Arjuna says, “They call me Dhananjaya because I won great wealth 
during my conquest of all the kingdoms, when I took their treasures. 

They call me Vijaya because I am always victorious in battle, even 
against invincible kings. 

I am called Swetavahana because white horses in golden armour draw 
my chariot when I go into battle. 

They call me Phalguna because I was born on Himavat Mountain when 
the nakshatra Uttara Phalguni was rising. 

I am named Kiriti because a crown that dazzles like the Sun was placed 
on my head by Indra during my battle against the Danavas of Devaloka. 

I am known as Bibhatsu among gods and men as I have never done 
anything dishonourable on the battlefield. 

Since I am perfectly ambidextrous when I draw the Gandiva’s 
bowstring I am known as Savyasachi. 

They call me Arjuna because my complexion is rare and like that of the 
arjuna tree, and because my actions are always pure. 

I am known among men and celestials as Jishnu because I am 
irrepressible, a tamer of my enemies, and son of the slayer of Paka. 

And my tenth name Krishna was given me by my father out of his 
affection for a dark-skinned boy of great purity.’ 

The enthralled son of Virata stands very erect before Arjuna, and 
folding his hands in reverence, formally introduces himself. “My name is 
Bhuminjaya and I am also called Uttara,’ he says. ‘It is my greatest good 
fortunte that I meet you, O mighty Arjuna. Welcome, Dhananjaya! You of 
the flashing red eyes and the arms that are each like an elephant’s trunk, I 
beg you, forgive what I said to you in my ignorance. Knowing your 
unmatched achievements, all my fears are dispelled. Ah, great indeed is my 
admiration for you.’ ” 


CANTO 45 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: ‘U ttara says, ‘O Kshatriya, which enemy division do wish to attack 
first, mounted on this chariot, with me for your sarathy? 
Command me and I will drive you there.’ 

Arjuna says, ‘I am pleased with you, O tiger among men. Do not be 
afraid; I will put your enemies to rout in battle, great warrior. Watch my 
feats of terror against our foes. Quickly tie my twin quivers to your ratha 
and draw the gold-adorned sword with the polished blade from its sheath.’ 

In a trice, Uttara shins down the tree with Arjuna’s weapons. Arjuna 
says to him, ‘Yes, I will fight the Kurus and recover your herd. Under my 
protection the canopy of this chariot will be your fortress, its many sections 
the streets and buildings of that fort, my arms its ramparts and gateway, this 
bow and these quivers its impregnable defences. And this single, grand 
banner, will it not be equal to all the standards of your city? My bowstring 
is the great catapult of war which will loose missiles at the invaders. My 
anger will make this a most formidable fortress. And the din of our chariot- 
wheels, will it not sound like drumrolls of thunder? Riding this chariot, I, 
with my Gandiva, render it invincible, O son of Virata. So banish your fear.’ 

Uttara says, ‘I am no longer afraid. I know that, even like Indra or 
Kesava, you never waver in battle. Yet, I am bewildered by the guise and 
form in which I find you. I wonder what circumstance could have deprived 
one of such a powerful body with every auspicious mark of his manhood. 


Indeed, to me you seem to be Mahadeva, or Indra or the lord of the 
Gandharvas. But, O Arjuna, in the guise of a eunuch?’ 

Arjuna says, “The truth is that I am keeping this vow for one year at the 
behest of my elder brother. Mighty-armed, I am no eunuch but only became 
one at another’s curse, to serve a higher purpose and gain spiritual punya. 
Know, O prince, that I have now fulfilled my vow and am fully a man 
again.’ 

Uttara says, “You have done me a great service today, for I now know 
that my suspicions were not unfounded. Such a one as you, O 
Manavottama, could not be a eunuch. I now have an ally with whom I can 
fight the Devas themselves. My fears are gone. What shall I do? Command 
me! 

I was taught the art of chariotry by an expert sarathy and, 
Purushavyaghra, expertly will I drive this chariot so it will scythe through 
the massed formations of the enemy. Bull among men, I am as skilful as 
Vasudeva’s charioteer Daruka or Sakra’s Matali. The first horse, yoked on 
the right, whose hooves are barely visible when he gallops, is like Krishna’s 
Sugriva; the handsome one on the left, the best of steeds, is as swift as 
Meghapushpa. This beautiful creature at the rear left is as fast as Shaibya 
and even stronger. And the one yoked at the rear right is fleeter and more 
powerful than Balahaka. 

This chariot is worthy of bearing an archer like you into battle, and you 
are an equally worthy warrior to ride in it. This is my opinion.’ 

Arjuna, of the measureless tejas, takes the bracelets off his arms and 
takes up archer’s gloves embroidered with gold thread. He ties his wavy, 
black hair with a piece of white cloth. Then, sitting on that superb chariot, 
the mighty-armed Kshatriya folds his hands and faces the east to purify his 
body; he meditates to summon all his astras. 

And all the divine weapons come to him and speak to the son of Pritha. 
‘We are here, O Illustrious. Indraputra, we are yours to command.’ 

Partha bows to them and receives them, saying, ‘Stay with me in my 
mind,’ and in a blur he strings his bow, the Gandiva, which no other man 
can bend; and he thrums on it, echoingly. That sound reverberates like two 
mighty bulls colliding. The twang that fills the air is dreadful; violent are 
the winds that rise and blow. Meteors rain down in torrents and a deep 
gloom falls everywhere. Birds fly about in alarm and great trees tremble. 


From the thunderous sound the Kurus know that it is Arjuna’s hands that 
drew the string of that best of bows. 

Uttara says, ‘Pandavottama, you are alone, and many are these warriors 
on their chariots. How will you vanquish all these Maharathas? O 
Kaunteya, you have no one to help you, while the Kurus are many. But I 
will be by your side, even if paralysed with fear.’ 

Laughing, Partha says to Uttara, “Do not be afraid, Kshatriya. Who did I 
have to help me when I fought the Gandharvas during the ghoshayatra? 
What ally did I have in the battle against the Devas and Danavas in 
Khandava? Who fought by my side when I fought for the Devas against the 
Nivatakavachas and the Paulomas? Child, who did I have beside me in 
battle against innumerable kings at the swayamvara of the princess of 
Panchala? 

I was trained in the use of weapons by Acharya Drona, by Sakra and 
Vaisravana, by Yama and Varuna, by Agni, by Acharya Kripa, by Krishna 
of Madhu’s clan and by Siva who wields the Pinaka. Why would I not fight 
these who stand before us? Drive my chariot with all speed, and calm your 
fearful heart.’ ” 


CANTO 46 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisamayana continued, “Gathering his weapons, and making Uttara 

his sarathy, the son of Pandu circles the sami tree in pradakshina and 
sets out. That Maharatha takes down the lion flag of the Matsya prince and 
leaves it on the ground beside the sami tree. And he hoists his own golden 
ensign emblazoned with the figure of a lion-tailed vanara, the emblem of 
Hanuman, as well as other fierce and warlike beings. 

This standard is Visvakarma’s divine creation. The moment that Arjuna 
thinks of Agni Deva, the superhuman creatures take their places on the 
Pandava’s banner. A flagstaff of celestial craft, which holds this wondrous 
flag, with quivers attached and adorned with gold, falls from the heavens 
softly onto the chariot. Seeing the staff and its banner on his ratha, Arjuna 
walks around both in pradakshina. 

Flying the monkey-standard, eases his hands into the lizard-skin gloves, 
takes up his bow and arrows and rides north towards the enemy. That 
Parantapa blows hard on his conch, a deafening blast that makes men’s hair 
stand on end. The swift horses fall to their knees. Uttara too, sits down in 
sheer fright. The son of Kunti takes up the reins himself, gently lifts up the 
horses and guides them back into their proper positions. 

He embraces Uttara, saying, ‘Have no fear, O best of princes; you are a 
Kshatriya, a chastiser of your foes. Why do you, Purushavyaghra, lose 
courage in the face of the enemy? You must often have heard the blare of 
conches, the blast of trumpets and the roar of elephants from armies arrayed 


for battle. Why does the sound of this conch terrify and weaken you as if 
you were just an ordinary youth?’ 

Uttara says, ‘I have heard the bass of many a conch, the sounding of 
many a horn and the trumpeting of many an elephant on the battlefield, but 
never have I heard the sound of such a conch before. Nor have I ever seen a 
banner like this unworldly one or heard the twang of such a bow. The blast 
of your conch, the sound of your bow and the raucous cries of the macabre 
creatures on your banner affright me, and I tremble, for my heart clenches 
in shock. This flag seems to cover the whole sky, hiding everything above, 
and the sound of the Gandiva’s bowstring has deafened and numbed me.’ 

Arjuna says, ‘Stand firm, press your feet down hard on the floor of the 
chariot and hold the bridle tight. I am going to blow the conch again.’ 

Arjuna sounds his conch, the reverberant Devadatta, once more, this 
sea-shell that fills his enemies with grief and his friends with joy. And the 
sound is so loud that it seems to split mountains and go echoing through the 
deepest caves; and it reaches the four corners of the Earth. Uttara falls into 
his seat again and clings to it. The Earth quakes with the blare of the 
Devadatta, the rumble of the chariot-wheels and the twanging of the 
Gandiva. Seeing that Uttara is still afraid, Dhananjaya reassures him once 
more. 

Meanwhile, Drona says, “The clamour of the chariot, the way the clouds 
fill the sky and the trembling of the Earth tell me that this warrior can only 
be Savyasachi. Our weapons have turned dull, our horses droop and our 
fires do not burn despite being fed. Our horses whinny dreadfully at the 
Sun, and crows perch on our banners: dire omens all. 

The vultures and kites to our right foretell some great danger. Notice the 
jackal that howls as it skitters through our ranks. Look! It escapes 
unscathed. This, too, portends some imminent calamity. All of you have 
your hair standing on end, warning of a great slaughter of Kshatriyas in 
battle. 

All bright things have paled, while animals and birds look fierce; dark 
omens foretelling the slaying of Kshatriyas abound and warn of havoc 
coming upon us. O Duryodhana, your forces seem to be overwhelmed by 
fear at these meteors flaring down from above; your horses and elephants 
seem to weep; more and more vultures and kites circle overhead, as if come 
to a feast of corpses that will soon litter the ground. 


You will rue this day when you see your army attacked by Partha’s 
arrows. Why, our forces seem to be defeated already, no man among them 
eager to fight. The faces of our warriors are pale, and they seem stupefied. 
We should send the cattle ahead and remain here, ready for battle.’ ” 


CANTO 47 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Then, on that field, Duryodhana speaks to his 

grandsire Bhishma, to that tiger among warriors Drona, and to that 
Maharatha Kripa. He says, “Both Karna and I have said this to our Acharyas 
and I will say it again, for it seems that once is not enough. The Pandavas 
vowed that, if they lost at dice, they would live in the open for twelve years 
in the forest, and then for one more year hidden from us. That thirteenth 
year is not over yet. Arjuna, who should still be hidden, is before us; and if 
he appears before their ajnatavasa ends, the Pandavas must spend another 
twelve years in the wilderness. 

Whether they have lost count of time in their eagerness for a kingdom 
or whether we are mistaken is for Pitama Bhishma to say. 

Uncertainty always stalks the path of anyone who has a goal in mind. 
Decisions may not always have the desired outcome. Even philosophers are 
puzzled when judging their own actions. As for us, we have come here to 
fight the Matsyas and seize their herds that they keep in the north. If, 
meanwhile, Arjuna comes to us, we are not to blame. We have come here as 
allies of the Trigartas to fight against the Matsyas, for Susarman and his 
people have been attacked many times by the Matsyas. We have come to 
help our allies the Trigartas, who are full of fear. 

It was agreed between us that on the afternoon of the seventh day of the 
moon they should seize the Matsyas’ most valuable herd in the east, and 


that at sunrise of the eighth day we would seize the rest of the Matsya 
herds, while king Virata pursues Susarman’s army. 

It may be that the Trigartas now herd the Matsya cattle this way; or, 
having been defeated, they come to us to negotiate with Virata. Else, 
possibly, the Matsya army has driven away the Trigartas, and Virata comes 
with his fierce legions to attack us at night. It may be that one powerful 
warrior among them advances to vanquish us, or perhaps it is the king 
himself. 

Be it Virata or Arjuna, we must fight, for we are sworn to battle. Why 
do all these superb rathikas—Bhishma, Drona and Kripa, Vikarna and 
Drona’s son—sit panic-stricken in their chariots? 

There is nothing for it but to fight. So stand firm and bold even if we 
meet Indra or Yama himself in our battle for the Matsya herds. Who can 
now return safely to Hastinapura? The enemy’s arrows flying after them, 
how will the foot-soldiers escape on foot, when it is doubtful whether our 
horsemen and Maharathas can ride to safety?’ 

Hearing Duryodhana, Karna says, ‘Ignore the Acharya and prepare for 
battle. He knows what the Pandavas wish to do and strikes terror into our 
hearts, for he bears them love. I see that his affection for Arjuna is great 
indeed, and, seeing him come alone, Drona praises him. Make sure that our 
troops do not break ranks. We have only heard the neighing of horses and a 
conch being blown, and instantly all is fear and confusion. Our soldiers 
travelled far from home to this thick forest in the summer heat; let them not 
fall into disarray and suffer defeat at the enemy’s hands. 

The Pandavas have always been Acharya Drona’s favourites. They have 
cleverly planted the Acharya amongst us, and he betrays himself by what he 
says. Who would extol an enemy merely upon hearing the whinnying of his 
horses? Horses will neigh whether standing still, walking or galloping; the 
wind blows; Indra showers rain; it thunders frequently: what has Arjuna to 
do with these? Why are these attributed to him? All this foolish talk is only 
because Drona wants to help Arjuna, or perhaps because of his anger and 
hatred towards us. 

Brahmanas are wise, pure-hearted and compassionate. However, they 
should never be consulted in a military crisis. The best place for learned 
men who make speeches is in grand palaces, their courts and pleasure 
gardens. They say many wonderful things in a royal sabha, and it is there 
they had best stay. 


They are best consulted about the proper cleaning and placing of 
sacrificial utensils. It is in seeing others’ shortcomings, in studying people’s 
characters, in the science of horses, elephants and chariots, in treating the 
diseases of livestock—donkeys, camels, goats, sheep and cattle, in planning 
buildings and arches and in pointing out the imperfections in food and drink 
that learned Brahmanas come into their own. 

Ignore the learned Drona who extols the heroism of Arjuna, and prepare 
for battle. Secure the cattle in a safe place; array the troops in battle-order 
and position guards in the proper places so that we can face and kill the 
enemy, whoever he might be.’ ” 


CANTO 48 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “kK arna says, ‘I see in all these great men alarm, indecision and an 

unwillingness to fight. Be it Virata or Arjuna, I will contain the 

one who comes even as the shore does the swollen sea. Arrows will stream 

like snakes through the air from my swift hands and find their mark. My 

golden-winged arrows will shroud Partha as locusts do a tree. Stretched to 

loose them, my bowstring will slap against my leathern gloves like the 
booming of two great drums. 

These past thirteen years, Arjuna has led the life of an ascetic and his 
skills will have turned mild. Kunti’s son will have acquired the saintly 
qualities of a Brahmana and will meekly allow thousands of my arrows to 
pierce him. This mighty archer is, indeed, celebrated across the three Lokas, 
but I am in no way inferior to Arjuna Manavottama. My golden arrows, 
flighted with vulture-feathers, will fill the air and make the firmament seem 
to swarm with fireflies. I will kill Arjuna in battle today and, at last, repay 
my long-standing debt to Dhritarashtra’s son. 

What man exists, even amongst the Devas and Asuras, who can resist 
my unerring arrows? My light and lethal shafts, for they are both hollow 
and of perfect balance, will indeed swarm Partha like fireflies. He may be as 
strong as Indra’s thunderbolt and have the same limitless urjas as the king 
of the Devas, but I will subdue him like branding an elephant. He may be a 
Maharatha and the best of all wielders of weapons, but I will snatch the 
hapless Partha from his ratha as Garuda would a snake in his talons. He is 


the weapon-fed Pandava fire that burns up enemies, but I am the 
thundercloud that lashes down rain to extinguish him; my army of chariots 
is the thunder, and the speed of my horses, the wind. 

My arrows will pierce Arjuna like poisonous snakes, like serpents 
burrowing through an anthill. My tempered shafts with golden wings, 
straight and true, and blistering with energy, will draw blood from his body 
today, and you will see Kunti’s son decked in them like a hill covered by 
crimson karnikara flowers. 

My weapons were given me by Jamadagni’s son Parasurama Bhargava, 
and with them I am confident to battle even the Devas. My spear will strike 
the ape on his flag and it will fall to the ground with terrible cries. The sky 
will be filled by the howls of the other un-human creatures on his banner 
and they will fly in all directions. 

Today I will pluck out the thorn that has long been in Duryodhana’s 
heart by casting Arjuna down from his chariot. Today the Kauravas will see 
the great Partha, his chariot shattered, his horses dead, his valour gone, 
sighing like a snake. Let the Kauravas take the cattle and leave if they wish, 
or they can stay in their chariots and witness my victory.’ ” 


CANTO 49 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: K ripa says, ‘O Radheya, your twisted mind is always bent on war 

and bloodshed. You do not understand the true nature of these 

things, nor do you consider their consequences. The Shastras tell of many 

grave matters, and those who have studied them speak of battle as being the 
most sinful of them. 

Battles result in victory only if they are fought at the right place and 
time. All the omens show that this moment is palpably inauspicious, and no 
good will come of this encounter. A display of prowess at the apt time and 
in the right place is beneficial. The appropriateness of any action is 
determined by its timeliness. Wise men do not follow the rash counsel of a 
sutaputra. Considering all this, a battle with Arjuna is foolhardy. 

It is Partha who, on his own, saved the Kurus from the Gandharvas; 
alone, he satisfied Agni; alone, he took up Brahmacharya for five years on 
Himavat; single-handed, he rescued Subhadra on his chariot and challenged 
even Krishna to a duel. By himself, Arjuna fought Rudra who came to him 
in the guise of a vetala. Partha rescued Krishnaa from the clutches of 
Jayadrata in this very forest; he studied the astra shastra from Indra for five 
years; on his own, he vanquished all enemies and spread the fame of the 
Kurus throughout the world. Alone, this Parantapa defeated the Gandharva 
king Chitrasena and all his invisible troops. Alone, he quelled the fierce 
Nivatakavachas and the Kalakhanjas, whom the gods themselves could not 
conquer. 


O Karna, what have you achieved compared to any of the sons of 
Pandu? They have each subdued many great kings. Even Indra cannot face 
Partha in battle. Therefore, he who finds himself filled with a desire to fight 
Arjuna should instantly disabuse himself of his absurd thought. You might 
as well want to pull out the fangs of an angry snake by stretching out your 
right hand and extending your forefinger; whilst wandering alone in a 
forest, you may want to try mounting an infuriated wild-elephant in musth 
or to attack a great boar without a hook or a weapon in your hand; you 
might want to walk through a blazing ghee-and tallow-fed fire, clad in silk 
and having smeared yourself all over with clarified butter, as you now want 
to fight Arjuna. 

Which man would tie his hands and feet, tie a heavy stone to his neck 
and try to swim across the ocean? What manliness is there in such folly? 
Karna, only a fool, who despite being weak and having no real skill at arms, 
would want to fight the consummate warrior Partha. 

Having been deceived by us and now freed from his exile of thirteen 
years, will the noble hero not destroy us all? We have come unknowingly to 
the place where Arjuna lay in wait like a fire in a well, and we have exposed 
ourselves to great danger. 

Yet, alas, though he is invincible, we must fight him for that is our 
dharma. Let our armoured troops stand ready. Drona, Duryodhana, 
Bhishma, Drona’s son, you, Karna, and all of us must go into battle against 
the son of Pritha. 

O Karna, do not be foolish enough to fight Arjuna by yourself. If we six 
maharathas unite, we might be a match for the dauntless Kaunteya, who is 
as fierce and mighty as Indra Vajradhari. Supported by our troops, we six 
will face Arjuna as the Danavas did Vasava.’ ” 


CANTO 50 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


“ A swatthama says, ‘Karna, the cattle are not yet ours, for they have 

not yet crossed the Matsya borders, nor have they reached 
Hastinapura. Why do you boast so? Truly heroic men do not brag about 
having won many victories, or of having amassed vast fortunes or of the 
enemies they have vanquished. Fire burns silently and so too does the Sun 
shine. The Earth mutely sustains life, both mobile and unmoving. 

Brahma, the self-existent, has ordained the duties of the four varnas so 
that they can acquire wealth by following their svadharma, without sinning. 
A Brahmana studies the Vedas, performs yagnas and officiates at sacrifices 
performed by others. A Kshatriya lives by his weapons and performs his 
own yagnas but does not officiate at those of others. A Vaisya ensures that 
the proper Vedic rituals are performed for him after he has acquired wealth. 
A Sudra always serves the other three orders. Flower-sellers and butchers 
may use some deceit to make their livelihood. 

The noble sons of Pandu became sovereigns of the Earth by living 
according to their svadharma, as prescribed in the Shastras. They are always 
respectful to their elders, even if they are their enemies. What true 
Kshatriya shows delight at having obtained a kingdom by means of 
cheating at dice, as this evil and shameless son of Dhritarashtra does? 
Having gained untold wealth through deceit and fraud, like a vendor of 
meat, which wise man would boast of it? 


You have taken their wealth, but have you ever defeated Dhananjaya or 
Nakula or Sahadeva in combat? In what battle did you best Yudhishtira, or 
that strongest of men Bhima? In which battle did you conquer Indraprastha? 
What you have done, however, O unscrupulous Duryodhana, is to drag the 
princess Krishnaa into court while she was in her period and wore just a 
single piece of cloth. You have hewn at the very root, delicate as that of the 
sandalwood, of the Pandava tree. When greed made you enslave the 
Pandavas, do you remember what Vidura said? 

Men and other creatures, even insects and ants, show as much 
forgiveness as lies in their power. The Pandava may forgive you for 
everything else, but he will not forgive you for tormenting Draupadi. 
Dhananjaya comes to kill Dhritarashtra’s sons. In an affectation of wisdom 
you make brave speeches, but Arjuna Parantapa will kill us all. 

Dhananjaya will not flee even from Devas, Gandharvas, Asuras or 
Rakshasas. When inflamed, he will slay whoever he encounters like Garuda 
crushes a tree in his talons. He is far more powerful than you are; he is 
equal to Indra at archery and to Krishna himself in battle. Who would not 
praise Partha? What man is a match for Arjuna who can counter devastras 
with devastras and wordly weapons with mundane ones. 

Those who are well-read in the scriptures say that a disciple is no less 
than a son in every way; that is why Arjuna is Drona’s favourite. 

Use the same deceit now, as you did when you played dice, the same 
stratagems by which you subjugated Indraprastha and the same bravado 
with which you dragged Krishnaa into the Kuru sabha. Let your clever 
uncle, who knows full well what Kshatriya Dharma is, the cheating Sakuni, 
prince of Gandhara, show us his mettle today! 

The Gandiva does not cast dice as do the Krita or the Dwapara, but it 
looses countless fiery, winged arrows at adversaries, with lethal accuracy. 
The deadly vulture-feathered arrows of inexorable speed that fly from the 
Gandiva can penetrate even mountains. Yama, the destroyer, Vayu and the 
horse-faced Agni all leave something behind, but Dhananjaya with his 
wrath unbridled, does not. 

You played dice with your uncle Sakuni’s help; fight this battle today 
with him beside you. Let my father Drona fight if he chooses to, but I will 
not fight Arjuna. We came here only to do battle against the king of the 
Matsyas if he comes to retrieve his herds.’ ” 


CANTO 51 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


: ‘RB hishma says, ‘Drona’s son speaks well and Kripa is also right. As 
for Karna, he wants to fight only out of respect for Kshatriya 

Dharma. No man of wisdom can find fault with Acharya Drona. It is my 
view that we must fight, giving consideration both to the time and the place. 

It is not surprising that any man is bewildered in the face of five 
adversaries, radiant as suns, Kshatriyas, beside, who have just emerged 
from adversity having been honed by it. Even those who know dharma 
would be confused about what they should do. Duryodhana, that is why I 
say this to you, whether or not you like what I say. 

Aswatthama, what Karna said was only to boost our courage; forgive 
him for it. The task at hand is grave. The appearance of the son of Kunti is 
not a good time for us to quarrel among ourselves. Acharya Kripa and you 
must forgive everything. As light is innate to the Sun, the mastery over 
weapons is within you. As beauty is never separated from Chandrama, the 
Moon, so are the Vedas and the Brahmastra part of you. Usually, the four 
Vedas dwell in one man and Kshatriya attributes in another. We have never 
heard of these two existing together in any person other than the preceptor 
of the Bhaaratas and his son. 

In the Vedantas, Puranas and Itihasas, O king, who other than 
Jamadagni is Drona’s superior? The Brahmastra and the Vedas have never 
before co-existed in one person. Acharyaputra, be forgiving, for this is no 
time for disharmony among us. Let us unite and fight Indra’s son who has 


come to battle. Of all the calamities that may befall an army, wise men say 
the worst is dissent among its leaders.’ 

Aswatthama says, ‘Purusharishabha, you have been fair and just in what 
you say. In his anger the Acharya elaborates on Arjuna’s virtues. The 
qualities of even an enemy should be admitted, while the faults of even 
one’s Guru may be pointed out. Therefore one must, to the best of one’s 
ability, declare the merits and shortcomings of a son or a disciple.’ 

Duryodhana says, ‘Let the Acharya grant his forgiveness and let peace 
be restored. If he is with us, all will be done as it should.’ 

Then, O Bhaarata, Duryodhana pacifies Drona with the help of Karna, 
Kripa and Bhishma Mahatman. 

Drona says, “I was already appeased by what Shantanu’s son Bhishma 
said. We must ensure that Partha does not meet Duryodhana in battle lest 
Duryodhana is captured from his own rashness. Arjuna will surely not have 
shown himself before the term of his exile expired; nor will he pardon us by 
merely recovering the cattle. So, make sure that he does not attack 
Dhritarashtra’s son and in one sroke defeat us all and our purpose. Like 
Duryodhana, I, too, am unsure exactly when the term of exile ends. Only 
Bhishma can clarify this.’ ” 


CANTO 52 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ ‘BR hishma says, ‘The Kaalachakra, the wheel of time, revolves with 
its divisions—kaalas, kashtas and muhurtas; days, fortnights, 
months and years; periods of the different constellations, planets and 
seasons. Every five years, their fractional increase of duration and the 
deviations of the planetary orbits create an excess of two months in time’s 
measure. By my calculations, in thirteen years there would be an excess of 
five months and twelve nights. Therefore, the sons of Pandu have 
completed their exile exactly; they have kept their sworn oath. Arjuna 
makes his appearance because he is sure of this. 

The Pandavas are virtuous and deeply-versed in the Shastras. With 
Yudhishtira to guide them, they would not deviate from the path of dharma, 
not by a hair’s width. The sons of Kunti do not yield to temptation, and they 
have achieved a difficult feat. If they had wanted to establish their rights to 
the kingdom through adharma, those Kurus would have displayed their 
might even during the game of dice. Bound by dharma, they did not flout 
Kshatriya Dharma. He who thinks that they are ever capable of deceit will 
surely meet with defeat. 

The sons of Pritha would prefer death to falsehood. When the time 
comes, however, those Purusharishabhas endowed with the limitless vitality 
of Sakra, will not give up what is theirs even if is defended by the wielder 
of the thunderbolt. 


But now we must face the best of all warriors in battle. So let us plan 
our strategy without delay, and with the approval of good and honest men, 
so that Arjuna does not take what is now ours. 

Duryodhana, I have never seen a battle in which one side can be certain 
of victory. In a battle there is victory and defeat, prosperity and adversity; 
and one side must have one of the two. Therefore, king of kings, despite the 
propriety, or lack thereof, of a battle at this moment, make your 
arrangements quickly, for Dhananjaya is here.’ 

Duryodhana says, ‘Pitama, I will not give back the Pandavas their 
kingdom. So let us prepare for battle in every way, without a moment’s 
delay.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘I will tell you what is wise, if you care to hear it. I 
always speak for your good, O Kaurava. Ride at once to Hastinapuraa and 
take a fourth of the army with you. Let another fourth escort the cattle. With 
half our legions we will fight Pandu’s son. Drona, Karna, Aswatthama, 
Kripa and I will withstand Bibhatsu, or the king of the Matsyas or indeed 
Indra himself if he comes. We will contain any of them as the shore 
restrains the surging sea.’ 

Duryodhna sees the sagacity of what Bhishma says, and the king of the 
Kauravas immediately does as he is told. When Duryodhana and the cattle 
have left, Bhishma begins to array his soldiers in battle formations. 

He addresses Drona, saying, ‘Acharya, stand at the heart of our legions 
with Aswatthama on the left; and let the wise Kripa defend the right wing. 
Encased in golden mail, let the Suta Karna station himself at the head of our 
forces. I will be at the rear and protect the whole army from there.’ ” 


CANTO 53 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “O Bhaarata, the Kauravas take their positions, 

and the din of Arjuna’s chariot-wheels fills the air as he flies towards 
them. The Kurus see his banner; they hear the rumble of his ratha and the 
deafening twang of the Gandiva. 

Drona sees that Maharatha coming towards them and says, ‘That 
glimmer in the distance is Partha’s standard, the rumble is his from his 
chariot-wheels, and that frightful roar is of the ape on his banner. O, the 
Vanara strikes terror into our troops. And standing on the superb chariot is 
the greatest Maharatha, who draws the thunderous Gandiva, best of all 
bows. 

Look! Two arrows fall together at my feet and two more skim past my 
ears. Having completed his exile and achieved many wonderful feats during 
these thirteen years, Arjuna salutes and whispers to me. It is after so long 
that I am seeing Dhananjaya, radiant with beauty and grace, this wise son of 
Pandu, beloved of his family. He blazes like fire in his chariot, with his bow 
and quivers of arrows, his conch and banner, his splendid armour, his 
crown, sword and bow, like a roaring ghee-fed yagna fire surrounded by 
sacrificial urns.’ 

Arjuna sees the Kurus ready for battle and says to Virata’s son, ‘O 
sarathy, rein in the horses as soon as the enemy is within bowshot. 
Meanwhile, let me locate Duryodhana, wretch of the Kuru vamsa, in the 


midst of his forces. I will ignore the others, single out that vain prince and 
strike him down, for his death will signal the defeat of all the rest. 

There stands Drona, and his son Aswatthama behind him, and there are 
those great archers Bhishma, Kripa and Karna. But I do not see 
Duryodhana. I suspect that, in his anxiety to save himself, he flees by the 
southern path, taking the cattle with him. Leave this formation of chariots 
and ride after Suyodhana. It is him that I will fight, O Virataputra, and the 
battle will not be in vain. Defeat him I shall, and return with your herds.’ 

The son of Virata holds back the horses and adroitly steers them away 
from where the Kurupumgavas stand in their chariots. He guides them 
towards Duryodhana. 

Seeing Arjuna’s chariot veering away from the dense cluster of Kuru 
chariots, Kripa guesses his intention and says to his men, ‘Arjuna is after 
Duryodhana. We must outflank the Pandava’s chariot. When his anger is 
roused, no one can challenge him other than thousand-eyed Indra, Devaki’s 
son Krishna, Dronacharya, his son Aswatthama and Maharatha Bhargava. 
Of what use would these herds be to us if Duryodhana were to sink like a 
ship in the ocean that is Partha?’ 

Meanwhile, Arjuna rides at Kripa’s division, announces himself, and in 
a blur covers the troops with a swarm of arrows, thick as locusts. Enveloped 
by Partha’s countless shafts, the Kuru warriors cannot see, and the earth and 
sky become overcast, covered by a dome of arrows. The soldiers, who were 
ready to fight, stand still in stunned awe, unable even to flee; and in their 
minds they applaud Partha’s astounding dexterity. 

Arjuna blows his conch, the Devadatta that always makes the hairs of 
the enemy stand on end; he pulls on his bowstring, to excite the creatures on 
his flagstaff into even more frightful roars and screams. The boom of his 
conch, the drumroll of his chariot-wheels, the echoing twang of the Gandiva 
and the terrifying yowls of the un-human creatures on his flagstaff make the 
earth tremble. 

The cattle low piteously and whisk their tails in terror; and they turn 
back, now heading south.” 


CANTO 54 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Having thrown the enemy forces into disarray 

and recovered the cattle, Arjuna, supreme archer, rides avidly 
towards Duryodhana. The Kuru lords see the herds running wildly towards 
the Matsya city and know that Kiriti has already prevailed. As he advances 
on Duryodhana, they charge Arjuna. 

Arjuna Parantapa sees their legions in tight formation, flying a sea of 
brilliant banners, and he says to the Matsya prince, ‘Spur your white horses 
to fly as fast as they can. Do your best, for I want to confront this mass of 
Kuru lions. Like an elephant eager to fight another tusker, the evil son of a 
Suta is impatient to fight me. Take me to him, Uttara, he has grown arrogant 
under Duryodhana’s patronage.’ 

At Partha’s command, Virata’s son flicks his whips over his great horses 
in golden armour. They fly like the wind, break into the formation of 
chariots and take the son of Pandu into the midst of the battlefield and the 
Kuru army. The Kuru Maharathas Chitrasena, Sangramajit, Satrusaha and 
Jaya rush to help Karna, spears and arrows at the ready to meet Arjuna’s 
onrush. 

With flaming shafts, the enraged Pandava hero sets all their chariots 
afire, and incinerates them as a great conflgration does a forest. 

The battle rages furiously when, mounted on his ratha, the Kuru hero 
Vikarna rides at Arjuna and covers him with a rain of thick, long, vicious 


barbs. Arjuna severs Vikarna’s rugged, gold-tipped bow and cuts down his 
flagstaff, and that Kshatriya flees in some haste. 

Vikarna’s flight leaves Satruntapa in an uncontrollable rage, and he 
looses a deluge of arrows over Partha. Arjuna is wounded by Maharatha 
Satruntapa but, though he seems to be drowning in a sea of Kuru warriors, 
he retaliates to Satruntapa’s attack. Arjuna pierces that Kshatriya with five 
razorlike arrows and kills his sarathy with another ten. Then, shot by the 
bull of the Bhaaratas with another shaft that can cleave the sturdiest armour, 
Satruntapa falls dead on the field, like a tree on a mountain-top blown down 
by the wind. 

Other valiant Narapumgavas are mangled in battle by that bravest bull 
among men; they stagger and tremble like vast forests shaken by the wind 
of the Mahapralaya, that blows at the dissolution of the universe. Struck by 
Partha, son of Vasava, the gloriously-attired Kshatriyas, those givers of 
wealth, heroes invested with the vital prowess of Indra, are vanquished and 
lie senseless on the field, like elephants clad in mail of black steel and gold. 

Gandiva in hand, Arjuna rages across the battlefield in all directions, 
spreading death like a forest fire at the end of a dry summer. Kiriti, greatest 
of maharathas, like the spring wind that breaks thunderheads open and 
blows about fallen leaves, strews his adversaries all around him. 

First killing the russet horses yoked to the chariot of Vikartana’s 
brother’s son, Sangramajit, Arjuna of boundless energy cuts off 
Sangramajit’s head with a single crescent-tipped arrow. When his cousin is 
slain, Suryaputra Karna rushes at Arjuna like an elephant with tusks 
lowered, like a tiger at a mighty bull. 

The Sutaputra wounds the Pandava with twelve arrows, pierces his 
horses all over and strikes prince Uttara’s hand which holds the reins. 
Arjuna responds with an impassioned attack as fierce as that of iridescent 
Garuda swooping on a snake. Both men are superb archers, indefatigable 
and deadly. 

The Kauravas excitedly stand aside to watch the duel between Karna 
and Arjuna. Incited to fury at the sight of Karna, and glad to be facing him 
at last, the Pandava casts a dark mantle of arrows over him, rendering him, 
his horses and chariot invisible. Bhishma’s legion of warriors, whose 
horses, elephants and chariots too Arjuna shrouds and pierces with his 
arrows, scatter, wailing in terror and pain. 


Breaking through the Pandava cloud of arrows, exploding into view like 
a mass of brilliant flame, illustrious Karna, bow in hand, gives Arjuna 
answer with countless arrows of his own. Loud applause breaks out as the 
Kurus cheer Surya’s son with booming conches, trumpets and drum-rolls; 
and the air resonates with the sound of Karna’s bowstring slapping his 
leather gloves. At the sight of Kiriti, who fills the air with the thunder of the 
Gandiva, of the upraised tail of the Vanara on his flag and of the other 
terrible creatures screeching furiously from the top of the flagstaff, Karna 
roars like a pride of lions. 

Arjuna attacks Karna, his horses, his chariot and his sarathy with 
arrows; he releases an unrestrained cloudburst of arrows over him, while 
glancing briefly at Bhishma, Drona and Kripa. Karna replies with a torrent 
of his own arrows, and the crown-adorned Arjuna unleashes another 
downpour of keen-edged barbs. Attacking each other with arrows and astras 
beyond count, the two create so many arrow-clouds that they appear to the 
onlookers like the Sun and the Moon in a stormy sky. 

Karna, of the light hands, wounds four of Arjuna’s horses with whetted 
shafts and then strikes his sarathy and flagstaff with three arrows each. 
Provoked, like a lion woken from slumber, Jishnu, crusher of foes, bull of 
the Kurus, lets fly a hot stream of shafts at Karna. 

A blizzard of arrows spumes at the Pandava, as Karna displays his 
prowess. Arjuna covers Karna’s chariot with so many arrows that it looks 
like the Sun radiating his light over many worlds. Like a lion set upon by an 
elephant, Arjuna draws his bowstring to his ear and shoots crescented 
arrows into all parts of the Sutaputra’s body. These seething shafts strike 
Karna’s arms and legs, his head and neck, and every other limb like 
thunderbolts. 

At last, somewhat mangled by Partha’s superhuman archery, Karna, son 
of Vikartana, surrenders his position at the van of the Kuru army, and flees 
the battle like an elephant routed by another.” 


CANTO 55 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana continued, “After Radheya leaves the field, the other 

warriors, led by Duryodhana, attack the son of Pandu. As the shore 
withstands the fury of the sea, Arjuna withstands the rage of the teeming 
legions that rush towards him in battle-formations, shooting fusillades of 
arrows. 

Kunti’s son Svetavahana, first among all warriors, rushes at them, now 
loosing divine astras. Partha’s arrows radiate from his Gandiva everywhere 
like rays from the Sun; amongst rathikas, horsemen, the elephant-mounted, 
and mail-clad foot-soldiers—there is not one who has even a two finger 
space left uninjured on his body. For his dexterity with Devastras, for the 
superbly trained horses and Uttara’s skill in maneouvering them, for his 
infallible aim, for his strength and light-handedness, Arjuna is like the 
apocalyptic fire that burns to end the world with all its creations; and none 
can bear to look at him for he blazes in blinding splendour. 

Devastated by Arjuna’s tirades of arrows, the enemy legions look like 
clouds rising over the brow of a hill that reflect rays of sunlight, or like 
groves of upright asoka trees resplendent with clusters of flowers. Afflicted 
by Partha’s arrows the enemy soldiers are like scalded garlands from which 
withered blossoms fall. Torn flags and royal parasols swirl about in the 
wind that blows everywhere. Terrified by bloody chaos, horses run in all 
directions, unyoked by Arjuna’s sure arrows, and dragging shards of broken 
chariots behind them; and beleaguered elephants, their chests, ears, tusks 


and trunks pierced, drop on the battlefield, making the ground tremble. 
Soon the earth is strewn with the corpses of Kaurava elephants and looks 
like a dark sky, overcast with black thunderheads, with no wind to blow 
them away. 

O King, just as the conflagration at the end of the yuga consumes all 
that can perish in the world, so does Partha consume his foes in this battle. 
With the might of his arms, the twang of his bow, the inhuman cries of the 
creatures on his flagstaff, the dreadful roar of the great monkey and the blast 
of his conch, the all-powerful Parantapa Arjuna strikes terror such as they 
have never known into the hearts of Duryodhana’s forces. Soon, the 
courage and strength of every hostile warrior seems to drain into the dust at 
the very sight of Arjuna. 

Unwilling to sin by killing those that are defenceless, Arjuna rides 
another path and attacks the Kuru army from behind with a storm of 
feathered barbs that fly, like trained falcons, to find their marks. Soon the 
very world seems covered by arrows and the sky to stream blood. Just as 
the infinite rays of the mighty Sun break out from being crowded into an 
inadequate vessel, so do Arjuna’s countless arrows find the vast sky too 
small. 

Those who face him see his chariot only once, for a moment, when it 
nears them, for then they and their mounts leave this world. His arrows pass 
unobstructed through men’s bodies, and his chariot flies unimpeded through 
hostile ranks. Arjuna tosses enemy troops carelessly about as if he is the 
thousand-headed Vasuki playing in the ocean. The noise made by the 
ceaseless tide of arrows from Kiriti’s bowstring exceeds all other sounds, so 
loud that its like has never, ever, been heard before. 

Their bodies pierced closely with arrows on fire, the elephants throng 
the field like black clouds flashing with lightning braids. As he looses his 
endless tide in all directions, Arjuna’s bow draws perfect circles. The 
arrows from the Gandiva never miss their mark, not one, even as the eye 
dwells surely, solely, on things beautiful. The trail made by Kiriti’s chariot 
is like that of a herd of elephants marching through a forest. Struck by 
Partha’s uncanny gales of missiles, his enemies might well believe that, 
wishing for his son’s victory, Indra himself, with all the Devas, is upon 
them. They see Vijaya, the ever-victorious, at his terrible sacrifice of 
slaughter, as Death incarnate. 


Beset by Partha, the Kuru troops are devastated in a manner that only 
Arjuna could achieve; just its own metaphor, it cannot be compared to 
anything but the battles of Partha himself. He beheads his enemies as easily 
as a reaper snips the tops of paddies, and the Kurus are weak with fear. 

Tossed about and torn by the hurricane that is Arjuna, the forest of his 
enemies bleeds into the earth and stains it purple; and the bloody dust 
whipped up by death’s wind reddens the Sun’s rays. Soon the sky is so red 
that it seems like the hour of sunset. But though the Sun stops shedding his 
light after he sets, the son of Pandu does not stop his stream of shafts. That 
Kshatriya of energy beyond imagining, who knows no fatigue, overwhelms 
all the great archers of the enemy with his divine weapons, despite their 
irresistible and combined prowess. 

Arjuna shoots seventy-three arrows at Drona, ten at Dussaha, eight at 
Drona’s son, twelve at Dussasana and three at Kripa the son of Saradvata, 
all inside a moment. The Parantapa wounds Shantanu’s son Bhishma; he 
strikes Duryodhana with a hundred arrows; he slashes Karna’s ear with a 
slim eagle-feathered shaft. When Maharatha Karna, who is truly a master of 
all weapons, is wounded and his chariot shattered, and his sarathy killed, his 
troops break up and flee. 

Seeing Karna’s army disintegrate, Virata’s son wants to know what 
Partha intends, ‘O Partha, to which division shall I now take you in my 
glorious chariot? Command me and I will bear you to it like the wind.’ 

Arjuna replies, ‘Uttara, that great warrior you see yonder, clad in tiger- 
skin, mounted on a chariot with a blue flag and drawn by red horses, is 
Kripa. You can see the frontlines of his legions. Take me to him and I will 
show that great bobwman my swiftness of hand. 

That other Maharatha whose flag bears the device of a golden water-pot 
is Acharya Drona, greatest among all masters of weapons. I have always 
revered him, as have all Kshatriyas. Therefore, drive around him in 
pradakshina and let us bow our heads to him, for that is our dharma. I will 
strike him only if he strikes me first; then he will not be able to fault me. 

The warrior beside Drona, whose flag has the emblem of a bow on it, is 
the Acharya’s son, Maharatha Aswatthama. I and all Kshatriyas honour him 
too. So pause again when you come to his chariot. 

The warrior who sits on his chariot wearing golden armour, surrounded 
by a third of the army consisting of the best troops, and whose standard 
bears an elephant against a background of gold, is the illustrious 


Duryodhana, son of Dhritarashtra. O Kshatriya, take this chariot to him who 
can smash enemy chariots. This king is difficult to overcome and he can 
crush any enemy at all. He thinks of himself as the best of Drona’s disciples 
in lightness of hand. Today, I will show him that I am the superior archer. 

The warrior whose flag bears the device of a thick rope used for 
tethering elephants is Vikartana’s son Karna, whom you already know. 
When you come before that evil son of Radha, be very careful, for he 
always challenges me to a fight, and he is a great warrior indeed. 

The warrior whose flag is blue and has five stars and a Sun at their 
heart, who has limitless prowess, who sits on his chariot holding a huge 
bow in his richly-gloved hands, whose head is shaded by a pure-white royal 
parasol, who stands at the head of a multitude of chariots flying various 
banners, who looks like the Sun in front of massed black clouds, whose 
mail of gold sparkles like the light of the Sun and Moon together, and who 
in his golden helmet strikes fear into my heart, is Shantanu’s son Bhishma, 
the grandsire of us all. Entertained with regal splendour by Duryodhana, he 
is partial to that prince, and very fond of him. Approach him last, for he 
might pose an obstacle to us. Now guide our horses with all your great 
skill.’ 

Virata’s son responds by briskly guiding Arjuna’s chariot towards where 
Kripa stands eager for battle.’ ” 


CANTO 56 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Those ranks of fierce Kuru fighters resemble 

massed monsoon clouds drifting on a slow wind. Near them are 
innumerable horses and their riders; there are also ferocious elephants, 
resplendent in beautiful armour and ridden by skilled warriors who goad 
them with iron hooks and ankushas. 

And O King, in the firmament above, accompanied by the divine 
Viswas and Maruts, and seated in a splendid vimana is Sakra. Yakshas, 
Gandharvas and Nagas also crowd the sky, so it seems bejewelled as a clear, 
star-spangled night. All the Devas have come, each in his own chariot, to 
see how well mortals use Devastras and to witness the great duel between 
Kripa and Arjuna. Indra’s divine vahana, embellished with myriad 
gemstones and commanded by the will of its rider, its roof held up by a 
hundred thousand golden posts and a central one entirely jewel-encrusted, 
stands out conspicuous among the others. 

Thirty-three Devas with Vasava at their head, and Gandharvas, 
Rakshasas, Nagas, Pitrs and Devarishis have come with the Lord Indra. 
Seated in the vimana of the king of Devas are radiant Rajarishis of old— 
Vasumanas, Balaksha and Supratardana, Ashtaka, Sibi and Yayati, Nahusha 
and Gaya, Manu and Puru, Raghu, Bhanu and Krisasva, Sagara and Nala. 
Then comes a magnificent procession—the chariots of Agni and Isa, Soma 
and Varuna, Prajapati, Dhatri and Vidhatri, Kubera, Yama, Alambusha and 
Ugrasena, and the Gandharva Tumburu. All the Devas, the Siddhas and the 


foremost of Munis have come here to witness the encounter between Arjuna 
and the Kurus. 

The sublime fragrance of heavenly vanamalas pervades the air like 
woodlands redolent with the perfumes of the blossoms of spring. Glorious 
are the great red parasols, the clothes, the garlands and the waving plumes 
on the heads of the gods. The dust of the earth has settled; lustre is 
everywhere, and the divinely-scented breezes waft soothingly over the 
combatants. 

The sky is ablaze with the beauty of the shining craft of the Devas that 
adorn it—those that have already arrived and the ones that still come, in a 
train behind the Lord of gods. They surround him, the magnificent Indra, 
wielder of the thunderbolt, who sits in his awesome vimana, wearing a 
garland of lilies and lotuses. And the slayer of Bala gazes insatiably at his 
son on the battlefield below.” 


CANTO 57 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Partha, scion of the house of Kuru, looks at the 

Kuru army arrayed for battle and says to Virata’s son, ‘Ride at 
Kripa, son of Saradvata; approach the chariot whose flag flies the device of 
a golden altar from the south.’ 

At once, Uttara sets out, urging his silver-white horses protected by 
golden kavacha. Encouraging each of them to run faster and faster, he spurs 
those spirited, moon-silver steeds forward. As they near the Kuru legions, 
he expertly reins in his wind-swift steeds. The prince of the Matsyas 
skilfully wheels them around, making them go in circles and turning them 
to the left, bewildering the Kurus. Virata’s intrepid son finally makes a full 
circle and arrives near Kripa’s chariot; then he stops, facing the Brahmana. 

Crying out his own name, Arjuna announces himself and blows a blast 
on the tremendous Devadatta. Blown on the field of battle by mighty 
Jishnu, the stentorian sound is like the roar of a mountain splitting. Amazed 
that the conch has not shattered with the force of Arjuna’s blowing, the 
Kurus and all their warriors begin to applaud it. The din reaches up into the 
sky and resounds there like a thunderbolt hurled at a mountain by 
Maghavat. 

The fearless Maharatha Kripa is roused to fury by Arjuna; he cannot 
bear that sound and takes up his own conch-shell and blows it emphatically. 
Filling the three worlds with that sound, Kripacharya angrily pulls on the 


string of his enormous bow. Like two suns, the two warriors stand face to 
face in their chariots, turbulent as monsoon clouds. 

In a flash, then, Saradvata’s son Kripa pierces Partha Parantapa with ten 
light-swift arrows that can penetrate deep into the body. Pritha’s son raises 
the celebrated Gandiva and shoots back a cataract of iron arrows. Kripa 
shreds Partha’s blood-sucking deluge into slivers even as they fly at him. 

Arjuna employs every manner of manoeuvre to spray arrows all around 
him. He fills the sky with them, does Pritha’s son of fathomless soul, and 
cloaks Kripa in a night of dark arrows. Wounded and bleeding, Kripa roars 
out his rage and looses ten thousand calescent shafts at the noble Partha of 
the boundless might. 

Arjuna responds by wounding Kripa’s four horses with four searing 
arrows from the Gandiva: sharp, straight and golden-winged. Struck by 
these flame-hot shafts, his horses rear up and Kripa loses his balance. 
Seeing him stagger in his chariot, Arjuna suspends his onslaught out of 
respect for his old master; but Kripa quickly composes himself and shoots 
ten kanka-feathered arrows at Savyasachi, piercing him deep. Partha severs 
Kripa’s bow and shreds his gloves with a crescent-tipped barb. With great 
care, SO as not to injure him, he cuts away Kripa’s coat of mail, with arrows 
that could pierce the heart beating in any man’s body. Divested of armour, 
Kripa looks like a snake that has shed its skin. 

As soon as he loses his bow to Partha’s arrows, Kripa takes up a new 
one and strings it in a flash, but Arjuna breaks that one too. And the 
Pandava breaks all his opponent’s bows, one after the other, as soon as the 
son of Saradvata takes them up. 

When most of his bows are broken, Kripa casts his javelin at Arjuna 
like a thunderbolt. Even as the golden spear flares at him meteor-like, 
Arjuna cleaves it with ten shafts of iron. 

Kripa seizes up another bow and smoothly looses a hundred arrows of 
curved flights at Arjuna; but Partha cuts these, also, into shards with just ten 
uncanny barbs. Infused with furious urjas on the battlefield, the son of 
Pritha shoots thirteen stone-sharpened arrows that are like flames. With one 
of these, he severs the yoke of his opponent’s chariot; with four he bloodies 
his four steeds; with the sixth he beheads the charioteer; with three he 
shatters the triple bamboo axle of the chariot, and with two its wheels; his 
twelfth chops down the flagpole; and with the thirteenth, Phalguna, looking 
like Indra, and smiling disdainfully, pierces Kripa’s chest. 


With his bow riven, his chariot broken, his steeds slain and his 
charioteer killed, Kripa leaps down, quickly takes up a mace and hurls it at 
Arjuna; but Arjuna uses his miraculous arrows to send that heavy, gleaming 
weapon back to its source. Kripa’s warriors attack Partha from all sides in 
an effort to rescue the son of Saradvata. 

The son of Virata turns his horses to the left and drives in the circular 
yamaka fashion, holding all those warriors at bay. Those bulls among men 
lead the chariotless, helpless Kripa away from the dangerous Dhananjaya, 
the son of Kunti.” 


CANTO 58 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Now that Kripa has been rescued, invincible 
Drona takes up his bow with an arrow already notched and ready to 
fly; he charges Arjuna and his white horses with his own chestnuts. 

Arjuna sees his Guru flying towards him on his golden chariot no great 
distance away and says to Uttara, ‘Blessings on you, my young friend; take 
me before that warrior atop whose lofty banner you see a golden altar that 
looks like a tall flame, around which many flags fly, whose chariot is drawn 
by large and handsome chestnut horses, as well-trained, pleasant and docile 
as they are mighty, whose bodies are the colour of corals and their faces 
copper-hued. That warrior is Drona, whom I wish to fight. 

This son of Bharadvaja is long-armed; he is irresistibly vigorous and 
illustrious; his prowess is celebrated across the three worlds; his mind is as 
brilliant as Usanas’ and his knowledge of dharma as vast as Brihaspati’s; he 
is well-versed in the four Vedas, and he is a chaste and devout Brahmachari. 
O my friend, he has mastered the loosing of devastras, as well as the 
mantras to withdraw them; indeed the science of weaponry, the very Astra 
Shastra, dwells within him. Forgiveness, self-control, truthfulness, 
abhorrence of causing injury and faultless conduct are some of the virtues 
of this Dvija. I would fight this most blest one on this field; so, Uttara, drive 
me to the Acharya.’ 

Virata’s son urges his horses towards the chariot of Bharadvaja’s son. At 
the same moment, Drona, too, plunges towards the onrushing Partha, like 


one enraged elephant charging another, and blows on his conch a blast that 
equals the sound of a hundred trumpets. At that sound, the whole army is 
agitated like a tempestuous sea. 

Seeing those beautiful, red horses mingling in battle with Arjuna’s 
swan-white ones, all racing swiftly as thoughts, those watching are 
wonderstruck. Seeing Drona, the guru, and his sishya Arjuna confront each 
other on the field of batthe—both are magnificent—the Bhaarata host 
trembles. 

Arjuna is full of joy when he reaches Drona’s chariot, and he salutes his 
teacher. That Parantapa humbly and affectionately addresses Drona, ‘We 
have completed our term of exile and now want to avenge the wrongs done 
to us. You who are invincible in battle, there is no need for you to be angry 
with us. O Anagha, I have no intention of striking you unless you strike me 
first. It is for you to decide.’ 

Drona promptly sends more than twenty arrows whistling at Arjuna, but 
the swift Partha cuts them off before they can reach him. Displaying 
awesome lightness of hand, the Acharya covers Arjuna’s chariot with a 
thousand arrows, and to provoke Partha he cloaks his silvery white horses 
with kanka-feathered arrows. The battle between Drona and Kiriti erupts, 
with both Maharathas shooting arrows of blazing splendour at each other. 

The two adversaries are renowned for their achievements; they are both 
as swift as the wind, masters of all the devastras and invested with 
extraordinary prowess. They loose clouds of fiery shafts at each other and 
stupefy the Kshatriyas who watch. All the warriors there are filled with 
wonder at the sight, and they give Drona a great accolade. 

Those that stand there on the battlefield say to one another, ‘Well done! 
Who except Phalguna is worthy of fighting Drona in battle? How stern the 
dharma of war is: Arjuna fights his own guru!’ 

Inflamed, inspired, neither mighty-armed hero gains any advantage, as 
each covers the other with arrows. His rage mounting, Bharadvaja’s son 
draws his huge gold-plated bow and stabs Arjuna repeatedly with a flurry of 
arrows; he assails Arjuna’s chariot with arrows so numerous and so 
dazzling that they dim the light of the Sun. That Brahmana Maharatha rains 
arrows on Arjuna like a cloudburst on a mountain, and pierces him with 
many. 

The son of Pandu takes up his Gandiva, the supreme bow, and 
nonchalantly responds with variegated shafts and checks Drona’s lethal 


deluge. All who watch are amazed. The handsome Savyasachi whirls about 
on his chariot, switching the Gandiva from one hand to the other, spraying 
his arrows on all sides simultaneously. They cover the sky in an expanse of 
dense shade, and Drona is invisible like the Sun hidden by fog. Shrouded by 
the golden arrows, Drona looks like a mountain on fire. 

Seeing his chariot enveloped by Partha’s archery, Drona, that jewel on 
the battlefield, bends his terrible bow that resounds like clashing clouds. It 
is a circle of flames as he draws it and lets fly a volley of crescented arrows; 
and the battlefield echoes with a sound like bamboo crackling in a forest 
fire. 

Still, the smooth, golden-winged arrows of Arjuna’s—he of 
unfathomable soul—choke the air on all sides and obscure the Sun. Planed 
smooth as mirrors and flighted with golden wings, the Pandava’s shafts look 
like flocks of birds in the sky; while, touching each other, tip to end, 
Drona’s arrows draw an unbroken line in the sky. The gilded arrows of the 
two splendid archers cover the heavens like a meteor shower, and surely the 
kanka-feathered ones look like rows of cranes coursing through the autumn 
sky. 

The fierce and terrible encounter between Drona and Arjuna is like that 
ancient one between Vritrasura and Vasava. Drawing their bows into 
circles, loosing endless rills of missiles at each other, they are like elephants 
battling with lowered tusks. Enraged though they may be, those jewels of 
the battlefield fight strictly by the sacred laws of war, even while exhibiting 
their mastery over celestial weapons. 

Arjuna resists his Acharya’s astras with his own; the Pandava puts his 
marvellous skills on show: that most brilliant Kshatriya fills the air with a 
bounty of astras. The Acharya sees how fiercely and intently Arjuna fights, 
and he playfully fights back, in affection. The duel with unearthly weapons 
between Bharadvaja’s son and Phalguna, those lions among men, each 
invincible to the other, is truly like the Devasura yuddha of old. 

The son of Pandu repeatedly checks Drona’s Aindra, Vayavya and 
Agneya astras with his own. The arrow-clouds of the two peerless archers 
cover the sky and cast a great shadow over the earth. 

Arjuna’s arrows fall on the hostile warriors like thunder and lightning, 
O Rajan. Elephants, chariots and horses are bathed in blood and look like 
kinsuka trees in full bloom. After the savage encounter between Arjuna and 
Drona, the spectacle of the field strewn with braceleted arms hewn off at the 


shoulder, other dissevered limbs, the crimsoned corpses of grandly attired 
rathikas, gilded armour stained scarlet, horsemen and foot-soldiers and 
banners cut down, sends waves of panic through the Kuru host. 

Wielding their invincible bows, the two sublime archers pare each 
other’s forces. Bharatarishabha, this dread duel between Drona and Kunti’s 
son is akin to the one of yore between Bali and Vasava. Bows drawn into 
circles of light, they assail each other, staking their lives. 

A voice from the sky applauds the Brahmana, ‘Drona performs a 
difficult feat indeed as he fights the firm-handed Arjuna, crusher of foes, 
invincible bowman, conqueror of Devas and Daityas, greatest of all 
Maharathas..’ 

Drona is wonderstruck at Partha’s infallible aim, his unflagging vigour, 
his swiftness and the formidable range of his missiles. O bull of the 
Bhaaratas, Partha looses a blizzard of arrows at his Acharya. Those who 
watch from the field applaud on seeing his arrows like locust-swarms, and 
exclaim, Excellent! So swift and continuous is the stream of arrows he 
unleashes that there is no space between them even for air, and the 
onlookers see his movements only as a blur. 

Lightness of hand rules the duel. Arjuna now shoots his arrows ever 
more swiftly, and hundreds of thousands of them fall at once on Drona’s 
chariot. 

The Kuru forces watch Drona being hidden from view by Arjuna’s 
arrows and set up a dismal wail. Maghavat and the Gandharvas and Apsaras 
who have come here cheer Partha’s magic fleetness of hand. 

Then the Acharya’s son, Maharatha Aswatthama, confronts the Pandava 
with a large force of chariots, and despite his rage to see his father sorely 
embattled, is filled with admiration for the noble son of Pritha. He charges 
Arjuna and inundates him with a pralaya of arrows. Partha turns his horses 
towards Aswatthama, giving Drona an opportunity to escape. Wounded, 
bereft of armour and banner, Drona hastily leaves the field.” 


CANTO 59 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Now Drona’s son thunders forward to meet 

Arjuna in battle. Seeing Aswatthama charge him, covering him in an 
arrow-storm and riding at him like a rain-charged hurricane, Arjuna greets 
his Acharya’s son with a flash-flood of his own arrows. 

Harrowing is the encounter between them, like that between the Devas 
and Asuras. They shoot at each other as Virata and Vasava once did, 
completely enclosing the sky with their shafts and hiding the Sun. The very 
air falls hushed; and as they strike each other, the explosions of their 
weapons ring out like dry bamboo stalks bursting in a raging fire. Rajan, 
Arjuna draws deep blood from Aswatthama’s horses; they falter and drag 
his ratha about in a daze, weakly. 

Partha is everywhere at once, but Drona’s tremendous son lifts his 
archery and severs the bowstring of the Gandiva with a horseshoe-headed 
arrow. The Devas watch this incredible feat and cry, Well done! Well done! 
So, too, do Drona, Bhishma, Karna and the great Kripa excitedly applaud 
Aswatthama’s deed. The Acharya’s son draws his own superb bow round 
and, with kanka-feathered arrows, pierces his adversary, that bull among 
warriors, squarely through his chest. 

But Partha Mahabaho only laughs and restrings the Gandiva in the 
twinkling of an eye. Moistening the new bowstring with sweat from his 
brow dark as the new moon, he rushes at his adversary, an infuriated bull of 
a great elephant herd charging another tusker. 


The contention between the two refulgent warriors makes the 
onlookers’ hair stand on end, and they watch in awe, in disbelief as the 
heroes fight on, calmly, fiercely. They fight on with fiery, hissing, snakelike 
arrows: narachas. The Pandava’s two quivers are inexhaustible, and he 
dominates the field, immovable as a mountain. Aswatthama’s arrows, 
discharged without let, are soon exhausted, and only so does Arjuna prevail. 

Then Karna pulls on the string of his awesome bow with great force, 
sounding it like spring thunder, and the fighting men of the Kuru army 
tremble and cry out in fear. Pritha’s son turns his gaze in the direction of 
that sound and sees Radheya. His anger ignites and the Pandava bull stares 
at Karna with death in his eyes. 

Seeing Arjuna now turn away from Drona’s son, O King, the Kuru 
warriors shoot thousands of arrows on him. But Mahabaho Dhananjaya just 
wheels away and, his eyes turning red as plums, makes a dash at Karna. 
Eager for single combat with him, the son of Kunti speaks to his inveterate 
enemy.” 


CANTO 60 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


s A rjuna says, ‘Karna, the time has come for you to make good the 
boast you made in the sabha, that you have no equal in battle. 
Today, Karna, you stand before me in battle; you will discover the limits of 
your prowess and never again be proud or dismissive. You abandoned good 
breeding and spoke brashly, but you will find it hard to translate your glib 
bragging into deeds. Radheya, you will fight me today before all the Kurus; 
let me see how you make good your lofty claims and all the insults you 
flung at me. 

You will now face the consequences of exhorting evil men to outrage 
Panchali in the Kuru sabha. Fettered by dharma, I did not avenge her on 
that darkest of all my days. Today I will unleash my long withheld anger 
against you. Evil one, we suffered for twelve years in the forests; today you 
will reap the harvest of our vengeance. Come, Karna, face me in battle and 
let your Kaurava friends, my vile cousins, be witnesses to what I do to you.’ 

Karna replies, ‘Partha, translate your boasts into deeds, if you dare. The 
world knows that your arrogance far exceeds your ability. It was not dharma 
but cowardice that prevented you from seeking revenge earlier. Prove 
yourself against me and we will acknowledge your prowess. If, as you 
claim, your forbearance was truly due to dharma, know that you are as 
bound by dharma today as you were before, although you consider yourself 
freed from that bond. 


But how can you want to fight me, after living a vanaprastha’s life for 
twelve years? Son of Pritha, even if Sakra fought at your side you would 
cause me no anxiety. Your wish is about to be fulfilled, Kaunteya. Fight me 
and you will see who the greater archer is and by how much.’ 

Arjuna replies, “O Radheya, it is because you fled while fighting me that 
you are still alive. I have killed your younger brother. What other true 
warrior but you would flee from the battlefield after seeing his brother slain, 
and then boast, as you still do, before all these honourable men?’ 

With that, invincible Arjuna rides at Karna and discharges a salvo of 
barbs that can pierce any armour. But Maharatha Karna responds with 
alacrity and covers Partha in a lashing downpour of the keenest shafts. In 
the fierce duel that follows, arrows fly in tempests from every direction; 
they lacerate the combatants’ arms and horses, and even shred each one’s 
leathern gloves. 

Arjuna severs Karna’s bowstring but, undeterred, Karna takes up 
another one and draws blood from the Pandava’s hand, loosening his grip 
on his bow. His rage stoked, Partha Mahabaho desiccates Karna’s weapon 
in his very hands, so it falls to his feet in pieces. Karna picks up a javelin 
and casts it, like another Vajra, at his sworn enemy; but Arjuna carves it up 
with a sharp burst of arrows. 

The forces that follow the son of Radha rush at Arjuna, who kills them 
all with deadly fire from the Gandiva. Drawing his bowstring to his ear, 
Bibhatsu fells Karna’s horses with a refrain of rough-hewn arrows; and they 
drop to the ground, dead. The mighty Kaunteya strikes Karna’s chest with a 
smoking shaft of untold vitality that pierces his armour and embeds itself 
deep in his body. Karna’s vision blurs and he briefly faints. When he 
recovers, he is in great pain; without further ado, he flees the field and rides 
away, leaving Arjuna and Uttara looking after him in scorn.” 


CANTO 61 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana continued, “Having defeated Vikartana’s son, Arjuna 

says to Uttara son of Virata, ‘Take me towards that division where 
you see the flag with a golden palmyra tree. My godlike pitamaha, 
Bhishma, waits there, eager to meet me in battle.’ 

Uttara, who is badly wounded, sees the great host of chariots, elephants 
and horses and says, ‘O Kshatriya, I can no longer steer your horses. My 
spirits droop and my mind is clouded. The power of the devastras that you 
and the Kurus have used makes the world spin before my eyes. The stench 
of blood and fat from wounded flesh makes my senses reel. The sights I see 
make my head ache in fear. 

Never have I seen such a vast army of war-horses. The slapping of 
gauntlets, the raucous blare of conches, the roars of the warriors, the 
shrieking of elephants and the thunderous twang of the Gandiva stupefy me. 

O Arjuna, my heart pounds and my vision fails me from watching you 
draw fiery circles with your blazing Gandiva. I am terrified by the sight of 
your dreadful arrows and your savage mien when you fight, so like an 
enraged Indra, even like Rudra wielder of the Pinaka. 

I am blinded every time you take up an arrow, fix it to your bowstring 
and send it forth. Though I am here, my very senses desert me and I cannot 
see what you do. I wilt and the earth churns before me, leaving me too weak 
to even hold my whip and reins.’ 


Arjuna says, “Do not be afraid; take heart. You have performed many 
wondrous feats in battle, O great Kshatriya. You are blessed that you are 
born into the royal house of the illustrious Matsyas. It does not become you 
to be downcast when punishing your foes. So, my prince, Parantapa, stay on 
my chariot, muster your courage and guide my horses once more into battle 
for me.’ 

Arjuna Maharatha speaks again to Virata’s son and says, “Take me now 
to the front of Bhishma’s army, and I will sever his bowstring. Today you 
will see me shoot divine weapons of great wonder and beauty, that flash like 
lightning amidst dark clouds. 

Today the Kauravas will see my gold-backed Gandiva and they will 
argue about which hand I use—right or left—to shoot my arrows. Today I 
will create a hideous river to the netherworld; blood will be its waters, 
chariots its eddies and elephants its crocodiles. Today I will strip the Kuru 
forest of its branches by hewing off heads, arms and legs, by shredding 
mighty chests and muscle-rippling backs. 

Alone, bow in hand, a hundred paths will open before me as I raze the 
Kurus. Today you will see the Kuru army beset by me, whirling in a blood- 
drenched spiral. Today I will show you my true skill at archery. Be the 
ground rough or smooth, stay firm on the chariot, for my winged arrows can 
pierce even Mount Sumeru that reaches up into Swarga. 

Once, at Indra’s behest, I killed hundreds and thousands of Paulomas 
and Kalakhanjas, and from him I have inherited my steadfast grasp of my 
bow. My lightness of hand comes from Prajapati Brahma, and from him I 
have learnt the tactics of attack and defence when surrounded by enemy 
forces. On the other side of the great ocean, I defeated sixty thousand 
chariot mounted warriors—all fierce archers from Hiranyapura. 

Today I will vanquish the multitude of the Kuru host as easily as a 
tempest would blow away a pile of cotton. My fiery arrows will set the 
Kuru forest aflame, its banners the trees, its infantry the shrubs, its chariot- 
warriors the wild animals. Just as the wielder of the thunderbolt crushed the 
Danavas, I will bring the Kuru Maharathas down from their chariots. 

In addition to my other weapons, I have obtained the Raudra from 
Rudra, the Varuna from Varuna, the Agneya from Agni, the Vayavya from 
Vayu and the Vajra from Sakra. Despite all the great warriors that protect it, 
I will bring the Dhartarashtra force to its knees. O son of Virata, do not be 
afraid.’ 


Thus assured by Savyasachi, prince Uttara penetrates that indomitable 
array of rathas protected by Bhishma. The illustrious son of Ganga, he of 
the fierce deeds, however, easily withstands the mighty-armed and 
relentless Kshatriya. Arjuna confronts Bhishma and, with a magic golden 
shaft, cuts down his standard, severing it cleanly at its base; and the flag 
bearing the golden palmyra crashes to the ground. 

At this, four great Kauravas, Dussasana, Vikarna, Dussaha and 
Vivimsati—all of them masters in the use of astras, all decked in beautiful 
garlands and jewellery —charge towards that fearful bowman and surround 
hm. Dussasana pierces Uttara with a crescent-tipped arrow and also draws 
blood from Arjuna’s chest. Partha shatters Dussasana’s gilded bow with a 
vulture-feathered shaft, and he bloodies the most bestial Kaurava’s hirsute 
chest with five more. 

He cannot withstand the terrible Arjuna, and Dussasana flees the fight; 
swiftly, his brother Vikarna attacks the raging Pandava with a slew of his 
own vulture-winged shafts. But the son of Kunti stuns him with a thick, 
blunt shaft that strikes his head, and Vikarna falls out of his chariot. 
Dussaha, supported by Vivimsati, smothers Arjuna with a cloud of shining 
arrows. 

Unperturbed, Dhananjaya strikes both of them, simultaneously, with 
two flashing darts and kills their horses immediately after. Chariotless and 
bleeding, those sons of Dhritarashtra are spirited away in his chariot by 
another Kaurava who dashes up to rescue them, with a host of other 
chariots. 

Wearing his crown, the undefeated Bibhatsu, son of Kunti, continues to 
assail the enemy from every side with his supernal archery.” 


CANTO 62 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Then, O Bhaarata, all the Maharathas of the 
Kurus unite; they surround Arjuna and put forth all their might to 
subdue him. But he of the fathomless soul envelops them all in a fog of 
arrows, aS mist covers the mountains. The trumpeting of enormous 
elephants and the booming of conch-shells mingle into deafening bedlam. 

Partha’s arrows fly in their thousands, piercing elephants and horses, as 
well as steely coats of mail. With incendiary archery, Pandu’s son appears 
to vie with the midday Sun in brilliance. 

Terror-stricken warriors leap from chariots and horseback, foot-soldiers 
flee helter-skelter. All the while, the air reverberates with the deadly 
clamour of Arjuna’s arrows as they bore through armour of steel, silver and 
copper, and in a short time the field is littered with the corpses of elephant- 
warriors and horsemen, mangled by hissing serpentine shafts from the 
Pandava’s bow. It is as if Dhananjaya, bow in hand, dances on the field of 
battle even like Siva at his Tandava. 

Terror-struck by the thunderous twang of the Gandiva, many soldiers 
run from the stained field strewn with severed heads— some turbaned, some 
with earrings and necklaces of gold. Torsos, butchered by arrows, litter the 
ground, as well as torn limbs decked in ornaments, some still holding 
weapons in dead hands. 

The Earth looks spectrally beautiful. O Bull of the Bhaaratas, heads 
sliced off by Arjuna fall in showers like meteors from the sky. And 


menacing, formidable Partha ranges the field spewing the fire of his anger 
over the sons of Dhritarashtra. 

Seeing how Arjuna scorches the enemy, the Kuru warriors lose all 
courage and stop fighting, although they are in Duryodhana’s presence; 
while Arjuna, who has succeeded in terrorising the Kuru host and routing 
its Maharathas, one by one, continues to wreak havoc. 

The son of Pandu creates a ghastly river of blood with rolling waves, 
quite like the river of death that time creates at the end of a yuga. This 
blood-river has the dishevelled hair of the dead and dying for its weeds, 
bows and arrows as its boats, and the flesh and the dying tissues of animals 
for its mud. Coats of mail and helmets float thick on its surface; it bears 
elephants instead of crocodiles, and chariots are its rafts; marrow, fat and 
blood form its foam; and it strikes abject fear into the hearts of those who 
look at it. 

Hideous, horrible, and rippling with the howling of wild carrion-eaters, 
the scarlet river floats keen-edged weapons menacingly like crocodiles. 
Rakshasas and Pisachas stalk its banks from end to end. Strings of pearls 
form its beads of froth and other gemstones its sparkling bubbles. With 
clutches of arrows for eddies and horses for its tortoises, that river is 
unfordable. The great Kuru Maharathas form the large island in the ruddy 
stream, island that echoes with the blast of conches and the boom of 
drumbeats. 

Thus does Partha create an uncrossable river of blood, river of death. So 
swift is he that no one discerns his taking up an arrow, notching it to his 
bowstring, drawing the string and loosing the shaft from the Gandiva as 
separate movements.” 


CANTO 63 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Duryodhana and Karna, Dussasana and 

Vivimsati, Kripa, Drona and his son charge Arjuna with their bows 
bent, determined to kill him. Great king, Arjuna rides forward to meet their 
attack from his glittering chariot. Kripa, Karna and Maharatha Drona are 
the clouds that rain arrows on Dhananjaya. Keeping their distance, they 
cover his body with their arrows, so there is not even a two-digit space left 
unpierced on him. 

Bibhatsu smiles unperturbed and sets the shimmering Aindrastra to the 
Gandiva. Sunlike, he stands wearing his crown on the battlefield and, like 
the Sun’s rays, covers it with arrows. As lightning flashes in a stormy sky, 
as a flame flares in a rock cleft, the Gandiva flashes, glorious as the 
Indradhanush, the rainbow. 

Like a thunderhead roaring and lashing down rain to soak the ground, 
the resonance of the Gandiva and the arrows that fly from it fill the air; and 
all the Kuru rathikas want to flee. Confusion and dismay strike the hitherto 
calm foot-soldiers; and despair spreads among those broken men who lose 
all hope of living.” 


CANTO 64 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “From the midst of the havoc amongst the 
devastated Kurus, Shantanu’s son Bhishma, Pitama of the Bhaaratas, 
rushes at Arjuna with his golden bow and strikes him with scorching 
clutches of arrows. With his white parasol unfurled above him, Bhishma 
Purushavyaghra is full of deep splendour; he is as radiant as the Sun rising 
over the mountains. The son of Ganga blows his conch to cheer 
Dhritarashtra’s sons, then wheels to his right to confront Arjuna. 

The heroic son of Kunti sees him coming and receives him joyfully, as a 
mountain welcomes a rain-filled cloud. But Bhishma of boundless might 
cuts down Partha’s flagstaff with eight arrows. These arrows flare on to 
reach the banner and strike the Vanara and the other creatures perched 
resplendently on it. 

Pandu’s son fells Bhishma’s regal parasol with a great javelin, and it 
falls onto the earth. Kunti’s son of the light hands strikes his grandsire’s 
flagstaff, his horses and the two chariot-warriors who protect Bhishma’s 
flanks. 

Bhishma cannot bear Arjuna’s onslaught and envelops him in a 
devastra. The Pandava of the deep soul invokes another divine weapon 
against Bhishma at the same time as he receives Bhishma’s missile of 
enchantment lightly, as a mountain wears a cloud. Relentless is the duel that 
ensues between Partha and Bhishma, and the Kaurava troops and warriors 


stand by watching in thrall. Arrows meet arrows and glimmer in the air like 
fireflies of the monsoon. 

O Rajan, bent by the ambidextrous Partha, the Gandiva is a hoop of fire 
as the Pandava’s missiles flow from it in a ceaseless stream. The son of 
Kunti covers Bhishma with a thousand shafts and Bhishma contains the 
cascade with his own astras, just as its shore does a swollen sea; he batters 
the Pandava with a fierce torrent in return. Shards of splintered arrows rain 
down around Phalguna’s chariot, whilst the Pandava’s golden-winged barbs 
swarm thickly from his bow like locusts. Bhishma deflects his grandchild’s 
deadly shower with a thousand stone-whetted arrows. 

The Kauravas shout Excellent! Well done! and applaud Bhishma’s 
marvellous feats as the Pitamaha battles great Dhananjaya who is young, 
powerful, swift and dexterous. Who but Bhishma son of Shantanu, Devaki’s 
son Krishna and Bharadvaja’s son Drona, greatest among Acharyas, can 
withstand Partha in battle? 

Countering astras with other astras, the two Bharatarishabhas, both 
astoundingly strong, fight as if they are at play, delighting all those who 
watch them. These two warriors flit here and there at will across the 
battlefield, wielding unearthly weapons given to them by Prajapati and 
Indra, Agni, Rudra and Kubera, Varuna, Yama and Vayu. All are 
wonderstruck by the contention between the illustrious twain, and they 
shout, Partha Mahabaho! Ah, Bhishma! So rare and awesome is the display 
of devastras that Bhishma and Partha invoke. 

The duel between the two, both masters of all the astras, rages on as if it 
will never end. When they have exhausted the divine astras, they take up 
their bows and arrows once more. Now Arjuna flies at his Pitamaha and 
rives Bhishma’s gold-covered bow with a razor sharp arrow, but without a 
moment’s pause Mahabaho Devavrata takes up another and strings it. 

In a flash the seething Bhishma casts a cupola of arrows over 
Dhananjaya; the tireless Pandava pierces the crafty dome at all the right 
points with a flurry of impossible accuracy. Again, Bhishma aims a ferocity 
of arrows at Pandu’s son. Great king, no distinction can be made between 
those two noblest Kshatriyas as they fight, both masters of mundane and 
divine weapons. 

The ten cardinal points of the sky are obscured by the arrows of Kiriti 
and the son of Shantanu, as each repeatedly attempts to smother his 


adversary with shafts of fire and water, wind and sky. O king, it is past 
belief that this most wonderful duel is fought in this world of mortals. 

Arjuna savagely cuts down the warriors who protect Bhishma’s chariot. 
The Pandava’s shafts flare from the Gandiva in all directions, as if they 
themselves want to slaughter the enemy indiscriminately. As they fly from 
his chariot, his enchanted barbs with golden wings look like a flight of 
unworldly swans in the sky. Indra and the Devas watch in wonder from the 
heavens as Arjuna, amazing archer, invokes yet another devastra. 

A joyful Chitrasena sees the supreme Gandiva and says to Indra, ‘Look 
how these arrows of Partha’s course through the skies in an unbroken line! 
Dazzling is Jishnu’s skill with this divine bow. It is beyond the power of 
any other mortal to wield the Gandiva; no other weapon like it exists on 
Earth. Wondrous and formidable is Arjuna’s arsenal of ancient weapons. 
His movements are so swift that no gap of time or space can be discerned as 
he takes an arrow, fixes it to his gleaming bow and releases it from the 
bowstring drawn back to his ear. 

The Kuru soldiers are blinded by the brilliance of the son of Pandu who 
blazes like the Sun at high noon. Neither does anyone try to gaze upon 
Bhishma, the son of Ganga. Both are celebrated for their achievements; 
both are powerful; both are equal in their heroic feats, and both are 
impossible to quell in battle.’ 

Upon hearing the Gandharva extol Partha and Bhishma, the king of the 
Devas showers divine blooms of petals of light over them. 

Bhishma attacks Arjuna from his left flank. Laughing in delight at the 
sublime duel, Bibhatsu shatters Bhishma’s bow with another vulture- 
feathered arrow and, although Bhishma fights as fiercely as he can, the 
Kaunteya pierces his chest with ten more whining shafts. Sorely wounded 
by these, pain lancing through him, Ganga’s hitherto undefeated son 
staggers and has to lean against his chariot post. Then Bhishma swoons and, 
knowing what he must to save his warrior’s life, his charioteer swiftly bears 
him away to safety.” 


CANTO 65 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “When Bhishma leaves the battle, Duryodhana 

hoists his flag high and comes roaring at Arjuna. He bends his bow 
into a circle and shoots Arjuna squarely through his forehead with a spear- 
headed shaft. With the arrow embedded in his brow, that Kshatriya looks 
strange and splendid, O Rajan, somehow like a lone mountain peak. Warm 
blood gushes from the wound and flows shining down his body like a mala 
of kinsuka flowers. 

Arjuna’s rage billows up, and he pierces Suyodhana with clutch after 
clutch of hissing shafts. A duel erupts between Duryodhana and Partha, first 
among Kshatriyas, both Purushottamas. Both are born into the Ajamida 
race; both are formidable; and they attack holding nothing back. 

Riding an enormous elephant, with four chariots around him in support, 
Vikarna also charges Arjuna. Dhananjaya sees the elephant lumbering at 
him and strikes it between its temples with a blistering arrow. Like a 
thunderbolt cast by Indra, that barb buries itself to its feathers in the 
mountainous creature’s head. The mastodon trembles in agony and, its 
knees buckling, crashes down onto the ground, its head riven like a 
mountain summit by the Vajra. When his great beast falls, Vikarna jumps 
off its back and runs some eight hundred paces in moments, to clamber onto 
Vivimsati’s ratha. 

After he kills the elephant, Partha strikes Duryodhana in his chest with 
another lightning streak of an arrow, drawing a font of his cousin’s blood. 


When they see the elephant slain and Duryodhana wounded, all the 
surrounding warriors, already bleeding from wounds inflicted by the 
Gandiva, lose their nerve and run in panic, following Vikarna and the Kuru 
king’s bodyguard. And Duryodhana Kurusthama, seeing them go, turns his 
chariot around and speeds away from the terrible Partha. 

He is sorely wounded and vomits blood as he flees, but Kiriti, his battle- 
lust undiminished, calls after him in anger, ‘Why do you sacrifice your 
honour and glory? Why do you run away? Why don’t you sound your 
trumpets now, as you did when you set out from your kingdom? I, who 
obey Yudhishtira, am the third son of Pritha; and I stand here ready to do 
battle. 

Do not abandon Kshatriya Dharma; turn and face me, O son of 
Dhritarashtra. Your name Duryodhana has no meaning left. Where is your 
famous ferocity and fortitude that you run from battle? I do not see your 
bodyguards, Duryodhana, in front of you or behind. Go, great man, fly; save 
your precious life, coward, or this Pandava will take it!’ ” 


CANTO 66 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana continued, “Stung deeper than arrows by the searing 
insult, Duryodhana turns back like an elephant prodded by a goad, 
like a snake trodden on. 

A broad golden necklace shimmering upon his great chest, Karna sees 
Duryodhana turn back and prevents him from going to certain death. After 
soothing his beloved friend, Karna himself swings his ratha round to face 
north, and Partha, in battle. A recovered Bhishma also turns his great tawny 
horses round and, bow raised, rushes to protect Duryodhana from the 
fearsome Pandava. Drona, Kripa, Vivimsati, Dussasana and others turn 
back as well and, bows drawn, ride to defend Duryodhana. 

Pritha’s son Dhananjaya sees these warriors and their legions flash 
towards him in a tide and he rushes eagerly at them, as a crane to a rain- 
charged cloud. Arjuna is quickly surrounded by Maharathas, all armed with 
devastras. 

They scathe him with a torrent of arrows, like clouds lashing a 
mountain’s crest with rain. Arjuna cuts down every last shaft in flight, and 
then invokes an inexorable weapon against the Kuru bulls, the Sammohana 
which he got from Indra, an astra of sleep. 

Covering all the cardinal points of the sky with his gorgeously-feathered 
arrows, the great Pandava pulls violently on his bowstring, stunning his 
enemies. Partha take up his Devadatta in both hands, and he blows it with 
such force that the sound fills the skies and echoes in the far corners of the 


Earth. The Kuru heroes are stupefied and stand entranced from the 
enchantment of the Sammohana, still holding their bows, which hang 
limply from nerveless hands. 

Seeing the transfixed Kuru army, Partha remembers princess Uttaraa’s 
request and says to her brother, his sarathy, ‘Purushottama, go amongst the 
Kurus while they are still frozen in trance and bring me Drona and Kripa’s 
white silk scarves; bring Karna’s beautiful golden one and the blue ones of 
Duryodhana and Aswatthama. I suspect that Bhishma is not under the 
astra’s spell, for he knows how to repel the power of Sammohana. So pass 
him by, keeping his horses on your left, for you must avoid any great 
warrior who is awake.’ 

The Matsya prince promptly drops his reins, jumps down from the 
chariot and does what Arjuna asks. He returns with the warriors’ silks and 
takes up the reins of his silver horses again, flicking them lightly over the 
white steeds’ necks, and bearing Arjuna away from the battlefield, beyond 
the footsoldiers and standard-bearers. 

Bhishma sees the Pandava go and strikes him with a flock of arrows, but 
Partha kills his Pitama’s horses and sarathy in a flash and pierces the old 
warrior with ten vicious shafts. Leaving Bhishma helpless on the field, 
Arjuna bursts out from the multitude of chariots with the beautiful bow in 
his hands, surely like the Sun breaking out from behind dark clouds. 

Duryodhana wakes from his trance and, seeing Partha riding away at his 
leisure, as majestic as the king of the Devas, says to Bhishma, ‘How did he 
pass you, Pitama? Attack him; he must not escape!’ 

Shantanu’s son smiles and says, ‘Did you lose good sense as well as 
your strength and weapons whilst you were unconscious? Bibhatsu is not 
addicted to killing, nor does his soul incline towards sin. He will not violate 
his dharma even to gain the three worlds, and only because of this are all of 
us still alive. 

Duryodhana, return to your city and let Arjuna go with the herds he has 
taken back from us. Do not be foolish and disregard what is good for you. 
Indeed, a man must always keep his own welfare in mind.’ 

Listening to his grandsire, Duryodhana quickly loses his hunger for 
battle. He sighs and falls silent. Meanwhile, the other warriors all awaken, 
one by one, and ponder Bhishma’s counsel; they see the wisdom in it and 
that Arjuna is indomitable and, wanting to protect Duryodhana, decide to 
turn home. 


Arjuna happily watches the Kuru warriors leave; he makes the Matsya 
prince turn his chariot around and follows them: he wants to pay his 
respects and speak to them. He honours and worships his Pitama Bhishma 
and his Acharya Drona with a salvo of beautiful arrows that fall at their 
feet; he also salutes Aswatthama, Kripa and the other Maharathas. Then, 
with a final arrow, the son of Pritha breaks Duryodhana’s haughty, jewelled 
crown into pieces. 

Having paid his homage to those he reveres and having humiliated his 
cousin he despises, he fills the three worlds once more with the reverberant 
twang of the Gandiva. He blows the Devadatta, and the sound pierces the 
hearts of all his enemies. Having humbled them all, he stands resplendent 
on the chariot flying the banner which mighty Hanuman adorns. 

As the Kurus ride away, Arjuna says to Uttara, ‘Turn back your horses. 
We have recovered your herds, the enemy has retreated, and you can ride 
home happily to your city.’ 

The Devas, who have witnessed the astounding encounter between the 
lone Phalguna and all the Kurus, also turn their invisible vimanas 
homewards and return to their ethereal abodes. Arjuna’s feats are imprinted 
on their lustrous hearts.” 


CANTO 67 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Having vanquished the Kurus in battle, he with 

the eyes of a bull is taking the valuable Matsya herd back to Virata 
when he sees some wounded soldiers of Dhritarashtra’s routed army 
coming out of the forest. They are terrified when they see Partha; and they 
stand before him with folded hands, their hair dishevelled, exhausted with 
hunger and thirst. Confused and afraid, for they are in a strange land, they 
bow down before Partha and say, “We are your slaves.’ 

Arjuna says, ‘Welcome, and may you be blessed. Go your way, you 
have nothing to fear from me. I will not take the lives of the injured. You 
have my protection.’ 

The band of soldiers greets this with salutations and they sing praises of 
his achievements and fame, and bless him with long life. The Kauravas 
cannot face Arjuna while he is on his way back to the city of Virata; he is 
like an elephant with rent temples. He has scattered the Kuru army like a 
gale does fleecy clouds. 

Partha, slayer of foes, thoughtfully says to the prince of Matsya, ‘You 
are the only one who knows that the sons of Pritha live in your father’s 
kingdom. Do not speak of them or praise them when you enter the city, for 
the king himself may hide in fear. Instead, in your father’s presence 
proclaim the defeat of the Kurus as your own doing. Say to him, “I have 
vanquished the Kurus and recovered our cattle.” 


Uttara says, ‘What you have done is beyond my power; I could never 
achieve it. But if you command me, I will not expose you to my father for 
as long as you forbid it, O Savyasachi.’ 

After he has vanquished the hostile Kurus and retrieved the precious 
herds from them, Arjuna goes back to the sami tree in the smasana and 
stands before it, his body wounded by enemy arrows. In a flash of light, the 
monkey on his banner flies up into the sky and vanishes, along with the 
other supernatural creatures on the magical flagstaff; the illusion created by 
Visvakarma melts away, leaving prince Uttara’s own banner, bearing the 
device of a lion, on the chariot once more. The Matsya prince fastens the 
Pandavas’ arrows and quivers back in the tree, along with the matchless 
Gandiva. With Arjuna for his charioteer again, he rides towards his city in 
joy. 

Having accomplished the stupendous rout of the enemy, Partha braids 
his hair as before, takes the reins from Uttara, and that glorious one will 
enter the city of Virata as Uttara’s sarathy Brihannala. Meanwhile, the 
defeated and dejected Kurus are well on their way back to Hastinapura. 

On the way back to Virata’s city, Arjuna says to Uttara, ‘O Kshatriya, 
Mahabaho, send the cowherds with the cattle in advance, and we will enter 
the city in the afternoon after bathing our horses and giving them water to 
drink. Tell the cowherds to go speedily and proclaim the good news of your 
victory.’ 

Uttara commands the messengers, saying, “The enemy has been routed 
and the cattle have been recovered. Go and proclaim the king’s victory.’ 

Thus, well pleased with their victory, having restored the Pandavas’ 
weapons to the sami tree, having put on the garments and ornaments they 
left there, the two Kshatriyas triumphally ride into the city of Virata: the 
heroic son of Virata with Brihannala as his charioteer.” 


CANTO 68 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Meanwhile, that morning, his wealth recovered 

and his own vast forces intact, Virata himself enters his city 
accompanied by the four still disguised Pandavas. The king and the sons of 
Pritha bask splendid in glory after shaming the Trigartas in battle and 
recovering all the Matsya herds. When Virata, enhancer of the joy of his 
friends, is seated on his throne, his subjects led by Brahmanas come before 
him. They adulate him, and happily he acknowledges their adoration and 
dismisses them. 

Virata of the Matsyas asks where Uttara is. With some pride and 
pleasure, the royal women and young girls of the palace and the other 
women of the antahpura say, ‘The Kurus came from the north and took the 
rest of our herds. Valiant prince Uttara rode against them alone, with 
Brihannala for his sarathy. He has gone to vanquish the six Maharathas who 
have come with the Kuru army—Shantanu’s son Bhishma, Kripa, Karna, 
Duryodhana, Drona and Drona’s son Aswatthama.’ 

Virata is filled with dread. He says nervously to his ministers, as if to 
console himself, ‘I am sure that the Kauravas will turn back once they learn 
that the Trigartas have been defeated. But let my warriors who were not 
wounded by the Trigartas take a great force out to protect Uttara. Let them 
go at once.’ 

A vast army of horses, elephants, chariots and a teeming legion of foot- 
soldiers, equipped with all kinds of weapons, is mustered without delay, and 


ready to go forth against the Kurus. They await their king’s command. 

A trembling Virata says, ‘Go at once to my child. With a eunuch for his 
charioteer, I fear he may not be alive.’ 

Kanka, the king’s dice-player, smiles and says to the distressed Virata, 
‘If, O King, Brihannala is his charioteer, the enemy will not escape with 
your cattle. If Brihannala protects him, your son will vanquish the Kurus 
today, even if they come with all the lords of the Earth, and even the Devas, 
the Asuras, the Siddhas and the Yakshas together.’ 

Just then, the swift dutas despatched by Uttara arrive in Virata’s city 
with their joyful tidings. His chief minister quickly brings the amazing 
news to Virata in his court. He says, ‘It is passing strange, but all our cattle 
have been rescued, the awesome Kurus defeated and prince Uttara, scourge 
of our foes, is well, and also his charioteer Brihannala.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “These are happy tidings that the herds have been 
recovered and the Kuru army routed, but I do not find it strange that your 
son defeated the Kurus, for Brihannala was his charioteer.’ 

The hair on Virata’s body stands on end in unbridled joy to hear of his 
son’s incredible feat. He makes gifts of clothes to the messengers and issues 
orders to his ministers. 

He says, ‘Let our highways be lined with flags; let all the gods and 
goddesses be worshipped with offerings of flowers. Let princes, warriors, 
musicians and dancing-girls decked in jewels go out to receive my son. Let 
the bell-ringer go out on a swift elephant and proclaim Uttara’s victory at 
every crossroad. Let Uttaraa put on her finest robes and, surrounding herself 
with maidens, musicians and singers of eulogies, go out to receive my 
heroic son.’ 

Beside themselves with excitement, all the people go to welcome 
Uttara, of the boundless prowess—some with auspicious gifts in their 
hands, many with cymbals, trumpets and conches, beautiful women in 
gorgeous attire, encomiasts and chanters of hymns along with minstrels, 
drummers and other musicians. 

Having sent out his army, as well as maidens and bejewelled courtesans, 
to welcome his son home, the overjoyed monarch of the Matsyas says, 
‘Sairandhri, fetch the dice. Come Kanka, let us play.’ 

Kanka says, ‘They say that one whose heart is overflowing with joy 
should not play against a cunning gambler. Therefore I would rather not 
gamble with you for you are in a transport of joy and as I am always 


conscious of your welfare. However, if that is what you truly want, let us 
play.’ 

Virata says, “Even if we do not gamble, you cannot be protecting my 
women, my cattle, my gold and all my wealth.’ 

Kanka replies, ‘O king, bestower of honours, why do you want to 
gamble when it is fraught with evil? It should be shunned. You might have 
seen or at least heard of Yudhishtira, the son of Pandu. He lost his vast, 
prosperous kingdom and his godlike brothers at dice. That is why I am 
averse to the game; but if it is your wish, Rajan, I will play.’ 

While they play, the Matsya king says to the Pandava, “Ah, my son has 
vanquished the formidable Kauravas in battle.’ 

To which the illustrious Yudhishtira says, “And why should he not, 
when Brihannala was his charioteer?’ 

This cuts the Matsya king to the quick, and he cries, “Wretch of a 
Brahmana! Dare you compare a eunuch to my son? Do you know nothing 
of what to say to your king, that you insult me so? Why should my son not 
vanquish all the Kurus led by Bhishma and Drona? Brahmana, it is only 
because of our friendship that I forgive you. But if you want to live, never 
speak such words to me again.’ 

But Yudhishtira says, “Who other than Brihannala can fight a force 
consisting of Bhishma, Drona, Drona’s son, the son of Surya, Kripa, 
Duryodhana, other Maharathas and, indeed, if the need arises, Indra himself 
surrounded by the Maruts? None has been, nor ever will be, his equal in 
prowess. Only Brihannala’s heart fills with joy at the prospect of a terrible 
battle. He vanquished the Devas, the Asuras and Manavas. With such an 
ally, why should your son not conquer the enemy?’ 

Virata growls, ‘Though I warned you, vile Kanka, you don’t care to 
hold your tongue. If there is no punishment, no one would practise virtue.’ 

And the enraged king flings his heavy dice in Yudhishtira’s face. ‘Let 
this not happen again!’ he thunders. 

Yudhishtira’s nose bleeds from being struck, but he contains the blood 
in his hands before it falls to the ground. He glances meaningly at Draupadi 
who stands at his side. Immediately understanding him, she brings a golden 
vessel filled with water to catch the blood that flows from his nose. 

Meanwhile, Uttara enters the city being feted with sweet perfumes and 
flower garlands by the Matsyas, their women and even people from the 


provinces. As he nears the gate of the palace he sends word of his arrival to 
his father. 

The gatekeeper goes to the king and says, ‘Your son Uttara is at the gate 
with Brihannala.’ 

The joyful Matsya king rises and says to him, ‘Show them both in, ah, I 
am impatient to see them!’ 

Yudhishtira takes the dwarapalaka aside and whispers, ‘Let Uttara enter 
alone; Brihannala must not come in yet. That Mahabaho has sworn a vow 
that whoever wounds me or sheds my blood, other than in battle, will not 
live. He will be enraged to see me bleeding and will kill Virata, even in the 
presence of his guards and ministers.’ 

Bhuminjaya enters and, having worshipped the feet of his father, 
approaches Kanka. He sees him seated in a corner of the sabha, bleeding, 
and waited upon by the sairandhri. 

Uttara asks his father, ‘O Rajan, who struck him? Who did this sinful 
thing?’ 

Virata says, ‘I struck the devious Brahmana, and he deserves further 
punishment, for while I was praising you, he dared praise the eunuch.’ 

Uttara says, ‘My lord, you have sinned gravely. You must appease him 
at once so the venom of a Brahmana’s curse does not consume you.’ 

Calming down, his heart brimming over to receive his triumphant son, 
Virata turns to soothe Kanka the gambler, Yudhishtira like a fire hidden in 
ashes, and begs his forgiveness. 

The Pandava replies, ‘My lord, I was never angry that I need to forgive 
you. I was only worried because if blood from my nose fell on the ground, 
you and all your kingdom would have burned. Rajan, I do not blame you 
for having struck me, for those with great power sometimes succumb to 
unreasonable anger.’ 

When the bleeding has stopped, Brihannala enters the sabha. He greets 
Virata and Kanka and stands silent. Having appeased his gambler, Virata 
begins to sing the praises of his son Uttara in Savyasachi’s hearing. 

The Matsya king says, ‘O you who gives the Kekaya princess so much 
joy, in you I truly have a son! I never had, nor shall have, another son who 
is your equal. My child, how did you do battle with the great Karna, whose 
aim is so unerring that he strikes every one of a thousand targets at once? 
How did you contend with Bhishma, who has no equal in the world of men? 
How did you fight Drona, that foremost of all wielders of weapons, the 


Acharya of the Vrishnis and Kauravas, the Dvija who is seen as the 
preceptor of all Kshatriyas? How did you withstand the celebrated 
Aswatthama? How did you fight Duryodhana, who can pierce a mountain 
with his arrows? 

My foes have all been destroyed and a delicious breeze seems to waft 
around me. And when you recovered my wealth which the Kurus stole, it 
seems that all those Maharathas were struck with panic. Without doubt, 
Purusharishabha, you have routed the enemy single-handedly and snatched 
the wealth that is my herds from them like his prey from a tiger.’ ” 


CANTO 69 
GO-HARANA PARVA CONTINUED 


“: U ttara says, ‘It is not I who retrieved the cattle and vanquished the 

Kurus. All this was done by the son of a Deva. That divine youth 

saw me running away in fear when I saw the fearsome Kuru army; he 

stopped me and himself mounted my chariot, making me his sarathy. It was 

he who put the Kauravas to rout and recovered the cattle. This incredible 
deed, father, is that hero’s and not mine. 

It was his arrows that repulsed Kripa, Drona, the Acharya’s powerful 
son, the Sutaputra Karna and Bhishma. He it was who said to the terrified 
Duryodhana who fled like the leader of a herd of elephants, “O prince of 
Kurus, you will not be safe even in Hastinapura. Do all you can to protect 
yourself, because you will not escape me by fleeing. Prepare to fight. If you 
win, you will be sovereign of the entire Earth; if you lose, it is Swarga you 
will gain.” 

Hissing like a snake, and surrounded by his Maharathas, Duryodhana 
turned back to fight. He shot arrows like thunderbolts, and my legs trembled 
at the sight, respected father. Then, that heavenly youth raised his unearthly 
bow and sprayed the Kuru army of chariots and brave warriors with his 
divine arrows. He transfixed that throng of Maharathas with an astra of 
sleep, and that lionish, irradiant youth laughed as he robbed them of silks of 
different hues. 

Indeed, the six greatest rathikas of the Kurus were vanquished by that 
hero alone, like a whole herd of deer in a forest falling prey to one ferocious 


tiger.’ 

Virata says, ‘Where is this mighty-armed youth of celestial origin, this 
hero who recaptured my wealth from the Kurus? I am agog to see him and 
pay my homage to that mighty warrior, for has he not saved you as well as 
my herds?’ 

Uttara replies, ‘The Devaputra vanished immediately. I believe, 
however, that he will show himself either tomorrow or the day after.’ 

Virata remains ignorant of the Pandava whom Uttara describes to him, 
and who lives in his very palace in disguise. 

With the noble Virata’s leave, Partha gives with his own hands the Kuru 
silks he has brought to Virata’s daughter, and the lovely Uttaraa and her 
sakhis are delighted with the fine and brilliant cloths with which they make 
clothes for their dolls.” 


CANTO 70 
VAIVAHIKA PARVA 


V aisampayana said, “Three days later, at dawn, the five Pandavas 

bathe, clothe themselves in royal white robes, put on_ their 
ornaments, and enter Virata’s palace with Yudhishtira at their head, looking 
as splendid as five fierce elephants. They walk into Virata’s sabha, seat 
themselves on thrones reserved for kings, and they look like five sacrificial 
flames ablaze upon an altar. 

In a while, Virata comes into the sabha to hold court; he sees the 
brothers in their splendour and stops short. 

Angrily, he addresses Kanka who sits on the Matsya king’s throne like a 
god, like Indra surrounded by Maruts. He says, ‘I employed you as a 
courtier, a player of dice. How dare you sit on my throne wearing white silk 
and ornaments?’ 

Arjuna smiles and says, “O king, this man is worthy of sharing a throne 
with Indra himself. He reveres Brahmanas, is well-read in the Vedas and 
indifferent to luxury and pleasures of the flesh. He performs sacrifices, is 
firm in his vows and, indeed, he is the embodiment of dharma. He is the 
very best among all men of power, more intelligent than anyone in the 
world, devout in his observance of ascetic rites and a master of all weapons. 
In fact, he knows more about astras than anyone else does, or ever will, in 
the three Lokas. 

There is no one like him even amongst the Devas, Asuras, Manavas, 
Rakshasas, Gandharvas, Yakshas, Kinnaras and Uragas. He is blessed with 


foresight and vitality, and he is much loved by all the people both in the 
cities and villages. He is the Adiratha, the best chariot-warrior, among the 
sons of Pandu. He is the Yajaman at countless sacrifices, a man of piety and 
self-control. 

Like the greatest sage, this saintly king is celebrated across the three 
worlds. He is strong, brilliant, capable, truthful and has his senses under 
perfect control. He is as wealthy as Indra and has amassed as much treasure 
as Kubera; he is as mighty a protector of the three worlds as the powerful 
Manu. 

This great man who is as compassionate as he is powerful is none other 
than that bull of the Kurus, Dharmaraja Yudhishtira. 

This king’s achievements are like the Sun in brilliance; his fame has 
travelled over the world even like the rays of the Sun; and, as sunbeams 
follow the rising Sun, ten thousand elephants and thirty thousand chariots 
and carriages adorned with the purest gold and drawn by the noblest horses 
followed him when he lived amongst the Kurus. Eight hundred vabdhis and 
magadhis, wearing earrings set with shining gemstones, accompanied by 
minstrels, chanted his praises in those days, even as the Rishis sing in praise 
of Indra. 

And, O Virata, the Kauravas and other lords of the Earth waited upon 
him like slaves, just as the Yakshas do on Kubera. This great king, who is as 
glorious as Surya at his zenith, once received tribute from all the lords of 
the Earth as if they were tenant farmers. 

Eighty-eight thousand chaste Snatakas depended on him for their 
subsistence while they observed stern and lofty vows. This illustrious king 
of kings took care of the old, the helpless, the crippled and the blind as if 
they were his children, and he ruled justly over his subjects. Unflinching in 
dharma and self-control, keeping anger on a tight leash, generous, dedicated 
to Brahmanas, respectful and truthful, he is the eldest son of Pandu. 

His prosperity and power inflamed the minds of Suyodhana and his 
followers, Karna and Subala’s son Sakuni. O lord of men, the virtues of this 
man cannot be enumerated. This son of Pandu is ever virtuous and never 
does harm. Possessing such qualities, O Virata, is this bull among kings not 
worthy of a royal seat?’ ” 


CANTO 71 
VAIVAHIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °V irata says, ‘If this is, indeed, the Kuru king Yudhishtira 

Kuntiputra, which amongst these is his brother Arjuna, and 
which the mighty Bhima? Which of these is Nakula, which is Sahadeva, 
and where is the celebrated Draupadi? After their defeat at dice, the sons of 
Pritha have not been heard of by anyone.’ 

Arjuna says, ‘O King, the man you know as Ballava your cook is 
Mahabaho Bhima of unrivalled strength and mercurial energy. It was he 
who killed the angry Rakshasas on Mount Gandhamadana and plucked the 
fragrant saugandhikas for Krishnaa. He is the Gandharva who killed evil 
Kichaka, and it was he who killed tigers, bears and boars in the antahpura 
of your palace, for your pleasure. 

He who has been the master of your stables is Parantapa Nakula; this 
one is Sahadeva, the man in charge of your herds. These handsome sons of 
Madri are famed Maharathas. These two bulls of the Bhaaratas, who, today 
have again put on royal garments and fine jewellery, are a match for a 
thousand great chariot-warriors. 

This devi of the lotus-petal eyes, slender waist and sweet smiles, your 
wife’s sairandhri, is Drupada’s daughter, for whose sake the Kichaka clan 
perished. 

And, O king, I am Arjuna whom you know of already—son of Pritha, 
Bhima’s younger brother and elder brother to the twins. 


Rajan, we have happily spent our ajnatavasa in your kingdom, as safe as 
infants in the womb.’ 

After Arjuna has identified the five Kshatriyas, the Pandavas, Virata’s 
son Uttara speaks of Arjuna’s prowess and confirms the identities of the 
sons of Pritha. 

Uttara says, ‘That one, with the glowing, golden complexion, who is 
tall, majestic as a lion, of the prominent nose, large eyes and broad, ruddy 
face, is the king of the Kurus. 

Look at this other Kshatriya, whose tread is like a mighty elephant’s, 
whose complexion is like molten gold, whose shoulders are huge, and arms 
long and powerful: he is Vrikodara. 

That one who stands beside him, the dark-skinned youth who is like the 
king bull in a herd of elephants, who has leonine shoulders and an 
elephant’s proud gait, whose eyes are large as lotus leaves, is Arjuna, 
greatest of all archers. 

The two who stand close to the king are those Purushottamas, the twins 
who, like Vishnu and Indra, are unrivalled in beauty, strength and 
demeanour. 

That devi who stands close to them is Krishnaa, who is beauty 
personified, the embodiment of light, dark like the blue lotus—a divine 
queen, like Sri Lakshmi come to life.’ 

Then Virata’s son describes Arjuna’s prowess. He says, ‘It is he who 
killed our adversaries like a lion rampaging through a herd of deer. He cut a 
swath through a host of enemy chariots, slaying so many of their best 
rathikas. With a single arrow, he killed an enormous, angry war-elephant so 
it fell in its golden armour and its tusks gored deep into the ground. It is 
Arjuna who retrieved our herds and vanquished the Kurus in battle; and I 
was deafened by the boom of his conch. It is this hero of the fierce deeds 
who quelled Bhishma, Drona and Duryodhana. These achievements were 
his, not mine.’ 

The king of the Matsyas is full of both guilt and fear at having offended 
Yudhishtira. He says quickly to Uttara, ‘The time has come for me to 
appease the sons of Pandu. If you approve, I will give my daughter Uttaraa 
to Arjuna.’ 

Uttara says, ‘Do so, father. And let us so worship the sons of Pandu who 
are entirely worthy of worship.’ 


Virata says, ‘Bhimasena rescued me from the clutches of the enemy, and 
Arjuna recovered my cows. It is because of their might that we are alive and 
victorious. We and our ministers will pay our respects to Yudhishtira son of 
Kunti.’ 

And to Yudhishtira he says, ‘O Pandavarishabha, Dharmaraja, may you 
and your brothers be blessed! If we have unwittingly offended you, you 
must forgive us, most noble and honourable son of Pandu.’ 

Then the good Virata joyfully proposes an alliance to Yudhishtira by 
offering him his kingdom, his crown, his treasury and his city. 

He says to the Pandavas, and to Arjuna in particular, ‘How fortunate I 
am to see you!’ and he embraces Yudhishtira, Bhima and Madri’s sons 
repeatedly and sniffs the top of their heads; but Virata, lord of a vast army, 
is still not satisfied. 

The delighted king says to Yudhishtira, ‘I am the most fortunate man 
alive that you chose to spend your ajnatavasa in my home, and fortune 
continued to smile on us that you spent the thirteenth year of your exile 
undiscovered. 

I hereby make a gift of my kingdom and whatever else I own to you 
sons of Pritha. Pandavas, accept these without hesitation. And let Arjuna 
Savyasachi accept the hand of my daughter Uttaraa; he is the best of all 
men and worthy of being her husband.’ 

In response, Dharmaraja Yudhishtira looks at his brother, and Arjuna 
says to the king of the Matsyas, ‘Rajan, I gladly accept your daughter, 
whose virtues I know well; but I will have her for my daughter-in-law. Let 
her become my son Abhimanyu’s wife. This alliance between the Matsyas 
and the Bhaaratas is fitting and brings us profound joy.’ ” 


CANTO 72 
VAIVAHIKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: °V irata says, ‘Pandavottama, why do you not wish to accept my 
daughter as your wife?’ 

Arjuna says, ‘When I lived in your antahpura I would see your daughter 
every day and, whether alone or accompanied, she trusted in me as in a 
father. I know about music and dancing, and she liked and respected me. 
She always considered me her teacher. I lived with her for a whole year 
even after she had attained puberty. 

Given this circumstance, you or other men may entertain unfounded 
suspicions about me, or, worse, about her purity. And so, O Virata, I prefer 
to have Uttaraa for my daughter-in-law and bear witness to her chasteness. 
There is no difference between a daughter-in-law and a daughter just as 
there is none between a son and one’s self. I am wary of slander and false 
accusations. I gladly accept your daughter Uttaraa as my daughter-in-law. 

My son Abhimanyu excels every warrior on Earth in skill and prowess 
in battle; he is as handsome as a Deva. He is the favourite nephew of his 
uncle Krishna, who wields the Sudarshana chakra. O king, he is fit to be 
your daughter’s husband, and your son-in-law.’ 

Virata says, “What you say is wise, O Arjuna. Partha, do what you think 
best and you decide what we should do next. He whose daughter marries 
Arjuna’s son has all his wished fulfilled.’ 

Yudhishtira gives his consent to the proposal. Bhaarata, Kunti’s son and 
Virata send messengers who bear invitations to the wedding, to Krishna and 


to all their friends and relatives. 

At the end of the thirteenth year of their exile, the five Pandavas move 
to Upalavya, one of the finest towns in Virata’s kingdom. Arjuna himself 
rides to fetch Abhimanyu, Krishna and many others of the Dasarha family 
from the country of Anarta. The king of Kasi and Saibya, who are 
Yudhishtira’s friends, arrive with an akshauhini of troops each. The mighty 
Drupada, Draupadi’s heroic sons, the unvanquished Sikhandi and _ the 
invincible Dhrishtadyumna arrive with another akshauhini of troops. 

All the kings who come are not only lords of armies, but also conduct 
sacrifices, give bountiful gifts to Brahmanas, are deeply learned in the 
Vedas, heroic and always ready to die in battle. As they arrive, the virtuous 
king of the Matsyas honours them and provides entertainment for their 
armies, their servants and attendants; great is his gladness at giving his 
daughter to Abhimanyu. 

Others come from different parts of the country. Then, Krishna arrives 
draped in bright, wild vanamalas made from forest blooms; Balarama, 
Kritavarma, Hridika’s son Satyaki, Satyaki’s son Anadhristi, Akrura, Samba 
and Nisatha, all magnificent Yadavas, come with Krishna. All these 
Parantapas come to Upalavya, bringing Abhimanyu and his mother 
Subhadra with them. 

Indrasena and the others who have been living in Dwaraka for a year 
come in Krishna’s train, bringing the Pandavas’ chariots. Ten thousand 
elephants, ten thousand chariots, a hundred million horses, a billion foot- 
soldiers, and countless Vrishni, Andhaka, Kukura and Bhoja warriors of 
untold prowess form the entourage of the great Vrishni tiger, Krishna the 
Avatara. Krishna brings many nubile young women, ancient and magical 
jewels past compare and garments of unearthly weave and design for each 
of the illustrious sons of Pandu. 

Soon, the wedding festivities are underway between the families of the 
Matsya king and the Pandavas. Conches, cymbals, horns, drums and other 
instruments sound, making music deep and wondrous, in Virata’s palace. 
Hundreds of deer and other pure animals are slaughtered; wines and other 
intoxicating fruit juices are pressed and fermented, and flow in rivers. 
Actors, vabdhis, who are eulogists, and other singers and pauranikas 
entertain the kings by chanting their praises and genealogies, as well as 
recounting legends from time out of mind. 


With Sudeshna at their head the royal Matsya women, wearing pearls 
and earrings of every other precious stone, come to the auspicious pandal 
where the marriage rites will be performed. Krishnaa by far outshines all 
the lovely, fair-skinned and bejewelled women in beauty, fame, virtue and 
splendour; dark Panchali is truly like a Goddess among them. 

The women lead in princess Uttaraa, wearing rich red silk and 
ornaments handed down from antiquity in her family, and she looks like a 
daughter of Indra himself. Gravely, formally, Arjuna of the Kurus accepts 
Virata’s flawless daughter on behalf of his son by Subhadra, and 
Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, who stands there like Indra, also receives her as 
his daughter-in-law. 

With the formal acceptance, Partha, with Krishna before him, conducts 
the sacred wedding rituals of Subhadra’s son. Virata gives him seven 
thousand horses, swift as the wind, two hundred elephants of the highest 
birth and wealth past telling. Libations of ghee are poured on the fire, and 
the Brahmanas are honoured. Now Virata offers his kingdom, his army, his 
treasury and himself to the Pandavas. 

When the solemn and joyful ceremony is completed, Yudhishtira gives 
all the wealth that Krishna of immortal glory has brought, in daana to the 
great Brahmanas who have come to the Matsya kingdom from every corner 
of Bharatavarsha. He also gives thousands of the purest cows, all kinds of 
garments, extraordinay ornaments, chariots and carriages, mattresses of 
swan’s-down and serves them the most varied and delicious food and drink. 
With the proper ceremonies, the king bestows vast lands on the Brahmanas. 
He gives away thousands of horses, treasuries of gold and other wealth to 
all the wedding guests, young and old. 

Janamejaya, O Bharatarishabha, Virata’s city teems with well-fed, 
contented, festive, celebrant men and women, and is lit by a festive glow, 
which, for the presence of Krishna, is unearthly and divine.” 


The end of Virata Parva 





THE COMPLETE MAHABHARATA 
Udyoga Parva 


THE COMPLETE 
MAHABHARATA 


Volume 4 


Udyoga Parva 


Jayashree Kumar 





RUPA 


Published by 
Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd 2013 
7/16, Ansari Road, Daryaganj 
New Delhi 110002 


Sales centres: 
Allahabad Bengaluru Chennai 
Hyderabad Jaipur Kathmandu 

Kolkata Mumbai 


Copyright © Jayashree Kumar 2013 


All rights reserved. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, or stored in a retrieval system, in any 
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the 
prior permission of the publisher. 


ISBN: 978-8 1-291-2459-3 


10987654321 


The moral right of the author has been asserted. 


for my mother 


CONTENTS 


A Brief Introduction 
Acknowledgements 

Canto 1-19 Senodyoga Parva 
Canto 20-32 Sanjaya-yana Parva 
Canto 33-40 Prajagara Parva 
Canto 41-46 Sanat Sujata Parva 
Canto 47-71 Yanasandhi Parva 


Canto 72—150 

Canto 151-160 
Canto 161-165 
Canto 166-173 
Canto 174-179 


Bhagavad-yana Parva 

Sainya Niryana Parva 

Uluka Duta Gamana Parva 
Rathatiratha Sankhyana Parva 
Ambopakhyana Parva 


A BRIEF INTRODUCTION 


The last complete version of the Mahabharata to be written in India in 
English prose was the translation by Kisar1 Mohan Ganguli in the late 19th 
century. He wrote it between 1883 and 1896. To the best of my knowledge, 
it still remains the only full English prose rendering of the epic by any 
Indian. 

More than a hundred years have passed since Ganguli achieved his 
monumental task. Despite its closeness to the original Sanskrit and its 
undeniable power, in more than a hundred years the language and style of 
the Ganguli translation have inevitably become archaic. 

It seemed a shame that this most magnificent of epics, a national 
treasure, an indisputable classic of world literature, believed by many to be 
the greatest of all books ever written, is not available in complete form to 
the Indian (or any) reader in modern, literary and easily accessible English: 
as retold by Indian writers. 

So we, a group of Indian writers and editors, warmly and patiently 
supported by our publisher Rupa Publications India, undertook a line-by- 
line retelling of the complete Mahabharata, for the contemporary and future 
reader. Our aim has not been to write a scholarly translation of the Great 
Epic, but an eminently readable one, without vitiating either the spirit or the 
poetry of the original, and without reducing its length. 

This is not a translation from the Sanskrit but based almost entirely on 
the Ganguli text, and he himself did use more than one Sanskrit version for 
his work. However, as will be obvious, the style of this new rendering is 


very much our own, and our hope is to bring as much of the majesty and 
enchantment of this awesome epic to you as is possible in English. 


Ramesh Menon 
Series Editor 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


My thanks go, again, to Ramesh Menon for having given me the 
opportunity to be involved in this project; and to my mother, my son and 
my daughter for their love and support throughout the making of this 
volume. 


CANTO 1 
SENODYOGA PARVA 


A UM! I bow down to Narayana and Nara, the most exalted Purusha, 
and to the Devi Saraswati and invoke the spirit of Jaya! 

Vaisampayana said, “After the joyful celebrations of Abhimanyu’s 
wedding, the Kurus of the wedding party rest that night and present 
themselves in the morning before Virata in his sabha. King Virata’s court is 
full of treasures, the choicest vaiduryas and other precious stones; 
exquisitely wrought thrones and deep silk-covered armchairs are carefully 
laid out and the great hall is fragrant with the scent of a wealth of garlands. 

The visiting kings are all present, when Virata and Drupada, the eldest 
among them, enter and occupy the thrones at the head of the sabha. 
Balarama, Krishna and their father Vasudeva are present. Satyaki, great 
Kshatriya of the Sini vamsa, and Rohini’s son Balarama sit beside the 
Panchala king. Krishna and Yudhishtira sit beside the king of the Matsyas 
and with them are all the sons of Drupada, Bhima and Arjuna, Madri’s sons, 
Virata’s princes, and Pradyumna, Samba, Abhimanyu. Draupadi’s sons, 
young lions who rival their fathers in courage, grace and prowess, are there 
as well, and they sit upon rich, gold-inlaid seats. 

All these glittering heroes in their resonant ornaments and grand attire 
make that sabha of kings sparkle like the star-filled sky. Greetings 
exchanged all round and pleasantries done with, the assembled Kshatriyas 
fall quiet, their pensive gazes fixed on Krishna. And rising, he calls their 


attention to the circumstances of the Pandavas. The sabha is hushed and the 
Kshatriyas are absorbed by what he says, which is grave and profound. 

Krishna says, “You all know how Yudhishtira was deceitfully defeated 
at dice by Subala’s son, and how his kingdom was stolen from him. You 
also know of his oath to live in exile in the forest. Although Pandu’s sons 
can conquer the very Earth, they kept the oath they had sworn and those 
incomparable princes fulfilled the cruel conditions imposed on them. This 
last, thirteenth year, was the most trying for them, but they have endured 
their ajnatavasa, disguised, suffering silently and unrecognised. You are all 
aware of these things. 

These illustrious men spent that thirteenth year doing menial service. 
You must take all this into consideration and decide what course is best, and 
fair to both Yudhishtira and Duryodhana. What you decide about the 
Kauravas and the Pandavas must be in keeping with dharma and must have 
your unanimous approval. 

Yudhishtira would not want even Devaloka if he violated dharma to 
gain the realm of the gods; he would gladly accept a single small village for 
his kingdom if that was righteous. All you kings and noble princes know 
how the sons of Dhritarashtra robbed Yudhishtira of the kingdom that was 
his birthright, and how he has suffered untold adversity. Although 
Dhritarashtra’s sons cannot hope to resist Arjuna’s prowess, Yudhishtira and 
his brothers still wish their cousins well; they wish for peace. 

These matchless sons of Kunti and Madri only ask for what is theirs — 
what they won by vanquishing other kings in battle. When they were mere 
boys, you know how, many a time and using diverse methods, Duryodhana, 
his brothers and Sakuni plotted to kill the sons of Pandu, because 
Duryodhana always wanted the kingdom for himself. Consider how greedy 
those twisted, evil men are and how virtuous Yudhishtira. Consider deeply 
the relationship between them. I beseech you all to consult together and to 
decide on which side dharma lies. 

The Pandavas have always been devoted to truth. They have fulfilled 
their oath faithfully. If the sons of Dhritarashtra do not give them justice 
now, and their kingdom back, the sons of Pandu will kill them all. When 
kings friendly to the Pandavas hear about the long suffering inflicted on 
them, they will all rally behind them and risk their very lives to see their 
tormentors punished, to see them die. Do not presume that the Pandavas are 


too few or too weak to prevail over their enemies. United, and with the 
support of their allies, they will destroy those who oppose them. 

However, we do not know Duryodhana’s mind, or what he might do. 
How can we form any opinion about what is best for both the Pandavas and 
the Kauravas without knowing what Dhritarashtra’s son intends? So, let an 
able ambassador—a high-born man who is virtuous, honest and alert— go to 
Duryodhana and persuade him to give half the kingdom to Yudhishtira.’ 

Full of wisdom and dharma, Krishna’s words hang over the hushed 
sabha; he speaks impartially and for peace. His elder brother listens and 
then Balarama rises to addresses the gathering of kings.” 


CANTO 2 
SENODYOGA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ ‘RB aladeva says, ‘You have all heard Krishna. What he says is in 

keeping with dharma, prudent and impartial, and equally 
beneficial for both Yudhishtira and Duryodhana. The sons of Kunti are 
prepared to give up half their kingdom to Duryodhana; the sons of 
Dhritarashtra should be willing to do the same. The Kurus should be 
grateful to us and rejoice that the conflict between them has been so 
amicably resolved. The Pandavas will be content with this arrangement, 
provided their cousins do the honourable thing. And the satisfaction of the 
Pandavas is conducive to the welfare of all mankind. 

I would be happy if one amongst us, committed to pacifying both the 
Kurus and the Pandavas, goes as a duta to Hastinapura, taking Yudhishtira’s 
thoughts with him, and also to discover Duryodhana’s intentions. This man 
must pay his respects to the noble Bhishma, to Dhritarashtra, to Drona and 
his son Aswatthama, to Vidura and Kripa, to Sakuni prince of Gandhara and 
to the Sutaputra Karna. Let him also pay his respects to the other sons of 
Dhritarashtra, who are all renowned for their strength and learning, who 
know dharma well, who are brave and aware of all that has happened, and 
who read the signs of the times. 

When all these and the elders are assembled, let our messenger speak 
with humility, since this will best serve the interests of Yudhishtira. 


While it is true that Dhritarashtra’s sons took the kingdom with some 
deceit, our messenger must spare no effort to avoid provoking them. When 
Yudhishtira had his throne he forgot himself; he gambled wildly at dice and 
lost his kingdom. 

Yudhishtira was never adept at dice-play, and despite his brothers and 
friends trying to dissuade him, he foolishly challenged Sakuni, who is a 
master gambler. Hundreds of other dice-players were present, whom 
Yudhishtira could have beaten, but he ignored them and, of all men, he 
challenged Sakuni. Naturally, he lost game after game but he still refused to 
play anyone but Sakuni, who easily routed him and took everything he 
owned. How can Sakuni be blamed for this? 

Therefore, our messenger must employ the utmost humility and first 
placate Dhritarashtra, who might then persuade Duryodhana to deal in 
peace. We must not incite a war with the Kurus, but approach Duryodhana 
in conciliation. War can never achieve what a peaceful agreement would, an 
enduring result.’ 

While the great and ponderous Balarama is still speaking, suddenly 
Satyaki, prince of the Sinis, jumps up and, his face red with indignation, 
roundly condemns what Baladeva advocates.” 


CANTO 3 
SENODYOGA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 S atyaki says, “What a man says reflects what is in his heart; as do 

your words. Men are either brave or cowardly; of two branches of 

the same tree, only one might bear fruit; in the same dynastic line, there 
may be foolish men as well as those who have great strength of character. 

O you whose banner bears the image of a plough, it is not what you say 
that I condemn, but those who listen to you. How can they allow a man who 
dares blame virtuous Yudhishtira to speak in this sabha? Clever dice-players 
challenged Yudhishtira even though he had little skill and, trusting in their 
integrity, he was vanquished. Can such men be said to have won 
honourably? 

If they had come to Yudhishtira in his own house, whilst he played dice 
with his brothers, and bested him there, their victory would have been 
righteous. They challenged him, who was bound by Kshatriya dharma, and 
they won by deceit. How can what they did be called dharma? Having 
agreed to what they made the stakes in the game, a life in the forests, how 
could Yudhishtira demean himself by asking to be freed from his wager, 
even if he was beaten with cunning sleight of hand? Even if, by rights, 
Yudhishtira still owned his ancestral kingdom, it would have been beneath 
him to beg. 

How can the Kauravas be termed righteous and their intentions 
honourable when they accused the Pandavas of having been discovered, 


although the sons of Pandu had completed their ajnatavasa unrecognised? 
Bhishma and Drona begged them to return the Pandavas’ rightful throne, 
but they refused. 

I would use arrows rather than words to convince them. I would use 
force to make them prostrate at Yudhishtira’s feet. They and their allies 
must bow before him, or they must die. When I, Yuyudhana, am provoked 
by anger to fight, they will not resist me, even as mountains cannot 
withstand a striking thunderbolt. 

Who can withstand Arjuna in fight? Who can resist him who has the 
discus for his weapon? Who can stand against me? Who can face the 
inexorable Bhima? And who that values his life would come near the sons 
of Madri, whose bows are firmly held and who are like twin embodiments 
of Yama? 

Who would dare face Drupada’s son Dhrishtadyumna, or these five sons 
of Pandu, who glorified Draupadi’s name, who rival their father in valour 
and in every other way, and who are full of Kshatriya pride? Who would 
ride against Subhadra’s son, whose mighty bow neither the Devas, nor 
Gada, nor Pradyumna, nor Samba can resist, and who is like Death himself, 
or like the very Vajra, or like Agni? 

We will kill Duryodhana, Sakuni and Karna in battle and install 
Yudhishtira on the Kuru throne. There is no sin in slaying those who are 
intent on killing us, but to beg from our enemies is both adharma and 
shameful. 

I ask you to do what Yudhishtira wants. Let Pandu’s son regain the 
kingdom that Dhritarashtra surrenders. If Yudhishtira does not get his 
kingdom today, I will mow down our enemies.’ ” 


CANTO 4 
SENODYOGA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ ‘T) rupada says, ‘Mahabaho, it will be as you say. Duryodhana will 
never give up the kingdom peacefully; his doting father 
Dhritarashtra will go along with him; Bhishma and Drona will, too, from 
helplessness and loyalty, and Karna and Sakuni from bravado. I like what 
Baladeva said; we must do as he advises, but only if we want peace. 

We should not speak to Duryodhana with mild words. He has a vicious 
nature, and temperance will not persuade him to see reason. Gentleness is 
appropriate for dealing with a donkey, but only firmness for cattle. If we 
speak leniently to Duryodhana, that evil one will think we are fools and 
presume that he has won. 

Let us make preparations and send word to our friends, asking them to 
gather an army for us. Let swift messengers go to Salya and Dhrishtaketu, 
to Jayatsena and the prince of the Kekayas. Duryodhana will also send word 
to these kings. By dharma, men will respond to the first one who asks them. 
So make haste to reach out to your friends. 

A great undertaking awaits us. Send word quickly to Salya and to the 
kings loyal to him, to Bhagadatta of immeasurable valour who rules the 
eastern coast, to fierce Hardikya and Andhaka, to the brilliant king of the 
Mallas and to Rochamanas. Summon Brihanta and Senabindu; Senajit, 
Prativindhya and Chitravarman; Bahlika, Munjakesa and the ruler of the 
Chedis; Suparsva, Subahu and that Maharatha Paurava. Call the kings of the 


Sakas, the Pahlavas, the Daradas; call Surari, Nadija and Karnaveshta, 
Neela and Bhumipala Viradharman; call Durjaya and Dantavaktra, Rukmi 
and Janamejaya, Ashada, Vayuvega and Purvapali; call Bhuritejas, Devaka, 
Ekalavya and his sons. Send also for the Karushaka kings and the valiant 
Kshemadhurti, and for the kings of the Kamboja and the Rishika tribes of 
the west coast; send for Jayatsena and the king of Kasi, for the rulers of the 
land of the five rivers, and for the son of Kratha; send for the rulers of the 
mountain realms, for Janaki and Susarman and Maniman, for Yotimatsaka 
and Dhrishtaketu, for the kings of Pansu, Tunda and Dandadhara, and for 
Brihatsena. Summon Aparajita, Nishada, Sreniman and Vasuman; call 
Brihadbala of untold might, Bahu the conqueror of hostile cities and the 
warlike Samudrasena and his valiant son; summon Udbhava and 
Kshemaka, Vatadhana, Srutayu and Dridhayu; summon the gallant son of 
Salva, the king of the Kalingas, and the unconquerable Kumara. Speedily 
send word to all these men. Yes, this plan appeals to me. 

And let this learned Brahmana, my priest, be the messenger who goes to 
Dhritarashtra. Tell him what he must say to Duryodhana, how to address 
Bhishma, that noblest of warriors and what to say to Drona, that greatest of 
Maharathas.’”’ 


CANTO 5 
SENODYOGA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 K rishna says, ‘What you counsel surely befits the king of the 

Panchalas, for your deep kinship and allegiance towards Pandu’s 

son. Yet, we want to adopt a wise course of action, and that is our first duty; 

it would be foolish to do otherwise. Our relationship to the Kauravas and 

the Pandavas is equal, regardless of their own inclinations towards each 

other. You and all of us were invited for a wedding. The marriage has been 
celebrated; let us go home happily. 

You are the first of all the kings here, both in age and learning, and the 
rest of us are like sishyas to you. Dhritarashtra has always had great respect 
for you; and you are also a friend of the acharyas Drona and Kripa. So, I 
ask you to send a message to the Kurus on behalf of the Pandavas. We are 
unanimously resolved that you should be our duta. 

If the Kuru king makes peace on equitable terms, the cordial, brotherly 
feelings between the Kauravas and Pandavas will be restored. If, on the 
other hand, Duryodhana takes a haughty stand and refuses peace, send for 
the others first and then summon us as well. 

The wielder of the Gandiva will be ignited with anger; the dull-headed, 
evil Duryodhana, his kinsmen and his friends will meet their fate.’” 

Virata pays homage to Krishna, bids farewell to him, and Krishna sets 
off home with his kinsmen. After Krishna leaves for Dwaraka, Yudhishtira 
and his followers join Virata and begin to prepare for war. 


Virata and Drupada send messengers to all the other monarchs, and at 
their request many powerful kings gladly arrive to join them. The sons of 
Dhritarashtra hear that the Pandavas have amassed a great army and they, 
too, muster a force of many rulers of the Earth. O king, quickly the world 
teems with warriors galvanised to the cause of either the Kurus or the 
Pandavas. Armies composed of the four kinds of forces pour in from all 
sides and fill the land; and Bhumi Devi, with her mountains and forests, 
seems to tremble beneath their tread. 

The king of the Panchalas consults Yudhishtira and sends his wise and 
learned priest to the Kurus.” 


CANTO 6 
SENODYOGA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) rupada says to his priest, ‘Of all beings, those endowed with life 

are superior to the inert; of living beings, those endowed with 
intelligence are superior to the others; of intelligent creatures, men are 
foremost; of men, Dvijas are the highest; of the twice-born, students of the 
Vedas are the best; of Vedic students, those of refined minds are first; of 
cultured men, the practical are the best; and of practical men, those who 
know Brahman, the Supreme Being, are the highest. 

You are at the very apex of this pyramid of beings. Distinguished by 
your age and learning, you are equal in intellect to Indra or Brihaspati. You 
know what kind of man the king of the Kurus is, and you know what 
Yudhishtira is. It was with Dhritarashtra’s knowledge that the Kauravas 
deceived the Pandavas and, despite Vidura’s counsel, that king follows his 
son. 

On behalf of the Kurus, Sakuni challenged Yudhishtira to a game of 
dice, although the Pandava was as a callow beginner while he himself was 
an expert. Unskilled in play, and guileless, Yudhishtira adhered strictly to 
rules of Kshatriya dharma. The ruthless Kurus cheated and won 
Yudhishtira’s kingdom from him, and they are not going to give it up 
voluntarily. 

If you speak words of dharma to Dhritarashtra, you will certainly gain 
the hearts of his warriors. Vidura will support what you say and, thereby, 


antagonise Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and the others. When the enemy 
commanders are alienated from their simple-minded fighting men, they will 
need to regain the confidence of their soldiers. In the meantime, the 
Pandavas will prepare their armies and gather their supplies, while, with 
you lingering in their midst and sowing subtle discord in the hearts of their 
men, the enemy will not be able to make adequate preparations for war. 
This plan of action seems the best. 

It is possible that Dhritarashtra might agree to your proposal and do as 
you ask. You, being virtuous, must behave toward them with dharma. Win 
the hearts of the compassionate by discoursing at length on the trials that 
the Pandavas have endured and convince the elderly by reminding them 
about the customs of their forefathers. 

I have no doubts in this regard, nor do you need to be apprehensive of 
any danger. You are a Brahmana, well versed in the Vedas; and you are 
going there as a duta; furthermore, you are elderly. So, old friend, set out at 
once for Hastinapura to promote the cause of the Pandavas. Set out on the 
day of the Pushyami nakshatra, during that part of the day called Jaya.’ 

The priest sets out for Hastinapura, mindful of Drupada’s instructions. 
That learned man, who has a deep knowledge of the Artha Shastra, goes 
with a retinue of disciples towards the city of the Kurus, to advance the 
welfare of Pandu’s sons.” 


CANTO 7 
SENODYOGA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “After the Pandavas send the priest to 

Hastinapura, they send other messengers to the kings of various 
kingdoms, and Arjuna sets out for Dwaraka. After Krishna and Baladeva 
leave for Dwaraka with all the Vrishnis, the Andhakas and hundreds of 
Bhojas, Dhritarashtra’s son sends out spies to garner information about 
what the Pandavas are doing. 

Duryodhana hears that Krishna is on his way home and goes at once to 
Dwaraka, riding on fine horses swift as the wind, and taking a small troop 
of warriors with him. He and Arjuna arrive on the same day in the beautiful 
city of the Anarta realm. On reaching there, those two lions of Kuru vamsa 
find that Krishna is sleeping, and they go to his bedchamber. 

Krishna is still asleep when Duryodhana enters the chamber and sits on 
a fine seat at the head of the bed. Arjuna enters behind him and stands at the 
foot of the bed, his head bent and hands folded. When Krishna awakes his 
gaze falls first on Arjuna. He greets both him and Duryodhana, and after 
asking if they had a safe journey, mildly enquires why they have come to 
see him. 

Duryodhana says, ‘You must help me in the impending war. Arjuna and 
I are both your friends, Madhusudana, and you are related to both of us in 
the same way. Today, it is I who petitions you first. Men of dharma take up 


the cause of the one who approaches them first. This is the way of the 
ancients. 

Krishna, you are the first of all men of dharma, and everyone respects 
you, at all times. I ask you to follow dharma and do what is right.’ 

Krishna replies, “That you have come first, O king, I do not doubt in the 
least. But, it is Arjuna that I saw first. Because you were the first to 
approach me and because Arjuna was the first one I saw, I shall help you 
both. It is said that those who are younger should choose first. That gives 
Dhananjaya the first choice. 

There exists a vast force of Yadavas, numbering ten crores, known as 
the Narayanas. Each of them is stronger than me and each one can fight in 
the very thick of any battle. One of you can have these irresistible soldiers. 
The other will have me; but I will bear no arms and neither will I fight on 
the field. 

Arjuna, you decide first which you will choose, because law dictates 
that you have the first choice.’ 

Arjuna chooses Krishna, who will not fight on the battlefield, who is 
Vishnu himself, creator, preserver and slayer of men, the uncreated one, 
born among men of his own will, foremost of all Kshatriyas, beyond all the 
Devas and Danavas. Duryodhana gladly accepts the Yadava army of 
Narayanas and, though he knows that Krishna will not be with him, he is 
thrilled at having acquired the massive force. Having secured that awesome 
army, Duryodhana goes in some delight to his old master, Rohini’s son 
Balarama, to tell him of the reason for his visit and its outcome. 

Baladeva says to Duryodhana, ‘Remember all that I said at Virata’s 
daughter’s wedding. It is for your sake that I spoke against Krishna there 
and contradicted him. Again and again, I spoke of the equality of our 
relationship to both sides. However, Krishna did not adopt my views, and I 
cannot separate myself from Krishna for even a moment. Since I cannot go 
into battle against him, I have resolved not to fight, either for Kunti’s sons 
or for you. 

O Bharatarishabha, born as you are into the noble race of Bharata, go 
bravely into battle and fight with Kshatriya dharma.’ 

Duryodhana embraces that hero whose weapon is the plough and, 
despite being aware that Krishna is not on his side, he still considers Arjuna 
and the Pandavas as having already been defeated. He then goes to 


Kritavarman, who gives him an akshauhini of troops. And surrounded by 
that terrifying host, he rides forth, to the great joy of his friends. 

After Duryodhana has left, Krishna says to Arjuna, ‘Why did you 
choose me, when you knew that I will not fight at all?’ 

Arjuna answers, ‘I have no doubt that you will slay all our enemies, 
even without fighting yourself. I, too, can kill them all, by myself, 
Purushottama. You are the most illustrious being in this world, and your 
renown and honour will come with you. I wish for that, and that is why I 
chose you. I have always wanted to have you for my sarathy, and I ask you 
now to fulfil my long-cherished desire.’ 

Krishna says with a deep smile, ‘I am glad that you chose me, son of 
Kunti. As for your wish, yes, I will be your charioteer.’ 

His heart full of joy, Arjuna returns with Krishna to where Yudhishtira 
waits.” 


CANTO 8 
SENODYOGA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “O king, Salya hears the news that the 

messengers bring and, accompanied by his sons and a teeming 
legion of soldiers, every man mighty in battle, he sets out to come to the 
Pandavas. 

His encampment extends over one and a half yojanas, so vast is Salya’s 
force. Rajan, this most powerful king commands an entire akshauhini. In 
his army are heroes wearing armour of different colours, carrying a myriad 
of banners and all sorts of bows, adorned with diverse ornaments, garlands 
and jewellery, and wearing beautiful clothing. Hundreds of thousands of the 
foremost Kshatriyas are the leaders of his troops, and they are clothed and 
decorated, each in the tradition of his native land. 

Salya moves slowly, majestically, toward the Pandava camp, frequently 
giving his men time to rest. The Earth’s little creatures are crushed and the 
ground trembles under the tread of his legions. Hearing that the great and 
mighty warrior is on the march, Duryodhana makes all haste to win him 
over to his side. He swiftly has finely-decorated, palatial pavilions erected 
at many enchanting sites for Salya’s comfort and pleasure, and sends 
performers to entertain that king. 

The first of these retreats is adorned with garlands and stocked with 
meat and the choicest delicacies and refreshments. There are fine pools and 
tanks of different shapes, all delightful to see; there is plentiful food, and 


there are spacious apartments. Salya arrives at the first exotic pavilion, and 
Duryodhana’s best servants wait upon him as if he is a Deva. 

Salya reaches another hall of entertainment that is as resplendent as an 
arbour of the gods. And there, luxuriating in comforts fit for any celestial, 
he thinks himself superior to the lord of the Devas and even thinks of Indra 
as being shabby in comparison. 

The delighted Salya asks the servants, “Where are Yudhishtira and the 
others who have arranged for these lavish mansions? Bring the men who 
built them before me; they deserve to be richly rewarded. I must 
acknowledge their work. I hope Kunti’s son will approve.’ 

The surprised servants inform Duryodhana, who stays hidden until 
Salya’s pleasure is so great that he is ready to grant even his life, and then 
he comes forward and reveals himself to his uncle. The king of the Madras 
sees him and understands that it is Duryodhana who has taken all these 
pains to fete him. 

And Salya embraces Duryodhana and says, ‘I want to give you 
something that you truly want.’ 

Duryodhana says, “Auspicious one, let it be as you say, and grant me 
this boon: I ask you to lead my armies in battle.’ 

Salya says, ‘So be it. What do I need to do?’ 

The son of Gandhari cries again and again, ‘It is done! It is done!’ 

And Salya says, ‘O best of men, go back to your city. I must pay 
Yudhishtira a visit. I will do that first and come to you very soon.’ 

Duryodhana says, ‘O Bhumipala, come quickly indeed after seeing the 
Pandava. I depend on you entirely, so remember the boon you have granted 
me.’ 

Salya says, ‘Blessings upon you! I will hasten back. Go in peace to your 
city, O protector of men.’ 

The two kings, Salya and Duryodhana, embrace and Duryodhana 
returns to his capital. Salya goes to inform the sons of Kunti of what has 
happened. 

When he reaches Upaplavya and enters the encampment there, Salya 
sees all the sons of Pandu before him. The mighty-armed Salya meets them 
and accepts the customary courtesies—water to wash his feet with and 
honourable gifts, including a cow. The king of the Madras asks how they 
are and, with great joy, embraces Yudhishtira, Bhima, Arjuna and _ his 
sister’s twin sons. 


When they are all seated, Salya says to Yudhishtira, ‘Naravyaghra, is all 
well with you? How fortunate it is that you have completed your exile. 
Such a difficult task you, your brothers and the princess have accomplished 
by living in the wilderness! No less trying was the year of your ajnatavasa. 

When a man has his throne taken from him, there is nothing but 
hardship to look forward to. Rajan, what happiness is there for such a one? 
But after killing your enemies you will gain as much, no, a hundredfold 
more, felicity and joy than the torment that Dhritarashtra’s son inflicted on 
you. 

You are wise in the ways of the world and, so, my son, you never do 
anything out of avarice. You walk in the footsteps of the ancient Rajarishis. 
You must remain firmly on your path of generosity, selflessness and truth. 
Mercy, self-control, truth, universal compassion and every other wonderful 
quality present in this world are also present in you. 

You are mild, generous, devout and large-hearted; and you look on 
virtue as the highest good. Many are the laws of dharma that prevail 
amongst men, and you know them all. In fact, you know everything there is 
to know of this world of ours. 

Bharatottama, how great it is that you have emerged from your travails. 
How fortunate I am to see you, who are a treasure-house of dharma, now 
free and among your followers.’ 

Then, Bhaarata, the king tells Yudhishtira of his meeting with 
Duryodhana, and about the boon he granted him. 

Yudhishtira says, “Pledging your allegiance to Duryodhana out of 
heartfelt gratitude is dharma indeed. But, Bhumipala, I ask you to do one 
thing for me. Even if what I ask is not dharma, you must do it for my sake. 
Listen to my plea. 

On the battlefield you are Krishna’s equal as a charioteer. When Karna 
and Arjuna come face to face in a mortal duel, I have no doubt that you will 
be Karna’s sarathy. At that time, I beg you, protect Arjuna, even while you 
are his enemy’s sarathy. You must dampen the Sutaputra’s spirits, for his 
lack of confidence is his only weakness, and only through that can Arjuna 
prevail over him. Uncle, you must do this, even though it is unseemly. For 
if Karna is not slain, we will lose the war.’ 

Salya says, ‘Bless you, Pandava, and now listen to me. You ask me to 
dispirit Karna in battle. Yes, I am sure I will become his charioteer, for he 
does consider me equal to Krishna. When he prepares to fight Arjuna, I will 


point out the dangers he faces. I will extol Arjuna and convince Karna that 
he is no match for your brother. Shorn of courage and pride, he will be easy 
to kill. 

I swear that I am determined to do what you ask. Whatever else I may 
be able to do for your good, I will do as well. The anguish you suffered 
along with Draupadi during the game of dice; the savage words that the 
Suta’s son spoke then; the misery that Jatasura and Kichaka inflicted on 
you; Draupadi’s torment, which was like Damayanti’s—this will all end in 
joy, O Kshatriya. 

Do not grieve over what happened, for destiny is inexorable. From time 
out of mind, the noblest men have endured all manner of suffering; why, 
even the Devas have found grave misfortunes, Rajan. It is told that Indra 
and his wife had to endure great grief once, and were plunged in black 
despair.’” 


CANTO 9 
SENODYOGA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 Y udhishtira says, “Best of kings, how did Devendra and his queen 
come to endure such torment?’ 

Salya says, ‘Listen, and I will tell you this ancient itihasa. Hear, 
Bhaarata, how affliction befell Indra and his consort. 

Once, Tvashtri, the lord of creatures and among the foremost of Devas, 
sat in austere tapasya, and out of his rancour against Indra, created a son 
with three heads. That lustrous being of universal form, Viswarupa, 
hankered after Indra’s throne. He had three awesome faces that resembled 
the Sun, the Moon and Fire. With one he read the Vedas, with one he drank 
wine and his gaze from the third seemed to imbibe the whole world. With 
unflinching tapasya, this imperturbable and self-controlled being lived a life 
of devout spiritual discipline. Severe and terrible was his penance. 

Observing the sternness, courage and truthfulness of this being of 
immeasurable tejas, Indra worried that he would take his place as the lord 
of the Devas. 

Indra thought to himself, “How can this one be made addicted to 
sensual pleasures? How can he be made to forsake his tapasya? If he grows 
any stronger, he will absorb the entire universe.” 

Having pondered thus within himself, Indra sent Apsaras from 
Devaloka to tempt the son of Tvashtri. 


He commanded them, saying, “Hurry! Go and tempt the three-headed 
one to plunge deep into pleasures of the senses. You, who are blessed with 
captivating hips, adorn yourselves in provocative attire, deck yourselves in 
fine necklaces and employ passionate gestures and language. My lovely 
ones, my heart is perturbed; distract him and alleviate my dread. Beautiful 
nymphs, avert this peril that hangs over me. May well-being be yours.” 

The Apsaras said, “O slayer of Bala, have no fear, we will seduce him. 
Together, we will tempt this rishi who sits in tapasya so fearful that his eyes 
seem to scorch everything they see. We will bring him under our control 
and put an end to your fears.” 

They went to the three-headed one and, arriving there, those exquisite 
temptresses teased him with gestures of love and their beautiful bodies. 
Absorbed in deep tapasya, he looked at them but was unmoved. With 
subdued senses he was like the ocean, full to the brim and unshakeable. 

Their efforts were to no avail. The Apsaras came back to Indra and, 
with hands joined, said, “O, we could not shake that tranquil one. Now do 
whatever you must.” 

Indra honoured the Apsaras and dismissed them, thinking all the while 
about other ways of destroying his enemy. He soon lit upon a way to be rid 
of the three-headed one. 

He said to himself, “Today, I will cast my thunderbolt at him, and he 
will die. Even the most powerful man must not take a nascent enemy 
lightly, of little account though he may yet be.” 

And so, with the exhortations of the Shastras in mind, he decided to kill 
the three-headed being and hurled his Vajra at him. It was terrible to see, 
such a fire, and struck dread into the heart. Struck by that all-powerful 
thunderbolt, the three-headed one died, and as he fell he loosened the 
summit of a mountain. 

The lord of the Devas saw that he was dead and lay still, like a 
mountain, but Indra found no peace. Instead, he was scalded by the 
effulgence of that being, who blazed in death as he had in life. Lying on the 
field, his three heads seemed eerily alive. Overawed and in fear of that 
dazzling lustre, Indra was plunged in dismay. 

Just then, he saw a carpenter walking through the forest with an axe on 
his shoulder. 

Indra said to him, “I ask a favour of you. Cut off this dead one’s heads.” 


The carpenter said, “His shoulders are broad, and my axe is not big 
enough. Also, I will not do this sinful thing.” 

Indra said, “Have no fear but quickly do as I say. At my command your 
axe will be as powerful as a thunderbolt.” 

The carpenter said, “Who are you, who have done this dreadful thing? 
Tell me the truth, I want to know.” 

Indra said, “Then know this: I am Indra, the lord of the Devas. Now do 
as I tell you. Do not hesitate, carpenter.” 

The carpenter said, “O Indra, why are you not ashamed of your bestial 
crime? How it is that you do not dread the sin of killing a Brahmana, 
particularly this son of a Mahamuni?” 

Indra said, “I will perform rigorous atonement to purify myself of these 
sins. He whom I killed with my Vajra was a powerful enemy. I am still 
uneasy; I fear him even now. Waste no time; cut off his heads and I shall 
bestow my favour upon you. I grant that in all sacrifices, you will get the 
head of the sacrificial beast as your share. Now do what I ask!” 

Hearing this, the carpenter cut off the heads of the three-headed one 
with his axe. When the heads were severed, partridges, quails, pigeons and 
all kinds of birds flew out from the naked throats. From the head which the 
three-headed one used to recite the Vedas and drink Soma nectar, partridges 
flew out in a flock. From the head with which he looked at the cardinal 
points as if to absorb them all, quails emerged. From that head which he 
used to drink wine came sparrows and hawks. 

With the heads removed, Indra’s trepidation left him. He returned to 
Devaloka with a light heart, and the carpenter went home. Indra was 
pleased that he had accomplished his objective. 

When Tvashtri heard that Indra had killed his son, his eyes reddened, 
and he said, “Indra has killed my son, who was innocent of any offence, 
who was absorbed in constant tapasya, who was merciful, who was self- 
controlled and who had subdued his senses. To destroy Indra, I will create 
Vritra. 

Let the Lokas behold my power; let the worlds see my tapasyashakti; let 
that inhuman, evil-minded Deva see what I do.” 

With these words, the furious Tvashtri, famed for his tapasya, washed 
his mouth with water in achamana, offered oblations to the fire and created 
the dreadful Vritra. He spoke to the Asura he had made, saying, “O Vritra, 


who are destined to slay Indra, may your might swell by the power of my 
tapasya.” 

And that Asura grew prodigiously in strength. Born of fire, like Agni’s 
son, he towered towards the sky. 

He said, “I have risen like the apocalyptic Sun; tell me what am I to 
do.” 

“Kill Indra,” said Tvashtri, and left for the celestial realms. 

A great battle ensued between Vritra and Indra. Both were fired with 
wrath, and the duel between them was terrible. The heroic Vritra seized the 
lord of gods and whirled him round and threw him into his open maw. 

The Devas were terrified to see how easily Vritra had swallowed Indra, 
and they created Jrimbhika to kill Vritra. Waiting his chance, Indra drew his 
body into itself and flew out when Vritra opened his mouth to yawn. It is 
since then that the yawn became a characteristic of living beings in the three 
worlds. Great was the joy of the Devas at Indra’s escape. And the furious 
battle between Indra and Vritra resumed. 

They fought for a long, long time and, finally, Indra could not withstand 
Vritra, who was infused by the power of Tvashtri’s tapasya; the Deva king 
fled and the Asura prevailed. In disarray after Indra’s retreat, all the other 
Devas were easily overpowered by Tvashtri. 

O Bhaarata, they consulted the greatest rishis and deliberated on the 
proper thing to do. Seized with dread, they sat on the top of the Mandara 
Mountain and invoked the indestructible Vishnu,’ says Salya.” 


CANTO 10 
SENODYOGA PARVA CONTINUED 


C6 S alya continues, ‘Indra said, “O Devas, Vritra has consumed the 

universe, and no-one can withstand him. Once I could have 
vanquished him, but not any more. What can I do now? He is unassailable: 
he has inexorable tejas; he is a Mahatman; victory will always be his in 
battle; he can swallow the three worlds with its Devas, Manavas and 
Asuras. 

Swargavasis, I have decided that we must go to Vishnu and seek his 
counsel. He will help us find a way to kill this evil one. 

At Maghavat’s word, all the Devas and the Rishis went to the 
omnipotent Vishnu, to place themselves under the protection of that 
protector of all. 

They said to the Supreme God, “O Narayana, it was you who once 
covered the three worlds in three strides. It was you who procured the 
Amrita and quelled the Asuras in battle. It was you who restrained the 
Asura Bali and placed Sakra on the throne of Devaloka. You are the Lord of 
the gods and the Soul of the universe. You are the almighty God whom all 
beings worship. 

Best of Gods, be the means of our salvation, of all the Devas and Indra. 
O Asurasudana, all creation is pervaded by Vritra.” 

Vishnu said, “It is my dharma to do what benefits you. I will tell you 
how Vritra can be killed. Go with the Rishis and the Gandharvas to Vritra, 


who has absorbed the universe into himself. Go in an attitude of 
conciliation and win him over with feigned humility. 

By virtue of my power, Indra will be victorious, for I shall invisibly 
enter his Vajra. Go now, all of you, with the Rishis and the Gandharvas, and 
make peace between Sakra and Vritra.” 

When he had spoken, the Rishis and the Devas, with Indra at their head, 
left all together. As they approached, they saw Vritra’s splendour, ablaze as 
if to incinerate the ten cardinal points and consume the three worlds; and 
glorious, like the Sun or the Moon. 

The Rishis came up to Vritra and said to him in a soothing tone, “O 
unconquerable one, your energy has consumed the universe. However, you 
have not vanquished Indra, although you have fought him for so long. All 
beings, including gods, men and demons, suffer from your conflict. Let 
there be peace between you and Sakra. You will be happy and live forever 
in Indra’s realm.” 

The mighty and noble Vritra heard what they said and, bowing his head 
to them, said, “Great ones, I hear you and the Gandharvas clearly. Now 
listen to what I have to say. How can there be friendship between Indra and 
me? How can there be amity between two inveterate enemies?” 

The Rishis said, “Concord between righteous beings happens at a single 
meeting and is always desirable. After that first contact, whatever is 
destined will happen. One should not lose the opportunity of forming an 
alliance with a man of dharma. Indeed, one should actively seek the 
friendship of the righteous. Wise men say that friendship with a good man 
is like wealth in a time of poverty, for the friend will give sage advice when 
it is needed. The friendship of a good person is of great benefit and, so, a 
wise man should never want to kill a righteous being. 

Indra is honoured by the just; he is the refuge of the magnanimous; he 
speaks the truth, always; he is without blame; he knows what dharma is; 
and his judgment is refined. Let there be eternal friendship between you and 
Indra. Have faith in him and let your heart not be otherwise inclined.” 

The illustrious Asura said, “I revere you Rishis who are endowed with 
supernatural powers. Do as I say, exactly as I say, and then, Devas, I will do 
everything these Brahmanottamas advise. 

My condition is: I shall not be killed with anything that is wet or dry, 
with anything made of stone or wood, with a weapon used in close combat 
or with an astra, neither during the day nor at night, not even by Indra 


himself or any of the gods. On these terms I will make eternal peace with 
Indra.” 

The Rishis agreed. Peace was restored, and Vritra was glad. Indra, too, 
was pleased, but thoughts of killing Vritra continued to fill his mind. The 
lord of the Devas passed his time, always uneasy and looking for a chink in 
the compact he had made with Vritra. 

One day, in the eerie twilight of evening, Indra caught sight of the 
mighty Asura on the sea shore. He thought of the boon that had been 
granted to the Asura, and he thought, ‘It is evening now—neither day nor 
night. I must kill Vritra, my enemy, who has stripped me of my power. 
Unless I slay this mighty Asura, even if I have to use deceit, I will not 
prosper.” 

At that moment, thinking these thoughts and bearing Vishnu’s promise 
to him in mind, Indra saw a mass of foam in the sea, as big as a hill, and he 
said, “This is neither dry, nor wet, nor is it a weapon. Let me cast it at 
Vritra, and he will die.” 

And he infused that mountain of foam with the Vajra and cast it. Vishnu 
entered the foaming Vajra and sloughed off Vritra’s head, and the matchless 
demon fell onto white, damp sands, his bare throat spouting a rill of blood. 
With the Asura’s death, the universal pall of darkness lifted and the cardinal 
points shone again; fragrant breezes blew; and gladness filled all the living. 
The Devas, with the Gandharvas, Yakshas and Rakshasas, and with the 
great Nagas and Rishis, glorified Indra with hymns in his praise; and all of 
them bowed to him. 

Indra and the Devas were happy, and Indra spoke soul-stirring words in 
joy at having killed his enemy. Ever conscious of dharma, Indra worshipped 
Vishnu, the most praiseworthy One of all. 

However, having killed Vritra, bane of the gods, Indra was overcome by 
his crime of deceit, and black dejection seized his very soul. Terrorised by 
his sin of Brahmahatya, for he had killed a Brahmana when he slew 
Tvashtri’s three-headed son, he withdrew from the world. He became like 
one who had lost his very mind. Haunted constantly by his sins, he was 
unrecognisable. He hid under water, writhing like a snake and, bereft of his 
presence, the Earth looked as if she had been devastated by a storm of the 
pralaya. 

Bhumi became treeless, and her forests withered; rivers stopped in their 
courses, and lakes and even seas dried up; and animals were stricken 


because it never rained and a drought without remit gripped the world. The 
Devas and all the great Rishis were seized in fear; the world, without a 
king, was wracked by cataclysms of every kind. With no lord, panic took 
the Devas and the Devarishis. They wondered desperately who could 
replace Indra, but none amongst them had any inclination to be the king of 
the gods.’” 


CANTO 11 
SENODYOGA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 S alya says, ‘Then all the Rishis and Devas said, “Let us crown the 
radiant Rajarishi Nahusha as king of the Devas. He is strong and 
famed, and always devoted to dharma.” 

They went to him and said, “O Bhumipala, we want you to be our 
king.” 

Nahusha, with self-interest at heart, said to the Devas, Rishis and Pitrs, 
“T am feeble and cannot protect you. You need a powerful god to be your 
king. Only Indra always owned that prowess.” 

The Devas with the Rishis at their head said, “It is true that we all have 
weaknesses. Rule the realms of Devaloka with the help of our tapasya. 
Rajarajan, accept the crown of heaven and this boon from us: whatever 
being stands within your sight—be he a Deva, an Asura, a Yaksha, a Rishi, 
a Pitr or a Gandharva—you shall absorb his power. Thereby your own 
power will be enhanced and you will grow in strength. Be guided only by 
dharma and rule the worlds. Protect the Brahmarishis and the Devas.” 

Nahusha was crowned king of Devaloka and, placing dharma before 
everything else, he became sovereign of all the worlds. Nahusha had led a 
virtuous life, but when he obtained the precious boon and reign over 
Devaloka, his mind began to turn to sensual thoughts. 

He surrounded himself with Apsaras and other celestial nymphs. He 
began to enjoy myriad pleasures in the Nandana vana, on Mount Kailasa, 


upon the crest of Himavat, on the Mandara Mountain, on the slopes of the 
Sweta, Mahendra and Malaya mountains, and in the oceans and rivers. He 
listened to captivating stories and enjoyed the sweet strains of musical 
instruments and divine voices singing. Viswavasu and Narada, bevies of 
Apsaras, bands of Gandharvas and the six seasons embodied attended upon 
him. Scented breezes wafted around him, cool and refreshing. 

Once, while the profligate king was enjoying himself in this way, he 
caught sight of Sachi Devi, Indra’s favourite queen. He looked at her, and 
his soul in the grip of lust, he said to his courtiers, “Why does this Devi, 
Indra’s queen, not minister to me? I am the lord of the Devas and the ruler 
of all the worlds. Let Sachi come to me at once.” 

Saddened when she heard this, Sachi said to Brihaspati, “O Brahmana, 
protect me from Nahusha. I take refuge with you. You have always said that 
I bear auspicious marks, being the favourite of the lord of the Devas; that I 
am chaste, devoted to my lord and destined never to become a widow. You 
say all this repeatedly; now let your words be proven true. You have never 
said anything in vain; therefore, Brahmanottama, all that you have said 
must come to pass.” 

Brihaspati said to Sachi, who was beside herself with fear, “What I have 
said will come true, Devi. It will not be long before you see the return of 
Indra. Truly, you have nothing to fear from Nahusha, and I shall unite you 
with Indra very soon.” 

Nahusha heard that Indra’s queen had taken refuge with Brihaspati, the 
son of Angiras, and he was furious.’” 


CANTO 12 
SENODYOGA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 S alya says, ‘Seeing that Nahusha was angry, the Rishis and Devas 

said to their king, who looked so fearsome now, “O Devaraja, 

shed your rage. When you are angry, the entire universe trembles, with its 

Asuras, Gandharvas, Kinnaras and Nagas. Let go of this wrath, righteous 
one. A man like you should not lose his equanimity. 

Devi Sachi is another man’s wife. Calm yourself. Turn your mind away 
from the sin of ravishing another’s wife. You are the king of the Devas, and 
may you prosper! Protect your subjects with dharma.” 

Nahusha was mindless with desire and paid no heed to what they said. 
Accusing Indra, he said, “Ahalya of the blemishless reputation was the wife 
of a Muni. Indra ravished her while her husband still lived. Why did you 
not stop him? Many were the deeds of inhumanity, of unrighteousness and 
of deceit that Indra committed in times past. Why did you not prevent him? 

Let the Devi serve my pleasure; it will do her good and will protect you 
all, as well.” 

The Devas said, “We will bring Indra’s queen to you, as you command. 
Set aside your anger and be at peace.” 

The Devas and Rishis went to inform Brihaspati and Sachi about what 
had transpired. They said, “Brahmanottama, we know that Sachi Devi has 
come to you for refuge and that you have promised to protect her. But we, 
the Devas, Gandharvas and Rishis, beg you to give her up to Nahusha. The 


lustrous Nahusha is now the king of the Devas and is above Indra. Let the 
beautiful Devi accept him as her lord.” 

Hearing this, Sachi began to sob pitifully, and she said to Brihaspati, “O 
best of Devarishis, I do not want Nahusha for my lord. I have placed myself 
in your protection; save me from this calamity.” 

Brihaspati said, “I am resolved not to abandon you. You of the 
blemishless life, I shall not forsake you, for you are virtuous and devoted to 
truth. I do not want to commit a sin, especially since I am a Brahmana who 
knows dharma, for I worship the truth and am aware of all the dictates of 
dharma. No, I will never betray you. Go your ways, Devas. But first, hear 
what Brahma has said about this: 

He who surrenders to a foe the terrified person who has asked for 
protection will not find refuge when he himself is in need of it. The seeds he 
plants will not grow, and rains will fail. 

He who gives up to an enemy the terrified one who has asked for his 
protection never succeeds in anything that he undertakes. He will lose his 
senses and fall stricken from heaven. The gods refuse the offerings he 
makes. His progeny die untimely deaths, and his Pitrs fight among 
themselves. The Devas with Indra at their head will cast the Vajra at such a 
one. 

Know this to be true. I shall not give up Sachi, who is Indra’s queen and 
his favourite. I, Brihaspati, tell you this, which is for her good and mine. I 
will never surrender Sachi.” 

Then the Devas and the Gandharvas said, “Acharya Brihaspati, think of 
a solution.” 

Brihaspati said, “Let this auspicious Devi ask Nahusha for some time 
before she decides what to do. This will be to her advantage and ours, for 
Kaala might create many obstacles in Nahusha’s way while we wait. Only 
Time knows the future. Nahusha has become powerful and haughty because 
of the boon you granted him.” 

Brihaspati’s words pleased the Devas, who said, ‘You have spoken well, 
O Guru. This is, without doubt, for the good of all the Devas. However, we 
must pacify this Devi.” 

Then the Devas led by Agni spoke soothingly to Indra’s queen, saying, 
“You are the holder of the universe of mobile and immobile things. You are 
chaste and true. Go to Nahusha. That degenerate who lusts after you will 


fail to have what he wants, and Indra will regain sovereignty over 
Devaloka.” 

Indra’s queen went bashfully to Nahusha of the dreadful mien, but to 
attain her end, not his. Struck mindless with lust, Nahusha saw her, how 
young and lovely she was, and was ecstatic.”” 


CANTO 13 
SENODYOGA PARVA CONTINUED 


C6 S alya says, ‘Nahusha saw Sachi come, and said, “O sweet smiles, I 
am the lord of the three worlds. Take me for your lord as well.” 

That chaste Devi quivered in terror, like the slender stalk of a young 
plantain tree in the wind. She bowed her head to Brahma, then joined her 
hands and spoke to the truly fearsome Nahusha. 

She said, “Devaraja, I need time. No one knows what became of Indra, 
or his whereabouts. I have sent my friends and servitors forth to look for 
him; if I get no news of him, I will come to you. I tell you this truthfully.” 

Nahusha was pleased, and said, “It shall be as you say. Come as soon as 
you discover what has happened. I hope you will keep your word.” 

The auspicious Sachi Devi went back to Brihaspati’s home. There, she 
told Agni and the other Devas what had happened, and they began to 
deliberate on what they should do to best benefit Indra. 

They went to the all-powerful Vishnu for refuge and said, “Indra has 
been overcome by the sin of killing a Brahmana. Devadeva, you are the 
Primeval One, the first creator, the ruler of the universe, and our refuge. 
You have assumed the form of Vishnu for the protection of all beings. 
When, by dint of your power, Indra slew Vritra he was guilty of the direst 
sin of killing a Brahmana, of Brahmahatya. How can he be absolved of his 
sin?” 


Vishnu said, “Let him offer a yagna to me, and I will purify the 
Vajradharin. If he performs the Aswamedha yagna, the slayer of Paka will 
regain his position as king of the Devas. Nahusha’s hubris and indulgences 
will destroy him. Be patient and bide your time, Devas, but remain 
vigilant.” 

Knowing that they are always true, Vishnu’s words were like amrita to 
their ears. And the Devas, their Acharya and the Rishis went to where the 
troubled Indra waited in constant terror. And there, they performed a great 
horse-sacrifice, which could expiate the sin of killing a Brahmana, so that 
Indra would be purified. 

O Yudhishtira, Mahavishnu divided Indra’s sin among trees, rivers, 
mountains, the Earth and women; and Indra was rid of it. His fever of dread 
left him and he was himself once more. 

From that place, Indra looked at Nahusha, before whom all living 
beings felt cowed, and who was unapproachable because of the boon that 
the Rishis had granted him. Sachi’s lord made himself invisible and 
wandered the universe, biding his time. 

When Indra disappeared, Sachi sank into a well of grief. In utter misery 
she cried, “O Indra! If I have ever given you a gift, if I have ever made an 
offering to the gods, if I have ever propitiated my gurus, if there is any truth 
in me, then I pray that my chastity remains inviolate. I bow to Nisha Devi, 
Goddess of Night, who is holy and pure, and who rules during uttarayana, 
the northern course of the Sun. I pray that she answers my plea!” 

Saying this, she purified herself in body and soul and worshipped Nisha 
Devi, whom she was able to invoke because of her chastity and devotion to 
truth, and she said, “Show me where the king of the Devas is. Let truth 
reveal the truth.”’” 


CANTO 14 
SENODYOGA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 S alya says, ‘Devi Upasruti appeared before the virtuous and 
beautiful woman. Indra’s queen gazed at this young and exquisite 
goddess and, with a glad heart, paid her worship. 

She said, “Who are you, lovely one?” 

Upasruti said, “I am Upasruti. I have made myself visible to you 
because of your truthfulness, noble one. You are devoted to your husband, 
you are self-restrained, and you are devout in your worship; and so I will 
show you where Vritrasudana Indra is. Follow me quickly; and you shall 
see him.” 

Upasruti, with Sachi following her, crossed celestial groves and many 
mountains. She crossed the Himavat Mountain and, by its northern flank, 
arrived at the sea. Many yojanas over the ocean, she flew to a large island 
covered with marvellous trees and plants of all kinds. 

And there the two devis came to an enchanting and heavenly lake, eight 
hundred yojanas long and wide, with flocks of birds all around and upon the 
shimmering water. Bhaarata, on its crystalline surface grew full-blown 
lotuses of five colours with thousands of bees humming above them. In the 
middle of the lake was a large and exquisite bank of these flowers, at the 
heart of which stood a singular white lotus upon a tall stem. 

Upasruti infused herself and Sachi into the stem of this wondrous 
flower, and there Sachi saw her lord Indra in a miniature form. Sachi and 


Upasruti contracted themselves into tiny forms as well; and Indra’s queen 
began to glorify her lord by reciting a litany of his celebrated deeds. 

The divine Purandara said to Sachi, “Why have you come? How did 
you find me?” 

Devi Sachi told him what Nahusha had done. She said, “O performer of 
a hundred sacrifices, he obtained the sovereignty of the three worlds and 
became powerful and haughty, and his soul became corrupt and vicious. He 
commanded me to serve him, and the wretch has even appointed a time by 
which I must go to him. If you do not save me, my lord, he will force me to 
give myself to him. That is why I have to come so desperately to you. 

Mahabaho, kill the terrible Nahusha of the black soul. Reveal yourself, 
slayer of Daityas and Danavas. Assume your own power and rule Devaloka 
again.”’” 


CANTO 15 
SENODYOGA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 S alya says, ‘The illustrious Indradeva said to Sachi, “This is no 

time for rashness. Nahusha is more powerful than I am, beautiful 

one. His power has been augmented by the benefits that the Rishis gain 

every time they make offerings to the Devas and the Pitrs. I have a 

judicious plan, which you will have to carry out. You must not disclose it to 
anyone, but do it secretly. 

Go to Nahusha in private, address him as lord of the universe and invite 
him to visit you, riding on a palanquin borne by Rishis. Tell him that if he 
does this, you will gladly place yourself at his disposal.” 

Returning to Amaravati, the lotus-eyed Sachi went to Nahusha, who 
saw her and, smiling, said to her, “Welcome, devi of the rounded thighs and 
sweet smiles. What is your pleasure? Give yourself to me. I am devoted to 
you and I will do whatever pleases you. Do not be shy; trust me. I swear by 
truth that I will do whatever you ask.” 

Sachi said, “O Lord of the universe, I want the time that you granted 
me. After that, you will be my lord. And I do have a wish that you must 
fulfil before I become yours. I ask this indulgence, knowing your love for 
me. If you grant my wish, I will be yours to command. 

Indra had horses to ride on, and elephants and chariots as well. I want 
you to have a unique vehicle, the like of which neither Vishnu nor Rudra, 
nor any of the Asuras and Rakshasas possess. Let a number of exalted 


Rishis carry you in such a palanquin. This is what I wish. You should not 
think of yourself as being merely equal to any Asuras or Devas. You absorb 
their strength as soon as they look at you and, thus, there is no one as great 
as you.” 

Nahusha was pleased, and he said to that perfect goddess, “Fairest one, 
you speak of a conveyance never heard of before. I am taken with your 
thought, Devi; ah, I am in your power! A man who has Rishis as his 
palanquin-bearers cannot be a feeble person. I have practised tapasya and 
am mighty. I am the lord of the past, the present and the future. The 
universe would cease to exist if I were to be moved to wrath, for all the 
universe is established in me. 

Devas, Asuras, Gandharvas, Nagas and Rakshasas together cannot 
withstand me when I am angry. My very gaze divests the man it falls on of 
his energy, whoever he is. And I am pleased to grant your request. The 
Saptarishis and other lofty sages will carry me, and you will look upon our 
greatness and splendour, lovely one.” 

Saying this with arrogant confidence, Nahusha dismissed Sachi. He 
harnessed a number of Rishis, all devout tapasvins, to him. Contemptuous 
of Brahmanas, capricious and intoxicated with power and pride, Nahusha 
made those divine sages bear his palanquin. 

Meanwhile, Sachi went to Brihaspati and said, “Just a brief time 
remains of the period of grace that Nahusha granted me. Out of compassion 
for one who reveres you so much, I beg you to find Indra quickly.” 

Brihaspati said to her, “Excellent one, there is no need for you to fear 
Nahusha. He will not keep his power for much longer. Indeed, the wretch 
has already fallen for having ignored dharma and making the Maharishis his 
palanquin-bearers. I will perform a yagna for his destruction, and I will find 
Indra. Have no fear; for now, farewell.” 

Brihaspati kindled a sacred fire, in accordance with the Shastras, and 
made the choicest offerings into it, in order to discover where Indra was. 
After making his offerings, he commanded Agni to search for Indra. 

Agni Deva, the consumer of burnt offerings, assumed a wonderful 
feminine form and vanished from there. With the speed of the mind, he 
searched everywhere—on mountains and in forests, on Earth and in the sky 
—and came back to Brihaspati within the blink of an eye. 

Agni said, “Brihaspati, nowhere can I find the king of the Devas. The 
only place I have yet to search is the waters, which I am loth to enter, O 


Brahmana. What would you have me do?” 

The Acharya of the Devas said to Agni, “O Illustrious Deva, you must 
go into the water.” 

Agni said, “I cannot enter the water, for extinguishment awaits me 
there. I put myself into your hands, effulgent one; O may you be blessed. 
Fire originated in water; Kshatriyas rose from Brahmanas; iron was born in 
stone. All three, which can consume all other things, are powerless over the 
sources from which they spring.”’” 


CANTO 16 
SENODYOGA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 S alya says, ‘“Brihaspati said, “O Agni, you are the mouth of all the 

gods. You are the conveyor of sacred offerings. You see into the 

inmost souls of all creatures. The poets call you single and three-fold at the 

same time. Consumer of burnt offerings, the Universe would cease to exist 
if you abandoned it. 

By worshipping you, Brahmanas, their wives and sons win in Swarga 
the rewards of their good deeds. Agni, it is you who are the bearer of the 
havis offered at every homa and yagna. Why, you are yourself the finest 
offering. In the most sacred of yagnas, it is you who are worshipped with 
gifts and oblations. 

You created the three worlds, and it is you who will unleash your power 
and consume them when the time comes. You are the mother of the 
Universe, and its destroyer, as well. Wise men say that you are the clouds 
and their lightning; your heat supports all life. All the waters are contained 
in you, as is this entire world. You purify all things. There is nothing in the 
Trilokas that you do not know. Every being looks kindly on its parent; enter 
the water without fear. I will imbue you with strength by chanting mantras 
from the Veda.” 

Agni was pleased at being glorified by Brihaspati and said, “I will 
reveal Indra to you. I say this truthfully.” 


Then Agni entered the waters, including seas and little ponds, and came 
to the lake where, as he searched among the flowers, he saw the king of the 
Devas lying among the fibres of a lotus stem. Quickly, he returned and told 
Brihaspati how Indra had made himself minuscule and taken refuge inside a 
lotus stalk. And Brihaspati, accompanied by the Devas, the Rishis and the 
Gandharvas, went to where Indra lay and eulogised him by reminding him 
of his great deeds. 

He said, “O Indra, you killed the great Asura Namuchi, as well as the 
terrible Sambara and Bala. Now rouse yourself and vanquish your enemy. 
Rise, Indra, and see the Devas and Rishis who are gathered here. 

You delivered the three worlds by killing the Danavas; with the foam of 
the sea, infused with Vishnu’s fervour, you slew Vritra. You are the refuge 
of all creatures and worthy of worship. There is no one equal to you. You 
are the support of all creatures. And you made the Devas great. Now, regain 
your sway over the worlds and all living beings by reclaiming your might, 
O Mahatman.” 

Thus glorified, Indra became bigger, little by little, and finally assumed 
his own resplendent, magnificent form. His strength flaring, he said to 
Brihaspati, who stood before him, “What more needs to be done? I have 
annihilated the two terrible Asuras—Tvashtri’s son and the gigantic Vritra 
who savaged the three worlds.” 

Brihaspati said, “The mortal king, Nahusha, who gained the throne of 
Devaloka through the power of the Devarishis, now persecutes us.” 

Indra said, “How did Nahusha gain the throne of heaven, which is well 
nigh impossible to have? What tapasya did he perform? How great is his 
power, O Brihaspati?” 

Brihaspati said, “The Devas became insecure when you renounced the 
lordship of Devaloka, and they wished for a king to rule over them. The 
Devas, the Pitrs, the Rishis and the Gandharvas met together and asked 
Nahusha to be their king and protector of the universe. Nahusha claimed 
that he was feeble and asked them to infuse him with the power of their 
tapasya. 

The Devas and Devarishis obliged him, O Indra, and Nahusha’s strength 
grew and became terrible. That is how he became Trilokapati. And now the 
wretch has harnessed the Devarishis to his palanquin and travels, thus, over 
the three worlds. 


May you never come within the dreadful Nahusha’s vision, for he emits 
venom from his eyes and absorbs the strength of every being he looks at. 
All the Devas are in terror of him. They hide from Nahusha and do not dare 
even cast a glance at him.” 

While Brihaspati was speaking, there came to that place Kubera 
guardian of the worlds, Yama the son of Surya, the luminous Soma Deva 
and Varuna. 

They said to Indra, “We are fortunate that you killed Tvashtri’s first son 
and Vritrasura. How lucky we are to see you safe and well, with your 
enemies dead.” 

Indra received those Lokapalas and greeted them gladly and with proper 
ceremony. He said, “Nahusha is the king of the Devas, and is dreadful. You 
must help me overcome him.” 

They replied, “Nahusha is truly fearsome. His vision is poison, and we 
are afraid of him. If you overthrow Nahusha, we, too, should be entitled to a 
share of the punya. 

Indra agreed, “So be it. You Devas— Varuna, Yama and Kubera—will 
be crowned alongside me. With the help of all the Devas, let us vanquish 
Nahusha of the venomous eyes.” 

Agni said to Indra, “Give me a share in sacrificial offerings, and I will 
help you, too.” 

Indra said to him, “O Agni, you will receive a large share in 
Mahayagnas; you and I will have an equal share each.” 

Accordingly, Indra conferred upon Kubera sovereignty over the 
Yakshas and the wealth of the worlds; upon Yama authority over the Pitrs; 
and upon Varuna dominion over the waters.” 


CANTO 17 
SENODYOGA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 S alya says, “While the brilliant Indra was with the Lokapalas and 
other Devas, deliberating the destruction of Nahusha, there 
appeared at that place the venerable Rishi Agastya. 

Agastya paid his respects to the lord of the Devas and said, “How happy 
I am that you, who killed Vritra and his brother who assumed the form of 
the universe, are well and growing in strength. Purandara, we are fortunate 
that today Nahusha has been removed from the throne of Swarga and that 
you have slain all your enemies.” 

Indra said, “Have you had a pleasant journey here, Maharishi? I am glad 
to see you. Oblige me by accepting this padya to wash your face and feet, 
this arghya and this cow for your yagna.” 

After the Brahmanottama accepted these, and when he was seated, the 
happy Indra said to him, “Dvijottama, tell us how Nahusha was cast out of 
Swarga.” 

Agastya said, “Listen, Indra, to how the vicious Nahusha, intoxicated 
with the vanity of power, was cast down from Devaloka. 

The chaste Brahmanas and Devarishis who were his palanquin-bearers, 
weary from carrying him, questioned the haughty one, asking if he believed 
that the hymns in the Vedas to be recited while sprinkling water over cows 
were authentic. Nahusha, whose mind had been overpowered by tamas, said 
that they were not. The Rishis then told him that in fact they were, and that 


the Maharishis had declared their sanctity. They accused him of having 
veered from dharma and of treading a sinful path. 

At this, driven by evil, he touched me on my head with his foot. 
Immediately, he lost his power and majesty, and became agitated and 
frightened. I said to him, ‘Because you have rejected the veracity of the 
Vedic hymns that the Brahmanas and Rishis validated, because you touched 
my head with your foot, and because, ignorant wretch, you have turned 
these exalted tapasvins who are like Brahma into your beasts of burden, I 
hereby divest you of your grandeur and cast you out of Devaloka. 

You will fall straight down into Bhumi, for all your punya is exhausted. 
For ten thousand years, you will range the Earth in the form of an enormous 
snake. At the end of that time you may re-enter Swarga.’ 

O Parantapa, that is how black-souled Nahusha lost his throne. It is 
fortunate that our strength is waxing and that the thorn in the flesh of the 
Brahmanas has been removed. Go to Devaloka; subdue your senses, 
suppress your foes, protect the worlds and let the great Rishis glorify you.” 

The Devas and Rishis were joyful, as were the Pitrs, the Yakshas, the 
Nagas, the Rakshasas, the Gandharvas and all the Apsaras; and the lakes, 
rivers, mountains and seas, as well. 

Together they came before Indra and said, “We are filled with gladness 
at your prosperity, O slayer of your enemies. How fortunate it is that 
Agastya cast the vicious Nahusha out of Amaravati and turned him into a 
snake on Earth!” says Salya.” 


CANTO 18 
SENODYOGA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 S alya says, ‘With the adulation of the Gandharvas and Apsaras 
echoing all round, Indra mounted his Airavata, the king of 
elephants blessed with every auspicious mark. Accompanied by Agni, 
Maharishi Brihaspati, Yama, Varuna and Kubera, he went to Amaravati, 
surrounded by all the Devas, Gandharvas and Apsaras. There the performer 
of a hundred sacrifices was united with his queen and joyfully resumed his 
role as guardian of the three worlds. 

The illustrious Devarishi Angiras came, too, to Indra’s sabha and 
eulogised him with hymns from the Atharva Veda. Indra granted him a 
boon, saying, “Henceforth, your name will appear in the Atharva Veda as 
Rishi Atharvangiras, and from now on you will receive a share of all yagnas 
that are performed anywhere.” 

Maharajan, when Atharvangiras left after this honour was conferred on 
him, Indra honoured all the Devas and Rishis, rich with the wealth of 
tapasya and, in happy contentment, he ruled the Trilokas with dharma. 

This is the story of the misery that Indra endured before being reunited 
with his wife; and, in order to slay his enemies, even he had to spend a time 
in hiding. Rajadhiraja, do not feel sorry for yourself because you, your 
brothers and Draupadi have suffered privations in the forest. 

O joy of the Kurus, you will regain your kingdom in the same manner 
that Indra did after he killed Vritra. In the same way that Agastya cursed the 


arrogant Nahusha, bane of Brahmanas, reducing him to a snake for many 
long years, you will soon quell your enemies—Karna, Duryodhana and 
other evil ones. Then you and your brothers, with Draupadi, will enjoy 
dominion of the Earth, as far as the sea. 

When his forces are arrayed in battle formations and ready to fight, the 
king who desires victory must listen to this story of Indra’s triumph. That is 
why, Yudhishtira, I have narrated it to you, to ensure your victory. Exalted 
men attain prosperity when they are glorified. The destruction of countless 
noble Kshatriyas is imminent because of the crimes that Duryodhana has 
committed, and by virtue of the might of Bhima and Arjuna. 

He who reads this story of Indra’s victory, with faith in God, is cleansed 
of his sins. He attains a state of beatitude, both in this world and in the next. 
He will never need to fear his enemies; he will have sons; he will never 
encounter peril of any sort; and he will enjoy great longevity. Everywhere 
his victory will be proclaimed; and he will never face defeat,” says Salya. 

That best of virtuous men, Yudhishtira whom the Madra king Salya so 
exhorts, honours him with due ceremony and says to Salya, ‘There is no 
doubt that you will be Karna’s charioteer. You must dampen his spirits by 
praising Arjuna.’ 

Salya says, ‘So it shall be. I will do as you ask, and whatever else is 
within my power to do for you.’ 

Then Salya bids farewell to the sons of Kunti and goes with his army to 
Duryodhana.” 


CANTO 19 
SENODYOGA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Satyaki, that great hero of the Satvata vamsa, 

comes to Yudhishtira with a vast army of foot-soldiers, horses, 
chariots and elephants. His soldiers, all men of valour, hail from diverse 
lands. Carrying weapons of various kinds, and all of them fierce and 
doughty, they embellish the Pandava army. 

Yuyudhana’s army looks splendid, with battle-axes, missiles, spears and 
lances; with mallets, clubs and staves; with cords; with gleaming swords 
and daggers; and with a variety of sharp, tempered arrows. The splendid 
army, made more magnificent by these weapons, is the colour of a cloudy 
sky, like a mass of clouds flashing with lightning. It consists of an 
akshauhini of troops, yet when it merges with Yudhishtira’s force it is 
subsumed like a small stream flowing into the sea. 

Dhrishtaketu, the powerful king of the Chedis, brings his akshauhini of 
troops and comes to the sons of Pandu. The immensely powerful Jayatsena, 
king of Magadha, adds his akshauhini of warriors to Yudhishtira’s army; 
and the Pandya king from his coastal kingdom does the same with his 
troops. 

O king, when all these legions are massed, the army with its finely 
attired, mighty warriors is a joy to behold. Drupada comes, too, with his 
tremendous sons and heroic fighting men from different lands, and they 
further enhance the splendour of that army. Virata, king of Matsyas, 


accompanied by the king of the hill kingdoms, leads his legions to the sons 
of Pandu. 

Seven akshauhinis augment the Pandava army, and a multitude of 
banners flutters in the air. Their eagerness to fight the Kurus gladdens the 
hearts of the Pandavas. 

Raja Bhagadatta gives an akshauhini of his men to Dhritarashtra’s son, 
pleasing him enormously. The unassailable mass of Duryodhana’s army, 
filled with gold-clad Chins and Kiratas, sparkles in beauty, like a forest of 
Karnikara trees. To Duryodhana’s aid come, also, the courageous 
Bhurisravas and Salya, each with one akshauhini. Kritavarman, the son of 
Hridika, comes with the Bhojas, Andhakas and Kukuras, with another 
akshauhini. All those terrific soldiers wear flower garlands and look as 
captivating as playful elephants ambling through a forest. 

Other forces from the land of Sindhu and Sauvira, led by Jayadratha, 
come in such vast numbers that the mountains seem to tremble under their 
tread. One akshauhini they are, and as they move they look like clouds 
driven by the wind. 

Rajan, more kings and their forces join the Kuru king. Sudakshina, the 
king of the Kambojas, along with the Yavanas and Sakas, comes with an 
akshauhini of troops that resembles a swarm of locusts. This force is 
absorbed by the Kuru army and blends seamlessly into it. King Nila comes 
from his capital Mahishmati with great warriors from the southern regions, 
who carry delicately wrought and lethal weapons. The two kings of Avanti 
come, each with a separate akshauhini of their men. Those tigers among 
men, the five princely brothers of Kekaya, hasten to Duryodhana with an 
akshauhini of warriors, adding to his elation. Illustrious kings from other 
parts of the land arrive with three divisions of fighting men. 

Duryodhana now has an army of eleven akshauhinis, a sea of colour 
with countless flags, eager to do battle with the sons of Kunti. So crowded 
is Hastinapura that there is no space in it even for the commanders of 
Duryodhana’s own army. This massive combined force fills the city of 
elephants and its surroundings. 

The land of the five rivers, the entire region of Kurujangala, the wild 
forest of Rohitaka, Ahichatra and Kalakuta, the banks of the Ganga, Varana 
and Vatadhana, the hills bordering the Yamuna—the whole of this rich and 
extensive tract, abundant with corn, is entirely occupied by that Kaurava 


army. And the priest whom the king of the Panchalas has sent to the Kurus 
sees this.” 


CANTO 20 
SANJAYA-YANA PARVA 


V aisampayana said, “Drupada’s priest, the emissary of the Pandavas, 

comes to the Kaurava king Dhritarashtra who, with Bhishma and 
Vidura, greets him with ceremonial honour. The priest gives them news of 
the Pandavas and goes on to enquire about the welfare of the Kauravas. 
After this, he speaks in the presence of all the leaders of Duryodhana’s 
army. 

The wise and seasoned Brahmana says, ‘You all know what the dharma 
of kings is. However, I will remind you of some things again before I begin 
what I have really come to say. Dhritarashtra and Pandu are sons of the 
same father. It is clear that they should inherit their father’s wealth equally. 
How is it that the sons of Dhritarashtra possess ancestral wealth, but the 
sons of Pandu have none? Why did Pandu’s sons not receive their share? 

You are all aware that Pandu’s sons did not receive their inherited share 
of their father’s wealth because Dhritarashtra’s sons usurped it. 
Dhritarashtra’s sons attempted to remove them from their path to power 
even by trying to have the Pandavas murdered; but their destined time on 
Earth had not run out, and they could not send the Pandavas to Yama’s 
halls. Then, when those noble princes had carved out a kingdom for 
themselves by dint of their own strength, the wretched sons of 
Dhritarashtra, helped by Subala’s son, robbed them of it by low deceit. As 
was his wont, Dhritarashtra gave his approval, even to this. 


For thirteen years the sons of Pandu were exiled, to live in the 
wilderness. Honourable though they were, in the sabha they and their wife 
were scorned, humiliated. Great was the suffering they had to endure in the 
forests; and unspeakable were the sorrows they had to bear, comparable 
only to the suffering that sinners undergo when they are reborn into inferior 
species. 

O Kurusattama, the sons of Pandu are willing to overlook all past 
miseries and injustices; they want a peaceful settlement with the Kurus. 
Bearing in mind the exemplary conduct of the Pandavas, as well as 
Duryodhana’s sinful ways, his friends should persuade Duryodhana to make 
peace. The heroic sons of Pandu are not eager for war with the Kurus. They 
want to reclaim their rightful inheritance without bringing the world to 
disaster and ruin. If Dhritarashtra’s son finds an excuse for war, it can never 
be a just one. 

The sons of Pandu are more powerful than him. Yudhishtira has 
gathered seven akshauhinis of troops, who are so eager to fight the Kurus 
that they just wait for his command. He has in his forces tigers among men, 
who are equal in strength to a thousand akshauhinis—Satyaki and 
Bhimasena, and the twins of untold prowess. 

Yes, truly, these eleven oceanic divisions are arrayed on one side, but 
they are balanced on the other by the mighty-armed Dhananjaya of many 
forms. Arjuna’s prowess is greater than that of all these legions put together. 
There is also Vasudeva’s son of dazzling effulgence and tejas. Faced with 
Arjuna’s awesome valour and Krishna’s plumbless wisdom, who is there 
that can fight them? So, I ask you to give what ought to be given, in 
accordance with dharma and the agreement you made. Do not lose this 
opportunity to do the right thing, and save yourselves and other lives 
beyond count.’” 


CANTO 21 
SANJAYA-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Bhishma hears what the Purohita says and, after 
paying his respects to him, speaks wise words, fitting to the 
occasion. 

He says, ‘I am glad that the Pandavas and Krishna are well. I am glad 
that they have found help and that they have set their hearts on a course of 
dharma. How fortunate that those sons of the Kuru vamsa want peace with 
their cousins. There is no doubt that you speak the truth; however, you 
speak bluntly. I presume that is because you are a Brahmana. 

The sons of Pandu must indeed have been sorely afflicted, here and in 
the forest. By law, they are entitled to their father’s kingdom. Arjuna is 
powerful, a master of all weapons and a Maharatha. Who can withstand 
Dhananjaya in battle? Even the wielder of the thunderbolt cannot, let alone 
mortal warriors. Arjuna is unmatched in the three worlds.’ 

Now, an angry Karna insolently interrupts Bhishma even while he is 
speaking. He directs his glance at Duryodhana, while saying to the priest, 
“There is no one in the world, Brahmana, who is not aware of all this. What 
point is there in repeating them over and over again? Sakuni played the 
game of dice on Duryodhana’s behalf, and won. Yudhishtira went into the 
forest according to the agreed stipulation, which was that if any of them 
was seen before thirteen years had passed they must spend another thirteen 


years in the vana. He now ignores that covenant and, confident of his 
alliance with the Matsyas and Panchalas, he wants his kingdom back. 

Learned one, Duryodhana will not yield even a single foot of land if you 
try to threaten him; but if dharma required it, he would give up the whole 
Earth, even to an enemy. If the Pandavas want their ancestral throne back, 
they must pass another thirteen years in exile. Afterwards they can live as 
Duryodhana’s liegemen, in safety and peace. 

Let them not, out of stupidity, adopt a clearly sinful course. If they 
decide to abandon the path of dharma and go to war, they will, when they 
meet the unimpeachable Kurus, remember my words.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Of what use are your lofty, boastful speeches, Radheya? 
You would do better to remember the time when Arjuna single-handedly 
vanquished six Kuru Maharathas in battle. If we do not do what this 
Brahmana says, you can be sure that Arjuna will kill us all in battle.’ 

Dhritarashtra lauds Bhishma’s words; then he rebukes the son of Radha, 
“What Bhishma says is salutary—good for us, for the Pandavas and indeed 
for the whole world. I will deliberate over this and send Sanjaya to the sons 
of Pandu. 

Brahmana, there is no need for you to wait; you can return today.’ 

The Kaurava king honours Drupada’s priest and sends him back to the 
Pandavas. He then summons Sanjaya to the sabha and speaks to him.” 


CANTO 22 
SANJAYA-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, ‘O Sanjaya, we hear that the Pandavas have 

arrived in Upaplavya. Go and enquire after them. You must greet 

Ajatasatru with these words: Jt is fortunate that you have come out of the 

wilderness and arrived at a city such as this. And to all of them you must 

say: Are you well, after having endured the hardships of exile, which you 

did not deserve? In no time they will think kindly of us, for, though we 
treated them treacherously, they are righteous and good. 

Never have I known the Pandavas to be untruthful. It was their own 
efforts that won them their prosperity, yet they were always obedient to me. 
Despite the most severe scrutiny, I cannot find a single transgression for 
which I can blame them. They always conduct themselves with their status 
and with dharma in mind. They never yield to sensual temptations, to heat 
and cold, to hunger and thirst. They subdue sloth and apathy, joy, anger and 
thoughtlessness. The sons of Pritha are always conscious of dharma and are 
always pleasant and cordial. 

When occasion demands, they give of their riches to their friends. 
Friendship with them never cools with passing time, for they bestow justly 
deserved honours and wealth on everyone. No one amongst the Ajamidas 
has ever hated them, excepting this vile, capricious and foolish Duryodhana 
and the even more evil-minded Karna. These two always envy and goad 
those Mahatmans who have been divested of friends and happiness. 


The spoilt and pampered Duryodhana, full of initial bluster, thinks he 
has done well for himself. He is foolish to think that he can rob the 
Pandavas of their rightful inheritance while they still live. Before war 
breaks out, he would be wise to yield what is due to Yudhishtira, who has 
the support of Arjuna, Krishna, Bhima, Satyaki, Madri’s two sons and the 
warriors of Srinjaya. From his chariot, Savyasachi, the wielder of the 
Gandiva, can devastate the whole world on his own; and so can the ever- 
victorious and exalted Krishna, the invincible Lord of the three worlds. 

What mortal could face him who is the worthiest man in all the world, 
whose countless arrows roar like clouds and fly like locust-swarms to cover 
all sides? Alone on his chariot, with his Gandiva in his hands, he conquered 
the northern realms, including the Kurus who live there, and took all their 
wealth. He made the Dravida soldiers part of his own army. It was Arjuna 
who defeated the Devas and Indra in the Khandava vana, he who made 
offerings to Agni and enhanced the honour and fame of the Pandavas. 

Of all mace fighters there is none to equal Bhima, nor any as skilful 
riding an elephant. On his chariot, he yields not to even Arjuna. As for the 
power of his arms, he is equal to ten thousand elephants. Of boundless 
energy, he is bitterly hostile, and his anger would consume my sons, making 
short work of them. Quick-tempered and immensely strong as he is, even 
Indra cannot subdue him in battle. 

Large-hearted, powerful and endowed with lightness of hand, the twin 
brothers, Madri’s sons, have been meticulously trained by Arjuna. Like a 
pair of hawks preying on flocks of small birds, they will not leave a single 
enemy alive. 

If truth be told, despite being so vast, our army will be as nothing when 
it encounters the sons of Pandu. On their side they have Dhrishtadyumna of 
the boundless tejas, whom the Pandavas consider one of themselves. They 
have the king of the Somakas, with his legions, who is devoted to their 
cause and ready to lay down his life for them. Who would be able to 
withstand Yudhishtira who has the jewel of the Vrishnis, Krishna, for his 
lord? 

I have heard that, though old now, Virata, king of the Matsyas, with 
whom the Pandavas lived for a year and whose wishes they fulfilled, has 
espoused the Pandava cause and is loyal to them, as are his sons. The five 
great princes of Kekaya, who were deposed from their thrones and want to 


regain their kingdom, have become allies of the Pandavas; they wield 
mighty bows and are ready to fight. 

All the bravest kings on Earth have come together on the side of 
Pandu’s sons. All these, who have become allies of Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, 
are infused with great new courage, honour and devotion, by virtue of their 
love for him. Many warriors from the mountain kingdoms and other 
inaccessible fastnesses, many old and venerable ones and many Mlechcha 
tribes boasting weapons of myriad kinds have pledged themselves to the 
Pandava cause and gathered under the Pandava banner. 

The Pandya king, who is as mighty as Indra, has come with 
innumerable warriors all eager for fight. Extraordinarily brave and of 
unparalleled might and energy, he is devoted to the Pandavas. Then there is 
Satyaki who, I have heard, was trained in the use of astras by Drona, 
Arjuna, Krishna, Kripa and Bhishma, and who is said to be equal to 
Krishna’s son Pradyumna; and he, too, is faithful to the Pandavas. 

Once, the kings of the Chedi and Karusha tribes assembled and 
combined their resources together. And there was one amongst them who 
blazed in beauty like the Sun, who was considered unassailable in battle and 
the best archer the Earth had known. Krishna killed him and, in an instant, 
robbed those Kshatriya kings of all their power. Kesava looked at that 
Sishupala, adulated by all the kings led by the king of Karusha, and 
beheaded him to enhance the glory of the Pandavas. 

The other kings saw Krishna in his chariot drawn by Sugriva and his 
other horses, abandoned the king of the Chedis and fled like small animals 
at the sight of a lion. Left on his own and, from sheer audacity and folly, 
Sisupala faced Krishna in single combat. Krishna killed him, and he lay 
dead, looking like a karnikara tree uprooted by a storm. 

O Sanjaya, the things I have heard about what Krishna has done for the 
sake of Pandu’s sons, and what I know of his achievements, disturb me and 
drive away my peace of mind. No adversary can withstand those that have 
that lion of the Vrishnis for their lord. My heart trembles with fear when I 
hear that the two Krishnas will be together in one chariot. 

If my dull-witted son abstains from fighting those two, he may yet do 
well. Otherwise, the two Krishnas will consume the very Kuru race, as 
Indra and Upendra did the Danavas. Arjuna is equal to Indra; and Krishna is 
Immortal Vishnu himself. 


Pandu and Kunti’s son Yudhishtira is virtuous and brave, and shuns any 
low deed. Duryodhana has wronged this man of awesome power. If not for 
his noble character, he would burn us all in a wink with his rage. Suta, I do 
not dread Arjuna, Bhima, Krishna or the twin brothers as much as I dread 
the wrath of Dharmaraja when his anger is kindled. He has practised austere 
tapasya and kept the vows of brahmacharya, and all his wishes will be 
fulfilled. When I think of his wrath and how justified it is, I am filled with 
alarm. 

Go swiftly in a chariot, as my emissary, to the encampment of the 
Panchala forces. Ask Yudhishtira about his well-being and repeatedly 
address him in affectionate terms. Meet Krishna, bravest of all men, who is 
the most magnanimous soul. On my behalf, ask him, as well, about his 
well-being. And tell him that Dhritarashtra desires peace with Pandu’s sons. 
There is nothing that Yudhishtira would not do at Krishna’s bidding, for 
Kesava is as dear to the Pandavas as their life-breath. And wise beyond 
understanding or description, he is devoted to them. Declare yourself as my 
messenger and also enquire after the welfare of all the sons of Pandu, the 
Srinjayas, Satyaki and Virata, and the five sons of Draupadi. 

In the midst of all those kings, Sanjaya, as the occasion arises, say 
whatever you deem appropriate and beneficial for the very race of Bharata, 
anything that is not distasteful or provocative.’” 


CANTO 23 
SANJAYA-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Sanjaya goes to Upaplavya to see the mighty 
Pandavas. He goes to Yudhishtira and pays his respects to him 
before he speaks. 

Sanjaya says to Ajatasatru, ‘O king, I am so happy to see you in good 
health and surrounded by your friends, you who are as powerful as Indra. 
The aged and wise Dhritarashtra, the son of Ambika, enquires after your 
welfare. I hope Bhimasena is well, and Dhananjaya, and the two sons of 
Madri also. I hope Drupada’s daughter, the princess Krishnaa, is well, too— 
she who never swerves from the path of truth, that devi of great tejas, that 
wife of heroes—as I hope are her sons, who are your joy, all that you hold 
dear, and whose welfare you constantly pray for.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘O Sanjaya, have you had a safe journey here? We are 
pleased to see you. I hope that you are well. I am in good health and so are 
my brothers. It is after a long time that I hear news of that Bhaarata, the 
revered king of the Kurus. Seeing you makes me as happy as seeing the 
king himself. Is our grandsire Bhishma, who is blessed with boundless 
energy and the highest wisdom, and who is always devoted to Kshatriya 
dharma, in good health? I trust he is as he ever was. 

I hope the noble Dhritarashtra is well, and also his sons. I hope the great 
and learned king Bahlika, the son of Pratipa, is also in good health. I hope 
Somadatta is well, and Bhurisravas, and Satyasandha, and Sala, and Drona, 


and Drona’s son, and Acharya Kripa. I hope all those mighty bowmen enjoy 
robust good health. 

O Sanjaya, the greatest and best archers, all the most intelligent and 
deeply learned, and the best of warriors, have allied themselves with the 
Kurus. I hope they receive the honour that they deserve and that they are 
well. How happy the people are in whose kingdom that mighty and 
handsome archer, Aswatthama, the honourable son of Drona, lives. 

I hope Yuyutsu, the brilliant son of Dhritarashtra by his Vaisya wife, is 
in good health. I hope Karna, whose counsel the dull-witted Suyodhana 
takes so to heart, is also well. I hope the elderly mothers of the Bhaaratas 
are well, and that the kitchen-maids, the servants, the daughters-in-law, the 
nieces and nephews, and the grandchildren of Dhritarashtra’s house are all 
free from ill health. 

I hope the king continues to provide a livelihood to good Brahmanas. I 
hope Dhritarashtra’s son has not appropriated from the Brahmanas the gifts 
I gave them, and that Dhritarashtra and his sons treat any hauteur on their 
part with forbearance. I hope he never neglects to provide for them, for that 
is the only way to Swarga. This is the excellent and clear path that Brahma 
has revealed to all living beings. If the sons of the Kuru house foolishly 
abandon tolerance of Brahmanas’ shortcomings, they will be ruined. 

I hope king Dhritarashtra and his son look after the administrators of the 
kingdom. I hope they have no enemies who, disguised as friends, plot their 
downfall. I hope none of these Kurus talk of our having committed any 
crimes, and that Drona, his son and the heroic Kripa do not think we are 
guilty in any way. 

I hope all Kurus look up to Dhritarashtra and his sons as their 
protectors. I hope that, when they see a band of criminals, they remember 
Arjuna’s deeds as the greatest warrior of all. I hope they remember how 
swift, unerring arrows flew from his Gandiva, its bowstring pulled taut, and 
the thunderous sound his dexterous fingers made as he stretched and 
released the string again and again. I have yet to see an archer to equal 
Arjuna, who can shoot sixty-one sharp, feather-flighted arrows with a single 
fluid motion of his hand. 

Do they remember the mighty Bhima, who, like an elephant with the 
juice of rut trickling from rent temples trampling through a forest of reeds, 
makes hostile armies arrayed for battle tremble with dread? Do they 
remember the powerful Sahadeva, who conquered the Kalingas in 


Dantakura by shooting arrows with both hands? Do they remember Nakula, 
whom you accompanied: how he subdued the Sibis and the Trigartas and 
brought all the western lands under my control? 

Do they remember the disgrace they had to face when they came, ill- 
advised, to Dwaita vana on the pretext of inspecting their cattle? Those 
malevolent men were crushed in battle by the Gandharvas, and it was 
Bhimasena and Arjuna that rescued them. In the battle that ensued, Bhima 
protected Arjuna and Madri’s sons from behind, and Arjuna emerged 
unscathed after savaging the enemy. Do they remember that? 

O Sanjaya, a single deed cannot bring happiness now when, despite our 
many endeavours, we have not been able to win over Dhritarashtra’s son.’” 


CANTO 24 
SANJAYA-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, ‘It is just as you say, noble son of Pandu! Those you 
ask about—the Kurus and the foremost among them—are in good 
health and spirits. 

Dhritarashtra’s son is surrounded by noble and righteous men, as well as 
by sinful, evil ones. He, who gives gifts even to his enemies, is not likely to 
withdraw the livelihood he provides to the Brahmanas. You Kshatriyas 
follow a dharma that makes you harm even those that bear you no ill will. 
Such dharma is fit only for butchers. If Dhritarashtra and his sons harbour 
ill will against you, who are righteous, they must be held guilty of 
treachery. 

Dhritarashtra does not condone the injury done to you; he is sorry for it. 
The old man grieves, Yudhishtira, for he has learnt from wise Brahmanas 
that treachery is the greatest of all sins. O king of men, the Kurus remember 
your prowess on the battlefield, and that of Arjuna who leads your forces. 
They remember Bhima wielding his mace, and the sounds of his conch- 
shell and drum rising to a deafening, maddening pitch. They remember 
those fearless Maharathas, the sons of Madri, ranging in all directions on 
the battlefield, endlessly unleashing torrents of arrows at the enemy. 

We cannot know what destiny has in store for anyone. See how you, 
Yudhishtira, who are endowed with every virtue, have had to suffer 
unendurable trials. I am certain that your wisdom will help you forget all 


that misfortune, and cleave to fortitude. The sons of Pandu are all equal to 
Indra and would never abandon dharma for the sake of pleasure. You in 
your wisdom will secure peace for the sons of Dhritarashtra and Pandu, for 
the Srinjayas and all the other kings assembled here. Listen to what your 
uncle Dhritarashtra said to me after consulting his ministers and sons. Lend 
your attention to his message.’” 


CANTO 25 
SANJAYA-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


C6 Y udhishtira says, ‘O Suta, we are all gathered here—the 
Pandavas, the Srinjayas, Janardana, Yuyudhana and Virata. Tell 
us everything that Dhritarashtra asked you to say.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘I greet you all— Yudhishtira, Bhima, Arjuna and the two 
sons of Madri; Vasudeva, Chekitana, Virata, Satyaki, the venerable Drupada 
and his son Dhrishtadyumna. Hear what I say; I speak with a desire for the 
welfare of all the Kuru vamsa. 

King Dhritarashtra welcomed the opportunity for peace and wasted no 
time in having the chariot prepared for my journey here. I hope Yudhishtira 
and his brothers, and his sons and kinsmen will accept the message I bring: 
Let there be peace. 

The sons of Pritha are blessed with every virtue, with steadfastness, 
gentleness and candour. Born into a noble house, they are humane and 
generous, and eschew any shameful deed. They know dharma. 

A base deed does not befit you, Yudhishtira, for you are noble, and the 
lord of a vast army. If you committed a sin, it would be a stain on your good 
name, like a smear of kohl on a white cloth. No one would ever knowingly 
acquire the guilt of an action that would result in universal slaughter; it is 
sinful and will lead to Naraka. Genocide is such an act, regardless of 
whether it results in victory or defeat. 


The truly blessed are they who work for the success of their kinsmen’s 
cause. The true son, relative or friend of the Kurus is he who would lay 
down his life, even at the risk of it being abused by evil, in order to ensure 
the welfare of the Kuru vamsa. If you, sons of Pritha, punish the Kurus by 
killing all your enemies, your life after that would be as death. Is life worth 
living after having killed your kinsmen? 

Not even Indra himself, with all the gods on his side, can defeat you, 
who have Kesava, Chekitana and Satyaki by your side, and the protection 
of Dhrishtadyumna. On the other hand, who can defeat the Kurus who have 
Drona and Bhishma, Aswatthama, Salya, Kripa and Karna, and a host of 
Kshatriya kings supporting them? Who will be able to slay, without great 
loss of life on his side, the vast force that Dhritarashtra’s son has 
assembled? I do not see any possible good ensuing from this war, either in 
victory or in defeat. 

How can the sons of Pritha commit such a heinous crime, as if they 
were lowborn men who know nothing of dharma? I beg of you; I prostrate 
myself before Krishna and the venerable king of the Panchalas; I put myself 
under your protection, with folded hands, so that both the Kurus and the 
Srinjayas may prosper. Krishna and Arjuna are unlikely to ignore my words 
and spurn my plea. Both, if asked, would give up their lives for truth. 

All this I say to ensure the success of my mission. The king and his 
mentor Bhishma both want to secure peace between you and the Kurus.’” 


CANTO 26 
SANJAYA-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


oY udhishtira says, ‘What have you heard me say, Sanjaya, that 

suggests that we wish for war, and which makes you 
apprehensive? Peace is always preferable to war, Sarathy; which man who 
had an alternative would choose to fight? If a man can have everything he 
wants without having to actually do anything, he would not make the 
smallest discomfiting effort in any direction, far less go to war. Why should 
a man ever go to war? Who is so cursed by the gods that he would choose 
this horrible option? 

The sons of Pritha do desire happiness, but their conduct is always 
marked by dharma and promotes the welfare of the world. The only 
happiness they want is that which accrues from deeds of dharma. The man 
who, in order to avoid sorrow, allows his senses to lead him in his quest for 
happiness is lured into actions that are wretched and miserable. A man’s 
hankering for pleasure results in suffering; he who is free of such craving 
knows no sorrow. Like a fire that blazes more fiercely when fuel is added to 
it, desire is never satiated with the acquisition of its object; rather, it flares 
up, like embers when ghee is poured on them, always wanting more. 

Compare the abundance that the fortunate king Dhritarashtra enjoys 
with what we possess. Unfortunate is the man who is never victorious; who 
does not enjoy music; who does not take pleasure in the fragrance of 
garlands and perfumes, or in cool, scented salves; and who does not enjoy 


wearing fine clothes. If this were not so, we would not have been driven 
from our kingdom; and although all this is true, none of us brooded over our 
torments. 

The king, in his troubled state, looks to the might of others for 
protection. This is not wise. Let their behaviour towards him reciprocate his 
own to them. The man who, at midday in spring, throws a burning log into 
the dense undergrowth in a forest has every reason to rue his lot as he tries 
to escape from the fire that is fanned into a blaze by the wind. 

Sanjaya, why does Dhritarashtra complain even though his own 
prosperity is intact? It is because he followed the course of action espoused 
by his vicious and foolish son? Duryodhana disregarded Vidura, the best of 
his well-wishers, as if he were his enemy. Dhritarashtra, who wanted only 
to please his sons, knowingly chose a path of sin. Indeed, from his fondness 
for his son, he would not pay heed to Vidura who, of all the Kurus, is his 
wisest and most sincere friend, who is vastly learned, eloquent and virtuous 
in all that he does. 

Dhritarashtra wants to please his son and, at the same time, have the 
respect of others. His son Duryodhana is full of envy and anger; he breaks 
the sacred laws laid down for the acquisition of dharma and artha. He has a 
foul tongue, allows anger to dictate his behaviour; and his soul is absorbed 
in indulging his senses and his vanity. He harbours hatred for so many; he 
obeys no law; his life is evil; he is obstinate and ruthless. For such a son as 
this, Dhritarashtra knowingly abandons dharma and true joy. 

Even as long ago as the time when I was playing that game of dice, I 
suspected that the destruction of the Kurus loomed near, because Vidura’s 
wise words received no praise from Dhritarashtra. It was when they ignored 
Vidura that the Kurus’ downfall began. As long as they placed themselves 
under the guidance of his wisdom, their kingdom flourished. 

Let me tell you, Sanjaya, who greedy Duryodhana’s advisors are now: 
Dusasana, Subala’s son Sakuni and the Sutaputra Karna. Look at his 
foolishness. However hard I think about it, I cannot see how the Kurus and 
the Srinjayas can prosper when Dhritarashtra has usurped the throne 
unlawfully and even once banished the far-sighted Vidura. Dhritarashtra 
and his sons now want undisputed sovereignty over the whole world. Peace 
is impossible. He thinks of what he has taken with deceit and treachery as 
being his own. 


When Arjuna takes up his Gandiva, Karna believes that he can stand up 
to him. Why, then, was Karna not able to prevail in any of the battles that 
have already been fought? Karna, Drona, Pitamaha Bhishma, as well as 
many other Kurus know that there is no bowman to compare with Arjuna. 
All the kings know how Duryodhana became a king although Parantapa 
Arjuna was alive. He continues to convince himself that he can rob the sons 
of Pandu of what is theirs, despite knowing that it was Arjuna who once 
came to his rescue when he was helpless, with nothing but a bow, four 
cubits long, to fight an unearthly Gandharva host. 

Dhritarashtra’s sons are alive only because they have not yet heard the 
reverberation of the fully-stretched Gandiva. Duryodhana thinks that he has 
achieved his objective, because he has not yet seen Bhima’s rage. Even 
Indra would not rob us of our rightful sovereignty as long as Bhima, 
Arjuna, heroic Nakula and patient Sahadeva live. The old king and his son 
fondly imagine that his sons will not be consumed on the battlefield by the 
fire of the Pandavas’ anger. 

Sanjaya, you know what misery they have made us suffer. Out of regard 
for you, I would forgive them all. You know what happened between the 
Kauravas and us, and how we conducted ourselves towards them; let things 
continue in the same way. I will take your advice and seek peace. Let me 
have Indraprastha for my kingdom; let Duryodhana give it to me.” 


CANTO 27 
SANJAYA-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


S anjaya says, ‘O Pandava, your unswerving dharma is known the 

world over. I also see it, Prithaputra. Considering that even a great 

life is transient, you must not kill the Kurus. Yudhishtira, if the Kurus will 

not give you your share peaceably, I think it is better for you to live on alms 

in the kingdom of the Andhakas and the Vrishnis than win your kingdom 
back through a bloody war. 

Our mortal existence is short; blame easily attaches to us; we are subject 
to constant suffering; life is uncertain; and life can never be as important as 
a good name. Therefore, never sin. O king, desires cling to men and keep 
them from leading a virtuous life. A wise man, having extinguished all 
desire, acquires unblemished fame in the world. The thirst for wealth is a 
fetter; and the virtue of men who pursue it suffers. The wise man is one who 
seeks only dharma. Even as a man’s worldly desires increase, their 
impermanence makes his miseries increase. 

The man who places dharma before all else shines like the Sun at his 
most glorious. A man devoid of dharma, of sinful soul, is ruined, although 
he may gain the very Earth. 

You have studied the Vedas and lived the austere life of brahmacharya; 
you have performed yagnas to satisfy the needs of Brahmanas and have 
given generously to them. With a view to achieving the loftiest state that a 


man can, you have devoted yourself, for years on end, to the pursuit of 
tapasya. 

He who devotes himself excessively to mundane indulgences cannot 
concentrate his mind on yogabhyasa, spiritual discipline; and such a man is 
always miserable. These fleeting sensual pleasures forsake him after his 
wealth is gone, and his lusts continue to drive him, even in frustration. He 
who has never lived a spiritually disciplined life, and sins, abandoning the 
path of dharma, has no belief in the permanence of the soul. This fool is 
slated for torment after death. 

In the next world, a man’s actions, both good and evil, are not nullified. 
All his deeds precede a man as he journeys from the mortal world to the 
next, and he cannot but follow them. Your deeds in this life are celebrated 
as being exceptionally noble and pure. They are like the delicious sattvik 
food specially prepared to offer, along with gifts, to Brahmanas and 
officiating priests at religious ceremonies. All karma is performed only as 
long as the mortal body lives, Prithaputra. After death there is no karma to 
be done. 

You have performed mighty deeds that righteous men admire, and they 
will benefit you in the world to come. Death brings entry into the next 
world and, with it, freedom from old age, fear, hunger and thirst, and from 
everything that is disagreeable to the mind. After death, there will be 
nothing to do except to delight; such will be the fruit of your actions. 

So, do not allow desire for temporal happiness to spur what you do in 
this world. At the end of your life and deeds do not, Pandava, take a path 
that forsakes truth, sobriety, honesty and compassion. You may perform the 
Rajasuya and the Aswamedha yagnas, but do not even think about any 
action that is sinful in itself. 

If, after such a long time, you sons of Pandu yield to hatred and commit 
such a horrific crime as this war, you will have endured all these years of 
suffering in the forests in vain. It will have been for nothing that you went 
into exile, parting with your army, which was then under your control; from 
your loyal friends Krishna and Satyaki, golden-charioted Virata of the 
Matsyas and his son at head of his warriors, and from all the other kings, 
whom you once vanquished, and who have now come to fight by your side. 

With all these mighty resources, with this army, with being held in 
dread by all, and supported by Krishna and Arjuna, you could well have 
slain your worst foes in battle; you could have long ago crushed 


Duryodhana’s pride. Why then have you allowed your enemies to grow so 
powerful and your friends so weak? What for have you lived in the 
wilderness for so many years? Why, having let slip the opportune moment, 
do you now want to fight? 

A sinner of no wisdom may win apparent prosperity by fighting; a wise 
and righteous man can win enduring felicity by shedding his pride and, 
guided by his higher instincts, refraining from war. Yudhishtira, your 
instincts do not make you lean towards any adharma, and never have you 
committed any sin from anger. Why then do you now want to do this 
ghastly thing, against every dictate of dharma? 

Wrath, mighty king, is a drug that cures no disease. Rather, indulging in 
it brings on a sickness of the mind; it robs a man of his justly earned fame, 
and leads him to sin. Good men quickly swallow and hold down anger, but 
not evil ones. I ask you to abjure your wrath and desist from war. 

Who would indulge in anger which leads to mortal sin and perdition? 
Forbearance would be far better for you than the pleasures you would enjoy 
if your enemies—Bhishma, Drona and his son, Kripa, Somadatta’s son, 
Vikarna, Vivimsati, Karna and Duryodhana—were killed. What happiness 
can you hope to enjoy after killing them? Tell me. 

Even if you win all the sea-girdled Earth, you can never be free from 
decrepitude and death, pleasure and pain, bliss and misery. Knowing all 
this, do not go to war. If you want to take this savage course because it is 
what your advisors recommend, then abdicate everything to them and go 
away yourself. You must not leave the path that leads to Swarga.’” 


CANTO 28 
SANJAYA-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “VY udhishtira says, ‘Sanjaya, what you say is true; deeds of dharma 
are the best of all deeds. But, before you censure me, you should 
first determine whether my conduct has been in accord with dharma or not. 

Sometimes, vice appears to be virtue and virtue to be vice; and 
sometimes, goodness is truly just that. The learned should use their 
discernment to distinguish one from the other. Then again, during times of 
distress, virtue and vice, which are indeed eternal and absolute, can appear 
to be the other. 

A man should live according to the svadharma of his varna; however, 
one’s dharma changes during a crisis. When his means of living are gone, 
the destitute man should certainly look for ways, other than those 
prescribed, by which he may fulfil his dharma. Not only such a man, but 
also one who is not destitute, must both be reproached if they act in 
contrariness to the condition of their lives at that moment. 

The Creator decrees atonement for Brahmanas who, in their desire to 
avoid being destroyed, act in a manner opposed to their svadharma. Surely, 
then, all men may, in times of dire distress, do what is contrary to the 
dharma of their varna. Sanjaya, you should regard as worthy those who live 
according to their dharma during normal times, as well as those who do not 
in a time of crisis. Equally, you should censure those who flout their dharma 
during normal times and those who live by it during a time of distress. 


For men who wish to gain self-knowledge and bring their minds under 
control, the same practices that are ordained for Brahmanas are prescribed. 
However, for those who have no immediate desire for mukti, and who are 
not Brahmanas, the code that is prescribed for their particular varnas is the 
best. This is the path that our fathers, grandfathers and ancestors followed. 
As for those that want knowledge of the Atman and also to avoid all karma, 
they, too, hold the same view and consider themselves orthodox. There is 
no other way. 

O Sanjaya, whatever wealth the Earth or the gods have; whatever is 
beyond reach—in the realm of Prajapati, in Devaloka or in Brahmaloka—I 
would not seek it by means that violate dharma. 

Krishna is Dharmeswara—the lord of virtue; he has an all-lustrous mind 
and is a master of the artha shastra; he has waited upon Brahmanas; he is 
all-knowing; and he counsels many mighty kings. Let him say whether I 
shall be held to blame, whether I would be acting against my dharma by 
abandoning peace and pursuing war, for he is impartial and desires the 
welfare of both sides. 

Satyaki, the Chedis, the Andhakas, the Vrishnis, the Bhojas, the 
Kukuras and the Srinjayas follow Krishna’s advice and slay their enemies, 
to the delight of their friends. 

The Vrishnis, the Andhakas and Ugrasena, led by Krishna, have become 
like Indra—high-spirited, devoted to truth, powerful and happy. Babhru of 
Kasi, having got Krishna, the fulfiller of wishes, as his brother, and upon 
whom Krishna showers all life’s blessings, even as clouds shower the 
Earth’s creatures with rain after the arid summer, has attained great 
prosperity. So great is Krishna. 

Know that he is the authority on the propriety of all karma. Moreover, 
he is dear to us and our friend. I will never do anything against his advice.’” 


CANTO 29 
SANJAYA-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “kK rishna says, “O Sanjaya, my wish is that the Pandavas live and 

prosper, and that their desires are fulfilled; and I wish the same 

for Dhritarashtra and his sons. I have always wanted to say to the Pandavas 

that peace is what king Dhritarashtra wants above all else; and I think it is 
best for them, too. 

Yudhishtira has shown an extremely rare inclination to peace, but 
Dhritarashtra and his sons are so avaricious that I can understand why the 
Pandava’s hostility has been aroused. You cannot claim to be more 
knowledgeable about dharma than Yudhishtira or me. Why then do you 
speak reproachfully of Yudhishtira’s conduct? He has great tejas; he is 
devoted to his svadharma; he fulfils his familial duties thoughtfully and in 
keeping with justice. 

Brahmanas have held various opinions on the matter we are discussing. 
Some say that success in the world to come depends upon karma; some 
declare that all action should be shunned and that salvation is attained by 
knowledge alone. Brahmanas say that although man knows there is food, 
his hunger is not appeased until he has actually eaten it. They say that only 
the knowledge that helps a man perform his duties bears fruit, for actions 
have visible results. 

A thirsty man quenches his thirst by drinking water—effort produces 
results, and therein lies the efficacy of work. If anyone thinks that there is 


something more productive than effort, his work and his words are 
meaningless. In the other world, it is by virtue of work that the Devas 
flourish. It is by effort that the wind blows. It is by effort that sleepless 
Surya rises every day and causes day and night, and Soma passes through 
the months and fortnights and the constellations. Fire uses energy to kindle 
itself and burn, doing good to mankind. The sleepless Bhumi Devi sustains 
her great burden by dint of her ceaseless effort. The sleepless rivers carry 
their waters without rest to sustain all beings. The ever-wakeful Indra pours 
down rain, making his power resound through the heavens and the cardinal 
points. 

Wanting to be the greatest of the Devas, Indra led an austere life of 
wakefulness, like a holy Brahmana. He renounced pleasure and the 
gratification of his senses. Scrupulously and diligently he devoted himself 
to virtue, truth and self-control, forbearance, impartiality and compassion. It 
was by no small effort of devoting himself to this way of life that he 
acquired kingship over the Devas. 

Brihaspati, too, did the same. He lived the austere life of brahmacharya 
with his mind closed to everything else. He gave up pleasure and controlled 
his senses, and became the Acharya of the Devas. Similarly, the 
Navagrahas, the Rudras, the Adityas, the Vasus, Yama Deva, Kubera, the 
Gandharvas, the Yakshas and the Apsaras, all worked hard to attain their 
positions. In the other world the Rishis shine as a result of their life of 
study, austerity and work. 

O Sanjaya, knowing that this is the way followed by the best of 
Brahmanas, by Kshatriyas and Vaisyas, you being one of the wisest men, 
why are you making this plea on behalf of the Kauravas? You must know 
that Yudhishtira is constantly engaged in the study of the Vedas; that he is 
inclined to performing the Aswamedha and Rajasuya yagnas. Also, he rides 
horses and elephants, has a chariot, is arrayed in armour, and bears a bow 
and all other weapons. 

If the Pandavas could see a course of action that does not involve the 
slaughter of the Kurus, they would take it. Their virtue would be saved, and 
they would achieve an act of punya, even if meant forcing Bhima to restrain 
himself. On the other hand, they might, as destined, die whilst fighting. If 
so, in trying their utmost to fulfil their dharma, their deaths would be 
praiseworthy. 


If you approve of peace, I would like to hear your answer to this 
question: Is the dharma of a king to fight or not to fight? You must, O 
Sanjaya, take into consideration the division of the four varnas and their 
respective callings. You must hear the course of action the Pandavas plan to 
take. Then you may allot praise or censure, as you wish. 

A Brahmana’s dharma is to study, offer sacrifices, do charity and go on 
pilgrimages to holy tirthas; he should teach, officiate as a priest in yagnas 
offered by those who merit his help, and accept gifts from persons he 
knows. 

A Kshatriya protects the people lawfully; he should practise charity, 
offer sacrifices, study the Vedas, marry and lead the virtuous life of a 
grihasta. If his soul is noble, and if he lives by the scriptures, he will easily 
attain the realm of the Brahman. 

A Vaisya’s svadharma is to study, work hard to earn and accumulate 
wealth through commerce, agriculture and cattle-rearing. He should 
conduct himself in a way that pleases Brahmanas and Kshatriyas; he should 
be upright, do good works and be a householder. 

From olden times, the Sudra has been ordained to serve Brahmanas and 
be obedient to them. A Sudra should not study or perform sacrifices; he 
should be conscientious and alert in performing his service. 

The king protects all these with care and ensures that all the varnas 
perform their svadharma. The king should not be addicted to sensual 
indulgence; he should be impartial and treat all his subjects equally. The 
king should never give in to sinful desires. If there is, in his kingdom, a man 
who is more praiseworthy than himself, and who is well-known and gifted 
with all the virtues, the king should encourage his subjects to recognise that 
man. An unworthy king, however, would not understand this. He would 
increase his own strength and grow in inhumanity, and become a target for 
the wrath of destiny. He would cast a covetous eye on the riches of others. 

Now we come to war, for which weapons, armour, bows and arrows 
came into being. Indra invented these for putting plunderers to death. Punya 
is acquired by doing away with thieves. Many horrible evils have 
manifested themselves because the Kurus have been unrighteous and 
neglected law and religion. This is not dharma, Sanjaya. 

Dhritarashtra, with his sons, has taken what rightfully belongs to 
Pandu’s sons. He does not care about the eternal dharma of kings. And all 
the Kurus follow him. The thief who steals wealth stealthily and the one 


who seizes it openly must both be condemned. What is the difference 
between them and Dhritarashtra’s sons? His greed has convinced him that 
what he does out of anger springs from righteousness. 

The share of the kingdom that the Pandavas are entitled to is clear. Why 
should that share be seized by that fool? This being the state of things, it 
would be great punya for us to be killed in battle. A kingdom gained as a 
birthright is preferable to a throne conferred by a stranger. Sanjaya, you 
must explain these time-honoured laws to the Kurus in the presence of the 
assembled kings—all those witless ones who have been brought together by 
Duryodhana and who are already marked by death. 

Look once more at that vilest of all their deeds—what they did in the 
Kuru sabha on the day of the dice. It is shameful that the Kurus, with 
Bhishma at their head, did nothing while the beloved wife of the Pandavas, 
the chaste Draupadi of unblemished fame, was seized, even as she wept, by 
Dusasana, that monstrous slave of lust. All the Kurus, young and old, were 
there. If they had prevented the humiliation inflicted upon her that day, I 
would have been pleased with Dhritarashtra, and that would have boded 
well for his sons also. 

Dusasana brutally dragged Krishnaa into the midst of the sabha, where 
her fathers-in-law sat. Expecting sympathy, she found none to take her part, 
except Vidura. None of the kings uttered a word of protest, because they 
were all fools. Vidura alone, from a sense of dharma, spoke just and 
righteous words; he alone opposed Duryodhana. Sanjaya, at that time you 
did not speak of law and morality, but now you come to instruct Yudhishtira 
about dharma. 

Panchali, on the other hand, even though she was dragged shamefully 
into the sabha, set things right; and like a ship at sea, she rescued the 
Pandavas and herself from a tidal wave of misfortune. 

As Krishnaa stood in that ancient hall, in the presence of her fathers-in- 
law, the Sutaputra said to her, “O daughter of Drupada, you have no refuge. 
Consider yourself a slave in Duryodhana’s house. Your husbands are 
defeated and are no longer of any consequence. You have a loving heart, so 
choose someone else for your lord.” 

Karna’s words were like arrows, cutting down all hope, piercing the 
very soul, so dreadfully. They buried themselves deep in Arjuna’s heart. 

When the sons of Pandu were about to put on garments made of black- 
deer skins, Dusasana said, scornfully, “These all are mean eunuchs, ruined, 


and damned for a long time to come.” 

And Sakuni, the prince of Gandhara, spoke slyly to Yudhishtira during 
the game of dice. He said, “I have won Nakula from you; now what else 
have you got? You had better stake your wife Draupadi.” 

Sanjaya, you know all the shameful things that were said at the dice- 
game. I want to go myself to the Kurus to settle this most difficult matter. If, 
without injury to the Pandava cause, I succeed in bringing about peace with 
the Kurus, not only will it fetch great punya, but the Kurus will be saved 
from certain death. I hope Duryodhana will take heed of what I say to the 
Kurus, which will be wise, founded in dharma, full of good sense and 
compassion. I hope that when I arrive, the Kurus will pay me proper 
respect, or else Dhritarashtra’s vile sons, already branded by the evil of 
what they have done, will be consumed by Arjuna and Bhima, who are 
keened for battle. Of this you can be certain. 

When Pandu’s sons were beaten at dice Duryodhana spoke vile and 
searing words to them. You can be sure that Bhima will remind him of what 
he said, at the first opportune moment. 

Duryodhana is a mighty tree of evil; Karna is its trunk, Sakuni its 
branches, Dusasana its blossoms and fruits, and the wise Dhritarashtra 
himself its roots. On the contrary, Yudhishtira is a great tree of truth, Arjuna 
its trunk and Bhima its branches. Madri’s twin sons are its copious flowers 
and fruits; and I, dharma, and men of dharma are its roots. 

Dhritarashtra and his sons are the forest, and the Pandavas are the tigers 
in it. Do not cut down the forest with its tigers in it, nor drive the tigers 
from it. The tiger makes easy prey when it is outside its home; and the 
forest without tigers is easily entered and destroyed. The tiger protects the 
forest, which shelters it. Dhritarashtra and his sons are creepers, while the 
Pandavas are Sala trees. Creepers cannot flourish unless they have trees to 
cling to. 

Pritha’s sons are as eager to wait on Dhritarashtra as his own sons are 
keen for war. Let King Dhritarashtra do the right thing. The virtuous sons of 
Pandu, though well prepared for war, still keep the peace. Learned one, tell 
Dhritarashtra everything as it truly is.’” 


CANTO 30 
SANJAYA-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


S anjaya says, ‘Farewell, O divine one. Pandava, I will leave now; 
may you be prosperous. I hope I have not been carried away by 
my emotions and said anything to offend you. 

Farewell also to you Janardana, Bhima and Arjuna, sons of Madri, 
Satyaki and Chekitana; I take my leave of you. May peace and happiness be 
yours; and I pray that all the kings here will look upon me with affection.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “You have our leave, Sanjaya; may peace be yours. 
Learned one, you harbour no ill will towards us. We all know that amongst 
those in the court of the Kurus, you are a pure-hearted soul. Besides, you 
are a faithful ambassador, loved by us, gifted with eloquence, of 
distinguished deportment and sympathetic to us. Your mind is never 
clouded and, even if spoken to harshly, you never retort in anger. You never 
speak harsh or slighting words, or false or bitter ones. We know that what 
you say is without malice, always full of truth, and serious. Amongst all 
dutas you are our favourite. Besides you, the other who is welcome here is 
Vidura. We used to see much of you, and you are as dear to us as 
Dhananjaya. Go with all speed, Sanjaya. 

Go to those Brahmanas of pure tejas, who are devoted to learning and 
live as brahmacharis, who study the Vedas whilst living on alms; go to the 
ascetics who live in the forest, as well as to the aged ones of other varnas. 
Pay your respects to them and enquire about their welfare on my behalf. Go 


to Dhritarashtra’s priest, his acharyas and his ritvijas; ask after their well- 
being, too. 

There are those who, though not of high birth, are intelligent, righteous 
and are men of strong moral fibre; men remember us and speak of us; and 
who live to the extent they are able by their dharma—tell them I am well 
and ask after their health. Enquire about the welfare of the tradesmen in the 
kingdom and the officials. 

In our name, salute our beloved Acharya Drona—our mentor, who is 
well versed in dharma; who took a vow of brahmacharya in order to master 
the Vedas; who has made the astra shastra full and complete and who is 
always gracious to us. 

You should also greet Aswatthama from us and ask after his welfare. He 
is learned and devoted to Vedic study; by living as a brahmachari, he has 
acquired lustrous energy, even like a Gandharva youth; and he, too, has 
made the science of weapons full and complete. Sanjaya, you must go to the 
home of Saradvata’s son Kripa, that Maharatha, that best of all realised 
souls. Repeatedly salute him and touch his feet in my name. 

Convey news of my good health to Bhishma, the foremost of Kurus, 
who is always valiant and abstains from doing harm; in whom asceticism, 
wisdom and Vedic learning reside; that steadfast and most excellent of men. 

Greet the wise and venerable king Dhritarashtra, the blind lord of the 
Kurus, who has vast gyana, and is respectful of the old. 

Enquire, also, after Dhritarashtra’s eldest son Duryodhana, that evil, 
ignorant, deceitful and vicious man, who now rules the world; and ask 
about the violent and vile Dusasana, hero and mighty bowman, who is like 
his elder brother, only more bestial. 

Sanjaya, greet the wise chief of the Bahlikas, whose most cherished 
wish is for peace among the Bhaaratas. You must also pay our respects to 
Somadatta, who is endowed with the most noble qualities, who is wise and 
merciful, and whose affection for the Kurus makes him patient with them. 
The son of Somadatta is worthy of the greatest reverence among the Kurus. 
He is my friend and a brother to us. A mighty bowman and the foremost of 
rathikas, he is worthy in every way. Ask after his welfare, from me, as well 
that as of his friends and advisors. 

Then there are the younger Kurus, our cousins. Ask about their health 
and prosperity and speak to each of them in ways that you deem 
appropriate. Enquire about the welfare of the kings who have been brought 


together by Duryodhana to fight the Pandavas—the Kekayas, the Vasatis, 
the Salvakas, the Amvashtas and the leading Trigartas; the brave warriors 
from the east, north, south and west; those who have come from the 
mountain kingdoms; and all among them who are not cruel and who lead 
pure lives. Let that mighty host of honourable men know that I am well and 
that I ask after them; let all the elephant warriors, the horsemen, the chariot 
warriors and the footsoldiers know that I am well. Ask kindly after the 
king’s servants—the revenue officials, the guards, the leaders of his troops, 
the accountants and officials who monitor other aspects of the affairs of the 
kingdom. 

Sanjaya, enquire about the welfare of Dhritarashtra’s son by his Vaisya 
wife—that young man who is among the best of all the Kurus, Yuyutsu, 
who never errs, who has great wisdom, who is blessed with every virtue, 
and who abhors the idea of this war. 

Ask about Chitrasena, who is unrivalled at the intricacies of dice, whose 
tricks others never detect, who plays with great skill, who is a master of the 
game, who is unbeatable at the dice-board but not in battle. 

Enquire after the health of Sakuni, the king of the Gandharas, native of 
the mountainous country, who has no equal in cheating at dice, who boosts 
Duryodhana’s pride, and whose cleverness leads him only to ruthless deceit. 

Ask about the well-being of Vikartana’s son Karna, that hero who, alone 
on his chariot and unassisted, is ready to vanquish all the Pandavas whom 
no one else dares challenge in battle; Karna, who is peerless at beguiling the 
already deluded. 

Ask also after the welfare of Vidura, who alone is devoted to us, who is 
our true guru, who raised us, who is our father, mother and friend, whose 
understanding is clear and unclouded, whose knowledge is deep, and who is 
our sagest advisor. 

Greet all the elder ladies, of great good qualities, who are like mothers 
to us. Say this first, Mothers of living sons, I hope your sons treat you well, 
with kindness and compassion. Then tell them that I and my sons are well. 

Greet those ladies, Sanjaya, who are equal in rank to our wives, and say 
to them, “I hope you are well-protected. I hope your good names are 
unblemished. I hope your lives are blameless and thoughtfully lived. I hope 
you behave with your fathers-in-law in a kind, praiseworthy manner. I hope 
you conduct yourselves so that you win your husbands’ approval.” 


Then there are the younger women who are like our daughters-in-law, 
who have come to us from noble families, who are mothers and who 
deserve praise. See them all and tell them that Yudhishtira sends his 
affectionate greetings. 

Embrace the daughters of your own house, Sanjaya, and ask kindly after 
their health on my behalf. Say to them, “May your husbands be kind and 
loving to you; may you please your husbands; may you have fine, clean 
homes, ornaments, clothes and perfumes; may you be happy and have all 
the joys of life at your command; may your faces and forms be beautiful 
and your words sweet.” 

You must ask after the others in the Kuru household, and tell them I am 
in good health—the maid-servants and man-servants, the humpbacked and 
the lame. Say to them, “I hope Dhritarashtra’s son continues to provide you 
with the same comforts as before.” 

You must also see the people that Dhritarashtra supports with food and 
clothing—the physically and mentally disabled, the dwarfs, the blind, the 
old, the lame and the legless. Tell them I am well and that I ask about their 
well-being. Say to them, “Have no fear; do not be dispirited by your 
unhappy lives that are full of pain. They are the consequence of your sins in 
past lives. When I have defeated my enemies and gratified my friends, I will 
give you food and clothes in plenty.” 

I ask that you also see the weak and unprotected, those who strive in 
vain to make a living, the ignorant and all who lead sorry lives, and anyone 
who you consider deserving of our concern. Ask on my behalf about their 
welfare and peace of mind. You should also enquire after any outsiders who 
have sought Dhritarashtra’s protection, those who have come to the Kurus 
of their own accord or who have been invited, and the ambassadors from 
other countries. Tell them all that I am well. 

As for the warriors that Duryodhana has amassed, there are none on 
Earth to equal them. Dharma, however, is eternal; dharma is my strength, 
with which I will destroy my enemies. Sanjaya, say to Duryodhana from 
me: 

That desire which tortures your heart, the desire to rule all the Kurus 
without a rival, is unreasonable and unjust. We will never do anything that 
harms you. Most heroic of the Bhaaratas, give me back my own 
Indraprastha, or fight me.’” 


CANTO 31 
SANJAYA-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “VY udhishtira says, ‘O Sanjaya, the Creator controls everyone—the 

righteous and the sinners, the young and the old, the weak and 

the strong. It is that Supreme Being who imparts knowledge to the child and 
bestows innocence on the learned, at his will. 

If Dhritarashtra asks you about our strength, tell him everything 
honestly, having first talked with all of us here and ascertained the truth. Go 
to the Kurus, greet the mighty Dhritarashtra, touch his feet and enquire 
about his welfare in our name. Then, when he is seated in the midst of his 
people, say to him, 

“O king, the Pandavas live happily, because of your prowess. It was by 
your grace that those children got a kingdom. Having bestowed their 
kingdom on them, you should not neglect them now, for they would then be 
ruined.” 

Sanjaya, one person cannot rule over the entire kingdom. Say to him for 
us, “We wish to live united with you. Do not allow your enemies to divide 
us and vanquish you.” 

Sanjaya, with head bent, salute our grandfather Bhishma, the son of 
Santanu. Say to him, “You revived Santanu’s race when it was threatened 
with extinction. Pitamaha, do what you think is best to make sure that your 
grandsons live in friendship and unity.” 


Then address Vidura, and say, Dear friend, for Yudhishtira’s sake, 
counsel peace. 

Then address that brash Duryodhana, when he is amongst all the Kurus; 
plead with him on my behalf. Say to him: 

“We will forget the insults you heaped on our innocent and helpless 
Draupadi in the midst of the sabha, only because we have no desire to see 
the Kurus killed. The Pandavas have silently borne all the other injuries too, 
both before and after that, although they have the power to avenge them. 
The Kauravas know all this. Dear cousin, you even sent us into exile 
wearing deer-skins. This also we have endured because we do not want to 
see all the Kurus slain. 

Commanded by you, and ignoring Kunti, Dusasana dragged Krishnaa 
into the sabha. That too we will forgive. But, Parantapa, we must have our 
rightful share of the kingdom. Turn your covetous heart away from what 
belongs to others. Peace will then reign amongst us, and we wish for peace. 

Give us each even a single province of the empire. Give us Kusasthala, 
Vrikasthala, Makandi and Varanavata, and any province of your choice for 
the fifth. This will end the enmity. Duryodhana, give your five brothers at 
least five villages.” 

Wise Sanjaya, let there be peace between our cousins and us. Tell him 
also, “Let brothers be loyal to each other; let fathers and sons unite; let the 
Panchalas and Kurus come together in joy, and let the two clans be one. 
This is my fervent wish. Bharatarishabha, with joy in our hearts, let us 
make peace.” 

O Sanjaya, I am as able to make war as I am to strike peace; I am as 
prepared to acquire wealth as to earn punya; I can be as harsh as I am soft,’ 
says Yudhishtira,” said Vaisampayana. 


CANTO 32 
SANJAYA-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Given leave to go, and having listened to what 
Yudhishtira wants of him, Sanjaya sets out at once for Hastinapura. 
He enters the city and presents himself at the gate of the palace apartments. 

He says to the gatekeeper, ‘Dwarapala, inform Dhritarashtra that I have 
returned from meeting the Pandavas. Do this without delay, if the king is 
awake. I have important things to tell him.’ 

The gatekeeper goes to the king and says, ‘Bhumipala, Sanjaya is at the 
palace gate and wants to see you. He comes with a message from the 
Pandavas. Command me, my lord; what shall I do?’ 

The king says, ‘Tell Sanjaya that I am in good cheer and health. Bid him 
enter, and welcome him; I am always ready to receive him. Why does he, 
who is free to enter at any time, wait outside?’ 

Sanjaya enters the palace and, with folded hands, comes before 
Dhritarashtra who sits on his throne surrounded by his courtiers—the wise, 
the heroic and the noble. 

Sanjaya says, ‘Lord of the Earth, I, Sanjaya, bow to you. Rajan, I went 
to the Pandavas from here. After paying his respects to you, Yudhishtira, the 
lustrous son of Pandu, enquired after your welfare. He enquired about your 
family and asked whether you are pleased with your sons and grandsons, 
friends and counsellors, and all your dependents.’ 


Dhritarashtra says, ‘O child, my blessings upon Ajatasatru. Is 
Yudhishtira in good health, and are his sons, brothers and ministers all 
well?’ 

Sanjaya says, “Pandu’s son is well, as are those with him. He, who 
acquires wealth and virtue without doing anything dishonourable, who is 
intelligent, learned, far-sighted and good-natured, now desires what was 
once his. Yudhishtira regards ahimsa as being superior to dharma, and 
dharma as superior to artha. His mind always inclines toward tapasya and 
inward joy, and to deeds of dharma which are spiritually exalting. 

In his worldly life, man is like a wooden puppet controlled by an 
outside force. Seeing how Yudhishtira has suffered, I realise that the power 
of destiny is stronger than the force of human endeavour. And seeing your 
adharma, which is not only sinful and shameful, but will also surely lead to 
misery, I am convinced that a man like you will enjoy praise only so long as 
your enemies bide their time. 

Having renounced all wrong-doing, like a serpent sloughing its old skin, 
the heroic Yudhishtira shines resplendent in perfection; his sins are now 
transferred to you. Rajan, reflect on your actions, which are dishonourable 
and violate both dharma and artha, and which have earned you evil karma 
in this world and inevitable misery in the next. 

You have followed your son’s evil advice, in order to enjoy wealth that 
would, otherwise, have been hard to come by; and you hoped to keep your 
enemies at bay. The world has denounced this sin, which is so unworthy of 
you. Calamity befalls a man who lacks wisdom, or is low-born or cruel, 
who holds grudges for a long time, who is not steadfast in Kshatriya 
dharma, who has no tejas, or who is base and shameless. 

It is fate that makes a man take birth into a good family, or become 
strong, or famous, or learned. It is fate that gives him life’s comforts and 
fate that gives him the ability to subdue his senses and discriminate between 
virtue and vice. No man, who is waited upon by the best of advisors, who is 
intelligent and can tell right from wrong in times of distress, who performs 
the necessary rites and rituals, who has full use of all his faculties, would 
knowingly sin. 

These, your loyal counsellors, are united in their determination that the 
Pandavas must not get back their share of the kingdom. Circumstances 
seem to move inexorably towards the destruction of the Kurus. Provoked by 
your crimes against him, if Yudhishtira wants to punish you, the very race 


of the Kurus will be prematurely extinguished. He will shift all his sins, 
such as they are, to you and you shall bear the blame and the burden for 
them. Nothing other than the will of the gods can prevent this, for Arjuna 
was honoured by them in Devaloka when he left this world and went there. 
In the face of fate, all individual effort is as nothing. 

The advantages of a noble birth and courage depend on what a man 
does for their development; and seeing that prosperity and adversity, 
stability and instability hold equal sway over a man and his possessions, 
Mahabali the Great, in his quest for the roots of suffering, failed to discover 
where the chain of karma of a former life began. He thought that the eternal 
Essence is the cause of everything. The eye, the ear, the nose, the skin and 
the tongue are the portals of a man’s knowledge; if he suppresses desire, he 
achieves spontaneous gratification through them. Therefore, one must 
control one’s senses, happily and without misgiving. 

Of course, there are those that do not agree. They believe that if a man 
behaves thoughtfully, his actions will produce the desired result, like a 
newborn child growing when nurtured with food and drink. Men in this 
world are subject to love and hate, pleasure and pain, praise and blame. The 
honest man deserves praise, but you I censure for being the root cause of 
the enmity between the Bhaaratas, which will result in the erasure of 
countless lives. If peace is not restored, it will be your fault that Arjuna 
burns the Kurus, as a blazing fire does a heap of dry grass. 

Rajan, in this world you are singular in the way you have given in to 
your son, who is completely unrestrained; in the way you complacently 
wear the crown of success, having done nothing to prevent the shame that 
occurred during the game of dice. Now reap the fruit of your weakness. By 
rejecting the advice of faithful friends and accepting the counsel of 
treacherous men, undeserving of your confidence, and by acting like a 
servant to your evil son’s whim, you have as good as lost your great and 
prosperous empire. 

I am tired from my journey and ask your leave to retire to bed now, 
Purushavyaghra, for tomorrow morning the Kurus will assemble to hear 
Yudhishtira’s message to you.’” 


CANTO 33 
PRAJAGARA PARVA 


V aisampayana said, “When Sanjaya leaves, Dhritarashtra says to an 
attendant, ‘I want to see Vidura; have him come here at once.’ 

The messenger goes to Vidura and says, “Wise one, our mighty king 
wishes to see you.’ 

Vidura comes immediately to the palace and tells the servant to inform 
the king of his arrival. The man goes to Dhritarashtra and says, “Maharajan, 
Vidura is here as you commanded. He wants to worship your feet. What 
shall he do?’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Bid him of the great wisdom and foresight enter. I 
am never unwilling or unprepared to see Vidura.’ 

The attendant goes out and says to Vidura, ‘Kshattri, the king bids you 
go into his inner apartment. He says he is always ready to see you.’ 

Vidura goes into Dhritarashtra’s chamber and, with hands joined, says 
to his brother, who is sunk in dark thought, ‘Wise one, here I am at your 
command, to do whatever you want.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, “Vidura, Sanjaya has returned and has gone home 
after rebuking me. Tomorrow in the sabha he will deliver Yudhishtira’s 
message. I could not get him to divulge what that is, and sleep evades my 
burning body. Tell me what is good for my feverish insomnia, my child, for 
you know dharma and artha well. Ever since Sanjaya came back from the 


Pandavas, my heart has known no peace; and filled with anxious thoughts 
about the message he will deliver, my senses are in turmoil.’ 

Vidura says, ‘Sleeplessness is for a thief, a lustful man, one who has lost 
his wealth, one who has failed in his endeavour, or a weak man under attack 
by a strong one. I hope, my lord, that none of these has overtaken you, and 
that you do not grieve or covet another’s wealth.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, “I want to hear you speak wise words of dharma. In 
our race of Rajarishis it is only you that the Munis respect.’ 

Vidura replies, ‘Yudhishtira is blessed with every virtue; he deserves to 
be the ruler of the three worlds. Despite his worthiness to rule beside you, 
you exiled him. 

Your qualities, on the other hand, are the opposite of his. Neither your 
virtues nor your knowledge of dharma entitles you to a share of the 
kingdom, for you are blind. As a consequence of his mildness and 
compassion, his righteousness and love of truth, his strength, and his 
reverence for you, Yudhishtira patiently endures innumerable and grievous 
wrongs. How can you hope to have prosperity or peace of mind when you 
have handed over the reins of the kingdom to Duryodhana, Subala’s son, 
Karna and Dusasana? 

The wise man is one who uses Atmagyana, hard work, forbearance and 
adherence to dharma to earn punya. The wise man is one who is known by 
his dharma, his rejection of sin, and by his faith and reverence. The wise 
man is one who cannot be swerved from his dharma by anger, joy, pride, 
false modesty, a crisis or vanity. 

The man who keeps what he intends to say and do from his enemies and 
whose deeds become known only after he has done them is wise. The man 
who does not allow heat, cold, fear born of attachment, prosperity or 
adversity to obstruct his plans is wise. The man whose judgment is detached 
from desire, who pays equal attention to dharma and artha, who disregards 
pleasure and chooses goals that will stand him in good stead in this world 
and in the next is wise. 

He who exerts as much effort as he can and does his very best, 
dismissing nothing as insignificant is wise. He who has a quick 
understanding, who listens patiently, who pursues his goals with good sense 
and not from desire, and who does not waste his energy on talking, unasked, 
about other people’s affairs is wise. He who does not yearn for the 
unattainable, who does not grieve for what is lost, whose mind is clear even 


in a crisis is wise. He who begins something and strives until it is 
completed, who never wastes his time, who has his soul under control is 
wise. 

Bharatarishabha, wise men always delight in honest deeds; they do only 
what leads to their happiness and prosperity and never mock at what is 
good. 

He who neither exults at being honoured nor grieves at being slighted, 
who remains serene like a lake on the Ganga is wise. He who knows the 
nature of all creatures—that no one and nothing is immortal—who is aware 
of the inter-connectedness of all things and all karma, and who knows the 
means that men may resort to for attaining their goals is wise. He who 
speaks confidently, who can converse on diverse subjects, who knows the 
art of debate, who has keen intelligence and who can interpret the meaning 
of what is written in sacred books is wise. He whose studies are regulated 
by reason, whose thinking follows the scriptures and who always pays 
homage to the good is wise. 

On the other hand, he who is vain though ignorant of the Shastras, 
arrogant though poor, and who uses unfair means to reach his goals is a 
fool. He who ignores his own affairs and pries into those of others, and who 
deceives his friends is a fool. He who craves things he should not and 
pushes aside the things he can justly wish for and who maligns powerful 
men is a fool. He who thinks of his enemy as a friend and hates his friends 
and who commits evil is a fool. 

Bharatarishabha, he who discloses his enterprises, who doubts 
everything and who dawdles over what can be done quickly is a fool. He 
who does not perform the sraddha for the Pitrs, who does not worship the 
Devas and who does not cultivate noble-minded friends is a fool. 

He is a fool and the worst of men who enters a place uninvited, who 
talks a lot without being asked and who trusts the dishonourable. He is the 
most foolish of men who blames others for something he himself is guilty 
of and who, though powerless, gives vent to anger. He is a fool who does 
not know his own strengths, who ignores both dharma and artha and, 
without equipping himself adequately, yearns for something that is difficult 
to obtain. 

O king, he who punishes the innocent, who pays homage to the 
undeserving and who keeps the company of misers is a man of little sense. 


But he who, having acquired great wealth and prosperity, as well as vast 
learning, is not haughty is wise. 

Who is more heartless than the man who, though wealthy and who eats 
and dresses well, does not share his riches among his dependants? The sins 
of one person result in advantages for many; but eventually it is the sinner 
alone who suffers the consequences of the sin, while the others escape. 
When an archer shoots an arrow he may or may not succeed in killing 
anyone, but when an intelligent man applies his mind, he can raze a 
kingdom and destroy its king. 

Discriminate between the two by means of the one. Control the three by 
means of the four. Conquer the five by knowing the six, abstain from the 
seven and be joyful. Poison kills only one person, as does a weapon; but 
one evil man can annihilate an entire kingdom, its king and all his subjects. 
One should not, on one’s own, gorge on tasty food, think about material 
gains, go on a journey or be the only one awake amongst a group of 
sleeping people. Listen now to what these are. 

O king, that Being who is the Supreme One without a second, whom 
you have not been able to comprehend, is truth manifest and, like a boat on 
the ocean, the Way to salvation. 

There is only one defect in those who are forgiving by nature—they are 
considered weak. That defect, however, should be ignored, for forgiveness 
is a powerful quality—a virtue for the gentle, an ornament for the strong. 
Forgiveness conquers all; there is nothing that the power of forgiveness 
cannot achieve. What can an evil person do to one who holds the sword of 
forgiveness in his hand? Cinder falling on grassless ground extinguishes 
itself. An unforgiving man defiles himself with many atrocities. 
Righteousness is the highest virtue; forgiveness is the supreme peace; 
knowledge is the supreme contentment and benevolence the supreme 
happiness. 

Just as a serpent swallows small animals living in burrows, the earth 
devours two kinds of people: a Kshatriya who is an inept warrior and a 
Brahmana who does not undertake pilgrimages to holy tirthas. A man may 
attain fame in this world by doing two things: refraining from harsh speech 
and ignoring those that are evil. 

Naravyaghra, there are two kinds of people who have no will of their 
own: women who desire men only because other women want them, and 
persons who worship another just because others do. Two things are like 


sharp thorns tormenting the body: the desires of a poor man and the anger 
of the impotent. There are two people who never shine because of their 
contrary conduct: a householder who makes no effort and a beggar who 
plots intrigues. 

There are two kinds of persons, Rajan, who live in a more blissful place 
than Swarga: a powerful man who is graced with the quality of forgiveness 
and a poor man who is charitable. There are two ways of misusing that 
which is honestly gained: by making gifts to the unworthy and by turning 
away the worthy. 

Two kinds of men should be cast into deep water with weights tied to 
their necks: a wealthy man who does not give and a poor man who is proud. 
Two other kinds of men shine more splendidly than the Sun: a mendicant 
accomplished in yoga and a warrior who dies in battle. 

Vedic scholars say that a man’s means may be great, average or poor. A 
man’s ability may be good, middling or bad. Every man should, therefore, 
be employed in work for which he is fit. 

There are three kinds of persons who cannot have wealth of their own: 
the wife, the slave and the son; whatever they earn becomes the property of 
the man to whom they belong. There are three kinds of crimes which 
inspire great fear: the theft of another’s property, the outrage of another’s 
wife and the fight with a friend. There are three qualities which, besides 
being self-destructive, also lead to hell: lust, anger and greed; everyone 
should renounce them. There are three kinds of persons whom one should 
never abandon, even in the face of grave danger: a follower, the person who 
puts himself under one’s protection and a guest in one’s house. There are 
three actions that bring as much merit as rescuing an enemy from distress: 
conferring a boon, acquiring a kingdom and having a son. 

Learned men have declared that a king, however powerful, should never 
consult with these four kinds of men: the dull-witted one, the procrastinator, 
the indolent one and the flatterer. Rajan, crowned with prosperity and 
leading the life of a grihasta, let these four kinds of persons live with you: 
elderly relatives, noblemen who have fallen on hard times, impoverished 
friends and childless sisters. 

When Indra asked him, Brihaspati declared that there are four things 
that can come to fruition in a single day: the resolve of the gods, the 
understanding of intelligent people, the humility of learned men and the 
destruction of the sinful. These four, which are intended to remove fear, 


fetch fear when they are improperly performed: the agnihotra, the vow of 
silence, study and sacrifice. 

A man should worship these five fires: the father, the mother, the sacred 
fire, the soul and the guru. Men attain great fame in this world by serving 
these five: the Devas, the Pitrs, other men, beggars and guests. These five 
follow a man wherever he goes: his friends, his enemies, those that are 
indifferent to him, his dependents and those that are entitled to his 
maintenance. If one of man’s five senses develops a flaw, then from that 
single egress all his intelligence leaks out, like water out of a perforated 
water bag. 

These are the six evil habits that a man who wants to attain prosperity 
must avoid: sleep, heedlessness, fear, anger, sloth and procrastination. 
These six should be abandoned like a broken ship at sea: a teacher who 
cannot explain the Shastras, a priest who is illiterate, a king who gives no 
protection, a wife who speaks unpleasantly, a cowherd who does not want 
to go out to the pasture and a barber who wants to leave the village to live 
in the forest. 

Man must never forsake these six virtues: truth, charity, diligence, 
benevolence, forgiveness and patience. These six things are instantly 
destroyed if neglected: cattle, service, agriculture, a wife, learning and a 
Sudra’s wealth. 

These six forget those who have done them favours: educated disciples 
forget their gurus; married men forget their mothers; men forget the woman 
once she has gratified their sexual desires; they who have achieved success 
forget those who helped them; they who have crossed a river forget the boat 
that carried them over; and patients who have been cured forget their 
physicians. 

These six, O king, promote happiness: good health, freedom from debt, 
living at home, the companionship of good men, certainty of one’s 
livelihood and living without fear. These six kinds of persons are always 
miserable: the envious, the malicious, the discontented, the bad-tempered, 
the suspicious and those depending upon the wealth of others. These six 
make up the happiness of men: acquisition of wealth, continuous good 
health, a loving and sweet spoken wife, an obedient son and knowledge that 
is lucrative. 

There are six desires that are ever present in the human heart; and the 
man who gains mastery over them by controlling his senses never sins or 


suffers any calamity. There are six kinds of persons who subsist on six other 
kinds: thieves upon those who are careless; physicians upon the ailing; 
women upon the lustful; priests on those that want to perform sacrifices; a 
king upon men who quarrel; and men of learning upon those that do not 
have it. 

A king should renounce these seven faults that lead to disaster; they can 
bring even firmly established monarchs to ruin: women, dice, hunting, 
drinking, harsh speech, inhuman punishment and the misuse of wealth. 

These eight conditions indicate a man’s imminent downfall: hating 
Brahmanas, disputes with Brahmanas, appropriation of a Brahmana’s 
possessions, taking the life of Brahmana, taking pleasure in abusing 
Brahmanas, an aversion to praising Brahmanas, forgetting Brahmanas on 
ceremonial occasions and giving vent to spite when Brahmanas ask for 
something. A wise man should understand and avoid them. 

Bhaarata, only these eight conditions can produce sublime happiness: 
meeting with friends, accession of immense wealth, embracing a son, 
sexual union during intercourse, conversation with friends at proper times, 
the advancement of those one is allied to, the acquisition of what has been 
anticipated and being respected in society. 

Eight qualities glorify a man: wisdom, noble birth, self-restraint, 
learning, prowess, moderation in speech, charity according to one’s 
capacity to give and gratitude. 

This house has nine doors, three pillars and five witnesses; and it is 
presided over by the soul. The learned man who realises this is truly wise. 

Dhritarashtra, these ten do not know what virtue is: the intoxicated man, 
the inattentive one, the raving man, the exhausted one, the angry, the 
starving, the hasty, the covetous, the frightened and the lustful one. The 
wise man must avoid their company. In this connection there is an old story 
about what happened between the Asura lord and Duryodhana, for the sake 
of the Asura’s son. 

The king who renounces lust and anger; who gives wealth to deserving 
people; who is discerning, learned and active is a lord of men. The king 
who knows how to inspire confidence in others, who punishes the guilty 
with just punishment and knows when to show clemency enjoys great 
prosperity. 

The wise man does not ignore even a weak enemy and is intelligently 
cautious about the foe who waits for an opportunity; he does not invite 


hostilities with people who are stronger than himself; and he shows his 
strength only when he needs to. He is the most noble-minded of men, who 
does not grieve once a calamity has struck him, but deals with the crisis 
sensibly, and who patiently endures adversity; this man will defeat all his 
enemies. 

Always happy is the man who does not live away from home without 
good reason, who does not make friends with sinners, who never molests 
another man’s wife, who is never arrogant, who never steals, who is never 
ungrateful and who does not drink. 

He is wise, who never boastfully pursues dharma, artha and kama; who 
always tells the truth when asked; who does not argue even for the sake of a 
friend; and who never gets angry even if insulted. 

Everyone praises the man who has no malice towards others but is kind 
to all; who, being weak, avoids disputes; who does not speak arrogantly; 
and who forgives a wrong done to him. 

Everyone loves the man who is never haughty, who never speaks ill of 
others while praising himself, and who never forgets himself and speaks 
harshly. Sages consider him a good man who does not rake up old quarrels, 
who is neither arrogant nor obsequious and who never violates dharma even 
when in distress. 

The man who neither exults in his own happiness nor delights in 
another’s misery, and who has no regrets after giving a gift is a good man. 
The man who is eager to learn about the customs of other countries and the 
languages and dharma of different varnas knows everything —important and 
insignificant; and wherever he goes, he gains authority over others, even the 
great. The intelligent man, who renounces pride, folly, insolence, sinful 
deeds, treasonous actions, dishonesty, enmity and arguments with men who 
are drunk, mad or evil is the best of men. 

The gods bestow prosperity on the man who makes a daily habit of self- 
restraint, self-purification, performing sacred rites, worshipping the gods 
and conducting rituals of penance. The learned man, whose actions are well 
thought out and properly executed, arranges a marriage with someone of 
equal status to his own; he looks up to people who are better than him; he 
talks, mixes and forms friendships with persons of his own status. 

The man who eats frugally after dividing the food amongst his 
dependents, who sleeps little after working hard, and who, when asked, 


gives even to his enemies is a man with his soul under control. Disaster 
stays away from such a man. 

The man who keeps his own counsel with plans and executes them 
without others knowing much about these, and whose actions, 
consequentially, never injure others, succeeds in achieving even the most 
trifling goal. The man who is intent upon abstaining from doing injury to all 
creatures, who is truthful, gentle, charitable and pure-minded shines among 
his kinsmen like a precious gem of the purest quality from the best mine. 

The man who is ashamed of his faults, even though only he knows of 
them, is the most honourable of men. With his pure heart and boundless 
energy, with his mind turned inwards, he blazes in energy like the Sun. 

King Pandu, suffering under a Brahmana’s curse, had five sons born to 
him in the forest; they are like five Indras. You brought up those children 
and taught them everything; they are obedient to you. Give them back their 
fair share of the kingdom, and you and your sons will be happy; and then, 
Rajan, you will regain the trust and confidence of both gods and men.’” 


CANTO 34 
PRAJAGARA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, ‘Tell me how a man copes with sleeplessness 

and burning anxiety. Only you know dharma and artha. Give me 

the benefit of your wisdom, generous Vidura; tell me what you think is 

good for both Yudhishtira and the Kurus. I think of my guilt, and I fear the 

dreadful things that may be in store for me. It is with terrible apprehension 
that I ask you this: what is Yudhishtira thinking?’ 

Vidura says, ‘Even if one is not asked, one should be truthful in what 
one says—be it good or bad, pleasing or hateful—to the man whose 
downfall one does not wish. I will tell you what is for the good of the 
Kurus, which is both beneficial and dharma. Listen, Rajan. 

Do not set your heart on unjust, sinful ways to achieve your ends. An 
intelligent man must not grieve if he does not succeed, despite using fair 
and righteous means. Before he embarks on a course of action, a man must 
take three things into consideration that all actions depend on: the 
competence of the person executing the plan, the nature of the deed itself 
and its purpose. He should think carefully about these and not act on 
impulse. The wise man must decide either to do something or not, after 
considering his ability, the act, and the consequences of failure and success. 

The king who does not know the true extent of his kingdom, his profits 
and losses, his treasury, his population and the nature of the danda neeti— 
the law of punishment, cannot hope to keep his kingdom for long. On the 


other hand, the king who is aware of all these, as prescribed in the ancient 
treatises, and who is learned in dharma and artha will retain his kingdom. 

Just as the planets affect the stars, the senses affect this world, 
regardless of whether they are directed or uncontrolled in their journey to 
their respective goals. Like the Moon waxing during the bright fortnight, 
calamities pile up for the man who allows his senses to control him and 
direct his actions. The man who tries to control his counsellors before 
controlling himself, or to subdue his adversaries before controlling his 
counsellors, ultimately succumbs in weakness. Hence, the man who first 
achieves mastery over himself, thinking of the ego as an enemy, always 
succeeds in subduing his counsellors and adversaries. 

Great prosperity is his who has subdued his senses, controlled his soul 
and is able to punish all offenders; who acts with discernment and is blessed 
with patience. A man’s body is his ratha; the inner soul is the sarathy; the 
senses are the horses. When this chariot is drawn by well-trained steeds, the 
wise man journeys pleasantly through life and finds ultimate peace. Horses 
that are unbroken and wild always lead an unskilful charioteer to doom 
during the course of his journey; so, too, do one’s senses, if they are not 
subdued. 

The inexperienced man, who is driven by his rampaging senses, thinks 
he can extract evil from good and good from evil, and he confuses sorrow 
with happiness. He who forsakes dharma and artha, and follows his senses, 
soon loses prosperity, wealth, his wife and his life. He who is the master of 
riches but not of his senses loses his riches. One should strive to know one’s 
self by using the Self, by controlling one’s mind, intellect and senses; for 
the self is as much an ally as an enemy. The man who has conquered his 
self through the Self, has his self for a friend—the self can be either friend 
or foe. 

Desire and anger tear at wisdom, just as large fish rip apart a flimsy net. 
The man who strives for success, paying heed to dharma and artha, wins 
happiness and all that he aspires for. He who wants to vanquish his outward 
adversaries without first conquering his inner enemies—his five senses —is 
overpowered by them. Many evil kings, because of their lack of mastery 
over their senses, are ruined by their own actions, which are directed by 
their unending lust for more territory and possessions. 

Just as wet fuel burns along with the dry, so, too, is an innocent man 
punished by association with evil men. Friendship with sinful men must be 


avoided. The ignorant man who fails to control his five greedy enemies, 
each of which has its own selfish goals, is overwhelmed by disaster. 

Evil men never have these attributes: guilelessness, simplicity, 
innocence, contentment, sweetness of speech, self-restraint, truth and 
steadiness. Inferior men do not have Atmagyana; they are never stable, 
patient or devoted to dharma, and neither trustworthy nor charitable. 

Fools try to injure the wise with false accusations and harsh words. In 
consequence, they acquire the sins of the wise who, freed from guilt, gain 
forgiveness. Malice is the strength of evil-minded men; protection of the 
weak and of women is the strength of kings; forgiveness is the strength of 
the virtuous. 

To control speech is said to be most difficult. It is not easy to hold a 
long conversation full of meaningful words that also delight the ear. Well- 
spoken words produce many benefits, but harsh ones are the cause of all 
evils. A forest destroyed by arrows or cut down by hatchets may grow 
again, but a heart wounded by cruel words never recovers. Weapons such as 
arrows, spears and bearded darts can be removed from the body, but a 
dagger of words plunged into the heart cannot. The mouth shoots word- 
arrows that strike deep and cause anguish through day and night. A learned 
man should never discharge such arrows; they pierce the very soul. 

The man whom the gods have destined for defeat loses his good sense 
and debases himself by dishonourable conduct. When one’s intellect 
becomes clouded and one’s destruction is imminent, one is convinced that 
wrong is right. Bharatarishabha, you do not see that your sons are in the 
grip of their deluded minds because of their hostility toward the Pandavas. 
Neither do you see that Yudhishtira, blessed with every auspicious mark 
and worthy of ruling the three worlds, is obedient to you. 

Dhritarashtra, exclude all your sons and make Yudhishtira Dharmaraja 
your heir. Intelligent and wise, steeped in dharma and artha, he has suffered 
untold misery out of kindness and sympathy for you and in order to 
preserve your good name.’” 


CANTO 35 
PRAJAGARA PARVA CONTINUED 


6 ‘T) hritarashtra says, ‘Effulgent one, tell me more about dharma and 
artha. My thirst for them remains unquenched, and your words 
delight my ears and my heart.’ 

Vidura says, ‘Ritual bathing in all the tirthas and compassion towards 
all creatures have equal merit, with kindness having the edge. Rajan, be 
kind to all your sons; by that you will win great fame in this world, and 
heaven thereafter. A man is glorified in Swarga for as long as his good 
deeds are spoken of in this world. Listen to an ancient story about the 
conversation between Virochana and Sudhanwan, both suitors for Kesini’s 
hand. 

Once, long ago, there was a maiden named Kesini, whose beauty was 
unrivalled. Wanting a good husband, she decided to choose one through a 
swayamvara. Wanting her for himself, one of Diti’s sons, Virochana, went 
to her swayamvara. 

Kesini noticed this Daitya lord and said to him, “O Virochana, tell me, 
who are superior— Brahmanas or the sons of Diti? Why is Sudhanwan not 
sitting on the grander seat?” 

Virochana said, “O Kesini, because we are the firstborn of Prajapati, we 
are superior to all creatures. The world is ours. Who are the Devas, and 
what are the Brahmanas before us?” 


Kesini said, “We will remain in this pavilion, Virochana. Sudhanwan 
will come here tomorrow, and I want to see both of you sitting together.” 

Virochana said, “Sweet and timid one, I will do as you say. Tomorrow 
morning, you will see Sudhanwan and me together.” 

When the night passed and the Sun rose Sudhanwan came there and saw 
Virochana waiting with Kesini. Kesini got up; she offered him her seat, 
padya to wash his feet and arghya. 

When Virochana invited him to share his seat, Sudhanwan said, “O Son 
of Prahlada, I will touch your beautiful golden seat, but since you are not 
my equal, I cannot sit on it with you.” 

Virochana said, “You have the right to sit only on a wooden plank, an 
animal skin or a mat of grass or straw. You do not deserve to sit on the same 
seat as me.” 

Sudhanwan said, “Only father and son, Brahmanas of the same age and 
equal learning, two Kshatriyas, two Vaisyas or two Sudras can sit together 
on the same seat; no others may sit together. Your father used to pay his 
respects to me and take a seat lower than mine. You are young, brought up 
in every luxury at home, and you understand nothing.” 

Virochana said, “I will wager all the gold, cattle, horses and every other 
kind of wealth that we have among the Asuras to the one who is able to 
answer this question that has arisen.” 

Sudhanwan said, “Leave aside your gold, your cattle and your horses, 
Virochana. Let us stake our lives and ask this question of those who can 
answer.” 

Virochana said, “Who shall we go to when we wager our lives? I will 
not go before any of the Devas and never before any man.” 

Sudhanwan said, “With our lives as wager, we will approach your 
father. Prahlada will never tell a lie, not even for his son’s sake.” 

So, they made a wager, and Virochana and Sudhanwan, both roused, 
went to Prahlada. 

Seeing them together, Prahlada said, “These two, who have never been 
companions, have come here like two angry snakes that have travelled by 
the same road. 

He said, “Have you two become friends now, who never were before?” 

Virochana said, “There is no friendship between Sudhanwan and me. 
Rather, we have both wagered our lives. O Lord of Asuras, I will ask you a 
question, which you must answer truthfully.” 


Prahlada said, “Bring water, honey and curds for Sudhanwan. You 
deserve our worship, Brahmana. A plump white cow is ready for you.” 

Sudhanwan said, “Water, honey and curds have already been given me 
on my way here. I will ask you a question, Prahlada; answer it truly. Are 
Brahmanas superior, or is Virochana?” 

Prahlada said, “O Brahmana, here you both are in person—my only son 
and you, a Brahmana. How can I answer this question over which you two 
have fallen out?” 

Sudhanwan said, “Keep your cattle and your other precious wealth, but 
you must declare the truth to settle our dispute.” 

Prahlada said, “What will a person who misuses his tongue, to answer 
falsely rather than truly, suffer?” 

Sudhanwan said, “The person who uses his tongue to lie suffers like a 
deserted wife who pines at night, with visions of her husband in the arms of 
another woman. He suffers like a man who loses at dice, or like one who is 
weighed down with an unbearable load of anxieties. He suffers like a man 
who is denied entry into a city and sits outside its gates, starving, and he is 
always faced with his enemies. 

He who tells a lie for the sake of an animal will have five of his 
forefathers cast down from heaven. He who tells a lie for the sake of a cow 
will have ten of his Pitrs cast down from Swarga; a lie for the sake of a 
horse causes the downfall of a hundred; and a lie for the sake of a human 
being results in the fall of a thousand of one’s manes. An untruth for the 
sake of gold ruins the members of one’s race both born and unborn, while 
an untruth for the sake of land ruins everything. So never lie about land.” 

Prahlada said, “Angiras is superior to me, and Sudhanwan is superior to 
you, Virochana; and Sudhanwan’s mother is superior to yours. You have 
been defeated by Sudhanwan; and he is now in command of your life. 

Sudhanwan, I ask that you grant Virochana his life.” 

Sudhanwan said, “O Prahlada, you have chosen dharma and not been 
tempted to lie. So, I grant the life of your son, who is so dear to you, and 
restore Virochana to you. He shall, however, have to wash my feet in 
Kesini’s presence.” 

This is why, Rajan, you must never utter the slightest falsehood about 
the kingdom. Do not hasten your death and the deaths of your children and 
close associates by lying for your son. The gods do not protect men by 


taking up wooden clubs as herdsmen would; however, they grant 
intelligence to those they wish to protect. 

There is no doubt that the degree of a man’s success is in direct 
proportion to the attention he pays to dharma. The Vedas never save a man 
who lives by falsehood from the guilt of sin. They forsake him while he is 
on his deathbed, like fledglings flying from their nests. 

Drinking, quarrels, enmity with many, marital disputes, severance of 
marital relationships between husband and wife, internal dissent and treason 
are all sins that must be shunned. A palmist, a thief turned merchant, a 
fowler, a physician, an enemy, a friend and a minstrel are not acceptable 
witnesses. Performed from motives of pride, an Agnihotra, abstention from 
speech, study and sacrifice become harmful, although they are intrinsically 
innocent. 

A man who sets fire to a house, one who gives poison, a pander, a 
vendor of alcohol, a fletcher, an astrologer, one who injures his friends, an 
adulterer, one who performs abortions, one who violates the wife of an 
elder, a Brahmana addicted to alcohol, one who is harsh-tongued, one who 
opens old wounds, an atheist, one who insults the Vedas, a taker of bribes, 
one whose upanayanam has been delayed beyond the appropriate time, one 
who secretly kills cattle, one who kills the man that comes to him for 
protection: all these are as lacking in dharma as a man who kills a 
Brahmana. 

Gold is tested for purity by fire, a high-born man by the way he carries 
himself and an honest man by what he does. A man’s courage is tested in a 
crisis, a man’s self-control in times of poverty and the strength of a man’s 
friendship or enmity in times of danger. Old age destroys beauty; ambition 
destroys patience; death ends life; envy removes righteousness; anger ruins 
prosperity; companionship with base persons destroys good conduct; lust 
sheds modesty; and pride takes away everything. Prosperity is born of good 
deeds; it grows by dint of work; its roots penetrate deep from well honed 
skill; it becomes stable from self-control. 

Wisdom, good lineage, restraint, knowing the scriptures, prowess, not 
being garrulous, giving gifts as one is able, and gratitude are the eight 
qualities that glorify a man. But there is one factor which, on its own, can 
make all these attributes coalesce: royal favour can make all these qualities 
cover the favoured person with their lustre. These eight are celestial 
qualities in this world of men. 


Of the eight, four are inherent in good people, and the other four they 
always practise. The four that are integral to good men are sacrifice, charity, 
study and asceticism; and the other four that good men always practise are 
self-restraint, truth, simplicity and abstention from causing injury. 

Sacrifice, study, charity, asceticism, truth, forgiveness, mercy and 
contentment constitute the eight paths of dharma. The first four of these 
may be practised from motives of pride, but the last four can exist only in 
those that are truly noble. 

No gathering of people can truly be a satsanga unless there are 
venerable men in it; and no one can be considered worthy of veneration 
unless he can say what dharma is. It is not dharma if it can be separated 
from truth; and it is not truth if it is tinged with deceit. 

Truth, beauty, knowledge of the scriptures, learning, noble birth, good 
conduct, strength, wealth, courage and the ability to speak on a variety of 
subjects are ten qualities of divine origin. 

A man who sins is overwhelmed by evil consequences; a man who is 
virtuous reaps great happiness. So, a man must be firm in his resolve to 
abstain from sin. Repeated sinning destroys intelligence, and the man who 
loses intelligence repeatedly sins. Being constantly virtuous enhances 
intelligence, and the man whose intelligence increases is constantly 
virtuous. The virtuous man attains bliss. Thus, a man should be firm in his 
resolve to be virtuous. 

The man who is envious, he who is hurtful, the man who is cruel, the 
man who is quarrelsome and one who is deceitful come to grief. The wise 
man who is not envious always does what is dharma and never suffers 
sorrow; instead, he shines. The man who acquires wisdom from wise men is 
himself learned and wise. He who is wise pays attention to dharma and 
artha, and achieves joy. 

Behave during the day in a way that will ensure an untroubled night; 
conduct yourself during eight months of the year in a way that will ensures 
happiness during the monsoon; spend your youth in a way that ensures a 
comfortable old age; and conduct your whole life on Earth in a manner that 
ensures bliss in the hereafter. 

The wise man thinks highly of food that is easily digested, of the wife 
who is young no more, of the hero who is victorious and of the sannyasin 
whose efforts have been rewarded with success. The empty space that a 


man tries to fill with wrongfully acquired wealth will never be filled; rather, 
new voids appear in other places. 

The Guru controls those who have restrained their souls; the king 
controls the black-souled one; Yama controls those who sin in secret. The 
greatness of Rishis, of rivers, of river-banks, of mahatmans cannot be 
determined, like a woman’s immorality. 

O king, the man who is devoted to the worship of Brahmanas, he who is 
generous, he who is charitable to his relatives, and the Kshatriya who 
conducts himself honourably rule the Earth for ever. The man who is brave, 
learned and who knows how to protect others can always gather flowers of 
gold from the Earth. 

Of all works, those performed by using the intellect are the best; next 
come those performed with the use of one’s arms; those for which the legs 
are used are worse; and those performed by carrying loads are the lowest. 

How can you expect to prosper when you have entrusted your kingdom 
to Duryodhana, Sakuni, the witless Dusasana and Karna? The Pandavas, 
who are blessed with every virtue, look up to you as a father. You must rely 
on them as your true sons.’” 


CANTO 36 
PRAJAGARA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “VV idura says, ‘I know an ancient tale that is told in this connection: 
of the discussion between Atri’s son and the Sadhyas. 

Long ago, the deities known as Sadhyas approached the son of Atri, the 
wise Maharishi of the stern tapasya, while he wandered the world in the 
guise of a mendicant, and said to him, “O Maharishi, we are deities known 
as Sadhyas. We cannot tell who you are. You seem highly intelligent and a 
man of rigid self-control, which comes from a deep knowledge of the 
Shastras. Share your knowledge with us.” 

The mendicant Rishi answered, “Immortal ones, I have heard that by 
untying the knots in one’s heart by means of tranquillity, by mastering one’s 
passions and by following true dharma, one must learn to look on all beings 
—likeable or hateful—as if on oneself. One should not retaliate to slander 
or accusations, because when one bears pain silently it consumes the 
slanderer, and one also acquires the merit of his good deeds. 

Do not indulge in slander or accusations; do not humiliate or insult 
others; do not quarrel with friends; do not seek the companionship of the 
vile and the base; do not be arrogant or dishonourable. Avoid speaking 
sharp or angry words, because they burn deep—into the heart and bones, 
and into prana itself. That is why the virtuous man never speaks harshly or 
in anger. He that does is the very worst of men. With hell on his tongue, he 


sears the inmost parts of a man with his piercing words, and always causes 
misery. 

The wise man, when wounded by another’s wordy arrows that scorch 
like fire or the Sun, endures them silently, remembering that the slanderer’s 
blessings become his. The man who serves a good man or an evil one, a 
saintly man or a thief, absorbs the characteristics of his companion, like a 
cloth soaked in dye. 

The gods like to be with the man who, when stung with criticism, 
neither criticises nor makes others do so in retaliation; who, when struck, 
neither strikes back nor makes someone else do so for him; and who does 
not wish even the slightest injury on the one who hurt him. 

Silence is better than speech; if you must speak, then it is better to speak 
the truth; if the truth is to be spoken, it is better to say what is pleasing; and 
if what is pleasing is to be said, then it is best to say what is dharma. 

A man becomes like the person he lives with, or like the one he sees 
regularly, or like the one he wants emulate. A man is liberated from those 
things from which he abstains; and if he abstains from everything, he will 
not suffer even the least sorrow. Such a man neither vanquishes others, nor 
is vanquished by any. He is never hurtful or antagonistic to anyone. He is 
unmoved by praise or reproach. He neither grieves nor exalts. 

The best human being is one who wants the prosperity of all and never 
gloats over the sorrows of others; he is truthful and humble; and he has his 
senses under control. The mediocre man is one who never consoles another 
with false platitudes; he gives what he has promised; and he is mindful of 
others’ weaknesses. The despicable man is one who is difficult to control; 
he is easily affected by the prospect of danger; he is short-tempered; he is 
ungrateful; he cannot make friends; and he has an evil heart. The worst 
among men is one who is unappreciative of any good that comes to him 
from others; he is suspicious by nature; and he drives away all his true 
friends. 

He who wants to prosper should keep the company of good men, 
perhaps occasionally those that are mediocre, but never those that are bad. 
The sinful man does, indeed, earn wealth by working hard, by his 
intelligence and by his strength; but he can never win fame, nor can he 
acquire the virtues and ways of noble families, even if he is born into one.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, “The gods, those who respect dharma and artha and 
do not swerve from either, and those who have great learning have an 


affinity to noble families. Tell me, Vidura, what families are truly noble?’ 

Vidura says, ‘The family whose life is characterised by simplicity, self- 
restraint, Vedic knowledge, sacrifice, proper marriages and gifts of food is 
considered noble. Such vamsas never deviate from dharma; their ancestors 
are never pained by having to see their progeny’s wrong-doings; they 
cheerfully practise all the virtues; they aspire to enhance the fame of their 
line; and they avoid every kind of falsehood. 

Noble families fall and debase themselves because they neglect to 
perform sacrifices, make impure marriages, abandon the Vedas and insult 
Brahmanas. They are degraded because their members ignore or speak ill of 
Brahmanas, or because they misappropriate what others have entrusted to 
them. 

Even if a family is extensive and owns much wealth and cattle, you 
cannot think of it as a cohesive family if its members lack good manners 
and deportment; whereas a family that lacks wealth, but is distinguished by 
good conduct, is noble indeed, and earns a great reputation. So, families 
must pay attention to good demeanour, for material wealth comes and goes. 
The man who is wanting in wealth is not really wanting, but the man who is 
wanting in decorum is really in want. Families that are rich in cattle and 
agricultural produce do not deserve fame if they lack good conduct. 

Let none in our dynasty provoke quarrels, serve another king as 
minister, take what is not his, stir dissent, be deceitful or false, or eat before 
serving the Rishis, Devas and Sadasyas. Any of our vamsa who kills a 
Brahmana or feels antipathy towards them, or who obstructs farming, does 
not deserve to mix with us. 

A seat of straw, a piece of ground to sit on, water to wash one’s face and 
feet, and sweet words are never wanting in the house of a good man. 
Virtuous men devoted to dharma have these things ready to reverently offer 
to any guest who might come to his home. Just as the sandalwood tree is 
able to support weights that larger trees cannot, so too are those from noble 
families able to shoulder great cares which ordinary men cannot. 

A man whose anger inspires fear, or whom people serve in fear is not a 
friend; but the man who is trusted like a father is. All other friendships are 
in name only. The man who acts as a friend, though not related by blood, is 
one’s true friend, refuge and protector. The man of wavering affections who 
does not care for the elderly or one who is restless can never make friends. 
Like swans abandoning a tank whose waters have dried up, success 


forsakes a man whose heart is unsteady, a man who cannot control his mind 
and a man who is a slave to his senses. 

Weak-minded men give in to anger and are gratified too easily; they are 
as changeable as clouds. Even birds of carrion will not touch the dead 
bodies of men who are ungrateful to friends who have helped them. 
Whether you are poor or rich, you must honour your friends. The sincerity 
of a friend is tested only when you ask for his help. 

Sorrow kills beauty; it debilitates; it destroys knowledge; and it makes 
the body vulnerable to disease. Rather than helping a man achieve his goals, 
grief dries up his body, to the delight of his enemies. Do not yield to grief. 
Men repeatedly die and are reborn; repeatedly they wither away and grow; 
repeatedly they ask others for help, and they themselves are asked for help; 
repeatedly they lament and are lamented. 

Everyone experiences happiness and misery, plenty and want, gain and 
loss, life and death, at one time or other. The man who is self-controlled 
should neither exult in joy nor wilt in sorrow at these twinned opposites. 

The six senses are always restless. One’s understanding leaks out 
through the sense that is heightened, in direct proportion to the level of its 
dominance, like water from a pot with holes, big and small.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘I have deceived Yudhishtira, who is like a flame. He 
will surely kill all my sons in battle. I see danger everywhere and my heart 
churns within me. Wise one, soothe my anxiety.’ 

Vidura says, ‘Anagha, I see good only in knowledge and tapasya, in 
restraining the senses and in giving up greed. Atmagyana dispels fear; 
tapasya brings rich rewards; serving one’s superiors gives learning; and 
self-restraint results in peace. Those who want moksha without first earning 
blessings by giving charity and practicing Vedic rituals go through life 
bound by anger and hatred. The happiness gained by a judicious course of 
study, by a battle fought virtuously or by stern tapasya always increases at 
the end. 

Those who quarrel with their relatives get no sleep, even if they lie on 
the most comfortable beds; nor do they derive any pleasure from women or 
from hearing bards sing hymns and eulogies in their praise. Such men can 
never practise dharma; they can never be happy; they can never have 
honour. Peace holds no charm for them. They never appreciate good advice; 
they never get what they want or keep what they have. O king, such men 
can expect to meet with ruin. 


As natural as milk is to cows, so is asceticism to Brahmanas, 
inconstancy to women and distrust to one’s own kin. Many thin threads of 
equal length can, when stranded together, stand the strain of the shuttle 
passing constantly over them, because of their numbers. It is the same with 
family members who are bound by ties of dharma. Burning twigs produce 
only smoke, singly; but together they burst into flame. It is the same with 
kinsmen, Dhritarashtra. 

Men who want to assert their authority over Brahmanas, women, 
relatives and cattle soon fall off their pedestals, like ripe fruits from their 
stems. The trunk of the tree that grows alone, though massive, strong and 
deep-rooted, is smashed and twisted by a strong wind. However, trees that 
grow close together in stands can resist violent gales by leaning on each 
other. In the same way, his enemies see the man who is alone, though 
blessed with all the good qualities, as being easy to bring down, like a lone 
tree by the wind. In contrast, relatives who are united grow in strength, like 
lotus-stalks in a lake. 

These must never be killed: Brahmanas, cows, relatives, children, 
women, hosts whose food one has eaten and persons who surrender and ask 
for one’s protection. 

Rajan, without health a man’s good qualities do not manifest 
themselves. If you are healthy, you can do much good; but if you have bad 
health, you might as well be dead. 

Rajan, anger is a bitter, pungent, acrid and scalding drink, painful in its 
consequences; it is a dark draught not born of any physical illness; and 
those that lack wisdom can never digest it. Swallow your anger, Rajan, and 
be at peace. Men who are wracked by disease derive no joy from pleasures 
or from wealth; they are so full of sorrow that they do not know what 
happiness is nor enjoy wealth. 

When I saw Draupadi won as a wager at dice, I told you that men of 
dharma never use deceit at gambling and urged you to stop Duryodhana. 
You paid no heed to me then. True strength is not opposed to softness; 
rather, the combination of both is the best and most effective course. 
Prosperity which is dependent on deceit is destined to be short lived; but 
that which depends on strength and softness is passed down to sons and 
grandsons intact. 

Your sons and the Pandavas must love each other. Let them have the 
same friends and enemies and live together in happiness and prosperity. 


Rajan, you are the refuge of the sons of Kuru. Indeed, the entire Ajamida 
vamsa depends on you. Preserve your good name by cherishing the sons of 
Pandu, especially for the great suffering they have endured in exile. O 
Kaurava, make peace with the Pandavas; do not let your enemies find a 
chink in your armour. The Pandavas are devoted to dharma. Draw 
Duryodhana away from his evil ways.’” 


CANTO 37 
PRAJAGARA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °V idura says, ‘Manu, the son of the Svayambhuva, the Self-Created 

One, spoke of the seventeen kinds of men who vainly strike air 

with their fists, who seek to bend Indra’s heavenly bow of vapour—the 
Indradhanush, or want to catch the intangible rays of the Sun. 

These foolish ones are the man who wants to control another who 
cannot be controlled; the man who is content with small gains; the man who 
humbly pays court to enemies; the man who seeks to control women; the 
man who solicits gifts from one who should not be asked for gifts; the man 
who boasts without having done anything; the high-born man who acts 
basely; the weak man who enters into hostilities with one that is powerful; 
the man who talks to one who listens with disdain; the man who desires the 
unattainable; the father-in-law who flirts with his daughter-in-law; the man 
who boasts about his fears being allayed by his daughter-in-law; the man 
who sows his seeds in another man’s field; the man who speaks ill of his 
wife; the man who does not acknowledge having received something from 
another; the man who, in a holy tirtha, commits to give something away and 
then makes excuses when asked to make good his words; and the man who 
tries to prove the truth of what is false. Yama’s dutas, with nooses in hand, 
drag these people away to hell. 

A man should behave towards others in the same manner as others 
behave towards him, for this is good policy. One may behave deceitfully 


with the deceitful, but must be honest with those who are honest. Old age 
withers beauty; patience takes away hope; death ends life; the practice of 
virtue denudes worldly enjoyments; lust abandons modesty; companionship 
with evil men destroys good character and deportment; anger ruins 
prosperity; and pride destroys everything.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘According to the Vedas, man’s life-span on Earth is 
one hundred years. Why is it, then, that not all men attain the allotted span?’ 

Vidura says, “Too much pride, excessive speech, overindulgence in 
food, giving in to anger, yearning for pleasure and inner discord are the six 
swords that cut short man’s life on Earth. It is these six, not death, which 
kill men. Know this and be blessed. 

Bhaarata, these acquire the guilt of killing a Brahmana: one who steals 
the wife of a friend who trusts him; one who violates the bed of his Guru; a 
Brahmana who marries a Sudra woman or drinks alcohol; a man who 
wields authority over Brahmanas, becomes their master or confiscates lands 
that support them; and one who kills those who give themselves up into his 
protection. The Vedas declare that contact with these kinds of people 
requires penance to purify oneself. 

These persons attain Swarga: one who accepts the teachings of the wise; 
one who knows dharma; one who is generous; one who eats only after 
offering his food to the Devas and Pitrs; one who has no envy; one who is 
incapable of doing anything injurious; and one who is grateful, truthful, 
humble and learned. 

O king, many are those who always say pleasing things; but rare is the 
man whose words are not always pleasant but yet medicinal, and the man 
who listens to him. The man who, without worrying about whether his 
words will please his master or not, tells him things that may seem 
unpalatable but are wise and in keeping with dharma, is an asset to the king. 

For the sake of the family one of its members may be sacrificed; for the 
sake of the village, a family may be sacrificed; for the sake of a kingdom a 
village may be sacrificed; and for the sake of one’s soul, the whole world 
may be sacrificed. A man should conserve his wealth, in case calamity 
strikes; he should use his wealth to protect his wives; and with his wealth 
and his wives he should safeguard himself. 

From time immemorial it has been obvious that gambling causes 
disputes. The wise man should never gamble, even light-heartedly. At the 
time of that game of dice I told you it was sinful and dangerous. To you, 


however, my words were as unpleasant as bitter medicine to a sick man. O 
king, you want to vanquish the sons of Pandu, who compare with your sons 
as peacocks to crows. You forsake lions in favour of jackals. The time will 
come when you will regret this. 

The master who does not vent his displeasure against devoted servants 
that want only his welfare, gains their confidence. They stand by him even 
in times of distress. A man must never seek to save wealth by confiscating 
grants or not paying his employees; for, deprived of their means of 
livelihood and prosperity, even those who are fond of him will turn against 
him and abandon him in his time of need. 

A king should first consider all his future plans, then fixing his servants’ 
wages with his own income and expenditure in mind, he should make 
suitable contracts, for there is nothing that cannot be accomplished by just 
and strategic alliances. The officer who, with a complete understanding of 
his king’s intentions, discharges his duties promptly and enthusiastically, 
who is respectable and devoted to his master, always tells him what is best 
for him. The king should regard the officer who is well aware of the 
strength of his own and the enemy’s forces as a second self. However, the 
king should immediately rid himself of the servant who is so proud of his 
own intelligence that he disregards his master’s instructions, refuses to obey 
him and argues with him. 

Learned men say that a good servant possesses these eight qualities: he 
is not arrogant; he does not procrastinate; he is able, kind, clean and 
incorruptible; he is from a family free of disease; and he weighs his words 
before he speaks. 

A man must never enter an enemy’s house confidently after dusk, even 
with notice; he must never lurk in the yard of another’s house at night; and 
he must never seek to be with a woman whom the king might enjoy. 

One must never disagree with the decision arrived at by a man who 
keeps company with sinners and who is in the habit of consulting all and 
sundry. Never tell him you disagree with him; instead dismiss him on some 
pretext. 

One must never borrow from, or lend to, these: a king who is 
inordinately soft-hearted, a woman of bad character, the servant of a king, 
one’s son, one’s brother, a widow with a child, one serving in the military 
and one who has suffered a great loss of wealth. 


Eight qualities bestow lustre on a man. They are wisdom, noble lineage, 
knowledge of the scriptures, self-restraint, prowess, moderation in speech, 
the giving of gifts such as one can afford and gratitude. These qualities, sire, 
are mustered and held close by the wise. 

The man who performs ritual ablutions acquires strength, beauty, a clear 
voice, the ability to clearly enunciate all the alphabet, delicacy of touch, a 
fine sense of smell, cleanliness, grace, delicacy of limbs and beautiful 
women. The man who eats sparingly wins good health, long life, ease, 
healthy children and freedom from sloth and accusations of gluttony. 

A man should not shelter the following in his house: one who is ill- 
behaved, one who eats too much, one whom everyone dislikes, one who is 
deceitful, one who is cruel, one who does not know the correctness of time 
and place and one who dresses immodestly. A person, even in dire distress, 
should never ask a favour of a miser, of one who speaks badly of others, of 
one who has no knowledge of the Shastras, of a forest dweller, of one who 
is cunning, of one who does not respect those who are worthy of reverence, 
of one who is cruel, of one who is quarrelsome or ungrateful. 

One should never serve these six worst types of men: an enemy, one 
who always errs, a habitual liar, one who wavers in his devotion to God, a 
cold-hearted man and one who is overconfident of his own abilities. 

One’s objectives depend on the means for their success; and means 
depend on the nature of the objective to be achieved through them. They are 
intimately intertwined, and success depends on both. A man must have 
sons, make them independent by providing for them, give daughters in 
matriage to suitable men and then retire to the life of a Vanaprastha. To 
receive the grace of the Supreme Being a man must always work for 
universal good as well as for his own happiness; and this is the root of 
success of all man’s endeavours. A man who has intelligence, energy, 
prowess, strength, promptness and perseverance need have no anxieties 
about his livelihood. 

Look at the evils that a quarrel with the Pandavas will bring, which 
would sadden Indra and all the Devas. Firstly, enmity with those who are 
like sons to you; secondly, a life of constant anxiety; thirdly, the ruin of the 
fame of the Kurus; and lastly, the joy of your enemies. O you who are as 
splendid as Indra, the wrath of Bhishma, Drona and Yudhishtira will 
consume the whole world, like a massive comet blasting through the Earth. 


Your hundred sons, Karna and the sons of Pandu can together rule this 
vast Earth with its girdle of oceans. Rajan, your sons are the forest, and the 
Pandavas are its tigers. O, do not destroy the forest and its tigers. O, do not 
let the tigers be driven away from the forest. Without tigers there can be no 
forest and without a forest there can be no tigers. The forest shelters the 
tigers and tigers guard the forest. 

Those who are sinful look more for the faults than for the good qualities 
of others. He who desires total success in his material ventures should be 
virtuous from the very beginning, for true artha is impossible to obtain 
without dharma, like amrita without swarga. He whose soul has been 
cleansed of sin and firmly fixed on dharma has understood all things, 
whether natural or artificial. He who pursues dharma, artha and kama at the 
appropriate times gains all three, in this world and the next. He who 
restrains the force of both anger and joy, and never loses his composure in a 
crisis, Wins prosperity. 

Listen to me, O great king. Men are said to have five different kinds of 
strength. Of these, the strength of arms is regarded as the least. The 
acquisition of good advisors is seen as the second most important. The wise 
have said that the acquisition of wealth is the third; the strength of one’s 
lineage is considered the fourth. However, Bhaarata, the one by which all 
these are won, and which is the best and most important of all kinds of 
strength is the strength of the intellect. 

After provoking the hostility of a man who is capable of doing great 
injury to others, one should not reassure oneself with the thought that one 
lives far away from him. A wise man does not repose his trust in women, 
kings, serpents, his own master, enemies, enjoyments or his longevity. 

There are no physicians or physics for a man who has been struck by 
the arrow of wisdom; neither the mantras of homa nor auspicious 
ceremonies, neither the mantras of the Atharva Veda nor any of the 
antidotes for poison are of any use. 

A man should not ignore snakes, fire, lions and blood relatives; all these 
are powerful. Fire is a thing of great energy in this world. It hides itself in 
wood but does not consume it until it is ignited by an outside agent. That 
same latent fire, when sparked by friction, consumes not only the wood in 
which it hides, but also an entire forest. Men of noble lineage are just like 
fire in their energy. Of a forgiving nature, they do not betray outward 
symptoms of wrath, and lie quiet like fire in wood. 


O king, you and your sons are like creepers and the Pandavas are like 
Sala trees. A creeper cannot grow unless there is a large tree for it to twine 
round. Your sons are like a forest and the sons of Pandu are its lions. 
Without its lions the forest is doomed to destruction, and lions, too, are 
doomed without the forest to shelter them.’”’ 


CANTO 38 
PRAJAGARA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “VV idura says, ‘The heart of a young man soars in joy when an older 

and venerable person comes to his house as a guest. His heart 

comes down to earth again when he goes forward and greets him. One who 

has self-control must first offer his guest a seat, then have his feet washed in 

clean water, after which he must make the usual enquiries of welcome, then 
give his own news and offer him food. 

Wise men say that the man cannot be considered to be truly alive, in 
whose home a Brahmana conversant with mantras does not accept water, 
honey, curds or cattle from fear of either being unsure of whether he can 
take the gifts away, or from the miserliness and unwillingness with which 
the gifts are made. A householder must look on a newly arrived guest as 
being very dear, regardless of the fact that he may not be worthy of being 
offered water to wash his feet, be the guest a physician, a fletcher, a lapsed 
Brahmachari, a thief, a Brahmana who drinks, an abortionist, a soldier or a 
seller of the Vedas. 

A Brahmana should never sell salt, cooked food, curds, milk, honey, oil, 
ghee, sesame, meat, fruits, roots, potherbs, dyed clothes, perfumes and 
sweets. The man who never gives way to anger, the one who is beyond 
grief, the one to whom friendship and quarrels are meaningless, he who 
disregards praise and blame and he who is detached from both the pleasant 


and unpleasant is completely withdrawn from the world, and is a real Yogin 
of the Bhikshu order. 

The virtuous sannyasin who lives on wild rice, roots or herbs, who has 
his soul under control, who carefully maintains his sacred fire for worship, 
who lives in the forest and is always mindful of guests is indeed the best of 
ascetics. 

If a man wrongs an intelligent person, he should never become 
complacent in that he lives a great distance away from the one he has 
wronged. Far is the reach of an intelligent man, by which he can avenge the 
wrongs done to him. One should never trust an untrustworthy man, nor 
indeed repose too much trust on a reliable man, for both these make one 
most vulnerable. 

Men should renounce envy, protect their wives, give everyone their due 
and speak pleasantly. A man should always speak sweetly to his wife but 
must never be enslaved by her. It has been said that wives who are blessed 
and virtuous, who are worthy of worship and who are the ornaments of their 
homes are embodiments of domestic prosperity, of the Grihalakshmi. They 
should be protected. 

A man should delegate the supervision of his inner apartments to his 
father; of the kitchen to his mother; of his cattle to somebody he looks upon 
as his own self; but he must himself tend to his farming. A man should 
assign his servants to care for guests who are Vaisyas and give his sons the 
responsibility of looking after Brahmanas. 

Fire has its origin in water, Kshatriyas in Brahmanas and iron in stone. 
Their energy can affect all things but is neutralised as soon as these things 
come in contact with their progenitors. Fire lies hidden in wood without 
showing itself. Good men of a forgiving nature and fiery tejas do not betray 
outwardly what is within them. The king whose plans are unknown to 
outsiders as well as to those around him, but who knows what others are 
planning, through his spies, enjoys long prosperity. 

One should never talk about what one intends to do. Let anything you 
do, with regard to dharma, artha or kama, remain unknown until it is done. 
Reflect over and settle on your plans secretly, climbing to the top of a 
mountain or the terrace of a palace or going to a deserted wilderness devoid 
of trees and plants to do so. O Bhaarata, neither an ignorant friend nor a 
learned one who has no self-restraint should be trusted with secrets. 


Rajan, never make a man your minister without examining him well, for 
your finances and inmost thoughts are in his hands. Fortunate is the king 
whose ministers know what he does, with respect to dharma, artha and 
kama, only after he has acted. The king whose counsels are kept close, and 
with complete faith, has success. 

He who commits reprehensible deeds from ignorance loses his life 
because of unexpected consequences of those actions. Commendable deeds 
are always followed by peace of mind, and their omission leads to 
repentance. 

Just as a Brahmana who has no Vedic learning is not fit to officiate at a 
Sraddha, so too, the king who is ignorant of the six ways of protecting his 
kingdom is not fit to engage in politics. The king who monitors the increase, 
decrease and surplus to his revenue, who is familiar with the six ways of 
protecting his kingdom, who has self-knowledge and whose conduct is 
always praised brings the whole world under his rule. The king whose anger 
and joy always produce results, who personally oversees all activity in his 
kingdom and who keeps his treasury under his own control brings the very 
earth under subjection. 

A king should be content with the name he wins and the royal parasol 
that is held over his head. He should divide the wealth of the kingdom 
among those that serve him and not keep everything for himself. 

A Brahmana knows a Brahmana, a husband understands the wife, a 
king knows his minister, and monarchs know monarchs. An enemy who 
deserves death should never be set free once he is subdued. If a man is 
weak and he deserves death, he should pay court to his enemies who are 
stronger than him. However, one must kill such an enemy as soon as one is 
powerful enough, for otherwise the enemy will become dangerous. 

A man should make an effort to control his anger against gods, kings, 
Brahmanas, old men, children and the helpless. The wise man should avoid 
unprofitable quarrels, in which only fools get involved. Thus one wins great 
fame in this world and avoids suffering and sorrow. 

The people never want for their master a man whose grace is without 
favour and whose anger is ineffective, just as a woman never wants a 
eunuch for a husband. Intelligence does not result in the acquisition of 
wealth nor idleness in adversity. 

Only the wise man knows what causes conditions on Earth to be so 
diverse. The fool, Bhaarata, always ignores his elders, those eminent in 


their conduct, the learned, the intelligent, the wealthy and the noble. 
Calamities befall those that are wicked, ignorant, filled with envy, sinful, 
foul-tongued and prone to anger. On the contrary, absence of deceitfulness, 
generosity, the observance of decorum, and controlled speech give a man 
domination over all creatures. 

The man who is straightforward, active, grateful, intelligent and 
guileless wins friends, advisors and servants, even if his coffers are empty. 
Intelligence, tranquillity of mind, self-control, purity, refraining from harsh 
speech and the unwillingness to do anything unpleasant to friends are 
qualities that fan the flame of prosperity. 

A man must avoid the wretched fellow who does not give others their 
due, who has an evil soul and is ungrateful and shameless. The guilty man 
who provokes suspicion about an innocent one cannot sleep peacefully at 
night, like a man in a room with a snake in it. A man must propitiate, as he 
would the gods, those who, when angry, put one’s possessions and means of 
acquiring them in jeopardy. Success is doubtful for goals that depend upon 
women, careless persons, men who do not follow the dharma of their varna 
and those who are evil. 

Like a stone raft has no choice but to sink, so do men who let a woman, 
a deceitful person or a child guide them. Those who are experts at 
something look down on men who are generally competent but have no 
particular skill. A man whom swindlers, actors and women of bad character 
speak highly of might as well be dead. 

Bhaarata, you have forsaken the sons of Pandu, those Kshatriyas of 
immeasurable energy, and entrusted care of this mighty empire to 
Duryodhana. You will soon see your burgeoning prosperity falling away, as 
Bali did from Swarga.’” 


CANTO 39 
PRAJAGARA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 D hritarashtra says, ‘Man has no control over his own prosperity or 

adversity. He is like a wooden string-puppet, and God subjects 

him to destiny. Go on speaking; I am listening attentively to everything you 
say.’ 

Vidura says, “‘Bhaarata, words spoken at the inappropriate time, even by 
Brihaspati, are considered ignorant and reprehensible. There are three ways 
for a man to become popular— giving gifts, speaking sweet words and using 
spells and narcotics. However, the man who is naturally likeable is always 
SO. 

In the eyes of one who hates him, a man is always dishonest, stupid and 
foolish. A man attributes everything good to him whom he loves and 
everything bad to him that he hates. 

O king, I told you on Duryodhana’s birth that you should do away with 
this one son, for, by that, you would ensure the prosperity of the rest of the 
hundred of them; and that by keeping him, you would doom them all. One 
should never give importance to a gain that leads to loss. One must, instead, 
place great store by a loss that will eventually bring gain. It is no loss which 
results in gain; only the loss that begets greater losses is a real loss. 

Some gain eminence because of their good qualities, others because 
they are wealthy. Dhritarashtra, keep away from the wealthy man who lacks 
dharma.’ 


Dhritarashtra says, “You speak wisely and for my good, but I dare not 
abandon my son. Let us reassure ourselves with the conviction that victory 
and dharma go hand in hand.’ 

Vidura says, “Those who are humble and graced with every virtue are 
always sensitive to the least suffering of living beings; but those who spend 
their time speaking ill of others always look for opportunities to quarrel 
with them and to inflict pain. It is wrong to accept gifts from, or to give to, 
those whose very presence is inauspicious and whose companionship is 
fraught with danger. 

Those who are contentious, covetous, shameless and deceitful are 
without dharma, and one should avoid being with them. One should also 
avoid those who have other serious flaws in their character. When the 
circumstances which created the friendship end, one must end friendly 
relations with those of bad character; the good that comes from that 
connection, and the happiness, come to an end. Such men will then speak ill 
of the man who was their friend and try to make him suffer losses and be 
unhappy if the loss is small. Lacking control over themselves, they cannot 
find peace. The learned man will carefully and objectively analyse 
everything and shun the friendship of such evil-minded ones. 

The man who helps his poor and helpless relatives will have children 
and animals, and will enjoy unending prosperity. Those who want their own 
good should always help their relatives. Therefore, Rajan, work for the 
glory of your great vamsa in any way you can. You will prosper if you treat 
all your kinsmen well and protect even those who are destitute of virtue. 

Bharatarishabha, think about how much more they, who are blessed 
with goodness and humbly await your favour, deserve your protection. 
Grace the heroic sons of Pandu with your favour and give them some part 
of the kingdom for their livelihood. This will bring you fame in this world. 
You are old. You should control your sons; that alone will benefit you. 

Know that I am your well-wisher. The man who wants his own good 
must never have enmity with his kin. Happiness must always be shared and 
enjoyed with one’s family, and not without them. Relatives should always 
eat together, talk with one another and love each other; they must never fall 
out. It is kinsmen who come to your rescue, and kinsmen who ruin you. The 
righteous ones are the ones who come to your help, while the sinful ones let 
you down. 


O, you who are the giver of honours, use dharma in your dealings with 
the sons of Pandu. Surrounded by them, you will be invincible. 

If a man shrinks in the presence of a prosperous kinsman, like a deer at 
the sight of a hunter armed with arrows, then the prosperous relative will 
absorb the sins of the other. Purushottama, you will regret your present 
course, of doing nothing to prevent a war, when you hear of the deaths of 
the Pandavas or your sons. 

O, think of this: when life itself is uncertain, one should from the start 
avoid any awful deed that will plunge one into a world of fear and grief and 
give cause for irremediable regret later. It is true that anyone, other than 
Bhargava who authored the Dharmashastra, is likely, at one time or other, to 
sin. Intelligent men understand the justness of the consequences of their 
crimes. 

As an elder of the Kuruvamsa, it is your duty to undo all the wrongs that 
Duryodhana inflicted on the Pandavas. By reinstating them to their rightful 
position you will be cleansed of all your sins in this world and be 
worshipped even by enlightened souls. The man who acts after carefully 
reflecting on what wise men say about the inexorable fruit of karma never 
loses renown. 

Wisdom imparted by knowledgeable men is imperfect if misunderstood, 
or if understood but not put into practice. The learned man who never does 
anything that will result in sin and sorrow always grows in prosperity. The 
heedless, evil man, who stubbornly pursues the sinful course he has 
embarked on, falls into a deep mire. 

The wise man must always be aware of these six ways by which his 
plans become known, and if he wants success and a lasting dynasty, he will 
be on his guard against them. They are intoxication, sleep, heedlessness of 
spies, one’s own demeanour which reflects one’s thoughts and confidence 
placed in evil-hearted advisors and inept representatives. The man who 
knows of these six doors through which secrets can slip out, who keeps 
them shut while conducting his life in dharma, artha and kama, succeeds in 
outwitting his enemies. 

Even Brihaspati cannot win dharma or artha if he has no knowledge of 
the Shastras and if he does not serve the elderly. As anything cast into the 
sea is lost are words spoken into the ears of one who does not listen. The 
Shastras are lost on one who does not have his emotions under control. An 
offering of ghee is wasted if poured over the ashes of an extinguished fire. 


The man who is blessed with intelligence forges friendships with the 
wise, having first used his intelligence to examine, his understanding to 
investigate and his ears to hear what others who have known and seen the 
man say about him, and then by relying on his own discernment. Humility 
prevents humiliation; prowess ends adversity; forgiveness conquers anger; 
and dharma neutralises evil omens. 

Rajan, a man’s lineage is judged by the things he enjoys, his place of 
birth, his home, his demeanour, his food and dress. Even a man who has 
attained spiritual freedom is tempted to indulge in pleasure, let alone the 
man who is still a slave to his desires. A king should treasure a minister 
who reveres the wise; who is blessed with knowledge and virtue; who has a 
pleasant appearance, good friends, sweet speech and a good heart. 

Whether he is of low or high birth, the man who does not break the 
rules of polite conversation, who is conscious of dharma and who is humble 
and modest is superior to a hundred men of noble lineage. The friendship of 
men, whose hearts, private lives, pleasures and acquisitions are in complete 
accord with one’s own, never cools. 

The intelligent man should avoid an ignorant and evil man even like a 
deep pit covered by grass, for friendship with such a man is short-lived and 
dangerous. The wise man should never make a friend of one who is proud, 
ignorant, fierce or reckless and who has strayed from the path of dharma. 
One should want for a friend the man who is grateful, virtuous, truthful, 
large-hearted and devoted, and one who has his senses under control, who 
preserves his dignity and never forsakes a friend. 

While the detachment of the senses from their objects is like death, 
excessive indulgence of the senses would ruin even the gods. Learned men 
say that humility, love of all creatures, forgiveness and respect for friends 
lengthen one’s life. The wise say that the man who, with determination, 
uses means of dharma to accomplish goals that have been thwarted 
possesses real manhood. The man who knows of all the remedies that may 
be applied in the future, who is firmly resolved in the present time and who 
can predict at the start the result of his actions attains all his goals. 

That which a man follows in thought, word and action wins him for 
itself; therefore, a man should always seek what is truly good for him. After 
achieving this, many other factors make a man prosper: effort, timely action 
in the right place, the means to do so, knowledge of the Shastras, diligent 
work, honesty and frequent contact with the good. 


Perseverance is the key to prosperity, achievement and all that is 
beneficial. The man who pursues his goal with perseverance, without giving 
up in impatience, is great; and he will enjoy everlasting happiness. Then, O 
king, there is the quality of mercy; nothing promotes happiness, nothing is 
more appropriate for a powerful man than forgiveness, anywhere and 
always. The weak man must be forgiving under all circumstances; the 
mighty should show forgiveness, keeping dharma in mind; but forgiveness 
comes naturally to the man who is detached from the success or failure of 
his endeavours. 

One must pursue, to the fullest extent, pleasure that does not go against 
dharma and artha. However, one should not be a fool and indulge one’s 
senses indiscriminately. Prosperity never attaches itself to a man who 
tortures himself with grief; nor to one who is addicted to evil, who is an 
atheist or idle; nor to one whose senses are uncontrolled; nor to one who 
makes no effort. The humble man’s modesty is mistaken for weakness, and 
the deluded persecute him. 

Prosperity fearfully avoids the man who is too honest, who gives 
without limit, who is too brave or who is vain about his wisdom. She stays 
neither with the man who is highly accomplished nor with one who is not in 
the least so. She does not prefer a conjunction of all the virtues, nor is she 
pleased with their complete absence. At random, like a mad cow that cannot 
be steered, prosperity blindly finds her home. 

The result of studying the Vedas is the performance of the homa; the 
fruits of knowing the Shastras are good manners and good conduct; the 
fruits of women are the pleasures of intercourse and children; and the 
consequence of wealth is the pleasure of doing charity. 

He that performs rituals, with ill-gotten wealth, for his good in the next 
world does not enjoy the usual fruits of such rites because of the means by 
which the wealth used for this purpose was acquired. The man who has 
strength of mind knows no fear, not in the midst of the desert, in forests or 
other inaccessible fastnesses; not amidst dangers, crises or in the face of 
deadly weapons raised against him. Prosperity is born out of effort, self- 
control, skill, meticulousness, steadiness, a good memory and mature 
deliberation before any action. 

Tapasya is the strength of tapasvins; the Vedas are the strength of 
scholars; envy is the strength of evil men; and in forgiveness lies the 
strength of the virtuous. Eight things could never negate a vow: water, 


roots, fruit, milk, ghee, obliging a Brahmana’s request, obeying a guru’s 
command and good medicine. 

One should never do to others anything that is against one’s own self- 
interest. This is virtue. There are other kinds of virtue, but these issue from 
caprice. Anger must be conquered by forgiveness, evil by dharma, the miser 
by generosity, and falsehood by truth. 

One must not trust a woman, a swindler, an idler, a coward, a vicious 
man, one who boasts of his own power, a thief, an ingrate and an atheist. 
The man who is respectful of his elders and serves the elderly will always 
see the growth of his achievements, longevity, fame and power. 

Do not set your heart on things that can be acquired only through 
painful exertion, at the cost of dharma or by bowing down to an enemy. A 
man without knowledge is pitiable, as is intercourse that does not bear fruit, 
and also the people of a kingdom who have no food and a kingdom without 
a king. These cause pain and debility in the living. Rain erodes hills and 
mountains; the absence of enjoyment gives women anguish; and sharp 
words wound the heart like arrows. 

The worst thing for the Vedas is not to study them, and for Brahmanas it 
is not to observe vratas; the worst beings on Earth are the Bahlikas; the 
worst characteristic in a man is falsehood and in the chaste woman, 
curiosity; and the worst condition for a woman is to be away from her 
home. The worst part of gold is silver; of silver, tin; of tin, lead; and of lead, 
grit. One cannot conquer sleep by lying down, women by desire, fire by fuel 
and wine by drinking. The crown of success rests on the man who has won 
over his friends by gifts, his foes by battle and his wife with food and drink. 

Those who have a hundred possessions are just as alive as those who 
have a thousand. O Dhritarashtra, renounce your greed for excessive 
possessions. There is no one who cannot live within the considerable means 
you own. All the paddy, wheat, gold, animals and women on Earth cannot 
satiate even one man. A wise man reflects on this and does not grieve for 
want of owning everything. Rajan, I say to you again, treat your children 
equally — your sons and Pandu’s.’” 


CANTO 40 
PRAJAGARA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “VV idura says, ‘The good man will win fame by abandoning pride 

and pursuing his goals. He must take care not to overstep the 

limits of his power because honourable men can make the man who pleases 
them happy. 

The man who voluntarily gives up something, even if it is magnificent, 
because it is charged with adharma lives happily and shakes off his 
enemies, like a snake shedding its skin. A victory won by a lie, by treachery 
towards the king and by insincerity towards one’s elders is equal to the sin 
of killing a Brahmana. 

Envy, death and boastfulness destroy prosperity. Carelessness in serving 
one’s elders, undue haste and vanity are the three enemies of knowledge. 
Idleness, inattention, mental turmoil, restlessness, passing time idly with 
friends, hauteur, pride and jealousy are particular shortcomings of students. 
How can they that seek pleasure gain knowledge? Students cannot pursue 
learning and, at the same time, indulge themselves. Devotees of pleasure 
must give up knowledge, and those who seek knowledge must first abjure 
pleasure. 

Fire can never have enough fuel; the mighty ocean can never receive 
enough water from the rivers that feed it; Death cannot be satiated even by 
devouring all living creatures; and a beautiful woman can never have too 
many men around her. 


Hope kills patience; Yama kills growth; anger kills prosperity; 
miserliness kills fame; neglect kills cattle; and the anger of just one 
Brahmana destroys an entire kingdom. Ensure the presence of goats, brass, 
silver, honey, antidotes to poison, birds, Brahmanas versed in the Vedas, 
aged kinsmen and impoverished noblemen in your house. 

Bhaarata, Manu has said that for the worship of the gods one must 
always have these in one’s house: goats, bulls, sandalwood, flutes, mirrors, 
honey, ghee, iron, copper, conch-shells, salagramas and gorochana, 
Brahmanas and guests. All these are auspicious. 

I will tell you of another sacred lesson, more exalted than these, one 
which will bear great fruit: virtue should never be forsaken from desire, fear 
or temptation, and not for life itself. Dharma is everlasting; pleasure and 
pain are transitory; indeed life itself is everlasting but transitory in each 
phase. Abandon the transitory and devote yourself to the permanent; and 
contentment, that best of all blessings, will be yours. 

See how illustrious and mighty kings, having ruled lands abounding in 
wealth and corn, have fallen to Yama, leaving behind their kingdoms and 
vast fonts of enjoyment. When the child who is nurtured with loving care 
dies, weeping and wild-haired men carry his body in grief to the smasana 
and throw it onto the pyre, where it burns as if it were just another log of 
wood. Others enjoy a dead man’s wealth, while birds and fire feast on his 
body. Only two things accompany him into the next world: his punya and 
his paapa. After discarding his body his kinsmen go home, even as birds 
abandon a tree that has no flowers or fruit. 

The one cast into the funeral pyre takes with him only his own deeds. 
Therefore, men should carefully and purposefully earn punya for 
themselves. In the worlds above and below ours are regions of terrible 
darkness, O king, where men’s senses suffer great torture. Do not allow 
yourself to go to there. 

If you listen attentively to me and act accordingly, great fame will be 
yours in this mortal world, and you will never have fear now or hereafter. 
The soul is like a river; deeds of punya are its sacred tirthas; truth, its water; 
self-control, its banks; and kindness, its waves. The righteous man purifies 
himself by bathing in it, for the soul is scared, and the absence of desire is 
the highest merit. Life is a river whose waters are the five senses, and 
whose crocodiles and sharks are desire and anger. Make self-control the raft 
by which you cross its eddies, which are your repeated births. 


The man who worships and pleases friends, who are wise, virtuous, 
knowledgeable and mature in years, is never misguided by the advice they 
give him. A man must restrain lust and hunger with patience, his hands and 
feet with his eyes, his eyes and ears with his mind and his mind and speech 
with his conduct. 

The Brahmana who unfailingly performs his ritual ablutions, who 
always wears his sacred thread, who never neglects his Vedic studies, who 
avoids unclean food, who always tells the truth and who honours his guru 
by his actions never falls from Brahmaloka. The Kshatriya who studies the 
Vedas, who makes offerings to Agni, who performs yagnas, who protects 
his subjects, who has purified his soul by arming himself with weapons in 
order to safeguard Brahmanas and his cattle and who dies on the field of 
battle attains Swarga. The Vaisya who distributes his wealth among 
Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and his own dependants at the appropriate time, and 
who breathes the sanctified smoke of the three kinds of fires gains joy in the 
other world. The Sudra who worships Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and Vaisyas 
as is their due; who has washed away his sins by gratifying them; and who 
peacefully casts off his mortal body enjoys celestial bliss. 

This is the dharma of the four varnas. Now listen to the reason I have 
told you all this. Yudhishtira has been unable to fulfil his Kshatriya dharma. 
You must place him in a position that he may discharge his kingly duties, 
Rajan.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, “What you teach me is always right, and I, too, am 
inclined to do as you say. Although, in keeping with your advice, my heart 
moves towards the Pandavas, it veers in a different direction as soon as I 
see Duryodhana. No one can avert fate, which will always take its course; 
and I think individual effort is futile.’” 


CANTO 41 
SANAT SUJATA PARVA 


6 “T) hritarashtra says, ‘O Vidura, if there is anything you have not 
told me, tell me now, for I am eager to listen. Your words delight 
my heart.’ 

Vidura says, ‘Dhritarashtra, the ancient and immortal Rishi Sanat 
Sujata, who was a celibate all his life, said that there is no death. That most 
brilliant of all men will clear every doubt you have.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Do you not know what the deathless Rishi would 
say to me? You can advise me as well as he would; you have as much 
wisdom.’ 

Vidura says, ‘I am a Sudra by birth and cannot say more than I have 
already said. The wisdom and knowledge of that Brahmarishi is infinite. A 
man who is born a Brahmana does not incur the disapproval of the gods, 
even when he expounds the most profound mysteries. This is why I will 
speak no more to you on this matter.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Tell me, Vidura, how I, in my mortal body, can 
meet this immortal and ancient one.’ 

Vidura meditates on that Rishi of stern vratas and, knowing that he was 
thought of, the sage appears. Vidura receives him reverently with the 
ordained rites and when, after a brief rest, Sanat Sujata is seated at his ease, 
Vidura says to him, ‘O illustrious one, Dhritarashtra has doubts which I am 
not able to clear. I beg you to do what I cannot. He might then overcome his 


sorrow, which stems from being confused about gain and loss, what is 
agreeable and disagreeable, old age and death, fear and jealousy, hunger and 
thirst, pride and prosperity, dislike, sleep, lust, wrath, decrease and 
increase.”” 


CANTO 42 
SANAT SUJATA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 V aisampayana said, “Dhritarashtra applauds what Vidura says and, 
eager to obtain the highest knowledge, puts his questions to 
Sanat Sujata without speaking. 

In his mind the king asks the Rishi, ‘O Sanat Sujata, I hear that you 
believe there is no death. On the other hand, it is said that Devas and Asuras 
practise austere tapasya in order to avoid death. Which of these two is 
true?’ 

Sanat Sujata says, ‘Some say that death can be averted by specific 
karma; others are of the opinion that there is no death. You have asked me 
which of these is true. Listen to me, O king, while I tell you about this, so 
that your doubts are removed. 

Kshatriya, both of these are true. The learned are of opinion that death 
results from ignorance. I say that ignorance is death. Thus, knowledge is 
immortality. 

It is from ignorance that the Asuras became subject to defeat and death, 
and it is from the absence of ignorance that the Devas attained Brahman. 
Death does not devour, as a tiger does; its form cannot be known. 

Some imagine Yama to be Death, deluded as they are by their weak 
minds. Immortality lies in the search for self-knowledge, the eternal 
Brahman. That imaginary Deva, Yama, rules over the realm of the Pitrs; he 
is the source of joy to the virtuous and a scourge to sinners. It is at his 


command that death walks among men, in the form of wrath, ignorance and 
covetousness. 

Swayed by pride, men walk the ways of dharma, and none amongst 
such men attains Atmagyana. With darkened minds and led by their 
passions, when they cast off their mortal bodies they fall into Naraka, over 
and over, and their unruly senses follow them always. That is why 
ignorance goes by the name of death. So, death also attaches to men who 
want the fruit of their actions. When the time for enjoying these fruit comes, 
they cannot avoid death. They leave their mortal bodies and go to 
Swargaloka. Men who do not desire to see the fruit of their deeds also go to 
Swarga when they leave their bodies; but for them there is no death. 

Creatures with physical bodies are caught in a cycle of birth and re-birth 
in varying states because of their inability to attain Brahman and due to 
their attachment to worldly enjoyment. Man has a natural inclination 
towards pursuits that seek illusory goals, and this is the single cause of his 
senses being led astray. The soul that is led towards illusions remembers 
only that with which it is constantly occupied and, so, worships only the 
mundane pleasures that surround it. The desire for pleasure is the first cause 
of death for man; lust and anger come next. It is these three—craving for 
pleasure, lust and anger—that lead foolish men to death. 

Those who have conquered their souls by self-restraint escape death. 
The man who has restrained his soul without falling prey to his ambitious 
desires subdues them; self-knowledge reveals their worthlessness to him. 
Ignorance, in the form of Yama, cannot overcome the learned man who 
controls his passions. 

The man who follows his desires is destroyed along with his desires. 
However, the man who can renounce desire can keep grief away, whatever 
form it may take. Desire is ignorance; it is darkness and hell for all 
creatures, for, swayed by it they lose control of their senses. Just as drunken 
men walking along a street reel towards ruts and holes, so too, men 
intoxicated by desire and lured by illusory joys stagger headlong towards 
their downfall. 

What can death do to a man whose soul has not been led by desire? For 
him death holds no terrors; it is like a straw tiger. Kshatriya, if you want to 
destroy desire, which is ignorance, you must not dwell on or pursue even 
the smallest wish. 


Your soul, which is in your body, enmeshed as it is in wrath and 
covetousness, is filled with ignorance, which is death. Realising that death 
comes in this way, the man who relies on knowledge need have no fear of 
it. Indeed, as surely as death destroys the body, knowledge destroys death.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, “The Vedas say that the sacred and eternal realms 
that Dvijas can attain through prayer and sacrifice offer emancipation. Why 
then should a learned man not perform such karma?’ 

Sanat Sujata says, ‘It is true that the man who has no knowledge can 
take the path you mention, and what the Vedas say about bliss and moksha 
being there is also true. The man who has given up all material wants 
attains Brahman at once; but even the man who confuses the physical body 
with the Atman attains Brahman, if he is able to renounce desire. If, 
however, one seeks mukti without destroying desire, one has to go step by 
step along the prescribed path, leaving every step he takes irrevocably 
behind oneself and being careful not to have to retrace one’s way.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Who is it that stimulates the Unborn and Ancient 
One into action? If He is this universe because he is present in everything, 
what form do action and happiness take for him who is without desire? 
Tejasvin Rishi, speak to me of this.’ 

Sanat Sujata says, ‘You should not think of two essentially different 
things as being one. Creatures come into being by the union of the Purusha 
with Prakriti, both of which have no beginning, like time. This in no way 
lessens the supremacy and importance of the unborn and all-pervading 
Brahman. Men, too, have their origin in the same Supreme Being. All that 
appears to you is nothing but that everlasting Paramatman. Indeed, the 
universe is created by the transformations that the Supreme Soul goes 
through. 

The Vedas say that the Paramatman has the power to transform Himself, 
and by that, causes transformations in this world.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Some practise dharma; some do not, but renounce 
all action and take sannyasa. Does virtue destroy vice, or is it destroyed by 
vice?’ 

Sanat Sujata says, “The fruits of virtue and of perfect stillness, or 
inaction, can both be used to attain moksha. The wise man succeeds by 
gyana, knowledge; the worldly man acquires punya through karma, action, 
but in the process he also acquires paapa, sin. 


After earning the transitory fruits of both virtue and vice and existing 
for a limited time in Swarga or Naraka the man of karma is involuntarily 
drawn to a life of action because of his previous karma. The wiser amongst 
such men exorcises his sins by his acts of dharma; dharma is powerful and 
is the path to moksha.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, “Tell me about those eternal realms, in the order of 
their importance, that Dvijas attain as a result of following their svadharma. 
Tell me about other, similar realms. Learned one, I do not wish to hear of 
man’s nature, sinful and condemnable as it is.’ 

Sanat Sujata says, “The Dvijas who have good reason to be proud of 
their skills at Yoga, as strong men are of their physique, shine in 
Brahmaloka when they leave this world. Those Dvijas who can take pride 
in their knowledge and the pure performance of yagnas and Vedic rites 
attain Devaloka when they are freed from their mortal lives. There are 
Vedic scholars who believe that the performance of yagnas will lead to 
moksha. They, too, seek Atmagyana but place undue emphasis on rituals. 
They are not worthy of the highest respect. 

The Yogi should seek his sustenance in a place where sattvik food and 
drink is abundant, like grass during the rainy season, rather than being a 
burden on a householder of scanty means. By no means, however, should 
he suffer from hunger or thirst. 

In a situation where revealing one’s superiority is fraught with 
uncertainties, the man who does not do so is more praiseworthy than the 
one who does. Wise men approve of the food offered by a man who is not 
offended by one who makes his superiority known and who never eats 
without first having offered a proper share to Brahmanas and Sadasyas. Just 
as a dog sickens because it eats its own vomit, so, too, do Yogins who get 
their sustenance by making their superiority obvious. 

Wise men recognise as a Brahmana the man who practices his religion 
discreetly, so that even his family, in whose midst he lives, is unaware of it. 
Only such a Brahmana is worthy of realising Brahman, who is formless, 
unchangeable, singular and without duality. By similar conduct a Kshatriya, 
too, can realise Brahman as being within himself. He who takes his Soul to 
be his doing, feeling self sins by robbing the Atman of its true attributes. 

A Brahmana should never try too hard or accept gifts; he should earn 
the respect of men of dharma; he should be quiet and modest about his 
Vedic knowledge. Only then will he gain Atmagyana and attain the 


Brahman. He who is poor in material wealth but rich in punya and 
sacrifices, becomes unconquerable and fearless; and he is Brahman 
embodied. 

The man who performs yagnas and succeeds in invoking the Devas and 
having them grant his wishes is a lesser man than one who knows that 
Brahman is the real performer of his yagnas; the former realises Brahman 
by effort, whereas the latter attains Him with ease. The man whom the 
Devas respect, though he does nothing for it, is truly honoured; the respect 
bestowed by men is not true honour. The lack of the honour of men is no 
cause for grief. 

People generally act unthinkingly according to their natures, as 
involuntarily as they blink their eyes. It is only the learned who respect 
other men, and the man who receives respect should be aware of this. Men 
who are foolish, inclined towards sin and deceitful, never respect those who 
are worthy; in fact they go out of their way to be disrespectful. 

The esteem of the world and the ascetic vow of silence, mowna vrata, 
can never go together. This world is enjoyed by men who want esteem, 
while the other world is for those who keep the vow of silence. In this 
world, Kshatriya, happiness rests in worldly prosperity, which is actually an 
obstacle to moksha, eternal bliss. Heavenly prosperity cannot be had by one 
who is not truly wise. 

Wise men say that there are several closely guarded gates that are 
portals to moksha. They are truth, integrity, humility, self-control, purity of 
mind and conduct, and Vedic knowledge. These six portals destroy vanity 
and ignorance as one passes through them.’” 


CANTO 43 
SANAT SUJATA PARVA CONTINUED 


6 ‘T) hritarashtra says, ‘What is the purpose of the mowna vrata? 

Which of its two kinds do you approve of—not speaking or 
dhyana? Learned one, tell me about true mowna. Can a learned man attain a 
state of stillness and freedom by practising it? Muni, how should it be 
practised?’ 

Sanat Sujata says, “Veda gyana, even if acquired with concentration and 
discipline, cannot reach the Paramatman; therefore Brahman itself is known 
as mowna. It is from mowna that the Vedic sound AUM and other ordinary 
sounds have been born; it is the Supreme Word, O king.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Is the man who knows the Rig, Yajur and Sama 
Vedas tainted by any sins he may commit?’ 

Sanat Sujata says, “A man who has not controlled his senses cannot 
escape from his sins by virtue of his knowledge of the Rig, Yajur or Sama 
Vedas. The Vedas never rescue a false man who lives by deceit; on the other 
hand, they forsake him at his end, like fledglings leaving their nests.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, “‘O you who have restrained your senses, if, as you 
say, the Vedas cannot save a man from the consequence of his sins, then 
why do Brahmanas labour under the delusion that the Vedas destroy sin?’ 

Sanat Sujata says, ‘Although this universe has been born from the 
Brahman uniting with the gunas—attributes such as name and form, the 
Vedas stress that it is distinct from them. Mowna and yagnas are prescribed 


for the attainment of Brahman, and they are the means by which a learned 
man acquires dharma. Sin is destroyed by virtue and the soul is enlightened 
by knowledge. 

It is with the help of knowledge that a learned man realises Brahman. 
The man of little wisdom covets the four material goals and takes the fruits 
of these with him into the next world. There he dwells and enjoys these 
fruits for a limited time and, because they are only short-lived, he comes 
back into this world of karma. The worldly fruits of mowna are enjoyed by 
those who have not restrained their souls; but those who have, enjoy fruits 
of the other worlds as well.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Muni, how can the same ascetic austerities be 
sometimes successful and sometimes not? Tell us how this is so.’ 

Sanat Sujata says, ‘Mowna that is not corrupted by desire or other 
failings is successful and results in moksha; the aspirant succeeds. The 
answers to all your questions touch the very roots of tapasya. It is with 
gyana and mowna that learned men realise Brahman and live forever.’ 

Dhritarashtra said, ‘I now know the eternal mystery, with the 
understanding you have given me about the mowna that is untainted by 
defects. Tell me now, Sanat Sujata, about mowna that is marred by faults.’ 

Sanat Sujata says, “Twelve human vices mar the effectiveness of 
mowna: anger, lust, avarice, ignorance of right and wrong, discontentment, 
cruelty, jealousy, vanity, grief, love of pleasure, envy, and speaking ill of 
others. Manavarishabha, a man should take care to avoid these twelve, for 
any one of them by itself can destroy him. Indeed, every one of these vices 
waits for its opportunity, like a hunter in ambush for a deer. 

There are six forms of evil that sinful men practise, which make them 
arrogantly fearless of dangers in this world and the next: boasting about 
one’s own superiority, enjoying the wives of other men, humiliating others, 
anger, fickleness and refusing to maintain those who deserve it. 

These seven kinds of men—the man who makes the gratification of lust 
his main aim in life, one who is haughty, one who regrets the gifts he gives, 
the man who is miserly, one who oppresses his people with excessive taxes, 
one who delights in the humiliation of others and the man who hates his 
own wives—are also evil. 

Twelve are the true attributes of a Brahmana’s way of life: 
righteousness, non-violence, truthfulness of speech, _ self-restraint, 
asceticism, joy in the happiness of others, modesty, forbearance, love of 


others, sacrifices, gifts, perseverance and knowledge of the Shastras. The 
man who acquires these twelve earns the power to control the Earth. A man 
who has three, or two, or even one of these can consider that he has reached 
his goal. Moksha lies in self-restraint, renunciation and Atmagyana. Wise 
Brahmanas say that these attributes are founded in truth. 

There are eighteen defects that, if avoided, pave the way for a man to 
achieve self-control: non-performance of the prescribed rituals from 
laziness, falsehood, malice, lust, wealth, love of sensual pleasure, anger, 
grief, thirst, avarice, deceit, joy in the misery of others, envy, injuring 
others, regret, aversion to piety, forgetfulness of duty, speaking ill of others 
and vanity. These eighteen faults constitute mada, pride. 

Renunciation is of six kinds, and the opposite of these six are also 
definitions of mada, making the total number twenty-four. All six kinds of 
renunciation are good; only the third is difficult to practise, but by it a man 
overcomes all sorrow. In fact, the man who is accomplished in this form of 
renunciation transcends the pairs of opposites, like joy and sorrow, pleasure 
and pain. 

O king, the first kind of renunciation is not feeling joy on gaining 
prosperity; the second is giving up non-performance of yagnas and prayers; 
the third is the abandonment of desire, or withdrawing from the world. As a 
result of this third kind, one renounces the objects of enjoyment without 
having enjoyed them, not after knowing them; nor does one relinquish an 
acquisition after acquiring it and having no appetite for it. 

The fourth kind of renunciation is not to allow oneself to grieve at the 
failure of one’s efforts even those made using dharma and artha, wealth. It 
is to feel no pain when something unpleasant happens. The fifth kind of 
renunciation is to not ask for anything from anyone, even sons, wives and 
other dear ones. The sixth kind is to give to a deserving person who asks, 
which always brings punya. These five enable Atmagyana or Self- 
knowledge. 

The last kind of renunciation has eight characteristics: truth, meditation, 
the ability to distinguish subject from object, the capacity to draw 
inferences, withdrawal from the world, never taking what belongs to 
another, adherence to brahmacharya—the vow of celibacy, and not 
accepting charity. 

In the same way as renunciation has characteristics, so, too, are defects 
characteristic of mada, which is the opposite of dama—self-restraint— that 


the Shastras elucidate. These faults should be avoided. I have told you 
about renunciation and self-knowledge. Just as self-knowledge has eight 
virtues, the want of it has eight faults. Those should also be avoided. 

Bhaarata, the man who is liberated from his five senses, the intellect, the 
past and the future becomes happy. Let your soul be devoted to truth; all the 
worlds are established in truth. Truth is also the first attribute of self- 
control, renunciation and self-knowledge. Avoid these faults and practise 
mowna. Brahman has ordained that truth alone should be the vow of the 
righteous. Mowna that is dissociated from these faults and endowed with 
the virtues becomes the source of great prosperity. 

I have now told you in brief about the sin-destroying and sacred subject 
which liberates a man from the cycle of birth, old age and death.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, “The fifth Veda, the Akhyana, says that the Supreme 
Soul is the universe. Others recognise four Vedas, while some recognise 
three, some two and some only one. Then there are those who acknowledge 
Brahman alone as the one thing that exists, everything else having its 
existence in Him. Tell me, which of these has true knowledge of Brahman?’ 

Sanat Sujata says, “There is but one Brahman, who is Truth. It is from 
ignorance of that One that men have conceived several Vedas. But who is 
there, O king, who has attained Brahman, that Absolute Truth? 

Without knowing that One object of knowledge that they ought to, men 
think they have gained wisdom. From the hope of gaining happiness they 
engage in study and practice daana and perform yagnas. The purposes of 
such men, who have strayed from Truth, match their condition; they rely on 
the Vedic texts as the Truth and so emptily perform their yagna and daana. 

Some perform and attain the object of sacrifices by dhyana, meditation; 
some by chanting prayers, japa; some by the completion of the yatishtoma 
and other costly rites. However, the man who seeks Brahman through Truth 
gets what he wants, in his very home. 

When a man’s objectives are aborted by lack of Atmagyana he must 
adopt vows such as mowna vrata and diksha vrata. In fact, the word diksha 
is its own root, and it means observance of vratas. For those who have 
attained Atmagyana, Truth is the highest object of their pursuit. 

The fruits of gyana are visible; the fruits of mowna are only enjoyed in 
the hereafter. A Brahmana who, without gyana and mowna, has read much 
should only be regarded as a great reader; never assume that a man can be a 
Brahmagyani—one who knows Brahman— merely by reading the Shastras. 


Know, on the other hand, that the true Brahmana is one who never deviates 
from the Truth. 

O Kshatriya, the verses that were recited in olden times by Atharvan to 
a conclave of Maharishis are also called the Chhandas. Those who have 
read the Vedas but do not have knowledge of the One Being, that should 
follow, must not be considered as having acquired true Vedic knowledge. 
The Chhandas are the independent means of attaining Brahman without the 
need for doing anything else. Those who are only acquainted with the 
modes of sacrifice prescribed in the Vedas cannot be regarded as knowing 
the Vedas. On the other hand, those who have served men with true Vedic 
knowledge have as good as attained knowledge of the One Being that Veda 
gyana leads to. 

There is no one quality of the intellect that can help a man acquire the 
true meaning of the Vedas, nor can all the qualities of the intellect; yet there 
may be some few men who have grasped it. Whatever might happen, the 
man who has only read them does not gain knowledge of the One Being 
that can be known through knowing the Vedas; it is the man who is firmly 
established in the Truth who knows Him. 

There are no qualities, which delude men to perceive the physical body 
as the Self, that can lead to Atmagyana. A man’s intellect alone cannot help 
him distinguish the Self from the not-Self. He who knows the Self also 
knows what is not-Self; but he who knows only what is not-Self does not 
know Truth. 

He who knows the proofs knows that which he seeks to prove, but 
neither Vedic knowledge nor the Vedas themselves can perceive its true 
nature. But Brahmanas who have true knowledge of the Vedas succeed in 
knowing the One Being that a study of the Vedas can lead to. 

Just as the twig of a particular tree is sometimes used for indicating the 
day of the new moon, the Vedas are used for indicating the highest 
attributes of the Paramatman. In my opinion, a Brahmana, or one who 
knows Brahman, is one who explains men’s doubts, having first cleared his 
own; he is one who has true knowledge of his Self, Atmagyana. 

You cannot find the Atman by searching in the East, South, West, North 
or in subsidiary cardinal directions, or even laterally. Very rarely can the 
man who thinks his body is the Self find Atman. Beyond the conception of 
even the Vedas, the man of Yoga dhyana can behold the Supreme Being. 


Completely restrain all your senses and your mind and seek Brahman who 
resides in your own soul. 

A man is no Muni who practises dhyana in silence, nor is he one who 
retires from the world and lives in the forest; a Muni is the man who knows 
his true nature. 

A man is said to be a Vaiyakarana, or grammarian, who can trace every 
word to its root and explain it— Vyakarana. Every word has its root in 
Brahman. The man who sees all the Lokas before his eyes knows 
everything; the man who is established in Truth and knows Brahman is a 
real Brahmana; and a Brahmana possesses universal knowledge. 

A Kshatriya who practises Brahmana dharma also beholds Brahman. He 
can also attain to that supreme state by going step by step in accordance to 
the teachings of the Vedas. I know all this for certain; and that is why I tell 
it to you.’” 


CANTO 44 
SANAT SUJATA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ ‘T) hritarashtra says, ‘O Sanat Sujata, what you say of Brahman and 

the origin of the universe is illuminating indeed and lightens my 

heart. Tell me more of such things that are not to do with worldly pursuits 
and, so, not common among men.’ 

Sanat Sujata says, ‘Brahman, about which you ask me so joyfully, 
cannot be attained in a hurry. After you have restrained your senses, when 
conscious thought is merged in pure intellect, the state that succeeds is one 
of utter absence of worldly thought. That condition is true knowledge and 
leads to the realisation of Brahman. It can be attained only by practising 
brahmacharya.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, “You say that the mind is where knowledge of 
Brahman naturally resides, being discovered only through brahmacharya; 
that, dwelling in the mind, it needs no effort to manifest itself; and that this 
happens whilst one seeks it through brahmacharya. How then is immortality 
associated with the attainment of Brahman?’ 

Sanat Sujata says, “Though dwelling in and inherent to the mind, the 
knowledge of Brahman is still unmanifest. Pure intellect and brahmacharya 
are needed to make it emerge into consciousness. Then, having attained that 
knowledge, Yogis forsake this world naturally. True gyana is found among 
great gurus. I will tell you now about this knowledge.’ 


Dhritarashtra says, ‘What should be the nature of brahmacharya by 
which the knowledge of Brahman might be attained without too much 
difficulty? Dvijottama, tell me this.’ 

Sanat Sujata says, “Those who live in the asramas of their gurus, who 
win their goodwill and friendship and who practise austere celibacy become 
earthly embodiments of Brahman. They cast off their bodies and become 
one with the Paramatman. Those who seek to attain the state of Brahman 
subdue all desires and, living in dharma, they succeed in dissociating their 
souls from their bodies, like a blade of grass standing upright on a flat 
heath. 

The mother and father create the human body, but the birth that occurs 
as a result of obeying the guru is sacred and free from old age and death. 
The guru who discourses on Brahman, while granting immortality, wraps 
all his disciples in the mantle of Truth. The sishya should think of him as 
father and mother; and remembering the good he does, never do him injury. 

A sishya must always greet his guru with respect; with a pure mind and 
body, he must direct his attention to his studies. He must not consider any 
service too humble to perform for him and must never feel anger. This is the 
first step of brahmacharya. The disciple who learns about his own duties by 
observing the duties of other disciples also takes the first step on the path of 
brahmacharya. 

A sishya should do whatever pleases his guru in thought, word and 
deed, even at the expense of his own life and all his possessions. This is the 
second step of brahmacharya. Also a second step is for the disciple to 
behave towards his guru’s wife and son in the same way that he does to his 
guru. 

The sishya must appreciate all that his guru has done for him and, 
understanding the goals, think with joy, He has taught me and made me 
great. This is the third step of brahmacharya. The good disciple should not 
leave his guru’s home without first getting his leave and without paying 
gurudakshina, while disassociating himself from being the giver of it. This 
is the fourth step of brahmacharya. 

He achieves the first step towards knowledge of Brahman, which is the 
object of brahmacharya, in due course; the second step is through the guru’s 
teachings; the third is by his own intellect; and finally, the fourth is by 
satsanga and discussion. 


Learned men have said that Brahmacharya consists of twelve virtues; 
the Yoga practices are called its Angas, and perseverance in Yoga dhyana is 
its nutrient. The man who has achieved mastery in Yoga, with his guru’s 
help and with true understanding of the Vedas, becomes a successful Yogi. 

A man must give whatever wealth he may earn, whilst he is a disciple, 
to his guru. It is in this way that the guru makes his livelihood by his 
svadharma. The sishya should do the same for his guru’s son. Living in this 
manner as a Brahmachari, the disciple thrives and is blessed with progeny 
and renown. Men from all over the world shower him with wealth, and 
many come to his home to practice brahmacharya. It is through 
brahmacharya of this kind that the Devas obtained their divinity, and 
blessed sages of great wisdom attained Brahmaloka. This is how the 
Gandharvas and the Apsaras acquired physical beauty, and it is through 
brahmacharya that Surya rises to make the day. 

In the same way that seekers of the stone that turns base metals into 
gold derive joy when they find what they are looking for, the Devas and 
others obtain great happiness on completion of their brahmacharya, for then 
they can have whatever they wish. 

Rajan, the man who is devoted to tapasya takes up brahmacharya in its 
entirety and thus purifies himself. This man is wise for, by this, he becomes 
like an innocent child, free from dark passions; and he triumphs over death. 
Through karma, men can only obtain worldly wealth, which is perishable; 
but the man who is blessed with true gyana uses it to attain Brahman, which 
is everlasting. There is no path other than gyana and the attainment of 
Brahman that can lead to Moksha.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘You say that a wise man sees Brahman in his own 
soul. Is Brahman white, red, black, blue or purple? Tell me what is the true 
form and colour of the omnipresent and eternal Being?’ 

Sanat Sujata says, ‘Brahman may be seen as white, red, black, brown or 
fulvid. But neither on Earth nor in the sky, nor in the waters of the ocean is 
there anything like It. You will not see the like in stars, in lightning or in 
clouds. It cannot be compared with anything one may see in the air, in the 
Moon, in the Sun or in the celestial bodies. 

Neither the Rig nor the Yajur, neither the Atharvan nor the pure Saman 
has anything that is comparable. It is not to be found in Rathantara, 
Varhadratha or in great yagnas. It cannot be measured and it lies beyond the 


limited reach of the intellect. Even the universal Destroyer loses himself in 
It after the Pralaya. 

One cannot see It, for It is as subtle as a razor’s edge and also more 
immense than a great mountain. It is the basis upon which everything is 
founded; It is unchangeable; It is this visible universe; It is omnipresent, 
vast and delightful. All creatures have sprung from It and will return to It. It 
is free from duality; It is manifest as the universe; and It is all-pervading. 
Learned men say that It is changeless, except in the language that is used to 
describe It. 

Those that know this Entity in which everything is established are 
emancipated.’” 


CANTO 45 
SANAT SUJATA PARVA CONTINUED 


C6 S anat Sujata says, ‘Sorrow, anger, avarice, lust, ignorance, sloth, 

malice, self-importance, love of profit, affection, jealousy and evil 

speech are grave and destructive flaws in character. Each of these waits for 

an opportunity to capture a man, who then yields his good sense up to them, 
and helplessly sins. 

A man who is covetous, one who is fierce, one who speaks harshly, a 
man who is garrulous, one who fosters anger and a man who 1s boastful are 
evil-minded and, once they acquire wealth, treat others discourteously. A 
man whose life’s objective is sensual gratification, one who is vain, a man 
who boasts about the gift he gives, a miser, a man who is feeble-minded, 
one who admires himself and a man who hates his own wife are seven that 
one must consider sinful. 

The twelve characteristics of a Brahmana are _ righteousness, 
truthfulness, asceticism, self-restraint, contentment, humility, self-sacrifice, 
selflessness, generosity, knowledge of the Shastras, patience and 
forgiveness. The man who adheres to these has the power to rule the world. 
The man who is invested with three, two or even one of these qualities 
never claims exclusive ownership of anything. Moksha lies in self-restraint, 
renunciation and knowledge. These are the attributes of wise Brahmanas 
who regard Brahman as the highest of all goals. Be it true or false, it is not 


proper for Brahmanas to speak ill of others; those who do will surely find 
Naraka. 

I have not yet spoken to you of the eighteen defects that mada has. They 
are ill-will towards others, obstruction of dharma, defaming others, 
dishonesty, lust, anger, excessive reliance on other people, slander, casting 
blame, wasting money, disputatiousness, insolence, cruelty to living 
creatures, malice, ignorance, disrespect of those that are worthy of 
deference, not recognising right and wrong, and hurtfulness. A wise man 
should never give in to mada, for its attributes are condemnable. 

Friendship is indicated in six ways. Firstly, a true friend delights in the 
prosperity of his friends. Secondly, he is distressed by their adversity. 
Thirdly, if his friend asks him for something he values, even that which 
ought not to be asked for, he gives it unreservedly. Fourthly, a true friend 
would give away all his wealth, his beloved sons and even his own wife for 
the sake of his friend. Fifthly, a friend would rather enjoy only what he can 
earn than live in the home of his friend to whom he may have given 
everything. Sixthly, a friend would think nothing of sacrificing his own 
good for his friend. 

The affluent man who wants to acquire these qualities, and who 
becomes charitable and keeps dharma, can do so by restraining his five 
senses. Such restraint is asceticism. When it grows it can take a man to 
realms of bliss in the hereafter. Gyana, however, can lead a man to moksha 
even in this world. 

Men who, from impatience, are unable to acquire wisdom, can still gain 
such asceticism through the power of their goal of attaining moksha. As a 
consequence of his ability to grasp that Truth, which is Brahman, the source 
of all yagna, a Yogi can perform sacrifices with the power of his mind; 
others perform yagnas by sacred chanting, japa; and some by work, karma. 
Brahman resides in him who knows Brahman as being saguna, vested with 
attributes, but is established more firmly in him who knows Brahman as 
being nirguna, without any attribute. 

Listen now to something else. All seekers should know this great and 
exalted philosophy; all other systems of belief are just so many words. The 
universe is established in this faith; those who know it never die. O king, 
one cannot attain Brahman merely by virtue of karma, regardless of how 
well one accomplishes one’s work. The man who is destitute of knowledge 
can never achieve moksha through karma, even if he conducts countless 


homas and yagnas. He does not experience lasting joy at their end. A man 
must restrain all the outward senses and on his own seek Brahman. He 
should give up all karma and still his mind. By this, he should neither feel 
elation on being praised nor anger on being censured. 

O Kshatriya, by conducting himself in this way, step by step as 
prescribed in the Vedas, a man can attain Brahman in this very world. Of 
this I assure you.’” 


CANTO 46 
SANAT SUJATA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 S anat Sujata says, “The Seed from which the universe originated is 

called Mahayasas. It is pure knowledge, devoid of extrinsic 

attributes, and It blazes with lustre. It leads the senses; It is what makes 
Surya shine. Yogis see the Eternal One with their inner eye. 

The Seed, which is bliss itself, gives Brahma the ability to create and to 
grow. It is this Bija that gives heat and light to luminous bodies; It generates 
its own light and heat and is an object of terror to all heat-and light-giving 
bodies. Yogis see the Eternal One with their inner eye. 

From Brahman arise the five subtle elements, the mahabhutas, from 
which are born the five gross elements, the bhutas, which constitute the 
human body. The heart contains both the living soul, Atman, as well as the 
divine soul, Iswara, or Paramatman. Respectively, these two lose 
consciousness during sleep and at the time of Pralaya. Brahman, on the 
other hand, is ever awake. He is the Sun’s Sun and holds up Bhumi and 
Swarga. Yogis see the Eternal One with their inner eye. 

The Seed supports Atman and Paramatman, Bhumi and Swarga, the 
cardinal directions and the whole universe. The points of the compass and 
the rivers spring from the Seed; It is the point of origin of the vast seas. 
Yogis see the Eternal One with their inner eye. 

The body is a chariot set on a course of destruction; its deeds, however, 
are undying. The wheels of that chariot are the deeds of past lives; the 


horses that pull it are the senses that draw a man of true knowledge through 
the realms of the unconscious to the Immortal Being. Yogis see the Eternal 
One with their inner eye. 

The form of the Supreme One cannot be described by comparison with 
any other. No one ever sees Him with the body’s eye; the man of wisdom 
who sees Him with his mind and heart has no death. Yogis see the Eternal 
One with their inner eye. 

The river of illusion is fearful; it is guarded by the gods and it bears 
twelve fruits. As they swim along, men drink its waters and see many 
desirable things in its midst. This river has its source in the Seed. Yogis see 
the Eternal One with their inner eye. 

The Atman is destined to journey to and fro, from life to afterlife, 
enjoying only half the fruits of earthly actions in the other world. Iswara, 
however, is all pervading and the ordainer of all sacrifices. Yogis see the 
Eternal One with their inner eye. 

The Soul is originally naked. Resorting to Avidya, which is like a tree 
with golden leaves, it clothes itself in attributes and takes birth again and 
again in different castes according to its current dominant guna. Thus does 
the Paramatman take forms that house the Atman. Yogis see the Eternal 
One, in whom all souls reside, with their inner eye. 

External attributes come into contact with Brahman, giving him many 
forms. From the One has the universe sprung, and from the One have also 
sprung outward attributes that are in themselves whole. When a man 
succeeds in dispelling everything extrinsic, what remains is Brahman who 
is the intrinsic whole. Yogis see the Eternal One with their inner eye. 

It is from the Seed that the five elements have arisen, and the Seed is the 
seat of power that controls them. It is from the Seed that both the one who 
consumes and the consumed—Agni and Soma—have sprung; it is in the 
Biya that all life rests. Everything originates from It. In the Vedas the Seed 
is named Tat, and it is beyond description. Yogis see the Eternal One with 
their inner eye. 

The vital air called apana is absorbed by the air called prana; prana is 
swallowed by the mind; the mind dissolves in the intellect; and intellect is 
consumed by Brahman. Yogis see the Eternal One with their inner eye. 

The Supreme Soul, when embodied, is like a man with four legs, each 
leg a state of being— waking, dream, deep sleep and turiya. In the last, he is 
like a swan wading out from the deep waters of samsara, hiding one leg 


deep in its wing. For the man who sees this hidden state of turiya as the 
means by which the other three are guided, death and moksha are the same. 
Yogis see the Eternal One with their inner eye. 

Only as large as a man’s thumb, this eternal organism, the Seed, the 
Biya, is ever full. When It becomes part of a human body—with its prana, 
mind, intellect and ten senses—It is set in motion. That Supreme Sovereign, 
worthy of reverential hymns, capable of everything when vested 
extrinsically, the prime cause of everything, is manifest as Gyana in the 
human Atman. Only a fool does not see him. Yogis see the Eternal One 
with their inner eye. 

There are those who have gained mastery of their minds and those who 
have not. Yet the Supreme Soul is equally present in all men—in the 
emancipated and in the bound; the difference being that nectar flows in a 
thick stream into the emancipated Yogis, who see the Eternal One with their 
inner eye. 

If, on his life’s journey, a man attains knowledge of self and not-self, it 
matters little whether he performs Agnihotra or not. O king, do not let 
words like J am your servant fall from the lips of such a man. Brahman has 
another name, Pure Knowledge. Only those who have restrained their 
minds know Him. Yogis see the Eternal One with their inner eye. 

He is illustrious and complete; all living creatures are merged into Him. 
The man who knows this embodiment of Oneness achieves moksha whilst 
alive in this world. Yogis see the Eternal One with their inner eye. 

Everything, even that which flies away, stretching thousands of wings 
and with the speed of the mind, must come back to the central spirit within 
the body, in which the most distant things reside. Yogis see the Eternal One 
with their inner eye. 

The eye cannot perceive his form; only the pure of heart can behold 
him. He is pure-hearted who seeks universal good, succeeds in controlling 
his mind and does not allow his heart to be touched by grief. Such a man 
can abandon the world and all its cares and become immortal. Yogis see the 
Eternal One with their inner eye. 

Like serpents lying coiled and hidden in a pit, there are those who 
despite their learning follow their own instincts; but they keep their vices 
hidden. They deceive only those who have little sense. They deceive people 
by an outward show of dharma and lead them to hell. Know that Brahman 


may well be attained by companionship with unlikely men. Yogis see the 
Eternal One with their inner eye. 

The man who is freed knows that his impermanent body cannot give 
him grief or joy, or indeed any other attributes that attach to it. For him 
there can be no death or birth. Since he realises that Brahman, which has no 
dualities and which is constant everywhere and all the time, is where reality 
and illusion both reside, he can be emancipated. He knows that Brahman 
alone is the beginning and end, all causes and effects. Existing in the form 
of I, or Self, the divine, Eternal One is beheld by Yogis with their inner eye. 

The man who knows Brahman is equal to Brahman. He is neither 
glorified by good deeds nor defiled by evil ones. It is only in ordinary men 
that good and bad karma produce different results. The man who has seen 
Brahman is immortal, Amrita; he is in the singular state called Kaivalya, 
unaffected by virtue or vice. In this way a man receives the essence of 
sweetness that is Brahman. Yogis see the Eternal One with their inner eye. 

The heart of such a man is not distressed by slander, or by not having 
studied the Vedas, or by not having performed the Agnihotra. The 
knowledge of Brahman imparts to him the wisdom that only they who have 
restrained their minds have access to. Yogis see the Eternal One, the 
Brahman which frees the soul from grief and ignorance, with their inner 
eye. 

The man who sees himself in everything no longer grieves, for grief is 
the lot of those who are occupied with worldly pursuits. Just as one’s thirst 
may as easily be quenched in a well as in a vast reservoir, a man’s 
knowledge of Brahman will quench his thirst for knowledge as easily as 
does knowledge of the entire Veda. Dwelling in the heart, and only as big as 
a thumb, that illustrious embodiment of wholeness cannot be seen. He is 
unborn, yet moves in wakefulness, day and night. The man who knows him 
becomes learned and is filled with ineffable joy. 

Iam the mother and father. I am the son. I am the soul of all that ever 
was and of all that shall ever be. I am the venerable grandfather; I am the 
father; I am the son. You live within my soul; but you are not mine nor am I 
yours. The Soul is the cause of my birth and procreation. I am the warp and 
weft of the universe. The foundation upon which I rest is indestructible. 
Unborn, yet awake, I move day and night. To know me is to be learned and 
full of joy. 

Thus is the Brahman. 


Subtler than the subtle, capable of looking into the past and the future, 
Brahman is awake in every creature. Those who know Him know that the 
Universal Father dwells in the heart of everything in creation.” 


CANTO 47 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA 


V aisampayana said, “Dhritarashtra passes the night in conversation 
with Sanat Sujata and Vidura. 

In the morning, all the kings and princes come to the sabha, full of joy 
on hearing that the Suta has returned and looking forward to seeing him. 
Both anxious and eager, they go to the beautiful hall with Dhritarashtra at 
their head to hear Yudhishtira’s message that is charged with dharma and 
artha. The capacious sabha is spotlessly clean and adorned with a golden 
floor. It is as bright as the Moon and sprinkled with fragrant sandalwood 
water; luxurious seats made of gold, wood, marble and ivory, covered with 
exquisite fabric, fill that majestic court. 

In one body do these kings and powerful others enter the Kuru sabha, 
with Dhritarashtra leading them: Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Salya, 
Kritavarman, Jayadratha, Aswatthama, Vikarna, Somadatta, Bahlika, the 
immensely wise Vidura and Maharatha Yuyutsu. With the regal and choleric 
Duryodhana at their head, Dusasana, Chitrasena, Subala’s son Sakuni, 
Durmukha, Dussaha, Karna, Uluka and Vivimsati enter the sabha, looking 
like Indra with his entourage of Devas. The hall, filled with these heroic 
men, their arms like iron maces, is like a mountain cave filled with lions. 
Those mighty and fiery archers blaze like the Sun as they enter and sit down 
on wonderful thrones. 


Once all the kings are seated, the door keeper announces the arrival of 
the Sutaputra Sanjaya, saying, ‘Here comes the chariot that was despatched 
to the Pandavas. Borne by the fleet Sindhu steeds, our duta has returned 
swiftly.’ 

Approaching with speed, Sanjaya, adorned with golden kundalas, 
alights from the ratha and strides into sabha filled with noble kings. 

The Suta says, ‘O Kauravas, I have returned from seeing the sons of 
Pandu. The Pandavas salute all the Kurus, each according to his age. They 
pay their homage to the elderly and send greetings and blessings to their 
contemporaries and the younger men. Listen, O Kshatriyas, to what I said to 
the Pandavas, as I was instructed by Dhritarashtra when I went from here, 
and hear what they said in reply.’” 


CANTO 48 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ ‘T) hritarashtra says, ‘O Sanjaya, I ask you in the presence of my 
son and all these kings, what did the illustrious and mighty 
Dhananjaya, that first among warriors, the scourge of evil men, say?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Let Duryodhana hear the words that noble Arjuna, who 
is eager to fight, said in Krishna’s hearing and with Yudhishtira’s approval. 
Fearless in battle, aware of the might of his arms and eager to fight, the 
heroic Kiriti spoke to me in Krishna’s presence. 

He said, “O Suta, say these words to Dhritarashtra’s son, in the presence 
of all the Kurus, also in the hearing of that foul-tongued, black-souled, dull- 
witted Karna, whose days are numbered and who spoils for battle with me, 
and in the hearing of all the kings who have gathered to go to war against 
the Pandavas. Make sure that the king and his ministers mark my words 
well.” 

O king, as attentively as the Devas listen to Indra did the Pandavas and 
Srinjayas listen to Arjuna’s grave words. 

The wielder of the Gandiva, his eyes as red as lotuses and eager for war, 
said, “If Duryodhana does not give Yudhishtira of the Ajamida vamsa his 
kingdom, it is plain that the sons of Dhritarashtra must have committed 
some heinous sin whose consequences they have not yet reaped, for there 
can be no other reason why they should want to go to war against 
Bhimasena, Arjuna and the twins, against Vasudeva, Sini’s son, the 


infallible marksmen Dhrishtadyumna and Sikhandin, and _ against 
Yudhishtira, who is a second Indra and who can consume heaven and earth 
by merely wishing them ill. If Dhritarashtra’s son wants war with these 
men, then the goals of the Pandavas will be accomplished. Therefore, do 
not propose peace to the sons of Pandu, but let us have war if you like. 

Yudhishtira lay on a bed of sorrows in the forest when he lived in exile; 
O, let a more painful bed than that, on bare earth, be Duryodhana’s now, 
and let him lie down on it at his end, deprived of life. Win Duryodhana’s 
men over to Yudhishtira’s side, for my brother is blessed with modesty and 
wisdom, asceticism and self-restraint, courage and the might of dharma. 
Our king is also humble, righteous and ever truthful, and though he was 
deceived and betrayed in so many ways, he has forgiven it all and patiently 
borne great injustice. 

When this eldest son of Pandu, of the controlled soul, directs the terrible 
anger that has accumulated for years at the Kurus, Duryodhana will repent. 
In the same way that a blazing fire burns dry grass in summer, so will 
Yudhishtira’s flaming wrath consume Dhritarashtra’s army, why, with a 
mere glance of his eye. 

When Duryodhana sees the great and furious Bhimasena standing in his 
chariot with his mace in hand and vomiting the venom of his wrath, he will 
repent. When he sees the mail clad Bhima, who always fights in the front, 
on whom even his own followers can scarcely bear to look, felling hostile 
heroes and devastating the enemy’s ranks, as if he was Yama himself, then 
vain Duryodhana will remember my words. 

When he sees Bhima strike down elephants like mountain peaks, and 
sees blood flowing from their shattered heads like water from broken casks, 
Duryodhana will repent. When the fierce Bhima of fearful form falls upon 
Dhritarashtra’s sons, mace in hand, and slaughters them, like a great lion 
attacking a herd of cattle, Duryodhana will repent. When the heroic Bhima, 
undaunted even by great danger and skilled in the use of all weapons, that 
crusher of enemy hosts, mounted on his chariot, grinds into the dust 
innumerable and better chariots, as well as entire divisions of footsoldiers, 
seizing enemy elephants with his iron-hard noose and mowing down 
Dhritarashtra’s forces, like a sturdy woodsman a forest with his axe, 
Duryodhana will repent. 

When he sees Dhritarashtra’s armies consumed like a village of straw 
huts by fire, or like a field of ripe corn by lightning; when he sees his vast 


army scattered, its leaders slain and the terrified men turning to flee, and all 
the warriors, humbled to the dust, scorched by fire of Bhimasena’s 
weapons, Duryodhana will repent. 

When Nakula, Kshatriya of wonderful feats, foremost of rathikas, 
shoots endless streams of deadly arrows and mangles Duryodhana’s chariot- 
warriors, Duryodhana will repent. When Nakula, who is accustomed to 
comforts and luxuries, thinks back on that bed of anguish on which he slept 
for years in the vana and spews his wrath in a venomous jet, like an angry 
snake, Duryodhana will repent. 

When Duryodhana sees our allied kings, who are ready to lay down 
their lives for Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, urged into battle by him, furiously 
advance in their resplendent chariots against the enemy, the son of 
Dhritarashtra will certainly repent. When the Kuru prince sees the five 
heroic sons of Draupadi, tender in years but not in deeds, and all masters of 
arms, storm fearlessly at the Kaurava legions, Duryodhana will repent. 

When Sahadeva, bent on carnage, and mounted on his chariot of silent 
wheels and inexorable course, set with golden stars and drawn by superb 
horses, makes the heads of kings roll on the field with his volleys of arrows; 
when Duryodhana sees that masterly warrior, riding his ratha in the frightful 
havoc of bloody war, attack the enemy in all directions, Duryodhana will 
repent. Indeed, when the modest but mighty Sahadeva, skilled in battle, 
truthful, devoted to dharma and of boundless vigour, attacks the son of 
Gandhari in fierce encounter and routs all his followers, Duryodhana will 
repent. 

When he sees Draupadi’s sons, all great archers, all heroes and masters 
of weapons and fighting from chariots, dart at the foe like vicious, 
poisonous snakes, then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this war. 
When Parantapa Abhimanyu, as expert in arms as Krishna, overpowers the 
Kaurava legions with dark gales of arrows, Duryodhana will repent. 

When he sees Subhadra’s son, a child in years but not in prowess, as 
skilled with weapons as Indra himself, attack the enemy ranks like Yama, 
Duryodhana will repent. When young Prabhadraka of leonine vitality, 
experienced in battle, is among Dhritarashtra’s sons and their troops, 
Duryodhana will repent. 

When those veteran Maharathas, Virata and Drupada, attack 
Dhritarashtra’s sons as they stand at the head of their legions, Duryodhana 
will repent. When the master of astras, Drupada, seated in his chariot and 


eager to take the heads off your young warriors, decapitates them with 
inexorable arrows, Duryodhana will repent. When Parantapa Virata and his 
cool-headed Matsya warriors penetrate the ranks of the enemy, felling them 
all around as they advance, Duryodhana will repent. When he sees the 
eldest son of the Matsya king fighting from the van of the Pandava army, 
sitting in his chariot, calm and courageous, and clad in shining mail, 
Duryodhana will repent. 

When that greatest of all Kaurava heroes, the virtuous son of Santanu, is 
slain in battle by Sikhandin, then all our enemies will die. This I know 
beyond doubt. When Sikhandin advances on his armoured ratha towards 
Bhishma, shattering multitudes of enemy rathas on the way, Duryodhana 
will repent. When Duryodhana sees Dhrishtadyumna, who has learnt all the 
secrets of the astra shastra from Drona, standing in splendour in the van of 
the Srinjaya force, he will repent. 

When the Senapati of the Pandava host, of immeasurable prowess, who 
can withstand the charge of any army, flies at Drona, on his way razing 
Dhritarashtra’s warriors with his arrows, Duryodhana will repent. What 
enemy can withstand him, who has for his lord that lion of the Vrishni race, 
the chief of the Somakas, who is modest and intelligent, mighty and 
invested with untold urjas and blessed with every noble quality? 

Say this also to Duryodhana: Do not covet the kingdom. We have with 
us the dauntless Maharatha Satyaki, the grandson of Sini, who is an 
unsurpassed master of weapons on this Earth. Broad-chested and long- 
armed, that Parantapa, unrivalled in battle and a master of the greatest 
astras, wields a bow four cubits long. When that bane of his foes, the chief 
of the Sinis, lashes the enemy with his arrow storms, at my urging, 
overwhelming their leaders, Duryodhana will repent. 

When that shining warrior of the long arms and firm grasp is resolved to 
fight, then, like cattle that scent lions on the wind, enemy forces flee, even 
before battle begins. This Kshatriya can split mountains and consume the 
universe in revelational flames. Blessed with awesome lightness of hand, he 
shines on the field of war like the Sun in the sky. 

That lion of the Vrishnis, scion of Yadu’s line, whose tutelage has been 
meticulous, commands supernal weapons; Satyaki commands all the 
greatest astras. When he sees Satyaki’s golden chariot on the field, drawn 
by four white steeds, Duryodhana of the uncontrolled passions will repent. 


When he sees my own chariot, glittering like gold and with bright 
gemstones inlaid, drawn by white Gandharva steeds, flying the banner of 
Hanuman, and driven by Krishna himself, that wretch of uncontrolled 
passions will repent. When, in the midst of the great war, he hears the 
incessant thrumming of my leather-gloved hands pulling the bowstrings of 
the Gandiva, loud as rolling thunder, Duryodhana will repent. 

When he sees his troops abandoning him and running like deer from the 
field, overwhelmed by the darkness that I create with my arrow banks; 
when he sees countless winged arrows, which excoriate a man’s bowels, 
flash from the Gandiva like lightning from storm clouds, and raze enemies 
by the thousands and devour horses and armour-clad elephants, Duryodhana 
will indeed repent. 

When he sees me turn enemy arrows back on their courses, or shred 
them with my own shafts, foolish Duryodhana will repent. When my broad- 
headed arrows pluck the heads of young warriors from their bodies, like 
birds picking fruit from the treetops, Duryodhana will repent. When he sees 
his peerless warriors fall from their chariots, and elephants and horses roll 
lifeless on the field, slain by my arrows, Duryodhana will repent. When he 
sees his brothers fall all around him, dying even before they come within 
range of his enemy’s weapons, and without having raised a weapon in 
battle, Duryodhana will repent. 

I will loose an endless river of blazing arrows and, like Yama with 
mouth agape, swallow multitudes of chariots and foot-soldiers, and then 
that dog Duryodhana will repent. When he sees his own troops, covered 
with the dust whipped up by my chariot as it wheels swiftly in all 
directions, torn to shreds by shafts from the Gandiva, and the living 
deranged by fear, the wretched Duryodhana will repent. 

When he sees his entire army flee in terror, their arms and legs mangled, 
and their minds unhinged; when he sees his horses, elephants and his best 
warriors slain, and his dry-mouthed and panic-stricken troops dead or 
wailing aloud as they lie dying beside their exhausted animals; when he 
sees hair, bones and skulls lying in mounds, like half-finished works of the 
Creator, that vile prince will repent. 

When he sees on my chariot Krishna with his Panchajanya, and me with 
my pair of inexhaustible quivers, my Gandiva, my Devadatta and my white 
horses, Duryodhana will repent. When I consume the Kauravas, as Agni 


consumes all the evil souls that throng together at the beginning of a new 
yuga, Dhritarashtra and all his sons will repent. 

When the evil and wrathful son of Dhritarashtra is deprived of his 
prosperity, along with his brothers, his army and his followers, that fool, 
stripped of pride and trembling, will repent. 

One morning, when I had finished my ritual bath and prayers, a 
Brahmana said to me, Partha, you will have a difficult task to perform; you 
will have to fight your enemies. Either Indra will ride before you on his 
superb mount and with his Vajra in hand, razing your foes in battle, or 
Vasudeva’s son Krishna will protect you from behind, in his chariot drawn 
by horses with Sugriva at their head. 

With complete faith in what he said, I have passed over Indra the 
wielder of the thunderbolt, preferring to have Krishna on my side. I have 
chosen Krishna to help me annihilate these evil ones. I see the hand of God 
in all this. The man, whose success Krishna merely wishes for, is sure to 
prevail over his enemies without Krishna needing to take up arms on his 
behalf. This is so, even if the adversaries are the Devas with Indra leading 
them, let alone mere mortals. 

The man who wants to vanquish that first among all heroes, Krishna of 
the mighty urjas, in battle, may as well try to cross the ocean by swimming 
across it. Such a fool is like a man who tries to split open the Kailasa 
mountain by striking it with his palm; he does not cause the mountain the 
slightest damage, while his hand might break and his nails tear. He may as 
well be able to put out a raging forest fire with his bare hands, or stop the 
Sun and Moon from moving, or steal amrita from the Devas. 

This is the same Krishna who mowed down all the Bhoja warriors and 
carried off Rukmini in his chariot, to make her his wife; and their son is the 
noble Pradyumna. Krishna is the darling of the Devas; he devastated the 
Gandharas and defeated all Nagnajita’s sons to rescue the mighty king 
Sudarshana from confinement. It was Krishna who killed King Pandya by 
striking him with his chest; and he who destroyed the Kalingas in battle. It 
is he who burnt the city of Varanasi, which remained kingless for many 
years because there was no one to succeed its prince Sudakshina. 

Ekalavya, the king of the Nishadas, always challenged him to battle; but 
Krishna slew him and he lay dead on a hillside like the Asura Jambha of 
old. Krishna, with Baladeva at his side, slew Ugrasena’s evil son Kansa, 
while he sat in the midst of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, and then gave 


Ugrasena the kingdom. It was Krishna who, fearless with his fathomless 
powers, fought Salya, lord of Saubha, the city that floats in the skies; and 
Krishna caught the Satagni of a hundred fires in his hand, when Salya 
hurled it at him at the gates of Saubha. No mortal can face Krishna’s might. 

The Asuras had a city called Pragjyotisha, formidable and inaccessible. 
There, Narakasura, the son of Bhumi Devi, kept the jewelled ear-rings of 
Aditi that he had taken by force. The Devas, who do not fear death, with 
Sakra at their head, could not subdue Naraka. The Devas saw Krishna’s 
prowess; they saw his irresistible Chakra; they knew the purpose of his 
birth, and they begged him to quell Naraka and his fell Asuras; and blithely 
Krishna agreed. In the city of Nirmochana he slew six thousand Asuras; he 
shredded their arrows and killed Mura and hosts of other Rakshasas; then 
he entered the city. 

There, a stupendous duel erupted between the dreadful Naraka and 
Vishnu’s Avatara; until, slain by Krishna, Naraka lay lifeless, like a 
karnikara tree uprooted by the wind. Having killed the Earth’s son and 
Mura, and having recovered the incomparable ear-rings, Krishna of 
unearthly prowess came back, alight with divine lustre and crowned with 
undying fame. The Devas, who witnessed his ineffable feats, blessed him, 
saying, You will never tire in a fight; neither earth nor water will obstruct 
you; weapons shall never pierce your body. And Krishna regarded this 
blessing as ample reward. This is Krishna, who is beyond all compare. 

Dhritarashtra’s son aspires to vanquish this same Vishnu, of infinite 
tejas; and the evil one often thinks of imprisoning him. Krishna bears all 
this for our sake. And vile Duryodhana wants to create a rift between 
Krishna and me. He will see for himself, when he is on the battlefield, how 
far he will be able to take Krishna’s love away from the Pandavas! 

I will bow to Bhishma, to Drona and his son, and to the peerless son of 
Saradwat, our acharya Kripa; but then I will begin the battle to regain our 
kingdom. Dharmadeva will bring righteous destruction down on our sinful 
cousin who is so eager to fight us. 

Deceitfully beaten at dice by those base men, we, of royal birth, spent 
twelve agonising years in the forest and one long year in hiding. While we, 
the Pandavas, are still alive, how can the sons of Dhritarashtra rejoice in 
their affluence or power? 

If they defeat us in battle, with the help of Indra and the Devas, it will 
mean that vice is superior to virtue, and the very concept of dharma would 


cease to exist. If indeed a man’s actions do bear fruit and if we are better 
men than Duryodhana, I believe that, with Krishna at my side, I will kill 
Duryodhana and all his kinsmen. Lord of men, if robbing us of our kingdom 
is evil, if our own good deeds are not in vain, Duryodhana’s is doomed. 

O Kauravas, you will see with your own eyes that, if they come to war, 
the sons of Dhritarashtra will surely die. If they desist from fighting, they 
might live; but if there is a battle, none of them will be left alive. I will kill 
all Dhritarashtra’s sons and Karna, and take the entire kingdom. Do 
whatever you think is best and, meanwhile, enjoy the time you have with 
your wives and other sweet things of life. 

There are many venerable Brahmanas with us, who are knowers of the 
Shastras, of pure conduct, of noble birth, witnesses to all the events that 
have transpired. They, who can understand and interpret the astrological 
significance of the movements of the planets and their relative positions to 
the stars; who can explain the mysteries of destiny and predict the future; 
and who know the signs of the zodiac and what is happening every hour, 
prophesy a great defeat for the Kurus and the Srinjayas, and final victory for 
the Pandavas. 

Because of this, Yudhishtira, who never made an enemy, considers that 
he has already achieved his goal, of vanquishing his enemies. Krishna, who 
sees the invisible future, sees all this; and I, too, with the clear and unerring 
foresight that I acquired years ago, the chaksushi I had from the Gandharva 
Angaraparna, see into the future. If they fight, the sons of Dhritarashtra will 
not live. My Gandiva stretches without my touching it; the bow-string 
trembles without being drawn; and arrows stand up in my quiver, impatient 
to fly out. My gleaming sword slides out of its scabbard by itself, like a 
moulting snake from its old skin; and terrible voices scream from atop my 
flag-staff, saying, When will you yoke your chariot, Arjuna? Hordes of 
jackals howl hideously at night; Rakshasas land from the sky in dense 
swarms; deer and jackals, peacocks and crows, vultures, cranes and wolves, 
and golden-plumed birds follow my chariot when I yoke my white horses to 
it. 

Single-handedly, with torrents of arrows, I will despatch all these 
warrior kings to Yamaloka. Just as a blazing conflagration consumes a 
forest in summer, I will consume my enemies with the astras I invoke. I will 
loose the Sthuna, Karna, Pasupata, Brahma and the other inexorable 
missiles that Indra gave me; and with my heart set on the death of those 


kings, I will obliterate all who enter the battlefield. Only after this, will I 
rest; this is my resolve. 

Tell them all this, Sanjaya. 

Look at Duryodhana’s foolishness. He is planning to go to war against 
men who are invincible, even to Indra with the Devas. So let the wish of 
Santanu’s aged son Bhishma, Kripa, Drona and his son, and _ the 
unfathomably wise Vidura— May the Kauravas have long lives, be proven 
true!” said Arjuna,’ says Sanjaya.” 


CANTO 49 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “O Bhaarata, in the midst of all the assembled 

kings, Santanu’s son Bhishma says to Duryodhana, “Once long ago, 
Brihaspati and Indra went to Brahma, accompanied by the Maruts, the 
Vasus and Agni, the Adityas, the Sadhyas, the seven Devarishis, the 
Gandharvas, Viswavasu and the Apsaras. Reverentially the Swargavasis 
bowed to the Lord of the universe and sat surrounding him. Then, the two 
ancient deities, the Rishis Nara and Narayana, drew into themselves the 
vital energies of all present there, and left the place. 

On seeing this, Brihaspati asked Brahma, “Who are these two that leave 
without worshipping you? Pitamaha, who are they?” 

Brahma replied, “These two, endowed with great tapasya, blaze in 
lustrous beauty, illuminating both Bhumi and Swarga. They, who are 
mighty, all-pervading and unequalled, are Nara and Narayana, who have 
come from the other world to live in Brahmaloka. Of incomparable glory, 
they shine with their tapasya and, by everything they do, enhance the joy of 
the world. The Devas and Gandharvas worship them, and their purpose is to 
destroy the Asuras.” 

Indra and the Devas, with Brihaspati at their head, went to the place 
where Nara and Narayana sat in tapasya. At that time, the Devas were in 
turmoil from a war that raged between them and the Asuras, and Indra 
asked the exalted pair to grant him a boon. They told him to name his wish, 


and Indra asked for their help, promising that the Devas would do as Nara 
and Narayana wished. It was with their help that Indra vanquished the 
Daityas and Danavas. Parantapa Nara slew hundreds of thousands of Indra’s 
foes—the Paulomas and the Kalakhanjas. 

It was Nara, as Arjuna, who, from his whirling chariot that was broken 
during their duel, cut off Jambhasura’s head with a broad-headed arrow just 
as the demon was about to swallow him. It was he who stormed 
Hiranyapura, the Daitya city across the ocean, and vanquished sixty- 
thousand Nivatakavachas. It was this conqueror, Mahabaho Arjuna, who 
gratified Agni by vanquishing the Devas led by Indra. Narayana, also, has 
slain countless other Daityas and Danavas. Such is their inexhaustible tejas 
and urjas; and you now see them together, their purpose one. 

The two Maharathas you face, Krishna and Arjuna, are the same 
timeless and divine Narayana and Nara. Of all who live on this Earth, they 
alone cannot be vanquished by the Asuras or, indeed, by the Devas with 
Indra at their head. Narayana is Krishna and Nara is Phalguna. 

They are one soul born as two. Their karma gives them the enjoyment 
of many eternal and inexhaustible realms; and they are born again and again 
into the world when cataclysmic wars become necessary to cleanse Bhumi 
Devi. Their mission is to fight and make a great sacrifice of human blood. 
This is what Narada, who is an authority on the Vedas, told the Vrishnis. 

O Duryodhana, when you see Kesava, with his conch-shell, discus and 
mace in hand, together with the awesome bowman Arjuna armed with 
various astras; when you behold those eternal and irradiant ones, the two 
Krishnas, riding the same chariot, then you will remember what I have just 
said. Child, danger threatens the Kurus because dharma and artha have 
deserted your mind. If you pay no heed to what I say, you will hear of an 
unimaginable, revelational carnage, for all the Kauravas follow your lead. 

All the Kurus listen to me but, Bull of the Bhaaratas, you put your faith 
in the opinions of just three men: Karna, a low-born Suta’s son cursed by 
Parasurama; Sakuni, the son of Subala; and your vile and sinful brother 
Dusasana.’ 

Karna says, ‘Bhishma, it is not right for you to still mock me as a 
Sutaputra, for I have adopted Kshatriya dharma without abandoning those 
who are my own. Besides, what evil is there in me? None among 
Dhritarashtra’s people will accuse me of having committed any wrong; 
never have I done any injury to Dhritarashtra’s son. And I will kill all the 


Pandavas in battle. How can wise men make peace again with those who 
were once their sworn enemies? It is my duty to do whatever I can to please 
king Dhritarashtra, and especially Duryodhana, for the kingdom is his.’ 

Bhishma hears Karna and says to Dhritarashtra, “Although this man 
often boasts about his intentions to kill them, he is not equal to even a 
sixteenth part of the noble Pandavas. The great calamity that is about to 
overtake your evil sons is the work of this Sutaputra. Relying on him, 
foolish Duryodhana insulted his cousins, those Kshatriyas of divine descent. 
Over the years, what feat has Karna achieved to equal any that each of the 
Pandavas has? 

What did this man do when he saw mighty Dhananjaya kill his beloved 
brother? Why was he absent when Dhananjaya charged the assembled 
Kurus outside Virata’s city, routed them in battle and stripped them of their 
clothes? Where was this son of a Suta, who roars like a bull now, when the 
Gandharvas captured your son during the Goshayatra? It was Bhima, the 
illustrious Partha and the twins who challenged the Gandharvas and 
vanquished them. 

Heedless of dharma and artha, what Karna does best is boast. O may 
you be blessed, Bharatarishabha.’ 

Bharadwaja’s high-souled son Drona listens to Bhishma and, after 
paying homage to the gathered kings, says to Dhritarashtra, ‘O king, do 
what Bhishma says. It is not wise for you to follow the counsel of covetous 
men. Making peace with the Pandavas, before war breaks out, is the most 
judicious course open to you. Arjuna will do everything he has said, which 
Sanjaya has repeated here, for there is no bowman to equal him in all the 
three worlds.’ 

The king takes no notice of what Drona and Bhishma have said and, 
without responding to them, asks Sanjaya again about the Pandavas. It is at 
this moment, when the king does not offer any response to Bhishma and 
Drona, that the Kauravas lose all hope of living.’” 


CANTO 50 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


6 “T) hritarashtra says, ‘What did Dharmaputra Yudhishtira say, 

Sanjaya, when he heard that a great force has assembled here in 

our support? What is he doing, in view of the war to come? Which of his 

brothers and sons look to him, waiting for his command? Who amongst his 

advisors tries to dissuade that honourable and virtuous king from war, and 

persuades him to make peace instead, knowing that my son’s evil, deceitful 
deeds have provoked him?’ 

Sanjaya says, “May you be blessed! All Pandu’s sons, as well as the 
Panchalas, wait eagerly for his command, but he restrains them. Multitudes 
of battle-ready war chariots belonging to the Pandavas and the Panchalas 
have come in separate divisions, making Yudhishtira glad. Just as the sky 
brightens at sunrise, so have the Panchalas’ hearts at being reunited with 
Kunti’s resplendent son, who floods the world with his lustre. 

All the Panchalas, Kekayas and Matsyas, even their cowherds and 
shepherds rejoice with an equally happy Yudhishtira. Bevies of Brahmana, 
Kshatriya and Vaisya girls have come to catch a glimpse of Arjuna in his 
coat of mail.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Sanjaya, tell us about the armies that 
Dhrishtadyumna, the Somakas and others have brought, using which the 
Pandavas will fight us.’ 


With this barrage of questions put to him in the great sabha, Sanjaya 
falls into dark thought and heaves long, deep sighs. Suddenly, he collapses 
onto the floor. 

Vidura cries to his blind brother, ‘Rajan, Sanjaya has fallen to the floor, 
unconscious and unable to speak.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘I am sure it is from anxiety after seeing those 
Purushavyaghras, those Maharathas.’ 

Sanjaya recovers consciousness and is comforted. Then in the presence 
of all the Kurus in the sabha, he says to Dhritarashtra, ‘O Rajarajan, I did 
indeed see those great warriors, the sons of Kunti. They are lean and trim 
from the austerities they observed while they lived in the Matsya kingdom. 
Listen, Rajan, to which kings and princes have joined them to fight you. 

The noble Dhrishtadyumna will fight against you. He is a virtuous soul, 
who never forsakes virtue, not from anger, fear or temptation; not for the 
sake of wealth or because of an argument. He is an authority on dharma; 
and he is the best of righteous men. He has never made an enemy, but he 
will fight on the side of the Pandavas, against you. 

Then there is the man who has no equal in the strength of his arms, who 
with his bow subjugated all the kings of this Earth, who long ago 
vanquished the kings of Kasi, Anga, Magadha and Kalinga. This man, 
Bhimasena, will fight for the Pandavas, against you. It is by his strength that 
his four brothers survived after he rescued them from the burning house of 
lac. This same Vrikodara saved them from the cannibal Hidimba; it is he 
who rescued Yagnaseni when Jayadratha abducted her; and it is he who 
saved the Pandavas from the forest fire at Varanavata. This formidable 
Bhima will fight for his brothers against you. 

Then there is the warrior who slew the Krodhavasas to please Draupadi, 
successfully crossing the rugged and _ fearsome mountains of 
Gandhamadana. His arms have the strength of ten thousand elephants; and 
with him for their ally the Pandavas will fight against you. Long ago, and 
with only Krishna’s help, this Kshatriya vanquished Purandara in order to 
please Agni; and he also gratified, with his prowess, the God of gods, 
Uma’s trident-bearing lord Mahadeva, who dwells in his mountain fastness. 
This Arjuna, the greatest warrior, subjugated all the kings of the Earth, and 
with him the Pandavas will face you in war. 

There is also that wonderful warrior Nakula, who vanquished all of the 
western world, the Mlechcha lands. He, too, this handsome son of Madri’s, 


this unrivalled archer, will fight against you, O Kaurava. 

Then there is the Kshatriya who defeated the warriors of Kasi, Anga 
and Kalinga. With Sahadeva on their side, the Pandavas will meet you in 
battle. There are only four men on Earth to equal him in sheer vitality — 
Aswatthama, Dhrishtaketu, Rukmi and Pradyumna. And against this 
youngest of the Pandavas, the terrible Sahadeva Manavottama, source of 
Madri’s joy, you must do battle. 

There is also Sikhandin, who was once born on Earth as the king of 
Kasi’s daughter, during which life she practised the most severe tapasya, 
praying to become the instrument of Bhishma’s death in another birth. She 
passed through death and was born as the Panchala king’s daughter; but by 
divine chance, she has become a man. Sikhandin knows the strengths and 
weaknesses of both sexes; this invincible prince of Panchala, who fought 
the Kalingas, who is skilled in all the astras, will now fight on the side of 
the Pandavas, against you. With this woman who was turned into a man, 
and a formidable bowman whose destiny it is to bring Bhishma down, the 
Pandavas will fight against you. 

There are others. The mighty archers, the five Kekaya princes clad in 
wondrous mail, will fight beside the Pandavas against you. You must face 
Yuyudhana, Satyaki the warrior of the long arms, who is a master of astras, 
intelligent and of indefatigable prowess, that lion of the Vrishnis. You will 
encounter Virata, who has been the refuge of the Pandavas for some time. 

The lord of Kasi, that Maharatha who rules in Varanasi, has become an 
ally of the Pandavas, and with him in their army they will fight you. The 
noble sons of Draupadi, tender in years but invincible in battle, as 
unapproachable as serpents, will fight beside the Pandavas against you. 

Do not forget Abhimanyu, whose tejas is as lustrous as Krishna’s and 
whose self-restraint is as stern as Yudhishtira’s; with him on their side the 
Pandavas will fight you. 

Sisupala’s warlike son Dhrishtaketu, of great fame and incomparable 
energy, is inexorable when roused. With this king of the Chedis, who has 
come to their side with an akshauhini of troops, the Pandavas will fight you. 

Krishna is the refuge of the Pandavas, as Indra is of the Devas; and with 
him on their side they will fight you. Sarabha, brother of the king of the 
Chedis, has come with Karakarsa; and with both these in their army, the 
Pandavas will fight you. 


Jarasandha’s son Sahadeva, and Jayatsena, both unrivalled in battle, 
have also pledged themselves to the Pandava cause; and with them the 
Pandavas will fight you. And the mighty and fearless Drupada, with a vast 
force, is resolved to fight on the Pandava side against you. 

O Bharatarishabha, with the support of these and hundreds of other 
kings from the east and north, Yudhishtira Dharmaraja prepares for war.’” 


CANTO 51 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, ‘All the men you mention are, indeed, great 

and valiant, but Bhima is equal to all of them together. I am as 

afraid of Bhima’s anger as a plump deer of a hunting tiger. I pass my nights 

in fearful sleeplessness, heaving feverish sighs, yes, like a small animal 
terrified of a lion. 

He is mighty-armed and as powerful as Indra, and I do not see in our 
whole army even one man who can withstand him in battle. Wrathful and 
unwavering in his hatred, this son of Kunti and Pandu does not smile even 
in jest; mad with rage, he looks askance at all and speaks in a thunderous 
voice. Impetuous and with no knowledge of fear, long-armed and dreadfully 
strong, he will not leave even one of my foolish sons alive. 

Vrikodara, that bull among the Kurus, whirling his mace in battle like 
Yama, will kill all my sons, who have set themselves on this calamitous 
course. Even as I speak, I see that terrible mace of his—six-sided, made of 
iron and adorned with gold—raised in fury: like a Brahmana’s curse. Bhima 
will wreak havoc among my troops like a lion amongst a herd of deer. He is 
the only one of the brothers who will seek the death of all my sons. 

Since his childhood, he has a voracious appetite and was endowed with 
fiery energy; and also since then he has been hostile towards my sons. Even 
now my heart trembles at the memory of how Bhima crushed Duryodhana 
and my other princes during their childhood fights. With his superior 


strength, he always dominated and bullied my sons, and it is Bhima of the 
terrible prowess who is the cause, the root, of this enmity. 

I see Bhima, mad with rage, and fighting from the very van of their 
legions, devour my entire force of men, elephants and horses. He is also 
Drona and Arjuna’s equal in his skill with other weapons; he is as swift as 
the wind, and in wrath like Maheswara himself. Who is there, Sanjaya, who 
can kill that dreadful Kshatriya in battle? I deem it a blessing that my sons 
have not already been killed by that awful Parantapa. How can any man 
withstand the prowess of this absolute warrior who has single-handedly 
savaged so many great Yakshas and Rakshasas? I was never able to control 
him even when he was a child. How will I do so now, especially since my 
dishonourable sons have wounded his great heart? 

He is bitter and full of anger; he will not relent. Frowning and ever 
looking askance, as he does now, he cannot be persuaded away from 
horrible vengeance. He is heroic and has no equal in might or 
handsomeness. Fair-skinned and tall as a palmyra, taller than Arjuna by the 
span of the thumb, this second son of Pandu is swifter than a horse and 
stronger than an elephant. His voice is soft, deep and dangerous, and his 
eyes are the colour of honey. 

Vyasa told me long ago of his remarkable physique and strength even 
when he was a child. Swinging his iron mace he will shatter chariots, 
elephants, men and horses. My child, for his disobedience to me I have, in 
the past, insulted this best of Kshatriyas, whose rage is so quickly sparked. 
How will my sons resist the power of his beautiful iron mace, which can 
kill a hundred men in moments, and which, when hurled at an enemy, 
makes the most fearful sound? 

O, my foolish sons want to cross the vast, shoreless ocean that is Bhima, 
fathomless, swirling with vicious, tempestuous currents that are as deadly 
as whistling storms of arrows. My sons believe themselves wise and ignore 
my piteous appeals for caution. They see only the imagined honey of 
victory, not their impending doom. My sons, who will not hesitate to do 
battle with Yama, are doomed to death by the Supreme Ordainer; they are 
like little creatures already in a great lion’s jaws. 

Bhima’s six-sided mace is four cubits long, and always lethal. When he 
hurls it at them how will my sons defy it? Bhima will whirl his mace around 
and smash the heads of our elephants; wetting the corners of his mouth with 
his tongue, he will draw deep breaths and rush, roaring, against our tuskers, 


matching the angry beasts roar for roar. He will erupt into the tight knot of 
our chariots and with unerring aim kill the greatest of our warriors who dare 
face him. When this happens, will even one of my men escape this 
conflagration of a man? Bhima Mahabaho will crush my forces, scythe a 
passage through them and, dancing with his mace in his hand, reveal the 
spectacle of the pralaya at the end of this yuga. 

Like a maddened elephant which brings flowering trees crashing down, 
Vrikodara in rage will mow down the ranks of my sons. Sanjaya, he will 
divest my warriors of their chariots, sarathies, horses and flagstaffs; wildly, 
he will be among our elephant warriors; and, like the tempestuous Ganga in 
spate uproots trees on her banks, that Purushavyaghra will devastate my 
sons’ troops in battle. Terrified of Bhimasena, my sons, their followers and 
the kings allied to them will fly in all directions. 

It was Bhima who, long ago with Vasudeva’s help, entered the inmost 
apartments of Jarasandha, the invincible king of Magadha, and killed him, 
thereby enabling the Pandavas to subjugate Bhumi Devi herself and 
perform the Rajasuya yagna. That he did not conquer the Kauravas, who 
were protected by Bhishma’s prowess, and the Andhakas and the Vrishnis 
with their brilliant diplomacy, is only because fortune smiled on these. Ah, 
Bhima went to Jarasandha, who had no equal, and with bare hands, tore his 
massive body in two. What could be more astounding than that? 

O Sanjaya, like a serpent who has stored his poison for years, Bhima 
will spew all the venom of his wrath at my sons in battle. As Indra 
incinerated the Danavas with his thunderbolt, Bhimasena, mace in hand, 
will blast all my sons to their deaths. Oh, he is irresistible, and in my mind’s 
eye, I see him even now, his coppery eyes ablaze, slaughtering my princes. 
Even without his mace or bow, chariot or armour, there is no man on Earth 
who can withstand Bhima. 

Bhishma, Dronacharya, and Saradwat’s son Kripa know as well as I do, 
Bhima’s intelligence and strength. These bulls among men, who are deep 
knowers of Kshatriya dharma, and for whom death in battle is desirable, 
will take their stand in the van of our forces. Destiny is inexorable, 
especially for men; so, even though I see victory for the Pandavas, I will no 
more try to restrain my sons. These mighty bowmen of mine, keen to take 
the time-honoured path to Swarga, will lay down their lives in battle, but 
without betraying their fame on Earth. 


Child, my sons and the Pandavas are equals; all of them are grandsons 
of Bhishma and disciples of Drona and Kripa. 

These three venerable ones are men of honour and will repay the small 
services that we have done them. For a Kshatriya who has taken up arms 
and wants to observe his dharma, death in battle is the highest good and 
brings punya. I weep, however, for all those that will fight the Pandavas. 
The danger that Vidura foresaw is near. 

On the one hand, Sanjaya, wisdom cannot overcome sorrow but, on the 
other, grief seems to make wisdom evaporate. When even Rishis who are 
free from worldly concerns and who view the affairs of the universe with 
detachment are all affected by adversity and prosperity, it is small wonder 
that I, who am attached to a thousand things, my sons, my kingdom, my 
wives, my grandsons and my kinsmen, grieve. What good can there 
possibly be in store for me in the face of this terrible danger? Considering 
all things, I am convinced that the end of the Kurus is at hand. 

That game of dice was the cause of the terrible fate which overtakes us 
each moment. Foolish Duryodhana committed that sin out of greed, and 
ever-fleeting, all-knowing Time, who controls all things, made him do it. I 
am bound helpless to the wheel of Time and cannot escape it. Tell me, 
Sanjaya, where shall I go? What shall I do? How shall I do it? My foolish 
Kauravas will all die, for their time has come. Helplessly I will have to hear 
their women wailing when my hundred sons are killed. Ah, how will death 
come to me? 

As a summer fire, fanned by the wind, consumes dry grass, Bhima, 
mace in hand and with Arjuna beside him, will raze all who fight for me.’” 


CANTO 52 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, “He whom we have never heard uttering a 
falsehood, he who has Dhananjaya to fight on his side, will attain 
sovereignty over the three worlds. 

I cannot think of anyone who can face the wielder of the Gandiva in 
battle. When he shoots winged arrows, nalikas and other shafts that pierce 
men’s mail and breasts, he has no rival. Perhaps, if those bulls among men, 
Drona and Karna, stand united against him the outcome could be uncertain; 
but I am sure that final victory will not be mine. 

Karna is compassionate and, at the same time, rash; the Acharya is 
elderly and most fond of his favourite pupil, Arjuna of the firm grasp of the 
bow, Arjuna who is brilliant and mighty. The encounter between them will 
be ferocious and will not result in any one’s clear defeat. All these are 
heroic, masters of weapons, and have earned great fame. They might give 
up sovereignty over the gods if it is offered them, but not the chance to 
prove themselves in the coming war. 

Peace will certainly result if either Drona or Karna or Phalguna falls. 
However, if truth be faced squarely, there is no one who can kill Arjuna. O, 
how can we pacify his anger against my foolish sons? There are others who 
are masters of weapons, who conquer and are conquered, but Arjuna always 
prevails. 


Thirty years have passed since Arjuna gratified Agni Deva in the 
Khandava vana by vanquishing all the Devas. We have never heard of him 
being defeated anywhere, my child. Like Indra, victory is always Arjuna’s; 
he has Krishna for his charioteer, who is also never conquered. We hear that 
the two Krishnas riding in the same chariot and the Gandiva are united as a 
single ineluctable force. As for us, we do not have a bow of that calibre, or 
a warrior like Arjuna or a charioteer like Krishna. Duryodhana’s foolish 
followers do not think of this. 

O Sanjaya, even a thunderbolt that falls on one’s head leaves something 
undestroyed, but Arjuna’s arrows leave nothing. Even now I see him 
unleashing his arrows in hurricanes, wreaking devastation all round, 
unerringly plucking heads from bodies. Even now I see flaming arrows flare 
from the Gandiva, burning all around and consuming the armies of my 
sons. Even now I see my vast army with its diverse forces struck with panic 
at the rumble of Savyasachi’s chariot, and fleeing in all directions. 

Just as a great conflagration, its flames fanned by the wind and 
spreading wild in all directions, consumes dry leaves and grass, so will the 
flames that are Arjuna’s astras consume my troops. He will loose arrows 
beyond count each moment; ah, he will be irresistible, like Yama Deva 
himself. 

When I hear that all kinds of evil omens manifest in the homes of the 
Kurus, on the battlefield and all around them, I am certain that annihilation 
will overtake our Bharata vamsa.’” 


CANTO 53 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, ‘The followers of the Pandavas are as strong 
and eager for victory as the Pandavas themselves are, and 
determined to sacrifice their lives for it. 

My son, you have told me who my enemies are—the mighty kings of 
Panchala, Kekaya, Matsya and Magadha. Not only them, but Krishna, that 
Creator of the universe, that all-mighty one who can conquer the three 
worlds with Indra at their head, is on the side of the Pandavas and bent on 
giving them victory. Then there is Satyaki, who acquired the entire astra 
shastra from Arjuna in a moment. That scion of the Sini vamsa will stand 
on the battlefield, shooting arrows as effortlessly as a farmer sows seeds. 
The prince of Panchala, Dhrishtadyumna, awesome and ruthless Maharatha, 
a master of all the astras, will also fight my forces. 

Great is my fear of Yudhishtira’s anger, of Arjuna’s prowess, and of the 
twins and Bhimasena. I am afraid that when those lords of men spread their 
mesh of unearthly arrows over them, my troops will not extricate 
themselves. That is why I weep, Sanjaya. 

Pandunandana Yudhishtira is majestically handsome, endowed with 
great tejas, blessed with the power of Brahma, intelligent beyond common 
ken, wise and virtuous. He has the best allies and advisors and is 
surrounded by men who are ready for battle. His brothers and father-in-law 
are Maharathas. That Purushavyaghra, the son of Pandu, is also blessed 


with profound patience; he keeps his own counsel, is compassionate and 
modest; his might is unassailable; he is deeply learned, has his passions 
under control and his senses subdued, and is dedicated to serving the 
elderly. Possessed of every virtue, he is like an unquenchable fire. 

What man is fool enough to fly moth-like into that blazing Pandava fire! 
Alas, I have deceived him and, like a long-tongued inferno, he will burn my 
foolish sons in battle, leaving none alive. I have come to the conclusion that 
it is better not to fight against him. 

O Kauravas, let your minds be in accord with mine. Without doubt, all 
the Kuru vamsa will perish if there is war. I am blind, but this I see so 
clearly. If we do as my better lights urge, my heart might still find peace. If 
you agree that war is not the best option, we will do our utmost to bring 
about peace. Yudhishtira will not be unmoved when he sees us in distress; 
he is angry with me only because he blames me for this unjust war.’” 


CANTO 54 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, “Great King, you speak truly. In the event of war, the 

annihilation of the Kshatriyas by the Gandiva is certain. I cannot 

understand how you, who are wise and well aware of Arjuna’s power, still 
follow your son’s lead. 

You have wronged the sons of Pritha from the very beginning and 
repeatedly sinned against them; this is no time for remorse. A father is his 
children’s best friend and, if he is always watchful and selfless in his 
affection, should swiftly seek their welfare. The man who wrongs them, 
instead, cannot be called a father. 

When you heard of the defeat of the Pandavas at dice, you laughed 
foolishly like a child and said, This is won, this is ours! When cruel words 
were spoken to the sons of Pritha you did not intervene, for you were 
pleased at the prospect of your sons gaining the entire kingdom. At that 
time you did not foresee their inevitable downfall. 

The Kuru kingdom, the lands called Jangala, is your paternal 
inheritance, but you have gained the whole Earth thanks to the might of the 
Pandava heroes, who made over their empire and all their vast conquests to 
you. You cannot imagine that you acquired all of it yourself. When the king 
of the Gandharvas seized your sons and when they were about to sink in a 
shoreless sea without a boat to save them it was Partha, O king, who 
rescued them. 


In foolish glee you laughed at the Pandavas when they were beaten at 
dice, and again as they went into exile. When Arjuna looses a shower of his 
astras the very oceans will dry up and be no more, let alone men of flesh 
and blood. He is the best of all archers; the Gandiva is the best of all bows; 
Kesava is the best of all beings; the Sudarsana is the best of all weapons; 
and his chariot, with the Vanara emblazoned on its banner, is the best of all 
rathas. That chariot of his, flying that flag and drawn by white steeds, will 
consume us all in battle like the whirling wheel of Kaala. 

Bull of the Bhaaratas, that best of kings who has Bhima and Arjuna 
fighting for him already owns the world. The Kauravas led by Duryodhana 
will see their forces fall, terror-struck and in despair; and when Bhima 
strikes they will all be razed. Paralysed by their fear of Bhima and Arjuna, 
your sons and their followers will find yawning defeat, and death. 

The Matsyas, the Panchalas, the Salvas and the Surasenas have all 
withdrawn their homage and disregard you. Knowing the tejas of that wise 
king, they have all joined the son of Pritha and, loyal to him, will oppose 
your sons. He who has committed evil and wronged the sons of Pandu, who 
are all wedded to dharma and deserve neither punishment nor death; he who 
hates them even now, your sinful son Duryodhana, with all his followers, 
must be restrained by all the means you command. 

It is not fitting that you grieve like this. The wise Vidura and I said as 
much even during the game of dice. Lamenting for the Pandavas as if you 
had no part to play in what resulted in their present condition is only 
hypocrisy, and will prove futile, O my king.’” 


CANTO 55 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) uryodhana says, ‘Fear not, O king; do not grieve for us. We are 
more than able to vanquish our enemy in battle. 

When the Pandavas were living in exile in the forest many Maharathas 
came to them: Krishna came with a huge army, in battle array and able to 
crush entire kingdoms; the Kekayas, Dhrishtaketu and Pritha’s kinsman 
Dhrishtadyumna came with numerous other kings. And, assembling in a 
place not far from Indraprastha, those great warriors denounced you and all 
the Kurus. Bhaarata, those Maharathas, led by Krishna, paid homage to 
Yudhishtira, who sat amongst them, wearing deerskin. 

The kings urged Yudhishtira to take back his kingdom and expressed 
their fervent wish to kill you and all your adherents. When I heard this I 
was struck with fear at the danger that threatened our people and spoke to 
Bhishma, Drona and Kripa. 

I said to them, “I do not think the Pandavas will keep the pact they 
made. Krishna wants to kill us all. With the exception of Vidura, all of you 
will be killed; Dhritarashtra, who knows dharma, will also be spared. 
Krishna wants to bestow the entire kingdom of the Kurus on Yudhishtira. 

What should we do? Shall we surrender, or flee? Or shall we fight the 
enemy, even if it means giving up all hope of life? If we fight them, our 
defeat is certain, for Yudhishtira still commands all the kings of the Earth. 


The people of the realm are disgruntled and our friends are also irate with 
us. All the kings, especially our friends and relatives, speak ill of us. 

There can be no shame in our surrendering, for from time immemorial 
the weaker side has chosen to make peace. However, I grieve for that 
Purushottama, my blind father, who will be overcome by sorrow and 
endless misery. You already know, Rajan, that all your other sons opposed 
the enemy only to please me. The mighty sons of Pandu will avenge the 
wrongs done to them by butchering all Dhritarashtra’s race along with all 
our ministers and royal counsellors.” 

Drona, Bhishma, Kripa and Aswatthama saw how I was wracked with 
anxiety and said to me, “Have no fear, Parantapa. If the enemy declares war 
against us, they will not vanquish us in battle. Each of us, singly, can quell 
all the kings of the Earth. Let them come. Our arrows will curb their pride. 

Long ago, inflamed with anger on the death of his father, Bhishma 
humbled all the kings single-handedly from his chariot. Countless 
Kshatriyas that furious Kurusattama killed, and in terror those that lived 
surrendered themselves into his protection. This Bhishma is on our side, 
and even now can crush all our enemies in battle. Therefore, Bhaarata, you 
quell your fear.” 

The Pandavas of great prowess have now resolved to fight us. Once 
they ruled all the world, but now our enemies without allies and their old 
power, and cannot possibly defeat us. Bharatarishabha, I am now Sovereign 
of the Earth, and all these kings assembled here are loyal to me in 
prosperity and adversity. They will enter fire or water for my sake. 

They laugh to see you lament like an ignorant child and so full of fear to 
hear the Pandavas being praised. Every one of these kings can withstand the 
Pandavas. Indeed, Rajan, every one of them thinks he is all-powerful. Indra 
himself cannot subdue my vast host. Brahma himself cannot destroy it, 
though he may wish to. 

Yudhishtira has given up hope of getting a city and asks for just five 
villages because he is afraid of the army I have assembled and of my power. 
Your belief in Vrikodara’s strength is baseless. You do not know how strong 
I am. There is no one on Earth who can match me in a duel with maces. No 
man has ever beaten me in a gada yuddha, nor ever will. 

I suffered many privations out of my devotion to learning when I lived 
in the home of my Acharya. I have mastered all the knowledge and skills he 
had to impart. I am not afraid of Bhima or the others. Blessed one, waiting 


humbly upon my guru Sankarshana as I did, he was sure that I, 
Duryodhana, have no equal in battle. In battle Iam Balarama’s equal, and in 
strength there is no one on Earth superior to me. 

Bhima will not bear even a single blow of my mace. One wrathful 
stroke will send him to Yama. Rajan, I am eager to see Vrikodara with his 
mace in hand; long have I wished for this. I will strike him like thunder and 
my detested cousin will die, all his limbs shattered. Why, one blow of my 
mace will split the mountains of Himavat into thousands of pieces. 
Vrikodara knows the truth of this, as do Krishna and Arjuna: that there is no 
one equal to Duryodhana at the mace. 

Dispel the fear that Bhima invokes in you, for have no doubt that I will 
kill him in savage battle. My lord, do not be dejected. After I have slain 
Bhima, my numberless chariot warriors, all as mighty as me, will quickly 
bring Arjuna down. Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Drona’s son, Karna, 
Bhurisravas, Salya, the king of Pragjyotisha and Jayadratha king of the 
Sindhus can each kill the Pandavas on his own. United, they will send 
Arjuna to Yama in an instant. 

There is no reason why the combined armies of all the kings, fighting as 
one, cannot vanquish Dhananjaya. Bhishma, Drona, Drona’s son and Kripa 
will cover him in a hundred shrouds of arrows and, broken, Arjuna will 
vanish into death’s catacombs. 

Our Pitamaha Bhishma, born of Devi Ganga, is superior to Santanu. He 
was born amongst men, but he is a holy being, whom even the Devas 
cannot face. There is no man on Earth who can kill Bhishma. Pleased with 
the sacrifice Bhishma made for his sake, his father gave him an exceptional 
boon: You shall not die except by your own wish. 

Drona was born of Bharadwaja Muni in a water-pot, with complete 
knowledge of the astra shastra at his very birth. Kripa, the best of Acharyas, 
whose father is Rishi Gautama, was born in a bank of river reeds and he, 
too, cannot be killed. 

Aswatthama’s father, mother and uncle were not born from a woman’s 
womb. That hero, too, is on my side. All these Maharathas are veritable 
gods and can confound Indra himself in battle. Arjuna cannot even look 
upon any one of these. When united, these tigers among men will bring him 
down like a pride of lions does a deer. 

Karna is equal to Bhishma, Drona and Kripa. Parasurama, too, declared 
him his equal. Karna was born with kundalas of dazzling beauty; and to 


please Sachi Devi, Indra begged him for them in exchange for an infallible 
shakti. How will Arjuna escape Karna when Radheya has that astra? 

I am sure of victory; it is a fruit I hold in my hand. The rout of my 
enemies is already being talked about everywhere. 

Bhaarata, in war Bhishma kills ten thousand soldiers in a day. As 
powerful as him are the master bowmen Drona, Drona’s son and Kripa. In 
addition, the Samsaptaka warriors are resolved to fight Arjuna to the death. 
There are other kings, too, who regard themselves as being superior to 
Savyasachi, and who are determined to kill him. 

Why then are you so fearful of the Pandavas? Once Bhimasena is killed 
who amongst them will continue to fight? Seven warriors—the five 
Pandava brothers, Dhrishtadyumna and Satyaki—are the backbone of the 
Pandava forces. We have Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and Drona’s son; Karna, 
Somadatta and Bahlika; Salya of Pragjyotisha, Vinda and Anuvinda of 
Avanti, and Jayadratha. We have your sons Dusasana, Durmukha and 
Dussaha, and the others; we have Srutayu, Chitrasena, Purumitra and 
Vivimsati; Sala, Bhurisravas and Vikarna. And I have assembled eleven 
akshauhinis. The enemy’s army is far smaller than mine, with only seven. 
How will they defeat me? 

Brihaspati has said that a king should fight an army which is less than 
his by a third. My army is bigger by more than that, my king. Besides, I 
know that the enemy has many shortcomings, while my forces are endowed 
with as many strengths. Knowing all this, and that my force is superior and 
that of Pandavas inferior, you must not to lose heart and good sense.’ 

Saying this, Duryodhana questions Sanjaya again, anxious to know 
more about the Pandavas’ thoughts.” 


CANTO 56 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


°*T) uryodhana says, ‘Sanjaya, I have gathered an army of seven 
akshauhinis; what have Yudhishtira and the kings who support 
him done to prepare for war?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Yudhishtira is eager for war and full of assurance. 
Bhimasena, Arjuna and the twins are also confident and fearless. Arjuna 
yoked his horses to his chariot and took it out to test the astras he has 
acquired, lighting up the world in all directions. Clad in mail, he looked like 
a mass of clouds charged with lightning. 

He was thoughtful for a while and then he said to me, “Sanjaya, look at 
the omens, they all predict our victory,” and indeed what he said was true.’ 

Duryodhana says, ‘You are happy to praise these sons of Pritha whom 
we routed at dice. Tell me, what sort of horses has Arjuna yoked to his 
chariot, and what banners has he raised?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘The divine architect Tvashtri has, with Indra and Dhatri’s 
help, created all kinds of wonderful and beautiful forms for Arjuna’s 
chariot. Using maya, he adorned Partha’s banner with celestial spirits of 
diverse forms and sizes. At Bhimasena’s plea, Vayuputra Hanuman will 
also enliven Arjuna’s pennant with his own splendid and fearsome form. 
Tvashtri’s genius is so powerful that the flag covers one Yojana, both in 
width and length, and even great trees cannot obstruct it. 


Tvashtri’s creation is like Indra’s evanescent and colourful bow that 
appears in the sky; nobody knows what it is made of and its form changes 
constantly. This banner rears its head like a column of fire and smoke rising 
up into the sky, filling it with dazzling colours and beautiful shapes, 
weightless, yet finding no impediment anywhere. 

Yoked to the chariot are one hundred celestial white horses endowed 
with the speed of the mind; they are the gift of the Gandharva king 
Chitrasena. Nothing can stand in their way, nothing can arrest their careen, 
not on Earth, in the sky, or in heaven. A boon ensures that their number will 
always be a hundred, regardless of how often or how many are killed. 

Yudhishtira’s chariot is drawn by great ivory-coloured horses of equal 
strength. The horses that pull Bhima’s chariot are as fleet as the wind and as 
splendid as the Saptarishis. Sable-hued horses with backs streaked like the 
wings of the tittiri bird are yoked to Sahadeva’s chariot; they are Arjuna’s 
gift to him, and superior to Dhananjaya’s own. And Madri’s son Nakula, of 
the Ajamida vamsa, is borne, like Indra, by exalted steeds given by Indra 
himself, all mighty and quick as the mind. 

Superb horses, gifts of the Devas, large and equal to those of the 
Pandava brothers in experience and strength, swift and handsome, bear 
Subhadra’s and Draupadi’s sons into war.’” 


CANTO 57 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, ‘Sanjaya, whom have you seen come to the 
Pandava camp out of love for them? Who will fight for them 
against my son’s forces?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Krishna, chief of the Andhakas and the Vrishnis, has 
arrived. I have also seen Chekitana and Satyaki, also called Yuyudhana, 
both Maharathas, proud of their strength and renowned the world over; and 
they have each brought an akshauhini of troops. Drupada, the king of the 
Panchalas, has come, accompanied by his ten heroic sons—Satyayjit and the 
others, led by Dhrishtadyumna, the fire-born. 

Sikhandin has come in Drupada’s support to honour Yudhishtira, with a 
full akshauhini of soldiers whom he has equipped well with everything they 
need. That lord of Earth Virata, and his two sons, Sankha and Uttara; 
Suryadatta and others headed by Madiraksha, with one akshauhini of troops 
and the support of his brothers and sons, have joined the son of Pritha. 

Jarasandha’s son, the king of Magadha, and Dhrishtaketu, the king of 
the Chedis, have arrived separately, each accompanied by an akshauhini. 
The five Kekaya brothers, flying purple flags, have joined the Pandavas 
with their akshauhini of warriors. All these valiant men, whom I have seen 
assembled there, will fight on the Pandava side against Duryodhana’s 
armies. Maharathika Dhrishtadyumna, who knows all the vyuhas of 
Manavas, Devas and Gandharvas, leads the Pandava host as its Senapati. 


O Rajan, Sikhandin is appointed to meet Santanu’s son Bhishma in 
battle, with Virata and his Matsya warriors to support him. Yudhishtira will 
face the king of the Madras, though some feel that the two are not evenly 
matched. Bhimasena will fight Duryodhana, his sons and his ninety-nine 
brothers, as well as the eastern and southern kings. Arjuna will meet 
Vikartana’s son Karna and Jayadratha, king of the Sindhus, those irresistible 
Kshatriyas so proud of their strength. 

The five mighty bowmen, the Kekaya brothers, will fight the Kekaya 
soldiers who are with Dhritarashtra. Also in their lot are the Malavas and 
the Salvakas, and the two famed Trigarta warriors who have sworn to 
conquer or die. Subhadra’s son has been assigned to kill all the sons of 
Duryodhana and Dusasana, and also king Brihadbala. And those great 
archers, the sons of Draupadi, with gold embroidered banners on their 
chariots, and led by Dhrishtadyumna, will do battle against Drona. 

Chekitana wants to meet Somadatta in his chariot, in single combat; 
Satyaki is anxious to do battle against the Bhoja lord Kritavarman; Madri’s 
heroic son Sahadeva, who roars so dreadfully in battle, means to kill your 
brother-in-law, Sakuni son of Subala; and Madri’s other son Nakula will 
meet the deceitful Uluka and the Saraswatas. The Pandavas have placed all 
the other kings under the leadership of one or other of their allies. Thus has 
the Pandava host been divided. You and your sons must do as you think 
best, and without delay.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Alas, my foolish sons, who cheated at dice, are 
already as good as dead, for it is Bhima they have chosen to meet in battle. 
Like moths to the flame, all the other kings will rush inexorably towards the 
Gandiva, as if consecrated for a yagna by Yama himself. In my mind’s eye I 
see my host routed and killed by those illustrious Kshatriyas whom I have 
grievously wronged. Who will follow my warriors, when the sons of Pandu 
break their ranks? 

The Pandavas are Maharathas of awesome accomplishments, with the 
energy of the fiery Sun and ever victorious. Indra himself cannot wrest the 
Earth from them, who have Yudhishtira for their king, Krishna for their 
protector, the heroic Savyasachi and Vrikodara for their warriors, and 
Nakula, Sahadeva and Dhrishtadyumna also fighting for them. 

Indra cannot prevail against them, who have with them the son of 
Prishata, Satyaki, Drupada and Dhrishtaketu with his son, Uttamaujas, the 
unconquerable Yudhamanyu of the Panchalas, Sikhandin, Kshattradeva, 


Virata’s son Uttara, the Kasayas, the Chedis, the Matsyas, the Srinjayas, 
Babhru, the sons of Virata, the Panchalas, and the Prabhadrakas. These 
heroes are calm and steadfast on the battlefield; they can cleave the very 
mountains; they are endowed with every virtue and blessed with 
superhuman strength; and it is against them that my foolish son wants to pit 
himself, ignoring all my pleas.’ 

Duryodhana says, ‘The Pandavas and we are of the same vamsa; we 
tread upon the same earth. Why do you think that victory will be theirs? 
Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, the unconquerable Karna, Jayadratha, Somadatta 
and Aswatthama are all mighty bowmen and endowed with great powers. 
When even Indra and the Devas cannot subdue them, what can the 
Pandavas do against them, O my father? 

All these noble and heroic kings of the Earth, bearing weapons on my 
behalf, will easily contain and quell the Pandavas; the sons of Pandu cannot 
dare look at my troops, let alone face them in war. Why, by myself I can 
crush the Pandavas and their sons in battle. Bhaarata, all these sovereigns of 
the Earth, who are anxious to serve my cause, will even capture the 
Pandavas as they would net a herd of young deer. Rest assured, O 
Dhritarashtra, that, with our numberless chariots and tempests of arrows, we 
will annihilate the Panchalas and the Pandavas.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Sanjaya, my son speaks like a madman; he cannot 
prevail over Dharmaraja Yudhishtira. Bhishma knows the true might of the 
Pandavas and their sons, which is why he does not want war with them. 

Tell me again, Sanjaya, of their movements. Tell me, who incites those 
bowmen of the wonderful tejas like priests feeding the homa fire with 
libations of ghee?’ 

Sanjaya says, “Dhrishtadyumna urges the Pandavas to war, saying, 
“Fight, Bharatottamas! Have no fear whatever. All those rulers of the Earth, 
whom Dhritarashtra’s son woos, will be no more than easy targets for your 
astras in war. I by myself can devour all the angry kings assembled, 
together with their kinsmen, like a whale swallowing swarms of little fish. 
Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna, Drona’s son, Salya and Duryodhana—I will 
contain them all, as the shore does the swelling sea.” 

Yudhishtira said in reply, “The Panchalas and the Pandavas depend on 
your prowess and fortitude to see us safely through the war. I know, 
Mahabaho, that you are devoted to Kshatriya dharma. Indeed, you can kill 


the Kauravas on your own. Parantapa, when they face us, eager for war, 
whatever strategy you decide on will be the best for us, of that I am sure. 

Those who know the Shastras say that the Kshatriya who manifests his 
strength, and then helps those who flee the battlefield after the rout he has 
made and ask for his protection, is worth a thousand men. Purusharishabha, 
you are such a man—peerless. I have no doubt that you will be the refuge 
of those who are taken by fear on the field of war.” 

When Dharmatma Yudhishtira said this, Dhrishtadyumna said to me, 
“Go, Suta, without delay and say to all those that have come to fight for 
Duryodhana—the Kurus of the Pratipa vamsa, the Bahlikas, the son of 
Saradwata, Karna and Drona, Drona’s son and Jayadratha, Dusasana, 
Vikarna and to Raja Duryodhana and Bhishma: Do not offer yourselves up 
to be slain by Arjuna, whom the Devas protect. Before that happens, let 
some good man approach Yudhishtira with all repair and entreat that son of 
Pandu, that Purushottama, to accept the kingdom that they surrender to 
him, without delay. 

There is no warrior on the Earth like Arjuna, of the pure and 
unquenchable prowess. The Devas protect the wielder of the Gandiva’s 
celestial ratha, and he cannot be vanquished by a human. Therefore, steer 
your minds away from war.”’” 


CANTO 58 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, ‘Yudhishtira has the power of a Kshatriya by 

birth and since his youth led a life of brahmacharya. Sadly, my 

foolish sons ignore me and want to fight this noblest man, which is why I 
weep. 

I beg you, Duryodhana, to turn away from this enmity. War is never 
commended under any circumstances. Half the Earth is quite enough for 
you and all your followers. Give back their rightful share of the kingdom to 
the Pandavas. All the Kauravas consider this course of action—to make 
peace with the sons of Pandu—to be in keeping both with nyaya and 
dharma. 

Think carefully, my son, and you will realise that your own army will 
become the instrument of your death. Your folly prevents you from 
understanding this. I myself do not want war and neither do Bahlika, 
Bhishma, Drona and Aswatthama; nor do Somadatta, Salya and Kripa; nor 
Satyavrata, Purumitra and Bhurisravas. If truth be told, none of these kings 
wants war. The warriors upon whom the Kauravas depend disapprove of the 
war. My child, accept this. In your own heart, you do not wish for war, but 
sadly, Karna and the vile-minded Dusasana and Sakuni lead you to it.’ 

Duryodhana says, ‘I challenge the Pandavas to battle without depending 
on you, Drona, Aswatthama or Sanjaya, on Vikarna, Kamboja, Kripa or 
Bahlika, on Satyavrata, Purumitra or Bhurisravas, or on any of the others in 


our force. Purusharishabha, Karna and I, by ourselves, are prepared to 
celebrate the Yuddha yagna—the sacrifice of war—with all the needful rites 
and make Yudhishtira the yagnapasu, the sacrificial animal. 

At that yagna my chariot will be the altar; my sword will be the small 
ladle and my mace the large one for pouring libations; my coat of mail will 
be the witness; my four steeds will be the officiating priests; my arrows will 
be the blades of kusa grass; and fame will be the ghrita, the clarified butter. 
Rajan, by performing such a sacrifice with war in honour of Yama, and by 
providing the ingredients for it ourselves, we will return crowned with 
victory and covered in glory after slaying our enemies. 

The three of us—I, Karna and my brother Dusasana—will kill the 
Pandavas in battle. Either I will slay them and rule the Earth or, having 
killed me, they will. My king, O you of unfading glory, I am ready to 
sacrifice my life, my kingdom, my wealth and everything else, but I cannot 
live at peace with the Pandavas. J will not surrender to the Pandavas even 
such land as may be covered by the point of a needle!’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Ah, I now cast Duryodhana off forever; however, I 
grieve for all you kings who will follow this fool into Yamaloka. Like tigers 
let loose amongst a herd of deer, the sons of Pandu will devour all of you, 
who are so agog for battle. 

I think of the Bhaarata host as a helpless woman who will be brutalised, 
then slain and cast into the distance by Yuyudhana of the long arms. 
Augmenting the strength of Yudhishtira’s army, which was already 
powerful enough, Sini’s son will take his stand on the field of battle and 
scatter his arrows like seeds on a ploughed field. And each one will take a 
life. 

Bhimasena will assume his position at the very front of the Pandava 
forces with his soldiers arrayed fearlessly behind him, as behind a rampart. 

O Duryodhana, when you see elephants as big as hills fallen on the 
ground with their tusks broken, their heads crushed and their bodies dyed 
with their own blood; when you see them lying on the field of battle like 
splintered mountains; then, terrified of Bhima, you will remember my 
words. When you see your forces of chariots, horses and elephants 
devastated by Bhimasena, and looking like the ruined, smoking wake of a 
great conflagration, you will remember my words. 

If you do not make peace with the Pandavas, inexorable doom will find 
you. You will meet your end by the hand of Bhimasena with his gada, and 


rest finally in peace. When you see the Kuru host levelled to the ground by 
Bhima, like a vast forest of trees torn up by their roots, then you will 
remember my words.’ 

Having spoken thus to all those rulers of the Earth gathered there, the 
king addresses Sanjaya once more.” 


CANTO 59 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, ‘Wise one, tell me what Krishna and 
Dhananjaya said. I am eager to hear that.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Listen, O king, and I will tell you how Krishna and 
Arjuna are, and what those heroes said. With my eyes turned down, my 
hands joined in reverence and with my senses under control, I entered the 
antahpura to confer with those gods among men. Not Abhimanyu or the 
twins have free access to the apartments that Arjuna and Krishna share with 
Draupadi and Satyabhama. There I saw those Parantapas, anointed with 
sandalwood paste, and cheerful from having drunk sweet wine. They wore 
grand clothes and celestial ornaments and sat on a golden dais decked with 
gems and covered with closely woven, many-hued carpets. 

Krishna’s feet rested on Arjuna’s lap, while Arjuna’s lay on Draupadi’s 
and Satyabhama’s. Arjuna pointed to a golden foot-stool for me to sit on; I 
touched it in ritual salutation and sat on the ground. And when he drew his 
feet away from the foot-stool, I saw auspicious marks on both his soles — 
two dark lines ran from heel to toe. 

Seeing the two Krishnas—both of them tall, dark and straight like the 
trunks of sala trees—sitting on the same seat, a great foreboding gripped 
me. They looked like Indra and Vishnu seated together. Relying on Drona 
and Bhishma, and on Karna’s vain boasts, the deluded Duryodhana does not 


realise that Yudhishtira, with these two obeying his every command, will 
have all his wishes fulfilled. My lord, of that I am entirely convinced. 

They entertained me with food and drink and honoured me with other 
courtesies, too; then, raising my folded hands over my head in reverence, I 
conveyed your message to them. Arjuna, with his cicatrised hand, removed 
Krishna’s auspicious foot from his lap and urged him to speak. Sitting up 
erect as Indra’s banner, adorned with every ornament, and splendid in tejas 
as Indra himself, Krishna addressed me. His words were sweet, charming 
and mild, but full of doom for Duryodhana. Krishna spoke directly, clearly 
and meaningfully, but what he said at the end rent my very heart. 

He said to me, “O Sanjaya, after greeting the elders and enquiring about 
the welfare of the younger ones there, say this to the wise Dhritarashtra, in 
the hearing of Kurusattama Bhishma and Drona: 

“We hope that you have been performing yagnas, giving gifts to 
Brahmanas, and enjoying your sons and wives, for dire peril is imminent. 
We hope you have been giving wealth to the deserving, helping your near 
and dear ones and that you have been blessed with good sons, for 
Yudhishtira is eager for victory. My old vow to Draupadi remains 
unfulfilled. You have provoked Arjuna, whose bow is the fiery and 
invincible Gandiva, and who has me by his side. Even if he were Indra, is 
there any man who would challenge Arjuna, who has me to help him, 
unless that man’s time on Earth has ended? Only the man who can lift the 
Earth in his arms, consume all creation in anger and who can cast the Devas 
out of Swarga, can hope to vanquish Arjuna. I do not see even one among 
the Devas, Asuras, Manavas, Yakshas, Gandharvas and Nagas who can face 
Dhanajaya in war. 

That wonderful battle in Virata’s kingdom is proof of this: when one 
man faced countless Maharathas and quelled them. That you all fled, routed 
single-handedly by this Pandava, is proof enough. No one has the might, 
prowess, energy, speed, lightness of hand, boundless stamina and patience 
that Partha does.’” 

Krishna cheered Arjuna with these words and, also, with roars of 
exultation, like thunder in the sky, that would frighten even Indra. When he 
heard what Krishna said, Arjuna, too, spoke in similar vein to me, and his 
words made the hairs on my body stand on end.’” 


CANTO 60 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “The wise Dhritarashtra weighs Sanjaya’s words, 
their merits and flaws. Once he has done this as best he can and has 
gauged the strengths and weaknesses of both sides, the Kuru king compares 
the might of each side, always keeping his sons’ interest at heart. He comes 
to the conclusion that the Pandavas, endowed with both human and divine 
ancestry and prowess, are more powerful. 

He says to Duryodhana, ‘My child, I cannot shake off the anxiety that 
grips me. It clings to me so that I can almost see it, like some demon. My 
dark forebodings cannot be explained away by your reasoning; and it is 
natural, for you are my son. All beings love their progeny; they do 
everything in their power to please them, and work for their advantage. It is 
the same with benefactors— good men always want to reciprocate the good 
done to them and do what pleases their patrons. 

Agni will remember what Arjuna did for him in the Khandava vana and 
will certainly help Arjuna in this unthinkable war. From paternal affection, 
Dharma, Indra, Vayu and the Aswins will come together to help the 
Pandavas; other Devas will join them. To protect them from Bhishma, 
Drona and Kripa, the wrath of the Devas will manifest itself like the very 
Brahmastra. Those Purushavyaghras, the sons of Pritha, are blessed with 
immense strength and are masters of all the godly and fell astras. When 


they are as one with the Devas, our warriors—mere mortals, all—will not 
be able to even look at them. 

He whose bow is the divine Gandiva; he who has a pair of inexhaustible 
celestial quivers from Varuna; he whose banner, which flies as freely as 
smoke in the air, has the Vanara upon it; he whose chariot has no equal on 
the Earth bound by the four seas, its rumble like clouds roaring, and which, 
like the crash of thunder, terrifies his enemies; he whose superhuman tejas 
the whole world knows; he whom all the kings of the Earth know to be the 
conqueror of the Devas; he who takes up five hundred arrows at a time and 
in the twinkling of an eye shoots them in a blur into far distances; this son 
of Pritha, Parantapa, tiger among Maharathas, whom Bhishma, Drona, 
Kripa, Drona’s son, Salya the king of the Madras and indeed all impartial 
men of thought consider invincible even by kings possessing phenomenal 
prowess; he who shoots five hundred arrows at each stretch of his bow and 
whose arms are as powerful as Kartavirya’s—I see this great bowman 
Arjuna, who is equal to Indra or Upendra, this Kshatriya himself without 
equal, wreaking unimagined havoc in this war. 

O Bhaarata, this thought preys on my mind night and day, and I am 
miserable and sleepless because of my fear for my sons and for all the 
Kurus. Savage and bloody carnage is about to overtake them unless this war 
is averted by striking peace. With all my heart, I am for making peace with 
the Pandavas and not for war. My son, I have always considered them 
greater than the Kurus.’” 


CANTO 61 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “At his father’s words, Dhritarashtra’s volatile 

son is inflamed with rage and in a voice heavy with envy says, ‘You 
assume that the sons of Pritha are invincible because they have the Devas 
on their side. Best of kings, dispel your fear. The Devas achieved divinity 
by virtue of the absence of desire, covetousness, hatred and of detachment 
from worldly affairs. 

Bharatarishabha, once, Dwaipayana-Vyasa, Maharishi Narada and 
Jamadagni’s son Parasurama told us that, unlike human beings, the motive 
for what the Devas do is never desire, anger, covetousness or envy. Indeed, 
if Agni, Vayu, Dharma, Indra or the Aswins had actively taken their side, 
the sons of Pritha would never have fallen into this pit of distress. Do not be 
anxious, for the Devas always act dispassionately, in accord with principles 
worthy of their divinity. If envy and lust are incentives, the laws that rule 
the Devas will nullify them. 

Besides, even if he flares into an all-consuming blaze, I will charm Agni 
into extinguishment. The tejas of the gods is great, but mine is greater. If the 
Earth herself cleaves in two, or mountain peaks split, I can reunite them 
with my mantras, Rajan. If a violent tempest or a roaring deluge threatens 
the universe of animate and inanimate, moving and immobile creatures, I 
can, from compassion for life, stop them. I have the power to freeze all the 
great waters of the Earth, so chariots and fighting men can pass over them. 


It is I who set in motion all the affairs of the Devas and Asuras. My 
horses take me anywhere at my will, wherever I go with my akshauhinis, on 
whatever mission. Within my dominions there are no fearful nagas and, 
protected by my mantras, innocent creatures within my kingdom never fall 
prey to others. The clouds bring rain at the appointed time and in the 
quantity wished for by my people. All my subjects are devout, and natural 
calamities never visit them. 

The Aswins, Vayu, Agni, Dharma and Indra with the Maruts will not 
dare protect my enemies. Had they been able to, would the sons of Kunti 
have suffered for thirteen years? Know that neither Devas nor Gandharvas, 
neither Asuras nor Rakshasas can save him who has incurred my wrath. I 
have never before had any doubt about the aptness of reward or punishment 
to friend or foe. Parantapa, whenever I say something it is always just so. 
The people know me as a speaker of truth. 

Everyone can bear witness to my greatness, whose fame has spread all 
around. I say this, Rajan, for your information and not from vanity. I have 
never praised myself before; to sing one’s own praises is petty. And I say to 
you, my father, you will soon hear of my victory over the Pandavas, the 
Matsyas, the Panchalas, the Kekayas, Satyaki and Krishna. 

Just as rivers cease to be when they enter the ocean, so will the 
Pandavas and all their followers when they encounter me. My intelligence 
is sharper, my energy is greater, my prowess is mightier, my knowledge is 
deeper and my resources are superior, by far, to theirs. The knowledge of 
weapons that our Pitamaha, Drona, Kripa, Salya and Sala have, I have it 
all.’ 

Saying this, Parantapa Duryodhana questions Sanjaya once more about 
Yudhishtira’s preparations for the war. 


CANTO 62 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Ignoring Dhritarashtra, who was about to ask 
about Arjuna, Karna addresses Duryodhana with words to cheer the 
spirit of the assembled Kurus. 

He says, ‘When Parasurama discovered the false pretence by which I 
obtained the Brahmastra from him, he cursed me that I would forget the 
mantra for that astra at the end of my days. Even for so great an offence, 
that Rishi, my guru, cursed me lightly; that Maharishi of the fierce tejas can 
consume the very Earth with her seas. By my diligence and bravery, I 
appeased him. I have that weapon with me still, and my end has not yet 
come. I am confident of victory. Let the charge of winning the war be mine. 

Through my guru’s favour, I will, in the twinkling of an eye, wipe out 
the Panchalas, the Karushas, the Matsyas, as well as the sons of Pritha, their 
sons and grandsons. I will win the war and bestow many realms upon you. 
Let the Pitamaha, Drona and all the kings remain here with you. I will go 
forth with the best of my warriors and kill Kunti’s sons. Let that task be 
mine.’ 

Bhishma says to him, ‘What are you saying, Karna? The approach of 
your end has dimmed your intellect. Do you not know that when our 
chieftains are killed, all the sons of Dhritarashtra will die? Considering that 
you know how Arjuna burnt down the Khandava vana, with only Krishna 
helping him, you ought to restrain yourself and your friends and relatives. 


You will see the shakti that Indra gave you burnt to ashes when Krishna 
strikes it with his chakra. Your other astra, with the serpent’s head, that 
shines in your quiver and which you worship with offerings of flowers, will 
be consumed and you with it, when Arjuna’s arrows flare at you. Karna, 
remember that it is Krishna, who killed Bana and Bhumi’s son Naraka in 
fervid battle, and who has slain many others much greater than you, who 
protects Arjuna.’ 

Karna says, ‘There is no doubt that Krishna is all that you say, and I 
believe he is even greater. Pitamaha, you are invariably harsh to me, and 
this is my response to you today: I hereby lay down my weapons! From 
now, you will see me only in the sabha and not on the battlefield. When 
death stills your voice, Bhishma, and only then, will the rulers of the Earth 
see my prowess,’ and with these words, the great archer, Mahadhanushman 
Karna, leaves the Kuru sabha and goes home. 

Bhishma laughs mockingly and says to Duryodhana in the midst of the 
Kurus, ‘How truly the Sutaputra keeps his word. When Bhimasena arrays 
his forces and brings havoc by decimating our legions, scattering hundreds 
of thousands of heads, how does Karna intend to keep his pledge to kill the 
kings of Avanti and Kalinga with Jayadratha, Chedidhvaja and Bahlika 
looking on? 

When he presented himself as a Brahmana before the holy Parasurama, 
he did indeed obtain the Brahmastra, but he lost his dharma and punya.’ 

When Bhishma says this after Karna lays down his weapons and leaves, 
Vichitravirya’s foolish grandson Duryodhana testily addresses Bhishma.” 


CANTO 63 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) uryodhana says, “Pritha’s sons are men like any others, mortals 

like other men. Why then are you so sure victory will be theirs? 

Both we and they are equal in energy, in prowess, in age, in intelligence, in 

our knowledge of the Shastras, in our mastery over astras, in the art of war, 

in lightness of hand and every other skill. We are all human by birth. How 
then, Pitamaha, do you know that victory will be theirs? 

I do not seek to accomplish my goals by relying on you, Drona, Kripa, 
Bahlika, or on any of the other kings. Vikartana’s son Karna, my brother 
Dusasana and I will slay the five sons of Pandu in battle. Having done this, 
we will gratify Brahmanas by performing great yagnas of all kinds, with 
abundant dakshina and gifts of cattle, horses and wealth. 

When my warriors haul the Pandavas’ legions across the field, like 
hunters a herd of deer caught in a net, or like whirlpools do a crewless boat, 
Pandu’s sons will see the might of our vast host of soldiers, chariots and 
elephants, and not only they, but Krishna as well, will surrender their pride.’ 

Hearing this, Vidura says, ‘Venerable men of infallible knowledge say 
that self-restraint is the best of all virtues; and for a Brahmana it is his 
eternal dharma. He whose self-control follows the path of daana, tapasya, 
gyana and Veda dhyana, always wins success, forgiveness and the punya of 
his charity. Self-restraint enhances a man’s tejas and is a most holy 


attribute. By absolving a man of his sin and increasing his vitality, it even 
leads him to Brahman. 

People always fear those who have no self-restraint, as if they are 
Rakshasas; and it is to curb Rakshasas that Brahma created Kshatriyas. 
Indeed, self-restraint is an excellent vow for all the four varnas to keep. 

And these are the qualities of a man with self-restraint: forgiveness, 
firmness of mind, non-violence, respect for all things, truthfulness, 
simplicity, control over the senses, patience, gentle speech, modesty, 
steadiness, liberality, mildness, contentment and faith. He who is self- 
controlled sheds lust, avarice, pride, anger, sloth, vanity, malice and sorrow. 
Purity and straightforwardness are the hallmarks of a self-restrained man. 

He who is not covetous, who is content with a little, who is indifferent 
to all things provocative or seductive, and who is as deep as the ocean, is a 
man of self-restraint. He who is virtuous, always pleasant and contented, 
who has Atmagyana and wisdom wins great respect in this world and bliss 
in the hereafter. The man who is wise and mature, who has no fear of other 
creatures and whom other creatures do not fear is the foremost of men. 

Such a man, who seeks the good of all, is a universal friend and makes 
one and all happy. Blessed with depth of character, like the ocean, and 
happily content by virtue of his wisdom, this man is always serene and 
light-hearted. A man who has self-control and serenity, regulates his life by 
the example of men of dharma of the past and the present, and lives in joy. 
Alternatively, such a man, whose gyana has endowed him with 
contentment, abandons karma and, with his senses firmly restrained, 
wanders over the Earth, impatient for death and absorption into Brahman. 

The path of the man who enjoys the contentment that his gyana brings 
is as invisible as the paths of birds in the sky. He who abandons the world 
and takes to sannyasa in pursuit of Moksha can look forward to the bright 
and eternal realms that are reserved for him in Swarga.’” 


CANTO 64 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °V idura says, “O king, there is a tale told by men of old of the 

fowler who spread his net on the ground to snare birds. Two 

birds that lived together were trapped in the net at the same time, but they 

took the net up and soared up into the air. Seeing them fly into the sky, the 

fowler, without giving way to despair, began to follow them on the ground. 

Just then, a hermit living in a nearby asrama, who had finished his morning 
prayers, saw the fowler running to catch the birds. 

The Muni said to the man, “Fowler, I find it strange and wonderful that 
you, who walk on solid ground are pursuing a pair of winged creatures of 
the air.” 

The fowler said, “These two, united now, are taking away my snare. 
Once they fall out I will indeed catch them.” 

Sure enough the two doomed birds soon began to quarrel, and they fell 
to the ground. Still caught in the net and facing death, they argued angrily 
with each other. The fowler came up stealthily and seized them both. 

Kinsmen who fall out with one another over wealth fall into the hands 
of their enemies, like the quarrelling birds. The duty of kinsmen is to eat 
together and talk with one another, and not argue under any circumstances. 
Family members who lovingly wait on the elderly become unconquerable, 
like a forest guarded by lions; but those who are mean, although wealthy, 


always contribute to the prosperity of their enemies. Dhritarashtra, cousins 
are like charcoal, blazing when united but only smoking when divided. 

I will tell you of something else I once saw on a mountainside. Listen to 
this, O Kaurava, and then do what you think best. Once, we went to the 
northern mountain, Gandhamadana, accompanied by some hunters and a 
number of Brahmanas who liked talking about magical charms and 
medicinal plants. 

Gandhamadana was a great sylvan tapovana, its slopes covered with 
trees and luminous herbs, and Siddhas and Gandharvas lived there. There 
we saw a jar of bright golden honey perched on an inaccessible precipice. 
That honey, which was Kubera’s favourite drink, was guarded by poisonous 
snakes. To the one who drank it, it had the power to grant immortality to the 
mortal, sight to the blind and youth to the old. It was this honey, too, that 
those Brahmanas had spoken of. The hunters saw that honey and, in their 
frantic attempt to secure it, they all died either falling from that snake 
ridden cliff or being stung by the vicious serpents. 

In much the same way, your son lusts for unrivalled ownership of the 
Earth. He sees the prize but, foolishly, not the terrible fall. Duryodhana 
wants to do battle with Savyasachi, but I do not see in him enough prowess 
or vigour to give him success. 

On a single chariot Arjuna conquered all the Earth. Bhishma, Drona and 
others, with huge armies behind them, were terrified of Arjuna, who routed 
them outside Virata’s city. Keep in mind what happened there. Arjuna still 
forgives you and looks to you in hope, waiting for your decision. When 
roused, Dhananjaya, Drupada and the king of Matsyas will leave no 
remnant of your army; they will be like apocalyptic flames fanned by the 
winds of yuganta. 

O Dhritarashtra, embrace Yudhishtira. If you go to war, neither side can 
win without dreadful losses to themselves, not under any circumstances.” 


CANTO 65 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, ‘O my son Duryodhana, think carefully about 
what I tell you. Like an ignorant wayfarer, you mistake the 
wrong path for the right one. 

The five sons of Pandu, whose tejas you are so eager to extinguish, are 
like the Panchabhutas, the five elements that support the very universe. You 
cannot vanquish Yudhishtira without sacrificing your life in the effort; this 
son of Kunti is the most virtuous man in the world. Like a weak tree against 
a howling storm, you dare defy Bhimasena, whose strength is unrivalled on 
Earth, and who is like Yama himself in battle. And what man of any sense 
would choose to face the wielder of Gandiva, greatest of all Kshatriyas, 
who is a man among men as Meru is among mountains? 

There is no man whom Dhrishtadyumna cannot vanquish, the prince of 
Panchala who looses astras at his enemies even like Indra hurling his Vajra. 
The noble, irresistible Satyaki, whom the Andhakas and the Vrishnis 
honour, is always with the Pandavas. He, too, will slaughter your forces. 

No man in his right senses would face the lotus-eyed Krishna, whose 
tejas and might surpass any in the three worlds. This same Krishna puts his 
wives, relatives, his own soul and the entire Earth on one side of a scale, 
and considers Arjuna on the other side to be equal to them all. Krishna, on 
whom Arjuna relies, is invincible; and the army with which he allies 
himself also becomes irresistible. 


Listen, my son, to your well-wishers; they advise you for your own 
good. Accept your Pitamaha Bhishma as your mentor and guide. Listen to 
what I say and to what these other true friends of the Kurus— Drona, Kripa, 
Vikarna and Raja Bahlika—say. They feel for you as I do, and you would 
do well to regard them as you do me. Bhaarata, they all know dharma and 
love you as much as I do. 

The rout by one man, and the ensuing panic of your troops, which you 
and your brothers saw outside Virata’s city, is proof enough of the truth of 
what I am saying. When Arjuna could single-handedly do that, what can the 
Pandavas not achieve when united? Take them by their hands as your 
brothers and cherish them with a share of the kingdom.’” 


CANTO 66 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Having said this to Duryodhana, the wise 

Dhritarashtra asks Sanjaya, ‘Now, Sanjaya, tell me what you have 
not yet told me—what Arjuna said after Krishna spoke. I am eager to hear 
it.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Having heard what Krishna said, the irresistible 
Dhananjaya spoke to me in Krishna’s presence. 

He said, “O Sanjaya, all the kings and the others who have assembled 
here to fight for the Kauravas are about to die—our Pitamaha, Dhritarashtra, 
Drona and Kripa; Karna and king Bahlika; Drona’s son, Somadatta and 
Subala’s son Sakuni; Dusasana, Sala, Purumitra and Vivimsati; Vikarna, 
Chitrasena and Jayatsena; Vinda and Anuvinda; the two lords of Avanti; 
Bhurisravas, Bhagadatta and Jarasandha and the other rulers of the Earth. 
Dhritarashtra’s son has brought them together to serve as a libation in the 
Pandava fire. 

In my name, Sanjaya, enquire after the welfare of those kings according 
to their status, making sure that you accord them proper respect. In their 
presence, address Duryodhana, that worst of evil men, who is wrathful, of 
sinful soul, and covetous. Make sure that fool and his advisors hear my 
message.” 

Saying this first, Pritha’s son, Dhananjaya of the large eyes with red 
corners glanced at Krishna and then spoke words of dharma and artha. 


He said to me, “You have heard the measured words of the high-souled 
lord of the Madhus. Tell the assembled kings that they are mine as well. 

Say this for me to those kings, Make peace with us so that you will not 
be poured as offerings into the arrow fire of the great yagna of war, in 
which the rumble of chariot wheels are the mantras and the annihilating 
bow is the sruva, the ladle which will pour blood into death’s great fire. If 
you do not give his rightful share of the kingdom to Yudhishtira, I will send 
all of you, with your footsoldiers, horsemen and elephants, into the dark 
regions of departed spirits.” 

I bowed before Dhananjaya and Hari of four arms and took leave of 
them, and here I am, come speedily to convey their grave message to you 
who are as effulgent as the Devas themselves.’” 


CANTO 67 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Duryodhana shows scant regard for Sanjaya’s 

words; the other kings mutely rise to leave the sabha. As they go, 
Dhritarashtra, who, out of blind love, always does whatever his son wants, 
wishes all those kings success and secretly asks Sanjaya what the Kurus 
plan, and what the hostile Pandavas. 

Dhritarashtra says, “Tell me truly, Gavalgana putra, what are the 
strengths and weaknesses of our forces? You are minutely acquainted with 
the affairs of the Pandavas, so tell me where their superiority and inferiority 
lie. You are aware of the strength of both sides; you know everything; and 
you are versed in all matters pertaining to dharma and artha. I ask you, 
Sanjaya, which side will lose in the war?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘I will not say anything to you in secret, Rajan, for then 
you might bear ill-will towards me. Have your father Vyasa of the stern 
vratas and your queen Gandhari come here. Being knowledgeable about 
dharma, perceptive and able to discern the truth, they will remove any ill- 
feelings that you might have. In their presence, I will tell you what Arjuna 
and Krishna intend.’ 

Dhritarashtra sends for Gandhari and Vyasa, and Vidura ushers them in. 
Vyasa Dwaipayana, the wise, says, ‘Sanjaya, tell Dhritarashtra everything 
he wants to know. Tell him honestly all that you know about Krishna and 
Arjuna.” 


CANTO 68 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, “Those wonderful archers Arjuna and Krishna, who 
are equally godlike, have been born of their own divine will. 
Krishna’s chakra, of the boundless energy, is five krosas wide. At will, and 
empowered by maya, he can cast it at any adversary, great or small. It 
blazes in refulgence but will be invisible to the Kurus. Krishna’s 
Sudarshana chakra is what determines the strength or weakness of the 
Pandavas. 

With it that mighty scion of the Madhus effortlessly, almost playfully, 
vanquished the formidable Naraka, Sambara, Kamsa and the Chedi king 
Sisupala. Krishna is the most exalted of all men; he is divine and a 
Paramatman; and he can bring Bhumi, Akasa and Swarga under his sway, 
just by willing it. Again and again you ask me about the strengths and 
weaknesses of the Pandavas. Listen and I will tell you of these, simply. 

If the whole universe is placed on one side of a balance and Krishna on 
the other, Krishna will be heavier. He can, at his pleasure, reduce the 
universe to ashes, but if all the forces in the universe combine, they cannot 
do the same to him. Wherever there is truth, righteousness, modesty and 
compassion, there is Krishna; and where he is, victory must be. 

Janardana is the soul of all creatures; he is the highest of all Purushas; 
and he guides, as if in sport, the earth, the sky and heaven. Beguiling the 
world, he uses the Pandavas as his instruments to destroy your evil sons, 


who are great sinners. The divine Kesava keeps the wheel of time, the 
wheel of the universe and the wheel of the yuga in constant motion. 

Know that this glorious One is the lord of time, of death and of this 
brahmanda of mobile and immobile things; and this Mahayogi Hari, though 
the Lord of the universe, still performs his dharma, even like a humble 
labourer who tills the fields. 

Indeed, Krishna beguiles the world with his maya; only those who have 
attained Him are not deceived.” 


CANTO 69 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, ‘How have you come to know Krishna as the 
Lord of the universe, and I have not? Tell me this, Sanjaya.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Listen, Rajan. You have lost your gyana, while the gyana 
I have acquired has not diminished. The man who has no gyana is wrapped 
in the dark cloak of ignorance and does not know Krishna. Through my 
gyana I know that in Madhusudana the three states—the gross, the subtle 
and the causal—come together. He is the Creator of all but is, himself, 
uncreated. He is divine; from him everything arises and into him everything 
returns.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘What is the nature of your faith in Krishna, which 
makes you know him to be the union of the kartaram, the akrutam and 
Devam’?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Rajan, worldly pleasures, which are really maya, hold no 
importance for me. I never perform empty rituals, like keeping vratas 
without a pure heart or faith in Krishna. With faith I have purified my soul 
and then realised Krishna through the shastras.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘O Duryodhana, turn to Krishna for protection. My 
child, Sanjaya is one of our truest friends. Seek refuge with Krishna.’ 

Duryodhana says, “Even if the divine son of Devaki, united with 
Arjuna, were to destroy all mankind, I will not surrender to him.’ 


Dhritarashtra says, ‘Gandhari, this evil son of yours is determined to 
plunge us all into hell. Envious, black-souled and vain, he disregards the 
wisdom of his elders.’ 

Gandhari says to Duryodhana, ‘O covetous child who ignores the 
commands of your elders, you abandon your father and me; you give up 
prosperity and life; you enhance the joy of your enemies; and I am deeply 
distressed. When Bhimasena strikes you down and you die, you will, 
foolish boy, remember what your father said to you.’ 

Vyasa says, ‘Listen to me, Dhritarashtra. Krishna bears you love. 
Sanjaya, as your envoy, will do what is good for you. He knows Krishna, 
the ancient and exalted One. If you pay heed to him, he will certainly save 
you from the great danger that threatens you. 

Son of Vichitravirya, men trap themselves because they are victims of 
krodha and kama. Those who are not content with what they have are like 
the blind leading the blind, into deep pits; deprived of their senses by 
avarice and desire, their actions lead them to a never-ending cycle of births 
and deaths. The path that the wise take is the only one that leads to 
Brahman. Those who are superior overcome death by keeping that path in 
view and reach their goal by it.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Sanjaya, tell me of that path without terrors, by 
which I can realise Hrishikesa and attain mukti.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘A man of uncontrolled mind cannot know Krishna 
Janardana, who has perfect and absolute control over his soul. The 
performance of yagnas with uncontrolled senses is not the means to that 
end. Renunciation of the objects of our turbulent senses comes from true 
gyana. Spiritual enlightenment and abstention from injury arise from true 
wisdom. Therefore, O king, subdue your senses with all possible effort; let 
your mind not deviate from true knowledge; and detach your heart from the 
worldly temptations that surround you. Learned Brahmanas say that this 
subjugation of the senses is true wisdom; and this wisdom is the path by 
which learned men strive for their goal. 

Rajan, Krishna cannot be realised by men who have not subdued their 
senses. He who has subdued his senses is gratified by spiritual knowledge 
that he gains from knowing the shastras and from the joy of absorption in 
Yoga, communion.” 


CANTO 70 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, ‘Sanjaya, tell me again about the lotus-eyed 
Krishna, so that, by knowing the significance of his names, I 
may attain that Purushottama.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘I have heard many of Krishna’s auspicious names, and I 
will tell you of those that I know. They all describe him as immeasurable 
and beyond description. 

He is called Vasudeva because he wraps all creatures with the cloak of 
maya, because of his glorious splendour and because he is the foundation 
and resting-place of the Devas. He is called Vishnu because he is all- 
pervading. He is called Madhava because he is an ascetic whose energy is 
always focused on the truth and absorbed in Yoga. 

He is called Madhusudana because he killed the Asura Madhu and 
because he is the substance of the twenty-four objects of knowledge. He is 
called Krishna because he is of the Sattvata vamsa, because he is the 
embodiment of the unity of the words Krishi, that which exists, and Na, 
eternal peace. 

His name Pundarikaksha comes from Pundarika, the high and eternal 
abode, and Aksha, indestructible. 

He is called Janardana because he strikes fear into the hearts of all evil 
beings. He is called Sattvata because the sattva guna is embodied in him. 
He is called Vrishabhakshana because he is the union of Vrishabha—the 


Vedas —and ikshana—eye: the Vedas are the eyes through which he can be 
seen. He is called Aja because he is Unborn; he has not taken birth in the 
usual way. 

That Supreme Soul is called Damodara because, unlike the Devas, his 
effulgence is not acquired but emanates from him and because he has self- 
control and great splendour. He is called Hrishikesa because he is the union 
of joy and divinity —Hrishika, eternal happiness and Isa, the six divine 
attributes. He is called Mahabahu because of his mighty arms with which 
he supports the Earth and the sky. 

He is called Adhokshaja because he never falls or deteriorates in any 
way. He is called Narayana because he is the refuge of all human beings. He 
is called Purushottama because he is the one who creates, preserves and 
destroys the universe—Puru means creator, preserver and destroyer. He is 
called Sarva because he knows and is all things. He is called Satya because 
he is the truth of Truth—Krishna exists in Truth and Truth in him. He is 
called Vishnu because of his prowess and Jishnu because of his success. He 
is called Ananta because he is eternal and Govinda because he knows all 
languages. 

He makes the unreal appear real and beguiles all creatures. With these 
his attributes, being ever devoted to dharma, and divine, the slayer of 
Madhu, that mighty-armed one who does not decay, will come here to try 
and prevent the slaughter of the Kurus.’” 


CANTO 71 
Y ANASANDHI PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, “O Sanjaya, I envy those who are gifted with 
sight, who will see Krishna, his beauty and radiance illuminating 
all the cardinal points of Earth and sky; Krishna, whose words the 
Bhaaratas listen to with reverence, which the Srinjayas consider sacred and 
auspicious, which those who seek prosperity regard as faultless and that the 
doomed find unpalatable; Krishna, who is full of exalted resolve, who is 
eternal and incomparably heroic, who is the bull of the Yadavas and their 
lord; Krishna who inspires awe in his enemies, who slays them and destroys 
their fame. 

The assembled Kauravas will behold that high-souled and adorable 
One, that Parantapa, the lord of the Vrishnis, speaking words of kindness 
and enthralling my people. I surrender to the refuge of that Eternal One, 
whom Rishis blessed with Atmagyana, that ocean of eloquence, that Being 
whom ascetics realise, that bird called Arishta of the beautiful wings, that 
destroyer of creatures, that refuge of the universe, that thousand-headed 
one, that Creator and Destroyer of all things, that Ancient One without 
beginning, middle or end, of the infinite achievements, that cause of the 
primeval Seed, that Un-born one, that embodiment of Eternity, that highest 
of the high, that Creator of the three worlds and of Devas, Asuras, Nagas 
and Rakshasas, that foremost of all the learned and rulers of men, that 
younger brother of Indra.’” 


CANTO 72 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA 


J anamejaya said, “When Sanjaya left the Pandava encampment and 
went back to the Kurus, what did my grandfathers, the sons of Pandu, 
do? Brahmanottama, I want to hear all this; I beg you, tell me.” 

Vaisampayana said, “After Sanjaya has gone, Yudhishtira addresses 
Krishna, scion of Dasarha vamsa and lord of the Sattvatas. 

He says, ‘O you who are faithful to your friends, the time has come to 
show your friendship. There is no one but you who can save us from our 
distress. We put our faith in you and fearlessly demanded our share of the 
kingdom from Duryodhana, who is swollen with bottomless pride, and from 
his counsellors. 

Parantapa, you protect the Vrishnis during all their times of misfortune; 
do the same for us Pandavas, who are in grave danger, for we deserve your 
protection.’ 

Krishna says, ‘Here I am, Mahabaho. Tell me what you want and I will 
do it.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “You have heard about Dhritarashtra’s intentions; all 
that Sanjaya has said to me has Dhritarashtra’s approval. Sanjaya, whom we 
must think of as Dhritarashtra’s soul, has spoken the king’s mind. A duta 
says what he is instructed to, for otherwise he deserves to die. 

With a mind not inclined to look impartially upon all that is his, and 
impelled by avarice and a sinful heart, Dhritarashtra wants to make peace 


with us without giving us back our kingdom. It was at Dhritarashtra’s 
command, and believing that he would honour the pledge we made with 
him, that we spent twelve years in the forests and one more year in hiding. 
The Brahmanas who were with us will bear out the fact that we did not 
deviate from our given word. 

Now the covetous Dhritarashtra does not want to keep Kshatriya 
dharma. Out of his love for his son, he listens to the counsel of evil men. 
Prompted by greed and selfishness, he takes Duryodhana’s advice and treats 
us deceitfully. 

What can be more sorrowful, Janardana, than my being unable to look 
after my mother and my friends? Even with the Kasis, the Panchalas, the 
Chedis and the Matsyas for my allies, and with you, Madhusudana, as my 
protector, I asked for only five villages— Avisthala, Vrikasthala, Makandi, 
Varanavata, and any one more of their choice. 

Grant us five villages or towns, we said, where we five may live 
together; we do not want to see Bharata vamsa destroyed. 

However, the evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra thinks he is the sole 
master of the whole world, and he did not agree. What can be more 
sorrowful than this? 

When a man, born and raised in a noble family, covets the possessions 
of others his avarice destroys his intelligence. Once intelligence is lost, he 
feels no shame; the lack of shame leads to an erosion of dharma; and the 
loss of dharma leads to the withering of prosperity. The destruction of 
prosperity, in its turn, ruins a man, for poverty is like death. Kinsmen, 
friends and Brahmanas shun a poor man, just as birds avoid a tree that has 
neither flowers nor fruit. Krishna, to me my relatives shunning me feels like 
death; I feel as if my prana is leaving my body. 

Sambara said that nothing is more distressful than being wracked with 
anxiety about where one’s next meal will come from and the uncertain 
future. It is said that wealth is the highest dharma and that everything 
depends on it. Those who have it are considered alive, whereas those who 
have none might as well be dead. A man who forcibly robs another of his 
wealth not only kills his victim but ruins his dharma, artha and kama. 

When poverty overtakes them, some men choose death; others leave 
their cities and retire to villages; many retire to the forest; while some 
become sadhus and beggars in a bid to destroy themselves. For the sake of 
wealth, some drive themselves to madness; others live as subjects of their 


enemies; and many go into the service of others. Poverty is more distressful 
to a man than death, for prosperity is the sole cause of a man’s dharma as 
well as his kama. Actual death is not as painful, for it is inevitable and none 
can overcome it. 

Krishna, a man who is poor from birth does not suffer as much as the 
man who, born into wealth and used to living in luxury, loses his prosperity. 
He may lose his wealth through his own fault, but he blames the gods and 
Indra, rarely himself. Even knowledge of the shastras fails to mitigate his 
pain. 

Sometimes he gets angry with his servants and harbours malicious envy 
towards his friends. In his anger, he loses the clarity of his mind and, 
because his intellect is clouded, he commits evil. His sinfulness makes him 
careless about maintaining caste divisions. Varnasankarshana, the mixing of 
castes, leads to Naraka and is the worst sin of all. If a man is not made 
aware soon, he goes straight to hell. Wisdom is the only thing that can 
awaken him, and if he regains the eye of wisdom, he is saved. When 
wisdom returns the man turns to the shastras, which enhance his virtue. 
Shame becomes a treasured ornament. 

The man who feels shame has an aversion to sin; his prosperity 
increases; and he is truly a man. He who is devoted to dharma, who has his 
mind under control and who always acts after careful deliberation, is never 
inclined towards adharma, nor does he sin. 

He who feels no shame and has lost good sense is neither man nor 
woman. He cannot earn punya and is like a Sudra. He who feels shame 
pleases the Devas, the Pitrs and his own self, and thus attains moksha, the 
highest aim of all men of dharma. 

Madhusudana, in me you have seen the truth of all that I say. You know 
how we have lived these years in exile, deprived of our kingdom. It is 
against our dharma to abandon what is rightfully ours. Our first efforts will 
be towards ensuring that both ourselves and the Kauravas enjoy prosperity 
and be united in peace. Otherwise, we will kill the Kauravas and regain the 
kingdom that is ours by right, although success won through bloodshed, 
even by killing the most hateful enemy, and in this case our close kin, is the 
very worst of violent deeds. 

We have many kinsmen, and many of our elders have ranged 
themselves against us. To slaughter these is a grievous sin indeed. What 
good can come of war? Sadly, war is the dharma of a Kshatriya; and we are 


born into that wretched varna. Sinful or virtuous, any other way of life 
would be wrong for us. A Sudra serves; a Vaisya lives by trade; the 
Brahmana has the wooden begging bowl to sustain himself; we have to live 
by war! A Kshatriya kills a Kshatriya; fish live on fish; a dog eats a dog. 
See how they all live according their inherent dharma. 

O Krishna, Kali, wrath, is always present in battlefields; lives are lost; 
and despite the strict laws that govern warfare, success and defeat cannot be 
foretold. None of Earth’s creatures control their own lives; and neither 
prosperity nor adversity come until their time is ripe. 

Sometimes one man kills many; sometimes many together kill one; a 
coward may slay a renowned and celebrated hero. In war both sides cannot 
win, and both cannot lose, even though both sides may suffer equal losses. 
If a Kshatriya flees a battle, he loses honour and glory. Ah, under any 
circumstances war is a sin. 

Who in striking another is not himself struck? For the one attacked, 
victory and defeat are the same, O Hrishikesa. Defeat is almost as bad as 
death, but the victor’s losses are no less. Even if the victor is himself not 
killed, one or more of his dear ones may die and, stricken by the loss of his 
kin, he becomes indifferent to his own life. 

Those who are quiet, modest, virtuous and compassionate are generally 
killed in battle, while evil ones escape unscathed. After killing his enemies 
a man is gripped by remorse. Moreover, the vanquished survivor will 
muster another army, to challenge the victor. In the hope of ending a dispute 
with finality, one often tries to annihilate the enemy, at times without 
success; and victory creates hatred, for the vanquished lives on in sorrow. 

The man who wants peace sleeps happily, giving up all thoughts of 
victory and defeat, while the man who provokes hostilities sleeps in misery 
and anxiety, as if he shares the room with a serpent. The man who kills 
seldom wins renown; in fact he gains eternal and universal infamy. A war 
waged over a long period of time never ends, because even if there is one 
family member left alive, there is no dearth of those who will remind him of 
past enmities. 

Krishna, enmity is never converted to peace by further enmity; it feeds 
on itself like a fire on ghee. There can be no peace without the complete 
obliteration of one side, because otherwise there will always be chances for 
a survivor to take revenge on the victor, a vice to which opportunists are 
addicted. 


Confidence in one’s own prowess is an incurable disease that can bring 
heartache. The only way to know peace is by renouncing war, or by death. 
Madhusudana, although it is true that we can achieve the goal by ridding 
oneself of an enemy by tearing him up by the very root, that is savage and 
cruel. The peace that one may achieve by giving up kingdom is almost like 
death, which comes if one loses one’s kingdom and is utterly ruined by the 
enemy. We do not wish to give up our kingdom, nor do we wish to see the 
extinction of our vamsa. Considering all this, it is better to make peace by 
giving in to the Kauravas. 

The time to show one’s might is when those who desire peace and not 
war fail at conciliation and war becomes inevitable. Horrible results follow 
the failure of peacemakers. Learned men have seen this in fights even 
between dogs. First, the dogs wag their tails, then they bark, then they circle 
each other and bare their teeth, then growl and, finally, attack each other. 
The dog that is stronger prevails and takes his meat. It is the same with 
men; there is no difference whatever. Those who are powerful should avoid 
disputes with the weak, who will yield, for they must. 

The father, the king and the elder always deserve respect and, so, 
Dhritarashtra deserves regard and reverence from us. But Dhritarashtra’s 
love for his son is great; he will be obedient to his son and reject what we 
propose. What do you, O Krishna, think is best at this juncture? How can 
we preserve both our interest and our virtue? Whom else, besides you, 
Madhusudana, shall we consult in this most difficult matter? What other 
friend do we have, who is as dear to us as you are, who wants our welfare, 
who knows the consequences of all karma, and who knows the truth?’ 

Krishna says to Yudhishtira, ‘I will go to the sabha of the Kurus, for 
both your sakes. If I can make peace without sacrificing your interests, I 
will have performed an act of great punya, which will bear immortal fruit. I 
will also have saved the angry Kurus and Pandavas, as well as 
Dhritarashtra’s sons and this sacred Bhumi herself from the snare of death, 
and perdition worse than death.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘I am not in favour of you going to the Kurus; 
Duryodhana will never do as you ask, even if you use the best advice to 
persuade him. All the Kshatriyas of the world are assembled there, obedient 
to his command. I do not like the thought of you going into their midst. If 
any harm comes to you, nothing, not the promise of godhood, not 


sovereignty over all the Devas, let alone mere mundane success, will please 
us.’ 

The Divine One says, ‘Rajan, I know how base and vicious the son of 
Dhritarashtra is; but by going there we will escape the censure of the kings 
of the Earth. Just like other animals before the lion, all the kings of the 
Earth united cannot stand before me when I am roused. If by some chance 
they try to do me harm, I will consume the Kurus. My going there will not 
be fruitless, for if our object is not fulfilled, we shall at least escape blame. 
And this is my intention.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Krishna, do whatever pleases you. May your plan be 
blessed. Go to the Kurus. I hope to see you return successful and in joy. Go 
and make such a peace that all the sons of Bharata may live together 
happily and in contentment. You are our brother and friend, as dear to me as 
to Arjuna. So close are we to you that we are not in the least concerned that 
you might neglect our welfare. Go there for our good. 

You know us and you know our enemies; you know what our intentions 
are and what to say. Whatever you say to Duryodhana will be for our good. 
By whatever means peace is achieved, Kesava, keep our welfare at heart.’” 


CANTO 73 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “kK rishna says, ‘I have heard what Sanjaya said and now I have 

heard you. I know Dhritarashtra’s intentions as well as yours. 
Your wishes are based on dharma, while theirs stem from malice. You 
greatly value what you might obtain without war. 

Yet, a long life of brahmacharya is not the way of a Kshatriya, O lord of 
the Earth. Men of all four varnas say that a Kshatriya should never live on 
alms. Brahma has ordained that either victory or death in battle is the 
eternal dharma of a Kshatriya; humiliating yourself by surrender is not for 
you. Yudhishtira Mahabaho, you cannot live by humbly giving in. Display 
your prowess and vanquish your enemies, Parantapa. 

Through his long association with many kings, and because of their 
affection and friendship, Dhritarashtra’s son has become powerful indeed. 
There is no hope that he will make peace with you. The Kurus think they 
are strong because they have Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and others with them. 
As long as you behave mildly towards them, they will not give up your 
kingdom. Dhritarashtra’s sons will not accede to your wishes from 
compassion or mildness or from a sense of righteousness. 

There is, Pandava, more evidence that they will not make peace with 
you. They felt no remorse despite having made you suffer terrible 
deprivation and hardship and making you wear a kaupina for your attire. 
The ruthless Duryodhana cheated to beat you at dice, in the sight of 


Pitamaha Bhishma, Drona, the wise Vidura, many holy Brahmanas, the 
king, the citizens and all the important Kauravas; he deceived you, who are 
charitable, gentle, self-controlled, virtuous and of stern vratas; and he was 
not ashamed of his vile deed. Do not show the wretches any compassion. 
These men, who are so deserving of death at anyone’s hands, are that much 
more deserving of it at yours, O Bhaarata. 

With what ugly words Duryodhana, with his brothers, gladly and 
boastfully, tormented you and your brothers. He said, “The Pandavas now 
own nothing in this wide world. Their names and lineage are already 
extinct. In time, which is eternal, they have already died. I have all their 
punya, and they will now be scattered into the five elements.” 

While the game of dice was being played, the brutal Dusasana seized 
the weeping Draupadi by her hair and dragged her to the sabha, as if she 
had no protectors. In the presence of Bhishma, Drona and others he 
repeatedly called her “cow”. Restrained by you and bound by dharma, your 
mighty brothers did nothing to avenge her. After you were exiled to the 
forests, Duryodhana spoke savage words and boasted to his kinsmen, who 
knew you were innocent and sat mute in the sabha and wept silently. 

The assembled kings and the Brahmanas did not applaud him for this 
deed. Indeed, all in the court censured him. To a man of noble descent, 
Parantapa, censure is equal to death. Death is many times better than a life 
of blame. That was when he already died; but he felt no shame although all 
the kings of the Earth disapproved of what he did. 

He whose character is utterly despicable is destroyed as easily as a tree 
supported by a single weak root. Duryodhana deserves death by any hand, 
like a snake. Kill him, Parantapa, without the slightest hesitation or 
remorse. 

It is incumbent upon you, and I approve of it, that you should pay 
homage to your uncle Dhritarashtra and to Pitamaha Bhishma. I will go 
there and remove the uncertainty of all men who are still in any doubt of 
Duryodhana’s evil nature and ways. There, in the presence of all the kings, I 
will tell of your shining virtues and Duryodhana’s vices. The rulers of 
kingdoms, who hear my words full of dharma and artha, will recognise that 
you are virtuous and truthful while Duryodhana is moved only by his greed. 

I will speak of Duryodhana’s vices before the citizens of Hastinapura 
and the other people of the kingdom, before the young and the old, of all the 
four varnas, who will be gathered there. Because you ask for peace no one 


will consider you sinful, while all the lords of the Earth will castigate the 
Kurus and Dhritarashtra. When Duryodhana dies the death of dishonour and 
of being forsaken by all men, my work will be complete. After that, do what 
needs to be done. 

Mindful of your noble intentions but never sacrificing your interest, I 
will go to the Kurus and try to make peace. I will observe their preparations 
for war and return to make you victorious, Bhaarata. 

I fear that war is certain; all the omens I see point to it. Birds and 
animals screech and howl at dusk; the best elephants and horses assume 
dreadful shapes; fires flame in many sinister hues. Such signs appear only 
when the pralaya is imminent. 

Let your warriors ready their weapons, their machines of war, armour, 
chariots, elephants and horses, and prepare for battle. Collect everything 
you need for the war that looms. As long as he lives Duryodhana will never 
give back your magnificent kingdom, which he stole from you at a game of 
dice.’” 


CANTO 74 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 B hima says, ‘Madhusudana, speak in such a way that there may be 
peace with the Kurus. Do not threaten them with war. Do not 
speak harshly to Duryodhana, who is always quick to anger, resentful, flouts 
his own best interest and is arrogant. Treat him gently. His heart, like a 
criminal’s, is naturally inclined to sin; he is intoxicated with pride in his 
own prosperity, and he is hostile towards the Pandavas. He has no foresight, 
is cruel and always blames others for his own sins; his strength is vicious; 
his wrath is not easily or quickly subdued. He does not learn from the 
mistakes of others or his own; his very soul is evil and he is full of deceit 
and treachery. He would rather give up his life than his opinion. Peace with 
such a man, Krishna, is difficult. 

Duryodhana disregards the advice of his well-wishers; he is without 
virtue and loves falsehood; his actions violate the advice of his best 
counsellors, which wounds their hearts. Like a snake hiding in the reeds, he 
is a Slave to his evil nature and his anger, and he sins again and again. You 
know well the strength of Duryodhana’s army, his ways, his character and 
his prowess. Until now the Kauravas and their sons passed their days 
happily, and we, too, with our friends and Indra, as if we were Indra’s 
younger brothers. But now, sadly, Duryodhana’s wrath will consume all the 
Bhaaratas, as fire does forests at the end of winter. 


O Krishna, you know about the eighteen kings who killed their friends 
and relatives. When Dharma’s time came to an end, Kali! was born among 
the Asuras, who blossomed in prosperity and blazed with energy; Udavarta 
was born among the Haihayas; Janamejaya was born among the Nipas; 
Bahula among the Talajghanas; proud Vasu among the Krimis; Ajabindu 
among the Suviras; Rushardhika among the Surashtras; Arkaja among the 
Balihas; Dhautamulaka among the Chinas; Hayagriva among the Videhas; 
Varayu among the Mahaujasas; Bahu among the Sundaras; Pururavas 
among the Diptakshas; Sahaja among the Chedis and Matsyas; 
Vrishadhvaja among the Praviras; Dharana among the Chandravatsas; 
Vigahana among the Mukutas and Sama among the Nandivegas. 

Vile and powerful souls, Krishna, take birth at the end of each yuga, in 
their respective races, for the destruction of their kinsmen. So has 
Duryodhana, the embodiment of sin, and the disgrace of his vamsa, been 
born at the end of the yuga into our clan, of the Kurus. Therefore, mighty 
one, you should speak gently to him in sweet, not bitter words, imbued with 
dharma and artha, and in depth on his favourite subjects, so you please him. 
All of us would rather submit humbly to Duryodhana than let the Bhaaratas 
be annihilated. 

Krishna, conduct yourself in such a way that we may rather live as 
strangers to the Kurus than incur the sin of destroying the whole vamsa. 
Encourage our Pitamaha and other elders and counsellors to foster feelings 
of kinship amongst us cousins and to pacify the son of Dhritarashtra. 

I say this and Yudhishtira approves. Arjuna, too, is opposed to war, for 
he is deeply compassionate.’” 


Kali refers to the demon Kali, not the Goddess Kaali. 


CANTO 75 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Hearing Bhima speak with such uncharacteristic 

mildness, as unexpected as hills without their bulk, or fire without 
heat, Krishna throws back his head and laughs aloud. And as if to provoke 
Bhima, like the wind fanning a fire, he speaks to him who was at that 
moment seized by an impulse of kindness. 

Krishna says, ‘O Bhimasena, you usually applaud war in your longing 
to slaughter Dhritarashtra’s vile sons who delight in every bestiality, in 
destroying the lives of others. Parantapa, you stay awake the whole night, 
sitting with your head bent down. Frequently, you utter frightful 
exclamations of anger that express the storm that rages in your heart. 
Inflamed by the fire of your fury, you sigh in restlessness, like a smoking 
flame. You go off by yourself and lie down, your fevered breaths labouring, 
like a weak man weighed down by a heavy burden. Those who do not know 
the reason for all this think that you are mad. 

Just as an elephant trumpets in rage while it tramples uprooted trees to 
pulp, you run wildly here and there, heaving sighs and making the Earth 
tremble under your tread. You take no delight in company and pass your 
time in solitude. Night or day, nothing pleases you so much as seclusion. 
Sitting by yourself, you suddenly laugh out loud; at times, you put your 
head between your knees and stay like that interminably, with your eyes 


shut; at other times, you frown and bite your lips and stare fiercely, fixedly 
ahead of you, your eyes seeing nothing. These are all symptoms of anger. 

Once, in the midst of your brothers, you seized your mace and cried, 
‘As surely as the Sun rises in the east and displays his radiance, and as truly 
as he sets in the west by journeying around Meru, so do I swear that I will 
kill Duryodhana with this gada of mine. And this I, Bhima, solemnly vow.” 

How does this same heart of yours now advocate peace, Parantapa? 
When fear enters even your heart, Bhima, all those who want war are 
dismayed as war draws nearer. Asleep or awake, you see inauspicious 
omens. Perhaps that is why you want peace. You seem to have lost your 
manliness, even like a eunuch. Panic grips you, which is why you are 
distraught. Your heart trembles; your mind is taken by despair; your thighs 
quiver in weakness, and all this makes you want peace. The hearts of mortal 
men, O son of Pritha, are as inconstant as the pods of a salmali seed in the 
wind. 

At this moment, your words are as soft and mild as the language of 
cows; and your brothers’ hearts sink into a sea of despair to listen to you, 
like swimmers in the sea without a raft. That you of all men should speak 
such tame and cowardly words is as strange as a mountain moving. 
Remember your strength, your achievements, and the race into which are 
born; and do not give in to grief. Be strong, Bhima. This weakness is not 
worthy of you; a Kshatriya never enjoys anything he has not acquired 
through his own prowess.’” 


CANTO 76 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “The choleric Bhima, who can never tolerate a 
slight, is stung to the quick, and responds like a mettlesome 
thoroughbred to a whip. 

He cries, ‘Krishna, you wrong me! What I want is one thing and one 
thing alone: war. We have known each other a long time and you well know 
that I delight in war and that my prowess is irresistible. Or, perhaps you 
don’t know me at all, like a swimmer unaware of the depth of the lake he 
swims in. That is why you speak to me like this. No one else, knowing 
Bhimasena, could say what you have to me. 

And so let me tell you, O joy of the Vrishnis, about my unrivalled 
might. I know that to boast is vulgar, but you have wounded me, and I will 
tell you about myself and what I am. 

Krishna, Sky and Earth are immovable, immense and infinite; they 
shelter the countless beings that are born into them. If, through anger, they 
suddenly come to collide like two mountains, I can keep them apart with 
my arms. Look at my mace-like arms; no man alive can extricate himself 
from their grasp. Indeed, the mountain Himavat, the Ocean and the mighty 
wielder of the thunderbolt—the slayer of Bala himself—cannot free the one 
that I seize in my great arms. 

I will grind under my feet all the Kshatriyas who come to fight against 
the Pandavas. You do not know, Krishna, the prowess with which I 


vanquished the kings of the Earth and subjugated them. If you really do not 
know my strength, which is as fierce as the midday Sun, you will see soon it 
in battle. You wound me deep with your cruel words; I feel the pain as of a 
foetid tumour being lanced. Ah, know that my strength is greater than I 
have described! 

On the very day that the havoc of war breaks out you will see me fell 
elephants, warriors on chariots, elephants and horseback; and, my long 
withheld fury unleashed, you will see me butcher countless brave 
Kshatriyas. You and the others will see me do all this, and mow down the 
greatest Maharathas. The marrow in my bones has not yet dried, nor does 
my heart tremble. Even if the whole world rush at me in wrath, I will feel 
no fear. 

Madhusudana, it is only from compassion that I advocate showing 
goodwill to the enemy. I quietly bear all our injuries, lest our Bharatavamsa 
become extinct.” 


CANTO 77 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ = he Divine One says, ‘I said what I did in affection and from a 

desire to know your true mind; it was not in reproach, from pride 

of knowledge, in anger, nor from any desire to hold forth. I know the 

magnanimity of your soul, your strength and your accomplishments. That is 
not why I was critical of you. 

O Bhima, the benefit that the Pandava cause will gain from you is a 
thousand times greater than you give yourself credit for. You, Vrikodara, 
with your kinsmen and friends, are exactly the man that should be born into 
a noble house such as yours, which is honoured by all the kings of the 
Earth. However, those who have doubts about the consequences of dharma 
and adharma, and strength and weakness, can never arrive at the truth. 
Indeed, the very thing that is responsible for a man’s success also causes his 
downfall. The consequences of human actions can never be certain. 

Learned men, who can gauge the evil in any deed, declare how worthy 
or not any action is; yet, action can have the opposite and unforeseen 
results, even like the wind suddenly changing direction. Even those deeds 
of men, performed after great deliberation and with well directed policy, 
and consistent with dharma, are baffled by providence. Then, again, 
providential circumstances, such as heat, cold, rain, hunger and thirst, 
which do not depend on human endeavour, can be overcome by man’s 
efforts. Also, apart from the course that a man is destined to follow as a 


result of his past lives, he can be rid of all other karma if he so pleases; the 
Smritis and the Srutis testify to this. 

Pandava, one cannot move through life on Earth by doing nothing. One 
should act in the knowledge that one’s goals will be achieved by a 
combination of destiny and effort. The man who does with this belief is 
never pained by failure, nor delighted by success. To explain this, 
Bhimasena, was what I intended, not to proclaim that war would ensure 
victory for you. 

When a man’s mind is upset he should not lose his cheer or succumb to 
lassitude or dejection. This is why I spoke to you as I did: to put heart into 
you. Tomorrow I will go before Dhritarashtra; and I will strive to make 
peace without compromising your interests. 

If the Kauravas make peace, everlasting fame will be mine; your goals 
will be achieved, and they, too, will reap great benefits. However, if the 
Kauravas disregard my advice and are obdurate with their opinion, there 
will surely be war. Bhimasena, the burden of fighting this war rests on you 
and Arjuna, and you two will have to lead all the others. In case of war, I 
will drive Arjuna’s chariot; that is his wish, not that I want to fight. 

I was fearful of the weakness your words conveyed. I only re-ignited 
your wrath, Mahabaho.’” 


CANTO 78 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 A rjuna says, ‘O Janardana, Yudhishtira has already said whatever 
needed to be said. But after hearing you, it appears that you 
think that Dhritarashtra’s greed and our relative weakness will make peace 
difficult to attain. Also, you think that human prowess alone is fruitless, that 
without showing our might our goals cannot be achieved. What you say 
may be true but, also, perhaps not always so. Nothing should be regarded as 
impossible. It is true that peace does seem to be unattainable, given our 
present condition, yet if peace is properly proposed, they might agree. 

O Krishna, strive to strike peace with our enemies. You are the truest 
friend of both the Pandavas and the Kurus, even as Prajapati is of the Devas 
and the Asuras. Accomplish what is in the best interests of both sides. 
Bringing about our welfare is not difficult for you to achieve; if you try, you 
will surely succeed. Why, as soon as you go to Hastinapura, it will be done. 
Even if you decide to deal with Duryodhana in any other way, you must do 
as you wish. Whether you want peace or war with the enemy, Krishna, we 
will honour your decision. 

Does the vile Duryodhana, with his sons and kinsmen, not deserve 
death when, unable to bear the sight of Yudhishtira’s prosperity and finding 
no other honest course to assuage his own burning envy, he took our 
kingdom by cheating at dice? When invited to combat, what Kshatriya turns 
away from the fight, even if death is certain for him? When Duryodhana 


defeated us with the lowest treachery and banished us to the forest, I 
thought that he deserved death at my hands. What you want to do for your 
loved ones is not strange; what is mysterious, though, is how you will 
achieve your objective, by mildness, or other means. If you think that for 
you to kill them all immediately is best, do it now; we need no further 
debate. 

Surely, you know how Duryodhana shamed Draupadi in the Kuru 
sabha, and how we bore it with profound fortitude. I cannot believe that the 
same Duryodhana will now behave with dharma towards the Pandavas. 
Wise counsel will be lost on him, like seeds sown in barren soil. 

So, Krishna, do what you think is right, and beneficial for the Pandavas, 
and also decide what should be done next.’” 


CANTO 79 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ al he Divine One says, ‘I will do as you say, Mahabaho, and do my 
best to bring about an outcome that will benefit both the Pandavas 
and the Kauravas. 

Arjuna, of the two options, war and peace, only peace lies somewhat 
within my power. A farmer may, through his effort, water and weed his 
field, but without rain it will not yield crops. Some do say that his effort will 
result in success if he irrigates his field artificially; but even that is uncertain 
because a drought sent by fate may still make it dry. In view of all this, the 
Rishis of old have said that human endeavour will only succeed when 
providence collaborates. I will do all that can humanly be done, but I cannot 
prevail over providence. 

Duryodhana goes in defiance of dharma and the world, and he feels no 
remorse. Moreover, his appetite for sin is fed by Sakuni and Karna, and by 
his brother Dusasana. Duryodhana will never make peace by giving back 
your kingdom, even if his obstinacy entails a bloody death for himself and 
his kinsmen at our hands. Yudhishtira does not wish to meekly give up his 
kingdom; neither will Duryodhana surrender it at any price. I think I need to 
deliver Yudhishtira’s message to him, though Duryodhana will not agree to 
Yudhishtira’s conditions. If he refuses, he deserves to die. Bhaarata, he 
deserves death at my hands because he is the one who always tormented all 
of you, ever since you were children, and later after cheating you of your 


kingdom when he could not restrain his overweening envy of Yudhishtira’s 
prosperity. 

Many times he has tried to draw me away from you, but I never paid 
him any heed. You know what dreams Duryodhana dreams, and you also 
know that I want Yudhishtira’s welfare. Knowing Duryodhana’s heart and 
my own wishes, why do you doubt me, as if you knew nothing? 

You know that an apocalyptic, revelational war has been ordained by 
the gods; how then, can we make peace with the enemy? I will say and do 
as much as I can, but do not expect peace. When Duryodhana made off with 
Virata’s cattle, did Bhishma not try to persuade Duryodhana to make peace 
for the good of all? 

I say to you today: as soon as you decided to fight them, their death was 
a foregone conclusion. Inexorably, and not surprisingly, Duryodhana has 
refused to part with even a very small part of the kingdom, for even a short 
time. As for me, I am always obedient to Yudhishtira’s commands, and I 
must ponder again the sins of the wretched Duryodhana.’” 


CANTO 80 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N akula says, ‘O Krishna, the benevolent Yudhishtira, who knows 

about dharma, has spoken at length; Bhimasena has heard him 

and has weighed his own strength against the desire for peace on the scales 

of dharma; you have heard what Arjuna said, too; and I have repeatedly 
expressed my own opinion, as well. 

Set all this aside; concentrate now on what the enemy has in mind and 
do what you think is best, given the circumstances. Kesava, each situation 
warrants a different decision, but a man wins success if he does the apt 
thing for the particular situation in which he finds himself. A decision that 
suits one situation becomes the opposite in another. One cannot hold the 
same opinion all the time. 

While we were in the forest, we adopted a particular way of life; things 
were different during the ajnatavasa. Now, when we need no longer hide, 
what we want has changed again. While we wandered in the vana, we were 
not as eager to have back our kingdom as we are now. Now our exile has 
ended and we have returned; and we hear that an army of seven akshauhinis 
has gathered to help us, by your grace, Janardana. Seeing these tigers 
among men, of immeasurable force, armed and ready for battle, what 
enemy of ours will not be terrified? Go to the Kurus; speak mildly first, then 
employ threats, so that the vile Duryodhana is filled with fear and anxiety. 


What man of flesh and blood can stand up to Yudhishtira and 
Bhimasena, to the invincible Arjuna and Sahadeva, to Satyaki of the 
scintillating tejas, to me, to you or Balarama in battle, Kesava? Who can 
face Virata and his sons, Drupada and his allies, Dhrishtadyumna and the 
powerful king of Kasi, and Dhrishtaketu, lord of the Chedis? 

Mahabaho, Yudhishtira Dharmaraja’s objective will be accomplished 
immediately as you arrive there. Vidura, Bhishma, Drona and Bahlika will 
understand the wisdom of what you say. They will advise Dhritarashtra and 
the sinner Duryodhana to do as you say. When you, Krishna, are the 
speaker and Vidura is the listener, what is there in any of the worlds that 
cannot be communicated easily and effectively?’” 


CANTO 81 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 S ahadeva says, ‘What the king says is Sanatana Dharma, but you, 

Parantapa, must ensure, by what you do and say in Hastinapura, 
that there is war. Even if the Kauravas express a desire for peace with the 
Pandavas, you must provoke war with them. Krishna, you know how 
Panchali was dragged into the sabha and shamed. How can my anger be 
appeased without killing Duryodhana? Even if Bhima, Arjuna and 
Yudhishtira chose to be virtuous and peaceful, I will abandon dharma and 
meet Duryodhana in battle.’ 

Satyaki says, ‘Mahabaho, noble Sahadeva speaks the truth. The anger I 
feel towards Duryodhana can be appeased only by his death. Do you not 
remember how enraged you were when you saw the distressed Pandavas in 
the forest, wearing rags and deer-skin? Purushottama, all the kings and 
warriors gathered here support what this fierce Kshatriya, Madri’s heroic 
son, says.’ 

Hearing this, all the Kshatriyas set up a huge roar. They applaud Satyaki 
with shouts of Excellent! Well said! and, eager to fight, they are 
exhilarated.’” 


CANTO 82 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “VV aisampayana said, ‘Grief-struck Krishnaa of the long black 

tresses applauds Sahadeva and the great warrior Satyaki, whose 

words for her are resonant with dharma. Overwhelmed with sorrow to hear 
Bhimasena speak for peace, she turns to Krishna. 

Her eyes are bathed in tears as she says, ‘Madhusudana, you know how 
deceitfully Dhritarashtra’s son, with his counsellors, robbed the Pandavas of 
their every happiness. You also know what message Yudhishtira sent 
through Sanjaya. 

Effulgent one, he said, “Give us just five villages— Avisthala, 
Vrikasthala, Makandi, Varanavata, and for the fifth, any other of your 
choice.” Krishna, this was the message sent to Duryodhana and his 
counsellors. Duryodhana heard what the humble Yudhishtira wants, and 
despite knowing that he is anxious to make peace, has done nothing towards 
it. If Duryodhana wants peace only without returning our kingdom, there is 
no need for you to go to Hastinapura. 

The Pandavas, with the Srinjayas, can easily withstand the 
Dhartarashtra forces. When they are not amenable to conciliation, it is not 
right for you to show them mercy. To safeguard himself, a man must be 
severe with enemies with whom he cannot make peace either by 
conciliation or gifts. Krishna, the punishment you mete out, with the help of 
the Pandavas and Srinjayas, must be immediate and harsh. This is the best 


course for the sons of Pritha and will, if accomplished, add to your glory 
and that of the entire Kshatriya race. 

The man who is covetous, be he a Kshatriya or of any other varna, other 
than even the most sinful Brahmana, must surely be killed by a Kshatriya, 
true to his dharma. The exception in the case of a Brahmana is because a 
Brahmana is the teacher of all the other varnas, and he is the first to get a 
share in everything. Those who know the shastras declare that sin is 
incurred only by killing one who does not deserve killing. It is just as sinful 
not to kill one who does deserve it. With the Pandava and Srinjaya forces 
behind you, you must act in a manner that will not taint you with sin. I keep 
repeating what has already been said because I have faith in you. 

Krishna, what other woman is there on Earth like me? I am the daughter 
of King Drupada, born from the fire of yagna. I am your beloved friend 
Dhrishtadyumna’s sister. By marriage I have become a queen of the 
Ajamida vamsa, the daughter-in-law of the illustrious Pandu. I am the 
queen of Pandu’s sons, who are each like Indra in splendour. To these five 
heroic Kshatriyas I have borne five sons, all mighty warriors, who are as 
close to you as Abhimanyu 1s. 

I, this same woman, was dragged by my hair into the Kuru sabha and 
humiliated in the very sight of the sons of Pandu, and even while you live. 
Krishna, the Pandavas, the Panchalas and the Vrishnis all lived to see me 
treated like a slave by those sinners. And while the Pandavas sat silent 
without giving way to their anger, I called out to you in my heart, saying, 
“Save me, Krishna, save me!” 

Then the illustrious Dhritarashtra, my father-in-law, said to me, “Ask 
for any boon, O princess of Panchala. You deserve that and honour from 
me.” 

I said, “Let the Pandavas be free men with their chariots and weapons.” 

The Pandavas were freed, only to be exiled into the forest. Janardana, 
you know all these sorrows of mine. Save me, lotus-eyed One, with my 
husbands, kinsmen and relatives, from that grief. By dharma I am a 
daughter-in-law to Bhishma and Dhritarashtra. Yet, I was forcibly enslaved 
before them. O, shame on Arjuna’s skill as an archer; shame on 
Bhimasena’s might, for letting Duryodhana live for even a moment after 
what he did. If I deserve any favour from you, if you have any affection for 
me, Krishna, direct your wrath at the sons of Dhritarashtra.’ 


The bewitching Panchali, her black eyes, large like lotus leaves, bathed 
in tears, walks with the lovely gait of a she-elephant and comes up to 
Krishna. Taking in her hands her lustrous tresses with wavy ends, so dark, 
almost deep-blue, scented with myriad perfumes, of every auspicious sign 
and, though braided, soft and glossy like some mighty serpent, she 
addresses him. 

She says, ‘O Lotus-eyed, who are anxious for peace with the enemy, 
remember in all that you do, these tresses of mine that Dusasana seized in 
his coarse hands. If Bhima and Arjuna have stooped so low as to long for 
peace, my old father will avenge me, with battle. My five sons, too, of the 
mighty tejas, with Abhimanyu at their head, will fight the Kauravas. What 
peace can my heart know unless I see Dusasana’s dark arm severed from his 
body and cut into pieces? 

Thirteen long years have I passed in expectation of better times, hiding 
my anger in my heart like a smouldering fire. Now, pierced by Bhima’s 
words like arrows loosed by dharma, my heart is about to break.’ 

The doe-eyed Draupadi is convulsed with sobs, tears pouring down her 
cheeks and over the lovely princess’s breasts like liquid fire. 

The mighty-armed Kesava speaks comfortingly to her, ‘Krishnaa, you 
will soon see the women of Bharata vamsa weep as you do. Timid one, they 
will cry for their relatives and friends who have been slain. They, with 
whom you are angry, have already lost their warriors and their power. For, 
at Yudhishtira’s command, and with Bhima, Arjuna and the twins, I will 
accomplish what is ordained by destiny. 

Their hour has come. If they do not listen to me, the sons of 
Dhritarashtra will lie on the earth and become food for dogs and jackals. 
Himavat might shift from his place; Bhumi might shatter into a hundred 
fragments; the sky with its countless stars might fall down; but what I say 
can never be in vain. 

Stem your tears, Panchali; I swear that soon you will see your husbands 
crowned with prosperity, and their enemies slain.’” 


CANTO 83 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 yee rjuna says, ‘O Kesava, you are the truest friend of all the Kurus. 

You are related to both sides and a dear friend to both. You must 

bring peace between the Pandavas and the sons of Dhritarashtra, for only 

you can. Lotus-eyed Parantapa, go now with that intention and say what 

needs to be said to our irascible cousin. If the foolish Duryodhana does not 

accept your good advice, in keeping with dharma and artha, he will surely 
fall prey to what fate has destined for him.’ 

The Divine One says, ‘Yes, I will go to Dhritarashtra. I want to achieve 
dharma, and weal for both ourselves and the Kurus.’ 

The night has passed and the Sun risen brightly in the east. The hour 
called Maitra has begun, and the rays of the Sun are still mild. The month is 
Kaumuda Kartika, the nakshatra Revati. It is the season of dew, for autumn 
has departed; and the Earth is verdant with lush crops. 

This is how the world’s stage is set that day, when Krishna, that 
mightiest of men, hears the auspicious and sacred sound of Brahmanas 
chanting the sweet mantras of prayer, like Indra hearing the adorations of 
the Devarishis. He performs his morning rituals, purifies himself with a 
bath, puts on his pitambara robes, adorns himself with ornaments and rubs 
himself with unguents, and worships Surya and Agni. He touches the tail of 
a bull and reverently bows to the Brahmanas; then he walks around the 
sacred fire and looks at the auspicious offerings laid out. 


He remembers Yudhishtira’s words and says to Satyaki, who sits nearby, 
‘Have my chariot prepared. Have my conch-shell, discus and mace, my 
quivers and arrows, and all my other astras placed in my ratha. Duryodhana, 
Karna and Subala’s son are evil men and, yet, they must not be taken 
lightly.’ 

Krishna’s attendants immediately begin to yoke his chariot, which is as 
effulgent as the fire that rages at the Pralaya, and which has no comparison 
in speed. Its two wheels are like the Sun and the Moon in lustre; it is 
emblazoned with crescent and full moons, fish, animals and birds; and it is 
adorned all over with garlands of flowers and with pearls and other 
gemstones of various kinds. It is grand and beautiful, and as splendid as the 
Sun. Besides its gold and jewelled decorations, it bears a wonderful flag- 
staff flying the finest pennants. Equipped with everything needed for battle, 
it is irresistible. Covered with tiger-skins, it can strip every enemy of his 
fame and enhance the joy of the Yadavas. 

Yoked to this ratha are the superlative horses, Saibya, Sugriva, 
Meghapushpa and Balahaka, all of which have been bathed and exquisitely 
caparisoned. And adding to Krishna’s glory is Garuda, the Lord of birds, 
who is perched on the flagstaff of that awesome chariot. 

Krishna ascends his ratha as lofty as Meru’s summit, the deep rumble of 
its wheels like massed clouds, which, like the pushpaka vimana, takes its 
rider where he wills it. Taking Satyaki with him, Krishna sets out, filling the 
earth and the sky with the thunder of his chariot-wheels. 

The sky becomes cloudless; cool, fragrant winds blow in the pure, clear 
air. Auspicious animals and birds, whirling always to their right, fly around 
the ratha; cranes, peacocks and swans follow the slayer of Madhu, uttering 
cries of good omen. The fire, fed with libations to the accompaniment of 
mantras, blazes up, smokeless, also sending its flames towards the 
auspicious right. 

Vasishta, Vamadeva, Bhuridyumna, Gaya, Kratha, Sukra, Kusika, 
Bhrigu and other Brahmarishis and Devarishis stand to the right of Krishna, 
the joy of the Yadavas and Indra’s younger brother. Worshipped by these 
and other illustrious Rishis and Munis, Krishna sets out for the city of the 
Kurus, being seen off by Yudhishtira, Bhima, Arjuna and the twin sons of 
Madri; as well as by the heroic Chekitana, Dhrishtaketu of the Chedis, 
Drupada and the king of Kasi, that great warrior Sikhandin, 
Dhrishtadyumna, Virata with his sons and the princes of Kekaya. All these 


Kshatriyas ride a respectful distance behind that bull of the Kshatriya race 
to honour him. 

Yudhishtira Dharmaraja follows Krishna for some distance and then 
speaks to him in the presence of the other kings. The son of Kunti embraces 
that Purushottama, who has never sinned, not from desire, anger, fear or any 
wish for profit; whose mind is steady; who knows no greed; who is dharma 
embodied, and endowed with fathomless intelligence and wisdom; who 
knows the hearts of all creatures; who is the Lord of all and the God of 
gods; who is eternal; who has every virtue and bears the auspicious Srivatsa 
on his chest. The king embraces Krishna and tells him what he must do. 

Yudhishtira says, “We should ask after the welfare of our mother, who 
always keeps dharma, performing tapasya and propitiatory rituals; who is 
devout in her worship of Devas and Atithis; who always waits upon her 
superiors; who loves her sons with a boundless affection; and whom we 
love dearly. She rescued us from Duryodhana’s many snares, like a boat 
saving shipwrecked sailors from the terrors of the sea. Krishna, though 
undeserving of woe, she has suffered untold misery because of us. We 
should pay homage to her. Embrace and comfort her repeatedly by telling 
her about the Pandavas. 

Ever since her marriage she has been the victim of pain and grief 
because of the way her father-in-law behaved; suffering has been her lot. 
Krishna, will I ever see the day when my afflictions end and I can make my 
grieving mother happy? On the eve of our exile she ran after us, crying in 
anguish, but we left her behind and went into the forest. Sorrow does not 
always kill; she might still be alive and, though grieving constantly for her 
sons, being looked after in Hastinapura. 

Glorious one, salute her for me, and salute Dhritarashtra also, as well as 
all the kings who are older than us. Greet Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Bahlika, 
Aswatthama, Somadatta and everyone of the Bharata vamsa. Salute the 
wise Vidura, counsellor of the Kurus, of the profound intellect and 
knowledge of dharma. Madhusudana, embrace everyone on our behalf.’ 

Having said this to Krishna in the presence of the kings, Yudhishtira 
circles him in pradakshina and asks his leave to return. Arjuna walks ahead 
a few steps and says quietly to his friend Krishna, the Avatara, ‘Illustrious 
Govinda, all the kings know that we have decided to ask for our kingdom 
back. If, without insulting us and by honouring you, they give us what we 
demand, I will be pleased and they will escape mortal danger. If, however, 


Dhritarashtra’s son, who is always deceitful, does otherwise, I will 
obliterate the very race of Kshatriyas.’ 

Bhima is delighted when Arjuna says this. That Pandava, who 
constantly quivers with rage he can scarcely contain, now lets out a dreadful 
roar of joy. Hearing him, all the bowmen tremble, and horses and elephants 
helplessly urinate and excrete in terror. 

Having declared his resolve to Krishna, Arjuna takes his leave and turns 
back after embracing his divine cousin. Once all the other kings are 
persuaded to turn back, as well, Krishna sets out with a cheerful heart, on 
his chariot drawn by Saibya, Sugriva and the other horses. Urged by his 
sarathy Daruka, those steeds fly, devouring road and sky as they go. 

On his way, Krishna Mahabaho meets some Rishis who shine with 
Brahmatejas, standing on both sides of the road. He gets down and greets 
them reverently and worships them. 

He says, ‘Is there peace in the world? Is dharma being practised? Are 
the other three varnas obedient to Brahmanas? Where have you met with 
success? Where are you going and why? What can I do for you? What 
brings you illustrious ones to Earth?’ 

Jamadagni’s son, Brahma’s friend, that lord of Devas and Asuras, 
comes forward and embraces Krishna. Parasurama Bhargava says, ‘O 
Dasarha, Devarishis of pious deeds, Brahmanas of deep knowledge of the 
Shastras, Rajarishis and venerable Munis, who are witnesses to the feats 
that the Devas and Asuras have achieved, want to see all the Kshatriyas of 
the Earth gathered together from everywhere, the counsellors sitting in the 
ancient Kuru sabha, the kings, and, amongst them, you who are the Truth 
incarnate, O Janardana. 

We are going to Hastinapura to witness that awesome sight. We are also 
anxious to hear what you will say to the Kurus in the presence of all those 
kings, words full of dharma and artha. Bhishma, Drona and others, as well 
as the illustrious Vidura and you, Yadavapumgava, will adorn that ancient 
sabha. We want to hear what you say there—divine words of wisdom. 

You now know our purpose, Mahabaho. We will meet you again; go 
safely. We hope to see you in the midst of that sabha, seated on a noble 
throne, radiating lustre and might.’” 


CANTO 84 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “O Parantapa, when Devaki’s mighty-armed son 

sets out for Hastinapura, ten powerful, fully armed and battle-ready 
Maharathas follow in his train. A thousand foot-soldiers, a thousand 
horsemen and hundreds of attendants carrying plentiful provisions also go 
with him.” 

Janamejaya said, “How does the illustrious Krishna of Dasarha vamsa, 
the slayer of Madhu, leave on his journey? What omens appear when he 
sets out?” 

Vaisampayana said, “I will tell you about the earthly and heavenly 
omens that appear on Krishna’s departure for Hastinapura. At first, the sky 
is clear and cloudless, yet thunder rolls and lightning flashes above. Later, 
light, fleecy clouds appear and pour down rain behind him, in his wake, as 
if in tribute. The seven great rivers, including the Sindhu, change their 
eastward courses and flow west instead. The cardinal directions seem to be 
reversed and all things seem in dizzy thrall. Fires blaze up everywhere, 
Rajan, and the Earth trembles. 

In hundreds of wells and earthen pots water gushes up spontaneously 
and overflows. The whole universe is enveloped in darkness. Akasa is filled 
with dust that obscures the cardinal and subsidiary points of the horizon. 
Loud roars sound in the sky, but no creature is seen to make them. This 
wonderful phenomenon is seen all across the land. A southwesterly wind, 


roaring, uproots trees by the thousands and crashes them down upon the 
city of Hastinapura. 

However, in those places through which Krishna passes delicious 
breezes blow and everything becomes auspicious. Lotuses and fragrant 
flowers fall in showers from above. The road becomes smooth and 
miraculously free from prickly grasses and thorns. Wherever Krishna stays, 
thousands of Brahmanas glorify that munificent One and worship him with 
offerings of curds, ghee, honey and rich gifts. Women come out onto the 
road and fling redolent wildflowers over him who is devoted to the welfare 
of all creatures. 

Bharatarishabha, Krishna comes to wonderful Salibhavana abundant 
with every crop, an enchanting and sacred realm. He sees, with delight, 
villages crowded with animals; he passes through many cities and 
kingdoms. He passes through Upaplavya where its happy, good natured 
citizens, who have the protection of the Bhaaratas and, so, free from fear of 
invasion, and unknowing of danger or calamities of any kind, come out of 
their town and stand together on the way, eager to set eyes on holy Krishna. 
They see that illustrious one like a fire, and they worship him as they would 
an honoured and welcome guest. 

When at last Krishna comes to Vrikasthala, the Sun is reddening the sky 
with his last rays of light. Alighting from his chariot, the Avatara performs 
the customary rites of purification, orders the horses unharnessed and sits 
down to his sandhya vandana. Daruka unyokes the horses, tends to them 
and lets them loose to graze and drink. 

Krishna says, ‘We must spend the night here, for the success of 
Yudhishtira’s mission.’ 

His attendants quickly set up camp and serve fine food and drink. 

Rajan, amongst the Brahmanas who live in that village, those who are 
of noble descent, and humble and obedient to the injunctions of the Vedas 
in their ways, approach Krishna and honour him with blessings and 
worship. They place their rich homes at his disposal. 

Krishna joyfully accepts their hospitality and pays homage to each of 
them as befits their status. He visits their homes, then returns with his own 
people to his ample tent. Having eaten his meal with them and fed all the 
Brahmanas with sweet-meats, Krishna passes the night happily in 
Vrikasthala.’” 


CANTO 85 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Dhritarashtra, in the meantime, has discovered 

through his spies that Krishna is on his way. His hair stands on end 
as he reverently faces the mighty-armed Bhishma, Drona, Sanjaya and the 
illustrious Vidura, and Duryodhana and his confederates. 

He says, ‘O son of Kuru vamsa, we hear strange and wonderful news. 
Old men, women and children are talking of it in their homes; most speak 
of it in awe; others gather in groups outside and talk of it; wherever men 
congregate, in homes or open spaces, they are discussing just one thing. 
They all say that Krishna, the great scion of Dasarha vamsa, is one his way 
here on behalf of the Pandavas. He is worthy of every honour we can do 
him and our worship. He is the Lord of all creatures; everything in the 
universe depends upon him; intelligence, strength, wisdom and energy are 
centred in him. 

This Narasreshta deserves the reverence of good men, for He is eternal 
virtue— Sanatana Dharma incarnate. He will bestow felicity and happiness 
if worshipped, and misery if not. If we please him with our offerings, we 
might have all our wishes fulfilled by his grace, in the presence of these 
kings. 

Parantapa, waste no time; make arrangements to receive him 
worshipfully; have pavilions built on the road and furnish them with every 
luxury, so that Krishna is pleased with you. What does Bhishma think?’ 


Bhishma and the others warmly laud what Dhritarashtra says. 
Duryodhana immediately orders pavilions to be erected at regular intervals, 
at the most charming sites, and adorned with myriad jewels. The king has 
them furnished with luxurious beds and seats; he sends beautiful maidens, 
perfumes, ornaments, fine clothes, a variety of the best food and drink and 
fragrant garlands of many kinds. Especially for Krishna’s reception and use, 
the king has a splendid, gem-studded pavilion built at Vrikasthala. Once 
these arrangements, made by superhuman or even divine effort, are 
complete, Duryodhana informs Dhritarashtra of them. 

Krishna arrives at the Kuru encampment, but casts not even a glance at 
these opulent pavilions.” 


CANTO 86 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, ‘Vidura, Krishna has left Upaplavya. He is in 
Vrikasthala now and will be here tomorrow. He is the lord of the 
Ahukas; he is the foremost of the Sattvatas; he is a Mahatman endowed 
with great lustre and might. He is the guardian and protector of the 
prosperous kingdom of the Vrishnis; he is the Pitamaha of the three worlds. 
The vastly intelligent Vrishnis and Andhakas worship Krishna’s wisdom, 
just as the Adityas, the Vasus and the Rudras do Brihaspati’s. Virtuous one, 
I will, in your presence, offer our worship to this noble son of the Dasarha 
vamsa. Let me tell you what I plan to do. 

I will give him sixteen rathas made of gold, each drawn by four superb, 
well-adorned, identically coloured Bahlika horses. I will give him eight 
elephants with the juice of musth running down their temples, with tusks as 
big as plough shares, which can smite down hostile ranks, and eight 
mahouts for each one. I will give him a hundred lovely maidservants with 
golden skins, all virgins, and a hundred man-servants as well. 

I will give him eighteen-thousand soft woollen blankets that the 
mountain dwellers gave us. I will give him a thousand deer-skins from 
Cheena, and everything else that one like him deserves. I will give him this 
great and serene gemstone of the purest rays that shines day and night, for 
only Krishna is worthy of it. I will give him my own chariot, which can 
traverse fourteen yojanas in a day. I will set food and drink before him, 


eight times more than what the animals and attendants in his entourage 
need. 

All my sons, except Duryodhana, will go out to welcome him on their 
chariots. Thousands of graceful dancing girls, decked in ornaments and 
unveiled, will receive Krishna. Let all the citizens with their wives and 
children feast their prayerful eyes on the illustrious Madhusudana with as 
much devotion as they look at the rising Sun. Let pennants and banners be 
raised and the road by which Krishna comes be well-watered to settle the 
dust. 

Let Dusasana’s palace, which is better than Duryodhana’s, be cleaned 
and decorated for Krishna to stay in. With its many beautiful mansions, and 
its abundant riches, it is enchanting indeed. All my wealth, as well as 
Duryodhana’s, is kept there. Give Krishna all that befits one as great as 
him.” 


CANTO 87 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “VV idura says, ‘O Rajan, you have the respect and love of everyone 
in all the three worlds, and you are considered the best of men. 
You are venerable and your mind is so serene that whatever you say will be 
in accord with the shastras and the dictates of reason. Your subjects are 
confident that dharma is as integral to you as writing etched on stone, as 
rays to the Sun or waves to the ocean. Your virtues make your subjects love 
you. Take care to preserve your noble traits. Be straightforward in all that 
you do. Do not, out of foolishness, be the cause of a slaughter of your sons, 
grandsons, friends, kinsmen and all your dear ones. 

You plan to give much to Krishna as your guest; he deserves all that and 
more, indeed he deserves the Earth. However, your generosity does not 
stem from motives of dharma or a desire to please him, but from selfish 
reasons. It reeks of insincerity, falseness and deception. I clearly see the 
hidden intentions behind what you plan to do. 

The Pandavas want only five villages, but you do not want to give them 
even that for the sake of peace. Instead, you are trying to win Krishna over 
with gifts and to alienate him from the Pandavas. You will not succeed in 
separating Krishna and Arjuna, neither with wealth, nor worship, nor with 
all your cunning stratagems. I know Krishna’s magnanimity; I know how 
unshakeable Arjuna’s devotion to him is; I know that Arjuna is as Krishna’s 
life and he will never forsake him. 


Krishna will not accept any hospitality from you other than water to 
wash his feet and to drink; the only courtesy he will offer is to enquire after 
the well-being of those he sees with you, nothing else. Rajan, offer him the 
honour of a welcome that he will accept. He is worthy of every reverence 
and deserves no less. Give Krishna what he comes for, which he desires for 
the good of both the Kurus and the Pandavas. He wants peace between you 
and Duryodhana, on one side, and the Pandavas on the other. 

Do as he says, Rajan; you are like a father to the Pandavas; you are old 
and they are children to you by age. Behave as a father would towards 
them, for they look upon you as one.’” 


CANTO 88 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ ‘T) uryodhana says, ‘All that Vidura has said about Krishna is true. 

Krishna is devoted to the Pandavas and inseparable from them. 

The gifts that you plan to give him are inappropriate. Kesava is indeed 

worthy of it all, but this is neither the time nor the place for it. He will think 

that we are honouring him out of fear. An intelligent Kshatriya must never 
do anything that may be considered cowardly or shameful. 

I am well aware that Krishna of the large eyes is worthy of the worship 
of the three worlds, but given the circumstances we should not give him 
anything. The war that we have set our minds on should not be set aside or 
delayed out of considerations of hospitality.’ 

Listening to Duryodhana, the Kuru Pitamaha Bhishma says, ‘Krishna 
will not be pleased or angry whether he is honoured or not; nor will he be 
insulted, for he is above such things. No one, however powerful he may be 
or however hard he may try, can obstruct his purpose. Do not hesitate to do 
as Krishna says, and use him to make peace with the Pandavas. He is 
righteous and his advice will be in keeping with dharma and artha. What is 
fitting is that you gratify him by doing what he asks.’ 

Duryodhana says, ‘Pitamaha, I cannot live if I have to share my fortune 
with the Pandavas. I have made my own decision: when he arrives here in 
the morning, I will imprison Krishna, who is the refuge of the Pandavas. 
With him confined, the Vrishnis and the Pandavas, indeed the whole world, 


will submit to me. Tell me how I should do this, so that Krishna does not 
guess what I intend, and so that we are not endangered.’ 

Dhritarashtra and his advisors are shocked to hear Duryodhana’s 
abysmal plan. 

Dhritarashtra says to Duryodhana, ‘Never speak of this again, it is 
sinful! Hrishikesa comes as an ambassador. Besides, he is related to us and 
we love him. He has done us no wrong; how can you even think of 
imprisoning him?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Your sinful son faces his end by choosing evil over 
dharma despite his well-wishers’ pleas; and you follow the lead of this 
wretch, who ignores all wise counsel and treads the path to doom. This vile 
prince of yours, with all his counsellors, will die the instant they lay hands 
on the pure Krishna. I dare not tarry to listen to this sinner anymore.’ 

And the inflamed Bhishma of the awesome might gets up and leaves the 
Kuru sabha.” 


CANTO 89 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Krishna rises at dawn and, having performed his 

morning ablutions and rituals and taken leave of those who rode 
with him, sets out for Hastinapura. The citizens of Vrikasthala bid farewell 
to the mighty-armed one and return to their homes. 

Other than Duryodhana, all the grandly attired sons of Dhritarashtra, 
along with Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and others, go out to meet Krishna. 
Thousands of people come out to look at him—on chariots and on foot. He 
meets Bhishma of the immaculate deeds, Drona and Dhritarashtra’s sons on 
his way; and they escort him into the city of elephants. 

In honour of Krishna’s visit, Hastinapura is vividly adorned and the 
main streets are bedecked with gold and gemstones of all kinds. Rajan, not 
a single man, woman or child remains indoors, so eager are the citizens to 
see Krishna. They come out and line the streets, and bow their heads in 
worship while they sing in his praise as he passes. Noble women crowd the 
balconies and terraces of great mansions to look at Krishna as he passes by; 
filling them until it seems they might collapse under their combined weight. 
And although swift, Krishna’s horses move slowly through the thronging 
streets. 

The lotus-eyed Parantapa enters the compounds of Dhritarashtra’s ash- 
coloured stone palace with its numerous edifices. He passes through the first 
three chambers of the palace and then he meets Dhritarashtra. The blind 


king stands to honour Krishna in welcome, and Drona, Bhishma, Kripa, 
Somadatta and king Bahlika rise with him. The Vrishni hero comes 
forwards and pays his respects first to the illustrious Dhritarashtra and 
Bhishma; he then greets the other kings one by one, in proper order. Finally, 
after Krishna has greeted Drona and his son, Bahlika, Kripa and Somadatta, 
Dhritarashtra shows him to a throne of wondrous artistry, made of gold and 
inlaid with resonant jewels. 

When Krishna is seated, Dhritarashtra’s priests make a ritual offering to 
him of a cow, honey, curds and water. Krishna stays awhile, surrounded by 
the Kurus, exchanging pleasantries with each one as befits their relationship 
with him. In due course, having accepted the honours of welcome accorded 
to him and having greeted all the Kurus in their sabha, he takes 
Dhritarashtra’s leave and goes to Vidura’s fine home. Vidura comes out to 
welcome Krishna of the Dasarha vamsa with all kinds of auspicious and 
loving offerings. 

Tears in his eyes, Vidura says, “O Lotus-eyed Lord, I cannot begin to 
describe the joy I feel to see you, for you are the inner soul of all the living, 
the antaratman.’ 

Vidura, who knows dharma, asks after the Pandavas. Krishna, for whom 
the past and future are merged into the present, who knows that the 
Pandavas love Vidura and he them, that he is learned, constant in dharma, 
ever truthful and wise, and that he bears no anger against the sons of Pandu, 
tells him in detail about what the sons of Pandu have been doing.’” 


CANTO 90 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “After noon, after visiting Vidura, Krishna, 

chastiser of his enemies, goes to see his aunt Kunti. When she sees 
him, his face glowing with the radiance of the Sun, she embraces him and 
begins to pour out her sorrow for her sons. At the long denied sight of 
Krishna, who is her sons’ very prana, her tears flow. When Krishna has 
received her ritual welcome she speaks to him, her face careworn, her voice 
choked with tears. 

Kunti says, ‘O Kesava, from their childhood my sons have served their 
elders and superiors with reverence. They were always devoted to each 
other. They were cheated of their kingdom and sent into exile, when they 
ought to have lived in the midst of their friends and kin. They have 
mastered anger and joy; they are devoted to Brahmanas and always truthful. 
These children of mine, the noble sons of Pandu, tore my heart out when, 
abandoning kingdom and pleasures, and leaving me behind, they went into 
the forest. How did my sons live in the vana full of lions, tigers and wild 
elephants? 

They have suffered untold misery. Deprived of their father in their 
infancy, I raised them all so tenderly. How did they live in the forest without 
seeing their mother? From their infancy the music of conches, drums and 
flutes woke them from their sleep. While at home, they slept in palatial 
apartments on soft sheets and skins of the runku deer; and were woken in 


the morning by the trumpeting of elephants, the neighing of horses, the 
clatter of chariot-wheels, and the music of flutes and veenas, the sounds of 
conches and cymbals. They would worship at dawn while listening to 
sacred hymns chanted by Brahmanas; they worshipped the eldest of those 
Brahmanas with grand gifts of clothes, jewels and ornaments. And those 
illustrious Dvijas blessed them in return. 

I cannot imagine how they slept in the deep forest where only the feral 
cries of predators ring. O how unjustified was their torment. They who were 
roused from their beds by music of cymbals, drums, conches and flutes, by 
the sweet voices of singers and by their praises being sung, how could they 
bear to be awoken in the forest by the roars of panthers and tigers? 

My eldest son is modest and devoted to truth; he has his senses under 
control, and compassion for all creatures; he has conquered lust and malice; 
he always walks the path of dharma; he was able to bear the heavy burden 
of the ancient Rayjarishis—Ambarisha, Mandhatri, Yayati, Nahusha, 
Bharata, Dilipa and Usinara’s son Sibi; his character is taintless and his 
disposition immaculate; he is deeply versed in dharma; his prowess is 
irresistible; his accomplishments make him fit to rule the three worlds; his 
profound learning and devotion to dharma make him rightfully the foremost 
of the Kurus; he is handsome and mighty-armed; and he has no enemies. 
How is my Yudhishtira, O Krishna? 

My pure-souled and golden-skinned second son is as strong as ten 
thousand elephants and as swift as the wind; he is the mightiest of the 
Pandavas and the most quick-tempered; he is devoted to his brothers and is 
beloved of them all. It is he who killed Kichaka and his brothers; he who 
slew the Krodhavasas, Hidimba and Baka. In prowess he is Indra’s equal, in 
might Vayu Deva’s; his anger is terrifying and like Rudra’s; he is the 
foremost of all warriors. This Parantapa, this wrathful son of Pandu, 
restrains his anger, might and impatience, and he controls his soul in 
implicit obedience to his elder brother. Tell me, Krishna, how is my 
Bhimasena of immeasurable valour, whose terrifying appearance suits his 
name Vrikodara? 

Krishna, what of my Arjuna, who with only his two arms is more 
powerful than his thousand-armed namesake of long ago, my son who 
shoots five hundred arrows with one draw of his bow? He is Kartavirya’s 
equal with the astras; Surya Deva’s equal in blinding energy; a Maharishi’s 
equal in self-restraint,; Bhumi Devi’s equal in forgiveness. It is by his 


strength that the Kuru kings have acquired their vast empire that blazes in 
splendour; and the Pandavas greatly value his prowess. This son of Pandu is 
the foremost of all Maharathas; his might is true and irresistible; no enemy 
has ever escaped him with his life; he is the conqueror of all, and invincible; 
he is the refuge of the Pandavas, as Indra is of the Devas. Krishna, how is 
your brother and friend, my Dhananjaya? 

Ah, tell me about my tender-hearted son, who is kind to all creatures 
and blessed with modesty, who is a master of powerful astras, who is 
delicate and virtuous, who is my most beloved child. The mighty archer 
Sahadeva is the hero and ornament of all sabhas; he is young and devoted to 
the service of his brothers; he knows artha and dharma; his brothers always 
praise his noble character and manner. Madri and Pandu’s son, the heroic 
Sahadeva, is the best of warriors; he waits submissively on his older 
brothers and reverentially on me; he is tender in years and of a gentle 
disposition; he is brave and handsome. He is loved by all and most dearly 
by his brothers, whose very life he is, though he inhabits his own body. 

And tell me about my Nakula, who is a master of the various vyuhas of 
war; who is strong and a mighty archer also. My precious child was raised 
in luxury; is he well in body and mind? Mahabaho, shall I ever see my 
Nakula again? That Maharatha is still a stripling to me; he does not deserve 
this grief. O, how could I, who knew no peace if Nakula was out of my 
sight for even the blink of an eye, be still alive today? 

Dearer to me than all my sons is Draupadi. She is nobly born and 
completely beautiful; she is endowed with every accomplishment; she 
always speaks the truth. She chose to accompany her husbands rather than 
stay with her sons and, leaving her children behind, followed the Pandavas. 
Once, a retinue of servants waited on her; her husbands, who love her, 
gratified her every little wish. She bears all the auspicious marks on her 
person and is accomplished in every way. Krishna, how is Draupadi? 

Although she has five heroic husbands, all slayers of foes and all 
peerless bowmen who are each equal to Agni in urjas, she has suffered great 
torment. I have not seen my daughter-in-law Panchali for fourteen years; 
she herself has not seen her sons for as long, and must have endured 
constant anxiety for them. That Draupadi does not enjoy the happiness that 
should be hers for her wonderful character convinces me that happiness is 
not the result of one’s deeds or nature. 


Whenever I remember how she was forcibly dragged into the Kuru 
sabha, I stop loving Yudhishtira, Arjuna, Bhima, Nakula and Sahadeva. 
Never before have I borne a heavier burden of grief as when the villainous 
Dusasana, driven by rage and lust, hauled Draupadi, who was in her 
menstrual period and wore only a single length of cloth, into the sabha 
where her father-in-law sat; and exposed her to the gaze of all the Kurus. 
Everyone knows that Dhritarashtra, Bahlika, Kripa, Somadatta and all the 
others were struck by sadness at this; but of all who were present in that 
sabha, it is only Vidura who spoke out for her, only him that I worship. 

One does not become worthy of homage by learning or wealth. It is 
one’s character alone that makes a man deserve honour. Krishna, the 
illustrious Vidura, with his great intellect and deep wisdom, is an ornament 
that adorns the world.’ 

Pritha is filled at once with joy at Krishna’s presence and sorrow for her 
sons; and she vents all her grief. She says, ‘O Parantapa, dissolute kings of 
ancient times occupied themselves with gambling and hunting deer. Can 
this be a happy way of life for the Pandavas? I am consumed by dark 
thoughts and images, Krishna—of Draupadi being violently dragged into 
the presence of the Kurus in their sabha by Dhritarashtra’s sons, and abuse 
worse than death being heaped on her; of my sons being banished from 
their city; of them wandering in the wilderness. These and other sorrows 
fairly crush me. 

Nothing could have been more painful to me or my sons than to have 
lived a year in wretched hiding, in a stranger’s house. Fourteen years have 
passed since Duryodhana exiled my sons. If suffering destroys the karma of 
paapa, and if happiness depends on punya, then considering the torment we 
have been through, we might yet enjoy happiness again. I never treated 
Dhritarashtra’s sons differently from mine. By virtue of that, O Krishna, 
surely I will see you emerge safely from this war, and with the Pandavas, 
their enemies slain and their kingdom restored to them. My sons have kept 
the oath they swore and lived so faithfully by dharma that their enemies 
cannot hope to vanquish them. 

As for my sorrows, I blame neither myself nor Duryodhana, but my 
father alone. Like a wealthy man making a gift of money, my father gave 
me away. When I was still a girl, playing with toys, or with a ball in my 
hands, your grandfather gave me away to his friend, the illustrious 


Kuntibhoja. Abandoned then by my father and now by my father-in-law, 
and suffering unbearably as I do, what point is there in my being alive? 

On the night of Arjuna’s birth, a disembodied voice said to me, “This 
son of yours will conquer the whole world and his fame will reach the 
heavens. Your son will destroy the Kurus in a great war and recover the lost 
kingdom, and with his brothers he will perform three mahayagnas.” 

I do not doubt the truth of that marvellous announcement. I bow to 
dharma that upholds creation. If dharma is real, you will surely make good 
all that the asariri said. Neither the death of my husband, nor the loss of 
wealth, nor our conflict with the Kurus inflicted such eviscerating pain on 
me as the separation from my children. What peace can my heart know 
when I do not see Dhananjaya, wielder of Gandiva and best of all 
Kshatriyas? I have not seen Yudhishtira, Arjuna and Bhima for fourteen 
years, Krishna. Men perform sraddha, last rites, for those who have gone 
missing for a long time, assuming that they are dead. Practically, my 
children are dead to me and I to them. 

Tell Yudhishtira Dharmaraja that his dharma diminishes with each 
passing day. Tell him to stop this with a Kshatriya’s rough deeds. Cursed 
are they, Krishna, who live as dependents at another’s mercy. Death is 
better than a livelihood gained by such meanness. 

You must tell Dhananjaya and Vrikodara that the time has come for 
them to fulfil the purpose for which a Kshatriya woman bears a son; that if 
they let time slip by without achieving anything, then, although they are 
still universally respected, they will become objects of contempt; and that if 
men’s disdain taints them, I will abandon them for ever. Tell those 
Purushottamas that when the time comes even life, which is precious, 
should be laid down. 

Tell Madri’s sons, who are more devoted to Kshatriya dharma than to 
life itself, that they must strive to win comfort and wealth back through 
their prowess, for only objects gained like that can please the heart of a man 
who wants to live by Kshatriya dharma. 

Go now, Mahabaho, and tell Arjuna, foremost of all Kshatriyas, to walk 
the path that Draupadi shows him. You know well, Krishna, that when 
inflamed Bhima and Arjuna are each like Yama and can vanquish even the 
Devas. Their wife Krishnaa being dragged into the sabha and spoken to as 
she was by the beasts Dusasana and Karna was a searing insult to them. 
Duryodhana, too, insulted the mighty Bhima in the presence of the Kuru 


kings. I am certain he will pay for that, for Vrikodara knows no peace when 
an enemy provokes him. Indeed, once provoked, Bhima remembers the 
slight until he has killed his foes and their allies. 

The loss of kingdom did not crush me; the defeat at dice did not sadden 
me; but the illustrious and beautiful princess of Panchala being dragged into 
the sabha, wearing only a single cloth, and there forced to hear the vilest 
taunts and abuse, grieved me more than anything I have known. Krishna, 
what could be a greater sorrow for me? Alas, that incomparable Kshatriya 
princess, so devoted to her dharma, had to suffer such savagery while in her 
delicate period and, though she had powerful protectors, was as helpless as 
if she had none. 

O Madhusudana, I find it strange that I have had to bear such a burden 
of grief in spite of you, and that mightiest of men Balarama and that 
Maharatha Pradyumna being protectors of my children and myself; and 
despite my sons, the invincible Bhima, and Arjuna who never turns his back 
on the enemy, being alive.’ 

Krishna comforts his aunt so grief-stricken by the plight of her sons. He 
says, ‘There is no other woman in the world like you, Matuli. You are the 
daughter of King Surasena, and by marriage you are of the Ajamida vamsa. 
The families of your birth and marriage are both noble; you are like a lotus 
transplanted from one great lake into another. You were blessed with 
prosperity and adored by your husband. You are the wife of a hero and have 
given birth to heroic sons. You possess every virtue and are endowed with 
great wisdom. It is fitting that you should bear joy and sorrow with 
equanimity and patience. 

Your children have overcome sleep and sloth, anger and joy, hunger and 
thirst, cold and heat and enjoy happiness in the true Kshatriya way. They 
are endowed with great light and strength and, abandoning the sensual 
pleasures which the low-minded are addicted to, pursue the noble felicity 
which Kshatriyas should. Nor are they content with a little. Wise men enjoy 
the limits of joy or unhappiness from objects that give these. Ordinary men 
choose mediocre pleasures and are content with lethargy. Those that are 
superior desire either the most acute human suffering or the highest bliss 
that man can have. The wise delight in extremes; they find no pleasure in 
mediocrity. They hold the extremes with true happiness and see the in- 
betweens as real sorrow. 


The Pandavas and Draupadi greet you through me. They send the 
message that they are well and ask after your welfare. You will soon see 
them become the lords of the whole world, with their enemy slain and 
themselves reinstated to power and prosperity.’ 

Consoled by Krishna, the sorrowing Kunti shakes off the gloom in 
which temporary ignorance has enveloped her and says to Krishna, 
‘Mahabaho, let us do whatever you think is proper, without abandoning 
dharma, and without deceit. I know the power of your truth and of your 
birth. I know also what wisdom and strength you will employ to accomplish 
what is best for your beloved cousins. In our vamsa you are dharma 
personified; you are truth; you are the embodiment of tapasya; you are 
Brahman. Everything is founded in you; and what you say must always be 
true.’ 

The mighty-armed Krishna bids her farewell, and after walking around 
her in pradakshina, leaves for Duryodhana’s palace.’” 


CANTO 91 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Having taken leave of Kunti and walked round 

her in pradakshina, Krishna goes to Duryodhana’s opulent palace. It 
is richly adorned, with beautiful furniture, and as grand as Indra’s abode. 
Krishna walks unobstructed through three large courtyards and enters the 
palace, which is as imposing as a mass of clouds, as tall as a hill, 
magnificent and resplendent. 

There he sees Dhritarashtra’s son of the mighty arms seated on his 
throne in the midst of a thousand kings and surrounded by all the Kurus. 
There he also sees Dusasana, Karna and Subala’s son Sakuni, who sit next 
to Duryodhana. When Krishna enters the sabha, Dhritarashtra’s illustrious 
son and his counsellors rise to honour him. Krishna greets Duryodhana and 
his counsellors, as well as all the kings present, according to their status, 
and then sits on a beautifully wrought golden throne spread over with a rich 
gold-embroidered cover. 

The Kuru king makes the ritual offering to Krishna of a cow, honey, 
curds and water; and he places at his service all his palaces and other 
mansions, and the whole kingdom. In the presence of all the kings, the 
Kauravas worship Krishna, who is like the Sun in all his glory. Once the 
ritual of worship is completed, Duryodhana invites Krishna to eat with him 
in his palace. Krishna declines. 


Duryodhana glances at Karna and, in a deceptively mild voice underlaid 
with malice, says to Krishna, ‘O Janardana, why will you not accept the 
feast of food and drink, and the garments and beds that I have arranged for 
you? You are helping both sides in this dispute; you want the good of both. 
You are the greatest of Dhritarashtra’s relatives and he loves you dearly. 
You also know dharma and artha, fully and in detail. Krishna, I want to hear 
the reason for your refusing my hospitality.’ 

Krishna raises his mighty right arm and, in a voice as deep as rumbling 
clouds, says to Duryodhana, “Rajan, envoys accept food and worship only 
after the success of their missions. So, Bhaarata, when my mission 
succeeds, you may entertain me and my attendants.’ 

Duryodhana says, ‘Krishna, it is not fitting that you behave in this 
manner. We are trying to please you because of your kinship to us, 
regardless of the success or failure of your mission. Our efforts seem to be 
futile; and we see no reason why you reject our worship, which we offer out 
of love and friendship. We have no quarrel or war with you; and on 
reflection, it seems what you say and do is not becoming.’ 

Krishna looks at Duryodhana and all his counsellors and says, “I could 
never forsake dharma, not from desire, from wrath or malice; not for gain or 
for the sake of argument and not from temptation. One accepts food from 
another when one is in distress. You have not inspired love in me by 
anything you have done, nor am I in distress. Without any reason, you hated 
your gentle cousins the Pandavas, who have every virtue, from the moment 
they were born. The unreasonable hatred you bear the sons of Kunti does 
not become you. 

The sons of Pandu are all devoted to dharma. Who would hurt them in 
the least? He who hates them, hates me; he who loves them, loves me. 
Know that the Pandavas and I have one soul. He who is driven by lust, 
anger and by the darkness of his heart, who hates and seeks to injure one 
who owns every good quality is the worst of men, even if he possesses 
every noble quality himself. 

That wrathful villain of uncontrolled soul, who, from ignorance and 
greed, hates his godlike kinsmen, will never enjoy his prosperity for long. 
On the other hand, the one who, through good judgement, wins over 
virtuous men, even if he has an aversion to them in his heart, enjoys 
undying felicity and fame. The food you offer me is defiled by your 


vileness, and I cannot eat it. The only food I will eat here is what Vidura 
offers me.’ 

Saying this to the wilful Duryodhana, who cannot bear to hear anything 
contrary to his wishes, Krishna leaves the glittering palace and sets out for 
Vidura’s home. While he is there, Drona, Kripa, Bhishma, Bahlika and 
many of the Kauravas come to see him. 

The Kauravas who have come place their palaces with all the wealth in 
them at Krishna’s disposal. Krishna thanks them for the honour they have 
done him and gives them leave to go. 

After the party of Kurus has left, Vidura entertains Krishna, the 
unvanquished, with lavish hospitality, providing him with everything he 
could want; and Kunti places sattvik, delicious food in abundance before 
him. Krishna first gratifies the Brahmanas who know the Vedas; he gives 
them food and gold. Only then he and his attendants, like Indra with the 
Maruts, dine on what remains of the feast that Vidura has prepared.’” 


CANTO 92 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “In the night, when Krishna has dined and is 

refreshed, Vidura says to him, ‘O Krishna, your coming has not 
been a well judged one. Dhritarashtra’s son violates dharma and artha; he is 
evil and wrathful; he insults anyone he pleases, while he himself craves 
honour; and he disobeys the elders. He ignores the shastras; he is foolish 
and vile; he has set himself on a fateful, inexorable path to perdition; and he 
is malevolent towards those who are concerned for his welfare. 

His soul is overcome by desire and lust, and he foolishly believes he is 
wise. He is the enemy of all his true friends. He is always suspicious, has no 
control over himself, is ungrateful and, having abandoned dharma, is 
infatuated by every sin. He is vain and immature, a slave to his senses, 
driven by bottomless greed, and indecisive. 

And these are not his only faults. Even if you point out what is good for 
him, his arrogance makes him ignore such counsel. He has great faith in the 
prowess of Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna, Drona’s son and Jayadratha and, 
so, he spurns peace. Dhritarashtra’s sons and Karna firmly believe that the 
Pandavas cannot even face Bhishma, Drona and the other Kshatriyas, let 
alone fight against them. Duryodhana has assembled an immense army and 
thinks that victory is already his. The fool believes that Karna can single- 
handedly vanquish the enemy, and so Duryodhana will never make peace. 


Krishna, you want peace and brotherhood between the Kauravas and the 
Pandavas; but know that Dhritarashtra’s sons have decided not to give the 
Pandavas what is rightfully theirs. Whatever you say to these men will be in 
vain, for they their minds are already made up. A wise man would not 
waste his breath when his words, good or bad, will surely prove ineffectual, 
even like singing to the deaf. Just as a Brahmana’s discourse is wasted on 
Chandalas, your words will be utterly disregarded by these ignorant and 
evil men, who have no reverence for anything that is worthy of it. 

Duryodhana is fatuous and, as long as he has strength, he will never 
heed your advice; everything you say to him will be futile. I do not think it 
is apt for you to go into the midst of these sinners, and speak out against 
them, who are black-souled, and many. Because they have no respect for 
age, are blinded by wealth and vanity, are full of the arrogance of youth and 
impatient, they will never accept your wise counsel. 

Duryodhana has mustered a strong force and does not trust you. He will 
never do as you say. Dhritarashtra’s sons are inspired by the conviction that 
Indra himself, with all the Devas, cannot defeat them in battle. Your words, 
always profound, will not move men of such dark beliefs, men driven by 
lust, greed and anger. 

Secure amidst his vast army of elephants, chariots and soldiers, 
Duryodhana is fearless and thinks he has already conquered the Earth. He 
wants his empire without rivals. Peace with him is not possible, for he 
assumes that what he owns is unalterably his. Sadly, the end of the world as 
we know it is at hand because of Duryodhana, for kings of the world and all 
their Kshatriya warriors have gathered here to fight for him against the 
Pandavas. 

Krishna, in the past, you have made all these kings, who are now 
arrayed against you, suffer grievous losses. Prompted by fear of you, these 
Kshatriyas have joined Karna and made an alliance with Dhritarashtra’s 
sons. Reckless, and even prepared to die, they have joined Duryodhana for 
the pleasure of fighting against the Pandavas and you. I do not think it wise 
for you to go to them. How will you manage, surrounded by so many 
treacherous enemies all seated together? I am aware that you cannot be 
vanquished by the Devas themselves; I know how powerful and intelligent 
you are. 

Krishna, I love you as much as I love the sons of Pandu, and what I say 
is from affection, respect and friendship for you. Need I tell you how 


delighted I am to see you, Lotus-eyed One? You are the inner soul of all the 
living.’” 


CANTO 93 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


6 = he Divine One says, ‘Vidura, all that a wise man should say; all 

that a far-sighted man would say; all that a man could to say to 

me as a friend; all that is truly worthy of you, in keeping with dharma and 

artha: all this you have said to me, as if 1am your child. What you have told 

me is true, praiseworthy and sensible. Now, Vidura, listen to my reason for 
being here. 

I am well aware of Duryodhana’s evil nature and of the hostility of the 
Kshatriyas who support him; yet I have come to the Kurus. The Earth is in 
the grip of an enormous danger, and the man who saves her, with her 
elephants, chariots and horses, from imminent death will earn great punya. 
If this man does not succeed despite his best efforts to do what is dharma, 
he is anyway certain to merit the punya attached to that achievement, even 
though he fails. Similarly, as men who are versed in religion and the 
shastras know, if a man does not actually commit a sin, even if he intended 
to, he will not accrue the punishment attached to that sin. 

I will try with all sincerity to bring about peace between the Kurus and 
the Srinjayas, who are about to be slaughtered in battle. Doom hangs over 
them because of the Kurus, fetched by the crimes of Duryodhana and 
Karna, while the other Kshatriyas only follow their lead. 

Learned men condemn the man who does not persuade a friend who is 
about to plunge into death’s maw to save himself. A man must do his 


utmost, even seizing his friend by the hair, to turn him away from a grave 
sin. Such a man will win praise, not blame. Duryodhana would do well to 
accept my good advice, which is in keeping with dharma and artha, and 
which can avert the unimaginable war that looms. I will sincerely try to 
secure the welfare both of Dhritarashtra’s sons and Pandu’s, as well of all 
Kshatriya kind. If Duryodhana disregards me, I shall at least have the 
satisfaction of having followed my conscience, for a true friend is one who 
mediates when hostility breaks out between kinsmen. 

I have come here so that no one can later say that, although he could 
have done so, Krishna made no attempt to stop the Kauravas and the 
Pandavas from slaughtering one another. I have come here to serve both 
sides and not all the gathered kings can reproach me. 

If, after listening to my well-meant advice, Duryodhana does not accept 
what I say, he will only invite a horrific destiny to take millions of lives. If I 
can bring about peace among the Kurus without sacrificing the interests of 
the Pandavas, what I accomplish will be worthy indeed, and the Kauravas 
will be freed from death’s clutches. If the sons of Dhritarashtra reflect 
calmly on what I say, then my objective will be achieved and the Kauravas 
will worship me as the one who brought peace to them. 

If, instead, they try to injure me, I tell you now that all the kings of the 
Earth together are no match for me. They will be as a herd of deer before an 
angry lion.’ 

Saying this to Vidura, that bull of the Vrishnis and joy of the Yadavas 
lies down on his soft bed to rest.” 


CANTO 94 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “The starlit night is spent in conversation 

between these two illustrious tejasvins. The night passes too quickly 
for Vidura, who listens and talks to Krishna about so many things, both of 
them speaking words filled with dharma and artha and delight. 

At dawn, a choir of singers awaken Krishna with melodious voices, 
accompanied by the sweet sounds of cymbals and conches. Krishna rises 
and performs his morning rituals; he bathes, recites the sacred mantras and 
pours ghee onto the sacrificial fire. He dresses himself and worships the 
rising Sun. 

While he is still at his morning devotions, Duryodhana and Sakuni 
come to him and say, ‘Dhritarashtra is in his sabha, with all the Kurus 
headed by Bhishma, and all the kings of the Earth. They request your 
presence, Krishna, with as much yearning as the Devas desire Indra’s.’ 

Krishna greets them both with courtesy, and when the Sun has risen a 
little higher into the sky he calls for a number of Brahmanas and presents 
them with gold, clothes, cattle and horses. After he has made generous gifts 
he sits down; his sarathy Daruka come and salutes him; at Krishna’s word, 
the sarathy fetches his master’s dazzling chariot adorned with rows of 
tinkling bells and harnessed to the superb horses. Seeing his ratha, which 
rumbles like massed thunderheads, ready, Krishna walks in pradakshina 
around the sacred fire and the Brahmanas present, puts on the jewel 


Kaustubha and, blazing in beauty, surrounded by the Kurus and escorted by 
the Vrishnis, climbs onto the chariot. 

Vidura follows Krishna, foremost of all the living and most brilliant 
among men, on his own chariot. Duryodhana and Sakuni follow in one 
Kuru chariot; Satyaki, Kritavarman and the other Vrishni Maharathas 
follow Krishna in chariots, and on horses and elephants. Rajan, those exotic 
chariots, adorned with gold and drawn by wonderful horses, flash and 
rumble as they move along. 

In the lead, Krishna, radiant in beauty, comes to a broad avenue that has 
been swept and watered, and made fit for the most kingly of kings. As he 
approaches cymbals clash, conches sound and other instruments pour out 
their music in homage. Many young Kshatriyas, the most heroic in the 
world and lionish in their strength, surround Krishna’s chariot as his escort. 
Thousands of soldiers, attired in a variety of uniforms and carrying swords, 
lances and axes, march in front of Krishna. Five hundred elephants and 
thousands of chariots follow that unconquered hero as he proceeds in 
majesty. 

All the citizens of the city, men and women of all ages, come out onto 
the streets to catch a glimpse of him. The terraces and balconies of houses 
are so crowded by women that they look as if they will collapse. 
Worshipped by the Kurus as he comes down the king’s highway, Krishna 
looks around, his eyes seeing everyone, he hears their adulations and 
responds to each one’s greetings, individually, magically. 

When at last he reaches the Kuru sabha his attendants blow their 
conches and trumpets, shaking the skies. And all the great kings assembled 
in the Kuru sabha shiver in excited anticipation of seeing Krishna. Hearing 
the rumble of his chariot, deep as the roll of thunderclouds, they know that 
he is near and the hair on their bodies stands on end. 

Krishna reaches the lofty gates and, alighting from his chariot that is 
like the summit of Mount Kailasa, he enters the sabha, which glimmers like 
newly risen clouds and is as splendid as Indra’s own court. He walks in with 
Vidura and Satyaki on either side; and he overshadows the splendour of the 
Kurus with his own, like the Sun dimming the lesser lights of the heavens. 

Karna and Duryodhana face Krishna, and the Vrishnis with Kritavarman 
are behind him. Bhishma, Drona, the blind Dhritarashtra and his courtiers 
rise to honour Krishna. When Dhritarashtra stands the thousands of kings 
who surround him also rise. Krishna accepts the exquisite golden throne 


that has been prepared for him at Dhritarashtra’s command. He smiles and 
greets the king, Bhishma, Drona and all the other kings, according to each 
one’s age. All the kings and all the Kurus worship him in return. Through a 
vast window Krishna sees at the great palace gates the Rishis he saw in the 
sky on his way to Hastinapura. 

Seeing them here, with Narada at their head, Krishna calmly says to 
Santanu’s son Bhishma, “These Devarishis have come to this earthly 
conclave of ours. Invite them in and offer them the finest seats and your 
gracious courtesy, for none of us can sit until they do. Without delay, offer 
worship to these Rishis who have mastered their souls.’ 

Bhishma sees the Rishis at the palace gate and orders the servants to 
fetch the finest seats for them, inlaid with gold and gem-set. Only after the 
Rishis are seated and have accepted the arghya offered to them does 
Krishna sit, and then so do the other kings. Dusasana assigns an excellent 
seat to Satyaki, and Vivimsati gives another golden one to Kritavarman. Not 
far from Krishna that illustrious and wrathful pair, Karna and Duryodhana, 
sit together on the same wide couch. Subala, the king of Gandhara, 
surrounded by the chiefs of his country, sits with his son beside him. The 
high-souled Vidura sits on a jewelled armchair covered with a white deer- 
skin, so close to Krishna’s that it touches it. 

All the kings gaze at Krishna for a long time but, just as people who 
drink amrita are never satisfied, even after imbibing cup after cup of it, their 
eyes remain unfulfilled. Krishna, clad in pitambara robes and his skin like 
the dark atasi flower, sits in the midst of the sabha, like a sapphire set in 
gold. A profound silence descends, for no one stirs, or speaks a word, why, 
they hardly breathe.” 


CANTO 95 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Finally, Krishna, master of silence, of the perfect 

teeth and deep voice speaks. Although his words are addressed to 
Dhritarashtra, his words resound through all the sabha like thunderheads 
rumbling, and all the assembly hears him. 

He says, ‘I have come here to bring about peace between the Kurus and 
the Pandavas, to prevent a slaughter of Kshatriyas. I have nothing new to 
say, as you, Rajan, know everything there is to be known in this world. 
Because of its gyana and dharma, and because it is adorned with every 
accomplishment, your vamsa is the most distinguished of all royal 
dynasties. Joy in the happiness of others, grief at the sight of another’s 
suffering, desire to alleviate distress, abstention from injury, sincerity, 
forgiveness and truth: all these prevail amongst the Kurus. Your dynasty is 
so noble that it would be sad indeed if anyone born into it did anything to 
break dharma, and tragic if it were you, King, who did so. For, you should 
be the first to restrain the Kurus if they sin against strangers or even their 
own people. 

Know that your sons, led by Duryodhana, have abandoned dharma and 
artha and, deprived of their good sense by greed, now treat their own 
cousins despicably, most viciously. What your sons do is the cause of the 
terrible danger which threatens us all. If you ignore it, their deeds will result 


in a massacre past imagining. If you so will, you can prevent this calamity 
even now, Bharatarishabha; peace is not difficult to achieve. 

The establishing of peace depends on you and me, Rajan. You correct 
your sons and I will pacify the Pandavas. Your sons and their followers 
must obey your command, whatever it is. Indeed, their best course is to 
obey you. If you strive for peace by controlling your sons, it will be to your 
benefit, as well as to that of the Pandavas. 

O great king, reflect carefully over this and do the proper thing. Let the 
Pandavas be your allies, and with their support seek dharma and artha. You 
cannot have better allies than them. With them as your protectors, Indra 
himself could not vanquish you. How can mere kings of the Earth withstand 
your might? 

If you have the support of Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna, Vivimsati, 
Aswatthama, Vikarna, Somadatta and Bahlika, of the rulers of the Sindhus 
and Kalingas, of Sudakshina the king of the Kambojas, of Yudhishtira, 
Bhimasena, Arjuna and the twins, of the mighty Satyaki and Yuyutsu, what 
man is there who is so misguided that he would dare challenge you? If you 
have both the Kurus and the Pandavas at your side, you will be invincible, 
and the sovereignty of the whole world will be yours. 

All the rulers of the Earth, your equals as well as your superiors, will 
want an alliance with you. Protected on all sides by sons, grandsons, 
fathers, brothers and friends, you will live in unalloyed felicity. With all of 
them around you, and treating them affectionately, as you once used to, you 
will enjoy lordship over all this Earth. With your sons, allies and the sons of 
Pandu to support you will easily subdue all your enemies. Dhritarashtra, 
this is the most advantageous course for you to take. In unity with your 
sons, kinsmen and counsellors, you will be lord of the whole world, which 
they surely win for you. 

O great king, nothing but death lies in war. What good can you see in 
the annihilation of both sides? Tell me, Bharatarishabha, if the Pandavas are 
killed in battle or if your own sons fall, what happiness will you enjoy? All 
of them are brave and skilled warriors; all of them want war. Save them 
from the terrible danger that threatens them. After the war you will not see 
all the Kurus or all the Pandavas; Maharathas will kill each other and you 
will see both sides decimated. 

All the rulers of the world are gathered here. They will exterminate the 
very population of the Earth in their anger. Save the world; do not let the 


people of this sacred Bhumi be destroyed. If you regain your natural 
goodness, the world will continue to be peopled as it is now. Rajan, save 
these kings from the horrible danger that threatens them; they are all of pure 
descent, modest, generous and devout, and related to one another by blood 
or marriage. 

Let go of your wrath and enmity; let these kings embrace one another in 
peace. Let them eat and drink together; let them return to their homes in joy, 
dressed in rich clothes, decked with garlands and paying kind courtesies to 
one another. 

Let the affection you had for the Pandavas be revived in your heart and 
let it lead to peace. They lost their father while they were mere boys, and 
you raised them. Now cherish them as befits you, as if they were your own 
sons. It is your duty to protect them, especially when they are in distress. 
Do not abandon dharma and artha. 

The Pandavas have greeted you reverently and said, “At your command, 
we have suffered great misery. For twelve years we lived in the forests, and 
we lived unknown in the thirteenth year. We never broke our sworn pledge 
and believed that our father, too, would keep his word. The Brahmanas who 
were always with us will testify that we never once broke our word. 

We have kept our side of the agreement; now you must abide by yours. 
Our travail has been long and great; now let us have our share of the 
kingdom. Knowing dharma and artha as you do, it falls to you to rescue us. 
We have endured our suffering in silence because we owed you obedience. 
Be a father and elder brother to us now. 

A guru should behave with his sishyas in ways that befit a teacher; and 
being your disciples, we regard you as our guru. So, treat us a guru should 
treat his sishyas. If we go wrong, it is the duty of our father to set us right. 
Therefore, set us on the right course and you, too, take the high path of 
dharma.” 

Your sons, the Pandavas, said this to the kings who have come here: “If 
the men in a sabha know dharma, they will not allow any impropriety to 
occur in their hallowed court. When, in the presence of men of dharma, 
sinners overpower the righteous and subvert truth by deceit, it is the evil 
ones who are vanquished. When, struck through by the arrow of adharma, 
good men seek the protection of a noble court, those who occupy that sabha 
are themselves pierced through by the arrow, if they do not extract it. 


Indeed, in that case, dharma will fell the men of that assembly, even like a 
river eating away the roots of trees on its bank.” 

Bharatarishabha, be your own judge. The Pandavas have kept peace, 
with their hearts set firmly in dharma, and deeply reflecting on all things. 
Whatever they have said is in keeping with dharma and nyaya. Rajan, what 
can you say to them except that you will restore their kingdom to them? Let 
these kings who are here tell you what your answer to the Pandavas should 
be. 

If you think that what I say is dharma and true, save all these Kshatriyas 
from certain death. Make peace, and do not give in to anger. Give the 
Pandavas their rightful share of their father’s kingdom; then enjoy 
happiness and prosperity with your sons; and have all your hopes fulfilled, 
Parantapa. 

You know that Yudhishtira always walks the path of dharma. You know 
how he has conducted himself with you and your sons. Although you tried 
to have him burnt him alive in the house of lac, he fled into the wilderness, 
he returned and put his faith in you, only to be banished by you to 
Khandavaprastha. Ruling from Indraprastha, he brought all the kings of the 
Earth under his sway and yet looked up only to you, to honour you. In spite 
of the noble manner in which he conducted himself, Subala’s son robbed 
Yudhishtira of his kingdom and wealth, at a deceitful game of dice. And 
despite being reduced to absolute penury, and having to watch Krishnaa 
dragged brutally into this sabha, Yudhishtira of the immeasurable soul did 
not swerve from Kshatriya dharma. 

I want both your good and theirs. For the sake of dharma and artha, for 
happiness, Rajan, do not mistake evil for good or good for evil and, thereby, 
allow the Earth’s population to be razed. Restrain your sons, whose greed 
has made them cross every limit. The sons of Pritha are as willing to wait 
upon you dutifully as they are to fight. Do what you think is best, 
Parantapa.’ 

In their hearts, all the kings in the sabha laud what Krishna says, but 
none of them dares speak out for dharma in Duryodhana’s presence.” 


CANTO 96 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “All in that sabha fall silent on hearing Krishna, 
the hair on their bodies stands on end. All the kings think that there 
is no man who would dare respond to what Krishna has said. 

Seeing that all the kings sit silently, Parasurama addresses Duryodhana 
but speaks to the entire gathering of Kurus. He says, ‘Listen to what I have 
to say and to the story I will tell to illustrate it; if you are convinced by me, 
do what will benefit you all. 

There was a king named Dambhodbhava, who ruled all the world. They 
say that his kingdom covered all this Bhumi. Every morning, when he rose, 
he would call his Brahmanas and Kshatriyas to him and ask them if they 
knew of anyone—a Sudra, a Vaisya, a Kshatriya or a Brahmana—who was 
better than, or even equal to him in battle. The king wandered over the face 
of the Earth asking this question, and he became drunk with vanity. 

High-souled Brahmanas, who knew the Vedas and who feared nothing, 
advised the boastful king to curb his pride. However, the king continued to 
ask his question day after day. Some great Brahmanas of immense tapasya 
became angry and spoke to the conceited king. 

They said, “There are two men, who are the best of all men, and who 
are always victorious in battle. Dambhodbhava, you will be no match for 
either of them.” 


The king asked those Brahmanas, “Where might I find these two 
heroes? To what vamsa do they belong? What feats have they achieved? 
Who are they?” 

The Brahmanas said, ““We have heard that these two are Munis, named 
Nara and Narayana. They have both been born as mortals. Go and find 
them, O king. This illustrious pair practises the severest tapasya in a remote 
fastness of the Gandhamadana mountains.” 

The king could not bear to hear of the greatness of Nara and Narayana. 
He mustered his vast army of six kinds of forces and hastened to the rugged 
Gandhamadana mountains, where those unvanquished Rishis lived. There, 
he began to search for them and finally discovered them hidden in a deep 
vana. He saw that they were emaciated from hunger and thirst; their veins 
were swollen and stood out; and extremes of cold and heat had debilitated 
them. He approached them, touched their feet and enquired after their 
welfare. 

The two Rishis received the king hospitably, with fruits and roots, with 
a darbhasana and water. They enquired about the king’s business, and then 
blessed him, saying, Jathaastu. Dambhodbhava asked them what he always 
asked everyone. 

He said, “I have conquered the Earth with the strength of my arms, and 
killed all my enemies. I have come here because I want to do battle with 
you. Do me the courtesy of hospitality by granting my wish, for I have 
wished for this for a very long time.” 

Nara and Narayana said, “Best of kings, anger and covetousness have 
no place in this mountain asrama. How then can we do battle here? There 
are no weapons here, no adharma or malice. Look somewhere else for a 
fight; there are many Kshatriyas on Earth.” 

Undeterred, the king tried to persuade them, but the Rishis ignored his 
repeated request and continued to try and placate him. Dambhodbhava, who 
was beside himself to fight them, would not relent. 

Finally, Nara took up a handful of grass and said, “Since you are so 
eager for a fight, Kshatriya, take up your weapons and array your troops. I 
will rid you of your eagerness forever.” 

Dambhodbhava said, “Rishi, do you really think this weapon you hold 
is fit to be used against me? Nevertheless I will fight you, for I have come 
here expressly for that.” 


And with that, Dambhodbhava and his warriors shot arrows at the Muni 
from all sides. The Rishi, however, warded off those deadly banks of shafts 
that could mangle any enemy, with his blades of grass. The invincible Rishi 
directed his own astra, made just of the blades of grass, yet irresistible, at 
the king’s army. Such was that weapon that it cut off the eyes, ears and 
noses of the troops. 

The king saw the sky turned pale by those blades of grass, and he fell at 
the Rishi’s feet and cried, “Bless me!” 

Nara, who was always ready to grant refuge to anyone who asked for it, 
said to Dambhodbhava, “O king, always obey Brahmanas and live by 
dharma. Never again do what you have done today. The conqueror of 
hostile kingdoms, a Kshatriya who is mindful of his dharma, should never 
be as you are, even in his inmost heart. You must never, from pride in 
yourself, insult anybody at any time, be they inferior or superior to you. 
Conduct yourself in a manner that befits you. 

Acquire wisdom, abandon covetousness and pride, control your soul, 
restrain your passions, be forgiving and humble, cherish your subjects and 
be well loved. Never slight anyone under any circumstances without first 
determining their true strengths and weaknesses. With our blessings, and by 
our leave, go now and change your ways from this day forth. We command 
you to ask sage Brahmanas what is good for you.” 

The king worshipped the feet of the two Maharishis and returned to his 
capital. And from that day on he began to live by dharma. This was the 
great feat that Nara achieved long, long ago. 

The Rishi Narayana was superior even to Nara, for many more and 
greater qualities had their home in him. That is why the eight astras— 
Kakudika, Suka, Naka, Akshisantarjana, Santana, Nartana, Ghora and 
Asyamodaka— are integral to that best of bows, the Gandiva. Rajan, give up 
your pride and go humbly to Dhananjaya. His astras take lives. 

These eight astras correspond with the eight sensual passions—lust, 
wrath, covetousness, vanity, insolence, pride, malice and selfishness. When 
these astras strike a man, he loses his senses and wanders about in 
bewilderment. Under their influence, men fall into a stupor, behave 
violently, vomit, pass urine and excreta, and weep and laugh uncontrollably. 

Arjuna has Narayana—the Creator, the Lord of the Trilokas, the one 
who knows the destiny of every created being—as his ally beside him, and 
he is invincible in battle. Who is there in the three worlds who can vanquish 


that Kshatriya— Arjuna of the Vanara banner—who has no equal in battle? 
Countless are the virtues that reside in Arjuna, and Krishna is his superior. 
You know Kuntiputra Arjuna well. I say to you, the ancient Nara and 
Narayana are now Arjuna and Krishna. Great king, that is who these 
foremost of men are. If you believe this, and if you trust me, make peace of 
dharma with the sons of Pandu. Realise that it is for your good not to have 
discord within your clan, then do not set your heart on war but make sacred 
peace. 

You are the foremost of the Kuru vamsa. The dynasty to which you 
belong has high honour through time. Let the vamsa continue to be worthy 
of that regard. Blessings be upon you; think of what is conducive to your 
own welfare.”” 


CANTO 97 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “The noble Rishi Kanva, who is present in the 
sabha, hears Parasurama and speaks to Duryodhana. 

Kanva says, ‘Loka Pitamaha Brahma is indestructible and eternal, as are 
the Maharishis Nara and Narayana; for, of all Aditi’s sons, Vishnu alone is 
eternal. Only he is unconquerable and indestructible; he alone exists for 
ever; he is the Lord of all and the possessor of divine attributes. All others, 
the Sun and Moon, Earth and Water, Wind and Fire, Sky, the planets and 
stars, can be destroyed; when the end of the universe comes all these will 
cease to exist. They are destroyed and created over and over, again and 
again. Human beings, animals, birds and other living creatures that live in 
the mortal world have impermanent lives. Even kings, having enjoyed great 
prosperity, reach the hour of their death and are reborn to reap the fruits of 
their good and evil karma. 

Therefore, it is essential that you make peace with Yudhishtira. Let the 
Pandavas and the Kauravas both rule this Earth together. Duryodhana, do 
not be vain about your strength, for there are always men more powerful 
than those who are considered strong. Mere physical strength is not 
regarded as true strength by the wise. The Pandavas are all blessed with 
prowess equal to that of the Devas and they live by dharma; they are truly 
strong. 


There is an ancient tale told that illustrates this, of Matali’s search for a 
husband for his daughter. 

Indra, king of the three worlds, has a charioteer named Matali, whom he 
loves dearly. A daughter was born to Matali, and she came to be celebrated 
across the world for her beauty. The girl, named Gunakesi, was blessed with 
celestial beauty; and in loveliness of face and form she outshone other 
women. Knowing that the time for giving her in marriage had come, Matali 
and his wife became anxious, and he wondered what he should do. 

He thought to himself, “Alas, the birth of a daughter in families that are 
noble and upright, that are respected and of great humility, brings evil in its 
wake. Daughters, when born into noble families, always endanger the 
honour of three families—their maternal and paternal families and the 
family into which they marry. In my mind’s eye I have scanned the worlds 
of Devas and Manavas, but I have not found an eligible groom for my 
daughter.” 

Amongst the Devas, Daityas, Gandharvas, Manavas and Rishis, not one 
did Matali consider a suitable husband for his daughter. One night, after 
consulting his wife Sudharma, he decided to travel to Nagaloka, thinking 
that since he had not found an eligible groom for Gunakesi amongst the 
Devas and Manavas, he might find one amongst the Nagas. 

Telling his wife this, he took her leave and, sniffing the head of his 
daughter in affection, Matali set out for the under-world.’” 


CANTO 98 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “kK anva says, “On his way, Matali saw Narada Muni going towards 

Varuna Deva’s abode. Narada asked him, “Where are you going? 

Are you on some work of your own or is it at Indra’s bidding that you 
journey?” 

Matali told Narada about his quest, and the Muni said, “Let us go 
together. I am coming from Devaloka to visit Varuna. While we range 
through Nagaloka, we will seek out a suitable husband for your daughter.” 

The illustrious pair went into the underworld and there they saw Varuna, 
the Lord of the waters. Narada was worshipped in a manner befitting a 
Devarishi, and Matali received what would be offered to Indra. The two of 
them, pleased that they could get on with the business at hand, explained 
why they were there. With Varuna’s leave, they began to wander about in 
Nagaloka and, while doing so, Narada, who knew all the inhabitants of that 
realm, described them in detail to his companion. 

Narada said, “O Sarathy, you have seen Varuna with his sons and 
grandsons around him. Now see his kingdom, so enchanting and rich. 
Varuna’s son of great wisdom is distinguished for his conduct and saintly 
character. This beloved son has eyes like lotus leaves, is blessed with great 
beauty and is a joy to look at. Soma’s daughter has chosen him for her 
husband. Her name is Jyotsnakali and she is as beautiful as Sree Devi. I 
remember that she once chose the eldest of Aditi’s sons for her husband. 


Matali, look at Varuna’s dwelling, made of gold, where the wondrous 
wine called Varuni flows abundant. It is from having imbibed this wine that 
the Devas acquired their godly status. These blazing weapons of every kind 
that you see once belonged to the Daityas, who have since lost their 
sovereignty. These astras never decay and, when loosed at an enemy, return 
unerringly to the hand that cast them. The Devas obtained them as the 
spoils of war. Tremendous tejas is required for them to be used against 
enemies. Many tribes of Rakshasas and Daityas, who possessed all kinds of 
devastras, lived here long ago, but they were all vanquished by the Devas. 

Look at that great fire in Varuna’s lake; see where Vishnu’s Chakra 
dazzles in the midst of those mighty flames. Look, there is that gnarled bow 
that was created for the destruction of the world. The Devas protect it 
constantly and vigilantly, and it is after this bow that Arjuna’s Gandiva was 
named. It has the strength of a hundred thousand other bows, and the power 
that impels it in battle is indescribable. It quells all evil kings who are 
friendly towards the Rakshasas. Brahma, the first expounder of the Veda, 
created this fierce weapon, and Indra has declared it to be one of the most 
terrible of all weapons. This awesome astra obeys the command of Varuna’s 
sons. 

Look at Varuna Deva’s sovereign parasol in that royal chamber. Like 
clouds, it showers cool water. The water that drops from it is as pure as the 
Moon and yet cloaked in such dense darkness that no one can see it. 

Here, Matali, there are innumerable wonders to be seen. However, your 
mission will suffer if we spend more time in this palace of wonders. So let 
us go now,” said Narada Muni,’ says the Maharishi Kanva.” 


CANTO 99 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “kK anva says, “Narada continued, “Here in the heart of Nagaloka is 

the city of Patala. It is celebrated across the universe and the 

Daityas and the Danavas worship it. Creatures that live on Earth cry out in 

terror if the ocean washes them to it. Here the fire, known as the Asura- 

agni, which is fed by water, burns continually. The Devas revere this fire, 
which does not move, being confined to this place. 

It was here in Nagaloka that the Devas, when they had defeated and 
killed all their enemies, disposed of the Amrita that remained after they had 
drunk their fill. It is here that the waning and waxing of the Moon originate. 
It is here that son of Aditi, the horse-headed Vishnu, Hayagriva, rises and 
fills the universe with his lustre on festive occasions, to the accompaniment 
of Vedic hymns, at which times he is called Suvarna. This wondrous place 
is called Patala because the Moon and other forms of water shed blissful 
showers on it. 

From here, the celestial elephant Airavata sucks cool water with which 
he fills the clouds for the nurture of the universe; and Indra pours the water 
down as rain. All kinds of aquatic animals of diverse shapes, the timingala 
and others, which get their nourishment from the Moon’s rays, live here. 
Also living here are creatures that sunlight kills during the day and which 
are restored to life at night by the Moon. This is where the Moon rises every 
day and, with its rays, resuscitates the dead creatures with his touch. It is 


here that many demonic Daityas, whom Indra defeated and deprived of 
their prosperity, stay imprisoned. It was here that the lord and master of all 
creation, Bhutapati, sat in austere tapasya for their benefit. 

Many Maharishis live here, who observe the vrata called go, who are 
emaciated from their arduous study and chanting of the Vedas, who have 
suspended their pranas and achieved Moksha by their tapasya. A man is 
said to live by the go-vrata when he can sleep wherever he chooses, and 
when he lives only on food and clothes that are given to him. Here were 
born all the best of elephants descended from the elephant Supratika of 
great renown— Airavata the king of his tribe, Vamana, Kumuda and Anjana. 

Look around, Matali, and see if there is a bridegroom here who stands 
out because of his superior qualities. I will go to him and ask him to accept 
your daughter’s hand. 

Look at that dazzlingly beautiful Egg in the water. It has been here from 
the beginning of the creation. It does not move, nor does it hatch. I have 
never heard how it was born or what it is, and nobody knows who its father 
or mother is. It is said, Matali, that when the end of the world comes, a 
mighty fire will erupt from within it and consume the three worlds, with all 
their moving and rooted beings.” 

Matali heard all that Narada said and replied, “I do not see anyone here 
who is eligible. Let us leave this place.”’” 


CANTO 100 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


ok anva says, ‘Narada continued, “Here is that great and most 

famous of cities, Hiranyapura. It belongs to the Daityas and 
Danavas who are skilled at one hundred types of maya. It was planned by 
the Danava Mayaa, and built by the divine architect Viswakarma. Many 
tejasvin Danavas, who obtained boons from Brahma long ago, live here, 
practising their thousand magical illusions. No one could vanquish them, 
neither Indra nor any other Deva, neither Yama, nor Varuna nor Kubera the 
Lord of treasures. 

Also living here are the Kalakhanja Asuras, who sprang from Vishnu; 
and the Yatudhana Rakshasas, who came forth from Brahma’s feet. All 
these violent beings have frightful fangs, are as swift and powerful as the 
wind, and have great powers of maya. Besides these, another invincible 
tribe of Danavas called Nivatakavachas also live here. 

You know that Indra cannot vanquish them. Many times you with your 
son Gomukha, and Sachi’s lord Indra Deva with his son, have had to flee 
before them. Look at their homes, Matali; they are all made of silver and 
gold, and grandly adorned. All these mansions are decked with vaiduryas 
and corals, and shine from the lustre of the jewels—arkasphatika and 
ajrasara. Many of these palaces seem as if they have been made of brilliant 
padmaragas, or of bright marble or of the most excellent wood. They dazzle 
like the Sun, or a blazing fire. Look how tall these jewelled edifices are, and 


they stand close together. They are of magnificent proportions and beauty, 
and it is impossible to determine exactly what materials they are built of, or 
to describe them. Indeed, they are lovely. 

Look at these grounds that the Daityas use for recreation and sport; look 
at their bedsteads, their opulent utensils set with precious stones, their 
majestic thrones. Look at these hills of theirs that seem like massed clouds, 
these water fountains, these trees that move of their own will and yield all 
the flowers and fruit that they are asked for. 

Matali, see if you can find a suitable groom here for your daughter. If 
you cannot, we will go elsewhere.” 

Matali said, “Devarishi, it is not wise or fitting for me to do anything 
that the Devas might disapprove of. The Devas and Danavas, though 
brothers, are always at war with each other. How can I make an alliance 
with our enemies? Let us go to some other place. I must not look among the 
Danavas for a husband for my child. Ah Muni, I know your nature and how 
you love instigating and fanning quarrels.” 


CANTO 101 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


8K anva says, ‘Narada said, “This region belongs to luxuriantly 

feathered birds that feed on snakes. They are tireless in their 
prowess, whether in flight or carrying loads. This avian tribe is descended 
from Garuda’s six sons—Sumukha, Sunaman, Sunetra, Suvarchas, Surucha 
and that prince of birds Subala. These best of avians, born of Kasyapa’s 
line, have multiplied and increased to create a thousand dynasties of birds. 
They are all of noble lineage and bring glory to Vinata’s dynasty. 

These birds are blessed with great prosperity; they all bear the 
auspicious Srivatsa mark; they are wealthy; and they are mighty. Their 
deeds are like a Kshatriya’s, but living as they do on snakes, they are 
without compassion. And because they also prey on their own kind, they 
can never attain Brahman. 

I will tell you their names, Matali. Listen well; these birds are respected 
because of the grace that Vishnu showers on them. They all worship 
Vishnu, who is their protector. He is always in their hearts and he is their 
refuge. 

These are their names—Suvarnachuda, Nagasin, Daruna, 
Chandatundaka, Anila, Visalaksha, Kundalin, Pankajit, Vajraviskambha, 
Vainateya, Vamana, Vatavega, Disachakshu, Nimisha, Animisha, Trirava, 
Saptarava, Valmiki, Dwipaka, Daityadwipa, Saridwipa, Sarasa, 
Padmaketana, Sumukha, Chitraketu, Chitravara, Anagha, Meshahrit, 


Kumuda, Daksha, Sarpanta, Sahabhojana, Gurubhara, Kapota, Suryanetra, 
Chirantaka, Vishnudharman, Kumara, Parivarha, Hari, Suswara, 
Madhuparka, Hemavarna, Malaya, Matariswan, Nisakara and Divakara. 

These descendants of Garuda all live in one province of this 
subterranean realm. The names I have recited are only of those who are 
distinguished by their power, fame and achievements. If you do not find one 
to your liking here, I will take you to another region, where you might find 
an eligible groom for your daughter,” said Narada,’ says Kanva.” 


CANTO 102 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


eee N arada said, “This, now, is called Rasatala: the seventh stratum 
below the Earth. Here Surabhi lives, the mother of all bovine species, who 
was born of Amrita. She continuously yields milk that is the essence of all 
the best things of the Earth; its unique, unmatched taste is an amalgam of 
the six tastes. 

Surabhi, the embodiment of perfection, sprang in that ancient time from 
Brahma Pitamaha. When he was satiated with Amrita the best of everything 
flowed out of his mouth. A single jet of Surabhi’s milk fell on the Earth and 
created the Kshirasagara. The shores of that ocean are always covered with 
white surf that looks like a flower garland. The best of ascetics, who are 
known as Fenapas, foam-drinkers, live by this ocean and subsist only on its 
surf, and so their name. They practise the most austere tapasya and even the 
Devas fear them. 

Surabhi gave birth to four calves, who stand one each at each of the four 
cardinal points and support them. They are called the Dikpalis. Surupa 
supports the east and Hansika the south; Subhadra, of the wonderful nature 
and universal form, supports the west, which is ruled by Varuna; and 
Sarvakamadugha supports the north, where dharma reigns supreme and is 
named after Kubera, the lord of treasures. 

The Devas and Asuras, with the Mandara Mountain as their rod, 
churned the waters of Kshirasagara to obtain the wine called Varuni. Devi 


Lakshmi, Amrita, the prince of horses Uchchaisravas, and that most 
precious of jewels the ruby Kaustubha emerged from it as well. Matali, 
those waters that yielded these precious things are mixed with the milk of 
these four cows. As for Surabhi’s milk, it becomes Sudha for those that live 
on Sudha, Swadha for those that live on Swadha and Amrita for those that 
live on Amrita. 

Even today, learned men recite the verse that the dwellers of Rasatala 
sang in days of old: Neither in Nagaloka, nor in Swarga, nor in Vimana nor 
in Trivishtapa is one as happy as in Rasatala,” says Kanva.’” 


CANTO 103 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °K anva says, ‘Narada said, “This best of cities that you see now, 

which is like Indra’s Amaravati, is Bhogavati. Vasuki, the king 
of the Nagas, is its ruler and he lives here. He supports the vast Earth by 
dint of having performed the most austere tapasya. His body is the size of 
Swetachala, the White Mountain; he is decked in celestial ornaments; he 
has a thousand heads; his tongues are like flames; and he is immeasurably 
strong. 

Countless Nagas of varied forms and adorned in all kinds of ornaments, 
all sons of Surasa, live here happily. They are adorned with the marks of 
gems, swastikas, chakras and kamandalas. All of them are fierce and 
mighty; some have a thousand heads, some five hundred and some three; 
some have two heads, some five and some seven; all of them have 
mountainous bodies. There are perhaps millions of Nagas of each dynasty, 
or even tens of millions; they cannot be counted. Listen now as I name a 
few of the more famous amongst them. 

They are Vasuki, Takshaka, Karkotaka, Dhananjaya, Kaliya, Nahusha, 
Kambala, Aswatara, Bahyakunda, Mani, Apurana, Khaga, Vamana, 
Elapatra, Kukura, Kukuna, Aryaka, Nandaka, Kalasa, Potaka, Kailasaka, 
Pinjaraka, Airavata, Sumanomukha, Dadhimukha, Sankha, Nanda, 
Upanandaka, Apta, Kotaraka, Sikhi, Nishturika, Tittiri, Hastibhadra, 
Kumuda, Malyapindaka, the two Padmas, Pundarika, Pushpa, 


Mudgaraparnaka, Karavira, Pitaraka, Samvritta, Vritta, Pindara, Bilvapatra, 
Mushikada, Sirishaka, Dijlipa, Sankhasirsha, Jyotishka, Aparajita, 
Kauravya, Dhritarashtra, Kuhura, Krisaka, Viraja, Dharana, Subahu, 
Mukhara, Jaya, Badhira, Andha, Visundi, Virasa and Sarasa. There are 
these as well as many other sons of Kasyapa. Matali, see if there is anybody 
here whom you can choose.”’ 

All this time Matali was gazing intently at one who stood before them, 
at a small remove, and when Narada stopped speaking, the celestial sarathy, 
looking very pleased, asked Narada Muni, “What vamsa does that 
handsome, radiant youth belong to, who stands in front of Aryaka of 
Kauravya vamsa? Who are his parents? Of which line of Nagas is he, who 
stands tall and erect like a flagstaff? His intelligence, patience, beauty and 
youth make my heart lean towards him. He will make an excellent husband 
for my Gunakesi.” 

Narada saw how delighted Matali was at seeing the young Sumukha 
and told him of his noble parentage and feats. 

He said, “This prince of Nagas is Sumukha. He is born in Airavata’s 
line; he is Aryaka’s favourite grandson, and his maternal grandfather is 
Vamana. His father was the Naga Chikura, whom Vinata’s son Garuda 
killed not so long ago.” 

Matali was delighted to hear this and said to Narada, “Lord, I would 
like to have this best of Nagas for my son-in-law. I beg you, try to make this 
match, for I am extremely pleased at the thought of bestowing him on my 
precious daughter,”’” 


CANTO 104 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


ok anva says, “Narada said to the great Naga Aryaka, “This is 

Indra’s sarathy Matali, and Sakra’s dear friend. His conduct is 
pure; he has an excellent character and has many virtues; he has strength of 
mind, great tejas and might. He is Indra’s companion, advisor and 
charioteer. In every battle, one sees that there is very little difference 
between him and Indra, in strength and prowess. In all the wars between the 
Devas and Asuras it is Matali who, with his mind, drives Indra’s glorious 
and ever-victorious chariot, drawn by a thousand horses. The enemies of the 
Devas are defeated by Matali’s expert handling of those unworldly steeds 
and by the might of Indra’s arms: Matali first outmanoeuvres them and then 
Indra kills them. 

Matali has an excellent daughter, of unrivalled beauty. She is truthful 
and accomplished; and her name is Gunakesi. Matali has searched all the 
trilokas for a suitable husband for her. 

O Aryaka of godlike splendour, he finds your grandson Sumukha to be a 
suitable match for his child. If you think his proposal acceptable, decide 
quickly to receive his daughter as a gift to your grandson. As Lakshmi does 
Vishnu’s, or Swaha Agni’s, let the slender-waisted Gunakesi grace your 
vamsa. Accept her for Sumukha, for they are born for each other, like Sachi 
and Indra. 


Although this youth has lost his father, we chose him for his good 
qualities and for the honour of being related to Airavata and yourself. 
Sumukha’s virtues, his disposition, purity, self-restraint and other qualities 
have persuaded Matali to offer his daughter to him. Do Matali the honour of 
accepting her.” 

Aryaka was filled with delight and sorrow, at once, on hearing Narada’s 
words—delight to see his grandson being chosen as a bridegroom and 
sorrow at the memory of his son’s death. 

He said to Narada, “How, Devarishi, how can I have Gunakesi for a 
daughter-in-law? That I do not approve is not for lack of reverence for you, 
for who is there who would not want an alliance with Indra’s own sarathy? 
Mahamuni, I hesitate only because I feel that the alliance will not be a 
lasting one. Effulgent one, this boy’s father—my son—was devoured by 
Garuda, and we are in deep mourning. Worse still, when he left Nagaloka, 
Garuda swore that, in a month’s time, he would devour Sumukha as well. 
Suparna will surely do as he said. His parting words have plunged us in 
grief.” 

Matali then said to Aryaka, “I have a solution for your fear. I have 
chosen your grandson as a son-in-law. Let him come with Narada and me to 
Indra, lord of Devas. I will do everything in my power to make Garuda 
desist from doing as he has sworn. If he does not agree, I will ascertain the 
life span allotted to Sumukha. Blessings upon you, O Naga; let your 
grandson come with me to Indra.” 

Saying this, Narada, Matali and Aryaka took Sumukha with them and 
these radiant ones went to Indra, in Devaloka. Vishnu, who happened to be 
there at that time, heard Narada’s account of Matali’s search and his 
eventual choice. 

Vishnu said to Indra, “Give this youth Amrita; let him be immortal like 
the Devas. By your grace, let Matali, Narada and Sumukha have everything 
they wish for.” 

Thinking about Garuda’s awesome might, Indra agreed and commanded 
that Sumukha be given Amrita. To this, Vishnu said, “You are the lord of all 
mobile and unmoving creatures. Who would refuse a gift from you?” 

Indra then granted the young Naga the boon of longevity, that he 
become a Chiranjeevi even without having to drink any Amrita. Sumukha’s 
face was suffused with radiant joy, making him truly sumukha! He married 
Matali’s daughter and returned home. Narada and Aryaka, delighted with 


the success of their venture, departed after worshipping Indra, lord of the 
Devas.’ 


CANTO 105 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


K anva says, “Meanwhile, Garuda heard about Indra’s boon of 
longevity to Sumukha. Inflamed with rage the sky-ranger flapped his 
wings furiously and punished the three worlds with a hurricane. 

He came to Indra and said, “Illustrious one, why have you deprived me 
of my food? Having granted me a boon of your own will, why do you now 
withdraw it? From the very beginning the Supreme Lord has ordained what 
my food is to be. Why do you now obstruct that divine decree? 

I had chosen this great Naga and had appointed a time to kill him, for I 
wanted to offer the meat of his body as sustenance for my numerous young 
ones. Now your boon has made him immortal, how can I kill another of his 
species? How can you do as you please, so frivolously? I, my family and 
my servants will die of hunger; perhaps that will gratify you, Indra. Indeed I 
deserve this and worse because although I am powerful enough to be lord of 
the Trilokas, I agreed to become the servant of another. O Trilokapati, 
Vishnu is not the only cause of my inferiority. I am your equal, yet the 
sovereignty of the three worlds is yours. 

Like you, I have Daksha’s daughter for my mother and Kasyapa for my 
father. Like you, I can untiringly bear the weight of the three worlds. I have 
immeasurable and irresistible strength; no creature can withstand me. In the 
war with the Daityas I, too, achieved wondrous feats. I killed Srutasri and 


Srutasena, Vivaswat, Rochanamukha, Prasrura and Kalakaksha and other 
sons of Diti. 

I perch on the flag-staff of your younger brother Vishnu’s chariot and 
protect him in battle; I sometimes carry him on my back. Perhaps this is 
why you disregard me. Who else in the universe can bear such heavy 
burdens? Who is stronger than me? In spite of my superiority, I carry your 
younger brother and his companions on my back. By interfering with my 
prey, my sustenance, you insult me, just as your brother does when he 
makes me carry him. 

As for you, Vishnu, of all the mighty and strong ones that Aditi has 
given birth to, you are the most powerful. Yet I can carry you, without 
feeling any fatigue, on just one of my feathers. Think then, brother, which 
of us is stronger.” 

Hearing the Bird’s haughty words, Vishnu, wanting to forestall the crisis 
he saw looming, provoked Garuda further, saying, “How do you think of 
yourself as being strong when in fact you are a weakling? It does not 
become you to brag like this in our presence. The three worlds together 
cannot bear the weight of my body. The truth is that I carry my own weight 
and yours as well. Come now, lift my right arm. If you can, I will consider 
your boast to be true.” 

Saying this, Lord Vishnu placed his arm on Garuda’s shoulders, and the 
golden Eagle fell down unconscious. To Garuda the weight of Vishnu’s arm 
felt as great as that of the entire Earth with her mountains. Compassionate 
Vishnu did not submit him to more suffering, and spared his life. 

Crushed by the immense weight of the Lord’s arm, Garuda gasped for 
breath and shed his feathers. His limbs were weak and terror confounded 
him. He bowed his head low before Vishnu and spoke to him. 

Garuda said feebly, “Illustrious Lord, the power that sustains the 
universe dwells in you. It is no wonder that one arm of yours, stretched out 
but lightly, crushes me. Divine One, forgive this worthless winged creature 
that perches on your flag-staff, this fool intoxicated with pride in his own 
strength, for, O Lord, I am entirely helpless. I did not know how great your 
strength is and, so, thought my own unrivalled.” 

Vishnu was gratified and, affectionately saying to Garuda, “Never yield 
to such arrogance again,” with his toe he cast Sumukha onto Garuda’s 
breast. 


From that time, Rajan, Garuda has always lived in friendship with that 
Naga, and that is how that mighty and illustrious kings of birds, the son of 
Vinata, was crushed by Vishnu’s might and cured of his pride. 

In the same way, Duryodhana, you will live as long as you do not 
confront the heroic Pandavas in battle. Who is there that Vayu’s son Bhima, 
and Indra’s son Arjuna cannot slay in battle? Your enemies are verily the 
gods themselves— Vishnu, Dharma, Vayu, Indra and the two Aswins. You 
are not worthy of even looking at them on the field, let alone face them in 
battle. Rajan, do not set your heart on war; with Krishna’s help, make 
peace. It is your duty to save your very race by doing this. 

Mahamuni Narada saw with his own eyes the incident I have just 
narrated; it should tell you how great is Vishnu. Krishna is that Vishnu, the 
wielder of the discus and the mace,’ says Kanva. 

Hearing what Kanva Muni says, Duryodhana’s face darkens; frowns 
and breathes heavily. Then he looks at Karna and bursts into loud mocking 
laughter and slaps his thigh that is like the trunk of an elephant. 

He says to the Rishi, ‘Maharishi, I am what the Creator has made me. 
What will be must be. Whatever is ordained for me must happen; and I 
cannot prevent it. Of what use then are your futile sermons?’” 


CANTO 106 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


J anamejaya said, “Why did Duryodhana’s friends not try to dissuade 

him from taking the path that led surely to doom, knowing that he was 
wedded to evil, blinded by avarice, addicted to sin and determined to bring 
ruin upon himself, thereby filling his kinsmen with grief, afflicting his 
friends and well-wishers with sorrow and making his enemies joyful. And 
why did neither Krishna nor Pitamaha Bhishma say anything out of 
affection?” 

Vaisampayana said, “Krishna and Bhishma both advise him. Narada, 
too, says much. I will tell you what they all say. 

Narada says, ‘Rare is the man who takes his friends’ advice; and rare, 
too, is the friend who gives honest advice. The man who needs advice is 
never where the man who is willing to offer it is. Kurunandana, I think you 
ought to listen to what your friends say. Do not be obstinate; the path you 
choose for yourself is fraught with evil and danger. I will tell you an ancient 
story to illustrate this, of how Galava disgraced himself because of his 
unyielding disposition. 

In an ancient time, Dharma Deva assumed the form of the Rishi 
Vasishta and came down to Earth to test Viswamitra, who sat in austere 
tapasya. In this form—of one of the Saptarishis—and pretending to be 
hungry and in dire need of food, he came to Kausika’s asrama. Viswamitra 
was awestruck and prepared charu—rice and honey boiled in milk—for 


him. He cooked with such careful concentration that he could not properly 
wait on his guest; and it was not until after his guest had eaten what some 
other hermits gave him that he was able to offer the charu that he had made, 
which was still hot. 

The holy one said he had already eaten and, telling him to wait there, 
went away. The Mahatapasvin Viswamitra waited, standing as still as a 
post, holding the food on his head with his arms raised, and subsisting on 
air. As he stood there, a muni named Galava began to wait upon him out of 
reverence and affection for him, and in order to please him. 

A hundred years passed and Dharma Deva assumed the form of 
Vasishta once more, and came to Viswamitra to ask for food. Seeing the 
wise Maharishi still standing there with the food on his head, living all the 
while on air alone, he accepted the still warm and fresh charu from him. 
After eating, Dharma Deva expressed his gratification and went away. 

At Dharma Deva’s word, Viswamitra, once a Kshatriya, was, to his 
great joy, elevated to being a Brahmana. Pleased with the services and 
devotion of his disciple Galava, Viswamitra gave him leave to go wherever 
he liked. 

Galava was happy with his Guru’s command and affectionately said to 
the radiant Viswamitra, “Exalted one, what shall I give you as 
Gurudakshina? Bestower of honours, any spiritual deed becomes successful 
only when accompanied by this final gift, and the giver attains Moksha. 
Gifts are the fruit of one’s actions, which one enjoys in heaven, and they are 
the embodiment of peace. Tell me what I should give to you, my Guru?” 

Viswamitra knew that he had been won over by Galava’s devotion and 
repeatedly tried to dismiss him, but Galava kept asking him what he should 
give as Gurudakshina. Annoyed with Galava’s persistence, Viswamitra 
finally said, “Give me eight hundred horses, all of them as white as the 
Moon’s rays and each with one black ear. Galava, go now!””” 


CANTO 107 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada says, “Viswamitra’s words filled Galava with such 

consternation that he could not sit, sleep or eat. He became a 
victim of anxiety and regret and, lamenting bitterly and burning with 
remorse, Galava grew pale and skeletal. 

Duryodhana, smitten with sorrow, he cried, “O where will I find rich 
friends? Where will I find money? Have I any savings? Where will I find 
eight hundred moon-white horses? How can I enjoy food or the things I 
like? The very love of life is extinguished in me. Why do I need to live? I 
will go to the opposite shore of the great ocean, or to the furthest part of the 
Earth and give up my life. What is the use of living? What happiness can 
there be, without extreme exertion, for one who is poor, unsuccessful, 
deprived of all the good things of life, and burdened with debt? The man 
who has, from friendship, enjoyed a friend’s wealth and cannot repay him is 
better dead than alive. 

When he fails to keep his word, a man’s good deeds lose their punya 
and become stained with falsehood. One who is tainted in this way cannot 
be beautiful, have children, or acquire power or influence. How can such a 
man attain bliss? What ungrateful man has ever earned fame? What is his 
proper place and where is his happiness? An ungrateful man can never win 
esteem or affection; neither can salvation ever be his. The wretched man 


who has no wealth is barely alive; he cannot support his relatives or his 
friends. He is unable to repay favours, he will certainly be ruined. 

I am this ungrateful wretch, destitute of resources and tainted with 
falsehood, for I have got what I wanted from my Guru but cannot do as he 
asks. I will do my best and then lay down my life. 

I have never before begged the gods for anything, and they respect me 
for this in yagnas. I will seek the protection of Vishnu the divine lord of the 
Trilokas; I will place myself in Krishna’s hands; he is the refuge of all who 
deserve protection. I will bow down and ask to see Krishna, that most 
exalted of ascetics, the Eternal One from whom all blessings flow to the 
Devas and the Asuras.” 

While Galava was thus lamenting, his friend Garuda, the son of Vinata, 
appeared before him and, wishing to help him, cheerfully said to him, “You 
are my dear friend. It is the duty of one who is prosperous to fulfil the 
wishes of his friends. Brahmana, Indra’s younger brother Vishnu has 
blessed me with good fortune. I have spoken to him on your behalf and he 
is pleased to grant my wish to help you. 

Come, we will go together wherever you like. I will carry you 
comfortably to the other shore of the ocean, or to the farthest end of the 
Earth. Come, Galava, do not linger.’”’ 


CANTO 108 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada says, ‘Garuda said, “God, who is the source of all 

knowledge, has commanded me. In which direction shall I take 

you first, to show you what there is? Shall I go east, south, west or north, 
Dvija? 

That cardinal direction where Surya, the illuminator of the universe, 
rises; where the ascetics practice their evening tapasya; where the Primeval 
Intelligence that pervades the universe was born; where the two eyes of 
Dharma are positioned to guide the universe; where ghee was first offered 
in sacrifice and from where it then flowed: that direction is the gateway of 
day and time, Dvijottama. 

There in time out of mind the daughters of Daksha gave birth to their 
children; and there the sons of Kasyapa first multiplied. That quarter is the 
source of all the prosperity of the Devas, for it was there that Indra was first 
anointed as their king. It was there that Indra and the other Devas 
performed tapasya. That is why this cardinal quarter, the East, is called 
Purva, or the First; and also because in the earliest times it was the home of 
the Devas and said to be owned by the oldest inhabitants of the universe. 

The Devas performed all their religious ceremonies here. It is here that 
the Creator first sang the Vedas. It is here that the Devi Savitri was born 
from Surya’s mouth to live as a sacred mantra. It is here that Surya 
presented the Yajur Veda to Yagnavalkya. It is here that the Gods first drank 


sanctified Soma during yagnas. It is here that the Homa—the sacrificial fire 
—first accepted ghee and milk; and it is here that Varuna became 
prosperous when he left for the netherworld. 

Here the ancient Rishi Vasishta was born, grew famous and died. Here 
Om, the mystical beginning of every mantra, was born and developed its 
one hundred branches. Here the smoke-imbibing Munis live as the smoke 
of sacrificial fires. Here Indra killed boar and other wild animals and 
dedicated them as sacrificial offerings to the Devas. Here the thousand- 
rayed Sun rises and in anger consumes all ungrateful and evil Manavas and 
Asuras. 

This is the gateway of the three worlds, of Swarga and of happiness. 
This cardinal quarter is called Purva. If you like, we will go there. I will do 
whatever pleases you, my friend. Galava, tell me if there is any other 
direction to which you wish to go, and we will fly there. Listen, I will tell 
you about another cardinal quarter.”’” 


CANTO 109 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada says, ‘Garuda said, “Long, long ago Vivaswat performed a 
yagna and gave this quarter away as Dakshina to his Guru, 
which is why this region, the South, is known as Dakshina. 

It is here that the Pitrs of the three worlds live; the Devas who live on 
smoke and the Devas known as Viswadevas also live here. They are 
worshipped in sacrifices in all the worlds and partake equally of the 
sacrifices with the Pitrs. 

This cardinal direction is known as the second door of Dharma. It is 
here that the span allotted to man is calculated in periods of time known as 
trutis and lavas. It is here that the Devarishis, Pitrlokarishis and Rajarishis 
live, beyond the reach of pain. Here reside Dharma and Satya; here man’s 
deeds bear fruit. 

This quarter is the ultimate resting place of the deeds of the dead, and it 
is where everybody must eventually come. However, as all of them are 
shrouded by ignorance, they cannot be happy here, for thousands of 
Rakshasas have been created to obstruct the paths of men, and those who 
have not brought their souls under perfect control see them as obstacles. 

Here, Brahmana, in Mount Mandara’s glades and in the asramas of 
Rishis, Gandharvas chant hymns that entrance the heart and mind. Here the 
Daitya Raivata heard the hymns of the Sama Veda sung so sweetly that he 
left his wife, friends and kingdom and retired to the forest. Here the son of 


Savarna and Yavakrita set a boundary which Surya cannot cross. Here 
illustrious Ravana of the Pulastyas, the king of the Rakshasas, performed 
austere tapasya and asked the gods for a boon of immortality. 

It is here that Vritrasura brought Indra’s hostility upon himself by his 
evil ways. It is here that the lives of all beings come, to be broken up into 
their five elements. It is here that men of evil deeds rot in agony. It is here 
that the river Vaitarani flows, filled with the bodies of those who cannot 
cross it to obtain Moksha. People who come here are subject to the 
extremes of joy or sorrow. 

When it arrives here the Sun drops sweet water on the Earth and then, 
continuing towards the cardinal direction named Vasishta, sheds dew. Once 
when I was hungry, in this realm, I found for food a huge elephant battling 
with an enormous tortoise. 

It is here that Maharishi Chakradhanu was born from Surya. That 
Devarishi later came to be known as Kapila and it was he who made ashes 
of Sagara’s sixty-thousand wild sons. It is here that a class of Brahmanas 
known as Sivas, who mastered the Vedas, were crowned with the fruit of 
their tapasya and finally attained eternal Moksha. 

In this region is the city called Bhogavati, ruled by Vasuki, the Naga 
Takshaka and Airavata. Those who come here after they die encounter a 
heavy gloom that is so dense that neither Surya nor Agni can penetrate it. 

Worthy as you are of worship, you still have to pass this way. Tell me 
now if you wish to go in this direction. Otherwise, listen while I tell you 
about the West.” 


CANTO 110 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ G aruda said, “The cardinal quarter, the West, is the favourite of 

Varuna, the lord of the ocean. He was born here and rules over it. 

Because it is here that the Sun sends his rays at paschata—the end of the 
day —it is called Paschima. 

The divine Kashyapa installed Varuna as the king here to rule over all 
marine creatures and to protect the waters themselves. Here the Moon, the 
dispeller of darkness, drinks all six of Varuna’s juices and renews himself at 
the beginning of every bright fortnight. It is here that Vayu defeated and 
captured the Daityas, who fled, panting, before a mighty tempest and finally 
laid themselves down to die. 

Here, everyday, the mountain Asta lovingly embraces the Sun in 
welcome and dispels the evening twilight. It is from here that Ratri and 
Nidra— Night and Sleep—emerge at the close of day and spread themselves 
over the Earth to steal half the life-span of all living beings from them. It is 
here that Indra, seeing his pregnant stepmother Diti lying asleep, cut up the 
foetus in her womb into forty-nine parts, from which the forty-nine Maruts 
were born. 

It is towards this cardinal direction that Himavat Parvata’s base 
stretches to touch the immortal Mandara Parvata who is sunk in the ocean, 
and even if one travels for a thousand years one cannot reach it. It is here 
that Surabhi, the first cow, goes to the shores of the sea that is adorned with 


golden lotuses and pours forth her milk. Here, in the midst of the ocean, is 
the headless torso of radiant Svarbhanu, Rahu, who is always intent on 
devouring the Sun and the Moon. 

Here the invincible and ever youthful Suvarnasiras, of the immeasurable 
tejas, loudly chants the Vedas. It is here that Muni Harimedha’s daughter 
Dwayjavati was transfixed in the sky by Surya’s command to stop and stay. 
Here wind, fire, earth and water are all deprived of their inherent capacity to 
inflict pain. It is from here that the Sun’s course starts its deviation; it is 
here that all luminous bodies enter the solar sphere, and after travelling for 
twenty-eight nights with the Sun they leave the Sun’s orbit and move with 
the Moon. It is in this region that the rivers which always feed the ocean 
have their sources. 

In this, the abode of Varuna, dwell the waters of the three worlds, 
Ananta—the king of snakes, Vishnu, who is without beginning and without 
end, and Maricha’s son Maharishi Kashyapa. 

I have told you now about Paschima. Tell me, where shall we go?” 


CANTO 111 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada says, ‘Garuda said, “O Brahmana, the cardinal quarter of 

the North saves a man from sin, and it is here that one attains 
salvation. The power to do both these is called Uttarana and hence this 
direction is called Uttara. It is sometimes called Madhyama, central, 
because the repository of all its treasures stretches in a straight line from 
east to west. 

Dvijarishabha, this quarter is the best of all—no one who is unfriendly, 
of uncontrolled senses or unrighteous can live here. In a refuge known as 
Badari live Krishna who is Narayana, Arjuna who is Nara, that most exalted 
of men, and Brahma the Creator. Here on the slopes of the Himavat 
Mountain dwells Maheswara, blazing in effulgence like the fire at the end 
of a yuga, like Purusha with the universal mother Prakriti. Only Nara and 
Narayana can see him, and not all the different classes of Munis, or the 
Devas with Indra at their head, or the Gandharvas, Yakshas and Siddhas. 
Vishnu, of the thousand heads and thousand eyes, which appear as one by 
the power of his maya, lives here. 

It is here that that Chandramas, the Moon, was crowned king of all 
twice-borns. It is here that Siva first received Ganga on his head and 
afterwards let her flow from heaven into the world of men. It is here that the 
Devi Uma performed tapasya from her desire to have Siva as her lord. It is 
here that Kama, Siva’s anger Rosha, Himavat and Uma were born and 


shone in unity. It is here that Kubera was vested with sovereignty over 
Rakshasas, Yakshas and Gandharvas. 

Kubera’s gardens, named Chitraratha, and the asrama of the Vaikshana 
Munis are here; the celestial river Mandakini and the mountain Mandara are 
here. The gardens called Saugandhi Kanaka are here, constantly guarded by 
Rakshasas. There are grassy, verdant plains, plantain forests and the 
celestial trees called sautanakas in this realm. 

This is where the Siddhas, who have their souls ever under control and 
who wander as they please, have their luxurious and heavenly homes. This 
is where Arundhati and the Saptarishis reside, and where the constellation 
Swati rises. This is where Pitamaha Brahma lives, near the embodied 
Yagna. This is where the movements of the Sun, Moon and other stellar 
bodies are visible. 

O Brahmanottama, here those illustrious and utterly truthful Munis 
called Dhamas guard the source of the Ganga; and no one knows where 
they came from, or how they look, or even what tapasya they perform. 
Indeed, the thousand dishes they use to serve food to those who go there, as 
well as how they prepare the food are all a mystery. Anyone who crosses 
the line of their protection is sure to meet with death; only the divine 
Narayana and the eternal Nara, Arjuna, can pass and remain unharmed. 

It is in this cardinal quarter that Kailasa Parvatam lies and where 
Kubera lives. It is here that the ten Apsaras known as Vidyutprabhas were 
born. It is this quarter that Vishnu covered with three strides when he 
accepted the three worlds at the Asura king Bali’s sacrifice; and one of his 
footprints is marked by a spot named Vishnupada. 

Here, by the shore of the golden lake named Jambunada, is a place 
called Usirvija, where Raja Maruta performed his yagna. Here the lustrous 
gold mines of Himavat made themselves visible to Rishi Jimuta, who gave 
all their mined wealth away to Brahmanas and asked that it be named after 
him. That gold is called Jaimuta. Here, every morning and evening, the 
guardians of the four cardinal points call out and ask each other which 
person’s affairs they should attend to. 

O Brahmanottama, it for all these and many other reasons that the North 
is superior—uttara—to all the other cardinal quarters, and that is another 
reason for its name Uttara. I have described all four realms to you in detail. 
To which direction would you like to go? I am ready to show you all four 
quarters and all the Earth, so climb on to my back.”’” 


CANTO 112 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


°° NT arada says, ‘Galava said, “O Garuda, slayer of the king of 

serpents, you of the beautiful feathers, Vinataputra, carry me to 

the east, on which the two eyes of Dharma are focused. Take me to that 

region you described first, where the Devas are always, where Dharma and 
Satya reside. I want to meet all the Devas; so take me there.’ 

Narada continues, ‘Accordingly, at Garuda’s prompting, Galava 
climbed onto the Bird’s back and said to him, “Devourer of snakes, your 
beauty as you fly is as radiant as that thousand-eyed maker of day, the 
morning Sun. Sky-ranger, you are so swift that the trees break in the storm 
of your flapping wings and seem to fly behind you in your wake; why, you 
seem to tow Bhumi with all her waters, mountains and forests in the airs 
you stir. The tempest that your wings blow lifts the waters of the oceans 
with all their fish, snakes and crocodiles into the air. 

The fish, the timis and timingalas, that look alike, and snakes with 
human faces are all dashed about by your wing-storm. And I am so 
deafened and stunned by the roar of the oceans that I seem to forget the 
reason for my journey. Slow down; remember that you may be endangering 
a Brahmana’s life. 

O Garuda, I can no longer see the Sun, the cardinal points or the sky. I 
see only a thick gloom all round me. I cannot see my body, but only your 
eyes, shining like two brilliant gems. I cannot see your body, but at every 


wing-beat I see fire spewing from it. Put out this fire and extinguish the 
dazzle from your eyes; I beg you, slow down! I do not need to go on this 
journey with you. Blessed one, I cannot bear your speed. I have promised to 
give my acharya eight hundred moon-white horses with one black ear each. 
I do not see how I can make good my word. 

The only course open to me is to lay down my life. I have no wealth of 
my own, nor a wealthy friend; indeed, no wealth, however immense, can 
give me what I need.” 

Laughingly, and without slackening his speed, Garuda said to Galava, 
“Your wish to end your life shows that you are a man of little wisdom, O 
twice-born Rishi. Death can never be brought about by one’s own effort. 
Death is God himself. Why did you not tell me what your intention was 
before we set out? There are many excellent ways by which your goal can 
be accomplished. 

Here is the mountain Rishabha, on the seashore. We will rest here for a 
while and refresh ourselves with some food before we turn back.””’” 


CANTO 113 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada says, ‘The Brahmana and the Eagle landed on the summit 

of Rishabha and there they saw a Brahmana woman named 
Sandili in tapasya. Galava and Garuda bent their heads in respectful 
greeting and worshipped her. The devi asked after their welfare and invited 
them to sit. Seated, they accepted the food she offered, having first 
dedicated it with mantras to the Devas. After eating, they lay down on the 
ground and fell into a deep sleep. Garuda woke up, wanting to leave, but 
discovered that his wings had fallen off and that he had become a ball of 
flesh with only a head and legs. 

Galava, seeing him in that plight, said, “What has staying here done to 
you? O how long will we have to remain here? Did you have any evil 
thoughts in your mind, for it cannot be a trivial sin that has taken your 
wings from you.” 

Garuda replied to the Brahmana, saying, “Actually, Dvija, I did think 
about carrying this Brahmani, of the tapasyashakti, away from here to 
where Mahadeva the Creator, Vishnu, and both Dharma and Yagna dwell, 
for I thought she ought to live there. For my own good, I will prostrate 
before this holy devi and pray to her. 

Garuda said to the Brahmani, “With a sore heart, I confess that I 
entertained the idea of carrying you away. Whether I acted rightly or 
wrongly, my intention, of which you evidently disapprove, was prompted 


by my regard for you. I beg you, from the nobility of your heart forgive 
me.” 

Pleased with the prince of birds and the Brahmana, she said to Garuda, 
“Do not be afraid, beautiful-feathered one. Here, have your wings back and 
cast off your fear. You insulted me, and I do not forgive insults. The sinner 
who insults me will quickly fall from Swarga. I bear no inauspicious signs 
at all and, being blemishless in my purity, I have achieved exalted 
tapasyashakti. Dharma and artha are the fruits of pure conduct, which 
removes all that is inauspicious. 

Go from here where you wish, prince of birds, and take care never to 
insult a woman, even in thought, even if she is not chaste. You shall regain 
your strength and energy as they were before.” 

At these words Garuda had back his splendid wings, and they were 
more powerful than before. Taking leave of Sandili, Garuda flew away with 
Galava on his back. They could not, however, find the kind of horses they 
were looking for. 

On their way, they met that most eloquent of men, Viswamitra, and in 
Garuda’s presence he said to Galava, “Brahmana, the time has come for you 
to give me what you promised. I do not know what you will do to get me 
the horses but, since I have waited so long, I will wait a little longer. Find a 
way of making good your solemn word.” 

Hearing this, Garuda said to the downcast Galava, who was plunged in 
sorrow, “I have now heard what Viswamitra said to you earlier. Come, 
Brahmanottama Galava, we will think about it together. You cannot rest 
until you have given your Guru what you swore.””’” 


CANTO 114 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada says, ‘Garuda said to the cheerless Galava, “This wealth is 

called Hiranya because Agni created it in the bowels of the 

Earth, which is also named Hiranmaya, and then Vayu increased it. Because 

this wealth supports the world and sustains life it is called dhana; indeed 
that has been its purpose in the Trilokas from the beginning. 

On the particular Friday, when either the constellation Purvabhadra or 
Uttarabhadra rises, Agni creates more wealth by his will and confers it on 
mankind in order to add to Kubera’s store of treasures. Deities called 
Ajaikapats and Ahirbudnas guard the wealth created in the Earth’s core, 
making it rare and well nigh impossible to obtain. This wealth is your only 
chance to acquire the horses; beg some king born into a vamsa of Rajarishis 
to help you, without harming his own subjects. 

I have a friend who is a king born into the Chandra vamsa. Let us go to 
him for, amongst all who live on Earth, he has the greatest wealth. This 
Rajarishi Yayati is the son of Nahusha, and has irresistible prowess. If you 
plead with him and I endorse your plea with my commendation, he will 
give us what we need; he is immensely wealthy, as wealthy as Kubera the 
lord of treasures. Learned one, by accepting this king’s gift, we can pay 
your debt to your Guru.” 

Talking together in this way and thinking about the best thing to do, 
Garuda and Galava went to King Yayati in his capital. The king received 


them hospitably and offered them arghya, and padya to wash their feet. 
Then he asked them why they had come. 

Garuda said to him, “O Son of Nahusha, this ocean of tapasya is my 
friend Galava, who has been Viswamitra’s sishya for several thousand 
years. This devout Brahmana, whom Viswamitra commanded to go 
wherever he chose, told his Guru that he wanted to give him gurudakshina. 
Viswamitra knew he was poor and did not ask for anything, but then, 
annoyed by his persistence, he asked for eight hundred moon-white horses 
with one black ear each. The Rishi told Galava that since he insisted, this is 
what he should give. The great tapasvin Viswamitra spoke in anger and it is 
this that grieves the Brahmana so painfully. 

Unable to fulfil his Guru’s command, he has come to you for refuge. 
Purushavyaghra, when he has accepted this favour he asks of you, he will 
pay his gurudakshina and happily devote himself to tapasya once again. 

A Rajarishi such as you, endowed as you already are with great punya, 
will be even more enriched when this Brahmana gives you a share of his 
own tapasya. Lord of men, giving a horse as a gift entitles you to as much 
bliss as there are hairs on a horse’s body. 

This man is as worthy to accept the gift as you are to make it. Give it to 
him, as you would pour milk into a conch shell.’”’” 


CANTO 115 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada says, ‘Yayati, ruler of all the Kasis, performer of a 
thousand sacrifices, that most generous of men, reflected deeply 
on Garuda’s words of truth. 

He saw his friend Garuda and Galava’s request for alms as an 
auspicious omen; he thought about Galava’s tapasya, and he pondered the 
fact that these two had passed over all the other kings of the Surya vamsa 
and come to him. 

Yayati said, “I and the vamsa into which I was born are blessed today. 
Sinless Garuda, you have blessed my kingdom. My friend, there is one 
thing that I wish to say to you. I am not as rich now as before, for my 
wealth is greatly reduced. Regardless, I cannot render your visit fruitless, 
nor can I disappoint this Rishi. 

I will give him enough to allow him to accomplish his purpose. If a man 
who comes for alms leaves unfulfilled, he might destroy my entire race with 
a curse. There is nothing more sinful than to say, J have nothing, and dash 
the hopes of one who comes in need. The disappointed man can ruin the 
sons and grandsons of the one who fails to help him. 

O Galava, take this daughter of mine, who will be the perpetuator of 
four dynasties. In beauty, she is like a daughter of the Devas; she will 
promote every virtue; and for her beauty, Devas, Manavas and Asuras are 
always me asking for her hand. The kings of the Earth would give entire 


kingdoms for her, let alone eight hundred horses with a black ear each. Take 
my daughter Madhavi. My only wish is to have a grandson by her.” 

Galava accepted the king’s gift and left with Garuda, saying to the king, 
“We will see you again,” and taking the maiden with them. 

Then Garuda said to Galava, “We finally have the means to obtain the 
horses,” and took his leave and went home. 

After the prince of birds had gone, Galava, with the maiden beside him, 
began to think about going to a king who would give him a fitting dower for 
her. He first thought of that best of kings Haryaswa of the Ikshvakus, who 
ruled in Ayodhya, who was endowed with great tejas, who possessed a great 
army consisting of the four kinds of forces, who had a well-filled treasury 
and an abundance of corn, whose subjects loved him and who respected all 
Brahmanas. Wishing to have children, he lived quietly, performing austere 
tapasya. 

Galava went to Haryaswa and said, “Rajadhiraja, this maiden will 
increase her husband’s family by bearing many children. Accept her from 
me as your wife, Haryaswa, by giving me a dower. Listen to what dower I 
expect and then decide what you will do.”’” 


CANTO 116 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada says, ‘Raja Haryaswa reflected for a long time, breathing 
deep and fervent sighs at the thought of having a son. At last he 
said, “The six parts of the body that ought to be raised in one’s body are 
well elevated in this maiden. The seven parts of the body that ought to be 
slender are indeed so in her. The three that ought to be deep are deep in her; 
and the five that ought to be reddish are flushed in her. It seems that her 
beauty is worthy of being gazed upon by Devas and Asuras, and she is 
accomplished in all the arts and sciences. With all these auspicious signs, 
she will certainly bear many children, and indeed one of them might 
become an emperor. 

As for the wealth you seek, Brahmanottama, what should her dower 
be?” 

Galava said, “Give me eight hundred horses of a lofty pedigree, which 
are all moon-white and with one black ear each. This blessed and large- 
eyed maiden will then become the mother of your sons, as the fire-stick 
gives birth to fire.” 

Hearing this, Rajarishi Haryaswa was filled with sorrow, but blinded by 
passion, he said, “I have only two hundred horses of the kind you want, but 
there are many others which roam in my kingdom. Galava, I want only one 
son with this maiden. Grant me my wish.” 


At this, the maiden said to Galava, “One who had attained Brahman 
once granted me a boon that I would, after the birth of every son, regain my 
maidenhood. Give me away to this king and accept his horses. In this way, 
you will get eight hundred horses from four different kings, and I will have 
four sons, as well. Collect the wealth that you want to give your Guru like 
this. This is what I think, but you may do as you think fit.” 

Galava said to Haryaswa, “O Haryaswa, best of men, accept this maiden 
for a fourth of the dower that I have asked for, and have only one son with 
her.” 

Haryaswa worshipped Galava and took the princess. In due time, she 
gave the king the son he so longed for, and the boy was named Vasumanas. 
He became richer than the wealthiest kings of the Earth and looked like one 
of the Vasus; and he came to be a great and generous king. 

After some time had passed, Galava came back to the delighted 
Haryaswa and said to him, “O Rajan, you have had a son, a child who is as 
splendid as the Sun. The time has come for me to go to another king for 
alms.” 

Haryaswa, being truthful and honourable in all that he said and did, and 
remembering the balance of six hundred horses that he had been unable to 
give the Brahmana Galava, gave Madhavi back to him. Madhavi left that 
radiant and prosperous king and, becoming a virgin once more, she 
followed Galava. 

Galava said to Haryaswa, “Let the horses stay here with you,” and went 
with Madhavi to Raja Divodasa.’” 


CANTO 117 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada says, ‘Galava said to Madhavi, “The ruler of the Kasis is 

the illustrious king Divodasa, who is Bhimasena’s son. He is an 
immensely powerful king. Blessed one, we are now going to Divodasa; 
follow me slowly and do not worry. This king is virtuous and devoted to 
truth, and has his passions under control.” 

Muni Galava came before the king, who received him with due 
reverence and hospitality. Galava urged the monarch to have a child. 

Divodasa said, “I have already heard about your quest, so you need not 
tell me much, Brahmana. As soon as I knew what you would come for, my 
heart was set upon it. I am honoured that you have passed over all other 
kings and come to me. What you want will be yours, but my wealth is like 
Haryaswa’s, reduced. I shall, therefore, have only one royal son with this 
maiden.” 

The Brahmana gave the girl to the king, who duly married her. Rajarishi 
Divodasa enjoyed his time with Madhavi like so many illustrious couples: 
Surya with Prabhavati, Agni with Swaha, Vasava with Sachi, Chandra with 
Rohini, Yama with Urmila, Varuna with Gauri, Kubera with Riddhi, 
Narayana with Lakshmi, Sagara with Jahnavi, Rudra with Rudrani, 
Pitamaha Brahma with Saraswati, Vasishta’s son Saktri with Adrisyanti, 
Vasishta with Akshamala, Chyavana with Sukanya, Pulastya with Sandhya, 
Agastya with princess Lopamudra of Vidarbha, Satyavan with Savitri, 


Bhrigu with Puloma, Kasyapa with Aditi, Richika’s son Jamadagni with 
Renuka, Kusika’s son Viswamitra with Himavati, Brihaspati with Tara, 
Sukra with Sataparva, Bhumipati with Bhumi, Pururavas with Urvasi, 
Richika with Satyavati, Manu with Saraswati, Dushyanta with Sakuntala, 
the eternal Dharma with Dhriti, Nala with Damayanti, Narada with 
Satyavati, Jaratkaru with Jaratkaru, Pulastya with Pratichya, Urnayus with 
Menaka, Tumburu with Rambha, Vasuki with Satasirsha, Dhananjaya with 
Kumari, Rama with Sita the princess of Videha, Janardana with Rukmini. 

And to Raja Divodasa, who delighted in her, Madhavi bore a son named 
Pratardana. After the child’s birth, Galava came to Divodasa and said to 
him, “Let the maiden come with me, but let the horses that you are giving 
me remain here. I need to go to another kingdom to obtain more dowry.” 


The virtuous Divodasa, who was devoted to dharma, gave Madhavi 
back to Galava.””” 


CANTO 118 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada says, “Madhavi was faithful to her promise and, 

abandoning prosperity and becoming a virgin once again, 

followed Galava. Galava, whose heart was set upon the accomplishment of 

his own business, had reflected on what he should do next and went to the 
city of the Bhojas, to King Usinara. 

When he arrived before that king of the unrestrainable prowess, Galava 
said to him, “This maiden will bear you two royal sons, who will be like the 
Sun and the Moon. With these two princes you will be able to attain all that 
you hope for in this world and in the hereafter. O you who are 
knowledgeable about dharma, in exchange you must give me four hundred 
horses of moon-white splendour with one black ear each. My effort to 
obtain the horses is only for my Guru’s sake; I myself have no need of 
them. If you accept my terms, do as I tell you, without hesitation. 

Rajarishi, you are childless. Have two children, for children are like a 
life-saving raft, who will rescue you and your Pitrs. The man who enjoys 
the punya of having had a son never falls from heaven, nor will he ever 
have to go to that frightful hell, Naraka, to which the childless are doomed.” 

Raja Usinara said to him, “I have heard your words, Galava, and my 
heart is inclined to do as you say. However, only the Supreme Lord has 
ultimate power over all things. I have only two hundred horses of the kind 


you want, but I have thousands of other kinds in my kingdom. I will do as 
Haryaswa and Divodasa did and have only one son by Madhavi. 

My wealth is for all my subjects, in the city and in the country, and not 
for my own comfort and pleasures. The king who gives away, for his own 
benefit, the wealth that belongs to others can never earn virtue or fame. 
Give this divinely radiant girl to me. I will accept her to bear me only one 
child.” 

Hearing these and other things that Usinara said, Galava approved of 
him. He gave Madhavi to him and went away into the forest. And as any 
man of dharma enjoys well deserved happiness that his good deeds have 
earned him, Usinara enjoyed Madhavi, and they sported in valleys and dales 
of the mountains, beside fountains and waterfalls, in charming mansions, in 
gardens, forests and woods, in other places of delight, and on palatial 
terraces beneath the stars. In due time, a son was born to them, who shone 
like the morning Sun, and who later became the great king Sibi. 

After the birth of this boy, Galava came to Usinara, took Madhavi from 
him and went to Garuda.’” 


CANTO 119 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada says, ‘Garuda saw Galava and said to him, “How happy I 
am to hear of your success.” 

Galava, however, informed him that a fourth part of his task was still 
unfinished, at which Garuda said, “Do not try to get the remaining two 
hundred horses, for you will not succeed. Long ago, Richika wanted to 
marry Satyavati, the daughter of Gadhi of Kanyakubja. 

Gadhi said to Muni Richika, Holy one, give me a thousand horses, all 
as brilliantly white as the Moon and each having one black ear. 

Saying, So be it, Richika went to Aswatirtha, the great home of horses 
in Varuna’s abode, and found what he wanted, which he promptly gave the 
king. The king performed a yagna named Pundarika and gave those horses 
away as dakshina to deserving Brahmanas. The three kings, whom you 
made agreements with, each bought two hundred of those horses from the 
Brahmanas. The remaining four hundred were claimed by the river Vitasta, 
while they were being led across it. 

You can never have that which is not there to be had. Virtuous one, give 
this girl as a gift to Viswamitra, along with the six hundred horses you have 
acquired. You will be freed from your grief and crowned with success.” 

Saying “Jathaastu,’ Galava went with Garuda to Viswamitra, taking 
Madhavi and the horses with him. On arriving, he said, “Here are six 
hundred horses of the kind you asked for. I offer you this maiden in place of 


the remaining two hundred. I beg you, accept what I offer as gurudakshina. 
This girl has had three virtuous sons by three Rajarishis; let her fourth, and 
best, son be yours. 

Let these six hundred horses be the complete discharge of my debt to 
you, so that I can be free to practice tapasya as I like.” 

Viswamitra saw Galava with the Bird and the maiden, and he said, “O 
Galava, why did you not give this girl to me before? All four sons, 
sanctifiers of my race, would have been mine. I accept this maiden, to give 
me one son. The horses can graze in my asrama.” 

Viswamitra lived happily with Madhavi, and she bore him a son, named 
Ashtaka. As soon as the child was born, Mahamuni Viswamitra instructed 
him in dharma and artha, and gave him the six hundred horses. Ashtaka 
went to live in a city, bright as the city of Soma; and Viswamitra gave 
Madhavi back to Galava and went away to the deepest forest. 

The happy Galava who, with his friend Garuda’s help, had succeeded in 
giving his Guru the dakshina he had asked for, said to Madhavi, “You have 
given birth to one son who is most charitable, to another who is very brave, 
to a third who is devoted to dharma and satya, and to a fourth who is a 
performer of great yagnas. Lovely Madhavi, through your sons you have 
saved not only your father but four kings and me, as well. Go to your father 
now, slender-waisted one.” 

Saying this, Galava bid farewell to Garuda that devourer of snakes, and 
after restoring the maiden to her father, went to live in the forest.’” 


CANTO 120 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada says, ‘King Yayati wanted to give his daughter in marriage 
by way of a swayamvara. He took Madhavi, decked in flower 
malas, in his chariot to a sacred asrama at the confluence of the Ganga and 
Yamuna, with his sons Puru and Yadu following him. Gathered in that place 
were innumerable Nagas, Yakshas, Manavas and Gandharvas; animals and 
birds; dwellers of mountains, trees and forests; and many inhabitants of that 
particular province. The vanas that surrounded the asrama were home to 
many Rishis, who were like Brahma himself. 

The swayamvara began, and that loveliest of maidens passed over all 
those assembled there and chose the vana as her lord. Descending from her 
chariot and greeting all her friends, Yayati’s daughter went into the sacred 
forest and devoted herself to a life of tapasya. 

She emaciated herself by fasting, performing religious rites and rigid 
vratas; and she took to living the life of a deer. She ate soft, green grass 
whose tender stems looked like lapis lazuli and tasted bitter-sweet; she 
drank the cool, sweet, crystalline water of sacred mountain streams. She 
roamed with other deer through forests where no lions or tigers lived, in 
deserts where there was no danger from forest fires and in dense forest, 
leading the life of a wild doe. She earned great spiritual punya because of 
her life of austere tapasya and brahmacharya. 


King Yayati lived for many thousands of years and, like many before 
him, eventually succumbed to inexorable Time. The progeny of his sons 
Puru and Yadu multiplied, thereby earning great reverence for Yayati in this 
and the other worlds. Yayati lived in Swarga, like a Maharishi; he was 
greatly honoured and respected, and enjoyed the best of those regions. 

One day, after many thousands of years had passed in great joy, when 
Yayati sat amongst illustrious Rajarishis and Maharishis, he mentally 
ignored all the Devas, Rishis and Manavas who were there, from folly, 
ignorance and pride. Indra immediately saw into his heart. The Rajarishis, 
too, saw this and disapproved. 

Everyone began to ask, “Who is this man? What king’s son is he? Why 
is he in Swarga? What has he done to deserve this honour? Where did he 
practice tapasya and earn punya? What is he known for? Who knows him?” 

The Swargavasis questioned each other about Yayati and asked 
hundreds of heaven’s charioteers, gatekeepers and those who were in charge 
of the seats in heaven; but all replied that they did not know. Their minds 
were suddenly clouded so that none of them recognised the king, who 
immediately lost his heavenly splendour.”’” 


CANTO 121 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada says, ‘In this state—deprived of his place in Swarga and 

cast out, his trembling heart consumed by fear and burning with 

remorse, his unfading garlands withered, his senses in turmoil, shorn of his 

crown and ornaments, his head reeling, his limbs weak and his body 

unadorned and unclothed—no one recognised Yayati. In the bewilderment 

of the fog that blanketed his mind, the Swargavasis swam in and out of his 
vision as Yayati fell headlong towards the Earth. 

As he fell, the king thought, “What sinful thoughts did I think that lost 
me my place in Devaloka?” 

All the kings, the Siddhas and the Apsaras laughed to see Yayati fall. At 
Indra’s command, came a Duta whose task was to remove from Swarga 
those whose punya had run out. 

He said to Yayati, “Intoxicated with pride, there is no one whom you 
have not disregarded. It is because of your vanity that Swarga is no longer 
for you. You do not deserve to live here, Rajaputra. We do not recognise 
you here, so fall you must.” 

At the Devaduta’s words, Yayati, the son of Nahusha, said three times, 
“If I must fall, let me fall amongst the righteous,” and this king, who was 
the best of all who had attained Swarga, thought about where he should fall. 

As he plunged down, Yayati saw the four mighty kings, Pratardana, 
Vasumanas, Sibi and Ashtaka, in a forest, and he fell toward them. At the 


time, those kings were performing the Vajapeya yagna to gratify Indra, and 
the smoke that rose from their fire had reached the gates of Swarga, looking 
like a river that flowed between heaven and Earth. It resembled the sacred 
Ganga during her descent to Earth. It was the smoke that guided Yayati as 
he fell toward the Earth and brought him to those four lions among men, all 
blessed with great splendour, the foremost of all sacrificers, who were in 
fact his own kin, who resembled the four Lokapalas, and who blazed in 
glory like four mighty sacrificial fires. Having exhausted his store of punya, 
Yayati fell toward them, and hung in mid-air above the kings, and he was 
still dazzlingly beautiful. 

Seeing him and how he shone, the kings asked, “Who are you? What 
race, country and city are you from? Are you a Yaksha, a Deva, a 
Gandharva or a Rakshasa? You do not appear to be a human being. Why are 
you here?” 

Yayati answered, “I am Rajarishi Yayati. I have fallen from Swarga 
because my punya was exhausted. I wanted to fall amongst men of dharma 
and have fallen amidst you.” 

The kings said, “Purushottama, may your wish come true. Accept as 
yours our punya and the fruits of all our sacrifices.” 

Yayati said, “I am not a Brahmana but a Kshatriya, and I cannot accept 
charity; nor do I want to take others’ punya from them.” 

Just at this time, Madhavi, in course of her wandering, came there. The 
four kings greeted her and said, “What brings you here? What would you 
command us to do for you? You have the right to command us, for we are 
your sons, O Tapasvini.” 

Madhavi was filled with delight when she heard this. She came before 
her father with reverence and greeted Yayati; and she touched the heads of 
all her sons. 

She said to her father Yayati, “Rajadhiraja, these are my sons, your 
grandsons. They are not strangers. They will save you. This practice is not 
new; it has its origins in antiquity. | am your daughter Madhavi, and I have 
been living in the forest like a deer. I have earned punya, and you must 
accept half of it because all men have the right to enjoy a portion of the 
punya earned by their children. That is why men want their daughters to 
have sons. That is what you wished for when you gave me to Galava.” 

At their mother’s words, the four monarchs paid homage to her and to 
their grandfather. They reiterated what their mother had said, as clearly and 


affectionately as she had; and the whole Earth resounded with their wish to 
save their fallen grandfather. 

Galava too came there and said to Yayati, “Accept an eighth of my 
tapasya from me and go back to Swarga.”’” 


CANTO 122 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada says, ‘No sooner was Yayati recognised by those virtuous 

ones, than he rose once more into Swarga, without having 

touched the Earth at all. He regained his celestial form and shed his grief. 

Once again he was adorned in celestial garlands, raiment and ornaments; 

sprinkled again with celestial perfumes and vested with heavenly attributes; 
all this without having actually set foot on the Earth’s surface. 

Vasumanas, whose generosity was renowned through the worlds, 
announced to Yayati, “I hereby give you the punya that I have won on Earth 
by my blemishless conduct towards men of all varnas. Let it all be yours 
King. I have acquired the punya that one gains from generosity, and 
redemption from my sins through the yagnas I have performed; let those, 
too, be yours.” 

Then Pratardana said, “My devotion to Kshatriya dharma has earned me 
fame and a heroic name. I hereby give you this punya.” 

Sibi, the intelligent son of Usinara, affectionately said, “I have never 
spoken an untruth to children, to women or in jest, to those in danger, in a 
crisis or during a game of dice. I can give up all objects of desire and 
pleasure, my kingdom and my life itself, but I cannot give up satya. By 
virtue of this and of us having gratified Dharma, Agni and Indra, you will 
ascend to Swarga. 


Lastly, Rajarishi Ashtaka— Madhavi and Kusika’s son, said to Yayati, “I 
have performed hundreds of Pundarika, Gosava and Vajapeya yagnas. Take 
the punya of these. I have spared nothing for their performance, not jewels, 
gold or other treasures. By that truth, ascend to Swarga.” 

Immediately, Yayati left the Earth and began to soar towards Swarga, 
higher and higher as his grandsons said what they were doing for him, one 
after the other. That is how those kings saved Yayati, who had been cast 
down from heaven, and how these royal grandchildren of Yayati’s, those 
perpetuators of their dynasties, made their grandfather rise again into 
Swargaloka by means of their dharma, yagnas and dana. 

The four kings said in unison, “We are your daughter’s sons, O Rajan, 
endowed with nobility and every virtue. By our dharma and punya, ascend 
again into heaven.”’” 


CANTO 123 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


°° NT arada says, “Restored to his place on high by his grandsons, 

distinguished by the largesse of their sacrificial gifts, Yayati 
blazed in beauty, adorned by his own great deeds, showered with fragrant 
flowers and enveloped in scented, balmy breezes. He was welcomed back 
with the joyful clash of cymbals and entertained with songs and dances by 
diverse clans of Gandharvas and Asuras. Devarishis and Rajarishis paid 
homage to him, and the Devas worshipped him with arghya and other 
honours. 

After he had returned to Swarga and, free from anxiety, regained 
tranquillity of heart, Brahma Pitamaha spoke words of approbation to him, 
saying, “You had earned the full measure—four padas—of dharma by your 
deeds on Earth. You had attained Swargaloka and renown for eternity. 
Rajarishi, you nullified all this punya by your vanity, which cloaked the 
hearts of Swargavasis in darkness so impenetrable that they could not 
recognise you, and you were cast down. You have been saved by the love 
and affection of your daughter’s sons and returned, regaining this eternal, 
sacred, wonderful and deathless realm you won earlier by your own deeds.” 

Yayati said, “Holy One, I have a doubt, which only you can dispel. My 
punya was vast, augmented by my reign of dharma over my subjects for 
thousands of years, and won by innumerable sacrifices and gifts. How could 


such immense punya become exhausted, and I be cast down from here? You 
know that the place created for me was eternal. Why was it destroyed?” 

The Pitamaha said, “Your merit, earned by countless yagnas and 
increased by your rule of dharma, perished because of a single fault: your 
vanity, and it made you the object of contempt of all the Swargavasis. 
Vanity, pride of strength, malice, deceitfulness or deception will all reduce 
your time in Swarga. Never disregard those that are inferior, superior or 
equal to you. There is no greater sinner than the man who is consumed by 
the fire of vanity. Those who tell of your fall and re-ascension will be 
protected from all calamities.” 

Rajan, this is the story of how vanity brought Yayati’s downfall, and the 
distress that Galava suffered because of his obstinacy. Those who want their 
own good should listen to their well-wishers. One must never be stubborn, 
for it is the root of ruin. 

O Son of Gandhari, forsake vanity and wrath; make peace with the 
Pandavas. Abandon anger; let go of what you have once given away, that 
which is done, austerities that you have practised and libations that you 
have poured on fire. These are indestructible and cannot be diminished. 
Also, no one other than their doer enjoys their fruit. 

The man who understands this greatest and best of stories, which is 
praised by those who know the scriptures and who are free from anger and 
greed, gains knowledge of dharma, artha and kama, and sovereignty over 
the world.’” 


CANTO 124 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, “Holy one, it is as you say. I, too, want to do 
exactly as what you tell us to, but Iam powerless.’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “The Kuru monarch then addresses Krishna 
and says, ‘O Kesava, you have spoken about the path that leads to Swarga, 
which is for the world’s good, full of dharma and wise. However, being 
blind, I cannot act independently, and Duryodhana never pays heed to me. 
Krishna, you must persuade my foolish, unprincipled and disobedient son. 
He never listens to the advice of Gandhari, Vidura or other true friends, or 
Bhishma the chief of them, all of whom want his good. 

Counsel my dishonest and evil prince, for by so doing you will have 
acted nobly, as a friend should.’ 

Krishna, all-knowing about dharma and artha, says to Duryodhana, 
‘Kurusattama, listen to what I say, which is good for you especially, as well 
as for your followers. You are born into a vamsa that is distinguished for its 
great wisdom, and you are honour-bound to keep dharma. 

You are learned and possess so many excellent and qualities. Only low- 
born, evil, shameless and cruel men do what you mean to. Men of dharma 
are always inclined towards virtue while sinful men lean the opposite way. 
Everything you are thinking of doing is against dharma. Insisting on going 
to war is nothing but sinful, vicious and evil, and will lead you to death. 


Abandon this dangerous path you have chosen to tread; it is unworthy of 
you and will only lead to untold suffering and doom. 

You will do yourself, your brothers and your followers a great service if 
you make peace with the Pandavas instead. The sons of Pandu are wise, 
courageous and learned; they have immeasurable tejas and perfect control 
over their souls. If you do what I ask, that will please Dhritarashtra, as well 
as Pitamaha Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Somadatta, Bahlika, Aswatthama, 
Vikarna, Sanjaya, Vivimsati and many of your kinsmen and friends. The 
whole world will benefit from that peace. 

You are blessed with modesty, noble birth, learning and kindness. Listen 
to what your father and mother tell you; a good son always obeys his 
father’s command, knowing it will benefit him. When calamity strikes, men 
remember their father’s advice, which they once ignored. Making peace 
with the Pandavas will please your father; so let peace recommend itself to 
you and your advisors. 

The man who hears the counsel of his well-wishers but does not heed it 
will be consumed by the consequences of his disregard, even as if he has 
eaten the poisonous kimpaka fruit. The fool who rejects sage advice and 
procrastinates will fail to achieve his objective and then repent. On the other 
hand, the man who heeds wise counsel and accepts it, setting aside his own 
opinion, will always be happy. 

He who discards the words of well-meaning friends, deluded that what 
they say is not in his best interest, will be crushed by his enemies. The man 
who ignores the views of the righteous and clings only to those of the 
sinful, who flatter his vanity, will sink into misery and make his friends 
weep for him. He who turns away from superior advisors and seeks out 
inferior ones will fall into distress, from which he will not be able to 
extricate himself. The Earth will abandon the man who befriends sinners, 
who behaves deceitfully, who ignores what his friends say, who honours 
strangers but hates his own people. 

Bharatarishabha, you have chosen to make enemies of the Pandavas and 
look to incompetent, foolish and sinful men for support. What other man is 
there on Earth besides you, who would disregard kinsmen who are all 
Maharathas, each like an Indra, and instead seek refuge and help from 
strangers? You have persecuted the sons of Kunti from the time they were 
born, but because they are virtuous they were not angry with you. Indeed, 
although you have been deceitful to them since their birth, those noble men 


have always been noble and generous to you. You ought to reciprocate their 
magnanimity in like measure. 

Do not yield to anger. Wise men’s energies are always focused on 
dharma, artha and kama. If all three cannot be attained, men pursue at least 
dharma and artha. Even if these three are followed separately, superior men, 
who have their senses under control, choose dharma as their priority; those 
who have a position between good and evil choose artha, which is subject 
to dispute; while those whose minds are darkened by tamas concentrate on 
gratifying their desires, however base. 

The fool who abandons dharma to pursue artha and kama by sinning is 
soon destroyed by his own senses. The man who seeks artha and kama 
should first practice dharma, because all three are inextricably linked. 
Rajan, the wise say that dharma is the primary source, and so he who seeks 
all three purusharthas will, by practicing dharma alone, flourish, like fire 
when it touches a hayrick. 

Bharatarishabha, you want to employ sin to obtain sole sovereignty over 
this vast and flourishing empire. The man who deals falsely towards those 
who live by dharma cuts himself down, like a forest felled by the axe. One 
seeks to destroy the very mind of the man one wants to defeat, for with his 
mind in chaos he cannot devote his attention to his true welfare. 

The man who has his soul under control is never heedless of anyone, 
not even the most common of creatures, far less those bulls among men, the 
Pandavas. He who gives in to anger loses his sense of right and wrong. Evil 
must not be allowed to grow; look at the proof of this. 

Solidarity with the sons of Pandu is far better for you than union with 
sinners. If you make peace with them, you will make peace with yourself, 
and have everything that you wish for. You now enjoy the kingdom that the 
Pandavas founded, but you ignore them and go to others for friendship and 
protection. Wanting the undiminished continuance of your prosperity, you 
have vested the care of your kingdom with Dusasana, Durvisha, Karna and 
Subala’s son, men far inferior to the Pandavas in knowledge, in dharma, in 
their ability to garner wealth and in prowess. 

Let alone these four men, all these kings together, with you at their 
head, cannot even look at an angry Bhima on the battlefield. This army of 
so many kings of the Earth is at your command. Also with you are 
Bhishma, Drona, Karna, Kripa, Bhurisravas, Somadatta, Aswatthama and 
Jayadratha. All of them together cannot face Arjuna, whom even the Devas, 


Asuras and Gandharvas cannot quell. Do not set your heart on war, 
Duryodhana. 

Have you seen any man who has encountered Arjuna in battle and come 
away unscathed, let alone victorious? What can you gain from a universal 
slaughter? Show me one man who will defeat Arjuna, whose defeat alone 
can ensure your victory. Who will face that son of Pandu in battle, who 
vanquished all the Devas, Gandharvas, Yakshas and Nagas at 
Khandavaprastha? There is also that marvellous account of the encounter in 
Virata’s city, of one against many, which should convince you. 

Do you hope to vanquish an enraged Arjuna, invincible, irresistible, 
ever-victorious and unfading, that hero who gratified even Mahadeva Siva 
in fight? When, with me as his sarathy, that son of Pritha storms on to the 
battlefield, like Indra himself, who will dare challenge him? He who would 
vanquish Arjuna in battle could lift up the Earth in his arms, consume in his 
rage the entire population of the world and cast the very gods out from 
heaven. 

Look at your sons, brothers, cousins and other relatives. Let them not 
die because of you. Let the Kaurava vamsa not horribly dwindle or even 
become extinct. Rajan, let the people not call you the exterminator of your 
dynasty and the destroyer of its noble achievements. If you make peace 
with them, the Pandava Maharathas will install you as Yuvaraja and your 
father Dhritarashtra as the king of this vast empire. 

Do not dismiss the prosperity that awaits you, which is sure to come if 
you tread the path of dharma. Give half the kingdom to the sons of Pritha 
and win great prosperity. Listen to your well-wishers. By making peace 
with the sons of Pandu and living with them in harmony you will be blessed 
for eternity.’” 


CANTO 125 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “After listening to Krishna, Bhishma says to the 

angry Duryodhana, ‘Krishna has spoken to you out of a desire to 
establish peace between cousins. Follow his advice; do not give in to 
vindictiveness. If you do not do as Krishna says, you will never gain 
prosperity, happiness or your own welfare. 

What Krishna said to you is in keeping with dharma and artha. Do as he 
says and you will achieve your every objective; do not obliterate the Earth’s 
population. Do not destroy this resplendent prosperity of the Bhaaratas 
amongst all the kings of the Earth, even while your father Dhritarashtra is 
still alive. If you disregard Krishna, your father and the wise Vidura, your 
stubborn arrogance will take you to your death and, with you, all your 
counsellors, sons, brothers and kinsmen will also die. What your true well- 
wishers counsel is dharma and will benefit you greatly. 

Do not become the extinguisher of your vamsa; do not cleave to evil; 
turn your heart away from sin; do not tread the path of adharma; do not 
drown your parents in a sea of grief.’ 

When Bhishma has spoken, Drona says to Duryodhana, who by now is 
panting with rage, ‘Rajan, what Krishna said is consistent with dharma and 
artha, and Bhishma has said the same. Accept their counsel. Both of them 
are wise, learned, of superior intelligence, have their souls under control 
and want only what is good for you. What they say is salutary; listen to 


them. Wise king, do as Krishna and Bhishma say; do not disregard Krishna, 
who counsels you gravely out of your vain delusion. 

The men who have been blithely encouraging you cannot give you 
victory. They will deny their responsibility and cast the burden of war onto 
others. Do not slaughter the Earth’s population nor slay your sons and 
brothers. The army which has Krishna and Arjuna in it is invincible. If you 
reject what Krishna and Bhishma have said, you will have cause to repent. 
Arjuna is even greater than Bhishma describes, and as for Devaki’s son 
Krishna, not the gods can withstand him. 

Bharatarishabha, there is no use in continuing to tell you what is good 
for you. Everything that needed to be said has been said. Now do as you 
wish; I have nothing further to add.’ 

After Drona has spoken, Vidura looks at Duryodhana and says, 
‘Duryodhana, I have no sympathy for you. I do grieve, however, for your 
elderly parents Gandhari and Dhritarashtra. With an unprincipled protector 
like you, whom they will soon lose, they will be left to wander the Earth 
like beggars and, deprived of their friends and counsellors, as well, they 
will be like a pair of birds whose wings have been shorn. 

Having a sinful son, who will cause the extermination of the human 
race as we know it, they will sorrowfully roam the Earth, living on alms.’ 

Now the king turns to Duryodhana, who sits among his brothers and all 
the other kings. Dhritarashtra says, ‘Listen, Duryodhana, to what Krishna 
Mahatman advises. Do as he says, for his words are eternal, auspicious and 
will lead to your salvation. With the help of blemishless Krishna we, of all 
the kings, are sure to achieve our most cherished goals. 

Join Krishna and reconcile your differences with Yudhishtira; give this 
the same importance you would a mahayagna, for the weal of all the 
Bharatas, the Pandavas and Kauravas as one. With Krishna’s help, bind 
yourself closely with the Pandavas, in love. This is the time to make peace; 
do not let the opportunity pass. 

If you choose to disregard Krishna, who wants your welfare as much as 
that of the sons of Pandu, and who urges you to make peace for your own 
good, you can never win the war that will be and ruin will overtake us all.’” 


CANTO 126 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Dhritarashtra’s impassioned words prompt 
Bhishma and Drona, who sympathise with the old king, to speak to 
the recalcitrant Duryodhana. 

They say, “While the two Krishnas are not yet clad in their armour; 
while the Gandiva is still quiet; while Dhaumya has not yet begun to burn 
his enemies in the fire that he will light and feed for the war; and while that 
mighty archer Yudhishtira, who wears modesty like a garment, has not yet 
begun to look on your army with anger, let all hostilities cease. 

While Bhimasena has not yet positioned himself in the midst of his 
troops, let enmity end. While Bhima has not yet entered the battlefield with 
his mace in hand and begun to smash down his enemies, make peace with 
the Pandavas. Before Bhima with his deadly gada makes the heads of 
elephant-warriors roll on the field like ripe palmyra-fruit, make peace. 
While Nakula and Sahadeva, Dhrishtadyumna of Prishata’s vamsa, Virata, 
Sikhandin and Sisupala’s son, all seasoned warriors versed in the astra 
shastra, have not yet donned their armour or penetrated your army, like 
crocodiles cutting through helpless waters, and showered you with 
fusillades of burning arrows, put a stop to this insane enmity. 

As yet, fierce-winged barbs do not fall upon the vulnerable bodies of the 
assembled kings; as yet, iron shafts, shot by mighty bowmen who 
unerringly find any target at whatever distance, do not pierce the breasts of 


your warriors, who sit here smeared with sandalwood and other fragrant 
pastes and adorned with golden necklaces and jewelled ornaments. Let 
hostilities end before they do. 

Let that elephant among kings, Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, receive you 
with an embrace while you salute him with your head bowed down. 
Bharatarishabha, let that king, renowned for the munificence of his 
sacrificial gifts, place his right hand marked with the signs of banner and 
hook on your shoulder. Let him set his gem-adorned and red-palmed hands 
on your back when you are seated before him. 

Let Mahabaho Vrikodara, his shoulders as broad as the sala tree, 
embrace you with goodwill for the sake of peace. When Arjuna and the 
twins greet you with respect, sniff their heads in affection and speak 
lovingly to them. 

Let all these kings who have gathered here shed tears of joy on seeing 
you united with your heroic cousins. Let the news of this happy union be 
proclaimed in their cities. Rule the Earth with brotherly affection in your 
heart and let her forever be freed from the fever of envy and anger.’” 


CANTO 127 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “In the Kuru sabha, Duryodhana is not pleased to 

hear this, and he says to Krishna, ‘O Kesava, it is indeed just that 
you speak as you have after reflecting on all the circumstances. Yet you 
speak harshly and, without reason, find fault only with me, whilst always 
speaking kindly to the Pandavas. Have you weighed the strength and 
weaknesses of both sides before censuring me? 

You, Vidura, the King, the Acharya and the Pitamaha all reproach only 
me and none other. I do not find the least fault in myself, yet all of you, 
including my own father, despise me. Parantapa, even after reflection I 
cannot find any shortcoming in me, grave or insignificant. 

At the game of dice, which the Pandavas happily accepted, Sakuni 
defeated them and won their kingdom. How can I be blamed for that? On 
the other hand, I commanded that the wealth I won from the Pandavas be 
returned to them. It cannot be any fault of mine that the invincible Pandavas 
lost again at dice and had to go into exile in the forest. What fault do they 
lay at my door and make me their enemy? 

Krishna, why do the weakened Pandavas so confidently choose to have 
war with us, as if they were as strong as they were once? What have we 
done to them? For what injury do the sons of Pandu, as well as the 
Srinjayas, seek to slaughter the sons of Dhritarashtra? Neither their fierce 


deeds nor their intimidating words will deprive us of our good sense and 
make us bow in fear, to them or even to Indra. 

I do not see any Kshatriya who can conquer us in battle. Let alone the 
Pandavas, the Devas themselves cannot vanquish Bhishma, Kripa, Drona 
and Karna. If, Madhava, we die while keeping our Kshatriya dharma in 
battle, we will still go to Swarga. 

Our highest duty as Kshatriyas is that we lay ourselves down on the 
field of battle on a bed not of down but arrows. If we do this without 
bowing to our enemies, that sharp bed will not injure us. Is there a 
Kshatriya who lives by his dharma, who would bow to an enemy out of fear 
and the wish to save his own life? Warriors who seek their own good 
honour what Rishi Matanga said: a Kshatriya should always keep himself 
erect and never bow down, for effort is manliness; he should rather break 
than bend. 

A Kshatriya like me should only bow to Brahmanas, out of piety, and 
not to anyone else; and with all others, I must conduct myself as Matanga 
said. This is Kshatriya dharma, and I have always been true to it. 

The portion of the kingdom that my father gave the Pandavas can never 
be theirs again, not as long as I live. As long as Dhritarashtra lives, both we 
and they must put away our weapons and live under his command as his 
dependents. The kingdom was given away from ignorance and fear when I 
was a callow youth and a dependent. It will never be given away again, and 
the Pandavas will never have it. 

As long as I live, I shall not give the Pandavas even as much of our land 
as may be covered by the point of a needle!’” 


CANTO 128 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Krishna is thoughtful for a moment and then, his 
eyes reddening ominously, he addresses Duryodhana in the presence 
of all who have come to the Kuru sabha. 

Krishna says, ‘You wish for the bed of heroes, and you shall have it, and 
your counsellors as well. For a great slaughter will soon happen. Does your 
small intelligence truly make you believe you have not committed any sin 
against the Pandavas? Let the kings who are assembled here be your judges. 

Piqued by the prosperity that the noble sons of Pandu enjoyed, you and 
Subala’s son conspired to arrange the game of dice. Why would those 
virtuous, honest and noble cousins of yours otherwise play such a vile game 
with the deceitful Sakuni? Gambling robs even the best of their intellect; as 
for the evil, it fetches disputes and other problems. It was you who, with 
your evil confederates, planned that disaster in the form of a game of dice, 
without consulting any men of dharma. 

Who else could shame his brother’s wife in the way that you shamed 
Draupadi by dragging her into the sabha and speaking as coarsely to her as 
you did? She is of noble birth and of pure conduct, and dearer to Pandu’s 
sons than their lives; yet you treated Panchali despicably. 

All the Kauravas know what Dusasana said that day in the sabha to 
Kunti’s sons when they were about to set out for the forest. Who could 
behave so disgracefully towards honourable kinsmen, who are always 


virtuous, untouched by greed and cleave to dharma? Karna, Dusasana, and 
you, too, used words that only the most cruel and contemptible men use. 

You took great pains, albeit without success, to immolate the Pandavas 
and their mother at Varanavata, when the princes were just youths. They 
escaped and were forced to hide in the home of a Brahmana in the town of 
Ekachakra. You tried again to kill them with poison, with snakes and by 
strangling; indeed you used every means to have the Pandavas killed, but 
none of your plans succeeded. When you have always behaved so 
malignantly towards the noble sons of Pandu, how can you say you have 
not offended them? 

O sinful one, you are not willing to give them their rightful share of the 
kingdom, although they beg you for it. But you will be forced to give it to 
them when you are vanquished in battle and forcibly stripped of your 
prosperity. Having wronged the Pandavas so cruelly and so grievously, you 
now want to present yourself in a different light. 

Repeatedly, your parents, Bhishma, Drona and Vidura tried to persuade 
you to make peace, but you did not. Peace would be advantageous to both 
you and Yudhishtira, but you fail to see the good in it. What else can be said 
of you than that you are ignorant? Going against the advice of your well- 
wishers, your true friends, can never bring you felicity. What you are about 
to do is fraught with disgrace, sin and danger, and will fetch a doom you 
cannot begin to imagine.’ 

Now Dusasana speaks to Duryodhana. In the Kuru sabha he says, ‘My 
brother, if you do not willingly make peace with the Pandavas, the 
Kauravas will bind and surrender you to Kunti’s son; Bhishma, Drona and 
your own father will hand Karna, you and me to the Pandavas.’ 

His heavy breath hissing like a great snake’s, Duryodhana rises in rage. 
He ignores Vidura, Dhritarashtra, Bahlika, Kripa, Somadatta, Bhishma, 
Drona and Krishna, indeed, all those present, and stalks out of the sabha, 
followed by his brother, his counsellors and all the other kings loyal to him. 

Bhishma says, ‘The enemies of the man who abandons dharma and 
artha to follow his greed and anger rejoice when he falls into distress. This 
evil son of Dhritarashtra, this foolish Duryodhana who knows nothing of 
dharma, who is undeservingly vain of his sovereignty, obeys only the 
dictates of wrath and avarice. Alas Krishna, I see that the end of all these 
Kshatriyas has come, all these deluded kings who follow Duryodhana.’ 


Lotus-eyed Krishna says to those that remain, chief among them 
Bhishma and Drona, “This is the great sin that all the Kuru elders are guilty 
of: that they do not stop this evil king from enjoying sovereignty. The time 
has come to stop him, for that may still do some good. Listen to me, sinless 
ones. What I say will benefit you. 

During the lifetime of the old Bhoja king, his son, who was evil and a 
slave to his passions, usurped his father’s throne and was eventually killed. 
It was I who killed Ugrasena’s son Kansa, whom his friends and relatives 
abandoned, in a great battle for the weal of the world. My kinsmen and I 
then paid homage to Ugrasena, son of Ahuka, and re-installed him on the 
Bhoja throne. All the Yadavas, Andhakas and Vrishnis found prosperity and 
peace by abandoning a single evil one: Kansa. 

Rajan, when the Devas and Asuras were arrayed for battle with their 
weapons raised and ready to strike, Paramesthin, the lord of all creatures, 
said something which is pertinent to the situation in which we now find 
ourselves. 

When the peoples of the worlds were divided into two sides and were 
about to be slaughtered, the divine Creator and Protector of the universe 
said, “The Asuras, Daityas and Danavas will be vanquished, and the 
Adityas, Vasus, Rudras and other Swargavasis will be victorious. The 
Devas, Asuras, Manavas, Gandharvas, Nagas and Rakshasas will massacre 
one another in this war.” 

With this in mind, Paramesthin commanded Dharma, saying, “Tie up 
the Daityas and Danavas securely and hand them over to Varuna,” which 
Dharma accordingly did. Varuna bound them again, fastening his knots over 
Dharma’s and even now keeps them in the depths of his watery kingdom, 
guarding them carefully. 

Even so, secure Duryodhana, Karna, Sakuni and Dusasana and give 
them up to the Pandavas. For the sake of a family, an individual may be 
sacrificed; for a village a family may be sacrificed; for a province a village 
may be sacrificed; and for the sake of one’s soul, the very Earth may be 
sacrificed. 

Rajan, restrain Duryodhana and make peace with the Pandavas. Do not 
be the instrument by which the entire race of Kshatriyas is annihilated.’” 


CANTO 129 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Dhritarashtra turns to Vidura, who knows all 
aspects of dharma. 

He says, ‘Go to the wise, far-seeing Gandhari and bring her here. 
Together with her, I will plead with my black-hearted son. If she can pacify 
him, we may yet be able to do as Krishna says. By speaking for peace, she 
might bring my greedy, foolish son, influenced by his evil friends, back to 
the path of dharma. If she can avert the calamity that Duryodhana is about 
to cause, we might be able to preserve peace and enjoy happiness for ever.’ 

Vidura brings Gandhari into the sabha, and Dhritarashtra says to her, 
‘My queen, with utter disregard for my commands, and greedy for power, 
your son is about to sacrifice the kingdom and his very life. Like some 
rough peasant, showing contempt for his superiors and the advice of his 
well-wishers, he walked out of our court with his sinful friends.’ 

Gandhari says, ‘Have that sinful son of mine fetched here. The man 
who has a coarse soul and sacrifices dharma and artha does not deserve to 
rule a kingdom. Arrogant, envious and greedy, obtained a kingdom by the 
vilest means. Indeed, Dhritarashtra, you who are so fond of your son, are to 
blame for this, for, knowing his evil heart, you did as he wanted. Lust and 
wrath have seized this son of yours and he is a slave to delusion. You 
cannot force him to change his ways, Rajan; it is too late for that. Now you 


reap the fruit of having given charge of the Kuru kingdom to an ignorant, 
selfish and evil prince, and one with unscrupulous advisors. 

Are you not affected by the imminence of the war that will be fought 
between such close relatives? Your enemies will rejoice at your discord 
with the Pandavas, who are as your own sons. What sane man would use 
force to overcome a calamity that can be resolved by conciliation and 
generosity?’ 

At Dhritarashtra and Gandhari’s command, Vidura brings Duryodhana 
into the sabha. His tread is heavy, his angry breath hisses snake-like and his 
eyes glitter coppery as he comes back into the sabha to hear what his 
mother has to say. Gandhari rebukes him and speaks to him in an attempt to 
make him see reason and to secure peace.’ 

Gandhari says, “Duryodhana, my son, listen to what I say; it is for your 
good and that of your followers as well. What I say is easy for you to do, 
and it will bring you prosperity and happiness. Duryodhana, do as your 
well-wishers tell you, those Bharatottamas: your father, Bhishma, Drona, 
Kripa and Vidura. If you make peace, you will pay homage to Bhishma, to 
your father, to me and to all the others who love you with Drona at their 
head. 

Nobody succeeds in acquiring, retaining or enjoying a kingdom by his 
own effort alone. The man who does not have his passions under control 
can never enjoy a throne for any length of time. Only the restrained man, 
one endowed with great intelligence, can rule a kingdom. Unbridled lust 
and wrath make a man lose his possessions and enjoyments. It is after first 
conquering these enemies within himself that a king brings the Earth under 
his subjection. 

Sovereignty over men is a great thing. Evil men may want to win a 
kingdom, but they cannot rule it when they do acquire it. He who desires to 
acquire an empire must firmly tether his senses to dharma and artha, for, if 
the senses are restrained, intelligence increases, like a fuel-fed fire. If 
uncontrolled, his senses can even kill him, like unbroken, wild horses can 
kill an unskilled rider. 

The man who tries to win over his counsellors without first conquering 
himself, and who tries to conquer his enemies without subduing his 
counsellors, is soon vanquished and ruined. He who masters himself first, 
taking himself for his worst enemy, will later succeed in conquering his 
confederates and outside enemies. Prosperity worships the man who 


commands his senses and his advisors, who metes out punishment to 
transgressors, who acts after deliberation and who is calm and wise. 

Lust and wrath, which live within a man, are like two small fish caught 
in the net of wisdom and restrained. These two, when they manage to 
escape and grow, make the gods shut the doors of heaven against a man 
who has shed his worldly desires and who is, otherwise, qualified to enter. 
The king who understands how to conquer lust, wrath, greed, boastfulness 
and pride can indeed rule the whole world. 

The king who wants to acquire artha and dharma, and who wants to 
vanquish his enemies, should always restrain his passions. The man who, 
influenced by lust or anger, behaves deceitfully towards his kinsmen or 
others can never win true allies. By uniting with the heroic sons of Pandu, 
who are all blessed with great wisdom, you can happily enjoy the Earth, my 
son. What Santanu’s son Bhishma and Maharatha Drona tell you is true— 
Krishna and Arjuna are invincible. So, seek the protection of this 
Mahabaho, to whom any exertion is as nothing, for if Krishna decides to be 
gracious, both sides will be happy. 

The man who does not obey wise and learned friends, who want his 
prosperity, will gladden only his enemies. My son, there is no good in 
battle, no dharma, no artha. How then can it bring felicity? Besides, child, 
victory is far from certain. Do not set your heart on war. Bhishma, your 
father and Bahlika gave the Pandavas their share of the kingdom from fear. 
Parantapa, never even think of going to war against Pandu’s sons. The 
peaceful state of your sovereignty over the Earth is the result of their rule, 
during which they removed all obstacles to harmony. 

Give the Pandavas what is only their due. If you wish to enjoy, with 
your friends and advisors, your half of the empire, give them their share. 
Half the Earth is enough to support you and yours. By doing as your well- 
wishers say, you will win great fame, Bhaarata. A war with the sons of 
Pandu will result only in the loss of everything you now have, for they are 
all blessed with prosperity; they have their souls under control; they are 
vastly intelligent and they have conquered their passions. Dispel the anger 
of your elders and rule your kingdom in a manner that becomes you: by 
giving the Pandavas back their rightful share. 

My son, for thirteen years you have made the Pandavas suffer; it is 
enough. Douse the fire that your lust and anger have fed. Neither you who 
covet their wealth, nor the always angry Sutaputra nor your brother 


Dusasana is a match for them. The fury of Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna, 
Bhimasena, Dhananjaya and Dhrishtadyumna can obliterate the Earth’s 
very population. Do not let your anger become the cause of the end of the 
Kurus. Do not let the world be destroyed for your stubbornness. 

Your limited intellect deludes you into thinking that Bhishma, Drona, 
Kripa and all the rest will fight whole-heartedly for you. That will never 
happen, for these men, who have Atmagyana, are just as fond of the 
Pandavas as they are of you. Even if they are willing to give up their lives 
in gratitude for the care that Dhritarashtra has given them, they could never 
be angry with Yudhishtira. 

Men never acquire true wealth through greed. Give up your avarice and 
desist, my son, O Bharatarishabha.’” 


CANTO 130 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Duryodhana ignores his mother’s words and, 

again, angrily walks away to be with his evil friends. Now the 
prince conspires with Sakuni, the crafty player of dice, and, together, he, 
Karna, Sakuni and Dusasana alight on a foul plan. 

They decide, “Krishna is always quick to act and, with Dhritarashtra and 
Santanu’s help, he will want to seize us. So we must take him captive first, 
even as Indra did Bala. When the Pandavas hear of his being our prisoner 
they will lose heart and become hapless, like snakes without fangs. 
Mahabaho Krishna is their protector and their refuge. If we imprison this 
granter of wishes, this bull of all the Sattvatas, the Pandavas and the 
Somakas will despair and become impotent to fight. 

We will ignore Dhritarashtra and take Krishna captive, even here in 
Hastinapura, and then go to war against the enemy.’ 

The intuitive Satyaki, who can read men’s intentions by what he sees 
around him, soon realises what Duryodhana is plotting. He comes out of the 
sabha with Kritavarman. 

Satyaki says to Kritavarman, “Array our troops now! Wait with your 
armed men at the entrance to the sabha, while I speak to Krishna.’ 

He walks back into the sabha, like a lion into a mountain cave, and 
informs first Krishna, then Dhritarashtra and Vidura of the conspiracy. 


Then he laughs, ‘What these evil men have plotted violates dharma, 
artha and kama. Besides, they will never be able to achieve what they plan. 
Overwhelmed by their passions and yielding to their wrath and greed, these 
sinners want to commit the most heinous sin. These despicable men, who 
want to seize lotus-eyed Krishna, are like children who want to hold a 
blazing fire in their hands.’ 

Vidura says to Dhritarashtra in the Kuru sabha, ‘O Rajan, the hour of all 
your sons’ deaths is at hand for what they are plotting, however incapable 
they might be to actually accomplish this unspeakable plan. Alas, they are 
united in their wish to vanquish Indra’s younger brother and make him their 
prisoner. When they encounter this Purushavyaghra they will all perish like 
insects in a fire. Even if they fight as one, if Krishna wants he can send all 
of them to Yama, like an angry lion dispatching a herd of deer. 

However, he will not do anything so sinful. This best of men, of 
everlasting glory, will never leave the path of dharma.’ 

Krishna looks at Dhritarashtra, who sits in the midst of so many good 
men, all heedful of sage counsel, and he says to the Kuru king, ‘Rajan, if 
these men of anger want to use violence against me, allow them to. As for 
me, easy though it may be for me to kill all of them, I will not commit any 
sin. Because of their greed for what belongs to the Pandavas, your sons will 
lose even what is rightfully theirs. And if they try to take me their prisoner, 
Yudhishtira will accomplish his purpose without fighting a war, for I will 
seize them and all their followers and make them over to the Pandavas. I 
tell you, it will not be difficult for me. 

However, Bhaarata, I will not be driven by anger or evil, nor commit 
this offence in your presence. Let Duryodhana do as he likes; I give him 
and all your sons my leave to do as they plan.’ 

Dhritarashtra says to Vidura, ‘Bring sinful Duryodhana, with his 
friends, counsellors, brothers and followers into my presence. I will make 
one last attempt to set him on the right path.’ 

Again, Vidura fetches the reluctant Duryodhana into the sabha with his 
brothers and the kings who follow him. Dhritarashtra says to Duryodhana, 
who stands haughty and defiant, surrounded by Karna, Dusasana and all 
those other kings, “O, you wretch of accumulated sins, how do you even 
dream of doing what you and these sinful allies of yours have plotted? O, 
you disgrace to your race, only you could think of committing this 
impossible crime. You want to make the invincible and inexorable lotus- 


leaf-eyed Krishna you prisoner! Like a child wanting the Moon, you want 
to do what even all the Devas led by Indra cannot achieve. 

Do you not understand that no one can withstand Krishna in battle, not 
the Devas, Gandharvas, Asuras, Uragas or Manavas? As impossible as 
seizing the wind, as reaching for the Moon with one’s hand or as supporting 
the Earth on one’s head is taking Krishna by force.’ 

Vidura looks at Duryodhana and says to Dhritarashtra’s malignant son, 
‘Duryodhana, listen to what I have to say. At the gates of Saubha, the great 
Vanara Dwividha, who fought beside Rama at the gates of Lanka in the 
Treta yuga, covered Krishna with a thunderous shower of rocks, wanting to 
capture him. He did not succeed. And you want to apprehend Krishna by 
force? 

When Sauri went to Pragjyotisha, Narakasura with all the Danavas 
could not overcome him. And you want to seize him by force? He slew 
Naraka, rescued a thousand women from his city and married them all, by 
law. 

In the city of Nirmochana, six thousand awesome Asuras could not 
capture him with their sorcerous nooses. And you think you can take him 
by force? When he was a child he slew Putana and two other Asuras who 
took the shape of birds. He held up Govardhana on his little finger to protect 
the herd from Indra’s deluge. He slew Arishta, Dhenuka, the powerful 
Chanura, Aswaraja and the evil Kansa. He vanquished Jarasandha eighteen 
times in battle, and killed Vakra and Sisupala, Bana and countless other 
kings. 

His strength is limitless, immeasurable. He vanquished Varuna and 
Agni, and when he brought the Parijata tree down from Devaloka, he routed 
Lord Indra himself, along with all the gods. While floating on the Ekarnava, 
the single infinite ocean, he slew Madhu and Kaitabha; and in another birth 
he killed Hayagriva. He is the Creator of everything but is himself 
uncreated. He is the origin of all power. Whatever he wishes, he 
accomplishes without effort. 

Don’t you know that sinless Krishna is permanent and undecaying? 
Like an angry cosmic snake, he is the never ending source of energy. By 
trying to use violence against Krishna, you and all your followers will 
perish, like insects that fall into a great fire.’” 


CANTO 131 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “When Vidura has spoken passionately, Krishna 
says mildly to Duryodhana, ‘You are under the delusion that I am 
alone, which is why you think of overpowering me and taking me captive. 
But look, foolish prince, here are all the Pandavas and all the Vrishnis and 
Andhakas. Here are all the Adityas, the Rudras and the Vasus, with all the 
great Rishis.’ And throwing back his beautiful head, he laughs ringingly. 

As the divine one laughs, from his body emerge myriad gods, each 
flashing like brilliant lightning and no bigger than a man’s thumb. On his 
brow Brahma appears, on his breast Rudra, on his arms the Lokapalas, and 
from his mouth issue Agni, the Adityas, the Sadhyas, the Vasus, the 
Aswins, the Marutas, Indra, the Viswadevas and hosts of Yakshas, 
Gandharvas and Rakshasas, all in miniature forms. 

From his two arms Balarama and Arjuna appear. Arjuna stands on his 
right with his bow in hand, and Baladeva on his left armed with the plough. 
Behind him are Bhima, Yudhishtira and the two sons of Madri, and before 
him are all the Andhakas and the Vrishnis with Pradyumna and other 
chieftains, with mighty weapons raised. In his countless other arms, now in 
view, flash the conch, the discus, the mace, the bow called Saranga, the 
plough, the javelin, the Nandaka and every other weapon, all shining with 
lustre and ready to strike. From his eyes, nose, ears and every part of his 


body burst forth dazzling sparks of fire and smoke; and from his pores 
flames spring, like the rays of the Sun. 

Beholding the magnificence of this form of Krishna, all the kings shut 
their eyes in fearful awe, except Drona, Bhishma, the wise Vidura, the 
blessed Sanjaya and the saintly Rishis imbued with their profound tapasya, 
for the Lord has revealed this divine form to them before. While this 
wondrous vision is manifested in the Kuru sabha celestial drums beat in the 
sky, flowers rain down upon Krishna, the Earth trembles and the oceans 
churn turbulently. And, O Bharatarishabha, all living things on Earth are 
filled with uncanny wonder. 

Krishna withdraws his divine and auspicious form and, taking the 
Rishis’ leave, and his arms linked with Satyaki’s and Kritavarman’s, he 
leaves the Kuru sabha. An uproar breaks out, during which the Rishis, 
Narada and others, vanish from sight to return to their sacred abodes. And 
this, too, is marvellous to see. 

Seeing Krishna leave the sabha, the Kauravas and all the kings follow 
him, like the Devas behind Indra. However, without a thought for any who 
walk behind him, Krishna of the fathomless soul emerges into the open, like 
a fire. At the gate his sarathy Daruka waits for him with his white chariot of 
the tinkling moonbells and golden embellishments, of untold speed, whose 
wheels rumble like thunderheads, its seats covered with white tiger-skins, 
and to which Saibya and his other horses are harnessed. Mounted and ready 
to ride with Krishna is that favourite of the Vrishnis, Hridika’s son, 
Maharatha Kritavarman. 

Krishna is about to leave when Dhritarashtra calls after him: 

‘O Parantapa, Janardana, you have seen how powerless I am to control 
my sons. You know everything now. Having seen how fervently I try to 
bring peace between the Kurus and the Pandavas, and knowing that I am 
blind and helpless, it is not fitting for you to doubt me. Kesava, I have no 
ill-will towards the Pandavas. You heard what I said to Duryodhana. The 
Kauravas and all the kings of the Earth also know that I have done 
everything in my power to make peace.’ 

Krishna now says to Dhritarashtra, Drona, Pitamaha Bhishma, Vidura, 
Bahlika and Kripa, ‘You have all witnessed what transpired in the hallowed 
Kuru sabha. You have seen how Duryodhana, like some lout, walked out of 
the court in anger, and how Dhritarashtra describes himself as being 


powerless. Now with leave from you all, I will return to Yudhishtira.’ And, 
saluting them, Krishna climbs into his chariot and departs. 

Those Bharatarishabhas, those maharathas Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, 
Vidura, Aswatthama, Vikarna and Yuyutsu follow him. And as the Kurus 
look on, Kesava turns his great white ratha of the tinkling bells toward the 
home of his aunt Kunti.” 


CANTO 132 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “VV aisampayana said, ‘After entering Kunti’s house and 
worshipping her feet, Krishna tells her briefly about all that 
happened in the Kuru sabha. 

He says, “The Rishis and I spoke in many ways and reasonably to 
persuade Duryodhana, but he would not heed anything we said. The time of 
his and his followers’ end has come. Let me go now to the Pandavas. What 
message would you send them? Wise Matuli, speak to me, I want to hear 
what you have to say.’ 

Kunti says, ‘Krishna, say to virtuous Yudhishtira: “My son, your 
dharma has diminished. Your mind is afflicted and you are like a man who 
vainly reads the Vedas without understanding their inner meaning, and who, 
thus, remains ignorant. You choose to take the Vedas literally while only 
your own intellect can see the truth. Think about your svadharma, for which 
Brahma created you. The Kshatriya was created from his arms, and by the 
strength of his arms he must live and perform the harsh deeds he may need 
to in order to protect his people. There is a story told in this connection, 
which I heard long ago. 

In the days of yore, a gratified Vaisravana gifted the Earth to the 
Rajarishi Muchukunda. The sage refused the gift and said he wanted only to 
enjoy what he had won by his own prowess. The delighted Vaisravana 


marvelled at his response. In keeping with Kshatriya dharma, Muchukunda 
conquered the Earth by the strength of his arms and ruled over it. 

Remember, Bhaarata, that a fourth of the punya gained by the subjects 
of a king who protects them accrues to the king himself, if a king keeps 
dharma that confers divine status on him, but if he sins, he finds Naraka, 
hell, for himself. Dandaneeti, the law of punishment, enforced by the king, 
ensures that the four varnas live by their inherent svadharma; and this leads 
to the king acquiring dharma, artha and moksha. 

When the king fully upholds the Dandaneeti, the law, without 
discarding any part of it, the golden immaculate age, the Krita Yuga, sets in. 
Have no doubts about whether the king makes the yuga, or the yuga makes 
the king, do as he does. We know for certain that it is the king who ushers 
in the yuga. Indeed, it is the king who is responsible for ushering in all the 
yugas— Krita, Treta or Dwapara, and even the Kali yuga. 

That king who ushers in a Krita yuga enjoys Swarga to the fullest. The 
king who causes a Treta yuga to set in does enjoy heaven but not fully. For 
fetching a Dwapara yuga, a king enjoys Swarga in proportion to his deeds. 
However, the evil king who causes a Kali yuga earns untold sin and lives in 
Naraka for countless years. This king’s sins affect the world, and the 
world’s sins affect him. 

Observe your kingly duties as befits your lineage. The path you want to 
take is not the way of a Rajarishi. The man who, from faintness of heart, 
allows his compassion to shake him from his dharma does not find the 
punya that accrues from cherishing his subjects with love. When we blessed 
you, neither Pandu, nor your grandfather Vyasa or I ever wished on you the 
impulses which now prompt you. What we prayed for was sacrifice, charity, 
merit, courage, subjects and children, greatness of soul, and might and 
energy. 

Brahmanas who wished you well worshipped and gratified the Devas 
and the Pitrs for life, wealth and children for you, whilst adding Swaha and 
Swadha to their mantras. As do the Devas, parents expect from their 
children generosity, tolerance, performance of yagnas, study and protection 
of their subjects. Whether this is virtue or not, you must perform these 
duties because of your birth. Though nobly born, my sons are destitute and 
persecuted. Hungry men can approach a brave and benevolent king and he 
will give them food and refuge. What can be more virtuous than for a man, 
who has acquired a kingdom, to make all the people of the world his own 


with his generosity, or establish his authority over them by the truth of his 
words? 

A Brahmana’s dharma is to be a priest or a mendicant, a Kshatriya’s is 
to protect his subjects, a Vaisya’s dharma is to earn wealth and a Sudra’s is 
to serve the other three varnas. The life of a beggar is forbidden for you, 
and so is farming. You are a Kshatriya and, therefore, the protector of all 
who are in distress. You have to live by the prowess of your arms. 
Mahabaho, recover your rightful share of the kingdom, which you have 
lost, by conciliation, by argument, by giving gifts, by diplomacy or 
violently. 

What can be sadder for me, who brought you into this world, than to be 
dependent on others for my sustenance? Fight, in keeping with your duty, 
the dharma of kings. Do not allow your Pitrs to sink into the disgrace of 
infamy. Do not exhaust your punya and, with your younger brothers, meet a 
sinful end.”’” 


CANTO 133 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “kK unti says, ‘Krishna, there is an ancient story told of the 
conversation between Vidula and her son. You must tell 
Yudhishtira this story, or any other that you think better. Listen to the tale. 

There was a noblewoman, a queen called Vidula, who was blessed with 
great wisdom and foresight. She was famous, prone to anger and devoted to 
Kshatriya dharma. She was well-educated, and all the kings of the Earth 
knew of her. Vidula would listen to discourses of all kinds given by eminent 
sages. 

One day, she rebuked her son, who lay prostrate with grief and despair 
after having been defeated in battle by the king of the Sindhus. She said, 
“You are not my son, making your enemies joyful as you do. You are not 
born from your father and me; from where have you come? You have no 
anger and cannot be called a man; and your unmanly body is a eunuch’s and 
bears no sign of strength. Do you mean to spend your life in dejection and 
despair? For your own sake, be as a Kshatriya should and do your duty by 
your subjects. 

Do not disgrace your soul; do not be satisfied with a little. Set your 
sights on great things and shed your fear. Rise, coward; you collapse like a 
woman after one defeat; do not be the source of delight to your enemies and 
grief to your friends; do not abandon honour and good sense. 


Little streams are filled with only a little water. The palms of a mouse 
hold a very small quantity. It takes very little, small acquisitions, to satisfy a 
coward. It is better to die pulling out the fangs of a serpent than to die like a 
dog. Exercise your strength and risk your life. Like an intrepid hawk that 
ranges the skies, fearlessly wander the Earth, display your strength, silently 
watch your enemies and wait for an opportune moment. 

You lie here like a man struck by lightning, a corpse. Rise, coward; 
shake off the memory of your defeat. Do not cower in hiding, so miserably. 
Let your deeds bring you renown. Eschew mediocrity; do not stand behind 
anyone, but proudly stand at the head of all. Blaze forth like a roaring fire. 
Even if for a moment, shine like a tinduka twig, rather than smoulder from 
unfulfilled desire like chaff. It is better to blaze for a single moment than to 
smoke impotently for ever. 

It does not befit a Kshatriya to be either too fierce or inordinately mild. 
By achieving every possible feat on the battlefield, a brave man discharges 
his Kshatriya dharma and never disgraces himself. Whether he gains his 
objective or not, the man of good sense never wallows in grief. A true 
Kshatriya forges ahead to accomplish his next objective, without caring for 
even his life. 

So, my son, show your strength or give up your life. What use is living 
like this, without honour, in shame, in disregard of Kshatriya dharma, and 
having lost the punya of all the yagnas you performed and nullified your 
past achievements? The basis of all your joy has been destroyed. Why, then, 
do want to live? If a man must fall, he should seize his enemy and fall with 
him. Even if his roots are severed, a man must not give in to despair. Think 
of the horse, which uses all its strength to pull carriages and chariots, or 
carry heavy burdens, and use your own strength and honour. 

Understand what real manliness is, and work to redeem and elevate the 
honour of your race that has been lost because of you. The man who has 
failed to accomplish anything great or noteworthy only increases the human 
population by one. He is neither man nor woman. He whose fame is not 
based on charity, asceticism, truth, learning and the acquisition of wealth is 
only waste born of his mother’s body; while, he who surpasses others in 
learning, asceticism, wealth, prowess and deeds is truly a man. 

For you to adopt the idle and wretched life of begging alms is in no way 
noble but only cowardly. A man can never have joy from a weak friend, 
whom enemies are delighted to see, who is despised by others, who has 


neither possessions nor fine clothes, who is pleased with the smallest 
acquisitions, who is destitute, who has no courage and who is base. 

Driven out of our home, exiled from our kingdom, deprived of all 
sources of enjoyment and wealth, we will soon die. I have given birth to 
Kali himself in the form of my son, who is a sinner among the virtuous, and 
who destroys our dynasty and family. O, let no woman ever have the 
misfortune of bearing a son like you, apathetic, weak, self-pitying and the 
joy of his foes. Do not smoulder sadly, but flare up like a great flame and 
show your prowess. Slay your enemies. Even if for a brief moment, blaze 
over your enemies’ heads. 

A real man nurtures his wrath and gives no quarter, whilst a man who 
forgives easily and has no anger is neither a man nor a woman but a eunuch. 
Contentment, softness of heart, fearfulness and the lack of effort destroy 
prosperity. The man who makes no effort does not win greatness. My son, 
exert yourself to undo the shackles of these failings that will lead to ruin. 
Steel your heart and go after your lost wealth. 

A man is called a purusha because he can overcome his enemy. The 
man who acts like a woman does not deserve to be called a purusha. A 
brave and mighty king, who goes majestically through life like a lion, is 
subject to fate, like all other creatures, but his subjects are never unhappy. 
The king who disregards his own happiness and pleasure and seeks the 
prosperity of his kingdom is the source of great joy to his ministers and 
friends.” 

Hearing these words, the son said, “If you do not see me, of what use 
would the whole Earth be to you, of what use your ornaments, all objects of 
pleasure, and life itself?” 

The mother said, “Let your enemies conquer regions that are the domain 
of the poor and low-born; let your well-wishers enjoy realms that are 
reserved for noble souls. Do not live the wretched life of a beggar, destitute 
and without servants, a weak and powerless life, lived on food given in 
charity. Our Brahmanas and your friends should depend on you for their 
sustenance, just as all the living depend on clouds for rain, as the Devas 
depend on Indra. 

The life of a man, on whom all other beings depend for their well-being, 
is not in vain, but like the tree full of ripe fruit that birds flock to. Indeed the 
life of that brave man, by whose strength his friends attain happiness, like 
the Devas derive happiness through Sakra’s prowess, is blessed. The man 


who lives on the strength of his arms wins fame in this life and bliss in the 
hereafter.” 


CANTO 134 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


ok unti says, ‘Vidula said, “If, defeated, you choose to give up 

manliness, you will soon find yourself on the path that the lowly 
walk. A Kshatriya who does not exercise his might to the best of his ability, 
from fear of death, is like a thief. 

Ah sadly, my grave words, which are for your good, and fitting and 
reasonable as well, fall uselessly on your ears, like medicine given to a 
dying man. What I say makes no impression on you. 

It is true that the king of the Sindhus has many followers. Discount 
them, for they are weak and ignorant; but though discontented under his 
command, they can do nothing for themselves but wait for their master to 
be overtaken by some disaster to be free of him. As for his enemies, they 
will join their forces with yours when they see your strength. Unite with 
them and bide your time in the mountains, until fate strikes at your enemy, 
as it must, for he is old and not immune to disease or death. 

Your name, Sanjaya, means victorious. I hardly see you living up to it. 
Be true to your name; do not prove it falsely given. A great Brahmana saw 
you when you were a child and predicted that you would fall into distress 
but rise to greatness again. Remembering his words, I feel some hope, and 
that is why I repeat myself over and over, my son. 

The man who pursues his objectives prudently, and with determination, 
and who has others working with him towards the same end, will surely be 


successful. Whether I stand to gain, or lose what I have, Sanjaya, I will not 
stop fighting. 

Sambara said that there is nothing more miserable than not to know 
where one’s next meal will come from. It is worse than losing a husband or 
a son. Poverty is only another form of death. 

I was born into a noble family and have been taken from one great lake 
to another. I am much blessed; my husband respects and cherishes me and I 
wield authority over so many. My friends have seen me living amongst 
well-wishers, my body bathed and adorned in rich clothes, garlands and 
ornaments. When you see me and your wife emaciated by hunger, you will 
not want to live, Sanjaya. Of what use will life be to you when you see our 
servants, our Acharyas and our Brahmanas leave us from want of 
sustenance? 

What peace can my heart have if I do not see you following your 
dharma again, to reach for mighty achievements in the way you once used 
to? My heart will burst if I have to turn away a Brahmana, for my husband 
and I have never done so in the past. We were the protectors of others and 
never had to ask for protection ourselves. I will die if I have to be 
dependent on someone else. 

My son, be our means of crossing this stormy ocean; be our raft. Make 
lavish room for us where now there is none. Bring us back to life. If you 
have a lust for life, you will be able to face any enemy. But if you insist on 
behaving like a eunuch and wallowing in self-pity, it would be better to end 
your life. 

A brave man wins fame by killing even a single enemy. By killing 
Vritra, Indra achieved greatness; he acquired sovereignty over the Devas, 
the cup for drinking Soma and the lordship of all the worlds. When a 
Kshatriya declares himself in battle and challenges his mail-clad foes, when 
he slays the best of the enemy warriors, when he wins renown in fair fight, 
his enemies feel pain and bow to him. Men who are not brave contribute 
their own wealth to his cause and fight his fight, uncaring of their lives. 
Whether kingdoms are overtaken by ruin, or whether life itself is 
endangered, noble men do not give up until they destroy the enemy who is 
within reach. 

Sovereignty is either Amrita or the gate of Swarga. Think of it as such 
and, bearing in mind that it is now shut against you, fall like a burning torch 
amongst your enemies. Rajan, slay your foes in battle; do your duty as a 


Kshatriya; let me not see you downcast. Enhancer of your enemies’ fears, 
let me not see you dejected and miserable, surrounded by us who also 
grieve, while your enemy exults. 

Rejoice in your wealth, and with the Sauvira daughters; do not be weak 
and ruled by the daughters of the Sindhus. If a handsome, educated, noble 
young man of renown, like you, yields in this unbecoming manner, like an 
angry bull with its yoked burden, life is like death itself. 

How can my heart know peace if I see you eulogise other men or walk 
submissively behind them? Never has there been anyone in our race who 
walked behind another. My son, it is not fitting for you to live as a 
dependent. 

I know what the essence of Kshatriya dharma is, as declared by our 
elders and sages of antiquity. Eternal and constant, Brahma himself 
ordained it. He who has been born into this world as a Kshatriya of a noble 
family, and who has studied Kshatriya dharma, will never be anxious about 
his sustenance, or bow to anybody on this Earth. You must stand erect with 
courage and honour and put forth your effort to vanquish your enemy, for 
effort is manliness. One should rather break in the joints than bend his will 
to another’s. A noble Kshatriya should always walk like an infuriated 
elephant. He should, my Sanjaya, bow only to Brahmanas, for the sake of 
dharma. He should rule over all other varnas, destroying every evil-doer. 
Whether or not he has allies, this is how he should live, all his life.” 


CANTO 135 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “kK unti says, ‘Hearing his mother’s words, the son said, “O cruel 

and wrathful mother, you value heroism on the battlefield so 

highly, it seems as if your heart is made of stone. Fie on Kshatriya dharma, 

with which you urge me to battle, as if I were a stranger to you and not your 

only son, as if you were not my mother. If you do not recognise me, if you 

disown me, of what use will all the Earth be to you, of what use your jewels 
and riches, indeed, of what use your life itself?” 

The mother said, “My son, wise men always base their actions on 
dharma and artha. I urge you to focus on these virtues and go to battle. This 
is time to show your prowess. If you do not fight, you will earn general 
contempt and my disapproval. If I say nothing when you are about to be 
tainted with dishonour and ridicule, my love for you would be as worthless 
a donkey’s for her young. 

Do not take the path that the wise disapprove of, which fools would 
take, for it is a base and ignorant way, in which innumerable common 
creatures of the world take refuge, with neither honour nor glory. However, 
if you choose the way of the Kshatriya, the way of war, you will endear 
yourself to me. If you tread the high path of dharma and seek artha, while 
using only ways of the godly and the honest, and relying on your own 
effort, you will be dear to me indeed. Real joy comes from sons and 
grandsons who are well taught and brave; while one who is happy with a 


son who is apathetic, immodest and without dharma might as well not have 
a son. 

The base man, who never performs his duty but cleaves to cowardice 
and sin, does not find happiness here or in the hereafter. A Kshatriya is born 
to do battle and win victory. Whether he wins or dies, he will attain Swarga. 
The joy that a Kshatriya experiences by conquering his enemies has no 
equal even in the realms of Indra. If a great Kshatriya meets with defeat 
many times, he would still wait, burning with anger, for a chance to avenge 
himself and vanquish his enemy. How can he have peace of mind other than 
by killing his enemy or dying himself in the attempt? 

The wise man considers pettiness distasteful. Insignificant things will 
eventually become the source of great pain to the man who finds them 
attractive. The man who does not have what is worthy soon becomes 
unhappy. He becomes needy and is overwhelmed, like the Ganga when she 
enters the ocean.” 

The son said, “Mother, you should not be saying such things to your 
son. Be loving and stand by him silently.” 

The mother said, “I am pleased to hear this. You have the right to 
remind me of my duty. And so, I will urge you even more to do yours. I will 
honour you only when I will see you crowned with success after 
slaughtering all the Saindhavas.” 

The son said, “With no wealth or allies, how can I have success or 
victory? Knowing this, I have relinquished the desire for kingdom, as a 
sinner does his wish for heaven. If, in your wisdom, you can see how I can 
succeed, tell me of it, and I will do as you command.” 

The mother said, “My son, do not disgrace yourself by anticipating 
failure. In the past, you have had victories as well as losses. You should 
never try to attain your goals using anger and foolhardiness. Success is 
never certain, yet men still act. Sometimes they succeed and sometimes do 
not. However, those who do nothing will never succeed. How can anyone 
dream of success without effort? 

Effort can have one of two results—success or failure. The man who 
already believes that he will fail will never have success or prosperity. With 
firm belief in yourself, and with alertness, put all your energy into 
everything you do. Prosperity comes to the wise king who acts with valour 
and forethought, after having performed all auspicious rites to propitiate the 


Devas and Brahmanas. As the Sun does to the east, the goddess of fortune 
comes to him. 

You have heard what I want you to do; now show me your manliness. It 
is your dharma to do your utmost to achieve your goals. Gather to you 
others who have enmity towards your enemy, men who are also hungry for 
victory and prosperity, men whom your enemy has weakened, who are 
jealous of him, whom he has humiliated. With their help you can break the 
ranks of the Saindhava, even as a violent storm does clouds. 

Give your allies their share of wealth before it is due, be active and 
speak pleasantly, respectfully, to them; and they will stand by you in battle. 
When the enemy realises that you care little for your life, he will be as 
fearful of you as of a snake living in his house. 

If a man does not try to kill in war an enemy he knows is powerful, he 
should at least conciliate him with friendly overtures and gifts, which is 
almost a victory. You can find artha through diplomacy, and if your wealth 
increases, your friends will adulate you and look on you as their refuge. If 
you lose your wealth, your friends and relatives will abandon you and, 
worse still, mistrust and despise you. 

However, the man, who befriends his enemy, can never regain his 
kingdom.”’” 


CANTO 136 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “kK unti says, ‘The mother said, “Whatever calamity may strike a 

king, he must never betray his fear. Seeing a frightened king, the 

whole kingdom, his army and ministers will also be afraid and his subjects 

will become disunited. Some will defect to the enemy; others will abandon 

the king; some, whom he has humiliated, will try to finish him. His close 

friends might stay loyal to him and want his welfare, but will wait 
helplessly, like a cow for her tethered calf. 

Well-wishers grieve for their king when he is plunged in distress, as true 
friends will. There are many, whom you have honoured in the past, who 
still bear friendship for you; and you have many true friends, who grieve 
over your loss of the kingdom and who want to share your troubles. Do not 
make them abandon you at seeing how frightened you are. 

I tell you all this because I want to see your strength, manliness and 
intelligence; and to encourage and awaken your strength. If you understand 
that I speak the truth, gather courage and set your mind on victory, Sanjaya. 
We have a number of treasure-houses that you are unaware of; only I know 
they exist. I will place all these at your disposal. You also have many 
sincere friends who will share not only your joys but your troubles, and will 
not turn away from battle. Parantapa, such men are fitting allies and 
advisors of a king who wants victory.” 


Although he was not greatly intelligent, his mother’s words melted 
away the despair that had gripped Sanjaya’s heart; and he said to her, “With 
you, who are so devoted to my welfare, for my guide, I will lift my 
kingdom out of the depths into which it has sunk, or die in the attempt. I 
stayed mainly silent while you spoke, because I wanted to hear more. Just 
as a man’s thirst for amrita is never slaked, I am not yet satiated with your 
love and wisdom. 

Mother, I swear to you, I will win the support of my friends, and rouse 
myself to crush my enemy and be victorious!” 

Stung by what his mother said, Sanjaya reared up like a proud horse of 
high pedigree and soon achieved everything she had urged him to. 

When enemies beleaguer a king and he is overwhelmed by despair, his 
minister should tell him this excellent tale, to arouse his courage and infuse 
him with strength. Indeed, this story is called Jaya, and everyone who 
desires victory should hear it. And, having listened to it, a Kshatriya may 
vanquish his enemies and conquer the whole world. 

A pregnant woman who hears it will give birth to a son, and repeatedly 
hearing it will ensure that a hero is born to her. The Kshatriya woman who 
listens to it will have a son of irresistible prowess, deeply learned and the 
most generous of men; who practises the severest tapasya and is utterly 
devout; who blazes with tejas and is the best of men; who is mighty and 
greatly blessed; who is a Maharatha, highly intelligent, irresistible in battle, 
ever victorious and invincible; and who suppresses the sinful and protects 
the righteous.””” 


CANTO 137 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 K unti says, ‘Say to Arjuna, “When you were born and I was in the 
asrama surrounded by my sakhis, a celestial voice spoke from 
the sky, saying, Kunti, this son of yours will rival the thousand-eyed Indra. 
He will vanquish all the assembled Kurus in battle. With Bhima, he will 
conquer all the Earth and his fame will reach into the heavens. With 
Vasudeva as his ally he will slay the Kurus in battle and recover his lost 
kingdom. He will be blessed with great prosperity and, with his brothers, he 
will perform three mahayagnas. 

Ever-glorious one, you know how devoted to truth Arjuna is, and how 
irresistible. Let it be as that asariri said. If dharma exists, those words will 
prove true, and you will fulfil them. I do not doubt what the voice said. I 
bow to dharma, which supersedes everything else. Tell my Dhananjaya all 
this. 

To Bhima, who is always ready for battle, say these words, “The time 
has come to fulfil the reason for which a Kshatriya woman gives birth to a 
son. The best men never grieve when a war has to be fought.” You know 
Bhima’s heart. That Parantapa will not rest until he has exterminated his 
enemies. 

Krishna, speak next to the beloved Draupadi of great renown, noble 
Pandu’s daughter-in-law, who knows every detail of dharma. Say to her, 


“Panchali, you are of noble descent and endowed with great fame. You are 
an exemplary wife to my sons and I bless you.” 

You must say to the sons of Madri, who always live by Kshatriya 
dharma, “Treasure that which you acquire by prowess more than life itself. 
Objects thus won fill the heart of a true Kshatriya with joy. Even while you 
lived a virtuous life, before your very eyes the Kurus spoke cruel and 
abusive words to Panchali. Will any Kshatriya worth his name forgive such 
an insult? 

The loss of the kingdom did not distress me nor did the defeat at dice; 
but to see the noble, beautiful Draupadi weeping in the sabha broke my 
heart. Alas, she, who is ever devoted to Kshatriya dharma, found no 
protector then, though her husbands are such powerful men.” 

O Mahabaho, tell Purushavyaghra Arjuna, that best of warriors, that he 
should always do as Draupadi says. You know that, when angered, Bhima 
and Arjuna can send even the Devas to Yamaloka. Was it not an unbearable 
torment for them to see their wife being dragged into the sabha? Kesava, 
remind them of the vile things that Dusasana said to her in the presence of 
all the Kuru warriors. 

Ask after the welfare of the Pandavas, Draupadi and their children for 
me. Tell them that I am well. Now go on your auspicious mission and, 
precious Krishna, protect my sons,’ says Kunti. 

Krishna pays homage to her by walking around her in pradakshina, and 
then the mighty-armed one walks in leonine majesty out of Pritha’s 
apartments. He dismisses the Kurus, who follow him with Bhishma at their 
head, and, taking Karna with him in his chariot, leaves the Kuru capital 
accompanied by Satyaki. 

And after he leaves, the Kurus gather and discuss what Krishna said and 
the wonderful vision he showed them. They say, ‘Overcome by ignorance, 
the Earth is caught in death’s meshes. Through Duryodhana’s folly, 
everything is doomed.’ 

Krishna leaves the city and goes on his way, talking at length with 
Karna, before letting him go and urging his horses to greater speed. With 
Daruka holding their reins those horses fly with the speed of the mind and 
flash across the sky, devouring it as they go. Covering the long distance like 
swift hawks, they arrive at Upaplavya, bearing the wielder of the Saranga,” 
said Vaisampayana. 


CANTO 138 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “When they hear of Kunti’s message to her sons, 

Bhishma and Drona say to the defiant Duryodhana, ‘Naravyaghra, 
did you hear the fiery words that Kunti said to Krishna? Her sons will do as 
she says, especially as Krishna approves. They will not be pacified until 
they have their share of the kingdom. 

You inflicted untold pain on Draupadi and the sons of Pritha in the 
sabha. Bound by dharma, at the time they swallowed your savage insults. 
Now that Yudhishtira has Arjuna, master of the astra shastra, the determined 
Bhima, the Gandiva and its inexhaustible quivers, Arjuna’s chariot that flies 
the Vanara banner, Nakula and Sahadeva, both blessed with brilliant tejas 
and awesome might, and Krishna and his allies by his side, the Dharmaraja 
will be unforgiving. 

Duryodhana, you saw for yourself how Arjuna vanquished us in battle 
outside Virata’s city. Dhananjaya, who flies the emblem of Hanuman on his 
flag, singly annihilated the dreaded Nivatakavachas. Have you forgotten the 
incident with the cattle, when the Gandharvas routed Karna and seized you 
and your brothers, whilst you wore armour and rode in your rathas? It was 
Arjuna who rescued you. Is all this not proof enough for you of what will 
happen if you go to war against Kunti’s sons? 

Bharatottama, you and your brothers must make peace with the 
Pandavas. O save this mother Earth from the apocalypse that looms. 


Yudhishtira is your elder brother; he is virtuous, affectionate, sweet-spoken 
and learned. Give up your evil plans and unite with that tiger among men. 

If the Pandava sees you put away your bow, and wipe the angry frown 
from your face and look cheerful, it will bode well indeed for your vamsa. 
Go to him with your ministers and embrace him as a brother. Pay your 
respects to him as a king, as you used to, and let Yudhishtira hold you 
lovingly in his arms. 

Let that most terrible warrior Bhima, of the lionish shoulders, mighty 
thighs and long, powerful arms embrace you. Then let Dhananjaya, of the 
lotus-petal eyes, wavy hair and conch-like neck greet you respectfully. Let 
those Purushavyaghras the twins, their beauty unrivalled on Earth, wait on 
you as their guru, affectionately and reverently. Let all the Kshatriyas with 
Krishna at their head shed tears of joy. 

Divest yourself of pride and reunite with your brothers. Rule the whole 
Earth with them. Let all the kings embrace one another and joyfully return 
to their homes. There is no need for war, Duryodhana. Listen to your 
friends’ sage advice, for they warn you that a complete decimation of 
Kshatriyas will be the only outcome of the war you mean to fight. 

The stars are not propitious: animals and birds of ill omen, and all kinds 
of ominous signs can be seen, particularly in our kingdoms, which portend 
an unprecedented massacre of Kshatriyas. Meteors fall on your forces; our 
animals are listless and seem to weep; vultures wheel above our troops. The 
city and the palace have lost their old appearance and seem sinister. Jackals 
howl and run in all directions, and fires blaze up everywhere of their own 
accord. 

Listen to your parents and to us, who want only your good. Mahabaho, 
war and peace both lie within your control. If you ignore the advice of your 
friends, you will repent when your army is shredded by Partha’s arrows. 
You will remember these words when you hear mighty Bhima’s terrible 
battle cry and the twang of the Gandiva. If you cannot find it in yourself to 
return to dharma, what we say will inexorably come to pass.’” 


CANTO 139 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Duryodhana frowns, his eyes glitter and he 
averts his gaze from his elders, saying not a word in reply. Bhishma 
and Drona look at each other and address him once more. 

Bhishma says, ‘What can be sadder for us than to have to fight against 
Yudhishtira, who is devoted to serving his elders, who has no envy, who 
knows himself and is truthful?’ 

Drona says, ‘I love Arjuna more than I love my son Aswatthama; and 
that hero who flies the ape-emblazoned banner reveres me more than my 
son does. Alas, out of loyalty to the Kuru House, I will have to fight him, 
who is dearer to me than my son. Fie on Kshatriya dharma. By my grace, 
there is no archer to equal Arjuna on Earth. 

He who hates his friends, he who is sinful, he who denies God and he 
who is crooked and deceitful never receives the worship of the righteous, 
like a_ sacrifice performed by an ignorant man. Though dissuaded 
repeatedly, a sinful man will still want to continue sinning, while a 
righteous man will never abandon dharma, even if he is tempted to sin. 
Though you have been deceitful and vicious to the Pandavas, they still want 
to do the right thing by you. 

O Duryodhana, your sins will bring you to disaster. The Kuru Pitamaha, 
Vidura, Krishna and I have all spoken to you, but you have not understood 
what is good for you. Like the Ganga flowing into the ocean, which 


abounds with sharks, crocodiles, timingalas and giant tortoises, you want to 
penetrate the Pandava host, which teems with heroes. You enrobe yourself 
in Yudhishtira’s wealth as if it was discarded by him, and you think of it as 
your own. 

Though Pritha and Pandu’s son lived twelve years in the forest with 
Draupadi and his brothers, who, even amongst kings, can vanquish him? 
Yudhishtira shone in splendour even in the presence of Kubera, to whom all 
the Yakshas and their kings are servile. The Pandavas went to Kubera’s 
court and obtained immense wealth from there, and now they want to attack 
your swollen kingdom and take back their sovereignty. 

Both Bhishma and I have given gifts, poured libations on the fire, 
studied the scriptures and gratified Brahmanas by gifts of wealth. Our life 
on Earth has come to an end. Our work is done. You, however, have much 
to lose—happiness, your kingdom, friends and wealth—and great will be 
the catastrophe you face, if you go to war against the Pandavas. 

How can you vanquish Yudhishtira when Draupadi, who is ever truthful 
and devoted to stern vratas and tapasya, prays for his success? How will 
you overcome that son of Pandu who has Krishna for his mentor, who has 
Dhananjaya for a brother? How will you defeat that son of Pandu, of the 
austere tapasya, who has on his side so many greatly intelligent Brahmanas 
who have mastered their senses? 

In the way that a well-wisher would when he sees his friend drowning 
in an ocean of distress, I tell you again—there is no need of war. Make 
peace with those heroes for the sake of the prosperity of all the Kurus. Do 
not court defeat and death, with your sons, allies and our army.’” 


CANTO 140 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, “O Sanjaya, in the presence of all the princes 

and vassals Krishna left the city, taking Karna with him in his 
chariot. What did he of the immeasurable soul say to Radheya? What 
pacifying words did Govinda speak to the Sutaputra? Tell me, Sanjaya, 
whatever Krishna, of the voice as deep as newly formed monsoon clouds, 
said to Karna, mild or stern.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Bhaarata, I will repeat the very words, both intimidating 
and mild, full of dharma, fraught with truth, beneficial and pleasing to the 
heart, that Krishna spoke to Radha’s son. 

Krishna said, “Radheya, you have worshipped many Brahmanas who 
have perfect knowledge of the Veda. With dhyana, and a mind free of envy, 
you have frequently sought knowledge from them, and thus you know the 
eternal truth of the Vedas and the subtleties of the Shastras. 

Those who know the Shastras say that sons are of two kinds—kanina 
and sahoda. Both are born before her marriage to an unwed maiden who 
later marries their father. You were born in this way, Karna; you are Pandu’s 
son. Be a king, as the Shastras dictate you should. On your father’s side you 
have Pritha’s sons for kin, and on your mother’s, the Vrishnis. 
Bharatarishabha, both these families are your own. 

Come with me today and let the Pandavas know that you are Kunti’s 
son, born before Yudhishtira was. The five Pandava brothers, Draupadi’s 


five sons and Subhadra’s invincible son will all worship at your feet. All the 
kings and princes, who have gathered for the Pandava cause, all the 
Andhakas and all the Vrishnis, will do the same. For your investiture, 
queens and princesses will bring water in gold, silver and earthen jars, 
aromatic herbs and all kinds of grain, jewels and flowers. Draupadi will be a 
wife to the six of you. 

Let Dhaumya, of the restrained soul, pour ghee on the sacred fire, and 
let the Pandavas’ Brahmanas, for whom the Vedas are the final authority, 
perform your investiture. Let the Pandavas’ family priest, who is devoted to 
Vedic rites, the five sons of Pandu, all bulls among men, Draupadi’s five 
sons, the Panchalas, the Chedis and me join in installing you as sovereign 
lord of the Earth. 

Let Dharma’s son Yudhishtira, of the great soul and stern vows, be your 
heir apparent and rule the kingdom under your authority. Let him stand 
behind you in your chariot, holding the white chamara fan. Let Bhimasena 
hold the royal white parasol over your head. Arjuna will drive your chariot 
drawn by white horses, adorned with a hundred tinkling bells, its sides 
covered with tiger-skins. Nakula and Sahadeva, Draupadi’s five sons, the 
Panchalas and that Maharatha Sikhandin will all follow. I with all the 
Andhakas and the Vrishnis will walk behind you. All the Dasarhas and the 
Dasarnas will be your kinsmen. 

O Mahabaho, enjoy the sovereignty of the Earth with your brothers the 
Pandavas, with japas and homas and auspicious rites being performed in 
your honour. Let the Dravidas, the Kuntalas, the Andhras, the Talacharas, 
the Chuchupas and the Venupas, all walk ahead of you. Let vabdhis and 
magadhis sing hymns in your praise. Let the Pandavas proclaim, Victory to 
Vasusena! 

O Kuntiputra, rule the kingdom surrounded by the Pandavas, like the 
Moon by the stars, and gladden Kunti’s heart. Let your friends rejoice and 
your enemies tremble. Even today, let there be a union between you and the 
sons of Pandu, your brothers.’” 


CANTO 141 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, ‘Karna said, “O Kesava, I have no doubt that you 

speak out of love, affection and friendship for me, and also 

because you wish me well. I already know and understand everything you 
have said. 

By descent, as well as by the laws of the Shastras, I know that I am 
Pandu’s eldest son. Before she married Pandu, my mother, while still a 
virgin, conceived me through intercourse with Surya Deva, and, at his 
command, abandoned me as soon as I was born. Yes, by dharma I am 
indeed the firstborn son of Pandu. 

Kunti abandoned me without a thought. The Suta, Adhiratha, saw me 
floating down the river, took me home and gave me to Radha. Her breasts 
filled with milk out of a mother’s love, and she adopted and raised me as 
her own. How can we, who know dharma and are always listening to 
scriptures deprive her of her pinda? 

Adhiratha, too, looked upon me only as a son and I loved him as my 
father. It was he who, with a father’s love, performed all the samskaras for 
me from my infancy, as prescribed in the shastras. He had the Brahmanas 
name me Vasusena. When I grew to be a young man I married the girls my 
father chose. Through them all my sons and grandsons were born. My heart 
is bound to them by love. Neither from joy nor fear, neither for all the Earth 
nor mountains of gold will I break those bonds. 


For thirteen years I have enjoyed lordship, without a thorn in my side, 
under Duryodhana’s patronage. At the same time, I have performed the 
yagnas that being a Suta demands; and all my family rites and marriages 
were performed in accordance with Suta customs. Knowing that I am loyal 
to him, Duryodhana has made preparations for war and taken an openly 
hostile stand against the Pandavas. This is also why I have been chosen to 
fight Arjuna in the war that will be. O Krishna, I could never be disloyal to 
Duryodhana, not from fear of death, nor for ties of blood or any temptation 
at all. If I now withdraw from meeting Arjuna in battle, I will disgrace both 
myself and him. 

I know that you said whatever you did out of love for me. The Pandavas 
are obedient to you and will do as you say. However, you must keep our 
conversation to yourself. If Yudhishtira comes to know that I am Kunti’s 
first-born son, he will never accept the kingdom; and if this mighty and 
burgeoning empire becomes mine, I will give it to Duryodhana. 

Let Dharmaraja Yudhishtira become king. He, who has Krishna for his 
mentor, Dhananjaya and Bhima for his warriors, and Nakula, Sahadeva and 
the sons of Draupadi by his side, is fit to rule the Earth. The Panchala prince 
Dhrishtadyumna, that mighty Maharatha Satyaki, Uttamaujas, 
Yudhamanyu, the prince of Somakas who is devoted to dharma, the ruler of 
the Chedis, Chekitana, the invincible Sikhandin, the Kekaya brothers whose 
skin is the hue of indragopaka insects, Bhimasena’s uncle Raja Kuntibhoja 
who has rainbow coloured horses, Maharatha Syenajit, Virata’s son Sanka 
and you yourself, Krishna, are on his side. This assemblage of Kshatriyas is 
like an ocean. Yudhishtira has as good as already won this radiant kingdom, 
celebrated among all the kings of the Earth. 

Duryodhana is about to perform a great astra yagna, a sacrifice with 
weapons, of which you, Krishna, will be the Yajaman, as well as the 
Adhvarya, the head priest. Clad in his coat of mail, Arjuna, who flies the 
Vanara-emblazoned banner, will be the Hotri, the giver of offerings. His 
bow Gandiva will be the sruva, the sacrificial ladle, and the prowess of his 
warriors will be the ghrita he pours. The Aindra, Pasupata, Brahma and 
Sthunakarna astras he invokes will be the sacrificial mantras. Arjuna and 
Subhadra’s son Abhimanyu, who is equal to, if not more powerful than, his 
father, will be the hymn that is sung. Mighty Bhima who roars in battle, that 
destroyer of elephant legions, that Naravyaghra will be the Udgatri, who 
chants the Veda, and the Prastota, who makes all the preparations, at this 


yagna. Dharmatma Yudhishtira, who is devoted to the performance of japa 
and homa, will be the Brahmana of that sacrifice. 

The sounds of conches, tabors and drums, and the leonine roars rising 
into the heavens will be the gong that announces the meal. Madri’s two sons 
Nakula and Sahadeva, of the great renown and strength, will be the slayers 
of the sacrificial animals. Rows of shining chariots, flying flags of all 
colours, will be the stakes to which the yagnapasus are tied. Karninas, 
nalikas, narachas and arrows with heads like calf-teeth will be the spoons 
used to distribute the Soma rasa; tomaras will be the vessels holding the 
Soma, and bows will be the pavitras—kusa leaves for pouring ghee. 

Swords will be the papalas—the chalices, the heads of slain warriors 
will be the purodasas—the oblations, and their blood the ghrita. Lances will 
be the paridhas—the kindling, and bright maces will be the saktis—pokers 
used to stir the fire. Drona and Kripa’s disciples and Saradwat’s son will be 
the Sadasyas—the guests and assisting priests. The arrows shot by Arjuna, 
by other mighty warriors, by Drona and Drona’s son will be the ladles for 
serving the Soma. 

Satyaki will be the chief assistant to you, Krishna, the Adhvarya. 
Duryodhana will be the Dikshita—performer of this yagna, and his vast 
army will play the role of his wife. When the evening rites of this yagna 
begin with the animal sacrifices, mighty Ghatotkacha will be the slayer of 
the animals. Dhrishtadyumna, who was born from a sacrificial fire, will be 
the Dakshina—the fee paid to the priest—of the yagna. 

I am consumed with remorse for my sin of speaking harsh words to the 
Pandavas in order to please Duryodhana. Krishna, the moment of my death 
at Arjuna’s hands will mark the commencement of the punaschiti, the 
second part of the yagna of war. When Pandu’s second son Bhima drinks 
the blood of the roaring Dusasana, only then the part of the yagna when the 
Soma rasa is drunk will occur. 

When the two Panchala princes Dhrishtadyumna and Sikhandin 
overthrow Drona and Bhishma the yagna will be paused for a while; and 
when mighty Bhimasena kills Duryodhana the yagna will end. When the 
wives of Dhritarashtra’s sons and grandsons stream onto the battlefield 
haunted by dogs, vultures and other birds of prey, and weep loudly in 
mourning with Gandhari for their slain husbands, sons and protectors, then 
the avabhrita snana, the final bath at the conclusion of the yagna, will take 
place. 


Krishna, I pray you, for your own sake, do not let the old and learned 
Kshatriyas die miserable deaths. This vast host of Kshatriyas must die 
honourably by weapons on Kurukshetra, that most sacred of all places in 
the three worlds. Lotus-leaf-eyed one, somehow enable us to achieve our 
goal, so that the Kshatriya race may attain Swarga. As long as mountains 
stand and rivers flow the fame of this sacrifice in blood will last. Brahmanas 
will recite the Mahabharata, this great war of the Bhaaratas. The fame that 
they achieve in battle is Kshatriyas’ true wealth. 

O Krishna, bring Kuntiputra Arjuna before me to fight; and keep our 
conversation a secret forever.””” 


CANTO 142 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, ‘Krishna smiled and said to him, “Karna, do you not 
wish to have the empire in the way I have shown you? Do you not 
want to rule over the Earth, which I am giving you? 

The victory of the Pandavas is certain; there is no doubt of that. 
Arjuna’s triumphal banner with the fierce Vanara on it seems to be flying 
already. The divine illusionist Bhaumana has created it with such 
enchantment that it stands high, like Indra’s banner, and displays on it 
celestial creatures of forms that symbolise victory. Rising upwards and 
across for a Yojana, unobstructed by mountains or trees, it blazes like fire. 
When you see Arjuna in battle on his chariot drawn by white horses, with 
Krishna as his sarathy; when he looses the astras Aindra, Agneya and 
Maruta; and when you hear the twang of Gandiva splitting the air like 
thunder, then all signs of the Krita, the Treta and the Dwapara yugas will 
disappear. Only the wrath of the Kali will remain. 

When you see in battle the invincible Yudhishtira, who is devoted to 
japa and homa, and who dazzles in brilliance like the Sun, protecting his 
mighty army and burning the army of his enemies, then all signs of the 
Krita, the Treta, and the Dwapara yugas will disappear. 

When you see in battle the mighty Bhimasena, having drunk Dusasana’s 
blood, dance like a fierce elephant with rent temples that has killed a 


fearsome antagonist, then all signs of the Krita, the Treta and the Dwapara 
yugas will disappear. 

When you see in battle Arjuna contain Drona, Bhishma, Kripa, 
Duryodhana and Jayadratha of the Sindhus, all of whom rush to attack him, 
then all signs of the Krita, the Treta and the Dwapara yugas will disappear. 

When you see in battle the two mighty sons of Madri, those Maharathas 
who shatter enemy chariots into shards, wreak havoc on the armies of 
Dhritarashtra’s sons from the very moment that weapons begin to clash, like 
a pair of maddened elephants, then all signs of the Krita, the Treta and the 
Dwapara yugas will disappear. 

Karna, go back and tell Drona, Bhishma and Kripa that this month is a 
delightful one, with an abundance of food, drink and all things salubrious. 
Plants and herbs are in a season of vigorous growth; the trees are full of 
fruit, and the flies are gone. The roads are free of slush, the water is sweet 
and the weather is pleasant, neither hot nor cold. 

Seven days from now will be Amavasya, the day of the new moon. Let 
the battle begin then, for it is Indra’s day. Tell all the kings who have come 
to fight that I will fulfil their cherished desires. All the kings and princes 
who are with Duryodhana, and who are killed by weapons, will attain 
Moksha.”’” 


CANTO 143 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, ‘Hearing Krishna’s auspicious words, Karna 

worshipped him and said, “Knowing everything, why do you still 

want to confuse me? The destruction of the whole world is at hand because 

of Sakuni, Dusasana, Duryodhana and me. Certainly, Krishna, a great and 

fierce war will soon be fought between the Pandavas and the Kurus, which 

will soak the earth with blood. All the kings and princes who follow 
Duryodhana will be consumed by the fire of weapons and go to Yama. 

Frightful visions and omens appear, making the people’s hair stand on 
end; and they all portend Duryodhana’s defeat and Yudhishtira’s victory. 
That fierce planet of dark effulgence, Sanaischara—Saturn—is in 
opposition to the star Prajapatya, and will bring untold suffering on Earth. 
The planet Angaraka— Mars— wheels towards the constellation Jyeshta and 
approaches Anuradha as if seeking friendship, foretelling a great slaughter. 
Without doubt, Krishna, a terrible calamity for the Kurus is at hand, 
especially as all the planets oppose the nakshatra Chitra. The Sun spot has 
changed its position and Rahu approaches Surya to devour him. Meteors, 
thundering and shaking, fall from the sky. 

Elephants trumpet loudly, the horses shed tears and shun food and 
water. Mahabaho, these omens forecast a great and universal slaughter. In 
Duryodhana’s army the horses, elephants and soldiers, eat little but excrete 
a lot. Wise men say that these conditions are harbingers of defeat. 


The elephants and horses that belong to the Pandavas are all in good 
spirits and the animals all wheel to the right. These signs augur success. In 
Duryodhana’s army, all the animals move to the left while disembodied 
voices speak overhead, warning of doom. Auspicious birds—mayuras, 
hamsas, kraunchas, chatakas, jivajivas and sankhas—follow the Pandavas, 
while kazhukas, lankas, vakas, hawks, pisachas, jackal packs and swarms of 
bees follow the Kauravas. The Pandava drums boom without being struck, 
while those in Duryodhana’s camp stay silent even when they are beaten. 

Many other signs of defeat manifest themselves in Duryodhana’s 
encampment: water tanks roar like bulls; soldiers are drenched in rains of 
flesh and blood; misty, ethereal edifices with high walls, deep trenches and 
imposing entrances suddenly appear, shimmering in the skies over the Kuru 
camp; and a black ring encircles the Sun. Sunrise and sunset are macabre, 
and jackals howl hideously at these sandhyas. These omens all foretell 
defeat. 

Bizarre birds, all one-winged, one-eyed and one-legged, screech 
horribly, also portending defeat. Other ferocious birds with black wings and 
red legs hover over the Kuru camp at nightfall. Duryodhana’s soldiers show 
hatred for Brahmanas, for their gurus and for all their loyal servants. From 
Duryodhana’s camp the eastern horizon appears red; the south has the hue 
of weapons; and the west the colour of the Earth; and all the four directions 
seem ablaze. I know that all these omens augur grave danger. 

I had a vision, Krishna, in which I saw Yudhishtira and his brothers 
climbing to a palace built on a thousand pillars. They all wore white robes 
and crowns and sat on white thrones. I saw you wrap the blood-dyed earth 
in an uncanny cover of weapons. Yudhishtira climbed upon a heap of bones 
and happily ate payasa and ghrita out of a golden cup. I saw him swallow 
the Earth, which you handed to him. He will surely rule this Bhumi. 

I saw Vrikodara, of fierce deeds, standing on the summit of a mountain 
with his mace in his hand, and he looked as if he was devouring this world. 
For sure, he will slay us all in savage battle. I know that victory follows 
dharma. 

I saw Dhananjaya, wielder of the Gandiva, riding with you on the back 
of a white elephant, and he shone with lustre. I have no doubt, O Krishna, 
that you will kill all the kings led by Duryodhana in the war that will be. 

I saw Nakula and Sahadeva, and that Maharatha Satyaki, adorned with 
white bracelets, white necklaces, white garlands and wearing white robes. 


Those tigers among men sat on grand palanquins borne on men’s shoulders, 
with great royal parasols held over their heads. I saw three of Duryodhana’s 
warriors — Aswatthama, Kripa and Kritavarman of the Sattvatas—also clad 
in white turbans, while all the other kings wore red turbans. 

I saw the Maharathas Bhishma and Drona climbing into a carriage 
drawn by camels, and they rode past Duryodhana and me _ towards 
Agastya’s kingdom. We shall soon find Yamaloka for ourselves. I have no 
doubt that all the kings and I, and indeed the entire assemblage of 
Kshatriyas, will enter the Gandiva fire and die.” 

Krishna said, “Yes, Karna. If you spurn my advice, the Earth will soon 
be destroyed. When a pralaya is at hand, adharma assumes the appearance 
of dharma and lodges itself in the heart.” 

Karna said, “Krishna, if we emerge alive from this great battle, which 
will raze numberless heroic Kshatriyas, we might meet here again. 
Otherwise we shall meet in Swarga and, O Anagha, to me this latter seems 
the only possibility.” 

Saying this, Karna clasped Krishna to him in a fervent embrace. With 
that, he alighted from Krishna’s chariot and, riding in his own gold-decked 
one, the dejected Karna returned here to Hastinapura,’ says Sanjaya.” 


CANTO 144 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “When Krishna’s mission for peace in 
Hastinapura fails, and after he leaves the Kurus and sets out for the 
Pandava camp, Vidura comes to Kunti and speaks to her, slowly, in grief. 

He says, ‘O Jivaputri, mother of living children, you know that I am 
always inclined to peace, but, although I cry myself hoarse, Duryodhana 
pays no heed to what I say. Yudhishtira has as allies the Chedis, the 
Panchalas and the Kekayas; he has Bhima, Arjuna, Krishna, Satyaki and the 
twins. Despite this he remains in Upaplavya, and out of his love for his 
kinsmen, still looks to dharma, seeming weak though he is in fact so 
powerful. Dhritarashtra, though he is old, does not care for peace and, 
intoxicated with pride in his sons, walks a sinful path. 

The evil-mindedness of Jayadratha, Karna, Dusasana and Sakuni has 
caused this strife between cousins. Their sins against Yudhishtira 
Dharmaraja will soon fetch nemesis upon us all. Is there anyone who would 
not be filled with sorrow to see the Kurus persecuting dharma? When 
Krishna returns without having been able to make peace, the Pandavas will 
prepare for war, and the sins of the Kurus will lead to the very race of 
Kshatriyas being annihilated. My mind is filled with these thoughts and I 
get no sleep by day or by night.’ 

Kunti listens to Vidura, who has always wished her sons well and, 
sighing deeply in grief, she thinks to herself, ‘Fie on wealth, for the sake of 


which this great slaughter of kinsmen is about to take place. In this war 
friends will slay friends and kinsmen their own blood. What can be sadder 
than to see the Pandavas, the Chedis, the Panchalas and the Yadavas 
assembled to fight the Kurus? Ah, I see no benefit whatever in war. On the 
other hand, if we do not fight, we face poverty and humiliation. Death is 
preferable to poverty, but the extermination of one’s kinsmen is not victory. 

As I reflect on this my heart wells with sorrow. That Pitamaha Bhishma, 
Acharya Drona and Karna are on Duryodhana’s side sharpens my fear. 
Surely Drona will never fight willingly against his pupils. Why does the 
Pitamaha not show any affection for the Pandavas? That leaves the sinful 
Karna, who follows the deluded Duryodhana who hates the Pandavas. 

Single-mindedly pursuing the ruin of the Pandavas, Karna is powerful 
indeed. This thought is what most burns me now. I will meet him today and 
disclose the truth of his birth to him, and try to draw his heart towards the 
Pandavas. 

When I was a maiden in my father Kuntibhoja’s antahpura, Durvasa 
Muni was pleased by the way I looked after him and gave me a boon of 
mantras. With a trembling heart, I thought of the power of those mantras 
and what Durvasa said: that they were incantations to summon any Deva I 
chose. I was just a girl then, and had not attained puberty; and I thought 
constantly about the mantras. Watched over by my nursemaid and 
surrounded by my sakhis, not wanting to incur any reproach and wanting to 
keep my father’s honour, I thought long about how I could use the secret 
mantras without sinning. 

Finally, I bowed to the Muni in my mind, and from curiosity and 
childish folly, I spoke the mantras to invoke Surya Deva into my 
maidenhood, and that is how Karna was born. Why should this child that I 
held in my virginal womb not obey me, when what I will say to him is both 
dharma and beneficial to himself and his brothers?’ 

After reflecting in this way, Kunti makes a decision. She sets out for the 
sacred Bhagirathi, and arrives on the banks of the Ganga. There she hears 
her son chanting slokas from the Veda. Karna stands facing the east with his 
arms raised above his head. Kunti stands behind him and waits for him to 
complete his prayers. In the noonday heat Kunti begins to wilt, like a faded 
lotus garland; she comes closer and stands in the shade cast by awesome 
Karna’s great body. 


Karna continues his prayers until his back burns from the Sun’s heat and 
his body radiates lustre. At last, he finishes his worship, lowers his arms and 
turning round, he is startled to see Kunti. He greets her respectfully, folding 
his hands together; he bows and speaks gently to her.” 


CANTO 145 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


C6 K arna says, ‘I am Karna, son of Radha and Adhiratha. Devi, what 
brings you here? What can I do for you?’ 

Kunti says, ‘You are Kunti’s son, not Radha’s, and Adhiratha is not your 
father. Karna, you are not a Suta; believe what I say to you. 

You were born to me when I was a girl; I carried you in my womb. My 
son, you were born in Raja Kuntibhoja’s palace. Resplendent Surya Deva, 
who makes everything visible, is your father. You were born in my father’s 
house, wearing ear-rings and armour that were a part of your body, and you 
were radiantly beautiful. It is not right that you remain ignorant of who your 
brothers are and serve Duryodhana. It is a sin. The laws of dharma state that 
a man’s highest duty is to obey and please his father and his mother. His 
mother is the one who most loves her child. 

Evil men have, from avarice, taken Yudhishtira’s wealth, which Arjuna 
won for him. Retrieve it from Dhritarashtra’s sons and enjoy that prosperity. 
Let the Kurus see Karna and Arjuna uniting today in brotherly love; and let 
the evil ones bow to you. Let yours and Arjuna’s names be spoken of in the 
same breath as Krishna’s and Balarama’s. If you two are united, what is 
there in this world that is unattainable? 

O Karna, surrounded by your brothers, you will blaze in glory, even like 
Brahma surrounded by the Devas at a mahayagna. Endowed with every 


virtue, you are my first born. Let the world no more call you a Sutaputra; 
you are a Partha—a son of Pritha, and you are a great tejasvin.”” 


CANTO 146 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “When Kunti has finished speaking, Karna hears 
a voice redolent with love coming from the Sun above. The far away 
voice is Surya Deva’s. 

The voice says, ‘What Pritha says is true. Karna do as your mother tells 
you; great good will come of it.’ 

Though his mother and his natural father have spoken to him, Karna’s 
heart is resolute, for he is devoted to the truth. 

He says, ‘O Kshatriya Devi, I cannot accept what you say, that to obey 
you is my highest dharma. Mother, you abandoned me as soon as I was 
born. This grievous injury not only put my life at risk, but has been 
detrimental to my achievements and fame. If indeed I am a Kshatriya, you 
have deprived me of all my rightful samskaras. An enemy could not have 
done me more harm. 

You mercilessly robbed me of the rites of passage that are my birthright, 
and now you come to demand my obedience. Never until now have you 
cared about my welfare, as a mother should; and you have come to me 
today only for your own good. Who is there who would not be afraid of 
Dhananjaya, who has Krishna as his sarathy? If I go to your sons now, 
everyone would think that I do so because I am afraid. Nobody knows I am 
their brother. If this becomes known on the eve of battle, and I join the 
Pandavas, what would all the Kshatriyas say? 


Dhritarashtra’s sons have given me everything I want, and they have 
worshipped me purely from a desire to make me happy. How can I make a 
mockery of this friendship and render it futile? Even though they have 
initiated hostilities with others, they have always honoured me and bowed 
to me, even as the Vasus do to Vasava. They base their confidence that they 
can conquer their enemies on my might. How can I betray their cherished 
hope? With me as their boat, they would cross the impassable ocean of war. 
How can IJ abandon them, when I am their only refuge? 

This is the time when all those who have received patronage and 
support from Dhritarashtra’s sons should show their gratitude and loyalty. I, 
surely, will fight for them, uncaring of even my life. Sinful, faithless men 
who, at the time to repay the kindness done to them, turn traitors to those 
who have fed them and met their every need, are like thieves who steal their 
master’s food. They will not prosper in this world or in the next. 

I will not lie to you. For Duryodhana’s sake I will fight against your 
sons, putting forth all my strength and might. At the same time, I will be 
compassionate, and I will observe my dharma. Therefore, however 
benevolent your words may be, I cannot obey them. Yet, your pleas shall 
not be in vain. Other than Arjuna, I will not kill your other sons— 
Yudhishtira, Bhima and the twins; I will spare their lives even when I hold 
them in the palm of my hand. 

Of all the warriors in Yudhishtira’s army, it is with Arjuna alone that I 
will fight. If I kill Arjuna, I will achieve great renown, and if he kills me, I 
will yet be covered in glory. Devi, you will always have no less than five 
sons. Five they will number, either including me, or Arjuna, if I am killed.’ 

Kunti trembles in grief and embraces her son, who remains resolute, 
and she says, ‘Karna, even if what you say is true, the Kauravas will 
certainly be killed. Destiny rules supreme. You have sworn you will not 
harm four of your brothers. Remember this oath when you are in the midst 
of battle. Be blessed with good health, my son.’ 

Karna says Tathaastu, and they both leave, each in a different 
direction.” 


CANTO 147 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Krishna returns to Upaplavya from Hastinapura 

and tells the Pandavas all that has transpired. He confers with them 
for a long time, and then goes to his own apartments to rest. The Pandavas 
give leave to Virata and the other kings, and at sunset they say their evening 
prayers. 

With their hearts set on Krishna they think worshipfully of him. At last, 
they bring Krishna into their midst and deliberate again on what they should 
do. 

Yudhishtira says, ‘O you of the eyes like lotus-petals, tell us what you 
said to Duryodhana in the Kuru sabha when you went to Nagapura.’ 

Krishna says, ‘What I said to Duryodhana in Nagapura was honest, 
reasonable and benign. But that evil one paid me no heed.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “When Duryodhana declared his intention to take the 
path of sin, what did the Kuru Pitamaha say to the vindictive prince? What 
did the noble Acharya, the son of Bharadwaja, say? And what did 
Duryodhana’s parents Dhritarashtra and Gandhari say? What did our uncle 
Vidura, who is the best of all those who know dharma, who grieves for us 
whom he loves as his own sons, say to Duryodhana? What did all the kings 
who sat in that ancient court say? Krishna, tell us everything, exactly as it 
happened. 


You have already told us all that Bhishma and Dhritarashtra, as well as 
the others in that sabha, said to Duryodhana, who believes himself wise, 
while he is ruled only by lust and greed. But I wish to hear everything 
again. Lose no time, Krishna, you are our refuge, our lord, our guide.’ 

Krishna says, ‘Rajan, listen to what was said to Duryodhana in the Kuru 
sabha, and remember the words. 

After I had spoken, Duryodhana laughed aloud, at which Bhishma grew 
incensed and said, “Duryodhana, listen to me for the sake of our vamsa. 
Then do whatever you think is best for your family. 

My father Santanu was famed throughout the world. At first, I was his 
only son, but he began to wish for another because the wise say that an only 
son is as good as not having any. He wanted his vamsa to live and his fame 
to spread. Knowing what he wished for, I made the dark Satyavati my step- 
mother and swore the most difficult vow, of lifelong celibacy: for my 
father’s sake and for the continuance of our royal line. You know how I 
could not be king and remain celibate, without breaking my solemn vow. I 
have no regret; I have lived contentedly, keeping my vrata. My step-mother 
bore my younger brother Vichitravirya, mighty-armed and handsome 
supporter of Kuru vamsa. 

When my father attained Swarga I installed Vichitravirya as ruler of the 
kingdom and served him as his subject. Later, I defeated several monarchs 
at the swayamvara for the daughters of the king of Kasi, and I brought 
home suitable wives for him. You have heard all this many times. 

Sometime after, I fought a duel against my guru Parasurama Bhargava, 
and my brother fled from fear of Rama and because his subjects deserted 
him. During this time, he indulged himself entirely in his wives and, 
because of the time he spent with them, was afflicted by consumption and 
died. There was anarchy in our kingdom. 

Indra did not send us a drop of rain, and the subjects, plagued by fear of 
hunger, came to me and said, ‘Your people are on the point of extinction. 
Be our king for our good. End this drought, and be blessed, O perpetuator 
of Santanu’s dynasty. Your subjects suffer from fearsome diseases, and very 
few are left alive. It is incumbent on you to save them, Gangaputra. Put an 
end to our suffering and rule your subjects with dharma. Let your kingdom 
not be destroyed even while you live.’ 

I remained unmoved by their tearful pleas. Remembering dharma, I 
wanted only to be faithful to my vow. Then, Rajan, the citizens, my step- 


mother Kali, our servants, priests, acharyas and many learned Brahmanas, 
all beset with sorrow, begged me to take the throne. 

They said, ‘While you still live will this ancient kingdom that was once 
ruled by the illustrious Pratipa go to ruin? Generous one, be the king for our 
sake.’ 

I joined my hands together and, filled with anguish, I told them about 
the vow I had sworn for my father’s sake. I told them that it was for the 
sake of our kingdom, and especially for my step-mother, that I had taken the 
vow of celibacy and renounced the throne. I begged them not to place the 
burden of kingship on me. 

I joined my hands once more and pacified my step-mother, saying 
repeatedly, ‘Mother, as Santanu’s son, and a Kuru, I cannot break my word. 
I took this vow especially for your sake; and I am your servant and yours to 
command, my loving mother.’ 

I placated her and the people, and then she and I begged Mahamuni 
Vyasa, who was also Satyavati’s son from the Rishi Parasara, to father 
children on my brother’s widows. He granted our prayers. The Rishi 
fathered three sons, Bharatottama: Dhritarashtra, Pandu and Vidura. Your 
father Dhritarashtra was born blind and he could not be king. Instead, the 
noble, mighty and celebrated Pandu ruled the Kuru kingdom; he expanded 
its boundaries immeasurably and the people flourished under his golden 
reign. 

Since Pandu was the king, his sons must rightfully inherit their father’s 
kingdom. Rajan, do not go to war; give them half the kingdom. While I am 
alive, what other man is fit to reign? Do not disregard what I say. My only 
wish is for peace amongst you. I make no distinction between you and 
them, and love all of you equally. 

What I have said to you now is also the opinion of your father, Gandhari 
and Vidura. One must always pay heed to one’s elders; do not ignore what I 
say. Do not destroy all that you have and the very Earth as well.”’” 


CANTO 148 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 K rishna says, “After Bhishma spoke, Drona, always eloquent, says 
to Duryodhana in the midst of the assembled kings, “May you be 
blessed, Duryodhana. Pandu was as devoted to the Kuru vamsa as Pratipa’s 
son Santanu was, and as Devavrata Bhishma is. Pandu was devoted to truth, 
had his senses under control, was virtuous, practised excellent vratas and 
was attentive to all his duties in dharma. Although he was king and 
conqueror, that perpetuator of the Kuru vamsa made over the sovereignty to 
his elder brother Dhritarashtra, of deep wisdom, and to his younger brother 
Vidura. After installing Dhritarashtra on the throne, Pandu went to live in 
the forest with his two wives. 

Vidura, in great humility, placed himself under Dhritarashtra’s 
command and waited on him like a servant, fanning him with palm leaves. 
All the subjects of the kingdom took his lead and submitted to Dhritarashtra 
just as they had to Pandu. 

Having handed the kingdom over to Dhritarashtra and Vidura, Pandu, 
conqueror of hostile cities, wandered the Earth. Vidura, ever devoted to 
dharma, took charge of the treasury, and of administering the kingdom and 
the welfare of its subjects. Bhishma, of the mighty tejas, took charge of the 
army, of making war and peace, and the giving or withholding of gifts to 
other kings. All the time that Dhritarashtra has sat on the throne, the noble 
Vidura stayed near him. 


How could you, who have been born in Dhritarashtra’s dynasty, even 
think of creating a rift in the family? Unite with your brothers the Pandavas 
and enjoy every pleasure. Rajan, I do not say this to you from cowardice or 
for the sake of wealth. Best of kings, the wealth I enjoy is what Bhishma, 
and not you, gave me. I do not desire any means of sustenance from you. 
Where Bhishma is, there Drona must be. 

Do what Bhishma has told you. Parantapa, give the sons of Pandu half 
the kingdom. I was their teacher as much as yours. Indeed, Arjuna is as 
much a son to me as Aswatthama. But, ah, of what use are speeches? 
Victory and dharma go together.” 

Now the virtuous Vidura turned to his uncle Bhishma and, looking him 
in the face, said, “O Devavrata, pay heed to what I say. When Kuru vamsa 
was threatened with extinction you revived it. That is why you are now 
indifferent to my pleas. Duryodhana is a blot on our royal house; and you 
follow his inclinations, although he is evil, ungrateful, and a slave to greed 
and lust. 

Duryodhana disregards his father’s command, which is in keeping with 
dharma and artha, and the Kurus must face the dire consequences of war. O 
Maharajan, do what needs to be done so entire house of Kuru is not 
extinguished. Even as an artist creates a painting, you brought Dhritarashtra 
and me into this world. The Creator creates beings and destroys them; do 
not do as he does, for you are not Him. Do not turn away in indifference 
from the coming extinction of your vamsa, which you see plainly before 
your eyes. If the imminence of a pralaya of blood has robbed even you of 
your vision, then take sannyasa in the forest, and take Dhritarashtra and me 
with you. Otherwise, this very day restrain Duryodhana, who uses deceit as 
wisdom, and rule this kingdom yourself with the sons of Pandu guarding its 
boundaries. 

Relent, O tiger among Kshatriyas. A great slaughter of the Pandavas, 
the Kurus and of other mighty kings is about to happen,” Vidura said, and 
he stopped and sighed deeply, his heart overflowing with sorrow. 

Then, alarmed at the prospect of the destruction of an entire race, King 
Subala’s daughter Gandhari spoke in anger to her sinful son Duryodhana in 
the Kuru sabha, words of dharma and artha. 

She said, “Let all the kings present in this ancient sabha, the twice-born 
Rishis and others who have gathered here listen to me proclaim your guilt 
for the sins that you and your companions have committed. The kingdom of 


the Kurus is inherited in the proper order of succession. This has always 
been the custom of our royal line, but you, of evil soul and inhuman deeds, 
seek to destroy the kingdom. The wise Dhritarashtra now rules the 
kingdom, with the far-sighted Vidura as his advisor. Why do you want the 
kingdom for yourself? What is your right to pass them by? 

Indeed, Dhritarashtra mahatman and Vidura should both be subordinate 
to Bhishma while he is alive. Gangaputra Bhishma has foresworn 
sovereignty for the sake of dharma. That is how Pandu became the king. 
And only his sons are the true kings today. This vast kingdom rightfully 
belongs to the Pandavas, and to their sons and grandsons, as _ their 
inheritance by the laws of succession. 

We must all do as Pitamaha Bhishma says, in accord with Kshatriya 
dharma and for the sake of our kingdom. In obedience to Bhishma’s 
command, Dhritarashtra and Vidura must declare the same thing, as must 
everyone who wishes us well, setting dharma above all else. I say let 
Dharmaputra Yudhishtira, guided by Dhritarashtra and with Bhishma for his 
mentor, rule this kingdom of the Kurus for many long years.””” 


CANTO 149 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “kK rishna says, “Then Dhritarashtra addressed Duryodhana in the 

midst of the assembled monarchs, saying, “Duryodhana my son, 

listen to what I say, and may you be blessed. Obey me if you have any 
respect for your father. 

Soma Deva, the lord of creatures, was the original progenitor of the 
Kuru vamsa. Nahusha’s son Yayati was sixth in descent from Soma; and 
Yayati had five sons who were all Rajarishis. The eldest of them was 
tejasvin Yadu and the youngest was Puru, from whom we are descended. 
Puru’s mother was Vrishaparva’s daughter Sarmishta, and Yadu’s mother 
was Devayani, and thus he was the grandson of Sukra of the immeasurable 
tejas, who is also called Kavya. 

Our ancestor Yadu was mighty, but also arrogant and seized by evil. 
Intoxicated with his prowess, he humiliated all the Kshatriyas of the world; 
and disobeyed his father, and insulted his younger brother. Yadu became 
all-powerful on Earth and, suppressing everyone, he established himself in 
his capital city, which he named Hastinapura. His enraged father cursed him 
and expelled him from the kingdom. The furious Yayati cursed his other 
sons, too, who were obedient to their arrogant eldest brother. He set his 
youngest son Puru, who was obedient and devoted to him, on the throne. 
Thus the eldest son may be passed over and deprived of the kingdom, and 


younger sons may, because of their reverence towards their elders, inherit 
the kingdom. 

Then there was my great-grandfather Pratipa, who was devoted to 
dharma and celebrated through the three worlds. This narasimha, this 
virtuous king, had three sons, all of great renown and like three Devas. 
Devapi was the eldest, Bahlika was second and my grandfather Santanu, of 
the scintillating intellect, the youngest. Devapi, who suffered from an 
ailment to his skin, was endowed with prodigious energy; he was virtuous, 
truthful, and devoted to the service of his father. Respected and popular 
among his subjects, loved by young and old, in cities and villages, Devapi 
was generous, firm in his adherence to dharma, devoted to the good of all 
creatures and obedient to his father and the Brahmanas. His noble brothers 
Bahlika and Santanu loved him dearly. 

In time, in accord with the shastras, Pratipa began to prepare for Devapi 
to inherit the throne, and all the arrangements he made were auspicious. 
However, the Brahmanas and the elders in the kingdom forbade him. 
Hearing this, the voice of the old king became choked with tears and he 
began to grieve for his son. Thus, though Devapi was liberal, virtuous, 
devoted to truth and loved by the subjects, he was deprived of his 
inheritance because of his sickly skin, for the gods do not approve of a king 
who has a physical disability. Those best of Brahmanas did not allow 
Pratipa to enthrone his eldest son as king. Devapi saw how his father 
grieved for him and took sannyasa in the forest. 

Bahlika left his father’s city and lived with his maternal uncle, whose 
rich kingdom he inherited. On Pratipa’s death, Santanu took Bahlika’s leave 
and became king. That is why, though I am the eldest, wisely, and after 
much thought, I was excluded from inheriting the Kuru throne, and, though 
he was younger than me, Pandu became king. 

After his death, Parantapa, our kingdom must pass to his sons. When I 
could not have the kingdom, how can you want it? You are not the son of 
the true king and you have no right to this kingdom. Despite that, you want 
to take what rightfully belongs to another. Dharmatma Yudhishtira is the 
eldest son of the king and this kingdom is his in dharma. This magnanimous 
soul is the sovereign lord of our Kuru vamsa. 

Yudhishtira is devoted to truth, clear thinking, heedful of the advice of 
his well-wishers, honest, loved by all his subjects, kind-hearted, master of 
his passions and a chastiser of criminals and sinners. All the kingly 


attributes dwell in him: forgiveness, renunciation, self-control, a deep 
knowledge of the scriptures, compassion and the ability to rule with dharma 
as his sceptre. 

You are not the son of a king, and are always inclined to sin against 
your own blood. How can ever you appropriate this kingdom that lawfully 
belongs to another? Dispel this delusion and give away half the kingdom 
with the proper share of wealth, animals and other possessions and 
treasures. Then, Duryodhana, you can hope to live a long life with your 
younger brothers.”’”’ 


CANTO 150 
BHAGAVAD-YANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “kK rishna says, ‘Although Bhishma, Drona, Vidura, Gandhari and 

Dhritarashtra spoke to him, the evil one could not be made to see 

sense. Duryodhana ignored them all and left the sabha, his eyes red with 

anger. All the kings he had called upon followed him, prepared to lay down 
their lives for his cause. 

Duryodhana said to those kings, “Today the Pushya nakshatra rises. Let 
us march at once to Kurukshetra!’ And, inexorably propelled by destiny, 
those kings gladly set out with their armies, making Bhishma their Senapati, 
their Commander-in-chief. 

Eleven akshauhinis of troops have assembled on the Kaurava side. At 
the head of that host, Bhishma shines, flying the flag with the palmyra 
emblem on his chariot. 

In view of all that has happened, do what you think proper, Yudhishtira. 
I have told you everything that Bhishma, Drona, Vidura, Gandhari and 
Dhritarashtra said in my presence. I did my very best to establish brotherly 
feelings between yourselves and your cousins: for the preservation of the 
race of Kuru and for the survival and prosperity of the Earth’s people. 
When conciliation failed, I used the art of dissent by creating disunity 
amongst his warriors, and I spoke about all your extraordinary powers and 
feats. 


When Duryodhana showed no interest in my attempts at conciliation, I 
had all the kings gather together and tried to create dissension amongst 
them. I showed them strange and terrible manifestations. I rebuked those 
kings and ridiculed Duryodhana; I terrified Karna and upbraided Sakuni for 
contriving the game of dice. I tried once more to disunite the kings with 
intrigue; and again, I resorted to diplomacy. To unite the Kurus, and given 
the uniqueness of the circumstances, I spoke also of charity. 

I said, “As subjects of Dhritarashtra, Bhishma and Vidura, the sons of 
Pandu will sacrifice their pride. You keep the kingdom; let them not have 
any power; let it all be as Dhritarashtra, Bhishma and Vidura decide. Let the 
kingdom be yours. Give just five villages to the Pandavas. Best of kings, the 
Pandavas deserve your father’s support and protection.” 

That malevolent one would still not yield; Duryodhana said he would 
not give up even land that would cover the point of a needle. The only 
method one can use against this evil man is danda, punishment. Why, even 
as we speak, those kings have already marched to Kurukshetra. 

I have told you everything that happened in the Kuru sabha. Pandava, 
they will not give you your kingdom without battle. Death awaits them, and 
they have chosen to become the cause of an apocalyptic war that will see 
the very race of Kshatriyas perish.’” 


CANTO 151 
SAINYA NIRYANA PARVA 


V aisampayana said, “Dharmaraja Yudhishtira now says to his brothers 

in Krishna’s presence, ‘You have heard all that happened in the 
Kuru sabha; you have understood what Krishna said. Purushottamas, array 
our troops for battle. 

Seven akshauhinis of fighting men have gathered to give us victory. 
Listen to the names of the seven celebrated warriors who will lead these 
akshauhinis. They are Drupada, Virata, Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandin, 
Satyaki, Chekitana and Bhimasena. These heroes are learned in the Vedas; 
they are valiant, and they have all practised excellent vratas. They are 
modest, conversant with politics, Maharathas and masters of mundane 
weapons and astras of the gods. 

Tell us now, Sahadeva, my wise brother, which warrior will be our 
Senapati? Who will lead our seven akshauhinis in battle, who knows about 
all the divisions of our forces? And who can withstand Pitamaha Bhishma, 
who will be an unimaginable fire shooting arrows of flame. Tell us, 
Narashardula, who you think is capable of being our Commander?’ 

Sahadeva says, ‘Mighty Virata, king of the Matsyas, is closely related to 
us; he sympathises with our cause; he is powerful, knows dharma, is skilled 
in weapons and irresistible in battle. We should rely on him to win our 
kingdom back, for he can surely withstand Bhishma and all the other 
Maharathas..’ 


The eloquent Nakula says, “There is one, who is an elder, who is learned 
in the Shastras, whose family and birth are impeccable and who is widely 
revered. He is blessed with modesty, strength and prosperity; he is deeply- 
versed in all branches of learning; he has studied the astra shastra under 
Rishi Bharadvaja; he is invincible; he is steadfast in dharma; he boldly 
challenges Drona and Bhishma; he belongs to one of the foremost royal 
houses; he is a renowned leader of armies; he resembles a tree of a hundred 
branches, so many sons and grandsons surround him. Impelled by wrath, 
this king, with his wife, performed the most arduous tapasya to effect the 
death of Drona; this Kshatriya is an ornament of any sabha; this bull among 
monarchs cherishes us as a father would. I speak of our father-in-law 
Drupada, and he should have full command of our army. 

I believe that he will withstand Drona and Bhishma in battle, for he is 
Drona’s peer and as much a master of the devastras as the Acharya.’ 

After the two sons of Madri express their opinions, Indra’s son, Arjuna, 
his father’s equal, says, ‘There is a mighty-armed, celestial man, who was 
born from fire through austere tapasya and Rishis being gratified. He 
emerged full-grown from a sacrificial fire armed with bow and sword, clad 
in iron mail and mounted on a chariot, yoked to superb horses, the clatter of 
whose wheels was as deep as the roar of massed thunderclouds. This 
Kshatriya is endowed with lionish energy and strength, and leonine are his 
shoulders, arms and chest; even his voice is like the lion’s roar. This 
splendid hero is handsome with a chiselled face, perfect teeth, round 
cheeks, long arms, sturdy thighs, large eyes, strong legs and a powerful 
frame. 

This prince, who cannot be pierced by weapons of any kind, and who 
looks like an elephant with rent temples, is Dhrishtadyumna. He is truthful 
in speech and has his senses under control; he was born to kill Drona. 

It is Dhrishtadyumna who will resist Bhishma’s arrows, which look like 
snakes with fiery tongues and strike with the fierceness of thunderbolts, 
which are as swift as Yama’s dutas and which fall like flames consuming 
everything they touch, and which so far only Parasurama Bhargava could 
bear in battle. Rajan, I do not see any man other than Dhrishtadyumna who 
will withstand Devavrata Bhishma. 

Blessed with lightness of hand, a master of every vyuha of war, and 
accoutred in impenetrable mail, this brilliant Kshatriya is like the lord of a 
great elephant herd. Only Dhrishtadyumna is fit to be our Senapati.’ 


Bhima says, ‘O king, Rishis and Siddhas have said that Drupada’s son 
Sikhandin was born to kill Bhishma. On the battlefield, with his devastras, 
he looks like the illustrious Rama himself. I do not see the man who can 
cleave Sikhandin’s kavacha when he stands in his chariot ready for battle. 
No warrior, other than Sikhandin, can kill Bhishma. I think that only 
Sikhandin is fit to be our Senapati.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Rajan, Krishna knows the strength and weakness of 
everything in the universe; he knows the mind of every man here. Be he a 
Maharatha or not, be he old or young, let Krishna choose the man who will 
lead my forces. Krishna is the bedrock of our victory or defeat. In him our 
lives rest, our kingdom, our prosperity or adversity, our happiness or 
sorrow. He is the Ordainer and Creator; in him dwells the fruition of our 
endeavours. Yes, let Krishna name the leader of our force. 

And let him tell us his choice now, for night draws near. Once Krishna 
has chosen our Senapati, we will worship that man with offerings of 
weapons, flowers and perfumes, and then under Krishna’s will, we will 
march into battle.’ 

The lotus-eyed Krishna looks at Arjuna and says, ‘Rajan, I approve of 
all the powerful warriors that each of you has named to be your Senapati. 
All of them can withstand your enemies. They can affright Indra himself in 
battle, let alone the greedy and evil sons of Dhritarashtra. 

Mahabaho, for your sake, I made great efforts to prevent the war and 
bring about peace. We have discharged our duty to dharma. Even the most 
critical man cannot fault us. Foolish Duryodhana has lost all good sense; he 
thinks that he is a great Maharatha, and, though weak with sins, imagines he 
is strong. 

Array your troops quickly, for war is the only way to retrieve your 
kingdom. When they see Arjuna with Satyaki behind him, when they face 
Abhimanyu and the five sons of Draupadi, and Virata, Drupada and our 
other mighty kings, all of them lords of akshauhinis, Dhritarashtra’s sons 
will not stand their ground. 

Our army is great and invincible; it is inexorable. Our forces will raze 
Dhritarashtra’s legions. And for our Senapati, I name _ Parantapa 
Dhrishtadyumna.’” 


CANTO 152 
SAINYA NIRYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “When Krishna has spoken, all the kings are 

filled with joy and shout out their delight. The troops swiftly begin 
to array themselves, calling out Draw up! Draw up! The air is filled with 
the whinnying of horses, the trumpeting of elephants, the rumble of chariot 
wheels, the blare of conches and the booming of drums, making a 
tremendous din. The Pandava host teems with chariots, foot-soldiers, horses 
and elephants; and the invincible Pandava warriors bustle, putting on their 
armour and shouting battle-cries; and they look like the turbulent Ganga in 
spate, churning with fierce eddies and waves. 

At the van of the army march Bhimasena, Madri’s two sons, Subhadra’s 
son, Draupadi’s five sons and Dhrishtadyumna of the Prishata vamsa. 
Behind Bhimasena march the Prabhadrakas and the Panchalas. The joyous 
roar made by the marching hosts is like the boom of the sea at high tide on a 
new moon night. Such is the tumult that it seems to reach the heavens, as 
those warriors march in joy. 

Kuntiputra Yudhishtira marches with them, accompanied by his chariots 
and other conveyances to transport food, fodder for the animals, tents, 
carriages, draught animals, treasury-chests, war-machines and weapons, 
surgeons and physicians, even invalids and weak soldiers, attendants and 
camp-followers. 


Panchali remains in Upaplavya with the noblewomen of the household, 
and surrounded by her servants and maids. To protect them and safeguard 
their treasures, soldiers are posted in a circle around them and more men in 
a vigilant, mobile outer ring. The Pandavas are ready to set out with their 
awesome host. First they give gifts of cattle and gold to the Brahmanas, 
who walk around them and utter blessings; and then the sons of Pandu 
march, riding in jewelled chariots. 

Behind Yudhishtira march the Kekaya princes, Dhrishtaketu, the prince 
of Kasi, Sreniman, Vasudana and the invincible Sikhandin, all men in their 
prime, wearing shimmering armour, bearing weapons and glittering with 
rich jewels. Bringing up the rear are Virata, Dhrishtadyumna the son of 
Yajnasena of the Somakas, Susarman, Kuntibhoja, Dhrishtadyumna’s sons, 
forty-thousand chariots, five times as many horsemen, foot-soldiers 
numbering ten times as many as those, and sixty-thousand elephants?. 
Anadhrishti, Chekitana, Dhrishtaketu and Satyaki ride in formation around 
Krishna and Arjuna. 

Those warriors arrive at the field of Kurukshetra in battle-array and, like 
a herd of bellowing bulls, the Parantapas blow their conches; Krishna and 
Dhananjaya sound theirs as well. The Pandava army hears the thunderous 
boom of the Panchajanya and rejoices. The Earth, the skies and the oceans 
resound with the leonine roars of those warriors, mingled with the blare of 
conches and drum beats.’” 


2The actual numbers should far exceed these, given the composition of an akshauhini. 


CANTO 153 
SAINYA NIRYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Yudhishtira orders his troops to set up camp on a 

part of the field that is flat, cool and rich in fodder and fuel to burn. 
At this delightful, fertile and auspicious site, where no cemeteries, temples, 
shrines, asramas or other sanctified places will be violated, Yudhishtira 
establishes his camp. 

After the animals have rested, the Pandava monarch rises and, 
surrounded by hundreds of thousands of kings, stands forth in joy that this 
hour is upon them. Krishna and Arjuna range the perimeters of the field, 
putting to flight hundreds of Dhritarashtra’s soldiers posted there as sentries. 
Dhrishtadyumna and Satyaki supervise the measurement of the camp 
boundaries. Krishna orders the soldiers to dig a moat around the camp and 
to fill it by diverting the clear, pure water of the sacred lake Hiranvati, 
where a holy asrama is located, and whose bed is free of sludge and 
pebbles. He has soldiers stationed there as guards. Krishna instructs the 
other kings who are Yudhishtira’s allies to establish their camps and erect 
their tents, exactly as the Pandavas have done. 

Lakhs of rich and impregnable tents are put up, separately for each of 
the kings; and they look like palaces, replete with food, drink and fuel to 
cook and warm the nights. Hundreds of skilled and experienced workmen 
are engaged in creating and fortifying the camp; surgeons and physicians, 
experts in their fields, are provided with everything they might need. In 


special pavilions, veritable mountains of bows and bow-strings, armour, 
weapons, honey, ghee, powdered lac, water, cattle-feed, chaff, coal, heavy 
machines, spears, lances, battleaxes, breast-plates, swords and quivers are 
heaped. Countless war elephants covered in armour and spiked mail, giant 
tuskers that can crush lakhs of fighting men, are tethered to iron stakes and 
pillars. 

O Bhaarata, when they learn that the Pandavas have camped on that 
field, numerous other kings arrive from their respective kingdoms, with 
their legions and animals, to support the sons of Pandu. Many of the kings 
who come to ensure the Pandavas’ success have practised strict 
brahmacharya, imbibed consecrated Soma rasa and have given generous 
gifts to Brahmanas at yagnas.” 


CANTO 154 
SAINYA NIRYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


J anamejaya said, “What measures does Duryodhana take when he hears 

that Yudhishtira has come with his army and set up camp on 
Kurukshetra, ready for battle under Krishna’s protection, supported by 
Virata and Drupada with their sons, surrounded by the Kekayas, the 
Vrishnis and numberless other kings, and by countless mighty Maharathas, 
and looking like glorious Indra surrounded by the Adityas? 

O Mahatman, I want to hear in detail all that happened in Kurujangala 
on that horrific occasion. The son of Pandu, with Krishna, Virata, Drupada, 
the Panchala prince Dhrishtadyumna, the Maharatha Sikhandin and the 
mighty Yudhamanyu, whom even the gods cannot withstand, could strike 
fear into the hearts of all the Devas with Indra at their head. O you of 
tapodhana, tell me everything that the Kurus and the Pandavas did, just as it 
happened.” 

Vaisampayana said, “When Krishna leaves the Kuru sabha, Duryodhana 
says to Karna, Dusasana and Sakuni, “Kesava has gone to the sons of 
Pritha, without fulfilling his goal. He is furious and will stir up the 
Pandavas. He is anxious to see a war between me and Pandavas, and 
Bhimasena and Arjuna are of the same mind. Yudhishtira, who has no 
animosity, is influenced by Bhimasena and, besides, I have indeed 
persecuted him and his brothers. Virata and Drupada, against whom I have 


fought, are obedient to Krishna, and both have become leaders of 
Yudhishtira’s forces. The war will be savage and terrible. 

With meticulous care and heedfulness, make preparations for war. Let 
all the kings who are my allies pitch their thousands of tents on 
Kurukshetra. Their tents must be large, well protected and within easy reach 
of plentiful water and fuel; their camps should be in positions where the 
enemy cannot sever communications and supplies between them; they must 
be stocked with a plenitude of all kinds of weapons and adorned with 
streamers and flags. Have the road from our capital levelled in preparation 
for the march of our armies. Make a proclamation today, at once, that we 
will set out tomorrow.’ 

Saying Tathaastu, those great warriors make arrangements for the kings, 
who hear Duryodhana’s command and rise from their thrones, now focusing 
their Kshatriya wrath on the enemy. 

The kings massage and flex their mace-like arms that dazzle with gold 
bracelets and are smeared with sandalwood paste and daubed with fine 
perfumes. With their lotus-like hands, they tie their turbans, fasten their 
upper and lower garments and put on their ornaments. Maharathas 
supervise the equipping of their chariots; syces harness the horses; mahouts 
prepare the elephants. The warriors don kavachas made of gold and arm 
themselves with every sort of weapon. Foot-soldiers pick up their weapons 
and put on their gold-inlaid armour. And, O Bhaarata, Duryodhana’s capital 
city Hastinapura, filled by these jubilant warlike millions, looks festive. 

With the excitement of impending battle, the city swells like the ocean 
at high tide; the vast crowds of the people are its current; the chariots, 
elephants and horses are its fish; the tumult of conches and drums is the 
ocean’s roar; the treasure chests are the jewels on the ocean floor; the 
warriors’ ornaments and armour are its waves and their shining weapons are 
its surf; the rows of houses are the mountains on the shore; and the masses 
of chariots are the lakes on the sea bed. 

His warriors shine on Duryodhana like the Moon over the ocean, 
making him look like the ocean at moonrise.” 


CANTO 155 
SAINYA NIRYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Yudhishtira remembers what Krishna said, and 

says to him, ‘O Krishna, how could Duryodhana say what he did? 
Ever glorious one, what should we do? How shall we conduct ourselves so 
we do not swerve from Kshatriya dharma? 

You know how Duryodhana, Karna and Sakuni think, and you know my 
brothers’ and my mind as well. You have heard what Vidura and Bhishma 
said, as well as Kunti’s wise message to us. But set all that aside, and you 
tell us unequivocally, Krishna, what is best for us.’ 

In a voice that booms as deeply as thunderclouds, or great drumbeats, 
Krishna says, ‘What I said to Duryodhana in his sabha was to his advantage 
and in keeping with dharma and artha, but I got no response from the Kuru 
prince, whose wisdom has been replaced by delusion and deceit. That 
sinner does not pay the slightest heed to Bhishma, Vidura or to me. He 
relies just on Karna, and assumes he has already won the war. 

Black-hearted Duryodhana even wanted to make me his captive, but he 
did not succeed. Neither Bhishma nor Drona said anything about that; and 
all, except Vidura, follow Duryodhana’s lead. 

Subala’s son Sakuni, Karna and Dusasana, all equally foolish, 
constantly give Duryodhana evil counsel about what he should do. Is there 
any use in my repeating everything that Duryodhana said? Suffice it to say 
that the wretch bears you nothing but ill will. More sinfulness resides in 


Duryodhana’s black heart than in all the kings and all the men in your army 
put together. As for us, we do not want to make peace with the Kauravas at 
the cost of losing what is ours. Yudhishtira, war is the only course open to 
you.’ 

All the kings hear Krishna and wordlessly look at Yudhishtira, who 
understands their silence and quietly tells Bhima, Arjuna and the twins to 
see that their forces are arrayed for battle. His command passes around like 
light, and a great tumult rises in the Pandava host and fills the warriors with 
joy. Yudhishtira, however, sighs, seeing in his mind’s eye the impending 
massacre of the undeserving. 

He says to Bhima and Arjuna, ‘I went into exile in the forest and 
suffered to avoid the very calamity that now overtakes us. The thing that we 
strove for so intensely slips out of our grasp even as if because of our 
striving for it. Instead, Kali Yuga comes to us uninvited. How are we going 
to fight against our revered elders, whom we must not kill for any reason 
whatever? What kind of victory shall we achieve by slaying our acharyas?’ 

Seeing Yudhishtira’s mood, Arjuna repeats everything Krishna has said, 
and he says to his brother, “Rajan, you know and understand what Kunti 
and Vidura said, which Krishna also affirms. I am certain that neither 
Vidura nor Kunti would say anything that is adharma or sinful. Kuntiputra, 
we cannot turn away from war.’ 

Krishna vouchsafes what Arjuna says, and then, O Rajan, with their 
soldiers, Pandu’s sons pass the night in some hope, and even happiness, 
their minds now resolved on war.” 


CANTO 156 
SAINYA NIRYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “When the night has passed, Duryodhana deploys 

his army of eleven akshauhinis, in proper order. He divides men, 
elephants, chariots and horses into three classes, superior, medium and 
inferior, and sets them in the front, middle and rear of his ranks. 

Well equipped and cared for is Duryodhana’s army: it has timber and 
wooden planks for repairing damage to the chariots in the battle; large 
containers of tiger-skins and other stiff leathers to encase the sides of the 
chariots; and barbed javelins. Elephants and horses carry quivers full of iron 
spears, and foot soldiers carry heavy wooden clubs. Flagstaffs fly vivid 
banners; long, heavy arrows for bows are heaped in hillocks, as are all sorts 
of nooses and lassoes, armour of many kinds and in every size, and short, 
sharp clubs made of wood. Oil and sand; earthen pots filled with poisonous 
snakes, pulverised lac and other inflammable materials; short spears with 
tinkling bells; weapons of iron and machines for hurling hot oil, water and 
stones; whistling hardwood clubs, wax, heavy mallets, spiked clubs, 
plough-poles and poisoned arrows: all these are stocked in plenty. Long 
syringes for spraying hot oil over the enemy, planks of cane, battle-axes, 
forked lances, spiked gauntlets, axes and pointed iron-spikes; chariots 
whose sides are covered with tiger- and leopard-skins; razor-sharp discs, 
horns and every other weapon imaginable; kuthara axes, spades, cloths 
soaked in oil and ghee: these, too, are stocked in endless store. 


Handsome warriors glitter in their gold embroidered battle-dress; they 
are radiant in jewels and gemstones. Kshatriyas of noble birth, in glittering 
kavacha, all master horsemen, swordsmen and archers, ride in splendid 
chariots, which carry stores of potent medicaments for wounds and are 
drawn by horses that have rows of bells and pearls on their heads; they fly 
fine banners on towering, richly ornamented flagstaffs; they bear loads of 
shields, swords, spears, slender javelins that can be flung far and spiked 
maces. Each ratha is yoked to four pedigreed horses; each carries a hundred 
bows; and each has one sarathy for the pair of horses in front, and two for 
the horses yoked to the wheels on either side; and all three charioteers are 
men of the highest skill. These chariots, numbering thousands, protected 
even like fortified towns and unassailable, are positioned on all sides. 

The elephants, too, are decked with rows of bells, pearls and other 
ornaments; on their backs each mighty beast carries seven warriors and, so, 
look like jewelled hills. Two of the warriors are armed with hooks, two are 
archers, two are expert swordsmen, and one is armed with a lance and 
trident. Duryodhana’s army teems with countless war-elephants, which bear 
loads of weapons and quivers filled with arrows, and all the great beasts are 
devastating in battle. 

Thousands of richly caparisoned horses fly their heroic riders’ flags. 
Hundreds of thousands of these well-broken and superbly trained steeds 
stand patient and docile before the war, neither restive nor whinnying in any 
excitement, though knowing full well why they are here. 

Hundreds of thousands of foot-soldiers of diverse races, wearing golden 
ornaments and armour of diverse hues and kinds, armed with a variety of 
weapons, have all come as part of the eleven teeming akshauhinis. Every 
chariot is protected by ten elephants, every elephant by ten horses and every 
horse by ten foot-soldiers. A large force is kept to regroup broken ranks, 
and this reserve force has countless chariots each with fifty elephants 
surrounding it; one hundred horsemen, and seven foot-soldiers follow each 
horse. 

One sena consists of five hundred chariots, five hundred elephants, one 
thousand five hundred horses and two thousand five hundred foot-soldiers. 
Ten senas make a pritana, and ten pritanas make a vahini. In common 
parlance, however, the words sena, vahini, pritana, dhwajini, chamu, 
akshauhini and varuthini are used in the same sense. 


The brilliant Duryodhana arrays his force in this manner, and, between 
the two sides there are eighteen akshauhinis, with seven in the Pandava 
army and eleven for the Kauravas. 

Two hundred and fifty men make a patti. Three pattis make a 
senamukha or gulma. Three gulmas make a gana. In Duryodhana’s army, 
there are hundreds and thousands of such ganas of able warriors, all 
impatient for battle. Duryodhana selects from among them the bravest, most 
intelligent men and makes these the leaders of his troops. He places an 
akshauhini of troops under each of those Purushottamas—Kripa, Drona, 
Salya, Jayadratha the king of the Sindhus, Sudakshina of the Kambojas, 
Kritavarman, Drona’s son Aswatthama, Karna, Bhurisravas, Subala’s son 
Sakuni and the mighty Bahlika. The king summons them every day and at 
all hours, looks after them himself, talks to them and honours them 
personally, making them and their followers eager to please him.” 


CANTO 157 
SAINYA NIRYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “With all his allied kings gathered round, 

Duryodhana, with folded hands, says to Bhishma, ‘Without a great 
Senapati, even the mightiest army can be crushed in battle like a swarm of 
ants. Two intelligent men will have different opinions and are often jealous 
of each other’s prowess. 

Wise one, I have heard the story of how, once, the Brahmanas, fighting 
under a banner of Kusa grass, clashed with the mighty Kshatriyas of the 
Haihaya clan. Pitamaha, the Vaisyas and the Sudras followed the 
Brahmanas, so that three varnas were on one side with the Kshatriyas alone 
on the other. In the battles that ensued, the Kshatriyas vanquished the 
combined force of the three varnas. The Brahmanas asked the Kshatriyas to 
explain how this had happened. 

The truthful ones among the Kshatriyas said to them, “In battle we obey 
the orders of one man blessed with great intelligence, while your forces are 
not united, but each follow different paths.” 

The Brahmanas made one amongst themselves as their Senapati, a man 
who was brave, a skilled tactician and diplomat, and they vanquished the 
Kshatriyas. Those who appoint a seasoned, courageous, wise and sinless 
man, devoted to the good of his men, always win battles. 

You are equal to Usanas himself, and always look to my welfare; you 
are invincible and devoted to dharma. Pitamaha, you be our Senapati. You 


shine amongst us like the Sun among the planets, like the Moon over 
fragrant herbs, like Kubera among the Yakshas, like Indra among the 
Devas, like Meru among mountains, like Suparna among birds, like Kumara 
among the Devas, like Havyavaha among the Vasus. If you protect us, as 
Sakra protects the Devas, even the gods will not be able to defeat us. Ride 
at the head of our forces, as Agni’s son Kumara leads the Devas; we will 
follow you like calves behind a mighty bull.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Mahabaho, what you say might be true, but the 
Pandavas are as dear to me as you are and, although I will fight on your side 
because I have given you my word, I must be mindful of their welfare as 
well. There is no warrior on Earth who is my equal, except Arjuna. He is 
brilliant, and is a great master of the devastras, but he will never engage me 
in open war. 

With all the astras I command I can destroy this universe of Devas, 
Asuras, Rakshasas and Manavas in an instant, but Pandu’s sons are 
invincible, even by me. But every day I will kill ten thousand enemy 
warriors and denude the Pandava forces, as long as I am not killed in battle. 

Then, there is one more condition that you must fulfil before I accept 
the command of your forces. Either Karna or I shall fight, but not both 
together. The Sutaputra always boasts and compares his prowess with 
mine.’ 

Karna says, ‘O king, as long as Gangaputra Bhishma lives I will not 
fight. After he is killed, I will fight Arjuna.’ 

Duryodhana makes Bhishma the Senapati of all his army and distributes 
generous gifts all round. Installed in his command, Bhishma blazes in 
splendour. The king orders musicians to joyfully beat drums and sound the 
conches in their hundreds of thousands. Loud roars of soldiers and the 
sounds of their animals fill the air. From the cloudless sky bloody showers 
rain down, soaking the ground; whirlwinds and earthquakes shake the 
Earth; horses whinny in fear, elephants trumpet, and the soldiers’ hearts 
tremble in dread. Ethereal voices are heard, and falling meteors flash across 
the sky; jackals howl hideously, foretelling a great cataclysm. A hundred 
other dreadful omens appear at Bhishma’s installation as the Senapati of 
Duryodhana’s army. 

Duryodhana gives an abundance of cattle and gold to Brahmanas and 
asks for their blessings. Basking in their benedictions and surrounded by his 
troops, with Bhishma in front and his brothers alongside him, Duryodhana 


marches to Kurukshetra with his immense host. He inspects the plain with 
Karna and decides to camp on a level field, a pleasant and fertile place, rich 
in grass and firewood, and it dazzles with that awesome force of men, their 
armour, ornaments, gold and weapons, like Hastinapura.” 


CANTO 158 
SAINYA NIRYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


J anamejaya said, “When Yudhishtira hears that Ganga’s mahatman son 

Bhishma, first among Kshatriyas, Pitamaha of the Bhaaratas, foremost 
of all regents, and Brihaspati’s equal in wisdom, deep as the ocean in 
character, calm and unshakable as Himavat, like Brahma himself in nobility, 
like the Sun in tejas; Bhishma who razes whole armies single-handedly, 
even as Indra does, has been made Senapati of the Kaurava army on the eve 
of the horrific war to be, the prospect of which makes the hair on men’s 
bodies stand on end, until death strips him of the command, what did 
Pandu’s mighty-armed son, Yudhishtira Dharmaraja say? What did Bhima 
and Arjuna say? And what did Krishna say?” 

Vaisampayana said, “When the news reaches him, Yudhishtira calls his 
brothers and Krishna to him. 

He says calmly, ‘Make your rounds among the men and take 
precautions by putting on your armour. Our first encounter will be with our 
Pitamaha. Inform the leaders of our seven akshauhinis.’ 

Krishna says, ‘Bharatarishabha, let it be as you say. I approve. Let us 
summon the seven lords of our akshauhinis’ 

Yudhishtira summons Drupada, Virata, Satyaki bull of the Sini vamsa, 
Dhrishtadyumna prince of the Panchalas, Dhrishtaketu, Sikhandin, and 
Sahadeva lord of the Magadhas, all of whom are eager for battle. 
Dhrishtadyumna, born from a sacrificial fire, is Senapati of the Pandava 


forces, the Panchala prince born to kill Drona. Yudhishtira sets Arjuna, of 
the curly hair, at the head of the other seven commanders, and gives 
Krishna charge of being Arjuna’s sarathy and guide. 

Upon learning that the war of the age is at hand, many other kings come 
to the Pandava encampment to support them: Halayudha with Akrura, 
Gada, Samba, Uddhava, Rukmini’s son Pradyumna, Ahuka’s sons, 
Charudeshna and more. Mighty-armed and handsome Balarama arrives, 
surrounded by the foremost Vrishni warriors, who resemble a herd of 
mighty tigers, and he looks like Indra in the midst of the Maruts. He arrives 
in his lion’s gait, wearing his customary blue silken robes, the corners of his 
eyes red from drink, and looking like the peak of Mount Kailasa. 

Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, Krishna of matchless effulgence, Vrikodara of 
terrible deeds, Arjuna wielder of Gandiva and all the other kings there rise 
from their places and offer worship to Balarama; and Yudhishtira touches 
his hands lovingly in greeting. Rama, in return, greets them all, with 
Krishna at their head and, respectfully saluting Virata and Drupada, he sits 
beside Yudhishtira on the same seat. 

After the other kings have resumed their seats, Rohini’s son Rama looks 
at Krishna and begins to speak. 

He says, “This great and brutal slaughter is inevitable. It is fate’s decree, 
and it cannot be averted. I hope to see all of you, with your friends, come 
safely and uninjured out of this war. Without doubt, all the Kshatriyas of the 
world who are assembled here have reached the end of their days. This war 
without precedent, this war like no other will cover the Earth with flesh and 
blood. 

Many times I said to Krishna, “Madhusudana, be impartial to all that are 
related to us in the same way. As are the Pandavas to us, so is Duryodhana. 
Give Dhritarashtra’s son the same help you do Yudhishtira. Indeed, he 
always asks for it.” 

However, for your sake, Krishna ignored what I said. For Arjuna’s sake, 
he has devoted himself entirely to your cause. I am certain that a Pandava 
victory is what he wants. As for me, I dare not face the world without 
Krishna by my side. That is why I aspire to whatever Krishna seeks to 
achieve. However, Bhima and Duryodhana are both my disciples and I love 
them equally. Hence, I will go to the tirtha of the Saraswati to bathe, for I 
cannot be indifferent to the slaughter of the Kauravas.’ 


Mahabaho Balarama takes leave of the Pandavas and, preventing 
Krishna from following him, sets out on his journey to the sacred river.” 


CANTO 159 
SAINYA NIRYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “At this time, there comes to the Pandava camp 
Bhishmaka’s son Rukmi, one of the most truthful men in the world. 
The Rajarishi Bhishmaka, also named Hiranyaroman, is Indra’s friend; he is 
the most illustrious of the descendants of Bhoja; and he is the ruler of the 
whole southern country. Rukmi was a disciple of that lion among the 
Kimpurushas, Drona, who lived on Gandhamadana Mountain. He learnt the 
entire astra shastra of four divisions from his guru, and also obtained the 
celestial bow Vijaya, which once belonged to Indra, and which is as 
powerful as the Gandiva and Krishna’s Saranga. 

Three celestial bows were owned by the lords of heaven: Varuna owned 
the Gandiva, the Vijaya belonged to Indra, and Vishnu the Saranga; all of 
them struck fear in the hearts of enemy warriors. Indra’s son Arjuna had the 
Gandiva from Agni after he burnt down Khandava Vana, and Rukmi had 
the Vijaya from Drona. Krishna obtained the Saranga when he baffled the 
Asura Mura’s paasas, deadly nooses, slew that demon, and then vanquished 
Bhumi’s son Naraka Asura to recover Aditi’s jewelled earrings, sixteen 
thousand exquisite women and various jewels and gems of beauty and 
power. 

Rukmi, who has the Vijaya, whose twang is like the roar of 
thunderclouds, comes to the Pandavas, and fills the universe with dread. 


The heroic Rukmi was arrogant of his might and, unable to tolerate 
Krishna’s abduction of his sister Rukmini during her swayamvara, he set 
out in pursuit, swearing that he would not return to his city without killing 
Krishna. With a large army of four kinds of forces, clad in beautiful mail 
and armed with every kind of weapon, and looking like the swollen Ganga, 
Rukmi went after Krishna. 

When he overtook Krishna, despite the power of every punya that 
tapasya can possibly confer, Rukmi was routed. In shame, he did not to 
return to his capital Kundina, but built a great new city for himself in the 
very place where Krishna vanquished him, and he called it Bhojataka. He 
filled the city with innumerable soldiers, elephants and horses, and it 
became renowned throughout the world. 

Now, this great Kshatriya and tejasvin enters the Pandava camp clad in 
mail, bearing many bows, lances, swords and quivers, and with an 
akshauhini of troops. He marches with his vast army under a flag as bright 
as the Sun, and comes haughtily before the Pandavas, expressing his wish 
to serve under Krishna’s command. Yudhishtira comes forward and pays his 
respects, and the Pandavas worship him and praise him. He salutes them in 
return and rests for a while with his troops. 

Then he addresses Arjuna grandly in the presence of the assembled 
Kshatriyas, saying ‘If, Panduputra, you are afraid, I am here to support you 
in battle. Your enemies will not withstand me. No man in this world is my 
equal in prowess. I will slay whichever of your enemies you ask me to. I 
will kill Drona, Kripa, Bhishma or Karna. Let all the kings who are here 
step aside; I will annihilate all your enemies myself and make a gift of the 
Earth to you.’ 

When Rukmi says this in the presence of Yudhishtira, Krishna, their 
allied kings and all the others in the camp, Arjuna looks at Krishna and 
Yudhishtira and replies, smiling, “Having been born into the Kuru vamsa, 
and especially being a son of Pandu; having had Drona for my guru and 
having Krishna for my ally; and having the bow Gandiva for my weapon, 
how can I be afraid? 

O Kshatriya, when I fought the mighty Gandharvas to free Duryodhana, 
who was there to help me? When countless Devas and Danavas united 
against me in Khandava vana, who fought by my side? When I fought the 
Nivatakavachas and the Kalakeyas, who was my ally? When I fought 
countless Kurus outside Virata’s city, who helped me in battle? 


I, who have paid due obeisance to Rudra, Sakra, Vaisravana, Yama, 
Varuna, Pavaka, Kripa, Drona and Krishna before going to war; I, who 
wield the Gandiva; I, who have twin quivers that well with inexhaustible 
arrows and all the devastras to command, how can a man like me say to my 
father Indra, who wields the Vajra, words of shame: that I am afraid? 
Mahabaho, I am never afraid, nor have I any need of your help. Go away or 
stay; do as you please.’ 

Rukmi takes his ocean-like army and goes to Duryodhana. He says the 
same thing to Duryodhana, but that proud king spurns him scornfully, as the 
Pandavas did. Thus, two great Kshatriyas take no part in the war on 
Kurukshetra— Balarama and Rukmi. 

After Rohini’s son Rama has set out on his tirtha-yatra, after 
Bhishmaka’s son Rukmi has left, the sons of Pandu sit together once more 
in consultation. Yudhishtira presides over this meeting attended by many 
kings, and that conclave dazzles like the sky spangled with stars with the 
Moon in their midst.” 


CANTO 160 
SAINYA NIRYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


J anamejaya said, “O Brahmanarishabha, after the troops have been 
arrayed on Kurukshetra, what did the Kauravas do, impelled as they 
were by destiny? 

Vaisampayana said, “O Bharatarishabha, when his troops have been 
arrayed, Dhritarashtra says to Sanjaya, “Come, Sanjaya, and tell me in the 
fullest detail all that is happening in the Kuru and Pandava camps. I am 
convinced that destiny reigns over effort, for, although I understand that this 
war will lead only to ruin, I cannot restrain my son, who rejoices in 
gambling and considers deceit to be wisdom. I understand all this, yet I can 
do nothing to prevent the slaughter that will be. 

O Suta, I clearly see my son’s defects, but when I am with him my mind 
turns away from dharma. Sanjaya, what will be must be. To sacrifice of 
one’s body in battle is the duty of every Kshatriya, and it is praiseworthy.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘What you say is true, but you cannot blame Duryodhana 
entirely. Listen to me, O king. 

The man who comes to evil because of his own sins can never impute 
the fault to either time or the gods. The man who perpetrates great evil 
deserves to die. The sons of Pandu silently bore all the injuries inflicted on 
them during the game of dice, looking only to you for refuge, which you 
denied them. 


Let me tell you now, Rajan, of the general carnage that stalks us close, 
the bloody massacre of horses, elephants and kings of measureless tejas. 
Listen patiently, wise one, to the destruction of the world as we know it that 
this war of wars will inexorably fetch; and the only conclusion you can 
come to is that man is never the agent of what he helplessly does, right or 
wrong. 

Like a wooden puppet, man is not the doer. However, there are three 
differing opinions about this. Some say that God ordains everything; some 
say that we act out of free will; and some say that all our actions are a result 
of our past lives. Now hear about the evil that is upon us.’” 


CANTO 161 
ULUKA DUTA GAMANA PARVA 


6 S anjaya says, “Rajan, after the great-souled Pandavas established 
their camp by the Hiranvati, the Kauravas too set up theirs. 
Duryodhana deployed his troops; he paid homage to all the kings on his 
side; he set up outposts and deployed soldiers in these to protect the camp. 
Then he summoned Karna, Dusasana and Sakuni. First he consulted with 
Karna and next with his brother Dusasana and Sakuni together. He 
summoned Uluka and spoke to him privately. 

He said to Uluka, “O Uluka, you are the son of a master of dice. Go 
now to the Pandavas and Somakas and repeat what I say to Yudhishtira, in 
Krishna’s hearing. 

Say to him, ‘The long awaited war between the Kurus and the Pandavas 
is at last upon us. The time has come, Kuntiputra, to make good the boasts 
you roared out with your brothers and Krishna, which Sanjaya repeated to 
me in the Kuru sabha. Now let us see you actually do everything you so 
glibly said you would. 

How does your virtuous character allow you, with your brothers, the 
Somakas and the Kekayas, to fix your heart on a sinful war? How can you 
want the destruction of the very world when you should be the dispeller of 
all people’s fears? 

O Bharatarishabha, this is the sloka, which Prahlada chanted when the 
gods took his kingdom from him: O Devas, the man who always flies the 


flag of dharma, whose sins are hidden, is like the cat in this story. Listen to 
that excellent story Narada told my father. 

O king, long ago, a wicked cat began to live on the banks of the Ganga, 
sitting still and with his arms raised above his head in the way of a tapasvin. 
Wanting to lull the other creatures there into trusting him, he announced 
that he had indeed begun to practice tapasya and had purified his heart. In 
time, the birds in that place trusted him and came to praise him. Seeing the 
feathered ones come to worship him, the cat, bird-eater that he was, 
considered the reason for his tapasya already accomplished. 

Time passed, and mice began to come there as well, and they too saw 
him as a virtuous creature practising tapasya. Firmly convinced of the cat’s 
virtue, they, who had many enemies, decided to make the cat their matulan, 
their maternal uncle, and ask his protection for the young and old of their 
kind. 

They went to the cat and said, “With your grace, we want to live our 
lives happily and without fear. You are our friend, and we place ourselves 
under your protection. You are devoted to dharma and always engaged in 
acquiring punya. Wise One, protect us in the same way as Indra Vajradhari 
does the Devas.” 

The cat answered the mice, “I do not see how my tapasya and this 
protection you ask for are connected. However, I am your well-wisher and I 
cannot refuse what you ask. All of you must obey me and do what I say. My 
tapasya has weakened me I and cannot move from where I sit. Everyday, 
you must carry me to the river for my ablutions.” 

The mice agreed and sent all their old and young ones to attend on the 
cat. That sinful feline began feeding on the mice and became fat, healthy 
and strong. The mice reduced in numbers, while the cat grew fatter daily. 
One day, all the mice met together and remarked that their uncle grew fatter 
by the day, while their numbers decreased. 

A wise mouse called Dindika told his entire tribe to go to the riverside 
together and said that he would follow with their uncle the cat. They did as 
Dindika said, for his words seemed grave and important to them. The cat 
knew nothing of this and ate Dindika that day. 

When Dindika did not appear at the river, the worst suspicions of the 
other mice were confirmed. A very old mouse called Kilika said to them, 
“Our uncle, the cat, does not really want to acquire punya. He is a 
hypocrite, and pretends to be our friend while he is really our enemy. The 


excreta of a creature that lives only on fruit and roots never contains hair or 
fur; and look how he grows fatter by the day, and our numbers dwindle. We 
have not seen Dindika for eight days.” 

The mice fled in all directions and the cat went back to where he had 
first come from. 

Sinful Yudhishtira, you are like that cat. You treat your kinsmen in the 
same way as the cat did the mice. You have honeyed words of dharma on 
your lips, but your actions are a sinner’s. Your devotion to the shastras and 
your mildness is only for show. You are no Brahmana. Stop your hypocrisy, 
O king, and be a Kshatriya; and you might deserve to be called Dharmaraja. 

Win the Earth through your prowess and give gifts to Brahmanas and 
offerings to your Pitrs, as you ought. Look to the welfare of your mother, 
whom you have distressed for many years; dry her tears and honour her 
with victory over your enemies in war. You have humbly asked for only five 
villages, and we refused even that. All we wanted was to anger you sons of 
Pandu and provoke a war. 

Remember that we dismissed the cowardly, treacherous Vidura because 
of you; remember, also, how we tried to burn you alive in the house of lac; 
at least now, be a man and fight, as you told Krishna you would when he set 
out from Upaplavya for the Kuru sabha. You sent a message to us through 
him, telling us that you are prepared both for peace or for war. The time for 
war has come, Yudhishtira, and I am ready for it. What better way is there 
for a Kshatriya to acquire punya than battle? 

You were born a Kshatriya; your fame has spread across the world; you 
have got weapons from Drona and Kripa; why then, Bharatarishabha, do 
you depend on Krishna, who is not in any way better than you by birth, as a 
Kshatriya, or in might?” 

Uluka, in the presence of the Pandavas say to Krishna, “For your own 
sake, as well as for the Pandavas, face me in battle as best you can. Use 
your powers of maya and take the form which you took in the Kuru sabha 
and, with Arjuna, fight me. A conjuror’s tricks can be frightening but only 
provoke rage in the man who stands ready for war. I, too, can use maya, 
sorcery, to fly into the sky, to plunge into the bowels of the Earth, to ascend 
into Indraloka and to assume many forms. However, it is not by terrifying 
another that a man attains his goal. The Creator brings all creatures under 
his control by the power of his will alone, and not by conjuring tricks. 


You say that you will confer absolute sovereignty on the sons of Pritha 
by annihilating Dhritarashtra’s sons in battle. Sanjaya brought me this 
message from you. You also said that when we declare war against Arjuna, 
it will also be against you. Keep your word now and put forth all your 
might for the Pandavas. Show us that you can be a man. 

The man, who knows his enemy’s faults and, using his manliness, 
makes them suffer, is truly a man. Your fame in the world is unjustified. The 
truth will soon be known that there are those in the world who appear to be 
manly but are really eunuchs. You were Kansa’s slave, and it does not befit 
me as a king to don armour to fight you.” 

O Uluka, next give this message to that stupid, ignorant and gluttonous 
Bhimasena, who is like a bull without horns, a bullock even. Say to him, 
“Prithaputra, you became a cook and called yourself Ballava in Virata’s 
city, because of what I did to you. Let the vow you swore before me in the 
Kuru sabha not be a lie. Drink Dusasana’s blood if you dare. You have often 
boasted that you will kill all Dhritarashtra’s sons in battle. The time has 
come to make good that boast. Bhaarata, you always deserve to be plied 
amply with food and drink, but there is a great difference between cooking 
food and fighting a war. Fight now; be a man. You will lay down your life 
and fall on the field, clutching your mace. And all your boasts in the Kuru 
sabha shall be proved vain, Vrikodara.” 

Then, Uluka, say to Nakula, “Fight us, Bhaarata; we want to see your 
manliness, your reverence for Yudhishtira and your hatred for me. 
Remember all the suffering that Draupadi has endured.” 

Next, say to Sahadeva in the presence of the assembled monarchs, 
“Fight now, to the best of your little prowess. Remember all your sorrows 
and meet us on the field.” 

Then say to Virata and Drupada, “Since the beginning of time, slaves, 
however accomplished, have never fully understood their masters; nor have 
wealthy kings been able to understand their slaves. Possibly, you pit 
yourselves against me assuming that I have done nothing praiseworthy. 
Unite now and fight to kill me; do your utmost to accomplish your goal, 
which is the same as the Pandavas’.” 

Say to Dhrishtadyumna prince of the Panchalas, “Your time has also 
come, and your end is near. When you face Drona in battle, you will 
discover the harsh truth. Yet, fight for your friends, your kinsmen, and die 
trying to accomplish the impossible.” 


Next, Uluka, say to Sikhandin, and emphasise these words, 
“Gangaputra Bhishma, foremost of all bowmen, will not kill you, since you 
became a woman once. So fight fearlessly and put forth your best in battle. 
We want to see your prowess.” 

Duryodhana laughs aloud and continues, saying to Uluka, ‘Address 
Arjuna once more, in Krishna’s hearing. Say to him, “Kshatriya, either 
vanquish us and rule the world, or submit to us and lay down your life on 
the field of war. Remember how you suffered when you were banished from 
the kingdom; recall the sorrows you endured whilst you lived in the forest; 
remember Krishnaa’s torment; and be a man, Pandava. The time has come 
to fulfil the purpose for which a Kshatriya woman gives birth to a son. 

Display your might in battle; show us your tejas, your courage, your 
manliness, your dexterity and speed with weapons; appease your wrath. Is 
there a Kshatriya whose heart would not have broken had he been driven 
from his kingdom, as you have, tormented with grief and despondent in 
long exile? Is there a man born into a noble house, who is brave and not 
covetous of another’s wealth, who would not be enraged when his ancient 
kingdom, handed down through the generations, is attacked and seized? 

Translate your lofty speeches into deeds. Good men regard the man who 
boasts without doing anything as worthless. Recover your kingdom and 
your wealth, which are now in the hands of your enemies. These are the 
twin objectives of a Kshatriya who wants war; so, Dhanajaya, show us your 
might. 

We defeated you at a game of dice and we dragged Krishnaa into the 
sabha. This alone should have been enough fuel to ignite the wrath of a real 
warrior. You have spent twelve long years in the forests, exiled from your 
home; and you have spent a year in Virata’s service. Remember the pangs 
of banishment, the hardships of your life in the vana, the torment that 
Draupadi has suffered, and show yourself to be a man. Vent your righteous 
anger on those who spoke cruel words to you and your brothers, for this is 
the way of a Kshatriya. 

Express your rage; display your might and your knowledge; show us 
your lightness of hand. Fight, Kaunteya, and prove your manhood. You 
have invoked your astras; the field of Kurukshetra has been cleared; your 
horses are strong and fleet; your soldiers have received ample wages. With 
Krishna as your sarathy, fight us. 


Why do you brag even before you have encountered Bhishma in battle? 
You are like the fool who boasts of scaling the summit of Gandhamadana 
before beginning to climb it. How can you eye your kingdom without 
defeating the invincible Karna, or Salya, or Drona that mightiest of 
Maharathas, our Acharya who is Indra’s equal in battle? How vain is your 
fond desire to conquer the effulgent Drona, commander of armies, teacher 
of the Vedas and archery, master of both bodies of knowledge, open and 
hermetic, foremost in the arts of war, unshakeable as a mighty tower, whose 
strength knows no diminution. It is like dreaming of the wind moving 
Mount Meru! If what you wish for does come to pass, the wind will blow 
Sumeru away, heaven will fall to the Earth and the yugas will change their 
order and duration. 

Which man, Arjuna or anyone else, could hope to escape with his life if 
he dares fight Drona? What man who walks the Earth could escape alive 
after facing Drona and Bhishma’s arrows in battle? Like a frog in a well, 
you do not see the vastness of the mighty armies of the countless kings who 
are with me, the armies that look like the celestial host, and which they 
protect just as the Devas do their forces. This army is ready for war and as 
difficult to ford as the Ganga; the kings of the East, the West, the South and 
the North lead it; as do the Kambojas, the Sakas, the Khasas, the Salwas, 
the Matsyas, the Kurus of the middle country, the Mlechchas, the Pulindas, 
the Dravidas, the Andhras and the Kanchis. 

Foolish Arjuna, how can you dare fight against me when I, Duryodhana, 
stand in the midst of my elephant legion? We will test your inexhaustible 
quivers, your chariot that Agni gave you and your ape banner. Do not brag, 
Arjuna, come and fight. Why so much vaunting? Victory in battle comes 
from fighting, never from vainglorious boasting. If boastfulness could 
indeed garner success, all men would achieve their objectives, for who is 
there that cannot boast? 

I know that you have Krishna for your ally. I know that your Gandiva is 
six cubits long. I know that there is no warrior equal to you. Yet, despite all 
this, I still hold your kingdom. A man can never win success merely by 
virtue of his lineage. It is Brahma alone who, if he wills it, can turn the tide 
of misfortune. For the past thirteen years, I have enjoyed sovereignty while 
you wept. I will kill you, your brothers and your kinsmen and continue to 
do so. 


Where was your Gandiva when you were put up as a stake in the dice 
game and we won you for a slave? What happened to Bhima’s might then? 
Your deliverance came neither from Bhimasena armed with his mace, nor 
from you with your Gandiva, but from the faultless Draupadi. It was the 
daughter of Prishata’s house who rescued you all who had been bound in 
slavery to work as menials. You were all like de-husked sesame seeds, and 
covered by nothing but shame. 

Partha, did you not later wear a woman’s braid whilst living in Virata’s 
city, and was Bhima not exhausted by cooking in Virata’s kitchens? Is this 
what you call manliness or being a Kshatriya? Arjuna, you became a 
eunuch, covered yourself in hip- and waist-chains, braided your hair and 
taught young girls to dance. All from fear of fighting us. This is how 
Kshatriyas punish lesser Kshatriyas. 

I will not give up my kingdom out of fear of you or of Krishna. Fight, 
with Kesava as your ally. Neither deception, nor conjuror’s tricks, nor 
jugglery can frighten the Kshatriya who is armed for battle. Instead, these 
pretty tricks will only provoke his wrath. A thousand Krishnas and a 
hundred Arjunas will fly from me in panic and in all directions. Encounter 
Bhishma in war; you will find it is like butting the hill with your head or 
swimming across the vast, deep sea. 

My army is like the ocean; Saradwata’s son is its sharks, Vivimsati its 
huge snake; Bhishma is its immeasurably powerful tide, Drona as its 
unconquerable alligator; Karna and Salya are its fish and whirlpools, the 
king of Kambojas is the badavamukha, the horse-headed creature that spits 
fire from his mouth; Brihadbala is its fierce waves, Somadatta’s son its 
whale, Yuyutsu and Durmarshana its waters, Bhagadatta its wind; Srutayus 
and Hridika’s son is its gulfs and bays, Dusasana its current; Sushena and 
Chitrayudha are its hippopotami and crocodiles, Jayadratha its submarine 
rocks; Purumitra its deeps and Sakuni its shores! 

Plunging into this surging ocean with its inexhaustible waves of 
weapons, you will see all your relatives and friends killed, and you will 
repent. Then your heart will turn away from the thought of ruling the Earth, 
like the heart of a sinful man turning away from hope of heaven. Indeed, for 
you to win a kingdom is as impossible as for one without tapasya punya to 
attain Swarga,” said Duryodhana to Uluka,’ says Sanjaya.” 


CANTO 162 
ULUKA DUTA GAMANA PARVA CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, “The gambler’s son Uluka went to the Pandava camp 

and, presenting himself to the Pandavas, addressed Yudhishtira 

and said, “You know full well the role of envoys and how they speak. So 

you must not be angry with me for repeating Duryodhana’s words exactly 
as he told me to.” 

Yudhishtira said, “You have nothing to fear, Uluka. Tell us without any 
anxiety what the greedy and short-sighted Duryodhana thinks.” 

In the midst of the illustrious Pandavas, the Srinjayas, of Krishna of the 
great renown, of Drupada and his sons, of Virata and of all the kings, Uluka 
delivered Duryodhana’s message. 

Sakuni’s son said, “This is what the noble king Duryodhana, in the 
presence of all the Kuru heroes, instructed me to tell you. Listen to what he 
said, O Yudhishtira. 

‘We beat you at dice and dragged Draupadi into the sabha. Any real 
Kshatriya would be enraged at this. You were exiled to the forest for twelve 
years, and then lived for a year in Virata’s service. Remember the reasons 
for your wrath—your exile, and our shaming of Krishnaa—and be a 
Kshatriya, O Pandava. Despite his weakened state, Bhima made a vow; 
now let him drink Dusasana’s blood. You have worshipped your weapons 
and invoked the deities who preside over each of them. The field of 


Kurukshetra is clear; the roads are smooth and your horses are well-fed. 
Begin the battle tomorrow, with Kesava as your ally. 

Why do you boast glibly without having faced Bhishma in battle? Like 
the fool who brags of his intention to climb Gandhamadana, without having 
set foot on it, you want sovereignty without having vanquished invincible 
Karna and Salya the mightiest of men, who is equal to Indra in combat. 

Salya is a preceptor of the Vedas and archery, having attained the 
ultimate levels in both branches of learning. You wish, in vain, to vanquish 
the illustrious Drona, who fights from the front. He is infinitely strong, 
unshakeable. We have never heard of the mountains of Sumeru being stirred 
by the wind! But the wind will blow away Sumeru; Swarga will fall down 
on Bhumi and the very yugas will be reversed if what you said to me comes 
to pass. Could any man escape with his life after facing Parantapa Drona in 
war, even if he fought from on the back of an elephant, a horse, or from a 
chariot? 

What creature that walks on Earth could escape with his life, if Drona 
and Bhishma attack him in battle and pierce him with their terrible arrows? 
You are like a frog in a well, that you do not see the awesome massed 
armies of kings, like the very host of the gods. My legions teem with the 
kings of the East, West, South and North; with Kambojas, Sakas and 
Khasas; with Salvas, Matsyas, Kurus of the middle country, Mlechchas, 
Pulindas, Dravidas, Andhras and Kanchis. Indeed, so many nations ready 
for battle are uncrossable like the swollen tide of Ganga. O, foolish cousin, 
how will you fight me when I take the field with my legion of elephants?’” 

Having repeated Duryodhana’s words to Yudhishtira, Uluka turned to 
Arjuna and delivered the message Duryodhana sent to him: 

“Arjuna, why do you brag so much? Fight, instead. Victory comes 
from deeds. A war is never won by boasts. If enterprises could succeed just 
by boasting, then all men would achieve their goals, for who cannot brag? I 
know that you have Krishna for your ally. I know that your Gandiva is six 
cubits long. I know that there is no warrior equal to you. Knowing all this, I 
still hold your kingdom. A man never wins success merely because of his 
lineage. It is the Supreme Ordainer alone who, by his will, turns hostility 
into friendship and subservience. 

For the past thirteen years have I enjoyed sovereignty, while you were 
sunk in grief. And I shall continue to rule, after killing you and your people. 
Where was your Gandiva when you were made a slave won at dice? Where, 


Phalguna, was Bhimasena’s might then? Your deliverance came neither 
from Bhimasena with his mace, nor from you with the Gandiva, but from 
the faultless Krishnaa. It was she, the daughter of Prishata’s house, who 
delivered you all, who were bound to us in slavery. I think of you as husks, 
sesame seeds without kernels, eunuchs. Did you not wear a braid while 
living in Virata’s city? Bhimasena tired himself out, working as a cook in 
Virata’s kitchens. Is this evidence of your manliness, Kuntiputra? To avoid 
facing me in battle, you braided your hair and taught girls how to dance. 
This is how Kshatriyas punish Kshatriyas. 

I will not give up the kingdom, Arjuna, from fear of Krishna or of you. 
Fight us, with him as your ally. Neither deception, nor conjuror’s tricks, nor 
jugglery can affright a Kshatriya armed for battle; on the contrary, these 
only ignite his wrath. A thousand Krishnas and a hundred Arjunas will fly 
from me in all directions. Encounter Bhishma in combat; it is like shattering 
the mountains with your head. Penetrate my army; it is like swimming 
across the vast and deep ocean. My army is a veritable ocean; Saradwata’s 
son is its large fish, Vivimsati its smaller fish, Brihadbala its waves, 
Somadatta’s son its whale, Bhishma its mighty current, Drona its 
unconquerable alligator, Karna and Salya its fish and whirlpools, Kamboja 
its horse’s head vomiting fire, Jayadratha its submarine rock, Purumitra its 
depth, Durmarshana its waters and Sakuni its shores. 

When, having plunged into this swelling ocean with its inexhaustible 
waves of weapons, you wilt from fatigue and have all your relatives and 
friends slain, then repentance will grip your heart. Then your heart will turn 
away, Partha, from the thought of ruling the Earth, like the heart of a sinner 
giving up hope of heaven. Indeed, for you to win a kingdom to rule is as 
impossible as for a man without any tapasya to attain Swarga,’” said 
Uluka,’ says Sanjaya.” 


CANTO 163 
ULUKA DUTA GAMANA PARVA CONTINUED 


°S anjaya says, ‘O Rajan, Uluka repeated these words to Arjuna, 

provoking him who is like a venomous snake further. The 

haughty, scornful message Uluka brought goaded the already incensed 
Pandavas beyond endurance. 

They began to flex their mighty arms and, truly like angry cobras, 
looked at one another, fire in their eyes. Bhimasena, with his head bent 
down and his breath hissing like a great hamadryad’s, turned his blood-red 
eyes to look at Krishna. Krishna saw how Bhima suffered and spoke to 
Uluka. 

He said, “Go now, Uluka, and tell Duryodhana that we have heard and 
understood his words. Let it be as he wishes.” 

Having said this, Krishna looked once more at the wise Yudhishtira. 
Then in the presence of all the Srinjayas, of Draupadi, of Drupada and his 
sons, of Virata and of all the other kings, Uluka yet again repeated what he 
had already said to Arjuna, like prodding a great and already furious serpent 
with a stick. 

And he repeated the same message again to Krishna and the others. 

Arjuna’s mighty body quivered with rage, and sweat beaded his brow. 
The kings saw him like that and were afraid; and the Pandavas’ Maharathas 
were greatly agitated to listen repeatedly to Duryodhana’s mocking 
message. They were all men of firm equanimity, but now they burned with 


anger. Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandin, Maharatha Satyaki, the five Kekaya 
brothers, the Rakshasa Ghatotkacha, the sons of Draupadi, Abhimanyu, 
Dhrishtaketu, Bhimasena and the twins jumped up from where they sat, 
their eyes crimson, swinging their splendid arms that were decked with red 
sandalwood-paste and golden ornaments. Knowing what was in their hearts, 
as Bhima sprang up he gnashed his teeth and wet the corners of his mouth 
with his tongue. Beside himself with anger, he clenched his huge fists and, 
turning his furious gaze on Uluka, spoke to him. 

He said menacingly, “Fool, we have heard Duryodhana’s vile message, 
sent to taunt us. Now listen to what I say, and, in the hearing of the Suta’s 
son and your black-hearted father Sakuni, repeat it to Duryodhana, who 
stands protected in the midst of his many Kshatriyas. Say to that sinner 
from me: 

“We always want to please our elder brother. That is why we tolerated 
everything you did to us. Do you not see this as being fortunate for you? It 
was for only the good of our entire vamsa that Yudhishtira Dharmaraja sent 
Krishna to the Kurus to try and make peace. But fate drives you to long for 
death. Come, fight us! Tomorrow, there will be war. I have sworn to kill you 
and your brothers. Sinful fool, do not have the slightest doubt that I will 
fulfil my vow. 

Varuna’s abode, the ocean, might suddenly flood the continents; and the 
mountains might split open, but what my oath will never prove false. Even 
if Yama, Kubera, or Rudra himself helps you, the Pandavas will still 
accomplish what they have sworn to do. I will drink Dusasana’s blood as I 
have sworn. I vow that I will kill any Kshatriya who comes to me in anger, 
even if he comes with Bhishma himself before him. All I have said in the 
Kuru sabha will come to pass. This I swear by my very soul.’” 

When Bhima finishes, Sahadeva, whose eyes have also turned red as 
plums, spoke before the assembled forces, in the ringing voice of a great, 
proud Kshatriya. 

He said to Uluka, “Listen well, sinner, to what I say, and convey this 
message to your father: 

‘No difference would ever have arisen between us and the Kurus, if 
Dhritarashtra had not befriended you. You were born an embodiment of 
dissent and to be the instrument of the destruction of Dhritarashtra’s vamsa 
and of the whole world.’ 


O Uluka, from the time we were born your evil father always tried to do 
us injury. I will cross the sea of malice and first kill you before his eyes, and 
then kill him in the sight of all the warriors.” 

Hearing Bhima and Sahadeva, Arjuna smiled and said to Bhima, 
“Bhimasena, those who have incited your enmity will not live. Even if they 
think they are safe in their homes now, they will surely be caught in death’s 
meshes. My brother, Uluka does not deserve to be spoken to harshly. What 
is his fault, who is only a messenger, and merely repeats what he has been 
instructed to say?” 

Then Arjuna Mahabaho addressed his allies and well-wishers, led by 
Dhrishtadyumna, saying, “You have heard the foul message of the sinful 
son of Dhritarashtra, sent to insult Krishna and especially me, and you are 
full of anger because you wish us well. Before Krishna’s might and yours, 
all the Kshatriyas of the Earth together, count for nothing. With your leave I 
will give Uluka a response to his message, to take back to Duryodhana: 

‘When tomorrow comes, I will keep myself at the head of my legions, 
and answer to your vile message with the Gandiva, for it is only eunuchs 
who respond in words:’” 

And all the kings applauded Dhananjaya. Now Yudhishtira Dharmaraja 
spoke respectfully to the friendly kings, to each according to his age and as 
befitted his rank; and, finally, to Uluka he gave this message for 
Duryodhana. 

Yudhishtira said, “No good king should patiently bear an insult. I have 
heard what you had to say; this is my reply.” 

Bharatottama, in response to Duryodhana’s message Yudhishtira, eyes 
red with rage, breath hissing like a serpent’s, tongue wetting the corners of 
his mouth, and trembling with anger, looked at Krishna and his brothers and 
spoke both gently and strongly to Uluka. 

Flexing his great arms, he said to the gambler’s son, “Go, Uluka, and 
say to Duryodhana, that ungrateful, evil embodiment of violence, that 
wretch of his race: 

“Malignant one, you always hated us Pandavas and treated us with 
deceit. The man who relies on his own strength, calls his enemies to battle, 
displays his prowess and makes good his boasts is a true Kshatriya. Be a 
Kshatriya and face us in war. Do not come to battle with those whom we 
revere at your head. Kaurava, rely on your own might and on that of your 
servants when you summon the sons of Pritha to war; be a Kshatriya in 


every way. He who declares war on his enemies, counting on the might of 
others, is a eunuch. 

You think highly of yourself, but you rely on the might of others. Being 
so weak and incapable yourself, why do you roar at us so grandly?” 

Krishna said, “O Son of Sakuni, take my words, as well, to 
Duryodhana: 

“When tomorrow the war dawns on you, show yourself to be a man, O 
evil one. You are foolish to think Krishna will not fight because the 
Pandavas have chosen him to be a charioteer; that is why you are fearless. 
But I say to you that if my anger is ignited, I will consume all the kings 
whom you have brought together, as fire burns a heap of straw. But since 
Yudhishtira commands me, I shall be a sarathy to Arjuna, and he alone will 
actually fight. 

But hear me, sinner, even if you hide beyond the three worlds, or deep 
in the bowels of the Earth, you will, even there, see Arjuna’s chariot flying 
at you tomorrow. You think that Bhima’s boasts are empty, but know that 
Dusasana’s blood is already as good as drunk. Know also that, although you 
have said a lot, and so haughtily and mockingly, not Arjuna, Yudhishtira, 
Bhimasena or either of the twins thinks much of you.’” 


CANTO 164 
ULUKA DUTA GAMANA PARVA CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, “Arjuna looked at Sakuni’s son Uluka with angry red 
eyes, and then at Krishna and, raising his arms, he said to Uluka, 
“The man who challenges and fights his enemies fearlessly, relying on his 
own strength, is a Kshatriya. While the man who summons his enemies to 
battle, depending on the strength of others, is a disgrace to all Kshatriyas 
and is considered the lowest of men. Tell Duryodhana from me, again: 
‘Cowardice makes you use the strength of others as your own, and you 
depend on them to vanquish your enemies. You have given the command of 
your forces to Bhishma, who is the eldest of the Kshatriyas, who is devoted 
to dharma, who has his passions under control and who is wise; and by this 
you make him face certain death. And then you brag! We know that you 
assume that we Pandavas will not kill our Pitamaha. But, Duryodhana, 
Bhishma is the first man that I will kill, and in full view of both armies.’ 
Uluka, go back to the Bhaaratas and tell Duryodhana that I, Arjuna, say 
this to him: ‘So be it. Tomorrow the great war will begin. Bhishma, of 
tireless might and devotion to truth, has already said to you that the task of 
destroying the Srinjaya and Salweya armies is his, and that he can kill 
anyone on Earth, excepting Drona; and that you need have no fear of the 
Pandavas. His assurances make you presume that the Pandavas will be 
easily vanquished and that you will become the undisputed sovereign of the 


world; and this fills you with pride. But what you will find is your own 
defeat and death. 

First of all, I will slay Pitamaha Bhishma before your very eyes. At 
sunrise tomorrow come with your chariots and banners to protect your 
Senapati, who is firm in his resolve; and watch my arrows fell him, who is 
your refuge. Tomorrow, when you see our Pitamaha covered by my arrows, 
you will realise the difference between bragging and battle. 

Duryodhana, very soon you will see Bhima fulfil the angry oaths he 
swore in the Kuru sabha to your bestial brother Dusasana. You will reap the 
terrible consequences of vanity, of wrath and cruelty, of arrogance and 
boastfulness, of vicious words and deeds, of adharma and sin, of speaking 
ill of others, of disobedience to elders, of prejudice and of all your vices. 

O you scum of the Earth, how can you hope to live or keep the kingdom 
if I, with Krishna beside me, give rein to my anger? After Bhishma and 
Drona have been stilled, and after Karna is slain, you will have no hope of 
any kingdom, of your son’s lives or your own worthless one. When you 
hear of the slaughter of your brothers and sons, and when Bhima strikes you 
a final, mortal blow, you will remember all your sins.’ 

Tell him, Uluka, that I make a vow only once. I swear that everything I 
have said will come to pass.” 

Now Yudhishtira said, “Repeat my words as well when you go to 
Duryodhana. Say to him: 

‘Do not judge me by your own dark nature and ways. We are as 
different as dharma and adharma. I never wish harm to even the smallest 
creatures, ants and other insects, let alone desire the massacre of my 
cousins. That is why I asked for just five villages. Why don’t you see the 
horrific calamity that threatens you? Your soul is overwhelmed by greed 
and lust, and you boast from being deluded. And you ignore even Krishna’s 
counsel. But the time for words is past; fight us with all your allies.’ 

Uluka, also say to the pathetic Kuru prince: ‘I have heard and 
understood what you said. Let it be as you wish.’” 

Then Bhimasena said, “Uluka, take my message to Duryodhana, who is 
an embodiment of sin. 

Say to him: ‘You are destined to find a home either in a vulture’s belly 
or in Hastinapura. I will fulfil the vow I swore in the Kuru sabha. I swear in 
the name of Truth: I will kill Dusasana in battle and drink his blood. I will 
kill all your brothers and then smash your manhood, and you will die in 


agony. Know, Duryodhana—I am the nemesis of all Dhritarashtra’s sons, 
and Abhimanyu will be the scourge of your younger princes. I will gratify 
you all with my deeds. 

Duryodhana, when I have killed you and your brothers, I will kick your 
stamp on your head with my foot in the sight of Yudhishtira Dharmaraja.’” 

Nakula said, “Uluka, tell Duryodhana that I have heard and understood 
everything he has said. Tell him that I will do exactly as he has asked me 
to.” 

Sahadeva said, “Tell Duryodhana for me: ‘Your fond hopes will all 
prove vain. You will repent, with your sons, kinsmen and your friends, that 
you bragged in joyful anticipation of killing us.’” 

The two old kings, Virata and Drupada, said to Uluka, “We are glad to 
serve a good man. Tomorrow we shall see who is the servant and who the 
master, and who will prevail in battle.” 

Now Sikhandin said to Uluka, “You must say to Duryodhana, who is 
addicted to sin: ‘Watch helplessly, O king, my fierce deeds on the field. I 
will kill your grandfather, on whose prowess you depend for victory. I was 
created by Brahma to kill Bhishma, and I will do what I was born to in the 
sight of all your bowmen.’” 

Dhrishtadyumna said to Uluka, “Say to Duryodhana: ‘I will kill Drona 
with all his followers; this task is mine and no one else’s.’” 

Yudhishtira spoke again, noble and compassionate words: “‘Rajan, I do 
not want the slaughter of my kinsmen, and everything that is now sure to 
happen is your fault. I have no choice but to sanction what all these great 
men around me will do.’ 

Now either go from here without delay, Uluka, or stay with our 
blessings; for we too are your kinsmen.” 

Uluka took leave of Yudhishtira and went back to Duryodhana, taking 
with him all that had been said; and when he came before Duryodhana, he 
repeated everything that Arjuna had told him to say. He faithfully delivered 
the messages that Krishna, Bhima, Yudhishtira, Nakula, Virata, Drupada, 
Sahadeva, Dhrishtadyumna and Sikhandin had given him; and then what 
Arjuna and Krishna had said later. 

Duryodhana listened to Uluka, and he ordered Dusasana, Karna and 
Sakuni to array their own and the troops of the allied kings for war before 
dawn broke. At Karna’s command, messengers mounted their chariots, 


camels and horses and rode through the camp, calling out, Into battle 
formations before sunrise!” 


CANTO 165 
ULUKA DUTA GAMANA PARVA CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, ‘After listening to Uluka’s messages from 
Duryodhana, Yudhishtira also deployed his army led by 
Dhrishtadyumna and the others: the vast army of the four kinds of forces — 
infantry, elephants, chariots and cavalry—as awesome and immovable as 
the Earth herself. The Pandava army was protected by mighty Maharathas 
led by Bhima and Arjuna, and was like the ocean, immense, still and calm. 

At the head of that sea-like force was the invincible bowman 
Dhrishtadyumna, prince of the Panchalas; and he chose Drona as his 
particular adversary and target. As Senapati, Dhrishtadyumna picked 
individual warriors from the enemy ranks and told his own warriors which 
one they would fight. He gave his chariot-warriors battle instructions, each 
according to his strengths. 

He assigned Karna to Arjuna, Duryodhana to Bhima, Salya to 
Dhrishtaketu, Kripa to Uttamaujas, Kritavarman to Nakula, Jayadratha to 
Satyaki, and Bhishma to Sikhandin. He pitted Sahadeva against Sakuni, 
Chekitana against Sala, and the five sons of Draupadi against the Trigartas. 
He set Abhimanyu against Karna’s son Vrishasena as well as against the 
rest of the kings, for he considered Abhimanyu superior to Arjuna himself 
in battle. He allocated responsibilities to his warriors, individually and 
collectively, and finally this Maharatha, brilliant as a blazing fire, reserved 
Drona for himself. 


And having arrayed the Pandava troops and its maharathas, 
Dhrishtadyumna waited coolly for the war to begin, his mind firmly fixed 
on victory for the sons of Pandu.’” 


CANTO 166 
RATHATIRATHA SANKHYANA PARVA 


V aisampayana said, “Dhritarashtra says, “After Arjuna had sworn to 
kill Bhishma in battle, what did my evil sons, led by Duryodhana, 

do? Ah, I can already see the sure-handed Arjuna, with Krishna by his side, 
killing my uncle Bhishma. And what did that greatest Kshatriya Bhishma, 
who is immeasurably wise, say when he heard Partha’s words? Having 
accepted the Kaurava command, what did that splendid warrior do?’ 

Sanjaya tells him everything that Pitamaha Bhishma said. 

Sanjaya says, ‘Rajan, having been given the command of the Kaurava 
force, Bhishma spoke words to Duryodhana that pleased him greatly. 

Bhishma said, “I bow to Lord Kumara, Velayudha, bearer of the 
inexorable spear, Senapati of the armies of Devaloka and I gladly accept 
command of your army. I know about the affairs of state, about every kind 
of battle formation, and how to inspire fighting men to give their best 
efforts. I know as much about the deployment of the vyuhas of war and 
their strategic movements as Brihaspati himself. I know the methods of 
attack and defence that the Devas, Gandharvas and Manavas use; and with 
these I will confound the Pandavas. Dispel the fear in your heart. I will fight 
the enemy, whilst protecting your army, in keeping with the dharma of war. 
Cool the fever of your mind.” 

Duryodhana said, “O Gangaputra, Mahabaho, I do not fear the hosts of 
the Devas and Asuras combined; then how will I fear these Pandavas with 


you as my Senapati and with Drona beside you, fighting for me? With you 
both on my side I will surely win this war; why, I could I could even win 
sovereignty over the gods. 

But tell me, Pitama, who amongst our warriors we count as a Ratha and 
who as an Atiratha. Pitamaha, you know the strengths of every warrior on 
both sides. I want to hear what you think with all these kings present.” 

Bhishma said, “Listen, Rajarajan, and I will tell you who the Rathas and 
Atirathas in your army are. In your legions are many millions of Rathas, but 
I will name the main ones. Firstly, there is you. Amongst your brothers, 
including Dusasana, you are the foremost of all the Rathas. All of you are 
skilled fighters, experts at attacking and destroying chariots. You are all 
great charioteers when you take the reins of the sarathy, and expert 
elephant-riders, as well. You are all doughty mace-fighters, excellent 
archers and swordsmen; you also wield impenetrable shields. You are 
learned in the astra shastra and ably discharge your duties. You are all 
Drona’s and Kripa’s disciples in archery and at others weapons. In the 
coming war, the mighty sons of Dhritarashtra will put forth their prodigious 
energy to destroy the irresistible Panchalas. 

Next come I, the Senapati of your troops. I will vanquish the Pandavas 
and extirpate the enemy forces. It does not become me to speak of my own 
strengths, but I believe you know me well. 

One of the finest among all warriors is Raja Kritavarman of the Bhojas. 
He is an Atiratha, and he will accomplish your goal in battle. No man, not 
the most skilled warrior, can overcome him. Shooting or hurling his 
weapons to great distances, and a master swordsman in close combat, he 
will raze the enemy ranks, just as Indra did the Danava hordes. 

The lord of the Madras, the mighty Salya, is an Atiratha. He considers 
himself equal to Krishna in every battle he fights. He has deserted his 
sister’s sons to take your side. In this war he will decimate the Maharathas 
of the Pandava army with tidal waves of arrows. 

The great archer Bhurisravas, the son of Somadatta, is an Atiratha and 
one of your sincerest friends. He has overall command of the heads of all 
our chariot divisions. He will wreak havoc among the enemy and swiftly 
reduce their numbers. 

Jayadratha king of the Sindhus is, in my opinion, equal to two Rathas. 
That best of chariot-warriors will display his prowess in battle. He still 
smarts from the humiliation the Pandavas meted out to him when he 


abducted Draupadi. He practised severe tapasya and obtained a boon most 
difficult to acquire, one he will use while fighting the Pandavas themselves. 
Harbouring his old hatred, he will fight, reckless of his life, which is well 
nigh impossible to take anyway.”’” 


CANTO 167 


RATHATIRATHA SANKHYANA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, “‘Bhishma said, “Sudhakshina, king of the Kambojas, 

is equal to one Ratha. He wants your victory, and he will fight 

boldly against your enemies; and the Kauravas will see that the prowess of 

this lion amongst Maharathas as he fights for you is equal to Indra’s. His 

Kamboja force of fierce chariot-warriors will swarm over the battlefield like 
locusts. 

Then there is Nila of Mahishmati, clad in blue mail; he is one Ratha. 
With his chariot army he will bring bloody havoc to your enemies. He 
detests Sahadeva and will fight loyally for you. The princes Vinda and 
Anuvinda of Avanti are powerful and seasoned warriors; they are two 
Rathas. These two will consume the enemy’s troops with maces, feathered 
arrows and swords, with spears and javelins. Lusting for battle, these 
Kshatriyas will range across the battlefield like bull elephants sporting in 
the midst of a herd, each of them looking like Yama. 

The five princely Trigarta brothers are, in my judgment, the best of 
Rathas. Pritha’s sons provoked enmity with them outside Virata’s city. Like 
great crocodiles churning the stream of the Ganga into high crested waves 
will they agitate the ranks of the Pandavas in battle. All five are Rathas, 
with Satyaratha being the first among them. They still remember the shame 
that Arjuna inflicted on them, many years ago, when he swept through the 


land with his white horses, on his campaign to subjugate all the kings of the 
Earth. They will give their all and, having already fought many of the 
leading Pandava warriors in the past, they will surely slay them now. 

Your son Lakshmana and Dusasana’s son are both tigers among men 
and unwavering in battle. In the prime of youth, of lithe limbs, and 
endowed with powerful energy, these two princes are expert warriors and 
could well lead all the Kuru chariots. I believe they are our two best Rathas 
and devoted to Kshatriya dharma. They will achieve great feats. 

Dandadhara is equal to a single Ratha. Guarded by his own soldiers, he 
will fight for you. Raja Brihadbala of the Kosalas, who is blessed with 
mighty tejas and strength, is equal to one Ratha. A fierce fighter, this great 
bowman is devoted to the Dhartarashtra cause, and will exert himself 
powerfully in battle, to the joy of his friends. 

Saradwata’s son Kripa is a commander of leaders of chariot forces. 
Uncaring of his life, he will consume your enemies at will. Kripa, who was 
born in a clump of heath as the son of Mahamuni Saradwata, also called 
Gautama, is as invincible as Kartikeya. Burning numberless warriors with 
all kinds of astras, he will rage across the field like a blazing fire.”’” 


CANTO 168 


RATHATIRATHA SANKHYANA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, ‘Bhishma said, “Your uncle Sakuni is equal to one 

Ratha. Being the cause of the hostilities with the sons of Pandu, 

he will definitely fight. His troops are irresistible when they charge the 

enemy and are armed with arsenals of all kinds of weapons; and they are as 
swift as the wind. 

Drona’s son Aswatthama is superior to all other archers. He is a 
profound knower of the astra shastra and his weapons are inexorable. He is 
a great Maharatha. Like Arjuna’s arrows shot from the Gandiva, 
Aswatthama’s shafts fly in an unbroken line, touching one another. This 
best among Rathas, whom I cannot laud enough, can consume the three 
worlds, if he sets his mind to it. He has performed austere tapasya and 
augmented his fury and energy. Brilliant is his intellect, and Drona has 
favoured his son with the gift of devastras. 

However, Aswatthama has one great defect, and for that I do not 
consider him a Ratha or an Atiratha: he loves his life too much, and holds it 
too dear. Yet, there is not a man amongst the warriors of both armies who is 
his equal. 

From a single chariot he can put the army of the Devas to rout. So 
powerful is his powerful body, that he can rive mountains merely by 
slapping his bowstring on the leather sleeve of his arm. Blessed with 


countless exceptional qualities, Drona’s son of fierce effulgence will range 
over the battlefield, as irresistible as Yama with his mace. Lustrous 
Aswatthama of the lion’s neck will extinguish your enemies like the fires of 
the pralaya do at the end of a yuga. 

His father Drona is endowed with great tejas, though old, he is superior 
to any younger man. He will perform great deeds in battle; of this I have no 
doubt. Standing immovable on the field, he will burn Yudhishtira’s troops 
with many fires. The Pandava army will be the dry grass and fuel in which 
those fires will be sparked, and the power of Drona’s weapons will be the 
wind that fans it into mighty flames. This bull among men is a leader of 
Maharathas. The son of Bharadwaja will achieve astounding feats for you. 

The venerable Acharya Drona, guru of all the royal Kshatriyas, will 
exterminate the Srinjayas. However, he loves Dhananjaya and, 
remembering the remarkable virtues Arjuna has acquired, and remembering 
that Arjuna is his most beloved disciple, he will never be able to bring 
himself to kill him. Indeed, Drona always prides himself on Arjuna’s 
accomplishments, and looks on him with more affection than on his own 
son. Otherwise, such is his prowess that he can, from a single chariot, 
vanquish all the Devas, Gandharvas and Manavas united together, with his 
devastras. 

Narashardula Paurava is one of your finest Maharathas, and he can 
shatter the ranks of enemy chariots. He will attack the enemy from the front 
of his own large force and consume the Panchalas like fire burns dry grass. 

Satyasravas, the son of Brihadbala, is equal to one Ratha. He will sear 
through your enemy’s troops like Death himself. His men, wearing motley 
armour and armed with all manner of weapons, will spread across the field, 
killing all that stand against them. 

Karna’s son Vrishasena is one of your best chariot-warriors and is a 
Maharatha. He will devastate your enemy’s forces. 

Then there is the great tejasvin Jalasandha, and he is among your 
foremost Rathas. Born in Krishna’s vamsa, he is always willing to give his 
life in battle. He is a true warrior and will scatter the enemy before him, 
whether from his chariot or elephant back. That best of kings is, in my 
judgment, a Ratha. He will fight a brutal battle, ready to surrender his life 
for your sake, and among his mighty legions, expert in all types of warfare, 
he will be fearless. 


Brave and like Yama himself, Bahlika is an Atiratha. He rushes 
headlong into any encounter and never retreats. He will blow away any 
enemy in his path even like Vayu Deva. 

Another router of hostile chariot divisions, Maharatha of wonderful 
feats in battle, is Satyavan. He knows no fear of war. He will fall like a 
blood-storm on those that stand on his way; and in the fierce press of battle 
he will achieve all that a Kshatriya should. 

The lord of Rakshasas, the feral Alambusha, is a Maharatha. 
Remembering his old hatred of the Pandavas, he will kill a countless enemy 
fighters. He is the best of Rathas amongst all the Rakshasa warriors and, 
with his magical powers and his uncompromising enmity, he will be 
merciless on the field. 

The great sovereign of Pragjyotisha, the powerful Bhagadatta, is the 
best of all elephant-warriors. Once, he and Arjuna fought for days on end, 
each avid for victory. Then, for the sake of his friendship with Indra, 
Bhagadatta made a treaty of peace with Indra’s son. And during this war, 
that king will fight from his formidable elephant’s back like Indra mounted 
on Airavata and fighting for the Devas.”’” 


CANTO 169 


RATHATIRATHA SANKHYANA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


a B hishma said, “The brothers Achala and Vrishaka are Rathas. They 
are invincible in battle and will raze your enemies. These Naravyaghras are 
the best of Gandharvas and never relinquish their anger. They are young, 
handsome and of unworldly prowess. 

This brings me to your dearest, most devoted friend Karna, always so 
proud of his battle skills, and who constantly goads you into fighting the 
Pandavas. You have taken this braggart as your advisor, guide and friend 
and elevated him to too high a position. The arrogant fellow is neither a 
Ratha nor an Atiratha. Yet he is generous and, deprived of good sense, he 
gave away his natural coat of mail and his divine earrings, which made him 
invincible. Without his kavacha and kundala, because of his guru 
Parasurama’s curse, as well as that of another Brahmana, he is merely an 
ardharatha, half a Ratha. When he faces Arjuna in battle, he will not escape 
with his life.” 

Hearing this, Drona said, “I agree with Bhishma. Karna boasts on the 
eve of every battle, and he has fled from every encounter. I judge him to be 
only half a Ratha because his generosity in giving away his kavacha and 
kundala was reckless and because of his brash and unrestrained ways.” 

Karna heard all this and his eyes widened in anger. He glared at 
Bhishma and said, “O Pitamaha, I am innocent, but your dislike for me 


makes you malign me as you please, with words like arrows at every step. I 
tolerate it for Duryodhana’s sake. You calling me an ardharatha makes plain 
how worthless you think I am, why, as if I were a coward! 

You, Gangaputra, are an enemy of the whole universe, especially of all 
the Kurus. But the king is unaware of this. What man but you, Bhishma, 
would seek to create envy and discord among us, to sap the united purpose 
and energy of these kings, all equals in rank and courage, as you do from 
your contempt for their great accomplishments? 

Neither years, nor wrinkles, nor wealth, nor possession of friends would 
entitle a Kshatriya to regard himself as a Maharatha! It has been said that a 
Kshatriya acquires greatness only through might proven on the field, just as 
Brahmanas acquire eminence through superiority in their knowledge of 
mantras, Vaisyas through wealth and Sudras with age. Influenced by hatred 
and envy, and speaking loosely from malice and ignorance, you list Rathas 
and Atirathas, capriciously, according to your whim. 

May you be blessed, Mahabaho Duryodhana; you be the true judge of 
this. Abandon the evil Bhishma, who wrongs you. Once seeds of discord 
are sown it is difficult to reunite warriors who have been divided by 
cunning comparisons. With some effort, your own army can be reunited in 
spirit, but it will be far more difficult to do the same with the armies from 
outside. Look how doubt has already raised its head in the hearts of your 
warriors. Bhishma subtly weakens us, even as we stand here, before the first 
arrow has been loosed in war. Besides, judging the true merits of Rathas is 
beyond Bhishma of the limited intellect. 

Alone, I, Karna, will withstand the Pandava army. My every arrow is 
unerring and deadly; when they face me, the Pandavas and the Panchalas 
will fly in all directions, like oxen before a tiger. 

Bhishma is old and twisted; he is not the one who should speak of battle 
or the dangers of war; he should not be the one to rely on for sage advice. 
Indeed, he is fated to be the first victim of destiny. He challenges the whole 
world, and deludes himself that no one else is a man or a warrior. It is true 
the shastras teach us to heed the elderly. But they do not mean those who 
are far too old, for they become children again. 

Alone, I would extinguish the Pandava army. However, the fame of that 
feat will go to Bhishma. You have made him your Senapati, and recognition 
always belongs to the leader and not to those who fight under him. Rajan, as 


long as Bhishma lives I will not fight. After Bhishma falls I will fight all the 
enemy Maharathas together, and kill them all for you.” 

Bhishma said, “I am about to assume the onerous burden of fighting 
Duryodhana’s war against the Pandavas. I have thought of this day for 
many years and now the time for this dreadful battle is upon us, I still 
would not have conflict between the Bhaaratas. It is you, Sutaputra, who 
were born for that vile task. It is fated; otherwise, old though I am and you 
young, I would quell your lust for war by taking your life. 

Your guru, Jamadagni’s son Parasurama, could not do me the least 
injury with his unearthly astras; so what could you do? Good men do not 
approve of self-praise. O wretch of your vamsa, I speak like this because I 
am angry and I am sad. 

From my lone chariot, I vanquished all the assembled Kshatriyas of the 
world at the swayamvara of the king of Kasi’s daughters and carried away 
those princesses. Alone, on so many fields, I stopped the charge of 
countless kings with their soldiers. 

With you as an embodiment of violence, a great carnage is about to 
overtake the Kurus. Yes, Karna, strive to vanquish our enemies; be a man 
and fight Arjuna, whom you envy so much and never tire of challenging. 
Evil one, I want to see how you come out of that encounter alive.” 

Duryodhana said to Bhishma, “Look at me, Gangaputra. The task we 
have at hand is dire and grave. Think earnestly of what is best for me. Both 
of you will render me great services. I want to hear now of the best of the 
enemy’s chariot-warriors, of their Rathas and Atirathas. I want to hear of 
the strengths and weaknesses of my enemies. When this night is over our 
great war will begin.”’” 


CANTO 170 


RATHATIRATHA SANKHYANA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, ‘Bhishma said, “I have told you who your Rathas, 

Atirathas and Ardharathas are. Listen now to who the Pandavas’ 

Rathas and Atirathas are. If you truly wish to know, hear, with these kings, 
of the Rathas in the army of the Pandavas. 

Yudhishtira himself, the son of Pandu and Kunti, is a mighty Ratha. 
Without doubt he will course unimpeded through the battlefield like a 
blazing fire. 

Bhimasena is equal to eight Rathas; none can remotely match him with 
the mace or with arrows. With the strength of ten thousand elephants, and 
with his enormous pride, his might and energy are superhuman. 

The two sons of Madri are both Rathas. In beauty they are like the twin 
Aswins, and they are blessed with mighty tejas. Stationed at the head of 
their divisions, they will remember the torment you inflicted on them and 
range the field like many Indras. 

All the Pandavas have noble souls; they are tall like Sala trees, taller 
than other men by half a cubit; they are brave as lions and blessed with 
awesome prowess. Rajan, all of them have practised brahmacharya and 
other stern austerities; they are modest; they have tigerish strength; in 
speed, in smiting and crushing foes, they are more than human. During their 
campaign of universal conquest before the Rajasuya yagna, each of them 


vanquished many great kings. No other men can wield their weapons; no 
other men can even string their bows or heft their maces, let alone shoot 
their arrows. 

In speed, in aim, in eating and in every sport they used to excel all of 
you even when you were all boys. With their prodigious might, they will 
exterminate this army. War with them is not desirable. Each of them, by 
himself, can slay all the kings of the Earth. You saw for yourself, Rajan, 
what happened during the Rajasuya yagna. Now they will remember 
Draupadi’s sufferings and the abusive, vicious words you spoke after the 
game of dice, and they will come to war like so many Rudras. 

As for Arjuna Gudakesa, of the reddish eyes, with Krishna as his 
sarathy, there is no warrior in either army who is remotely his equal. Let 
alone men, I have not heard of any among the Devas, Asuras, Uragas, 
Rakshasas and Yakshas, who has been born already or yet to be born, who 
can compare with him. 

His chariot flies the banner of Hanuman; Krishna is his sarathy; 
Dhananjaya himself is the Kshatriya who fights from it; his bow is the 
Gandiva; his horses are as fleet as the wind; his unworldly coat of mail is 
impenetrable; his two quivers are inexhaustible; he has obtained his astras 
from Indra, Rudra, Kubera, Yama and Varuna; and his chariot bears maces 
of dread and all sorts of other astras, including the Vajra. 

What warrior can equal Arjuna, who killed a thousand Danavas in 
Hiranyapura from his lone chariot? Inflamed with wrath, his prowess 
beyond your imagination, this Mahabaho will raze your army even as he 
protects his own legions. 

Dronacharya and I, with no third warrior, can stand against 
Dhananjaya’s arrow storms for a time. Yet, when this son of Kunti comes to 
war, with Krishna seated before him, his gales of astras will not cease, but 
blow like monsoon winds. He is masterly and young, while Drona and I are 
both old and worn; we will not last against Nara and Narayana.” 

Listening to Bhishma, and now vividly remembering, with a trembling 
heart, the valour of Pandu’s sons, and thinking of the war as if it was 
already happening before their eyes, the kings’ great arms, decked with 
bracelets and smeared with sandal-paste, seemed to hang limp, sapped of 
their strength,’ says Sanjaya.” 


CANTO 171 


RATHATIRATHA SANKHYANA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


“°B hishma said, “Draupadi’s five sons are Maharathas. Virata’s son 
Uttara is among the best Rathas. The mighty-armed Abhimanyu is a 
commander of the leaders of their chariot divisions; this youthful Parantapa 
is Arjuna or Krishna’s equal. Gifted with marvellous lightness of hand, and 
steeped in the ways of the astra shastra and every kind warfare, he has 
untold energy and is firm in his vratas. He will remember his father’s 
agonies and put forth all his valour. 

Brave Satyaki of the Madhu vamsa is also a commander of leaders of 
chariot divisions. Foremost among the Vrishnis and of towering wrath, of 
fear he knows nothing. Uttamaujas is also a magnificent chariot-warrior, as 
is Yudhamanyu. All the kings own many thousands of chariots, elephants 
and horses, and they will fight, uncaring of their lives, to please Kunti’s 
sons. They will unite with the Pandavas and sweep through your troops like 
fire and wind, burning through and scything down all warriors that confront 
them. 

Virata and Drupada, bulls among men, are both blessed with awesome 
prowess. Both are Maharathas. Though old, they are devoted to Kshatriya 
dharma, and will give their utmost in battle. Because of their relationship to 
the Pandavas, the energy of these two great bowmen will only swell in tide. 
Men become heroes or cowards by the righteousness of their cause. 


Motivated by a singleness of purpose, both these aged kings will lay down 
their lives to destroy your troops. Fiery in battle, leading great akshauhinis, 
these most noble Kshatriyas will accomplish great and terrible feats, and 
justify both the confidence that the Pandavas have placed in them and their 
relationship with them.”’” 


CANTO 172 


RATHATIRATHA SANKHYANA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, ‘Bhishma said, “Sikhandin, scion of the Panchalas, is 

a subjugator of hostile cities and is among the foremost of 

Yudhishtira’s Rathas. He will fight your troops to win great fame. He has a 

vast legion of Panchala and Prabhadraka troops to support him. With his 
hosts of chariots he will achieve dreadful feats. 

Dhrishtadyumna, Senapati of Yudhishtira’s army, disciple of Drona, is a 
Maharatha. He is an Atiratha. He will harry his foes and, by himself, sweep 
the field clean, as Mahadeva does the worlds with his Pinaka at the Pralaya. 
Great warriors will speak in awe of his oceanic chariot forces, which are 
like those of the Devas. 

Dhrishtadyumna’s son Kshattradharman is young and inexperienced, 
and so I consider him only half a Ratha. Sisupala’s heroic son Dhrishtaketu, 
who is kin to Pandavas, is a mighty bowman and a Maharatha. This king of 
Chedis and his son will perform deeds of valour in battle that are difficult 
even for a Maharatha. 

Kshattradharman is a conqueror of enemy cities, and he is devoted to 
Kshatriya dharma; and his son Kshattradeva is one of the best of the 
Pandavas’ Rathas. Then there are the dauntless Panchala warriors—Jayanta, 
Amitaujas and the Maharatha Satyajit. They are all noble Maharathas and 
will fight like angry elephants. Aja and Bhoja are both Maharathas and will 


fight for the Pandavas. Both are gifted with uncanny lightness of hand; they 
use every manner of weapon and are exceptional warriors. 

Five Kshatriya brothers, related to the Pandavas by blood, are almost 
impossible to defeat. They, too, fight with diverse weapons, and are skilful, 
fierce and unshakeable. These five who fly blood-red banners, Kasika, 
Sukumara, Nila, Sankha, also called Madiraswa, and Suryadatta, are 
incomparable Rathas. 

Vardhakshemi is a Maharatha. Raja Chitrayudha is a superlative Ratha 
and, besides being an asset in battle, he is utterly devoted to Arjuna. The 
two Maharathas, Chekitana and Satyadhriti, are tigers among men and two 
of the Pandavas’ unrivalled Rathas, as are Vyaghradatta and Chandrasena. 

Senabindu, also named Krodhahantri, is a warrior equal to Krishna and 
Bhimasena; he will fight with formidable audaciousness. That best of kings 
is proud of his achievements in battle. You should think of him as you do of 
Drona, Kripa and me. Then there is Kasya, who is truly praiseworthy for his 
dexterity with every weapon. This subduer of hostile cities is equal to one 
Ratha. 

Drupada’s son Satyajit, though young in years, shows great prowess in 
battle, and he is equal to eight Rathas. He is Dhrishtadyumna’s equal and, 
thus, an Atiratha. He will also accomplish great and savage deeds in battle 
in his eagerness to spread the fame of the Pandavas. 

Devoted to Pandu’s sons and brave beyond common ken is another 
great Ratha—Pandya, bowman of scintillating tejas. The superb archer 
Dhridadhanwan is a Maharatha; and Kurusattama Srenimat and Raja 
Vasudeva are both Atirathas.”’” 


CANTO 173 


RATHATIRATHA SANKHYANA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


"BR hishma said, “Rochamanas is another Maharatha in the Pandava 
army. He will fight against us like a Deva. Bhima’s uncle Kuntibhoja is an 
Atiratha. He will fight with the same might as Indra did against the 
Danavas, and his renowned warriors are all accomplished and fearless. 
Devoted to his nephews, he will achieve extraordinary feats for their sakes. 

Bhima and Hidimba’s son, the Rakshasa prince Ghatotkacha is gifted 
with powerful magical powers. He is a commander of the leaders of chariot- 
divisions. He revels in battle and, using maya, he and his feral Rakshasa 
legion will also fight without fear. 

All these and many other kings, with Krishna at their head, have 
gathered to fight Yudhishtira’s cause. I have listed the main Rathas, 
Atirathas and Ardharathas of the Pandava army, and these will lead 
Yudhishtira’s fearsome legions, protected by Kiritin Arjuna. I will confront 
these warriors in battle, some of whom will fight with sorcery, and all of 
whom are fired by a consuming will to win the war; and I, too, am prepared 
for victory or for death. 

I will ride against Krishna and Arjuna who, with the Gandiva and the 
Chakra, are like the Sun and the Moon shining together in the evening sky. I 
will face Yudhishtira’s other Maharathas and their swarming troops. 


Duryodhana, I have named for you, in their order of importance, the 
Rathas, Atirathas and Ardharathas in your army and theirs. I will fight 
Arjuna, Krishna and all the other lords of Earth whom I encounter, but I 
will neither strike nor kill Sikhandin, prince of Panchalas, not if I see him 
rushing at me with his weapons raised. 

The world knows how, to please my father, I renounced the kingdom I 
inherited and have lived as a brahmachari. I made Chitrangada king of the 
Kurus and the child Vichitravirya the Yuvaraja. I swore a pledge in the 
presence of all the kings of the Earth that I will never kill a woman or one 
who was once a woman. Sikhandin was a woman once. Born as a girl child, 
he later changed himself into a man. I will not fight against him. 

Also, Rajan, although I will strike down all the other kings I meet on the 
battlefield, I could not kill the sons of Kunti.”’” 


CANTO 174 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA 


6 S anjaya says, ‘Duryodhana said, “Why will you not kill Sikhandin 

even if you see him riding at you to take your life? You once told 

me that you would destroy the Panchalas and the Somakas; why now this 
reluctance, Gangaputra?” 

Bhishma said, “Duryodhana, I will not kill Sikhandin, even if I meet 
him in battle. Hear why, you and all these other kings. 

My father Santanu was renowned throughout the world. When that 
virtuous king died I crowned my brother Chitrangada king of the vast Kuru 
kingdom. On Chitrangada’s death, in keeping with dharma and with 
Satyavati’s acquiesance, I made Vichitravirya king. Vichitravirya was a 
mere boy then, and though I had invested him with sovereignty, I ruled in 
his name and he looked to me in all things. 

When the time came, I wanted to him to wed and began to look for 
princesses from a royal house equal to our own. I heard that the three 
daughters of the king of Kasi, Amba, Ambika and Ambalika, of unrivalled 
beauty, were to hold a swayamvara, and that all the kings of the Earth had 
been invited. Amba was the eldest, Ambika the second and Ambalika the 
youngest. On a chariot, I rode on my own to the city of Kasi and saw the 
three girls clad in finery and bejewelled, and I saw all the kings who had 
been invited there. 


Bharatarishabha, I seized the three princesses, lifted them into my 
chariot and said to the kings, J, Bhishma, son of Santanu, abduct these 
young women! O kings, do your best to rescue them. I am taking them away 
by force, with all of you as witnesses. 

The kings sprang up and shouted to their sarathies to fetch their 
chariots. Those Kshatriyas rode after me in their rathas, with weapons 
unsheathed—chariot warriors looking like dark clouds massed; those 
mounted on elephants, and others on horseback. They surrounded me with 
countless chariots, but I vanquished them all, as Indra does Danava hordes. 

Laughing, and easily, I cut down the kings’ many-coloured flags 
embroidered with gold thread. I felled their horses, elephants and sarathies, 
each one with a single arrow. Seeing my lightness of hand, they stopped 
fighting and yielded. I returned victorious to Hastinapura and brought the 
young princesses to Satyavati, as brides for my brothers, telling her 
everything I had done.””’” 


CANTO 175 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, ‘Bhishma said, “Coming before my mother Satyavati, 
a daughter of the dasa clan, I saluted her, the mother of heroes. 

I said to her, J defeated all the kings and took these daughters of Kasi, 
who have their beauty as dowry, to be Vichitravirya’s brides. 

Rajan, Satyavati’s eyes streamed tears as she sniffed my head in 
affection and she was joyous at my triumph. With Satyavati’s approval the 
nuptials approached, when Amba, the Kasi king’s eldest daughter spoke 
bashfully to me. 

She said, ‘Bhishma, you know dharma well and the shastras. Hear what 
I have to say and then do what you think is just. I had already chosen the 
king of the Salvas to be my husband before when you took me away from 
the swayamvara. He proposed to me privately, without my father’s 
knowledge. Can you, O Bhishma of the Kuru vamsa, go against dharma by 
forcing someone who longs for another to live in your household? Bear this 
in mind and decide what you will do. 

The king of the Salvas waits for me, and you must let me go to him. Be 
merciful to me, O most righteous of men. All the world knows of your 
devotion to dharma.””” 


CANTO 176 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, ‘Bhishma said, “I shared what Amba told me with 
my mother Kali, otherwise called Gandhavati, as well as with our 
ministers and our priests, and we allowed the eldest princess Amba to leave. 
She went to the city of the Salva king with an escort of Brahmana elders 
and her own maid. 

She went before the king and said, ‘Mahabaho, I have come to you, take 
me for your wife.’ 

But the king of Salva laughed and said to her, ‘Princess, you have 
already been taken by another, and I will not marry you. So, go back to 
Bhishma. He abducted you and I no longer desire you. When he defeated 
the other kings and took you away, you went happily. He humiliated and 
vanquished all the kings of the Earth, and I do not want another man’s 
leavings. I am a king and a lawmaker, who knows the shastras; how will I 
take a woman already given into my home? Devi, go wherever you wish; 
do not waste your time here.’ 

Amba, who was struck by Kama Deva’s subtle arrows, cried to Salva, 
‘Ah, do not say this, Rajan, for it is not true. Parantapa, I did not go happily 
with Bhishma. He seized me by force, defeated all the kings, and I wept the 
whole time. Accept me; I am innocent. 

The shastras do not approve of a man abandoning one who loves him. I 
told Bhishma about our love, begging him to release me, and I have come 


to you with his leave. Besides, Bhishma does not want me for himself; it is 
for his brother that he abducted me. He has given my two sisters Ambika 
and Ambalika to his younger brother Vichitravirya. O lord of the Salvas, I 
swear on my very life that I have never thought of any man but you as my 
husband. I do not come to you as a betrothed woman. I speak the truth, 
Salva; I swear it on my soul. 

Take me as a maiden who comes to you on her own, as one who is not 
promised to another, as one who asks for your grace.’ 

Although she spoke in this vein, Salva rejected the princess of Kasi, like 
a snake sloughing off his old skin. Although she entreated him repeatedly, 
the king of the Salvas would not relent. Then rage filled Amba and, her eyes 
streaming, she cried, “You may have cast me out, Rajan, but righteous 
people will protect me wherever I may go, for truth is indestructible.’ 

This is how the lord of the Salvas spurned the princess, who pleaded 
with him and sobbed so piteously in grief. 

The king of Salva said, ‘Go, go! I am in terror of Bhishma, you of the 
lovely hips, and you are Bhishma’s prize.’ 

Thus evicted by Salva, the princess Amba left his city, crying like an 


99999 


osprey. 


CANTO 177 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


ree B hishma said, “As she left the city, sobbing, Amba thought, ‘There is 
no woman in the world in as miserable a plight as me. Without family or 
friends and cast out by Salva, I cannot return to Hastinapura after begging 
Bhishma to let me leave. Who can I blame—myself, or the invincible 
Bhishma, or my father who held a swayamvara for me? 

Perhaps it is my own fault. I could have leapt off Bhishma’s chariot 
when he fought the other kings, and gone to Salva then. My turmoil and 
anguish are because I did not do that. I curse Bhishma. I curse my own 
wretched and misguided father, who fixed valour as my bride price, as if I 
were a commodity to be sold. I curse myself. I curse the king of Salva. I 
curse my Creator too. I curse them all, who have been the cause of my 
terrible misery. 

Human beings suffer what they are destined to; but the cause of my 
suffering is Bhishma, and I will avenge myself on him, either through 
tapasya or by battle. But is there a king who would dare face Bhishma in 
battle, to fight my cause?’ 

Deciding that she would have revenge on Bhishma, she set out for an 
asrama of virtuous Munis, where she stayed the night, protected by them. 
The once sweet-smiling devi told them all that had happened to her, to the 
smallest detail, of how Bhishma abducted her and how Salva betrayed her 
love. She begged their help. 


There lived in that asrama a Brahmana of great tapasya called 
Saikhavatya, who was a teacher of the shastras and aranyakas. This Muni 
said to the suffering princess, from whom pitiful sighs came like her very 
breath, ‘Princess, how will we Rishis, who perform tapasya in the forest, 
help you?’ 

Amba said, ‘Be merciful to me. I have renounced the world and wish to 
live in the forest. I will practise the severest of tapasya. My suffering is the 
result of the sins I committed in ignorance. I have no desire to return to my 
family, and grief has its way with me after Salva humiliated me. You are a 
godly man, who have washed away your sins; teach me how to perform 
tapasya. Be merciful to me.’ 

The Muni comforted her with examples and explanations from the 
scriptures, and he and the other Brahmanas promised to help her.”’” 


CANTO 178 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, ‘Bhishma said, “Those Munis then went about their 
daily chores, study, penance and worship, thinking all the while 
about what they could do for that devi. 

Some amongst them said that she should be taken back to her father; 
some said she ought to blame me; some thought that they should go to the 
king of Salva and persuade him to accept her; some disagreed with this for 
he had shamed her in his court. 

After some time had passed in such deliberations, Saikhavatya Muni 
said to her, “Devi, what can sadhus of self-restraint do for you? Do not 
renounce the world and devote yourself to a life in the forest. Listen to me; 
I speak for your good. Go from here to your father’s palace. Your father, the 
king, will do what needs to be done. You can live there happily, in luxury. 
You are a woman and, so, your only protector is your father. 

Fair child, a woman’s protector is either her father or her husband. Her 
husband is her protector when she is happy, but when she is plunged in grief 
it is her father she goes to. A life in the wilds is very difficult, especially for 
one who is delicate. You are a princess by birth and you are fragile. Devi, a 
life in the forest entails many hardships and tribulations, none of which you 
have known in your father’s house.’ 

The other Munis looked at the helpless girl and said, ‘Seeing you alone 
in the deep and lonely forest, wild hunters, bandits or even kings may seek 


to ravish you. Do not set your heart on a life of sannyasa.’ 

Amba said, ‘I cannot go back to my father’s house in Kasi, for I am 
certain to be shunned by all my relatives. Rishis, I spent my childhood 
there, but I cannot return to my father’s city. With your protection, I want to 
practise penance, so that someday I can be rid forever of suffering. 
Maharishis, I want to be a tapasvin.’ 

Whilst the Brahmanas deliberated on what to do with her, there came to 
that forest the mighty sage, Rajarishi Hotravahana. The Munis paid their 
homage to him and welcomed him courteously, offering him padya, arghya 
and a darbhasana. After he was seated and had rested a while, the Munis 
began to talk to the devi once more, in his hearing. 

Hearing the story of Amba and the king of Kasi, Hotravahana grew 
distraught. He heard how she spoke and saw how distressed she was, and 
that Rajarishi was moved to pity. In fact, Hotravahana was her grandfather, 
and he stood up suddenly, tears springing in his eyes; and, taking her onto 
his lap, he comforted her lovingly. He asked her in detail about her sorrows 
from the beginning, and she told him everything that had happened. He was 
filled with sadness when he had heard it all and decided what she should do. 

Trembling in some agitation, he said to the tormented girl, ‘Do not go 
back to your father’s house. Devi, I am your mother’s father. I will remove 
your grief; rely on me, child. Your suffering must be great that you are so 
wan and thin. You must go to Jamadagni’s son Parasurama Bhargava. He 
will rid you of your deep sorrow. He was Devavrata’s guru and will kill 
Bhishma in battle if the Kuru does not obey him. Go to that greatest of all 
the Bhrigus, whose tejas and urjas are like the flames of the pralaya. That 
Maharishi will set you on the right path.’ 

The girl, who wept on while he spoke, bowed her head reverentially to 
Hotravahana and said to him, ‘I will go to that greatest of sages, but will I 
succeed in even catching a glimpse of Parasurama, whose renown echoes 
through the world? How will the Bhargava dispel my torment? How will I 
find him? Tell me, O my grandfather.’ 

Hotravahana said, ‘You will find the mighty Parasurama in the great 
tapovana on the mountain Mahendra, where he sits in tapasya with many 
Rishis learned in the Vedas, many Gandharvas and Apsaras. Go with my 
blessings and tell the Mahamuni what I said, after first bowing your head to 
him in worship. He is a sage of strict vratas and fathomless ascetic punya. 


Tell him whatever you wish for. If you name me, Parasurama will do 
anything for you, for he is my devoted friend and always wishes me well.’ 

Even as Hotravahana was speaking to the princess, Akritavrana, a close 
companion of Parasurama’s, arrived there. All the hundreds of Munis and 
the Srinjaya king Hotravahana rose, and together they performed all the 
rituals of welcome and hospitality and then sat down around him. Delighted 
to have him amongst them, they spoke with him on many profound and 
wonderful subjects. When silence fell on the sacred gathering, Hotravahana 
asked Akritavrana where Parasurama was at the time. 

Akritavrana said, ‘Lord, Parasurama always speaks of you as his dear 
friend, and I believe he will arrive here tomorrow morning, for he comes 
even to see you. 

But why has this maiden come to the forest? Whose is she, and what is 
she to you? I wish to know all this.’ 

Hotravahana said, ‘She is the favourite daughter of the king of Kasi, and 
her mother is my daughter. She is Amba, the eldest daughter of the king of 
Kasi. She and her two younger sisters Ambika and Ambalika were in their 
swayamvara in Kasi, for which all the Kshatriya kings of the Earth had 
come. Great festivities were underway there, when Santanu’s son, Bhishma 
of mighty valour, brushed aside all the kings and abducted the three 
princesses. Bhishma of Bharata vamsa took them to Hastinapura and to 
Satyavati. He asked his brother Vichitravirya to marry the princesses he had 
brought. 

Seeing arrangements for the wedding being made, this devi Amba said 
to Bhishma, ‘O Kshatriya, in my heart I had already chosen the lord of the 
Salvas to be my husband. Knowing dharma as you do, you know that your 
brother must not marry me, when my heart is given to another.’ 

Bhishma consulted his ministers and after deliberation, and with 
Satyavati’s consent, gave Amba leave to go to Salva. She went to that king 
and told him that she had come with Bhishma’s permission; that she had not 
done anything to break adharma and that she had chosen him, Salva, for her 
husband. 

But Salva rejected her, suspecting her purity. Now she has come to these 
sacred forests, fervently wanting a life of tapasya. I recognised her from 
what she told me of her parentage. She blames Bhishma for her sorrow.’ 

Then Amba said to Akritavrana, ‘Holy one, what my grandfather says is 
true. I cannot go back to my own city for fear of disgrace and shame. I have 


decided to obey whatever Parasurama tells me to do.’ 


CANTO 179 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


kritavrana said, “Devi, for which of your two problems do you seek 

a remedy? Do you wish that the king of Salva should be persuaded 
to marry you? Parasurama Mahatman will certainly urge him to do so for 
your sake. Or, if you want to see Gangaputra Bhishma defeated in battle by 
Parasurama, Bhargava will gratify even that wish of yours. Let us hear what 
Hotravahana has to say further, and what you say as well, and decide today 
what should be done for you.’ 

Amba said, ‘Holy one, Bhishma abducted me without knowing that I 
had given my heart to Salva. Bear this in mind, and dharma, when you 
decide what I should do. Do what is just, towards both Bhishma and Salva. 
I have told you honestly about the root of my grief; now you must decide 
what is best for me.’ 

Akritavrana said, “Lovely Devi, what you say is imbued with dharma, 
and worthy of you. If Bhishma had not taken you to Hastinapura, Salva 
would have married you on Parasurama’s asking him to. It is because 
Bhishma carried you away by force that Salva is suspicious of you. 
Bhishma is proud of his valour and is crowned with success. Your 
vengeance should be directed at him.’ 

Amba said, ‘Dvija, I too dearly want to kill Bhishma in battle. 
Mahabaho, be it Bhishma or Salva, punish the man you think guilty, the one 
who has made me suffer.’ 


With a delicious, balmy breeze blowing, that day passed, and the night 
as well, while they discussed Amba’s plight. In the morning, awesome, 
splendid Parasurama arrives in that asrama, his matted hair in jata, clad in 
deer-skin and carrying his bow, sword and battle-axe. 

He came to Hotravahana, and that Rajarishi, all the Munis and the 
distressed princess stood up and waited on him with joined hands. They 
worshipped Bhargava with offerings of honey and curds, and he sat down in 
their midst, and Hotravahana and the great Bhargava began to speak of 
many profound and mysterious matters. 

Finally, at an opportune moment, Hotravahana said, ‘Rama, this girl is 
the daughter of my daughter and the king of Kasi. She needs your blessing 
from you. You are the lord of all things; I beg you, listen to what she has to 
say.’ 

Now Parasurama asked the princess to tell him what she wanted to say. 
Amba approached Parasurama, who blazed with tejas, like a fire. She laid 
her head at his feet in worship, touched them with her two lotus-like hands, 
and then stood silently before him. Overwhelmed by grief, and her eyes 
bathed in tears, she asked for his protection, for he was the refuge of all 
those in distress. 

Parasurama said, “Tell me what grief you hold in your heart, and I will 
do what needs to be done.’ 

Encouraged, Amba said, ‘O holy one of the great vratas, I seek refuge 
with you. Free me from my suffering and raise me out of this ocean of 
sorrow.’ 

Seeing her beauty and her youthful, tender body, Parasurama sat silently 
in thought for a time, filled with pity, wondering what she would ask. Then 
he asked Amba to tell him everything, and she told him all that had 
happened. 

Parasurama heard her out and, having first resolved what he should do, 
said to the exquisite girl, ‘Beautiful devi, I will send word to Kurusattama 
Bhishma. He will do whatever I ask, and if he does not, I will consume him 
in battle. Or, if you prefer, I can speak to the heroic king of the Salvas and 
tell him to marry you.’ 

Amba said, ‘O Bhargava, Bhishma allowed me to leave Hastinapura as 
soon as he heard that I had already given my heart to the lord of the Salvas. 
I went to Salva and spoke to him in forthright words. Doubtful of my purity, 


he refused to accept me. O great one, reflect on all this, and in your wisdom, 
do what you think is best. 

However, Bhishma is the root cause of my distress, for he assumed 
control over my life by carrying me away in his chariot. Ah, kill Bhishma 
for me, Mahabaho; it is because of him that I suffer so grievously. Bhishma 
is covetous, mean and proud of his victory. Anagha, you must punish him. 
In my heart I wished for Devavrata Bhishma’s death even while he was 
abducting me. Sinless Parasurama, gratify this desire of mine; slay 
Bhishma, as Purandara slew Vritra.”’” 


CANTO 180 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


°S anjaya says, “‘Bhishma said, “O Rajan, Parasurama said to the 

weeping girl, who repeatedly urged him to kill Bhishma, 

‘Daughter of Kasi, I do not take up arms on any account now except on 
behalf of Brahmanas. Tell me what else I might do for you. 

Both Bhishma and Salva are implicitly obedient to me. Do not grieve, I 
will accomplish what you wish for. But I will not take up arms, unless I am 
asked to by a Brahmana, for this is the law I live by.’ 

Amba said, ‘Ah, holy one, somehow dispel my misery, which Bhishma 
has caused. Do not delay, kill him!’ 

Parasurama said, ‘Princess of Kasi, you have only to ask and I will have 
Bhishma set your feet on his head.’ 

Amba said, ‘Parasurama, slay Bhishma, who roars like an Asura. If you 
want to allay my torment, let him call you to a duel and kill him there. You 
have given me your word that you will help now; you must not break it.’ 

Now Rishi Akritavrana intervened, ‘Mahabaho, you should not break 
your word to this child, who seeks your protection. If, when you summon 
Bhishma, he comes and does what you ask, or you humble him in battle, if 
he does not, Amba’s wish will be fulfilled and you will not forswear 
yourself. 

Mahamuni, you swore an oath that after you have conquered all the 
Kshatriyas, you would kill any man, be he a Brahmana, a Kshatriya, a 


Vaisya or a Sudra, who is an enemy of us Brahmanas. You also swore that 
as long as you lived you would not forsake anyone who sought your 
protection in fear. You also said that you would slay the arrogant warrior 
who vanquished all the Kshatriyas of the Earth. 

Lord, Bhishma, scion of Kuru vamsa, has achieved such a victory. Go to 
him now, O Bhargava, and humble him.’ 

Parasurama said, ‘Best of Rishis, I remember that vow I once took. 
However, in this instance, I must first use the way of conciliation as best I 
can. What the princess of Kasi wants is grave indeed, Brahmana. I will take 
her with me and go to Bhishma. If he does not do what I ask, I will kill that 
arrogant one. The arrows I shoot do not glance off the bodies of my 
enemies, but pass through them. You know this when I fought the 
Kshatriyas of the Earth and spilled their blood in rivers.’ 

Parasurama and the Brahmanas decided to set out from the asrama. 
They spent the night there and duly performed their homas and recited their 
prayers the next morning; then they set out, intending to kill me. 

Rajan, Parasurama came to Kurukshetra with the young princess and his 
followers. With the Bhargava at their head, those great Munis arrived on the 
banks of the Saraswati,” said Bhishma.’” 


CANTO 181 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, ‘Bhishma continued, “On the third day, Parasurama 
sent a message to say that he had come to help me. 

Hearing that this Rishi of tejas, vast as the ocean had entered our 
kingdom, I went to him at once, and in joy. A cow led my retinue, and 
many of our family priests went with me, as also other great Brahmanas, 
whom we employed for special occasions such as this. 

Parasurama accepted the worship that I offered and said to me, 
‘Bhishma, having cleansed yourself of desire, what were you thinking when 
you abducted the king of Kasi’s daughter during her swayamvara, and then 
later when you let her leave? You have sullied her virtue; and, since you 
have touched her who will marry her now? Salva spurned her because you 
abducted her. Take her for yourself, Narapumgava, and let this princess 
fulfil a woman’s dharma. It is not dharma that she be humiliated like this.’ 

I saw Parasurama’s anguish at the princess’ plight and said to him, ‘O 
my guru, there was no way that I could bestow this girl on my brother once 
she herself told me that she belonged to Salva; and so I let her go to him. As 
for me, I cannot break my vrata and abandon Kshatriya dharma; not for 
fear, pity, wealth or lust.’ 

Parasurama’s eyes rolled, and he said to me, ‘Bharatarishabha, if you do 
not do as I say, I will kill you and all your followers this very day,’ and he 
repeated this again and again in his fury. 


I pleaded with him, but to no avail. I bowed my head before that 
Brahmanottama and asked him why he wanted to fight me. 

I said, ‘When I was a child it was you who instructed me in all four 
parts of the Dhanurveda. I am your sishya, O Bhargava.’ 

His eyes still red, he retorted, “‘Bhishma, you acknowledge me as your 
guru, but you refuse to please me by taking this princess of Kasi for your 
wife. I will not be satisfied unless you do what I ask. Take this devi and 
safeguard the dharma of your vamsa; you abducted her forcibly from her 
swayamvara, and now she cannot find a husband. You must marry her 
yourself.’ 

I said, ‘That I cannot do. I am eager to please you because you were 
once my guru. I refused this princess before I was aware of the great evil 
that the frailties of women can bring. No man will welcome into his 
household a woman whose heart belongs to another, and who is, thus like a 
venomous snake. I would never forsake my dharma by breaking my solemn 
oath, not even for fear of Indra. Be gracious, or do to me now what you 
think is just. 

There is a sloka from the Puranas, which Maruta Mahatman once told 
me of: A man may disobey the command of even a guru who is filled with 
vanity, who does not know right from wrong and who walks a path of 
adharma. 

You are my guru and I have revered you out of my love for you. 
However, you do not know the dharma of a guru, and I would fight you. But 
I could never kill a guru in battle, especially if he is Brahmana, and more 
so, one who is blessed with boundless tapasya. And so I forgive you. 

It is a well known scriptural truth that no guilt attaches to a man who 
kills a Brahmana who has taken up arms as if he were a Kshatriya, and who 
fights in anger without trying to escape. I am a Kshatriya, and I am devoted 
to my dharma. One does not sin, neither does one do any harm, by treating 
a person as he deserves. When a man, who is aware of the timeliness of 
things, and versed in dharma and artha, is doubtful about anything, he 
should, without misgivings, follow his svadharma, for that will give him the 
most punya. 

O Bhargava, you have violated dharma by asking me to break my vow, 
and I have no qualms about fighting you. You know that my prowess is 
superhuman, and I will give my all when I face you on the field of 


Kurukshetra. Effulgent one, prepare yourself for single combat; take your 
position. 

My arrows will purify you and you will attain the regions to which your 
tapasya has entitled you. I will come to fight you, who so love battle, on 
Kurukshetra, where long ago you propitiated your ancestors with sea-like 
offerings of Kshatriya blood. There, Bhargava, I will propitiate those slain 
Kshatriyas by killing you. 

Come, do not delay. On Kurukshetra I will curb your pride, of which the 
Brahmanas speak. For long years you have boasted that you single- 
handedly slew all the Kshatriyas in the world. And well you could boast, for 
in those days Bhishma was not yet born, nor were there any Kshatriyas like 
him. Only later did the truly valiant Kshatriyas come into this world. 

All your vaunted conquests were against men of straw. The man who 
can quell your pride has since been born. I, Bhishma, am that man: the 
conqueror of enemy kingdoms. I will crush your pride of old conquests.’ 

Parasurama said to me, laughing, ‘I am glad that you will do battle with 
me, Bhishma. I will come to Kurukshetra with you even now. Yes, I will do 
what you want. Come there, and let your mother Jahnavi see you lying dead 
on the battlefield, pierced by my arrows and become carrion for vultures, 
crows and jackals. Let that Devi, whom the Siddhas and Charanas worship, 
Bhagiratha’s blessed daughter who took the form of a holy river and who 
gave birth to you, weep today when she sees you lying lifeless on 
Kurukshetra, although she does not deserve the grief of such a sight. 

Come, Bhishma; follow me, arrogant Kshatriya always hungry for 
battle, and bring your chariot and weapons.’ 

I worshipped Parasurama with my head bent and answered him by 
saying Tathaastu. 

He strode away toward Kurukshetra, and I went to our city to inform 
Satyavati of what had happened. I performed propitiatory rites for victory, 
took my mother’s blessings, and made the Brahmanas utter their blessings 
over me. I mounted a superb silver chariot yoked to white horses. It was 
finely crafted, spacious and covered on all sides with tiger-skin; it had many 
great weapons in it. My sarathy was a brave nobleman, an expert horseman 
and charioteer, and one who had seen many battles. 

I wore a white coat of mail and carried my white bow; and I set out, 
Bharatottama. A royal white parasol was held over my head and white 
chamaras waved over me. Clad in white silk and with white head-gear, all 


my adornments were also white. I rode out of Hastinapura to songs of 
praise and to the sound of Brahmanas wishing me victory, and I rode to 
Kurukshetra. 

Spurred by my sarathy, the steeds, fleet as the wind or the mind, bore 
me swiftly to the great encounter. Upon Kurukshetra, Parasurama and I, 
both keened for battle, would display our prowess. When I came within 
sight of Parasurama I blew a loud blast on my conch. Many Brahmanas and 
sadhus who lived in the forest had come to watch our duel. Divine garlands, 
celestial music and canopies of clouds were all around and above us, and 
the Rishis who had come with Bhargava stood on the periphery of the field. 

Suddenly, my divine mother Ganga, who washes the sins of men in her 
sacred waters, appeared before me in her human form and said, ‘What is 
this that you are about to do? I will go to Jamadagni’s son and beg him not 
to fight Bhishma, who is his disciple. My son, you are a Kshatriya; you 
must not fight Parasurama; he is a Brahmana.’ 

She continued to reproach me, ‘My son, Parasurama Bhargava is as 
powerful as Mahadeva himself; he once exterminated the entire Kshatriya 
varna. You do not know this as I do, who saw it all, and you want to face 
him in battle!’ 

I saluted the Devi reverentially and with folded hands recounted the 
events that had taken place at the swayamvara; I told her everything that 
happened with the princess of Kasi, and how I had tried to dissuade 
Parasurama from fighting me. 

My mother Ganga went to Parasurama and beseeched him to desist 
since I was his disciple. He said to her that she ought to urge me to obey 
him, and that he had challenged me because I refused to do what he 
wanted.” 

Out of her love for him, Ganga came back to persuade Bhishma to 
relent, but the angry Bhishma refused. And just then, Parasurama of the 
Bhrigu vamsa came to Bhishma and said they should begin their duel,’ says 
Sanjaya.” 


CANTO 182 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


“BR hishma said, “Smiling, I said to Parasurama, ‘You stand on the 
ground and I do not want to fight you from my chariot. Mount a chariot and 
put on a coat of mail, if you wish to fight me.’ 

He also smiled and said, “The Earth is my chariot and the Vedas are the 
steeds that pull me; the wind is my sarathy and the mothers of the Vedas are 
my coat of mail—Gayatri, Savitri and Saraswati. With their protection, I 
will fight.’ 

With that, he covered me with a barrage of arrows; and indeed I saw 
him, standing on a supernal chariot equipped with weapons of every kind. 
Wondrous was his chariot, created by his will, and great and beautiful, like 
a town. Celestial horses were yoked to it, and it was armoured on all sides. 
It was decked with ornaments of gold, covered with tough skins, and it bore 
the symbols of the Sun and the Moon. Parasurama was armed with a bow 
and quiver of arrows, and his fingers were encased in leather gloves. His 
friend Akritavrana was his sarathy. 

Parasurama repeatedly summoned me to battle, crying, Come, come, 
make me a happy man! And so that invincible exterminator of Kshatriya 
kind, resplendent like the rising Sun, became my adversary in battle. 

He showered me with three bursts of arrows, curbing my horses; I 
alighted from my chariot, set aside my bow and walked up to him. I paid 
reverent homage to him. 


I said, ‘My lord, whether you are equal or superior to me, I will fight 
you, my virtuous guru. Bless me and wish me victory.’ 

He said, “The man who desires victory should do as you have. Those 
who fight with warriors elder and more eminent than themselves must 
perform such homage. Kshatriya, I would have cursed you if you had not 
come to me in this way. Go; fight carefully and call on all your patience. I 
cannot, however, wish you victory, for I am here to vanquish you. Go, fight 
in dharma. I am pleased with you.’ 

Bowing to him, I quickly returned and, climbing onto my chariot once 
more, I blew my conch. The fervid duel between us began. It lasted many 
days. Parasurama drew first blood, striking me with nine hundred and sixty 
vulture-feather-winged arrows, which covered my horses and my sarathy, 
although I myself was unscathed in my coat of mail. 

Bowing to the Devas, and especially to the Brahmanas, I said to 
Parasurama, ‘Although you have shown scant respect for me, I have paid 
you full reverence as my guru. There is another auspicious duty to be 
discharged if you want to earn punya. I do not loose my arrows at the Vedas 
you have absorbed, or at you as a Brahmana or at your great tapasya. I take 
aim at the Kshatriya warrior you have chosen to become. When a Brahmana 
takes up weapons he becomes a Kshatriya. Now witness the power of my 
bow and the might of my arms. Look how I sever your bow with my single 
arrow!’ 

I shot a sharp broad-headed arrow at him and cut off one of the horns of 
his bow, which fell on the ground. I then shot a hundred arrows at his 
chariot. They flew through the air like serpents and pierced him. Blood 
covered his body and poured out. And he shone in battle, like Mount 
Sumeru with molten lava flowing down its sides, or like an asoka tree in 
spring when it is covered with red flowers, or the kinsuka tree in bloom. 

Angrily, he took up another bow and inundated me with keen, golden- 
winged arrows and, like snakes, fire or venom, these vicious barbs of terrific 
impetus flashed at me from all sides, piercing me deep and making me 
tremble. I gathered myself, and struck Parasurama with a hundred shafts 
that were like fire, or the Sun, and which also looked like snakes spitting 
venom, and he seemed to swoon away. 

Pity surged in me and I lowered my bow, in disgust of battle and 
Kshatriya dharma. Grief quite overwhelmed me and I kept saying to myself, 


Ah, great is the sin I have committed by observing my dharma.I have sorely 
wounded my own guru, who is a virtuous Brahmana, with arrows! 
Thousand-rayed Surya, having warmed the Earth, now sank away to his 


abode in the west at the close of day; and the duel between the Bhargava 
and me ceased.””’” 


CANTO 183 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


“°B hishma said, “After the day’s battle ended, my sarathy skilfully 
drew out the arrows embedded in his own body, from the bodies of our 
horses and from mine as well. The next morning, at sunrise, we resumed 
battle. 

My horses had been bathed, fed, given water and had rested, rolling 
luxuriantly in the grass, and they were re-invigorated. Seeing me come, in 
my coat of mail, Parasurama refitted his chariot with care. And when I saw 
him ride towards me, eager to fight, I put down my bow and got down from 
my chariot. I paid him worship, before climbing back on, and now stood 
fearlessly before him, ready for battle. 

I overwhelmed him with a thick shower of arrows, and he mantled me 
with a barrage of shafts in return. His rage mounting, my guru loosed a 
storm of serpentine shafts with blazing mouths. I retaliated with lakhs of 
arrows, cutting off his barbs before they could reach me. 

He now invoked devastras against me, which I repelled with greater 
astras of my own; the spirit of war risen in us absorbed both of us entirely. 
The thunder of astra fusing with astra rose into the sky. I cast the 
Vayavyastra at him, but he quelled it with his Varunastra. And so we fought, 
each of us subduing the astras of the other. 

Suddenly, he wheeled to my right and struck me squarely through the 
chest, and I fainted in my chariot. My sarathy quickly bore me away from 


the field. Great was the joy of Akritavrana, Amba and all Parasurama’s 
followers, who began to shout with joy when they saw me being borne 
away unconscious. 

Regaining my senses, I ordered my sarathy to take me back into battle, 
for I was recovered. He flicked his reins over the superb wind-swift horses, 
which seemed to dance as they flew across the plain, and we were soon 
there. 

In fury, and now determined to vanquish my adversary, I covered him 
with a deluge of arrows that fell from the sky. But the Bhargava shot three 
missiles for every one of mine and bisected my arrows in the air. His 
followers were joyous again, seeing my countless arrows cloven by his. 

Now the urge to kill him seized me. I struck him with an arrow of 
blazing effulgence, with Death sitting at its head. He fell unconscious from 
his chariot. Exclamations of Oh! and Alas! arose on all sides, and 
everywhere was confusion and alarm, as might have been if the Sun were to 
fall from the sky. 

All the gathered ascetics and the princess of Kasi rushed, in great 
anxiety, to where he lay. They embraced him and soothed him with the soft 
touch of hands cooled by having been dipped in water, and with assurances 
of victory. 

Parasurama rose, fixed an arrow to his bow and roared at me, Stay, 
Bhishma. You are slain! 

The arrow he shot at me pierced my left side and I began to tremble like 
a young tree in a gale. Calmly, he killed my horses and, with unearthly 
lightness of hand, shot locust-like swarms of winged arrows which 
enveloped me in darkness. I, too, loosed arrows beyond count to stem his 
tide. Our arrow clouds covered the sky, suspended there interlocked and not 
falling down. The Sun’s rays could not penetrate them and the wind could 
not pass through them. From their vast friction a conflagration flared up in 
the sky. Every arrow burst into flames and fell to the Earth as ashes. Beside 
himself with fury, Parasurama loosed crores and crores of deadly barbs at 
me; and I shot them into fragments and they fell around us like snakes 
chopped up. 

Finally, when the shadows of evening fell, my guru withdrew from the 
field.”’” 


CANTO 184 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, ‘Bhishma said, “The next day, the duel was no less 
frightful. Day by day, that Mahatman, master of celestial 
weapons, invoked more devastras, of diverse kinds. With no thought for my 
life, so difficult to sacrifice, in the ferocity of that duel, I baffled all his 
weapons with astras of my own. And, Bhaarata, when his astras proved 
ineffectual, Jamadagni’s mighty son cast a fierce and sorcerous lance at me, 
blazing like a meteor, with a flaming mouth, filling the whole world with its 
effulgence, and like Yama’s very dart. But I cut that missile in three, that 
occult weapon which shone like the Sun that rises at end of the yuga. 

At this, fragrant breezes began to blow around me. His anger burning 
higher, Bhargava loosed a ferocious astra at me. Their forms, Bhaarata, I 
cannot describe, but terrible was their lustre and speed. I saw those missiles 
flare at me from all sides, interminable tongues of flame, truly like the 
twelve suns that arise at the pralaya, and I was filled with fear. Holding my 
nerve, I doused the fire of those missiles with a great astra of water, and 
never pausing, shot down the twelve with twelve arrows of my own. 

Undeterred, Parasurama showered a fusillade of golden-winged darts 
over me, with variegated handles chased with gold, which were like comets 
afire. | warded them off with my shield and sword so they fell impotent on 
the ground. I covered Parasurama’s horses and charioteer with clouds of 


gold-shafted arrows. His wrath mounted further to see my barbs like snakes 
coming out of their nests, and once more he summoned the devastras. 

Locust-like swarms of missiles overwhelmed me, my steeds, my 
charioteer and my chariot. Indeed, Duryodhana, my ratha, horses and 
sarathy were completely enmeshed by those arrow nets. The yoke, shaft, 
wheels and the wheel-spokes of my chariot broke. 

When his arrow storm ceased, I, too, covered my guru with a heavy 
shower of weapons. That sage of Brahmic punya began to bleed copiously. 
I was also densely pierced by his barbs. 

When, at last, the Sun set behind the western hills, our savage duel 
ended for the day.””” 


CANTO 185 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


“°B hishma said, “The next morning, Bhargava and I resumed our 
contention. From his chariot, he rained a downpour of arrows on me, as 
clouds do on a mountain. My sarathy was struck and fell unconscious to the 
ground; to my great grief, he succumbed to his injuries. 

Rajan, fear gripped my heart, and while I was still numb Parasurama 
shot me with an arrow that pierced deep into my chest, and I fell to the 
ground with the arrow. Presuming that I was dead, Parasurama roared in 
triumph, like a thundercloud. All his followers rejoiced loudly with him, 
while the Kurus who had followed me, and all the rest who were watching, 
were stricken. 

As I lay there, I saw eight ethereal Brahmanas, who shone like the Sun. 
They surrounded me and picked me up in their arms. My breathing was 
laboured as they held me; and, sprinkling me with water and still carrying 
me, they blessed and reassured me repeatedly. Soothed by their words, I got 
up, and I saw my mother Ganga standing embodied on my chariot. 

O king of the Kurus, it was that great Devi who had held my horses’ 
reins after my sarathy fell. I worshipped my mother’s feet and my Pitrs, and 
I climbed onto my chariot with my weapons. I begged my mother to leave 
and took the reins myself and, restraining those steeds gifted with the speed 
of the wind, I resumed my duel with Parasurama and we fought until that 
day ended. 


I shot him with an arrow that pierced his breast, so he lost his grip on 
his bow and fell onto his knees, and then out of his chariot, unconscious. 
Masses of clouds filled the sky and rained blood. Hundreds of meteors fell 
and thunder rolled across the sky, making everything tremble. Rahu covered 
the Sun, and violent winds blew. The Earth herself trembled, and vultures, 
crows and cranes began to alight in joy, in anticipation of a feast. The points 
of the horizon seemed to be on fire, and jackals howled. Drums rang out 
spontaneously in cacophony. When the great Parasurama embraced the 
Earth all these frightful omens of evil appeared. 

All of a sudden, he arose and came towards me, more furious than ever 
and ready to fight again. That Mahabaho took up his bow of immeasurable 
power and shot a deadly arrow at me; but I struck it down in flight. The 
Rishis who watched were filled with horror and pity, but Bhargava felt only 
rage. I shot an arrow fulgurant as the fires of the pralaya, but Parasurama of 
the fathomless soul baffled my weapon. Clouds of dust obscured the 
splendour of the Sun as it moved to the western sky. Night came with its 
cool breezes, and both of us suspended our duel till the morrow. 

In this way, stopping when dusk came and resuming at daybreak, we 
fought relentlessly for twenty-three days.””’ 


CANTO 186 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ S anjaya says, “‘Bhishma said, “That night, after paying my respects 

to the Brahmanas, the Rishis, the Devas, the creatures of the night 

and the kings of the Earth, I lay down on my bed, and in the solitude of my 
chamber I began to reflect. 

I thought to myself, The battle between Bhargava and me has gone on 
for many days without my being able to defeat this tejasvin. If indeed I am 
going to overcome Parasurama, then let the gods appear before me tonight. 

As I lay asleep on my right side, my body fairly mangled by arrows, the 
same Brahmanas who had lifted me up when I fell from my chariot on the 
field, and who reassured me then, appeared in a dawn dream. They stood 
around me and said: 

‘Rise, Kurupravira. Gangaputra, have no fear; we will protect you, for 
you are our own body. Jamadagni’s son Parasurama can never vanquish you 
in battle. Instead, you will conquer him. In another life you commanded the 
matchless Praswapastra, which belongs to the Lord of all creatures, and 
which Tvashtri forged; it shall be yours again to invoke. Neither 
Parasurama nor anyone else but you knows it. Think hard of it, Mahabaho, 
and it will come to you on its own. 

With the Praswapa, you can vanquish the greatest tejasvins of the world. 
But you will not be able to kill Parasurama, so you will not sin by using it 


against him. Overpowered by the mighty astra, Parasurama will fall into 
sleep, and you will awaken him with the Sambodhanastra. 

In the morning, from your chariot, do what we have said. We think of 
sleep and death as being the same; Parasurama will not actually die, but fall 
into a deathlike slumber. At the right moment, invoke the Praswapastra 
gladly and use it against the Bhargava.’ 

Saying this, those eight lustrous and identical Brahmanas vanished.”’” 


CANTO 187 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


eee B hishma said, “When the night passed, I awoke and, thinking of my 
dream, was filled with joy. Then, Bhaarata, we took to the field again and 
fought with so far unprecedented ferocity, so the hairs of all those who 
watched stood on end. 

Bhargava unleashed a deluge of arrows over me, but I checked it with a 
rising shower of my own. Then, filled with wrath at what he had seen the 
day before and what he now saw, he hurled an occult spear at me, as hard 
and as brilliant as Indra’s Vajra, like Yama’s very mace. It flew towards me, 
flaming, hungrily consuming the whole battlefield, before falling on my 
shoulder like a bolt of lightning. 

Blood gushed from me like streams bubbling down a mountain after 
rain. Shaken, stung, I shot a naracha like a venomous snake at him. It struck 
him on the brow, ah, turning him so handsome, like a crested hill. He 
assumed a fresh archer’s stance, drew his bowstring taut and shot a deathly 
shaft at me. It streaked through the air and took me in the chest. I fell on the 
ground, covered in blood. 

Coming quickly awake, I cast a dazzling missile, another veritable 
thunderbolt, which pierced his breast, so he trembled and, his eyes glazing 
over, swooned. Akritavrana held him close and comforted him. Waking, his 
eyes now turned red as plums, and Parasurama invoked the Brahmastra. I 


called upon the same astra myself, and the two weapons fused high above 
us and broke into a conflagration that occurs only at the end of a yuga. 

The sky was on fire; all the Earth’s creatures were terrified; the Rishis, 
the Gandharvas and the Devas panicked; the Earth, her mountains, seas and 
trees shook violently; and every living being burned in the energy the fused 
astras radiated. As the sky blazed, all ten points of the horizon billowed 
with smoke, and sky creatures fell helplessly to the ground. 

The whole world with the Devas, the Asuras and the Rakshasas cried 
out in terror, and I thought that the time had come for me to invoke the 
Praswapastra. At my very thought, the mantras for the astra flashed into my 
mind.”’” 


CANTO 188 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


“°B hishma said, “A tumult of unearthly voices sounded in the sky, 
begging me not to invoke the Praswapastra. When I still aimed the astra at 
the Bhargava, Narada appeared there and said to me, ‘In the sky, O 
Kaurava, are the Devas. They forbid you from what you are about to do. Do 
not loose the Praswapastra. Parasurama is a tapasvin of Brahma punya, and 
he is also your guru. Never humiliate him.’ 

As Narada spoke, I saw those eight Brahmanas in the sky. Smiling, they 
said to me, ‘Bharatottama, do as Narada says, for it will benefit the whole 
world.’ 

I recalled that astra and invoked, instead, the Brahmastra. When 
Parasurama saw the Praswapastra being withdrawn, he exclaimed, Bhishma, 
you have vanquished this wretch! 

Then he saw before him his father and his grandfathers. They stood 
around him and spoke words of consolation to him, “Never again challenge 
Bhishma or any Kshatriya to a fight, Bhargava, for it is their dharma to fight 
and not yours. The study of the Vedas and practice of vratas are a 
Brahmana’s greatest wealth. Once, we did indeed command you to take up 
arms, and you annihilated all the Kshatriyas of the world. Let this battle 
with Bhishma be your last, for you have done enough already. Retreat from 
battle, Mahabaho. Our blessings be upon you. Let this be the last time you 
pick up a bow. Throw your weapon away and return to your tapasya. 


See how the Devas forbid Bhishma. They try to pacify him and make 
him desist from this battle; they try to prevent him from fighting against 
you, who are his guru, for, they say, it is not proper that he vanquishes you 
in battle. They tell him to do you every honour on the field. As his superiors 
they forbid him to humiliate you. 

Bhishma is the greatest of the Vasus. You are fortunate to be alive. How 
can you defeat this son of Santanu and Ganga? Stop, Bhargava. Brahma has 
ordained that Indra’s mighty son Arjuna will be the one to slay Bhishma.’ 

Parasurama answered his Pitrs, ‘I cannot abandon a battle; that is my 
solemn vow. I have never yet given up a fight or left any battlefield. 
Pitamahas, if you so wish, tell Bhishma to stop, for I cannot.’ 

Hearing him, the Rishis with Richika at their head came to me with 
Narada and said, ‘Bhishma, desist from battle. Honour your guru the 
Bhargava.’ 

I replied, ‘In keeping with Kshatriya dharma I have sworn never to 
yield in battle, or turn my back, or allow arrows to strike me in the back. 
Not from temptation, distress, fear, or for any gain or wealth, renounce my 
dharma. In this I am resolved.’ 

All those tapasvins and Narada, as well as my mother Bhagirathi, stood 
on the battlefield before me. I stood quietly, with my bow and arrows as 
before, determined to fight on. 

They turned towards Rama once more and said to him, ‘The hearts of 
Brahmanas are soft like butter. Be pacified, Bhargava, give up this battle. 
You cannot kill Bhishma; and neither can he kill you.’ 

They stood between us as they spoke and made Bhargava set aside his 
weapons. Just then I saw those eight Brahmanas once more, irradiant, and 
like bright stars in the sky. 

They said to me gently, with great love, ‘Mahabaho, Parasurama is your 
guru; you must go to him first. Do what is good for the world.’ 

When I saw that the Bhargava restrained himself, I too, set aside my 
weapons, for the weal of the world. Although I was sorely wounded, I came 
before Parasurama and worshipped him. 

The Maharishi smiled and, with great affection, said to me, ‘There is no 
Kshatriya equal to you on Earth. Go now, Bhishma, for you have pleased 
me greatly in battle.’ 

He summoned the princess of Kasi into our presence and spoke to her 
with some regret in the midst of all those Mahatmans.”’” 


CANTO 189 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, “Bhishma said, “Parasurama said, ‘Devi, in the 

presence of all these great ones, I put forth all my prowess and 

fought as hard as I could. Even by using the most formidable astras I could 

not prevail over Bhishma. Beautiful Amba, go wherever you wish, unless 

there is something else you want from me. Seek refuge with Bhishma, for 

you have no other now. He has vanquished me in battle.” The Bhargava 
sighed and fell silent. 

Amba said, ‘Holy one, it is true what you say: Bhishma of the great 
intellect cannot be vanquished, even by the Devas. You have done what I 
asked, as best you could. You used tejas that cannot be dimmed and 
weapons of all kinds. Yet, you could not conquer Bhishma. As for myself, I 
will not go to Bhishma a second time. Instead, I will go to the place where I 
might acquire the means to kill Bhishma in battle myself.’ 

Saying this, Amba left, wild-eyed in anger, my death her sole aim, and 
resolved to devote herself to tapasya. Bhargava bid me farewell and, with 
the tapasvins, departed for the mountains from where they had come. I also 
left on my chariot, praised by the Brahmanas, and when I entered 
Hastinapura I told my mother Satyavati everything that had taken place; and 
she invoked blessings on me. 

I sent forth trusted agents to discover where Amba had gone and what 
she did, and these loyal spies brought me regular reports of her, from day to 


day. When Amba went into the forest, resolved to perform tapasya, 
melancholy and heartache gripped me and I became unwell. No Kshatriya 
can vanquish me in battle, other than one who knows Brahman, and who 
observes perfectly austere and praiseworthy vratas. 

O king, I humbly told Narada and Vyasa all about Amba, and they both 
said to me, ‘Bhishma, do not yield to sorrow because of the princess of 
Kasi. Who would try to avert destiny by his own efforts?’ 

Meanwhile, Amba went to live near some asramas and began practising 
tapasya so stern that it was beyond human endurance and belief. Without 
food, emaciated, dry, with matted-locks and grimy, for six months she lived 
only on air, and stood immobile like a post. After this, that devi, now rich in 
tapasya, fasted for a year, standing in the waters of the Yamuna. The whole 
of the next year, her anger unabated, she stood on her toes, having eaten 
only one fallen leaf. In this way, for twelve years, she scalded heaven with 
her austerities, and though her relatives tried to dissuade her, she would not 
be moved. 

She then went to Vatsabhumi tirtha, the retreat of lofty, pious Rishis, 
and where Siddhas and Charanas lived. There she bathed frequently in the 
sacred waters and wandered about as she pleased. In this way she went to 
many tirthas, one after the other. She went to Narada’s asrama, then to 
Uluka’s, then to Chyavana’s, then to the place most sacred to Brahmanas, 
then to Prayaga the yagnashala of the gods, then to that forest sacred to the 
gods, then to Bhogavati, then to the Viswamitra’s asrama, to Mandavya’s, to 
Dilipa’s, then to the sacred lake Ramahrida, and then to the hermitage of 
Garga. In the sacred waters of all these places the princess of Kasi 
performed ablutions, while constantly observing the most difficult of vratas. 

One day, from the waters my mother Ganga asked her, “Blessed devi, 
why do you torture yourself like this? Tell me truly.’ 

That faultless princess answered with folded hands, ‘O you of the 
beautiful eyes, Bhishma vanquished Parasurama. What other Kshatriya king 
would venture to face Bhishma in battle when he has his weapons raised? I 
am performing the severest tapasya in order to kill Bhishma. I wander over 
the Earth with just one purpose—that I obtain the means to kill that 
Kshatriya. Devi, in everything I do this is my only goal.’ 

Ganga said, ‘Devi, what you do is not wise. Weak girl, you will never 
achieve your end. If you observe these vratas for Bhishma’s death, and if 
you lose your own life whilst doing so, you will become a river in your next 


birth, sourceless, its course crooked and filled only by rain water. All the 
bathing ghats along your course will be difficult to reach and filled only 
during the rainy season. You will be dry for eight months of the year. You 
will be full of terrible crocodiles and other frightful monsters. * 

Speaking to Amba in this way, my mother Ganga, the thrice-blessed 
Devi, sent the princess of Kasi away. Amba renewed her tapasya, going 
without food and water, sometimes for eight months and sometimes for ten. 
She wandered here and there in her passionate quest of holy tirthas until she 
came back once more to Vatsabhumi. It is here that she became a river, 
filling only during the monsoon, abounding with crocodiles, her waters 
flowing a crooked course, and difficult to find or ford. But, O king, because 
of her tapasya only half of her turned into this river in Vatsabhumi, while 
her other half remained a woman.”’” 


CANTO 190 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, “Bhishma said, “All the Rishis living in Vatsabhumi 

saw how intent the princess of Kasi was in her tapasya, and they 

tried to dissuade her from it. The aged ascetics asked her what she wanted, 

to which Amba responded, ‘Bhishma cast me out and deprived me of the 

dharma of living with a husband. I keep these vratas for his destruction, and 

not to gain Swarga. O you of tapasyadhana, I will find peace only with 
Bhishma’s death. 

I will not rest until I kill the son of Ganga in battle. All my grief is 
because of him; he has robbed me of the punya I would have gained by 
having a husband; because of him I am neither man nor woman. As a 
woman, I no longer have any desire. I want to be a man, for then I can take 
my revenge on Bhishma. So, you should not try to keep me from my 
penance.’ And she kept repeating this to the munis. 

Soon, the divine lord of Uma, the Trisulin, appeared before that 
tapasvini who lived amongst the Maharishis. Mahadeva Siva told her to ask 
for a boon; she begged for my death. 

You shall slay him, were the words Siva said to that devi of the great 
strength of mind. 

Amba was reassured but said again to him, ‘How can I, a woman, defeat 
mighty Bhishma in battle? Umapati, as a woman, my heart is perfectly 


calm. However, you have promised me Bhishma’s death. Vrishabdhvayja, do 
what you must to keep your word that I will kill Santanu’s son in battle.’ 

The Devadeva said to Amba, ‘The words I have uttered cannot be false. 
Blessed Amba, they will prove true. You will become a man and slay 
Bhishma. You will also remember everything about this life even when you 
inhabit a new body. You will be born in Drupada’s house and become a 
Maharatha. You will be swift in the use of astras, and a fierce warrior; and 
you will be skilled in battle. O princess, all that I have said will be come to 
pass, in time.’ 

The god of gods, the Kapardin, who has the bull for his emblem, 
vanished while the Brahmanas looked on in awe. Without delay, that 
faultless and lovely princess, eldest daughter of the king of Kasi, gathered 
wood from the forest and, in the presence of those Maharishis, heaped a 
large funeral pyre on the banks of the Yamuna. She lit it, and eagerly 
entered the blaze, her heart yet another fire. As she walked into the flames, 
she repeatedly reminded herself of her purpose, This I do for Bhishma’s 
death.””’” 


CANTO 191 
AMBOPAKHYNA PARVA CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, “Duryodhana said, “Tell me, Pitamaha, how Amba, 
having been a woman, later became a man.” 

Bhishma said, ‘Duryodhana, the eldest and beloved queen of king 
Drupada of the Panchalas was at first childless. Drupada went into the vana 
and worshipped Lord Sankara with a fervid tapasya for the sake of sons, for 
he wanted to have a son who would kill me. 

He begged Mahadeva, ‘Let a son, and not a daughter, be born to me. I 
want a son to take revenge on Bhishma.’ 

Mahadeva said to him, ‘You shall have a child who will be both female 
and male. Stop your penance, king, it will not be otherwise.’ 

Returning to his capital, Drupada said to his wife, ‘Devi, I worshipped 
Siva and He said to me that my child would be a daughter first and then 
become a man. 

And though I asked him repeatedly, all Siva said was, ‘This is fate’s 
decree. It will not be otherwise; that which is destined must come to be.’ 

Drupada’s queen came to Drupada as her fertile time drew near. 
Purifying herself, she came to him and in due time she conceived. Narada 
told me this. And that lady, of eyes like lotus-petals, held the embryo in her 
womb, and Mahabaho Drupada saw to his beloved dear wife’s every 
comfort. Kaurava, the queen of that childless lord of the Earth had all her 
wishes granted when she gave birth to a beautiful daughter. 


The strong-minded queen announced that she had given birth to a son. 
King Drupada had all the samskaras prescribed for a male child to be 
performed for his daughter, as if she were a son. Drupada’s queen guarded 
her secret closely; nobody in the city other than she and Drupada knew the 
sex of the child. With faith in what the ever-glorious Siva had said, the 
Panchala king also kept the secret, saying, /t is a son. 

Drupada named the child Sikhandin. But, through my spies and from 
Narada’s news, I knew the truth, for I knew from my spies about Amba’s 
tapasya and what Siva had promised her.””’ 


CANTO 192 
AMBOPAKHYNA PARVA CONTINUED 


* “B hishma said, “O Parantapa, Drupada paid careful attention to the 
education of his daughter. He taught her writing, painting and all the arts. In 
the astra shastra the child became a disciple of Drona. And when the time 
came, Sikhandin’s lovely mother urged her husband to find a wife for their 
daughter, as if she were a son. 

When the king saw that his daughter had reached puberty and her 
femininity become apparent, he spoke to his queen. 

Drupada said, ‘Our daughter, who fills me with sorrow, has attained 
maturity. On the strength of Mahadeva’s word, I have so far kept the truth 
secret.’ 

The queen said, ‘Great king, what Siva says can never be untrue! Why 
would the Lord of the three worlds say something that will not happen? If it 
pleases you, my husband, listen to what I have to say and then follow your 
own heart. Have our child married to a young woman, for Siva words can 
never prove false. Of this I am certain.’ 

The royal couple chose the daughter of the king of the Dasarnakas to be 
Sikhandin’s wife. Drupada, lion among kings, made inquiries from all the 
kings of the world about the purity of her lineage before he chose this 
maiden. And Hiranyavarman of the Dasarnakas gave his daughter to 
Sikhandin. 


Hiranyavarman was a powerful king, not easy to vanquish. He himself 
was irresistible and he had a large army. A while after the wedding, 
Hiranyavarman’s daughter attained puberty. Sikhandin returned to 
Kampilya and his wife soon knew that her husband was a woman like 
herself. Shyly, Hiranyavarman’s daughter told her sakhis and servant-maids 
about Sikhandin’s secret. 

The women who had come to Kampilya with the Dasarnaka princess 
were aghast and sent word to Hiranyavarman. When he heard about the 
fraud that had been perpetrated against him, Hiranyavarman was beside 
himself, and sent a messenger to Drupada’s palace. 

The king’s messenger approached Drupada and said to him in private, 
‘Rajan, the king of the Dasarnakas is outraged at the deceit you have shown 
him. Sinless one, he is furious and he said these words to you: 

Foolish Drupada, you have humiliated me by making my daughter your 
daughter’s wife. Now reap the consequence of your vile deception; wait just 
awhile, and I will kill you with all your relatives and advisors!’” said 
Bhishma.’” 


CANTO 193 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


6 S anjaya says, ‘Bhishma said, “Drupada, found out, was numbed by 
Hiranyavarman’s message. He made every effort to pacify the 
Dasarnaka king; he sent messengers to him with instructions to speak 
sweetly and persuasively. King Hiranyavarman, however, having confirmed 
that the child of the Panchala king was really a daughter, left Kampilya 
immediately. 

He sent messages to all his powerful friends about what Drupada had 
done. That best of kings mustered a great army to march against Drupada. 
Hiranyavarman consulted his ministers, and it was decided that they should 
bind Drupada and drag him out of his city; and after installing another king 
to rule over the Panchalas, they would kill both Drupada and Sikhandin. 

Hiranyavarman again sent a duta to Drupada with the same message, / 
will kill you, just wait. 

King Drupada was not naturally brave and, because he was guilty, he 
was filled with fear. He sent his own messenger again to Hiranyavarman to 
placate him; and panic-stricken by now, he went to his wife to discuss the 
matter with her. 

The terrified king said to his favourite wife, Sikhandin’s mother, ‘The 
powerful Hiranyavarman has gathered a large force and is coming here in 
rage. My queen, we have both been fools; what are we to do now about 
Sikhandin? Hiranyavarman and his allies want to kill me for deceiving him. 


O you of the beautiful hips, tell me what you think, and I will decide 
what to do. I am in grave peril and so is Sikhandin. Why, my queen, you are 
also in danger. For all our sakes, tell me where you think dharma lies. 

Although you misled me about my duty towards our son, who is no son 
at all, I show you both mercy. So have no fear, and do not let our daughter 
be afraid either. 

I have indeed deceived the king of the Dasarnakas. Tell me what I must 
do now so that everything turns out well?’ 

Drupada had always known the truth about Sikhandin, but now he 
spoke to his wife in the presence of others in this way, to proclaim his own 
innocence. And his queen answered him.”’” 


CANTO 194 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


“B hishma said, “Sikhandin’s mother openly declared the truth about 
her daughter, keeping up the pretence that Drupada had not known the truth. 

She said, ‘I was childless, Rajan, and it was from fear of your other 
wives that, when she was born, I pretended that our daughter was a son. Out 
of your love for me, you did not question me and had all the samskaras for a 
son performed, for our Sikhandin. You had her married to the daughter of 
the king of Dasarnakas, and, remembering the words of Mahadeva, I 
approved of the wedding. I did not try to stop the marriage because Siva 
said, She will be born a daughter, and she will become a son. 

Thus, subtly, Drupada Yajnasena informed all his counsellors of the 
truth, and sought their advice on how to protect his subjects from 
Hiranyavarman’s invasion. Although he had himself deceived the king of 
the Dasarnakas, he made it seem as if he had not known about Sikhandin’s 
sex; and then he turned his undivided attention to the looming threat from 
Hiranyavarman. 

King Drupada’s city was already well-protected, but he now bolstered 
its fortifications. The king and his queen were, however, consumed by the 
thought of how to avoid a war. Drupada began to pay fervent homage and 
adoration to the gods, and his wife did as well. 

Then she said to him, ‘Paying homage to the gods has its benefits and is 
approved of by the righteous. What shall I say of those that are plunged in 


an ocean of distress? Pay homage to your elders and superiors and worship 
all the gods; making bounteous gifts to Brahmanas; pour oblations on the 
fire to pacify the ruler of the Dasarnakas. My lord, think of a way of 
pacifying Hiranyavarman without a war. The grace of the gods will help 
you make peace with him. 

Take the counsel of your ministers for the protection of our city. Do 
everything they advise, for reliance on the gods, when supported by human 
effort, always leads to success. These two must go hand-in-hand; one by 
itself cannot be successful. So, consult your advisors and make every 
arrangement to defend our city, and also worship the gods.’ 

While husband and wife were conversing, both full of grief and fear, 
their hapless daughter Sikhandin was full of shame and guilt. Thinking that 
it was because of her that her parents were in such anguish, she decided to 
end her life. She left Kampilya, her heart breaking, and went into a dense 
and lonely forest that was the haunt of a formidable Yaksha called 
Sthunakarna, for fear of whom no-one ever entered that forest. 

In that vana stood a mansion with high walls; it was plastered with clay 
and rich with smoke that bore the fragrance of roasted paddy. Sikhandini 
entered that mansion and began to emaciate herself by fasting for many 
days. The Yaksha named Sthuna, who was a kindly being, appeared before 
her. 

He said to her, ‘What is the purpose of your endeavour? I will 
accomplish it for you; tell me what it is.’ 

Sikhandini replied, ‘You cannot.’ 

The Yaksha retorted, smiling, ‘Accomplish it I will! I am a follower of 
the Lord of treasures and I can grant boons, princess. I will grant you even 
the impossible. Tell me what you want.’ 

Now Sikhandini told Sthunakarna everything that had happened, in 
detail. She said, ‘O Yaksha, my father will soon meet his end. The king of 
the Dasarnakas marches against him in rage. Hiranyavarman in his golden 
armour is mighty and invincible. Yaksha, save me, my mother and my 
father! You have already said you will give me what I want. Through your 
grace, Yaksha, I want to become a man in all my parts. Be gracious to me, 
great Yaksha.””’ 


CANTO 195 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


vee B hishma said, “Bharatarishabha, the Yaksha heard Sikhandin’s 
strange story and saw it was fraught with destiny, when she said, ‘It was all 
pre-ordained, and it was ordained for my grief.’ 

The Yaksha said, ‘Blessed princess, I will do what you wish. Listen, 
however, to the condition I have. For a specified time, I will give you my 
own manhood, and take your womanhood upon myself. But you must come 
back to me at the specified time. Promise me this, and you shall become a 
man. I am a ranger of the skies and wander at my pleasure; I have great 
powers and I can accomplish whatever I want. Take my boon, and save 
your city and all your kin. Swear in truth to return my manhood to me, and I 
will do what you want.’ 

Sikhandin said to him, “Holy one of most excellent vows, I will return 
your manhood to you. Wanderer of the night, bear my womanhood for a 
short time only. After the king of the Dasarnakas, who wears golden mail, 
has left my city, I will become a woman once more and you will be a man 
again.’ 

Thus, the two made a pact with each other and exchanged their genders. 
The Yaksha Sthuna became a female, while Sikhandin obtained the 
resplendent form of the Yaksha. 

Sikhandin of the Panchala vamsa entered Kampilya in great joy and 
approached his father. He told Drupada everything that had happened and 


Drupada heard it and was very glad; and the king and his wife remembered 
Mahadeva’s words. 

Forthwith, Drupada sent a messenger to Hiranyavarman saying that his 
Sikhandin was indeed a son. Meanwhile, the king of the Dasarnakas arrived 
suddenly outside Kampilya and despatched a messenger to the Panchala 
king, a man who was one of the foremost of Vedic scholars. 

The king of the Dasarnakas said to his messenger, ‘O duta, say to that 
worst of kings, the ruler of the Panchalas: 

O evil-minded one, you chose my daughter as a wife for your daughter. 
Today, you will taste the fruit of deception.’ 

The Brahmana messenger went before Drupada. The king of the 
Panchalas, with Sikhandin, offered the duta a cow and honey. However, 
without accepting that worship, the Brahmana delivered Hiranyavarman’s 
rough message. 

The duta said, ‘My lord Hiranyavarman says: O vile Drupada, you have 
deceived me. I will kill you and all your counsellors, sons and kin! 

Forced to listen to King Hiranyavarman’s censure in the midst of his 
counsellors, Drupada assumed a mild and friendly manner and said, “My 
reply to my brother’s words I will send to him with my duta.” 

Drupada sent a Brahmana, learned in the Vedas, to Hiranyavarman. 

The messenger delivered this message: “Sikhandin is my son, you can 
have him examined. Somebody has lied to you; do not believe the liar.” 

King Hiranyavarman of the Dasarnakas was filled with sorrow. He sent 
some beautiful virgins to ascertain the truth about Sikhandin’s sex. These 
maidens returned and told the king that Sikhandin was a powerfully built 
man. The king of the Dasarnakas was filled with great joy. He accepted 
Drupada’s hospitality and stayed happily with him for a while. 

In his joy, he gave Sikhandin much wealth, many elephants, horses, 
cows and bulls. For as long as he was there, Drupada treated him 
worshipfully, and, before leaving, Hiranyavarman rebuked his daughter for 
what she had done. Sikhandin rejoiced that Hiranyavarman left in joy and 
with his anger pacified. 

Meanwhile, a while after Sikhandin became a man, Kubera, in the 
course of his wanderings over the world, borne as always on the shoulders 
of men, arrived at the home of the Yaksha Sthuna. From the sky, he looked 
down at the Yaksha Sthuna’s palace and saw that it was adorned with 
beautiful garlands of flowers, and perfumed with fragrant extracts of fine 


grass and other sweet scents. It was decked with canopies, and incense 
wafted in the air. Beautiful flags and banners adorned the palace, which was 
filled with food and drink of every kind. 

Kubera, lord of the Yakshas, saw Sthuna’s glorious abode filled also 
with strings of jewels and gems, perfumed with the fragrance of many 
different kinds of flowers, well-watered and swept. 

He said to the Yakshas in his train, “My mighty ones, grand indeed is 
this mansion of Sthuna’s, but why does the wicked one not come out to 
greet me, though he knows I am here? He deserves some stern 
punishment.” 

The Yakshas said, “Lord, the king Drupada had a daughter born to him, 
named Sikhandini. Sthuna has given her his own manhood and become a 
woman in her place. He remains inside his palace because he is ashamed to 
come before you. Now do what you think is right.” 

Kubera ordered his chariot to stop there and Sthuna brought before him, 
still repeatedly vowing to punish Sthuna. Summoned by the lord of 
Yakshas, Sthuna came out and stood before his Lord, head bent in shame. 

The Lord of treasures cursed him in anger, “Guhyakas, let this wretched 
Yaksha remain a woman! 

Sinner, you have shamed all Yakshas by giving your manhood to 
Sikhandini and becoming a woman. You have done what no one has ever 
done before, and from this day you shall remain a woman and she a man.” 

Now all the Yakshas tried to pacify him for Sthunakarna’s sake and 
begged him to limit his curse. 

Kubera relented, “After Sikhandin’s death, O Yakshas, this one will 
regain his own form. So, let the noble Sthuna not worry.” 

And the illustrious lord of the Yakshas received worship and departed 
with his colourful and wild people, who could travel great distances in short 
time. And, thus cursed, Sthuna continued living in his fine sanctuary. 

When Hiranyavarman left, Sikhandin came at once to the Yaksha 
Sthuna, as he had promised. Sthuna was pleased that the prince had kept his 
word, and he told Sikhandin everything that had happened. 

The Yaksha said equably, “O Kshatriya, because of you, Vaisravana 
cursed me. Go now and live happily amongst men as you please. Both your 
arrival and Kubera’s visit were fated, and they could not be avoided.” 

Sikhandin went back to his city, full of joy. He worshipped the gods, the 
Brahmanas, the great ancestral trees and the crossroads with all kinds of 


garlands and costly gifts. Drupada, king of the Panchalas, his son Sikhandin 
whose wish had been crowned with success, and his kinsmen, all rejoiced. 
The king sent his son Sikhandin, who had once been a woman, to Acharya 
Drona as a sishya. With all of you, Sikhandin mastered all four parts of the 
astra shastra, as did his brother Dhrishtadyumna. 

Rajan, I gathered all this information through my spies whom I set on 
Drupada, disguised as fools or blind men. 

This is how Maharatha Sikhandin of the Panchalas was born as a girl, 
and later became a man. And it was the king of Kasi’s eldest daughter, 
Amba, who was born into Drupada’s royal house as Sikhandin. 

If Sikhandin comes to fight me, bow in hand, I will not so much as look 
at him, let alone attack that prince. The world knows that I have vowed 
never to take up arms against a woman, or one who was once a woman, or 
one who has a woman’s name, or one who looks like a woman. I will not 
kill Sikhandin. Now that I know about this prince’s past, I will not slay him 
in battle even if he rides at me with his weapon raised. If I, Bhishma, kill a 
woman, the righteous will speak ill of me.” When he heard this, 
Duryodhana, after a moment’s reflection, agreed with Bhishma.’ 


CANTO 196 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


S anjaya says, ‘When night passed and morning broke, your sons, 
standing in the midst of their vast legions, asked their Pitamaha, “O 

Gangaputra, Yudhishtira’s army is ready for war; it teems with men, 
elephants and horses; Maharathas throng its ranks and protected by these 
mighty bowmen—Bhima, Arjuna and others headed by Dhrishtadyumna, 
who are all like the rulers of the world—that great force is impregnable, 
invincible; it resembles the endless sea. Even the gods cannot perturb it in 
battle; how long will it take you to raze Yudhishtira’s army? How long will 
Acharya Drona need, and Kripa, and Karna who loves battle? How long 
will that Brahmanottama, Aswatthama son of Drona, need? My army has 
you all, who have devastras at your command. 

I am beset by curiosity. Mahabaho, tell me what I want to know.” 

Bhishma said, “First among Kurus, your question about the strength and 
weakness of your enemy is worthy. I will tell you of my prowess in battle, 
of my own strength and the power of my weapons. One should fight 
common soldiers in a simple, straightforward way, but one must use 
cunning with those who resort to deception. This is the dharma of a 
Kshatriya. 

I can indeed raze the Pandava army. Every morning, I can mark ten 
thousand common warriors and a thousand chariot-warriors to kill, and 
accomplish my task by dusk. So, given time, donning my impenetrable 


kavacha and putting forth my tireless urjas, I can entirely destroy the vast 
enemy forces. However, if I loose my devastras, which consume thousands 
in moments, I can complete the massacre in a month.” 

Duryodhana then asked Drona, “Acharya, in how much time can you 
annihilate the legions of Pandu’s son?” 

Drona said, smiling, “I am old, Mahabaho. My tejas and urjas have both 
waned, but with the fire of my astras I can, like Santanu’s son Bhishma, 
consume the Pandava army in a month.” 

Then Kripa declared that he could finish the enemy in two months. 
Drona’s son Aswatthama swore that he would do the same in ten nights; 
and Karna, who commanded the most potent astras, claimed he would 
achieve that feat in five days. 

Bhishma laughed aloud to listen to Karna, “Radheya, your vainglory 
will last until you encounter Arjuna, flying into battle on his chariot, with 
his conch, bows and arrows, and with Krishna beside him. You can say 
anything you like, for talk is cheap.” 


CANTO 197 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “When Yudhishtira hears what the Kuru 
commanders said, he summons his brothers and speaks privately to 
them. 

Yudhishtira says, ‘The spies I sent into Duryodhana’s army brought me 
news this morning. 

They told me that Duryodhana asked Bhishma how long it would take 
him to raze our army and Bhishma said he could do it in a month. Drona 
declared that he could achieve the same thing in the same time; Kripa 
indicated twice that period; so we have heard. Aswatthama, who has 
powerful astras, said he would take only ten nights; and Karna, who, also, 
can summon the most devastating astras, declared that he could complete 
the slaughter in five days. 

Arjuna, I want to hear what you have to say. How long will you take to 
vanquish the enemy?’ 

Dhananjaya, of the curly hair, glances at Krishna and says, ‘Bhishma 
and all these other warriors are Mahatmans, masters of arms and all the 
methods and vyuhas of war. They can, doubtlessly, destroy our forces as 
they have said. But, my lord, dispel the anxiety in your heart. With Krishna 
beside me, from a single chariot, I, Arjuna, can incinerate the three worlds, 
with even the gods, and indeed all living creatures that were, are and will be 
in the blink of an eye. This is my belief. 


I still command the awesome astra which Mahadeva, Lord of all 
creatures, gave me when I fought him hand-to-hand, when he came as a 
Vetala; the Pasupatastra is still mine. O Naravyaghra, I have, besides, the 
astra that Mahadeva uses to destroy creation during the Pralaya at the end of 
a Yuga. Bhishma knows nothing of that astra, nor do Drona, Kripa and 
Drona’s son. How can the Sutaputra Karna have any knowledge of it? 
However, it is adharma, and a great sin, to use such devastras against 
ordinary mortals in war. We will vanquish our enemies in a fair contention. 

Then, Rajan, look at all these mighty kings, your allies. They are all 
masters of devastras and all eager for battle. After their initiation into the 
Vedas, they have all performed the final ritual bath in great yagnas. All of 
them are undefeated, and they can vanquish even the host of the Devas in 
battle. 

You have for your allies these incomparable Kshatriyas: Sikhandin and 
Yuyudhana; Dhrishtadyumna of Prishata vamsa; Bhimasena and Madri’s 
twins; Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas; and Virata and Drupada who are 
Bhishma and Drona’s equals in battle; Mahabaho Sankha, Hidimba’s 
mighty son and his son Anjanaparva, whose strength and prowess defy 
description; Sini’s descendant, Mahabahu Satyaki; and Abhimanyu and 
Draupadi’s five sons. 

And then, you, by yourself, Dharmaraja, can destroy the three worlds. O 
you who are blessed with the effulgence of Indra himself, I know, for it is 
manifest, that you can turn any man, whom you look upon in anger, to 
ashes.” 


CANTO 198 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “The next morning, under a cloudless sky, led by 

Duryodhana, all the kings in his army, prepare themselves for the 
great war, what will be the Mahabharata yuddha, against the Pandavas. 
They leave Hastinapura and go forth to Kurukshetra like a sea leaving its 
bed. 

They take ritual baths of purification; they put on royal white robes and 
drape garlands around their necks. They pour ritual offerings onto sacred 
fires, and when they have received the blessings of their Brahmanas they 
take up their weapons and raise their standards. All these kings are knowers 
of the Vedas; they are courageous without exception, and have observed 
stern vratas. They are great warriors, and men of kingly generosity. Those 
mighty lords of the Earth, all of them equally confident of their own 
prowess and that of their companions, share the single-minded desire to 
attain mukti through battle: the greatest goal of any Kshatriya. 

First, the Avantis, Vinda and Anuvinda, the Kekayas and the Bahlikas 
go forth with Bharadwayja’s son, Drona, at their head. 

Then come Aswatthama, Bhishma and Jayadratha of the Sindhus; the 
kings of the southern and the western countries and of the mountainous 
regions; Sakuni, king of the Gandharas, all the chiefs of the eastern and the 
northern regions, the Sakas, the Kiratas, the Yavanas, the Sibis and the 


Vasatis with their Maharathas at the heads of their respective divisions: all 
these great chariot-warriors ride in the second legion. 

And next: Kritavarman, at the head of his swarming troops; that 
Maharatha—the king of the Trigartas; Raja Duryodhana surrounded by his 
brothers; Sala, Bhurisravas, Salya and Brihadratha the king of the Kosalas. 
All these, with Dhritarashtra’s sons at their head, make up the rear; they are 
magnificent warriors, without exception, and, uniting together in 
immaculate formations, their armour shimmering like some vast lake of 
lustre, they make camp on one side of the hallowed field of Kurukshetra. 

Duryodhana has his encampment adorned to look like a second 
Hastinapura. Indeed, even the citizens of Hastinapura could hardly 
distinguish their city from the sprawling cantonment. By order of the 
Kaurava king, there are hundreds of thousands of inaccessible pavilions, 
each one as grand as his own, for every king in his army. The tents for the 
troops occupy five yojanas of the field, and the lords of the Earth and their 
fighting men enter those countless pavilions and tents, all richly appointed 
and replete with every excellent manner of provender and comfort, even 
like some unimaginable pride of lions. 

Rare and of the finest quality are the supplies and comforts Duryodhana 
orders for the kings, their footsoldiers, elephants and horses, and all their 
followers. He makes more than ample provisions for the engineers, bards, 
singers and panegyrists loyal to him, for the vendors and traders, for 
prostitutes, spies and the people who have come to witness the great war.” 


CANTO 199 
AMBOPAKHYANA PARVA CONTINUED 


V aisampayana said, “Like Duryodhana, Yudhishtira, too, commands 

his heroic legions and warriors led by Dhrishtadyumna. He does this 
through his Senapati the Panchala prince, through Dhrishtaketu of the 
Chedis, Kasis and Karushas, as well as through Virata, Drupada, 
Yuyudhana and Sikhandin, and the two other Panchala princes, the peerless 
bowmen Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas. 

These warriors in their shining kavachas, adorned with golden kundalas, 
blaze like flames in a ghrita-fed yagna fire and are as resplendent as the 
great planets in the sky. Yudhishtira Dharmaraja honours all his warriors 
and then commands them to take the field. He, also, provides the best of 
food and drink for the Mahatman kings, as also for their footsoldiers, 
elephants and horses, their camp followers and engineers. 

Yudhishtira first has Abhimanyu, Brihanta and Draupadi’s five sons set, 
with Dhrishtadyumna at their head; he then sends Bhima and Arjuna with 
the second division of his forces. The din that the men make as they harness 
their horses and elephants and load the chariots with weapons and other 
battle equipment, and the excited shouts of the soldiers, rises into the 
heavens. And last of all, the king himself sets out, with Virata, Drupada and 
all the other kings come to fight for him. 

And the army of fierce bowmen that Dhrishtadyumna leads, which until 
now was gathered in one place, now streams into interminable columns, and 


looks like the wide and turbulent Ganga. Yudhishtira sends forth his 
divisions in formations calculated to bewilder Duryodhana; and at this, he 
succeeds. 

In Yudhishtira’s first division ride the five sons of Draupadi, 
Maharathas; Abhimanyu, Nakula, Sahadeva and all the Prabhadrakas are 
part of this vast complement of warriors, as are ten thousand horses, two 
thousand elephants, ten thousand foot-soldiers and five hundred chariots. 
And Yudhishtira gives charge of this force to Bhimasena. 

In the middle division of his army he places Virata and Jayatsena; the 
two Maharathas Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas, those noble Panchala 
princes, both of great prowess and both armed with maces and bows; and 
Krishna and Arjuna, as well as countless other master warriors who seethe 
with rage and warlust. Countless are the valiant horsemen, five thousand the 
elephants, all these surrounded by fleets of chariots. A thousand fearless 
footsoldiers, armed with bows, swords and maces, march behind them and a 
thousand before them, all united in spirit and purpose like a single terrible 
Being. 

In the oceanic division, in which Yudhishtira himself is, numberless 
great kings ride, along with thousands of elephants, tens of thousands of 
horses, and thousands upon thousands of chariots and footsoldiers. 

Chekitana and the Chedi king Dhrishtaketu march with their own 
immense akshauhinis; with them rides the most brilliant Satyaki, best of the 
Vrishni Maharathas, whom hundreds of thousands of chariots surround. The 
Purusharishabhas Kshattradharma and Kshattradeva bring up the rear, 
where, also, are carts, stalls, wagons laden with battle-fatigues, other 
conveyances for immense stores of weapons and provisions, and draught 
animals, as well; here go thousands of elephants and tens of thousands of 
horses. 

Yudhishtira goes forth slowly, majestically, his elephant divisions 
bringing all the sickly and women, all the emaciated and the weak to watch 
the great war; pack animals carry the Pandava king’s treasures, and the 
contents of his granaries. The ever truthful and invincible Sauchitti follows 
him; and Srenimat, Vasudeva and the king of Kasi’s son Vibhu, as well, 
with twenty-thousand chariots, and a hundred million mettlesome horses 
with bells on their legs. Twenty-thousand fighting elephants with curved 
tusks as long as plough-shares, all of the highest pedigree, and looking like 


dark, rolling cloud masses, bring up the rear, ambling behind the kings, in 
lordly gait. 

Besides these twenty-thousand war-elephants in Yudhishtira’s division, 
are seventy-thousand more, in his army of seven akshauhinis. The juice of 
musth trickles down their trunks and spills out of their mouths, and they are 
like moving mountains with spring water flowing down them. 

Thus does Yudhishtira array his awesome army, upon which he relies in 
the war against his cousin Duryodhana. Besides these that I have named, 
there are others: lakhs of smaller legions of free men, who follow the main 
body of Pandava army, roaring as they march. Thousands of warriors 
infused with the joy of imminent battle upon them beat thousands of drums 
and sound tens of thousands of booming conches,” said Vaisampayana. 


The End of Udyoga Parva 










THE CO 


ge os . 
i — 
\ es 
oem) emg 


“Bhishma Parva 


Leds 









Al ul 
series editor: RAMESH MENON, 






THE MAHABHARATA of Veda Vyasa is 
the longest recorded epic of the world. 
With almost 100,000 verses, it is many times 
as long as the Iliad and the Odyssey combined 
and has deeply influenced every aspect 
of the Indian ethos for some 4,000 years. 


The main theme is the Great War in 
Kurukshetra, but the epic teems with smaller 
stories, and other stories within these, all 
woven together with a genius that defies 
comparison. As its heart, it contains Krishna’s 
immortal Bhagavad Gita, the Song of God. 


The Mahabharata embodies the ancient 
and sacred Indian tradition, in all its earthy 
and spiritual immensity. Famously, ‘What is 
found here may be found elsewhere. What is 
not found here will not be found elsewhere.’ 


Many believe this most magnificent epic 
to be the greatest story ever told. Yet, the only 
full Indian translation of the Mahabharata into 
English is the 19th century one by Kisari Mohan 
Ganguli. More than a hundred years have 
passed since Ganguli accomplished his task, 
and the language he used is now, sadly, archaic. 


THIS NEW TWELVE VOLUME SERIES 
RETELLS THE GREAT EPIC, LINE BY LINE, 
IN FRESH, EASILY READABLE ENGLISH 
PROSE. WITH IT, WE HOPE TO BRING THE 
MAHABHARATA ALIVE AGAIN, FOR 
THE CONTEMPORARY AND 
THE FUTURE READER. 


a 


THE COMPLETE MAHABHARATA 


Bhishma Parva 


THE GOMPLETE 
MAHABHARATA 


Volume 5 


Bhishma Parva 


Anjuli Kaul 





RUPA 


Published by 
Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd 2013 
7/16, Ansari Road, Daryaganj 
New Delhi 110002 


Sales centres: 
Allahabad Bengaluru Chennai 
Hyderabad Jaipur Kathmandu 

Kolkata Mumbai 


Copyright © Anjuli Kaul 2013 


All rights reserved. 

No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, or stored in a 
retrieval system, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the 
publisher. 


10987654321 
The moral right of the author has been asserted. 
Printed at Thomson Press India Ltd, Faridabad. 
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or 
otherwise, be lent, resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated, without the 


publisher’s prior consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in 
which it is published. 


For Richa, naturally. 


And for Akshay, necessarily. 


CONTENTS 


Acknowledgements 

CANTO 1-10  Jambu-khanda Nirmana Parva 
CANTO 11-12  Bhumi Parva 

CANTO 13-24 Bhagavat-Gita Parva 

CANTO 25-42 Srimad Bhagavad Gita 
CANTO 43-124 Bhishma Vadha Parva 


Appendix for The Bhagavad Gita 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


I am grateful to Ramesh Menon, my editor, for guiding my learning in this 
journey. 

And to Jayashree Kumar, my friend, for drawing me into its joys and 
struggles and staying by my metaphorical side throughout. 

And to Roshan Ghose and Sheila Menon, my gurus, for instructing me 
in the ways vital for understanding the world of this compelling epic. 


CANTO 1 


JAMBU-KHANDA NIRAMAN PARVA 


UM! Having bowed down to Narayana, and Nara, the most exalted of 
‘Purushas, and also to the Devi Saraswati, I invoke the spirit of Jaya! 
Janamejaya asked, “How did those heroes, the Kurus, the 
Pandavas and the Somakas, and the great kings assembled together from 
various countries, fight?” 

Vaisampayana replied, “O lord of the earth, hear now how those heroes, 
the Kurus, the Pandavas, and the Somakas fought on the sacred plain of 
Kurukshetra. Seeking victory, the mighty Pandavas, along with the 
Somakas, advance against the Kauravas. Accomplished masters of the 
Vedas, they take great delight in battle. Eager for success, they and their 
legions face the war. 

Approaching the army of Dhritarashtra’s son, those invincible warriors 
and their troops station on the western part of the plain, facing the east. 
Yudhishtira, the son of Kunti, has thousands of tents erected beyond 
Samantapanchaka. The whole earth seems then to be empty, divested of 
horses and men, destitute of chariots and elephants, with only the children 
and the old left at home. 

That immense force has come from all of Jambudwipa over which the 
sun sheds his rays. Men of all races assemble together and occupy an area 
of many yojanas over plains, rivers, hills and forests. That bull among men, 
king Yudhishtira, orders excellent food and other things of enjoyment for all 
of them and their animals. He fixes diverse code-words for them so that 
anyone saying these would be known as belonging to the Pandavas, and 
also gives names and badges to all of them for recognition during the war. 

Seeing the standard-top of Pritha’s son, the great son of Dhritarashtra, 
with a white royal parasol held over his head, in the midst of a thousand 
elephants, surrounded by his ninety-nine brothers and allied kings, begins to 
dispose his troops against the son of Pandu. Seeing Duryodhana, the 
Panchalas, who take delight in battle, are filled with joy and blow on their 
booming conches and clash cymbals of sweet sounds. 


Watching the happy troops, the hearts of Pandu’s son and Vasudeva fill 
with joy. And those tigers among men, Krishna and Arjuna, seated together 
in one chariot, blow their celestial conches. And hearing the blast of the 
Panchajanya and the echoing blast of the Devadatta, the enemy soldiers are 
terrified, even as other animals are filled with fear on hearing the roar of the 
lion; many helplessly urinate and even defecate. 

A frightful pall of dust arises and nothing can be seen, for, suddenly 
enveloped by it, the sun himself seems to have set. A black cloud pours a 
shower of flesh and blood over the troops all around. All this seems 
macabre and extraordinary. A wind rises, blowing along the earth 
numberless tiny stones, and harries the hundreds and thousands of fighting 
men. 

Despite that, O king, both armies, filled with joy, stand keen for battle 
on Kurukshetra like two stormy seas. Indeed, that encounter of the two 
armies is wonderful, like that of two oceans when the end of the Yuga has 
arrived. The whole world is empty, having only the children and the old left 
at home, from that vast army having been mustered by the Kauravas. 

O Bharatarishabha, then the Kurus, the Pandavas, and the Somakas 
make certain covenants, and agree on the laws governing the different kinds 
of combat. In order to fight fairly, men equally circumstanced must 
encounter each other. And if, having fought fairly, the combatants withdraw, 
they should be able to do so without fear of being attacked. Those who 
engage in contests of words should be fought with words. Those that leave 
the ranks should never be killed. 

A warrior in a chariot should be opposed by another such warrior; one 
on the neck of an elephant should have a similar adversary; a horseman 
should be met by a horseman, and a foot-soldier, O Bhaarata, should be met 
by a foot-soldier. 

Guided by considerations of fitness, willingness, daring and strength, 
one fighting man should strike another, after giving notice. An unprepared 
or panic-stricken opponent must not be attacked. A soldier who is engaged 
with another, or is seeking refuge, or retreating, or one whose weapon is 
broken, or one unprotected by armour, should never be shot at or struck. 
Charioteers, animals yoked to chariots or bearing weapons, men engaged in 
the transport of weapons, drummers and blowers of conches, must never be 
assaulted. 


Having decided on these rubrics of battle, the Kurus, and the Pandavas, 
and the Somakas gaze at each other in awe. After positioning their troops, 
the exhilaration felt by these powerful and high-souled men is reflected in 
their faces, which shine.” 


CANTO 2 


JAMBU-KHANDA NIRMANA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


the west for the fierce and imminent war, the holy Rishi Vyasa, the 

son of Satyavati, learned in the Vedas, that grandfather of the 
Bhaaratas, trikalagyani, knower of the past, the present and the future, 
seeing everything every time as if they were before his eyes, says these 
words in private to the royal son of Vichitravirya, who is distressed and 
dejected, thinking of the evil policy of his own sons. 

Vyasa says, ‘Dhritarashtra, the day of reckoning for your sons and the 
other kings has arrived. Assembled for battle they will kill one another. O 
Bhaarata, their hour having come, they will all perish. Bearing in mind the 
changes brought on by time, do not grieve. O king, if you wish to see them 
fighting, I will grant you vision. Behold the war.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘O Maharishi, I would not like to watch the slaughter 
of kinsmen. I will, however, through your powers, listen to the details of 
this battle.’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Upon his not wanting to see the battle but 
wishing to hear of it, Vyasa, that lord of boons, gives a boon to Sanjaya and 
says to Dhritarashtra, ‘O Rajan, Sanjaya will describe the war to you. 
Nothing in the war will be hidden from his eyes. Endowed with celestial 
vision, Sanjaya will describe the fighting to you. He will have knowledge of 
everything. 

Sanjaya will know everything: that which is manifest or concealed, 
occurring by day or by night, even that which is thought of in the mind. 
Weapons will not hurt him and exertion will not fatigue him. This son of 
Gavalgani will come out of the battle alive. 

As for myself, I will spread the fame of these Kurus, and of the 
Pandavas. Do not grieve. This is destiny, O tiger among men. It does not 
become you to give way to grief. The war cannot be prevented. As for 
victory, it lies with the righteous. 


V ine west for said, “Seeing the two armies standing on the east and 


There will be great slaughter in this war. I see numerous omens of terror. 
Hawks and vultures, crows and herons, together with cranes, alight on the 
tops of trees and gather in swarms. Delighted at the prospect of battle, these 
birds look down on the field before them. Carnivorous beasts will feed on 
the flesh of elephants and horses. Fierce herons, foreboding terror, and 
uttering merciless cries, circle across the centre of the field towards the 
south. 

In both the twilights of every day, I see, O Bhaarata, the sun, while 
rising and setting, covered by headless trunks. Tri-coloured clouds with 
their white and red ends and black necks, charged with lightning, and 
shaped like maces, envelop the sun at both dawn and dusk. I see the sun, the 
moon and the stars to be all ablaze, with no difference in their appearance at 
nightfall. I have seen this all day and all night. All of it forebodes fear. 

On even the full moon night of the month of Kartika, the moon becomes 
invisible, or turns the colour of fire, the sky being of the hue of a lotus. 
Many heroic kings and princes, with arms like maces, will be slain and 
strewn upon the earth. Every night, in the sky I hear the fierce cries of 
battling boars and cats. The idols of the Devas and Devis sometimes laugh, 
sometimes tremble; sometimes they vomit blood through their mouths, 
sometimes they sweat and sometimes fall down. 

Drums, without being beaten, sound, and the great chariots of 
Kshatriyas move without being drawn by yoked horses. Kokilas, wood- 
peckers, water-cocks, parrots, crows, and peacocks utter fell cries. Here and 
there, cavalry soldiers, encased in mail, armed with weapons, shout fiercely. 
At sunrise, millions of insects fly everywhere in thick swarms. At both 
dawn and dusk, the four quarters of the earth seem to be on fire, and the 
clouds, Bhaarata, shower down dirt and flesh. 

Arundhati, who is celebrated over the three worlds and applauded by the 
righteous, keeps her lord Vasistha at her back. The planet Sani appears to 
afflict the constellation Rohini. The sign of the deer in the moon has shifted 
from its usual position. A great terror is indicated. A dreadful roaring can be 
heard in the cloudless sky. The animals are all weeping, their tears falling 
fast.’” 


CANTO 3 


JAMBU-KHANDA NIRMANA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


pleasure with their mothers. The trees in the forests exhibit 

unseasonal flowers and fruit. Pregnant women, and even those 
who are not, are giving birth to monsters. Carnivorous beasts and birds live 
and feed together. Ill-omened beasts, some with three horns, some with four 
eyes, some with five legs, some with two sexual organs, some with two 
heads, some with two tails, some with fierce fangs, are being born, and 
maws agape, utter unholy cries. Horses with three legs and strange crests, 
with four rows of teeth and horns, are also being born. 

O Rajan! Strange sights are seen in your city: the wives of many 
Brahmavadis are giving birth to eagles and peacocks, the mare is bringing 
forth a calf and the bitch jackals and cocks, while deer and parrots all 
screech inauspiciously. 

Some women give birth to four or five daughters together, who begin to 
dance, sing and laugh as soon as they are born. The coarse laughing, 
dancing and singing of the lowest born portend dire events. Infants, as if 
drawn by death, fight each other with clubs and break down the little towns 
they built while playing. 

Many kinds of lotuses and lilies grow on trees. Fierce winds blow and 
dust flies everywhere. 

The earth trembles frequently and Rahu approaches the Sun. The white 
Ketu stays still, having passed beyond the asterism of Chitra. All these 
prophesy the destruction of the Kurus. A fierce comet rises, afflicting the 
constellation of Pusya. This great thing will bring calamity on both the 
armies. 

Mars spins towards Magha and Brihaspati towards Sravana. Sani 
approaches the nakshatra Bhaga, afflicting it. Sukra, ascending towards 
Purva Bhadra, shines brilliantly, and wheels towards and faces the Uttara 
Bhadra arranging itself next to a smaller planet. Ketu, blazing like fire 


CC Vires says, ‘Cows are giving birth to asses. Men desire sexual 


mixed with smoke, is stationary, having attacked the bright star of Jyeshta 
so sacred to Indra. 

Dhruva burns strongly and turns to his right. Both the Moon and the Sun 
afflict Rohini. Ferocious Rahu has taken up his position between the 
constellations of Chitra and Swati. The red-bodied, fiery Mars orbits 
circuitously, staying aligned with the nakshatra of Sravana over-ridden by 
Brihaspati. 

The Earth that produces crops each in their season is now covered with 
crops of every season. Every barley-stalk is graced with five ears, and every 
paddy-stalk with a hundred. When milked after their calves have suckled, 
cows, those best of creatures upon whom the universe depends, flow only 
blood. 

Radiant beams of light emerge from bows, and swords shine brightly. It 
appears that the weapons can already see the war before them, as if it is 
already being fought. The weapons, the water, and the coats of armour all 
assume the colour of fire. 

A great slaughter will take place. In this battle between the Kurus and 
the Pandavas, O Bhaarata, the earth will be a river of blood and the 
standards of warriors its rafts. The wild cries of animals and birds with 
blazing mouths are evil omens of dreadful outcomes. A fierce bird with but 
one wing, one eye, and one leg, hovering over the sky in the night, screams 
in such great anger, so as to make its hearers vomit blood. 

It seems, O great king, that all weapons are now shining radiantly. The 
lustre of the Saptarishi mandala has been dimmed. Having approached the 
asterism of Visakha, Brihaspati and Sani, ablaze, have been still there for a 
whole year. 

Three lunations twice meeting together in the course of the same lunar 
fortnight, the duration of the latter is shortened by two days. On the 
thirteenth day, therefore, from the first lunation, according to whether it is 
the day of the full moon or the new moon, the Moon and the Sun are 
afflicted by Rahu. Such strange eclipses, both lunar and solar, forebode a 
great carnage. 

Overwhelmed by showers of dust, all the quarters of the earth look 
inauspicious. Predicting danger, angry clouds rain bloody showers during 
the night. Rahu of fierce deeds also balefully impacts the constellation of 
Krittika. Rough winds of evil omen are constantly blowing. All these will 
beget a war of numberless sorrows and untold grief. 


The Nakshatras are of three types: the Deva, the Asura and the 
Manushya. A malignant planet casts its influence upon at least one of each, 
foreshadowing terrifying dangers. A lunar fortnight usually consists of 
fourteen, fifteen or sixteen days. Never have I known the day of new moon 
to fall on the thirteenth day from the first lunation, or the day of full moon 
on the thirteenth day from the same. And yet, in the course of the same 
month both the moon and the sun have undergone eclipses on the thirteenth 
days from the day of the first lunation. These will result in a great massacre 
of the earth’s creatures. 

Though drinking blood in mouthfuls, the rakshasas are not satiated. The 
great rivers are flowing back to their sources, and their waters have become 
bloody. The wells are frothing and bellowing like bulls. Meteors, effulgent 
like Indra’s thunderbolt, fall in showers with loud hisses. This night will be 
followed by direst evil. 

People will have to light torches when they emerge from their houses to 
assemble and still be enveloped in the encircling thick gloom. Great Rishis 
have said that in such circumstances the earth drinks the blood of thousands 
of kings. 

From the peaks of Kailasa, Mandara and Himavat, thousands of 
explosions are heard and hundreds of great crags and peaks come crashing 
off their summits. Earthquakes swell the four oceans, which threaten to 
break their banks and sweep over the continents to drown the land. 

Violent winds filled with sharp pebbles blow and mighty trees fall. In 
villages and towns both sacred and ordinary trees are struck by lightning 
and felled by savage winds. When Brahmanas pour libations onto the 
sacrificial fire, it burns blue, or red, or yellow. Its flames bend towards the 
left, giving off a vile stench and loud reports. 

Touch, smell and taste, O king, have changed their very nature. 

The flagstaffs of warriors tremble continually and emit smoke. Drums 
and cymbals shower coal-dust. And from the tops of tall trees all around, 
crows, wheeling in circles from the left, utter fierce cries of paka! paka! and 
perch upon the tops of standards for the destruction of the kings. 

Demented wild elephants, their great bodies shaking in fear, dash here 
and there, spraying urine and dung. The horses in our stables are all 
melancholy, while our elephants wade into water. O Bhaarata, pay heed to 
all these omens, and do what needs to be done so that the world may not be 
completely destroyed.’” 


Vaisampayana continued, “Hearing these words of his father, 
Dhritarashtra says, ‘I think all this has been preordained. A great slaughter 
of men will indeed take place. If the kings die in battle observing Kshatriya 
dharma, they will be assured a place in those blessed regions where heroes 
go when they die and will find only happiness there. These great 
Purushavyaghras, who give up their lives in this battle, will win fame in this 
world and great bliss in the next.’ 

O great king, thus addressed by his son Dhritarashtra, that prince of 
poets, the Muni Vyasa concentrates his mind in supreme dhyana. After 
meditating for a short time, Vyasa says, ‘Without doubt, O king of kings, it 
is Time that destroys the universe. It is Time also that creates the worlds. 
Nothing here is eternal. Show the path of dharma to the Kurus, to your 
kinsmen, relatives and friends. You have the power to restrain them. The 
slaughter of kinsmen has been declared sinful. Do not do that which is 
disagreeable to me. 

Rajan, Death himself has been born in the guise of your son. Killing is 
never praised in the Vedas. It can never be beneficial. The members of one’s 
race are as the limbs and organs of one’s own body. Those limbs slay him 
that destroys them. Although you can well walk the righteous path of 
dharma, it is for the destruction of this race and of those kings of the earth 
that Time makes you deviate onto the evil path like one in distress. 

O Rajan, your kingdom brings calamity upon you. Your virtue has been 
greatly diminished. Show your sons the meaning of dharma. You invincible 
one, of what value is that kingdom which brings sin upon you? Protect your 
good name, your virtue, and your fame. Then alone can you win heaven. 
Let the Pandavas have their kingdom, and let the Kauravas have peace.’ 

While Vyasa Brahmanottama is speaking, sadly, Dhritarashtra, the 
eloquent son of Ambika, once more addresses him, ‘My knowledge of life 
and death is similar to yours and I know the truth of these things. Yet when 
a man’s own interests are involved, he loses his discernment. 

Father, I am like any ordinary man. I ask you to extend your boundless 
power to us. As a self-controlled soul you are our refuge and our guru. My 
sons do not obey me, great Rishi. I too am not inclined to commit this 
enormous sin. You are the cause of the fame, the achievements, and the 
inclination for virtue, of the Bhaaratas. You are the revered grandfather of 
both the Kurus and the Pandavas.’ 


Vyasa says, ‘Royal son of Vichitravirya, tell me openly what is in your 
mind and I will remove your doubts.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Holy one, tell me about all that happens to those that 
will be victorious in battle.’ 

Vyasa says, “The sacred fire glows and its light ascends upwards. Its 
flame bends towards the right. It blazes up without being smoky. The 
offerings poured on it give out a sweet fragrance. It is said that these are the 
indications of future victory. The conches and cymbals emit deep, sweet 
sounds. The Sun and the Moon emanate pure rays. It is said that these are 
the signs of future success. 

Crows, whether stationary or in flight, utter agreeable cries. Those that 
are behind them, encourage the warriors to advance; while they that are 
ahead forbid all advance. Where vultures, swans, parrots, cranes and 
woodpeckers utter delighted cries, and turn towards the right, the 
Brahmanas say that victory in war is certain there. Those armies whose 
ornaments, armour and standards shine so brightly that one cannot gaze 
upon them, and whose horses neigh melodiously, will always defeat their 
enemies. 

The warriors who utter cheerful, energetic shouts, O Bhaarata, and 
whose garlands do not fade, always win in battle. Having penetrated the 
legions of their adversaries with cheerful cries, they who utter kind words, 
even to the enemy, and warn them before attacking, are victorious. The 
objects of the senses, not changing for the worse, become auspicious. 
Another indication of a victorious army is the joy among the soldiers at all 
times. Other signs of success include favourable winds, clouds and birds, 
while clouds and the rainbows bring beneficial rain. 

This, O king, is what happens to the armies about to be crowned with 
victory, while the opposite happens to those that are about to be destroyed. 
Whether the army is small or large, the morale of the combatants is said to 
be a sure indication of victory. 

One panic stricken soldier can cause even a vast army to take flight. And 
when this happens, it frightens even heroic warriors. If such an army is once 
broken and put to flight, it cannot be stopped, even like a frightened herd of 
deer or a powerful wave of water. 

It is impossible to rally a mighty army once routed; why, seeing this, 
even those best fighters lose heart. Watching frightened and fleeing soldiers 
makes the panic spread in other directions, and soon the whole army is 


demoralised and scatters in all directions. And when an army is routed, 
even brave leaders cannot rally them. 

Always exerting himself with activity, an intelligent man should strive 
to win success using peaceful means. It is said that the noblest success is 
that which is won through negotiation. That which is achieved by creating 
dissension in the enemy ranks is undistinguished. But the victory which is 
won by war is the worst. 

There are many evils in battle, the first and greatest one being killing. 
Even fifty brave men who know one another, who are calm and determined, 
and free from family ties, can crush a large army. Even five, six, or seven 
men, who are unyielding, can achieve victory. 

Vinata’s son Garuda, O Bhaarata, did not ask for the help of many 
followers to defeat a great flight of birds. The numerical strength of an army 
is not always the reason for its victory. Victory is uncertain. It depends on 
chance. Even those who are victorious have to sustain losses.’” 


CANTO 4 


JAMBU-KHANDA NIRMANA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


departs. And Dhritarashtra, having heard those words, reflects in 
silence and soon begins to sigh repeatedly. 

And then, Bharatarishabha, he tells the noble-souled Sanjaya, ‘O 
Sanjaya, these kings, these lords of the earth, so brave and taking pleasure 
in battle, are in favour of striking one another with a variety of weapons. 
They are prepared to lay down their lives for the sake of owning the earth. 
Impossible to restrain, they are, indeed, killing one another to increase the 
population of Yama’s kingdom. They are incapable of tolerating each other 
because of their desire to possess the earth and be prosperous. 

Therefore, I believe that the earth must have many wondrous qualities. 
Tell me about these, O Sanjaya. Many thousands, millions, tens of millions, 
many hundreds of millions of heroic men have come together at 
Kurujangala. I want to hear in accurate detail about the locations and sizes 
of their countries and cities. Through the power of Vyasa’s boundless tejas, 
you are endowed with the light of divine vision and knowledge.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Wise king, I will describe to you the merits of the earth 
according to my knowledge. You can see them with your eye of wisdom. I 
bow to you, O bull of Bharata’s race. 

Creatures in this world are of two kinds, mobile and immobile. By birth 
mobile creatures are oviparous, viviparous, and those engendered by heat 
and damp. Of these the foremost are the viviparous of which the leading 
ones are men and animals. There are fourteen species of animals, O king. 
Seven live in forests, and seven are domestic. Lions, tigers, boars, 
buffaloes, elephants, bears and monkeys are regarded as wild. Cows, goats, 
sheep, horses, mules, asses and men are the seven animals regarded as 
domestic by the learned. 

These fourteen species of domestic and wild animals are mentioned in 
the Vedas, and sacrifices rest upon them. Of creatures that are domestic, 


V separ an said, “Having spoken thus to Dhritarashtra, Vyasa 


men are foremost, while lions are the foremost of those that live in forests. 
All creatures support themselves by living upon one another. 

Vegetables are said to be immobile; their five species include trees, 
shrubs, creepers, creeping plants living for only a year, and all stemless 
grasses. Thus there are a total of nineteen species of mobile and immobile 
creatures, and there are five of their universal constituents, the 
panchabhutas. 

These twenty-four are described as Gayatri Brahman as everyone 
knows. He who truly knows these to be the sacred Gayatri, having every 
virtue, cannot be annihilated in this world. Everything comes from the Earth 
and everything, when destroyed, merges back into the Earth. Bhumi is the 
home and refuge of all creatures, and it is eternal. He who has the Earth, 
controls the entire universe with its mobile and immobile creatures. It is for 
this desire to possess the Earth, that kings kill one another.’” 


CANTO 5 


JAMBU-KHANDA NIRMANA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


the names of rivers and mountains, and its forests, and their 
dimensions, give me a detailed description of them all.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Great king, since everything in the universe possesses the 
five elements, the wise deem all of them equal. These panchabhutas are 
space, air, fire, water, and earth. Their respective attributes are sound, touch, 
sight, taste, and smell. In addition to what is notably its own quality, each of 
these elements has the attribute or attributes of that or those coming before 
it, 

The earth, say the Rishis, is the first among them all, possessing as it 
does the qualities of the other four, besides what is specially its own. Water 
has four attributes but not scent. Fire has three, sound, touch, and sight. 
Sound and touch belong to air, while space, akasa, has sound alone. 

The existence of all living things depends, O king, on these qualities of 
the panchabhutas. 

When the universe is held in balance, they exist in their natural state, 
separate and independent. When, however, they exist in conjunction with 
one another, then creatures with bodies spring into life. This is the 
unchanging order of things. 

The elements are destroyed and the one succeeding merges into the one 
that precedes; and so also do they spring into existence, one arising from 
the one before it. All these are immeasurable, their forms being Brahman 
itself. In the world creatures consisting of the five elements can be seen. 
Men Strive to discover their forms by using reason. However, inconceivable 
matters should never be sought to be understood by reason. That which is 
beyond human nature is an indication of the inconceivable. 

But, O Kurunandana, I will describe to you the island of Sudarsana. This 
dwipa, Rajan, is formed like a wheel. Rivers and lakes cover it and its 
mountains look like a blur of massed clouds; it has many cities and 


[ ite tines says, ‘O Sanjaya, so knowing of all things on the earth, 


delightful regions. It is also full of blossoming trees, which bear sweet fruit, 
varied crops, and other kinds of wealth. The ocean of salt surrounds it on all 
sides. 

As a man can see his own face in a mirror, even so is the island called 
Sudarsana seen in the lunar disc. Two of its parts seem to look like a pipal 
tree, while two others appear like a large hare. It is surrounded on all sides 
with an assortment of deciduous plants. Besides these, the rest is covered by 
water. I will describe more to you in brief, and the rest later. Now listen to 
what I describe in brief.’ 


CANTO 6 


JAMBU-KHANDA NIRMANA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


truth about everything. You have described the dwipa in brief. 

Now tell us about the island in detail. Tell me about the size of 
the expanse of land that looks like a hare. Then speak of the part resembling 
the pipal tree.’” 

Vaisampayana said, “Sanjaya says, ‘Stretching from east to west, 
between the two oceans, are six mountains of equal majesty. These are 
Himavat, Hemakuta, that most excellent mountain named Nishadha, Nila 
abundant with lapis lazuli, Sweta as white as the moon, and the mountain 
Sringavat made of many metals. 

These six mountains are always the abodes of Siddhas and Charanas. A 
thousand yojanas lie between each of them, and many delightful kingdoms 
are situated there. 

These divisions are called Varshas, O Bhaarata. Creatures of diverse 
species live in those kingdoms. The land where we are is in the Varsha 
named after Bharata. Moving northwards, the next is the Himavatvarsha. 
The land beyond Hemakuta is called Harivarsha. South of the Nila range 
and north of the Nishadha is a mountain called Malyavat that extends from 
east to west. Beyond Malyavat to the north is the mountain Gandhamadana. 

Between these two lies the greatest mountain, called Meru, made of 
gold. Effulgent as the morning sun, it is like fire without smoke. Both its 
height and its depth measure eighty-four thousand yoyjanas. It stands bearing 
the worlds above, below and across. 

Four islands are located near Meru: Bhadraswa, Ketumala, Jambudwipa 
otherwise called Bharatavarsha, and Uttara-Kuru which is the abode of men 
of dharma. The bird Sumukha, the son of Suparna, seeing that all the birds 
on Meru had golden plumage, thought that he should leave that mountain 
since no distinction could be made between the good, average and lowly 


cc D)icut abn says, ‘You are intelligent, O Sanjaya, and know the 


birds. The luminous Sun, the Moon with its attendant nakshatras and Vayu 
the Wind-god all circle Meru. 

The mountain, O king, is abundant in celestial fruits and flowers, and it 
is dotted with sparkling golden mansions. There, on that mountain, the 
heavenly beings, the Gandharvas, the Asuras, and the Rakshasas, 
accompanied by the Apsaras, frolic and play. 

There Brahma and Rudra and also Sakra the king of the Devas, 
assemble to perform many kinds of sacrifices with bountiful gifts. Tumburu, 
and Narada and Viswavasu, and the Hahas and the Huhus, go there to praise 
them with sublime hymns. 

The great-souled Saptarishis and Kasyapa, the lord of creatures, go there 
on every parva day. Upon its peak, Usanas, Sukra otherwise called the 
Kavi, sports with his disciples, the Daityas. 

All the jewels and gemstones that we see and all the mountains 
abounding in precious stones are of Meru. A fourth part of this is enjoyed 
by the holy Kubera. Only a sixteenth part of that wealth is given to men. On 
the northern side of Meru is the lovely forest of karnikaras, extending over 
a range of hills and covered with the flowers of every season. 

There the illustrious Pasupati himself, the creator of all things, 
resplendent with his three sun-like eyes, surrounded by his celestial ganas 
and accompanied by Uma, wears a chain of karnikara flowers on his neck, 
which reach down to his feet. Only the ascetic Siddhas can gaze upon him 
for they are truthful, steadfast and practise austere tapasya. Indeed, 
Maheswara cannot even be seen by evil men. 

From the summit of that mountain, like a stream of milk, O ruler of 
men, the sacred and auspicious Ganga, Bhagirathi adored by the most 
righteous, gushes like a cataract, with a tremendous sound, falling headlong 
into the delightful lake Chandramas. 

Indeed that sea-like sacred lake was formed by Ganga herself. While 
leaping from the mountains, Ganga, too turbulent to be supported by even 
the mountains, was held for a hundred thousand years by Siva, the bearer of 
the Pinaka, on his head. 

On the western side of Meru, lie Ketumala and Jambu-khanda, both 
great seats of humanity. There, O Bhaarata, the span of human life is ten 
thousand years. The men all have golden complexions, and the women are 
like Apsaras. They dwell in happiness without sickness or sorrow. The men 
born there are of the radiance of liquid gold. 


On the summits of Gandhamadana, Kubera, the lord of the Guhyakas, 
with many Rakshasas and Apsaras, passes his time in joy. Besides 
Gandhamadana there are many smaller mountains and hills. The measure of 
human life there is eleven thousand years. There, O king, the men are most 
energetic, strong and full of good cheer; the women are all very beautiful, 
with the complexion of lotus flowers. 

Beyond Nila is the Varsha called Sweta, beyond Sweta is 
Hiranyakavarsha, and beyond that lies Airavatavarsha, the vast. The last 
Varsha in the extreme north and Bharata’s Varsha in the extreme south are 
both shaped in the form of a bow. 

The five Varshas of Sweta, Hiranyaka, Elavrita, Harivarsha, and 
Himavatvarsha lie in the middle, and Elavrita is at the very heart of them 
all. Amongst these seven Varshas, the five already mentioned and Airavata 
and Bharata that which is further north surpasses the one to its immediate 
south in respect of the lifespan, stature, health, dharma, kama and artha of 
its inhabitants. 

In these Varshas, O Bhaarata, creatures of diverse species co-exist. 

Thus is Earth covered with mountains. The majestic mountains of 
Hemakuta are otherwise called Kailasa where Vaisravana passes his time 
joyfully with his Guhyakas. Immediately to the north of Kailasa and near 
the mountains of Mainaka there is a large and beautiful mountain called 
Manimaya with golden peaks. Beside this mountain is a great, splendid lake 
with crystal-clear waters called Bindusaras with a beach of golden sand on 
its shores. There seeing Ganga, since called Bhagirathi after his own name, 
the Rajarishi Bhagiratha lived for many years in an awesome tapasya. 

Numberless sacrificial stakes made of gems and the Chaitya tree made 
of gold can be seen there. It was there that Indra of a thousand eyes and 
great fame gained spiritual triumph by performing a thousand sacrifices. 

There the Lord of all creatures, the eternal Creator of all the worlds, 
Siva of supreme tejas, surrounded by his ghostly attendants, the ganas, is 
adored. There Nara and Narayana, Brahma and Manu, and Sthanu are ever 
present. 

And there the celestial Ganga of three streams, issues out of 
Brahmaloka, and first shows herself; she then divides herself into seven 
streams, and becomes Vaswokasara, Nalini, the sin-cleansing Saraswati, 
Jambunadi, Sita, Ganga and Sindhu. The Supreme Lord himself arranged 
for the divine river, beyond human understanding, to flow from that place 


down into this world. It is there that since the beginning of creation, on 
thousands of occasions, the Devas and Rishis have performed sacrifices, 
after every pralaya, when creation begins afresh. 

As for the Saraswati, in some parts of her course she becomes visible 
and in some parts remains hidden. This celestial seven-fold Ganga is 
renowned across the three worlds. 

Rakshasas live on Himavat, Guhyakas on Hemakuta, and serpents and 
Nagas on Nishadha, while Rishis dwell on Gokarna. The Sweta mountains 
are said to be the abode of the Devas and the Asuras. The Gandharvas 
always stay on Nishadha, and the regenerate Rishis on Nila. The mountains 
of Sringavat also are regarded as the resort of the gods. 

Thus, O great king, is the world divided into the seven Varshas. Diverse 
creatures, moving and unmoving, are found in all of them. Both 
providential and human prosperity are seen in these realms. They cannot be 
counted. Those who want their wellbeing believe what I have now told you 
about this delightful land in the form of a hare about which you asked. 

At the edges of that region are the northernmost and southernmost 
Varshas. I have described these as well. The two islands Naga-dwipa and 
Kasyapa-dwipa are the two ears of this great land shaped like a hare. 

The beautiful mountains of Malaya, whose rocks look like plates of 
copper, are another prominent part of Jambudwipa whose shape resembles a 
hare.’” 


CANTO 7 


JAMBU-KHANDA NIRMANA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


regions to the north and the east of Meru, as also of the mountains of 
Malyavat.’ 

Sanjaya continues, “To the south of the Nila mountain and the northern 
side of Meru are the sacred Northern Kurus, O king, which are the home of 
the Siddhas. The trees there are always covered with sweet fruits and 
flowers. All the flowers are fragrant, and the fruits delicious. Indeed, some 
of the trees bear fruits according to the desire of the plucker. 

Some other trees are described as milk-yielding. These produce milk 
and the six different kinds of food that taste of Amrita. They also provide 
cloth and in their fruits lie ornaments to be used by men. 

The entire land is covered in fine golden sand. A part of the region has 
the radiance of gemstones like rubies or diamonds, or of the lapis lazuli. All 
the seasons there are pleasant and the land has no swamps. 

The tanks are charming and full of delicious pellucid water. The men 
born there have descended from the Devas. All are of pure birth and 
extremely handsome. Of the fraternal twins the women resemble Apsaras in 
beauty. They drink the milk, sweet as Amrita, from those milk-yielding 
trees. Of the twins born there, both men and women possess equal beauty, 
both are endowed with similar virtues, and both equally resplendent, grow 
up in love, like a couple of chakravakas. 

The people of that province are always happy and free from illness. 
They live for tens of thousands of years and never abandon one another. A 
species of birds called bharunda, who have sharp beaks and great strength, 
lift them up when they die and throw them into mountain caves. I have just 
described to you, O king, the Northern Kurus briefly. 

I will now describe to you the eastern side of Meru. Of all the regions 
there, the best is called Bhadraswa, where there is a large forest of 
Bhadrasalas, and a huge tree called Kalamra which always bears flowers 


[resis says, “Tell me in detail, O wise Sanjaya, about the 


and fruit. That tree is a yojana in height and is adored by the Siddhas and 
the Charanas. 

The men there are fair in complexion, and possess great energy and 
strength. The women have the colour of lilies, and are very beautiful to 
behold. White and radiant, their faces resemble the full moon; their bodies 
are as cool as its rays. All of them are skilled in singing and dancing. The 
life span of humans there, O Bharatarishabha, is ten thousand years. They 
remain young by drinking the juice of the Kalamra. 

To the south of Nila and the north of Nishadha, stands a gigantic Jambu 
tree that is eternal. Adored by the Siddhas and Charanas, that sacred tree 
grants every wish. This realm has been named Jambudwipa after this tree. 
That prince among trees, a thousand and a hundred yojanas tall, touches the 
very heavens. The circumference of its fruit measures two thousand five 
hundred cubits, and it bursts open when ripe. 

These fruit fall on the earth with a loud sound, and then pour out a 
silvery juice. That juice of the Jambu becomes a river, and encircling Meru, 
reaches the land of the Northern Kurus. If the juice of that fruit is drunk, it 
produces peace of mind. After drinking it, no thirst is ever felt again, nor 
the weakening effect of ageing. 

A type of dazzling gold of the colour of Indragopaka insects called 
Jambunada, used for celestial ornaments, is found there. The men born 
there look like the morning sun. 

On the summit of Malyavat, the fire called Samvartaka can always be 
seen, which blazes forth to destroy the universe at the end of the yuga. 
There are many small mountains towards the east on its peak, and 
Malyavat, itself, measures eleven thousand yojanas. The men born there 
have golden-coloured skins and these Brahmavadis are descended from the 
world of Brahma. 

They perform the severest tapasya, drawing their vital seed up into their 
bodies. For the protection of creatures they all enter the Sun. Numbering 
sixty-six thousand, they fly before Aruna, surrounding the Sun’s chariot. 
Heated by the sun’s rays for sixty-six thousand years, they then enter the 
Moon.’ 


CANTO 8 


JAMBU-KHANDA NIRMANA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


Varshas, and of all the mountains, and also about all those that 
live on those mountains.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘To the south of Sweta and the north of Nishadha, is the 
Varsha called Romanaka. The men that are born there are fair in 
complexion, of good parentage, and handsome. These men also do not have 
any enemies. And they live joyfully for eleven thousand and five hundred 
years. 

To the south of Nishadha lies the Hiranmayavarsha where the river 
Hiranvati flows. There, O king, lives that great bird named Garuda. And the 
people there are all followers of the Yakshas, wealthy, and attractive in 
appearance. These men are endowed with great strength and happy 
dispositions. And they live for twelve thousand and five hundred years. 

The mountains of Sringavat, O ruler of men, have three beautiful 
summits. One of these is made of jewels and gemstones; another, also made 
of all kinds of gems, is adorned with palatial mansions. There lives the self- 
luminous lady named Sandili. 

From the north of Sringavat upto the sea is the Airavatavarsha, the most 
excellent of them all because of the presence of this jewelled mountain. The 
Sun gives no heat to this land and men do not age or decay. The Moon and 
the stars in the sky are the only source of light. 

The men born there have the radiance, complexion and fragrance of the 
lotus; even their eyes resemble lotus-petals. With unblinking eyes, and an 
agreeable scent, they live without food and have mastery over their senses. 
Descended from the heavens, they are all without any sin. They live for 
thirteen thousand years. 

To the north of the milky ocean, the Lord Hari of unlimited strength 
lives in his golden chariot. That vimana, with the speed of the mind, has 


cc D) verstas says, ‘Tell me, O Sanjaya, the names of all the 


eight wheels, with many supernatural creatures in it. It is the colour of fire, 
covered with Jambunada gold, and has a powerful energy. 

Lord Hari is the lord of all creatures, and enjoys great wealth. The 
universe merges into him at the moment of Pralaya, and it again emanates 
from him when the desire to create takes him once more. He is the principal 
actor, and the One who directs the actions of others. He, O monarch, is 
earth, water, space, air, and fire. He is Yagna embodied for all creatures, and 
Agni is his mouth.’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “When Sanjaya says this, the great 
Dhritarashtra becomes absorbed in thought about his sons. Having thought 
deeply, and filled with energy, he says, ‘Without doubt, O Suta’s son, it is 
Time that ends the universe. And it is Time that again creates everything. 
Nothing here is eternal. It is the all-knowing Nara and Narayana that 
destroy all creatures. The gods speak of him as Vaikuntha, of immeasurable 
might, while men call him Vishnu, one that pervades the Universe!’” 


CANTO 9 


JAMBU-KHANDA NIRMANA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


after Bharata, where this senseless force has been collected, a land 
which I know both my son Duryodhana and the sons of Pandu want 
to possess. Tell me about this place; you are all-knowing.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Listen to me, O king. The sons of Pandu do not covet this 
earth. It is Duryodhana who is greedy, and Sakuni, the son of Subala, and 
many other Kshatriya rulers who are inimical towards one another. 

I will now tell you about Bharatavarsha. This land is loved by Indra, and 
also by Manu, the son of Vivaswar. It is the beloved of Prithu, of Vainya, of 
the high-souled Ikshvaku, of Yayati, of Ambarisha, of Mandhatri, of 
Nahusha, of Muchukunda, of Sibi, the son of Usinara, of Rishava, of Ila, of 
King Nriga, of Kusika, of the great Gadhi, of Somaka, and of Dilipa, and 
also of many other mighty Kshatriyas. 

Let me describe to you that land as I heard of it. Listen to me, Rajan, as I 
tell you about what you have asked me. Mahendra, Malaya, Sahya, 
Suktimat, Rakshavat, Vindhya, and Paripatra, these seven are the Kala- 
mountains of Bharatvarsha. Besides these there are thousands of unknown 
mountains that are tall and mighty cloven with wondrous valleys. There are 
also many other smaller mountains inhabited by barbarous tribes. 

Aryans and Mlecchas, O Kauravya, and many other races drink the 
waters of these rivers: the magnificent Ganga, Sindhu, and Saraswati; the 
Godavari, and Narmada and the great Yamuna; the Drishadwati, Vipapa, 
Vipasa and Sthulavaluka; the river Vetravati, and the Krishna-vena; the 
Iravati, Vitasta, Payosyini and Devika; the Vedasmrita, Vedavati, Tridiva 
and Ikshumalavi. 

They also drink from the Karishini, Chitravaha, and Chitrasena; of 
Gomati, and Dhutapada and the mighty Gandaki, of Kausiki, Nischitra, 
Kirtya, Nichita and Lohatarini; of Rashasi and Satakumbha, and also the 
Sarayu; of Charmanwati, and Vetravati, and Hastisoma, and Disa; of the 


[iter Bhar says, ‘Tell me Sanjaya about this Varsha that is named 


river called Saravati, and Venna and Bhimarathi; of Kaveri, Chuluka, Vina, 
and Satabala; of Nivara, and Mahila, and Suprayoga; of Pavitra, and 
Kundala, and Rajani, and Puramalini; of Purvabhirama, and Vira, and 
Bhima, and Oghavati; of Palasini, and Papahara, and Mahendra, and 
Patalavati, of Karishini, and Asikni, and the wide Kusachira; of Makari, and 
Pravara, and Mena, and Hema, and Dhritavati; of Puravati, and Anushna, 
and Saivya, and Kapi, O Bhaarata; of Sadanira, and Adhrishya, and the 
great stream Kusadhara; of Sadakanta, and Siva, and Viravati; of Vatsu, and 
Suvastu, and Kampana with Hiranwati; of Vara, and the mighty river 
Panchami, of Rathachitra, and Jyotiratha, and Viswamitra, and Kapinjala; of 
Upendra, and Bahula, and Kuchira, and Madhuvahini: of Vinadi, and 
Pinjala, and Vena, and the mighty Pungavena; of Vidisa and Krishna-vena, 
and Tamra, and Kapila, of Salu, and Suvama, the Vedaswa, and the mighty 
river Harisrava; of Sighra, and Pischala, and the river Bharadwaji, of the 
river Kausiki, and Sona, and Chandrama; of Durgamantrasila, and Brahma- 
bodhya, and Brihadvati; of Yaksha, and Rohi, and Jambunadi; of Sunasa 
and Tamasa, and Dasi, and Vasa, and Varuna, and Asi; of Nila, and 
Dhrimati, and the Parnasa; of Pomasi, and Vrishabha, and Brahma- 
meddhya, and Brihaddhani. 

These they drink from, and many other great rivers, like the 
Sadonirmaya and Krishna, and Mandaga, and Mandavahini; and 
Mahagouri, and Durga, O Bhaarata; and Chitropala. Chitraratha, and 
Manjula, and Vahini; and Mandakini, and Vaitarani, and Kosa, and 
Mahanadi; and Suktimati, and Ananga, and Pushpaveni, and Utpalavati; 
and Lohitya, Karatoya, and Vrishasabhya; and Kumari, and Rishikulya and 
Marisha, and Saraswati; and Mandakini, and Supunya, Sarvasanga. 

These rivers, O Bhaarata, are all mothers of the universe and confer 
deep punya. Besides these, there are hundreds and thousands of rivers 
whose names are not known. I have now recounted to you all the rivers I 
remember. 

Now listen to the names of the peoples of the various kingdoms. They 
are the Kuru-Panchalas, the Salwas, the Madreyas, the Jangalas, the 
Surasena, the Kalingas, the Bodhas, the Malas, the Matsyas, the Saubalyas, 
the Kuntalas, the Kasi-kosalas, the Chedis, the Karushas, the Bhojas, the 
Sindhus, the Pulindakas, the Uttamas, the Dasarnas, the Mekalas, the 
Utkalas; the Panchalas, the Kausijas, the Nikarprishthas, Dhurandharas; the 


Sodhas, the Madrabhujingas, the Kasis, and the Ati-Kasis; the Jatharas, the 
Kukuras, O Bhaarata. 

There are the Kuntis, the Avantis, and the further-Kuntis; the Gomantas, 
the Mandakas, the Shandas, the Vidarbhas, the Rupavahikas; the Aswakas, 
the Pansurashtras, the Goparashtras, and the Karityas; the Adhirjayas, the 
Kuladyas, the Mallarashtras, the Keralas, the Varatrasyas, the Apavahas, the 
Chakras, the Vakratapas, the Sakas; the Videhas, the Magadhas, the 
Swakshas, the Malayas, the Vijayas, the Angas, the Vangas, the Kalingas, 
the Yakrillomans; the Mallas, the Suddellas, the Pranradas, the Mahikas, the 
Sasikas. 

There are the Balhikas, the Vatadhanas, the Abhiras, the Kalajoshakas; 
the Aparantas, the Parantas, the Pahnabhas, the Charmamandalas; the 
Atavisikharas, the Mahabhutas, O Sire; the Upavrittas, the Anupavrittas, the 
Surashatras, Kekayas; the Kutas, the Maheyas, the Kakshas, the 
Samudranishkutas; the Andhras, and many hilly tribes, and many tribes 
living on lands in the foothills, and the Angamalajas, and the 
Manavanjakas; the Pravisheyas, and the Bhargavas; the Pundras, the 
Bhargas, the Kiratas, the Sudeshnas, and the Yamunas, the Sakas, the 
Nishadhas, the Anartas, the Nairittas. 

There are the Durgalas, the Pratimasyas, the Kuntalas, and the Kusalas; 
the Tiragrahas, the Ijakas, the Kanyakagunas, the Tilabharas, the Samiras, 
the Madhumattas, the Sukandakas; the Kasmiras, the Sindhusauviras, the 
Gandharvas, and the Darsakas; the Abhisaras, the Utulas, the Saibalas, and 
the Valhikas; the Darvis, the Vanavadarvas, the Vatagas, the Amarathas, and 
the Uragas; the Bahuvadhas, the Kauravyas, the Sudamanas, the Sumalikas; 
the Vadhras, the Karishakas, the Kalindas, and the Upatyakas; the 
Vatayanas, the Romanas, and the Kusavindas; the Kacchas, the 
Gopalkacchas, the Kuruvarnakas; the Kiratas, the Varvasas, the Siddhas, the 
Vaidehas, and the Tamraliptas; the Aundras, the Paundras, the Saisikatas, 
and the Parvatiyas. 

There are other kingdoms, O bull of Bharata’s vamsa, in the south. They 
are the Dravidas, the Keralas, the Prachyas, the Mushikas, and the 
Vanavashikas; the Karanatakas, the Mahishakas, the Vikalpas, and also the 
Mushakas; the Jhillikas, the Kuntalas, the Saunridas, and the Nalakananas; 
the Kankutakas, the Cholas, and the Malavayakas; the Samangas, the 
Kanakas, the Kukkuras, and the Angara-marishas; the Samangas, the 
Karakas, the Kukuras, the Angaras, and the Marishas. 


There are also the Dhwayjinis, the Utsavas, the Sanketas, the Trigartas, 
and the Salwasena; the Bakas, the Kokarakas, the Pashtris, and the 
Lamavegavasas; the Vindhyachulakas, the Pulindas, and the Valkalas; the 
Malavas, the Vallavas, the further-Ballavas, the Kulindas, the Kalavas, the 
Kuntaukas, and the Karatas; the Mrishakas, the Tanavalas, the Saniyas; the 
Alidas, the Pasivatas, the Tanayas, and the Sulanyas; the Rishikas, the 
Vidarbhas, the Kakas, the Tanganas, and the further-Tanganas. 

Among the tribes of the north are the Mlecchas, and the Kruras, O best 
of the Bhaaratas; the Yavanas, the Chinas, the Kambojas, the Darunas, and 
many Mleccha tribes; the Sukritvahas, the Kulatthas, the Hunas, and the 
Parasikas; the Ramanas, and the Dasamalikas. These countries are, besides, 
the abodes of many Kshatriya, Vaisya, and Sudra tribes. 

Then again there are the Sudra-abhiras, the Dardas, the Kasmiras, and 
the Pattis; the Khasiras; the Atreyas, the Bharadwajas, the Stanaposhikas, 
the Poshakas, the Kalingas, and diverse tribes of Kiratas; the Tomaras, the 
Hansamargas, and the Karamanjakas. These and other kingdoms are on the 
east and on the north. My Lord, alluding to them briefly, I have told you all. 

If the Earth’s resources are properly used according to their qualities and 
nature, Bhumi is like an ever-yielding cow, which may be milked for its 
fruits of dharma, artha and kama. 

Powerful kings who know of dharma and artha have become greedy for 
the Earth. They are restless in their craving for this wealth, for which they 
are willing to sacrifice their very lives in battle. 

Bhumi is the home of both creatures with heavenly bodies and those 
with human ones. Wanting to enjoy the pleasures of Earth, the kings have 
become like dogs that snatch meat from one another. Their unbounded 
ambition cannot be satisfied. 

It is for this that the Kurus and the Pandavas are striving for possession 
of Earth, by negotiation, creation of discord, bribery, and battle. If Earth is 
well nurtured, it becomes the father, mother, children, sky and heaven of all 
creatures, O Purusharishabha.’ 


CANTO 10 


JAMBU-KHANDA NIRMANA PARVA 
CONTINUED 


strength, the virtues and vices, the future, past and present, of the 
people of Bharatavarsha, of Himavatvarsha, and also of Harivarsha.’ 

Sanjaya says, “Bharatarishabha, the four yugas set in Bharata’s Varsha 
are Krita, Treta, Dwapara and Kali. The yuga that comes first is Krita; next 
comes Treta; after Treta comes Dwapara; and at the very end, the Kali. 

In the Krita Yuga, men live for four thousand years, while in the age of 
Treta they live three thousand years. At present in Dwapara, men live on 
Earth for two thousand years. In the Kali, however, there is no fixed 
measure of life, so much so that men sometimes die while still in the womb, 
or soon after birth. 

In the Krita Yuga, men are born and have children, in hundreds and 
thousands. They have great strength and power, and are endowed with great 
wisdom, wealth and beauty. In that age Munis are born with the knowledge 
of asceticism and are naturally capable of great tapasya. They have great 
souls, are virtuous and truthful in speech. 

The Kshatriyas born in that age are agreeable in appearance and able- 
bodied. Having great tejas, they are accomplished in the use of the bow, 
highly skilled in battle and brave. 

In the Treta Yuga, all the Kshatriya kings are emperors ruling vast lands, 
which extend from sea to sea. They give birth to invincible warriors, who 
enjoy long lives, are heroic, and wield the bow in battle with great skill. 

When the Dwapara sets in, all the four varnas born are energetic and 
ambitious, wishing to conquer one another. 

The men born in the Kali Yuga have little energy, and are given to anger, 
greed and dishonesty. Jealousy, pride, anger, deception, malice and 
covetousness, O Bhaarata, are the qualities of the creatures in this age. A 
small part of the Dwapara Yuga remains before the advent of Kali. 


D)stenetnt says, ‘Tell me, Sanjaya, in detail, about the lifespan, the 


With respect to all qualities the Varsha known as Himavat is superior to 
Bharatavarsha, while Harivarsha is more excellent than Himavatvarsha.’ 


CANTO 11 


BHUMI PARVA 


hritarashtra says, ‘Sanjaya, you have described Jambu-khanda to me. 
[ Dro tell me of its size and expanse. Tell me also, in detail and 

without omission, about the extent of the ocean of Sakadwipa, and 
Kusadwipa, of Salmalidwipa and Kraunchadwipa. Tell me also of Rahu, 
Soma and Surya.’ 

Sanjaya says, “There are many islands, over which the Earth extends. I 
will speak of only seven islands to you, and of the Moon, and the Sun, and 
the planet Rahu. 

The Jambu mountain spreads across eighteen thousand six hundred 
yojanas. The extent of the ocean of salt is said to be twice this size. That 
ocean is dotted with many kingdoms, and is adorned with precious stones 
and corals. It is also covered with mountains made of many metals. Thickly 
peopled by Siddhas and Charanas, the ocean is circular in form. 

I will now speak to you of Sakadwipa; listen to me, O Bhaarata, as I 
describe it. That island is twice the size of Jambudwipa and the ocean is 
twice the extent of that island. Indeed, Sakadwipa is surrounded by the 
ocean on all sides. The kingdoms there are infused with dharma, and the 
men there live eternal lives. How can famine occur there? The people are 
all full of forgiveness and great tejas. 

I have now briefly described Sakadwipa to you. What else, O king, do 
you wish to know?’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘You have given me, wise Sanjaya, a_ brief 
description of Sakadwipa; now tell me everything in detail.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘On that island, there are seven mountains strewn with 
jewels and have mines of gemstones. There are also many rivers whose 
names I will recount to you. Everything there is excellent and delightful. 

The first mountain is named Meru. It is the home of the Devas, Rishis, 
and Gandharvas. The next mountain is called Malaya, stretching towards 
the east. It is there that clouds arise, and from there they scatter in all 
directions. The next one is Jaladhara from where Indra daily draws the 
finest water. It is from this water that we get seasonal rain. 


Over the next high mountain called Raivataka, the constellation of 
Revati has been fixed in the sky. Brahma himself has done this. 

To the north of this is the lofty mountain Syama. Its beautiful bright 
body is made brilliant by ascending clouds. And since those mountains are 
dark, the people living there are all dark in complexion.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘A great doubt arises in my mind because of what 
you say. Why do the people there have dark complexions?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘On all islands, there are fair and dark men, and those 
produced by a union of the fair and the dark races. But that mountain is 
called the Dark Mountain because all its people are dark. Beyond this lies 
the great mountain called Durgasaila, and the next one is called Kesari. The 
breezes that blow from that mountain carry sweet fragrances. The height of 
each mountain is twice that of the one mentioned immediately before it. 

O Kurunandana, the wise say that there are seven Varshas in that island. 
The Varsha of Meru is called Mahakasa; that of the water-giving Malaya is 
called Kumudottara. The Varsha of Jaladhara is called Sukumara: while that 
of Raivataka is called Kaumara; and of Syama, Manikanchana. The Varsha 
of Kesara is called Mandaki, and that named after the next mountain is 
called Mahapuman. 

At the heart of that Dwipa is a mighty tree called Saka equal in height 
and breadth to the Jambu tree in Jambudwipa and the people there always 
worship the Saka. 

In the many delightful provinces of that island, Siva is worshipped, and 
it is there that the Siddhas, the Charanas, and the unearthly beings find rest 
and rejuvenation. The people are virtuous, and all the four varnas devote 
themselves to their svadharma. There is no theft. Freed from decay and 
death and gifted with long lives, the people grow as rivers during the 
monsoon rains. 

The rivers there are full of holy water. Ganga herself, divided into many 
streams, is there, as are Sukumari, Kumari, Seta, Keveraka, and Mahanadi; 
so also are the rivers Manijala, Chakshus, and Vardhanika, O Bharatottama. 
There are other innumerable sacred rivers, from which Indra draws water 
for showering rain. It is impossible to recount the names and lengths of all 
these rivers. All of them are awesome and sin-cleansing. 

There are four sacred provinces known to men on the island of Saka. 
They are the Mrigas, the Masakas, the Manasas, and the Mandagas. The 
Mrigas are largely inhabited by Brahmanas devoted to their svadharma. 


Amongst the Masakas are virtuous Kshatriyas who grant the Brahmanas 
their every wish. 

The Manasas live by following the duties of the Vaisya order. They, too, 
have all their desires fulfilled; they are brave and steadfast in their devotion 
to dharma and artha. The Mandagas are all brave and upright Sudras. 

In these lands there is no king, no punishment, indeed no person that 
deserves to be punished. They are all conversant with and diligently 
engaged in the practice of their respective duties and protect one another. 
This is what can be said about Sakadwipa. 

To listen to the description of this great island also confers merit on the 
listener.’ 


CANTO 12 


BHUMI PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘O Bhaarata, I will tell you about what is known of the 

islands in the north. Listen to me. In the north, the first ocean has 
waters of ghee. Then is the ocean whose waters are curds. Next comes the 
ocean whose waters are wine, and then is another ocean of water. The 
islands double in area as we proceed further north and these oceans 
surround them. 

In the centremost island is a lofty mountain called Goura made of red 
arsenic; on the western island is the mountain Krishna, the favourite abode 
of Vishnu. There celestial gemstones are found in abundance, guarded by 
Kesava who, inclined to grace, bestows happiness on all creatures. 

Along with the kingdoms there, a field of divine Kusa grass in 
Kusadwipa and the Salmali tree in Salmalika are adored. 

In the Kraunchadwipa the mountain called Maha-krauncha is a mine of 
precious stones and is worshipped by all the varnas. On the mighty 
Gomanta, rich in all kinds of precious metals, lives the mighty Narayana, 
endowed with wealth and eyes like lotus leaves, with those who have 
attained moksha. 

In Kusadwipa there is another mountain mottled with varicoloured 
corals and named after that island itself. This mountain is inaccessible and 
made of gold. O Kauravya, there is another splendid mountain there called 
Sumida. The sixth is called Harigiri. 

These are the six principal mountains. The intervening space between 
these mountains doubles, moving further and further towards the north. 

The first Varsha is called Audhido; the second is Venumandala; the third 
is called Suratha; the fourth is known by the name Kamvala; the fifth 
Varsha is called Dhritimat; and the sixth is Prabhakara; the seventh Varsha 
is called Kapila. These are the seven successive Varshas. 

In these, Devas and Gandharvas, and other beings of the universe, sport 
and find their delight. The inhabitants of these Varshas are immortal. There 
are no robbers, nor any tribes of Mlecchas. All those who live there are 
almost white in complexion and very delicate. 


As for the rest of the Dwipas, I will tell you all that I have heard. Listen 
with an attentive mind. In the Kraunchadwipa there is a towering mountain 
called Krauncha. Next to Krauncha is Vamanaka; and next to Vamanaka 
stands Andhakara. And next to Andhakara is that excellent massif Mainaka. 
After Mainaka lies the most wonderful of mountains called Govinda; and 
after Govinda is the mountain called Nivida. 

Rajan, the spaces between these mountains increase twofold. I will now 
tell you about the lands that lie there. Listen to me. 

The land near Krauncha is called Kusala; that near Vamanaka is 
Manonuga; that next to Manonuga is Ushna. After Ushna is Pravaraka; and 
after Pravaraka is Andhakaraka. The country after Andhakaraka is 
Munidesa. After Munidesa, in the land called Dundubhiswana live Siddhas 
and Charanas. The people there are almost white in complexion. 

All these lands are inhabited by Devas and Gandharvas. In the island of 
Pushkara is a mountain by the same name, rich in jewels and gemstones. 
There dwells Prajapati himself praised and worshipped by all the Devas and 
Maharishis. A variety of precious stones from Jambudwipa is found there, 
and used for diverse purposes. 

In all these islands the celibacy, honesty, discipline, health and lifespan 
of the inhabitants doubles as one moves northwards. 

The land in those Dwipas, O Bhaarata, comprises but one country in 
which but one religion prevails. The Supreme Prajapati himself lives there; 
he holds the danda of chastisement and protects those islands. He is the 
king and the source of their bliss. He is the father, and the grandfather; he 
protects all creatures there, mobile or immobile. Cooked food appears by 
itself and is enjoyed by the people. 

Mahabaho, after these vast lands can be seen Sama, a starshaped land 
with four corners, and thirty-three mandalas. There, O Kauravya, live four 
grand elephants adored by all. They are Vamana, Airavata, Supratika and 
Sarvabhauma. All efforts to calculate the proportions of these four Diggajas 
are fruitless. Their length, breadth and width remain unknown. 

In those regions winds blow irregularly from all directions and are 
caught by those elephants with the tips of their splendid trunks that have the 
colour of lotuses and can draw up everything in their path. They then exhale 
to release these winds which then arrive on Earth thus allowing all creatures 
to breathe and live.’ 


Dhritarashtra says, “You have, Sanjaya, told me everything about the 
first subject in detail. You have also indicated the positions of the islands. 
Speak to me now about what remains.’ 

Sanjaya says, “Indeed, O great king, the Dwipas have all been described 
to you. Listen now to what I tell you about the heavenly bodies and about 
the size of Swarbhanu. The planet Swarbhanu is large and round with a 
diameter of twelve thousand yojanas, and a circumference of forty-two 
thousand yojanas, according to the learned of ancient times. 

The diameter of the moon is said to be eleven thousand yojanas while its 
circumference is declared to be thirty-eight thousand nine hundred yojanas 
of the illustrious planet of cool rays. 

Anagha, sinless, it has been said that the great, swift, beneficent, and 
luminous Sun, is ten thousand yojanas across, and thirty-five thousand eight 
hundred around. These are the dimensions estimated here, O Rajan, of 
Arka. 

The planet Rahu, on account of his great size, eclipses both the Sun and 
the Moon at regular intervals. I recount this to you briefly. I have now given 
you answers to all your questions. Let peace be yours. I have told you about 
the construction of the universe as indicated in the Shastras. Therefore, O 
Kauravya, pacify your son Duryodhana. 

Having listened to this charming Bhumi Parva, a Kshatriya is endowed 
with prosperity, obtains the fruit of his desires, and wins the approval of the 
righteous. The king who listens to this on days of the full moon or the new 
moon, while carefully observing vows, finds enhancement in his lifespan, 
his fame and energy. The spirits of his ancestors are appeased. You have 
now heard of all the merits that flow from Bharatavarsha!’ 


CANTO 13 


BHAGAVAT-GITA PARVA 


seeing all things as if present before his eyes, Sanjaya rushes grief 

stricken into court from the battlefield. To Dhritarashtra, who sits lost 
in thought, he announces that Bhishma the grandfather of the Bhaaratas has 
been killed. 

Sanjaya says, ‘I am Sanjaya, O great king. I bow to you. Bhishma, the 
son of Shantanu and the grandsire of the Bhaaratas, has been cut down in 
battle. That foremost of all warriors, that Pitamaha of the Bhaaratas, is 
fallen. That greatest Kshatriya, who embodied the urjas of all archers, that 
grandfather of the Kurus, lies today on a bed of arrows. 

That Bhishma, on whose strength your son relied as he played the game 
of dice, now lies on the battlefield felled by Sikhandin. That Maharathika 
who defeated all the kings of the Earth gathered together in a fierce 
contention at the city of Kasi, he who fearlessly fought Rama, the son of 
Jamadagni, oh, even he has today fallen to Sikhandin. 

Resembling the great Indra himself in courage, and Himavat in firmness, 
like the ocean in gravity, and the Earth herself in patience, that invincible 
warrior with arrows for teeth, a bow for his mouth, and a sword for his 
tongue, that lion among men, has been brought to grief by the prince of 
Panchala. 

That Parantapa, on seeing whom in battledress even the mighty army of 
the fearless Pandavas would tremble like a herd of cows facing a lion, 
having protected your army for ten nights and having accomplished mighty 
and well-nigh impossible feats, has set like the Sun. 

He, who like Sakra himself, calmly shot arrows by the thousands, killed 
ten thousand soldiers every day for ten days: even he, slain by the enemy, 
lies, undeserving on the bare ground like a mighty tree felled by the wind, 
as a consequence, Rajan, of your evil counsels.’” 


V aisampayana said, “Knowing the past, the present and the future, and 


CANTO 14 


BHAGAVAT-GITA PARVA CONTINUED 


How has my father, who resembled Vasava himself, fallen from his 

chariot? What has become of my sons, O Sanjaya, deprived of the 
support of mighty Bhishma, he who was like a divine being, and who led 
the life of Brahmacharya for the sake of his father? How do our warriors 
feel about the loss of that tiger among men who was filled with great 
wisdom, great power and great energy? 

Hearing that that great leader of men, that unfaltering Kshatriya, is 
fallen, a terrible sadness pierces my heart. While advancing against the 
enemy, who followed him and who marched ahead? Who stayed by his 
side? Who moved alongside? What brave fighters followed protecting the 
rear of that Maharathika, that wonderful archer, that bull among Kshatriyas, 
while he penetrated into the ranks of the foe? 

While attacking the enemy’s divisions, which warriors opposed that 
great luminary of a thousand rays, who spread fear and destruction among 
their ranks like the Sun destroying darkness, and who accomplished near 
impossible feats in battle among the ranks of Pandu’s sons? 

How, indeed, Sanjaya, did the Pandavas stand up to the son of Shantanu, 
that invincible Kshatriya, when he attacked them? How did Kunti’s son 
conquer the unconquerable one, who, though modest, was a tiger among 
men slaughtering the enemy’s ranks with great ferocity, having arrows for 
his teeth, a bow for his mouth, and a terrible sword for his tongue? 

Oh, how undeserving is he of such a fate, that fierce archer shooting 
raging arrows, mounted on this chariot, beheading his foes, that irresistible 
hero, irresistible as the fires at the end of the yugas, seeing who in readiness 
for battle made the great army of the Pandavas falter in its advance. 

Having achieved great feats on the battlefield, destroying the hostile 
armies for ten nights, alas, that greatest of Kshatriyas has set like the Sun. 
He who, like Sakra himself, loosed an unending stream of arrows, and 
killed millions of soldiers in ten days, that descendant of Bharata’s race, 


[itor as says, ‘How has Bhishma been cut down by Sikhandin? 


now lies on the bare ground, on the field of battle, a mighty tree uprooted by 
the winds, as a result of my evil counsels! 

Seeing Shantanu’s son, how could the army of the Pandavas succeed in 
striking him down? How did the sons of Pandu fight Bhishma? How is it 
that Bhishma fell when Drona lives? When Kripa was near him, and 
Drona’s son Aswatthaman also, how could Bhishma, that foremost of 
destroyers be himself destroyed? 

How could Bhishma who was an Atiratha and who could not be 
vanquished by the very gods, be defeated by Sikhandin, the prince of 
Panchala? He, who always regarded himself equal to the mighty son of 
Jamadagni in battle, he whom Jamadagni’s son himself could not quell, he 
who resembled Indra in valour, alas, O Sanjaya, tell me how that hero, 
Bhishma, born in the race of Maharathas, was brought down, for without 
knowing all the details I cannot regain my composure. 

Which great archers of my army did not desert that glorious hero? What 
heroic warriors, at Duryodhana’s command, stood protecting him? When all 
the Pandavas with Sikhandin in the vanguard moved against Bhishma, did 
not all the Kurus stay by his side? 

Hard as my heart is, surely it is not unbreakable, for why does it not 
break on hearing the news of the fall of Bhishma! In him lay boundless 
truth, intelligence, and political acumen. Alas, how was he slain in battle? 

Like an imposing cloud, the twang of his bowstring, its roar, his arrows 
its raindrops, and the sound of his bow for thunder, that Kshatriya shot his 
arrows at the Pandavas and the Panchalas and the Srinjayas who stood at 
their side; he struck hostile charioteers like the slayer of Bala smiting the 
Danavas. 

Who were the heroes that resisted, like the shores of the surging sea, 
him that punished enemies, who was a terrible ocean of weapons, an ocean 
in which arrows were inexorable crocodiles and bows were the waves? 
Who resisted this limitless ocean, without an island, agitated and with no 
raft to cross it, in which maces and swords were like sharks, and horses and 
elephants like eddies, foot-soldiers like fishes in abundance, and the sound 
of conches and drums like its roar? 

Who resisted this Kshatriya, this ocean that swallowed horses and 
elephants and foot-soldiers, an ocean that devoured enemy heroes and that 
seethed with wrath that constituted its Yadava-fire? 


When, in Duryodhana’s interests, Bhishma achieved great feats in battle, 
who were in his vanguard? Who were they that protected the right wheel of 
that tremendous warrior? Who were they that resisted hostile heroes who 
came from behind him with patience and vigour? 

Who positioned themselves to guard him from the front? Who protected 
the fore-wheel as he battled the adversary? Who struck at the Srinjayas 
from beside his left wheel? Who were they that defended the irresistible 
advance troops? Who protected the flanks of that warrior who has made his 
last painful journey? And who, O Sanjaya, fought the enemy heroes in the 
general conflict? 

If he was protected by our heroes, and if they were protected by him, 
why could he not then swiftly humble the army of the Pandavas, invincible 
though it may be? Indeed, how could the Pandavas succeed even in striking 
Bhishma who was like Siva Parameshti himself, that Lord and creator of all 
creatures? 

Sanjaya, you speak of the fall of Bhishma; that tiger among men, that 
mighty warrior, our refuge upon whom the Kurus were relying to fight the 
Pandavas, how was he slain by the enemy? In ancient times, all the Devas 
sought that Kshatriya’s assistance to annihilate the Danavas. That foremost 
of sons filled with great tejas, on whose birth the famous Shantanu cast 
aside all grief, despair, and sorrows, how can you tell me that that 
celebrated hero, that great refuge of all, that wise and holy man who was 
devoted to his dharma and conversant with the truths of Vedic knowledge, 
has been slain? 

Accomplished in the use of every weapon and imbued with humility, if 
the son of Shantanu, gentle, restrained, yet so intrepid, has been felled, then 
I regard the rest of my army as already destroyed. In my judgment, 
immorality has now become stronger than righteousness, for the sons of 
Pandu desire sovereignty even by killing their venerable elder! In olden 
days, Jamadagni’s son Rama, who was acquainted with every weapon and 
who was superior to all, when fighting on behalf of Amvya, was defeated 
by Bhishma in combat. 

You tell me that Bhishma, that greatest of warriors who resembled Indra 
himself in his feats, has been vanquished. What can bring greater despair to 
me than this? Suffused with great intelligence, he who was not slain even 
by that destroyer of hostile heroes, that Rama, the son of Jamadagni, who 
repeatedly defeated hordes of Kshatriyas in battle, he has now been laid low 


by Sikhandin. Surely then, Drupada’s son Sikhandin, who has quelled that 
bravest and most skilful Kshatriya, who commanded the most powerful 
weapons, must be superior in energy and strength to the mighty Bhishma! 

In that encounter, who were the heroes that accompanied that destroyer 
of enemies? Tell me how the battle was fought between Bhishma and the 
Pandavas. The army of my son, O Sanjaya, bereft of its hero, is like an 
unprotected woman. Indeed, that army of mine is like a panic stricken herd 
of cows lost without its herdsman. When he, who was braver than anyone 
else, was vanquished, what was the state of mind of my army? What power 
remains in our lives, when we have killed our all-powerful father, the most 
righteous of men in the world? 

Like a man who wishes to cross the sea as he watches his boat sink in 
deep waters, my sons, I imagine, are weeping grievously on Bhishma’s 
death. My heart must surely be hard that it does not tear apart even on 
hearing of Bhishma’s fall. Endowed with vast weapons, intelligence, and 
insight, how could that invincible warrior have been quelled? 

A man cannot free himself from death using weapons or courage, ascetic 
merit or intelligence, firmness or offerings. Indeed, time cannot be 
transgressed by anything in the world, when you tell me that Shantanu’s son 
Bhishma is fallen. Consumed by grief because of my sons, indeed 
overwhelmed with great sorrow, I had hoped for relief from Bhishma. 
When he saw Shantanu’s son lying on earth like the Sun fallen from the sky, 
what other refuge did Duryodhana seek’? 

Reflecting on this, I cannot foresee how this will all end, both for our 
allies and for our enemies as they range themselves in opposition to each 
other. 

Sadly the duties of the Kshatriya varna as laid down by the Rishis are 
cruel; the Pandavas desire sovereignty even at the cost of the death of 
Shantanu’s son, and we too crave it by offering up in sacrifice that great 
hero. The sons of Pritha and mine do all observe their Kshatriya dharma 
and, thus, incur no sin. This is the path of a righteous man in times of 
terrible calamity. The display of valour and great strength has been laid 
down among the duties of Kshatriyas. 

How, indeed, did the sons of Pandu oppose my father Bhishma in battle? 
How were the troops arrayed, and how did he fight against those high- 
souled adversaries? How, O Sanjaya, was my father Bhishma cut down, and 


what did Duryodhana, Karna, the deceitful Sakuni, the son of Subala, and 
Dussasana say when Bhishma fell? 

In the house of death that is war, where the chessboard is made up of the 
bodies of men, elephants, and horses, where arrows and javelins, mighty 
swords and darts kill and maim, who were those wretched gamblers, who 
staked their very lives? Who won in this game, who were defeated, who 
cast the dice successfully, and who have been killed, besides Bhishma, the 
son of Shantanu? 

Tell me all, Sanjaya, for I am not at peace, hearing that Devavrata has 
been slain, that father of mine, of great and terrible deeds, that jewel of 
battle, Bhishma! Anguish like a blade pierces my heart, born of the thought 
that all my children will die. As a fire blazes brighter when ghee is poured 
on it, you do deepen my sorrow. 

My sons must even now be grieving, seeing Bhishma fallen, that great 
Bhishma celebrated in all worlds and who took upon himself a heavy 
burden. I will listen to all those sad outcomes of Duryodhana’s terrible 
folly. Therefore, tell me everything that happened there, everything that 
happened in the battle, born of the folly of my wicked son. Confused or 
clear, tell me everything, Sanjaya. 

Whatever was achieved in the war by the tejas of the great Bhishma who 
desired victory; tell me everything and in complete detail of how each battle 
between the armies of the Kurus took place.’ 


CANTO 15 


BHAGAVAT-GITA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, “You are deserving and this is a noble question. However, 

it does not befit you to blame Duryodhana. The man who incurs evil as 
the consequence of his own misdeeds, should not attribute the blame to 
others. 

Great king, the man who injures others deserves to be killed for his sins. 
The upright and blameless Pandavas, along with their friends and 
counsellors, look up to you; they have endured their injuries, forgiven them, 
and lived peaceably in the forest. 

Do not grieve as you listen to the grim stories of horses and elephants, 
and powerful kings I have seen by Yoga-shakti. For all this was pre- 
destined. 

I have bowed before your wise and high-souled father, the Mahatman 
Vyasa, who has bestowed upon me the boon of divine understanding, a 
sight beyond the vision of the eyes, heightened hearing from a great 
distance, a knowledge of other people’s thoughts and of the past and the 
future, a knowledge also of the origin of all those who transgress the sacred 
ordinances, the delightful power of coursing through the skies, and 
protection from all weapons in battle. 

Now listen to me carefully as I narrate the romantic and awesome battle 
between the Bhaaratas, a battle that makes one’s hair stand on end. 

When the combatants were ready and arrayed by the rules of war, 
Duryodhana says to Dussasana, ‘O Dussasana, let chariots be moved 
swiftly to protect Bhishma, and order our akshauhinis to advance. 

I now recollect what I have been thinking for many years about the war 
between the forces of the Pandavas and the Kauravas. For us, nothing is 
more important than keeping Bhishma safe. If protected he will annihilate 
the Pandavas, the Somakas and the Srinjayas. 

That pure-souled Kshatriya has said that he will not slay Sikhandin. 
Sikhandin was a woman in an earlier birth, and so Bhishma refuses to fight 
him. For this, Bhishma should be particularly well protected. 


Let all my soldiers take up their positions, and be determined to kill 
Sikhandin. Also let the troops from all cardinal directions, skilled in the use 
of every kind of weapon, watch over the Pitamaha. Even the mighty lion, if 
left unprotected, may be slain by the wolf. We must not allow Bhishma to 
be slain by Sikhandin like the lion by the jackal. 

Yudhamanyu guards the left wheel and Uttamauja the right wheel of 
Arjuna, and thus shielded, Phalguni himself safeguards Sikhandin. O 
Dussasana, ensure that Sikhandin, who is protected by Arjuna, and whom 
Bhishma will not attack, does not kill Ganga’s son.’ 


CANTO 16 


BHAGAVAT-GITA PARVA CONTINUED 


exclamations of the kings rend the air. The blast of conches and the 

sound of drums resembling the roars of lions, the neigh of horses and 
the clatter of chariot wheels, the noise of raucous elephants and the shouts, 
clapping of arm-pits, and cries of roaring combatants, all raise a thunderous 
noise. 

The teeming armies of the Kauravas and the Pandavas, rising before 
dawn, complete all their deployments. When the Sun rises, the fierce 
weapons of attack and defence, the armour of your sons and the Pandavas, 
and the great splendid armies of both sides, are fully seen. Elephants and 
chariots, adorned with gold, look radiant like clouds streaked with 
lightning. The arrays of chariots look like cities. 

Standing there, your father shines brilliantly like the full moon. And the 
warriors armed with bows and swords, scimitars and maces, javelins and 
spears, and other bright weapons of many kinds, take up their positions in 
the ranks. Resplendent standards, belonging to us and the enemy, are seen, 
hoisted by the thousands. Thousands of golden banners decorated with 
gemstones blaze like fire. They look beautiful even like the armoured 
heroes longing for battle. 

Countless great Kshatriya commanders, wearing quivers, and with eyes 
big as those of bulls, and with hands cased in leather gloves, stand at the 
heads of their divisions, with shining weapons raised. 

Subala’s son Sakuni, and Salya, Jayadratha and the two princes of 
Avanti, Vinda and Anuvinda, the Kekaya brothers, Sudakshina the ruler of 
the Kambojas and Srutayudha the lord of the Kalingas, and king Jayatsena, 
Brihadbala, king of the Kosalas, and Kritavarman of the Satwata vamsa— 
these ten powerful tigers among men, whose arms resemble maces, these 
performers of sacrifices and givers of gifts to Brahmanas, stand each one at 
the head of an akshauhini of troops. 

These and many other kings and princes, maharathikas all, knowers of 
statecraft, obedient to the commands of Duryodhana, all sheathed in mail, 


V exclamation said, “Sanjaya says, ‘When the night passed, loud 


are seen at the head of their legions. All of them, wearing black deerskin, 
imbued with great strength, accomplished in battle, and cheerfully prepared, 
for Duryodhana’s sake, to give up their lives and attain Brahmaloka, stand 
there commanding ten powerful akshauhinis. 

The eleventh great division of the Kauravas, consisting of the 
Dhartarashtra troops, are positioned in front of the great army. 

There in the vanguard of that division is Shantanu’s son. With his 
helmet, royal parasol, and armour, all in white, we see the unfailingly 
mighty Bhishma looking like the risen moon. His standard bears the sign of 
a golden palmyra; he himself is mounted on a silver ratha. Both the 
Kauravas and the Pandavas gaze upon that hero, looking like the full moon 
encircled by white clouds. 

On seeing Bhishma, the great archers amongst the Srinjayas, led by 
Dhrishtadyumna, appear like little lesser animals looking at a mighty 
yawning lion. Indeed, all the warriors led by Dhrishtadyumna tremble in 
fear. 

These, O Rajan, are the eleven splendid divisions of your army. 

So also the seven akshauhinis belonging to the Pandavas are protected 
by the greatest Kshatriyas. Indeed, the two armies facing each other look 
like two oceans at the end of the Yuga agitated by fierce makaras, teeming 
with monstrous crocodiles. Never before did we see or hear of two such 
armies encountering each other like these of the Kurus.’” 


CANTO 17 


BHAGAVAT-GITA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Just as predicted by the holy Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa, 

the kings of the Earth gather in that manner for the great contention. 
On the day the battle begins, Soma approaches the region of the Pitris. The 
seven great planets are ablaze as they appear in the sky. 

The Sun, as he rises, seems to be split in two, and bursts into flames. 
Carnivorous jackals and crows, expecting to feed upon the dead, call out 
fiercely from all burning directions. 

Every day the Pitamaha of the Kurus, and the son of Bharadwaja, rising 
from their beds in the morning, say with dhyana, “Victory to the sons of 
Pandu”, while those mighty warriors are pledged yet to fight for your cause. 
Your father Devavrata, aware of varna dharma, summons all the kings and 
speaks to them. 

“Kshatriyas, the broad door into heaven is open to you. Pass through it 
to the region of Sakra and Brahma. The ancient Rishis have shown you this 
eternal path. Bring honour upon yourselves by fighting with alert minds. 
Nabhaga and Yayati, and Mandhatri, and Nahusha and Nriga, were 
triumphant in battle and attained bliss. It is a sin for a Kshatriya to die of 
sickness at home; to die in battle is his eternal duty.” 

Thus addressed by Bhishma, the magnificent kings, in their majestic 
chariots, move to the heads of their respective akshauhinis. Only 
Vikartana’s son Karna, with his friends and relatives, puts aside his 
weapons for the sake of Bhishma. Without Karna then, your sons and their 
allies forge ahead, to the ten points of the horizon which reverberate with 
their leonine roars. 

And their legions shine brightly with white sovereign parasols, banners, 
standards, elephants, horses, chariots, and foot-soldiers. And the Earth fills 
with the sounds of drums and cymbals, and the clatter of chariot wheels. 
And the maharathas, bedecked with golden ornaments and with their bows 
streaked with gold, look as resplendent as hills of fire. 

And with his large palmyra-standard, bearing five stars, Bhishma, the 
Senapati of the Kaurava army, looks like the radiant Sun himself. He orders 


your noble archers to take up their positions, which they do with alacrity. 

King Saibya of the country of the Govasanas, accompanied by all the 
others, goes forth on a royal elephant graced with a banner on its back. And 
the lotus-complexioned Aswatthaman rides out prepared for every 
contingency, stationing himself at the very head of all the divisions, with his 
standard bearing the emblem of the lion’s tail. 

And Srutayudha and Chitrasena, and Purumitra and Vivimsati, and 
Salya and Bhurisravas, and that mighty maharathika Vikarna—these seven 
great archers mounted on their chariots and encased in excellent mail, 
follow Drona’s son with Bhishma behind them. The lofty golden standards 
adorning their chariots shine brilliantly. 

The standard of Drona, that most excellent of acharyas, bears the 
emblem of a golden shrine ornamented with a kalasha and a bow. That of 
Duryodhana, bearing a jewel-encrusted elephant, guides many hundreds 
and thousands of divisions. The rathas of Paurava, the king of the Kalingas, 
and Salya, are positioned in Duryodhana’s vanguard. 

The king of the Magadhas guides his akshauhini against the enemy on a 
bejewelled chariot with his standard bearing the image of a bull. The great 
force of the Eastern Kingdoms, protected by the chief of the Angas, Karna’s 
son Vrishaketu, and the powerful Kripa, appears like the soft white clouds 
of approaching winter. 

Stationed in front of his troops, with his silver standard bearing the 
emblem of the boar, is the splendid Jayadratha. A hundred thousand rathas, 
eight thousand elephants, and sixty thousand cavalry are under his 
command. 

Commanded by the king of the Sindhus, that vast akshauhini in the 
forefront of the army with countless chariots, elephants and horses, is truly 
magnificent. With sixty thousand chariots and ten thousand elephants, the 
ruler of the Kalingas, accompanied by Ketumat, advances. His majestic 
elephants, looking like hills, and adorned with yantras, lances, quivers and 
standards, are strikingly beautiful. 

The ruler of the Kalingas blazes forth with his lofty standard effulgent as 
fire, his royal parasol, golden cuirass, and the chamaras which fan him, all 
shining. Ketumat, riding on an elephant and holding a wonderful and 
beautiful goad, is also stationed in battle, O king, like the Sun in the midst 
of dark clouds. 


And king Bhagadatta, fiery with energy and riding on his legendary 
elephant, goes out like the wielder of the thunder. And the two princes of 
Avanti, Vinda and Anuvinda, regarded as equal to Bhagadatta, follow 
Ketumat, riding on the necks of their elephants. 

Thus arrayed by Drona and Bhishma, and by Drona’s son, and by 
Bahlika and Kripa, the Kaurava vyuha, of numberless divisions of chariots, 
appears as if elephants form its body, the kings, its head; and the horses, its 
wings. Facing all sides, that fearsome vyuha seems to smile in readiness to 
spring upon the enemy.’ 


CANTO 18 


BHAGAVAT-GITA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘A loud uproar made by the fighting men in readiness for 

battle causes the heart to tremble. Indeed, the Earth seems to split into 
two with the sounds of conches and drums, the bellows of elephants and the 
clatter of chariot wheels. Soon the Sky and the Earth are filled with the 
neighing of chargers and the shouts of warriors. 

O great Rajan, the troops of your sons and of the Pandavas both tremble 
when they face each other. There on that battlefield, elephants and chariots, 
decked in gold, are as beautiful as clouds flecked with lightning. And the 
standards of your allies, adorned with golden rings, glow like fire. And 
those standards of your side and theirs resemble the banners of Indra in his 
celestial mansions. 

And the heroic warriors, all fitted out in golden coats of mail with the 
brilliance of the blazing Sun, themselves look like Agni or Surya. All the 
leading Kshatriyas amongst the Kurus, with magnificent bows, and other 
weapons ready, with leather gloves on their hands, and with standards, 
those mighty bull-eyed archers, stand lordly at the heads of their 
akshauhinis. 

Protecting Bhishma from behind, among your sons are Dussasana, and 
Durvishaha, Durmukha and Dussaha and Vivimsati, and Chitrasena, and 
that maharatha Vikarna; also amongst them are Satyavrata and Purumitra, 
Jaya, Bhurisravas and Sala. 

And twenty thousand maharathas follow them. The Abhishahas, the 
Surasenas, the Sibis, and the Vasatis, the Swalyas, the Matsyas, the 
Ambashtas, the Trigartas, and the Kekayas, the Sauviras, the Kitavas, and 
the dwellers of the Eastern, Western, and the Northern kingdoms, these 
twelve brave races are resolute in their determination to fight, heedless of 
their lives. 

These protect the Pitamaha with an awesome array of chariots. And with 
a division of ten thousand war elephants, the king of Magadha follows that 
akshauhini. They who guard the wheels of the chariots, and they who 
protect the elephants, number a stupendous six million. 


And the foot-soldiers that march ahead, armed with bows, swords, and 
shields, number many hundreds of thousands. And they fight using also 
their nails and bearded barbs. And the eleven akshauhinis of your son, O 
Bhaarata, look like Ganga separated from Yamuna.’ 


CANTO 19 


BHAGAVAT-GITA PARVA CONTINUED 


formation, how does Yudhishtira, the son of Pandu, with his smaller 

number of legions, make his counter-array? How does Kunti’s son, 
Sanjaya, create his battle formation against that Bhishma who was a master 
of all kinds of vyuhas, Manushya, Deva, Gandharva, and Asura?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Seeing Dhritarashtra’s legions arrayed, Pandu’s son of 
virtuous soul, Yudhishtira Dharmatma, says to Arjuna, “We have long 
known the wise words of Maharishi Brihaspati, that a small army must be 
made to fight by compressing its troops, while the large army may be 
stretched out at will. In encounters of the few with the many, the vyuha to 
be formed is the suchimukha, the needle-mouthed one. Our troops 
compared with the enemy’s are few. Deploy our troops, Arjuna, in 
accordance with the precept of the great Rishi.” 

Arjuna answers Yudhishtira, “I will create for you an unshakeable and 
invincible vyuha known as the Vajra, designed by the very wielder of the 
thunder-bolt himself. He who is like the bursting tempest, he who cannot be 
defeated by the enemy in battle, Bhima that greatest of smiters, will fight at 
our head. That foremost of men, knower of all ayudhas, will be our leader at 
the front destroying our adversaries, shattering their very confidence. 

Seeing Bhima, awesome in battle, all the enemy soldiers led by 
Duryodhana will retreat in panic like smaller animals upon seeing the lion; 
Bhima will protect us like a wall and dispel our fears like Indra who gives 
refuge to all heavenly beings. There is no living man who can even look 
upon Vrikodara of fierce deeds when he is angry.” 

Having said this, Dhananjaya moves to form his vyuha. He swiftly 
orders his troops into battle-array and advances against the enemy. And the 
mighty army of the Pandavas, seeing the Kuru army move, appears itself to 
look like the swelling, rushing and powerful current of Ganga. And Bhima, 
and Dhrishtadyumna blessed with great tejas, and Nakula, and Sahadeva, 
and king Dhrishtaketu, become the leaders of that force. 


[ decnstion, says, ‘Seeing our eleven akshauhinis laid out in battle 


And king Virata, surrounded by this akshauhini, along with his brothers 
and sons, marches in the rear, protecting them from behind. The two radiant 
sons of Madri become the guardians of Bhima’s wheels, while the five sons 
of Draupadi and the son of Subhadra, all blessed with tejas, protect Bhima 
from behind. And that maharathika, Dhrishtadyumna the prince of 
Panchala, with the valiant Prabhadrakas, protects those princes from the 
rear. 

And behind him is Sikhandin, who in turn is guarded by Arjuna, and 
who advances with dhyana for the destruction of Bhishma. Behind Arjuna, 
to guard his wheels, rides the powerful Yuyudhana and the two princes of 
Panchala, Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas, along with the intrepid Kekaya 
brothers, and Dhrishtaketu, and Chekitana. 

Bhima, wielding his mace made of the sternest metal, moving with 
fierce speed on the battlefield, can dry up the very ocean. And there the sons 
of Dhritarashtra with their counsellors, stand looking at him. This, O Rajan, 
is what Bibhatsu says pointing out the mighty Bhima to Yudhishtira; while 
Arjuna speaks, all the gathered troops bow to praise and worship him. 

King Yudhishtira, the son of Kunti, takes up his position at the heart of 
his army, surrounded by vigorous overpowering elephants which resemble 
moving hills. The high-souled and valorous Drupada, lord of the Panchalas, 
stations himself behind Virata with an akshauhini to fight for the Pandavas. 
And on the chariots of those kings are high standards bearing diverse 
emblems, decorated with beautiful ornaments of gold, and with the radiance 
of the Sun and the Moon. 

Moving those kings to make space for himself, Maharatha 
Dhrishtadyumna, his brothers and sons around him, watches over 
Yudhishtira from behind. Transcending the lofty standards on all the 
chariots, yours and those of your opponents, is the gigantic Vanara on 
Arjuna’s chariot. 

Hundreds and thousands of foot-soldiers, armed with swords, spears and 
scimitars, advance in front to safeguard Bhima. And ten thousand dauntless 
elephants, big as hills, emblazoned with golden armour follow the king like 
moving mountains. With temporal juice trickling down their faces, they 
resemble great rain clouds, and emit the fragrance of lotus flowers. 

And the unconquerable Bhimasena, Mahatman, swinging his fierce 
mace that resembles a parigha surely looks as if he can easily crush the 
sprawling army of your son. Appearing like the Sun himself, and scorching 


the hostile army like fire, it is impossible for the warriors to even look at 
him. 

This fierce and fearless Vajravyuha, facing all sides, and having bows 
for its lightning sign, is protected by the wielder of the Gandiva himself. 
Deploying their legions in this manner against your army, the Pandavas 
await battle. And protected by the Pandavas, that vyuha is veritably 
invincible in the world of men. 

And as both armies stand waiting for sunrise, a wind begins to blow, 
gentle rain falls with no clouds in sight, and the roll of thunder is heard. Dry 
winds blow showering the ground with sharp stones and a thick dust arises 
covering the world with darkness. Meteors begin to fall towards the east 
and, striking against the rising Sun, shatter loudly into fragments. 

As the troops stand ready for battle the Sun rises without his customary 
splendour, and the Earth trembles and cracks open reverberantly in many 
places. The sound of thunder, O king, can be heard frequently on all sides 
and so thick is the billowing dust that nothing can be seen. 

And the towering standards of the warriors, furnished with strings of 
bells, decked with golden ornaments, garlands of flowers, and rich cloths, 
graced with banners and like the Sun in splendour, are shaken by the wind, 
and jingle loudly like a forest of palmyra trees with a gale blowing lustily 
through. 

Thus stand those tigers amongst men, the sons of Pandu, joyful in battle, 
having arrayed their legions against the army of your son, sucking as it 
were, the marrow of our warriors, with Bhima, mace in hand, stationed at 
their head.’ 


CANTO 20 


BHAGAVAT-GITA PARVA CONTINUED 


Bhishma and the Pandava army led by Bhima, which, in joyful 

readiness for battle, approaches the other first? To which side are the 
Sun, the Moon and the Wind hostile, and against whom do the beasts of 
prey utter inauspicious cries? Who are those beautiful and daring young 
men? Tell me everything and in detail.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Both armies look equally joyful and equally beautiful like 
blooming forests. Both armies abound in elephants, chariots and horses. 
Both are vast and terrible to behold, and hostile to each other. Both of them 
teem with outstanding warriors organised to conquer the very heavens. 

The Kauravas stand facing the west, while the Pandavas face the east, 
ready to fight. The troops of the Kauravas appear like the army of the 
Danavas, while those of the Pandavas look like the army of the Devas. The 
wind begins to blow from behind the Pandavas against the face of the 
Dhartarashtras, and the predators howl against your son’s legions. The 
elephants of your sons cannot bear the strong odour of the temporal juice 
emitted by the majestic elephants of the Pandavas. 

And Duryodhana rides on a lotus coloured elephant, with rent temples, 
graced with a golden kaksha on its back, and protected by netted steel 
armour. He is at the very heart of the Kurus and is extolled by bards and 
singers. And a white sovereign parasol with a golden chain and moon-like 
brilliance is held over his head. 

Sakuni, the lord of the Gandharas, follows, surrounded by his mountain 
men. And the revered Bhishma is at the head of all the troops, with another 
royal white parasol over him, armed with bow and sword, with a white 
helmet, a white banner atop his chariot yoked to white horses, looking 
altogether like a white mountain. 

In Bhishma’s legion are all the sons of Dhritarashtra, and also Sala of 
the Bahlikas; there are also all those Kshatriyas called Amvastas and 
Sindhus, and also the Sauviras, and the heroic people of the land of the five 
rivers. 


Denisa says, “When the Sun rises, O Sanjaya, of my army led by 


And on a golden chariot drawn by red horses stands the valiant 
Mahatman Drona, bow in hand, the Acharya of almost all the kings, who 
remains behind all the troops, protecting them like Indra. And Saradwat’s 
son Gautama, that frontline fighter, that high-souled and mighty archer 
familiar with all manner of warfare, accompanied by the Sakas, the Kiratas, 
the Yavanas and the Pahlavas, takes up his position at the northern point of 
the army. 

That immense force which is well guarded by maharathas of the Vrishni 
and the Bhoja vamsas, as also by the fighting men of Surashtra, well-armed 
and masters of weapons, and which is led by Kritavarman, goes towards the 
south of the army. Ten thousand chariots of the Samsaptakas, masterful 
warriors all, who were created for either the death or the fame of Arjuna, 
and who intend to stay close to and hunt Arjuna, all advance along with the 
brave Trigartas. 

In your army, O Bhaarata, are a thousand magnificent war elephants to 
each of which are assigned a hundred chariots. A hundred horsemen are 
given to each chariot; each horseman has ten archers, each of whom is 
accompanied by ten foot-soldiers armed with sword and shield. Thus does 
Bhishma lay out your legions. 

As each day dawns, your great Senapati, Bhishma the son of Shantanu, 
sometimes moves your troops in the Manava vyuha, sometimes in the Deva, 
sometimes in the Gandharva, and at others in the Asura. Thronged with a 
large number of maharathas, and roaring like the very ocean, the 
Dhartarashtra army, disposed by Bhishma, stands facing the west for battle. 
Unbounded and dreadful as your army is, the army of the Pandavas, though 
smaller, appears to me to be colossal and invincible since Krishna and 
Arjuna lead it.’ 


CANTO 21 


BHAGAVAT-GITA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, “Seeing the vast Dhartarashtra army ready for battle, king 

Yudhishtira, the son of Kunti, gives way to grief. Seeing that 
formidable vyuha formed by Bhishma and knowing it to be impenetrable, 
the king grows pale and says to Arjuna, “Dhananjaya, how will we fight the 
Dhartarashtras who have the Pitamaha as their Senapati? 

How will we withstand the unshakeable and invincible vyuha which has 
been designed by that destroyer of foes Bhishma of transcendent glory, by 
the directions laid down in the scriptures? Parantapa, given the numbers of 
our troops we are doubtful of success. How, indeed, will we obtain victory 
in the face of this mighty formation?” 

Arjuna answers Yudhishtira who is troubled by grief at the sight of your 
army, “Listen, O king, to how a few soldiers may defeat a vast army having 
many strengths. Since you are without malice, I will tell you the means by 
which we can triumph. 

The Rishi Narada knows it, as do both Bhishma and Drona. Brahma 
himself in olden days during the battle between the Devas and the Asuras 
said to Indra and the other celestials, ‘They who desire victory do not 
conquer by might and force so much as by truth, compassion, righteousness 
and vitality.’ 

Discriminating then between dharma and adharma, and understanding 
what covetousness is and what it is to fight without arrogance, victory lies 
with righteousness. Know, O Rajan, that victory is already assured to us in 
this war. 

Indeed, as Narada says, ‘Where Krishna is, there is victory. Victory is 
inherent to Krishna, indeed it follows him. And as victory is one of his 
attributes, so is humility. Govinda possesses infinite energy. Even in the 
midst of uncountable enemies, he is without pain. He is the most eternal of 
Purushas. And victory surely lies where Krishna is.’ 

Even he, indestructible and impossible to conquer with weapons, 
appearing as Hari in olden days, said clearly to the Devas and the Asuras, 
“Who amongst you would be victorious?’ Even the conquered Devas 


replied, ‘With Krishna to lead us we will prevail.’ And it was through 
Hari’s grace that the three worlds were conquered by the gods led by Sakra. 

I do not, therefore, see any reason for you to be dejected, you who have 
the Sovereign of the Universe and the Divine Lord of the gods himself 
wishing you triumph.” 


CANTO 22 


BHAGAVAT-GITA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, “Then king Yudhishtira, laying out his own troops against 

the legions of Bhishma, urges them on, saying, “The Pandavas have 
now deployed their forces in counter array in keeping with the scriptures. 
Fight fairly, you sinless ones, who wish to enter the highest heaven!” 

In the midst of the Pandava army is Sikhandin, and his troops are 
protected by Arjuna. And Dhrishtadyumna advances in the vanguard, 
protected by Bhima. The southern akshauhinis are guarded by that mighty 
archer, the handsome Yuyudhana of the Satwatas, who resembles Indra 
himself. 

Yudhishtira is stationed on a chariot that is worthy of bearing Mahendra 
himself, adorned with an excellent standard, mottled with gold and 
glittering gemstones, and furnished with golden reins for the horses, in the 
midst of his war elephants. His sovereign white parasol with an ivory 
handle, unfurled over his head, is resplendent; and many great Rishis walk 
around him singing his praises. 

Many priests, and regenerate Rishis and Siddhas, chant laudatory 
hymns, praying for the destruction of his enemies, with the help of japas 
and mantras, potent drugs, and a variety of propitiatory ceremonies. That 
Mahatman king of the Kurus, showering the Brahmanas with gifts of cows 
and fruit, flowers and gold, along with rich cloths, advances like Sakra, king 
of the Devas. 

The chariot of Arjuna, with a hundred bells, the best Jambunada gold, 
having excellent wheels, possessing the effulgence of fire, and pulled by 
white horses, shines brilliant as a thousand suns. And on that chariot whose 
banner bears the Vanara emblem, whose reins are held by Krishna, stands 
Arjuna with the Gandiva and arrows in hand, peerless archer whom none 
can ever equal. 

For crushing your sons’ troops, the mighty Bhimasena Vrikodara, who 
assumes the most terrifying aspect, who without weapons and with his mere 
bare hands pounds men, horses, and elephants into the dust, that Mahabaho 


accompanied by the twins, is the protector of the heroic maharathikas of the 
Pandava army. 

Seeing indomitable Vrikodara, like the towering leader of a herd of 
elephants, an enraged prince of sprightly lions, or like great Indra himself in 
earthly form, at the forefront of the army, the strength of your fighting men 
turns weak with fear, and they begin to tremble like elephants in mire. 

And Krishna says to the valiant Arjuna standing in the midst of his 
troops, “There is the banner of Kuru’s race, Bhishma, who scorches us with 
his wrath and stands rocklike in the midst of his forces. He who will attack 
our men like a lion, he who has performed three hundred Aswamedha 
yagnas, stands surrounded by great Kshatriyas who envelop his brilliance 
like clouds. Great Kshatriya, Purushottama, kill those troops and seek out 
that greatest of warriors, Bhishma Bharatarishabha!””’ 


CANTO 23 


BHAGAVAT-GITA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Seeing the Dhartarashtra army approach ready for battle, 
Krishna says these words to Arjuna. 

The Holy One says, “Purifying yourself, O Arjuna, on the eve of the 
battle, recite the hymn to Durga to achieve the enemy’s defeat.” 

Thus addressed on the eve of battle by Krishna of fathomless intellect, 
Pritha’s son Arjuna, alighting from his chariot, recites this hymn with 
folded hands. 

Arjuna says, “I bow to you, O Mahayoginis, you who are Brahman, you 
who dwell in the forest of Mandara, free from decay and dissolution, O 
Kali, wife of Kapala, of a black and dusky hue, I bow to you! I submit to 
you, Mahakali, wife of Siva, the destroyer of the universe, you who bestow 
blessings on your devotees. 

O exalted Durga, you who rescue us from danger, you who are blessed 
with every auspicious attribute, which has sprung from the Katas, you who 
deserve the most devoted worship, fierce one, giver of victory, victory’s 
own self, you who bear a banner of peacock plumes, decked with every 
ornament, bear a terrible spear, hold a sword and shield, you who are the 
younger sister of the lord of cowherds, O Eldest, born amongst the Nanda 
cowherds, always fond of buffalo’s blood, born in the race of Kusika, O 
Pitambara, you who, assuming the face of a wolf, have devoured Asuras, I 
bow to you who take delight in battle! 

O Uma, Sakambhari, you who are white in hue, you who are also black, 
you who slew the Asura Kaitabha, O tawny-eyed and many-eyed, you who 
have eyes the colour of smoke, I venerate you! 

You are the Vedas, the Srutis, and the highest virtue; you are auspicious 
to Brahmanas performing yagnas. O you who know the past, you who are 
ever present in the sacred shrines erected for you in the cities of 
Jambudwipa, I bow to you! 

You are the Brahmavidya among sciences, and you are that slumber 
from which there is no waking. Mother of Skanda, who possesses the six 


noblest qualities, Durga, you dwell in the remotest corners of the Earth, and 
are described as Swaha and Swadha, as Kala, as Kashta, and as Saraswati, 
as Savitri, the mother of the Vedas, and as the Vedanta. 

With inner soul cleansed, I praise you. Mahadevi, let me always be 
victorious on the battlefield, always minister to me through your grace on 
the field of war. You dwell in remote regions, where there is fear, in places 
of hardship, in the homes of your worshippers and in Patala. You always 
vanquish the Danavas. You are the mahanidra, the great sleep, the illusion, 
the modesty and the beauty of all creatures. 

You are the twilight and the day, you are Savitri, and you are the Mother. 
You are contentment, you are sustenance, and you are light. It is you who 
supports the Sun and the Moon and make them shine. You are the wealth of 
the prosperous. The Siddhas and the Charanas look upon you in dhyana.” 

Sanjaya continues, ‘Understanding the depth of Arjuna’s devotion, 
Durga, who is always graciously inclined towards mankind, appears in the 
sky, and in the presence of Krishna, the Devi says, “You will swiftly defeat 
your enemies, O Pandava. Invincible one, you have Narayana on your side. 
You cannot be vanquished even by the Vajradhari Indra himself.” 

The boon-granting Goddess disappears. Having that boon from her, the 
son of Kunti now regards himself as already victorious and mounts his 
magnificent chariot. And then Krishna and Arjuna, seated on the same 
chariot, blow their celestial conches. 

The man who recites this hymn rising at dawn, does not fear Yakshas, 
Rakshasas or Pisachas. He can have no enemies; he does not fear snakes 
and any animal with fangs and teeth; nor does he fear kings. He is certain to 
be victorious in all battles, and if bound, he is freed from his shackles. He is 
sure to overcome all obstacles, is free from thieves, ever victorious in battle 
and has the blessings of Lakshmi Devi for eternity. In health and strength, 
he lives for a hundred years. 

I know all this through the grace of Vyasa imbued with great wisdom. 
However, your evil sons, all entangled out of ignorance in the snare of 
death, do not recognise them as Nara and Narayana. Nor do they, ensnared 
by death, know that the hour of the end of this kingdom has arrived. 
Dwaipayana and Narada, Kanwa and the sinless Rama have all warned your 
son. But he does not accept what they say. 

Where dharma is, there lie glory and beauty. Where modesty is, 
prosperity and intelligence are to be found. And in righteousness, there is 


Krishna; and where Krishna is, there is victory.’ 


CANTO 24 


BHAGAVAT-GITA PARVA CONTINUED 


which army first advances gladly into battle? Whose hearts are filled 

with confidence, and who are dispirited and downcast? In that war 
which makes the hearts of men tremble, who strikes the first blow, my 
forces or those belonging to the Pandavas? Tell me all this, Sanjaya. Among 
whose troops do the flowery garlands and balms emit fragrant scents? And 
whose troops, roaring fiercely, speak merciful words?’ 

Sanjaya says, “The fighters of both armies are joyful and the flowery 
garlands and perfumes of both armies emit equal fragrance. Fierce is the 
collision that takes place when the tightly compacted ranks arrayed for 
battle encounter each other. 

And the sound of musical instruments, mingled with the blast of conches 
and the noise of drums, and the shouts of brave warriors roaring fiercely at 
one another, reverberate all around. Terrible is the impact of the encounter 
of the warriors of both armies, filled with assurance and staring at one 
another, with the elephants uttering boisterous grunts.” 


Vv aisampayana said, “Dhritarashtra says, ‘There on that field, Sanjaya, 


CANTO 25! 


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA 


Aum Sri Ganapatheyah namaha 
Aum Sri Saraswatheyah namaha 
Aum Sri Krishnayah namaha 


Arjuna vishada yoga: The despair of Arjuna 


“Dhritarashtra says: 

‘Upon the field of dharma,’ field of Kuru, gathered keened for war, my 
force and the sons of Pandu, what did they do, Sanjaya?’ 

Sanjaya says: 

‘Seeing the Pandava army arrayed, Duryodhana then 

his honoured master approaches; the king says these words: 

“Behold this immense army, master, of the sons of Pandu, 

deployed by Drupada’s son, your brilliant pupil. 

Here, heroes, mighty bowmen, of Bhima and Arjuna equals in war— 
Yuyudhana and Virata, and Drupada maharatha;° 

Dhrishtaketu, Chekitana, and the valiant Kasiraja, 

Purujit and Kuntibhoja, and the Saibya, bull among men. 

And Yuddhamanyu the brave and the intrepid Uttamaujas, 
Subhadra’s son* and Draupadi’s princes—surely, maharathas all. 


Be aware, also, of the distinguished amongst us, O best of dvijas>, 
the commanders of my army—let me name them for you to know. 
Yourself and Bhishma and Karna, and Kripa winner of wars; 
Aswatthaman and Vikarna, and the son of Somadatta, as well. 
And so many other heroes, too, willing to give their lives for me; 
myriad weapons they wield, all of them masters of war. 


Our army is invincible, defended comprehensively by the might of 
Bhishma; 


their force is inferior, guarded by Bhima’s strength all around. 
And positioned at every ingress, each at your station, 
Bhishma alone you must all perfectly protect, surely, from every side.” 


To hearten him, the mighty Kuru ancient,° the grandsire, 

a lion’s roar lets out and blows his conch reverberantly. 
Then, conches and bugles and trumpets, kettledrums, horns 
resound suddenly, all together: that sound was tumultuary. 


When, from a magnificent chariot, white horses yoked to it, 
Madhava’ and the Pandava,® also, their divine conches sound. 
The Panchajanya, Hrishikesa;? the Devadatta, Dhananjaya;!° 
the great conch Paundra blows Vrikodara!! of awesome deeds. 
The Anantavijayam, the king, Kunti’s son Yudhishtira; 

Nakula and Sahadeva: the Sughosha, the Manipushpaka. 

And the Kaasi, supreme archer, and Sikhandi, maharatha; 
Dhrishtadyumna and Virata and Satyaki, the unvanquished. 
Drupada and all the sons of Draupadi, O lord of the earth, 

and Subhadra’s mighty-armed son sound their conches, every one. 
That clamour Dhritarashtra’s sons’ hearts pierces; 

and sky and earth, also, that fierce uproar shakes. 


Now, watching in formation the sons of Dhritarashtra, the monkey- 
bannered!? Pandava, when weapons are about to be loosed, raises his bow. 
Then, to Hrishikesa he speaks these words, lord of the earth. 


Arjuna says: 

“Between the two armies, set my chariot, Achyuta.!° 

So I can look at those arrayed against us, seeking war, 
against whom I must fight— before battle begins. 

The warriors let me see, that have come together here, 
wanting to please Dhritarashtra’s evil-minded son with war.” 


Sanjaya says: 
‘Asked this by Gudakesa,!* Hrishikesa, O Bhaarata,!° 
drawing up that fine chariot between the two armies, 


before Bhishma, Drona and all the rulers of the earth, 
says, “Partha,!° look at these massed Kurus.” 


Then Partha sees standing there fathers and grandfathers, 

masters, uncles,!’ brothers, sons, grandsons and friends, 
fathers-in-law and well-wishers —and in both armies, besides; 

the son of Kunti looks closely at all those kinsmen deployed there. 
By great pity overcome, stricken, he says this. 


Arjuna says: 

“T see my kinsmen, Krishna, gathered avid for war. 

My limbs turn weak, my mouth is parched; 

and my body trembles, and my hair stands on end. 

The Gandiva slips from my hands and my skin burns; 

and my anxiety I cannot control and the fierce whirling of my mind; 
and omens I see, evil, Kesava, 

and nor do I see what good can come from killing my kinsmen in battle. 
I do not want victory, Krishna, neither kingdom nor happiness; 

for what a kingdom, Govinda, what for pleasures or even life? 

Those for whose sake we want a kingdom, pleasures or happiness, 
they are here for war, leaving their lives and wealth. 

Masters, fathers, sons, and grandsires, too; 

uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law and other kinsmen; 
I do not want to kill them even if they kill me, Madhusudana:!® 

not for lordship over the three worlds,!? what then of this earth? 

Killing Dhritarashtra’s sons, what joy will we get, Janardana?”” 

We will only find sin ourselves if we slay these sinners. 

So we must not kill the sons of Dhritarashtra, who are our kin; 

for, after killing our own, how can we be happy, Madhava??! 

Even if these, their hearts ruined by greed, see no 

atrocity in destroying the clan and no crime in harming friends, 

why don’t we realise that we must desist from this sin, 

when we see clearly how heinous it is to exterminate one’s race, Janardana? 


With the destruction of the clan, ancient family traditions are lost forever; 
when dharma is no more, evil takes all that race. 


When adharma rules, Krishna, the women of the clan become loose; 

when the women are depraved, Vaarshaneya,”* the varnas~* become mixed. 
Crossbreeding only casts into hell those that ruin the clan, and the clan, 
itself; 

their manes surely fall, for the ritual of the offering of rice-balls and holy 
water having disappeared. 

Through the sins of these clan-destroyers, defilers of the varnas, 

lost are sacred traditions”* of caste and family, forever. 

Men whose kuladharma has been destroyed, Janardana, 

will live forever in hell, as I have heard. 


Ah, what a great sin we have decided to commit: 

that from greed for the pleasures of kingdom, we are ready to kill our 
kinsmen. 

While I am unarmed and unresisting, 

let Dhritarashtra’s sons kill me on the field of war—that I could still bear.” 


Sanjaya says: 
‘Saying this, Arjuna sits down in the back of that chariot, in war; 
he casts aside his arrows and bow, his heart plunged in profound anguish.’ 


1. The translation of the Bhagavad Gita given here is a verse translation by Ramesh Menon from the 
original Sanskrit. It preserves the Sanskrit order of words, and tries to reflect the Sanskrit cadences. 
This is not a reworking of Ganguli’s translation. 

2. truth; righteousness 

3. great (chariot) warrior 

4. Abhimanyu 

5. the twice-born, the two upper castes; in this case, the Brahmanas 

6. Bhishma 

7. Krishna 

8. Arjuna 

9. Krishna; Vishnu 

10. Arjuna; lit. ‘winner of wealth’ 

11. Bhima; lit. ‘wolf-belly’ 

12. Hanuman 

13. Krishna; immaculate one 

14. Arjuna; curly-haired; conqueror of sleep 

15. Dhritarashtra is a descendant of the ancient king Bharata, after whom Bharata-varsha is named 
16. Arjuna; Pritha’s (Kunti) son 

17. maternal 


18. Krishna, slayer of the demon Madhu 

19. Swarga, Bhumi and Patala; heaven, earth and the under-world 
20. Krishna 

21. Krishna 

22. Krishna, scion of the Vrishnis 

23. castes 

24. dharma, spiritual 


CANTO 26 


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA CONTINUED 


Samkhya yoga: The way of Samkhya> 


Sanjaya says: 
‘Seeing him so, in the grip of pity, tearful, agitated, 
grief-stricken, these words to him speaks Madhusudana. 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“From where has this stain come over you at this critical time? 

This is the way of the base; it does not lead to heaven but fetches infamy, 
Arjuna. 

Do not go this cowardly way, Partha; it is beneath you; 

abandon this vile faint-heartedness, and arise, O bane of your enemies!” 


Arjuna says: 

“How will I attack Bhishma and Drona in battle, Madhusudana, 

with arrows, when they are worthy of worship, Arisudana?*° 

Surely, without killing one’s masters and noble elders, it is better to live by 
begging alms in this world; 

else, by killing our masters, if we enjoy wealth and pleasures we shall enjoy 
blood-stained spoils. 

We do not know which of these would be better for us: 

that we conquer them or that they vanquish us! 

They whom killing, we would not wish to live—standing before us, the 
sons of Dhritarashtra. 

The weakness of pity besieges my nature; my mind confounded about what 
dharma is, I ask you— 

tell me what is unquestionably best for me. I am your disciple; 

teach me, I submit to you. 

Because I cannot see what can exorcise this anguish that withers my senses, 


not if I gained a thriving and unrivalled kingdom on earth, and even 
lordship over the gods of light.?””’ 


Sanjaya says: 
‘Speaking thus to Hrishikesa, Gudakesa, scourge of his enemies, 
says “I will not fight” and falls silent. 


Then, Hrishikesa speaks smilingly, Bhaarata, 
between two armies, to him who sorrowed, these words. 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“You grieve for those not worth grieving over, and argue as if you were a 
wise man discoursing; 

not for the dead or for the living do the wise grieve. 

Surely, at no time ever did I not exist, or you, or all these kings; 

and for sure, not in any future to come will any of us cease to exist. 

Just as the indweller passes, in the body, through childhood, youth and old 
age, 

the soul also assumes new bodies; the wise are not perplexed by this. 
Contact between the elements alone, son of Kunti, causes cold and heat, 
pleasure and pain; 

these come and go, they are evanescent; endure them, Bhaarata. 

Whom these cannot perturb, the wise man, O bull among men; 

who is the same in sorrow and joy, steadfast, is fit for immortality. 

Never does the unreal exists, and the real never ceases to be; 

of both these, surely, the end has been seen by seers of truth. 

But, know, what pervades all this is immortal; 

that everlasting being no one can destroy. 

Mortal these bodies; eternal, it is said, the embodied soul; 

Tt is immortal, ineffable —so, fight Bhaarata! 


He that thinks of it as being a killer and he who thinks This is slain: 

both do not know —it neither kills nor is slain. 

This is not born nor ever dies, not in the past, present or future; 

un-born, changeless, eternal it is, primeval; it is not killed when the body is 
slain. 

Knowing this is indestructible, constant, un-born, immutable, 


how does a man kill anyone, Partha, whom does he kill? 


Even as a man abandons old, tattered clothes and puts on other fresh ones, 
the indweller leaves old, worn bodies and enters other new ones. 
Weapons cannot pierce it; fire cannot burn it; 

water does not wet it, nor dry it, the wind. 

Not pierceable, not burnable, not wettable, and also not dryable— 
permanent, ubiquitous, abiding, invariable, eternal. 

unmanifest, it; inconceivable, it; changeless, it, they say; 

So, knowing it is such, you must not despair. 

and if you think that it is constantly being born and continually dying, 
even then, mighty-armed, you ought not to despair. 

For he who is born death is certain, and birth is certain for who dies; 
so, over what you believe to be ineluctable, you should not despair. 
Unmanifest the source of beings, manifest their interim, Bhaarata; 
unmanifest, too, their end; so why grieve for them? 


As a miracle, some see it; and others say it is marvellous; 

and others learn that it is ineffable; and some, after having learnt,2° still do 
not know it. 

This eternal spirit is unkillable, in every body, Bhaarata; 

so, you must not grieve for any of the living. 

And also, looking at your svadharma”’ you must not falter; 

for, there is nothing higher for a Kshatriya than a war for truth. 

Fortuitous and just, an open portal to heaven— 

joyful are Kshatriyas, Partha, who find such a war! 


But if you do not fight this battle of dharma, 

then, forsaking your svadharma and your fame, you will find sin. 
Besides, of your ignominy all men will tell forever, 

and for the honoured, infamy is worse than death. 

That out of fear you quit the battle these maharathas will think; 

and in those that once held you in great esteem, you will find contempt. 
And your enemies will malign you with vile slander, 

scoffing at your prowess; what can be more painful than that? 

Either being killed you will attain heaven, or, victorious, enjoy the earth; 
so arise, Kaunteya, resolved to fight! 


Pleasure and pain equally treat: gain, loss: victory, 
defeat; then join battle—you will no sin incur. 


I have told you about samkhya;*? to the yoga of buddhi*! now listen; 

yoke** your intellect with this, Partha, the bonds of karma put to sword. 

In battle, with this,*° there is no-one killed, no sin to consider; 

even the least bit of this dharma preserves from great fear. 

In the resolute soul, the mind is one, joy of the Kurus; 

many-branched and unending are the thoughts of the irresolute. 

With these memorised flowery words those of small vision 

eulogise the panegyrics of the Veda, Partha, saying nothing else** exists. 
Their hearts of desire, swarga their ideal, the rewards of births and rites they 
seek; 

frequent, unvarying rituals, to have pleasure and power, they perform. 

To pleasure and power attached, their thoughts beguiled by these; 

with devoted mind to attain samadhi*» they do not strive. 

With matters of the three gunas°° the Vedas deal; be without the three 
gunas, 

Arjuna: 

free from duality; always established in sattva,*’ unattached, serene. 


As much use as in a well to a deluge of water everywhere: 

so much in all the Vedas to a Brahmana of enlightenment. 

You surely have the right to do your karma,’® not to its fruit, at any time; 
the fruit of karma should not become your motive, nor be attached to sloth. 
Steadfast in yoga, do your duty, renouncing attachment, Dhananjaya; 
success and failure becoming the same: that equanimity is called yoga. 

Far inferior is ritual to the yoked mind, Dhananjaya; 

in wisdom seek refuge: pitiful are those driven by gain. 

Mind yoked, you can be free here*? of both good and evil; 

so, to yoga devote yourself; yoga is genius at karma. 


Performing karma, mind devoted, but its fruit renouncing, wise men, 
from the bondage of birth entirely freed,*° come to the place of no sickness. 
When beyond this chaos of illusions your mind passes, 


then you will arrive at indifference to what you have heard and what you 
will hear.*! 

By the srutis confused:** when your mind becomes still, unmoving, 

in samadhi permanently, then you will find yoga.” 


Arjuna says: 


“How can you tell a man of resolution, who is founded in samadhi, Kesava? 
43 


How does a realised one speak? How does he sit, how walk?” 

The Gracious Lord says: 

‘When a man abandons all desires, Partha, which spring in the mind, 

and gratifies himself in just his soul, a man of unshakeable wisdom he is 
said to be. 

Unaffected by adversity, whose mind, in fortune unmoved to desire; 

free of passion, fear and anger, a true muni is called. 

Who everywhere is without affection; who, upon finding fortune or 
misfortune, 

neither exults nor feels aversion, his wisdom is founded. 

And when, like a tortoise completely retracts all its limbs, a man 

does his senses from their objects of desire, his wisdom is founded. 
Through restraint the embodied can refrain from indulging the senses, 

but not from desire; even his desires disappear at the vision of God. 


Of even, son of Kunti, a restrained man, 

his turbid senses forcibly ravish his mind. 

All the senses restraining, the sage sits intent on me; 

for, one whose senses are tamed, his wisdom is established. 

Dwelling on the objects of desire,** a man becomes attached to these; 

from attachment is born desire; from desire anger arises. 

From rage comes upheaval;*° from turmoil, the wavering memory; 

after the loss of memory, destruction of the mind; when the mind is 
destroyed, he dies. 


Emancipated from attraction and revulsion, but going among the objects of 
the senses, 

tamed by the Atman, ruled by the soul, he attains grace. 

With grace, of all suffering the end comes; 


the tranquil one’s wisdom, surely, is quickly constant. 

No wisdom for the wilful, and not for the reckless, faith; 

and for the faithless, there is no peace; for the peaceless, from where joy? 
Which ever of the ever-roving senses the mind yields to, 

that bears his wisdom away, as the wind a boat on the sea. 


So, he, Mahabaho, who withdraws completely 

the senses from the objects of sensuality, his wisdom is profound. 

When night comes for all creatures, is when the ascetic awakes; 

what is waking for the rest, that is night for the visionary. 

Always still, the ocean, though being filled by water entering into it; 
equally, he who contains all desires entering him, acquires peace, not he 
who submits to desire. 

Leaving the things of desire, who roams the earth, unattached, 

without ‘mine’, without ‘I’, he attains peace. 

This is the Brahmi state,*° Partha; attaining to this, he is no more tempted; 
abiding in this at his final hour, as well, he goes to Brahmanirvana.”*/ 


25. see appendix for samkhya and yoga 

26. slayer of enemies 

27. the Devas 

28. one who knows, has studied, the Veda; knowing the scriptures 
29. inherent caste duty, here as a Kshatriya warrior 

30. system of philosophy founded by Kapila muni 

31. mind 

32. Yoga means to yoke; control, restrain, here. 

33. yoga of knowledge 

34. higher 

35. communion with God, liberation 

36. sattva, rajas and tamas 

37. the pure guna 

38. natural duty 

39. in this world 

40. repeated birth, death and rebirth 

41. srotasi refers to what you will hear in the Vedas, too 
42. now confused 

43. Krishna 

44. sense objects; objects of sensuality 

45. ‘delusion’ is the most common translation for sammohah 
46. union with Brahman 





47. Nirvana: absorption; eternal bliss; highest felicity; union; dissolution in; extinction; death; 
vanishment 


CANTO 27 


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA CONTINUED 


Karma yoga: The way of action 


Arjuna says: 

“If you think knowledge superior to action, Janardana, 

then why to this ghastly deed do you commit me, Kesava? 

With your seemingly ambiguous words, you only confuse my mind; 
say one thing, decidedly, by which I can attain felicity.” 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“In this world, two kinds of devotion were of old ordained by me, 
O sinless — 

the yoga of knowledge for samkhyas, the way of deeds for yogis. 


By not doing his duty a man does not achieve freedom from karma; 

nor by mere abstention is transcendent perfection attained. 

Nor, certainly, can anyone even momentarily ever stay inactive; 

because all are helplessly made to act by the Prakriti-born gunas. 

He that restrains the organs of karma but continues to dwell in his mind on 
the objects of sensuality, that foolish soul is deemed a hypocrite. 

But he who, restraining the senses with the mind, Arjuna, engages the 
organs of action in karma yoga, dispassionately —he excels. 

You must always do your duty; because action is higher than inactivity; 
besides, you will not succeed even in keeping your body through inertia. 
All karma other than that done as an offering binds this world in rebirth; 

for that, act, Kaunteya, free from attachment, consummately. 


Together with sacrifice, creating men, of old Prajapati*® said, 

‘By this, you will generate and multiply; let this be the yielder of your 
wishes. 

Adore the Devas by this; let the Devas succour you; 


by each other nourished, supreme felicity you will have. 

Bound by the nurture of sacrifice, the gods will surely give you the 
pleasures you desire; 

one who enjoys these gifts, without giving to them, he is certainly a thief.’ 


The saintly who eat the leftovers of a sacrifice are liberated from all sins; 
but the sinful eat sin, who cook food just for themselves. 

From food are born beings; from rain, food grows; 

from sacrifice, come the rains; sacrifice from karma*® springs. 

Karma from Brahma arises, know; Brahma of the Imperishable is born; 

so, ubiquitous Brahma always abides in sacrifice. 

Hence, this turning wheel, who does not live by it here,°° 

lives in sin, indulging the senses—in vain, Partha, he lives. 

But for him who is devoted only to the Atman >! and remains absorbed in 
the Atman, the man 

who, also, is fulfilled only in the soul—for him no duty is ordained. 

He surely has nothing to gain here, either by doing or by not doing; 

nor does he, among all the living, seek any gain. 

Thus, without attachment, always do your duty consummately; 

for, by performing karma without attachment man attains the Supreme. 
Indeed, only through karma did in absolute perfection abide Janaka>* and 
others; 

besides, also considering the good of the world, you must act. 

Whatever a great man does: all that other men also do; 

whatever norm he sets, that all the world follows. 


Not for me, Partha, is there any duty in the three worlds, 

nor anything to attain that is unattained; and I am always at work. 
Surely, if ever I am not at my work, tirelessly, 

my path would be followed by men, Partha, of every walk. 

Plunged into ruin these worlds, if I did not do my work; 

and I would be the cause of crossbreeding,>° diminishing these generations. 
As the ignorant perform karma with desire, attachment, Bhaarata, 

so must the knowing act, unattached, wanting the weal of the world. 

Not creating confusion in the minds of the unknowing attached to karma, 
silently the wise man does all his work, yoked, absorbed. 

Nature’s essences perform karma, in every way; 


he who is beguiled by egoism thinks, ‘I am the doer’. 

But he who knows the truth, Mahabaho, about the difference between guna 
and karma— 

the gunas act upon the gunas—so knowing, is not attached. 

Those deluded by the gunas of nature become enmeshed in karma born of 
the gunas; 

those dull ones that do not know the AlP*, a knower of everything must not 
agitate. 


To me all karma consigning, to the Atman your thought; 

becoming desireless, dispassionate, do battle, leaving panic. 

This my teaching, those men who always follow, 

with faith, without derision, are also liberated from karma. 

But they who slight this, do not follow my precept, 

fools to all knowledge, are, know, lost, insensate. 

In concord with his nature, acts even the wise man; 

nature, beings obey — what can inhibition achieve? 

For the senses, attraction and revulsion towards the objects of sensuality are 
inexorable; 

no man must come under their sway, for they are his enemies. 

Better in one’s own dharma, flawed, than another’s dharma immaculately 
done; 

death in one’s own dharma is auspicious; another’s dharma is dangerous.” 


Arjuna says: 

“Then what makes a man to commit sin, 

even unwillingly, Vaarshaneya, with force as if coerced?” 
The Gracious Lord says: 

“It is desire, it is anger, arisen from the rajoguna>” — 
voracious, direly sinful, know this, here, for an enemy. 

As fire is obscured by smoke and a mirror by dust, 

as the womb hides an embryo, so is it hidden by that. 
Shrouded, wisdom by this, of the wise the constant enemy, 
with lust’s form, Kaunteya, and an insatiable fire. 

Senses, mind, intellect, its abode, it is said; 

by these confounding, it shrouds the wisdom of the embodied. 
So, your senses first control, Bharatarishabha; 


kill this malignant thing, for this is the ruiner of knowledge and wisdom. 
The senses are lofty, they say; higher than the senses is mind; 

and beyond mind is intellect; but past intellect is He. 

So, knowing what is beyond the intellect, stilling the self with the soul, 
vanquish, Mahabaho, the enemy, lust-formed, unassailable.” 


48. Brahma, the creator; lord of the people 

49. action, duty, caste duty, sacred duty 

50. in this world 

51. Soul; Self 

52. the Rajarishi king Janaka, Sita’s father, Sri Rama’s father-in-law 
53. varnasamkarasya: anarchy through mixing of the castes 

54. the Truth, Brahman 

55. the second guna, mode of Prakriti, of the essence of passion 


CANTO 28 


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA CONTINUED 


Gyana yoga: The way of knowledge 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“This yoga to Vivaswat”® I revealed, immortal; 

Vivaswan to Manu?’ taught it; Manu to Ikshavaku>® imparted it. 

So, by lineal tradition received, this the Rajarishis? knew; 

after great time, here, the yoga was lost, Parantapa. 

That very same have I to you today revealed, the ancient yoga: 

for you are my devotee and my friend, because this is the secret supreme.” 
Arjuna says: 

“Recent your birth, earlier the birth of Vivasvat; 

so how do I comprehend this— you first taught him?” 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“Myriad births of mine are past, and yours, Arjuna; 

these I know, every one; you do not know, Parantapa. 

Though un-born, my soul immortal, the Lord of creatures though being, 
abiding in my own nature, I incarnate through my soul’s maya. 
Whenever there is a decline of dharma, Bhaarata, 

an ascendancy of adharma, then myself I manifest. 

For the deliverance of the good and for the destruction of sinners; 
in order to establish dharma, I come from age to age. 

So, who my divine birth and deeds knows truly, 

after leaving the body does not find rebirth; he finds me, Arjuna. 
Gone, passion, fear, anger; absorbed in me, sheltering in me, 
many, purified by wisdom’s penance, have come to my being. 

As they come to me, so do I cherish them; 

my path men walk, Partha, on every path. 


Those who wish for gain from karma sacrifice here to the gods; 


for, speedily in the world of men gain attends on ritual. 

The four varnas, my creation: by gunas, karma, divided; 

its creator, also, know that I am act-less, immutable. 

I am not by karma tainted; I do not desire the fruit of karma; 

one who recognises me to be thus, he is not bound to karma. 

This knowing, the ancients, too, performed karma, the seekers after 
mukti;°! 

so must you do your duty, as the ancients did of old. 


What is karma, what is akarma? By this even the seers are baffled; 

of that karma I will tell you, knowing which you will be saved from every 
ill. 

What karma is must also be understood, and what is forbidden karma; 

and what is not karma be known—deep is the way of karma. 

Who in work repose sees, and in inactivity ado, 

he is wise among men; he is a sage, all his duty done. 

Whose every endeavour is without desire’s intent; 

whose deeds are burnt in wisdom’s fire, him the wise call a sage. 
Renouncing attachment for the fruit of work, always contented, 
independent, 

though incessantly at work, he does nothing at all. 

Desireless, he of restrained mind, leaving all possessions, 

just the body doing work, finds no sin. 

With whatever chance gives contented, beyond duality, without envy, 

and equable in success, failure—though doing, he is not bound. 

Whose attachments are gone, who is free, mind founded in wisdom; 

who acts only as a sacrifice—all his karma dissolves entirely. 


Brahman the sacrifice, Brahman the oblation; 

Brahman the fire into which Brahman makes the offering; 
Brahman he surely attains through the devotion of Brahmakarma.°* 

Only with sacrifices to the Devas, some yogis worship; 

into the fire of Brahman others sacrifice itself as sacrifice offer. 

Hearing, the other senses, some into restraint’s fire offer; 

sound, the other objects of sensuality, others into the fire of the senses offer. 
All the senses’ karma and the karma of life, others 


offer into self-restraint’s yogic fire, kindled by wisdom. 


Material sacrifice; penance as sacrifice; with yoga, too, others sacrifice; 
sacred study and knowledge, sacrifice the ascetics of stern vows. 

Inhaling they offer into exhalation; exhaling into in-breath, as well, others: 
prana, apana’s, movement stilling, those devoted to pranayama. 

Others curb what they eat, into prana, prana offer; 

all these, also, knowers of sacrifice: by sacrifice, their sins expelled. 
Eating sacrificial remains, ambrosia, they go to eternal Brahman; 

not this world is for the unsacrificing, much less any other, best of Kurus. 


So, many kinds of sacrifice are spread across Brahman’s face; 
karma-born, know, all these; so knowing, you will become free. 
Better than sacrifice of wealth, the devotion of wisdom, Parantapa; 
all karma, in entirety, Partha, culminates in wisdom. 

That learn, through homage, by inquiry and service: 

the wise, seers of truth, will teach you wisdom. 

Which knowing, not again will delusion so torment you, Pandava; 
with this, all creatures, without exception, you will see in yourself, and in 
me. 

Even if you, of sinners, of them all, are the greatest sinner, 

all distress, by wisdom’s boat, you will surely cross. 

Just as its fuel of wood a fire makes ashes, Arjuna, 

wisdom’s fire all karma to ashes turns, as surely. 

Nothing to equal wisdom in purity exists here; 

that, of himself, one evolved in yoga, in time, within himself attains. 
He of faith attains wisdom: absorbed, senses restrained; 

wisdom gained, to supreme peace, also, he quickly comes. 


The ignorant and the faithless and the doubting soul perishes; 

not this world, not the next, nor happiness for the doubting soul. 

Through yoga renouncing karma, with wisdom severing doubt, 

a self-possessed one no karma binds, Dhananjaya. 

So, cut away ignorance-born doubt seated in your heart, with wisdom’s soul 
sword; 

turn to yoga—arise, Bhaarata!” 








56. the Sun god; Surya Deva 

57. Surya’s son Vaivaswata Manu: progenitor of the Manushyas or Manavas, humankind 

58. Manu’s son, great king, founder of the Suryavamsa, royal house of the Sun, into which Rama was 
born 

59. royal sages, saintly kings 

60. mysterious power of illusion 

61. liberation; final salvation 

62. working for Brahman; serving Brahman 


CANTO 29 


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA CONTINUED 


Sannyasa yoga: The way of renunciation 


Arjuna says: 
“Renunciation of karma, Krishna, then again, yoga you extol; 
which one of the two is better for me, say for certain.” 


The Gracious Lord says: 
“Sannyasa and karma yoga effect liberation, both; 
but of the two, doing karma is superior to inaction. 


Know him as a constant renunciate, who neither dislikes nor desires; 

for, detached from duality, Mahabaho, he is easily freed from bondage. 

The callow say that samkhya and yoga are different, not the wise; 

for, who is absorbed in one, of both enjoys the fruit. 

The condition the samkhyas achieve, that yogis also attain; 

and as one, who samkhya and yoga sees, he sees. 

But sannyasa, mighty-armed, is difficult to attain without yoga; 

the sage yoked to yoga, to Brahman swiftly comes. 

Who is absorbed in yoga, pure soul, master of his mind, subduer of the 
senses, 

who is the soul of all souls—though he does, he is not tainted. 

‘I do nothing’ a yukta®? thinks, a knower of truth: 

while seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating, moving, sleeping, 
breathing, 

speaking, emitting, ingesting, staring and blinking: 

the senses in sensuality are engaged—in this awareness. 


Resigning his karma to Brahman, without attachment, who works: 
he is not stained by sin, as a lotus leaf by water. 
With the body, with the mind, with the intellect, or merely with the senses, 


yogis perform karma, leaving attachment—to purify the soul. 

The yoked, sacrificing the fruit of karma, attains profound peace; 

the unyoked, moved by desire, devoted to the fruit, is bound. 

All karma with the mind relinquishing, dwells the restrained one, at ease, 

in the city of nine doors,°+ the embodied—surely, neither doing nor 
causing.© 

Neither doer nor deed for the world, the Lord creates; 

not union of work with its fruit; only nature acts. 


Neither anybody’s sin nor, indeed, their virtue does God assume; 
wisdom is shrouded by ignorance; by this the living are deluded. 
But whose ignorance is destroyed by knowledge of the Atman, 
their sunlike wisdom illumines that, highest. 

That their mind, that their soul, that their faith, that their devotion— 
they go to non-return, by wisdom their sins destroyed. 


A Brahmana endowed with learning, humility; a cow, an elephant, 

and even a dog and a dog-eater, the wise see as equal. 

Even here, they conquer nature, whose minds are founded in equalness; 
because Brahman is immaculate, equal, so they abide in Brahman. 

Not elated at getting the agreeable and not dejected upon finding the 
unpleasant; 

mind calm, undeluded, the knower of Brahman in Brahman dwells. 

Who is detached from the outward touch.°’ finds the bliss in the Atman; 

the one yoked in Brahman through yoga, he immortal bliss enjoys. 

Surely, the pleasures of the touch of the senses, they are only wombs of 
SOIroW; 

they begin and end, Kaunteya; not in them dwells a wise man. 

Who can, even here, before leaving the body, endure 

the lust- and anger-born rush, he is a yukta; he is the happy man. 

Who joy within, rest within, and also light only within finds; 

that yogi dissolution in Brahman, union with Brahman, attains. 

Those rishis find Brahmanirvana, whose sins are exhausted, 

doubts scattered, minds restrained: to the felicity of all beings devoted. 
Freed from lust, anger, yatis, with minds restrained, 

live subsumed in Brahmanirvana, those who know the Atman. 


Outward objects of sensuality shutting out, and gaze fixed between the 
brows; 

making equal outward and inward breath, moving within the nose; 

with restrained senses, mind and intellect, the sage devoted to liberation, 
who has departed desire, fear and anger, he is surely always free. 

Enjoyer of sacrifices and penance, great Lord of all worlds, 

friend to all beings—me, knowing, he comes to peace.” 


63. a yoked one, who is united with the divine 
64. the body of nine inlets 

65. anything to be done 

66. Chandala 

67. of sensual contact, pleasure 








CANTO 30 


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA CONTINUED 


Dhyana yoga: The way of meditation 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“Not seeking karma’s fruit, who does his ordained work, 

he is the sannyasi and the yogi; and not one without the fire,°° and not him 
without ritual. 

So, what they call sannyasa, know that is yoga, Pandava; 

for, without renouncing desire, no one becomes a yogi. 

For the sage who aspires to yoga, karma is the way, it is told; 

who has attained yoga, only for him is quiescence the way, they say. 
Only when neither to the objects of sensuality attached, 

he who renounces all desire is said to have attained yoga. 

Raise yourself through the Atman; never abase yourself; 

for, only you are your own friend; you alone, your own enemy. 

His Atman is his friend only to him who has mastered himself; 

for the uncontrolled, his very soul is hostile like an enemy. 


Who has conquered himself, who is tranquil, his soul is entirely composed, 
in heat and cold, joy and sorrow, also, in honour and ignominy. 

In knowledge and wisdom, fulfilled, unshakeable, master of his senses; 

that yogi is said to be yoked for whom the clod of earth, a stone and gold 
are the same. 

With the friend, the companion, an enemy, a stranger, an arbiter, an odious 
man, a relative, 

as well as a saint and a sinner, he who is equal-minded, excels. 


The yogi should constantly yoke himself: in seclusion, 
alone, heart and mind controlled, without desire and possession. 
In a clean place, setting his seat firm, himself, 


neither too high nor too low, with kusa grass, cloth and deerskin, one over 
the other. 

There, making his mind one-pointed, controlling his thought and senses, 
sitting upon the seat, he should absorb himself in yoga, to purify his heart. 
Aligning body, head and neck, keeping still and steady; 

fixing his gaze on the tip of his nose, and not looking around; 

serene, fearless, steadfast in the vow of celibacy; 

mind controlled, intent on me, yoked, he sits devoted to me. 

Thus yoking himself always, the yogi of subdued mind 

to peace, supreme nirvana which abides in me, attains. 


Not for one who eats too much is yoga, nor for him who overly fasts; 

and not for him given to too much sleep, nor yet for the overly wakeful, 
Arjuna. 

Who is restrained in food and pleasure, devoted in thought and deed; 
moderate in sleep and waking, attains yoga, leaving sorrow. 

When the restrained mind is founded exclusively in the Atman, 

indifferent to every desire, then he is said to be a yukta. 


As a lamp in a windless place does not flicker: similar, it is recorded, 

is a yogi of restrained thought, engaged in the yoga of the Atman. 

Where thought ceases, curbed by the practice of yoga; 

and where, also, the mind sees the soul, and is fulfilled in the Atman; 

in which infinite joy, through the intellect experienced, beyond the senses, 
he knows; and in which established, he surely does not move from truth; 
and gaining which, no other gain he considers as greater than that; 
wherein founded, no grief, even the heaviest, shakes him: 

that, know—the disunion from union with pain—to be absorption in yoga; 
this, with conviction, practise: yoga, with an undismayed heart. 


Will-spawned desires, all, renouncing entirely; 

with the mind, the host of senses surely restraining, on every side; 

by degrees growing still, through firmly restraining the intellect; 

in the soul having established the mind, let him not think of anything. 
Wherever the restless and fickle mind strays, from there it must be 
restrained, 

brought back under the sway of just the Atman. 


Who is of serene mind, only to this yogi the highest bliss 
comes, his passion stilled, his spirit in Brahman, sinless. 

Thus constantly devoting himself, the yogi, delivered from sin, 
easily communes with Brahman, enjoys infinite bliss. 


In all beings the Atman, and all beings in the soul: 
the one absorbed in yoga sees everywhere the same. 
Who sees me everywhere, and everything sees in me, 
to him I am never lost, and he is not lost to me. 


As abiding in all beings, who worships me, founded in oneness, 
whatever his life, he is a yogi and lives in me. 

In the image of himself, who everywhere sees the same, Arjuna, 
be it in pleasure or in pain, he is deemed the highest yogi.” 


Arjuna says: 

“This yoga you have said to be sameness, Madhusudana, 

for this I see no enduring stability —out of restlessness. 
Fickle, surely, is the mind, Krishna, turbulent, strong, obstinate; 
to control it, I think, is so difficult—like” the wind.” 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“Doubtless, Mahabaho, the mind is difficult to control, unsteady; 
but with practice, Kaunteya, and dispassion, it is restrained. 

For the unrestrained, yoga is difficult to attain, I agree; 

but the restrained soul, striving expediently, can attain it.” 


Arjuna says: 

“Who cannot control himself, though he has faith, whose mind strays from 
yoga, 

without attaining consummation in yoga, to what end, Krishna, does he 
come? 

Does he not, from both fallen,’! and like a rent cloud, surely perish, 
unstable, Mahabaho, confounded along the path of Brahman? 

This my doubt, Krishna, you must dispel entirely; 

none but you, for sure, can effect the undoing of this doubt.” 


The Gracious Lord says: 
“Partha, neither here nor hereafter, does he find harm; 
for never does any good man, my friend, come to evil. 


Having attained worlds of the righteous, living there for countless years, 
into a home of the pious and the prosperous, the one fallen from yoga is 


nobly born. 

Else, born even into a family of yogis of wisdom; 

though rare indeed in the world is such a birth. 
Thereupon, the evolution of his past life he recovers; 

and, with that, strives again for perfection, Kurunandana.’ 
Also, that same previous practice bears him away, inexorably; 
even a seeker after yoga transcends the Veda.” 

But the yogi who strives with zealous mind, purified of all sin, 
through many lives perfected, then comes to the supreme. 
Than the tapasvin’* 
Than the karmi’® greater the yogi—so a yogi become, Arjuna. 
Of all yogis, even, who abides in me in his inmost soul, 

who devotedly worships me, him I consider the foremost yukta.” 


2 


68. who does not light the sacred fire 
69. of mind 

70. controlling 

71. devotion and yoga 

72. joy, child of the Kurus 

73. Vedic ritual 

74. ascetic 

75. man of knowledge, wisdom 

76. man of deeds, work 


greater the yogi; also greater than the gyani,’° regarded; 


CANTO 31 


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA CONTINUED 


Gyana Vigyana yoga: The way of knowledge and realisation. 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“To me the mind cleaving, Partha, devoted in yoga, taking refuge in me, 
without doubt, you will know me in full—listen how. 

This knowledge to you, I, together with wisdom, will tell in full, 

which knowing, nothing else here will remain to be known. 

Among thousands of men scarcely one strives for perfection; 

among these seekers, even among sages,’’ hardly one knows me in truth. 


Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intellect and also 

ego—this my differentiated nature, eight-fold. 

This is my lower nature; know my other transcendent nature — 
the Living Spirit, Mahabaho, which supports this world. 

These two are the womb of all beings, know; 

I am all the world’s source and its dissolution, as well. 

Than me higher nothing else at all exists, Dhananjaya; 

in’® me all this is strung like so many jewels on a thread. 


Taste am I in water, Kaunteya; light Iam in moon and sun; 

Aum in all the Vedas, sound in ether, manliness in men. 

The pure fragrance in the earth I am, and brilliance in fire; 

life in all beings am I, and austerity in ascetics. 

The seed am I of all creatures, know, Partha— eternal; 

the intelligence of the intelligent I am; the splendour of the splendid, I. 
And I am the strength of the strong; of lust, passion devoid; 

in beings, legitimate desire am I, Bharatarishabha. 

And whatever sattvik existences, of rajas and tamas there are: 

from me alone they are, know—I am not in them; they are in me. 


By all these, the three gunas’ manifestations, this whole world, 
deluded, does not know me, transcendent, supreme, immutable. 
For, this divine, guna-comprised maya of mine is impenetrable; 
only who in me refuge, they cross over this maya. 

Not in me evil-doers, fools, refuge, lowest of men; 

robbed by maya of wisdom, they yield to demonic ways. 


Four kinds of men worship me, virtuous ones, Arjuna: 

the distressed, the aspirant /? the material seeker,° and the wise man, 
Bharatarishabha. 

Of these the wise man, always in communion, of singular devotion, is the 
best; 

for, most dear to the wise man I am, and he is dear to me. 

Noble are all these, surely, but the gyani I regard as my own self; 

Because he, the yoked soul, is absorbed just in me, as his highest refuge. 

At the end of many lives, the wise man resorts to me: 

‘Because Vasudeva is all’—such a great soul is exceedingly rare. 


Through desire they whose wisdom is swayed, worship other gods, 

a myriad of rites observing, by their own natures compelled. 

Whatever form, however, any devotee wishes to worship with faith, 

in just that his faith I make firm. 

He, to this faith yoked, that®! to propitiate seeks; 

and through that, obtains his wishes, which in truth by me alone are 
granted. 

But they have an end, the fruits of these small-minded ones; 

to the Devas, the worshippers of Devas go; and my devotees come to me. 
The Unmanifest as reduced into manifestation: the ignorant regard me; 
my supreme nature not knowing —imperishable, unsurpassed. 

I am not plain to all, being cloaked by my yogamaya; 

this foolish world does not know me: un-born, immortal. 

I know equally, Arjuna, past and present 

and future beings; but me no one knows. 

By desire- and aversion-arisen duality seduced, Bhaarata, 

all creatures are born to ignorance, Parantapa. 

But whose sins have come to an end, men of virtuous deeds: 

they, from duality’s delusion freed, worship me with unswerving devotion. 


For liberation from decay, death, who strive, sheltering in me, 

they the Brahman truly know, the Atman entirely, and all about karma. 

As the Lord of creatures,®* master of gods, the support of sacrifice, me who 
know, 

with absorbed minds they also know me even at the hour of death.” 





77. Siddhas: the perfect. A Siddha is also a semi-divine being of great purity, characterised by eight 
supernatural faculties, or siddhis 

78. on me 

79. after knowledge; the spiritual seeker 

80. of wealth, gain 

81. form, deity 

82. the elements, the material world 


CANTO 32 


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA CONTINUED 


Akshara Brahma yoga: The way of immortal Brahman 

Arjuna says: 

“What is that Brahman, what Adhyatma,®? what karma, Purushottama? 
and what is called Adhibhutam, what said to be Adhidaivam? 

Who is the Adhiyagna, and how: here in this body, Madhusudana? 
And at the hour of death how are you known by the restrained soul?” 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“Deathless Brahman is supreme; nature is called Adhyatmam; 

beings, souls, that which creates, sends forth, is named karma. 

Adhibhutam is mortal forms, and Purusha,®* Adhidaivatam; 

Adhiyagna even I am, in this body, O most excellent of the living. 

And at the time of the end, only me remembering, while leaving the body, 
who departs, he comes to mybeing: of this there is no doubt. 

Or else, of whatever thinking he gives up the body, 

even to that he surely attains, Kaunteya, being ever absorbed in that 
thought. 

So, at all times, think of me, and fight; 

to me your heart and mind offered, to me you will surely come, without 
doubt. 

Mind engaged in absorption in yoga, not straying, 

who meditates, Partha, the supreme Purusha, divine, attains. 

Who meditates on the Seer, the Ancient, the Ruler, smaller than the 
smallest, 

the support of everything, of inconceivable form, Sun-coloured, beyond 
darkness, 

at the hour of death, mind stilled, with devotion, yoked, and also, with the 
power of yoga, 

prana fixed firmly between the brows—he, that supreme Purusha attains, 
divine. 


That Immortal of which Veda knowers speak, which passionless sages 
enter; 

wanting which, they practice brahmacharya—that condition to you briefly I 
will tell. 


All inlets®> restrained, and the mind confined in the heart; 

in the head fixing the soul’s life-breath, founded firm in yoga, 

AUM, the one-syllabled Brahman, uttering, remembering me, 

who departs, leaving the body, he goes to the highest destination. 

Of nothing else aware, who ever remembers me, with constancy, 

to him I am attainable, Partha, to the always yoked yogi. 

Attaining me, to rebirth, house of sorrow, impermanent, 

great souls do not return—the highest perfection they have reached. 
Up to Brahma’s realm, all worlds are subject to rebirth, Arjuna; 

but upon me attaining, Kaunteya, there is no experiencing birth again. 


A thousand yugas lasts Brahma’s day, who know, 

that his night lasts a thousand yugas, they are knowers of day and night. 
From the Unmanifest all the manifest come forth at the advent of day;*° 

at the coming of night, they then dissolve into that same, called the 
Unmanifest. 

The host of beings, they the same which recur, dissolves, 

when night comes, helplessly, Partha, comes forth, when day arrives. 

But beyond this existence is another unmanifest unmanisfestation eternal: 
He who, when all beings perish, is not destroyed. 

This Unmanifest is said to be imperishable: this, which is called the 
supreme condition, 

whom attaining, they do not return—that is my supreme abode. 

He is the supreme Purusha, Partha, but through singular devotion can be 
attained — 

in whom all beings dwell, by whom all this is pervaded. 


Now the times of yogis not returning, and also returning, 

when departing hence—those times I will tell you, Bharatarishabha. 
Fire, light, day, the bright fortnight,®’ the northern course:*° 
by these departing, those who know Brahman to Brahman go. 


Smoke, night, also the dark fortnight, the six months of the southern course: 


there, the lunar light, the yogi, obtaining, returns. 


The bright, the dark: surely these paths of the world are considered eternal; 
going by one, he does not return; by the other he comes back again. 

Not, these paths, Partha, knowing, is the yogi deluded, ever; 

so, at all times, yoked in yoga be, Arjuna. 

By the Veda, by sacrifice, through penance, and also from charity what 
good fruits accrue— 

the yogi transcends all that, and, this knowing, the supreme place attains, 
the primeval.” 


83. the Supreme Soul 

84. the Cosmic Person 

85. of the body, the senses 

86. Brahma’s day 

87. when the moon waxes 

88. the six months of the sun’s northern course 


CANTO 33 


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA CONTINUED 


Rajavidyarajaguhya yoga: The way of royal knowledge, the royal secret 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“Now to you, this deep secret I will reveal, O unenvious, 

along with knowledge, wisdom—knowing which, you will be delivered 
from evil. 

The sovereign knowledge, sovereign secret, sacred, this, supreme, 

directly perceived, righteous, most easily practised, immortal. 

Men who are faithless in this teaching, Parantapa, 

not attaining me, return to the path of this world of death.*? 


By me is pervaded all this world: in unmanifest form; 

in me are all creatures, and not I in them situated. 

And not in me are the creatures founded—behold my divine yoga! 
The support of beings and not founded in the beings, my soul the 
beings’ source. 

As in akasa”” is founded, ever, the great wind going everywhere, 
even so do all beings in me abide, reflect. 

All beings, Kaunteya, into Prakriti pass, mine, 

at kalpa’s”! end; 

again, these, at kalpa’s beginning, I send forth. 

In my own nature resting, I emit, again and again, 

this entire host of beings, helpless, in Prakriti’s sway. 

And not me do these acts bind, Dhananjaya; 

as one indifferent I remain, unattached amidst these works. 

Under my rule, nature gives birth to all the moving and the immobile; 
because of this, Kaunteya, the world revolves. 


Fools mock me, who have assumed a human body: 
my supreme nature not knowing—the Great Lord of beings. 


Of vain hopes, of vain deeds, of vain knowledge, witless; 

and also of Rakshasas’ and Asuras’ deluded nature partaking.”* 

But great souls, Partha, abiding in divine nature, me worship, single- 
mindedly, 

knowing”? the source of beings, imperishable. 

Always hymning me, and striving, with stern vows; 

venerating me with devotion, ever yoked, they worship. 

And through the ritual of wisdom yet others sacrifice, worship me: 

as one, as apart, as many, universe-faced. 


I am the ritual; I am sacrifice; the ancestral oblation, I; I, the herb; 

the mantra, I; I alone the clarified butter; I, the fire; I, the offering. 

the father, I, of this world, the mother, supporter, grandsire; 

That which is to be known, the purifier, Aum, Rik, Sama and Yajus, also. 
The goal, sustainer, lord, witness, abode, refuge, friend; 

the origin, dissolution, the ground, the receptacle, the seed eternal. 

I give heat; I withhold and send forth rain; 

immortality and death, also, and reality and unreality —I, Arjuna. 


Veda-knowers”* who drink soma and are cleansed of sin, worshipping 
me with sacrifices, pray for the passage to heaven;” 

they attain the holy world of Indra, enjoy in heaven divine pleasures of the 
gods. 

They that enjoy the vast world of swarga, when their merit is exhausted 
enter the mortal world; 


thus, followers of the triune faith, seekers after pleasure, come and go. 


With no other thought, they who worship me: 
constantly, assiduously, their welfare I support. 


Those, too, other gods’ devotees, who sacrifice with faith, 

they, also, only to me, Kaunteya, sacrifice;”° not by ancient law. 

For, I of all sacrifices am the enjoyer, and the lord, as well; 

but they do not know me truly; so, they fall. 

Deva worshippers go to the Devas; to the manes go adorers of the Pitris; 
To spirits go spirit worshippers; and my worshippers come to me. 

A leaf, flower, fruit, water, who, to me, with devotion offers: 


that devout offering, of a pious soul, I accept. 
Whatever you do, what you eat, that which you sacrifice; 
whatever penance you perform, Kaunteya—that make an offering to me. 


Thus from good and bad consequences you will be free, the bondage of 
karma; 

to renunciation and yoga mind yoked, liberated, me you will attain. 

The same, I, to all beings: none to me is hateful, none dear; 

but those who worship me with devotion, they are in me and I, too, in them. 
If even a most sinful one worships me, single-mindedly, 

a saint he must be considered, for he has rightly resolved. 

Quickly he becomes a righteous soul, eternal peace attains; 

Kaunteya, know for certain, never does my bhakta perish. 

For, in me, Partha, those who refuge, even they of sinful birth, 

women, vaishyas and sudras, they also attain the supreme goal. 


How much more then, pure Brahmanas and devout Rajarishis; 

this impermanent, unhappy world having found— worship me. 
Your mind on me; be my devotee; to mesacrifice; to mebow; 

to me you will surely come, thus devoted, your mind on me intent.” 


89. Samsara is also the world of illusions 

90. space, sky, cosmic ether. The fifth element 

91. see appendix: note on time 

92. those that mock me 

93.Iam 

94. knowers of the three Vedas. The Atharva is often not included in Vaishnava texts. 
95. Swarga 

96. though 


CANTO 34 


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA CONTINUED 


Vibhutih yoga: The way of Brahman 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“Yet again, Mahabaho, hear my supreme word, 

which to you, I, holding you dear, will tell, wishing your weal. 

Neither the hosts of Devas my origin know, nor the Maharishis; 

for I am the source of the Devas and the Maharishis, in every way. 
Who me, un-born and beginningless, Great God of the world, knows — 
undeluded, he, among mortals, from all sin liberated. 

Intelligence, knowledge, clarity, patience, truth, self-control, calm; 
joy, sorrow; being, non-being; and fear and also fearlessness; 
non-violence, equanimity, contentment, austerity, charity, fame, infamy — 
born, these dispositions of beings, from me alone, of different kinds. 


The great sages, the seven 27 and the earlier four;?® the Manus, also: 
of my being, mind, born—from these, this world’s progeny. 

This power and work of mine who knows in truth, 

he to unfaltering communion is joined—of this, no doubt. 

I, of all the source; from me everything begins; 

this knowing, me the wise worship, with devotion. 

In me their thought, to me given their life, awakening one another; 
and speaking of me always; and contented and joyful. 

To them, always devoted, worshipping with love, 

I give buddhi yoga, by which to me they come. 

For these, out of tenderness alone, I their darkness of ignorance, 
dwelling in my Self, dispel—with the lamp of wisdom, resplendent.” 


Arjuna says: 
“The supreme Brahman, the highest abode, absolutely pure, you are, 
the Purusha eternal, divine, the primeval God, un-born, immanent, 


say all the sages, Devarishi Narada, too, 

Asita, Devala, Vyasa; and you yourself tell me so. 

All this I hold true, which to me you say, Kesava; 

not, surely, Lord, your origin the Devas know, nor the Danavas. 
Only you yourself your soul, with your soul, know, Purushottama, 
Source of beings, Lord of beings, God of gods, Lord of the world. 
Surely, you alone can tell fully of the divine powers, 

with which glories these worlds, you, pervading, abide. 

How can I know, O Yogin, you, with constant contemplation? 

And in which various forms are you, Lord, to be thought of by me? 
Expatiate again on your power and might, Janardana; 

for, I am not satiated hearing your words, like nectar.” 


99 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“Yes, I will tell you my divine manifestations, 

only those which are main, best of the Kurus—there is no end to my extent. 
I, the soul, Gudakesa, in all beings’ hearts dwelling, 

and I the beginning and middle, and, also, the end of beings. 

Of the Adityas I am Vishnu; of luminaries, the Sun, radiant; 
Marichi of the Maruts I am; of stars Iam the Moon. 

Of Vedas, the Sama Veda am I; of Devas, I am Vasavah;! 

and of senses the mind, I; in beings I am consciousness. 

Of Rudras, Sankara I am; Vittesha!®! among Yakshas and Rakshasas; 
and of Vasus I am fire; Meru among mountains, I. 

And of priests, the chief, I, know, Partha: Brihaspati; 

of generals, I am Skanda; of lakes, I am the ocean. 

of Maharishis, Bhrigu, I; of speech, the single syllable;!0* 

of sacrifices the Japa yagna!°° I am; of mountains, Himalaya. 

The Aswattha among all trees, and of Devarishis Narada; 

of Gandharvas, Chitraratha; among Siddhas, Kapila muni. 
Ucchaisravas among horses, know me to be, nectar-born; 

Airavata among elephant lords, and among men, the king. 

Of weapons, I, the Vajra; of cows am I Kamadhenu; 

and among progenitors, I am Kandarpa;!"* of serpents I am Vasuki. 
and Ananta I am among Nagas; Varuna of ocean-dwellers, I; 

and of the manes Aryaman am I; Yama of regulators, I. 


And Prahlada I am of Daityas;!°° Time, of reckoners; 
and of beasts, the king of beasts, I, and Vainata!® of birds. 


The wind among purifiers I am; Rama of weapon-bearers, I; 
and among fish the crocodile I am; among rivers I am Jaahnavi. 
Of creations, the beginning and end, also the middle, I, Arjuna; 
metaphysics of sciences, the dialectic of debaters, I. 

Of alphabets, the a am I and of compounds, the dual; 

I alone, eternal Time; the Creator, I, facing everywhere. 

And death, taking all, I, and the source of what is to be; 

fame, fortune, speech of women, memory, intelligence, fortitude, patience. 
The Brihat Saman, also, of hymns, the Gayatri among mantras, I; 

of months, Margasirsa, I; of seasons, the flower-mine.!08 

Of deceivers, gambling I am; the splendour of the splendid, I; 

victory I am; effort I am; the goodness of the good, I. 

Of Vrishnis, Vaasudeva!°? I am; of the Pandavas, Dhananjaya; 

of sages Vyasa, also, I; of poets, the poet Usana.!!° 

The rod!!! of punishers I am; the strategy I am of conquest seekers; 

and the silence, also, I am, of secrets; the wisdom of the wise, I. 

And, further, what is the seed of all beings—that, I, Arjuna; 

which can exist without me: there can be no being, moving or unmoving. 
No end is there to my divine manifestations, Parantapa; 

All this that I have said are!!? illustrative of my infinite glories. 

Whatever existence is glorious, graceful or powerful, surely, 

that, know you, from a portion of my splendour is born. 

Anyway, of what avail all these knowing, to you, Arjuna? 

I pervade all this with an iota of myself, support the Universe.” 


107 


97. Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vasishta 
98. Sanatkumara, Sanatana, Sananda and Sanaka 

99. demons, sons of Danu 

100. Indra 

101. Kubera 

102. Aum 

103. chanting god’s names 

104. Kama, god of love 

105. demons, sons of Diti 


106. Vinata’s son, Garuda 

107. Ganga 

108. Spring 

109. Vasudeva’s son, Krishna 

110. Sukra 

111. Yama’s danda, rod of chastisement 
112. merely examples 


CANTO 35 


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA CONTINUED 


Viswarupa darshana yoga: The way of the vision of the Cosmic Form. 


Arjuna says: 

“To bless me, the supreme, secret, Adhyatmam, you revealed; 

with these words that you spoke, my bewilderment has gone. 

Indeed, of the appearance and passing of beings, I have heard extensively 
from you, Lotus-eyed; and also your greatness, imperishable. 

It is just so: what you have said about yourself, Parameswara— 

I want to see your Form Divine, Purushottama! 

If you think That can be seen by me, Lord, 

Yogeswara, then, to me show your Self Eternal.” 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“Behold, Partha, my forms, hundreds and thousands, 

of many kinds, divine, vari-coloured and -shaped. 

Behold the Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, the two Asvins, also the Maruts; 
many previously unseen wonders, behold, Bhaarata. 

Here, as one, the Universe, whole, see now, moving and immobile, 
in my body, Gudakesa; and whatever else you wish to see. 


But you cannot see me with just these your eyes; 
I give you divine sight—behold my Sovereign Yoga.”’ 


Sanjaya says: 
‘So saying, then, my king, the Great Lord of yoga, Hari, 
shows Partha his supreme Form Divine. 


Countless mouths, eyes; countless amazing visions; 

countless divine ornaments; countless divine weapons raised; 
divine garlands, raiment, wearing; with divine perfumes anointed; 
of all wonders, refulgent; infinite, faces everywhere. 


In the sky, if a thousand suns were together risen, 
light like that might perhaps compare with the splendour of that Great 
Being. 


There, as one, the Universe, whole, of divisions manifold, 
sees, in the God of gods’ body, then, the Pandava. 

Then, he, wonderstruck, horripilating, Dhananjaya, 
bowing his head before God, with hands folded, speaks. 


Arjuna says: 

“TI see the Devas, O God, in your body, and also all the myriad hosts of 
beings, 

Brahma, the Lord upon lotus-throne seated, and all the Rishis and Uragas!!° 
divine. 


With countless arms, bellies, mouths, eyes: I see your infinite form 
everywhere; 

neither your end nor middle, nor again your beginning, do I see, 

crying, the Maharishi, Siddha hosts 

With crowns, maces, and chakras, a mass of light, everywhere shining, 

I see you, hard to look at, on all sides with irradiance of fire, blazing sun— 
immeasurable. 

You, the imperishable, the supreme,!'* to be known; you are the universe’s 
ultimate basis; 

you, the changeless guardian of everlasting dharma; the eternal Purusha, 
you, I believe. 

Without beginning, middle, end; of infinite power; endless armed; the Sun, 
Moon, your eyes, 

I see you, burning fire your faces, with your refulgence this universe 
searing. 

This space between heaven and earth, surely, is pervaded by just you, and 
the dishas all;!!° 

seeing this your astounding, dreadful form, the three worlds are terrified, 
Mahatman. 

Ah, you these hosts of Suras enter; some, in fear, hands folded, give praise; 
Svasti!,!'© so crying, the Maharishi, Siddha hosts adore youwith hymns of 
mighty praise. 


The Rudras, Adityas, Vasus, and these Sadhyas; the Viswas, the two Asvins 
and the Maruts, and the Usmapas;!!” 

the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the Asuras, Siddha hosts gaze at you in 
wonder, also, surely, all. 

Your great Form, many-mouthed, -eyed, Mahabaho, of many arms, thighs, 
feet, 

many bellies, many fangs, horrible, seeing, the worlds tremble, as also I. 
Sky-touching, ablaze, countless-hued, mouth agape, huge blazing eyes: 
seeing only you, my inmost soul quails; no stability do I find, nor peace, O 
Vishnu. 

And seeing your fearful, fanged mouths, like time’s fire flaming, 

the directions I do not know, nor find joy—be merciful, Lord of gods, abode 
of the universe! 


And Dhritarashtra’s sons, all, with the hosts of kings; 

Bhishma, Drona, and that Sutaputra,!!8 also, with our side’s main warriors, 
too, 

into your fearful jaws, terrible with fangs, rush; 

some stick between the teeth; are seen, heads crushed. 

As many rivers’ swift waters just towards the ocean flow, 

even so, those heroes of the world of men enter your fiery mouths. 

As a burning fire moths enter, to perish swiftly, 

even so, to perish, these men, also, fly into your mouths at great speed. 


You lick,!!° devouring on all sides the worlds, entirely, with mouths aflame; 
your brilliance covers all the universe, you lustre terrible, searing, O 
Vishnu. 

Tell me who you are, of dreadful form; salutations to you, best of gods, 
have mercy! 

I want to know you, the first, for I do not understand what you do.” 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“Time I am, world-waster, ancient—the world to annihilate, here, my 
mission; 

even without you,!70 no future have all these, arrayed hostile, the warriors. 
So, arise, glory gain: defeating your enemies, enjoy a thriving kingdom; 


by me alone these have been killed already —the instrument, only, become, 
Savyasachin,!*! 

Drona and Bhishma and Jayadratha and Karna, as also other warrior heroes, 
by me slain already, you raze; do not be afraid—fight, you will conquer in 
battle, the enemies.” 


Sanjaya says: 
‘Hearing these words of Kesava, hands folded, trembling, Kiriti!?? 
bows, again, speaks to Krishna, falteringly, in terror, prostrating. 


Arjuna says: 

“Rightly, Hrishikesa, by your praises is the world enraptured and 
fascinated; 

Rakshasas, terrified, flee in all directions, and the Siddha hosts pay homage. 
And why not worship you, Mahatman, who are greater than Brahma even, 
the first creator; 

O Infinite, Lord of gods, Abode of the universe, you are deathless; real, 
unreal; and what is beyond that. 

You, the first God, the ancient Purusha; you are the supreme home of the 
universe; 

you are the knower and the known!?> and the final resort—by you the 
universe is pervaded, infinite-formed! 

Vayu, Yama, Agni, Varuna, Sashanka, and Prajapati,!7+ the great Grandsire 
—you. 


Hail, hail to you, a thousand times, and again, yet again, hail, hail to you! 
Obeisance in front, also from behind, to you; obeisance to you on every 
side, O All! 

Of endless prowess, boundless compass, you; everything you suffuse, so 
you are all. 

‘My friend’, so thinking, rashly, whatever I said, ‘O Krishna’, ‘O Yadava’, 
‘O friend’, thus, 

not knowing This your greatness, out of my carelessness or out of love, 

and whatever slight, in jest, was shown, at sport, lying down, seated, while 
eating, 

alone or, Achyuta, in the presence of others—all that forgive me, O 
Incomprehensible. 


The father you are of this world, of the moving, the unmoving; you are its 
adored and loftiest guru; 

none is your equal, how then any greater, in the three worlds, as well, O 
unequalled power? 


So, bowing, prostrating my body, I worship you, Lord adorable; 
as a father his son, a friend his friend, a lover his beloved, you must, Lord, 
suffer me. 


The never-before-seen, seeing, I rejoice, and with fear my heart is shaken 
SO; 

so, Lord, your other form show me—be merciful, God of gods, home of the 
universe! 

crowned, with mace, disc in your hands—I want to see you, just as before; 
that same form, four-armed, assume, O thousand-armed, universe-bodied!”’ 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“By my grace, to you, Arjuna, this Form Supreme was shown, through my 
divine yoga— 

resplendent, universal, infinite, primal, which none but you has seen before. 
Not by the Veda, sacrifice, learning, not by charity, and not by rituals, not 
by fierce penance, 

in this form can I, in the world of men, be seen by anyone but you, O 
Kurupravira.!*° 

Do not be afraid, nor confounded, seeing this terrible Form, like this, of 
mine; 

free from fear, with a glad heart, again, then, the same, this my form, see.” 


Sanjaya says: 

‘Thus to Arjuna saying, Vaasudeva his own form shows again, 

and comforts that terrified, becoming once more the gentle, beautiful 
Mahatman. 


Arjuna says: 
“Seeing this human form of yours, gracious, Janardana, 
now, I become calm, return to myself.” 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“Most difficult to see, this form which you have seen, of mine; 

the Devas, even, always, this form to see are keen. 

Not through the Veda, not by tapasya, not through daana, nor yet by yagnas, 
can I like this be seen, as you have seen me. 

But through devotion, singular, can I like this, Arjuna, 

be known, seen, and, in truth, also entered into, Parantapa. 


Who for me does work; I his supreme; my devotee, of attachment rid; 
without hostility towards any of the living, he comes to me, Pandava.” 


113. serpents 

114. the thing to be known 

115. the four quarters, directions of the sky 
116. hail, peace! 

117. manes, ancestors 

118. Karna 

119. them up, while 

120. killing them 

121. Arjuna was ambidextrous 

122. Arjuna, the crown-wearer 

123. knowable, that which is to be known 
124. the Gods Wind, Death, Fire, Sea, Moon, Brahma 
125. great hero of the Kurus 








CANTO 36 


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA CONTINUED 


Bhakti yoga: The way of devotion. 


Arjuna says: 

“Thus, always yoked, those devotees who worship you, 

and, again, those who do the Imperishable, the Unmanifest—of these, 
which have yoga?” 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“On me fixing the mind, who, ever absorbed, me worship, 

with devotion supreme endowed, them, I the best yogis consider. 
But who the Imperishable, ineffable, unmanifest, worship, the ubiquitous 
and inconceivable, highest, unmoving, permanent, 

restraining all the senses, everywhere even-minded, 

they attain me, surely—to the weal of all beings devoted. 

The travail greater of them, on the Unmanifest whose minds are set; 
for, the way of the Unmanifest is painfully by the embodied attained. 
But who all karma to me renounce, on me intent, 

with singular yoga, me, through meditation, worship: 

of them, I, the deliverer from death, samsara’s!2° sea, 

become, quickly, Partha—on me whose minds are set. 


On me alone your heart set; in me let your mind dwell: 
you will live in me, surely, thereafter, beyond doubt. 


If your mind you cannot fix on me, steadily, 

through the practice of yoga, then, me seek to attain, Dhananjaya. 
Abhyasa,!?’ even, if you cannot do, let my work your highest be; 
for my sake, even, work doing, perfection you will find. 

If even this you cannot do, in performing yoga for me refuge; 

all karma’s fruit renounce, then, with subdued mind. 


Better, surely, knowledge than routine; than knowledge meditation is 
superior; 
than meditation, the sacrifice of karma’s fruit—upon renunciation, peace 
follows. 


Without aversion towards any creature, friendly and compassionate, only, 
without ‘mine’, without ‘I’; equal in pain, pleasure; forgiving; 

contended always, the yogi, self-controlled, of firm resolve, 

to me given heart, mind—who is my devotee, he is dear to me. 

By whom the world is not disturbed; and the world does not disturb him; 
from exultation, anger, fear, agitation who is free, he, too, is dear to me. 
Independent, pure, competent, indifferent, free from pain; 

who all endeavour has abandoned— my devotee, he is dear to me. 


Who neither exults nor dislikes; neither grieves nor desires; 
good, evil, abandons — that devotee, he is dear to me. 

And alike with enemy and friend; also, to honour, dishonour; 
in heat, cold, joy, sorrow, the same; free from attachment; 
equal in blame, praise; quiet, contented with anything; !78 
Homeless, of firm resolve—my devotee, a man dear to me. 
But who this immortal dharma, as told, follow, 

with faith, me the!?? goal, those devotees are very dear to me.” 


126. the mortal world of delusion, transmigration 
127. the exercise, practice of yoga 

128. which comes 

129. their 


CANTO 37 


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA CONTINUED 


Kshetra Kshetrajna vibhaga yoga: The way of discernment between the 
field and its knower. 


Arjuna says:!°0 
“Prakriti and Purusha, also; kshetra and kshetrajna, too: 
these, I wish to know; knowledge and the known, Kesava.” 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“This body, Kaunteya, the field it is called; 

this who knows, he is called kshetrajna,!*! by those who know. 

And the kshetrajna, also, me in every field, Bhaarata; 

of kshetra, kshetrajna,'** the knowledge: that, true knowledge, in my view. 
and what that field is, and what its nature, and what its transformations, 
whence arisen, 

and what He!?? is, and of what origin —that, in brief, from me hear. 

By the rishis, variously, sung, in chhandas,'** diversely, distinctly; 

and also in Brahma sutra!*» passages, logical, decisive. 

The mahabhutas,!°° ego, intelligence, and also the unmanifest; 

the senses, ten, and the one,!°’ and five sense pastures; 

desire, aversion; pleasure, pain; the organism, consciousness, fortitude — 
thus, the field, in brief, is described, with examples. 


Humility, integrity, non-violence, patience, uprightness; 

serving the guru, purity, stability, self-control; 

for the objects of sensuality, aversion; lack of egotism; and also, 

in birth, death, old age, sickness— pain, evil, seeing; 

detachment, no clinging to son, wife, home, the likes; 

and, always, even-mindedness to desired,!** unwanted happenings; 
and for me, through exclusive yoga, devotion abiding; 

to solitary places resorting; distaste for gatherings of men; 


in spiritual wisdom, constancy; the knowledge of truth’s end seeing — 
all this gyana is called; ignorance, what is other than this. 


That which is known, I will tell you, which knowing immortality is gained; 
beginningless, Jt, supreme Brahman; neither being, That, nor un-being, it is 
told. 

Everywhere, hands, feet: that; everywhere, eyes, heads, faces; 

everywhere, ears —in the world everything enveloping, it dwells. 

all the senses’ qualities reflecting, of all the senses devoid; 

unattached and also all-supporting; without gunas and experiencing the 
gunas. 


Outside and within the living, mobile and unmoving, too; 

being subtle, that, imperceptible; and far and near, that. 

And undivided, in beings, also, seemingly, divided, exists; 

and as beings’ support that is known, devourer and creator. 

Of lights, also, that the light, beyond darkness, said to be; 

knowledge, the known, gained through knowledge, in the hearts of all 
seated. 

Thus, the field and also knowledge and the known, told in brief; 

my devotee, this knowing, to my being attains. 


Prakriti!*° and also Purusha,!*° know, are beginningless, both; 

and transformations and also gunas, know— of Prakriti born. 

Effect, cause, instrument, agency — Prakriti, it is told; 

Purusha, of joy, sorrow’s, experience, the cause, it is said. 

For, the Purusha, dwelling in Prakriti, enjoys the Prakriti-born gunas; 

the cause, attachment to the gunas: of its birth in good, evil wombs. 
Witness and sanctioner, lord, experiencer, great God, 

and also the supreme soul, it’s told—in this body, the Purusha transcendent. 
Who thus knows Purusha and Prakriti, with the gunas, 

whatever his life, he is not born again. 


Through meditation, the Atman see, some, in the Atman, with the Atman; 
others, through samkhya yoga, and by karma yoga, others. 
Yet others, not thus knowing, hearing from others, worship; 


and they also, surely, transcend death by devotion to what they hear.!*! 


Whatever being is born, motionless or mobile— 
from kshetra and kshetrajna’s union: that know, Bharatarishabha. 


Equally in all creatures abiding, the Supreme God, 

amidst the perishing, imperishable, who sees, he sees. 

For, the same God seeing, everywhere, omnipresent, 

he injures not the Atman with the Atman, so attains the final goal. 
And only by Prakriti, karma is done, in every way, 

who sees, also that the Atman is act-less, he sees. 

When the diversity of beings as situated in the one, he sees, 

and also, therefrom, their spread, the Brahman he then becomes. 
Beginningless, without attributes, this Paramatman, immortal, 
though dwelling in the body, Kaunteya, neither acts nor is tainted. 
As, being subtle, the ubiquitous ether is not tainted, 

so also, everywhere located, in the body, the Atman is not stained. 


As one sun illumines this whole world, 


so, too, the kshetri!*? illumines this entire kshetra,!4> Bhaarata. 


Between kshetra, kshetrajna, thus, the distinction, with eye of wisdom, 
and the deliverance of beings from Prakriti, who know, they attain the 
Supreme.” 


130. this verse is not included in many versions. If it is, the number of slokas in the Bhagavad Gita 
becomes 701, instead of 700. As in Radhakrishnan’s translation, I have not numbered it here. 
131. knower of the field 

132. Swami Vireswarananda: matter and spirit 

133. the kshetrajna 

134. Vedic hymns 

135. aphorisms of Brahman 

136. the five elements 

137. mind 

138. and 

139. nature, the feminine principle 

140. soul, the masculine principle 

141. Sruti is also the Veda 

142. embodied soul 

143. field, universe 








CANTO 38 


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA CONTINUED 


Gunatrai vibhaga yoga: The way of the division of the three gunas. 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“Again, the highest I will tell you, of wisdoms the best wisdom; 
this knowing, the sages, all, to final perfection from here passed. 
This wisdom resorting to, my nature attaining, 

at creation, even, they are not born, and not during the dissolution 
disquieted. 

My womb great Brahma, into which the seed cast I; 

to birth all beings, from that, come, Bhaarata. 

In all the species, Kaunteya, whatever forms take birth, 

of them, great Brahma the womb, I the seed-giving father. 
Sattva, rajas, tamas, these gunas, Prakriti-born, 

bind, Mahabaho, into the body the dweller imperishable. 


Of these, sattva, being pure, is illumining, health-giving, 

through attachment to happiness binds, and through attachment to 
knowledge, O sinless. 

Rajas has passion’s nature, know, from craving, attachment, sprung; 

it binds, Kaunteya, with addiction to action, the embodied. 

But tamas, ignorance-born, know, deludes all the living; 

through rashness, sloth, stupor, it binds fast, Bhaarata. 

Sattva to happiness binds; rajas to activity, Bhaarata; 

but, wisdom shrouding, tamas to rashness, it is told. 


Rajas and tamas subduing, sattva prevails, Bhaarata; 
Rajas, the same, over sattva and tamas; tamas, even so, over sattva and 


rajas. 


When through all doors!* of this body, light radiates, 


knowledge: then, know, sattva surely waxes. 

Greed, activity, undertaking karma, disquiet, desire — 

when rajas increases, these prevail, Bharatarishabha. 

Darkness and inactivity, neglect and also delusion: 

when tamas increases, these prevail, joy of the Kurus. 

Now, while sattva waxes, if to dissolution!* the embodied goes, 
then, worlds of the highest sages, taintless, it gains. 

In rajas, death finding, among those addicted to karma it is born; 
and if dissolved during tamas, in dark wombs it is born. 

Of virtuous karma, it is told, sattvik and pure the fruit; 

while rajas’ fruit is sorrow, and darkness the fruit of tamas. 


From sattva arises knowledge; and from rajas only greed; 
heedlessness, delusion, from tamas come, and also ignorance. 
Upwards go those founded in sattva; midway remain the rajasas; 
those steeped in the vile guna, go downwards, the tamasas. 


No other agent than the gunas, when the seer sees, 

and what is beyond the gunas knows, to my being he attains. 

These gunas transcending, triune, which spring from the body, the 
embodied, 

from birth, death, old age, pain, is liberated, immortality gains.” 


Arjuna says: 
“What signs of one who these three gunas has transcended, Lord? 
what his deportment, and how does he the three gunas transcend?” 


The Gracious Lord says: 

“Light and activity and, even, delusion, Pandava, 

he does not shun, when they arise, nor, when they cease, long for. 

As if indifferent seated, by the gunas who is not moved; 

the gunas act: this knowing, who is still, unwavering. 

The same in joy, sorrow, contented; equal!*° a clod, stone, gold; 

the same to the pleasant, unpleasant; calm; equal to blame of himself, to 
praise. 

In honour, disgrace, the same; equal to a friend, an enemy; 


all endeavours who has renounced— gone beyond the gunas, he is said to 
have. 

And me who, with unfailing yoga of devotion, serves, 

he, these gunas transcends, for becoming Brahman is fit. 

For, Brahman’s abode I, immortal and imperishable; 

and of eternal dharma, and absolute bliss.” 


144. of perception 
145. death 
146. for him 


CANTO 39 


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA CONTINUED 


Purushottama yoga: The way of the Supreme Person. 


“Root above, branches below, the Aswattha,!*’ they tell of, imperishable, 
of which the chhandas are the leaves; who knows this, he is a Veda knower. 


Below and above, extend its branches, guna-nourished, 

sense-objects for twigs; 

and below its roots stretch, binding in karma the world of men. 

Not its form,'*® either, is here perceived, not its end, nor beginning, and 
neither its foundation. 

This aswattha, deep-rooted, with the mighty sword detachment severing, 
then, let that condition be sought, going where, there is no returning again; 
only to that original Purusha surrender, from whom this ancient world 
came. 

Without pride, delusion; quelled, the sin attachment; spiritual always; rid of 
desire; 

liberated from the dualities, called pleasure, pain—the undeluded go to that 
state eternal. 


Not that, the sun illumines, not moon, not fire; 
who go there do not return—that abode supreme, mine. 


A mere particle of myself, a living spirit, eternal ,'4° 

into the world of jivas the senses, mind the sixth, founded in nature, 
draws .!>9 

A body when assuming, and also when leaving it, the Lord 

takes all these, leaving, even as the wind scents from their places. 


Ears, eyes, and touch, taste, and also smell 
dwelling in, and mind, he the sense-objects enjoys. 


Departing or dwelling, as also experiencing, while associated with the 
gunas, 

the deluded do not see;!°! they see who have wisdom’s eye. 

Striving yogis also, That see, in themselves situated; 

even Striving, the unrestrained do not see it, unawakened ones. 


That lustre of the sun, which the whole world illumines, 

that in the moon, and that in fire—that light, know, is mine. 

And the earth entering, creatures I support with energy; 

and nourish all plants, the moon becoming, sapful. 

I the fire become, in creatures’ bodies dwell; 

prana, apana,!°? uniting with, digest food, the four kinds. 

And, of all, I in their hearts am lodged; from me, memory, wisdom, and 
their loss; 

and in all the Vedas, I alone, the known; Vedanta’s author, and also the 
Veda-knower, I. 


And two persons in this world: the mortal, and also the immortal; 
mortal, all creatures; the unchanging, the immortal called. 

But the highest being, another, Paramatman called, 

who the three worlds enters, sustains them, imperishable God. 


Because the mortal I transcend, and even the immortal surpass, 
so, | am, in the world and in the Veda, known as Purushottama.! 
Who, thus, undeluded, knows me, Purushottamam, 

he, knowing everything, worships me with all his being, Bhaarata. 


53 


Thus, this most secret Shastra has been taught by me, O sinless; 
this, understanding, wise he becomes; and all his duty done, Bhaarata.” 


147. peepul tree 

148. true form 

149. becoming 

150. to itself 

151. the indweller; /t 

152. inward and outward breaths 
153. the Supreme Person 


CANTO 40 


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA CONTINUED 


Daivaasurasampad vibhaga yoga: The way of the distinction between the 
divine and the demonic qualities. 


The Gracious Lord says: 

““Fearlessness, essential purity, in wisdom’s yoga steadfastness, 

charity and self-control and sacrifices, sacred study, austerity, rectitude; 
non-violence, honesty, without anger, renunciation, not critical, mercy 
for the living, non-covetousness, gentleness, modesty, free of caprice; 
vitality, forgiveness, fortitude, purity, without malice, without hubris — 
the wealth of one with divine nature born, Bhaarata. 

Ostentation, arrogance and great conceit, anger, and also violence, 

and ignorance—the endowments of those born, Partha, demonic. 


The divine inheritance liberates, the demonic binds, it is thought; 
grieve not: you to wealth divine are born, Pandava. 


Two kinds of being in the world, the divine and also the demonic; 
the divine at length have been spoken of; of the demonic, Partha, from me 
hear. 


Neither what to do nor what not to, they know, the demonic; 

no purity and neither conduct, no truth, in them found. 

Unreal, un-founded, they say, the world, God-less, 

of continuing origin, nothing other than lust-begotten. 

To this view cleaving, lost souls, of small minds, 

come forth, of savage deeds, for the destruction of the world, its enemies. 
To lust surrendered, insatiable; by hypocrisy, arrogance, conceit, possessed; 
through delusion seizing fell designs, they act, sworn to evil. 

And to cares boundless, ending in death, surrendered; 

sensual enjoyment the highest:!** that this is all convinced; 


by desire’s bonds, hundreds, bound; to lust, anger, yielded; 

they strive, in order to gratify their desires, unscrupulously, great wealth to 
amass. 

‘This, today, by me gained; this heart’s desire I will satisfy; 

this there is, and this, too, I will have:!°° more wealth. 

By me!» slain that enemy; and I will kill others, too; 

the lord, I; I, the enjoyer; successful, I, strong, happy; 

rich, well-born I am; who else is!°’ like me? 

I will sacrifice, give charity, rejoice!’ —thus, by ignorance deluded. 


By countless fancies confounded, in delusion’s net ensnared; 
addicted to satisfying lusts, they fall into foetid hell. 


Smug with conceit, obdurate, with wealth’s pride intoxicated, 

they sacrifice,!°* in name sacrifice, with ostentation, disregarding precept. 
To egotism, force, pride, lust and rage given: 

me, in their own and other’s bodies, hating, these envious ones. 

These, haters vicious, vilest of men, in samsara, 

I cast repeatedly only into inauspicious, demon wombs. 

Fiendish wombs finding, the deluded, birth after birth, 

me far from attaining, Kaunteya, then devolve to the basest state. 


Triune, of this hell, the gates, which destroy the soul— 

lust, anger and greed; so, these three abandon. 

From these the man who is liberated, Kaunteya, gates to darkness, three, 
does what is good for his soul, then reaches the supreme condition. 


Who scriptural law forsakes, acts by desire’s dictates, 

he does not perfection attain, not happiness, not the highest goal. 

So, let the Shastras!°? be your authority: what may be done, what is 
forbidden, to determine; 

knowing what the scripture’s laws declare, your karma you must do, 
here.”!60 


154. aim 


155. in future 

156. already 

157. there 

158. only 

159. scriptures: the Vedas, the Vedanga/Upanishads, the 18 great Puranas. The Ramayana and 
Mahabharata are traditionally only considered Itihasas, histories 

160. in this world 


CANTO 41 


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA CONTINUED 


Sraddhatrai vibhaga yoga: The way of the divisions of the three kinds of 
faith. 


Arjuna says: 
“Who scriptural laws forsake, but worship, with faith— 
what is their condition, Krishna, sattva, rajas or tamas?” 


The Gracious Lord says: 
“Threefold is the faith of the embodied, of their nature born— 
sattvik, rajasik and also tamasik; and hear about it. 


In concord with his nature everyone’s faith is, Bhaarata: 
of his faith’s nature, man— what his faith is, that indeed is he. 


The sattvikas worship the Devas; the rajasas do yakshas and rakshasas; 
pretas and other kinds of bhutas, tamasik men worship. 


Not ordained by the Shastras, violent austerities those men perform, 
to pride, egotism yoked, by lust, passion’s force possessed. 

Torturing the elements in the body, the senseless, 

and me, also, dwelling in the body—these, know, of demonic resolve. 


The food, too, by all liked, is of three kinds; 

sacrifice, austerity, charity, as well; of the divisions of these, hear. 
Longevity, vitality, strength, health, happiness, love, which augment; 
succulent, soft, nourishing, tasty — foods dear to the sattvik. 

Bitter, sour, salty, hot, pungent, harsh, burning — 

foods by the rajasika liked: pain, grief, disease causing. 

Cold, insipid, putrid, stale and what is 

refuse and also unclean— food to tamasas dear. 


By those expecting no reward, the sacrifice which by scriptural decree is 
offered, 

exclusively as a duty, mind absorbed, that is sattvik. 

But aiming for its fruit, and also for display, what 

is offered, best of Bhaaratas, that sacrifice, know, is rajasik. 

Against law,'°! where no food is given, without mantras, without 
dakshina,!©? 

of faith devoid, the yagna is tamasik, they say. 


Of the gods, the twice-born, gurus, the wise, worship; purity, rectitude, 
continence and non-violence—bodily austerity is called. 

Speech which no offence causes, and which is truthful, pleasant and benign, 
and also regular recitation of the Veda—verbal austerity is called. 


Mental calm, gentleness, silence, self-control, 

purity of feeling, all these—austerity of mind are called. 

With faith transcendent undertaken, this three-fold penance, by men 
who wish for no gain, devoted —sattvik is called. 


For respect, honour, reverence, the austerity, and which with ostentation 
is performed, that, here, is deemed rajasik: fleeting, impermanent. 

From foolish belief, the self-torturing, the penance that is practised, 

or to others meaning harm—that tamasik is said to be. 

‘To give is a duty’: thus,!'® to give charity, without!™ obligation, 
and at a proper time and place—that charity is sattvik regarded. 


But that which to be reciprocated, or aiming for its fruit, in future, 
and given grudgingly —that charity rajasik is considered. 

at the wrong place, time: that charity given, and to the undeserving, 
without respect, contemptuously — that tamasic is told. 


Aum tat sat—this is declared Brahman’s triad name: 

Brahmanas, by this, and the Veda and Sacrifice, were created of old. 
So, Aum, thus uttering, acts of sacrifice, charity, austerity are 
performed, scripture-enjoined, always by Brahmavadis.!° 

Tat: thus,!©° without desiring their fruit, acts of sacrifice, penance 


and various deeds of charity are performed, by liberation seekers. 
Reality and goodness, sat for these is used; 

for laudable deeds, as well, the word sat, Partha, is used. 

In sacrifice, austerity and charity, constancy — sat is called; 

and also karma done for that, sat, indeed, is named. 


Without faith, oblation,'®’ gifts,'°® austerity performed, and whatever! 
done — 
Asat it is called, Partha, and is of no account hereafter nor here.” 


161. scriptural 

162. the fee paid to priests 

163. thinking 

164. expecting 

165. expounders, followers of the Veda 
166. they say 

167. offered 

168. given 

169. else 








CANTO 42 


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA CONTINUED 


Moksha Sannyasa yoga: The way of renunciation, liberation. 


Arjuna says: 

“Of sannyasa!’?, Mahabaho, the truth I wish to know, 

and about tyaga,!’! Hrishikesa,!/? separately, Kesinisudana.!”° 

The Gracious Lord says: 

“Desire-impelled karma abandoning, as sannyasa the seers understand; 
all karma’s fruit sacrificing, call tyaga, the knowing. 


‘Renounced as an evil, all karma,’ say some thinkers; 
‘Acts of sacrifice, charity, austerity must not be abandoned,’ and so say 
others. 


Decisively hear from me about this tyaga, best of the Bhaaratas; 
for, relinquishment, Purushavyaghra,!”* of three kinds is declared. 


Works of sacrifice, charity, these are not be relinquished but surely 
performed; 

sacrifice, charity and also austerity are purifiers of the wise. 

But even these works done, attachment leaving and fruit, 

as duty—this, Partha, my decided view, the best. 

But with religious duty, the renunciation of!’° karma is not proper; 

through delusion its abandonment, tamasik is declared. 

Painful: so being, a duty; bodily suffering fearing, if it is abandoned — 

he, performing merely a rajasik relinquishment, surely does not 
relinquishment’s fruit gain. 


When just because it ought to be, a prescribed duty is done, Arjuna, 


leaving attachment, and also its fruit, that relinquishment is considered 
sattvik. 

Neither averse to unpleasant karma, nor to pleasant work attached — 

the tyagi: of sattva possessed, intelligent, doubts dispelled. 


Surely, impossible, for the embodied to renounce karma entirely; 
but who the fruit of karma relinquishes, he a tyagi is said to be. 


Unpleasant, pleasant and mixed: of three kinds karma’s fruit, 
accruing to non-relinquishers after death, but not to sannyasis, ever. 


These five, Mahabaho, causes, learn from me, 
in the samkhya doctrine mentioned, for the accomplishment of all karma. 


The place and also the doer; and the various actions; 

the many and different endeavours; and also destiny, the fifth of these. 
With body, speech, mind, whatever karma a man undertakes, 

whether just or the opposite, these five are its causes. 

This being so, who, yet, as the only doer himself 

sees, from ignorance, he does not see: a foolish one. 


Who no egotism has, whose intellect is not defiled, 
though he kills these men, he neither slays nor is bound.!7° 

Knowledge, the known, the knower: the triple impulse to karma; 

the instrument, action, the agent, these the three-fold conjunction of karma. 
Knowledge and action and agent, of three kinds only, the distinctions of the 
gunas, 

said to be, in the philosophy of the gunas; respectively, hear, of these, also. 


In all beings, the knowledge by which the One, imperishable, is seen, 
undivided in the divided, that wisdom, know, is sattvik. 

But separately, which knowledge, diverse entities, of various kinds, 
perceives, in all creatures—that knowledge, know, is rajasik. 

But what, as the whole, to one effect clings, illogically: 

The unreal and trivial, that tamasik is said to be. 


Which, ordained, without attachment, without attraction or aversion is done, 
by one not desiring its fruit, that karma is sattvik called. 

But that karma, prompted by desire, or again, with egotistical motives, 
done, with great strain, that is rajasik called. 

For consequence, loss, violence: disregard, and for capability; 

through delusion the karma undertaken, that tamasik is called. 


Free from attachment, not egotistical, of fortitude, zeal, possessed; 

by success, failure, unmoved — that doer is sattvik called. 

Passionate, keenly wanting karma’s fruit, greedy, violent-minded, impure; 
by elation, dejection moved —that agent rajasik is deemed. 

Unstable, feral, obstinate, deceitful, spiteful, lazy; 

morose and procrastinating —that doer tamasik is said to be. 


To the divisions of intellect and also fortitude, according to the gunas, 
threefold, listen, 
told fully, separately, Dhananjaya. 


Action and inactivity and what to do, what not to do, fear, fearlessness, 
bondage and liberation the intellect which knows, that, Partha, is sattvik. 
By which dharma and adharma, and what to do and also what not to, 

is erroneously known —that intellect, Partha, rajasik. 

Adharma as dharma that which regards, in darkness shrouded, 

and all things perversely — that intellect, Partha, tamasik. 


The fortitude by which one rules mind, life breaths, senses’ functions, 
through yoga unwavering — that firmness, Partha, sattvik. 

But the fortitude by which to dharma, kama, artha one clings, Arjuna, 
through attachment to the desire for gain!’’—that firmness, Partha, rajasik. 
By which sleep, fear, sorrow, dejection and also arrogance 

a fool does not leave—that obduracy, Partha, tamasik. 


But of happiness, now, the three kinds, hear from me, Bharatarishabha— 
long practice through which enjoyed, and sorrow’s end attained. 
That which at first like poison, at the end like amrita,!7° 


that joy sattvika, it’s told, of the soul’s intelligence,!’° serene, born. 


180 the senses, which arises, at 


From contact between objects of sensuality, 
first like amrita, 

but at the end is like poison—that joy rajasik is called. 

And which joy, both at first and at the end, binding in delusion the soul, 


and which from sleep, sloth, heedlessness arises —that tamasik is deemed. 


There is not on earth or, again, in heaven among the gods, 

a being that is free from these Prakriti-born three gunas. 

Of Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Sudras, Parantapa, 

their duties are divided, by their innate qualities. 

Serenity, self-control, austerity, purity, forbearance, and also uprightness; 
knowledge, wisdom, belief in God—a Brahmana’s duties, of his nature 
born. 

Valour, boldness, fortitude, skill, and even in war not fleeing; 

generosity and lordliness—a Kshatriya’s duties, of his nature born. 
Farming, tending the cow, commerce —a Vaishya’s karma, nature born; 
karma of the essence of service, a Sudra’s, also of his nature born. 


Each to his own duty devoted, man attains perfection; 

in his own karma absorbed, how perfection one attains, that hear. 

From Whom beings arise; Who all this pervades: 

through one’s own karma Him worshipping, perfection a man achieves. 


Better in one’s own dharma, imperfectly, than in another’s dharma, 
immaculately; 

by one’s naturally ordained karma doing, one incurs no sin. 

The karma one is born to, Kaunteya, though flawed, one must not abandon; 
for, all endeavours by faults, even as fire by smoke, are clouded. 


Unattached, his intelligence, everywhere; mind conquered; desire gone; 
to inaction’s perfection supreme, through renunciation, he comes. 
Finding this perfection, Brahman, also, how he finds learn from me, 

in brief, Kaunteya, that consummation of knowledge, transcendent. 
With intellect, pure, endowed, and firmly the mind restraining, 

sound and objects of sensuality leaving, and likes, dislikes, rejecting; 
living in solitude, eating little, controlling speech, body, mind; 

in dhyana yoga!*! absorbed, always, in dispassion sheltering; 


egotism, force, arrogance, lust, anger, possessions, 
forsaking, without ‘mine’, peaceful—to become Brahman, he is fit. 


Becoming Brahman, clear-souled, he neither sorrows nor desires; 
alike to all beings, for me devotion he finds, supreme. 

Through devotion, me, he knows, how much and what I am, in truth; 
then, me truly knowing, he enters into me. 

Even!*? all karma always doing, in me sheltering, 

through my grace, he attains the eternal state, immutable. 
Through thought, all karma to me renouncing; me the ultimate; 
to buddhi yoga resorting, on me your heart constantly fix. 

On me your thought,!*° all difficulties by my grace you will cross; 

but if you, from pride, do not listen, you will perish. 

If, ego indulging, ‘I will not fight’, you think: 

Vain this resolve of yours— your nature will compel you. 

By your own nature-born karma, Kaunteya, bound, 

what you do not want to do—being deluded—even that you will do, 
helplessly. 


God in all beings’ hearts, Arjuna, dwells, 

deluding!** all creatures, as!®> upon a contrivance, with maya. 
To Him alone for refuge go, with all your heart, Bhaarata; 

by his grace, supreme peace you will find, the place eternal. 


Thus, to you, has the wisdom, more secret than secrets, been told by me; 
reflect on it fully, and do as you wish. 


Of all the most secret, again, hear: my supreme word; 

since dearly loved you are by me, so I tell you, for your good. 
Mind!*° on me; to me be devoted; to me sacrifice; to me prostrate; 

to me you will surely come—truly, I promise you, who are dear to me. 


All duty abandoning, to me, the sole refuge, come; 
I will liberate you from every sin, do not grieve. 


This, you must not to the in-austere, nor the devotionless, ever, 

nor one who has no wish to listen, tell, nor me who derides. 

Who this supreme secret to my devotees teaches, 

the highest devotion to me performs, to me surely comes, without doubt. 
Nor is there among men anyone who to me does dearer service than he; 
nor will there be than he, to me, another, dearer on earth. 

And who studies this sacred conversation of ours, 

through knowledge’s sacrifice, by him, I adored will be—this, my view. 
Faithful and without cavil, who just listens, that man: 

he, too, liberated, to blessed worlds attains, of those of virtuous deeds. 


Has this been heard, Partha, by you, with singular thought? 
has your ignorant delusion been dispelled, Dhananjaya?” 


Arjuna says: 

“Dispelled my delusion, understanding gained, through your grace, 
Achyuta; 

I stand firm, doubts gone; I will do as you say.!*7" 


Sanjaya says: 

‘So, I, between Vaasudeva and Partha, great souls, 

this converse heard, wondrous, making my hair stand on end. 
Through Vyasa’s grace heard I this secret, supreme 

yoga, from the Lord of yoga, Krishna, directly, as he told it himself. 


O king, I remember, again and again, this wonderful conversation 

of Kesava, Arjuna, sacred, and thrill with joy, over and over. 

And as I repeatedly recall that Form, most awesome, of Hari, 

great my astonishment, O king, and I tremble with joy again and again. 


Where the Lord of yoga, Krishna, where Partha the bowman: 
there, fortune, victory, prosperity, eternal justice—this, my belief!’” 


Aum shanti shanti shanti. 
Hare Krishna.'*8 


170. 
171. 
72. 
Loa. 
174. 
15. 
176. 
VF}. 
178. 
179. 
180. 
181. 
182. 
183. 
184. 
185. 
186. 
187. 
188. 








renunciation 

relinquishment 

Krishna 

Krishna, Vishnu: slayer of the demon Kesin 
best of men; tiger among men 

such 

by what he does 

the fruit of karma 

nectar 

in the sense of realisation, enlightenment 
and 

meditation 

while; though 

fixing your thought on me 

whirling, spinning, turning around 

if mounted 

fix your 

your bidding 

Appendix for the Bhagavad Gita at the end of this volume 


CANTO 43 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA 


again take up his arrows and Gandiva, the mighty Pandava 

maharathas utter a tremendous shout. And those heroes, the 
Pandavas and the Somakas, and those who followed them, filled with joy, 
blow their sea-born conches. And drums, and pesis, and krakachas, and 
cow-horns are beaten and blown together, to make a loud uproar. 

And then there come the Devas, with Gandharvas and the Pitris, and the 
hosts of Siddhas and Charanas, wanting to witness the sight; and a host of 
most blessed Rishis accompany Indra of a hundred sacrifices leading them, 
to witness that great slaughter. 

Then, seeing the two armies, that look like two oceans, ready for the 
encounter and restlessly moving, Yudhishtira Dharmaraja takes off his coat 
of mail and puts aside his excellent bow, and quickly alighting from his 
chariot, with joined hands, goes quietly on foot towards his Pitamaha 
Bhishma, facing the east, towards the direction where the enemy army 
stands. 

Seeing this, Arjuna hastily alights from his chariot and follows 
Yudhishtira, accompanied by his brothers. And Krishna also follows; and 
the chief kings of his army, filled with anxiety, also follow Yudhishtira. 

Arjuna says, “What are you doing, O king, that abandoning your 
brothers, you go on foot, facing east, towards the enemy?” 

Bhima says, “Where are you going, O king of kings, having cast off 
your armour and weapons, towards the enemy warriors, leaving your 
brothers?” 

Nakula says, “You are my eldest brother, O Bhaarata; seeing you go this 
way, I am afraid. Tell us, where do you go?” 

Sahadeva says, “When these vast and powerful forces are by our side 
ready to fight, where do you go, O king, in the direction of our enemies?”’ 

Sanjaya continues, ‘Yudhishtira of restrained speech says nothing but 
walks on towards the enemy army. The high-souled, wise Krishna smilingly 
says to them, “I know his purpose. He will fight the enemy only after 


AY can tae, said, “Sanjaya says, ‘Upon seeing Dhananjaya once 


having paid his respects to all his superiors: Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and 
Salya. 

It is heard in histories of olden times that he who fights against those 
that are his superiors, after having paid his respects, according to dharma, to 
his preceptors, those revered in years, and his kinsmen, is sure to be 
victorious in battle. This is my view as well.” 

When Krishna says this, loud exclamations can be heard among the 
ranks of Dhritarashtra’s son, but the Pandava army remains perfectly still. 
Seeing Yudhishtira, the heroic warriors of Dhritarashtra’s son speak among 
one another, “This one is a wretch of his race. It is clear that he is coming in 
cowardly terror to Bhishma’s side. Yudhishtira, with his brothers, is seeking 
Bhishma’s protection. 

When Dhananjaya protects him, and Bhima, and Nakula, and Sahadeva 
also, why does the eldest son of Pandu come here in fear? Though 
renowned through the world, he could never have been born in the 
Kshatriya varna, for he is weak and his heart is filled with fear at the 
prospect of battle.” 

Then those soldiers all praise the Kauravas. Rejoicing with cheerful 
hearts, all of them wave their cloths. All the fighting men there then censure 
Yudhishtira and his brothers and Krishna too. The Kaurava army, having 
disdained Yudhishtira, becomes perfectly still. What would this king say? 
What would Bhishma say in reply? What would proud Bhima say, and what 
Krishna and Arjuna? What, indeed, has Yudhishtira to say? 

Both the armies are filled with great curiosity. Meanwhile, penetrating 
the hostile vyuha bristling with arrows and spears, Yudhishtira, surrounded 
by his brothers, walks quickly towards Bhishma. Seizing his feet with his 
two hands, the royal son of Pandu speaks to Shantanu’s son who stands 
there ready for battle. 

Yudhishtira says, “I salute you, O invincible one. We will wage war 
against you. Grant us your leave to do so. Give us also your blessing.” 

Bhishma says, “Had you not thus come to me in this battle, I would have 
cursed you, O Bhaarata, to bring about your defeat. I am gratified, my son. 
Fight then and let victory be yours. O son of Pandu, whatever else you 
desire, may you obtain it in battle. Ask us also for any boon you want and if 
it is in my power to give, then you will not be defeated. 

A man is the slave of wealth, but wealth is no one’s slave. This is the 
truth and I have been bound by the Kauravas with their wealth. It is for this 


reason, Kurunandana, that I speak these words like a eunuch. Bound am I 
by the Kauravas with wealth. Beyond battle, what do you desire?” 

Yudhishtira says, “Wise Pitamaha, keeping my welfare in mind, from 
day to day, look after my interests. Do battle, however, for the Kauravas. 
This is my prayer to you.” 

Bhishma says, “Rajan, what help can I give you in this? I shall, of 
course, fight for your adversaries. Tell me plainly what you have to say.” 

Yudhishtira says, “Bowing to you, I ask you, O Pitamaha, how shall we 
vanquish you who are invincible in battle? Tell me this for my benefit, if 
you see any good in it.” 

Bhishma says, “I do not, O son of Kunti, see the warrior who, even if he 
were the Lord of the Devas himself, can defeat me in battle when I fight.” 

Yudhishtira says, “My salutations to you, Pitamaha! And that is why I 
ask you this. Tell us how your own death may be achieved by your enemies 
in battle.” 

Bhishma says, “I do not see the man who can quell me in battle. The 
time of my death has also not yet arrived.” 

Sanjaya continues, ‘Saluting him again, Yudhishtira accepts Bhishma’s 
words with a bow of his head. And that Mahabaho, along with his brothers, 
goes towards the chariot of Acharya Drona amidst all the soldiers who 
watch him. Saluting Drona and walking around him in pradakshina, the 
king speaks to that invincible warrior. 

Yudhishtira says, “With your leave, Acharya, I will fight with dharma, 
and thus permitted by you, O sinless one, I will defeat all my enemies.” 

He now goes to get the blessings of Acharya Kripa, who says, “If, 
having resolved to fight, you had not come to me, I would have cursed you, 
O king, for your complete overthrow. A man is the slave of wealth, but 
wealth is no one’s slave. This is so true. Since I have been bound with 
wealth by the Kauravas, I must fight for them. I therefore speak like a 
eunuch in asking you: besides battle, what do you desire?” 

Yudhishtira says, “Sorrowfully, I ask you, Acharya, to listen to what I 
say.” Saying this, the king, greatly troubled and confused, stood silent.’ 

Sanjaya continues, ‘Understanding, however, what he intended to say, 
Gautama Kripa says, “I cannot be killed, Rajan. Fight and triumph. I am 
gratified by your coming. Rising every morning I will pray for your victory. 
I say this to you sincerely.” 


Hearing Kripa’s words, and paying him due respect, Yudhishtira goes to 
where the ruler of the Madras stands. Saluting Salya and walking around 
him in pradakshina he says to that invincible warrior, words that are for his 
own benefit. 

Yudhishtira says, “With your leave, invincible one, I will fight without 
incurring sin, and so defeat my valiant enemies.” 

Salya says, “If, having resolved to fight, you had not come to me thus, I 
would have cursed you to be routed in battle. I am gratified and honoured 
by you. Let it be as you wish. I grant you leave: fight and be victorious. 
Speak, O Kshatriya, what do you need? What shall I give you? 

Under these circumstances, beyond battle, what do you wish? A man is 
the slave of wealth but wealth is no one’s slave. This is the truth. I have 
been bound with wealth by the Kauravas, and so I speak to you like a 
eunuch: I will grant you your cherished desire. Besides battle, what do you 
wish?” 

Yudhishtira says, “Think daily of what is for my greatest good. Fight, 
according to your pleasure, for the sake of my enemy. This is the boon that I 
seek.” 

Salya says, “Given these circumstances, tell me how I can support you? 
I must, of course, fight for your enemy, having been bound by the Kauravas 
with their wealth.” 

Yudhishtira says, “O Salya, the boon I want is the one I sought during 
the preparations for the war: that you must weaken the energy of the Suta’s 
son Karna during battle.” 

Salya says, “I grant you your wish, son of Kunti. Go, fight at your 
pleasure. I shall ensure your victory.” 

Sanjaya continues, “Having obtained the permission of his maternal 
uncle, the ruler of the Madras, Yudhishtira, surrounded by his brothers, 
comes out of that vast army. 

Krishna goes up to Radha’s son on the battlefield. And on behalf of the 
Pandavas, Krishna says to Karna, “I have heard, Karna, that because of 
your hatred of Bhishma you will not fight. Come to our side, O Radheya, 
and remain with us as long as Bhishma is not slain. After Bhishma is killed, 
you can fight for Duryodhana, if you have no preference for any of the 
sides.” 

Karna says, “I will not do anything that is offensive to Dhritarashtra’s 
son, Kesava. Devoted to Duryodhana’s good, know that I have offered up 


my life for him.” Krishna stays silent, and rejoins the Pandavas. 

Amidst all the fighting men, Yudhishtira loudly exclaims, “He who will 
choose us now shall be our ally!” 

Seeing them, Yuyutsu says cheerfully to Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, “I will 
fight under your banner in war, against the sons of Dhritarashtra, if you will 
accept me, sinless one!” 

Yudhishtira says, “Come, all of us will fight against your foolish 
brothers, Yuyutsu. Krishna and we all say to you: we accept you, 
Mahabaho, fight for my cause. It appears that both the thread of 
Dhritarashtra’s line as also his funeral rites rest upon you. Splendid prince, 
accept us who receive you. The wrathful and evil-minded Duryodhana will 
cease to live.” 

Sanjaya continues, ‘Yuyutsu, abandoning the Kauravas, your sons, 
crosses over to the army of the Pandavas, to the beating of drums and 
cymbals. Yudhishtira, again joyfully puts on his radiant coat of armour. 

Those bulls among men mount their respective chariots and they 
organise their troops in battle formation as before. They cause hundreds of 
drums and cymbals to be sounded. They roar like lions. Seeing those tigers 
among men, the sons of Pandu, on their chariots, the allied kings, with 
Dhrishtadyumna and others, once more set up shouts of joy. 

Observing the nobility of the Pandavas, who had paid due honour to 
those that were deserving of it, all the gathered kings praise them. And the 
kings talk with one another about the friendship, the compassion, and the 
kindness to kinsmen, displayed at the proper time by those high-souled 
ones. Excellent! Excellent! These are the words spoken everywhere, 
together with eulogies about those famed heroes. 

As a result of this, the minds and hearts of everyone present are drawn 
to them. The Mlechchas and the Aryas there, who saw or heard of what the 
Pandavas had done, all weep, deeply moved. Those great warriors, of 
terrific tejas, cause large drums and pushkaras by the hundreds and 
thousands to be sounded; they blow their milk-white conches.’ 


CANTO 44 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


enemy are thus arrayed, who strikes first, the Kauravas or the 
Pandavas?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Hearing the words of his elder brother, your son 
Dussasana advances with his troops, with Bhishma at their head. The 
Pandavas, led by Bhima, also advance with joyful hearts, wanting battle 
with Bhishma. Leonine shouts, the noise of krakachas and the blare of cow- 
horns, and the sound of drums and cymbals, rise on all sides. The fighting 
men of the enemy assail us, and we too charge against them with loud 
shouts. The ensuing uproar is deafening. 

In that terrible encounter, the vast armies of the Pandavas and the 
Dhartarashtras shudder for that reverberance of conches and cymbals, like 
forests shaken by the wind. The clamour of the hordes of kings, elephants 
and horses, rushing against one another in that evil hour, is as loud as that 
of tempestuous oceans. 

And when that din, making one’s hair stand on end, arose, Mahabaho 
Bhima begins to roar like a bull. Bhima’s roars resound above the clamour 
of conches and drums, the grunts of elephants, and the leonine shouts of the 
warriors. Indeed, the shouts of Bhima transcend the neighing of the 
thousands of horses in both armies. 

Hearing Bhima roaring like thunderclouds, his voice like the report of 
Sakra’s thunder, your warriors are terrified. At those roars of that Kshatriya, 
the horses and elephants all urinate and excrete as other animals do at the 
roar of the lion. Thundering like a deep mass of clouds, and assuming an 
awful form, Bhima falls upon your sons. 

Duryodhana, Durmukha and Dussaha, and that maharathika Dussasana, 
and Durmarshana, and Vivimsati, and Chitrasena, and the mighty 
maharatha Vikarna and also Purumitra, and Jaya, and Bhoja, and the valiant 
son of Somadatta, shake their splendid bows like masses of clouds streaked 
with flashes of lightning. 


[ eset ae says, ‘When the legions of both my side and that of the 


Drawing from their quivers long arrows resembling snakes that have just 
cast off their skins, they surround that mighty archer charging towards 
them, covering him with flights of arrows like the clouds shrouding the sun. 

The five sons of Draupadi, and the majestic warrior Saubhadra, and 
Nakula, and Sahadeva, and Dhrishtadyumna of Prishata’s race, attack those 
Dhartarashtras, rending them with arrows like mountain peaks with bolts of 
lightning. In that first encounter of the awe-inspiring twang of bowstrings 
and their flapping against the leather gloves of the fighting men, no warrior, 
on either side, retreats. 

Bharatarishabha, I saw the lightness of hand of Drona’s disciples, in 
particular those who, shooting countless arrows, always succeed in finding 
their target. And the sound of bowstrings is unceasing, and the blazing 
arrows flare through the air like meteors falling from the sky. 

All the other kings stand as silent spectators witnessing that dread 
encounter of kinsmen. Those maharathikas remember the old injuries 
sustained at one another’s hands, and wrathfully strive in battle, Bhaarata, 
always challenging each other aloud. 

The two armies, of the Kauravas and the Pandavas, teeming with 
elephants, horses and chariots, look exceedingly beautiful on the battlefield 
like figures in a painting. The other kings all take up their bows. And the 
Sun himself is veiled by the dust raised by the soldiers. 

They attack one another, at the heads of their respective troops, at the 
command of your son. The uproar of the elephants and the horses of those 
kings dashing into battle mingles with the leonine shouts of the warriors 
and the blast of conches and the sounds of drums. The tumult of that ocean, 
having arrows for its crocodiles, bows for its snakes, swords for its 
tortoises, and the bounding leaps of warriors for its gale, resembles a real 
surging sea. And kings in thousands, commanded by Yudhishtira, along 
with their forces, fall upon your son’s legions. 

The encounter between the warriors of the two armies is intense, and no 
difference can be seen between the men of the two warring sides, whether 
battling, or retreating in disarray, or rallying again to the fight. In that 
terrific and dreadful melee, Pitamaha Bhishma is most radiant, dominating 
that teeming host.’ 


CANTO 45 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘On the morning of that fateful day, the war that mangled 

the bodies of many kings begins. And the deafening shouts, the 
leonine roars of the Kauravas and the Srinjayas, both wanting victory in 
battle, resound through earth and sky. And a tumultuous pandemonium is 
heard mingled with the flaps of leather gloves and the blast of conches. Like 
roaring tigers, the men shout against one another. 

The sound of bowstrings stretched by gloved hands, the heavy tread of 
foot-soldiers, the furious neighing of horses, the falling of sticks and iron 
hooks on the heads of elephants, the clash of weapons, the jangle of the 
bells of elephants as they rush against one another, and the rumble of 
chariots like thunderclouds, mix to produce a clamour that makes one’s hair 
stand on end. 

And all the Kaurava warriors, reckless of their very lives and their 
intentions cruel, charge, with standards raised, against the Pandavas. 
Bhishma himself, taking up a bow that resembles the rod of Yama, charges 
Dhananjaya on the field. Arjuna of flaming tejas, seizes up the celebrated 
Gandiva, and rushes against Ganga’s son. Both these tigers among the 
Kurus are determined to kill each other. 

The mighty son of Ganga, despite a searing attack on the son of Pritha, 
cannot make him falter. And so also Arjuna cannot make Bhishma waver in 
battle. 

The great archer Satyaki rides against Kritavarman. The battle duel 
these two is fierce and makes the hair of onlookers stand on end. With loud 
yells, Satyaki strikes Kritavarman, and Kritavarman smites Satyaki, and 
each weakens the other. Pierced all over with arrows, these maharathas 
shine like two blossoming kimsukas in spring bedecked with blood flowers. 

The awesome young Abhimanyu battles Brihadbala. Soon, however, the 
ruler of Kosala cuts off the standard and kills the sarathy of Subhadra’s son. 
Abhimanyu wrathfully pierces Brihadbala with nine arrows, and with two 
more that parantapa cuts down Brihadbala’s standard, and with yet another, 


kills one of the protectors of his chariot wheels, and his charioteer as well. 
And the two continue to exhaust each other with vicious arrows. 

Bhima faces your son Duryodhana, that maharathika, proud and 
pompous, who had so harmed the Pandavas. Both princes are tigers among 
men and maharathas. And on the battlefield, they cover each other with 
showers of arrows. And seeing these high-souled warriors fight, all are 
amazed. 

Dussasana charges maharathika Nakula and pierces him with countless 
barbs which can pierce an enemy’s very vital organs. Laughing, the son of 
Madri severs his adversary’s standard and bow, and strikes him with 
twenty-five fine arrows. In the ferocious encounter, your powerful son kills 
Nakula’s horses and cuts down his standard. 

Durmukha assails the mighty Sahadeva, covering him with a storm of 
shafts. The heroic Sahadeva fells Durmukha’s charioteer with a razor-tipped 
arrow. Both men, irrepressible in fight, attempt to strike terror into each 
other with vigorous shafts. 

King Yudhishtira himself faces the ruler of the Madras, who breaks 
Yudhishtira’s bow in his hands. Throwing aside the riven bow, Kunti’s son 
takes up a stronger bow and one that can loose arrows more swiftly. With 
wrathful cries and unerring aim, he covers the Madra king with deadly 
shafts. 

Dhrishtadyumna, O Bhaarata, rushes against Drona in wrath, and the 
great Drona breaks the unyielding bow of the high-souled prince of 
Panchala that always finds its deadly mark. He looses a terrible shaft that is 
like the rod of Yama; this barb pierces the body of the Panchala prince. 
Swiftly snatching up another bow and fourteen arrows, the son of Drupada 
stabs Drona with a fluent volley. In high rage, they battle fiercely on. 

The impetuous Sankha encounters Somadatta’s son who is equally 
impulsive in battle and, asking him to stop and fight, shoots him in his right 
arm. The son of Somadatta strikes Sankha through the shoulders. The duel 
that follows between these two proud Kshatriyas soon becomes as ferocious 
as an encounter between the Devas and the Danavas. 

Maharatha Dhrishtaketu of immeasurable soul and great wrath storms 
against Bahlika, himself an embodiment of rage. With a leonine roar, 
Bahlika draws blood from Dhrishtaketu with a shower of keen shafts. The 
king of the Chedis swiftly pierces Bahlika with nine savage arrows. Like 
two incensed elephants, they duel in thunderous rage. 


They confront each other, appearing even like the planets Angaraka and 
Sukra. 

The feral Ghatotkacha encounters the brutal and mighty rakshasa 
Alambusha like Sakra facing Bala in battle. And Ghatotkacha, O Bhaarata, 
pierces the rakshasa with ninety keen shafts. 

Alambusha strikes Bhima’s son copiously with his straight and wild 
wooden barbs. Lacerated, they shine like the mighty Sakra and the powerful 
Bala during the ancient Devasura yuddha. 

Sikhandin rides against Drona’s son Aswatthaman, only to be deeply 
wounded with a long arrow, making him tremble. Sikhandin also strikes 
Drona’s son deep with an elegant shaft, and they continue in this vein with 
various kinds of barbs, plain and exotic. 

Virata, the Senapati of a vast legion, swiftly advances to face Bhagadatta 
in battle, and covers Bhagadatta with a shower of arrows like the clouds 
showering rain upon a mountain breast. But Bhagadatta, that lord of the 
earth, swiftly envelops Virata with his own arrow cloud like thunderheads 
might the risen sun. 

Kripa, son of Saradwat, rushes against Brihadkshatra, king of the 
Kaikeyas, and shrouds him in a barrage of arrows. Brihadkshatra also rains 
arrows down on the incensed son of Gautama. And having killed each 
other’s horses and cloven off each other’s bows, those two soon find 
themselves deprived of their chariots. In rage, they approach each other to 
fight with swords. And dreadful and unparalleled is the duel which ensues 
between them. 

King Drupada wrathfully attacks Jayadratha, king of the Sindhus, who is 
cheerfully awaiting battle. Jayadratha stabs Drupada with three arrows and 
Drupada pierces him with a brace of barbs in return. And the battle between 
them, also, is awesome and fierce, and brings great satisfaction to all 
onlookers for it resembles a conflict between Sukra and Angaraka.’ 


CANTO 46 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


hundreds and thousands of foot-soldiers, who abandon all restraint. 

re the son does not recognise the father, or the father the son of his loins; 

the brother does not acknowledge the brother, nor the sister’s son his 

maternal uncle. The maternal uncle does not acknowledge the sister’s son, 
the friend not the friend. 

The Pandavas and the Kauravas fight as if possessed by demons. Some 
mighty warriors fall with their chariots shattered. The axle rods of chariots 
break as they clash against shafts, and the spikes of chariot yokes against 
spikes of chariot yokes. 

And some watriors unite together to fight others that are similarly 
together, all wanting to kill. Some chariots, obstructed by other rathas, 
cannot move. Lofty elephants with rent temples fall upon other elephants, 
rending one another in many places with their tusks. Others encountering 
massive tuskers with arched howdahs and standards on their backs, and 
trained to fight with their tusks, scream in agony. 

Disciplined by training and goaded by pikes and hooks, elephants not in 
rut attack those in demented musth. And some leviathans, encountering 
those in rut, run in all directions, screeching like cranes. Many towering 
mastodons, well-trained, and with juice trickling down from rent temples 
and mouth, lacerated by swords, spears and arrows in their vital parts, 
trumpet awfully and fall dead, shaking the earth. Some utter frightful cries 
and run in all directions. 

The broad-chested, powerful foot-soldiers that protect the elephants are 
armed with pikes and bows, and bright battle-axes, and with maces and 
clubs mounted with iron spikes, and short arrows, and lances, and brightly 
polished swords; they, too, charge in all directions seeming determined to 
kill each other. And the swords of brave fighters, steeped in human blood, 
shine brightly. 

And the sound of the swords of Kshatriyas as they whirl and fall upon 
the vital parts of enemies is sickening. The heartrending wails of the hosts 


anjaya says, “Bhaarata, I will now describe to you the clashes between 
c 


of fighting men, crushed with maces and clubs, and cut down with well- 
tempered swords, and pierced with the tusks of elephants, and grained by 
tuskers, calling upon one another, can be heard, Bhaarata, ah, like the cries 
of those cursed to hell. 

Horsemen, on flying chargers with outstretched tails resembling the 
plumage of swans, dash against one another. And hurled by the riders, long- 
bearded golden barbs, polished and sharp, fall like snakes. Some heroic 
horsemen, on agile coursers, leaping high, hew off the heads of warriors in 
their chariots. 

Here and there a maharatha, finding a host of cavalry within range, 
decimates them with arrows. Many incensed elephants bedecked with 
trappings of gold, and looking like newly-risen clouds, trample the horses 
underfoot to bloody pulp. Some elephants, struck on their frontal globes and 
flanks, and mangled by spears, scream horribly. 

Massive tuskers, in the bewildering commotion, fling down and crush 
horses along with their riders; and some, overthrowing horses and riders 
with the points of their tusks, roam about smashing chariots with their 
standards. 

Some majestic bull elephants, bursting with a surfeit of energy and 
gushing temporal juice, kill horses and their riders with trunks and legs. 
Nimble arrows, polished and pointed, so like snakes, fall upon the heads, 
the temples, the flanks, and the limbs of these great beasts. 

And polished javelins, meteoric, hurled by noble arms, fall on all sides, 
piercing coats of mail in scarlet bursts and penetrating the bodies of men 
and horses. Many, drawing polished swords from sheaths made of the skins 
of leopards and tigers, cut down the enemy with fell strokes. Others, though 
themselves attacked and with gashed bodies, angrily fall upon their foes 
with swords, shields and axes. 

Some tuskers, dragging down and hurling chariots and their horses with 
their trunks, begin to wander in all directions, exhorted by the cries of those 
behind them. The men, some pierced by spears, some dismembered by 
battle-axes, and some crushed by elephants and others trodden down by 
horses, and some slashed by chariot wheels, and others by axes, cry out 
plaintively to their kinsmen. 

Some call out to their sons, and some to their fathers, and some to 
brothers and other kinsmen. Some call to their maternal uncles, and some to 
their sister’s sons. And some call out to others, on this frightful battlefield. 


Countless warriors lose their weapons, or have their thighs broken. 
Others with arms torn off or with gaping wounds, wail loudly, desperately 
wanting to live. And some, with a little remaining strength, tortured by 
thirst, and lying gasping on the field of battle, on the bare ground, beg for 
water. And some, soaking in pools of blood, O Bhaarata, censure 
themselves and your sons gathered for battle. 

Brave Kshatriyas, who having injured one another, do not abandon their 
duels or cry out. Instead, lying on the battlefield, they roar with joyful 
hearts, and in great fury, they bite their own lips. They glower at one 
another with faces rendered fierce by the furrowing of their brows. And still 
others, enduring the pain caused by arrows and ghastly wounds, with 
strength and tenacity, remain perfectly still and silent. 

Other maharathikas, deprived of their own chariots, and flung down and 
wounded by elephants, ask to be taken up on to the chariots of others. Many 
look glorious with their wounds like blooming kinsukas. In all the legions, 
countless cries can be heard, rising into the heavens. 

And in this awful war that destroys Kshatriyas, the father kills the son, 
the son kills the father, the sister’s son cuts down the maternal uncle, and 
the uncle the sister’s son. Friend fells friend, and all kinsmen one another. 
Such is the slaughter in this conflict of the Kauravas with the Pandavas. 

In that monstrous war of no mercy, the forces of the Pandavas, 
approaching Bhishma, begin to waver. 

Mahabaho Bhishma, with his silver standard graced with the sign of the 
palmyra with five stars, sitting on his majestic chariot, shines like the full 
moon under Meru’s peak.’ 


CANTO 47 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘After most of the morning of that terrible day passes in 

that awesome engagement, so destructive of the most magnificent 
men, Durmukha and Kritavarman, and Kripa, and Salya, and Vivimsati, 
urged by your son, ride to Bhishma to protect him. Shielded by those five 
maharathas Bhishma penetrates the Pandava host. 

The palmyra standard of Bhishma glides through the Chedis, the Kasis, 
the Karushas, and the Panchalas. With broad-tipped arrows, that Kshatriya 
razes the enemy, cutting off heads, and shattering chariots with their yokes 
and standards. Bhishma seems to veritably dance on his chariot as it courses 
along its path. 

Elephants, struck by him in their vital parts, shriek dismally. 
Abhimanyu, mounted on his chariot yoked to excellent tawny steeds, 
charges at Bhishma’s chariot in fury. With his standard adorned with a 
golden karnikara tree, he draws near Bhishma and the five maharathas who 
protect him. Abhimanyu strikes the standard of the palmyra-bannered 
warrior with a keen shaft, and hotly engages Bhishma and his defenders. 

Piercing Kritavarman with one arrow, and Salya with five, Abhimanyu 
draws blood from the great patriarch with nine more. And with one shaft 
brilliantly shot from his bow drawn to its fullest stretch, he cuts off his 
adversary’s gold standard. 

With another barb, piercing through every defence, he severs the head of 
Durmukha’s sarathy from his body; with another, he breaks Kripa’s gold 
bedecked bow. With a flurry of jagged shafts, this young maharatha strikes 
so furiously, he also appearing to dance the while. 

And seeing the lightness of his hand, the Devas are gratified. The deadly 
accuracy of Abhimanyu makes the other maharathas, headed by Bhishma, 
look upon him as being as much an archer as Arjuna himself. Sounding a 
twang even like that of the Gandiva, while stretched and re-stretched, his 
bow seems to revolve like a circle of fire. 

Bhishma charges forward and pierces Arjuna’s son with nine seething 
barbs; in turn, Abhimanyu burns the standard of that warrior of great tejas, 


while Bhishma strikes Abhimanyu’s charioteer. 

And Kritavarman, and Kripa, and Salya also, shoot Abhimanyu, but he 
stands before them like the Mainaka mountain. Though surrounded by these 
maharathas of the Dhartarashtra army, he continues to rain a ceaseless storm 
of arrows upon them. 

He obstructs their mighty weapons with his tumult of arrows, and 
showering Bhishma with them, he sends up a joyful roar. And in this battle 
with Bhishma, the strength of Abhimanyu’s handsome young arms is 
wonderful to see. Despite this prowess, Bhishma also looses his arrows at 
him. But Subhadra’s son wards them off, and fells Bhishma’s standard with 
nine arrows. And seeing that wondrous feat, the soldiers there set up a loud 
shout. 

Bedecked with jewels, Bhishma’s lofty silver standard, bearing the 
device of the palmyra, falls to the ground. Seeing this, the proud Bhima sets 
up a great roar to cheer on the son of Subhadra. 

The irresistible Bhishma now invokes powerful devastras to appear. The 
Pitamaha of immeasurable soul envelops Abhimanyu with thousands of 
mystic arrows. Ten great archers and maharathas of the Pandavas swiftly 
advance in their chariots to protect the youthful hero Virata with his son, 
and Dhrishtadyumna of Prishata’s race, and Bhima, the five Kekaya 
brothers, and Satyaki. 

As they recklessly fall upon him, Bhishma pierces the prince of 
Panchala with three sizzling shafts, and Satyaki with ten. And with one 
winged, razor like arrow, shot from his bow fully drawn bow, he cuts off 
Bhima’s standard. That standard made of gold and bearing the device of a 
lion, plunges from Bhima’s chariot. Bhima enraged stabs Bhishma with 
three arrows, Kripa with one, and Kritavarman with eight. 

And Uttara, the son of Virata, seated on a tusker with upraised trunk, 
attacks the king of the Madras. Salya, however, succeeds in checking the 
unparalleled speed of that prince of elephants racing towards his chariot. 
Uttara wrathfully sets his leg upon the yoke of Salya’s chariot, and kills his 
four magnificent horses. 

Salya remains in that chariot, and hurls an iron spear like a venomous 
snake at Uttara. The lance pierces Uttara’s coat of mail and he falls dead 
from his elephant’s neck, with the hook and the lance loosened from his 
grasp. And Salya takes up his sword and, leaping down from his chariot, 
severs the enormous trunk of that mighty elephant. His coat of mail pierced 


all over with a torrent of arrows, and his trunk hacked, the elephant cries 
out and falls dead. 

Salya hastily climbs into Kritavarman’s splendid chariot. Seeing his 
brother Uttara slain and seeing Salya with Kritavarman, Virata’s son Sweta 
blazes up in fury, like a fire on which ghee is poured. Stretching his 
majestic bow that resembles the bow of Sakra himself, the mighty Sweta 
rushes forward to kill Salya. 

Surrounded on all sides by a host of chariots, Sweta moves towards 
Salya’s chariot raining arrows at him. And seeing him charging like an 
incensed elephant, seven of your maharathas, Rajan, surround him on all 
sides, to save the king of the Madras from a certain death. 

Those seven warriors are Brihadbala king of the Kosalas, and Jayatsena 
of Magadha, and Rukmaratha, the gallant son of Salya, Vinda and 
Anuvinda of Avanti, and Sudakshina, king of the Kambojas, and 
Jayadratha, lord of the Sindhus and the kinsman of Brihadkshatra. The 
stretched bows of these high warriors, decorated with many colours, look 
like flashes of lightning in the clouds. And they all rain unceasing arrows on 
Sweta’s head like the clouds tossed by the wind that pour rain on the 
mountain breast at the end of summer. 

That brilliant Kshatriya, enraged, strikes their bows with seven swift 
broad-headed arrows, and continues to assail them. And in the same 
moment as their bows are riven, they all instantly take up other bows. And 
they shoot seven arrows at Sweta. 

And again that Mahabaho of immeasurable soul breaks these other bows 
with seven shafts. Their anger mounting, the maharathas whose bows have 
been riven, seize seven lances, roar loudly, and cast those seven javelins at 
Sweta’s chariot. Those fiery spears, which course through the air like 
comets, with the sound of thunder, are all cleaved by seven uncanny shafts 
before they can reach that most excellent warrior, master of the most fearful 
astras. 

Taking up a missile which can pierce every part of the body, he 
unleashes it at Rukmaratha. And this powerful weapon, with a force greater 
than that of a thunderbolt, pierces Rukmartha’s body and he falls 
unconscious in his chariot. His charioteer fearlessly carries him away, 
unconscious, before the eyes of all. 

Taking up six other arrows adorned with gold, Mahabaho Sweta cuts off 
the standard-tops of his six adversaries. That chastiser of enemies, piercing 


their horses and charioteers, and raining ceaseless barbs upon these six 
fighting men, moves towards the chariot of Salya. And seeing that 
commander of the Pandava forces moving swiftly towards Salya’s chariot, a 
loud uproar of anxious cries rises up in your army, O Bhaarata. 

Your valiant son, with Bhishma at the head of his forces, and supported 
by noble Kshatriyas and vast troops, advances towards Sweta’s ratha, and 
rescues the Madra king from the jaws of death. A hair-raising battle erupts 
between your soldiers and those of the enemy, one in which chariots and 
elephants are all embroiled in bedlam. The old Kuru Pitamaha rains a flurry 
of arrows upon Abhimanyu and Bhima, and the maharathika Satyaki, and 
upon the ruler of the Kekayas, and Virata, and Dhrishtadyumna, and upon 
the Chedi troops.’ 


CANTO 48 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


Salya’s chariot, what do the Kauravas and the Pandavas do, Sanjaya? 
And also what does Bhishma do? Tell me, I entreat you.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Rajan, hundreds and thousands of noble Kshatriyas, all 
brave maharathas, placing Sikhandin in the vanguard, and displaying their 
strength to your royal son, want to rescue Sweta. And they move swiftly 
towards Bhishma’s chariot, bedecked with gold, to kill that meridian 
warrior. The battle that follows is hair raising to watch. 

I will describe to you that astonishing and chilling battle between your 
troops and those of the enemy. Bhishma empties many chariots of their 
maharathas by sloughing off their heads with a barrage of arrows. Imbued 
with energy equal to that of the sun, he shrouds the very sun with his shafts; 
he eliminates his enemies that encircle him, like the rising sun dispels the 
surrounding darkness. 

The son of Shantanu shoots hundreds of thousands of arrows that claim 
the lives of countless Kshatriyas. He cleaves the heads of countless valiant 
fighting men. Elephants cased in spiked armour fall like mountains peaks 
struck by lightning. 

Chariots are seen entangled with one another. One chariot lies upon 
another chariot, and one horse upon another. And reckless chargers bear the 
corpses of daring young riders, hanging from their saddles with their bows 
still in their lifeless hands. 

With swords and quivers as yet attached to their bodies, and loosened 
coats of mail, hundreds of men lie dead on the ground, sleeping on beds 
worthy of heroes. Charging against one another, falling down and rising up 
again, and charging once again, they fight hand to hand. Wounded deep by 
each other, they reel on the battlefield. 

Incensed elephants rush in all directions, and hundreds of maharathas 
are slaughtered. Chariots and their riders are crushed on all sides. And they 
fall upon each others’ chariots, and are killed by the arrows of another. A 


[ sibs’ cne says, ‘When that brilliant archer Sweta advances towards 


maharatha can be seen to plunge from a height, his charioteer also having 
been slain. 

A thick pall of dust rises, and it is only by the twang of a hostile bow 
that the presence of an opponent is known to an embattled fighter. From the 
pressure upon their bodies, warriors gauge their enemies. And they fight on 
with arrows, guided only by the sound of bowstrings. 

The very hiss of the arrows shot by the fighting men at one another 
cannot be heard. And so loud is the sound of drums that it seems to pierce 
the ears. In that tumultuous uproar making the hair stand on end, the name 
of the warrior called out as he shows his prowess, cannot be heard. The 
father does not recognise the son of his loins. 

As a wheel breaks, or the yoke is torn off, or a horse killed, the 
maharatha is flung from his chariot, along with his sarathy. Many daring 
fighters, deprived of their rathas, are seen to take flight. Some are killed, 
while others are struck in their very vitals: but none escape unscathed, when 
dreadful Bhishma attacks the enemy. 

In that burning, awesome fray, Sweta slaughters a vast number of the 
Kauravas. And he kills hundreds upon hundreds of noble princes with his 
inexorable arrows; in every direction, he smashes the bows and cuts off the 
heads of hundreds of great warriors, their arms decked with angadas. 

Sweta annihilates maharathas and splinters chariot wheels, the chariots 
themselves, and shreds standards both small and large and precious, and 
numerous horses, and a multitude of men. As for me, fearing Sweta, and 
abandoning the magnificent Bhishma, I retreated from the battle and now 
stand before you, Rajan. 

And all the Kauravas, though armed for war, desert Bhishma, and stand 
like spectators beyond the range of arrows. Joyful in the hour of widespread 
gloom, that tiger among men, Bhishma, alone stands unshakeable like 
Meru. 

Melting the enemy, like the sun at winter’s end, he stands in the shining 
radiance of his chariot like the irradiant sun. And that great archer shoots a 
tempest of arrows and mows down the enemy. 

And being slaughtered by Bhishma in that fierce fight, the enemy 
warriors break ranks and flee from him, as if from a dire inferno. 
Encountering the prodigious Sweta, Bhishma alone stands calm and 
undaunted. Devoted to the cause of Duryodhana, he begins to ravage the 


Pandava warriors. Uncaring for his life, which is so precious to all men, he 
fearlessly destroys the Pandava army. 

Seeing Sweta strike down the Dhartarashtra legions, your father 
Bhishma charges him. Sweta covers Bhishma with a fusillade of arrows. 
And Bhishma also cloaks Sweta in a shroud of shafts. And roaring like two 
bulls, they fall upon each other, like colossal maddened elephants or two 
raging tigers. 

Thwarting each other’s weapons with their own, those bulls among men, 
Bhishma and Sweta, fight, each to kill the other. In a single day the angry 
Bhishma can obliterate the Pandava army, if Sweta did not protect it. 

Seeing Sweta holding off the Pitamaha, the Pandavas are filled with joy, 
while your son becomes despondent. Supported by his allies, Duryodhana 
garners his troops and wrathfully attacks the Pandava host. 

Momentarily turning away from the son of Ganga, Sweta begins to 
energetically slaughter your son’s forces like a violent wind uprooting trees. 
Beside himself with wrath, having routed your army, the son of Virata 
advances again towards Bhishma. 

And those two high-souled maharathas, both blazing arrows, battle each 
other like Vritra and Vasava of old. Drawing his bow to the fullest stretch, 
Sweta pierces Bhishma with seven shafts. Bhishma swiftly checks his 
adversary like an incensed elephant curbing an angered rival. 

Sweta, who delights the Kshatriyas with his prowess, strikes Bhishma, 
who in return stabs him with ten shining barbs. Yet that glorious warrior 
stands still like a mountain. Sweta gores Shantanu’s son with twenty-five 
shafts, filling all those around them with wonder. 

Smiling and licking the corners of his mouth, Sweta shatters Bhishma’s 
bow into ten pieces with ten perfect arrows. Then aiming a plumed iron 
barb, he cleaves the palmyra on top of Bhishma’s standard. 

Seeing the standard of Bhishma cut down, your sons think that Sweta 
has killed the Pitamaha. The elated Pandavas, thinking the same, blow their 
conches. Seeing the palmyra standard of the great Bhishma laid low, a 
furious Duryodhana urges his troops into battle. And they all converge to 
protect Bhishma who was in danger. 

To both his forces and to bystanders, the king says, "Either Sweta will 
die today, or Bhishma!" 

Hearing Duryodhana, his maharathas swiftly advance to protect the son 
of Ganga. With great alacrity, Bahlika and Kritavarman, and Kripa, and 


Salya also, O Bhaarata, and the son of Jarasandha, and Vikarna, and 
Chitrasena, and Vivimsati surround Bhishma, and shower Sweta with a high 
storm of arrows. 

That celebrated Kshatriya adroitly checks those angry opponents, 
displaying his own dexterity. Stopping them like a lion might a herd of 
elephants, Sweta smashes Bhishma’s bow with a singing cloud of arrows. 

Bhishma takes up another bow and pierces Sweta, Rajan, with feathered 
barbs. Sweta animatedly strikes Bhishma with numerous shafts before 
everyone’s eyes. 

Duryodhana is distraught seeing Bhishma, that most excellent Kshatriya, 
thwarted in battle by Sweta, and your whole army is alarmed. And all who 
see great Bhishma, mangled by Sweta’s arrows, believe him to be dead. 

Enraged, seeing his standard fallen and the Dhartarashtra army checked, 
Bhishma looses a refulgent volley at Sweta. But Sweta, magnificent 
maharatha, wards off Bhishma’s arrows, and once again rives the 
Pitamaha’s bow with a thick and heavy shaft. 

Beside himself, Bhishma flings aside that bow and takes up another 
bigger and stronger one. Aiming seven flat, whetted arrows, he kills Sweta’s 
four horses with four, cuts down his standard with two, and with the 
seventh, provoked beyond all measure, cuts off his charioteer’s head. 

The stricken Sweta jumps down from his chariot. Bhishma attacks him 
from all sides with dense, relentless broadsides of arrows. Bleeding from 
many wounds, Sweta leaves his bow on his abandoned chariot and seizes up 
an occult golden lance. 

Taking up that fierce astra which resembles the rod of Yama and could 
slay Death itself, Sweta furiously cries to Bhishma, “Stop and watch me, 
best of men!” And that great young hero hurls the serpentine lance, 
displaying his valour on behalf of the Pandavas. Loud exclamations arise 
among your sons, as they see that awesome missile in all its splendour. And 
launched by Sweta’s arm, that ayudha like a snake that has just cast off its 
skin, falls like a meteor from the sky. Without the slightest quiver of fear, 
Bhishma cuts the shining thing that blazes through the air into nine 
fragments with eight winged arrows. 

All your forces roar in jubilation. The son of Virata, seeing his lance of 
power desiccated, stands shocked, trembling suddenly, uncertain like one 
touched by the arrival of his final hour. But his rage still high, Sweta 
masters himself, and smiling, takes up a recondite mace to kill Bhishma. 


His eyes ruby red, and even more like a second Yama now, he assails 
Bhishma like a swollen river dashing against rocks. 

So knowing of the strengths of others, knowing that Sweta’s gada is 
impossible to thwart, Bhishma leaps down from his chariot to escape that 
sorcerous weapon. Sweta whirls the heavy mace in fury and casts it at 
Bhishma’s chariot like Siva himself. And the mace, intended for Bhishma’s 
destruction, reduces his chariot, its standard and its charioteer, its horses 
and its shaft, all to ashes. On seeing great Bhishma reduced to fighting on 
foot, many maharathas like Salya rush to his rescue. 

Mounting another chariot and rather dejectedly stretching his bow, 
Bhishma slowly advances towards Sweta; he hears a celestial voice, an 
asariri in the skies, fraught with his own good, which says, “Mahabaho 
Bhishma, strive without losing a moment. This is the hour fixed by Brahma 
for your victory over this one.” 

Hearing those words spoken by the celestial voice, Bhishma joyfully 
moves towards Sweta to kill him. Seeing maharatha Sweta fighting on foot, 
many great Pandava warriors rush to his rescue: Satyaki, and Bhimasena, 
and Dhrishtadyumna of Prishata’s race; and the five Kekaya brothers, and 
Dhrishtaketu and Abhimanyu of great energy. 

And seeing them, Bhishma, along with Drona and Salya and Kripa, 
arrests them all like a mountain stopping the force of the wind. When all the 
high-souled warriors of the Pandava side are thwarted, Sweta cleaves 
Bhishma’s bow with a sword. Throwing aside that bow, the Pitamaha, 
having heard the celestial message, decides it is time to slay Sweta. 

Though baffled by Sweta’s genius, maharatha Bhishma seizes up 
another bow, as splendid as that of Sakra himself, and instantly strings it. 
He advances towards Sweta alone, though the prince is surrounded by those 
tigers among men with Bhima at their head. 

Seeing Bhishma near, Bhima pierces him with sixty shafts. But Bhishma 
checks Bhima, Abhimanyu and the other maharathas with awesome astras. 
He also strikes Satyaki with a hundred arrows, Dhrishtadyumna with twenty 
and the Kekaya brothers with five. 

Holding up all those great archers with his own deadly fire, the Pitamaha 
advances purposefully towards Sweta. Invoking an inexorable weapon of 
Death, Bhishma sets it to his bowstring. And that winged shaft, imbued 
with the force of the Brahmastra, is watched by the Devas and Gandharvas, 
and Pisachas and Uragas, and Rakshasas at the moment Bhishma releases it. 


In an eruption of blood, that blazing ayudha plunges cleanly through 
Sweta’s coat of mail and his body and passes into the earth, with a flash 
akin to lightning. Like the setting sun that divests the earth of light, the astra 
passes through Sweta, carrying away his life. Thus slain in battle by 
Bhishma, we see that young tiger among men fall to the ground like a 
crumpled mountain peak. 

And all the maharathas of the Kshatriya race on the Pandava side 
lament. Your sons and all the Kauravas are elated. Seeing Sweta slain, 
Dussasana dances in joy on the battlefield to the loud music of conches and 
drums. 

When that magnificent archer, that jewel of battle, is killed by Bhishma 
the other Pandava archers led by Sikhandin tremble in fear. Arjuna and 
Krishna slowly withdraw the men for the nightly rest. Bhaarata, the forces 
of both sides withdraw with frequent roars. And the Partha maharathas 
enter their quarters downcast, thinking of the dreadful slaughter of their 
splendid commander.’ 


CANTO 49 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


mighty archers, on the Pandava side, respond? Hearing that Sweta 
has been slain, what transpires between his comrades and _ his 
opponents that retreat before them? 

Sanjaya, hearing of our victory, your words please me. My heart feels no 
shame in remembering our wrongdoing. The Pitamaha of Kuru’s race is 
ever triumphant and devoted to us. 

As for Duryodhana, having provoked war with that intelligent son of his 
uncle, on one occasion he looked for the protection of the sons of Pandu as 
he was anxious and afraid of Yudhishtira. At that time, abandoning 
everything, he was despondent. In view of the skill of the Pandavas, and 
thwarted and ensnared on all sides, Duryodhana for some time showed 
honourable behaviour, and placed himself under their protection. 

Why, therefore, Sanjaya, has Sweta, who was loyal to Yudhishtira, been 
killed? Indeed, this magnificent prince has been hurled down to patala by a 
number of these despicable enemies of ours. 

Bhishma does not support the war, nor does Acharya Drona; neither 
Kripa nor Gandhari likes it. Sanjaya, nor do I like it; neither does Krishna 
of Vrishni’s race, nor Yudhishtira; nor Bhima, nor Arjuna, nor the twins, 
Nakula and Sahadeva, bulls among men. Always warned by me, by 
Gandhari, by Vidura, by Rama the son of Jamadagni, and by the high- 
souled Vyasa also, the depraved and corrupt Duryodhana, with Dussasana, 
always following the evil counsels of Karna and Subala’s son, has behaved 
maliciously towards the Pandavas, and so great misfortune has fallen upon 
him. 

After the killing of Sweta and the victory of Bhishma, what does the 
enraged Partha, with Krishna, do in battle? Indeed, it is Arjuna that I fear, 
and these fears cannot be dispelled. He is so very brave and powerful. He 
can decimate his enemies with his arrows. The son of Indra, and equal to 
Upendra, the younger brother of Indra, he is a warrior whose fury and intent 


[ist ace says, ‘When Sweta is killed, how do the Panchalas, those 


are never futile. When you behold him on the field of war, what is your state 
of mind? 

Valiant, familiar with the Vedas, resembling the Fire and the Sun in 
radiance, and owning knowledge of the Aindrastra, this Kshatriya of 
immeasurable soul is always victorious. His weapons always descend on his 
enemies with the force of the thunderbolt and he is blindingly quick in 
drawing his bowstring. 

The formidable son of Drupada is also endowed with great wisdom. 
What does Dhrishtadyumna do when Sweta is killed? I am certain that the 
implacable hearts of the Pandavas burn for the injustices heaped upon them 
and the death of Sweta. Thinking of their wrath I am never at ease, by day 
or by night, on account of Duryodhana. How does the great war unfold? 
Tell me all about it, Sanjaya.’ 

Sanjaya says, “Listen carefully, Rajan, to the account of your own 
wrongdoings. It is not fitting for you to attribute their outcome to 
Duryodhana. Your understanding is much like the construction of an 
embankment after the waters have disappeared, or like the digging of a well 
when the house is on fire. 

With the passing of the morning, and the killing of Sweta by Bhishma, 
Virata’s son Sankha, that grinder of the enemy, always delighting in battle, 
seeing Salya stationed with Kritavarman on his chariot, suddenly blazes in 
anger, as does a fire when ghee is poured on it. Stretching his immense bow 
that is like the bow of Indra himself, he rides to kill the king of the Madras, 
supported on all sides by a legion of chariots. And Sankha shoots a torrent 
of arrows as he dashes towards Salya’s chariot. 

Seeing him come like an enraged elephant, seven of your maharathas 
surround Salya to save him from the jaws of death. Mahabaho Bhishma, 
thundering like the very clouds, and taking up a bow six cubits long, rides 
swiftly at Sankha. 

And seeing great Bhishma charge, the Pandava host trembles like a skiff 
tossed in a storm. Arjuna swiftly places himself in front of Sankha to 
protect him from Bhishma. And the duel between Bhishma and Arjuna 
begins. Loud exclamations arise among the gathered. One army blurs into 
the other, and all are filled with wonder. 

Salya alights from his great chariot, and savagely kills Sankha’s four 
horses with his mace. Sankha jumps down from his chariot and, sword in 
hand, runs to Arjuna’s chariot where he is safe, and mounts it. A dense 


cloud of arrows from Bhishma’s chariot covers all the sky and the earth. 
The arrows that fall from that most excellent archer’s deadly cloud 
annihilate the Panchala, the Matsya, the Kekaya and the Prabhadraka horde 
and rills of blood flow on Kurukshetra. 

Leaving Arjuna Savyasachin, the perfectly ambidextrous bowman, 
Bhishma dashes towards Drupada, king of the Panchalas, surrounded by his 
forces. And he shrouds his beloved kinsman with a dazzle of arrows. Like a 
forest consumed by fire at winter’s end, the troops of Drupada are 
obliterated. 

Bhishma stands in that battle like a radiant smokeless fire, or like the sun 
himself at noon scorching everything with his heat. The Pandava fighting 
men are unable to even look at him. In terror, they look around for a 
protector, and seeing none, seem like a herd of trembling cows. 

The Pandava forces, slaughtered or retreating dejectedly, lament 
dispiritedly while being pursued. 

Bhishma, with bow always drawn in a circle, shoots fiery shafts like 
virulent poison, creating a continuous stream of arrows in all directions; 
that hero of rigid vows kills the Pandava maharathas naming each aloud as 
he picks them off one by one. When the Pandava troops have been routed 
and crushed, corpses askew strewn across the battlefield, the sun sets and 
nothing can be seen. 

And then, Bharatarishabha, beholding Bhishma, proudly standing before 
them, the Parthas withdraw their forces for the night.’ 


CANTO 50 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


and when Duryodhana is elated seeing Bhishma in full fury of battle, 
maraja Yudhishtira hastily approaches Krishna, accompanied by all his 
brothers and his allies. 

Filled with great despair thinking of his rout, and seeing Bhishma’s 
dominance, he says to Krishna, “See how Bhishma of terrible prowess 
consumes my forces with his arrows like fire consuming dry grass. How can 
we even look at that high-souled warrior who is sweeping through my men 
like flames fed with ghee? 

Watching that purushavyaghra with his mighty bow, my men flee, 
excoriated by his barbs. Enraged Yama himself, or Indra armed with the 
Vajra, or even Varuna with Paasa in hand, or Kubera with his mace may be 
defeated. But maharatha Bhishma is impossible to overcome. I am 
drowning in the fathomless ocean called Bhishma, without a boat to rescue 
me. 

Kesava, it is from my abysmal ignorance that I have Bhishma as my 
adversary in war. I want to quit this terrible massacre and take sannyasa in 
the forest. To live there is preferable to sacrificing these earthly kings to 
Death come hunting us in the form of Bhishma. 

Bhishma is a master of the greatest astras, and he will annihilate my 
army. My fighting men are like insects rushing into a raging fire to their 
certain death. In fighting for a kingdom, I am being led only to sure 
destruction. 

My gallant brothers also bear arrows for my sake, having lost both 
sovereignty and happiness for the love of me, their eldest brother. We 
regard life highly, and it is too precious to be so lightly sacrificed. During 
the rest of my days I will practise the severest tapasya. I will not anymore 
be the cause of the deaths of my friends and my kinsmen. 

The resplendent Bhishma, with his divine weapon, ceaselessly thwarts 
thousands of my maharathas, the most excellent of great warriors. Tell me, 
Krishna, without delay, what should I do for my own good? 


S anjaya says, ‘When the troops have been withdrawn on the first day, 
Dhar 


As for Arjuna, I see that he is an unmoved spectator in this battle. Only 
great Bhima, remembering Kshatriya dharma, fights with all his strength. 
With his mighty mace, this high-souled Kshatriya achieves the most 
difficult victories over foot-soldiers and horses, chariots and elephants. But 
this hero cannot in fair fight destroy the enemy even in a hundred years. 
Only your Arjuna can achieve this with his Devastras. 

He looks on indifferently as we are overpowered by Bhishma and 
Drona. The unceasing astras of Bhishma and Drona raze all our Kshatriyas. 
Unquestionably, the raging Bhishma and his allies will annihilate us. 
Krishna, go look for that great archer, that maharatha, who can extinguish 
Bhishma like rain clouds a forest fire. Then with your blessings, the sons of 
Pandu, their enemies defeated and their kingdom restored, will be at peace 
with their kinsmen.” 

Having said this, Yudhishtira, with a grieving heart and mind in turmoil, 
remains silent in reflection for a long time. Seeing the son of Pandu stricken 
with grief, Krishna lifts the spirit of the Pandavas saying, “Do not mourn, 
lord of the Bhaaratas. It does not befit you to lament, when your brothers 
are all brave archers renowned the world over. 

I also am engaged in working towards your welfare, as are the revered 
maharathas Satyaki and Virata and Drupada, and Dhrishtadyumna of 
Prishata’s line. All these kings and their legions honour you and are devoted 
to you. Maharatha Dhrishtadyumna, who commands your army, wants your 
welfare, as also Mahabaho Sikhandin, who is the one certain to kill 
Bhishma.” 

Hearing these words, before the assembled men and in the presence of 
Krishna, Yudhishtira says to Dhrishtadyumna, “You of Prishata’s lineage, 
listen to my words which must not be violated. Approved by Vasudeva, you 
have been our Senapati. As Kartikeya was the Senapati of the divine forces, 
in bygone days, so also are you for the Pandava army. 

Use your prowess, O tiger among men, and exterminate the Kauravas. I 
will follow you along with Bhima, and Krishna also, and the sons of Madri, 
all united together, the sons of Draupadi in full armour, and all the other 
valiant kings.” 

Dhrishtadyumna says, “Ordained by Shambhu himself, I am _ the 
proclaimed destroyer of Drona. I shall wage war against Bhishma, and 
Drona and Kripa, and Salya and Jayadratha, and all the proud kings on the 
Kaurava side.” 


When that most glorious of princes, that slayer of enemies, the son of 
Prishata, says this defiantly, the Pandava warriors are once more filled with 
great unyielding courage and heart, and roar loudly. 

Yudhishtira says to Dhrishtadyumna, “Form the vyuha called 
Krauncharuma. This formation was the one advocated by Brihaspati to 
Indra in ancient days when the Devas and the Asuras fought, and it 
devoured enemy hosts. Unseen before, dazzle the Kauravas with its power.” 

Thus addressed by that god among men, Yudhishtira, like Vishnu by 
Indra, Dhrishtadyumna places Arjuna in the vanguard of the army at dawn. 
And Dhananjaya’s standard, crafted by divine power at Indra’s command, 
waves gloriously in the crisp morning air. 

Decked with the colours of the Indradhanusha, the rainbow, that 
standard coursing through the air looks like an edifice of vapour which 
seems to glide along its chariot. And the bearer of the Gandiva, adorned 
with jewels, and that standard beside him, looks doubly brilliant, like 
Brahma with the Sun, and the Sun with the Self-created One. 

King Drupada, surrounded by a host of fighting men, becomes the head 
of that vyuha. And the two kings Kuntibhoja and Saibya become its two 
eyes. And the ruler of the Dasarnas, and the Prayagas, with the Daserakas, 
and the Anupakas, and the Kiratas are its neck, Bharatarishabha. 

Yudhishtira with the Patachcharas, the Hunas, the Pauravakas and the 
Nishadas, so also the Pisachas, with the Kundavishas, and the Mandakas, 
the Ladakas, the Tanganas, and the Uddras, and the Saravas, the 
Tumbhumas, the Vatsas, and the Nakulas, become its right wing. And 
Nakula and Sahadeva place themselves on the left wing. 

On the joints of the wings are ten thousand chariots, and on the head a 
hundred thousand; on the back of the vyuha are a hundred million and 
twenty thousand rathas, and on the neck a hundred and seventy thousand. 
On the joints of the wings and their tips move majestic elephants, like 
blazing mountains. And the rear is protected by Virata with the Kekayas, 
and the ruler of Kasi and the king of the Chedis, with thirty thousand 
chariots. 

Forming this mighty vyuha, the Pandavas, eager for sunrise, await battle 
in armour. And their white royal parasols, rich and sparkling, as brilliant as 
the sun, bedazzle on their elephants and chariots.’ 


CANTO 51 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


son of immeasurable energy, your son approaches Acharya Drona, and 
ipa, and Salya, and Somadatta’s son, and Vikarna, and Aswatthaman 
also, and all his brothers, led by Dussasana, and other mighty Kshatriyas 
gathered for battle, and speaks these judicious and pleasing words, “Armed 
with diverse weapons, you are all familiar with the shastras. Each of you 
maharathas is singly capable of decimating the sons of Pandu with their 
legions. How much more then we can accomplish when you are united. Our 
forces, protected by Bhishma, are beyond measure, while theirs, protected 
by Bhima, are limited. 

Let the Samsthanas, the Surasenas, the Venikas, the Kukkuras, the 
Rechakas, the Trigartas, the Madrakas, the Yavanas, with Shatrunjayas, and 
Dussasana, and that admirable Vikarna, and Nanda and Upanandaka, and 
Chitrasena, along with the Manibhadrakas, protect Bhishma with their 
fighting men.” 

Then Bhishma and Drona and your sons form a mighty vyuha for 
resisting that of the Parthas. And Bhishma, surrounded by a vast fighting 
force, advances like the king of the Devas himself. And that mighty archer, 
the son of Bharadwaja, endowed with immense tejas, follows him with the 
Kuntalas, the Dasarnas, and the Magadhas, and with the Vidarbhas, the 
Melakas, the Karnas, and the Pravaranas also. 

The Gandharas, the Sindhusauviras, the Sibis and the Vasatis with all 
their legions follow Bhishma, that ornament of battle; and Sakuni, with all 
his warriors, protects him. King Duryodhana, with all his brothers, with the 
Aswalakas, the Vikarnas, the Vamanas, the Kosalas, the Daradas, the 
Vrikas, as also the Kshudrakas and the Malavas, advances spiritedly against 
the Pandava army. 

And Bhurisravas, and Sala, and Salya, and Bhagadatta, and Vinda and 
Anuvinda of Avanti, guard the left flank. And Somadatta, and Susarman, 
and Sudakshina, the ruler of the Kambojas, and Satayus, and Srutayus, are 
on the right flank. Aswatthaman, and Kripa, and Kritavarman of Satwata’s 


anjaya says, ‘Seeing the awesome Krauncha vyuha, formed by Pandu’s 
T 


race, with a very large akshauhini, are at the rear of the army. And behind 
them are the kings of many lands, Ketumat, and Vasudana, and the powerful 
son of the king of Kasi. 

All the forces on your side joyfully await battle, blowing their conches 
with delight, and roaring like lions. Hearing these happy shouts the revered 
and powerful Bhishma also roars and blows his conch. Conches and drums, 
and many kinds of pesis and cymbals are sounded by others, setting up an 
upsurge of pulsating noise. 

Krishna and Arjuna, both on a majestic chariot yoked to white horses, 
blow their beautiful conches decked with gold and jewels. Hrishikesa blows 
the Panchajanya, and Dhananjaya the one named Devadatta. Bhima of 
terrible deeds blows the enormous Paundra, and king Yudhishtira blows the 
Anantavijaya, while Nakula and Sahadeva blow upon the Sughosa and 
Manipushpaka. 

The ruler of Kasi, and Saibya, and maharathas Sikhandin and Satyaki, 
and Dhrishtadyumna, and Virata, and that awesome archer, the king of the 
Panchalas, and the five sons of Draupadi, all blow their conches and set up 
leonine roars. And the great uproar of these Kshatriyas reverberates 
thunderously through the earth and the sky. 

Thus, Rajan, the Kauravas and the Pandavas advance against each other 
eager to scorch each other in further battle.’ 


CANTO 52 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


formation, how do those excellent warriors begin their attack?’ 
Sanjaya says, “When all the forces are arrayed, the fighting men 
wait, in full armour, with their beautiful standards raised. And seeing the 
Kaurava army looking like the boundless ocean, your son Duryodhana, 
standing within it, commands his forces into fight. 

The soldiers, with savage intent, abandoning all caution, charge the 
Pandavas, with standards aloft. The battle is fiercely fought and makes 
one’s hair stand on end. The chariots and elephants blur into each other. 
And vigorous, beautifully feathered shafts shot by maharathas rain down on 
the elephants and horses. 

Mahabaho Bhishma of awesome prowess, encased in mail, takes up his 
bow, and approaching them, looses a torrent of arrows on the valiant son of 
Subhadra, and maharatha Arjuna, and the king of the Kekayas and Virata, 
and Dhrishtadyumna, as also upon the Chedi and the Matsya warriors. 

And that mighty Pandava vyuha wavers at Bhishma’s onslaught. 
Terrible is that encounter, terrible the Kuru grandsire. Horses and riders, 
and maharathas, fall swiftly. The Pandava chariot akshauhinis melt away. 

Then that tiger among men, Arjuna, seeing the supreme Bhishma, 
angrily says to Krishna, “Press forward towards the Pitamaha. Bhishma 
incensed will annihilate our army for Duryodhana’s sake. And this Drona, 
and Kripa and Salya and Vikarna, united with Dhritarashtra’s sons headed 
by Duryodhana, and protected by this awesome archer, will slaughter the 
Panchalas. I must stop him.” 

Krishna cautions him saying, “Be careful, Dhananjaya, as I take you 
towards the Pitamaha’s chariot.” And he drives Arjuna’s celebrated chariot 
towards Bhishma’s. 

With numerous banners waving, with handsome steeds resembling a 
flight of white cranes, with a raised standard bearing a roaring Vanara, 
Arjuna, the friend of friends, swiftly draws up on his chariot of sunlike 


[ Jeers. says, “When the two armies stand ready in battle 


radiance and the thunder of clouds, razing the Kaurava and the Surasena 
hordes. 

Dashing like an incensed elephant he terrifies brave warriors felling 
them all round with his shafts, and encounters Bhishma, protected by the 
forces headed by Saindhava and by the fighting men of the East, and the 
Sauviras and the Kekayas. Who other than Bhishma, Drona and Karna can 
advance in battle against the bearer of the Gandiva? 

Bhishma strikes Arjuna with seventy-seven arrows and Drona shoots 
him with twenty-five, and Kripa with fifty, and Duryodhana with sixty-four, 
and Salya with nine; and Drona’s son, that purushavyaghra, with sixty, and 
Vikarna with three barbs; and Saindhava with nine and Sakuni with five. 
And Artayani pierces Pandu’s son with three thick shafts. 

Though pierced from all sides with sharp arrows, Mahabaho Arjuna 
does not falter; he is like a mountain struck by straws. In response, this 
Kiriti of immeasurable soul pierces Bhishma with twenty-five and Kripa 
with nine barbs, and Drona with sixty, and Vikarna with three shafts, and 
Artayani with three, and Duryodhana also with five. 

And then Satyaki, and Virata and Dhrishtadyumna, and the sons of 
Draupadi, and Abhimanyu, all ride up, surrounding him for protection. The 
prince of the Panchalas, supported by the Somakas, advances towards the 
great Drona, who guards Bhishma. 

Maharatha Bhishma swiftly stabs the son of Pandu with eighty fierce 
arrows, greatly pleasing your soldiers. Hearing the shouts of those 
maharathikas, Arjuna joyfully enters into their midst raining fire upon them. 

Watching his troops struggle in battle against the son of Pritha, 
Duryodhana says to Bhishma, “This mighty son of Pandu, with Krishna, 
felling all our troops, cuts away our roots, even while you and Drona live. It 
is on your account that Karna has laid aside his weapons, and does not fight 
against the Pandavas. O son of Ganga, Arjuna must be killed!” 

Bhishma Pitamaha saying, “Fie on this cruel Kshatriya dharma!” rides 
towards Arjuna’s chariot. And all the kings, seeing both those warriors with 
white horses yoked to their chariots, roar like lions and blow their conches. 
Drona’s son and Duryodhana, and your son Vikarna, encircle Bhishma and 
stand prepared; and so also do all the Pandavas, surrounding Dhananjaya. 
And the battle begins. 

Bhishma pierces Arjuna with nine shafts; Arjuna strikes him in return 
with ten, probing his very vitals. With a thousand adroit missiles, Arjuna, 


famed for his archery, shrouds Bhishma in a net of arrows. Bhishma 
responds with a like mesh of his own. And both are pleased, and both 
delighting in battle, contend with each other without either gaining any 
advantage. 

The flights of arrows from Bhishma’s bow are dispersed by Arjuna’s 
shafts. And so the torrents of arrows shot by Arjuna, cleaved by the arrows 
of Ganga’s son, all fall tamely to the ground. Arjuna strikes Bhishma with 
twenty-five keenly whetted barbs. Bhishma strikes Partha with nine. 

And these two glorious warriors, those Parantapas, sport with each 
other, piercing each other’s chariots, horses, shafts and wheels. Suddenly 
Bhishma strikes Krishna squarely in his chest with three sizzling barbs, and 
Krishna bleeds red, Rajan, like a flowering kinsuka. 

Infuriated at seeing Krishna wounded, Arjuna strikes Bhishma’s sarathy 
with three searing arrows. Both maharathas strive against each other, 
without success. The dexterity of their charioteers allows them to display 
beautiful circles and advances and retreats with their chariots. They 
zealously seek any slight opening to strike, frequently changing positions. 

Both Kshatriyas blow their conches echoingly, the boom of which 
mingles with their leonine roars; those maharathas twang their bows 
deafeningly. The resonance of their conches and the rattle of their chariot 
wheels agitate the very Earth, which begins to tremble and make cavernous 
sounds. 

No one detects any weakness in either of them. Both are strong and 
courageous, and a match for the other. Guided by his fleeting standard, the 
Kauravas seek refuge in Bhishma; the Pandavas are inspired by Arjuna’s 
moving banner. Seeing this stunning display of prowess, all present are 
filled with wonder. 

No one, Bhaarata, observes any difference between the two, just as no 
one finds lapses in a man of dharma. At times, both become perfectly 
invisible in the prevailing clouds of arrows. At times, both are clearly seen. 

The Devas with the Gandharvas and the Charanas, and the great Rishis 
watching this, say to one another, “These wrathful maharathas cannot be 
defeated by the Devas, the Asuras and the Gandharvas. This breathtaking 
battle will be held in awe in all the worlds. Indeed, such a war will never 
take place again. 

Bhishma cannot be overcome by even brilliant maharatha Arjuna 
raining down arrows. So also Arjuna, who cannot be vanquished by the 


very gods, will not be defeated by Bhishma. As long as the world itself 
lasts, so will this battle continue without an outcome.” We hear these words 
in praise of both embattled warriors. 

While these two are engaged in displaying their magnificent dexterity, 
other soldiers of both armies kill one another with sharp-edged swords, 
polished battle-axes, innumerable arrows, and a variety of weapons. Brave 
fighting men continue to fell each other in the murderous war. 

And the clash between Drona and the prince of the Panchalas is terrible 
too.’ 


CANTO 53 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


the Panchala prince of Prishata’s race fight, each striving to put forth 

his utmost. I regard destiny to be superior to exertion, considering 
that Bhishma could not escape Arjuna in battle. Indeed, when enraged, 
Bhishma can destroy all mobile and immobile creation; then why can he not 
kill the son of Pandu?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Listen attentively, Rajan, to the story of this awesome 
war. The son of Pandu cannot be defeated by the very gods led by Indra. 
With a range of arrows Drona pierces Dhrishtadyumna and fells his 
charioteer. He also strikes Dhrishtadyumna’s four horses with four brilliant 
shafts. The daring Dhrishtadyumna strikes Drona’s body deep with nine 
arrows and arrests him. 

Bharadwaja’s son, of great prowess and immeasurable soul, shrouds the 
wrathful Dhrishtadyumna with his arrows. And he takes up a forbidding 
missile, like a second rod of death, as powerful as Indra’s Vajra. Seeing that 
astra aimed by Drona, fearful shouts arise among the fighting men. 

We watch Dhrishtadyumna’s prowess as he stands alone like a 
mountain, adamant. He cuts down that blazing arrow flying towards him 
like his own death, and rains a storm of barbs on Drona. Seeing that 
incredible feat of Dhrishtadyumna’s, the Panchalas with the Pandavas roar 
in delight. 

Always seeking Drona’s death, that fire prince hurls a spear at him, 
decked with gold and stones of lapis lazuli, like a thunderbolt. Drona smiles 
and cuts it into three slivers. Seeing his missile frustrated, Dhrishtadyumna 
looses a gale of arrows on Drona. Containing that squall, maharatha Drona 
smashes the Panchala prince’s bow in his hands. 

His bow riven, Dhrishtadyumna casts a mace weighty as a mountain at 
Drona. As it flies for Drona’s life, we witness the astounding dexterity of 
Bharadwaja’s son. By a nimble movement of his chariot, he avoids that 
golden arcane mace, in a wink, and looses a clutch of inscrutable golden- 


DD itte Pancna says, “Tell me, Sanjaya, how that great archer Drona and 


winged shafts at Prishata’s son. These pierce Dhrishtadyumna’s armour 
drinking his blood. 

The high-souled Dhrishtadyumna takes up another bow, and strikes 
Drona with five barbs. Those two bulls among men, both covered in blood, 
look quite beautiful, like two blossoming kinsukas in spring. 

Drona again breaks Drupada’s son’s bow in his hands. That profound 
Kshatriya, the Acharya with arrows, like clouds lashing a mountain with 
rain. Roaring like a lion, he fells his enemy’s sarathy and his four horses 
from his bay in the chariot; elegantly, fiercely he cuts away the leather glove 
that protects Dhrishtadyumna’s right hand. 

His bow broken, deprived of his chariot, his horses slain, and charioteer 
overthrown, the prince of Panchala begins to alight from his ruined ratha, 
mace in hand, ready to display great prowess. But before he can leap down, 
Bhaarata, Drona smashes his mace into fragments with arrows swifter than 
seeing. Ah, that is breathtaking to see! 

The stalwart prince of the Panchalas, that Mahabaho, takes up a grand 
shield decked with a hundred moons, and a mighty sword, and dashes out, 
like a ravenous lion towards an incensed elephant to kill Drona. With 
lightness of hand and power, we see Bharadwaja’s son curb Prishata’s son 
with a spate of arrows. 

Yet for all his great power, Drona cannot himself advance, for the 
maharatha Dhrishtadyumna stands resolute and unmoving, warding off 
those arrow clouds with his shield with unmatched skill. Bhima swiftly 
moves to help Dhrishtadyumna. He stabs Drona with seven arrows, and 
forces him to clamber on to another chariot. Duryodhana cries at the king of 
the Kalingas, with his large force, to protect Drona. 

The fearsome Kalinga legion charges against Bhima at your son’s 
command. And Drona, abandoning the prince of Panchala, faces Virata and 
Drupada together. Dhrishtadyumna advances to support Yudhishtira. A 
fierce fight breaks out between the Kalingas and Bhima, making one’s hair 
stand on end; it quickly swells into an encounter that threatens to destroy 
the universe.’ 


CANTO 54 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


commander of a vast army, goaded by my son, fight Bhima of 
stupendous feats, that Kshatriya ranging over the field of war with 
his mace like Death himself?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Driven by your son, the mighty king of the Kalingas, 
accompanied by a colossal force advances on Bhima’s chariot. And Bhima, 
supported by the Chedis, charges that army, replete with chariots, horses 
and elephants, and bristling with powerful weapons, flying towards him 
with Ketumat, the son of the king of the Nishadas. 

And Srutayus also, lively and armoured, followed by his troops in battle 
formation, rides with king Ketumat to assail Bhima. The lord of the 
Kalingas with thousands of chariots, and Ketumat with ten thousand 
elephants, and the Nishadas encircle Vayu’s mighty son. 

With Bhima at their head, the Chedis, the Matsyas and Karushas, along 
with others, plunge wildly at the Nishadas. A fierce and majestic battle 
erupts between Bhima and his enemies, all avid to kill one another, a terrific 
fray that resembles the clash between Indra and the host of Diti’s sons. The 
uproar of that horde reverberates like the booming ocean. 

The fighting men fell one another, transforming the battlefield into a 
cremation ground strewn horribly with flesh and flowing blood. The 
warriors, in their frenzy of killing, cannot distinguish friend from foe, and 
so men strike down their own. Ah, feverish is the encounter between the 
few and many, between the Chedis on one side, and the Kalingas and the 
Nishadas on the other. 

After briefly displaying fierce valour, the Chedis abandon Bhima, and 
turn away. Unruffled by the desertion, the son of Pandu takes on the 
Kalingas single-handedly. The mighty Bhima stands unwavering, and 
inundates the Kalinga legions with torrents of arrows. 

That mighty archer, the king of the Kalingas, and his son the maharatha 
Sakradeva, both strike Bhima painfully. Mahabaho Bhima fights back 
bravely, but his horses are felled by Sakradeva’s volleys. Seeing Parantapa 


[ Jeon says, ‘How does the king of the Kalingas, that 


Bhima without a chariot, Sakradeva attacks him fervently with a gale like a 
cloudburst at the end of summer. 

Bhima remains in his horseless chariot, and hurls an iron mace at 
Sakradeva. The son of the Kalinga king plunges to the ground, with his 
standard and sarathy, dead. Seeing his son killed, maharatha Srutayush 
surrounds Bhima with thousands of chariots. 

Bhima discards his mace and takes up a sword. Crimson eyed with 
anguish and wrath, the great Kalinga rubs his bowstring, takes up an arrow 
deadly as a king cobra, and shoots it at Bhima. Bhima cleanly divides that 
coursing arrow in two with his imposing sword. And he roars in triumph, 
terrifying the soldiers. 

In deranged fury, the Kalinga launches fourteen bearded stone-whetted 
shafts at Bhima, who in a blur smashes those arrows surging through the 
sky into bits with his sword. Bhima, husky bull among men, attacks 
Bhanumat. Bhanumat envelops Bhima with a shower of arrows, and makes 
the sky echo with a resounding shout. Bhima responds with strident roar 
after roar, like an angry tiger. 

Hearing him roar so awfully, the Kalinga army grows fearful. That army 
suddenly sees Bhima as being more than a mere man. Levering himself by 
its tusks, Bhima, sword in hand, leaps onto the back of Bhanumat’s 
elephant, and slices through Bhanumat with his magnificent sword, 
bisecting his trunk in a flash of scarlet. 

Having killed that prince of the Kalingas, Parantapa Bhima dissevers the 
neck of his tusker which falls to the ground with a deafening bellow, like a 
cliff whose base has been eroded by the heaving sea. Leaping down from 
that dying elephant, the prince of Bharata’s race stands once again on the 
ground, his mighty chest heaving, sword in hand and impervious as ever. 

Destroying numberless elephants on all sides, he wanders across the 
battlefield, looking like a moving wheel of fire, decimating akshauhinis of 
cavalry, elephants, chariots, and hordes of foot-soldiers. 

And that lord among men, the mighty Bhima, moves hawklike, cleaving 
the bodies and heads of elephants and their riders with his keen-edged 
sword. On foot and furious, he strikes fear into his bravest opponents and 
baffles them single-handedly, like Yama during the pralaya. Only the 
foolish dare challenge him rashly as he roams the battleground, sword in 
hand. 


That hulking, terrifying Kshatriya smashes the shafts and yokes of 
chariots, also killing their warriors. Bhima displays all kinds of movements, 
so surprisingly agile and graceful for one of his bulk: he turns, and wheels, 
makes side-thrusts, jumps, runs, and leaps high. He races forwards and flies 
upwards. And some are mangled, struck by his sword through their very 
vitals, and others beheaded. 

Many elephants, Bhaarata, some with their trunks and tusks severed, 
others with their temporal lobes slit open, deprived of riders, kill their own 
ranks and fall down with plaintive cries. And broken spears, and the heads 
of elephant drivers, and beautiful caparisons of elephants, and dazzling 
golden chords, and collars, and arrows and mallets and quivers, many kinds 
of war machines, and beautiful bows, short arrows with polished heads and 
hooks, and iron goads for driving elephants, bells of many shapes and tones, 
and hilts decked with gold, are seen tumbling to the ground along with 
horsemen past count. 

And with elephants spread on the ground with parts of their bodies and 
their trunks cut, or killed, the field appears to be spread with fallen hills. 
That bull among men, having killed those majestic tuskers, moves on to 
raze the horses, and also fells their riders. Savage and ferine is the battle 
between him and them. 

We see hilts and traces, and radiant golden saddle girths and covers for 
the backs of horses, and bearded shafts, and costly swords, and coats of 
mail, and shields, and beautiful ornaments scattered all around in that virile 
encounter. Bhima covers the earth with blood as if it were dotted with 
crimson lilies. 

The mighty son of Pandu leaps high and dragging some maharathas 
down, fells them and their standards with his sword. Filled with entirely 
boundless energy, that Kshatriya sometimes lunges, or dashes on all sides, 
along many sudden paths; and the fighting men all look on in wonder. 

And some he kills with his legs, and others he drags down, thrusting 
them into the earth. Some he strikes with his sword, and others he petrifies 
with his roars. Some men are thrown to the ground by the force of his 
thighs as he runs through them; others escape hastily, terrified to see him. 

Yet again, the vast and vigorous force of the Kalingas rushes at the 
dreadful Bhima and surrounds him. Seeing Srutayush at the head of the 
Kalinga forces, Bhima charges him. The Kalinga king pierces Bhima’s 


chest with nine whistling arrows. Like an elephant pierced with a goad, 
Bhima blazes up in anger, like a fire fed with ghee. 

Ashoka, that most excellent sarathy, brings up a golden chariot for 
Bhima to mount. The son of Kunti swiftly climbs on and rides at the ruler 
of the Kalingas, calling out to him to halt. 

The mighty, infuriated Srutayush looses a luculent volley at Bhima, 
flaunting his marvellous lightness of hand. Struck forcefully by nine shafts 
from Kalinga’s bow, Bhima shivers like a snake beaten with a rod. With a 
growl he raises his bow and kills the Kalinga king with seven massive iron 
shafts. 

With another two arrows he brings down the two powerful protectors of 
Srutayush’s chariot wheels. He despatches Satyadeva and Satya to 
Yamaloka. Of immeasurable soul, Bhima has Ketumat’s life with a mad 
flurry of arrow and spear. Supported by a force of many thousands, the 
Kshatriyas of the Kalinga country rise in incensed froth to confront the 
raging Bhima. 

With spears and maces, swords and battle-axes, hundreds upon hundreds 
of the Kalingas besiege Bhima. Grandly foiling their torrents of missiles, 
the mighty one takes up his mace and again leaps from his chariot. 

Bhima on his fresh rampage kills another seven hundred brave 
Kshatriyas; that Parantapa sends two thousand more Kalingas to their death. 
Ah, truly wonderful, even by his lofty norm, is his feat. Thus does Bhima of 
awesome prowess fell teeming bands of the Kalingas. 

Elephants deprived of their riders by Bhima, and stricken with arrows, 
blunder frenetically across the battlefield, trampling their own men, with 
deafening roars, like masses of clouds driven by the wind. Mahabaho 
Bhima, sword in hand, triumphantly and stridently blows his conch. 

And that blast makes the Kalinga forces tremble, all of them absolutely 
panic-stricken. The warriors and the animals quake in terror for Bhima 
charges down many paths, impetuously, in every direction, like a prince of 
tuskers, roaring, leaping high time and again. His enemies are flung into a 
trance. 

The Kalinga army shudders in dread of Bhima like a vast lake agitated 
by a great crocodile. And seeing Bhima’s wondrous feats, the Kalinga 
forces flee in all directions. When they rally again, the Pandava Senapati 
Dhrishtadyumna, Bhaarata, orders his own troops to fight. 


Obeying their Senapati, many warriors of the Pandava army led by 
Sikhandin surge towards Bhima with their akshauhinis of consummate 
chariots. Dharmaraja Yudhishtira follows them with a grand elephant force 
the colour of clouds. Exhorting his men, the son of Prishata, surrounded by 
sO many great warriors, takes upon himself the protection of one of Bhima’s 
flanks. 

There exists no one on earth who is more cherished by the prince of the 
Panchalas than Bhima and Satyaki; indeed he values them more highly than 
his life. As that Parantapa, the son of Prishata, watches Mahabaho Bhima 
rampaging among the Kalingas, he roars in exultation. He blows his conch 
and lets out a leonine roar. And Bhima, seeing the red standard of 
Dhrishtadyumna’s chariot decked with gold and yoked with horses white as 
pigeons, is reassured. Soon enough he remounts his own chariot again. 

Dhrishtadyumna of immeasurable soul advances to rescue Bhima 
beleaguered by the Kalingas. And both those Kshatriyas, Dhrishtadyumna 
and Bhima, of pulsating tejas, noticing Satyaki at a distance, furiously fall 
upon the Kalingas. 

And that bull among men, Satyaki Yuyudhana, grandson of Sini, 
foremost of victorious warriors, swiftly rides to defend the flanks of Bhima 
and Prishata’s son. Bow in hand, fighting ferociously, he devastates the 
enemy’s ranks. Bhima lets flow a crimson river, a bloody current floating 
the shredded flesh of the Kalinga fighting men. 

Beholding Bhima the men cry out, “This is Yama himself fighting 
against the Kalingas in Bhima’s form!” Hearing those cries, himself 
encircled by armed adversaries, Bhishma breaks free of his encirclement 
and rides at Bhima. 

Satyaki and Bhima, and Dhrishtadyumna rush at Bhishma’s silver 
chariot decked with gold. And all of them surround Ganga’s son and pierce 
him, each with three scathing barbs. 

Bhishma pierces each of those mighty archers with three straight shafts. 
And checking those maharathas with thousands of arrows, loosed in 
moments, he kills Bhima’s horses. Resplendent with golden armour and 
filled with tejas, Bhima stands firm on that horseless chariot and launches a 
spear at Bhishma’s chariot, which the Pitamaha cleaves in two before it can 
reach him. 

Bhima seizes a mighty mace made of Saikya iron and leaps down from 
his chariot. Dhrishtadyumna swiftly takes him into his own chariot and 


carries him to safety in plain view of all the soldiers. 

Satyaki kills Bhishma’s sarathy with a single arrow, and Bhishma is 
borne away from the battlefield by his horses with the speed of the wind. 
Bhima remains in the midst of his men, burning like a mighty fire 
consuming dry grass as he kills all the Kalingas. None of your warriors, 
Bharatarishabha, dare to oppose him. 

And revered by the Panchalas and the Matsyas, he embraces 
Dhrishtadyumna and then Satyaki. In the presence of Dhrishtadyumna, 
Satyaki, tiger among the Yadus, of unthwarted prowess, gladdens Bhima by 
saying, “By our good fortune the king of the Kalingas, and his son Ketumat, 
and their kinsman Sakradeva, indeed, all the Kalingas, have been killed. 
With the strength of your arms alone, the vast legions of the Kalingas 
teeming with elephants, horses and chariots, noble Kshatriyas, and brave 
fighting men, have been decimated.” 

Having said this, the long-armed grandson of Sini, that Parantapa, 
climbs back into his chariot and embraces the son of Pandu. That maharatha 
begins to slaughter your forces vigorously augmenting Bhima’s efforts.’ 


CANTO 55 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


elephants, horses, horsemen and foot-soldiers and cavalry continues, 
shtadyumna engages with the three maharathas, Drona’s son, Salya, 
and the high-souled Kripa. 

And the valiant heir of the king of Panchala kills the celebrated steeds of 
Drona’s son with a storm of arrows. Deprived of his animals, Aswatthaman 
climbs into Salya’s chariot and showers him with his shafts. 

Seeing Dhrishtadyumna battling Aswatthaman, the son of Subhadra 
rushes forward, loosing a tide of fire. He pierces Salya with twenty-five 
arrows, Kripa with nine, and Aswatthaman with eight. Drona’s son 
retaliates, striking Arjuna’s son with a fusillade of winged shafts; Salya 
stabs him with twelve, and Kripa with three fierce barbs. 

Your grandson Lakshmana storms at Abhimanyu and a duel between 
them ensues. Duryodhana’s vehement son covers Abhimanyu in a fury of 
arrows. His feat, O king, appears truly wonderful! 

The magnificent Abhimanyu blithely shoots five hundred arrows at his 
cousin, in a flash. Lakshmana responds by carving up his adversary’s bow 
in his hands, seeing which all the warriors send up a loud shout. That 
Parantapa, the son of Subhadra, discards his broken bow and seizes up 
another strong one. 

The two young bulls among men defy each other ferociously, drawing 
rich, royal blood. Seeing his powerful son afflicted by Abhimanyu, 
Duryodhana himself rides to where the cousins fight feverishly. All the 
enemy kings surround the son of Arjuna with hosts of chariots. Invincible in 
battle and equal to Krishna himself in prowess, that resplendent Kshatriya 
remains unperturbed. Seeing Subhadra’s son in the midst of fierce fighting, 
Arjuna rushes to rescue him. The kings allied to the Kauravas, led by 
Bhishma and Drona, with their chariots, elephants and horses, briskly attack 
Savyasachin. 

A pall of dust, raised by foot-soldiers and horsemen, horses and chariots, 
obscures the sky. Coming within range of Arjuna’s arrows, those thousands 


S anjaya says, ‘As the morning passes, and the destruction of chariots, 
Dhri 


of elephants and hundreds of kings cannot advance. All the creatures there 
wail loudly and darkness cloaks every direction. 

The violation of the Kauravas assumes a fierce and dreadful mien. 
Neither the sky nor the sun, nor any of the cardinal points of the earth can 
be distinguished for Arjuna’s tempest of arrows. 

Many elephants have the standards cut down from their backs, and many 
maharathas their horses killed. Some commanders of chariot akshauhinis 
can be seen wandering purposelessly on foot, bereft of their chariots. And 
other maharathas, their arms graced with angadas, roam aimlessly with their 
weapons. 

Fearing Arjuna, riders of horses and elephants abandon their beasts, and 
flee in all directions. Kings are felled by Arjuna’s arrows or plunge to the 
ground from chariots and elephants and steeds. With his terrible volleys, 
Arjuna, fierce-faced, dissevers the upraised arms of warriors grasping 
maces and swords, or spears, quivers, arrows, bows, hooks, or standards. 

Bhaarata, we see spiked maces shattered, and mallets, and bearded 
shafts, and short arrows, and swords, and sharp battle-axes, and spears and 
shields smashed into shards, and coats of mail and standards, and other 
weapons of all kinds, and parasols furnished with golden staves, and iron 
goads, and whips, and traces strewn across the battlefield in stacks. 

There is no warrior who can face Arjuna in battle; whoever advances 
against him is killed. When all your fighting men scatter, Arjuna and 
Krishna blow their conches. 

Bhishma sees the routed host and smilingly addresses the brave son of 
Bharadwaja, “The daunting, with Krishna in his chariot, frustrates all our 
forces. He cannot be overpowered today by any means; today he is like 
Siva at the end of the yuga and we cannot rally our legions, vast though 
they be. 

Look how our forces scatter. The setting sun is about to reach that best 
of mountains, the sunset mountain Asta. Bharatarishabha, I think that the 
hour has come for us to withdraw our army. Our warriors are weary and 
panic-stricken and cannot fight anymore.” 

Having said this to Acharya Drona, Maharatha Bhishma orders the 
retreat of your army. And thus at nightfall, both sides withdraw.’ 


CANTO 56 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘With the arrival of dawn, Parantapa Bhishma gives the 
order for the Kaurava army to prepare for battle. The son of Shantanu, 
eager for the victory of your sons, forms the Garuda vyuha. 

And on the beak of that Garuda is Bhishma himself. Its two eyes are 
Drona and Kritavarman of Satwata’s race. The famed Aswatthaman and 
Kripa, supported by the Trigartas, the Matsyas, the Kekayas, and the 
Vatadhanas, stand at its head. Bhurisravas and Sala, and Salya and 
Bhagadatta, and the Madrakas, the Sindhu-Souviras, and the Pancha- 
Noadas, together with Jayadratha, are placed on its neck. 

And upon its back is Duryodhana with his followers. Vinda and 
Anuvinda of Avanti, and the Kambojas with the Sakas, and the Surasenas, 
Rajan, form its tail. The Magadhas and the Kalingas, with all the tribes of 
the Daserakas, encased in mail, form the vyuha’s the right wing. And the 
Karushas, the Vikunjas, the Mundas, and the Kaundivrishas, with 
Brihadbala, are its left wing. 

Arjuna, seeing this vyuha, forms another with Dhrishtadyumna to 
oppose it. The son of Pandu forms the commanding crescent moon vyuha. 

Surrounded by kings of many lands, abundantly armed, stationed on the 
right horn, Bhima dazzles. Beside him are those maharathas Virata and 
Drupada; next to them is Nila bearing deadly weapons. After Nila stands 
the maharatha Dhrishtaketu, surrounded by the Chedis, the Kasis, the 
Karushas, and the Pauravas. 

Dhrishtadyumna, and Sikhandin, with the Panchalas and_ the 
Prabhadrakas, supported by other forces, are stationed in the centre, 
Bhaarata, ready for battle. And there also stands Yudhishtira Dharmaraja 
surrounded by his akshauhini of elephants. Next to him are Satyaki and the 
five sons of Draupadi. Immediately beyond is Iravan. After these are 
Bhima’s son Ghatotkacha and those maharathas, the Kekayas. 

On the left horn of that vyuha stands that best of men, he whom 
Janardana, the preserver of the Universe, protects. It is thus that the 


Pandavas form their powerful vyuha to counter and destroy your sons and 
their allies. 

Conches boom and the war between your forces and those of the enemy 
begins again. Chariots and elephants charge one another and blur on grim 
Kurukshetra. Hordes of elephants and hosts of chariots can be seen 
everywhere rushing wildly forward to effect the destruction of the enemy. 

The roar of the chariots swiftly moving to either join the general fray or 
to fight individually is fused with the thunder of drumbeats. The shouts and 
yells of the dauntless warriors on both sides as they cut each other down 
reaches the very heavens.’ 


CANTO 57 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘After the two armies have been disposed in battle 

formations, maharatha Arjuna wreaks great carnage on_ the 
commanders of the enemy’s hosts of chariots with his arrows. Despite being 
slaughtered by him, who is truly like Siva at the end of the yuga, the 
Dhartarashtras persevere to fight the Pandavas. 

Wanting to win blazing glory, unrelenting and absorbed in their task, 
scorning death, they break the Pandava ranks in many places and are also 
themselves broken. In places, Pandava and the Kaurava troops both briefly 
scatter and flee. 

Nothing can be distinguished. A swirling dust arises and shrouds the 
very sun. The cardinal and subsidiary directions are a haze; the warriors are 
guided only by the indications of colours, passwords, names and tribal 
distinctions. Protected by great Drona, the vyuha of the Kauravas remains 
whole and steadfast. So also the formidable Pandava vyuha holds firm, 
defended by Arjuna and Bhima. 

Chariots and elephants, in close ranks, and hordes of fighting men of 
both the armies, clash vigorously. In that savage fight, riders on horses kill 
one another with polished swords and long spears. Maharathas cut each 
other down with golden-winged arrows. And elephant-riders mow down 
others with broad-headed shafts and lances. 

Hosts of doughty foot-soldiers cheerfully slaughter others with short 
arrows and battle-axes. Maharathas kill elephants and their riders; and are 
in turn slain by the latter. Bharatarishabha, the horseman fells the maharatha 
with his spear, and is in turn flung down to the ground by the chariot 
warrior. In both the armies, the foot-soldier kills the maharatha only to be 
razed by another rathika. Elephant-riders fell horse-riders, and horse-riders 
fell warriors on the backs of elephants. 

All this seems all too awesome and so very bloody. Roars and screams 
of slayer and slain thicken the air and men quit their bodies in their 
thousands, each moment, and the air is a denseness of the shocked or 
bemused spirits of fighting men. 


Everywhere foot-soldiers, elephant-riders and horse-riders despatch 
each other; and strewn with broken standards and bows, spears and 
housings of elephants, costly shawls and feathered barbs, maces and spiked 
clubs, kampanas and arrows, mottled coats of mail and kunapas, iron hooks, 
and polished swords, and golden winged shafts, the gore-slicked battlefield 
shines as if with floral wreaths. 

The earth, mired with chunks of hewn off flesh and spilt blood, becomes 
impassable with the corpses of men and horses and elephants killed in that 
most dreadful war. Drenched with human blood, the dust settles, and the 
cardinal points become perfectly clear once again. Many headless bodies 
rise up in macabre pageant to intimate the end of the world. And in that fell 
and gruesome battle, maharathas can be seen escaping in all directions. 

Then Bhishma and Drona, and Jayadratha, king of the Sindhus, and 
Purumitra, and Vikarna, and Sakuni the son of Subala, all leonine and 
invincible in battle, break through the ranks of the Pandavas. Bhima and 
Ghatotkacha, and Satyaki, and Chekitana, and the sons of Draupadi, 
supported by their allies, begin grinding down your forces and your sons, 
like the Devas razing the Danavas. 

And those bulls among Kshatriyas, smiting one another, are awesome to 
behold; covered in blood, dripping blood, they glow like kinsukas. The 
foremost warriors of both armies, striking down their opponents, look like 
the luminous planets in the sky. 

Your son Duryodhana, supported by a thousand chariots, storms at the 
Pandavas and Ghatotkacha, the Rakshasa. The Pandavas, with a great host 
of fighting men, charge the Parantapas Bhishma and Drona. 

The diadem-decked Arjuna furiously attacks all the foremost among the 
enemy kings. Abhimanyu and Satyaki ride against the forces of Subala’s 
son Sakuni. A bloodthirsty encounter breaks out again between the two 
sides both of whom yearn for victory, a battle that makes one’s hair stand on 
end.’ 


CANTO 38 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Then those kings, seeing Arjuna in battle, furiously hem 

him round with thousands of chariots and shroud him with a dark and 
dense cloud of arrows. And they hurl shining spears, and maces, and spiked 
clubs, and feathered barbs and battle-axes, and mallets and bludgeons at his 
chariot — braids of eerie lighting flashing. 

With golden shafts Arjuna thwarts that shower of weapons coursing 
towards him like a flight of locusts. Watching the superhuman lightness of 
that hand, the Devas, the Danavas, the Gandharvas, the Pisachas, the 
Uragas and the Rakshasas cry out: “Magnificent, truly magnificent!” 

The daring Gandharas, led by Subala’s son with a vast force, encircle 
Satyaki and Abhimanyu. With diverse astras, Sakuni’s warriors shatter the 
chariot of the Vrishni hero. Satyaki abandons his chariot and swiftly mounts 
Abhimanyu’s. The two begin to slaughter the army of Subala’s son. 

Drona and Bhishma steadily dwindle the forces of Yudhishtira 
Dharmaraja with jagged shafts furnished with the feathers of the kanka bird. 
The son of Yudhishtira and his uncles, Madri’s twins, now savagely raze 
Drona’s legions in plain sight of both vast armies. That hair-raising battle 
can be likened to the one between the Devas and the Asuras in ancient 
times. 

Bhima and Ghatotkacha achieve stupendous feats; until, riding up in 
fury, Duryodhana thwarts them both. We see Hidimbi’s son displaying his 
prowess and even transcending his father. Enraged, Bhima _ shoots 
Duryodhana squarely through his chest, smiling the while. Duryodhana 
slumps onto the floor of his chariot and faints. His charioteer quickly bears 
him away to safety, and the forces supporting Duryodhana break rank and 
scatter. 

Pursuing them, Bhima hunts the fleeing Kaurava army with inexorable 
archery. 

Even before the eyes of Drona and Bhishma, blazing Dhrishtadyumna, 
foremost of warriors, thins their army with stunning flurries from his great 
bow. The Acharya and the Pitamaha together cannot stop your son’s host 


from breaking ranks and fleeing from the terror that the Panchala prince 
brings. 

When those thousands of maharathas have fled in all directions, 
Subhadra’s son and Satyaki, that bull of Sini’s race, together in the same 
chariot, attack the army of Subala’s son. And Sini’s grandson and that bull 
of the Kuru vamsa are radiant like the sun and the moon together in the sky 
after the last lunation of the dark fortnight. 

Arjuna yet furiously rains down his remitless arrow storms on your 
army in mighty cloudbursts. Trembling like children, the Kaurava army 
flees his terror and his slaughter. Seeing their army run from battle, the 
enraged Bhishma and Drona move to stop its retreat. 

Duryodhana himself comforts the fighting men and prevents a further 
flight of his unnerved forces. All the maharathas stop when they see your 
son. The common soldiers, seeing them halt, stop of their own accord; 
ashamed and wanting to display their courage to one another, Rajan, your 
army rallies like the surging sea at moonrise. 

Seeing his legions revive, Duryodhana quickly rides upto Bhishma and 
says, “Pitamaha, while you are alive, and Drona, master of weapons, with 
Aswatthama and all our other friends, still alive, and that mighty archer 
Kripa, it is dishonourable that my army should take flight. 

The Pandavas are not any match for you or for Drona, or for Drona’s 
son, or for Kripa. Pitamaha, you are favouring the sons of Pandu by 
disregarding this massacre of my army. You should have told me before this 
war began that you will not fight against the Pandavas. 

Had you and Drona said this, I would have reflected upon the course I 
should pursue with Karna. If I do not deserve to be abandoned by you both 
in battle, O bulls among men, fight with your full powers.” 

Hearing these words, Bhishma laughs and, rolling his eyes in anger, says 
to your son, “Many a time, I spoke to you in the interest of your good. As 
long as Krishna is with them, the Pandavas are invincible even against the 
Devas. 

However, what my age and strength permit, best of kings, I will do in 
this war. With your kinsmen, witness it today! In the sight of all, single- 
handedly I will contain the sons of Pandu as they lead their forces with all 
their kin. I will kill ten thousands of their men each day.” 

Thus addressed by Bhishma, your son has conches blown and drums 
beaten in joy. And the Pandavas also, hearing that loud uproar, blow their 


conches, and sound their drums and cymbals.’ 


CANTO 59 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


words of my son, what, Sanjaya, does Bhishma do to the sons of 
Pandu; what do the Panchalas do to the Pitamaha? Tell me all, O 
Sanjaya.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘After the passing of that morning, as the sun moves on 
his westward course, and after the high-souled Pandavas are victorious, 
Bhishma, knower of every nuance of dharma, protected by a vast force and 
by all your sons, rides on his ratha yoked to the swiftest horses towards the 
Pandava army. 

As a result of your sinful policy, O king, a horrific battle breaks out 
between us and the Pandavas. The twang of bows and the flapping of 
bowstrings against leather gloves, unite to make a tumult like the cracking 
of mountains. 

“Stay! Watch me! Know this one! Turn back! Stand! I await you— 
strike!” These roars resound everywhere. And the sounds of tumbling 
golden coats of mail, of crowns and diadems, and of standards, resemble the 
clatter of stones onto a great bed of rock. Heads and arms decked with 
ornaments fall by the thousands upon the field of the awful sacrifice of 
living men. 

Some warriors, with heads severed from their bodies, continue to stand, 
weapons in hand or armed with drawn bows. Soon a ghastly turbulent river 
of blood flows, choked with lifeless dismembered men and hewn limbs, and 
the corpses of elephants its jutting rocks. It flows from the bodies of horses, 
men, and elephants, delighting swarming raucous vultures and jackals, and 
it races towards the ocean of the next world. A war such as this one, Rajan, 
fought between your sons and the Pandavas, has never been seen or heard 
before. 

The bodies of slain soldiers render the field impassable for chariots. And 
dead elephants lying on the ground make Kurukshetra appear to be covered 
with the peaks of blue hills. And, ah, the battleground, strewn with 


[sorts of says, ‘After his dreadful vow made when stirred by the 


multicoloured coats of mail and turbans, is also as beautiful as an autumn 
sky. 

Some fighting men, though sorely wounded, can be seen charging 
joyfully and proudly against the enemy. Many fallen on the field, cry out, 
“O father, O brother, O friend, O kinsman, O companion, O uncle, do not 
abandon me!” Others shout, “Come! Come back! Why are you frightened? 
Where do you go? I stand firm in battle, do not be afraid.” 

In that deathly conflict, Bhishma, with bow drawn to a circle, looses 
astras like deadly snakes. Raining down a continuous tempest of arrows in 
all directions, that hero of rigid vows strikes the Pandava maharathas 
naming each one. Displaying his unearthly skill, and dancing as it were 
along the path of his chariot, he appears to be present everywhere, like an 
ubiquitous circle of fire. 

The Pandavas, along with the Srinjayas, behold that lone Kshatriya as 
multiplied a thousand-fold; all who are there regard Bhishma as having 
multiplied himself with maya. Having seen him now in the east, the next 
moment they see him in the west. Having seen him in the north, the next 
instant they see him in the south. Thus the son of Ganga fights that war. 
None among the Pandavas is able to even gaze upon him. They see only the 
bankless, seamless blaze of arrows radiating from his bow. 

Valiant warriors, seeing him butcher their ranks, lament loudly. And, 
kings in thousands attempt to face the Pitamaha, who seems to fly over the 
field in a superhuman way, falling into the fire, the conflagration that is the 
enraged Bhishma, like senseless insects that fly into a flame, only to be 
devoured. 

Not a single shaft of that warrior is futile; each one claims a life, felling 
men, elephants and horses without favour. With a single arrow he kills a 
mighty tusker like a hill being riven by the Vajra. Another single shaft does 
to bring down two or three armoured elephant-riders standing together. 

Whoever approaches Bhishma, that tiger among tigers among men, is 
seen for but a moment before slumping to the ground. And being 
annihilated by Bhishma of incomparable prowess, that vast host of 
Yudhishtira Dharmaraja scatters in all directions. Assailed by Bhishma’s 
simoom of arrows, the immense Pandava army trembles despite the 
presence of Krishna and Arjuna. 

The gallant efforts of the heroic leaders of the Pandava army cannot 
check the flight of the maharathas afflicted by Bhishma’s volleys; the 


prowess that routs this great legion equals that of Indra himself. 
Yudhishtira’s army is so completely dispersed, that no two men can be seen 
together. 

Chariots and elephants and horses are pierced all over, and standards 
and shafts of chariots strewn across the field. The Pandava forces cry out in 
anguish. The father strikes the son and the son strikes the father; and friend 
challenges the dearest of friends to battle to death as if goaded by destiny. 

Many of the Pandava allies flee, dishevelled and distraught, flinging off 
their coats of mail. Loudly, dismally, the Pandava army wails and screams 
as it witnesses the best of its maharathas appearing as bewildered as a herd 
of cows lost in a terrible jungle. 

Krishna, observing the rout of the army, stops the chariot and says to 
Arjuna, “The hour you awaited has arrived, Partha. Strike Bhishma now 
before you are lost. Remember, in an assembly of kings you said, ‘I will 
slay all the warriors of Dhritarashtra’s sons, headed by Bhishma and Drona; 
why, I will not leave a single man who fights against me alive.’ 

Son of Kunti, Parantapa, make those words true. Bibhatsu, look at your 
legions being routed on all sides. Seeing Bhishma looking like Rudra 
himself with open maw, watch how Yudhishtira’s allies flee. Terrified they 
run, like weaker beasts on seeing the lion.” 

Arjuna replies, “Plunging through this sea of the hostile host, drive the 
horses to where Bhishma stands. I will overwhelm that invincible warrior, 
the revered Kuru Pitamaha.” 

Krishna drives his silvery horses to where Bhishma’s chariot stands, 
chariot that shines like the sun, impossible to even gaze upon. Seeing 
Mahabaho Arjuna charging at Bhishma, the mighty army of Yudhishtira 
rallies for battle. 

Bhishma, that foremost of Kuru warriors, roars like ten lions, and 
swiftly shrouds Arjuna’s chariot with a gale of arrows. In a moment, that 
chariot, with standard and charioteer, becomes invisible. Patiently, 
fearlessly, Krishna guides his horses wounded by Bhishma’s barbs. And 
Arjuna takes up his celestial bow, whose twang resembles the roar of 
thunderclouds, and cleaves Bhishma’s bow with a clutch of jagged shafts. 

The Pitamaha takes up another and strings it in a flash; with his two 
hands, he stretches that bow whose reverberations are like thunder. But 
Arjuna, excited with wrath, severs that bow as well. 


The son of Shantanu applauds Arjuna, saying, “Excellent, Mahabaho, 
son of Pandu! Magnificent Dhananjaya, such a marvellous feat is truly 
worthy of you. I am pleased with you. Fight hard against me.” 

Having praised Arjuna, Bhishma seizes up another great bow and 
unleashes a fiercer storm on Arjuna’s ratha. Krishna displays divine skill 
guiding that chariot in sharp, impossible circles, frustrating Bhishma’s 
transcendent archery. But tireless Bhishma soon strikes both Krishna and 
Arjuna with subtle, whetted barbs. And pierced by those shafts, those two 
tigers among men look like two roaring bulls with the gashes of horns on 
their bodies. 

In high dudgeon, Bhishma covers the two Krishnas from all sides with 
an unprecedented fusillade, which makes Krishna shiver. Laughing loudly, 
Bhishma fills even blue Krishna with wonder. 

Mahabaho Krishna contrasts the prowess of Bhishma with the mildness 
of Arjuna; he sees Bhishma loosing incessant firestorms of arrows, looking 
like the all-consuming sun himself in the midst of the two contending 
armies. And marking that that Kshatriya ancient was killing the best of 
Yudhishtira’s warriors, bringing havoc to the legions as if Pralaya had 
arrived, Kesava of the fathomless soul, slayer of enemy hosts, thinking that 
Yudhishtira’s army will be annihilated, cannot bear what he sees. 

He thinks, “In a single day this Bhishma can kill all the Daityas and the 
Danavas. How easily then will he crush the sons of Pandu with their forces 
and allies. The vast Pandava army is again being scattered. And the 
Kauravas, seeing the Somakas routed, fight in high spirits, much to 
Bhishma’s delight. 

Protected by my kavacha, I will stop Bhishma today for the sake of the 
Pandavas. I will lighten their burden. As for Arjuna, though struck with 
keen shafts, he still hesitates, out of his reverence for Bhishma.” 

While Krishna thus reflects, Bhishma again looses a deep and violent 
swarm of arrows at Arjuna’s chariot. All the cardinal directions are 
completely shrouded. And neither the sky nor the quarters nor the earth nor 
the brilliant sun can be seen. The gusts of winds that blow are mixed with 
smoke, and all the points of the compass are agitated. 

And Drona, and Vikarna, and Jayadratha, and Bhurisravas, and 
Kritavarman, and Kripa, and Srutayush and the ruler of the Amvashtas and 
Vinda and Anuvinda, Sudakshina and the rulers of the western kingdoms, 


and the tribes of the Sauviras, the Vasatis, and the Kshudrakas, and the 
Malavas, swiftly advance towards Kiritin, at Bhishma’s command. 

The grandson of Sini sees that Arjuna is surrounded by hundreds of 
horses and foot-soldiers, chariots and colossal elephants. Seeing both 
Krishna and Arjuna encircled, Satyaki rides swiftly forward. Coming to 
Arjuna’s side like Vishnu to the aid of Indra, that noblest archer charges the 
gathered enemy. 

In grand exhilaration, he addresses Yudhishtira’s host of fighting men 
who, cowed by Bhishma, their elephants, steeds, chariots and standards 
slain, mangled and shattered, roaring, “Brave Kshatriyas, where do you go? 
This is not the dharma of the righteous as proclaimed by the ancients. 
Excellent heroes, do not break your vows. Keep your Kshatriya dharma!” 

Unable to bear the flight of the army, marking the mildness with which 
Arjuna fights, and seeing Bhishma’s forceful exertions, and the Kauravas 
rushing in from all sides, Krishna, younger brother of Vasava, and protector 
of all the Dasarhas, cries to the intrepid and famed Satyaki, saying, “O hero 
of Sini’s race, let they who retreat go. And let they who remain, let them 
also flee. 

I will fling Bhishma down from his chariot, and vanquish Drona, too, 
and all their followers. No one in the Kaurava legions will escape my wrath. 
I will kill Bhishma of high vows with my Sudarshana. Killing those two 
greatest of maharathas, Bhishma and Drona, and their forces, O my Satyaki, 
I will please Arjuna and Yudhishtira, and Bhima, and the twin Aswins. And 
killing all the sons of Dhritarashtra and all their allies, I will joyfully deliver 
unto king Ajatashatru a kingdom today.” 

Saying this, Vasudeva’s son releases the reins of his horses, leaps off the 
chariot, and materialises over his right hand his beautiful chakra whirling, 
sharp as a razor, as radiant as the sun, with the force of a thousand 
thunderbolts. Making the earth tremble under his step, Krishna runs towards 
Bhishma. 

And that Parantapa, the younger brother of Indra, charges Bhishma in 
the midst of his forces, like a lion wanting to kill a prince of elephants 
blinded with fury, proudly awaiting the attack. The fringes of Krishna’s 
yellow pitambara robe flutter in the air like a lightning-charged cloud in the 
sky. 

That lotus-like Sudarsana, having for its stalk the beautiful arm of 
Saurin, is as beautiful as the primeval lotus, bright as the morning sun, 


which springs from the navel of Vishnu Padmanabha. Krishna’s anger is the 
morning sun that makes that lotus sway. And the exquisite leaves of that 
lotus are as sharp as a dagger’s edge. 

Krishna’s body is the beautiful lake, and his right hand the stalk that, 
springing from it, holds the shining lotus. Seeing him, in wrath and roaring 
loudly, armed with that chakra, all creatures howl piercingly, thinking that 
the destruction of the Kauravas is imminent. With his chakra, Krishna looks 
like the Samvarta fire that appears at the end of the yuga to consume the 
world. And the preceptor of the universe blazes like a fierce comet risen to 
consume all creatures. 

Seeing that Avatara advancing with the Sudarsana, Bhishma standing in 
his chariot, bow and arrow in hand, cries fearlessly, “Come, come, Lord of 
the Devas, you who dwell in all the universe! I bow to you, you who are 
armed with mace, sword and Saranga. 

Lord of the universe, cast me down from this chariot, O you who are the 
refuge of all creatures in this war. Krishna, were I to be slain here by you, 
great will be my fortune both in this world and the next. You show me 
exalted regard, Lord of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas. My fame will be 
celebrated in all the three worlds.” 

Hearing Shantanu’s son, Krishna charges him and says, “You are the 
cause of this great slaughter on earth. You will see Duryodhana killed today. 
A wise minister who walks the path of dharma must restrain a king addicted 
to the evil of gambling. That despicable one who transgresses dharma 
should be abandoned as one whose intelligence has been led astray by 
destiny.” 

Hearing this, the royal Bhishma says to the Lord of the Yadavas, 
“Destiny is all powerful. The Yadavas abandoned Kamsa for their own 
good. I said this to Dhritarashtra but he paid no heed. Destiny perverts the 
listener’s understanding and, to his own detriment, he cannot receive good 
advice.” 

Meanwhile, leaping off his chariot, Mahabaho Arjuna runs towards 
Krishna and seizes him by his two hands. That supreme deity is incensed, 
and, though seized, he forcibly drags Jishnu after him, like a tempest 
bearing away a single tree. The high-souled Arjuna forcefully holds 
Krishna’s feet, as he rushes towards Bhishma, and succeeds, Rajan, in 
stopping him with great difficulty at the tenth step. 


And when Krishna halts, bedecked with a beautiful gold garland, Arjuna 
joyfully bows down to him and says, “Subdue your anger. You are the 
refuge of the Pandavas, O Kesava. I swear by my sons and my brothers that 
I will not retreat from what I have pledged myself to. Krishna, at your 
command I will annihilate the Kauravas.” 

Hearing Arjuna’s vow, Krishna grows calm; he is gratified. And devoted 
to the cause of that most excellent Kuru, he once more mounts his chariot, 
still armed with his chakra. And that Parantapa takes up the abandoned 
reins, and blowing on his conch the Panchajanya, he fills all of the earth and 
the sky with its blast. 

Seeing Krishna, decked with necklace and angada and earrings, with 
curling eyelashes coated with dust, and with teeth of perfect whiteness, take 
up his conch again, the Kuru heroes cry out stridently. The clash of cymbals 
and drums, and the thunder of chariot wheels and the clatter of smaller 
drums, mingle with those leonine shouts to become a fierce uproar. And the 
twang of Arjuna’s Gandiva, like the roll of thunder, fills the sky and all the 
quarters of the earth. Its burning shafts flare out in all directions. 

The Kaurava king, with a vast force, along with Bhishma and 
Bhurisravas, arrows in hand, resembling a comet risen to consume a 
constellation, dashes against him. Bhurisravas hurls seven spears with 
wings of gold at Arjuna, while Duryodhana flings a brutal lance; Salya 
launches a mace, and Bhishma looses an astra. 

Arjuna stops Bhurisravas’s spears with seven shafts, and cleaves the 
lance hurled by Duryodhana with another. He thwarts the blazing pike, as 
luminous as lightning, cast by Bhishma, and the mace of the ruler of the 
Madras, with two mighty arrows of his own. 

Then drawing with both hands and with great energy his magnificent 
Gandiva, he invokes with fitting mantras the awesome Mahendra astra to 
appear in the sky. With it, that maharatha, decked with diadem and a 
garland of gold, produces an intense storm of flaming arrows that frustrates 
the Kaurava host. 

Those shafts from Arjuna’s bow sever arms, bows, standard-tops, and 
chariots; they pierce the bodies of the enemy kings and their imposing 
tuskers and horses. Arjuna fills the cardinal and subsidiary directions with 
his awe-inspiring arrows and makes the hearts of his adversaries tremble 
with the twang of Gandiva. 


The blast of conches, the beat of drums and the sonorous rumbling of 
chariots are silenced by the resonance of the Gandiva. Following that 
reverberation, king Virata and other Kshatriyas, and the brave Drupada, the 
king of the Panchalas, all joyfully advance towards Arjuna. 

All your warriors are fearful and become rooted to where they stand 
when they hear the Gandiva. None dare to venture to the place from where 
the sound springs. In that terrific war of kings, valiant warriors are killed 
along with maharathas and their sarathies. And elephants with resplendent 
golden howdahs and beautiful standards, pierced with broad-headed shafts, 
fall dead, their bodies truncated by Arjuna. 

Struck by Partha’s winged wide shafts, the standards of many kings 
stationed at the heads of their yantras and Indrajalas are cut down. Hordes 
of foot-soldiers and maharathas, and horses and elephants, fall rapidly on 
the battleground, their limbs paralysed, or themselves killed, by Arjuna’s 
arrows. 

Rajan, many fighting men have their armour and bodies perforated by 
the all-powerful Mahindra astra. And with his deadly shafts, Arjuna makes 
a vile river of blood course across the battlefield, formed by the twisted 
bodies of the warriors, with their fat as its froth. The bodies of slain 
elephants and horses form its banks. 

Its mire consists of the entrails, the marrow, and the flesh of men, while 
Rakshasas are the majestic trees on its banks. And a profusion of human 
skulls, covered with hair, forms its floating morass; heaps of human bodies, 
forming its sandbanks, cause the current to flow in a thousand directions. 
The coats of mail strewn all over form its hard pebbles. 

Its banks are infested with jackals and wolves, cranes and vultures, 
crowds of Rakshasas and Pisachas, and packs of hyenas. And they that are 
alive gaze upon that terrible river of fat, marrow and blood, caused by 
Arjuna’s arrows, the river that embodies man’s cruelty, like the great 
Vaitarani. 

Seeing those outstanding warriors of the Kaurava army decimated by 
Phalguni, the Chedis, the Panchalas, the Karushas, the Matsyas, and all the 
Pandava allies roar jubilantly in unison to terrify the Kaurava fighting men. 
Their triumphant shouts proclaim the victory of Arjuna, who razes the 
Kaurava legions, though they are protected and led by the noblest men, the 
greatest maharathas, mighty leaders of akshauhinis; Arjuna terrifies them 
like a lion frightens herds of small animals. 


And then the bearer of Gandiva himself and Krishna roar in delight. The 
Kauravas, with Bhishma, and Drona and Duryodhana and Bahlika, are 
savagely wounded by Arjuna’s weapons. Watching the setting sun, and 
seeing the irresistible Aindrastra spread out as if to invite the end of the 
yuga, they withdraw their forces for the night and rest. 

Famed for crushing his enemies, the victorious Arjuna, having achieved 
a great feat, seeing the sun turn red as dusk approaches, also retires with his 
brothers to their camp. 

Then when darkness is about to descend, there arises a terrible lament in 
the Kaurava camp. And all cry, “In today’s battle Arjuna has killed ten 
thousand maharathas and seven hundred elephants! All the forces of the 
western kingdoms, and all the tribes of the Sauviras, and the Kshudrakas 
and the Malavas, have been annihilated. Arjuna has achieved a mighty feat 
indeed. There is no other who could do this. 

Srutayush, the ruler of the Amvashtas, and Durmarshana, and 
Chitrasena, and Drona, and Kripa, and the ruler of the Sindhus, and 
Bahlika, and Bhurisravas, and Salya, and Sala, and other warriors united in 
hundreds, along with Bhishma himself, have been defeated today by the 
angry son of Pritha, Arjuna, that most wondrous of warriors.” 

Talking thus among themselves, Bhaarata, all your soldiers leave the 
battlefield and enter their tents. Petrified by Kiritin, your warriors enter their 
beautiful tents illuminated by countless torches and lamps.’ 


CANTO 60 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Next morning, the incensed Bhishma, supported by an 

enormous force, at the head of the Bhaarata army, advances against the 
enemy. And Drona and Duryodhana and Bahlika, and also Durmarshana 
and Chitrasena, the mighty Jayadratha, and other royal warriors, backed by 
massive legions, surround him on all sides. Protected by those magnificent 
maharathas, Bhishma shines forth like Indra in the midst of the Devas. 

The colourful standards, red, yellow, black and brown, waving in the air, 
on the backs of the elephants in the vanguard, look beautiful. The entire 
army, with Bhishma and other chariot warriors, with their elephants and 
horses, glows, like a mass of clouds charged with lightning, or like dark 
thunderheads gathered in the sky during the monsoon. 

The Kaurava army, ready for battle and led by Bhishma, charges 
towards Arjuna like the turbid current of the Ganga rushing towards the sea. 
Filled with many kinds of mighty forces, and having in its wings a 
profusion of elephants, horses, foot-soldiers, and chariots, Arjuna, with the 
great Vanara on his banner, sees that vyuha like a dense mass of 
approaching clouds. 

That Kshatriya mahatman, bull among men, upon his chariot furnished 
with a lofty standard, yoked to white horses, riding at the head of his own 
great army presses forward against the enemy. 

Seeing the warrior with the wild Hanuman on his banner, lofty standard 
and chariot shaft wrapped in costly sheath, with Krishna Yadupumgava, his 
charioteer in battle, your sons and all the Kauravas are dismayed. Your 
army gazes upon that most excellent vyuha with four thousand elephants at 
each corner, protected by maharatha Arjuna with astras ready. 

This vyuha of the Pandavas is as wonderful at the one formed just 
yesterday by Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, the like of which has never been seen 
or heard before by men. 

Thousands of drums are pounded, and the deafening sound of conches, 
the blast of trumpets, and many leonine roars arise from every legion. The 


twang of countless bows stretched by noble warriors and the blowing of 
conches, silence that din of drums and cymbals. 

The sky resounds with the booming of the conches and, diffused with an 
earthly dust, is awesome to behold; the sky looks like a vast canopy spread 
overhead. Seeing that canopy, the fighting men charge into battle. 

Maharathas are overthrown by maharathas, with their sarathies, horses, 
chariots, and standards. Elephants fall to the ground, attacked by elephants, 
as do foot-soldiers struck by other foot-soldiers. Racing horsemen are felled 
by horsemen with spears and swords. And all this seems amazing. 

Beautiful shields decked with golden stars and radiant like the sun lie 
smashed on the field, riven by battle-axes, lances and swords. Many 
maharathas, gored and mangled by the tusks and the trunks of elephants, 
collapse along with their charioteers; many are struck down by other chariot 
warriors. Hearing the cries of riders and foot-soldiers pierced by the tusks 
or crushed by the massive legs of elephants as they charge in close ranks, 
other warriors fall senseless to the ground. 

As the horsemen and foot-soldiers fall fast, and elephants, horses and 
chariots scatter in fear, Bhishma, surrounded by maharathas, glimpses him 
who has the mighty Vanara on his standard. The five Palmyra bannered 
warrior, attacks the diademed Arjuna, the Kiritin, whose chariot, because of 
the swift horses yoked to it, and the power of his mighty astras, blazes with 
energy like lightning. 

And so against that son of Indra who was like Indra himself, advance 
many warriors headed by Drona and Kripa, and Salya and Vivimsati, and 
Duryodhana and Somadatta’s son. 

The gallant Abhimanyu, son of Arjuna, master of all weapons and 
protected by golden armour, attacks those warriors; and he of most 
wondrous feats, thwarts their mighty weapons, fiery like the adored Agni 
himself, on the sacrificial altar, invoked with mantras. 

Bhishma of great tejas, letting a veritable river of the blood of his 
enemies, avoiding Subhadra’s son, encounters Arjuna himself. 

With sparkling coronet and bright garlands, with his Gandiva of 
wonderful mien and twang as loud as thunder, shooting cataracts of arrows, 
Arjuna foils the astras of Bhishma. And that invincible Kshatriya, with 
Hanuman on his banner, looses a towering gale of shafts upon the son of 
Shantanu. 


Your troops watch that swarm of arrows shot by Arjuna dispersed by 
Bhishma like the maker of day dispelling the darkness of night. And the 
Kurus and the Srinjayas, and all the men there, behold that clash between 
those two supreme heroes, Bhishma and Dhananjaya, distinguished by the 
dreadful twanging of their bows.’ 


CANTO 61 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Drona’s son, and Bhurisravas, and Chitrasena, and the 

son of Samyamani also, all attack Subhadra’s son, who fights back 
single-handedly with great urjas against those five tigerish men, like a 
young lion against five tuskers. None among them equals Krishna’s nephew 
in bravery, in lightness of hand or in the knowledge of astras. 

Seeing his son, that Parantapa, displaying his prowess, Arjuna sets up a 
leonine roar. And seeing your grandson, Rajan, thus afflicting your army, 
your warriors encircle him. The valiant son of Subhadra, advances 
cheerfully against the Dhartarashtra host. His powerful and radiant bow is 
seen to be relentlessly stretched, always ready to strike. 

Piercing the son of Drona with one shaft, and Salya with five, he 
overthrows the standard of Samyamani’s son with eight. With another 
whetted arrow he cleaves the snakelike golden spear hurled at him by 
Somadatta’s son. The heir of Arjuna cuts down his many deadly shafts and 
kills his four horses. 

Bhurisravas, and Salya, and Drona’s son and Samyamani, and Sala, 
terrified by this display of arms, cannot stand before him. Goaded by your 
son, the Trigartas and the Madras, with the Kekayas, numbering twenty-five 
thousand, all excellent men skilled in the science of weapons and 
unconquerable in war, surround Arjuna and his son to destroy them. 

The Senapati of the Pandava army, the prince of the Panchalas, sees 
their chariots surrounded. Leading thousands of elephants and chariots, and 
hundreds of thousands of horsemen and foot-soldiers, he stretches his bow 
in great wrath, and advances against that horde of the Madras and the 
Kekayas. 

That division of the Pandava army, protected by this brilliant archer, and 
consisting of chariots, elephants, and horsemen, is so majestic as it 
advances. Moving towards Arjuna, that perpetuator of Panchala’s race 
pierces Saradwat’s son’s shoulder with three keening arrows. He swiftly 
strikes the Madrakas with ten shafts, killing him who protects Kritavarman 
from the rear. 


With a thick shaft, that Parantapa slays Damana, the heir of the high- 
souled Paurava. The son of Samyamani stabs the indomitable Panchala 
prince and his charioteer with ten arrows each. Though wounded, 
Dhrishtadyumna merely licks the corners of his mouth, resolutely, and 
cleaves his enemy’s bow. 

The prince of Panchala attacks his adversary with twenty-five arrows 
and kills his horses, and both the protectors of his flanks. Bharatarishabha, 
Samyamani’s son, standing on that horseless chariot, looks intently at the 
son of the famed Drupada. Taking up a terrible sword of steel, Samyamani’s 
son walks towards the Panchala prince who awaits him in his chariot. 

The Pandavas, the soldiers and Dhrishtadyumna of Prishata’s race watch 
him come like a surging wave, a snake falling from the skies. Dazzling like 
the sun, he whirls his sword and advances with the tread of an incensed 
elephant. 

As Samyamani’s son, sword and shield in hand, nears his enemy’s 
chariot, the enraged prince of Panchala takes up a mace and smashes his 
head. The young warrior plunges to the ground, dribbling blood and brains, 
with his shining blade and shield loosened from his grasp. And so, having 
killed his opponent, Dhrishtadyumna wins great glory. 

Upon the slaying of that maharatha and most excellent archer, loud 
lamentations can be heard among your troops. Beside himself at seeing his 
son killed, Samyamani charges towards the invincible fire prince of 
Panchala. All the kings of both the Kaurava and the Pandava armies watch 
those two noble maharathas lock in battle. 

The Parantapa Samyamani strikes down the scion of Prishata’s race with 
three shafts much like a mahout of an elephant felling a mighty tusker with 
hooks. Thus does Salya, that jewel among kings, pierce the valiant son of 
Prishata in the chest. And another battle begins.’ 


CANTO 62 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


Sanjaya. This is clear to me as I watch my son’s army being 

decimated by the Pandava host. You always describe my forces as 
being slaughtered, and you speak of the Pandavas as being unslain and 
cheerful. Indeed, you speak of mine as stripped of manliness, felled and 
falling, even as they fight uncompromisingly and strive hard for victory. 

You portray the Pandavas as achieving victory and my sons as becoming 
progressively weaker. I incessantly hear of countless causes of unbearable 
and poignant sorrow caused by Duryodhana’s deeds. I do not see, Sanjaya, 
the means by which the Pandavas may be diminished and my sons can 
triumph in this war.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘This great evil has ensued from you, Rajan. Listen now 
with patience to the annihilation of men, elephants, horses and maharathas. 
Dhrishtadyumna, wounded by Salya’s nine shafts, pierces the ruler of the 
Madras with many steely arrows. We watch the awesome prowess of 
Drupada’s son as he swiftly impedes Salya. 

The battle between them is brief, and they fight vigorously without rest. 
Salya rives Dhrishtadyumna’s bow with a tempered shaft; he covers him 
with a deluge of arrows like a cloudburst on a mountain’s breast during the 
monsoon. While Dhrishtadyumna is being attacked, Abhimanyu wrathfully 
charges towards the chariot of the ruler of the Madras. Nearing it, he stabs 
Artayani with three sizzling barbs. 

To oppose Abhimanyu, your warriors quickly surround Artayani’s 
chariot. And Duryodhana, and Vikarna, and Dussasana, and Vivimsati and 
Durmarshana, and Dussaha, and Chitrasena, and Durmukha, and 
Satyavrata, and Purumitra position themselves to defend that chariot. 

Incensed, Bhima, and Dhrishtadyumna, and the five sons of Draupadi 
one by each Pandava, and Abhimanyu, and the twin sons of Madri and 
Pandu attack the Dhritarashtra army with a rage of astras. They fight to kill 
one another, Rajan, as a result of your evil deeds. 


[ )ssise. 1 says, ‘I regard destiny to be superior to exertion, 


When those ten enraged maharathas clash with the enemy ten, the other 
maharathas of both armies stand still like spectators, and gaze. Those 
powerful warriors bellow stridently and strike one another with myriad 
astras. With ever rising anger, they roar fiercely and challenge each other. 
They unite and fight the enemy with deadly, mighty weapons. 

Choleric Duryodhana pierces Dhrishtadyumna with four shafts. 
Durmarshana pierces him with twenty, and Chitrasena with five, and 
Durmukha with nine; he shoots Dussaha with seven, and Vivimsati with 
five, and Dussasana with three barbs. Dhrishtadyumna resists each of them 
expertly with twenty-five arrows of his own. 

Abhimanyu pierces Satyavrata and Purumitra each with ten shafts. The 
sons of Madri shroud their uncle with sheets of lean missiles. And all this 
appears wonderful. Salya attacks his nephews, those two excellent 
maharathas who want to counter their uncle’s exploits; but the sons of 
Madri do not falter. 

The mighty Bhima, seeing Duryodhana, and wanting to end the very 
war, takes up his mace. Beholding Mahabaho Bhima with raised mace and 
looking like the peak of Kailasa, your sons flee in terror. Duryodhana, 
incensed, goads the Magadha legion of ten thousand majestic tuskers to 
attack. Surrounded by that legion and placing the ruler of Magadha before 
him, Duryodhana rushes at Bhimasena. 

Watching that legion of elephants coming towards him, Vrikodara, mace 
in hand, leaps down from his chariot with a lion’s roar. Armed with that 
awesome mace, having the weight and strength of adamant, he charges like 
Siva himself with cavernous mouth agape. 

Like a slayer of Vritra among the Danava host, Bhima ranges across the 
battleground killing elephants with his mace. With his frequent roars, that 
make the heart and mind tremble, the elephants cower and cannot move. 

The sons of Draupadi, and the son of Subhadra, and Nakula and 
Sahadeva, and Dhrishtadyumna of Prishata’s race, protecting Bhima’s rear, 
move swiftly behind him, and stop all by loosing a barrage of arrows, truly 
like the very clouds pouring rain on a mountain’s breast. From the backs of 
elephants, those Pandava warriors sever the heads of their adversaries with 
exquisite shafts. 

The heads of elephant-riders, and arms decked with ornaments, and 
hands still holding iron-hooks, falling fast, resemble a downpour of strange 
rocks. The headless bodies of those riders on the necks of the beasts they 


rode look like crownless trees on mountain peaks. And we see mighty 
elephants felled and falling, killed by Dhrishtadyumna. 

The ruler of the Magadhas goads his elephant which looks like Airavata 
himself towards the chariot of Subhadra’s son. Parantapa Abhimanyu kills it 
with a single shaft. After killing his elephant, Abhimanyu cuts off that 
king’s head with a silver-winged arrow. 

Bhima penetrates that horde of elephants and meanders about, crushing 
those royal beasts around him like Indra crushing the mountains of yore. 
We watch Bhima kill those tuskers, each with but a single stroke of his 
mace, like hills riven by thunder. Numerous elephants as grand as hills 
perish, having their tusks broken, or temples, bones, backs, or frontal lobes 
shattered. Others lie dead, with foaming mouths. Many mighty elephants, 
with frontal lobes smashed, vomit streams of blood. And some, from fear, 
lie down on the ground side by side like a range of hills. 

Smeared with their fat and blood, and almost bathed in their marrow, 
Bhima roams over the field like Siva himself; whirling his blood-soaked 
mace, he is terrible to behold, like Rudra armed with his Pinaka. Being 
crushed by the raging Bhima, those massive tuskers run wildly in pain, 
trampling their own warriors. 

All the while, the daring archers and maharathas, led by Subhadra’s son, 
guard that awesome Kshatriya, whirling his gory mace, dripping the blood 
of elephants, like the Devas protecting Indra. Of terrible soul, Bhima now 
truly looks like none but Sankara. 

Indeed, Bhaarata, displaying his strength on all sides, we see Bhima like 
Siva dancing his Tandava at the end of the yuga; his heavy and resounding 
mace resembles the club of Yama, it echoes with the sound of Indra’s 
thunderbolt. His bloodthirsty mace, smeared with marrow and hair, seems 
to be the Pinaka annihilating all creatures during Rudra’s rage. 

As a herdsman chastises his herd of cattle with a goad, Bhima smites 
that elephant legion with his club. Slaughtered by Bhima and pierced with 
the arrows of the warriors who protect his rear, the elephants scatter, 
crushing your chariots. Driving away those great beasts from the field like a 
mighty wind great clouds, Bhima stands like the wielder of the Trisula on a 
cremation ground.’ 


CANTO 63 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


Duryodhana rouses his entire army, commanding his warriors to kill 

ma. The whole awesome force rushes towards Vrikodara. That vast host, 

a challenge for the very Devas, impossible to cross like the surging sea at 
the full or new moon, teeming with chariots, elephants and _ horses, 
resounding with the blast of conches and the beating of drums, with 
countless foot-soldiers and maharathas, and shrouded by the swirling dust it 
raises, that sea of hostile forces, is arrested by Bhima, like the shore 
containing the ocean. We are wonderstruck by Bhima’s superhuman exploit. 

With his mace, he fearlessly checks all those kings cholerically attacking 
him, with their steeds and chariots and elephants. Withstanding that vast 
force with his mace, Bhima stands in that fierce melee as unyielding as 
Meru. 

And in that tremendous encounter, his brother and sons, and 
Dhrishtadyumna of Prishata’s race, and the sons of Draupadi and 
Abhimanyu, and the undefeated Sikhandin do not cravenly abandon him. 
Taking up his hefty mace made of Saika iron, Bhima charges the warriors of 
your army like Mahadeva turned to ire. Grinding a multitude of chariots and 
throngs of horsemen into the earth, Bhima roves across the battleground 
like the fire consuming all at the end of the yuga. 

Pandu’s son of infinite prowess smashes a host of chariots just with his 
legs like iron and kills another host of your fighting men. He crushes your 
troops with such ease, like an elephant ploughing through a forest of reeds. 
Dragging down maharathas from their chariots, and horsemen from their 
horses, and foot-soldiers as they stand their ground in your son’s forces, 
Mahabaho Bhima demolishes them all with his mace like the mighty wind 
risen uprooting frail trees. 

Slaughtering elephants and horses, smeared by now richly with fat, 
marrow, flesh and blood, his mace looks gruesome indeed. With the bodies 
of warriors and horsemen lying scattered, Kurukshetra appears like Yama’s 


S Durse says, ‘When that elephant akshauhini is destroyed, your son 
Bhi 


abode. Bhima’s mace, that bludgeon of death with the brilliance of Indra’s 
Vajra, is like the Pinaka of Rudra claiming all living creatures. 

That swinging mace is fiercely resplendent like the Khatvanga of Siva at 
the end of the yuga. Seeing him routing that enormous force, your fighting 
men are dismal. Wherever Bhima casts his eye, there all the warriors seem 
to melt away. 

Beholding Vrikodara consuming those legions, himself impregnable, 
Bhishma charges at him on his chariot radiant like the sun and with the 
sound of thunderous clouds, covering the sky with his gale of arrows like a 
misty rain-filled awning. 

Seeing Bhishma charging him like another Rudra, Mahabaho Bhima 
attacks him fiercely. At that moment, that foremost Kshatriya of Sini’s race, 
the matchless Satyaki, also assails the Pitamaha, killing so many of the 
enemy as he gloriously rides, filling your son’s army with fear. Your 
warriors, Bhaarata, cannot stop or stand up to him at all, flying along with 
his silvery horses, spraying splendid winged shafts. 

Only the Rakshasa Alambusha pierces him with ten shafts. Satyaki 
shoots Alambusha with four arrows and continues on his careen. Watching 
that recalescent warrior whirl through his enemies, scything through the 
foremost of Kaurava fighting men, and roaring loudly all the while, your 
warriors shower him with clouds of arrows. But their deadly rain falls as 
onto a mountain’s breast of rock. They cannot impede that gallant hero who 
looks like the noon-day sun in full glory. 

Everyone is despondent, except for Somadatta’s son, Bhurisravas, who, 
seeing the maharathas of his side dispersed, charges against Satyaki with his 
mighty bow.’ 


CANTO 64 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Bhurisravas, excited with great wrath, pierces Satyaki 

with nine arrows. Before the eyes of all, Satyaki stabs the Kaurava 
warrior with nine shafts of his own. Duryodhana and his brothers surround 
Somadatta’s son as he fights passionately. 

The Pandavas quickly encircle Satyaki, protecting him. Ever furious 
Bhima, mace raised, roars his challenge at all your sons led by Duryodhana. 
Supported by thousands of chariots, your son Nandaka attacks Bhima with 
arrows winged with the feathers of the kanka bird. 

Duryodhana strikes Bhima in the chest with nine shafts. Mahabaho 
Bhima, standing in his chariot, says to his sarathy Vishoka, “These heroic 
and mighty sons of Dhritarashtra, all maharathas, are furious, and want to 
kill me. I will slaughter all of them today. So steer my horses carefully into 
battle.” 

O Dhritarashtra, saying this, Pritha’s son strikes your son with a rash of 
gold decked arrows. And he pierces Nandaka with three barbs in his chest. 
Duryodhana stabs the mighty Bhima with six shafts and Vishoka with three. 
Duryodhana calmly cuts off Bhima’s resplendent bow at its grasp with three 
arrows of incredible aim. 

Bhima, bull among men, cannot bear to see Vishoka wounded by 
Duryodhana; he seizes another excellent bow to kill your son. Drawing a 
crescent-tipped winged arrow, he cleaves Duryodhana’s bow in his hands. 
Roaring, your son discards it and plucks up a more robust one. 

Aiming a fearful shaft blazing like Yama’s danda, Duryodhana strikes 
Bhima. Deeply and painfully pierced in his chest, the mighty one drops 
down in his chariot and faints. Unable to endure seeing Bhima wounded, 
the illustrious maharathas of the Pandava army, led by Abhimanyu, with 
unwavering accuracy, loose a harmattan of arrows upon your sons. 

Bhima regains consciousness and first covers Duryodhana with a hail of 
shafts. That gallant son of Pandu pierces Salya with twenty-five golden- 
winged barbs. Salya is carried off in a swoon from the battleground. 


Your fourteen sons, Senapati, Sushena, Jalasandha, Sulochana, Ugra, 
Bhimaratha, Bhima, Virabahu, Aolupa, Durmukha, Dushpradarsha, Vivitsu, 
Vikata, and Sama, face Bhima. Unitedly they charge Bhima and with eyes 
red with anger wound him deeply with countless arrows. 

Mahabaho Bhima, licking the corners of his mouth like a wolf amidst 
smaller creatures, falls upon them with the ferocity of Garuda. With a 
crescent-tipped shaft, Bhima decapitates Senapati. Exultant, laughing all the 
while, that towering Kshatriya kills Jalasandha with three arrows. Smiting 
Sushena, he dispatches him to Yama. And with a single barb he hacks away 
the stately head of Ugra, beautiful as the moon, decked with turban and 
adorned with ear-rings. 

With seventy arrows, Bhima kills Virabahu and his horses, standard and 
charioteer. The smiling Bhima slays both the brothers Bhima and 
Bhimaratha. In that great war, Bhima also fells Sulochana. The rest of your 
sons, seeing indomitable Bhima roused like that, flee. 

Bhishma addresses all the maharathas of his army saying, “Bhima, 
excited with wrath, can annihilate the mighty sons of Dhritarashtra and 
every other maharatha, all united together, regardless of their knowledge of 
weapons, and their valour. All of you must attack and kill that son of 
Pandu.” 

Hearing this, the vast legions of the Dhritarashtra army rush at Bhima. 
Bhagadatta, on his elephant of rent temples, dashes to where the massive 
Pandava stands. He mantles Bhima with countless arrows, like the clouds 
covering the sun. 

But those intrepid maharathas of the Pandava army cannot bear seeing 
that shrouding of Bhima by the torrent of Bhagadatta’s shafts, and they 
surround Bhagadatta, raining arrows on him. They also pierce his elephant 
with showers of barbs. Struck by the awesome shafts of those maharathas, 
that elephant of the ruler of the Pragjyotishas, with blood flowing down his 
body, appears as strikingly handsome as a mass of clouds stained by the 
sun’s rays. With temporal juice pouring down, that elephant Supritika is 
goaded by Bhagadatta to race forward, shaking the earth with his tread. 

The Pandava maharathas, gazing upon the beast’s dreadful appearance, 
lose all courage. King Bhagadatta, lion among men, forcefully strikes 
Bhima in the chest with a straight shaft of great length. Bhima faints and 
falls to the floor of his chariot, holding onto his flagpole. Seeing the fear of 


the enemy maharathas and an unconscious Bhima, Bhagadatta roars 
exultantly. 

Seeing his father Bhima fainted, the feral Rakshasa Ghatotkacha is 
incensed and vanishes from sight using maya. Creating a macabre illusion, 
he reappears the next moment in a form so prodigious and fierce as to fill 
the hearts of the timid with nameless dread. Riding on an Airavata created 
by his maya shakti, the other celebrated elephants, Anjana, Vamana, and 
Mahapadma, follow him. 

Ridden by Rakshasas, those massive tuskers, with juice profusely 
trickling down in three lines, thunder into battle. Ghatotkacha spurs his own 
elephant forward to demolish Bhagadatta and his great beast. The other 
mastodons, each endowed with four tusks, goaded by huge and sinister 
Rakshasas, attack Bhagadatta’s elephant from every side, goring him, 
shooting him with savage arrows. 

Wounded by excruciating shafts, Supritika bellows boomingly as loud as 
Indra’s thunder. Hearing those deafening cries, Bhishma says to Drona, 
Suyodhana and all the kings, “The mighty Bhagadatta, battling the evil son 
of Hidimbi, is in distress. The Rakshasa is formidable, and the king beside 
himself with anger. They will slaughter each other. Loud shouts of the 
rejoicing Pandavas can be heard, as can the agonised cries of king 
Bhagadatta’s terrified elephant. 

Let us all ride to save the beleaguered king or he will be killed! Warriors 
of great urjas, do not delay. The battle becomes even fiercer, making one’s 
hair stand on end. That legion’s commander is of high varna, brave, and 
devoted to us. O my heroes of unfading glory, we must save him.” 

Hearing Bhishma’s words, all the kings of the Kaurava army, led by 
Drona, charge towards Bhagadatta, sovereign of the Pragjyotishas. Seeing 
them come, the Panchalas with the Pandavas, led by Yudhishtira, pursue 
them. Ghatotkacha, mighty prince of Rakshasas, roars shatteringly as he 
sees the enemy legion press forward. 

Hearing that roar and seeing those battle elephants, Bhishma says to 
Drona, “I do not wish to fight today with the evil son of Hidimbi. Mighty 
and vigorous, he is so well supported at the moment that even Indra could 
not vanquish him. He has a deadly aim. As for us, today our animals are 
tired. We have been crushed by the Panchalas and the Pandavas. I would 
not like a fresh encounter with them just now. Order our army to withdraw. 
Tomorrow we will fight anew.” 


Hearing these words of the Pitamaha, the Kauravas, terrified of 
Ghatotkacha and ready to use nightfall as a pretext, obey him promptly. 
After the Kauravas have withdrawn, the conquering Pandava lions roar and 
roar in victory, and their roars echo with the blast of conches and mingle 
with the notes of flutes. Bhaarata, in this way did the Kauravas and the 
Pandavas led by Ghatotkacha fight each other on that day. 

The Kauravas, overcome with shame at being decimated and humiliated 
by the Pandavas, retire downcast to their tents. And those maharathas, the 
sons of Pandu, lacerated by arrows and wearied by the fighting, also retire 
to their camp led by Bhima and Ghatotkacha. Joyfully, they praise these 
two heroes. Their triumphant shouts mingle with the music of horns. Those 
sounds make the very earth tremble, carving the hearts of your sons. 

Thus those Parantapas retreat into their tents. Duryodhana, stricken by 
the death of his brothers, is forlorn, overcome with grief and weeping. He 
passes the hours in meditation, anguish over the killing of his brothers 
burning him.’ 


CANTO 65 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


whom the very Devas appear powerless, my heart, Sanjaya, is filled 

with awe and fear. Hearing also of the humiliation of my sons, I 
dread the outcome of this war. Vidura’s words trouble me. Everything that 
has occurred appears to be the will of fate. 

Led by Bhishma, The warriors of the Pandava army confront and 
annihilate our exceptional fighting men who are led by Bhishma and are so 
skilled in using every weapon. What ascetic penances have the high-souled 
and mighty sons of Pandu performed, what boon have they obtained, what 
science is known to them, that they do not diminish like stars in the sky? I 
cannot bear that my army is being slaughtered by them. This divine and 
cruel punishment has fallen on me alone. 

Tell me everything truly, Sanjaya, that explains the invincibility of the 
Pandavas and the vulnerability of my sons. I am drowning in this ocean of 
anguish and cannot see the other shore. I am like a man thrashing to cross 
this vast ocean by just the strength of my two arms. I know that a great 
calamity has engulfed my sons. Certainly, Bhima will crush them. I do not 
see any hero who will be able to protect them. Their death, in this war, is 
assured. 

I implore you, O Suta, to tell me everything about the true cause of all 
these events. Seeing his troops retreating from the melee, what does 
Duryodhana do? And what the respected Bhishma and Drona, and Kripa, 
and Subala’s son, and Jayadratha, and that forceful archer, Drona’s son, and 
mighty Vikarna? Wise Sanjaya, watching my sons withdraw, what do the 
Pandavas resolve to do?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Listen carefully, Rajan, and having heard, understand 
this. Nothing is the result of a spell, or the outcome of chimera of any kind. 
Nor have the sons of Pandu created any new terrors. They are mighty, and 
fight fairly in this war. Seeking glory, the sons of Pritha always cleave to 
dharma, even when their own lives are at risk. 


[ Jerton te says, ‘Hearing of those feats of the Pandavas, before 


Having both great wealth and strength, they continue to battle, never 
straying from righteousness. And victory lies with the virtuous. This is why 
the sons of Pritha are unassailable and always victorious. Your sons are evil 
and sinful. They are cruel and shameful in what they do. This is why they 
are being diminished. 

Your sons’ actions towards the Pandavas have been devious and 
ruthless. The sons of Pandu have always disregarded these offences. On 
many occasions your sons have humiliated them. Let them now reap the 
terrible fruit, like poison, of that persistent course of sins. Rajan, you too 
will harvest that fruit, along with your sons and kinsmen, since you could 
not be persuaded to return to dharma despite the counsel of your well- 
wishers. 

Repeatedly forbidden by Vidura, by Bhishma, by the high-souled Drona, 
and by me also, you would not understand, disregarding what we said for 
your good, like a sick man refusing medicine that would save him. Instead 
believing your sons’ opinions, you considered the Pandavas already 
defeated. Again, listen to me about the true cause of the Pandava victory. 
Parantapa, I will tell you what I have heard. 

Duryodhana asked the Pitamaha this very question. Seeing his brothers, 
all mighty chariot warriors, routed in battle, your grief-stricken son humbly 
goes to the wise Bhishma during the night and asks him this same thing. 
Rajan, I will tell you all about it. 

Duryodhana says, “Drona and you, and Salya, and Kripa, and Drona’s 
son, and Kritavarman the son of Hridika, and Sudakshina the ruler of the 
Kambojas, and Bhurisravas, and Vikarna, and Bhagadatta of exceeding 
prowess, are all deemed maharathas. All are dvija, and prepared to sacrifice 
their lives in battle. 

It is my view that these are a match for even the hosts of the three 
worlds combined. All the warriors of the Pandava army jointly cannot 
Oppose your prowess. A doubt has risen in my mind. Explain it to me. 
Whom do the Pandavas rely on to repeatedly subdue us?” 

Bhishma says, “Listen to me, Suyodhana. I frequently advised you about 
this but you did not listen. Bharatarishabha, make peace with the Pandavas. 
This will benefit both the world and you. Enjoy this earth with your 
brothers and be happy, gratifying all your well-wishers and delighting your 
kinsmen. 


Although I beseeched you, you did not heed my counsel. You have 
always scorned the sons of Pandu. The outcome has now overwhelmed you. 
Listen also to the reason why the tireless Pandavas cannot be slain. 

There is not, was not, nor will be, in all the worlds a warrior who can 
overpower the sons of Pandu who are all protected by the wielder of the 
Saranga. Knowing dharma as you do, listen to that ancient history, itihasa, 
which was narrated to me by sages of restrained souls. 

In olden days, all the Devas and the Rishis, united together, waited 
respectfully on the Pitamaha Brahma upon the mountains of 
Gandhamadana. 

And the Lord of all creatures, seated in their midst, saw a wonderful 
luminous chariot in the sky. Having gained knowledge of it through dhyana, 
calmly joining his hands, Brahma, with delighted soul, greeted the highest 
Divine Being. The Rishis and the Devas, beholding this form in the sky, all 
stood up with folded hands, their eyes fixed on that wonder of wonders. 

Worshipping him duly, Brahma, the Creator of the universe, aware of 
Brahman, conscious of the highest rectitude, spoke these noble words: 
“With your form, you endow magnificence upon the universe. You are 
indeed the protector of the universe. O most Supreme One, the universe is 
your creation. You are Vasudeva. Therefore, I seek refuge in You who are 
the soul of yoga and the highest God. Victory to You who are the Supreme 
Deity! 

Victory to You who personify all the good of the worlds. Victory to you, 
Lord of yoga, who are omnipotent. Victory to You who both precede and 
succeed yoga. With the lotus springing from your navel, and having all- 
embracing eyes, victory to You who are the Lord of the Devas. O Holy 
Being of the past, the present, and the future, victory to You, the 
embodiment of gentleness! 

You are the sun of suns. The receptacle of countless attributes, the 
refuge of all things, may You triumph. You are Narayana, too deep to be 
fathomed. Wielder of the Saranga, may victory be yours. 

Unsullied and blessed with every attribute, having the universe for your 
form, may you always prevail. Lord of the universe, Mahabaho, one who 
blesses the worlds, victory to You. O great Snake, mighty Varaha, O first 
Cause, with tawny hair, all-powerful One, may You always be victorious! 

Saffron-robed Lord of the cardinal and the subsidiary directions, You, 
who pervade all the universe, are infinite and eternal, the manifest and the 


unmanifest. You that are the immeasurable Akasa, with all your senses 
under control, who attains what is good, You that are immeasurable, You 
who alone know your own nature, victory to You! 

You are profound and vast; you grant all wishes, One without end, 
known as Brahman, You that are eternal, the Creator of all creatures, ever 
successful and wise, are familiar with dharma, the One who confers victory, 
You of mysterious Self, You are the soul of all yoga. You who cause 
everything to be born, who are the knowledge of the selves of all beings, 
Lord of the worlds, victory to you. Svayambhu, most blessed, you are also 
the veritable Destroyer. 

Inspirer of all thoughts, dear to all conversant with Brahman, ever 
creating and destroying, controller of all wishes, Supreme Lord, the cause 
of amrita, You are all-existent, nityasya. You are the first to appear at the 
end of the yuga, guardian of victory, Divine Lord of the Lord of all 
creatures, from whose navel springs the lotus, mighty and, arisen from 
Yourself, embodying the great elements in their primeval state, You who are 
the soul of all rites and rituals, victory to You who grants everything! 

Bhumi Devi represents your two feet, the cardinal and the subsidiary 
directions your arms, and the sky your head. I am your form, the Devas 
your limbs, and the sun and the moon are your two eyes. Tapasya and satya 
born of dharma and yagna are your strength. Agni is your energy, Vayu is 
your breath, and the waters have sprung from your sweat. The Aswins form 
your ears, and Saraswati is your tongue. The Vedas are your knowledge, 
and upon you rests this Brahmanda. Lord of yoga and yogins, we do not 
know your extent, your measure, your energy, your prowess, your power, 
your origin. 

Vishnu, we worship you fervently, with vows and ceremonies, as the 
Supreme One, and depend upon you. The Rishis, the Devas, the 
Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the Rakshasas, the Pannagas, the Pisachas, the 
Manavas, animals and birds, were all created by me on Earth through your 
grace. 

Krishna, with the lotus springing from your navel, O you of large 
expansive eyes, you dispel all despair and are the refuge and guide of all 
creatures. The Universe is your mouth and the Devas delight in your 
blessings. Through your grace the Earth is freed from terrors. 

Therefore, take birth in the Yaduvamsa. Establish dharma, slay the sons 
of Diti, and uphold the universe. Vasudeva, I sing your supreme mystery 


through your own benevolence. 

Having created the divine Sankarshana out of your own self by yourself, 
Krishna, you then made yourself as Pradyumna born of yourself. From 
Pradyumna you created Aniruddha known as the eternal Vishnu. And it was 
Aniruddha who created me as Brahma, the support of the universe. Created 
out of Vasudeva’s essence I have, therefore, been created by you. 

Krishna, dividing yourself into amsas, take birth among human beings. 
Slaughtering the Asuras there for the bliss of all the worlds, establishing 
virtue, and winning fame, You will again realise Yoga. 

The regenerate Rishis on Earth and the Devas are devoted to you and 
sing of your wonder, pronouncing all your names. Mahabaho, all classes of 
creatures depend on you, having taken refuge in You who grants boons. The 
regenerate ones sing of you being Setu, the world’s bridge to salvation, 
having no beginning, middle and end, possessing unlimited Yoga.’”’ 


CANTO 66 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Bhishma says, “Then the Lord of the worlds said to 
Brahma in a soft rumbling voice, “Through Yoga, I know what you 
desire. It will be as you wish.’ 

And saying this, he disappeared. Then the Devas, Rishis and 
Gandharvas, filled with great wonder and curiosity asked Brahma, ‘Who is 
that one that you worshipped with such humility and praised so highly? Tell 
us.” 

The celebrated Pitamaha replied to all the Devas, the regenerate Rishis, 
and the Gandharvas, in sweet tones, ‘He who is called TAT, He who is 
Supreme, He who exists now and for all time, He who is the highest Self, 
He who is the Soul of beings, and who is the great Lord, it was to Him that 
I spoke. I pleaded with the Lord of the universe, for the good of the 
universe, to take his birth among men in the family of Vasudeva. 

I said to Him: Take birth in the world of men to slaughter the Asuras! 
Those fierce and strong Daityas and Rakshasas, killed in unworldly battle, 
have been born among men. Incarnating in a human womb, You will live on 
the Earth accompanied by Nara. 

Those ancient and excellent Rishis, Nara and Narayana, cannot be 
defeated in battle by even all the Devas united. Of immense effulgence, 
those Rishis when born together in the world of men will not be recognised 
by fools. 

He, from whose Self, I, Brahma, the Lord of the whole Universe, have 
sprung, that Vasudeva, that Supreme One, is worthy of your adoration. 
Imbued with great tejas, and holding the conch, the discus, and the mace, he 
should never be regarded as a mere man. He is the Unmatched Mystery, the 
Ultimate Refuge, the Supreme Brahman, and the Greatest Glory. 

Unmanifest and eternal, he cannot perish. He has been praised as 
Purusha, though no one can understand him completely. The Creator has 
extolled him as the Supreme Energy, the Supreme Felicity, and the Supreme 
Truth. 


Therefore, Vasudeva of vast capacities should never be considered as 
just a man, not by all the Asuras and the Devas led by Indra. Someone who 
speaks of Hrishikesa as only a man is a fool and a wretch. 

People who disregard that Yogin of illustrious soul for entering into 
human form are blind. They labour under darkness who do not know that 
Divine luminary, that Soul of the mobile and the immobile creation, that 
one bearing the Srivatsa on his chest, that one of dazzling brilliance, that 
one from whose navel has sprung the primeval lotus. 

He who disdains that high souled one, the wearer of the divine crown 
and the Kaustubha ruby, one who dispels his friends’ fears, sinks into deep 
darkness. Vasudeva should be adored by all.’ 

Having said these words to those Devas and Rishis, the illustrious 
Brahma, dismissing them all, returned to his own abode. The Devas and the 
Gandharvas, and the Munis and the Apsaras, having heard those holy words 
of Brahma, were delighted and returned to Devaloka. I myself heard this 
about Krishna from Rishis of cultured souls speaking in their assembly. 

You who know the Shastras well, I heard this from Rama, the son of 
Jamadagni, and Markandeya of great wisdom, and Vyasa and Narada. 
Having learnt all this and heard of the illustrious Vasudeva as the Eternal 
Lord, the Supreme God of all the worlds, and the great Master, from whom 
Brahma himself has sprung, I ask: why should not that Vasudeva be adored 
and worshipped by men? 

You were forbidden by great sages who asked you never to go to war 
with that Vasudeva armed with his bow as also with the Pandavas. Your 
foolishness prevented you from comprehending what they said. I hence 
consider you a wicked Rakshasa. You are also enveloped in ignorance. It is 
for this reason that you hate Krishna and Arjuna, for who else among men 
would hate the divine Nara and Narayana? 

It is for this, Duryodhana, that I say to you that this one is Eternal and 
Unfading, pervading the whole Universe, Unchanging, the Ruler, Creator 
and Upholder of all, and the truly Existent. He supports the three worlds. 
He is the Supreme Lord of all mobile and immobile creatures, and He is the 
great Master. He is warrior, He is Victory, He is Vanquisher, and He is the 
Lord of all nature. 

He is full of goodness and without all the qualities of tamas and rajas, 
darkness and passion. Where Krishna is, there is righteousness; and where 
righteousness dwells, there is victory. It is by the Yoga of his Supreme 


Excellence, and the Yoga of his Self, that the sons of Pandu are supported. 
Therefore, they will surely triumph. 

To the Pandavas he imparts understanding permeated with 
righteousness, and strength in battle; and He always protects them from 
danger. He is the Eternal God, pervading all beings, and ever blessed. 
Known as Vasudeva, he is humbly served by all, Brahmanas and 
Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras, who, fulfilling their own dharma, worship 
Him with restrained hearts. 

Towards the close of the Dwapara Yuga and the beginning of the Kali 
Yuga, it is He who is praised with songs of devotion by believers. It is that 
Vasudeva who creates, yuga after yuga, the worlds of the Devas and 
Manushyas, all the cities encircled by the sea, and all the regions where 
men live.” 


CANTO 67 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


as the Supreme Being. Pitamaha, I want to understand his origin and 
ry.” 
Bhishma says, “Vasudeva is the Supreme Being. He is the God of all 
Gods. With eyes like lotus petals, there is none more exalted than him. 
Markandeya speaks of Govinda as the Most Wonderful and the Most High, 
as the All-being, as the All-soul, as the Highest soul, and as the Supreme 
Purusha. 

He created Water, Wind, and Fire. That Divine Master created this 
Earth. That Supreme Being of illustrious soul and all kinds of Tejas laid 
himself down on the ocean and slept in Yoga. From his mouth He created 
Fire, and from his breath, the Wind. Of unfading glory, He created from his 
mouth Vak, the Word and the Vedas. 

It was thus that he created first the Worlds and also the Devas along with 
the many classes of Rishis. And he created the decay and death of all 
beings, as well as birth and maturity. He is Dharma itself. He grants us 
boons and desires. He is the Actor and Action, and He is himself the Divine 
Guru. 

He created the Past, the Present, and the Future; He is the Creator of the 
Universe. Of illustrious soul, He is the magnificent Preceptor. He created 
Sankarshana, the First-born of all creatures. He created the divine Sesha 
Ananta, who supports the Earth with all her creatures and mountains. 

Of matchless Tejas, the regenerate ones know Him through Yoga. 
Sprung from the secretions of his ear, the fierce and merciless Asura 
Madhu, who intended to and almost destroyed Brahma, was slain by 
Vasudeva. And so the Devas and the Danavas, the Manavas and Rishis call 
Janardana the slayer of Madhu, Madhusudana. 

The great Varaha, the great Narasimha, He is the Three-stepped Vamana. 
He is the Mother and the Father of all living creatures. There never was, nor 
will be, any more excellent than He of eyes like lotus petals. 


S anjaya says, ‘Duryodhana says, “In all the worlds Vasudeva is known 
fo) 


8 


He created the Brahmanas from His mouth and the Kshatriyas from His 
arms; from His thighs He fashioned the Vaisyas, and from His feet the 
Sudras. One who serves Him dutifully, observing vows with ascetic 
austerities on days of the full-moon and the new-moon, is sure to obtain the 
Divine Kesava, that refuge of all embodied creatures, that essence of 
Brahman and Yoga. 

Kesava is the higher Energy, the ancestor of all the worlds. The sages 
call Him Hrishikesa. All should know Him as the Acharya and the 
Pitamaha. Him with whom Krishna is delighted, attains eternal regions of 
blessedness. 

He who is fearful should seek Kesava’s protection; and he who 
repeatedly reads this stuti, achieves happiness and prosperity. Those who 
attain Krishna are never deceived; Janardana always sustains those who are 
frightened. 

Rajan, knowing this truly, Yudhishtira, has wholeheartedly sought 
refuge in Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, and the Lord of the Earth.” 


CANTO 68 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ Tyhishma says, “I will recite this hymn that Brahma himself sang. In 
ancient times, this hymn was imparted by regenerate Rishis and the 
Devas to men: 

‘Narada described you as the Acharya and the Supreme Lord of the 
Devas and all the Sadhyas and the heavenly beings, and as one who knows 
the nature of Brahman. Markandeya spoke of you as the Past, the Present, 
and the Future, the sacrifice of sacrifices, and the austerity of austerities. 

The celebrated Bhrigu said that you are the God of the gods and all 
creatures, the ancient form of Vishnu. Dwaipayana said that you are 
Vasudeva of the Vasus, who establishes Sakra. When mortals were being 
born, the sages described you as Daksha, the Father of creation. 

Angiras said that you are the creator of all beings. Devala said that your 
body comprised the unmanifest, your mind the manifest, and that all the 
Devas are produced by your breath. The heavens are filled with your heads, 
and your arms support the Earth. In your stomach are the three worlds and 
you are the Eternal Being. 

Even thus do men exalted by asceticism know you. You are the Sat of 
Sat, with Rishis gratified with sight of the Atman. With royal sages of 
liberal minds, resolute in battle and with ethical aims, you, destroyer of 
Madhu, are the only refuge.’ 

The Supreme Being, Hari, is thus adored and worshipped by 
Sanatkumara and other ascetic yogis. I have now described the truth about 
Kesava to you, both in brief and detail. Turn to him in love.” 

Sanjaya continues, “Hearing this sacred story, your son begins to revere 
both Kesava and the Pandava maharathas. Then, O Rajan, Bhishma says to 
Duryodhana, “You have now heard about Krishna’s glory and about Nara. 
You also now know why Nara and Narayana have incarnated among men. 

You have also been told why those heroes are invincible and have never 
been defeated in war, and why also no one can kill the sons of Pandu in war. 
Krishna greatly loves the sons of Pandu. And so I say: Make peace with the 
Pandavas. Curb your passions and enjoy the Earth with your mighty 


brothers. By disregarding the divine Nara and Narayana, you will be 
destroyed.” 

Having said these words, the Pitamaha becomes silent, and dismissing 
King Duryodhana, enters his tent. Duryodhana also returns to his tent, after 
paying his respects to Bhishma. And then, Bharatarishabha, he lies down to 
sleep.’ 


CANTO 69 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


face each other again. Each side moves forward in united and furious 

s to overcome the other. And as a result of your evil deeds, the 
Pandavas and the Kauravas advance, encased in armour and in battle 
formation. 

The vyuha that Bhishma protects from all sides is that of the Makara, the 
great crocodile. The Pandavas also form and protect their vyuha. Maharatha 
Bhishma rides with a large akshauhini of chariots. Chariot warriors, foot- 
soldiers, elephants, and horsemen, all follow him, positioned in assigned 
places. 

Seeing them ready for battle, the Pandavas deploy their forces in the 
invincible Syena vyuha. On that vyuha’s beak shines the formidable Bhima. 
The invincible Sikhandin and Dhrishtadyumna are its eyes. In its head is the 
heroic Satyaki of indomitable prowess. 

On its neck stands Arjuna vibrating his Gandiva. Upon its left wing is 
the high-souled and blessed Drupada with his son supported by an 
akshauhini of all forces. And the king of the Kekayas, with an akshauhini, 
forms the right wing of that vyuha. On its back are the sons of Draupadi, 
and Subhadra’s wonderful son. And at its tail is the heroic and excellent 
Yudhishtira himself, supported by Nakula and Sahadeva. 

In the battle that ensues, Bhima penetrates the Kaurava vyuha of Makara 
through its mouth, and approaching Bhishma, covers him with stern arrows. 
Mighty Bhishma looses his deadly weapons, baffling the Pandava forces. 
And when the Pandava fighting men are thus confounded, Arjuna swiftly 
strikes Bhishma with a thousand shafts. Countering Bhishma’s weapons, 
Arjuna, supported by his own spirited men, erupts into battle. 

Maharatha Duryodhana, seeing the bloody carnage wreaked on his army 
and remembering the slaughter of his brothers, rushes up to Drona and says 
to him, “Acharya, ever my well-wisher, relying on you and on the 
Pitamaha, we hope to defeat the very Devas in battle, let alone the sons of 


S anjaya says, ‘When the night passes and the sun rises, the two armies 
ra 


Pandu who are floundering with neither energy nor prowess. O blessed one, 
fight today so that the Pandavas are annihilated.” 

At this, Drona plunges into the Pandava vyuha before Satyaki’s very 
eyes, who quickly retaliates to stop the son of Bharadwaja. The battle that 
follows is pitched and fierce. Roused, the great Drona, smiling the while, 
pierces the grandson of Sini with ten shafts in his shoulder. Bhima shoots 
Drona with a rash of arrows, seeking to protect Satyaki. Infuriated, Drona, 
Bhishma and Salya shroud Bhima with their fire. Abhimanyu and the sons 
of Draupadi wound those armed warriors with their sharpest barbs. 

In that brutal contention, the great archer Sikhandin charges against 
Bhishma and Drona who have fallen upon the Pandavas. Firmly grasping 
his bow, whose twang is the roar of clouds, that Kshatriya, obscuring the 
very sun with his volleys, ferociously attacks his adversaries. The Pitamaha, 
finding Sikhandin before him, avoids him, remembering his once 
womanhood. 

Spurred on by your son, Drona, wanting to protect Bhishma, presses 
forward. Sikhandin quickly turns on Drona, avoiding the Pitamaha, fearing 
that warrior who is like fire that appears at the end of the yuga. Duryodhana 
moves to protect Bhishma with a vast legion. 

And the Pandavas, resolved on victory, also press forward, and the 
encounter between the two sides, both seeking fame and triumph, is 
breathtaking, indeed like the Devasura yuddha of old.’ 


CANTO 70 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


your sons from Bhima. The battle between the kings of the Kaurava 
nd the Pandava armies is shocking and bloody, annihilating great 
Kshatriyas. From that war, a tumult rises, reaching the very heavens. 
Deafening is that bedlam, as tuskers scream and horses whinny, while 
conches blast and drums pound, and mighty enemies roar at one another 
like contending bulls in a cow-pen. Severed heads fall ceaselessly, like 
some grisly rain of weird rocks from the sky. 

Bharatarishabha, countless heads lie strewn across the battlefield, with 
bright earrings and ornamented turbans. And the earth is covered over with 
limbs hacked away with broad-headed shafts, and bejewelled arms; with 
bodies sheathed in gleaming, red-stained armour, with braceleted arms, with 
moon-like faces and kohl-tinted eyes; limbs of elephants, horses and men 
lie everywhere. Dust swirls everywhere in a thick cloud, and bright 
weapons flash like lightning. The sound of all the weapons together is the 
roar of thunder. 

The horrible war between the Kauravas and the Pandavas lets flow a 
bloody river, sprung from a million wounds made by the incessant tirade of 
arrows loosed by invincible Kshatriyas upon Kurukshetra. Bleeding from 
that gale of vicious barbs, the elephants of both armies shriek, and course 
furiously in all directions. Everything is hidden in the twang of virile bows 
and the mighty flapping of bowstrings against the leathern gloves of 
incensed and heroic fighting men. 

On Kurukshetra, looking like a lake of blood, stand headless trunks, 
briefly; kings determined to kill their enemies charge reckless at them; 
mighty warriors, with club-like arms, slaughter one another with barbs, 
maces and swords; riderless horses and elephants, pierced with arrows, 
plunge wildly in all directions; many soldiers on both sides leap high and 
fall, heads stricken off. 

In the battle between Bhima and Bhishma, ever-growing heaps of arms 
and heads, as also of bows and maces and spiked clubs, and hands and 


S anjaya says, ‘Bhishma, son of Shantanu, fights awesomely to protect 
a 


thighs, of legs, and jewels and bracelets, are strewn over the field. Across 
that dreadful field, Rajan, masses of unretreating elephants, horses and 
chariots can be seen. Kshatriya warriors, moved by destiny, decimate one 
another with maces, swords, spears, and arrows. Heroic and skilled fighting 
men contend with bare arms that resemble spiked iron clubs. 

Other valiant men of your army fight the Pandava host, killing thousands 
with clenched fists and knees, slaps and blows. The fallen and falling 
warriors, and those lying on the ground wounded and in agony, make the 
fell field a horrible spectacle; maharathas, bereft of their chariots, still 
holding their swords, always eager to kill, attack one another in mad rage. 

Surrounded by a large Kalinga akshauhini, with Bhishma at its van, 
Duryodhana charges the Pandavas. The Pandava warriors supporting Bhima 
ride wildly, intently against Bhishma with their fine horses and lumbering 
elephants.’ 


CANTO 71 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Seeing his brothers and the other kings battling Bhishma, 

Arjuna storms towards him, weapons raised. Hearing the blast of the 
Panchajanya and the twang of the Gandiva, and seeing his standard, we are 
terrified. That standard bears the emblem of a lion’s tail and looks like a 
mountain blazing in the sky. Beautiful and of divine workmanship, it is 
flecked with many colours, looking like a rising comet on a horizon 
unobscured by any trees. 

All the warriors see the Gandiva, chased with purest gold, as 
magnificent as a great flash of lightning amidst dense clouds in the sky. 
While razing the soldiers of your army, Arjuna’s shouts are like the 
thunderous roars of Indra himself; the slaps of his palms are deafening. 

Like a cloud mass charged with lightning, bolstered by a raging wind, 
Arjuna relentlessly looses his arrows on all sides, completely shrouding the 
ten points of the compass. He of the terrifying astras advances rapidly 
towards the Pitamaha. We that watch are struck senseless and cannot 
distinguish the East from the West. 

Bharatarishabha, your men are bewildered and depressed, their animals 
tired, their horses slaughtered; huddling close to one another, together with 
your sons, they seek Bhishma’s protection. And in that battle Bhishma 
becomes their protector. 

Fearstricken maharathas leap from their chariots, horsemen from the 
backs of their steeds, and foot-soldiers fall where they stand. Hearing the 
thunder of the Gandiva, all your fighting men flee, shutting their ears. 

With many swift horses of the Kamboja breed, surrounded by thousands 
of Gopas with a large Gopayana force, and supported by the Madras, the 
Sauviras, the Gandharas and the Trigartas, surrounded by all the principal 
Kalingas, along with king Jayadratha accompanied by all the kings, and 
supported by a large force of diverse races with Dussasana at their head, 
and fourteen thousand leading horsemen, spurred by your son, the great 
Kamboja king encircles Sakuni, son of Subala, to protect him. 


All the sons of Pandu, united, again desiccate your forces from their 
chariots and animals. And the dust raised by maharathas, horses and foot- 
soldiers, flecked generously with spraying blood, renders Kurukshetra 
hideous, like a dark precinct of hell. 

With a vast legion of elephants, horses and chariots, armed with spears, 
barbs and arrows, Bhishma fights Arjuna Kiritin. The king of Avanti 
engages the lord of the Kasis, and the ruler of the Sindhus, Bhima. With his 
sons and advisors, Yudhishtira battles Salya, his uncle, the famed ruler of 
the Madras. Vikarna engages with Sahadeva, and Chitrasena with 
Sikhandin. The Matsyas fight Duryodhana and Sakuni, while Drupada and 
Chekitana, and the maharatha Satyaki encounter the high-souled Drona and 
his son Aswatthaman. Kripa and Kritavarman both charge against 
Dhrishtadyumna. 

Thus, all over the field, storming bodies of horses, elephants and 
chariots break upon each other. Although there are no clouds in the sky, 
flashes of lightning are seen on high. Every direction is darkened by flying 
clouds of dust raised by the hostile forces. Fierce meteors fail with loud 
reverberations. Violent winds blow swirling the dense dust everywhere. The 
sun is eclipsed by these. And all the warriors, wielding weapons, are choked 
by that dust and swoon. 

The roar of weapons, discharged from the arms of the fearless, missiles 
which can cut through armour like knives through butter, rises to another 
tumult. Bharatarishabha, those weapons of stellar brightness, illuminate the 
sky. Dappled leather shields plated with gold are scattered all around. Heads 
and limbs are seen falling on all sides, cut down with radiant swords and 
spears. Their chariot wheels, axles and carriages smashed, their horses 
killed, valiant maharathas plunge to the ground, their proud standards 
toppling about them. 

The horses of these slain chariot warriors, dragging their riderless 
chariots, mangled with weapons, finally crash to the ground. Some excellent 
horses, despite having their limbs mangled with arrows, continue to run, 
dragging their chariot yokes behind them. Maharathas, their sarathies and 
horses are all flattened like meat on a cook’s board by powerful tuskers. 

Many elephants, smelling the temporal juice of others, sniff the air 
repeatedly through wrinkled trunks. And the whole field is strewn with hilly 
corpses of these massive beasts, slaughtered by arrows, fallen along with 
their howdahs and mahouts. Many elephants, with their standards and 


riders, are trampled by others goaded on by their riders. Terror stalks 
Kurukshetra in every sinister guise. 

Swinging thick trunks, the colossal war beasts, each one an Airavata, 
shatter chariot shafts all around; and many maharathas, with the jalas of 
their chariots cracked, are dragged by the bloodthirsty elephants from their 
rathas by their long hair, like branches of trees, and smashed again and 
again on the ground, crushed into shapeless heaps. Other enormous tuskers 
drag tangled chariots as if they were lotus stalks in lakes, and run bellowing 
in all directions. 

And so we see that Kurukshetra grimly, copiously, adorned with the 
bodies of horse-riders and foot-soldiers, maharathas and their standards.’ 


CANTO 72 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


invincible Bhishma. Arjuna encounters Drona and Kripa, and Vikarna 

nd many other brave kings, all powerful archers; he also faces that mighty 

bowman, the ruler of the Sindhus, supported by his friends and kinsmen and 
many kings of the west and the south. 

Bhima marches against your malicious son Duryodhana, and also 
against Dussaha. Sahadeva advances against those invincible warriors, 
Sakuni and the maharatha Uluka, those great archers, father and son. 
Maharatha Yudhishtira, so treacherously treated by your son, presses 
forward against the Kaurava akshauhini of elephants. 

And that son of Pandu and Madri, the valiant Nakula, who can reduce 
any enemy to tears, faces the excellent Trigarta maharathas. Satyaki and 
Chekitana, indomitable, and the mighty son of Subhadra ride against Salya 
and the Kekayas. The unassailable Dhrishtaketu and the Rakshasa 
Ghatotkacha break upon your sons’ chariots. 

Maharatha Dhrishtadyumna, Senapati of the Pandavas, opposes fierce 
Drona. Thus those fearless and heroic archers of your army and the 
Pandavas engage in battle. 

When the sun is overhead and the sky brilliantly illuminated by his rays, 
the Kauravas and the Pandavas massacre one another. Beautiful chariots, 
draped in tiger skins, race across the field, their flags and pennants fluttering 
in the wind. Warriors let out leonine roars as they contend fiercely. 

Furious and wonderful to watch is the encounter between the noble 
Srinjayas and the Kauravas. Arrows fly thickly in every direction, covering 
the sky, the sun and every point of the compass. 

The splendour of polished barbs looking like blue lotuses, of bearded 
spears hurled like thunderbolts, of tempered swords, of flecked coats of 
mail, and of the ornaments worn by the fighting men, light up the sky and 
the earth with blinding radiance. And Kurukshetra shines with the 
brightness of embattled kings as if with the lustre of the sun and the moon. 


S anjaya says, ‘Sikhandin, with Virata the Matsya king, swiftly nears the 
a 


Brave maharathas, tigers among men, glow in that battle, Rajan, like the 
planets in the sky. 

Maharatha Bhishma challenges the mighty Bhima before the eyes of all. 
Bhishma’s golden-winged arrows strike Bhima. Bhima looses a serpentine 
astra at Bhishma, who cleaves that tangential weapon as it courses towards 
him with a flight of straight shafts. With another, he breaks Bhima’s bow in 
two. 

Satyaki flies up in his ratha and recklessly pierces Bhishma with a 
constellation of shimmering barbs shot from his bowstring drawn to his ear. 
Bhishma fells Satyaki’s sarathy, while his horses bolt. Swift as the mind or 
a storm, they run wildly over the battleground. 

Roars, yells, shouts and cries rise all around from the horrible melee: 
Run, seize, check the horses, hurry! 

And this uproar follows Yuyudhana’s chariot. Bhishma meanwhile 
begins to destroy the Pandava forces like Indra killing the Danavas. But the 
Panchalas and the Somakas, though suffering, courageously attack the Kuru 
grandsire. Other Pandava warriors, led by Dhrishtadyumna, determined to 
thin the ranks of your son’s army, charge at Bhishma. 

In this manner, the warriors of your army, headed by Bhishma and 
Drona, fearlessly harry their enemies. Then the warriors ride away from 
their many contentions and other fresh battles begin.’ 


CANTO 73 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Virata pierces Bhishma with three shafts; he strikes his 

opponent’s horses with three golden winged arrows. Aswatthaman, the 
deadly maharatha, shoots Arjuna through his chest with six whistling barbs. 
Arjuna rives Aswatthaman’s bow and strikes him deep with five shafts. 
Incensed, Drona’s son snatches another great bow and pierces Arjuna with 
ninety whetted arrows and Krishna with seventy. 

Arjuna and Krishna breathe deeply and pause to take thought. Firmly 
grasping the Gandiva in his left hand, Arjuna fits some vicious astras to his 
bowstring, and looses them at Aswatthaman. They plunge through the 
armour of Drona’s son and drink his blood. But Aswatthaman does not 
flinch. With his heart set firm on protecting Bhishma, he unleashes his own 
robust volley back at Arjuna. And since he has faced the two Krishnas 
undaunted, the Kaurava legions roar his praises. 

Aswatthaman has been taught the great astras by his father Drona, and 
he fights without fear. 

“He is the son of my Acharya. He is Drona’s beloved son. He is a 
Brahmana, and worthy of my respect,” thinks Arjuna. And so he is lenient 
towards Drona’s son. He avoids him, and instead decimates your other 
forces with terrible swiftness. 

Duryodhana strikes Bhima with ten keen golden shafts winged with 
feathers of vultures. With a roar, Bhima seizes up a powerful bow which 
can despatch any enemy, and ten terrific arrows. He aims those shafts, 
draws his bowstring to his ear, and pierces the Kaurava king’s wide chest. 
The pendant of Duryodhana’s necklace, surrounded by those arrows, shines 
like the sun in the sky encircled by the planets. 

Hissing like a beaten snake, Duryodhana responds in fury, covering 
Bhima with a rash of golden barbs. Thus your two mighty sons battle and 
draw blood from each other, looking like two Devas. 

Abhimanyu assails Chitrasena with a haze of arrows and Purumitra with 
seven. Piercing Satyavrata with seventy shafts, Arjuna’s son is like Indra 


himself in battle, as he seems to dance on the battleground drawing geysers 
of blood and sowing death all around. 

Chitrasena attacks him with ten missiles, Satyavrata with nine, and 
Purumitra with seven. Abhimanyu is covered in blood, but he smashes 
Chitrasena’s formidable bow, and strikes him deep through his breast with a 
potent shaft. 

The wrathful kings of your army, magnificent maharathas, together stab 
Abhimanyu with barbs beyond count. And Abhimanyu, knower of the 
deadliest astras, shrouds them in supernal arrows. Seeing the splendid 
young Kshatriya consume your army like a blazing fire burning dry grass in 
summer, your sons surround him. As Abhimanyu devours your forces, he 
glows like a god on the profound and dreadful field of death. 

Seeing him like that, Rajan, your grandson Lakshmana rounds on him. 
In a flash, Maharatha Abhimanyu pierces Lakshmana and his charioteer 
with six fleet shafts. Lakshmana responds with a flare of his own barbs. And 
this duel between the young princes is glorious. 

Abhimanyu kills his four horses and his sarathy, and charges at 
Lakshmana, who looses a snakelike astra at Abhimanyu’s chariot. 
Abhimanyu easily foils that ayudha, and Kripa rides up quickly to bear 
Lakshmana away from the field in full sight of all the warriors. 

The fighting spreads like a dread disease, with men killing and dying 
thickly on every side. The great archers of your army and the maharathas of 
the Pandava host slaughter each other without pause, recklessly. 
Kurukshetra is a yawning portal to Yamaloka through which fervid hosts of 
warriors flow into death, in dark tide. With wild, dishevelled hair, deprived 
of armour and chariots, and their bows riven, the Srinjayas fight the 
Kauravas with their bare arms. 

Mahabaho Bhishma continues to vigorously massacre the soldiers of the 
Pandava army with his divine weapons. And the earth is covered with the 
fallen bodies of elephants, horses, chariot warriors and horsemen.’ 


CANTO 74 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Mahabaho Satyaki takes up a fresh powerful bow and 

covers the field of Kurukshetra in a swathe of death. He is like a 
looming cloud of murder, as he draws his arrows, fits them to his bowstring 
and unleashes his bankless storms all round him in a seamless blur. 

Seeing him blaze like a fire of the pralaya, Duryodhana sends ten 
thousand chariots against him. Satyaki is unmoved; he kills those 
maharathas in a flash flood with his divine weapons. He flares on towards 
Bhurisravas. Noble Bhurisravas, stricken to watch the decimation of the 
Dhartarashtra army, charges Satyaki in blind rage. Drawing his vast bow 
like Indra’s, he looses a towering masterly salvo of thousands of shafts at 
the Vrishni. The warriors who follow Satyaki cannot endure that fulminant 
fire and scatter in all directions, abandoning their invincible leader. 

Satyaki’s mighty sons, celebrated maharathas all, cased in shining mail, 
bearing diverse weapons and flying fine standards, advance towards the 
great Bhurisravas, with his pennant with the emblem of a yupastamba, a 
sacrificial stake. They cry at him, “Kinsman of the Kauravas, come and 
fight us, jointly or separately. Either defeat us in battle and win fame, or be 
crushed by us and die!” 

Proud of his strength, Bhurisravas roars back, “Kshatriyas, you speak 
nobly! Fight me jointly and vigilantly. For I will kill all of you in battle.” 

Those heroic archers energetically cover that lone Parantapa in a deluge 
of arrows. That majestic battle between Bhurisravas and those united 
against him is fought in the afternoon. The ten Kshatriyas, Satyaki’s sons, 
rain unending storms on Bhurisravas, hiding him in a shroud of ferocious 
shafts. But none finds a mark on his leonine body, for he cuts them down 
with unworldly dazzling archery. All the while the Vrishni heroes press in 
on Bhurisravas, surrounding him, drawing nearer each moment. With 
incredible genius and prowess, whirling round and round in his ratha, he 
breaks their bows in their hands and sloughs off their handsome heads in 
scarlet explosions. And they plunge to the ground like majestic trees felled 
by thunder. 


Seeing his mighty sons killed, Satyaki roars deafeningly and rushes at 
Bhurisravas. They thrust their chariots against each others. They destroy 
each other’s horses. They leap down to the ground from their useless 
chariots. Taking up mighty swords and great shields they charge into each 
other, glow radiantly, those purushavyaghras. But then, armed with a 
mighty sword, Bhima streaks up to Satyaki and spirits him away in his 
chariot. And your son Duryodhana takes Bhurisravas into the safety of his 
chariot. 

In that great war, the Pandavas fight vigorously, spiritedly against 
maharatha Bhishma. Near sunset, Arjuna massacres twenty five thousand 
maharathas. These had been sent by Duryodhana against him, but he 
destroys them entirely before they can even approach him, burning them 
with astras like insects by a blazing fire. 

The Matsyas and the Kekayas, all masters of astras, surround Arjuna 
and Abhimanyu to bolster them. Just then the sun disappears, and all the 
fighting men are exhausted. 

His horses tired, Bhishma orders the withdrawal of the forces. And the 
armies of the Pandavas and the Kauravas, both anxious and shaken by the 
day’s carnage, return to their camps. The two armies rest for the night in 
accordance with the laws laid down for war.’ 


CANTO 75 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Having rested the night, most sleeping only fitfully with 
nightmares of the dreadful day raging through their sleep, at dawn of 
the next morning, the Kauravas and the Pandavas emerge again for battle. 

A deafening roar rises from fearless, still excited Kshatriya maharathas 
as they ready themselves to take the field. And great tuskers trumpet as they 
are readied for the day’s conflict, and foot-soldiers shout, at least to 
embolden themselves, as they wear their armour, and restless horses 
whinny, their eyes wild. The boom of conches and the beat of drums 
resound again across Kurukshetra. 

King Yudhishtira addresses Dhrishtadyumna saying, “Mahabaho, deploy 
the forces in the Makara vyuha that will scorch the enemy,” and maharatha 
Dhrishtadyumna arrays his rathikas in that formation of the great crocodile. 

Drupada and Arjuna form the war beast’s head, Sahadeva and Nakula its 
two eyes, and mighty Bhima is its snout. Subhadra’s son and the sons of 
Draupadi and the Rakshasa Ghatotkacha, and Satyaki, and Dharmaraja 
Yudhishtira are positioned at its neck. King Virata, with a large akshauhini, 
becomes its back, supported by Dhrishtadyumna and his vast force. The five 
Kekaya brothers comprise its left flank, and that tiger among men, 
Dhrishtaketu, and Chekitana of great prowess, are its right flank, to protect 
the vyuha. 

The great reptile’s two feet are formed by the maharathas Kuntibhoja 
and Satanika, solidly supported. And the illustrious Sikhandin, surrounded 
by the Somakas and Iravat, make up the tail of the Makara. 

Having shaped this wondrous formation, the armoured Pandavas, Rajan, 
stand ready for battle at dawn. With elephants and horses, chariots and foot- 
soldiers, with raised standards and unfurled parasols, with weapons 
gleaming, they march against the Kauravas. 

Seeing the Pandava vyuha, Bhishma forms a great Krauncha vyuha, 
formation of the crane. On its beak is Drona. Aswatthaman and Kripa form 
its two eyes. Kritavarman, most excellent archer, with the king of the 


Kambojas and with the Bahlikas is stationed on its head. In its neck are 
Surasena and your son Duryodhana, surrounded by many other kings. 

The ruler of the Pragjyotishas, along with the Madras, the Sauviras, and 
the Kekayas, followed by a massive force, make up its chest. Susarman, 
king of Prasthala, with his legion forces, stands in full armour as the left 
wing. The Tusharas, the Yavanas and the Sakas, along with the Chulikas, 
form the right wing of that vyuha. And Srutayush and Satyatish and 
Somadatta’s son stand in the rear protecting the others. 

The Pandavas charge the Kauravas. The sun rises above the horizon as 
the battle begins. Elephants advance against elephants, horse-riders against 
horsemen, chariot warriors against others like them, and also against war 
elephants in the war to end all others. 

Maharathas attack riders of elephants, who bear down on horsemen. 
Foot-soldiers engage with maharathas, horse riders with foot-soldiers. All 
the fighting men storm against each other in battle. 

The Pandava army, protected by Bhima and Arjuna and the twins, seem 
beautiful as the night spangled over with stars. And your army also, with 
Bhishma and Kripa, and Drona and Salya, and Duryodhana, shines like the 
sky sparkling with luminous planets. 

Powerful Bhima, seeing Drona, wildly attacks the Acharya’s akshauhini 
of swift horses. The spirited Drona pierces Bhima with nine iron arrows, 
deeply wounding his arms and legs. Bhima, roused, kills Drona’s sarathy. 

The adroit son of Bharadwaja, himself guiding his horses, begins to 
consume the Pandava army like fire consuming a stack of cotton. 
Slaughtered by Drona and Bhishma, the Srinjayas along with the Kekayas 
flee. Your troops also, mangled by Bhima and Arjuna, are benumbed and 
they stand still, like a magnificent lioness in her pride. In this war that 
annihilates Kshatriyas, both armies suffer grievously. 

We are overwhelmed by the sight of men fighting frenziedly, 
unconcerned for their very lives. In this war, the Pandavas and the Kauravas 
oppose each other with all their energies and weapons.’ 


CANTO 76 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


forces. It is organised, deployed expertly and should be invincible. It 

is loyal to us. It is obedient, and free from the vices of drunkenness 
and licentiousness. Its abilities are proven. The soldiers are neither very old 
nor very young. They are neither thin nor fat. They are robust, muscular and 
healthy. 

They are well armed and armoured. They are proficient in the use of all 
kinds of astras. They fight skilfully with swords, maces and even bare arms. 
They are well trained in the use of spears and arrows of many kinds. 

The men are fit, adept in mounting and alighting from the backs of 
elephants, in marching forward, attacking and retreating, and in effectively 
striking the enemy. They have been often tested in their handling of 
elephants, horses and chariots. They are paid soldiers, hired not because of 
their lineage, or on the basis of their earlier associations with us; neither 
have we chosen them in order to favour them. 

They are upright and honest; their kinsmen have been treated well by us 
in the past. We have esteemed them highly for their services. They are all 
eminent and capable men. 

They are in turn led by many dynamic and famed warriors, rulers of the 
earth, celebrated all over the world. Countless illustrious Kshatriyas, who 
have freely allied with us, with their forces also protect them. 

Our army is like the vast ocean filled with the water of a myriad rivers 
flowing from all directions. It has countless elephants, and its chariots, 
though wingless, fly even like birds. Warriors are the waters of that ocean, 
and the horses and other animals are its lashing, terrifying waves. Swords, 
maces, spears and arrows are the oars of our vast and numberless craft. Rich 
in emblems and jewels, adorned with cloth inlaid with gold and gems, the 
charging horses and elephants are the stormy winds that make that ocean 
surge. 

Our host resembles the vast, shoreless, raging ocean. It is defended by 
Drona and Bhishma, and by Kritavarman and Kripa and Dussasana, and 


[ ices: itis says, ‘Our army is skilled, resourceful and has diverse 


others headed by Jayadratha. It is also protected by Bhagadatta and Vikarna, 
by Drona’s son, and Subala’s son, and Bahlika, and by other mighty and 
high-souled Kshatriyas. 

That our army is being destroyed is only due to Destiny, Sanjaya. 
Neither men nor highly blessed Rishis have ever before seen such 
preparations for war on earth. That such a vast and loyal force, deployed so 
scientifically, can be slaughtered in battle can only be the outcome of 
Destiny. All this appears strange and inexplicable. 

Vidura had often given useful and wise advice. But my evil son 
Duryodhana would not accept it. I believe that Vidura foresaw all that is 
happening now; and hence he gave his counsel. Or it may be that all these, 
in every detail, has been predetermined by God, for that which is ordained 
by the Creator must happen and not otherwise.’ 


CANTO 77 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


weakness. Bharatarishabha, you, and not Duryodhana, clearly saw that 
at was done to the Pandavas was wrong. 
That the game of dice was ever played was your folly. And it is your 
fault that this war against the Pandavas has been fought. Having done 
wrong, you must now face the outcome. One reaps the fruit of one’s own 
actions. You must now reap the fruit of your sins in this life and the next. 
Rajan, be calm and accept the unfolding tragedy; listen to my narration of 
the battle. 

Having smashed your awesome vyuha with his shafts, Bhima advances 
upon Duryodhana’s younger brothers. Mighty Bhima sees Dussasana and 
Durvisaha, Dussaha and Durmada and Jaya, Jayasena and Vikarna and 
Chitrasena and Sudarsana, and Charuchitra and Suvarman and Duskarna 
and Karna, and other maharathas of the Dhartarashtra host approach him; 
he attacks your vyuha protected by Bhishma. 

Seeing him amidst them, these warriors cry, “Let us kill Bhima!” and 
Bhima is surrounded by his indomitable cousins. He resembles the burning 
sun encircled by the malevolent planets at the end of the yuga. 

Though besieged in the very heart of the Kaurava vyuha, Bhima is 
fearless, like Indra surrounded by the Danavas in the ancient battle between 
the Devas and the Asuras. Thousands of maharathas engulf him with deadly 
arrows. Valiant Bhima ignores the sons of Dhritarashtra and slaughters 
many other mighty Kaurava warriors fighting from chariots and from the 
backs of elephants and horses. 

Then, knowing that his cousins are determined to kill him, Bhima sets 
himself to exterminate them all. Leaping down from his chariot, mace in 
hand, he begins to destroy the enemy. 

As he penetrates the Kaurava army, Dhrishtadyumna turns away from 
Drona whom he has been fighting and swiftly advances towards Subala’s 
son Sakuni. Killing so many warriors of your army, he notices Bhima’s 
empty chariot. He sees Bhima’s sarathy Visoka, and is distraught. 


S anjaya says, ‘You are the victim of this calamity because of your own 


WwW 


Filled with sudden sorrow, and in a choking voice, he asks Visoka, 
“Where is Bhima who is as precious to me as life itself?” 

Visoka replies humbly, “Bhima commanded me to wait here, while he 
strikes out alone into the heart of the Dhartarashtra host vast as the ocean. 
He cheerfully said to me, ‘Wait here with my horses for some time, until I 
kill those who are determined to kill me.’ Seeing him storm ahead, mace in 
hand, all our fighting men were elated. Bhima smashed through the enemy’s 
mighty vyuha in his awesome way.” 

Hearing Visoka’s words, Dhrishtadyumna says to him, “My life would 
be worthless if I deserted Bhima in battle. If I return without Bhima, what 
will the Kshatriyas say about me? What will they say when they know that 
while I was on the battlefield Bhima charged alone into the enemy vyuha? 

The Devas led by Indra curse those who abandon their comrades in war 
and return unharmed themselves! Brave Bhima is my friend and kinsman. 
He is devoted to me, and I too love that Parantapa dearly. I will go where he 
has gone. Watch me raze the enemy like Vasava slaying the Danavas.” 

Dhrishtadyumna rides right through the enemy, along the path opened 
up by Bhima and marked by elephants crushed under his mace. He sees 
Bhima consuming the Kaurava host, felling Kshatriya warriors like a storm 
ravaging trees. Maharathas and horsemen, foot-soldiers and tuskers scream 
aloud as he slaughters them. Your men cry in anguish as he massacres them. 

The Kaurava warriors surround Bhima and shower him relentlessly with 
their arrows. Dhrishtadyumna sees Bhima attacked from all sides; mangled 
with shafts, on foot, and vomiting the poison of his anger, mace in hand, he 
looks like Siva at the end of the yuga. Dhrishtadyumna moves towards him 
and takes him into his chariot; he plucks out the shafts from his body, and 
embraces him in the sight of the enemy. 

Duryodhana, seeing this, says to his brothers, “Dhrishtadyumna has 
allied with Bhima. Let us attack and kill him. We must be on the offensive 
and not wait for the enemy to strike us.” 

Goaded by their eldest brother’s command, the Dhartarashtras, with 
raised weapons, hurtle towards Dhrishtadyumna, looking like fierce comets 
at the hour of universal dissolution. Like clouds shrouding a mountain with 
torrential rain, these Kshatriyas loose a volley of arrows on him, wielding 
their beautiful bows, making the earth shiver with the twang of their 
bowstrings and the rattle of their chariot-wheels. 


But Dhrishtadyumna, proficient in all kinds of warfare, does not falter 
for a moment. Seeing your sons ready to kill him, he uses the Pramohana 
astra against them, again looking for all the world like Indra facing the 
Danavas. The Pramohana of sleep instantly makes the Kaurava princes 
weak and they swoon. Seeing your sons faint, your forces flee in all 
directions, with their horses, elephants and chariots. 

Drona advances towards Drupada and pierces him with three searing 
shafts. Drupada, remembering his earlier enmity with Drona, leaves the 
battlefield. Drona blows his conch triumphantly, and the Somakas are 
terrified on hearing that blast. 

Wielder of weapons, Drona, full of tejas, now hears of your sons being 
overwhelmed by the Pramohana astra, and rides in a flash to where they 
struggle vainly to remain conscious. Drona sees Dhrishtadyumna and 
Bhima careering across the battleground. And the maharatha watches your 
sons rendered unconscious. He uses the Prajna astra to make powerless the 
Pramohana loosed by Dhrishtadyumna. Your sons recover and again storm 
ahead to fight Bhima and Dhrishtadyumna. 

Yudhishtira says to his warriors, “Send twelve brave maharathas, led by 
Abhimanyu, to Bhima and Prishata’s son. Let them find out about those two 
warriors. I am anxious.” 

Those Kshatriyas sally forth at mid-day. The Kekayas and the sons of 
Draupadi, and Dhrishtaketu, supported by a large force and with 
Abhimanyu at their head, form the Suchimukha vyuha and drive deep into 
the Dhartarashtra chariot akshauhini. 

Your forces, already terrified by Bhima and Dhrishtadyumna, cannot 
withstand the charge of those maharathas led by Abhimanyu. They are 
weak like an unprotected woman. 

With standards flecked with gold, the Pandava warriors cleave swiftly 
through the Kaurava ranks to rescue Dhrishtadyumna and Bhima. Seeing 
them approach, Bhima is elated and, with a glad roar, continues to demolish 
your soldiers. 

The heroic Dhrishtadyumna sees the Acharya advance towards him, to 
protect your sons. He has the chariot of the king of the Kekayas take Bhima 
away, while he himself engages the superlative Drona. 

With a broad-headed’ shaft Parantapa Drona cuts down 
Dhrishtadyumna’s bow even as the Panchala prince rides recklessly towards 


him. Remembering his loyalty to Duryodhana, he also shoots hundreds of 
arrows after Prishata’s son. 

Dhrishtadyumna seizes another bow and pierces Drona with seventy 
whetted shafts, all golden winged. Drona again severs his bow and 
slaughters his four horses with four incredibly excellent barbs, and also kills 
his charioteer with a heavy shaft. Mahabaho Dhrishtadyumna leaps off his 
chariot and climbs onto Abhimanyu’s colossal ratha. Right before Bhima 
and Dhrishtadyumna, Drona makes the Pandava army with all its chariots, 
elephants and horses tremble in fear. 

Seeing that army devastated by Drona, all its maharathas cannot stop its 
flight. Slaughtered by Drona, that army heaves like a stormy sea. Seeing the 
Pandava army reduced, your forces are jubilant. Seeing the fiery Acharya 
consume the enemy, all your warriors roar loudly in praise of Drona.’ 


CANTO 78 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘On recovering, Duryodhana again looses a tide of arrows 

at Bhima. And again those maharathas, your sons, unite and bravely 
oppose the great Pandava. Mahabaho Bhima mounts his chariot and rides 
straight at your sons. He takes up a golden bow, with the power to 
overcome any enemy, and he covers your sons with his wrath. 

Duryodhana strikes him deep with a spear. Roaring, Bhima draws his 
bow in a circle and pierces Duryodhana through his arms and his chest with 
three fierce barbs. But the king stands firm like a prince of mountains. 

Seeing those great Kshatriyas fight, Duryodhana’s younger brothers 
renew their resolve to kill Bhima and attack him again, prepared to die if 
they must. The mighty Bhima charges them like an elephant charging 
another. With untold power, Bhima strikes your son Chitrasena with a long 
arrow, and your other sons with many kinds of swift and golden-winged 
shafts. 

Dharmaraja Yudhishtira meanwhile sends his twelve maharathas led by 
Abhimanyu to follow Bhima. These ride towards your sons. Looking at 
those Kshatriyas on their chariots, resembling the Sun himself or a radiant 
fire, beautiful and resplendent in their golden ornaments, your mighty sons 
turn away from Bhima. The Pandavas, however, are determined not to let 
them leave the battle alive.’ 


CANTO 79 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


your sons. The maharathas of your army, including Duryodhana, see 

imanyu and Bhima united with Dhrishtadyumna in the very middle of 
the Kaurava forces; they seize their bows and ride swiftly at those three 
watriors. 

Ah, such a dreadful battle there is that afternoon, Rajan, between the 
two armies. Abhimanyu kills Vikarna’s horses and pierces him with twenty- 
five fine arrows. Maharatha Vikarna abandons that chariot and mounts 
Chitrasena’s shining one. 

Abhimanyu envelops those two brothers of Kuru’s race, standing 
together on one chariot, with a barrage of shafts. Durjaya and Vikarna stab 
Abhimanyu with five iron barbs. Abhimanyu stands firm like the mountain 
Meru. 

Dussasana fights valiantly with the five Kekaya brothers. All these feats 
are more awesome than can be told. The Pandavas furiously round on 
Duryodhana and each of them pierces your son with three arrows. Your 
indomitable prince, too, shoots each of them with whetted shafts. Thus 
pierced and drenched in blood, he glows like a mountain with rivers of 
muddy water running down its sides. 

And the mighty Bhishma persists against the Pandava army like some 
herdsman belabouring his recalcitrant herd. The twang of the Gandiva is 
heard repeatedly as Arjuna slaughters his opponents on the right of the 
army. In that corner of the battlefield thousands of headless bodies of both 
sides can be seen still standing macabre among the living forces. And 
Kurukshetra resembles an ocean with blood for its water, with arrows as its 
currents. The elephants are its islands and horses its waves. Chariots form 
the boats that bold men use to cross that ocean. Thousands of brave 
warriors, with arms amputated, without armour, and hideously mutilated, lie 
on the ground. 

With the bloody bodies of massacred elephants, the battleground looks 
as if scattered with hills. What a sight! Not a single warrior in both armies 


S seus says, ‘Abhimanyu, along with Bhima, hunts and dismays all 
A 


is less than eager to fight. And so they battle on: those daring warriors of 
both your army and that of the Pandavas, seeking victory and glory.’ 


CANTO 80 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘At sunset, Duryodhana charges Bhima, always to kill 
him. Seeing him come with loathing in his heart, Bhima says, “The 
awaited hour has come. If you do not yield, I will kill you today. 

By killing you I will dispel Kunti and Draupadi’s sorrows, and all our 
anguish during our exile in the forests. You arrogantly humiliated the sons 
of Pandu. O son of Gandhari, you will reap the fruit of all your sins today. 

You always listened to the vicious counsel of Karna and Subala’s son, 
and, dismissive of the Pandavas, you had treated us unjustly. You ignored 
Krishna who had pleaded with you for peace. Jubilantly you had sent 
haughty, mocking messages to us through Uluka. Today I will kill you and 
all your kinsmen, and avenge all the insults and suffering you inflicted on 
us.” 

Bhima stretches his bow, takes up many terrible shafts that shimmer like 
lightning, and looses thirty-six of them at Duryodhana. Flaming they fly at 
his cousin like thunderbolts. With two shafts, Bhima smashes Duryodhana’s 
bow in his hands, and strikes his charioteer with two more. With four shafts 
he kills Duryodhana’s four horses; with another two he cuts down the king’s 
royal parasol. With three others he fells the Kaurava’s magnificent, jewel 
worked standard, which falls to the earth like a flash of lightning from the 
clouds. All the gathered rulers see that radiant Kaurava standard, bearing 
the emblem of a great tusker, adorned with precious stones, plunge to the 
ground, and Bhima roars triumphantly. 

Smiling, maharatha Bhima stabs Duryodhana with ten shafts like a 
mahout piercing a colossal elephant with his hook. The mighty king of the 
Sindhus, with many brave warriors, swiftly sets himself at Duryodhana’s 
flank, while maharatha Kripa quickly takes the seething Duryodhana onto 
his own chariot. The king, deeply wounded by Bhima and suffering, 
collapses on its platform. 

Jayadratha surrounds Bhima with thousands of chariots to have his life. 
Dhrishtaketu and Abhimanyu, and the Kekayas, and the sons of Draupadi, 
all clash with your sons. And the high-souled Abhimanyu strikes each of 


them with five straight shafts that appear like dark lightning or guises of 
Yama. 

They, in turn, unleash a storm of arrows at Abhimanyu, like black 
clouds pounding Meru with rain. But brilliant Abhimanyu makes your sons 
tremble like Indra did the mighty Asuras during the ancient Devasura 
yuddha. In a moment, he shoots fourteen broad-headed shafts like snakes at 
Vikarna; as if dancing in battle, Abhimanyu destroys Vikarna’s standard and 
kills his charioteer and horses. 

Subhadra’s resplendent son covers every direction around him with 
astounding gales of arrows, shafts that can pierce the best armour. Plumed 
with feathers of the kanka bird, these barbs pass right through Vikarna’s 
body and enter the ground like hissing snakes. And decked with gold, 
drenched in Vikarna’s blood, they seem to vomit blood on the earth. 

Seeing Vikarna wounded, his brothers charge the maharathas led by 
Abhimanyu and engage the heroes of the Pandava army, who shine like so 
many suns. 

Durmukha pierces Srutakarman with five shafts, breaks his standard 
with a single shaft and strikes his sarathy with seven. Advancing, he 
butchers his enemy’s horses, as swift as the wind and wearing bright 
armour, with six arrows, and kills his charioteer too. 

Srutakarman stands firm on his horseless chariot and casts a meteor-like 
astra at Durmukha; that weapon cuts through Durmukha’s kavacha and 
plunges into the ground behind him, glowing all the while. Sutasoma helps 
Srutakarman into his chariot, in plain sight of all the forces. 

The heroic Srutakirti storms at Jayatsena. Your son severs Srutakirti’s 
bow with a horse-shoe headed arrow. Seeing his brother’s bow broken, 
brave Satanika rides up swiftly roaring like a lion. In a blink, Satanika 
pierces Jayatsena with ten shafts, and then bellows his victory like a wild 
elephant trumpeting. 

Satanika stabs Jayatsena deeply in the chest; Dushkarna who is near his 
brother Jayatsena, breaks Satanika’s bow. The mighty Satanika seizes 
another powerful bow and, roaring dreadfully, looses a tide of arrows at 
Dushkarna before Jayatsena arrests him with some serpentine nagapasas. 

Recovering in a moment, Satanika destroys Dushkarna’s bow with one 
fell barb, kills his charioteer with two more, and pierces Dushkarna himself 
with seven unerring astras. That flawless warrior slaughters all Dushkarna’s 
swift glossy horses with twelve sharp shafts. Satanika strikes Dushkarna 


deeply through his chest and Dushkarna plunges to the ground like a tree 
felled by lightning. 

To avenge Dushkarna’s death, five maharathas surround Satanika 
determined to kill him. They attack him with dense volleys. The five 
Kekaya brothers press forward to protect Satanika. Seeing them advance, 
your sons fly at them like elephants thundering at other colossal tuskers. 

Your sons Durmukha and Durjaya, and the youthful Durmarshana and 
Satranjaya and Satrusha, all celebrated warriors, plunge red-eyed at the five 
Kekaya brothers. They ride on splendid chariots that look like fortified 
cities, yoked to bejewelled horses and bearing beautifully coloured 
standards; those Kshatriyas carry formidable bows, and wearing beautiful 
coats of mail they penetrate the enemy force like lions entering one forest 
from another. 

A pitched earthshaking battle erupts, in which chariots and elephants are 
shattered and mangled. With untold hatred, they fight until sunset; countless 
warriors on both sides are killed. Thousands of great chariot-warriors and 
horsemen are strewn over the battlefield, like rag dolls now, drenched in 
crimson. 

In rage, Bhishma continues his massacre of the Pandava forces with 
banks and banks of straight shafts, streaming ceaselessly from his matchless 
bow. His arrows annihilate the Panchala fighting men. Having savagely 
reduced the ranks of the Pandavas, the Pitamaha withdraws his forces and 
retires to his camp. 

And seeing Dhrishtadyumna and Bhima both safe, Yudhishtira is 
relieved and he also leaves the field and enters his tent.’ 


CANTO 81 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Those Kshatriyas return to their tents, blood-spattered 

and with the hatred and enmity in their hearts undimmed. They praise 
each other for their glorious feats of the day and spend the night, some in 
deep sleep, others tossing and turning in their beds from the dark and 
violent dreams which plunge through their sleep. The next morning finds 
them again in full armour and ready for battle, which is now their very life 
to them; no other thought occupies their minds. 

Duryodhana is anxious, and with blood still oozing from his wounds, 
asks his Pitamaha, “Our fierce forces carry countless standards. They are 
perfectly drilled and deployed. Yet the Pandava maharathas penetrate our 
vyuha, slaughter our men, and escape unharmed. 

They humble us and win fame in battle. Smashing through our Makara 
vyuha, powerful as the Vajra, Bhima wounded me with terrible shafts each 
like a Yama danda. I was baffled by him. Even now I cannot regain my 
composure. Pitamaha only you can help me kill the sons of Pandu and 
achieve victory.” 

Foremost of all wielders of weapons, and imbued with great tejas, 
Bhishma understands Duryodhana’s anguish; though inwardly despondent, 
he cheerfully says, “My child, I truly exert myself wholeheartedly, to crush 
the Pandava forces and bring you victory and joy, O king. For your sake I 
do not hesitate. 

The Pandava’s allies in this war are many and magnificent. Celebrated 
maharathas, they are more than merely brave and great masters of astras. 
Tireless, they spew forth their righteous anger. They hate you, Suyodhana, 
and swelling with prowess, they will not be easily defeated. I will fight 
them with my whole soul, risking my life. For your sake, for your glory, I 
will stake my life. 

For you, my child, I would consume all the worlds with the Devas and 
the Daityas, not just your enemies on this battleground. And I will fight the 
Pandavas, and do whatever pleases you.” 


Hearing these words, Duryodhana is reassured and filled with hope and 
joy. He cheerfully orders his forces, along with the allied kings, to advance. 
And his army of chariots, horses, foot-soldiers and elephants moves regally 
forward. 

And sensing their king’s fresh confidence, that vast force, armed with 
every kind of weapon, is also full of joy. It looks wonderful with its 
elephants, horses and foot-soldiers. And its colossal tuskers, brightly 
caparisoned, formed in massive akshauhinis, and skilfully goaded, look the 
most resplendent. Many royal Kshatriyas, all accomplished in the use of 
diverse weapons, are seen amidst your forces. And the dust, red as the 
morning sun, raised by the chariots and foot-soldiers and elephants and 
horses as they move across the field, is deeply beautiful, even as it swirls up 
to obscure the face of the sun. 

And the vari-coloured banners on the chariots and elephants wave in the 
air and look like many-hued lightning in clouds in the sky. The din raised 
by the twang of stretched bows is like the roar of the ocean when the Devas 
and the Asuras churned it together during the Krita Yuga, to fetch up the 
Amrita. 

The stately and accomplished army of your sons, consisting of a great 
variety of fighting men, roar and shout fiercely, looking like the clouds of 
the Pralaya that appear at the end of the yuga.’ 


CANTO 82 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘O Bharatarishabha, Bhishma once again addresses your 
thoughtful son with these pleasing words: 

“Drona and I, and Salya and Kritavarman of Satwata’s race, and 
Aswatthaman and Vikarna, and Bhagadatta and Subala’s son and Vinda and 
Anuvinda of Avanti, and Bahlika with the Bahlikas, and the mighty king of 
the Trigartas and the invincible ruler of the Magadhas, Brihadbala the king 
of the Kosalas, and Chitrasena and Vivimsati and thousands of maharathas 
with lofty standards, excellent horses mounted by superior riders, many 
incensed tuskers with the juice of rut trickling from their mouths and 
temples, and numberless brave foot-soldiers from many lands, are all 
prepared to fight for you. 

These, and many others, are ready to lay down their lives for you, 
capable as they are of defeating the very gods in battle. I will however 
advise you again in your best interests. 

The Pandavas are unconquerable even by the gods. With Krishna for an 
ally they are equal to Mahendra himself in prowess. As for myself, I am at 
your command. Either I shall crush the Pandavas or they will overcome 
me.” 

Saying this, Bhishma applies a poultice of medicinal herbs to 
Duryodhana’s wounds and these heal instantly, magically. 

At dawn, with a clear sky overhead, the valiant Bhishma, consummate 
master of vyuhas of all kinds, himself organises his fighting men in the 
Mandala vyuha, the formation of the Galaxy, bristling with weapons. And it 
still abounds in outstanding warriors, elephants and foot-soldiers. 

It is protected on all sides by thousands of chariots, and with legions of 
horsemen armed with swords and spears. Near every elephant are seven 
chariots, and besides every chariot are seven horsemen. Behind every 
horseman are seven archers, and behind every archer are seven soldiers 
with shields. Thus, your army, assembled by mighty maharathas and 
protected by Bhishma, stands ready to fight. 


Ten thousand horses, and as many elephants, and ten thousand chariots, 
and your sons, all covered in mail, the heroic Chitrasena and many others, 
all guard the Pitamaha. Thus Bhishma is protected by those intrepid princes, 
and they in turn are safeguarded by him. And Duryodhana in his coat of 
mail sits on his chariot, graceful and resplendent like Sakra himself. 

Your sons let out thunderous shouts, and the clatter of chariots and the 
sound of musical instruments is deafening. The mighty and impenetrable 
Mandala vyuha of the Dhartarashtras created by Bhishma begins to move 
westwards. It is invincible and so beautiful to behold. 

Seeing the Mandala vyuha, Yudhishtira himself arrays his forces in the 
Vajra vyuha. When all the akshauhinis of chariot-warriors and horsemen are 
suitably stationed, he roars like a most noble lion. The warriors of both 
armies advance; a thirst for battle, they want to destroy the other’s vyuha, 
leaving not a single enemy alive. 

Bharadwaja’s son Drona rides against the king of the Matsyas, and his 
son, Aswatthaman, against Sikhandin. And king Duryodhana himself 
strikes out at the son of Prishata. Nakula and Sahadeva attack the king of 
the Madras. 

And Vinda and Anuvinda of Avanti charge against Iravat. Many kings 
unite to oppose Arjuna. Bhima challenges the son of Hridika, while 
Abhimanyu faces your sons Chitrasena and Vikarna and Durmarshana. 

Hidimbi’s son, Ghatotkacha, that prince of the Rakshasas, charges the 
mighty Bhagadatta, king of the Pragjyotishas, like one incensed elephant 
against another. The Rakshasa Alambusha, Rajan, with rising anger, battles 
the indomitable Satyaki surrounded by his Vrishni warriors. And 
Bhurisravas fights with vim against Dhrishtaketu. 

Dharmaraja Yudhishtira advances against king Srutayush. Chekitana 
challenges Kripa. Other Kaurava fighting men confront maharatha Bhima. 
And thousands of other kings armed with spears, arrows, maces, and spiked 
clubs surround Arjuna. 

Arjuna says to Krishna, “Behold, O Madhava, the Dhartarashtra troops, 
assembled by Bhishma conversant with every kind of vyuha. Look at these 
myriad daring warriors who seek to fight me. Kesava, look, there stands the 
lord of the Trigartas with his brothers. Today I shall kill them all, Janardana, 
before your eyes.” 

Saying this, Arjuna rubs his bowstring to warm it, pulls it to affright his 
foes and overwhelms that host of kings with his arrows. And _ those 


celebrated archers also cover him in gales of shafts, like monsoon clouds 
filling a lake with their torrents. Strident roars are heard in your army as the 
two Krishnas are mantled in a deluge of arrows. Seeing this from on high, 
the Devas, the celestial Rishis, and the Gandharvas with the Uragas are 
awestruck. 

Arjuna, enraged, invokes the Aindra astra. We can only marvel at his 
impossible prowess, as he repels his enemies’ scathing volleys, effortlessly. 
Thousands of kings, horses and elephants are direly wounded by Arjuna’s 
unearthly archery; others are each pierced with two and three of his barbs 
and quickly flow blood. 

The wounded warriors seek Bhishma’s protection. The Pitamaha comes 
to their rescue as they flounder in the bottomless ocean that is Arjuna’s 
mystic archery. Rajan, as they scatter in fear and confusion and tangle with 
other warriors, your broken ranks appear like a sea heaving in a storm.’ 


CANTO 83 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


and the other valiant Kshatriyas of the Kaurava army are routed by the 
gh-souled son of Pandu, indeed, after your army has been tossed like a 
slight fleet of boats upon a great and turbulent ocean, and Bhishma has 
charged swiftly against the chariot of Vijaya, Duryodhana, seeing Arjuna 
straddle Kurukshetra like Yama come hunting, rides up and speaks 
comfortingly to those belaboured, lacerated kings, and to the mighty 
Susarman in the vanguard. 

Duryodhana says, “This Bhishma, the son of Shantanu, uncaring for his 
very life, will fight wholeheartedly against Arjuna. United, exert yourselves, 
and protect Bhishma as he forges at the enemy.” 

All the akshauhinis rally and follow the magnificent Pitamaha. Mighty 
Bhishma charges to confront Arjuna, who also thunders towards him on his 
splendid chariot yoked to white horses, flying his standard bearing the fierce 
Vanara, who gives vent to the most bloodcurdling cries and roars. 

Your entire army, seeing the diadem-decked Dhananjaya advancing into 
battle, cries out in terror. And your forces cannot gaze upon Krishna, as he 
stands, reins in hand, a fiery, magnificent sun. 

The Pandavas also cannot look at Bhishma, who, with his white horses 
and gleaming bow, resembles Sukra rising in the sky. The son of Shantanu 
is ringed by the noble Trigarta warriors led by their king with his brothers 
and sons, and by many maharathas. 

Drona strikes the king of the Matsyas with his winged shafts. He cuts 
down Virata’s standard with a single arrow, and his bow with another. 
Virata, Senapati of a vast akshauhini, discards the cloven bow and swiftly 
takes up another that is strong and resilient. He seizes many blazing arrows 
resembling poisonous snakes, stabs Drona with three of these and his four 
horses with four. He fells Drona’s standard with another barb, and his 
sarathy with five. Cracking Drona’s bow in his hands with yet another shaft, 
he enrages that bull among Brahmanas. 


S anjaya says, ‘When the battle rages on, after Susarman stops fighting, 
hi 


Drona kills Virata’s horses with eight long shafts, and then his charioteer 
with one. Virata has to leap down from his chariot whose horses have been 
slaughtered. Virata, that most excellent maharatha, mounts his son Sankha’s 
chariot. Riding together, father and son powerfully resist Drona with a 
refulgent wrath of arrows. 

In fury, Drona strikes Sankha with a missile like a serpent spitting 
venom. This shaft pierces Sankha’s chest and he falls to the ground bathed 
in his own spraying gore. He plunges down from his chariot, before his 
father’s eyes, his bow and arrows falling out of his grasp. Seeing his son 
killed, Virata flees howling in shock and terror, flees from the awful Drona 
who looks like Death with mouth agape. 

Drona rapidly thwarts the vast Pandava host. Sikhandin strikes Drona’s 
son in his forehead with three sharp darts. Aswatthaman glows like Meru 
with its three golden peaks. Incensed, in less than a blink of the eye, 
Aswatthaman overwhelms Sikhandin’s charioteer and cuts down his 
standard, horses and weapons, covering them all in a swathe of arrows. 
Sikhandin, scorcher of enemies, leaps off his horseless chariot. Taking up a 
gleaming sword and shield, he moves as he wishes, wrathfully and sharply 
like a hawk. Aswatthaman cannot kill Sikhandin and all are filled with 
wonder. 

Aswatthaman looses thousands of arrows at his enemy but mighty 
Sikhandin wards them off with his whirling sword and shield, as if in 
another dimension of time. Drona’s son shoots Sikhandin’s radiant shield 
decked with a hundred moons into shards, and cuts his sword in two. He 
now stabs Sikhandin himself with a volley of winged arrows. 

Sikhandin whirls the remaining length of his snake like blade, and hurls 
it at Aswatthaman like lightning. Drona’s son shoots that blade into slivers 
even as it flies at him, brilliant like the fire that blazes at the end of the 
yuga. And he strikes Sikhandin himself with countless solid iron arrows. 
Deeply wounded and in agony, Sikhandin climbs onto Satyaki’s chariot. 

Satyaki pierces the feral Rakshasa Alambusha all over, on every side, 
deeply with his lusty arrows. That prince of Rakshasas shatters Satyaki’s 
bow with a crescent-tipped shaft, then draws blood from Satyaki himself 
with countless other barbs. Using his Rakshasa’s maya to create a 
formidable illusion, he shrouds Satyaki with torrents of fire and water, and 
storms of very real sharp missiles. 


The grandson of Sini displays breathtaking prowess as he remains 
undaunted by that ferocious fusillade. The son of Vrishni’s race intones a 
profound mantra and launches the Aindra astra, which he had from his guru 
Arjuna. The astra burns down that demonic illusion and envelops 
Alambusha in a torrid arrow storm. Wounded sorely by that exceptional 
Kshatriya, Alambusha flees to avoid facing Satyak1. 

Defeating that prince of Rakshasas, unbeatable by Maghavat himself, 
the grandson of Sini flings back his handsome head and roars and roars 
before your stunned forces. The indomitable Satyaki now begins to 
decimate and scatter your fighting men at will. 

Meanwhile, O Rajan, Dhrishtadyumna covers your son in a shroud of 
fire. Your royal Suyodhana stands rocklike and undaunted. He strikes 
Dhrishtadyumna with sixty shafts, and in a wink with thirty more. And all 
these feats seem amazing. The Pandava Senapati responds by smashing 
your son’s bow in fury. That maharatha slaughters your son’s four horses, 
and pierces him with seven finely-honed arrows. 

Your son, so strong and vigorous, leaps from his horseless chariot, and 
runs straight at the son of Drupada wielding a raised sword. The mighty and 
loyal Sakuni quickly takes Duryodhana into his own chariot. Having routed 
their king, Drupada’s fire prince begins to raze your forces like Indra killing 
the Asuras. 

Kritavarman swathes maharatha Bhima with his shafts, overwhelming 
him like a mass of clouds hiding the sun. That nemesis of enemies, Bhima, 
only continues to furiously shoot arrows at Kritavarman, laughing in glee. 
That atiratha of the Satwatavamsa, outshining everyone, boldly strikes 
Bhima with a ceaseless stream of lean missiles. The colossal Bhima kills 
Kritavarman’s four horses and strikes down his sarathy and his beautiful 
standard; and masterful Bhima stabs Kritavarman with many kinds of 
arrows. 

Pierced all over, his limbs mangled, Kritavarman runs to Vrishaka’s 
chariot, in the sight of both Salya and your son. Fury unabated, Bhima 
begins to butcher your men all around. He beats them to pulp, like Siva 
with his mace.’ 


CANTO 84 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


contests between the Pandavas and my warriors. You do not 

mention, however, Sanjaya, the heroism or high spirits of anyone of 
my side. You talk of the cheerful and invincible sons of Pandu, and of mine 
as being listless, dejected and vulnerable in battle. Unquestionably, all this 
is Destiny.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Bharatarishabha, your fighting men display strength and 
courage to their utmost. But just as the sweet waters of the celestial Ganga 
turn salty when they meet the sea, so is the valour of your sons rendered 
futile when they meet the heroic sons of Pandu in battle. 

They exert themselves forcefully, and accomplish the most difficult 
feats: you should not censure your forces. It is your sins, and those of your 
sons, that have resulted in this horrific destruction of the world, all this 
shameful and bloody waste and ruin. 

It does not befit you, Rajan, to mourn what you have caused. The duty 
of kings in this world is not merely to protect their lives. Wishing to win the 
realms of the righteous, they fight daily, thrusting into enemy akshauhinis, 
with the heavens alone as their aim. 

In the bright morning, widespread carnage ensues, yes, even like in the 
Devasura yuddha, the first of all wars. Hear of it with undivided attention. 

The two lustrous princes of Avanti, those mighty archers, rush at Iravat. 
The battle that breaks out between them is brutal, making one’s hair stand 
on end. The incensed Iravat strikes the divine brothers with a luminous and 
deadly volley, which they cut down in a shower of sparks. Hotly the three 
battle their only thought to have the enemy’s life; so feverishly do they fight 
that they cannot be distinguished one from the others in the rage of arrows 
with which they darken earth and sky. 

Iravat kills Anuvinda’s four horses with four terrific shafts, and 
demolishes Anuvinda’s bow and standard with another two, all of which 
pierce the general cloud of arrows all round. And this feat is truly 
wonderful. 


Deorisss says, ‘I hear you speak of the countless awesome single 


Abandoning his chariot, Anuvinda leaps onto Vinda’s. From that single 
ratha, the inspired brothers of Avanti unleash an elemental fury of missiles 
at the high-souled Iravat. Those golden arrows course through the air and 
cover the sky. Cut to the quick, Iravat creates a thunderhead of shafts in the 
sky and they lash down in a cataract on the two splendid maharathas and 
fell their sarathy. 

When their charioteer falls dead to the ground, the unrestrained horses 
run amok, dragging the chariot wildly behind them. In some satisfaction, 
Iravat begins to consume your foot-soldiers all around him. And the mighty 
Dhartarashtra host, thus slaughtered, reels like a man drunk on poison. 

Mounted on his black ratha, its flag flying high, that prince of 
Rakshasas, Hidimbi’s looming son Ghatotkacha charges Bhagadatta. The 
king of the Pragjyotishas rides his prince of elephants, Supritika, even like 
Indra did Airavata in the battle of antiquity provoked by Taraka’s 
molestation. 

The Devas, the Gandharvas, and the Rishis all assembled in the subtle 
akasa cannot distinguish between Ghatotkacha and Bhagadatta. As the 
infuriated king of the Devas once infused the Danavas with fear, so does 
Bhagadatta terrify the Pandava warriors. And stricken on all sides, they 
look around vainly for a protector among their ranks. 

The son of Bhima stands valiant with darkly glimmering defiance on his 
chariot, while other maharathas melt away disheartened. When the Pandava 
forces rally, there rises a deafening roar among your fighting men. 
Ghatotkacha, O Rajan, pours down a thunder shower of arrows on 
Bhagadatta, as the clouds of the monsoon do on Meru’s great summit. 
Bhagadatta foils every falling shaft from the Rakshasa’s bow, and strikes 
Ghatotkacha deeply in all his marmas, the vital parts of his hulking body, 
lancing agony through him. That prince of the Rakshasas does not waver 
for a moment but stands still like a mountain pierced. 

Rage mounting, the Pragjyotisha king hurls fourteen spears, all of which 
the magnificent Rakshasa cuts in slivers. Mahabaho Ghatotkacha stabs 
Bhagadatta with seventy keening shafts, each one like Indra’s Vajra. 

But laughing all the while, Bhagadatta slaughters the Rakshasa’s four 
horses. Ghatotkacha remains steadfast on his ratha and launches a deadly 
javelin at Bhagadatta’s elephant. The mountain king smashes that swift 
golden lance hurtling wildly towards him into three harmless stalks. 


Ghatotkacha flees terrified, like Namuchi, that foremost of the Daityas, did 
from Indra in the primordial battle. 

Having defeated that daring Kshatriya, unassailable even by Yama 
himself or Varuna, king Bhagadatta with his elephant begins to crush the 
Pandava forces like a wild tusker trampling the lotuses in a lake. 

Salya of the Madras fights his sister’s sons, the twins. And he 
overwhelms them with salvos of arrows. Sahadeva shrouds his dead 
mother’s splendid brother with arrows like clouds veiling the sun. Covered 
by these shafts, the king of the Madras is delighted, and the twins also are 
satisfied for their mother Madri’s sake. 

Maharatha Salya kills Nakula’s four horses. Nakula leaps down from his 
own chariot and mounts his brother’s. Standing on one ratha, the two 
brilliant Kshatriyas draw their bows in circles and pound Salya’s chariot 
with a battery of arrows. That purushavyaghra remains unmoved as a 
mountain. Laughing, happy to see his nephews’ prowess, he also inundates 
them with arrows. 

Sahadeva charges at Salya, adroitly stabbing him with a powerful astra. 
Like Garuda’s beak, the arrow pierces the Madra king and he falls in a faint 
in his chariot. Seeing him felled by the superb twins, and unconsciousness 
and prostrate, his sarathy steers him away to safety. Watching Salya’s 
chariot leave the field, the Dhartarashtras are shocked, crestfallen, thinking 
he is dead. 

Having bested their uncle, the twins blast their conches and roar 
triumphantly. They fly exultantly, Rajan, towards your forces like Indra and 
Upendra at the Daitya host.’ 


CANTO 85 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘At noon, seeing Srutayush, Yudhishtira goads his horses 

at that Kshatriya. He attacks Srutayush, that chastiser of foes, striking 
him with nine keen shafts. Foiling those arrows, the illustrious Srutayush 
pierces Yudhishtira with seven barbs loosed in a single moment, which 
pierce his armour, spilling his blood and sapping the Dharmaraja’s tejas. 

Though painfully wounded, the son of Pandu shoots a missile formed 
like a boar’s ear into Srutayush’s breast and fells his standard from his 
chariot with another shaft. Seeing his proud standard destroyed, Srutayush 
strikes Yudhishtira with seven emerald arrows. The Dharmaraja is inflamed, 
and flares up like the fire that blazes at the end of the yuga consuming all 
creatures. 

Seeing the son of Pandu’s towering wrath, the Devas, the Gandharvas 
and the Rakshasas tremble on high, and the very universe is disturbed. And 
they fear that Yudhishtira will incinerate the three worlds that very day. And 
the Rishis and the Devas pray for peace. Still enraged and frequently licking 
the corners of his mouth, Yudhishtira looks like the sun that rises at the end 
of the yuga. Rajan, all your warriors fear for their lives. 

With perfect composure, mighty Yudhishtira cleaves Srutayush’s bow at 
its very grasp, and before the eyes of all the fighting men, he strikes 
Srutayush with a long arrow squarely though that king’s chest. Summarily, 
the Pandava king despatches Srutayush’s horses and his charioteer. 

Srutayush abandons his horseless chariot and flees, and a wave of shame 
courses through Duryodhana’s army. And now Yudhishtira begins to 
decimate your men at will, like Yama himself with mouth agape come 
hunting to Kurukshetra. 

All see Chekitana of the Vrishnis cover maharatha Kripa Gautama with 
an extravagance of arrows. Cutting these down in flight, Kripa son of 
Saradwat shatters Chekitana’s bow and fells his sarathy. Kripa kills 
Chekitana’s horses, and the two warriors that protected his flanks. 

Chekitana leaps down from his chariot with a mace in his hands. 
Dashing forward, he kills Kripa’s horses and his charioteer with five 


sickening, bloody blows. Kripa, too, jumps down from his useless ratha and 
from the ground looses sixteen flashing arrows at Chekitana in the blink of 
an eye. Those barbs pierce cleanly through that noble Kshatriya and plough 
into the earth. Blossomed in blood flowers, in pain and enraged, Chekitana 
flings his mace at Kripa, like Purandara when he wanted to kill Vritra. 

Gautama pulverises that gleaming gada coursing at him with a thousand 
arrows shot in an instant. Chekitana draws his sword and charges Gautama, 
who discards his bow, and drawing his own polished blade, also rushes 
towards his opponent. Both mighty warriors flay each other with their 
glinting weapons, sparks flying. Both bulls among men are wounded and 
fall onto the Earth, mother of all creatures. Exhausted, they faint. 

Karakarsha, moved by friendship, rides up, and that invincible Kshatriya 
quickly lifts Chekitana into his chariot. And your brother-in-law, the 
intrepid Sakuni, swiftly helps maharatha Kripa onto his ratha. 

Dhrishtaketu strikes the son of Somadatta in his chest with a blur of 
ninety shafts. And adorned with those arrows, Somadatta’s son looks like 
Surya Deva with his burning rays. 

Bhurisravas destroys maharatha Dhrishtaketu’s chariot and kills his 
sarathy and his horses. Seeing him defenceless, Bhurisravas cloaks 
Dhrishtaketu with a veil of fine arrows. Dhrishtaketu abandons his chariot 
and mounts Satanika’s. Encased in golden armour, maharathas Chitrasena, 
Vikarna and Durmarshana unite to attack the son of Subhadra. A fierce 
battle ensues between them and Abhimanyu, like the struggle of the body 
with vata, pitha and kapham, wind, bile, and phlegm. 

Abhimanyu, tiger among men, smashes your sons’ chariots, but does not 
kill them, remembering Bhima’s vow to kill all the sons of Dhritarashtra 
himself. Arjuna sees Bhishma, invincible even against the Devas, 
advancing to save your sons from the terrible young Abhimanyu, already a 
maharatha among maharathas. 

He addresses Krishna, “Urge your horses, Hrishikesa, to where those 
indomitable maharathas gather. Guide our horses so that the enemy does not 
annihilate our forces.” 

Krishna steers the chariot yoked to white horses into battle. Seeing 
Arjuna advance on your army, a loud clamour is heard among your fighting 
men. As he nears the kings protecting Bhishma, Arjuna addresses 
Susarman, “I acknowledge you both as excellent warriors and as our dire 


enemy. Today you will taste the harsh fruit of your sins. Today I will send 
you to the resting place of your ancestors.” 

That commander of chariot akshauhinis, Susarman, makes no reply to 
Arjuna’s threat. Riding at Bibhatsu, with a large host of his allies, he 
surrounds him, and, supported by your sons, envelops him in a billowing 
gale of arrows, which hide the face of the sun. 

Another dreadful battle breaks out between your army and that of the 
Pandavas, in which blood runs like water.’ 


CANTO 86 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Mighty Arjuna, pierced by Susarman and his host, 

inhales deeply and dissects the bows of those maharathas with his own 
arrow storm; he draws copious blood from all their bodies. Many of them 
fall bleeding on the ground. The limbs of some lie dissevered, and the heads 
of others roll, cut cleanly from their neck. Some die with bodies twisted and 
their coats of mail mangled. Struck by Arjuna’s tremendous arrows, they 
plunge to gory death. 

Seeing this carnage, Susarman, king of the Trigartas, yet advances on 
his chariot. And thirty-two other maharathas, who had been protecting the 
rear of those slain warriors, also attack Arjuna. Surrounding him, drawing 
their powerful bows in circles, they assail him relentlessly with deadly fire. 
Wounded by their deluge, Arjuna is incensed, and kills them all with six 
extraordinary shafts. Having slain sixty maharathas in moments and their 
legions in a few more, the glorious Kshatriya is exhilarated and he dashes 
ahead to kill Bhishma. 

Seeing his allies overthrown, Susarman of the Trigartas still rushes at 
Arjuna with some other kings in his vanguard. Watching them press 
forward, the Pandava legion led by Sikhandin charges at them to protect 
Dhananjaya’s chariot. 

Arjuna turns and unleashes another arrow storm from the Gandiva at 
Susarman and his Samsaptakas. Eager to confront Bhishma, great Arjuna 
sees Duryodhana and some other kings led by the sovereign of the Sindhus, 
guarding the Kuru grandsire. Erupting into a grand inspiration of unearthly 
archery, sublimely thwarting the warriors who protect Bhishma, Arjuna 
who knows no fear adroitly avoids Duryodhana, Jayadratha and others, and 
forges on to engage the awesome son of Ganga. 

Dharmaraja Yudhishtira also nimbly avoids the Madra king Salya, who 
has been assigned to harry him, and, along with Bhima and the sons of 
Madri, rides furiously at Bhishma. 

Dominating the field of war as ever, peerless Bhishma faces the unified 
onslaught of the sons of Pandu, never wavering. The dexterous Jayadratha 


takes careful aim and with gusto smashes the bows of all those Pandava 
maharathas. Always wrathful, Duryodhana strikes Yudhishtira, Bhima, 
Arjuna and the twins with a firetide of flaming shafts. Pierced roundly by 
Kripa and Sala and Chitrasena, Rajan, the Pandavas appear like the Devas 
attacked by the united Daitya hordes in ancient times. 

Yudhishtira sees Sikhandin flee when Bhishma, with some disdain, 
consumes an astra loosed by the Panchala prince, and the Dharmaraja is 
stirred to anger. He cries at Sikhandin, “In the presence of your father, you 
had sworn to me that you would kill Bhishma. That was your solemn oath. 
Why do you not fulfil it now? O Kshatriya, do not neglect your vow. 
Defend your virtue, your noble race and your honour. 

Look how Bhishma burns my troops with his fiery shafts, consuming 
them like Death himself. Your own bow is riven and you are repeatedly 
vanquished by Shantanu’s terrible son. Where do you go, deserting your 
kinsmen and brothers? This does not befit you. 

Ah, you are terrified, and the colour fades from your face to watch 
indomitable Bhishma, and our army routed and in retreat. But you do not 
yet know that Arjuna has joined this dreadful fray. O celebrated Kshatriya, 
why are you afraid of Bhishma today?” 

Hearing Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, harshly though the Dharmaraja speaks, 
Sikhandin is quickly reassured, and turns back to fight, once more his sole 
and fervid purpose to destroy great Bhishma. As that prince rides back with 
verve into battle, Salya greets him with a flaming agneyastra. The son of 
Drupada, powerful as Indra himself, is undaunted, by that weapon, 
luminous as the fire that burns at the end of the yuga. Sikhandin stands firm, 
and invokes a Varunastra, and douses Salya’s flames with a great tide of 
water in the sky. The Devas in the akasa and the kings of the earth all watch 
that awesome spectacle in wonder. 

Meanwhile, the noble Bhishma breaks Yudhishtira’s bow and cuts down 
his standard. Seeing Yudhishtira suddenly seized by fear, Bhima sets aside 
his bow and arrows, and, seizing a club, rushes roaring at Jayadratha on 
foot. Jayadratha riding in a circle pierces Bhima from all sides as the great 
Pandava runs at him, with five hundred whetted arrows each like a 
Yamadana. Calmly ignoring those barbs, the daring Vrikodara, incensed, 
turns his fury on Jayadratha’s horses, foaled in Aratta, the kingdom of the 
Sindhus, and slaughters them all in explosions of blood. 


Seeing Bhima fighting on foot, your son, the unrivalled Chitrasena, who, 
also, resembles the king of the Devas, swiftly attacks him from his chariot 
with astras. Mace in hand, Bhima bellows like ten wild bison and storms 
recklessly at your prince. Seeing Bhima’s raised rod of Death, the Kauravas 
abandon your brave son and run like terrified boys. 

In that fierce and bewildering fray, O Bhaarata, Chitrasena is undaunted 
as he watches that blood-dripping club flung by Bhima’s tremendous hand 
course towards him through the air. Taking up a shining sword and shield, 
he leaps down from his chariot like a lion from the top of a cliff, to fight on 
foot. In that moment, falling on them like some meteor from the sky, 
Bhima’s mace crushes Chitrasena’s magnificent chariot, its horses and its 
sarathy. Watching your son’s heroic and narrow escape, your forces are 
elated and shout triumphantly to applaud his deed.’ 


CANTO 87 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Your son Vikarna dashes up to Chitrasena and lifts him 

on to his own chariot. As the relentless war, fought at terror’s very 
heart, continues, Bhishma attacks Yudhishtira. The Srinjayas, despite their 
chariots, elephants and horses, tremble to see the utterly frightening 
grandsire, and they believe Yudhishtira to be near his end. 

Yudhishtira, accompanied by the twins, presses forward towards 
Bhishma, most illustrious archer, tiger among tigers among men. He 
shrouds Bhishma with thousands of arrows, clouds hiding the sun. And 
those countless arrows, so skilfully shot by Yudhishtira, reach the son of 
Ganga in distinct flights of hundreds and thousands. 

And Bhishma responds by releasing a myriad shafts that are like dense 
locust swarms. In a flash, Bhishma mantles Kunti’s son in several cerements 
of arrows which he looses in tide upon tide. Yudhishtira, stung, responds 
with an elongated nagapasa with venomous jade scales. Maharatha 
Bhishma destroys Yudhishtira’s shaft in the air with a horse-shoe headed 
arrow. 

Bhishma slaughters Yudhishtira’s gold decked horses and the Pandava 
king abandons his horseless chariot and swiftly mounts Nakula’s. Bhishma, 
conqueror of hostile cities, confronting the twins in battle, covers them 
entirely with his arrows. Seeing his afflicted brothers, Yudhishtira begins to 
seriously plot Bhishma’s end. 

He goads his friends and allies to the deed, crying, “Unite and kill 
Bhishma!” Hearing these words, the kings surround the Pitamaha with 
many chariots. But Bhishma, almost playfully, fells the maharathas, one 
after the other with his transcendent archery. 

The Pandavas helplessly watch Bhishma thundering all over the 
battlefield, Bhishma like a young lion in a forest amidst a herd of deer. 
Roaring, he terrifies the bravest warriors; all the gathered Kshatriyas before 
him are like lesser animals before a lion. They see his swirling majestic 
movements in his chariot as being like a blazing wind-blown inferno 
devouring a heap of dry grass. 


And Bhishma beheads maharathas like a forester felling ripe fruits from 
palmyra trees with stones. And those heads of helmeted soldiers fall upon 
the earth with the clatter of cascading rocks. 

As that dreadful battle rages, utter chaos reigns among the armies. The 
carefully deployed legions of both armies fall into complete disarray. And 
the Kshatriyas challenge one another to individual combat. 

Sikhandin charges at the Pitamaha, shouting to him to stop and fight. 
But Bhishma thinks of the princess Amba that Sikhandin once was, and 
disdaining him, advances against the Srinjayas who are delighted at seeing 
him approach. They cheer deafeningly and blast their conches. 

Another bloodthirsty battle erupts in which chariots and elephants are 
mangled, and a thousand good fighting men die each moment. And the day 
passes as in a scarlet nightmare. 

Dhrishtadyumna, prince of the Panchalas, and maharatha Satyaki are 
tormented by a barrage of arrows and spears aimed at them. With riptides of 
fire they begin to burn columns and columns of your warriors. Though 
under fiery siege, your forces do not retreat, but fight back bravely by now 
determined to die for honour if they must. Slaughtered by the illustrious son 
of Drupada, they cry out in anguish and fall in waves into the sea of blood 
which spreads everywhere and congeals upon sacred ground. 

Hearing the desperate screams of those dying legions, maharathas Vinda 
and Anuvinda of Avanti ride in a froth at Dhrishtadyumna at his horrible 
sacrifice of living men. Abruptly killing his horses, they envelop him in 
deadly storms of dark arrows. The prince of the Panchalas leaps off his 
chariot and mounts that of the noble Satyaki. 

King Yudhishtira, supported by a vast akshauhini, rides against the two 
enraged princes of Avanti. And your son surrounds them defensively. 

Arjuna fights against many bulls of the Kshatriya race, like Indra against 
the Asuras. Drona, always ready to defend your son, begins to devour the 
Panchalas like fire consuming a heap of cotton. Your other sons, Rajan, 
loyal to Duryodhana, surround Bhishma, and confront the Pandavas. 

When the evening sun turns red, Duryodhana says to your forces, 
“Hurry!” And as the sun sets behind the western hill, and the soldiers 
accomplish difficult feats, the ghastly river of blood flows and swells, 
infested by jackals. 

And the battlefield turns hideous, full of spectres, and the jackals howl, 
portending further evil. Thousands of Rakshasas and Pisachas and other 


flesh eaters and blood drinkers are seen all round. 

Having routed the kings led by Susarman and their soldiers, in the very 
midst of their akshauhini, Arjuna returns to his tent. And Yudhishtira and 
his brothers, followed by his men, withdraw to theirs. 

Bhima, too, having brought deadly havoc among Duryodhana’s 
warriors, returns to his tent. And Duryodhana, with his troops, after 
defending Bhishma successfully another savage day, turns back to his. 

And Drona, and Drona’s son, and Kripa, and Salya, and Kritavarman of 
the Satwata vamsa, all of the Dhartarashtra army, retire to their tents. 
Satyaki too and Dhrishtadyumna, the son of Prishata, shepherding their 
army, withdraw towards theirs. 

Thus those fearless chastisers of enemies, your forces and the Pandavas, 
stop fighting at sunset. Both the Pandavas and the Kauravas enter their tents 
and praise one another. 

Making arrangements for the protection of their fearless legions through 
the night, having their watch posts manned, they pluck out the day’s arrows 
from their bodies and bathe in many kinds of water. And Brahmanas 
perform propitiatory rites for them, and poets sing their praises. 

Those illustrious men amuse themselves with singing and instruments. 
And for a while the whole place resembles heaven itself! Those bulls 
among men do not speak of the war. And when both armies sleep, 
exhausted men and elephants and horses, they are serene and beautiful to 
watch.’ 


CANTO 88 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Having passed the night in sound sleep, at daybreak the 

Kauravas and the Pandavas once more advance into battle. As they 
come onto the battleground again, a great deep sound like the roar of the 
ocean is heard. 

Duryodhana, and Chitrasena, and Vivimsati, and that most excellent 
maharatha Bhishma, and Drona, all united and in full armour, expertly array 
the Kaurava vyuha against the Pandavas. Fierce as the stormy sea, with 
horses and tuskers for its billows and current, the Pitamaha leads that 
dwindled but still vast army, supported by the Avantis and the Malavas, the 
people of the southern kingdoms. 

Beside him is the noble son of Bharadwaja, with the Pulindas, the 
Paradas, and the Kshudraka-Malavas. The valiant and stalwart Bhagadatta 
is in your ranks, along with the Magadhas, the Kalingas, and the ghoulish 
Pisachas. 

Behind Bhagadatta is Brihadbala king of the Kosalas with the Melakas, 
the Tripuras, and the Chichilas. Next to Brihadbala is the brave Trigarta, 
king of the Prasthala, surrounded by a vast number of the Kambojas, and by 
Yavanas in thousands. 

Next to the lord of the Trigartas, Bhaarata, advances that mighty 
Kshatriya, Aswatthaman son of Drona, filling the earth with leonine roars. 
Alongside is king Duryodhana himself with his entire army, surrounded by 
his magnificent brothers. Behind Duryodhana rides Kripa the son of 
Saradwat. 

Thus, that mighty vyuha, resembling the turbulent ocean, presses into 
battle. And standards and royal white parasols, beautiful bracelets and 
costly bows, shine radiantly. Watching the enemy advance, maharatha 
Yudhishtira says to Dhrishtadyumna, “‘Behold that oceanic vyuha! O son of 
Drupada, create another swiftly to contain and destroy it.” 

The gallant Dhrishtadyumna forms the Sringataka vyuha, which is 
known to raze all other vyuhas. At its horns are Bhima and Satyaki, with 
thousands of chariots, horsemen and foot-soldiers. Near them is Arjuna, 


with his chariot yoked to white horses driven by Krishna. In the centre 
stand Yudhishtira and Madri’s twin sons. 

Other royal archers, all knowers of the vyuha shastra, with their forces, 
fill the remaining spaces. Abhimanyu, and Virata, the sons of Draupadi and 
the Rakshasa Ghatotkacha are told to bring up and defend the rear. 

Having created this awesome vyuha, the noble Pandavas stand on the 
field, longing for battle and eager for victory. And the crashing of drums 
mingles with the blast of conches; the leonine roars of the soldiers and the 
slapping of their armpits are thunderous and fill every direction. 

Those mighty warriors advance, and stare across Kurukshetra, field of 
dharma, chasmic field of death, unwinkingly. After a moment’s perfect 
silence they erupt into fierce roars and yells, challenging each other, and 
attack! The war on the crack of the ages between your sons and their 
enemies, their cousins, resumes beneath its enveloping canopy of wrath. 

Quickly lethal shafts fall like showers of serpents with mouths agape, 
and polished gleaming barbs rain down like gashes of lightning. Glittering 
maces loosed from bright slings fly up and whistle down over the enemy in 
batteries of thunder and blue swords and leather shields decked with a 
hundred moons look wondrous as they adorn the field of endless death. 

The two hostile armies look at once awful and resplendent, like the 
Devas and Asuras fighting each other. In every direction they storm against 
one another, and the air is a thick hoarseness of roars and screams. 

Celebrated maharathas crash violently into others, the yokes of their 
chariots tangling with those of their opponents. The friction of the tusks of 
elephants as they collide sets off flashes of fire and smoke. 

Warriors on the backs of elephants, struck through with spears, fall like 
loosened rocks from hillsides. And the spectacle of foot-soldiers, fighting 
with bare arms or impaling one another with spears, is both magnificent and 
poignant. 

With unending banks of arrows of every size and description, Kaurava 
and Pandava warriors mow each other down as if in some terrible game, a 
nightmare difficult to conceive. Bhishma charges the Pandavas, filling the 
air with the clatter of his chariot, while the twang of his bowstring petrifies 
his enemies all over again. 

The resolute Pandava maharathas, led by Dhrishtadyumna, roar 
stridently and rush at him. This ignites a general battle between the foot- 
soldiers, chariot warriors, and elephants of both sides, in which countless 


bright fighting men, old and young, killing and dying, become tangled with 
one another, their bodies and already written destinies.’ 


CANTO 89 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘The Pandavas cannot even look upon Bhishma who rages 

over the battleground scorching every side like the Sun himself. The 
Pandava army, commanded by Yudhishtira, attacks the son of Ganga who 
destroys everything around him with blazing tides from his noble bow. 

In elation, Bhishma razes the best of the Srinjaya and the Panchala 
archers. Yet the Panchalas and the Somakas continue to attack him with no 
thought for their lives. Bhishma severs the arms and heads of their 
maharathas. He smashes their chariots. And the heads of horsemen fall like 
eerie hail as they are hewn off in vermilion blasts. 

We see countless war elephants, paralysed by Bhishma’s §astras, 
sprawled like hills on the ground, their riders crushed under them. None 
among the Pandavas can resist Bhishma, but only the formidable Bhima. 
Bhima rides to face his Pitamaha in battle, scything a bloody path through 
the Kaurava ranks, who roar or scream at him even as kills them. The 
jubilant Pandavas too roar like lions to see the carnage Bhima inflicts on the 
enemy. 

Duryodhana, surrounded by his brothers, protects Bhishma. Inexorable 
Bhima still thunders up and beheads Bhishma’s charioteer. Uncontrolled, 
his horses run wildly from the field, dragging their chariot behind them. 
Bhima decapitates Sunabha with horse-shoe headed arrow, so that son of 
yours falls out from his chariot. Seven of his brothers watch this cool brutal 
slaying and cannot bear it. 

Adityaketu and Bahavasin, Kundadhara and Mahodara, and Aparajita, 
and Panditaka and the invincible Visalaksha, dressed in silver-flecked 
armour and carrying splendid weapons, attack Bhima in fury. Mahodara 
pierces Bhima with nine thunderbolt like arrows, quite like Indra assailing 
the great Asura Namuchi. 

Adityaketu stabs him with seventy shafts and Bahavasin with five. 
Kundadhara strikes him with ninety barbs and Visalaksha with seven. And 
that conqueror of enemies, the maharatha Aparajita makes Bhima’s mighty 


body a home for countless smoking barbs. And Panditaka also pierces him 
with three shafts. 

Bhima does not flinch, instead he laughs, roars, in echoing peals and 
roars to make your sons’ blood run cold. His bow firmly held in his left 
hand, Vrikodara of the cavernous appetites sloughs off your son Aparajita’s 
most handsome head. And that head falls to the ground and rolls some way 
like some grisly ball. 

While both armies watch transfixed, Bhima cuts your son Kundadhara’s 
body in two with an exceptional sword-headed arrow. His next shaft, Rajan, 
is aimed at Panditaka and its rips through his armour so his heart bursts in a 
hot red font, and passing clean through your son’s body, that irresistible 
barb burrows into the ground like a snake entering its hole after claiming its 
marked victim. 

In great joy now, for he thinks of all the pain and shame your sons 
inflicted on him in the past, he cuts away Visalaksha’s head. Bhima strikes 
the mighty Mahodara square through his chest with an interminable arrow 
which excoriates this next son of yours and your prince plunges lifeless to 
the ground. Slashing down Adityaketu’s royal chatra with one light like 
shaft, he beheads this boy of yours as well with another. Animated, roaring, 
roaring all the while, Bhima next kills Bahavasin in a bright red flash of 
gore. 

Suddenly remembering the solemn oath that dreadful Bhima swore in 
the Kuru sabha, that he would kill every one of your sons, your other 
princes panic and flee from him. Stricken, sobbing, wailing to watch the 
brutal death of his brothers, Duryodhana roars at his forces, “There stands 
Bhima, preening. Destroy him!” 

And your sons, those famed archers, seeing their brothers killed, 
painfully remember the wise and precious warning and counsel of the 
dignified and upright Vidura. For whatever nemesis he warned them of they 
now see unfolding before their eyes. Indeed, Rajan, everything that Vidura 
warned you of is coming to pass on Kurukshetra, field of dharma, field of 
death. But then you were blinded not just in your eyes, but your very heart 
by your greed, your foolishness and your inordinate love for your sons. 

Ah, to watch that mahabaho decimating the Kauravas, it is amply clear 
that Bhima has undoubtedly been born to kill all your sons. 

Overwhelmed by sorrow, Duryodhana rides up to Bhishma, and laments, 
“Bhima slaughters my brave brothers in battle like animals in a hunt. Our 


forces fight courageously, but they are failing. You seem to be an indifferent 
spectator, unconcerned about our fortunes. What terrible path have I taken? 
Ah, behold my evil destiny.” 

Sanjaya continues, “Hearing Duryodhana’s sad and cruel outburst, 
Bhishma’s eyes fill with tears, and he says, “I said this before, as did Drona, 
Vidura, and the revered Gandhari. O my child, you did not understand it 
then. Parantapa, I have long ago determined that neither I nor Drona will 
leave this war alive. 

But I also tell you this: Bhima will kill all whom he targets in this war. 
So muster your fortitude, and firmly resolved on battle, fight the sons of 
Pritha, making only Swarga your goal. As for the Pandavas, with Krishna 
on their side, they cannot be vanquished by the very Devas. Be resolute and 
brave; fight, O Bhaarata!””’ 


CANTO 90 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


Sanjaya, how do Bhishma and Drona and Kripa respond? 

Day after day my sons are being slaughtered. Ah, I believe they 
are being overtaken by dark destiny; for they seem unable to find victory 
and always appear to face defeat. If my sons are being overcome despite 
Drona and Bhishma, and the high-souled Kripa, and Somadatta’s gallant 
son, and Bhagadatta, Aswatthaman and other invincible heroes being with 
them, it can only be the will of fate. 

Though reproached by me, Bhishma and Vidura, heinous Duryodhana 
paid no heed to what we said. Gandhari, too, warned him, but the dissolute 
Suyodhana did not realise his folly. And his folly now results in the death of 
my reckless sons at the hands of Bhima, day after day in battle.’ 

Sanjaya says, “You yourself did not then understand Vidura’s august 
words spoken for your good, but they have now come true. Vidura said, 
“Restrain your sons from gambling.” 

Like a man whose hour is come, refusing the remedy which can save 
him, you did not listen to the counsel of your well-wishers. The words of 
the righteous are being fulfilled and the Kauravas now perish for 
disregarding what the wise Vidura and Drona and Bhishma and other well- 
wishers warned them about. Why, O king, the dark omens portending the 
unthinkable tragedy which would ineluctably unfold were in evidence even 
when you refused to listen to their dire warnings. 

It is far too late now and you cannot turn time back. So listen instead to 
my narration of the war exactly as it happens. 

At noon, the battle turns even more savage and bloody. At the command 
of Dharma’s son, the Pandava forces charge Bhishma yet again, always 
seeking to kill him. Dhrishtadyumna and Sikhandin, and maharatha Satyaki, 
with their spirited legions, ride at Bhishma as he stands alone like some 
great and unassailable column of light and death looming over Kurukshetra. 

Maharathas Virata and Drupada, with all the Somakas, attack the 
solitary Bhishma. And the Kaikeyas, and Dhrishtaketu, and Kuntibhoja, 


[ sitive. says, ‘Seeing so many of my sons killed by a single man, 


armoured and bolstered by their forces, advance against the grandsire. 
Arjuna and the sons of Draupadi, and the fierce Chekitana press forward 
against all the kings commanded by Duryodhana who protect Bhishma. The 
noble Abhimanyu, terrible Ghatotkacha, and the smouldering Bhima fall 
upon the remaining Kauravas. 

These three Pandava legions begin to slaughter the Kauravas, and the 
Kauravas also kill their enemy in ever mounting numbers. Drona assails the 
Somakas and the Srinjayas, meaning to raze them from the face of the earth. 
Shrill cries of anguish rise among the brave Srinjayas as they are mown 
down by Drona’s remorseless tide of fire. 

Countless Kshatriyas, struck by Drona, shudder and writhe in agony like 
men in the grip of some terrible disease. All over the field wounded men 
moan, some scream in pain, some groan hollowly like men dying of thirst 
or starvation. 

And so also, like a second Yama, Bhima ravages the Kaurava forces. 
The river of blood swells and surges frothing across Kurukshetra and every 
moment hundreds of souls increase the population of Yama’s kingdom. 
Bhima runs amok among the elephant akshauhini of the Kauravas, striking 
the great beasts down at will with arrows and mace, so their trumpeting 
rings horribly with the screams and mortal cries of dying men and their 
blood foams copiously into the ankle-deep lake of gore which spreads 
across the field of horror. 

Struck with Bhima’s shafts, some of those tuskers plunge to the ground, 
some are paralysed and cannot move, some bellow in pain, while others run 
dementedly everywhere crushing men and chariots of both armies. Majestic 
elephants, their trunks cut off and limbs mangled, scream like cranes, and 
briefly pirouette ungainly before plummeting to the ground, shaking the 
earth. 

Nakula and Sahadeva are at the Kaurava horsemen. Thousands of the 
finest horses, wearing garlands of gold on their heads and golden jewels on 
their necks and chests, are butchered by the radiant twins. The earth is 
strewn with handsome fallen steeds. Some have had their tongues cut away; 
some lying limbs askew with wild eyes, their flanks heaving; some whinny 
weakly in agony, while others are still, no movement or breath stirring in 
them and their noble spirits fled. The field of war presents a strange and 
unnerving sight, adorned with fallen horses of many breeds and colours. 


The very earth looks fiercely resplendent, with the bodies of countless 
kings killed by Arjuna; and with broken chariots, slashed banners and 
brilliant parasols, with rent chamaras and fans, and mighty ayudhas 
smashed in pieces, with garlands and gold necklaces, with jewelled 
bracelets, with heads still decked with ear-rings, with crowns fallen from 
royal heads, with standards, with jutting bases of beautiful chariots ruined, 
O Rajan, and with traces and reins Bhumi Devi is as radiant as she is in 
spring when strewn with flowers. But with such a grim and eerie splendour. 

Bhaarata, thus the Pandava host is devastated when Bhishma and Drona, 
and Aswatthaman, and Kripa and Kritavarman fight with their utmost 
ferocity, while your army also faces similar devastation when the Pandava 
heroes unleash their long withheld simmering rage and put forth their 
might.’ 


CANTO 91 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘As that war greater and more horrible than any other 
continues to claim brave Kshatriyas all around, Sakuni charges the 
Pandavas. Hridika’s son of the Satwata vamsa also rides at them. 

Suddenly, joyfully, as if some hidden tide has turned in their favour, 
your warriors encircle the Pandava army; their horses are the best of the 
Kamboja breed and those born in the northern plains, those of Aratta and 
Mahi and Sindhu, Vanayu’s white horses, and those of the mountain 
kingdoms. The Tittiri horses, swift as the winds, surround the Pandavas. 
And with swift, mail-covered horses, decked with gold, Parantapa Iravat, 
son of Arjuna, rides at the Kaurava legion. 

Iravat is the son of Arjuna, born to the daughter of the king of the Nagas 
who was vulnerable and despondent when her husband was killed by 
Garuda. Childless, she was given to Arjuna by Airavat. Partha took her to 
be his wife for she desired him. Thus that son of Arjuna was born to the 
wife of another. 

Abandoned by his uncle who hated Arjuna, he was raised among the 
Nagas, protected by his mother. He grew up handsome, strong and 
accomplished, with unassailable strength and many occult powers. Hearing 
that Arjuna had gone to Indraloka, he promptly went there. He approached 
his father and greeted him with folded hands. He introduced himself to 
Arjuna, saying, “I am Iravat. Blessed are you, and I am your son.” 

He reminded Arjuna of the circumstances of the Kshatriya’s meeting 
with his mother. Arjuna embraced his son who was so like him in heroic 
deeds, and exulted. Mahabaho Iravat was then joyously commanded by 
Arjuna, “When the war begins, you shall fight for us.” Agreeing happily, 
Iravat left. 

And now at the hour of battle he presents himself, with many swift and 
beautifully coloured horses. Decked with gold ornaments, they glide across 
the field like swans on the surface of a lake. Those stallions dash headlong 
against yours and both fall to the ground with a reverberation like the swish 
of Garuda’s wings. And the horse-riders hack one another down. The 


riderless chargers of both sides break free and scatter wildly in every 
direction. 

Their strength sapped by receiving so many arrows upon their splendid 
bodies, their horses killed under them, brave Kshatriya horsemen stagger 
exhaustedly on Kurukshetra and die. When those legions of horses diminish 
and only a few survive, the younger brothers of Sakuni ride out of the 
Kaurava vyuha to the front, mounted on fresh, rested, well trained chargers, 
neither old nor young, swift and forceful as a gale. 

Those six powerful brothers, Gaya, Gavaksha, Vrishava, Charmavat, 
Aarjavam, and Suka storm out of the Kaurava vyuha. They are supported 
by Sakuni and by their ardent fighting men, all wearing armour. Breaking 
through the hitherto inviolable Pandava legion of horsemen, those 
indomitable and jubilant Gandhara warriors penetrate deep into it, longing 
for victory or death and the bliss of heaven. 

Seeing these exhilarated warriors, Iravat says to his bejewelled Naga 
soldiers, “Destroy these, their astras and their beasts.” And his uncanny 
fighters, many of them half human and half great serpents, begin to cold- 
bloodedly harvest the onrushing cavalry of spirited Dhartarashtra warriors. 

Watching their horsemen being coolly erased by Iravat’s nerveless 
legion, the distraught sons of Subala charge Iravat and surround him. Their 
forces attack Iravat and his Naga cavalcade with spears, and gory 
pandemonium rules all Kurukshetra. 

Pierced with deep spears and drenched in blood pouring free from his 
wounds, Iravat looks like an elephant repeatedly pierced with a hook. 
Though wounded deeply in his chest, back, and thighs, he faces his 
adversaries alone and never wavers, not for a moment, Arjuna’s heroic son. 

Iravat stuns his rivals with a tornado of arrows so they swoon. That 
parantapa rips out the spears from his body, and flings them back at the sons 
of Subala striking them deep. He charges them with sword and shield in 
hand to kill them. They recover consciousness and attack him ferociously. 
Undaunted, Iravat continues to run at them, blade upraised. So swiftly does 
he weave and run, that even on their fleet chargers they cannot accost him. 

His enemies ring him round and try to capture him. But as they near him 
that parantapa hacks off their arms in a flurry and hacks away the legs of 
some. Their ornamented arms and weapons fall, and Arjuna’s terrifying 
Naga son cuts off their heads all around. 


Only the wounded Vrishava, Rajan, escapes alive from Iravat. Seeing 
those valiant Kshatriyas killed in moments, Duryodhana says to the sinister 
Alambusha, master of maya, who loathes Bhima for having killed his 
brother Baka once, “Look how Iravat has slaughtered my troops. You, too, 
have maya at your command and can go anywhere at will. You loathe 
Arjuna. Now kill his son in battle.” 

Alambusha roars like a lion and, with the fiendish Rakshasas of his 
akshauhini, wielding weirdly shining spears, charge Iravat. With the 
remainder of the Kaurava horsemen, too, Alambusha rushes at the mighty 
Iravat, who covers him in blizzard of arrows in the twinkling of an eye. 
Immediately, the Rakshasa begins to uses sorcery against the Naga prince. 
He conjures illusory chargers ridden by Rakshasas armed with spears and 
axes. 

Two thousand die in moments in the battle between Iravat and 
Alambusha, and the two of them quickly come face to face like Vasava and 
Vritra. As Alambusha closes on him, Iravat cleaves his bow with his sword, 
and, whirling like some dervish, cuts down the Rakshasa’s arrows all round 
him. 

Alambusha flies up into the air and flitting here and there, changing his 
form moment to moment, tries to confound Iravat with maya. But Iravat can 
also shift his shape at will, and baffles Alambusha with his chimeras, and 
swiftly hacks off the fiend’s arms and legs, shredding them with lightning 
sword strokes. 

But lo, Alambusha reappears in a wink, now with a youthful appearance. 
Making illusion is natural to rakshasas, and they can choose their age and 
form at will. The Rakshasa’s severed limbs join magically together and are 
now darkly splendid and rippling with youth and vigour. With a howl, 
Iravat hacks at Alambusha with his axe, like a woodsman cutting down a 
tree, mangling him again so his blood flows in rills. Alambusha’s horrible 
roaring echoes across the field entirely patinaed with a skin of blood. 

Yet again, Alambusha’s desiccated body rejoins miraculously and now 
assuming a more macabre form than any he yet has, he rushes forward to 
try to seize Iravat bodily. Arjuna’s son never flees a battle. Quickly a great 
Naga, a kinsman of his mother, appears at his side, and through that uncle’s 
maya, Iravat is surrounded by his serpentine kin. 

Surrounded by glimmering emerald-scaled Nagas, Iravat assumes a 
form as vast as Ananta himself. He then mantles monstrous Alambusha in a 


writhing mass of snakes. The Rakshasa reflects for only a moment and, 
assuming the form of Garuda, devours those snakes and Iravat’s uncle with 
them. Seeing that Naga of his mother’s line consumed through illusion, 
Iravat is momentarily confounded. In that moment, the Rakshasa kills him 
with his sword; Iravat’s crowned head, lovely as a lotus, beautiful as the 
moon, rolls to the ground. 

When Arjuna’s noble son is slain by the Rakshasa, the Dhartarashtra 
legions erupt in celebration. Conches boom and drumrolls fill the air thick 
with ghosts of men and their beasts dying in thousands all the while, and 
hardly aware yet they have been killed. 

What a bloodletting there is on both sides in the war on Kurukshetra. 
Horses and elephants and foot-soldiers are killed by rampaging tuskers, 
gored and trampled. And glossy steeds and countless elephants are felled by 
swarming foot-soldiers. Maharathas annihilate chariots and warriors in 
numbers that cannot be counted or told as death’s hurricane swirls on, only 
mounting in savagery by the passing day, by the hour. 

Unaware of his son’s death, Arjuna continues to decimate the kings who 
shield Bhishma. The warriors of your army and the Srinjayas sacrifice their 
lives by the thousands as libations in the yagna fire of war. And having lost 
their swords and bows, many maharathas, with dishevelled hair, fight with 
their bare arms. 

Bhishma kills so many maharathas with supernal astras of wind, fire and 
shafts of solid water and the Pandava forces tremble before him. He 
massacres horses, elephants, horsemen and chariot warriors without favour, 
the river of blood surging before him most of all. Surely, Bhishma’s 
prowess appears equal to Sakra’s. 

The fearsome valour of Bhima and Parshata is no less than Bhishma’s, 
and scintillating handsome Satyaki’s no less than theirs. Yet on this day the 
Pandavas are most fearful when they see Drona put forth his might. They 
think: “Drona can destroy us and our forces singlehandedly. What can he 
not do when he has a legion of maharathas with him?” Even Arjuna thinks 
like this and is afraid to watch his Acharya sow death all around him as 
casually as a farmer sowing seeds in a fertile, darkling field. 

With every passing hour of war, the warriors of both sides become more 
ruthless and cruel, as if demons possess them and impel them to commit 
every atrocity they can. Quickly the war, which began with noble covenants 


being made between both armies, degenerates in this horrible contention 
that is like a fell carnage between two Rakshasa hosts.’ 


CANTO 92 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


the Pandavas learn that Iravat is dead?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Seeing his cousin Iravat slain, the Rakshasa 
Ghatotkacha roars terribly again and again in anguish. And the earth, with 
her oceans and mountains and forests, trembles. The sky and the four 
quarters of the world shudder. 

Hearing those roars, the legs and arms of warriors quiver, and they 
sweat profusely. Your army is terrified. Everywhere, your soldiers stand 
frozen, like a herd of tame elephants fearing the charging lion. 

With shattering roar after roar, Ghatotkacha assumes a truly terrifying 
form; with a raised flaming spear, encircled by many fierce Rakshasas all 
wielding astras, he charges in wrath like Siva at the end of the yuga. Seeing 
him come like some plague and his own troops scatter in absolute panic, 
Duryodhana, roaring like a pride of lions, rides headlong at the wild 
Rakshasa loosing a rage of flaming arrows at Ghatotkacha. Behind 
Duryodhana rides the king of the Vangas, with ten thousand great tuskers 
with musth juice trickling down. 

The sight of your son with a legion of elephants angers Ghatotkacha 
further and his slanted eyes seem to spew flames. A pitched battle, that 
makes the hair stand on end, breaks out between him and Duryodhana. 
Seeing the lumbering elephant force towering on the horizon, the infuriated 
Rakshasas rush at it, weapons in hand, thundering forward like clouds 
charged with lightning, with chilling cries and yells. With sword and arrow, 
spear and mallet and rough hewn axe, they begin to raze that elephant host. 

They kill majestic tuskers with great rocks and uprooted trees. As the 
Rakshasas demolish the elephants, we see some of the mighty beasts with 
their frontal globes smashed, some bathed entirely in their own blood, 
others with their limbs mangled or trunks sliced off leaving blood spraying 
hollow stumps whistling. 

As his elephant host is laid waste, Duryodhana charges the Rakshasa 
horde recklessly. He looses cataracts of arrows at Ghatotkacha’s legion of 


[ite Panda says, “Tell me, Sanjaya, how does Arjuna respond when 


night, killing any number of those dark and excellent warriors. Inflamed, 
Suyodhana strikes four of the best and most dangerous Rakshasas, Vegavat, 
Maharudra, Vidyujihva and Pramathin, with four particularly deadly arrows 
and swathes the entire fell force in a calorific mantle of arrows. Many 
handsome and magnificent Rakshasas perish. 

Bhima’s wild son blazes up at your son’s success. He draws his 
resplendent bow and charges Duryodhana. But your son is unperturbed at 
seeing Ghatotkacha storming towards him like Yama at Siva’s bidding. 

With fiery eyes, Ghatotkacha says to Duryodhana, “Today I will be 
released from my debt to my elders, and my mother; they were exiled by 
your vile game of dice. You dragged Drupada’s daughter Krishnaa, in her 
period and clad in a single garment, into the Kuru sabha and humiliated her. 
Your persecution did not end there, and at your command, Jayadratha of the 
Sindhus tried to ravish her in the forest. Wretched Duryodhana, if you do 
not surrender, I will avenge all those injuries today!” 

With that, Hidimbi’s son bites his lower lip with his fangs, and licking 
the corners of his mouth with his long sharp tongue, covers Duryodhana in 
a scathing tide of arrows.’ 


CANTO 93 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


for the Danavas to withstand, like a bull elephant, lord of his herd, 
nduring the rains. Bharatarishabha, your son is in grave danger, but 
heedless of it he looses twenty five keen arrows, which flash to strike great 
Ghatotkacha, like poisonous snakes on the chest of Gandhamadana. Pierced 
by those shafts, blood trickles down the Rakshasa’s body and he looks like 
an elephant with rent temples and juices flowing down. 

Ghatotkacha turns his attention on Duryodhana, to kill your son no less. 
He seizes up an enormous spear, which could rive even a mountain. He 
chants an arcane mantra over it and it begins to blaze with light, like a 
comet, like a streak of lightning in his awesome hands. The Rakshasa raises 
it high above his head to cast it at Duryodhana, certainly impaling him, 
having his life. 

Even as the recondite and dreadful thing burns and fizzes in 
Ghatotkacha’s hand, Bhagadatta king of the Vangas, riding an elephant 
taller than any other, the peerless Supritika, thunders and sets himself 
squarely between Suyodhana and the Rakshasa, shielding your son 
completely. 

Ghatotkacha fumes to see his intention foiled and casts his incendiary 
lance at Bhagadatta’s elephant instead. Supritika gives a most abysmal 
bellow as the fiery ayudha strikes him with a huge explosion, blasting a 
gaping hole in his side, blowing his great heart to shreds, and slowly, his 
eyes screaming a legend of grief and pain that lord of all mountain 
elephants buckles at his knees and falls over dead, shaking the earth. 
Bhagadatta leaps down to save his life, with a heartbroken roar to see his 
beloved beast die. 

Duryodhana is anguished to see that prince among elephants killed and 
his troops give way to the wave of despair that sweeps over them and they 
run in dismay in every direction. But steadfast himself, cleaving to his 
Kshatriya dharma and his dignity, and full of fresh wrath, the Kaurava king 


S anjaya says, ‘Duryodhana calmly bears that storm of arrows, hard even 
e 


unleashes an astra seemingly made of the flames of the pralaya at 
Ghatotkacha. 

With alacrity, Ghatotkacha thwarts that burning shaft in flight. He seems 
to grow even taller with the mahima siddhi he commands and looming like 
some great shadow over the cowering Kaurava legions, his eyes shining 
crimson red with rage, he gives a roar truly like a thundercloud’s, so your 
warriors stand rooted and trembling before him. Again and again, 
Ghatotkacha roars and all Kurukshetra quakes to hear him. 

Hearing him, Bhishma rides up to Drona and says, “Hidimbi’s son is 
battling Duryodhana and no creature on earth can quell Ghatotkacha. O 
blessed one, go and protect the king or the Rakshasa will have his life 
today. Hurry Drona, and all your parantapas, this is our highest dharma!” 

Drona and the other maharathas rush towards where the king of the 
Kauravas stands facing the roaring Rakshasa. They meet Duryodhana and 
Somadatta, Bahlika and Jayadratha, Kripa and Bhurisravas and Salya, and 
the two princes of Avanti, along with Brihadbala, Aswatthaman and 
Vikarna, Chitrasena and Vivimsati, all in the thick of the wheeling, 
whirling, blood spraying battle. 

Thousands of other maharathas and their legions press forward to defend 
your son who is being cornered. Seeing those invincible forces dash 
towards him, Ghatotkacha stands unyielding as the Mainaka mountain, bow 
in hand, surrounded by his fiendish kinsmen armed with clubs and mallets 
and many astras. 

The Rakshasas on one side and the best of Duryodhana’s akshauhinis on 
the other launch into a mortifying battle. The twang of bows everywhere is 
like the ear-splitting cracks of burning bamboos cracking at their knots. The 
clatter of weapons falling upon coats of mail is as deafening as mountains 
shattering. Spears hurled by noble arms course through the sky like snakes. 

Ghatotkacha raises his enormous bow, roars like a pride of lions, and 
cleaves Drona’s bow with a strange, curved arrow. He fells Somadatta’s 
standard with another broad-headed one. He pierces Bahlika with three 
shafts through his chest. He strikes Kripa with one arrow and Chitrasena 
with three. With another swift one from his fully stretched bow, he strikes 
Vikarna in the shoulder. Spouting blood, Vikarna falls to the floor of his 
chariot. 

The Rakshasa vigorously drives fifteen shafts into Bhurisravas; they 
pierce through his armour and flesh and enter the earth. He smashes the 


chariots of Vivimsati and Aswatthaman. They drop the reins of their horses, 
and fall to the ground. 

With another crescent-tipped arrow he fells Jayadratha’s standard 
bearing the emblem of a golden boar; with a shaft he rives the Sindhu 
king’s bow. In frightful rage, he kills the king of Avanti’s four horses with 
four unerring barbs. With another well tempered shaft, he stabs king 
Brihadbala deep, and the wounded king stumbles in his chariot. Never 
pausing, Ghatotkacha looses a clutch of serpentine narachas, which pierce 
the celebrated Salya.’ 


CANTO 94 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Having scattered all your warriors, the rampant Rakshasa 
attacks Duryodhana, at which many indomitable warriors of your army 
rise up to kill Ghatotkacha. 

Those maharathas draw their mighty bows and charge at him, roaring 
like a countless lions. Surrounding him, they lash him with arrows like 
clouds belabouring a mountain with torrential rain. Deeply struck and in 
agony Ghatotkacha is like an elephant pierced repeatedly with a cruel hook. 
Then, like Garuda, he soars up into the sky, from where he thunders like 
stormclouds, and his fierce roaring resounds in every direction. 

Hearing the Rakshasa’s roars, Yudhishtira says to Bhima, “Listen to 
Ghatotkacha! For certain he is battling the maharathas of the Dhartarashtra 
army. The Pitamaha stands always ready to slaughter the Panchalas and 
Arjuna fights to protect them. Mahabaho, both these tasks demand your 
immediate attention; go and support Hidimbi’s son who is in grave danger.” 

Bhima advances swiftly, terrifying the enemy with his tigerish roars that 
sound like the ocean at full moon. The valiant Satyadhriti and Sauchiti, and 
Srenimat and Vasudana, and the powerful son of the king of Kasi, all follow 
Bhima Vrikodara. Countless other rathikas led by Abhimanyu, and by the 
sons of Draupadi, and the bold Kshatradeva, and Kshatradharman, and Nila 
follow these. To protect Ghatotkacha they encircle him with a great force of 
chariots and six thousand war elephants. 

Their loud shouts and roars, the thunder of their horses’ hooves and the 
clatter of their chariot wheels make the earth shudder. Hearing that tumult, 
your anxious forces, ever fearing Bhima, turn ashen. Leaving Ghatotkacha, 
they flee. An unrelenting battle breaks out between those high-souled 
warriors and yours. Maharathas unleash astras at each other. 

The war makes the brave exult and strikes terror into the hearts of the 
timid, as horsemen and elephant warriors face each other, and foot-soldiers 
and maharathikas. Absolutely possessed by the spirit of battle and 
bloodlust, they fight blindly, in rage. 


In that seething ferment of chariots, horses, elephants, and foot-soldiers, 
a pall of dust rises from chariot wheels and the running feet of men and 
animals. Impenetrable, like red smoke, it obscures Kurukshetra. The 
warriors cannot distinguish friend from enemy. The father does not 
recognise the son, nor the son the father, in that vicious, unfeeling war 
which makes one’s hair stand on end. 

The ceaseless ominous whine of coursing weapons and the roars and 
screams of fighting men are like the howls of dead souls in torment. The 
blood of men and their beasts flows in frothing rivers; warriors’ hair upon 
dissevered heads form its ghastly weeds and moss. Indeed, severed heads 
fall like hail on Kurukshetra. The earth is scattered with headless corpses of 
men, alongside mangled bodies of elephants and hacked limbs and bodies 
of horses. 

Maharathas pursue each other and loose elemental astras to consume the 
enemy. Chargers, goaded by their riders, dash against others and fall down 
dead, their wild eyes glazing over in death. And men with burning, mad 
eyes, who have lost their weapons, dash against each other breastplate on 
breastplate, helmet on helmet, and fall stunned. Cruelly prodded by their 
mahouts, elephants gore other elephants disembowelling one another. 
Covered with bleeding wounds, their backs decked with standards, they are 
seen locked horribly, inextricably into each other like clouds charged with 
ivory lightning. 

Some lie on top of others; some have their frontal lobes split with 
spears; they run wildly thundering like roaring clouds. Some, with their 
trunks lopped off, others with mangled limbs, plunge to the ground like 
mountains shorn of their wings of old by Indra. Other majestic tuskers bleed 
copiously, their sides ripped open; they look like mountains with red muddy 
streams gushing down their sides after a cloudburst. Others, riderless and 
pierced with arrows and spears, are like mountains shorn of their peaks. 

Some of the great beasts are blind with fury, with juice streaming down 
their temples and cheeks and over their maddened eyes; no longer guided or 
restrained by any goad, for their riders have fallen, they trample hundreds 
of chariots, horses and foot-soldiers. 

Horses, attacked by horsemen with bearded arrows and _ spears, 
whinnying in pain and rage and helplessness, careen at their assailants, 
disturbing all the points of the compass. Noble maharathas, encountering 
others, all fight without fear, recklessly. All those that fight on that abysmal 


field seek earthly glory or eternal life as they hew and smite and loose 
coruscating tumults of arrows. 

Then, their spirits suddenly broken by the primeval brutality of it all, the 
Dhartarashtra troops quit the battle and flee the field.’ 


CANTO 95 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Duryodhana is incensed on seeing his forces decimated 

and he charges Bhima. With his bow luminous as lightning, he 
envelops Pandu’s son with a wither of arrows. He cleaves Bhima’s bow 
with a crescent-moon-tipped winged shaft. He ruptures his detested 
enemy’s chest with a missile with the power to split mountains. Pain 
screaming through him in a flash, yet Bhima remains tenacious, clasping his 
golden flag pole. 

Seeing his father spurting blood, Ghatotkacha blazes up like a wrathful 
inferno. With booming shouts, a swarm of Pandava maharathas, led by 
Abhimanyu, attacks Duryodhana. 

Seeing them, Drona says to your maharathas, “The Pandava maharathas, 
with Bhima at their head, hem Duryodhana in. They terrify our own 
warriors with squalls of fire. The king is in mortal peril, fly to protect him!” 

Led by Somadatta your rathikas fall upon the Pandava ranks. Kripa and 
Bhurisravas and Salya, and Drona’s son and Vivimsati, and Chitrasena and 
Vikarna, and Jayadratha, and Brihadbala, and the two princes of Avanti, 
encircle Bhima in a ring of protection. The Pandavas and the Dhartarashtras 
encounter each other a mere twenty paces apart. 

Mahabaho Drona bends his colossal bow and strikes Bhima with twenty 
six shafts. He bedevils Vrikodara with a luciferous volley like a cloudburst 
upon a mountain. Mighty Bhima swiftly pierces his Acharya with ten barbs 
through his left side. Frail with age, and tormented by pain, Drona faints on 
to the floor of his chariot. Roaring, Duryodhana dashes at Bhima with 
Aswatthaman beside him. 

Seeing them come, each like a Yama at the end of the yuga, Bhima 
seizes a mace, and, leaping off his chariot, he stands like a hill on the field, 
unyielding. Why, he is like the imposing Kailasa, as Aswatthaman and 
Duryodhana attack him fervidly. Bhima, who knows no fear, runs straight 
toward them mace aloft. So terrible is his face that the Kaurava aim great 
astras at him to stop him somehow. Led by Drona, they harangue him from 
every side. Such is the immediate danger to his life and such his disdain for 


it, that the host of Pandava maharathas, led by Abhimanyu, dash forward, 
all of them ready to sacrifice their lives to save him. 

Looking like a mass of blue clouds, heroic Nila charges Aswatthaman. 
A famed archer himself, he had long desired a duel with Drona’s son. He 
strikes Aswatthaman with an irruption of winged shafts, even like Sakra 
who chastised Viprachitti, the Danava who once terrified the Devas and the 
three worlds. 

Blood drenched in moments, infuriated, Aswatthaman draws _ his 
bowstring and, with a twanging as loud as Indra’s thunder, unleashes a 
refulgence of flaming barbs at Nila. He fells Nila’s standard and four horses 
with six rutilant shafts. With a seventh, he find Nila’s chest and Nila, 
gushing blood, slumps down in his chariot. 

Seeing Nila swoon, Ghatotkacha, with his invincible Rakshasas, falls 
upon Aswatthaman, who turns calmly to ride directly at his assailants. 
Quick as light, deadly as venom spitting king cobra, Drona’s son despatches 
a host of Rakshasas in Ghatotkacha’s vanguard. His anger stoked, 
Ghatotkacha uses powerful maya to create a great and demonic illusion. 
Aswatthaman stands bewildered and momentarily afraid. Your men run 
from that hellish vision, as part of which they see one another, though alive 
and breathing, lying dead, convulsed by death’s spasms on the field of all 
horrors. 

Drona and Duryodhana, Salya and Aswatthaman, and other noble 
Kaurava archers scatter before Ghatotkacha’s fell sorcery. In his 
hallucinatory illusion, all your maharathas appear as being already routed, 
and all your allied kings slain. Meanwhile, the Pandava maharathas raze 
thousands of your horses and horsemen. Wailing, your legions escape to the 
safety of their tents. 

Bhishma and I cry out to them, “Fight, do not run away! This is merely 
Rakshasa maya conjured up by Ghatotkacha.” 

Panic-stricken, they pay no attention to us, they do not stop. Watching 
this flight, the Pandavas regard themselves victorious. Along with 
Ghatotkacha they roar like lions. The air resounds with their shouts, the 
blast of their conches, and the throbbing of their drums. 

By dusk, your entire army has been routed and scattered by 
Ghatotkacha.’ 


CANTO 96 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


with a humble salutation, tells him about the defeat at the hands of 
otkacha. 

Dejectedly he says to the Pitamaha, “O sire, relying on you, just as the 
Pandavas rely on Krishna, I began a fierce war with the Pandavas. 
Parantapa, I and my eleven akshauhinis obey your command. Despite this, I 
have been routed in battle by the Pandavas drawing on the powers of 
Ghatotkacha. 

Ah, this consumes my limbs like a fire burning down a dry tree. O 
Parantapa, with your support and blessings, I want to crush Ghatotkacha 
myself. It befits you to fulfil my desire.” 

Bhishma says to Duryodhana, “O king, you should always conduct 
yourself suitably. Protect yourself in battle under every circumstance. Fight 
against Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, or with Arjuna, or with the twins, or with 
Bhima. In accordance with varnadharma, a Kshatriya must only contend 
with another Kshatriya. 

Myself, and Drona, and Kripa, and Drona’s son, and Kritavarman of the 
Satwata race, and Salya, and Somadatta’s son, and that maharatha Vikarna, 
and your valiant brothers led by Dussasana, will all combine to fight the 
Rakshasa. Or if you are inconsolable at the carnage he brought to your 
legions, let Bhagadatta, who is equal to Purandara himself in war, fight 
Ghatotkacha.” 

And Bhishma says to Bhagadatta, “Advance swiftly, Rajan, against the 
son of Hidimbi. Engage that savage Rakshasa with caution, like Indra in 
ancient times did Taraka. You have divine weapons; your prowess is great. 
You, who have vanquished many Asuras in the past, are a true match for 
Ghatotkacha on the field. Backed by your vast forces, kill that bull among 
Rakshasas.” 

Hearing Bhishma’s words, Bhagadatta advances towards the enemy, 
roaring like a lion. Seeing him approach like a storm of thunderheads, many 
Pandava maharathas furiously move against him: Bhima, Abhimanyu and 


S anjaya says, ‘After that rout, Duryodhana approaches Bhishma and, 
at 


Ghatotkacha, the sons of Draupadi, and Satyadhriti, and Kshatradeva, and 
the rulers of the Chedis, and Vasudana, and the king of the Dasarnas. 

Mounted on his great new elephant, Bhagadatta charges into battle. A 
truculent encounter erupts. Forceful shafts, shot by maharathas, fall on 
elephants and chariots. Majestic trained tuskers with rent temples fall upon 
one another. Blind with rage, with temporal juice trickling down their 
bodies, they gore one another with column-like tusks. 

Regal horses, ridden by warriors armed with spears, are goaded to 
fearlessly fly at each other. And thousands of foot-soldiers, attacked by 
legions of foot-soldiers with spikes and arrows, plunge to the ground, their 
legion spirits quitting their carved and mangled bodies in thick swarms. 
Roaring maharathas slaughter their daring adversaries with livid 
coruscations of barbed arrows. 

In that battle which makes one’s hair stand on end, the famed 
Bhagadatta, mounted on his elephant of rent temples with juice trickling 
down in seven streams, which makes him look like a mountain with seven 
rivers gushing down after heavy rain, like Indra himself riding Airavata, 
attacks Bhima in fury. Riding on the head of his massive beast, he looses a 
fulmination of arrows on the hulking Pandava. 

King Bhagadatta unleashes that volley on Bhima like clouds lashing rain 
on to a mountain at the end of summer. Incensed, Bhima kills more than a 
hundred fighting men that protected Bhagadatta’s rear and flanks in a 
sanguinary flash. 

Wrath surges up in Bhagadatta and he goads his elephant straight at 
Bhima’s chariot, why, even like some unimaginable arrow from a great 
god’s bow! Bhima leads a host of Pandava maharathas directly at the 
attacking elephant. These warriors are the five Kekaya princes and 
Abhimanyu, the five sons of Draupadi and the ruler of the Dasarnas, 
Kshatradeva and the ruler of the Chedis, and Chitraketu. They wield divine 
astras with consummate skill and prowess, and they quickly surround their 
opponent’s elephant. 

That majestic tusker, stabbed with many arrows, streams blood from his 
wounds, and looks resplendent like a mountain plastered with red mud after 
the rains. The ruler of the Dasarnas rides his elephant out towards 
Bhagadatta. Bhagadatta’s beast contains the attack like a continent the 
surging sea. Seeing this remarkable resistance, even the Pandava troops 
applaud and marvel. 


The ruler of the Pragjyotishas is enraged and casts fourteen spears at the 
Dasarna king’s regal mammoth. Like snakes entering anthills, these pierce 
the tusker’s gold-decked armour. Deeply pierced and sorely wounded, that 
elephant’s fury subsides and it swiftly retreats. As it flees, it mows down the 
Pandava host of its own side like a gale smashing down young trees. 

With their elephant defeated, the maharathas of the Pandava army roar 
like lions and setting Bhima at their head, storm at Bhagadatta loosing all 
manner of arrows and astras at him. Bhagadatta is unmoved by these 
weapons and the legion that surges roaring at him; instead, he goads his 
great prince among elephants at them, prodding it with his hook and spurred 
boots. That elephant provoked with hook and spur seems to assume the 
form of the Samvarta fire that destroys everything at the end of the yuga. 

Crushing hordes of chariots, elephants and horses with their riders, it 
thunders about in every direction, pounding down foot-soldiers by the 
thousands. The vast legions of the Pandavas shrink like leather exposed to 
fire. 

As Bhagadatta thins the Pandava vyuha, Ghatotkacha, with fiery eyes 
and blazing face, charges towards him. Assuming a terrible form alight with 
rage, he seizes a bright lance that can penetrate a mountain and hurls the 
flaming thing at Bhagadatta’s elephant. Seeing it course towards him, the 
ruler of the Pragjyotishas cuts it in two with a crescent-headed arrow, and 
the golden spear plunges into the earth like Indra’s thunderbolt. 

With a shout, Bhagadatta takes a glittering spear and in a fluid blur casts 
it at Ghatotkacha, who leaps up into the air and seizes it in his hand. The 
Rakshasa snaps it like a twig against his knee before the eyes of the 
assembled kings. All this appears awesome. The Devas, the Gandharvas 
and the Munis are wonderstruck. And the Pandava warriors, led by Bhima, 
also cry out their praises at what Ghatotkacha incredibly does. 

Bhagadatta cannot endure these exultations. He roars, draws his radiant 
bow, and shoots a scintillation of fire shafts at all the Pandava maharathas. 
He strikes Bhima with one arrow and Ghatotkacha with nine. He shoots 
Abhimanyu with three, and the Kekaya brothers with five. With his bow 
drawn in a circle, he pierces Kshatradeva’s right arm deeply so that the 
Kshatriya’s bow falls from his hand. 

Bhagadatta strikes the five sons of Draupadi with five arrows; he kills 
Bhima’s horses; with three feathered shafts, he cuts down Bhima’s standard 
bearing the lion emblem. And with three more searing arrows he pierces 


Bhima’s charioteer Visoka, who plunges to the floor of his chariot in agony. 
Bhima leaps down from his chariot with his mace. All your forces are 
terrified, watching him with gada upraised, looking like a mountain peak. 

As Bhima and Ghatotkacha are battling the ruler of the Pragjyotishas, 
Arjuna appears, slaying the enemy on all sides. He sees his embattled 
brothers and radiates tides of fire in every direction. Duryodhana swiftly 
moves his legion of chariots and elephants. Arjuna charges that Kaurava 
akshauhini on his chariot of white horses. 

Riding his elephant, Bhagadatta crushes the Pandava ranks, and storms 
towards Yudhishtira. A fierce battle begins between Bhagadatta and the 
Panchalas, the Srinjayas and the Kekayas. Bhima narrates the details of the 
slaughter of Iravat to Krishna and Arjuna.’ 


CANTO 97 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


with tears and he sighs deeply. He says to Krishna, “Ah, the wise 

ura Mahatman surely saw this terrible destruction of the Kauravas and 

Pandavas clearly with his mind’s eye. And so did he warn Dhritarashtra 
repeatedly. 

Krishna, the Kauravas have killed so many of our heroes, and we have 
killed many of theirs. What contemptible deeds have been done in the 
pursuit of kingdom and wealth! I curse these that have led to such slaughter 
of kinsmen. 

For him who is penniless, even death would be better than acquiring a 
fortune by killing his relatives. Krishna, what will we gain by destroying 
our own blood and lineage? Duryodhana, Sakuni and Karna are to blame 
for the extermination of the very Kshatriya race. 

I now understand, Mahabaho, that Yudhishtira was wise to ask 
Suyodhana for only half the kingdom, indeed for only five villages. And 
even that was not given. Seeing so many brave warriors lying dead on the 
field, I curse myself and curse the dharma of a Kshatriya. 

I continue to fight only so that I am not called weak and cowardly. 
Otherwise, this war repulses me. Ah, drive the horses forward towards the 
Dhartarashtra army; let me continue with this bloodthirsty sacrifice. There 
is no time to lose.” 

And Krishna goads those fleet white horses forward, while your troops 
are disturbed like the stormy ocean at high tide. The battle between 
Bhishma and the Pandavas is dreadful and deafening like thunder. 

Your sons surround Drona like the Vasus surrounding Vasava, and storm 
into battle against Bhima. Bhishma and maharathas Kripa, Bhagadatta and 
Susarman advance against Arjuna. Kritavarman and Bahlika attack Satyaki. 
And king Amvashta sets himself before Abhimanyu. Other great chariot- 
warriors clash with each other. On every side, the war is ever more fierce 
and gruesome. 


; ) anjaya says, ‘Hearing of his son Iravat’s death, Arjuna’s eyes glisten 
1 


Bhima is a fire that blazes up with offerings of ghee. Your sons shroud 
him with arrows, but that Kshatriya, his body and litheness like a tiger’s, 
licks the corners of his mouth in savage glee. Bhima kills your son 
Vyudoroska with a horseshoe-headed arrow; with another keen shaft, he 
blows Kundalin’s heart to shreds like a great lion killing a small cub. He 
covers your other sons who are close in gusts of fire, killing Anadhriti, and 
Kundabhedin, and Virata, and Dirghalochana, and Dirghabahu, and Subahu, 
and Kanykadhyaja, who topple lifeless from their chariots, Bharatarishabha, 
looking like mango trees sprouted with red blossoms in spring. 

Your other sons flee from Bhima as if from Yama himself. Drona 
envelops him in a shroud of arrows. But Bhima is irresistible, his prowess 
astounding as he continues to massacre your sons in the face of Drona’s 
best efforts to thwart him. Bhima laughing aloud wildly, magnificently foils 
Drona’s intense volleys, while he continues to feed the blood and corpses of 
your sons to yawning thirsty Kurukshetra. He sports among your sons like a 
tiger among a herd of deer. Like some mythic wolf, Vrikodara terrifies your 
sons and kills them one after the other. 

Meanwhile, Bhishma, Bhagadatta and Kripa oppose the daring Arjuna. 
Dhananjaya thwarts the astras of his adversaries with his own, and kills 
many leading warriors of your army. 

Abhimanyu divests king Amvashta of his chariot with a flurry of arrows. 
Amvashta leaps out of his ruined ratha in shame, hurling his sword at the 
high-souled Abhimanyu. And he hastily mounts the chariot of Hridika’s 
son, while Abhimanyu shatters his sword in the air. The Pandava warriors 
marvel at the inspired archery of Subhadra’s son and cheer loudly. Others 
led by Dhrishtadyumna continue to raze your forces, which still stand 
valiant, fighting on, facing death squarely. 

With great feats of daring, the war swells and plunges on, claiming 
thousands of lives across grisly Kurukshetra every moment. Brave fighting 
men seize one another by the hair, fight with their nails and teeth, fists and 
knees, heads and hands and swords, and strapping arms. With frightening 
vigour they slaughter each other. 

Father and son kill one another. The soldiers fight desperately using all 
their limbs. Beautiful bows with golden arrows slip from the hands of fallen 
warriors, and precious jewels and gleaming feathered shafts lie scattered 
thickly across the killing field; glistening arrows resemble snakes with shed 
skins. 


Golden swords with ivory handles, and shields dappled with gold, lie 
fallen on the field, blood slicked, glistening under the hazy sun. Arrows, 
axes, swords and spears, many decked with gold, beautiful coats of mail, 
and heavy and spiked clubs, and howdahs of elephants, and yak tails, and 
fans, are strewn everywhere. 

Lifeless maharathas, still clasping their weapons, look as if they are still 
alive, biting bloodied lips. Their arms and legs shattered with maces and 
heads smashed with clubs, or crushed by elephants, horses and chariots, 
foot-soldiers lie like broken puppets on the crimsoned earth. The earth 
laden thickly with the corpses of horses, men and elephants, looks beautiful, 
Rajan, as if dotted with hills great and small. How copiously Kurukshetra of 
the terrible blood sacrifice is covered with arrows, axes, swords, spears, 
cudgels, satagnis and mangled bodies. 

Bleeding profusely, warriors lie with limbs askew, some silent in death, 
others moaning in anguish. What a sight the Earth presents! Smeared with 
sandalwood paste and wearing fine leather gloves and golden armlets, 
severed arms of powerful warriors are to be seen everywhere one looks; 
also mighty, shapely thighs like the trunks of elephants, and fallen 
bejewelled turbaned heads; and all this fills the field of dread with strange 
and poignant beauty. 

The field of the Kurus, stained with blood, covered with bloodied coats 
of armour and radiant ornaments, looks as if on fire. Like a beautiful 
woman adorned with jewels, Bhumi appears eerily lovely with scattered 
ornaments, bows, arrows with golden wings, smashed chariots with silvery 
bells, and horses with tongues lolling out, with standards, quivers, banners 
and great conches of heroes, and elephants with severed trunks—with all 
these. 

Wounded elephants groan in agony and appear like shifting mountains. 
Colourful mantles and finely wrought hooks studded with stones of lapis 
lazuli, and bells, flecked cloths and deerskin, neck-chains and golden 
girdles that once adorned majestic tuskers, are spread across the ground as 
if in some great and bizarre exhibition. 

Various devices lie broken by golden darts, and embroidered saddles of 
horses, caked with mud. The hacked arms of horsemen, decked with 
bracelets, are everywhere, along with shining spears and swords, and 
turbans fallen off noble heads. 


The earth looks like the star-strewn sky with crescent-headed arrows, 
crushed saddles of ranku deer skin, and glistening jewels from the coronets 
of kings. It glows with the resplendent parasols, yak tails and fans, and with 
faces, bright as the lotus or the moon, of daring Kshatriyas, with gleaming 
ear-rings and elegant beards, who lie lifeless. 

Thus the two armies annihilate each other in the fight. The warriors are 
exhausted in body and spirit; the events and sights of the day have been 
splendid and horrifying beyond imagining; until, dark night sets in and 
nothing can be seen. The Kauravas and the Pandavas withdraw their armies. 
Retiring to their tents, they rest for the night.’ 


CANTO 98 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


sit together and evaluate their situation. How can the sons of Pandu 
nd their allies be defeated? This is the subject of their discussion. 

Duryodhana says to them, “Drona, Bhishma and Kripa, and Salya and 
Somadatta’s son do not challenge the Pandavas. I do not know why. 
Unopposed, they are destroying my forces. Karna, I am being weakened 
and my weapons exhausted. I am baffled by my adversaries; I feel that even 
the Devas cannot vanquish them. My mind is filled with doubt; how can I 
quell the Pandavas in battle?” 

Karna replies, “Do not be distressed, O lord of the Bhaaratas, for I will 
achieve the end you desire. Let Bhishma withdraw from the great war. 
When he puts down his weapons, I will kill the Parthas and the Somakas, 
before Bhishma’s eyes. 

I swear I will do this. Indeed, Bhishma shows mercy towards the 
Pandavas everyday. He cannot defeat those maharathas. Bhishma is proud 
in battle. He enjoys the fight. Why would he subdue the Pandavas, for then 
the war itself will end? 

Go to Bhishma’s tent, and ask the revered Pitamaha to set aside his 
weapons. When he does this, consider the Pandavas dead, slain along with 
all their supporters and kinsmen by me alone.” 

Thus addressed by Karna, Duryodhana says to his brothers, “Dussasana, 
get ready to accompany me.” He says to Karna, “Parantapa, I will persuade 
Bhishma to consent to what you ask, and then promptly come to you. After 
Bhishma retires from the fight, you will destroy the enemy.” 

Accompanied by his brothers, your son sets out like He of a hundred 
sacrifices accompanied by the Devas. Dussasana makes him mount on his 
horse. Adorned with bracelets, with a crown on his head, and ornaments on 
his arms, he shines brilliantly as he goes forth. Smeared with fragrant 
sandalwood-paste, bright as the burnished gold of the bhandi flower, 
wearing spotless garments, Duryodhana goes forth like a great lion, looking 
like the glowing sun in the sky. 


S anjaya says, ‘Duryodhana, Sakuni, Dussasana and the invincible Karna 
a 


And as that tiger among men goes towards Bhishma’s tent, many 
celebrated archers follow him. His brothers also accompany him, like the 
Devas walking behind Vasava. Other gallant men, riding on horses, 
elephants and chariots, go with him. 

Like the Devas surrounding Sakra, his well-wishers assemble in hordes 
to protect him. Adored by all the Kauravas, Duryodhana rides slowly, 
regally towards Bhishma’s tent. 

He raises his right arm, like an elephant’s trunk with which he can crush 
all enemies, and accepts the homage paid to him by the bystanders who 
stand with folded hands raised above their heads. As he canters along, he 
hears the sweet voices of the people of many lands. He is praised by their 
bards and poets. That great king responds with equal respect to all. 

Many high-souled men stand around him with golden lamps burning 
with perfumed oil. Duryodhana looks radiant like the moon surrounded by 
blazing planets. Attendants with head-gear decked with gold, with canes 
and jhariharas in hand, gently part the crowd. 

The king reaches Bhishma’s tent and dismounts from his horse. He 
greets the Pitamaha and sits on a golden seat covered with an ornate cloth. 

With hands folded, tearful eyes, and in a grieving voice, he says to 
Bhishma, “Parantapa, under your protection, we could defeat the very 
Devas and Asuras led by Indra. What can I say, then, of the gallant 
Pandavas, their kinsmen and friends? 

Son of Ganga, be merciful. Kill the sons of Pandu like Mahendra 
destroying the Danavas. J will slay all the Somakas and the Panchalas, and 
the Karushas along with the Kekayas: these were your words to me. Stand 
by those words. 

Kill the Parthas, and the Somakas. Honour your promise. If your love 
for the Pandavas, or loathing towards me, sways you to spare them, then 
allow Karna to fight. He will put a swift end to them along with their allies 
and kinsmen.” 

Having said this to Bhishma, your son Duryodhana falls silent.’ 


CANTO 99 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


But he does not reply with a single harsh word. He is overwhelmed 
ith grief and anger, sighs deeply and reflects silently for a long time. 

Looking up, as if angrily swallowing the world with the Devas, Asuras, 
and Gandharvas, Bhishma speaks calmly to Duryodhana, “Why do you stab 
me with such sharp words? I always try hard to achieve your interests. For 
this I am prepared to sacrifice my life in this battle. 

The Pandavas cannot be defeated. This is clear ever since the brave son 
of Pandu pleased Agni in the Khandava vana, after vanquishing Sakra 
himself in battle. O Parantapa, Arjuna rescued you when you were captured 
by the Gandharvas; even that was a clear sign. 

On that occasion, your brave brothers fled, as did Radha’s son. What 
Arjuna did even then clearly revealed his prowess. In Virata’s city, he 
single-handedly subdued us all. That was a sufficient indication. 

He defeated and disrobed both Drona and me. That was ample evidence. 
When the cows were stolen, he overcame Aswatthaman and Saradwat. This 
surely should have shown you what he is. 

Having easily quelled Karna, who boasted loudly of his manliness, 
Arjuna took his robes and gave them to Uttara. That should have been 
unmistakable proof for you. Arjuna defeated the Nivatakavachas who were 
invincible even to Vasava. How much clearer could it be, Suyodhana? 

Who can hope to defeat such a hero, and besides one protected by the 
Protector of the Universe armed with sankha, chakra and gada? Krishna has 
infinite power, and is the Destroyer of the Universe. He is the highest Lord 
of all, the God of Devas, the eternal Paramatman. He is eulogised by 
Narada and other great Rishis. 

But, ah, you are foolish and do not know what should be said and what 
should not. To a man on the point of death, all trees appear to be made of 
gold. Son of Gandhari, you see everything as being the opposite of what 
they truly are. Having provoked war with the Pandavas and the Srinjayas, 


S sat says, ‘Bhishma is saddened by your son’s dagger like words. 
Ww 


fight them now. Let us see you not moan and whine like a boy, but fight like 
aman. 

As for me, I will bring death to the Somakas and the Panchalas, 
avoiding only Sikhandin. If killed, I will go to Yama’s abode; if I kill them, 
I will give you joy. 

Once, Sikhandin was born in Drupada’s palace as a woman. Upon 
receiving a boon, she became a man. She is Sikhandini. I cannot kill him 
even to save myself. She is the same Sikhandini created by Brahma. Sleep 
peacefully tonight. Tomorrow I will fight so fiercely that men will 
remember the battle as long as the world lasts.” 

Duryodhana comes away with these words. He bows to the Pitamaha 
and returns to his own tent. He dismisses his attendants. He enters his tent 
and sleeps. At dawn he rises, and orders the royal warriors, “Gather our 
forces. Today Bhishma will slay all the Somakas.” 

Bhishma regards Duryodhana’s lamentations as commands to himself. 
Saddened, and deploring his servile position, he thinks carefully about a 
possible duel with Arjuna. 

Duryodhana anticipates Bhishma’s plan and commands Dussasana, 
“Deploy the chariots to defend Bhishma. Press all our twenty two legions 
into battle formation. The moment that we have been thinking about for 
years, the slaughter of the Pandava army and seizing the whole kingdom, 
has arrived. 

For this, our first duty is to protect Bhishma. Well guarded, he will 
protect us and kill the Parthas in battle. 

Bhishma said to me, ‘I will not kill Sikhandini, for he was a woman 
once and I will not face him in battle. The world knows that, to honour my 
father, I gave up a vast kingdom. I will not kill any woman or anyone who 
was once a woman. This is the truth by which I live and the dharma I will 
never break. 

Sikhandin was first born a woman. You have heard that story as I have 
narrated it to you before the war began. Killing herself first and taking birth 
as a daughter, she who was once the princess Amba of Kasi has become a 
man. She will fight me, but I will never aim an arrow at her. 

Other Kshatriyas who fight for the victory of the Pandavas, I will 
consume them all with devastras.' These were the wise Bhishma’s words to 
me. 


Our first and last duty is to protect the son of Ganga. If a lion is left 
unprotected in the jungle, he can be killed even by a wolf. We cannot allow 
the Pitamaha to be slain by Sikhandin like the lion by the wolf. Let Sakuni 
and Salya, Kripa and Drona, and Vivimsati safeguard Bhishma. If he is 
safe, our victory is assured.” 

Hearing Duryodhana, all surround Bhishma with a majestic legion of 
chariots. Your sons position themselves around him and ride into battle. As 
they advance the earth and the sky shudder and strike fear into the hearts of 
the Pandavas. 

The Kaurava maharathas stand around Bhishma, in full armour, backed 
by that resplendent chariot force and by their elephants. They hold their 
positions to protect the Pitamaha even like the Devas watching over Indra 
in the war against the Asuras. 

Duryodhana says to his brother, “Yudhamanyu protects the left wheel of 
Arjuna’s chariot, and Uttamaujas his right wheel. Arjuna in turn protects 
Sikhandin. Dussasana, see that Bhishma is never left unprotected for even a 
moment so that Sikhandin might attack him.” 

With his surging forces, Dussasana rides with Bhishma in the vanguard 
of the Kaurava army. Seeing Bhishma encircled by so many chariots, 
Arjuna says to Dhrishtadyumna, “Prince of Panchala, place Sikhandin 
before Bhishma today, and I myself will be your brother’s protector.” 


CANTO 100 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


sweeping, encompassing Sarvatobhadra vyuha. Kripa _ and 

itavarman, and maharatha Saibya, and Sakuni, and Jayadratha of the 

Sindhus, and Sudakshina king of the Kambojas take their positions at the 
forefront of the army and the vyuha, along with Bhishma and your sons. 

Drona and Bhurisravas, and Salya and Bhagadatta, guard the vyuha’s 
right flank. Aswatthaman and Somadatta, and those maharathas, the two 
princes of Avanti, with a vast host, protect the left. Surrounded by the 
Trigartas, Duryodhana places himself in the middle, ready for the Pandavas. 
Maharathas Alambusha and Srutayush, position themselves behind that 
vyuha and the whole army. 

Your mail-clad warriors form this enveloping vyuha and they look like 
flames upon Kurukshetra. 

Yudhishtira and Bhima, Nakula and Sahadeva, in glistening armour, 
position themselves in the vanguard of their vyuha, in front of all their 
fighting men. Dhrishtadyumna and Virata, and maharatha Satyaki stand 
ready, hungry for battle. Sikhandin and Arjuna, the Rakshasa Ghatotkacha, 
Mahabaho Chekitana, and the valiant Kuntibhoja, all encircled by their 
forces, stand prepared. Abhimanyu and Drupada, and the five Kaikeya 
brothers, all in their chariots, are splendid to behold, weapons at the ready. 

Having formed their mighty vyuha, the Pandavas serenely wait for the 
conches to boom, the drums to roll and the day’s fighting to begin. Today, 
the kings in your vyuha and their warriors set Bhishma at their head and 
with a tumult of blaring sankhas and deafening roars, they charge out 
against the Parthas. The Pandavas, led by Bhimasena, rush out against 
Bhishma seeking victory. 

Roaring and shouting, blowing their krakachas and cow-horns, beating 
their drums and cymbals, the Pandavas forge into battle. We respond to 
their call with the pounding of our drums, and clash of cymbals and 
conches; roaring like lions, we attack our enemies furiously. 


anjaya says, ‘Bhishma advances with his forces. He ranges them in the 
r 


Those sounds from both armies mingle like two surging seas and the 
warriors of the two armies charge wildly into the ranks of the enemy, so that 
in moments there are no longer two great forces facing each other but a 
single throng of men all intent on killing one another as brutally as they can. 
The earth shudders with the clamour of that vast collision. 

Birds scream and wheel in the sky. The radiant sun dims. Fierce winds 
blow, portending ever greater terrors. Jackals roam howling, foretelling 
another horrible carnage. All corners of the earth seem to be on fire, and 
dust rains down. 

A rain of hewn limbs and spurting, splashing blood falls on to the earth. 
And tears fall from the eyes of weeping animals. In their distress they 
urinate and defecate. The cries of the Rakshasas drown every other roar and 
shout of the battle. Jackals and vultures, and crows and dogs wheel at the 
perimeter of the holocaust and also in the air above the canopy of arrows 
and spears that quickly covers Kurukshetra. 

Ominous meteors collide against the sun and fall to the earth, foreboding 
incomprehensible tragedy. The blast of conches and drums shake the 
Pandava and the Dhartarashtra hosts like forests in a hurricane. The uproar 
of the two armies, kings, elephants and horses, which face each other in that 
malevolent hour, resembles that of a raging ocean.’ 


CANTO 101 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Riding his tawny horses, the dashing Abhimanyu charges 

Duryodhana’s host, his bow flaring arrows. Bharatarishabha, your 
watriors cannot withstand him, as he plunges into the sea of Kaurava hordes 
with his wealth of astras. 

Subhadra’s son kills many Kshatriyas with deadly shafts that are like 
venom-spitting cobras and rods of death. Phalguni’s son _truncates 
maharathas and their chariots, horses and riders, elephant-warriors and their 
tuskers. The kings of the earth are delighted, and laud these feats and those 
who achieve them, regardless of whether they are ally or enemy. 

Abhimanyu tosses those Kaurava legions about like a storm that scatters 
a heap of cotton in every direction. Like elephants stuck in mire, your men 
flounder without a protector. Having routed them, Abhimanyu stands like a 
fire which blazes pure and smokeless. Like insects drawn irresistibly to a 
fire but consumed by it, your warriors cannot endure that Parantapa. 
Abhimanyu looks like Vasava himself armed with his Vajra. 

His gold inlaid bow flashes like lightning amidst clouds as it courses 
through the enemy in its magnificent archer’s hand, loosing endless shafts 
like swarms of bees from trees blossoming in the forest. No one is able to 
strike or contain Abhimanyu, as he careers over Kurukshetra in his golden 
chariot. Riding swift as the wind, the sublime youth baffles Kripa and 
Drona, Aswatthaman and Jayadratha. He consumes your forces, his bow 
always bent in a circle, his chariot also wheeling in a circle, resembling the 
bright halo sometimes seen around the sun. 

Seeing him lustily decimating the enemy, brave Kshatriyas think that the 
world contains two Arjunas. The vast host of the Bhaaratas reel under that 
golden prince’s onslaught like a drunken woman. He routs them 
everywhere, terrifying maharathas and delighting his friends, like Vasava 
who pleased the Devas when he vanquished Mayaa. 

Your watriors roar in anguish even like thunderclouds. Hearing that 
awful wail like the turbulent sea raging at full tide when lashed by violent 
winds, Duryodhana says to Rishyasringa’s Rakshasa son Alambusha, 


“Abhimanyu single-handedly destroys my army like Vritra routing Indra’s 
legions. You, who know war so well, must challenge him for it seems none 
else can. Ride swiftly, Alambusha, and kill the preening sons of Arjuna. 
And led by Bhishma and Drona, we will kill Arjuna himself.” 

That dreadful Rakshasa charges into the fray, his roars like 
thunderclouds rumbling, and the Pandava host trembles. Why, many 
warriors are so terrified by those roars that they fall dead. Jubilant, dancing 
in glee, it appears, in his chariot, Alambusha advances towards Abhimanyu 
with bow drawn round. On reaching Arjuna’s son he begins to despatch his 
supporters. Alambusha dwindles the Pandava legion, like Balasura once did 
the divine host. 

Carnage and rivers of blood flow once more when the Rakshasa assails 
the Pandava force with thousands of immaculate arrows. Terror-stricken, 
the Pandava army flees his slaughter. Ravaging the enemy like an elephant 
trampling lotus-stalks, Alambusha now rides at the Pandavas themselves. 
The five sons of Draupadi attack the Rakshasa like five planets plunging at 
the Sun. They torment him as the five planets afflict the Moon at the end of 
the yuga. 

Prativindhya pierces the Rakshasa with shafts as heavy and sharp as 
battle-axes, which can cleave any armour, drawing geysers of blood from 
the Rakshasa, who looks like clouds stabbed by the sun’s rays. Lacerated by 
golden-winged shafts, he looks like a mountain with peaks ablaze. 

The Pandavas wound him grievously with gusts of arrows that look like 
angry snakes. Alambusha is enraged like the king of the Nagas himself. 
Pierced all over by those maharathas, he faints and remains unconscious for 
a long time. Awakening, he jumps up with a fulminant roar and using the 
mahima siddhi grows to twice his size, and in fury carves up their bows, 
arrows and standards. Baring great fangs in a hideous smile, he shoots them 
each with five seething shafts. 

Wild Alambusha dances in his chariot, and kills their horses and 
sarathies. Burning, he stabs them with thousands of every kind of fell barb. 
That night ranger dashes forward now to kill the beleaguered sons of Pandu. 
Seeing them tormented by the Rakshasa, Abhimanyu attacks him. The 
battle between him and the Rakshasa compares with that between Vritra and 
Vasava. The maharathas of both armies witness that encounter. Their eyes 
bloodshot, both warriors seem to be aflame with wrath, and regard each 
other as the fire that burns at the end of the yuga. 


The duel between them is like the ancient one between Sakra and 
Sambara in the war between the Devas and Asuras.’ 


CANTO 102 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


who so imperiously dominates our maharathas? How does the son of 

Subhadra face Rishyasringa’s son? Tell me all this in detail, exactly 
as it happened. How do Bhima, and Ghatotkacha, Nakula and Sahadeva, 
and maharatha Satyaki, and Arjuna confront my forces? You are a master 
narrator, Sanjaya; tell me everything.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘I will describe the merciless, tumultuary duel between 
Alambusha and Abhimanyu. I will also describe Arjuna’s prowess in battle, 
and the marvellous feats of Bhima, Nakula and Sahadeva, and the 
achievements of your warriors led by Bhishma and Drona. 

Alambusha roars at Abhimanyu to stand and fight and then charges him. 
Abhimanyu whirls around to face his father’s sworn enemy. Mounted on 
their chariots, like Deva and Danava, man and Rakshasa confront each 
other. Alambusha owns the hermetic powers of maya, while Abhimanyu is 
accomplished in the use of divine astras. 

Abhimanyu strikes the Rakshasa with three sizzling shafts, and yet again 
with five. Alambusha pierces Abhimanyu’s chest with nine barbs like a 
mahout goading his elephant with his hook. In a wink, he looses a scathing 
volley of a thousand shafts at Arjuna’s superb son. Incensed Abhimanyu 
makes a bloody home in the Rakshasa’s hirsute breast for nine steely 
arrows, which delve deep into Alambusha’s innards. The bloodied Rakshasa 
looks like a mountain lush with flowering kinsukas. The Rakshasa bears 
those golden-winged shafts and glows like a mountain on fire. 

Alambusha shrouds Abhimanyu, equal to Mahendra himself, in clouds 
of smoking arrows. Like Yama dandas these pass through Abhimanyu into 
the earth. Abhimanyu’s golden shafts plunge through the Rakshasa and also 
enter the ground. Alambusha retreats before the prince’s scintillating 
barrage of arrows, like Mayaa repulsed by Sakra. Quickly the Rakshasa 
invokes sorcery, mantling the field in perfect darkness using maya. All the 
warriors on Kurukshetra are lost in that blind night. Abhimanyu is hidden 
by it, and friend and enemy cannot be distinguished. 


[ste sine says, ‘Sanjaya, how does Alambusha resist Abhimanyu 


Abhimanyu calls forth the blazing Suryastra and Alambusha’s illusional 
night is dispelled in a moment, and everything is visible again. With 
renewed ferocity Abhimanyu covers the Rakshasa with a solid swath of 
brilliant arrows. 

Now Alambusha creates a slew of magical illusions, hunts of sinister 
beasts and monsters bound at Arjuna’s son from every side. Abhimanyu 
dissipates them all with knowing astras. His every sorcery pierced and 
made impotent, and bleeding from countless wound mouths that 
Abhimanyu opens all over his devilish body, Alambusha flees in terror from 
the lustrous prince. 

After routing the devious Rakshasa, Abhimanyu begins to demolish 
your forces, truly like a maddened tusker wading into a lake of lotuses. 
Seeing the field being richly strewn with his warriors’ corpses, Bhishma 
looses a tremendous volley at Abhimanyu, shrouding him in a wave of 
arrows. 

Swiftly, numerous maharathas of the Dhartarashtra army encircle that 
angelic and terrible young Kshatriya and strike him repeatedly. So 
resembling his father and equal to Krishna in profound valour, Abhimanyu 
demonstrates his stunning genius worthy of both his vamsas. He astounds 
his gathered enemies with archery not yet seen on Kurukshetra. 

Seeing his precious magnificent son hemmed in, Arjuna arrives at the 
place where Abhimanyu continues to raze your warriors with breathtaking 
ease. Immediately Bhishma rides at Arjuna, like Rahu approaching the Sun. 
Supported by chariots, elephants, and horses, your sons surround the 
Pitamaha as he comes. And the Pandavas ride with Arjuna and a feverish 
battle breaks out. 

Kripa stabs Arjuna with twenty-five arrows, as Dhananjaya engages 
Bhishma. Like a tiger attacking an elephant, Satyaki pierces Kripa with 
countless whetted shafts. Enraged, Gautama bloodies his chest with nine 
arrows like time. Sini’s grandson draws his bow round and looses a deadly 
astra him at Kripa, but fiery Aswatthaman cuts it down as it flames at the 
old Acharya. Satyaki leaves Kripa and charges Drona’s son like Rahu flying 
to devour the Moon. Aswatthaman rives Satyaki’s bow in two, and launches 
a fury of barbs at the bright Vrishni. 

Satyaki seizes up another colossal bow and strikes Aswatthaman with 
six searing arrows through his chest and arms, drawing a howl of pain from 
him. Aswatthaman faints and falls to the floor of his chariot, clinging on to 


its flagpole. Regaining his senses in a moment, he looses a long shaft at 
Satyaki, which passes right through the handsome body of Sini’s grandson, 
and plunges into the earth like a young snake entering its hole after the end 
of winter. 

Another arrow shatters Satyaki’s standard. Drona’s son roars like five 
lions and covers his adversary in a rain of arrows as the clouds do the sun at 
the onset of the monsoon. Like the sun from behind clouds, Satyaki 
emerges undimmed, and shrouds the son of Drona with twisting sheets of 
arrows, vicious windings. Aswatthaman unravels them unscathed. Anger 
mounting, with a roar, Satyaki unleashes a thousand arrows in a moment, a 
deadly relucent torrent of shafts. Seeing his son afflicted like the Moon by 
Rahu, Drona storms at Satyaki, striking him deep with a streak of lightning 
from his great bow. 

Satyaki turns away from Aswatthaman and pierces Drona with a scourge 
of twenty stinging barbs. Immediately, Arjuna rushes at Drona, and these 
two, guru and sishya, assail each other like the planets Budha and Sukra in 
the sky.’ 


CANTO 103 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


face each other in battle? The son of Pandu is as dear as a son to 
Drona. Arjuna worships the Acharya. Both maharathas delight in 
war, and both are awesomely powerful. How do they battle each other?’ 

Sanjaya says, “In battle Drona remains distant from his love of Arjuna. 
Arjuna focuses on his dharma as a Kshatriya and does not recognise his 
teacher but only an enemy. Kshatriyas never turn away from battle. They 
are detached, and fight their fathers and brothers. 

Arjuna stabs Drona with three scalding shafts. Drona remains 
unperturbed. Arjuna covers the Acharya in a mantle of arrows. Drona 
blazes up in anger at the heart of the dreadful war, like a fire in a dense 
forest. Drona covers Arjuna with myriad arrows. Duryodhana sends 
Susarman to protect Drona’s flank. The king of the Trigartas swathes 
Arjuna in countless iron-tipped missiles, beautiful like cranes flying through 
the sky. They pierce Arjuna like birds vanishing into a fruit laden tree. 
Arjuna roars and savages Susarman and his son with riptides from the 
Gandiva. 

Despite the towering attack, and quite ready to die, they do not retreat. 
They target Arjuna’s chariot and the Pandava faces their onslaught like a 
mountain receiving a cloudburst. Partha’s prodigious archery is superhuman 
as, almost with disdain, he scatters his enemies’ combined, virile flurries of 
fire, cutting down their storms of arrows as if he were facing some boys in 
battle, why like a high wind scattering fleecy clouds. The Devas and 
Danavas congregated in the firmament acclaim his feat. 

Arjuna invokes the Vayavya astra against the Trigarta legion. A mighty 
gale sweeps across Kurukshetra, shaking the sky, felling trees, and blowing 
away enemy chariots and soldiers like bits of straw. Drona looses the 
Sailastra, which makes Arjuna’s squall abate and calm returns to all 
quarters. But, fearing Arjuna now that they have seen some part of his 
actual prowess, the Trigarta maharathas are despondent and leave the 
battlefield. 


[ Discs each says, ‘How do those famed warriors, Drona and Arjuna, 


Duryodhana and Kripa, and Aswatthaman, and Salya, and Sudakshina, 
the king of the Kambojas, and Vinda and Anuvinda of Avanti, and Bahlika 
supported by the Bahlikas, surround Arjuna with their chariots. Bhagadatta 
and the mighty Srutayush encircle Bhima with an akshauhini of elephants. 
And Bhurisravas, and Sala, and Subala’s son attack the twins with luminous 
whetted arrows. Along with your sons, Bhishma rides to surround 
Yudhishtira. 

Bhima watches that legion advance and licks the corners of his mouth 
like a hungry lion. He seizes his mace, leaps off his chariot again, terrifying 
your warriors. The elephant-warriors besiege him from all sides. At the very 
heart of your sons’ forces, Bhima looks like the sun in the midst of dark 
clouds. And like the wind that scatters those clouds, the Vayuputra swings 
his mace all around him in scarlet eruptions to slaughter your son’s elephant 
legion. The shrill trumpeting of those tuskers and Bhima’s dreadful roars 
shake the very earth; covered with gashes inflicted by the tusks of the 
elephants, Bhima blossoms in blood like a flowering kinsuka. 

Seizing some of the elephants by their tusks, he rips them out and then 
with those tusks smashes other elephants on their round foreheads and kills 
them like Siva himself. Like Rudra, his body and mace are drenched in 
blood. A few surviving tuskers run in every direction, crushing their own 
ranks as they blunder away from the fearful Bhima. Duryodhana’s frantic 
forces quit the field any way they can.’ 


CANTO 104 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘At high noon a bloody battle breaks out between 

Bhishma and the Somakas. Bhishma denudes the Pandava ranks with 
thousands of immaculate arrows, every one claiming a life. He crushes 
them like a herd of bulls grinding paddy clumps under their hooves. 

Dhrishtadyumna and Sikhandin, and Virata and Drupada attack 
maharatha Bhishma with a torment of arrows. Bhishma_ pierces 
Dhrishtadyumna and Virata each with three exquisite barbs, and aims a long 
lance at Drupada. Wounded, shamed by Parantapa Bhishma, those 
maharathas are like snakes stamped upon. Sikhandin darts within range and 
besieges the Pitamaha with countless arrows. Bhishma does not shoot back, 
still regarding his enemy as a woman. 

Dhrishtadyumna skewers Bhishma with three lean shafts through his 
arms and chest. Drupada pierces him with twenty-five barbs, Virata with 
ten, and Sikhandin with another twenty-five. Bhishma is covered in blood, 
and looks quite magnificent like an ashoka in full carmine bloom. Bhishma 
shoots them each with three arrows. He cracks Drupada’s bow with a broad- 
headed shaft. Drupada seizes another bow and strikes his adversary with 
five barbs quick as one. He stabs Bhishma’s sarathy with three shafts. 

Draupadi’s five sons, the five Kaikeya brothers and Satyaki, all led by 
Yudhishtira, charge Ganga’s son to protect the Panchalas and 
Dhrishtadyumna. All your warriors attack the Pandava host to defend 
Bhishma. 

Another pitched battle ensues, resulting in another carnage. Maharathas 
kill maharathas. Soldiers, elephant-riders and horse-riders kill others with 
inhuman, heartless projectiles. Riderless chariots are hauled wildly across 
death’s abysmal field. Careening blindly, these crush countless men and 
mow horses down; they dash everywhere like the wind strewing cloud 
forms across a sunset sky, bathing it in stains of blood. 

With sparkling ear-rings, bright garlands and bracelets, handsome as the 
sons of Devas, surpassing Vaisravana in wealth and Brihaspati in 


intelligence, great rulers of vast kingdoms, brave maharathas left without 
their chariots, run like ordinary men in every direction. 

Mighty tuskers, their skilled riders slain, crush friendly ranks and run 
wildly until they fall. These mammoths, their armour cut away by arrows 
and spears, flowing blood from all over their massive bodies, roar like 
clouds and scatter in all directions. The chamaras and dappled standards, 
their golden parasols, and the dazzling spears of their riders lie in ruins 
everywhere. 

Elephant-riders of both armies, their mounts slain, run on foot in that 
awful melee. Thousands of horses with golden ornaments gallop away from 
death’s field. Armed with swords, but without horses, horsemen run from 
their assailants. 

Elephants continue to dash against other elephants, crushing foot- 
soldiers and horses on their way. They smash countless chariots; chariots 
ride tilting over fallen horses lying in their path. Horses trample foot- 
soldiers under their hooves. Thus, O Rajan, they massacre one another and 
mercy has fled this war entirely. 

The river of blood swells every hour, frothing across Kurukshetra with a 
hundred tributary streams. Fallen bows obstruct its straight course, and the 
hair of dead warriors forms its moss. Smashed chariots are its islands, and 
arrows beyond count create its eddies. Horses make up its fish; heads of 
tuskers its boulders; butchered elephants are the river’s crocodiles. And 
coats of mail and helmets form its froth. 

Bows still clutched by fallen warriors regulate its swift current and 
swords are its tortoises. Banners and emblems stand like forlorn trees on its 
banks. And bodies of men are its banks relentlessly consumed by the russet 
river. Countless carnivores are its swans, drinking thirstily of its sanguine 
waters. 

That river swells not the ocean but Yama’s kingdom. Noble and fearless 
maharathas try to cross that river with their chariots, elephants, and horses 
for rafts and boats. Like the river Vaitarani bears the dead to Yama’s realm, 
so does that bloody river on Kurukshetra sweep along diffident and 
unconscious men. 

The Kshatriyas look upon that horrible carnage and exclaim, “Alas, the 
very race of Kshatriyas will perish from Duryodhana’s sin. Deluded by 
greed, why, O Dhritarashtra, was he so envious of the virtuous Pandavas?” 


Such cries are accompanied by others that praise the sons of Pandu. 
Hearing these reproaches, Duryodhana says to Bhishma and Drona and 
Kripa and Salya, “Fight without pride. Why do you delay?” 

The murderous war caused by a game of dice, resumes between the 
Kauravas and the Pandavas. 

Son of Vichitravirya, you see now the dreadful outcome of disdaining 
the advice of your true friends. Neither the Pandavas nor their forces and 
allies, nor the Kauravas, fear for their lives in this war. And for this very 
reason, Rajan, of savage Kshatriya dharma, such a terrible destruction of 
kinsmen is underway on Kurukshetra, ah, caused either by Destiny or your 
wicked design.’ 


CANTO 105 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


who ride with Susarman. Susarman strikes Arjuna with an angry 
olley. He pierces Krishna with seventy barbs and Arjuna again with nine. 
Serenely, Arjuna continues to kill Susarman’s men. 

Those maharathas flee from Arjuna as if Death himself had come to hunt 
them at the end of the yuga, for indeed the Dwapara Yuga is drawing to its 
end and the Kali, age of wrath, is rising near. Some of the Trigartas jump 
down from their horses, some from their chariots, others clamber down 
from their elephants and flee. Others swiftly escape on their very mounts 
and chariots. Foot-soldiers throw away their weapons in panic, and run 
helter-skelter with no thought for their comrades. Though stridently 
forbidden by Susarman and other noble kings, they desert their armies. 

Seeing this rout, Duryodhana, together with Bhishma, mounts a driving 
attack against Arjuna to protect Susarman. While his men take to their heels 
all around him, Duryodhana is unyielding and, surrounded by his brothers, 
continues to engage the enemy with undiminished vigour. 

To protect Arjuna, the other Pandavas advance on Bhishma. Aware of 
Phalguni’s prowess, they still dash forward roaring, and the Pitamaha 
relentlessly dwindles the Pandavas army with every moment, his every 
arrow a killer. At noon, absolute, bloody, chaos reigns on Kurukshetra so it 
seems unclear whether the war between cousins is being fought in the realm 
of the living or the dead, whether on Bhumi or in Yamaloka. 

Striking Kritavarman with five arrows, the triumphant Satyaki kills 
thousands of Dhartarashtra men with uncanny archery so like his master 
Arjuna’s. King Drupada, having already drawn blood from his old and 
hated enemy, his boyhood friend Drona, strikes the Acharya with seventy 
shafts, all loosed in a moment, and Drona’s sarathy with another nine. 

Bhima roars like some mythic tiger after wounding his great granduncle, 
king Bahlika. Chitrasena wounds Abhimanyu deep with a brace of torrid 
shafts, and the luminous Abhimanyu adorns Chitrasena’s broad breast with 
three perfect barbs. Locked in battle, the two are as glorious on the field as 


S anjaya says, “With banks of razor like arrows Arjuna kills the warriors 
V 


Venus and Saturn in the sky. Then, in a flash, Abhimanyu kills his noble 
adversary’s horses and charioteer and maharatha Chitrasena leaps off his 
chariot and mounts Durmukha’s. 

Drona repeatedly carves slivers off Drupada’s ratha, and remembering 
their enmity of such long standing, the Panchala king retreats with his swift 
horses. 

Bhima kills Bahlika’s horses and sarathy. Finding himself in grave 
danger, Bahlika jumps down from his chariot and mounts Lakshmana’s and 
they ride away from dreadful Bhima. 

Satyaki thwarts Kritavarman, who fights for Duryodhana, and looses a 
plethora of every kind of barb upon the Pitamaha whom Kritavarman 
protects. Piercing Bhishma with sixty whetted feathered shafts, the ebullient 
Satyaki seems to dance on his chariot, brandishing his bow. Bhishma shoots 
an extraordinary iron arrow at the Vrishni, flecked with gold, serpentine and 
beautiful as a Naga woman. 

But Satyaki intercepts it with another astra and both exceptional 
weapons explode into flames and lunge harmless to the ground like 
extinguished meteors. Satyaki seizes up a shimmering golden spear and 
casts it like a streak of lightning at Bhishma. It flies at the Kuru ancient like 
his very death coming to claim a doomed man. Quicker than seeing, 
Bhishma trisects it with two lean horseshoe-headed arrows and it falls to the 
ground in three strips, undone. 

Possessed by the murderous spirit of war, yet smiling the while, 
Parantapa Bhishma strikes Satyaki through his chest with nine arrows in an 
incredibly close and neat cluster. With their chariots, elephants and horses, 
the Pandava warriors besiege Bhishma from every side to rescue Satyaki. 

Yet another general fray, always more bloody than the ones gone before, 
breaks out between the Pandava and the Kaurava hosts, both seeking glory, 
both wanting victory more than life itself.’ 


CANTO 106 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Seeing Bhishma seethe upon Kurukshetra, encircled by 

the Pandavas, like the sun in the sky by monsoon clouds, Duryodhana 
says to Dussasana, “Parantapa Bhishma is surrounded by the Pandavas. 
Your only charge is to protect him. If we guard him well, our Pitamaha will 
destroy the Panchalas and the Pandavas. Defending Bhishma is our first and 
highest dharma, for he is our protector and our main hope. Surround him 
with your legions, Dussasana, and make sure he comes to no harm!” 

Dussasana surrounds Bhishma with a vast force and stands ready to fight 
anyone who threatens his grandsire. With thousands of horsemen carrying 
shining spears, swords and standards, forming a confident legion, together 
with twice as many proficient foot-soldiers, Subala’s son Sakuni assails 
Nakula, Sahadeva and Yudhishtira. 

Duryodhana sends ten thousand horsemen to attack the Pandavas. As 
they fly like so many Garudas, the earth trembles and groans under their 
horse hooves, the din of which resounds like a bamboo forest on fire. They 
raise a cloud of dust as they hurtle across the battlefield, obscuring the sun. 
They unnerve the Pandava host like a flight of swans that disturbs a lake 
while descending on it. Nothing can be heard above their loud neighing. 

Yudhishtira and the sons of Madri contain their charge like the shore the 
surging sea at high tide. Those three maharathas mow down line after line 
of horsemen with tides of arrows. Themselves wheeling across the 
battleground, the three Pandava brothers display some incredible archery in 
concert as they decapitate those onrushing lines of horsemen while never so 
much as scratching any other part of their bodies. 

Felled with swords and arrows, heads drop like fruits from tall trees. 
Everywhere riders and their horses fall dead to the ground. Many horses 
bolt in fear like deer on seeing lions. And the Pandavas blow their conches 
and beat their drums in triumph. 

Duryodhana is crestfallen to see his forces demolished again and says to 
Salya, king of the Madras, “Before your eyes, Yudhishtira and the twins 


have routed our army. Mahabaho, you are powerful and irresistible. Stop 
Yudhishtira, like the continent that resists the ocean.” 

Salya rides at Yudhishtira with a legion of chariots. As he rushes at 
Yudhishtira like a tidal wave, the Pandava calmly strikes Salya through his 
chest with ten thudding shafts. Nakula and Sahadeva assail him with seven 
more. Salya, whose very name means to menace, to harry, pierces them 
each with three arrows, and further stabs Yudhishtira with sixty keen darts. 
Enraged, he makes the twins bleed with two shafts each. Parantapa Bhima 
sees Yudhishtira within Salya’s reach, as in the jaws of Death, and rushes to 
his defence. 

And as the sun begins to set, one more dark and destructive battle 
begins.’ 


CANTO 107 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


radiates arrows in every direction, every shaft claiming an enemy 
oldier’s life or drawing blood from a Pandava maharatha. Yet he fights 
without rancour even with deep sadness in his aged heart, and even for this 
is more terrible. He strikes Bhima with twelve arrows and Satyaki with 
nine. Stabbing Nakula with three barbs, he shoots Sahadeva with seven. 
Yudhishtira he pierces through his arms and chest with twelve faultless 
shafts. Lacerating Dhrishtadyumna with a flat flight of barbs, that mighty 
old lion roars deafeningly. 

Nakula stabs him with twelve arrows and Satyaki with three. 
Dhrishtadyumna shoots him with seventy shafts and Bhima with seven. 
Yudhishtira pierces the Pitamaha with twelve barbs. Drona attacks Satyaki 
and Bhima at once, stabbing them each with five whetted arrows like Yama 
dandas. Bhima and Satyaki retaliate without a moment’s pause. 

Rulers of the eastern, western and northern regions, the Sauviras, the 
Kitavas, the Malavas, the Abhishahas, the Surasenas, the Sibis, and the 
Vasatis, vigorously assail Bhishma despite his endless barrage of arrows. 
Other kings of various realms loose many astras of fire, water and air at the 
Pandavas themselves. 

The Pandavas surround the Pitamaha. Encircled and doubly defiant, the 
aged lion blazes like a forest fire, continuing to raze the enemy army with 
transcendent archery. His chariot is his fire-chamber; his bow its flames; 
swords, arrows and maces are his fuel; his shafts are sparks; and Bhishma 
himself becomes the fire that consumes his adversaries. 

Bhishma shrouds the Pandava hosts with golden-winged shafts decked 
with the feathers of vultures, with nalikas, and dirghastras, elongated barbs. 
He fells elephants and chariot-warriors. He makes the Pandava legion of 
chariots look like a forest of palmyras shorn of their leafy heads. He 
decimates riders of horses, elephants and chariots without favour. Hearing 
the thunder of his bowstring and the thunderclaps of his palms as he looses 
his tirades of fire, all the soldiers tremble. 


S anjaya says, ‘Bhishma bestrides the yawning field and his great bow 
S 


His arrows shot from his bow pierce through armour like through butter. 
And again, endlessly, we see riderless chariots dragged across the battlefield 
by their yoked horses. Fourteen thousand celebrated and noble maharathas, 
with golden standards, of the Chedis, the Kasi, and the Karushas, stand firm 
and ready to sacrifice their lives; they do not retreat, and are swiftly 
despatched, in blasts of gore, along with their horses and elephants, by 
Bhishma like Siva with mouth agape. 

We see thousands of chariots with smashed axles, terraces and wheels. 
The ground is covered with wrecked chariots, arrows, axes, ruined coats of 
mail and the mighty bodies of maharathas, which seem to glow on even 
after life has left them. Maces and arrows, quivers and bows, swords, and 
jewelled severed heads lie scattered in profusion; as do gloves and felled 
standards, and riven bows. 

Riderless elephants and horse-riders lie dead as if they are mere clods of 
earth, so plentiful are they. The most valiant efforts of the Pandavas cannot 
any more rally their maharathas who lose their nerve and flee before 
Bhishma’s relentless arrow storms. By himself the Kuru Pitamaha disperses 
that teeming force of fighting men with the ageless energy of Indra. With its 
chariots, elephants, horses and standards felled, the Pandava army in 
disarray laments loudly and scatters. Driven by ruthless destiny, fathers, 
sons and friends kill one another, on and on. 

The Pandava warriors tear off their armour and run dementedly in all 
directions, like terrified bulls lowing in despair, and running wild and 
unrestrained from the great terror which is Bhishma. 

Seeing the Pandava army disbanding, Krishna reins in Arjuna’s chariot, 
and says to his warrior, “The awaited hour has arrived. Strike now, O tiger 
among men, or you will be lost. You said, in Sanjaya’s presence, in the 
assembly of kings in Virata’s city, “I will kill all Duryodhana’s warriors and 
their followers, including Bhishma and Drona, if they oppose me in battle.’ 
Son of Kunti, O Parantapa, honour your words now. Remember your 
Kshatriya dharma; fight fearlessly.” 

Arjuna, troubled and unsure, says, “I can seize the kingdom, 
slaughtering the innocent, or accept exile in the forest. These are my 
choices. Which of these should I strive for? Spur the horses on, Krishna; I 
will obey you. I will kill the invincible Bhishma.” Krishna goads the silvery 
white horses to where Bhishma stands dazzling like the sun. 


Seeing Arjuna riding at Bhishma, Yudhishtira’s host rallies to the fight. 
Roaring, the Pitamaha shrouds Arjuna’s chariot in an opacity of arrows so it 
is hidden from view. Krishna adroitly urges the wounded horses on. Arjuna 
raises the Gandiva and slashes Bhishma’s bow into pieces. Bhishma 
promptly strings another bow. Arjuna breaks this one as well. Bhishma cries 
out in some delight, “Wonderful, Mahabaho! Well done, son of Kunti.” 

Bhishma takes up another beautiful bow and looses a crescendo of 
arrows at Arjuna’s chariot. Krishna skilfully manoeuvres his horses and 
avoids the searing volley. Yet some shafts find their mark, and those two 
tigers among men look like two angry bulls gored by horns in a fight. 

Meanwhile, yet again, Krishna sees that while Bhishma, positioned 
between the two armies, unleashes his firestorms of arrows, scorching 
everything like the Sun himself, and killing Yudhishtira’s warriors 
relentlessly, proclaiming, as it were, the end of the yuga, Arjuna still 
hesitates and turns mild when faced with his grandsire. 

Leaving Arjuna’s horses, Krishna leaps off the chariot in fury. His eyes 
crimson, his body burning with terrible light, and the whip in his hand his 
only weapons, the Lord of the universe runs straight at Bhishma, like some 
great lion, his strides appearing to cleave the earth, and his heart set on 
killing the Kuru ancient. 

All the assembled warriors can only watch, rooted and stunned as they 
see Krishna rush Bhishma. “Bhishma is dead!” they cry. Their shouts of 
dismay are loud and fearful. 

Dark as lapis lazuli, clad in yellow silk, Krishna streaks towards 
Bhishma, like a thunderhead charged with lightning. Like a lion at an 
elephant, or a great bull thundering at another, Krishna roars as he storms at 
Bhishma. 

Seeing the Dark One come with cosmic fury on his brow and in his 
eyes, Bhishma stands perfectly calm and fearlessly draws his great bow. 
Serenely he says to Krishna, “Come, O you with eyes like lotus petals. O 
Lord of the Devas, I bow to you. O best of the Satwatas, kill me today in 
this great war, for, Govinda, I will be blessed in every way if I die by your 
hand in battle. Krishna, the honour in the three worlds is mine today. Kill 
me as you please, for I am your slave.” 

But Arjuna has leapt down from his chariot and running after Krishna, 
seizes the Blue God in his arms, restraining him. Krishna hardly seems to 


notice Arjuna and drags him along as if he were not there at all. At the tenth 
step, Arjuna falls to the ground and stops Krishna by clinging to his legs. 

Arjuna cries in despair to the terrifying Lord, “Stop, Krishna! You must 
not break your vow that you will not fight or men will say that Krishna is a 
liar. This burden is mine and I will kill the Pitamaha. I swear by my 
weapons, by truth, and my punya that I will do everything in my power to 
destroy all my enemies. Watch me now and I will effortlessly quell this 
great maharatha, even like the crescent moon being extinguished at the end 
of the yuga, at the moment of final destruction.” 

Krishna’s brow is still like thunder, but he remains silent and allows 
Arjuna to lead him back to their chariot. The moment of absolute dread 
passes and the universe breathes again! 

Bhishma once more envelops the two Krishnas in a cloud of arrows, 
while continuing to consume the Pandava ranks like the sun sapping the life 
force of all things in summer. The Pitamaha kills two Pandava soldiers for 
every life that the sons of Pandu claim from his own army. Without being 
able to even look upon him who blazes like the noonday sun, thousands of 
helpless dispirited warriors perish at Bhishma’s hands. 

Fearful and grown timid, the Pandavas themselves are powerless before 
Bhishma’s super-human feats in war. Unprotected, their forces flee like a 
herd of cows swarmed by an army of ants, his millions of arrows. 

The Pandavas, too, cannot bear to look upon that maharatha who turns 
his fire on Yudhishtira, their king. As the sun sets ever so slowly for the 
decimated Pandava army, and too swiftly for the triumphant Kauravas, the 
exhausted soldiers withdraw from the battlefield.’ 


CANTO 108 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


by the many flares of Bhishma, the sun sets and in the deep twilight 
othing can be seen, not the corpses now past all count with which the 
awesome grandsire has strewn Kurukshetra. Yudhishtira sees the remnants 
of his devastated forces throw down their weapons and eagerly quit the 
battlefield before the conches have been sounded for the day’s slaughtering 
to end. But Bhishma stands still blazing in the gloom of dusk, still 
unleashing his arrow storms all around him. The shaken Pandava king 
orders the conches to be blown for the armies to withdraw. 

In honour, Bhishma also withdraws his legions, and all the wounded and 
weary maharathas, those left alive, return to their tents. 

As they have their wounds inflicted by Bhishma tended, the Pandavas 
reflect on how entirely terrible and invincible their Pitamaha had been 
through the day he has won so resoundingly for the Kauravas, and they are 
deeply distraught. Across the darkling field on which numberless corpses lie 
under the stars, Duryodhana and the Kauravas eulogise Bhishma’s exploits 
as the old lion makes his way to his tent with some satisfaction surrounded 
by your jubilant sons. 

Night, that quietens all creatures, sets in. In that intense hour, the 
Pandavas, the Vrishnis and the Srinjayas confer. Those noble ones, 
experienced in deliberations, discuss the courses that lie before them. 

Yudhishtira says sombrely to Krishna, “Ah, look how the Pitamaha 
savaged our men like an elephant trampling a forest of reeds. We dare not 
even look at him, while he consumes my army like a raging fire. He is 
grown as fierce as the poisonous Takshaka. Yama can be defeated, even 
Indra armed with the Vajra, or Varuna, noose in hand, or the Lord of the 
Yakshas with his mace. But Bhishma cannot be killed. 

Krishna, I am helpless, and drown in anguish, when I face Bhishma in 
battle. I will go into the forest and take sannyasa. That would benefit me. I 
do not want to fight this hopeless war any more. Bhishma conquers us 
always. Riding against him, I am like an insect that flies into a fire only to 


5 anjaya says, ‘Even while they fight like figures in a nightmare scathed 
n 


meet certain death. By foolishly fighting for a kingdom, I am being 
destroyed. 

My brave brothers have all been wounded, look how they still bleed. 
Out of their love for me, their eldest brother, they lost their kingdom and 
followed me into exile. For my sake, Krishna, you also suffer. Life is so 
precious and now even that is threatened. If I survive this war, I will devote 
the rest of my days to the performance of penance and good deeds. If you 
bear us good will, Krishna, tell me what I should do, without forsaking the 
duties of my varna, my Kshatriya dharma.” 

Krishna speaks kind, comforting words to Yudhishtira, “Son of Dharma, 
you are unwavering in your commitment to truth; do not be sad, blessed as 
you are with Parantapas for brothers. Arjuna and Bhima are imbued with 
the energy of the Wind and Fire. The twin sons of Madri are as valiant as 
the king of the Devas. 

Honour our friendship; use me and achieve victory. I will fight with 
Bhishma myself. Only command me and I will show you my prowess in 
war. If Arjuna will not, I will challenge Bhishma and kill him, in the very 
sight of the Dhartarashtras. If you think that killing noble Bhishma will help 
you triumph, I will single-handedly destroy the Pitamaha. My prowess is 
equal to Indra’s in battle. I will overpower that Kshatriya of great weapons. 

He, who is an enemy of the Pandavas, is also my enemy; and my 
detractors are yours. Your brother Arjuna is my friend, kinsman, and 
devotee. I will cut off my flesh and sacrifice it for Arjuna’s sake. He, too, 
will give up his life for me. This is our sacred bond, and we will protect 
each other. 

So command me: how should I fight? At Upaplavya, Arjuna vowed that 
he would kill Bhishma. Now he must honour his words with deeds. If he 
asks me to, I will fulfil what he swore he would do, unquestioningly. 
Otherwise, he must accomplish the task himself. It is not difficult for him, 
he can kill Bhishma easily, for this Arjuna can achieve feats that others 
cannot. 

He can annihilate the very Devas, along with the Daityas and the 
Danavas. What then of Bhishma? Bhishma is old now, dull, his strength 
reduced by his years, and he cannot stand against Arjuna, if Arjuna once 
decided that he will indeed bring Bhishma down.” 

Yudhishtira says, “It is as you say, Mahabaho. When you both are 
united, not Bhishma or all the Kaurava maharathas together can stand 


before you. Krishna, with you by my side I am certain to have victory and 
everything that I might wish for. With you as my defender, I can overcome 
the very Devas with Indra at their head. And Bhishma, though he is the 
greatest maharatha, can also be vanquished. 

But, Krishna, for my own honour and truth, I cannot let you break your 
vow that you would not actually fight. Give me the support you promised, 
but without actually fighting yourself. Bhishma said to me, ‘I am obliged to 
fight for Duryodhana and against you. But you can always come to me for 
advice. 

Krishna, Bhishma might still help me regain my kingdom by telling me 
what I should do. Taking you with us, we will all go to the Pitamaha once 
again and ask him how he can be killed. Let us go to him even now and I 
will do whatever he tells me to in battle. He is honourable and a man of 
unswerving dharma. His heart lies with us and he will tell me how I can win 
this war.” 

Yudhishtira’s eyes are moist and his voice is low as he says, “We were 
orphans, mere children, and our Pitamaha raised us with his love. Ah, how 
cruel this Kshatriya dharma is that today I must go and ask my grandfather 
how I can kill him.” 

Krishna says to Yudhishtira, “Wise king, I approve of what you say. 
Bhishma is an unrivalled maharatha, the greatest master of astras. He can 
kill an enemy with just a look from his eyes. Yes, let us go to him and ask 
him how he himself can be killed. He will answer truthfully, especially if 
you are the one that asks this question. Let us go to him even now and ask 
him how we can win this war.” 

The Pandavas and Krishna set aside their armour and weapons and go 
towards Bhishma’s tent; they enter, and bow to him. The Pandavas pay him 
obeisance and worship, and ask for his blessings. 

The Pitamaha, Mahabaho Bhishma, says warmly to them, “You are 
welcome, my sons. Welcome to you Arjuna. Welcome Yudhishtira 
Dharmatma, and you also, my Bhima. Welcome Nakula and Sahadeva. Tell 
me why you have come to me at this hour. What can I do for you? Let it be 
anything, however demanding, and I will do it wholeheartedly.” 

His head bowed, Yudhishtira replies, “Pitamaha, wise Bhishma, tell us 
how we can win this war and have our kingdom back. Tell us how we can 
end this terrible slaughter of men. You, great Kshatriya, are invincible on 
the field of battle, you leave no chink through which an enemy might strike 


you down. As long as you live, we can never hope to win this war. O 
Pitamaha, tell us how you can be killed! 

Your bow is always drawn and streams tides of arrows razing my army. 
Day after day, we see you, Parantapa, mounted on your chariot, blazing like 
a second sun, as you consume our chariots and horses, men and elephants. 

Bharatarishabha, there is no man who can defeat you, and you wreak 
destruction on us with your arrows. Pitamaha, tell me how we can triumph 
against you in battle, regain what is rightfully ours, and prevent any more 
bloodshed.” 

Bhishma says to Yudhishtira, “‘As long as I live, you cannot win. This is 
the simple truth. Sons of Pandu, only if you vanquish me can victory be 
yours. Indeed, if you want to win this war, you must kill me immediately 
otherwise your cause will be lost. I gladly give you leave to strike down me 
in any way. Why, I would be the happiest one if you did so for I hate this 
war in which I must fight against you. After you kill me, the others can all 
be slain. I do not ask you to do this, I, your Pitamaha, command it.” 

Yudhishtira says, “Tell us how we can defeat you in battle, you who are 
like the mace wielding Siva himself. Indra, Varuna, or Yama may be 
quelled, but not the Devas and Asuras united under Indra’s command can 
overcome you.” 

Bhishma says, “What you say is true, Mahabaho. As long as I fight with 
my bow and my astras, I cannot be defeated by the Devas and Asuras led by 
Indra. But if I lay down my weapons, these brothers of yours, these 
maharathas can surely kill me. I never fight against one who has discarded 
his weapons, who has fallen, who has lost his armour, whose standard has 
collapsed, or who is fleeing from battle; nor will I confront anyone who is 
afraid, who humbles himself before me, or one who is weak and vulnerable, 
or a man who has only one son, or a vulgar lowly man. And I will never 
bear arms against a woman or a man who bears a woman’s name. 

This is my old resolve. I will never fight if I see an inauspicious sign. 
Sikhandin, son of Drupada, brave and tenacious in war, fights on your side; 
he was once a woman, a royal princess, before he became a man. We all 
know how this happened and the reasons for it. 

Let Arjuna set Sikhandin in front of him, and then attack me. When I see 
that inauspicious sight, that ill omen in the form of a prince who was once a 
woman, I will never attack him. I will put down my bow and Arjuna must 


seize that moment to strike me down me with his arrows, piercing me 
through every limb and organ, from every side. 

Even if I lay my weapons down, other than Krishna and Arjuna, there is 
nobody from any of the three worlds who can kill me in battle. Setting 
Sikhandin before him, let Arjuna, with his Gandiva and every astra, strike 
me down from my chariot. Then, and only then, will your victory be 
assured. Do as I have told you, Rajan, and after I have fallen you will surely 
kill all the Dhartarashtras.” 

The Pandavas listen numbly to what their grandsire says. They can only 
bow in silence to acknowledge the terrible counsel he gives them. Taking 
the dust from his feet, they return grimly to their tents. 

Arjuna hears Bhishma’s awful advice, he sees how his beloved Pitamaha 
is ready, so eager to die, and he is filled with shame and anguish. He cries to 
Krishna, “Krishna, how can I do what Bhishma asks me to? How can I kill 
our Pitamaha, who is so great and wise, and the eldest of our race? 

In my childhood, I would climb onto his lap and playfully smear his face 
and body with dust. He is my father Pandu’s father. As a child I once called 
him father as I clambered on his lap; and he said: I am not your father, but 
your father’s father. That was his reply. 

How can I kill someone who said those words to me? Ah, let my army 
perish and let me also die. I do not care if we lose this war, but I will never 
fight my Pitamaha. And how can I even think of killing him in the 
cowardly, shameful way that he commands me to? Ah Krishna, save me 
from this sea of grief in which I am drowning. Tell me what you think!” 

Krishna says, “Having once sworn to kill Bhishma, how can you now 
break your solemn vow, without violating your sacred dharma as a 
Kshatriya? Arjuna, you must strike Bhishma down, for you cannot win this 
war unless you kill Ganga’s invincible son. And he has told you the only 
way by which he can be sent to Yama’s realm, and you are the only one 
who can do this thing. 

The Devas decided this a long time ago and what is destined to happen 
must happen. It cannot be otherwise. You alone, not even Indra, can 
conquer Bhishma, who is like Siva with mouth agape. Fearlessly kill the 
Kuru Pitamaha. 

My words are but those that Brihaspati said to Sakra. One should kill 
even an old person, however meritorious and revered, if he comes as an 
enemy, indeed one must kill anyone who comes to destroy you. Arjuna, this 


is the eternal dharma of Kshatriyas; they must fight, protect their subjects, 
and perform sacrifices, without hatred.” 

Arjuna says, “Sikhandin will certainly become the cause of Bhishma’s 
death, for as soon as he sees the prince of the Panchalas my Pitamaha will 
put down his bow. We will keep Sikhandin in front of us, I will thwart the 
other archers who surround him and thus we will vanquish Bhishma. 
Sikhandin will fight Bhishma alone. I know that he will not strike 
Sikhandin, for he was once a woman.” 

Yet again, Krishna gives Arjuna the courage he needs for the great and 
violent deed. Having decided on their course, at Bhishma’s own counsel 
and with his leave and blessings, the Pandavas feel relieved and hopeful 
again. And past midnight, these bulls among men retire to sleep.’ 


CANTO 109 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


how did Bhishma press forward against the Pandavas? Tell me 
everything, Sanjaya.’ 

Sanjaya says, “At dawn, to the beating of drums and the clash of 
cymbals, and the blast of milk white conches, the Pandavas advance into 
battle, setting Sikhandin before them. They form a daunting vyuha. 

Sikhandin is positioned in the vanguard. Bhima and Arjuna defend his 
chariot wheels. The sons of Draupadi and Abhimanyu ride behind the 
Panchala prince. In turn, Maharathas Satyaki and Chekitana guard them. 
Behind them is Dhrishtadyumna surrounded by the Panchalas. Behind 
Dhrishtadyumna ride Yudhishtira and the twins, filling the air with roars. 
They are followed by Virata, surrounded by his troops. 

Alongside Virata is Drupada. And the five Kaikeya brothers and the 
valiant Dhrishtaketu protect the rear of the Pandava army. Having prepared 
their vyuha, the Pandavas, taking their lives in their hands, charge your 
army by first light. 

The Kauravas place maharatha Bhishma at the head of their army and 
advance against the Pandavas. That indomitable Kshatriya is protected by 
your mighty sons. Behind him are Drona and Aswatthaman. 

Bhishma is followed by Bhagadatta surrounded by his elephant 
akshauhini. Behind Bhagadatta are Kripa and Kritavarman. Behind them 
are Sudakshina of the Kambojas, and Jayatsena of the Magadhas, and 
Sakuni and Brihadbala. Countless other kings, all great archers, protect the 
rear of your army. 

Every day, Bhishma forms vyuhas, sometimes like those of the Asuras, 
sometimes similar to those of Pisachas, at other times comparable to ones of 
the Rakshasas. The battle between the two forces begins yet again; 
sweeping into each other, both forces recommence the great slaughtering, 
the blood sacrifice on Kurukshetra. 

The Parthas with Arjuna leading them place Sikhandin before them all, 
and attack Bhishma with every kind of arrow and astra maiming and killing 


Drow aia says, ‘How did Sikhandin ride against Bhishma, and 


your warriors in waves. Nakula, Sahadeva and maharatha Satyaki 
vigorously annihilate your forces. 

Such is the carnage the Pandavas bring to your warriors this day, from 
every side, that it does not take them long to scatter and flee from the 
rampaging maharathas. Felled by the whetted arrows of the Pandavas and 
the Srinjayas, your troops cannot defend themselves.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Tell me, Sanjaya, what does Bhishma do when he 
sees my army afflicted by the Parthas? How does that greatest Kshatriya, 
that Parantapa, storm the Pandavas and slaughter the Somakas?’ 

Sanjaya says, “I will tell you what Bhishma does when attacked by the 
Pandavas and the Srinjayas. In great heart after the night’s secret meeting 
with Bhishma, the Pandavas assail your son’s forces, slaughtering all in 
their path. Seeing their inexorable, bloody advance, seeing his men, 
elephants and horses razed at will, Bhishma blazes up in wrath. 

Uncaring of his life, that greatest maharatha unleashes a tornado of 
every kind of shaft at the enemy, elongated arrows, calf-toothed and 
crescent-headed ones, and many others. He covers the five mighty Pandavas 
in sheets of fire, holding them up; countless elephants and horses he kills; 
and that bull among men unseats so many maharathas from their chariots, 
riders from their horses, elephant-warriors from the backs of their beasts, 
and strikes fear into the hearts of the enemy. 

All together, the Pandava warriors charge maharatha Bhishma, like the 
Asuras assailing Indra in unison. He brings them up sharply with a storm of 
stone-whetted arrows, each like Indra’s thunderbolt, and so fierce his very 
countenance, that the enemy quails to look at him. Like Sakra himself, his 
vast bow is always drawn in a circle, and arrows flare from it in tide. 

Watching their Pitamaha, your sons are awestruck and humbled. The 
Pandavas are as shaken as they look at Bhishma dominate Kurukshetra as 
he pleases as the Devas were dejected by the feats of the Asura Viprachitti. 
They have neither the nerve nor the prowess to face that Kshatriya who 
looks like Siva with mouth agape. 

On that tenth day of the great Mahabharata yuddha, the day on which 
the Dwapara Yuga ends and the Kali Yuga actually rises over the world, 
Bhishma devours Sikhandin’s akshauhini like a fire burning down a dry 
forest. Resembling an angry Naga, or indeed Siva goaded by Yama himself, 
Sikhandin pierces the flaming Kuru grandsire squarely through his breast 


with three sizzling shafts. The surprised, wounded Bhishma sees that it is 
Sikhandin who has struck him. 

Incensed, yet Bhishma laughs and says, “Whether you attack me or not, 
I will never fight with you. You remain the same Sikhandini, the princess 
Amba whom the Creator first made.” 

Sikhandin’s eyes turn red, and licking the corners of his mouth he says 
to Bhishma in a ringing voice, “I know you, Parantapa, to be the 
exterminator of the race of Kshatriyas. I have also heard of your battle 
against your guru, Jamadagni’s son. I have heard a great deal about your 
superhuman prowess. Despite all that I have heard, I will fight you today. 

What satisfies the Pandavas is also what I want; Parantapa, I will not 
only fight you but surely kill you today. I solemnly swear this. You have 
heard me now; do whatever you must. Whether you resist me or not, you 
will not escape alive. O mighty, ever-triumphant Bhishma, look at this 
world for the last time.” 

Having loosed these word barbs, Sikhandin pierces Bhishma with five 
straight shafts. Arjuna urges the Panchala prince on, “Sikhandin, I am 
behind you, and the enemy will not stand before my arrows. Attack 
Bhishma and kill him now! 

If you return without killing Bhishma today, you will be ridiculed by all. 
Kill him now, so that we may not be mocked in this great war. I will protect 
you from the Kaurava maharathas. Kill Bhishma, O Sikhandin! 

I will contain Drona and his son, and Kripa, and Suyodhana, and 
Chitrasena, and Vikarna, and Jayadratha of the Sindhus, Vinda and 
Anuvinda of Avanti, and Sudakshina of the Kambojas, and the mighty 
Bhagadatta, and Salya of the Magadhas, and Somadatta’s son, and 
Rishyasringa’s son Alambusha and his fierce Rakshasas, and Susarman and 
the Trigartas, and all the other Kaurava maharathas. 

I will contain them all like a continent does the surging sea. Destroy the 
Pitamaha even now!” 


CANTO 110 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


righteous Bhishma? Which Pandava maharathas, armed with astras 

and seeking victory, protect Sikhandin? On the tenth day of the war, 
how does Bhishma fight the Pandavas and the Srinjayas? I cannot bear the 
thought of Sikhandin meeting Bhishma in battle. When Sikhandin attacks 
Bhishma what happens to the Pitamaha’s chariot and to his bow?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Neither Bhishma’s bow nor his chariot is in the least 
damaged in that battle. He continues to mow down the enemy with deadly 
banks of arrows. Thousands of your maharathas and elephants and horses, 
led by the Pitamaha, advance into battle. Bhishma fulfils his word given to 
Suyodhana to massacre the Pandava forces. The Panchalas and the 
Pandavas can in no way withstand the magnificent Kshatriya and he 
destroys their forces as he likes. 

On the tenth day, Bhishma scythes through the enemy with his countless 
shafts. Rajan, the sons of Pandu cannot remotely contain him for he is truly 
like Siva with his flaming trident come to Kurukshetra. Then Arjuna, with 
Krishna at his chariot head, appears and the perfectly ambidextrous 
Savyasachin is at your maharathas like some dreadful plague. 

Roaring like a lion now, the greatest of them all, he seems to be 
everywhere, so prodigious is Krishna’s chariotry, and the Pandava’s bow, 
the peerless Gandiva, appears to have life of its own for it seems to hang in 
the air, always drawn in a round of flames, so one cannot see that awesome 
archer’s hands or any apparent movement from them, while firetides of 
unearthly arrows flare in seamless spate from his chariot, incinerating the 
enemy all around him wherever he goes. 

Your warriors are petrified, and either stand rooted while this Kshatriya 
like one they have never seen the like of before, while this bowman like 
Yama strews the field with their corpses, reduces them to ashes, or they flee 
like small animals at the growl of the lion. 

Duryodhana, alarmed, cries to Bhishma, “Look at Arjuna, white horses 
yoked to his chariot, driven by Krishna, consuming your army like a flame 


[)itenicous says, ‘How does Sikhandin attack the noble and 


of the pralaya burning a forest. O great Kshatriya, see how he devours our 
men, thinning our army by a thousand lives every moment. 

My maharathas are as hard pressed as some cowherds in the jungle 
trying to control their stampeding herd attacked by a two great lions. From 
every side Arjuna and Bhima beset my legions and my men are butchered, 
and those that still live are terrified, their spirits broken. Satyaki, and 
Chekitana, and the twin sons of Madri, and the terrific Abhimanyu hunt 
with Arjuna and Bhima, and panic sweeps through my legions and they flee 
as they can. 

Dhrishtadyumna and Ghatotkacha also put my men to rout so their 
blood flows again in rills. Ah, in this carnage, I see no one other than you, 
with your divine powers, who can prevent the Pandava maharathas from 
winning this war within the hour. Pitamaha, save us or we are lost!” 

Bhishma ponders these words, and says slowly to your son, 
“Duryodhana, listen calmly to what I say. I vowed that I would kill ten 
thousand noble Kshatriyas every day, and return triumphant from the 
battlefield. I have fulfilled that vow! 

Even today I will achieve a great feat as you watch me. I will either kill 
the Pandavas or die. Tiger among men, today I will free myself from my 
debt to you by sacrificing myself while leading your army.” And Bhishma 
attacks the Pandava host. 

The Pandavas oppose the son of Ganga who stands at the heart his 
forces seething like an angry snake. He annihilates thousands of warriors on 
that tenth day of the war. Like the sun sucking the earth dry of her moisture, 
he exhausts the regal ranks of the Panchala maharathas. He kills ten 
thousand spirited elephants, ten thousand horses with their riders, and two 
hundred thousand foot-soldiers; like a smokeless fire, Bhishma blazes like a 
flame which burns at its brightest just before being extinguished. 

And none among the Pandavas can even look at him who is like the sun 
fixed in the northern solstice. The heroic Pandavas and the Srinjaya 
maharathas still storm at him in waves. Battling the countless warriors who 
surround him, Bhishma looks like Meru’s steep slopes covered by dense 
clouds. 

Your sons surround Bhishma with a vast protective force. Another fierce 
battle between the Kauravas and the Pandavas ensues.’ 


CANTO 111 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Watching Bhishma ablaze, more fearsome than he has 

yet been, Arjuna says to Sikhandin, “Ride towards the Pitamaha. Do 
not fear him today. For it is I who ride behind you and I who will strike him 
down from his chariot today.” 

Sikhandin charges Bhishma, and Dhrishtadyumna and the radiant 
Abhimanyu ride with him, their bows streaming many fires. Splendid in 
their armour, old Virata and Drupada, and Kuntibhoja also attack Bhishma 
before your son’s eyes. And Nakula, Sahadeva, and Yudhishtira too, along 
with the other warriors ride at only Bhishma. 

As for your Kshatriyas, listen, O Rajan, as I speak of them who advance 
so bravely, united against the Pandava army. Like a young tiger attacking a 
bull, Chitrasena charges Chekitana who is harrying Bhishma. Kritavarman 
holds up Dhrishtadyumna who is threateningly close to the Kuru Pitamaha. 

Somadatta’s son fearlessly attacks Bhima who is also furiously trying to 
make Bhishma’s great frame a home for his powerful arrows. Vikarna 
creates a magical wall of shafts between Nakula’s gales of barbs and the 
grandsire. 

Kripa prevents Sahadeva from approaching Bhishma’s chariot. 
Durmukha storms against the mighty Ghatotkacha who also wants to kill 
just the son of Ganga. Duryodhana stops Satyaki from advancing. 
Sudakshina, king of the Kamabojas, engages and holds up Abhimanyu as he 
nears Bhishma’s chariot. And Aswatthaman foils both Virata and Drupada. 

Drona somewhat easily contains Yudhishtira who also is bent just on 
having Bhishma’s life today. Showing incredible skill today, Dussasana 
thwarts Arjuna himself who, with Sikhandin before him, is dashing towards 
Bhishma, lighting up the ten quarters of the world with his shining astras. 

Other warriors of your army clash with the Pandava maharathas 
advancing against Ganga’s majestic son. 

Dhrishtadyumna rides at Bhishma alone, crying to his forces, “Look at 
Arjuna storming at Bhishma. Be without fear today and attack just the son 
of Ganga. Bhishma will be helpless to harm you today. Why, Vasava 


himself cannot face Arjuna in battle, then what to say of Bhishma who, 
though he great indeed and courage incarnate, is also old and weak?” 

Hearing this from their Senapati, the Pandava maharathas are jubilant 
and rush all together towards Bhishma’s chariot. Many excellent men of 
your army spiritedly resist those Kshatriyas hurtling hungrily towards 
Bhishma. 

To shield him from the hunting Arjuna, Dussasana fearlessly attacks the 
Pandava. The other sons of Pandu assail your mighty sons who surround 
Bhishma’s chariot. It is wonderful to see Arjuna stopped short by 
Dussasana. As the shore contains the surging sea, your son Dussasana holds 
up the storming son of Pandu. 

Both of them are excellent maharathas. Both are invincible. Both 
magnificent to behold, they resemble the sun and the moon. Both are 
incensed, and both want to kill the other. They fight like Mayaa and Sakra 
in olden days. 

Dussasana stabs Arjuna with three shafts and Krishna with twenty. 
Enraged to see Krishna bleed, Arjuna looses a hundred shafts at Dussasana, 
which flash through his armour and draw spouts of blood. Dussasana strikes 
Arjuna in the chest with five barbs, and upon his brow with three whetted 
shafts. These project from his head, making him look like Meru with lofty 
peaks. Looking like a radiant kinsuka, your son harangues Arjuna in that 
duel. 

Inflamed like Rahu on a full moon night, Arjuna unleashes a flurry of 
arrows winged with the feathers of the kanka bird, and wounds Dussasana 
deeply. Arjuna cleaves Dussasana’s bow and smashes his chariot with three 
shafts, and looses countless arrows like barbs of death at your son. But 
splendid Dussasana swiftly thwarts them in flight. All this appears so 
marvellous. 

Dussasana strikes Arjuna with a hundred shafts and the angry Partha 
replies with flocks of searing arrows that plunge into Dussasana’s body like 
swans diving into a lake. Covered in his own blood and staggering from the 
wounds of Arjuna, your son now runs towards Bhishma’s chariot. He seeks 
Bhishma out like a drowning man clings to an island. 

Finding refuge, your heroic Dussasana once more rains arrows at 
Arjuna, even like Purandara resisting Vritra. Though he is so mighty and 
powerful, his best efforts to vanquish Arjuna are in vain.’ 


CANTO 112 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, “Alambusha thwarts Satyaki and rides towards Bhishma 

to offer his protection. The incensed Satyaki strikes the Rakshasa with 
nine dire arrows. Alambusha responds with nine shafts as well. Satyaki 
unleashes a storm of arrows at the Rakshasa, who, roaring dreadfully, 
responds in kind. Deeply injured by Alambusha, Satyaki laughs off his 
wounds. Bhagadatta stabs him with more keenly whetted shafts like a 
mahout piercing a tusker with his hook. 

Satyaki turns away from Alambusha to vent his wrath upon Bhagadatta, 
who calmly breaks the shining Vrishni hero’s massive bow in his hands. 
Satyaki Yuyudhana seizes another and pierces Bhagadatta deeply, drawing 
small fonts of blood from his great frame. Bhagadatta licks the corners of 
his mouth and flings a most deadly iron spear, shimmering with gold and 
lapis lazuli, fierce like Yama’s rod, at his enemy. 

Satyaki cuts down that coursing shaft even as it flies at him, and it falls 
lustreless, like a burnt out meteor. Duryodhana surrounds Satyaki with 
many chariots. 

He says to his brothers, “Kauravas, ensure that Satyaki does not escape 
from this encirclement. If he is killed, consider the vast host of the 
Pandavas also destroyed.” Before Bhishma’s eyes, those Kaurava 
maharathas attack Satyaki all together. 

The king of the Kambojas sees Abhimanyu sweeping towards Bhishma 
and rides to bar his way. In a flash, Arjuna’s son strikes Sudakshina with 
sixty four shafts. The Kamboja pierces Abhimanyu with five arrows and his 
charioteer with nine, to defend Bhishma. The duel between these two is 
ferocious and wonderful. 

Meanwhile, Sikhandin continues to advance towards the Pitamaha. 
Destroying the teeming Kaurava army, maharathas Virata and Drupada also 
press their way towards Bhishma but they are confronted by an infuriated 
Aswatthaman. 

Virata strikes Drona’s son, that ornament of battle, sharply, as he dashes 
at them, and Drupada pierces him with three heavy shafts. Aswatthaman 


looses a fuming volley at the twain. With awesome archery the two old 
warriors serenely thwart Aswatthama’s arrow storm. 

Like an incensed elephant charging another in a forest, Kripa rides at 
Sahadeva who is also advancing upon Bhishma. He strikes Sahadeva with 
seventy golden shafts. The son of Madri cleaves Kripa’s bow in his hands 
and pierces his first acharya with nine barbs. 

Seizing another great bow, Kripa shoots ten immaculate barbs at 
Sahadeva in the space of a wish. Possessed by the single thought of killing 
Bhishma, annoyed at being thus held up, Sahadeva unleashes an altogether 
more savage clutch of missiles at his aged master’s chest. And another 
zealous duel begins. 

Parantapa Vikarna, also wanting to protect Bhishma, strikes Nakula with 
sixty shafts and Nakula replies with a hot salvo of seventy-seven barbs. 
Quickly, those purushavyaghras battle like two bulls in a herd over a cow. 
For Bhishma’s sake, too, your son Durmukha whirls at Ghatotkacha who is 
slaughtering your army as he also rides at Bhishma. Hidimbi’s son opens a 
deep gash in Durmukha’s breast with one arrow like time. Durmukha only 
roars at the wound, even in elation, and stabs Ghatotkacha with sixty keen 
darts. 

Dhrishtadyumna, also, sweeping down on Bhishma and Hridika’s son 
Kritavarman, obstructs him. Drupada’s fire prince looses a sear of five 
molten shafts at Kritavarman and strikes him with another fifty iron barbs in 
his chest, most of which glance off his mail. Dhrishtadyumna swift as the 
mind shoots nine more burning arrows, winged with the feathers of the 
kanka bird at the Yadava prince. 

They battle impassionedly for Bhishma’s sake, as fiercely as Vritra and 
Vasava. Bhurisravas assails Bhima who is also advances ever nearer the 
mighty Bhishma. That grand Kuru warrior pierces Bhima’s commodious 
chest with a telling golden-winged arrow; so awesome does Bhima look as 
dramatic as the Krauncha mountain did of old when it bore Lord Skanda’s 
barb. Ablaze, the two Kshatriyas, Purusharishabhas both, loose livid rivers 
of missiles, bright as sunflares, at each other. Bhima fights, longing for 
Bhishma’s death, while Somadatta does to secure Bhishma’s victory, and 
each matches the other’s stunning feats. 

Drona arrests the careen of Yudhishtira storming towards Bhishma. The 
Prabhadrakas tremble hearing the roar of Drona’s chariot that is like the 


rumble of massed thunderheads, and that vast Pandava host cannot advance 
even a step because of Bharadwaja’s formidable son. 

Your tenacious son Chitrasena impedes the fierce Chekitana, also riding 
at Bhishma. Chekitana attacks him vigorously, and scintillating is the duel 
between these two. Though Dussasana powerfully obstructs Arjuna’s path 
to Bhishma, that irresistible Pandava overwhelms him and forces your son 
to retreat. Arjuna strews the field with Kaurava corpses at his majestic, 
inexorable will, and the other Pandava maharathas also decimate your 
legions which try to keep Bhishma safe.’ 


CANTO 113 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, “Like an incensed elephant, Drona penetrates the Pandava 
ranks, and mows them down on every side with his godlike archery. 

Drona, knowing interpreter of omens, sees the signs of an age ending 
and another rising all around him and says to Aswatthaman who also 
ravages the enemy on every side, “This is that day on which Arjuna will put 
forth all his prowess to have Bhishma’s life. 

My arrows leap out from their quiver by themselves. My bow seems to 
yawn. My astra seems unwilling to obey me, and I feel a great 
despondence. Animals and birds cry relentlessly in fearful voices. Vultures 
fly down and vanish under the feet of the Bhaarata forces. 

The Sun appears dull. The four quarters are on fire. Everywhere the 
Earth seems to wail and tremble in some great fear. Kankas, vultures and 
cranes cry out repeatedly warning of some dreadful evil. Jackals scream and 
wheel in inauspicious apradakshina also predicting grave danger. 

Immense meteors seem to flare down from the heart of the Sun. The 
Parigha constellation appears around Surya Deva, shrouding his light. The 
Sun and Moon look threatening, foretelling a massacre of Kshatriyas. The 
statues in the temples of the Kauravas tremble and laugh and dance and 
weep, as if they have gone mad. The glowing crescent moon rises with 
horns turned down. The bodies of the kings in the Kaurava army appear 
pale, and though clad in armour, they are strangely dull. 

The blast of Panchajanya and the twang of Gandiva resound all around 
both armies, above every other sound. Today, bearing all his astras, Arjuna 
will surely mow his way through all our maharathas and mount his attack 
on Bhishma. 

The pores of my body contract, and all my hope drains from me, when I 
think of the coming battle between Bhishma and Arjuna. Ah, look! Keeping 
the deceitful Panchala prince before him, even now Arjuna rides at the 
Pitamaha. Bhishma has said that he will not kill Sikhandin because this 
prince was born a woman, and only later became a man. 


That mighty son of Yajnasena is himself the most inauspicious omen. 
Bhishma will never fight with such an unnatural one. Ah, my son, fear grips 
my heat in a vice knowing that every moment Arjuna draws nearer the 
revered Pitamaha. 

Yudhishtira’s anger, which has been restrained so long, the very thought 
of Arjuna fighting his beloved grandsire, and me, a Brahmana taking to 
arms in a war, all portend the gravest tragedy. Arjuna is imbued with untold 
tejas; he is powerful, brave, and a great master of weapons. Apart from 
loosing his arrows farther and more powerfully than any other man, he too 
is a Sure reader of omens. 

So strong, intelligent and tireless is Arjuna that not the Devas with 
Vasava at their head can defeat him in battle. He has the most virulent astras 
and he is called Vijaya because he never loses a battle but always triumphs 
in war. Avoid him, my son, and ride to defend Bhishma from this terrible 
son of Pandu. 

Today we shall see such carnage that not even this war among all wars 
has yet shown us. The beautiful golden armour of heroic Kshatriyas will be 
riven by his arrows, and Arjuna will cut down their flags, and bearded 
javelins in flight, and bows, and bright pointed spears, and glittering arrows, 
and the standards on the backs of their elephants. 

O my son, this is not the time to care for our lives. Focussed on heaven, 
fame and victory, go and fight. There, the Vanara-bannered Arjuna crosses 
the treacherous river of battle in his chariot, the river that has blood for its 
currents and shattered chariots, dead elephants, and horses for its islets. 

Regard for Brahmanas, self-restraint, liberality, asceticism, and noble 
conduct are to be found in Yudhishtira alone; for his brothers he has Arjuna, 
the mighty Bhima, and the twin sons of Madri by Pandu; and he has 
Krishna of the Vrishni vamsa for his protector. 

His body has been purified by the flames of tapasya, and Yudhishtira’s 
anger, born of grief, is directed at the black-souled son of Dhritarashtra and 
this righteous anger is what destroys the Bhaarata host. 

There comes Arjuna; with Krishna as his sarathy and refuge he advances 
irresistibly and lays waste the entire Dhartarashtra army. Look, he terrifies 
our host like a great whale stirring up an ocean with towering waves. Listen 
to the frantic sad cries of our army. 

Charge against the heir of the Panchala king. I will ride against 
Yudhishtira. The heart of his vyuha is difficult to penetrate. Inaccessible as 


the depths of the sea, it is guarded on all sides by Atirathas. Satyaki, and 
Abhimanyu and Dhrishtadyumna, and Bhima, and the twins, all protect 
Yudhishtira. 

Dark as the younger brother of Indra, and standing like a tall sala tree, 
behold Abhimanyu storming ahead at the head of the Pandava host, like a 
second Arjuna! Seize your mighty weapons, and with your great bow ride 
against Sikhandin and Bhima. 

Who doesn’t want their son to live long? However, I now observe the 
dharma of a Kshatriya, and I assign this task to you. Ah, look where 
Bhishma also razes the swarming Pandava host. O son, the Kuru Pitamaha 
is equal to Yama or Varuna himself in battle.’”’ 


CANTO 114 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Hearing what Drona says, Bhagadatta and Kripa and 

Salya and Kritavarman, and Vinda and Anuvinda of Avanti, and 
Jayadratha of the Sindhus, and Chitrasena and Vikarna and Durmarshana, 
these ten warriors of your army, supported by a legion of diverse soldiers, 
boldly face Bhima, wanting to win fame in the war for Bhishma’s sake. 

Salya strikes Bhima with nine arrows, and Kritavarman stabs him with 
three, and Kripa with nine. And Chitrasena and Vikarna and Bhagadatta, 
each pierce him with ten barbs. Jayadratha strikes him with three, and 
Vinda and Anuvinda of Avanti each with five shafts. 

Duryodhana attacks him with twenty arrows. In return Bhima 
relentlessly pierces each one of those kings, those maharathas of the 
Dhartarashtra army. He shoots Salya with seven arrows and Kritavarman 
with eight. And he cleaves Kripa’s bow in two. He pierces Kripa once more 
with seven shafts. And he strikes Vinda and Anuvinda with three barbs 
each. 

Bhima strikes Durmarshana deep with twenty arrows, Chitrasena with 
five, Vikarna with ten, and Jayadratha with five; and once more flaying the 
king of the Sindhus with three astras, Bhimasena roars loudly with delight. 

Kripa, maharatha, angrily stabs Bhima with ten polished shafts. Pierced 
like an elephant by a goad, Bhima’s eyes turn red in a moment and he 
looses a vicious salvo at Kripa, drawing founts of blood from his old 
master. Splendid as Yama, as he appears at the end of the yuga, Bhima kills 
Jayadratha’s horses with three scarlet explosions, and also his charioteer. 
Maharatha Jayadratha leaps down from his horseless chariot and looses a 
squall of keen shafts at Bhima. 

Bhima destroys Jayadratha’s bow with two broad-headed arrows. His 
bow broken, his chariot stranded, his horses and sarathy killed, Jayadratha 
mounts Chitrasena’s chariot. Triumphant Bhima draws blood from all the 
maharathas before him; celebrant, he smashes Jayadratha’s chariot into 
pieces in the very sight of all the Kaurava army. Watching Bhima’s dreadful 


feats, Salya roars out a challenge to him; he looses a gale of gleaming barbs 
at the monumental Pandava. 

Kripa and Kritavarman and the valiant Bhagadatta, and Vinda and 
Anuvinda of Avanti, and Chitrasena, and Durmarshana, and Vikarna, and 
Jayadratha all attack Bhima in concert. Irrepressible Bhima stabs each of 
them with hot clutches of arrows, five for each one. And he harries Salya 
with seventy shafts loosed in the twinkling of an eye, and again with ten 
more. Salya drives nine steaming arrows through him, and then five more. 
With another broad one he pierces Bhima’s charioteer deep. 

Seeing his charioteer Visoka wounded deep, with a terrible cry, Bhima 
drills three searing shafts into the arms and chest of the Madra king; he 
riddles the other maharathas each with three perfectly straight arrows and, 
throwing back his massive head, lets out a deafening, lion’s roar. 

Those mighty archers gore Bhima, probing his very vitals. Wounded, he 
yet remains still, like a mountain drenched by lashing rain clouds. That 
Pandava maharatha, that celebrated Kshatriya, wrathfully reams the ruler of 
the Madras with three light like arrows; he punishes the ruler of the 
Pragjyotishas with a hundred. 

He castigates Kripa with countless barbs and, with astounding dexterity, 
cleaves Kritavarman’s bow with a single shaft—all this in a breathtaking 
instant. Kritavarman, parantapa, scourge of his enemies, takes up another 
bow and strikes Bhima right between his eyes with a fine long arrow. 

Having pierced Salya with nine iron arrows, and Bhagadatta with three, 
and Kritavarman with eight, Bhima chastens the others led by Kripa, each 
with two shafts. These warriors reply with calid flurries, making blood 
flowers sprout on great Bhima. They scathe him with diverse astras, but 
Bhima remains nonchalant and courses effortlessly across the battleground, 
spraying Kurukshetra liberally with enemies’ blood. Hundreds of thousands 
of arrows rain down on him from every side. 

Bhagadatta casts a fierce golden javelin spear at him; the Sindhu king, 
Mahabaho, flings both a javelin and a battle-axe at Bhima in wrath, to 
remember the humiliation this Pandava inflicted on him once in the forest. 
Kripa unleashes a satagni of a hundred flames at Bhima, and Salya a single 
arrow as fulgurant. The other archers each aim five punitive shafts at him. 

The son of Vayu cleaves Bhagadatta’s missile along its deadly length; he 
pulverises Jayadratha’s axe as if were a stem of sesame. He douses the 
satagni with five occult shafts winged with the feathers of the kanka bird, 


blows Salya’s one arrow of dread into dust. Proud Bhima, who knows 
neither doubt nor fear, cuts every other arrow flying at him in three. And he 
strikes each of those illustrious archers who attacked him with blinding 
archery that rivals, why, now exceeds, his brother Arjuna’s. 

As the war burns on, Arjuna sees Bhima devouring the enemy on all 
sides like Yama and rides towards him on his chariot. The warriors of your 
army watch those two enkindled sons of Pandu come together, and their 
spirits tremble. 

Arjuna has only a single intention today—to kill Bhishma. Setting 
Sikhandin before him, he nears Bhima who has been battling the ten 
Kaurava maharathas by himself; Arjuna descends on those fierce ten like 
some dreadful plague. In a wink he strikes all of them with arrows that fling 
them back in their chariots or strike them down. 

In some alarm, Duryodhana cries to Susarman, the Trigarta king, “Great 
Susarman, fly taking your Trigarta host with you. Let the earth drink the 
blood of Pandu’s sons Dhananjaya and Vrikodara today!” 

Roaring, his host of sterling archers riding with him, Susarman, king of 
the Trigartas, lord of Prasthala, swoops on Bhima and Arjuna and surrounds 
them with thousands of chariots. A stupendous duel spumes up between 
him and Arjuna.’ 


CANTO 115 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


maharatha Salya who fights him gallantly. Arjuna pierces Susarman 
nd Kripa with three arrows each. 

Atiratha Arjuna torments your army all around him; he adorns 
Bhagadatta and Jayadratha, and Chitrasena, and Vikarna, and Kritavarman, 
and Durmarshana, and those two maharathas, the princes of Avanti, each 
with three barbs winged with the feathers of the kanka and the peacock. 

Jayadratha, whom Siva blessed, putting forth his best fight, pierces 
Arjuna and also Bhima from Chitrasena’s chariot. Salya and Kripa both 
strike Arjuna with diverse arrows, which burrow deeply into his virile form. 
Your sons led by Chitrasena, Rajan, each pierce Arjuna and Bhima with five 
arrows like daggers. 

Kunti’s two prodigious sons, both maharathas without compare, Bhima 
and Arjuna, begin to pound the mighty Trigarta host. Then Susarman looses 
nine extraordinary arrows at Arjuna, all of which find their mark, and 
roaring loudly terrifies the Pandava forces. 

Other noble Kshatriyas rack Bhima and Dhananjaya with many whetted 
golden winged shafts. Standing amidst them, those two bulls of the Bharata 
vamsa only ever more look magnificent and they seem to tantalise their 
opponents like two furious lions hunting in a herd of cows. 

The two peerless Kshatriyas cleave their most valiant adversaries’ bows 
and barbs and fell the heads of countless warriors. Innumerable chariots 
they smash, hundreds of horses they kill, and so many elephants, along with 
their riders, in that tumultuary and dreadful battle. Chariot warriors and 
untold numbers of horsemen and elephant-riders are slain outright or seen 
convulsing in death’s final spasms all over Kurukshetra. And the earth is 
covered with the corpses of elephants, horses and foot-soldiers, and chariots 
destroyed in many ways. 

Arjuna’s prowess is wonderful to behold, as he thwarts his enemies and 
slaughters them in droves. Kripa, and Kritavarman, and Jayadratha, and 
Vinda and Anuvinda of Avanti remain resolute. And as if inspired at being 


S sar says, “With shafts of fierce precision, Arjuna envelops 
a 


opposed by any, Bhima and Arjuna appear to raise the level of their archery 
and where hundreds died at their hands each moment now thousands perish 
and the rout of the fierce Kaurava host swells exponentially. The enemy 
kings loose millions of arrows with peacock feathers at Arjuna’s chariot. 
Dazzling, thought-swift Arjuna cuts all these missiles down as in some 
dream and in the same moment, it seems, annihilates his challengers. 

Inflamed to watch this, Salya strikes Arjuna in his chest with some 
broad headed shafts. With five startling barbs, Arjuna breaks Salya’s bow 
and shreds his leather gloves, and pierces him deep in his body. Snatching 
up another powerful bow, the Madra king furiously attacks Arjuna with 
three arrows and Krishna with five. He gores Bhima in the arms and the 
chest with nine shafts. 

At Duryodhana’s urgent command, Drona and the Magadha king ride 
swiftly to where Arjuna and Bhima massacre the mighty Kaurava army at 
will. As his rides up, Jayatsena pierces Bhima of terrible weapons with 
eight serrated arrows. Bhima looses a flash of fifteen searing shafts at him. 
With another broad-headed arrow he fells Jayatsena’s charioteer from his 
chariot head, and the Magadhan’s unrestrained horses dash wildly away and 
carry him out of battle in the sight of all the troops. 

Drona, seeing an opening, stabs Bhima with eight unusual barbs with 
heads like a frog’s mouth. Bhima, always delighting in battle, wheels round 
and strikes the Acharya with five heavy arrows, and O Bhaarata, with sixty 
more fleet ones. 

Arjuna looses countless iron barbs at Susarman himself, while also 
demolishing his Trigarta forces like a high wind dispersing massed clouds. 
Bhishma and Duryodhana, and Brihadbala, king of the Kosalas, wrathfully 
advance upon Bhima and Dhananjaya. At this, the gallant Pandava warriors 
and Dhrishtadyumna charge against Bhishma who is pressing forward like 
Yama with mouth agape. 

Sikhandin sees the Pitamaha of the Bhaaratas; he charges fearlessly and 
jubilantly towards that greatest maharatha. All the Parthas with Yudhishtira 
at their head, uniting with the Srinjayas and setting Sikhandin in their van, 
come hunting Bhishma. With Bhishma at their head, all the warriors of your 
army confront all the Pandava legions with Sikhandin in their van. That 
pitched battle between the Kauravas and the Pandavas, fought for 
Bhishma’s victory or his death, is the fiercest and most terrifying one yet. 


Indeed, on that fateful tenth day, first of the fell Kali Yuga, age of 
vileness and wrath, in that brutal game of war, being played out on sacred, 
bloodied Kurukshetra, field of dharma, Bhishma becomes the stake 
wagered, his life the precious thing on which the success or defeat of your 
army depends. 

Dhrishtadyumna roars his command at all his men, “Charge against the 
son of Ganga. Be fearless, O you wonderful maharathas!” 

Hearing their Senapati’s call to the moment of a great reckoning, the 
Pandava host swarms towards Bhishma, themselves roaring, ready to lay 
down their lives to achieve holy, priceless victory. Great Jaya! Maharatha 
Bhishma receives that storming host like a continent withstanding the 
surging sea.’ 


CANTO 116 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


Pandavas and the Srinjayas on the tenth day of the war? How do the 
Kauravas oppose the Pandavas? Describe the great endeavour of that 
jewel of battle.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘I will tell of how the Kauravas fight the Pandavas, and 
the details of their battle. Day after day, Arjuna Kiritin obliterates countless 
maharathas of your vast army with his astras. The triumphal Bhishma also 
wreaks great carnage upon the Pandavas. O Parantapa, seeing Bhishma 
ablaze at the head of the Kurus, and Arjuna at that of the Panchalas, it is 
hard to say who will be victorious. 

On the tenth day, when Bhishma and Arjuna face each other, there is an 
unprecedented bloodbath on Kurukshetra. Bhishma slaughters thousands of 
unknown but heroic warriors, all resolute in battle. Scorching the Pandava 
army for ten days, Mahabaho Bhishma fights without the slightest care for 
his life, and magnificently, yet with sorrow in his noble heart. And on this 
day of moment, he wishes fervently that he may not take any more noble 
lives discharging his terrible Kshatriya dharma, and he wishes for his own 
death. 

Seeing Yudhishtira near him, he says, “Wise Yudhishtira, listen to my 
righteous words. I no longer want to save my body. I have already killed 
countless great warriors. If you want to truly please me, your Pitamaha, set 
Arjuna with the Panchalas and the Srinjayas in your van, and exert yourself 
to the utmost to take my life.” 

Understanding him, Yudhishtira presses forward with the Srinjayas. 
Also having heard what Bhishma said, Dhrishtadyumna goads his legions 
forward. 

Yudhishtira cries with as much rage as grief, “Fly at Bhishma and kill 
him even now! Arjuna will protect you, as will Dhrishtadyumna and Bhima. 
Srinjayas, do not fear Bhishma today. With Sikhandin before us, we will 
surely vanquish the Pitamaha.” 


D)rrantives says, “Sanjaya, how does mighty Bhishma fight the 


Determined to either triumph or die, led by Sikhandin and Arjuna, the 
Pandava host essays at Bhishma giving their all and with nothing to lose. 
Many powerful kings, urged on by your son Suyodhana, along with Drona 
and his son and a vast force, with Dussasana at the head of all his brothers, 
also fly toward Bhishma at the very heart of all the unspeakable and 
resplendent butchery. 

Keeping Bhishma at their head, your legions spiritedly engage with the 
Pandavas led by Sikhandin. Supported by the Chedis and the Panchalas, the 
Vanara-bannered Arjuna, keeps Sikhandin before him, and storms at his 
Pitamaha. Satyaki clashes first with Drona’s son, and Dhrishtaketu with 
Puru’s descendant; Yudhamanyu grimly fights Duryodhana and his legion. 
Virata leads his heroes against Jayadratha’s. 

Parantapa, Vardhakshatra’s heir encounters Chitrasena of the most 
excellent bow. And Yudhishtira faces the haranguing Salya at the head of 
his forces. Bhima, purest, mightiest and most unalloyed of all Kshatriyas in 
spirit, roaring, always roaring in exultation at being in battle at last, storms 
yet against the Kaurava elephants. 

Dhrishtadyumna, fire prince of Panchala, along with his brothers, 
furiously attacks the unconquerable Drona, foremost of all wielders of 
weapons. Parantapa Brihadbala, who flies the lion on his standard, hurtles at 
Abhimanyu whose standard bears the karnikara flower. With countless 
kings going with them, your sons advance upon Sikhandin and Arjuna. 
When these warriors clash, the earth trembles. 

Seeing Bhishma approach, both armies fall into disarray and become 
hopelessly entangled, flailing out with sword and spear, covering the air 
with a single dense cloud of arrows. Great is the commotion they make, 
those warriors inflamed with rage charge madly, bloodthirstily at one 
another. The tumult rings all around, a ceaseless deafening din, shattering 
the eardrums of warriors so blood oozes down their necks before those 
necks are hewn. 

The blast of conches and the tigerish roars of fighting men form what 
appears to be an unending bellow of pain from the wounded earth’s very 
womb. The radiance of the bracelets and crowns of all the heroic kings, 
equal to that of the sun or the moon, is dimmed by the dust raised by flying 
hooves, thundering elephants’ charges, the running feet of millions of foot- 
soldiers, the whirling swerving wheels of numberless chariots; against this 


dark thunderhead of dust and smoke, the flash of weapons everywhere is 
like braids and streaks of lighting. 

The twanging bows, the stentorian hum of arrows like that of black bee 
swarms beyond count disturbed, the booming conches, the pounding drums, 
and the dementedly barbarous clatter of chariot-wheels, of both the armies, 
is numbing. And the sky darkens deeper by the moment with rich flights of 
bearded barbs, spears, swords wildly flung and the ceaseless rain of fell 
astras. 

Maharathas and horsemen cut each other down as if offering rivers of 
noble blood to the earth in some ghastly sacrifice in that awesome war, at 
once so abominable and so irresistibly beautiful. And elephants gore down 
elephants, and foot-soldiers butcher foot-soldiers. And the war on that tenth 
day, being fought for Bhishma’s life, between the Kauravas and the 
Pandavas assumes an incrementally hideous aspect, while it is also like a 
fight between two hawks for a fine piece of flesh. The crimson river of 
death foams ever higher and darker on bleeding, incomparable 
Kurukshetra.’ 


CANTO 117 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, “Abhimanyu displays his prowess before Bhishma, and 

challenges your mighty eldest son. Duryodhana strikes Abhimanyu 
through his chest with nine straight arrows, and in a flash with three. 
Arjuna’s son hurls a fierce and strange lance resembling Yama’s rod at 
Duryodhana’s chariot. Your son cleaves it along its length as it courses 
towards him. 

Seeing his spear plummet, Abhimanyu seizes his bow and strikes 
Duryodhana deep with three shafts through his arms and breast. Quicker 
than the eye sees, that scintillating young maharatha stabs the Kaurava king 
with a blur of ten barbs making a neat feathered circle of quivering arrows 
on his wide chest. 

And the duel between those two Kshatriyas, one fighting to kill Bhishma 
and the other to vanquish Arjuna, is brutal and breathtaking to watch, and 
gratifying to the senses; it is praised by all the kings. 

The son of Drona, that bull among Brahmanas and chastiser of enemies, 
bloodies Satyaki’s chest with a salient arrow. The grandson of Sini also 
pierces all his vital limbs with nine signal shafts winged with the feathers of 
the kanka bird. Aswatthaman stabs Satyaki’s arms and breast with nine 
horned barbs, and then with thirty significant shafts more. That celebrated 
bowman of the Satwatavamsa returns the fire cardinally, covering 
Aswatthaman in blood. 

Maharatha Paurava swathes Dhrishtaketu with his remarkable volleys 
and fairly mangles him. But the formidable Dhrishtaketu is unmoved and 
looses a jagged volley of lightning bolts at Paurava. Paurava smashes 
Dhrishtaketu’s bow, and roaring loudly, strikes him repeatedly with a clutch 
of keen arrows. Dhrishtaketu seizes another bow and gouges Paurava with 
an astonishing salvo of seventy-three shafts all shot in the heart of a 
moment. 

Those two illustrious archers cover each other with arrows. Each 
shatters the other’s bow, and each kills the other’s horses. They face each 
other with gleaming swords drawn, and bull’s hide shields, one adorned 


with a hundred moons and the other with a hundred stars. They run at each 
other like two lions in the forest, over a lioness in heat. They wheel around 
in elegant circles, advance and retreat, and display other dancelike 
movements, all the while looking for an opening to strike the adversary. 

Growing impatient, Paurava roars at Dhrishtaketu to stop and fight, and 
swiftly strikes him on his mail-covered collar bone, a mighty blow. Not 
flinching, the Chedi king fetches Paurava a powerful stroke on his shoulder, 
so some blood flies from the wound. In a blink, they rain a dreadful flurry of 
cuts, thrusts and wild swings on each other, so that both fall to the ground. 
Your son Jayatsena takes Paurava into his chariot and bears his away from 
the field, while Sahadeva bears Dhrishtaketu away. 

Chitrasena, having already pierced Susarman with manifold arrows, 
looses a fresh salvo of sixty-nine burning shafts at him. The incensed 
Susarman wounds your son all over his body with hundreds of barbs. 
Chitrasena, infuriated, retaliates with thirty penetrating shafts, and 
Susarman strikes Chitrasena again. 

In that battle for Bhishma’s life, Subhadra’s son further swells his fame 
and honour when he flays Brihadbala, drawing that maharatha away from 
Arjuna, and then marching towards Bhishma. The Kosala king attacks 
Abhimanyu with five heavy iron shafts, and then with twenty more. 
Abhimanyu stabs Brihadbala with eight similar missiles, which Brihadbala 
only shrugs off and Arjuna’s son lifts his archery to rive Brihadbala’s bow 
in his hands, and strikes him again thirty barbs swifter than light. 
Brihadbala takes up another bow and covers the brilliant youth of just 
sixteen summers in fire. 

Both Kshatriyas, one so young and the other seasoned and mature, are 
such masters of war, that the duel between them is surely reminiscent of the 
contention between Indra and Bali during the Devasura yuddha in time out 
of mind. 

Bhima, wild and bloody amongst the elephants, looks as resplendent as 
thunderous Sakra after splitting lofty mountains. The screams and dismal 
bellows of the great beasts, big as cliffs, that he strikes down as he pleases, 
fill the world. Hillocks of antimony, the tuskers lying dead across 
Kurukshetra with their round temples cloven by terrible Bhima are like 
mountains scattered over the earth. 

Well protected, Yudhishtira attacks Salya, king of the Madras, who loses 
no time turning on his assailant. Jayadratha of the Sindhus strikes Virata 


with nine keen arrows, and seamlessly with thirty more. Commanding a 
vast legion, Virata makes a home in Jayadratha’s chest for thirty polished 
shafts. And radiant are those two, the lord of the Matsyas and the ruler of 
the Sindhus, both armed with beautiful bows, swords and other weapons, 
wearing dazzling armour, and flying brilliant pennants. 

Drona encounters Dhrishtadyumna and mounts a ferocious attack on the 
prince sworn, why, born to kill him. Smashing Drupada’s son’s bow, Drona 
excoriates him with a hum of fifty barbs. That parantapa raises another bow 
and vents his wrath on the Acharya with a fiery volley. Maharatha Drona 
slices those arrows along their length even as they flare at him, and looses 
five keening barbs at his old enemy Drupada’s prince. Dhrishtadyumna, 
roaring, hurls a knobbed golden mace at the Brahmana warrior and Drona 
nervelessly shatters it with fifty arrows loosed in a blink. 

Dhrishtadyumna launches a most refined astra at Drona, who effortlessly 
foils it with a clutch of nine smoking barbs, unsettling the Pandava 
Senapati. Rajan, thus they fight, master and disciple, both inspired to draw 
upon their deepest skills, during this duel fought for the life of Bhishma. 

Arjuna, meanwhile rushes towards Bhishma like one king elephant at 
another, showering ceaseless fire over his Pitamaha. Bhagadatta arrests 
Arjuna’s dangerous careen, setting his massive Supratika between the 
marauding Pandava and the Kuru grandsire and lashing down a gale of 
arrows from his height. Arjuna storms straight at Bhagadatta, unleashing a 
fury of silver shafts at his towering beast, so that Bhagadatta quickly turns 
away and thunders down upon Drupada’s chariot. 

Again, Arjuna sets Sikhandin before him and courses on towards 
Bhishma, who is all he sees before him, his only real target. With loud yells 
and roars, hordes of your brave fighting men assail Arjuna, who so calmly 
sows death all around him, in a carmine flash flood. And, ah, all this 
appears wonderful. 

Like the high wind scattering fleecy clouds in a summer sky Arjuna 
disperses your son’s akshauhinis, all the while thinning them, thinning them 
dreadfully. Each moment, Sikhandin of the single obsession that has 
possessed him through two strangest lives, heralding his advent with an 
endless stream of wooden arrows, plunges ever nearer Bhishma. 

As for Bhishma, his chariot is his fire-chamber. His bow is the flame of 
that fire. And swords, shafts and maces are its fuel. The arrows he shoots 
are the blazing sparks that consume Kshatriyas in that grisly war. As a 


raging fire rolling across a field of dry grass with the wind, Bhishma burns 
gloriously as he unleashes his divine astras. 

And he decimates the Somakas that follow Arjuna into battle; that 
effulgent maharatha attenuates the other Pandava legions that ride with 
Arjuna with swarms of golden-winged shafts. Bhishma fills all the 
directions, with his leonine roaring, and endlessly strews the awful field of 
dharma with corpses of chariot warriors and horses with their riders. He 
reduces the massed chariots to look like palm forests with their leafy heads 
severed. He strips horses, elephants and chariots of their riders, a thousand 
each moment. 

Hearing the twang of his bow and the slap of his palms against his 
bowstring, like rolling thunder, terror sweeps through the Pandava ranks; 
even your own fighting men are affrighted. Not an arrow shot by the 
daunting Pitamaha misses its mark. They do not just pierce or slay his 
numberless victims; his barbs plough right through their armoured bodies in 
bright red eruptions and enter the earth behind them. What count is there of 
chariots careering across the field of death, with riders and sarathies slain 
and yoked horses dragging them on all sides with the speed of the wind? 

Fourteen thousand noble maharathas, all ready to sacrifice their lives, 
with gold-worked standards, great warriors belonging to the Chedis, the 
Kasis, and the Karushas, attack Bhishma, Kshatriya who can only be Siva 
himself with mouth agape; in moments they are destroyed along with their 
horses, chariots and elephants. 

Rajan, not a single maharatha of the Somakas returns alive from that 
encounter with Bhishma. Seeing his prowess, all know that none who dares 
ride against Bhishma this day will escape with his life. And indeed, after the 
massacre of the Somakas, no rathika will approach Bhishma anymore, but 
only Arjuna Swetavahana of the white horses, with Krishna as his 
charioteer, and Sikhandin, prince of Panchala.’ 


CANTO 118 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


him squarely through his chest with ten broad-headed arrows. The son 
of Ganga merely looks at Sikhandin as if to kill him with withering disdain. 
Bhishma will not shoot back at Sikhandin. 

Sikhandin pauses, bemused. Arjuna cries at the Panchala prince, “Do 
not hesitate, Sikhandin. Destroy Maharatha Bhishma, for you alone can. 
This is the truth. Kill him, Purushavyaghra, kill him now!” 

Like a dreamer waking, Sikhandin covers Bhishma in a tirade of every 
kind of arrow. Ignoring these, Bhishma only looses his own shafts at 
Arjuna; he also razes the Pandava ranks behind these two. Like grim clouds 
occluding the sun, the Pandavas, with their vast hosts, push forward to 
engulf Bhishma. 

Bharatarishabha, though surrounded on all sides, that Kshatriya without 
equal continues to consume the advancing legions like the forest fire does 
countless trees. Dussasana’s shining prowess is wonderful to see as he 
battles Arjuna to protect the Pitamaha. Even his enemies laud his sheer 
courage as he fights alone and gloriously against all the Pandavas, and they 
cannot resist him. 

Dussasana smashes the chariots of so many maharathas. With deadly 
salvos he fells mighty archers from horseback, powerful rathikas and 
elephants. The great beasts thunder away from the terror and pain of the 
incandescent Dussasana; flowing blood from the wounds he inflicts on them 
they scatter in all directions. 

Like a fire that blazes more fiercely when fuelled, so does your son rage 
against the Pandava host. And no Pandava maharathika dares to advance 
against him as he is then, other than Arjuna with his white horses and 
Krishna for his sarathy. And, watched by all the warriors, Arjuna, the 
Vijaya, ineluctably quells the flaming Dussasana and flashes past him 
towards Bhishma. Though beaten, your son, still relying upon Bhishma’s 
invincible might, comforts his forces and continues to fight fiercely against 


Sims says, ‘Sikhandin storms within range of Bhishma and strikes 


the Pandavas. Arjuna is radiant; his body seems to blaze with light as he 
scythes through his enemies. 

Sikhandin pierces the Pitamaha with many arrows deadly as lightning 
and fatal as a snake’s venom. But all the Panchala prince’s missiles have 
little impact as Bhishma receives them smiling, as if with delight. Even as a 
man whose body is fevered by summer heat welcomes torrential rain so 
does awesome Bhishma seem to welcome Sikhandin’s arrows. 

All the assembled Kshatriyas behold Bhishma as a great and fierce 
being, more than merely a man, who relentlessly devastates the Pandava 
warriors. Duryodhana says to his troops, “Attack Arjuna from all sides. 
Bhishma will protect you.” 

The Kaurava forces shed their fears and charge the Pandavas. 
Duryodhana says again to them, “With his lofty standard with the golden 
palmyra, Bhishma stands resolute, protecting the honour and the power of 
all the Dhartarashtra warriors. The very Devas cannot defeat him. What 
then to say about the Pandavas who are mere mortals? Kshatriyas, do not 
flee when you face Arjuna. I myself will fight the Pandavas, and be your 
support.” 

Hearing your son’s words, Rajan, enraged warriors of the Videhas, the 
Kalingas, and the many tribes of the Daserkas fall upon Phalguni. And 
many belonging to the Nishadas, the Sauviras, the Bahlikas, the Daradas, 
the western and northern kingdoms, the Malavas, the Abhighatas, the 
Surasenas, the Sibis, the Vasatis, the Salwas, the Sakas, the Trigartas, the 
Ambashtha, and the Kekayas, also swoop down on Arjuna, like swarms of 
insects upon a fire. 

Arjuna aims his devastras at the maharathas leading their akshauhinis; 
he makes ashes of them, like a fire swallowing insects. As he creates 
thousands upon thousands of arrows with his astras, his Gandiva dazzles. 

Wounded by those arrows, their grand standards torn, those Kshatriyas, 
even united, cannot so much as draw near Arjuna. Assailed by Kiritin’s 
shafts, rathikas fall with their standards, horsemen with their horses, and 
elephant riders with their elephants. Soon the earth is covered with the 
fleeing forces of those kings, routed by Arjuna’s arrows. 

Having crushed the Kaurava army, Arjuna looses a storm of arrows at 
Dussasana. The iron shafts pierce through him, and enter the earth like 
snakes through ant-hills. Arjuna kills Dussasana’s horses and his charioteer. 


With twenty barbs he smashes Vivimsati’s chariot, then strikes that 
prince with five straight shafts. Attacking Kripa and Vikarna and Salya with 
a terrific volley, he demolishes their chariots. Defeated, they flee, along with 
Dussasana and Vikarna and Vivimsati. 

Victorious over those maharathas, Arjuna blazes like a god on 
Kurukshetra. Unleashing waves of arrows on every side, even like the sun 
streaming rays, Partha overcomes many other kings. Bhaarata, killing them 
disdainfully with his unearthly archery, he makes another bloody river flow 
between the Kaurava and Pandava hosts. 

Elephants and horses and maharathikas are slaughtered by chariot 
warriors. And many chariot warriors are trampled by elephants, and many 
horses are butchered by foot-soldiers. The bodies of elephant-riders and 
horsemen and chariot warriors are hacked to pieces, which, along with their 
heads, tumble to the ground. 

And the field of the dread war, Rajan, is strewn with the corpses of 
princes, maharathikas all falling or fallen, decked with ear-rings and 
bracelets. The bodies of warriors bisected by chariot wheels, or crushed by 
elephants, also lie scattered. And foot-soldiers and horse riders flee. 

Elephants and maharathikas plunge to the earth on all sides. Numerous 
chariots, with their wheels, yokes and standards smashed, lie strewn across 
Kurukshetra, as if by some vengeful god’s hand. Dyed with the gore of 
numerous elephants, horses and chariot warriors, the earth looks beautiful 
like a red cloud in the sky. 

Dogs, crows and vultures, wolves and jackals, and other terrifying 
beasts and birds howl and screech, hungering for dead flesh. Many fell 
winds blow from all sides. And Rakshasas and Pisachas can be seen with 
monstrous and ghoulish visages roaring fiercely. Golden strings and costly 
banners flap in the unnatural wind. Thousands of royal parasols and lofty 
chariots with splendid standards lie ruined on the ground. 

Before all the archers, Bhishma invokes an agneyastra and aims it at 
Arjuna. His kavacha glittering, Sikhandin rides between the Kuru ancient 
and Arjuna and attacks Bhishma fiercely. Bhishma promptly withdraws the 
blinding astra of flames. Arjuna of the white steeds continues to raze your 
forces, letting ever more streams of blood, while Bhishma is a helpless 
spectator to the massacre of his army.’ 


CANTO 119 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Resolved to fight to the death, the teeming legions of 

both armies are ranged against each other, tenacious Kshatriyas ranged 
in vyuhas which have long since been violated. And no more, as had been 
agreed before the war began, do rathikas exclusively fight other chariot 
warriors, or foot-soldiers against foot-soldiers, or horsemen face other 
horsemen, or elephant-warriors other elephant-warriors. Instead, possessed 
completely by the feral spirit of war they attack each other wildly, 
chaotically, like men gone mad. 

Ghastly devastation sweeps both armies, as elephants and men fight 
each other without distinction. 

Then Salya and Kripa, and Chitrasena, and Dussasana, and Vikarna, 
mounted on their shining chariots, bring swift terror to the Pandava host. 
Savaged by those great Kshatriyas, the Pandava army reels and lurches like 
a boat tossed on the ocean by the wind. Like the biting cold that chills the 
blood of soft cows, Bhishma ploughs through the forces of sons of Pandu. 

Immaculate and absolute mayhem rules Kurukshetra. Celebrated Arjuna 
fells your mighty tuskers like bulging clouds; his arrows drink the blood 
and claim the lives of great rathikas by now past all count. Struck by 
tempests of arrows and spears, whole elephant legions fall trumpeting. And 
oh, the battlefield looks eerily magnificent with the lifeless bodies and 
heads of warriors still adorned with sparkling ornaments. 

Watching the Pitamaha exert himself against the storming Arjuna, your 
sons draw near him and surround him with their forces. Wanting to give up 
their lives and attain swarga this very day, they ride fearlessly at the 
Pandavas. Remembering all the insults and injuries inflicted upon them by 
you and your son, the noble Pandavas, eager for revenge and victory, 
joyfully engage your sons and their army. 

The Pandava Senapati Dhrishtadyumna roars to his men, “Somakas and 
Srinjayas, attack Bhishma!” And though wounded by innumerable arrows, 
they charge at the son of Ganga. Himself in the grip of the fury of battle, the 
Pitamaha turns on the Srinjayas. When he was a boy, Bhishma learnt the 


astra shastra from great Parasurama, who imparted to him knowledge of 
mighty devastras which could consume hostile armies. Using that 
knowledge now, the Kuru ancient wreaks havoc on the enemy ranks, killing 
ten thousand great warriors every day. 

Bharatarishabha, on the tenth day, Bhishma single-handedly slaughters 
ten thousand elephants. He kills seven famed maharathikas of the Matsyas 
and the Panchalas; he kills five thousand foot-soldiers, one thousand 
tuskers, and ten thousand horses and horsemen. 

Having razed the troops of all the kings who have come to war for the 
Pandavas, he kills Satanika, Virata’s beloved brother. The incomparable 
Bhishma annihilates a thousand Kshatriyas with his broad-headed 
inexorable shafts. He cuts a russet swathe through the Kshatriyas of the 
Pandava army as they advance towards him following Arjuna. 

Enveloping the Pandava host with dense barrages of arrows, with fire, 
water and wind of awesome devastras, Bhishma stands imperious at the 
head of the Kaurava forces. On the tenth day of the war, he stands between 
the two armies, bow in hand, and none of the kings can even look at him, 
for he burns like the mid-day sun in the summer sky. As Sakra scorched the 
Daitya host in battle, even so does Bhishma sear the Pandava army. 

Seeing the Kuru Pitamaha’s torrid prowess, Krishna says blithely to 
Arjuna, “‘There between the two armies stands Bhishma, the son of 
Shantanu, devouring our ranks. Only you can withstand Bhishma’s arrows. 
Only you can bring him down. Kill Bhishma today, Arjuna, or this war will 
be lost.” 

The Vanara bannered Arjuna lifts his archery and shrouds Bhishma, his 
chariot, horses and standard with his blistering arrow storm. But serenely 
Bhishma cuts Arjuna’s every shaft down. 

Dhrishtaketu, Bhima, Dhrishtadyumna, Nakula and _  Sahadeva, 
Chekitana, and the five Kaikaya brothers, and Mahabaho Satyaki and 
Subhadra’s son, and Ghatotkacha, and the five sons of Draupadi, and 
Sikhandin, and the valiant Kuntibhoja, and Susarman, and Virata, and 
countless powerful Pandava warriors have been wounded by Bhishma’s 
arrows, and they all seem plunged in an ocean of despair, until Arjuna 
arrives to rescue them. 

Protected by Arjuna, Sikhandin seizes a mighty astra and charges 
toward Bhishma alone. The indomitable Arjuna makes short and bloody 
work of those who surround and follow Bhishma, and then himself attacks 


the Pitamaha. Satyaki, and Chekitana, and Dhrishtadyumna, and Virata, and 
Drupada, and Madri’s twin sons, all led and shielded by Arjuna, attack 
Bhishma. And Abhimanyu, and the five sons of Draupadi, with raised 
weapons, also storm against him. 

All those unwavering maharathas pierce various parts of great 
Bhishma’s body with deadly barbs. Disregarding them entirely, Bhishma 
plunges ahead into the Pandava ranks with undimmed assurance. 
Effortlessly he thwarts all the arrows they rain down upon him and strikes 
them with terror and death. 

Glancing frequently at Sikhandin, always with a mocking smile, always 
remembering this prince was born a woman, he does not aim a single arrow 
at him. Instead he kills seven maharathikas of Drupada’s akshauhini. 
Confused and despairing shouts arise amongst the Matsyas, the Panchalas, 
and the Chedis, who unitedly attack that preternatural Kshatriya. With vast 
numbers of foot-soldiers and horses and chariots, and with unending volleys 
of arrows, they engulf Bhishma, son of Bhagirathi, that devourer of his 
enemies, like clouds hiding the sun. 

Truly now, the war is turned as awesome as the Devasura yuddha of old 
at its most brutal, and Arjuna Kiritin sets Sikhandin before him and strikes 
Bhishma repeatedly with transcendent archery, with terrible fusillades.’ 


CANTO 120 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Keeping Sikhandin in front, the Pandavas surround 

Bhishma and rain wave upon wave of arrows at him. All the Srinjayas 
unite to strike him with hundred-flamed satagnis, with spiked maces and 
battle-axes, clubs and bearded barbs, golden winged shafts and spears and 
Kampana, arrows with heads shaped like the calf-tooth and myriad other 
missiles. 

His coat of mail is pierced all over; he is wounded in every vital part and 
blood gushes from all him limbs; but Bhishma feels no pain. And to his 
enemies, he looks like the fire that blazes at the end of the yuga. His bow 
and arrows are the apocalyptic flames of that fire. The flight of his astras is 
like the winds of the pralaya. The clatter of his chariot wheels is its heat, 
and his weapons are its blinding brilliance. His beautiful bow forms its 
fierce tongue and the bodies of heroic warriors he slays is the source of its 
energy. 

Bhishma blasts his scarlet way through hosts of chariots that encircle 
him and emerges triumphant from the welter of that seething throng. 
Ignoring the king of the Panchalas and Dhrishtaketu, he penetrates deep 
into the Pandava army. He stabs the six Pandava maharathas, Satyaki and 
Bhima, Arjuna and Drupada, Virata and Dhrishtadyumna, with a many 
headed dragon of arrows which can melt any armour on earth. 

Those maharathas foil Bhishma’s beast of barbs and strike him 
forcefully with ten barbs, always closing in on him still. Sikhandin 
continues to pierce great Bhishma’s body with his golden winged arrows, 
and Bhishma never offers him any response. And protected by Sikhandin, 
Arjuna dashes at Bhishma and smashes his bow in his hands. 

The seven maharathas, Drona and Kritavarman, Jayadratha and 
Bhurisravas, Sala and Salya, and Bhagadatta cannot bear to watch this 
affront. Inflamed, they assail Arjuna; they cover him with elemental 
devastras and the thousands of shafts that these divine weapons spew. As 
they charge Arjuna’s chariot, their roaring is like that of the raging ocean at 


the end of the yuga: kill, bring up our forces, take, pierce, hack them down! 
These shouts resound all around. 

Hearing that tumult, the Pandava maharathas fly up to defend Arjuna. 
Satyaki, and Bhima, and Dhrishtadyumna of Prishata’s race, and Virata and 
Drupada, and the Rakshasa Ghatotkacha, and the wrathful Abhimanyu: 
enraged, and bearing mighty bows, they advance like seven storms. And the 
battle that breaks out between them and the Kaurava warriors makes one’s 
hair stand on end, even on this tenth blood-soaked day of the war, for it is 
like the battle of the Devas against the Danavas. 

Guarded by Arjuna, the Kiritin, Sikhandin strikes Bhishma with ten 
deep arrows after the Pitamaha’s bow was broken. He strikes Bhishma’s 
charioteer with another volley, and fells his standard with yet another. 

Bhishma takes up another colossal bow. That too is riven by Arjuna with 
three barbs. Bhishma seizes up another, quick as thinking, but ambidextrous 
Arjuna, switching the Gandiva from hand to hand, breaks that one as well, 
and, indeed, every other bow which his Pitamaha picks up. 

Bhishma licks the corners of his mouth and takes up a spear charged 
with an astra which can split a mountain. He hurls it furiously at Arjuna’s 
chariot. Watching it course towards him like lightning, Partha looses five 
thick arrows swift as the mind and shatters Bhishma’s recondite missile into 
five pieces. And it plummets, extinguished, like a flash of lightning 
separated from a mass of clouds. 

Bhishma flares up in anger. That Kshatriya, that conqueror of enemy 
cities, now says to himself, “With a single bow I could kill all the Pandavas, 
if they were not protected by Mahavishnu himself. 

But I will not fight them for two reasons: because they cannot be slain 
and because Sikhandin is a woman. When my father married Kali, he 
granted me two boons: that no one could kill me in war, and that I could 
choose the time of my death. I believe that this is the fitting hour, and I 
should now wish my own death.” 

Knowing Bhishma’s resolve, the Rishis and the Vasus in the sky say, 
“We commend your decision, O son! Do as you have resolved and 
withdraw your heart from battle.” As they finish speaking, a fragrantly 
moist and auspicious breeze blows along a natural direction. Heavenly 
cymbals clash and a shower of bright unearthly flowers rains down upon 
Bhishma. 


Only Bhishma hears the words spoken by the Rishis and the Vasus. And 
I hear them through the power given to me by the Muni. The hearts of the 
Devas are full of anguish at the thought of Bhishma, that favourite son of all 
the worlds, falling from his chariot. 

Having heard those divine words, though deeply pierced already, 
Bhishma of great tapasya attacks Arjuna more violently than ever. Incensed, 
Sikhandin strikes the Pitamaha in the chest with nine sharp arrows. 
Bleeding profusely, yet Bhishma remains fearless, and unyielding as a 
mountain during an earthquake. With a ferocious laugh, Arjuna draws his 
Gandiva, strikes the son of Ganga with twenty five barbs, and then roaring 
he pierces him through every limb and vital organ with a fiery sermon of 
hundreds of arrows. 

Maharatha Bhishma remains unmoved and returns Arjuna’s mighty fire, 
shaft for shaft. As for Sikhandin’s whetted arrows with golden wings, they 
make not the least impression on the Kuru grandsire. 

Still keeping Sikhandin before him, and his rage quickening each 
moment, even as if he finds himself hurtling, now helplessly, toward some 
great and fateful moment in time, Arjuna continues to advance towards 
Bhishma and once more breaks the bow in his hands. Striking Bhishma 
with ten punitive arrows, he cleaves the Pitamaha’s standard with another. 
Pounding Bhishma’s chariot with ten explosive shafts, he makes him 
shudder. 

The son of Ganga takes up an even greater bow. But no sooner does he 
heft it than Arjuna slices it into three slivers with a trinity of broad-headed 
shafts. And thus the son of Pandu destroys all Bhishma’s bows in that duel. 

Suddenly the last vestige of resistance within Bhishma, the pure 
Kshatriya, gives way and with it Bhishma no longer wants to fight Arjuna. 
Arjuna strikes him with another tremendous volley of twenty five thudding 
shafts. Dripping blood, down his noble face and his magnificent body, 
Bhishma says to Dussasana, “Behold Arjuna, this magnificent Pandava 
maharathika, who has single-handedly pierced me with countless arrows. 
Not even Indra can vanquish Arjuna in battle. As for me, even united, the 
Devas, Danavas and Rakshasas cannot quell me. What then of maharathas 
among men?” 

Even while Bhishma is speaking, Arjuna, still with Sikhandin before 
him, continues to attack his Pitamaha. 


Deeply wounded by Arjuna’s unearthly shafts, Bhishma says to 
Dussasana with a smile, “These arrows coursing at me in a straight line, 
whose touch is like lightning, are not Sikhandin’s but Arjuna’s. They plunge 
easily through my impenetrable armour, strike me with the force of 
mushalas and shake me with their ferocity. These shafts are not Sikhandin’s. 

Hard as the Brahmana’s rod of punishment and with an irresistible force 
like lightning, these arrows ravage my very prana. These are not 
Sikhandin’s. Each as forceful as a mace or a jagged club, these arrows 
destroy my strength like messengers sent by Yama himself. These are not 
Sikhandin’s. Like angry serpents, flicking their tongues, these barbs eat into 
my vitals. These are not Sikhandin’s—these that cut through me like the 
biting cold of winter that kills cows. 

Other than the valorous wielder of Gandiva, the Vanara-bannered 
Jishnu, all other kings, even united, cannot harm me in the least.” 

And then, once more Kshatriya fire blazes up in the old warrior, like a 
lamp burning high just before it is put out, and Bhishma unleashes a terrible 
astra at Arjuna as if to destroy all the Pandavas with that single weapon. 
Before all the great warriors of your army, Arjuna truncates the incendiary 
shaft with three light like arrows, and it falls harmlessly to the ground. 
Ready for either death or victory, Bhishma takes up a sword and a golden 
shield. Before he can even alight from his chariot, Arjuna shatters that 
shield into a hundred pieces. All this, my lord, is breathtaking. 

Yudhishtira goads his forces on crying, “Charge at Ganga’s son. Do not 
be afraid!” And roaring all together, as if in some god’s gigantic voice, they 
attack that solitary warrior from all sides with bearded shafts and long 
spears, axes and swords, with calf-toothed and thick arrows. 

Longing for Bhishma’s triumph, your sons surround him also roaring 
like lions. On that tenth day of the great war, when Bhishma and Arjuna 
face each other in that final contention, the two armies, with everything at 
stake this momentous day, fight a battle like none yet seen, inundating 
Kurukshetra with noble warriors’ gore. An abysmal whirlpool of killing and 
dying rises and spins wildly where the two armies collide, even like the 
vortex that occurs where the Ganga meets the ocean. And the bloody Earth 
assumes a fierce form. Her even and rough surfaces can no longer be 
distinguished; the swollen tide of blood covers them. 

Although pierced in all his limbs and vital organs, Bhishma stands 
serene, having annihilated ten thousand warriors. At the head of his forces, 


Arjuna breaks through the very heart of the Kaurava legions. With white 
horses yoked to his whirling chariot, he terrifies us with his astras, and your 
men flee from the nightmared field. 

The Sauviras, the Kitavas, the kings of the eastern, western and northern 
regions, the Malavas, the Abhishahas, the Surasenas, the Sibis, the Vasatis, 
the Salwas, the Sayas, the Trigartas, the Ambashthas, the Kaikeyas, and 
many other illustrious warriors, all mutilated by implacable, paramount 
Arjuna, desert Bhishma and flee. 

The Pandava hosts encircle Bhishma and overwhelm the Kauravas that 
protect him. Kill, hack them to pieces, show no mercy, drink his blood, off 
with their heads! These are the unmitigated roars and yells which ring out 
around Bhishma’s chariot. 

Having killed so many thousands, now every inch of Bhishma’s body is 
pierced by arrows, most of them Arjuna’s keen shafts. And then, with a 
final echoing roar, with his head to the east, just before sunset, before your 
sons’ very eyes, mighty, mighty Devavrata falls out of his chariot and onto 
to the waiting, grieving earth. 

When Bhishma falls, the sky is rent with the sad cries of the Devas and 
of earthly kings. Seeing the high-souled Pitamaha fall, our hearts fall with 
him. That greatest of all maharathas, that Mahabaho, plunges to the ground 
like Indra’s standard cut down, and the earth shakes. 

With arrows protruding from him all over, his body never touches the 
ground. O Bharatarishabha, at that awful moment a miracle reveals him 
lying on a bed of arrows all plunged deep into his own body! Cloud scud 
into the sky at that twilight hour and bathe his resplendent, bleeding form 
with a soft, cool, fragrant shower; and Bhumi Devi trembles. 

Fallen Bhishma observes that the sun is in the southern solstice, and he 
does not allow himself to die, for it is Dakshinayana still and an 
inauspicious time. The very sky is full of divine voices saying, “Why does 
Ganga’s son, that foremost of all men, give up his life during the southern 
declension?” 

Hearing them, Bhishma replies, “I am alive!” 

Although fallen, Bhishma waits for Uttarayana, the northern declension, 
to die. Learning of his resolve, Ganga, the daughter of Himavat, sends some 
great Rishis to him. They come as swans who dwell on the Manasa lake, 
and fly down together to Bhishma, where he lies on his bed of arrows. 


Those Rishis alight from the sky and walk around him in pradakshina. 
Knowing well that it still Dakshinayana, while the Sun is on his southern 
journey, they say to one another, “Being such a Mahatman, why should 
Bhishma pass from the world during the southern declension?” 

Having said this, they fly up and towards the southern direction. 
Knowing Bhishma sees them and reflects for a moment. And he says to 
them, “I will not leave this world as long as the sun is in the southern 
solstice. I will die when the Sun resumes his northern journey, during 
Uttarayana. O swans, I swear this to you. I will keep my breath in this 
broken body until the northern declension. 

I can choose the hour of my death, it was my father’s boon to me and let 
his boon be proved true. I will stay alive, and die only when the Sun 
resumes his northern course during Uttarayana. I will hold life within this 
body and I have the power to decide the time of my death.” Having said 
these words to the swans, Bhishma continues to lie upon his bed of arrows. 

The Pandavas and the Srinjayas rejoice when they see Bhishma fall, and 
your son is aghast when the Pitamaha is overthrown. All the Kauravas are 
stricken, benumbed. Led by Kripa and Duryodhana they stand transfixed, 
tears leaking from their disbelieving eyes. Overcome, they remain 
motionless for a long time; as if frozen in that abyssal moment, they no 
longer fight the Pandavas. 

When the unslayable Bhishma of untold tejas is felled, all the Kauravas 
think that the destruction of the Kuru king is now certain. Routed by 
Arjuna, in the midst of their fallen heroes, themselves mangled, they are all 
bemused, not moving a muscle, not knowing what to do. 

The daring Pandavas, raise massive arms that look like spiked maces, 
and exult in their victory and blow their great conches. And the Somakas 
and the Panchalas rejoice. Thousands of trumpets are blown, and the mighty 
Bhima slaps his arm-pits and roars and roars above the shocked silence, 
peals of thunder. 

When Bhishma falls, the warriors of both armies put down their 
weapons. Some then scream loudly and some flee, while others faint. Some 
condemn the ways of the Kshatriya varna while others praise the fallen 
Bhishma. 

The Rishis and the Pitris all extol Bhishma of lofty vows; the departed 
ancestors of the Bhaaratas also honour Bhishma. Meanwhile, wise Bhishma 
himself, the noble son of Shantanu who knows the final Yoga, the 


communion described in the Vedanta, prays silently. He is quiet, and awaits 
his hour.’ 


CANTO 121 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


Brahmacharin, what is the state of my warriors, O Sanjaya? The very 

moment that Bhishma did not attack Sikhandin, even though he 
despised him, I knew that the Kurus would soon be vanquished by the 
Pandavas. 

Ah, I am dejected to hear of the Pitamaha’s fall. What can be a heavier 
sorrow than this? My heart must surely be made of stone that it does not 
break into a hundred pieces on hearing of Bhishma’s end! Tell me of his 
achievements for, alas, the war has claimed even he who was invincible. 

I cannot bear that Devavrata should be killed in battle. He who could not 
be overcome by Jamadagni’s son himself, even with divine astras, alas, he 
is now felled by Drupada’s son Sikhandin, that paltry prince of Panchala.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Overpowered in the twilight hour, the Pitamaha Bhishma 
dismays the Dhartarashtras and delights the Panchalas. Falling onto the lap 
of the Earth, he lies on his bed of arrows without his body touching the 
ground. 

When he plunges from his chariot, despondent cries are heard among all 
creatures. When that great tree of shelter of the Kurus, the ever victorious 
Bhishma, plummets, the Kshatriyas of both armies are astounded. Seeing 
Bhishma overthrown with his standard, his armour desiccated, the Kauravas 
and the Pandavas are both grief-stricken. And the sky darkens and the Sun 
himself is dimmed. The Earth seems to cry out when Bhishma is cut down. 

This one is the foremost of those with knowledge of the Vedas! He is 
unsurpassed in this learning! This is what all men say of that 
Purusharishabha as he lies on his bed of a thousand arrows. 

Once, discovering that his father Shantanu had been struck by Kama, he 
resolved to draw up his vital seed and to remain a_ brahmacharin 
throughout his life—this is what the Rishis, Siddhas and the Charanas say 
of Bhishma as he lies on his bed of arrows. 

When Bhishma, the Pitamaha of the Bhaaratas, is struck down, your 
sons stand as if in a nightmare, bewildered, disbelieving, not knowing what 


LD eaatinch says, ‘Alas, deprived of Bhishma, god-like 


to do next. Their hearts and faces are suffused with sadness. Their splendid 
appearances are dull. They hang their heads low in shame. 

The victorious Pandavas, on the other hand, stand jubilantly at the head 
of their forces; and they blow their golden conches. As thousands of 
trumpets blast celebrantly, we see the mighty Bhima, drenched in blood, 
looking like some gory phantasm, prancing about, dancing, roaring, even 
singing in delight, having himself slaughtered countless enemy maharathas, 
among them many of your sons. 

The Kauravas are crippled in spirit. Karna and Duryodhana sigh deeply. 
When Bhishma falls, cries of anguish and dismay are heard all around, and 
great confusion sweeps your son’s ranks. 

Seeing Bhishma fall, your son Dussasana swiftly rides into Drona’s 
akshauhini. Duryodhana had given charge of protecting Bhishma’s life to 
his younger brother, with his legion. Dussasana is now surrounded by a sea 
of abject, shocked fighting men. The Kauravas surround him wanting to 
hear what he has to say. 

Dussasana gives Drona the grave tidings, and the Acharya staggers as if 
struck by an astra and falls down in a dead faint. When he recovers, he 
stops the Kuru army from continuing the battle. Seeing the Kauravas hold 
back, the Pandavas send messengers on horseback to forbid their forces also 
from fighting on. The kings of both armies remove their armour and move 
towards Bhishma. 

Thousands of other warriors too put down their weapons and advance 
towards the high-souled Bhishma, like the Devas towards Indra. The 
Pandavas and Kauravas approach Bhishma, lying on his bed of arrows, and 
bow reverently to him. 

Bhishma speaks to the Pandavas and the Kurus who stand sorrowing 
and silent before him. He says, “Welcome to you, blessed ones! Welcome to 
you, maharathas! I am pleased to see you, who are the equals of the very 
Devas.” His head lolls back awkwardly unsupported. Bhishma says, “My 
head need a pillow, fetch me one.” 

The assembled kings rush away and bring back many soft and fine 
pillows. The Pitamaha refuses them all. That purushavyaghra says with a 
laugh, “These are not fitting for a Kshatriya’s bed.” Seeing the world’s 
greatest maharatha, Arjuna, he says “Dhananjaya, Mahabaho, my head 
hangs back. Give me a pillow that you regard fitting.”’ 


CANTO 122 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


filled eyes, says, “Command me, you invincible one, greatest of all 
shatriyas, O foremost among the Kurus, for I am your slave! What should 
I do, Pitamaha?”’ 

Bhishma says, “My head droops. O Phalguna, quickly get me a pillow 
for my bed. You are the most outstanding archer. You know Kshatriya 
dharma, and you are both wise and noble.” 

Arjuna says, “So be it,’ and sets himself to the task. He raises the 
Gandiva and, with Bhishma’s leave and chanting mantras, drills three 
arrows into the ground beneath the Pitamaha’s head, to be its support! 
Bhishma is satisfied and he praises Arjuna. 

Looking at all the Bhaaratas there, he says to Dhanajaya, “Son of Pandu, 
you have given me a fitting pillow for a fallen Kshatriya. Had you done 
otherwise, I would have cursed you. Mahabaho, a Kshatriya should sleep on 
the battlefield on even such a bed of arrows.” 

Bhishma then says to the gathered kings and princes, “Look at the 
pillow that Arjuna has given me. I will lie on this worthy bed until the sun 
turns north again at Uttarayana. Those kings who come to see me then will 
watch me die. When the Sun moves towards Vaisravana on his swift chariot 
yoked to seven horses, only then will I leave my body even like the dearest 
friend. 

Dig a ditch around me, O kings. Lying upon these hundreds of arrows, I 
will worship the Sun. As for you, forsake your enmity and stop fighting.” 

Sanjaya continues, ‘Now some physicians and men skilled in drawing 
out arrows, bring the tools of their trade. Seeing them, Bhishma says to 
your son, “Dismiss these physicians with gifts, after paying proper respect 
to them. I have no need for them now. I have won the highest and most 
praiseworthy state ordained for Kshatriyas! 

Lying on this bed of arrows, it is not proper for me to accept any 
treatment. I should be burnt with these arrows in my body.” Duryodhana 
honours and dismisses the physicians. The rulers of different realms who 


) anjaya says, ‘Stringing the Gandiva and bowing, Arjuna, with tear- 


witness this display of great Bhishma’s steadfast virtue are moved to 
wonder. 

The Pandavas and the Kauravas together draw near Bhishma Mahatman 
lying on his magnificent bed. They pay him worship and circumambulate 
him three times in pradakshina; posting guards around him, those 
Kshatriyas, with bodies drenched in blood, retire to their tents in anguish, 
reflecting on what they have seen this dreadful day, the first of the Kali 
Yuga. 

Krishna comes to the Pandavas, as those maharathas sit together both 
elated and grief-stricken at the fall of Bhishma, and says to Yudhishtira, 
“Your victory is the outcome of your good fortune. Through good fortune 
alone the indomitable Bhishma has fallen. Or perhaps it is destiny that he 
who was a master of every weapon found you, O king of dharma, as his 
enemy and has been consumed by your wrathful eye!” 

Dharmaraja Yudhishtira replies feelingly, “Krishna, through your grace 
comes victory, and through your fury defeat! You dispel the fears of those 
who worship you. You are our refuge. It is no surprise that they whom you 
have always protected in battle, in whose welfare you have always been 
engaged, Kesava, should triumph. With you as our protector, I do not regard 
anything as surprising, fortunate or wonderful!” 

Krishna answers with a smile, “O best of kings, only you can speak such 
words!” 


CANTO 123 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


Dhartarashtras go again to the Pitamaha. They worship that 

incomparable Kshatriya, lying on his hero’s bed, and stand before 
him with folded hands. Thousands of maidens shower powdered 
sandalwood, cooked rice grains over him; they drape auspicious garlands of 
flowers on him. 

And women and old men and children, and countless other spectators to 
the gruesome war, all approach Bhishma like earthly creatures wanting to 
gaze at the setting sun. Hundreds of thousands of conches boom and 
trumpets resound, and actors, mimes, and skilled craftsmen draw near the 
aged Pitamaha to pay homage. 

The war pauses, as the Pandavas and the Kauravas put aside their 
armour and weapons and together come to that Parantapa. And once more, 
as in earlier times, they stand there together, kinsmen and enemies, and 
speak to each other amiably. That assemblage of hundreds of Bhaarata 
kings, adorned by Bhishma in their very midst, is glorious like a gathering 
of the Devas in Swarga. And they honour him like the Devas adore Brahma. 

Though his body is broken by the very arrows on which he now lies, and 
they sear pain through him like burning fire, Bhishma shows hardly any 
sign of agony. Almost unconscious because of his wounds, Bhishma looks 
at the kings and asks for water. Those Kshatriyas bring him many beautiful 
jars of cool, crystalline water, and other exquisite drinks besides. 

Seeing all that sweet water and wine, Bhishma says curtly, “I am now 
distanced from worldly pleasures and this fine water and wine is of no use 
to me. Iam lying on a bed of arrows, waiting for the return of the Moon and 
the Sun!” Thus reproaching the kings in a low voice, he says, “I want to see 
Arjuna.” 

Mahabaho Arjuna comes forward, stands with folded hands, and says, 
“What shall I do?” 

The righteous Bhishma says to him, “My body burns with your shafts 
and I am in agony. My mouth is parched. Give me water, O Arjuna. You are 


«Cc S anjaya says, ‘The next morning, all the kings, the Pandavas and the 


a great archer, and only you can give me water to quench my thirst.” 

Arjuna says, “I will, Pitamaha.” 

He mounts his chariot, and stretches the Gandiva. Hearing the twang of 
his bow and the slap of his palms like a thunderclap against his bowstring 
terrifies the armies and the kings. That maharatha mounts his chariot and 
circles the fallen Pitamaha. Before both vast hosts, chanting mantras to 
invoke the Parjanyastra, Arjuna shoots a candescent arrow into the ground, 
slightly south of where Bhishma lies. 

Nectar-like in scent and taste, a spring of pure, auspicious and cool 
water gushes out of the earth and up into Bhishma’s lips. And with that jet 
of water Arjuna slakes the thirst of Bhishma, that bull among the Kurus, of 
godlike deeds and prowess. 

Watching that Sakra-like feat of Arjuna’s, all the kings are amazed; and 
seeing his superhuman ability, the Kurus tremble like cows shivering in the 
cold. The gathered sovereigns of the world wave their pennants in 
admiration. And the deafening blast of conches and the pounding of drums 
are heard all over the battlefield. 

His thirst quenched, Bhishma praises Arjuna before all the kings saying, 
“O Mahabaho, this is not as amazing as it seems, O son of Kuru’s race, for, 
you of immeasurable effulgence, even Narada spoke of you as the ancient 
Rishi Nara! 

With Krishna for your ally, you will accomplish things that even Indra 
may not try to achieve. Those who know such things recognise you as the 
destroyer of the entire race of Kshatriyas. You are the supreme archer. You 
are the most superior man. Just as humans are the best of all animals, and as 
Garuda is the foremost of all avians; as the Ocean is the best among all 
water bodies, and the cow foremost among all quadrupeds; as the sun is the 
most brilliant among all luminous bodies and Himavat among _ all 
mountains; as the Brahmana is among all varnas, you are the greatest 
archer! 

Duryodhana did not listen to what Vidura and Drona and Rama and 
Janardana and I, and also Sanjaya repeatedly said to him. Rashly, foolishly, 
he ignored our most earnest advice. Beyond all counsel, he will die at the 
hands of Bhima!” 

Hearing these words, Duryodhana is plunged in dejection. Bhishma 
says, “Listen to me, O king, and at least now discard your anger. You have 


seen how Arjuna created this spring of water like amrita for me. No one 
else on earth can achieve such a feat. 

The weapons of Agni, Varuna, Soma, Vayu, and Vishnu, those of Indra, 
Pasupati, and Paramesthi, and those of Prajapati, Dhatri, Tashtri, Savitri, 
and Vivaswat—in this world of men, all these are known only to Arjuna. 
Yes, Krishna also knows them. But there is no one else. 

Not even if the Devas and Asuras unite can they defeat this son of Pandu 
in battle. His powers are more than superhuman. Make peace with this 
mighty warrior, this ornament of battle. Before great Krishna is moved to 
complete wrath, king of the Kurus, it is dharma for you make peace with 
the heroic sons of Pandu. As long as a few of your brothers still remain 
unslain, let peace, O Rajan, be struck. Before Yudhishtira, with eyes blazing 
fury, entirely annihilates your forces, let peace be made. Before Nakula, and 
Sahadeva, and Bhima exterminate your army, you must befriend the 
Pandavas again. 

Let this war end today with my death. Make peace with the Pandavas; 
listen to me, Anagha, and do as I say! Only this can still save you, and 
indeed the entire Kuru vamsa. Put aside your rage and make peace with 
your cousins. 

What Arjuna has achieved is enough. Let Bhishma’s death renew love 
between the sons of Dhritarashtra and those of Pandu. Let the surviving 
warriors live. Relent, O Rajan! Give half the kingdom to the Pandavas. Let 
Dharmaraja Yudhishtira go to Indraprastha. Do not be small-minded or 
incite further bloodshed; this will only bring you eternal disgrace among the 
kings of the earth. 

With my death, let peace come to all. Let all the rulers of the earth 
embrace and mingle joyfully with one another. Let father be united with 
son; let sister’s son join his uncle. Ah Suyodhana, if ignorance and 
foolishness keep you from listening to me, you will repent greatly. This is 
the truth. Stop this war now!” 

Having said this kindly to Duryodhana in the midst of the gathered 
kings, Bhishma falls silent. The arrows burn his body and, withdrawing his 
mind from the pain with dhyana, he applies himself to yoga. 

Your son disregards what Bhishma has told him, those words of dharma 
which might still have saved him, like a dying man refusing medicine.’” 


CANTO 124 


BHISHMA VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


assembled kings return to their encampments. When he hears that 

Bhishma has been struck down, Radha’s son Karna comes alone to 
him, in some fear. He sees that most illustrious Kshatriya lying on his bed 
of reeds. 

With eyes closed, he approaches Bhishma and falls at his feet. His voice 
choking, Karna says, “O Lord of the Kurus, I am Radha’s son, whom you 
always looked upon with hate whenever I was near.” 

Bhishma opens his failing eyes, asks the guards around to withdraw, and 
suddenly he embraces Karna with one arm, like a father holding his son, 
and speaks to him lovingly. “Come, come near me. You are my adversary 
who always challenges me. If you had not come to me, I would have been 
sad indeed. 

You are Kunti’s son, not Radha’s. Adhiratha is not your father. 
Mahabaho, I heard this from Narada and from Krishna. And it is true. Ah 
Karna, I do not bear you any grudge. I only spoke harshly to you to weaken 
your resolve. 

You of excellent vows, you speak ill of the Pandavas for no reason. You 
were born out of wedlock and that is why you have said and done whatever 
you have. Through pride, and keeping the company of base men, you have 
come to hate men of worth. And so I spoke unkindly about you in the 
Kaurava camp. 

I know too well that your prowess in battle is irresistible. I also know of 
your deep reverence for Brahmanas, your courage, and your charity. You 
are like a Deva and there is none like you among men. I wanted to prevent 
this war between brothers and that is why I always spoke cruelly and 
contemptuously about you, for I knew that Duryodhana depended on you to 
win this war for him. And, my child, as a warrior and an archer you are 
Arjuna’s equal in battle, why, even Krishna’s peer! 

O Karna, you rode by yourself to Kasi with your bow and vanquished all 
the kings there single-handedly to get a bride for Duryodhana. The 


CC S anjaya says, “After Bhishma shuts his eyes and falls silent, all the 


invincible Jarasandha, who always boasted of his great prowess, was no 
match for you in battle and you quelled him. 

You are devoted to Brahmanas; you always fight fairly. In strength and 
vigour, you are equal to a child of the Devas and superior to all men. I have 
never felt any true anger towards you and that which I showed is now 
dispelled. For I have learnt that men’s best efforts cannot prevent Destiny 
from taken its course, having its way. 

O Parantapa, the valiant sons of Pandu are your brothers. Mahabaho, if 
you want to gratify me, your Pitamaha, join them. O Suryaputra, let this war 
end with me. Even today let all the kings of the Earth who remain alive be 
freed from danger!” 

Karna says, “I know this, Mahabaho! It is as you say. I know I am 
Kunti’s son, and not the son of a Suta. But I was abandoned by Kunti, and I 
have been raised by a Suta. Having enjoyed the wealth and friendship of 
Duryodhana, I cannot betray his trust now. Like Krishna who fights 
resolutely for the Pandavas, I too am willing to sacrifice my possessions, 
my body itself, my children, and my wife, for Duryodhana’s sake. It is 
fitting for a Kshatriya to die on the battlefield, and not from disease or old 
age! 

Relying upon Suyodhana I have always chosen to oppose the Pandavas. 
This choice will run its full course. It cannot be changed. Who dares, O 
Bhishma, to challenge Destiny? Who can prevail against what is written in 
the stars before we are even born? 

Pitamaha, you saw and spoke of various signs and omens which 
portended the destruction of the world. I know only too well that Arjuna 
and Krishna cannot be conquered in battle. Still we will fight them. And I 
will overcome Arjuna in war! This I am determined to do. I cannot put 
aside this hatred I have for the Pandavas. Readily and unwaveringly, I will 
face Arjuna in battle. I am firm in my resolve, so give me your leave to go 
to war. 

Now that you have fallen, I will fight. This is my only wish. Ah 
Pitamaha, forgive me any cruel words that I may have spoken to you, or any 
angry or callous deed which I might have directed against you.” 

Bhishma says, “I allow you to fight, Karna, if you cannot root out this 
loathing in your heart. Fight, moved by the wish to attain Swarga! Without 
anger and spite, serve your king righteously with all your power and 
courage. 


You have my leave, Karna! Achieve what you seek. Through Arjuna 
you will attain what is possible by fulfilling the dharma of a Kshatriya. Free 
of pride, fight vigorously and well, for a Kshatriya’s source of happiness 
lies in a just war. For a long time I tried to make peace between the sons of 
Pandu and the sons of Dhritarashtra. But, Karna, I failed. This is the truth.” 

Sanjaya says, ‘Having obtained Bhishma’s forgiveness and his blessing, 
Karna takes the dust from his Pitamaha’s feet, bows deeply to him, mounts 
his chariot and rides towards Duryodhana’s tent.’” 


End of Bhishma Parva 


APPENDIX FOR THE BHAGAVAD GITA 


1. Samkhya 


Notes directly quoted from Sanskrit-English dictionary of Vaman Shivram 
Apte: 

1. Relating to numbers. 2. Calculating, enumerating. 3. Discriminative. 
4. Deliberating, reasoning, a reasoner. 5. Of one of the 6 systems of Hindu 
philosophy, attributed to the Sage Kapila. The philosophy is so called 
because it enumerates 25 tattvas or true principles; its chief objective is to 
enter the final emancipation of the 25th tattva, the Purusha or Soul, from the 
bonds of this worldly existence—the fetters of phenomenal creation—by 
conveying a correct knowledge of the 24 other Tattvas and by properly 
discriminating the Soul from them. It regards the whole universe to be a 
development of an inanimate principle called Prakriti q.v., while the 
Purusha is altogether passive and simply an onlooker. Samkhya agrees with 
the Vedanta in being synthetical and thus differs from the analytical Nyaya 
or Vaiseshika; but its great point of divergence from the Vedanta is that it 
maintains two principles that Vedanta denies, and it does not admit God as 
the creator of the universe, which the Vedanta affirms. 


2. Yoga 


Also from the dictionary of Vaman Shivram Apte: 

1. Joining, uniting. 2. Union, conjunction. 3. Deep and abstract 
meditation, contemplation with the Supreme Spirit. 4. The system of 
philosophy established by Patanjali, which is considered to be the second 


division of the Samkhya philosophy, but is practically reckoned as a 
separate system. The chief aim of the Yoga philosophy is to teach the means 
by which the human soul may be completely united with the Supreme Spirit 
and thus secure absolution; and deep abstract meditation is laid down as the 
chief means to securing this end, elaborate rules being given for the proper 
practice of such Yoga or concentration of mind. 


3. For further details on Samkhya and Yoga philosophy, see: 


1. ‘Samkhya and Yoga. Two classical Hindu “paths of insight”, by 
Professor Russell Kirkland, University of Georgia. 

2. Samkhya and Yoga, Encyclopaedia Britannica article. 

3. Samkhya and Yoga, Wikipedia. 

4. Classical Samkhya and Yoga: An Indian Metaphysics of Experience. 
Mikel Burley (Routledge. July, 2006). 


4. Kalpa 
A NOTE ON HINDU TIME 


365 human years make one year of the Devas and Pitrs, the Gods and the 
manes. 

Four are the ages in the land of Bharata: the krita, the treta, the dwapara 
and the kali. The krita yuga lasts 4800 divine years, the treta 3600, the 
dwapara 2400, and the kali 1200; and then, another krita yuga begins. 

The krita or satya yuga is the age of purity; it is sinless. Dharma, 
righteousness, is perfect and walks on four feet in the krita. But in the treta 
yuga, adharma, evil, enters the world and the very fabric of time begins to 
decay. Finally, the kali yuga, the fourth age, is almost entirely corrupt, with 
dharma barely surviving, hobbling on one foot. 

A chaturyuga, a cycle of four ages, is 12,000 divine years, or 365 x 
12,000 human years long. 71 chaturyugas make a manvantara; fourteen 
manvantaras, a kalpa. A kalpa of 1000 chaturyugas, 12 million divine years, 
is one day of Brahma, the Creator. 

8,000 Brahma years make one Brahma yuga, | 000 Brahma yugas make 
a savana, and Brahma's life is 3,003 savanas long. 

One day of Mahavishnu is the lifetime of Brahma.’ 


ANJULI KAUL grew up in Mumbai, lives in Goa, 
but dreams of Kodaikanal. She has been 
a teacher for thirty years. More recently, her love 
of language and literature has drawn her 
into editing and writing. She is passionate about 
education, organic farming, sustainable living 
and sunsets. 


a 


RAMESH MENON was born in 1951 
in New Delhi. He has also written modern 
renderings of the Mahabharata, Ramayana, 
Srimad Bhagavad Gita, Siva Purana, Devi 
Purana and Bhagavata Purana. 


Cover illustration: Ajanta Guhathakurta Das 


RUPA 


www.rupapublications.com 





Performing karma, mind devoted, but its fruit renouncing, wise men, 


‘rom the bondage of birth entirely freed, come to the place of no sickness, 
; Sd mR Rar Bena ta inal ie AR ele Ste th ne 0 





Bel eek ales oa Seen enn! big nny nee te BAS hen ce 
When beyond this chaos of illusions your mind passes, 
then you will arrive at indifference to what you have heard 

_and what you will hear, 








THE COMPLETE 
MAHABHARATA 


Drona Parva 


Born in 1951, S.B. Pillay is a retired Indian Audit and Accounts Service officer. He was educated at 
St Xavier’s High School (Delhi), Loyola College (Kolkata), and received his master’s degree from 
Loyola College in Chennai. He went on to study Law at St Xavier’s College, Mumbai. 

During an illustrious career in the IA& AS, he worked all over India and abroad, as well, and has 
a deep insight of Indian life. He was director general of the NAAA in Shimla and retired as 
additional deputy CAG in 2011. 

He has always been an avid reader and is the author of several comic and satirical pieces. 


THE COMPLETE 
MAHABHARATA 


Volume 6 


Drona Parva 


SB. Pillay 





RUPA 


Published by 
Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd 2014 
7/16, Ansari Road, Daryaganj 
New Delhi 110002 


Copyright © S.B. Pillay 2014 
All rights reserved. 

No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, or stored in a retrieval system, in any 
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the 
prior permission of the publisher. 

ISBN: 978-81-291-3261-1 
First impression 2014 
10987654321 
The moral right of the author has been asserted. 

This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, 


resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated, without the publisher’s prior consent, in any form of 
binding or cover other than that in which it is published. 


To my wife Anita 


CONTENTS 


A Brief Introduction 


Acknowledgements 


Canto 1-29 Dronabhisheka Parva 
Canto 30-81 Abhimanyu-vadha Parva 
Canto 82-148 Jayadratha-vadha Parva 
Canto 149-180 Ghatotkacha-vadha Parva 
Canto 181-199 Drona-vadha Parva 


A BRIEF INTRODUCTION 


The last complete version of the Mahabharata to be written in India in 
English prose was the translation by Kisar1 Mohan Ganguli in the late 19th 
century. He wrote it between 1883 and 1896. To the best of my knowledge, 
it still remains the only full English prose rendering of the epic by any 
Indian. 

More than a hundred years have passed since Ganguli achieved his 
monumental task. Despite its closeness to the original Sanskrit and its 
undeniable power, in more than a hundred years the language and style of 
the Ganguli translation have inevitably become archaic. 


It seemed a shame that this most magnificent of epics, a national 
treasure, an indisputable classic of world literature, believed by many to be 
the greatest of all books ever written, is not available in complete form to 
the Indian (or any) reader in modern, literary and easily accessible English: 
as retold by Indian writers. 

So we, a group of Indian writers and editors, warmly and patiently 
supported by our publisher Rupa Publications India, undertook a line-by- 
line retelling of the complete Mahabharata, for the contemporary and future 
reader. Our aim has not been to write a scholarly translation of the great 
epic, but an eminently readable one, without vitiating either the spirit or the 
poetry of the original, and without reducing its length. 


This is not a translation from the Sanskrit but based almost entirely on 
the Ganguli text, and he himself did use more than one Sanskrit version for 
his work. However, as will be obvious, the style of this new rendering is 
very much our own, and our hope is to bring as much of the majesty and 
enchantment of this awesome epic to you as is possible in English. 


Ramesh Menon 
Series Editor 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


Thanks to my old friend Ramesh Menon, who brought me to this project. 
And to Kadambari Mishra, who proofread this volume. 


CANTO 1 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA 


A UM! Having bowed down to Narayana, Nara, the foremost of 
Purushas, and to Devi Saraswati, I invoke the spirit of Jaya! 

‘Janamejaya said, “O regenerate Rishi, what does the powerful and 
disconsolate Dhritarashtra, his eyes bathed in tears, do when he hears that 
Sikhandin, prince of the Panchalas, has felled his sire, the incomparable 
Bhishma of matchless tejas? His son Duryodhana wants to vanquish the 
sons of Pandu, mighty bowmen all, through Bhishma, Drona and other 
maharathas, and have undisputed sovereignty. Tell me, O Tapodhana, you 
of the wealth of penances, what the scion of the Kurus does after Bhishma, 
greatest of all bowmen, falls.” 

“Vaisampayana replied, “When he hears that his sire has fallen, 
Dhritarashtra is filled with anxiety and sorrow, and has no peace of mind. 
While he is plunged in grief, Gavalgana’s son Sanjaya, who has returned 
that night to Hastinapura, visits the son of Ambika. With a cheerless heart 
and anxious for his son’s victory, the king in great distress laments and then 
questions Sanjaya, “Tell me, Sanjaya, after weeping for the felled 
mahatman, the invincible Bhishma of terrible prowess, what did the 
Kauravas do next, sunk as they were in an ocean of grief? Indeed, now that 


the swelling forces of the Pandavas would strike fear into even the three 
worlds, what did the assembled kings do after the Bharatarishabha 
Bhishma’s fall?’ 

Sanjaya says, “Listen attentively, Rajan, and I will tell you what 
happened after great Bhishma’s fall. 

Your warriors and the Pandavas both reflect on the dharma of the 
Kshatriya and are filled with wonder and joy. Then, following their 
swadharma, they all bow to the maharatha and make a bed of straight 
arrows for him, as well as a pillow, and also arrangements for his 
protection, all the while engaging one another in pleasant converse. The 
Kshatriyas bid Ganga’s son farewell and circumambulate him in 
pradakshina; looking at one another with angry red eyes and urged by fate, 
they take the field once more to do battle again. 

The best part of the day has passed, when the divisions of your army 
and those of the enemy, sally forth with a blast of trumpets and the beat of 
drums. With hearts filled with wrath and touched by fate, they engage each 
other again, disregarding the wise counsel of Ganga’s son Bhishma. Due to 
your folly and your son’s folly and the fall of Bhishma, Death himself 
seems to summon the Kauravas with all the kings allied to them. 

Deprived of Devavrata and filled with great anxiety, the Kurus resemble 
a herd of goats and sheep without a herdsman lost in a forest teeming with 
beasts of prey. Indeed, the Kuru army looks like the firmament without its 
stars, like the sky without the planets, like the earth with her crops all burnt, 
like an oration flawed by bad grammar, like the ancient Asura sena after 
Mahabali was struck down, like a beautiful bride deprived of her husband, 
like a river whose waters have dried up, like a doe who has lost her mate 
and is surrounded in the vana by wolves, or like a spacious mountain cave 
with its lion killed by a Sarabha. Indeed, O king, the Bharata army is like a 
frail boat on the bosom of the ocean, tossed by a tempest blowing from 
every side. 

Hard pressed by the heroic and inexorable Pandavas, the Kaurava host, 
its steeds, maharathas and elephants are distressed, helpless and panic- 
stricken. With the frightened kings and the common soldiers no longer 
relying upon one another, the army deprived of Devavrata seems to sink 
into the deepest Patala. 

Then the Kauravas remember Karna, who, indeed, is equal to Bhishma 
himself. All hearts turn to the greatest of all wielders of weapons, the one 


resembling a Guest resplendent with gyana and tapasya, even as the 
suffering heart of a man turns to a friend who can allay his distress. The 
kings then cry out, “Karna! Karna! The son of Radha, our friend, the 
Sutaputra, who is ever prepared to lay down his life in battle! The 
illustrious Karna, with his followers and friends, did not fight these ten 
days. O, summon him quickly!” 

In the presence of all the Kshatriyas, Bhishma, during the enumeration 
of valiant and mighty maharathas, called Karna an ardharatha, although that 
bull among men is equal to two maharathas! Thus did Bhishma slight Karna 
who is easily the greatest of all rathas and atirathas, he whom all Kshatriyas 
respect, he who would venture to fight even Yama, Kubera, Varuna and 
Indra! 

In anger at this insult, Rajan, Karna vowed, “As long as you live, O 
Bhishma, I will never fight! And if you succeed in slaying the sons of 
Pandu in battle, I will, with Duryodhana’s leave, retire to the forest and take 
sannyasa. But if, Bhishma, the Pandavas kill you and you find swarga, then 
I will fight from a single chariot, and kill all those whom you regard as 
great maharathas.” 

Having said this, and with your son’s approval, Karna Mahabaho did 
not fight for the first ten days of the war. The awesome Bhishma slew a 
multitude of Yudhishtira’s warriors but when he is struck down, your sons 
think of Karna, like men wanting to cross a river thinking of a boat. 

Your warriors and sons, together with all the kings, cry out in unison, 
“Karna!” And they all say, “This is the time to display your valour.” 

We look to the invincible Karna, whom Jamadagni’s son Parasurama 
taught the astra shastra! He, Rajan, can save us from great peril, why, even 
like Govinda always rescues the Devas from the gravest dangers.” 

To Sanjaya who thus repeatedly lauds Karna, Dhritarashtra sighs like a 
snake and says, ‘I understand that your hearts are all turned towards 
Vikartana and Radha’s son Karna and depend on the hero of the Sutas who 
is always ready to give his life in battle. I hope that shura will not belie the 
expectations of the grieving Duryodhana and the Kauravas, all of whom 
look to him for sanctuary. With Bhishma, the refuge of Kauravas fallen, will 
Karna, greatest of bowmen, fill the void he left and strike fear into the 
hearts of the enemy and crown my sons’ hopes of victory with success?’” 


CANTO 2 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “Then Karna, Adhiratha’s son of the Suta varna, 

knowing that Bhishma has fallen, comes like a brother who wants 

to rescue your son’s army from the distress into which it has fallen. Indeed, 

hearing that Santanu’s son, the maharatha of unfading glory, has been struck 

down from his chariot, Karna, greatest of all wielders of bows, swiftly joins 

the battle, coming to rescue the Kuru host which is like a boat sunk in the 
ocean, like a father to save his children. 

Karna addresses the soldiers, “When Bhishma parantapa, who 
possessed firmness, intelligence, prowess, vigour, truth, self-restraint and all 
the virtues of a Kshatriya, and also devastras, humility, modesty, pleasing 
speech and freedom from malice, the slayer of the enemies of Brahmanas, 
in whom these attributes resided as permanently as Lakshmi in the moon, 
alas, has fallen, I regard all the other Kshatriyas as already slain. Due to the 
eternal connection of all things with karma, nothing exists in this world that 
does not perish. When Bhishma Mahavrata has been felled, who can say 
with certitude that tomorrow’s sun will rise? When he, endued with prowess 
equal to that of the Vasus, born of the tejas of the Vasus, when he, the 


sovereign of the earth, has fallen, do you grieve then for your possessions, 
your children, for this very Bhumi, the Kurus and this host?” 

Thus does Karna, with a dismal heart and eyes filled with tears, attempt 
to console your sons. Hearing what he says, your sons and their soldiers, 
initially wail and weep copious tears. However, when the dreadful battle is 
rejoined, the Kaurava akshauhinis, urged on by the kings, once more set up 
loud shouts, and Karna, bull among maharathas, speaks to the great chariot 
warriors of the Kaurava army, words which bring great joy. 

Karna says, “In this transient world, I regard all things as ephemeral for 
they continually flit towards the jaws of Death. Still, with all of you present, 
how could Bhishma, bull of the Kurus, immovable as a hill, be struck down 
from his ratha? The son of Santanu even now lies on the ground like the 
Sun himself fallen from the firmament and the Kuru kings are scarcely able 
to face Arjuna, like trees that cannot bear the mountain-wind. Let the 
burden to protect this helpless and despondent Kuru army, whose greatest 
warrior the enemy has already cut down, now devolve on me. In this 
fleeting universe, since the greatest of all Kshatriyas has been laid low, why 
should I have any fear of battle? Rampaging through this field, I will 
despatch the Pandavas to Yama. I hold honour and fame as the highest 
objectives in the world and I will annihilate them in battle, or be slain and 
sleep on the field of war. 

Yudhishtira possesses determination, intelligence, virtue and might; 
Bhima is equal to a hundred elephants in strength; Arjuna is young and is 
the son of Indra, the king of the Devas; thus, even the gods cannot easily 
vanquish the Pandava force. They include in their ranks, the twins, each like 
Yama himself, Satyaki and Devaki’s son Krishna. Approaching them is like 
entering the jaws of Death from which no coward can return. 

As the wise meet growing ascetic power with their own tapasya, so 
should force be opposed by force. Truly my mind is fixed firmly upon 
fighting the enemy and protecting my own. O sarathy, today I will defy the 
enemy’s might and vanquish him on this Kurukshetra. I will not allow this 
feud between cousins to continue. When the troops are broken, he who 
helps in the endeavour to rally them is truly a friend. I will either achieve 
this deed of dharma worthy of an honest man, or casting off my life, I will 
follow Bhishma. I will either slay all my enemies united, or killed by them, 
find for myself the regions reserved for heroes. O Suta, I know that this is 
what I must do when women and children cry for help, or when 


Duryodhana’s power sustains a diminution. Therefore will I today vanquish 
the foe in this terrible war, heedless of my very life; I will protect the Kurus 
and destroy the sons of Pandu and all my other enemies banded together. 
And then I will bestow undisputed sovereignty on Dhritarashtra’s son. 

Let me don my golden kavacha, bright and radiant with jewels and 
gemstones, and my crown, effulgent as the sun, let me take up my bows, 
and arrows that resemble fire, poison or serpents. Let also sixteen quivers 
be tied to my chariot in their proper places and let a number of superior 
bows be stocked in it as well. Let also shafts, spears, heavy maces and my 
conch worked with gold, be got ready. Fetch my many-coloured, beautiful 
and brilliant gold standard, with the lustre of the lotus and bearing the 
device of an elephant; clean it with a fine cloth and deck it with garlands 
and cover it with a mesh of wires. O Suta’s son, bring me some fleet horses, 
not lean, of the hue of tawny clouds, bathed in water sanctified with mantras 
and caparisoned in trappings of bright gold. Quickly bring me such an 
excellent ratha, decked with garlands of gold, adorned with gems bright as 
the sun or the moon, stored with every weapon and yoked to superb steeds. 
Bring me also a number of strong bowstrings for my bows; bring me 
quivers, large and full of arrows, and armour for my body. Bring me also 
with haste, every auspicious thing needed before setting out for battle, the 
brass and gold vessels full of curd. Bring garlands of flowers and tie them to 
the limbs of my body. Let drums be beaten for victory! 

Then fly to where Arjuna Kiritin, Vrikodara, Dharmaputra Yudhishtira 
and the twins are. I will either kill them, or being killed by them, follow 
Bhishma. Arjuna, Krishna, Satyaki and the Srinjayas are a force that cannot 
be conquered by the kings. But even if all-destroying Death himself, with 
unremitting vigilance, is to protect Arjuna, I will still have his life; or go 
myself to Yamaloka like Bhishma. Truly I say to you, I will ride into the 
very midst of those Kshatriyas. The kings that are my allies are not 
provokers of feuds, or of weak attachment to me, or of unrighteous souls.” 

And so, riding on a wonderful, rich and mighty chariot, with an 
excellent flagstaff and to which are yoked the best horses, fast as the wind, 
decked with gold, auspicious and flying a noble standard, and whose rumble 
resembles the rumbling of clouds, Karna rides forth fully prepared for 
battle. Worshipped by the greatest of Kuru maharathas, even like Indra by 
the Devas, the mahatman and fierce archer, of immeasurable energy like the 


Sun himself, rides leading a large force to the heart of the battlefield where 
Bharatarishabha Bhishma has paid his debt to nature. 

Handsome and with the splendour of fire, the son of Adhiratha, the 
matchless bowman and mighty warrior, then mounts his radiant chariot and 
shines like Indra riding on his celestial vimana.” 


CANTO 3 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “Seeing the Pitamaha, the venerable Bhishma, that 
destroyer of all the Kshatriyas, the soul of dharma, and of infinite 
tejas, that matchless archer shot down from his chariot by Arjuna with his 
devastras and lying on a bed of arrows, looking like the vast ocean dried up 
by mighty winds, the hope of your sons for victory disappears along with 
their peace of mind. He was always an island for men sinking in the 
fathomless ocean in their endeavours to cross it; and that Kshatriya now lies 
covered with arrows that coursed in a stream as continuous as that of the 
Yamuna, looking like Mainaka of awesome splendour struck down by 
Indra. He lies prostrate on the earth like the sun fallen from the firmament, 
he who looks like the inconceivable Indra himself after his defeat of long 
ago by Vritra. The depriver of all warriors of their very senses, the greatest 
of all shuras, the idol and ideal of all bowmen, bull among men, your 
Pitamaha Bhishma Mahavrata, the grandsire of the Bharatas, has been 
struck down in battle, covered with Arjuna’s terrible shafts, and lies on a 
Kshatriya’s bed. 
Adhiratha’s son Karna alights from his chariot in great sorrow, numb 
with grief and in tears. He approaches on foot and with joined palms, says 


reverentially, “I am Karna. Be you blessed! O Bhaarata, open your eyes and 
look at me and speak sacred and auspicious words to me. Certainly no man 
can enjoy in this world the fruits of his pious deeds, when you, venerable in 
years and devoted to dharma, lie mortally wounded on the ground. O 
Kurusattama, I do not see that there is anyone else among us who is 
remotely your equal in filling the treasury, in counsels, in the deploying of 
troops in the vyuhas of war and in the use of weapons. Alas, you who are 
endowed with a righteous intellect and have always protected the Kurus 
from every danger and killed numberless warriors are now on your way to 
the realm of the Pitris. 

From this day, the Pandavas, energised by this success, will slaughter 
the Kurus like tigers hunting deer. Today the Kauravas, familiar with the 
force of the twang of the Gandiva, will view Arjuna with complete terror, 
like the Asuras do Vajradhari Indra. Today, the sound of the arrows shot 
from the Gandiva, like heaven’s thunder, will fill the Kurus and all other 
kings with absolute fear and like a raging conflagration devours a forest, the 
shafts of the Kiritin will consume the Dhartarashtras. In the parts of a forest 
through which fire and wind flare together, they burn all plants, vines and 
trees. Without doubt, Arjuna is such a surging fire and Krishna is like the 
wind. The blast of the Panchajanya and the twang of the Gandiva will fill all 
the Kaurava troops with abject terror and panic. 

Without you, when Arjuna rides at them, our kings will hardly bear the 
thunder of his monkey-bannered chariot. Who among the kings, save you, 
can match him whose feats in battle the wise say are all superhuman? 
Superhuman was the battle that he fought with the Mahadeva of three eyes. 
From Him he obtained a boon that men of unsanctified souls can never 
attain. Delighted by the duel, Siva blessed the son of Pandu and gave him 
his own astra. Who is there to vanquish him whom even you could not 
defeat although you vanquished the fierce destroyer of the very Kshatriya 
race, Parasurama, whom the Devas and the Danavas worship? 

I am skilled and can withstand the son of Pandu, that greatest of 
Kshatriyas. With your leave and blessing, I will even kill this valiant and 
ferocious warrior who is like a snake of virulent poison and who slays his 
enemies with just the looks from his eyes!” 


CANTO 4 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘After listening to Karna, the aged Kuru Pitamaha, 
with a happy heart, gives this valuable advice, “Like the ocean to 
rivers, like the Sun to all luminous bodies, like men of dharma to Truth, like 
fertile soil to seeds, like the clouds to all creatures, be the refuge of your 
relatives and friends! As the Devas depend on him of a thousand eyes, let 
your kinsmen look to you. Be the conqueror of your enemies and the 
enhancer of the joys of your friends. Be to the Kauravas what Vishnu is to 
the dwellers of swarga. 

O Karna, for Dhritarashtra’s son you once conquered the Kambojas of 
Rajapura. In Girivraja, you defeated many kings, among whom Nagnajit 
was the greatest, as well as all the Ambashtas, the Videhas and the 
Gandharvas. You forced the Kiratas, so fierce in battle, who dwell in the 
fastness of Himavat, to accept Duryodhana’s sovereignty. You subdued all 
the Utpalas, the Mekalas, the Paundras, the Kalingas, the Andhras, the 
Nishadas, the Trigartas and the Balhikas. In many other countries, Karna, 
driven by just the wish to benefit Duryodhana, you crushed many vamsas 
and kings of great tejas. 


Like Duryodhana, with his kinsmen, relatives and friends, be you also 
the refuge of all the Kauravas. In words of blessing I command you, go and 
fight the enemy. Lead the Kurus in battle and bring victory to Duryodhana. 
You are my grandson just as Duryodhana is. According to the law, all of us 
also are as much yours as Duryodhana’s! The wise say that the 
companionship of the righteous with other men of dharma is a superior 
relationship to the one with those born of the same womb. Therefore, regard 
the Kaurava army as your own and protect it even as Duryodhana would.” 

Karna reverentially touches Bhishma’s feet, bids him farewell and joins 
the other Kaurava archers. Looking at the vast and matchless Kuru army he 
encourages and exhorts the well-armed and broad-chested warriors. All the 
Kauravas led by Duryodhana are overjoyed and seeing the Mahabaho 
Karna take the field and station himself at the head of their army; eager 
again for battle, they receive him with loud shouts, slapping of armpits, 
leonine roars, twanging of bows and diverse other kinds of loud bold 
sounds.’” 


CANTO 5 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


°S anjaya says, ‘Seeing Karna Purushavyaghra mount his chariot, 

Duryodhana is filled with joy, and says, “With your protection, 

this army now has a proper leader. Let us decide our strategy and what we 
can achieve with our might.’ 

Karna replies, “Tell us yourself, O Naravyaghra, for you are the wisest 
of kings. No one can know better what to do than the one who is the most 
concerned. All these kings want to hear what you have to say. And I am 
sure that you will say nothing that is amiss.” 

Duryodhana says, “Bhishma was our commander, our aged and 
seasoned senapati, mighty, learned and supported by all our warriors. He 
achieved great glory, massacred vast numbers of my enemies, and served us 
by fighting with dharma for ten days. He achieved the most difficult feats 
but now that he is fallen, who, Karna, do you think is fit to be our senapati 
after him? Without a senapati, an army cannot fight a war for even a short 
while. You are the greatest warrior among us. An army without a general is 
like a boat without a helmsman or a chariot without a charioteer. Like a 
merchant who falls into every kind of distress when he is unacquainted with 
the ways of the country he visits, an army without a senapati is exposed to 


every kind of danger and loss. Therefore, look among the noble warriors of 
our host and identify a commander who can succeed the son of Santanu. All 
of us, without hesitation, will accept anyone you choose as the one fit to 
lead us.” 

Karna says, “All these best of men are mahatmans, and every one of 
them deserves to be our senapati. There is no need for any minute 
examination since all of them are highborn and masters of the art of war; 
they all own prowess and intelligence, and are heedful men who know the 
shastras. They are all wise and resolute in battle. Yet, since not all of them 
can at once be the supreme commander of our forces, we must choose just 
one of them in whom there are special and exceptional merits to be our 
senapati. All of them regard one another as equals and if you honour one 
among them, the others will be discontented and will no longer fight 
wholeheartedly for you. 

Drona, however, is the Acharya of all these warriors; he is venerable in 
years, and worthy of reverence. Therefore, let this greatest of all warriors be 
made our senapati. Who else is worthy of becoming our supreme leader, 
when the invincible Drona, foremost of men who know the Brahman, equal 
to Sukra or Brihaspati, is among us? Among all the kings in your army, 
Bhaarata, there is not a single warrior who will not gladly follow Drona 
when he takes the field. Drona is the foremost of all our commanders, our 
greatest warrior, and the first among all intelligent men. Besides, Rajan, he 
is your guru. So, Duryodhana, make him the senapati of your forces without 
hesitation or delay, even as the Devas made Kartikeya theirs in their war 
against the Asuras.”’ 


CANTO 6 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “Hearing what Karna says, king Duryodhana 
addresses Drona, who stands amongst the troops. “For the 
superiority of the varna of your birth, for the nobility of your parentage, for 
your learning, your age and intelligence, for your prowess, skill, 
invincibility, knowledge of the world, policy, self-conquest, as well as for 
your tapasya and your gratitude, superior as you are in every virtue among 
these kings, there is none who will make a better senapati than you. Protect 
us, therefore, as Indra did the Devas. With you as our general, we will, O 
best of Brahmanas, vanquish our enemies. 

As Kapali among the Rudras, Pavaka among the Vasus, Kubera among 
the Yakshas, Vasava among the Maruts, Vasishta among Brahmanas, the sun 
among light-givers, Yama among the Pitris, Varuna among aquatic beings, 
as the Moon among the stars, and Usanas among the sons of Diti, so are you 
the greatest of all lords of armies. Therefore, be you, O Anagha, our lord in 
war. Let these eleven akshauhinis be obedient to your command. Deploy 
these men for battle and destroy our enemies like Indra slaying the 
Danavas. You lead us all, even like Pavaka’s son Kartikeya at the head of 
the celestial host. 


We will follow you into battle, like bulls following the leader of a herd. 
You are a fierce and great archer, and besides, seeing you stretch your bow 
at the head of our forces, Arjuna will not strike. Without doubt, 
Naravyaghra, if you become our senapati, I will vanquish Yudhishtira with 
all his followers and kinsmen in this war.” 

After Duryodhana says these words, all the kings in the Kaurava army 
cry “Jaya! Jaya Drona!” They delight your son with a tremendous shout. 
The troops, with Duryodhana at their head, filled with joy and eager to win 
great renown, begin to glorify that best of Brahmanas. Then, Rajan, Drona 
addresses Duryodhana.’” 


CANTO 7 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: D rona says, “I know the Vedas and their six angas. I am also 

familiar with the science of human affairs and know the Saivastra 

and diverse other weapons. I will attempt to display all the virtues that you 

have attributed to me, while I fight the Pandavas. However, O king, I will 

not be able to kill Drupada’s son Dhrishtadyumna, for he was born to kill 

me.I will fight the Pandavas who will not fight me with happy hearts and I 
will raze the Somakas.” 

Thus permitted by Drona, your son, Rajan, then makes him senapati of 
his forces with the rites laid down in the shastras. The kings in the Kaurava 
army led by Duryodhana perform the investiture of Drona as the supreme 
commander of their forces, even like the Devas led by Indra in the ancient 
days, performing the investiture of Skanda. 

The pounding of drums and the blare of conches follow this ritual —the 
expression of the Kaurava army’s joy. They honour Drona with such cries 
as greet one’s ears on a festive day, with auspicious invocations by 
Brahmanas, and gratify him with cries of Jaya! from the foremost of 
Brahmanas and with the dance of mimes and other players. The Kaurava 
warriors regard the Pandavas as already vanquished. 


Then maharatha Drona, Bharadwaja’s son, now senapati of the Kaurava 
army, deploys his troops for battle, and goes forth to the field with your 
sons to engage the enemy. The ruler of the Sindhus, the king of the 
Kalingas and your son Vikarna, all clad in mail, take up their positions on 
Drona’s right side, supported by Sakuni and a squadron of great horsemen 
belonging to the Gandhara tribe, bearing bright lances. Kripa, Kritavarman, 
Chitrasena, and Vivimsati, led by Dusasana, protect the left flank supported 
by the swift cavalry of Kambojas led by Sudakshina, the Sakas and the 
Yavanas. The rear guard is comprised of the Madras, the Trigartas the 
Ambashtas, the westerners, the northerners, the Malavas, the Surasenas, the 
Sudras the Maladas, the Sauviras, the Kaitavas, the easterners and the 
southerners with your son Duryodhana at their head. 

The Suta’s son, Karna, at the head of the bowmen, adds prowess to the 
advancing force and gladdens the warriors of their army. His blazing, large 
and tall standard bearing the device of the elephant’s girth rope, shines with 
an effulgence like that of the sun, gladdening his own akshauhinis; seeing 
Karna, no one anymore regards Bhishma’s death as a calamity and the 
kings, along with the Kurus, are rid of their grief. 

Large numbers of warriors huddle together and tell one another, 
‘Finding Karna on the field, the Pandavas will never be able to face us in 
battle. When Karna can vanquish the very Devas with Indra at their head, 
what can the sons of Pandu do, who are of little energy and strength? The 
Mahabaho Bhishma spared the Parthas in battle, but Karna will kill them 
with his scorching shafts.’ Speaking thus to among themselves and filled 
with elation, they advance boldly, applauding and worshipping Radha’s son 
Karna. 

Drona arrays our legions in a Sakata vyuha, the cart formation, Rajan, 
while the serene Yudhishtira chooses the vyuha of the Krauncha, the crane, 
for his army. At the head of their formation are those two greatest of all 
men, Krishna and Dhananjaya, flying their banner with the device of the 
great Vanara. The inspiration of the whole army and the refuge of all its 
bowmen, Partha’s banner, imbued with immeasurable tejas as it floats in the 
sky, seems to illumine the entire host of Yudhishtira Dharmatman. The 
potent standard of Arjuna seems like the blazing sun that rises at the end of 
the yuga to consume the world. 

Among archers, Arjuna is the best; among bows, the Gandiva is the 
foremost; among all beings, Krishna is the first; and among all kinds of war 


chakras, the Sudarshana chakra is the greatest. Bearing these four 
embodiments of tejas, Swetavahana in his chariot takes up his position at 
the front of the enemy army, quite like the fierce chakra upraised to strike. 
Thus, the two greatest warriors stand at the very head of their respective 
forces— Karna at the head of your army and Dhananjaya at the head of the 
hostile one. Both excited with wrath and each wanting to kill the other, 
Karna and Arjuna glower at each other. 

When Bharadwaja’s son, maharatha Drona rides into battle like a storm, 
the very earth seems to tremble with a deep, chasmal wailing. The thick 
dust raised by the wind envelops the sky and the sun like a canopy of tawny 
silk. Though the firmament is cloudless, a shower of pieces of flesh, bones 
and blood falls on the earth. Vultures, hawks, cranes, kankas and crows in 
thousands, incessantly fall upon the Kaurava troops. Jackals howl and many 
fierce and terrible birds repeatedly wheel to the left of your army, in evil 
omen, impatient to eat flesh and drink blood; showers of blazing meteors, 
illuminating the sky and with their tails spread wide, fall on the field 
echoing with loud and uncanny sounds. And when the senapati of the 
Kaurava army rides forth, the wide disc of the sun, Rajan, seems to emit 
flashes of lightning and peals of thunder. One sees these and many other 
fierce portents, indicating an imminent devastation of Kshatriyas. 

Battle erupts again between the armies of the Kurus and the Pandavas, 
each wanting to annihilate the other. So loud is the din that it seems to fill 
the whole world; and the Pandavas and the Kauravas, all masters of war, all 
in the grip of battle’s consuming rage, strike each other with every manner 
of weapon, all determined to win the war. 

Drona of blazing glory rides recklessly, furiously at the Pandava host, 
spraying hundreds of arrows at the enemy every moment. The Pandavas 
and the Srinjayas reply, O king, with their own searing fusillades. But 
swiftly routed by Drona, the vast host of the Pandavas and the Panchalas 
break ranks, like flights of cranes buffeted irresistibly by a dread wind. 
Invoking a slew of devastras, in moments Drona dreadfully besieges the 
Pandavas and the Srinjayas, while their blood sprays everywhere. Drona 
slaughters the Panchala forces led by Dhrishtadyumna, like Indra the 
Danavas. The Acharya lances terror through the enemy ranks. 

Then, spurred to blind rage, Yagnasena’s son, maharatha 
Dhrishtadyumna, master of devastras looses storms of recondite shafts at 
Drona’s troops and rends them savagely all around, hundreds of men falling 


to his towering archery. He, the Pandava senapati, slaughters as many of 
Drona’s men as the Acharya does his. The mighty-armed Drona quickly 
rallies his forces around him, and charges Drupada’s son ablaze on 
Kurukshetra. Like an enraged Maghavat attacking the Danavas, Drona 
assails the Pandava and the Srinjaya ranks, so powerfully and remorselessly 
that they break ranks and flee before the terrible Brahmana like a herd of 
small animals set upon by a great lion. The mighty Drona devastates the 
Pandava force like the fabled ring of fire that protects the chalice of amrita. 
It is truly amazing, wondrous, O Rajan, how Drona mounted on his 
magnificent ratha even like a city coursing through the sky, his horses past 
superb, his sarathy masterful, his flagstaff like shining crystal, and his 
banner flapping wide in death’s wind, strikes perfect and absolute terror into 
the hearts of the enemy and wreaks unprecedented carnage among them.’” 


CANTO 8 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Seeing Drona furiously destroy horses, riders, 

maharathas and elephants, the Pandavas surround him. 

Yudhishtira tells Dhrishtadyumna and Arjuna, “Carefully surround the pot- 
born Drona with our men and check the slaughter he brings to us.” 

The maharathas Arjuna and Dhrishtadyumna, along with their soldiers, 
challenge Drona’s wild onslaught. The Kekaya princes, Bhimasena, 
Subhadra’s son, Ghatotkacha, Yudhishtira, Nakula and Sahadeva, Virata of 
the Matsyas, Dhrishtadyumna and the five sons of Draupadi, all exhilarated, 
and Dhrishtaketu, Satyaki, the fierce Chitrasena, the maharatha Yuyutsu, 
and many other kings who follow the sons of Pandu, all achieve diverse 
feats in keeping with their lineage and prowess, while now Drona looks on 
in frustrated rage. 

Further inflamed, the invincible Brahmana warrior standing erect in his 
ratha yet consumes the Pandava host like a tempest dispelling cloud masses. 
Tilting from all sides at chariot-warriors, horses, foot-soldiers and 
elephants, Drona, despite his years, careens over the field like a young man. 
His thoroughbred chestnut horses, fleet as the wind, covered in blood, are 
beautiful and awesome. Yudhishtira’s soldiers flee when they see him razing 


their ranks like an angry Yama. And as some take flight, others rally, some 
look at him dazed, and others remain on the field, the noise they make is 
tumultuous and terrible. The fearful din, which delights the brave and 
makes the timid tremble, fills all the sky and the earth. And once more 
Drona, roaring out his own name like a battle cry, makes himself still more 
awful, scourging his enemies with hundreds of arrows. 

Indeed, though old, the mighty Drona even looks half his years as he 
rides everywhere loosing his tides of arrows at the Pandava legions like 
Death himself, striking off heads and arms decked with ornaments, 
emptying chariots in gory blasts, all the while uttering tigerish roars. At his 
terrifying roars and the force of his shafts, the enemy warriors, my lord, 
shiver like a herd of cows beset by deep winter’s cold. 

Kurukshetra resounds with the rumble of Drona’s chariot, the twanging 
of his bow. His shafts fly in thousands from his bow, enveloping all the 
points of the compass, and fall upon enemy elephants, horses and 
horsemen, chariots and foot-soldiers. 

The Panchalas and the Pandavas unflinchingly advance on Drona, who, 
with his mighty bow, resembles a dread fire with arrows and astras for its 
leaping flames. Countless elephants, foot-soldiers and horsemen he 
despatches to Yama and turns the battleground into bloody mire. Invoking 
mighty astras and spraying his shafts thickly on every side, Drona soon 
covers all the points of the compass, so that among millions of foot- 
soldiers, chariots, horsemen and elephants, one can see nothing save 
Drona’s arrows. The pennant on his chariot is all that one sees, flashing here 
and there like streak lightning amidst all the other chariots. 

The irrepressible Drona attacks the five princes of Kekaya, Drupada of 
the Panchalas, and then dashes against the akshauhini of Yudhishtira 
Dharmaraja. 

Bhimasena, Arjuna, Satyaki, the sons of Drupada, the ruler of Kasi, the 
son of Saibya, and Sibi himself, gladly and with loud roars, swathe him 
with their arrows. Shafts in thousands, with wings of gold, shot from 
Drona’s bow, pierce right through the bodies of the elephants and the young 
horses of these warriors, and plunge into the earth, their feathers dyed in 
blood. Strewn with chariots and the prostrate forms of numberless warriors, 
elephants and horses torn by the Brahmana’s shafts, Kurukshetra looks like 
the sky covered with banks of black clouds. 


Ever seeking victory for your sons, Drona rampages to decimate the 
divisions of Satyaki, Bhima, Dhananjaya, Subhadra’s son, Drupada, the 
king of Kasi, and excoriates many other Kshatriyas as well. Indeed, 
achieving these and many other terrible feats, that maharathin scorches the 
world like the sun as he rises apocalyptic at the end of the yuga. 

After Drona entirely destroys more than two Pandava akshauhinis of 
brave and resolute warriors, the canny hero Dhrishtadyumna Mahabuddhi 
finally slays the Brahmana shura with the golden chariot; and Drona attains 
mukti, the highest state. Indeed, Rajan, it is only after he has brought the 
most horrific carnage to the Pandava and Panchala legions with his astras, 
letting rills of blood on hallowed ground, do they finally kill him. 

When the Acharya dies, a loud uproar from all creatures and all the 
troops fills the sky. Resounding through heaven, earth and the intermediate 
space and through the cardinal and the subsidiary directions, one hears the 
loud cry “O Fie!” from all beings; and the Devas, the Pitris, and his friends; 
all watch that incomparable maharatha, the son of Bharadwaja, slain. With 
this triumph, the relieved and overjoyed Pandavas give vent to leonine 
shouts, and the earth trembles with their celebrant roaring.” 


CANTO 9 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra asks, ‘How did the Pandavas and the Srinjayas kill 
Drona, who was such a matchless warrior? Did his chariot break 
down in the fight? Did his bow break while he was shooting at the enemy, 
or was Drona careless at the moment when he was killed? Sanjaya, how 
could Prishata’s son kill the greatest of Brahmanas, that invincible hero 
gifted with such speed of hand, who could loose torrents of gold-winged 
shafts to great distances in the twinkling of an eye, who was a master of all 
the forms of warfare, of astounding skills, self-restrained, and also a master 
of the devastras? 

It is plain to me that destiny is superior to effort and exertion since 
Dhrishtadyumna has killed the magnificent Drona, maharatha of unfading 
glory, who was always cautious, who achieved incomparable feats in battle, 
the Brahmana who verily embodied the four kinds of weapons. Ah, alas, 
you tell me that the same Drona, Acharya of archery, is slain! 

Oh, hearing that the hero who rode his bright ratha covered with tiger 
skins and adorned with the purest gold is dead, I cannot contain or drive out 
my burning grief! Undoubtedly, Sanjaya, no one dies of grief from 
another’s end, since, wretch that I am, I am still alive after hearing of 


Drona’s death. Destiny is truly all-powerful and all effort fruitless. Surely, 
my heart is made of adamant, since it does not break into a hundred pieces 
after hearing of Drona’s death. How can Death take him whom Brahmanas 
and Kshatriyas alike came and served to acquire instruction in the Vedas 
and divination and archery? Oh, I cannot brook the killing of Drona; it is 
even like the ocean drying up, or Meru being uprooted from his place, or 
the sun falling from the sky. 

He restrained the evil, and protected men of dharma, and now he has 
given up his life for the wretched Duryodhana! He was equal to Brihaspati 
or Usanas himself in intelligence and upon his ability rested the hope of 
victory that my evil sons entertained. Alas, how was he slain? 

Did his great, strong, keenly-trained, chestnut Sindhu horses, 
caparisoned in golden mesh, swift as the wind, yoked to his mighty chariot 
and drawing it so wonderfully, always neighing joyfully and invincible to 
every weapon, and always protecting him in the midst of war, grow 
suddenly weak and collapse? How did they overwhelm those Sindhu steeds 
of wonder that drew Drona’s chariot, which could calmly face the sound of 
elephants trumpeting in war, the blare of conches and the pounding of 
drums; which were unmoved by the twanging of bows and showers of 
arrows and other weapons; those steeds that were ominous by their very 
appearance, never short of breath, exhausted or in pain? When such were 
the horses that drew his golden ratha, why could he not cross the sea that is 
the Pandava army? 

What feats did Drona achieve in battle, the warrior who always drew 
tears from other Kshatriyas, and upon whose knowledge of weapons all the 
best archers of the world rely! What all did this mighty man of dharma do 
in battle? 

Who were the maharathas who challenged that doer of fierce deeds, the 
best of all the bowmen, first among shuras, who was like Indra himself? 

Did the Pandavas flee on seeing him, mighty and strong on the golden 
chariot, and invoke devastras? Or, did Dharmaraja Yudhishtira and his 
brothers with Dhrishtadyumna for their binding cord, fall upon Drona after 
surrounding him with their troops on all sides? Arjuna with his faultless 
arrows must have checked all the other chariot-warriors, and then, protected 
by Partha, Dhrishtadyumna must have brought death to the mighty 
Acharya. Possibly the brave Kekayas, Chedis, Karushas, Matsyas and the 
other kings surrounded the Acharya, like ants crawling over a snake, even 


while he was engaged in some difficult feat, and so allowing the wretched 
Dhrishtadyumna to bring him down. 

How could the venerable Brahmana, master of the four Vedas with their 
angas and the Itihasas the fifth Veda, the refuge of all Brahmanas as the 
ocean is of rivers, that blazing parantapa, who lived both as a Brahmana and 
as a Kshatriya, alas, meet his end at the point of a weapon? 

A proud spirit, he had yet to often endure humiliation and to suffer 
much pain on my account. However undeserving, he met his end at the 
hands of his pupil Arjuna. Such a dharmatman and yuddhavira, whose feats 
all bowmen in the world looked up to—alas, how could men greedy for 
riches kill such a one? Foremost in this world, like Indra in swarga, of great 
might and energy, alas, how could the Parthas kill him, like a whale being 
killed by smaller fish? He, from whose presence no challenger could ever 
escape with life, he whom, while he lived, the two sounds of the Vedas 
being chanted by those learning Vedic lore and the twang of bows, never 
left; he who was never dispirited or dejected, alas, that Naravyaghra, that 
shura endowed with prosperity and never vanquished in battle, that warrior 
of prowess equal to that of the gaja or the simha, has been slain! 

Sanjaya, I cannot bear the very thought of his death. How could 
Dhrishtadyumna, in the sight of all the greatest men in the world, murder 
the invincible Drona whose might was unequalled and his fame never 
tarnished? 

Who fought in Drona’s van, protecting him, and who, riding by his 
side? Who guarded his rear and who were the maharathas who shielded the 
right and the left wheels of Drona? Who were before him while he strove in 
battle? Who were they, who reckless of their lives, met death with him and 
joined him on his last journey? Did any of these Kshatriyas assigned to 
protect Drona prove false and abandon him in battle, thus letting the enemy 
kill him while he was alone? However great the danger, Drona would never 
turn his back on battle from fear. How then did the enemy kill him? Even in 
great distress, Sanjaya, an illustrious man should demonstrate his prowess 
to the full measure of his might. All this was in Drona. Ah, Sanjaya, I am 
losing my mind! Let us stop this speech a while until I regain my reeling 


999 


senses. 


CANTO 10 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: V aisampayana said, “Saying this to Sanjaya, Dhritarashtra, in 
extreme grief and distressed about the hopelessness of his son, 
Duryodhana’s, victory, falls unconscious onto the ground. His attendants 
rush forward to fan him and sprinkle him with perfumed cold water, while 
the royal Bhaarata women surround him, weeping, gently rub him with their 
soft hands; and slowly lifting him up from the ground, seat him on his 
throne. He remains insensate and still, until a tremor passes through his 
body and he slowly regains consciousness. 

He begins to question Sanjaya again about the incidents that occurred 
on the battlefield. 

Dhritarashtra asks, ‘Ajatasatru Yudhishtira who, like the risen sun, 
dispels darkness with his own light, who charges an enemy like an inflamed 
tusker in musth, whom no other herd leader can arrest, rushing eagerly 
towards a female elephant in heat—which of my warriors keep him at bay 
when he charged Drona? Who are the Kshatriya heroes that surrounded that 
best of glorious men, who killed so many of my brave men, that intelligent, 
courageous king of unbaffled prowess, who, bent on victory, could single- 
handedly consume the entire host of Duryodhana with just his terrible 


glances, that resplendent archer, that self-restrained king whom the whole 
world reveres? 

Which valiant men of my army surround the invincible prince, Kunti’s 
son Bhimasena, bowman of unfading glory, Naravyaghra, hero of gigantic 
fame and untold valour, strong as ten thousand elephants, when he rushed 
wildly at Drona? 

When Arjuna, maharatha of exceeding tejas, came looking like a mass 
of clouds discharging thunderbolts, loosing showers of arrows like Indra 
pouring down rain, and making all the points of the compass resound with 
the slapping of his palms and the rattle of his chariot-wheels; when he 
whose bow is like the lightning’s flash, whose chariot too resembles a cloud 
with the sound of its wheels its thunder, the hum of whose arrows is so very 
fierce, whose wrath resembles a dreadful thunderhead and who is as quick 
as the mind or the tempest; who always strikes an enemy deep in his very 
vitals, who is terrible to look at, who like Yama himself bathes all the points 
of the compass with human blood and who, with awful visage and fierce 
noise, wielding the Gandiva, lashes my warriors led by Duryodhana with 
arrows whetted on stone and fletched with vultures’ feathers—alas, when 
that hero of great intellect descended upon you, what was your state of 
mind? 

When Arjuna, with Hanuman upon his banner, obstructed the sky with 
dense swarms of arrows, what was your state of mind? Did Partha advance 
upon you, slaying your troops at will, with the Gandiva pealing in his 
hands, accomplishing great feats on the way? Did he take your lives like the 
tempest destroying gathering cloud-masses or felling forests of reeds by 
blowing through them? Who is there that can face the Gandivi in battle? 

Just hearing that he leads the enemy’s forces, the heart of every 
opponent would seem to be broken. In the war in which the troops tremble 
and even great Kshatriyas are terrified, who stood firm by Drona and which 
cowards abandoned him from fear? Who, reckless of their lives, met Death 
himself, facing them squarely in the shape of Dhananjaya who can vanquish 
even unworldly adversaries in battle? 

My troops cannot withstand the impetus of Swetavahana and the 
twanging of the Gandiva that is like the thunder of the very clouds. Why, I 
believe the very Devas and the Asuras united together cannot conquer the 
chariot that has Vishnu himself for its charioteer and Dhananjaya for its 
warrior. 


When the son of Pandu, Nakula, delicate, young, intrepid and so 
handsome, gifted with exceptional intelligence, skill, wisdom and prowess, 
invincible in battle, attacked Drona with loud roars, which shuras of my 
army contained him? 

When Sahadeva, who resembles an angry snake of virulent venom, that 
invincible hero of the white steeds, who observes laudable vows, is resolute 
and modest attacked us, which Kshatriyas of our army encircled him? 

O Sanjaya, which of my warriors resisted Satyaki who, having crushed 
the mighty host of the Sauvira king, took for his wife the beautiful, perfect- 
limbed Bhoja maiden, that bull among men Yuyudhana, gifted with 
decisiveness, awesome courage and brahmacharya, that maharatha always 
keeping dharma, never unhappy, never vanquished, who in battle is equal to 
Krishna and is regarded as Krishna’s second self, who, through Arjuna’s 
tutelage has become the greatest of bowmen, why, equal to Partha himself. 
Who resisted Satyaki, at least trying to keep him away from Drona? 

Know, O Sanjaya that Satyaki of the Satwata vamsa, Yuyudhana 
greatest hero of the Vrishnis, is equal to Parasurama himself in his 
knowledge and genius in the use of weapons. Ability, fame, truth, 
determination, intelligence, heroism, the knowledge of Brahman, and of the 
great astras, are all to be found in him, as the three worlds are in Krishna. 
Which Kshatriyas of my host confronted this peerless bowman, the 
indomitable Satyaki whom not the Devas can contain? 

Which of my warriors surrounded Uttamaujas, greatest among the 
heroic Panchalas, ever achieving wondrous feats at arms, high-born, 
favourite among champion warriors, devoted to Arjuna, born just to destroy 
my evil, equal to Yama, Vaisravana, Aditya, Mahendra, or Varuna, fearless 
maharatha always ready to lay down his life? 

Who opposed that singular Chedi warrior Dhrishtaketu, ally of the 
Pandavas, when he charged Drona? 

Who resisted the heroic Ketumat, slayer of prince Durjaya, even when 
Durjaya took refuge in Girivraja? Who kept the predatory Ketumat away 
from Drona? 

Which of my Kshatriyas challenged the Naravyaghra Sikhandin, 
Yagnasena’s son who knows the strengths and weaknesses of his own 
nature, who is man and also woman, who is always unperturbed in battle, 
the Kshatriya who became the cause of Mahatman Bhishma’s fall? Who 
kept Sikhandin away from Drona? 


O which Kshatriyas of my army defied the greatest hero of the Vrishnis, 
the noble Abhimanyu, Subhadra’s son, that most transcendent of all archers, 
the intrepid son of Arjuna more accomplished than Dhananjaya himself, in 
whose weapons truth and brahmacharya dwell, who is equal to Krishna in 
tejas and Dhananjaya in urjas, who in splendour is equal to Aditya and in 
intelligence to Brihaspati, who is like Yama himself with yawning maw? 
Which of my heroes contained the youthful and radiant Abhimanyu when 
he charged Drona? What was your state of mind when that Parantapa of 
boundless vigour plunged towards the Acharya? 

Which Kshatriyas surrounded the Purushavyaghras, the sons of 
Draupadi, when like rivers rushing towards the sea they hurtled at Drona? 
Who tried to keep those children, the heroic sons of Dhrishtadyumna— 
Kshatranjaya, Kshatradeva, Kshatravarman and Manada, who gave up all 
boyishness and sport for twelve years to observe stern vratas and to wait 
upon Bhishma to acquire the astra shastra from him? Who kept those 
ferocious youths away from the Acharya? 

Who defied the great archer Chekitana, whom the Vrishnis regard as 
superior in battle to a hundred other maharathas, to keep him away from 
Drona? 

O, which of the Kshatriyas of my army attempted to stop the onrush of 
the five Kekaya brothers, valiant, virtuous, irresistible in fight and of 
exceptional skills and prowess, who have the hue of the Indragopaka insect, 
clad always as they are in red coats of mail, with red weapons and red 
banners, cousins and fervent supporters of the Pandavas? Who faced those 
heroes when they rode at Drona to have his life? 

Which champion from my army withstood Yuyutsu, lord of war, first 
among great bowmen, of unerring aim and _ prodigious strength, 
Naravyaghra whom many vengeful kings battled for six months at 
Varanavrata but could not quell him, and who, in a swayamvara at Varanasi, 
overthrew the prince of Kasi with a broad-headed arrow, and seized a young 
princess for his wife? 

Which Kshatriyas of my host confronted the mighty, mighty 
Dhrishtadyumna, raised almost in Drupada’s lap, the fire-born prince who is 
the chief counsellor and senapati of the Pandavas, who so _ hates 
Duryodhana, who was born to kill Drona, when he attacked the Acharya, 
breaking through my ranks, destroying all my warriors in battle in scarlet 
tide? 


The Maharatha Saibya measured this earth on his chariot as if with a 
leather belt, and as a substitute for all other sacrifices, performed without 
hindrance ten Aswamedha yagnas with ample and excellent food, drink and 
gifts offered in profusion. He rules his subjects as if they are his children, 
gives away in sacrifices kine as numerous as the grains of sand in the 
Ganga; he whose feats none among men has or will ever be able to imitate, 
and after the performance of which, the very Devas once cried out, “We do 
not see in the three worlds with their mobile and immobile creatures anyone 
other than Usinara’s son, who ever was, is, or will ever be born, who has 
acquired the rarest realms in the after-life unattainable by other men.” O, 
Sanjaya, who in my army stood firm against this Saibya, Usinara’s 
grandson, while he attacked Drona? 

Which heroes of my army encircled the chariot-division of Parantapa 
Virata, king of the Matsyas, when it neared Drona on the field? 

Who kept the gigantic Ghatotkacha away from Drona, that heroic 
Rakshasa who always puts forth his inhuman strength for the Pandavas’ 
victory, Ghatotkacha who owns great powers of maya, apart from enormous 
strength and superhuman prowess, he who was born to Bhima in the course 
of a single day and of whom I entertain such terrible fears? 

Who, Sanjaya, can remain unconquered by those who are prepared to 
lay down their lives in battle? How can the sons of Pritha meet with defeat, 
when they have the greatest of all beings, Krishna, wielder of Saringa, for 
their refuge and benefactor? He is, indeed, the Master of all the worlds, the 
Lord of all, the Eternal One! Narayana Divyatman, of infinite power, is the 
refuge of men in battle. The wise tell of his unearthly feats. Ah, let me also 
recite them with devotion, so that I may recover my composure and 
resolution!’” 


CANTO 11 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Yes, as I saw everything that happened with my own 
eyes, I will describe how Drona falls, slain by the Pandavas and 
the Srinjayas. 

After he is appointed senapati of the Kaurava army, Bharadwayja’s son, 
Drona maharatha, says to your son in the midst of all the troops, “O Rajan, 
how can I thank you for honouring me with the command of your legions 
after the son of Ganga? What desire of yours can I now fulfill? Ask any 
boon that you wish.” 

Having consulted with Karna, Dusasana and others, Duryodhana says to 
the Acharya, “If you will give me a boon, seize Yudhishtira alive and bring 
him here to me!” 

Drona replies, gladdening all the men there, “Praise be to Yudhishtira, 
Kunti’s son, whom you wish only to capture O invincible one. Why do you, 
Duryodhana, who are a strategist, not seek Yudhishtira’s death? It is 
wonderful that he has no enemy wishing his death. Do you want him to live 
to preserve your race from extinction, or having vanquished the Pandavas in 
battle, are you keen to establish brotherly relations with them by giving 
back their kingdom? Auspicious was the birth of the intelligent prince 


Yudhishtira Mahabuddhi. He is truly called Ajatasatru—the man with no 
enemies, for even you have affection for him.” 

Hearing these words of Drona, the feeling that is ever present in your 
son’s heart is plainly exposed. Not even a Brihaspati can conceal the 
expressions of his countenance! Your son filled with joy, answers, “By 
killing Kunti’s son in battle, Acharya, victory cannot be mine. The very 
Devas cannot slay all of them and if Yudhishtira is slain, Arjuna or he 
among them who survives, will surely annihilate us. Yudhishtira, however, 
is truthful in his promises. If brought here alive and defeated once more at 
dice, the Pandavas will again go into the vana, for they are all obedient to 
their eldest brother. Such a victory will be an enduring one. This is why I do 
not wish to kill Dharmaraja Yudhishtira but to take him alive.” 

Ascertaining this crooked purpose of Duryodhana, Drona, conversant 
with the truths of the science of artha and gifted with great intelligence, 
reflects a little and gives him the boon, circumscribing it in the following 
way. Drona says, “If Arjuna does not protect Yudhishtira, you can consider 
the eldest Pandava as already brought captive to you. As for Arjuna, the 
very Devas and the Asuras together, led by Indra, cannot face him in battle. 
It is for him that I dare not do what you ask of me. Without doubt, Arjuna is 
my sishya and I am his Acharya. He is, however, young, blessed with great 
good fortune, and set upon achieving his purposes. He has obtained many 
astras from Indra and Rudra; and, besides, you have provoked him direly. I 
dare not, therefore, do what you ask. 

However, if Arjuna is removed from the battle by whatever means, you 
may regard Yudhishtira as already taken. Since our victory rests upon his 
being captured alive, and not upon his death, we can accomplish this by 
stratagem, O bull among men! Seizing the king devoted to truth and 
dharma, this very day, I will yield him up to you. But only if he faces me in 
direct battle for at least a moment, and if you can lure Arjuna away from the 
field. For otherwise Yudhishtira cannot be captured.” 

After Drona promises that he would seize Yudhishtira, but if Arjuna is 
far from him, your foolish sons consider the Dharmaraja as already taken. 
Duryodhana knows Drona’s partiality for the Pandavas and in order to make 
Drona fulfil his given word, he proclaims Drona’s oath before all his 
troops.’” 


CANTO 12 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘When your troops hear of Drona’s vow to capture 
Yudhishtira, they roar their approval, mingling their lusty yells 
with the whistling of their arrows and the booming of their conches. 
Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, however, soon learns of Drona’s oath and his 
intention through his spies. He brings together all his brothers and the other 
kings of his army and tells Arjuna, “You have heard, Naravyaghra, of 
Drona’s plot. Take such measures that will prevent him from capturing me. 
It is true that Drona has sworn his pledge but its success or failure depends 
on you. Therefore, stay and fight today in my vicinity so that Drona will not 
keep his word given to Duryodhana.” 

Arjuna says, “Just as I can never cause the death of my Acharya, I can 
never give you up, my brother. O Yudhishtira, I would rather sacrifice my 
life in battle than fight against my guru. This son of Dhritarashtra wants 
sovereignty by taking you his captive in battle. He will never succeed. The 
Sky with its stars may fall down, the Earth herself may split in pieces, but 
Drona will not take you his captive as long as I am alive, not even if 
Vajradhari Indra or Vishnu at the head of the Devas comes to help him. As 
long as I live, Rajan, do not have any fear of Drona, although he is the 


greatest of all warriors. I further assure you that my word is never broken 
nor does what I swear ever remain unfulfilled. I do not recollect ever having 
spoken an untruth, ever being defeated, or leaving the least part of a vow 
unfulfilled.” 

Then, Rajan, small and big conches, drums and cymbals are sounded 
and beaten in the Pandava camp. The noble Pandavas roar and shout, and 
the awful twanging of their bowstrings and the slaps of palms reach into the 
high heavens. Hearing the loud booming of conches that arises from the 
camp of the mighty sons of Pandu, your divisions also sound diverse 
instruments. 

Your legions and the enemy’s forces slowly advance against each other 
in battle order and soon savage, bloodcurdling battle breaks out again 
between the Pandavas, the Kurus, Drona and the Panchalas. The Srinjayas 
fight vigorously but cannot make headway as Drona himself shields his 
forces. So also, your son’s best maharathas cannot beat back the Pandava 
army, for the diademed Arjuna Kiritin protects it. Guarded by Drona and 
Arjuna, both sides appear as if to stand quite still, like two blossoming 
forests in the silence of the night. 

Then Drona, mounted on his golden chariot, like the magnificent Sun, 
bursts headlong through the ranks of the Pandavas, smashing them down at 
will. The Pandavas and the Srinjayas are afraid and feel as if this single 
mahatejasvin warrior upon his racing ratha has multiplied into many 
maharathas. Drona’s terrible shafts fly in all directions, petrifying his 
opponents and he is indeed like the Sun himself at mid-day shedding a 
thousand rays of light all around. Just as once the Danavas could not face 
Indra, there is no one among the Pandavas who is able to face the raging 
son of Bharadwaja. After he confounds the hostile troops, Drona swiftly 
begins to decimate the legion led by Dhrishtadyumna, mowing them down 
with his incessant volleys of arrows which cover all the points of the 
compass.’ 


CANTO 13 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Seeing Drona, wrathful warrior in his golden 

chariot, causing great havoc among the Pandava host and 

destroying their divisions like a forest-fire consuming a vana, the Srinjayas 
tremble in fear. 

In battle, the twang of the maharatha’s taut bow resounds like roaring 
thunder. Fierce arrows that Drona shoots with light like speed decimate 
chariot-warriors, horsemen, elephant-warriors and foot-soldiers, along with 
their elephants and horses. Showering down arrows, like roaring clouds 
helped by the wind raining hailstones at the close of summer, he brings 
terror to the hearts of the enemy. Raging through the hostile ranks and 
petrifying the troops, the mighty Drona swells the unnatural fear that his 
enemies feel. The gold-decked bow on his fleeting ratha is like the streak of 
lightning in a mass of dark clouds. 

The shura, firm in truth, wise and always devoted to dharma, causes an 
awful river of angry current to flow there, such as seen only at the end of 
the Yuga. The river has its source in the recklessness of Drona’s wrath and 
is haunted by thronging carnivores. Fighting men are the waves that cover 
its surface, and great heroes constitute the trees on its banks whose roots the 


river’s current constantly erodes. Its waters are the blood shed in the battle, 
chariots are its eddies, and elephants and horses form its banks. Coats of 
mail are its floating lilies, the flesh of men is the mire on its bed, the fat, 
marrow and bones of fallen animals and men are the sands on its banks, and 
fallen head-gear is its froth. 

The battle itself is the canopy above its surface; lances, the fish with 
which it abounds, and it is uncrossable for the vast number of slain men, 
elephants and horses that fall into it. The impetus of shafts loosed constitute 
its flow, corpses the timber floating on it; chariots its tortoises; heads the 
stones strewn on its banks and bed; swords and scimitars its fish in 
profusion; chariots and elephants form its lakes and it is decked with many 
adornments. Maharathas constitute hundreds of little whirlpools and blood- 
damp earth its wavelets. Though it can easily be crossed by men of 
exceptional valour, the timid can never ford the dread river of death. Heaps 
of bodies pile up on sandbanks, obstructing its navigation, and it is the 
seething haunt of kankas, vultures and other birds of prey. 

It bears away thousands of maharathas to Yama’s abode. Long spears 
are the snakes that infest it in profusion and the living combatants are the 
fowl frolicking on its waters; torn chatras, parasols, are its swans, and 
diadems the smaller birds that adorn it. Wheels are its turtles, maces its 
alligators, and arrows its smaller fish. It is home to frightful swarms of 
crows, vultures and jackals. 

The river carries away hundreds of those that Drona kills in battle to the 
region of the Pitris. Dammed by these numerous bodies floating upon it, the 
hair of slain warriors and animals are like its moss and weeds. The 
inexorable and awesome Drona causes even such a river to flow there, 
terrifying the timid, magnifying their fears. 

While Drona is thus desiccating the enemy army everywhere, the 
Pandava warriors led by Yudhishtira rush at him from all sides. Seeing this, 
your brave soldiers counter attack from every direction and a hair-raising 
battle ensues. Sakuni, full of a hundred kinds of deceit, attacks Sahadeva 
and pierces his charioteer, standard and chariot, with many keen shafts. 
Sahadeva, however, remaining unruffled, first cuts down Saubala’s 
standard, breaks his bow, strikes his charioteer and carves splinters from his 
ratha; and he then pierces Sakuni himself with sixty shafts like 
thunderbolts. 


Seizing up his mace, Sakuni jumps down from his fabulous chariot and 
fells Sahadeva’s charioteer with a blow, so the sarathy falls out of his ratha. 
Then, Rajan, those two heroic and mighty warriors, both on foot and armed 
with gadas, battle like the peaks of two mountains. 

Drona and Drupada, king of the Panchalas, draw blood from each other 
with braces of searing arrows. Bhimasena strikes Vivimsati sharply, but 
Vivimsati remains wonderfully unmoved. Serenely he cuts down 
Bhimasena’s horses, standard and bow winning the worship of all the 
witnessing troops. The incensed Bhima cannot brook this and in a blur kills 
Vivimsati’s pedigreed horses, at which the mighty Vivimsati, taking up a 
shield and sword, jumps down and charges Bhimasena and they fight like 
two demented elephants. 

The heroic Salya, laughing the while, pierces, as if in jest, his own 
beloved nephew Nakula with a flurry of arrows, mainly to annoy him. 
Nakula, however, in a hot flash shoots down his uncle’s horses, royal 
parasol, standard and charioteer, and blows his conch in echoing triumph. 

Dhrishtaketu engages Kripa, wards off diverse kinds of arrows Kripa 
looses at him, pierces him with seventy fiery barbs and then cuts down the 
device of his standard with three perfect arrows. Kripa replies with a thick 
shower of shafts and the fight between the Brahmana and Dhrishtaketu 
rages on. 

An amused Satyaki bloodies Kritavarman squarely through his chest 
with a special long arrow and then strikes him in a wink with seventy more. 
The Bhoja replies in kind but like swiftly coursing winds failing to move a 
mountain, Kritavarman cannot move Satyaki at all or affright him in the 
least. 

The Pandava senapati strikes Susarman deeply in his vitals and is 
himself stabbed with a lance through his shoulder-joint. Virata, with his 
energetic Matsya warriors, manfully resists Vikartana’s son and this feat of 
the Matsya king is a deed of great valour for he singly contains an entire 
legion with his immaculate archery. 

King Drupada engages with Bhagadatta, and the combat between these 
two watriors is quite beautiful to watch. Bhagadatta, bull among men, 
lacerates Drupada, his sarathy, his standard and whole chariot with a myriad 
of arrows. The wrathful Drupada swiftly strikes the maharatha squarely 
through his chest with a flawless shaft. The two great warriors, Somadatta’s 
son Bhurisravas and Sikhandin, masters of every kind of weapon, fight a 


fierce duel that terrifies all. Bhurisravas covers Yagnasena’s son Sikhandin 
with a heavy downpour of arrows and is in turn pierced with ninety shafts, 
making him tremble. 

Both capable of creating a hundred illusions, and swelling up with 
pride, Hidimbi’s son Ghatotkacha and Alambusha, fierce Rakshasas, battle 
each other in the most astonishing manner, using their powers of maya, 
vanishing and reappearing at will—each set on vanquishing the other. 

The fierce Chekitana fights Anuvinda, and they range right across the 
field, causing great amazement. Lakshmana fights Kshatradeva fiercely, 
even like Vishnu, long ago, against the Asura Hiranyaksha. The mighty 
Paurava roars at Abhimanyu as he attacks him wildly. Abhimanyu retaliates 
fiercely but Paurava envelops him in a mantle of arrows. Arjuna’s 
marvellous son fells his antagonist’s standard, parasol and rives his bow. He 
pierces Paurava with seven arrows and with another five strikes deep his 
charioteer and horses, gladdening his own troops, and then repeatedly roars 
like a lion. 

In a blur, Abhimanyu fits an arrow to his bowstring that is certain to 
take Paurava’s life. Seeing this, Kritavarman, Hridika’s son, with two 
thunderbolt like shafts, breaks both Abhimanyu’s bow and_ arrow. 
Abhimanyu flings aside his broken bow, takes up a bright sword and a 
shield decked with many stars, and whirling these at great speed, he careens 
across the field, putting his prowess on display. Whirling them overhead 
and then brandishing them fiercely, and leaping high himself, he makes no 
difference between using blade and shield for defence and vicious attack. 

He leaps suddenly onto the axle-shaft of Paurava’s ratha, gives a mighty 
shout and next moment is in the chariot and seizes Paurava by his hair, 
meanwhile breaking his sarathy’s neck with a terrific kick, and cutting 
down his proud standard with a fluent stroke of his sword. Abhimanyu 
raises Paurava up high, like Garuda a snake from the bottom of the sea, 
agitating the waters. All the kings see Paurava helplessly flung down and 
dragged about on his chariot floor, his hair disheveled, and looking like an 
ox deprived of its senses and on the point of being killed by a lion. 
Jayadratha cannot bear to watch Paurava being so roughly mishandled; 
seizing up a sword and a shield that bears the device of a peacock, decked 
with a hundred little bells hung in rows, he jumps down from his chariot 
with a roar. Abhimanyu sees the king of the Sindhus, lets Paurava go and 
springs like a launching hawk from that warrior’s ratha, landing lithely on 


the ground. Like some dancer, he effortlessly wards off with his sword and 
shield the javelins, arrows and swords that his enemies aim at him, showing 
off the strength of his own arms. 

Mighty Abhimanyu once more raises his great sword and shield, and 
now rushes at Vriddhakshatra’s son, a sworn enemy of his father, why, like 
a tiger rushing at an elephant. Both shuras, they joyfully fall on each other, 
just like a tiger and a lion with claw and tusk. No one finds any difference 
between them in the swinging strokes and the flashing thrusts and parries of 
their swords and shields. They circle each other gracefully, quite 
beautifully, and seem like two winged mountains of old. 

Abhimanyu bends low and thrusts out with his sword, and in a blink 
Jayadratha dances aside and swings down mightily from above with own 
blade but it breaks in shards against the gold-plated shining shield of 
Arjuna’s son. Jayadratha hastily retreats six steps and in the twinkling of an 
eye, is back on his own chariot. The duel with the sword over, Abhimanyu 
also climbs back into his own chariot. Ten enemy kings of the Kuru army 
now unite and surround him, but still eyeing Jayadratha, mighty 
Abhimanyu continues to whirl his sword and brandish his shield and lets 
out a deafening roar of triumph. 

Having bested Jayadratha, Abhimanyu proceeds to burn the Kaurava 
legions like the Sun scorching the world at midday. Salya casts a vicious 
iron spear at him, decked with gold and like a blazing flame. Abhimanyu 
jumps up high and catches it in flight, as Garuda may a mighty snake in the 
air. Seeing this, all the kings together give a great howl and in a flash 
Arjuna’s son casts Salya’s own spear back at him like a streak of lightning. 
Looking like, a snake that has recently cast off its slough, the missile kills 
Salya’s charioteer in a burst of blood and fells him from the ratha. Virata, 
Drupada, Dhrishtaketu, Yudhishtira, Satyaki, Kekaya, Bhima, 
Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandin, Nakula and Sahadeva, and the five sons of 
Draupadi all exclaim, “Uttamam! Excellent!” 

Diverse kinds of sounds fill Kurukshetra—the loud hum of arrows, 
leonine shouts, all exhorting the aggressive son of Arjuna. Your sons cannot 
bear these sounds and all of them suddenly surround Abhimanyu and cover 
him with hails of arrows like clouds pouring down rain on a mountain- 
breast. The parantapa Salya storms up to support your sons and 
remembering the death of his own charioteer, attacks Abhimanyu 
furiously.’” 


CANTO 14 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra says, ‘O Sanjaya, you have described to me many 

awesome duels. Hearing about them, I envy those that have eyes. 
All men will speak of this battle between the Kurus and the Pandavas, 
which reminds one of the great and wonderful wars of ancient times 
between the Devas and the Asuras. Ah, I am agog to listen to your narration 
of this stirring battle. Tell me more about the duel between Salya and 
Abhimanyu.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Seeing his charioteer killed, Salya, with his iron mace 
upraised, jumps down in rage from his ratha; at which, Bhima hefts his own 
huge gada and rushes at Salya who looks like the blazing Yuga-fire or the 
Destroyer Himself, armed with his cudgel. Abhimanyu, too, plucks up a 
remarkable mace like the Vajra itself, and taunts Salya, crying, “Come! 
Come on!” 

Bhimasena, though, persuades his nephew to stand aside, and advances 
on Salya who stands immovable as a hill, calmly watching Bhima come 
towards him like a tiger at an elephant. The blare of trumpets, thousands of 
conches booming, roars and shouts and the sound of drums then erupt and 


17? 


cries of “Jaya! Jaya!” arise among hundreds of Pandava and Kaurava 
warriors charging towards each other. 

There is no one among all the kings, O Bhaarata, other than the king of 
the Madras who can bear the might of Bhimasena in single combat; 
similarly, who else in the world, save Vrikodara, can withstand the 
illustrious Salya’s mighty mace? Grasped by Bhima, his prodigious gada, 
bound in hempen strings mixed with wires of gold and magnificent to 
behold, shines so brilliantly. And Salya’s mace, adorned with beautiful 
circles, looks like a blaze of lightning. Both of them bellow like bulls, circle 
each other, and standing as they do with their maces slightly bent, truly 
resemble a hillocky pair of horned bulls. The duel between the two lions 
among men is in every way evenly matched. Bhimasena strikes Salya’s 
formidable mace with his own, and draws a burning cascade of sparks. And 
Bhima’s gada, struck by Salya, is like a beautiful tree covered by fireflies at 
eventide, during the monsoon. 

The mace that Salya hurls at Bhima lights up the sky; likewise, the gada 
that Bhima flings at his enemy scorches Salya’s forces like a meteor falling 
from the sky. Both wonderful maces strike each other like hissing she- 
snakes and we see flashes of fire. Like two great tigers mauling each other 
with their talons, or like two mighty elephants goring each other with their 
tusks, the titanic warriors circle, striking one another with utmost violence; 
and soon, covered with blood, they look like a couple of flowering 
Kinsukas. The sound of the blows of the maces wielded by those two lions 
among men is as loud as Indra’s thunder; and it echoes on all sides. Soon, 
they are so battered that they can hardly move, like hills stricken by 
lightning. Yet, both of them are still full of vigour and, moving in smaller 
circles, quickly fall upon each other again like two bull-elephants, the 
leaders of their herds, and pound each other with their iron maces, and then 
fall down at the same moment like a pair of Indra’s massive sacrificial 
stakes! 

In a wink, Maharatha Kritavarman darts up to Salya lying breathless 
and senseless on the field, hauls him up into his chariot and bears him away. 
Immediately, reeling like a drunk, Bhima gets up and stands ready, gada in 
hand, for further fight. Seeing Salya of the Madras turn away from the battle 
demoralizes your sons, along with their elephants, foot soldiers, horsemen 
and chariot-warriors. Sensing victory, the Pandavas quickly attack the 


frightened men of your army, who break ranks and flee in all directions, like 
masses of clouds scattered by the wind. 

The triumphant Pandava maharathas are resplendent in that moment, 
Rajan, like blazing fires. Elated and joyful, they let out loud yells and roars, 
blow their conchs, beat their drums, large and small, clash cymbals and 
sound other instruments.’” 


CANTO 15 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


anjaya says, ‘Seeing your army comprehensively routed, Rajan, 

Karna’s son, the valiant Vrishasena, single-handedly comes to 
their defence, creating an astounding mayic illusion with his astras. He 
sends flights of thousands of arrows of blinding effulgence soaring in all 
directions, like the rays of the sun in mid-summer, and striking men, horses, 
chariots and elephants, destroying chariot-warriors and horsemen, who fall 
like trees broken by the wind, in their thousands. Watching this single 
warrior wheel fearlessly on the field, all the kings of the Pandava army 
unite to surround him. Nakula’s son, Satanika, attacks him and strikes him 
with ten keen barbs, but in a flash Vrishasena breaks his bow and cuts down 
his standard. 

The other sons of Draupadi, anxious to rescue their brother, charge 
Vrishasena and shroud him with their arrows. Immediately, many 
maharathas led by Aswatthama dash up to defend Vrishasena and lash the 
mighty sons of Draupadi with all kinds of shafts, which fall like rain on 
mountain breasts. The Pandavas join the fray. The ensuing battle between 
your troops and those of the Pandavas is fierce and enthralling, indeed like 
the Devasura yuddha of old. 


Having stoked intense enmity between them for past wrongs, in the grip 
of wrath, the heroic Pandavas and Kauravas fight savagely, even like 
Garuda and the mighty Nagas battling in the sky. With Bhima, Karna, 
Kripa, Drona, Aswatthama, Dhrishtadyumna and Satyaki, the battlefield is 
lustrous, terrible and resplendent as the all-destroying Sun that rises at the 
end of the Yuga. The brutal and awesome contention is surely like the 
Devasura yuddha of yore. Roaring like the swollen sea, Yudhishtira’s host 
brings slaughter to your army, and even your maharathas flee the fight. 
Seeing the debacle, Drona rallies them, crying, “Kshatriyas do not run!” 

Drona of the red steeds, now fuming with rage, is like Indra’s four- 
tusked elephant Airavata, and surging forward he scatters the Pandava 
soldiers, penetrates deep into their host and attacks Yudhishtira. Yudhishtira 
responds with a fever of arrows fletched with the feathers of the kanka bird, 
drawing blood on his Acharya. Drona breaks Yudhishtira’s bow in his hands 
and forges ever closer to the Pandava king. 

Kumara, renowned prince of the Panchalas, protector of Yudhishtira’s 
chariot-wheels, confronts the advancing Drona, like a continent receiving 
the surging sea. Seeing Drona, that bull among Brahmanas, contained by 
Kumara, loud shouts of “Uttamam! Wonderful!” are heard from the 
Pandava warriors. 

Excited and his blood risen, Kumara roars and roars, and pierces Drona 
deep with an arrow through his chest. Holding up the dangerous Acharya, 
though tiring, the mighty Kumara shows amazing lightness of hand, and 
strikes Drona with a thousand shafts. But then, the incensed Drona, bull 
among men, kills valiant Kumara, Kshatriya of dharma, who knew both 
mantras and astras well. 

The inexorable Brahmana plunges on, loosing firestorms of arrows in 
every direction, mowing down your legions at his august will. He strikes 
Sikhandin with twelve arrows, Uttamaujas with twenty, Nakula with five, 
Sahadeva with seven, Yudhishtira with twelve searing shafts, each of the 
five sons of Draupadi with three barbs, Satyaki with five, Virata with ten. 
He attacks each of the Pandavas, one after the other, and beleaguers their 
entire host. All the while, he is advancing on Yudhishtira, seeking to capture 
him. Yugandhara looms before the threatening Drona, and holds him up for 
a while. He only provokes the raging Drona, like the ocean whipped into 
fury by the tempest. The Acharya strikes him with a fusillade of immaculate 


arrows in the heart of a moment, and then with a wedge-headed shaft 
beheads him, and brave Yugandhara falls out of his chariot. 

Virata, Drupada, the Kaikeya princes, Satyaki, Sibi, Vyaghradatta, the 
Panchala princes, the valiant Singhasena and many others rush forward to 
protect Yudhishtira from the marauding Drona. They surround Drona to 
slow him down, while he burns on loosing riptides of fire on every side. 
Vyaghradatta, prince of the Panchalas, strikes Drona with fifty keen barbs, 
and the Pandava troops shout in exultation. Singhasena also draws blood 
from the Brahmana; Drona bristles and then, throwing back his head, gives 
such a dreadful roar that even those Pandava maharathas feel terror touch 
their hearts. Red-eyed Drona glares, twangs his bowstring like thunder and 
charges the pair that dares confront him. With two perfect wedge-headed 
arrows, he decapitates both Singhasena and Vyaghradatta. Flaring on, 
harrying the other maharathas of the Pandavas with remitless tirades of 
arrows, he stands before Yudhishtira’s chariot, like all-destroying Yama 
himself. 

Then, Rajan, loud cries of The king is slain! are heard among 
Yudhishtira’s warriors; seeing Drona’s fearsome, ineluctable prowess, many 
cry in dismay, Today Dhritarashtra’s son will have victory for Drona has 
captured Yudhishtira! 

But even as black despair grips them, Arjuna Swetavahana thunders up 
on his chariot of white steeds and suddenly stands implacable between the 
Brahmana and his brother. He comes bringing carnage with him, leaving a 
river of blood in his terrible wake, whose eddies are broken chariots and the 
severed limbs, heads and bodies of brave warriors, whose froth is floating 
arrows, whose fish are spears and other weapons clutched in the hands of 
fallen men, river that bore them in swift tide to where spirits of the departed 
dwell. Driving the enemy before him like wretched animals on a hunt, 
Arjuna Kiritin breaks like a flash-flood upon Drona’s divisions and mantles 
them in a thick cloud of deadly arrows, every shaft claiming a life. 

No one can distinguish when he sets his arrows to his bowstring or 
looses them; it is a single uninterrupted motion, without pause or let, a fluid 
blur, a dance, a tandava of slaughtering. Neither the four cardinal directions, 
nor the firmament above, nor the earth, Rajan, can be distinguished, for the 
singular darkness of Arjuna’s arrows, engulfing all. And then the Sun also 
sets in a pall of dust, and friend and enemy cannot be told apart. Drona, so 


close to taking Yudhishtira alive, is frustrated and lets out a howl that 
reaches into the very sky. 

The day’s battle ends, and Drona and Duryodhana, Arjuna and the 
others slowly withdraw their denuded legions. The Pandavas, the Srinjayas 
and the Panchalas are full of relief and joy, and praise Partha as the Rishis 
eulogise the Sun. Having thus vanquished his enemies, a happy Arjuna, 
rides slowly to his tent at the very rear of the rest of the army, with Krishna 
for his companion. Standing on his beautiful chariot decked with the 
costliest of sapphires, rubies, gold, silver, diamonds, corals and crystals, the 
son of Pandu is glorious as the Moon in a firmament spangled with stars.’” 


CANTO 16 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘The troops of both the armies retire in disciplined 
order to their tents, Rajan, according to the divisions and the 
subdivisions to which they belong. 

Having withdrawn the legions, Drona, in great sadness, says to 
Duryodhana “I told you that when Arjuna is with Yudhishtira, he cannot be 
captured even by the very Devas. Look how, although all of you fell upon 
him, Partha frustrated all of you. Do not doubt me when I say that Krishna 
and Arjuna are invincible. If, however, Swetavahana Arjuna can somehow 
be lured away from Yudhishtira’s side, I say to you that Yudhishtira will be 
your captive. Let someone challenge Arjuna to a battle and draw him away 
to a far corner of the field from where he cannot return without vanquishing 
the challenger. While Arjuna is away, I will penetrate the Pandava host and, 
in the very sight of Dhrishtadyumna, seize Yudhishtira. This I swear I will 
do, but only if the son of Dharma stands alone before me for at least a 
moment in battle. And surely, that single feat of mine will benefit us more 
than defeating the whole Pandava army!” 

Hearing this from Drona, Susarman, king of the Trigartas, who is 
present there with his brothers, says, “Arjuna constantly wrongs and 


humiliates us, Rajan, although we have done him no injury. Remembering 
all those humiliations, we burn in anger and cannot sleep at nights. With 
some good fortune, Arjuna will confront us on the field and we will have 
revenge on him, which will not only suit your purpose but also bring us 
renown. We will lure him out of the very field and kill Arjuna. We solemnly 
swear that today the Earth will be either without Arjuna or without the 
Trigartas. Our oath will never prove false.” 

The five brothers Satyaratha, Satyavarman, Satyavrata, Satyeshu and 
Satyakarman also endorse what he says. With ten thousand chariots, they 
come to Duryodhana, having sworn their oath on the battlefield. The 
Malavas, the Tundikeras with a thousand chariots, and Purushavyaghra 
Susarman, lord of Prasthala, with the Mavellakas, the Lalithyas, and the 
Madrakas, also with ten thousand rathas, and his brothers, with another ten 
thousand chariots from diverse realms, also come. 

They bring fire and each prepares for lighting one for himself. They 
take up ropes of Kusa grass and after they don remarkable coats of mail, 
they bathe in ghrita, put on robes of Kusa grass and tie their bowstrings as 
girdles around their waists. These Kshatriyas, who have given away 
hundreds and thousands of cows and gold nishkas as gifts to Brahmanas, 
who have performed many yagnas, who have been blessed with children, 
who have nothing more to achieve in this world, who have earned blessed 
regions in the hereafter, who are prepared to lay down their lives in battle, 
who have devoted their souls to the attainment of fame and victory, now 
only want to reach those unearthly kingdoms through dharma yuddha, those 
realms attainable by yagnas, with abundant dakshina to Brahmanas and 
through sacred rites, the chief among which are Brahmacharya and study of 
the Vedas. Having each gratified Brahmanas by giving them gold, cattle, 
fine clothes, and having addressed one another in loving discourse, those 
Kshatriyas kindle their sacred fires and take the solemn vow to either kill or 
be killed by Arjuna. 

In ringing voices they declare in the hearing of all men, “Those realms 
shall be ours that are reserved for men of mahavratas, worlds which are not 
for those who drink wine, or have adulterous relations with their guru’s 
wife, steal from Brahmanas, enjoy the king’s favour without satisfying its 
conditions, or who abandon those who seek protection, who slay a rival out 
of selfish greed. Those exalted worlds are not for those who set fire to 
homes, who kill kine, who wound others with words or deeds, who harbour 


malice against Brahmanas, who from folly do not seek the companionship 
of their wives in their season, who seek the congress with women on the 
day they are to perform the Sraddha for their ancestors, who harm 
themselves, who misappropriate what is given to them in trust for 
safekeeping, who destroy learning, who have battle with eunuchs, who 
follow mean base men, who are atheists, or those who abandon their sacred 
fires, their mothers, and who are generally sinners. 

May we lose those lofty, sacred worlds if we return from the field 
without killing Dhananjaya, or if we run from him on the field in fear. 
While if we do indeed achieve the most difficult feat in the world, of killing 
Arjuna, we will indeed attain to those most blessed realms of felicity and 
grace!” 

Having said these words, sworn the grave oath for which they are 
henceforth called the Samsaptakas, Rajan, those Kshatriya shuras go forth 
into battle, and loudly challenge Arjuna, summoning him to the 
southernmost part of Kurukshetra. Thus challenged, Arjuna, tiger among 
men, subjugator of hostile cities, immediately says to Yudhishtira, “I never 
refuse a challenge. It is a sacred vow I have sworn. These men, Susarman 
and his brothers, themselves sworn to conquer or die, have challenged me 
to battle. You must give me leave to kill Susarman with all his followers, O 
Purusharishabha, for I cannot brook their arrogance and I say to you that 
these enemies are already dead.” 

Yudhishtira says, “You know, my child, what Drona has resolved to 
accomplish. You must not let him succeed in keeping his vile word given to 
Duryodhana. Drona is endowed with great prowess. He is a _ shura, 
accomplished in arms and tireless, and he has vowed to seize me.” 

Arjuna says, “Rajan, this Satyajit will protect you today in battle. As 
long as Satyajit lives, the acharya will never succeed in taking you. If, 
however Satyajit is slain in battle, you must not remain on the field for a 
moment, even if all our other warriors surround you.” 

Yudhishtira then gives Arjuna leave to face the Samsaptakas; the king 
embraces his brother lovingly and chants many mantras of blessing over 
him. After he makes this arrangement for Yudhishtira’s protection, the 
mighty Partha rides against the Trigartas, like a hungry lion hunting a herd 
of deer. Filled with joy at Arjuna’s absence from Yudhishtira’s side, 
Duryodhana’s men are eager to capture Yudhishtira. Both armies plunge 


furiously at each other, like the Ganga and the Sarayu in spate in the season 
of rains, when both rivers are swollen with water.” 


CANTO 17 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘The Samsaptakas, sworn to kill Arjuna or die, are 

full of delight as they take their stand on a level part of the field, 

arraying their chariots in the vyuha of the Half-moon. Seeing Arjuna Kiritin 

come towards them, they give vent to lusty shouts that fill the sky and all 

the points of the compass. Because it is an open plain covered only with 
men, their roars create no echoes. 

Seeing them so full of joy, Dhananjaya, with a small smile, tells 
Krishna, “Look, the Trigarta brothers, who are about to die, are full of 
delight when they should weep instead. Or, perhaps this is their moment to 
rejoice, since they will go to those transcendent realms that cowards can 
never attain.” 

Arjuna comes upon the arrayed ranks of the Trigartas, takes up his gold 
embellished conch, the Devadatta, and blows it with great force, filling the 
place with its blare, suddenly terrifying the Samsaptaka chariot legion, and 
all their animals, who stand, petrified, with staring eyes, ears, necks and lips 
paralysed. They urinate helplessly and some even vomit blood. 

When they regain composure, they quickly form their ranks and loose 
their arrows all together in a stream at Arjuna. The mind-swift Pandava 


invokes fifteen astras and shoots down all those thousands of shafts in 
flight, before they can reach him. The Samsaptakas strike Arjuna with ten 
arrows each, and he, them with three. Each of them pierces Arjuna with five 
shafts; he, with two of storm force. 

They shower Arjuna and Kesava with a downpour as thunderclouds do 
when they open. Thousands of arrows fall upon Arjuna, like swarms of bees 
on a flowering stand of trees in the forest. Thirty of these gold-winged barbs 
pierce Arjuna’s crown of adamant and stick there, so he seems to wear 
golden ornaments, and shines like the newly risen sun. 

With a wedge-headed arrow, Arjuna shreds Subahu’s leathern shield; he 
covers Sudharman, Sudhanwan and Subahu in searing fire. They find Partha 
with ten arrows each, and he, the monkey-bannered shura, strikes them all 
with rashes of arrows, also cutting down their golden standards. He breaks 
Sudhanwan’s bow, kills his horses and then, in a scarlet flash, cuts his 
turbaned head from his neck. 

This terrifies the Samsaptaka troops and, panic-stricken, many break 
ranks and run headlong back to Duryodhana’s main army. The incensed 
Arjuna inundates the mighty legion with a flood of arrows; he falls upon 
that host and begins to raze it with a ceaseless torrent of arrows, like the 
Sun destroying darkness with his rays. The Trigarta forces visibly melt 
away on all sides. The Samsaptakas are as full of fear as Arjuna is of wrath; 
they stand transfixed, helpless before him like a terrified herd of deer, and 
he slaughters them with his supernal archery. And then even their 
maharathas turn their chariots to flee from the terrible Pandava. 

Susarman roars in rage at his maharathas, “Stand and fight, Kshatriyas! 
It is shameful to flee from battle. You swore such a dread and solemn oath 
before all the army. What will you say to Duryodhana’s great commanders 
when you go running back to them? The whole world will mock us for such 
cowardice. Stand and fight!” 

Hearing him, Rajan, those shuras roar aloud and blow on their conches 
to embolden themselves. The Samsaptakas return to the field, along with the 
fighting Narayana cow-herds, resolved now to face Yama himself.’” 


CANTO 18 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Seeing the Samsaptakas return to the field, Arjuna 
says to his sarathy, the divine Krishna, “Hrishikesa, ride at the 
Samsaptakas! They will not yield as long as they are alive. Today you will 
see the might of my arms and of this Gandiva. Today I will slaughter all 
these men like Rudra does the creatures at the end of the Yuga.” 

The invincible Krishna smiles, heartens his warrior with some 
auspicious words, and sets his chariot towards the enemy. That chariot 
yoked to white horses is as splendid as a celestial vimana coursing through 
the sky. And like Indra’s ratha, Rajan, in the war between the Devas and the 
Asuras in olden days, it could fly in every direction. 

Armed with diverse weapons, the wrathful Narayanas surround 
Dhananjaya, and cover him with a thick darkness of arrows. 
Bharatarishabha, in moments Arjuna and Krishna are entirely shrouded, 
invisible. His face dark with anger, Arjuna grips the Gandiva more tightly, 
rubs its bowstring and, his great brow furrowed deep, he blows a 
reverberant blast on his prodigious conch, the Devadatta. His ire provoked, 
his greater might summoned, the Pandava invokes and looses the 
devastating astra called the Tvashtri. Thousands of shining terrible Arjunas 


and Krishna appear on that field. Confounded and maddened by that sight, 
the enemy soldiers turn on one another for they see just Arjunas and 
Krishnas everywhere, and their every comrade one! 

“Hah! Arjuna!” 

“Krishna!” 

““Pandu’s son!” 

“Yadava!” 

Bewildered by the hallucinations of the astra, crying out thus, they hew 
blindly at one another, and their bodies are quickly like blossoming 
Kinsukas, sprouted in red flowers and beautiful. The astra consumes all the 
thousands of arrows they shot at the real Arjuna and Krishna, plunging 
them in a solid night; the two emerge from darkness glorious as ever. All 
the while, the occult weapon sends Samsaptaka heroes past counting to 
Yama’s halls. Then, laughing in exhilaration, Arjuna turns to further raze 
the Lalithya, the Malava, the Mavellaka, and the Trigarta warriors. Arjuna 
massacres those Kshatriyas in the grip of fate, but they valiantly continue to 
besiege him with so many different kinds of missiles. 

Yet again, the Samsaptaka arrows plunge Arjuna and Krishna in 
darkness and neither they nor their ratha can be seen. Seeing their arrows 
find their mark, their enemies roar in joy; they already celebrate, waving 
bright silks scarves, thinking the two Krishnas are dead. They blow their 
conches, beat their drums and clash cymbals in thousands, and roar in 
exultation like some vast pride of lions. 

Krishna, bathed in sweat and weak, speaks to Arjuna in the unnatural 
dark, “Where are you, Partha? I do not see you. Are you alive, O 
Parantapa?”’ 

At once, Arjuna invokes the Vayavyastra, weapon of the Wind, and 
blows away the sinister cupola of arrows, and the darkness with it. 
Illustrious Vayu, god of that mighty astra, blows away whole legions of 
Samsaptakas, thousands of men, with their horses, elephants, chariots and 
weapons, as if they are dry leaves. And ah, they look beautiful, like flights 
of birds taking wing all together from their trees! 

Even while they are borne through the air and along the ground, Arjuna 
cuts off thousands of martial and royal heads; he cuts away weapon- 
wielding hands from wrists, dissects warriors’ thighs like elephants trunks, 
and strikes others deep and fatally through backs, arms and eyes. 


Arjuna dismembers his enemies and shatters their richly adorned 
chariots that look like cloud palaces in the sky; he kills rathikas, horsemen, 
elephant-riders and their beasts of war. Ruined chariots lie everywhere in 
dense profusion, with standards broken, looking like forests of headless 
palmyra trees. Elephants bearing proud banners, hooks, goads and royal 
standards, fall like wooded mountains split by Indra’s Vajra. 

Horses in mail with yak-like tails, roll on the ground with their riders, in 
death’s spasms, their entrails and eyes gouged out, all struck by Partha’s 
shafts. Foot-soldiers lie askew in the final postures of death, their hands no 
longer grasping the swords that had been their talons, their armour 
shredded, their bones broken and protruding ghastly, their vitals excoriated, 
all slain by Arjuna’s irresistible arrows. 

Kurukshetra, field of war, is dreadful with corpses, with warriors still 
being killed, the fallen and then falling, standing or being swept away. The 
showers of blood sprayed copiously all around by Arjuna’s indescribable 
archery wetly clears the air of it dust. The ground strewn with thousands of 
headless trunks is impassable. 

Arjuna’s chariot shines fiercely like Rudra’s ratha at the end of the 
Yuga, when the Lord comes as Hara to destroy creation. The warriors, with 
their holy horses, chariots and elephants, slaughtered by Arjuna become the 
guests of Indra. Strewn thickly with dead maharathas, Kurukshetra is as 
macabre as Yama’s domains that teem with the spirits of departed creatures. 

Meanwhile, as Arjuna is furiously engaged with the Samsaptakas, 
Drona at the head of his forces in battle array, along with many armed and 
famous maharathas, hunts Yudhishtira, determined to capture him. The 
ensuing battle is unimaginably brutal.’” 


CANTO 19 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “The next morning, Maharatha Drona tells 
Suyodhana, “‘I am ready! I arranged for Arjuna to be lured away 
by the Samsaptakas.” 

When Partha rides after the Samsaptakas, Drona, at the head of his 
vyuha, sets out to capture Dharmaraja Yudhishtira. Seeing Drona array his 
forces in a Garuda vyuha, Yudhishtira deploys his troops in an Ardhachakra 
vyuha. 

At the beak of the Garuda is Drona himself while Duryodhana 
surrounded by his brothers forms the head with Kritavarman and the 
illustrious Kripa being the two eyes of that Eagle. Bhutasarman, 
Kshemasarman, the valiant Karakaksha, the Kalingas, the Singhalas, the 
Easterners, the Sudras, the Abhiras, the Daserakas, the Sakas, the Yavanas, 
the Kambojas, the Hangsapadas, the Surasenas, the Daradas, the Madras 
and the Kalikeyas, with hundreds and thousands of elephants, horses, 
chariots, and foot-soldiers are stationed at its neck. Bhurisravas, Salya, 
Somadatta, and Balhika, surrounded by a full Akshauhini, take up their 
position as the right wing, while Vinda, Anuvinda of Avanti and 


Sudakshina, king of the Kambojas, station themselves at the left wing with 
Drona’s son Aswatthaman. 

At the rear of that Garuda are the Kalingas, the Ambashtas, the 
Magadhas, the Paundras, the Madrakas, the Gandharas, the Sakunas, the 
Vasatis, the Easterners and the Mountain-men. At its tail is Vikartana’s son 
Karna, with his sons, kinsmen and friends, leading a large force raised from 
diverse kingdoms. At the heart of that formation are Jayadratha, 
Bhimaratha, Sampati, the Jayas, the Bhojas, Bhuminjaya, Vrisha, Kratha, 
and the mighty king of the Nishadas, all masters of war, surrounded by a 
large host, keeping Brahmaloka in their hearts and as their goal. 

Drona’s vyuha with its foot-soldiers, horses, chariots and elephants, 
heaves like a tempest-tossed ocean, as it advances to engage the enemy. 
Impatient warriors sally forth from its flanks, like roaring summer clouds 
charged with lightning, scudding in from all sides. In the midst of that army, 
the king of the Pragjyotishas, mounted on his war elephant, is magnificent, 
Rajan, like the rising sun. Decked in garlands of flower and with a royal 
white chatra held over his head, he is like the full moon when Soma is in 
conjunction with the Krittika nakshatra. His elephant, blind with the wine- 
like exudation from its temples rent in musth, looks like a mass of black 
antimony and shines like a mountain washed by the showers of mighty 
clouds. Bhagadatta himself, armed with various weapons, riding in the 
midst of many heroic kings of the hill countries, is like Indra himself 
surrounded by the Devas. 

Yudhishtira sees that superhuman and invincible vyuha and tells 
Dhrishtadyumna, “O you of the steeds white as doves, do whatever you 
must to ensure that the Brahmana does not take me his captive.” 

Dhrishtadyumna replies, “O Punyavrata, Drona will never take you, 
however he strives to, for I myself will contain him and his forces. As long 
as I am alive, O Kurusthama, have no fear. Under no circumstances can 
Drona vanquish me in battle.” 

With this, Dhrishtadyumna, the mighty son of Drupada, with bow raised 
and streaming arrows charges Drona. Seeing the fire-born Panchala prince 
ride straight at him like an evil omen, Drona feels a pang of fear and 
weakness. Watching this, your son Durmukha, rides between the Acharya 
and Dhrishtadyumna, and a pitched battle erupts between them, O Bhaarata. 
Dhrishtadyumna covers Durmukha in a rage of arrows, and looses a 


scathing volley at Drona as well. Durmukha replies with thick swaths of 
violent shafts, arrow clouds of every hue and kind. 

Even while they are thus engaged, Drona consumes many legions of 
Yudhishtira’s army, like the wind scattering a cloudbank. Only briefly does 
that battle resemble an ordinary encounter, Rajan, for it swiftly turns into a 
wild carnage of men of absolute wrath, in the grip of the feral spirit of kali. 
The men can no longer distinguish their own from the enemy and the battle 
rages with the warriors guided only by instinct and the crying out of names. 
Rays of light like those of the Sun seem to fall and play upon the gemstones 
on their helmets, their necklaces, other ornaments and upon their coats of 
mail, and turn the chariots, elephants and horses adorned with streaming 
banners, into clouds with flocks of cranes under them. 

Foot soldiers butcher other foot soldiers, cavalrymen riding horses of 
fiery mettle slay other horsemen, chariot-warriors kill other rathikas, and 
the elephant-mounted bring down other elephant-riders. Perhaps the most 
ferocious contention is between the elephant legions with lofty standards on 
their backs. The mastodons lumber at one another and great bodies collide 
in thunder; they gore each other deep with curved tusked, while smoke 
issues from white tusks locking and grinding against other tusks, so that the 
spectacle is like dark clouds massed in the sky and charged with lighting. 
The earth, spread over with elephants in mortal combat, dragging along 
other leviathans, trumpeting shrilly in fury and pain, drawing geysers of 
blood and then falling with dismal screams, quakes and looks beautiful like 
the autumn sky covered with clouds. The deep cries of the great beasts cut 
down by thousands of arrows and savage spears are like the rumble of 
thunderheads during the monsoon. 

Some of the massive beasts, wounded with lance and barb, are panic- 
stricken and their tails curling run wildly from the field trumpeting in terror 
even like the roaring of the apocalyptic clouds of the pralaya when a Yuga 
ends. Some are turned back by their redoubtable riders, to the fray with 
sharp hooks and goads to charge the enemy again. They come back in 
renewed frenzy trampling, crushing to bloody pulp all that stand in their 
way. 

Mahouts attack other mahamatras with arrows and lances and fell them 
from the backs of their beasts, their weapons and hooks falling from dead 
hands. Many riderless elephants blunder about like clouds torn from greater 
masses until they encounter one another and then fall to again. Some 


towering beasts, bearing slain warriors on their backs, or those whose 
weapons have fallen from their grasps, wander singly, aimlessly in all 
directions. 

In that awful carnage of mammoths, untold numbers of the great 
animals are killed with spears, arrows, swords and battle-axes, and fall, 
shaking the earth with their heavy bodies and the sky with their echoing 
screams. The earth trembles repeatedly, struck all around by the falling 
creatures heavy as hills. With elephants killed along with their riders lying 
everywhere with the standards still on their backs, the earth looks eerily 
beautiful as if strewn with shapely grey hills running streams of red down 
their sides. The mahamatras on the backs of countless hulking beast, their 
breasts pierced by broad-headed shafts, collapse, their spears and hooks 
loosened from nerveless hands. Some elephants, struck through with long 
shafts, utter crane like cries and bolt in all directions, trampling allies and 
enemies alike, leaving ghastly patches of crushed bodies in their wake. 

Covered with countless corpses of elephants, horses and _ chariot- 
warriors, the Earth, Rajan, is sludge of flesh and blood. Large chariots with 
wheels and many without wheels, shattered by great tusks, are tossed high 
into the air by the maddened elephants on the rampage, ever cruelly goaded 
by the warriors perched on their backs. Chariots are seen careering 
everywhere, their charioteers and warriors slain; and riderless horses and 
elephants, pouring blood from deep wounds and all crying out pitiably. 

On horrible Kurukshetra, father slays son, and son kills father, for the 
war has turned altogether ghastly; the kali yuga is upon the world and 
dharma has left the sacred field stalked by unseen demons and every 
manner of sinister savagery. Men sink ankle-deep in the gory mire and look 
like tall trees whose lower parts have been swallowed in a forest-fire. Fine 
Kshatriyas’ capes, coats of mail, parasols and standards are all dyed with 
blood and everything on the yawning field of Yama seems to have turned 
death’s stark crimson. Muscular corpses of slain steeds ripple no more, 
chariots lie sad and broken, as do brave fighting men beyond count; yet the 
war rages on and these are further ridden over and truncated by the chariot 
wheels of those that fight on. 

The sea of troops with elephants for its stream, slain men for its floating 
moss and weeds, and chariots for its fierce eddies, makes a grim and horrific 
spectacle. Warriors, with horses and elephants for their large craft, seeking 
victory for their spoil, plunge into that sea, and do not sink but soldier 


madly on to have their enemies’ lives at any cost. When all the warriors, 
each bearing his particular insignia, are lashed by scathing arrow-storms, 
none among them loses heart, not though all have lost their proud emblems. 
In that greatest and most awful battle, Drona flays all the maharathas ranged 
against him, protecting Yudhishtira, confounding them with archery that 
defies both imagination and belief. Finally, the Brahmana afire draws near 
enough to charge Yudhishtira himself.’” 


CANTO 20 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya continues, “Seeing Drona near him, Yudhishtira greets him 

fearlessly with a thick shower of arrows. Yudhishtira’s troops 

receive this like a herd of elephants trumpeting when a lion attacks their 

leader. Seeing Drona close in on Yudhishtira, the powerful Satyajit rushes at 

the Acharya; the Panchala prince and the Brahmana come hunting the 
Pandava king fight lustrously, stirring their troops even like Indra and Bali. 

In a blur, Satyajit strikes Drona’s charioteer with five barbs smoking 
like snake-venom, each one looking like Death himself. Drona swoons. 
Satyajit swiftly kills Drona’s horses with ten deadly shafts; incensed, he 
pierces each of Drona’s Parshni charioteers with ten arrows. Flaring around 
the field in a circle at the head of his troops, wrath of battle high in him, he 
cuts down Drona’s standard. 

Recovering himself, seeing his enemy’s feats, Drona resolves to 
dispatch him. The Acharya first breaks Satyayjit’s bow, even as the prince 
draws the weapon’s string back with an arrow fitted, and then plunges ten 
more terrible shafts deep into that Kshatriya’s body. In a flash, valiant 
Satyajit takes up another bow and quick as thinking strikes Drona with 
thirty barbs winged with the feathers of the Kanka bird. The Pandavas roar 


in joy and wave their capes to celebrate Satyajit’s valour. Now the mighty 
Vrika amazes all by striking Drona squarely through his chest with a swath 
of sixty arrows shot in a single moment. Mighty Drona glowers and 
reaching into his great heart summons all his energy. 

He breaks both Satyajit and Vrika’s bows, and with six missiles like 
thunderbolts, in a red flash, he kills Vrika with his charioteer and horses. 
Satyajit seizes up another stronger bow and again makes Drona, his sarathy 
and his horses a home burning shafts. Drona cannot bear this ignominy and 
pounds Satyajit with a hail of shafts, drawing blood from his horses, 
cleaving the very grip of his new bow, and wounding both his Parshni 
sarathies. Yet, though his bows are thus repeatedly riven, the Panchala 
prince, master of the greatest astras, continues to ferociously engage the 
Brahmana of the red chargers. Seeing Satyajit grow in energy in their 
pitched duel, Drona strikes off that shining young warrior’s handsome head 
with a crescent-tipped arrow. 

When he sees the Panchala prince die, Yudhishtira does not pause a 
moment but, borne away by his fleet steeds, flees that perilous encounter for 
fear of the hunting Acharya. The Panchalas, the Kekayas, the Matsyas, the 
Chedis, the Karushas and the Kosalas dash at Drona from every side to 
protect Yudhishtira. However, awesome Drona, razer of teeming enemy 
hosts, calmly begins to consume those legions, like fire consuming some 
heaps of cotton. Virata’s younger brother Satanika leads a sally against 
Drona, and roaring like a tiger, strikes Drona, his charioteer and horses with 
six streaks of lightning, polished bright as sunrays. Never pausing, though it 
is a hard and wild thing he does, for Drona is a Brahmana, Satanika bathes 
Bharadwaja’s maharatha son with arrow showers. 

Then, Drona aroused roars back at Satanika and, with an arrow sharp as 
a razor, dissevers the Matsya hero’s head decked with bright earrings. And 
the Matsya warriors all flee. Having vanquished the Matsyas, the inexorable 
son of Bharadwayja repeatedly routs the Chedis, the Karushas, the Kaikeyas, 
the Panchalas, the Srinjayas, and the Pandus. 

Seeing the enraged warrior of the golden chariot consuming their 
akshauhinis like a fire devouring a forest, the Srinjayas tremble with rage 
and fear. Drona is everywhere massacring the enemy, and we hear the awful 
twang of his bowstring everywhere. Fierce arrows stream from his bow 
without pause or let, cutting down elephants, horses, foot-soldiers, chariot- 
warriors and elephant-riders. As a mighty mass of roaring summer clouds 


blown by violent winds batters down hailstones, so Drona does arrows and 
fills fear in the hearts of his enemies. He blows in every direction, 
seemingly ubiquitous, agitating the enemy sea. We see his gold chased bow 
in his hands of untold genius, all around us, like streak lighting amidst dark 
clouds. The beautiful emblem of the Vedi, the altar on his banner resembles 
a peak of Himavat. 

The carnage that Drona fetches to the Pandava troops is like the 
slaughter that Vishnu, adored by both the Devas and the Asuras, brought to 
the Daitya army. Heroic, truthful in speech, wise beyond measure, mighty 
and inexorable, the illustrious Brahmana lets a fierce river of blood, which 
strikes terror into the timid. Coats of mail are its waves, standards its 
eddies, and it bears away, as it flows, countless numbers of mortal creatures, 
elephants and horses its great crocodiles, and swords its fish. Ah, no one 
can easily cross Drona’s river of death. 

The bones of heroes form its pebbles; drums and cymbals its tortoises; 
shields and armour are its boats; the hair of Kshatriyas its floating moss and 
weeds; arrows are its wavelets and bows its current; the writhing arms of 
soldiers form its snakes; and that river of fierce tide runs over the 
battlefield, sweeping away both Kurus and Srinjayas. Human heads, are its 
grisly stones; their thighs its large fish; maces form the rafts by which many 
seek to cross it; and floating helmets are the froth that covers its surface and 
the entrails of animals of war are its reptiles. Terrible in aspect, it bears 
away numberless heroes to the other world; blood and flesh make up its 
sludge; elephants its crocodiles and flagstaffs the trees on its banks. 
Thousands of Kshatriyas sink in it. Fierce corpses clog it and with horse- 
soldiers and elephant-warriors for its sharks, Drona’s blood river is 
impassable, as it hurtles towards Yamaloka. It abounds with Rakshasas, 
wild dogs and jackals and macabre pisachas haunt its banks and drink 
thirstily from it. 

Then, led by Yudhishtira, a host of Pandava warriors attacks Drona, as 
he burns on Kurukshetra like the Sun beating down on the world and 
devours their legions greedily like Death himself. The Pandava forces 
surround Drona from every side, hemming him in. At this, Rajan, the kings 
and the princes of your army, with weapons raised, all rush to support the 
Brahmana shura. Meanwhile, Sikhandin strikes Drona with five perfectly 
straight barbs, Kshatradharman with twenty, and Vasudeva with five; 
Uttamaujas pierces him with three shafts, and Kshatradeva with five; 


Satyaki drills him with a hundred thunderbolts, and Yudhamanyu with 
eight. Yudhishtira shoots the fearsome Brahmana with a dozen shafts, and 
Dhrishtadyumna with ten and Chekitana with three. 

But then Drona, like an elephant with rent temples, routs the chariot- 
division of the Pandavas and he kills Dridhasena. Attacking king Kshema, 
who fights without fear, the wild Acharya kills him with nine arrows loosed 
in the space of a wish and Kshema falls lifeless in his very ratha. Ploughing 
his way into the very heart of the hostile troop, Drona careening 
everywhere, Drona bestriding the war, protects his own luminously, while 
he himself needs no protection at all. He strikes Sikhandin with twelve 
singing shafts and Uttamaujas with twenty. He despatches Vasudeva with a 
wedge-tipped arrow that severs his head so very cleanly; Drona savages 
Kshemavarman with eighty arrows shot quicker than seeing, and 
Sudakshina with six and twenty. He shoots Kshatradeva down from his 
chariot with a thick and heavy shaft. Having wounded Yudhamanyu with 
sixty-four arrows and Satyaki with thirty, Drona of the golden chariot once 
again rounds on Yudhishtira, that best of kings, who wisely flees like the 
wind from his Acharya. 

Panchala, son of Drupada, attacks Drona feverishly. Drona in his froth 
breaks his bow, fells his horses and his charioteer and with a single final 
shaft that plunges through Panchala’s armour and blows his noble heart to 
shreds kills Drupada’s son with some satisfaction, and the young hero falls 
lifeless from his sad chariot like a bright star come loose from the sky. 

Upon the fall of the illustrious Panchala, we hear loud cries, “Kill 
Drona! Kill Drona!” 

But the imperturbable and violent Brahmana continues to maim and 
slaughter the Panchalas, the Matsyas, the Kaikeyas, the Srinjayas and the 
Pandavas. Supported by your Kurus, Drona then triumphantly quells 
Satyaki, and Chekitana’s son, and Senabindu, and Suvarchas, and many 
other majestic Kshatriyas. Your warriors, Rajan, are victorious in that fervid 
encounter, and massacre the Pandava forces as they fly in all directions. The 
Panchalas, the Kaikeyas and the Matsyas shake with fear as they are 
butchered on all sides like the Danavas were of old by Indra.’” 


CANTO 21 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra asks, ‘When Bharadwaja’s son breaks through the 
Pandavas and the Panchalas is there anybody who challenges 
him? Alas, seeing Drona standing there at the head of his troops like a tiger 
or an elephant in musth, such a terror to his enemies, and willing to die for 
Duryodhana’s cause, was there no man who could face him, none of 
courage to enhance the fame of the Kshatriyas, a spirit that lower men can 
never have and which is distinctive only of the greatest? Tell me, O 
Sanjaya, which shuras faced Bharadwaja’s son at the head of his forces?’ 
Sanjaya replies, ‘Seeing Drona ravish the Panchalas, the Pandavas, the 
Matsyas, the Srinjayas, the Chedis, the Kaikeyas with his astras, so they 
shamefully flee from his unbearable archery, so they are like skiffs by the 
dreadful waves of a tempested ocean, your sons the Kauravas, roaring like 
lions, and blowing their conches and beating their drums, suddenly fall 
recklessly upon the enemy’s chariots, elephants and foot-soldiers from all 
sides. The Pandava fighters break ranks entirely and flee blindly from the 
fray. At the head of his own forces, surrounded by his brothers and 
kinsmen, Duryodhana exults, and laughingly says to Karna, “Look 
Radheya, the Panchalas before Drona are like a herd of the wild deer 


terrified by a lion. I do not think they will come back to battle for our 
Acharya has blown them away as a great storm does mighty trees. 

Each man for himself, they flee from his golden-winged arrows, no two 
of them together. They panic as men caught in whirlpools; and look now 
how they huddle together like elephants in a forest-fire. They are like trees 
in blossom swarmed by the dark bees that are Drona’s arrows. With their 
blood flowing, they run all together, for they have no answer to the 
Acharya. 

Look there Karna, the sight of the angry Bhima, abandoned by the 
Pandavas and the Srinjayas and surrounded by my warriors, delights me 
most of all! Ah today, that evil one see the world full of just Drona! I have 
no doubt that Pandu’s wretched son has lost all hope today of life and 
kingdom.” 

Karna replies quietly, “Mahabaho Bhima will not abandon the battle as 
long as there is life in him. Neither will he brook our triumphant shouts, and 
nor will the Pandavas be vanquished in battle. They are valiant, resilient, 
powerful beyond common understanding and hard to resist in war. When 
they remember how we tried to poison them and burn them alive, and the 
shame and exile that arose from the game of dice, the Pandavas will not 
abandon the war. 

Look where the mighty-armed Vrikodara of endless tejas has already 
turned back to the fight. This son of Kunti will certainly kill many of our 
best maharathas. With sword and bow, with astras, horses, elephants, men, 
chariots and with his iron gada, he will raze many legions of our soldiers. 
Other maharathas of the Panchalas, the Kekayas, the Matsyas, and 
especially the Pandavas themselves, follow him. All of them are intrepid, 
powerful and skilled. The mighty Bhima leads them again in wrath. 
Vrikodara surrounded by the bulls of his vamsas, like the clouds around the 
Sun, engages Drona from all sides. 

Intent upon their one object, they will besiege the unprotected Drona, 
like insects near death flying at a burning flame. They are masters of 
weapons and equal to facing the Acharya in battle. Heavy is the burden that 
now rests on Bharadwaja’s son. Let us ride quickly to Drona. We must not 
let them kill him like wolves hunting down a mighty elephant!” 

Listening to what Karna says, Duryodhana with his brothers rushes to 
Drona’s rescue. The sound of the Pandava warriors returning to the fight on 


their chariots drawn by superb horses of diverse colours, all bent upon 
Drona’s death, is deafening.’” 


CANTO 22 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: ‘T) hritarashtra says, ‘Describe for me, Sanjaya, the distinctive 
marks of their rathas, all those who fight for Bhimasena against 
Drona.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Vrikodara rides a chariot drawn by dappled horses 
coloured like the antelope, while the brave Satyaki’s has a ratha is 
harnessed to silvery chargers. The furious and irresistible Yudhamanyu 
rides a ratha with superb horses of variegated hue. Dhrishtadyumna’s 
chariot has fleet horses yoked, in trappings of gold and grey. Red horses 
draw the ratha of Dhrishtadyumna’s son, Kshatradharman of firm vows, 
who fights to protect his father and ensure his complete success. 
Sikhandin’s son Kshatradeva’s finely caparisoned horses are of the colour 
of lotus-leaves and have pure white eyes. 

Beautiful Kamboja chargers, decked with the feathers of the green 
parrot, bear Nakula towards your army. Horses dark like thunderclouds take 
Uttamaujas into the battle, against the invincible Drona standing with arrow 
drawn. Sahadeva, his weapons raised, has horses fleet as the wind and of 
variegated hues, during that fight encounter. 


Yudhishtira Naravyaghra’s steeds are ivory coloured with black manes, 
high-strung and fleet like the wind. He rides at the head of many warriors 
borne along by equally swift horses, decked in gold trappings. Behind him 
is Drupada, the king of the Panchalas, with a golden parasol over his head, 
protected by all these soldiers that follow Yudhishtira. Sautabhi, great 
archer, has truly beautiful horses that can endure every frightful sound of 
war, and Virata follows him. 

The Kaikeyas, Sikhandin and Dhrishtaketu, surrounded by their 
respective troops, follow the king of Matsyas. Excellent horses of the pale 
red tint of trumpet-flowers are most handsome to behold as they bear Virata 
into the fight, while fleet yellow steeds yellow drawn with chains of gold, 
carry his son Uttara. Chargers of deep red hue bear the five Kekaya 
brothers. The aureate Kshatriyas, with red pennants and decked with golden 
chains, all great heroes, loose arrows like clouds pouring down rain. 

Superb steeds of the colour of unbaked earthen pots, the gift of 
Tumburu pull the chariot of Sikhandin, Panchala prince of great tejas. 

Altogether, twelve thousand maharathas of the Panchala race take the 
field. Of these, six thousand follow Sikhandin. Spirited piebald horses, 
dappled like the antelope, carry the son of Sisupala into the fray. The bull 
among the Chedis, the strong and invincible Dhrishtaketu, has Kamboja 
steeds of variegated complexion, while, fabulous Sindhu horses of beautiful 
limbs and of the hue of straw smoke draw the Kaikeya prince 
Brihadkshatra’s chariot. Of eyes of pure white their skins the colour of the 
lotus, horses foaled in the country of the Balhikas and decked with fine 
ornaments, bear Sikhandin’s son, brave Kshatradeva. Senabindu, scourge of 
his enemies, has quiet horses of the rich hue of red silk, caparisoned in gold. 
Exceptional stallions of the colour of cranes bring the youthful maharatha, 
the delicate son of the king of the Kasi, into battle. 

White steeds with black necks, swift as the mind, yet always obedient to 
their sarathy, bear Prince Prativindhya. Arjuna’s son Sutasoma has cream- 
coloured steeds, which he has received from Soma Deva himself. He was 
born in the Kuru city of Udayendu. Blessed with the brilliance of a 
thousand moons he came to be called Sutasoma because he also had won 
great renown in an assembly of the Somakas. Horses of the colour of sala 
flowers or of the morning sun bear Nakula’s praiseworthy son Satanika. 
Horses of the hue of the peacock’s neck, in trappings of gold, carry 
Draupadi’s son by Bhima, the Naravyaghra Srutakarman, her son Srutakirti, 


who like Arjuna is an ocean of learning, uses marvellous steeds coloured 
like kingfisher. 

The youthful Abhimanyu, who is regarded as one and a half times 
superior to Krishna or Arjuna in battle, has tawny horses yoked. Horses of 
gigantic size bear Yuyutsu, the only son of Dhritarashtra who, abandoning 
his brothers, fights for the Pandavas, into battle. Plump and well-decked 
horses of the colour of the dried paddy stalk, bear the most energetic 
Vardhakshemi into the terrible battle while the youthful Sauchitti has 
obedient horses with black legs, fitted with golden breastplates. Srenimat 
has well-broken horses, their skins like red silk, whose backs are covered 
with golden armour and drawn with chains of gold. 

Satyadhriti, accomplished in the astra shastra and in the divine Vedas, 
yokes red horses. Steeds coloured like pigeons draw the ratha of 
Dhrishtadyumna, senapati of the Pandava army, who always views Drona 
as his victim by fate. He follows Satyadhriti, the irresistible Sauchitti, 
Srenimat, Vasudana and Vibhu, son of the Kasi king. They have thought- 
swift steeds of the best Kamboja breed adorned with chains of gold. Each 
resembles Yama or Vaisravana as they take the field, striking fear into the 
hearts of the enemy soldiers. 

Six thousand Prabhadrakas of the Kamboja country, with exceptional 
steeds of different colours yoked to their gold-decked chariots, and resolved 
to die together, ride into battle, their bows always stretched and loosing 
tirades of arrows at their enemies, making them tremble. Exceptional 
warhorses, the shade of tawny silk, decked with shining chains of gold, 
heartily bear Chekitana into battle. 

Arjuna’s uncle Purujit, also called Kuntibhoja, has extraordinary 
rainbow-coloured horses. Steeds the colour of the star-spangled firmament 
draw king Rochamana’s ratha, while stallions the colour of red deer, with 
white streaks on their bodies, are yoked to the chariot of the Panchala 
prince Singhasena, son of Gopati. 

That tiger among the Panchalas called Janamejaya, has sturdy horses of 
the hue of mustard flowers. Fleet, massive and dark blue, with golden 
chains, their backs the colour of curd and faces that of the Moon, are the 
animals of Drupada himself, which bring him storming into battle. Fearless 
red steeds with striking white heads, their splendour like that of the sky or 
the lotus, are Dandadhara’s. Vyaghradatta has light brown horses with 


mouse-coloured backs and their necks proudly drawn up. The 
Purushavyaghra Sudhanwan, prince of Panchala, yokes dark-spotted horses. 

Chitrayudha drives fiercely mettlesome horses of the bright colour of 
Indragopakas, with variegated patches, and they resemble Indra’s very 
Vajra; while Sukshatra, the son of the king of the Kosalas’ horses, draped in 
golden chains, have bellies the colour of the chakravaka. Stunning tall 
beasts of many colours and giant bodies, yet exceedingly docile, and draped 
with chains of gold, fetch the seasoned Satyadhriti to the fight; Sukla’s 
standard, armour, bow and horses are all white. 

Magnificent steeds born on the sea-coast and white as the moon, are 
yoked by Samudrasena’s son Chandrasena of burning tejas, while Saiba 
rides an exotic chariot drawn by horses of the complexion of the blue lotus, 
lavishly adorned with golden ornaments and bright garlands of flowers. The 
inexorable Rathasena has superior steeds the colour of kalaya flowers with 
white and red streaks, while white horses carry that bravest of men 
Chitrayudha, king who slew the Patachcharas. His chariot is also drawn by 
other pedigreed horses red as kinsuka flowers, and Chitrayudha himself 
wears beautiful garlands and wears striking armour, bears diverse 
marvellous weapons and flies a majestic standard. 

King Nila comes to battle with standard, armour, bow, banner and 
horses all the same colour—blue. 

Chitra’s chariot-fence, standard and bow are bejewelled and his horses 
and banner remarkable. Grand steeds of the colour of the lotus carry 
Hemavarna, the son of Rochamana, into the fight, while bold, strong 
stallions, which can haul a heavy load of weapons, whose backs are the 
colour of reeds, and their testicles white as the hen’s egg, pull Dandaketu’s 
ratha. 

Chargers like the moon’s rays wearing kavacha set with stones of lapis 
lazuli draw the chariot of the mighty Sarangadhwaja, king of the Pandyas, 
and he advances upon Drona, stretching his tremendous bow into a circle. 
Krishna had killed his father in battle; his country had been invaded and his 
kinsmen had fled. Prince Sarangadhwaja learnt and acquired the devastras 
from Bhishma, Drona, Rama and Kripa, and became the equal of Rukmi, 
Karna, Arjuna and Krishna in battle. He then wanted to destroy Dwaraka 
and to subjugate the whole world. Wise friends counselled him against this 
reckless course. Having given up all thoughts of revenge, he now rules his 
own dominions. Horses all the colour of the atrusa flower carry a hundred 


and forty thousand principle mama-rathas that follow Sarangadhwaja into 
battle. 

Chargers of diverse colours and many different kinds of troops follow 
the heroic Ghatotkacha. Enormous steeds of the Aratta breed are yoked to 
the golden ratha of Mahabaho Brihanta of the red eyes, prince, who flouted 
the counsel of all the Bharatas, and singly, from his reverence for 
Yudhishtira, went over to him, abandoning all his most cherished hopes and 
desires. 

Yudhishtira Dharmaraja yokes the most exceptional steeds shining like 
gold. 

Bhimasena leads a large contingent of Prabhadrakas with horses of 
various colours, all flying standards of gold and ready to battle with their 
very lives. Rajan, that force of Bhima’s truly resembles the celestial army of 
Swargavasis, with Indra at their head. This assembled host pleases 
Dhrishtadyumna no end. 

Yet, Drona surpasses all these warriors in splendour. His standard with a 
black deerskin and the beautiful kamandalu waving in the wind is the most 
striking. Bhimasena’s standard, with the device of a great lion emblazoned 
in silver, its eyes of lapis lazuli, is also splendid. Yudhishtira’s standard of 
great tejas bears the device of a golden moon with planets around it; it, too, 
is marvellous. Two large and exquisite kettledrums, called Nanda and 
Upananda, are fastened to it. Played upon by a yantra, these create 
wonderful music that delights all who hear it. 

We see the tall and fierce standard of Nakula, which strikes terror into 
the enemy, for it bears the emblem of a golden-backed Sarabha. A graceful 
silver swan graces Sahadeva’s banner, with bells upon; it is somehow 
terrible, as well, and brings grief to the enemy. The pennants of the five 
sons of Draupadi bear the marvellous images of Dharma, Maruta, Sakra and 
the twin Aswins. On youthful Abhimanyu’s chariot is a gorgeous flag with a 
peacock, bright as molten gold. On Ghatotkacha’s banner is a vulture which 
shines brilliantly and his horses can go anywhere at will, like those of 
Ravana in old days. 

In Yudhishtira’s hands is the celestial bow Mahendra; Bhimasena has 
the Vayavya; Phalguni wields the Brahmaa which was created to protect the 
three worlds; Nakula grasps the Vaishnava, and Sahadeva the Aswina. In 
Ghatotkacha’s hand is the terrible Paulastya. 


The jewels among weapons wielded by the five sons of Draupadi are the 
Raudra, the Agneya, the Kauverya, the Yamya and the Girisa. The great 
bow called the Raudra, which Rohini’s son Baladeva had, he later gave to 
the noble son of Subhadra, being delighted with Abhimanyu. 

We see these and many other standards decked with gold flying on 
Kurukshetra, all of which belong to brave warriors, all of which strike their 
enemies with dread. The host that Drona commands does not have a single 
faint-hearted man in its ranks. Its countless standards flying high together 
seem to obscure the sky, looking like magic images in a painting. As is the 
custom, we hear the brave warriors announce their names and lineage as 
they charge Drona in battle. 

Then the royal Drupada takes the field against him at the head of a 
mighty akshauhini and their encounter is terrible, like that between two 
aged and mighty tuskers, the leaders of their herds, and yet in musth. Vinda 
and Anuvinda of Avanti, with their troops, encounter Virata, the Matsya 
king at the head of his forces, as Indra and Agni did the Asura Bali in days 
of yore. The dread contention between the Matsyas and the Kekayas, in 
which horses, maharathas and elephants fight so savagely, is like the 
Devasura yuddha of older days. Bhutakarman, also called Sabhapati, keeps 
away from Drona. However, Nakula’s son Satanika attacks this 
Bhutakarman and with three broad-headed shafts, sharper than razors, hews 
off both that Kshatriya’s arms and then his head. 

Vivimsati intercepts the heroic and mighty Sutasoma as he advances 
towards Drona, spraying him with arrows. Inspired in wrath, Sutasoma 
drills his uncle with a clutch of line-straight barbs and, cased in mail, stands 
ready for a duel. Duryodhana’s brother Bhimaratha looses six shafts of solid 
iron at the other Salwa, not the uncle of Madri’s twins, and sends him 
straight to Yama, along with his horses and charioteer. 

Chitrasena’s son, Rajan, closes with your grandson Srutakarman as 
Srutakarman rides into battle with horses that are coloured like peacocks. 
These two grandsons of yours, both invincible in battle, and each 
determined to kill the other, fight vigorously, each one for his grandsire. 
Seeing Prativindhya in the van of the thick and heady fray, Aswatthaman 
attacks him wildly—for the honour of his father. The infuriated 
Prativindhya looses a rash of arrows, drawing blood from Aswatthaman 
who flies a lion’s tail upon his standard. 


Srutakirti, Draupadi’s eldest son by Arjuna, sprays Drona’s son with his 
barbs, like a farmer scattering seeds in the sowing season. The son of 
Dusasana bars the way of maharatha Srutakirti as Draupadi’s prince flashes 
towards Drona. Srutakirti, however, who is equal to Arjuna himself, breaks 
Dusasana’s son’s bow in his hands, lacerates his standard and charioteer 
with three keen wedge-headed missiles, and charges on towards Drona. 

Duryodhana’s son Lakshmana stands firm against the slayer of the 
Patachcharas, whom both the armies regard as the bravest of the brave. 
Srutakirti, however, destroys both Lakshmana’s bow and the standard and 
drawing blood-flowers from his enemy with great swiftness of hand, flares 
up in splendour. The wise and youthful Vikarna rounds on Sikhandin, son 
of Drupada, who greets Vikarna with a hot burst of arrows. The mighty 
Vikarna stands firm against this onslaught and is glorious on darkling 
Kurukshetra. 

Angada confronts the heroic Uttamaujas as that Panchala prince dashes 
at Drona. Ferocious is the encounter between those two Naravyaghras and it 
infuses their troops with zeal. The mighty Durmukha covers the valiant 
Purujit with sizzling arrows as Durmukha also rides towards Drona. Purujit 
strikes Durmukha between his eyes with a long and slim shaft, so 
Durmukha’s face resembles a lotus on its stalk! 

Karna faces the five Kekaya brothers who fly red standards and course 
at Drona; he burns them with scorching volleys. Scathed by Karna’s 
majestic archery, the five brothers respond with fire of their own, and a 
running battle erupts. Engulfed by arrows, neither Karna nor the five 
brothers can be seen, nor their horses, chariots, charioteers and standards. 

Your sons Durjaya, Jaya and Vijaya set upon Nila, and the king of the 
Kasis and Jayatsena; intense is the encounter between these and it enthralls 
those who watch; it is as if they saw a fight between a lion, a tiger and a 
wolf, on the one side, and a bear, a buffalo and a bull on the other! The 
brothers Kshemadhurti and Brihanta harry Satyaki as the Satwata flies at 
Drona. The battle between these two and Satyaki is breathtaking, like one 
between a lion and two mighty elephants in musth, in a dim forest. 

The king of the Chedis, aflame, kills hundreds of men with wrathful 
volleys; Ambashta, always delighted by bloody battle, keeps him far from 
Drona. Ambashta then strikes his antagonist with a long, long arrow that 
plunges into his very entrails and fells him from his chariot, the bow and 
arrow loosened from his grasp. 


The noble Kripa, son of Saradwata, holds up Vardhakshemi of the 
Vrishnis, who is fury incarnate on the field, with a storm of short, thick 
shafts. Those who watch this duel stand riveted; they cannot tear their gazes 
away from the tremendous contest. 

Somadatta’s son, fighting of Drona, challenges the vital king Manimat. 
Manimat breaks his bowstring, flagstaff and sovereign parasol, so they fall 
out of his chariot. The son of Somadatta, who flies a yupastamba, device of 
the sacrificial stake, on his banner, leaps down from his ratha and with his 
great curved sword hacks down his adversary, along with his horses, 
charioteer, and carves his chariot into shards. Climbing back onto his own 
ratha, taking up another bow and his horses’ reins himself, he begins, 
Rajan, to consume the Pandava host. 

Vrishasena, the gifted son of Karna, looses a thick flock of arrows at the 
Pandava king, who is rushing into battle like Indra himself after the Asuras. 
With gadas, spiked cudgels, swords, stones, thick clubs, mallets, discs, short 
arrows, battle-axes, occult storms of dust and wind, fire and water, ashes, 
bricks, straw and trees, does Ghatotkacha fall on your forces, smiting and 
shattering —altogether terrifying as he lets rills of blood flow, also on his 
careen towards Drona. The fell Rakshasa Alambusha bars Ghatotkacha’s 
way with a myriad of weapons common and strange. The battle between 
those fiercest and greatest of Rakshasas resembles the one between the 
Asura Sambara and Indra of long ago. 

Thus, with your blessings, O king, hundreds of fervid single battles 
blaze between the maharathas, elephants, horses and foot-soldiers of your 
army and theirs in the midst of the dreadful general engagement. Such is the 
battle, at whose eye is Drona, so bloody and so brutal, that none like it has 
ever been seen or heard of before. Indeed, O lord, numberless are the 
pitched encounters that burn across all parts of the field, some of them vile 
and horrible, some inspired and even beautiful, and some just so fierce.’” 


CANTO 23 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra asks, ‘When the troops in separate akshauhinis are 

thus ferociously engaged, how does Arjuna fight my army, how 

does he battle the maharathas of the Samsaptakas? And how, O Sanjaya, do 
the Samsaptakas face Arjuna?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘As the battle swells all around, your son Duryodhana 
himself leads his elephant division against Bhimasena. Like one elephant 
encountering another, like a bull meeting a bull, Bhima, challenged by 
Suyodhana himself, falls gleefully on the Kauravas’ elephant legion. With 
gales of arrows, awesome Bhima brings bloody havoc to the great beasts of 
war, big as hills, with blood and ichor trickling from every part of their 
bodies. Single-handedly, and like a terrific wind scattering clouds massed in 
it path, Bhima savages the elephant host and the beasts left alive turn tail 
and flee from him in terror. Bhima is as magnificent as the risen Sun 
striking everything in the world with his rays swifter than thoughts. Struck 
by Bhima’s bolts of thunder and lightning, the looming, lumbering beasts, 
bathed in blood, look like cloud masses in the sky painted upon by red rays 
of the sun. 


Duryodhana, livid, looses a wrath of shining arrows at Vayu’s son, his 
detested cousin who mows down his much-vaunted elephant force so 
joyfully, so disdainfully. He draws blood from Bhima whom, more than any 
other, Duryodhana would love to kill. Bhima’s eyes turn red as plums and 
he unleashes a lucific volley at your son, whom he hates as much as he is 
hated by the Kaurava king. Pierced all over by Bhima’s manic shafts, 
stricken with his cousin’s warm barbs, but outwardly cool and grinning 
mockingly, Duryodhana responds with a brace of arrows bright and hot as 
the sun, piercing Bhima deep. 

In a flash Bhima breaks Duryodhana’s bow with two flat-headed shafts; 
he cuts down your son’s black banner with the device of the jewelled 
elephant, unnerving Duryodhana with his ferocity. Seeing Duryodhana 
violently set upon by Bhima, the king of the Angas quickly thunders up on 
his loudly trumpeting elephant to rescue your son. Turning on the Anga, 
Bhimasena shoots a long arrow deep into that great grey beast’s head, 
directly between its temples. The elongated barb drives right through the 
mastodon’s head in a scarlet eruption and plunges into the earth beyond the 
beast. With an echoing bellow Anga’s elephant falls like a hill riven by 
thunder, and the Mleccha king falls with it. Quicksilver for all his bulk, 
Vrikodara cuts Anga’s head from his neck before that king’s body strikes 
the ground. 

When the heroic king of the Angas falls, his akshauhinis panic and flee 
in all directions. The fleeing chargers, elephants, chariot-warriors trample 
and run over their own foot-soldiers. 

Then the king of the Pragjyotishas, Bhagadatta, riding his elephant, 
comes to challenge Bhima. Its eyes rolling in rage, it raises its trunk and 
forelegs and crashes them down on Bhima blazing like a dread fire on 
Kurukshetra. The great beast pulverises Bhima’s chariot and crushes his 
horses into bloody pulp. Bhima, who has leapt out of his ratha just in time, 
does not flee but runs under that towering animal’s belly. For Bhima knows 
the Anjalikabedha, the science of fighting the war elephant on foot. 

From below Bhima repeatedly strikes Bhagadatta’s elephant Supratika 
with thunderous blows of his mighty fists. The elephant turns and twists in 
frenzy, desperate to find Bhima and impale him on its tusks. But Vayu’s son 
was born with the strength of ten thousand elephants and he seizes the great 
pachyderm and begins to whirl it around as potter does his wheel. Having 
dealt many staggering blows to that colossus, Bhima once more darts out 


from under its body and stands facing the beast. In a blink, Supratika seizes 
Bhima in his trunk, by his throat, and lifting him high dashes him down on 
the ground. 

Twisting the elephant’s trunk viciously, Bhima frees himself in trice and 
again gets under the body of the massive creature. Meanwhile, an elephant 
from the Pandava’s side thunders up to face Supratika and now Bhima 
escapes, running quick as the wind! So swiftly does he go, that believing 
him dead, a dismal cry goes up from the Pandava army, “The elephant has 
killed Bhima!’ 

Affrighted by the elephant Supratika, the Pandava host breaks and runs, 
back to a living, waiting Bhima. Meanwhile, Yudhishtira thinks that Bhima 
has been killed and in fury, riding with the Panchalas, he surrounds 
Bhagadatta with countless chariots, covering him in gales of vengeful 
arrows. But Bhagadatta, king of the mountains, strikes aside those arrow 
showers with his iron goad. Then falling like a natural disaster on the 
Pandavas and Panchalas, he tramples their legions with his terrible, hulking 
beast. Rajan, it is wonderful to watch—Bhagadatta and Supratika 
rampaging among the enemy, crushing them on every side. 

The king of Dasarnas, mounted himself on a swift elephant, its temples 
too rent and the juice of mad musth streaming down, storms at Bhagadatta, 
attacking him from a flank. The battle that erupts between those two beasts 
of awful size is as the mythic one of old between two winged mountains 
covered with forests. Bhagadatta’s elephant wheels around in a flash and, 
with tusks like streaks of lightning, rakes the Dasarna king’s animal, tearing 
open its flank, killing it instantly. Even as that beast totters and falls, 
Bhagadatta kills the Dasarna king with seven lances cast in the blink of an 
eye, and bright as sunrays. 

Yudhishtira once more surrounds Bhagadatta with a number of chariots, 
and makes his body a home for countless arrows. Ah, Bhagadatta seated 
lordly on Supratika, surrounded by the Pandava maharathas, blazes like a 
fire on a mountaintop, in a dense forest. He stays fearlessly in the midst of 
these serried rathas ridden by fierce archers, all of whom rain arrows at him. 

The king of the Pragjyotishas presses down on his beast’s back, hard 
with his great toe, urging Supratika to thunder down on Satyaki’s chariot. 
The prodigious beast seizes Satyaki’s ratha with his trunk and hurls it like a 
toy through the air so it shatters on the ground some distance away. Satyaki, 


however, jumps off in time and escapes. His charioteer, also, abandons the 
great Sindhu steeds yoked to his chariot and quickly follows his warrior. 

Meanwhile, Supratika easily breaks out from the encirclement of 
Pandava and Panchala chariots, and brings mayhem to the Kshatriyas that 
stand in his dreadful way. Terrified out of their wits by that singular 
mastodon attacking them, those bulls among men look up at it in awe as if it 
has multiplied into a hundred great elephants, why, a thousand. From that 
indomitable animal’s back Bhagadatta razes the Pandava army, even like 
the king of the Devas mounted on Airavata mowing down the Danavas in 
ancient times. 

Their own elephants trumpeting shrilly and their horses whinnying 
awfully in fright and panic, the Panchalas flee in all directions. All the while 
Bhagadatta destroys the Pandava troops. And then wrathful Bhima rushes at 
the king of the Pragjyotishas. But Supratika terrifies Bhima’s horses by 
spraying thick streams of water over them and the animals bolt from the 
field with a helpless Bhimasena. 

Now Kriti’s son, Ruchiparvan, rides at Bhagadatta, spewing arrows like 
Death himself. The handsome and magnificent Bhagadatta of the mountains 
shoots just a single shaft and sends Ruchiparvan to Yamaloka. 

Upon the fall of the brave Ruchiparvan, Subhadra’s son, the sons of 
Draupadi, Chekitana, Dhrishtaketu and Yuyutsu turn their attention to 
killing the elephant Supratika. With loud roars, they loose downpours of 
arrows on the colossal beast, like clouds drenching the earth with rain. 
Goaded by the masterful Bhagadatta, with heel, hook and toe, with trunk 
outstretched and eyes fixed and glittering, Supratika thunders at the enemy. 
Stamping down Yuyutsu’s horses, the elephant kills his charioteer as well; 
Yuyutsu has to abandon his chariot and flee. 

The Pandava warriors continue their combined assault on Supratika, 
prince of all elephants, inundating him with ceaseless volleys of deadly fire. 
And now, your son, incensed Duryodhana, wildly attacks Abhimanyu in his 
chariot. 

Bhagadatta on his elephant, loosing arrows in tornadoes over the enemy, 
is radiant like the Sun himself covering the earth with his rays. Abhimanyu 
strikes Supratika with a dozen shafts Yuyutsu with ten, and each of the sons 
of Draupadi and Dhrishtaketu with three feral barbs. Bleeding from these 
missiles, the grand elephant looks magnificent like a mighty thunderhead 
wounded by the Sun’s rays, bleeding. Impervious to his wounds, Supratika 


charges ahead tossing enemy warriors, their chariots and horses, around like 
straws in his mighty path. 

Like a cowherd belabouring his cattle in the forest with his staff, 
Bhagadatta repeatedly strikes the Pandava host. Like the frenzied cawing of 
scattering crows attacked by hawks, we hear a loud and raucous din among 
the Pandava troops as they run from the savage elephant and his rider. 
Prodded repeatedly by Bhagadatta’s sharp hook, Rajan, that prince of 
elephants resembles, an ancient winged mountain; and Supratika fills his 
enemies’ hearts with naked fear, akin to merchants fearful at the sight of a 
swollen surging sea. As they flee, the elephants, maharathas, horses and 
kings of the Pandavas, create a resounding commotion, an echoing clamour 
that fills earth, sky, heaven and all the directions. Mounted on that greatest 
of elephants, Bhagadatta cleaves the hostile army like the Asura Virochana, 
who ripped through the celestial host though it was well protected by the 
Devas. 

A violent wind begins to blow; a thick cloud of dust covers the sky and 
the troops and always the enemy sees that single elephant as multiplied into 
many, and stampeding murderous across all Kurukshetra.’” 


CANTO 24 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘You asked me about the feats of Arjuna in battle. 
Listen, O Mahabaho to what Partha achieves in the fight. When he 
sees the rising pall of dust and hears the wail of the troops when Bhagadatta 
buffets them like a bloody tempest having sway over all the war, Arjuna 
says to Krishna, “O Madhusudana, it seems that the king of the 
Pragjyotishas has come to the field on his elephant. This din that we hear 
must be from his advent. He fights from elephant-back and stamps on all 
that come in his way. He is no less than Indra himself in battle, why, I 
believe he is the greatest of all elephant-warriors in the world. 

His elephant Supratika, again, has no rival in war. He is amazingly 
nimble for all his massive bulk; he knows no fatigue, and is impervious to 
all weapons. Not even fire burns Supratika; by himself, he can destroy the 
entire Pandava army today. Other than the two of us, no one else can check 
this giant from the mountains. 

Krishna, turn our horses towards Bhagadatta. He is arrogant because of 
his elephant’s strength, and proud of his age. This very day I will send him 
to be a guest in the halls of Indra.” 


Krishna turns his chariot to where Bhagadatta continues to devastate the 
Pandava forces. While Arjuna is riding at Bhagadatta, the mighty 
Samsaptaka maharathas, numbering fourteen thousand, of which ten 
thousand are Goals or Narayanas, who once followed Krishna, return to the 
field and summon him to battle. Seeing the Pandava host broken by 
Bhagadatta, and challenged on the other hand by the Samsaptakas, Arjuna 
finds himself in a quandary. He asks himself, “Should I return to fight the 
Samsaptakas or ride to help Yudhishtira?” 

Reflecting on this for a moment, O Kurupravira, Arjuna decides that he 
would devote himself to extirpating the Samsaptakas. 

Wanting only to kill as many maharathas as possible—in their 
thousands—flying his banner with the image of Hanuman, greatest of 
Vanaras, Arjuna suddenly turns back. This is exactly as both Duryodhana 
and Karna had planned. Arjuna’s heart wavers for a time, but finally he 
resolves to face the Samsaptakas and he appears to serve his enemies’ 
purpose. 

The excited Samsaptaka maharathas greet Arjuna’s return with 
extravagant salvos, thousands of missiles loosed all together in a moment, 
shrouding him entirely with a dense locust swarm of arrows so one can no 
longer see Kunti’s son, Krishna, their horses or their shining chariot. So 
sudden and overwhelming is the onslaught that Krishna briefly breaks into a 
profuse sweat and even swoons; at least he appears to! Now Arjuna is 
compelled to summon the Brahmastra and loose it at his enemies. In an 
apocalyptic flash, with a sound as if the earth broke in two, that astra of the 
Creator obliterates almost the entire Samsaptaka force in a moment. 
Thousands of arms with bows, arrows and bowstrings in their grasp, cut 
clean from their trunks, and thousands of standards, steeds, charioteers and 
maharathas, fall in the blinding flash of that astra. Elephants big as forested 
hills, or cloud masses, fall with muffled peals of thunder, their riders dead. 

Arjuna does not pause. Countless elephants fall to his supernatural 
archery, their fine trappings shredded by the Kiritin’s arrows, their housings 
torn, their riders crushed by them. Partha’s flat-headed arrows shear 
countless arms from their shoulders, their hands still clutching spears and 
swords, clubs and axes. Heads, also, handsome as the morning sun, the 
lotus or the moon, severed cleanly by Arjuna roll onto the earth. While 
Phalguni in rage razes the Samsaptakas with storms of diverse missiles, the 
enemy host seems to be alight. Seeing great Dhananjaya crush the 


Samsaptaka legion like an elephant trampling some lotus-stalks, all men, 
why, all creatures applaud him, saying, “Uttamam! Wonderful!” 

Krishna marvels seeing Partha’s feat which is no less that those of 
Vasava himself. Indeed Madhava folds his hands to Arjuna and says, 
“Truly, Partha, I believe that not Sakra, Yama or Kubera can do what you 
have just done. Ah, in moments you have killed thousands of mighty 
Samsaptaka warriors.” 

Having despatched the battling Samsaptakas, Arjuna says to Krishna, 
“Now let us ride at Bhagadatta.”’” 


CANTO 25 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Krishna turns his white chargers, wearing golden 

armour and swift as the mind, towards Drona’s akshauhini. Even 

as the Kurusattama courses along toward his brothers beset by Drona, 
Susarman with his brothers ride after him roaring out a challenge. 

The ever-victorious Arjuna says to Krishna, “O you of unfading glory, 
Susarman and his brothers challenge me again! Towards the north, Drona 
has broken our army once more. Lord, my heart is full of uncertainty. Shall 
I kill the Samsaptakas now or save my beleaguered troops from further 
harm? Which shall I do?” 

Without a word, Krishna turns the chariot back towards Susarman, king 
of the Trigartas. Arjuna stabs Susarman deep with seven visceral shafts and 
breaks both his bow and standard with two more razor-headed arrows. 
Never pausing, he sends the Trigarta king’s brothers to Yama with another 
six barbs loosed in the space of a wish. Roaring in shock, Susarman looses 
a serpentine iron naracha at Arjuna, and casts a thunderbolt of a spear at 
Krishna. Arjuna cuts both missiles down in flight and with a sizzle of 
arrows strikes Susarman unconscious in his chariot. 


Partha turns back and courses again towards your army, lashing it with 
his mighty volleys like Vasava pouring down rain. And none among your 
troops ventures to oppose him. Like a fire consuming bales of straw as he 
comes, he flares on scorching all the Kaurava maharathas with his flaming 
missiles. As no living creatures can stand the touch of fire, your troops 
cannot bear the irresistible Arjuna. 

Decimating your legions, Arjuna rides at Bhagadatta, king of the 
Pragjyotishas, like Garuda swooping down on his prey. Kunti’s matchless 
son grasps the Gandiva in his hands, mighty and mystic bow which protects 
the Pandavas and is deadly to all enemies. Your son Suyodhana, Rajan, 
brought destruction down on the race of Kshatriyas when he used deceit in 
the game of dice to achieve his ends. And now, assailed by Partha, your 
army shatters like a boat striking a great rock. 

The ten thousand archers, all brave and fierce, engage Arjuna and with 
dauntless hearts those maharathas surround him. Unruffled, mighty Arjuna 
is upon them like an angry elephant of sixty years in musth among a bed of 
lotuses; he crushes that legion of your army. Bhagadatta on his elephant 
charges Arjuna, Naravyaghra, who turns calmly to face him. 

Fierce and fervid is the encounter between Arjuna’s ratha and 
Bhagadatta’s elephant. These two heroes wheel all over the field, one on his 
chariot and the other on his elephant. Like the lord Indra from his elephant, 
looking like a mass of clouds, Bhagadatta rains down arrow showers on 
Dhananjaya. Intrepid Arjuna fluently cuts all these down in flight before 
they can reach him. Avoiding Arjuna’s fire, the king of the Pragjyotishas 
now strikes both Partha and Krishna with a veritable cloudburst of arrows, 
overwhelming them. He prods his Supratika forward to trample the two 
Krishna in the ratha. Seeing the angry elephant come at them like Death 
himself, Krishna adroitly maneuvers his chariot out of harm’s away, 
keeping the great beast on his left. 

Arjuna has the opportunity to kill both Supratika and Bhagadatta from 
behind, but always remembering the laws of a dharma yuddha, he has no 
wish to do this cowardly thing. However, when he sees Supratika wildly 
slaughtering other elephants and horses, crushing chariots that comes in his 
way, red rage rises in Arjuna.’” 


CANTO 26 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra asks, “Tell me all, O Sanjaya, what does the wrathful 
Partha, the son of Pandu, do to Bhagadatta? And what 
Bhagadatta to the son of Pandu?’ 

Sanjaya says, “While Partha and Krishna are engrossed with the king of 
the Pragjyotishas, all around them saw them as if in the very jaws of death. 
From his perch on the neck of his elephant, Bhagadatta looses gales of 
arrows down on the chariot borne Krishnas. Drawing his bow in a circle, He 
pierces Devaki’s son with many golden-winged arrows of black iron. These 
sizzling bolts of fire pass right through Krishna into the earth. 

Arjuna then breaks Bhagadatta’s bow and kills the warrior who protects 
his flank; why, the inspired Dhananjaya seem to toy with the Pragjyotisha 
king. Bhagadatta hurls fourteen formidable spears, bright as sunrays, at 
Arjuna, who with dazzling virtuosity cuts each lance into three slivers. With 
a thick swath of shafts, he neatly disjoints the armour that encases 
Supratika, and the kavacha clatters to the ground. Bare without his coat of 
mail, grievously wounded by Arjuna’s arrows, Supratika looks like a naked 
mountain without any cloud cover, with red streams frothing down its sides. 


Once more Bhagadatta flings a vicious iron spear at Krishna, lance 
streaked with gold that Arjuna neatly bisects in flight. Cutting down the 
mountain king’s standard and parasol, quicker than seeing, Arjuna, smiling, 
strikes him with a beautiful volley of ten shafts, winged with kanka 
feathers. Pierced deep, roaring, the incensed Bhagadatta casts a flurry of 
thick spears down on Arjuna’s head, knocking down his crown. Arjuna 
calmly picks up his kirita, sets it back on his head and cries up to the ruler 
of the Pragjyotishas, “Look well on this world! For you will not see it 
long.” 

Bhagadatta’s fury mounts; he seizes up another bright bow and 
unleashes a torment of arrows down on both, Arjuna and Govinda. Partha, 
quick as the mind, breaks Bhagadatta’s bow, rends his quivers, and then 
strikes him with a rage of seventy-two shafts, piercing him deep, lancing 
agony through all his limbs. Roaring still more loudly, Bhagadatta invokes 
the Vaishnava astra into his goad with mantras, and hurls it straight at 
Arjuna’s chest. 

But Krishna sways into the path of that fatal weapon and, shielding 
Arjuna, receives the Vaishnavastra himself. Striking Krishna’s breast, the 
astra turns into a triumphal garland of flowers! 

Arjuna bleakly asks Kesava, “Sinless one, you said that you would only 
guide my chariot and not fight the war! O lotus-eyed one, why do you break 
your word? Only if I am helpless and cannot resist an enemy or a weapon, 
should you intervene; not when I am still standing and able. You know that 
I can subdue all these worlds of the Devas, Asuras and Manushas with my 
bow and arrows.” 

Krishna replies, “Listen, O Partha, to this secret and ancient itihasa! I 
have four forms, eternally engaged in protecting the worlds. Dividing my 
own Self, I maintain the weal of the worlds. One form of mine stays on the 
earth and is engaged in tapasya. Another sees the good and the evil deeds in 
the world. My third form is in this world of men, engaged in karma. My 
fourth form lies in sleep for a thousand years and, upon awakening, grants 
exceptional boons to deserving men. Once, the Earth, knowing that the time 
had come, asked me for a boon for her son Naraka. The boon, Partha, was 
for the Vaishnavastra for her son, so that the Devas and the Asuras could 
not kill him. “You must give me this astra, she pleaded. 

Hearing her prayer, I gave of old the supreme Vaishnavastra to the 
Earth’s son. I also said at that time, ‘O Bhumidevi, this astra will protect 


Naraka. No one will be able to kill him, and your son will be invincible in 
all the worlds and vanquish his enemies.’ 

Saying, “Tathaastu!’ the Devi went away, her wish fulfilled. And so 
Naraka became invincible and always destroyed his enemies. 

It was from Naraka, O Partha, that the lord of the Pragjyotishas received 
my weapon. There is no one in the entire world, not even Indra and Rudra, 
who cannot be killed with this weapon. So, it was for your very life that I 
received it upon myself. I have divested the great Asura of that supreme 
astra. Now kill your invincible enemy Bhagadatta, enemy of the Devas, 
even as, for the good of the worlds, I slew the Asura Naraka.” 

Hearing this, Arjuna suddenly overwhelms Bhagadatta with a solid 
swath of jagged arrows. In a blur, Arjuna looses a long arrow straight into 
the brow of Supratika, missile that rives the elephant like thunder splitting a 
mountain and pierces its body up to its wings, like a snake flashing into an 
anthill. Bhagadatta repeatedly prods it with his iron goad, but even as a poor 
man’s wife will not obey her lord, Supratika does not obey him. Its limbs 
paralysed, the great beast’s legs buckle and it falls forward, its tusks goring 
the earth. With a last dreadful bellow, the mighty elephant dies. 

Never pausing, Arjuna looses a deathly shaft straight into Bhagadatta’s 
chest, killing the king of the Pragjyotishas in a crimson explosion. His bow 
and arrows fall from his lifeless hands; loosened from his head, his rich and 
precious turban falls off his head like a petal from a lotus whose stalk is 
violently shaken. Bhagadatta himself, decked with golden garlands, falls 
from his immense beast’s back like a flowering kinsuka uprooted from a 
mountaintop by a terrific gale. 

Having killed the king who resembled Indra himself in power, 
Bhagadatta who was Indra’s friend, Indra’s son Arjuna now sweeps 
unobstructed through your army devastating it like a great storm tearing 
down a forest of trees.’” 


CANTO 27 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘After killing Bhagadatta, who was always Indra’s 

favoured friend and a hero of untold tejas, Arjuna 

circumambulates the fallen warrior, the Earth’s grandson, in solemn 
pradakshina. 

The two sons of the Gandhara king, Sakuni’s brothers Vrishaka and 
Achala, subduers of hostile cities, attack Arjuna feverishly. They ride at him 
from in front and behind and scourge him with ferocious volleys. 
Magnificent Arjuna, ablaze after killing Bhagadatta, fairly shreds 
Vrishaka’s horses, charioteer, bow, chatra, standard and chariot. With clouds 
of arrows and diverse other missiles, Arjuna falls upon the Gandhara army, 
killing five hundred brave and mighty warriors in moments. 

Jumping down from his ruined chariot, its horses dead, Vrishaka swiftly 
mounts his brother’s ratha and takes up another bow. From their single 
chariot, the Gandhara brothers once more mount a raging attack on Arjuna. 
They cover him with dark arrow clouds even as Vritra or Bala did Indra in 
time out of mind. Their aim unerring, the two princes, themselves unhurt, 
strike Arjuna viciously, tormenting him as the two months of summer do 
the world. 


But then, Rajan, Arjuna kills the two princes, those tigers among men, 
Vrishaka and Achala, cutting both down as they stand side by side in their 
chariot— with a single arrow! The splendid brothers, both so alike, both red- 
eyed, both like lions, both beloved of their kinsmen and their friends, fall 
onto the earth at the same moment, and lie there, spreading sacred fame all 
around. 

Seeing their heroic uncles cut down by Arjuna, your sons rain a fury of 
fire down on the Pandava. Sakuni, dark and master sorcerer, sees his 
brothers die and creates sinister illusions of maya to confound the two 
Krishnas. Cudgels, iron balls, rocks, sataghnis, darts, gadas, spiked maces, 
swords, spears, mallets, axes, kampanas, curved scimitars, showers of nails, 
short clubs, flights of razors, arrows with sharp broad heads, nalikas, calf- 
tooth tipped shafts, arrows with heads of bone, discs, snake-headed shafts, 
and diverse other weapons, fall upon Arjuna from everywhere. Donkeys, 
camels, buffaloes, tigers, lions, deer, leopards, bears, wolves, vultures, 
monkeys, various reptiles, diverse pisachas and swarms of crows, all 
ravenous and in frenzy, fly at Arjuna. But Dhananjaya, knower of devastras, 
greets these occult assailants with mystic weapons of his own; crying out in 
fear and pain, they either vanish or perish. 

Now a turgid darkness appears and covers Arjuna’s chariot; from within 
the gloom, harsh voices rebuke Arjuna. He invokes the Jyotishkastra, which 
dispels Sakuni’s awful night of sorcery. Immediately, cataracts of water rush 
at Arjuna from every side; he vaporises them with an Adityastra. 

Smilingly does Arjuna dispel and destroy the mayic weapons that 
Sakuni repeatedly creates to assail him. Seeing the ease with which the 
Pandava negates his most powerful and abstruse spells, fear unmans Sakuni 
and he flees the duel like some low and vulgar coward, borne by swift 
horses. 

Arjuna, transcendent master of war, puts his unearthly genius on 
display, and continues to raze the Kaurava forces at will. He is like a 
mountain that cleaves the very Ganga into two streams, as he faces your 
legions squarely and massacres your men. One of these panicked streams 
flows towards Drona and the other, with loud cries, towards Duryodhana. 

A thick pall of dust rises and covers all the troops, and we cannot see 
Arjuna. We only hear the reverberant twanging of the Gandiva, echoing 
above the blare of conches and the beat of drums and the noise of all the 
other instruments across the field. Then, on the southern part of the field, a 


fierce battle breaks out between many great Kuru maharathas and Arjuna. 
However, I followed Drona. 

The various akshauhinis of Yudhishtira’s army beset the enemy on 
every part of the field. Arjuna strikes your son’s divisions, O Bhaarata, like 
the hot wind of summer destroying cloud masses in the sky. Arjuna falls on 
your legions, loosing clouds of arrows, like Vasava pouring down heavy 
showers of rain; and there is none in your army who can resist that tiger 
among men. 

Struck by the storm of fear, pain and death that is Partha, your warriors 
flee, trampling so many of their own as they escape. The arrows Arjuna 
shoots are fletched with kanka feathers and they pierce every armour, and 
cover earth and sky like a dire locust swarm. Piercing right through horses, 
rathikas, elephants and foot-soldiers, the shafts enter the earth like snakes 
plunging into anthills. Arjuna never shoots twice at any elephant, steed or 
man; every arrow of his is a killer. 

With dead men, elephants and horses lying all around, and echoing with 
the yowls of dogs and jackals, Kurukshetra presents a strange and horrific 
sight. Wounded by Arjuna’s arrows, fathers abandon sons, friends desert 
friends and sons leave behind fathers as each one flees for his own life. 
Struck by Partha’s shafts, many warriors abandon the very animals that bear 
them in war.’” 


CANTO 28 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra asks, ‘What is our state of mind when my 

akshauhinis are routed and all of you flee the field? To rally 
broken and fleeing men, who find nowhere to make a stand, is always 
difficult. Tell me all about it, O Sanjaya!’ 

Sanjaya says, “Although your general ranks are broken, Rajan, many 
great kshatriyas of the world, who fight Duryodhana’s cause and want to 
keep their honour and fame, still follow Drona. In the dreadful pass, they 
fearlessly follow their senapati, achieving great feats against the Pandava 
troops and Yudhishtira within striking distance. 

Taking swift advantage of a careless oversight from Bhimasena, Satyaki 
and Dhrishtadyumna, the Kuru leaders fall upon the Pandava army. The 
Panchalas exhort their troops, chanting, “Drona, Drona! Death to Drona!” 

Your sons, however, roar to all the Kurus, “Let not Drona be killed! Let 
Drona not die!” 

One side crying, “Kill Drona!”, “Kill the Brahmana!” and the other, 
“Don’t let Drona be killed!’’, “Let not Drona be slain!” the Kurus and the 
Pandavas seem to gamble again, now with Drona as their stake. 


Dhrishtadyumna, fire-prince of the Panchalas, rides up to all the 
Panchala maharathas whom Drona seeks to annihilate. The kali yuga come 
and the war turned feral, they no longer observe any law of dharma yuddha 
about which enemy each warrior could fairly choose to fight. The battle is 
appalling with Kshatriya fighting Kshatriya with bestial cries and roars. But 
now maharathas wipe out phalanxes of foot-soldiers with astras; chariot- 
warriors hack down horsemen; great heroes crucify lesser soldiers. A new 
darkness falls on sacred Kurukshetra; all nobility melts away. 

Their enemies cannot make the Pandavas flinch; while the sons of 
Pandu remember all their sufferings, and make their enemies tremble with 
fear. Though humble, yet agitated by rage, and in the grip of the naked spirit 
of revenge, and they fight as men possessed, reckless of their very lives, to 
kill Drona. They fight heroes of immense energy, making a sport of horrible 
war, with life the only stake. The two hosts falling on each other resemble 
elemental iron colliding with pristine adamant. 

And not the oldest men can remember hearing of, let alone seeing, a 
battle as brutal as this. Carnage spreads in a great stain across the earth; 
weighed down with those two enormous hosts, Bhumi shudders; the bedlam 
raised by your army and theirs paralyses blood-drenched holy ground, 
pierces the firmament, and rings even in Devaloka. 

Coming upon the Pandava forces in their thousands, Drona is 
everywhere on the field in his magnificent ratha, mowing the enemy down 
at his supreme ease and will. Seeing the awesome Brahmana cover 
Kurukshetra in blood, Dhrishtadyumna, the Pandava senapati, rides himself 
to contain him. Breathtaking is the duel between Drona and the Panchala 
prince. Ah, Rajan, I am convinced that it has no equal. 

Like a fire, of which his bow is the flame and his arrows the flaring 
sparks, Nila begins to consume the Kuru ranks like heaps of dry grass. 
Drona’s great son Aswatthaman, who always wanted to fight Nila, cries 
smilingly to him, “O Nila, what honour do you gain by burning so many 
common soldiers with your astras? Fight me instead!” 

Nila, the brightness of whose face resembles the splendour of a full- 
blown lotus, instantly looses a ferocious volley at Aswatthaman, whose 
body is like a bank of lotuses and whose eyes are like lotus-petals. Deeply 
and suddenly struck by Nila, Drona’s son breaks his adversary’s bow and 
cuts down his standard with three broad-headed arrows. Leaping down from 
his chariot, with a shield and a marvellous sword, Nila rushes at 


Aswatthaman wanting to pluck his head from his neck like a bird bearing 
away its prey in its talons. But, instead, in a gory flash, Drona’s son severs 
Nila’s handsome head, with its fine hooked nose, and long kundalas. The 
tall mighty Nila, whose face is bright as the full moon, and his complexion 
of a lotus, sprawls dead never knowing how he was killed. 

Shocked and grief-stricken, the Pandava host trembles when Drona’s 
son kills Nila of blazing tejas. The Pandava maharathas all wonder in some 
despair, “Ah, how will Arjuna save us when he is far away to the south 
locked in battle with the remnant of the Samsaptakas and the Narayana 
force?’”’” 


CANTO 29 


DRONABHISHEKA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Bhima cannot bear to see the slaughter of his army. 

He attacks Balhika with sixty wrathful arrows and Karna with ten. 

Drona wants to kill mighty Bhima and excoriates him with twenty-six 

shafts of untold violence, which plunge into the very vital organs of Vayu’s 
son like snakes of virulent poison. 

Karna strikes Bhima with a dozen shafts, Aswatthaman with seven, and 
Duryodhana also with six more. Dauntless Bhimasena roars like five lions, 
and unleashes fifty burning arrows at Drona, ten at Karna, a dozen at 
Duryodhana, and eight thunderbolts at Drona. 

Yudhishtira sees his mighty brother, his favourite brother, beset by a 
host of enemies who all fight reckless of their lives, in that battle where 
death is so easy to find; the Dharmaraja despatches a cohort of his own 
maharathas to Bhima’s side. These tejasvin Kshatriyas, led by Nakula and 
Sahadeva, and others led by Satyaki, fly to Bhima’s rescue. Full of battle 
lust, those bulls among men unitedly storm Drona’s legions, protected by so 
many stalwart bowmen, and they are determined to tear the Acharya’s 
forces apart. 


Together now, Bhima and the others fall furiously upon Drona’s host. 
But serene Drona, ablaze, easily checks their surging careen, holding them 
all at bay. The warriors of your army fight the Pandavas without a thought 
for their own kingdoms, without fear for their lives. 

The war burns on; horsemen encounter horsemen, and maharathas other 
maharathas; arrows fly against arrows, swords clash against swords, and 
axes ring against axes. Fiercest is the battle of swords, making a terrible 
carnage. The elephant legions of both sides collide again in earthshaking 
thunder. Men plunge head first from elephant back and horseback, countless 
warriors, while others are struck out of their rathas dismembered by arrow 
showers everywhere. 

In the brutal press, some lose their armour and fall to be crushed by 
elephants, their handsome bodies and noble heads pulped. Indeed, 
everywhere elephants stamp on fallen men, grinding them into flat patches 
of blood, flesh and bone; other great beast impale standing men on flashing 
tusks and fling their corpses high into the air or tear them apart after laying 
them on the ground. The dark and wild spirit of war possesses man and 
beast equally and absolutely. 

Other elephants, with arrows protruding from their trunks, range madly 
across the field, goring and crushing men in their hundreds; while others 
great beasts continue to stamp fallen warriors, horses and smaller elephants 
cased in armour of black iron, as if these were mere reeds. Many humble 
and brave kings, their hour having come, lie in the last sleep on beds of 
pain, overlaid with vultures’ feathers. 

Battling from chariots, father slays son; and maddened son, also, attacks 
his father. The wheels of rathas are broken; banners are torn; regal parasols 
fall onto the earth. Dragging broken yokes, horses run everywhere. Arms 
still grasping swords, and heads decked with twinkling ear-rings fall 
continually in macabre rain. The irresistible elephants haul chariots around, 
then overturn them and smash them into fragments. Waylaid by elephants, 
horses and their riders are strewn everywhere, maimed, disfigured past 
recognition. 

Savage pandemonium reigns; the merciless war rages on, the battle 
from which every shred of mercy and nobility have gone so it seems like a 
contention of demons. 

Oh father! Oh son! Where are you, friend? Wait! Where do you go! 
Strike! Kill this one!—these cries and roars echo all around, as does the 


deranged laughter of butchery. The blood of men, horses and elephants 
mingle and flow together in streams, covering all the filed in scarlet. The 
brave exult and cowards tremble at the heart of unbridled savagery loosed 
upon the sacred earth. 

Here a Kshatriya gets his chariot-wheel entangled with that of another, 
and at this intimate proximity, smashes the other’s head with his mace. Why 
the bravest, most seasoned warriors wish for safety where there is none; 
they drag one another by the hair, and fight with fists, teeth and nails. Here a 
hero’s arm upraised, sword in its hand, is hacked off at the elbow; there 
another’s arm is lopped off at the shoulder, the hand still wielding bow, 
arrow or hook. Here, one roars a ringing challenge at another; and there, 
another turns his back on the battle and flees. Here, one cuts another’s head 
from his throat, finding him within reach; while another rushes with loud 
shouts at an enemy. One soldier is filled with fear at another’s roar, while 
another hews down another, who was a dear friend and is now an enemy. 

Somewhere, a bull elephant, big as a hill, his heart pierced with an 
elongated shaft, falls on the field and lies like an island in a river during the 
summer. Elsewhere, another elephant, with sweat streaming down its body, 
like a mountain with rivulets flowing down its breast, also lies on the field, 
having crushed a glorious maharatha and his horses and charioteer when it 
fell. 

Seeing grave and awesome warriors, masters of war, covered in blood 
and fighting passionately on, the timid and faint-hearted, are sombre, some 
even swoon. Darkness of spirit and savagery mantle Kurukshetra, as does 
the pall of dust raised by the teeming hosts. Suddenly, Dhrishtadyumna 
roars, This is the time! and plunges forward to assail the most vigorous and 
heroic enemy warriors. Riding after him the Pandavas themselves strike the 
Kaurava army like a storm of death and fly towards Drona’s chariot like 
swans towards a lake. 

Roars and yells of Seize him! Stand firm! Do not run! Do not fear! Hack 
them to pieces! echo close to of Drona’s ratha above the rest of the tumult. 

Drona, Kripa, Karna, Aswatthaman, Jayadratha, Vinda and Anuvinda of 
Avanti and Salya, rally to thwart the marauding Pandava Kshatriyas. They 
draw blood from the Panchalas and the Pandavas; but stirred by dharma and 
the desire for noble revenge, the attacking warriors ride on at Drona. Then 
Drona, enraged, looses hundreds of arrows and brings a great carnage to the 
Chedis, the Panchalas and the Pandavas. We hear the twanging of his 


bowstring and the slaps of his palms on all sides; and they are like peals of 
thunder and strike fear into the hearts of all. 

Meanwhile, Arjuna, having killed a large number of Samsaptakas, 
storms up to join battle with Drona who sows death so liberally among the 
Pandava troops. Arjuna fords many lakes of blood, whose fierce waves and 
eddies are Drona’s arrow gales, and arrives at the heart of the dreadful war. 
Suddenly he erupts on Drona’s troops, Vijaya of measureless fame, 
Dhananjaya splendid as the Sun, flying wild Hanuman on his shining 
banner, whose roars terrify his enemies. Having dried up the Samsaptaka 
ocean with his astras, the third son of Pandu now scathes the Kurus as if he 
is the very Sun that rises at the end of the Yuga; as if he is like the Fire that 
appears then to devour all creatures. 

Elephant-riders, horsemen and rathikas fall before Arjuna’s lucific 
barrages of arrows, leaking blood onto already wet earth Some utter cries of 
distress while others set up loud shouts. Some struck by the shafts of Partha 
fall dead. Arjuna still fights the dharma yuddha—he will not shoot at those 
who have fallen from their mounts or in their chariots; he does not aim at 
those who flee the battle; he spares those that are unwilling to fight. 

Deprived of their chariots and overawed, almost all the Kauravas run 
from the filed with piteous cries, and call out to Karna to save them. 
Hearing their shouts and screams, Karna roars his assurance to the Kuru 
troops, Do not fear! and he dashes up to confront Arjuna. 

Karna, greatest among all the Kaurava maharathas, invokes the 
Agneyastra and unleashes the weapon of fire at Arjuna. Quicker than sight, 
Arjuna douses it with an astra of his own, of water. Without a moment’s 
pause he looses another elemental missile at Karna, who as swiftly quells it 
with another astra. A lofty and dangerous contention of devastras ensues 
between the two, and each is the other’s equal. Then Dhrishtadyumna, 
Bhima and Satyaki all ride at Karna; each one striking him deep with three 
long and vicious barbs. Even as he fights his towering duel with Arjuna, 
Karna, incredibly, breaks the bows in the hands of the other three 
maharathas, leaving them like snakes without fangs. 

They fling deadly lances at him from their chariots, with tigerish roars. 
The fierce and brilliant javelins hurled by mighty arms fly like snakes at 
Karna’s ratha. Unruffled, lightning swift Karna calmly destroys those lances 
with three of his own, all the while covering Arjuna with arrows; Karna 
maharatha gives a great roar. Arjuna drills Karna with seven shafts; he kills 


Karna’s young brother Satrunjaya with another six, and with a wedge- 
headed barb, strikes off Vipatha’s head. Before the eyes of the 
Dhritarashtras and Karna, Arjuna kills Karna’s three brothers. 

Bhima leaps down from his ratha, fierce as another Garuda, and hacks 
down fifteen of Karna’s followers with his huge sword. Mounting his 
chariot again in a trice, seizing up another bow, he strikes Karna with ten 
arrows and his charioteer and horses with five. Dhrishtadyumna also hefts a 
sword and a dazzling shield, and kills Charmavarman and Brihadkshatra, 
king of the Nishadas. Remounting his chariot, swooping up another bow, 
the Panchala prince strikes Karna with a fusillade of seventy-three arrows, 
and then gives a shattering roar. 

Satyaki, splendid as Indra himself, also takes up a fresh bow, strikes 
Karna with sixty-four barbs, and he also roars like a pride of lions. In wink 
he severs Karna’s bow in his hands and pierces his arms and chest with 
three shafts like serpents. 

Duryodhana, Drona and Jayadratha rush forward to rescue Karna from 
the Satyaki-ocean, in which he is about to drown. Hundreds of your foot- 
soldiers, horses, chariots and elephants swarm to where Karna still terrifies 
his assailants. Dhrishtadyumna, Bhima, Abhimanyu, Arjuna himself, 
Nakula and Sahadeva dash to Satyaki’s defence. The fevered battle between 
these archers swells towards some unthinkable crescendo. 

All fight without any thought for their lives. Infantry, chariots, cavalry 
and elephants fight against rathas and footsoldiers, while maharathas 
engage with elephants and men on foot and horsemen; and rathas and 
infantrymen confront chariots and elephants. We see horses tilt at horses, 
elephants thunder at other elephants and foot-soldiers run at foot-soldiers. 
Thus is the horrific battle fought, marked by great bedlam, and hundreds of 
noble fighting men and beasts perish every moment, to the delight of the 
blood-drinking pisachas and carnivores that stalk Kurukshetra with burning 
eyes. Indeed, every moment the grisly war swells the population of Yama’s 
kingdom. 

Men, rathas, horses and elephants destroy each other in vast numbers. 
Elephants kill elephants and chariot-warriors with weapons raised are slain 
by other rathikas, horsemen by horsemen, and the massacre of foot-soldiers 
by other foot-soldiers is ceaseless, ubiquitous. But, also, elephants are killed 
by rathikas, and magnificent steeds gored or trampled by grey tuskers; 
horsemen mow down foot-soldiers, and cavalrymen are killed by chariot- 


warriors —all these against the laws of dharma yuddha, for the kali yuga has 
indeed dawned darkly on the world. With tongues lolling, teeth and eyes 
gouged out, with coats of mail and ornaments crushed into the dust, the 
slaughtered creatures fall in hundreds every moment. 

Others who are struck or flung down onto the ground are then trampled 
into the earth by horses’ hooves, by the mighty tread of elephants, and 
mangled and vivisected by heavy chariots and flying chariot wheels. Ah, 
how the pisachas, jackal and wild dog packs, the wolves, vultures, crows 
and other birds and beasts of prey delight in the vigorous, endless 
butchering —for the feast that will follow. 

When men and beasts now beyond all count have been sacrificed to 
Death’s maw yawned wide on Kurukshetra, the survivors bathed in blood 
take panting pause and look glazed-eyed at each other. The Sun sets in the 
western hills, and slowly both armies, O Bhaarata, retire to their 
encampments and tents.’” 


CANTO 30 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA 


: S anjaya says, “We look upon your warriors as defeated because the 
invincible Arjuna first breaks them and then Drona fails to keep 
his vow to capture the well-protected Yudhishtira. All of them, dusty and 
with rent coats of mail, cast anxious glances around. With Drona’s consent 
they retire from the battlefield, after their flawless enemies vanquish and 
humiliate them; and, as they march, they hear everyone praise the countless 
merits of Arjuna and speak about Krishna’s friendship with him. They pass 
the night like men under a curse, reflecting upon the course of events and in 
perfect silence. 

Next morning, from petulance, wrath and distraught at the success of 
his enemy, Duryodhana, in the hearing of the troops, says to Drona, 
“Dvijottama, I have no doubt now that you have marked us as your 
enemies, that we face such defeat. You did not seize Yudhishtira today, 
though you had him within reach. No foe can escape you once you have 
him in your sights, not if the Pandavas, helped by the very gods, protect 
him. You granted me a boon; but now you do not honour it. The noble never 
betray the hopes of those devoted to them.” 


Drona is mortified by Duryodhana’s words and, says, “You must not 
even think this let alone speak thus to me. I have always tried to fulfill your 
wishes. The three worlds with the Devas, the Asuras, the Gandharvas, the 
Yakshas, the Nagas and the Rakshasas cannot defeat a force that the 
diadem-decked Arjuna leads. Where Krishna, the Creator of the universe is, 
and where Arjuna leads the army, whose might can prevail against them, 
save the three-eyed Mahadeva’s? I vow that today that I will slay a 
maharatha for you, one of the greatest heroes of the Pandavas. Today I will 
also form a vyuha that the very Devas cannot penetrate. However, 
Duryodhana, lure Arjuna away from the battle again, for there is nothing 
that he does not know or cannot achieve in war.” 

After this, the Samsaptakas once more challenge Arjuna to battle and 
draw him away to the southern side of the field. There a battle ensues place 
between Arjuna and Susarman’s forces the likes of which has never been 
seen or heard of before. 

Meanwhile, Rajan, the chakra vyuha that Drona forms, is magnificent, 
why, even hard to look at, like the sun at his zenith when he scorches 
everything below. At Yudhishtira’s command the dashing, invincible 
Abhimanyu pierces the otherwise impenetrable circular formation. Once 
inside he kills thousands of the enemy, fighting like a god, until six great 
Kaurava maharathas face him together. Finally, Abhimanyu succumbs to 
Dusasana’s son and gives up his life. This fills our side with joy and the 
Pandavas with black grief. After Abhimanyu dies, we withdraw our troops 
for the night.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Oh Sanjaya, my heart seems to break in pieces 
when I hear of youthful Abhimanyu’s death. Cruel and savage is Kshatriya 
dharma that the law-givers have laid down, when brave men, who want 
sovereignty have no scruples and ruthlessly butcher even a child. Tell me 
how so many maharathas slay that boy who, though raised in luxury, fights 
so fearlessly? Tell me how our warriors quell Subhadra’s son of 
immeasurable tejas, who stormed into our chakravyuha.’ 

Sanjaya says, “Rajan, I will describe the death of Subhadra’s son to you 
in detail. Listen to how, after breaking into our midst, Abhimanyu wields 
his weapons even as if he were at play, and how he dismays and routs all 
the irresistible heroes of your army. Like the denizens of a dense forest fear 
a forest conflagration, Abhimanyu terrifies all the warriors of your army.’” 


CANTO 31 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “The very devas cannot oppose the five sons of Pandu 

and Krishna, all maharathas, as their feats in battle show. There 

never was and never will be another man so blessed as Yudhishtira, in 

dharma, karma, lineage, intelligence, achievements, fame and prosperity. 

Devoted to satya and dharma and with his passions under control, because 

of his worship of the Brahmans and other virtues, Yudhishtira always seeks 
and enjoys the bliss of Swarga. 

We also speak of these three as being equal—the Destroyer himself at 
the end of the Yuga, Jamadagni’s son Parasurama, and Bhimasena on his 
chariot, Of Arjuna, wielder of the Gandiva, who always fulfills his battle 
vows, I do see no equal on earth. These six qualities—reverence for elders, 
keeping his own counsel, humility, self-restraint, a handsome and radiant 
appearance and bravery —are always present in Nakula. In the knowledge 
of the shastras, gravity, sweetness of temper, dharma and prowess, the 
heroic Sahadeva is equal to the Aswins themselves. 

Yet all the noble qualities that are in Krishna, and all those that the 
Pandavas possess, together, can be found together only in Abhimanyu. In 
resolve, he is equal to Yudhishtira, in conduct to Krishna; in exploits, to 


Bhimasena of terrible deeds; in comeliness, in skill and in knowledge of 
shastras, he is the equal of Arjuna, and in humility, he is equal to Sahadeva 
and Nakula.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘I wish, O Suta, to hear in detail, how the invincible 
Abhimanyu, the son of Subhadra, is slain on the battlefield.’ 

Sanjaya continues, “Be calm, Rajan, and endure your insupportable 
grief. I will tell you about the death of your young and incomparable 
kinsman. 

The Acharya forms the great circular vyuha, a Chakra, and in it he 
positions all the kings of our side that are each equal to Indra himself. At 
the entrance, he stations all the princes of sun like refulgence and who have 
all sworn to stand by one another. They have standards decked with gold, 
all of them wear red robes with red ornaments, red banners and are adorned 
with garlands of gold and wildflowers; they are smeared with sandalwood- 
paste and other scented liniments. 


All the renowned Kaurava archers, numbering ten thousand, face 
Abhimanyu in a body. They set your handsome grandson Lakshmana at 
their head and all of them are in consort, are comrades in joy and grief, 
emulate one another in feats of courage, want to excel one another and are 
also devoted to one another. 

Surrounded by the maharathas Karna, Dusasana and Kripa, Duryodhana 
stands at the heart of his forces and has a white royal chatra over his head. 
Fanned with yak tails, he is as resplendent as the king of the Devas. At the 
head of your army is the senapati, Drona like the rising sun. Immovable as 
Meru stands the striking Jayadratha, ruler of the Sindhus. At his side and 
led by Aswatthaman, are your thirty sons, resembling the very gods. Also 
beside Jayadratha, are these maharathas—the gambler Sakuni, king of 
Gandhara, Salya and Bhurisravas. 

The day’s battle begins, fierce, breathtaking, making one’s hair stand on 
end, both sides fighting to the death.’” 


CANTO 32 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “Led by Bhimasena the Pandava forces advance on 
the invincible chakravyuha created by Bharadwaja’s son. All of 
them are seasoned and skilled warriors, wily and full of battle lust, keened 
for the fight—Satyaki, Chekitana, Dhrishtadyumna, the son of Prishata, 
Kuntibhoja of great ability, the mighty Drupada, Abhimanyu, 
Kshatradharman, the valiant Brihadkshatra, Dhrishtaketu, the ruler of the 
Chedis, the twin sons of Madri, Ghatotkacha, the powerful Yudhamanyu, 
the unvanquished Sikhandin, the irresistible Uttamaujas, maharatha Virata, 
the five sons of Draupadi, the valiant son of Sisupala, the Kaikeyas of 
terrific energy and the Srinjayas in their thousands. These and others, all 
master warriors at the head of their forces, charge roaring against 
Bharadwaja’s son Drona. 

The heroic Drona, however, coolly checks all of them with a torrid 
storm of arrows. Like a mighty wave striking an impregnable hill, like the 
surging sea restrained by its shores, Drona drives them back. The Pandavas 
and the Srinjayas suffer grim losses and cannot sustain their charge against 
the prodigious Acharya. Seeing Drona advance in fury, a frantic Yudhishtira 
thinks of what he can do to arrest the Brahmana warrior. Finally, in despair, 


Yudhishtira places the intolerable burden on the young shoulders of 
Abhimanyu. 

Yudhishtira, who is not less than Vasudeva himself, and whose tejas is 
superior to Arjuna’s, says to Abhimanyu, “My child, fight today so that 
when Arjuna returns after killing the Samsaptakas, he will not reprove us. 
We do not know how to break into the chakravyuha. Only you, Arjuna, 
Krishna, or Pradyumna can pierce the wheeling circle; there is no fifth. 
Abhimanyu, child, you must accomplish this thing, you must do this for us; 
it is your sires, your uncles, and all these troops that ask this boon of you. 
Take up your weapons and destroy Drona’s vyuha before Arjuna returns to 
rebuke us all!” 

Abhimanyu says, “I will breach this most difficult vyuha that Drona has 
formed and bring victory to my vamsa. My father has taught me how to 
attack and pierce the chakravyuha. However, he has yet to teach me how to 
come out of it once I am in, if danger overtakes me.” 

Yudhishtira says, “Break the vyuha once, O maharatha, and make a 
passage for us. In battle, you are equal to Arjuna himself. Once you break in 
the rest of us will follow you and protect you from all sides.” 

Bhima says, “I will follow you close, and Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki, the 
Panchalas and the Prabhadrakas. Once you make the first breach, we will 
break the chakravyuha apart, and kill the greatest warriors within it.” 

Abhimanyu says, “I will break into Drona’s impenetrable vyuha, why, 
like a frenzied insect flying into a flame. Today I will do what will benefit 
both my father and my mother’s vamsas. I will make my mother and my 
uncles proud. Today, everyone will see the endless carnage that I, a boy by 
himself bring to the teeming enemy. If anyone who faces me in battle today 
escapes with his life, I will not call myself the son of Arjuna and Subhadra 
anymore. If from a single chariot I do not truncate the very race of 
Kshatriyas into eight slivers, I will no longer regard myself the son of 
Arjuna!” 

Yudhishtira says, “Abhimanyu, child of splendour, glorious Kshatriya, 
let your strength, O son of Subhadra, increase a thousand fold to break 
Drona’s vyuha protected by Naravyaghras, such great and fierce bowmen, 
warriors that resemble the Sadhyas, the Rudras, or the Maruts, who are like 
the Vasus, Agni or Aditya himself in prowess!” 

When Yudhishtira says this, Abhimanyu cries to his charioteer, Sumitra, 
“Fly at Drona’s vyuha, sarathy!”’” 


CANTO 33 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Abhimanyu charges headlong at Drona’s 
chakravyuha, roaring to his sarathy, “On! Ride on!” 

The charioteer says to Abhimanyu, “Ah, you are blessed with length of 
days, and heavy is the burden the Pandavas have laid upon you! Think well 
if you are ready to engage Drona, who is an old master of war and all the 
great astras. While you have been reared in luxury and are new to war.” 

Abhimanyu replies with a laugh, “O Suta, who is Drona? What is this 
vast gathering of Kshatriyas? I will defy Indra himself in battle, riding his 
Airavata and all the devas with him. I feel no anxiety whatever about all 
these Kshatriyas, for they do not measure up to even a sixteen part of 
myself. O son of a Suta, fear will not enter my heart even if my uncle 
Krishna, conqueror of the universe, Vishnu himself, or my father, Arjuna 
confronts me in battle.” 

Disregarding the charioteer’s advice, Abhimanyu presses on, crying, 
“Fly like the wind at Drona’s army!” 

His heart heavy, the charioteer Sumitra whips Abhimanyu’s three-year 
old horses, caparisoned in gold, with greater speed towards Drona. Seeing 
him dash at them all the Kauravas led by Drona, advance to meet him, 


while the Pandavas follow Abhimanyu. Wearing golden armour and flying 
the device of a karnikara tree, Abhimanyu fearlessly attacks those warriors 
led by Drona, like a lion-cub a herd of elephants! 

The elated warriors begin to strike Abhimanyu while he attempts to 
pierce their vyuha. For a moment, the disturbance there is like the one in the 
ocean where the Ganga flows into it. Quickly it grows frenzied and 
appalling; and then in a flash, under Drona’s very eye, Abhimanyu breaks 
into the chakravyuha. 

Legion elephants, cavalry, chariots and infantry surround the young 
hero and attack him all together. The earth resounds with the noise of 
diverse musical instruments, with shouts and slaps on arm-pits and roars, 
with yells and leonine shouts, with exclamations of Stop! Stop! with fierce 
cries Wait! Fight me! with repeated exclamations of Here! I am the enemy! 
With trumpeting elephants, with the chiming bells and ornaments, with 
bursts of laughter and the din of horses’ hooves and chariot-wheels, the 
Kaurava warriors lay into Abhimanyu. 

But that tremendous young shura, who knows all the marmas of the 
body, unleashes a keen hot wind of astras at his enemies, missiles that 
pierce all their vital organs, scorching the advancing warriors, mowing 
whole legions down in moments with a myriad of astras, so swiftly 
reducing them to helplessness. Like insects falling upon a blazing fire, they 
yet ride and run at Abhimanyu; he cuts off thousands of warriors’ weapon- 
bearing arms and scatters the earth with bodies and limbs, like priests 
strewing the altar at a sacrifice with blades of Kusa grass. 

Some of them wear corselets made of iguana skin, some hold bows and 
shafts, some swords or shields or iron hooks and reins; some, lances, battle 
axes, maces, iron balls or spears, some, rapiers, crowbars or axes. Several 
of them grasp short barbs, spiked maces, darts, or kampanas. Many have 
goads and prodigious conches; some, bearded darts and kachagrahas; a few 
wield mallets; several others, all manner of missiles—some nooses, some 
heavy clubs and some stones and bricks. Their arms are decked with 
amulets and laved with delightful perfumes and lotions; and with these arms 
dyed brightly with blood, the field of battle soon presents a startling sight, 
as if strewn with five-headed snakes slain by Garuda. 

Abhimanyu casually scatters countless heads, graced with fine noses, 
faces and hair, and adorned with ear-rings. Blood flows copiously from 
these heads, their lips bitten with anger. Wearing gorgeous garlands, 


crowns, turbans, pearls and gems, and splendid as the sun or the moon, they 
fall like lotuses severed from their stalks. Fragrant with many perfumes, 
these heads could speak so pleasantly and eloquently while life was in 
them. 

Abhimanyu destroys well-equipped and ethereal looking chariots, fitted 
with bamboo poles, with grand pennants flying, and their wonderfully 
crafted janghas, kuvaras, nemis, dasanas, wheels, standards and footboards. 
He breaks all the instruments of war they carry; blows away the rich cloths 
with which they are overlaid, and slays by thousands the warriors riding in 
them. Mangling everything before him with unearthly archery, rampaging 
Abhimanyu desiccates elephant-warriors and elephants, shredding their 
standards, hooks, banners, quivers, coats of mail, girths and neck-ropes 
blankets, bells, trunks, breaking their tusks; and also razing the foot-soldiers 
who protect the elephants. 

We see so many horses of the Vanayu, the Hilly, the Kamboja and the 
Balhika breeds, with tails, ears, eyes motionless and fixed, fleet, well- 
trained, and ridden by accomplished warriors armed with swords and 
lances, lose everything, even the excellent ornaments on their lush tails. 
Many lie with tongues lolling out and eyes detached from their sockets, 
entrails and livers gouged out, the rows of bells that adorn them all ruined 
while the riders on their backs lie lifeless by their sides. Lying thus all over 
the battlefield, they delight the pisachas, rakshasas and beasts of prey, the 
blood-drinkers and flesh-eaters. 

With the coats of mail and the other leather armour covering their limbs 
cut open, they lie in dung they excrete themselves. Thus slaying many great 
horses of your army, Abhimanyu looks splendent. Achieving the most 
difficult feats, alone, like the inconceivable Vibhu in days of old, 
Abhimanyu crushes your vast host of chariots, elephants and cavalry, like 
the three-eyed Mahadeva of immeasurable power crushing the terrible 
Asura host. Indeed, Abhimanyu, performs feats his enemies cannot match, 
mowing down whole divisions of your foot-soldiers everywhere. 

Seeing him slaughter your army single-handedly, like Skanda the Deva- 
senapati did the Asuras, your warriors and sons look around vacantly, 
dazed. Their mouths are dry; their eyes restless; sweat covers their bodies; 
and their hair stands on end. Fearing complete defeat, they run for their 
lives. They call one another by their names and the names of their families, 
abandon wounded sons, fathers, brothers, kinsmen and relatives by 


marriage on the field, and try only to escape, goading their horses and 
elephants to their greatest speed.’” 


CANTO 34 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Seeing Abhimanyu of blinding tejas put his army to 

flight, an angry Duryodhana takes the field against him. At this, 

Drona roars to all the Kaurava warriors, “Rescue the king! Look where the 

valiant Abhimanyu kills anyone he wants at will. Go quickly against him, 
and bravely protect Duryodhana.” 

Then many grateful, mighty warriors, who fear for Duryodhana, lay a 
protective ring around your son. Drona, his son, Kripa, Karna, Kritavarman, 
Subala’s son, Brihadbala, Salya of the Madras, Bhuri, Bhurisravas, Sala, 
Paurava and Vrishasena loose tirades of arrows at Abhimanyu to keep 
Duryodhana safe. Abhimanyu attacks the maharathas, their charioteers and 
the horsemen with thick deluges of arrows, and roars in triumph when he 
makes them turn back. Hearing him roar like a hungry lion, your warriors, 
with Drona at their head, cannot stand it. They surround him again with a 
host of chariots and shoot all kinds of arrows at him. 

Abhimanyu not only cuts down all their shafts before they reach him, 
but wounds your warriors with his own barbs, killing many. Ah, his feat is 
extraordinary and wonderful to behold. Scathed by his arrows like serpents, 
they encircle him, desperate to kill him. However, Abhimanyu singly holds 


off the sea of Kaurava troops, like the continent resisting the surging ocean. 
None among those Kshatriyas, neither Abhimanyu nor his opponents, turns 
away from the battle. 

In that pitched and awesome encounter between a youth and an army, 
Duhsaha pierces Abhimanyu with nine shafts; Dusasana strikes him with a 
dozen; Saradwata’s son Kripa, with three; Drona strikes him with seventeen 
arrows, each one a virulent snake; Vivimsati with seventy; Kritavarman 
with seven; Brihadbala with eight; Aswatthaman with seven shafts; 
Bhurisravas shoots him with three barbs; the king of the Madras with six, 
Sakuni with two, and king Duryodhana with three arrows. 

The valiant Abhimanyu, however, dancing on his chariot, wounds each 
of these warriors with three shafts in return, quicker than seeing. Filled with 
rage at your sons’ attempts to frighten him, he displays his wondrous 
prowess, inborn and honed with long practice. Borne by his marvellous 
steeds, fleet like Garuda or the Wind and obedient to their sarathy, he 
confronts the handsome heir of Asmaka, crying Stop! and strikes him first 
with ten shafts and then with ten more; he kills his horses and charioteer 
and cuts off his standard, his two arms, breaks his bow and severs his head; 
so all these fall to the ground, while Abhimanyu smiles all the while. 

After Abhimanyu kills the heroic king of the Asmakas the whole of his 
fickle army quits the field. Then Karna, Kripa, Drona, Drona’s son, the ruler 
of the Gandharas, Sala, Salya, Bhurisravas, Kratha, Somadatta, Vivimsatti, 
Vrishasena, Sushena, Kundavedhin, Pratardana, Vrindaraka, Lalithya, 
Prabahu, Dirghalochana, and a livid Duryodhana cover the radiant Pandava 
prince with their arrows. Struck by the many barbs from these great 
bowmen, Abhimanyu responds by striking Karna deep with shafts that 
pierce both his armour and body. One arrow passes right through Karna’s 
kavacha and his body and streaks down into the earth like a snake through 
an anthill. In agony, mighty Karna trembles like a hill during an earthquake. 

Still seething, Abhimanyu kills Sushena, Dirghalochana and 
Kundavedhin, all in a flash. Meanwhile, Karna recovers and pierces 
Abhimanyu with twenty-five shafts; and Aswatthaman strikes him with 
twenty, and Kritavarman with seven. Covered all over with arrows stuck 
into him, Arjuna’s son storms all over the field in rage and your troops see 
him as Yama with his noose. 

He attacks Salya, who happens to be near, with a burn of arrows, and 
raises loud shouts, frightening your men further. Struck deep in his very 


vital organs by Abhimanyu, Salya gives a sigh and faints on his chariot’s 
platform. Seeing Salya collapse, all your troops flee like a herd of deer 
attacked by a lion, even as Drona looks on. And Abhimanyu is resplendent, 
like a sacrificial fire fed with ghee; and the Pitris, the Devas, Charanas and 
Siddhas, as well as different beings of the earth sing praises of his heroism 
and unworldly skill.’” 


CANTO 35 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra asks, ‘While Abhimanyu devastates our best 
bowmen, which of my warriors try to check him?’ 

Sanjaya replies, ‘Hear, Rajan, of the superb skill the youthful 
Abhimanyu displays while putting to rout the chariot-ranks of the Kauravas, 
which Drona himself leads. 

Seeing Abhimanyu’s volleys unman Salya, the Madra king’s younger 
brother, filled with fury, rushes at the youthful, incredible prince, raining 
arrows on him. But Abhimanyu kills his charioteer, cuts down his triple 
bamboo-pole, smashes his seat on the ratha, his chariot-wheels, his yoke, 
shafts, quiver and his chariot’s floorboard, his banner and every other 
implement of war with which the chariot is equipped; and he beheads 
Salya’s brother as well. All this happens in the space of a thought, so 
swiftly that none can discern the prince’s movements; they occur in another 
dimension where time stands still before Abhimanyu’s staggering genius. 
Never knowing how he dies, Salya’s brother, great Kshatriya, falls headless 
onto the ground like a hill uprooted by a tornado. His followers flee in all 
directions. Witnessing this feat, all men and indeed all creatures, O 
Bhaarata, cry out Uttamam! Wonderful! in their different tongues. 


After Salya’s brother is killed, many of his followers, wanting revenge 
and armed with diverse weapons, with ringing battle cries proclaiming their 
families, homelands and names, charge Abhimanyu; some of them on 
rathas, some on horses, some on elephants, while others run at him on foot. 
All of them are fierce warriors and they rush the son of Arjuna with the loud 
hum of arrows, the deep rumble of chariot-wheels, fierce whoops, shouts 
and yells, roars, twanging bowstrings, and the slaps of their palms, crying, 
Today you will not escape us alive! 

Smiling, down those who wounded him earlier. With wonderful astras, 
diverse, beautiful and swifter than sight, Abhimanyu the shura fights them 
almost gently, using astras that he has received from Krishna and Arjuna, 
just as they would have. 

With no thought for the great burden he has assumed, untouched by any 
fear, he looses his missiles in an endless stream. Such is his speed that no 
one can see any interval between his bending his bow, aiming and loosing 
his arrows; from every side, one only sees his vibrating bow drawn in a 
circle, like a blazing disc of the autumn sun. The twang of his bow and the 
slap of his palms, O Bhaarata, resound like thunder clouds. 

Modest, reverential to his elders, ah, so handsome, yet ferocious and 
passionate in war, Abhimanyu, out of regard for these hostile heroes, 
merely skirmishes with them. However, beginning gently, Rajan, he soon 
grows fierce, like the Sun in autumn after the monsoon. Like the Sun 
himself blazing forth his rays, his battle rage growing by the moment, 
Abhimanyu soon unleashes thousands of golden-winged shafts. In the very 
sight of Drona, he covers the chariot-division of the Kaurava army with 
diverse astras—the Kshurupra, sharp as razors, the Vatsadantas, with heads 
like the calf’s tooth, the Vipatha, a long, heavy and inflexible missile, the 
Naracha Ardhachandrabhai, its head a half-moon, Anjalikas with broad- 
heads. 

Harried unbearably by Abhimanyu your army once more turns its back 
on the fray and runs.””’” 


CANTO 36 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


°*T) hritarashtra says, “My heart, O Sanjaya, is agitated by both 

shame and delight, on hearing how Subhadra’s son singly curbs 
my son’s army. Once more tell me in detail about the youthful Abhimanyu’s 
exploits which appear to be so like Skanda’s battle of old with the Asura 
host.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘I will describe to you the fearful encounter, between the 
radiant prince fighting alone against countless adversaries. Mounted on his 
chariot, Abhimanyu, with absolute daring, shoots a thick swarm of shafts at 
your watriors, parantapas all, full of great valour. Charging them with 
astounding speed, like a circle of fire, he strikes Drona, Karna, Kripa, Salya, 
and Drona’s son, Kritavarman of the Bhoja vamsa, Brihadbala, 
Duryodhana, Somadatta, mighty Sakuni and various other kings, princes 
and their troops. As he rages around slaughtering the enemy with his 
remarkable weapons, Abhimanyu mahatejasvin seems, O Bhaarata, to be 
everywhere at once. 

Seeing this, your soldiers tremble with fear, Drona, his eyes alight with 
joy, rides up to Kripa and says to him in Duryodhana’s hearing, “There 
comes the youthful Abhimanyu at the head of the Parthas, enthralling his 


friends, and king Yudhishtira, Nakula, Sahadeva, Bhimasena, his other 
kinsmen, and all the rest who watch the battle as spectators, taking no part 
in it. I do not consider any archer on earth to be Abhimanyu’s equal. If he 
wants, he can destroy this vast army by himself. It seems that for some 
reason, he does not wish it.” 

It is as if his words eviscerate your son. Duryodhana’s eyes turn red and 
Drona looks at him with a faint and mocking smile. Duryodhana, his very 
heart on fire, says to Karna, Balhika, Dusasana, Salya and the other leading 
maharathas of his army, “The Acharaya of the entire Kshatriya varna, the 
first among all Brahmagyanis, does not want to kill this son of Arjuna. No 
one in battle can escape the Acharya with his life, not even the Great 
Destroyer himself, if Drona fights him as an enemy. What, then, to say of 
any mortal? 

I tell you that Abhimanyu is the son of Arjuna, and Arjuna is the 
Acharya’s beloved sishya. It is for this that Drona protects this youth, for 
their disciples and their sons are always dear to men of dharma, why, dearer 
than their own sons! Protected by Drona, the callow son of Arjuna regards 
himself as valorous. He is only a fool to entertain such a high opinion of 
himself. Ah, kill this foolish brat without delay!” 

Goaded by the Kuru king, the already shamed and incensed warriors 
charge Abhimanyu all together. Dusasana, in particular, that tiger of the 
Kurus, assures Duryodhana, “Rajan, I say to you that I will kill this prince 
before the very eyes of the Pandavas and the Panchalas. I will consume 
Subhadra’s son today, like Rahu swallowing Surya.” 

Once more addressing the Kuru king loudly, Dusasana says, “When the 
two vain Krishnas hear that I have killed their precious Abhimanyu, they 
will quit their lives and leave this world of men. Hearing of their death, the 
other sons of Pandu and all their friends and kinsmen will not last another 
day from despair. It is plain to me that if we kill this one Abhimanyu, we 
will kill all your enemies and victory shall be yours. Wish me well, Rajan, 
and I will despatch this prince swiftly to his dead sires!” 

Saying this, your excited Dusasana gives a shattering roar and charges 
Abhimanyu, covering him with dark arrows. Abhimanyu retaliates in wrath 
with twenty-six keen shafts. The battle between Dusasana, who is like an 
infuriated elephant, and Abhimanyu is wild and savage. Both maharathas, 
they wheel around each other in circles, one to the left and the other to the 
right. While, with their panavas, mridangas, dundubhis, krakachas, great 


anakas, bheris and jharjaras, your army makes deafening din, mingled with 
deep roars, like the very sea!’” 


CANTO 37 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Abhimanyu, lacerated by arrows, says smilingly to 

Dusasana, “It is my good fortune that I see before me the vain, 

cruel Kshatriya, who has abandoned dharma and lustily shouts his own 

praises. In the Kuru sabha, in the hearing of king Dhritarashtra, you 

humiliated and angered Yudhishtira Dharmaraja with your vile conduct and 

words. Relying on deceit at the game of dice and Sakuni’s skill at cheating, 
and maddened by low success, you taunted great Bhima repeatedly! 

You are about to reap the fruits of your arrogance that you dared anger 
those illustrious ones. O evil-hearted one, you are about to be punished for 
all your sins—for stealing what does not belong to you, for your haughty 
wrathfulness, your hatred of peace, your avarice, your ignorance, your 
enmity towards your kinsmen, for the injustice and persecution you have 
meted out to them, for depriving my sires, these fierce bowmen, of their 
kingdom and for your always vicious nature and temper. 

I will punish you with my arrows today, wretched Dusasana, in the sight 
of your whole army. Today, I will unburden myself of the rage which I carry 
against you and free myself of the debt I owe the angry Krishna and my 
father Arjuna, who always looks for an opportunity to punish you. Kaurava, 


today I will free myself of the debt I owe my uncle Bhima. You will not 
escape me with your life today, if you do not run away from the battle.” 

Mahabaho Abhimanyu, razer of his enemies, invokes a shaft endued 
with the splendour of Yama, Agni or Vayu, an astra that will send Dusasana 
to the next world. Flashing straight at Dusasana’s chest, the arrow strikes 
his shoulder-joint and plunges into his body up to its very wings. His bow 
drawn to its fullest stretch, Abhimanyu strikes him with twenty-five arrows 
more, all like fire. Struck deep and in agony, Dusasana sighs, sits down 
abruptly in his chariot and faints. 

His charioteer swiftly bears him away senseless from the field. At this, 
the Pandavas, the five sons of Draupadi, Virata, the Panchalas and the 
Kekayas roar their approval and the elated Pandava troops blow their 
conches and beat their drums. Seeing Abhimanyu’s spectacular feat they 
laugh aloud in exhilaration, especially to watch the proud and violent 
Dusasana humbled. The mighty sons of Draupadi, who fly banners with the 
images of Yama, Maruta, Sakra and the twin Aswins, Satyaki, Chekitana, 
Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandin, the Kekayas, Dhrishtaketu, the Matsyas, 
Panchalas, the Srinjayas and the Pandavas led by Yudhishtira, are all 
overjoyed. They dash forward now to pierce Drona’s chakravyuha, to 
shatter it. A dreadful battle breaks out at its rim between all these fierce 
heroes, all bent on victory. 

Duryodhana turns to Karna and says, “Look where valiant Dusasana, 
who until now burned our enemies like the Sun himself, has succumbed to 
Abhimanyu. Look where the Pandavas, filled with war lust, come hunting 
us like a pride of lions to rescue Abhimanyu. Karna, do something!” 

Always sensitive to Duryodhana’s least concern, Karna is quick to blaze 
up in anger and lashes the invincible Abhimanyu with stinging torrents of 
arrows. Now roused, gallant Karna, as if in contempt of his young 
adversary, also strikes the radiant youth’s followers with countless 
exceptional shafts. But the high-souled Abhimanyu has set his sights on 
Drona, and he unleashes a flurry of seventy-three arrows at Karna, drawing 
fonts of blood from that hero. 

No maharatha of your army succeeds in obstructing Abhimanyu’s 
charge towards Drona; indeed, Arjuna’s son, Indra’s grandson, brings havoc 
to them all, even the greatest of them. But recovering in a moment, great 
Karna, most honoured of all bowmen, scathes Abhimanyu with hundreds of 


fiery shafts, consuming the young warrior’s most formidable astras; Karna 
bars Abhimanyu’s path to Drona. 

He bleeds from Karna’s awesome archery, but Abhimanyu, the godlike, 
feels no twinge of pain! He serenely continues to break many great Kaurava 
heroes’ bows in their hands, and also holds Karna at bay. With serpentine 
narachas, shot from his bow drawn into a circle, Abhimanyu destroys 
Karna’s royal chatra, cuts slivers from his standard, and grievously hurts his 
sarathy and horses, ah, smiling all the while. 

In froth, Karna picks up another bow and looses five immaculate arrows 
at Abhimanyu, who receives them fearlessly. In a wink, with a single arrow, 
the scintillating youth breaks both Karna’s bow and flagstaff, so they fall 
onto the ground. Seeing Karna beset, his younger brother drawing his bow 
with great force, charges Subhadra’s overweening son. The Parthas and 
their followers raise loud cheers and blow their conches and beat their 
drums again to celebrate the heroism of the peerless, indomitable 
Abhimanyu.’” 


CANTO 38 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Roaring, bow in hand, its string stretched full, 
Karna’s younger brother sets himself between the two illustrious 
warriors. He pierces invincible Abhimanyu with ten shafts, and his chatra, 
standard, charioteer and horses, smiling the while. Seeing Abhimanyu, who 
fights with superhuman prowess even like his father and grandfather, 
wounded, the warriors of your army are delighted. But with a dazzling 
smile, Abhimanyu bends his bow and with one winged arrow cuts off his 
adversary’s head and drops it onto the ground. 

Seeing his brother defeated and slain like a karnikara tree shaken and 
flung down by the wind from a mountain top, Karna is stricken. Abhimanyu 
unleashes such a ferocious volley at him that he has to turn away from the 
battle; immediately, Abhimanyu attacks the other great bowmen and again 
demolishes the enemy elephants, cavalry, chariots and infantry. With Karna 
fleeing the carnage on his swift ratha, the Kaurava vyuha is shattered. 

Abhimanyu’s shafts shroud the sky like dark locust swarms, Rajan, and 
one can see nothing. All your warrior flee; other than the lone Jayadratha, 
king of the Sindhus. Abhimanyu, Purusharishabha, blows his conch and 
falls on the Bharata host like a burning brand thrown into the midst of dry 


grass. Gleefully, he begins to consume his enemies, charging at will through 
the Kaurava host. Piercing deep into their vyuha, he mangles chariots, 
elephants, horses and men with cataracts of shining arrows; he strews the 
field with headless trunks and trunkless heads. The Kaurava warriors turn 
tail, running down their comrades. 

Arrows, loosed in an endless downpour, miraculous arrows past 
counting, annihilate maharathas, elephants and horses. Severed arms, 
decked with angadas and other golden ornaments, hands cased in leathern 
gloves, arrows, bows, bodies and heads adorned with chariot-rings and 
garlands of flowers, lie in their thousands on Kurukshetra. Covered over 
with upaskaras, adhishthanas, akshas, broken wheels and yokes, in 
thousands upon thousands, and with arrows, bows, swords, fallen standards, 
shields everywhere, and with the bodies of slain Kshatriyas, horses and 
elephants, the battlefield is quickly impassable. 

Deafening is the noise the princes make, as they call out to one another 
while Abhimanyu slaughters them, and cowards quail at it. The din, O lord 
of the Bharatas, fills all the points of the compass. Abhimanyu tears into the 
Kaurava troops, cutting down the greatest maharathas, horses and elephants 
and consuming his enemies truly like a fire in the midst of a heap of dry 
grass. Past count are the men and beasts he kills; as he dashes everywhere at 
will through the heart of the Kaurava army. Surrounded by our troops and 
covered with dust, none of us can catch a glimpse of him as he flies joyfully 
killing horses, elephants and warriors, with no moment’s pause. Corpses fall 
like rain before dreadful, inexorable Abhimanyu of sixteen summers. 

Soon after, we see him flare out of the press, still burning his enemies 
like the meridian sun. Equal to Vasava himself in war, Abhimanyu in the 
midst of Duryodhana’s army is beyond being merely glorious.’” 


CANTO 39 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra asks, “When Abhimanyu, a mere child in years, 

raised in luxury’s lap, proud of the strength of his arms, a wizard 

at war, absolutely heroic by nature, the perpetuator of his race, and heedless 

of his life, pierces the Kaurava army with his chariot yoked to three-years 
old spirited horses, does any maharatha of Yudhishtira’s army follow him?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Yudhishtira, Bhimasena, Sikhandin, Satyaki, Nakula and 
Sahadeva, Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, Drupada, Kekaya, Dhrishtaketu, and the 
Matsya warriors all stream fiercely behind him. Abhimanyu’s sires, along 
with uncles, all maharathas, arrayed in battle order, come thundering in his 
wake, along the very path that he creates. Seeing them come in fearsome 
tide, your troops back away from the fight. 

It is then that your son-in-law, Jayadratha of the Sindhus, his brief time 
of glory come, faces the Parthas and all their followers, standing at the 
fateful moment between them and Abhimanyu, and holding them all at bay! 
Like a lone elephant appeared in a bloody marsh, Vriddhakshatra’s 
formidable son invokes great devastras to arrest the charge of the 
Pandavas.’ 


Dhritarashtra says, ‘Sanjaya, the burden of Jayadratha must have been 
heavy, for he faced the angry Pandavas by himself, even as they stormed 
forward to the rescue of their beloved prince. Surely, his might and heroism 
are more than wonderful. Tell me about that noble Kshatriya’s prowess, and 
how he accomplishes the incredible feat. 

What dana has he given, what libations has he poured onto the sacred 
fire, what sacrifices has he performed, what tapasya has he undergone, that 
he now succeeds in holding up all the Parthas single-handed?’ 

Sanjaya says, “Once, when Jayadratha tried to abduct Draupadi in the 
forest, Bhimasena crushed and humiliated him savagely. Utterly shamed, 
Jayadratha went into a deep forest and performed the most arduous tapasya. 
He restrained his senses, endured hunger, thirst and heat, and he emaciated 
his body until his veins stood out like blue snakes through his skin. 
Chanting the eternal mantras of the Vedas, he worshipped Mahadeva. 

Finally, the illustrious Siva, who is always kindly towards his devotees, 
appeared in a dream and said to Jayadratha, “Ask for the boon you want. I 
am pleased with you, Jayadratha! What do you wish for?” 

Bowing down to the Lord with folded hands, Jayadratha said, “Grant 
that, alone on a single chariot, I once vanquish all the sons of Pandu 
together, for all their terrible tejas and prowess.” 

This, O Bhaarata, was the boon he asked for. Mahadeva said to him, “I 
grant you your boon. Other than Arjuna, you will one day defeat the other 
four sons of Pandu in battle.” 

Jayadratha said to the Devadeva, ““Tataasthu!” and awoke, O Rajan, 
from his sleep. 

It was because of that boon and also through the power of his devastras 
that Jayadratha single-handedly arrests the entire Pandava force. The virile 
twanging of his bowstring and the slaps of his palms as he looses his 
missiles fill the enemy Kshatriyas with uncanny fear; and they delight your 
troops. Seeing Jayadratha’s astonishing feat, the emboldened Kshatriyas of 
your army ride back into battle against Yudhishtira’s forces.’” 


CANTO 40 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “You ask me, Rajan, about the prowess of Jayadratha 
of the Sindhus. I will describe in detail how he opposes the 
Pandavas. 

Great horses of the Sindhu breed, well-trained, fast as the wind and 
obedient to the commands of his sarathy, are harnessed to his chariot, which 
looks like a cloud palace in the sky. His flag that bears the device of a large 
silver boar is striking to behold. He shines like the moon in the firmament 
with his white chatra and banners, and he is fanned with yak-tails—all the 
emblems of sovereignty. Pearls, diamonds, rubies and gold deck his iron 
chariot rails and it glitters like the starry sky. Drawing his ample bow and 
shooting a fusillade of missiles, quick as thinking, he blocks the breach that 
Abhimanyu made in the chakravyuha. He pierces Satyaki with three arrows, 
Vrikodara with eight, Dhrishtadyumna with sixty, Drupada with five, and 
Sikhandin with ten. 

He then draws blood from the Kaikeyas with twenty-five keen bolts. 
Jayadratha strikes each of the five sons of Draupadi with three arrows; he 
wounds Yudhishtira with seventy; pierces the other heroes of the Pandava 
army with thick showers of shafts: ah, a feat altogether wonderful. Rajan, 


then with a gleaming arrow, Yudhishtira breaks Jayadratha’s bow with a 
smile. However, in the twinkling of an eye, the Sindhu takes up another 
bow and pierces Yudhishtira with ten sharp barbs and each of the others 
with three. 

Amazed by Jayadratha’s newfound dexterity, Bhima cleaves his bow, 
and knocks down his standard and royal parasol with three wedge-headed 
shafts. Jayadratha sweeps up another bow, strings it in a flash and fells 
Bhima’s flag, bow and horses, forcing him to abandon his useless chariot. 
Bhima leaps onto Satyaki’s ratha like a lion bounding onto a mountain. 
Seeing this, your troops applaud Jayadratha, and shout, “Wonderful! 
Wonderful!” 

Indeed, they and all beings repeatedly applaud the feat of the Sindhu 
king who, single-handedly, holds all the Pandavas together at bay. 
Jayadratha bestrides and fills the path that Abhimanyu made for the 
Pandavas by slaughtering so many warriors and elephants. Indeed, with 
great effort do the mighty Matsyas, Panchalas, Kaikeyas and the Pandavas 
themselves manage to draw near Jayadratha; but none of them can subdue 
him. Jayadratha, using Mahadeva’s boon, holds up every one of your 
enemies who tries to break into Drona’s chakravyuha.’” 


CANTO 41 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Jayadratha, king of the Sindhus, effectively halts the 
onrush Pandavas and the battle between them is marvellous and 
dreadful. First, the invincible Abhimanyu breaks into the Kaurava array and 
shakes it like a makara agitating the ocean. Then the principal warriors of 
the Kaurava army attack him in turns, each according to his rank and 
precedence. Fierce and bloody is the contention between these powerful 
maharathas on the one side and Abhimanyu alone on the other. 

Surrounded on all sides by the enemy with massed chariots, the 
splendid prince kills Vrishasena’s sarathy and demolishes his bow. He 
excoriates Vrishasena’s horses with a brace of unerring shafts, and those 
horses swift as the wind bolt, bearing a helpless Vrishasena from the battle. 
Abhimanyu’s charioteer escapes from the thick melee, whisking his young 
hero away to another part of the field The numerous maharathas who watch 
this feat are all filled with admiration and exclaim, “Uttamam! Wonderful!” 

Seeing the lion Abhimanyu furiously mowing down the Kauravas like 
some force of nature, Vasatiya charges him and falls upon him. He pierces 
Abhimanyu with sixty golden-winged shafts and cries, “As long as I am 
alive, you will not escape with your life.” 


Although Vasatiya wears an iron kavacha, Abhimanyu blows his heart 
apart with a single arrow, and that Kshatriya falls dead out of his chariot. 
Incensed at this, many bulls among Kshatriyas besiege your grandson all 
together, Rajan, to try and overpower him. Stretching bows of diverse 
kinds, they assail him and another fierce battle ensues. A vengeful 
Abhimanyu shreds their bows and arrows, their limbs, and plucks off their 
heads decked with ear-rings and crowns of flowers. He lops off their arms 
adorned with various golden ornaments, which still hold swords, spiked 
maces and battle-axes in fingers cased in leather gloves. 

The earth is strewn with garlands, ornaments, fine cloaks, fallen 
standards, coats of mail, shields, golden chains, diadems, parasols, yak- 
tails; with upaskaras, adhishthanas, dandakas, banduras, with crushed 
akshas, broken wheels, and yokes, numbering thousands; with anukarshas, 
banners, charioteers, horses; and also with broken chariots and felled 
elephants. The hallowed field spread over so liberally with slain Kshatriya 
shuras, rulers of different kingdoms, all come here for victory, presents a 
fearful sight. 

When Abhimanyu angrily rides across Kurukshetra, everywhere at will, 
his very form becomes invisible. One sees only his coat of mail, 
glimmering with gold, his ornaments, bow and arrows. Indeed, he razes the 
enemy like the sun himself in his blazing effulgence, and no one can even 
look at him so bright is he.’” 


CANTO 42 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Abhimanyu at war resembles the Destroyer, Rudra 

himself claiming the lives of all creatures upon the advent of the 

Pralaya. His prowess like his grandsire Indra’s, that prince is magnificent, 

ineffable! He pierces the enemy ranks like Yama and seizes Satvasravas like 

an angry tiger seizing a deer. Seeing this, many Maharathas, wielding all 

kinds of weapons, rush at him, calling out, “I will go first! Let me strike 
first!” 

Just as a whale in the sea catches a shoal of small fish with great ease, 
so does Abhimanyu consume that whole division of Kshatriyas. Like rivers 
that never retreat as they approach the sea, none among the charging 
Kshatriyas draw back when they reach Abhimanyu. That legion reels like a 
boat tossed on the ocean where a mighty tempest rages, its crew panic- 
stricken by the violence of the wind. 

Great Rukmaratha, son of Salya of the Madras, roars, “Kshatriyas, have 
no fear! When I am here, what is Abhimanyu? I will take him alive.” 

Riding his beautiful and well-equipped chariot, Rukmaratha dashes at 
Abhimanyu and bloodies him with three shafts that whistle into his torso, 
three into the right arm and three the left. Arjuna’s son, however, breaks 


Rukmaratha’s bow, and in a blink cuts off his arms and his head with its 
beautiful eyes and high-arched brows. Seeing Rukmaratha, who vowed to 
either kill Abhimanyu or take him alive, die gorily, a hundred of his friends, 
each one a heroic Kshatriya, flying gold adorned pennants, join the battle. 
These maharathas, stretching their bows that are full six cubits long, 
surround Abhimanyu and loose tornadoes of arrows at him. 

Seeing him besieged by all those great princes, Duryodhana rejoices 
and considers Abhimanyu already a guest in Yama’s halls. The princes 
shroud Abhimanyu with dense gusts of golden missiles, making him well 
nigh invisible. We quickly see Abhimanyu with his standard and his chariot 
covered over with barbs like a great tree with flights of locusts. His blood 
flowing, his ire rising, he responds like an elephant goaded with an ankusha. 

O Bhaarata, he invokes the Gandharvastra and the illusions it creates. 
Arjuna received this astra from the Gandharva Tumburu and others through 
tapasya and yagnas; he gave it to his son. Now unleashing it at his enemies 
Abhimanyu bewilders them. He is a circle of fire and we see him sometimes 
as one prince, sometimes as a hundred and sometimes as a thousand. 
Confounding his massed adversaries with the magic illusions of that 
weapon, he forges ahead on his ratha and vivisects the enemy kings, 
sending hosts of spirits soaring into the next world while here their bodies 
fall onto the ground tike tops that spin no more, many cut into a hundred 
raw sections. He destroys their bows, horses, charioteers, standards, why, 
their very legions while time seems to stand still for him. He kills the 
hundred princes like five-year old mango-trees on the point of bearing fruit, 
swept down by a tempest. 

Seeing Abhimanyu single-handedly massacre all these youthful princes, 
brought up in every luxury and resembling angry snakes, along with their 
rathikas, elephants, horses and foot-soldiers, fear and blind rage grip 
Duryodhana and the shocked Kuru king rushes roaring at Abhimanyu. The 
incendiary duel between them lasts only a short while, before your son, 
harried past endurance by the resplendent Abhimanyu, is obliged to turn 
away from the fight.’” 


CANTO 43 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, “What you tell me, O Suta, about the battle 

between the lustrous Abhimanyu fighting alone against so many 

enemies, seems wonderful, why, incredible. However, I do not regard such 

feats as unbelievable marvels in those who have dharma for their refuge. 

After Duryodhana is beaten back and a hundred princes are slain, what do 
the warriors of my army do next against Abhimanyu?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Their mouths become dry, their eyes restless; sweat 
covers their bodies, their hair stand on ends and they are ready to quit the 
field in despair. Abandoning their wounded brothers, fathers, sons, friends, 
and kinsmen they flee, urging their horses and elephants to their utmost 
speed. Seeing them broken and in full flight, Drona, Aswatthaman, 
Brihadbala, Kripa, Duryodhana, Karna, Kritavarman and Subala’s son 
Sakuni come swarming to quell the invincible Abhimanyu. But your 
grandson, Rajan, routs all of them and only one warrior, Duryodhana’s son, 
the noble Lakshmana, accomplished tejasvin, fearless now because his is 
both proud and callow, takes the field against Abhimanyu. Anxious for his 
son, Duryodhana turns back to follow him, as do other maharathas. 


Like dark thunderheads inundating a mountain-breast with rain, all of 
them lash arrow showers over Abhimanyu. Abhimanyu sweeps over them 
the dry wind in the sky that blows in every direction scattering cloud 
masses. Then, like one infuriated elephant fighting another, he engages your 
grandson, the handsome, brave and strapping Lakshmana, who stands near 
his father with his bow stretched, like a prince of the Yakshas; Lakshmana 
who strikes Abhimanyu through his arms and his chest with robust shafts 
that drink his blood. 

Abhimanyu Mahabaho is like a snake beaten with a stick. He cries to 
Lakshmana, “Look well on this world, for you will soon go to the other one. 
In front of all your kinsmen, I will dispatch you to Yama’s realm.” 

He looses a broad-headed astra that resembles a snake just emerged 
from its slough, and dissevers Lakshmana’s beautiful head, graced with a 
strong and noble nose, fine eye-brows and handsome curls, and with 
sparkling kundalas. Seeing Lakshmana killed, your troops cry out in shock 
and grief. 

Blood leaping into his eyes to see his precious son die, Duryodhana 
howls long and echoingly truly like some dreadful demon, and screams at 
his Kshatriyas, Kill him! 

Six maharathas— Drona, Kripa, Karna, Aswatthaman, Brihadbala and 
Kritavarman, son of Hridika, surround Abhimanyu. He drills each of them 
with his burning arrows, and beats them off like a lion might a pack of 
dogs. The incandescent son of Arjuna falls upon the vast forces of 
Jayadratha with redoubled ferocity. With their elephant-division, the 
Kalingas, the Nishadas and the valiant son of Kratha, all clad in gleaming 
mail, encircle him and block his way ahead. Another pitched battle breaks 
out and tameless, invincible Abhimanyu quickly melts those forces; he is at 
them like a hurricane. 

Kratha’s son showers him with deadly fire, while many other rathikas 
led by Drona, who returns to the field, rush at him, discharging their violent 
fusillades at the meridian prince. Containing their assault with some 
disdain, Abhimanyu looses a flash flood of arrows at Kratha’s son, cutting 
down all his barbs, breaking his bow, severing his arms and then his head 
with its golden coronet. Seeing Kratha’s noble, mighty and famed son, 
master of astras, die in the incarnadine blasts of Abhimanyu’s unworldly 
shafts, your other maharathas quickly ride away from this terrible prince of 
tender years.””’ 


CANTO 44 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra asks, ‘While young and invincible Abhimanyu, who 

never flees a battle, strikes deep into our vyuha, so effortlessly, 

and achieves feats more than worthy of his lineage, which of my heroes 
stand up to him?’ 

Sanjaya answers, ‘Once he breaks into the chakravyuha, Abhimanyu 
brings bloody mayhem to your forces and all your heroes and the kings that 
fight for your son turn away from Arjuna’s prince, for he fights like a god 
and they cannot bear him. Then it is that the six maharathas surround him 
again— Drona, Kripa, Karna, Aswatthaman, Brihadbala and Hridika’s son 
Kritavarman of the Yadavas. 

The other warriors harry Yudhishtira, to support Jayadratha who single- 
handedly holds up the Pandavas, Many powerful Kshatriyas draw their six 
cubit long bows and shower arrows on him like rain. Abhimanyu paralyses 
all these great archers. He strikes Drona with fifty arrows, Brihadbala with 
twenty, Kritavarman with eighty, and Kripa with sixty shafts. Abhimanyu 
draws his bow into a circle and stabs Aswatthaman with ten gold fledged 
barbs, and Karna with a keen bright, bearded arrow shot with great force. 


Cutting down Kripa’s horses and both his Parshni charioteers, mighty 
Abhimanyu bloodies Kripa’s chest with ten searing shafts. In the very sight 
of your heroic sons, he overwhelms the brave Vrindaraka, the pride of the 
Kurus. While Arjuna’s incredible son mows down your greatest warriors, 
one after another, Aswatthaman strikes him with twenty-five small and 
clever barbs. Abhimanyu turns on Drona’s son with a sizzling volley and 
Aswatthaman responds with sixty fierce darts. But Abhimanyu stands 
immovable as the Mainaka mountain. 

Mahatejasvin Abhimanyu looses seventy-three gold-winged shafts in a 
wink at Aswatthaman so he staggers in his ratha. Drona rides to his son’s 
rescue, striking Abhimanyu with a hundred arrows, while Aswatthaman 
also pierces him with sixty. From another side, Karna strikes him with 
twenty-two broad-headed shafts; Kritavarman with fourteen; Brihadbala 
with fifty and Saradwata’s son, Kripa, with ten. Abhimanyu, majestic 
dancer in his chariot, makes each of them a home for ten missiles from his 
implacable bow. 

Brihadbala, king of the Kosalas, drills a slender barbed shaft into 
Abhimanyu’s chest; in a flash, that superlative prince cuts down his 
antagonist’s horses, standard, bow and charioteer. Brihadbala seizes up a 
great sword and, leaping down from his ruined chariot, runs at Abhimanyu 
to hew his head off. With one inexorable shining shaft, Abhimanyu find 
Brihadbala’s heart, and that great Kshatriya falls dead without a sound. 
Seeing this, ten thousand illustrious Kshatriyas break away from the fray 
and flee, cursing Duryodhana. 

Having killed Brihadbala, Abhimanyu courses around the field, sowing 
death all around him.’” 


CANTO 45 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


°S anjaya says, ‘Arjuna’s dazzling son again strikes Karna with a 
heavy barbed bolt, then quick as the mind with fifty more. Now 
Duryodhana pierces Abhimanyu with a relucent clutch of shafts. Covered 
all over by now with arrows, Abhimanyu presents a striking appearance; 
mad with rage, he bathes Karna in blood so that he, too, mangled by that 
astounding prince’s archery, wears a burnished look; and both of them 
resemble a couple of flowering kinsukas. Without a moment’s pause, 
amazing Abhimanyu kills six of Karna’s bravest warriors, with their horses 
and charioteers, and shatters their chariots. 

Fear lays no hand on that luminous sixteen-year-old god among men 
and, never pausing, he shoots the six maharathas with ten more shafts each. 
With six unerring barbs, he strikes off the head of the youthful Aswaketu, 
son of the Magadha king, in the same moment killing his four horses and 
charioteer; no, never pausing, he despatches the Bhoja prince of 
Martikavata, whose banner has an elephant emblazoned on it. Roaring like 
several lions, so the field echoes with his strong and youthful voice, 
Abhimanyu blows like a desert storm of death on Kurukshetra; like a lion in 
a cattle pen is he. 


Dusasana’s son scathes Abhimanyu’s horses with four shafts, his 
sarathy with one and Abhimanyu himself with ten; Abhimanyu plunges two 
smoking barbs into his enemy’s body. Red-eyed, he cries, “Your father has 
fled battle like a coward. It is well that you are not like him. But you will 
not escape me alive today.” 

And Abhimanyu looses a long polished arrow at his enemy, but Drona’s 
son cuts it down from a side with three light-like bolts. 

Letting Aswatthama alone, Abhimanyu turns on Salya and shreds his 
chest with nine fierce barbs, vulture-feathered. The riverine arrows from his 
uncanny weapon break Salya’s bow, kill both his Parshni charioteers, and 
bloody Salya himself, forcing him to quit his chariot and mount another. 
Tireless Abhimanyu, unchained, kills five maharathas in a_ blur— 
Satrunjaya, Chandraketu, Mahamegba, Suvarchas and Suryabhasa; he 
strikes Sakuni hard making him lurch in his chariot. Subala’s evil son drills 
Abhimanyu with three barbs and says to Duryodhana, “We must attack him 
all together, or this boy will kill us all today. Rajan, take counsel with Drona 
and Kripa and think of how this horrible prince can be killed.” 

Karna asks Drona, “Abhimanyu crushes us all as he pleases. Tell us 
how we can stop him.” 

Drona says to all his maharathas, “You have all seen him close, this 
magnificent youth. Have you found any weakness in him? He careens 
everywhere among us all, but have any of us seen the faintest frailty in him? 
Ah, we can only gaze at the unearthly swiftness of this incomparable young 
lion, while he slaughters us, and gaze on in wonder. 

We see his chariot fly among us like a streak of lightning; we see his 
bow always drawn in a circle; but so quickly does he aim his arrows and 
shoot them that it seems time is his servant. Ah, this dreadful son of 
Subhadra delights me, even while he razes our army, and afflicts my very 
prana, for he is so entirely wonderful. Our greatest maharathas are 
flabbergasted and I myself enchanted by the skills of Abhimanyu. Truly, I 
see no flaw in him, no chink to pierce so we might bring him down. 

There is no difference between this youth and his father; if anything his 
son exceeds Arjuna! Look how he fills all the points of the horizon with his 
mighty shafts.” 

Still bleeding from Abhimanyu’s arrows, Karna says between clenched 
teeth, “I am sorely wounded by this boy, and I fight on only because I am a 


true warrior. I fear that my injuries are grave, for the force of his arrows is 
like none I have ever known, and I fear my wounds weaken my heart.” 

The Acharya tells Karna, with a smile, “Abhimanyu is young, his 
prowess is great. His kavacha is impenetrable because I myself taught his 
father how to wear his coat of mail. This young parantapa surely knows that 
subtle science completely. Yet with shafts well shot, you can destroy his 
bow, bowstring, the reins of his horses, the steeds themselves and his two 
Parshni charioteers. 

O Karna, mighty archer, do this if you can and make him turn his back 
on the fight; and then strike him from behind. With his bow in hand, the 
very Devas and the Asuras together cannot conquer Abhimanyu. If you 
want to kill him, first deprive him of his chariot and divest him of his bow.” 

Not hesitating a moment, Karna cleaves Abhimanyu’s bow in his hands, 
even as that prince continues to vigorously burn his enemies; Kritavarman 
of the Bhojas kills his horses and Kripa his two Parshni charioteers. After 
breaking his bow, the six maharathas fall ruthlessly on the now chariot less 
youth, unleashing a black storm of arrows at him. Bowless and his chariot 
useless, but always the pure Kshatriya who never knows fear, Abhimanyu 
takes up a sword and shield and leaps high into the air. He hangs there, 
using the arcane Kausika way, going freely through the sky like Garuda, 
prince of all birds! 

With thoughts like He will fall upon my sword! the maharathas, their 
gazes now turned up, continue to loose their arrows at the suspended prince, 
always wary of him striking down at them. They draw blood from Arjuna’s 
son turned into the ultimate embodiment of a warrior. 

Then, with a perfect shaft, mighty Drona breaks Abhimanyu’s sword at 
its jewelled hilt; at the same moment Karna shatters his shield in shards. 
Abhimanyu falls from a height but lands unhurt on his feet. Undaunted, 
with never a thought for his life, he pulls a wheel free from his ratha and 
holding it aloft, runs roaring at the Acharya. 

Ah, this world has hardly ever seen any sight equal to Abhimanyu at 
that moment, covered in dust, but his body shining so brightly through it, 
with the chariot-wheel in his hands like Krishna’s very Sudarshana, and still 
full of fierce valour. His clothes dyed red with the blood flowing from his 
countless wounds, his brow knit and formidable with deep furrows, still 
roaring like a pride of young lions, lord Abhimanyu of immeasurable tejas, 


is magnificent, splendid, my king, glorious past telling or imagining on 
heartless Kurukshetra.” 


CANTO 46 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Abhimanyu, the joy of Krishna’s sister, Abhimanyu 
the Atiratha, flaunting his wheel like the Sudarshana, is so 
beautiful; he is like a second Janardana. With his lambent locks flying in the 
wind, his body alight, and that strangest weapon, so dazzling now in his 
hands, the very Devas are blinded by that prince and cannot look at his 
splendour. 

Seeing him with the chariot wheel, the unnerved maharathas tremble 
and, somehow, all together, cut that wheel into a hundred pieces. Peerless 
Abhimanyu takes up a great mace and runs at Aswatthaman. Seeing the 
gada aloft, and looking like Indra’s Vajra, Aswatthaman, tiger among men, 
jumps out of his chariot and runs three loping stride to escape that blazing 
prince. Abhimanyu, like a flame burning brightest just before it is put out, 
kills Aswathaman’s horses and Parshni charioteers with dreadful strokes of 
his mace. 

Pierced all over with arrows, looking like some ethereal porcupine, he 
smashes Subala’s son Kalikeya’s head like a red melon; never stopping, 
never doubting himself, he fells Kalikeya’s seventy-seven Gandhara 
followers with his supernatural mace. Next, he slaughters ten rathikas of the 


Brahma-Vasatiya vamsa, and then ten massive elephants! Flying then at 
Dusasana’s son, he smashes his chariot along with its horses and pounds 
them down into the earth. 

The indomitable son of Dusasana takes up his own gada and rushes at 
Abhimanyu, roaring, Stop! Wait! The cousins, the two young Kshatriyas 
heroes, begin to swing their maces at each other wildly, landing sickening 
blows. Both have a single thought; both are a single thought—to kill the 
other. They fight like the three-eyed Mahadeva and the Asura Andhaka in 
days of old. Finally, at the same instant, both land thunderous blows on 
each other and both fall at once onto the earth, like two uprooted 
yupastambas, sacrificial stakes raised in honour of Indra. 

But it has been a day as long as several lives for Arjuna’s matchless son. 
Dusasana’s son, enhancer of the fame of the Kurus, is first to rise. Even as 
Abhimanyu begins to haul himself onto his feet, Dusasana’s son swings an 
awful blow of his mace down squarely on the crown of noble Abhimanyu’s 
head, shattering it. With a soft sigh, Parantapa Abhimanyu, sixteen years 
old, who has killed so many thousands of your greatest warriors by himself, 
falls dead on sacred Kurukshetra, the hint of a smile still on his bloody lips. 

Thus, Rajan, many join together to finally kill this one hero, who by 
himself razes a vast portion of your army, like an elephant trampling lotus- 
stalks in a lake. And as he lies dead on the field, Abhimanyu looks like a 
wild elephant slain by hunters. Your troops surround the fallen Kshatriya 
who now resembles a raging summer conflagration extinguished after 
consuming a whole forest; or like a tempest divested of its fury after 
devastating mountain crests; like the Sun arriving at the western hills after 
having consumed the Bharata army; or like Soma swallowed by Rahu; or 
like the Ocean dried of water. 

The maharathas of your army gaze at Abhimanyu whose face still has 
the splendour of the full moon and whose lashes black as the feathers of the 
raven made his eyes luminous and beautiful, Abhimanyu now lying prone 
on the bare earth. They are filled with joy and roar in relief and triumph 
again and again. 

Indeed, Rajan, your troops are in transports of joy, while tears fall fast 
from the eyes of the Pandava heroes. Seeing Abhimanyu lying on the field 
of battle, like the moon fallen from the sky, diverse beings of the air lament, 
“Alas, he who fought alone, like an army himself, lies dead on the 


battlefield, murdered by six mighty maharathas of the Dhartarashtra army, 
led by Drona and Karna. This killing was not a deed of dharma.” 

Upon fall of that transplendent prince among the countless corpses he 
has strewn her with, the earth looks like the star-filled sky with the moon 
now among the fainter lights. Bhumi assumes a beautiful aspect, covered 
with wavelets of blood, scattered with innumerable arrows with wings of 
gold and spread over with the noble heads of Kshatriyas, wearing ear-rings, 
variegated turbans of great value, with banners, yak-tails, beautiful cloths, 
priceless jewel-encrusted weapons, with the bright ornaments of chariots, 
horses, men, elephants; sharp and well-tempered swords looking like snakes 
freed from their sloughs, bows, broken arrows, spears, swords, kampanas 
and all kinds of weapons. 

The ground in many places is impassable because of the horses that lie 
upon her dead or dying, all weltering in blood, with their riders lying near 
them, felled by Subhadra’s son. Kurukshetra wears a grim and terrible 
aspect, with iron hooks and elephants big as hills, with shields, swords and 
standards, lying everywhere, all cut down by Abhimanyu. Superb chariots 
deprived of their horses, charioteers and maharathas lie all around in death’s 
final attitudes, some crushed flat by elephants. Ample corpses of foot- 
soldiers with diverse weapons lie on the bloody ground and _ the 
indescribable sight fills all faint hearts with terror. 

Seeing Abhimanyu, splendent as the sun or the moon, fallen on the 
ground, your troops rejoice, while the Pandavas are grief-stricken. When 
youthful Abhimanyu of sixteen summers falls, the Pandava legions all flee 
in shock from the very presence of Yudhishtira. Seeing his army breaking 
up, Yudhishtira addresses his warriors, “The heroic Abhimanyu was killed 
without retreating from battle, and he has certainly risen into swarga. So 
stand and fear not, for we shall yet vanquish our enemies.” 

Endued with great energy and lustre, Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, the best 
of Kshatriyas, attempts to put heart into his stricken men. 

He says, “Arjuna’s son has given up his life after killing countless 
enemies princes who were like snakes of virulent poison in battle. Razing 
ten thousand warriors, Abhimanyu who was like Krishna or Arjuna himself, 
has assuredly gained the realm of Indra. He destroyed chariots, horses, men 
and elephants, thousands of them, and was not content with what he did. He 
fought as no other Kshatriya ever has, and died in battle. We should not 


grieve so for him for he has attained the bright regions of the righteous, 
realms that men acquire only through great punya karma.”’” 


CANTO 47 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “And thus, on that momentous day, after killing one 

of their greatest warriors, after suffering untold losses and injuries 

at his hands, we return to our camp in the evening, covered in blood. Under 

the unwavering gaze of our enemy, we slowly leave the battleground, in a 
stupor for such have been our losses. 

The wonderful twilight hour arrives. We hear inauspicious howls of 
jackals and the Sun, now turned the pale-red of the filaments of a lotus, 
sinks low on the horizon, having reached the western mountains of Astama. 
Surya takes with him the brilliance of our swords, arrows, blades, chariot- 
railings, shields and ornaments. Colouring sky and earth with the same hue, 
the Sun assumes his favourite form of fire. 

Kurukshetra, spread over with the motionless bodies of innumerable 
dead elephants, looks like the crests of cloud-capped hills riven by thunder, 
and lying all around are their standards, hooks, and riders fallen from their 
backs. The earth presents an amazing spectacle with great chariots smashed 
to pieces, and their warriors, charioteers, ornaments, horses, standards and 
banners all destroyed, many past recognition. The great rathas look like 
living creatures whose lives the enemy has taken with his shafts. The field 


of battle wears a fierce and awful aspect with the legion horses and riders 
all lying dead, with costly trappings and coverlets of varied kinds torn and 
scattered about as if by some terrible storm; and tongues, teeth, entrails and 
eyes of men and beasts falling out of their proper places. Men wearing fine 
coats of mail, ornaments, bright robes and weapons, lie with dead horses, 
elephants and broken chariots on bare ground this twilight, although they 
deserve to sleep on costly beds and sheets. 

Dogs, jackals, crows, cranes and other scavenging birds, and wolves, 
hyenas, ravens, diverse tribes of Rakshasas and sinister hosts of Pisachas 
arrive on the field of horror; they tear away the skins of the corpses and 
suck up their fat, blood and marrow, and then begin to feast greedily on 
their flesh and the vilest among them on all the secretions of rotted corpses. 
The Rakshasas laugh horribly and sing aloud, dragging dead bodies away in 
thousands, preventing noble Kshatriyas from having their last rites 
performed with honour and sanctity. The kali yuga has arrived. 

A horrible river flows across the field of death, like the Vaitarani itself. 
Its waters are blood; chariots are its rafts; elephants its large rocks and the 
heads of dead men its smaller stones. It is soggy with the loosened flesh of 
slain steeds, elephants and men. The diverse kinds of beautiful weapons are 
the garlands floating on it or lying on its banks. The terrible river flows 
fierce through the heart of the field, bearing its dreadful cargo to the regions 
of the dead. 

Hosts of Pisachas, their forms horrible and repugnant, rejoice as they 
drink and eat from that scarlet rill; wild dogs, jackals and scavenging birds, 
vultures, crows and the rest, partake of the same grisly feast, their ghoulish 
carnival. The warriors, whom death has spared on this day, gaze numbly at 
the field and its ghastly river, and before their eyes corpses seem to rise up 
and dance! Then, all those who have survived the apocalyptic day, slowly 
leave the field, for their eyes fill when they see Abhimanyu, who was like 
Sakra himself, lying there, his ornaments broken and fallen around him. 
Dead Abhimanyu looks like a sacrificial fire on an altar no longer fed with 
ghee.’” 


CANTO 48 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘After the slaying of Abhimanyu, all the Pandava 

warriors leave their rathas, take off their armour, throw aside their 

bows, and sit surrounding Yudhishtira, all of them plunged in untold grief, 
their hearts fixed on one thought—dead Abhimanyu. 

Upon the fall of his meteoric nephew, Yudhishtira is unmanned by 
sorrow and laments aloud. “Alas, Abhimanyu pierced the chakravyuha that 
Drona formed against me. He put so many mighty bowmen to flight, all of 
them masters of weapons and well-nigh invincible. He stormed our 
implacable enemy Dusasana and, striking him senseless, forced him to flee 
the field. Alas, that gallant son of Arjuna, having crossed the vast sea of 
Drona’s army, is now a guest in Yama’s halls, killed by the same Dusasana’s 
son. Ah, how will I face Arjuna, and the blessed Subhadra who has lost her 
favourite son? How will I break this tragic news to Krishna and 
Dhananjaya? What hollow words will I speak to them? With what voice? 

Wanting victory at any cost, it is I who has done this great evil to 
Subhadra, Kesava and Arjuna. He who is greedy never sees his own faults. 
Covetousness springs from folly. Honey-gatherers do not see the fall before 
them; and I am like them. Alas, we set our prince who was still a child in 


the van of our army, while he should instead have been cossetted with fine 
food, carriages and chariots, rich beds and ornaments. How could our child 
of tender years, unskilled in battle, ride with any hope into such grave 
danger? Like a noble steed of proud spirit, he sacrificed himself instead of 
refusing to do what I asked. 

Alas, today we too will lay ourselves down on the bare earth, blasted by 
the glances of grief that the angry Arjuna will cast on us. The very Devas 
applaud the feats of Arjuna, for he is mighty, handsome, liberal, intelligent, 
modest, forgiving, a shura who is respectful to his elders and superiors, who 
is heroic, beloved and devoted to truth— Arjuna of glorious achievements. 
This Kshatriya slew the Nivatakavachas and the Kalakeyas, Indra’s enemies 
in Hiranyapura. In the twinkling of an eye he slew the Paulomas with all 
their followers. Yet he grants mercy to even his most inveterate enemies, if 
they but ask! 

And it is his son that we could not protect from danger today. The 
Dhartarashtras, endued though they might be with great power and strength, 
will rue this day! For when he hears of Abhimanyu’s death, Arjuna 
exterminate the Kauravas in wrath; and then, foolish Duryodhana, who has 
vile counsellors, who is the destroyer of his own race and friends, will give 
up his life in anguish. Seeing this son of Indra’s son, with no remote rival in 
splendour and prowess, lying lifeless on the field, neither victory, 
sovereignty, immortality, nor living with the very Devas, can anymore fetch 
me the least delight!”’” 


CANTO 49 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “While Kunti’s son Yudhishtira thus laments, the 
Maharishi Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa comes to him. 
Worshipping him duly, and offering him a seat, the grief-stricken 
Yudhishtira says, “Mahamuni, while he fought alone, magnificently, several 
great maharathas surrounded Abhimanyu and killed him treacherously. He 
was but a child and he fought gloriously against a whole army. I asked him 
to open a passage for us and he broke into Drona’s chakravyuha. We wanted 
to follow him but Jayadratha, with Siva’s boon, barred our way. A dharma 
yuddha is fought fairly and against an equal adversary. But here Abhimanyu 
was besieged by an entire army. Ah, my heart is broken when I think that I 
sent that child to his death, and tears leak from my eyes, and I have no 
peace of mind.” 

The illustrious Vyasa says to the distraught, shattered Yudhishtira, 
“Wise Yudhishtira, men like you, who are masters of yourselves and of all 
knowledge, never allow any calamity to overwhelm them. Having killed 
countless enemies, Abhimanyu has risen into swarga. Indeed, though young 
in years, he fought like a grown and seasoned warrior. Yudhishtira, let alone 


men, Death takes all Devas, Danavas and Gandharvas, without exception, 
and his law is inviolable.” 

Yudhishtira says, “Alas, these lords of earth that lie on the bare earth, 
slain in the midst of their forces, were all men of great prowess and valour. 
Some had the strength of ten thousand elephants while others were gifted 
with the impetuosity and force of the wind. They have all perished in battle, 
slain by men of their own varna. 

They possessed great skills, energy and strength. Alas, the wise 
Kshatriyas who took daily to the field, always in the hope that they would 
conquer, now lie dead on Kurukshetra. The meaning of the word Death has 
today been amply revealed, for almost all these great lords of the earth are 
dead. These Kshatriyas lie motionless, bereft of vanity, having succumbed 
to their enemies. Many princes, themselves full of wrath, have been 
consumed by the fire of their enemies’ fury. 

A great doubt possesses me—from where comes Death? Whose son is 
Death? What is Death? Why does Death take away all beings? Pitamaha, O 
you who are like a god, tell me this.” 

Vyasa says, “Rajan, let me tell you this ancient story about the origin of 
Death that Narada once told Akampana, whilst that king suffered great and 
unbearable grief because his son had died. By listening to this most 
excellent tale, you will be freed from sorrow and the touch of affection’s 
attachment. Listen well to this Itihasa, for it lengthens one’s life, kills grief 
and bestows health. It is sacred, destroys hosts of enemies and is the most 
auspicious of all auspicious things. Indeed, this Itihasa is even like the study 
of the Vedas, Rajan, and every morning the best of kings, who wish for 
long-lived children and their own weal, should listen to it. 

In olden days, there was a great and fearless king named Akampana. 
Once, on the battlefield, enemies surrounded and overpowered him. He had 
a son called Hari, equal to Narayana himself in strength. Hari was 
exceptionally handsome, a master of astras, gifted with great intelligence, 
and was like Sakra himself in battle. Surrounded by countless enemies, he 
shot thousands of astras at the warriors and elephants that hemmed him in. 
When he had achieved the most difficult feats in that battle, Yudhishtira, 
they finally killed him. 

Performing the obsequies for his son, king Akampana purified himself. 
However, he continued to grieve for his Hari day and night and could regain 


neither happiness nor peace of mind. Learning of his grief, the Devarishi 
Narada came to him. 

Seeing Narada, the related everything that had happened—his defeat at 
the hands of his enemies and the killing of his son. Akampana said, “My 
son was endued with great energy, and equalled Indra or Vishnu himself in 
splendour. Alas they slew him, who had displayed his prowess on the field 
against countless enemies! O illustrious one, who is this Death? What is the 
measure of his energy, strength and prowess? O greatest of intelligent men, 
I truly wish to hear all this.’ 

The boon-giving lord Narada said, ‘Listen, Rajan, to this long Itihasa 
which will destroy your grief! In the beginning, the Pitamaha Brahma 
created all creatures. Invested with mighty energy, he saw that his creation 
showed no signs of decay. So Brahma began to reflect upon the destruction 
of the universe but failed to find any method to achieve it. He then became 
angry and from his anger a fire sprang from the sky. The fire spread in all 
directions consuming everything in the universe, and flames filled all 
swarga, akasa and bhumi. 

Thus Brahma began to consume the whole universe and to destroy his 
creatures, mobile and unmoving, terrifying all with his wrath. Then Hara, 
who is also called Sthanu or Siva, with matted locks on his head, the Lord 
of all Rakshasas and Asuras, the night-rangers, appealed to the divine 
Brahma, the Lord of the Devas. When Sthanu fell at Brahma’s feet for the 
good of all creatures, the Supreme Deva said to the Mahayogin blazing with 
splendour, “What wish of yours can I grant, O you who deserve to have all 
your wishes fulfilled? O you who have been born of our wish, we will do 
anything that will please you! Tell me, Sthanu, what is your desire?”’” 


CANTO 50 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


os S iva replied, ‘O Lord, you took great pains to create and nourish 
creatures of diverse kinds. However, you now destroy them with 
your fire. I am filled with pity. O illustrious one, be merciful.’ 

Brahma said, ‘I have no wish to destroy the universe. I only want the 
good of the Earth, and this is why anger has possessed me. Bhumidevi 
suffers because of the heavy burden of creatures, and constantly urges me to 
destroy them. But I could not find the means to put an end to this infinite 
creation. At this, anger maddened me.’ 

Rudra said, ‘Be merciful, O Lord of the universe; do not annihilate all 
living beings with your wrath. Let no more creatures, immobile and 
unmoving, perish. Through your grace, let the three-fold universe, the 
Future, the Past, and the Present, continue to exist. A fire has sprung from 
your wrath and even now it consumes rocks, trees, rivers and all kinds of 
plants and trees. Indeed, the fire devours all the universe and reduces it to 
ashes. 

Be merciful, O Illustrious! Do not give way to anger. This is the boon I 
seek. Your rage destroys everything that belongs even to you; appease your 
wrath and quench it in your own self. Look on your creatures with 


compassion and do good for them. Ensure that creatures with life and the 
power of generation do not cease to exist. 

O Creator of the worlds, you have appointed me their Protector. Let not 
the mobile and the unmoving universe be destroyed. You are naturally 
inclined to grace, and it is for this that I plead with you.’ 

Narada continues, “Hearing what Mahadeva said, Brahma withdrew the 
fire of his wrath into himself and contained it there—for the weal of the 
world and all its creatures. Extinguishing the fire, the divine Benefactor of 
the world, the great Master, declared the dharma of procreation and 
emancipation. And while the Supreme Deity exterminated the fire born of 
his wrath, there emerged through the portals of his diverse senses, a young 
woman, dark, red and tawny, her tongue, face and eyes crimson, and decked 
with two brilliant ear-rings and diverse other scintillating ornaments. 
Issuing out of his body, she smilingly looked at the two Lords of the 
universe and then set out for the southern quarter. 

Then Brahma, regulator of creation and destruction, named her Mrityu, 
and said to her, ‘Slay these creatures of mine! You have been born of my 
wrath which I nourished for the destruction of the universe. Kill all 
creatures, be they fools or and seers, at my command. By doing this, you 
will benefit yourself.’ 

The lotus-devi, called Death, reflected deeply and then wept aloud and 
piteously in a melodious voice. The Pitamaha caught the tears she shed in 
his two hands.’” 


CANTO 51 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: °N arada said, “The compassionate young Devi repressed her sorrow 

and, bending with humility like a vine, with her hands folded, 

asked the Lord of creation, “O Lord of words, how can I, being a woman, 

and created by you, do what you ask when I know that it is cruel and evil? I 

greatly fear adharma, I fear sin. O divine Lord, be merciful. Sons, friends, 

brothers, fathers and husbands are always dear; if I kill them, I fear that 
their kin will seek to do me harm. 

The thought of the tears that will fall from the eyes of grief-stricken and 
weeping ones, fills me with dread! I seek your protection, O greatest of 
Devas, I will not go to Yama’s abode. O boon-giving one, with bowed head 
and folded hands, I beg your clemency. Pitamaha of the worlds, I beg just 
this one wish from you—with your leave, I want to perform tapasya. Grant 
me this boon, O Divine One, O Master, if you allow me, I will go to the 
great asrama of Dhenuka! I will undergo the severest tapasya there and 
worship only you. I will not be able, O Devadeva, to take the precious prana 
of living creatures weeping in sorrow. Protect me from sin!’ 

Brahma said, “Mrityu, you have been born for achieving the destruction 
of creatures. Go, kill all living creatures, you need not have any scruples. It 


must be so. It cannot be otherwise. Do as I say and no one in the world will 
find fault with you.’ 

But she was still afraid. Looking into Brahma’s face, she stood silently 
with joined hands. Wanting to do good to all beings, she could not bring 
herself to set her heart upon their destruction. Brahma also remained silent. 
And then, soon, the Pitamaha became pleased with himself and smiled 
looking upon all his creation. Thereupon, living beings were enlivened and 
continued to breathe as before, untouched by untimely death. When the 
invincible and illustrious Lord shook off his wrath, the dark and kindly girl 
left the presence of the wisest Deity. 

Leaving Brahma, without having to destroy all creatures, Mrityu 
quickly went to the asrama called Dhenuka where she performed fierce 
tapasya and observed the sternest, most austere vratas. She stood there on 
one leg for sixteen billions of years, and another fifty billions, through pity 
for living creatures and from her wish to do them good, all the time 
restraining her senses from their favourite objects. 

And once again, Rajan, she stood there on one leg for twenty-one times 
ten billions of years. And then she wandered for ten times ten thousand 
billions of years with the creatures of the Earth. Next, going to the sacred 
Nanda full of cool and pure water, she spent eight thousand years in those 
waters and performed a great tapasya there as well; at Nanda, she cleansed 
herself of all her sins. 

Then, keeping her vow, she went first of all to the sacred Kausiki. 
Living only upon air and water, she practised tapasya there. She then went 
to Panchaganga and after that to Vetasa, where, by different kinds of 
especial austerities, that pure kanya emaciated her own body. Then she 
visited Ganga and from there went to great Meru, where she remained 
motionless like a stone, suspending her breath. Then at the summit of 
Himavat, where the Devas had performed their yagna in the most ancient 
days, the auspicious and compassionate girl remained for a billion of years 
standing on just her toe. Going then to Pushkara, Gokarna, Naimisa and 
Malaya, she emaciated her body further, practising austerities which 
satisfied her heart. 

Without acknowledging any other God, with steady devotion only to the 
Pitamaha, she lived and delighted Brahma in every way. 

At last, gratified with her, his heart softened and full of delight, the 
unchangeable Creator of the worlds said to that maiden. ‘O Mrityu, why do 


you perform so severe a tapasya?’ 

Mrityu replied, ‘Living beings exist in health and do not injure one 
another even through words. I will not be able to kill them. O Lord, I want 
just this boon from you. I fear sin, and this is why I am engaged in tapasya. 
Most blessed one, undertake to remove my fears for ever. | am a woman, in 
distress, and innocent. I beg you, be my protector.’ 

To her, the divine Brahma, knower of the past, the present and the 
future, said, “You will commit no sin, O Mrityu, by killing these creatures. 
My words can never prove false, O amiable one! Therefore, auspicious girl, 
kill these creatures of the four kinds. Eternal dharma will always be yours. 
Yama, the Regent of the world, and the various diseases will become your 
helpmates. I myself and all the Devas will grant you boons, so that, freed 
from sin and perfectly cleansed, you will even acquire glory.’ 

Thus addressed, Rajan, Mrityu, joining her hands and bowing down to 
him, once more said, ‘If, O Lord, this cannot be achieved without me, then I 
bow my head to your command. But I beg you, listen once more to what I 
say. Let covetousness, wrath, malice, jealousy, quarrel, folly and 
shamelessness and other violent passions rend the bodies of all embodied 
creatures.’ 

Brahma said, ‘O Mrityu, it will be as you say. Meanwhile, do away with 
living beings appropriately and sin will not be yours, nor will I seek to 
injure you. Your tear drops that are in my hands will now become diseases, 
springing from living creatures themselves. They will kill men; and if men 
are killed, do not fear, for sin will not be yours. Be devoted to dharma, 
observe your duty, and casting off both desire and anger, take the lives of 
these mortal beings. This will be your eternal virtue. Sin will destroy men 
of evil ways. By doing my bidding you will cleanse yourself. It will be your 
dharma to sink them in their sins. Therefore, cast off both kama and krodha, 
and kill these beings endued with life.’ 

Seeing that Brahma persistently called her Death, she feared to do 
otherwise. In terror of his curse, she said, ‘Yes!’ Helpless not to obey, 
casting off desire and wrath, she began to take the lives of living creatures 
when the time came for their death. 

It is only the living that die. Disease spring from living creatures 
themselves and is an abnormal condition as it causes them distress and pain. 
So do not indulge in fruitless grief for anyone after they are dead. The 
senses, after death, go with them to the other world. Achieving their 


respective functions, they return once more with each individual jiva when 
the spirit is reborn. 

Thus all creatures, including the very Devas, are subject to death; they 
too are mortal. The awful wind, omnipresent and with infinite energy, with 
its terrible howl and great strength irresistibly drives the bodies of living 
creatures. It will not demonstrate active energy, nor will it suspend its 
functions; but do this naturally. Even all the Devas have the appellation of 
mortals attached to them. 

Therefore, lion among kings, do not grieve, for your son is passing his 
days in perpetual happiness in swarga for he has attained those delightful 
regions that are reserved for Kshatriyas. Casting off all sorrows, he has 
gained the companionship of great souls of dharma. The Creator himself 
has ordained Death for all beings and when their hour comes, they are 
destroyed. The death of all beings arises from the creatures themselves for 
they are responsible for their own deaths. 

Death does not kill anyone, armed with her bludgeon! Therefore, those 
who are wise truly know death to be inevitable because Brahma himself has 
ordained it. So never grieve for those who are dead; and knowing that the 
Supreme God has ordained this death, cast off your grief for your dead 
son!’ 

Vyasa continues, “Hearing these profound words of advice from 
Narada, king Akampana said to his friend, ‘O illustrious Maharishi, after 
hearing this Itihasa from you, my grief is gone and I am contented. I am 
grateful to you and I worship you.’ 

Hearing this, the Devarishi Narada of immeasurable soul left for the 
Nandana vana. 

The frequent recital of this story to others, and listening to it, is said to 
be purifying. It leads to fame and heaven, is worthy of approbation, and 
also enhances the life-span. Now that you have heard this tale, cast off your 
grief, Yudhishtira. Reflect on the duties of a Kshatriya, and the high state of 
punya that can be attained by heroes. Abhimanyu, the maharathin the 
mahatejasvin, has attained swarga after killing numberless enemies in full 
view of all the mighty archers. He has fallen on the battle field, struck with 
sword, mace, dart and bow. Sprung from Soma Deva, he has returned into 
the lunar essence, cleansed of all his impurities. 

Therefore, O Pandava, you and your brothers should muster all your 
courage and without allowing yourselves to be stupefied by sorrow, take the 


99999 


field again, inflamed with fury for battle. 


CANTO 52 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Hearing of the origin of Mrityu and her strange 
deeds, Yudhishtira humbly addresses Vyasa once more. He says, 
“There were many kings of dharma in blessed countries, their prowess 
equal to that of Indra himself. They were rajarishis, O Muni, who were 
sinless and spoke only truth. Once more, tell me of their feats in ancient 
times so that I am consoled. What was the extent of the gifts they made at 
yagnas? Who were these mahatmans, these royal sages of dharma? Tell me 
all, O illustrious one!” 

Vyasa replies, “There was a king named Switya. He had a son called 
Srinjaya. The Rishis Narada and Parvata were his friends. One day, the two 
munis came to visit Srinjaya in his palace. Duly worshipped by Srinjaya, 
they were pleased with him, and continued to stay happily with him. Once, 
as Srinjaya was seated at his ease with the two rishis, his beautiful daughter 
came to him, smiling sweetly, and greeted him with reverence. Srinjaya 
blessed the delightful girl. 

Seeing her, Parvata smilingly asked Srinjaya, ‘Whose daughter is this 
girl of restless glances, who has every auspicious mark? Is she the 


splendour of Surya, or the flame of Agni? Or is she Sri, Hri, Kirti, Dhriti, 
Pushti or Siddhi, and the lambency of Soma?’ 

King Srinjaya answered, “O illustrious one, this girl is my daughter. She 
seeks my blessings.’ 

Then Narada asked king Srinjaya, ‘If, Rajan, you wish for great fortune 
for yourself, give your daughter to me as a wife.’ 

Delighted with the Rishi’s proposal, Srinjaya said to Narada, ‘I give her 
to you.’ 

At this, the other Rishi, Parvata, indignantly said to Narada ‘I had in my 
heart chosen this girl first, but you have taken her as your wife. O 
Brahmana, you will not go to swarga.’ 

Narada replied, ‘For a man to be a husband he must first give his heart 
and seek consent. This is followed by the solemn commitments by both 
parties, and the actual gift is made by the sprinkling of holy water and the 
recital of the mantras ordained for the taking of the bride’s hand. These 
have been declared as the indications by which one becomes a husband. 
Even this ceremonial is not all. Above all is the pradakshina of seven paces 
by the bride circumambulating the groom. Without these your marriage is 
not complete. You have cursed me, and you will also not go to heaven 
without me.’ 

Having cursed each other the two Rishis continued to live there in the 
palace. 

Meanwhile, king Srinjaya, who wanted a son, purified himself and 
scrupulously entertained the Brahmanas to the very best of his power, with 
food and clothing, and saw to their every other need and comfort. After 
some time, those greatest of Brahmanas became pleased with the king and 
wished a son for him. Together they went to Narada and said to him, ‘Give 
this king a son of the kind he wants.’ 

Narada replied to them, saying, ‘Tathaastu, so be it.’ 

Then the Devarishi said to Srinjaya, ‘O Rajarishi, the Brahmanas are 
pleased and they wish you a son! Ask them for the boon; tell them what 
manner of son you want.’ 

With joined hands, the king asked for a son with every accomplishment, 
famous, of glorious feats, of great tejas and a parantapa who would 
vanquish all his enemies. And he further asked that the urine, the 
excrement, the phlegm and the sweat of that child should be gold! And in 
due time the king had a son born to him, who came to be named 


Suvarnashthivin and because of the boon, the child began to increase his 
father’s wealth beyond all calculation. 

King Srinjaya had all the objects of his desire to be wrought of gold. 
His houses, walls, forts, the houses of all Brahmanas within his dominions, 
and his beds, vehicles, plates, all manners of pots, cups, the palace that he 
owned, and all implements, utensils, and weapons were made of gold. And 
in time his fame increased. 

Then some thieves heard of the prince and banded together and sought 
to harm the king. Some among them said, ‘Let us seize the king’s son for he 
is his father’s gold mine.’ 

They broke into the king’s palace and forcibly abducted prince 
Suvarnashthivin and made off with him to the forest. There those fools, 
urged by greed, but not knowing what to with the prince, killed him and cut 
his body into pieces. They did not see any gold inside him. When the prince 
was dead, all the rest of the gold, got through the Rishi’s boon, also 
vanished. The thieves began to fight among themselves and killed each 
other, and with them perished that most wonderful prince. Those evil men 
plunged down into the most unimaginable and awful hell. 

Seeing his son killed, king Srinjaya, in deep sorrow, began to lament 
piteously. Seeing the king so grief-stricken on account of his son, the 
Devarishi Narada appeared before him. 

Listen, Yudhishtira, to what Narada said to Srinjaya. ‘Srinjaya, you will 
have to die with your desires unfulfilled, although we Brahmavadis live in 
your house. Even Avikshita’s son Marutta had to die. 

Annoyed with Brihaspati, Marutta had Samvatta perform his great 
yagnas! The illustrious lord Mahadeva himself had given wealth in the 
shape of a golden plateau of Himavat to that royal sage. With that wealth, 
king Marutta performed various yagnas so that afterwards different groups 
of gods, the creators of the universe, with Indra himself in their company 
and with Brihaspati at their head, used to visit him. 

All the carpets and furnishings of his yagnasala were made of gold. At 
his yagnas, the Munis all ate food as they pleased, food that was clean and 
to their taste. The milk, curds, ghee, honey and other kinds of victuals, were 
the very best; the robes and ornaments were enviably costly; and the 
Brahmanas who were masters of the Vedas were gratified. 

The very Devas would serve the food in king Marutta’s palace, while 
the Viswedevas were his courtiers. Those dwelling in swarga were happy 


with the libations of clarified butter and they, in their turn, increased the 
powerful ruler’s wealth of crops with abundant rains. He always contributed 
to the satisfaction and joy of the Rishis, the Pitris and the Devas, by 
practising Brahmacharya, studying the Vedas, performing obsequial rites 
and giving all kinds of gifts. 

Such was his immense store of wealth and gold that it was difficult to 
give away. And he did, in fact, give all his untold wealth away in dakshina 
to the Brahmanas. Sakra himself used to wish him well. He made his 
subjects happy by always living in dharma, and he ultimately went to those 
eternal realms of bliss, which he acquired through his inexhaustible punya. 

With his children, counsellors, wives, descendants and kinsmen, king 
Marutta, in his youth, ruled his kingdom for a thousand years. When such a 
king died, Srinjaya, who was your superior in the four cardinal virtues — 
tapasya, truth, compassion and liberality—and who, being superior to you, 
was far greater than your son? Do not grieve saying, “O Swaitya!”, for your 
son who performed no yagnas nor gave any dakshina at a sacrifice.’ 


CANTO 53 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: °N arada said, ‘O Srinjaya, it is said that King Suhotra also fell prey 

to death. He was the greatest of Kshatriyas and invincible in 
battle. The very Devas would come to visit him. Acquiring his kingdom 
through dharma, he always sought the advice of his Ritwijas, and other 
domestic priests and Brahmanas and followed their behests. Virtuous and 
liberal, familiar with the duty of protecting his subjects, king Suhotra 
performed yagnas, subjugated his enemies and wished to increase his 
wealth. He worshipped the Devas by the ordinances of the Shastras, and 
defeated his enemies with his astras. He brought joy to all that lived within 
his domains through his pure and majestic deeds. 

He ruled the earth, freeing her from Mlecchas and forest-brigands. The 
Deva of the clouds showered gold upon him all the year around. In those 
times out of mind, the rivers in his kingdom flowed liquid gold and it was 
available to everyone. The Devas blessed his kingdom with a large number 
of crocodiles, crabs and fish of different species and countless objects of 
desire, all made of gold. 

The artificial lakes in the king’s dominions each measured full two 
yojanas. Looking at the thousands of dwarfs, humpbacks, alligators, 


makaras and tortoises, all made of gold, king Suhotra wondered greatly. He 
performed a yagna at Kurujangala and gave away the unlimited wealth of 
gold to Brahmanas before the completion of the sacrifice. After he had 
performed a thousand Aswamedha yagnas, a hundred Rajasuya yagnas, 
many sacred Kshatriya yagnas, at all of which he gave lavish gifts to 
Brahmanas, and after countless daily rituals performed for specific wants, 
the king ultimately obtained a most desirable end. 

When, O Srinjaya, the life of such a king who was superior to you in the 
four cardinal virtues, had to come to an end, and who, being superior to 
you, was thus far greater than your son, you should not grieve saying, “Oh 
Swaitya, Oh, Swaitya!” for your son performed no sacrifice and made no 
sacrificial dakshina.’ 


CANTO 54 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: °N arada said, ‘The heroic king Paurava too, O Srinjaya, fell prey to 
death. This king gave away a thousand times a thousand horses 
that were all perfectly white. Countless learned Brahmanas, all versed in the 
principles of Siksha, one of the six Vedangas, and Akshara, the letters of the 
original alphabet, came from different kingdoms to the Aswamedha yagna 
that royal sage performed. The king gave priceless gifts to these 
Brahmanas, purified by the Vedas, by gyana, and by vratas, men of liberal 
and gracious countenances—fine robes, houses, excellent beds, carpets, 
carriages and draft-cattle, and actors, dancers and singers who were 
marvellous exponents of their respective arts, and always entertained them. 
At each of his yagnas, in due time, he gave away as sacrificial gifts ten 
thousand elephants of golden magnificence, with ichor trickling down their 
bodies, and chariots made of gold with wonderful standards and banners. 
He also gave away a thousand times a thousand maidens decked with 
ornaments of gold, chariots, horses and elephants for riding, and mansions, 
fields, hundreds of thousand of kine and thousands of cowherds—all decked 
out in gold. They who are acquainted with ancient history, sing this song 
about the yagna at which king Paurava gave away cows with calves with 


golden horns and silver hooves, brass milking pots, female slaves, male 
slaves, asses, camels and sheep, all countless in number, diverse kinds of 
gems and varied hill-like mounds of food. 

Countless yagnas the king of the Angas successively performed, in the 
order of their merit, and according to his varna dharma, so many auspicious 
yagnas which yielded every possible object of desire. O Srinjaya, when 
such a king died, who was better that you in respect of the four cardinal 
virtues, and who being superior to you, was far greater than your son, you 
should not lament, “Oh, Swaitya, Oh, Swaitya!” and grieve for your son 
who performed no yagnas and gave away no dana.’ 


CANTO 55 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


°° NT arada said, ‘Usinara’s son Sibi, too, O Srinjaya, fell prey to 
death. That king had, as it were, cast a leathern girdle around the 
Earth, making Bhumi with her mountains, islands, seas and forests resound 
with the clatter of his chariot. The Parantapa, king Sibi always slew his 
greatest enemies. He performed many yagnas and gave away gifts in 
profusion to the Brahmanas. That king of great prowess and intelligence 
had acquired enormous wealth. In battle, he won the praise of all 
Kshatriyas. He subjugated the whole world and performed many 
Aswamedha yagnas, without any impediment, giving away as sacrificial 
dakshina a thousand crores of golden nishkas and so many elephants, 
horses, deer, sheep and other animals, and hills of grain, earning him untold 
punya. 

King Sibi also gave away the sacred Earth of diverse kinds of soil to the 
Brahmanas as dakshina. Indeed, Usinara’s son Sibi gave away as many kine 
as the number of rain-drops that fall on the earth, the number of stars in the 
firmament, the number of sand-grains on the bed of Ganga, or the number 
of rocks that constitute the mountain called Meru, the number of gems or 
fish in the ocean. 


The Creator himself had not met with and will not meet in the present or 
the future, another king who could bear the burdens that king Sibi carried. 
Many were the sacrifices with every kind of ritual that Sibi performed. In 
his yagnas, the sacrificial stakes, the carpets, the mansions, the walls and 
the arches, were all made of gold. Delicious and pure food and drink were 
served in profusion to the Brahmanas who went there in numbers past all 
count. With delicacies of every description laid out, one heard nothing but 
pleasing words like Give away and Take, being spoken there. Milk and 
curds were collected in lakes. In his yagnasala, there were rivers of drink 
and white hills of food. Bathe, drink and eat as you like! These were the 
only words heard there. 

Gratified with his righteous karma, Rudra granted Sibi a boon, saying, 
“As you give away, let your wealth, devotion, fame, dharma, the love that 
all creatures bear you, and the heaven you attain, all be inexhaustible.” 

Having obtained these boons, even Sibi, when the time came, left this 
world for swarga. When, O Srinjaya, he who was superior to and far 
superior to your son had to die, you should not lament, crying, “Oh, 
Swaitya, Oh, Swaitya!”, and grieve for your son who performed no 
sacrifice and gave no sacrificial gift.’ 


CANTO 56 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada said, ‘Srinjaya, Rama, the son of Dasaratha, fell prey to 

death. His subjects were as much delighted in him, as a father is 
with the children of his loins. He possessed great tejas and was a home to 
countless virtues. Of unfading glory, at his father’s command, Rama, the 
elder brother of Lakshmana lived for fourteen years in exile in the forest, 
with his wife. In Janasthana, that Bharatarishabha slew fourteen thousand 
Rakshasas for the protection of the munis of the vana. 

The Rakshasa called Ravana who, beguiling both him and Lakshmana, 
abducted his wife Sita, the princess of Videha. Like the three-eyed 
Mahadeva killing the Asura Andhaka in the olden days, Rama in wrath slew 
Ravana, the offender of Pulastya’s race, with all his kinsmen and followers, 
Ravana whom even the Devas and the Asuras together could not quell, the 
evil Ravana who was as a thorn to the Devas and the Brahmanas. 

Because of his loving nurture of his subjects, the very Devas 
worshipped Rama. Filling all the Earth with his achievements, even the 
Devarishis lauded him. Compassionate to all beings, that king, after 
conquering different realms and protecting his subjects  virtuously, 
performed a great yagna without hindrance. The lord Rama also performed 


a hundred Aswamedha yagnas and the mahayagna called Jaruthya. With 
libations of ghrita he pleased Indra. Through all these, Rama conquered 
hunger and thirst and all the diseases to which living creatures are subject. 
He possessed every accomplishment and blazed with his own tejas. Indeed, 
Rama, the son of Dasaratha, by far outshone all other living creatures. 

When Rama ruled his kingdom, the Rishis, the Devas, and Manushyas, 
all lived together on the Earth, and their lives were never as full and 
wonderful as during Ramarajya. All life’s sacred and mighty breaths, Prana, 
Apana, Samana, and the others, performed their functions blemishlessly. All 
luminous bodies shone brighter, and no calamity ever came near. All his 
subjects had long lives, and none died in their youth. 

The dwellers of heaven were highly pleased for they received, 
according to the vidhis of the four Vedas, libations of clarified butter and 
other offerings of food made by men. Rama’s realm was free from flies, 
gnats and other pernicious insects; and there were no beasts of prey or 
poisonous reptiles. There was no adharma; no one was covetous, and none 
ignorant. The subjects of all the four varnas engaged in acts of dharma and 
other worthy deeds. 

When the Rakshasas in Janasthana obstructed the flow of offerings to 
the Pitris and the worship of the Devas, Lord Rama killed them. Men were 
each blessed with a thousand children, and their life-span was a thousand 
years. Elders had never to perform sraddhas of those younger than them. 
Youthful in form, with a dark-blue complexion and reddish eyes, Rama had 
the tread of a mighty elephant in musth. He had a lion’s shoulders, untold 
strength, his arms reached down to his knees, and were great and handsome, 
and all creatures loved him. Rama ruled his kingdom for eleven thousand 
years and his subjects always uttered his name. 

While Rama ruled his kingdom, the world was full of divine beauty and 
joy. Having established his own dynasty on earth, consisting of eight royal 
houses of the Suryavamsa, finally Rama ascended into swarga taking with 
him, his four kinds of subjects, all the species, men, beasts, birds, insects 
and plants of every kind. 

O Srinjaya, even he who was vastly superior to you in the four cardinal 
virtues and superior to your son, died. You should not lament, crying, “Oh, 
Swaitya! Oh, Swaitya!’ for your son performed no yagna and gave no 
sacrificial dakshina.’ 


CANTO 57 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: °N arada said, ‘O Srinjaya, we hear that even king Bhagiratha died. 
He caused the Bhagiratha ghats of the Ganga, so named after 
him, to be covered with flights of steps made of gold. Surpassing all kings 
and all princes, he gave the Brahmanas a thousand times a thousand girls 
decked in ornaments of gold, riding on chariots yoked to four horses, and 
with a hundred kine behind each chariot, with many goats and sheep behind 
each cow. King Bhagiratha gave away vast gifts at his yagnas for which an 
immense gathering of men assembled. 

The Ganga was aggrieved by her burden, so she said “Protect Me,” and 
sat down in his lap because of which she, like the Apsara Urvasi, came to 
be regarded as his daughter and was named Bhagirathi after him. Having 
become the king’s daughter, she became like a son, and thus the means of 
salvation to his deceased ancestors. 

Soft-spoken Gandharvas of celestial splendour, gratified, sang all this in 
the hearing of the Rishis, the Devas and the Manavas. Thus, O Srinjaya, did 
the Devi, the ocean-going Ganga choose for her father king Bhagiratha, 
descendant of Ikshvaku, and performer of yagnas who gave lavish gifts to 
Brahmanas. The very Devas with Indra at their head always attended his 


sacrifices. The Devas used to facilitate his yagnas in every way by 
removing all impediments to them, in order to take their shares of the havis. 

Possessed of great punya, Bhagiratha gave the Brahmanas whatever 
they wanted, wherever they wanted, without requiring them to move. There 
was nothing which he would withhold from Brahmanas. Every one received 
from him everything they wished for. Finally, the king ascended to the 
world of Brahma, through the grace of the Brahmanas. For the very object 
on which the Rishis who subsisted on the rays of the Sun would wait upon 
the Sun and the Deity of the Sun, they used to wait upon the lord 
Bhagiratha, the ornament of the three worlds. 

O Srinjaya, when he who was superior to you as regards the four 
cardinal virtues, and who, being superior to you, was far superior to your 
son, had to die, you should not grieve, crying, “Oh, Swaitya! Oh, Swaitya!” 
for your son performed no yagnas and gave no sacrificial gifts.’ 


CANTO 58 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada said, ‘Dilipa, the son of Havila, O Srinjaya, we hear, also 
fell a victim to death. Brahmanas, vested with the knowledge of 
Truth, devoted to the performance of yagnas, blessed with children and 
many grandchildren, were present during his hundreds of yagnas. King 
Dilipa, after performing his yagnas, gave away this very Earth filled with 
her treasures to those Brahmanas. At Dilipa’s yagnas, the roads were all 
paved with gold and the very Devas, with Indra at their head, would come 
to visit him, equating him to Dharma himself. 

The upper and lower rings of his sacrificial stake were of gold. Eating 
the Raga-khandavas at his yagnas, many were seen to lie down on the very 
streets, sated. It was exceedingly wonderful to see that while crossing water, 
the wheels of his chariot never sank but skimmed upon the water’s surface. 
This never happened to other kings, Even those who witnessed king Dilipa, 
the indomitable, always truthful in speech, give away lavish gifts at his 
yagnas, ascended into swarga. 

In Khattanga, the home of Dilipa, one always heard these five sounds — 
the sound of Vedic chanting, the twang of bows, and cries of Drink! Enjoy! 
and Eat! 


O Srinjaya, when even he, who was superior to you in the four cardinal 
virtues, and therefore far superior to your son, had to die, you should not 
cry, “Oh, Swaitya! Oh, Swaitya!” and grieve for your son who performed 
no yagnas and gave no Sacrificial gifts.’ 


CANTO 59 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: °N arada continued, ‘Mandhatri, the son of Yuvanaswa, O Srinjaya, 

fell prey to death. That king vanquished the Devas, the Asuras 

and Manavas. The Aswin twins brought him out of his father’s belly with 
magical surgery. 

Once upon a time, king Yuvanaswa while hunting deer in the forest 
became thirsty and his horses were exhausted. Attracted by a wreath of 
smoke, which turned out to be from a yagna fire, Yuvanaswa went and 
drank the sacred ghrita that he found lying there. The king, thereupon, 
conceived. Seeing that Yuvanaswa was advanced with child, the physicians 
of the Devas, the twin Aswini Kumaras, extracted the child from the king’s 
belly. 

Seeing the child of celestial splendour lying on the lap of his father, the 
Devas said to each other, “What sustenance will support this child?” 

At this Vasava said, ‘Let the child suck my fingers.’ 

At which, from the fingers of Indra there issued milk sweet as nectar. 
And since Indra, from compassion, said, “He will draw his sustenance from 
me’, and showed him that kindness, the Deva named the child Mandhatri. 
Springs of milk and divine ghee fell into the mouth of Yuvanasva’s son 


from the hand of Indra. The boy grew up sucking nourishment from Indra’s 
fingers. In twelve days he grew to twelve cubits in height and acquired 
prodigious abilities and prowess. 

He conquered the whole of this Earth in a single day. Virtuous, 
intelligent, heroic, devoted to truth and a master of his passions, Mandhatri 
with his bow vanquished Sudhanwan, Jaya, Suna, Vrihadratha and Nriga. 
The lands lying between the mountain Udaya where the Sun rises and the 
Astama where it sets, are known to this day as the dominion of Mandhatri. 

Rajan, after performing a hundred Aswamedha yagnas as well as a 
hundred Rajasuya yagnas, he gave away to Brahmanas, Rohita fish made of 
gold that were ten yojanas long and one yojana wide. Others, who came to 
his yagnas and contributed to their success, ate the mountains of savoury 
food of diverse kinds, but after he had entertained the Brahmanas. The vast 
quantities of food, drink, and mountains of rice, looked incredible and 
delightful where they were piled. Rivers and lakes of ghee, with different 
kinds of soup for their base, curds for their froth and liquid honey for their 
water, were beautiful to behold and, wafting honey and milk, encircled 
mountains of solid viands. 

Devas, Asuras, Manushas, Yakshas, Gandharvas, Nagas, Pakshis, and 
many Brahmanas, accomplished in the Vedas and their angas, and 
innumerable great Rishis came to Mandhatri’s yagnas. No one among those 
present was illiterate or less than learned. 

King Mandhatri, having bestowed the Earth confined by the seas and 
full of wealth upon the Brahmanas, vanished like the Sun at night. Filling 
all the points of the compass with his fame, he left for the regions of great 
souls of dharma. When he, O Srinjaya, who excelled you in the four 
cardinal virtues and who was thus far superior to your son, had to die, you 
should not grieve, crying, “Oh, Swaitya! Oh, Swaitya!” for him who 
performed no yagna and made no sacrificial gifts.’ 


CANTO 60 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: °N arada said, “O Srinjaya, Yayati, the son of Nahusha, was also a 

victim of Mrityu. He performed a hundred Rajasuyas, a hundred 
Aswamedha yagnas, a thousand Pundarikas, a hundred Vajapeyas, a 
thousand Atiratras, innumerable Chaturmasyas, various Agnishtomas and 
many other kinds of yagnas, at all of which he gave away lavish dakshina 
and dana to great Brahmanas. Having counted it first, he gifted to 
Brahmanas all the wealth that existed on the Earth and was in the 
possession of Mlecchas and other Brahmana-haters. 

When the Devas and the Asuras were arrayed for battle, king Yayati 
went to the Devas’ help. He divided the Earth into four parts and gave it 
away to four great ones. Having performed various yagnas and virtuously 
fathered admirable offspring upon his wives Devayani, the daughter of 
Usanas, and Sarmishta, king Yayati, like a Deva, like a second Vasava, 
roamed through the Nandana vana at his own pleasure. 

When Yayati, profound master of all the Vedas, found that indulging his 
passions did not satisfy him, he, with his wives, retired into the forest, 
saying, “Even all the paddy, wheat, gold, animals and women there is on 


Earth is not sufficient to satisfy one man. Considering this, one should 
cultivate contentment.” 

Thus abandoning all his desires and attaining true peace and 
satisfaction, the lord Yayati, installed his son on his throne and retired into 
the forest. 

When he, O Srinjaya, who was superior to you in respect of the four 
cardinal virtues, and therefore far superior to your son, had to die, you 
should not cry, “Oh, Swaitya! Oh, Swaitya!”, and grieve for your son who 
performed no yagna and made no sacrificial gifts.’ 


CANTO 61 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


°°NT arada continued, ‘Nabhaga’s son Ambarisha, O Srinjaya, we 
know, fell prey to death. Alone he battled a thousand kings, a 
thousand times. These enemies, all masters of weapons and desperately 
wanting victory, attacked him from all sides, with fierce war cries. With the 
measureless strength, vigour and skill he had acquired through long 
abhyasa, and his awesome astras, he destroyed his enemies’ royal chatras, 
weapons, standards and chariots and dispelled his own apprehensions. 

Throwing off their armour, these men begged him for mercy. They 
sought his protection, saying, “We yield ourselves to you!” 

Reducing them to subjection and conquering the whole Earth, he 
performed a hundred yagnas of the best kind, according to the rites ordained 
in the shastras. At these yagnas, people of all varnas ate his pure and 
delicious fare and they worshipped the Brahmanas and thus greatly pleased 
them. The Munis ate delectable sweet-meats, purikas, puras, apupas, 
sashkalis and large karambhas, prithumridwikas, and diverse kinds of other 
dainties, and drank various kinds of soups, maireyaka, and ate 
ragakhandavas, and every sort of confectionary, well-prepared, soft and 


fragrant, as well having as nectarine ghee, honey, milk, water, sweet curds, 
and many kinds of exotic and succulent fruits and roots. 

Those accustomed to wine, drank so many different kinds of 
intoxicating drinks for their pleasure, and sang and played their musical 
instruments. Eager revellers by the thousands, intoxicated with drink, 
danced and merrily sang hymns in praise of Ambarisha; while others, 
unable to stand, fell down. At these yagnas, king Ambarisha gave, as 
sacrificial gifts, the kingdoms of hundreds and thousands of kings to the ten 
million priests he engaged. After he had performed various yagnas the king 
gave to the Brahmanas, as dakshina, a number of princes and kings whose 
coronal locks had been washed in the sacred bath, all wearing golden 
armour, all having white chatras spread over their heads, all seated on 
golden chariots, all attired in rich robes and having large trains of followers, 
and all bearing their sceptres and bringing their treasuries. 

Seeing this, the Maharishis were highly gratified, and said, “No one in 
the past has done, and none in future will be able to do, what king 
Ambarisha of unequalled munificence, does now.” 

When he, O Srinjaya, who was superior to you in the four cardinal 
virtues, and therefore far superior to your son, had to die, you should not 
cry, “Oh, Swaitya! Oh, Swaitya!” and grieve for him who performed no 
yagna and made no sacrificial gifts.’ 


CANTO 62 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada said, ‘O Srinjaya, we hear that king Sasabindu, too, fell 

prey to death. He was a handsome man of great ability and 
intelligence and he performed a host of yagnas. The noble king had one 
hundred thousand wives from each of whom were born a thousand able 
sons. Proficient in the Vedas, these princes performed millions of yagnas, 
and many mahayagnas. They wore golden armour and were superlative 
archers. Every one of them performed Aswamedha yagnas. 

Sasabindu at his own Aswamedha yagna gave away as dakshina all 
these sons of his to the Brahmanas! Behind each of these princes were 
hundreds upon hundreds of chariots, elephants and gorgeous maidens 
decked in ornaments of gold. With each maiden were a hundred elephants; 
with each elephant, a hundred chariots; with each chariot a hundred horses 
wearing garlands of gold. With each of these horses were a thousand kine; 
and with each cow were fifty goats. Such was the limitless wealth that the 
most blessed Sasabindu gave away to the Brahmanas. 

The king caused as many sacrificial stakes of gold to be made for his 
great Aswamedha yagna as were ordained, and he doubled that number of 
the sacrificial stakes of wood in other yagnas. There were mountains of 


food and drink some two yojanas high. Upon the completion of his yagna, 
thirteen such mountains of food and drink remained untouched. His 
kingdom was free from evil and full of contented, well-fed and perfectly 
happy people. 

Having ruled for many long years, Sasabindu finally ascended to 
swarga. When he, O Srinjaya, who was superior to you in respect of the 
four cardinal virtues and therefore, far superior to your son, had to die, you 
should not cry, “Oh, Swaitya! Oh Swaitya!”, and grieve for him who 
performed no yagna and made no sacrificial gifts.’ 


CANTO 63 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada said, “O Srinjaya, Gaya, the son of Amartarayas, we know, 

fell a victim to death. He, for a hundred years, ate nothing but 

the leftovers of the libations of ghee poured into the sacrificial fire. Gratified 
with his proof of great devotion Agni offered to grant him a boon. 

Gaya said, “I wish to have a complete knowledge of the Vedas through 
tapasya, through the practice of brahmacharya, by observing vratas and 
niyamas, and through the grace of my superiors. I also want to acquire 
inexhaustible wealth through practice of the duties of my swadharma and 
without injury to others. I also wish to be able to make gifts to Brahmanas 
with veneration. Let me also beget sons upon wives belonging to my own 
varna and not upon others. Let me be able to give away food with devotion. 
Let my heart always delight in dharma. O Agni, supreme cleanser, let no 
impediment overtake me while I am engaged in sacred karma for the 
attainment of punya.” 

Saying “Tathaastu”, Agni disappeared. 

King Gaya got all he had asked for and also subdued his enemies in fair 
battle. Then, for a full hundred years, he performed a myriad yagnas with 
generous gifts to the Brahmanas, as well as the vratas called chaturmasyas 


and many others. Every year, for a century, the king gave the Brahmanas 
one hundred and sixty thousand kine, ten thousand horses and one crore of 
gold nishkas—upon rising after the completion of his yagnas. Further, he 
gave away as Nakshatra-dakshinas under every constellation, the gifts 
ordained for each of these occasions. Indeed, the king performed his many 
yagnas like another Soma or Angiras. 

At his great Aswamedha yagna, king Gaya made a golden Earth and 
gave it away to the Brahmanas. His sacrificial stakes were past all 
calculation in value, being of gold, encrusted with such jewels and gems as 
fascinated and delighted all beings. Willing to fulfil every wish, Gaya gave 
those sacred stakes of sacrifice to delighted Brahmanas and other deserving 
men. He gratified all the different species of beings dwelling in the ocean, 
the forest, the islands, the rivers, male and female, the tanks, pools and 
lakes, the towns, the provinces and even in swarga, with the wealth and 
food distributed at his yagnas. And they all said, “No other yagna can 
measure up to this one of Gaya’s.” 

The sacrificial altar of Gaya was thirty yojanas long, twenty-six yojanas 
wide, and twenty yojanas high. It was made entirely of gold and studded 
with pearls, diamonds and other precious stones. He also gave away this 
vedi, along with fine clothes and ornaments to the Brahmanas, as well as 
other gifts of the kind laid down in the shastras. Upon the completion of the 
yagna twenty-five hillocks of food remained untouched, and many lakes 
and several beautifully flowing rivulets of exquisite drink, besides many 
heaps of fine clothes and ornaments. Due to the merit of the great yagna, 
Gaya came to be renowned through the three worlds. It is because of Gaya’s 
mahayagna that the eternal Pipal tree and the sacred Brahmasaras came into 
existence. 

O Srinjaya, when he, who was superior to you in respect of the four 
cardinal virtues and, therefore, greatly superior to your son, had to die, you 
should not cry, “Oh, Swaitya! Oh, Swaitya!” and grieve for him who 
performed no yagna and made no sacrificial gifts.’ 


CANTO 64 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada said, ‘Great Rantideva, too, we hear, met with death. The 
noble king had two hundred thousand cooks to prepare and 
distribute unmatched food, raw as well as cooked, dishes like amrita, to the 
Brahmanas who came to his palace as atithis, day and night. He gave away 
his wealth acquired through deeds of dharma to great Brahmanas. Having 
studied the Vedas, he quelled his enemies in dharma yuddha. Being of strict 
vows and always engaged in the performance of yagnas, countless animals, 
wanting to attain swarga, came to Rantideva of their own accord to become 
his yagnapasus, his sacrificial beasts. 

So large was the number of animal yagnas in the Agnihotra that the 
secretions flowing from his kitchens from the heaps of skins deposited 
there, created a veritable river which so came to be called the Charmanwati. 

He incessantly gave away thousands of nishkas of bright gold to 
Brahmanas, saying gently, lovingly, “I give you nishkas. I give you 
nishkas.” 

After gifting in a single day one crore of such coins, he thought that he 
had given away very little and would give more. Who else is there that 
would be able to give as much as him? 


The king gave away wealth, thinking, “If I do not give wealth to the 
Brahmanas, I will experience great and eternal grief.” 

For a hundred years, every fortnight, he gave thousands of Brahmanas a 
golden bull each, followed by a hundred cows and eight hundred pieces of 
nishkas. All that was needed for his Agnihotra and other yagnas—karukas, 
water-pots, plates, bedsteads, carpets, carriages, mansions, houses, diverse 
kinds of trees and various kinds of viands—he gave away to the Rishis. 

Whatever utensils and other possessions Rantideva had were of gold. 
Those who in ancient times saw the phenomenal affluence of Rantideva, 
sing this song, “We have not seen such treasures even in the abode of 
Kubera; what then to say of mortal men?” 

People wonderingly said, “Undoubtedly, the kingdom of Rantideva is 
made of sacred Svarna, of gold!” 

On such nights, when guests assembled in Rantideva’s palace, he 
sacrificed twenty-thousand and one kine to feed them. Yet the royal cook, 
adorned with bejewelled earrings, had to cry out, “Drink as much soup as 
you like, for there is not as much of meat today as on other days.” 

Rantideva gave away even the gold that remained with him, and was his 
due, to the Brahmanas during one of his yagnas. In his very presence, the 
Devas would come down to take the libations of clarified butter poured into 
the fire for them, and the Pitris the food that was offered to them in 
Sraddhas. Rantideva was wont to fulfill all the wishes of all true and great 
Brahmanas. 

When he, O Srinjaya, who was superior to you in the four cardinal 
virtues and, so, vastly superior to your son, had to die, you should not cry, 
“Oh, Swaitya! Oh, Swaitya!” and grieve for him who performed no yagna 
and gave no dakshina or sacrificial gifts.’ 


CANTO 65 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada said, “‘O Srinjaya, Dushyanta’s son Bharata, we know, fell 
a victim to death. While only a boy living in the vana, he 
achieved feats no other could. He was so strong that he would bring down 
snow-white lions, with great fangs and talons, and drag them around like 
little cats. He would tame tigers also, which were fiercer and more ferocious 
than the lions. Seizing other mighty beasts of prey, even great elephants, 
dyed with red arsenic and spotted with other liquid minerals, by their tusks, 
he would fetch them to their knees or force them to bolt from him. He 
would drag the mightiest of bison by their horns; he was a master of prides 
of hundreds of proud lions, and powerful srimaras, horned rhinoceros, and 
other beasts. He would bind them by their throats, beat them within an inch 
of their lives and then let them go. 

For his feats the regenerate rishis with whom he lived, called him 
Sarvadamana—the controller of all. Finally, Sakuntala, his mother, forbade 
him to torment animals in this way. 

Gifted with great ability, he performed a hundred Aswamedha yagnas 
on the banks of the Yamuna, three hundred on the banks of Saraswati, and 
four hundred on the banks of the Ganga. Having performed these sacrifices, 


he yet again performed a thousand Aswamedha yagnas and a hundred 
Rajasuyas, great yagnas in which his gifts to the Brahmanas were more than 
bounteous. Other yagnas, such as the Agnishtoma, the Atiratra, the Uktha 
and the Viswajit, he performed, together with thousands and thousands of 
Vajapeyas, without any impediment, and gratified the Brahmanas with vast 
gifts of wealth. 

The renowned Bharata gave ten thousand billions of coins, made of the 
purest gold, to Kanwa, who had raised his mother Sakuntala as his own 
daughter. 

The Devas with Indra at their head, accompanied by the Brahmanas, 
came to his yagna, to set up his sacrificial stake made entirely of gold and 
measuring a hundred vyamas in width. Bharata, the noblest soul, vanquisher 
of all his enemies, the king never defeated by anyone, gave away millions 
and millions of beautifully caparisoned horses, elephants, chariots, decked 
with gold and exceptional gemstones of all kinds as well as camels, goats, 
sheep, and slaves, both male and female, and wealth, grain, milch cows 
with calves, villages, fields, and different kinds of robes, to the Brahmanas. 

O Srinjaya, when Bharata, who was superior to you in respect of the 
four cardinal virtues and who was far superior to your son, had to die, you 
should not cry, “Oh, Swaitya! Oh, Swaitya!” and grieve for your son who 
performed no yagna and gave no sacrificial gifts.’ 


CANTO 66 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada said, ‘O Srinjaya, Vena’s son, king Prithu, we know, fell 
prey to death. In the Rajasuya yagna that he performed, the 
maharishis installed him as emperor of the world. He vanquished all and his 
achievements became known throughout the three worlds. For this, he came 
to be called Prithu, the celebrated. And because he protected all the people 
from injury, he became a true Kshatriya. Seeing Vena’s son Prithu, all his 
subjects said, “We are pleased with him!” 

Due to the love of his subjects, he came to be called a Rajan. During the 
time of Prithu, the Earth, without being cultivated, yielded crops in plenty, 
and cows yielded milk whenever they were touched. Every lotus was full of 
honey, the kusa blades were all of gold, pleasant to the touch, and otherwise 
delightful so that the subjects of Prithu made clothes and their beds from 
these grasses. 

His subjects lived on fruits, which were all soft and sweet like Amrita, 
and none of them had ever to starve. All men were joyful, hale and robust, 
with all their wishes granted and with nothing to fear. They dwelt as they 
liked upon trees or in caves. His dominions were not divided into provinces 
and towns and the people lived happily and as they pleased. 


When king Prithu stepped into the sea, the waves stood still. The very 
mountains used to yield him openings so that he might pass through them. 
The flagpole of his chariot never broke. Once, the tall trees of the forest, the 
mountains, the Devas, the Asuras, Manushas, the Nagas, the seven Rishis, 
the Apsaras, and the Pitris, all came to Prithu, who was seated at his ease 
and said to him, “You are our emperor. You are our king. You are our 
protector and father. You are our Lord. Therefore, O Rajan, give us the 
boons that we wish so that we may have gratification and joy forever.” 

Prithu, the son of Vena, replied, ““Tathaastu’”’. 

Then taking up his bow, the Ajagava, and some dreadful astras the like 
of which did not exist other than with him, he reflected for a moment. He 
then addressed the Earth, saying, ‘Come quickly, O Bhumi! Yield to them 
the milk they wish for. From that, blessed be you, I will give them the food 
they want.’ 

The Earth said, “You may, Shura, regard me as your daughter.” And she 
became Prithvi. 

Prithu answered, “Tathaastu”! And then the Rajarishi, his passions 
under perfect control, made arrangements for milking the Earth. Then the 
entire assembly of living beings began to milk the Earth. First of all, the tall 
trees of the forest rose to milk her. The Earth, full of love, stood there 
wanting a calf, someone to milk her, and vessels to hold the milk. The 
blossoming Sala tree became the calf, the Pipal became the milkman, buds 
became the milk and the auspicious Nyagrodha became the vessel. 

Next, the mountains milked her. The Eastern mountain Udaya, where 
the Sun rises, became the calf; the prince of mountains, Meru, the one to 
milk her; the diverse gems and herbs became the milk; and the stones 
became the vessels to hold that milk. 

Next, one of the Devas milked her, and all things that bestow tejas and 
urjas became the coveted milk. 

The Asuras then milked the Earth, having wine for their milk and using 
an unbaked pot for their vessel. During this milking, Dvimurdha milked her 
and Virochana became the calf. 

The Manavas milked the Earth for cultivation and crops. The self- 
created Manu became their calf and Prithu himself the milker. 

Next, the Nagas milked the Earth, getting poison as milk and using a 
vessel made of a gourd. Dhritarashtra was the one to milk and Takshaka the 
calf. 


The seven Rishis, who could create everything by their decree, milked 
the Earth, getting the Vedas as their milk. Brihaspati became the one to milk 
her; the Chhandas were the vessel and the excellent Soma, the calf. 

The Yakshas, milking the Earth, got the power to disappear at will like 
the milk in an unbaked pot. Vaisravana Kubera was the one to milk her and 
Vrishadhvayja their calf. 

The Gandharvas and the Apsaras milked all fragrant perfumes in a 
vessel made of a lotus-leaf. Chitraratha became their calf, and the powerful 
Viswaruchi the one to milk Bhumi. 

The Pitris milked the Earth, getting Swaha as their milk in a vessel of 
silver. Yama, the son of Vivaswat, became their calf and the Destroyer 
Antaka the one to milk her. 

Thus, the assembly of great creatures milked the Earth and all got as 
milk what each desired. The calves and vessels they employed exist to this 
day and will always exist. The powerful Prithu, the son of Vena, performed 
many and diverse yagnas, and gratified the desires of all creatures by gifts 
of whatever they wanted. He had golden images of everything found on 
Earth to be made and gifted them to the Brahmanas at his great Aswamedha 
yagna. The king caused six and sixty thousand elephants to be made of gold 
as well as this whole Earth to be adorned with jewels, gems and gold and 
gave her away as dakshina to the Brahmanas. 

O Srinjaya when Prithu, who was superior to you in the four cardinal 
virtues and who, therefore, was far superior to your son, died, you should 
not, cry, “Oh, Swaitya! Oh, Swaitya!” and grieve for your son who 
performed no yagna and made no sacrificial gifts.’” 


CANTO 67 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °N arada said, ‘Even Jamadagni’s son Maharishi Rama, the shura 

worshipped by all other heroes, he of great fame, will die, 
without being content with length of his life. Rooting out all evils from the 
Earth, he ushered in the primeval Satya Yuga. He obtained unrivalled 
prosperity, and no one could see any fault in him. 

The Kshatriyas killed his father and stole his calf, and without any 
boast, he slew the invincible Kartavirya, whom no enemy had ever bested. 
With his bow, he killed sixty-four times ten thousand Kshatriyas. In that 
awesome carnage were included fourteen thousand Brahmana-hating 
Kshatriyas of the Dantakura country. He massacred a thousand Haihayas 
with his short club, a thousand with his sword and a thousand by hanging 
them. Enraged at the murder of his father, the wise Rama killed great 
warriors and scattered their corpses on the battlefield, with their chariots, 
horses and elephants. 

Rama slaughtered ten thousand Kshatriyas with his Parasu, his battle- 
axe, because he could not brook their arrogant ways and talk. When many 
great Brahmanas called out the name of Rama of Bhrigu’s race, the valiant 
son of Jamadagni continued against the Kashmiras, the Daradas, the Kuntis, 


the Kshudrakas, the Malavas, the Angas, the Vangas, the Kalingas, the 
Videhas, the Tamraliptakas, the Rakshovahas, the Vitahotras, the Trigartas, 
the Martikavatas, by the thousands, and slew them all with his astras. 

Moving from kingdom to kingdom, province to province, he razed 
thousands of crores of Kshatriyas. Creating a deluge of blood and filling 
many lakes with gore as red as indragopakas or the wild fruit bandujiva and 
subjugating all the eighteen Dwipas of the Earth, he performed a hundred 
mahayagnas of great punya, all of which he completed and gave profuse 
dakshina to the Brahmanas. 

The sacrificial altar, eighteen nalas high made entirely of gold, and 
wrought according to the injunctions of the shastra, full of different kinds of 
jewels, gems, and adorned with hundreds of standards, Kasyapa accepted as 
the sacrificial dakshina along with this Earth full of her animals, domestic 
and wild, that Rama, the son of Jamadagni, offered him. Rama also gave 
him many thousand prodigious elephants, all caparisoned in gold. Indeed, 
freeing the Earth from all thieves and brigands and filling her with honest 
and gracious men, Rama gave her away to Kasyapa at his great Aswamedha 
yagna. 

Again, after he had divested the Earth of Kshatriyas twenty-one times 
and after performing hundreds of yagnas, that puissant Rama gave away 
this Bhumi to the Brahmanas. And it was Kasyapa who then accepted the 
Earth with her seven islands from him. Then Kasyapa said to Rama, “I 
command you to leave this world.” 

At Kasyapa’s word, in obedience to the Brahmana, Rama used his 
arrows to make the very ocean stand aside, and going to the best of 
mountains called Mahendra, lived there. Even that enhancer of the fame of 
the Bhrigus, possessed of numberless virtues, the famed and splendid son of 
Jamadagni, incalculably superior to your son, will die. Do not, therefore, 
grieve for your prince who performed no yagna and made no sacrificial 
gifts. All these men, superior to you in the four cardinal virtues and also a 
hundred other merits, all these greatest of great men, have died, O Srinjaya, 
and they who are like them will also die.’” 


CANTO 68 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ °V yasa says, ‘Hearing this sacred itihasa of sixteen kings, which 

can increase the listener’s life, king Srinjaya remained silent. 
The illustrious Rishi Narada then said to the silently seated king, “O you of 
great majesty, have you heard these tales and understood their purport? Or, 
are they lost on you like a Sraddha performed by a Muni with a Sudra 
wife?” 

Srinjaya then replied with joined hands, “O Tapodhana, after listening 
to these great and laudable itihasas of ancient rajarishis, all of whom 
performed great yagnas with lavish dakshinas to the Brahmanas, wonder 
has scattered all my grief, like the rays of the sun dispelling darkness. I 
have been cleansed of my sins, and feel no pain now. Tell me, what I should 
do next.” 

Narada said, “It is through good fortune that your grief has been 
dispelled. Ask any boon that you wish for and it will be granted. I never 
make false promises nor ever speak an untruth.” 

Srinjaya said, “O holy one, I am happy that you are gratified with me, 
for nothing is unattainable here for those with whom you are pleased.” 


Narada said, “I will bring back your son, whom the brigands senselessly 
killed like an animal slaughtered in a yagna. I will fetch him back from 
terrible hell.” 

Then Srinjaya’s wonderful and magnificent son appeared, that prince 
resembling the son of Kubera himself, restored by the gratified Rishi to the 
bereaved father. King Srinjaya, united again with his son, was overjoyed. 
Srinjaya’s son had not fulfilled the purusharthas of his life. He had 
performed no yagnas or given away any generous gifts upon their 
completion and had sired no children. He had done nothing brave and had 
perished miserably and not in battle. This was why he could be brought 
back to life. 

As for Abhimanyu, he was valiant and heroic. He had fulfilled the 
purposes of life, for the brave son of Subhadra annihilated his enemies by 
the thousands before he left the world, dying on the field of battle. Your son 
has found even those inaccessible realms that only brahmacharya, gyana, a 
profound knowledge of the shastras, and the greatest of yagnas bestow. 

Men of knowledge always desire swarga through their deeds of dharma. 
Those who live in swarga never prefer this world to it. Thus, it is not easy to 
bring back into this world Arjuna’s son slain in battle and now dwelling in 
heaven; for he has no great purpose that he did not accomplish here. Your 
son has attained that eternal goal that yogins achieve with eyes shut in 
dhyana, or performers of great yagnas, or those possessed of great punya. 
After death, gaining a new body, he shines forth in glory like a king, with 
his own immortal lustre. Indeed, he has regained his own and true body of 
Soma rasa that all munis want. 

He does not deserve your grief. Knowing this, be quiet, and slay your 
enemies. O sinless one, bear this with fortitude for it is the living that stand 
in need of our grief, and not those who have attained to paradise. Rajan, the 
sins increase of those for whom the living grieve. Therefore, the wise 
should abandon grief and strive for the good of the dead. The living man 
should think of the joy, the glory and the happiness of the dead. 

Knowing this, the wise never indulge in grief, for grief is painful. 
Understand this to be the truth. Rise up! Strive to achieve your purpose. Do 
not grieve. You have heard of the origin of Death, and her unprecedented 
tapasya, and also of her impartiality towards all creatures. You have heard 
that prosperity is unstable and fleeting, and how the dead son of Srinjaya 


was revived. O wise and learned king, do not grieve. Peace be upon you. I 
go now, farewell!’ 

Having said this, the holy Vyasa, most eloquent of men, wisest of the 
wise, whose complexion is like that of the clouded sky, disappears before 
their eyes. Yudhishtira, with tejas equal to that of Indra himself, derives 
consolation from what he has heard about the merit and prosperity that 
accrued from the yagnas performed by those great kings of old, all of whom 
had acquired wealth by righteous means. The Dharmaraja lauds and 
worships those illustrious ones in his heart and is freed from grief. 

However, with a melancholy heart he asks himself, “What will we tell 
Arjuna?” 


CANTO 69 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “When that terrible day, so full of slaughtering, 

comes to an end with the sunset, soothing twilight spreads itself 

over earth and sky. The troops of both the armies, Bharatarishabha, retire to 

their tents. And now the victorious vanara-bannered Arjuna makes his way 

back towards the Pandava camp on his triumphal chariot, after annihilating 
a great host of Samsaptakas with his devastras. 

As he rides back, suddenly his heart clenches in a knot of grief and tears 
choke him. His voice low, he asks Krishna, “Why is my heart afraid, O 
Kesava, and why does my speech falter? I see evil omens and my limbs feel 
weak. Thoughts of terrible disaster fill my mind. I see everywhere, many 
kinds of omens and portents, which tell of some terrible tragedy. Is 
everything well with my brother the king, and all his companions?” 

Krishna says, “It is evident that everything is well with your brother and 
his companions. Do not grieve; some trifling evil might have transpired.” 

The two shuras, Krishna and Arjuna, worship the twilight sandhya, and 
continue discussing the day’s battle, which had claimed so many Kshatriya 
lives and during which they had achieved so many extraordinary feats. 
Finally, they arrive at the Pandava encampment. 


Arjuna notices the joyless and melancholy air that hangs over the camp, 
a stricken pall, and again the pang of fear clutches at his heart. Trembling, 
he says to Krishna, “Janardana, no one blows the auspicious trumpets today, 
mingling its blasts with the beat of drums and the boom of conches. I hear 
no sweet vinanadam or the victorious slapping of palms. Our bards do not 
sing the auspicious songs of eulogy. 

Ah, look how our warriors all turn away from me, with their heads hung 
down. They do not as usual tell me of the feats they have achieved. 
Madhava, is all well with my brothers today? Seeing our men all plunged in 
grief, I have no peace. Does all fare well with the lord of the Panchalas, 
with Virata, with all our warriors, O you of unfading glory? Alas, 
Subhadra’s son, ever cheerful, does not come out today with his brothers, 
smiling radiantly to receive me as he always does.” 

Krishna and Arjuna enter their own quarter of the camp and find the 
Pandavas all plunged in deep sorrow. Seeing his brothers and sons sitting 
with their heads hung down, in complete silence, Arjuna is quickly 
distraught, full of awful fear. 

Not seeing Abhimanyu there, Arjuna says, “I see that all your faces are 
pale, and I do not see Abhimanyu. He does not come running to embrace 
and welcome me as he always does. I heard that Drona formed the 
chakravyuha today. None among you save my son could break into that 
formation. I taught him myself, but I did not teach him how to break out of 
it again. Ah, did you make my boy enter that vyuha? 

Did Subhadra’s mighty son go alone into the enemy’s midst? Did he kill 
countless maharathas there and finally fall to countless enemies combined 
against him? Oh, tell me how that indomitable hero of mighty arms and red 
eyes, born into our vamsa like a lion upon the mountain breast, Abhimanyu 
equal Vishnu himself, perished on the field of battle?” 

Moment by moment certainty of the tragedy seizes Arjuna. His voice 
rises, and he cries desperately, “What warrior, whom Death deprived of his 
reason, dared kill Subhadra’s beloved son, he who was the favourite of 
Draupadi and Krishna, the child whom Kunti loved most? He was equal to 
Krishna himself in prowess, learning and dignity; how has he been slain on 
the field of war? If I do not see the favourite son of the daughter of the 
Vrishnis, whom I loved more than my life, I will not live another moment 
but kill myself!” 


No one makes any reply, and like one caught in a deepening nightmare, 
Arjuna continues, biting his lip, speaking to himself as much as to the 
others. 

“With locks ending in soft curls, of tender years, with eyes like those of 
a young gazelle, with a tread like that of an elephant in musth, tall like a 
young Sala tree, of sweet speech, ah, such sweet smiles, quiet, ever 
obedient to his elders, though so young, always conducting himself like one 
of mature years, of untold courage and energy, his eyes like lotus-petals, 
always kind to those who loved him, self-restrained, never doing anything 
mean, always grateful, learned and wise far beyond his years, a great master 
of astras, never fleeing from battle, instead always delighting in fight and 
striking fear into his enemies, ever engaged in his kinsmen’s welfare, 
wishing victory to his sires, never striking first, perfectly fearless in war—if 
I do not see that son of mine, I will follow him even now to the land of 
Yama.” 

Arjuna continues truly like a man in a dreadful dream, “He was a 
maharatha among maharathas; he was one and a half times the warrior I am. 
Of tender years, of mighty arms, so very dear to Pradyumna, Kesava and 
myself—if I do not see my son I must leave you and go to Yama’s world. 

With a beautiful nose and lofty brow, with startling, brilliant eyes, and 
arched lips—oh, if I do not see that face, what peace can my heart have? 
His voice melodious as the voice of the male kokila, enchanting and sweet 
as the soft, deep sounds of the vina—without hearing his voice, what peace 
can my heart have? 

His beauty is unrivalled, rare even among the Devas. Without casting 
my eyes on that form, what peace can my heart have? Accomplished in 
greeting his elders with reverence, and always obedient to the behests of his 
sires—alas, if I do not see him, what peace can my heart have? 

Brave in battle, accustomed to every luxury, deserving of the softest bed 
—alas, he sleeps today on the bare earth, as if there is none to take care of 
him, although he is first of those who have protectors. He was attended on 
by the most beautiful women, in his bed; alas, mangled with arrows, 
inauspicious jackals, prowling the field, will attend to him today. He who 
was once roused from his slumbers by singers, bards and panegyrists—alas, 
today he will be awakened by discordant cries of beasts of prey. 

His handsome face that eminently deserves to be shaded by a royal 
chatra—alas, the dust of the battlefield will soil it today. O my child, 


unfortunate that I am, death forcibly takes you away from me, who was 
never sated with looking at you. Today you will illumine the palace of 
Yama, mansion of delight, which is always the goal of men of dharma, and 
your brilliance will add to is lustre. Without doubt, Yama, Varuna, Indra and 
Kubera, finding you their favourite guest, even now make much of you, O 
my heroic son.” 

Thus lamenting like a merchant whose vessel has sunk, grief-stricken 
Arjuna asks Yudhishtira, “O, Kurusthama, has he ascended into Swarga 
after facing their fiercest warriors in battle and slaughtering the enemy? Ah, 
while he single-handedly fought the greatest maharathas, countless in 
number, his heart must have turned towards me seeking help. While set 
upon by Karna, Drona, Kripa and the others with arrows of every kind, with 
glittering heads, my son must have repeatedly thought, ‘My father will be 
my rescuer in this peril.’ 

Even while he thought of me and grieved, I feel sure that savage 
warriors must have felled him. Or, perhaps, as he was my son, the nephew 
of Krishna and born to Subhadra, he would not have uttered any 
lamentation. But oh, my heart is made of the adamant of the Vajra, since it 
does not break even though I do not see that mighty-armed shura with the 
red eyes. 

How could these cruel maharathas shoot their deep-piercing arrows at 
my son of such tender years, the child who was Krishna’s nephew? Every 
evening the noble-hearted prince would rush out to greet me when I rode 
home; where is he today? Terrible certainty grips me that he lies slain and 
bathed in his own blood on naked ground. Ah, making this bhumi beautiful 
with his body, my child surely lies like the sun fallen from the sky. 

I grieve for Subhadra, who, when she hears of her fearless son’s death 
in battle, will end her own life in sorrow. Missing Abhimanyu, what will 
she say to me? What will Draupadi say to me? Ravaged by grief as they are, 
what will I say to them? Surely, my heart is made of the adamantine essence 
of the very Vajra, since it does not break in a thousand pieces at the sight of 
my weeping daughter-in-law Uttaraa, impaled on her grief. 

I did indeed hear the leonine shouts of the Dhritarashtras swelling with 
pride. Krishna also heard Yuyutsu censuring the Kshatriyas of the 
Dhritarashtra army saying, “Maharathas, why do you rejoice when, unable 
to vanquish Arjuna, you have killed only a child? Why, having done what is 
intolerable to Kesava and Arjuna, why do you roar like lions in joy, when in 


truth it is the hour for sorrow that is come? The fruits of this horrible sin of 
yours will overtake you swiftly. Heinous is the crime you have perpetrated. 
How long can it take to bear its fruits?’ 

Rebuking them in these words, the noble son of Dhritarashtra by his 
Vaisya wife rode away, flinging aside his weapons, seized by rage and grief. 
O Krishna, why did you not tell me all this during the battle? I would have 
consumed all those heartless, bestial maharathas.” 

Krishna consoles the stricken Arjuna, whose eyes are bathed in tears, 
“Do not yield so to grief. This is the way of all brave heroes, and especially 
of Kshatriyas, whose dharma is battle. O Mahabuddhi, such is the goal the 
authors of our shastras ordain for fearless warriors in war. Death is certain 
for Kshatriyas who do not retreat. There is no doubt that Abhimanyu has 
ascended to those lofty realms that are reserved for men of the highest 
dharma. Bharatarishabha, all brave men wish to die in battle, facing their 
enemies. 

As for Abhimanyu, he killed so many maharathas, before meeting with 
a death coveted by Kshatriyas. Do not grieve, Naravyaghra, our lawgivers 
of old have declared the death in battle to be the eternal punya of the 
Kshatriyas. Best of the Bharatas, your brothers are all forlorn, as is the king, 
and our friends, to see you plunged in despair. You must not sharpen their 
grief but comfort them by being calm and brave yourself.” 

Controlling himself somewhat, Arjuna, his voice still choking, says to 
Yudhishtira and his brothers, “Lord of the earth, tell me now how my heroic 
Abhimanyu fought, that shura of eyes like lotus-petals. You will see me 
annihilate my son’s killers with their elephants, chariots, horses and all their 
followers and kinsmen. 

Yet, my great brothers, you are all masters of arms, and you were all 
armed in battle. How then was Subhadra’s son slain, even if it were 
Vajradhari Indra himself whom he fought? 

Alas, if I had known that Pandavas and the Panchalas would not be able 
to protect my son in war, I myself would have done so. You were mounted 
on your chariots; you held your bows and loosed your arrows. Alas, how 
could the enemy kill Abhimanyu, and bring a great carnage to your ranks? 

Ah, you have neither manliness nor prowess, since they killed 
Abhimanyu before your very eyes. Or I should blame myself, because 
knowing that you all are weak, cowardly and irresolute, I went away! Are 
your coats of mail and weapons only ornaments to embellish your bodies, 


and were you given words only to make fine speeches in sabhas, that you 
failed to protect my son, despite being clad in mail, fully armed and 
although you gave me your solemn word that you would safeguard my 
son?” 

Arjuna suddenly sits down, his fists clenched around his great bow and 
fine sword. Indeed, no one can even look at him at that time, for he is like 
Death himself, repeatedly drawing deep breaths. None of his friends or 
kinsmen venture to look at or speak to Arjuna, as he sits there, with tears 
streaming down his face. No one dares address him, save Krishna or 
Yudhishtira. These two he reveres so much that they are free to speak to 
him under any circumstances, and at any time. 

At last, in that deep and terrible silence, slowly, Yudhishtira speaks to 
Arjuna.’ 


CANTO 70 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ Y udhishtira says, “Mahabaho, after you rode to face the 
Samsaptakas, Drona did everything he could to capture me. 
However, we resisted the Acharya at the head of his vyuha, deploying our 
own forces in a powerful formation. Contained by a large number of our 
warriors, and I too was well protected, the infuriated Drona began to assail 
us with his devastras, burning up whole legions of common soldiers. We 
could not even look at his army, far less face it in battle. 

It was then that all of us asked Abhimanyu to break Drona’s vyuha! 
And he unquestioningly sought to fulfil our wish, dreadful though the task 
was. The brilliant child plunged into the chakravyuha even like Garuda into 
the sea. As for us, we followed Abhimanyu close, but then suddenly the 
wretched Jayadratha barred our way, using the boon he had from Siva. 
Why, by himself the vile Saindhava held all of us at bay! 

And then six maharathas, Drona, Kripa, Karna, Aswatthaman, the king 
of the Kosalas and Kritavarman, surrounded Abhimanyu. Having encircled 
the child, the six, who proved more than he could contain after all the 
fighting and killing he had done, shattered his chariot. Abhimanyu battled 
on foot but finally, by great mischance, Dusasana’s son struck him dead. 


During the day, Abhimanyu killed many thousands of men, horses and 
elephants; he destroyed eight thousand chariots and nine hundred elephants 
more, two thousand Kshatriya princes, and a vast number of warriors, all 
heroes if unknown to fame, and sent king Brihadbala also to heaven. 
Finally, through dark misfortune, your glorious son met his death. 

Arjuna, that he died alone within the treacherous chakravyuha only 
makes our grief sharper than it might be otherwise.” Yudhishtira’s voice is a 
hoarse whisper now, “My brother, it was thus that your magnificent son, 
that tiger among all men, ascended to swarga!” 

Arjuna moans, “Oh my son!” and heaving a great sigh, keels over on his 
side, swooning in agony he cannot endure. Their faces dark with sorrow, all 
the Pandava warriors stand around the unconscious Dhananjaya, and stare 
mutely at one another. 

When Arjuna regains his senses, he awakes in rage that is terrible to 
see. Sighs like a great serpent’s hisses issue from his trembling body; he 
draws deep shuddering breaths and tears flow in a rill down his face. He 
casts manic glances around him, eyes darting everywhere, like a madman, 
like one possessed. 

In a truly dreadful voice, Arjuna says, very quietly, “I swear that 
tomorrow I will kill Jayadratha. If he does not forsake the Dhritarashtras 
from fear of death, or come to beg for our protection, or for Krishna’s 
protection, or yours, Rajan, I will surely kill him tomorrow. 

Forgetting his friendship for me, eager only to please Dhritarashtra’s 
son, the wretch caused the death of my precious child. And tomorrow I will 
kill the sinner Jayadratha. Whoever faces me in battle tomorrow to protect 
the vile Saindhava, be it not Drona or Kripa—I will smother them with my 
arrows. I will kill them if they stand in my way! 

O Purusharishabhas, if I do not achieve this in tomorrow’s battle, let me 
not attain the heaven reserved for men of dharma. Why, if I do not kill 
Jayadratha tomorrow, let me find those hellish realms that sinners do who 
kill their mothers, or their fathers, or violate their guru’s beds, the most vile 
and evil men, they who are envious of righteous men, they who speak ill of 
others or appropriate wealth entrusted to their care, betrayers of trusts, who 
speak ill of their dead wives, or who have slain Brahmanas, or sacred kine, 
or they who eat payasa, meat or other delicacies without having first 
dedicated them to the Devas. May those narakas become mine to which 
men who insult Brahmanas devoted to the study of the Vedas go, or speak 


harshly to other men worthy of respect, or to their very gurus—if I do not 
kill Jayadratha tomorrow! 

The end that becomes theirs who lay their feet on Brahmanas or sacred 
fire, those who cast phlegm, excreta and urine into pure water—may even 
such an end be mine if I do not kill Jayadratha! 

Let me find the end which is his who bathes naked in water, or his who 
does not hospitably entertain a guest, or he who takes bribes, speaks 
falsehoods and deceives and cheats others, or who offends against his own 
soul, or who falsely praises others, or of those low sinners who eat fine 
sweets in the sight of servants, sons, wives and dependents without sharing 
them—if I do not kill Jayadratha tomorrow! 

The end of the cruel brute who does not support an obedient sishya of 
dharma but casts him off; the end of him who, without giving the offerings 
in Sraddhas to deserving neighbours, gives them instead to those who do 
not deserve them in the least; the end which is his who drinks wine, or 
insults those who are worthy of respect; or one who is ungrateful, or speaks 
ill of his brothers—let that end swiftly be mine if I do not kill Jayadratha! 

I vow that I will immediately attain to the end of all the sinners whom I 
have mentioned, and also those whom I have not named, if after this night, I 
do not slay Jayadratha tomorrow. 

And listen now to another oath of mine! If tomorrow’s Sun sets without 
my killing that wretch, then even here will I enter a blazing fire and 
immolate myself! You Asuras, Devas and Manushas, you Pakshis and 
Nagas, you Pitris and all you Rakshasas, you Maharishis and Devarishis, O 
all you mobile and immobile creatures —not all of you together will succeed 
in protecting my enemy from me tomorrow! Even if he enters the Patalas, 
or rises into Akasa, or runs to the Devas in Swarga, or to the realms of the 
Daityas, upon the expiration of this night, I will yet with a hundred arrows, 
sever the head of Abhimanyu’s enemy!” 

Having said this, Arjuna begins to stretch the Gandiva mightily with 
both his arms. Echoing beyond Arjuna’s voice the sound of the great bow 
rises and touches the very heavens. After Arjuna swears his oath, Krishna, 
filled with wrath, blows his conch the Panchajanya, while Arjuna blows the 
Devadatta. At the reverberant booming of the great Panchajanya, the rulers 
of the cardinal and the subsidiary points, the nether regions, why, the Lords 
of the whole universe tremble, as if it is the end of the Yuga. After Arjuna 


Mahatman has sworn his solemn oath, the sound of thousands of musical 
instruments and lionish warriors’ roars arise from the Pandava camp.’” 


CANTO 71 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Duryodhana’s spies quickly come to inform their 
masters of the cause of the great uproar raised by the Pandavas. 
Jayadratha is overwhelmed by terror, and feels as if he is sinking in a vortex 
of black despair. He sits plunged in thought for a time, numb, then slowly 
rises and comes into the assembly of the Dhartarashtra kings. He stands 
mute for a while in that conclave of those gods among men, and then 
breathes, “He whom Indra sired in Pandu’s soil has sworn to send me to 
Yamaloka tomorrow! May fortune smile on you, I will return to my home 
for I have no wish to die. O Kshatriyarishabhas, protect me with your 
weapons, for Arjuna seeks to kill me. Make me fearless! Drona, 
Duryodhana, Kripa, Karna, Salya, Balhika, Dusasana and all you others can 
protect a man from Yama himself. When Phalguna alone threatens me, will 
these the lords of the earth not join together and protect me? 

Great is my fear after hearing the Pandavas shouting loud in joy. My 
limbs, Bhumipalas, have turned weak like a dying man’s. The Gandeevi has 
sworn to kill me. And that is why the Pandavas are roaring in joy at a time 
when they should weep! Let alone the rulers of men, the very Devas, 
Gandharvas, the Asuras, the Uragas and the Rakshasas cannot thwart 


Arjuna when he has sworn to kill me. And so, you bulls among men, 
blessed be you, give me leave to depart the Kuru camp for I have no wish to 
die. Even Arjuna cannot take my life if he does not find me here!” 

Thus does the terrified Jayadratha babble in fear, but Duryodhana, 
always looking to achieve his own ends over everything else, says, “Do not 
fear, Naravyaghra! Who will dare seek to kill you when you are in the midst 
of all these Kshatriya tigers? Vikartana’s son, Karna, Chitrasena, Vivimsati, 
Bhurisravas, Sala, Salya, the invincible Vrishasena, Purumitra, Jaya, Bhoja, 
Sudakshina of the Kambojas, Satyavrata, the Mahabaho Vikarna, 
Durmukha, Dusasana, Subahu of the Kalingas, and I myself, with weapons 
raised, Vinda and Anuvinda of Avanti, Drona, Drona’s son, and Subala’s 
son Sakuni—all these and many other kings, with their armies, will protect 
you on all sides. Let the fever of fear in your heart be dispelled. 

You are yourself one of the greatest maharathas. O splendid Jayadratha, 
you are a shura, a magnificent hero. And being what you are, how can you 
see any cause for fear? My own eleven akshauhinis will fight just to protect 
you tomorrow. O king of the Sindhus, let your fears be dispelled!” 

Comforted somewhat by your son, the king of the Sindhus, along with 
Duryodhana, goes then to meet Drona, the senapati of the Kuru army. 
Touching Drona’s feet with reverence and taking his seat with humility, 
Jayadratha earnestly asks the Acharya, “Illustrious one, tell me the 
difference between Arjuna and myself in striking a target from a distance, 
in the firmness of our grips, and the force of shooting our arrows. O 
Acharya, I want to know accurately the difference as bowmen between 
Arjuna and myself! I beg you, tell me this truthfully, for only you can.” 

Drona says, “O son I have given both Arjuna and you the same measure 
of instruction. However, through yoga and because of the hard life that 
Arjuna has led, he is superior to you. But for no reason should you be afraid 
of Partha. For have no doubt that I will protect you from what you fear. The 
very Devas cannot prevail over him whom my arms protect. Tomorrow I 
will form a vyuha that Partha will not succeed in piercing! 

So have no fear and observe your swadharma. O maharatha, walk in the 
path of your fathers and grandfathers. Having studied the Vedas, you have 
poured libations, according to the laws, into fire. You have performed many 
yagnas. Death cannot be an object of terror for you. For if you die, you will 
acquire the great good fortune which evil men cannot attain and you will 


gain all those felicitous regions in heaven that only the might of arms can 
bestow! 

The Kauravas, the Pandavas, the Vrishnis and other men, and also my 
son and I, are all mortal and short-lived. Think of this. One after another, all 
of us, killed by Kaala which is all powerful, will go to the other world, 
carrying only our deeds with us—the same regions that munis acquire 
through severe penances and heroic Kshatriyas who observe their 
swadharma.” 

Thus, Bharadwaja’s son consoles the king of the Sindhus. Banishing his 
fear of Partha, he sets his heart on the battle to follow. Then, Rajan, your 
troops also feel great delight and one hears the loud sounds of musical 
instruments, mingled with lusty roars.” 


CANTO 72 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘After Partha vows to kill Jayadratha, Krishna says to 
Arjuna, “With only your brother’s consent and without consulting 
me, you have sworn to kill the Saindhava. You have been rash to swear this 
oath and taken a great burden upon yourself. Alas, how will we escape the 
ridicule of all men? I sent some spies into Duryodhana’s camp and my men 
report that after you vowed to kill the king of the Sindhus, the 
Dhartarashtras heard our loud roaring, mingled with the sounds of our 
musical instruments. This terrified them and their well-wishers, and they 
thought these tigerish shouts could not be without good reason and waited 
to see what would ensue. 

O Mahabaho, a clamour has arisen among the Kauravas, their elephants, 
horses and foot-soldiers; and we hear the terrible rattle of their chariots. 
After hearing of the death of Abhimanyu, they fear that you, Arjuna, will 
set out in the very night, raging for battle! 

The Kaurava king waits ready for battle. While preparing themselves, O 
you of eyes like lotus-petals, they learnt of the vow that you swore to kill 
Jayadratha. All Duryodhana’s counsellors became faint-hearted and 
frightened like little animals. Jayadratha, king of the Sindhus and the 


Sauviras, was overwhelmed by fear and hastily called his closest advisors 
for a consultation. 

After consulting them, he went to the assembly of the allied kings and 
there said to Duryodhana, “Arjuna thinks of me as his son’s killer and will 
challenge me to battle tomorrow. In the midst of his army, he has sworn to 
kill me. The very Devas, Gandharvas, Asuras, Uragas and Rakshasas 
cannot frustrate Arjuna’s solemn vow. So protect me. Do not let 
Dhananjaya set his foot on your head, and find his mark, which is my life! 
Make every arrangement to safeguard me; otherwise, if you think you 
cannot save me from Arjuna on the field, give me leave to return to my 
kingdom.” 

Seeing Jayadratha so terrified, an unhappy Duryodhana sat with his 
head hung down and reflecting in silence. Seeing the Kuru king distraught, 
Jayadratha slowly says, “I do not see any archer here who can match Arjuna 
in war. Who, even if it were Satakratu himself, can stand against Arjuna 
who has Krishna for his sarathy, and wields the Gandiva? I hear that Partha 
fought Lord Maheswara himself once on the mountains of Himavat. At 
Indra’s behest, from a single chariot he slew a thousand Danavas of 
Hiranyapura. 

And now that the clever Vasudeva is his ally, I feel certain that Arjuna 
can destroy the three worlds including their very gods. I beseech you that 
you either grant me permission to leave Kurukshetra or ensure that the 
high-souled and heroic Drona with his son will assuredly protect me. I 
await your pleasure.” 

O Arjuna, hearing Jayadratha’s pitiful plea, Duryodhana also added his 
voice to humbly beseech Drona to protect the Saindhava. And they have 
indeed taken every measure in their power to protect Jayadratha. They have 
deployed all their chariots and cavalry. Karna, Bhurisravas, Drona’s son 
Aswatthaman, the invincible Vrishasena, Kripa, and Salya of the Madras— 
these six will be in Jayadratha’s van. Drona will form a vyuha half of which 
will be a Sakata, a cart, and half a Padma, a lotus. In the midst of the leaves 
of that lotus will be a needle-mouthed formation, a suchimukha vyuha. At 
the eye of the needle, Jayadratha will take his stand, protected by those six 
greatest Kuru maharathas! 

In the use of the bow, and every other weapon, in the ability to kill their 
enemies, in sheer prowess, and also in lineage, these six maharathas are 


well nigh without equal. Without first vanquishing these six, you will not be 
able to reach Jayadratha. 

Think, O Arjuna, of the individual prowess of each of the six. When 
united they cannot be vanquished easily, if at all! And so, for our benefit 
and our success, we should once again take counsel with our well-wishers, 
who are familiar with strategy!” 


CANTO 73 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


eS A rjuna says, ‘The prowess of the six maharathas of Dhritarashtra’s 

army whose united might you think so highly of, I believe is not 

equal to even half of mine! You will see, O Madhusudana, how I destroy 

their weapons and render them impotent, when I confront them on my way 

to kill Jayadratha! In the very sight of Drona and all his men, I will behead 

the king of the Sindhus, and Duryodhana’s whole army will weep and 
lament. 

Even if the Siddhas, the Rudras, the Vasus, with the Aswins, the Maruts, 
with Indra at their head, the Viswadevas with the other Gods, the Pitris, the 
Gandharvas, Garuda, the Ocean, the Mountains, the Firmament, Heaven, 
Earth, the cardinal and subsidiary points of the compass and the regents of 
those points, all the beasts that are domestic and all that are wild, in fact if 
all the mobile and the unmoving beings together become the protectors of 
Jayadratha, O Krishna, you will see me kill him tomorrow with my arrows! 
I swear by Truth; I touch my weapons and swear by them that I will, at the 
very outset, face the mighty Drona, who has become the protector of the 
sinner Jayadratha. Duryodhana believes that this game of war hinges upon 


Drona. And even so, hewing my way through the very van that Drona 
himself commands, I will strike at Jayadratha! 

Tomorrow you will see the great Acharya blown away by my arrows 
like the summits of a hill struck by thunder. Blood will flow in rills from the 
breasts of fallen men, elephants and horses, eviscerated by my showers of 
shafts falling heavily upon them. The astras shot from the Gandiva, fleet as 
the mind or the wind, will claim the lives of thousands upon thousands of 
men, elephants and steeds. 

In tomorrow’s battle, all men shall see the awesome astras that I have 
acquired from Yama, Kubera, Varuna, Indra and Rudra. You will witness 
how my Brahmastra nullifies the weapons of all those who come to protect 
Jayadratha. 

O Krishna, tomorrow you will see the Earth strewn with the heads of 
kings cut off cleanly by my shafts! Tomorrow I will gratify all the thirst and 
hunger of all the ravening Rakshasas that stalk Kurukshetra. I will mow 
down the enemy and gladden my friends, and finally I will cut the head of 
the ruler of the Sindhus from his throat. 

He is a vile and heinous sinner; he has not behaved like a relative; he is 
born in a sinful country and when I kill him, it will plunge dark grief 
through all that are his own. Krishna, tomorrow you will see the wretched 
Jayadratha, who was raised in every luxury, die from my inexorable arrows! 

Tomorrow, Krishna, I will do that which will make Duryodhana believe 
that there is no bowman in the world who is Arjuna’s equal. My Gandiva is 
a celestial bow. I, Arjuna, am the warrior. You, O Hrishikesa, are the 
charioteer. What can come between me and my prey, who is there that I 
cannot vanquish? Through your grace, O Holy one, what is there that I 
cannot achieve in battle? Knowing well that my power is irresistible, why, 
O Krishna, do you still rebuke me? 

As Lakshmi is ever present in Soma, as water is ever present in the 
ocean, know, O Janardana, that I always accomplish what I have sworn to 
do. Do not think lightly of my weapons. Do not think lightly of my great 
bow. Do not think lightly of the might of my arms. Do not think lightly of 
your Dhananjaya. I will go into battle in such heart that I shall not lose but 
surely prevail. When I have vowed it, know that Jayadratha has already 
been slain. Truly, in the Brahmana is truth; in men of dharma is humility; in 
yagna is prosperity, and always in Narayana is victory!” 


Having said these words to Krishna, having said all this to himself, as 
well, in a deep voice Arjuna once more addresses the Lord Kesava, saying, 
“Krishna, yet the task before us is grave and not easy, and you must prepare 
our chariot by the hour of dawn. We must ride forth at break of day and 
conquer!’”’ 


CANTO 74 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Stricken with sorrow and frequently sighing like two 

snakes, Krishna and Arjuna both get no sleep that night. Realising 

that Nara and Narayana are in wrath, the Devas along with Vasava grow 
anxious and think, ““What will come of this?” 

Fierce dry winds, foreboding danger, begin to blow, howling, and a 
headless trunk and a mace appear on the disc of the sun. And although the 
sky is cloudless, there are frequent peals of thunder, and flashes of 
lightning. The earth with her mountains, rivers and forests, shake; and the 
seas, the habitation of makaras, swell in agitation and crash against their 
shores. And the rivers flow back towards their sources, opposite to their 
normal course. The lips of chariot-warriors, horses, men and elephants, 
begin to tremble unaccountably. The animals on the field began to spray 
urine and dung and utter loud cries, to the delight of Rakshasas and 
pisachas, and foretelling a great exodus of men to the domain of Yama. 
Seeing these omens that make the hair stand on end, and hearing of the 
fierce vow of mighty Arjuna, all your warriors, Bharatarishabha, are 
desperately agitated. 


Arjuna, the mighty-armed son of Indra, says to Krishna, “O Madhava, 
go and comfort your sister Subhadra, her daughter-in-law Uttaraa and her 
companions. Speak soothing words to her, words of deep truth and solace.” 

Krishna reluctantly makes his way to Arjuna’s tent, and begins to 
console his sister grieving at the death of her son. Krishna says, “O you of 
Vrishni’s vamsa, do not grieve, you and Uttaraa, for your son. All creatures 
have but one end ordained by Time. The end your son has met is the most 
desirable one for any Kshatriya of proud lineage. Do not grieve, for by good 
fortune your maharatha of great intelligence, of prowess equal to that of his 
father, has met with an end that all Kshatriyas covet. 

After vanquishing numberless enemies and sending them to Yama’s 
land, he himself has gone to the eternal realms of men of dharma, worlds 
that grant the realisation of every wish. Your son has attained the end which 
men of dharma attain only through tapasya, brahm, knowledge of the 
shastras and gyana. The mother, the wife, the daughter and a kinsman of 
such Kshatriyas, O Subhadra, do not grieve for a son who has obtained the 
supreme end. 

The evil king of the Sindhus, my beautiful sister, the murderer of a 
child, will, with all his friends and kinsmen, find the fruit of his arrogance 
before the end of this day. Even if he enters Indra’s domain he will not 
escape Arjuna. Tomorrow you will hear that his head has been cut from his 
neck to roll dismally on the hem of Samantapanchaka! 

Abandon your sorrow and do not grieve, for your valiant son has 
attained the end that men of dharma who observe the svadharma of a 
Kshatriya fervently wish for. Your splendid, magnificent Abhimanyu has 
attained swarga. Drive away this fever of sorrow. Comfort your daughter- 
in-law, O queen, that, obedient to his fathers and his mother’s kinsmen, the 
heroic Abhimanyu has slain thousands upon thousands of his enemies 
before dying a great Kshatriya’s death in the field of war. Do not grieve too 
much, O Kshatriya woman! 

Drive away your grief, gentle Subhadra, for tomorrow will bring great 
tidings. Arjuna will accomplish what he has sworn to do. It cannot be 
otherwise, for your husband never fails to do as he has sworn. Even if all 
Manavas, Nagas, Pisachas, Rakshasas, great Avians, and all the Devas and 
the Asuras come to help the king of the Sindhus, Jayadratha will still die 
tomorrow.””’” 


CANTO 75 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘But Subhadra cannot control her terrible grief and 

wails, “Oh, my son, of prowess equal to your father, O my child, 

how could you die? Alas, how does your face like a blue lotus, with its 
perfect teeth and brilliant eyes, look now covered over with battle’s dust? 

You were so entirely brave, your head so handsome, your neck, arms, 
your deep chest, your low flat belly, your splendid limbs decked with 
ornaments, your beautiful sparkling eyes! All creatures looked upon you as 
the rising moon, and now you have been mutilated, my perfect child, and 
fallen on the yawning field of death. Alas, your bed was always overlaid 
with the whitest and costliest sheets; you who deserved every luxury, how 
do you sleep today on the bare earth, your body mangled with arrows? 

The mighty Kshatriya, whom the most beautiful women waited on, has 
now fallen on the field, to pass his time in the company of jackals! He 
whom vabdhis and magadhis daily hymned at dawn is today greeted by the 
savage cries and growls of Rakshasas and beasts of prey. 

O my precious son, who killed you, and how, when you had the 
Pandavas and all the Panchalas for your protectors? Oh my son, O sinless 
one, I am not yet satisfied with looking at you. Wretched as I am, it is plain 


that I will have to go to Yama’s realm now for my eyes have not seen 
enough of you. When will I cast my gaze again on your face with its lotus- 
like eyes and shining locks, the smooth radiant face from which endearing 
words and the most delicate fragrance constantly issued? 

Fie on the strength of Bhimasena, on the archery of Partha, on the 
prowess of the Vrishni heroes and the might of the Panchalas! Shame on the 
Kaikeyas, the Chedis, the Matsyas and the Srinjayas, who could not protect 
you, O my shuravira! I see the Earth as being empty and hollow today, and 
made of just sorrow and despair. My eyes hurt and stream tears that they do 
not see my Abhimanyu. You were Krishna’s sister’s son, the son of the 
wielder of Gandiva, and yourself an incomparable hero and an atiratha. 
Alas, how will I look at you dead! 

O Kshatriya, to me you were like a treasure that is briefly won and lost 
in a dream. Oh, everything human is as fleeting as a bubble of water on this 
river of time. Your young wife is overwhelmed by grief at the evil that has 
befallen you. And how will I, who am like a cow without her calf, comfort 
her? O my sweet prince, you have so untimely fled from me, even as your 
greatness was about to flower and bear wondrous fruit. Oh my son, can you 
see how my heart is breaking over and over for just a glimpse of your face! 
Ah, there is no doubt that not the wisest can fathom the inexorable ways of 
Death, since despite having Krishna for your protector you were killed as if 
you were quite helpless. 

O son, let that end be yours which is theirs that perform yagnas, who are 
Brahmanas of purified souls, those who have practised brahmacharya, have 
bathed in all the sacred tirthas, who are grateful and charitable and devoted 
to the service of their gurus, and those who have given sacrificial dakshina 
in profusion. The end that is theirs who are intrepid and fearless in battle, or 
theirs who have fallen most heroically in war, after slaying their enemies — 
O my Abhimanyu, let that end be yours! 

The auspicious end which is theirs who have given away a thousand 
cows, or theirs who have given lavish dana in yagnas, or theirs who give 
away houses and mansions, the end which is theirs who give away gems 
and jewels to deserving Brahmanas, or theirs who are punishers of crime— 
O, let that end be yours. 

The end that Munis of rigid vows attain through brahmacharya, or that 
which women who remain faithful to one husband, attain—O son, let that 
end be yours. 


The eternal end which kings get by their good deeds, or by those men 
who have cleansed themselves by leading all the four varnasramas one after 
another, and by duly observing their dharma, the end of men who are 
compassionate to the poor and the distressed, or those who equitably divide 
sweets among themselves and their dependants, or those who are never 
given to deceit and evil—O my son, let that end be yours! 

O child, the end of those who observe chaste vows, or who are virtuous, 
devoted to the service of their gurus, or those who have never sent away a 
guest without entertaining them—let that end be yours. 

O son, let the end of those who succeed in adversity and of those who 
have the most difficult trait of preserving the equanimity of their souls, 
however much they are burnt by the fires of grief, let that end be yours. 

O son, let that end be yours which is theirs who are always devoted to 
the service of their fathers and mothers, or theirs who are exclusively 
devoted to their own wives. 

O son, let that end be yours which those wise men attain who restrain 
themselves from the wives of others and seek the companionship of only 
their own wives in season. 

O son, let that end be yours which is theirs that look upon all creatures 
with an eye of peace, or theirs that never give pain to others, or theirs that 
always forgive. 

O son, let that end be yours which is theirs who abstain from honey, 
meat, wine, pride and falsehood. 

Let that goal be yours which they attain who are modest, acquainted 
with all the shastras, content with knowledge, and have their passions under 
control.” 

While the stricken Subhadra thus laments, wildly, Draupadi 
accompanied by Virata’s daughter Uttaraa, comes to her. All of them, in 
great sorrow, weep copiously and indulge in heart-rending expressions of 
grief. Quite lost to reason through sorrow, they faint and fall onto the earth. 
Then Krishna the lotus-eyed one, who stands ready with water, himself 
deeply affected, sprinkles water over his weeping, unconscious and 
trembling sister, pierced through her very heart. When she comes to her 
senses, he attempts to comfort her again, and the others as well. 

“Grieve not, Subhadra! O Panchali, console Uttaraa! Abhimanyu, bull 
among Kshatriyas, has found the most laudable end for himself. O 
Sumukhi, you of the beautiful face, may all the other men yet alive in our 


race obtain the end which Abhimanyu of great fame has. We, with all our 
friends, together only wish to achieve in this war the feats which your son, 
the atiratha, achieved by himself! So do not grieve for that hero with no 
remote equal.” 

Finally, having somewhat consoled his sister, and Draupadi and Uttaraa, 
through his presence and grace as much as by what he says, Krishna, 
returns to Arjuna. Saluting the kings, friends and Arjuna himself, Kesava 
enters the inner apartments of Arjuna’s palatial tent while the other kings 
return to their own tents.’” 


CANTO 76 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Lord Kesava, of eyes like lotus petals, enters the 
sprawling tent, Arjuna’s unrivalled mansion on Kurukshetra; he 
touches water, and lays out on the auspicious and even floor for Arjuna an 
excellent bed of kusa grasses, which are the colour of lapis lazuli. And 
arranging his majestic weapons around the bed, duly adorns it with garlands 
of flowers, fried paddy, perfumes and other auspicious things. After Partha 
also touches water, gentle and attentive attendants bring the nightly yagna 
offerings for the three-eyed Lord Mahadeva. With a serene soul, Arjuna 
smears Krishna with perfumes and offers him the sacred nightly offering 
adorned with flowers. 

With a faint smile, Govinda says to Arjuna, “Bless you, Partha, lie 
down and sleep. I will leave you now.” 

Seeing that doorkeepers and well-armed guards are in their places, 
Krishna, followed by Daruka his charioteer, goes to his own tent. There the 
illustrious one of eyes like lotus petals lies on his white bed and thinks of 
different ways to dispel Partha’s grief and anxiety and enhance his 
confidence and greatness. Then he, the Supreme Lord of all, Vishnu of 


universal fame, who always does what is for Arjuna’s weal, immerses 
himself in yoga and dhyana. 

Everyone else in the Pandava camp, Rajan, is awake, thinking, 
“Burning with grief at the death of his son, the Gandivi has swiftly vowed 
to kill the Saindhava. But how will Arjuna Parantapa accomplish his rash 
vow? He has sworn a difficult oath, for Jayadratha is invested with great 
prowess and great protection too. Oh, may Arjuna succeed in fulfilling his 
dire vow that he swore while he was in the grip of searing grief! 

The sons of Dhritarashtra are all mighty warriors and their forces are 
countless. Duryodhana has assigned all of them to be just Jayadratha’s 
protectors tomorrow. Oh, let Dhananjaya return to our encampment 
tomorrow after slaying the king of the Sindhus. Let him fulfil his vow. If he 
fails, he will surely enter the fire and immolate himself, for he never swears 
a false oath. If Arjuna dies, how will Dharmaputra Yudhishtira, who has 
reposed all his hopes of victory in Arjuna, succeed in recovering his 
kingdom? If we have all acquired any punya, if we have ever poured 
libations of ghrita into fire, let Savyasachin benefit from our punya and 
vanquish all his enemies!” 

Speaking thus amongst themselves, and deeply anxious for the morrow, 
the Pandava warriors pass that long night. 

In the heart of the night, Krishna awakes, remembers Arjuna’s vow, and 
says softly, but in a terrible voice, to his charioteer, “Daruka, grief-stricken 
at his son’s death, Arjuna has vowed, that before tomorrow’s sun sets he 
will kill Jayadratha or take his own life. Hearing this, Duryodhana will 
surely take counsel with his advisors about how Partha can be prevented 
from fulfilling his vow. His several akshauhinis will all protect Jayadratha. 
Drona, too, with his son Aswatthaman, will stand watch over the 
Saindhava. And even Indra himself, the thousand-eyed scourge of the pride 
of the Daityas and Danavas, will hardly be able to kill one whom great 
Drona protects. And if Arjuna does not do as he has sworn he must take his 
own life. I mean to help Kunti’s son to kill Jayadratha before the sun sets. 

My wives, my kinsmen, my relatives, none among these are dearer to 
me than Arjuna. Daruka, I will not be able to look upon an Earth without 
Arjuna in it for even a single moment. I say to you, the Earth shall not be 
without Arjuna for I will raze them all, with their horses and elephants, by 
putting forth my might for Partha’s sake. I will kill them all along with 
Karna and Duryodhana. Tomorrow let the three worlds witness my prowess 


when I join the fray for Arjuna’s sake, and thousands of kings and hundreds 
of princes, with their horses, chariots and elephants, flee the battle or die 
from fear of me. 

Daruka, you will see my wrath for I will decimate the army of kings, 
and the three worlds with the Devas, the Gandharvas, the Pisachas, the 
Nagas and the Rakshasas, will know me as a true friend of Savyasachin. 
Those who hate him hate me. Those who follow him, follow me. You are 
intelligent, Daruka, so know that Arjuna is half of myself. 

When morning comes after this night ends, you, Daruka, must equip my 
chariot with the Kaumodaki, my Sudarshana Chakra, my Saringa and my 
astras, and everything else I might need, and then you must follow me 
discreetly into battle. O Suta, make room upon my chariot for my standard 
and for heroic Garuda thereon, who adorns my chatra. Yoke my horses 
Balahaka, Meghapushpa, Saibya and Sugriva, after having them cased in 
golden mail of the splendour of the Sun and Fire; and then put on your own 
armour and remain in the chariot vigilantly waiting. 

When you hear the blast of my Panchajanya blowing the shrill Rishabha 
note, fly to me. In a single day, Daruka, I will dispel the wrath and the many 
sorrows of my cousin, the son of my aunt. I will do everything in my power 
to see that Arjuna kills Jayadratha in the very sight of the Dhartarashtras. 
Why, Daruka, I say to you that I will ensure that Dhananjaya will surely kill 
everyone he wants to.” 

Daruka says, “He, whose charioteer, O Naravyaghra, you become is 
certain to be victorious. Indeed, from where can defeat come to him? As for 
myself, I will do as you have commanded. This night will bring in its wake 
an auspicious morning for Arjuna’s triumph and glory.’”’” 


CANTO 77 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


S anjaya says, ‘Kunti’s son, Dhananjaya of inconceivable prowess, 
also lies thinking of ways to accomplish his vow. He recollects the 
mantras Vyasa had taught him and chanting them silently is soon lulled into 
sleep. To the Kshatriya of the Hanuman banner, his heart burning with grief 
even in slumber, Krishna of the Garuda banner appears in a dream. Arjuna 
Dharmatma always rises and advances a few steps to greet Krishna in 
bhakti whenever he sees him. And now in his dream as well he rises and 
offers Govinda a seat, while he keeps standing himself. 

Krishna Mahatejasvin says to Kunti’s son, “Let not your heart grieve, O 
Partha. Time is immutable and it forces all creatures into its inevitable 
course. Greatest of men, why do you grieve? Grief should never be 
indulged in, for it is an impediment to action. Fulfil your karma; accomplish 
what you have sworn to do. Dhananjaya, the grief that makes a man 
abandon all effort is an enemy of the warrior. By giving in to sorrow, a 
Kshatriya pleases his enemies and saddens his friends, while he himself is 
weakened. It does not become you to grieve.” 

The unvanquished Vijaya of deep learning says, “Grave is the vow that 
I have sworn, to kill Jayadratha. And tomorrow I will slay the evil one, my 


son’s murderer. This is my solemn vow, Kesava! To frustrate me, the 
Dhartarashtras will keep Jayadratha at their rear, protected by all their 
maharathas. 

Their army consists of the remnants of eleven akshauhinis of troops, 
still difficult to vanquish. Surrounded as he will be by all of them and by all 
their great maharathas besides, how will we even catch a glimpse of the vile 
Saindhava? O Krishna, I may not be able to fulfil my oath! And if I fail, 
how can I continue to live, Kesava? Ah, I fear that I will not succeed in 
keeping the impossible vow that I have sworn, demented as I was by 
Abhimanyu’s death. And this is what makes me grieve. 

Besides, at this time of the year, Krishna, the Sun sets early 

Hearing this, the cause of Arjuna’s grief and anxiety, Krishna gently 
touches water with his fingers and sits with his face turned to the east. The 
lotus-leaf-eyed One says to his cousin who has sworn to kill Jayadratha the 
next day, “Partha, there is an inexorable, supreme astra called the Pasupata. 
With it, the Lord Maheswara once slew all the Daityas! If you meditate 
upon that final weapon now, you will be able to kill Jayadratha tomorrow. If 
you do not know that Pasupatastra, worship Maheswara, who has the Bull 
for his mark. Think of the Mahadeva in your heart and fix your mind on 
him in dhyana, Arjuna. You are his devotee and through his grace, you will 
have that invaluable weapon.” 

Hearing Krishna’s words, Arjuna now touches water and sits on the 
ground in deep dhyana, his thought fixed on the Lord Bhava. It is the 
auspicious Brahmamuhurta when Arjuna meditates on Siva. Arjuna sees 
himself journeying through the sky with Krishna, and travelling with the 
speed of the mind to the sacred foot of Himavat and the Manimat mountain 
replete with many brilliant gemstones, Manimat frequented by Siddhas and 
Charanas. 

Krishna seems to hold his left arm as they course along, and Arjuna sees 
many wonderful sights there. Dharmatma Arjuna then finds himself at the 
White mountain of the north, Sweta, where, in the pleasure-gardens of 
Kubera, he sees the crystalline exquisite lake, the Bindusaras festooned 
with lotuses. He also sees the Ganga, greatest of rivers, brimful of pellucid 
water. Flying on, he arrives at the Mandara mountains covered with 
unearthly and awesome trees that are always laden with flowers and fruit. 

Fine stones lie strewn everywhere in this place; all of them are the finest 
lucent crystals. Lions, tigers and diverse animals abound here, some truly 


17? 


exotic and found nowhere else, as do auspicious asramas of Munis, which 
echo with the sweet songs of brightly plumed birds, and also the 
transcendent songs of Kinnaras. Many golden and silver peaks grace this 
wondrous realm, and different magical herbs and plants illumine it; and 
Mandara trees with their gorgeous loads of flowers. 

Then Arjuna comes to the mountain called Kala that looks like a great 
mound of antimony, and its summit Brahmatunga, and flying on, comes to 
many sparkling rivers and peopled realms, inhabited by men as well as 
unearthly beings. He comes to Satasringa, and the vana called Sharyati and 
sees the sacred Horse-head, the realm of Atharvana. He sees that prince of 
mountains called Vrishadansa, and the great Mandara, graced by Apsaras 
and Kinnaras. 

Wandering on that mountain, Arjuna and Krishna see a place where 
exquisite fountains plash, a place shimmering with the rarest gold of the 
gods, lambent like the Moon, and with many shining cities and towns. In 
this fabulous zone of dreams, he also comes upon uncanny seas of 
marvellous shapes and diverse mines of untold wealth. And going through 
the sky, and over the earth, he arrives at the place known as Vishnupada. 
Like an arrow shot from a bow does Arjuna fly through the vaults of these 
skies of dream, with Krishna beside him, while below them indescribable 
landscapes unfold. 

Soon Partha sees a mountain whose splendour equals that of the stars, 
the constellations, or fire. And at the summit of this lone and towering 
massif, he sees the Great God whose mount and emblem is the Bull. Arjuna 
sees Lord Siva who is always at tapasya, Mahadeva whose lustre is like that 
of a thousand suns fused, ah, ablaze with his own effulgence. Siva sits with 
trident in hand, matted jata upon his awesome head, his complexion white 
as snow or moonbeams, and wearing bark and deerskin. 

Of tejas past telling, Maheswara’s body seems to be alight with a 
thousand mystic eyes. He is seated with Parvati, with many creatures of 
fantastic and brilliant forms around him, his ganas, while his attendants sing 
and play musical instruments, full of joy, laughing and dancing in bliss, 
moving about and stretching their arms as if in waking trance, and often 
shouting aloud in primeval ecstasy. Divine fragrances perfume that place, 
and Rishis who worship the Brahman, worship Siva here with exceptional 
hymns of unfading glory—the God who is the Pasupati, the Lord and 
Protector of all creatures, who wields the great bow called the Pinaka. 


Seeing Rudra, Krishna Mahatman and Arjuna prostrate and touch the 
earth with their heads, uttering the eternal words of the Veda. Krishna 
worships with speech, thought, intellect, and by what he does, the God who 
is the first source of the universe, himself uncreated, the Supreme Lord of 
unfading glory, who is the highest cause of the mind, who is Akasa and 
Vayu, who is the cause of all the luminous bodies in the universe, who is the 
cause of rain, and the Supreme, Primordial Essence of the Earth, who is the 
object of the adoration of the Devas, the Danavas, the Yakshas, and 
Manushas; who is the supreme Brahman that Yogins see and the refuge of 
those who know the Shastras, who is the Creator of all mobile and 
unmoving creatures and their Destroyer too; who is the Wrath that burns 
everything at the end of the Yuga; who is the Paramatman, the Supreme 
Soul; who is Sakra and Surya, and the origin of all the gunas. 

Krishna seeks the protection of that Bhava, whom men of knowledge, 
wanting to attain to that which is called the sukshma and the adhyatma, 
seek; that Uncreated One who is the Soul of all causes. Arjuna also 
repeatedly worships the Great God, knowing that He is the Origin of all 
beings, the Cause of the past, the future and the present. 

Seeing those two, Nara and Narayana, arrive, Bhava Anandatman, He 
of blissful soul, smilingly says, “Welcome greatest of men! Arise and let the 
tiredness of your journey leave you. What, O heroes, do you wish for? Tell 
me quickly, what brings you here? I will grant everything you want and do 
everything that will benefit you besides.” 

At these words of Siva, Krishna and Arjuna rise and then, with joined 
hands, the immaculate twain, both of great wisdom, praise that noblest 
Deity with a most resonant and excellent hymn. Krishna and Arjuna say, 
“We bow to Bhava, to Sarva, to Rudra, to the boon-giving Siva. We bow to 
the Pasupati, Lord of all creatures endued with life, to the Deva who is 
Ugra, fierce, to Him who is called Kapardin! 

We bow to Mahadeva, to Bhimasankara, to Tryambaka, to Him who is 
Satchitananda. We bow to Isana, to Him who is the destroyer of Daksha’s 
yagna. 

We salute the slayer of Andhaka, the father of Kumara, to He who is 
Nilakantha, and the First Creator. 

Our salutations to the wielder of the Pinaka, to Him who is worthy of 
the offering of libations of ghrita, to Him who is Truth, to Him who is All- 


pervading, to Him who is unvanquished, to Him who has luculent blue jata, 
to Him who is armed with the Trisula, to Him of celestial vision! 

Our greetings to him who is Hotri, to Him who protects all, to Him who 
has three eyes, to Him who is disease, to Him whose hiranyaretas fell into 
Agni, to Him who is inconceivable, to him who is the Lord of Ambika, to 
Him who is adored by all the Devas! 

Our salutations to Him who has the Bull for his mark, to Him who is 
bold, to Him who has matted dreadlocks, to Him who is a Brahmachari, to 
Him who stands as an ascetic in water, to him who is devoted to the 
Brahman, who is the Brahman, to Him who has never been conquered, to 
Him who is the Soul of the universe, to Him who is the Creator of the 
universe, to Him who lives pervading the whole universe! 

We bow to You who are the object of the reverence of all, to You who 
are the Original Cause of all creatures, to You who are called 
Brahmachakra, to Sarva, Sankara, and Siva! We bow to You, the Lord of all 
great beings! 

We bow to You who have a thousand heads, to You who have a 
thousand arms, to You who are called Death, to You who have a thousand 
eyes and a thousand feet, to You whose great deeds are innumerable! 

We bow to You, Hiranyavarna, whose complexion is of gold, to You 
who are cased in golden kavacha, to You who are always compassionate to 
your devotees! 

O Lord, let our wish be granted.” 

Having adored Mahadeva thus, Krishna and Arjuna then begin to 
further gratify Him to have the great Pasupatastra from the God of gods.’” 


CANTO 78 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Partha, with a full soul and joined hands, his eyes 

wide with wonder, gazes at the God with the bull for his mount, 

He who is the home of all tejas. Partha sees the offerings that he makes 

every night to Krishna lying before the Three-eyed Deity. The son of Pandu 

worships both Krishna and Sarva in his heart, and says to Siva, “Lord, I 
wish to have the Pasupatastra from you.” 

Siva smilingly says to Vasudeva and Arjuna, “Welcome Purushottamas! 
I know what you want and the reason why you have come here. I will give 
you what you wish for. Parantapas, there is a lake full of amrita, not far 
from this place. In it, I left my celestial bow and astra, with which I once 
slew all the enemies of the Devas. Krishna, go and fetch that divine bow 
with the arrow fixed to it.” 

Hearing what Siva says, Vasudeva and Arjuna answer, “Tathaastu, so be 
it.” 

Accompanied by all the ganas of Siva, the two heroes set out for the 
unearthly lake replete with countless heavenly wonders, the sacred lake that 
can grant every object of desire. Reaching the lake, the Rishis Nara and 
Narayana, who are Arjuna and Krishna, go fearlessly up to the water bright 


as the disc of the sun, and see within it a great and terrible snake and yet 
another enormous, which has a thousand heads, the effulgence of fire and 
spews flames from all its jaws. Krishna and Partha touch the water, join 
their hands together, and approach the snakes, bowing in their minds to the 
God Siva. As they approach, the amazing Nagas, who know the Vedas, 
chant the hundred hymns of the Veda that praise Lord Rudra, bowing all the 
while with their devout souls to Bhava of immeasurable power. 

Then, all at once, from their worship of Siva, the two awesome serpents 
abandon their snake-forms and assume the shapes of an enemy-destroying 
bow and arrow! Gratefully, Krishna and Arjuna seize the bow and arrow of 
blinding refulgence and bring them back to the illustrious Mahadeva. Now, 
from one side of Siva’s body a Brahmacharin of tawny eyes emerges, who 
seems to be the very refuge of asceticism. Of blue throat and red jata, he is 
invested with untold might. Taking up the great bow effortlessly, the 
Brahmacharin places his feet in alidha, the archer’s stance, fixes the brilliant 
arrow to the bowstring, and begins to stretch the bow. 

Watching the way the Brahmacharin stands, holds the bow and draws 
back the string, and listening to the mantras that Siva recites, Arjuna 
instantly masters what he watches and hears. The mighty Brahmacharin 
unleashes the arrow to the same lake from which it was brought and, with a 
cry, flings the bow into that lake. Arjuna remembers the boon that Siva 
granted him in the vana when He came as a Kirata; he recalls the Vision of 
Himself that Siva showed him in the vana and knows that Bhava is pleased 
with him. Silently, Arjuna prays, “May all this bear fruit.” 

Understanding this to be his wish, Bhava blesses him with power over 
the Pasupatastra and the accomplishment of his vow to kill Jayadratha. 

Thus having again obtained the Pasupata from the Devadeva, the 
invincible Arjuna, his hair standing on end, regards his vow as being 
already fulfilled. Full of joy, Arjuna and Krishna worship Mahadeva by 
bowing their heads deeply. Then, permitted by Bhava, the two shuras 
instantly return to their camp on Kurukshetra, in a transport of delight. 
Their joy is as great as that of Indra and Vishnu when those two Gods, 
wanting to slay Jambha, had Siva’s blessing to kill the great Asura. 

All this, Rajan, transpires in Arjuna’s dream and Krishna’s dhyana.’” 


CANTO 79 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Krishna and Daruka pass the night in conversation 
until day dawns. Paniswanikas, Magadhas, Madhuparkikas and 
Sutas come to sing Yudhishtira’s praises, as they do daily, and greet him 
with music and dance, while sweet-voiced singers sing melodious songs of 
praise for the Kuru vamsa. Skilled musicians play on mridangas, jharjharas, 
bheris, panavas, anakas, gomukhas, adambaras, sankhas, loud dundubhis 
and diverse other instruments. All this joyous sound, deep as the roar of 
clouds, touches the very heavens and they awaken Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, 
who lies asleep on his luxurious bed, from his slumber. 

The king rises from his bed and proceeds to perform his morning 
ablutions. A hundred and eight freshly bathed young servants, all attired in 
white, approach the king with many golden jars filled to the brim with the 
purest water. Sitting at his ease on a royal throne, wearing a thin cloth, the 
king bathes in several kinds of water made fragrant with sandalwood and 
purified with mantras. Strong and well-trained servants wash and rub his 
shining body with water soaked with diverse kinds of medicinal herbs. He 
then washes himself with adhivasha water rendered fragrant by various 


exquisite scents. Yudhishtira ties a long cloth as white as the feathers of the 
swan, and kept loose before him, around his head to dry the water. 

He smears his body with sandalwood-paste, drapes wildflower garlands 
around his majestic person, puts on clean clothes, and the Mahabaho sits 
facing the east, his hands joined together and silently says his morning 
prayers. Then with great humility, he enters the chamber in which the 
sacred fire is kept. He worships the agni by feeding it pieces of fine wood 
and with libations of ghee sanctified with mantras. He comes out and enters 
a second chamber, where many learned Brahmanas, all deep knowers of the 
Vedas, all self-restrained, purified by the study of the Vedas and by keeping 
vratas, are gathered after they have taken the ritual bath upon on the 
completion of the yagnas they have performed. 

There are a thousand worshippers of the Sun, as well as eight thousand 
others of the same varna. The mighty-armed Yudhishtira presents them with 
honey, clarified butter, auspicious fruits of the best kind, a nishka of gold 
each, a hundred horses decked with ornaments, costly robes and other such 
gifts that they like, and in return receives their blessings in clear and 
distinguished voices. Yudhishtira also gives them gifts of cows that yield 
milk whenever touched, along with calves with their horns covered with 
gold and their hooves with silver; after which he circumambulates them in 
pradakshina. Now looking at and touching auspicious swastika symbols, 
which increase good fortune, nandyavartas made of gold, flower garlands, 
water-pots, the sacred fire, vessels full of sun-dried rice, other auspicious 
offerings, the yellow pigment prepared from the urine of the cow, 
auspicious and well-adorned virgins, curds, clarified butter, honey, 
auspicious birds and diverse other things held sacred, he finally comes into 
the outer chamber. 

The attendants waiting in that chamber bring a wonderful round throne 
of gold, encrusted with pearls and lapis lazuli and overlaid with a priceless 
rug over which is spread another cloth of the finest loom. This seat is the 
handiwork of the Viswakarman himself. When the Dharmaraja takes his 
place, the servants bring him all his invaluable, bright ornaments, which 
Yudhishtira puts on; and his magnificence is such as to sharpen the envy of 
his enemies. 

The servants fan him with white golden-handled yak-tails luminous like 
the Moon and Yudhishtira is resplendent like a mass of clouds charged with 
lightning. Bards begin to sing his praises and panegyrists utter his eulogies; 


and other singers sing to the delighter of Kuru’s vamsa, and their voices 
swell harmoniously and resonantly. 

We then hear the rumble of chariot-wheels and the drumming of horses’ 
hooves; and the noise mingles with the chiming of great elephants’ bells, 
the blare of conches and the tread of numberless men, and the very Earth 
seems to tremble. One of the guards in charge of the doors, sheathed in 
armour, youthful in years, wearing brilliant ear-rings, and with his sword 
strapped to his side, enters the private apartment, kneels on the ground and, 
bending his head, salutes the Dharmaraja who deserves all worship. The 
young guardsman announces that Hrishikesa is waiting to enter. 

Yudhishtira orders his servitors, “Get ready an excellent throne and 
prepare an arghya for him.” 

Krishna of Vrishni’s race is welcomed warmly and seated on the fine 
throne. Greeting Madhava with the customary enquiries of welcome, 
Yudhishtira worships Krishna fervently.’” 


CANTO 80 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


°S anjaya continues, ‘Then the royal son of Kunti asks Krishna, 
“Have you spent the night happily, Madhusudana? Are all your 
faculties clear, O you of unfading glory?” 

Krishna makes similar enquiries of Yudhishtira. Then the guardsman 
comes again and says that the other Kshatriya warriors are waiting to be 
announced. Commanded by the king, the man announces a roll of heroes, 
which consists of Virata, Bhimasena, Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki, 
Dhrishtaketu, the ruler of the Chedis, the Maharathas Drupada and 
Sikhandin, the twins Nakula and Sahadeva, Chekitana, the king of the 
Kalikayas, Yuyutsu of Kuru’s race, Uttamaujas of the Panchalas, 
Yudhamanyu, Subahu, and the five sons of Draupadi. These and many other 
Kshatriyas, approach Yudhsihtira Mahatman, that bull among Kshatriyas, 
and greeting him, sit down on the rich seats provided for them. Krishna and 
Satyaki sit together on the same wide throne. 

Then in the hearing of them all, Yudhishtira addresses the lotus-eyed 
slayer of Madhu, and says humbly, “Relying on you alone, do we, like the 
Deva of a thousand eyes, seek victory in battle and eternal happiness. You 
are aware, O Krishna, of how we were deprived of our kingdom, of our 


exile at the hands of the enemy, and our various sorrows in exile. O Lord of 
all, you who are compassionate to those who are devoted to you, the 
happiness and the very existence of all of us rest solely and entirely on you! 

O you of Vrishni’s vamsa, do that by which my heart will ever find its 
rest in you! Also do that, O Lord, by which Arjuna may fulfil his vow. 
Rescue us today from the sea of grief and rage that confronts us. Madhava, 
become today a ship for us who wish to cross the dreadful sea. The great 
maharatha who wants to kill the enemy in battle cannot do what his sarathy 
can, if the charioteer will exert himself subtly! 

Janardana, you always save the Vrishnis from all danger and calamities, 
and you must save us from this looming distress! Sankhachakragadadhara, 
become a boat to rescue the sons of Pandu sunk in the fathomless Kuru- 
sagara. 

I bow to you, O God of the lord of the gods, O you who are eternal, O 
supreme Destroyer, O Vishnu, O Jishnu, O Hari, O Krishna, O Vaikuntha, O 
best of friends! Narada described you as that ancient and best of Rishis 
called Narayana, who grants boons, who wields the Saranga, and who is the 
greatest of all Rishis. O Madhava, prove his words true!” 

Krishna, most eloquent of all speakers, replies to Yudhishtira in a voice 
deep as that of clouds charged with rain, “In all the worlds, including 
Devaloka, there is no archer equal to Dhananjaya. Mahatejasvin, 
mahadhanurvan, of great prowess and untold genius, celebrated in battle, 
always fierce, Arjuna is the greatest of all men. Youthful in years, bull- 
necked and of long arms, he is endowed with measureless strength. His 
tread like a lion or a bull’s, and divinely handsome he will kill all your 
enemies for you today. 

As for myself, I will do what I can to help Arjuna consume the legions 
of Dhritarashtra’s son like a great forest fire. This very day, Arjuna will 
despatch vile Jayadratha, sinner and murderer of Subhadra’s son down the 
road from which no traveller returns. Today vultures, kites, ravening jackals 
and other carnivores will feed on the Saindhava’s flesh. Yudhishtira, even if 
all the gods with Indra become his protectors today, Jayadratha will still 
leave this world for Yamaloka. And having slain the king of the Sindhus, 
Jishnu will return triumphantly to you in the evening. Dispel your grief and 
your heart’s fever, Rajan, and be graced with calm and felicity.””” 


CANTO 81 


ABHIMANYU-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “While Yudhishtira, Krishna and the others thus 
converse together, Arjuna enters the auspicious chamber to meet 
Bharatottama Yudhishtira and also his friends and well-wishers. Solemnly, 
reverently he salutes his king and brother. Rising, Yudhishtira greets Arjuna 
with great affection, embracing him and sniffing the top of his head, 
blessing him warmly. 

Smiling, Yudhishtira says, “Judging by your bright and cheerful 
countenance and from the fact that Krishna is well pleased with you, 
Arjuna, it is plain that complete and absolute victory awaits you in battle 
today!” 

Now Arjuna says, “Be you blessed, Rajan, through Kesava’s grace I 
have seen something entirely marvellous in the night.” 

To reassure his brothers and friends, Arjuna relates his dream of the 
night, and everything about his meeting with the three-eyed Lord Siva. All 
that listen are filled with amazement; they bend down and touch the earth 
with their heads to worship Mahadeva whose emblem is the Bull, and cry, 
“Uttamam! Wonderful!” 


Then, at the command of the Dharmaputra, their hearts filled with fury 
against the enemy the Pandava warriors set out towards the battlefield. 
Saluting the king, Satyaki, Krishna and Arjuna, set out from Yudhishtira’s 
tent; and Arjuna and Krishna ride together on the same chariot to Arjuna’s 
tent. Arriving, Hrishikesa, like a professional charioteer, begins to prepare 
Arjuna’s ratha, which flies the mark of the prince of the Vanaras. The 
wonderful chariot with the radiance of molten gold, whose rumble is like 
the deep roar of thunderheads, shines like the morning sun. Soon enough, 
Krishna, now wearing armour, comes to inform Partha, who has finished his 
morning prayers, that his chariot is ready. Arjuna Kiritin, clad in golden 
mail, his bow and magical quivers in hand, circumambulates the chariot in 
grave pradakshina. 

Now his Brahmanas, mature in tapasya, gyana and years, always 
engaged in the performance of pujas and yagnas, with passions ever 
restrained, adore and bless Arjuna. He climbs into his great ratha, which has 
already been sanctified with mantras to give him victory in battle; he 
mounts his chariot like Surya Deva ascending the Eastern mountain. 
Arjuna, the greatest of all maharathas, is truly like the blazing Sun God 
upon the breast of Meru. 

Arjuna, Satyaki and Krishna mount the chariot, like the twin Aswins 
riding the same chariot with Indra when they attended Saryati’s yagna. 
Govinda, greatest of maharathas, takes the horses’ reins even like Matali 
took the reins of Indra’s steeds when he rode to slay Vritra. Mounted on that 
best of chariots with his two friends, Partha rides out to kill the king of the 
Sindhus; he goes forth like Soma rising into the sky with Budha and Sukra, 
to destroy the darkness of night, or like Indra going forth with Varuna and 
Surya to the great battle against the Asuras when the Daityas abducted 
Brihaspati’s wife Tara. 

Bards and musicians sing the praises of heroic Arjuna, as he rides forth 
to the sound of musical instruments and auspicious hymns of good omen. 
The sonorous voices of the vabdhis and magadhis uttering resonant 
blessings for victory and wishing for a triumphant day, mingling with the 
sounds of the musical instruments, are deeply gratifying to those 
Kshatriyas. An auspicious and fragrant breeze blows from behind Partha, 
vitalising him and enervating his enemies. And many propitious omens of 
various kinds appear, indicating victory for the Pandavas and defeat for 
your warriors! 


Seeing these portents of victory, Arjuna says to the great archer Satyaki, 
now in his own chariot on the right, “Yuyudhana! Look at all the auspicious 
omens around us. I will surely have victory today, O bull of Sini’s vamsa. I 
will ride straight to where Jayadratha waits, fully expecting me to send him 
to Yamaloka. Satyaki, today it is as much your duty to protect Yudhishtira 
from Drona as it is mine to ride out and kill the Saindhava. You must guard 
him as I myself would. I do not see anyone in the world who can vanquish 
you, for you are Krishna’s equal in battle. The king of the Devas himself 
cannot defeat you. Reposing this burden on you, and on maharatha 
Pradyumna, I can hunt Jayadratha down with no anxiety shadowing my 
heart. 

O Satwata, dearest friend, have no fear for me. You must 
wholeheartedly protect the king. Where this Krishna Mahabaho is, and 
where I am, together, not the slightest danger can ever befall either him or 
me.” 

Satyaki, the Parantapa replies, “Tathaastu!”’ He then rides to where 
Yudhishtira is.’” 


CANTO 82 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA 


: ‘T) hritarashtra says, ‘On the day after Abhimanyu was killed, what 
did the grief-stricken Pandavas do? Who among my warriors 
gave them battle? Knowing, as they did, the awesome prowess Arjuna, tell 
me how the Kauravas, having committed such a heinous crime, could 
remain unafraid? How could they venture even to look at him as Arjuna 
Naravyaghra advanced upon them like all-destroying Death himself in fury, 
burning with grief at the murder of his son? Seeing the maharatha with the 
image of Hanuman on his banner, grieving for his dead son and brandishing 
his awesome bow, what did my warriors do? What, O Sanjaya, has 
happened to Duryodhana? 

A great sorrow overwhelms us today and I no longer hear any sounds of 
joy. The enchanting strains of music and celebration that we once heard 
from Jayadratha’s palace here are alas all fallen silent. 

In Duryodhana’s camp, we no more hear the sounds of countless 
vabdhis and magadhis singing my sons’ praises nor the songs of musicians 
or the chiming of dancers’ anklets. Earlier, such sounds would fall 
incessantly upon my ears. Alas, as they are plunged in grief, I do not any 
longer hear these merry noises. Previously, Sanjaya, while sitting in the 


home of Somadatta, who is devoted to truth, I would always hear such 
delightful sounds. Alas, how destitute of punya I am, for I hear the palaces 
of my sons today echoing instead with the sounds of grief and lamentations, 
and none full of the old life, energy and joy. In the mansions of Vivimsati, 
Durmukha, Chitrasena, Vikarna and my other sons, I do not hear a single 
sound of cheer, which they were filled with in the past. 

The great archer Drona’s son Aswatthaman, who is the refuge of my 
sons and upon whom Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and a large number 
of disciples waited, who takes pleasure day and night, in talk, in debate and 
animated disputation, in the stirring music of different instruments and in 
various kinds of delightful songs, whom many among the Kurus, the 
Pandavas and the Satwatas worship—alas, his home is utterly silent today, 
and no singers sing there or dancers ply their sublime art. 

Alas, we no longer hear the clamour of boisterous celebrations that echo 
in the camp of Vinda and Anuvinda every evening. Today in the camp of 
the Kaikeyas, we do not hear any songs or hand clapping in which their 
soldiers, at their music, dance and revelry, daily indulged. 

Ah, we no longer hear the reverberant chanting of priests proficient in 
the performance of yagnas, men who are repositories of pujas, who wait 
upon Somadatta’s son, Bhurisravas. The virile twanging of bowstrings, the 
sounds of Vedic chanting, the whistling of spears and the humming strokes 
of swords; the rumble of chariot-wheels, all of which were heard 
unceasingly in the abode of Drona: we hear none of these from there today. 
Sanjaya, today we no longer hear the swell of music from diverse 
kingdoms, or the rhythms and harmonies of musical instruments, which 
never failed to fill Drona’s great and sacred home. 

When Janardana of unfading glory came from Upaplavya out of his 
compassion for every living creature, seeking peace, O Suta, I said to the 
evil Duryodhana, “My son, use Krishna as the means to arrive at an 
amicable understanding with the Pandavas. I think it is time to make peace, 
so do as I say. If you spurn Krishna, who now begs you for peace and 
entreats you for my welfare, you will never find victory.” 

But Duryodhana refused Krishna, the bull among all the bowmen of 
Dasarha’s race, Krishna who sought Duryodhana’s own good. And by doing 
this, my foolish son embraced disaster and tragedy. Seized by Death 
himself, my evil-hearted prince would not obey me but followed Dusasana 
and Karna instead, into the jaws of doom. I did not approve of the game of 


dice. Nor did Vidura, Jayadratha, Bhishma, Salya, Bhurisravas, Purumitra, 
Jaya, Aswatthaman, Kripa or Drona, O Sanjaya! If my son had paid heed to 
their counsel, he would then have lived for ever in happiness and peace 
with his kinsmen and friends. 

I said to Duryodhana: Charming and delightful in their speech, always 
saying what is pleasing to their kinsmen, high-born, loved by all, and wise, 
the sons of Pandu are sure to find success and felicity. The man, who keeps 
his eye on dharma always, and in all places, will find happiness and he will 
win great rewards and blessings after his death. The Pandavas are noble and 
accomplished; they are able and deserve to enjoy half the Earth. The Earth 
girthed by the seven seas, is as much their ancestral possession as it is of the 
Kurus. Once they win back sovereignty, the Pandavas will never deviate 
from the path of dharma. 

O child, I have kinsmen to whom the Pandavas will always listen: 
Salya, Somadatta, the Dharmatman Bhishma, Drona, Vikarna, Balhika, 
Kripa, and many others among the Bharatas who are illustrious and revered 
because of their years. If they speak to them on your behalf, the Pandavas 
will surely do what they ask. Do you think, for a moment, that anyone who 
is with them will counsel them otherwise? Krishna will never abandon the 
path of dharma and the Pandavas are all obedient to him. My words of 
dharma, too, those Kshatriyas will never disobey, for the Pandavas are all 
righteous men. 

Piteously lamenting, Suta, I spoke to my son. Fool that he is, his heart 
full of darkness, he did not listen to me! I believe that all this is the 
malignant and inescapable influence of Kaala! Where Vrikodara and Arjuna 
are, the Vrishni hero Satyaki, Uttamaujas of the Panchalas, the invincible 
Yudhamanyu, the irrepressible Dhrishtadyumna, the unvanquished 
Sikhandin, the Asmakas, the Kekayas, Kshatradharman of the Somakas, the 
ruler of the Chedis, Chekitana, Vibhu, the son of the lord of the Kasis, the 
sons of Draupadi, Virata, the mighty maharatha Drupada, the 
Purushavyaghras Nakula and Sahadeva and, most of all, the slayer of 
Madhu, Krishna himself, is—who is there in this world, or even the next, 
that can fight them and expect to live? 

Who else is there who would dare resist these my formidable enemies 
when they summon their devastras in war, save the witless Duryodhana, 
Karna, Sakuni the son of Subala, and Dusasana their base fourth? For I do 
not see a fifth who is so blind and senseless! They who have Vishnu himself 


driving their chariot, clad in armour and reins in his divine hands; they who 
have Arjuna for their warrior—they can never find defeat! 

Does Duryodhana not remember my pleas and implorations now, when 
it is too late? You say that the invincible Bhishma has been cut down. 
Surely now, my sons grimly recall the prophetic words uttered by the far- 
seeing Vidura, and lament their folly! Seeing his army overwhelmed by 
Sini’s grandson Satyaki and Arjuna, and seeing their countless empty 
chariots, my sons surely shed bitter tears today. Ah! Sanjaya, terrible 
Arjuna will devour my troops even like a raging fire fanned by the gusting 
wind consumes a heap of dry grass at the close of winter. 

Sanjaya, you are a most accomplished narrator. Tell me everything that 
transpires in the evening after they committed the great wrong to Partha. 
When Abhimanyu was killed, what was their state of mind? After having 
grievously offended the Gandivi, my warriors cannot face him in battle. 
What measures do Duryodhana and Karna decide to take to contain Arjuna? 
What do Dusasana and Subala’s son do? O Sanjaya, what has overtaken all 
my sons is surely because of the sins of Duryodhana, who walks the way of 
avarice, whose heart and mind are full of evil, whose judgment anger 
perverts, who blindly covets sovereignty, who is foolish besides and his 
reason lost to greed and anger. Tell me, O Sanjaya, what does Duryodhana 
do now? Are the preparations he makes and the plans he has shortsighted or 
well-judged?’” 


CANTO 83 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘I will tell you everything, as I saw it with my own 
eyes. Listen carefully, for your own guilt in this war is great. Just 
as an embankment is useless after the waters of the field have drained away, 
Rajan, your lamentations now are useless! Bharatarishabha, do not grieve. 
Wonderful and terrible are the decrees of Time the Destroyer, and they 
cannot be violated. Do not lament, for this is not a recent development. If 
you had restrained both Yudhishtira and your sons from the game of dice, 
this calamity would never have overwhelmed you. Again, if you had 
stopped both the sides who were inflamed by anger, this tragedy would 
never have occurred. 

Indeed, if you had once urged the Kurus to kill the wayward 
Duryodhana, this disaster would never have come to you, and the Pandavas, 
the Panchalas, the Vrishnis and the other kings would have never had cause 
to blame you. Again, if you had done your duty as a father, shown 
Duryodhana the path of dharma, and led him to tread the way of 
righteousness, this misfortune would never have beset you. 

You are the wisest man on earth. Forsaking sanatana dharma, how could 
you follow the counsels of Duryodhana, Karna and Sakuni? Therefore, 


Rajan, these your lamentations are in truth wedded to worldly wealth, and 
seem to me to be like honey mixed with poison. Time was when Krishna 
himself did not regard Yudhishtira or Drona, as much as he respected you. 
However, when, he found you to have fallen from Rajadharma, Krishna has 
ceased to look upon you with respect. 

Your sons spoke harshly, vilely, to the sons of Pritha, and you sat silent. 
Nemesis for that grave sin of omission has now overwhelmed you, O 
Anagha, and your kingdom is in danger. 

At best, you will find the shame and bitterness of ruling over a world 
bestowed upon you by the Pandavas. It is the virtuous Pandus who added to 
the kingdom and also the fame that the Kurus enjoy. These achievements, 
however, became fruitless and barren for them when they encountered your 
greed, for you deprived them of even their ancestral kingdom. 

Now, Rajan, when the war has begun, you absolve yourself of all 
wrongdoing and censure your sons, pointing out their various faults. And 
this is not becoming. While they fight, Kshatriyas leave off care for their 
very lives, and plunge fearlessly into the Pandavas’ vyuhas. Why, who but 
the Kauravas would dare fight and army which Krishna, Arjuna, Satyaki 
and Vrikodara lead? Which mortal archer is there that would dare fight 
them who have Arjuna for their warrior, Krishna for their adviser and 
Satyaki and Vrikodara for their protectors? Only your sons and their allies. 

The friendly kings, full of heroism and always conscious of Kshatriya 
dharma, do all that they can, taking their lives in their hands. So now listen 
to everything that transpires in the savage war between the Naravyaghras, 
the Kurus and the Pandavas.’” 


CANTO 84 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘When the night ends and dawn breaks, Drona begins 

to array his akshauhinis for the battle of the momentous day. One 

hears diverse sounds, of enraged shuras’ voices raised in shouts and roars, 

all of them eager to be at the enemy and spill blood. Some stretch their 

bows some strum their bowstrings and some draw deep breaths. And many 
of them roar in challenge, “Where is Dhananjaya?” 

Many warriors throw their glinting swords high into the air and then 
catch them again, and brandish them, naked blades the colour of the sky, 
keenly honed, and with beautifully wrought hilts. One sees thousands of 
brave warriors, their skills perfected through years of practice, swordsmen 
and bowmen, all keened for battle. Some whirl their great maces decked 
with bells, smeared with sandalwood paste encrusted with gold and 
diamonds, and challengingly demand that the sons of Pandu come forth to 
fight. Other warriors with massive bodies and arms like pillars, intoxicated 
with the pride of their strength, obscure the sky with their spiked clubs that 
resemble a forest of great stakes raised in honour of Indra. 

Still others, heroes all, wear gorgeous vanamalas, and armed with 
various other kinds of weapons, takes their positions across the field of fate, 


and they also roar, “Where is Arjuna? Where is Govinda? Where is proud 
Bhima? Where are their allies?” 

Drona blows his conch, and urging his horses to great speed, moves 
everywhere with amazing celerity as he deploys all his divisions. When all 
the troops, every man of them ardent for battle, have taken their stations, 
Drona says to Jayadratha, “Somadatta’s son Bhurisravas, maharatha Karna, 
Aswatthaman, Salya, Vrishasena and Kripa, with a hundred thousand 
horsemen, sixty thousand chariots, four and ten thousand elephants in 
musth, one and twenty thousand foot-soldiers clad in mail, will be 
positioned behind me to a distance of twelve krosas. You will be behind all 
of these. When the very gods with Vasava at their head will not be able to 
attack you where you are, what can the Pandavas do? Take comfort, 
Jayadratha, O king of the Sindhus.” 

Thus does Drona comfort Jayadratha who then himself moves to the 
place Drona indicates, surrounded by many Gandhara warriors and with 
many mail-clad foot-soldiers armed with paasas, nooses, all ready give their 
all in battle. Jayadratha’s well-trained chariot-horses are all decked with 
chamari yak-tails and ornaments of gold. Seven thousand such horses and 
three thousand other steeds of the Sindhu breed go with him. 

Your son Durmarshana, eager for combat, stations himself at the head of 
all the Kaurava troops today, along with a thousand five hundred infuriated 
elephants of awesome size, covered in mail, and all ridden by well-trained 
mahamatras. Your two other sons, Dusasana and Vikarna, take up their 
positions among the vanguard. 

The vyuha that Drona forms- part sakata and part a circle is full forty- 
eight miles long and twenty wide, front to rear. Drona arrays that great 
formation with countless heroic kings, in a sea of chariots, horses, elephants 
and foot-soldiers. Behind the sakata vyuha, the formidable cart, is yet 
another impregnable legion in the form of a lotus, a Padma vyuha. And 
buried deep that lotus is another dense vyuha, the suchimukha, the needle 
formation. 

Having formed his mighty vyuha thus, Drona takes up his own station. 
The mouth of the needle is held by the great archer Kritavarman. Next to 
Kritavarman, stands the ruler of the Kambojas and Jalasandha, and then 
Duryodhana and Karna. Behind them thousands of dauntless Kshatriyas 
stand ready for fierce battle, specifically position to protect the eye of the 


most crucial suchimukha. Behind them all, Rajan, surrounded by a teeming 
force, is Jayadratha at the far end of the needle. 

At the head of the Sakata, is Drona, barring the way into it; behind him 
the chief of the Bhojas protects Bharadwaja’s son. Clad in white armour, 
with a superb helmet, broad chested and with mighty arms, Drona stands 
tall, stretching his great bow, like the Death himself in wrath. Seeing 
Drona’s chariot graced with a beautiful standard, bearing red sacrificial altar 
and a black deerskin, the Kauravas are filled with joy. 

Seeing the awesome vyuha Drona forms, which resembles the ocean 
itself in agitation, the Siddhas and the Charanas in the sky are filled with 
wonder and all beings think that the vast formation would devour the very 
Earth with her mountains, seas and forests, Bhumi abounding with life and 
creatures and everything else she bears. And seeing the mighty and 
wonderful sakata, packed dense with chariots, foot-soldiers, horses and 
elephants, trumpeting dreadfully, and hearing its great clamour, which could 
rive the hearts of his enemies, Duryodhana exults!’” 


CANTO 85 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “After the akshauhinis of the Kuru army are thus 

arrayed, a tumult arises from the beating of drums and mridangas, 

the roars and fierce shouts and the sound of different musical instruments, 

the blowing of conches. The awful uproar makes one’s hair stand on end as 

the Bharata heroes eager for battle, slowly advance. Then the hour called 
Rudra sets in and Arjuna makes his appearance. 

Many thousands of ravens and crows, O Bhaarata, sport in front of 
Arjuna’s chariot. Various animals, giving terrible cries and inauspicious 
jackals begin to scream and howl on our right, as we went forward into 
battle. Thousands of blazing meteors fall out of a clear sky with loud noises, 
and all the Earth trembles on the dreadful occasion. Dry winds blow in all 
directions, peals of thunder crack the sky, driving gravel and gusts of little 
pebbles ahead of him, as Kunti’s son comes to begin the days’ battle. 

Nakula’s son Satanika, and Dhrishtadyumna, the two wise and expert 
warriors, array the Pandava legions into an attacking vyuha. Accompanied 
by a thousand chariots, a hundred elephants, three thousand Kshatriyas, and 
ten thousand foot-soldiers, which cover the length of fifteen hundred bows, 
your son Durmarshana takes up his position at the very van of all the troops, 


and says, “Like the continent resisting the surging sea, I will today contain 
the wielder of Gandiva, that irresistible Parantapa in battle today. Today let 
everyone witness the raging Dhananjaya collide with me, like one stone 
mountain against another. You maharathas eager for battle, stay back and 
watch me fight all the Pandavas by myself, watch me enhance my honour 
and fame today!” 

Your noble son, the daring archer says this and stands there prepared 
and full of valour, surrounded by many other great bowmen. 

Then, like an angry Yama, or Vajradhari Indra himself, or like Death’s 
irresistible self armed with his cudgel and urged on by Time, or like 
unruffled Mahadeva armed with his trident, or like Varuna with his paasa, 
or the blazing fire which consumes all creation at the end of the Yuga, the 
slayer of the Nivatakavachas, inflamed with rage and swelling with might, 
the ever-victorious Vijaya, clad in mail, armed with a sword, wearing a 
golden coronet, adorned with garlands of white flowers, attired in white 
robes, his arms decked with beautiful angadas and ears with brilliant 
kundalas, faithful to dharma and determined to fulfil his great vow, 
incomparable Arjuna mounts his incomparable chariot. 

The incarnate Nara, with Narayana for his sarathy, holding his Gandiva, 
shines as brilliantly on Kurukshetra as the risen sun. Setting his ratha, 
Rajan, at the very van of his army, where densest showers of arrows will 
fall, Dhananjaya blows an echoing, deafening gives a blast on his conch the 
Devadatta. Then Krishna, too, fearlessly blows with his great Panchajanya 
—peal after peal of booming thunder. And all your warriors quail and 
tremble at the massive twin sound, their hearts feel faint within them and 
their hair stands on end. 

Just as the sound of the thunder fills living creatures with fright, even so 
does the chasmal booming of those conches terrify your warriors; and all 
their animals helplessly urinate and excrete. All your army with its animals 
is filled with dread, Rajan, and the limbs of your fighting men turn weak. 
Some among them even faint. 

And then the Hanuman in his terrifying aspect on Arjuna’s banner, his 
mouth agape, as well all the fierce spirits and creatures that surround him 
give vent to the most fearful and macabre sounds, further dismaying your 
men. But then Drona and the other maharathas of your army collect 
themselves, raise their conches, horns and anakas and blow resoundingly on 
them, and the other fighting men follow suit beating drums, clashing 


cymbals together, and letting out great cheers and loud yells and roars, so 
that the wave of terror blows away and they are emboldened again. Sounds 
of other instruments fill earth and sky and further defiant roaring and the 
loud clapping of hands and armpits. Your maharathas roar leonine 
challenges at their adversaries and your army is again filled with 
exhilaration. As that tumult rises, an uproar that raises fear in the hearts of 
the timid, Arjuna, the son of Pakasasana, filled with great delight, says to 
him of Dasarha’s race, “Urge the horses, O Hrishikesa, to where 
Durmarshana stands. I will cut our way through his elephant legion and 
break into the enemy army.” 

Krishna flicks his reins over his gandharva horses’ necks and flashes 
ahead at Durmarshana. Fierce and tremendous is the encounter that erupts 
there between one and the many, a savage encounter that destroys chariots, 
elephants and men. Like a cloud lashing down torrential rain on a mountain 
breast, Arjuna inundates his enemies with thick showers of shafts. Showing 
great lightness of hand, the opposing maharathas swiftly envelop Krishna 
and Dhananjaya in clouds of arrows. 

Quickly incensed, Mahabaho Partha begins to slough off great chariot- 
warriors’ heads at his supreme will; he strews the field with noble and 
handsome heads, decked with earrings and turbans, their lips bitten through, 
and the eyes upon their faces still dark with anger. Ah, the scattered heads 
are resplendent like lotuses clipped off their stems, lying everywhere. 

Golden coats of mail dyed with gore lie all over the field, looking like 
cloud masses charged with lightning. The sound, Rajan, of severed heads 
falling onto the earth resembles the falling of ripened palmyra fruit. In 
weird pageant, headless trunks arise, some holding bows in hand and some 
with naked swords upraised in the very act of striking. Those valiant 
warriors, who swarm forward to have great Arjuna’s life, never know when 
he strikes their heads off! 

Then, quickly, the horrific and magnificent field is scattered by the 
absolute and sublime genius of Arjuna’s incredible archery with not just the 
heads of great warriors but also those of horses and the trunks of elephants, 
while Kurukshetra rings with their screams, as well the arms, legs and other 
limbs of both Kshatriyas and their beasts of war. Bloody chaos sweeps your 
army, O king. 

“This one is Partha!” 

‘Where is Partha? Here is Partha!” 


Obsessed with just the single thought of Arjuna, these cries rise from 
your army. Deprived by Time of their reason and very senses, they see the 
whole world as being full of just Partha, innumerable Arjunas everywhere. 
And striking out and loosing their arrows at one another, many of your men 
perish. Why, some kill themselves in their delirium! With woeful cries, 
many heroes, not in their right minds, covered with blood and in agony, lay 
themselves down, calling out piteously to their friends and kinsmen. 

Arms, bearing short arrows, or lances, or darts, or swords, or battle- 
axes, or pointed stakes, or scimitars, or bows, or spears, or other shafts, or 
maces, and cased in armour, and adorned with angadas and other 
ornaments, arms that look like large snakes, that resemble thick clubs, 
hacked off from trunks with mighty weapons leap from their owners, jerk 
and thrash about with great force, as if in separate rage of their own. Every 
last man who attacks Partha perishes, body pierced with the fatal shafts of 
that transcendent shura. While he seems to dance in his ratha, fleeting 
everywhere, and his bow seems always drawn in a magic circle, no 
adversary can find the minutest chance to strike him. The speed with which 
he draws, fits them to his bow, and looses them is inscrutable, a single 
uninterrupted blur, and fills all his enemies with wonder. 

Phalguna strikes elephants and elephant-riders, horses and horsemen, 
rathikas and their charioteers. There is no one among his enemies, whether 
facing him, trying to shoot him down from a distance, or wheeling about, 
whom the son of Pandu does not kill. Even as the sun rising in the sky 
destroys a thick darkness does Arjuna annihilate Durmarshana’s elephant- 
legion with his uncanny missiles fletched with kanka plumes. 

Swiftly, the field that your troops occupy looks like the earth strewn 
with grey hills at the hour of the pralaya. Just as no creatures can gaze at the 
midday sun, Dhananjaya’s enemies cannot look upon the face of Arjuna 
tejasvin ablaze. Stricken by Partha’s arrow storms, your troops break and 
flee the dreadful Kshatriya. 

Like a towering wind dispersing a bank of clouds, Partha rides at the 
Kaurava army and puts it to bloody rout, and truly none of them can even 
look at him as he razes them at will. Whipping and spurring their horses to 
greater speed, prodding them with their bows to fly faster, with threatening 
growls and roars at the helpless creatures, their eyes wild and full of fear, 
your cavalry, chariot-warriors, and your foot-soldiers as well, beset by 
Arjuna, flee in every direction. 


Others, who ride elephants, lumber away from him by digging their 
sharp hooks and goads cruelly into the sides of their great mounts. Such 
bedlam grips the field, such panic, that many who seek to escape him run 
straight at Arjuna instead and are consumed by him. Awful fright, confusion 
and dismay seize your men entirely.’” 


CANTO 86 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra asks, ‘When the van of my army is slaughtered by 

the Kiritin and falls apart and flees, who are the heroes that stand 
up to him? Do any of them actually fight Arjuna, or do they all abandon 
courage and run back into the sakata vyuha, to hide behind the fearless 
Drona, that immovable wall?’ 

Sanjaya replies, “When Indra’s son breaks like a gale of death upon the 
frontline of your army, Rajan, many Kshatriyas are killed or run. Not one 
can even look at Arjuna’s alight, let alone fight him. 

But then, your son Dusasana, Rajan, who has watched the rout, and 
your men dying and fleeing, is filled with wrath and he dashes straight at 
Arjuna. Your fierce son, wearing a shimmering coat of golden mail, his 
head covered by a turban, surrounds the rampaging Partha with his own 
formidable elephant legion, a force that looks as if it can devour the very 
world. The Earth, the points of compass and the sky seem to be entirely 
filled with the sound of the elephant’s bells, the blare of conches, the 
twanging of bowstrings and the deep grunts and bellows of the tuskers. 

Now a pitched and ferocious battle ensues. Seeing the angry beasts, 
with trunks extended, thundering down on him, like winged mountains 


urged on with goads, Dhananjaya throws back his head and gives a 
shattering lion’s roar. Then, in the twinkling of an eye, he begins to 
decimate the elephant legion. Like a makara plunging into a surging ocean, 
Arjuna wades into the elephant-host. 

The Vijaya is like the apocalyptic Sun that rises infracting every law of 
direction and hour on the day of the pralaya. In moments, at his unearthly 
archery, men and elephants alike have their spirits broken and are deranged 
by the elemental force they come up against, the cosmic tempest that is 
Kunti’s son. The sound of horses’ hooves, the maddening rattle of chariot- 
wheels, the shouts of warriors, the twanging bowstrings, the cacophony of 
diverse musical instruments, and most of all the blare of the Panchajanya 
and the Devadatta and the deafening twang of the Gandiva serves to dement 
your forces even further. 

And Savyasachin shreds men and elephants with his arrow that are like 
snakes of virulent poison, every one of them claiming a Kaurava life, man’s 
or beast’s. Thousands and thousands of deadly shafts flare from the Gandiva 
spraying blood everywhere, desiccating your elephant legion. Countless 
great grey beasts fall, shaking the sacred field, their screams echoing in the 
vaults of the sky; they fall like the mountain of old when Indra sheared their 
golden wings. 

Some hulking beasts he shoots savagely through their mouths, others 
through their round temporal lobes, and the elephants cry out like cranes as 
they die. And now, Arjuna begins to clip the heads from the necks of the 
warriors mounted on the elephants with unerring arrows like lopping lotus 
flowers from their stalks. The heads shining with earrings, continually 
falling onto the earth, resemble a multitude of lotuses that Partha offers to 
his gods. While numberless elephants blunder across the field, one sees 
warriors hanging from their backs, stripped of armour, grievously wounded, 
painted in blood as if in a picture. 

In some cases, he kills two or three warriors with a single arrow plumed 
with beautiful feathers and they plunge down to the ground. And so many 
elephants excoriated by long shafts, continue to fall, vomiting blood, and 
their riders tumble from their backs. Partha destroys standards, bows, 
bowstrings, yokes and shafts of the chariot-warriors that oppose him. And 
still no one can discern when Arjuna draws his arrows, when he fixes them 
to his bowstring, when he draws back the string or when he shoots them. 


All that they see is Partha seemingly dancing on his ratha with his bow 
always drawn to a circle. 

Elephants fall like ranges of hills, one after the other, gored deep, 
immediately as they are struck, and the blood they vomit seeps across the 
field of dharma. In the midst of that great carnage, one continues to see 
innumerable headless trunks standing upright, though their arms have also 
been dissevered and lie about with bows in grasp, their fingers are cased in 
leather, some holding swords, and adorned with striking angadas and other 
golden ornaments. 

Kurukshetra is copiously strewn with innumerable upaskaras, 
adhishthanas, shafts, crowns, crushed chariot-wheels, broken akshas and 
yokes, warriors armed with shields, bows, wildflower garlands, different 
sparkling ornaments, fine robes and broken standards. The Earth there 
assumes a most surreal aspect from the slain elephants, horses and the fallen 
Kshatriyas. And absolutely routed by Arjuna, Dusasana’s forces turn tail. 
Himself direly injured and in great pain, and now stricken with such terror 
as he never expected, Dusasana also flees the battle and seeks shelter in the 
sakata vyuha behind Drona.’” 


CANTO 87 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


S anjaya says, “After annihilating Dusasana’s forces, Arjuna, never 
pausing, sweeps on towards Drona, for his quarry Jayadratha lies 
beyond the Acharya and is still far. Nearing Drona at the lip of the sakata 
vyuha, at Krishna’s behest, Arjuna folds his hands to his old master and 
says, “Wish me well, O Brahmana, and bless me, saying Swasti. Through 
your grace, I would pierce this unassailable vyuha. I tell you truly, O sinless 
one, you are like my father to me, or Yudhishtira, or even Krishna. 
Maharishi, I deserve your blessing and protection even as Aswatthaman 
does. And with your blessing, I want to kill Jayadratha the Saindhava today. 
O lord, see that my vow is accomplished.” 

The Acharya, smiling, replies, “Arjuna, you will not be able to strike at 
Jayadratha without first vanquishing me.” 

With this, still smiling, in a flash Drona covers Arjuna, his ratha, horses, 
standard and charioteer with a great burst of arrows. Arjuna cuts down the 
flurry of shafts, and strikes his master with nine thought-swift arrows. 
Drona, too, cuts down Partha’s arrows in flight, and pierces both Krishna 
and Arjuna with clutches of venomous bolts like fire. 


Then, while Arjuna is still thinking of destroying Drona’s bow with his 
arrows, the great Brahmana, quicker than thinking, breaks the Pandava’s 
bowstring, and draws blood from him, his horses and sarathy, and cuts 
slivers from his flagstaff, still with the superior smile on his lips. 

Arjuna restrings his bow in a blink and shrugging off his initial 
hesitation unleashes a storm of six hundred blinding shafts at Drona, as if 
they were just a single barb; next moment, he looses another seven hundred 
searing arrows, and then another thousand, all in the space of a wish. He is 
still not done and follows these with a full ten thousand light like blazing 
thunderbolts, razing so many warriors of Drona’s stolid vyuha, and horses 
and elephants as well. Maharathas fall out of their great chariots, their 
horses, standards, weapons and lives lost. 

Elephants founder like mountain peaks, or cloud masses, or like 
towering palaces, loosened, dispersed and incinerated by thunder, wind and 
fire. Struck by Arjuna’s arrows, thousands of horses collapse like swans 
upon the breast of Himavat struck down by the force of a sudden flashflood. 
Like the Sun that rises at the end of the Yuga drying up the oceans with his 
rays turned murderous, the son of Pandu obliterates a vast number of 
chariot-warriors, cavalry, elephants and foot-soldiers. 

Then, like clouds covering that fulminant Sun, the Drona-cloud covers 
the Pandava-sun with lashing arrow showers; Drona obscures the thick 
swath of shafts with which Arjuna covers the great Kuru Kshatriyas of the 
sakata vyuha. The Acharya strikes Dhananjaya deep through his breast with 
a long shaft unleashed with awful ferocity, an arrow that will take the life of 
any adversary. Great Arjuna trembles at the force of that barb, his limbs feel 
faint; he shakes like a mountain during an earthquake. 

But only for a moment, after which Indra’s son, like whom there is no 
warrior, in heaven or earth, is back to himself and strikes his forbidding 
teacher with a volley of golden-winged missiles. Drona, unperturbed, 
strikes Krishna with five bolts, Arjuna with seventy-three and his standard 
with three. Having the better of his disciple, in a wink Drona mantles 
Arjuna, his chariot and sarathy entirely in a dense cloud of arrows. We see 
the shafts of Bharadwaja’s son fly and fall in unbroken lines and his bow 
present the wonderful aspect of being incessantly drawn to a circle. His 
vicious projectiles, winged with kanka feathers, fall with the least pause on 
Dhananjaya and Vasudeva. 


Krishna watches the soaring battle between Arjuna and Drona for a 
short time, then says to his warrior, “Partha we must not waste time here for 
Jayadratha awaits. You must ride past Drona and on towards your quarry.” 

Partha replies, “As you will, O Krishna!” 

Now they keep Drona to their right and ride swiftly past him, which 
Arjuna continues to inundate with his arrows. Drona cries to Arjuna, 
‘Where are you going, O Pandava! Is it not true that you never stop fighting 
until you have defeated your enemy?” 

Arjuna answers, “You are my guru and not my enemy. I am your sishya 
and, so, like your son. There is no man in this world that can vanquish you 
in battle.” 

With this Arjuna flares on, cleaving your army, bringing death with him. 
The noble Panchala princes, Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas, follow him to 
protect his chariot wheels. 

Rajan, they find themselves facing Jaya and Kritavarman of the Satwata 
vamsa, and the king of the Kambojas, and Srutayus, who have ten thousand 
maharathas between them. Clad in glittering mail, a master of all the 
different forms of warfare, prepared to lose his life, the mighty and brave 
Abhishahas, the Surasenas, the Sibis, the Vasatis, the Mavellakas, the 
Lalithyas, the Kaikeyas, the Madrakas, the Narayana Gopalas and the 
various tribes of the Kambojas whom Karna once vanquished, all swarm 
recklessly at the speeding Arjuna, who comes among them in fury like the 
great leader of an elephant herd, eager to crush them all, to consume their 
entire army. 

A savage battle erupts between all those heroes on the one side and 
Arjuna on the other, making one’s hair stand on end. Like a whole host of 
powerful specifics resisting a raging disease, they combine to stop the 
inexorable Pandava flaring ahead to have Jayadratha’s life.”” 


CANTO 88 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Drona swiftly turns his chariot and rides after 
Arjuna, whom the others attempt to hold in some check. But the 
son of Pandu is like an army of dread plagues by himself and the arrows 
that blaze from his Gandiva like rays from the Sun razing those that come 
in his way. He cuts down warhorses, mauls chariots and riders, brings down 
elephants, cuts down royal chatras and shatters the wheels of countless 
rathas. Soon, your men, bloodied, their nerve broken, flee from the 
irresistible, unearthly storm that is Dhananjaya. 

Thus does the furious contention between the massed Kuru warriors and 
Arjuna unfold, a gory dream in another dimension of pure war, which is 
shrouded in arrows and where the resplendent Vijaya harries his enemies 
with inspired perfect archery. Steadfastly devoted to dharma and determined 
to fulfill his vow, he attacks Drona who has flashed up on his ratha drawn 
by red horses. The Acharya strikes his disciple with twenty-five immaculate 
shafts that can eviscerate an enemy; Arjuna cuts them all down. Partha 
quickly invokes the Brahmastra and confounds Drona’s deadly fusillades. 

And now we witness Drona’s supernal genius unbridled, for Arjuna, 
putting forth his own, cannot pierce the Acharya with a single shaft. Like a 


mass of clouds letting fall torrents of rain, Drona lashes down a ceaseless 
cascade of vicious barbs on the Partha-mountain. Tejasvin Arjuna receives 
his master’s downpour by invoking the shielding Brahmastra and truncates 
Drona’s searing shafts with his own. 

The dreadful Brahmana, aroused, strikes Swetavahana with twenty-five 
arrows and Vasudeva with seventy, barbs that pierce their torsos and arms. 
Partha serenely contains his invincible Acharya, who rages like the fire at 
the end of the Yuga. 

Nimbly avoiding Drona’s brilliant and brutal onslaught, Arjuna begins 
to slaughter the Bhoja host. Turning away from Drona who stands 
immovable like the Mainaka mountain, Arjuna rides between Kritavarman 
and Sudakshina the Kamboja king. Kritavarman, lord of the Bhojas, calmly 
strikes Partha with ten scorching shafts, kanka-feathered, but Arjuna stuns 
the Satwata shura with a hundred and three arrows shots in the space of a 
thought. 

Recovering quickly, the Bhojaraja, with a laugh like rolling thunder, 
strikes Arjuna and Krishna with twenty-five arrows each. Arjuna breaks 
Kritavarman’s bow and stabs him with twenty-one arrows like blazing 
flames or angry snakes of virulent poison. Kritavarman seizes up another 
bow and pierces Arjuna’s chest, O Bhaarata, with ten arrows swift as light; 
Partha bloodies his powerful antagonist’s breast with nine shafts shot in a 
neat circle. 

Again, Krishna sees his Kshatriya held up by Kritavarman, who is a 
Satwata fighting for Duryodhana, and cries, “Show Kritavarman no mercy! 
Do not think of your kinship with him. Kill him, Arjuna!” 

Abandoning affection and restraint, Arjuna staggers Kritavarman with 
some archery for which the Bhoja has no response; Krishna dashes ahead 
past Kritavarman towards the Kambojas. In red-eyed fury, Kritavarman 
turns his frustration and ire on the two Panchala princes who guard Arjuna’s 
rear as they follow him everywhere. The Bhoja hero strikes Yudhamanyu 
with three violent barbs and Uttamaujas with four. The heroic brothers 
instantly pierce him deep with ten shafts each, and break his bow and cut 
down his standard as well. Roaring, Kritavarman, son of Hridika, sweeps up 
another bow and rives the bows of both brothers and covers them with his 
scathing arrows. Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas, quick as thinking, take up 
fresh bows and loose twin ferocious invectives of shafts at the Satwata. 


Arjuna forges ahead, piercing deeper into the enemy army, while the 
Panchala princes occupy Kritavarman, who holds them up. Swetavahana 
attacks the akshauhinis drawn up against him but does not kill Kritavarman 
although he is within reach. Seeing Partha’s violent progress the brave king 
Srutayudha rushes at him, brandishing his big bow and strikes Partha with 
three arrows, Janardana with seventy and Partha’s standard with a razor- 
headed barb. Arjuna retaliates in fury, piercing his antagonist deep with 
ninety straight shafts, like a mahout a mighty elephant with his ankush. 

Srutayudha, undimmed, finds Arjuna with seventy-seven thunderbolts 
but Arjuna breaks his bow, shreds his quiver, and in wrath strikes him deep 
through his chest with seven heavy shafts. An incensed Srutayudha takes up 
another bow and drills Vasava’ son with nine barbs, his arms and chest. 
Laughing all the while, the Pandava unleashes a gale of thousands of 
arrows, killing his horses and charioteer. Never pausing, Arjuna bores his 
antagonist with seventy arrows. Leaping down from his useless chariot, 
valiant Srutayudha rushes roaring at Arjuna with his mace raised high. 

The heroic king Srutayudha is the son of Varuna and Parnasa, the 
mighty river of cool, limpid waters. His mother, Rajan, once begged 
Varuna, “Let my son never be killed on earth.” 

Varuna, well pleased with her, had promised, “I will give him an 
ayudha, by which your son will not be killed on the ground by any enemy. 
No man can have immortality, O greatest of rivers, for everyone who is 
born must inevitably die. This child, however, will always be invincible in 
war through the power of this weapon. Let the fear in your heart be 
dispelled.” 

Varuna then gave Srutayudha, with mantras, a mace, and with his gada, 
Srutayudha became invincible on earth. However, the illustrious Lord of the 
waters had also said to him, “This mace should not be cast at anyone who is 
not actually fighting. If flung at such a one, it will fly back and fall on you, 
O brilliant, and take your life!” 

And now, his hour to die come, Srutayudha violates that injunction. He 
casts his lethal mace at Krishna, who receives it upon his dark and 
tremendous shoulder. Like the wind failing to shake the Vindhya 
mountains, it has no impact on the Avatara. Instead, the occult gada flies 
back and fells Srutayudha himself, like a powerful spell consuming the 
sorcerer. Your troops see Srutayudha slain by his own mace and cries of 
dismay rise from your ranks. 


The river Devi Parnasa’s beloved son falls with his head and body 
shattered before the eyes of all the archers, he falls, resplendent, like a tall 
pipal tree with spreading branches broken by the wind. Seeing Srutayudha 
perish, panic grips your warriors and they flee. 

Brave Sudakshina, son of the king of the Kambojas, now attacks the 
flashing Arjuna. Partha looses seven arrows at him that pass right through 
his body and burrow into the ground behind him. Though spouting blood, 
Sudakshina strikes Arjuna back with ten kanka-feathered shafts, Krishna 
with three, and Partha again with five. Arjuna severs his bow, lops off this 
standard and pierces him with two wedge-headed arrows. 

Sudakshina stabs Partha again with three sizzling arrows, and gives an 
echoing roar. He looses a dread iron astra at the Pandava, a weapon decked 
with little bells, which blazes like a meteor, giving off sparks of fire, strikes 
the Vijaya squarely and fells him to his chariot floor! 

Recovering in a moment, great Arjuna, now licking the corners of his 
mouth in anger, shoots a dazzle of fourteen barbs, drawing fonts of blood 
from his enemy, his horses, and charioteer, breaking his standard and bow 
into shards. With no instant’s pause, Partha pulverises Sudakshina’s chariot 
and then looses a mighty arrow, which blows Sudakshina’s heart to shreds. 
With a sigh, the valiant Kamboja prince, his armour ruined, his limbs turned 
weak, his crown and angadas come loose, falls head first from his ratha, and 
his spirit departs his mangled body. 

Like a beautiful Karnikara tree in the spring with handsome branches 
lying uprooted by the wind on a mountaintop, Sudakshina of the Kambojas 
lies on the bare ground lifeless, instead of on the costliest bed, wearing 
precious ornaments. Handsome, with coppery eyes and on his head a 
garland of gold, and radiant like a fire, even in death the mighty-armed 
Sudakshina is splendent as some wonderful mountain. 

Seeing Srutayudha and Sudakshina slain, your warriors yet again take to 
their heels in terror.’” 


CANTO 89 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “After he kills Sudakshina and Srutayudha, and when 
they recover their courage, your legions set on Arjuna more 
fiercely than ever. The Abhishahas, the Surasenas, the Sibis and the Vasatis 
loose storms of weapons of every kind at the Kiritin, but Arjuna responds 
with an awesome volley of six hundred arrows, unleashed in a moment, 
sprayed in all directions. Struck by panic by his archery the likes of which 
they have never imagined let alone seen before, your men take flight from 
this dreadful god come hunting them, like little animals from a great tiger. 

However, they soon rally and once more surround Partha, who 
continues to massacre his enemies at imperious and terrifying ease; arrows 
flare in a constant stream from the Gandiva, hewing off heads and warriors’ 
arms until there is no inch of the field that is not strewn with these grisly 
ornaments of death. The flights of crows, vultures and ravens that hover 
over Kurukshetra form an eerie canopy in the sky. 

Seeing their men decimated, Srutayus and Achyutayus are full of 
belligerence and continue to fight Dhananjaya in wrath. Mighty, strong, 
proud, heroic, of noble lineage, the two archers, Rajan, anxious to win great 
fame and victory for your son, by extinguishing the elemental Arjuna, 


envelop him with arrows from his right and left. A thousand deadly shafts 
they lash down on Arjuna like two thunderheads filling a lake. Maharatha 
Srutayus suddenly strikes Dhananjaya with a fell spear and, deeply 
wounded, Arjuna Parantapa faints, to Krishna’s puzzlement. 

Immediately, as if to pour acid into his wound, Achyutayus from the 
other flank drives another javelin into Partha. In excruciating agony, Arjuna 
totters in the chariot and clutches at his flagstaff to support himself. And all 
the fighting men give a great jubilant roar, thinking that the Pandava they 
dread has been killed. 

Krishna, grieved to see Partha swoon, soothes him with divine, 
comforting words. Srutayus and Achyutayus do not cease their onslaught; 
wheeling around the son of Indra, they mantle the Pandava’s chariot with a 
tempest of missiles so completely that the ratha, its warrior and sarathy and 
its horses vanish from view. Even the banner of snarling Hanuman cannot 
be seen anymore. 

Meanwhile, Arjuna slowly regains his senses, like someone returning 
from the very land of the dead. Seeing his ratha with Vasudeva 
overwhelmed by arrows and finding his two antagonists before him like two 
blazing fires, Partha the paladin invokes the Indrastra. Thousands of arrows 
flame forth from it, cutting down their volley in the sky and striking both 
their heads from their necks in scarlet bursts and they fall like two great 
trees brought down by the wind. This done, Arjuna ploughs on through the 
dense enemy, encountering many great warriors, besting them all. Shock 
sweeps through your ranks at the deaths of Srutayus and Achyutayus; your 
men stand as if they have seen the ocean dried up. Arjuna effortlessly 
despatches fifty maharathas who followed the two slain princes, and 
plunges on strewing the field with corpses of numberless great warriors. 
Seeing Srutayus and Achyutayus die, O Bhaarata, their sons Niyatayus and 
Dirghayus charge Arjuna, covering him in a gale of diverse weapons. 
Invincible Partha Arjuna, in an incarnadine moment, sends both princes to 
Yama. Arjuna thunders on through the helpless Kuru army like some 
elephant trampling his way through a red lake of lotuses. 

Then thousands of Angas surround Arjuna with their elephant-force. 
Urged on by Duryodhana, many kings of the west and the south, and many 
others led by the king of the Kalingas also encircle Arjuna with their great 
elephants. But Arjuna today is a god on Kurukshetra, and more quickly than 
I can tell you, Rajan, the field of death is bestrewn with thousands of heads 


and arms more, all richly ornamented, all struck off by the arrows than 
radiate endlessly from the magical Gandiva. The severed heads look like 
golden stones entwined by snakes. Arms lopped off from the elephant riders 
fall to the ground like birds dropping from trees; while the elephants, 
pierced by thousands of arrows and flowing blood from their wounds, look 
like hills in the monsoon with melted red chalk streaming down their sides. 

Different kinds of Mlecchas, all variously ugly, wearing garish attire, 
armed with many strange and crude weapons, sit on the backs of elephants 
bathed in blood, while others look weirdly resplendent, as they lie prone on 
the field, having been killed by Arjuna. Thousands of elephants and their 
riders, and those on foot that urged them forward, all struck by Partha’s 
bolts, vomit blood, scream in agony, and either fall or run in all directions. 

Many of the huge beasts, terrified, lumber away from the fearsome 
Kshatriya and crush their own men, including countless warriors fierce as 
poisonous snakes. Many terrible Yavanas, Paradas, Sakas, Balhikas and 
Mlecchas born of the cow belonging to Vasishta, with fierce eyes, 
accomplished in war and looking like Yamadutas, all of them experts of the 
mayic powers of the Asuras, many Darvabhisaras, Daradas, Pundras in 
thousands of bands, and together forming a force that is beyond count, 
shower their missiles all together over Arjuna aflame. 

The wild and skilled Mlecchas pound Arjuna with their arrows. Arjuna 
fluidly shoots lethal torments of shafts from the Gandiva, barbs like locust 
swarms which cast a deathly shadow over the Dhartarashtra troops, and 
mow down almost all the Mlecchas, whose heads are completely shaved or 
half-shaved or covered with matted locks, who are unclean in all their ways 
and have crooked faces. 

The remaining hill dwellers flee. 

In dark glees, ravens, kankas and wolves lap up the blood of elephants, 
horses and their Mleccha-riders lying upon the field, all felled by the 
Partha’s burning volleys. Partha lets flow a bubbling river of blood; the 
slain foot-soldiers, horses, chariots and elephants are its banks; the showers 
of arrows, its rafts; the hair of the dead its moss and weeds and the fingers 
cut off from warriors’ hands its little fishes—ah, river as awful as Death 
itself at the end of the Yuga. The bloody river flows towards the realm of 
Yama with the bodies of dead elephants floating on it and slowing its 
current. 


The Earth covered with the blood of Kshatriyas, elephants, horses and 
their riders, has become a crimson lake, like one formed by Indra’s 
torrential rains when they cover lands both high and low. The Kshatriya bull 
despatches six thousand horsemen and a thousand of the greatest rathikas 
into the jaws of death. Thousands of elephants, pierced all over by his 
arrows, lie prostrate on the field, like hills struck down by thunder and 
lightning. 

Arjuna hurtles across Kurukshetra, an elephant in musth trampling a 
forest of reeds, killing horse riders, ratha-warriors and elephants with 
supreme ease. Just as a wind fuels a conflagration that devours a dense 
forest of trees, creepers, plants, dry wood and grass, Dhananjaya’s fire, with 
shafts for its flames and fanned on by the Krishna-wind, hungrily consumes 
the forest of your warriors. Emptying chariots in carmine flurries, covering 
the ground everywhere he goes with corpses, Dhananjaya truly seems to 
dance, bow in hand, among teeming legions of enemies, flooding the earth 
with blood with his thunderous shafts. 

Energized by all the killing he does, he penetrates deeper into the 
Bharata host and confronts Srutayudha, king the Ambashtas. Arjuna 
slaughters his horses with a slew of kanka-feathered arrows; he breaks that 
king’s bow in his hands with a single unerring shaft. 

The briefly shaken Ambashtha king picks up a great mace and rushes at 
Arjuna’s chariot and strikes Krishna a stunning blow. Arjuna’s eyes turn red 
and he looses a vicious flight of gold-winged barbs at the Ambashtha, 
shrouding that hero in a small cloud, shimmering. Arjuna shatters that 
king’s mace with another clutch of arrows, smashing the heavy weapon into 
dust. Quick as thinking, that king hefts another gada and, undaunted, 
storming the Pandava’s ratha, rains a flurry of heavy blows on both Krishna 
and Arjuna. 

Next moment, Arjuna hacks his opponent’s massive arms off at their 
shoulders with two wedge-headed short arrows, spraying blood in the air. 
With another shaft, he removes Srutayudha’s head from his neck in a bright 
ruddy blast. That Kshatriya falls like a stake raised to Indra with its ropes 
cut. 

Hundreds of elephants and chariots beyond count surround the battling 
Pandava and he becomes invisible like the Sun hidden by dark clouds.’” 


CANTO 90 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Arjuna, his heart set just on killing Jayadratha, 
furrows deep into the Bharata host, decimating the invincible 
akshauhinis of both Drona and the Bhojas; he kills prince Sudakshina of the 
Kambojas, as well as the valiant Srutayudha. Relentlessly he razes the Kuru 
army and panic takes your forces like a fever. 

Seeing his army mown down at the Vijaya’s will, Duryodhana rides up 
to Drona and cries, “Arjuna has already humbled our great army, Acharya; 
he has already cloven through your sakata vyuha. He brings such carnage to 
us, you must tell us what to do to stop him! Bless you, Acharya! You are 
our only refuge; do what you must to see that the Pandava does not kill 
Jayadratha. Like a raging fire consuming heaps of dry grass and straw, the 
Dhananjaya conflagration, fanned by the wind of his wrath, devours my 
troops. 

Seeing the son of Kunti burning his way so easily through our legions, 
the maharathas who guard Jayadratha are full of doubt if they can stop 
Partha. All the kings say that Arjuna could never defeat Drona. But Pandu’s 
son stormed disdainfully through your vyuha, most splendid one. Ah, my 
army must be weak indeed, why, even as if I have no warriors of any worth. 


O most splendid, blessed Drona, I know that in your heart, you are 
devoted to the Pandavas, and that is why Arjuna has his way with us. I also 
seek to please you, Acharya, with everything in my power, and I cannot 
think of what more I can do. But you seem to disregard all that I do for you. 
Ah Drona, we are devoted to you but your favour lies only with the 
Pandavas, although you receive your livelihood from us! I did not know 
until now that you are a razor hidden in honey. If you had not assured that 
we would contain, no, even humiliate the Pandavas, I would never have 
prevented Jayadratha from returning to his own country. I am a fool to 
expect protection from you. 

I assured Jayadratha that he would be safe with us and now I see him 
being offered up as a yagnapasu, a sacrificial animal to Yama. Any man 
might escape from death’s very jaws, but there will be no escape for 
Jayadratha once he is within Dhananjaya’s reach. 

O you of the red horses, do whatever you must to save Jayadratha! I am 
deranged with anxiety. Pay no heed to my raving at you; I beg you protect 
the Saindhava from dreadful Arjuna!” 

Drona replies, “I do not find fault with what you say. Duryodhana, I tell 
you truly that you are as dear to me as Aswatthaman. So do what I tell you 
now, Rajan! Of all charioteers, Krishna is the greatest and his horses are the 
best of their great pedigree. Arjuna’s chariot flashes through the small gap 
in our forces. Do you not see the countless arrows the Kiritin unleashes 
from his great Gandiva that fall full two miles behind his ratha as he flies 
ahead, and every shaft taking a life? 

I am old now, child; I cannot ride as swiftly as Pandu’s son. Besides, the 
entire Pandava army is now close upon our van. 

Arjuna has left Yudhishtira by himself, and this is my chance to seize 
their king, as I vowed I would before all our Kshatriyas. I cannot leave the 
entrance to our vyuha, and so you must fight Phalguna! 

Riding with the best support, you can match Arjuna, who is alone and 
who only is your equal in lineage and achievements. Do not be afraid, go 
and fight him. You are the sovereign of the world, a great king, a famed 
Kshatriya and a master of quelling your enemies. O heroic subduer of 
enemy cities, ride swiftly and face Kunti’s son yourself!” 

Duryodhana says, “O Acharya, how can I fight Arjuna who passed even 
you, who are our greatest warrior by far? The lord of the Devas, armed with 
the Vajra, can be vanquished in battle but not Arjuna Purandara. He has 


defeated Hridika’s son Kritavarman of the Bhojas and you, who are equal to 
a Deva. He has killed Sudakshina and king Srutayudha; he has killed both 
Srutayus and Achyutayus and numberless Mlecchas. How can I challenge 
this invincible son of Pandu, who is like an all-consuming fire? How can 
you think I am fit to fight Arjuna today? Ah, I am dependent on you like a 
slave. Protect my honour and my fame, O Drona!” 

Drona says, “You rightly say, O scion of Kuru, that Dhananjaya is 
irresistible. Yet, today I will ensure that you will face him and contain him. 
Let all the archers in the world witness the wonderful feat of Arjuna being 
held in check by you in the very presence of Krishna. I will sheath your 
body in my golden kavacha in a way that no weapon will so much as graze 
your skin! Even if the three worlds with the Asuras, the Devas, the Yakshas, 
the Uragas and the Rakshasas, together with all Manavas, take the field 
against you today, you will still have no cause to fear them. Neither Krishna 
nor Arjuna, nor any other warrior, will be able to pierce your armour. Cased 
in this armour, ride swiftly against Arjuna today. He will not resist you!” 

Then Drona, the one who knows Brahma the best, touches water, utters 
some powerful secret Mantras, and quickly fastens his own remarkable 
kavacha around Duryodhana’s, astonishing everyone there, and ensuring the 
your son will be invincible. 

Drona says, “Let the Vedas, Brahman, and the Brahmanas bless you. 
Let all the greater Nagas bless you, O Bhaarata! 

Let Yayati, Nahusha, Dhundhumara, Bhagiratha and the other Rajarishis 
watch over you and do what benefits you. 

Let blessings be upon you from creatures that have but one leg, and 
from those having many legs and from creatures that have no legs. 

Let Swaha, Swadha and Sachi all be with you and help you. O sinless 
one, let Lakshmi, Arundhati, Asita, Devala, Viswamitra, Angiras, Vasishta 
and Kasyapa do what is favourable to you. 

Let Dhatri, the Lord of the worlds, the points of the compass, the 
Lokapalas, the regents of those cardinal points, and the six-faced Kartikeya 
all be benign toward you. 

Rajan, let the divine Vivaswat help you completely. Let the four 
elephants, the Diggajas of the four quarters, Bhumi, Akasa, the Navagraha, 
the Lord Sesha, the greatest Naga, who is below the Earth and holds her on 
his head, give you what fetches you weal! 


O son of Gandhari, once upon a time, an Asura named Vritra, 
displaying his prowess, defeated the best of the Devas in battle. Those 
inhabitants of swarga, led by Indra and numbering thousands upon 
thousands, their bodies lacerated, sapped of their vitality and strength, and 
in terror of Vritrasura, went to Brahma and sought his protection. 

The gods said, ‘O best and foremost of Devas, Vritra has crushed us in 
battle. Be our refuge now; rescue us from this great dread.’ 

Addressing Vishnu beside him and the Devas led by Indra, Brahma said 
to the unhappy ones, these words filled with truth. ‘Indeed, I will always 
protect the gods led by Indra, and the Brahmanas too. The tejas of Tvashtri 
from which Vritra has been created is invincible. Having in olden days 
performed tapasya for a million years, Tvashtri then created Vritra with the 
leave of Maheswara. This mighty enemy of yours has vanquished you 
through the grace of Mahadeva Siva. You must go to Sankara’s abode to see 
him. Once you behold him, you will be able to defeat Vritra. So go without 
delay to the mountains of Mandara where the origin of tapasya, the 
destroyer of Daksha’s yagna, the wielder of the Pinaka, the Lord of all 
creatures, the slayer of the Asura Bhaganetra, lives.’ 

The Devas flew to Mandara with Brahma, and saw there that mass of 
energy and light, that Supreme God endued with the splendour of a million 
suns. Seeing the Devas, Maheswara welcomed them and enquired what he 
could do for them. Said He, The sight of a radiant person can never be 
fruitless. Let the fruition of your desires proceed from this. 

The dwellers of swarga replied, ‘Vritra has deprived us of our tejas and 
strength. Be the refuge of the swargavasis. Look, O Lord, at our bodies 
battered and bruised by his blows. We seek your protection. Be our refuge, 
O Maheswara!’ 

The God of Devas, called Sarva, said, ‘Devas, you well know how this 
originated from the fervid wish and tapasya of Tvashtri the divine artificer, 
whose son is Vritra. It is surely my dharma to help you dwellers of heaven. 
O Indra, take this lustrous armour from my body and, O king of the Devas, 
put it on while chanting these mantras in your mind.’ 

And the boon-giving Siva gave Indra the armour with the mantras to be 
chanted by the wearer. Protected by the armour, Indra went to battle against 
the army of Vritra and although they cast all kinds of astras at him, the 
joints of Siva’s armour could not be breached. Then Indra slew Vritra, and 
later he gave Angiras the kavacha, whose joints are made of mantras. 


Angiras passed on those mantras to his son Brihaspati, who indeed has 
knowledge of all mantras. Brihaspati imparted that knowledge to the very 
intelligent Agnivesya. Agnivesya passed it down to me, and it is with those 
same mantras, O Duryodhana, best of kings, that I fasten this armour onto 
your body.” 

Saying this, Drona, that bull among acharyas, says again to your 
magnificent son, “Rajan, I sheath your body in this divine, joining its links 
with the Brahma mantras, even as in olden days Brahma himself fastened 
this kavacha to Indra’s body during the Devasura yuddha sparked by the 
abduction of Tara. Here, I do now swathe you in the same ancient armour.” 

Having thus fastened the impenetrable armour onto Duryodhana with 
the arcane mantras of Brahma, Drona sends the king to battle Arjuna. Now 
wearing the armour of the Mahatman Acharya, Duryodhana rides at 
Arjuna’s ratha with a thousand mighty war-maddened elephants, a hundred 
thousand horses and many maharathas. He storms forth to the sound of 
conches, drums and other instruments, going even like Virochana’s son Bali 
of yore. Then, O Bhaarata, seeing the Kuru king himself go forth a 
fathomless ocean, a deafening uproar of joy arises among your troops.’” 


CANTO 91 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘After Duryodhana sallies forth to hunt down Partha 
and Krishna, who have penetrated deep into the Kaurava army, 
the Pandavas, accompanied by the Somakas, charge Drona with loud 
shouts. A ferocious battle erupts between the Kurus and the Pandavas at the 
portal to the sakata vyuha, the sight of which fills all onlookers with awe 
and makes their hair stand on end. Rajan, the sun is in the meridian and the 
encounter between the two forces is truly such that we have never seen or 
heard of its like before. 

Led by Dhrishtadyumna, the Parthas all in immaculate battle array 
cover Drona’s legions with heavy showers of arrows. We, too, with the 
maharatha Drona leading us, envelop the Pandava forces under Prishata’s 
son Dhrishtadyumna, with our missiles. 

The two hosts, massed with rathas, are past magnificent, like two 
immense clouds in the summer sky, driven at each other by opposing winds. 
Locking in bloody battle, they fight wildly, recklessly, like the Ganga and 
Yamuna swollen with rainwater during the monsoon hurtling into 
confluence. Their myriad weapons are like the winds that blow before them; 
their legions are packed dense with elephants, horses and chariots and the 


maces the warriors wield their lightning that charges the awesome dark 
cloud formed by the Kuru host, whirled on by the Drona-tempest, and 
pouring incessant shafts: lashing torrents of rain that seek to quench the 
blazing Pandava-fire. 

Like a spinning, blasting summer typhoon agitating the ocean, Drona 
blows at the Pandava host. The Pandavas rush towards the Acharya with 
terrific energy, to breach his vyuha, like a driving flood dashing against a 
strong embankment, to sweep it away. But Drona resists the furious 
Pandavas, Panchalas and Kekayas like a mountain stopping the fiercest tide. 
Quickly, many other avid and great kings of your army attack the Pandavas 
from all sides. 

Then, rallying the Pandavas, Naravyaghra Dhrishtadyumna repeatedly 
attacks Drona, fervently trying to pierce his stolid defences. Indeed, as 
Drona showers his arrows on Prishata’s son, so does he on Drona. With 
blades and swords for the winds that blow before it, richly furnished with 
arrows, spears and sabres, with the bowstring its lightning, and its twang its 
thunderclaps, the Dhrishtadyumna-cloud decants on all sides, killing many 
Kaurava maharathas and large number of horses, and swamps the hostile 
akshauhinis with his ceaseless gales of arrows. 

Dhrishtadyumna stops Drona in his tracks, as the Brahmana attempts to 
scythe through the chariot-divisions of the Pandavas, felling their rathikas 
with his extraordinary thunderbolts. Although Drona struggles valiantly, his 
army, on encountering the fire-prince Dhrishtadyumna is truncated into 
three columns. One of these retreats towards Kritavarman, the Bhoja king; 
another towards Jalasandha; and the third, savagely set upon by the 
Pandavas, retreats towards Drona himself. 

Drona repeatedly rallies his troops but every time Dhrishtadyumna 
splits them again. And the Pandavas and the Srinjayas massacre the 
Dhartarashtra army divided into three, like many beasts of prey a herd of 
cattle left unprotected by its herdsmen in a forest. Such is the slaughtering 
that it is as if Death himself swoops down to swallow Drona’s warriors after 
Dhrishtadyumna first stuns them. As famine, pestilence and robbers destroy 
the kingdom of a weak or evil king, the Pandavas consume your army. The 
rays of the sun reflected by the warriors’ weapons and the pall of dust raised 
by the fighting men blind and sting the eyes of all. 

Seeing the Kaurava forces rent in three parts by Dhrishtadyumna and 
then butchered by the Pandavas, Drona, stirred to great wrath, begins to 


denude the Panchalas with his elemental astras of fire, water and wind. The 
Brahmana burns like the fire at the end of the Yuga. He shatters chariots, 
strikes down elephants, steeds and foot-soldiers, each with just a single 
missile. No warrior in the Pandava army can withstand Drona’s grievous 
archery. 

Scorched by the sun and blasted by the astras of Drona, the Pandava 
akshauhinis reel and give way on abysmal Kurukshetra. And your host, too, 
ravaged by Dhrishtadyumna, seems to burst into flames all around like a dry 
forest on fire. While both Drona and Dhrishtadyumna decimate the two vast 
hosts, killing untold numbers, the maharathas, the great warriors of both 
armies, in utter disregard for their lives, continue to fight manfully 
everywhere. Neither in your army, nor in that of the enemy, O 
Bharatarishabha, is there a single warrior who flees that hellish carnage 
through fear. 

The brothers Vivimsati and Chitrasena and the maharatha Vikarna 
surround Bhimasena, while Vinda, Anuvinda of Avanti and Kshemadhurti 
of marvellous skill support your three sons who engage the incomparable 
Bhimasena. 

The noble and energetic king Balhika, with his troops, fights the sons of 
Draupadi. Saibya, lord of the Govasanas, with a thousand of his best 
warriors, faces the son of the great warrior king of the Kasis and resists 
him. Salya, king of the Madras, surrounds Dharmaraja Yudhishtira with his 
legion, gentle Yudhishtira who today is a blazing fire on the abysmal 
harrowing field. Brave and choleric Dusasana, ably supported by his own 
akshauhini, as always in fury, his brow knit darkly, rides against the 
matchless Satyaki. 

Rajan, I led my own troops, all in armour, well armed and supported by 
four hundred of the finest bowmen, to fight Chekitana. 

Sakuni with seven hundred Gandhara warriors armed with bows, darts 
and swords, faces Sahadeva the son of Madri. The two great archers, Vinda 
and Anuvinda of Avanti, fight Virata, king of the Matsyas, with no care for 
their lives, fighting for their friend Duryodhana. King Balhika furiously 
confronts the mighty Sikhandin, son of Yajnasena. The lord of Avanti, with 
the Sauviras and the cruel Prabhadrakas fend off the rampaging 
Dhrishtadyumna of the Panchalas. 

The fierce-faced Rakshasa Alambusha rushes, fangs bared, at the feral 
and heroic Ghatotkacha, Bhima’s son who comes like Death into battle. The 


maharatha Kuntibhoja, with a large force, attacks the horrible Alambusha. 
Thus, O Bhaarata, hundreds of separate duels break out between the 
warriors of your army and theirs. 

Meanwhile, Rajan, Jayadratha remains at the rear of the Kuru army 
protected by so many great archers and maharathas; among them is Kripa 
whose chariot wheels are guarded by Aswatthaman on his right, and Karna 
the Sutaputra on the left. Behind Jayadratha, protecting his rear, is a small 
host of heroes led by Kripa, Somadatta’s son, Vrishasena, Sala and the 
invincible Salya, who are all masters of every aspect of warfare. After 
making these arrangements for the protection of Jayadratha, the Kuru army 
continues the tremendous battle against the Pandavas.’” 


CANTO 92 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Listen further to that astounding encounter between 

the Kurus and the Pandavas. Flying straight at Drona, who stands 

at the lip of his great vyuha, the Pandavas put forth all their might to break 

into the fortress like formations. Drona and his legions fight staunchly, in 
rage and inspiration to keep them at bay. 

Vinda and Anuvinda of Avanti, fighting for your son, unleash ten torrid 
shafts at Virata and a terrific battle ensues between them. Blood sprays in 
the sunlight and flows like water during that contention that resembles an 
encounter in the forest between a lion and a pair of wild elephants in musth. 

The powerful son of Yajnasena strikes king Balhika with excruciating 
arrows piercing his innards, and Balhika drills Drupada’s son with nine 
coruscating shafts fletched with golden wings. Indescribably brutal is the 
duel between those two, one that swells the delight of the brave and makes 
the timid wilt in terror. The dark deluges of arrows they loose over each 
other shroud the sky and all the points of the compass, so that darkness falls 
on Kurukshetra and nothing can be seen. 

Saibya, king of the Govasanas, leads his fearless and wild men against 
the prince of the Kasis, and they lock in battle like two bull elephants. 


The belligerent king of the Balhikas is glorious indeed, as he faces all 
five of Draupadi’s sons; their unrestrained encounter is like that of the battle 
between the mind and the five senses! Loosing torrents of arrows from all 
sides Draupadi’s warrior princes are like the objects of the senses constantly 
besieging the body. 

Your son Dusasana strikes Satyaki deeply with nine keen bolts so the 
Vrishni almost swoons. Recovering quickly, Satyaki stabs your son deep 
with ten kanka-feather winged shafts. Lacerating each other, their blood 
flying, the two look as splendid as two kinsukas in bloom. 

Mauled by the arrows of Kuntibhoja, an angry Alambusha also looks 
like a beautiful flowering kinsuka. The pale Rakshasa, fighting at the head 
of your army, begins to roar most horribly and gashes Kuntibhoja with a 
squall of wooden barbs. The two resemble Sakra and the Asura Jambha of 
old. 

The two sons of Madri meanwhile find Sakuni, whom they most loathe, 
and a violent, hate-filled encounter erupts between them; the twins fetch 
carnage to Sakuni’s Gandhara troops. 

The fire of the Pandava’s wrath, which you kindled, which Karna stoked 
and your sons fanned into a conflagration, blazes now as if it will surely 
consume the entire world. Forced to turn his back on the fight against 
Nakula and Sahadeva, so ferocious is their onslaught on him, Sakuni stands 
briefly bemused, not knowing what to do. Seeing him turn back, the 
fearsome twins again lash down their arrows on him like two thunderheads 
upon a dimmed mountain. Subala’s son, overwhelmed, sorely wounded by 
countless powerful shafts, turns his chariot and flees towards Drona for 
refuge! 

Magnificent, black Ghatotkacha dashes towards the vile Alambusha 
with gusto and the duel between the two Rakshasas is like the one between 
Rama and Ravana of old. 

Having struck Salya of the Madras with all of five hundred arrows in a 
dazzle of bowmanship, Yudhishtira pierces him deep with seven more. The 
duel between them swells to breathtaking proportions, and is like the one 
between the Asura Sambara and Indra of the Devas in olden days. 

Your sons Vivimsati, Chitrasena and Vikarna, at the head of a large 
force, skirmish with Bhimasena.’” 


CANTO 93 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘The Pandavas wildly beset the Kauravas who have 
been divided into three divisions. With blood-curdling roars, 
Bhimasena rushes against the mighty-armed Jalasandha; Yudhishtira leads 
his legions against Kritavarman; and Dhrishtadyumna tears into Drona, 
Rajan, and his arrows flaring at the Brahmana like sunrays. 

Now the individual duels cease and a great and general battle begins 
between all the archers of the Kuru and the Pandava armies, every man of 
them bright-eyed with battle lust, and an unprecedented bloodbath ensues. 
Great Drona looses a dense swarm of missiles at Dhrishtadyumna and his 
legions, and a gasp goes up from both armies. In a moment, which seems to 
occur in another dimension of time, Drona’s virulent shafts sever the heads 
of some thousands of fighting men and they roll in macabre pageant on the 
battlefield, which then resembles a forest of ghoulish lotuses. 

Fine robes, ornaments, weapons, standards and coats of mail are strewn 
on the ground everywhere amidst every division of the armies. Coats of 
golden mail, dyed with blood, appear like clouds charged with lightning. 

Other mighty maharathas, drawing great swords measuring full six 
cubits long, shoot down elephants, horses and men. In that frightful melee, 


one sees swords, shields, bows, heads and coats of mail lying scattered all 
around; one sees innumerable headless trunks rise up weirdly, Rajan, in the 
midst of the horrific battle and vultures, kankas, jackals and swarms of 
other carnivores rending at the flesh of fallen men, horses and elephants, 
drinking their blood, or dragging them by their hair, or licking up their 
matrow through bones bitten through, or hauling whole corpses and severed 
limbs, or rolling their heads on the ground. 

Masters of war, seeking only fame, fight at the ends of their strength and 
skills. Many warriors wheel across the field, displaying various incredible 
maneuvers of swordsmen. The noblest men butcher one another in frenzy, 
with swords, darts, lances, spears, axes, maces, spiked clubs and other 
uncommon weapons, why they strangle each other with bare hands until 
tongues loll out blue, eyes roll up in their sockets and fierce spirits finally 
quit their manly bodies. 

Maharathas fight other chariot-warriors, horsemen against horsemen, 
elephants other elephants and foot-soldiers fall upon foot-soldiers. The 
elephants present the most dramatic and gory spectacle, maddened and 
trumpeting shrilly, as they gore each other viciously in the manner they do 
in sporting arenas. 

All mercy and dharma have departed Kurukshetra, on this fourth day of 
the kali yuga of wrath unleashed, and the greatest warriors fight like 
senseless beasts rather than highborn heroes. Dhrishtadyumna horses are 
entangled with those of Drona. Those steeds fleet as the wind, the former’s 
white as doves and the latter’s red as blood, are still so beautiful, even at the 
grim heart of darkness; they are like stunning clouds charged with lightning. 

O Bhaarata, abruptly Prishasta’s son parantapa Dhrishtadyumna sees 
Drona again, and in froth, flings down his bow and engages him the most 
difficult kind of combat— hand-to-hand, with sword and shield. Seizing the 
shaft of Drona’s ratha, he vaults onto it, sometimes leaping onto the middle 
of the yoke, sometimes on its joints and sometimes just behind the horses. 

And as the fire-prince moves nimbly from place to place, even upon the 
very back of Drona’s red horses, Drona finds no opportunity or opening to 
strike at him. All of us watch this in amazement! Indeed, Dhrishtadyumna’s 
sudden attack is like the strike of a hunting hawk in the forest. 

Recovering from his initial surprise, Drona _ first smashes 
Dhrishtadyumna’s shield, emblazoned with a hundred moons, next his 
sword with ten more shafts, and finally with four and sixty arrows, kills his 


horses. With a few broad-headed shafts, the Brahmana fells the Panchala 
prince’s standard, his royal chatra and then kills both his Parshni 
charioteers. The terrible Acharya now draws his bowstring to his ear and 
looses a fatal arrow straight at Dhrishtadyumna standing on his horses’ 
necks, even like Indra casting his Vajra at an enemy. 

Even as the deadly shaft flies to claim the life of the prince born to kill 
the grand Drona, Satyaki from a side cuts it in slivers with fourteen perfect 
arrows. The bull of the Sinis saves the prince of the Panchalas whom the 
greatest of acharyas had seized like a deer held by a lion in its jaws. Seeing 
Dhrishtadyumna saved, Drona in fury shoots twenty-six arrows at Satyaki, 
to which now the emboldened, relieved Panchala, having leapt gratefully 
off Drona’s chariot horses, replies with precisely twenty-six of his own that 
thud squarely into Drona’s chest in a neat round clump, even while the 
Brahmana turns to slaughtering the Srinjayas. 

All the Panchala maharathas, agog to see the inspired Satyaki vanquish 
the Kuru Acharya and senapati, quickly converge and whisk their own 
prince Dhrishtadyumna away from immediate danger.’” 


CANTO 94 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra asks, ‘O Sanjaya, after Satyaki saves 
Dhrishtadyumna’s life, what does Drona do against that 
Naravyaghra Satyaki, the grandson of Sini?’ 

Sanjaya replies, ‘Like a mighty Naga, with wrath for his venom, his 
stretched bow his yawning jaws, his sharp shafts his fangs, his eyes red as 
copper from the frenzy of battle, and breathing hard, Drona, his red 
chargers seeming to soar into the sky to scale a mountain top, turns 
viciously on Satyaki, covering the Vrishni who has deprived him of his 
most precious prey with a tempest of golden-winged arrows. 

Seeing the irresistible Drona cloudburst, with the rumble of chariot- 
wheels its roar, the twanging of its always bent bow its thunderclaps, long 
arrows its lightning-flashes, the Brahmana’s fury its gale winds and flying at 
him upon the horses that are the hurricane that impel it, Satyaki coolly 
rushes ahead to meet it, smilingly saying to his charioteer, ‘O Suta, whip the 
horses to fly at this Brahmana fallen from his swadharma, this refuge of 
Dhritarashtra’s son, the dispeller of the Kuru king’s sorrows and fear, the 
acharya of all the princes, the warrior always so proud of his skill.’ 


At which, Satyaki’s superb silver horses, with the speed of the wind, 
hurtle directly towards Drona. The two Parantapas collide, and each rains 
down thousands of arrows at the other, shafts that fill the firmament and 
obscure the ten points of the compass. Like two clouds are they, which 
empty themselves over the Earth at summer’s end. The sun becomes 
invisible, the very wind ceases to blow and an endless thick pall of gloom 
descends on the battlefield, so that, blinded, all the other warriors on 
Kurukshetra are forced to stop fighting. 

The thunder of the fusillades of the awesome twain is no less than that 
of Indra’s Vajra striking. Pierced all over with long shafts, O Bhaarata, both 
look as if they are covered by nests of snakes. Brave warriors hear the 
incessant twanging of their bows and the sounds that their palms make, and 
to them it is just like the crash of thunder falling upon mountaintops. 

The rathas of both warriors, their horses and their charioteers pierced by 
barbs of golden wings, are beautiful to behold. Fierce and incessant is the 
downpour of bright straight arrows, splendent like snakes freshly freed from 
their sloughs. Their canopies and their standards are shredded; their 
glorious bodies are bathed in blood, but spurred by the single thought of 
victory, they continue to strike each other with deadly shafts. With blood 
flowing down their limbs, they resemble a pair of elephants in musth, ichor 
streaming from lust rent temples. 

The roars, shouts and other cries of the soldiers, the blast of conches 
and the beat of drums all cease, Rajan, for no one make the slightest sound. 
All the akshauhinis fall silent, and all their warriors stop fighting and 
become spectators of that single duel. Maharathas, elephant riders, 
horsemen and foot-soldiers surround these two bulls among men and 
witness their duel with unwinking eyes. The elephant-divisions, the horse- 
divisions, and the chariot-akshauhinis, all stand still in their ranks, like 
figures in a painting of war. Adorned with gems and gold, studded profusely 
with pearls and corals, with flags waving, with coats of shining golden mail, 
with triumphal banners and richly caparisoned elephants, with fine cloaks 
and robes, with bright and sharp weapons glinting, with the heads of horses 
ornamented with chamaras, yak-tails and with gold and silver, with 
wildflower garlands draped around the frontal lobes of elephants and 
shimmering rings round their tusks—the Kuru and Pandava armies look 
like a vast gathering of cloud banks at the close of summer, decked with 


rows of cranes and myriads of fire-flies under them and embellished with 
rainbows and flashes of lightning. 

Riveted, our men as well as those of Yudhishtira watch the battle 
between Satyaki and the noble Drona, as do the Devas led by Brahma, 
Soma, the Siddhas, the Charanas, the Vidyadharas, and the great Nagas, 
from their invisible wondrous vimanas in the sky. All that watch are 
wonderstruck by the two lions among men who dash forward and fall back, 
striking at each other all the while. 

Both of untold prowess and skill, Drona and Satyaki put their 
astounding genius at battle on display, and draw gushing fonts of blood 
from each other, always as if in sport! Satyaki cuts down a rash of Drona’s 
powerful missiles in flight, and next moment breaks the Acharya’s bow in 
his hands. In the twinkling of an eye, Bharadwaja’s son sweeps up another 
and strings it, but Satyaki cleaves that one too. 

Drona picks up another bow in a wink, but no sooner does he string it 
than Satyaki splits it; and this happens a full nine and seven times! 

Watching Satyaki fight, Drona thinks, “Such prodigious archery that this 
greatest of the Satwatas shows may be found in Rama and Arjuna, in 
Kartavirya and the Purushavyaghra Bhishma! But hardly in anyone else.” 

In his heart he applauds the prowess of Satyaki. Seeing the Vrishni 
prodigy’s dexterity as being equal to that of Vasava himself, Drona, greatest 
of all masters of weapons, is deeply stirred and gratified. So, too, are the 
Devas above with Indra at their head, for they have never seen another 
archer of such brilliance and light like swiftness of hand as Satyaki 
although they, the Siddhas and the Charanas are acquainted with Drona’s 
feats. 

Finally, Drona, that scourge of Kshatriyas, strings a fresh bow and 
launches an astra of profound maya at Satyaki. The Vrishni hero baffles that 
recondite weapon with a hermetic astra of his own; and then he continues to 
lash Drona with his arrow storms. In truth, Rajan, I have no words with 
which to describe the superhuman skill and unworldly feats of the two 
heroes, one old and the other still young. I have never before seen such a 
duel, which all the most knowing among both your warriors and the 
Pandavas’ cheer and applaud. Satyaki and Drona both summon the exact 
same astras at the very same moments, and when they themselves become 
aware of this, they fight with somewhat diminished fury, as if 


acknowledging each other’s unequalled greatness. It seems their spirits turn 
mild for a moment. 

Then, Rajan, his wrath returning, Drona begins to invoke the most 
potent devastras to kill Satyaki. Seeing the dreadful foe-slaughtering 
Agneyastra, Satyaki invokes the Varuna. Seeing them both now summon 
celestial weapons, loud cries of alarm are heard and the very birds of the 
sky cease to fly through it. The two astras flare out at each other at the same 
moment and locking on high are extinguished against each other, falling 
away in embers and a drizzle. 

Just at this time, the sun begins to sink toward the western horizon. 
Anxious for Satyaki, Yudhishtira, Bhimasena, Nakula, and Sahadeva charge 
Drona bringing the Matsyas and the Salweya troops with them. At which, 
thousands of Kuru princes led by Dusasana at their head, rally to protect 
Drona who is now surrounded by his enemies. Another pitched and 
tumultuous battle breaks out. The earth is quickly covered with a thick skin 
of dust and showers of arrows shot by both sides; and nothing is visible 
anymore. The battle rages on complete disregard of life and limb, of kinship 
and friendship.’” 


CANTO 95 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


S anjaya says, “The sun moves into his downward course towards 

the summit of the Asta hills, Surya turns cool, the sky is covered 

with dust, and the day begins to fade fast. As for the soldiers, some rest, 

some fight, some return to the field they have let in fear, now to vie again 

for victory. As the great war burns on behind them, Arjuna and Krishna fly 

on towards Jayadratha. With his irresistible arrows, Arjuna creates a path 

through the enemy forces, wide enough for his chariot and Krishna plunges 

his ratha along that narrow way. Awesome is the Parthasarathy’s skill, 

quicksilver, as he flashes expertly along the narrowest openings. Your 
troops give way to Krishna blazing with lustre. 

Arjuna’s arrows, each one engraved with his name, some of bamboo, 
others of iron, of long range, flame from his Gandiva like the yuga fire, 
every last one claiming an enemy life, drinking the blood of living men and 
their beasts, killing scavengers and birds of prey and ill omen as well, who 
rend at the noble blood and swill thirstily from the river of gore flowing on 
Kurukshetra. Standing tall and erect upon his chariot, Arjuna shoots his 
arrows full two miles ahead of him, and his chariot driven by his divine 


sarathy arrives where he aims even as the shafts pierce and dispatch his 
enemies! 

Hrishikesa drives his ratha, yoked to gandharva horses swift as Garuda 
or the wind, with such speed that the whole universe marvels to watch him. 
Indeed, Rajan, the chariot of Surya himself, or those of Rudra or 
Vaisravana, have never gone as fast. No chariot has ever before been driven 
with such speed in war, as Arjuna’s moving with the swiftness of a wish 
cherished in the mind. However, as Krishna and Arjuna race along through 
the enemy ranks, the superb horses begin to tire. Hunger and thirst afflict 
them as do the countless barbs that have pierced their sides along their 
careen. Yet, the wonderful beasts prance as they flash along flying over 
slain enemies’ bodies, over dead horses, over broken chariots and even the 
massive corpses of fallen elephants. 

Rajan, the two heroic brothers of Avanti, Vinda and Anuvinda at the 
head of their forces, notice that Arjuna’s horses are tired, challenge him and 
strike him with sixty-four sizzling shafts, Janardana with seventy, and their 
four horses with a hundred. Infuriated, Arjuna, with his knowledge of the 
marmas of the body, pierces them with nine perfectly aimed barbs, striking 
them deep through the most critical and painful parts of their bodies. 
Roaring like two tigers, the brothers drown Krishna and Arjuna in a flood of 
arrows. 

With two wedge-headed arrows Arjuna Swetavahana of the white steeds 
seamlessly breaks Vinda and Anuvinda’s wonderful bows, and cuts down 
their standards bright as gold. The Avantis seize up fresh bows and resume 
their onslaught but great Partha easily frustrates their fire upon him. Never 
pausing he kills their horses, their charioteers, the two rathikas that protect 
their backs and the others that follow them. 

Next, with another broad-headed arrow, sharp as a razor, he severs the 
older brother’s head and Vinda falls out of his ratha like a tree broken by 
the wind. His eyes turning crimson to see his precious brother die, 
Anuvinda abandons all restraint, leaps down from his horseless chariot, 
mace raised high, and rushes towards Arjuna to wreak vengeance on him. 
He strikes Krishna on his brow, but the Avatara stands unmoved as the 
Mainaka mountain. In a blur of six arrows, Arjuna cuts away his legs, his 
arms and head and blows his wide chest apart, and Anuvinda falls onto the 
hallowed field like a riven hillock. 


Seeing both the brothers dead, their followers, mad with grief, attack 
Arjuna, shooting hundreds of arrows in frenzy. Arjuna, resplendent as a fire 
consuming a forest at the end of winter, consumes them all in a few 
moments. He trundles over the fallen troops with some difficulty, shining 
bright like the rising sun destroying the clouds that had hidden it. Fear fills 
the Kauravas but seeing that he is tired and that Jayadratha is still far away, 
they recover quickly and surround him, shouting and roaring. 

Arjuna says softly to Krishna, “Our horses are injured and tired and 
Jayadratha is still far away. Tell me, O Krishna, wisest of men, what should 
we do now? With you for their vision, the Pandavas will vanquish their 
enemies. I think that we should unyoke the horses and draw out luck the 
arrows that are stuck in them.” 

Kesava replies, “I too think the same, O Partha.” 

Arjuna then says, “I will hold the enemy forces at bay, O Kesava, while 
you tend to the horses.” 

Alighting from his chariot, Dhananjaya takes up his Gandiva, and 
stands fearlessly there like an immovable hill. Seeing him stand alone on 
the ground, the Kuru Kshatriyas, scenting victory, roar louder and surround 
him with a number of chariots; all of them stretch their bows and shower 
arrows over him. Filled with battle lust, they brandish their weapons and 
entirely shroud Partha with their shafts like clouds shrouding the sun. The 
great warriors rush impetuously at him like angry elephants attacking a lion. 

And now the might of Partha that we witness is more extraordinary than 
ever, as he stands alone holding those countless warriors at bay. Cutting 
down his enemies’ multitudinous shafts, he covers them all with a 
maelstrom of fire. The banks of shafts colliding in the sky sets the azure 
vaults ablaze, cascading rivers of sparks down on the field below. The air on 
Kurukshetra is steamy with the hot breath of Kshatriyas covered in blood, 
and their horses’ heaving breath, and the gasping trumpeting elephants; that 
great crush of warriors and their beasts resounds with yells, shout, neighing, 
and wild roars. 

That impassable, limitless, surging and implacable ocean of chariots has 
arrows for its tide, standards for its eddies, elephants for its crocodiles, foot- 
soldiers for its countless fishes, the blare of conches and the beat of drums 
for its roar, rathas for its surging waves, helmets for its tortoises, chatras 
and banners for its froth, and the bodies of slain elephants for its submarine 


rocks. With his arrows, Partha contains the advance of this sea like a 
continent. 

Now Krishna says to Arjuna, “There is no well here on the field, O 
Arjuna, for our horses to drink from. They do not want a bath but thirst for 
water to drink.” 

Arjuna cheerfully replies, “Here it is!” And he pierces the earth with an 
astra and creates a wonderful lake from which the horses can drink! Swans 
glide on the magic lake, ducks and chakravakas; and it is wide, full of 
crystalline water with the finest of full-blown lotuses, and teeming with all 
kinds of fish. Fathomless, it is the resort of many a Rishi; and the Devarishi 
Narada comes there to look at Arjuna’s lake of wonder. And Partha, who is 
capable of achieving marvels even like the celestial artificer Tvashtri 
himself, creates a hall of arrows there, arrows its beams and rafters, arrows 
its pillars, and arrows for its roof. 

Smiling in joy, Krishna cries, “Uttamam! Wonderful!”’”’” 


CANTO 96 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘After the noble son of Kunti creates the lake, even 

while holding off the enemy, after he creates the hall of arrows, 

Krishna alights from the chariot and unyokes the horses lacerated by 

arrows. Watching this extraordinary sight, the Siddhas, the Charanas and all 
the Kuru warriors, too, applaud loudly. 

The maharathas ranged against Arjuna cannot defend themselves 
against him, even when he fights on foot. It is wonderful to see that 
although myriads of chariots, elephants and horses attack him, Partha does 
not flinch but battles on as if he has juts begun his day of war, and prevails 
over all his enemies. The hostile kings shoot a solid swath of arrows at him, 
but the son of Vasava, in no anxiety whatever, seems to receive the 
hundreds of arrows, maces and lances cast at him as the ocean does the 
hundreds and hundreds of rivers flowing into it, even gladly. 

Mahabaho Partha serenely receives all the weapons that the greatest of 
the enemy warriors loose at him in utmost fury. Fighting from the ground, 
he still confounds all the kings massed against him on their chariots—like 
that one fault, avarice, destroying a host of accomplishments! 


The Kauravas, Rajan, applaud the astonishing prowess of Partha and 
Vasudeva, saying, “What more wonderful thing has ever been seen in this 
world, or will ever be than this that Partha and Govinda, in the very thick 
battle, have unyoked their horses? These maharathas inspire us with their 
energy and unshakeable assurance!” 

Then Krishna, of eyes like lotus-petals, smiling as if he is in the midst 
of a group of women and not armed enemies, leads the horses into the hall 
of arrows, in the very sight of all your troops, and there takes away their 
fatigue, pain, their trembling and heals their wounds. At his ease, he plucks 
out the arrows that stick in them and, rubbing them down with his tender 
hands, makes them trot around slowly and coaxes them to drink. After 
quenching their thirst and removing their tiredness and pain, he once more 
carefully yokes them to the wonderful chariot. This done, Sauri, greatest of 
all living men, mahatejasvin Krishna, mounts the ratha again along with 
Arjuna and they ride back into battle, swifter then ever. 

Seeing the chariot of the two Krishnas fly back into the war, its horses 
now refreshed, the Kauravas are crestfallen. They sigh, O Rajan, like snakes 
whose fangs have been pulled out, and say, “Oh, shame, shame on us! 
Partha and Krishna storm our ranks again slaughtering our troops even like 
boys playing with a toy. Shame on us that, despite all our best efforts, they 
vanquish us with such ease and disdain.” 

Other warriors cry, “O brave Kauravas, kill Krishna and the Kiritin! For 
their horses have drunk and been refreshed and they fly closer to Jayadratha 
every moment, decimating us on their way.” 

Some great lords, Rajan, having seen the never before witnessed sight at 
the very heart of a war, say among themselves, “Alas, through 
Duryodhana’s sins, king Dhritarashtra’s warriors, the other mighty 
Kshatriyas, and the very Earth has been plunged into calamity and are being 
destroyed. But ah, Duryodhana still does not understand it.” 

Thus speak many redoubtable Kshatriyas. Others, O Bhaarata, say, 
“Jayadratha has already been despatched to Yama. Let the small-minded 
Duryodhana, with diminished resources, prepare for the funeral obsequies 
of the Saindhava, his brother-in-law.” 

Meanwhile, Arjuna sees the sun rapidly westering and Krishna urges his 
heartened steeds to still greater speed. The Kuru warriors cannot impede his 
progress at all, as Partha furrows a bloody trail through them, menacing 
them all like a lion a herd of deer, killing thousands on his inexorable way, 


drawing nearer a quailing Jayadratha with each moment as he races the Sun 
to the horizon. 

Krishna now whips his fabulous horses and blows a reverberant blast on 
his Panchajanya the colour of clouds. So swiftly do the gandharva horses fly 
along now that they overtake Arjuna’s arrows! 

Seeing danger draw nearer, many Dhartarashtra kings and other 
Kshatriyas group together and surround Arjuna in some frenzy. Thus 
confronted by them all, Arjuna has to stop for a moment and now 
Duryodhana races up and catches up with his lustrous cousin. Seeing the 
chariot whose rumble is the roar of thunderheads, the ratha that flies the 
terrible standard bearing Hanuman animated upon it, howling and roaring 
terribly at them, your forces are quickly unnerved. And when the sun is 
almost entirely shrouded by the dust that the armies raise, the Kuru 
warriors, wounded and bleeding from awesome Arjuna’s onslaught can no 
longer bear to even look at the two blindingly splendid Krishnas.’” 


CANTO 97 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “Rajan! I watch Vasudeva and Dhananjaya penetrate 
deep into our forces, after overrunning many akshauhinis, with 
their captains running away in fear. A little later, however, the Maharathas, 
filled with excitement and shame, and spurred on by their innate valour, 
regain their composure and begin to defy Arjuna again. However, the men 
who now ride against Arjuna do not return, like the rivers that never return 
from the ocean. Seeing this, many ignoble Kshatriyas incur sin and hell by 
turning their backs and running away, like atheists turning away from the 
Vedas. 

Blasting their way through the squadron of Kuru chariots, the two bulls 
among men finally issue out of it, looking like the Sun and the Moon freed 
from the jaws of Rahu. The two Krishnas, their tiredness dispelled come 
through the great host of enemies like two fish passing through a strong net. 
Truly, they look like Yuga-suns risen in the sky, like men who have escaped 
from a raging conflagration, or like two fish emerging from the jaws of a 
makara. And they agitate the Kuru host like a pair of antediluvian makaras 
agitating the ocean. 


While Partha and Krishna were in the midst of Drona’s division, your 
warriors and sons thought that they would never emerge from it. However, 
now seeing them blithely dash out of its confines, they no longer have 
hopes for Jayadratha’s life. They had thought that the two Krishnas would 
never be able to escape Drona and Hridika’s son Kritavarman. Frustrating 
their hopes, the two Parantapas, Rajan, slice through Drona’s division, and 
also the impenetrable Bhoja akshauhini. Seeing them, lick their way 
through the formidable akshauhinis like two blazing fires, your men despair 
and no longer hope to save Jayadratha’s life. Then the intrepid Krishna and 
Dhananjaya begin to discuss among themselves how they could kill 
Jayadratha. 

Arjuna says, “Six of the very greatest maharathas among the 
Dhartarashtras have set Jayadratha in their midst. But today, if I only see 
him, he will not escape me even if Indra with all the Devas become his 
protectors.” 

Thus, do the two Krishnas talk, O Mahabaho, while constantly looking 
for Jayadratha. Hearing them, for they speak freely and aloud, your sons set 
up a loud outcry. These two Krishna look like a pair of thirsty thunderous 
elephants, refreshed by drinking water after having crossed a desert. 
Beyond death and above decay, they look like two merchants who have 
crossed a mountainous country infested with tigers, lions and wild 
elephants. Indeed, seeing them free of Drona and Kritavarman and the 
dreadful light on Partha and Krishna’s face, your warriors set up a loud 
bewailing from all sides. 

Having shaken off Drona who is like a deadly poisonous snake or a 
great fire, as well as the other lords of the Earth, Partha and Krishna are like 
two blazing suns. Indeed, free of Drona’s ocean-like division, they are full 
of joy like men who have safely crossed the vast deep itself. Free from the 
dense showers of shafts from the Drona and Kritavarman and their legions, 
Kesava and Arjuna look like Indra and Agni, or Suns of blinding 
effulgence. Pierced by the arrows of Bharadwaja’s son, and their dark 
bodies dripping blood, they are as glorious as two mountains covered with 
flowering karnikaras. 

Having crossed the vast lake, of which Drona is the crocodile, 
numberless arrows the fierce water-snakes and makaras, and _ great 
Kshatriyas the deep waters; having emerged out of the cloud of Drona’s 
astras, whose thunder is the twanging of bows and the lightning the flashes 


of maces and swords, Partha and Krishna are like the Sun and Moon 
liberated from an engulfing darkness. 

Crossing the field which Drona’s arms had barred, all beings regard the 
dark splendid twain as men who have forded the five rivers—the Satadru, 
the Vipasa, the Ravi, the Chandrabhaga and the Vitasta—, with the ocean 
for their sixth, all in spate during the monsoon, and full of crocodiles. 
Wanting to kill Jayadratha who is no longer far from them, the two heroes 
look like two tigers waiting to fall upon a ruru deer. Their very faces make 
your warriors, Rajan, think of Jayadratha as one already dead. 

Krishna and Arjuna together, with red eyes, are bursting with 
excitement and joy, and give vent to a battery of jubilant shouts and roars at 
their first sight of Jayadratha. Indeed, Rajan, the splendour then of Krishna, 
standing with reins in hand, and of Partha armed with his bow, is like that of 
Surya or Agni. Free from Drona’s restraint, their joy at sight of Jayadratha 
not far off is like that of two fierce hawks at the sight of a piece of flesh; and 
even like a pair of hunting hawks do they swoop down on the hapless 
Saindhava. 

But seeing Hrishikesa and Dhananjaya rout Drona’s divisions, your 
valiant son, the king Duryodhana, whose mystic armour Drona has fastened 
to his majestic form with Brahma’s own mantras, dashes forward in a single 
chariot to protect Jayadratha. He overtakes Krishna and Partha and wheels 
back to face Kesava of the lotus-like eyes. Seeing this incredible happening, 
your troops joyfully blow on horns and conches and beat a hundred 
thousand drums and utter deafening roars to match. Those who stand like 
burning fires around Jayadratha as his final guardians are also filled with joy 
on seeing your son. 

Seeing Duryodhana confront them, now with his followers rallied 
behind him, Krishna speaks softly to Arjuna.’ 


CANTO 98 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: K rishna says, “Look Arjuna, how wonderfully Duryodhana 
overtook us! There is no maharatha equal to him. He is a great 
bowman and can shoot his arrows to a great distance. He is a master 
warrior, almost invincible in battle, and knows all the different arts of war. 
Raised in luxury, he is held in great esteem by even the most renowned 
maharathas. Partha, he has always hated the Pandavas and it is best that you 
fight him now. For upon him rests, even as on a stake at dice, victory or 
defeat. Arjuna, expend the venom of your wrath which you have nurtured 
so long against Duryodhana. He is the root of all the wrongs the Pandavas 
have suffered and he is now within reach of your arrows. Trust your 
prowess. 

Why has Duryodhana come to do battle with you? Fortune has brought 
him to you; Dhananjaya, kill him. He was born into a great palace, and he 
has never known want or deprivation. O bull among men, he also does not 
know your true might in battle. When there is none in the three worlds of 
the Devas, the Asuras and Manushyas who can vanquish you in battle, what 
can one Duryodhana do? Partha, now that he is within range of your ratha, 
kill him as Purandara slew Vritra. 


Duryodhana has always tried to harm you. He cheated Yudhishtira at 
dice, and this prince with a sinful soul has sinned in many ways against the 
Dharmaraja. Arjuna, have no scruple, and kill this evil, wrathful and cruel 
man who is the very embodiment of avarice. Remember the theft of your 
kingdom through vile deceit; think of your exile in the forest; remember the 
shame of Draupadi; and remembering all that, put forth your strength and 
kill this most evil prince. 

He has come to bar your way to Jayadratha. Providence has fetched him 
to you and he is within range of your arrows. He knows that he will have to 
fight you and today all your purposes, even those that you have not thought 
of, will be crowned with success. Arjuna, destroy this wretch of his race, 
the son of Dhritarashtra, even as Indra did of old the Asura Jambha at the 
Devasura yuddha. If you kill Duryodhana, you can then easily pierce 
through this headless army. Cut the very root of this evil one, and perform 
the avabhrita snana, the final cleansing bath of this war, with his blood.” 

Having heard Krishna out, Arjuna says, “Tathaastu! I will do what you 
say. Ignore everything else and ride at Duryodhana. I will cut off the head 
of this devil, who has enjoyed our kingdom for too long without a qualm. 
Will I not succeed, O Kesava, in avenging myself against this sinner who 
had Draupadi dragged by her hair into the Kuru sabha when she was in her 
period and had done no wrong herself?” 

Speaking thus among themselves, the two Krishnas are filled with 
exultation; they urge their great white steeds towards Duryodhana. As for 
your son, Bharatarishabha, as he nears Partha and Krishna, he feels no fear, 
even though the occasion is charged to inspire dread. The Kshatriyas of 
your army applaud him for his daring; indeed, the entire Kuru host roars in 
exhilaration to watch their king dash forward to bar Arjuna and Krishna’s 
way. 

Held up by your son with his bow upraised, Arjuna is furious, and 
Duryodhana, too, is no less in fury. All the fierce Kshatriyas stop to watch 
their duel. Duryodhana, Arjuna and Krishna, all eager for the fight, roar and 
the three of them together raise their conches to their lips and blow 
resounding blasts on them. Hearing the deep boom of the Panchajanya and 
the Devadatta drown Duryodhana’s lesser sankha, dread quickly seizes your 
warriors, who are certain that your son will die; they regard him already as 
a libation poured into the mouth of the sacred fire. 

Your warriors cry in fear, “The king is slain! Our king is slain!” 


But Duryodhana roars at them, “Dispel your fears! I will send the two 
Krishnas to Yama.” Feeling certain of victory, wearing Bramha’s magic 
kavacha, he further cries to Arjuna, “If, Partha, you are truly Pandu’s son 
loose all your weapons, of this world and unworldly, at me. Let me see your 
much vaunted manliness today that wins the praise of so many great 
Kshatriyas.””’” 


CANTO 99 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Roaring out his challenge, Duryodhana strikes 

Arjuna with three lethal shafts that can excoriate an enemy; with 

four more, he pierces his enemy’s four horses; and with another ten searing 

missiles he bloodies Krishna’s chest and shoots the whip out of the Blue 
One’s hands. 

Partha, calm as ever, swift as ever, looses fourteen searing barbs at 
Duryodhana, stone-whetted and beautifully fletched with shining feathers. 
They fly true to their mark but every one of them glances harmlessly off the 
armour that Duryodhana wears. In some surprise, Arjuna shoots another 
nine and five keen arrows at his hated enemy. But these, too, glance mildly 
off Duryodhana’s kavacha. 

Krishna says to Arjuna, “Ah, this is passing strange, even as if 
mountains moved! Your arrows, O Partha, have turned weak. Has your 
Gandiva lost its power? Tell me, have the might of your grip and the power 
of your arms grown womanish? Will this not to be your last meeting with 
Duryodhana? For I am amazed to watch your terrible shafts fall soft as 
flowers on Duryodhana. What misfortune is this that your astras filled with 


the power of thunder and which never fail to pierce an enemy now glance 
so kindly off this sinner?” 

Arjuna replies, “Krishna, I feel certain that Drona has wrapped 
Duryodhana in his own armour, his ancient kavacha which has the powers 
of the three worlds, whose secret only the Acharya knows, and which he 
once shared with me. None of my weapons can pierce this armour; not 
Indra can pierce it with his Vajra. 

But you know all this too well, Krishna! Then why do you berate and 
provoke me? You know everything that has ever happened in all the worlds, 
in the past, the present, and what is in the womb of future. Madhusudana, 
no one knows all this as you do! Duryodhana wearing Drona’s armour is 
fearless in battle. Yet, he does not know what one wearing this kavacha 
should do for he wears it only like a woman. 

Watch now, Janardana, the might of my arms and of my bow. Even 
though he wears this greatest coat of mail, I will still vanquish Duryodhana. 
Brahma himself gave this golden armour to Angiras, who gave it to 
Brihaspati. Purandara had this kavacha from Brihaspati, and Indra once 
showed it to me with the mantras to be chanted while putting it on. Krishna, 
though this armour is divine, though Brahma himself created it, it will still 
not protect the wretched Duryodhana from my arrows.” 

Saying this, Arjuna invokes an inexorable astra with potent mantras and 
fits it to his bowstring. But even as he draws back the string of the Gandiva, 
from a long way off Aswatthaman burns up Arjuna’s weapon in his very 
hand with another astra of untold power. Seeing Aswatthaman, the 
Brahmavadi, consume his occult weapon from a distance, a stricken Arjuna 
Swetavahana says to Kesava, “Janardana, I cannot use this astra twice, for if 
I do it will turn itself on me and kill me and all our troops.” 

Meanwhile, Rajan, Duryodhana pierces each of the Krishnas with nine 
barbs like venom-spitting serpents, and then showers down a veritable 
storm of other shafts over them. Your warriors exult to see this and blow on 
conches and horns and beat deafening rhythms on their drums; and their 
roaring fills earth and sky. A fuming Partha, licking the corners of his 
mouth, closely examines his enemy’s body but sees no part that is not 
covered by the impenetrable armour. 

Nothing else for it, the Vijaya in a savage flash kills his adversary’s 
horses, his two Parshni charioteers, and then cleaves Duryodhana’s bow and 
cuts away his leather finger guards, with a perfect incredible volley. The 


Pandava shatters the Kaurava’s chariot next and, having cut away his 
gloves, strikes him agonisingly through his fingers and palms! 

Seeing Duryodhana stricken by Arjuna’s canny brilliance, seeing him 
with his chariot ruined and his bow broken and wringing his hands in pain, 
a host of Kuru warriors rush to rescue him and surround Arjuna’s chariot 
with thousands of rathas, elephants and horses, and also with teeming 
legions of foot-soldiers, so that they can no longer be seen. 

Dauntless, serene Partha begins to massacre the maharathas, other 
warriors and elephants, in their hundreds, striking off limbs and heads at his 
mighty will, so they fall thick and fast on the field. Slain, or in the very 
moment of being killed, they all fail to reach Arjuna’s chariot which stands 
motionless full two miles from the besieging force on every side. 

Now Krishna says urgently to his warrior of light, “Draw your bow 
forcefully, Partha, and raze the enemy as swiftly as you can, and I will blow 
my conch!” 

Arjuna then draws his bow Gandiva to the fullest stretch and begins to 
decimate the enemy horribly, in a tide of blood. Meanwhile, his face 
covered with dust, Krishna raises his Panchajanya to his lips and blows 
reverberantly on it so all Kurukshetra shakes at the sound. From the 
thunderous twanging of the Gandiva and the awful blast of the 
Panchajanya, the Kuru warriors all around, their bodies turning weak, all 
fall down on the ground. 

Arjuna’s chariot, suddenly freed from the encircling press, flashes ahead 
like a bright cloud driven by the wind. Seeing Arjuna flare at them, the 
protectors of Jayadratha and their followers, all maharathas and mighty 
bowmen, are shaken and shout aloud. They unleash tempests of arrows at 
the lone chariot descending so swiftly upon them, and fill the field of the 
great hunt with the whistling of their arrows, the blare of their conches and 
other fierce noises —all this in as much fear as wrath! 

Hearing the awful uproar that your troops raise, Krishna and Arjuna 
blow their conches, Rajan, and the twin sound seems to fill all the Earth, 
with her mountains, seas, islands and the nether worlds. The blast echoes 
through all the points of the compass, and is echoed back by both the 
armies. Your maharathas are at first terrified to see Krishna and Dhananjaya 
but they soon recover and continue to fight. The sight of the two most 
blessed Krishnas charging towards them is a wonderful one!’” 


CANTO 100 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “When your greatest warriors finally see those 
greatest of all the heroes of the Vrishni-Andhaka and the Kuru 
races, they lose no time, each striving to be the first, in engaging them in 
battle. On their great rattling chariots, decked with gold, spread with tiger- 
skins, resembling blazing fires and drawn by mettlesome steeds, they 
charge, illumining the ten points of the compass, brandishing their bows, 
the backs of whose staves are chased with dazzling gold. With terrible 
roars, eight great chariot-warriors, Bhurisravas, Sala, Karna, Vrishasena, 
Jayadratha, Kripa, Salya and Aswatthaman attack as if they will devour the 
sky and illuminate the world around in their splendid chariots, adorned with 
golden moons. 

Fighting inspired, on the edge of madness even, they envelop Arjuna on 
every side with eight gales of fire. Their shining chariots, which rumble like 
thunderheads, are drawn by the very best horses of different species bred in 
diverse countries, some in mountainous realms, some in the land of rivers, 
and some in that of the Sindhus. And other Kuru maharathas converge on 
Arjuna’s chariot to protect your son Duryodhana. 


These great warriors, Rajan, take up their conches and blow them, 
filling the sky, the earth and her seas, with their booming blare. Then 
Vasudeva blows his Panchajanya and Dhananjaya his Devadatta, those best 
of all conches on Earth. The blast of the Devadatta fills the world, the sky 
and the ten cardinal points; and the Panchajanya, surpassing all sounds, fills 
the highest heaven and the deepest earth. The awesome and appalling 
clamour persists, filling the timid with fear and the brave with excitement. 

Thousands of great maharathas, matchless bowmen, kings from diverse 
realms, some fighting for the Kuru cause and other for the Pandavas, beat 
drums, jharjharas, cymbals and mridangas. And the Kuru heroes, filled with 
rage, for they cannot stand the blasting of Arjuna and Krishna’s unworldly 
conches, also blow great conches, while their troops roar behind them in 
support. 

Though being urged forward by the blare of conches, the chariot- 
warriors, elephants and horses of the Kuru army are yet full of fear, and 
indeed, O lord, they look ill. The booming conches of Krishna and Arjuna 
agitate the Kuru host and their bravest warriors seem to be like the very 
heavens fallen down through some vast convulsion of nature. The stunning 
din, Rajan, resounds all around and affrights your troops as if this is some 
critical moment and event at the end of the Yuga terrifying all living 
creatures. 

Then Duryodhana and the eight great maharathas chosen to protect 
Jayadratha all surround Arjuna. Aswatthaman strikes Krishna with three 
and seventy shafts, and Arjuna with three broad-headed ones, and their 
standard and four horses with five others. Seeing Krishna injured, a furious 
Arjuna looses a hundred arrows at Drona’s son. Then piercing Karna with 
ten arrows and Vrishasena with three, Dhananjaya destroys Salya’s bow 
with arrows fitted to its string. Salya takes up another bow and stabs the son 
of Pandu with a blistering barb, while Bhurisravas cuts him sharp with three 
stone-whetted shafts, golden-winged. 

Karna strikes Arjuna with thirty-two arrows and Vrishasena with seven. 
Jayadratha himself pierces Arjuna with three and seventy shafts and Kripa 
with ten. The king of the Madras also lacerates Arjuna with ten shafts and 
the son of Drona first with sixty arrows, and again with five arrows; 
Aswatthaman makes Krishna a home for twenty more of his scathing barbs. 
Unruffled, Arjuna of the white steeds, displaying supernal dexterity, and 


speed that is past believing, strikes Karna with a dozen shafts, Vrishasena 
with three, and Partha breaks Salya’s bow at the grip. 

Shooting the son of Somadatta with three arrows and Salya with ten, he 
strikes Kripa with five and twenty thunderbolts, Jayadratha with a hundred, 
and Drona’s son with seventy: all in what seems, what is, a single moment. 
A battling, wrathful Bhurisravas cracks the goad in Krishna’s hand, and 
bloodies Arjuna with three and twenty shafts. Dhananjaya retaliates with a 
flashflood of missiles, hundreds and hundreds of arrows, like a tempest 
tearing at some masses of clouds.’” 


CANTO 101 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says almost abstractedly, ‘Describe to me, O 
Sanjaya, the beautiful and resplendent standards which both the 
Parthas and our warriors fly.’ 

Sanjaya says, “Then listen, Rajan, as I describe to you the banners that 
blaze on that field of death like fire and are flaunted there. They are made 
entirely of gold thread, or chased with strings of gold, and look like the 
fulvid Mount Meru. Attached to them all around are the most striking 
banners of different colours. Fluttering in the wind, seeming to float on the 
breeze, the banners of the maharathas are like exquisite women dancing in 
an arena of pleasure; they are magnificent like the rainbow. 

Arjuna’s standard, with the image of Hanuman on its main flag, the 
great Vanara his face snarling and a lion’s tail, and also adorned with many 
other banners, all with strange and dreadful spirits animated upon them, 
which cry out and roar and screech chillingly, terrifies the Kuru host. 

The lion-tail pennant atop Aswatthaman’s ratha shines with the lustre of 
the rising sun. Decked with gold, wondrous like the rainbow, it floats and 
flaps in the wind high above, inspiring the greatest Kuru warriors. 


The standard of Adhiratha’s son Karna bears the motif of a golden 
elephant-rope and seems to fill the entire sky. Adorned with banners of gold 
and garlands, it appears to dance upon his chariot when the wind shakes it. 

Kripa, son of Gotama, and the first Acharya of the Pandavas, the 
Brahmana given to tapasya, has for his emblem a superb bull and Kripa 
looks as glorious as Mahadeva the destroyer of the Tripura with his bull. 

Vrishasena’s pennant is always in the van of the army and his emblem is 
a peacock calling out, made of gold and embellished with jewels and gems. 
Rajan, it glows like the ratha of Skanda the celestial Senapati. Shining with 
his brilliant mayura and with a beautiful golden ploughshare, Vrishasena 
looks resplendent on his chariot, like a great flame. 

Salya, the ruler of the Madras, has on his standard-top an image like 
Annalakshmi, the Goddess of corn, lovely and bountiful. Salya’s standard 
also shows a huge silver elephant with golden peacocks on every side. His 
great presence graces your army like the immense white elephant Airavata 
adorning the host of the celestial king. 

A silver boar adorns the top of Jayadratha’s flagstaff, which is wound 
about with golden chains, and shimmers like white crystal and glorious as 
Surya in the battle between the Devas and the Asuras of long ago. 

The standard of Somadatta’s son, who is devoted to yagnas, bears the 
sign of a golden sacrificial stake, shining like the sun or the moon and it 
glitters like the lofty yupastamba erected in the greatest of sacrifices, the 
Rajasuya. 

On king Duryodhana’s towering standard chased with gold is a great 
black elephant encrusted with glittering jewels. Tinkling with the sound of a 
hundred bells, it waves on top of his chariot and, Rajan, your son, that bull 
among the Kurus, looks magnificent. 

These nine excellent standards stand tallest among your divisions. The 
tenth great banner is Arjuna’s, with the terrific Vanara and with it Arjuna 
looks like Himavat with a blazing fire on his summit. 

These mighty chariot-warriors, all parantapas, take up their wonderful, 
bright and colossal bows to face Arjuna. Partha, too, achiever of celestial 
feats, raises his incomparable, enemy-destroying Gandiva—all because of 
your evil policy, Rajan. And because of you, so many royal warriors, rulers 
of men from different kingdoms called to arms by your sons, will be slain in 
battle and with them countless noble, blameless horses and elephants. 


The maharathas led by Duryodhana on one side and the bull of the 
Pandavas on the other, utter loud shouts and roars and begin the encounter. 
And astounding and unearthly is the feat that Arjuna, with Krishna for his 
charioteer, achieves there by battling all your great warriors single-handed. 
Resplendent is the mighty-armed hero as he stretches his Gandiva, 
determined to vanquish all your maharathas in order to kill Jayadratha. 

In a supernatural shimmer of archery, Arjuna casts a mantle of arrows, 
thousands upon thousands of deadly arrows, over your forces so that they 
become invisible. On their part, they respond with a haze of shafts loosed 
from every side. Seeing Arjuna engulfed, obscured, your troops set up a 
loud cheer.’” 


CANTO 102 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra asks, “O Sanjaya, once Arjuna has Jayadratha in 
sight, what do Krishna and he do?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘It is late afternoon of the momentous day, Rajan, in the 
battle between the Panchalas and the Kurus, when Drona becomes the 
wager for which each side fights to win or lose. Intent on killing the 
Acharya, the Panchalas, roaring all together besiege him with multitudinous 
volleys. Fierce, dreadful and extraordinary as the battle of yore between the 
Devas and the Asuras is the encounter between the forces of Drupada and 
his inveterate enemy, the meridian son of Bharadwaja. 

All the Panchalas with the Pandavas, finding Drona’s chariot within 
reach, unleash many great astras in their feverish attempt to breach and 
destroy his vyuha. Chariot-warriors ride slowly, purposefully Drona’s ratha, 
making the earth tremble, and loosing rivers of arrows at the master. 

Brihadkshatra, the Kaikeya maharatha, attacks Drona incessantly with 
heavy shafts forceful as thunderbolts. The famed Kshemadhurti quickly 
comes between Brihadkshatra and Drona, firing scathes of razor-headed 
barbs at Kshemadhurti. Seeing this, the mighty Dhrishtaketu, bull among 
the Chedis, also swiftly assails Kshemadhurti, quite as Mahendra did the 


Asura Sambara. Seeing him dash forward, like the Yama himself with 
mouth agape, the mighty Viradhanwan confronts him. 

Meanwhile, resolved to win the war by himself, Drona rides at 
Yudhishtira. Your son, the gifted, fearless Vikarna, confronts the marauding, 
potent Nakula. Parantapa Durmukha covers the onrushing Sahadeva with 
thousands of light-swift barbs. The heroic Vyaghradatta manfully faces 
Satyaki the Naravyaghra, making him repeatedly tremble with bolts like 
fire. Bhurisravas, son of Somadatta, stands firm against the five maharatha 
sons of Draupadi, he also lashes them with gales of arrows. 

The sinister and powerful maharatha, the Rakshasa Alambusha, 
Rishyasringa’s fierce son of awful mien, confronts the charging Bhimasena. 
That encounter between manusha and rakshasa, Rajan, resembles the 
mythic battle of old between Rama and Ravana. 

Yudhishtira, lord of the Bharatas, strikes Drona with ninety perfectly 
aimed arrows in all his vital organs. The enraged Drona bloodies the 
Dharmaraja’s chest with five and twenty excruciating shafts. In sight of all 
the archers, Drona looses twenty arrows at Ajatasatru’s horses, charioteer 
and standard, but Yudhishtira, truly a majestic Kshatriya at war today, cuts 
them all down in flight. 

Further incensed, Drona breaks Yudhishtira’s bow in his hands and 
covers the Dharmaputra with a thousand barbs shot in a moment. Seeing the 
king engulfed by Drona’s dark torrent, men of both armies believe that the 
Pandava is either dead or has fled the battle. Many Pandava warriors cry out 
in despair, “Oh, the Brahmana has killed our king!” 

In some strife, Yudhishtira puts down the bow that Drona broke and 
takes up another, stronger and of exceptional brightness. Now, raising his 
won archery, he quite easily burns up Drona’s dense tirades in the air. 
Rajan, the son of Dharma is altogether breathtaking to watch and, having 
consumed all Drona’s shafts, a red-eyed Yudhishtira invokes a great astra 
that can rive Yudhishtira mountain. With a golden shaft, eight bells attached 
to it, of awesome appearance and entirely terrible, the mighty Yudhishtira 
raises his bow with this weapon fitted to it and gives such a roar that all the 
living tremble at it. 

Seeing the astra that Yudhishtira holds aloft, all creatures, in accord, 
pray, “May Drona be saved!” 

Loosed by the king, that missile like a snake just freed from its slough, 
flies at Drona, illumining the sky and all the directions cardinal and 


subsidiary, like a Nagina with a fiery mouth. Watching the Nagastra flare 
towards him, Drona the master invokes the Brahmastra, which flies at 
Yudhishtira’s chariot blowing the Nagastra to dust on its way. Yudhishtira 

Quicker than thinking, Yudhishtira summons his own Brahmastra and 
the two great ayudhas extinguish each other in the sky. Not pausing, 
Ajatasatru pierces Drona deep with five immaculate shafts and, with a sixth 
razor-faced arrow, he breaks Drona’s great bow. 

With a growl, Drona, the Kshatriya-grinder, flings aside his broken bow 
and hurls a mace like a thunderbolt at Yudhishtira. Instantly the Pandava 
snatches up a mace of his own and casts it at his master’s gada. The two 
mighty weapons explode against each other showering an effusion of sparks 
all around Yudhishtira. His rage mounting by the moment, Drona kills 
Yudhishtira’s horses, with four unerring deadly barbs, and with another 
broad-headed shaft, he breaks the king’s regal bow, which is like a stake 
erected to worship Indra. 

With another arrow, he cuts down Yudhishtira’s banner and with three 
more, he injures the Pandava himself. Yudhishtira leaps down from his 
ratha and stands weaponless and with his arms raised, helpless. 

O Bharatarishabha, seeing Yudhishtira without a chariot and unarmed, 
Drona startles his enemies, why both armies, by cleaving to the base vow he 
had sworn to Duryodhana and, violating every dharma of war, continues to 
shoot deadly showers of arrows at the Dharmaraja and charges towards him 
like a lion bounding at a deer. 

Cries of Oh! and Alas! arise from the Pandava army. 

Many cry, “Bharadwaja’s son has killed our king!” 

O Bhaarata, these and other loud wails go up from the Pandava forces. 
But before Drona can reach his brother, Sahadeva dashes up on his chariot 
and, mounting it with alacrity, Yudhishtira flees the field, escaping the 
dangerous Brahmana, who is left howling in frustration.’” 


CANTO 103 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “Kshemadhurti strikes the valorous Brihadkshatra in 
his chest with several arrows, and the advancing prince of the 
Kaikeyas strikes him back with ninety deadly straight barbs. The 
Kshemadhurti smashes Brihadkshatra’s bow with a broad-tipped shaft and 
immediately stabs him deep with another longer arrow, drawing a gush of 
blood. Great Brihadkshatra takes up another bow and, smiling at his enemy, 
kills maharatha Kshemadhurti’s horses, charioteer and ruins his chariot, in a 
flurry. Then, with another wedge-headed shafts, he cleanly dissevers his 
royal antagonist head, with its sparkling ear-rings, and graced with wavy 
locks and a crown; the noble head rolls onto the ground, shimmering like a 
star fallen from the sky. Having slain his enemy, the triumphant 
Brihadkshatra falls upon your troops with great ferocity. 

The seasoned Viradhanwan flies to check Dhrishtaketu who rides 
intently against Drona. The two heroes lash each other with thousands of 
arrows. Those two Naravyaghras fight like two leaders of elephant herds in 
the deep jungle, both determined to kill the other, or two angry tigers in a 
mountain-cave, and their duel is one to be seen, O Rajan, breathtaking it is. 


The very Siddhas and the Charanas, in great numbers, gaze down at it 
raptly. 

Then, with a rumbling laugh, Viradhanwan shatters Dhrishtaketu’s bow 
with a thick and heavy arrow. Throwing down the broken bow, the king of 
the Chedis seizes an iron spear, its head of gold, and casts it with immense 
force at Viradhanwan’s chariot. The lance strikes Viradhanwan squarely 
through his heart he falls dead, his blood spraying from both his breast and 
back. 

After the fall of the Trigarta maharatha, the Pandavas break right 
through your army. Your son Durmukha looses sixty slender shafts at 
Sahadeva, and roars out an echoing challenge. Sahadeva, unmoved, indeed 
smiling, drills your son, his cousin, with a squall of arrows, flinging him 
back against his flagstaff. The mighty Sahadeva, roused, never pausing, 
gores Durmukha with nine powerful barbs, then cuts down his proud 
standard and fells his four horses. As his cousin stands stunned, Madri’s son 
now beheads his sarathy, and in the same instant breaks your prince’s bows 
in his hands grown weak. 

Still not desisting, Sahadeva pierces Durmukha himself with a sizzle of 
five molten arrows, at which your son jumps down from his horseless 
chariot, and clambers onto Niramitra, prince of the Trigartas’, ratha. 
Sahadeva kills Niramitra in the very midst of his army with a thick arrow; 
that prince falls headless from his chariot, plunging your army in grief. 
Slaying him, the mighty-armed Sahadeva looks as glorious as Dasaratha’s 
son Rama, after he killed the feral and mighty Rakshasa Khara. O Rajan, 
seeing maharatha Niramitra die, loud cries of lamentation rise among the 
Trigarta warriors. 

Nakula, in a moment, amazingly vanquishes your son, the large eyed 
Vikarna. 

With a cloud of arrows, Vyaghradatta makes Satyaki and his horses, 
charioteer and standard invisible in the midst of his forces. However, Sini’s 
mighty grandson cuts down all those missiles, and in a great scarlet eruption 
kills Vyaghradatta along with his horses, charioteer, felling his standard as 
well. At the fall of that prince, the Magadhas, fighting vigorously, surround 
Satyaki from all sides, covering him with their arrows and spears by the 
thousands, as also with mallets, thick clubs and keen lances. The invincible 
Satyaki, bull among men, with the greatest ease, laughing, vanquishes and 
annihilates almost all of them. A small remnant escapes from the field. 


Seeing this, your army, already distressed by Yuyudhana’s fearsome shafts, 
breaks apart, my lord! 

After slaughtering your troops, Satyaki raises his bow high and shakes it 
in triumph and he is resplendent. Your army shrinks from the radiant 
Vrishni hero and none dare approach him. Then a fuming Drona, rolling his 
eyes, charges the uncontainable Satyaki.’” 


CANTO 104 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says ‘The illustrious son of Somadatta strikes each of the 

sons of Draupadi, all great archers, with five arrows, and then 

seven more. Badly wounded by that fierce shura, they are dazed and for a 

while do not know what to do. Then Satanika, Nakula’s son, strikes 

Somadatta’s son with two searing shafts and gives a ringing roar. At once, 

his other brothers also resume battle and draw copious spurts of blood from 
Somadatta’s son, each with three arrows. 

That Kshatriya shoots five terrific barbs, piercing each son of Draupadi 
viciously. The five brothers surround him and bloody him savagely with 
their arrows. Arjuna’s son by Draupadi despatches Saumadatti’s four horses 
to the land of Yama, while Bhimasena’s son destroys his bow, and with a 
loud shout transfixes his enemy with razorine barbs. The son of Yudhishtira 
fells his standard, while Nakula’s son kills his charioteer from his ratha. 

Now Sahadeva’s son sees that the enemy is on the point of leaving the 
field and cuts off his head with a crescent-tipped shaft. The head of that 
illustrious warrior, decked with earrings of gold, falls on the ground and 
adorns the field like the burning sun that rises at the end of the Yuga. Seeing 


this, your troops, O Rajan, are overcome by stark terror and run in all 
directions. 

The Rakshasa Alambusha, Rishyasringa’s son, fights the mighty 
Bhimasena in frenzy; their contention is like Ravana’s son Indrajit’s 
encounter with Lakshmana. Seeing the Rakshasa fight the human warrior, 
all are enthralled and wonderstruck. An amused Bhima wounds the fiend 
with nine heavy arrows making the Rakshasa scream in the most hideous 
way. He charges Bhima with all his followers. Alambusha strikes Bhima 
with five thunderbolts and quickly destroys thirty rathas that support him. 
He blasts another four hundred of Bhima’s rathas all the while lacerating 
Bhimasena himself with a barrage of barbarous winged missiles. 

Ah, the mighty Bhima, struck deeply by the Rakshasa, swoons and sits 
down on the deck of his ratha. However, the son of Vayu recovers quickly 
and leaping up, crimson-eyed with rage, draws his tremendous bow and 
strikes Alambusha in every part of his body, with arrows like thunder. And 
the Rakshasa, who resembles a great mass of antimony, looks resplendent, 
O Rajan, indeed like a flowering kinsuka in full bloom. 

While being struck by the shafts that fly from Bhima’s bow, the 
Rakshasa remembers the slaying of his brother Baka by the titanic Pandava. 
Assuming an awful, monstrous form, he says to Bhima, “Fight a little 
longer, Pandava, and behold my prowess today! Evil-hearted one, the best 
of Rakshasas, the mighty Baka was my brother. It is true that you killed him 
but that was when I was away.” 

Saying this, Alambusha makes himself invisible with maya, and covers 
Bhimasena with a black storm of arrows. But Bhima, O Rajan, covers the 
very sky with a tremendous fusillade and forces Alambusha back to his 
chariot. But, next moment, the Rakshasa uses sorcery again to dive deep 
underground, and then once more soars high into the sky. 

Alambusha assumes myriad uncanny forms, now becoming tiny and 
then enormous, filling earth and sky with his dreadful roaring. From above 
he chants many dark spells so thousands of fell arrow showers flare down 
on Bhima and his men, as well as kunapas, lances, spiked maces, short 
barbs, scimitars, swords and bolts of thunder. These eerie weapons raze 
Bhima’s troops as well as countless elephants, horses and foot-soldiers. 

Another river of blood flows, with rathas for its eddies, elephants its 
crocodiles, the chatras of maharathas its swans, and the flesh and marrow of 
animals, its mire and severed human arms its snakes. Hordes of Rakshasas, 


pisachas and other blood-drinkers and flesh-eaters stalk the banks of the 
darkling river and carry away numberless Chedis, Panchalas and Srinjayas. 

Seeing Alambusha haunt the field so fearlessly, and his dark prowess, 
the Pandavas are full anxious; while joy fills the hearts of your troops. 
Amongst your army turned irrevocably to evil, hair raising sounds of 
musical instruments blares cacophonously, which the Pandavas cannot bear 
even as a snake cannot bear the clap of human palms. 

Bhima, the son of the Wind-god, his eyes red as copper with rage, with 
glances that like fire consumes everything, invokes the astra called Tvashtri, 
like the divine artificer himself doing so, and millions of arrows flash out 
from his ratha in every direction. Bhima aroused puts your dense legions to 
rout, mowing them down all around him. The Tvashtrastra dissolves the 
maya with which Alambusha has mantled Kurukshetra; it direly wound the 
Rakshasa himself. 

Struck violently through every part of his body, Alambusha abandons 
the fight and takes refuge with Drona’s akshauhini. At the defeat of that 
prince of the Rakshasas by the noble Bhima, the Pandavas fill every point 
of the compass with leonine roars and joyously worship the mighty son of 
Marut, even like the Maruts worshipping Sakra after the defeat of Prahlada 
in the ancient war between Deva and Asura.’” 


CANTO 105 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “After escaping from Bhima, Alambusha fights 

fearfully in another part of the field, where he confronts Hidimbi’s 

son Ghatotkacha, and harries him viciously with a spate of flaming arrows. 

A horrific duel breaks out between those two lions among Rakshasas. As 

Indra and Sambara did in olden days, they fight with deep sorcery, spells of 
maya, and their battle resembles that between Rama and Ravana on Lanka! 

Ghatotkacha strikes Alambusha through his chest with twenty 
exceptionally long arrows, and repeatedly roars like a tiger. Also roaring 
shatteringly, and smiling to show curved fangs, Alambusha strikes back 
viciously. Quickly, both mighty Rakshasas, in mounting frenzy, use their 
powers of maya in a duel of sorcery, but neither gains any advantage so 
equally matched are they. Each a powerful mayavi, they create a hundred 
sinister spells, and bewilder the other. 

Seeing Alambusha dissolve all Ghatotkacha’s conjurations with his own 
spectres, the Pandavas are anxious and many of their foremost maharathas 
surround him in a protective cordon. Bhimasena and others all attack 
Alambusha and, hemming him in from all sides with their rathas, rain astras 
on him, like men in a forest cornering an elephant with blazing brands. 


Annulling their arrow storms with his maya shakti, Alambusha frees 
himself from that press of chariots like an elephant escaping a forest fire. 
Drawing his terrible bow whose twang resembles Indra’s Vajra striking, he 
pierces Bhima with twenty-five sizzling shafts, Ghatotkacha with five, 
Yudhishtira with three, Sahadeva with seven, Nakula with three and 
seventy, and each of the five sons of Draupadi with five arrows, and gives a 
weird and bloodcurdling scream. 

Bhimasena strikes him square with arrows with the power of the wind, 
Sahadeva with five, Yudhishtira with a hundred, Nakula with three and 
Ghatotkacha with five hundred. Alambusha, unmoved, returns their fire, 
goring Ghatotkacha with seventy wicked barbs, and pale devil gives another 
horrible bellow shakes the Earth, O Rajan, with her mountains, forests, trees 
and waters. 

Deeply wounded by those maharathas, Alambusha pierces with five 
arrows each, and then he swiftly covers Ghatotkacha with countless sable- 
hued missiles, fletched with wings of gold and whetted on stone. Every barb 
burns into Ghatotkacha, like angry snakes a mountain summit. 

The anxious Pandavas and Ghatotkacha continue to pour on their 
firetides, from every side. Wounded by the Pandavas, Alambusha mortal as 
he is, soon does not know what to do and his chariot in flames and he 
himself flows blood from a thousand wounds. Seeing this, Bhima’s terrific 
son sees the time come to kill Alambusha. He leaps out of his own ratha 
and, rushing up to Alambusha’s ratha, which now resembles a burnt 
mountain peak or a broken heap of antimony, seizes his dreadful enemy, 
snatching him down from it like Garuda snatching up a snake in his talons. 

Ghatotkacha lifts Alambusha high with his mighty hands, whirls him 
round over his head, so like his awesome father Bhima does his enemies, 
and smashes him down onto the hard ground so his body is blown apart like 
an earthen pot flung against a rock. Such an eruption of flesh and blood, O 
Rajan! Roar after roar of triumph erupts from the triumphant son of Bhima, 
in absolute frenzy, drenched with his enemy’s blood and spattered with 
pieces of his flesh from head to foot, and your troops tremble, whimper like 
small boys and many sully themselves. Alambusha, so terrible and 
indomitable a moment ago, lies like a tall sala tree uprooted and shattered 
by a wrathful wind. 

Upon the slaughtering of the wanderer of the night, the Parthas are 
ecstatic, give vent to a vast chorus of roars, and wave their bright scarves 


and other cloths in the air. Your brave warriors, however, see the mighty 
Alambusha, prince of the Rakshasas, lying like a crushed mountain, and cry 
out and howl in shock and defeat. Many curious ones go up to look closely 
at the shattered body lying like some great piece of charcoal, no longer able 
to burn. 

Ghatotkacha roars reverberantly like Vasava after slaying the Asura 
Bala. His sires and other kinsmen applaud him for felling the Rakshasa, like 
an alambusha fruit, and he celebrates with his friends, and there arises a 
loud tumult in the Pandava army of conches and arrows being rattled 
together. Hearing that noise the enraged Kauravas shout back in anger, 
filling the whole world with echoing tumult.’” 


CANTO 106 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra says, “Tell me, Sanjaya, how Satyaki Yuyudhana 
battles Drona so valiantly. I feel a great curiosity to hear about 
i 

Sanjaya says, “Listen, O wise one, to an account of the hair-raising 
battle between Drona and the Pandavas led by Yuyudhana. Seeing the Kuru 
army slaughtered by Satyaki, Drona himself attacks the brilliant Vrishni 
hero. Satyaki swiftly assails him with blistering ferocity with five and 
twenty short and savage barbs. Drona pierces Satyaki, with five perfect 
golden-winged shafts, which plunge through his resilient mail, and drinking 
his blood, enter the earth behind him like hissing serpents. 

Like an elephant prodded hard with a goad, an inflamed Satyaki gores 
Drona with fifty long shafts that are like flames. Drona responds with fervid 
volleys, wounding Yuyudhana direly so the Satwata’s radiant face suddenly 
shows anxiety, while Drona continues to loose his tide of burning arrows. 
Seeing Satyaki stagger in his chariot and even lower his bow, your sons and 
troops, O Rajan, exult and roar repeatedly. 

Some way off, Yudhishtira hears that celebrant uproar and sees Satyaki 
in danger. He cries to all his soldiers, ‘Drona is about to devour Satyaki 


even as Rahu does the Sun. Ride swiftly, you must save our Yuyudhana 
from the dreadful Acharya.” 

Yudhishtira cries to Dhrishtadyumna, “Why do you _ linger, 
Dhrishtadyumna? Don’t you see the great peril that has already arisen from 
Drona? He toys with Satyaki like a cruel boy does with a bird tied with a 
string. Fly all of you, with Bhima, to Satyaki. I will follow with my men. 
Satyaki is in the very jaws of death. Do not waste a moment but go and 
snatch him away from the murderous Brahmana!” 

And not hesitating a moment himself, Yudhishtira, with his troops 
behind him, charges towards Drona. Bless you, my king, but the Pandavas 
and the Srinjayas attack Drona all together, surrounding him, and unleash 
torrents of arrows at him, winged with kanka and peacock feathers 
shimmering in the gloom. 

The Acharya receives them smiling, even like a householder welcoming 
honoured guests with seats and water! And he satisfies them amply with his 
extravagant hospitality of arrows. And none of them can even gaze at him, 
who is like the thousand-rayed Surya at midday who scorches all those 
great bowmen with lavish banks of arrows, like the Sun burning everything 
below him with his rays. 

Struck like ten deadly storms by Drona, the Pandavas and the Srinjayas 
find no protector, like elephants sunk in a quagmire. And indeed the mighty 
arrows of the Brahmana Drona are like the scalding rays of the sun blasting 
everything around. In moments, he has slain five and twenty of 
Dhrishtadyumna’s Panchala maharathas, as all the Pandava and Panchala 
legions are helpless onlookers. He continues to raze their greatest warriors 
like children before him. 

After slaughtering a hundred Kekaya warriors and routing their army, 
Drona stands, Rajan, like Yama with maw agape, still hungry. The 
Brahmana vanquishes the Panchalas, the Srinjayas, the Matsyas and the 
Kekayas. Millions of living men suddenly breathing no more because the 
dreadful Acharya has hewn off their heads or blown their hearts to shreds. 
Their teeming troops invaded by his arrows cry out pitifully like the 
denizens of a forest engulfed by a conflagration. But Satyaki is rescued. 

Above, riveted, the Devas, Gandharvas, and the Pitris say, “Look, the 
Panchalas and the Pandavas, with all their troops, are running away from 
Bharadwaja’s son.” 


As Drona annihilates the Somakas, none venture to stand up to him and 
none succeed in wounding him in the least. While the Brahmana turned 
from his swadharma calmly butchers maharathas, past all count by now, 
Yudhishtira suddenly hears a faint tone of the great Panchajanya that 
Krishna blows. Such bedlam reigns on Kurukshetra, as the heroic protectors 
of Jayadratha fight Arjuna, and while the Dhartarashtras roar and shout 
before the great ratha of the two Krishna surging toward the Saindhava, that 
even the virile twang of the of the Gandiva is inaudible. 

Yudhishtira feels faint, thinking, “Ah, Arjuna fares darkly! For I do not 
hear the Panchajanya anymore and the Kauravas roar so lustily and 
gleefully!” 

Stricken with anxiety, a dazed Yudhishtira says to Satyaki, “O 
Yuyudhana, the time for that sanatana dharma which the mahatmans of old 
said that friends must do for their friends has come. Satyaki, none among all 
my warriors is a greater well-wisher of ours than you. Only one who is 
always courteous, obedient and valorous beyond all common measure 
should be entrusted with a grave mission in times of trouble. As Krishna is 
ever the refuge of the Pandavas, so are you, who are equal to him in 
prowess and affection. 

And so I will lay a burden on you knowing that you will not frustrate 
my purpose. Arjuna is your brother, friend and acharya, O bull among men, 
so go to his help now when he is in distress, O Satwata. Mahatman, you are 
devoted to truth. You are a great Kshatriya. You are the dispeller of the fears 
of friends and celebrated in the world for your deeds and as one who is 
always truthful. Satyaki, he who casts away his body while fighting for 
friends is equal to him who gives away the Earth to Brahmanas. We have 
heard of many kings who are in heaven for giving away this Earth as 
dakshina to Brahmanas, with due rites. I beg you with folded hands, that 
you too attain the rewards of giving away the very Earth to Brahmanas, or 
something even higher, by incurring danger to yourself for Arjuna’s sake. 

Krishna, the dispeller of the fears of his friends, is ever willing to 
sacrifice himself for them. You, Satyaki, are another such. None but a hero 
can help another hero by fighting valorously in battle purely for fame. An 
ordinary man cannot do this. And now there is none but you who can 
protect Arjuna. Once, while lauding your many great feats, Arjuna gave me 
much pleasure by recounting them repeatedly. He said of you that you are 


gifted with unearthly dexterity of hand, and that you are a master of every 
manner of warfare, that you are a man of great abilities and great deeds. 

My brother said, “Satyaki is endued with great wisdom, he knows every 
weapon thoroughly, is a true hero, and is never baffled in battle. With his 
powerful neck and broad chest, with mighty arms and wide face, with 
awesome strength and prowess, Satyaki is a maharatha among maharathas 
and he is the noblest of men. Yuyudhana is my disciple and my friend; I am 
dear to him and he is dear to me. Becoming my ally, Sini’s grandson will 
crush the Kauravas. 

Even if Krishna, Rama, and Aniruddha, the mighty Pradyumna, Gada, 
Sarana, Samba, with all the Vrishnis, arm themselves to fight for us, I will 
only appoint Satyaki, tiger among men, Satyaki of unfazed prowess, to the 
task, for there is none equal to him.” 

This is what Dhananjaya told me in the Dwaita vana while extolling 
your merits in an assembly of Rishis. It is only appropriate that you now 
live up to Arjuna’s expectation, as well as Bhima’s and mine! When we 
were on our way back from the various tirthas, I witnessed your reverence 
for Arjuna in Dwaraka. While we were at Upaplavya, I saw no one else 
who showed us as much affection as you did. You are of noble lineage and 
bear us both respect and love. And so, O Vrishni hero, out of your love and 
regard for Arjuna, who is your friend and your guru, you must do what is 
demanded in this critical hour by, O great bowman, your friendship, your 
genius, your noble lineage and truthfulness. 

O Satyaki of Madhu’s vamsa, Duryodhana wearing Drona’s armour has 
gone in pursuit of Arjuna! The other great Kaurava maharathas already hunt 
Arjuna and IJ hear a great tumult in the vicinity of Arjuna’s ratha. Satyaki, 
you must ride there like the wind for your guru is in mortal peril. 
Bhimasena and the rest of us will resist Drona with all our forces, if he 
advances against you. 

Ah, look where the Kaurava troops are fleeing the battle, wailing as they 
run. Like the ocean at full tide agitated by a mighty tempest, Arjuna stirs 
the Dhartarashtra host. Look at the cloud of dust that rises and spreads 
across the field from the men and rathas that dash about. Ah, look where the 
Sindhu-Sauviras, armed with spikes, lances surround Arjuna with their 
horsemen. 

Arjuna will never be able to kill Jayadratha without first vanquishing 
this host of ferocious fighters for every man of them will lay down his life 


for the Saindhava king before allowing Partha near him. Look at the 
invincible Dhartarashtra force stationed there bristling with arrows, spears, 
their tall standards, and teeming with cavalry and elephants. Listen to the 
beat of their drums and the blare of their conches, their tremendous roars, 
and the earthshaking rumble of their chariot-wheels. Listen to the deep 
grunts and trumpeting of their elephants, the heavy tread of their foot- 
soldiers, and the hoof-beats of their charging horses, al of which make 
Bhumi devi herself tremble. 

Facing Arjuna is Jayadratha’s akshauhini, and behind him is Drona’s. 
The enemy is so great in numbers that it would dismay the Lord of the 
Devas himself. Plunged in the midst of this fathomless host, Arjuna could 
well lose his life. And if he is killed, how can I live on? Oh Satyaki, is this 
calamity to befall me when you are alive? The son of Pandu is dark-blue in 
colour, young in years, with wavy locks and exceptionally handsome. 
Vigorous in battle and familiar with every kind of warfare, the mighty- 
armed Arjuna penetrated the Bharata host at sunrise. The day is about to 
end, Satyaki, and I do not know whether he lives or not. The vast Kuru host 
is like the ocean and Arjuna has breached it on his own, the army which 
even the gods cannot overcome. My mind is clouded and Drona attacks my 
forces with irresistible might! You see, O Mahabaho, how the Acharya 
fights. 

You are discerning when several tasks present themselves at once. And 
it must be you who take this critical task upon yourself, none other. I am 
certain that going to the embattled Arjuna’s help and rescuing him must be 
our first priority. I have no fear for Krishna of Dasarha’s race because he is 
the Protector and the Lord of the Universe. When this Naravyaghra can 
vanquish the three worlds assembled together, what need be said of this 
insignificant Dhritarashtra host? But Krishna is sworn not to fight. 

Arjuna however, Satyaki, faces the most in today’s battle and may lose 
his life. This is what fills me with dread and grief. So go to him, mighty, 
Satyaki, for men like you should follow men like him, at a time like this, 
sent forth by one like me. 

Among the greatest of the Vrishni vamsa, we regard two as Atirathas. 
They are the mighty-armed Pradyumna and yourself, O Satyaki great 
renown. In the mastery of weapons, you are equal to Narayana himself, and 
in strength to Sankarshana. O Naravyaghra, in courage you are equal to 
Dhananjaya, and exceed Bhishma and Drona and all the other greatest 


warriors. The wise say of you, “There is nothing that Satyaki cannot 
accomplish.’ 

So accede to the wishes of all of us here, of myself and of Arjuna. It 
would not be dharma, O Mahabaho, to refuse what we ask of you today. 
Reckless of your very life, ride into battle like the great hero you are. The 
scions of Dasarha’s race never care to protect their lives in war by avoiding 
the most dangerous battle, or fighting from behind breast-works, or fleeing 
an encounter— Dasarhas never adopt the ways of cowards. 

The virtuous Arjuna is your superior, and Krishna is superior to both of 
you. And I also say to you that I am the superior of your superiors and 
Arjuna agrees with me in this matter. Go then to Arjuna and, at my behest, 
penetrate the army of Dhritarashtra’s evil son. Challenge the great 
maharathas who protect Jayadratha and accomplish, O Satyaki, feats you 
are worthy of!”’” 


CANTO 107 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Hearing these warm and loving words from 
Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, Satyaki, the Sini bull, says, “O you of 
unfading glory, I have heard you well, and what you say to me is just, 
delights my heart and inspires me to earn fame and honour for myself by 
fighting Arjuna’s grave cause. 

At a time like this, it is high dharma and ineluctable fate that you find 
me, who am devoted to you, to command at your will, as you would Arjuna 
himself. As for myself, I am always prepared to give my life for Arjuna, 
without a thought! 

Lord, at your command what is there I would not do in battle let alone 
to Dhritarashtra’s weakling army? At your command, I would go into battle 
against the three worlds, with the Devas, the Asuras and Manushyas massed 
together. Why, for your sake today I will raze Duryodhana’s entire army. I 
vow to you, O Yudhishtira, king of kings, that I will fight my way to Arjuna 
and return to you only after Jayadratha is dead. 

Yet, Rajan, I must also tell you of what both Krishna and Arjuna said 
repeatedly to me before all our warriors. 


Arjuna said, “Today, O Satyaki, noble and determined in battle, protect 
my brother the king with your very life until I kill Jayadratha! By entrusting 
Yudhishtira’s safety to you, or to maharatha Pradyumna, I can hunt 
Jayadratha down with an easy heart. You know that Drona is the greatest 
warrior among the Kurus. You also know the vow he has sworn to take 
Yudhishtira alive, which he is well capable of doing. So I charge you with 
his protection while I go today to kill Jayadratha. 

Ensure that Drona does not succeed in seizing Yudhishtira for if that 
happens I will not be able to kill Jayadratha, and grief will break my heart 
and take my very life from me. If Drona takes my brother, we will have to 
return to the forest and my killing Jayadratha will be of no avail. Therefore, 
Mahabaho Satyaki, for my sake as well as for the success of my enterprise 
and my honour, protect the king today at all costs!’ 

You see, Rajan, Arjuna has left you to me to defend for he is in constant 
fear of Drona. O Dharmaraja, I myself daily see that there is none, save 
Rukmini’s son Pradyumna, who can match Drona in battle. I am also 
regarded to be a match for the Brahmana. Great Yudhishtira, I find myself 
torn between two choices: I must either obey my master Arjuna or ride after 
him, leaving your side, thus obeying you and disregarding what his 
command! 

Once he corners you, Maharajan, Acharya Drona will toy with you as a 
child with a little bird. If Krishna’s son Pradyumna, flying the Makara on 
his banner were here, I could entrust you to him, for he would protect you 
like Arjuna himself. But I do not see him here and if I leave you who will 
protect you from Drona? 

Rajan, do not be anxious on Arjuna’s account for no burden can 
vanquish him. All his opponents together, the Sauvirakas and the Sindhava— 
Pauravas warriors, those from the north and those from the south, and those 
led by Karna, whom I regard as the greatest maharatha—all these together 
do not constitute even a sixteenth part of Arjuna. The very Earth rising up 
against him, with the Devas, the Asuras, and Manushyas, with all the tribes 
of Rakshasas with the Kinnaras, the great Nagas, and in fact, all the mobile 
and the immobile beings massed together, would be no match for Arjuna. 
Know this, Rajan, and dispel your fears on Arjuna’s account. 

Wherever the two potent and inexorable Krishnas are, no obstacle can 
prevent them from accomplishing their mission. Think of their celestial 
power, their mastery over weapons, their resourcefulness, their fury in 


battle, their gratitude and the compassion of your brother. And think also, 
Rajan, of the mighty prowess of Drona, if I leave to ride out to Arjuna. The 
Acharya is eager to seize you for he is proud and determine to fulfill his 
vow, O Bhaarata! 

Think first of your own safety. Who will watch over you in my absence 
and to whom can I entrust your protection so that I can go to Arjuna? I say 
to that I will not ride after Arjuna without first ensuring that you will be 
safe. Employ your great intelligence, O Yudhishtira Mahabuddhi; reflect on 
this from every angle, and then command me after deciding what is for your 
greatest good!” 

Yudhishtira says, “It is as you say, Mahabaho! However, for all that, my 
heart is uneasy on Arjuna’s account. I will take the greatest precaution in 
protecting myself; so, at my command, go without delay to Arjuna. 
Weighing my own safety against Arjuna’s dire need, my judgment tells me 
that your going to Arjuna’s side is the first need of the hour. Therefore, 
Satyaki, prepare to ride to Arjuna. 

The mighty Bhima as well as Prishata’s son Dhrishtadyumna, with all 
his brothers, our other mighty kings, and the sons of Draupadi will not fail 
to protect me. The five Kekaya brothers, and the Rakshasa Ghatotkacha, 
Virata, Drupada, and the maharatha Sikhandin, the powerful Dhrishtaketu, 
Kuntibhoja, Nakula and Sahadeva, the Panchalas, the Srinjayas—all of 
them are with me and I will be safe in their midst. Not Drona at the head of 
his troops, or even Kritavarman, will succeed in defeating us or harming 
me. 

Parantapa Dhrishtadyumna will contain the raging Drona even like the 
continent the sea, and however he fights, Drona will never overcome our 
troops. Dhrishtadyumna sprang from the fire clad in mail, armed with bow, 
arrows and sword, and wearing unworldly ornaments; he was born just to 
kill Drona. Go, O grandson of Sini, with an easy heart; do not be anxious on 
my account. Dhrishtadyumna can always defy Drona in battle.’” 


CANTO 108 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Satyaki still fears the censure of Arjuna if he leaves 

the king. However, he is certain that he will be called a coward if 

he disobeys Yudhishtira, and says to himself, “Let no one say that I am 
afraid of riding out to help Arjuna.” 

Reflecting repeatedly on this, that invincible Vrishni hero says to 
Yudhishtira, “If you think that these arrangements will suffice to keep you 
safe, I will do your bidding and follow Arjuna. I tell you truly that there is 
no one in the three worlds who is dearer to me than he, and I will follow in 
his wake because you command me to and because there is nothing that I 
will not do for you. 

O best of men, the commands of my guru always weigh with me, but 
yours are still more important. Your brothers, Krishna and Arjuna, always 
do what pleases you. I too accept your command, and I will ride out for 
Arjuna’s sake, cleaving my way through this impenetrable host of Drona, 
like a fish through the sea, to where Jayadratha, supported by his troops, 
hides in fear of Arjuna, protected by the maharathas Aswatthaman, Karna 
and Kripa. 


O Rajan, the distance from here to where Partha forging ahead to kill 
Jayadratha is three yojanas, I will follow in his trail with a brave heart, and 
support him until Jayadratha dies. Who goes into battle without the 
command of his superiors? Dharmaraja, who will not fight if you command 
him, as I have been? I know the place where I must go, teeming as this 
ocean-like enemy does with ploughshares, darts, maces, shields, scimitars, 
swords, lances and the most potent shafts, this ocean that I will agitate 
today. 

The enemy’s elephant legion consists of a thousand elephants of the 
formidable Anjana breed, ridden by Mlecchas who love battle and are 
accomplished fighters. These musth-maddened elephants that shed their 
juice of rut like rain from dark clouds never retreat if goaded forward by the 
warriors upon their backs. They cannot be vanquished unless one kills 
them. 

Rajan, the chariot-warriors you see, also numbering thousands, are all 
of royal lineage and maharathas all. They are called Rukmarathas and are 
all impressive warriors who fight from rathas as well as from elephant-back. 
They are masters of weapons as also of hand-to-hand combat. Skilled mace- 
fighters, they are also masters of the art of close combat, and are equally 
adroit with scimitars, sword, and shield. 

They are brave, learned and animated by an intense spirit of rivalry and 
every day they vanquish a vast number of men in battle. Karna commands 
them and they are devoted to Dusasana; even Krishna lauds them as great 
maharathas. Always solicitous of Karna’s welfare, they are ever obedient to 
him. It is at Karna’s command that, after turning back from their pursuit of 
Arjuna, fresh as when they began and with no trace of tiredness, these 
heroes, wearing impenetrable armour and armed with exceptional bows, 
certainly wait for me, as Duryodhana also wants. I will crush them in battle 
for you, Yudhishtira, and then follow in Arjuna’s trail. 

Rajan, Kiratas ride these other seven hundred elephants that you see, all 
covered in armour and with ornaments, which the king of the Kiratas, 
fearing for his life, gifted to Arjuna together with many servitors. They 
were once in your employ. Behold the vicissitudes that time brings, for they 
now fight against you. Kiratas are sprung from the race of Agni, and they 
are all expert elephant warriors and they and their beast are well nigh 
impossible to defeat. Arjuna once quelled them all in battle and, never 
having forgotten the shame of that, they now stand in wait for me, under 


Duryodhana’s command. These Kiratas, too, I will kill with my arrows and 
follow Arjuna as he nears Jayadratha to have the wretched Saindhava’s life. 

Those other hulking elephants of impenetrable hides have sprung from 
the race of the great elephant sire Arjuna. Caparisoned entirely in gold, with 
ichor running down from their rent temples and mouth, they resemble 
Airavata himself and are even more formidable in battle. They have come 
from the northern hills, and fierce bandits of mighty limbs and sinews ride 
them, wearing steel coats of mail. These men are great warriors, brigands 
though they are. 

Among them are men born of the cow, the ape, diverse other creatures, 
as well as of humans. Look how they appear at a distance to be of a smoky 
hue, these terrible Mlecchas, sinners all who hail from the fastnesses of 
Himavat. 

With these and countless great Kshatriyas, as well as Kripa and Drona, 
foremost of maharathas, and Karna, also, to protect him, Jayadratha thinks 
lightly of the Pandavas. Impelled by fate, he regards himself already 
crowned with success. These whom I have named will soon be within reach 
of my arrows. They will not escape me, O son of Kunti, even if they acquire 
the speed of the mind. Duryodhana, the prince who depends upon the 
abilities of others, regards them highly, but I say to you that when my 
arrows cover these warriors they will find destruction. 

These other chariot-warriors with golden standards, O Rajan, whom you 
see, are the Kambojas. They are brave and skilled, and devoted to the astra 
shastra, the science of weaponry. They are close knit, firmly united and 
constitute a full akshauhini of furious warriors, O Bhaarata; and are on the 
alert, with their eyes on me and wait well protected by the Kuru heroes. I 
will destroy them all, like fire consuming a bale of straw. 

Therefore, O Rajan, let our attendants prepare my ratha and equip it 
well with bows, swords, spears, arrows, quivers, every other kind of 
weapon and all else that I will need to take dreadful war against our 
enemies. 

Let my chariot be furnished with weapons five times more than what 
acharyas of military science direct, for I will have to encounter the 
Kambojas and the Kiratas who are armed with diverse, and both of whom 
are like serpents of virulent poison, accomplished in war, and fiercely loyal 
to Duryodhana who has always treated them well. I will also have to fight 
the Sakas who are as powerful as Sakra himself, and are ferocious and 


difficult to extinguish as a burning forest fire. Yudhishtira, I will face many 
indomitable warriors today; and for this let renowned horses of the best 
breed with auspicious markings be yoked to my ratha, after grooming them 
and slaking their thirst.” 

Yudhishtira ensures that quivers full of arrows, all manner of weapons, 
and everything else that he might need are placed in Satyaki’s ratha. The 
attendants give his four superb horses water to drink and feed them; and 
then after they are walked, bathed and adorned with golden chains, and the 
arrows stuck in them drawn out, these well-trained, fleet, docile, steeds of 
golden complexion are yoked again to Satyaki’s ratha. 

Then a tall standard with the symbol of a lion with a golden mane is 
mounted on the ratha embellished with gold, which carries a heavy load of 
weapons, and flies banners of the hue of white clouds. Then, Daruka’s 
younger brother, who is the charioteer and the dear friend of Satyaki, comes 
and reports to him that the ratha is ready: like Matali reporting to Vasava 
himself. 

Having bathed and purified himself with every auspicious ceremony, 
Satyaki gives nishkas of gold to a thousand Snataka Brahmanas who 
shower their blessings on him. With these, the radiantly handsome Satyaki, 
hero worthy of our worship, drinks two jars of rich, invigorating kairata and 
honey, and ah, he is resplendent and rolls reddened eyes in some 
intoxication. He touches a brazen mirror and is filled with great joy, his 
energy doubled, and he looks truly like a blazing fire. 

Picking up his bow and strapping a quiver full of arrows across his 
lion’s shoulders, putting on his shimmering mail and sparkling, priceless 
ornaments, Yuyudhana has the Rishis perform for him the profound rites of 
propitiation. Fair lovely young virgins honour him by showering fried 
paddy over him, daubing him with delicate perfume and draping vanamalas 
over his rippling body. 

Then, with folded hands, he worships the feet of Yudhishtira, and 
Yudhishtira nuzzles and sniffs the top of his head in deep affection. Finally, 
Satyaki mounts his grand chariot. His horses, good natured, strong, swift as 
the wind and invincible, belong to the Sindhu breed, and bear him forward 
on that triumphal ratha. 

Bhimasena, too, honoured by Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, reverentially 
salutes the king and sets out with Satyaki. Watching those two warriors 
advance to engage your army, your troops all stand waiting for them, with 


Drona at their head. When Satyaki sees Bhima cased in mail and following 
him, he salutes him and with every limb filled with joy, says, “O Bhima, do 
you protect the king for that is your first duty and I will cleave my way 
through this host whose hour has come. Whether now or later, the king’s 
protection is your highest dharma. You know my ability and you wish me 
well, so return, O Bhima!” 

Bhima replies, “Go then, and achieve your purpose, O best of men. I 
will protect the king.” 

Satyaki replies, “Go back, O Bhima! As for me, I am certain to succeed, 
for today all my merits are obedient to my wishes. Indeed, the omens all 
around tell me that I shall be victorious. After the noble Arjuna kills the 
sinner Jayadratha, I will embrace Dharmaraja Yudhishtira.” 

Saying these words to Bhima and releasing him with an embrace, the 
illustrious Satyaki eyes your troops like a tiger eyeing a herd of deer. Seeing 
his dreadful gaze, your troops tremble. And then, Satyaki dashes forward in 
his ratha and bursts upon your army like some dreadful plague.’” 


CANTO 109 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘O Rajan, when Satyaki attacks your troops, 
Yudhishtira and his forces follow him to get at Drona’s ratha. The 
indomitable Dhrishtadyumna, the son of the Panchala king, and king 
Vasudana both loudly exhort the Pandava host, crying, “Come, let us be at 
the enemy so that Satyaki can pass easily through the Kaurava host. For 
many maharathas will put forth their might to vanquish him.” 

At this, the mighty maharathas of the Pandava army fall wildly on their 
enemies saying, “We will crush those that try to stop Satyaki.” 

Then one hears a loud pandemonium near Satyaki’s ratha. Your son’s 
host, overwhelmed by Yuyudhana’s tempestuous onslaught, turns tail and 
runs from the terrible Yadava. With such archery as we have not yet seen, 
Sini’s grandson truncates the united Kuru army into a hundred portions, and 
then straightaway beheads seven great maharathas in stunned van of 
Drona’s vyuha. With banks of lustrous, flaming shafts, he dispatches 
hundreds of heroes and kings of diverse realms. 

At one moment he pierces a hundred warriors with a single arrow, and 
at others one great maharatha with a hundred arrows. Even like Rudra 
devouring living beings at yuganta, Satyaki the Vrishni slaughters elephant- 


riders and chariot-warriors, horses and horsemen. Quickly, none among 
your troops dares face Satyaki, who shows blinding lightness of hand and 
covers them with storm clouds of fire. Panic-stricken, ravaged by the 
Kshatriya of long arms, all your bravest run away on seeing that radiant 
Kshatriya come hunting them like a god. His energy dazes them, and they 
see a thousand Satyakis everywhere, all come to take their lives. 

The field is a horrible work of art with demolished chariots, their broken 
seats and wheels, with fallen canopies, standards, anukarshas, banners, with 
helmets decked with gold, human arms smeared with sandalwood-paste and 
adorned with angadas, with human thighs that resemble the trunks of 
elephants or the tapering bodies of great pythons, and with faces handsome 
as the Moon and twinkling with the kundalas of large-eyed warriors, lying 
all across Kurukshetra where Satyaki the Yadava holds sway. 

The Earth is littered with the huge bodies of fallen elephants, cut up in 
diverse ways, like a plain strewn with hills. Carved by Satyaki, the 
carcasses of dead horses, of handsome breed and build, look striking in 
their traces made of burnished gold hung with rows of pearls. After razing 
your various troops, Satyaki of the Satwata vamsa breaches your army’s 
ranks, agitating and routing them as he flies along unobstructed, following 
the very trail that Arjuna blazed. 

Then Drona confronts him and, facing the son of Bharadwaja, rage 
flares up in Satyaki, and at first, like a tidal wave flashing past an ineffectual 
embankment he sweeps past the great Brahmana. Doubling back, Drona 
strikes him deep with five shafts like bolts of lightning. Satyaki, pausing, 
lacerates the Acharya with seven stone-whetted arrows, fletched with 
golden wings and the feathers of the kanka and peacock. Drona draws blood 
from the Yadava, his horses and charioteer, with six thunderous missiles. 

Beside himself now, and roaring like a full pride of lions, maharatha 
Satyaki stabs the Brahmana with three volleys of ten, six and eight barbs, 
which lance agony through the Kaurava Senapati. Never pausing, glorious 
Yuyudhana drills Drona with ten more shafts, his charioteer with one and 
his four horses with four; and with another thick shafts strikes Drona’s 
standard. Drona, his eyes crimson, envelops Satyaki, his ratha, horses, 
charioteer, and standard, with a locust swarm of dark arrows. Fearless 
Satyaki responds in kind, shrouding the Acharya in a blizzard of arrows. 

Now Drona says to the Yadava, “Your master Arjuna avoids fighting me 
like a coward. He passed me by in fear. If you do not do the same, O 


17? 


grandson of Sini, you will not escape with your life 

It is as if Drona himself tells Satyaki what he should wisely do. Satyaki 
says to the towering Brahmana, “I follow in Arjuna’s wake at the command 
of Dharmaraja Yudhishtira. Bless you, O Brahmana, much as I would love 
to continue this battle, I will lose time if I fight you. A sishya must always 
follow his guru, and if Arjuna rode past you, I will do the same. Farewell, O 
Drona!” 

Saying this, Satyaki quickly dodges past Drona and says to his sarathy, 
“Drona will try everything he can to stop us so go carefully and cleverly, O 
Suta. There you see the splendid Avanti horde and next to them the mighty 
army of the Southerners, and beside that, the great host of the Balhikas. 
Next to the Balhikas stands majestic Karna, with his powerful forces. 

Suta, all these forces are dissimilar, but on the battlefield, they depend 
on one another for support and protection and fight as one. So guide your 
horses towards the open space between these divisions at a moderate speed, 
and aim for the place where the Balhikas stand with diverse weapons, and 
the countless Southerners led by the Sutaputra’s division presents a serried 
array of elephants, cavalry and rathas and foot-soldiers from various 
kingdoms.” 

They ride on and Satyaki says again, “Now fly through the gap between 
those two divisions towards the Karna’s fierce and mighty host!” 

A wrathful Drona, however, pursues him closely, loosing countless 
arrows after the Vrishni shura, but the most blessed Satyaki rides on and 
finds no need to turn back to face the Brahmana. Smiting the great host of 
Karna with hurricanes of arrows, Satyaki penetrates into the vast and 
limitless army of the Bharatas, who flee at his advent. 

A fuming incensed Kritavarman rushes up to contain Satyaki, but in a 
flash the inspired Yuyudhana strikes Kritavarman with six shafts and kills 
his four horses with four more. He unerringly finds Kritavarman’s chest 
with four more arrows, and, all in the space of a wish, drills him with 
another sixteen of ferocious velocity. Kritavarman cannot bear this and, 
drawing his bowstring to his ear, plunges a calf-toothed astra, serpentine 
and swift as the wind, into Satyaki’s breast drawing a geyser of blood. That 
weapon of beautiful feathers pierces Yuyudhana’s golden kavacha, bores its 
way through his body and enters the ground behind him, dyed in blood. 

O Rajan, heartened to see his adversary stagger in his chariot, 
Kritavarman unleashes a clutch of stormy arrows, and desiccates Satyaki’s 


great bow with keen barbs fitted. In exhilaration, roaring, Kritavarman 
adorns Satyaki’s chest with a bunch of ten thudding shafts. 

Satyaki, his bow broken, hurls a spear at Kritavarman’s right arm, and 
quickly taking up and drawing a stronger bow, he unleashes a dense cloud 
of fire, thousands of shafts loosed in the twinkling of an eye, and entirely 
shrouds Kritavarman and his ratha. With no instant’s pause, he decapitates 
his enemy’s sarathy with a wedge-headed missile so the suta falls dead from 
his seat. Kritavarman’s horses bolt and the distraught hero is forced to take 
their reins and control them himself. 

Yet undaunted, and bow in hand, heroic Kritavarman stands upon his 
chariot ready for battle again. Seeing this feat, his troops cheer deafeningly 
and, after drawing a few moments’ breath, Kritavarman guides his fine 
horses and resumes fighting. Devoid of fear, he strikes fear into his 
enemies. 

However, by this time, Satyaki has left him behind. A thwarted, 
frustrated Kritavarman does not pursue him anymore but instead charges 
Bhimasena. Blasting his scarlet way out of the legion of the Bhojas, Satyaki 
swoops down on the mighty Kamboja akshauhini. Many maharathas 
challenge him all together, and Satyaki cannot advance at all. 

Meanwhile, Drona, having regrouped and arrayed his troops again, 
gives charge of them to Kritavarman of the Bhojas, and rides after Satyaki. 
Seeing Drona pursue Yuyudhana once more, the greatest Pandava warriors 
combine to thwart the Acharya. The Panchalas, led by Bhimasena, 
challenge Hridika’s son Kritavarman. He displays his prowess, and holds 
them all up; faced with his prodigious archery, they still fight back with 
some vigour. 

Kritavarman violently attacks his enemies’ horses and elephants. 
However, though sorely beset by him, his valiant foemen stand firm like 
high-born warriors they are, resolved to vanquish the entire Bhoja 
akshauhini, for fame and honour.’” 


CANTO 110 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra says, ‘O Sanjaya, our army too can boast of many 

outstanding attributes. Our forces are regarded as being equally 

superior, equally well arrayed, and equally numerous! We always treat our 

soldiers well, and they are always devoted to us. They are beyond count and 

their skill is exceptional and proven. Our men are neither too old nor very 

young, nor are they overly lean or corpulent. They are energetic, well built 
and strong, and free from disease. 

They are all sheathed in excellent mail, well-armed and subject 
themselves to stern disciplines and arduous training. My fighters are adept 
in mounting and alighting from the backs of elephants, in marching, 
advancing, retreating, and striking with the utmost effectiveness. They have 
been often tested in managing elephants, horses and riding chariots. Our 
warriors are recruited only after passing stringent tests, and not merely 
because of their lineage, or from favoritism or nepotism. They are not a 
rabble come of their own accord, nor have they been admitted into my army 
without handsome payment. 

My army consists of well-born and honourable men, who are contented, 
well fed, and obedient. They are generously rewarded and are all famed and 


intelligent. They are, besides, led and protected by many of our foremost 
advisers and other men of dharma, all of whom are the best of men, and are 
like the very regents of the world. They are also led by innumerable rulers 
of the world, seeking to please us and who have, out of sheer goodwill and 
friendship, allied themselves to us with their forces and followers. 

Indeed, our army is like the vast ocean filled with the waters of 
countless rivers flowing from all directions. It has a plenitude of horses and 
chariots, which, though wingless, fly like the very birds of the air. We also 
have an abundance of war elephants in musth. Sanjaya, only destiny can 
destroy such an army. 

Ocean-like, the vast numbers of warriors are its interminable waters, the 
horses and other animals its terrible waves, the numberless swords, maces, 
darts, arrows and lances are the oars plied on this ocean, and the abundant 
standards, ornaments and the pearls and gems of the warriors represent the 
lotuses that adorn it, and the running horses and elephants, the winds that 
agitate it into fury. 

Drona is the fathomless cavern of that ocean, Kritavarman its vortex, 
Jalasandha its mighty makara, and Karna the Moon that makes it swell in 
tide with pride and energy. 

When Arjuna, the Pandava bull on his single chariot, has battled his 
way so swiftly and with such aplomb through my oceanic army, and when 
Satyaki has also followed him, I do not, O Sanjaya, nurture any hope that 
these two will leave the smallest remnant of my legions alive. Seeing that 
these two mahatejasvins have scythed their way through the packed van and 
heart of my forces, and seeing that now Jayadratha is also within reach of 
the shafts from the Gandiva, what measures do the Kauravas, driven by 
rough fate, now adopt? 

What has become of my sons during this intense battle? Ah, I believe 
that Death himself has overcome the massed Kurus. Their prowess no 
longer appears to be what it once was. Krishna and Arjuna have both 
breached the Kuru host unharmed. There is none in our army, O Sanjaya, 
who is capable of resisting them. We recruited so many of our great 
maharathas after a careful evaluation. We honour them with the 
remuneration each deserves and others with accolades. There is no one 
among my legions who is not rewarded and each receives his assigned 
payment and rations according to the extent and nature of his services. 
Sanjaya, there is none in my army who is unskilled in battle, none who 


receives payment less than what he deserves, none who does not receive 
any wage at all. I have acknowledged the soldiers to the best of my ability 
with gifts, honours and position. My sons, my kinsmen and my friends 
behave in the same manner towards them. Yet, Arjuna and Satyaki’s mere 
approach has vanquished them. What can this be but Destiny ranged against 
us? 

The protected and those who protect them all go the same way! Seeing 
Arjuna arrive where Jayadratha is secreted, what measures does my foolish 
son adopt? Seeing Satyaki also furrow a bloody path into the Kuru host, 
what does Duryodhana think appropriate to do? Seeing these two 
maharathas, who are invincible to all weapons, breach my host, what 
decision do my warriors take? 

For myself, I must believe that the sight of both Krishna and now 
Satyaki engaged in Arjuna’s cause, and mowing their gory way through my 
teeming ranks, fills my sons with shock and grief. I fear that they must be 
saddened and benumbed to watch their greatest maharathas flee in all 
directions, that they must truly despair of vanquishing the enemy. I fear 
they themselves must now think only of escaping with their lives. 

Surely, my sons must be heartbroken to watch their thousands upon 
thousands of cavalry, elephants, chariots and heroic warriors run from the 
battle in abject fear. Surely, Duryodhana’s heart must bleed to watch his 
great war-elephants excoriated by Arjuna’s fiery tides of arrows, and turn 
tail, while others fall dead all around them shaking the earth. 

I feel sure that, seeing Satyaki and Arjuna deprive horses of riders and 
warriors of rathas, and seeing Madhava and Partha rout and kill vast 
numbers of horses, my sons are stricken by grief. 

I am certain, that seeing whole divisions of foot-soldiers flee in all 
directions, my sons, despairing of success, are grief-stricken. 

Seeing those two heroes pass through Drona’s vyuha, unvanquished, in 
mere moments, I am sure that my sons are full of grief. 

I am shocked and aghast, O Sanjaya, to hear that Krishna and 
Dhananjaya, heroes of unfading glory, and Satyaki, as well, have penetrated 
my host. After maharatha Satyaki storms through the Bhojas, what do the 
Kauravas do? Tell me also, Sanjaya, about the battle where Drona 
disconcerts the Pandavas. Drona is imbued with immense power; he is the 
foremost of all warriors, and unconquerable in battle. How did the 


Panchalas quell this great bowman in the fight? The Panchalas and Drona 
are sworn enemies in Arjuna’s quest for victory. 

O Sanjaya, you are an eloquent raconteur; tell me everything that 
Arjuna does to bring death to Jayadratha.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘O Bharatarishabha, you should not indulge in such 
lamentations like an ordinary man, when you are overwhelmed by a 
calamity that is the result of your own sins. Years ago, many of your wise 
well-wishers, including Vidura, told you, ‘Do not, O king, abandon the sons 
of Pandu.’ 

But at that time, you paid no heed to what they said and the man who 
ignores the advice of well-wishers will weep when he falls into great 
despair. O Rajan, he of Dasarha’s vamsa came to beg you to make peace. 
For all that, Krishna of universal fame, could not get you to listen to his 
plea and the Lord of all the worlds himself realised your worthlessness, 
your jealousy of the Pandavas, and understood your malicious intentions 
towards them. 

He calmly heard out your delirious protestation and then caused the 
flame of war to blaze forth among the Kurus. This enormous destruction has 
overtaken you solely because of your own guilt. It is not correct to impute 
the fault to Duryodhana because no merit can be attributed to you either in 
the beginning, the middle, or at the end in the unfolding of events. This 
bitter defeat is entirely due to you. Therefore, knowing as you do the truth 
about this world, quieten yourself and hear about the apocalyptic war on 
Kurukshetra, the Mahabharata yuddha that is even akin to the Devasura 
yuddha of time out of mind. 

After the scintillating Satyaki pierces deep into your army, the Parthas 
led by Bhimasena also attack your troops. However, the maharatha 
Kritavarman, by himself, resists the Pandavas who take the furious 
offensive against your host. As the continent resists the surging sea, even so 
does Kritavarman, son of Hridika, resist the Pandava legions and he 
displays such wonderful skill that the united Parthas cannot defeat him. 

Then the mighty-armed Bhima strikes Kritavarman with three dreadful 
shafts and blows his conch resoundingly, gladdening the hearts of all the 
Pandavas. Sahadeva strikes the Bhoja with twenty arrows, Yudhishtira with 
five, Nakula with a hundred, the sons of Draupadi with three and seventy, 
Ghatotkacha with seven, Virata and Drupada and Dhrishtadyumna each 


with five spiteful shafts, and Sikhandin, first with five, and again with 
twenty-five brutal barbs. 

Seamlessly, Kritavarman strikes every one of those maharathas with 
five arrows, and Bhima with seven. He fells Bhima’s chariot from his 
chariot, breaks his bow in his hands and quickly gores him with seventy 
barbs through his massive chest. Deeply wounded, the mighty Bhima 
trembles on his ratha like a mountain in an earthquake. 

Seeing Bhima in danger, the Parthas led by Yudhishtira surround 
Kritavarman in fury, covering him in fire to protect Vayu’s son. The 
Vayuputra recovers swiftly casts a steely spear with a golden shaft at 
Kritavarman’s ratha. That fierce spear hurled so powerfully from Bhima’s 
hands is like a snake freed from its slough and blazes as it flies at 
Kritavarman. Seeing the dart invested with the brilliance of the Yuga-fire 
coursing towards him, Kritavarman slices it in two as it falls onto the 
ground, still burning, like a meteor from the sky, illumining the ten points 
of the compass. 

Seeing his occult lance cut down, Bhima roars in anger and, sweeping 
up another stronger bow, its twang like thunder, bloodies Kritavarman’s 
chest with five throbbing shafts. 

All this, Rajan, is the result of your evil policy! 

Kritavarman, king of the Bhojas, lacerated in every limb by Bhimasena, 
is resplendent like a red asoka tree covered with flowers. Roaring himself 
like a hunt of lions, he plunges three fervent shafts into Bhima, and slashes 
every maharatha ranged against him, with three passionate barbs. They 
strike him back with seven arrows. 

Then, with a razor-tipped shaft, the battling Bhoja breaks Sikhandin’s 
bow, but the Panchala quickly takes up a sword and a bright shield adorned 
with gold and a hundred moons; whirling the sword in his hands, he flings it 
like a dagger at Kritavarman’s ratha, riving his bow with a mighty astra 
fitted to it, so it falls onto the earth like a star come loose from the sky, 
burning briefly there before dying out. 

The other maharathas also cover Kritavarman with their stern shafts; 
upon which, casting aside the broken bow, he takes up another and strikes 
each of the Pandavas with three shafts like streaks of lightning. He strikes 
Sikhandin first with three, and then with five shafts. The illustrious 
Sikhandin takes up another bow, and responds with a barrage of fleet barbs 
fitted with heads like tortoise nails. Inflamed, Kritavarman rushes recklessly 


at the powerful Sikhandin, son of Yajnasena, who was the cause of a great 
fall in the battlefield. He dashes at Drupada’s son like a tiger at an elephant. 

The two parantapas, who resemble a couple of wild elephants or two 
blazing fires, clash in a shower of arrows. They use their best bows and 
shoot their arrows in hundreds, like twin suns shedding their rays and they 
shine in glory like two suns appearing at the end of the Yuga. 

Kritavarman pierces Sikhandin first with three and seventy shafts and 
again with seven. Deeply wounded, Sikhandin sits down in his ratha in 
shock and pain, drops his bow and arrows, and faints. Seeing this, your 
troops hail Kritavarman and wave their bright cloaks and scarves in the air. 
Sikhandin’s charioteer quickly takes him out of the battle. 

Watching this, the Parthas encircle Kritavarman with their rathas. The 
maharatha Kritavarman then demonstrates a feat of great wonder there, as, 
by himself, he holds all the Pandavas and their followers at bay. He 
vanquishes the Chedis, the Panchalas, the Srinjayas, and the Kekayas. The 
Pandava forces scatter; they cannot bear the flaming Kritavarman. Having 
defeated the sons of Pandu led by Bhimasena himself, the son of Hridika 
shines forth like Agni himself on Kurukshetra, and all the Pandava 
maharathas, soundly beaten by the Bhoja’s torrents of arrows, cannot find 
the heart to face him.”” 


CANTO 111 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘After Kritavarman, the noble son of Hridika, routs 
the enemy and humiliates the Parthas, your troops are jubilant. 
Hearing the uproar from your army, Sini’s grandson Satyaki, protector of 
the Pandavas when they sink in that fathomless sea of distress in this awful 
war, quickly turns back and attacks Kritavarman who covers him with a 
torment of arrows. Satyaki looses a wide-tipped shaft at the Bhoja and 
follows this with four more terrific arrows, which kill his horses and destroy 
his bow. He inundates Kritavarman’s charioteer and the warriors who 
protect his back with a deluge of shafts. They cannot withstand the lustrous 
Vrishni, and fall apart. The incomparable shura Yuyudhana quickly turns 
his chariot around and continues on his way towards his master Arjuna. 
Now listen, O Rajan, to what Satyaki does to your army. After fording 
the sea that is Drona’s division, and triumphant after vanquishing 
Kritavarman, he says to his charioteer, “Go with care but fearlessly.” 
However, he then sees your thronging army of rathas, cavalry, elephants 
and foot-soldiers, and says again to his sarathy, “This great legion, dark as 
clouds that you see on the left of Drona’s vyuha, consists of a vast 
contingent of elephants led by Rukmaratha, and is difficult to subdue. 


Positioned there by Duryodhana, these warriors belong to the country of the 
Trigartas, are of princely birth, are great bowmen, skilled in battle, and they 
are all illustrious maharathas, with their standards decked with gold. All of 
them are prepared to die fighting. These heroes seek battle with me, so drive 
your horses at them swiftly! I will fight the Trigartas in the very sight of 
Bharadwaja’s son.” 

His sarathy, Daruka’s brother, always obedient to Satyaki, cracks his 
whip over his superlative steeds, white as silver or the kunda flower, swift 
as the mind, and the shining ratha that flies a flag bright as the sun, flies 
towards the elephant legion of great Rukmaratha. The elephants surround 
that chariot, and their riders lash down all manner of arrows over the 
raiding Satyaki. 

Satyaki, shooting up at them, covers them in a storm-cloud of radiant 
fire, shredding the great beasts’ flesh, felling many outright, felling their 
riders from their backs, all in a moment, a violent dream. Their caparisons 
and blankets coming loose, their very tusks cloven, their huge bodies 
covered in blood, their round temples split open, the flapping ears, great 
faces and trunks sliced in slivers, their shrill screams echoing across the 
grim field, the mastodons lumber away in terror from this dread god come 
hunting them. 

The Satwata ablaze mangles the grey beasts with arrows long as spears, 
with calf-tooth-headed bolts, broad-headed shafts, anjalikas, razor-faced 
and crescent-tipped barbs, and they flee from him in perfect terror, spraying 
urine and dung as they go. Some of them limp away as quickly as they can 
for the fearsome warrior has lamed them, some just fall, and others, fleeing, 
are pale with tears flowing down their faces. Stricken by mighty Yuyudhana 
with astras that are like the sun or fire, the elephant division bolts in all 
directions. 

When Satyaki has put Rukmaratha’s elephant legion to flight, when he 
has slaughtered so many of the beasts, the mighty Jalasandha nonchalantly 
lumbers up on his elephant to confront Satyaki’s ratha drawn by white 
horses. Wearing a golden angadas, with kundala and kirita, armed with a 
huge curved sword, smeared with red sandalwood-paste, his brow wreathed 
with a shining chain of gold, his breast covered with a brilliant kavacha, his 
neck also adorned with a golden chain, Jalasandha, Kshatriya of sinless 
soul, enthroned upon the neck of his outsized elephant, shaking his gold- 
inlaid bow, is as glorious as a cloud charged with lightning. 


As the continent checks the surging sea, Satyaki checks the Magadha 
king’s Jalasandha’s exceptional elephant that bears down on him in fury. 
Finding his elephant hesitate against Satyaki’s tirade of arrows, 
Jalasandha’s eyes turn red and he strikes Yuyudhana through his chest with 
an angry volley. Shooting down at his adversary, the Magadhan shatters 
Satyaki’s bow in his hands, and then drills five more serpentine shafts down 
into the Yadava’s body. 

Ah, Rajan, it is wonderful to see how the mighty-armed Satyaki hardly 
winces though struck so violently. Seizing up a fresh bow, and actually 
smiling, he makes a mess of blood on Jalasandha’s wide chest with sixty 
shafts loosed up at his in a blink, then breaks his bow at its very grip with 
another razor-headed shaft, and strikes him hard with three more barbs that 
thud into his breast again like a single shaft. 

Jalasandha flings aside his bow and hurls a terrible lance at Satyaki, 
which passes right through his left arm and enters the earth, like a hissing 
snake of gigantic proportion. Heedless of his gaping wound, the invincible 
Satyaki drives another thirty keen arrows deep into Jalasandha’s body 
already covered in blood. Jalasandha takes up his sword and a large bull’s 
hide shield embellished with a hundred moons, whirls the great blade round 
and casts it like summer lightning at the Satwata, demolishing his bow. The 
occult sword then lies upon the earth like a circle of fire. 

A wrathful Satyaki takes up another bow big as a sala-offshoot, the 
sound of its bowstring like Indra’s Vajra; drawing it in a circle he strikes 
Jalasandha with a heavy, ferocious arrow, stunning the Magadhan. Next 
moment, with two razor-sharp, crescent-headed shafts he cleanly hews off 
Jalasandha’s ornamented arms like spiked maces at their shoulders, so they 
fall from the elephant’s back like two thick squirming five-headed snakes 
falling from a mountain cliff. With a third razorine shaft Satyaki severs his 
antagonist’s great head, with shining perfect teeth and sparkling earrings, in 
a carmine blast. The macabre trunk still astride the elephant dyes 
Jalasandha’s hulking beast with gushing blood. 

Rajan, Yuyudhana quickly fells the wooden warrior’s frame and its 
rider’s throne-like seat from that beast’s lofty back, so that, bathed in his 
master’s blood, Jalasandha’s elephant suffers the costly seat to hang from 
his back, and wounded terribly by Satyaki’s arrows, in absolute anguish, he 
blunders across the field trampling Jalasandha’s own ranks to pulp, all the 
while trumpeting wildly in pain. 


At the sight of Jalasandha slain by the Vrishni bull, wails of woe arise 
among your troops; and your warriors, turning their faces, flee in all 
directions, despairing entirely of success. Meanwhile, Drona advances 
again on Satyaki, on his red chargers. Many other Kuru warriors, seeing 
Satyaki swollen with rage and pride, furiously follow Drona. Then 
commences a battle, O Rajan, between the Kurus and Drona on one side 
and Satyaki on the other, that is yet another like the one of old between the 
Devas and the Asuras.” 


CANTO 112 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘O king, shooting clouds of arrows, all these 

seasoned warriors cautiously advance on Satyaki. Drona strikes 

him with seven and seventy shafts, Durmarshana with a dozen, Dusasana 

with ten and Vikarna pierces him through his side as well as his chest with 
thirty keen kanka-feathered arrows. 

Durmukha strikes him with ten shafts, Dusasana with eight, Chitrasena 
with two; Duryodhana and many other heroes also draw blood from Sini’s 
sublime grandson with their dense fire. Though they surround him and lash 
him with their arrows, Satyaki the magnificent makes the bodies of every 
last one a home for his robust missiles. 

He pierces Drona savagely with three, Dusasana with nine, Vikarna 
with five and twenty, Chitrasena with seven, Durmarshana with a dozen, 
Vivimsati with eight, Satyavrata with nine, and Vijaya with ten sinewy 
barbs. After striking Rukmangada also, Satyaki, shaking his bow, swiftly 
attacks Duryodhana and, in the sight of all that teem there, draws deep fonts 
of blood from your son. A relucent duel breaks out between the two and, 
each renders the other invisible with thick arrow shrouds. 


Injured by the Kuru king, and blood flowing freely down his body, 
Satyaki soon looks like a sandalwood tree bleeding its ruddy juices. Your 
son too, struck often by Yuyudhana, is conspicuous, like a stake set up at a 
yagna, decked with gold. Then, with an imperious smile, Satyaki breaks 
Duryodhana’s bow and strikes him with a flurry of arrows, past counting. 

But Duryodhana is far from ready to concede defeat. Snatching up a 
fresh bow, he gashes the Vrishni hero with a hundred shafts shot like one. 
Stabbed deep by your mighty son’s barbs, Satyaki blazes up in dreadful 
anger. He launches such an intense assault on your son that your other 
maharathas, fearing for his life, rush in to pour down opaque gales of 
missiles, mantling the menacing Vrishni with their fierce fire. 

Satyaki pierces each of them first with five arrows, and again with seven 
more. He strikes Duryodhana with eight scorching arrows and serenely 
breaks your son’s massive bow that frightens all enemies. With a few 
arrows more, he fells the king’s standard adorned with the jewelled black 
elephant; and with another four arrows kills Duryodhana’s four horses and 
then his charioteer with a razor-faced shaft. Elated by his success, Satyaki 
strikes Duryodhana deep with some slender missiles that pierce into his 
very vitals. 

Rajan, wounded by Satyaki’s great shafts, Duryodhana leaps out of his 
ratha and runs to mount Chitrasena’s chariot, and arms himself with another 
bow. Seeing Satyaki overwhelm Duryodhana, indeed like Rahu swallowing 
the Moon, cries of woe arise from every part of the Kuru host. Hearing that 
great lament, maharatha Kritavarman quickly rides up to where Satyaki, the 
puissant Madhava, rules the war. Shaking his bow, crying to his charioteer, 
“Go! Fly at Satyaki!” comes the dauntless Kritavarman. 

Seeing Kritavarman racing towards him like Death himself with jaws 
agape, Satyaki says to his sarathy, “Look where Kritavarman comes 
dashing at us. Ride to meet his charge, O Suta!” 

His horses spurred to their greatest speed, Satyaki meets the king of the 
Bhojas, Kritavarman first among all bowmen. The two naravyaghras, both 
inflamed with rage, and like fire, encounter each other like two raging 
tigers. Kritavarman strikes Satyaki first with six and twenty whetted and 
keen arrows, and his sarathy with five; he stabs Satyaki’s four superb steeds 
of the Sindhu breed with four cruel shafts. Flying a standard decked with 
gold, and wearing golden mail, and his arrows all golden-winged, 


Kritavarman, shaking his formidable bow, stops the storming Satyaki in his 
tracks. 

Satyaki is by now more than eager to arrive at Arjuna’s side. He raises 
his archery and plunges eight truly dreadful shafts into Kritavarman, 
wounding him so fiercely that invincible warrior begins to tremble like a 
hill during an earthquake. Fluidly, Satyaki strikes Kritavarman’s four horses 
with three and sixty keen missiles and his sarathy with seven; he then aims 
another astra of golden wings that emits flames and resembles an angry 
snake, or the rod of Yama himself, and pierces Kritavarman with it. The 
flaming ayudha burns through Kritavarman’s effulgent armour, his body, 
and enters the ground behind him. 

Gravely wounded now and bathed in blood, Kritavarman, the lion- 
toothed hero of untold prowess, that bull among men, drops his bow and 
arrows and falls on his knees in his ratha. Having stopped Kritavarman who 
is like the thousand-armed Kartaviryarjuna of old, or the Ocean himself of 
immeasurable might, Satyaki dashes on once more. Mowing easily through 
Kritavarman’s division bristling with swords, darts and bows, and thick 
with elephants, horses and rathas, and out of the ground mired in the blood 
shed by hundreds and hundreds of the best Kshatriyas, the bull of the Sinis 
forges on like Indra through the fell Asura legions. 

Meanwhile, Kritavarman recovers, and taking up another huge bow, 
remains where he is, giving up his chase of Satyaki and fighting the 
Pandavas instead.’” 


CANTO 113 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


°S anjaya says, ‘As Satyaki storms through the Kuru host, Drona 

engulfs him with a dense bank of arrows. Another pitched battle 

erupts between them before all the troops, even like that between Bali and 
Vasava in days of old. 

Drona strikes Yuyudhana’s forehead with three shimmering iron 
quarrels that are like snakes of virulent poison and Sini’s grandson briefly 
looks like a mountain with three peaks. Drona continues to pour fire over 
him, shafts that roar like Indra’s Vajra. 

Satyaki strikes back with two beautifully winged arrows, after he cuts 
down all Drona’s shafts in flight. Drona sees his young adversary’s 
dexterity, and with a smile, looses thirty arrows at him in a wink, and now 
showing even greater speed of hand than Satyaki, in two blurred instants he 
strikes him first with fifty shafts and then with a hundred more. These 
deadly shafts spume from Drona’s ratha like angry snakes boring through 
an anthill. 

And Satyaki, not outdone, covers the Brahmana’s ratha with thousands 
of blood-drinking missiles. None that watch the duel can mark any 


difference between the skills of the Acharya and the Satwata; both bulls 
among men, they appear to be perfectly equal. 

A fiery Satyaki strikes Drona and his standard with nine straight arrows, 
and in Drona’s sight, he berates his suta with a hundred shafts. Drona 
pierces Satyaki’s charioteer with seventy barbs, and each of his four horses 
with three; with a single flawless missile he cuts down Drona’s proud 
standard, and with another broad-headed arrow, streaked with gold, he 
shatters his bow. 

His rage mounting by the moment, Satyaki hefts a heavy mace and 
hurls it like lightning at Bharadwaja’s son. However, Drona smashes it to 
dust with an imperious volley. Satyaki picks up another bow, drills Drona 
with a clutch of strident shafts, and gives a deafening shout. Drona cannot 
bear that roar and he launches a golden-shafted lance, charged with an astra, 
at the Vrishni hero. But the lethal weapon passes through Satyaki’s ratha 
never touching Sini’s grandson, and plunges into the earth, and is 
extinguished with a loud report. 

Satyaki ravages the Acharya with a still more fervid volley, drawing 
geysers of blood from the Brahmana, and especially his right arm. 
Invincible Drona once more severs Yuyudhana’s great bow with one of his 
favoured crescent-tipped shafts and also gores his sarathy with such ferocity 
that the suta collapses briefly on his chariot-head. 

O Rajan, what Satyaki does next is surely superhuman, for he snatches 
up the reins from his supine charioteer’s hands, and continues to battle great 
Drona while guiding his own horses! Indeed, he strikes the Brahmana with 
a hundred arrows, and rejoices at his own marvelous feat, which even his 
enemies applaud. Drona unleashes five ferocious barbs at his brilliant 
antagonist; they pierce his armour and drink his blood. 

Resorting to cunning, Satyaki looses a squall of arrows directly at 
Drona, absorbing him, but with a single shaft in its midst beheads the 
Brahmana’s sarathy; Drona’s already lacerated horses panic, and their reins 
hanging loose, careen wildly across the field, dragging the Brahmana’s 
bright chariot in wide circles, like an unrestrained sun in chaotic motion. 
All the kings and princes of the Kaurava host cry out, “Quick, seize Drona’s 
horses!” 

And leaving Satyaki, all the Kuru maharathas rush towards Drona’s 
ratha. Your troops see this and think that they are fleeing from Satyaki and 
yet again their spirits plummet. Meanwhile, borne far away from Satyaki by 


his maddened horses, Drona, in some resignation, returns to the mouth of 
his vyuha. There he finds that the Pandavas and Panchalas have smashed 
the great cart formation; he makes no further attempt to follow Yuyudhana 
but employs himself in rallying his broken vyuha. Turning on the Pandava 
and the Panchala legions, the Drona fire, blazing up in wrath, remains there 
consuming all around him with dreadful astras never used against common 
soldiers. He burns like the uncommon Sun that rises at the end of the 
Yuga.’” 


CANTO 114 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘O Kurusthama, after vanquishing Drona and other 

warriors of your army that Hridika’s son Kritavarman leads, 

Satyaki, the Sini bull, jocularly tells his charioteer, “O Suta, Kesava and 

Phalguna have already consumed our enemies, and in vanquishing them, we 

are merely the apparent instrument. Already slain by Nararishabha Arjuna, 
the son of Indra, we have but slain the dead.” 

Satyaki presses on, continuing to raze the Kaurava ranks all around him, 
arrowing on like a hawk in search of prey. Although the Kuru warriors still 
attack him from all sides, they cannot stop him from surging ahead, borne 
by his horses white as the moon or a conch, like the sun of a thousand rays. 
Indeed, O Bhaarata, no one can oppose the irresistible Satyaki of valour 
equal to that of the thousand-eyed Indra, and looking like the autumnal sun 
in the sky. 

Then the great king maharatha Sudarshana rides at the racing Satyaki 
and attempts to stop him. Another calescent duel breaks out, which both 
your warriors and the Somakas acclaim as being like the one between Vritra 
and Vasava. Sudarshana looses hundreds of arrows at Satyaki from a 


distance, while cutting down the handful of shafts that Yuyudhana blazes at 
him. 

But consummate Satyaki easily thwarts Sudarshana’s volleys, and 
enraged by his enemy’s disdain, fierce Sudarshana draws his bow into a 
circle and unleashes three exceptional astras of fire at the Vrishni hero. 
These burn through Satyaki’s kavacha and pass through his body, 
momentarily fetching him up. In a flash, Sudarshana plunges four burning 
shafts into Satyaki’s silver steeds. 

But the Vrishni is as powerful as Indra himself, and, unperturbed, he 
slaughters Sudarshana’s horses in four scarlet explosions and roars like four 
tigers. Next moment, he hacks off Sudarshana’s sarathy’s head and then, 
with a razor-faced arrow like the Yuga-fire, strikes off Sudarshana’s own 
head radiant as the full moon, indeed again like Indra once did the head of 
the mighty Bala in that battle of long ago. 

Satyaki, karmayogin, noble bull of the Yadus, is exultant after he kills 
prince Sudarshana and shines on Kurukshetra like the king of the Devas 
himself. Not pausing, he flares on along Arjuna’s trail, thwarting all your 
troops with firetides of arrows, and filling all with amazement as he goes. 
All the greatest warriors gathered there, even his enemies, applaud his 
amazing feats, for he consumes all that come within the reach of his arrows, 
like a sweeping forest fire fanned by the wind.’” 


CANTO 115 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “Having killed Sudarshana, Satyaki speaks again to 
his charioteer, “We have forded the impassible ocean of Drona’s 
vyuha, teeming with rathas, horsemen and elephants, whose waves are 
arrows and darts, its fishes swords and scimitars and its makaras maces, the 
great sea that roars with the songs of astras and the thunder of diverse 
weapons colliding, the ocean of terror, death and blood which resounds with 
the noise of conches and drums, whose touch is unbearable, and whose 
shores fierce Rakshasas and carnivores infest. 

I think, beloved Suta, that now we can easily cross what remains of the 
vyuha, which is like a poor stream of willow water. Urge your horses on 
without reserve or fear, for I feel certain that I am very near Arjuna. Yes, 
having vanquished the invincible Drona and his legions, and the mighty 
Kritavarman, I do believe I cannot be too distant from my master Arjuna. 

I never feel fear even if I see countless enemies before me. To me they 
are like a heap of straw and dry grass to a blazing conflagration in the 
forest. This is the path by which Arjuna Kiritin, the greatest of the 
Pandavas, has gone and numberless corpses of foot-soldiers and horses, 
chariot-warriors and elephants have rendered the earth uneven. Look at the 


Kaurava army running away, routed by the noblest warrior. Look, Suta, at 
the brown dust the fleeing chariots, elephants and horses raise. 

Yes, I am very near to the Swetavahana, Arjuna who has Krishna for his 
sarathy. Ah, listen! The sweet thunder of the Gandiva! From the omens I 
see all around me, I am certain that Arjuna will kill Jayadratha before the 
sun sets. 

Without tiring our horses, now guide them slowly to where the warriors 
led by Duryodhana, their hands cased in leather gauntlets stand; and there, 
where the Kambojas of fierce deeds and the Yavanas with their marvellous 
bows; and towards the Sakas and Daradas and Barbaras and Tamraliptakas, 
and countless other Mlecchas, armed with diverse strange weapons. All 
these, with vile Duryodhana at their head, wait with their faces turned 
towards me, excited at the prospect of doing battle against me. 

Suta, think of us as already having passed through this fierce fastness, 
having slain all these legions with their chariots, elephants, horses and 
footsoldiers.” 

His charioteer replies, “O you of Vrishni’s vamsa, I too have no fear. 
Why, O indomitable one, if you face Jamadagni’s son Parasurama himself 
in anger, or Drona, best of maharathas, or the king of the Madras, fear will 
not enter my heart, as long as I have the shade of your protection. 

Parantapa, you have already decimated countless invincible Kambojas, 
invincible in battle, as many intrepid Yavanas, including Sakas, Daradas, 
Tamraliptakas, and many other Mlecchas armed with their myriad weapons. 
Never have I experienced fear in any battle. Why will I then be afraid in 
this miserable fray? 

O you who are blessed with long life, by which route should I take you 
to where Dhananjaya is? With whom are you angry, and who are they that 
will run away from battle, when they see you demonstrate the prowess of 
the Destroyer himself as he appears at the end of the Yuga? O Mahabaho, 
who are they of whom king Vaivaswata is thinking today?” 

Satyaki replies, “Like Vasava destroying the Danavas I will slay these 
Kamboja warriors with shaved heads and fulfil my vow. Take me there and 
causing a great carnage among them, I will join Arjuna. The Kauravas, with 
Duryodhana at their head, will see my prowess today, when I exterminate 
this legion of Mlecchas of shaved heads and put the whole Kaurava army to 
the greatest grief. Today, hearing the loud wails of the Kaurava host, 


mangled and broken by me in battle, Duryodhana will suffer the grief he 
deserves. 

Today I will show my guru, the noble Swetavahana, my skill with 
weapons that I acquired from him. When he sees thousands of mighty 
warriors slain by my arrows, king Duryodhana will be plunged into great 
grief. The Kauravas will behold the bow in my hands to resemble a circle of 
fire when, light-handed, I stretch the bowstring to loose multitudes of 
missiles. Seeing the incessant slaughter of his troops, their bodies covered 
with blood and pierced all over with my arrows, Duryodhana will be filled 
with sorrow. While I kill the foremost Kuru warriors today, he will see not 
one but two Arjunas. Seeing me dispatch thousands of kings in battle, 
intolerable pain will fill his body and heart. Slaying those thousands of 
kings today, I will show my love and devotion to the noble sons of Pandu. 
And the Kauravas will know the measure of my might and energy, and my 
gratitude to the Pandavas.” 

The charioteer then urges his coursers of the hue of the moon to their 
utmost speed. The excellent steeds, swift as the wind or thought, fly forward 
as if to devour the very skies, and bear Satyaki to where the Yavanas are 
stationed. The numerous Yavanas, expert archers all, envelop the charging 
Satyaki with showers of arrows. The wrathful Satyaki, Rajan, destroys all 
their shafts and other weapons; with hosts of arrows, winged with gold and 
vulture’s feathers he dismembers the Yavanas, striking off their heads and 
arms so they fall like eerie hail. Many of his shafts pass through their iron 
or brass coats of mail, and stick in the earth. The Mlecchas perish in 
hundreds; his arrows flowing in spate, a torrid river from his bow drawn to 
its fullest stretch, he fells five, six, seven, or eight Yavanas at a time. 

Satyaki massacres thousands of Kambojas, Sakas, and Barbaras, and the 
great carnage makes the earth impassable with a horrible sludge of flesh and 
blood. 

The battlefield looks exotic like a sky covered with coppery clouds, 
with the strewn helmets of the Mlecchas and their shaven heads, which with 
their long beards look like featherless birds; and the field is also covered 
even more thickly with headless trunks dyed in blood. Slaughtered by 
Satyaki, whose touch is like that of Indra’s thunder, the dead Yavanas 
sprawl everywhere, cover the earth with their dead. The small living 
remnant of those warriors, Rajan, and their spirit broken, face to face with 


death, they whips their horses and flee in all directions, overwhelmed by the 
terror of Satyaki. 

Thus, the insuperable Satyaki routs the invincible Kamboja host as well 
as the Yavana army and the large force of the Sakas, and crowned with 
victory, cries to his charioteer, “On! Fly!” 

Seeing his indescribable feats in this battle, never achieved by anyone 
before, the Charanas and the Gandharvas in the sky applaud him. Indeed, O 
king, the Charanas, and your warriors, seeing Satyaki flying to help Arjuna, 
are filled with delight at his heroism.’” 


CANTO 116 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “Having vanquished the Yavanas and the Kambojas, 

Satyaki, most magnificent maharatha, courses on towards Arjuna, 

blasting his way through your terrified troops, decimating them on every 

side at his great will. Brandishing his glorious bow, which many moons 
adorn, he forges on irresistibly. 

Golden angadas deck his arms; his helmet is adorned with gold; his 
body is covered in golden mail and his standard and bow too are 
embellished with gold, so that he shines like the summit of Meru. So 
lustrous is he, with the bow always bent into a circle, that he does resemble 
a second Surya in autumn. Yuyudhana, with his mighty shoulders, tread and 
lion’s gaze, looks like a bull in a cow-pen in the midst of your troops. 

Your warriors surround him again, Sini’s grandson who stands so tall 
and proud, radiant in his chariot, like some incomparable tusker with rent 
temples. Indeed, after he ploughs through Drona’s division, and the 
unfordable Bhoja division; after he wades through the sea of Jalasandha’s 
troops as well as the host of the Kambojas; after he escapes Kritavarman the 
makara, after he traverses the entire oceanic Kuru host, once more many 
infuriated chariot-warriors of your army attack the Yadava. Duryodhana, 


Chitrasena, Dusasana, Vivimsati, Sauna, Duhsaha, the youthful 
Durdharshana, Kratha, and many other great warriors, all difficult to defeat, 
wrathfully chase Satyaki as he dashes on, nearer and nearer Arjuna with 
each moment. 

Then, O Sire, loud is the uproar that arises among your troops, like that 
of the ocean at full tide when lashed into fury by a tempest. Seeing all those 
warriors dashing at him, Satyaki smilingly says to his charioteer, “Drive 
slowly, Suta. Swollen with rage and pride, and swarming with elephants, 
horsemen, rathas and foot-soldiers, rushes towards me, filling the ten points 
of the compass with deep rumble of its chariots and making the earth, the 
sky, and the very seas to tremble. 

This sea of troops, O Suta, will I contend with in a great battle, like the 
continent resisting the ocean risen to its height at full moon. Watch my 
prowess, O friend, which is equal to that of Indra himself for I will devour 
this hostile force with my arrows. Look at the foot-soldiers, horsemen, 
chariot-warriors, and elephants I slew in thousands, their bodies pierced by 
my fiery arrows.” 

While he speaks to his charioteer, the enemy host breaks upon the 
unassailable Satyaki. They come with a deafening din, and roars of Kill 
him! fill the field of dharma. Satyaki kills three hundred horsemen and four 
hundred elephants of those brave warriors in less time than it takes to tell. 
The exchange of arrows between the enemy bowmen and Satyaki is yet 
again comparable to that between the Devas and the Asuras in the days of 
old. Carnage rules the field; Yuyudhana’s astras are like venomous snakes, 
not one failing to find its target and he shrouds them with his missiles in an 
unearthly cloudburst. 

The surging sea of troops, seething with chariots rathas, elephants, 
cavalry and foot-soldiers, which are its waves, is stilled as soon as it comes 
upon the Satyaki Dwipa. Such slaughtering does he bring to them, that in no 
time they break ranks and flee, utterly shattered, in a daze, trembling as if 
struck by the icy winds of winter. 

We see no foot-soldier or chariot-warrior or elephant or horseman or a 
horse that Yuyudhana’s arrows do not strike. Not even Arjuna, O Rajan, has 
brought such carnage there as the dauntless Satyaki! 

Then Duryodhana strikes Satyaki’s charioteer with three keen arrows, 
his four horses with four, and Satyaki himself first with three and again with 
eight. Dusasana pierces him with sixteen, Sakuni with five and twenty 


arrows, Chitrasena with five; Dusasana drills fifteen thunderbolts into his 
chest. The Vrishni never flinches but proudly wounds each of them with 
three arrows. Yet, fiercely wounded, by enemy shafts, maharatha, 
mahatejasvin Satyaki flits all over the battlefield with the speed of a hawk. 

He demolishes Sakuni’s bow and shreds his leathern gloves, bloodies 
Duryodhana’s chest with three shafts, Chitrasena with a hundred arrows, 
Duhsaha with ten, and Dusasana with twenty. Your brother-in-law Sakuni 
takes up another bow and strikes Satyaki first with eight arrows and again 
with five; Dusasana wounds him with three, Durmukha with a dozen, 
Duryodhana with three and seventy and then his charioteer with three 
keening barbs. 

Satyaki excoriates each of those maharathas with five blazing shafts. He 
swiftly strikes Duryodhana’s charioteer with a broad-headed shaft, and 
drops him dead on the field. At this your son’s horses bolt, bearing 
Duryodhana madly away from the field of battle, quick as the wind. Seeing 
this, your other sons and warriors flee in their hundreds. Satyaki unleashes 
burning arrow storms after the fleeing enemy, golden-winged and 
shimmering. 

Thus routing all your legions, thousands and thousands of men, Satyaki 
again courses on towards Arjuna’s ratha. If truth be told, Dhritarashtra, your 
troops worship Satyaki, when they see him loose his gales of arrows, even 
while protecting his charioteer and himself. They have never before seen 
archery like this, or valour!’” 


CANTO 117 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: ‘T) hritarashtra says, ‘Seeing Satyaki fight his way towards Arjuna, 
smashing the large force as he went, Sanjaya, what do my 
shameless sons do? When he who is equal to Savyasachin himself confronts 
them, how can these wretches, face to face with death, feel any eagerness to 
fight? What do all those Kshatriyas, routed in battle, then do? Yet, how can 
Satyaki of renown pass through our ranks when my sons still live? Tell me 
all this, O Sanjaya, for Iam astonished to hear about this encounter between 
a single hero and the many maharathas. 

O Suta, fate has surely turned against my sons, that one warrior of the 
Satwata vamsa has killed so many mighty maharathas. Alas, my army is no 
match for even this one Satyaki inflamed. Let all the Pandavas hang up their 
weapons. Vanquishing Drona himself, Satyaki will kill all my sons, like a 
great lion hunting little animals. So many maharathas, Kritavarman the first 
among them, all fighting vigorously, cannot stop Yuyudhana. The Vrishni 
will surely slay my sons. Truly, Arjuna himself does not fight as the 
renowned Satyaki does!’ 

Sanjaya replies, “All this, O Rajan, is the consequence of your evil 
counsels and the sins of Duryodhana. Listen attentively to what I say. 


At the command of your son, the Samsaptakas now rally once more, all 
determined to fight to the death. Three thousand archers led by Duryodhana, 
with a number of Sakas, Kambojas, Balhikas, Yavanas, Paradas, Kalingas, 
Tanganas, Ambashtas, Pisachas, Barbaras and mountain-men—inflamed 
with rage and armed with stones—all rush in frenzy at Satyaki, like insects 
into a blazing fire. Five hundred other warriors also charge Yuyudhana. 
Another mighty contingent of a thousand chariots, a hundred maharathas, a 
thousand elephants, two thousand Kshatriyas and countless foot-soldiers 
also attack him. Dusasana urges all these warriors on, crying, “Surround 
Satyaki and cut him down like a dog!” 

And then still more grand and wonderful is the fight that we see from 
Sini’s grandson, as he fights alone against these innumerable enemies. He 
kills the entire body of maharathas, the elephant force, all the horsemen and 
the Mlecchas. Like the autumn sky spangled with stars, the battlefield is 
strewn with chariot-wheels his mighty weapons break apart with volleys of 
innumerable akshas; and reduce beautifully wrought chariot-shafts to 
fragments; like the star-strewn autumn sky is Kurukshetra with felled 
elephants and fallen standards, with coats of mail and shields scattered all 
around, with garlands and ornaments and fine cloaks and anukarshas, O 
great King! 

Many hilly elephants, born of the race of Anjana or Vamana or of other 
noble lines, so many immense tuskers lie there on the ground, unbreathing, 
and their eyes shut forever. Satyaki kills the great horses of the Vanayu, the 
Malaya, the Kamboja and the Balhika breeds: in thousands. He razes 
hundreds of thousands of foot-soldiers, born in various kingdoms and 
belonging to diverse nations. 

Even while all these men and beasts are being slaughtered, Dusasana 
exhorts the virile Mleccha brigands, “You warriors who know no dharma, 
fight now as savagely as you can! Why do you retreat? This is just one man, 
cut him to pieces and feed on his flesh!” 

But they ignore him and just run. Now Dusasana turns to the mountain 
men, the wild stone-fighters, saying, “You are masters of fighting with 
stones and slingshots, while Satyaki knows nothing of this way of battle. So 
stop this Vrishni. The Kauravas also know nothing of your method of 
fighting. If you rush fearlessly at Satyaki, he will be helpless against you.” 

Those mountain-dwelling Kshatriyas, all masters at the unusual art of 
fighting with stones, run towards Satyaki like ministers towards a king, with 


stones big as elephants’ heads raised in their hands. Others, urged by your 
son, and wanting to kill Yuyudhana, surround him, also armed with rocks. 
Satyaki pulverizes the heavy cascade of rocks and stones they fling so 
expertly at him; he kills many of the mountain Kshatriyas, while the 
shattering rock fragments pierce others in hundreds blowing heads asunder, 
smashing open brawny chests, and countless more fall dead. Next moment, 
he hacks off the arms of five hundred stone-throwers, so scarlet geysers 
spray from their armpits, while their hands still clasp great rocks. 

Never pausing, growing more fierce by the moment, Satyaki kills a 
thousand mountain men next, and then a whole hundred thousand, all of 
them never coming near him, all with their rough weapons raised above 
their heads, even as he strikes off those heads. It is an exceptional and 
incredible feat that the Yadava on fire accomplished quick as seeing. 

The hordes of stone-throwers continue to rush at Satyaki in waves, for 
they are numerous, and he continues to kill them as they come. Many 
Daradas, Tanganas, Khasas, Lampakas and Pulindas fling swords and lances 
at him for what they believe to be a safe distance. Satyaki carves all these in 
flight, the rocks exploding with loud reports, which frighten horses, and 
elephants that flee yet again, while bedlam reigns with Satyaki its dreadful 
heart. The shattering fragments continue to sting and kill countless men and 
beasts, even as if cobras are stinging them. 

The small remnant of the elephants that attacked Satyaki also flees from 
the Vrishni’s ratha, covered with blood, their heads and frontal lobes split 
open. While he annihilates your legions in an unprecedented carnage, a loud 
and deep wailing rises from your troops, even as if the Earth herself 
bellowed in agony, or the sea at full tide. 

Hearing the great and dismal sound, Drona says to his charioteer, “O 
Suta, Satyaki fights like Yama himself enraged and annihilates our forces. 
Ride to where this great tumult has arisen. I have no doubt that Yuyudhana 
decimates the mountain men who fight with rocks and stone. And look 
where our maharathas also flee everywhere in terror of the Yadava. Look 
where they fall, the wounded and the dead, while the charioteers cannot 
restrain their horses.” 

His sarathy tells Drona, the greatest of wielders of weapons, “O you 
who are blessed with length of days, look at the Kaurava troops flee and all 
our watriors, routed by one hero, run in all directions. And here, the 
Panchalas and the Pandavas, united, converge on you from every side to 


have your life. You must decide which of these should have your first 
attention? Should we stay here to face the advancing Pandavas or should we 
find Satyaki who is so far from us?” 

Even as his charioteer says this to Drona, Satyaki suddenly appears in 
hot pursuit of a large number of rathikas who are fleeing from him towards 
Drona’s army. Some other chariot-warriors, Dusasana’s troops, all panic- 
stricken, also fly towards Drona’s ratha.’” 


CANTO 118 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


S anjaya says, “Seeing Dusasana’s chariot near his, Drona asks him, 
“Why are all these rathas fleeing? Is the king not well? Is 
Jayadratha still alive? You are a prince, a king’s brother, a maharatha. Why 
do you run away from battle? Hand the throne over to your brother and 
become the Prince Regent. You once told Draupadi, “We have won you at 
dice; you are our slave. Do not limit yourself to your husbands; set aside 
your chastity and take these robes to the king, my brother Duryodhana. 
Your husbands are all good as dead; they are as worthless as grains of 
sesame without their kernels.” 

And now you run away from battle? Having provoked such fierce 
enmity with the Panchalas and the Pandavas, why are you afraid to fight a 
lone Satyaki? When you took up the dice in the Kuru sabha, could you not 
divine that one day they would transform themselves into fierce arrows? It 
was you that abused the Pandavas. You are the cause of Draupadi’s torment. 
Where is your pride now, your insolence and your brag? After stirring their 
wrath, now why do you run away from the Pandavas who are like terrible 
snakes of virulent poison? 


As a brave brother of Suyodhana, you should protect the routed, panic- 
stricken Kaurava army with your might, instead of running like a common 
coward. With this dastardliness you will increase the joy of your enemies. O 
Parantapa, when you who are the leader of your host, flee like this, who else 
will stay to fight? When you, its refuge, are frightened, who in our army 
will not be afraid? 

You run in terror from just one Satwata warrior. Kaurava, what will you 
do when you face Arjuna the Gandivi in battle, or Bhima, or Madri’s twins? 
Satyaki’s arrows from which you flee in terror are hardly equal to Arjuna’s 
astras, which are like the Sun or Fire. 

If you are bent on escape, let us declare peace and hand over the 
sovereignty of the Earth to Dharmaraja Yudhishtira. Make peace with the 
Pandavas before Arjuna’s astras like thunderbolts enter your body. Before 
the noble Parthas kill your hundred brothers and wrest the Earth from you 
by force, make peace with the Pandavas. Before king Yudhishtira is truly 
enraged, and Krishna, who delights in battle, also, make peace with the sons 
of Pandu. 

Before the Mahabaho Bhima blasts his terrible way through our vast 
army and seizes your brothers like a lion seizes lambs, Dusasana, make 
peace with the Pandavas. 

Bhishma once said to your brother Duryodhana, ‘The Pandavas are 
unconquerable in war, so make peace with them.’ 

Your evil brother did not listen to him. So now set your heart firmly on 
war and fight the Pandavas with all your might, fearless for your life. Go, 
coward, fly to where Satyaki is. Without you, O Bhaarata, this host will 
melt away. For your own sake, fly and fight the indomitable Satyaki.” 

Thus addressed by Drona, your son Dusasana, his heart burning with 
shame, says not a word in reply, feigning not to have heard him. However, 
taking a large force of brave Mlecchas with him, Dusasana rides at Satyaki, 
burning like the yuga-fire on Kurukshetra, and engages him in a pitched 
battle. Heartened by this, Drona turns back to attack the Pandavas and the 
Panchalas again. 

Loudly announcing himself, that he is the great and invincible Drona, 
son of Bharadwaja, he plunged straight into the midst of the enemy, and 
begins to decimate their forces, killing thousands and thousands of fighting 
men. He brings another dreadful carnage to the Pandavas, the Panchalas, 
and the Matsyas. 


The illustrious Viraketu, another son of Drupada, faces Drona boldly 
and strikes the Brahmana with five sizzling barbs, sticks another deep into 
his flagstaff and rakes his sarathy with another seven. It is an amazing sight, 
Rajan, to watch Drona exert himself vigorously and yet not be able to 
approach, let alone vanquish that Panchala prince! 

The other Panchalas swoop down to surround the beleaguered Acharya, 
and they lash him with dense smoking gusts of fiery shafts, with whistling 
spears flung from all around and other powerful missiles. Cutting all these 
down with his own banks of astras, like the wind driving away masses of 
clouds in the sky, Drona is magnificent. Then he looses an astra blazing like 
Surya or Agni at Viraketu; the shafts of fire flames its way right through 
that prince and burns into the ground behind him, simmering blood. 
Viraketu falls dead from his ratha like a champaka tree uprooted by the 
wind. 

The Panchalas all rush in rage at Drona—Chitraketu, Sudhanwan, 
Chitravarman and Chitraratha, covering him with a wrath of arrows to 
avenge their slain brother. Struck from all sides by these royal maharathas, 
the Brahmana bull summons all his energy and anger. 

Drona rakes them with a hurricane of fire from his bow drawn into a 
circle, and they are dazed and have no reply to this awesome onslaught. 
Then the angry Brahmana, his lips curled in a grim smile, kills their horses 
and charioteers, he shatters their rathas; and before they even realise what is 
happening, with his favourite crescent-headed arrows he plucks their 
handsome heads from their throats like flowers from their stems. The 
Panchala princes fall out of their chariots even like the Danavas of old 
during the Devasura yuddha. 

Roaring, Drona raises his golden-backed bow high and shakes it in 
triumph. He has killed five sons of his great enemy Drupada. 

An anguished Dhrishtadyumna sheds tears for his brothers, who were 
like gods among the Panchalas; losing all control of himself, he wildly 
attacks Drona. So violent is the assault that a great and fearful cry goes up 
from your troops, for they are certain that the fire-prince, the Pandava 
Senapati, will have the Brahmana’s life. 

But Drona, smiling all the while, continues to battle, triumphant and 
unperturbed. Blood leaping into his eyes, Dhrishtadyumna drills a rash of 
terrific shafts into Drona’s chest and the Acharya faints in his ratha. Seeing 
him swooned, Dhrishtadyumna flings down his bow and, seizing up a 


sword, leaps off his own chariot and running forward mounts Drona’s ratha, 
intent on having the Brahmana’s head for his trophy. 

Meanwhile, Drona regains his senses, snatches up his bow and 
unleashes a scathing volley of special short barbs meant just for such a duel 
at close range at Dhrishtadyumna, wounding him deep and _ sharply. 
Dhrishtadyumna finding himself thwarted, jumps down again from Drona’s 
chariot, runs back to his own, and again picking up a great bow once more 
covers Drona with savage fire. 

The two duel like Indra and Prahlada once did for the sovereignty of the 
three worlds. Their chariots wheel and flash everywhere and torrents of 
arrows issue from both, cover earth, sky and all the directions, and also 
drawing copious blood from each other. Watching, the rest of the greatest 
Kshatriyas, O Rajan, and all the other warriors as well marvel at the 
unworldly skills of the two. 

The hopeful Panchalas exclaim, “Drona fights Dhrishtadyumna who 
was born to kill him. The Brahmana’s end is here!” 

But then, like a man plucking a ripe fruit from a tree, Drona takes the 
head of Dhrishtadyumna’s charioteer from his neck with a crescent-tipped 
shaft; the Panchala’s horses bolt, leaving Drona to annihilate the Panchalas 
and the Srinjayas. After slaughtering so many of these, Drona resumes his 
lordly station at the heart of his own vyuha. And the Pandavas, my lord, do 
not venture to challenge him.’” 


CANTO 119 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Meanwhile, Rajan, Dusasana attacks Satyaki with 
some vehemence. He strikes the Vrishni first with sixty arrows 
and then with sixteen, but fails to shake the shura who stands immovable as 
the Mainaka mountain. Leading a large group of rathas from various 
kingdoms, Dusasana fills the field with his roars deep as rumbling clouds. 
Seeing the Kaurava come to battle, the mighty Satyaki flashes straight at 
him, covering him with arrows. Those in the van of Dusasana army all flee 
in terror and only your son, Rajan, remains and faces the irradiant Vrishni 
hero fearlessly. He pierces Satyaki’s horses with aggressive shafts, his 
charioteer with three, and Satyaki himself with a hundred and roars yet 
again, challengingly. An incensed Satyaki quickly shrouds Dusasana’s 
ratha, sarathy, banner and your son himself in a cloud of shafts, making him 
invisible. Yuyudhana is like a spider entangling an insect in its web. 
Watching this, Duryodhana despatches a legion of Trigartas at Satyaki’s 
ratha to bolster Dusasana. Three thousand fierce Trigarta maharathas, 
seasoned warriors all, surround Satyaki with their chariots, resolved to 
engage him and vowing not to retreat. In a trice Satyaki shoots down five 


hundred of their leading warriors. They fall from their rathas like tall trees 
from mountaintops, uprooted by a tempest. 

O Rajan, Kurukshetra, strewn with mangled elephants, dead horses 
decked in trappings of gold and torn to shreds by Satyaki’s arrows, 
weltering in blood and littered with fallen standards, presents a striking 
appearance, like a ghastly garden overgrown with flowering kinsukas. 
Slaughtered by Satyaki, your soldiers can find no refuge; they are as 
elephants sunk in mire. And all of them turn back in haste towards Drona’s 
ratha, like mighty snakes making for their holes from fear of the hunting 
prince of birds. After killing those five hundred, Satyaki again makes his 
majestic way towards Arjuna. 

As he goes, Dusasana strikes him with nine fine shafts. Turning, Satyaki 
pierces Dusasana with five golden-winged vulture-feathered arrows. 
Dusasana, smiling, shoots back three bolts, followed by another five, to 
which Satyaki replies with five of his own that smash your son’s bow in his 
hands; and a smiling Yuyudhana rides on towards Arjuna. An incensed 
Dusasana hurls an iron spear, which Satyaki destroys with kanka-feathered 
shafts. 

Rajan, your son takes up another bow, rakes Satyaki with a clutch of 
arrows and gives a lion’s roar. Satyaki, aroused, turns back and plunges five 
arrows that burst into flames, and then eight more thick iron shafts. 
Dusasana, bestirred by Drona’s censure, heroically lacerates the Yadava 
with twenty stinging shafts. 

Yuyudhana, roaring now, finds Dusasana’s chest with three vicious 
barbs; next moment, he kills Satyaki’s horses. With another broad-headed 
arrow he cleaves your son’s bow, and with five more slim missiles, shreds 
his leather gauntlet. Satyaki, master of weapons, severs Dusasana’s standard 
and the wooden shafts of his chariot and kills both his Parshni charioteers in 
crimson eruptions. 

Left without a bow, a ratha, horses and charioteer, Dusasana is rescued 
by the lord of the Trigartas on his ratha. O Bhaarata, Satyaki pursues him 
briefly and has him at his mercy, but does not kill him for he remembers the 
vow that Bhima swore in the Kuru sabha that he would kill all hundred of 
your sons. Thus, having vanquished and shamed Dusasana, Satyaki again 
courses ahead in Arjuna’s trail.’” 


CANTO 120 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra says, ‘O Sanjaya, are there no mighty maharathas in 

my army who can stop or defy Satyaki as he scythes his way 

towards Arjuna? Why, the Yadava’s exploits are like those of Indra himself 

when he fought the Danavas! Perhaps, the path Satyaki rode was not 

defended? But no, the truth is that he has superior prowess and skills and by 

himself annihilates countless of our warriors. Tell me how this grandson of 
Sini, all alone, cleaves through the vast force facing him?’ 

Sanjaya replies, “Rajan, the fierce effort and the uproar of your army, 
which teems with numberless chariots, elephants, horses and foot-soldiers, 
resembles what one sees at the end of the yuga. When your army assembles 
daily, it seems to me that one has never seen another such a vast gathering 
of men and beasts on Earth. The Devas and the Charanas who watch from 
above say, “This muster will be the last of its kind on Bhumi.” 

Truly, never has such a vyuha been formed in the past as the one that 
Drona has on this day of Jayadratha’s killing. The din made by the vast 
multitude of soldiers meeting each other in battle is no less than that of the 
ocean lashed into fury by the tempest. In your host, as well as that of the 


Pandavas, are hundreds of thousands of kings. The sound these inflamed 
heroes of fierce deeds make while battling each other is hair-raising. 

Now Bhimasena, Dhrishtadyumna, Nakula, Sahadeva and Dharmaraja 
Yudhishtira all cry variously, “Forward! Charge! Strike! For Krishna and 
Arjuna have broken into the enemy army! Do whatever we must so that 
they easily find Jayadratha’s ratha.” 

Dhrishtadyumna says, “If Satyaki and Arjuna are killed, the Kurus will 
achieve their objective and we will be defeated. All of you unite quickly 
and agitate their oceanic army, like impetuous winds stirring the very deep.” 

And responding to their great commanders’ call, the Pandava warriors 
surge forward in tide and, heedless of their own lives, smother the 
Kauravas. All of them are not merely prepared but even eager to die for 
their friends and lords, at either the point or the edge of the sword, 
expecting swarga as a reward. So also, do your warriors too crave fame and 
stand ready, determined to fight to the end, to kill or be killed. 

In the midst of this fierce and horrible battle, Satyaki, after besting all 
his opponents, drives on towards Arjuna. The glare of the sun reflects from 
the bright armour of the warriors and dazzles all the combatants. 
Duryodhana, too, Rajan, pierces the mighty army of the noble Pandavas and 
fights dreadfully there, bringing great and dire butchery with him.” 

Dhritarashtra asks, ‘Duryodhana must be hard-pressed while fighting 
the Pandava army. I hope he does not turn his back on the battle, O Suta! 
The contention between him and the Pandava army seems to me to be a 
most unequal one. Besides, Duryodhana has been raised in great luxury, in 
wealth and possessions and now he is a king of men. Encountering so many 
alone, I truly hope he does not turn back from the fight.’ 

Sanjaya replies, “Listen to me, Rajan, as I describe your son’s wonderful 
feats. Duryodhana agitates the Pandava army like an elephant stirring a 
bank of lotus-stalks in a lake. Seeing their forces being mown down at will 
by your son, the Panchalas led by Bhimasena rush at him. Duryodhana 
pierces Bhimasena with ten arrows, each of the twins with three, 
Yudhishtira with seven, Virata and Drupada with six, Sikhandin with a 
hundred, Dhrishtadyumna with twenty arrows and he strikes each of the 
five sons of Draupadi with three. 

With his astras, meanwhile, he slaughters hundreds of lesser warriors, 
and elephants and many other maharathas, too, like an angry Yama. His 
bow appears to be drawn to a circle, whether while aiming or loosing his 


shafts. Indeed, his formidable bow, inlaid with gold, is always seen as a 
circle, while he destroys his enemies with it. 

Then, Yudhishtira, with a brace of broad-tipped arrows, rives your son’s 
bow and with another ten exceptional shafts strikes your son lustily. 
However, on touching Duryodhana’s armour, Yudhishtira’s arrows shatter 
into dust. The Parthas, filled with delight, surround Yudhishtira, like the 
Devas and the great Rishis in olden days surrounding Sakra when he killed 
Vritra. Taking up another bow, your son roars at Yudhishtira, “Stop and 
fight me!” and attacks him. 

Seeing Duryodhana charge headlong at Yudhishtira, the Panchalas, hope 
of victory surging in their hearts, eagerly rush forward to meet his charge. 
However, Drona intercepts the onrushing Panchalas, like a mountain 
looming in the path of a mass of wind driven, rain-charged clouds. Brutal, 
O king, the ensuing bloodletting, why, like the sport of Rudra at the end of 
the Yuga. 

Then, above every other sound in the general bedlam, there arises a 
spine-chilling uproar from where Arjuna is fighting. 

Thus, O Mahabaho, the battle develops between Arjuna and your 
archers, the contention between Satyaki and your men at the heart of your 
army, and thus continues the bloodshed between Drona and his antagonists 
at the lip of his vyuha. Thus, indeed, O lord of the world, the carnage on 
this Earth continues, with Arjuna and Drona and Satyaki, all afire.’” 


CANTO 121 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


°S anjaya says, ‘Beyond noon, O Rajan, another dreadful battle, 

marked by roars and bellows, deep as those of thunderheads, 

ensues between Drona and the Somakas. Drona, keened for a bloodbath, 

advances against the Pandavas. The pot-born magnificent son of 

Bharadwaja, always serving your cause, cuts down many leading enemy 
warriors, why, even as if he sports in battle. 

Then the mighty maharatha of the Kaikeyas, irresistible Brihadkshatra, 
the eldest of five brothers, challenges him. Like a great cloud mass 
emptying itself over Gandhamadana, he lashes torrents of arrows down on 
Drona. Drona looses five and ten stone-whetted, golden-winged barbs at 
Brihadkshatra but the Kekaya prince shatter them all in flight. Drona, the 
Brahmana bull shoots eight whistling shafts at him; these, too, 
Brihadkshatra cuts down. 

Your troops are filled with amazement at the prince’s feat. Applauding 
Brihadkshatra himself, Drona invokes the Brahmastra and looses that 
celestial ayudha at the Kekaya prince, who, quicker than thinking, 
extinguishes it with a Brahmastra of his own. Immediately, he strikes the 
surprised Acharya with a terrific volley of sixty glittering shafts. Drona, 


provoked, unleashes a formidable missile at his adversary, a bolt of 
lightning that plunges through Brihadkshatra’s armour, his body and flies on 
like a black cobra, hissing into the earth behind him. 

Pain screaming through his every nerve, filled with rage and rolling his 
handsome eyes, Brihadkshatra drills Drona with seventy arrows; with 
another, he gores the Brahmana’s sarathy through his very vitals. Lifting his 
archery, Drona now shoots so ferociously at the Kekaya prince that 
Brihadkshatra staggers in his chariot, his limbs turning weak. 

In a flash, Drona kills his horses, his sarathy, cuts down that brave 
prince’s standard and regal chatra. And then, as Brihadkshatra stands 
helpless, shocked by the raging Brahmana’s tirade, Drona serenely blows 
his heart to shreds with another perfect arrow and that radiant hero falls 
dead. 

Seeing Brihadkshatra die, Dhrishtaketu, son of the Kaikeya maharatha 
Sisupala whom Krishna killed at Yudhishtira’s Rajasuya yagna, cries to his 
charioteer, “Suta, take me to where Drona stands, slaughtering the Kaikeya 
and the Panchala hosts!” 

His charioteer turns his fleet of Kamboja horses towards Drona, and 
Dhrishtaketu, king of the Chedis, swelling with fury and prowess, flies at 
the dreadful Brahmana, like an insect towards a blazing fire to be 
consumed. And like a man rousing a tiger from sleep, he rakes Drona, his 
red chargers, his ratha and standard first with a burst of sixty shafts and 
again with many others. Drona the tiger responds with a razor-faced arrow 
winged with vulture feathers, neatly bisecting Dhrishtaketu’s bow. The 
Chedi picks up another bow and draws blood from Drona with a flurry of 
shafts winged with the shiny feathers of kankas and peacocks. 

Drona kills Dhrishtaketu’s noble horses, strikes off his sarathy’s head 
and wounds him direly with another five and twenty robust arrows. 
Dhrishtaketu jumps down from his ratha with a mace and hurls it at Drona 
like an angry naga. Seeing the heavy gada, hard as adamant and inlaid with 
gold, fly towards him like Death, Drona smashes it to dust with a thousands 
shafts loosed in the heart of an instant; the earth echoes with the report of 
that weapon being blown apart. 

Now the wrathful and fearless Dhrishtaketu hurls a spear embellished 
with gold at the Brahmana. Drona slices the lance into slivers with five 
breathtaking shafts; and it falls onto the ground like a serpent mangled by 
Garuda. Not pausing, Drona looses another keen barb that cleaves the Chedi 


king’s kavacha, his muscled chest and dives into the earth behind him like a 
swan into a lake overgrown with lotuses. And Sisupala’s son keels over, 
dead. As a hungry blue jay seizes and devours a little insect so does Drona 
take the life of Dhrishtaketu. 

When Dhrishtaketu dies, his enraged son, a considerable warrior 
himself, attacks Drona. Him Drona smilingly despatches to Yamaloka, like 
a great tiger in the deep vana killing a fawn. 

While the Pandavas, O Bhaarata, are thus being thinned, the heroic son 
of Jarasandha charges Drona and covers the Acharya with such an opacity 
of arrows that the Brahmana is briefly invisible, like the sun hidden by 
black clouds. Then Drona, the scourge of the Kshatriyas, looses a hundred 
thousand deadly shafts at the gifted prince and kills him in the very sight of 
all the other great archers. 

Truly, Drona is like Yama the Destroyer, jaws agape, swallowing every 
warrior who dares confront him. Once again roaring out his own name and 
his lineage in ringing proclamation and challenge, the Brahmana who has 
abandoned is swadharma and is far more terrible than any Kshatriya, 
swathes the Pandava host with millions of arrows. Each of these is engraved 
with his name and they massacre men, elephants and horses in thousands 
like the Asuras were once slain by Sakra; the Panchalas begin to tremble 
like a herd of cattle beset with winter’s cold. 

Indeed, an awful bewailing arises from the terrified Panchalas, scorched 
by the sun above and made ashes by Drona below. Benumbed by Drona, the 
greatest Panchala maharathas feel like men whose thighs have been seized 
by makaras. 

Then, Rajan, the Chedis, the Srinjayas, the Kasis and the Kosalas band 
together and, with great heart attack Drona all together, roaring to one 
another to embolden themselves, “Drona is slain! Drona is dead!” 

These Naravyaghras fall upon the illustrious Drona, bent on sending the 
fulminant Brahmana to Yama. But the implacable Drona annihilates those 
brave warriors, especially the greatest ones among the Chedis; and, struck 
brutally by Drona’s shafts, the Panchalas quail. 

They call loudly to Bhimasena and Dhrishtadyumna, crying, “This 
Brahmana has performed the most terrible tapasya and acquired great 
punya, for now, inflamed by rage, he consumes the greatest Kshatriyas. A 
Kshatriya’s dharma is battle; a Brahmana’s, mahatapasya. A Brahmana 
galvanized by tapasya and gyana can make ashes of anything with just his 


angry gaze. Here countless great Kshatriyas, O Bhaarata, have been blasted 
by the fire of Drona’s astras. The illustrious Drona has abandoned all 
restraint and devours our troops as he pleases, while none can stand before 
him.” 

At this, Kshatradharman, Dhrishtadyumna’s mighty son, severs Drona’s 
bow in his hands with a crescent-tipped shaft such as the Acharya himself 
favours. Drona, bane of the Kshatriyas, is further incensed, and takes up 
another bright bow and in a blur transfixes Kshatradharman to his flagstaff 
with an arrow through his heart. 

Now the Pandava troops quake with fear. The redoubtable Chekitana 
falls upon Drona and bloodies his torso with ten fulvid arrows; he pierces 
Drona’s charioteer with four shafts and his chestnut horses with another 
four. The Acharya ablaze pierces Chekitana’s right arm with sixteen arrows, 
his standard with another sixteen, and his charioteer with seven. With his 
charioteer killed, Chekitana’s horses bolt, dragging his chariot with them, 
and filling the Panchalas and the Pandavas with more panic yet. And 
dominating, resplendent, terrifying Drona routs the united forces of the 
Panchalas and the Srinjayas all around him. Ah, Raja, he is beyond being 
merely magnificent. 

The venerable Drona, full five and eighty years of age, dark in 
complexion and with pure white hair, dashes all over the battlefield like a 
youth of sixteen. Rajan, his enemies look upon him as none else than 
Vajradhari Indra himself come to hunt them. 

Then the mighty-armed and intelligent Drupada says, “This vile and 
dreadful Brahmana is killing noble Kshatriyas like a hungry tiger killing 
small animals. The sinful Duryodhana will surely find the most vicious hell 
for himself in the next world. It is through his greed that countless great 
Kshatriyas lie dead the field like mangled bulls, weltering in their own 
blood and becoming food for dogs and jackals.” 

Saying this, O Rajan, Drupada, the lord of an akshauhini, sets the 
Parthas at its head, and rides with great speed towards Drona.’” 


CANTO 122 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “When the Pandava army is set upon from all sides, 
the Parthas, the Panchalas and the Somakas retreat to a great 
distance. O Bhaarata, during this harrowing battle, reminiscent of the 
pralaya at yuga’s end, Drona, straddling the field, repeatedly roars, shaking 
earth and sky and continues to obliterate the Panchalas and the Pandavas. 
And when Yudhishtira can find no succour in his extreme distress, he 
begins to wonder how the war can ever be won as long as the Brahmana, 
his old Acharya, is alive. Looking around him desperately for Arjuna, 
Yudhishtira sees neither him nor Krishna. Not finding the Naravyaghra who 
flies Hanuman on his banner and not hearing the twang of the Gandiva, and 
not seeing Satyaki anywhere either, the Dharmaraja loses all peace of mind. 
Yudhishtira, fearing the world’s censure, begins to think of Satyaki. “I 
sent the brilliant Satyaki, dispeller of the fears of friends, to follow Arjuna. 
Earlier I had only one source of anxiety, but now I have two. I should have 
some tidings of both Satyaki and Dhananjaya by now. Having sent Satyaki 
to follow Arjuna, whom can I now send to follow Satyaki? If I try to find 
intelligence only of my brother without enquiring after Satyaki, the world 
will reproach me. They will say, ‘Yudhishtira Dharmaputra seeks only his 


brother and leaves Satyaki of Vrishni’s vamsa, the hero of unfailing 
prowess, to his fate!’ 

Fearing as I do the reproach of the world, I will send Bhimasena to find 
the noble Yuyudhana. The love I bear for the invincible Satwata is no less 
than the love I have for Arjuna, the Parantapa. Ah, I fear I have set the 
delighter of the Sinis a task more difficult than he can accomplish on his 
own. Yet, either at a friend’s request or for honour, he has pierced deep into 
the Bharata army like a great Makara into the ocean. Loud is the outcry I 
hear from enemy heroes, fighting together against him. They appear to be 
too many for him and I must think quickly of rescuing him. 

Bhimasena should go to the two mighty maharathas. There is nothing 
on earth that Vrikodara cannot face and if he fights with resolve, he is a 
match for all the archers in the world and with the might of his arms he can 
stand by himself against all his enemies. It is relying on the strength of arms 
of noble Bhima in the wilds that we returned from our exile and have never 
been vanquished in battle. 

If Bhimasena joins Satyaki, both Satyaki and Arjuna will find great and 
real support, and I will be anxious for them anymore. Both of them are 
masters of weapons and Krishna protects them both. Yet, I will allay my 
own anxiety and send Bhima after Arjuna and Satyaki. No one can then 
accuse me of being carless of Yuyudhana’s life.” 

Making up his mind, Yudhishtira tells his charioteer, “Drive me to 
Bhima.” 

His sarathy does as he is told. Typically, once he sees Bhima before 
him, Yudhishtira is filled with remorse, and begins to press Bhima with 
diverse solicitations. Finally he says, “O Bhima, I do not see Arjuna’s 
standard—he who on a single ratha vanquished all the Devas, the 
Gandharvas and Asuras!” 

Bhimasena replies, “Never before have I seen or heard you so agitated. 
Indeed, in the past, when we were stricken with grief, it was you who were 
our comforter. O King of kings, stop your prevarication and command me 
what I should do, for there is nothing that I cannot do for you. O 
Kurusathama! Do not be unhappy.” 

Then, with a sorrowful face and his eyes bathed in tears, and sighing 
like a cobra, Yudhishtira says to Bhimasena, “We hear the repeated blasts 
on Panchajanya that Krishna wrathfully blows. Ah, I fear they are telling us 
that your brother Arjuna lies dead on the field and that Krishna is fighting. 


Our Arjuna, to whom we always turn when in trouble even as the Devas to 
thousand-eyed Indra, has fought his way deep into the Kuru army on his 
quest for Jayadratha. I know this, my Bhima, but he has not returned. 

Dark in complexion, youthful in years, with wavy locks, exceedingly 
handsome, broad of chest and with long arms, with the tread of an angry 
elephant, with eyes like chakras the colour of burnished copper, the 
mightiest maharatha, this brother of yours, Arjuna, always terrifies his 
enemies. This is the cause of my grief, Parantapa! My pain increases like a 
fire fed with libations of ghee, because of Arjuna, as well as for Satyaki. I 
am dazed with sorrow for I do not see his banner emblazoned with great 
Hanuman. 

Oh, I have no doubt that he has been killed and that it is Krishna who 
now fights. Know also, Bhima, that I fear that the other tiger among men, 
the mighty Satyaki, is also slain. Alas! Satyaki followed in the wake of 
Arjuna out of his great love. Without seeing Satyaki, too, I am benumbed 
by grief. 

O Kaunteya, if you think it your dharma to obey me, you must rush to 
Arjuna and Satyaki. O you who know dharma well, remember that I am 
your eldest brother. You should consider Satyaki dearer to you than Arjuna 
himself. Satyaki went forth after Arjuna for my sake, following a trail that 
only the noblest men can tread. Now you must follow after Yuyudhana and 
upon finding the two Krishnas and Satyaki of the Satwata vamsa, safe, send 
me a message, O son of Pandu, beloved Bhima, by giving a loud roar.” 


CANTO 123 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


B hima replies, “The two Krishnas have gone in the ratha which once 

carried Brahma, Isana, Indra and Varuna to battle, so they can be in 
no danger. However, to obey your command, my brother, look, I too ride 
after them! Do not be anxious. As soon as I meet those Naravyaghras, I will 
send you the message you want with a roar of joy.’” 

“Sanjaya says, “Bhima prepares to set out and repeatedly entrusts 
Yudhishtira’s care to Dhrishtadyumna and other friends, saying, “You know 
how Drona is always looking to seize Yudhishtira by any means. Indeed, O 
son of Drupada, I should never set my riding out to help Arjuna and Satyaki 
above my duty to protect the king. But because he has himself commanded 
me to go, I cannot disobey him. I will go where Jayadratha, the wretched 
king of the Sindhus waits in the suchimukha vyuha, at the point of death. In 
truth, I should only do what Arjuna and Satyaki asked me to, and remain 
here beside Yudhishtira. But, my dearest friend Dhrishtadyumna, I am 
helpless and entrust my brother’s care to you. You must protect him at any 
cost. Of all tasks, this is your highest duty today.” 

To this, Dhrishtadyumna replies, “I will do as you wish. Go, O son of 
Kunti, without anxiety of any kind. Without killing me, Drona will never 


harm or take Yudhishtira. And Drona fears me more than any other warrior 
for he knows that his death is written at my hands.” 

Thus entrusting Yudhishtira to Dhrishtadyumna and saluting his elder 
brother, Bhimasena rides forth in search of Arjuna. Before he leaves, 
Yudhishtira embraces Bhimasena and sniffs his head affectionately and 
blesses him, for it is well known that Bhima has always been his favourite 
brother. After worshipping a number of Brahmanas, circumambulating 
them in pradakshina; after gratifying them with many gifts; after touching 
the eight kinds of auspicious articles and drinking potent kairataka honey, 
Bhimasena, the shura of all shuras, the corners of whose eyes have turned 
red with intoxication, feels that his natural, boundless strength has doubled. 

The Brahmanas perform propitiatory ceremonies for him, various 
omens indicating success greet him; and seeing all this, he already feels the 
delight of anticipated victory. Favourable winds begin to blow to predict his 
success. Then, Mahabaho Bhimasena, foremost of maharathas, strongest 
man on earth, decked with earrings and angadas, and his hands cased in 
leather gauntlets, mounts his excellent ratha. His priceless armour made of 
black steel inlaid with gold, looks like a cloud charged with lightning. 
Yellow, red, black and white robes gracefully cover his great body. Also 
wearing a coloured cuirass that protects his neck, Bhimasena is as 
resplendent as a cloud ornamented with a rainbow. 

Just as Bhimasena is on the point of setting out, we hear the fierce blasts 
of Panchajanya again, which can fill the three worlds with fear. Yudhishtira 
says to Bhima, “The Vrishni hero blows his conch again and fills the earth 
and sky with its thunder. Surely, Arjuna has fallen and Krishna now fights 
the Kurus. I am certain that Kunti, Draupadi and Subhadra, with their 
relatives and friends, have all seen inauspicious omens today. So fly to 
Arjuna, my brother, for all the world seems empty to my eyes that long to 
see Dhananjaya and Satyaki.” 

Bhima puts on his leather gloves, takes up his bow, calls for the drums 
to be beaten, blows his conch with great force and roaring like ten lions, 
pulls on his bowstring, shaking the field and making his enemies’ hearts 
tremble. Assuming a dreadful form, he rides out in his great chariot yoked 
to horses of the finest breed, gifted with the speed of the wind or thought, 
their reins held by Visoka and whinnying furiously as they dash ahead into 
the fray. 


Losing a gale of arrows, powerful as his father the Wind, be quickly 
begins to raze the enemy vyuha, while the valiant Panchalas and the 
Somakas follow him, like the Devas following Maghavat. 

The brothers Dusasana, Chitrasena, Kundabhedin, Vivimsati, 
Durmukha, Duhsaha, Sala, Vinda, Anuvinda, Sumukha, Dirghabahu, 
Sudarshana, Suhasta, Sushena, Dirghalochana, Abhaya, Raudrakarman, 
Suvarman and Durvimochana surround him and these resplendent shuras 
attack him with their troops. Bhima is at them with the wild imperiousness 
of a lion hunting herds of deer. They loose devastras and other incandescent 
arrows that cover him like clouds shrouding the sun. 

Blasting them out of his way, truly like some towering gale of his father 
Vayu, Bhima attacks Drona’s elephant-force and covers them with fire. In 
no time, the Vayuputra demolishes that division and those that remain alive 
bolt in all directions. Like animals in the forest terrified at the roar of a 
Sarabha, the elephants all run, with frightful cries. Racing along, Bhima 
comes upon Drona’s main host. 

The Acharya checks his advance, like the continent resisting the surging 
sea and, smiling, strikes Bhimasena on his forehead with a shaft whereupon 
he looks like the sun with his rays streaming up. Drona thinks that Bhima 
will show him reverence as Arjuna had, and says to him, “Mighty 
Bhimasena, you cannot enter my vyuha without vanquishing me! Krishna, 
with your brother, went into my army with my consent, but you will never 
succeed.” 

Bhima, enraged, his eyes the colour of blood, red or burnished copper, 
replies roughly, “O wretch of a Brahmana, it cannot be that Arjuna entered 
this host with your consent. He is invisible and can break into an army 
commanded by Sakra himself. If he offered you reverence, it was only 
because he respects you. But know, O Drona, that I am not compassionate 
like Arjuna. Iam Bhimasena your enemy. 

We regarded you as our father, Acharya, and ourselves as your sons and 
so we were always humble before you. However, when you speak to us as 
you do today, and fight us with devastras, all that is a thing of the past. You 
regard yourself as our enemy, so let it be as you wish. I am Bhima and I will 
now show you the force of my enmity!” 

And Bhima whirls a great mace, like Yama himself twirling his danda, 
and hurls it at Drona like lightning. Drona leaps out of his chariot in the 
nick of time and Bhima’s massive gada shatters the Brahmana’s ratha, 


killing his horses and sarathy in an explosion of wood and blood. Then 
Bhima destroys countless Kuru warriors, truly like a tempest felling trees. 
Your sons once more surround him while Drona, mounting another chariot, 
returns to the mouth of his vyuha and remains there, recovering himself, 
waiting for Bhima to come to him again. 

The infuriated Bhima covers the chariot-division before him with 
showers of arrows, with force not yet seen on the field. Your sons, the 
maharathas, fight back manfully. Dusasana casts an iron spear at his cousin; 
Bhima divides it neatly, marvellously along its length as it flies towards 
him. With three immaculate shafts he kills your sons Kundabhedin, Sushena 
and Dirghanetra; he beheads your heroic son Vrindaraka, pride of the 
Kurus. He next despatches your sons Abhaya, Raudrakarman and 
Durvimochana. 

Your other princes then surround Bhima, and shower fulminations of 
arrows over him, like lashing rain upon the mountain breast at summer’s 
end. And like the mountain does Bhima receive those heavy salvos. Bhima 
feels no pain and smiling awfully sends your sons Vinda, Anuvinda and 
Suvarman to Yama. He does not pause and blows your son Sudarshana’s 
chest apart, killing him instantly. 

The titanic Pandava trains his wrath on the rathas of your army, and 
within moments overwhelms them with his fury and they flee in all 
directions. Like a herd of frightened deer, your sons terrified by Bhimasena, 
all turn and flee from their dreadful cousin. He, however, goes coursing 
after their vast legion and careening everywhere as he belabours your 
warriors from every side. Your best soldiers spur their horses, as swiftly as 
they can go, away from the force of nature that is Bhima come hunting 
them. 

Stupendous Bhimasena gives roar after shattering roar, slaps his armpits 
like peals of thunder, further deranging your rathikas, and flares on towards 
Drona’s main vyuha, trampling over the corpses with which he has 
scattered the field.’” 


CANTO 124 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “After Bhima mows down the chariot-division, 

Drona, smiling, shrouds him in a downpour of arrows to stop his 

furious progress. However, Bhimasena confounds your army with his 

powers of maya and absorbs the Acharya’s fusillade, while your sons attack 

him again. Inspired by your princes, many kings, all great archers, rush to 
surround him. 

Bhima grins fearsomely, gives a great roar and casts a mace at them like 
a thunderflash, like Indra’s very Vajra. Blazing with splendour, emitting 
streaks of lightning, that mace fills the whole world with a deafening sound 
and overwhelms your soldiers. It terrifies your sons and your other warriors 
flee again in alarm, with loud cries. Many foot-soldiers fall where they 
stand at the unbearable sound made by the fierce gada; many maharathas 
fall out of their chariots. 

The occult and magical mace flies everywhere, killing hundreds; it flies 
back into Bhima’s hands and he casts it, again and again. Slaughtered by 
Bhimasena’s great gada, once given him by Mayaa Danava, all your 
warriors run away in fear, like deer attacked by a monstrous tiger. The 
colossal Bhima demolishes the enemy, blasting his way through their ranks 


in a furrow of blood. He tears his way through your army like Garuda of the 
beautiful feathers. 

Rajan, while Bhimasena, the great leader of chariot-divisions, brings 
bloody carnage to your troops, Drona rushes at him again and stops him 
still with a supernatural volley of shining arrows; Bharadwaja’s son roars in 
triumph and fear seizes the Pandavas. Yet another feverish duel develops 
between Drona and Bhima, this one also like the Devasura yuddha of yore. 

Drona’s luciferous astras consume brave Pandava warriors, thousands 
of them. Losing all control of himself, with a roar like none heard before 
during this war, Bhima shuts his eyes, leaps down from his chariot and runs 
straight at Drona’s ratha, ignoring all the arrows that pierce him on his mad 
way like a massive bull might the rain that falls upon him. 

Staggering Bhima seizes Drona’s ratha by the shaft, and lifts it above 
his head and flings it down smashing it into shards. However, Drona nimbly 
jumps out of his chariot just before Bhima seizes it, and running with some 
celerity, quickly mounts another chariot and with his sarathy whipping his 
horses to great speed, the Acharya retreats, mildly dazed by Bhima, to 
defend the entrance to his vyuha again. Who has ever thought of a feat like 
the one Bhima performs, let alone seen such a thing? 

Bhima quickly remounts his ratha and once more advances imperiously 
towards your son’s army, defying all the enemy warriors like a mountain a 
surging sea. As he forges on, he destroys the Kshatriyas before him like a 
tornado uprooting rows of trees. 

Bhimasena now erupts on the Bhoja troops led by Kritavarman, and 
flattens them. He affrights them with the very sound of clapping his huge 
hands; he overwhelms them like a tiger a herd of cattle. Blasting through 
the Bhoja division, with blood spraying all around him as he goes, and 
through the Kambojas as well as countless tribes of Mlecchas, he sees some 
way ahead of him the splendid Satyaki, fighting like an army by himself! 
Bhimasena flashes on relentlessly, anxious now to catch sight of Arjuna. 

After he effortlessly blows his way through all your warriors, in 
scarcely any time at all, the gale that is Bhimasena finally sights Arjuna, 
fighting fervidly to reach and kill Jayadratha. And seeing his brother, Bhima 
gives the roar that Yudhishtira wanted of him; he roars and roars as the 
greatest thunderheads do during the monsoon, exhilarating his own forces 
and making his enemies’ blood run cold. 


At the heart of the raging battle, Arjuna and Krishna hear those 
awesome roars, and they reply with roars of their own, elated and eager to 
lay eyes on Vrikodara. Then, they resume their hot charge to discover 
Jayadratha, for their time is short. Far away, Yudhishtira clearly hears 
Bhima’s roars and then in delight he hears Arjuna and Krishna roaring as 
well. In a moment, all Yudhishtira’s anxiety leaves him and, a smile 
wreathing his noble face, he repeatedly prays for Dhananjaya’s success. 

While Bhima continues to bellow out his roars, to make certain that his 
brother has heard him above the bedlam of the war, Yudhishtira happily 
says to himself, “Bhima my brother, you have indeed sent me the message I 
asked for. You have indeed fulfilled the wish of your brother. Those who 
have you for their enemy can never be victorious! 

It is our great good fortune that Arjuna Savyasachin is still alive and the 
heroic Satyaki as well. 

It is my great good fortune that I hear both Vasudeva and Dhananjaya 
roaring as they do. Arjuna, who vanquished Sakra himself in battle and 
gratified Agni in the Khandava vana, still lives and my hope surges high 
within me again that we shall yet win this horrible war. 

A benign providence has kept Arjuna Parantapa, on whose might we 
rely, alive. 

Truly, it is kindly fate smiling on our cause that Partha, who vanquished 
the Nivatakavachas, whom the gods themselves could not kill, still lives. 

It is through good fortune that Dhananjaya, who crushed all the 
Kauravas come to seize Virata’s kine outside the Matsya king’s city, still 
lives. 

Ah, the Partha who slew fourteen thousand Kalakeyas, still lives— 
through sheer good fortune and against all likelihood. 

It is because of great destiny that the Vijaya, who for Duryodhana’s 
sake vanquished Chitraratha, the Gandharva king in the forest, still lives. 

Only providence has kept my Arjuna, always dear to me, who wears the 
kirita and golden garlands, who is Swetavahana of the white steeds, with 
Krishna himself for his sarathy, alive. 

Ah, I am still anxious. Will Arjuna, burning with grief over the death of 
his son, succeed in his most difficult mission to kill Jayadratha? After he 
fulfills his vow, protected by Vasudeva, will I see Arjuna again before the 
sun sets? 


Will the killing of Jayadratha, who is devoted to Duryodhana, break our 
enemies’ spirit? Will they make peace with us when Jayadratha dies? 
Seeing his brothers all killed by Bhimasena, will he make peace with us? 
Seeing other great warriors lying prone on the ground in the piquant 
postures of death, will the dark-hearted and obdurate Suyodhana give way 
to remorse? Will our enmity not cease with the single sacrifice of Bhishma? 
Will Duryodhana make peace with us to save the remnants of what is still 
left to him and us?” 

Diverse reflections of this kind pass through the mind of Yudhishtira, 
who is overwhelmed with compassion. Meanwhile, the war between the 
Pandavas and the Kauravas continues to rage.’” 


CANTO 125 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


S D hritarashtra says, “While mighty Bhimasena roars repeatedly and 

loud as thunder, which of our heroes surround him? I do not 
know of a warrior in the three worlds, Sanjaya, who can face an angry 
Bhimasena armed with a gada and resembling Death himself. Not even 
Sakra himself can stand against our Bhima, who can destroy a ratha with a 
ratha and an elephant with an elephant. 

Who among those devoted to Duryodhana dares to do battle with an 
incensed Bhimasena, ardently engaged in slaughtering my sons, like a 
forest fire consuming dry leaves and grass? Who are they that encircle 
Bhima after seeing him slay my sons one after another like Yama himself? I 
do not fear Arjuna, Krishna, Satyaki or the fire-born Dhrishtadyumna as 
much as I do Bhima. Tell me, O Sanjaya, who are the heroes that attack the 
conflagration that is Bhima, who devours my sons?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘While maharatha Bhimasena roars and roars, the great 
Karna cannot bear it and rushes at him with a shout. Karna bends his bow 
forcefully, reveals his vehement prowess, and stops Bhima’s rampage like a 
lone great tree withstanding a hurricane. And Bhima, finding Vikartana’s 


son before him, flares up in wrath and charges at him, unleashing a thick 
torrent of arrows at the Sutaputra. 

Karna serenely faces all these thunderbolts and shoots as many back at 
Bhima. All the other warriors, maharathas and horsemen, tremble when 
they hear the resounding twanging of the bowstrings of those two. Indeed, 
to all the great Kshatriyas there the dreadful bellowing of Bhimasena seems 
to fill all the earth and the sky, so both quake with it. All around him, bows 
clasped in the hands of warriors drop from their hands turned weak by the 
Pandava’s terrific yells and roars. And horses and elephants, O Rajan, spray 
urine and dung in fear. 

Various fearsome evil omens make their appearance. The sky swarms 
with dark flights of vultures and kankas during the remarkable duel between 
Bhima and Karna. Then Karna strikes Bhima with twenty arrows and 
quickly pierces his charioteer also with five. Mighty Bhima, with a smile, 
looses four and sixty sizzling shafts at Karna. Karna responds, O Rajan, 
with four flaming astras, which Bhima adroitly smashes into fragments. 
Now Karna covers him with dense showers of arrows, and Bhima breaks 
Karna’s bow and strikes the Suta’s son with ten perfect arrows. 

Maharatha Karna, of terrible deeds, takes up another bow and stringing 
it quickly, strikes Bhima savagely with countless cruel barbs. A livid Bhima 
drills three straight and vigorous shafts into Karna’s chest. O 
Bharatarishabha, with these barbs protruding from his breast, Karna looks 
as stunning as a mountain with three peaks; blood begins to flow from his 
wounds like rills of red chalk flowing down the mountain. 

Wounded and bleeding, Karna is a little distraught. He strikes Bhima 
with one shaft of exceptional force, then assails him with hundreds, why, 
thousands of quicksilver barbs. Suddenly shrouded in Karna’s torrid arrows, 
Bhima, unperturbed, almost playfully severs Karna’s bowstring; then, with 
a broad-headed arrow, he strikes off Karna’s charioteer’s head in a red burst 
and, next moment, kills the Sutaputra’s four horses. Karna, his pride sorely 
wounded, is forced to jump down from his chariot and hastily mount 
Vrishasena’s ratha. 

And after vanquishing Karna, the roar that erupts from Bhima is louder 
than any gone before; it is like booming thunder. Hearing that roar, 
Yudhishtira is elated knowing that Bhimasena has defeated Karna. The 
watriors of the Pandava army also blow their conches from all sides and 
your warriors, hearing this noise, shout and roar back defiantly, and sound 


their horns and conches. Arjuna pulls resonantly on the bowstring of the 
Gandiva and Krishna blows the Panchajanya. Yet, drowning all these 
sounds, all Kurukshetra hears the bellowing of Bhima, O Sire! 

Karna and Bhima loose storms of flawless arrows at each other. While 
the son of Radha shoots his arrows calmly, the son of Pandu does so with 
great force.” 


CANTO 126 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “After routing your army, Arjuna and Bhimasena go 

after Jayadratha, while your son Duryodhana rides to Drona 

astride his single ratha, thinking on the way about what he must say and do. 

His ratha endued with the speed of the wind, flies along towards Drona. His 

eyes red with anger, your son tells the Acharya, “O Parantapa, Arjuna, 

Bhimasena, the invincible Satyaki and many other maharathas have put our 
troops to rout and are nearing Jayadratha by the moment. 

O bestower of honours, how have both Satyaki and Bhima bested you? 
Foremost of Brahmanas, your defeat at the hands of Satyaki, Arjuna, and of 
Bhimasena is like the ocean drying up: incredible to us all. All our warriors 
blame you and ask loudly, ‘How has Drona, the greatest master of the astra 
shastra, been vanquished?’ 

When three maharathas have vanquished you in succession, it seems 
that I will surely lose this war. Acharya, tell me now what you have to say 
on what awaits us since what has happened is past and irretrievable. Think 
now of what remains and say quickly what we should do next to save 
Jayadratha’s life.” 


Drona replies, “I have reflected upon this, Duryodhana, and listen to 
what I have to say. As yet only three great maharathas among the Pandavas 
have overwhelmed us. We have as much to fear from those behind these 
three, as we have to dread those that have gone ahead. Where Krishna and 
Dhananjaya are, our fear must be greatest. They have attacked the Bharata 
army, both on the front and now from behind. Surely, now protecting 
Jayadratha is our main task. The Sindhu is terrified of Arjuna and deserves 
our protection. And now the fearless Satyaki and Bhima both hunt 
Jayadratha. And all this is the result of the game of dice that Sakuni 
contrived. 

Nothing of final worth was won or lost in the Kuru sabha during the 
game of dice. But this sport that we are engaged in now will fetch real 
victory or defeat. The apparently innocent die, which Sakuni cast in the 
Kuru sabha, have turned into deadly arrows that claim millions of lives. 
Today, O Rajan, Kshatriya warriors are the dice players, their lethal arrows 
are the long dice, and the wager is Jayadratha’s life. 

There is only one thing for us to do: without care for our lives, we must 
fight to save him from Arjuna. Today the game has become real; and here 
on Kurukshetra, where our greatest warriors guard Jayadratha, is where we 
will find final victory or defeat. So, ride with all speed to support the 
maharathas who are already engaged in saving his life. I myself will stay 
here and direct other assistance to you, while holding up the joint advance 
of the Pandavas and the Srinjayas.” 

At the Acharya’s command, Duryodhana flies with his legions towards 
Jayadratha, now determined to accomplish the difficult task of saving him. 
Meanwhile, the two guardians of Arjuna’s chariot-wheels, the Panchala 
princes Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas, are attempting to rejoin Arjuna by 
skirting around the Kuru array. You may remember, O Dhritarashtra, that 
earlier, while Arjuna penetrated into your host, Kritavarman stopped the 
Panchala brothers. Now, seeing them go around his army, Duryodhana loses 
no time in engaging them in fierce battle. 

Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas, both known to be great maharathas, 
stretch their bows and attack Duryodhana fiercely. Yudhamanyu strikes 
Duryodhana with twenty arrows, and his horses with four shafts. But, with a 
single arrow, Duryodhana demolishes Yudhamanyu’s standard, with another 
his bow, and finally with a wedge-headed arrow, fells Yudhamanyu’s 
charioteer from his niche, stunning but not killing him. Again, he rakes 


Duryodhana’s horses with four more arrows, and then, in ferocious 
inspiration, plunges thirty barbs in a blink straight into your son’s chest. 

Equally animated, Uttamaujas kills Duryodhana’s sarathy with gold- 
embellished arrows. Duryodhana in rage brutally kills Uttamaujas’ four 
horses and his two Parshni charioteers. Uttamaujas quickly jumps down 
from his useless ratha and clambers onto his brother Yudhamanyu’s chariot. 
Red-eyed, he kills Duryodhana’s horses. 

Yudhamanyu immediately severs Duryodhana’s bow and shreds his 
leather shooting gloves. Your son, the bull among men, leaps down roaring 
from his ratha with a great mace in his hand and rushes headlong at the 
Panchala princes. Seeing him come at them, like Yama himself with his 
cudgel, Yudhamanyu and Uttamauyjas hastily jump out of their ratha. 

Then Duryodhana, wrath incarnate, pulverizes the chariot in frenzy; 
with manic blow after dreadful blow he makes a pulp of blood and bone of 
the horses and their charioteer. Continuing to vent his blind fury, he shatters 
the gold-inlaid wooden ratha into fragments, which he then drives down 
into the earth with an uncontrolled barrage of blows. Finally spent, 
Duryodhana, his eyes still red as plums, climbs onto Salya’s nearby chariot. 

Meanwhile, those two Panchala maharathas also mount two other 
chariots and drive on towards Arjuna.’” 


CANTO 127 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘At the chaotic heart of the general pandemonium, 
Karna and Bhima duel again, like two great wild elephants in rut 
in the heart of a wild jungle.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Tell me about the duel between Bhima and Karna, 
as they fight not far from Arjuna’s chariot. Earlier Bhimasena defeated 
Karna, so how does the mighty Karna now fight Bhima? How does Bhima 
fight the Suta’s son, whom so many say is the greatest maharatha on earth? 
Dharmaputra Yudhishtira, having prevailed over Bhishma and Drona, does 
not fear anybody more than he does Karna; indeed, he passes sleepless 
nights from fear thinking of him. 

So say, O Sanjaya, how Bhima faces great Karna, who is always 
devoted to Brahmanas and never flees a battle? Karna now knows that he is 
the Pandavas’ brother, and feels kindly towards them. He also remembers 
the solemn word he gave Kunti that he would not kill any of her sons other 
than Arjuna. Then how will he vanquish mighty Bhima? As for Bhima, he 
only remembers all that the Suta’s son inflicted on him, his brothers and 
their beloved Panchali. Tell me how he fights Karna. 


My son Duryodhana has put his faith most of all in Karna to overcome 
all the Pandavas in this war. How does Radheya, in whom my wretched son 
rests his hope of victory, fight Bhimasena of terrible deeds? 

How does Bhima fight the Sutaputra, relying upon whom my sons chose 
to fight this war against the maharatha sons of Pandu? Burning within 
himself to recall all the indignity and injuries that Karna has heaped upon 
the Pandavas, how does Bhima contend with him? 

How, indeed, does Bhima face Karna in single combat, Karna is 
endowed with such valour that he subjugated all this Earth on a single ratha, 
for Duryodhana’s sake? How does Bhima fight this son of a Suta, who was 
born wearing blazing golden kundalas like drops of the fiery sun? 

You are a masterly narrator, O Sanjaya! Tell me, therefore, in detail, 
how the duel unfolds between these two incomparable heroes; tell me who 
among them is victorious?’ 

Sanjaya replies, ‘Maharatha Bhimasena is anxious to leave Karna 
behind him and join Krishna and Dhananjaya. However, the Sutaputra 
lashes him with relentless flights of arrows, and holds him up. The mighty 
son of Adhiratha, his face handsome, radiant as a full-blown lotus, and lit 
up with a smile, challenges Bhimasena to fight him again. 

Karna says, “O Bhima, I did not in my dreams ever think that you were 
a coward who would show his back to a battle. But why else do you run 
from me in such haste to find Arjuna? O delighter of the Pandavas, this is 
not becoming of a son of Kunti. Stay and show me your valour, if indeed 
you are at all valiant. Come, loose your fiercest arrows at me!” 

Bhimasena, expectedly, is cut to the quick by Karna’s sneering 
challenge; growling, he turns his chariot around and rushes fuming at 
Karna. Bhima Parantapa, Pandu’s choleric son who has killed so many of 
your princes, my lord, looses a windstorm of arrows like his father Vayu at 
the calm Sutaputra. The titanic Vayuputra now wants to kill Karna as 
quickly as he can. 

O Rajan, Karna, with the tread of a royal elephant, effortlessly cuts 
down Bhima’s frenetic torrents with just a handful of astras. With his 
superior knowledge of the art of war, Karna takes on the aspect of a great 
Acharya. He seems to mock and even toy with Bhimasena with his light- 
swift, feather-light touch, as the infuriated Pandava fights with great 
prowess but little finesse or restraint. Bhima seethes at Karna’s amusement, 


which the many brave warriors gathered all around to watch this duel, 
witness. 

Roaring and his eyes bulging, Bhima strikes Karna through his chest 
with a tempestuous clutch of calf-toothed barbs. He pierces the Suta’s son, 
who now wears rainbow-hued armour after Indra took the golden kavacha 
he was born with, with three and seventy powerful shot arrows of beautiful 
feathers; he strikes Karna’s horses sheathed in golden armour, each with 
five stormy barbs. 

Then, in the twinkling of the eye, Karna raises his archery to a supernal 
level, covering Bhima, his chariot, his horses and sarathy with a network of 
arrows as delicate and perfect as it is violent. Next moment, with untold 
ferocity, the Sutaputra pierces the Pandava’s impenetrable armour with 
sixty-four lethal barbs that plunge deep into the hulking Bhimasena’s 
massive body. 

Briefly startled, Mahabaho Vrikodara entirely disregards the onslaught, 
for he who once drank Nagamrita feels no pain whatever at being struck 
deep by Karna’s missiles like serpents of virulent venom. Never flinching, 
Bhima rakes Karna with thirty-two flat-headed shafts, loosed with 
indescribable force. Mighty Karna shrugs off these arrows with the greatest 
disdain and again envelops Bhima in a cloud of fire. 

In truth, Karna, who is beyond compare and who knows that Bhima is 
his brother, fights Bhima with mildness, while Bhima, his heart burning 
with remembering old wrongs, fights with utmost ferocity. Further incensed 
by Karna’s cool manner, his maddening, almost tender smile for which he 
does not know the cause, wrathful Bhimasena unleashes a swarm of arrows 
at his enemy that plummet down on him like hunting falcons. Golden- 
winged and keen, Bhima’s shafts cover the superior son of Radha like a 
flight of insects covering a roaring fire, and are all consumed. 

Karna, still languidly, returns Bhima’s fire, shaft for shaft, and Bhima 
cuts all these arrows down with a slew of broad-headed thunderbolts, before 
they can reach him. Karna, son of Vikartana, chastiser of foes, again 
swathes Bhimasena with some more intense volleys, indeed, now so 
profusely that the Pandava begins to resemble a porcupine with its quills 
erect. 

Like the sun containing his own rays, Bhima remains unmoved by the 
dense clusters of golden-winged, stone-whetted barbs that protrude from 


him all over. With all his limbs bathed in blood, Bhimasena looks 
resplendent as an asoka tree in spring, bearing its flowery burden. 

But he cannot countenance what Karna does, still playfully, and, rolling 
his eyes in rage, he strikes Karna with twenty-five great and long shafts, 
with all his might. At which, Karna looks like a white mountain with 
countless snakes hanging from its sides. And once more, Bhimasena, 
endowed with the skill of a Deva, pierces the undaunted Sutaputra, always 
ready to lay down his life for honour, with fourteen more stinging shafts. 

As Karna receives these, Bhima, now smiling to himself and exerting 
himself truly to the fullest, breaks Karna’s bow, kills his horses, his sarathy 
and ruptures the Sutaputra’s chest with a host of elongated arrows brilliant 
as the sun. Those winged shafts pierce through Karna’s body and into the 
earth, like rays of the sun piercing through the clouds. 

Stricken by these arrows and with his bow destroyed, the haughty 
Karna’s face turns red and, in considerable pain, he takes to another ratha 
and rides briefly away.’” 


CANTO 128 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: ‘T) hritarashtra says, ‘O Sanjaya, what does Duryodhana say when 

he sees Karna, upon whom my sons have reposed all their hopes 

of victory, turn away from the field? How did the mighty Bhima, arrogant 

of his prowess, fight on? What does Karna do after he faces Bhimasena in 
that fiery encounter?’ 

Sanjaya replies, ‘Mounting another ratha that is swiftly prepared for 
him, Karna comes storming back to confront Bhima again; he comes with 
the fury of the ocean stirred by a tempest; now he comes in rage. Seeing the 
Sutaputra like that, his brow dark and his face set grim, your sons, Rajan, 
consider Bhimasena as having been already poured as a libation on the 
Karna fire. 

Furiously pulling on his bowstring and making terrifying sounds with 
his palms, Karna sends scathing volleys of shafts of dire intent at 
Bhimasena’s chariot. And once more, a pitched and awful duel erupts 
between the two. Both equally stirred now, both great mahabahos intent on 
killing the other, they glare at each other as if to consume the other with 
their very gaze. Their eyes are red as roses and both breathe fiercely, like a 
couple of snakes. 


Like two fighting or two angry Sarabhas, they set upon each other, 
drawing gushes of blood, mangling each other. Bhima again recalls all that 
he endured during the game of dice, during his exile in the vana and in 
Virata’s city; he remembers how your sons robbed the Pandavas of their 
kingdom full of riches; dark images of all their sufferings of the past 
fourteen years and before, flash before his eyes: all the numerous wrongs 
inflicted on his brothers and himself and Panchali by you and Karna. 

Bhima remembers how you conspired to immolate Kunti and her sons 
in the house of lac; most of all he remembers the torment of Draupadi in the 
Kuru sabha. He recalls clearly, as if it were happening again before his eyes, 
how the bestial Dusasana dragged a wailing Panchali into the hallowed 
Kuru court, and what Karna said to her then rings in his ears as if all the 
war around them has fallen hushed: “Take another husband, for your 
husbands are all dead! The sons of Pritha have sunk into hell and are like 
sesame seeds without kernels.” 

Awesome Bhimasena also remembers everything your sons said to the 
pure Draupadi, telling her that she was now their slave and they would 
enjoy her as one. Bhima recalls the harsh words that Karna spoke to the 
sons of Pandu when, attired in deer-skins, they were about to be banished to 
the vana; he recalls the coarse and unbridled joy that your wrathful, envious 
and foolish son showed, when he himself was prosperous and the sons of 
Pritha were plunged in distress. The virtuous Bhima, terrible Parantapa, 
remembers these and indeed all the sorrows he has suffered since his very 
childhood, and he is beside himself in a moment, utterly reckless of his very 
life. He sees Karna before him and Vrikodara, wolf-belly, wants to devour 
him at once! 

Bhima draws his gold inlaid, redoubtable bow and that tiger of 
Bharata’s vamsa, utterly reckless of his life, bears down on Karna, covering 
him with shining storms of arrows, obscuring the sun. A smiling Karna 
destroys Bhimasena’s arrow showers and pierces him with nine keen 
formidable bolts. Struck by these like an elephant prodded viciously with a 
hook, Bhima yet continues to rush at him like an angry elephant. 

Blowing his conch then, whose blast is like the sound of a hundred 
trumpets, Karna turns his fire on Bhima’s legion of elephants, horses, 
chariots and foot-soldiers, agitating them, like a tempest the sea. Bhima 
undeterred continues to attack the Suta’s son with a ceaseless tirade. Now 
Karna artfully entangles his snow-white horses with Bhima’s coloured like 


black bears of the Himalaya, and still envelops him with his shining river of 
arrows. 

Seeing the traces of Bhimasena’s steeds snarled with those of Karna’s, 
loud shouts arise from your troops. Tangled together, the eight horses look 
like white and black clouds blown together in the sky. Watching both the 
heroes in their frenzied duel, the maharathas of your army begin to tremble, 
as the battlefield, liberally strewn all around with the corpses of men and 
beasts, is quickly as dreadful as Yama’s dark and horrible realms. 

The greatest maharathas of your army look upon that terrible duel, like 
spectators watching some gory sport in an arena, and they see that neither 
awesome warrior has any advantage over his adversary. They only see the 
clash of mighty weapons, all this, Rajan, I remind you again, is the fruit of 
the evil policy of you and your sons. 

Both slayers of their foes, both gifted with wonderful strength and skill, 
they continue to assail each other in absolute ferocity, filling the air and sky 
with their arrows, razing one another’s troops all around. Ah, past glorious 
is the duel between Karna and Bhima; the sky is alight with the lustre of 
their arrows like meteors, arrows that are like flights of cranes in the 
autumn sky. 

Krishna and Arjuna also see the fearsome contention between Karna 
and Bhima, and think that Bhima might be in danger. All around Karna and 
Bhima, the arrows they loose at each other fell thousands of elephants, 
horses and men—bloody mayhem rules the field. Blood blows in streams, 
corpses cover the earth darkly.’” 


CANTO 129 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra says, ‘Bhimasena is surely an archer of great skill if 

he succeeds in balking Karna, who is a greater warrior than 

anyone. Sanjaya, tell me why Karna, who can challenge the very Devas, 

with the Yakshas and Asuras, let alone men, could not vanquish Bhima. Tell 
me more about their duel, for I now believe that either could kill the other. 

It is relying upon great Karna that Duryodhana went to war against the 
Pandavas and Krishna and the Satwatas. But hearing how Bhima repeatedly 
defeats Karna, I feel faint, O Suta; why, I fear that the Kauravas are already 
as good as slain because of my son’s sins.’ 

I fear that Karna will not succeed in overcoming the sons of Pritha. In 
all the battles that Karna fought the sons of Pandu, they have invariably 
defeated him. Ah, I do believe now that not the Devas led by Indra can 
quell these Pandavas. Alas that my evil son Duryodhana does not know 
this. Having vilely robbed Yudhishtira, who is like Kubera himself, of his 
kingdom and his wealth, my son of little intelligence is like a honey 
gatherer climbing a tree overhanging a cliff. He still does not see the fall 
that lies ahead. 


Steeped in deceit, he regards the treasures that are not rightfully his 
belonging to him forever; and in his delusion, he continues to provoke and 
insult the Pandavas and dharma itself. Sanjaya, I too am a crude soul and 
ruled by my blind love for my children. I also showed no scruple when I 
betrayed Pandu’s noble sons who observe dharma. Yudhishtira, with great 
foresight, always wants peace but my sons foolishly think of him as being 
weak and despise him. 

And with all the sufferings and shame they have endured at our hands, 
the mighty-armed Bhimasena fights Karna. Tell me, Sanjaya, how Bhima 
and Karna do battle, each intent on killing the other.’ 

Sanjaya replies, ‘Then listen, Rajan, to how the battle develops between 
Karna and Bhima. By now in considerable rage, Karna, son of Vikartana, 
lifts his archery and powerfully strikes Bhima with thirty golden arrows; no 
longer does the Sutaputra fight with any mildness. But the wild and raging 
Bhima breaks Karna’s bow with three exquisite arrows; with a wedge- 
headed shaft he fells Karna’s sarathy from his seat. 

In a smooth blur, Karna seizes up a magnificent spear, adorned with 
gold and lapis lazuli, a thing of beauty but one that is most of all a missile 
of death. Like Indra casting down his Vajra, Karna hurls that spear at Bhima 
with force enough to kill the Pandava, and then the Sutaputra roars like a 
pride of lions! Your sons are exultant to hear that roar; they believe Bhima 
will die. 

However, for all his bulk, Bhima strikes down Karna’s spear bright as 
the sun or fire, deadly as a snake that has just shed its old skin, with seven 
arrows too swift to see. With no moment’s pause, Bhima unleashes a sizzle 
of splendid arrows, all golden-winged and peacock-feathered, all of which 
are like Yama’s danda. 

Mahatejasvin Karna takes up another intimidating bow, its back inlaid 
with gold, and, stretching it, looses a barrage of arrows at Bhima, who cuts 
them all down with nine true barbs and he also roars like ten lions. Roaring, 
and bellowing at each other like two bulls for a cow in season, or like two 
tigers for the same meat, they continue to loose rivers of arrows at each 
other, always seeking a fatal lacuna through which they can kill the other. 

At times they stand still and glare at each other like bulls pawing the 
earth, resting briefly. Then, again, the gales of arrows from bows drawn 
round. 


They do their utmost, Rajan, their worst; they scorch each other always 
with blazing anger and hatred in their eyes, for, they are pure warriors, 
absorbed in battle, and in the moment all else is forgotten, indeed ceases to 
exist. Sometimes laughing at each other, at others taunting and mocking 
each other, and occasionally blowing their conches, they continue to duel 
upon the very edge of life and death. 

Then Bhima breaks Karna’s bow at the grip again, and sends his white 
horses to Yama in a crimson flurry; he fells the Sutaputra’s sarathy as well. 
Finding himself without horses or charioteer and bleeding freely from al his 
limbs, Karna is plunged into swift anxiety and does not know what to do. 

Seeing Karna, dearer to him than his brothers, stricken and helpless, 
Duryodhana blazes up in anger and commands his brother Durjaya, “Look 
where the beast Bhima is about to devour the son of Radha. Kill that 
beardless Pandava, and put heart into Karna!” 

Crying “Tathaastu!” Durjaya rushes at Bhima and strikes him with nine 
searing shafts, his horses with eight, his charioteer with six, his standard 
with three, and Bhima once more with seven. Turning away from Karna 
with a terrible growl, red-eyed Bhima plunges a lethal volley into Durjaya’s 
body, striking all his vital organs at once, and that brave son of yours falls, 
dying in agony. Seeing this, Karna, with tears flowing down his great face, 
circumambulates Durjaya, who, adorned with regal ornaments, lies on the 
earth, writhing like a snake in death’s last throes. 

Having destroyed Karna’s chariot, Bhima, grinning awfully, covers him 
with arrows and makes him look like a sataghni with numberless spikes on 
it. Yet, Atiratha Karna, though pierced all over direly, makes no attempt to 
escape the preening Bhima.’” 


CANTO 130 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “The chariot-less Karna, yet again comprehensively 

beaten by Bhima, mounts another ratha and flies at the Pandava 

again. Like elephants goring each other with tusks, they strike one another 

with arrows shot from bows drawn to the fullest stretch. Karna scathes 

Bhimasena with a scorching volley, roars, then bloodies the Pandava’s 
brawny breast. 

Bhima, in return, first rakes Karna with ten deadly straight arrows and 
then again with twenty. Karna pierces Bhima with nine arrows and takes a 
substantial shard from his standard with a flat-headed shaft. The Pandava 
responds quick as light with three and sixty arrows, like a mahout stabbing 
an elephant with his goad, or a rider whipping his horse. 

Bleeding profusely, Karna begins to lick the corners of his mouth, and 
his eyes turn redder than ever. Beside himself by now, Karna looses an 
extreme missile, now in deadly earnest to have his brother’s life. The shaft 
flares from his bow, passes through Bhima, and plunges deep into the earth. 
Bhima, whose eyes can turn no redder, suddenly hurls a huge and heavy 
six-sided gilded mace, measuring full four cubits in length, and kills all four 
of Karna’s horses. 


With two razor-faced arrows, he cuts down Karna’s standard and with 
another savage volley, kills his enemy’s charioteer. Yet again, Karna must 
leap down from his ratha and stands bared on the ground, drawing his bow. 
But now the prowess that we see from Radha’s son is wondrous in the 
extreme, as he continues to hold off the chariot-mounted Bhima. 

Seeing that Karna has lost his chariot again, Duryodhana cries to his 
brother, ““The animal Bhima has deprived Radheya of his ratha again. Take 
your chariot to him, my brother. Fly!” 

Durmukha rushes up to support Karna and envelops Bhima with his 
arrows. Bhima is delighted to see your son and begins to lick the corners of 
his mouth. Then, even as he fends off Karna’s incessant fire, he whirls his 
chariot round and dashes straight at Durmukha and in a flash, Rajan, 
slaughters him with nine irresistible shafts. Bhima, triumphant on his ratha 
is like the blazing sun. Seeing Durmukha sprawled dead, his powerful body 
blown apart by Bhima, Karna lowers his bow, stops the duel momentarily, 
and weeps. 

Circumambulating the fallen Durmukha and leaving him there, the 
heroic Karna begins to draw long, hot breaths and stands dazed, not 
knowing what to do. Seizing the opportunity, Bhimasena strikes him deep 
with fourteen long barbs, vulture-feathered. Those blood-drinking shafts of 
golden wings, infused with great power, illuminate the ten directions of the 
sky as they blaze into Karna, pass right through him, drink his blood and 
bore their glittering way into the earth behind him. 

Karna shoots back fourteen golden arrows, which pass through Bhima’s 
right arm and dive into the earth like birds a grove of trees. Sticking in the 
ground, those shafts shine like the rays of the sun while he sinks towards 
the Asta mountains of sunset. Bhima’s arm spouts blood like a mountain 
stream of water. Bhima, never unnerved, strikes Karna with three shafts 
imbued with the impetuosity of Garuda and then his charioteer with seven. 

O Rajan, wounded by Bhima’s might, Karna finally loses heart and that 
illustrious warrior abandons the battle, borne away by his fleet horses. 
Roaring in triumph, Atiratha Bhimasena continues to stretch his bow and 
radiates arrows, sowing death all around him. Like a great fire he blazes, 
gloriously.’” 


CANTO 131 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra says, “Ah, I do believe now that destiny is supreme. 
Fie on men’s prowess and striving, which is all in vain if 
Adhiratha’s son Karna cannot vanquish Bhimasena, despite fighting so 
resolutely. Karna boasts that he can vanquish all the Parthas with Krishna. I 
often hear Duryodhana maintain that he has not seen another warrior like 
Karna in the world! 

Indeed, Sanjaya, the wretched Duryodhana often told me, “Karna is no 
Sutaputra but a mighty Kshatriya, an unyielding archer who never feels 
fatigue. If I have the Vasusena for my ally, the very Devas cannot vanquish 
me, what then need be said of the sons of Pandu?” 

So tell me what Duryodhana says when he sees Karna defeated, and flee 
the field like a snake that has lost its venom. Alas, mindlessly Duryodhana 
sends Durmukha, who has no experience of battle, alone to face Bhima, like 
an insect into a great fire. 

O Sanjaya, even Aswatthaman, Salya and Kripa, united together, cannot 
stand up to Bhimasena. Even they know the terrible might of Bhima, equal 
to that of ten thousand elephants; they know he is endowed with the tejas of 
Vayu himself, as well as his brutal intentions. Why did they provoke the 


savage hero of cruel deeds; why did they stoke the fire of that Kshatriya 
who, when roused, is like Yama himself at the end of the Yuga? And then 
only the dauntless Karna dared fight Bhima by himself. Ah, no one can 
quell this son of Pandu who routed Karna in battle like Purandara 
vanquishing an Asura. 

Who is there that can face dreadful Bhima and hope to live? Bhima who 
ploughs his bloody way through my army by himself, after brushing aside 
even Drona, Bhima who rides in quest of his brother Arjuna? Indeed who in 
my army, O Sanjaya, will dare to face titanic Bhimasena? Who among the 
Asuras will venture to face the great Indra with his thunderbolt, the Vajra, in 
his hand? 

A man may return from the land of the dead, but no one can return alive 
after doing battle with Bhimasena Vayuputra! These men of little strength 
who senselessly rush into battle against the wrathful Bhima are truly like 
insects flying into a blazing fire. When I think of the gruesome oath that this 
Pandava swore in the Kuru sabha on the day of the game of dice that he 
would kill all my hundred sons, and when I hear about how he put mighty 
Karna to flight, I have no doubt that Duryodhana and his brothers are 
terrified to fight Bhima. 

My evil son repeatedly bragged in our court, “Karna, Dusasana and I 
together will vanquish the Pandavas in battle.” After seeing Bhima rout 
Karna thrice and deprive him of his chariot, Duryodhana is now consumed 
by grief not only because Draupadi rejected his suit but also to see 
Bhimasena butcher his brothers in battle, one after the other, as a result of 
his own heinous crimes. 

Who that values his life will ride against Panduputra Bhima, when he 
straddles the field like Yama himself, burning with wrath and armed with 
terrible astras? A man may escape from the very jaws of the Badava fire, 
but I am convinced that no one can escape from Bhima. Indeed, neither 
Partha nor the Panchalas, nor Kesava, nor Satyaki, all excited with battle 
lust, shows the least care for their lives. O Suta, the lives of all my sons are 
in danger.’ 

Sanjaya replies, ‘O Kaurava, you who now grieve like this after hearing 
of the carnage your enemies bring to your army are yourself the real root of 
this destruction of the world! Obedient to the sinful counsels of your sons, it 
is you who have yourself provoked this ghastly war. Though your well- 
wishers repeatedly advised you against this enormous folly, you were like a 


sick man who is fated to die and will not accept the only medicine that can 
save his life. O Rajan, best of men, having drunk the most virulent poison, 
now you must accept its consequences. 

Your warriors all fight to the best of their abilities, putting their lives at 
risk. Yet, sitting here, you speak ill of them. But now listen to me and I will 
describe to you how the war for truth rages on. 

Seeing Karna defeated by Bhimasena, five of your sons, Durmarshana, 
Duhsaha, Durmada, Durdhara and Jaya, all clad in beautiful armour, 
surround Bhimasena and shroud him with their shafts like locust swarms. 
Bhimasena stands smiling before these princes of celestial handsomeness. 
Karna dashes into battle again, losing torrents of golden-winged shafts, so 
that Bhima turns to face Karna, although your sons are attacking him. 

Your sons continue to cover Bhimasena with showers of precise shafts. 
But then, with an earth-shaking roar, Bhima unleashes twenty-five lethal 
arrows from his massive bow and sends your five sons, with their horses 
and charioteers to Yama, their blood spraying in the westering sun. They 
fall from their rathas along with their charioteers, like large trees uprooted 
by a hurricane because of the weight of their variegated flowers. 

And wonderful is Bhima’s grisly feat for he achieves it even as he 
battles Karna. Attacked from every side by Bhima wheeling around him, a 
shocked Karna can only gaze at the massive Pandava in some disbelief that 
he is such an archer as well. Bhimasena, too, with eyes crimson, glowers at 
Karna, while stretching his awesome bow.’” 


CANTO 132 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Seeing your sons lying dead on the field, a surge of 
fresh rage fills Karna. He no longer cares for his life for he 
considers himself responsible for the death of your sons, slain before his 
eyes by Bhima. Bhimasena, meanwhile, always sees images from the past 
of the sufferings of the Pandavas and Panchali before his mind’s eye. Full of 
rancour, he continues to loose flaming, unerring arrows at the Sutaputra. 
Smiling, or still sneering, Karna rakes Bhima first with five arrows and 
again with seventy razor-sharp ones with golden wings. Brushing aside the 
cascade of barbs that Karna pours over him, Bhima strikes him with a 
hundred perfect arrows, followed by five more which plunge deep into his 
body, and finally, with a wedge-headed arrow, he severs his bow. The 
dispirited Karna takes up another bow and envelops Bhimasena with some 
luminous archery. But indomitable Bhima gives a dreadful laugh, which 
rocks the field and, easily cutting down Karna’s shafts in flight, yet again 
kills his horses, charioteer, and, with reverberant twang of his bowstring 
breaks great Karna’s golden-backed bow once more. 
Karna leaps down from his chariot with a mace in his hand that he hurls 
furiously at Bhima. In full view of all your troops, Rajan, Bhima blows that 


gada into powder with a thought-swift volley, and immediately looses a 
thousand arrows at Karna. Karna cuts them all down, then cuts away 
Bhima’s armour, disjointing it neatly with some perfect shafts, and then 
strikes Bhima’s body with twenty-five vicious short arrows. 

All this, Rajan, occurs as if time has paused for the two heroes; it takes 
one’s breath away. His fury always mounting, Bhima looses nine intense 
barbs at Karna, piercing his armour and his right arm and then flashing on 
down into the earth. Shrouded with showers of shafts from Bhimasena’s 
bow, Karna yet again escapes by running away on foot. 

Seeing this, Duryodhana tells his brothers, “Fly! Protect Karna from 
every side. Surround Bhima and kill him.” 

Your sons Chitra, Upachitra, Charuchitra, Sarasan, Chitrayudha and 
Chitravarman charge Bhimasena, shooting a solid swath of arrows at him. 
And now Bhima, showing himself to be truly the son of Vayu; Bhima who 
is only half-human, kills these six sons of yours, Rajan, with a single 
incredible arrow! And now, Karna, tears springing to his eyes again, 
ruefully remembers what Vidura said in dire warning fourteen years ago. 

Mounting yet another ratha, Karna sweeps back into battle, to face 
Bhima again. The two duel feverishly, covering one another with clouds of 
golden missiles; they both look splendid like two cloud masses pierced by 
the rays of the sun. 

Now Bhima cuts away Karna’s armour with six and thirty flat-headed 
arrows shot with utmost force. The mighty-armed Karna gores Bhima with 
fifty immaculate barbs and, smeared with red sandalwood paste and 
streaming blood from all their limbs, the two resemble the newly risen sun 
and bronze moon. Their armour cut away, their bared bodies covered in 
blood, Karna and Bhima look like a couple of snakes just freed from their 
sloughs. 

The two Naravyaghras maul each other with their shafts, like two tigers 
tearing into one another with fangs and talons. Circling each other in their 
rathas, they cover each other in ceaseless fire, drawing blood, slicing off 
shreds of flesh, roaring like two mythic tigers, bellowing like two massive 
bulls battling over a cow in season. Indeed, they are two lions from bygone 
times, their eyes crimson as they battle like Indra and Virochana’s son 
Prahlada. 

Bhima, thunderhead charged with lightning, mantles Karna, the 
mountain, with a downpour of a thousand harsh kanaka-feathered arrows. 


Your sons watch Bhima incredulously, for they had never imagined their 
cousin was such a bowman; Arjuna watches him in delight, as do Krishna 
and Satyaki and Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas. Your sons are awed; they are 
all dismayed for it seems that the dreadful Pandava will indeed keep the 
vow that he swore.’” 


CANTO 133 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


°S anjaya says, ‘Hearing the twang of Bhimasena’s bow and the 

sound of his palms striking each other, Karna cannot bear what he 

sees and experiences, no more than a maddened wild elephant can the 

trumpeting of a rival. Turning away for a moment from Bhimasena, Karna 

looks with deep sorrow at the corpses of your sons whom Bhimasena has 

killed. Drawing hot, long breaths, he once more takes up arms against the 
second son of Pandu, the son of the Wind. 

Eyes burning like copper, and sighing in fury like a mighty snake, 
Karna, as he shoots his arrows, is as resplendent as his natural father, Surya 
Deva, radiating his rays. Vrikodara, bristling with the shining shafts shot 
from Karna’s bow, looks like a plant reflecting the rays of the sun. The 
beautiful shafts fitted with peacock-feathers penetrate every part of Bhima’s 
majestic body, like birds entering a tree to roost there. Karna’s golden 
winged arrows, falling incessantly, resemble an infinite flight of cranes. So 
numerous are they, that they seem to issue not from his bow alone but from 
his standard, his royal parasol, the shaft, yoke and base of his ratha! Karna 
shoots his sky-ranging golden shafts fitted with vulture feathers so he fills 
the sky with them. 


Seeing him so galvanised with fury and now rushing towards him like 
Yama himself, Bhima still neither wavers nor feels the least trace of fear. 
Instead, becoming utterly reckless of his life, he strikes Karna with nine 
meridian missiles and stops Karna’s onrush. He strikes the radiant 
Sutaputra, the Suryaputra, with twenty more brutal arrows. Indeed, swiftly 
he shrouds Karna with as many arrows as his antagonist did him a moment 
ago. 

Seeing the prowess of Bhimasena, your warriors, as well as the 
Charanas on high, are filled with joy and applaud him. O Rajan, 
Bhurisravas, Kripa, Aswatthaman, Salya of the Madras, Uttamaujas, 
Yudhamanyu, Kesava, and Arjuna, all these great maharathas, among both 
the Kurus and the Pandavas, loudly cheer Bhima, crying, “Uttamam! 
Wonderful!” and they shout aloud and roar in exhilaration, friend and foe 
alike, for they are all noble Kshatriyas and master warriors and recognise 
the extraordinary archery of Bhimasena the Pandava against his redoubtable 
adversary. 

When this pandemonium breaks out, Duryodhana tells all the kings and 
princes and particularly his brothers, “Bless you all, mighty ones! Ride 
swiftly to Karna’s rescue, or Bhima will have his life today.” 

At this, seven of his brothers, Rajan, rush forward and surround 
Bhimasena, enveloping him with torrents of arrows; they assail Vrikodara 
like the seven planets afflicting the moon at the hour of the Pralaya. But the 
son of Kunti kills them all in a moment with seven luminous shafts. His 
lustrous shafts pass cleanly, lethally through their bodies, taking their lives 
with them, and soar up into the sky like birds of superb, now incarnadine 
plumage. 

Your seven sons whom Bhima kills are Satrunjaya, Satrusaha, Chitra, 
Chitrayudha, Dridha, Chitrasena and Vikarna. But Bhimasena grieves 
bitterly for Vikarna who was dear to him. And he says in grief, his 
bloodshot eyes glimmering with tears, “It is only for the oath I swore that I 
would kill all of you in this war, O Vikarna, that I have taken your life. O 
Shura, you came to fight to discharge your dharma as a Kshatriya. 
Otherwise, you alone among your brother always wished us well, Kaurava, 
and you especially loved Yudhishtira. I have kept my vow as a Kshatriya 
and I should not grieve but my heart does grieve, for you were noble and 
illustrious, my cousin!” 


Having killed those seven princes, O Rajan, before Karna’s very eyes, 
Bhimasena again gives a fulminant roar, which informs Yudhishtira at a 
distance that victory is his. Indeed, hearing Bhima’s tremendous shout, 
Yudhishtira feels joy course through him in the midst of the gory battle and 
he responds with loud conches booming and batteries of drums being 
beaten. Elated to hear his brother Vrikodara’s echoing message across the 
field, Yudhishtira, emboldened, launches an attack against Drona. 

Duryodhana on the other hand, seeing one and thirty of your sons, his 
brothers slain, recollects the wise words of Vidura and in some anguish he 
thinks, “Vidura’s prophecy is being realised!” 

Thinking this, Duryodhana is benumbed. All that your foolish and 
black-hearted son, with Karna at his side, said to the princess of Panchala 
during the game of dice, after having Draupadi hauled roughly into the 
Kuru sabha, all the harsh, coarse words that Karna said to Panchali, in your 
presence, O Dhritarashtra, and what was said to the sons of Pandu, returns 
to haunt Duryodhana and paralyses him. 

O Draupadi, the Pandavas are lost and have sunk into eternal hell, so 
choose other husbands for yourself! 

Alas, my king, the bitter fruit of all that now manifests itself. On that 
day your despicable sons said so many vile things, calling the noble 
Pandavas sesame seeds without kernels. Today, Bhimasena spews forth the 
fire of wrath, which he has restrained for thirteen years, and massacres your 
haughty sons. Oh Rajan, despite his repeated pleas, his many lamentations, 
Vidura failed to persuade you towards peace. 

O King of the Bharatas, now reap the harvest of all that you and your 
sons have sown. You are mature, patient, and entirely capable of foreseeing 
the consequences of all deeds. So it truly seems that your refusal to follow 
the sage counsel of your well-wishers is the result of fate. Ah, do not grieve, 
O Naravyaghra! All this is your fault. In my opinion, you are yourself the 
cause of the destruction of your sons. 

Vikarna has fallen, as has Chitrasena of great prowess. Many other 
maharathas and the greatest among your sons have also fallen. Yes, 
whichever of your sons Bhima found within range, he killed in a trice. It is 
for you, to narrate this horrific war to you, day after day, that I had to see 
our vyuha annihilated by Pandu’s son Bhima!’” 


CANTO 134 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra says, ‘O Sanjaya, I do believe that it is my evil rule 

that is responsible for the terrible consequences that now 

overtake us. I have so far thought only about the past, but what should I do 

now? I am calm again, so tell me how this slaughter of Kshatriyas 
continues.’ 

Sanjaya replies, “Rajan, Karna and Bhima continue to discharge arrows 
at each other like two rain-charged clouds. The shafts winged with gold, 
whetted on stone and marked with Bhima’s name, strike Karna and pierce 
his body, as if piercing into his very life. Similarly, Bhima is shrouded by 
Karna’s arrows in their hundreds and thousands, each one a venomous 
serpent. With their arrows falling on all sides, an agitation like that of the 
very ocean is created among the troops. The arrows Bhima shoots from his 
grand bow kill countless men of your army. Bestrewn with fallen elephants 
and horses, and the corpses of men, Kurukshetra is like a field of trees 
broken by a tornado. Mown down on every side by Bhima’s arrows, your 
warriors flee, screaming, “Ah, what is this?” 

The army of the Sindhus, the Sauviras and the Kauravas are afflicted by 
the shafts of both Karna and Bhima, and withdraw to a great distance. The 


remnant of these brave soldiers, with their steeds and elephants killed, flee 
in all directions away from both Karna and Bhima, crying out, “Truly, the 
Devas are confounding us for the sake of the Pandavas, for the arrows shot 
by both Bhima and Karna are razing our forces!” 

Your frightened troops run away beyond the range of Karna and 
Bhima’s arrows and stand at a safe distance to watch the blazing duel. 
While, on Kurukshetra another river of terror flows, a river that makes 
heroes exult and cowards quail, a river flowing the blood of elephants, 
horses and men. The Earth, O Bhaarata, is weirdly resplendent covered with 
the lifeless forms of men, elephants and horses along with their ornaments, 
with flagstaffs and the bases of chariots, with broken rathas and wheels and 
akshas and kuveras, with bows inlaid with gold, and gold-winged arrows in 
millions shot by Karna and Bhima, with countless javelins, spears, swords, 
battleaxes, with maces and clubs all adorned with gold, with standards of 
diverse shapes, with darts and spiked cudgels, and with beautiful sataghnis. 

The field of war looks like the sky scattered with stars, being strewn all 
over with earrings, necklaces of gold, bracelets loosened from wrists, rings, 
precious gems worn on diadems and crowns, helmets, golden ornaments of 
diverse kinds, coats of mail, leather gauntlets, elephants’ ropes, broken 
chatras, Yak-tail fans, with the shredded bodies of elephants, horses and 
men, with blood-dyed arrows, and with diverse other objects, lying 
loosened from their true and living places. 

Watching the inconceivable feats of those two warriors, the Charanas 
and the Siddhas above are full of amazement. Like a great fire, fanned by 
the wind, courses through a heap of dry grass, Karna engages fiercely with 
Bhima. Both of them shoot down countless standards and rathas, slay 
horses, elephants, and men: like a pair of fighting elephants trampling a 
forest of reeds. Your host looks like a mass of clouds, Rajan, and great is 
the scarlet carnage Karna and Bhima cause.’” 


CANTO 135 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Rajan, Karna pierces Bhima with three arrows and 

deluges him with a relentless downpour of shafts. The mighty- 

armed Bhimasena stands unmoved like a mountain. In return, he rakes 

Karna’s ear with a barbed arrow rubbed with oil and Karna’s large and 
exquisite kundala falls from his lobe like a star from the sky. 

Smiling in mockery, Vrikodara stabs Karna through his chest with 
another broad-headed arrow, and swiftly follows these with ten long shafts, 
which strike Karna’s brow and pierce it like snakes entering an anthill. With 
these shafts protruding from his forehead, the Suta’s son looks quite 
stunning, as if with a chaplet of blue lotuses encircling his lofty brow. 

Hurt deep, Karna lurches, supports himself on the kuxara of his ratha, 
and shuts his eyes in a brief swoon. He soon regains consciousness and, 
with his face and body bathed in blood, he seems to lose all restraint and 
rushes roaring and wild-eyed at Bhima, unleashing a hundred vulture- 
winged shafts at him. 

Bhima, however, ignores this tirade of shafts and looses his own 
scathing volley at Karna. The suddenly energised Karna strikes Bhima with 
nine arrows through his torso. Both Naravyaghras, roaring and growling 


like two tremendous tigers, continue to belabour each other with endless 
banks of arrows. They seek to unnerve each other by sudden bursts of 
thunderous hand clapping, and with uncanny missiles rarely used or seen. 
Then Bhima severs Karna’s bow with a razor-faced arrow, and gives a 
bloodcurdling roar. 

Throwing away the broken bow, the Suta’s son seizes up another 
stronger one. Karna’s body blazes with strange effulgence as he looks in 
anger at the slaughter of the Kuru, the Sauvira, and the Sindhu Kshatriyas, 
seeing coats of mail, standards, discarded weapons as well as the lifeless 
forms of elephants, foot-soldiers, horsemen and rathikas lying all around, 
covering the Earth. Stretching his fresh bow into a circle, he eyes Bhima 
wrathfully and begins to unleash his anger at him, looking like the autumn 
sun dazzling at mid-day. 

None that watch him can see when he draws an arrow from his quiver, 
fits it to his bowstring, draws the string back and looses his shaft; Karna’s 
archery is like a river in spate, his bow always drawn in a ring of fire and 
arrows flowing in tide from it all around him, covering the sky and 
dimming the sun. Karna’s volleys are like flights of thousands of cranes in 
the sky, like locust swarms, why like a single ubiquitous missile that never 
stops. A raging Karna swathes Bhima with his vulture-feathered, golden- 
winged barbs. 

And your sons, O Bhaarata, and their troops see the strength, energy, 
prowess and fortitude of Bhima, for with scant regard for the arrows 
pouring down on him, continues to attack Karna like a raging sea. Bhima 
stretches his bow and shoots his arrows with such ferocious speed that it 
seems like a second bow of Indra, his weapon also incessantly drawn to a 
circle. The golden shafts issuing from it form a continuous line in the sky 
and appear like a bright garland of gold. 

Bhimasena marvellously cuts down Karna’s torrents in the air, and 
sparks cascade down onto the field below. The sun is shrouded, the wind 
ceases to blow, and nothing can be seen. 

Then, both atirathas raise their archery so that the very sky seems to 
catch fire: a conflagration on high! Karna, straining himself, unleashes a 
volley of golden-winged scintillating barbs at Bhima in rage, but Bhima 
truncates every one of them into three neat slivers and roars in jubilation. 

Pandu’s tremendous son afire harries his enemy with his own savage 
streaks of lightning. Their leather gauntlets slapping against their 


bowstrings, their clapping palms, their terrible roaring, the deep rumble of 
their chariot-wheels and the deafening twang of their bowstrings all create 
absolute pandemonium. All the other warriors stop fighting and stand 
rooted, with eyes peeled, to watch this duel that exceeds all duels. The 
Devarishis, Siddhas and Gandharvas applaud them, saying, “Uttamam! 
Wonderful!” The tribes of Vidyadharas rain flowers on them. 

Cutting down Karna’s incendiary shafts, Bhima lacerates his opponent 
with a handful of arrows. Karna, also, confounds most of Bhimasena’s fire 
on him; he plunges nine long barbs deep into the great Pandava’s vast body. 
Bhima, unmoved, replies with his own shafts that rake Karna sorely. 

Suddenly, Bhima unleashes an astra like Yama’s danda, why, like Yama 
himself at Karna, who with a superior smile smashes it into shards in flight 
with three light-like arrows. Bhima, roaring louder than ever so 
Kurukshetra trembles, again looses a firetide of barbs that Karna serenely 
douses in the air. Next moment, he shreds Bhima’s quivers so the arrows 
fall out of them; he breaks his bow and severs the reins of his horse. 
Inspired, Karna kills Bhima’s horses and gouges his charioteer deep with 
five arrows like streak lightning. 

Visoka the sarathy falls out of his chariot, takes to his heels and finds 
refuge in Yudhamanyu’s ratha. Now, smiling broadly, Karna, burning like 
the yuga fire, fells Bhima’s flagstaff and banner. 

Deprived of his bow, Bhima Mahabaho seizes up a curved dart, such as 
rathikas use and, whirling it round in his hand, hurls it like a meteor at 
Karna’s ratha. Karna shatters it with ten exact arrows. Bhima picks up a 
shield decked with gold and a sword, but again Karna, still smiling, calmly 
smashes that shield into fragments with a sizzle of shafts. 

In a flash a desperate Bhima flings his sword at Karna breaking his bow 
in his hands so it hangs limp. Cool as ever, Karna takes up another dreadful 
bow and unleashes a gale of a thousand arrows at the Pandava. Struck by 
many of these shafts, Bhima gives an agonised cry and hops about in pain. 
At once, Karna’s soft heart melts in sorrow for his enemy who he knows is 
his brother. 

Now sensing victory, Karna beguiles Bhima by concealing himself on 
the floor of his ratha. Bhima darts forward and seizes Karna’s flagstaff from 
the ground and stands firm waiting to haul Karna out of his ratha. All the 
Kurus and the Charanas above applaud Bhima, who means to lay hold of 
Karna like Garuda snatching up a snake. His bow destroyed, his ratha 


ruined, Bhima stands unflinching and resolute, true to Kshatriya dharma, 
fearless for his life, still wanting just battle. 

A livid Karna now advances against Bhima in his chariot; they rush at 
each other, roaring out challenges, roaring like thunderheads at the close of 
summer. The passage-at-arms that then takes place between the two lions 
among men does indeed again resemble that of old between the Devas and 
the Danavas. 

However, Bhima’s store of weapons is soon exhausted, and he is forced 
to turn back while Karna pursues him. Seeing the elephants that Arjuna 
killed lying near, the unarmed Bhimasena runs into their hilly midst, for 
Karna cannot follow him there in his chariot. And lo, the son of Pritha and 
Vayu actually hefts a great elephant that Arjuna slew and he waits there 
even like his half-brother Hanuman with the peak of Gandhamadana! 

But Karna with unearthly archery shreds that great carcass in Bhima’s 
hands. Bhima flings the pieces of flesh at his enemy, and then laying hands 
on anything he can find, chariot-wheels and dead horses, hurls all these at 
Karna. Karna carves and smashes everything that Bhima flings at him. But 
Bhima rushes straight at the brother he does not know, taking Karna by 
surprise. Bhima raises his great fists imbued with the power of thunder and 
then suddenly remembers that Arjuna has sworn to kill the Sutaputra and he 
spares Karna’s life. 

Karna, beside himself, now gashes Bhima with fierce bursts of arrows 
and finally the Pandava collapses under the onslaught and the Sutaputra has 
him squarely in his sights; he can kill Bhima now. Karna’s rage cools 
quickly; he remembers his word given to Kunti that he would not kill any of 
her sons other than Arjuna; he remembers that the vulnerable magnificent 
Kshatriya now at his mercy is his brother. Instead of taking Bhima’s life, he 
rides up to him and repeatedly prods him with the tip of his bow. 

Hissing like a snake, Bhima snatches the bow from Karna’s hands and 
strikes him a stunning blow on the head with it! Struck by Bhimasena, 
Karna’s rage blazes up again and, his eyes burning red once more, he says 
to Bhima, “Beardless eunuch, ignorant fool, and glutton! You are no archer, 
so don’t dare fight me again. You are like an overgrown child, a lout and a 
laggard in battle! 

Pandava wretch, you should be in either a kitchen or a dining hall, not 
on a battlefield. Bhima, you should pass your days in the vana eating roots 
and flowers, keeping vratas and doing tapasya, for as a warrior you are 


nothing. Great is the difference between battle and the life of a muni. O 
Vrikodara, you are suited to a life in the forest since battle does not suit you 
at all. 

Otherwise, glutton, you are fit to order cooks, servants and slaves, as 
you did in Virata’s palace and reprove them when you do not like your 
dinner! O dimwitted one, take sannyasa and gather fruits for your insatiable 
appetite. Go into the forest, O son of Kunti, for you are fit to fight a war. 
Employ yourself in plucking fruits and roots, or in waiting upon guests, for 
battle does not suit you at all.” 

Rajan, I believe that Karna’s harsh words reflect all the wrongs done to 
him in his youth, the shame of being spurned as a Sutaputra. As Bhima 
stands helpless before him, he prods Vrikodara yet again with his bow, and, 
laughing loudly, says again to the red-faced Pandava, “Well, if fight you 
must, pick on your equals not Karna! For you now see what happens to 
those that dare face me in battle. Go, great lout, to where the two Krishnas 
are so that they protect you. Or go home, for, child that you are, what place 
do you have on this field of heroes?” 

But Bhimasena laughs in Karna’s face, and says in the hearing of all, 
“Evil spirit, I have repeatedly beaten you! And yet you continue to boast? 
In this world the ancients have witnessed the victory and defeat of Indra 
himself. Lowborn fellow, son of a Suta, fight me with bare arms if you dare 
and I will kill you before all these kings even as I did the giant Kichaka.” 

But the intelligent Karna refuses to be provoked into such folly before 
all the maharathas. Instead, having deprived Bhima of his chariot and 
having humiliated him, Karna mocks him again in the hearing of Krishna 
and the noble Arjuna. Then, incited by Kesava, Arjuna looses a blazing 
volley of arrows from the Gandiva at Karna, golden shafts that plunge into 
Karna’s regal frame like cranes into the Krauncha mountains. Partha drives 
Karna away from the imperiled Bhima. His bow broken by Bhima, and now 
raked by Arjuna’s terrific arrows, Karna quickly rides away from Bhima on 
his great ratha. 

Bhimasena mounts Satyaki’s chariot and they hurtle after Arjuna 
Savyasachin. In fury Arjuna looses a dreadful astra at Karna, a missile like 
Yama danda, which flashes at the Sutaputra like Garuda flying at a great 
snake. The shafts would have killed Karna, but in that moment, from a fair 
distance, Aswatthaman cuts it in two, saving the Suryaputra’s life. Flaring 


up in anger, Arjuna strikes Drona’s son with sixty-four arrows, and roars at 
him, “Do not run away, O Aswatthaman, but stay a moment and fight me.” 

But, scathed by Arjuna’s shafts, Drona’s son quickly finds refuge in a 
dense division of the Kaurava army, full of maddened elephants and 
teeming with rathas. Pulling on the bowstring of the Gandiva, drowning 
every other sound on the field, Arjuna follows the hastily retreating 
Aswatthaman, frightening him with his shafts. As he goes after Drona’s 
son, Partha razes hosts of men, elephants and horses with his arrows 
fletched with the feathers of kankas and peacocks.’” 


CANTO 136 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra says, “Day by day, O Sanjaya, my once radiant glory 

is being tarnished. Untold numbers of my army have perished. 
Ah, all this is from the reversal of fortune that time inexorably brings. 
Arjuna, stirred by the death of his son, has broken through my legions, 
which Drona’s son and Karna protect and which the very gods could hardly 
breach. 

United with the two of blazing tejas, Krishna and Bhima, as well as the 
bull of the Sinis, Satyaki, Arjuna’s powers have increased manifold. Ever 
since I heard of Dhananjaya’s success, grief, like fire burning dry grass, 
consumes my heart. I see that an evil destiny has descended upon all the 
kings of the Earth, and Jayadratha of the Sindhus among them. Having done 
the Kiritin grievous wrong, if Jayadratha comes within Arjuna’s reach, he 
will not escape with his life. Why, I already infer from the way the war 
swings against us, that the Saindhava, my son-in-law, is already slain. 

However, relate to me exactly how the battle rages on, for you are a 
gifted narrator, O Sanjaya; describe to me further how the Vrishni hero 
Satyaki fights. He entered my vast force alone, resolutely for Arjuna’s sake, 
indeed like an elephant plunging into a lake overgrown with lotuses..’ 


Sanjaya replies, ‘Seeing Bhima fight on though sorely wounded by 
Karna’s shafts, Satyaki follows him on his ratha, drawn by silver horses, 
roaring like the clouds at the close of summer and blazing like the autumn 
sun, and begins to slaughter your son’s army with his formidable bow. None 
of your maharathas can check his progress; indeed they tremble to see him 
ride at them. 

Then a warrior king Alambusha, who never leaves a battle, rushes at 
Satyaki, greatest of the Sinis. The battle between them is one that defies 
description. All your warriors, and the enemy, too, stop fighting and become 
mere spectators of the duel between these two ornaments of war. 
Alambusha shoots ten arrows at Satyaki, which that bull of Sini’s race 
destroys with his own shafts before they reach him. 

Once more, Alambusha draws his bowstring to his ear and, with the 
force of fire or the wind, strikes Satyaki with three beautifully winged 
arrows that burn like fire and pierce Yuyudhana’s kavacha and bore into his 
body. He next strikes Satyaki’s four white horses, each with a vicious barb. 
Satyaki, endued with tejas and urjas like Kesava himself, looses four shafts 
to slaughter Alambusha’s horses. With a broad-headed arrow, he strikes off 
Alambusha’s head, handsome as the full moon and fierce as the Yuga-fire. 

Having slain the descendant of a long line of kings, the Yadu bull forges 
on in Arjuna’s wake, killing countless enemy warriors at will as he goes. 
Indeed, the Vrishni hero destroys your forces like a hurricane dispersing 
masses of clouds. Wherever this lion among men wants to go, his 
resplendent Sindhu horses, white as milk of the kunda snow, take him. 

Then all the leaders of your various akshauhinis surround Satyaki and 
inundate him with arrows. Dusasana in particular attacks the Yadava 
fiercely. Satyaki, however, is undaunted and swiftly checks them all with 
fire tides from his impressive bow. Turning on Dusasana, he kills your son’s 
horses. Watching him, Arjuna and Krishna are filled with joy.’” 


CANTO 137 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “Then the great archers of the Trigarta country, their 
banners woven with golden thread, surround the mighty-armed 
Satyaki, who has accomplished everything that was required of him, indeed 
far more, and now attacks Dusasana and his legion to lend Arjuna his 
support. They blockade him from all sides with a multitude of rathas and 
cover him with a barrage of arrows. The peerless, radiant Satyaki, having 
blasted his way through the Bharata army, which is like a shoreless sea, 
which is filled with the sound of twanging bowstrings, which bristles with 
swords, darts and maces, by himself vanquishes those fifty Trigarta princes. 
Ah, Sini’s grandson is past being merely wonderful, and so swift, 
effortless and light are his movements that he flits in moments from west to 
east, north to south, back to east to west again, as well as the other 
subsidiary directions, and the shura seems to dance all over the battlefield, 
as if he is a hundred warriors in his single self. Finding Satyaki with tread 
of a lion, the Trigarta warriors cannot withstand his dexterity and flee 
towards a greater division of their own countrymen. 
Next the valiant Surasenas try to stop Satyaki, covering him with dark 
arrow showers. The noble Satyaki quells them in no time and then dashes 


against the Kalingas and, smashing his way through their mighty legions, he 
finally reaches Dhananjaya! Like a tired swimmer arriving ashore, the very 
sight of Dhananjaya, tiger among men, comforts the brilliant Satyaki. 

Seeing him approach, Krishna says to Arjuna, “Here comes the 
grandson of Sini, following in your wake. Satyaki is your disciple and 
friend, and he has consumed the Kaurava warriors like straw to find you. 
Past all count are those that he has slain on his way here. This Satyaki 
comes to you, O Arjuna, after vanquishing Drona himself and Kritavarman 
of the Bhojas with his arrows! 

Intent on achieving Yudhishtira’s weal, the brave and _ irresistible 
Yuyudhana comes to you after killing countless maharathas! 

Having achieved the most difficult feats in the midst of the Kaurava 
troops, the dashing Satyaki has come to gaze on you, O son of Pandu! 

Having, from a single ratha, fought and defeated so many mighty 
maharathas, with Drona himself at their head, does Satyaki come to you, O 
Partha! 

Sent by Yudhishtira, Satyaki comes to you, Arjuna, after razing a vast 
portion of the Kaurava army all on his own. Invincible in battle, Satyaki, 
whom no Kaurava warrior can match, flies to join you after decimating 
Duryodhana’s vast legions. Look where he comes like a lion charging out of 
a herd of cattle. 

Having strewn the earth with the heads of thousands of kings, all 
handsome as full-blown lotuses, does our Yuyudhana come to meet you, O 
Partha, after vanquishing Duryodhana himself and his brothers, and having 
killed Jalasandha. Having let flow a gruesome river of blood on 
Kurukshetra, mired with a sludge of corpses of men and beasts, ruins of 
rathas, look where he flashes towards you in joy!” 

But Arjuna shows no great joy. He says somberly to Krishna, “I am 
hardly pleased to see Satyaki arrive here! I do not know how my brother 
Yudhishtira is. Now that he is separated from Satyaki, I doubt that he is 
alive. Satyaki should have protected the king. Why then, O Krishna, has he 
left Yudhishtira to follow in my wake, leaving the king at Drona’s mercy? 

I have not yet killed Jayadratha and look where Bhurisravas now attacks 
Satyaki. I must now protect Satyaki as well while the sun sinks lower in the 
sky by the moment and I have yet to kill Jayadratha. As for Satyaki, he is 
weary; he has exhausted his astras, and his horses and his charioteer are 


worn out, O Madhava! Bhurisravas, on the other hand, is not tired and he 
has supporters behind him. How will Satyaki defeat him? 

Having crossed the very ocean of war by himself, will this bull among 
the Sinis not succumb? Bhurisravas is beyond doubt among the greatest 
Kuru warriors. Will fortune favour Satyaki against this mighty hero? O 
Kesava, I think Yudhishtira has erred in his judgement to send Satyaki out 
here to us. Forgetting his fear of the Acharya, he has sent away Satyaki 
from his side. Like a sky-ranging hawk after a peace of meat, Drona is 
always waiting for an opportunity to seize my brother. Is the king free from 
danger, Krishna?”’” 


CANTO 138 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Seeing Satyaki, the invincible Satwata, riding to join 

Arjuna, Bhurisravas swiftly advances on him and says, “It is fate 

that has brought you within my grasp and today I will fulfil my long- 

cherished wish. If you do not flee from battle, you will not escape me with 

your life. And by killing you who are so proud of your valour, I will 

gladden Duryodhana’s heart. Krishna and Arjuna will see you lying dead on 
the field riddled with my arrows. 

Hearing that I have killed you will disgrace Yudhishtira, who sent you 
here. Arjuna will see my prowess when he sees you lying dead on the earth, 
covered in blood. I have always wanted to face you in a battle, like the one 
between Sakra and Bali during the Devasura yuddha of old. Today, Satwata, 
you will feel my prowess! And then you will understand the true measure of 
my might and manliness. 

Slain by me, Yuyudhana, you will find yourself in Yamaloka, even as 
Ravana’s son Indrajit did when Lakshmana killed him. Today, Krishna, 
Partha and Dharmaraja Yudhishtira will watch you die and, grief-stricken, 
they will concede this war. Killing you today, O Madhava, I will bring joy 


to the wives of all those whom you have killed. Now that you are in my 
sight like a deer before a lion, you will not escape with your life.” 

Hearing this, Satyaki, O Rajan, laughs, “O Kurusattama, I am not 
frightened by my enemies’ arrows and I hardly fear your words! Only he 
who can vanquish me at arms can kill me, and such a one will always be 
victorious. What use your long-winded vainglorious bragging, O 
Bhurisravas? Let me see your deeds not tire of your empty threats, which 
are like autumn cloud that fetch no rain. 

Listening to you, O Kshatriya, and your hollow roars, I can only laugh. 
Let us fight like men and have between us the duel that you have so long 
wanted. My heart also longs for this battle; let us not delay! And I solemnly 
swear, O wretched Bhurisravas, that I will not leave this place without 
killing you.” 

And those bulls among men, both excited and charged with old 
animosity, unleash fiery storms of arrows at each other. Somadatta’s son 
Bhurisravas, who has been resting while Satyaki fought his way through the 
entire Kuru host, draws first blood. He plunges ten pugnacious shafts into 
Satyaki’s body, and then covers the tired Yadava in a haze of arrows. 

Satyaki, summoning deep resources, invokes an astra, which quells 
Bhurisravas’ arrow storm before it can fall on him. And then, we watch 
those two shuras, enhancers of the fame and honour of the Kuru and Vrishni 
vamsas, fight a duel that lights up the swiftly dimming sky. They mangle 
each other with utmost rancour and ferocity. Quickly, blood spurts richly 
from both in this fresh game of death, with their lives for the wager. 

Like wild tigers, like great tuskers, leaders of their clans, the two heroes 
battle, both ardent for either victory or death, while Kurukshetra echoes 
with their yells and roars, while all the Dhartarashtra army watches them 
transfixed, the other maharathas delighted by the sublime duel. Then each 
one kills the other’s horses and destroys the other’s bow, and now they fight 
with swords ringing together with sparks flying brightly at each dreadful 
stroke. 

Having taken up two great and handsome shields and two shining blue 
swords, they stalk each other in circles, and in parallel lines, then suddenly 
fly at each other striking out with fabulous skill and strength. Both master 
swordsmen, they put their lofty skills on display. They wheel about, make 
side-thrusts, rush forward abruptly, and spring high into the air to strike one 
another, both intent on having the other’s life. And having lashed out with 


their blades and parried the other’s strokes, they pause to rest, their gazes 
locked like other blades all the while. 

Truly like superb dancers they are, and all the other fighting men around 
them their awed audience. After a brief moment’s pause, the wonderful 
exhibition of prowess erupts again and they carve each other’s beautiful 
shields emblazoned with a hundred moons into pieces, until both shields are 
useless strips, which they fling away, and their swords have been broken as 
well. And then they rush at each other to wrestle with bare hands. 

Both wide-chested and long-armed, both equally magnificent wrestlers, 
they grapple. They strike each other stupendous blows and seize one 
another by the throat, with their arms hard as iron that resemble spiked 
maces. Their skills and prowess, their speed and ferocity enthrall those that 
watch. 

Loud and fearful are their roars, yes, like thunder falling upon the 
mountain breast. Like two elephants goring each other with their tusks, or 
like two bulls locking horns, the two most illustrious Kuru and the Satwata 
heroes at times struggle with brawny arms entwined, at other butt heads, 
intertwine massive legs, now slapping their armpits in bravado, sometimes 
clawing each other with their nails, sometimes clasping each other in tight 
holds, or twining their legs round each other’s waists, at others rolling on 
the ground locked together, sometimes advancing, sometimes retreating, 
sometimes rising up to their full height, and at other leaping into the air and 
then colliding thunderously. 

Indeed, they employ all the thirty different kinds of expert tactics that 
characterise such encounters between masters of the art of wrestling. 

When Satyaki exhausts his weapons during his duel with Bhurisravas, 
Krishna says to Arjuna, “Look at Satyaki, best of all archers, fighting 
without a chariot. He has scythed through the Bharata host, following in 
your wake, O son of Pandu! He has fought all the Bharata maharathas and, 
now in exhaustion, meets the mighty Bhurisravas, the giver of bounteous 
dakshina at yagnas.” 

The formidable Bhurisravas, excited with wrath, vigorously strikes 
Satyaki, Rajan, like an infuriated elephant dashing against another, blow 
after staggering blow. The two battle on, with Krishna and Arjuna 
watching. 

Then Krishna says urgently to Arjuna, “Look where Satyak1, tiger of the 
Vrishnis and the Andhakas, is succumbing to Somadatta’s son. Exhausted 


after his superhuman exploits, he has now lost his ratha. Arjuna, you must 
protect your devoted sishya otherwise Bhurisravas, of countless yagnas, 
will have his life. Mahabaho, you must hurry!” 

But Arjuna says quite cheerfully to Krishna, “The bull of the Kurus and 
the best of the Vrishnis sport wonderfully with each other, like a crazed 
elephant and a mighty lion in the forest!” 

Just then, loud cries ring out from the troops, O Bharatarishabha, for 
suddenly Bhurisravas unleashes a flurry of thunderous blows to Satyaki’s 
head and face and fells him to the ground. And like a lion dragging an 
elephant, the mighty Bhurisravas, giver of lavish dakshina at yagnas, 
roughly drags the supine Satyaki around as he likes, roaring in glee as he 
humiliates the noble Yadava before your troops. 

Then Bhurisravas draws another sword from its sheath, seizes Satyaki 
by his hair of his head and, setting his foot upon his chest, draws his arm 
back to cut the Vrishni’s head, its earrings glittering, from his trunk. But, 
fighting to save his life, Satyaki whirls his head around a few times and 
with it Bhurisravas’s arm that grasps his hair, even like a potter wheel being 
whirled along with the staff. 

Seeing Bhurisravas coarsely drag Satyaki along the ground, Krishna 
says again to Arjuna, “Bhurisravas is about to kill Yuyudhana. The very 
name Satyaki means the invincible one, and that name will be proven false 
is the wretched Bhurisravas kills my kinsman, your disciple.” 

At this, Arjuna mentally salutes Bhurisravas, thinking, “I am pleased 
that Bhurisravas, enhancer of the fame of the Kurus, is dragging Satyaki 
across the ground, as if in sport, without killing him.” 

Silently admiring his kinsman, the Kuru tiger, Arjuna replies to Krishna, 
“My eyes are fixed on the Sindhus, and I cannot, O Madhava, see Satyak1. 
Yet, for his sake and for yours, I will achieve an impossible feat.” 

Then, in obedience to his Lord and charioteer, Krishna the Avatara, 
Arjuna, although he truly cannot see Satyaki, in a blur looses a blind shaft 
from the Gandiva, which, like a meteor falling from the sky, hacks off 
Bhurisravas’s bejewelled arm with the sword in its hand in a bloody 
eruption.’” 


CANTO 139 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Severed by the unseen Arjuna’s sudden shaft, 

Bhurisravas’s angada-decked arm, still grasping the sword, which 

was raised to hew off Satyaki’s head, falls onto the ground like a five- 

headed snake. The Kuru warrior turns around in shock and wrathfully 
reproves the son of Pandu. 

Bhurisravas says, “O son of Kunti, what is this cruel and heartless thing 
you have done, for without engaging me in battle, you cut off my arm in 
stealth? Will you not have to say to Yudhishtira Dharmaputra, ‘I killed 
Bhurisravas while he fought another battle?’ 

Were you not taught the astra shastra by the noble Indra, by Rudra, by 
Drona, and by Kripa? In this world, you know the dharma of war better 
than anyone else does. How then have you cut off the arm of a warrior who 
was not fighting you? Dharma requires that one should never strike those 
who are unaware, those that are afraid, those who are without a chariot, 
those who beg for life or protection, or those who are suffering. How then, 
O Partha, have you done this heinous, sinful and cowardly thing that only 
the most lowborn, ignoble and evil wretch would do? 


Dhananjaya, an upright man can easily achieve a noble feat, while a 
dishonourable sinful deed he can do only with great pain to himself. 

A man quickly adopts the behaviour of those with whom he moves. 
This is surely seen in you, O Arjuna! Being of royal lineage and born 
especially into Kuru’s race, you have forgotten the dharma of a Kshatriya, 
although you are known for your purity and keep stern vratas. I have no 
doubt that you have done this vile thing, for Satyaki’s sake, at Krishna’s 
word. Who other than a friend of Krishna’s would inflict such an injury 
upon one who was unaware of you and fighting another battle? The 
Vrishnis and the Andhakas are base Kshatriyas, always engaged in sinful 
deeds, and are, by nature, given to disreputable conduct. Why, O noble 
Arjuna, have you taken them to be your models?” 

Arjuna replies, “My lord Bhurisravas, it is evident from all the senseless 
words you utter, that with the decrepitude of the body one’s intellect also 
becomes feeble. Although you know Hrishikesa and me well, how is it that 
you rebuke us like this? Knowing as I do the dharma of war and conversant 
as I am with the meaning of all the scriptures, I would never commit a sin in 
battle. You of all men know this well, and you still reproach me. 

The Kshatriyas fight their foes, surrounded by their own followers, their 
brothers, sires, sons, relatives, kinsmen, companions, and friends. They 
fight, relying on the strength of their leaders. Why then should I not protect 
Satyaki, my disciple and dear kinsman, who is fighting for our sake without 
caring for his life? Invincible in battle, Satyaki is like my very right hand. 
In war one should not look out only for oneself, but also protect those that 
fight for one’s cause, risking their very lives. 

This is what ensures that the king is protected in the press of battle. If I 
had not intervened when I saw Satyaki on the point of being killed, I would 
have been responsible for his death and would have grievously sinned for 
my negligence! You know all this, then why are you angry with me for 
saving Satyaki? 

Again, you reprimand me, O king, saying, ‘Though I was fighting 
another, you cut off my arm without challenging me first.’ 

In this matter, my answer is that I erred in my judgement. Sometimes 
adjusting my armour; sometimes riding on my ratha, sometimes drawing 
my bowstring, I am at war with my enemies in the midst of a host 
resembling the vast deep, full of rathas, elephants, horses and foot-soldiers 
and echoing with fierce shouts and roars. Among friends and enemies 


engaged with one another, how can you say that the Satwata warrior was 
fighting only one warrior? Having fought many and vanquished many 
maharathas, Satyaki is tired, wounded and disheartened. 

It is under such circumstances, and while you yourself had returned 
freshly to battle, that you vanquished the mighty Yuyudhana and sought to 
display your superiority. You were about to behead him with your sword 
and I could not stand by and watch that with indifference, for Satyaki is my 
friend and my sishya and as dear to me as my brothers. You should rather 
rebuke yourself that you did not take care to defend yourself while 
attacking another. Indeed, O Shura, I ask how, if you were in my place, how 
you would have behaved towards someone who depends on you as Satyaki 
does on me?” 

Thus addressed by Arjuna, the mighty-armed and_ illustrious 
Bhurisravas, who bears the device of the sacrificial stake on his banner, 
leaves Satyaki, and decides to die according to the vow of praya, to starve 
and, here, to bleed to death. A Kshatriya distinguished by many righteous 
deeds, he spreads with a bed of arrows for himself with his left hand, and 
looking to ascend into Brahmaloka, he relinquishes his senses to the care of 
the deities that preside over them. Fixing his gaze on the sun, setting his 
cleansed heart on the moon, and meditating on the mantras in the great 
Upanishad, Bhurisravas sits down on the bed of arrows, yokes himself in 
yoga, and stops speaking. 

Seeing this, your entire army, led by your sons, begins to curse Krishna 
and Dhananjaya and to laud Bhurisravas, bull among men. Though roundly 
censured, the two Krishnas speak not a word distasteful to the dying hero. 
Bhurisravas, also, although thus lauded, feels no joy. 

Then Arjuna cannot bear to listen to the curses of your sons, and what 
Bhurisravas said to him. Without anger and only grief in his heart, as if to 
remind them all, Arjuna says, “All the kings know my solemn vow that no 
one will succeed in killing anybody from our army within range of my bow. 
Knowing this, Bhurisravas, it is not appropriate, without properly 
understanding the laws of dharma, for one to censure others. That I have cut 
off your arm while you, well armed in battle, were on the point of slaying 
the unarmed Satyaki is not at all contrary to dharma. But what righteous 
man is there that would applaud the slaughter of Abhimanyu, a mere child, 
unarmed, deprived of his ratha, and without his armour by six maharathas 
uniting against him while he stood helpless?” 


Hearing this, Bhurisravas of dazzling effulgence, touches the ground 
with his left palm—for the right one has been lost—and remains silent, with 
his head hanging down. 

Then Arjuna says, “O eldest brother of Sala, the love I have for you is 
equal to what I bear Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, Bhima, Nakula, or Sahadeva. 
I now say to you, as does the illustrious Krishna: Go, O sire, to the realm of 
the righteous, and join Sibi, the son of Usinara, there!’ 

Krishna says, “You have constantly performed yagnas and agnihotras. 
Go straight into my pure realms that blaze with endless splendour, which 
the greatest deities, even Brahma, wish for, become equal to me, borne on 
the back of Garuda.” 

Meanwhile, Satyaki rises to his feet and, his eyes burning, draws his 
sword to cut off the noble, sinless head of Bhurisravas, who now sits in 
yoga with his senses withdrawn from battle, blood gushing from where 
Arjuna hacked away his right arm. All the maharathas cry out to Satyaki to 
stop: Krishna and Arjuna, as well as Bhima, Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas, 
Aswatthaman, Kripa, Karna, Vrishasena and even Jayadratha. Even the 
other troops, watching aghast, forbid him. But Satyaki hews off 
Bhirusravas’s head in a crimson blast even as that great Kuru sits in praya, 
lost in dhyana to free his soul from his body. Cries of outrage fill 
Kurukshetra. 

The Siddhas, the Charanas, and all the fighting men, as also the Devas 
witness the slaying of Bhurisravas even as he sits with his eyes shut and his 
senses withdrawn in deep dhyana, and all of them laud that great Kuru. 

Your soldiers argue the matter. “It is not Satyaki’s fault; what was fated 
has happened. We must not yield to wrath, for anger is the root of men’s 
sorrow. Brahma ordained that Satyaki would kill Bhurisravas in battle and 
there is no point in our judging what inevitably transpired.” 

Satyaki rages, “You sinful Kaurava wretches! You wear the outward 
garment of dharma, and tell me sanctimoniously that I should not have 
killed Bhurisravas. But where did this dharma of yours go when you slew 
that child, Subhadra’s son Abhimanyu, while he was unarmed? 

Once in a mood of pride, I vowed that I would kill anyone who flings 
me down alive in battle and kicks me, even if that enemy should take praya 
or even sannyasa. While I still struggled against Bhurisravas to stay alive, 
you thought me dead. This was your folly. O you Kuru bulls, the death of 
Bhurisravas at my hand is just and in accord with dharma! 


I would have killed him anyway, but Arjuna deprived me of my glory 
by cutting off his arm out of his love for me and his vow to protect all that 
fight for Yudhishtira. Indeed, what is ordained must come to pass. 
Everything is destiny; fate has slain Bhurisravas in the press of battle. What 
sin have I committed? 

Once upon a time, Valmiki sang this verse: “You say, O Vanara, that 
women should not be killed. However, in all the ages, men should always 
and without fail do whatever brings pain to his enemies.’” 

After Satyaki speaks in his ringing voice, none among the Pandavas and 
the Kauravas, O Rajan, say anything. However, in their hearts they are with 
Bhurisravas because no one there approves of Yuyudhana killing one who 
was like a Rishi made holy by countless yagnas, Bhurisravas who gave 
away incalculable gold during all his sacrifices, and who was purified 
beyond all common measure by the holiest mantras. The head of that hero, 
graced with rich blue locks and eyes red as those of a pigeon, now looks 
like the head of a horse decapitated at an Aswamedha yagna and placed on 
the sacrificial altar. Sanctified by his prowess and by the death he obtains at 
the edge of a weapon, the boon-giving Bhurisravas, worthy of every boon, 
casts off his body and ascends into swarga, sanctifying the exalted realms 
with his high punya.’” 


CANTO 140 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: ‘T) hritarashtra says, ‘Having crossed the ocean of the Kaurava 

army, unvanquished even by Drona, Karna, Vikarna or 
Kritavarman, to keep his word given to Yudhishtira, how was it that the 
heroic Satyaki was humiliated by Bhurisravas and flung down on the 
ground and almost killed?’ 

Sanjaya replies, “Listen, Rajan, to the antecedents of Sini’s grandson 
Bhurisravas. Maharishi Atri had a son called Soma, the Moon, and Soma’s 
son was called Budha. Budha had one son, of the splendour of Indra, called 
Pururavas. Pururavas had a son called Ayus whose son was Nahusha. 
Nahusha’s son was Yayati, a Rajarishi equal to a Deva. Yayati and his wife 
Devayani’s eldest son was Yadu. In Yadu’s race was born a prince of the 
name of Devamidha, whose son Sura was acclaimed in the three worlds. 
Sura’s son was the greatest of men, the celebrated Vasudeva. Sura himself 
was the equal of Kartavirya in battle. Sini was born into Sura’s vamsa, 
equal to Sura in tejas! 

About this time, Rajan, there occurred the swayamvara of the noble 
Devaka’s daughter Devaki, to which all the great Kshatriyas of the world 
came. During that swayamvara, Sini vanquished all the others and, for 


Vasudeva’s sake, swept the princess Devaki into his chariot. Seeing Devaki 
in Sinti’s ratha, that bull among men, the mahatejasvin Somadatta could not 
bear the sight and he challenged Sini to a match of wrestling, which lasted 
half a day and was stunning and wonderful to witness. During the wrestling, 
Sini threw Somadatta down on the earth. Lifting up his sword and seizing 
him by the hair, Sini kicked his adversary before the many thousands of 
kings who stood as spectators all around. Finally, out of compassion, Sini 
spared Somadatta’s life, saying in contempt, “Live!” 

Humiliated by Sini, Somadatta worshipped Mahadeva for his blessings 
so he could avenge himself on Sini. Mahadeva, the great Lord of all boon- 
giving deities, was pleased with him and asked him what boon he wished. 
The royal Somadatta asked for his boon: “I want a son, O Divine Lord, who 
will strike Sini’s son down in the midst of thousands of kings and kick him 
with his foot.” 

Mahadeva Siva said, “Tathaastu! So be it,’ and vanished from 
Somadatta’s sight. It was from Siva’s boon that the most noble and benign 
Bhurisravas was born as Somadatta’s son. And that is also why Bhurisravas 
was able to fling down Sini’s grandson Satyaki in battle and kick him before 
the eyes of the whole army. 

This is the story, Rajan, and indeed, other than for Siva’s boon, not the 
greatest of warriors can conquer the Satwata hero Yuyudhana in battle. The 
Vrishni heroes are all superlative archers, and masters, besides, in every 
other form of warfare. They are conquerors of the very Devas, the Danavas 
and the Gandharvas. They are never nonplussed and always fight, relying 
upon their own prowess and are never dependent on others. There is no one 
in this world equal to the Vrishnis. None, O Bharatarishabha, has been, is, 
or will be equal in might to the Vrishnis. They never show disrespect to 
their relatives and they are always obedient to the commands of their elders. 
When the very Devas, Asuras, Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the Uragas and the 
Rakshasas cannot vanquish the Vrishni heroes in battle, what need be said 
of men? 

They never covet the possessions of those whom they help in distress. 
Devoted to the Brahmanas and truthful in speech, they never display any 
pride although they are wealthy. The Vrishnis regard even the strong as 
weak and rescue them from their troubles. Always devoted to the Devas, 
they are self-restrained, charitable, and free from pride. This is why the 
abilities of the Vrishnis are never questioned. A man may uproot the 


mountains of Meru or swim across the ocean, but no one can defeat the 
Vrishnis. I believe I have cleared all your doubts, Rajan. However, O king 
of the Kurus, remember that all that is happening is due to your evil 
policy!” 


CANTO 141 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra says, ‘After the great Kuru warrior Bhurisravas is 
killed, under these extraordinary circumstances, tell me, Sanjaya, 
how the battle progresses.’ 

Sanjaya replies, “After Bhurisravas left for the next world, Bhaarata, 
Mahabaho Arjuna says to Krishna, “Urge the horses, Lord, to greater speed 
to take me to Jayadratha, for the sun sinks swiftly towards the Asta hills. O 
Naravyaghra, I have yet to fulfil my vow and many maharathas still protect 
Jayadratha. Ah, we must fly, Krishna, racing the sun to the horizon for I 
must kill the Saindhava before Surya Deva sets.” 

Flicking his reins and whip, Krishna, greatest of all sarathies, spurs his 
silver horses, white as moonbeams, towards Jayadratha’s chariot. At once, 
many great Kuru rathikas like Duryodhana, Karna, Vrishasena and, now, 
Jayadratha himself dash forward to stop Arjuna’s careen. Finally, Arjuna 
sees Jayadratha before him, and glares at him fearfully, as if to burn him up 
with his very gaze. 

Duryodhana quickly tells Karna, “O son of Vikartana, the critical hour 
is upon us. Now show us your true prowess, beloved friend, and ensure that 
Arjuna does not kill Jayadratha! The day is about to end, so cover the 


Pandava with clouds of arrows and slow him down! If we can protect 
Jayadratha until the sun sets, Arjuna would have failed to fulfil his oath, and 
he will take his own life by immolating himself, and then victory will be 
ours! For Arjuna’s brothers, with all their followers, will hardly last a few 
moments in a world without him. And upon the death of Pandu’s sons, we 
will enjoy the whole Earth, Karna, with her mountains, waters and forests, 
and without any thorn in our sides and no limit to our power! 

Arjuna swore his oath in anger at his son’s death; he became fate’s 
victim for he took leave in his grief of his judgement. Karna, I have no 
doubt that fate favoured us at that moment, for Pandu’s son, the Kiritin 
swore his vow to kill Jayadratha only for his own destruction. 

How, when you, my great Karna, are alive, will Arjuna succeed in 
killing the Saindhava before the sun sets behind the Asta hills? How will he 
kill him when Salya of the Madras and the illustrious Kripa protect 
Jayadratha? How will Arjuna, who is being led to his death by fate, even 
reach Jayadratha when Aswatthaman, Dusasana and I protect him? Many 
are the heroes among us who are engaged in this battle and the sun hangs 
low in the sky and plummets towards the sunset mountain. 

Partha will not even come near Jayadratha. So, Karna, summon your 
greatest determination and resolution, along with me and our other brave 
maharathas like Drona’s son, the king of the Madras and Kripa, and resist 
Arjuna with all your might.” 

Karna replies, “Deeply has my body been injured by mighty 
Bhimasena, who is more of an archer that I had dreamt. I am still in battle 
because it is ordained that I should be here. Pain wracks my every limb 
from Bhima’s arrows. Yet, for you I will fight with all my might. My life 
itself is for you and I will do everything in my power to ensure that Arjuna, 
greatest of the sons of Pandu, does not succeed in killing Jayadratha. 

As long as I am able to fight, the ambidextrous Savyasachin, who looses 
his arrows with equal facility with both his hands, will not reach the king of 
the Sindhus. Kurusathama, all that one who bears you the great love that I 
do, and is always concerned for your welfare, I will do. As for victory, that 
depends on destiny. I will exert myself to my utmost for Jayadratha’s sake 
and for yours. Victory, however, is dependent on fate. 

Fear not, Naravyaghra, I will fight Arjuna today for you as I have never 
fought before. Yet, fate and fate alone will decide who wins or loses. O king 


of the Kurus, let all our troops witness today the fierce battle between me 
and Arjuna, which will make their very hair stand on end.” 

While Karna and your son are thus speaking together, Arjuna begins to 
slaughter your host again, hewing off the great arms of helpless heroes, 
arms like spiked clubs or the trunks of elephants. He cuts off heads, as well 
as actual trunks of elephants, beheads horses, and carves up the akshas of 
rathas all around, as well as blood-dyed horsemen armed with spears and 
javelins. From horses and the best of elephants, standards, royal parasols, 
bows, yak-tails and heads fall thick and fast on all sides. Consuming your 
army like a wind-fanned great fire a heap of dry grass, the invincible Arjuna 
covers the earth with blood, and swiftly reaches Jayadratha. 

Protected by Bhimasena and Satyaki, Arjuna looks as glorious as Agni 
himself. Seeing Arjuna thus ablaze, the mightiest bowmen of your army, 
bulls among men, endowed with great energy, cannot face him at all. Then 
the maharathas Duryodhana, Karna, Vrishasena, Salya and Aswatthaman 
set Jayadratha behind them and surround Krishna and the Kiritin, who 
dances wildly on his ratha to the savage, reverberant music of the Gandiva’s 
bowstring and the slap of his palms against that incomparable weapon. 

Arjuna is like Death himself, with open maw, come hunting the 
trembling Sindhu king. The sun turns red in the sky and, wanting it to set 
quickly, the Kaurava warriors bend their bows with arms that resemble the 
tapering bodies of Nagas and cover Partha with hundreds of arrows like the 
very rays of the setting sun. That peerless one, however, dissects every shaft 
into two, three, or eight slivers, and gashes the bowmen with his raking 
shafts. 

Aswatthaman, who flies a lion’s tail on his banner, charges at Arjuna, 
striking him with ten whistling barbs and Krishna with seven and barring 
Arjuna’s way to Jayadratha. Quickly, many Kurus hem Arjuna in with a 
mass of rathas. Stretching their bows to the fullest and shooting countless 
arrows, they shield Jayadratha from the Pandava, at your son’s command. 

And now we witness glorious Arjuna’s unearthly genius; we witness the 
might of the Gandiva and see how his magical twin quivers well 
inexhaustibly with arrows. Confounding the high weapons of Aswatthaman 
and Kripa, he pierces all the warriors that surround him with nine bolts of 
thunder each. Drona’s son pierces him with five and twenty arrows, 
Vrishasena with seven, Duryodhana with twenty, Karma and Salya with 


three each. And all of them roar at him and, shaking their bows, hem him in 
closer still and continue to strike him frequently. 

They draw their rathas up in serried ranks around Arjuna and, willing 
the sun to set quickly, those great maharathas of the Kaurava army roar 
awfully at Arjuna and lash him with dense gusts of arrows. These intrepid, 
mighty warriors, their arms like maces, loose devastras at the battling 
Dhananjaya. 

But the relucent Arjuna shatters all their missiles, mundane and 
unworldly; breaking through the encirclement of chariots he rides straight at 
Jayadratha. Then Karna appears as if out of nowhere, and stops Arjuna with 
a towering gale of arrows, in the very sight of Bhimasena and Satyaki. 
Arjuna cuts these arrows down and strikes Karna, before all the troops, with 
ten steaming shafts. Satyaki drills the Sutaputra with three stinging barbs. 
Bhimasena pierces him with three arrows, and Arjuna, again, with seven. 

An unfazed Karna, fighting for his beloved Duryodhana to save 
Jayadratha’s life, unleashes sixty terrific arrows, each, at Arjuna, Bhima and 
Satyaki. In moments, the battle between the lone Karna and his three 
adversaries swells to momentous proportions. Karna’s skill that we then see 
is wondrous, as, mad with battle lust, he singly resists those three matchless 
maharathas. 

Then Arjuna looses a torrid volley at Karna, piercing him through every 
limb. Bathed in blood, the Suta’s son gores Arjuna with fifty lofty arrows. 
Arjuna breaks his bow and bloodies his chest with shafts. Seeing how the 
sun plunges towards the sunset mountain, Arjuna unleashes a devastra at 
Karna, to kill him with that single missile incandescent as the very sun. It 
flies inexorably towards Karna and the Dhartarashtras hold their breath for 
they are certain he will die. But then, from a side Drona’s son Aswatthaman 
bisects that flaming astra and it falls tamely to the ground. 

Karna takes up another bow and envelops Arjuna with a swath of 
thousands of arrows. Like the wind dispersing a locust swarm, Arjuna 
shoots them all down and covers Karna with his own arrow storms. Karna, 
destroyer of armies, shreds these in flight and returns Arjuna’s fire, shaft for 
shaft. Roaring at each other like two mighty bulls, those incomparable 
maharathas obscure the sky with clouds of arrows. Each made invisible by 
the other’s rain of shafts, they continue their transcendent duel, often 
shouting taunts at each other. 


Ah, Rajan, surely unearthly is the duel between Karna and Arjuna, for 
each is a match of the other and they put forth their best skills and strength. 
All the others around stand disbelieving of what they see, lowering their 
own weapons and gazing at the luculent contention. Applauded by Siddhas, 
Charanas and Pannagas, the two fight at the limits of their prowess, entirely 
absorbed, each bent on killing the other. 

Then Duryodhana says to his maharathas, “Do everything you can to 
protect Karna, for Vrisha has sworn that he will not rest until he has killed 
Arjuna.” 

With the sun plunging down every moment, Arjuna kills Karna’s horses 
and with a broad-headed arrow, he fells Karna’s charioteer from his niche in 
the ratha. Before Duryodhana’s eyes, Arjuna Swetavahana shrouds Karna in 
a blizzard of arrows, overwhelming him so he stands helpless and stunned. 
Seeing this, Aswatthaman dashes up and, mounting Drona’s son’s chariot 
the two continue to assail Arjuna. 

Salya of the Madras pierces Arjuna with thirty arrows while 
Kripacharya strikes Krishna with twenty telling shafts and Partha with a 
dozen. Still from a fair distance, joining the battle to save his life, 
Jayadratha now shoots the two Krishnas with four barbs each; Vrishasena 
also rakes them both with seven shafts. Radiant Arjuna lacerates them all in 
return — Aswatthaman with four and sixty tremendous arrows, Salya with a 
hundred, Jayadratha with ten flat-headed ones, Vrishasena with three and 
Saradwata’s son with twenty. The lustrous Dhananjaya throws back his 
head and roars. 

Intent on stopping the Pandava from fulfilling his vow, your warriors 
swarm at him from all sides. And now, terrifying the Dhartarashtras, Arjuna 
invokes the great Varunastra, which radiates an awesome tide of fluid 
arrows all around his chariot. Well aware of what is at stake and that they 
need only contain the godly Pandava for a brief while before the sun sets, 
the Kauravas withstand his occult flashflood and continue to advance upon 
him. 

Arjuna Kiritin remains serene and intent on his single purpose; arrows 
of all sorts, high and plain, continue to flare from the Gandiva, darkening all 
the field, all the directions. 

The sky, dense with shafts, is ablaze with meteors and on the ghastly 
ground innumerable crows alight from the sky to perch on fresh corpses, 
picking out eyes and swallowing them whole before setting their black 


beaks to work on noble steaming flesh. And Arjuna continues to provide a 
grisly feast for these and other birds and beasts of carrion with the Gandiva, 
why, like Mahadeva slaying the Asuras with his Pinaka with the tawny 
string. So many great Kuru maharathas, riding their best horses and 
elephants the inescapable Pandava sends to Yama. 

Then a host of kings, taking up heavy maces and clubs of iron and 
swords and darts and different kinds of powerful weapons of terrible forms, 
rush suddenly at Partha. Bending the Gandiva Arjuna consumes them all, 
now uncanny laughter bubbling up in him as if at some great intuition of 
success; he never ceases devouring your troops with their rathas, elephants, 
foot-soldiers and supporting bowmen and swell the population of Yama’s 
domain.’” 


CANTO 142 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya continues, ‘Hearing the twang of Dhananjaya’s bow, which 

is like the beckoning of Death himself, or the frightful peal of 

Indra’s thunder, your army, Rajan, is like an ocean swept by a tempest of 

mountainous waves that surges up at the Yuganta. Krishna pilots Arjuna’s 

ratha across Kurukshetra so that he seems to be in a hundred places at once, 

and from a hundred places apparently do his tides of arrows flare sowing 

death in every shaft. A hundred Gandivas afire appear all around, all bent in 
a constant circle, all spewing relentless, ceaseless waves of flame. 

Arjuna invokes the Aindrastra, lancing terror through your legions. A 
hundred thousand flaming arrows issue from that fulminant celestial 
weapon and fetch fresh carnage to your army; so brilliant is that astra that 
no one can bear to look at it and then death comes for them in the twinkling 
of an eye. Arjuna traverses Kurukshetra at will, driven by his sarathy the 
Avatara, his prowess on full display, scattering the darkness that the 
Kauravas caused with their arrows, which no other can disperse even in 
imagination. But Arjuna, with his elemental devastras, summoned with 
ringing mantras, dispels the sinister Kaurava darkness as Surya Deva does 
the night when he rises over it. 


Arjuna evaporates the lives of your warriors like the summer sun the 
waters of tanks and lakes. He mantles your legions with his shafts like the 
sun does the earth with his rays. With other precise arrows he enters and 
breaks the hearts of great enemies, even like beloved friends! He consumes 
your akshauhinis as a blazing fire does swarms of insects. 

Devouring the lives of his enemies and their fame, Partha rides like 
Death embodied over Kurukshetra. He severs crowned heads, massive arms 
adorned with angadas, and long-lobed noble ears with earrings. He hacks 
away the arms of elephant-riders clutching spears to cast at him; those of 
horsemen with javelins clasped to fling at him; those of foot-soldiers with 
shields to stop his arrows; those of maharathas with mighty bows; and those 
of charioteers and mahouts with whips and goads. He is scintillating, a 
conflagration burning your army with incessant flames. 

For all their resolve, the hostile Kauravas cannot even look at Arjuna, 
greatest of all warriors, the shura equal to Indra, the greatest bull among 
men. One sees him everywhere at the same time, dancing on his ratha, with 
no moment’s pause in his apocalyptic rant of lucific astras. Ah, my lord, he 
is handsome, he is beautiful, and he is godly: the Kiritin like some banks of 
massed thunderheads adorned with many rainbows, for he is in so many 
places at once, in this hour that he was born for, that he learnt and suffered 
for. 

Arjuna’s immaculate inundation of devastras sees many great warriors 
shrink in fright, as he makes an unfordable morass upon the field of dharma 
and death. Strewn with elephants whose trunks or tusks have been severed, 
with horses that have lost hooves and heads, with rathas smashed in 
smithereens, eviscerated warriors with entrails hanging out, and others with 
legs hacked off, with corpses of men and besats lying, either still forever or 
convulsed in death’s last throes, the vast field of Kurukshetra, which Arjuna 
bestraddles, resembles the coveted arena of Death, increasing the terror of 
the timid, or the sporting ground of Rudra when he devastated all creatures 
in time out of mind. 

Parts of the field, strewn with the trunks of elephants cut off with razor- 
headed arrows, look as if scattered with thick snakes. Portions covered with 
the dissevered heads of warriors, look as if spread with garlands of lotuses. 
Variegated with beautiful head-gear, crowns, keyuras, angadas and ratha- 
rings with coats of mail decked with gold and with the trappings and other 


ornaments of elephants and horses, and scattered over with hundreds of 
coronets lying everywhere, the Earth looks beautiful like a new bride! 

Arjuna has a gory river flow, like the Vaitarani itself and affrights the 
timid. The marrow and fat of men and animals forms its mire, blood its 
current, and limbs and bones fill it and moment by moment it grows 
fathomless in depth. The hairs of the dead, men and beasts, are its moss, 
weeds; heads and arms form the rocks and stones on its shores, and 
standards, and banners that brightly colour its appearance deck it. Royal 
parasols and bows are its wavelets and it abounds with the vast corpses of 
dead elephants and teems with rathas that float like countless rafts on its 
surface. 

The carcasses of countless horses forms its banks and it is impassable 
because of the wheels, yokes, shafts, akshas and kuveras of rathas, and from 
spears, swords, darts, battle-axes and snake-like arrows. Ravens and kankas 
are its crocodiles, jackals, its terrible makaras, and fierce vultures, its 
sharks. It ripples and rings with the howls of jackals. It abounds with 
capering bhutas and pisachas, and thousands of other dreadful spirits that 
feed and drink blood from the numberless corpses of warriors that float 
upon it. 

Seeing Arjuna’s astounding prowess, the Vijaya whose visage 
resembles that of Yama himself, panic like never before. He obliterates all 
that comes before him; he seems to reveal himself truly now for what he is. 
His body is full of blinding light and none can even gaze upon him let alone 
face him in battle. 

Intent on having Jayadratha’s life before the sun sets, the Savyasachin 
demolishes all the great maharathas before him, stunning them with archery 
possibly never seen in this age of men. Dhananjaya, with Krishna for his 
charioteer, continues to blaze across Kurukshetra like streak lightning on 
the ground. His arrows, hundreds of thousands of them, cover the field in a 
cupola of endless death, his Gandiva always bent in an inscrutable circle of 
flames. And then blasting his bloody way through all the maharathas and 
other warriors arrayed in thousands before him, he finally arrives at where 
the terror-stricken Jayadratha is, and drills him with four and sixty deadly 
straight, light-swift shafts. 

The Kuru warriors freeze, every one of them by now, those not dead, 
bleeding from Partha’s arrows; they despair for Jayadratha’s life. And 
maharatha Arjuna, greatest of victorious men, his astras blazing like pralaya 


fire, saturates your army with kabandhas, headless trunks of men, and 
fetches absolute havoc to your legions consisting of four kinds of forces. 

He gashes Aswatthama with fifty thunderbolts, Vrishasena with three, 
mildly strikes Kripa with nine, Salya with sixteen and Karna with two and 
thirty. He plunges another sixty-four barbs deep into Jayadratha and gives a 
bloodcurdling roar. But now, actually faced with his shining hunter, 
Jayadratha’s fear leaves him! Rage takes the place of terror, and, the Sindhu 
king who bears the emblem of the Varaha on his banner roars like a great 
tiger himself and unleashes a gale of arrows, vulture-feathered and hissing 
like venomous serpents, at Arjuna. 

The Saindhava strikes Govinda with three shafts, Arjuna with six, 
Arjuna’s horses with eight and his standard with one. Arjuna, unmoved, the 
hungry tiger, hacks away Jayadratha’s sarathy’s head with a wedge-tipped 
shaft and fells his flame like standard with another. 

Meanwhile, the sun perches on the brim of the Asta mountains and 
Krishna tells Arjuna, “Look, Partha, they have set Jayadratha in the midst of 
six mighty maharathas and he waits there in fear. Bull among men, you will 
not be able to kill him without vanquishing the six. I will use my yoga 
shakti to hide the sun so everyone thinks Surya has set. They will all 
rejoice, thinking that, having failed to keep your vow, you will immolate 
yourself. Jayadratha will emerge from hiding and you must shoot him dead. 
Though it will seem as if night has fallen, know that the sun will not have 
set and kill the Saindhava!” 

Arjuna replies, ““Tathaastu. So be it!” 

Then Krishna, the Mahatapasvin, creates darkness through his cosmic 
Yoga. Your warriors, O Rajan, think the sun has set and are ecstatic; they 
throw their heads back, including Jayadratha, gaze skywards, where the 
stars have appeared on high and cry out in celebration that Arjuna must now 
take his own life. Krishna says fiercely to Arjuna, “Look how the wretched 
Jayadratha look up at the sky and has lost his fear of you. Kill him now, 
Bhaarata. Cut off his head and fulfil your vow!” 

Arjuna, in a fearsome blur, shining himself like the sun that has not 
truly set, strikes Kripa with twenty arrows, Karna with fifty, Salya and 
Duryodhana each with six, Vrishasena with eight and Jayadratha himself 
with sixty. Finding that he attacks them even after the sun has set, and like a 
great fire with its tongues of flame extended, the protectors of Jayadratha 
are perplexed. But they return his fire swiftly with torrents of arrows. 


Shrouded by their mantle of shafts, and raging, Arjuna raises his prodigious 
archery and creating a mesh, a great net of intertwined flaming arrows, casts 
it over the Kuru maharathas. Having never seen the like of this, your 
warriors abandon Jayadratha in fear and flee in all directions, with no two 
heroes going the same way. 

The prowess that Arjuna now displays is uncanny, unseen ever before 
and will never again be witnessed. Like Rudra himself slaughtering all 
creatures during the pralaya, Dhananjaya butchers elephants and elephant- 
riders, horses and horse-riders, maharathas and charioteers. I do not see, 
Rajan, a single elephant, horse or warrior that is not struck with Partha’s 
arrows. Their vision blurred by dust and darkness, your warriors cannot 
distinguish one another in the sudden night, and strange blackness envelops 
their senses and mind as well. 

Urged by fate, and with their bodies cut open and lacerated by Arjuna’s 
arrows, they begin to wander like men in a dream, to limp and fall down. 
Some among them are paralysed and some deathly pale. During the ensuing 
carnage, Arjuna the Pandava showers, drenches the earth with rills of gore, 
while the air clears marvellously with the blood that sprays everywhere 
absorbing all the raised dust and a sudden gusting wind blowing the rest 
away. So deep is the river of blood that the wheels of chariots are mired 
almost fully and thousands of terror-stricken elephants thunder about in all 
directions, their limbs mangled, their riders slain, trumpeting horribly and 
trampling your own ranks as they go. 

Horses without riders and foot-soldiers, too, as well as your great 
warriors, Rajan, all struck by Dhananjaya’s arrows, flee in abject fear, 
abandoning the field, their hair dishevelled, their armour cut away and 
blood pouring from their wounds. Some stand frozen as if crocodiles from 
the macabre red river have seized their legs, while some others hide behind 
and under the bodies of dead elephants. 

Routing your army thus, Rajan, Arjuna savagely attacks the six 
maharatha protectors of the Sindhu king—Karna, Aswatthaman, Kripa, 
Salya, Vrishasena and Duryodhana. So quicksilver is his archery that in a 
wink he shatters Karna’s and Vrishasena’s bows, and fells Salya’s 
charioteer. With dreadful storms of shafts he deeply wounds Kripa and his 
nephew Aswatthaman. 

All of them stricken, Arjuna invokes a mahastra of the splendour of 
Indra’s Vajra, a great weapon that he has always worshipped with incense 


and garlands of flowers. He summons it with the most recondite mantras 
and affixes it to the Gandiva and we hear loud cries from the sky for that 
astra is bright and fiery as the sun himself. 

Krishna says again to Arjuna, “Quick, Partha, cut Jayadratha’s head 
from his neck! The sun is about to set behind the Asta mountain, so listen to 
what I say to you now. Jayadratha’s father Vriddhakshatra is famed the 
world over. It was after a long time and tapasya that Jayadratha, the 
Parantapa, was born to him. 

At his birth, an asariri, a disembodied voice deep as rumbling clouds 
said to Vriddhakshatra, ‘Among men in this world, in respect of blood, 
conduct, self-restraint and the other qualities, your son will become worthy 
of the two races of the Sun and the Moon. He will become one of the 
greatest Kshatriyas of all and will always be worshipped by heroes. 
However, one day in battle, a bull among all Kshatriyas, the greatest one in 
the world will cut off his head.’ 

Hearing what the asariri said, Vriddhakshatra reflected for a long while. 
Overwhelmed by his love for his son, he summoned all his kinsmen and 
said, “The head of the man who causes my son’s head to fall on the earth 
will burst asunder like a melon in a hundred pieces!’ 

Having said this, Vriddhakshatra installed Jayadratha on the throne and 
retired to the vana to devote himself to tapasya. Endowed with great tejas, 
Arjuna, he is still engaged in the observance of the austerest of penances 
outside this very Samantapanchaka. So, after you take Jayadratha’s head, 
you must with the great Pasupastra ensure that the head does not fall onto 
the ground but flies on with the arrow and falls into Vriddhakshatra’s lap! 
For if Jayadratha’s head falls onto the ground, have no doubt that your own 
head will burst apart in a hundred pieces. O son of Indra, there is nothing in 
this world that you cannot achieve. So do this now.” 

Hearing this, Arjuna licks the corners of his mouth and looses the arrow 
he has charged with Siva’s astra, which has always been worshipped with 
incense and garlands. The ultimate ayudha, with which once Mahadeva 
torched the Tripura from the sky, takes Jayadratha’s head from his neck in a 
crimson eruption, like a hawk snatching a small bird from a tree. Arjuna 
follows this by shooting a dozen more shafts in a blur, arrows that carry the 
severed head through the sky, out to the far limits of Samantapanchaka, 
where your son-in-law’s father, mahatejasvin Vriddhakshatra, is at his 
sandhya vandana, his evening worship. 


Adorned with thick black hair, with sparkling kundalas, Jayadratha’s 
bleeding head falls perfectly into Vriddhakshatra’s lap, where he sits in 
padmasana at his twilight prayer. So deep is his dhyana that at first 
Vriddhakshatra does not even notice. He duly completes his worship and 
then slowly rises to his feet. His son’s head now falls onto the earth and 
Vriddhakshatra’s own head blows apart in a hundred pieces of flesh bone 
and brain, for it is he himself who has at last made his son’s head fall onto 
the earth! And all that learn of this wonderful, terrible feat of Arjuna laud 
both the Krishnas. 

Rajan, after the Kiritin kills the Saindhava, Krishna withdraws the 
darkness, the false night that fell over Kurukshetra through his maya. As all 
the stars that peeped out from on high vanish, your sons and their men see 
that they were deceived and the sun has not yet set. And that, O 
Dhritarashtra, is how Arjuna kills Jayadratha and keeps his vow to avenge 
the death of Abhimanyu. On that day, amongst them, Arjuna, Satyaki and 
great Bhima slaughter eight whole akshauhinis of your army! Seeing 
Jayadratha killed, tears fall from the eyes of your sons that remain alive, 
Duryodhana weeps the most bitterly. 

After Arjuna kills Jayadratha, Krishna blows a clarion blast on his 
Panchajanya and Arjuna raises the Devadatta to his lips and blows 
resoundingly on his conch. And, as if to send the message of triumph not 
merely to Yudhishtira but into the very heavens, Bhima fills Kurukshetra 
with a battery of dreadful roars drowning every other sound on the filed of 
dharma. Yudhishtira Dharmaputra hears these sounds across the field and 
knows that Arjuna has killed Jayadratha. Exultantly he has his own troops 
sound conches and horns and beat on drums. 

And the excited, elated Yudhishtira charges at Drona to do battle with 
him. 

By now the sun has actually set, and a most horrifying battle breaks out, 
by night’s darkness, between Drona and the Somakas, descended from the 
moon. Jubilant after the killing of Jayadratha, the Pandava maharathas now 
attack Drona to kill him; why, they fight intoxicated with success. Having 
kept his vow, a celebrant Arjuna also engages many of your great chariot- 
warriors and now, with the great burden, upon which the very outcome of 
the war hinged, lifted from his shoulders, he destroys your ranks like truly 
the Devaputra that he is. He razes your legions like the Devas mowing 
down the Danavas, like the sun scattering darkness.’” 


CANTO 143 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


°*T) hritarashtra says, ‘Tell me, O Sanjaya, what my warriors did 
after Arjuna killed the heroic Jayadratha?’ 

Sanjaya replies, “After Arjuna, O sire, kills Jayadratha, an angry Kripa, 
son of Saradwat, confronts Arjuna and envelops him with a barrage of 
arrows, while a furious Aswatthaman attacks him from the rear. A tiring 
Arjuna bleeds from the many wounds these two maharathas inflict on him 
and is in considerable pain. Yet, he does not want to kill his guru, Kripa or 
the son of his other acharya, Drona, so he treats the encounter like some 
exalted lesson in archery, and instruction even. 

Thwarting both Aswatthaman and Kripa, he covers both in his arrows 
storms, but his shafts are mild and none loosed to take either of their lives. 
Yet, they injure Kripa and Aswatthaman fiercely, coursing pain through 
their bodies while avoiding all the vital marmas that, pierced, could kill 
them. So swift and so many are the arrows that Arjuna unleashes that Kripa 
faints in his ratha. His sarathy thinks that Arjuna has killed the old Acharya 
and whisks him away from the field. At this, Aswatthaman also flees in 
fear! 


Seeing his guru Kripa swoon and fall, Arjuna is overcome by great 
grief. His face tearful and his voice full of anguish, he says, “Vidura clearly 
foresaw all this long ago in his mind. When Duryodhana was born, Vidura 
said to Dhritarashtra, ‘Have this demon born into the noble house of Kuru 
killed. Otherwise, unimaginable calamity will overtake the greatest Kurus.’ 

Ah, how true Vidura’s warning has proved. It is because of Duryodhana 
that I see my precious Acharya Kripa lying fallen to my arrows. Fie on this 
unholy Kshatriya dharma! Shame on my much vaunted might and prowess! 
Who else will fight a Brahmana who is also his guru? Kripa is the son of a 
Rishi; he is my Acharya; he is also Drona’s great friend and brother-in-law. 
Alas, now he lies sprawled on his ratha, dying from my arrows. 

Krishna, I had no wish to kill him, yet that is what I have done. My 
heart breaks to see him like this. Even if he wounded me sorely with his 
arrows, I should have only looked fondly at that warrior of dazzling 
splendour and never attacked him in return. And now, I have sent him, my 
first teacher, whom I always loved and revered to Yama. I say to you 
Krishna, this causes me more agony that even Abhimanyu’s death. Ah, look 
at the plight I have reduced him to; look where he lies so pitiable and dying 
in his chariot. 

Kshatriyas who acquire knowledge from their gurus and then gift them 
with the dakshina that they desire, attain to Godhead. On the other hand, the 
lowest of men, evil ones who learn from their acharyas and then do them 
harm: such men go straight to naraka. And I have no doubt that I will find 
hell for myself having done this ghastly thing today. I have horribly 
wounded my Acharya Kripa with ruthless showers of arrows. While I was 
learning the astra shastra at his feet, Kripa once told me, ‘Do not, O you of 
Kuru’s vamsa, ever strike your acharya.’ 

I have not obeyed that grave command of my righteous and noble guru; 
on the contrary today I have struck the same Kripa, my sacred master with 
cruel arrows and felled him. Oh, I bow to this worshipful son of Gotama, to 
this inexorable shura. And everlasting shame be on me for what I have 
done.” 

While Arjuna is crying in remorse at having wounded Kripa, he thinks 
mortally, Karna sees that Jayadratha has been slain and rushes in fury at the 
victorious Pandava who has kept his vow. Seeing this, the two Panchala 
princes, Uttamaujas and Yudhamanyu, and Satyaki attack Karna. 


Arjuna now wipes his tears and, smiling wanly at Krishna, says, “Here 
comes Karna, viciously attacking Satyaki. No doubt, he is incensed at the 
death of Bhurisravas, and the manner in which Yuyudhana killed him. Take 
my steeds there, O Janardana, so that Karna does not make the Satwata 
follow in the wake of Bhurisravas.” 

Krishna says, “Satyaki by himself is a match for Karna. How much 
more he will be with the two sons of Drupada beside him. For the time 
being, it is not wise for you to fight Karna. He has with him a blazing spear, 
like a meteor, a shakti that Indra gave him when Karna gave Sakra his 
golden kavacha. Parantapa, he has kept it to use against you, worshipping it 
with reverence. Let Karna ride against Satyaki. I know when this evil man’s 
hour will come, and then you will dispatch him from this world, you and no 
one else, Arjuna.” 

Dhritarashtra says, “Tell me, O Sanjaya, about the battle between Karna 
and Satyaki, after the fall of Bhurisravas and Jayadratha. Satyaki was 
without a ratha; so whose chariot does he mount? How did the guardians of 
the wheels of Arjuna’s ratha, the two Panchala princes, fight?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘I will describe to you all that happens. Listen patiently, 
my lord, to the consequences of your own evil conduct. Before the battle, 
Krishna knew in his heart that Bhurisravas, who flew a banner with the 
insignia of a sacrificial stake, would vanquish the heroic Satyaki. Rajan, 
Krishna knows both the past and the future. It was for this that, the previous 
night, he summoned his sarathy Daruka, and said to him, “Keep my ratha 
ready tomorrow and wait until you hear me blow the rishabha svara on the 
Panchajanya.” 

Neither the Devas, nor the Gandharvas, nor the Yakshas, nor the 
Uragas, nor the Rakshasas, nor Manushyas can ever conquer the two 
Krishnas. The Devas with the Pitamaha Brahma at their head, and also the 
Siddhas, know the incomparable prowess of these two. But listen now to 
the battle as it unfolds in grim reality, as if upon the edge of Yamaloka. 

Seeing Satyaki without a ratha and facing Karna ready for battle, 
Krishna blows his conch long and loud in the rishabha note. Daruka hears 
what he has been waiting for, and comes flying to Krishna on his unearthly 
ratha with the golden standard. With Krishna’s leave, Satyaki climbs into 
the deva ratha, driven by Daruka, which is like Surya or Agni in splendour. 
To that chariot are yoked the greatest of all - Saibya, Sugriva, Meghapushpa 
and Balahaka, all caparisoned in gold. These unearthly steeds fly anywhere 


at will, and now bearing Satyaki, they fly at Karna, while Yuyudhana looses 
a fresh torrent of shafts at the Sutaputra. 

Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas leave Dhananjaya’s side and ride to help 
Satyaki. The duel between Karna and Satyaki is another that has hardly ever 
been seen on earth or in heaven, not between Devas, Gandharvas, Asuras, 
Uragas, or Rakshasas. Yet again, both great armies stop fighting to watch 
the stunning encounter; they are as awed by the superhuman skills of the 
two archers as they are by Daruka’s wizardly chariotry, as he flies across 
Kurukshetra, his unearthly horses obedient to his very thought, in the most 
incredible manoeuvres. 

The Devas, the Gandharvas and the Danavas in the sky watch the battle 
between Karna and Satyaki, never blinking. 

The two maharathas fight one another, each for the cause of their 
friends. Karna, looking like a Deva now, and the brilliant Satyaki cover 
each other with scathing interminable volleys. Karna still has the brutal 
slaying of his friend Jalasandha, whom Satyaki despatched, before his eyes, 
and he fights the Vrishni hero in absolute rage. 

Full of grief for all the Kuru maharathas that Satyaki has killed on this 
day, Karna glowers at Yuyudhana as if to burn him up with his eyes. The 
dense swarms of steaming arrows he unleashes at Sini’s grandson never 
pause. Sinuous and powerful as two mighty tigers, the two Naravyaghras 
maul each other in fury. 

Satyaki drills slender iron shafts into Karna’s every limb, and then he 
fells Karna’s charioteer from his ratha with a flat-headed shaft. He kills 
Karna’s four white horses, smashes Karna’s standard into a hundred pieces 
with a hundred arrows, and yet again Karna finds himself without a chariot 
in Duryodhana’s sight. 

All your warriors, O Rajan, are quickly dispirited. Then Karna’s son 
Vrishasena, Salya of the Madras, and Aswatthaman surround Satyaki and a 
smoking fray ensues and one can see nothing anymore. When Satyaki 
deprives the heroic Karna of his ratha, cries of Oh! and Alas! arise from 
your troops. Satyaki continues to rake the already weakened Sutaputra, until 
Duryodhana dashes up and helps his precious friend into his chariot. Karna 
is distraught, hissing and sighing like a serpent now, ashamed when he 
thinks of how he boldly swore that he would make your son undisputed 
king of the world. 


After he destroys Karna’s ratha, the self-restrained Satyaki stops himself 
from killing either the Sutaputra or your sons led by Dusasana, O king, for 
he honours Arjuna’s oath that he would kill Karna and Bhima’s that he 
would kill all your princes. He only wrecks their chariots and wounds them 
sorely with his radiant archery, weakening but not killing them. 

However, although all these maharathas led by Karna tried concertedly 
to slay the Vrishni hero, Yuyudhana shames them all. Using just one bow, 
he crushes Aswatthaman, Kritavarman and other maharathas, as well as 
hundreds of great Kshatriyas. He fights Yudhishtira Dharmaraja’s cause and 
to attain to Swarga, and truly Parantapa Satyaki is no less than either of the 
two Krishnas in tejas. Always smiling, for he, the pure Kshatriya, delights 
in war, he puts all your troops to rout, O best of men! I say to you with 
conviction that, in this world, there are only three truly matchless archers — 
Krishna, Arjuna, and Satyaki. There is no fourth.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, “Riding the invincible ratha of Krishna, with Daruka 
for charioteer, Satyaki, proud of the might of his arms and equal in battle to 
Krishna himself, destroys Karna’s ratha. Did Satyaki ride any other chariot 
after his battle with Karna was over? I want to know this, Sanjaya, O most 
gifted narrator. Truly, I believe Satyaki is endowed with enormous, 
superhuman prowess. Tell me everything, Sanjaya!’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Hear, O Rajan, what transpires on the dharmakshetra. 
Daruka’s younger brother brings out another chariot for the battling Satyaki. 
It has shafts attached by chains of iron, it has gold in profusion and bands of 
silk; it is adorned with a thousand stars and festooned with bright banners; 
this ratha flies the figure of a great lion on its standard, and yoked to it are 
horses fleet as the wind and wearing trappings of gold; and the rumble of its 
wheels are like thunderheads sounding. Mounting the fresh chariot, Satyaki 
besieges your troops again, while Daruka goes to Krishna’s side. 

A new ratha is also fetched for Karna, to which are yoked pedigreed 
horses white as milk, caparisoned in gold. Its kaksha and standard are 
wrought from gold. Furnished with colourful banners and a profusion of 
weapons of every kind, this excellent ratha has a superb sarathy as well. 
Mounting that chariot, Karna also mounts an unrestrained assault on his 
enemies. 

I have now told you all that you asked me. However, Rajan, listen once 
more to the extent of the horrible destruction that your evil plotting caused. 
Bhimasena has killed thirty-one of your sons. Led by Durmukha, they were 


all masters of weapons. Satyaki and Arjuna also have slain hundreds of 
great heroes and Bhimasena more than either of them, and so has 
Bhagadatta. Still, the carnage begun by your evil ways is far from over.’” 


CANTO 144 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra says, “Tell me now what Bhima did, Sanjaya, at this 
stage of the war. Indeed, tell me everything!’ 

Sanjaya replies, ‘After Bhimasena loses his ratha, Karna cuts him deep 
with his words like arrows, as Bhima stands helpless before him. Karna’s 
acerbic words still burning him, Bhima says to Arjuna in some anger, “In 
your very hearing, Dhananjaya, Karna repeatedly mocked saying, ‘Eunuch, 
fool, glutton, you are no warrior. Why have you come to fight, when you 
cannot bear the heat of battle? Take yourself where you belong, you 
overgrown child, to a kitchen or a dining table.’ 

I will kill any man who dares speak to me like that, Arjuna, and Karna 
said all this and more. You know the vows that we swore together in the 
Kuru sabha. Remember them now and let us fulfill both our oaths!” 

Hearing this, Arjuna rides near Karna and tells him, “O false Karna, son 
of a Suta, you always brag and praise yourself. O evil one, listen to what I 
have to say to you. Heroes in battle meet with either victory or defeat, both 
of which are uncertain. It is no different even for Indra. Your ratha smashed 
by Satyaki and standing in a daze, exposed before Yuyudhana, you were on 


the point of death. But Satyaki remembered that I have sworn to kill you 
and to honour my oath he spared your life. 

It is true that you deprived my brother Bhimasena of his ratha in fair 
battle. But the manner in which you taunted and abused him then was a 
shameful sin. No man of dharma ever humiliates an enemy after 
vanquishing him in battle. Your heart and mind are small, Sutaputra, as is 
your wisdom, and that is why you boast so loudly and speak so vilely. 

Then again, the abuse that you have heaped on my brother Bhima, who 
is a great Kshatriya warrior and devoted to dharma, is neither true nor 
acceptable. In plain sight of all the troops, of Krishna, and me, how many 
times Bhima defeated you in battle and left you stranded without a chariot. 
He never once abused you, Karna. Since you have spoken harshly to 
Vrikodara many times, and since you were one of the six who combined to 
kill Abhimanyu, while I was far away, I say to you, Sutaputra, that you will 
find the reward for your crimes this very day. It was to call death to you, 
evil one, coward, that you severed Abhimanyu’s bow from behind. And for 
that, O you of small wit, I will kill you, along with all your followers, your 
forces and your beasts of war. 

Finish everything that you still need to do in this world, because a great 
misfortune will soon overtake you. I will first kill your son Vrishasena 
before your eyes. Then, all the other kings that ride against me I will 
despatch to Yama. This I swear, laying my hand on this Gandiva. You are a 
fool, Karna, unwise and full of vanity. I tell you that Duryodhana will soon 
see you lying dead on this field as carrion for vultures and jackals, and that 
evil prince will lament bitterly.” 

When Arjuna swears to kill Karna’s son, a great uproar arises among 
the maharathas. At that very moment, when pandemonium reigns all 
around, the sun enters the Asta mountain. 

Krishna, in the van of army, embraces Arjuna who has fulfilled his vow, 
and says to him, “By great good fortune, O Jishnu, you have accomplished 
your great vow and Vriddhakshatra has also died along with his son. Had 
Kumara, the Deva Senapati himself, encountered the Dhartarashtra forces, I 
have no doubt that he would not have prevailed. Naravyaghra, I cannot 
think of a single warrior in the three worlds other than you who can fight 
this oceanic army. 

So many great maharathas of untold prowess, some equal or even 
superior to you, are united under Duryodhana’s command. Yet, clad in 


armour, they cannot face you in battle when you are roused. Your tejas and 
urjas are equal to those of Rudra or Yama himself. No one else could have 
shown the prowess and genius in war that you, by yourself and alone, have 
done today. 

And so, Arjuna, will I truly applaud and embrace you again after you 
kill the evil Karna and all his followers, yes, I will glorify you when you 
have vanquished this, your greatest, enemy.” 

Arjuna replies, “It is through your grace, O Madhava, that I have 
fulfilled my vow that even the gods might have found difficult to 
accomplish. And my victory is no matter of wonder for those who have 
you, O Krishna, for their Lord. Through your grace, Yudhishtira will regain 
the whole world. All this is because of your power, O Vrishni. This is your 
victory, O Lord! Our victory is in truth only yours; our fortune is in your 
care and we are your servants, O Madhusudana.” 

Krishna smiles slightly, and slowly drives the horses and, as they 
traverse the battlefield full of brutal sights, he points them out to Arjuna 
saying, “Having fought for victory or great fame so many heroic kings lie 
on the earth, struck by your arrows, their weapons and ornaments scattered, 
their horses, chariots and elephants mangled and their armour cloven, all of 
them having attained to the final sorrow. Some of them are still alive, in 
agony, and some dead. But look, Arjuna, even the dead still seem alive for 
their lustre and greatness. 

Look at the field covered over with their golden-winged arrows, with 
their numberless other weapons, and with their dead animals. The earth is 
resplendent with coats of mail and necklaces of gems, with severed heads 
gleaming with earrings, and helmets and crowns shining with great jewels, 
and garlands of flowers, and kanthasutras, angadas, collars of gold and with 
diverse other beautiful ornaments. Strewn with anuskaras and quivers, with 
standards and banners, with upaskaras and adhishthanas, with shafts and 
crests of chariots, with broken wheels and beautiful akshas in profusion, 
with yokes and trappings of horses, with belts and bows and arrows, with 
elephants, their housings, with spiked maces and hooks of iron, with darts 
and short arrows, with spears and pikes, with kundas and clubs, with 
sataghnis and bhushandis, with scimitars and axes, with short and heavy 
clubs and mallets, with maces and kunapas, with whips decked with gold, 
with the bells and diverse other ornaments of elephants, and with rich robes, 


all loosened from the bodies of men and animals, the earth shines 
brilliantly, like the autumn sky strewn with planets and stars. 

The lords of the earth, slain for the sake of earth, lie asleep on the earth 
clasping her like a wife. Like mountains flowing streams of liquid chalk 
through their caves and fissures, these elephants big as mountains, which 
look like Airavata himself, flow profuse streams of blood through the 
wounds in their bodies. 

See, O Shura, where some of these vast creatures, struck by hundreds of 
arrows, lie spamming in death’s last throes, their eyes full of pain and grief. 
Look where countless horses lie, their golden caparisons stained with 
scarlet. 

Look, O Partha, at these empty chariots, which once resembled celestial 
vimanas of vapoury forms in the evening sky, now lying on the ground, 
with standards, banners, akshas and yokes cut into pieces, with broken 
shafts and crests, and with their warriors and charioteers slain and flung out 
of them. Foot-soldiers, also, holding bows and shields and slain in hundreds 
of thousands, lie everywhere, bathed in blood, clasping the earth with every 
limb and their long hair undone and smeared with dust. 

Look, O Mahabaho, at all the warriors who lie unmoving, their bodies 
mutilated by your astras. Look at Kurukshetra scattered with yak-tails and 
fans, parasols, standards, steeds, chariots and elephants with diverse kinds 
of rich blankets, and the cut away reins of horses, and exquisite garments 
and the costly varuthas of the rathas. The field appears as if it is spread over 
with embroidered tapestry. 

Many warriors fallen from the backs of elephants look like lions struck 
down by thunder and fallen from mountaintops. Lying among their horses 
and their bows, horsemen and foot-soldiers welter in blood. Ah, look how 
fearful this earth is to gaze upon, covered over with multitudes of slain 
elephants, horses, maharathas, and mired with blood, fat, and rotten flesh, 
on which wild dogs and wolves and pisachas and diverse fell wanderers of 
the night feed and around which they dance in sinister glee! 

Only you, O Arjuna, or Indra himself, could have accomplished such a 
feat and fetched such carnage.” 

Thus showing the Kiritin the grisly field of devastation, Krishna raises 
his Panchajanya and blows triumphal thunder on it and the joyful soldiers 
of the Pandava army respond by blowing their conches too. And Janardana 


drives his chariot swiftly towards Yudhishtira Ajatasatru and brings him 
news of the killing of Jayadratha.’” 


CANTO 145 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘After Arjuna kills Jayadratha, Krishna drives to 

Yudhishtira, worships him with a glad heart and says, “Through 

good fortune, Rajan, your prosperity increases and you have killed your 
enemy. By great good luck, your brother has fulfilled his vow.” 

Yudhishtira, the subjugator of hostile towns, is overjoyed and climbs 
down from his ratha! His eyes fill with tears of joy and he embraces the two 
Krishnas and then, wiping his bright and lotus-like face, he says to Kesava 
and Arjuna, “Mighty Maharathas, it is destiny that I see both of you now 
after you have accomplished your mission. It is indeed great good fortune 
that you have killed the sinner Jayadratha. 

You Krishnas have filled me with untellable joy, and plunged our 
enemies into an ocean of grief. You are the sovereign Lord of all the worlds, 
Krishna, O Madhusudana! In the three worlds, there is nothing that those 
who have you for their lord and master cannot achieve. 

Through your grace, O Govinda, we will conquer our enemies, as Indra 
did the Danavas in olden times. Be it the conquest of the world, or be it the 
conquest of the three worlds, everything is assured for those with whom 


you are pleased. They can be stained by no sin, nor can they meet with 
defeat in battle, O Lord of all the gods! 

It is through your grace, Hrishikesa, that Indra became the king of the 
Devas. It is through your benevolence that he won the sovereignty of the 
three worlds on the field of battle. It is through your kindness, O Devadeva, 
that he gained immortality and enjoys the eternal regions of bliss. Having 
slain thousands of Daityas with powers acquired by your grace did Indra 
win lordship over the Devas. 

It is through your grace, Hrishikesa, that the mobile and immobile 
universe, without swerving from its ordained course, is engaged in prayers 
and homa. In the beginning, this universe, enveloped in darkness, was one 
vast expanse of water, the Ekarnava. Through your grace, O Mahabaho, the 
universe became manifest! You are the Creator of all the worlds, you are the 
Supreme Soul, and you are immutable. 

Those who see you, O Hrishikesa, are never mystified. You are the 
Supreme God, you are the God of the gods, and you are Ananta. Those who 
seek refuge with you, O Lord of the Devas, are never lost. Without 
beginning and without death, you are Divine; you are the Creator of all the 
brahmandas, and Absolute. Those who are devoted to you, O Hrishikesa, 
always tide over every difficulty. You are Supreme, the Ancient One, the 
Divine Being, and that which is the Highest of the high. He who attains 
your Supreme Self obtains the highest felicity. 

You are sung in the four Vedas and the four Vedas sing of you. By 
seeking your protection, O noblest one, I will enjoy unrivalled prosperity. 
You are the Supreme God, you are the God of the highest gods, you are the 
lord of winged creatures, and the lord of all humans. You are the Supreme 
Lord of everything. I bow to you, O Best of beings! 

You are the Lord, the Lord of lords, O Omnipotent One! Prosperity to 
you, O Madhava! O you of the louts eyes, O Universal Soul, You are the 
origin of all things. 

He, who is a friend of Arjuna or is devoted to Arjuna’s welfare, finds 
you who are the Guru of Dhananjaya and attain ultimate bliss.” 

Thus addressed by him, Kesava and Arjuna cheerfully say to 
Yudhishtira, “The fire of your wrath has consumed the sinful Jayadratha, O 
puissant one. Although the Dhartarashtra host is vast and swells in pride, 
yet it daily faces death and diminution; the Kaurava host is being 
annihilated. It is because of your wrath that the Kauravas are being 


destroyed. Having angered you, most gentle and patient soul, who can kill 
with just your gaze, the evil Duryodhana with all his friends and kinsmen 
will have to lay down his life in battle. Already slain because of your ire, 
and struck down by the gods themselves, the invincible Bhishma, Pitamaha 
of the Kurus, now lies on a bed of arrows. 

O Parantapa, victory in battle is impossible, and death waits for those 
who have you for their enemy. Kingdom, life, dear ones, children, and all 
kinds of bliss will soon be lost by him with whom you are angry. I look 
upon the Kauravas as having already lost their sons and kinsmen, when 
you, who observe, why, embody Rajadharma, are wroth with them.” 

Then Bhima, O king, and Satyaki, both lacerated and bleeding by 
arrows past count, come and pay their salutations to Yudhishtira. Those two 
mighty bowmen then sit on the ground surrounded by the Panchalas. Seeing 
the two heroes brimming with joy and waiting with folded hands, 
Yudhishtira embraces them both and cries, “It is through good fortune that I 
see you both before me, O Shuras, see you after you have escaped with 
your lives from the raging sea of enemy legions, the sea in which Drona is 
an invincible crocodile and Kritavarman, the son of Hridika, a ravening 
shark. It is destiny that you two have vanquished all the greatest kings of 
the earth. 

It is by good fortune that I see both of you victorious in battle. It is by 
good fortune that you have defeated Drona as well as the mighty 
Kritavarman. It is by providence that you have defeated Karna in battle with 
your barbed shafts. It is by good fortune that Salya was forced away from 
the field by you both, O you bulls among men. By good fortune, I see you 
both returned from battle safe, you who are the greatest of all maharathas 
and masters of war! 

It is my good fortune that I see you heroes again, who have forded that 
sea of enemy troops at my command, you who went into battle to honour 
me! You are true and pure Kshatriya heroes who revel in battle. You are 
dear to me like my own life. Ah, it is through great good fortune that I see 
you both again alive!’ 

Having said this, Yudhishtira embraces Satyaki and Bhima, the 
Naravyaghras, again, and tears of joy flow down his noble face. Then, the 
entire Pandava army is full of good cheer and a tide of joy surges through 
all the warriors. All of them are once more determined to give battle and 
win this war to end all wars.’” 


CANTO 146 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


°S anjaya says, ‘Upon the fall, O Rajan, of Jayadratha, your son 

Duryodhana, his face bedewed with tears, breathing hot sighs like 

a snake whose fangs have been drawn, this offender against the whole 

world, experiences bitter sorrow. Seeing the terrible slaughter of his troops 

that Arjuna, Bhimasena and Satyaki have wrought, he becomes pale and 

dejected. He begins to believe that no warrior on earth can compare with 
Arjuna. 

“Neither Drona, Karna, Aswatthaman, nor Kripa can stand up to Arjuna 
when he is provoked,” Duryodhana says to himself, “After defeating all the 
maharathas of my army, Arjuna has kept his vow and killed Jayadratha. No 
one can resist him and the Pandavas have almost exterminated my once vast 
army. Ah, no one can protect my army, no, not even Purandara himself. He, 
upon whom I relied most in this war, Karna, has been defeated and 
Jayadratha slain. I believed so much in Karna’s prowess that I thought of 
even Krishna, who came to me to sue for peace, as being but a straw in 
gale; and now, Karna has been vanquished in battle.” 

Grieving thus, his dark and powerful spirit all but broken, Duryodhana 
comes to see Drona. He informs the Acharya of the immense slaughtering 


of the Kurus, the victory of his enemies, and the grim catastrophe that faces 
the Dhartarashtras. 

Duryodhana says fervidly, “Look, Acharya, at this vast carnage of 
kings. Setting the invincible Bhishma at our head, I came to war. Having 
cut the Pitamaha down, Sikhandin, his aspirations fulfilled, leads his troops, 
surrounded by all the Panchalas and seeking another triumph. Another 
disciple of yours, the invincible Savyasachin, decimated seven akshauhinis 
of troops and has despatched Jayadratha to Yama. How, Acharya, will I ever 
free myself of the debt that I owe those allies of mine who, fighting this war 
for my sake, have lost their lives? Ah, those lords of the earth now lie prone 
and lifeless upon the earth, having lost their kingdoms, possessions and 
prosperity. 

Alas, it is true that I am a coward! Having caused such a massacre of 
my friends, I dare not believe that I can purify myself with even a hundred 
Aswamedha yagnas. I am covetous, sinful and a transgressor of dharma. 
Because of my greed and envy, and nothing else, these lords of the earth, in 
their quest for victory, have gone to Yama’s halls. Why, in presence of all 
these kings, does the kindly Earth not yield me a hole through which I can 
sink, for I am the greatest sinner ever and the sole fomenter of this horrible 
war between cousins? Alas, what will the Pitamaha of bloodshot eyes, the 
invincible shura who has conquered the other world, say to me in the midst 
of all the great kings when he meets me? 

There lies the mighty bowman Jalasandha, killed by Satyaki. How 
proudly he came to fight, ready to lay his life down for me. Looking at the 
dead king Kambojas, as well as Alambusha and so many, many other allies 
of mine, all slain, what reason can I have to continue living? Ah, all of them 
died savage deaths, even as they put forth their great valour to vanquish my 
enemies. 

Acharya, today I will give my all in battle to free myself from the debt 
that I owe them and then gratify them with oblations of water by going to 
the Yamuna. O greatest of warriors, I tell you truly and swear by all the 
punya I have ever done, by the prowess and skill that I possess, and on my 
sons’ heads, that I will kill all the Panchalas along with the Pandavas, and 
find peace of mind, or, killed by them in battle I will go to the realms where 
my friends and allies have gone while fighting my cause during this war. 

Seeing that we are not able to protect them, our allies that still live no 
longer wish to stand by us, Mahabaho, and they now regard the Pandavas as 


being preferable to us. And you, Acharya, have fetched doom upon us by 
showing your favourite sishya Arjuna softness and leniency in battle. This 
is why all these heroes, who endeavoured to secure victory for us, have 
been slain. It seems that only Karna now truly wishes us victory. A man of 
weak understanding, who without properly examining another, accepts him 
for a friend, and enlists him in matters that require true friends for their 
achievement, is certain to suffer disappointment. You, upon whom I so 
relied, have brought dreadful disappointment and defeat to me, O Drona. 

I am inordinately covetous, sinful, crooked, and avaricious! Alas, 
Dussala’s husband Jayadratha has been killed, and Somadatta’s son 
Bhurisravas of great tejas, and the Abhishahas, the Surasenas, the Sibis, and 
the Vasatis. And I myself mean to leave this world today and join those 
bulls among men, whom Arjuna slaughtered while they fought for me. With 
them gone, I have no wish to live on. O Acharya of the sons of Pandu, let 
me have your leave to die fighting.””” 


CANTO 147 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra says, ‘After Savyasachin kills the king of the 

Sindhus, after the death of Bhurisravas, what was the state of 

mind of our army? After Duryodhana passionately addressed Drona in the 
midst of the Kurus, what did the Acharya say to him? Tell me, Sanjaya!’ 

Sanjaya says, “Loud wails arise among your troops, O Bhaarata, after 
the killing of Bhurisravas and Jayadratha. Now all of them show scant 
regard for the command and policy of Duryodhana, based on which 
hundreds of great maharathas have died. 

As for Drona, he listens to what your son says and is full of grief. 
Reflecting for a short while, Rajan, he says in anguish, “Duryodhana, why 
do you pierce me so with your wordy shafts? I have already told you that no 
one can defeat Arjuna in battle. Protected by Kiritin, Sikhandin cut 
Bhishma down. This feat by itself, O Kuruttama, should have convinced 
you of the invincible prowess of Arjuna. For myself, I was certain on that 
day, seeing Bhishma, whom the Devas and the Danavas could not vanquish, 
felled, that this Bharata army is doomed. After the fall of Bhishma, whom 
we all looked upon as the greatest Kshatriya in the three worlds, whom else 
can we rely upon now? 


The loaded dice that Sakuni spun in the Kuru sabha were not dice but 
keen arrows that would claim countless lives. The same arrows, unleashed 
now by Jaya, are now decimating us. Though Vidura said this even then, 
you did not understand him or chose not to. With tears in his eyes, he 
begged you to make peace with the Pandavas, but you did not listen to him. 
The calamity that he foretold has come to pass. 

This horrible carnage, Duryodhana, is the result of your defiance of 
Vidura’s sage counsel. The foolish man who disregards the precious advice 
of true and trusted friends, and follows only his own lusts, falls swiftly into 
deep trouble and distress. O son of Gandhari, you had Draupadi dragged 
into the Kuru court before us all, while she was in her period and wore but a 
single cloth. How did you dare do this to one as pure as her, she who owns 
every virtue, she who was born from the sacred fire? 

Yet, know Duryodhana that all this is as nothing, for in the next world 
you will be visited with retribution before which this carnage will seem 
pale. Beating the Pandavas at dice by deceit, you sent them into the forest, 
wearing deerskins. Which other Brahmana in this world, other then I, would 
seek to harm the sons of Pandu, Kshatriyas of dharma, who are like my own 
sons. In the Kuru sabha, with your father Dhritarashtra’s approval, you, 
with Sakuni for your collaborator, provoked the ire of the Pandavas. 
Together with Dusasana, Karna then fanned that wrath. Disdaining Vidura’s 
wisdom, you repeatedly stoked that fire yourself. 

With great determination and resolve, all of you surrounded Arjuna, to 
save Jayadratha. Why, then, have you all been vanquished and why has 
Jayadratha been killed? Why, when you, Karna, Kripa, Salya and 
Aswatthaman are alive, O Kauravya, has the king of the Sindhus been 
killed? All the mighty kings who fight this war for you spared no effort to 
save his life; how was Jayadratha beheaded in their very midst? Relying on 
me, Jayadratha thought he would be saved from Arjuna. He did not find the 
rescue he expected. 

Suyodhana, I too do not see any safety for myself. Until I succeed in 
killing the Panchalas with Sikhandin, I always feel like one sinking deeper 
in the mire that is the fire prince Dhrishtadyumna. Having failed to save 
Jayadratha’s life, why do you pierce me with your words like arrows of fire, 
when you plainly see that I too burn with grief? 

No more do you see Kurukshetra adorned with the golden standards of 
Bhishma, who knew no tiredness in battle, whom no warrior could face. 


How, then, can you have any hope for victory? When the king of the 
Sindhus and Bhurisravas have been slain in the very midst of so many 
mighty maharathas, do you still not see how this war must inevitably end? 

Kripa, well nigh impossible to defeat, is still alive, Rajan! He did not 
follow Jayadratha out of this world, and I applaud him. When I saw 
Bhishma himself, whom not the Devas led by Indra, could vanquish in 
battle, felled before your very eyes, I thought that the Earth had abandoned 
you. 

Look where the troops of the Pandavas and the Srinjayas, united, come 
rushing at me. To bring you victory, I swear that I will not remove my 
armour until I have killed all the Panchalas. Rajan, go and tell my son 
Aswatthaman that even at the risk of his life he must attack the Somakas 
without let. 

Say to him and yourself follow what I tell you now: Observe all the 
teachings you have received from your father. Be firm in deeds of humility, 
in self-restraint, in satya and dharma. Observe dharma, artha, and kama, 
but, most of all, you must always follow the way of dharma. You must 
always gratify the Brahmanas with gifts. All of them deserve your worship. 
You must never do anything to hurt them. They are like flames. As for 
myself, I will break into the enemy army, O Parantapa, for a great battle, for 
you have pierced me with words sharper than arrows. If you can, 
Suyodhana, go and protect the troops. Both the Kurus and the Srinjayas are 
full of rage. They will fight even during the night.” 

Saying this to Duryodhana, Drona rides against the Pandavas. He, the 
Brahmana warrior, goes forth to eclipse the tejas of the Kshatriya like the 
sun dimming the light of the stars.’” 


CANTO 148 


JAYADRATHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Duryodhana, a being of absolute rage now, sets his 

heart on battle: to kill or be slain. He says to Karna, “Look how 

the Kiritin son of Pandu, with only Krishna going with him, penetrated 

three vyuhas of Drona, formations that the Devas themselves could not 

pierce and, in the very sight of the illustrious Acharya and all our other 
maharathas, killed Jayadratha. 

Look, Karna, at the countless great kings lying dead on the earth, killed 
by Arjuna, like a host of little creatures by a single great lion, despite Drona 
and I doing our utmost to stop Arjuna. The son of Indra has reduced my 
army to a small remnant of what it was. How could Arjuna have kept his 
impossible vow unless Drona himself allowed it? Ah, truly, Arjuna always 
was and still is exceedingly dear to our illustrious Acharya! And for this he 
allowed Arjuna into the great Sakata vyuha, without properly fighting him. 

My friend, look at my misfortune! Having first assured Jayadratha of his 
protection, Drona let Arjuna into our army like a tiger into a calf-pen. If the 
Brahmana had allowed Jayadratha to return to his kingdom, as the 
Saindhava so dearly wanted to, this day’s unimaginable carnage would 
never have occurred and our army would not have been reduced to a mere 


fraction of its great size. Ah, I was a fool to believe Drona when he swore 
to protect Jayadratha! I should have let Dussala’s husband return to his 
kingdom. And for my foolishness, today so many of my brothers, led by 
mighty Chitrasena, have perished before our very eyes.” 

Karna says, “Do not blame the Acharya, for he is giving his all in battle, 
and without a care for his very life. If Arjuna broke into our army, no fault 
attaches to Drona. Arjuna is a great maharatha, and he is young compared 
to the Acharya; the Pandava is renowned for his speed. Armed with 
devastras and mounted on his ratha that flies the Hanuman banner, with the 
reins of his horses in the hands of Krishna, cased in impenetrable armour 
and wielding the celestial Gandiva, Arjuna bested Drona, who is old now. 
There is nothing to wonder at this and certainly nothing to blame Drona for. 
He has not betrayed you in any way, only that his age slows him and tires 
him quickly, and, most of all, Arjuna has Krishna for his sarathy! 

For myself, I believe that whatever Fate had ordained will come to pass, 
for while Arjuna swept his way deep into our vyuhas and slew Jayadratha, 
Drona, for all his prowess, could not vanquish the Pandavas and take 
Yudhishtira captive. Despite all our concerted efforts, despite all of us 
giving our all in battle, Arjuna yet succeeded in killing Jayadratha and 
fulfilling his impossible vow. Surely, this could only have happened because 
Fate did not smile on us. 

Duryodhana, the truth is that we have always tried to harm the 
Pandavas, resorting to both deceit and strength. Whatever a man crossed by 
Fate attempts is undone by Fate, however the man himself may strive to 
achieve his end. Whatever a persevering man should do, he must do 
fearlessly, without caring for the outcome of his exertions. Success and 
failure depend on destiny! 

We have wronged the sons of Pandu. We first tried to poison them, and 
then immolate them in the house of lac. Finally, we vanquished them 
deceitfully at the game of dice; we humiliated them and banished them to 
the forest. Fate seemed to be with us at that time and now seems to have 
turned against us. It appears, Duryodhana, that now you must reverse the 
present course of fate as well as fight the Pandavas. Fight resolutely, fight 
with all your might and valour and only then can you still possibly prevail. 
Fight without doubt and fear and the side which excels the other will 
triumph. 


The Pandavas have used no superior intelligence or strategy in this war, 
and neither have your methods been inferior or wanting. I say to you again 
that inscrutable Fate alone decides the outcome of all karma, wise or 
unwise. Fate, ever intent on its own purposes, is awake when all else sleeps. 
Vast was your army, and your warriors numberless, when the battle began. 
Though their host was smaller, it would seem that their warriors were more 
effective in battle and we find ourselves terribly reduced. I fear it is the 
work of Fate that has frustrated our efforts.” 

Rajan, while Karna and Duryodhana thus confer, the Pandava 
akshauhini comes into view, eager for fight. Another fevered battle breaks 
out between your legions and theirs, with chariots, horsemen and elephants 
flying at each other. 

Remember, O Dhritarashtra, that your evil policy towards the Pandavas 
is the single root and cause of all this bloodshed!’” 


CANTO 149 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA 


: S anjaya says, ‘Your elephant force, Rajan, burgeoning with might, 
fights everywhere, prevailing over the Pandava forces. 
Determined either to find the next world or to triumph, the Panchalas and 
the Kauravas fight for admission into the swelling domains of Yama. 
Fearless warriors face valiant rivals, drawing geysers of blood with arrows, 
spears and darts and despatch one another to Yama’s abode in thick streams. 
Dreadful and savage is the battle between the maharathas who cause blood 
to flow furiously across Kurukshetra. 

Infuriated elephants gore each another deep with great curved tusks. 
Horsemen, seeking glory, cut one another down in the terrific melee with 
lances, arrows and battle-axes. Foot-soldiers too, in hundreds, repeatedly 
attack one another with resolute ferocity! So great is the bedlam, that the 
Panchalas and the Kurus can only be distinguished from the tribal, family 
and personal names they shout as battle cries. Horrible and relentless is the 
carnage everywhere, and darkness mantles the field of death for by now the 
sun has set. Deranged with wrath at the slaying of Jayadratha, and more 
than willing to lay down his life, Duryodhana charges straight into the midst 
of the Pandavas. Filling the earth with the rumble of his chariot-wheels and 


making Bhumi tremble, your son and his forces attack the Pandava host 
headlong and terrific is the battle between the two forces and blood runs in 
frothing streams on the ground. 

Like the meridian sun that burns everything with his rays at midday, the 
blazing Suyodhana scathes the enemy forces with relentless flights of 
arrows so that the Pandavas cannot even look at him. Indeed, so terribly and 
gloriously does he fight, that the sons of Pandu and their legions despair of 
defeating the Kauravas and, slaughtered by your lustrous son, his tides of 
gold-winged arrowheads ablaze, the Panchalas flee in all directions. 

Duryodhana mows down the Pandava legions as he pleases, heads and 
severed arms falling like rain onto the gory ground. Truly, Rajan, none 
among the Pandavas has achieved the feats that Duryodhana now does on 
the darkling field. He ravages the enemy like great Surya and Vayu wilting 
a pool of lotuses with their searing rays and arid winds. 

He strikes the Panchalas and Bhimasena with ten shafts, each of the 
sons of Madri with three, Virata and Drupada each with six, Sikhandin with 
a hundred, Dhrishtadyumna with seventy, Yudhishtira with seven, Satwata 
with five, each of the five sons of Draupadi with three, Ghatotkacha also 
with many barbs, and the Kaikeyas and the Chedis with innumerable keen 
arrows, and then roars like a mythic lion from time out of mind. 
Annihilating hundreds of other warriors as well as elephants and horses 
with his fierce shafts, he is like Rudra devouring the creatures at the 
pralaya. 

Then Yudhishtira rives his bow in three with two immaculate broad- 
headed arrows. He strikes Duryodhana with ten potent shafts loosed in an 
unbroken line that pass clean through Duryodhana’s limbs and pierce the 
earth behind him. The Pandava troops surround Yudhishtira, as the Devas 
did Purandara when he killed Vritra. 

Another mighty shaft from Yudhishtira fells Suyodhana onto his knees 
in his great ratha. Thereupon, the Panchala troops roar in jubilation, 
“Duryodhana is slain!” 

Now we hear a great and wild buzzing of countless arrows, like many 
swarms of bees, O Bhaarata, and Drona appears, holding up the enemy with 
a firestorm of arrows that light up the early night. Meanwhile, Duryodhana 
recovers, seizes up a fresh bow and charges Yudhishtira, roaring, “Stop and 
fight!” Sensing victory, the Panchalas charge Drona, who, unruffled, 
implacable, has rushed to the rescue of your son and now beats back the 


Panchalas and decimates their troops spraying blood copiously everywhere. 
Yet another pitched and lethal battle erupts and rills of blood flow 
glimmering in the soft and dreadful dark.” 


CANTO 150 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: ‘T) hritarashtra says, “When the mighty Drona breaks through the 

Pandava ranks and rides his ratha all over the battlefield, how do 
the Pandavas stop him? Who protects the right wheel and who the left 
wheel of his chariot as he slaughters the enemy? Who are the brave warriors 
who follow him and protect his back? Who are those who confront the 
maharatha? When that the greatest of all warriors, dancing in his chariot 
scythes his way into the Pandava host, his enemies must feel an 
unseasonable cold in their very bones. They must tremble like cattle 
exposed to wintry blasts. How does the bull among rathikas, who consumes 
all the Panchala troops like a raging conflagration, meet his death?’ 

Sanjaya says, “After killing Jayadratha at the twilight hour, Arjuna 
meets Yudhishtira and Satyaki, and then rides at Drona, as do Yudhishtira 
and Bhimasena, each with an akshauhini of troops. The intelligent Nakula, 
the invincible Sahadeva, and Dhrishtadyumna, with their divisions, Virata, 
and the king of the Salwas with a large force, also advance against Drona. 
Dhrishtadyumna’s father, king Drupada, leads the Panchalas against the 
Acharya as do the sons of Draupadi and the Rakshasa Ghatotkacha with his 
feral army. The Prabhadraka—Panchalas, too, six thousand strong and all 


great fighters led by Sikhandin, advance against Drona. Other leading 
Kshatriyas and maharathas among the Pandavas unite and take the field 
against Drona. 

As these heroic warriors, O Bharatarishabha, fly into battle, the night by 
now is pitch dark, increasing the terrors of the timid. During this hour of 
darkness, Rajan, numberless warriors, elephants, horses and foot-soldiers 
die and jackals howling all around create great fear with their blazing 
mouths and predatory owls with lamp like eyes perch on the standards of 
the Kauravas and hoot abysmally, foretelling further murdering. 

A grim and resounding uproar arises everywhere from the troops, 
mingling with the loud beating of drums and cymbals clashing, deep grunts 
of elephants, neighing of horses, and stamping of horses’ hooves and a truly 
dreadful battle ensues between Drona and all the Srinjayas. The world is 
enveloped in utter darkness; the sky is obscured by the dust raised by the 
combatants and nothing can be seen. The blood of men, horses and 
elephants flow freely together with palls of dust and disappears into the 
thirsty earth and all of us are overwhelmed by dejection and panic. 

During this grimmest night, we hear weapons clashing, which sound 
like a burning forest of bamboos upon a mountain. With the sounds of 
drums like mridangas, anakas, vallakis and patahas, with the shouting and 
neighing, horrific pandemonium rules the dark. No one can tell friend from 
foe and madness possesses all in the night. The showers of blood 
everywhere quickly settle the dust arisen, O Bharatarishabha, and the 
golden coats of mail and the bright ornaments of the warriors glint some 
light through the gloom. 

When the blood-drenched dust settles, the air clears and the Bharata 
host adorned with gems and gold and wielding spears and standards looks 
like the sky strewn with dim twinkling stars. Kurukshetra resounds with the 
howls of jackals, the cawing of crows, the grunts of elephants, and the 
shouts, roars and screams of warriors. All these sounds mingle into a hair- 
raising din and fill all the points of the compass like the report of Indra’s 
thunder. 

At dead of night, the Bharata host is illumined by the angadas, earrings, 
cuirasses, and the other weapons of the fighting men. The elephants and 
chariots, adorned with gold, look like clouds charged with lightning. 
Swords, arrows, maces, scimitars, clubs, lances and axes, as they fall, are 
dazzling flashes of fire. Duryodhana is the gust of wind that is the precursor 


of the two tempestuous armies. Chariots and elephants are its dry clouds 
and the loud noise of drums and other instruments form the peals of its 
thunder and the bright standards and bows its lightning flashes. 

Drona and the Pandavas are its rainclouds, while swords, darts and 
maces are its thunder, arrows are its downpour, and ceaseless flights of 
every other kind of weapon are its blasting winds. Hot are these deadly 
storms that blow, or agonisingly cold, as they claim lives past all count. 
There is nothing that can protect the warriors from death’s night gale. Brave 
men who still lust after battle enter into the frightful fray on this dread night 
that echoes with horrifying sounds, which sharpen the fears of the timid and 
swell the joy of heroes. 

As the war at night swells, the Pandus and the Srinjayas unite and attack 
Drona. However, Rajan, all who advance against the illustrious Drona are 
either forced to turn back or despatched to the halls of Yama. Indeed, on 
this appalling night, Drona by himself cuts down thousands of elephants, 
tens of thousands of chariots, and millions of foot-soldiers and horses.’”’ 


CANTO 151 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ ‘T) hritarashtra asks, ‘As the invincible Drona Mahatejasvin, his 
wrath stirred by Jayadratha’s death, wreaks havoc upon the 
Srinjayas, what do my sons and the rest of you feel? After the death of 
Jayadratha and of the great Bhurisravas, and after the Acharya says what he 
did to my recalcitrant Duryodhana, when that maharatha Brahmana breaks 
viciously on the Panchalas by night, scattering them, what does Arjuna do? 
What does Duryodhana think that he should do now? Who follows the 
boon-giving hero, the foremost of Brahmana warriors, and stands behind 
him while he fights so dreadfully, like all the spirits of darkness embodied, 
and who fights in his van? Ah, Suta, as you speak I can feel upon my very 
skin the fear and devastation that Drona brings to the Pandava host; I feel 
them tremble like cows under a wintry sky. 

After he breaks into the midst of the Panchala forces, how does this 
Parantapa, the Naravyaghra, meet with his death? When on that night all the 
troops unite and all the great Pandava maharathas combine and Drona still 
rules the dark disdainfully, imperiously, which of our best warriors stand 
and face him? 


You also say that my troops are either being slain or huddle together, 
and that my maharathas have lost their chariots having had them shattered 
by the sons of Pandu. While the Pandavas fetch terror and death to our 
forces, how do they withstand those shuras in the gruesome dark? You say 
that the Pandavas are heartened and full of hope for victory, while my 
troops are dejected and panic-stricken. How, O Sanjaya, do you perceive 
this distinction between the Kurus and the advancing Parthas? Tell me all, 
old friend, and in every detail.’ 

Sanjaya says, “As the red and black night deepens, Rajan, the Pandavas 
and the Somakas all attack Drona. As if he sees through the dark as clearly 
as by daylight, Drona kills all the Kaikeyas and the sons of 
Dhrishtadyumna, as well as many other maharathas. At this, king Sibi, 
master archer, challenges the heroic son of Bharadwaja, and seeing this 
great hero riding at him, maharatha Drona strikes him with ten thick iron 
barbs. Sibi drills Drona with thirty arrows, fitted with kanka feathers; 
smiling fiercely, he fells Drona’s charioteer with a broad-headed shaft. 
Drona kills the illustrious Sibi’s horses and his charioteer and, quicker than 
it takes to tell, hacks off Sibi’s head, with its crown and helmet. 

Duryodhana sends a charioteer out to Drona and as soon as this sarathy 
takes up the Brahmana’s reins, the Acharya resumes his savage decimation 
of his enemies. 

Full of rage at Bhima having slain his father, the Kalinga king, 
supported by his troops, attacks Bhimasena. He first strikes Bhima with five 
arrows and again with seven more; rakes Bhima’s sarathy Visoka with three 
perfect shafts and cuts a wedge from his proud standard with another. 
Roaring, Vrikodara leaps off his chariot straight onto his adversary’s ratha, 
kills the Kalinga with his bare hands, tears him limb from limb, and strews 
black Kurukshetra with the pieces of his body! 

Karna, the brother of the slain prince and others cannot bear to watch 
the brutal deed and looses narachas like venomous serpents at the giant 
Pandava. Jumping down from Kalinga’s ratha, Bhima, covered in gore, runs 
to the chariot of Dhruva, the brother of the king whom he has just 
dismembered, and strikes that Kalinga prince a single blow with his fist that 
shatters his royal head like a melon and Dhruva dies. 

Bhimasena, now roaring like a king lion in great fury, runs to the chariot 
of Jayarata, and dragging Jayarata down onto the ground with his left hand, 
kills him with a slap of his right, which blasts his head off his neck and 


inundates Bhima with his blood as well. All this he does before Karna’s 
eyes and Karna casts a golden spear like a gash of lightning at him. But, 
smiling hideously, the Pandava seizes the golden lance and hurls it back at 
Karna! In the very nick of time, Sakuni divides that lance before it can 
reach Karna. 

Having killed these three Kalingas, Bhima returns to his own chariot in 
some satisfaction, dripping scarlet, and charges your troops again, mowing 
them down before him like Yama himself enraged. Your sons steel 
themselves to stand firm against the advent of the horrible apparition and 
cover the hulking Pandava with ceaseless showers of arrows. 

Grinning fiendishly, Bhima unleashes a gust of arrows at Durmada’s 
charioteer and horses, sending them in a wink to Yama. Durmada quickly 
mounts Dushkarna’s chariot and together they charge Bhima, even like 
Varuna and Surya rushing against Taraka, that best of Daityas. They pierce 
Bhima with a hundred arrows. However, in the very sight of Karna, 
Aswatthaman, Duryodhana, Kripa, Somadatta and Balhika, Bhima stamps 
his great foot with such violence that the wheels of Dushkarna’s ratha sink 
into the earth. In a flash, Bhima is upon them, striking them wildly with 
inexorable blows of his prodigious fists, beating both into a pulp of blood, 
bone and flesh so they are a single mangled corpse. Horrified wails arise 
from your watching troops. 

Their kings look at Bhima and say, “That is Rudra who fights from 
Bhima’s body. This is Rudra come among the Dhartarashtras.” And 
deranged by the titan’s awful ferocity, they all flee in all directions 
whipping their horses to their greatest speed. Indeed, no two of them can be 
seen fleeing together such is their absolute panic in the hellish night. 

Many kings applaud Vrikodara when he brings bloody havoc to your 
army in the night. His eyes as beautiful as full-blown lotuses, he goes to 
Yudhishtira and pays his respects to his brother. Nakula and Sahadeva, 
Drupada, Virata, the Kaikeyas, and Yudhishtira are overjoyed and honour 
Vrikodara just as the Devas did Mahadeva after he had killed Andhaka. 

Then your sons, all equal to the sons of Varuna, and fulminant with 
wrath, ride with the awesome Drona and a large force of chariots, foot- 
soldiers, and elephants, and they surround Bhima, intent on putting an end 
to him. On this terrible night, Rajan, when everything is enveloped in 
darkness as if by a black thunderhead, another dreadful battle erupts 


between those illustrious warriors, an unbridled contention that pleases the 
ravening hearts of wolves, crows and vultures.’” 


CANTO 152 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘After Satyaki kills his son Bhurisravas, while he sat 

in praya, an outraged Somadatta says to Yuyudhana, “Why, O 

Satwata, have you abandoned the Kshatriya dharma that the great Gods 

ordained and taken to the ways of base bandits? Why would one who 

observes Kshatriya dharma and possesses wisdom strike a man who turns 

his back on battle, or one who has become helpless, or one who has laid 

down his weapons, or one who begs for quarter? Two among the Vrishnis 

are reputed to be the best of great maharathas— Pradyumna of mighty tejas 

and you, Satyaki! Why then did you act so cruelly and sinfully towards one 
who sat on praya and who had, besides, his arm hewn off by Partha? 

Now reap the fruit of what you did to my son, sinner! For I mean to cut 
your head off with a winged and powerful astra. I swear by my two sons 
who are dear to me and by all my deeds of punya, that if I do not kill you 
before this night passes, you who are so proud of your heroism, with your 
sons and younger brothers, unless Pritha’s son Arjuna protects you, then let 
me sink into terrible hell, O wretch of the Vrishnis!” 

Saying this, and demented with grief, the mighty Somadatta blows his 
conch and gives a leonine roar. Satyaki, with eyes like lotus-petals and teeth 


like a lion’s, says angrily to Somadatta, “O you of Kuru’s race, whether 
fighting you, or any other, no trace of fear enters my heart. Even if you fight 
me protected by all your troops, I will have no complaint! I always observe 
Kshatriya dharma and you cannot frighten me with brave, brash words or 
with insults. If you want to fight me today, strike me with arrows and I will 
do the same. 

Your son, the maharatha Bhurisravas, Rajan, I have slain; and Sala, and 
Vrishasena, I have vanquished. And I will kill you as well today with all 
your sons and kinsmen. Fight with resolve for you, Kaurava, are endowed 
with great strength. Yet Somadatta, you are already dead for you fight 
against mahatejasvin Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, of the drum banner, in whom 
there is always charity, self-restraint, purity of heart, compassion, modesty, 
intelligence, forgiveness, and all else that is indestructible. You will die 
along with Karna and Subala’s son Sakuni. I swear by Krishna’s feet and by 
all my punya that I will kill you and your sons. You will save yourself only 
if you flee from battle. 

After addressing each other thus, their eyes red with fury, the two great 
Kshatriyas begin to fight with arrows. Then with a thousand rathas and ten 
thousand horsemen, Duryodhana casts a defensive circle around Somadatta, 
as does Sakuni armed with every kind of astra and supported by his sons, 
grandsons and brothers: why, a power to equal Indra’s. Your brother-in-law, 
Rajan, young in years and his body hard as the Vajra, and canny and wise, 
has a hundred thousand brave horsemen with him with which force he 
defends Somadatta. Protected by these powerful ones, Somadatta shrouds 
Satyaki with clouds of arrows. 

Seeing Satyaki so besieged, Dhrishtadyumna rushes up to protect him 
with a large force, and the two vast legions collide with a sound like that of 
many oceans lashed into fury by tearing hurricanes. Somadatta pierces 
Satyaki with nine arrows; Yuyudhana strikes him back also with nine shafts 
of such power that Somadatta staggers and sits down abruptly in his chariot, 
fainted. His sarathy whisks him away from the battle. Drona sees this and 
arrives swiftly to face the Yadu hero. 

Seeing the Acharya attack him, many Pandava warriors led by 
Yudhishtira come to Satyaki’s rescue. Then commences a battle between 
Drona and the Pandavas, like that between Bali and the Devas for the 
sovereignty of the three worlds. Drona covers the Pandava host with a 
barrage of arrows and sharply wounds Yudhishtira. He strikes Satyaki with 


ten barbed shafts, Dhrishtadyumna with twenty, Bhimasena with nine, 
Nakula with five, Sahadeva with eight, Sikhandin with a hundred, and each 
of the five sons of Draupadi with five. Next, he shoots Virata with eight 
arrows, Drupada with ten, Yudhamanyu with three and Uttamaujas with six. 
And piercing many other warriors, he rushes towards Yudhishtira whose 
troops run in all directions wailing. 

Seeing Drona slaughter his forces, an incensed Arjuna quickly rides up 
to contain the Acharya. Now Yudhishtira’s army rallies to support him and, 
again, the fierce battle between Drona and the Pandavas ensues. Drona, 
supported by your sons, begins to consume the Pandava host like a fire 
devouring a heap of cotton. He is radiant like the sun at dead of night, and 
like a blazing fire he looses his ray-like arrows without any moment’s lapse 
from his bow, which is always drawn into a circle. Like the sun he scorches 
everything around him and consumes his enemies, and there is none in that 
army who can stop him. 

Drona’s shafts hack away the heads of all who venture to confront him 
before burrowing into the earth. Butchered by the illustrious Brahmana, the 
Pandava host once more turns tail and flees in the very presence of Arjuna. 
Seeing the rout that Drona perpetrates, at Arjuna’s instance, Krishna guides 
his ratha harnessed to horses white as silver, or milk, or the kunda flower, or 
the moon, towards Drona’s chariot. Bhimasena, too, seeing Phalguna ride at 
Drona, says to his charioteer, “Take me towards Drona’s legion.” 

Visoka urges his horses down Arjuna’s wake. Seeing the two brothers 
ride towards Drona’s akshauhini, the greatest maharathas among the 
Panchalas, the Srinjayas, the Matsyas, the Chedis, the Karushas, the 
Kosalas, and the Kaikeyas, all follow them. Then, Rajan, a hair-raising 
battle breaks out as two mighty squadrons of rathas led by Arjuna and 
Bhima attack your host; the former on the right and the latter in the van. 
Seeing them dimly in the night lit by flaming astras, Dhrishtadyumna and 
Satyaki rush to support them. 

The two hosts come together with a sound that is like the noise made by 
many seas lashed into fury by many tempests. Spying Satyaki in the battle, 
Aswatthaman, wroth at the killing of Bhurisravas, rides furiously against 
him. However, Bhimasena’s Rakshasa son, the towering Ghatotkacha, 
riding on a massive chariot of black iron covered with bear-skins, which is 
twelve thousand cubits tall and wide, swoops down on Drona’s son, coming 
like another night himself. 


The eerie creatures yoked to it are neither horses nor elephants, but 
strange beasts big as elephants. On its lofty flagstaff is perched a prince of 
vultures with outstretched wings and outspread talons, with glaring, 
unwinking eyes, and shrieking dreadfully. The immense ratha is festooned 
with red flags, decked with the entrails of various animals and fitted with 
eight wheels. Riding on it, is a full akshauhini of the most ferile and 
macabre Rakshasas armed with spears, great clubs, rocks and trees, all 
surrounding their prince Ghatotkacha. 

Seeing Ghatotkacha come to battle at night, the time when his kind are 
at their strongest, the enemy kings are struck with fear. He, the prince of 
Rakshasas, looms like some great black hill of terrible aspect, altogether 
frightful, with terrible fangs bared and his visage fierce, with arrowhead- 
like ears and high cheek-bones, stiff hair rising straight up from his head, 
glittering eyes, a sunken belly, a blazing mouth yawned wide as a chasm, 
and a crown on his head, darkly splendid, and waves of terror sweep your 
son’s army even like the current of the Ganga agitated by the wind. 

At his dreadful roars, elephants spray urine and dung and the kings 
tremble. Then the Rakshasas, whose day is night, cover the field with a 
shower of stones, with wheeling chakras, bhundis, darts, lances, spears, 
sataghnis and axes. Rajan, all your sons and Karna flee from that ghastly 
phalanx. Only Drona’s proud son Aswatthaman, ever arrogant of his valour, 
stands fearlessly and quickly dispels the mayic illusions that Ghatotkacha 
creates. 

His rage mounting, Ghatotkacha looses a tirade of arrows at 
Aswatthaman, which pass through his body, emerging dyed with his blood 
and streak into the earth like snakes into an anthill. However, an inspired 
Aswatthaman does not flinch but wounds Ghatotkacha deeply in all his 
marmas with ten arrows that lance agony through the great Rakshasas so he 
throws back his head and howls abysmally. Bhima’s son takes up a chakra 
with a thousand spokes and an edge sharp as a razor, shining like the rising 
sun and adorned with diamonds, and hurls it at Aswatthaman. As the wheel 
flies spinning towards Drona’s son, he shatters it into fragments with a 
tremendous volley and it falls onto the earth, like the cherished hopes of an 
ill-fated man. 

Ghatotkacha swiftly mantles Aswatthaman with a torrent of 
thunderbolts, even like Rahu swallowing the Sun. Meanwhile, 
Ghatotkacha’s splendid son Anjanaparvan, looking like a mass of shining 


antimony, checks the Brahmana warrior like Meru, king of the mountains, 
checking the coursing wind. Beleaguered and bleeding profusely from the 
recalescent arrows of Bhimasena’s grandson, Aswatthaman looks like 
Sumeru receiving a lashing of rain from a mighty cloud. 

By the moment battle fury mounts in Aswatthaman, who is no less than 
Rudra, of whom he is often called an amsa, or Upendra in prowess, and 
with one shaft he smashes Anjanaparvan’s standard, with two more kills his 
two charioteers, and with three others, his trivenuka. Next, with a single 
astounding shaft he destroys his bow and slaughters his horses with four 
more thick barbs. His ratha rendered useless, Anjanaparvan picks up a 
sword engraved with golden stars but Aswatthaman breaks it in two in his 
hands with a single arrow. 

Hidimba’s grandson hefts a gold-chased mace and, whirling it over his 
head casts it like fell lightning at Aswatthama, who calmly smashes it into 
dust even as it flares at him. Now, Anjanaparvan flies up high into the air, 
snatching up some trees as he goes! Roaring like a thunderhead from above, 
he hurls the trees down over Aswatthaman like thunderbolts. Adroitly 
avoiding these, Drona’s son covers Anjanaparvan, the mayavi hanging in 
the sky, with an upward storm of shafts. 

The Rakshasa descends again on to his gold-decked chariot, still 
looking like a high and beautiful hill of antimony running rillets of blood. 
And finally, Aswatthaman kills Anjanaparvan, cased in a heavy iron coat of 
mail, even like Mahadeva killed the Asura Andhaka in olden days. Seeing 
his mighty son slain, Ghatotkacha’s roars erupt like peals of thunder across 
dark Kurukshetra; he rides up to Drona’s son who now consumes the 
Pandava troops like a raging forest-fire, and cries: “Stop and fight me, O 
son of Drona! You will not escape me alive! I will kill you today like Agni’s 
son did Krauncha.” 

Aswatthaman replies, “Go, child, and fight others, O you who have the 
power of a Deva. It is not proper, O son of Hidimbi, that I should have 
battle with one who is like a son to me. I have no grudge against you! Yet, 
when one’s ire is roused, one may even kill one’s own self.” 

Ghatotkacha, stricken at the death of his son, and his eyes red as copper, 
tells Aswatthaman, “Am I a coward, O son of Drona, that you try, like some 
vulgar fellow, to frighten me with this talk? Your words do not become you. 
I have been sired by Bhima in the celebrated Kuru vamsa and I am a son of 
the Pandavas, the heroes who never retreat from battle. I am also the king of 


the Rakshasas, equal to the ten-headed Ravana in prowess. Stop, Stop, O 
son of Drona! Brahmana, I will remove your very wish for battle and you 
will not escape me alive today!” 

With that, Ghatotkacha, son of Bhima, attacks Aswatthaman like a lion 
a prince of elephants. He unleashes a gale of arrows of the measure of 
akshas at the Brahmana bull among maharathas. Aswatthaman 
consummately cuts down the furious shafts before they can reach him. The 
night sky is lit up bright with the astras the two loose at each other, and the 
sparks that flow down in cascades from the unearthly weapons locked 
together are like vast swarms of fireflies. 

Ghatotkacha uses fluent sorcery, maya, against Drona’s son, who, 
however, is particularly adept at dispelling such illusions and proud of his 
prowess at this. Ghatotkacha quickly makes himself invisible with maya 
and again suddenly assumes the towering form of a great mountain 
appeared out of nowhere, crowded with cliffs, trees and fountains from 
which spears, lances, swords and heavy clubs flow in a cataract. 
Aswatthaman remains unmoved and invokes the Vajrastra, imbued with the 
force of thunder, which blasts the mayic mountain into the stuff of dreams 
of which it is made. 

Now the Rakshasa becomes a mass of deep blue clouds in the sky, 
decked with a rainbow, and begins to hurl down storms of stones and rocks 
on Drona’s son. Then summoning the Vayavyastra, Aswatthaman blows 
away the sorcerous cloud mass. Seamlessly, he turns his attention back to 
the ground and the battlefield plunged in night and now using every 
devastra at his command, without the least restraint, covers all the points of 
the compass with his flaming arrows and, in moments, kills a hundred 
thousand maharathas. 

He sees Ghatotkacha riding fearlessly at him, with bent bow and a large 
cohort of tigerish Rakshasas, some riding elephants, some on dark chariots 
and some on enormous horses, all followers of the son of Hidimbi, their 
faces fearsome, their heads and necks great and outlandish. These 
Rakshasas are from the strains of both Paulastyas and Yatudhanas, their 
powers equal to that of Indra, and they carry large and exotic weapons and 
wear diverse kinds of mail not seen among human warriors. So terrible are 
they and so obviously hard to quell, and swollen with rage, that 
Duryodhana looks at them and is plunged into swift dejection. 


Aswatthaman tells him, “Stop, O Duryodhana! You need have no fear. 
Stand aside with your brothers and these lords of earth, powerful as Indra. I 
swear that I will kill all your enemies and you will not face defeat. 
Meanwhile, reassure your troops of this.” 

Duryodhana replies, “I do not find what you say surprising for your 
heart is great, O son of Drona, and your love for us greater.” 

Then he says to Sakuni, “Arjuna fights supported by a hundred thousand 
maharathas of untold valour. Ride against him, Matulan, with sixty 
thousand rathas, while Karna, Vrishasena, Kripa, Nila, Kritavarman, the 
sons of Purumitra, Dusasana, Nikumbha, Kundabhedin, Puranjaya, 
Dridharatha, Hemakampana, Salya, Aruni, Indrasena, Sanjaya, Vijaya, Jaya, 
Purakrathin, Jayavarman, Sudarshana, and the Northerners will follow you 
with sixty thousand foot-soldiers. O my uncle, kill Bhima, the twins and 
Dharmaputra Yudhishtira, as Indra did the Asuras. You are my hope of 
victory. Drona’s son has already grievously wounded them, mauling all 
their limbs; so now kill the sons of Kunti, O Sakuni, like Kartikeya slaying 
the Asuras.” 

Sakuni hears this and, without hesitating a moment, rides forth to have 
the Pandavas’ lives, filling your son’s heart with delight. Meanwhile, Rajan, 
a fearsome battle is underway between the Rakshasas and Aswatthaman, 
truly like that between Sakra and Prahlada in days of yore. A raging 
Ghatotkacha strikes Drona’s son in the chest with ten powerful shafts, fierce 
as poison or fire, and Aswatthaman trembles on his ratha like a tall tree 
shaken by a storm. With a broad-headed arrow, Bhima’s son severs the 
bright bow in Aswatthaman’s hands. 

Aswatthaman sweeps up another mighty bow and looses an occult, 
spreading torrent of shafts at all the Rakshasas. These shafts draw gushes of 
blood from the great Rakshasa legion and they are like a herd of elephants 
harried by a pride of lions. Drona’s son overwhelms Ghatotkacha’s 
Rakshasas with their horses, charioteers and elephants, and blazes forth like 
Agni consuming all the living at the end of the Yuga. 

With astras of recondite fire, he incinerates a full akshauhini of 
Rakshasa troops, and looks as magnificent as the divine Maheswara in 
Swarga after the Lord torched the triad city of Tripura from the sky. 
Aswatthaman shines forth on dark Kurukshetra like the apocalypse of the 
pralaya after it has cremated every creature. 


A wild Ghatotkacha roars at his vast Rakshasa force, “Slay the son of 
Drona!” 

Their fangs curved and bright like diamonds, their faces great and 
frightful, their mouths agape with long tongues lolling out, and their eyes 
burning in the darkness like ominous slitted flames, the night-rangers fill the 
world with their devastating roars; armed with strange and glinting 
weapons, they rush headlong at Aswatthaman, attacking him ferociously 
with thousands of sleek lances, sataghnis, spiked maces, asanis, axes, 
scimitars, maces, short arrows, heavy clubs, thick spears, swords, polished 
kampanas, kunapas, hulas, strange keening rockets, stones, vats of hot oil, 
thunas of black iron, and massive mallets, all dreadful and eerie. 

Seeing this downpour of weapons fall upon the head of Drona’s son, 
your warriors are shaken. Aswatthaman, however, nervelessly destroys the 
entire lot of ayudhas, looming in magnificence like a golden cloud rising by 
dark. Never pausing, he yet again razes entire hordes of the demons. The 
skill that Aswatthaman displays is wondrous, my lord, incomparable. 

Alone and unsupported, an expert with great and mighty weapons, he 
consumes the seething Rakshasa army with his blazing astras in the very 
presence of Ghatotkacha, so they turn into pillars of ashes, which the wind 
scatters. Drona’s son is irradiant in the night as the Samvartaka fire. 

Indeed, Rajan, there is no warrior among all the thousands of great 
kings and Kshatriyas on that chasmal field that can face Aswatthaman as he 
devours the Pandava host as he pleases, none except Bhima’s son 
Ghatotkacha. His coppery eyes by now rolling in wrath, biting his lips until 
they bleed, Ghatotkacha says in deathly quiet to his sarathy, “Take me to the 
son of Drona.” 

Riding on the formidable chariot that flies banners of victory, Bhima’s 
son by Hidimbi rides again at Aswatthaman ablaze. With a roar to drown all 
gone before, he whirls a grave asani, an iron mace of celestial craft fitted 
with eight golden bells, and flings it like a thunder flash at Drona’s son. But 
in a blink, Aswatthaman leaps high in his chariot, seizes the lethal weapon 
in his hands and casts it right back at the Brahmana! Now Ghatotkacha 
hurls himself out of his ratha and the incandescent asani explodes on his 
massive chariot, turning it to a heap of ashes along with its horses, 
charioteers and standard, and then lies still smouldering on the ground 
before subsiding in a reverberant susurrus. 


Everyone applauds this feat of Drona’s son. Ghatotkacha now runs to 
Dhrishtadyumna’s chariot, takes up a bow as great as that of Indra himself, 
and shoots again at Aswatthaman. Dhrishtadyumna, too, pierces 
Aswatthaman’s chest with many gold-winged shafts, all vicious as serpents. 
Drona’s son retaliates with burning arrows by the thousands, which 
Ghatotkacha and Dhrishtadyumna repel with their own shafts of fire. The 
battle that swells between Ghatotkacha and Aswatthaman is awesome, 
terrible and it enthralls all the warriors around them, O Bharatarishabha! 

Then, with thousands of rathas, three hundred elephants, and six 
thousand horsemen, Bhimasena arrives there. With unflagging zeal, 
Aswatthaman continues to fight Ghatotkacha and Dhrishtadyumna with his 
forces. Wondrous, past describing is the genius that Drona’s son displays; 
why, one might well say that no one else could match his valour. In the flash 
of an eye, he slaughters a full akshauhini of Rakshasa troops with horses, 
charioteers, rathas and elephants, in the presence of Bhimasena, 
Ghatotkacha, Dhrishtadyumna, the twins, Yudhishtira, Arjuna and Krishna. 

Struck deep by Aswatthaman’s arrows, elephants fall on elephants like 
crestless mountains. Strewn all around with the still convulsing trunks of 
elephants lopped off, Kurukshetra looks as if it is overspread with writhing 
snakes. The field is resplendent with golden staves and royal parasols, like 
the sky at the end of the Yuga, shining with planets, stars, and many moons 
and suns. He lets flow a river of the blood of elephants, horses and warriors. 
Tall standards are its great frogs; drums its large tortoises; white royal 
parasols its rows of swans; yak-tails its kankas, vultures, and crocodiles; 
weapons its fish; elephants the rocks on its banks; horses, its sharks; 
chariots, its broad and shifting banks; and banners, its rows of fine trees. 
With arrows for its smaller fish, the frightful river has spears, darts and 
swords for snakes; marrow and flesh for its mire, and trunkless bodies 
floating on it for its rafts. It is choked with the hair of men and beasts, 
which are its moss and it filled the timid with fear. We see bloody waves on 
its surface and it is frightful because of the corpses of foot-soldiers that fill 
it. Yama’s world is the ocean towards which this river flows. 

After killing the Rakshasas, Aswatthaman now turns his supernatural 
archery on Ghatotkacha. He also lacerates the mighty Parthas, Vrikodara, 
the sons of Dhrishtadyumna and hacks away the head of Suratha, one of 
Drupada’s sons. He kills Suratha’s younger brother Satrunjaya, and then 
Valanika, followed by Jayanika and Jaya. He beheads Prishadhra with a 


roar, and next the proud Chandrasena and, with ten exact arrows, 
despatches Kuntibhoja’s ten sons. 

Then, Rajan, he sends Srutayus to Yama, the Lord of Death. Now 
Aswatthaman, the terrible, affixes a devastra to his bowstring, draws it to 
his ear and unleashes that celestial weapon, like the very Yama danda, the 
rod of death, at Ghatotkacha. The astra blasts through Ghatotkacha’s chest 
and bores into the ground behind him. Bhima’s son collapses in his chariot. 

Believing him dead, maharatha Dhrishtadyumna spirits him away and 
sets him on another chariot. And, Rajan, Yudhishtira’s chariot legion flees 
the battle from Drona’s invincible son, who throws back his head and gives 
a triumphant roar that shakes the earth, while all your sons and your army 
cry out his name and hail his feat. The earth, strewn all around with the 
fallen, hilly bodies of dead rakshasas, mangled and shredded by thousands 
of arrows, presents the face of an indescribable nightmare. The Siddhas, 
Gandharvas, Pisachas, Nagas, Pitris, black ravens, large numbers of 
pisachas, bhutas, Apsaras and Devas, all laud Aswatthaman, the son of 
Drona.’” 


CANTO 153 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “On finding the sons of Drupada, Kuntibhoja and the 

Rakshasas, in their thousands, killed by Aswatthaman, 

Yudhishtira, Bhimasena, Dhrishtadyumna and Satyaki converge on him 
together, determined to stop him. 

Somadatta sees Satyaki and rage surges up again in him and he looses a 
cataract of arrows at Yuyudhana. A bloody and thrilling battle breaks out 
again between your army and the enemy, Seeing Satyaki beset, Bhima 
attacks the Kaurava hero Somadatta, raking him with ten searing arrows. 
Somadatta replies with hundred frenzied shafts. 

Then an angry Satyaki looses ten razor like thunderbolts at the grand 
old warrior, grieving over the death of his son Bhurisravas—Somadatta 
blessed with every estimable virtue, who is even like Yayati, the son of 
Nahusha. Yuyudhana strikes him again with seven excruciating shafts, 
while Bhimasena casts a dreadful adamantine parigha at the ancient. 
Satyaki gores Somadatta’s chest with an exceptional astra fierce as fire. The 
parigha and the fire shaft, both strike him at once and fell the heroic 
Somadatta. 


Seeing his son fallen into a swoon, Balhika rushes at Satyaki, covering 
him with arrows as a cloud does a mountain during the monsoon. Bhima, 
defending Satyak1, strikes the illustrious Bahlika with nine arrows, at which 
the mighty-armed son of Pratipa casts a javelin like Indra’s Vajra at Bhima’s 
great chest. Struck squarely, mighty Bhima trembles on his ratha and faints 
for a moment. 

Recovering quickly, with a shattering roar, the titanic Pandava hurls a 
mace at Balhika, which strikes his head off in a scarlet explosion and that 
aged shura falls like an old and great tree struck by lightning. Upon his 
death, your sons Nagadatta, Dridharatha, Virabahu, Ayobhuja, Dridha, 
Suhasta, Viragas, Pramatha and Ugrayayin, each equal in prowess to 
Dasaratha’s son Rama, rush at Bhima, their bows streaming deadly fire. 
Seeing them, Bhimasena’s eyes light up and with nine marvellous arrows, 
loosed in a single moment, he kills them all, either taking their heads or 
blowing their hearts to shreds. 

After killing your nine sons, Bhima shrouds Karna’s favourite son in a 
swathe of arrows. The vaunted Vrikaratha, Karna’s brother, strikes Bhima 
with a slew of powerful shafts but growling, the mighty Pandava takes his 
head from his neck with a wide-headed arrow. Next, O Bhaarata, he slays 
seven maharathas of Sakuni’s forces, and strikes Satachandra down and 
rides over him with his chariot, crushing him into the earth. Unable to bear 
watching this savagery, Sakuni’s brothers, five mighty Kshatriyas, 
Gavaksha, Sarabha, Vibhu, Subhaga and Bhanudatta rush at Bhimasena 
showering arrows at him. A calm Bhima gladly kills all five with five heavy 
shafts. Seeing those heroes killed, many other great Kshatriyas feel the 
touch of fear upon them and waver. 

Showing uncommon fury, now Yudhishtira attacks your troops and 
begins to raze them as he pleases, in full view of Drona and your sons. He 
despatches the Ambashtas, the Malavas, the brave Trigartas, the Sibis, the 
Abhishahas, the Surasenas, the Bahlikas and the Vasatis, turning the earth 
soggy with flesh and blood. Turning in another direction, with ferocity so 
unexpected of the Ajatasatru, he sends the Yaudheyas and a large host of 
the Madrakas to Yama. 

Now a loud tumult arises around Yudhishtira’s chariot, and we hear 
roars and cries of, “Kill!” “Hack him to pieces!” “Seize him!” 

Seeing the Dharmaraja raze your troops, Drona, urged on by your 
desperate son, unleashes the Vayavyastra at Yudhishtira. But the son of 


Pandu counters the astra of the Wind with his own weapon of Vayu. 
Inflamed by this, Drona looses a clutch of unearthly astras at the 
Dharmaputra—the Varuna astra, the Yamya astra, the Agneya astra, the 
Tvashtra astra and the Savitra astra. But amazingly the gentle Yudhishtira, 
now turned into a pure Kshatriya warrior, easily negates every unworldly 
weapon that his Acharya aims at him. 

Drona, determined to keep his vow to Duryodhana, invokes the Aindra 
and the Prajapatya astras to kill the son of Dharma. However, Kuruttama 
Yudhishtira, with the gait of an elephant or lion, of broad chest, large red 
eyes and endowed with tejas hardly less than that of Drona, summons the 
Mahendrastra to confound all Drona’s celestial ayudhas. The Mahendra 
extinguishes Drona’s entire volley. A livid Drona, his eyes aflame to kill the 
Pandava, his disciple, summons the Brahmastra so the dark filed is suddenly 
illumined as if by another blinding sun and all that watch are terror-stricken. 

Seeing the Brahmastra invoked, Yudhishtira summons his own 
Brahmastra and the two great weapons extinguish each other. All the great 
maharathas there applaud both Drona and Yudhishtira. 

In frustration, in great rage, his eyes turning the colour of copper, Drona 
turns away from Yudhishtira and begins to annihilate Drupada’s akshauhini 
with the Vayavyastra. Before the very eyes of Bhimasena and Arjuna, the 
Panchala forces flee from the Acharya. Arjuna and Bhima check the flight 
of their troops and attack the enemy with two large divisions of rathas. 
Arjuna assails the right and Bhima the left, and they confront Bharadwaja’s 
son with two veritable tornadoes of arrows. The Kaikeyas, the Srinjayas, 
and the vigorous Panchalas again follow the two brothers, Rajan, as do the 
Matsyas and the Satwatas. 

And now Arjuna Kiritin brings such devastation to your army, already 
besieged by exhaustion and sleep, that they break ranks and flee. Drona and 
Duryodhana try to rally them but they cannot check their troops in their 
flight.’” 


CANTO 154 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “Looking at the vast, seething army of the Pandavas 
your son Duryodhana now thinks it impossible to withstand the 
enemy. He says to Karna, “Loyal friend, the hour has come when your 
friends need you most. O Karna, save us! Our army is encircled by the 
Panchalas, the Kaikeyas, the Matsyas, and their maharathas, all full of rage 
and like hissing snakes. There, the Pandavas, sure of victory, shout for joy. 
The teeming chariot-force of the Panchalas is now as powerful as Indra 
himself.” 

Karna replies, “If Purandara himself comes here to save Arjuna, I will 
vanquish even the Deva king before I kill that son of Pandu. Believe me 
that this is the truth. Be of good cheer, O Bhaarata! I will kill Arjuna and all 
the Panchalas and bring you victory even as Pavaka’s son gave Vasava. I 
will achieve whatever you need to win this war. 

Among all the Pandavas, Arjuna is most powerful and I will use Indra’s 
shakti against him. Upon his death, his brothers will either surrender 
themselves to you or retire once more to the forest. As long as I am alive, O 
Kauravya, never yield to grief or despair. I will vanquish the united forces 
of the Pandavas, the Panchalas, the Kaikeyas, and the Vrishnis. I will make 


porcupines of them with my arrows and I will give you the Earth and 
everything in it.” 

At this, Kripa, who is near enough to hear what Karna says, tells him 
with a sardonic smile, “Your speech is fair indeed, Karna! If fine words 
could fetch victory, surely with you for his protector, this Bharatarishabha 
Duryodhana would be thought to have abundant protection. But you boast 
so much in the presence of the Kuru king, but we seldom see you prove 
yourself with deeds to match. 

Many times we have seen you fight the sons of Pandu, and on every 
occasion, O Suta’s son, they have beaten you soundly. When the 
Gandharvas captured Duryodhana, all the men fought except you, who were 
the first to run away. Outside Virata’s city, Arjuna defeated all the Kauravas 
including you and your younger brother. You are no match for even one of 
the sons of Pandu in battle; how can you expect to vanquish all of them 
together led by Krishna? 

Karna, you brag too much! Sutaputra, good men, men of true worth, do 
not talk they prove themselves with their deeds. You, on the other hand, are 
always thundering like the dry clouds of autumn, and you have shown 
yourself to be a man of no substance. Sadly, Duryodhana does not seem to 
understand this. 

You rant and roar, Karna, as long as you do not see Arjuna. And, as 
soon as you see him near, you fall silent. Indeed, you roar as long as you are 
out of range of Arjuna’s arrows and your bragging is stanched the moment 
Partha’s thunderbolts strike you. Kshatriyas prove themselves by their feats 
of arms; Brahmanas, by their wise and sacred speech; Arjuna proves 
himself with his bow, but Karna only by the castles he builds in the air. 

Fool, who is there that can stand up to Pandu’s son Partha who pleases 
Rudra himself?” 

Thus railed at by Saradwat’s son, Karna answers, “Heroes always boom 
like the clouds of the monsoon, and just like seeds planted in fertile soil, 
quickly sprout. I do not see any fault in heroes who accept great loads on 
their shoulders before making boastful speeches on the field of battle. When 
a man mentally resolves to bear a burden, Destiny itself helps him in its 
execution. Wishing in my heart to accept a great responsibility, I am always 
firm and resolved. If before killing the sons of Pandu with Krishna and 
Satwatas, I do proclaim what I will do, what is it to you, OO Brahmana? True 


heroes never roar fruitlessly like autumn clouds. Conscious of their own 
might, only the wise dare tell of it. 

In my heart I am determined to vanquish Krishna and Partha today! It is 
for this that I declare myself, O son of Gotama! Now behold the fruit of my 
roars, Brahmana. Slaying the son of Pandu with all their followers, Krishna 
and the Satwatas, I will bestow this whole Earth on Duryodhana without a 
thorn in it.” 

Kripa replies, “I do not give much credence, Sutaputra, to your delirious 
boasting, for they are mere words not deeds. You always deprecate the two 
Krishnas and Dharmaraja Yudhishtira. But Karna, Yudhishtira will have 
victory for he has the two Krishnas on his side. I tell you, the Devas, the 
Gandharvas, the Yakshas, Manavas, the Nagas, and the Garudas cannot 
defeat Krishna and Arjuna. 

Yudhishtira Dharmaputra is devoted to the Brahmanas, truthful in 
speech and self-controlled. He reveres the Pitris and the Devas, is devoted 
to the practice of satya and dharma, is a master of weapons, possesses great 
intelligence, and he is also grateful. His brothers are endowed with great 
strength and are masters of war. They are devoted to the service of their 
elders, possess wisdom and fame, and practise dharma. Their kinsmen are 
all powerful as Indra and great warriors, and they are all exceptionally 
devoted to the Pandavas. Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandin, Janamejaya, the son 
of Durmukha, Chandrasena, Madrasena, Kritavarman, Dhruva, Dhara, 
Vasuchandra, Sutejana, the sons of Drupada, and Drupada himself, all 
maharathas and owners of devastras, and the king of the Matsyas with his 
younger brothers, all fight resolutely for Yudhishtira’s cause. 

Gajanika, Virabhadra, Sudarshana, Srutadhwaja, Balanika, Jayanika, 
Jayapirya, Vijaya, Labhalaksha, Jayaswa, Kamaratha, the handsome 
brothers of Virata, and the twins Nakula and Sahadeva, the five sons of 
Draupadi and the Rakshasa Ghatotkacha all fight for the Pandavas. The 
sons of Pandu cannot be destroyed. Why, Bhima and Phalguna with their 
cosmic weapons can annihilate the entire universe, with the Devas, Asuras, 
and Manavas, with all the tribes of Yakshas and Rakshasas and with all the 
Gajas and Nagas, and all other creatures. 

As for Yudhishtira, he can consume the whole world with just an angry 
look from his pure eyes. How, Karna, can you vanquish these enemies for 
whom Krishna of immeasurable might has donned armour? This intention 


of yours, Sutaputra, is just your folly, that you dare contend with Sauri 
himself, who is the Lord of the universe.” 

Karna replies, smiling, “O Brahmana, whatever you say about the 
Pandavas is true. All the virtues you see in them, and many more besides, 
can be found in the sons of Pandu. It is true also that even the Devas led by 
Vasava, the Daityas, the Yakshas, and the Rakshasas cannot vanquish the 
Parthas. For all that, I, Karna, will defeat the Parthas using the inexorable 
astra given me by Indra. With that shakti, I will kill Arjuna and when he 
dies, all his brothers, and Krishna too will never enjoy sovereignty over the 
Earth, not without Arjuna. They will all perish. And then, this Bhumi, with 
her seas, will belong undisputedly to Suyodhana. 

In this world, one can achieve anything one wants, as long as one plans 
carefully for it. This I know well, and that is why I venture to proclaim what 
I will do, O Kripa. As for you, you are old, a Brahmana by birth, and no 
Kshatriya. You bear too much love for the Pandavas and that is why you 
repeatedly belittle me. I have been patient, but if you speak mockingly to 
me again, I will cut out your tongue, O wretch! 

You want to praise the Pandavas to frighten all our troops and the 
Kauravas. Listen to what I say now. Duryodhana, Drona, Sakuni, 
Durmukha, Jaya, Dusasana, Vrishasena, Salya, you, Somadatta, Drona’s son 
and Vivimsati—all these maharathas are here with us, clad in armour. 
Which enemy, even if he has the power of Indra, can vanquish you all? All 
that I have named are great warriors, knowers of dharma, and have earned 
their place in Swarga. They can match the very gods in battle, and they have 
taken the field to kill the Pandavas for Duryodhana’s sake. 

I regard victory and defeat to depend on destiny, even in the case of the 
greatest maharathas. When Mahabaho Bhishma himself lies pierced with a 
hundred arrows, and Vikarna, Jayadratha, Bhurisravas, Jaya, Jalasandha, 
Sudakshina, Sala the great, Bhagadatta mahatejasvin and many others equal 
to them, heroes all and mightier than the Pandavas, lie on Kurukshetra, 
killed by the Pandavas, what can you think, O wretched Brahmana, except 
that all this is the result of destiny? 

As for the enemies of Duryodhana, whom you so adore, their brave 
warriors, too, have been slaughtered in thousands. The armies of both the 
Kurus and the Pandavas diminish with every passing moment; I do not see 
in this the prowess of the Pandavas! For Duryodhana’s sake, O lowest of 


men, I will challenge the sons of Pandu with all my heart and all my might. 
As for victory, that depends on destiny.””’” 


CANTO 155 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Aswatthaman is at hand and, hearing his uncle Kripa 

spoken to so harshly and contemptuously by Karna, Drona’s son 

draws his sword and, in the very presence of Duryodhana, rushes roaring at 
Karna. 

Aswatthaman says, “Vile of men, Kripa speaks of the virtues that 
Arjuna truly has. And you dare rebuke him from being evil-minded and 
malicious. Your pride and insolence make you brag without a sane care for 
any of the world’s great bowmen! Where was your great prowess when, 
after chasing you away like a dog, the Gandivi slew Jayadratha in your very 
sight? Vainly, O wretch of a Suta, do you carry in your mind the hope of 
beating him who once fought Mahadeva himself. 

The very Devas and the Asuras united, and with Indra at their head, 
failed to vanquish Arjuna, with only Krishna for his ally. How then do you, 
Sutaputra, hope to defeat the greatest shura in the world, the unconquered 
Arjuna? But look now, vile Karna, what I, Aswatthaman, do to you today. 
Lowest of men, dimwitted, evil-minded Karna, I will cut your head from 
your neck!” 


And Aswatthaman rushes furiously at Karna but Duryodhana and Kripa 
seize him together and firmly restrain him. 

Then Karna says, “This dark-hearted dog of a Brahmana thinks he is 
great and boasts of his strength. Set him free, Duryodhana, and let him feel 
the might of Karna.” 

Aswatthaman replies, “Son of a Suta, O you with an evil mind, we may 
pardon you, but Phalguna will quell your rising pride.” 

Duryodhana intervenes and says, “Aswatthaman, control your anger. 
You must forgive, Anagha, and not be angry with Karna. Upon you, him, 
Kripa, Drona, Salya and Sakuni a great burden rests. Drive away your 
wrath, O best of Brahmanas! Look where all the Pandava troops advance to 
attack Karna. Indeed, here they come, challenging us all.” 

Pacified by the king, Aswatthaman, the noble son of Drona, suppresses 
his fury and forgives Karna. Then the quiet and mild Acharya Kripa says to 
Karna, “Dark-hearted Sutaputra, we forgive you, but Arjuna will quell your 
pride.” 

Meanwhile, the Pandavas and the Panchalas charge your army unitedly, 
with reverberant roars. Mahatejasvin Karna maharatha, leading many great 
Kuru warriors and looking like Indra in the midst of the Devas, waits, his 
bow drawn. As if each battle that erupts is more frightful and deafening 
than the ones gone before, so is the one that now breaks out between the 
Pandavas and the Panchalas and Karna and his forces. 

The enemy warriors roar, There stands Kana in his ratha! and Evil one, 
come fight us now! Others, with eyes bulging in rage, cry, “Let our great 
Kshatriyas kill this arrogant wretch of little discernment, this son of a Suta. 
He must not live. This sinner is the Pandavas’ worst enemy. Loyal to 
Duryodhana, he is the root of all these evils that we have seen on 
Kurukshetra. Kill him!” 

With these and other cries, and exhorted by Yudhishtira, many great 
Pandava and Panchala maharathas rush at Karna, unleashing a cataract of 
arrows at him. But the Sutaputra is supremely unmoved; no trace of fear 
lays its fingers on his heart and a mocking smile curves his fine lips. Seeing 
that sea of troops, Karna, like Death himself, begins to mow them down 
with clouds of arrows. 

The Pandavas respond with arrows from their lakhs of bows; they fight 
Radha’s son as the Daityas of old fighting with Indra. Indeed, so evenly 


matched are the two vast forces that the gory, magnificent contention 
between them is like the Devasura yuddha of old. 

Karna’s archery is wonderful, for not all his enemies combining against 
him can find a home in his body for a single arrow. He cut down all the 
barbs that streak at him in flight and responds by severing royal parasols, 
smashing chariots and killing enemy horses—all with arrows that bear his 
name upon them, every one. Harried by Karna so they quickly lose all 
assurance, the Pandava Kshatriyas begin to wander across the field like a 
herd of cattle stricken by bitter cold. 

Struck by Karna’s transcendent, godlike volleys, countless horses, 
elephants and maharathas fall dead and yet again the entire field is strewn 
with the severed heads and limbs of noble Kshatriyas. With the dead, the 
dying, and the wailing of wounded warriors, Kurukshetra by night truly 
resembles Yama’s realm. 

Duryodhana watches Karna at his splendid best, goes to Aswatthaman 
and tells him proudly, “Look where Karna torments and routs all the 
enemies massed against him! Why, he overwhelms them as Kartikeya did 
against the Asura host. And look where Arjuna now rides to kill him. 
Aswatthaman, my friend, you must protect Karna!” 

Aswatthaman, Kripa, Salya and the great maharatha Kritavarman, son 
of Hridika, all ride against against Partha dashing towards them like Sakra 
against the Daitya host. They go gladly to support the heroic Karna. 
However, Rajan, Arjuna surrounded by the Panchalas presses on against 
Karna, like Purandara against the Asura Vritra.’ 

Dhritarashtra asks, ‘Finding Phalguna advancing like Rudra himself, as 
he appears at the end of the Yuga, what does Karna do? Maharatha Karna, 
son of Vikartana, has always challenged Partha and always maintained that 
he can defeat the invincible Arjuna. What then, O Suta, does he do when he 
is suddenly face to face with his inveterate enemy?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Seeing Arjuna rushing towards him like an elephant 
towards a rival elephant, Karna stands fearlessly up to him. Partha covers 
Karna with showers of shafts with wings of gold, and Karna envelops 
Vijaya with his arrows. Clouds of golden-winged, uncanny barbs they 
exchange, until, his rage boiling up, Karna strikes Arjuna with three deadly 
missiles. Arjuna can hardly bear to watch his adversary’s virtuosity and 
looses a swath of thirty shafts at him, all with burning heads. 


Arjuna strikes Karna through his left wrist with another long arrow, 
smiling, and forcing Karna to drop his bow. But Karna recovers in a flash, 
picks up his bow again and once more covers Arjuna with gales of 
wondrous fire, now showing his true unearthly skill. Not to be outdone, 
Dhananjaya cuts down Karna’s arrow storms with his own. 

Approaching each other quite close, these two greatest of all archers, 
fighting for honour, fighting at the outer limits of their incomparable 
prowess, continue to shoot at each other in an astounding display of genius, 
which makes one’s hair stand on end. 

Arjuna, inspired by his antagonist’s prowess and swiftness of hand, lifts 
his archery and breaks Karna’s bow at the very grip, kills his four horses 
with a scathe of wedge-headed shafts, and decapitates Karna’s charioteer. 
As Karna stands vulnerable, Partha drills him with deadly volleys, so blood 
spouts from the golden Sutaputra. Karna leaps down from his useless ratha 
and quickly finds sanctuary in Kripa’s chariot. Seeing Karna beaten again, 
your watriors run in all directions. 

Duryodhana roars to them to stop. “Shuras, do not turn your backs on 
the battle. You bulls among Kshatriyas, stop! I will kill Partha myself, and 
all the Panchalas. When I fight the Gandivi today, he will see that my 
prowess is as that of Rudra at the end of the yuga. Today the Pandavas will 
find my arrows among them like locust swarms, like the torrents of rain that 
fall at summer’s end. 

Today I will put the proud Arjuna to rout and remove your fear of him. 
Arjuna will not withstand me today, brave heroes, even as the ocean can 
only dash helplessly against the continents.” 

His eyes red, Suyodhana rides at Arjuna, taking a teeming host with 
him. Seeing this, Kripa tells Aswatthaman, “Look, where Duryodhana, 
made mad by anger, goes to fight Arjuna, like an insect flying into a blazing 
fire. Stop him before this great king loses his life, in our very sight. He will 
certainly die if comes within range of Partha’s arrows. My son, stop the 
king before Arjuna’s astras make ashes of him. While we are still here and 
alive, it is a crime for the king to go into battle himself as if he has no one 
to fight for him. And if he engages Arjuna, his life will be good as lost!” 

Aswatthaman rides quickly to the canny Duryodhana and says to him, 
“When I who love you am alive, O son of Gandhari, you must not go into 
battle yourself! Do not be anxious about vanquishing Arjuna, for I will stop 


him for you. Stay here, O Suyodhana, and watch me fight the son of 
Pandu.” 

Duryodhana replies, “Drona always protects the sons of Pandu, as if 
they are his own sons. You, also, either do not put forth your true prowess 
against the Pandavas or it is my fate that your awesome might wanes as 
soon as you are faced with Kunti’s sons. Perhaps, you bear Yudhishtira or 
Draupadi some exceptional love for otherwise I cannot fathom why you do 
not fight the Pandavas as you do our other enemies. 

Ah, shame on me for my bottomless greed, for whose sake all my 
dearest friends, who dearly want to please me, find themselves vanquished 
and shamed on the field and plunged into great grief! But you, 
Aswatthaman, who are Mahadeva’s very equal and can destroy the enemy, 
will not do it. O son of my Acharya, I beg you, be pleased with me and 
vanquish my enemies! 

Neither the Devas nor the Danavas can stand your astras, O son of 
Drona. For my sake, for all our sakes, kill the Panchalas and the Somakas 
with all their followers. The rest, with your protection, we ourselves will 
slay. Look, O Brahmana, where the famed Somakas and the Panchalas blaze 
among my troops like a great forest fire. Douse them, Aswatthaman, as only 
you can, and the Kalikeyas; otherwise, led by Arjuna, they will annihilate 
us all. 

O Aswatthaman, Parantapa, ride there in haste. Whether you achieve it 
now or later, you must accomplish this feat and fetch us victory. The Rishis 
have all said that you have been born for the destruction of the Panchalas 
and that you will remove them from this world. It will be as they have 
predicted. O Naravyaghra, fulfil your destiny and kill the Panchalas with all 
their forces. When even the Devas with Indra at their head cannot face your 
astras, what can these Parthas and Panchalas do? 

I speak truly when I say that the Pandavas united with the Somakas are 
no match for you. Ride, O Mahabaho! Do not delay another instant for 
look, where stricken by Arjuna’s tides of arrows, our army breaks up and 
flees. Use your celestial tejas, my friend, for you can bring ruin to the 
enemy by yourself!””’” 


CANTO 156 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “After Duryodhana speaks to him, Aswatthaman the 
insuperable is determined to annihilate the enemy. He tells your 
son, “It is as you say, O Kuruttama! The Pandavas are always dear to both 
my father and to me just as both of us are precious to them. But not in 
battle. We fight fearlessly, to the best of our abilities, and reckless of our 
lives. Karna, Salya, Kripa, Kritavarman and I could destroy the Pandava 
host in the twinkling of an eye just as the Pandavas could destroy the 
Kaurava host, if we were not here. 

We fight the Pandavas to the best of our might, and they too fight us 
with their best strengths. Power, encountering power, is neutralised, O 
Bhaarata! I say to you, the Pandava army cannot be overcome as long as the 
sons of Pandu themselves are alive. The Pandavas are born with unworldly 
prowess and they are fighting in their own interest. Why, Duryodhana, 
should they not be able to kill your troops? 

However, you are covetous and deceitful, Rajan, beyond all measure. 
You are vainglorious and suspicious of everything, which is why you 
suspect even us. I also think that you are evil, mean-spirited, selfish, why, 


an embodiment of sin, that you question us after everything that we do for 
you, day after harrowing day. 

As for myself, I fight with determination for your sake, always prepared 
to lay down my life for you. I will return to battle now, O Kuruttama, and 
will fight and kill a great host of your enemy. I will do battle with the 
Panchalas, the Somakas, the Kaikeyas, and the Pandavas as well, only to 
please you. Seared by my arrows today, the Chedis, the Panchalas and the 
Somakas will scatter like a herd of cattle hunted by a lion. Today, seeing my 
prowess, the Dharmaputra with all the Somakas will find the whole world 
filled with Aswatthamans. Yudhishtira will be heartbroken to watch me 
slaughter the Panchalas and Somakas. 

I will, O Bhaarata, slay all who dare come near me and no one will 
escape me alive today.” 

Saying this to your son, the mahabaho Aswatthaman charges the enemy, 
his arrows flaring in all directions. He cries to the Panchalas and the 
Kaikeyas, “Great maharathas, strike me! Show me your prowess.” 

At this, all the enemy warriors shower their shafts upon Drona’s son. 
Easily cutting down all their arrows, Aswatthaman kills ten brave warriors 
among them, in the very sight of Dhrishtadyumna and the sons of Pandu. 
The Panchalas and the Somakas abandon the fight and flee. 
Dhrishtadyumna rides into the fray surrounded by a hundred unflinching 
maharathas in their chariots, the rattle of whose wheels is like the thunder 
of rain-charged clouds. 

Looking at this, Dhrishtadyumna says to Aswatthaman, “O foolish son 
of Drona, of what use is killing common warriors? If you are a hero, then 
fight me. I will kill you, wretched Brahman. Stop and fight me for a 
moment without fleeing.” 

He shoots the Acharya’s son countless savage barbs, which fly in an 
unbroken line and pierce Aswatthaman’s body like honey bees entering a 
flowering tree. Deeply wounded and swelling with rage like a snake trodden 
upon, Aswatthaman, astra in hand, says, “Dhrishtadyumna, stop for a 
moment and I will send you straight to Yama!” 

With astonishing dexterity, bending his arrows in flight at impossible 
trajectories, he covers Dhrishtadyumna from every side with a cascade of 
gold-winged shafts. Dhrishtadyumna says, “You know nothing of my birth, 
evil Brahmana, or of my vow. I will not kill you today when Drona himself 


is still alive. After this night passes and day dawns, I will first kill your 
father and then send you to your ancestors. This is my purpose today. 

So, until then display the hatred you bear towards the Parthas, and the 
devotion you cherish for the Kurus. Come morning and you shall not escape 
me with your life. The Brahmana who abandons his svadharma and takes to 
the dharma of a Kshatriya can be killed by any Kshatriya, O lowest of men. 
So I will break no law by killing both your father and you.” 

So harshly does Dhrishtadyumna speak, as if to a servant, insulting the 
finest of Brahmanas, that, mustering all his choler, Aswatthaman answers 
him, saying, “Stop! Stop and fight, you Panchala wretch!” And he glares at 
him as if to burn him up with his eyes. 

Sighing with rage like a snake, Aswatthaman looses a scorching volley 
at Dhrishtadyumna, striking him squarely and drawing blood. 
Dhrishtadyumna hardly winces but returns the fire with his own torrid 
salvo. The two are matched so evenly that no arrow separates them, one 
from the other. The duel escalates and each one kills hundreds of the other’s 
common soldiers on every side even as they fight one another. Such is that 
marvellous contention between Drona’s son and Dhrishtadyumna that the 
Siddhas, Charanas and other sky-ranging beings applaud them from above. 

Filling the sky and all the points of the compass with veritable 
cloudbursts and covering the dim stars therewith, the two great warriors 
continue to duel and none can see them or where their arrows fly, land or 
claim countless lives in pitch darkness. As if dancing with their bows drawn 
into circles, intently trying to kill each other, those mahabahos fight so 
remarkably that even the greatest maharathas around them tremble in 
wonder, while others are terrified. Indeed, loud cheers and handclapping 
breaks out among both armies and every true warrior is filled with elation to 
watch that duel among duels. We hear loud shouts and so many combatants 
blow their conches, and begin to sound thousands of musical instruments. 

This duel blazes equally but for a brief while. Then, darting forward 
suddenly, Aswatthaman cleaves Dhrishtadyumna’s bow, standard, royal 
parasol, and kills his two Parshni charioteers, the principal sarathy, and his 
four horses. Roaring aloud, he then massacres the unprotected Panchalas in 
thousands! The Pandava host quakes with fear, for Drona’s son is no less 
than Indra himself in the night. 

In the very sight of Dhrishtadyumna and Arjuna, Aswatthaman slays a 
hundred Panchalas that face him with a hundred arrows, including three 


maharathas with three thunderbolts. The Panchalas and the Srinjayas turn 
tail with their banners torn. Having vanquished his enemies, Drona’s son 
give a roar like stormclouds thundering at summer’s end. He is as 
resplendent as the blazing fire at the end of the Yuga, after it has consumed 
all living creatures. Cheered deafeningly by all the Kauravas after he kills 
thousands of enemies, the valiant Aswatthaman shines in splendour, like the 
king of the Devas himself after vanquishing his enemies.’” 


CANTO 157 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Now Yudhishtira and Bhimasena besiege 

Aswatthaman. Seeing this, Duryodhana and Drona ride against 

the Pandavas and a tumultuary battle ensues, to make the timorous tremble. 

A furious Yudhishtira despatches vast numbers of Ambashtas, Malavas, 

Vangas, Sibis and Trigartas to the land of the dead. Bhima, too, mauls the 

Abhishahas, the Surasenas and other mighty Kshatriyas, and makes the 
earth a swamp of blood. 

Then, Rajan, Kiritin Swetavahana sends the Yaudheyas, the Madrakas, 
the Malavas and the Mountain-men to the regions of Yama. Struck by 
arrows shot with terrific force, elephants fall onto the earth like twin-peaked 
hills. Strewn with the lopped-off trunks of elephants that still writhe in 
convulsions, the field again looks as if covered with wriggling snakes. 
Kurukshetra is horribly magnificent, covered with the fallen golden chatras 
of kings; it looks like the firmament at the end of the Yuga, spangled with 
suns, moons and stars beyond count. 

At this very time, there is an uproar near Drona’s chariot, in which one 
can hear the words, “Kill!’, “Strike!”’, “Hack!’’, “Pierce!”’, “Cut him to 
pieces!” Drona swiftly summons the Vayavyastra and begins to decimate 


the enemies that surround him, like a mighty tornado destroying gathering 
masses of clouds, and the Panchalas run away from fear, while Bhimasena 
and the noble Partha look on. However, they soon check the flight of their 
troops and lead a large force of chariots against the equally vast force of 
Drona. Arjuna attacking the right and Vrikodara the left, they lash 
Bharadwaja’s son with two heavy torrents of arrows. 

The maharathas among the Srinjayas and the Panchalas, with the 
Matsyas and the Somakas, Rajan, follow the two against Drona. While, 
many maharathas loyal to your son, bringing a great host with them, rush 
forward to support Drona. However, swiftly slaughtered by Arjuna and 
overcome by the turgid darkness, your Bharata host falls apart. Your son 
and Drona try to rally them but to no avail. Indeed, razed mercilessly by the 
arrows of the incomparable Arjuna, your army takes to its heels in all 
directions in that hour when the world is plunged in night. Abandoning the 
animals and chariots they ride, many great kings flee, Rajan, overwhelmed 
with fear of the hunting Kiritin.’” 


CANTO 158 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


°S anjaya says, ‘Finding Somadatta brandishing his massive bow, 

Satyaki tells his charioteer, “Drive me towards Somadatta. I tell 

you truly, O Suta, I will not return from battle today without killing that 
worst of the Kurus, the son of Balhika.” 

The sarathy whips his fleet horses of the Sindhu breed, white as conch 
shells, and strong, so they fly at Somadatta, bearing Satyaki towards him 
even as the steeds of Indra bore him in the olden days against the Danavas. 
Seeing the Satwata hero coming like a storm, Somadatta turns fearlessly 
turns towards him and shrouds Yuyudhana in a cloudburst of shafts. 

Satyaki, who knows no fear ever, returns Somadatta’s calescent fire, and 
two gales of flaming shafts light up the thick darkness of Kurukshetra. 
Somadatta strikes Satyaki’s chest with sixty shafts, while Satyaki draws 
blood all over Somadatta’s body with arrows like streaks of lightning. 
Lacerated by each other the two look magnificent, like a couple of 
flowering kinsukas in spring. Dyed all over with blood, those illustrious 
warriors of the Kuru and the Vrishni races glare at each other as if they will 
ignite the darkness and each other with their eyes. 


Riding on their chariots, these maharathas of terrible countenances 
circle each other, glowering like two baleful planets. Their bodies torn all 
over by arrows that still protrude from them, Rajan, they are like two 
porcupines. Pierced with countless golden-winged shafts, the two warriors 
glitter like a pair of tall trees covered with fireflies. Their bodies bright with 
the blazing arrows planted in them, the two maharathas look like two angry 
elephants caparisoned with burning torches. Then, Rajan, all at once, with a 
crescent-tipped arrow, Somadatta cleaves Satyaki’s bow and, with dazzling 
swiftness, strikes him with thirty thunder flashes loosed quick as a thought. 

Satyaki snatches up another bow, pierces Somadatta with five iron 
shafts and, with another broad-headed arrow smilingly rives his golden 
standard. Somadatta drills Satyaki with five and twenty shafts and in rage, 
with a razor-faced arrow, Satyaki breaks Somadatta’s bow and savages him 
with a hundred straight gold-winged barbs, reducing him to the state of a 
snake without fangs. 

However, Somadatta picks up another bow and looses banks and banks 
of arrows at Satyaki, who responds in kind. Somadatta continues to assail 
Satyaki without let. Then Bhima joins the fight to support Satyaki and 
gashes Somadatta with ten arrows and the great Kuru strikes back with 
many fanged shafts of his own properly inflamed Satyaki aims a terrible 
parigha at Somadatta’s chest, an astra with a golden shaft and hard as the 
Vajra itself. However, smiling the while, Somadatta slices the dreadful astra 
as it flashes toward him, and riven in two, it falls to the earth like some 
mountain peak cloven by lightning. 

With a broad-headed arrow, Yuyudhana severs Somadatta’s bow again, 
and with another five arrows, cuts the leather gauntlet that covers his fingers 
into shreds. Never pausing, he cuts down Somadatta’s four great horses, and 
with another immaculate shaft, beheads his sarathy. He now draws a stone- 
whetted, oil-slicked, gold-winged and occult arrow, a most exceptional 
shaft, and unleashes it at his hated enemy with such ferocity that it ignites 
into blinding light and flame as it falls like a hawk upon the old Kuru 
warrior, plunges into his chest, blows his heart into pieces and maharatha 
Somadatta, the hitherto invincible Kuru Kshatriya, falls dead without a 
murmur. 

Seeing maharatha Somadatta killed, your warriors attack Satyaki with a 
force of rathas. Meanwhile, the Pandavas also, Rajan, with all the 
Prabhadrakas, and a large legion, tear into Drona’s army. Yudhishtira leads 


this attack and puts Drona’s forces to rout, killing hundreds of brave 
soldiers in his Acharya’s very presence. Drona rushes in to defend his 
troops and strikes Yudhishtira deep with seven keen arrows. Yudhishtira 
responds by goring his master with five whistling shafts. Bleeding 
profusely, Drona licks the corners of his mouth and cuts down Yudhishtira’s 
standard and breaks the bow in his hands. 

Quicker than seeing, when speed is of the essence, Yudhishtira sweeps 
up another bow and covers Drona, his horses, charioteer, standard, and 
grand chariot with a thousand arrows! And all are spellbound with 
amazement, for they can hardly believe that this is the gentle, patient 
Dharmaraja they are watching. 

Wounded and in great pain, Drona, the bull among Brahmanas, sits 
down for a while on the floor of his chariot. Then, recovering, sighing like a 
snake and full of rage, the Acharya invokes the Vayavyastra. However, 
Yudhishtira calmly summons a weapon of the Wind himself and nullifies 
Drona’s astra; in the same moment, he breaks the Acharya’s bow in two. 
Drona takes up another bow, which Yudhishtira again breaks. 

Now Krishna says to Yudhishtira, speaking into his heart from afar, 
“Listen to me, O Mahabaho. Do not fight Drona anymore for he means to 
take you his captive. He who has been born to kill Drona will slay him; that 
task is not yours. Leave the Acharya and fight Duryodhana, for kings 
should battle kings, and not others. Surround yourself with elephants, 
horses and chariots and come where Dhananjaya and I, and Naravyaghra 
Bhima are fighting the Kurus with but a small force.” 

Yudhishtira reflects for a moment and then goes to that part of the field 
where Bhima, fighting in fury, is slaughtering your troops like Death 
himself with maw agape. Making the earth resound with the rumble of his 
chariot, like the roar of thunderheads at the end of summer, Yudhishtira 
forms the flank of Bhima’s forces. Meanwhile, Drona, too, in the horrible 
night, turns away and begins to destroy his most detested enemies, the 
Panchalas.’” 


CANTO 159 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘While the dreadful war is being fought, when the 
world is enveloped in darkness and dust, the warriors on the field 
cannot see each other; they battle with sheer instinct and by calling out 
names to discern friend from foe. O Bharatarishabha, during this 
unmentionable carnage of maharathas, elephants, horses and foot-soldiers, 
Drona, Karna, Kripa, Bhima, Dhrishtadyumna and Satyaki wreak havoc on 
one another’s troops. The common soldiers of both armies, demoralised all 
around by these great maharathas in the hour of darkness, break and flee in 
all directions. Even as they run, they are massacred and thousands of 
leading maharathas slaughter one another, while they are blind in the dark 
and full of fear. 

All this is the result of the evil counsels of your son. Indeed, at the hour 
when the world is shrouded in darkness, all creatures, even the greatest 
Kshatriyas, are overcome with panic, and quite lose their minds.’ 

Dhritarashtra asks, ‘What is the state of mind of the troops when, in the 
dark, all of you are sapped of your courage and sorely pressed by the 
Pandavas? O Sanjaya, when everything is swathed in darkness how do the 
Pandava and my troops become visible again?’ 


Sanjaya replies, ‘Drona somehow masses again in a compact array the 
remnants of the army of the Kauravas, under their leaders. He sets himself 
in the van, Salya at the rear, Aswatthaman and Sakuni on the right and the 
left flanks. Duryodhana on this most dreadful night busies himself with 
protecting all his legions. The king, your son, puts heart into the foot- 
soldiers, Rajan, and tells them, “Lay aside your weapons and take up 
torches and lamps in your hands instead. Let the maharathas alone continue 
to fight.” 

The foot-soldiers gladly take up burning lamps and the Devas, Rishis, 
Gandharvas, Deva-rishis, the diverse tribes of Vidyadharas and Apsaras, 
Nagas, Yakshas, Uragas, Kinnaras, looking on from the heavens, also 
joyfully take up blazing celestial lanterns. We see many wondrous floating 
lamps, filled with sweet-scented oil, fall from the Regents of the principal 
and the subsidiary directions. For Duryodhana’s sake, we see many come 
down especially from Narada and Parvata, lighting up the stagnant darkness 
so full of death. Now arrayed in a compact vyuha, the Kaurava army looks 
dazzling with the light of the marvellous lamps shining on their costly 
ornaments and the Devastras blazing as they are shot or hurled. On each 
chariot five lamps are set, three on each maddened elephant and on each 
horse one large lamp. Thus, the Kuru warriors light up the field and the 
army, revealing now the true extent of the massacre that has occurred by 
darkness. 

Set in their places quickly, these lamps light up your army wonderfully. 
All the great Kshatriyas, made radiant by the foot-soldiers with oilfed lamps 
in their hands, are as handsome as clouds in the night sky illumined by 
flashes of lightning. When the Kuru host has been thus lit up, Drona, of the 
effulgence of fire, scorching everything around, looks as radiant Rajan, in 
his golden armour as the midday sun. The light of the lamps reflects from 
the golden ornaments, the bright cuirasses, the bows and the other polished 
weapons of the warriors, from their maces twined with strings, from the 
bright parighas, their chariots, arrows and javelins, as they fly in 
scintillating arcs and streaks. 

The royal parasols, yak-tails, swords, blazing brands and necklaces of 
gold, as they are whirled or moved, mirror the lamplight and the spectacle 
of Kurukshetra is now entirely beautiful. Your army burns with soft 
splendour that no artist has beheld or captured. Ornaments, beautifully 


wrought weapons, red with blood and whirled by heroes, create a glowing 
effulgence like dim flashes of lightning in the sky at the end of summer. 

The faces of warriors, impetuously pursuing foes to strike them down 
and themselves trembling in the ardour of battle, are altogether 
breathtaking. As the sun is fierce when a forest is on fire, in the same 
manner, the terrible night grows in grandeur both from the fighting and the 
now lamplit host. 

Seeing our army illuminated, the Parthas too with great alacrity exhort 
the foot-soldiers throughout their army to imitate what ours have done. On 
each elephant, they place seven lamps; on each chariot, ten; and on the back 
of each horse, two; and on the flanks and rear of their rathas as well as on 
their flagpoles, they place multiple lamps. Also, on the flanks of their army, 
at the rear, in the van, all around and within, they light numberless lamps. 
And now, both armies are strangely and gloriously lit up in the fleeting 
night of all horrors. 

Throughout your army, foot-soldiers carrying lamps mingle with 
elephants and chariots and cavalry. The army of Pandu’s son is also 
illuminated by foot-soldiers with blazing torches in their hands. The twin 
hosts are refulgent as fire and sun when they burn together. As more and 
more lamps are lit, the splendour of both armies seems to illumine not just 
the field of war but the very sky and all the directions. Both armies are 
clearly visible and distinguishable from each other. 

Awakened by the light that reaches into the sky, the Devas, the 
Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the Rishis, other Mahatapasvins and the Apsaras 
all gather directly above Kurukshetra. Thronged with Devas, Gandharvas, 
Yakshas, Maharishis, Apsaras, and the spirits of slain warriors about to 
enter the celestial realms, the battlefield looks like a second Swarga. 
Teeming with chariots, horses and elephants, by now brilliantly illumined 
with a million lamps, with wild warriors either lying in the poses of death or 
wandering bemused across the field like madmen, and horses slain or 
roaming dazed, the immense hosts resemble the vyuhas of the Devas and 
the Asuras in days of old when they fought. 

The dense swish of shafts form the fierce winds; great rathas, the 
clouds; the neighing and trumpeting of horses and elephants, the thunder; 
the lash of arrows landing and the spraying, gushing blood of warriors and 
animals is the flood of the tempestuous nocturnal encounter between all 
those godlike men. 


In the very midst of the battle, the greatest of Brahmanas, the noble 
Aswatthaman, scorching the Pandavas with flames from his bow, is the 
midday sun at the end of the season of rains, burning everything with his 
flerce rays.’” 


CANTO 160 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘When the battlefield which had been plunged in 
darkness is illumined, great warriors, maharathas, again attack 
each other ferociously. With so many thousands of lamps burning all around 
and with the unearthly lanterns of the Devas and the Gandharvas now set on 
golden stands decked with jewels, and fed with fragrant oil, Kurukshetra, O 
Bhaarata, is wonderfully resplendent, bright as the earth lit by the lesser 
flames of the pralaya! With every side scintillating with lamps, of this world 
and the one above, the field of death looks like a forest covered over by 
fireflies on a monsoon evening. 

At your son’s command, maharathas engage with other maharathas, 
elephants with elephants, horsemen with horsemen, all filled with joy on 
this fiercest night. Terrible and now plainly visible is the war between the 
Kaurava army and that of the Pandavas without the sun above. 

Then Arjuna begins to annihilate the Kaurava ranks with unprecedented 
ferocity and swiftness, weakening the position of all the kings who fight for 
you.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, “When the invincible Arjuna breaks into the ranks of 
my son’s army, what is the state of their minds? Indeed, what do our 


soldiers feel and think? What steps does Duryodhana take to contain 
Partha? 

Who challenges the Kiritin? When Swetavahana breaks into our army, 
who protects Drona? Who guards the right wheel, who the left wheel and 
who the rear of Drona’s ratha? Who are they that fight in his van? The 
mighty Drona battles his way into the midst of the Panchalas, dancing on 
his ratha, and shatters a huge number of Panchala chariots with his arrows; 
alas, how does the Acharya meet with his death? 

You always speak of my enemies as cool, unvanquished, cheerful and 
swelling with might. However, you do not speak of my men in such words. 
On the other hand, you describe them to be dead, pale, and beaten, and you 
speak of my maharathas as always deprived of their chariots in all the 
battles they fight!’ 

Sanjaya replies, ‘Understanding the wishes of Drona who is determined 
to give his all in the war at night, Duryodhana says to his brothers Vikarna, 
Chitrasena, Suparsva, Durdharsha, Dirghabahu, and all the men who follow 
them, “You heroes of great valour, fight with resolve and protect Drona’s 
rear. Kritavarman will protect his right and Sala his left flanks.” 

Saying this, your son sets these brothers of his in the van of his forces, 
and then himself advances with the remnant of the Trigarta maharathas, 
saying, “The Acharya is merciful! The Pandavas fight with great resolution, 
so unite and protect him well. Drona is mighty; he is endued with great 
agility and valour. He can vanquish the very Devas; what need then be said 
of the Pandavas and the Somakas? All of you, however, must remain united 
and support the invincible Acharya against the dangerous maharatha 
Dhrishtadyumna. Other than Drupada’s fire-born prince, I do not see the 
man among all the Pandava warriors who can vanquish Drona. And so, we 
must, with all our souls, guard the son of Bharadwaja against the Panchala 
prince. 

Protected by us, Drona will massacre the Somakas and the Srinjayas, 
one after another. After the slaughter of all the Srinjayas at the head of the 
Pandava army, Aswatthaman will kill Dhrishtadyumna, and Karna will 
vanquish Arjuna maharatha. As for Bhimasena and the other sons of Pandu, 
I myself will kill them all. After that, our army will easily raze what 
remains of the Pandava forces. It is all plain to me now. And when we have 
won the war, my victory will last forever, and I will rule the earth 
unopposed, with all of you beside me. 


I have given you the reasons. Now go forth, taking courage in both 
hands and, at all costs, protect Acharya Drona.” 

Saying this, Duryodhana charges headlong into the fray with his best 
troops around and behind him. The two armies collide again, each side 
intent on securing victory. Arjuna continues to inflict heavy losses on the 
Kauravas, and now the massed Kauravas begin to trouble Arjuna with 
diverse kinds of weapons. 

Aswatthaman attacks Drupada of the Panchalas, while Drona covers 
Srinjaya with multitudes of deadly straight shafts. And as the Pandava and 
the Panchala troops on the one side and the Kaurava troops on the other, O 
Bhaarata, are engaged in butchering each other, absolute bedlam and bloody 
mayhem hold sway over lamplit Kurukshetra, field of truth. The war by 
night is more brutal than it has ever been. Great spirits of darkness crowd 
the field, unseen.’” 


CANTO 161 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘During the ghastly bloodbath by night, Yudhishtira 

exhorts the Pandavas, the Panchalas and the Somakas to destroy 

men, rathas and elephants without mercy, and cries to them, “Attack Drona! 
Kill the Acharya!” 

At this command, Rajan, the Panchalas and the Somakas rush at Drona 
with terrifying roars. We, on our part, are equally energised, and roaring 
dreadfully in return, rush to confront the enemy to the utmost limits of our 
prowess, courage and might. 

Kritavarman, son of Hridika, challenges Yudhishtira, as the Dharmaraja 
charges towards Drona, like an infuriated elephant against another. The 
great Kuru warrior Bhuri bars the way of Satyaki, who comes flying into 
the thick of battle, spraying arrows all around with incredible power and 
swiftness. Karna faces Sahadeva, as Madri’s brilliant son rides at Drona, 
and Duryodhana himself faces the stupendous Bhimasena, riding on his 
chariot like the Great Destroyer. 

Sakuni, son of Subala, stands firm against maharatha Nakula, who is an 
adept at every kind of battle. Kripa, son of Saradwat, sets himself in the 
way of Sikhandin, while Dusasana contends vigorously with Prativindhya 


whose chariot is yoked to steeds coloured like peacocks, their skins 
glistening marvellously by the now glaring lamplight! Aswatthaman defies 
Ghatotkacha, master of maya, a hundred different kinds of sorcery and 
illusion. Vrishasena quells the mighty Drupada with his troops as the 
Panchala king aims to cut Drona down. Salya, king of the Madras, holds up 
Virata, as the Matsya king also rushes towards Drona. Chitrasena forcefully 
holds up Nakula’s son Satanika with a thousand shafts, as that prince also 
rides at Drona. Alambusha, the Rakshasa prince, defies Arjuna, and 
Dhrishtadyumna gladly contains Drona as the seemingly demented Acharya 
devours the Pandava forces with devastras, making no distinction between 
great warrior and common foot-soldier. 

As for the maharathas of the Pandavas who advance against Drona, 
other maharathas of your army attack them ferociously. Elephant riders 
meet elephant riders in this frightful battle by lamplight, and grind each 
other down in their thousands. In the dead of night, as bright horses charge 
each other recklessly, they look like winged hills. Horsemen encounter 
horsemen, armed with lances, darts and swords and give vent to loud roars. 
Vast numbers of bold foot-soldiers slaughter one another, with corpses 
heaping up, with maces, short clubs and diverse other weapons. 

Kritavarman fights Yudhishtira in rage, like a continent, a great dwipa, 
resisting the surging sea. Yudhishtira first pierces Kritavarman with five 
arrows and then with twenty more, and roars, “Stop! Stop and fight.” 

Kritavarman breaks Yudhishtira’s bow with a wedge-headed arrow and 
draws blood from him with seven more. Yudhishtira picks up a fresh bow 
and gashes his adversary’s arms and chest with ten arrows, making him 
tremble and retort with seven veritable thunderbolts. At which, Yudhishtira 
demolishes his bow, shreds his leather gauntlet and pierces him fiercely 
with five long shafts that rip through his gold-inlaid armour, his body and 
dive into the ground like snakes into an ant-hill. 

In a wink, Kritavarman takes up another bow and blasts the son of 
Pandu first with sixty arrows and then with ten more. Yudhishtira puts down 
his bow and casts a serpentine javelin that passes through Kritavarman’s 
right arm and into the earth. Taking up his formidable bow again 
Yudhishtira covers Kritavarman in a lashing downpour of exact barbs, 
making him cry out in pain. 

In swift rage, the mighty Bhoja kills Yudhishtira’s horses and charioteer 
and makes a wreck of his chariot. The Pandava hefts a sword and shield 


only to have them instantly shattered by the maharatha of the Madhu 
vamsa. Yudhishtira sweeps up a spear with a golden staff and hurls it like 
light at the illustrious son of Hridika; smiling arrogantly, Kritavarman 
neatly slices the missile along its length as it flashes at him. 

He then shrouds Yudhishtira with a hundred arrows and, utterly roused 
by now, disjoints the Dharmaputra’s golden armour so it falls from his body 
like a cluster of stars from the sky. His chariot in shambles, his armour cut 
away and bleeding from Kritavarman’s hail of arrows, Yudhishtira quickly 
retreats from battle. Having vanquished the Dharmaputra, the mighty 
Kritavarman returns to once more protect the right wheel of Drona’s 
chariot.’” 


CANTO 162 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Bhuri, Rajan, stands in the way of Sini’s grandson 
Satyaki who comes charging like an elephant towards a lake full 
of water. An angry Satyaki makes five springs of blood spurt from Bhuri’s 
body. The Kuru warrior retaliates with great speed and pierces splendid 
Satyaki with ten arrows through his chest. Drawing their bows to their 
fullest stretch and with eyes red, these two begin to maul each other. Their 
cascades of lethal arrows are like rays of the sun; their duel is as if Death 
has taken two forms to do battle against himself. For a while, the battle is 
perfectly even. Until, with a terrible smile, Satyaki breaks Bhuri’s bow and 
plunges nine arrows deep into his breast, and gives a terrible roar. 

Bhuri quickly picks up another bow and strikes the Satwata with three 
light like barbs, and then, he also smiling, splits his antagonist’s bow a 
wide-headed shaft. Beside himself, Satyaki flings a mighty javelin right into 
Bhuri’s heart, and that great Kuru warrior, covered in blood, falls dead out 
of his chariot, like the sun from the sky when he sets. 

Seeing Bhuri slain, Aswatthaman charges Satyaki recklessly. He shouts, 
“Stop! Stop and fight!” at Yuyudhana and covers him with a blistering flight 
of arrows, like clouds lashing Meru’s crown with a torrential rain. 


Seeing the grim Aswatthaman rush towards Satyaki, Ghatotkacha gives 
a roar that makes all of Kurukshetra cringe; he says to Drona’s son in the 
most dreadful voice, “Stop, O son of Drona! You will not escape me with 
your life and I will kill you like the six-faced Karttikeya did the Asura 
Mahisha. Stay and fight me, for today I will purge your heart of all desire 
for battle.” 

And the coppery-eyed Rakshasa, Bhima’s tremendous son, attacks 
Aswatthaman like a prince of elephants, unleashing indescribable shafts at 
him, each the size of a chariot’s axle-rod! Quicker than thinking, 
Aswatthaman smashes those massive arrows into dust and pierces 
Ghatotkacha deep with hundreds of keen barbs. 

The handsome Rakshasa resembles an incredible porcupine with quills 
all erect! Unmoved, Bhima’s son looses a terrific tirade of shafts at 
Aswatthaman, missiles that fly roaring like thunder at Drona’s son, crashing 
into the Brahmana’s shining body, making him stagger in his ratha. 
Ghatotkacha does not pause but looses volley after volley of different 
arrows over Aswatthaman; some have razor like heads; others are crescent- 
tipped; some have elongated points; some are frog-faced; other have heads 
like boar’s ears; some are barbed, and there are others as well. 

Drona’s son remains immaculately calm throughout this onslaught and 
with hands moving quicker than thoughts, like the wind scattering large 
cloud masses, he consumes every shaft shot by Ghatotkacha, common and 
strange, with the handful of devastras that he invokes. And when 
Ghatotkacha also discharges his own unworldly astras, the dark sky is lit up 
by other suns where his astras and Aswatthaman’s fuse and hang until 
falling away in showers of sparks. Ah, the firmament is exquisitely lit up, as 
if with a swarm of fireflies at twilight. 

Aswatthaman fills all the points of the compass with his arrows and 
envelops Ghatotkacha in his storm of shafts—for the sake of your sons. The 
duel that develops between the two is like the one of yore between Indra 
and Prahlada. Ghatotkacha pierces Aswatthaman’s chest with ten arrows 
that burn like the yuga fire, and the Brahmana trembles like a tall tree 
shaken by the wind. He supports himself briefly by clinging to his flagstaff, 
then collapses. There is an outcry of woe from yours troops who think him 
slain, while the Panchalas and the Srinjayas shout in glee. 

However, maharatha Aswatthaman recovers quickly and, drawing his 
bowstring to his ear in a blur, looses a torrid astra at Ghatotkacha, a shaft 


like Yama’s danda. The arrow with golden wings ploughs right through the 
Rakshasa’s chest and enters the earth behind him. Gored savagely through, 
spouting blood, the prince of Rakshasas sits down in his ratha and his eyes 
glaze over. Seeing this, his charioteer spirits him away from the field. 
Having wounded Ghatotkacha grievously and driven him from the fray, 
Aswatthaman gives a ringing roar of triumph. Your sons and all your 
warriors cheer him deafeningly, O Bhaarata, and Aswatthaman’s body 
blazes like the midday sun. 

Looking at Bhimasena who battles like ten maharathas in front of 
Drona’s chariot, Duryodhana strikes him with a fierce and heartfelt volley 
of utmost hatred. Bhima pierces him in return with nine arrows and 
Duryodhana strikes back with twenty. Quickly mantled over by each other’s 
arrows, the two magnificent maharathas look like the sun and the moon 
covered by clouds in the sky. Then Duryodhana pierces Bhima deeply with 
five gold-winged thunderbolts and roars, “Stop! Stop and fight!” 

In a flash, Bhima shatters Suyodhana’s bow, cuts down his standard and 
strikes him in a dazzle with full ninety barbs. Duryodhana takes up an even 
more formidable bow and returns his cousin’s fire so that blood flowers 
sprout all over the Pandava’s vast body, in full view of all the other 
maharathas. Destroying many of Duryodhana’s shafts in flight, Bhima 
pierces him with five and twenty short, heavy arrows. Duryodhana smashes 
Bhimasena’s bow with a razor-faced arrow and pierces him with ten more. 

Bhimasena snatches up another bow and rakes your son with seven 
violent shafts. Displaying great lightness of hand, Suyodhana cuts Bhima’s 
bow in two. The second, third, fourth and the fifth bows that Bhima picks 
up, also, Suyodhana demolishes. Indeed, Rajan, full of self-assurance and 
feverish eagerness to kill the cousin whom he has always detested the most, 
your son breaks every bow that Bhima picks up immediately as he does so. 

Finding his bows repeatedly broken, Bhima hurls an iron spear at 
Duryodhana, hard as diamonds, which ignites in the air as it flies at your 
son, which resembles Yama’s sister Mrityu. Before all the watching 
warriors, Suyodhana cuts the lance into three pieces, even as it flares at him 
through the sky straight as the parting in a woman’s hair. Bhima now picks 
up a heavy mace alight, and casts it like doom at Duryodhana’s chariot and 
that weapon kills your son’s horses, charioteer and blows his chariot apart. 

Now afraid of dreadful Bhima, your son uses the anima siddhi to make 
himself little and hastily climbs into the illustrious Nandaka’s chariot. In the 


half-light of the lamplit night, Bhima thinks he has killed Duryodhana and 
gives an earthshaking triumphant roar, challenging the Kaurava host. Your 
warriors also believe their king dead, and dismal cries echo across 
Kurukshetra. 

Yudhishtira hears Bhima’s repeated roaring and the howls of your 
terrified warriors, Yudhishtira also thinks that Duryodhana has been killed, 
and rushes to Bhima. The Panchalas, the Srinjayas, the Matsyas, the 
Kaikeyas, and the Chedis turn their chariots and charge Drona all together, 
and another horrible battle erupts between Drona and the enemy, during 
which thousands on both sides die scarlet deaths.’” 


CANTO 163 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Karna, son of Vikartana, Rajan, faces the mighty 
maharatha Sahadeva, who is closing in dangerously on Drona. In 
a flash, Sahadeva strikes Karna with nine sizzling arrows and then another 
nine in a blink. Karna returns his fire with a full hundred storming shafts; he 
severs Sahadeva’s bowstring. Sahadeva takes up another bow and strikes 
Karna squarely with twenty arrows, a wonderful feat. Karna, roused, 
despatches Sahadeva’s horses with a flock of perfect arrows and his sarathy 
with a single wedge-headed one. Without a ratha, Sahadeva picks up a 
sword and shield, which Karna shatters with a lofty smile. 

Sahadeva flings a heavy mace of power at Karna, a dread weapon 
adored with gold; Karna demolishes that, too, with a rash of incredible 
arrows. His mace shattered, Sahadeva casts a whistling spear at Karna, 
which that greatest bowman slices in two along its length. Madri’s red-eyed 
son leaps down from his chariot, pulls a wheel free from his ruined ratha 
and hurls it spinning at the brother he does not know. Karna, still with the 
mocking, maddening smile, looses a thousand arrows in a moment and 
smashes that chariot wheel flying at him like Death’s very chakra. 


In a frenzy, the desperate Sahadeva pulls off the yokes, shafts and other 
parts of his chariot, the traces of his horses, and casts all these like deadly 
weapons at the Sutaputra. Karna disdainfully shoots them all down. Now 
Sahadeva picks up whatever he finds lying around him—the limbs of 
elephants, horses and even dead men—and hurls these at his enemy. 
Karna’s speed artistry as he shreds all these in flight is amazing to behold, 
my lord. Deprived of all his weapons and fairly mangled by Karna’s barrage 
of shafts, Sahadeva quits the unequal duel and leaves the field. 

Karna pursues him for a while and, with the same smile, now turned so 
mysterious, mocks him, “Kshatriya, do not fight your superiors. Seek out 
your equals to do battle with, O son of Madri! Listen to me, what I say is 
for your own good!” 

Karna then prods Sahadeva with the tip of his bow, and says, “Look 
where your great brother Arjuna fights so resolutely against the Kurus. Go 
to him or, if you prefer, go back home!” And he laughs at Sahadeva, a 
sound more cruel than any arrow. 

Thus, Karna, when he could have done so, does not kill Madri’s son, 
remembering his word given to Kunti before the war. Instead, he now rides 
away against the troops of the king of the Panchalas. A dispirited Sahadeva, 
wounded equally by Karna’s arrows and by his words, is humiliated, 
crestfallen, even wishes for death, proud Kshatriya that he is. He sadly 
climbs into the Panchala prince Janamejaya’s chariot.’” 


CANTO 164 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Salya, king of the Madras, holds up Virata and his 
troops, with clouds of missiles as they advance to attack Drona. 
The duel between Salya and Madra is like the one between Bala and Vasava 
of old. Salya strikes Virata, who commands a large akshauhini, with a 
hundred immaculate shafts. Virata, in return, pierces him first with nine 
sharp arrows, then with three and seventy, and again with a hundred. Salya 
kills the four horses yoked to Virata’s chariot and cuts down his royal 
parasol and standard. 

Virata jumps down from his useless ratha and, standing on the ground, 
continues to loose storms of arrows at Salya with undimmed ferocity. 
Seeing his brother exposed on the ground, Satanika rides swiftly to rescue 
him. With a flurry of lethal barbs, Salya sends the advancing Satanika to 
Yama. At the fall of Satanika, his brother Virata climbs into the fallen hero’s 
chariot, and his prowess fuelled, doubled by his rage, glares his eyes wide 
at Salya and mantles the Madra and his ratha with a cloudburst of arrows. 

But the mighty Salya responds in strength and strikes Virata squarely 
through his chest with a hundred slender shafts, forcing the Matsya king to 
sit down in a swoon. His charioteer quickly takes his king away from the 


field, and, its spirit broken, the vast Matsya force flees, pursued, O 
Bhaarata, by the thousands of arrows that Salya, that ornament of battle, 
shoots after them. Seeing their troops run, Krishna and Arjuna come 
dashing up to confront Salya. 

Now, Rajan, the Rakshasa prince Alambusha appears, looming on an 
altogether macabre and wondrous chariot of black iron, harnessed to eight 
awful pisachas with equine faces, flying blood-red banners, festooned with 
wildflower garlands, covered with bear-skins and mounted with a lofty 
standard atop over which a fierce-looking and incessantly shrieking vulture 
with spotted wings and gaping eyes perches. The Rakshasa looks like a 
heap of antimony; and he stands up to the advancing Arjuna like Meru 
withstanding a tempest, and rains down showers of arrows on Arjuna’s 
head. Ah, pitched and intense is the ensuing battle between the Rakshasa 
and the human warrior; it fills all that watch with awe and it adds to the glee 
of the vultures, crows, ravens, owls, kanakas and jackals that patrol death’s 
abysmal field. 

Arjuna strikes Alambusha with six bolts of lightning and cuts off his 
standard with ten more. He beheads his strange demon sarathy in a burst of 
slimy green blood, severs his weirdly shining bow in his hands and kills the 
equine pisachas with four occult barbs. Alambusha takes up another sinister 
bow, but that too Arjuna rives. Bharatarishabha, Partha strikes that vile 
prince of Rakshasas with four such formidable shafts that Alambusha takes 
to his heels. 

Having vanquished the fiend of darkness, Arjuna rides swiftly towards 
Drona, on his way slaughtering innumerable men, elephants and horses that 
fall like trees laid low by a storm, while the remaining soldiers run away 
like a frightened herd of deer.’” 


CANTO 165 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Your son Chitrasena, O Bhaarata, confronts 
Nakula’s son Satanika who is consuming your army with his 
missiles. Satanika strikes Chitrasena with five arrows and your prince 
responds with ten whetted shafts. Chitrasena gashes Satanika with nine 
bolts, at which the son of Nakula responds with a fusillade of arrows that 
rip Chitrasena’s armour from his body: a wonderful feat. Without his 
armour, your son looks remarkable, like a snake that has just cast off his 
slough. Satanika cuts down the struggling Chitrasena’s standard, and then 
breaks his bow. 

The beleaguered Chitrasena seizes up another powerful dhanusha and 
plunges countless arrows at Satanika. His fury mounting, Satanika kills 
Chitrasena’s horses and his charioteer, at which his powerful opponent 
jumps down from his ratha and drills Satanika with five and twenty arrows. 
Satanika destroys Chitrasena’s gold-decked bow with a crescent-tipped 
arrow. Deprived of his bow, chariot, horses and charioteer, Chitrasena 
quickly runs to Kritavarman’s chariot and climbs aboard. 

Karna’s son Vrishasena leads his legion against maharatha Drupada, 
spraying multitudinous arrows at the Panchala king, who is closing rapidly 


on Drona. Yajnasena challenges the son of Karna and plunges sixty barbs 
into his arms and chest. The doughty Vrishasena responds with astounding 
speed and draws spouts of blood from Drupada’s chest. These two, as well, 
with each other’s arrows protruding from their bodies, look startlingly like a 
couple of huge porcupines with quills erect. Bathed in blood from wounds 
taken from golden-winged arrows, they are especially striking during their 
wrathful duel. Indeed, the spectacle they present is as that of a pair of 
radiant Kalpa vrikshas or of two kinsukas laden with blood flowers. 

Vrishasena strikes Drupada with nine arrows, then with seventy more 
and again with another three. Loosing a gale of arrows, Karna’s son, Rajan, 
makes a resplendent spectacle. An inflamed Drupada splits Vrishasena’s 
bow in two with a broad-headed arrow. Vrishasena picks up another gold 
chased bow, invokes a great astra and, taking careful aim at Drupada, while 
he ignores the slew of barbs that the Panchala king looses at him, unleashes 
the blazing thing at the Acharya, filling all the Somakas with fear. The 
astras plunge straight through Yagnasena’s chest and he collapses onto the 
floor of his chariot. His sarathy whisks him away from the field. Seeing the 
great Panchala maharatha leave the battle in a faint, the Kaurava army 
fervidly attacks Drupada’s troops. 

The lamps fallen from the hands of slain warriors light up the earth all 
around so Kurukshetra looks even like the firmament lit by stars and 
planets. The ground sparkles with the angadas of fallen heroes, like a great 
cloud mass during the monsoon, in which streaks of lightning flash. From 
fear of Karna’s son, the Panchalas flee on all sides, as the Danavas did from 
terror of Indra during the great Devasura yuddha. 

Thus stricken by Vrishasena, the Panchalas and the Somakas, illumined 
by lamps, present an unusual and arresting sight. Having vanquished them, 
Vrishasena looks like the sun, O Bharata, when he reaches his zenith. 
Among all those thousands of kings on your side and theirs, the valiant 
Vrishasena seems to be the only resplendent luminary. Having vanquished 
many heroes and all the great maharathas among the Somakas, Karna’s son 
races on towards the Pandava king Yudhishtira. 

Your son Dusasana rides against the mighty Prativindhya, who charges 
at Drona who unabatedly devours the enemy troops with his devastras. The 
duel that erupts between them is like the contention between Mercury and 
Venus, Budha and Sukra, in a cloudless sky. Dusasana pierces Prativindhya, 
who is accomplishing fierce feats, with three arrows shot straight into his 


forehead. Gushing blood from the wounds Prativindhya looks like a three 
crested hill with streams of red chalk flowing down. 

Prativindhya strikes back in fury, first piercing Dusasana with three 
arrows and again with seven. Now your son achieves a difficult feat. He 
first fells Prativindhya’s horses with a dense volley, then, with one broad- 
headed shaft, kills his sarathy and then cuts down his standard. Dusasana 
then smashes Prativindhya’s chariot under him into a thousand pieces, 
shreds his banner, his quivers, bowstrings and the traces of his ratha. 

Deprived of his chariot, the virtuous Prativindhya stands, bow in hand, 
and contends with your son, shooting an opacity of arrows at him, until 
Dusasana, showing marvellous dexterity, breaks his adversary’s bow and 
then lacerates him with ten brutal arrows. Seeing Prativindhya’s plight, his 
brothers, maharathas all, come dashing forward with a large force to protect 
him. Prativindhya climbs onto Sutasoma’s splendid chariot and, taking up 
another bow, continues to shoot at your son. A strong force of your warriors 
arrives swiftly to support Dusasana. 

Another dreadful battle ensues between your troops and theirs, O 
Bhaarata, at the midnight hour, and swells the population of Yama’s 
domain.’” 


CANTO 166 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Roaring “Stop! Stop!” Subala’s son Sakuni in 
sudden fury attacks Nakula, who is decimating your forces. 

Bows drawn in circles, both show the same measure of skill, lashing 
each other with arrows. Soon, these two also resemble strange porcupines. 
Their armour cut away and each bathed in blood, they resemble two 
beautiful and brilliant Kalpa vrikshas, or flowering kinsukas, or Salmali 
trees with prickly thorns on them. 

Eyes red and bulging with rage, they cast sidelong glowers at each 
other, as if to kill the other with their gazes. Then, with a fiendish grin, 
Sakuni pierces Nakula’s chest with a barbed arrow and Madri’s son swoons 
in his chariot. Sakuni roars as loud as the clouds at the end of summer. 

Nakula recovers quickly and attacks his vile enemy again, now like the 
Destroyer himself with jaws agape; Nakula drills him first with sixty arrows 
and again with a hundred long shafts right through his chest. He breaks 
Sakuni’s bow, and fells his haughty standard. He plunges an arrow shot 
with all his might deep into Sakuni’s thigh and drops him onto the floor of 
his chariot, clasping his flagstaff like an amorous man his mistress. 


Seeing your brother-in-law felled and fainted, his charioteer quickly 
rides away from the van of the battle. At this, the Parthas and all their 
followers give a loud and triumphal shout. 

Nakula, the Parantapa, says to his sarathy, “Take me towards the forces 
that Drona commands.” The man does as he is commanded. Seeing Nakula 
ride against Drona, Kripa rides to stop him but a smiling Sikhandin pierces 
Kripa with nine arrows from a flank. Turning, Kripa strikes Sikhandin first 
with five arrows, and then with twenty more. The duel that breaks out 
between the two is hair-raising, my lord, even like the one between 
Sambara and the king of the Devas in the war of antiquity between the 
Devas and the Asuras. 

Both maharathas cover the heavens with their missiles, like clouds at 
the end of summer. The night is full of terror and evokes all sorts of fears in 
the warriors. Then Sikhandin splits Kripa’s large bow with a crescent- 
headed arrow and ravages him with a flurry of other shafts. The infuriated 
Kripa casts a polished golden spear at the Panchala prince, which Sikhandin 
shatters in flight with ten immaculate arrows. 

Kripa takes up a fresh bow and looses such a rage of arrows at the 
prince who was once a princess that Sikhandin collapses onto the floor of 
his ratha. Kripa continues to strafe him with many more shafts, trying to kill 
him, but his charioteer bears Sikhandin away to safety. 

The Panchalas and the Somakas see the mighty maharatha son of 
Yajnasena retreat from battle, and rush to his rescue, while your sons 
surround Kripa, best of Brahmanas, with a large force to support him. 
Another ferocious battle ensues; a great tumult arises, full of roars and 
screams, and the thunder of horses’ hooves and lumbering elephants, filling 
the hour past midnight like massed thunderheads. The earth trembles with 
the tread of running foot-soldiers, why like a woman shaking with fear. 

Maharathas dash manically at one another, in their thousands, 
slaughtering numberless common soldiers as they go. Great elephants, with 
ichor flowing down their bodies, rush at other mastodons, and fight 
furiously with trunks and curved, glinting tusks that are soon dyed in red. 
Horsemen and foot-soldiers, too, fight without any vestige of restraint or 
sanity. 

In the heart of night, the sound of troops attacking and retreating is 
deafening and bizarre. The blazing lamps placed on chariots, elephants and 
horses are like meteors fallen from the sky and smouldering still. Lit by 


these, the night, O lord of the Bharatas, is a strangest day. As the sun dispels 
the darkness of every night, do the blazing lamps the turgid darkness of the 
war. 

Indeed, the sky, the earth, the cardinal and the subsidiary points of the 
world, enveloped by dust and darkness, are all illuminated by the lamplight, 
which is increased many times over by being reflected by splendid 
weapons, coats of mail and the jewels of famed Kshatriyas. Yet, during the 
tumultuary war at night, few of the fighters, O Bhaarata, can distinguish ally 
from enemy and father kills son, son kills father, friend slays friend, 
relatives slay relatives, uncles kill sisters’ sons, countless warriors kill other 
warriors of their own side. 

Absolute brutal chaos and madness rule everywhere, and all that 
appears to matter is to kill or be killed, regardless of who kills and who is 
slain.’” 


CANTO 167 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Dhrishtadyumna, fire-prince of the Panchalas faces 
Drona in this night. His formidable bow raised and repeatedly 
twanging its string, Drupada’s meridian son, supported by his own troops 
and those of the Pandavas, charges toward Drona’s gold-bedecked ratha. 
Seeing the great Acharya thus assailed, your son resolutely protects Drona 
on all sides and the two hosts collide again in vast numbers, even like two 
awesome seas lashed into fury by a tempest surging into each other, with all 
their marine creatures frantically agitated. 

Dhrishtadyumna pierces Drona’s torso with five arrows and gives a roar 
of triumph. Drona strikes his most feared enemy with five and twenty 
arrows and, with another broad-headed shaft, severs his bright bow. 
Dhrishtadyumna casts aside his broken bow, bites his lip in rage and, 
picking up another awesome weapon, drawing its string to his ear in a flash, 
looses an astra that can have Drona’s life. The missile illuminates the whole 
army like another sun. Seeing the incandescent astra, the Devas, the 
Gandharvas and the Danavas pray: “May Drona live!” 

At that moment, from a far flank, Karna, showing godlike genius, 
shatters the fulminant astra into a dozen pieces even as it flies inexorable 


towards the Acharya; extinguished, the astra falls onto the earth like a snake 
that has lost its fangs and venom. Karna inundates Dhrishtadyumna with a 
torrent of arrows. Maharatha Aswatthaman strikes him with five singing 
barbs, Drona with another five, Salya with nine, Dusasana with three, 
Duryodhana with twenty and Sakuni with five of his own. Thus, seven 
mighty maharathas come quickly to Drona’s rescue and vigorously assault 
the burning prince of the Panchalas. 

He, however, draws blood from every one of them: Drona, Karna, 
Drona’s son and your son with three arrows each. Their roaring, Rajan, all 
this while, is truly horrible, as they combine to wildly beset 
Dhrishtadyumna. Then Drumasena wounds the fire-prince deep with a gold- 
winged shaft, and again with another three, shouting, “Stop! Stop and fight 
me!” 

Dhrishtadyumna strikes back with three deadly accurate arrows, 
fletched with wings of gold and shining slick with oil; with another 
crescent-headed arrow he blasts Drumasena’s head from his neck, and its 
earrings sparkle red as the grisly thing falls onto the ground, a final cry 
frozen on its lips curled in fury still. The head of that hero falls like a ripe 
palmyra fruit blown from its stalk by a powerful gust of wind. 

Dhrishtadyumna, the irradiant, sprays fire all around him despatching 
thousands to Yamaloka; with a wedge headed arrow he splits Karna’s bow 
in two. Karna cannot abide this; he is like a wild lion that has its tail cut off! 
He takes up another bow, and with eyes red as plums and breathing hard, 
envelops mighty Dhrishtadyumna with riptides of arrows. Seeing Karna in 
this mood, your six other maharathas quickly surround the prince of the 
Panchalas, determined to kill him. 

Seeing their Senapati facing the six greatest warriors of your army, all 
your troops consider him as being already delivered into the jaws of death. 
But then, Satyaki of the Dasarha vamsa arrives to support the embattled 
Dhrishtadyumna; the Satwata hero comes loosing a tide of arrows before 
him. Karna greets him with ten arrows. Before the watching maharathas, 
Satyaki responds with ten thunderbolts and cries tauntingly, “Do not run 
away again, Karna! Stay and fight me.” 

And once more, the blazing duel that ensues between mighty Satyaki 
and the redoubtable Karna resembles, O Rajan, that between Bali and 
Vasava in the days of old. Satyaki, bull among Kshatriyas, terrifies all your 
warriors with the rumble of his ratha, and he strikes the lotus-eyed Karna 


deep with countless arrows. Making the earth shudder with the twang of his 
bow, the majestic Sutaputra covers the relucent Satyaki with a barrage of 
long, barbed, tall-toothed and razor-headed arrows and diverse other 
missiles. Satyaki of the Vrishnis also shrouds Karna in a mantle of fire. 

For a time, that duel is magnificent and equal. Then, your sons, keeping 
Karna at their head, shoot at Satyaki from every side. Fending them all off, 
including Karna, with his own astras, Satyaki abruptly strikes the valiant 
Vrishasena through his chest so that he falls down in his chariot, casting 
aside his bow. 

Believing his son, the maharatha Vrishasena, dead, shock plunges 
through Karna and he attacks Satyaki in reckless frenzy. Satyaki serenely 
pierces Karna with many strong shafts. He first strikes the Sutaputra with 
ten arrows, then Vrishasena, who has arisen again, with five, and finally 
shreds the leather gloves and severs the bows of both father and son. 
Stringing fresh bows, father and son assail Satyaki from two sides and 
lacerate him with countless arrows. 

During the course of the war by night that kills so many heroes, we hear 
the loud twang of the Gandiva, O Rajan, over every other sound. Hearing 
the rumble of Arjuna’s ratha as well as reverberant Gandiva, Karna tells 
Duryodhana, “Arjuna strums his great bow after slaughtering our leading 
warriors, SO many great archers among the Kauravas, and, indeed much of 
our entire army. The thunder you hear is the rumble of his ratha. It is plain 
that this son of Pandu tonight achieves feats truly worthy of him and that he 
will swiftly raze all our forces. 

Many of our troops already flee and no one dares stand up to Arjuna as 
he scatters our legions as the mighty wind may a rising mass of clouds. 
Encountering Arjuna, our soldiers all capsize like small skiffs on the raging 
ocean. You hear the wails, Duryodhana, of our best warriors as they run 
from the field, or fall to the arrows loosed in great waves from the Gandiva. 

Listen, O tiger among maharathas, to the sound of drums and cymbals 
being beaten near Arjuna’s ratha at dead of night like the deep roll of 
thunder in the sky. Listen to the screams of wounded soldiers and the 
tremendous roars and victorious shouts around Arjuna’s chariot. 

However, here Satyaki, the greatest of the Satwata vamsa, holds us all 
up. If Yuyudhana can be brought down, we might conquer all our enemies. 
Also, Dhrishtadyumna battles Acharya Drona, and many of our best 
rathikas encircle those two. If we can kill Satyaki and Dhrishtadyumna, 


victory will certainly be ours. So let us surround these two shuras even as 
we did Abhimanyu in the chakravyuha and kill them both. Arjuna already 
turns his chariot toward Drona’s chariot, for he knows that Satyaki holds up 
so many of our Kuru maharathas. Let another goodly number of our 
greatest warriors ride to prevent Partha from coming to the beleaguered 
Satyaki’s rescue. And let those that remain attack Satyaki all together, 
putting forth their fiercest prowess so that Yuyudhana of Madhu’s race is 
despatched swiftly to Yama’s abode.” 

Duryodhana concurs with Karna’s view and, like the illustrious Indra 
requesting Vishnu, says to his uncle Sakuni, “Matulan, ride against Arjuna 
with ten thousand elephants and ten thousand chariots. Dusasana, 
Durvishaha, Subahu and Dushpradharshana will follow you with an 
akshauhini of foot-soldiers. Kill the two Krishnas; kill Yudhishtira, Nakula, 
Sahadeva and Bhima. My hope of victory rests in you, as that of the gods 
on their lord Indra. O Sakuni, slay the sons of Kunti, like Kartikeya slaying 
the Asuras.” 

Clad in armour and taking your sons and a large host with him, Sakuni 
rides against the Parthas to have their lives. Another great and general battle 
begins between the warriors of your army and the enemy. When Subala’s 
son Sakuni advances against the Pandavas, Karna leads a teeming force 
against Satyaki, unleashing a gale of arrows. Your warriors all combine and 
surround Satyaki. Then, Bharatarishabha, Drona advances against 
Dhrishtadyumna’s ratha and fights a wonderful and bloody night battle 
against the Panchalas.’” 


CANTO 168 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


°S anjaya says, “All the indomitable kings of your army besiege 
Satyaki’s ratha in fury, to put an end to his lustrous and terrible 
exploits. Mounted on their fine chariots decked with gold and encrusted 
with jewels, and accompanied by cavalry and elephants, they surround the 
Satwata hero and, roaring an earthshaking challenge at him, cover him with 
their arrows. Even as they come at him, Sini’s grandson snips off countless 
heads even as if he were plucking flowers from their stems. With his razor- 
faced arrows, he hacks away the trunks of so many elephants, the necks of 
numerous horses and the arms of countless warriors, wearing sparkling 
angadas. 

The field of dreadful dharma is covered over by fallen chamaras and 
white chatras, O Bhaarata, and resembles the sky with stars in it. The 
screams of the host slaughtered by Satyaki is as awful as those of shrieking 
ghosts in hell. The world is filled by the horrible uproar and the night 
becomes still more brutal and appalling. Seeing Yuyudhana desiccate your 
army, hearing the incredible bloodcurdling din at dead of night, your mighty 
Duryodhana cries to his sarathy, “Ride to where this dreadful sound comes 
from.” 


Duryodhana, master archer, rides at Satyaki, who greets him with a 
dozen blood-drinking arrows shot from his bow drawn to its fullest stretch. 
A maddened Duryodhana gashes Yuyudhana with ten shafts like streaks of 
lightning. Meanwhile, the battle that rages between the Panchalas and your 
troops presents an exceptionally wonderful sight. Satyaki bores 
Duryodhana’s brawny breast with eighty arrows, then despatches his horses 
to Yama’s realm and fells his charioteer from his ratha. 

Your son, Rajan, remains standing on his immobile chariot and looses a 
brilliant arrow storm at Satyaki, the Satwata cuts down with luculent skill. 
Then, with a broad-headed shaft, Satyaki breaks your son’s formidable bow. 
Deprived of both his ratha and bow, Suyodhana, powerful ruler of men, 
quickly mounts Kritavarman’s bright chariot and rides away. After 
Duryodhana’s retreat, Satyaki harries and routs your army all around. 

Meanwhile, surrounding Arjuna on all sides with thousands of rathas, 
elephants and horses, Sakuni lays violent siege to the glorious Pandava. 
Many of the Kuru maharathas loose devastras of great power at Arjuna. 
Indeed, these Kshatriyas fight Arjuna, accepting the certitude of death. An 
inspired Arjuna single-handedly arrests the progress of the thousands of 
chariots, elephants and horses; he is awesome, he is a god on the darkling 
field, and he forces them all to turn back. His eyes glittering coppery with 
rage, Sakuni strikes Arjuna powerfully with twenty shafts, drawing fonts of 
blood; with another hundred vicious barbs, he halts the sweeping advance 
of Partha’s great chariot. 

Arjuna first strikes Sakuni with twenty arrows and then each of the 
maharathas who ride with him with three. Stopping all of them with his 
scintillating volleys, Arjuna razes your army’s warriors at will, with arrows 
shot with the force of striking thunder. Strewn with corpses of man and 
beasts, and arrows cut down, the earth looks as if it is covered with morbid 
yet fascinating flowers. Spread over with the heads of Kshatriyas, heads 
wearing crowns, their faces with noble noses, noble ears with beautiful 
earrings, lower lips bitten through in rage and pain, and staring eyes; 
covered by these heads graced with rich collars and crowned with 
gemstones, and lips that spoke sweet, eloquent words when life was in 
them, the earth looks splendent as if with hillocks covered with champaka 
flowers. 

Having perpetrated this carnage, Arjuna pierces Sakuni once more, 
strikes his son Uluka with an arrow, and gives a roar that fills the world. He 


smashes Sakuni’s bow and sends his four horses to Yama’s realm. Sakuni, 
O Bharatarishabha, jumps down from his chariot and clambers into Uluka’s 
ratha. Riding on the same chariot, the maharatha father and son shower 
arrows over Partha like twin clouds lashing a mountain with rain. Arjuna 
rakes both with ferocious shafts and scuttles your troops so violently that 
they run in their thousands. Like a vast cloud mass dispersed on all sides by 
an irresistible wind, your army runs in all directions, in full view of their 
commanders. In the sinister night, many abandon the beasts they are riding; 
others urge their horses to their greatest speed and flee. Having put your 
forces to complete rout, Krishna and Arjuna sound their conches echoingly. 

Dhrishtadyumna stabs Drona with three arrows, and severs the 
Acharya’s bowstring. Throwing down that bow, Drona, the Kshatriya 
grinder, takes up another and, quicker than seeing, strikes Dhrishtadyumna 
with five arrows, and his charioteer with another five. Holding the 
Brahmana up, Dhrishtadyumna begins to destroy the Kaurava host like 
Maghavat annihilating the Asura army. He lets flow a ghastly, frothing river 
of blood, which glimmers in the lamplight. It runs between the two hosts, 
and bears away men, horses and elephants on its current! It resembles, O 
Rajan, the Vaitarani that flows down to the domain of Yama. 

Harrying and decimating your army, the valiant Dhrishtadyumna blazes 
with tejas as Indra in the midst of the Devas. Then Dhrishtadyumna and 
Sikhandin blow their great conchs, as do the twins, Nakula and Sahadeva, 
and Bhima as well. Thus, O Dhritarashtra, do these inexorable maharathas 
vanquish thousands of your illustrious kings before the eyes of Duryodhana, 
Karna, Drona and Aswatthaman!’”’ 


CANTO 169 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Seeing his army being massacred by the illustrious 

enemy maharathas, your son, O Rajan, rides up in fury to Karna 

and Drona and says to them, “You two started this battle in resentment, after 

Arjuna killed Jayadratha. And now you watch with indifference as the 

Pandavas decimate my army although you are both entirely able to 

vanquish them. If you intend to abandon me now, you should have warned 
me before we went to war. 

‘Together we will vanquish the sons of Pandu,’ is what you said to me 
then. Listening to you, I went to war. If you had said otherwise, I would 
never have provoked hostilities with the Parthas, this dreadful battle that is 
killing our heroes past all count. If I do not deserve to be abandoned by you 
two, then fight as you truly can, O you bulls among men!” 

Prodded by the shrewd Duryodhana with his goad of words, Karna and 
Drona attack the enemy again, like two snakes prodded with sticks. These 
two greatest maharathas in the world rush forward against the Parthas led 
by Satyaki and others. And uniting, the Parthas, with all their troops 
advance against these two shuras, who now repeatedly roar their ringing 
challenges at the Pandava forces. 


Great Drona, master of all weapons, pierces Satyaki, bull of the Sinis, 
with ten arrows while Karna strikes him with ten, your son with seven, 
Vrishasena with ten, and Sakuni with seven. They join the unbreachable 
wall of Kauravas built around the Satwata. Seeing Drona mow down the 
Pandava army with his astras, the Somakas cover him from every side with 
dense showers of arrows. Drona continues to annihilate the Pandava 
Kshatriyas around him, Rajan, as the sun destroys darkness with his rays. 

We then hear an uproar among the Panchalas, who call out pitifully to 
one another, while Drona the Brahmana butchers them. Some abandoning 
sons, some fathers, some brothers, some uncles, some their sister’s sons, 
some other relatives and kinsmen, all run to save their own lives. Many are 
so panic-stricken that they run straight at Drona himself. Ah, past all count 
are the common Pandava soldiers and great Kshatriyas that the incendiary 
Acharya sends to Yama. Set upon in the night by the blazing master, the 
Pandava host flings down its weapon and runs from the terrible Acharya in 
full view of Bhimasena, Arjuna, Krishna, the twins, Yudhishtira and 
Dhrishtadyumna. 

The world being plunged in darkness, one might otherwise see nothing; 
but by the light of the lamps from the Kaurava troops, one sees the flight of 
the enemy. Drona and Karna pursue your legions, killing countless men 
from behind with ruthless volleys of arrows and devastras too. 

Seeing the Panchalas thus butchered, Krishna tells Arjuna and the rest 
of the Pandavas, “Dhrishtadyumna and Satyaki, with the Panchalas, have 
confronted Drona and Karna. But they have been soundly beaten and the 
Brahmana and the Sutaputra have put our vast forces to flight and not all 
our persuasions will fetch the men back to fight. 

Yet have no fear, O sons of Pandu, for the two Krishnas will now 
descend upon Drona and Karna like doom!” 

Krishna sees Bhima riding up, and says again to Arjuna, to put heart 
into him, “There comes Bhima, leading the Somakas and the Pandavas, to 
confront Drona and Karna. O Pandava, fight now for the morale of all your 
troops, supported by Bhima and the rest of the many maharathas we have 
with us!” 

The two Naravyaghras, the two Krishnas, ride to the van of their forces 
and advance on Drona and Karna. Now, Yudhishtira’s army returns to the 
battle again, to the place where Drona and Karna are decimating their 
forces. Another horrific battle erupts between the two hosts, like two oceans 


swollen at moonrise and surging into each other in tide. And now, the 
warriors of your army throw away the burning lamps they hold and, with 
the world plunged in darkness again, they rush at the Pandava soldiers 
again, guided only by the names they call out. 

We hear the names that the kings fighting there proclaim, O Rajan, as if 
they are being announced at a swayamvara. Suddenly, a grim silence 
spreads over the field and lasts for a moment. Then, once more, we hear the 
bedlam raised by the roars and cries of the fighting men, both victors and 
vanquished. The heroes rush to where they see lamps still burning, like 
insects to a blazing fire. One by one, the lamps all die down and, as the 
Pandavas and the Kauravas wage bloodthirsty war between them, the 
darkness of the night thickens around them.’” 


CANTO 170 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Karna, slayer of enemy Kshatriyas, sees 

Dhrishtadyumna and strikes him powerfully through his chest 

with ten excoriating arrows. Dhrishtadyumna swiftly returns Karna’s fire 
with five searing arrows and shouts, “Halt! Stop and fight!” 

They shroud each other in arrow clouds shot from bows drawn into 
circles. Then Karna kills Dhrishtadyumna’s four horses; Karna destroys his 
enemy’s best bow and, with a broad-headed shaft, fells the Panchala 
prince’s sarathy from his niche in the chariot. Dhrishtadyumna jumps down 
from his chariot with a mace in hand. Though continuously gashed by 
Karna’s arrows, he runs at him, clubs his horses so their heads are crushed, 
and then running back climbs nimbly into Arjuna’s chariot. From there, 
Dhrishtadyumna wants to continue his duel with Karna but Yudhishtira 
stops him. 

Mahatejasvin Karna, whose leonine roars mingling with the resounding 
twang of his bow, pauses, raises his conch to his lips and blows a blast on it 
like age-ending thunder. Seeing Dhrishtadyumna beaten, the Panchalas and 
the Somakas, mighty maharathas all, attack Karna all together, intent on 
killing him and with no care for their lives. Meanwhile, Karna’s charioteer 


has great Sindhu horses, white as moonbeams and fleet as thoughts, 
attached to his ratha. 

Karna resumes battle with great energy, harrying the Panchala 
maharathas with a torrent of blazing arrows. The Panchala soldiers flee in 
terror, like some little does frightened by a lion. O Rajan, we see horsemen 
fall from their horses all around, elephant-riders from their elephants and 
maharathas from their chariots, all slain by Karna’s supernal archery. In this 
battle being fought surely in a zone of hell, Karna lops off the arms of 
fleeing warriors with razor-faced shafts, their heads decked with chariot- 
rings, the thighs of others that are seated on elephants, or on horseback, or 
stand upon the earth. So sharp are his arrows that many of these fleeing 
maharathas do not realise for a while that they have lost their limbs or their 
mounts. 

Killed by the Sutaputra’s terrible shafts, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas 
are so seized by fear that they begin to see Karna everywhere; they imagine 
that the wind stirring a blade of grass for that awesome, superhuman 
maharatha. Why, they lose their wits to the extent that they see Karna in the 
forms of their friends and comrades and flee from them in terror. Karna 
pursues the broken and retreating army, his arrows flaring everywhere as he 
mows down the hapless enemy at his great will. 

Others run away when Drona just looks at them. Seeing his army turn 
tail, Yudhishtira thinks it would be advisable for them all to retreat, and says 
to Arjuna, “Look where mighty Karna stands like Rudra himself with his 
Pinaka. In the dead of night, look how he scorches everything around him 
like Surya himself. All we hear are the helpless screams of those whom 
Karna tears apart with his arrows. So swiftly does he aim and loose his 
shafts that it appears to be an unbroken movement. He will annihilate all 
our friends, so quickly do whatever you must to kill Karna, for his time may 
have come.”’ 

Hearing this, Partha says to Krishna, “The Dharmaputra is frightened 
today by Karna’s great skill. His legions repeatedly overwhelm ours and our 
men are fleeing. The rest of our army is already in shreds from the 
Acharya’s arrows. Slaughtered and terrified by these two, we cannot seem 
to make a stand against them. I see Karna ride fearlessly everywhere and 
our best maharathas fleeing from him. 

He unleashes his fervid tirade as he likes and I cannot bear to watch this 
anymore than a trodden-upon serpent. O tiger of Vrishni’s vamsa, let us ride 


at mighty Karna. I will either kill him, or let him kill me.” 

Krishna says, “Naravyaghra, this superhuman warrior rides across the 
field at will sowing death all around him, and he is like Indra himself. 
Arjuna, no one can challenge the Sutaputra other than you or Ghatotkacha. I 
do not think that the time has come for you to face the Suta’s son. He still 
has the astra given him by Indra, which he has kept carefully to use against 
you. It has now assumed a terrible form. 

Ghatotkacha is devoted to you and wishes to serve you, so let the great 
Rakshasa ride against Karna. Bhima is his father and Ghatotkacha is as 
powerful as a Deva. He has the astras of the Devas as well as those used by 
Rakshasas.” 

They send for Ghatotkacha and he appears before them, Rajan, clad in 
black armour and armed with a sword, a bow and arrows. Saluting Krishna 
and Arjuna, he proudly says, “Here I am, command me!” 

Krishna says to Hidimbi’s Rakshasa son of the blazing mouth and fiery 
eyes, his body the hue of clouds, “Listen, O Ghatotkacha, to what I have to 
say. The time has come for you, and none else, to display your prowess. 
Become the raft in this battle to save the sinking Pandavas. You have a 
myriad of weapons, and many kinds of Rakshasa maya. Look where Karna 
decimates the Pandava army as if it were a herd of cattle before him. Karna, 
mahabuddhi, mahatejasvin, consumes our greatest Kshatriyas in the flames 
of his astras as if offering them as havis to the gods. 

The Pandava warriors cannot withstand him; burnt and shredded by the 
Sutaputra’s arrows, the Panchalas also run from him like deer chased by a 
lion. You are the only one who can face him in battle, Ghatotkacha. Your 
time for glory has come. O Mahabaho, do what is worthy of your mother’s 
race, as well as that of your sires. Men wish for sons to be delivered by 
them from strife. You must rescue your kinsmen tonight, Ghatotkacha, at 
this hour of your great strength. 

Fathers wish for sons in order to accomplish their own objectives. Sons 
are the source of everything good, and are expected to save their fathers 
both here and in the hereafter. [lustrious you are and your might is dreadful 
and unrivalled; there is no one to equal you in battle. Become tonight the 
ship in which the Pandavas, whom the terrible Karna routs with his astras, 
and who are sinking in the Dhartarashtra ocean, safely come ashore. By 
night, all Rakshasas are infused with limitless powers, great might and 
untold courage. At this hour, they turn into invincible warriors of matchless 


valour. Using your maya shakti and all your astras, slay Karna in this heart 
of the night. The Parthas, with Dhrishtadyumna, will then easily do away 
with Drona.” 

Arjuna adds, “Ghatotkacha, the long-armed Satyaki, Bhimasena and 
you are, in my judgment, our greatest warriors. Go and fight Karna tonight 
in single combat. Satyaki will protect your rear and, with his help, kill the 
brave Karna, as Indra did, with Skanda’s, the Deva senapati’s help, the 
Asura Taraka.” 

Ghatotkacha replies, “I am a match for Karna, and for Drona, O 
Bhaarata, or for any great Kshatriya maharatha. This night I will fight such 
a duel with the Suta’s son that it will be spoken of as long as the world lasts. 
Tonight, I will spare neither the brave nor the timid, nor even those who, 
with joined hands, pray for quarter. Following Rakshasa dharma, I will kill 
all that come before me.” 

Saying these words, Hidimbi’s Parantapa son, does not tarry a moment 
but rushes at Karna, attacking him with such ferocity that your troops are 
terrified. The Sutaputra, the Naravyaghra, smilingly meets the Rakshasa 
warrior of the blazing mouth and wild flaming locks down to his shoulders. 
And there is no doubt, O tiger among kings, that the battle between Karna 
and Ghatotkacha resembles the one between Indra and Prahlada in the old 
days.’” 


CANTO 171 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “Seeing the mighty-armed Ghatotkacha attack 

Karna’s chariot in frenzy, Duryodhana says to Dusasana, “Stop 

the dangerous Rakshasa! Take a strong force with you and ride to Karna’s 

help. Put forth all your prowess, my brother, and ensure that the terrible 
demon does kill Karna out of our heedlessness.” 

Meanwhile, Jatasura’s mighty son, Alambusha, comes to Duryodhana 
and says, “O Suyodhana, I seek consent to go into battle. I mean to kill your 
celebrated enemies, the mighty Pandavas and all their followers. The 
despicable sons of Pritha killed my father Jatasura, greatest of all 
Rakshasas, by using some occult mantras. O king of men, I wish to worship 
my dead sire by offering him the blood of his enemies, and their flesh as 
tarpana and pinda! It is only just that you allow me this.” 

Duryodhana is delighted and says to that vile and powerful one, “I can 
vanquish my enemies with the might of Drona, Karna and others. However, 
you may, O Rakshasa, go and kill the monstrous Ghatotkacha, this 
Rakshasa who is always devoted to the Pandavas and now kills our 
elephants, horses and maharathas from the sky. Go, O Alambusha, and send 
Bhima’s bestial son to Yamaloka.” 


Saying, “Tathaastu, so be it,’ Alambusha roars an echoing challenge to 
Ghatotkacha and attacks him furiously with diverse kinds of missiles. 
However, Hidimbi and Bhima’s prodigious son blows in indescribable fury 
at Alambusha, Karna and the vast Kuru host like some unprecedented 
tempest banishing a mass of clouds. Seeing the power of Ghatotkacha’s 
maya, his dreadful sorcery, Alambusha strikes Ghatotkacha with a slew of 
different kinds of arrows; he then ravages the Pandava army with many 
strange and sinister astras, which consume whole legions with dark fires, in 
the twinkling of an eye. The Pandava troops break and flee from the 
tameless Rakshasa. 

Mangled by Ghatotkacha’s missiles, your troops also flee in their 
thousands, throwing down their torches as they go. Alambusha strikes 
Bhimasena’s rampaging son with countless volleys. Ghatotkacha shatters 
Alambusha’s chariot, kills his weird sarathy and incinerates all his weapons, 
then laughing frightfully, Bhima’s son unleashes a cataract of seething barbs 
down on Karna, Alambusha and all the Kurus, like a cloudburst over the 
mountains of Meru. Hunted mercilessly by the staggering Ghatotkacha, 
unearthly panic and terror seize the Kuru host of the four kinds of forces, 
and in their haste to flee the awful Rakshasa, who is sometimes in the air 
and at others on the ground, your soldiers push, shove, trample and ride 
over one another in absolute pandemonium. 

Without a chariot or a charioteer, Alambusha leaps at Ghatotkacha and 
fetches him several blows like thunder with his fists. Ghatotkacha trembles 
like a mountain with its trees, creepers and grasses struck by an earthquake; 
his eyes the colour of sunset, he raises his own arm like a spiked mace and 
strikes Jatasura’s son a stupendous blow that fells him onto the ground. He 
kneels on his back and grinds Alambusha into the earth. Alambusha frees 
himself and, springing up, attacks Ghatotkacha wildly, trips him and throws 
him down. Now he kneels on the supine son of Bhima and batters him in 
fury. 

Awful and bloodcurdling is the hand-to-hand battle between the two 
Rakshasas, their fangs glinting in the night. They fight like Indra and 
Virochana’s son Bali; now they begin to use maya, dark sorcery, as they 
fight. Turning into fire and water, then into Garuda and Takshaka, then into 
a cloud and a tempest, and after that into thunder and a mountain, then two 
elephants and then Rahu and the Sun, they employ a hundred different 
kinds of illusions to kill each other. 


Alambusha and Ghatotkacha strike each other with clubs, maces, 
lances, mallets, axes, short cudgels and crags. Riding on horseback or on 
elephants, fighting on foot or from chariots, the great Rakshasas, both gifted 
with ample powers of magic, fight on bewildering and mystifying those that 
watch them. Then, Ghatotkacha leaps down again from his ratha in a flash, 
like a hunting hawk, gives a horrible roar and, seizing the gigantic 
Alambusha, he flings him down on the earth, like Vishnu slaying the Asura 
Maya. With a gleaming stroke of a magnificent curved and serrated 
scimitar, he hews off his ferile enemy’s head in an eruption of gore, even as 
Alambusha is still roaring hideously. The head roars on even after its has 
been cut from its neck. 

Holding the blood-dyed head by its long red hair, Ghatotkacha runs to 
Duryodhana’s chariot and, with a smile, flings Alambusha’s frightful head 
down at your son’s feet. With a roar deep as clouds during the rains, he says 
to Duryodhana, “Here is the head of your monster on whom you relied! I 
will bring you your precious Karna’s head next, and then take yours, vile 
Duryodhana! One who observes dharma, artha and kama never visits a 
king, a Brahmana, or a woman with empty hands. Take this head as my 
tribute to you, O king of evil. And live happily still, until I bring you 
Karna’s head.” 

Duryodhana stands frozen in shock, and Ghatotkacha lopes away into 
the night, mounts his chariot and rides straight at Karna, loosing a hundred 
arrows at his head. A duel breaks out between the two that is altogether 
wonderful and well nigh indescribable.’” 


CANTO 172 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra says, ‘Tell me about this battle in the middle of the 

night between Karna and Ghatotkacha. Describe the form of the 

Rakshasa to me. What kind of chariot does he ride and what is the nature of 

his horses and his weapons? How big are his horses, the standard on his 

chariot and his bow? What kind of armour and what type of casque does he 

wear? Describe all this to me, O Sanjaya, for you are a marvellous 
narrator!’ 

Sanjaya says, “The gigantic Ghatotkacha has eyes the colour of blood, a 
face the colour of copper; his belly is low and sunken and the bristles on his 
body all point upwards. His head is green, his ears are like arrowheads, his 
cheekbones are high, and his mouth is wide, extending from ear to ear. His 
teeth are sharp, with four of them high and curved fangs; his tongue is long 
and his lips are heavy, both coppery. His brows are long and thick, his nose 
is heavy, his body is blue and his neck is red. Tall as a hill, he is terrible to 
behold and has strength to match his massive frame. By the standards of 
men he might be called ugly, yet he is striking, O king. His limbs are as 
tough as tree-trunks or rocks; the hair on his head is tied up in topknot of a 


fearful shape. His hips are large and his navel is deep. Although he is 
enormous, he is muscular and lithe. 

The ornaments on his arms are both dark and bright, rough and 
beautiful. He wears heavy angadas and a corselet on his torso like a circle 
of fire upon the breast of a mountain. On his head is a brilliant golden 
crown, exquisitely wrought, and rising over his lofty brow in an arch. His 
earrings are as bright as the morning sun, and his garlands are made of gold 
and also scintillating. Apart from the cuirass, he wears a great and heavy 
coat of polished brass armour of great effulgence. 

His chariot is decked with a hundred tinkling bells, and on his flagstaff 
flutter numerous blood-red banners. Of prodigious proportions, and of the 
measure of a nalwa, the ratha is covered with bearskins. Carrying all kinds 
of mighty weapons, it has a tree-tall standard, eight wheels, is adorned with 
every kind of wildflower garland, and its rumble is like the roar of the 
clouds. His horses are immense, of unknowable breed; they are like 
infuriated elephants and they have red eyes that shine in the night; of utterly 
terrible appearance, they are variegated in hue and, for all their bulk, are 
gifted with great speed as well as strength. Untiring, with long manes and 
neighing repeatedly in voices that horrify, they bear the Rakshasa hero into 
battle. A rakshasa of sinister eyes, with a fiery mouth and earrings like 
circles of flame, is his charioteer, holding reins bright as the rays of the sun 
in his claw like yet elegant hands. With this charioteer, Ghatotkacha comes 
to battle, like Surya with his legless sarathy Aruna. 

He looks like a small mountain encircled by a mighty cloud; the 
standard he flies seems actually to scrape the skies. A carnivorous vulture, 
its feathers also the hue of blood, perches on top of the flagstaff. Bhima’s 
son comes into battle drawing his bow with a sound like Indra’s Vajra; his 
bowstring is hard as diamonds and sparkles; his bow is twelve cubits long 
and one cubit wide. Filling all the points of the sky with missiles the length 
of the aksha of a chariot, the Rakshasa attacks Karna, on this night that has 
already destroyed so many heroes. 

The Rakshasa stands looming and erect, proudly on his chariot, and his 
bow roars as he stretches it. O Bhaarata, your troops tremble like an 
agitated sea when they see Hidimbi’s son ride toward them. However, 
Karna gazes calmly at the fearsome apparition advancing wrathfully on 
him. A smile curving his haughty lips, the Sutaputra stands unmoved and 
does battle with the monstrous one, at close quarters, like one great tusker 


against another, or a hilly bull against another lord of a great herd. The duel 
between the two cannot be described as being any less than that between the 
one of yore between Indra and Sambara. 

Each wields a formidable bow, its twanging like thunder, and lays 
unbridled siege to the other with arrows of untold power. The shafts shot 
from the bows drawn to their fullest stretch, pierce brazen armour and draw 
geysers of blood. With these, with spears as long as akshas, they maul each 
other like tigers with fang and talon. Ah, searing one another with arrow 
storms they are peerless, resplendent. 

Their limbs pierced and gashed, bathed in blood, they look like two hills 
of chalk, with crimson rillets running down their breasts. Neither can make 
the other flinch, Rajan. For a long while, the duel by night between Kara 
and Ghatotkacha is even, nothing separates the twain. 

The reverberations of Ghatotkacha’s bow fill both friends and foes with 
fear. Karna cannot prevail over the Rakshasa with common arrows and he 
invoke devastras and discharges these at Ghatotkacha; at which, 
Ghatotkacha promptly begins to uses maya, the sorcery of illusions. He 
appears as if surrounded by a teeming akshauhini of frightful Rakshasas 
armed with lances, great rocks, hillocks and cudgels. Seeing Ghatotkacha 
himself advance towards Karna with a mighty and bizarre weapon raised in 
his hands, like the Destroyer himself armed with his club, all the kings there 
pierced through with fear and panic. 

Terrified by Ghatotkacha’s horrible roars, the elephants spray urine and 
dung, and all the warriors tremble with fright. Then a thick rain of rocks 
and stones falls everywhere, flung incessantly by all the Rakshasas, for their 
strength swells many times at the midnight hour. Iron wheels, bhusundis, 
strange darts, lances, spears, sataghnis and axes also fall in torrent. At this, 
all the kings of your army, as well as your sons and the rest of their soldiers 
flee. Only one stands unmoved, a grim smile still curving his handsome 
lips; Karna stands quite unmoved, like a god upon dark Kurukshetra. 

Why, he dispels every illusion of dread that Ghatotkacha creates. Seeing 
his sorcery dispersed, an infuriated Ghatotkacha once more aims deadly 
astras at the radiant Sutaputra. These bolts of lightning, fire, wind and water 
plough right through Karna’s body and, covered in blood, flash into the 
ground hissing like angry snakes. The Suta’s son looses ten excruciating 
barbs at Ghatotkacha, which plunge into his very marmas. Agony screams 
through the Rakshasa’s blood, yet never wavering, he summons an 


unworldly chakra from patala, thousand spoked, sharper than razors, 
brilliant as the morning sun, shimmering with dark and resonant gemstones, 
and he hurls that wheel of death at Karna. 

But Karna blows the wheel of death, spinning at him like a hurricane, 
into dust with his superhuman archery; the dazzling and eerie chakra falls 
as powder on to the ground, dashed like the hopes and plans of an 
unfortunate man. 

His fury mounting by the moment, Ghatotkacha envelops Karna with 
lashing showers of shafts, like Rahu covering the Sun. However, invested 
with the skill of Rudra or of Indra’s younger brother or of Indra, Karna 
shrouds Ghatotkacha’s chariot in a darkness of arrows. Ghatotkacha whirls 
a golden mace and casts it ardently at Karna, who demolishes that 
exceptional weapon as well. 

The titanic Rakshasa flies up into the sky and, roaring deep like a mass 
of thunderheads, rains down a shower of occult golden trees, their leaves 
like swords, over the Sutaputra. Karna desiccates these and strikes the 
mayavi poised above him so that now his blood rains down over the 
Sutaputra’s ratha; ah, Radha’s son is truly like Surya piercing ominous 
cloud with his ineluctable rays. Slaughtering Ghatotkacha’s horses, 
smashing his chariot into a hundred pieces, Karna assaults him with arrows 
like streak lightning, blinding astras. 

Quickly, Ghatotkacha is so covered by Karna’s shafts that stick 
quivering in his body that nowhere upon him can even two finger widths of 
space be found that are arrowless. The Rakshasa resembles the most 
astounding porcupine with quills erect. So entirely is he covered with 
arrows that we no longer see Ghatotkacha or his dead horses, his broken 
chariot or even his lofty standard with the sinister vulture on top. 

Ghatotkacha repels and destroys Karna’s devastras with his own astras. 
Showers of dark shafts fall from an invisible source in the sky, O Bhaarata, 
and he assumes a terrifying form that chills the blood of the Kauravas. With 
maya, he assumes many ferocious and grim heads and faces, and he 
consumes all Karna’s devastras. Then, all of a sudden, the enormous 
Rakshasa, bleeding from a hundred wounds on his body, lays down on the 
field, as if life has left him. Thinking him dead, the Kauravas erupt in joy. 

However, next moment, Ghatotkacha appears everywhere! He runs all 
across Kurukshetra, changing shapes every moment, until he again looms 
over the field in a giant form with a hundred heads and a hundred bellies, 


and looking like the Mainaka Mountain. He next becomes minuscule, about 
the measure of a thumb, and flits about on the ground and through the air. 
He burrows down into the earth, then soars up into the sky, then dives down 
into the pools and lakes of blood, dyeing himself in scarlet. 

We see him near us one moment, then far away the next. With his maya, 
we see him blaze across earth and sky and all the directions, and then again 
standing mountainous wearing his brazen armour on a massive golden 
chariot. His pendulous kundalas waving about, the Rakshasa comes right up 
to Karna’s chariot and fearlessly says to the Sutaputra, “Stop a while, O 
Suta’s son. Where will you go tonight? You will not escape me alive. For 
tonight, I mean to quench forever your consuming thirst for battle by killing 
you, O Karna!” 

Saying this and laughing like thunder, the coppery-eyed Ghatotkacha 
once more soars steeply up into the sky, from where he lashes down a 
downpour of arrows over Karna, all of them big as akshas, the axlerods of 
chariots. The unruffled Karna fluently destroys the heavy cascade before it 
comes anywhere near him. 

Ghatotkacha uses maya again and makes himself invisible. Then he 
turns into a mountain with many summits and covered with tall trees. From 
that black mountain, streams of spears, swords and clubs issue incessantly. 
Karna remains unmoved and, still smiling, invokes a great devastra, which 
consumes the barrage of weapons and blows the mountain of illusion apart. 

Ghatotkacha turns himself into a blue cloud with a glimmering rainbow 
in the sky and begins to pelt the Suta’s son with a storm of hard stones. 
Vikartana’s son Karna, also called Vrisha, the greatest of all men that know 
of weapons, invokes a Vayavyastra and destroys the cloud. Ghatotkacha 
casts down another weapon like a bolt of lightning at him; Karna douses 
this with a weapon of water. The mighty son of Bhimasena laughs 
uproariously, shaking earth and sky; he conjures up an all-powerful illusion 
against the mighty Karna. 

Karna sees Ghatotkacha advance wildly on him, surrounded by a host of 
Rakshasas who resemble lions and tigers and infuriated elephants; some 
ride on elephants, some on chariots, and some on horseback; all are armed 
with diverse, uncanny weapons and clad in diverse kinds of armour and 
wear sundry kinds of ornaments. Seeing Ghatotkacha with his fiends like 
Indra surrounded by the Maruts, Karna gives him violent battle. 


Ghatotkacha pierces Karna with five arrows and gives a roar that again 
terrifies all the kings and maharathas. He looses an Anjalikastra and shatters 
the bow in Karna’s hands, as well as all the shafts that the Sutaputra has 
shot at him. Karna takes up another bow as big and mighty as Indra’s 
dhanusha, draws its bowstring back powerfully and unleashes a lethal 
volley of golden-winged arrows at the sky-ranging Rakshasas. Ravaged by 
these shafts, the host of wide-chested Rakshasas is as agitated as a herd of 
wild elephants chased by a kingly lion. Karna devours all the Rakshasas in 
the air and upon the ground, along with their elephants and other 
extraordinary mounts; the Sutaputra, Suryaputra looks like apocalyptic 
Agni burning all creatures at the pralaya. 

Having destroyed the Rakshasa army, the Suta’s son is as resplendent as 
the Lord Maheswara when he once razed the triad city of the Asuras, the 
Tripura in the sky. Among the thousands of kings on the Pandava side, O 
sire, there is not one who can match Karna then, save Ghatotkacha, prince 
of Rakshasas, invested with unearthly strength and who, inflamed with 
battlelust and fury, looks like Yama himself. The Rakshasa’s eyes seem to 
spew flames, even like burning drops of oil from two blazing brands. 
Striking palm against palm like thunderclaps, biting his lower lip, we see 
the Rakshasa again mounted on a chariot wrought from maya to which are 
yoked a number of macabre fanged green donkeys, which as big as 
elephants and have the faces of Pisachas. 

He says to his charioteer, “Take me to the Suta’s son.” 

Riding at Karna again on his fearful ratha, Ghatotkacha hurls an asani 
of Rudra’s workmanship, dreadful and furnished with eight wheels at the 
Suta’s son. Throwing down his bow, Karna jumps down onto the ground, 
seizes the asani in his hands and hurls it back at Ghatotkacha. The Rakshasa 
also leaps out of his chariot before the dreadfully blazing weapon burns the 
dark chariot to ashes in a flash of fire, taking with it horses, charioteer and 
standard, and then plunges down into the earth and deep into its very 
bowels, filling even the Devas with wonder. All who see Karna’s incredible 
feat applaud him. 

Karna climbs back into his ratha and once more unleashes a tirade of 
arrows. Indeed, O Maharajan, there is none among all living creatures who 
could have done what Karna does during his battle with Bhima’s awesome 
son. Struck by Karna’s missiles, like a mountain lashed by torrents of rain, 
Ghatotkacha vanishes again from the field with maya. 


Fighting with sorcery, the great Rakshasa destroys Karna’s lustrous 
devastras with his maya. Karna is not intimidated but battles on splendidly. 
The mighty son of Bhimasena divides his body into many sorcerous forms, 
frightening all the maharathas of the Kuru army. There bound onto the field 
of war lions, tigers, hyenas, snakes with fiery tongues, and birds with iron 
beaks. 

Whenever Karna strikes him deep with mighty arrows and astras, the 
Rakshasa, looming large as Himavat, vanishes using his maya. 
Immediately, many Rakshasas, Pisachas, Yatudhanas, teeming wolf packs, 
and leopards of frightful aspect rush towards Karna to devour him. They 
run at the Suta’s son, with fierce roars and howls to frighten him. Karna 
strikes each of the mayic beasts and apparitions with golden-winged arrows 
that drink their unnatural blood; finally, with a Gandharvastra he dissipates 
all the Rakshasa’s illusions. 

Karna never pauses but looses a brutal volley at Ghatotkacha’s freshly 
appeared horses so they buckle and fall before the Rakshasa’s eyes, their 
bodies mangled, their backs torn open by the Sutaputra’s virile shafts. 
Seeing his maya dispelled, Hidimbi’s son vanishes again, warning Karna, “I 
will be back soon to kill you, Sutaputra!””’ 


CANTO 173 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘As Karna and Ghatotkacha battle luciferously, the 

valiant and grotesque Rakshasa appears on the field, leading a 

large force of fiends, and approaches Duryodhana. Thousands of sinister 

Rakshasas, of diverse forms and endowed with great heroism, come with 

him. He has come because of his old animosity for the Pandavas. Bhima 

had killed all his kinsmen—the great Baka, who ate Brahmanas, as well as 
the powerful Kirmira—and his friend Hidimba. 

Alayudha has waited for a long time, brooding over his old enmity. 
Learning now that a nocturnal battle rages, he arrives like an angry elephant 
or a provoked snake, driven by the wish to kill Bhima. 

The awful Alayudha says to Duryodhana, “You know how Bhima killed 
my kinsmen, Baka, Kirmira and Hidimba. He deflowered the virgin 
Hidimbi, dishonoring us Rakshasas. I am here to kill Bhima with all his 
followers, horses, chariots and elephants, as well as the son of Hidimbi and 
his warriors. I will slaughter all the sons of Kunti today, and Krishna and all 
that walk before them. I will devour them with all their followers. 
Command all your troops to desist from battle for we will fight the 
Pandavas.” 


Duryodhana, surrounded by his brothers, is delighted! He tells the 
Rakshasas, “I will place you in the van of army but my own troops will not 
stand by as spectators for their enmity has not cooled.” 

Alayudha, bull among Rakshasas, saying, “Tathaastu, so be it!” to the 
king, and sweeps at Bhima with his horrible army. He has a blazing form, 
and rides a chariot bright as the sun and very like Ghatotkacha’s ratha. The 
rumble of Alayudha’s huge chariot is as deep as Ghatotkacha’s and it too is 
covered with bearskins and measures a full nalwa. His horses, like those of 
Ghatotkacha, are swift as thoughts, are as big as elephants, have faces like 
pisachas and bray like donkeys. They live on warm flesh and blood, and a 
hundred of these gigantic creatures are yoked to Alayudha’s black chariot. 
Truly, Rajan, the sound of Alayudha’s chariot is just as loud as 
Ghatotkacha’s and his bowstring too is hard and strong as diamonds. His 
arrows, winged with gold and whetted on stone, are as big as 
Ghatotkacha’s, measuring as much as an aksha. 

Alayudha is as mighty-armed as Ghatotkacha, and the banner of his 
ratha is fiery and has the splendour of the sun, and like Ghatotkacha’s, 
vultures and great ravens perch on it. In form, he is more handsome than 
Ghatotkacha, and his face blazes in wrath. With dazzling angadas, shining 
coronet and wildflower garlands, a glittering helmet, a great curved sword, 
a mace, bhusundis, short clubs, ploughshare weapons and bows and arrows, 
his skin black, and thick and hard as an elephant’s, riding on the 
magnificent chariot, the dreadful Alayudha looks indeed like some great 
storm cloud gashed by flashes of lightning. 

The greatest Pandava kings and maharathas joyfully ride forward to 
meet Alayudha the Rakshasa’s onrush. Yet another battle that makes one’s 
hair stand on end breaks out between the demons and the Pandava forces, at 
dead of night.’” 


CANTO 174 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “The advent of Alayudha puts heart into your sons; 
also knowing that Duryodhana himself leads them now, they are 
in high spirits, like men wanting to cross the ocean when they find a raft. 
The surviving kings and maharathas of the Kuru army regard themselves 
having obtained a new lease of life and all of them accord a respectful 
welcome to Alayudha, who is such a vile Rakshasa that Bhishma would 
never have allowed him near his army as long as he had command. But 
now, the Kali yuga has risen over the world and this is the war at night, the 
soul of darkness. 

The preternatural battle between Karna and Ghatotkacha’s Rakshasa, 
which though savage and horrible is yet magnificent, holds the Panchalas 
and all the other Kshatriyas who watch it spellbound in irresistible 
fascination. Meanwhile, your soldiers, though protected on all sides by 
Drona, Aswatthaman, Kripa and the others, are all seized by absolute terror 
and we hear loud wails everywhere, dismal cries of “All is lost!” 

Having watched his unimaginable feats on Kurukshetra, your warriors 
are all frantic with fear of Ghatotkacha, frightened out of their very wits. 
Your troops give up all hope of Karna surviving the duel with Bhima’s son. 


Seeing his precious Karna in grave distress, Duryodhana summons 
Alayudha and says to him, “Look where Karna battles Hidimbi’s son by 
himself. Look at the corpses of the thousand great kings that lie askew upon 
the ground, all slain by Bhima’s monstrous son with his dark and bright 
astras; ah, look where they lie like trees struck by lightning or uprooted by 
an elephant in rage. If you agree, mighty Alayudha, from this moment, 
among all my warriors, let it become your sole mission to slay Bhima’s 
horrible son. My friend, you must see that Ghatotkacha does not take 
Karna’s life on this night, using his maya shakti, or our cause will be lost 
and the war. And all who have died for our sake will have sacrificed their 
lives in vain. Grave and great is the mission with which I entrust you, noble 
Alayudha; I know you will not disappoint me.” 

Alayudha says “Tathaastu—so be it,” and attacks Ghatotkacha. Turning 
away from Karna, Ghatotkacha greets Alayudha with a terrific volley. An 
epic battle ensues between the two night rangers. Karna turns his attention 
to Bhima, riding his chariot of solar effulgence. Bheema sees Alayudha 
locked in battle with Ghatotkacha and, troubled like the great bull of a herd 
facing a lion, Vrikodara ignores Karna charging at him and dashes instead 
at Alayudha, covering him with gusts of arrows. 

At this, Alayudha abandons Ghatotkacha and turns to face Bhima. 
Bhima, the Rakshasa slayer, lays violent siege to him and Alayudha too 
shrouds the Pandava in clouds of arrows. All Alayudha’s dreadful 
Rakshasas turn on Bhima, for it is him that they have come to kill and 
avenge Hidimba, Kirmira, Baka and the others that the son of Pandu 
despatched. Bhima Mahabaho strikes each fiend deep with five scalding 
arrows at which they scream horribly and flee. 

Seeing Bhima drive away his Rakshasas like some dogs, Alayudha 
assails the Pandava ever more fiercely. Bhimasena also shoots back at him 
with great violence, but the Rakshasa cuts down Vrikodara’s shafts in flight 
and some he even catches with his hands. Bhima pauses, gazes for a long 
moment at his enemy and casts a mace like a thunderbolt at him. Alayudha 
smashes that weapon with a mace of his own. 

Kunti’s son again unleashes squalls of arrows at the Rakshasa prince 
and Alayudha cuts these down with his own arrow storms. Seeing their lord 
Alayudha contain Bhima by himself, the Rakshasas who fled in fear return 
to battle and begin to slaughter Bhima’s elephants; they also harry the 


Panchalas, the Srinjayas and the horses of Bhima’s army, considerably 
disconcerting them. 

Watching the battle between Bhima and Alayudha, Krishna says to 
Arjuna, “Bhima is succumbing to this prince of Rakshasas. We must leave 
everything else and protect Bhima. Let Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandin, 
Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas, along with the sons of Draupadi, ride against 
Karna. Let Nakula, Sahadeva and Satyaki kill Alayudha’s Rakshasas! As 
for you, O Mahabaho, face this akshauhini led by Drona for great is the 
danger that threatens us now.” 

At Krishna’s command, the Pandava and Panchala maharathas ride 
against Karna and the Rakshasas that fight for the Kurus. 

Alayudha draws his bow into a circle and looses some astras like venom 
spitting cobras at Bhima, breaking his bow. The mighty Rakshasa kills 
Bhima’s horses and charioteer, so Bhima leaps down from his ratha. With 
an echoing roar, Vrikodara casts a mace heavy as a hill at his adversary. 
Alayudha shatters that gada with one of his own and the report deafens all 
the war by night; the Rakshasa gives a bloodcurdling roar. Bhimasena 
seizes up another massive mace, and the battle that now erupts between the 
human prince and the Rakshasa makes brave men tremble. 

They swing their maces at each other with such violence that the very 
earth trembles and both are covered in brilliant showers of sparks. When the 
maces shatter, they cast them aside and fight with bare arms and fists: with 
blows that echo like spring thunder. In frenzy they fight, soon with chariot 
wheel, yokes, akshas, adhishthanas, upaskaras, and indeed with anything 
that comes to hand. Both are covered in blood and present such a 
magnificent spectacle, O Rajan! 

Then, Krishna sends Hidimbi’s son Ghatotkacha to protect 
Bhimasena.’” 


CANTO 175 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Seeing Bhima sorely tried and wounded by 
Alayudha, Krishna rids to Ghatotkacha and says to him, “O 
Mahabaho, look where the Rakshasa violently besets Bhima in front of all 
the troops and you. Leave Karna for now and kill Alayudha. You can 
despatch Karna later.” 

Ghatotkacha immediately abandons his duel with Karna and confronts 
Alayudha. The battle between them is intolerably ferocious, O Bhaarata. 
Meanwhile, the mighty Yuyudhana, with Nakula and Sahadeva, looses a 
firetide of blazing shafts at Alayudha’s terrible-looking and _ heroic 
Rakshasas. Spraying arrows all around him Arjuna Kiritin claims the lives 
of many great Kshatriyas. 

Karna continues to harangue so many kings and maharathas amongst 
the Panchalas led by Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandin and others. Bhima rushes 
at Karna, covering the Sutaputra with a tempest of arrows. Having slain 
Alayudha’s Rakshasas, Nakula, Sahadeva and Satyaki ride at Karna, while 
the Panchalas confront Drona. 

The raging Alayudha strikes Ghatotkacha on his head with a huge 
parigha, making him swoon and forces him to sit in his chariot, where he 


remains still. Bhima’s son recovers soon and hurls a golden gada, with a 
hundred little bells, at his enemy with untold force. This mace of power 
kills Alayudha’s steeds, his charioteer, and shatters his loud ratha. Using 
sorcery, Alayudha jumps down from his smashed chariot and decants a 
copious shower of blood. The sky appears overspread with a mass of black 
clouds adorned with flashes of lightning. We hear a booming thunderstorm 
with the strangest peals of thunder on high, all created by Alayudha’s maya. 

Ghatotkacha soars up from his chariot and dispels this threatening 
illusion. Alayudha now rains down a storm of smooth hard pebbles over 
Ghatotkacha, who blows the stones into smithereens with his astras. The 
two inundate each other with cascades and cataracts of iron parighas, 
spears, maces, short clubs, mallets, pinakas, swords, lances, long spears, 
kampanas, keen shafts, both long and flat-headed arrows, quoits, battle- 
axes, ayogudas, short-arrows, weapons with heads like those of cattle and 
ulukhalas. 

Tearing up great sami, pilu, karira, champaka, ingudi, badari, the 
flowering kovidara, the arimeda, plaksha, banyan and peepul trees, they 
batter each other with these; they tear mountain peaks and hurl these at each 
other and large crags and balls of iron. Kurukshetra quakes with the sound 
of these weapons crashing against each other and the battle between 
Alayudha and Bhima’s son is like the one between Vali and Sugriva, the 
two Vanara princes of old. 

They hew and smite each other with other missiles, with countless 
powerful spells, and with glinting swords curved like half moons. The two 
titanic Rakshasas pause often to wrestle and strike one another with their 
bare hands, as blood and sweat run profusely down their great bodies; they 
seize each other by their locks of wild hair. Finally, Ghatotkacha darts low 
and bodily hefts Alayudha over his head. Whirling him around, he dashes 
that Rakshasa down onto the ground so Alayudha briefly faints. Before he 
awakes, Ghatotkacha, quick as light cuts his grisly head from its thick neck 
with a sweeping arc of his great sword. Hidimbi’s half-human son throws 
back his head and roar after echoing roar erupts from him. 

The Pandavas and Panchalas also roar out their relief and exhilaration at 
seeing the great Alayudha slain; they blow ten thousand conches and beat a 
thousand batteries of drums. Lamps are lit again everywhere. Victory 
clearly belongs to the Pandavas and the grim night is bright and magnificent 
with the din of celebration that your enemies raise. Once more, Ghatotkacha 


lopes up to Duryodhana’s chariot and flings Alayudha’s still warm and 
bleeding head down at his feet. 

Duryodhana is stricken with dread for his troops. Alayudha had come to 
Duryodhana on his own, wanting to avenge his kinsmen whom Bhima had 
killed, and Duryodhana had rejoiced thinking that this great demon would 
surely kill his most hated cousin. Suyodhana had thought that Bhima’s 
death would break the spirits of the other sons of Pandu and that victory 
would then be his. Besides, with Bhima killed, he had thought that his own 
brothers’ lives would be safe. 

Now with Alayudha killed by Ghatotkacha, Duryodhana hangs his head 
and feels instead that Bhima’s vow is already as good as fulfilled and he, 
Duryodhana, and his brothers are as good as slain by Pandu’s second son 
who blows everywhere on Kurukshetra, irresistibly as a hurricane of his 
father Vayu the Wind.’” 


CANTO 176 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘After killing Alayudha, the Rakshasa Ghatotkacha is 
overjoyed and, standing in front of the army, he gives all kinds of 
shouts and roars. Hearing these inhuman sounds that make elephants 
tremble, a great fear, O Rajan, lays hold of your warriors. Karna, apparently 
unmoved, attacks the Panchalas. He draws blood from Dhrishtadyumna and 
Sikhandin with ten strong and perfect arrows, each; with a flurry of other 
powerful barbs, he makes Yudhamanyu, Uttamaujas and even the great 
Satyaki shudder as the shafts crash into their great bodies. These warriors, 
too, draw their bows into circles and shoot at Karna from all sides. 

During the war by night, the twanging of their bowstrings and the 
rumble of their chariot-wheels are loud and deep as the thunder of clouds 
massed at the end of summer. Their arrows are streaks of lightning; they are 
the driving deadly rain. Standing immovable like a hill, a prince of the 
mountains, Parantapa Karna cuts down every arrow shot at him. With speed 
that defies imagination, he strikes his enemies viciously with javelins flung 
with the force of thunder and with arrows that have golden wings. 

He destroys the standards of some maharathas and mauls the bodies of 
others, deprives some of their charioteers, and some of their horses. Unable 


to withstand the Suryaputra, thousands flee from him and seek refuge with 
Yudhishtira’s force. 

Seeing them thus broken and fleeing, Ghatotkacha who has just killed 
Alayudha, gives a roar more dreadful than any heard before, and rushes 
towards Karna unleashing a torrent of savage shafts, big as axle rods. 
Locking quickly into another frenetic duel, both loose barbed bolts, cloth- 
yard shafts, frog-faced arrows, nalikas, dandas, asanis, arrows with heads 
like the calf’s tooth or the boar’s ear, broad-headed arrows, those pointed 
like bulls’ horns, and others with heads like razors. All these have golden 
wings and as they fly through the air they seem to drape a garland of 
unworldly lotuses around the throat of the sky. 

Evenly matched, they loose blazing devastras at each other and astra 
consumes astra lighting up the night sky with many small suns. No one can 
see the slightest difference between the two, in speed or prowess, and the 
scintillating duel between the son of Surya and the son of Bhima presents a 
breathtaking spectacle even like the contention between the Sun and Rahu 
in the firmament. 

Rajan, when Ghatotkacha finds that he cannot prevail over Karna, he 
invokes an astra with which he first kills Karna’s horses and then his 
charioteer, after which he vanishes.’ 

Dhritarashtra asks, ‘When the Rakshasa, fighting deceitfully, vanishes, 
tell me, O Sanjaya, what the warriors of my army think.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Seeing the Rakshasa disappear, all the Kauravas cry, 
“The Rakshasa will reappear as suddenly as he has disappeared and he will 
kill Karna.” 

Karna Mahabuddhi is aware of the danger and covers all the directions 
with dense showers of shafts darkening earth and sky so everything 
becomes invisible. So great is the lightness of hand Karna displays that no 
one can discern when he touches his quiver, when he fits his arrows to his 
bowstring and when he aims and shoots them. The whole sky is shrouded 
by his shafts. 

In the sky, the Rakshasa creates a profound and deadly illusion of maya 
in the firmament. We see above us what appears to be a mass of red clouds 
blazing like fire. From this cloud issue flashes of lightning, and many 
burning brands, O Kuru king! Frightful roars also emanate from there, like 
the sound of thousands of drums beaten at once. From it fall, all around, 
countless golden-winged shafts, darts, lances, weighty clubs, battle-axes, 


scimitars washed with oil, axes with blazing edges, short spears, long spears 
with keen points, spiked maces emitting strange bright rays of light, 
beautiful maces of iron, others of solid gold and twined about with silver 
string and sataghnis. Huge crags fall from it, and thousands of thunderbolts 
with deafening reports, and hundreds of chakras and razor sharp blades, 
brilliant as the fire. 

Karna’s missiles cannot destroy all that thick and blazing deluge. Loud 
is the sound of falling horses killed by the wizardly weapons pouring down, 
mighty elephants struck with thunder, and great maharathas slain. Ravaged 
by Ghatotkacha, Duryodhana’s host wanders demented and in agony all 
over the battlefield. With piteous cries, even as those of women, your host 
drifts lost and aimless, on the point of being annihilated. 

Only their leaders, great Kshatriyas noble of heart, do not turn their 
faces from the battle but stand steadfast waiting for death. Seeing the 
carnage Ghatotkacha fetches upon their host, terror and dismay grip your 
sons. Hundreds of jackal packs, with tongues blazing like fire and terrible 
voices, begin to howl, further petrifying the Kaurava warriors. The 
Rakshasas that tread air on high, with fiery tongues and burning mouths, 
fangs like thick needles and forms big as hills, lash down arrows over your 
hapless forces. Struck by shafts, darts, lances, maces and spiked clubs, by 
thunderbolts, pinakas, asanis, chakras and sataghnis, the Kaurava troops are 
on the very verge of complete collapse and surrender. The maya Rakshasas 
further assail them with sthunas made of black iron and twined about with 
strings of jute. 

All your combatants are in a nightmarish stupor. The bravest warriors 
have their weapons broken, or their heads hewn off, or limbs fractured and 
fall like grass being mown, while falling rocks crush horses, elephants and 
rathas. The Yatudhanas of terrible forms that Ghatotkacha creates with 
maya spare neither those who are terrified nor those who cry for mercy. 
During the brutal carnage of Kuru heroes, and the extermination of majestic 
Kshatriyas brought on by Death himself, the Kaurava warriors break ranks 
and flee all together, crying, “Fly, you Kauravas! All is lost! The Devas 
with Indra at their head are killing us for the sake of the Pandavas!” 

And at this horrible juncture, there is not a soul that can rescue the 
Bharata troops. During the mayhem, no one can distinguish friend from foe; 
all run any way they can from the horror with which Ghatotkacha visits 
them in that very soul of darkness. All your warriors and soldiers having 


fled, Kurukshetra seems eerily empty as if no living man is anywhere near 
the gruesome field of fate. 

We see only Karna, Rajan, shining by himself, drowning in the awful 
shower of weapons that falls incessantly from above. 

Karna covers the sky with his missiles, resisting the unworldly sorcery 
of the Rakshasa. In truth, we see that he is endowed with deep humility, 
which enables him to achieve the most difficult and noble feats; Karna 
remains calm, unmoved by the horrors that flare down from the sky. All the 
Saindhavas and Balhikas are frightened and look just to Karna for 
protection. They worship him in their thoughts, while Ghatotkacha 
continues to wreak havoc upon them. 

Ghatotkacha casts down a sataghni of a hundred fire, fitted with 
scything chakras, and kills Karna’s four horses simultaneously and they fall 
dead on their knees. Jumping down from his horseless chariot and seeing 
the Kauravas run away, and finding his own devastra nullified by the 
Rakshasa’s maya, Karna still remains calm and turns his thought inward in 
dhyana to reflect on what he should do next. 

Watching Karna and the infernal Rakshasa maya that Ghatotkacha uses, 
all the Kauravas and your sons cry out in despair, “Karna, kill the Rakshasa 
with your shakti or he will kill us all tonight! What will Bhima and Arjuna 
do to us? Slay this wretched Rakshasa or he will consume us all. Only those 
who escape from this monster tonight will live to fight the Parthas. Karna, 
you must use the shakti you had from Indra and slay Ghatotkacha. Karna, 
there is no other way. You must kill Bhima’s dreadful son or we will lose 
everything within the hour.” 

Karna seeing the Rakshasa ablaze at dead of night, and the Kuru army 
struck with terror; hears the piteous entreaties of the Kauravas and knows 
he has no choice but to use Indra’s shakti. Quivering all over his mighty 
form like some mythic lion, magnificent Karna summons Indra’s shakti, 
which he has kept so carefully and worshipped for years so that, when the 
time came, he could kill Arjuna with it. But now, he summons the awesome 
weapon that looks like the very tongue of Death lolling out to drink copious 
blood, or Yama’s sister Mrityu herself descended on dark Kurukshetra being 
laid waste by Ghatotkacha. 

Karna invokes that burning weapon called Naikartana and casts it at 
Bhima’s son. Seeing that inexorable shakti in the Sutaputra’s hands, 
Ghatotkacha in a flash assumes a body as big as the foot of the Vindhya 


mountain! Bhima’s Rakshasa son tries to flee. Seeing that apocalyptic shakti 
all creatures, visible and hidden, human, divine and all the rest, on the 
ground and in the air, cry out in fear. 

Fierce winds begin to blow, and thunderclaps resound as if to break the 
very sky into shards. Indra’s fulminant shakti consumes all of 
Ghatotkacha’s mighty maya in a wink. It then courses straight through the 
Rakshasa’s massive breast, flares on upwards and flies into a constellation 
deep in the heavens, leaving a flaring trail in its wake! Sky shaking roars 
erupt from great Ghatotkacha and he keels over dead. Indra’s shakti claims 
the life of Bhima and Hidimbi’s son who had razed so many great heroes, 
both human and demonic, who had by himself devoured a vast portion of 
your army by night. 

Rajan, listen to a final astounding feat that Ghatotkacha accomplishes 
even as he falls dead. He shines like a sun and having assumed a form as 
great as the Vindhya mountain, falls in death upon a teeming akshauhini of 
your army, crushing thousands of your men with his stupendous body. Even 
as life quits him, out of his fathomless love for the Pandavas, he obliterates 
a full akshauhini of your troops. 

A bedlam of triumphant sounds erupts from your sons and their forces 
—lion’s roars, blaring conches, the thunder of drums and cymbals. 
Unbridled is the joy of the Kauravas when they see Ghatotkacha’s maya 
cloven and the Rakshasa himself slain. Idolised, worshipped, eulogised by 
the Kurus even as Sakra had been by the Maruts after he slew Vritra, a 
smiling Karna climbs into your son Duryodhana’s chariot and, watched by 
all, joins the Kuru host.’” 


CANTO 177 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Meanwhile, the Pandavas are pierced through by 
savage grief when they see Ghatotkacha die; they see him lying 
on Kurukshetra like a cloven mountain and weep bitter tears. But Krishna 
seems in a transport of delight! He roars as jubilantly as the Kauravas and 
embraces Arjuna fervently. Tying up his horses, he leaps down from his 
chariot and dances in ecstasy, still giving vent to joyous shouts and roars. 
He embraces Arjuna yet again, and repeatedly slapping his own armpits, the 
Krishna Mahabuddhi climbs back onto his ratha and continues to roar in 
some unnatural rapture. 

The Pandavas and their troops are shocked to watch this display. 

His heart bursting with grief, Arjuna cries at Krishna in anguish, 
‘“Madhusudana, how are you so delighted at this hour of tragedy when 
Bhima’s precious son has died? Our troops flee in all direction to see 
Ghatotkacha slain and we too are filled with anxiety. Yet, you are so full of 
joy! There must be some great cause for your celebration, Krishna. If it is 
not a secret, you must share the reason for your strange delight with me. 
Tell me why you appear to have lost your very mind and rejoice when the 
rest of us grieve. Ah, you terrify me, Krishna, for looking at your levity I 


feel as if Meru has moved from his proper place or as if the ocean has dried 
up!” 

Krishna replies, “Great is the joy I feel. Listen to me, Dhananjaya, and 
what I say to you will dispel your sorrow and infuse delight into your heart 
as well. Understand clearly what has happened—Karna has used his 
inexorable astra against Ghatotkacha and for that Karna is already as good 
as dead. Hear me well, O Pandava. There is no man in this world, including 
you, who could have vanquished Karna, who straddled Kurukshetra like 
Kartikeya himself, in battle as long as he had Indra’s shakti with him. 

He would have been invincible anyway, but through good fortune the 
kavacha and kundalas that he was born with were both taken from him. 
Now, again through fate, his infallible astra has also been lost to him. You 
do not know who Karna is. I say to you that, wearing his golden armour and 
earrings, Karna could vanquish the three worlds by himself and the very 
gods. Not Indra, Varuna or Yama could withstand mighty Karna. If this bull 
among men had his natural armour and earrings, neither you, bending the 
Gandiva, nor I with my Sudarshana chakra, could kill him. 

For your weal, your father Indra took Karna’s golden kavacha and 
kundalas away from him. And even knowing the reason why Indra went to 
him as a Brahmana to ask him for these as a gift at the hour of his noonday 
prayer, the noble Karna cut them from his body and gave them away. And 
for that is he known as Vaikartana. 

Now having exhausted the shakti he had from Indra in exchange for the 
armour and earrings, Karna is like a virulent serpent that has lost his 
venom; he is like an inextinguishable fire whose flames have turned mild. 
As long as he had Indra’s astra, which he kept just to kill you, Karna always 
knew that you were as good as dead!” 

Krishna pauses, then continues gravely, “But listen well to me Arjuna, 
even without his kavacha, kundalas and the shakti of Sakra, there is no man 
on earth, or any warrior in heaven, who can kill great Karna other than you. 
It is because he is devoted to Brahmanas, is always truthful in speech, 
engages himself in tapasya, observes his vratas and is kind even to his 
enemies, that Karna is called Vrisha. He is heroism embodied; there is no 
archer in the world like Karna; his bow is always ready and he is the lion in 
the jungle that takes his pride from great lords of elephants. Karna is he 
who strips the greatest maharathas of their pride on the filed of battle. He 
blazes like the midday sun at his zenith, at whom no one can gaze. 


Fighting all the most illustrious warriors of your army, O Naravyaghra, 
Karna, shooting his arrows, looks like the autumn sun with his thousand 
rays. The Sutaputra is like a great cloud that rains devastras. Not the Devas 
can quell him; he could carve them up so their divine flesh and blood fell 
copiously onto the earth. But deprived of his armour and his earrings, and 
now without the astra given him by Vasava, Karna is like a mere mortal and 
no longer like a god. 

You will find an opportunity to kill him when his chariot-wheels sink 
into the earth. You must not hesitate or let pity rule at that moment. I will 
give you a sign when the moment arrives and you must act instantly and kill 
this hero like whom there is no other. 

The vanquisher of Bala himself, Indra wielding his Vajra, cannot kill 
invincible Karna while he stands with a weapon in his hand. Indeed, 
Arjuna, for your benefit, using different stratagems I have killed, one after 
the other, Jarasandha, Sisupala of the Chedis and the mahabaho Nishada 
Ekalavya. Other great Rakshasas among which Hidimba, Kirmira, Baka 
were the greatest, as well as Alayudha, grinder of hostile troops, and 
Ghatotkacha, crusher of his foes and warrior of fierce deeds, have all been 
killed.’”’ 


CANTO 178 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ A rjuna asks, “How, O Janardana, for our sake, and by what 
stratagems, were these lords of the earth, Jarasandha and the 
others, killed?” 

Krishna says, “If Jarasandha, Sisupala of the Chedis, and Ekalavya, the 
peerless son of the Nishada king, had not been slain, they would have 
become terrible. Duryodhana would have had these maharathas to fight for 
him. They have always been hostile to us, and they would all have 
supported the Kauravas. They were all heroes and mighty archers, 
accomplished in weaponry and resolute. Like Devas they would have 
protected Dhritarashtra’s sons. Indeed, if Karna, Jarasandha, Sisupala and 
Ekalavya had been with Duryodhana, he would have conquered the whole 
world. 

Listen, Dhananjaya, to how they were killed. Without using strategy, the 
very gods could not have slain them. Each of them, O Partha, could fight 
the entire celestial host protected by the Lokapalas, regents of the world. 

Once, when Balarama attacked him, a livid Jarasandha hurled a gada 
that could destroy any creature at our city from his own city of Girivraja. 
With the splendour of fire, the mace flew towards us dividing the sky like 


the line on her head that parts the tresses of a woman; it blazed at us like 
Sakra’s Vajra. Seeing the mace fly at us, Rohini’s son Balarama loosed the 
astra called Sthunakarna at Jarasandha’s mace. Its vigour destroyed by the 
energy of Balarama’s weapon, that mace fell onto the earth, splitting her 
open with its force and making the very mountains tremble. 

There once lived a terrible Rakshasa called Jara, gifted with great 
powers. She joined together the infant Jarasandha, who had been born as a 
child cloven in two halves. For this, that mighty king was called Jarasandha, 
joined by Jara. Jarasandha’s mace, when it plunged down into the earth 
along with the Sthunakarnastra, killed Jara in her subterranean cave home 
and her son and kinsmen. Later, it was in your presence and mine that 
Bhima killed Jarasandha by tearing his body along its length, where once 
the Rakshasi Jara had joined it. If Jarasandha had stood armed with his 
mace, the very Devas led by Indra could not have quelled him. 

O best of men, It was for your sake that Drona, whom Ekalavya 
worshipped from afar as his Acharya, asked for the Nishada’s thumb as his 
guru dakshina. Ekalavya was no less an archer than Rama of Ayodhya 
himself! With all his digits, he too was invincible even to the Devas, the 
Danavas, the Rakshasas and the Uragas all together. Even without his 
thumb, he was far greater than any mere mortal. I killed Ekalavya on 
another field of battle, to protect you, Arjuna. 

I killed Sisupala, king of the Chedis, before your very eyes during the 
Rajasuya yagna. Him, also, the Devas and the Asuras together could not 
overwhelm. I was born to kill him, as well as the other enemies of the 
Devas, and so were you. O Naravyaghra, for the weal of the world 
Bhimasena killed Hidimba, Baka and Kirmira. All these Rakshasas were as 
powerful as Ravana and all of them were destroyers of Brahmanas and 
yagnas. 

Ghatotkacha killed Alayudha who possessed awesome powers of maya. 
And Ghatotkacha I sacrificed through strategy, using Karna and his astra. If 
Karna had not killed Ghatotkacha, I myself would have had to kill Bhima’s 
son. I did not kill him earlier, only for your sake. Much as he loved you and 
your brothers, the Rakshasa was inimical to Brahmanas and yagnas and he 
had to be slain. He would have grown altogether too powerful in this world 
if he had been left alive. 

O sinless one, with Ghatotkacha’s death Indra’s shakti can no longer be 
used against you. I have come to this world to establish dharma and I will 


kill all those who are destroyers of dharma, for I have sworn a solemn vow 
to establish righteousness on earth. Wherever the Vedas, truth, self-restraint, 
purity, dharma, modesty, prosperity, wisdom and forgiveness need to be 
maintained, there I will always be. 

Now you have no need to fear great Karna, for I will tell you how and 
when to kill him. And Bhima will kill Duryodhana. I will also tell you how 
that final death shall be achieved. Meanwhile, listen, the uproar of the 
hostile army swells by the moment. Your troops are fleeing on all sides. 
Having killed Ghatotkacha, the triumphant Kauravas are mowing down 
your troops at will. Ah, look where Drona, the terrible Brahmana, devours 
our men with blazing astras, burning whole legion to ashes.””’” 


CANTO 179 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


S D hritarashtra says, “When Karna had an astra with which he could 
kill any one warrior, why did he not use it against Arjuna? If he 
had killed Partha with the Naikartana, all the Srinjayas and the Pandavas 
would have been as good as dead. If Arjuna had died, nothing could have 
stood between us and victory. Arjuna had sworn a vow that he would never 
refuse to accept a challenge to fight. The Sutaputra’s son should have 
challenged Dhananjaya and killed him with Indra’s Naikartana. Oh, why 
did he not do this? Truly, my son Suyodhana is without both intelligence 
and proper counsellors! 

When the wretched sinner is constantly confounded by the enemy, how 
can he ever hope to defeat them? Ah, how cunningly Krishna had Karna use 
the one weapon that could have won the war for us against Ghatotkacha! 
Why, he snatched it right out of Karna’s hands like a fruit from the withered 
hand of a cripple. 

In a fight between a boar and a dog, upon the death of either, the hunter 
is the one profited. So, too, Krishna is the one benefited by the battle 
between Karna and Hidimba’s son. If Ghatotkacha had killed Karna, that 
would have been a great gain for the Pandavas. If, as has happened, Karna 


killed Ghatotkacha, that also would have favoured the sons of Pandu for 
then the Naikartana would have been lost anyway. 

Krishna is the only real lion among all men and, in his great wisdom, he 
saw this clearly and had Karna kill Ghatotkacha with Indra’s astra, while 
shielding Arjuna from the Suta’s son. How canny this Yadava is, Sanjaya— 
he contrived a subtle battle that he could not lose!’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Knowing that Karna had Indra’s astra and that he was 
saving it to kill Arjuna, Krishna knowingly sent Ghatotkacha into battle 
against the Suryaputra, for he also knew that Karna would be obliged to 
exhaust the Naikartana against Bhima’s mighty son. 

Rajan, do not forget that all this is the fruit of your evil rule! We would 
certainly have achieved victory, O Kuruttama, if Krishna had not saved 
Arjuna’s life by sacrificing Ghatotkacha’s. Karna would have consumed 
Arjuna along with his horses, standard, and chariot, if the Master, the Lord 
of yogins, Krishna had not saved him. Without Krishna’s grace upon him, 
Arjuna would have been blasted like a tree struck by lightning.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘My son is addicted to violence, his advisers are 
foolish and he is vain about his own intelligence of which he has dire little. 
It is for this that the only weapon with which Arjuna could be killed has 
been lost to us. O Sanjaya, why did Duryodhana not command Karna to 
cast the fatal astra at Dhananjaya? O son of Gavalgana, you who are so 
wise, why did you also forget to remind Karna of what he should have 
done?’ 

Sanjaya says, “Indeed, O Rajan, this was the subject of deliberation 
between Duryodhana, Sakuni, Dusasana and me every single night. We 
would tell Karna, “Forget every other warrior, O Karna, and kill Arjuna. 
With Arjuna slain, we can keep the Pandavas and the Panchalas for your 
slaves. If at Partha’s death, Krishna exalts another son of Pandu in his place, 
we must kill Krishna himself. Krishna is the very root of the great Pandava 
tree, and Arjuna is its trunk. The other sons of Pritha are its branches, while 
the Panchalas are just its leaves. 

The Pandavas have Krishna for their protection, Krishna for their might 
and Krishna for their Lord. Indeed, Krishna is their essential support even 
as the Moon is of the constellations. Therefore, O Sutaputra, ignore the 
leaves, branches and trunk, and kill Krishna who is everywhere and is 
always the root and foundation of the Pandavas.” 


If Karna had killed the dark lion of the Dasarha vamsa, the delighter of 
the Yadavas, there is no doubt that all the world would have belonged just 
to you and your sons. Have no doubt that if this illustrious Krishna could be 
slain, Rajan, all this Bhumi, with her mountains and forests would have 
accepted your sovereignty. 

Although we would rise every morning resolved to eliminate the Lord 
of the very gods, Hrishikesa of immeasurable tejas, uncannily once the 
fighting began, we would forget our resolve. Kesava always protected 
Arjuna and never allowed Arjuna to face Karna as long as the Suta’s son 
had Indra’s astra. Indeed, Krishna would always turn his chariot away from 
Karna and set some other great maharatha to fight him, intent on making 
Karna use his Naikartana, intent on saving Arjuna’s life. O Rajan, when the 
noble Krishna protected Arjuna thus from Karna, how would Arjuna, 
greatest of all warriors, not protect Krishna? I have reflected deeply on all 
this and concluded that there is no one in the three worlds who can even 
dream of vanquishing this Parantapa, Janardana Krishna, the hero who 
wields the Sudarshana Chakra! 

Why, Satyaki, the invincible tiger among maharathas asked Krishna, 
‘“Janardana, Karna is resolved to kill Arjuna with Indra’s weapon. Why, 
then, does he not do so?” 

Vasudeva replied, “Dusasana, Karna, Sakuni and Jayadratha, all led by 
Duryodhana, have frequently discussed this very matter. They would say to 
the Sutaputra, ‘O Karna, matchless bowman, O you of immeasurable 
prowess, O foremost of all victors in battle, you must not even think of 
casting this astra at anyone other than Kunti’s son Dhananjaya. He is the 
greatest among the enemy; he is like Vasava amongst the Devas. If he dies, 
all the other Pandavas and the Srinjayas will be broken in spirit and might, 
even as the Devas without Agni to fuel and feed them!’ 

Karna agreed to this, saying ‘“Tathaastu—so be it!’ 

O Satyaki, bull of the Sinis, the wish to kill the Gandivi was always in 
Karna’s heart. However, I would subtly bewilder and distract his mind and 
he would forget to cast the Naikartana at Arjuna! As long as I could not 
remove the dire threat to Phalguna’s life, I had neither sleep nor joy in my 
heart. But today, seeing the Naikartana spent against Ghatotkacha, I know 
that Dhananjaya has been saved from the jaws of Death. 

Satyaki, I do not view my father, my mother, my brothers, you, or my 
own life as being as precious as Arjuna’s. If there is anything more valuable 


than the sovereignty of the three worlds, I do not want to have it without 
Dhananjaya to share it with me. That is why, Yuyudhana, that seeing Arjuna 
saved from Karna’s astra and a certain death, I am in a transport of delight. 
And this is the reason I sent Ghatotkacha into battle against Karna. No one 
else could defy the Sutaputra at night. Only Ghatotkacha could try Karna so 
gravely that he would be forced to use the Naikartana against Bhima’s son.” 

This is what Devaki’s son Krishna, who is for ever devoted to Arjuna, 
told Satyaki.’” 


CANTO 180 


GHATOTKACHA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


66 D hritarashtra asks, “I see clearly that what Karna, Duryodhana and 

Sakuni and you did was against the dictates of all good sense 

and strategy. Indeed, when you knew that the astra could always slay only 

one warrior, and that it could not be either contained or confounded by the 

very Devas led by Vasava, why then, O Sanjaya, did Karna not cast it 
against Arjuna or Krishna whenever he fought them earlier?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘As I told you, Rajan, we would return from battle every 
day and all of us would confer about this very thing, and we would say to 
Karna, “Tomorrow morning, Karna, you must cast the Naikartana against 
either Arjuna or Krishna.” 

However, when the morning came, either through fate or Krishna’s 
subtle power, both Karna and the rest of us would completely forget this 
resolve. Surely, fate reigns supreme, for Karna did not kill either Krishna or 
Arjuna, although he faced them repeatedly on the field. I have no doubt that 
the gods themselves clouded his mind, and destiny conspired against us that 
time and again, whenever he had ample opportunity, he did not yet cast the 
astra against either of the two Krishnas!’ 


Dhritarashtra says, ‘Destiny, your own lack of understanding, and 
Krishna destroyed you! Indra’s astra is gone, having effected the death of 
Ghatotkacha who was as insignificant as a straw. To my mind, through this 
single act of folly, Karna, my sons and all the other kings have already 
entered the halls of Yama. 

Tell me now how the battle continues between the Kurus and the 
Pandavas after the fall of Hidimbi’s son Ghatotkacha. How do the Srinjaya 
and the Panchalas fight great Drona? How do the Pandus and Srinjayas defy 
the battling Acharya when he attacks them in fury, agitated at the death of 
Bhurisravas and Jayadratha, reckless of his own life and like some tiger 
from antique times or Rudra himself with jaws agape? What do 
Aswatthaman, Karna, Kripa and the others led by Duryodhana do to protect 
the Acharya? 

Tell me, O Sanjaya, how my warriors contain Dhananjaya and 
Vrikodara who are intent on killing Drona. Frantic as they are with anger, 
how do they fight the battle by night, for some have been moved to wrath 
by the death of Jayadratha, and others at the death of Ghatotkacha, and both 
sides cannot abide their loss?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘After Karna kills Ghatotkacha, your troops are exuberant 
and roar and shout with joy. In the darkness, they fall wildly upon the 
Pandava troops and begin to slaughter them. Yudhishtira is crestfallen to see 
this; besides, Ghatotkacha was always his most favourite nephew. 

He tells Bhimasena, “I am dazed by my child Ghatotkacha’s death. 
Bhima, Mahabaho, go and confront Dhritarashtra’s army. Lead our men into 
battle, for my head spins and my body is weak with grief.” 

Having said this to Bhima, Yudhishtira sits down in his ratha with a 
tearful face, sighing repeatedly and utterly afraid and dejected by Karna’s 
awesome archery. Seeing him suffering, Krishna consoles him, “O son of 
Kunti, do not grieve so much. It does not become you, as it may an ordinary 
man. Arise, fight and bear the heavy burden that is your! If you, our king 
and lord, are plunged in gloom, how will we win this war?” 

Yudhishtira wipes his eyes, and says to Krishna, “O mighty one, the 
golden path of dharma is not unknown to me. The dire consequences of 
Brahmahatya, killing a Brahmana, visit those who forget the services he 
receives at another’s hands. Janardana, while we lived in the forest, 
Hidimbi’s noble son Ghatotkacha, although he was then a mere child, did us 
sO many services! 


When he learnt that Arjuna had gone to acquire the devastras, 
Ghatotkacha came to me in the Kamyaka vana and lived with us until 
Dhananjaya returned. When we journeyed through inaccessible regions of 
the world, he carried the tired Draupadi on his back. The feats he achieved 
on the war showed that he was a great and unequalled warrior. Ah, that 
noble child accomplished so many difficult tasks for my sake. My love for 
Ghatotkacha is twice that I bear for Sahadeva. The Rakshasa mahabaho was 
devoted to me; I was dear to him and he was precious to me. This is why I 
am numb with grief, burning with it. 

Look, O Madhava, where our troops are being routed and butchered by 
the Kauravas. Look where now, in this abysmal night, Drona and Karna 
fight in earnest. Look as the Pandava host being crushed this night, like 
some light woods by two musth maddened elephants. Listen to the terrible 
celebrant roaring of Drona, Karna and Duryodhana, even as they annihilate 
our hapless fighting men. 

How, O Krishna, when we Pandavas are still alive and you as well, 
could the Sutaputra kill Bhima’s son? Karna fetched untold carnage to our 
legions and then, as if to crown his dreadful achievements, he slew our 
precious nephew in the very presence of Arjuna. Arjuna was far away when 
the evil Dhartarashtras killed Abhimanyu; at that time, Jayadratha used his 
boon from Lord Siva to keep the rest of us from breaking into the 
chakravyuha. 

Drona and his son Aswatthaman perpetrated that dastardly deed. The 
Acharya himself told Karna how to kill Abhimanyu. While Abhimanyu 
fought with his sword, it was the Acharya himself who destroyed the 
weapon. And while he was in lonely distress, Kritavarman ruthlessly killed 
his horses and his Parshni charioteers. And then other Kaurava maharathas 
brought down our splendid child like a throng of huntsmen a golden stag. 

For his small enough offence, O Krishna, Arjuna killed Jayadratha. I 
found no great joy in that killing. If it is our dharma to kill our enemies, 
then Drona and Karna should have died first. O Lord, these two are the root 
of Duryodhana’s confidence and of all our sorrows. Arjuna should have 
despatched Drona or Karna to Yama, instead he chose to kill the 
insignificant Jayadratha, whose role in Abhimanyu’s death was hardly 
direct.” 

Suddenly, a great rage takes hold of Yudhishtira. His frame shudders in 
anger, his eyes turn red as plums, and he says, “Bhima now fights against 


Drona’s legion. So I will myself fight and kill the Suta’s son. Yes, Karna 
shall die at my hands today!” 

Yudhishtira raises his bow, blows resoundingly on his conch and dashes 
at Karna. Leading a combined force of Panchalas and Prabhadrakas 
numbering a thousand rathas, three hundred elephants and five thousand 
horses, Sikhandin swiftly follows the wake of the king. Now, with some 
heart restored, the mail-clad Panchalas and the Pandavas led by Yudhishtira 
all beat their drums and blow their conchs. 

Krishna says urgently to Arjuna, “Look where Yudhishtira, beside 
himself with grief and anger, rides against Karna. You must not allow him 
to do this or his life will be in danger!” 

And Krishna also rides quick as the wind after the distraught 
Dharmaraja, who by now has gone some way. 

In his mind’s eye, Vyasa sees Yudhishtira, deranged by grief, rushing 
recklessly at Karna. Vyasa appears before the eldest Pandava and says, 
“Through Krishna’s wisdom and good fortune, Arjuna still lives. Krishna 
kept him from facing the Sutaputra in single combat when Karna still had 
his Naikartana that he had kept to use against your brother. If Karna had 
killed Arjuna, then truly great would your grief have been, O Yudhishtira. 

O bestower of honours, it is your great good fortune that Ghatotkacha 
has sacrificed himself for Arjuna’s sake. Why, Death himself has taken 
Ghatotkacha using the Vasava astra as merely an instrument. It is for your 
good, O Pandava, that the Rakshasa has died. Do not yield to anger, and do 
not grieve, Yudhishtira. This war is war to end all others and a new and evil 
age has risen over the earth. Unite with your brothers and all the illustrious 
kings that are with you and dharma, and fight the Kauravas! 

O Naravyaghra, on the fifth day from today, the earth will be yours, so 
set your mind on dharma. Set aside this mad sorrow and rage. With a serene 
heart, practise karunya to all creatures, and tapasya, daana, kshama and 
dharma. Jaya is where dharma is.” 

Having said these words to the son of Pandu, Vyasa vanishes before 
Yudhishtira’s eyes.’” 


CANTO 181 


DRONA-VADHA PARVA 


: S anjaya says, “His holy grandsire, the profound Maharishi, arrests 

Yudhishtira’s insane careen; the Dharmaputra’s blind fury leaves 

him and he stops himself from riding ahead to fight the dangerous Karna, 

the older brother he does not know. However, grief still wracks the Pandava 
king from of the death of Ghatotkacha. 

Yudhishtira looks at Bhima containing your still vast army; he turns to 
Dhrishtadyumna and says, “Ride against the pot-born Drona! O Parantapa, 
you were born a full-grown youth from the sacred fire, wearing armour and 
armed with a sword, bow and arrows. You were born to kill Drona! So go 
confidently into battle; you need have no fear. Let Janamejaya, Sikhandin, 
Durmukha’s son and Yasodhara attack Drona from every side. Let Nakula, 
Sahadeva, the sons of Draupadi, the Prabhadrakas, Drupada, and Virata 
with their sons and brothers, Satyaki, the Kaikeyas, the Pandavas and 
Dhananjaya all attack him together. Let all our maharathas, all our 
elephants, our cavalry and foot-soldiers join forces to bring down the 
implacable Acharya who burns up the very night!” 

Thus commanded by the illustrious son of Pandu, all of them launch a 
combined attack against Drona, determined to put an end to the Brahmana 


ablaze. Drona, however, meets their onslaught with such a fusillade of 
arrows and astras! He hold them all up. Anxious for Drona’s life, 
Duryodhana rushes to his support with all his forces, might and resolve. A 
general battle now breaks out between the Kurus and the Pandavas, all of 
them shouting and roaring at one another. 

By now, the animals of both armies as well as the warriors are all 
exhausted. The greatest maharathas find they can hardly keep their eyes 
open or move their limbs, and feel helpless and worn. This horrific night of 
nine hours appears to have no end. While they mutilate and slaughter one 
another in droves by darkness, and while sleep sits heavy on their eyelids, it 
is past midnight. All the Kshatriyas are miserable and the soldiers of both 
armies have no weapons or arrows left. Yet, the warriors of both the armies 
do not quit the fight; they keep their svadharma and, summoning the very 
dregs of the reserves of strength they still possess, battle on. 

Others, blind with sleep, lay aside their weapons and lie down, some on 
the backs of elephants, some on chariots, some on horseback and some on 
the ground. And when they fall into helpless slumber, other warriors who 
are awake despatch them to Yama’s abode. Others, senseless with fatigue, 
and in a waking dream, kill their own comrades as well as their enemies. 
Indeed, they fight giving vent to weird cries and exclamations. Many 
warriors of our army who still want battle stand half awake but unable to 
fight on, their eyes half shut. However, some exceptional Kshatriyas, during 
the terrible night, although exhausted and being dragged down by 
drowsiness, continue to glide superbly across the field killing one another. 
Many among the enemy, stupefied by slumber, are slain without their being 
aware of the strokes and barbs that send them into eternity. 

Seeing this state of the troops, Arjuna cries out in a loud voice, “All of 
you, and your animals, are exhausted; you are plunged in darkness and dust 
and sleep overcomes you all. So let us all agree to call a halt to the battle 
and sleep awhile. When the moon rises, Kurus and Pandavas, awake again 
and do battle once more to find victory or heaven.” 

The tired men of both armies gladly agree. The Kaurava troops shout all 
together, “O Karna, O Duryodhana, stop the fighting. The Pandava army 
has ceased to attack us.” 

At Arjuna’s word, the Pandava army as well as yours, O Bhaarata, 
refrain from battle. Indeed, the Devas and the noble Rishis all applaud 
Partha’s noble thought and all the worn out Kshatriyas lie down to sleep 


like some sea subsiding among all the corpses that are strewn everywhere, 
of man and beast. Your army blesses Arjuna, “In you, great Arjuna, the 
Vedas and all the astras truly dwell together. In you are intelligence and 
supernal ability. In you are dharma and compassion for all creatures, O 
sinless Partha. And since you have comforted us, we wish you well, O 
Dhananjaya. Let prosperity be yours. May you soon have, O hero, all that is 
dear to your heart!” 

Blessing him thus, the great Kuru maharathas fall silent and sleep 
comes swiftly over them. Many lie down to sleep with their weapons— 
maces, swords, battleaxes, lances and with their armour still strapped on. 
Elephants, heavy with sleep, make the earth cool with their breath that 
passes through their snake-like trunks stained with dust. Surely, the great 
elephants, as they breathe on the ground, and sleep standing, look as serene 
and beautiful as hills scattered across the field of battle over which giant 
snakes hiss. 

Horses in trappings of gold and with manes entwined with their yokes 
and stamping their hooves, make the ground uneven. Thus, every warrior 
sleeps there with the animal they ride. The slumbering host, plunged in 
unconsciousness, looks like a wonderful picture drawn on canvas by the 
most gifted artists. 

The more youthful Kshatriyas, their kundalas gleaming softly, their 
limbs lacerated by arrows and swords, have laid themselves down on the 
round heads of their elephants, and look as if they lie in the embraces of 
beautiful women. 

Then, the Moon, the delighter of the eye and lord of the lotuses, white 
as the fair cheeks of a virgin, rises in the East, adorning the direction 
presided over by Indra. Indeed, like a lion of the Udaya hills, its rays his 
mane of brilliant yellow, he issues out of his cave in the east, shredding the 
blackness of the night. The lover of all lotuses and lilies in the world, bright 
as the body of Mahadeva’s Bull, full-arched and radiant as Kama’s bow, 
enticing as the smile on the lips of a bashful bride, Soma Deva begins to 
bloom in the firmament. 

Soon, however, the divine lord with the hare for his sign shows himself 
more fully, shedding brighter rays. Soma Deva gradually emanates a bright 
halo of far-reaching light with the splendour of amber-gold. Quickly, his 
lustre, dispelling the darkness entirely, spreads over all the quarters, the sky 
and the earth. The world is illuminated and the unspeakable darkness that 


had hidden everything melts away. When the world is lit up in silver, among 
creatures that wander the night some continue to roam while others retire to 
their hides, caves and holes. 

The sea of troops, Rajan, is awakened by the light of the Moon and they 
arise like a great lake of lotuses blossoming or like the ocean surging up in 
tide at moonrise. Then, Rajan, the war commences again on earth, for the 
destruction of the race of warriors, between men who wish to attain 
heaven.’” 


CANTO 182 


DRONA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘An excited and rested Duryodhana approaches 

Drona and, to encourage him and provoke his ire, says to him, 

“You should have shown no mercy to our enemies while they were 

downcast after Ghatotkacha’s death and exhausted, especially when they 

are all deadly archers. To satisfy your noble wish, Acharya, we showed 

them misplaced kindness by allowing a cessation in a battle we were 
winning. Having rested and slept, the Pandavas are stronger now. 

As for ourselves, we loose energy and strength in every way, hour by 
hour, while the Pandavas, whom you so lovingly protect, gain ground and 
success. All the Devastras and Brahmastras dwell in you. I say to you, O 
Drona, if you put forth your true prowess, neither the Pandavas nor we, nor 
any other bowmen in the world are a match for you on the field of battle. 

O Mahamuni, you are a consummate master of every manner of weapon 
and warfare, the teacher of us all. With your devastras, you can destroy the 
three worlds with the Devas, the Asuras and the Gandharvas. The Pandavas 
are all afraid of you and yet, time and again, you spare them, remembering 
fondly that they were your students. Or, perhaps, this is all because of my ill 
luck and the stars turning against me.” 


Thus chided by your son, Drona wrathfully tells Duryodhana, 
“Although I am old, Suyodhana, I still exert myself to the utmost in this 
war. All these men are hardly acquainted with the weapons of which I do 
indeed possess mastery. So, if, from a desire for victory, I become 
responsible for the death of such common soldiers, there can be no more 
ignoble deed. However, now, O Kaurava, I will at your evil command, do 
what you have in your dark heart, be it good or bad. It will not be otherwise. 
Duryodhana, I will not remove my kavacha from my body until I have 
killed all the Panchalas. I swear this to you. 

You think that Kunti’s son Arjuna is worn out by the war? Listen to me 
carefully, and I will truly tell you about his prowess. If Savyasachin is truly 
roused, not the Gandharvas, the Yakshas or the Rakshasas can hope to stand 
up to him. In the Khandava vana, he encountered the Lord Indra himself in 
battle. Arjuna confounded a raging Indra with his arrows. He killed the 
Yakshas, Nagas, Daityas, and all rest, so proud of their might in that forest 
when it burned, so none escaped. 

And when you went to mock the Pandavas in the forest and were 
humiliated and taken captive by Chitrasena and his people, it was Arjuna 
that vanquished the Gandharvas and set you free, while the unearthly ones 
had you bound firmly in a net. This is the hero who quelled the 
Nivatakavachas, who not the Devas could resist or conquer in battle. 

Naravyaghra Partha vanquished the thousands of Danavas who dwelt in 
Hiranyapura. How can you be so foolish to imagine for a moment that mere 
human warriors can withstand him? You saw with your own eyes, 
Duryodhana, how Arjuna razed your army on his way to kill Jayadratha. Is 
your mind so clouded with darkness that you have forgotten that so 
quickly?” 

Duryodhana replies in anger to hear Arjuna being extolled, “Dusasana, 
Karna, Sakuni, and I will divide this Bharata army into two akshauhinis. We 
will take one host with us and kill Arjuna today.” 

Drona laughs and says sardonically, “My blessings go with you! But 
which Kshatriya among you will kill this bull among all Kshatriyas, the 
immortal bearer of the Gandiva, the hero who blazes forth with divine 
tejas? Not Kubera, Lord of treasures, not Indra or Yama, not the Asuras, the 
Uragas and the Rakshasas can face an armed Arjuna in battle. Only fools 
will speak such nonsense as you just have, Duryodhana! Who can return 
with his life after facing Arjuna in battle? As for you, you are sinful, cruel 


and suspicious of everyone. You are always ready to rebuke even those who 
risk their lives to fight for you. 

Yes, go and give battle to the son of Kunti, for you are a well-born 
Kshatriya who seeks combat. But why cause all these other unoffending 
Kshatriyas to be slain? You are the root of this enmity and this war, so go 
and fight Arjuna yourself. Your uncle Sakuni has wisdom and observes 
Kshatriya dharma. Let Sakuni the great gambler take the field against 
Arjuna. He is skilled in dice, wedded to deception, addicted to gambling, 
and a master of cunning and subterfuge. Surely, this great man will 
vanquish the Pandavas in battle! 

With Karna in your company, you often boasted foolishly in the hearing 
of Dhritarashtra, ““O father, we three, Karna, Dusasana and I will kill all the 
sons of Pandu in battle.” 

We heard this brag of yours at every conclave in the Kuru sabha. Do 
what you said you would now; show that your boasts were neither hollow 
nor idle. Look, there before you is your mortal enemy, Arjuna, son of 
Pandu. Observe Kshatriya dharma and fight him. Your death at the hands of 
the Vijaya shall be worthy of our every praise. You have practised charity, 
you have eaten everything that you ever wished, you have gained as much 
wealth as you wanted, more than any other man, and you leave no debts. 
You have done all that a prince should do. So have no regrets or fears. Go 
and fight the son of Pandu.” 

Then, the battle begins.’” 


CANTO 183 


DRONA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘When three yaamas of the night have worn away, 
Rajan, the battle between the Kurus and the Pandavas resumes 
and both sides are exhilarant, born warriors that they are! Soon after, 
Surya’s sarathy, the legless Aruna, weakening the splendour of the moon, 
appears upon the Udaya mountain, turning the sky a coppery hue. The east 
is soon lit with the crimson rays of the Sun, who, rising, resembles a 
circular plate of gold. All the warriors of the Kuru and the Pandava armies 
alight from their chariots, horses and palanquins, stand with joined hands, 
facing Surya Deva, and recite the Gayatri Mantra appropriate to greet the 
first sandhya of the day, the golden dawn. 

The Kuru army is divided into two parts. Drona, with Duryodhana 
going before him with one of the hosts, advances with the other one against 
the Somakas, the Pandavas and the Panchalas. Seeing the Kuru army thus 
divided, Krishna says to Arjuna, “Keep your cousins to your left, and the 
division commanded by Drona to your right.” 

Arjuna moves to the left of the mighty Drona and Karna. Understanding 
Krishna’s intention, Bhimasena says to Partha who is at the van of the army, 
“Arjuna, Bibhatsu, listen to me. The time has come to fulfil the purpose for 


which Kshatriya women bear sons. If you fight for victory now, you will 
demean your birth. The moment has come to pay the debt you owe Truth, 
Prosperity, Virtue and Fame. O greatest of warriors, keep this akshauhini to 
your left and destroy it.” 

When Bhima and Krishna urge him on, Arjuna truly puts his unrivalled 
prowess on display and, dominating Drona and Karna, begins to raze the 
Kaurava forces all around him. Many great Kshatriyas among the Kurus do 
their best but cannot stop the Kiritin as he sweeps over them like a raging 
conflagration, consuming them all. Duryodhana, Karna and Sakuni shoot 
tremendous volleys at Kunti’s son. Defending himself with light like 
swiftness, he cuts down every arrow loosed at him, and then strikes each of 
the three with ten deep barbs. 

The dust and thick arrow showers darken the sky as if night has 
returned, and a great din arises everywhere. The sky, the earth and all the 
directions are obscured. Blinded by the swirling dust, and yet again no one 
can tell friend from foe, ally from enemy. Once more, the kings and 
warriors loudly call out their own names, and fight the war for dharma by 
instinct and approximation. 

Maharathas losing their chariots run headlong into one another and are 
tangled together in chaos. Their horses killed and charioteers slain, many 
remain petrified, sitting or standing perfectly still to save their lives. Dead 
horses and their riders lie on felled elephants as if stretched out on mountain 
summits. 

Drona then rides away from the general melee towards the north and 
takes up his station there, like a smokeless fire, resplendent, magnificent 
and blazing with energy. Seeing him, the Pandava troops tremble; they turn 
pale and falter on the field, O Bhaarata. From seeming like an elephant in 
rut, the enemy loses its nerve entirely, terrified as the Danavas when they 
fought Vasava. Some among them are broken in spirit, while other, bolder 
ones are enraged. Others are filled with wonder, and some, though they 
would try, are unequal to the challenge of the refulgent Acharya. Some of 
the Pandava kings wring their hands, and some are beside themselves with 
anger and bite through their lips in that wrath. A few brandish their 
weapons, others rub their arms; and some who possess truly great tejas and 
whose souls are under complete control, attack Drona. The domineering 
Brahmana mauls the Panchalas in particular with arrows mundane and 


unworldly; mangled, burnt and bleeding, and in agony, they yet continue to 
contend with him. 

Then Drupada and Virata take the field against Drona who by now rages 
unchecked all across Kurukshetra sowing death wherever he rides like some 
storm of another furious world. Drupada’s three grandsons also ride against 
Drona, as do the mighty Chedi archers. Seeing them come, in a flash, Drona 
beheads all three Panchala princes, who are no remote match for him. He 
next routs the Chedis, the Kaikeyas, the Srinjayas and all the Matsyas. 

In rage past enduring, Drupada and Virata unleash gales and hurricanes 
of arrows at the dreadful Brahmana. The scourge of the Kshatriyas swathes 
both Drupada and Virata with harrowing gusts of shafts, and they, also, 
strike him back ardently. Drona, roused, looses two of his favoured 
crescent-tipped shafts and breaks both Drupada and Virata’s bows at the 
same moment. 

Virata flings ten spears at Drona, desperate to have his life, while 
Drupada, great Kshatriya, casts a blazing astra of iron and gold inlaid with 
lapis lazuli, a weapon like a gleaming serpent, at him. Drona cuts all these 
weapons down with a lordly and serene display of superhuman archery. 
Next moment, with a long roar, with two perfect arrows, he sends both 
those great and aged kings to the world of Yama, cutting one’s head from 
his throat and blowing the other’s heart to shreds. A terrible wail rises from 
the armies of the Panchalas and the Matsyas. 

Dhrishtadyumna watches Drona kill his father Drupada, his own sons, 
and Virata; he watches him slaughter the Kaikeyas, the Chedis, the Matsyas 
and the Panchalas; he sees him kill Drupada’s three grandsons and the fire- 
prince is filled with grief and swears an oath in rage before all the 
maharathas: “Let me lose all the punya of all the dharma that I have done, 
as Well as my Kshatriya and Brahma tejas if Drona escapes me today with 
his life, or if he succeeds in vanquishing me!” 

With this, taking his own division with him, the Panchala prince rides at 
Drona. The Panchalas then fall upon Drona from one side and Arjuna from 
the other. Duryodhana, his brothers, Karna and Sakuni defend Drona 
against the attack and, though the Panchalas fight with fury and vigour, your 
sons and their allies prevent the dead Drupada’s sons and warriors from so 
much as catching a proper look at the Acharya. 

Bhimasena is furious with Dhrishtadyumna and berates him, “What 
Kshatriya is the warrior born into great Drupada’s vamsa, and who is 


besides the greatest warrior of all born from the fire, who can only look at 
his enemy standing before him? What true man, who has seen his father and 
his son slain before his eyes, and who has sworn to have revenge on their 
killer, stands listless and helpless before his enemy? There stands Drona 
like a fire blazing high with its own energy and, with his bows and arrows 
for fuel, consumes all our Kshatriyas that come before him like mere 
straws. Why, he will annihilate all the Pandava army by himself in a brief 
hour if he is not extinguished. 

If you will not fight, be spectators and watch me as I fight Drona. I do 
not fear this vile Brahmana. I do not revere him.” 

With this, the fuming Vrikodara rips into Drona’s vyuha and begins to 
decimate that host. In a moment, Dhrishtadyumna follows Bhima and 
quickly the two of them engage Drona in a fiery battle as the sun rises and 
bathes the holy field of Kurukshetra in dawn’s light. By first light of day, we 
see the enormity of the night’s carnage—the rathas entangled with one 
another, and the dead scattered in their thousands and thousands, men and 
beasts, all over the field. And again, the war resumes between the two 
armies, more bloodthirsty than ever. Some, while riding towards another 
part of the field are waylaid and butchered; others, who are fleeing, are 
struck in their backs, or through their sides like beasts on a hunt. 

The general engagement, the war from which every vestige of a dharma 
yuddha has fled, continues to rage as the morning sun rises higher.’” 


CANTO 184 


DRONA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘The warriors, however, Rajan, do pause briefly to 

worship the thousand-rayed Aditya, as he ascends the field of 

battle on this morning. When they have paid their daily homage to God of 
day, they fight again exactly as they did by night. 

Bharatarishabha, horsemen fight maharathas, elephants confront 
horsemen, foot-soldiers battle elephants and horsemen other horsemen. 
Sometimes united and sometimes separately, the warriors lay into each 
other, and many, having fought through the night and slept only briefly, are 
tired, weak with hunger and thirsty and they fall unconscious. The uproar 
made by the blare of conches, the beating of drums, the trumpeting of 
elephants and the twanging of bowstrings drawn and released with force, 
reaches the very heavens. 

So, too, is the clangour of charging infantry, weapons falling, horses 
neighing, chariots thundering along, and the roaring, shouting and yelling of 
the warriors earthshaking; it, too, swells by the moment and echoes in the 
realms of the gods. The screams, groans and wails of pain, of falling and 
fallen foot-soldiers, rathikas and elephants multiply by the moment; they 
wash across the field in a piteous, horrifying wave. 


Men and animals fall like leaves in autumn blown down by a strong 
wind. Hurled from Kshatriyas’ hands at other warriors and elephants, we 
see swords heaping themselves on the ground, many bloody, like heaps of 
cloth on a washing ghat. The sound of falling swords resembles that of 
clothes being beaten to wash them well. Rajan, though we should now be 
inured to the horror after the grisly night, the battle by daylight continues to 
be appalling. 

A river runs again towards the land of the dead. The blood of elephants, 
horses and men are its current, weapons its fish in profusion, blood and 
flesh its mire, the cries of grief and pain its roar, and proud banners cut 
down and other bloodied cloths are its froth. 

Pierced all over by arrows and spears, elephants and horses stand 
perfectly motionless on Kurukshetra, worn out with exertion, spent with the 
grim toil of the night, and utterly exhausted so they cannot move. With their 
arms in graceful attitudes, their beautiful coats of mail, with their turbaned 
and crowned heads decked with sparkling kundalas, even on this ghastly 
morning the warriors bearing the instruments of war look magnificent. 

Meanwhile, the chariots find passage across the field difficult indeed, 
for all the dead, the dying and the scavenging carnivores that cover the 
ground of death. Stricken by arrows and worn out by their exertions, steeds 
of the noblest breed and high mettle, of gigantic size and strength, tremble 
with effort as they attempt to draw the chariots whose wheels have been 
mired deep in the blood swamped earth. Terror and only terror holds every 
warriors of both armies in its cold, benumbing clasp, O Bhaarata, with the 
exception of only Drona and Arjuna. These two become the refuge, the 
saviours of the warriors of their respective legions. Others who encounter 
these two are swiftly sent to Yama’s abode. 

Entwined, enmeshed, even like the great bodies of unimaginable and 
violent lovers in the throes of lethal lust, the armies of the Kurus and the 
Panchalas are no longer distinguishable. During this carnage where 
Kshatriyas turn Kurukshetra into an endless smasana, a cremation ground, 
nothing and no one is plainly visible—not Karna, Drona, Arjuna, 
Yudhishtira, Bhimasena, the twins, the Panchala fire-prince, Satyaki, 
Dusasana, Drona’s son, Duryodhana, Subala’s son, Kripa, Salya, 
Kritavarman, all the great others, nor the earth, nor the points of the 
compass, nor I, can be seen as clouds of dusts shroud all the heroes, their 
chariots and beats and the thousands of foot-soldiers. 


As the war burgeons by the moment, it seems that another night has 
fallen over the filed for the pall of dust that rises and billows, and the 
swarms of arrows and other weapons, which cover the sky, hiding the sun. 
You cannot tell Kaurava from Panchala, or Panchala from Pandava; all is a 
single haze, which rings hellishly with roars and screams. The warriors, 
possessed absolutely by the spirit of murdering, by now kill friend and 
enemy alike, making no more distinction, for to kill is all that matters 
regardless of who kills and who is slain. 

Then, suddenly, strong winds arise and, blowing powerfully from all 
directions like the breath of a many faced God, blows away the single vast 
cloud of dust. Now there is a unique rain of blood everywhere, Rajan! 
Elephants, horses, maharathas and foot-soldiers, all bathed in crimson, look 
as wondrous as the celestial forest of Parijata flowers. 

The four Kaurava maharathas Duryodhana, Karna, Drona and Dusasana 
attack the Pandava host with renewed ferocity. Duryodhana and his brothers 
fight Nakula and Sahadeva, while Karna battles Vrikodara Bhima, Arjuna 
confronts Drona, and all the troops from every side stand still and gaze at 
these scintillating duels. Why, even the maharathas of both armies pause 
and quietly watch the superhuman engagement between those greatest 
among all Kshatriyas. 

The interminable and deadly rain of arrows and other weapons pours 
on. The great maharathas, bulls among all men, riding their chariots of solar 
effulgence, still look as stunning as dark and golden clouds in the autumn 
sky. Avid for blood, thirsty for revenge and killing, this handful of the 
greatest warriors on earth engage one another like infuriated leaders of 
elephant herds. 

In truth, Rajan, death does not ever come until its hour is come, and not 
all the warriors on Kurukshetra perish all together in the battle. Strewn with 
lopped off arms, legs, heads with dazzling earrings, bows and arrows, 
lances, swords, battleaxes, nalihas, razor-headed arrows, cloth-yard shafts, 
darts, diverse kinds of exquisite armour, splendid rathas broken into pieces, 
slain elephants, other huge chariots without standards broken like cities, yet 
others being dragged here and there by frightened horses without a 
charioteer to control them, by hosts of grandly adorned warriors of 
immeasurable courage, fallen chamaras and coats of mail and standards, 
scattered ornaments, robes and fragrant bloodied garlands, chains of gold, 
diadems, crowns, helmets, rows of bells, jewels worn on breasts, cuirasses, 


collars, and with gems that adorn coronets, the field of battle looks as 
marvellous as the endless firmament spangled with countless stars. 

Now there ensues a duel between a furious Duryodhana, voracious for 
revenge, and Nakula full of the same hunger. Madri’s son shoots hundreds 
of arrows at your son on his right, and is loudly cheered by the Pandava 
soldiers. Duryodhana responds with vehemence and passion. Nakula wheels 
away to the left, and now attacks your son from that side. However, your 
son is not to be bested on this day and, with incandescent archery, forces 
Nakula to turn back. All the troops applaud Suyodhana’s feat, while Nakula 
recalls every indignity of the past and roars at your incensed son, “Stop! 
Stop and fight, you wretched sinner!””’” 


CANTO 185 


DRONA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘An angry Dusasana pushes fiercely towards 

Sahadeva, making the earth shiver with the speed of his chariot. 

But, in a flash, with a wedge-headed arrow, Sahadeva strikes off the head of 

your son’s sarathy, helmet and all. So swiftly does Sahadeva do this that 

neither Dusasana nor any of the troops even notices that the charioteer has 

been decapitated, until their reins hanging loose, Dusasana’s horses careen 
wildly away. 

Being a master charioteer himself, Dusasana quickly takes the reins up 
himself and fetches the horses under control. Friend and foe alike acclaim 
his feat, for now driving the chariot himself, he moves effortlessly and 
fearlessly across the field, attacking Sahadeva again. Sahadeva pierces your 
son’s horses now with a volley of vicious arrows and, flowing blood, 
whinnying in pain, they bolt once more, for as soon as Dusasana picks up 
his bow to fight Sahadeva he loses control of his agonised steeds again. 

The relentless Sahadeva drills him with a score of hate-filled arrows. 
Karna comes dashing to rescue your son, when, taking careful aim, Bhima 
strikes the Sutaputra deep through his arms and chest with three shafts like 
thunderbolts shot from his bow drawn into a circle. Struck by these arrows 


like a snake with a stick, Karna stops and faces Bhimasena in wrath, 
unleashing a terrific volley of slender deadly shafts at him. 

Another fervid duel breaks out between Bhima and Karna, both roaring 
like bulls and their eyes dilated with rage. Both find themselves too close to 
each other and cannot shoot their arrows with any freedom. Thereupon, 
they fight with maces and Bhimasena quickly smashes the kuvara of 
Karna’s ratha, a feat to watch. Then Karna hurls his gada in fury at Bhima’s 
chariot; Bhima strikes it aside with his own mace. Bhima sweeps up another 
mace and hurls it with titanic force at Karna; Karna shoots the heavy thing 
with an astonishing golden-winged volley, which turns the massive gada 
right back at Bhima, like a snake charmed by mantras! The mace strikes 
Bhima’s immense flagpole, which breaks, falls and strikes his charioteer 
senseless. 

His brows knit, Bhima, with the greatest care, rives Karna’s standards, 
his bow and shreds his leather gauntlet. Radheya takes up another gold- 
decked bow and in a blur kills Bhima’s horses the colour of bears, and his 
two charioteers. Bhima quickly jumps into Nakula’s chariot like a lion 
bounding down a mountain summit. 

Meanwhile, Drona and Arjuna, the two greatest maharathas, Acharya 
and sishya, duel, stunning all that watch with their mastery over the astras, 
the sureness of their aim, and with the manoeuvres of their chariots. 
Watching that battle, the like of which they have never seen, the other 
warriors stop fighting and stand with hair standing on end, quivering with 
equal parts of awe and fear. 

Both Arjuna and his master display immaculate tactics, while trying 
always to keep the adversary to his right. The plane on which these two 
make sublime war is such that all the other maharathas can only gaze in 
wonder. That duel is like one between a pair of eagles in the sky fighting 
over a piece of meat. Whatever Drona does to have the better of his 
favourite pupil, Arjuna matches. 

When Drona can find no edge over his younger rival with common 
shafts or lesser astras, the Brahmana invokes into the Aindra, the Tvashtra, 
the Vayavya and the Yamya astras. No sooner do these issue from Drona’s 
bow, Dhananjaya extinguishes them with his own astras. At this, Drona 
looses the very greatest astras at Arjuna, but even these Partha nullifies. 
Seeing Arjuna negate all his weapons, even the highest celestial ones, 
Drona applauds his disciple in his heart and is full of secret joy. 


Since the days when Arjuna was his pupil, the Acharya has regarded 
himself as the greatest master of weapons in the world. Now, equalled by 
his sishya in the midst of all those most illustrious and discerning warriors 
on earth, Drona continues to attack and to defend himself energetically, 
marvelling all the while at the genius of his opponent. 

We plainly see the Devas, Gandharvas in their thousands, Rishis and 
bodies of Siddhas, everywhere in the sky. Filled with these as well as with 
Apsaras, Yakshas and Rakshasas, it once more seems as if gathering clouds 
fill the vaults of the firmament. We hear a reverberant asariri, a disembodied 
voice from above, repeatedly sweep through the sky, end to end, full of 
praise for the mighty Drona and the noble Partha. 

From the flames and lustre of the astras that Drona and Partha loose at 
each other, all creation seems to blaze with light, and the Siddhas and the 
Rishis on high say, “This is not a Manava, an Asura, a Rakshasa, a Deva or 
a Gandharva yuddha. Without doubt, this is a transcendent Brahma 
yuddha!” 

And indeed so it is, the unmatched, spectacular contention, the like of 
which we have never even heard before let alone seen. As we all stand 
transfixed, now the Acharya prevails over Arjuna, and then the son of 
Pandu over Drona, and no one can find any difference between them. Only 
if Rudra, dividing himself into two parts fought against himself, could there 
be a battle to match this one. The astra shastra, focused, embodied, dwells 
in the Acharya on one side; so, too, does it, on the other, in the resplendent 
and profound Arjuna, along with deep substance. Virata, heroism, in one 
place, dwells absolutely in Drona; on the other side, heroism and strength 
are in the son of Pandu. Neither of these warriors can be challenged by 
enemies in battle. It is the opinion of all the invisible and visible beings, 
who watch the sacred conflict, that either of them can destroy the very 
universe with all the gods, if they wish. 

Drona now invokes the Brahmastra against Arjuna and the all invisible 
ones above and below, and the Earth with her mountains and waters and 
trees tremble. Howling winds begin to blow, the seas rise up, and the 
warriors of the Kuru and Pandava armies, as well as all other living 
creatures are struck through with fear, when Drona raises that astra. Arjuna, 
O king, summons his own Brahmastra and like two other suns risen into the 
bright sky, their weapons extinguish each other. All agitated Nature is 
pacified again. 


Finally, acknowledging that neither can vanquish the other, the two 
armies engage each other, generally, once more. Widespread havoc 
occupies Kurukshetra again. And mayhem, pandemonium and darkness 
engulf the battlefield all around. The sky is obscured with dark swarms of 
arrows, as if with masses of heavy clouds, and the creatures that fly through 
the air can no longer find a passage through the element.’” 


CANTO 186 


DRONA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘During the carnage of men, horses and elephants, 
Dusasana, O Rajan, meets Dhrishtadyumna in battle. Dusasana 
ravages the fire-prince mounted on his golden chariot; in fury, 
Dhrishtadyumna covers your son, his chariot, horses and sarathy in an 
opacity of arrows so they become invisible. Dusasana is forced to turn away 
from the Pandava senapati and Dhrishtadyumna forges on toward his main 
enemy, Drona, the one he must kill. As he goes, he showers arrows all 
around him, claiming a thousand lives each moment. 

Kritavarman, with three of his Bhoja brothers, challenges dead 
Drupada’s_ son, but Nakula and Sahadeva, who are _ following 
Dhrishtadyumna while he makes his way like a blazing fire towards Drona, 
are at hand to keep these heroes at bay. All of them, fighting now on the 
very brink of death, attack one another in perfect fury, determined to kill or 
be killed. Of pure souls and pure conduct, and with swarga in mind, they 
fight according to the noble tenets of dharma. Of impeccable lineage, un- 
stained deeds and gifted with great intelligence, these lords of men fight 
righteously and with Kshatriya dharma, using no vile weapons that might 
be regarded as unfair. 


None of them use either cruelly barbed arrows, those called nalikas, 
poisoned ones, those with heads made of horns, those with many pointed 
heads, ones made of the bones of bulls and elephants, those having two 
heads, ones with rusty heads, or those that do not fly straight. All of them 
use simple and direct weapons and wish to win both fame and heaven and 
the region of great blessedness, by fighting justly. Yet, the battle between 
the four warriors of your army and the three from the Pandava side is 
fearsome, O king. 

Meanwhile, Dhrishtadyumna seeing Nakula and Sahadeva successfully 
contain your mighty maharathas, surges on toward Drona. Held up by the 
tigerish twins of Madri, your warriors fight them like the wind assailing two 
mountains. 

Seeing the Panchala fire-prince ride like another wind at Drona and the 
four heroes of his own army obstructed by the twins, Duryodhana dashes 
against the dangerous Dhrishtadyumna, loosing thunderous volleys of 
blood-drinking arrows at him. At which, Satyaki rides up, quick as a wish, 
to stop him. These two Naravyaghras, descendants of Kuru and Madhu, fall 
wildly upon each other. Then the strangest thing, Rajan—both recall with 
pleasure and affection the days of their boyhood, when they had been 
loving friends and, even as they fight savagely, they look at each other with 
some love and smile repeatedly! 

Indeed, so moved is your son that, with tears standing in his eyes, guilt 
and sorrow laying their touch upon his heart, he says to his ever dear 
Satyaki, “Shame on anger, my precious friend, and shame on revenge! 
Shame on Kshatriya dharma and shame on valour and prowess, for today 
you aim your astras at me and I also loose my shafts at you. In those days 
when we were young, you were dearer to me than life itself, and you felt the 
same for me. Alas, where have that love and those childhood memories 
gone now? They mean nothing on this field of war. Alas, O Satwata, moved 
by greed and hatred, we are here today fighting each other to kill or die!” 

Hearing this, Satyaki draws a clutch of sharp arrows from his quiver, 
and replies with a smile, “This is no sabha, O prince, nor the home of our 
Acharya, where we once played together.” 

Duryodhana says, “Where have those games of our childhood gone, O 
bull of Sini’s race, and how has this battle come upon us now? It seems that 
the influence of Time is irresistible. Urged though we are by the desire for 


wealth, what use is the wealth for which you and I meet to fight, moved 
only by avarice.” 

Satyaki replies, “This has always been the way of the Kshatriyas that 
they must fight even against their acharyas. If I am dear to you, Suyodhana 
my friend, then kill me quickly. Let me find the realm of the righteous by 
your hand. Nothing would make me happier. I cannot bear this loving talk. 
Put forth your best valour and let us do battle like the Kshatriyas that we 
are. For to speak of the past and our friendship is far more cruel than to 
fight with arrows.” 

With this, and not without tears in his own eyes, Satyaki rides at 
Duryodhana with his bow raised. Seeing him come, your son cascades a 
blithe shower of deadly shafts on his old and beloved friend, and a pitched 
and mighty duel breaks out between those scions of the races of Kuru and 
Madhu, like one between an elephant and a lion. Drawing his bow round, 
Duryodhana strikes the invincible Satyaki with a blizzard of vicious shafts 
and Yuyudhana of the Satwatas responds with first fifty, then with twenty, 
and once more with ten keening arrows. 

Duryodhana, still smiling, his eyes still moist, rakes Satyaki with thirty 
arrows shot from his bowstring drawn to his ear; then, with a razor-headed 
arrow, he breaks Satyaki’s bow. Quicker than thinking, Sini’s grandson 
picks up another bow and covers Duryodhana with a marvellous unbroken 
straight line of burning barbs. With wonderful skill, Suyodhana cuts every 
shafts into pieces, at which your army cheers him loudly. 

Duryodhana lacerates Satyaki with three and seventy shafts, with wings 
of gold, dipped in oil and shot from his bow drawn to its fullest stretch. In a 
flash, the explosive Yuyudhana cleaves your son’s bow in his hands and 
gores him with a hundred barbs, which draw fonts of blood from 
Duryodhana and course agony through his body. Duryodhana swiftly seeks 
refuge in another chariot. Having rested awhile, he rides once more against 
Satyaki, shooting blazing salvos of arrows at the Satwata hero’s chariot. 
Always smiling, Rajan, Satyaki continues to pour an endless river of arrows 
at his childhood friend, his enemy. 

The immaculate shafts of both Kshatriyas meet in the sky, in small 
explosions and fall broken on every side, sounding like a raging fire 
consuming a great forest. The thousands of arrows that they both shoot 
densely cover earth and sky. Then, Karna sees that Satyaki is surely 
beginning to prevail over Duryodhana and rides up swiftly to rescue your 


son. However, Bhima is quick to see this and races up to cut Karna off. He 
unleashes powerful heavy volleys at the Sutaputra who, with great grace 
and ease, cuts down Bhima’s wall of fire, severs his bow, and maims his 
charioteer. 

Bhima hefts a mace and, running headlong at Karna, smashes his bow, 
standard, one of his chariot wheels and his charioteer with a flurry of 
sickening blows like thunder. But Karna stands on his broken chariot, 
immovable as Meru, the king of all mountains. His horses continue to draw 
his wonderful ratha with only a single wheel, even like Surya’s one- 
wheeled chariot, drawn by the Sun God’s seven celestial steeds. 

Karna finds Bhima’s irrepressible prowess intolerable; he continues to 
fight the titan with storms of arrows and diverse astras as well. An incited 
Bhima matches Karna’s shaft for shaft, astra for astra. 

Then the battle spreads, when Yudhishtira says to all the leading 
warriors among the Panchalas and the Matsyas, “Those who are our very 
life, who are our heads, who are powerful bulls among men are all fighting 
the Dhartarashtras. How then do you all stand here, as if stupefied and 
deprived of your very senses? Fly to those great maharathas of my army. 
Drive out your fears and fight. Hold your Kshatriya dharma high, for with 
that, regardless of victory or death, you will attain swarga. If you prove to 
be victors, you will perform great yagnas with lavish dakshina to the 
Brahmanas. If, instead, you are killed, you will become equals to the Devas, 
and win many realms of felicity and bliss.” 

Thus exhorted by the king, the rest of the maharathas of the Pandava 
army charge into battle, the Panchalas attacking Drona from one side, while 
Bhimasena leads the others from another. 

Bhima, Nakula and Sahadeva are the most ardent and active warriors 
for the Pandavas. They also read the battle the best at this time. They cry to 
Arjuna, “Dhananjaya, brother, drive the Kurus away from Drona’s side. If 
the Acharya loses his defenders, then the Panchalas can kill him.” 

At this, Partha rides swiftly against the Kauravas, while Drona 
continues to battle the Panchalas led by Dhrishtadyumna. On the fifth day 
of Drona’s command, O Bhaarata, Bharadwaja’s implacable son slaughters 
the enemy with unearthly archery and inhuman ruthlessness.’” 


CANTO 187 


DRONA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, “Drona razes the Panchala legions even as Indra did 
the Danavas of old. Though he sends gales of fire and wind 
swirling at them, and countless numbers of their troops are consumed by the 
matchless, apparently deranged Acharya, the great Pandava maharathas 
remain unmoved and continue to advance and to fight. In fact, Rajan, the 
Panchalas and the Srinjayas rush all together at Drona with fierce yells and 
surround the dreadful Brahmana. He, however, burns and mows them down 
at will. 

Seeing the lustrous Drona putting the Panchalas to rout with unworldly 
astras, to which they have no defence, fear grips the hearts of the Pandavas 
and they despair of having victory and tell one another, “Ah, it is plain that 
Drona will consume us with his astras like a forest fire does a heap of straw 
in spring. We have no one who can so much as look at him in battle. Arjuna 
is possibly the only one who can face this apocalyptic Brahmana, and he 
will not fight him, for he does not consider it dharma to fight his Acharya.” 

Finding the sons of Kunti sorely pressed, bleeding and now truly 
frightened, from Drona’s many fires, the omniscient Krishna says to Arjuna 
and his brothers, “Not the Devas with Vasava at their head can vanquish 


this Brahmana in battle. He can only be killed if he were to lay down his 
weapons himself. You must set aside your lofty dharma, you sons of Pandu, 
and use some cunning stratagem to kill Drona. Otherwise, from the golden 
ratha, the Brahmana will kill us all.” 

He pauses and, seeing he has their attention, says quietly, “Drona loves 
his son more than his life. I think if Aswatthaman were to die, Drona would 
abandon the war and lay down his weapons. So, let someone go and tell the 
Acharya that his son Aswatthaman has been killed.” 

Arjuna looks at Krishna in some shock and does not approve of this 
counsel. The others, seeing the havoc from hell that Drona sows all around 
him, and knowing very well that the war would indeed be swiftly lost if he 
was not stopped, quickly concur with Krishna. Yudhishtira thinks a long 
while and then, unwillingly, accepts what Krishna says. Rajan, then 
Mahabaho Bhima armed with his mace goes and kills a dangerous elephant 
whose name is also Aswatthaman and which belongs to his own army, to 
Indravarman, the king of the Malavas. 

Riding upto Drona, with some reluctance in his heart and shame, Bhima 
begins to roar aloud, “Aswatthaman has been killed. Aswatthaman is dead!” 

Bhima proclaims this white lie for it is not the Acharya’s son who has 
died. Drona hears what Bhima says and feels all his limbs turn weak as if 
they have dissolved like sand in water. Then, he remembers the invincible 
prowess of his son and quickly concludes that Bhima is lying. Strength 
floods back into his mighty body. He knows that his son wears a secret 
jewel that makes him invincible to his enemies; Drona knows that his 
beloved Aswatthaman could not be dead. 

Drona bears down hotly on Dhrishtadyumna, who he wants to kill 
above all else, for he knows that the Panchala prince is destined to kill him, 
indeed born just for that. He covers Dhrishtadyumna with a thousand keen 
kanka-feathered arrows. At this, full twenty thousand powerful Panchala 
maharathas inundate him with their barbs even as he dashes across 
Kurukshetra as he likes leaving spasming corpses all around him. 

Completely shrouded by Panchala arrows, we no longer see the 
Acharya; he is as the sun hidden by rainclouds during the monsoon. 

But no Panchala arrow finds its home in Drona’s body, for he invokes 
the Brahmastra to protect himself and to ravage them. Drona is like a 
smokeless, blazing fire and he is invested with celestial grandeur as he 
slaughters the Somakas. He fells heads and cuts off massive arms like 


spiked maces decked with golden ornaments; these fall in a veritable rain. 
Massacred by Bharadwaja’s meridian son, the Panchala Kshatriyas fall 
everywhere like trees uprooted by a tempest. 

Yet again, the field of death becomes impassable for fallen elephants 
and horses, O Bhaarata, and the thick sludge of flesh and blood. Having 
killed all twenty thousand Panchala maharathas, Drona shines forth 
gloriously, truly like a smokeless fire. The inexorable son of Bharadwaja 
then beheads Vasudana with a broad-headed arrow, and then he kills five 
hundred Matsyas, six thousand elephants and ten thousand horsemen, in 
less time than it takes me to tell you of it. 

Seeing Drona annihilating the very race of Kshatriyas on chasmic 
Kurukshetra deeper than death, the Rishis Viswamitra, Jamadagni, 
Bharadwaja, Gautama, Vasishta, Kasyapa, Atri, and the Srikatas, the 
Prisnis, Garga, the Balakhilyas, the Marichis, the descendants of Bhrigu and 
Angiras, and diverse other sages of subtle forms, gather there quickly, with 
Agni, the bearer of sacrificial libations at their head. They want to fetch 
Drona to Brahma, the Grandsire. They say to Drona, the ornament of battle, 
“You are fighting sinfully, without dharma. The hour of your death has 
come, O Brahmana. Lay down your weapons, Drona. Look, we are here 
and, after seeing us, you must no longer perpetrate such cruel violence. 

You are well versed in the Vedas and their angas. You are devoted to 
dharma, especially because you are a Brahmana. Such brutal deeds do not 
become you. Lay down your weapons, drive away the film of darkness that 
blinds your heart and your eyes and cleave fast again to the sanatana 
dharma. The time that you had to spend in this world of men is now full. 

You have consumed ordinary soldiers with the Brahmastra, burnt men 
who know nothing of the divine weapons to ashes. What you have done, O 
Muni, is in no way dharma. O blessed Drona, put aside your weapons 
without delay, and do not remain an hour longer on earth. Sin no more! You 
have done enough grievous harm.” 

Drona hears what the great Rishis say; he remembers again what Bhima 
had declared, that Aswatthaman was dead; he sees Dhrishtadyumna 
advancing upon him and a great pang, verily of death, clenches his heart. 
Burning with grief and plunged into sudden dejection, while he burned with 
energy and wrath a moment ago, Drona rides up to the one man that he 
trusts completely. He goes to the always truthful Yudhishtira Dharmaraja 
and asks him if his son Aswatthaman has indeed been killed. 


Drona firmly believes that Yudhishtira would never tell a lie, not for the 
sovereignty over the three worlds. This is why he asks the question of 
Yudhishtira and nobody else. He had always looked for and found perfect 
truth in Yudhishtira from that Pandava’s very boyhood. 

Meanwhile, Krishna, knower of all things, is anxious for he knows that 
the indomitable Acharya can indeed devour all the Pandavas with his astras; 
he knows that Drona cannot be killed unless he lays down his weapons. 
Addressing Yudhishtira he says, “If Drona fights as he does now for half a 
day more, he will have exterminated all your army and ourselves. Save us, 
Yudhishtira, from the terrible Brahmana. In dire circumstances, falsehood is 
advocated if it saves lives. There is no sin in a lie spoken to women, or in 
matriages, or to save kings, or to rescue a Brahmana’s life.” 

Bhima says, “As soon as I heard of the only way by which Drona can be 
slain, I killed a mighty elephant, like the elephant of Sakra himself, which 
belonged to Indravarman, the king of the Malavas, a great beast that stood 
within our army. I then went to Drona and told him, ‘Aswatthaman has been 
killed, O Brahmana. Lay down your weapons and stop fighting!’ 

However, the Acharya does not believe that I spoke the truth. If you 
want to save us all and win this war, Yudhishtira, do as Krishna says and 
tell Drona that Aswatthaman, the son of Saradwat’s daughter, is indeed 
dead. The Brahmana bull will never doubt what you say to him, for it is 
known that you are the most truthful one in all the worlds.” 

Hearing what Bhima says, persuaded by what Krishna also says, and 
bowing also to inevitable destiny, Yudhishtira decides to go along with what 
they want him to do. Yet, fearing to tell an outright lie Yudhishtira clearly 
says that Aswatthaman is dead, but adds under his breath, “the elephant 
Aswatthaman’’. Until that moment, Yudhishtira’s chariot and horses were 
always suspended at a height of four fingers’ breadth from the ground, for 
his immaculate dharma and honesty. No sooner does he tell this white lie 
than his ratha and steeds descend and then on ride along the earth as any 
other man’s! When Yudhishtira says that his son is dead, Drona’s already 
faltering spirit breaks. Having heard what the unworldly Rishis said to him, 
he suddenly sees himself as a most heinous sinner, and particularly against 
the noble Pandavas who always trod the path of dharma. At this critical 
juncture, he sees Dhrishtadyumna drawn dangerously close to him, and 
finds that his arms have grown weak and that he can no longer fight as he 
did before.’” 


CANTO 188 


DRONA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Dhrishtadyumna sees Drona stricken before him and 

charges at him with doubled celerity. As we know, king Drupada 

received Dhrishtadyumna from Agni Deva at a great yagna, and the fire- 

prince was born for Drupada to have revenge against Drona who had 
humiliated him. Dhrishtadyumna had been born just to kill Drona. 

Wanting to kill Drona, to accomplish the final purpose of his birth, the 
Panchala prince picks up an unearthly bow, a weapon with few rivals. He 
fits an arrow on it, a shaft like a serpent of the most virulent venom, and 
that arrows glow with a fierce flame within the circle of his bow, and is like 
the splendent autumn sun within a radiant disc. Seeing Prishata’s son bend 
that blazing bow, all the troops think that the last hour of the world has 
come. 

Seeing the arrow aimed at him, Drona, son of Bharadwaja, also thinks 
that the last moment of his body has come. The Acharya prepares to parry 
the shaft. However, his astras, O Rajan, no longer appear at his bidding, 
although he has not exhausted them despite shooting them ceaselessly for 
four days and one night. Yet, when the third part of the fifth day is past, his 
shafts are all exhausted. Seeing that his arrows have all been spent, broken 


with grief believing that his son is dead and finding that the Devastras no 
longer appear at his bidding, he is overcome by a wish rising from the very 
depths of his being to lay aside his weapons as the Rishis asked him to. 

Though still full of great tejas, he cannot fight as before. But, being the 
master he is and tameless, he takes up another celestial bow given him by 
Angiras, and some arrows that are like a Brahmana’s curse; with his last 
vestiges of strength, the Acharya continues to battle Dhrishtadyumna! 

Suddenly renewed, like a flame that blazes most brightly before it dies, 
Drona covers the Panchala prince with a steaming fusillade, which strike 
his adversary heavily, drawing fonts of blood from Dhrishtadyumna. Drona 
shatters the Panchala prince’s shafts into dust; he cuts down the Pandava 
senapati’s standard, severs his bow and beheads his sarathy: all in a flash. 
Dhrishtadyumna, still smiling, takes up another bow and drills a long 
violent shaft deep into Drona’s torso. 

Deeply wounded by that staggering shaft, losing his self-possession, 
Drona roars dreadfully and again rives Dhrishtadyumna’s bow. As the 
Panchala prince seizes up more bows, the Acharya, apparently undimmed, 
destroys all of them, Rajan, leaving him only his mace and sword. He 
strikes the enraged, roaring Dhrishtadyumna with nine shafts such as would 
kill any enemy. But maharatha Dhrishtadyumna, of immeasurable soul, 
invokes the protective Brahmastra, and with light like speed and adroitness 
entangles his own horses with the Brahmana’s, steeds red and dove 
coloured. Their whinnying is like the raging of stormclouds during the 
season of rains, and their shimmering skins flash like lightning. 

The unrelenting Dvija shatters the shaft-joints, the wheel-joints, and all 
the other joints of Dhrishtadyumna’s chariot so it collapses under that hero. 
Deprived of his bow, ratha, horses and sarathy, Dhrishtadyumna, in great 
distress, grasps up a mace. In a wink, Drona splits that weapon into slivers 
just before it is hurled at him. Dhrishtadyumna, Naravyaghra, picks up a 
gleaming sword and a bright shield decked with a hundred moons. Despite 
every reversal, the Panchala prince remains absorbed in his single intention: 
to kill Acharya Drona. 

At times sheltering low in his chariot, at others leaping onto his chariot- 
head, the fire-prince remains in constant motion, brandishing his sword and 
whirling his bright shield, perhaps foolishly, still wanting to achieve his 
impossible task of despatching the Brahmana, who has him at his mercy. 
Now he leaps onto the very yoke of Drona’s ratha, then dives under his 


chestnut horses and hides himself briefly beneath their haunches. With such 
mercurial speed does he move, that the troops all around break into 
spontaneous applause. And indeed, O Dhritarashtra, he is an incredible 
marvel to watch darting about as quickly as the very mind, denying Drona 
any opportunity to strike him down. Both of them strangely resemble, in 
their different roles, hawks flying after a piece of flesh or a smaller bird— 
both are hawk and both are quarry. 

Expertly now, Drona spears his antagonist’s white horses, one after 
another, without touching his own red ones tangled with them. 
Dhrishtadyumna’s horses die, freeing Drona’s red horses from the traces of 
Dhrishtadyumna’s chariot. Seeing his horses killed, Dhrishtadyumna, the 
best of all swordsmen, springs at Drona with his sword, even like Vinata’s 
son Garuda swooping upon a snake. The appearance, Rajan, of 
Dhrishtadyumna resembles Vishnu’s when he was on the point of slaying 
Hiranyakasipu. He performs many elegant flourishes with his sword, 
including the well-known twenty-one different kinds of movements. With 
sword and shield in hand, he wheels about whirling his sword above his 
head, makes side thrusts, rushes forward, runs sideways, leaps high, attacks 
his antagonist’s flanks, retreats, closes with his enemy, and presses him 
hard. Having practised them thoroughly, he also shows the manoeuvres 
called the Bharata, the Kausika and the Satwata, as he prepares to kill 
Drona. Seeing Dhrishtadyumna’s striking display as he charges about the 
field, sword and shield in hand, all the warriors, as well as the Devas 
assembled there, are full of wonder. 

Drona shoots a thousand arrows in the thick of the fray and destroys 
Dhrishtadyumna’s sword as well as his shield of a hundred moons. The 
arrows that Drona uses are special short ones, used only in close combat. 
No one other than Kripa, Partha, Aswatthaman, Karna, Pradyumna and 
Yuyudhana own or know how to use these; Abhimanyu also had such 
arrows. Now the Acharya wants to kill his helpless disciple, who is like his 
own son, and affixes a deathly shaft to his bowstring. Just then, from a way 
off, the splendid Satyaki shatters that lethal arrow with ten whistling barbs, 
in the very sight of your son and the noble Karna, and rescues 
Dhrishtadyumna who would not otherwise have escaped with his life. 

Krishna and Arjuna cry joyfully, “Uttamam! Uttamam!” and loudly 
applaud Satyaki of unfading glory, who continually destroys the devastras 


of all the enemy maharathas. Then Kesava and Dhananjaya charge towards 
the Kurus. 

Dhananjaya says, “Look Krishna, how Satyaki, the joy of the Madhu 
vamsa, sports before the Acharya and the other maharathas and gladdens 
the twins, Bhima, Yudhishtira and me. With skill acquired through long 
abhyasa and deep humility, Yuyudhana toys with these mightiest warriors.” 

All the troops and the Siddhas in the sky look at the invincible grandson 
of Sini, are filled with joy and wonder and laud him, saying, “Wonderful, 
Wonderful!” Indeed, Rajan, all the warriors of both armies show their 
appreciation of the Satwata hero’s stunning feats.’” 


CANTO 189 


DRONA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Seeing what Satyaki does, an angry Duryodhana and 

others quickly surround him. Kripa and Karna join them, loosing 

towering gales of arrows at the Satwata hero. Swiftly, Yudhishtira, the twin 

sons of Madri and the stupendous Bhimasena arrive to support Satyaki. 

Karna, Kripa, Duryodhana and many others attack Satyaki viciously, all of 

them at once. But Yuyudhana is equal to them all; he cuts down all their 
arrows and incinerates the devastras that flare at him from all around. 

So bloody and brutal is the war now that Kurukshetra resembles a scene 
from antiquity when Rudra, filled with rage, destroyed all creatures. Human 
arms, heads, royal parasols cut down, and yak-tails are seen lying in heaps 
on the field of dharma where dharma itself has all but perished. The earth is 
strewn thickly with broken wheels and rathas, massive arms lopped off 
from trunks and brave horsemen deprived abruptly of their lives, many of 
them headless. Thousands of valiant men, mangled by cruel shafts and 
lances, roll and writhe on the ground in agony, in the spasms of death. What 
doubt can there be, Rajan, that the Mahabharata yuddha fought on 
Kurukshetra is like the Devasura yuddha of old fought on the filed of 
swarga? 


Dharmaraja Yudhishtira says to his warriors, “O Maharathas, attack 
Drona the pot-born with all your might! Look where Dhrishtadyumna, the 
heroic son of Prishata, is doing his utmost to slay the son of Bharadwaja. 
Looking at him, I feel certain that he will not fail today. But the Acharya is 
formidable and you must support him if he is to succeed. So unite and fight 
Drona!” 

At Yudhishtira’s command, the maharathas of the Srinjayas all rush 
forward feverishly to attack the still battling son of Bharadwaja; he sees 
them come at him and knows that his end is near. He does not pause but 
continues to fight back like some deranged god. Suddenly, the earth 
trembles unaccountably, fierce winds blow, meteors fall in showers out of 
the sky, seemingly issuing from the Sun, blazing fiercely, foreboding great 
terrors; the omens send waves of terror and panic through your army. 

The weapons of Drona seem to blaze more lividly than ever; the 
chariots on the field rumble louder and the horses all seem to weep. Drona, 
then, appears to rapidly lose his tejas and his left eye and hand begin to 
twitch. He sees Dhrishtadyumna before him again and, he hears the words 
of the Devarishis echo in his mind, saying that the time had come for him to 
leave the world. Drona feels a tide of despair and resolves to give up his life 
but after burning fiercely again in battle. 

Surrounded on all sides by the troops of Drupada’s son, Drona begins to 
range across the field, massacring countless Kshatriyas with his astras. 
After he first annihilates four and twenty thousand Kshatriyas, he 
despatches another hundred thousand, with his unearthly ayudhas. He 
stands upon Kurukshetra like a smokeless fire and, then, decides that he will 
exterminate the very Kshatriya race with the Brahmastra. 

The mighty Bhima races up to help Dhrishtadyumna who, without a 
chariot or weapons, still defiantly assails Drona with his bare hands and 
with whatever he can retrieve from the bloody mire around his feet. Bhima 
takes the Panchala prince into his ratha and says to him, “Only you can kill 
the dreadful Brahmana. The task of killing him rests with you; 
Dhrishtadyumna, hurry or he will finish us all!” 

Dhrishtadyumna quickly seizes up a fresh, marvellous bow and once 
more covers Drona with a tornado of arrows. Both invoke the Brahmastra 
and many other Devastras. Gradually Dhrishtadyumna destroys and 
somewhat depletes the arsenal of Bharadwaja’s son; having done this, the 


Panchala prince begins to mow down the Vasatis, the Sibis, the Balhikas 
and the Kurus, all those who are protecting Drona. 

The incandescent Acharya continues to summon and unleash fusillades 
of elemental arrows on all sides, while Dhrishtadyumna too is resplendent 
as the sun with his millions of rays. Then, once more, Drona breaks the bow 
in the Panchala prince’s hands and bores him deep with fierce clutches of 
shafts that pierce his very marmas and fling him back in Bhima’s ratha. 

At this, Rajan, Bhima loses his temper completely. Besides himself with 
fury, the Vayuputra leaps out of his chariot, seizes Drona’s red horses by 
their bits, and cries reverberantly to the Acharya, “If the vilest wretches 
among Brahmanas, discontented with their swadharma but well-versed in 
the use of arms, did not fight, the Kshatriya varna would not have been 
exterminated. Refraining from injury to all creatures, non-violence, the 
highest of all virtues and the Brahmana is the root of that virtue. As for you, 
you are the greatest of all knowers of the Brahman. These Mlecchas and 
other warriors are all engaged in their own swadharma and are motivated by 
ignorance and folly, and by the desire for wealth for their sons and wives. 
But you, O despicable and lowly Brahmana, commit genocide for the sake 
of an only son. Are you not ashamed? Unknown to you, Aswatthaman for 
whom you have taken up weapons, and for whom you live, lies dead today 
on the field. Yudhishtira himself has told you this, and do you still doubt 
it?” 

With such fervour does the great son of the Wind speak that the already 
heartsick Drona lays down his bow and all his other weapons as well. The 
invincible Brahmana says aloud in his lion’s voice, “O Karna, Karna 
maharatha, O Kripa, O Duryodhana, I say to you again, be careful how you 
fight the Pandavas otherwise they will kill you all. As for myself, I am 
laying down my weapons now. My time has come.” 

And then he repeatedly, dementedly calls out Aswatthaman’s name in 
absolute grief. Having finally laid down his weapons, he sits on the floor of 
his chariot, and takes up a Yogic posture to reassure all the warriors, why all 
living creatures and to dispel their abject terror of him. Seeing his chance, 
Dhrishtadyumna gathers all his strength and courage. Laying aside his own 
bow and grasping up a sword, he lean down from Bhima’s ratha and runs 
towards Drona. All men, all the unearthly ones who watch from the sky cry 
out in distress. 


Drona, having abandoned his weapons, is in a supremely tranquil state. 
Having called out the name of his son, he fixes his mind in dhyana, 
concentrating on attaining Yoga, communion with the Brahman. Endued 
with great radiance by years of tapasya, he fixes his heart on that Supreme, 
Ancient and Eternal Being, the Lord Vishnu. Bending his head down, 
thrusting his chest out a little, closing his eyes, yoking himself now to the 
sattva guna, giving his heart and soul up to the most profound meditation, 
focused on the Pranava, the single syllable AUM that is the Brahman, the 
ultimate, his heart flying like an arrow toward the puissant and 
indestructible God of gods, with great punya acquired through tapasya, the 
Acharya of the Kurus and the Pandavas soars into Swarga, which even the 
pious find so difficult to attain. 

When Drona’s spirit ascends into Swarga, the sky is lit by two suns, 
until the soul of Bharadwaja’s incomparable son dims and vanishes. We 
hear strange cries of joy from the delighted celestial ones above, Devarishi, 
Gandharva, Charana, Apsara, Vidyadhara, Deva and others as well. 

When Drona leaves his body thus, Dhrishtadyumna stands beside him, 
unconscious of what has happened. Only we five among men, Arjuna, 
Aswatthaman, Krishna, Yudhishtira and I see the noble Drona engrossed in 
Yoga ascend to the highest realm of blessedness. Nobody else, O Rajan, 
sees the lustre or magnificence of the wise Drona, devoted to Yoga, when he 
leaves this world. Indeed, all present know nothing of it, or that, after 
setting aside his weapons, Drona has attained to supreme Brahmaloka, a 
region mysterious to the very gods, in the company of the greatest Rishis, 
leaving his body lacerated by arrows and bathed in blood. 

Dhrishtadyumna knows nothing of it either and he roughly seizes the 
Acharya’s lifeless body and, coarsely dragging it around on the floor of the 
golden chariot, hacks off the Acharya’s head with his sword in an eruption 
of blood, while the already departed one makes no sound. Having beheaded 
him, Dhrishtadyumna gives a tremendous shout of joy, and whirls his sword 
around in triumph. 

Dark of complexion, with white locks hanging down to his ears, that 
Brahmana of five and eighty years ranged over the battlefield with the 
vigour of a youth of sixteen: only for your sake, O Rajan! Before 
Dhrishtadyumna has his way with Drona, Arjuna cries to him, “Take the 
Acharya alive, do not kill him. He should not be slain!” 


All the troops also cried out similar pleas; Arjuna, in particular, melts 
with pity, and cries out repeatedly. However, Dhrishtadyumna disregards all 
those cries and kills Drona on the floor of his ratha. Covered with the 
Brahmana’s blood, Dhrishtadyumna jumps down from the chariot, red as 
the sun and as fierce. This is how your troops and the Pandavas’ witness 
Drona killed in the battle. Though we five saw how Drona, called by the 
Sages of Swarga, attained to a transcendent realm before Dhrishtadyumna 
apparently slew him, fulfilling his destiny. 

Then the exultant Panchala fire-prince flings down Drona’s leonine, 
majestic head, flowing blood from its throat, before the warriors of your 
army, roaring terribly all the while. Your soldiers flee in all directions. 

Meanwhile, Drona courses up through the firmament along the path of 
the stars. Through the grace of the Rishi Krishna Dwaipayana, the son of 
Satyavati, I was a witness, Rajan, to the true circumstances of the death of 
Bharadwaja’s great son. I saw the illustrious one going, after he ascended 
the sky, like a smokeless brand of blinding splendour. 

Shocked and panic-stricken by the death of Drona, the Kurus, the 
Pandavas and the Srinjayas, all run from the battle. As your army breaks up 
and flees, many are killed and many wounded. Your warriors seem as if 
they have lost all will to continue fighting; they seem already vanquished, 
dead, and fear rips through them. The Kurus think of themselves as having 
lost both worlds and lose all self-control. 

The kings of your army seek out Drona’s body, Rajan, on the field 
covered over with thousands of headless trunks, and they cannot find it. 
With Drona slain, the Pandavas celebrate, twanging their bows, blowing 
their conches and beating their drums. Bhimasena and Dhrishtadyumna 
embrace each other in the midst of the Pandava host and Bhima says, “I will 
embrace you again, O son of Prishata, as a senapati who has won the war, 
when the wretch of a Suta’s son Karna, and the other wretch Duryodhana 
have been slain!” 

After he says this, Bhimasena, in a transport of joy, makes the earth 
tremble by deafeningly slapping his cavernous armpits. Terrified by that 
sound, the remainder of your troops run from the battlefield, forgetting 
Kshatriya dharma and intent on saving their lives. The Pandavas, O king, 
are overjoyed, for, a short while ago, it had truly seemed that Drona by 
himself would annihilate them and win the war by himself.” 


CANTO 190 


DRONA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Upon the fall of Drona the Kurus, beaten, broken, 
wounded and now leaderless, are listless, desperate and sapped of 
all will and energy to continue the battle. They mourn with loud wailing and 
lamentations and, seeing their enemies, the Pandavas, prevail over them all 
around, cutting them down at will, they quake with fear. Their eyes fill with 
tears, their hearts are afraid, and they become melancholic and gather 
forlorn around your son. Covered with dust and grime, they cast glazed and 
vacant looks all around, and with their very breaths choked with terror, they 
resemble the Daityas after the fall of Hiranyaksha in the olden days. 
Surrounded by them, as if by small terrified animals, Duryodhana 
cannot bear to remain in their sorry midst and moves away. Hungry, thirsty 
and scorched by the sun, your warriors, O Bhaarata, are entirely 
demoralised. For them the fall of Bharadwaja’s son Drona is as if the sun 
fell onto the earth, or the ocean dried up, or Meru was moved from his true 
place, or Indra vanquished and slain. Losing all composure and dignity they 
scatter with anxiety lending them great celerity. 
Sakuni, king of the Gandharas, watches Drona of the golden chariot 
killed, and he too runs away with the maharathas of his division, with even 


greater speed than any of the others. Even Karna flees in shock, taking with 
him his own vast division, with all its standards flapping in the hot wind 
that blows across Kurukshetra. 

Salya of the Madras casts vacant looks all around him; he, too, escapes 
with his akshauhini, with all his chariots, elephants and horses. 

Saradwat’s son, Kripa, too, flees crying aloud, “Alas! Alas!” at the fall 
of his brother-in-law, and takes with him his akshauhini of elephants and 
foot-soldiers, the greater part of which have by now been killed. 

Kritavarman also takes flight, borne by his swift horses, and surrounded 
by the remnants of his Bhoja, Kalinga, Aratta, and Balhika troops. 

Uluka, O Rajan, seeing Drona slain, is terror-stricken and runs away, 
with his teeming cohort of foot-soldiers. 

Handsome, youthful and reputed for his bravery, Dusasana, also, turns 
his back on the battle with alacrity, surrounded by his elephant division. 

Vrishasena also flees at the sight of Drona’s beheading, along with his 
ten thousand chariots and three thousand elephants. 

With his elephants, horses, chariots and foot-soldiers, even your 
otherwise fearless son, the mighty Duryodhana also rides away in panic, 
Rajan, as do the remnants of the Samsaptakas whom Arjuna has not yet 
slaughtered. Seeing Drona die, Susarman flees. 

Riding on their elephants, chariots and horses, all the warriors of the 
Kaurava army run from the field of battle; some call out to their fathers to 
flee, some to their brothers, some to their uncles, some to their sons and 
some to their friends. Others cry out to their brothers in arms, their sisters’ 
sons or other kinsmen, and everyone bolts in all directions. With 
dishevelled hair, and clothes come loose, they all run so that no two men 
can bee seen to be fleeing together with any composure. It is every man for 
himself and each of them believes that the war is lost and the Kuru army 
has been entirely destroyed. Others among your troops flee, Rajan, throwing 
off their armour so they can go faster. 

A very few of the warriors and soldiers cry out to the others, “Stop! Do 
not run!” And then they themselves flee. Abandoning their fine chariots, 
and their bright ornaments flashing, they flee on horseback or on foot. 

Only Drona’s son Aswatthaman, like a great crocodile swimming 
against the current of a river, does not run but bears down on his enemies 
instead. A fierce battle breaks out between him and the many warriors led 
by Sikhandin, the Prabhadrakas, the Panchalas, the Chedis and the 


Kaikeyas. Even while cutting down vast numbers of the enemy, this 
Brahmana hero, with the tread of an infuriated elephant, sees the Kaurava 
host running from battle, bent just upon escape. 

Aswatthaman rides up to Duryodhana and says, “Why, O Bhaarata, do 
our men flee as if in some great dread? Why do you not rally them? Rajan, 
you seem dazed and not yourself. Which of our maharathas has been killed 
that our men flee in such terror? O Kaurava, Karna himself leads those who 
run away. Never before have I seen such a sight. What dire evil has befallen 
your troops, O Suyodhana?” 

Duryodhana cannot bear to tell him. Your son seems to sink deeper into 
an ocean of grief, like a foundering boat; he looks at Aswatthaman and tears 
flow down his face. Full of shame, your son finally says, “Blessed are you 
that you ask before any other why our army runs like frightened boys.” 

Then, Saradwat’s son Kripa, in great anguish, tells Drona’s son how his 
father had been killed. He says, “We set Drona, greatest of all maharathas, 
at the head of our troops and began to fight the Panchalas. The Kurus and 
the Somakas closed with each other with a roar as of spring thunder and we 
fought closely, with swords and bare hands. As the battle progressed, the 
Dhartarashtras were being swiftly thinned and, seeing this, your august 
father was filled with rage and invoked a Brahmastra, which incinerated 
thousands of the enemy, great warriors and common soldiers alike. Any 
man of the Pandavas, Kaikeyas, Matsyas or Panchalas, O Aswatthaman, 
who came near Drona’s ratha, died. With his Brahmastra, Drona sent a 
thousand maharathas and two thousand elephants to the land of Yama. 

Dark, with gray locks hanging down to his ears, and full five and eighty 
years old, the aged Drona would ride into battle like a youth of sixteen. 
While he razed the enemy troops and slew so many of their kings and 
maharathas, the Panchalas, though desperate to have revenge on him, ran 
from the fight in disorder. Invoking Devastras and unleashing them without 
discrimination, Drona burned like the sun. Your father, radiating arrows as 
Surya does his rays, was like the star at his zenith at whom no one can gaze. 
He scorched his enemies; he incinerated them or sapped them of their 
energy and will. 

Seeing Drona devour their troops, Krishna said to Arjuna, “Truly, not 
Indra who slew great Vritrasura can vanquish this Brahman in battle. O you 
sons of Pandu, set aside your dharma and look for victory, otherwise Drona 
of the golden chariot will slaughter all of you this very day. We must use 


stratagem against him for only thus can he be killed. I believe that if he 
hears that Aswatthaman is dead he will not fight on. Only if Drona lays 
down his weapons can he be killed. Someone must say to him that his son 
had been slain. That will break his heart and his will not only to fight but to 
live.’ 

Arjuna did not approve of what Krishna said but the others all agreed, 
even Yudhishtira although after struggling with his conscience. Then, 
Bhimasena killed a great elephant called Aswatthaman, which belonged to 
the Malava lord Indravarman; his heart full of shame, he then went to your 
sire and said, ‘Aswatthaman has been killed.’ 

But your father did not believe Bhima and he asked Yudhishtira is this 
was true. Afraid of telling a lie, but knowing that the war would be lost 
otherwise, and wanting victory, Yudhishtira said to the Acharya, ‘He for 
whom you wield weapons, he for whom you live, your beloved son 
Aswatthaman has been slain. He lies unbreathing on the ground like a 
young lion killed in his prime.’ 

Knowing well the consequences of telling a lie, Yudhishtira added 
under his breath ‘the elephant Aswatthaman’. Hearing this from the 
Dharmarajan, whom he did not doubt for a moment, the stricken Drona 
wailed aloud, his limbs turned weak and he did not fight as he did before. 
Seeing him almost senseless with shock and anxiety, Drupada’s son, the 
cruel Dhrishtadyumna, rushed towards him. 

Seeing the prince who had been born to kill him, Drona, knower of all 
things, knower of fate and its inexorable ways, cast aside his weapons and 
sat down in his chariot in praya. Dhrishtadyumna bounded onto that ratha, 
seized Drona by the hair with his left hand and, ignoring the loud 
admonitions of all the heroes around him, struck off the Acharya’s head 
with his sword. 

‘Drona must not be killed!’ These were the words that echoed from all 
sides. Arjuna, too, jumped down from his chariot and ran towards Prishata’s 
son with arms upraised and repeatedly cried to him, “O you who know the 
ways of dharma, do not kill the Acharya but take him alive!’ 

Though the Kauravas and Arjuna forbade him, Dhrishtadyumna brutally 
killed your father even as he sat with his eyes shut in dhyana. And now, our 
terrified troops run in all directions as if they have themselves been 
beheaded. Aswatthaman, Anagha, I and my brothers are also plunged in 
grief and fear, and we are also fleeing the field.” 


When he hears this, Aswatthaman’s hisses like a serpent trodden upon; 
rage like a fire fed with ample fuel blazes up in him. He wrings his hands, 
grinds his teeth, breathes like a snake and his eyes turn red as blood.’” 


CANTO 191 


DRONA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: “T) hritarashtra says, ‘When he hears about how his father Drona 

was killed, what does Aswatthaman say, O Sanjaya? He in 

whom the Manava, Varuna, Agneya, Brahma, Aindra and Narayana astras 

reside always, what does he say when he hears that Dhrishtadyumna has, 
sinfully and eschewing dharma killed the virtuous Acharya in battle? 

Having learnt the astra shastra, the science of weapons, from 
Parasurama himself, including all the Devastras, Drona had imparted all his 
knowledge to his son, wanting to see him invested with all the 
accomplishments of a great warrior. In this world, there is only one person, 
and none else, whom even the greatest men wish to see become superior to 
themselves and that is the son. 

All the noblest, greatest teachers have this characteristic and they impart 
all the mysteries of their science to either their sons or devoted disciples 
whom they think of as being their own sons. Becoming his father’s disciple, 
and obtaining all those mysteries in every nuance and detail, Aswatthaman 
became a veritable second Drona. Aswatthaman is equal to Karna in the 
knowledge of weapons, to Purandara in war, to Kartavirya in might, 


Brihaspati in gyana, a mountain in fortitude, in tejas to Agni, in depth to an 
ocean, and in wrath and virulence to the venom of a great serpent. 

He is the best of all maharathas in war, accomplished and indefatigable. 
In speed, he is equal to the wind and he tears about in the thick of a battle, 
like Yama in a rage. The very Earth shakes when he shoots his arrows. With 
prowess that cannot be confounded, this Brahmana hero is remorseless as 
well. 

Purified by the Vedas and by his vratas, he is a perfect master of the 
science of arms, why, even like Dasaratha’s son Rama. Like the ocean, he is 
imperturbable. 

Hearing that Dhrishtadyumna has killed his father Drona, with adharma, 
what did Aswatthaman say? Even as Yagnasena’s son was born to become 
the slayer of Drona, so too was Aswatthaman born to avenge his father’s 
death and to kill Dhrishtadyumna. What does Aswatthaman say, hearing 
that the ruthless Dhrishtadyumna has beheaded his sire, the Acharya?’” 


CANTO 192 


DRONA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says. “Aswatthaman is filled with grief and rage in equal 
parts, O Rajan, on hearing how Dhrishtadyumna slaughtered his 
father like some animal. His body blazes forth with wrath like that of the 
Destroyer while he consumes all the creatures at the end of the Yuga. 
Repeatedly wiping his tears, and breathing hot sighs in anger, he says to 
Duryodhana, “Ah, Yudhishtira is the greatest hypocrite that he bears the 
standard of dharma, always sanctimoniously preaches the virtue of truth but 
then lies so vilely himself. No one could have vanquished my father unless 
he first set his weapons down and he would have consumed the Pandavas 
and their entire army with the fires of his astras. Now, he has been killed by 
a lie and in the most treacherous and cowardly way even while he sat in 
praya. So this is the great dharma of Dharma’s own son! 

Men who fight a war must inevitably find either victory or defeat. Death 
in battle is always commended and the sages have declared that the death of 
a warrior fighting in the cause of dharma is never to be mourned. My father 
met with a noble death and he has, beyond doubt, found the loftiest realm of 
felicity. I should not mourn him. But the utter shame of being crudely 
seized by his white hair before all the troops, even as he fought a dhama 


yuddha, burns and rends the very core of my heart. If my father could thus 
be seized by his silver locks and be beheaded while he sat in dhyana, why 
then should any sonless man ever want to have a son? 

Moved by lust, wrath, folly, hatred or levity, men perpetrate deeds of 
grave adharma and humiliate the noblest souls. The cruel and evil son of 
Prishata has committed this unforgivable sin but he forgot that this 
Aswatthaman is not dead but alive! He will pay with his life, and savagely, 
for what he did to Drona; the lying Yudhishtira will pay for the lie he told 
my father that made him lay down his weapons. Drona trusted Yudhishtira 
absolutely and the Pandava betrayed his trust to have his life and win this 
war. 

This very day, the earth will drink the blood of this false Dharmaraja. 
Besides this, I swear by the Truth, O Kauravya, as also by all my religious 
karma, that I will not continue to live unless I annihilate all the Panchalas 
for what their prince did to my father. I swear that I will kill the sinner 
Dhrishtadyumna, even as brutally as he did my father. Let the means be 
any, mild or violent, but I will not rest in peace until I have wrought the 
destruction of all the Panchalas. 

O Kaurava, Naravyaghra, men wish for sons so that they may be saved 
from great fears both here and in the hereafter. Yet, my father met a 
disgraceful death, like a friendless creature, although I, his son and disciple, 
am alive, and like a mountain in strength. Shame on my devastras, fie on 
my weaponry, shame on my prowess, for Drona, although he had a son in 
me, had his gray locks seized by the Panchala and his head hewn off! 

O Duryodhana, king of the Bharatas, I will now do what will free me 
from the debt I owe my sire who has left this world. A superior man never 
praises himself. But I cannot bear the sinful slaying of my father and today I 
will speak of my prowess. Let the Pandavas, with Krishna among them, 
behold my tejas today as I consume all their troops even as Rudra does 
when the yuga ends. 

Not the Devas, the Gandharvas, the Asuras, the Uragas, the Rakshasas, 
nor all the greatest Manavas shall contain me in battle today. There is none 
in the world to equal Arjuna or me in the knowledge of weapons. Today I 
will break into the Pandava army, shining like the Sun himself with his 
blazing rays, and I will incinerate the enemy with my devastras. Endless 
arrows will spume forth from my bow and devour them all. Today the 
warriors of our army will see all the points of the compass, O Rajan, 


obscured by my arrows, as if with dark torrents of rain. Today I will mow 
them all down like a great tempest does trees, great and small, that stand in 
its way. Not Arjuna, Janardana, Bhimasena, Nakula, Sahadeva, Yudhishtira, 
Drupada’s evil son Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandin or Satyaki possess the 
astras that I have, for my father gave me more than he did any of them. 

Once, assuming the form of a Brahmana, Narayana himself came to my 
father and, after bowing down to him, my father made his offerings to Him. 
Taking them in his own hands, the divine Lord offered to give him a boon. 
My father asked for the supreme weapon, the Narayanastra. 

The Devadeva said to my sire, “No man will ever be your equal in 
battle. However, O Brahmana, you must never use this weapon lightly or in 
haste, for it never returns without destroying the enemy at whom you loose 
it. There is no one whom it cannot slay! Indeed, the Narayanastra would 
consume even the immortals. Therefore, it should be used only after the 
greatest deliberation and to serve the gravest cause. This astra, O Parantapa, 
should never be cast against men who abandon their chariots or weapons in 
battle, at those who seek quarter or those that concede defeat. Also, he who 
seeks to injure the Immortal One with it will himself be severely afflicted 
by this supreme weapon!’ 

My sire humbly received the Narayanastra. Then Lord Narayana said to 
me, ‘With this Narayanastra, you will also be able to unleash other astras 
beyond count in battle and blaze with tejas.’ 

Having said these words, the divine Lord vanished before our eyes and 
ascended into Swarga. This is the tale of how I came to possess the 
ineluctable Narayanastra. Today, I will put it to good use and annihilate the 
Pandavas, the Panchalas, the Matsyas and the Kaikeyas, even as Sachi’s 
lord razed the Asuras. My arrows, O Bhaarata, will fall upon my enemies in 
the very forms that I wish them to assume; they shall be without count or 
end and they will not cease falling upon the enemy until their last warrior is 
dead. I am a Parantapa, O Duryodhana, a blazing scourge of my enemies, 
and today you will see me destroy the Pandavas and all who fight their 
cause. As for that cur of the Panchalas, Dhrishtadyumna, who is an offender 
of friends, Brahmanas and of his own Acharya, who is a deceitful and 
ignoble wretch, he will not escape me with his life today.” 

Hearing what Aswatthaman says, the Kuru army takes heart and rallies. 
Many great warriors are delighted and blow their gigantic conches; the 
troops beat their drums and dindimas by the thousands. The earth resounds 


with the hooves of charging horses and the racing wheels of chariots; the 
sky echoes with the great sounds. Hearing this uproar, deep as rolling 
thunder, the Pandava maharathas take counsel together. 

Meanwhile, after he has spoken, Drona’s son, O Bhaarata, touches holy 
water and invokes the devastra called the Narayana.’” 


CANTO 193 


DRONA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘No sooner does Aswatthaman invoke the 
Narayanastra than violent winds begin to blow with lashing 
showers of rain, and we hear peals of thunder although there is not a cloud 
in the sky. The earth trembles and the seas swell up in great agitation. The 
rivers begin to run back towards their sources in terror; mountain peaks 
cleave themselves and giant crags come loose of their own accord and crash 
down sheer precipices; diverse beasts of the earth all run in panic, keeping 
the Pandavas ever to their right. 

Darkness sets in. The sun is obscured and all manner of birds of prey 
and beasts of carrion alight on the field in joy of a further fresh feast to 
come. The Devas, the Danavas and the Gandharvas, Rajan, are all petrified. 
Seeing this tremendous upheaval in nature, all the men begin to cry out 
loudly to one another about its cause. A terrible wave of anguish, both 
bodily and spiritual, courses through all the kings and maharathas when 
Drona’s son summons the Narayanastra.’ 

Dhritarashtra asks, ‘O Sanjaya, tell me what strategy the Pandavas 
adopt to protect Dhrishtadyumna when they see the Kauravas advance 


again into battle, rallied by Drona’s son seared by grief at the murder of his 
sire?’ 

Sanjaya continues, “Having seen the Dhartarashtras turn tail earlier, and 
now finding them prepared for a furious battle, Yudhishtira asks Arjuna, 
“Dhananjaya, after Dhrishtadyumna slew the Acharya even as Indra did 
Vritrasura, the Kurus’ spirit was broken and they fled in fear. Some kings 
dashed away on chariots along uneven paths without Parshni drivers, 
without standards, banners, chatras and with their kuvaras broken, and all 
their weapons awry. 

Others, losing their wits with fear, whipped and kicked their horses and 
fled in frenzy. Many, riding on chariots with broken yokes, wheels and 
akshas, flew in absolute fear. Several on horseback were borne away, almost 
unseated and clinging on for dear life. Some warriors were dislodged from 
their lofty seats and transfixed by arrows to the necks of their elephants, 
while the great creatures lumbered away in equal terror. Elephants, mangled 
with hundred of barbs, trod on other fighting men, crushing them to pulp. 

Having lost their weapons and armour, great fighting men fell down 
upon the earth from their chariots and animals. Chariot-wheels cut others in 
two, or they were crushed by horses. Others, calling loudly after their sires 
and sons, also fled in fear, without recognising one another, all their courage 
and energy gone from shock and grief at the death of Drona. Some, setting 
their dead sons, fathers, friends and brothers on their chariots and taking off 
their armour, were seen dementedly washing them with water. After the 
slaying of Drona, the Kuru army had fallen into utter despair and chaos and 
scattered in every direction. Who, then, has rallied it now? Tell me, Arjuna, 
if you know. 

We hear neighing horses and trumpeting elephants, their cries 
resounding once more with the rumble of chariot-wheels. These fierce 
sounds from the Kuru ocean swell in tide and make my troops tremble. This 
spine-chilling uproar that we now hear, it would seem, will swallow the 
three worlds with Indra at their head. Why, I feel as if the Vajradhari 
himself makes this terrible din. Arjuna, I feel certain that Indra himself 
comes to fight us at the fall of Acharya Drona; I do fear that the gods 
themselves have taken the field against us and will fight for the Kauravas. 

My hair stands on end; our greatest maharathas are all full of anxiety. O 
Dhananjaya, tell me who rallies the Kurus against us that they return to 
battle so fiercely and full of courage again?” 


His eyes full of angry tears, Arjuna replies with some passion, “He, 
relying upon whose tejas, the Kauravas are determined to accomplish fierce 
deeds, and blow their conches in blaring challenge; who roars so loudly, 
having rallied the Dhartarashtras after the fall of the Acharya; who is 
endued with modesty, possesses mighty weapons, has the tread of an 
enraged elephant, a face like a tiger’s, always accomplishes fierce deeds and 
dispels the fears of the Kurus; he upon whose birth Drona gave away a 
thousand heads of the finest cattle to the worthiest Brahmanas; he, Rajan, 
who bellows like Nandin himself is Aswatthaman. 

As soon as he was born, this hero neighed like Indra’s steed 
Ucchaisravas and made the three worlds tremble at the sound. Hearing that 
sound, an asariri spoke resonantly out of the sky and called him 
Aswatthaman, the horse-voiced. Aswatthaman is the shura who roars today 
as if he means to end the world. 

Drupada’s son Dhrishtadyumna took Drona’s life brutally today, 
hacking off his head while the Acharya sat in praya. He killed him as if he 
was never his guru. Because Dhrishtadyumna seized his father, our 
Acharya, by his hair, the proud Aswatthaman will never forgive him. 

You told your Acharya a lie for the sake of a kingdom! Although you 
know dharma better than anyone, yet you committed this grave sin. Your 
infamy will resound through the three worlds for the death of great Drona, 
and it shall be eternal, Yudhishtira, even as Rama’s is because of the way in 
which he slew Vali the Vanara, treacherously. 

Of you Drona thought, ‘The son of Pandu possesses every virtue; 
besides, he is my sishya. He will never lie to me.’ 

And believing this he never doubted you when you told him that 
Aswatthaman was dead. You added ‘the elephant’ under your breath, but 
what you swore to your Acharya was still a lie and a terrible sin. Believing 
what you said, our Acharya laid down his weapons and grew indifferent to 
the war. His heart was broken and he was senseless with grief. He sat down 
on the floor of his ratha, shut his eyes and gave himself up to dhyana. 

And it was at such a time that a sishya, Dhrishtadyumna, abandoning 
dharma, killed his own acharya. Having caused to lay down his weapons 
with your lie and thus be savagely killed, now protect Dhrishtadyumna if 
you can, with all your allies and counsellors. All of us together will not be 
able to protect Drupada’s son today from the grief and wrath of Drona’s son 
Aswatthaman. 


Aswatthaman is no mere mortal warrior; the knowing say that he is an 
amsa of Siva himself. This superhuman Brahmana, who is given to showing 
affection and friendship towards all, is in the grip of righteous anger and no 
one will save us from his ire today. Aswatthaman will consume us all for 
the manner in which we slew his great father. 

Although I cried repeatedly at the very top of my voice to save the 
Acharya’s life, yet ignoring me and abandoning dharma, a sishya, 
Dhrishtadyumna, took the life of his own acharya in the vilest, most brutal 
manner imaginable. All of us have passed the greater part of our lives and 
the days that remain to us are limited. This sin that we have committed will 
darken the rest of our lives. For the deep love he bore towards us, he was 
like a father to us. According to the dictates of the scriptures too, he is a sire 
to us for he was our guru. Yet we killed our acharya for the sake of a short- 
lived, meaningless kingdom. 

Dhritarashtra, Rajan, gave Bhishma and Drona all the Earth, and what is 
more precious, all his children. Though thus honoured by our uncle, our 
enemy, and though he had gained untold wealth from him, the Acharya still 
loved us as his own children. Of unfading tejas and prowess, Drona was 
killed only because, persuaded by your lie to him, he set aside his weapons. 
As long as he fought, he was invincible and not even Indra could kill him. 
Our Acharya was venerable in years and always devoted to our welfare. Yet 
sinners that we are, we had no scruple in sending him to his death. The sin 
that we have committed is inconceivably heinous and cowardly, for moved 
by the desire of enjoying the pleasures of sovereignty, we have murdered 
great Drona. 

My Acharya always believed of me that, because of my love for him, I 
would gladly abandon my father, brothers, children, wife and life itself for 
his sake. And yet, moved by the lust for a kingdom, I did not intervene 
when he was about to be killed. I did not stop Dhrishtadyumna with an 
arrow when I well could have. For this crime, Rajan, I am overwhelmed 
with shame and I have already plunged into hell. For the sake of a kingdom, 
I caused the death of one who was a Brahmana, who was venerable in 
years, who was my Acharya, who had laid down his weapons, and who was 
at the time devoted, like a great ascetic, to yoga. 

Ah, death has become preferable to me over life 


99999 
! 


CANTO 194 


DRONA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Hearing what Arjuna says, the maharathas present 
there say not a single word to him, O Rajan, good or bad. 

Then, an angry Bhimasena, his brow dark, upbraids Arjuna sharply, 
“You preach the truths of dharma like a sannyasi living in the vana or a 
Brahmana of rigid vratas and his senses under complete control. But a man 
is called a Kshatriya because he saves others from danger and harm. Being 
such, he must save himself from hurt and injury as well. Showing 
forgiveness towards the three that are good—the Devas, the Brahmanas and 
an Acharya—a Kshatriya, by performing his svadharma, soon wins the 
earth and also piety, fame and prosperity. O perpetuator of your race, you 
possess every attribute of a Kshatriya. Therefore, it does not look well for 
you to speak like an ignorant lout. O son of Kunti, your prowess is as that 
of Sachi’s lord, Sakra himself. You do not break the bounds of dharma, like 
the ocean that never transgresses its continents. Who is there that will not 
worship you, seeing that you seek dharma, having abandoned the anger you 
cherished for thirteen years? 

Fortunately, today your heart follows the path of dharma. O you of 
unfading glory, providentially, your intellect is disposed towards 


compassion. However, though you are inclined to tread the path of dharma, 
your kingdom was taken from you most sinfully. Dragging Draupadi to the 
Kuru sabha, your enemies insulted and shamed her. Clad in barks of trees 
and skins of animals, all of us were banished to the vana. Though we did 
not deserve it, our enemies compelled us to endure our exile for thirteen 
years. O sinless one, you have forgiven all these circumstances, every one 
of which demands the demonstration of our anger. Wedded as you are to 
Kshatriya dharma, you quietly bore these trials and tribulations. 

I, however, remember all those sins committed against us and I came 
here with you for revenge. But when I see that you are so indifferent, why, I 
myself will kill these low wretches that stripped us of our kingdom. You 
once said, ‘We will fight the war to the utmost of our abilities.’ 

Today, you reproach us and you now seek dharma. So what you said 
earlier must be untrue. We are already stricken with fear and you sow doubt 
and weakness in the very core of our hearts with your words, O Parantapa, 
like one pouring acid into open wounds. My heart is breaking to listen to 
you preach. You are virtuous, Arjuna, but you do not know what dharma 
truly consists of, since you laud neither yourself nor us, though all of us are 
worthy of praise for our deeds on the field of battle. 

When Krishna himself told us how to kill Drona, how can you praise 
the son of Drona, a warrior who does not measure up to even a sixteenth 
part of yourself, Dhananjaya? Do you not feel ashamed confessing your 
own faults like some weakling? 

I can rend asunder this earth in anger, or split the very mountains with 
my gada decked with gold. Like a tempest of my natural sire, I can tear 
down trees tall as hills. Partha, with my arrows, I can rout all the Devas 
with Indra at their head, together with all the Rakshasas, the Asuras, the 
Uragas and Manushas. Knowing me, your brother, to be such, O bull among 
men, it is not fitting that you should entertain any fear about Drona’s son. 
Otherwise, stand here with all these heroes, Bibhatsu, while, alone and 
unsupported, armed with my gada, I vanquish this fellow of no great worth 
in a duel.” 

When Bhima has finished, Dhrishtadyumna rounds on Arjuna, and says 
in a tone as terrible as the one Hiranyakashyapu used when he once 
addressed Vishnu, “O Bibhatsu, the sages have ordained that assisting in 
yagnas, performance of yagnas, teaching, giving away alms, receiving gifts, 
and study to be the six duties of Brahmanas. To which of these six duties 


was Drona, whom I have slain, devoted? Fallen from the dharma of his own 
varna and practising those of the Kshatriya varna, this doer of evil deeds 
burned us and our common soldiers with his devastras. Professing himself 
to be a Brahmana, he used irresistible maya against us as well. 

Today he has been killed with maya, an illusion. O Partha, what is 
reprehensible in this? If Drona’s griefstricken and enraged son roars threats 
at us after I punished Drona, what do you lose by it? I myself believe that, 
after rallying the Kauravas back to battle, Aswatthaman, who roars so 
loudly, will find himself unable to protect them and will be the cause of 
their being killed instead. 

You know dharma well. Why then do you say that I am a slayer of my 
Acharya? It is for this very task that I was born as a son to the king of the 
Panchalas, having sprung from a yagna fire. How, O Dhananjaya, can you 
call him a Brahmana or Kshatriya, to whom, while waging war, all actions, 
righteous and utterly sinful, are the same? O best of men, why should he 
who, losing his mind in anger, used the Brahmastra to kill even those who 
knew nothing of the astras, our common troops, not be killed by any 
means? 

He who lives by sin is considered by men of dharma to be like poison. 
Knowing this, why do you, Arjuna, who know all the truths of dharma, 
reproach me? 

I seized and killed the ruthless and cruel maharatha. I have done nothing 
that is worthy of reproach. Why then, O Bibhatsu, do you not congratulate 
me? O Partha, I cut off the terrible head of Drona that was like the blazing 
sun, virulent poison or the all-destroying Yuga fire. Why do you not 
approve a deed that is worthy of the highest praise? He has killed only my 
father and kinsmen and not those of anyone else. I say that by having only 
beheaded him, the fever of my heart has not cooled. My heart is in anguish 
that I did not fling Drona’s head among the Nishadas, like that of 
Jayadratha! 

I have heard, O Arjuna, that one incurs sin by not killing one’s enemies. 
The dharma of a Kshatriya is to slay or be slain. Drona was my enemy. I 
have killed him in battle, O Pandava, exactly as you killed the brave 
Bhagadatta, who was your friend. Having cut down your own grandsire 
Bhishma in battle, you still speak of dharma! How, after that, do you dare 
say I sinned by killing my wretched and inveterate enemy? 


Because of our relationship, O Partha, I cannot raise my head in your 
presence and am like a prostrate elephant with a ladder against his body for 
helping puny creatures to climb on its back. So do not reproach me, it does 
not become you. 

For the sake of my sister Draupadi and her children, and no other 
reason, I forgive you what you have dared say to me today. It is well known 
that my enmity with the Acharya has come down from sire to son. 
Everybody in this world knows it. You sons of Pandu, husbands of my 
sister, are you not acquainted with it? The eldest son of Pandu has not lied. I 
myself, O Arjuna, have not sinned. The wretched Drona was a hater of his 
disciples. Stop whining like a witless boy and fight now. Victory will be 


99999 


yours. 


CANTO 195 


DRONA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, ‘The illustrious Drona, who had studied the 

Vedas with all their angas; he in whom the entire science of arms 
and modesty dwelt; the Brahmana through whose grace so many of the 
greatest still achieve superhuman feats that the very gods perform with 
difficulty—alas, when the Maharishi Bharadwaja’s invincible son was 
humiliated and beheaded by the base and sinful Dhrishtadyumna, slayer of 
his own Acharya while all men watched, was there no Kshatriya who felt 
called upon to display his anger? Shame on the Kshatriya varna and fie on 
wrath itself! 

Tell me, O Sanjaya, what the sons of Pritha, and all the other royal 
archers of the world, say to the prince of Panchala after he murdered his 
guru Drona.’ 

Sanjaya replies, ‘All that are present there remain perfectly silent, O 
Rajan, when they hear what Drupada’s dishonest son says. Arjuna, 
however, casting oblique glances at Dhrishtadyumna, seems to reproach 
him with tears and sighs, which say, “Shame! Shame!”, while Yudhishtira, 
Bhima, the twins, Krishna and the others stand there saying nothing. 


But Satyaki says clearly, “Is there no man here who will at once kill this 
sinful creature, this lowest of men, who speaks so evilly? The Pandavas all 
condemn you for your sinful deed, like Brahmanas condemning a Chandala. 
Having committed such a heinous crime, and incurring the censure of all 
honest men, are you not ashamed to open your mouth and speak in the 
midst of such an honourable gathering of Kshatriyas? Despicable wretch, 
why did your head not burst apart into a hundred pieces when you were 
about to slay your own Acharya? Why does your tongue not spilt into 
slivers when you now defend what you did? Why does your sin not strike 
you down even now, vile Dhrishtadyumna? 

You not only commit an unmentionable sin but you applaud and 
congratulate yourself in the midst of noble men. Panchala, I swear that you 
incur the censure of the Parthas, all the Andhakas and the Vrishnis. Having 
perpetrated atrocity, you still loudly declare your rancour and hatred for the 
one that taught you everything you know. And for this you deserve death at 
our hands. You should not be left alive for even a moment. Who other than 
you, O filthy wretch, would dare seize our great Acharya by his silver locks 
as he sat in yoga and cut his head from his neck? 

Having got you for part of their great vamsa, vile man, your ancestors 
for seven generations and your descendants for seven generations, deprived 
of honour and fame, have sunk into hell. You dare charge Arjuna, bull 
among men, with the killing of Bhishma. But the truth is that Bhishma 
sought and brought about his own fall, for no other could bring him down. 
And in truth, wretched Panchala, it is your own brother Sikhandin, greatest 
of sinners, who was the cause of Bhishma’s fall. 

I say that there are no greater sinners in this world than the sons of the 
Panchala king. Your father created Sikhandin for Bhishma’s destruction, 
and you to kill Drona in the most depraved manner. As for Arjuna, he only 
protected Sikhandin while your brother shot Bhishma down with his arrows 
because the noble Bhishma would not defend himself against one whom he 
regarded to be a woman. 

Having you, whom all righteous men condemn, and your eunuch 
brother born into their clan, the Panchalas have fallen from dharma and, 
stained with malice, have all become haters of friends and acharyas. 
Dhrishtadyumna, if you say what you have again in my presence, I will then 
smash your head with my mace that is like Indra’s Vajra. 


Anyone who so much as looks at you, O Brahmana slayer, marked with 
the guilt of the direst sin of Brahmahatya, must look up at the sun to purify 
himself for having set eyes on such a sinner. You dog of a Panchala, evil 
man, do you feel no shame casting aspersions first on my guru Arjuna and 
then on my guru’s guru the great Drona himself? 

Stop, and have done, you lowly thing! Bear but one stroke of my mace 
and I myself will bear many blow of yours.” 

Harshly rebuked by the Satwata hero, Prishata’s son Dhrishtadyumna, 
filled with rage, says to Satyaki with a superior, mocking smile, “I have 
heard you, O you of Madhu’s race, but I forgive you. Being a sinner and an 
adharmi yourself, you now wish to censure honest men of dharma? The 
quality of forgiveness is acclaimed in the world while sin like yours 
deserves none. He who has a sinful soul regards the forgiving man as being 
weak. You are evil in your conduct, your soul is dark with sin, and you are 
wedded to adharma. You are culpable in every way, from the tips of your 
toes to the ends of your hair. And you, base Satwata, still speak ill of 
others? 

What can be more sinful than what you did when you murdered the 
armless Bhurisravas, while he sat in praya, and you were unleashing 
devastras. Yes, Drona had laid aside his weapons and I killed him. Crooked 
hypocrite, what did I do that was wrong? How can you, O foolish Satyaki, 
blame me for what I did, when you did exactly the same, and that, too, after 
Arjuna saved your worthless life by cutting off Bhurisarvas’ arm? This 
valiant Kuru enemy of yours displayed his prowess by throwing you down 
onto the earth and stamping on you with his foot. Why did you not kill him 
then, and show your manliness? No, vile Satyaki, you killed great 
Bhurisravas only after Arjuna had hewn away his arm and when he sat in 
dhyana. 

And now you dare preach dharma to me? When Drona was annihilating 
the forces of the Pandavas, I fought him with thousands of arrows. But 
having yourself behaved like a Chandala and become worthy of censure, 
how do you now reproach me so harshly? You are the evil one and not I, O 
wretch of the Vrishni vamsa! You are the home of all sins, so it is better that 
you remain silent and not point your crooked finger at me again in blame. 

Don’t dare speak to me again. This is the reply I give you with my lips. 
But if, from folly, you say anything more, I will send you to Yama before 
you have finished talking. 


Through dharma alone, O fool, one cannot vanquish great enemies. If 
you have forgotten, listen to all the adharma the Kurus committed against 
the sons of Pandu, which caused this war. Pandu’s son Yudhishtira 
Dharmaraja was deceived with rank adharma at the game of dice. O 
Satyaki, the sons of Dhritarashtra and the sinner Karna coarsely humiliated 
my sister Draupadi in the hallowed Kuru sabha. The Pandavas, with 
Panchali, were then exiled and robbed of their all, O foolish Satwata. Was 
that, according to you, dharma? 

With cunning, the enemy deprived us of a valuable ally, Salya of the 
Madras. Subhadra’s son was trapped in the chakravyuha by your great 
Acharya and cut down by six maharathas. Do you call that dharma, O 
Yuyudhana, fool? 

On our side, it was though adharma that Bhishma, the Kuru grandsire, 
was brought down and with adharma that you slew Bhurisravas. This is 
how both the enemy, as well as the Pandavas, have fought this war. They 
are all valiant and mighty; they are all knowers of dharma; yet, they have all 
sinned in order to have victory in this ghastly war. O glib Satwata, true 
dharma and adharma as well are difficult to comprehend, and vary 
according to circumstances. 

I say to you, stop this talk now and now fight the Kauravas, without 
turning back to the home of your fathers!” 

Dhrishtadyumna speaks with contempt and vituperation, and the radiant 
Satyaki begins to tremble from head to foot in anger. His eyes turn the hue 
of copper. Sighing like a snake, he leaves his bow in his ratha, grasps his 
mace and rushes at the prince of the Panchalas, and cries, “I will not speak 
to you anymore, but kill you as you deserve!” 

Seeing Satyaki rushing at the Panchala prince, like one Yama at another, 
Bhima, urged by Krishna, jumps down from his chariot and clasps 
Yuyudhana firmly in his mighty arms. Satyaki, who is strong himself, still 
manages to take five steps forward, dragging Bhima with him. Then, Bhima 
plants his massive feet firmly and stops the bull of Sini’s race at the sixth 
step. 

With Bhima restraining the red-eyed Satwata, Sahadeva leaps down 
from his chariot, and mollifies Satyaki, “O Naravyaghra, we have no friends 
dearer to us than the Andhakas, the Vrishnis and the Panchalas. So, also, the 
Andhakas and the Vrishnis, particularly Krishna, have no friends dearer to 
them than us. The Panchalas, too, even if they comb the whole world to the 


confines of the sea, have no friends dearer to them than the Pandavas and 
the Vrishnis. You are such a friend to this prince Dhrishtadyumna; and he is 
a similar friend to you. You all are to us even as we are to you. Knowing 
dharma as you do, think now of the dharma that you owe your friends. 
Restrain your anger and be calm, O best of Sini’s race! Forgive 
Dhrishtadyumna, and let him also forgive you. We, too, will forgive all that 
has been said in anger. What is there, Yuyudhana, that is better than 
forgiveness?” 

Even as Sahadeva is attempting to pacify the furious Satyaki, 
Dhrishtadyumna, smiling arrogantly, says, “O Bhima, release Sini’s 
grandson who is so proud of his prowess in battle. Let him come to me like 
the wind assailing the mountains and I will quell his anger and lust of battle. 
I will have his life with my arrows. 

Look, where the Kauravas advance on us. After killing this fool Satyak1, 
I will burn all Duryodhana’s troops with my astras, or let Arjuna do so if he 
chooses to. But now I mean to cut this vile Satwata’s head from his neck. 
He thinks I am like the armless Bhurisravas. He will find he is sadly 
mistaken. Either I will kill him or he will kill me today.” 

Satyaki wriggles like an angry snake to get free from Bhima’s clasp. 
Both Dhrishtadyumna and he bellow at each other like a pair of bulls. 
Finally, Krishna and Yudhishtira, with some effort, succeed in calming the 
two. Having placated those maharathas, whose eyes had turned the colour 
of blood, all the Kshatriyas of the Pandava army take the field against the 
Kaurava warriors to do battle again.” 


CANTO 196 


DRONA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Then Drona’s son Aswatthaman inflicts great 
carnage among his enemies like the Destroyer himself at the end 
of the Yuga. Killing them with banks of broad-headed missiles, he soon 
heaps a mountain of dead on the battlefield. The banners of chariots form its 
trees; weapons are its pointed peaks; lifeless elephants are its large 
boulders; dead horses and their riders are its Kimpurushas, half man and 
half equine; bows are its creepers and plants; and it resounds with the cries 
of birds of prey and carrion, its feathered population, and the spirits that 
walk there are its Yakshas. 

Aswatthaman repeats his dreadful vow in the hearing of your son 
Duryodhana: “Since Kunti’s son Yudhishtira, who wears only the false 
outer garb of dharma, lied to my father, who fought righteously, to lay aside 
his weapons and be slain, I will, in his very sight, destroy his entire army 
and then kill Dhrishtadyumna, sinful prince of the Panchalas. Rally your 
troops, O Suyodhana, for I swear to you that I will annihilate them all if 
they dare face me in battle!” 

Dispelling the fears of his men with a booming bellow, your son gathers 
his troops. The battle between the Kurus and Pandavas resembles two seas 


in high tide surging into each other. The Kauravas are now emboldened by 
Drona’s son, and the Pandus and the Panchalas are inspired by Drona’s 
death. Indescribable mayhem and bloodshed rule Kurukshetra again and all 
who fight have battle lust and no trace of fear coursing through them. 

Truly, Maharajan, the collision between the Kurus and the Pandavas is 
like one mountain striking another, or an ocean another ocean. 

Full of spirit and bravado, the Kuru and the Pandava warriors beat 
thousands of drums and the ear-splitting bedlam that arises from the troops 
resembles that of the Kshirasagara when it was churned in days of old by 
the Devas and the Danavas when they sought the Amrita. 

And now Aswatthaman invokes the Narayanastra and unleashes it at the 
Pandava and Panchala host. Thousands of serpentine arrows with blazing 
mouths appear in the sky, and rain down on the Pandavas. Like rays of the 
sun, in a moment these shafts shroud all the directions of the sky and engulf 
all the enemy legions. Innumerable iron balls appear like resplendent 
luminaries in the clear firmament. Sataghnis, some with four and some with 
two wheels, innumerable maces, and discs with edges sharp as razors and 
shining like lightning, also appear from the Narayanastra. Seeing all the sky 
covered by these uncanny weapons, O Bharatarishabha, the Pandavas, the 
Panchalas and the Srinjayas are absolutely terror-stricken. Most of all, 
wherever the Pandava maharathas offer resistance to the awesome astra of 
the Lord Vishnu, it only increases in power and ferocity. Devoured 
everywhere by the Narayanastra, as a heap of dry grass by some raging 
forest fire in summer, the Pandava warriors have no answer to 
Aswatthaman’s ultimate ayudha and it consumes them rabidly on all sides. 

Yudhishtira watches his men being incinerated and mown down in their 
thousands every moment, standing stupefied or flying blindly in all 
directions, and Arjuna doing nothing to stop the carnage, a panic-stricken 
Yudhishtira cries, “Dhrishtadyumna, escape with your Panchala troops! 
Satyaki, run with the Vrishnis and the Andhakas. Krishna will save himself. 
He can counsel the whole world so what need to tell him what he should 
do? We will not fight any more. This is my command. 

As for myself, my brothers and I will climb onto a funeral pyre. Having 
crossed the Bhishma and the Drona oceans in this war, can I sink with all 
my followers in a cow’s hoof print that is Drona’s son? Let what 
Duryodhana wants be crowned with success today, for today I have killed 
our Acharya, who always loved us well, Drona who had the child 


Abhimanyu slaughtered by six maharathas and a host of warriors besides in 
the chakravyuha; the Acharya who sat indifferent with his son in the Kuru 
sabha, without answering Draupadi when she was dragged into that ancient 
court of dharma and asked him for truth and justice; Drona who wrapped an 
impenetrable kavacha around Duryodhana when Dhritarashtra’s son wanted 
to kill Arjuna and sent him to protect Jayadratha; Drona who did not 
hesitate to turn Satyajit and his warriors into ashes with the Brahmastra 
while they protected my life; the Acharya, who, while we were being 
wrongfully exiled from our kingdom, gladly told us to go into the vana 
although our friends all asked him not to take sides with the Kauravas. Alas, 
it is this great friend of ours that has been slain! And for his sake today, I 
will, with my brothers and friends, lay down my life.” 

When Kunti’s son, Yudhishtira says this with some fervour, Krishna 
makes a sign to the troops not to flee and says, “Be quick and lay down 
your weapons, all of you, and alight from your chariots. This is the only 
way, declared by the Lord Narayana himself, to render his great astra 
powerless. All of you come down onto the ground from your elephants, 
horses and chariots. If you stand weaponless on the earth, this astra will not 
touch you, while if you seek to fight it, it will only grow stronger and more 
devastating. The Narayanastra does not kill those who throw down their 
weapons and alight from their rathas, while those who even think of 
resisting it will be consumed, even if they seek refuge in the deepest 
Patala.” 

At what Krishna says, all the warriors of the Pandava army fling down 
their weapons and drive out every thought of violence from their hearts. But 
seeing this, Bhimasena roars, “No one should lay down his weapons here. I 
will face and extinguish Aswatthaman’s astra. With this golden mace of 
mine, I will range across the field and quell the Narayanastra on my own! 

There is no man here equal to me in strength, even as there is no 
luminary in the firmament equal to the Sun. Look at these arms of mine like 
the trunks of mighty elephants, which can tear down the very peaks of 
Himavat. I possess the might of a thousand elephants. I have no peer for 
strength among men, even as Indra has none among the Devas. Let all men 
witness today the might of these arms and my chest as I smash down 
Aswatthaman’s Narayanastra. If there is no one else who can face this 
weapon, I, Bhima, do so alone before all the Kurus and the Pandavas. O 


Arjuna, Bibhatsu, if you lay the Gandiva aside, a stain will attach to you 
like the one on the Moon.” 

Arjuna says, “Bhima, I have vowed that my Gandiva will not be used 
against the Narayanastra, cows and Brahmanas.” 

Hearing this, Bhima, roaring, riding his chariot of solar effulgence, 
whose rumble is like that of massed thunderheads, dashes off alone against 
Aswatthaman. With awesome prowess and lightness of hand, in the 
twinkling of an eye he covers Drona’s wrathful son in a cloud of arrows. 
Smiling at Bhima’s folly, Aswatthaman looses a storm of astras at him, each 
blazing like a small sun. Shrouded by these shafts that vomit fire and 
resemble snakes with mouth afire, as if covered with sparks of gold, 
Bhimasena looks like a mountain in the evening burning with many fires in 
the dry summer. 

The Narayanastra now focuses it fury on just Bhimasena and, by the 
moment, swells in ferocity like a fire fanned by an angry wind. Watching 
this, further dread and panic seize the hearts of all the Pandava warriors 
other than Bhima. All the others, to the last man, throw down their weapons 
and alight from their mounts and chariots; now, that the rest supplicate 
themselves before it, the fulminant astra rages just at Bhima. 

A great lament goes up from the Pandavas, for the dreadful 
Narayanastra swiftly overwhelms the defiant son of the Wind.’” 


CANTO 197 


DRONA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: S anjaya says, ‘Seeing Bhimasena overwhelmed and being set on 

fire by the Narayanastra, Arjuna envelops him with a Varuna astra 

to douse its flames. So swiftly does Arjuna do this that no one can see the 

watery cupola that covers Vrikodara. Still enveloped by Aswatthaman’s 

Narayanastra, Bhima, his horses, charioteer and ratha are like a great flame 
at the heart of a raging fire. 

Even as at close of night, O Rajan, all the luminaries drop towards the 
Asta hill, the fiery arrows of Aswatthaman all fall on just Bhimasena’s 
ratha, and he, his chariot, horses, and charioteer seem to be on fire. As the 
Yuga fire consumes the entire universe with all its creatures when Pralaya 
comes and finally re-enters the mouth of the Creator, even so does 
Aswatthaman’s astra enter the body of the fearless and brash Bhimasena. 

Just as one cannot see a fire if it falls into the sun or the sun if it enters 
into Agni, no one can see the blinding energy that suffuses Bhima’s body. 
Seeing the astra invading Bhima, and seeing Drona’s son swelling with 
tejas, and being without an opponent to face him; seeing that all the 
warriors of the Pandava army have laid down their weapons and that all the 
maharathas of the Yudhishtira’s army have turned their faces from the 


enemy, Arjuna and Krishna, leap out of their chariot and run towards 
Bhima; using maya shakti, they dive straight into the fires of the 
Narayanastra. The flames of the Lord’s own weapon does not burn for, 
unlike Bhima, they have laid down their weapons, and also because of the 
Varuna astra and their own tejas. 

Then, to pacify the Narayanastra, ancient Nara and Narayana forcibly 
lay hold of Bhima and wrest all his weapons away from him, at which the 
son of Vayu begins to roar in anger like a pride of lions being attacked! As 
he resists Krishna and Arjuna, the terrific astra grows even more ferocious. 

Krishna says to Bhima in an irresistible voice, “How is it, O son of 
Pandu, that after being warned by us, you still continue to fight? If the 
Kurus could be vanquished now, while the Narayanastra hangs above us 
like the pralaya, we and all our maharathas would surely have fought as 
well. Look, all the warriors of your army have left their chariots. And you 
must do the same if you do not want to die!” 

Krishna’s tone will brook no refusal, and Bhima allows him to be 
hauled out of his flaming chariot, his eyes still crimson with rage, and 
sighing like some unimaginable serpent. As soon as he is pulled out of his 
chariot and made to lay down his weapons, the Narayanastra is pacified and 
grows cool. It drifts away in the sky, now a clear azure again, from above 
Kurukshetra. 

All the directions and points of the firmament, cardinal and subsidiary, 
became clear. Sweet breezes begin to blow and the birds and animals are all 
calm again. The horses, elephants as well as all the warriors are enlivened 
once more, O ruler of men. Indeed, when the dreadful urjas of the 
Narayanastra is stilled, Bhima shines resplendent as the morning sun! With 
the passing of the threat from the Narayanastra, the remnant of the Pandava 
army once more stands ready to fight your sons. 

Duryodhana says urgently to Aswatthaman, “Quick, use this astra again, 
for the Panchalas have taken up their weapons again and stand ready for 
battle!” 

Aswatthaman sighs and says sadly, “The Narayanastra, O king, cannot 
be brought back and used again. If it is summoned again, it will have the 
life of the one that invokes it. Krishna knew the only way in which the 
Lord’s own astra could be overcome, and he saved them all. But defeat and 
death are the same, Duryodhana. In fact, defeat is worse than death. Look at 
the enemy, vanquished and forced to lay down their weapons and prostrate 


before our Narayanastra. They are full of shame and even look as if they 
have lost their lives!” Duryodhana says, “Aswatthaman, if this weapon 
cannot be used twice, let these murderers of their Acharya be slain with 
other weapons! In you all the Devastras dwell, even as they do in the three- 
eyed Siva of immeasurable tejas. Even a raging Purandara cannot escape 
you.” 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘After Drona was killed with deceit and the 
Narayana weapon foiled, what does Drona’s son, incited by Duryodhana, 
do, when he finds the Parthas ready for battle again and leading their troops 
at our army?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Aswatthaman thinks of how his father was killed and 
rage fills him again. Casting aside all fear, flying the device of a lion’s tail 
on his banner, he rides furiously at Dhrishtadyumna. Racing towards him, 
he pierces the Panchala prince with five and twenty small thunderbolts. 
Dhrishtadyumna retaliates with sixty-four searing shafts that rake Drona’s 
son, strikes his charioteer with twenty golden-winged arrows whetted on 
stone, and his four horses with four long keen barbs that make them whinny 
in pain. 

Repeatedly striking Aswatthaman with endless flights of arrows, and 
making the earth tremble with his thunderous shouts, a murderous 
Dhrishtadyumna appears intent on taking the lives of all the creatures of the 
world. Making death itself his only goal, the mighty son of Drupada, a great 
master of weapons and gifted with unerring aim, charges Drona’s son 
pouring a deluge of arrows upon his head. 

A roaring covers the angry Panchala prince with endless volleys. 
Always remembering the killing of his father, he pierces Drupada’s son 
with lightning bolts and cuts down Dhrishtadyumna’s standard and breaks 
his bow with two perfect shafts with razor heads. Never pausing his assault, 
he deprives his adversary of his horses, charioteer and chariot, and envelops 
all his followers with dense showers of sizzling shafts. Mauled by 
Aswatthaman, the Panchala troops, Rajan, flee. 

Finding the troops turning away from battle and Dhrishtadyumna in dire 
trouble, Satyaki dashes at Aswatthaman and drills him first with eight 
straight, slender arrows and again stabs the roaring Brahman with twenty 
shafts of diverse kinds. Yuyudhana is a blur of fluid movement, as he then 
pierces Aswatthaman’s sarathy with four barbs and his horses with another 
four. Without a moment’s pause, displaying wonderful adroitness, he breaks 


Aswatthaman’s bow and standard, and then shatters his gold-decked 
chariot, killing his horses as well in the same insant. Finally, he plunges 
thirty violent barbs into Aswatthaman’s chest. 

Beset by the resplendent Satyaki, bleeding profusely from his arrows, 
the mighty Aswatthaman founders, he does not know what to do. Seeing 
Drona’s son in grave peril, Duryodhana, Kripa, Karna and others begin to 
cascade arrows over the radiant Satwata hero. They besiege Satyaki from 
every direction; Duryodhana pierces him with twenty stunning shafts, 
Acharya Kripa with three, Kritavarman with ten, Karna with fifty, Dusasana 
with a hundred and Vrishasena with seven. However, the marvellous 
Satyaki whirling around in his ratha, quickly demolishes the chariots of all 
these great heroes and they have to run from him on foot. 

Meanwhile, Aswatthaman regains consciousness and, sighing 
repeatedly in pain and grief, thinks of what he should do. Mounting another 
chariot, he challenges Satyaki, shooting hundreds of arrows at the Satwata. 
Seeing him come to battle again, Satyaki, quick as a thought, destroys his 
ratha again and forces him to turn back. The Pandavas blow their conches 
with great force and give tremendous shouts. Having deprived 
Aswatthaman of his chariot, the invincible, scintillant Satyaki kills three 
thousand great maharathas of Vrishasena’s akshauhini, slaughters fifteen 
thousand elephants of Kripa’s division and fifty thousand horsemen of 
Sakuni’s army. 

Aswatthaman, riding another chariot and beside himself with rage at 
Satyaki, sets upon him, determined to kill him. Satyaki, nemesis of his 
enemies, instantly gores him with diverse kinds of arrows, fiercer than he 
had used earlier. Although deeply injured by these variegated shafts that 
Yuyudhana shoots, Aswatthaman still says, with his superior smile, to his 
enemy, “O grandson of Sini, I know your affection for Dhrishtadyumna, 
killer of his Acharya, but you will not be able to save him or yourself from 
me. I swear to you, Satyaki, by truth and by my tapasya, that I will know no 
peace until I kill all the Panchalas. You may unite the Pandava and Vrishni 
forces together and attack me, but I will still rid the world of the Somakas.” 

Saying this, the son of Drona shoots an astra with the effulgence of the 
sun at Satyaki, just as Indra in days of old cast his Vajra at the Asura Vritra. 
That astra flashes right through Yuyudhana’s armour, passes through his 
body and dives into the earth like a hissing snake into its hole. Like an 
elephant deeply struck with a hook, the Satwata hero is bathed in the blood 


that gushes from his yawning wound. His bow, with an arrow fitted to its 
string, comes loose from his mighty grasp and he sits down weakly on the 
floor of his chariot, while the blood continues to flow copiously, covering 
his magnificent body. Quickly, his sarathy whisks him away from the 
deadly Aswatthaman. 

Immediately, Aswatthaman turns and strikes Dhrishtadyumna right 
between his eyebrows with another perfect arrow. Already sorely wounded, 
the Panchala prince, senapati of Yudhishtira army is flung back against his 
flagstaff and clutches onto it to prevent himself from falling. Seeing 
Dhrishtadyumna in distress and danger, like a weakened elephant attacked 
by a great lion, five Pandava maharathas—Kiritin, Bhimasena, 
Brihadkshatra of the Puru vamsa, a youthful prince of the Chedis and 
Sudarshana, lord of the Malavas, rush to defend him. 

In moments, they surround Aswatthaman and, advancing twenty paces, 
all of them strike him simultaneously with five and twenty arrows. Pivoting 
on his heels, Drona’s son cuts all twenty-five blistering shafts down with 
five and twenty barbs of his own that are like virulent snakes; so swift is he 
that he appears to achieve this feat in the heart of a single instant. 
Aswatthaman then draws seven fonts of blood from the Paurava prince, 
three from the Malavas’ chieftain, one from Partha, and six from Vrikodara, 
once more, it seems, at the same moment. 

Now Rajan, those maharathas attack Drona’s son, both united and 
separately, with storms of arrows whetted on stone and fletched with wings 
of gold. The youthful prince of the Chedis drills him with twenty barbs and 
Arjuna pierces him with three. Aswatthaman strikes Arjuna with six arrows, 
Krishna with six, Bhima with five, and each of the other two, the Malava 
and the Paurava, with two arrows. Then gouging Bhima’s charioteer with 
six thunderbolts, Aswatthaman destroys Bhimasena’s bow and standard 
with another two heavy, precise shafts of iron. Drona’s stalwart son covers 
Arjuna once more with a dense and furious volley, and the Brahmana hero 
gives a deep and echoing shout. 

Aswatthaman covers the earth, the sky, all the directions, cardinal and 
subsidiary, with his arrows so they are shrouded in darkness. Fierce is his 
tejas and his skill equal to Indra’s; with three exact arrow he hacks off 
Sudarshana’s arms like yupastambas and his head. He shatters the Paurava’s 
chariot, then lops off his sandalwood seared arms and noble young head as 
well. Next moment, with a blaze of burning shafts he sends the mighty 


Chedi prince, dark as a blue lotus, to Yama, along with his charioteer and 
horses. 

Seeing the Malava lord, the scion of Puru and the youthful prince of the 
Chedis killed in front of his eyes by Aswatthaman, rage blazes up in Bhima 
and he swathes Drona’s son with hundreds of serpentine narachas. But 
Aswatthaman destroys these showers of fiery shafts and strikes Bhima deep 
with his own thundering missiles. The dauntless Bhima _rives 
Aswatthaman’s bow with a wedge-headed arrow and pierces him deep with 
a smoking iron barb, heavy as a mace. 

Throwing away his broken bow, Aswatthaman takes up another and 
rakes Bhima again with countless shafts. Locking into a duel, the two 
scathe each other with gales of arrows, like two masses of rain-clouds. 
Gold-winged arrows, whetted on stone and engraved with Bhima’s name 
cover Drona’s son, and thousands of powerful shafts shot by Drona’s son 
enfold Bhima. Though wounded and bleeding profusely, it is wonderful that 
Bhima feels no pain, O Rajan! 

Mahabaho Bhimasena looses ten shimmering gold-decked arrows up 
into the sky, from where they fall squarely on Aswatthaman, truly like 
streaks of lightning. Aswatthaman shuts his eyes and supports himself by 
gripping his flagstaff. He recovers his composure in a moment and, bathed 
in blood, musters all his valour and strength and races towards Bhimasena’s 
chariot. From his bow drawn to its fullest stretch, he unleashes a hundred 
electrifying arrows at the hulking Pandava. Bhima merely shakes these off 
and responds with another burning volley. 

As the battle continues, Drona’s raging, magnificent son once more 
cleaves Bhimasena’s bow in his hands and then gores his chest with a clutch 
of vicious shafts. The imperturbable Vrikodara merely picks up another 
bow and gashes Aswatthaman deep with five smouldering shafts. Once 
more, shooting ceaselessly at each other the two red-eyed heroes 
completely swathe one another with their banks upon banks of formidable 
missiles. Attempting to frighten each other by roaring and slapping their 
armpits echoingly, they fight on and there is nothing to choose between 
them. 

Bending his massive bow, chased with gold, Aswatthaman gazes 
steadily at Bhima who continues to inundate him with shafts of fire, and, 
shooting back at Bhima, Drona’s son looks like the meridian sun radiating 
his rays on an autumn day. So quicksilver is Aswatthaman’s archery that no 


one can distinguish when he pulls an arrow from his quiver, when he fixes it 
to his bowstring, when he draws back the string, and when he looses his 
shaft. His bow, Rajan, seems always to be drawn into a circle of fire. And 
the terrible golden shafts, in their hundreds of thousands course like a river 
through the sky, like a swarm of locusts at Bhima’s chariot. 

We then see, O Bhaarata, an extraordinary demonstration of 
Bhimasena’s skill, his strength, energy and spirit, for he shrugs off the 
riptides of Aswatthaman’s arrows as if they were no more than gentle rain 
falling on him. Bhima, awesome, dreadful Bhima lets loose a typhoon of 
arrows at Drona’s son, even as his father Vayu does at sea. Bhima’s 
prodigious golden-backed bow also appears drawn into a constant circle; it 
is as lustrous as another bow of Indra and, spewing forth arrows past 
counting, shrouds Aswatthaman, that jewel of the war, so no one can see 
him or his chariot anymore. So thick and dense are their volleys that the 
very wind finds it difficult to flow through them. 

Aswatthaman looses countless golden arrows, their points slick with oil, 
at Bhima. Bhimasena truncates each one into three segments before they 
can reach him. Bhima, with a roar, covers Drona’s son in fierce rash of 
shafts. Aswatthaman shatters these in flight, then breaks Bhima’s bow and 
pierces him with burning volleys. 

Bhima casts a spear like a gash of lightning at the Brahmana; he divides 
it along its length as it flies burning at him. 

Vrikodara the terrible takes up another massive bow and covers 
Aswatthaman in fire; Aswatthaman strikes Bhima’s sarathy through his 
brow with a lean shaft and the charioteers swoons, drops his reins and his 
panicked horses bolt before all the watching warriors. Seeing Bhima borne 
helplessly from the field, the undefeated Aswatthaman blows a deep and 
echoing blast on his huge conch and all the Panchalas abandon 
Dhrishtadyumna and flee. Drona’s son, unleashing torrid gusts of arrows 
pursues the fleeing Panchalas and cuts them down as he likes. Screaming, 
dying in droves, they never look back but continue their flight, and now 
many of the Pandava warriors join them. 

Seeing the Panchala force broken and running, as also his own men, 
Arjuna quickly takes the field against Aswatthaman. The troops rally behind 
Krishna and Arjuna and remain on the field. Supported by the Somakas and 
the Matsyas, Arjuna lays dreadful siege to the Kauravas and stops them in 
their tracks. 


The two Krishna ride up to Aswatthaman, and Arjuna says to him, 
“Now show me your prowess, your knowledge of the astras and your 
manliness, as well as your love for the Dhartarashtras and your hatred for 
us. Show me your fortitude and determination. I say to you that I will quell 
your pride today. Come now and face this Dhananjaya, who burns like the 
Yuga fire and Rudra himself, with Krishna for his sarathy. You have shown 
us your hubris in battle, Aswatthaman, but I will quell your arrogance.” 

Dhritarashtra asks, ‘O Sanjaya, Aswatthaman is noble, mighty and 
worthy of our respect. He loves Dhananjaya dearly and the noble Arjuna 
loves him in return. Partha has never addressed Drona’s son in this way 
before. Why then did the son of Kunti speak so roughly to his friend?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Seeing the death of the youthful prince of the Chedis, of 
Brihadkshatra of the Puru vamsa, and of Sudarshana, the lord of the 
Malavas, who were all great warriors, and watching the defeat of 
Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki and Bhima, Arjuna feels great sorrow. He is also 
touched to the quick by what Yudhishtira said to him. Most of all, all the 
wrongs of the past rise up in Arjuna in tide, and with it, suddenly, wrath the 
like of which he had never felt before. This was why he rounded on 
Aswatthaman, who is indeed worthy of our regard, and spoke in rage to 
him, like any lowborn man, in a crude, indecent, bitter, and harsh manner. 
Hearing those coarse and cruel words so unexpectedly from Arjuna, 
Aswatthaman is furious and especially with Krishna, whom he blames for 
influencing Arjuna and the Pandavas and for the death of his father. 

Standing resolute in his chariot, Aswatthaman touches water and 
invokes the Agneyastra, which the very gods cannot resist. Aiming the 
weapon of the Fire god at Arjuna and indeed all his enemies, he breathes a 
mantra into the ayudha incandescent as smokeless fire and looses it at the 
Pandavas and their allies. It spumes up into the sky and, hanging there, 
erupts into thousands of flaming missiles that flare down crackling over 
Arjuna’s chariot. Many of these fly at that ratha in uncanny trajectories, 
from every side. Meteors blaze down from the firmament and a thick gloom 
descends the Pandava host and envelops all the directions. 

Rakshasas and Pisachas, thronging together, utter fierce cries. 
Inauspicious winds blow like simooms of the desert and the sun no longer 
exudes any warmth; a dreadful chill falls on Kurukshetra. Ravens caw 
raucously everywhere, and strange crimson clouds shower a rain of blood 
from the sky. Birds, beasts, kine and rishis with souls under perfect control, 


all grow distraught. The Panchamahabhutas, the very elements, appear to be 
in upheaval; the sun seems to spin like a top and the entire universe, 
scorched by the heat of the weapon of fire, to be in a fever. 

Seared by the fiery energy of that astra, great elephants and other beasts 
of the world lose their wits in terror and dash about, panting and desperate 
for salvation from the weapon made of the flames that consume the world 
when the yuga ends. Seas, lakes, river, pools and tanks begin to steam and 
bubble, and the fish and other creatures living in them are scalded and 
perish in agony. From all the points of the sky, from the highest firmament 
and from the very bowels of earth, cataracts of fiery arrows erupt out of the 
ground, as if released with the force of Garuda or Vayu himself. Struck and 
burnt to cinders by these, the enemy warriors are made ashes like trees 
devoured by a raging conflagration. 

The biggest elephants, leviathans, are incinerated by the Agneyastra and 
fall in great mounds of whispering ashes, while others of their kind thunder 
about everywhere in absolute panic, trumpeting in terror. Everywhere, 
thousands of horses and chariots burn like the tops of trees in a forest-fire. 
Indeed, O Bhaarata, it is as if the divine lord Agni has come down to burn 
the Pandava army, like the Samvarta fire consuming everything at the end 
of the Yuga. 

Your soldiers, Rajan, are elated and give vent to loud shouts. Sensing 
victory, your troops blow thousands of conches and trumpets as they watch 
the Pandava army being devoured by the flames of the astra of fire. 
Darkness and smoke wrap the world and neither any part of the Pandava 
army nor Arjuna can be seen at all. The war has not yet seen the like of this 
weapon which Drona’s son unleashes. 

Then, Arjuna invokes the Brahmastra, which belongs to the Lotus-born 
Brahma himself and which can confound every other astra. Within a 
moment, all the darkness is dispelled, cool winds begin to blow, and all the 
directions of the sky become clear and bright; and now the wondrous and 
dreadful sight of a full akshauhini of the Pandava army having being turned 
to ashes becomes visible. Some of the dead men, chariots and beasts of war 
stand as pillars formed of ash, like the most delicate sculptures, while all the 
rest have been entirely consumed and lie in grey heaps or blow in the dry 
wind that sweeps Kurukshetra. 

Emerged from the darkness, we see Krishna and Arjuna again, like the 
Sun and the Moon. And, Rajan, there is not a wound, not even the merest 


scratch of burn upon them from Aswatthaman’s astra. The ratha, which 
strikes such terror into your warriors’ hearts, shines resplendent on the field, 
its great banner with Hanuman flapping free in the wind, its gandharva 
horses white and shining like great lotuses, and with all the mighty astras in 
it untouched and still unsummoned by the invincible Dhananjaya. 

Now the remnant of the Pandava host erupts in joyful sounds, with roars 
and laughter of great relief, with booming conches and drumrolls. Both 
hosts had thought that Krishna and Arjuna had perished, but finding them 
alive and shine forth again after the darkness has been dispelled, all the 
Pandavas are filled with absolute joy, and the Kauravas with wonder. 

Unharmed and cheerful, the two heroes blow their wonderful conches, 
the Panchajanya and the Devadatta, and Kurukshetra trembles in delight at 
their melodious thunder. Your troops, however, are crestfallen, as is 
Aswatthaman who had also believed that he had slain the two Krishnas. For 
a moment, my lord, he reflects on what has happened and he is filled with 
dismay and lancing anxiety; he breathes long, hot sighs and is plunged into 
an abyss of dejection. 

Aswatthaman flings aside his bow, alights from his chariot, cries in utter 
despair, “Shame, O shame! Everything is lost, everything is a lie, all is 
adharma!” and like one gone mad he runs away from the battle, waving his 
arms wildly. 

On the way, he meets the impeccant Krishna Dwaipayana, Maharishi 
Vyasa dark as thunderheads, compiler of the Vedas, home of the Shastras, 
the abode of Saraswati. Seeing him standing in his path, Aswatthaman 
prostrates before him and, in a voice choked with grief and frustration, asks, 
“O Sire, Mahamuni, is this an illusion or a whim of the Agneyastra? I do 
not know how my astra proved ineffectual. What flaw was there in its 
invocation? Is this my fault, something supernatural, or have the two 
Krishnas achieved victory over Nature herself and Agni that they are still 
alive? 

Ah, it seems that Kaala is irresistible. The Agneyastra that I unleashed 
at the Pandava army, the Asuras, Gandharvas, Pisachas, Rakshasas, Uragas, 
Yakshas, Pakshis and Manavas cannot ever hope to confound, the blazing 
ayudha which must devour all that stand before it, was doused after killing 
just one akshauhini of troops. Why did it not kill Kesava and Arjuna, both 
of whom are human? O Holy one, O Mahamuni, answer me truly and in 
detail.” 


Vyasa replies, “What you ask is grave and significant, so listen well to 
what I have to tell you. He who is called Narayana is older than the very 
oldest ones. To fulfil a great mission in the world, the Creator of the 
universe was once born as the son of Dharma. He undertook the most 
arduous tapasya, the atikatora, upon the Himavat mountan. 

Imbued with infinite tejas, and like fire or the sun in splendour, he stood 
there with arms raised to the skies. His eyes like lotus-petals, he emaciated 
himself there for sixty-six thousand years, subsisting all the while only on 
air. When this was over, he resumed his tapasya, now of another king, and 
this time for twice as many years as the first. He filled the space between 
earth and heaven with his boundless energy. When, through those tapasyas, 
he became like Brahma himself, he then beheld the Master, the Origin, and 
the Guardian of the Universe, the Lord of all the gods, the Supreme Deity, 
who it is well nigh impossible to gaze upon, who is more minute than the 
most minute thing, and greater than the greatest; who is called Rudra, who 
is the Lord of all the Superior Ones, who is called Hara and Sambhu, who 
wears matted jata on his head, who is the infuser of life into every living 
being, who is the First Cause of all things, mobile and unmoving; who is 
irresistible and of frightful aspect, who is fierce in anger and the Final Great 
Soul, who is the All-destroyer, and whose heart is as vast, loving and 
merciful as all eternity; who wields the celestial bow, the Pinaka, and wears 
two inexhaustible quivers, who wears golden kavacha and whose energy is 
infinite; who holds a blazing Trisula, the battle axe, a mace and a huge 
sword; whose eyebrows are fair, whose locks are always matted, who 
wields the heavy cudgel, who has the Moon on his brow, who is clad in 
tiger-skin; who is decked with beautiful angadas, who has snakes for his 
sacred thread, and who is surrounded by diverse creatures of the universe 
and by numerous ghosts and spirits; who is the One, who is the abode of 
ascetic austerities, and who is adored by those of venerable age; who is 
Water, Heaven, Sky, Earth, Sun, Moon, Wind and Fire, and who is the 
measure of the duration of the universe. 

Sinners can never obtain a sight of the Un-born One, the slayer of all 
haters of Brahmanas, the giver of Mukti. Only Brahmanas of dharma, when 
cleansed of all their sins and freed from the control of grief, see him with 
their mind’s eye. As a result of his two unequalled tapasyas, Narayana 
obtained a sight of the Unfading One, Siva the embodiment of dharma, the 
Adorable One, the Being whose Form is the universe. Seeing that Supreme 


Abode of all splendour, the God with a garland of akshas around his neck, 
Narayana Vasudeva, his soul gratified, was filled with rapture, and he 
sought to express it through words, with his heart, understanding and body. 
Narayana worshipped the Divine Lord Siva, the First Cause of the universe, 
the giver of boons, the Puissant One who is always at love with the fair- 
limbed Parvati, the Noblest Being surrounded by large bands of bhutas, 
pramathas, the Unborn Aja, the Supreme Lord, the Embodiment of the 
Unmanifest Brahman, the Essence of all causes, the One of unfading power 
and glory. 

Having saluted Rudra, destroyer of the Asura Andhaka, the lotus-eyed 
Narayana, his heart full of love, began to praise the Three-eyed One: ‘O 
Adorable one, O First of all the gods, Creator of the Prajapatis who are the 
regents of the world, who having entered the Earth, your first work, O Lord, 
protected it once, all, all have sprung from you. 

The Devas, Asuras, Nagas, Rakshasas, Pisachas, Manavas, Pakshis, 
Gandharvas, Yakshas and all other creatures, along with the entire universe, 
we know, have all sprung from you. 

Everything done to worship and propitiate Indra, Yama, Varuna, 
Kubera, the Pitris, Tvashtri and Soma, is really offered to you. 

Form and light, sound and sky, wind and touch, taste and water, scent 
and earth, time, Brahma himself, the Vedas, the Brahmanas and all these 
moving beings have sprung from you. 

Vapours rising from diverse bodies of water, become raindrops, which 
falling upon the earth, are separated from one another. When the time of the 
Mahapralaya, the Universal Dissolution comes, these individual water 
drops, separated from one another, once more unite together and make the 
Earth one vast expanse of water. Thus observing the origin and the 
destruction of all things, the learned man understands your Oneness. 

You have created everything—the two birds Iswara and Jiva, four 
Aswatthas with their wordy branches the Vedas, the seven guardians, which 
are constituted by the five Panchamahabhutas, the elements, the heart, the 
understanding, and the ten senses that constitute the body. But you are 
separate from and independent of them. 

The Past, the Future, and the Present, over each of which none can have 
any sway, are from you, as also the seven worlds and this universe. I am 
your devoted adorer, Lord, be kind to me. Do not injure me by causing evil 
thoughts to enter my heart. 


You are the Soul of souls, incapable of being known. He who knows 
you as the Universal Seed, attains Brahman. Wishing to offer you 
reverence, I do praise you, endeavoring to ascertain your true nature, 

O you whom the very gods cannot fathom, I worship you fervently, so 
grant me the boons I want that are difficult to acquire. Do not hide yourself 
in your maya.’ 

The blue-throated God of inconceivable Soul, the wielder of the Pinaka, 
the divine Lord forever praised by the Rishis, then gave boons to the 
deserving Narayana. 

Mahadeva said, ‘O Narayana, through my grace, you will be of 
immeasurable might and soul among Manushas, Devas and Gandharvas. 
Neither Devas, Asuras, great Uragas, Pisachas, Gandharvas, Rakshasas, 
Manavas, Garudas, Nagas, nor any creature in the Universe will ever be 
able to withstand you. None among even the Devas will be able to vanquish 
you in war. Through my grace, no one will ever be able to cause you the 
least injury, not even with the Vajra or with any weapon that is wet or dry, 
or with anything mobile or unmoving. You will even be superior to me if 
you ever go to battle against me.’ 

This is how Narayana acquired boons in the past. Even that Narayana 
now walks the Earth as Krishna, beguiling the universe with his maya. 
From Narayana’s tapasya a great Muni of the name of Nara was born, and 
he was equal to Narayana himself. Know that Arjuna is none other than that 
same Nara. These two Rishis, said to be older than the oldest gods, are born 
in every Yuga to serve the mysterious purposes and designs of the universe. 
You, too, O you of great heart, have been born as an amsa of Rudra, by 
virtue of all your punya of past lives and as a result of your stern and lofty 
tapasya, and you are endowed with Rudra’s own energy and wrath. You 
were, in a former life, imbued with great wisdom and were equal to a Deva. 

Thinking of the universe as consisting only of Mahadeva Siva, you once 
emaciated yourself through diverse vratas from a wish to gratify this God. 
Assuming the form of a very superior person who blazes fourth with 
splendour, you worshipped the Great God with mantras, with homa, and 
with offerings. Thus adored by you in your past life, Siva was gratified with 
you, and granted you many boons, everything that your heart wanted. Like 
Kesava’s and Arjuna’s, your punya karma and tapasya were also exalted 
and superior. Like them, in your worship, you have, in every Yuga, 
worshipped Mahadeva as Linga, his phallic form. 


Krishna is that devoted worshipper of Rudra who has sprung from 
Rudra himself. Kesava always worships the Lord Siva, believing his sacred 
Linga to be the origin of the universe. That supreme knowledge, which 
allows him to see the identity of Brahman with the universe, as well as that 
other trikaalagyana by which he sees the Past, the Present and the Future, 
the near and the remote, as if all are before his divine eyes, dwell in dark 
Krishna. The Devas, the Siddhas and the great Rishis worship Krishna to 
acquire that highest object in the universe, which is Siva Mahadeva. 
Krishna is the creator of everything. The Eternal Krishna must be 
worshipped with sacrifices. The Lord Kesava always worships Siva as 
Linga as the origin of all creatures. The God, with the bull for his mark, 
cherishes greater regard for Krishna than for anyone else.” 

Having heard what Vyasa says, Aswatthaman bows to Rudra and now 
looks upon Krishna as worthy of the highest reverence. Having fetched his 
soul under complete control, he is filled with bliss, the marks of which 
communion with Brahman appear on his body. Bowing to the great Rishi, 
Aswatthaman turns back to the unhappy Kuru army and withdraws them 
from the field for the night. The Pandavas also, Rajan, follow. 

Having fought for five days and caused immeasurable carnage, thus 
does great Drona, the Brahmana who knew the Veda in its entirety, leaves 
this world and attains to Brahmaloka!’” 


CANTO 198 


DRONA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


: ‘T) hritarashtra says, ‘After the killing of Atiratha Drona by 
Drupada’s son Dhrishtadyumna, what do my sons and the 
Pandavas do?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘After the rout of the Kuru army and the death of Drona, 
Arjuna, who saw something wonderful during the great battle, asks his 
grandsire Vyasa, who arrives in Kurukshetra during his wanderings. 

Arjuna says, “O Maharishi, while I loosed a river of arrows at the 
enemy, I always saw before me, always going before my chariot, a shining, 
resplendent being, one who had the effulgence of fire. Wherever he went 
with his spear raised, all the enemy warriors fell before him. While 
everyone thought that I vanquished the enemy, in truth they died at the 
hands of this mysterious being. I merely followed I his wake and only put 
down those that he had already destroyed. 

Holy one, tell me who is this greatest one that I saw, armed with a spear, 
and shining like the Sun himself in tejas? He did not touch the earth with 
his feet, nor did he cast his spear even once. Yet, through his energy, 
thousands of spears, why, millions of spears issued out of the single one that 
he held.” 


Vyasa replies, “Arjuna, you have seen Sankara, the First Cause! from 
which the Prajapatis have sprung; you saw the omnipotent One of infinite 
tejas, He who is the embodiment of Swarga, Bhumi and Akasa, the Divine 
Lord, the protector of the universe, the great Master, the giver of boons, 
who is also called Isana. O Arjuna, seek the protection of this boon-giving 
Deity, the Lord of the universe. He is called Mahadeva, the Supreme Deity, 
of Supreme Soul, the One and only Lord, with matted jata, Siva the abode 
of auspiciousness. With three eyes and mighty arms, with his locks tied in 
the shape of a crown, and his body clad in skins, He is called Rudra. 

This Lord of the universe, the Supreme God, is also called Hara and 
Sthanu. He is the Best of every being in the universe; He cannot be 
vanquished, He is the delighter of the akhanda and its Supreme Sovereign. 
He is the First Cause, the light and refuge of the universe, and ever 
victorious. He is the Soul and the Creator of the Brahmanda with the 
Brahmanda for his form, and He possesses eternal fame. 

The Lord of the universe and its great Ruler, this powerful One, is also 
the master of all karma, of every deed. Also called Sambhu, He is Self- 
born; He is the Lord of all creatures and the Origin of the Past, the Future 
and the Present. 

He is Yoga and the Lord of Yoga; He is called Sarva, and is the King of 
all the worlds. He is superior to everything. The best of everything in the 
universe, and the highest of all, He is also called Paramesthin. 

The Ordainer of the three worlds, He is their sole refuge. Invincible, He 
is the protector of the universe, and the cause of birth, decay and death. The 
Soul of knowledge, incapable of being grasped by knowledge, and the 
highest of all knowledge, He is unknowable. 

Through his grace, He gives his worshippers the blessings they desire. 
This Lord has for his companions celestial beings, Ganas, of various forms, 
some of whom are dwarfs, some have matted locks, some are bald, some 
have short necks, some protuberant bellies, some huge bodies, some long 
ears and some possess great strength. All of them, O Partha, have deformed 
faces and mouths and legs and wear strange attire. These Siva Ganas are his 
nearest, greatest followers and they worship this Supreme God called 
Mahadeva. 

It is this same Siva, O son, who, through his kindness and love, rides in 
front of you. Partha, who other than the divine Maheswara, the greatest of 
all archers, can even in imagination venture to vanquish a host led by 


maharathas like Aswatthaman, Karna and Kripa? No one can face the 
warrior who has Maheswara going before him. There is no being in the 
three worlds that is equal to Rudra. The very scent of an enraged Mahadeva 
causes men in battle, to tremble and fall senseless and in their thousands. It 
is for this that the Devas in Swarga worship and bow to Him. The men in 
this world and these other men of pious conduct, that devoutly worship the 
boon-giving, divine and auspicious Siva, find happiness here and attain to 
the highest state in the hereafter. 

O son of Kunti, bow down to Him who is peace, to Him who is called 
Rudra or Nilakanta, to Him who is the Subtlest and of great refulgence and 
is also Kapardin, the skull-bearer. 

Bow down to him who is terrible, who has tawny eyes, who is boon- 
giving; bow to the Great Ordainer of red locks and righteous conduct; to 
Him who always performs and enables auspicious deeds; to Him who is the 
final object of desire; to Him who is called Sthanu; who is called Purusha; 
who has tawny hair; who is without fear, who is subtler than all that is 
sukshma and of absolute radiance; bow to Him who is Light and the giver 
of light; who is the embodiment of all sacred tirthas and waters; to He who 
is the God of gods, and who is also endued with great impetuosity. 

Bow down to him who is of manifest form; who is called Sarva; who 
wears truly agreeable attire; who wears a wonderful crown, who is 
handsomeness itself; who has the mountains for his dwelling; who is Peace; 
who is the Protector; who wears valkala, tree bark; he whose arms are 
decked with ornaments of gold; who is Ugra, fierce, who is the Lord of all 
the directions; he who is the Lord of the clouds and of all created beings: 
He who is the Lord of all trees and of all kine, He whose body is shrouded 
by trees. 

Bow down to him who is the celestial Senapati; who inspires all 
thought; who holds the yagna ladle in his hand; who is ablaze; who wields 
the great bow; who is Rama’s very self; who has diverse forms; who is the 
Lord of the universe; who is attired in munja grass; who has a thousand 
heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand arms, and a thousand legs. 

O son of Kunti, seek the protection of this boon-giving Lord of the 
universe, the Lord of Uma, the God with three eyes, the destroyer of 
Daksha’s sacrifice, the Guardian of all created things, who is always 
blissful, the Protector of all beings, the God of unfading glory; the One with 
jata; the Mover of all superior beings, the One whose navel is like that of a 


bull and who has the bull for his symbol; the one who is proud like the bull, 
who is the Lord of bulls; who is represented by the horns of the bull; and 
who is the Bull of bulls: He who has the image of the bull on his banner. 

Seek the protection of him who is liberal to all the righteous; who can 
be approached only through Yoga; and whose eyes are like those of a bull; 
who owns the highest weapons: who has Vishnu himself for his astra; who 
is the embodiment of dharma; who is called Maheswara; who is of infinite 
belly and body; who sits on a leopard’s skin; who is the Lord of the worlds; 
who is devoted to Brahman and who loves Brahmanas; who is armed with a 
trident; who is boon-giving; who wields the sword and the shield and who 
is the Auspicious One, who wields the bow called Pinaka, who gave away 
his battle axe to Parasurama, and who is the Protector and Lord of the 
universe. 

I place myself in the hands of this divine Lord, the grantor of protection, 
the God clad in deer-skins. 

Salutations to this Lord of the celestials who has Vaisravana for his 
friend. 

Salutations to Him of great vows; to Him who has the mightiest archers 
for his companions; to Him who himself wields the bow; to the God with 
whom the bow is a favourite weapon; who is himself the shaft shot by the 
bow; who is the bowstring and the bow; who is the Acharya of acharyas 
who teach the use of the bow. 

Salutations to the God whose weapons are fierce and who is the greatest 
of all the gods. 

Salutations to Him of diverse forms, to him who is surrounded by many 
bowmen. 

Salutations to Him who is called Sthanu and who has an immense host 
of great archers for companions. 

Salutations to Him who destroyed the triple city of Tripura. 

Salutations to Him who slew the Asura Bhaga. 

Salutations to Him who is the Lord of trees and of men. 

Salutations to Him who is the Lord of the Devas, the Mothers, and of 
those tribes of spirits known as Ganas. 

Salutations to Him who is the Lord of kine and of sacrifices. 

Salutations to Him who is the Lord of the waters and the Lord of the 
gods, who broke Surya’s teeth, who has three eyes, who is the grantor of 


boons; who is called Hara, who is blue-throated, and who is of golden 
dreadlocks. 

I will now tell you, as best I know, all the divine deeds of Mahadeva of 
Supreme Wisdom. If Mahadeva becomes angry, neither the Devas, the 
Asuras, the Gandharvas or the Rakshasas, even if they hide themselves in 
the deepest oceans, can find peace. 

In olden days, Brahma’s son, the Prajapati Daksha undertook a great 
sacrifice and insulted Siva by not inviting him to attend, not offering him a 
share in the havis. Daksha’s daughter, Rudra’s wife Sati, killed herself at 
her father’s yagna and Mahadeva destroyed the sacrifice in wrath. He was 
truly fearsome on that occasion and roared most horribly and shouted in 
anger so earth and sky shook. The Devas were terrified then. Indeed, at 
Mahadeva’s fury, Yagna himself fled and the gods were beside themselves 
for fear at the twanging of Mahadeva’s bow and the sound of his palms. 

The Devas and Asuras fled all together. All the waters, great and small 
rose up in agitation and the Earth trembled. The mountains split, all the 
points of the sky wavered, and the Nagas were petrified. The universe was 
enveloped in a thick darkness and could no longer be seen. The splendour 
of all the stars and of the Sun grew dim. The Rishis, filled with fear, were 
distraught and, wanting to save themselves as well as all creatures, 
performed propitiatory rites, with Surya being given the principal oblation 
to eat. Smilingly, Sankara approached him and tore out his teeth. 

The humbled gods then fled as one. Once more, Mahadeva aimed a 
shower of arrows like the flames of the pralaya at the Devas, astras like 
densely smoking fire, or clouds with lightning. Seeing the luciferous volley, 
all the Devas prostrated again to Maheswara, and to Him a substantial share 
in yagnas. In fright, the gods, O prince, sought Rudra’s protection. His 
wrath having been dispelled, for He is easily pleased, the great God then 
restored the yagna. The gods that had fled came back, but to this day they 
are afraid of Maheswara. 

Once, the great and valiant Asuras had three cities in the sky, the 
Tripura. Each of these was vast and wonderful. One was made of iron, 
another of silver, and the third of gold. The golden city belonged to 
Kamalaksha, the silver city to Tarakaksha, and the third, made of iron, to 
Vidyunmalin. With all his weapons, Indra Maghavat Indra could not breach 
or make any impression on those triad cities. Troubled by the Asuras, the 
Devas sought the protection of Rudra. 


Approaching Siva, all the gods with Indra at their head, pleaded, “These 
terrible dwellers of the Tripura have blessings from Brahma. Filled with 
pride because of these boons, they are wreaking havoc upon the universe. O 
Devadeva, no one save you can stop them. O Mahadeva, slay these enemies 
of the Devas. O Rudra, creatures sacrificed in every yagna will then be 
yours.’ 

Thus implored by the gods, Siva was moved by the desire to help them. 
He agreed and said, ‘I will overthrow the Asuras.’ 

Then Hara made the two mountains Gandhamadana and Vindhya the 
two poles of his chariot; He made the Earth with her oceans and forests his 
ratha. The three-eyed Lord made Sesha, that prince of snakes, the aksha, of 
that chariot. That God of gods, the wielder of Pinaka, then made the Moon 
and the Sun his two chariot wheels, and the Lord made Elapatra and 
Pushpadanta, the two pins of its yoke. Mahadeva made the Malaya 
mountains the yoke, and the great Takshaka, the rope that bound the yoke to 
the poles, and the ganas about him the traces of the horses. 

Maheswara made the four Vedas his four horses and made the Vedangas 
the bridle-bits. Mahadeva made Gayatri and Savitri the reins, Om the whip, 
and Brahma was the charioteer. Making the Mandara mountains his great 
bow, Vasuki the bowstring, Vishnu his awesome astra, Agni the arrow-head, 
and Vayu the two wings of that missile, Yama the feathers in its tail, 
lightning its whetting stone, and Meru his standard, Siva, riding on that 
magnificent chariot which was wrought from all the celestial forces, went 
forth to destroy the Tripura, the three sky cities of the Asuras. 

O Partha, then Sthanu of incalculable prowess, worshipped by the 
Devas and by Rishis, He of untold tapodhana, formed an unrivalled vyuha 
named after Himself, and stood unmoving for a thousand years. Finally, 
when the three cities came together in the firmament, the Lord Mahadeva 
struck them through with his that awesome astra of three knots. The 
Danavas could not look at the shaft made of the Yuga-fire and composed of 
Vishnu and Soma. 

When the Tripura began to burn, the Devi Parvati went there to see the 
sight. She had on her lap a child with a bald head with five clumps of hair 
on it. The Goddess asked the Devas who the child was. Sakra, through 
malice, tried to strike that child with his thunderbolt. The divine lord 
Mahadeva, for the child was none other than He, smilingly paralysed the 
arm of the enraged Indra. Sakra, with all the celestials, flew went to the 


Lord Brahma of unfading glory and, bowing their heads to him, they said to 
him with joined hands, ‘Some wonderful Being, O Brahma, lies on the lap 
of Parvati, in the form of a child. We saw but did not pay him reverence and 
he has vanquished us all. We ask you, Pitamaha, who the child may be, 
who, without fighting, has with the greatest ease vanquished us all with 
Purandara at our head.’ 

Hearing this, Brahma the greatest of all the Gods, knower of the 
Brahman, reflected for a moment and knew that boy of immeasurable 
energy was none other the divine Sambhu. He said to all the Devas with 
Indra at their head, ‘That child is the divine Hara, Lord of the mobile and 
unmoving universe. There is nothing superior to Maheswara. That Being of 
immeasurable splendour whom you all saw with Uma, the Divine Lord, had 
assumed the form of a child for Uma’s sake. Let us all go to him. That 
illustrious One is the Supreme Sovereign of the worlds. O Devas, you could 
not recognise the Master of the universe!’ 

All the Devas with the Grandsire went to that child, of the radiance of 
the morning Sun. Beholding Maheswara, and knowing that he is the 
Supreme Being, the Pitamaha Brahma worshipped him: ‘You are Sacrifice, 
O Lord, you are the stay and refuge of the universe. You are Bhava, you are 
Mahadeva, you are the abode of all things and you are the highest refuge. 
This whole universe, with its mobile and rooted beings is pervaded by you. 
O Holy One, O Lord of the past and the future, O Lord of the world, O 
Protector of the universe, show your mercy to Indra whom you have 
paralysed.’ 

Hearing these words of the Lotus-born Brahma, Maheswara was 
gratified; He laughed aloud, a wondrous sound so full of grace. The Devas 
then eulogised both Uma and Rudra and paid them great reverence. Indra’s 
arm was free again when The Greatest God Maheswara, the destroyer of 
Daksha’s sacrifice, the Divine Lord with the Bull for his emblem, grew 
benign towards Indra and his Devas. 

He is Rudra, He is Siva, He is Agni, He is Sarva, and He has knowledge 
of everything. He is Indra, He is Vayu, He is the Aswin twins, and He is the 
lighting. He is Bhava, He is Parjanya, He is Mahadeva, He is sinless. He is 
the Moon, He is Isana, He is Surya, He is Varuna. He is Kala, he is Antaka, 
He is Mrityu, He is Yama. 

He is the day, and He is the night. He is the fortnight, He is the month, 
He is the seasons. He is the morning and evening sandhyas, He is the year. 


He is Dhatri, He is Vidhatri, He is the Soul of the universe, and He is the 
doer of all karma in the universe. Though bodiless, He is also the Great God 
embodied. Endowed with the Splendour beyond all splendour, He is 
worshipped and praised by all the gods. He is One, He is Many; He is a 
hundred, a thousand and beyond all count. 

Brahmanas versed in the Vedas say that He has two forms, the terrible, 
Ugra, and the auspicious, Siva. These two forms, again, are multifarious. 
His auspicious forms are water, light, and the moon. Whatever is most 
recondite and mysterious in the several angas of the Vedas, in the 
Upanishads, in the Puranas, and in the Atmavidyas, the sciences that deal 
with the Soul, dwells the Lord Maheswara. 

O Arjuna, Mahadeva is Aja, Un-born. All the attributes of this God not 
even I can begin to enumerate, not if I were to describe them with out pause 
for a thousand years. Even to those who are afflicted by all the evil planets, 
even to those who are stained with every sin, this great Protector grants 
salvation, if only they seek him, and He becomes pleased with them. He 
grants and takes away life, health, prosperity, wealth and all the diverse 
kinds of objects of desire. 

The prosperity seen in Indra and other gods is his. He is ever engaged in 
the good and evil of men in this world. As a result of his supremacy, He can 
always have whatever He wishes for. He is called Maheswara and is the 
Lord of even the Supreme ones. In many forms, of many kinds, He 
pervades the universe. The mouth of that God is in the deepest ocean. It is 
well-known that, assuming the form of a mare’s head, this mouth drinks the 
sacrificial libation in the form of water. 

This Siva always dwells in smasanas, burning ghats. Men worship this 
Supreme Lord in that place where none but the courageous can go. Many 
are the blazing and terrible forms of this God that men speak of and 
worship in the world. Many also are the true names of this Deity in all the 
worlds. These names are based upon his supremacy, his omnipotence, and 
his divine and unequalled deeds. In the Vedas, the marvellous and sacred 
hymn called the Sata Rudriya has been sung in honour of this great God, the 
infinite Rudra. 

This God is the Lord of all wishes that are human and heavenly. He is 
omnipotent, and He is the supreme master. Indeed, He pervades the infinite 
universe. The Brahmanas and the Munis describe him as the First-born of 


all creatures. He is the First of all the gods; from his mouth was born Vayu 
the wind. 

Since he always protects the creatures of the universe and plays with 
them, and since he is the Lord of all creatures, he called Pasupati. 

Since his Linga is always in the observance of the vow of 
Brahmacharya, and since He always gladdens the world, He is called 
Maheswara. The Rishis, the Devas, the Gandharvas and Apsaras ever 
worship his Lingam, which stand eternally upright. This worship pleases 
Maheswara and makes him joyful. 

With regard to the past, the future, and the present, Siva has many 
forms, and for that he is known as Bahurupa. Possessing one eye, he blazes 
forth in effulgence; He is otherwise known to have infinite eyes on every 
part of his body. 

Since He possesses the worlds He is called Sarva. 

Since his form is like that of smoke He is called Dhurjjati. 

Since the Viswedevas dwell in him, He is called Viswarupa. 

Since three Goddesses, Heaven, Water and Earth adore and depend on 
the Lord of the universe, he is called Tryambaka. 

Since he always increases all kinds of wealth and wishes the good of 
mankind in all their actions, He is called Siva, the Auspicious One. 

He has a thousand eyes, ten thousand eyes, and they gaze in all 
directions. And because He protects this vast universe, He is called 
Mahadeva. 

Since He is Great and Ancient and is the Source of life and of its 
continuance, and since his Lingam is everlasting, He is called Sthanu. 

Since the rays of the Sun and the Moon that appear in the world are 
spoken of as the hair on the Three-eyed One, He is called Vyomakesa. 

Since, from Kalpa to Kalpa, He destroys every Brahma, Indra, Varuna, 
Yama, Kubera, and the rest, He is called Hara. 

Since, He is the Past, the Future and the Present, and everything in the 
universe, and since He is the Origin of the past, the future, and the present, 
He is for that reason called Bhava. 

Kapi means Supreme, and Vrisha is said to mean righteousness. The 
illustrious God of gods, is hence called Vrishakapi. 

Since Maheswara, with his two eyes shut in dhyana, created through 
sheer force of will a third eye on his forehead, He is called Trinetra. 


Whatever sickness there is in the bodies of living creatures and 
whatever health is in them represent that God. He is the Wind, the vital airs 
called Prana, Apana and the others in the bodies of all creatures, including 
those that are diseased. Those who worship any image of the Sivalinga, 
always obtains great felicity. 

He is fiery below his waist, and the upper half of his body that is cool 
and auspicious is Soma the Moon. So too, half his Soul is Agni and the 
other half Soma. His auspicious form, full of tejas, blazes more brightly that 
than the forms of all the gods together. Among men, his burning and 
dreadful form is called Agni. With his cool and auspicious form, He 
practises Brahmacharya. 

With the other terrible form He is the Supreme Lord who devours 
everything. Since He burns, since he is fierce, since he is endued with great 
prowess and devours flesh, blood and marrow, he is called Rudra. 

O Partha, this is the Deity called Mahadeva, armed with the Pinaka, 
whom you saw going before your chariot and killing your enemies. After 
you vowed to kill the king of the Sindhus, O sinless one, Krishna showed 
you this God, in your dream, sitting on the top of Kailasa, the holiest 
mountain. This illustrious God goes before you in battle. It is He who gave 
you the weapons with which you brought carnage to the Danavas. 

O Arjuna, I have now told you of the Sata-Rudriya, contained in the 
Veda, which is the hymn that describes and praises the God of gods, and 
enumerates some of his endless names, each one a potent and holy mantra. 
This hymn of four divisions, with which every objective is achieved, is 
perfectly sacred, destroys all sins removes all stains and destroys all 
sorrows and all fears. Men that always listen to this Sata-Rudriya, Siva’s 
hundred names, will vanquish all their enemies and be highly regarded in 
the land of Rudra. 

The person who always attentively reads or listens to this auspicious 
account of how Siva went before Arjuna’s chariot and annihilated his 
enemies, and devoutly worships that illustrious Lord of the universe, will 
obtain all the objects of his desire as a result of the Three-eyed God being 
pleased with him. Go and fight, O son of Kunti! Defeat is not for you, who 
have Krishna on your side for your advisor and protector.” 

O Bhaarata, having spoken thus to Arjuna, Maharishi Vyasa, the son of 
Parasara, vanishes and returns to his asrama from whence he had come.’ 


I This passage is based on Siva’s sacred names, each a holy mantra, found in the Sata Raudriya and 
the Koti Rudra. 


CANTO 199 


DRONA-VADHA PARVA CONTINUED 


°S anjaya says, ‘Having fought savagely for five days, Rajan, the 
Brahmana Drona fell and ascended into blessed Brahmaloka. 

The very benefits that accrue from a study of the Vedas arise from a 
study of this Drona Parva. The great feats of the most intrepid and majestic 
Kshatriyas have been described here. He who reads or listens to the 
recitation of this Parva every day is freed from the most heinous sins and 
the most atrocious crimes. Brahmanas will always obtain the fruits of 
yagnas from here. From this Parva, Kshatriyas will have victory in the 
fiercest battles. The other varnas, Vaisyas and Sudras, can acquire desirable 
sons and grandsons and all objects of desire!” 


The End of Drona Parva 





THE COMPLETE MAHABHARATA 


Karna Parva 
Salya Parva 
Sauptika Parva 
Stri Parva 


THE COMPLETE 
MAHABHARATA 


Volume 7 


Karna Parva 
Salya Parva 
Sauptika Parva 
Stri Parva 
S.B. Pillay 


and 


Anita. Pillay 


RUPA 


Published by 
Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd 2015 
7/16, Ansari Road, Daryaganj 
New Delhi 110002 


Copyright © Anita Pillay 2015 


All rights reserved. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, or stored in a retrieval system, in any 
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the 
prior permission of the publisher. 


ISBN: 978-81-291-3584-1 


First impression 2015 


10987654321 


This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, 
resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated, without the publisher’s prior consent, in any form of 
binding or cover other than that in which it is published. 


In loving memory of 
S.B. Pillay (1951-2014) 


CONTENTS 


Karna parva 
Salya parva 
Sauptika Parva 


Stri parva 


A BRIEF INTRODUCTION 


The last complete version of the Mahabharata to be written in India in 
English prose was the translation by Kisar1 Mohan Ganguli in the late 19th 
century. He wrote it between 1883 and 1896. To the best of my knowledge, 
it still remains the only full English prose rendering of the epic by any 
Indian. 

More than a hundred years have passed since Ganguli achieved his 
monumental task. Despite its closeness to the original Sanskrit and its 
undeniable power, in more than a hundred years the language and style of 
the Ganguli translation have inevitably become archaic. 


It seemed a shame that this most magnificent of epics, a national 
treasure, an indisputable classic of world literature, believed by many to be 
the greatest of all books ever written, is not available in complete form to 
the Indian (or any) reader in modern, literary and easily accessible English: 
as retold by Indian writers. 

So we, a group of Indian writers and editors, warmly and patiently 
supported by our publisher Rupa Publications India, undertook a line-by- 
line retelling of the complete Mahabharata, for the contemporary and future 
reader. Our aim has not been to write a scholarly translation of the great 
epic, but an eminently readable one, without vitiating either the spirit or the 
poetry of the original, and without reducing its length. 


This is not a translation from the Sanskrit but based almost entirely on 
the Ganguli text, and he himself did use more than one Sanskrit version for 
his work. However, as will be obvious, the style of this new rendering is 
very much our own, and our hope is to bring as much of the majesty and 
enchantment of this awesome epic to you as is possible in English. 


Ramesh Menon 
Series Editor 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


Thanks to my old friend Ramesh Menon, who brought me to this project. 
And to Kadambari Mishra, who proofread this volume. 


Karna Parva 


CANTO 1 


va UM! Having bowed down to Narayana, to the foremost of Purushas, 
Nara, and to the Devi Saraswati, I invoke the spirit of Jaya! 

Vaisampayana said, “After Drona’s death, O Rajan, Duryodhana leads 
the anxious maharathas of the Kaurava army to Aswatthaman. They lament 
Drona’s loss and sit around the son of Sharadvata’s daughter, listless and 
grieving. Comforted for a little while by readings from the scriptures, the 
royal warriors leave for their respective camps at nightfall. However, Karna, 
Suyodhana, Dusasana and Sakuni find no rest in their tents when they 
consider the immense slaughter. They pass a sleepless night in 
Duryodhana’s tent, reflecting upon the sufferings they had inflicted upon the 
noble Pandavas. 

Once they had dragged a distraught Draupadi after the game of dice into 
the Kuru sabha. Now, their hearts filled with anxiety, they bitterly regret 
what they did. Thinking of the grief they had caused the Pandavas after the 
game of dice, they spend the night, O Bhaarata, in sorrow as if it were a 
hundred years long. When morning finally comes, they mechanically 
perform the customary and obligatory rituals. This comforts them to some 
extent and soon they deploy their troops, and prepare themselves for battle. 

They ordain Karna as their senapati. They tie the auspicious thread 
around his wrists, have many leading Brahmanas pray for their victory and 
give them gifts of vessels full of curd, ghee, akshata, gold coins, jewels, 


gemstones, costly garments and kine. They arrange for heralds, musicians 
and panegyrists to recite hymns of victory. 

The Pandavas, too, Rajan, perform their morning ceremonies and issue 
from their camp, intent on battle. Soon, yet again, a bloody clash of arms 
begins between the Kurus and the Pandavas, each bent on annihilating the 
other, and this lasts full two days. Finally, after he had brought huge 
carnage to his enemies, Arjuna kills Karna before the Kauravas. Sanjaya 
returns to Hastinapura and relates all that had happened at Kurujangala to 
Dhritarashtra.” 

Janamejaya said, “The venerable Dhritarashtra, son of Ambika, was 
already grief-stricken at the fall of Bhishma, Drona and the other 
maharathas. O greatest of Brahmanas, how could he bear now to hear of the 
death of Karna who was Duryodhana’s dearest friend and greatest source of 
strength? How did he receive the news of the death of the warrior on whom 
his own hopes of his sons’ victory had rested? 

Ah, when the blind king did not quit his life even after hearing of 
Karna’s death, it must truly be difficult for men to die even under the most 
extreme grief! Indeed, Brahmana, it must have been agonising for the king, 
for he had also to bear the grief of the fall of Bhishma, of Bahlika, Drona, 
Somadatta and Bhurisrava, as well as of other friends, and his sons and 
grandsons. 

Tell me all the details of the war as they actually happened. I am always 
eager to hear of the great achievements of my ancestors!” 


CANTO 2 


V aisampayana said, “After Karna is killed, O Rajan, Sanjaya, the 

unhappy son of Gavalgana, sets out that night for Nagapura, on 
horses fleet as the wind. In deep anxiety, he reaches Dhritarashtra’s palace 
in Hastinapura, now empty of kinsmen and friends. Finding the king 
dispirited, he greets and salutes him with joined hands and bent head, and 
with a sorrowful face, says, ‘I am Sanjaya, O lord of Earth! Are you not 
happy? I hope you are not stricken by the loss? Remember, you spurned the 
sage counsel of Vidura, Bhishma and Krishna. I trust you feel no regret 
now? Rama, Narada, Kanwa and others also offered you wise counsel in the 
sabha. I hope you feel no pain now, when you remember how you 
disregarded them? I hope you feel no hurt, when you think of the slaughter 
of Bhishma, Drona and so many others—friends who were always 
concerned about your welfare?’ 

Dhritarashtra draws a long hot breath, and replies, ‘When I heard, O 
Sanjaya, of the fall of Bhishma, the valiant son of Ganga, the warrior with 
all devastras, and the greatest archer alive, my heart felt great pain and 
anguish. That shura of great tejas, born of the Vasus themselves slew ten 
thousand enemy maharathas every day; Bhrigu’s son Parasurama had given 
him greatest astras, when the Bhargava taught him archery when he was a 
boy; alas, Yajnasena’s son Sikhandi cut that matchless Kshatriya down with 
the Pandavas. 


My heart is full of anguish after I heard how Dhrishtadyumna vilely 
killed the heroic Drona, through whose grace all the royal sons of Kunti, as 
well as so many other lords of earth, became maharathas. After Bhishma, 
there was no other archer like Acharya Drona. 

No, no one in the world could equal Bhishma and Drona in the 
knowledge and use of the four kinds of weapons. Alas, hearing of the death 
of these two, my heart is indeed agonised with grief. 

What did my army do when they heard of the death of Drona, who had 
no equal in the three worlds in the knowledge of weaponry? After Arjuna 
despatched the mighty force of the Samsaptakas to Yama, after Krishna 
rendered Aswatthaman’s Narayanastra harmless and Arjuna routed the 
Kaurava divisions, what did my army do? I feel sure that after Drona’s 
death my troops ran away sunken in an ocean of grief, like mariners 
shipwrecked on the bosom of the vast and fathomless deep. 

What, O Sanjaya, was the colour of the faces of Duryodhana, Karna, 
Kritavarman of the Bhojas, Salya of the Madras, and of my remaining sons, 
and of the others, when the Kuru divisions fled the field? Tell me about all 
this as it happened, O son of Gavalgana, and describe to me the skill the 
Pandavas and my warriors demonstrated!’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘O sire, do not feel any pain when you hear all that has 
happened to the Kauravas through your wrongdoing. The wise never feels 
any pain at what fate brings. Since Destiny is unconquerable, one may or 
may not attain human purposes. Hence, he who is wise never feels regret or 
pain on the acquisition or the loss of the objects he desires and cherishes.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘I do not feel great grief, O Sanjaya. I regard all this 
to be the result of Destiny. Tell me all that you wish!’” 


CANTO 3 


oS S anjaya says, ‘Upon the fall of Acharya Drona, your sons are pale 

and dazed. Although armed, O Rajan, they hang down their heads 

in grief and stand silent without looking at one another. Seeing this, your 

already agitated troops vacantly gaze up into the sky as if for hope from on 

high. The weapons of many soldiers, dyed with blood, fall from their hands; 

though many still grasp their weapons, from their despondent stances, they 
resemble meteors fallen from the sky. 

Duryodhana finds your army standing paralysed and listless and says to 
them, “I challenged the Pandavas and embarked on this war relying upon 
the might of your arms! Now, at the death of Drona, the prospect of victory 
appears bleak. In war, all warriors may die and meet with either victory or 
death. What then is strange in Drona’s death? So, fight resolutely! 

Look how the noble Karna ranges all over Kurukshetra and uses his 
devastras. That coward Dhananjaya, the son of Kunti, always flees from 
him in fear, like a small deer at the sight of a lion! 

Karna reduced the mighty Bhimasena, strong as ten thousand elephants, 
to a sorry plight without any divine help. He slew the terrible Ghatotkacha, 
master of devastras, mayavi of a thousand illusions, and gave a deafening 
shout of triumph. Today you will see the vast strength and energy of great 
Karna of unerring aim. Let the sons of Pandu today confront both 
Aswatthaman and Karna with prowess like that of Vishnu and Vasava! 


All of you are singly capable of slaying the sons of Pandu and all their 
troops. How much more then will you be able to accomplish when you are 
united. Be not dejected. With your great prowess and mastery of weapons, 
you will prevail today!” 

Your son Duryodhana and his brothers proclaim Karna the senapati of 
the Kuru army. Taking command, the shura Karna, so staunch in battle, 
gives vent to a simhanada, a reverberating lion’s roar, and leads the fight 
against the enemy. He causes a great carnage among the Srinjayas, the 
Panchalas, the Kekayas and the Videhas. From his bow issues a dense flight 
of arrows, like a swarm of bees with their wings brushing. After he 
decimates the energetic Panchala and Pandava forces and thousands of their 
warriors, Arjuna finally kills him!’” 


CANTO 4 


V aisampayana said, “Hearing this, Rajan, Dhritarashtra experiences 

the uttermost fierceness of grief and thinks of Suyodhana as being 
already dead. In his agitation, he faints like an elephant that has swooned. 
At this, the women of the royal household begin to weep aloud and their 
wails seem to fill the whole world. Approaching the king, queen Gandhari 
and the other Bharata women also swoon. Sanjaya comforts these stricken 
women, who tremble like a plantain grove in a high wind. 

Vidura sprinkles water over the blind king and comforts his brother 
whose vision is limited to only gyana. Slowly restored to consciousness, the 
king remains silent for some time even as one who has lost his reason; then, 
after drawing long breaths, he censures his own sons and lauds the 
Pandavas. He blames himself and Sakuni, son of Subala, and his mighty 
frame begins to tremble and shake. Finally controlling himself somewhat, 
the king once more questions his suta, Sanjaya. 

‘I have listened to you, Sanjaya. Has my son Duryodhana already gone 
to Yama’s world, despairing of success? Tell me truly, Sanjaya, all the 
details even if you have to repeat them!’ 

Sanjaya replies, ‘The maharatha Karna, Rajan, along with his sons, 
brothers, and other mighty and loyal suta archers is dead. Bhimasena killed 
Dusasana and then drank his blood on the field in triumph!’” 


CANTO 5 


V aisampayana said, “Hearing this, Ambika’s son Dhritarashtra, in 

great agitation, tells Sanjaya, ‘Through the evil rule of my 
imprudent son Vikartana’s son Karna has been killed. This news cuts into 
the very core of my heart. Oh, I want to cross this sea of grief. Remove my 
doubts and tell me quickly the names of those who are still alive and those 
who are dead among the Kurus and the Pandavas.’ 

Sanjaya says, “Rajan, on the tenth day of the war, they brought down 
Shantanu’s son, the invincible Bhishma, after he slaughtered untold 
numbers of Srinjayas and Panchalas. 

The mighty Drona of the golden chariot is also dead, after he butchered 
the Panchala divisions. 

Karna is slain after he slaughtered half of those who survived the 
carnage that Bhishma and the illustrious Drona had wreaked. 

They have also killed the powerful Vivimsati, O Rajan, who decimated 
hundreds of Anarta warriors. 

The two great and mighty princes of Avanti, Vinda and Anuvinda, 
achieved the most difficult exploits before going to Yama’s abode. 

After consuming eleven akshauhinis with his missiles, Arjuna killed 
your son-in-law Jayadratha, tejasvin Kshatriya and the ruler of ten 
kingdoms. Arjuna also killed the fearless Ambashta king Srutayus, and 


Sudakshina, who led thousands of superb elephants, as well as the 
inviolable king Paurava and his forces. 

Savyasachi annihilated the Abhishahas, those fiercest warriors, along 
with the Sibis, greatest of maharathas, and the Kalingas. He also sent the 
fierce, fanatical and indomitable Narayana Gopas of Gokula to Yama, and 
many thousands of Srenis and Samsaptakas. Your two brothers-in-law, the 
great warrior princes Vrishaka and Achala met with similar fates at the 
hands of Dhananjaya. 

The belligerent Arjuna killed the virtuous king of the Kiratas, 
Bhagadatta, devoted to Kshatriya dharma and the respected and dear friend 
of Indra, along with his troops from the lowlands on the sea coast. 

Partha also slew that lord of the earth Srutayus, who always had a deep- 
rooted antipathy for the Pandavas, and not before he reminded him of that 
hatred. 

O sire, with the slaughter of his son Abhimanyu in mind and his own 
vow, a vengeful Dhananjaya slew Karna’s son, the vital and accomplished 
Vrishasena, in the very sight of Karna. He slew Karna, Radha’s son of the 
Suta varna, and his maharatha brothers, as well as the Kaikeyas, the 
Malavas, the Madrakas, the fierce Dravidas, the Yaudheyas, the Lalittyas, 
the Kshudrakas, the Usinaras, the Tundikeras, the Savitriputras, the 
Easterners, the Northerners, the Westerners and the Southerners. 

Also despatched were armies of foot soldiers, thousands upon thousands 
of cavalry, teeming squadrons of rathas, and many great elephants. The 
tireless Partha massacred so many noble, richly attired, and armed 
Kshatriyas, all veteran warriors. Other shuras, immeasurably powerful and 
always eager to kill their enemies, met with a similar fate at the hands of 
Indra’s son. 

Subhadra’s son Abhimanyu killed the indomitable and ever obedient 
son of Duryodhana and Dusasana’s brave son after fierce battles. He 
despatched the ruler of the Kosalas to Yamaloka, as well as the mighty 
Jayatsena, the son of Jarasandha and the prince of the Magadhas, in brutal 
encounters. He also killed the intrepid younger brother of Salya of the 
Madras, a radiantly handsome warrior who fought with sword and shield. 

Rajan, Satyaki extinguished your kinsman, Somadatta’s son, the 
celebrated Bhurisrava in a duel. 

Sahadeva killed Salya’s intrepid son Rukmaratha, who was the son of 
his maternal uncle and thus his brother as well. 


The old king Bhagiratha and Brihatkshatra, king of the Kaikeyas, both 
awesome warriors, are also dead. 

Nakula, who darts about the field with the speed of a hawk, slew the 
strapping and most intelligent son of Bhagadatta. 

Bhimasena, Rajan, killed your ferocious and invincible princes— 
Dusasana, master of weapons, and the brilliant Chitrasena. Seething with 
the memories of the many wrongs that Duryodhana inflicted upon him, and 
honouring his own vow, Vrikodara sorrowfully killed even your son of 
dharma, Vikarna, who fought like a true Kshatriya despite losing his chariot 
and weapons. 

Bhima annihilated your grandsire, the powerful Bahlika, and all his 
troops. He beat your mighty sons Durmukha and Dussaha to death with his 
mace. He despatched, in a great duel, your counsellor, the energetic 
Vrishavarman of the Suta varna, as well as king Shalva, great maharatha 
and master of powerful astras. 

Oghavat and Vrishanta, O Rajan, who fought the war savagely for your 
sake, have both gone to Yama’s abode. So too has maharatha Kshemadhurti, 
whom Bhimasena crushed with his mace. 

Durmarshana, Durvisaha and maharatha Durjaya, after performing the 
most difficult and astounding feats in battle, and the two daring brothers 
Kalinga and Vrishaka have been sent to Yama’s halls. 

The war saw the annihilation of the Vasatis, numbering two thousand, 
all great fighters, as well as of the adept Surasena warriors. 

Satyaki accounted for the mighty king Jalasandha after that hero had 
caused an immense carnage. 

Ghatotkacha killed Alayudha, the other prince of Rakshasas, who rode a 
chariot harnessed to monstrous asses. 

Rajan, so far in the battle, we have lost these and thousands of other 
kings and their forces. This is my answer to the questions you asked. And 
the devastation that took place when Arjuna and Karna fought was even as 
when Mahendra killed Vritra, when Rama slew Ravana; even as when 
Krishna slew Naraka or Mura; as when the incomparable Parasurama of 
Bhrigu’s vamsa killed the Kartavirya with all his kinsmen and friends, after 
fighting a bloody battle that is celebrated through the three worlds; even as 
when Skanda killed the Asura Mahisha, and Rudra slew the Asura Andhaka 
—even so has Arjuna, in single combat, killed that greatest of all bowmen 
Karna, with all his kinsmen. 


Karna was indeed invincible in battle and upon him the Dhartarashtras 
placed their hopes of victory. He was also a major cause of the hostility 
with the Pandavas for what he said in the Kuru sabha during the game of 
dice and after. 

Pandu’s third son Arjuna has accomplished what always seemed 
impossible. He has killed Suryaputra Karna, who the god themselves dared 
not face in battle. Thus, even as your well-meaning friends warned you, the 
disaster they predicted and the great destruction have now come about. O 
Rajan, for the hollow sinful happiness of your covetous sons, you have 
heaped these evils on their heads and millions of Kshatriyas have perished. 
Dhritarashtra, the fruit of these evils is now manifest.’”’ 


CANTO 6 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, “You have, O son, mentioned the names of 
those of my allies whom the Pandavas have killed. Now tell me 
the names of those among the Pandavas whom my forces slew.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Bhishma decimated the veteran Kuntis warriors, 
irrepressible and valorous in battle, along with all their kinsmen and 
advisers, as well as the Narayanas, the Balabhadras and thousands of other 
Kshatriyas, all devoted to the Pandavas’ cause. 

Rajan, six of our leading maharathas led by Dusasana’s son were finally 
able to surround and murder that resplendent shura, Abhimanyu, who, 
though a boy in years, was still equal to Arjuna, Kesava or Baladeva in war. 
He was an extraordinarily gifted warrior, and brought a hardly credible 
slaughter to our forces. He lost his chariot, but that heroic son of Subhadra 
continued to fight until the end, true to his Kshatriya dharma. Because they 
could not subdue Arjuna, they murdered his son to break his heart. This was 
the most dastardly deed of the entire war. 

The destroyer of the Patachchatras, the handsome son of Ambashta, 
leading a large force, fought heroically and caused a great slaughter of our 
army until he encountered Duryodhana’s son Lakshmana, who despatched 
him to Yama’s realm. Your grandson also accounted for Sikhandi’s valiant 
son Kshatradeva. 

Fighting with great skill, Dusasana slew the fierce maharatha Brihanta. 


Drona killed Satyajit, who was well-nigh the equal of the diadem- 
decked Arjuna in tejas and power, and the Acharya killed so many other 
mighty and seasoned archers among the Panchalas, as well as the two 
majestic kings, Virata and Drupada. He killed the two indomitable kings 
Manimat and Dandadhara, who fought us with tigerish courage, and 
maharatha Ansumat, lord of the Bhojas at the head of his army. He also 
felled the brothers Rochamana, who were like two brilliant planets ranging 
the field. 

Similar was the fate of the vigorous king of the Magadhas, slayer of 
hostile warriors armed with the most potent astras, and Vasudana too, who 
now sleep on the battlefield after causing great carnage — Drona despatched 
both to Yama. 

Drona also sent Purujit and Kuntibhoja, the two uncles of Arjuna, 
Mitravarman the Panchala prince, Satyadhriti of the Matsyas, the great 
Madiraswa, the powerful Suryadatta, as well as the valorous Srenimat to the 
regions of the dead. 

The Acharya also slew the two shuras Suchitra and Chitravarman, 
father and son and both mighty warriors, as well as that lord of earth 
Suketu, son of Sishupala, who had strewn the field of dharma with the 
corpses of so many of our Kshatriyas. 

Drona fought like a god and the Brahmana decimated these and 
countless other maharathas. 

Samudrasena snuffed life from Chitrasena, the ruler of the seacoast, and 
his son, O Bhaarata, while Aswatthaman did the same to Nila and 
Vyaghradatta, two other mighty rulers of seaside countries. 

Vikarna raced across the field on his ratha with uncanny speed and great 
nimbleness and he beheaded Chitrayudha and Chitrayodhin, who were 
slaughtering our forces. 

Kaikeya killed his own brother, the king of the Kaikeyas, who was 
equal to Vrikodara himself in battle and who led the Kaikeya legions. 

Your son Durmukha killed Janamejaya of the hill country, gifted with 
prodigious strength and an expert mace warrior. 

Many other great and able kings, who fought for the Pandavas, have all 
gone to Yama’s abode after achieving impossible deeds. Vasudana’s son 
shot dead Abhibhu of the Kasis, riding at the head of his numerous host. 

Our Kshatriyas killed the most skilful Yudhamanyu, and the powerful 
Uttamaujas, who between them had destroyed thousands of our most valiant 


walriors. 

Vardhakshemi, O Rajan, who was like the ocean at full tide, exhausted 
all his astras in battle, and finally found undisturbed peace. 

Bahlika slew Senabindu, the foremost of Sutas, after he had wasted 
many enemies in battle. 

Dhrishtaketu, O Rajan, the greatest maharatha among the Chedis, also, 
laid down his life after many a heroic deed on the field. 

The daring veteran Satyadhriti, Virata’s son Sankha and the mighty 
Uttara, after they had slaughtered our troops and accomplished the most 
noteworthy feats, have repaired to Yama’s abode. 

As you desired, I have now listed the Pandava maharathas that we killed 
on the field of Kurukshetra.’” 


CANTO 7 


. ‘T) hritarashtra says, ‘When all my great warriors, O Sanjaya, have 

perished, I have no hope that those who remain will survive. 

When Bhishma and Drona are dead, what use is life to me any longer? I 

cannot bear the death of Radha’s son Karna, that ornament of battle, the 

might of whose arms was as great as that of ten thousand elephants. O best 

of Sutas, tell me now, who yet remain alive in my army. It seems to me that 
all those who are still alive must be as good as dead.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘O Rajan, the shura Aswatthaman, to whom his father 
Drona imparted many devastras of the four kinds, still stands on the field. 
The noble son of Drona, as great a master of weapons as his sire, stands 
ready to battle for you. 

Kritavarman, of the Anarta country, the son of Hridika, the greatest of 
the Satwatas, the lord of the Bhojas, great maharatha, is still alive and ready 
for battle. 

Artayana’s intrepid son, the invincible Salya, perhaps the most 
formidable Kshatriya who still remains alive on your side, he who was 
forced to abandon his own sister’s sons, to keep his solemn word, still 
contends manfully. He who promised Yudhishtira that he would dispirit 
Karna, who is Sakra’s very equal, also straddles Kurukshetra yet. 

Subala, king of the Gandharas, with his forces of Ajaneyas, Saindhavas, 
Kambojas, Vanayus, mountaineers and dwellers of riparian regions, remains 


on the field, still eager to fight for you. 

With his massive and wondrous bow, Sharadvata’s son Kripa Gautama, 
Acharya, mahabaho, who fights with a myriad of weapons in different 
astonishing ways, still stands on the battlefield yet eager for fight. 

The son of the Kalinga king, riding a sizeable chariot drawn by large 
horses and flying a proud standard, is still on the field, O Kurudvaha, 
battling for your cause. 

Your son, the Kurusrestha Purumitra, Rajan, rides his ratha with the 
effulgence of fire, and remains upon Kurukshetra like the sun shining 
brilliantly in a cloudless sky. 

The vigorous Duryodhana, at the head of an elephant force and 
accompanied by many great warriors, stands on his golden chariot, always 
prepared to engage in war. In the midst of many kings, that great shura, with 
the majesty of a lotus, is resplendent in his beautiful armour, like a fire with 
little smoke or the sun freshly emerged from behind dark clouds. 

So, too, do your sons Sushena, armed with splendid sword and shield, 
and the heroic Satyasena, fight on, along with Chitrasena, their hearts full of 
undimmed excitement. 

Those modest but powerful Bharata princes, Chitrayudha, Srutavarman, 
Jaya, Dala, Satyavrata and Dussala live to fight the war. 

The courageous ruler of the Kaitavyas, who fearlessly wheels across the 
field and slays his enemies at will, leads his foot-soldiers, cavalry, elephants 
and chariots, determined yet to win your cause. 

The proud and great Srutayus, Srutayudha, Chitrangada and 
Chitravarman, who always strike so effectively, continue to fight. 

The sons of Karna, the noble Satyasandha and his two brothers, experts 
in the use of the most powerful astras and so exceptionally adroit, both fight 
on for your sake, leading large and unassailable forces. 

Accompanied by all these Kshatriyas and by many of his finest and 
intrepid fighters, O Rajan, Duryodhana yet stands tall on Kurukshetra, in 
the midst of his elephant division, like a second Indra, always confident of 
victory!’ 

Dhritarashtra says, “You have named all the great warriors who are still 
alive, both in my army as well as the enemy’s. From what you have said, I 
can plainly infer whom victory will favour.’ 

Having learnt that only a small portion of his army survives and that 
almost all his great warriors are dead, Dhritarashtra’s hearts is convulsed 


with grief and he swoons again. When he returns somewhat to his senses, 
he tells Sanjaya, ‘Wait with me for a moment, O son! My heart is greatly 
disturbed after hearing of this calamity. I am stupefied and my limbs are 
paralysed!’ 

Saying this, Dhritarashtra, the son of Ambika, again falls down on the 
earth, in a dead faint.” 


CANTO 8 


J anamejaya asked, “O Maharishi, what did the king say after he heard 
of the slaughter of Karna and his sons, and when he had been 
comforted a little? Poignant must have been his grief. Tell me everything.” 

Vaisampayana replied, “King Dhritarashtra absorbed the fact that great 
Karna, who was like the impossible clouding of the intellect of the wise 
Shukra, was dead. His loss was like the defeat of Indra by his enemies, or 
the fall of the resplendent Surya from the firmament, or the unbelievable 
drying up of the inexhaustible waters of the ocean. His death was like the 
destruction of the earth, the firmament and the waters, or like the futility of 
both dharma and adharma. 

Dhritarashtra realised that his army was annihilated. He knew that very 
soon the other warriors as enduring as Karna would meet with a similar fate 
as the Sutaputra. He burned with grief, sighed like a snake, and with all his 
limbs almost palsied, he lamented weakly and aloud. 

He says, ‘O Sanjaya, the valiant son of Adhiratha was powerful like the 
lion or the elephant; he had a bull’s thick neck, eyes, walk and bellow. With 
limbs as hard as the Vajra, that young man like a rampant rishabha never 
stepped back from a fight even if his opponent be Indra Deva himself! At 
the sound of his bowstring, slapping palms and at the hiss of his relentless 
torrent of arrows, men, horses, chariots and elephants fled before him. 
Duryodhana provoked hostilities with the mighty sons of Pandu relying 


upon Karna, the Mahabaho, the slayer of akshauhinis of enemies, that 
warrior of unfading glory. How did Partha kill Karna, the greatest of 
maharathas, that unconquerable Naravyaghra? 

He always relied on the might of his own arms and astras and had scant 
regard for Kesava, Dhananjaya, the Vrishnis, and all other enemies. Often 
he used to boast to the avaricious, kingdom coveting, foolish and spoilt 
Duryodhana, “Alone, I will fell the two invincible Krishnas from their great 
chariot, the wielder of Saranga and the wielder of Gandiva!” 

He conquered so many mighty enemies—the Gandharas, the Madrakas, 
the Matsyas, the Trigartas, the Tanganas, the Khasas, the Panchalas, the 
Videhas, the Kulindas, the Kasi-kosalas, the Suhmas, the Angas, the 
Nishadhas, the Pundras, the Kichakas, the Vatsas, the Kalingas, the Taralas, 
the Asmakas and the Rishikas. Subduing all these brave vamsas with his 
keen arrows fletched with kanka feathers, great Radheya made all of them 
pay tribute to us to enhance the honour and power of Duryodhana. Alas, 
how did the sons of Pandu manage to kill that Vrisha, the warrior son of 
Vikartana, that leader of armies, that unrivalled master of devastras? 

Among horses, Ucchaisravas is the best; among Yakshas, Vaisravana is 
the leader; among the Devas, Indra is the lord; among warriors, Karna was 
the foremost. In the three worlds, there is no one to match any of these. 
Unvanquished by even the mightiest of kings, he subjugated the whole 
world for Duryodhana’s aggrandisement. 

Why, the ruler of Magadha, after he had honoured and conciliated 
Karna and made him a friend, challenged all the Kshatriyas of the world, 
other than the Kauravas and the Yadavas, to battle! Now, to hear that 
Savyasachi has killed Karna in single combat, I am plunged in an ocean of 
grief like a broken ship, and sinking without a raft in the fathomless deep. 

O Sanjaya, my heart must be made of something harder than the Vajra 
of adamant since I am not dead from such anguish. Who else in this world, 
save my wretched self, would not yield up his life after the defeat and 
humiliation of my kinsmen, friends and allies? Ah, give me poison to drink 
or fire to burn myself with or push me off the summit of a mountain, for I 
cannot bear this intolerable burden of grief!’” 


CANTO 9 


: S anjaya says, “The world considers you the equal of Nahusha’s son 

Yayati in appearance, birth, fame, asceticism and learning. Indeed, 

in erudition you are, O Rajan, like a most accomplished and successful 
Maharishi. Summon your courage. Do not yield to grief.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘I believe that fate is supreme and all hard work 
fruitless since even Karna, who was like a sala tree, has met his end in 
battle. After he put Yudhishtira’s army and hordes of Panchala chariot- 
warriors to the sword, after he scorched all the directions with his scathing 
volley of arrows and confounded the Parthas in battle like the Vajradhari 
confounding the Asuras, alas, the enemy killed that maharatha, like a 
tempest uprooting a mighty tree. 

Like a drowning man unable to see the end of the ocean, I cannot see 
the end of my sorrows. My anxieties increased when I heard of Karna’s 
death and Phalguna’s victory and I no longer wish to live. Indeed, Sanjaya, 
the killing of Karna is hardly credible. This heart of mine must surely be 
made of adamant, since it did not burst into a thousand pieces when I heard 
of his death. Without doubt, before my birth the gods ordained an 
inordinately long life for me. 

Fie, O Sanjaya, on this life that is devoid of friends and kinsmen. 
Brought today to this sorry plight, fool that I am, I will have to live 
miserably, pitied by all. Once the whole world feted me, how can I now 


live, after my enemies have brought me down? I have gone from pain to 
greater sorrow and misfortune because of the deaths of Bhishma, Drona and 
now the noble Karna. 

Sanjaya, now that they have killed Karna, I do not think that anyone 
from my army will escape alive. He was the great raft for my sons to cross 
the sea of this war. And that shura, after he ravaged his enemies, is now 
dead. Of what use is life to me without that Nararishabha? The son of 
Adhiratha struck down by arrows fell from his chariot like a mountain-peak 
split by a thunderbolt! Bathed in blood, he lies adorning the earth, like an 
elephant killed by another infuriated prince of tuskers. Alas, Arjuna has 
killed that pride of all archers, Karna, he who was the strength of the 
Dhartarashtras and a source of utmost fear to the sons of Pandu. He was an 
unequalled warrior, a mighty, mighty archer, the dispeller of my sons’ fears, 
and alas, now he lies on the earth, lifeless, like a mountain struck down by 
Indra. 

Now, the fulfilment of Duryodhana’s wishes is as travel is to one who is 
lame, or the gratification of the poor man’s desires, or stray drops of water 
to one who is thirsty. We plan in a certain way but all our most careful 
schemes end so differently from what we thought. Alas, destiny is all 
powerful and we cannot go against time. 

Was my son Dusasana killed while running away from the battle, 
humiliated, unhappy in spirit and bereft of his manliness? Sanjaya, I hope 
that he did no cowardly deed? Did he not meet with his death like the other 
Kshatriyas who have fallen? 

The foolish Duryodhana did not accept Yudhishtira’s constant sage 
advice against the impropriety of war. When Bhishma begged for a drink as 
he lay on his deathbed of arrows, the illustrious Partha pierced the surface 
of the earth and created a jet of water. Bhishma then told Duryodhana, 
“Make peace with the Pandavas. When these hostilities cease, true peace 
will be yours. Let the war between you and your cousins end with me. 
Enjoy the earth in brotherliness with the sons of Pandu.” 

My son must certainly repent today, for what the wise Devavrata 
predicted then has now come to pass. 

Sanjaya, now I have no counsellors and sons and am miserable like a 
bird that has lost its wings. Often children at play capture a bird and cut off 
its wings and merrily release it. But the bird can no longer fly. I too have 
become like a bird shorn of its wings. Weak, without any resources, without 


kinsmen and friends, unhappy and overpowered by enemies, which way 
shall I turn? Karna who vanquished all the Kambojas, the Ambashthas, the 
Kaikeyas, the Gandharas and the Videhas and subjugated the whole earth 
for the glory of Duryodhana—alas, the powerful Pandavas have killed him. 

When Kiritin slew Karna, tell me, Sanjaya, which warriors remained 
with him on the field? I hope he did not die alone, abandoned by his 
friends? With powerful arrows, Sikhandi felled Pitamaha Bhishma, who did 
nothing to defend himself against the attack of that androgynous prince. 
Drupada’s son Dhrishtadyumna slew the mighty Drona, who had laid aside 
his weapons and sat immersed in dhyana. I have heard that both Bhishma 
and Drona were killed mainly through deceit. 

Truly, Indra himself could not have slain Bhishma and Drona in a fair 
fight. So, too, how could Death touch that shura Karna, surely equal to 
Indra himself, while he still had his many devastras? Purandara had given 
Karna the inexorable shakti of the splendour of lightning in exchange for 
the Sutaputra’s kundalas; in his quiver, amid sandalwood dust, nestled that 
serpent-mouthed devastra, fitted with goodly wings, that ayudha that could 
destroy any enemy. From Jamadagni’s son Parasurama, Karna had acquired 
the dread Brahmastra to fend off all the enemy maharathas led by Bhishma 
and Drona. Remember, he saved Drona and his warriors from Subhadra’s 
son Abhimanyu and, in a trice, shattered the chariot of the invincible 
Bhimasena of the strength of ten thousand elephants and the speed of the 
wind, and then laughed at Bhima. 

Karna vanquished Sahadeva as well and destroyed his ratha but did not 
kill him out of compassion and for the word he gave Kunti. He used 
Shakra’s astra and slew Ghatotkacha, who fought with a thousand different 
sorceries. In fact, his prowess filled Dhananjaya with so much fear that for a 
long time he avoided facing him in a duel. Alas, how could they kill that 
Karna, that greatest Kshatriya of all? 

How could his enemies best him unless either his ratha was destroyed, 
his bow riven and his astras exhausted? Who could vanquish that tiger 
among men, ah, the impetuous Karna, who brandished his formidable bow 
and unleased tides of arrows at his enemies? Surely, his bow must have 
broken, or his ratha must have sunk into the ground, or his astras were 
exhausted, since you tell me that the great Karna is dead. I do not see how 
else he could have been slain. 


That noblest warrior who swore the grave oath, “I will not wash my feet 
until I kill Arjuna”, he from fear of whom that bull among men, 
Dharmarajan Yudhishtira, had no sleep in the wilderness every night of 
thirteen years, that matchless maharatha of unearthly prowess—how did he 
meet his end? 

My son forcibly dragged Panchali, the wife of the Pandavas, into our 
court, relying upon Karna’s valour, and there in the midst of that conclave, 
in the very sight of the Pandavas and in the presence of the Kurus, called 
the princess of Panchala the wife of slaves. Karna, shura of the Suta varna, 
said to Draupadi, “O exquisite dark one, all your husbands are now like 
sesame seeds without kernels; they are men no more, so seek some other 
husband for yourself!’ He said more in the heat of rage and pride; he forced 
her to listen to other taunts and vile abuse. How was that choleric, wild and 
bravest hero slain by the enemy? 

He said to Duryodhana, “If Bhishma, who boasts of his prowess in war, 
or Drona, who is insuperable in a fight, do not kill the sons of Kunti out of 
their affection and favour, I will kill them all for you, my friend. Let the 
fever of your heart be dispelled!” 

He also assured us, “What will Arjuna’s Gandiva and his two 
inexhaustible quivers do to my astra, smeared with cool sandalwood paste, 
when it courses flaming through the sky?” 

Alas, how did Arjuna kill that warrior with shoulders as broad as a 
bull’s? 

Sanjaya, he brushed off the fierce touch of the arrows shot from the 
Gandiva; and, yes, he said to Panchali, “You have no husbands now” and 
glared at the Pandavas. He was so confident of his own prowess that he had 
no fear of them or of even of Janardana. When I thought that he could not 
meet with death even at the hands of the very Devas led by Vasava, 
attacking him in fury, what then need I say of the Pandavas? 

No one could face the son of Adhiratha when he put on his gauntlets 
and strummed his bowstring. I could believe that the earth could be without 
the splendour of the sun, the moon, or of fire, but not that Karna, greatest of 
all warriors, is slain. My foolish and evil-minded son decided to flaunt 
Krishna’s sage advice to make peace with the Pandavas only because 
Duryodhana relied on Karna and his brother Dusasana to win the war for 
him. He surely will lament now, seeing how both the bull-shouldered Karna 
and Dusasana have died. 


What did Duryodhana say when he saw Savyasachi and the Pandavas 
victorious and Vikartana’s son killed? That son of mine must surely rue the 
slaying of Durmarshana and Vrishasena and the headlong flight of his 
kings, maharathas and all his forces from the field. 

With his army dispirited, what did the unruly, proud and foolish 
Duryodhana, whose passions are always his master, say? Though his friends 
dissuaded him, he provoked such a horrific carnage as this age has not seen 
and suffered such an untold loss of his friends, followers and kinsmen in the 
war. Therefore, what did Duryodhana say? 

What did Duryodhana say when he watched Bhimasena kill his brother 
and then drink his blood? My son, with the ruler of the Gandharvas, once 
proclaimed, “Karna will kill Arjuna in battle!” 

What did Sakuni, the son of Subala, who was ecstatic after he cheated 
the son of Pandu at the game of dice, say when he saw Karna slain? 

What did that mighty maharatha among the Satwatas, that great archer 
Kritavarman, the son of Hridika, say when he saw Vaikartana slain? 

Sanjaya, what did the youthful Aswatthaman, Drona’s handsome, 
intelligent and celebrated son, to whom Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and 
Vaishyas who wish to acquire the science of weaponry look for instruction, 
say when he saw Karna slain? 

What did Sharadvata’s son Kripa of Gautama’s race, that best of 
maharathikas, that Acharya of the astra shastra, say when he saw Karna 
slain? 

What did that king of the Madras, the mighty leader of the Madra 
warriors, maharatha Salya of the Sauvira vamsa, that ornament of 
gatherings of noble men and the greatest among warriors say when he saw 
Karna killed? 

What did all the other Kshatriyas, those invincible lords of earth that 
came to fight, say when they saw Vaikartana slain? 

After the fall of the shura Drona, that tiger among maharathas, bull 
among men, who now led our army of many akshauhinis? Tell me, Sanjaya, 
how they prevailed upon the great and proud Salya, king of the Madras, to 
become Karna’s sarathy. Who guarded his right wheel, who his left wheel, 
and who protected his rear in battle? Who were the Kshatriyas who did not 
desert Karna, and who were those mean-spirited warriors that fled? How, in 
the midst of all our troops, was maharatha Karna killed? How did the 
Pandavas assail him with their torrents of arrows? 


O Suta, tell me also how his mighty devastra, with the serpentine head, 
was rendered impotent. Ah, for certain I see no way by which even a small 
part of my now dwindled and miserable army can be saved when its 
greatest leaders have fallen. 

When I have heard of the downfall of Bhishma and Drona, who were 
always ready to lay down their lives for my sake, what use have I now in 
living? Yet, I still cannot fathom how the Pandavas could kill Karna, the 
might of whose arms equalled that of ten thousand elephants. 

Now, tell me, Sanjaya, all that transpired after the death of Maharatha 
Drona between the Kaurava warriors and their enemies. Tell me, also, how 
the sons of Kunti fought the battle with Karna, and how that parantapa 
found his end!’” 


CANTO 10 


: S anjaya says, ‘O Rajan, after the fall of Drona, the vast army of the 

Kauravas flees but his son, maharatha Aswatthaman, holds firm. 

Partha, too, marshals his own troops and remains on the battlefield with his 

brothers. Seeing his own army running away, your son Duryodhana rallies 

them with great courage and fortitude and, relying just on his own might, 
fights the triumphal Pandavas for a long time. 

When twilight comes, he orders his troops to disengage and to withdraw 
to their own encampment. There the Kauravas sit like the Devas on 
luxurious couches overlaid with rich coverlets and on deeply cushioned 
chairs and ample beds, and hold consultation about the future. 

Duryodhana asks his greatest and closest commanders, “Give me your 
advice without delay! Under these circumstances, what do you think is 
essential and what is most urgent for us to do?” 

In reply, those Naravyaghras, seated on their thrones, all declare without 
hesitation their wish to fight on. Observing their eagerness to pour their 
lives out as libations into the battle-fire, and seeing the king’s face radiant 
as the morning sun at this, the Acharya’s most intelligent son, 
Aswatthaman, says, “Enthusiasm, opportunity, skill and strategy —these are 
the means by which the learned declare that any end can be achieved. 
However, we have to rely on destiny. Those towering warriors that fought 
on our side, maharathas equal to the Devas, possessed strategy, devotion, 


and were accomplished and loyal. They all met with death. Yet we should 
not despair. If all these methods are properly applied, we can yet make even 
destiny favour us. 

O Bhaarata, all of us should make Karna, endued with every 
accomplishment, our senapati! He is powerful; he is a conqueror, 
accomplished in weaponry and unassailable in battle. Irresistible as Yama 
himself, if we make Karna our senapati, we can surely vanquish our 
enemies in battle!” 

Aswatthaman’s words fill Duryodhana with joy and he immediately 
consigns his hopes and expectations upon Karna: that he would be the one 
to vanquish the Pandavas after the fall of Bhishma and Drona. Comforted 
again, he grows calm, his confidence quickly renewed, and says 
affectionately and respectfully to Karna, “I know your true ability and the 
great love you bear me! For all that, Mahabaho, let me share with you some 
of my concerns so that you can do what you think is needed, gifted as you 
are with great insight. 

My two great generals, the Atirathas Bhishma and Drona, have both 
fallen. Now you be my senapati, for you are mightier than them! Both those 
great ones were advanced in years and were, besides, partial to Arjuna and 
the Pandavas. Yet, I respected them depending on your final assurance. 
Bhishma considered the sons of Pandu as his grandchildren and spared 
them for ten successive days. When you had laid aside your weapons, 
Phalguna used Sikhandi as a shield and felled the valiant Bhishma in a great 
duel. 

After that indomitable warrior took to his bed of arrows, it was on your 
advice, O Naravyaghra, that we made Drona our senapati. He, too, spared 
the sons of Pritha because he was their Acharya. And Dhrishtadyumna 
killed that venerable Brahmana, his own master, in the most vile and 
horrible manner. 

I do not see another warrior equal to you; not even those great men who 
have been killed in the war. I have no doubt that only you are capable of 
securing us victory! In the past, today, and tomorrow, too, you have only 
my welfare at heart. So, like the true leader you are, it is appropriate that 
you bear this burden. Take charge now as our senapati, and like the 
Devasenapati, Lord Skanda of unfading prowess, lead this Dhartarashtra 
host! 


Like Mahendra slaying the Danavas, destroy the enemy forces. Seeing 
you fight, the Pandavas and the Panchalas will turn tail like the Danavas at 
the sight of Vishnu. Lead this vast host! When you stand ready on the 
battlefield, the vile Pandavas, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas will all flee 
with their allies. You will consume our enemies as the midday sun might 
any darkness!” 

Your son, Rajan, still entertains hope in his heart that although Bhishma 
and Drona had failed, Karna will vanquish the Pandavas. He says, “O 
Sutaputra, Partha is afraid to fight you!” 

Karna says, “I have, O son of Gandhari, said before in your presence, ‘I 
will vanquish all the Pandavas with their sons and Janardana too!’ 

Calm yourself, O Rajan, I am willing to become your senapati. And I 
regard the Pandavas as already defeated!” 

Duryodhana and all the other kings rise to honour Karna with command 
of the army, as the Devas once did for Skanda. They seat him at ease on a 
throne made of udumbara wood and overlaid with silken cloth, and invest 
him with the command according to the prescribed rites. They use golden 
and earthen jars filled to the brim with holy water sanctified with mantras, 
and ivory tusks and rhinoceros and bovid horns, use other vessels encrusted 
with jewels and gems, and fragrant herbs and plants and other auspicious 
things. He is bathed upon his throne, after which the Brahmanas, 
Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and goodly Sudras eulogize him. 

After the ceremony, Karna gifts niskas, kine and other riches to many 
leading Brahmanas to have their blessings. The panegyrists and the 
Brahmanas bless him, saying, “Vanquish the Parthas and Govinda with all 
their followers. O Radheya, slay the Parthas and the Panchalas, as the rising 
sun destroys darkness with his fierce rays! They will not be able to 
withstand you in battle, even as the Danavas failed before Indra. Arjuna and 
Kesava will not be able to even look at your astras, like owls unable to gaze 
at the rays of the sun.” 

Karna, installed as senapati, is truly radiant like a second Surya. 
Standing amongst your sons, he looks magnificent like Skanda surrounded 
by the Devas in the war with Taraka. Urged on by Death, your prince 
Duryodhana now regards himself as having already accomplished his 
purpose and achieved victory. 

Karna orders the troops to be deployed at dawn.’” 


CANTO 11 


. “T) hritarashtra says, ‘After the events which lead to Karna 

assuming command of the army and which culminate with his 

orders to the troops to be ready at the hour of sunrise, tell me, O Sanjaya, 
what does the Sutaputra do the next morning?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘As commanded by Karna, your sons, Bharatarishabha, 
order the troops to be woken with joyful music. Well before dawn, a loud 
clamour of “Fall in! Take up your positions!” arises among your troops. The 
sound of elephants and war chariots being readied, of foot-soldiers putting 
on their armour and of the warriors shouting to one another, is tremendous 
and reaches into the very heavens. Then Karna arrives in his chariot drawn 
by chargers of the hue of cranes, splendid like the irradiant sun, flying a 
white standard with the device of an elephants’ girth rope and festooned 
with pennants tied with many bows, a hundred quivers, gadas, shataghnis, 
rows of bells, darts, lances and spears, and blowing his conch! He holds 
aloft his gold inlaid bow. When they see that resplendent, awe-inspiring 
golden maharatha, no one among the Kauravas, O sire, anymore grieves the 
loss of Bhishma or Drona or any other warrior. 

Hurrying his warriors with blasts of his conch, Karna arrays the still 
vast army of the Kauravas in the makara vyuha, and leads them against the 
Pandavas. He stations himself at the tip of the snout of the crocodile. Its two 


eyes are the bold Sakuni and the mighty Uluka. At its head is Aswatthaman 
and its neck is created by Duryodhana’s remaining brothers. 

At the heart of the beast of war is Duryodhana supported by a large 
force. Kritavarman at the head of the invincible Narayana warriors, the 
Gopalas, forms its left foreleg. Gautama’s indomitable son Kripa, 
surrounded by the mighty Trigartas who still live, and by the Dravidas 
forms the bent, clawed, right foreleg. Salya, with a large force raised in the 
country of the Madras, forms the left hind leg of the reptile. The upright 
Sushena at the head of a thousand chariots and three hundred elephants 
forms the right hind leg. The two royal brothers of brilliant tejas, Chitra and 
Chitrasena, with another large force, make up the thick, long and tapering 
tail of the makara. 

Seeing great Karna come forth to give battle, Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, 
says, “Look, O Arjuna, how Karna arrays the Dhartarashtra army for war, 
protected by Kshatriyas and maharathas. They have lost their greatest 
warriors and those that remain, mahabaho, are like straw. Only one great 
archer remains, the Sutaputra. He is indestructible. None in the three worlds 
with their mobile and immobile beings, not the Devas, Asuras and 
Gandharvas, and the Kinnaras and Nagas can vanquish him. If you kill 
Karna today, victory will be ours, Phalguna. Pluck out this thorn that has 
been planted in my heart for twelve years, my brother. Choose the vyuha 
that you wish to deploy.” Arjuna chooses to deploy the Pandava forces in 
the chandrakala vyuha of the half moon. On the left wing is Bhimasena and 
on the right Dhrishtadyumna. Arjuna sets himself in the middle with 
Yudhishtira. Nakula and Sahadeva are behind them and the two Panchala 
princes, Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas, protect Arjuna’s chariot wheels; they 
do not leave him for a moment. The remaining valourous commanders, 
their armour shining in the dawn light, stand in the positions assigned to 
them in the array, according to the measure of their vigour and resolution. O 
Bhaarata, the Pandavas and the mighty bowmen in their great vyuha, are 
soon ready for battle. 

Looking at your army arrayed in Karna’s makara vyuha, Duryodhana 
and all his brothers regard the Pandavas as already conquered. And 
Yudhishtira is equally convinced that the Pandavas’ vyuha will overwhelm 
Karna and the Dhartarashtras. Both armies loudly blow conches and beat 
kettle-drums, tabors, cymbals, dindimas and jharjharas. Ferocious warriors 
let out loud exultant roars and shouts which can be heard over the noise of 


neighing horses and trumpeting elephants and the fierce clatter of chariot- 
wheels. O Bhaarata, in the Kaurava army, seeing magnificent Karna at the 
head of their vyuha, no man even thinks of the loss of Drona anymore. 

Both armies teem with joyous men, eager for battle and eager to 
decimate each other without delay. The two shuras, Karna and Yudhishtira, 
wound up with wrath at sight of each other, ride through their divisions, 
each resolved to triumph. The two armies, as they advance to meet each 
other, seem to prance with enthusiasm. From the wings, warriors seeking 
individual combat, issue in bursts. Then, conches resound and the general 
battle commences, O Rajan, between warriors, elephants, cavalry and 
chariots, all bent on either killing or dying in the attempt.” 


CANTO 12 


S anjaya says, “The two vast armies, bursting with exultant warriors, 
horses and elephants, splendid like the Deva and the Asura 
armies, clash in thunder and begin to hack and mow down each other. 
Leonine warriors strike off the heads of other combatants—with crescent- 
tipped and broad-headed shafts, razor-faced arrows, axes, and curved and 
straight swords. Each noble head strewn on the field is lustrous like the full 
moon or the sun and fragrant like the lotus. The lopped off, long and 
massive arms, holding weapons and wearing bracelets, shine as they fall 
upon the earth and writhe, the arms with their red palms and fingers looking 
as if the ground is strewn with fierce five-headed snakes killed by Garuda. 

Struck down by their enemies, brave men plunge down from elephant 
back, chariots and horses, like the inhabitants of heaven falling from their 
celestial vimanas upon the exhaustion of their punya. They massacre each 
other in their hundreds with heavy gadas, spiked clubs and short bludgeons; 
their hands, feet, weapons and rathas are all desiccated. In the turbulent 
melee, chariots, elephants, horsemen and foot-soldiers all cause bloody 
carnage. 

As the battle spreads and swells savagely, terrible Vrikodara leads the 
Parthas against us. That force consists of Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandi, the 
five sons of Draupadi, the Prabhadrakas, Satyaki and Chekitana with the 
Dravida men, the Pandyas, the Cholas, and the Keralas at the head of a 


mighty army. They are all exceptionally tall warriors with broad chests, 
long arms and large eyes. Their battledresses of diverse colours, they use 
powdered scents, wear ornaments, have red teeth, and are as strong as 
infuriated elephants. Armed with swords and nooses, they are powerful 
enough to restrain mighty elephants, never desert each other, are bound 
companions in life and death, carry bows and quivers of wondrous craft, 
and are pleasing in their speech. Satyaki leads the foot-soldiers to the 
Andhra tribe who have mighty physiques and terrific energy. 

Other dauntless warriors such as the Chedis, the Panchalas, the 
Kaikeyas, the Karushas, the Kosalas, the Kanchis, and the Magadhas, also 
rush forward. Their chariots, cavalry and elephants, all of the best kind, and 
their brutal foot soldiers, all keened by the notes of diverse instruments, 
seem to dance and laugh as they plunge wildly ahead. In the midst of that 
vast force comes Vrikodara, titanic Bhima, riding on the neck of an 
elephant and surrounded by many other great elephant-warriors. His 
immense elephant is resplendent, like a stone-built mansion on the summit 
of the Udaya mountain crowned by the rising sun. Its wonderful armour of 
iron, studded with costly gemstones, is as glorious as the autum sky alight 
with stars. With a lance in his outstretched arm, a beautiful crown on his 
brow, and splendid as the meridian sun in autumn, Bhima begins to raze his 
enemies at his great and gory pleasure. 

Kshemadhurti, the king of the Kulutas, riding an elephant himself, 
eagerly challenges a most willing Bhima. The encounter is like two hills 
topped with trees, fighting with utmost atavism. They strike each other with 
their spears brilliant like sun rays, and utter earthshaking roars. They circle 
each other on their elephants, and then attack with their bows and stir up the 
soldiers around with their deafening shouts and slaps on their armpits and 
the whizzing of arrows like bee swarms. Both are doughty and masterly 
beyond description and their elephants lumber about nimbly with upturned 
trunks and with banners floating wide on the wind. 

Each rives the other’s bow, then seize up fresh bows and shoot showers 
of gleaming arrows and fling spears like two masses of clouds in the 
monsoon. Then, Kshemadhurti suddenly casts a spear at Bhimasena and 
pierces him through the chest and follows this with six more javelins and 
gives an echoing shout of victory. Bhimasena blazes up with wrath and, 
with those spears sticking out of his body, he is glorious like a cloud- 
covered sun with his rays issuing through the interstices of the canopy. 


He hurls a dazzling iron spear at his antagonist, which the king of the 
Kulutas destroys with ten arrows and then strikes Bhima with a flurry of 
sixty smoking shafts. Bhima takes up a bow whose twang is like thunder, 
and with a truly paralysing yell, wounds Kshemadhurti’s elephant with a 
spate of such vicious barbs that the wounded beast breaks its restraints and 
runs chased by Bhima’s fierce leviathan: like one mass of wind-driven 
clouds pursuing another cloud in a tempest. 

Finally, the valiant Kshemadhurti fetches his own tusker under control 
and looses a slew of arrows at his pursuer. He rives Bhima’s bow with a 
razor-headed arrow and draws blood from Vrikodara’s elephant as well; the 
enraged Kshemadhurti strikes both Bhima and his elephant with several 
long shafts through every vital part. 

O Bhaarata, Bhima’s massive beast’s knees buckle and it falls with a 
booming bellow, but quick as a thought, Bhima leaps off its back, flies at 
his enemy and brings Kshemadhurti’s grey beast down with a flurry of 
thunderous mace blows. Kshemadhurti also leaps off his dead war animal 
and, sword in hand, rushes in fury at Bhima. Quicker than seeing, Bhima 
looses a lethal volley at his noble adversary and Kshemadhurti falls dead 
right beside his elephant like a lion struck by a thunderbolt beside a 
thunder-cloven hill. 

Seeing the celebrated king of the Kulutas killed, your troops, O 
Bharatarishabha, run away in panic.’” 


CANTO 13 


S anjaya says, ‘By now, the general battle is joined in earnest and 

Pravira Karna, powerful and audacious, begins to raze the 

Pandava army with his deadly fire and the Pandavas, too, O Rajan, retaliate 

in kind. Karna’s cloth-yard shafts, polished and bright as the rays of the sun, 

bring dreadful devastation to the Pandava army and their elephants struck 
by Karna’s relentless tirade, give vent to dismal bellows and flee. 

Nakula attacks Karna with alacrity and valour, while Bhimasena assails 
Drona’s son and Satyaki lays siege to the Kaikeya princes Vinda and 
Anuvinda. King Chitrasena stands firm against the advancing Srutakarman; 
Prativindhya faces Chitra, who uses a wonderful bow and flies a striking 
standard; Duryodhana charges Yudhishtira and Dhananjaya launches his 
onslaught once more against the seething Samsaptakas horde. 

In that slaughter of great Kshatriyas, Dhrishtadyumna advances against 
Kripa; the invincible Sikhandi closes with Kritavarman; Srutakirti 
encounters Salya and Madri’s son, and the valiant Sahadeva confronts your 
son Dusasana. The two Kaikeya princes and Satyaki shroud each other with 
bursts of brilliant arrows, fighting like two rival elephants goring each other 
in the forest; Satyaki’s chest is lacerated while the brothers have their own 
marmas pierced by Yuyudhana’s relucent arrows. 

The war swells all around, with roars and cries of anguish, and blood 
spraying lavishly in the sun. Satyaki maharatha Saurin destroys the great 


war bows of the Kekaya princes; they seize up other bows in a flash and 
envelop the brilliant Satwata with gales of thunderbolts, even as all three 
wheel like triad winds across Kurukshetra. The brothers’ potent golden 
shafts, fletched with kanka and peacock feathers, illuminate the field which 
has turned darkling from the dense profusion of arrows shot all around. This 
fervid contention lasts a while, with Satyaki and the heroic brothers often 
shattering one another’s bows and cutting down each others’ shafts in flight. 
Until, finally, the invincible Satwata prince hews off Anuvinda’s head with 
a razor like arrow in a scarlet eruption. Anuvinda’s severed head, its great 
golden kundalas sparkling and stained red, falls like the head of the Asura 
Sambara slain in the great Devasura yuddha of old, and fills all the 
Kaikeyas with grief. 

Seeing the end of his beloved and fierce brother, Vinda strings another 
bow and, wheeling in a circle in his ratha, attacks the grandson of Sini from 
every side. He draws blood fonts from Satyaki with sixty arrows fitted with 
golden wings and whetted on stone, and shouts, “Stay and fight!” 

Swift as thoughts he strikes Satyaki with thousands of arrows. Bleeding 
from his limbs, Yuyudhana looks resplendent, O Rajan, like a flowering 
kinsuka. Yet undaunted, the Satwata hero responds with five and twenty 
searing shafts, bathing the Kaikaya prince in blood. The two maharathas 
swiftly kill one another’s sarathy and horses, then break one another’s bows 
and then leaping down from their chariots, close with each other on foot to 
fight with swords drawn. Both have massive arms and flaunt awesome 
swords and shields decked with a hundred moons, like the mighty Jambha 
and Sakra in the war between the Devas and the Asuras, long ago. 

They circle, gauging each other every electric moment, and watching 
for the slightest chance to strike a killing blow. As the duel progresses, each 
has his shield destroyed by the other; they continue to circle warily until, 
finally, Satyaki sees his momentary chance and, with a slashing sidestroke, 
cleaves Vinda clean in two, his blade bisecting the Kaikeya prince’s body 
just above the waist, felling him like a hill split by a thunderbolt. 

Satyaki clambers into Yudhamanyu’s chariot and escapes. Later, after he 
has mounted another fully equipped ratha, he wildly attacks the large 
Kaikeya force and brings such wrath and death to them that they flee the 
field in absolute panic.’” 


CANTO 14 


: S anjaya says, “A pugnacious Srutakarman, O Rajan, strikes 
Chitrasena, at the head of his forces, with fifty keening arrows; 
Chitrasena responds quick as light, driving nine perfect barbs into his 
attacker’s body and five into his sarathy. Srutakarman plunges a single 
immaculate arrow into a vital marma on Chitrasena’s body, and that prince 
collapses onto his chariot seat. Never pausing, Srutakarman covers his 
insensible adversary with ninety arrows. 

Chitrasena recovers consciousness, leaps up, splits his antagonist’s bow 
with broad-headed shafts and pierces him with seven vicious thunderbolts. 
Srutakarman picks up another heavy, gold inlaid bow and, with a great 
wave of fire, turns Chitrasena’s body into an amazing sight with arrows 
protruding from every inch of him. The youthful king, wearing beautiful 
garlands and these arrows as well as ornaments, looks like a remarkable 
youth in the midst of a noble congregation! 

But, unmoved, Chitrasena drills a dreadful thick shaft straight into 
Srutakarman’s chest, shouting, “Halt! Fight!” Srutakarman spurts a geyser 
of blood like a mountain a spring of liquid red chalk. Bathed and dyed in 
blood, that shura too glows like a kinsuka in full bloom. 

Red-eyed Srutakarman cleaves his adversary’s bow in his hands. He 
strikes him with three hundred arrows shot in such a blur that Chitrasena is 
obscured by that dark, wide-winged swath. Finally, with another broad- 


headed and sharp-edged shaft, Srutakarman decapitates his enemy and 
Chitrasena’s blazing head falls onto the earth like the moon come loose 
from the firmament. 

Seeing their king slain, Chitrasena’s troops recklessly charge 
Srutakarman. However, he tears into them, unleashing his arrow gales like 
an infuriated Yama at the time of the pralaya at yuga’s end. Slaughtered by 
your grandson Srutakarman, they scatter and bolt like elephants scorched by 
a forest conflagration, and are pursued hotly by that shura, resplendent on 
his ratha. 

Prativindhya, O Bhaarata, launches an assault on Chitra with five 
arrows, strikes his charioteer with three and his standard with one. Chitra 
defends, piercing his adversary in the arms and chest with nine broad- 
headed arrows with golden wings and fletched with kanka and peacock 
feathers. Prativindhya destroys his opponent’s bow and deeply injures him, 
upon which Chitra casts an irresistible dart with golden bells at him, which 
flares at him like a burning meteor. 

Prativindhya, however, easily truncates that missile into three slivers, 
and it explodes with a thunderclap, creating fear in all creatures as if it was 
the end of the yuga. Chitra takes up a massive gada finished with gold 
filigree work and hurls it expertly, killing Prativindhya’s horses and sarathy, 
and crushing his ratha, all at once. Prativindhya jumps down from his ratha 
and flings a fiery spear with golden staff at Chitra. The noble Chitra catches 
it in his hand even as it flashes at him, and flings it back at Prativindhya. 
That powerful and occult lance plunges through Prativindhya’s right arm 
and burrows down into the ground behind him, illumining that field like a 
blast of lightning. 

A livid Prativindhya now casts another golden missile at Chitra; this 
astra crashes through Chitra’s kavacha, through his great heart, blowing it to 
shreds, killing him instantly, then darts deep into the earth like a mighty 
snake into its hole. Chitra lies there lifeless, his massive arms that resemble 
iron clubs, outspread in death’s final, poignant attitude. 

Your most veteran warriors attack Prativindhya in stormy retaliation, 
impetuously from all sides. Shooting diverse kinds of shafts and sataghnis 
decked with rows of bells, they soon cover him like masses of clouds 
covering the sun. But gallant Prativindhya consumes them with his arrows, 
like the Vajradhari himself routing the Asura host. Your army, O Rajan, runs 
in all directions like cloud masses scattered by the wind. 


Meanwhile, only Drona’s son remains standing and singly charges the 
mighty Bhimasena. At once, a pitched duel erupts between them like the 
one between Vritra and Vasava in the battle between the Devas and the 
Asuras long ago.”” 


CANTO 15 


: S anjaya says, ‘Drona’s vigorous son Aswatthaman, displaying 

unworldly dexterity, strikes Bhima with a scathing arrow, 

numbing him briefly, and then quicker than imagination, pierces all his vital 

marmas with ninety more shafts. Pierced all over, Bhimasena resembles the 
sun with his rays of light. 

Imperturbable, Vrikodara, who feels no pain or pays it no mind, 
envelops Aswatthaman with a full thousand squally shafts, and lets out an 
earth-shaking simhanada. Aswatthaman coolly cuts down Bhima’s tornado 
with his own recalescent volley and smilingly strikes the Pandava on his 
brow with a cloth-yard shaft, which the Pandava titan bears on his forehead 
even as the proud rhinoceros does his horn! With a grin, Bhima adorns 
Aswatthaman’s brow with three arrows, so that the Brahmana resembles a 
triad peaked mountain washed with red rain in the monsoon presenting 
quite an extraordinary sight. 

They continue to lash each other with hundreds of arrows, but neither 
can shake the other, like the wind failing to sway or torrents of rain failing 
to move a mountain. The two are resplendent on their magnificent rathas, 
like two apocalyptic suns arisen for the destruction of the world at yuga’s 
end, their arrows the rays of the consuming sun as they scorch each other. 
With utmost expertise and care, they endeavour to match each other’s feats 
and prowl the field of yawning death like two mythic tigers. Invincible and 


fearsome, the arrows are their fangs and the bows their mouths, and under 
the shroud of arrows, they hide like the sun and the moon in the firmament 
enveloped by masses of clouds. However, soon the two warriors break out 
of the dark mantle and blaze forth like Mars and Mercury freed from clouds 
that obscured them. 

During the battle, Aswatthaman manoeuvres to place Vrikodara on his 
right and looses hundreds of vicious arrows at him. Bhima cannot brook his 
enemy’s brief triumph and from that very station on Aswatthaman’s right, 
unleashes his own torrid arrow storms at Drona’s punitive son. Their 
chariots wheel, turn, advance and retreat strategically, and the battle 
between these two lions among men is a sight to behold. Racing along 
different courses, they circle and move with supernatural agility, as they 
continue to strike each other with arrows shot from bows drawn to their 
fullest stretch. 

Determined to kill each other, they first try to demolish the other’s 
chariot. Aswatthaman invokes many astras in this attempt, which Bhima 
nullifies with his own. The colliding astras illuminate all the directions of 
the sky and the troops all around. Covered with flights of arrows and 
clashing astras, the heavens assume an awesome sight, O Rajan, like at the 
time of pralaya, with colliding planets and meteors beyond count falling 
alight. 

Great fires, with leaping sparks and towering flames, begin to consume 
both armies. Siddhas who arrive there, O Rajan, say, “O Lord, this war is 
the greatest ever and no battle fought so far measures even a sixteenth part 
of this one. A war like this will never occur again. Both these warriors, the 
Brahmana and the Kshatriya, are gifted with knowledge, possess courage 
and are both fierce in their attitudes. Tremendous is the might of Bhima, 
and wonderful is the skill of Aswatthaman. How great is their energy and 
how amazing their genius. The two awe-inspiring ones straddle the field 
like two universe-destroying Yamas at the end of the yuga. These two 
Naravyaghras are born like two Rudras or two Suryas.” 

One hears all the time such words from the Siddhas present there and a 
deep roar arises from the assembled Devas in the sky. The dense throng of 
Siddhas and Charanas are filled with wonder on seeing the inconceivable 
feats of the two warriors and, along with the Devas and the great Rishis, 
they laud them both saying, “Wonderful, O Mahabaho Aswatthaman! 
Excellent, O magnificent Bhima!” 


Meanwhile, the two shuras ceaselessly inflict gashing injuries on each 
other; they glare and roll their eyes red with rage; their lips quiver; they 
grind their teeth and bite their lips in the intensity of their fury. They shower 
each other endlessly with arrows and their weapons flash as if the two of 
them, maharathas both, are two great thunderheads that rain arrows and 
unleash jagged streaks of lightning. 

Thus they battle on, tireless, shredding each other’s standards, raking 
each other’s charioteers and chargers. Then, Rajan, each invokes an astra 
and looses it at the other; both strike home, like twin thunderclaps, and 
Bhima and Aswatthaman faint at the same instant, at the head of their 
troops. They fall senseless in the chariots and their sarathies whisk them 
away from the field.’” 


CANTO 16 


: “T) hritarashtra says, ‘Describe to me, O Sanjaya, Arjuna’s 

contention with the Samsaptakas and the other lords of the earth, 

as well as his duel with Aswatthaman. Narrate to me also, the battle 
between the other kings and the Pandavas.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Listen, O Rajan, and I will tell you about the battle 
between our heroic warriors and the enemy—ah, the encounter which 
destroyed bodies, sins and lives. The indomitable Partha penetrates deep 
into the still vast Samsaptaka forces and agitates it like a tempest stirring 
the fathomless deep. He beheads brave warriors with faces splendid as the 
full moon, with beautiful eyes, brows and teeth. Soon the earth is strewn 
with heads like lotuses, plucked from their stalks. 

He also severs muscular, massive arms, smeared with sandalwood paste 
and other perfumes; he cuts away hands that grasp weapons, wear leather 
gloves, and look like five-headed snakes. He destroys horses, riders, 
charioteers, flags, bows and arrows and arms that wear jewels, and 
despatches maharathas, elephants, horses and horsemen to Yama’s realm. 

Throngs of enemy warriors, roaring like bulls mad with excitement for a 
cow in season, attack Arjuna with loud cries and cover him with their 
arrows. The hair raising encounter is like the battle between the Daityas and 
Vajradhari Indra during the conquest of the three worlds. Defending himself 
masterfully against his enemies’ livid storms, Arjuna massacres them like 


the inexorable wind destroying massed thunderheads. The fearsome Arjuna, 
called Jaya, shatters squadrons of derelict chariots, which he earlier 
deprived of poles, wheels, axles, wooden fences, and whose warriors, 
horses and charioteers he had already killed and whose weapons, quivers 
and standards he had desiccated. 

He fights like a thousand maharathas and his feats fill all with wonder. 
Crowds of Siddhas, Devarishis and Charanas applaud him and sound 
celestial kettle-drums and shower unearthly blooms down upon the heads of 
Kesava and Arjuna. An asariri, an incorporeal voice, says, “These two 
heroes, Krishna and Arjuna, own the beauty of the moon, the splendour of 
fire, the force of the wind and the radiance of the sun. Riding the same 
ratha, they are invincible like Brahma and Isana. These two shuras, the 
greatest of all beings, are Nara and Narayana!” 

Aswatthaman, O Bhaarata, sees Arjuna’s astounding exploits and so 
with equal parts of care and resolution, takes the field against him. 
Unleashing a gale of shafts, he then holds an arrow in his hand, pauses and 
hails the Pandava. Smiling, Drona’s son says to Arjuna, “If, O shura, you 
regard me a worthy guest who has arrived before you, give me your 
wholehearted hospitality of battle.” 

Thus challenged, Arjuna considers himself honoured, and asks Krishna, 
“TI need to annihilate the Samsaptakas, but Drona’s son summons me to 
battle again. Tell me, O Madhava, which dharma should I attend to first? 
Possibly, if you think it proper, I should first provide the Acharya’s son with 
the services of hospitality.” 

Without hesitation, Krishna drives Partha towards Aswatthaman’s ratha, 
even like Vayu bearing Indra to the yagna. Saluting Drona’s son, Kesava 
tells him, “O Aswatthaman, don’t lose a moment, but both give and take. 
The time has come for dependents to repay their obligations to their 
masters. The contention between Brahmanas is subtle but the consequences 
of disputes between Kshatriyas are palpable, and bring either victory or 
defeat. To have the excellent rewards of hospitality which, from folly, you 
solicit from Partha, fight now the son of Pandu.” 

At this, the great Brahmana warrior says, “Tathaastu!” and strikes 
Kesava with sixty shafts and Arjuna with three. Arjuna destroys 
Aswatthaman’s bow with three arrows and Drona’s son picks up a more 
formidable bow. Stringing it in the twinkling of an eye, he rakes Arjuna 
with a thousand and Krishna with three hundred arrows. Then, my lord, he 


looses an unimaginable flood of arrows, in millions, past all count, and he 
stuns Arjuna. These unworldly missiles issue from the quivers, the bow, the 
bowstring, the fingers, the arms, the hands, the chest, the face, the nose, the 
eyes, the ears, the heads, the limbs, the pores, the armour, the chariot and 
the standard, of that Brahmavadi. Piercing Madhava and the son of Pandu 
with that fury of uncanny barbs, Drona’s son, full with joy, roars like ten 
thunderclouds. 

Hearing that roar, Arjuna says to Kesava of unfading glory, “Look, O 
Madhava, at this animosity of the Acharaya’s son towards me. He thinks 
that if he covers us with a tide of countless arrows, we will die. But I will 
disappoint him and show him my prowess.” 

Arjuna, the Bharatasattama, splits every arrow of Aswatthaman’s into 
three slivers; he dispels the Brahmana’s darkness of arrows like the sun 
destroying a black fog. Immediately, he turns his attention back to the 
Samsaptakas, and once more harries them and their horses, charioteers, 
rathas, elephants, standards and foot-soldiers with his fierce fires. Arjuna’s 
thunderbolts shroud all—spectators, foot-soldiers, chariot-warriors, 
horsemen and elephants. Shot from Gandiva, his winged arrows of myriad 
kinds slaughter elephants, horses and men, those right before him as well as 
those two yojanas away. 

Elephants with ichor flowing down their faces in excitement, have their 
trunks severed by his broad-headed shafts, and fall down like great trees cut 
down with an axe, wailing dreadfully. They fall with their riders, like 
mountains that Indra has blasted with his Vajra. With his arrows, 
Dhananjaya demolishes splendid, well-equipped chariots into dust, so they 
appear to dissolve as vapour into the evening sky. The Vijaya, his Gandiva 
bent in a circle of flames, inundates his enemies with riptides of arrows; he 
massacres maharathas, horsemen and foot-soldiers. Arjuna is like the sun of 
the apocalypse that rises at the end of the yuga and he vaporises the 
immense Samsaptaka ocean with his arrows. 

Then again, seamlessly, Arjuna switches his attention back to 
Aswatthaman and drills him with incandescent shafts, like sun flares, even 
like Indra striking the mountain of old with his Vajra. The dauntless and by 
now properly incensed Aswatthaman does not waver but closes, instead, on 
Arjuna, unleashing his own tremendous arrow storms. But Arjuna 
demolishes Aswatthaman’s fusillades and indignantly offers him, the 


supposed “desirable guest”, quivers upon inexhaustible quivers of arrows, 
like a most charitable man offering everything in his house to a guest. 

Leaving the Samsaptakas, the son of Pandu hastens towards Drona’s 
son like a host abandoning undeserving guests to attend to a more worthy 
one.” 


CANTO 17 


: S anjaya says, “The battle between Arjuna and Aswatthaman 
resembles the one in the sky between Shukra and Brihaspati, both 
trying to enter the same constellation. Wounding each other with burning 
arrows, the two terrify the world like two planets that have strayed from 
their orbit and shoot their rays at each other. Arjuna stabs Aswatthaman 
with a shaft between his eyebrows, while the Brahmana gashes the two 
Krishnas with hundreds of arrows, which dazzle like so many slivers of the 
sun at the end of the yuga. 

When Krishna briefly appears to be stunned, Arjuna shoots an astra 
from which issue multitudes of shafts from all sides. He strikes 
Aswatthaman with innumerable shafts, each like the thunder or fire or the 
sceptre of Death. The ferocious, mighty Aswatthaman retaliates with a 
multitude of arrows shot with such force that Yama himself would have felt 
their pain. Arjuna blankets him, his horses, charioteer and standard with 
twice as many arrows fitted with wide wings. 

Yet again, he then turns to assail the Samsaptakas and demolishes their 
bows, quivers, bowstrings and hacks off the arms and hands that tightly 
grasp weapons, and destroys chatras, standards, horses, chariot shafts, 
robes, garlands, ornaments, armour, handsome shields and ruins the 
beautiful heads of his relentless enemies. He destroys well-equipped rathas, 
chargers and elephants, as well as the Kshatriyas who ride in them. With 


crescent-tipped, razor-faced arrows, Arjuna snips away human heads that 
resemble lotuses from their throats, heads as bright as the sun, or the full 
moon in beauty and which glitter with crowns, and they fall endlessly onto 
the earth. 

The seasoned Kalinga, Vanga and the Nishada elephant warriors, riding 
on their splendid beasts, which are as grand as the leviathans of Indra, come 
charging against Arjuna. Partha cuts off the giant animals’ limbs and trunks 
and destroys their riders, the standards and banners, upon which those 
beasts fall like mountain summits riven by thunderbolts. 

With that elephant force annihilated, Kiriti turns back to target the son 
of his Acharya with arrows that shine like the newly risen sun, and shrouds 
him with these as the wind shrouds the sun with cloud masses. 
Aswatthaman, however, brilliantly negates Arjuna’s arrows with his own, 
and strikes both Arjuna and Krishna and gives a roar like that of thunder at 
summer’s end. Deeply wounded, Arjuna swiftly dispels the darkness 
Aswatthaman’s arrows bring, and pierces his adversary and his army with 
shining tides of shafts. 

No one can see when Savyasachi picks up his arrows, when he aims 
them, and when he shoots them. All that is seen are the elephants, horses, 
foot-soldiers and maharathas, struck and falling dead. Drona’s son looses 
ten great missiles, which flare from his bow as a single one. Shot with huge 
force, five of these strike Arjuna and the other five Krishna, and bathe them 
in blood as Kubera and Indra were once. A gasp goes up from all that watch 
for they are convinced that Aswatthaman, complete master of the astra 
shastra, has killed the two Krishnas. 

Krishna, in some pain, asks Arjuna, “Why do you spare Aswatthaman? 
Kill him! Because if you do not he will cause you great sorrow, like some 
untreated disease.” 

“Tathaastu—So be it!” Arjuna of unfading glory replies. 

Arjuna begins to carve Aswatthaman’s splendid body with his arrows. 
He pierces his antagonist’s massive sandalwood paste smeared arms, his 
chest, head, and his muscled thighs with shafts fitted with heads like goats’ 
ears, and shot with untold force from the Gandiva. He cuts away the traces 
of Aswatthaman’s chargers and gashes the steeds themselves so that, wild- 
eyed with pain, they bolt from the field. Bleeding from a hundred wounds, 
Drona’s most intelligent son reflects for some time and ruefully realises that 
he can never hope for victory against Krishna and Dhananjaya; 


Aswatthaman decides not to go back and renew the duel. He calms his 
horses, comforts himself a little and joins Karna’s teeming division, his 
proud hopes belied and the armoury in his ratha almost exhausted. 

After his runaway horses bolt with Aswatthaman, rather as incantations 
and medicaments remove a disease from the body, Krishna and Arjuna ride 
again at the Samsaptakas, on their ratha with its kapi-dhvaja floating wide 
on the breeze and with a rumble as of thunderheads.’” 


CANTO 18 


: S anjaya says, “They hear the sound of a fierce battle towards the 
northern part of Kurukshetra where Dandadhara, the lord of the 
Magadhas, wreaks havoc among the chariots, elephants, cavalry and foot- 
soldiers of the Pandava army. Krishna turns his chariot yoked to Gandharva 
horses fleet as Garuda, and says to Arjuna, “That is Dandadhara with his 
dangerous and matchless elephant, and he himself is not inferior to 
Bhagadatta himself. Kill him first, before we fight the Samsaptakas.” 

Krishna takes Partha to where Dandadhara, unrivalled in wielding the 
elephant-hook, just as the headless planet Ketu is peerless among all the 
navagrahas, is annihilating the Pandava host like some awesome comet 
destroying the very earth. Riding his indomitable and brutal mastodon, 
Dandadhara razes thousands of chariots, horses, elephants and men with his 
torrid arrow banks. 

The Magadhan’s rampaging elephant legion tramples thousands of 
soldiers along with their horses and charioteers, crushing them to pulp. His 
own greatest beast also ranges across the field like a wheel of Death. 
Dandadhara shoots down men clad in armour along with their horses and 
foot-soldiers, and his elephants stamp them into the ground with their great 
legs, making a gory mess all around. 

Arjuna, on his great ratha, races towards that prince of elephants 
standing in the midst of the Magadhan force with thousands of chariots, 


horses and other elephants; the whole place resounds with the clashing of 
innumerable cymbals, batteries of drums being pounded, booming conches, 
the awful clatter of chariot-wheels, the twanging of bowstrings, and with 
the echoing of striking palms. 

Dandadhara straightaway strikes Arjuna with a dozen sizzling arrows, 
Krishna with sixteen and each of their horses with three, and then gives an 
echoing shout of triumph and laughs uproariously. Arjuna shatters 
Dandadhara’s bow, his magnificent standard, then the traces of his hulking 
beast and the footmen that protect the animal. The lord of Girivraja’s eyes 
turn red as plums; his elephant’s temples have now split open and the juice 
of musth flows freely down them; the creature’s linga hangs forth in wild 
erection. Dandadhara flings a volley of javelins at Dhananjaya. 

Even as he does this, Arjuna, with three razor-headed arrows, hews off 
his enemy’s arms at their shoulders, each like an elephant’s trunk, and then 
his moon like head. He swathes the elephant covered in burnished armour 
with golden arrows, and it looks resplendent like a mountain in the night 
with its herbs and trees on fire. Trumpeting echoingly in pain, the beast 
staggers, totters and finally falls with its hastikas still on its neck, like a 
riven hillock. 

Dandadhara’s younger brother Danda advances in grief and rage against 
Krishna and Dhananjaya, determined to kill them; Danda comes on his 
snow white tusker caparisoned with gold, and big as a Himalayan peak. 
Danda strikes Krishna with three whetted spears bright as sun rays, and 
Arjuna with five, and gives a roar. Arjuna responds with a ringing roar of 
his own and, in a wink, cuts off Danda’s arms as well with razor-headed 
arrows; the sandalwood paste smeared arms, wearing angadas and grasping 
lances, fall at the same moment from the elephant’s back like two mighty 
snakes of great beauty falling from a mountain summit. 

With a crescent-headed arrow, Kiriti beheads Danda and his head falls 
on the earth from the elephant’s back, covered in blood, resplendent as if it 
is the sun fallen from the Asta mountain in the western quarter. 

Partha turns to his enemy’s elephant and fells it with a fusillade of 
dazzling arrows, with a reverberant sound like a Himalayan summit cloven 
by thunder. Savyasachi, never pausing, annihilates all the other invincible 
Magadhan elephants, which could turn the course of a war. 

The vast hostile force breaks and the elephants, rathas, horses and men, 
in dense throng, break upon one another and die on the chasmic field of 


death and truth. His own troops mob Arjuna like the Devas surrounding a 
victorious Purandara, and they say, “O Shura, it is destiny that you slew this 
ferocious enemy who terrified us like Yama himself. If you had not saved us 
from his fear, our foes would now have felt that delight that we now feel at 
their death, O Parantapa.” 

Hearing these and other words of praise from friends and allies, Arjuna 
properly and gladly salutes them and, his heart cheerful, forges on to once 
more attack the Samsaptakas.’” 


CANTO 19 


: S anjaya says, ‘Wheeling around, like the planet Mercury, Buddha 
in the ellipse of its orbit, Arjuna slaughters vast numbers of the 
Samsaptakas. His arrows, some of which are wedge-headed, some razor- 
edged, some crescent-tipped, and some with calf’s tooth heads, strike men, 
horses, and elephants, O Bhaarata, who then falter, stagger, collapse and 
die. The son of Pandu destroys horses, charioteers, standards, bows, shafts 
and cuts off hands grasping weapons and the heads of heroic warriors 
opposing him. 

Like bulls competing for a cow in season, thousands of valiant 
Kshatriyas close in on Arjuna. The bloodcurdling battle that ensues is like 
the encounter between the Daityas and Vajradhari during the war for the 
three worlds. 

The son of Ugrayudha drills Partha with three arrows like three 
venomous snakes but Partha cut off his head in a scarlet blast. Their fury 
mounting, the enemy warriors attack Arjuna from every side with all 
manner of astras, like the clouds that the Maruts drive to shroud the 
Himavat at summer’s end. Arjuna defends himself magnificently; he kills a 
host of his enemies with perfect arrows; he destroys the Trivenus, their 
horses, chariots, charioteers and weapons. 

Kurukshetra appears like the luxurious mansions of the rich which 
elements have ruined. Elephants, their vital organs pierced with shafts like 


thunderbolts, fall like palaces struck by lightning falling from mountain 
cliffs. Arjuna’s arrows mow down teeming troops of cavalry and they 
present an appalling sight, their entrails hanging out, gruesome and bathed 
in blood. Like Mahendra smiting down the Danavas does Partha smite 
enemies past all count, with his shafts whetted on stone, and which are like 
smoking venom in their deadliness. The bravest warriors lie dead on the 
field, wearing fine armour, ornaments and armed with diverse kinds of 
weapons, now their chariots shattered and their once proud standards felled. 
Noble men, of dharma and great gyana, ascend into swarga while their 
bodies lie on blood spattered earth, unbreathing. 

Your various commanders lead their divisions and rush toward Arjuna. 
Warriors on their rathas, horses and elephants, and foot soldiers attack him 
with diverse weapons. However, Arjuna stops them in their tracks with a 
torrent of arrows. We then see him cross that raftless ocean formed by 
horses, foot soldiers, elephants and chariots, where mighty weapons are its 
waves, where his own mighty weapons are its bridge. 

Then Krishna says to Arjuna, “Why, O sinless one, do you sport in this 
manner? Finish these Samsaptakas and then make haste to kill Karna.” 

Arjuna says, “So be it.” 

He tears into the remnant of the Samsaptakas with his astras, and 
decimates them like Indra destroying the Daityas. No one can discern when 
Arjuna takes out his arrows, when he aims them or when he shoots them. 
Govinda himself, O Bhaarata, thinks it wonderful. The white shafts of 
Arjuna plunge into the enemy force like swans diving into a lake. 

Krishna looks at the enormous carnage on Kurukshetra, and says, 
“Here, O Partha, is this colossal destruction of the Bharatas and other kings 
of the earth, and all this is solely because of Duryodhana. 

Look, O Bhaarata, at these golden bows of so many mighty archers and 
these belts and quivers loosened from their bodies. 

Behold these straight shafts fitted with wings of gold, and these long 
arrows smeared with oil looking like snakes freed from their sloughs. 

See these abandoned, beautiful gold embellished spears, and these suits 
of armour cut from the bodies of the warriors. 

Look at these golden spears, these darts, and these heavy gadas chased 
with gold filigree and tied with cords of hemp. Look at these gilded swords 
and battle-axes, these spiked clubs, these short arrows, these bhusundis, 
these kanapas; look at these abandoned iron kuntas, and these heavy 


mushalas. These warriors must have fought so vigorously with all these 
different weapons, and though they are now dead, they still seem to be 
alive. 

Behold, O slayer of enemies, the field of battle strewn with the bodies 
of thousands of Kshatriyas, their limbs crushed with maces, and heads split 
with mushalas; or whom elephants, horses or chariots have trodden upon; 
look at all the dreadfully mangled corpses of elephants and horses, bathed 
in streams of blood. Magnificent sandalwood-paste-smeared arms and 
hands wearing angadas, leather guards, keyuras, and other ornaments lie 
scattered across on the earth along with severed thighs that look like 
elephant trunks and with heads adorned with earrings and helmets and 
turbans set with great gemstones, which look so striking. 

Look at those beautiful broken rathas with golden bells, the long quivers 
and stunning standards and banners of different kinds, the big conches, 
lying flecked with blood, the innumerable horses coloured in blood and 
those perfectly white yak-tails. Look at those elephants with tongues lolling 
out and lying on the field like hills with their dead warriors, their rich 
coverlets and blankets, the bells loosened and broken into pieces from the 
beasts as they fell; the fallen hooks with grips set with stones of lapis lazuli. 
Look at the ornamental yokes for horses, the diamond studded cuirasses, the 
rich golden tassels of the cavalry pennants, the motley horse caparisons and 
housings and ranku skins set with brilliant gems and inlaid with gold, all 
fallen on the ground. 

Look, Partha, at the great solitaire diamonds that adorned the crowns of 
kings, their exquisite necklaces of gold, and their sovereign chatra, yak-tails 
and chamaras all fallen, all ruined. 

Behold the earth strewn with heads flaunting finely trimmed manly 
beards, with earrings bright as the stars, each like a moon. This bhumi 
reminds me of a lake with a dense overgrowth of lilies and lotuses. 

Behold the earth, brilliant like the full moon and strewn with myriad 
stars as in the autumn firmament. O Arjuna, these victories that you have 
achieved today are indeed worthy of you or of Indra, the king of the Devas 
himself in heaven.” 

Thus does Krishna show Arjuna the battlefield of Kurukshetra. 

As they return towards their camp, they hear the blare of conches, the 
beat of cymbals, drums and patahas, the clatter of chariot wheels, the 
neighing of horses, the trumpeting of elephants, and the fierce clash of 


conflict from Duryodhana’s army. Krishna is wonderstruck to see that great 
warrior Pandya charge into that force on his ratha fleet as the wind and 
destroying elephants, horses and men like Yama slaughtering those whose 
lives have been exhausted. Defending himself against his enemies, Pandya 
kills them like Sakra destroying the Danavas.’” 


CANTO 20 


ae D hritarashtra says, “You have never mentioned until now the name 

of that shura Pandya, famous for his feats, O Sanjaya. Tell me 

today in detail of his ability, skill, spirit, energy, the measure of his might 
and his pride.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘You consider Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Aswatthaman, 
Karna, Arjuna and Krishna as being the greatest of maharathas. Know, 
however, that Pandya regards himself superior to all of them. Indeed, that 
great king, that finest warrior, never thought of anyone among the kings to 
be his equal, not even Karna, Bhishma, Vasudeva or Arjuna. Filled with 
rage like the Destroyer himself, Pandya now massacres Karna’s forces 
swelling with chariots, cavalry and seasoned warriors. Pandya’s whirlwind 
of arrows spins them around as if on a potter’s wheel. 

Like the wind dispersing some clouds, like the splitter of mountains 
striking asunder parvatas with his Vajra, Pandya scatters and destroys the 
enemy cavalry, chariots, charioteers and standards; he fells elephants with 
their riders, as well as the foot-soldiers who protect those beasts. He mauls 
the Pulindas, the Khasas, the Bahlikas, the Nishadas, the Andhakas, the 
Tanganas, the Dravidas and the Bhojas, all mighty warriors, unyielding and 
of stoic fortitude. He divests them of their weapons and coats of mail, and 
then deprives them of their lives. 


Aswatthaman sees Pandya on his spree of killing, seemingly dancing, a 
small Pandava in his chariot, as he razes the Dhartarashtra host before him. 
Aswatthaman rides up to confront that hero on the rampage, and tells him 
sweetly, “O Rajan, with your eyes like lotus petals, your noble birth, and 
your great learning, you are justly celebrated for your might and prowess 
for you do resemble Indra himself. Stretching your great bow with your 
massive arms, you look like a great thunderhead lashing your enemies with 
your torrential rain of arrows. 

O Pandya, I do not see anyone other than myself who can match you in 
battle. Singlehandedly, you mow down chariots, elephants, foot-soldiers 
and cavalry, like some awful lion hunting herds of deer in the forest. You 
look magnificent, Rajan, like a crop-destroying autumn thundershower, and 
the heavens and the earth resound with the rumble of your chariot wheels. 
But now fight me, O Shura, shoot your arrows that are like snakes of 
virulent poison at me. Come, fight me as the Asura Andhaka once did the 
three-eyed Rudra!” 

Pandya replies, “Tathaastu!” 

Drona’s son calls out, “Then strike!” and attacks him viciously. Quicker 
than thinking, Pandya Malayadhwaja pierces Aswatthaman deep with a 
barbed arrow. The Brahmana, smiling, gashes Pandya with a volley like 
flames, and other large and heavy shafts, all of which he shoots with ten 
subtly different kinds of speed and motion. Pandya, however, destroys all 
those arrows with nine shafts of his own, and with four others he kills 
Aswatthaman’s four horses. Without a moment’s pause he breaks the 
Brahmana’s splendid stretched bowstring with another astonishing arrow. 

Drona’s son strings his bow in a flash, while his men yoke new horses 
to his ratha. He looses thousands of arrows at his enemy, filling all the sky 
and the ten cardinal points with them. Pandya knows that Aswatthaman’s 
arrows are inexhaustible, yet that bull among men cuts them down and 
immediately kills the two protectors of his adversary’s chariot wheels. 
Drawing his bow into a circle, Drona’s son shoots so many arrows that in a 
mere eighth part of a day, he uses up eight large cartloads of shafts. 
Aswatthaman is like a furious Destroyer, or rather like an insane Destroyer 
of the Destroyer, as he lashes the enemy with a frenzy, a pralaya of arrows. 
Negating with that unendurable torrent from the Aswatthaman-cloud with a 
Vayavyastra, the exultant Pandya-wind gives a long and resounding roar. 


Aswatthaman’s response is to demolish Pandya’s standard with the 
device of the Malaya Mountain, smeared with sandalwood paste and other 
perfumed unguents and kill his four horses in a blink. He next kills his 
enemy’s charioteer with a single perfect shaft and, with a crescent-tipped 
arrow, breaks Pandya’s bow whose twang was like spring thunder in his 
massive hands, and shatters his ratha into fragments. He stops his 
redoubtable enemy in his tracks, but Drona’s son does not kill the 
Malayaraja so that he can have the pleasure of battling against him for some 
more time! 

Meanwhile, Karna attacks the large elephant force of the Pandavas and 
annihilates it. Destroying the chariots of maharathas, he strikes elephants, 
horses and warriors, O Bhaarata, with tide upon tide of relentless arrows. 

Aswatthaman resumes his duel with the great maharatha Pandya. 
Suddenly, a looming and riderless war elephant with enormous tusks, and 
maddened by Aswatthaman’s arrows, charges Pandya. Seeing that prince of 
elephants, which is like a cloven mountain summit, Pandya does a most 
astonishing thing. He is an expert elephant warrior and, with a single bound 
leaps onto the neck of the demented beast, even like a lion springing with a 
roar onto the top of a mountain. He strikes the elephant masterfully with the 
ankush, taming it almost instantly, and in the same moment casts a golden 
spear bright as a ray of the sun at Aswatthaman, and then a roar of sheer joy 
and triumph erupts from him, echoing across all Kurukshetra. 

Repeatedly shouting in excitement, “You are dead, you are dead!” 
Pandya flings his lance to destroy Aswatthaman’s golden diadem studded 
with priceless gemstones—diamonds of the rarest kind—and padded with 
excellent cloth and festooned with strings of pearls, coronet which shines 
like the sun, the moon, the planets and fire. The crown falls from 
Aswatthaman’s head and breaks apart into fragments. 

Aswatthaman, enraged like a kicked serpent, picks up four and ten 
lethal shafts each like Yama’s danda. With five of them, he severs the four 
feet and the trunk of his adversary’s elephant; with three, the two arms and 
the head of king Pandya, and with six more he kills the six mighty and 
radiant maharathas who follow the Malaya king. Pandya’s long and well- 
rounded arms, smeared with fragrant sandalwood paste, and adorned with 
gold, pearls and diamonds fall upon the earth and writhe like a pair of 
snakes killed by Garuda. His head, its face bright as the full moon, with a 
prominent nose and large eyes, copper red with rage, its ears adorned with 


resonant kundalas, fall onto the ground, luminous as the moon between two 
bright constellations. 

Aswatthaman cuts up the king and his elephant into ten pieces as if they 
are yagna butter being divided into ten portions for ten deities. Thus 
Aswatthaman makes an end of mighty king Pandya, after that hero had 
annihilated countless horses, men and elephants and offered them as food to 
Rakshasas. Pandya dies like a blazing fire in a crematorium, extinguished 
with water after it has received libation of numberless dead. 

Your son, the king, O Rajan, accompanied by his brothers, approaches 
Aswatthaman, the complete master of the astra shastra, with great respect, 
like Indra, the lord of the Devas joyfully worshipping Vishnu after the Lord 
came as the Vamana and subdued the Asura Bali.’” 


CANTO 21 


. “T) hritarashtra asks, ‘After Pandya is killed and that shura Karna 
destroys the enemy, O Sanjaya, what does Pandu’s son Arjuna 

do? The eternal Sankara made Partha invincible and I greatly fear 

Dhananjaya. Tell me, O Sanjaya, all that Arjuna accomplishes.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘After Pandya’s death, Krishna quickly says to Arjuna, “I 
do not see Yudhishtira and it appears that the other Pandavas have retreated. 
If only the Parthas had returned, we could have broken this vast enemy 
force. Here, in accordance with Aswatthaman’s strategy, Karna razes the 
Srinjayas’ cavalry, chariot-warriors and elephant division.” 

Partha understands the grave danger to Yudhishtira, and says to Krishna, 
“Whip the horses, O Hrishikesha!” and the chariot leaps forward. 

Karna leads the Kurus and Bhimasena the Pandavas, and once more 
they fearlessly close with each other and another violent battle ensues that 
swells the population of Yama’s kingdom. With bows and arrows, spiked 
clubs and swords, lances and axes, short clubs, bhushundis, darts, rapiers, 
battle-axes, maces, spears, polished kuntas, short shafts and hooks, 
Kurukshetra is again liberally strewn with corpses. Filling the welkin, the 
cardinal points of the compass, the subsidiary ones, the firmament, and the 
earth, with the thick buzz of arrows, the twanging of bowstrings, the sound 
of slapping palms and the rumble of chariot wheels, they fall upon each 
other madly, blindly. 


Encouraged by the uproar, Kshatriyas fight Kshatriyas, anxious to end 
this long and harrowing war, either in victory or in death. The sound of 
bowstrings and bows, the trumpeting of elephants and the cries of foot- 
soldiers and dying men ring out everywhere in hideous cacophony. At the 
sound of flying arrows and the diverse shouts and roars of brave warriors, 
the common troops become pale with fear, and many even swoon. 

The Sutaputra annihilates a vast number of his enemy troops, including 
twenty shining Panchala maharathas, with their horses, charioteers, and 
standards. Then many leading Pandava warriors wheel around and 
encompass him. Karna troubles that hostile force with showers of astras like 
the leader of an elephant herd plunging into a lake blooming with lotuses 
and full of swans. Radheya penetrates the enemy ranks, flourishes his bow, 
and begins to decapitate them with his arrows like snipping flowers off their 
stalks; and not one among them needs the touch of a second arrow from 
him. The shields and coats of mail smashed and cut away fall in a hail on 
the earth. 

Like a charioteer whipping his horses, Karna with arrows that pierce 
armour and bodies like butter, takes the life that quickens them; he surely 
finds the wrist guards of his enemies who are perceivable only by their 
bowstrings. Like a whole pride of lions hunting herds of deer, Karna brings 
down the Pandus, Srinjayas and Panchalas that come within range of his 
arrows. 

Dhrishtadyumna, prince of the Panchalas, O Rajan, and the sons of 
Draupadi, Madri’s twins and Yuyudhana unite against Karna. While the 
other great warriors recklessly fall on one another with maces, short clubs 
and spiked bludgeons; they leap high into the air and utter loud shouts of 
challenge. They die, gushing blood from their limbs, and with their brains 
and eyes torn out. As they lie there dead, with faces shining like 
pomegranates, their beautiful mouths filled with blood, they appear to be 
still alive. 

Others, in that vast ocean of war, mangled, dissected, truncated, slain 
with battle-axes, short arrows, hooks, spears and lances, fall gory and 
lifeless, like sandalwood trees cut down and oozing their cool blood-red sap 
onto the receiving earth. 

Warriors now long past any count, horsemen and foot-soldiers lie on 
Kurukshetra, with arms hewn off by razor-faced, wedge-headed or crescent- 
tipped arrows, their faces and limbs like crushed lotuses and faded 


wildflower garlands. Horses, and tuskers with their trunks cut off, continue 
to fall like hills and mountains, and perish in their thousands. Broken 
chariots, standards, royal parasols lie strewn all over the battlefield. The 
beautiful shapes of elephants, horses and men, O Rajan, resemble clothes 
fouled with filth, and are repulsive to look at.”” 


CANTO 22 


S anjaya says, “Your son orders his elephant warriors to move 
against Dhrishtadyumna, determined to finish him. Many men 
skilled in the use of war elephants, the Easterners, the Southerners, the 
Angas, the Vangas, the Pundras, the Magadhas, the Tamraliptakas, the 
Mekalas, the Koshalas, the Madras, the Dasharnas and the Nishadas join the 
Kalingas, O Bhaarata, to attack the Panchala forces with spears and arrows. 
Drupada’s son Dhrishtadyumna shoots back at those fearsome elephants 
that their riders goad forward with their heels, toes and hooks. He strikes 
each of those beasts, huge as the hills with ten, eight, or six keen barbs. 
Seeing those elephants surround the prince of the Panchalas, like clouds 
that cover the sun, the Pandus and the Panchala warriors hurry to his rescue, 
and with loud shouts, assail those elephants furiously. 

They begin the dance of the Kshatriyas to the music of their bowstrings 
and the warriors keep time with the sound of their slapping palms. Nakula 
and Sahadeva, the sons of Draupadi, the Prabhadrakas, Satyaki, Sikhandi 
and Chekitana vigorously attack those elephants from every side. The 
Mleccha hastikas prod the elephants until they are infuriated and drag down 
men, horses and chariots with their trunks and crush them underfoot. They 
gore many with the points of their tusks, and some they raise aloft and dash 
down on the ground; others they lift on their tusks and crash down, lancing 
fear through the enemy. 


Satyaki shoots a long arrow with great force at the elephant of the king 
of the Vangas, pierces its heart and it drops dead. The Vanga king is now 
exposed and the Satwata hero despatches him even as he leaps off his felled 
beast’s back. 

Meanwhile, with three arrows shot with great care, Sahadeva strikes 
Pundra’s elephant, as it charges him like a moving mountain, and takes 
away its standard, hastikas, armour and life. Sahadeva then moves to fight 
the king of the Angas. 

However, his twin Nakula pre-empts Sahadeva and engages the Anga 
king, pierces him with three long arrows, each like the rod of Yama, and his 
enemy’s elephant with a hundred arrows. The king casts a full eight 
hundred javelins at Nakula that coruscate like the rays of the sun but all of 
which Madri’s son of unearthly handsomeness splits into three slivers. 
Then, with a crescent-tipped arrow, Nakula cuts off Anga’s head, felling 
him from his beast. 

On the death of their king, the Anga fighters all charge Nakula on their 
elephants covered in golden armour, which look like blazing mountains, 
their banners fluttering in the breeze. The Mekalas, Utkalas, Kalingas, 
Nishadas and Tamraliptakas support them. However, the Pandus, the 
Panchalas and the Somakas rush to Nakula’s rescue. 

A fierce battle breaks out between the maharathas and the elephant- 
warriors; the former attack with their arrows while the latter hurl lances by 
the thousands. The Pandava shafts strike the frontal lobes, limbs, tusks and 
adornments of the elephants and split and mangle them. With four and sixty 
flashing arrows, Sahadeva kills eight elephants which fall with their riders. 
Nakula, too, that delighter of his race, bending his outstanding bow with 
great vigour, kills many elephants with his unerring shafts. 

Then Satyaki, Dhrishtadyumna and the sons of Draupadi, the 
Prabhadrakas and Sikhandi cascade arrows on those massive beasts, and the 
hilly creatures collapse like a mountain being blown apart by many gashes 
of lightning and thunder. The leaders of the Pandava maharathas, after 
killing those elephants, cast their gazes balefully on the enemy army, which 
promptly flees like a river that has broken its banks. 

Now, having put your army to flight, those great warriors who fight for 
Pandu’s son turn on Karna and attack him savagely.’” 


CANTO 23 


: S anjaya says, “While Sahadeva is savaging your army, O Rajan, 

Dusasana confronts him, cousin against cousin. Such a duel 

ensues between them that all the maharathas present shout and wave their 

bright scarves. Your son strikes the mighty Sahadeva’s chest with three 

thudding arrows; Dusasana responds in a blur, first with one golden shaft, 
then with seventy more, and strikes Sahadeva’s sarathy with another three. 

Dusasana rives Sahadeva’s bow and drills him with three and seventy 
arrows across his arms and chest. Sahadeva picks up a sword, whirls it 
around and hurls it at your son’s chariot; that sword of great power destroys 
Dusasana’s bow and then falls onto the earth like a snake from the sky. 

The valiant Sahadeva sweeps up another bow and looses a shaft bright 
as Yama’s danda at Dusasana, which, with his keen sword, your prince cuts 
in two as it flies towards him. Your son spins his sharp sword and launches 
it at his enemy even as he quickly picks up another bow and arrow. 
However, with the greatest ease, Sahadeva knocks that sword to the ground. 
Next, O Bhaarata, Dusasana shoots sixty-four whistling shafts at 
Sahadeva’s chariot, which also Madri’s sage son easily consumes with five 
shafts of his own, and then looses a veritable storm of arrows at Dusasana. 

Your son cuts down each of Sahadeva’s arrows and the very earth 
resounds with his fierce shout! 


Dusasana strikes Sahadeva and his charioteer with nine thunderbolts. A 
furious Sahadeva fits a fearful shaft like the Destroyer himself to his 
bowstring and, drawing his bow into a circle, unleashes that missile at your 
son. The astra plunges right through Dusasana’s kavacha, his great body 
and flashes into the earth. Your son, that great maharatha, collapses onto the 
floor of his chariot and his brave sarathy spirits away from the deadly field, 
thought Sahadeva rakes him all the while with burning shafts. 

After he vanquishes Dusasana, Sahadeva turns his attention to 
Duryodhana’s division and attacks it ferociously. Indeed, O Bhaarata, as an 
angry man crushes a swarm of ants underfoot, that son of Pandu destroys 
the Kaurava host.’” 


CANTO 24 


: S anjaya says, ‘A rampaging Karna checks Nakula as he attacks and 

routs the Kaurava divisions. With a superior smile, Nakula tells 

Karna, “It has taken a long time, wretch, but through the will of the gods we 

finally meet on the battlefield. You are the root of all these evils and this 

horrible war, and you are the reason why so many men have died and are 
still dying. I will kill you today and dispel the fever of my heart.” 

Karna replies soberly, as befits a prince and an archer, “Strike me, O 
Shura, we want to see your mettle. Like a true Kshatriya, boast only after 
you achieve something in battle. Fight me to the best of your ability and I 
promise to quash your pride.” 

The Sutaputra scathes Nakula with three and seventy shafts; Madri’s 
beautiful son responds with eighty narachas like venomous snakes. Karna 
breaks his antagonist’s bow with one inexorable arrow and draws blood 
from him with thirty more. These pass through his armour and drink his 
blood like nagas drinking water after burrowing through the earth. 

Nakula takes up another formidable golden bow, pierces Karna with 
twenty arrows, his sarathy with three, and cleaves his bow with a razor- 
headed shaft. Then, with a smile, he gashes the disarmed Karna with three 
hundred searing barbs. Seeing Nakula overwhelm Karna, O Rajan, all the 
maharathas present, and the Devas in the heavens, are filled with great 
wonder. 


Karna takes up another bow and pierces Nakula’s right shoulder with 
five arrows. Nakula, dauntless, rakes Karna with seven shafts and, again, 
Rajan, cracks one of the horns of his bow. But the awesome Suryaputra 
seizes up a fresh bow and now fills the firmament with his arrows. Nakula 
destroys them all with his own shafts which crowd the sky as if with 
myriads of fireflies. Indeed, the sky quickly seems to swarm with locust 
flights, dark with the hundreds of arrows that the magnificent twain cover it 
with. 

Golden arrows flow in a continuous stream like rows of cranes winging 
through the air. With the sky so full of arrows, which hide even the sun, no 
bird ranging the air can fly down to the earth. The two noble warriors are 
luminous, like two suns at the end of the yuga. 

Karna’s gales decimate the Somakas, while Nakula spreads death 
through your warriors, tossing your legions about at will like a tempest 
some fleecy clouds. The two armies retreat beyond the range of the astras of 
the mighty twosome, and are soon mere spectators of their scintillating 
duel. 

Now freely using their Devastras, O Rajan, they set the field alight with 
their luculent archery. Nakula’s shafts, fletched with kanka and peacock 
feathers, and Karna’s, seem to float in the firmament and to create a vast 
vault of arrows, making both warriors invisible, yes, truly like the clouds 
shrouding the sun and the moon. 

The son of Adhiratha’s arrows, shot with great force from every side, 
have little effect on Nakula, like the clouds on the sun. Karna, smiling 
haughtily, looses a barrage of shafts, thousands upon thousands of them, so 
that a cupola of arrows seems to rest on Kurukshetra, like clouds casting a 
shadow. Yet again, he shatters the noble Nakula’s bow, and in a scarlet 
flash, despatches his sarathy and four horses to Yama’s land. 

Karna pulverises the ratha, standard, gada, sword and shield adorned 
with a hundred moons, and brutally beheads the protectors of Nakula’s 
chariot wheels, so Madri’s son suddenly finds himself standing on bare 
ground armed with just a spiked club. He raises that cudgel above his head 
with a defiant roar but Karna blasts it into dust with a flurry of arrows. 
Seeing his adversary weaponless, Karna lacerates him with a hundred 
shafts, but with great and almost loving care, so he does not wound him 
grievously. 


His attack forces the mighty Nakula to withdraw in great confusion. 
Laughing repeatedly, Radheya pursues him and pulls Nakula up with his 
great bow, stopping Madri’s son by restraining him with bow and string 
around his neck. The son of Pandu looks like the moon in the firmament 
within a halo of light, or a white cloud girdled by Indra’s dhanusha. 

Karna says, “Look how vain were your earlier boasts, Nakula. Dare you 
repeat them now, boy? O Pandava, fight your equals and not those that are 
immeasurably superior to you. O child, little one, do not feel humiliated but 
go back home, or go to Krishna and Arjuna.” 

With this, Karna removes his bow from around Nakula’s throat and 
turns away from him—for the oath he had sworn to Kunti, as well as 
because his dharma forbade him from killing an already helpless enemy. In 
terrible shame, Nakula takes himself to Yudhishtira’s chariot and, his head 
hung, climbs into it, burning with humiliation and sighing like a snake 
caught in a jar. 

After he vanquishes Nakula, Karna rides against the Panchalas, his 
chariot flying many gorgeous pennants and drawn by horses white as the 
moon. 

There is a great uproar among the Pandavas when they see the new 
Kaurava senapati assail the Panchala chariot divisions. Rolling all over the 
battlefield like a racing wheel, the Suta’s son fetches great carnage there, 
just when the sun has reached his meridian. We see many Panchala warriors 
without horses, chariots with broken wheels, axles and with torn standards 
and pennants. 

Numerous elephants wander deranged over the field torn by arrows, as 
if they have been scalded in a forest fire. Others with their round temples 
split open, bathed in blood, or with trunks lopped off, or with their armour 
cut away, or their tails severed, fall screaming in pain, all struck by the 
terrible Karna. Other elephants, terrified by the shafts and lances of 
Radheya, stampede and run at him, like insects toward a blazing fire, and he 
fells them without mercy. Other leviathans gore each other in frenzy and 
bleed like mountains with red rivulets running down their breasts. Horses of 
the best breed, without their armoured breastplates, their ornaments of 
silver, brass and gold, their trappings, bridle-bits, yak-tails, saddle-cloths 
and saddles fallen from their backs, and with their heroic riders all slain, 
dash wild-eyed and directionless everywhere across Kurukshetra. 


We see, O Bhaarata, so many horsemen, although wearing armour and 
helmets, stabbed and gored with lances and swords, with some limbs 
hacked away, or killed or being killed, or trembling horribly with fear. We 
see gold embellished chariots, yoked to fleet horses being hauled 
directionless, for their charioteers are dead. Some of these have their axles 
and poles broken, others their wheels, flagpoles or their shafts. 

Karna’s firestorms of arrows incinerate many maharathas who wander 
about without their chariots, turning them to ash pillars. Many lie lifeless on 
the field weaponless, while some still clasp their weapons in dead hands. 
Elephants, studded with clusters of jewels like stars, adorned with rows of 
beautiful bells, and decked with different coloured variegated banners, 
lumbering about, their riders and their very minds and hearts and senses 
lost. Karna’s arrows dissever heads and arms, bisect torsos and other limbs, 
and these lie scattered everywhere—some twitching, other writhing and yet 
other still. 

The Pandava warriors meet with a great and brutal disaster at the hands 
of Karna. He slaughters the Srinjayas, as they blindly ride against him, like 
insects swarming at a blazing fire. Soon, as that maharatha is mowing down 
the Pandava legions, the Kshatriyas try to avoid him as if he is the very 
yuga fire. Those of the Panchala maharathas, who survive the slaughter, run. 
Karna pursues those broken and fleeing warriors and looses his arrows at 
them even as the sun, dispeller of darkness, scorches all beings at high 


999 


noon. 


CANTO 25 


: S anjaya says, ‘Shouting “Stop and fight me!” Prince Uluka 
confronts your son Yuyutsu, who fights for the Pandavas, as that 
prince razes your son’s vast army. 

Yuyutsu responds with a winged arrow that strikes Uluka with great 
force. A bristling Uluka rives your son’s bow with a razor-headed arrow 
and pierces him with a barbed shaft. His eyes red as roses, Yuyutsu picks up 
another formidable bow and first drills Uluka with sixty arrows, then injures 
his charioteer before turning his attention back to the prince. Uluka 
lacerates Yuyutsu with twenty golden arrows, and cuts down his lofty 
golden standard, and drops it in front of his chariot. 

Now quite beside himself with rage, Uluka bloodies your prince’s torso 
with five stunning shafts; Yuyutsu recovers quickly, O Bharatasattama, and 
decapitates Yuyutsu’s charioteer with a broad-headed arrow slick with oil. 
He targets his four horses and then rakes Yuyutsu himself with five more 
arrows, forcing your son to find another chariot. After he bests Yuyutsu in 
that short duel, Uluka speeds away towards the Panchalas and the Srinjayas 
and tears into them with his stormy missiles. 

Meanwhile, your son Srutakarman deprives the maharatha Satanika of 
his horses, charioteer and chariot in the twinkling of an eye. However, 
Srutakarman remains standing on his broken ratha and hurls a great mace at 
your son smashing his chariot, horses and charioteer into pieces and bloody 


pulp. Both Kuru-Praviras, having lost their chariots, retreat from the 
encounter, glaring at each other. While your son mounts Vivingsu’s ratha, 
Satanika quickly climbs into Prativindhya’s. 

Sakuni strikes Sutasoma with raging flurries of arrows, but fails to 
shake the latter. Sutasoma envelops Sakuni, his father’s enemy, with 
thousands of sizzling barbs. However, Sakuni, that seasoned warrior and 
master in all kinds of warfare, destroys all those shafts before they reach 
him, and strikes Sutasoma squarely with three more. He then swiftly 
destroys his opponent’s horses and standard and kills his charioteer, 
drawing a shout of wonder from those who watch. 

Sutasoma leaps down from his chariot, takes up another bow and a firm 
stance, and shrouds Sakuni’s chariot with a tempest of golden-winged 
shafts. The illustrious son of Subala sees those showers of arrows fly 
towards him like a locust swarm; unmoved, he stands firm and cuts the lot 
down. The warriors all around, as well as the Siddhas in the firmament, all 
applaud this wonderful feat of Sutasoma fighting the chariot-mounted 
Sakuni on foot. 

Sakuni destroys his adversary’s bow and quivers. Sutasoma draws a 
sword of the hue of the blue lotus with an ivory grip, roars, and whirls it 
overhead as he circles a wary Sakuni who knows that the sword is as deadly 
as the rod of death. Brandishing that blade, Sutasoma displays, O Rayan, all 
the fourteen different kinds of manoeuvres. He wheels, whirls, makes side- 
thrusts, springs forward and leaps high, treads air, and flails forward and 
upwards. 

Sakuni looses a clutch of arrows at his antagonist, who cuts them all 
down with his astonishing blade. Thwarted, Subala’s son once more angrily 
unleashes a volley like serpents at the prince. With celerity and skill that 
equal Garuda’s, Sutasoma cuts all these down as well with his marvellous 
blade. Then, with a most special shaft, Sakuni breaks that bright and 
magical sword in two, even as Sutasoma dances with it. Maharatha 
Sutasoma dances back six steps and hurls the half of the sword in his grasp, 
decked with gold and gemstones, at his enemy and rives Sakuni’s bow. 

Immediately, Sutasoma runs to the great chariot of Srutakirti for refuge. 
Sakuni takes up another massive invincible bow, and now turns towards the 
Pandava army. 

A roar of alarm arises in that part of the army when they see the son of 
Subala on his chariot, fearlessly attacking the Pandava host. The onlookers 


watch him mow down those large and proud divisions, bristling with heroes 
and their weapons, just as the chief of the Devas once razed the Daitya 


999 


army. 


CANTO 26 


°S anjaya says, ‘Kripa, O Bhaarata, faces Dhrishtadyumna, like a 
Sarabha in the forest facing a proud lion. Held up by Kripa, 
Prishata’s son Dhrishtadyumna cannot advance at all. Suddenly, all are 
afraid that Dhrishtadyumna’s end is at hand. Maharathas and horsemen are 
dispirited and say, “Undoubtedly, Sharadvata’s mighty son is burning to 
avenge Drona’s death. Will Dhrishtadyumna escape the ire of Kripa? How 
will this vast army escape this danger? Will this fearsome Brahmana not kill 
all of us? His appearance is like that of the Destroyer himself, and he will 
fight like another Drona today. This awesome Acharya is invincible in 
battle and today the usually mild one is full of rare fury.” 

As Dhrishtadyumna and Kripa face each other, warriors of both armies 
exclaim similar fears. Drawing a deep breath of rage, Kripa begins to target 
all Dhrishtadyumna’s vital marmas, while the Panchala stands dazed, not 
knowing what to do. 

His charioteer tells him, “All is not well with you, O son of Prishata. 
Never before have I seen you so overcome and dismayed in battle. It is 
fortunate that the great Brahmana’s arrows do not all find their mark. I will 
turn the chariot around, like a river turned back by the sea. I do not think 
that you can face the Brahmana today; he appears to have destroyed your 
assurance.” 


Dhrishtadyumna slowly replies, “My mind is numb, perspiration covers 
my limbs, my body trembles and my hair stands on end. Avoid a duel with 
the Brahmana and drive me to Arjuna. I promise you, Suta, if you take me 
safely to either Arjuna or Bhimasena, I will see that you prosper.” 

The charioteer whips the horses and drives to where the mighty 
Bhimasena is battling your troops. Seeing Dhrishtadyumna’s chariot break 
away, Kripa gives chase and shoots hundreds of shafts at it, repeatedly 
blowing his conch, much like Indra pursuing the Danava Namuchi. 

The invincible Sikhandi, the cause of Bhishma’s death, confronts 
Hridika’s son Kritavarman who wears a broad smile as he fights him. 
Sikhandi strikes the maharatha of the Hridikas with five keen broad-headed 
shafts in his shoulder-joint. Kritavarman first responds by piercing his 
enemy with sixty winged arrows and then with a single barb he smilingly 
breaks his bow. A livid Sikhandi picks up another bow, and shouting, “Wait, 
Wait!” looses ninety golden winged shafts, shot with great force but they 
merely glance off Kritavarman’s armour. Seeing this, Sikhandi splits 
Kritavarman’s bow with a razor-headed arrow and excoriates his enemy’s 
powerful frame with eighty arrows. Kritavarman bleeds from his limbs like 
a jar with holes in it leaking its contents. Covered in blood, the Bhoja king 
looks rather stunning, like a mountain, O Rajan, streaked with streams of 
fluid red chalk after a heavy rain. 

The powerful Kritavarman takes up another bow and pierces Sikhandi’s 
shoulder. With his shafts sticking out from his shoulder-joint, Sikhandi 
looks like some majestic tree with spreading branches and twigs. Having 
wounded each other, the two resemble a pair of bulls that have gored each 
other. Determined to finish each other, the two maharathas circle each other 
a thousand times in their chariots. 

Then Kritavarman shoots the son of Prishata with seventy shafts with 
wings of gold and whetted on stone, and a final dreadful arrow that almost 
fells the Panchala prince. Sikhandi staggers and supports himself by holding 
on to his flagstaff and gasps for breath. His charioteer whisks him away 
from the fight. After this defeat, O Rajan, the badly beaten Pandava army 
flees en masse from the field.’” 


CANTO 27 


: S anjaya says, “Swetavahana, O Rajan, overwhelms your army like 
the wind blowing away cotton heaps. The Trigartas, the Sibis, the 
Kauravas, the Salwas, the Samsaptakas and the Narayanas bear the fury of 
his onslaught. Satyasena, Chandradeva, Mitradeva, Satrunjaya, Susruta’s 
son, Chitrasena, Mitravarman and Susarman, king of the Trigartas, 
surrounded by his brothers and sons, all mighty archers and famed at arms, 
abruptly counter-attack, shooting a solid swath of arrows at Arjuna, like a 
fierce flash flood of water rushing towards the ocean. 

However, those warriors, in their hundreds of thousands, dissipate when 
they reach Arjuna, like snakes at the sight of Garuda. Though mowed down, 
they continue to fall on the son of Pandu like insects helplessly drawn to a 
blazing fire. Satyasena strikes Arjuna with three arrows, Mitradeva with 
three and sixty, Chandradeva with seven, Mitravarman with three and 
seventy arrows, Susruta’s son with seven, Satrunjaya with twenty, and 
Susharman with nine. Thus beset by so many warriors, Arjuna retaliates 
radiantly; he pierces the son of Susruta with seven arrows, Satyasena with 
three, Satrunjaya with twenty, Chandradeva with eight, Mitradeva with a 
hundred, Srutasena with three, Mitravarman with nine, and Susarman with 
eight. 

Dhananjaya kills king Satrunjaya with a burst of whetted arrows, 
beheads Susruta’s son, and without a moment’s pause, despatches 


Chandradeva too. He continues fighting the other maharathas vigorously 
and stops them with five arrows each. 

A spirited Satyasena hurls a formidable javelin at Krishna and utters a 
loud shout of triumph as the iron-tipped missile with a golden shaft passes 
through the left arm of the noble Madhava and dives into the earth. 
Krishna’s whip and reins fall down from his hands. Seeing Vasudana’s arm 
bleed, Arjuna’s eyes turn crimson, and he says to his divine sarathy, “O 
Mahabaho, take the chariot to Satyasena, I mean to send him to Yama.” 

Kesava quickly picks up the whip and the reins and brings the chariot to 
face Satyasena’s ratha. An angry Dhananjaya cannot countenance the Lord 
of the Universe being wounded; in a flash, he severs Satayasena’s head 
from his throat with a wedge-headed arrow, and the large head decked with 
earrings falls spraying blood to the ground before all the army. Arjuna turns 
next on Chitravarman, despatches him with a slew of deadly shafts and then 
his suta with a keen calf-toothed barb. Still infuriated at seeing Krishna 
bleed, the mighty Partha mows down thousands of the Samsaptakas. He 
cuts off illustrious Mitrasena’s head with a razor-headed arrow with wings 
of silver, and strikes Susharman through his shoulder. 

The Samsaptakas themselves are now incensed and_ surround 
Dhananjaya and attack him with roars that resound all across the field. 
Maharatha Jishnu, of immeasurable soul and powerful like Sakra himself, is 
further roused and invokes the Aindrastra. From that single missile, 
thousands of arrows issue endlessly. Kurukshetra resounds with a din of 
breaking chariots and their standards, quivers, arrows, horses, spears, 
swords, maces, spiked clubs, darts, lances, axes, and sataghnis with wheels. 

Heads decked with diadems, necklaces, angadas and keyuras, O 
Bhaarata, and gorgets, cuirasses, coats of mail, chatras and chamaras, lie 
scattered on the yawning field of absolute violence. Heads adorned with 
earrings, with beautiful eyes, each like a full moon, look like stars in the 
firmament. Bodies beyond all count of slain warriors lie on the ground, 
adorned with sandalwood paste, garlands of flowers and rich, fine robes. 
Kurukshetra looks like the heavens teeming with vapoury forms. 

As Arjuna continually kills his enemies and strikes down elephants and 
horses with his lucific volleys, the battlefield soon becomes impassable with 
the bodies of slain princes, Kshatriyas of great prowess, and fallen 
elephants and horses, and there is no room for the wheels of Arjuna’s 
chariot to move. My lord, it is as if the wheels themselves have stopped in 


fright at the thought of moving through that bloody mire. However, then, 
his horses, endued with the speed of the mind or the wind, with a great 
effort again haul the magnificent ratha forward. 

Thus does Pandu’s son put your army to savage rout, and your troops 
turn tail without leaving even the least remnant to face the inexorable 
enemy. Pritha’s son Arjuna is magnificent as a great smokeless fire.’” 


CANTO 28 


: S anjaya says, ‘Duryodhana, O Rajan, fearlessly rounds on 

Yudhishtira, as the Dharmaraja devours your army with his 

missiles. Yudhishtira whirls around to face your son, as that maharatha 
comes charging recklessly towards him, roaring, “Stop, stop!” 

Duryodhana replies with nine sharp arrows that pierce Yudhishtira and 
then gore his charioteer as well. Yudhishtira retaliates first with three and 
ten whistling arrows with wings of gold loosed at Duryodhana; with four 
more heavy shafts, he kills his four horses and with a fifth, beheads his 
charioteer. With the sixth arrow he drops the Kuru king’s standard to the 
ground, with the seventh rives his bow, and with the eighth cleaves his 
sword. With yet another five arrows, Yudhishtira severely wounds 
Duryodhana, drawing fonts of blood from his cousin. 

Duryodhana jumps down from his chariot and stands on the ground 
alone and in great peril. Karna, Aswatthaman, Kripa and others rush to 
defend him. Yudhishtira leads the Pandavas to confront them and a 
ferocious battle breaks out. They blow thousands of horns and conches and 
a din of a million voices arises as the Panchalas clash with the Kauravas; 
men, elephants and rathikas fight with no thought but to kill or die. The 
myriad duelling pairs of maharathas and animals, all using diverse kinds of 
weapons, present a resplendent sight as these Kshatriyas flit everywhere, 


with great skill and energy, observing noble Kshatriya dharma again under 
Karna’s command, after Drona’s death. 

However, soon enough, the battle degenerates into an atavistic 
encounter of madmen, in which the combatants show no ruth or 
temperance. The chariot-warriors target elephants; elephants gore horses 
and horsemen with their tusks, or seize and fling them down with great 
force so their bodies are blown apart; horsemen surround lone horses and 
massacre them; they attack elephants as these great beasts wander over the 
field, and slaughter them from behind. Many mighty tuskers, struck by 
cunning foot-soldiers with fierce spears, scream in pain and stampede, 
trampling their own troops as well as the enemy. 

Some of the more intrepid and powerful foot-soldiers are able to kill 
many elephant-warriors and their beasts. Others astride massive elephants 
chase down the foot-soldiers, who run from them but are overtaken and 
gored and crushed to pulp beneath stupendous feet; yet others are seized in 
long curling trunks and flung high into the air and impaled deftly, horribly, 
on curved tusks. The elephants trap the other foot-soldiers adroitly under 
their stupendous feet and then roll them awfully along the ground until they 
are reduced to shapeless lengths of crushed flesh, bone and gore. Some the 
elephants seize with their trunks, whirl them around like fans and fling them 
far to their deaths. 

Many elephants that confront other elephants are torn with spears, 
lances and darts—their cheeks, temporal lobes and between their tusks; 
while the bellies of others are slashed open so hot entrails and faeces fall 
out, and they sink dead onto their knees with dismal sighs and bellows. 

In that dreadful battle, horsemen impale foot-soldiers with their lances 
and pin them down to the ground, where they writhe and die crying out 
piteously. Elephants attack chariot-warriors, and plucking them out of their 
rathas, hurl them down with great force, shattering their bodies. Cloth-yard 
shafts find their mark and kill some hulking mastodons, which collapse like 
mountain peaks struck by thunderbolts. Individual combatants pummel each 
other with their fists or, seizing each other by their hair, drag each other 
around before one is flung down and slain. Enemies push each other down 
violently and then set their feet on their enemy’s chests and behead them. 
Some frenzied soldiers kick already dead men, some decapitate a falling 
enemy, while many run living ones through with spears and glinting blades. 


In that atrocious melee, O Bhaarata, fighting men use all means, fair and 
foul, to prevail brutally over their foes. Some strike each other down slyly 
from behind, against all tenets of a dharma yuddha. In that macabre 
dimension of the general engagement, thousands of headless trunks stand 
upright on the grisly field for long moments before toppling over. Weapons 
and coats of mail, drenched with gore, look glorious, like starched cloth 
dyed gorgeous crimson. 

The battle is like the tumultuary current of the Ganga in spate, as it 
seems to fill the whole universe with its uproar. In the manic grip of 
absolute bloodlust, the warriors fail to distinguish friend from enemy, as 
kings bent on victory cut down anyone they can reach, enemies and 
comrades alike. With broken chariots, fallen elephants, horses and dead 
men covering the bloody ground, Kurukshetra, field of truth, field of death, 
is soon impassable on all sides. 

Karna slaughters the Panchalas while Dhananjaya decimates the 
Trigartas and Bhimasena annihilates the Kurus and all their elephant 
divisions. Thus, both the Kuru and Pandava troops destroy each other in the 
sole attempt to win great fame, as the sun passes his zenith in mid heaven.’” 


CANTO 29 


ae D hritarashtra says, ‘I have heard from you, O Sanjaya, incidents of 
great poignancy and unbearable grief as well as of the losses that 
my sons have sustained. From what you say about the manner in which they 
fought the battle, it is my certain conviction that the Kauravas are doomed. 
Duryodhana lost his chariot in his duel with Yudhishtira, so how did his 
battle with the Dharmaraja continue? Tell me now about the battle which 
was fought in the afternoon? Tell me all in detail, for you are a skilled 
raconteur, O Sanjaya.’ 

Sanjaya says, “When both armies engage each other in battle, your son 
Duryodhana, O Rajan, riding another chariot and seething like a poisonous 
snake, tells his charioteer, “Fly to where the royal son of Pandu clad in mail 
shines under the royal chatra held over his head.” 

Seeing him come, Yudhishtira, looking like an angry elephant, urges his 
own charioteer, “Ride straight at Suyodhana.” 

Then those two cousins, invincible maharathas both, meet again to fight 
and maul each other with arrows. Duryodhana splits Yudhishtira’s bow; the 
Pandava, his eyes turning red, takes up another and destroys Duryodhana’s 
bow and standard. Beside themselves with fury, they shower storms of 
shafts at each other; they are like a pair of angry lions or two raging bulls. 

They circle each other, always probing to find a weakness and wound 
the other grievously. Bleeding and stuck with shafts shot from bows drawn 


to their fullest stretch, the two look brilliant, like flowering kinsukas. They 
repeatedly give vent to tigerish roars and make echoing sounds with their 
palms and pull lustily on their bowstrings to make them twang loudly and 
blow their conches with great gusto. 

Yudhishtira sees a momentary opening and gores your son’s chest with 
three thunderous shafts. Your royal son strikes back with five golden 
winged barbs and also flings a fierce spear like a blazing brand. As it flares 
towards him with a loud crackle, Yudhishtira cuts it into three slivers, and 
then drills Duryodhana with five arrows. The great and occult spear falls 
tamely, extinguished. 

Your son seamlessly unleashes nine razorine arrows at Yudhishtira. 
Deeply struck, his blood spouting from those wounds, Yudhishtira, 
unmoved, looses a flashing missile at Suyodhana, which passes right 
through his body and leaves him dazed. Recovering swiftly, the incensed 
Duryodhana rushes at Yudhishtira, brandishing a mace even like Yama with 
his bludgeon, to kill his cousin, to have done with this endless war! 

Yudhishtira casts a lance like a streak of lightning at Duryodhana, 
felling him in a dead faint. But then, Bhima remembers his own vow and 
says to Yudhishtira, “You must not kill him, O Rajan, for I have sworn to 
kill all the sons of Dhritarashtra.” Yudhishtira restrains himself and allows 
your son to live when he could have had his life. 

At this time, Kritavarman arrives there and finds your royal son 
Duryodhana lying unconscious and in great distress and danger. Bhima 
takes up his mace, adorned with gold and flaxen strings, and attacks him. A 
tumultuous battle breaks out between your troops and the enemy that 
afternoon, O Rajan, and death rules Kurukshetra.’” 


CANTO 30 


°S anjaya says, ‘Your warriors led by Karna return to the battle 
which is indeed like the Devasura yuddha of old. Spurred on by 
the pandemonium created by the elephants, men, chariots, horses and 
conches, the maharathas, foot-soldiers, horsemen and elephant-warriors 
advance against the enemy and all lay into one another with every kind of 
weapon. Yet again the earth is littered with human heads that wear beautiful 
diadems and earrings, with faces that have strong teeth, fair faces and dark, 
handsome eyes and large noses—faces which resemble the lotus, the sun, or 
the moon. 

Thousands upon thousands of elephants, men and horses lie dead, killed 
with spiked clubs, short bludgeons, darts, lances, hooks, bhusundis and 
maces. The blood that they shed forms another ghastly river on the 
battlefield and, with the boundless corpses of warriors and animals lying 
thickly everywhere, with their pallid faces and gaping wounds, the whole 
place looks like the domain of Yama, king of the dead, at the time of the 
pralaya at yuga’s end. 

O Kurusreshta, your troops and your sons who resemble the 
Devaputras, with a host of invincible warriors that shine with fierce beauty, 
ride against Satyaki, bull of Sini’s race, with a great rumble and a roar as 
loud as that of the vast deep, like the army of the Asuras or that of the 
Devas. Karna, Suryaputra, like the king of the Devas himself in strength 


and even like the younger brother of Indra, strikes Satyaki with arrows 
brilliant like the rays of the sun. Yuyudhana envelops Karna, his chariot, 
chargers and charioteer with a myriad of arrows like poisonous snakes. 

Many atirathas of your army with elephants, chariots and foot-soldiers 
rush to support Karna, when they see him beset by Satyaki. However, the 
Pandava warriors led by the sons of Drupada swiftly rout that force vast as 
the ocean and cause a fearful carnage of men, chariots, steeds and 
elephants. 

Meanwhile, the two shuras, Arjuna and Kesava, say their daily prayers, 
duly worship the Lord Bhava and join the battle against your troops, 
determined to exterminate them. The Kurus look fearfully at their chariot as 
it comes thundering at them, drawn by white horses, with banners floating 
in the wind and with a rumble like the roar of the clouds. Arjuna bends the 
Gandiva and, as if dancing on his chariot, fills the firmament and all the 
directions with a pralaya of arrows, not leaving the smallest space empty. 
Like the tempest scatters clouds, the son of Pandu smashes countless 
chariots that are magnificent as deva rathas, and sends as many war 
elephants, numberless horsemen with their horses, hastikas, charioteers and 
foot-soldiers to Yama’s realm. 

Duryodhana stands against that unassailable maharatha and veritable 
Yama, and strikes him with some perfect shafts. Arjuna demolishes your 
son’s bow and standard, kills his sarathy and horses with seven thunder 
flashes, and with an eighth shaft cuts down his royal parasol so it falls in 
shame to the ground. 

Seeing his chance, Arjuna unleashes a deadly devastra at his cousin, but 
intrepid Duryodhana slices it into seven pieces. Tireless Dhanajaya splits 
Aswatthaman’s bow and kills his four horses, and he also rives the bows of 
Kripa and Dusasana, and destroys Kritavarman’s bow as well as his 
standard and slaughters his horses. 

Arjuna turns his attention to Karna, who is forced to leave Satyaki and 
defend himself. He finds Krishna with twenty arrows and Arjuna first with 
three telling barbs and then repeatedly with many dense volleys. Karna 
feels no fatigue despite fighting furiously, without let, like an enraged Indra. 
Meanwhile, Satyaki races up and drills Karna first with nine and ninety 
blinding arrows, and again with a hundred. 

All the leading warriors among the Parthas— Yudhamanyu, Sikhandi, 
the sons of Draupadi, the Prabhadrakas, and Uttamaujas, Yuyutsu, Madri’s 


twins and Dhrishtadyumna—surround Karna. The divisions of the Chedis, 
the Karushas, the Matsyas, Kaikeyas, the mighty Chekitana and 
Dharmarajan Yudhishtira, all with chariots, horses, elephants and valiant 
foot-soldiers, arrive and all together deluge Karna with different kinds of 
astras, shouting insults at him, both desperate and determined to kill him. 

But the meridian Karna disperses his assailants with his astras like the 
tornado uprooting trees that stand in its way. Inflamed, he destroys chariot- 
warriors, elephants and riders, cavalry, and large bands of Pandavas foot- 
soldiers, who flee the field, devoid of weapons and with limbs torn and 
mangled. Then a smiling Arjuna thwarts Karna with his own astras which 
cover the sky, the earth, and all the points of the compass with cataracts of 
arrows. Arjuna’s missiles fall like heavy clubs, spiked bludgeons, sataghnis 
and thunderbolts. Without mercy, he annihilates the Kaurava force— 
infantry, cavalry, chariots and elephants; those that survive his transcendent 
onslaught wander dazed and helpless across death’s field, giving vent to 
piteous wails. Great hosts of horses, men and elephants perish there or are 
grievously wounded and run away in fear. 

While your warriors are thus engaged in a desperate battle, the sun 
enters the Asta. Darkness falls, and because of the deepening night and also 
the thick pall of dust, we can no longer discern what transpires between the 
two forces, who kills or who is slain. Dreading another night engagement, 
the Kaurava maharathas retire from the field with all their men. Seeing this, 
the Parthas are heartened that they have won the day, and they also 
withdraw from horrific Kurukshetra and return to their encampment. As 
they go, they mock and jeer at their enemies with diverse atonal sounds on 
their musical instruments, even as they loudly shout and sing the praises of 
Krishna and Arjuna. 

After those shuras have withdrawn their army, all the troops and all the 
kings shower blessings upon the Pandavas as those sinless men retire to 
their tents with some joy in their hearts. 

And now the rakshasas, pisachas, jackals and hyenas and every other 
kind of scavengers and carnivores, swarm onto the horrible field in droves 
after waiting all day as slavering onlookers to the carnage that has been like 
the bloody sport of Rudra himself gone berserk. With ravening appetites, 
with growls and grunts, and the sounds of flesh being torn from bone, bone 
being cracked and blood being quaffed in absolute glee, they fall greedily to 
the ample feast before them.’” 


CANTO 31 


. “T) hritarashtra says, “Apparently Arjuna massacred all of you at 
will. Indeed, it appears that the Destroyer himself would not 
escape if Arjuna took up arms against Him. Single-handed, Partha attacked 
Bhadra and gratified Agni. Alone, he subjugated the whole world, 
vanquished all its kings, and made them pay him tribute. Unaided, with his 
celestial bow, he slew the Nivatakavachas, and contended with Mahadeva 
who appeared before him in the guise of a hunter. By himself, he protected 
the Bharatas, and pleased Bhava. I say that the Kurus deserve praise for 
standing up to such a warrior. Tell me now, O Suta, what Duryodhana and 
the others did next.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Struck by Arjuna’s arrows, wounded and brought down 
from their chariots, divested of armour and deprived of weapons, their 
beasts slain, beaten by their enemies and burning with grief, the vain 
Kauravas enter their tents and once more take counsel together. They look 
like snakes with fangs drawn, venom removed and trodden upon. 

Karna, sighing like an angry snake, wringing his hands, says to 
Duryodhana, “Arjuna is always careful, determined, and masterful and has 
great intelligence. Moreover, he has Krishna advising him with the proper 
course of action at the apt time. Today, he surprised us with that sudden 
storm of astras. Tomorrow, king of the world, I will frustrate all his 
designs.” 


Duryodhana says, “Tathaastu” and gives leave to his commanders and 
allies to retire to their own tents. 

The night passes and, come the dawn, they ready themselves for battle 
again and sally forth in some good heart. They see Yudhishtira 
Dharmarajan’s invincible vyuha that he has formed with great care, exactly 
as prescribed by Brihaspati and Usanas. Duryodhana thinks of the 
mahatejasvin Karna, the paraviraha with the neck of a bull, equal to 
Purandara himself in battle, the Maruts in might and Kartavirya in energy 
and prowess. The heart of not just your son but those of all his troops turn 
to that hero, the Sutaputra, as one’s heart turns naturally to a dear friend in a 
time of grave danger and crisis.’ 

Dhritarashtra asks, ‘What does Duryodhana do next, O Suta, when all 
thoughts are turned towards Karna? Do my troops look at Radheya like men 
afflicted with cold turning their faces towards the sun? When the battle 
begins, does Karna fight manfully and how do the Pandavas counter him? 
Ah, mahabaho Karna, whose might equals that of Sakra or Vishnu, could 
indeed single-handedly destroy the Parthas and the Srinjayas. It was relying 
on Karna’s superhuman prowess that Duryodhana decided to go to war 
against the sons of Pandu. Now, seeing Yudhishtira dominate Duryodhana, 
Arjuna raze our legions and watching all the Pandavas display their great 
might, what does maharatha Karna do? 

Alas that the foolish Duryodhana, relying on Karna, hopes to vanquish 
the Parthas, their sons and Krishna himself in battle. Ah, it is a thing of 
great grief that Karna, with all his strength and astras and unworldly genius, 
could not overcome the Pandavas. Sanjaya, without doubt, Fate is supreme 
and inexorable, and now the evil end of that game of dice has truly arrived! 
O Suta, in my dotage I have to endure, like so many burning arrows, these 
heart-rending sorrows brought down on us by all Duryodhna’s vile deeds. 

Subala’s son Sakuni is reputed to be a clever and wise man, and Karna 
and Duryodhana are closer than brothers. When this is so, why is it that I 
hear only of the repeated defeats and deaths of my sons and their allies? 
There is truly no one that can face the Pandavas in battle. They break into 
my army like men into helpless women. Sanjaya, Sanjaya, only fate is 
supreme.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Rajan, think now of all your own sins—the game of dice 
that you allowed and encouraged, and all the other crimes that you 
acquiesced in and abetted, things that possibly most men have by now 


forgotten. Yet, one should not dwell too much on the past since time and its 
terrible faults cannot be called back. What you hoped to acquire and 
achieve through your heinous crimes against your brothers’ sons has not 
come to pass but rather its very reverse has, and the horrors of this most 
dreadful war of all—because, Rajan, you did not consider dharma when you 
chose to betray your nephews. Later, again, your heart full of dark greed, 
you chose to go to war against the Pandavas disregarding all the wise 
counsel you received that warned you of the dangerous folly of that course. 

The carnage that we now witness on Kurukshetra, of our greatest 
Kshatriyas, is nothing but the natural fruit of the many grave sins and 
sufferings you inflicted on the sons of Pandu. But the time to rue all that is 
past now; so do not grieve, O Bharatarishabha. Listen again in detail to the 
progress of the gruesome war. 

After all the others have left for their tents the previous night, Karna 
comes alone to Duryodhana and says, “Tomorrow, I will fight Pandu’s 
illustrious son Arjuna. Either I will kill him, or he will kill me. For many 
reasons, and inscrutable fate as well, we two have not yet faced each other 
in a duel to death. Listen now, O Rajan, to what I say to you. Tomorrow I 
will not return from battle without killing Arjuna. 

Now that our army has lost its greatest warriors, Partha will surely come 
to contend with me, and especially because I have spent the astra that his 
father Sakra gave me. The power of my devastras is equal to that of 
Arjuna’s astras. O Bhaarata, Savyasachi was never my equal in speed, 
dexterity, in the range of arrows we command, in marksmanship, in 
physical strength, in courage, in the knowledge of astras, or in prowess. 

My bow, the Vijaya, is the greatest weapon of its kind. Viswakarman, 
the celestial artificer, made it to please Indra. At its sound, the Daityas saw 
the ten points emptied and were defeated. Sakra gave that famed bow to 
Bhrigu’s son Rama, who then gave it to me. With that bow, I will contend 
with the mighty-armed Arjuna, foremost of victorious warriors, even like 
Indra fighting the Daityas massed against him. This formidable Vijaya, the 
gift of Parasurama, is superior to the Gandiva for it was with this bow that 
the Bhargava subjugated Bhumi, three times seven over, and made lakes of 
Kshatriya blood to avenge his father Jamadagni. And tomorrow, O 
Duryodhana, I will bring rare joy to you and your friends by killing Arjuna 
with it. So let your mind be at rest, my beloved friend, and sleep in peace.” 


And the next morning, while the two armies are being arrayed, Karna 
comes again to Duryodhana. He says, “Today, you, your sons and 
grandsons will reign supreme over the whole earth with her mountains, 
forest and islands, without an enemy left to oppose you. There is nothing 
that I cannot achieve, especially since my purpose is to please you, just as a 
Rishi zealously devoted to dharma and with his soul under control cannot 
fail to achieve success. Arjuna will not be able to contain me in battle, even 
as a tree cannot bear the flames of a great fire. 

However, I must tell you in what respect I am inferior to Arjuna. The 
string of his bow is celestial, and his two quivers are inexhaustible. His 
charioteer is Govinda and I have no sarathy like him. The Gandiva cannot 
be broken in battle. But Iam the elder Vijaya. So, with regard to our bows, I 
am superior to Arjuna. 

Listen now to those matters in which Partha is superior to me. His 
charioteer is he of the Dasharha vamsa, Krishna whom all the worlds adore. 
His golden devaratha, which Agni gave him, is invincible, and his white 
gandharva horses have the speed of the mind. His celestial standard, the 
kapi-dhvaja with the image of the shining Hanuman, is awe-inspiring, and 
Krishna, who is the Creator of the universe, protects his chariot. Though 
inferior to Arjuna in these things, I still want to fight him. 

This Salya, the ornament of royal courts, is Krishna’s equal as a sarathy. 
If he becomes my charioteer, victory will certainly be yours. Let the 
invincible Salya be my sarathy. Let a number of carriages carry my long 
shafts as well as those that are fletched with vulture feathers. Let a number 
of goodly chariots, O Rajan, with excellent horses yoked, always follow 
me. And today I will prove better than Arjuna. 

Salya is also superior to Krishna in another way. Both are masters of 
horses but there is no one equal to the king of the Madras in might of his 
arms. Just as there is no one to match me in archery, no one is Salya’s equal 
in the knowledge of horses. If Salya agrees to be my sarathy, I will surely 
become Partha’s superior; why, the very gods with Vasava at their head will 
not dare attack my ratha. And thus, I will vanquish Arjuna. 

If you do what I ask, Duryodhana, you will see today, O Bhaarata, what 
Karna can achieve in battle. The very Devas and Asuras will not stand 
against me, so what need be said then of the sons of Pandu, who are mere 
men?” 


After listening to Karna, your son salutes Radheya, and answers him 
with a happy heart, “O Karna, accomplish all that you say. Equipped with 
the best quivers and horses, a legion of chariots will follow you to battle. 
Let as many carriages that you wish bear your long shafts and vulture- 
feathered arrows. We, as well as all the kings, will follow you in battle.” 

Your royal son then approaches the king of the Madras to persuade him 
to be Karna’s sarathy.” 


CANTO 32 


: S anjaya says, ‘Your son, O Rajan, humbly approaches maharatha 
Salya, king of the Madras, and affectionately says, “O you of true 
vows, O you of great good fortune, O shura who instils fear in hostile 
troops, you have heard Karna. I want to beseech you before all these great 
kings, bowing my head in humility, out of your love for me, to be Karna’s 
sarathy. With you for his charioteer, Karna will vanquish my enemies. You 
are Krishna’s equal and there is no one else who can take the reins of 
Karna’s horses. Protect Karna then in all ways like Brahma does 
Maheswara and Krishna does Arjuna. 

Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, you, the valiant king of the Bhojas, Subala’s 
son Sakuni, Drona’s son Aswatthaman and I, are now the backbone of our 
army. And so did we divide the Pandava army into different parts that each 
one of us was responsible to battle. Bhishma and the noble Drona accounted 
not only for their charges but some part of mine as well. Those two aged 
Naravyaghras achieved the most impossible feats and the enemy killed 
them only through deceit. Many other great warriors of our army have also 
attained swarga, casting off their lives after displaying untold heroism on 
the field of battle. 

O Rajan, the Parthas who were fewer than us at first, have reduced the 
greater portion of my army and they outnumber us now. You must tell us 


what we should do now. But, ah, great Salya do whatever we must to 
prevent the sons of Kunti from entirely exterminating what remains. 

The Pandavas have slaughtered my bravest warriors. Only mahabaho 
Karna and you, who are the greatest maharathas in the world, remain, who 
are devoted to our cause. O Naravyaghra, Karna is determined to fight 
Arjuna today. My hopes of victory rest on him. There is no one else in the 
world other than you who can be the charioteer for Karna as Krishna is for 
Partha. With Kesava’s guidance and protection, you see what Partha has 
achieved. Arjuna was never before so successful in battle, but here, united 
with Krishna, his prowess has increased beyond belief. Day after day, he 
has razed this vast army of Dhritarashtra, until only a mere fraction of it 
remains, under Karna’s command and yours. 

Mighty Salya, join forces with Karna today and, together, destroy the 
enemy. Karna is the greatest maharatha and you are the greatest sarathy. 
With you as his charioteer, Karna would be invincible even against Sakra 
leading the Devas, let alone the paltry Pandavas. 

I beg you, do not doubt what I say. Even as Surya and Aruna together 
destroy the darkness, you must unite with Karna and kill Arjuna this day. 
Let the maharathas of the enemy flee at the sight of you both, radiant as two 
suns risen on the horizon. O Salya, even as darkness is dispelled at the sight 
of Surya and Aruna, let the Pandavas with the Panchalas and Srinjayas 
perish on seeing you and Karna.” 

But Salya is livid to listen to what Duryodhana says! His brow furrows 
into three deep crevasses, he repeatedly waves his arms and, rolling his 
bulging eyes red with anger, that Kshatriya of the massive arms and proud 
of his lineage, wealth, knowledge and strength, says, “You insult me, son of 
Gandhari, or surely you are suspicious of my loyalty, since you brazenly 
ask me, Salya, to be a sarathy to another. 

You may regard Karna to be my superior and laud him but I do not 
consider Radheya to be my equal. O lord of the earth, assign to me a greater 
part of the enemy and I will destroy that portion in battle and then return 
home. Or, if you wish, I will fight the enemy single-handed and then watch 
my prowess! 

Kurusattama, men like us never accept any assignment while stung and 
brooding over an insult. Do not entertain doubts about me and never 
humiliate me as you have done. Look at my two arms, strong as the Vajra. 
Behold my wonderful bow, and these arrows in my quivers that resemble 


virulent snakes. Look at my ratha to which are yoked horses swift as the 
wind. Duryodhana, look at my golden gada tied up with hemp cords. I can 
split open the earth, smash down the mountains in my wrath, and dry up the 
oceans with my oorjas. When you know that I, a great Kshatriya, can put 
the enemy to rout on my own, why do you seek to make the charioteer of a 
lowborn Sutaputra? 

It is a sin that you even think of assigning such a base and menial task 
to me! Being Karna’s immeasurable superior, I will not obey the commands 
of a lowly man, and a sinner besides. I came to fight of my own will and out 
of love for you. Now if you ask me, a great Kshatriya, to obey an evil, 
lowly Sutaputra, you will surely incur the sin of confusing the superior with 
the inferior. 

Brahma created the Brahmanas from his mouth, the Kshatriyas from his 
arms, the Vaishyas from his thighs and the Sudras from his feet. As a result 
of the mixing of these four varnas, O Bhaarata, new ones have been created, 
which consist of those born of men of superior varnas marrying women of 
inferior varnas, as well as those born of women of higher castes marrying 
beneath themselves. According to the shastras, the Kshatriyas are 
established on the earth as the protectors of the other classes, and they 
acquire and distribute wealth; the Brahmanas assist at yagnas, teach and 
accept pure dakshina; the Vaishyas are occupied in agriculture, animal 
husbandry and giving dakshina; Sudras have been ordained to be the 
servants of the Brahmanas, the Kshatriyas and the Vaishyas. 

So also, the Sutas are the servants of Kshatriyas, and not the other way 
around! Listen to me, Anagha. I am born into a race of Rajarishis, royal 
sages, and my coronal locks have undergone the sacred bath. I am also 
acknowledged the world over as a great maharatha. I deserve the worship 
and the praises that vabdhis and magadhis render and sing. Being all this, I 
cannot stoop to be the suta of a suta’s son in battle. I will never fight again 
after being subjected to such a humiliation. Allow me, O son of Gandhari, 
to return home.” 

Saying this, an angry Salya stands up quickly and begins to stalk out of 
that gathering of kings. However, your son, from affection and great regard, 
stops him and in a sweet and conciliatory manner, tries to pacify him, 
“Without doubt, O Salya, what you say is true, but I beg you listen to what I 
have in mind. Karna is not superior to you, nor am I suspicious of you, 
Rajan. The noble king of the Madras will never do anything wrong and is 


rightly called Artayani or the descendant of those who always told the truth. 
O giver of honours, you are called Salya since you are like a barbed arrow 
to your enemies. O giver of large dakshina at yagnas, may you achieve all 
that you have said that you will accomplish. 

Neither the son of Radha nor I am superior to you in valour that I would 
ask you to be Karna’s charioteer. However, just as Karna is superior to 
Arjuna as a warrior, the world regards your expertise in managing horses to 
be better if not twice that of Krishna’s.” 

Salya takes pause and replies, “I am gratified, Duryodhana, that you 
acknowledge in front of all these troops that I am superior to Devaki’s son. 
For this I will do what you ask and become Karna’s sarathy when he 
engages Partha in battle. However, let Vikartana’s son understand that I will 
say whatever I please to him.” 

O Bhaarata, your son and Karna readily accept what Salya wants, both 
of them saying, “Tathaastu!” 


CANTO 33 


: D uryodhana says, “Listen, O king of the Madras, as I tell you in 
detail about the battle long ago between the Devas and the Asuras 
as it was related by Maharishi Markandeya to my father. That was a great 
battle indeed of which the evil Taraka was the cause. We know that the 
Devas defeated the Daityas and, after their defeat, the three sons of Taraka, 
named Tarakaksha, Kamalaksha and Vidyunmalin, performed a tapasya of 
unprecedented severity and kept the most lofty and austere vratas. They 
emaciated their bodies through harsh penance and because of their self- 
restraint, atonement, vows and contemplation, Pitamaha Brahma was 
pleased with them and granted them boons. Together they prayed to Him 
for the boon of immunity from death, from all beings and forever. The 
divine Lord and Master of the worlds said to them, “There is no boon that 
can confer immorality. So ask me for some other boon that you want.’ 

The three brothers conferred among themselves long and finally, 
bowing to Brahma, said, ‘O Pitamaha, give us this boon. We will dwell in 
three sky cities and, with your blessings, roam safely over the earth. After a 
thousand years, our three cities and we will come together as one. That 
greatest of gods who can pierce the three cities at that time, with a single 
shaft, will, O Lord, destroy us.’ 

Saying, “Tathaastu—so be it’, Brahma left them and returned to his own 
lofty world. 


Filled with joy at having obtained those boons, the three sons of Taraka 
asked the peerless Asura Mayaa, who is to the Daityas and Danavas what 
Viswakarman is to the Devas, and whom all the Asuras worship, to create 
their triad cities for them. 

Mayaa wrought, with the vast power he had through his own tapasya, 
three cities without parallel. One was made of gold and was set in swarga; 
the second was created with silver and remained aloft in the sky, and the 
third was made from black iron upon the earth. These, together, cities of 
every marvel, were called the Tripura and they orbited one another 
synchronously. 

Each city had houses, mansions, lofty walls and porches, and measured 
a hundred yojanas in width and a hundred in length. Though full of lordly 
palaces set close to each other, yet the streets were wide and spacious and 
adorned with mansions and grand gateways. The beautiful city of gold 
belonged to the illustrious Tarakaksha, the silver city to Kamalaksha, and 
the iron one to Vidyunmalin. Those three Daitya kings soon assailed the 
three worlds with their power, and continued to reign from the sanctuary of 
their Tripura, and, in their swelling hubris, began to ask, ‘Who is this 
Creator?’ 

To these greatest of Asuras, who had no equal, flocked millions of 
proud and flesh-eating Danavas whom the Devas had once vanquished and 
driven into exile; now they streamed into the three cities and Taraka’s sons 
welcomed their magnificent people, who had endured untold hardship 
hiding from the hunting Devas in deserts and mountain caves and other 
hidden fastnesses; they welcomed their people with opulent mansions and 
great wealth. Indeed, Mayaa himself fulfilled all their needs and they lived 
fearlessly in luxury and grandeur, relying upon him. Whenever any Asura 
living in the triple cities desired anything, Mayaa fulfilled his wish through 
his powers. 

Tarakaksha had a heroic and mighty son named Hari. He underwent the 
most austere of tapasyas and gratified the Grandsire. Hari prayed for a boon 
of him, saying, ‘Grant us a lake in our city, such that when persons slain by 
weapons are immersed in it, they emerge alive and with redoubled 
strength.’ 

With Brahma’s boon, Hari, son of Tarakaksha, created a lake in his city 
that revived the dead. In whatever manner a Daitya died, as soon as they 
immersed him in that lake, he was reborn in his old form and appearance. 


Thus restoring their dead, the Daityas began to visit the three worlds with 
grief and oppression. Because these enemies of the gods sustained no 
diminution in battle, they became greedy and arrogant, and savagely, 
recklessly, brought destruction to cities and towns across the universe. 

Filled with pride at the boons they had received, they now hunted the 
Devas and their followers everywhere, wreaking violent revenge on the 
lords of light for the privation and torment they themselves had suffered. 
The demons roamed at will through sacred vanas and other realms dear to 
the Devas, through the peaceful sacred asramas of Rishis, and brought 
havoc and desecration with them wherever they went, with no regard or 
respect for anybody. 

While the demons persecuted the three worlds, Sakra led the Maruts 
against them in their cities and cast his Vajra at them from every side. 
However, through Brahma’s blessing, the three cities, the Tripura, were 
inviolable and Indra could make no dint on any of them nor harm any of the 
Asuras that lived in them in the least. 

Indra and the Devas went to the Grandsire Brahma, to complain to him 
about the depredations of the Asuras. They told him all about the violence 
of the Asuras and, bowing before him, asked the divine Pitamaha of the 
worlds how Tripura, the triple city, could be destroyed. 

The illustrious four-faced Deity heard Indra and reassured the Devas, 
‘He who causes you sorrow offends me too. All Asuras are evil and have 
always hated the Devas. I am impartial to all beings but it is my law that we 
must kill those who do not follow dharma. You can destroy Tripura only if 
you strike all the three cities with a single astra. No one except the great 
Lord Siva can achieve this. You Adityas should go and beseech Rudra, to 
become your warrior and he will destroy the Asuras and their cities for 
you.’ 

At this, Sakra and the Devas led by Brahma, sought the protection of 
Sankara, Vrishavahana, Bhava without compare with all their hearts and 
souls, while chanting the eternal words of the Vedas. They praised that 
dispeller of all fears, that Universal and Supreme Soul, the One whose Soul 
pervades all and worshipped him with a stern and most demanding tapasya. 
And when the Devas had perfectly stilled their bodies, minds and hearts in 
penance, they saw Umapati Siva as a mass of glory, which has no remote 
equal in the universe, that Source of everything, that sinless, taintless Self. 


They saw that Deity, the Mahatman whose diverse forms they had 
individually conceived and imagined in their own hearts, and they were all 
filled with bliss and absolute wonder, as well as some trepidation. 
Beholding that Unborn one, Vishveswara, the embodiment of all creatures, 
the Devas and the Maharishis, the Devas all prostrated before blazing 
Mahadeva and touched the earth with their brows. 

He greeted them lovingly, saying, “Welcome, O Devas!’ and raising 
them up, the lustrous Sankara smilingly asked, ‘Tell us the object of your 
tapasya and your coming here.’ 

At this, the trembling Devas were somewhat comforted and said, ‘Our 
salutations to you, O Lord, our salutations a thousand times! Our reverences 
and greetings to you who are the source of all the Devas, O Pinakin who are 
full of wrath. We give our salutations to you who once destroyed the yagna 
of Daksha Prajapati and to you who are adored by all the lords of creatures. 

Our salutations to you who are always praised, to you who deserve to be 
praised, to you who are Death’s self. 

Our salutations to you who are red, to you who are fierce and are blue- 
throated Nilakantha. 

Our salutations to you, O Sulin, who cannot be baffled, O lotus-eyed 
Kamalaksha. 

Our salutations to you who fight with the greatest of weapons, to you 
who deserve all praise; to you who are pure, to you who are destruction 
itself, to you Sarvatapana and are irresistible. 

Our salutations to you who are the Brahman, to you who lead the life of 
a brahmachari; to you who are Isana, who are immeasurable, to you who 
are the Great and Subtle Controller, to you who are clad in tattered deerskin, 
and who are always engaged in tapasya. 

Salutations to you who are tawny, to you who observe the most 
impossible vratas, to you who wear animal skins; to you who are the sire of 
Kumara, to you who wield the very greatest of weapons; to you who 
destroy the afflictions of all that seek your shelter. 

Salutations to you who destroy all haters of Brahmanas, to you who are 
the lord of all trees, the lord of all men, the lord of all kine, and always the 
lord of yagnas. 

Salutations to you who are always at the head of armies; to you, O 
Trilochana, to you O Mahashaktimaya. 


We devote ourselves to you in thought, word and deed. Be gracious to 
us, most kindly Lord.’ 

Gratified by their worship, the Holy One reassured them, saying, “Let 
your fears be dispelled. Tell me, what can I do for you?’” 


CANTO 34 


¢ D uryodhana continued, “O Salya, after that Mahatman Siva 
dispelled the fears of the multitude of Pitris, Devas and Rishis, 
Brahma greeted Sankara, and said for the benefit of the universe, ‘Through 
your favour, O Lord, the dominance of all creatures is mine. I gave a great 
boon to the Danavas. Only you, O Lord of the Past and the Future, can 
destroy those evil spirits who show no regard for anyone and are the 
enemies of these Devas. The Devas seek your protection and beg you to 
show them kindness. Slay the Danavas, O Trisulin, and through your grace, 
let the universe be restored to peace and joy. O Trilokapati, we all seek 
refuge in you.’ 

Sthanu said, ‘All your enemies will be slain. However, I will not kill 
them by myself. The enemies of the Devas possess great power. Therefore, 
all of you united together can destroy your enemies and you shall have half 
my might as well. Unity is great strength.’ 

The Devas replied, ‘We have experienced their power and we think that 
the Danavas have twice our energy and might.’ 

The Holy One said, ‘The sinful Asuras, who have transgressed dharma 
and persecuted you, shall be destroyed. With half of my energy and power, 
we will kill all these enemies of yours.’ 

The Devas pleaded, ‘O Maheswara, we will not be able to bear half of 
your oorjas. On the other hand, with half of our combined power, you can 


kill our enemies.’ 

The Holy One said, ‘If you truly cannot support half of my power, then, 
using half of your combined strength, I will kill them.’ 

The Devas acquiesced, ‘Tathaastu.’ 

Sankara took half their combined energies unto himself and became 
superior in prowess to all in the universe and so came to be called 
Mahadeva. Mahadeva then said, ‘With my bow and astra, I will burn your 
enemies from my chariot. Therefore, O Devas, see to my chariot, bow and 
astras even now, so that I may, this very day, cast the Asuras down.’ 

The gods said, ‘O Someswara, we will gather what we need from the 
three worlds and have Viswakarman create an unequalled chariot for you.’ 

Soon, the fashioning of that chariot began and the Devas made Vishnu, 
Soma and Hutasana the astras for Sankara to use. Agni became the staff, 
Soma the arrowhead and Vishnu the point, O Rajan, of that greatest of 
arrows. 

The Devi Bhumi, with her great cities, towns, mountains, forests, 
islands and the homes of different creatures, herself became the chariot. 

The Mandara Mountain was its axle, and the great river Ganga, its 
jangha; and the points of the compass, cardinal and subsidiary, were the 
adornments of the unparalleled ratha. 

The constellations were its shaft; the Krita yuga became its yoke; 
Vasuki, that best of Nagas, was the kuvara of that ratha. The Himavat and 
Vindhya mountains were its apaskara and adhishthana; and the Udaya and 
the Asta mountains the wheels of that ratha. 

They made the Ocean, the abode of the Danavas, its other axle and the 
Saptarishi, the seven Sages, became the protectors of the chariot’s wheels. 
Ganga, Saraswati, Sindhu and the Sky were its dhura; all the other rivers 
and all the waters of the world were the bonds which held the several limbs 
of that chariot together. 

Day and Night and the other divisions of time, the kaalas and kaasthas 
and the rest, and the Seasons, became its amukarsha. The planets and the 
stars became its great railing; Dharma, Artha and Kama, united together, 
were its trivenu. The herbs and the creepers, decked with flowers and fruits, 
formed its bells. 

The Sun and the Moon formed the other two wheels of that great ratha. 
Day and Night became its auspicious wings on the right and left. The ten 
foremost Nagas, with Dhritarashtra at their head, formed the other shaft of 


that chariot; the Sky was made its other yoke, and the clouds of the pralaya, 
Samvartaka and Balahaka, were the leathern strings of the yoke. 

The two Sandhyas, Dhritri, Medha, Sthiti and Sannati, and the 
firmament spangled with planets and stars, were the skins used to cover that 
chariot. 

The Lokapalas—Indra, Varuna, Yama and Kubera—were the steeds of 
that chariot. Kalaprishtha, Nahusha, Karkotaka, Dhananjaya and the other 
Nagas became the ropes that tied the mane of the steeds. The cardinal and 
the subsidiary directions became the reins of the horses yoked to that 
chariot. The Vedic sound Vashat became the goad, and the Gayatri was the 
string attached to that goad. 

The four auspicious days were the traces of the horses, and the Pitris 
presiding over them were made the hooks and pins. 

Karma, dharma, tapasya and artha were the chords of that chariot. 
Manas, the Mind, became the ground upon which that chariot stood, and 
Speech the tracks upon which it was to ride. 

Beautiful banners of various hues floated in the air. With lightning and 
Indra’s bow attached to it, that blazing chariot shone with fierce light. 

That space of time which, once of yore, had been fixed as a Year during 
the noble Isana’s mahayagna, was made the bow, and the goddess Savitri 
became the thundering twang of the bowstring. They made a celestial suit 
of armour, encrusted with priceless gemstones from across the universe, 
impenetrable and effulgent from the wheel of Time. That golden mountain 
Meru was the flagstaff, and the clouds streaked with flashes of lightning 
became its banners. 

Thus equipped, that chariot shone like a blazing fire in the midst of 
priests officiating at a vast yagna. Beholding that chariot equipped with the 
energies of the entire universe united together in one place filled the gods 
with wonder. At last, they came and said to the illustrious Lord Sarveswara 
that the chariot was ready. 

After the Devas had wrought that best of chariots, O Naravyaghra, to 
destroy the Asuras, Sankara placed upon it his own devastras. Making the 
sky its flagstaff, he placed upon it his Bull Nandin. The Brahmana’s rod, the 
rod of Death, Rudra’s rod and Fever became the protectors of the sides of 
that chariot and stood with faces turned outwards. Atharvan and Angirasa 
became the protectors of the chariot-wheels of that illustrious warrior. 


The Rigveda, the Samaveda and the Puranas stood at the head of that 
chariot. The Itihasas and the Yajurveda became the protectors of the cosmic 
ratha’s rear. All the sacred vaks and all the vigyanas stood around it, as well 
as all the holiest, most potent mantras and the Vedic sound of Vashat and 
Pranava, the syllable AUM, standing in the van of that chariot, rendered it 
magnificent and ineffable. 

Having made the Year adorned with the six seasons his bow, Siva made 
his own shadow the irrefragable string of that dhanusha. The illustrious 
Rudra is Death’s self. The Year became his bow; Kala Ratri, the Death- 
night, therefore, which is Rudra’s shadow, became the indestructible string 
of that bow. The universe consists of Agni, Soma and of Vishnu. Vishnu is 
the Soul of the holy Bhava of immeasurable tejas. So Vishnu, Agni and 
Soma became the arrow and because of this the touch of that bowstring 
became unbearable to the Asuras. 

Then the Lord Sankara infused into that arrow his own irresistible and 
universal wrath, the unbearable fire of anger, born of the fury of Bhrigu and 
Angirasa. He called forth Nila Rohita, dreadful deity robed in skins, 
refulgent as ten thousand suns, and shrouded by the fire of super-abundant 
energy, ablaze with splendour that cannot be described. 

To humiliate even those who are difficult to discomfit, that ever- 
victorious One, that slayer of all haters of Brahman, who is also called 
Hara, that rescuer of those of dharma and destroyer of the unrighteous, was 
splendour itself, the first Light of all things. The illustrious Sthanu was 
accompanied by many beings of fearsome might and forms with the speed 
of the mind who could erase all foes, as if with all the fourteen faculties of 
the Soul awake about him. With his limbs for their refuge, this entire 
universe of mobile and unmoving creatures that were present there, O 
Rajan, was completely wonderful and presented a transcendent, most 
incredible spectacle, an unprecedented appearance. 

Seeing his chariot fully prepared and equipped, the illustrious Rudra put 
on his armour and picked up his bow and that celestial astra born of Soma 
and Vishnu and Agni. The gods then commanded that foremost of Devas, 
Vayu, to breathe all his fragrance over that most powerful Deity. The 
Maharishis, the Gandharvas, the throngs of Devas and the different tribes of 
Apsaras worshipped, sang and danced as that boon-giving Lord, armed with 
sword, bow and arrow, ascended the chariot. 

Smiling, he asked the Devas, ‘Who will drive my ratha?’ 


The Devas answered him, saying, ‘Whoever you appoint, O 
Maheswara, will become your sarathy!’ 

Siva replied, “Think quickly and make him my sarathy who is better 
than me!’ 

Hearing this, the Devas rushed to Brahma and said, “We have 
accomplished everything that you ordered us to do to put an end to the 
Danavas. Rudra is happy with us and we have created a ratha of cosmic 
parts and equipped it with wonderful weapons. The Pinaka wielding Hara is 
ready to ride forth and battle the Danavas. 

The four Vedas are its steeds; the earth with her mountains is the chariot 
and the stars are the adornments of that ratha. However, we do not know 
who is to be made the sarathy since he must be superior to all these. O 
Pitamaha, that ratha is equal to you, and Hara is its warrior. His armour, 
astras and bow are ready. Other than you we can find none who is fit to be 
his sarathy. You have every accomplishment and are superior to all the 
Devas. For our victory and the destruction of our enemies, mount the 
chariot, O Brahma, and take up the reins of those wondrous steeds. Earlier, 
you assured us that you would help us. It is only appropriate, O Lord, that 
you now keep the word you gave us.’ 

The Devas bowed their heads to the Grandsire and sought to induce him 
to accept being the charioteer and to please Trilokapati. 

Brahma said, ‘All that you have said, O Devas, is true. I will hold the 
reins of the steeds for the Kapardin when he rides forth into battle.’ 

Thus, the gods made the Creator of the worlds, the Grandsire Brahma 
the sarathy of the noble Isana. They all worshipped him as he prepared to 
ascend the chariot; the horses, gifted with the speed of the wind, bowed 
their heads to the chariot that was Bhumi Devi. Scintillant with his own 
tejas, Brahma took the reins and the whip and said to Sthanu Mahadeva, 
‘Ascend the chariot, Lord.’ 

Siva climbed into the chariot, taking with him the ultimate astra made 
of Vishnu, Soma and Agni, which caused the enemy to tremble. The 
Maharishis, the Gandharvas, the Devas, and the diverse tribes of Apsaras 
worshipped Sureshwara. Resplendent, the boon-giving Lord, armed with 
sword, astra and bow, stood on the chariot causing the three worlds to blaze 
forth with his own effulgence. 

The great Lord Mahadeva once more said to the Devas with Indra at 
their head, ‘Do not fear nor doubt my ability to destroy the Asuras. Know 


that this astra has already killed them.’ 

The Devas said, ‘It is true! The Asuras have already been slain.’ 

Indeed, the Devas were certain that the divine Lord’s words were true, 
and they were exceedingly happy. Then that Lord of the Devas drove off 
upon that incomparable chariot, O Rajan, with all the gods in attendance 
and worshipped all the while by his Ganas that always wait upon him. 
Others, too, who live on meat, who were invincible in battle, and who 
danced in joy, ran wildly on all sides, shouting jubilantly and raucously at 
one another. Rishis of great good fortune, Tapasvins endued with the 
highest qualities, as well as the Devas, wished Him success. 

When Mahadeva rode into war, the entire universe and all the Devas 
were full of rare bliss, O Rajan. The Rishis present worshipped him with 
hymns and enhanced his glory. Millions upon millions of Gandharvas 
played upon all kinds of musical instruments at the hour of his setting out. 

With Brahma, Vishweswara set out to fight the Asuras, and He 
smilingly said, ‘Uttamam, Uttamam! Fly, O Deva, to where the Daityas are. 
Today you will see the might of my arms when I slay them.’ 

Brahma whipped those horses, swift as the wind or thought, which all 
the worlds revered, and they seemed to devour the skies as they sped 
towards the Daityas and the Danavas’ triple city of Tripura, taking Bhava 
the Illustrious into battle for the Devas. During that flight, his Bull 
bellowed, filling all the points of the sky. Just hearing that sound like no 
other, many of the descendants and followers of Taraka, those enemies of 
the gods, breathed their last, while others stood unmoved and ready for 
battle. 

Then, suddenly, Sthanu, armed with his trident, erupted in wild wrath, 
terrifying all the living and the three worlds to tremble. Frightful portents 
appeared as he aimed that universal astra and the Earth chariot seemed to 
sink down because of the weight of Soma, Agni and Vishnu that were the 
shaft, as well as the weight of Brahma, Rudra himself and his bow. At this, 
Narayana issued out of the head of the astra, assumed the form of a bull and 
raised up that tremendous ratha. Meanwhile, the chariot had sunk low and 
the enemy began to shout triumphantly at seeing this. Incensed and more 
terrible than terror, Mahadeva standing on the head of his bull and on the 
back of his steeds began roaring so it seemed the very galaxies spun away 
from the places in the chasmal firmament. 


Standing there and eyeing the Danava city, Rudra ablaze cut off the 
teats of the horses and split the hooves of the bull! From that day, all bulls 
and cows have cloven hooves and, O Rajan, horses came to be without 
teats. 

Sarva strung his bow and aimed that astra beyond all astras, with which 
he had united the Pasupatastra, which is his own weapon, and waited in 
fathomless dhyana. And as Rudra stood waiting, his bow and its missile at 
the ready, the three cities spun together into confluence and became a single 
city. Tumultuous was the joy of the Devas, and along with the Siddhas and 
the Maharishis, they shouted ‘Jaya!’, and hailed Maheswara. 

As soon as the Tripura appeared as one before that God, he drew his 
bowstring to his ear and unleased the astra shaft which contained the might 
of the whole universe at the triad city. His aim was unerring and that astra 
plunged burning into the Tripura and Mayaa Danava’s cities of marvel fell 
out of the sky down towards the Earth. The screams and roars of the Asuras 
filled all the directions. Siva, now a Spirit of pure and absolute wrath, 
torched the three cities, incinerating all the Asuras inside them, and flung 
them into the Western ocean. Thus did Maheswara burn the Tripura in rage, 
and made ashes the Danavas for the good of the three worlds. 

Trilochana then quenched the fire born of his own wrath, the fire of the 
apocalyptic astra, saying, “Do not reduce the three worlds to ashes.’ 

Thus were restored the Devas, the Rishis and the three worlds to their 
natural state, and they all gave praise to the unrivalled Sthanu. With their 
objective accomplished, the Devas led by Brahma, returned to their homes 
after paying profound obeisance to and with the leave of Rudra. 

Thus, Maheswara, Lord of both the Devas and the Asuras, did what was 
for the benefit of all the worlds. 

Ah, great Salya, even as Pitamaha Brahma, Creator of the worlds, that 
Supreme Deity of unfading glory, became Rudra’s charioteer when Siva 
consumed the Tripura, will you take the reins of the horses of the noble 
Karna, when he rides out today to kill Arjuna and win this war? 

There is not the slightest doubt, O Naravyaghra, that you are superior to 
Krishna, to Karna, and to Phalguna. In battle, Karna is like Rudra, while 
you are like Brahma in strategy. Together you can vanquish my enemies 
even if they are like the Asuras of the Tripura. You must help Karna, O 
Salya, so that he can raze the Pandava troops and kill Swetavahana, who 
has Krishna for his sarathy. Karna, our kingdom, our victory, and we, 


depend on you, O Salya of the Madras. I beseech you again, take up the 
reins of Karna’s wonderful horses, and become his sarathy!” 

When Duryodhana sees that Salya still hesitates, he says, “Listen to 
another ancient tale, which a virtuous Brahmana once related in the 
presence of my father. When you hear these words full of dharma, O Salya, 
do what you must without any scruple or hesitation. 

Jamadagni of severe tapasya was born in the race of the Bhrigus. His 
son born with great tejas and every virtue was the celebrated Rama. In order 
to acquire astras, he practised stern penance with a cheerful soul, observed 
all vows, kept his senses under control, and gratified the God Mahadeva. 
Because of his devotion and tranquillity of heart, Siva was pleased with him 
and, knowing the desire he cherished in his heart, showed himself to Rama 
and said, “O Rama, I bless you. I am pleased with you and I know what you 
want. Make your soul pure and I will give you all that you desire as well as 
all the devastras. These astras, O son of Bhrigu, will make ashes of a man 
who does not know how to use them or who does not deserve them.’ 

When the son of Jamadagni heard the Trisulin, he bowed and said, ‘O 
Lord, give me, who am always devoted to you, the astras whenever you 
think me fit to have them.’ 

With further stringent tapasya and by restraining his senses, observing 
vratas, through worship, offerings, and with yagnas and homa performed 
with mantras, Rama worshipped Sarva for many long years. At last, pleased 
with the noble Rama, Mahadeva described him in the presence of his divine 
spouse Uma as one who possessed many virtues: “This Rama, of 
determined vratas, is always devoted to me.’ 

Happy with Rama of the Bhrigus, the Lord Sankara thus repeatedly 
proclaimed his virtues in the presence of Devas and the Rishis, O Salya. 
Meanwhile, the Daityas grew in strength and, blinded by pride and folly, 
they imposed themselves on the Devas. The Devas united and strove to 
destroy their demonic enemies but to little effect. They sought out Umapati 
Maheswara and began to serve him with devotion, pleading, ‘Kill our 
enemies, O Lord.’ 

Sankara promised the Devas that their enemies would be destroyed and 
summoned Rama, the descendant of Bhrigu, and said to him, ‘O Rama, kill 
all these enemies of the Devas, for me and for the good of all the worlds.’ 

At this, Rama asked the boon-giving Trilochana, ‘What strength have I, 
O Lord? I have no astras to destroy the Danavas, who are accomplished 


warriors and invincible in battle.’ 

Maheswara replied, ‘You go at my command, so you will slay these 
enemies. Vanquish them all and you will acquire numerous virtues.’ 

Rama accepted the Lord’s command, performed propitiatory rites for 
his success, and went forth against the Danavas. He said to those mighty 
enemies of the Devas, by now completely possessed by folly and pride, 
“You Daityas, who are fierce in battle, Mahadeva has sent me to defeat 
you.’ 

A battle began and the delighter of the Bhargavas massacred the Daityas 
with strokes of his axe reminiscent of the Vajradhari; he went back to 
Mahadeva bearing on his body many wounds acquired during the battle, 
which were instantly healed at Sthanu’s touch. Pleased by his feat, the 
lustrous God gave diverse kinds of boons to Rama. Satisfied with Rama, the 
trident-wielding Mahadeva said, “The pain that you have suffered from the 
injuries on your body is evidence of the superhuman feats that you have 
achieved, O delighter of the Bhrigus. Now receive from me the devastras 
that you desired.’ 

After he had obtained all the devastras and the boons that he had 
wanted, Rama bowed low to Siva and, with the leave of Mahadeva, that 
Maharishi went his way. 

This is the story the Brahmana once narrated in the presence of my 
father. O Salya, tiger among kings. You know that the same Rama, the 
Bhargava, gladly imparted the entire astra shastra to our noble Karna. If 
Karna had any fault, Rama would never have given him his devastras. 

Listen further to me now, mighty Madra. I do not believe that Karna is 
from the Suta varna. He must be the son of a Deva, born into the Kshatriya 
varna. Perhaps he was abandoned in his infancy so that his varna would 
stand revealed by his noble lineaments and accomplishments. No, by no 
means could this Karna have been born a Suta. Born wearing a golden 
kavacha and kundalas, this mighty maharatha with long arms, who 
resembles Surya himself, could not have been born to a common woman no 
more than a tiger could be born to a doe. 

Each of his arms is like the trunk of a prince of elephants. Behold his 
chest so broad and able to resist the weapons of every foe. Karna cannot be 
an ordinary man. Endued with such great valour, this disciple of Parasurama 
Bhargava, O Rajan, is a noble being, at the very least a Kshatriya and I 
think even a Devaputra, the son of some great god.’ 


CANTO 35 


¢ D uryodhana continues, “This was how Brahma, Grandsire of all 
the worlds, became the charioteer of Rudra the warrior. The 
charioteer, O king of the Madras, should be superior to the warrior on the 
chariot. Therefore, take the reins of Karna’s chariot. The Devas once chose 
Brahma because they felt that he was greater than Sankara. So, as you are 
Karna’s superior, we now choose you, and you must take charge of Karna’s 
ratha.” 

Salya says, ‘O Bhaarata, I have heard this celestial itihasa of how 
Brahma was Bhava’s charioteer, and how the Asuras were all destroyed 
with one astra. Krishna, too, must already know the story, for he knows the 
past and the future, in their every detail, which is why he became Partha’s 
sarathy. If Karna somehow succeeds in killing Arjuna, it will force Krishna 
to take up arms himself in the war. If he does, that bearer of the sankha, 
chakra and gada will consume your army. There is no one who can remotely 
stand up to that illustrious one of Vrishni’s vamsa if he comes to fight.” 

“Sanjaya says, “To the king of the Madras, your mahabaho son replies, 
“Do not think disparagingly of Vaikartana; he is the greatest of all warriors 
and knows all our Shastras. The Pandava troops flee in terror from the 
twang of his bow and the sound of his palms losing his arrows. You have 
seen how he killed Ghatotkacha, the master of maya. Why, all these days 
Arjuna was afraid to confront Karna. Radheya even beat the mighty 


Bhimasena with the horn of his bow, and harshly called him ‘Fool’ and 
‘Glutton’. Madri’s two brave sons also he defeated, though, for some 
unknown reason, he did not take their lives when they stood helpless before 
him. 

Karna vanquished the heroic Satyaki, lord of the Satwatas and best of 
all the Vrishni warriors; he shattered Yuyudhana’s chariot. Repeatedly he 
had the better of the Srinjayas led by Dhrishtadyumna. Karna is a great 
maharatha who, when roused, can contain even Purandara armed with his 
thunderbolt in battle. 

You, too, Salya, are a master of every weapon as well as of all the 
branches of learning. There is no one on earth who is your equal. Irresistible 
to your enemies you are like a savage dart, and it is for this that they call 
you Salya. The Satwatas jointly could not get the better of you, so how is 
Krishna superior to you? Just as Krishna will bear the burden of the 
Pandava troops after Partha is dead, you will shoulder the responsibility of 
this great Kaurava army if Karna dies in battle. 

And hear me, O sire, for your sake I would willingly follow my dead 
brothers and the other heroic kings of the earth!” 

Salya says, “O son of Gandhari, I am happy to hear you say before our 
troops that I am superior to the son of Devaki! And so I accept what you 
ask of me. I will take the reins of the celebrated Vaikartana’s ratha when he 
rides against Arjuna. Yet, I have one inviolable condition. We must have a 
solemn compact between us: I must be allowed to say whatever I wish to 
him, while we ride in battle.” 

Your son, O Rajan, says, “Tathaastu!” in the presence of all the 
Kshatriyas; Duryodhana is delighted that he has prevailed on Salya to be 
Karna’s sarathy, and he embraces Karna in joy. All the bards and 
panegyrists present eulogise your son, who, his eyes shining, says again to 
Karna, “Finish all the Parthas even like Indra slaying the Danavas!” 

Though Salya finally agrees to be Karna’s sarathy, Karna says to 
Duryodhana, “The king of the Madras does not appear to be very happy to 
accept this role. O Rajan, speak to him again in sweet words.” 

At this, Duryodhana, prince of great wisdom and diplomacy, speaks 
again to Salya in his deep voice, which seems to fills all Kurukshetra. “O 
Salya, Karna feels that he should fight Arjuna today and kill him. I ask you 
humbly again to guide Karna’s horses in battle. Just as Krishna is Partha’s 


mentor and protector, so must you counsel and protect Radheya from every 
danger today.” 

Now Salya embraces your son and joyfully answers him, “If this is what 
you want, O handsome and royal son of Gandhari, I will do everything I 
can, with all my heart, to make you happy. I will bear the burden of all that 
you have decided, but both of you must pardon me for anything I might say 
to Karna while I am his sarathy, be it agreeable or disagreeable, for I will 
speak only for his good.” 

Karna says in his humblest tone, “O king of the Madras, may you 
always be engaged in our welfare as Brahma is for Isana, or Keshava for 
Partha.” 

Salya says, “The honourable never indulge in four kinds of conduct— 
self-rebuke, self-praise, speaking ill of others and adulation of others. 
However, learned one, what I now say to instil confidence in you may be 
construed as being self-adulation. Yet, listen carefully when I tell you that I 
am fit to be the sarathy of even Indra, and am a match for Matali himself in 
watchfulness, in managing horses and in anticipating and avoiding danger 
in a battle. When you engage Partha, I will drive your ratha; so dispel your 
anxiety, O Sutaputra.””’ 


CANTO 36 


D uryodhana says, “O Karna, Salya, king of the Madras, who is 

superior to Krishna, will be your sarathy, as Matali is the charioteer 
of Indra, king of the Devas. With you as the warrior on that chariot and 
Salya as its sarathy, that ratha will certainly vanquish the Parthas.” 

When all is being finally prepared for the morning’s battle, O Bhaarata, 
Duryodhana says again, “O Salya, take the reins of Karna’s ratha. With your 
protection, the son of Radha will vanquish Dhananjaya.” 

Salya, answers, “Tathaastu.” 

Salya approaches the chariot and Karna cheerfully says to him, “O 
Sarathy, prepare the chariot for me.” 

Salya duly equips his ratha, the best of its kind, which resembles a 
vapour mansion in the sky, and fetches it to Karna, saying, “I bless you. 
May victory be yours.” 

Maharatha Karna duly worships the ratha, which a priest conversant 
with Brahman has sanctified, circumambulates it in pradakshina, fervently 
worships the Surya Deva and says to Salya, “Ascend the ratha now, great 
Salya.” 

The mighty Salya climbs into Karna’s invincible and wonderful chariot, 
like a lion springing up a mountain summit. Karna follows him. Mounted 
on the ratha, the two shuras dazzle like Surya and Agni sitting together on a 


cloud in the sky. The vabdhis and magadhis eulogise those two heroes, like 
Ritwiks and Sadasyas worshipping Indra and Agni with hymns at a yagna. 

Karna is like the sun on the Mandara Mountains, riding on a mass of 
lightning charged clouds; a halo of brilliant lustre encircles him, his arrows 
are like sunrays. Ah, the son of Surya is glorious to behold as he stands on 
his ratha stretching his formidable bow. 

Duryodhana says, “O son of Adhiratha, O Shura, I had always believed 
that those two mighty maharathas, Drona and Bhishma, would kill Arjuna 
and Bhimasena. Like a second Vajradhari, go forth, my precious friend, and 
achieve that which they could not accomplish. Either seize Dharmaraja 
Yudhishtira or slay Dhananjaya, Bhimasena and the twin sons of Madri. 
Bless you and let victory be yours. Set out, O Naravyaghra, and reduce the 
Pandava troop to ashes!” 

Then, thousands of conches and tens of thousands of drums sound 
together and the sound they make is like that of massed thunderheads in the 
sky. Karna then tells Salya, “Whip the horses forward, Mahabaho, so that I 
can destroy Dhananjaya, Bhimasena, the twins and Yudhishtira. Arjuna will 
feel the true might of my arms today when I unleash my arrows fletched 
with kanka feathers in tides, and annihilate the Pandavas and give victory to 
Duryodhana!” 

Salya says, “O Suta’s son, why do you underestimate the sons of Pandu, 
all of whom are mighty warriors, great archers, and have mastery over 
every weapon? They are unrelenting, invincible, enjoy great good fortune 
and can inspire fear in the heart of Indra himself. When you hear the twang 
of the Gandiva, which is like the peal of thunder, you will find yourself less 
able to so facilely brag. When you are faced with the Dharmaputra and the 
twins and their canopy arrows in the sky; when you face the other 
invincible warriors of the Pandava army lashing and mowing down our 
forces with arrow storms, you will feel less inclined to boast, O Karna.” 

Ignoring what Salya says, Karna only roars, “Ride Salya, let us be at 
them!””’ 


CANTO 37 


: S anjaya says, ‘When the Kauravas see mighty Karna take up his 
station and ready for battle, they let out loud shouts of delight 
from every side. With the clash of cymbals and the sound of drums, with 
the whizzing of arrows and the roars of the fierce warriors, all your troops 
are ready to fight till death. The Earth trembles and a great sound emerges 
from her very bowels and it seems as if the seven great planets including 
the Sun are set for combat. We see meteor showers and all the quarters 
seem to be on fire. 

We hear thunder from a cloudless sky, fierce winds begin to blow, and 
animals and birds in ever larger numbers pass your army to their right, 
foreboding a great calamity. When Karna sets out, his horses stumble and 
fall to their knees; a frightful shower of bones falls from the sky and the 
weapons of the Kuru warriors seem to be ablaze; their standards tremble; 
and their animals, O Rajan, shed copious tears. 

These and many other dreadful portents appear, indicating ruin for the 
Kurus. Lulled by fate, none of the commanders and men in the Kaurava 
army notice these omens, but seeing Karna set out, wish him victory and 
regard the Pandavas as having already been defeated. 

Vaikartana, as he rides on his chariot, reflects on the death of Bhishma 
and Drona, and on the mighty feats of Partha and burning with self-conceit 
and pride, and breathing long and hard in simmering anger, tells Salya, 


“Fighting from my ratha and armed with my bow, I would challenge a 
furious Indra himself armed with the Vajra. Seeing those great warriors, 
even the flawless and invincible Bhishma and Drona, the equal of Indra and 
Vishnu, those crushers of chariots, horses and elephants slaughtered by the 
enemy, O Salya, do not be anxious for I am not afraid. 

The Acharya was a master of mighty astras and the foremost of 
Brahmanas, yet why did he not kill all our enemies, when he saw them 
destroy the mightiest of our kings and their charioteers, elephants and 
chariots? Remembering that Drona in battle, I tell you truly, that there is no 
one among you, other than me, who can match this Arjuna advancing 
towards us, this Kshatriya who resembles Death himself in his fiercest form. 
Drona acquired his skills through inborn might, practice and bravery; he 
possessed the greatest of astras and was a master strategist. When even he 
had to succumb to death, I regard all the others in our army to already be in 
death’s very jaws. 

Even upon deep reflection, I do not find anything in this world that is 
permanent or anything that is fated which can be changed through human 
effort. When the Acharya himself was killed, who then can be certain that 
he will live until today’s sunset? I have no doubt that not astras, strength, 
skill, achievements, or cleverness can fetch man any happiness. Only what 
is fated will come to pass. 

In energy, Drona was equal to Agni or the Sun, in prowess he resembled 
Vishnu or Purandara; in strategy he was equal to Brihaspati or Usana. Yet, 
irresistible as he was, astras could not protect him. When our women and 
children lament and weep, when the enemy has laid our valour low, I know, 
O Salya, that it is I who must now fight. So ride, O great Madra, at the 
enemy army. There is no one other than me who can face the Pandava army 
that has Dharmaputra Yudhishtira, Bhimasena, Arjuna, Satyaki and the 
twins among them. 

Come, fly at the Panchalas, the Pandavas and the Srinjayas. I will either 
kill them all, or follow Drona’s path into Yama’s presence. Do not think that 
I will not break into the very heart of those warriors. Wise or ignorant, 
when a person’s time has run out, the Destroyer has no favourites; no one 
can escape him, and I too will not escape my destiny. 

Duryodhana loves me and is always concerned about my welfare, and 
for his sake I will not hesitate to cast away my life’s breath and this body 
that are so dear. Rama gave me this great ratha covered with tiger skins, its 


axle silent, and furnished with a golden seat and a trivenu made of silver, 
and yoked to these splendid horses. Look Salya, at these wonderful bows, 
these standards, these maces, these shafts of fierce shapes, this blazing 
sword, this mighty astra, this white conch of the loud and ferocious blare. 

Riding in this chariot, whose wheels rumble deep as thunder, with white 
horses yoked to it, and with these superb quivers, I will put forth all my 
might to kill Arjuna, that bull among maharathas. If Death himself, that 
universal destroyer, were to protect him vigilantly, I will still meet him in 
battle and either kill him or leave this world of sorrow for Yamaloka. If 
Yama, Varuna, Kubera, and Vasava, with all their forces come here united 
and protect the son of Pandu, I will still vanquish all of them.” 

Hearing Karna’s bravado and his great delight at the prospect of battle, 
the valiant king of the Madras laughs aloud in derision and, in order to 
temper his arrogance, says, “Forbear, forbear, O Karna, from your bragging. 
In your transports of delight, you have said things that you should never 
say. Where is Dhananjaya, that foremost of men, and where are you, O 
lowest of men? Who else save Arjuna could abduct the younger sister of 
Krishna, that greatest of all beings, by storming the home of the Yadus, 
which the younger brother of Indra protected and one that resembled 
Devaloka? 

What man but Arjuna, who is as powerful as Indra, could challenge 
Bhava, the Lord of Lords, the Creator of the worlds, to battle when a 
dispute arose over the slaughter of an animal in the forest? 

To please Agni, Vijaya slaughtered Asuras, Devas, great Nagas, 
Pisachas, Yakshas, Rakshasas, men and birds, and offered Hutasana the 
food he wished for in the Khandava vana. 

Do you remember, Karna, how Phalguna killed throngs of celestial 
Gandharvas, with arrows that flashed like the sun, and freed Dhritarashtra’s 
son? Indeed, do you remember that occasion, when you were the first to 
flee, when the Pandavas freed the foolish sons of Dhritarashtra after they 
were beset and captured by those rangers of the skies, Chitraratha and his 
Gandharvas? 

Do you remember the battle when Virata’s kine were stolen, and Arjuna 
single-handedly routed the Kauravas, who had far superior numbers, as well 
as Drona, Aswatthaman and Bhishma in their ranks? Why, O Sutaputra, did 
you not vanquish Arjuna then? 


But fortunately, another great battle will now take place for you to die at 
Partha’s hands. If you do not flee in fear, know that as soon as the battle 
begins, you will be killed.” 

While Salya is heartily engaged in deflating Karna with these rough 
words, while simultaneously singing his adversary’s praises, an incensed 
Karna says, “Yes, yes, it may be so! However, why do you praise Arjuna 
so? A battle is about to take place between us and only if he kills me can 
your lofty praises be regarded as being deserved.” 

The king of the Madras replies, “Let it be so,” and says no more. 

A determined Karna says, “Ride at them!” That great maharatha, his 
white steeds yoked to his chariot covered with tiger skins and with Salya for 
his charioteer, wildly attacks his enemies, slaying great numbers of them, 
like the sun destroying the darkness of night. Indeed, he rides with a joyous 
heart and, breaking upon the Pandava army, immediately looks for 
Dhananjaya.’” 


CANTO 38 


: S anjaya says, ‘Karna gladdens the hearts of his soldiers when he 
sets out for battle and tells every Pandava soldier that he meets, “I 
will give whatever wealth he asks for to him who will point out the noble 
Dhananjaya to me today. If he is not satisfied, I will further give him a 
cartload of jewels and gemstones. If he is still not satisfied, I will give him a 
hundred heads of cows and as many vessels of brass for milking them. I 
will give him a hundred fine villages and a number of long haired, black 
eyed damsels and a chariot yoked to white mules. 

If all this does not yet satisfy the one who points out Arjuna to me, I 
will give him another magnificent golden chariot yoked to six bulls as big 
as elephants. I will give him another hundred fair damsels, decked with 
ornaments and with collars of gold, all of them accomplished in singing and 
dancing. 

If that man is still dissatisfied, I will give him a hundred elephants, a 
hundred villages, a hundred chariots, and ten thousand fine horses, fat, 
docile, well trained and with many excellent qualities, all able to draw 
chariots. I will then give him four hundred cows, each with golden horns 
and a calf. 

If he is still not satisfied, I will give him a yet more valuable gift of five 
hundred horses in trappings of gold and decked with jewelled ornaments. In 


addition, I will give him eighteen other docile horses, a bright golden 
chariot with priceless ornaments and pulled by Kamboja steeds. 

If that still does not satisfy the man who discovers Arjuna for me, I will 
give him six hundred trained elephants born on the western shores of the 
ocean, with golden chains around their necks and in gold caparison. 

If that does not satisfy him, I will give him an even more valuable gift 
of fourteen wealthy, populated Vaishya villages, situated in the proximity of 
forests and rivers, free from all danger, well furnished with other luxuries 
and fit for kings. I will also give him a hundred young and nubile female 
slaves from the country of the Magadhas, all wearing the finest golden 
necklaces. 

If that man is still not sated, I will make him an even more valuable gift, 
which he himself could not but want. I will give him, if he desires them, my 
sons, wives and all things of pleasure and enjoyment that I possess. Indeed, 
I will also give him all the wealth left by Kesava and Arjuna, after I kill 
them!” 

When he has said all this, Karna blows his wonderful conch, sea-born 
and its boom honeyed and reverberant. Duryodhana, with all his followers, 
is elated to listen to Karna, to hear the assurance in his voice. The sounds of 
cymbals, drums, the trumpeting of elephants, along with those of diverse 
musical instruments, arise among the Kaurava troops along with their 
shouts of exultation. 

However, even while the Kaurava troops are full of joy, Salya, king of 
the Madras, laughs scornfully, and derides the maharatha son of Radha, 
who, even as he is about to plunge into the ocean of battle, is bragging so 
vainly.” 


CANTO 39 


: S alya says, “O Sutaputra, you will see Dhananjaya today without 
any trouble, so you need not give away a golden chariot with six 
bulls as big as elephants. You are foolishly offering to give away wealth as 
if you are Kubera, the Lord of treasures, and you do not see the sin that 
attaches to gifts made to the undeserving. Instead, you should perform 
many yagnas with that wealth. And as far as your foolish intention to kill 
Krishna and Arjuna, who has heard of a jackal hunting down a pair of 
lions? 

You seek to do what is well beyond you because you have no friends to 
warn you that you are about to fall into a blazing fire. You cannot 
discriminate between what you should do and what you should not. Without 
doubt, your end is near for no man that wants to continue living will speak 
as you do, insanely, like the worst fool. Your endeavour is like that of a man 
who wants to cross the vast ocean with just his two arms and, besides, after 
having tied a heavy stone to his neck; or like that of one who wants to leap 
off a mountaintop and hopes to live. 

For your own good, I suggest that you fight Arjuna from within the 
relative safety of your vyuha, and with the help and protection of all your 
warriors. My advice is only for the good of Duryodhana and not from any 
ill will towards you. Listen to me if you have any wish to preserve your 
life.” 


Karna replies, “I seek out Arjuna relying only on the might of my arms. 
You, Salya, are an enemy with the face of a friend and all you want to do is 
put fear into me. No man will deter me from my resolve, not even the 
Vajradhari himself; so what can a mere mortal do?” 

Salya says, “You will lament your encounter with Partha when that 
mahabaho drills you with his arrows fletched with kanka feathers and shot 
with all his might. When Savyasachi burns your army and gashes you with 
his arrows loosed from the Gandiva, you will repent your folly. Even as a 
child lying in its mother’s lap wants to seize the moon, do you seek naively 
to vanquish the resplendent Arjuna in his chariot. Why, you are like a fool 
who would thrust his own body into a trident! 

Your challenge, O Suta’s son, is like that of a frisky little deer calling an 
angry lion to fight! You dare contend with the greatest Kshatriya of all, even 
like a little fox in the forest, with its belly full, challenging his great maned 
king. 

You, O Karna, are like a rabbit challenging an elephant with tusks big as 
plough-shafts, with rent cheeks and rut juices flowing out of its mouth; you 
face a certain death when you encounter Arjuna. 

In your folly in wanting to fight Partha, you are like an idiot poking at a 
virulent black cobra inside its hole. 

You are more than stupid, Sutaputra, to discount Arjuna, that narasimha, 
and to shout out to him like a jackal howling at an angry lion. When you 
challenge Dhananjaya, Karna, you are like a snake that seeks its own 
destruction by challenging Vinata’s son, the fierce Garuda, with his splendid 
plumage. 

You are as one who, despite having no raft, wants to cross the savage 
ocean, receptacle of all waters, with its mountainous waves, when the moon 
is waxing. 

O Karna, your battle with Arjuna will be as one between a little calf 
meeting a great charging bull, his neck thick as a drum and his horns sharp 
as arrows. 

Like a frog croaking at a mighty cloud lashing down torrents of rain, 
you croak at Arjuna who is like a Parjanya among men. 

You are like a dog, Karna, which barks at a forest-roaming tiger from 
within the safety of his master’s house when you snarl at Dhananjaya, that 
tiger among men. 


A jackal, Karna, living in the forest among rabbits, thinks it is a lion 
until he actually sees one. You, too, consider yourself a lion for you do not 
yet see that Naravyaghra Arjuna. You will think yourself to be a lion until 
you see the two Krishnas riding on the same chariot like Surya and 
Chandra. As long as you do not hear the twang of the Gandiva, you can 
continue to say what you please. 

When you see Partha and hear the rumble of his ratha and the twang of 
his bow resound around the ten cardinal points of the sky, and when he 
roars at you like a tiger, Sutaputra, you will turn into a jackal. You were 
always a jackal, and Dhananjaya always a lion. O fool, it is your envy and 
hatred for truly great warriors that makes you a jackal. As a mouse and a 
chariot are to each other in strength, or a dog and a tiger, a fox and a lion, or 
a hare and an elephant, as falsehood and truth, as poison and nectar, even so 
are you and Partha known to all by your different deeds.””’ 


CANTO 40 


: S anjaya says, ‘Salya’s word barbs now infuriate Karna and, losing 

his temper, he responds in fury, saying, “The qualities of men of 

dharma, O Salya, are known only to those who are themselves noble. When 

you are far from being exemplary yourself, how can you be a judge of 

worth? The mighty astras of Arjuna, his wrath, his tejas, his bow, his shafts 

and his abilities I know very well. You also do not know, as well as I do, the 
greatness of Krishna, that bull among the lords of Earth. 

However, it is knowing my own prowess as well as that of Pandu’s son, 
that I challenge him to battle. I am no insect flying into a fire. I have this 
blood-drinking astra, O Salya, which lies alone within a quiver in a bed of 
sandalwood dust, and which I have worshipped for many years. It is like a 
venomous serpent and it can consume whole aksauhinis of men, horses and 
elephants. It can pierce any armour and make ashes of flesh and bones, and 
if Iam provoked, I may unleash it even against the mighty Meru. 

I tell you, Salya, that I will use that astra only against Phalguna or 
Krishna. And that would be a worthy feat, since, of all the shuras in the 
Vrishni race, it is Krishna in whom Prosperity resides and among the 
Pandavas it is Partha in whom Victory always dwells. Both Naravyaghras, 
riding the same chariot, will advance against me to do battle. And today, 
you will see the nobility of my lineage. You will see, Salya, the two dark 
cousins, one the son of the other’s aunt, and the other the son of the other’s 


uncle, both invincible warriors, impaled by my one astra, like two pearls on 
a single string. 

Arjuna’s Gandiva and his kapi-dhvaja, Krishna’s chakra and his garuda- 
dhvaja, create fear only among the timid. In me, O Madraka, they cause 
only delight. 

You are a fool, base Salya, of evil disposition, and unskilled in the 
strategy for great wars. You are either raving because terror grips you, or 
you praise them for some reason unknown to me. Today, I will first kill 
those two, and then kill you with all your kinsmen! Born in a sinful country 
you are ignoble, mean and a wretch among Kshatriyas. Being a friend and 
ally, why do you, like an enemy, try to frighten me by singing the praises of 
the two Krishnas? Either they will kill me today or I will kill them. 
Knowing my own might as I do, I have no fear of them. Why, I will single- 
handedly kill a thousand Vasudevas and hundreds of Phalgunas. 

Hold your tongue, O you who are born in the sinful country of the 
Madrakas. Hear from me, O Salya, what the people, young and old, men 
and women and travellers, say about the evil Madrakas. Brahmanas have 
also been speaking of these same things in the courts of kings. 

The Madraka is always a hater of friends and there is no friendship in 
him. He is mean in speech, is the lowest of humankind, a base one, always 
untruthful and crooked. It is said that until their death, the Madrakas are 
evil. Among them, the father, son, mother, mother-in-law, brother, grand- 
son, and other kinsmen, companions, strangers, slaves, male and female 
mix lasciviously together in their homes. Their women mingle freely with 
men, known and strangers. Their conduct is without dharma and they 
subsist on fried and powdered corn and fish in their homes; they drink 
heady spirits, eat beef, speak coarsely and laugh and cry with no restraint or 
dignity. They sing incoherent songs, are always lustful and say whatever 
they please, with no thought. How then can virtue have any meaning for the 
Madrakas, who are arrogant and notorious for all kinds of venal and mortal 
sins? 

No one should befriend or provoke enmity with a Madraka. They are 
the dregs, the dirt of humanity, and all their deeds of friendship are impure 
as gandharakas or the libations poured in a yagna in which the king is 
himself the sacrificer and priest. Then, again, it is truly seen that wise men 
treat a person bitten by a poisonous scorpion, with these words: ‘Just as a 
Brahmana who assists at the religious ceremonies of a Sudra, or as one who 


hates Brahmanas always suffers degradation does one who makes an 
alliance with the Madrakas becomes debased. As there is no friendship 
among the Madrakas, so, O scorpion, your poison is as nought.’ 

With these mantras from the Atharvan, I have duly performed the rite of 
exorcism. Knowing this, O learned, wretched one, hold your tongue, or 
listen to something further that I have to say. The intoxicated Madraka 
women throw off their clothes and dance naked, while their unattached 
women are promiscuous and utterly depraved in their behaviour. You are 
the child of one of those women; how can you be fit to declare the dharma 
of men? Yes, you are the son of one of those sinful and shameless women, 
who live and answer every lust and call of nature like camels and asses; 
how are you fit to discourse on the duties of men? When you ask a Madraka 
woman for a little vinegar, she scratches her hips and says cruelly, “Let no 
man ask me for any vinegar that is so dear to me. I will give him my son or 
my husband, but I will not give him any vinegar.” 

We are told on good authority that young Madraka maidens are without 
any shame, hirsute, gluttonous and filthy and carnal to the core. Many 
others and I, too, can vouch for these and many other similar qualities in 
them. How then would the Madrakas and the Sindhu-Sauviras know 
anything of dharma, being born, as they are, in a sinful country, being 
Mlecchas in their practices, and being entirely careless of all dharma? 

We are told that the highest duty of a Kshatriya is to die in battle, lauded 
by men of dharma. That I should lay down my life in this war is my 
foremost wish, for I seek swarga through death. I am also the dearest friend 
of Duryodhana. Why, I live for him and whatever wealth I have is also his. 
As for you, O you who are born in a sinful country, it is evident that you are 
under the influence of the Pandavas, since your behaviour towards us in 
everything is as that of an enemy. Like a man of dharma whom atheists 
cannot lead astray, hundreds of men like you cannot dissuade me from this 
battle. 

Like a deer, bathed in perspiration, you are at liberty to weep or thirst. 
You cannot frighten me for I observe Kshatriya dharma. I recall what my 
Acharya Bhargava Rama once described to me about the death in battle of 
those lions among men, the Kshatriyas he slew, those unrelenting heroes. 

I am determined to follow the example of Pururavas, to rescue the 
Kauravas and to kill our enemies. I do not know of a man in the three 


worlds who can turn me away from my resolve. So do not even try, O 
Salya. Or do you rave and rant so only from fear? 

Wretched Madraka, I do not kill you even now and present your carcass 
as an offering to scavengers and carnivores only from my regard for 
Duryodhana, and to avoid any blame. But, know, that if you speak to me as 
you have again, I will crush your head with my gada. 

I say to you again, Salya, the people of this world will today see or hear 
either that the two Krishnas have killed Karna or that Karna has killed the 
two Krishnas!” 

Having said these words, the son of Radha, O Rajan, once more 
fearlessly commands the king of the Madras, “On! Fly at the enemy.” 


CANTO 41 


: S anjaya says, ‘Hearing, O Rajan, what Karna says, Salya responds 

with some heat, “I was born in the race of men who performed 

great yagnas, who never retreated from battle, who were kings whose 

coronal locks underwent the sacred bath. I too am devoted to the practice of 

dharma. You, O Vrisha, seem to be drunk. Still, from friendship, I will try 

and cure of your vainglorious intoxication. Listen, stupid wretch, to this 
story of a crow and then do what you like. 

I do not recall any fault of mine for which you wish to kill me. It is my 
duty to make you aware of what is good for you and what is not, for I know 
both, and as I am now your sarathy and have Duryodhana’s welfare at heart. 
I know what ground is level and what is uneven; I know the strength and 
weakness of the warrior on my chariot; I know at all times the fatigue and 
fitness of my horses and my warrior. 

I have a thorough knowledge of the weapons you possess; I can 
decipher the cries of animals and birds; what would be heavy for the horses 
to carry and what would be exceedingly heavy for them; I know about the 
extraction of arrows and the healing of wounds, which astras counteract 
which other astras, the many battle tactics, and the meaning of all kinds of 
omens and portents. As the sarathy of this ratha, | am a master of my craft, 
and so I will narrate this story for you. 


There once lived, on the other side of the ocean, a Vaishya who owned 
an abundance of wealth and corn. He performed yagnas, gave liberal 
dakshina, was peaceful, devoted to the duties of his own varna, and was 
pure in habits and mind. He had many sons whom he loved, and was kind to 
all creatures. He lived fearlessly in the dominions of a king of dharma. A 
crow lived in his home, as well, eating the leavings of the food set before 
the Vaishya’s well-behaved young children. The children always gave the 
crow meat, curds, rice payasa, honey and butter. Thus well fed, the crow 
became arrogant and disrespected all birds that were equal or even superior 
to him. 

It so happened that once some happy swans, of swift flight, which could 
fly anywhere at will and equal to Garuda himself in the range and speed of 
their aerial journeys, crossed the ocean and came to the Vaishya’s dwelling. 
Seeing the swans, the Vaishya boys said to the crow, ‘O ranger of the skies, 
you are superior to all winged creatures.’ 

The crow, in his folly and arrogance, was deceived by what the callow 
children said and believed them. Proud of the remains of the children’s food 
upon which he fed, the crow alighted in the midst of those swans, and then 
challenged one among them whom he thought was their leader, saying, ‘Let 
us compete in flight.’ 

Hearing the raving crow, the assembled swans, those great birds born 
with vast speed and endurance, began to laugh. They asked the crow. ‘Our 
home is the Manasa Lake. We navigate the whole earth, and among winged 
creatures, we are famed for the distances we traverse. Foolish crow, how 
can you challenge a swan? How will you keep up with us?’ 

The crow, true to the stupidity of his species, repeatedly mocked what 
the swan said and finally boasted, ‘I will fly showing you a hundred and one 
different kinds of flight, a fresh one for every hundred yojanas. I will soar 
up, swoop down, whirl around, fly straight, and fly swiftly, and then gently 
and steadily. I will show you all the diverse kinds of flight. I will display all 
these and you shall all witness my prowess and my genius. 

With one of these different kinds of flight, I will now rise into the sky. 
You decide which of these ways in which you want me fly and then match 
me in that particular style. You must match me in all the different kinds of 
flight through the sky where there is no support.’ 

Listen, O Radheya, to what one of the swans said to the foolish, 
ungainly crow. ‘You, O crow, will doubtless demonstrate the hundred and 


one different kinds of flight. I, however, will fly in just one kind of flight 
that all other birds know, for I do not know any other. As for you, O bird 
with red eyes, fly in any manner that you like.’ 

At this, the other crows that had assembled there laughed aloud, cawing, 
‘How will the swan with just one kind of flight compete with a hundred 
different kinds?’ 

Then the swan and the crow rose into the sky, challenging each other. 
The swan who could fly gracefully anywhere, at will, flew using a single 
kind of wing beat, while the awkward crow chose a hundred different kinds 
of flights. The swan and the crow flew, each one praising himself. Seeing 
the crow fly in hundred different ways, the other crows were delighted and 
cawed raucously. The swans laughed, mocking the clumsy crows. The other 
crows joined the first one now, all of them flying in many ways, up and 
down, slowly then quickly, and in all kinds of acrobatic foolish manouvers, 
cawing victoriously all the while. The swan, however, with his single regal 
kind of flight, began to cut through the skies. For a moment, O Karna, he 
seemed to fall behind, and, seeing this, the crows, cried, “The swan is 
losing!’ 

Hearing this, the soaring swan flew westwards, now with great speed, 
towards the ocean, the home of the makaras. The crow quickly grew frantic 
at not seeing any island or trees on which he could alight and perch, when 
he grew tired, upon that vast expanse of water. The ocean, being the home 
of countless creatures and hundreds of monsters, is indeed more terrifying 
than the air. Karna, nothing can exceed it in depth and men know that the 
waters of the ocean are as limitless as space and the crow swiftly lost his 
arrogance, terror filling him instead. 

The swan, having traversed a great distance in a moment, looked back 
at the crow, and did not have the heart to leave him behind. Turning back, 
he flew to the struggling black bird, and hung on the air waiting for the 
crow to fly up to him. 

The exhausted crow somehow found the strength, before he fell into the 
sea and sank, to fly up to the gracefully hovering swan. The swan felt that 
he must rescue the foolish bird, and said, ‘You repeatedly spoke of the 
hundred different kind of flight you would show us but this one is 
mysterious indeed! You skim the waves with your wings and beak, almost 
as if you mean to dive into the water. What is the name of this kind of flight, 
O crow? Come, come, quickly, crow, I am waiting for you.’ 


Stricken, and unable to rise above the ocean, the humbled, frightened 
crow cried, in despair to the swan, ‘Ah, we are mere crows that wander here 
and there, cawing as we go. O swan, I seek your protection, I place my life 
in your care. Oh, carry me to the shores of this dreadful ocean with your 
wings and beak!’ 

With that, the crow fell into the sea and struggled desperately in the 
water to stay afloat. Moved to pity, the swan said to the dying crow, 
‘Remember now, O crow, what you said in praise of yourself. You claimed 
that you could fly through the sky in a hundred and one different ways and 
were thus superior to me. Alas, why then are you tired and fallen into the 
sea’)’ 

All his arrogance gone, the piteous crow looked up at the swan, and 
replied weakly, ‘Proud of the leftovers upon which I fed, I imagined myself, 
O swan, to be the equal of Garuda and felt contempt for all other crows and 
many other birds far greater than me. I now seek your protection and place 
my life in your care. Oh swan, take me to the shores of some island. If I 
ever return safely to my own country, I will never again belittle anyone. 
Rescue me now from death by drowning!” 

Without a word, the swan plucked up the crow with his feet, adroitly set 
the wet, trembling and miserably cawing creature on his back, and flying up 
as gracefully and strongly as ever, flew back to the island from where they 
had flown out. Setting the crow down on dry land and having comforted 
him, the swan, fleet as the mind, rose up into the sky and continued on his 
way. 

O Sutaputra, it was thus that the swan humbled the crow that lived on 
the food that the Vaishya’s children fed him. The crow, on his part, entirely 
cast off his pride born out of his wild delusions, and took to living a life of 
peace and quiet, and never bragged again in all his days. 

Just as that crow, who lived upon the remains of the food eaten by the 
Vaishya children, slighted his equals and superiors, so do you, O Karna, 
who feed on the scraps from the table of the sons of Dhritarashtra, denigrate 
your equals and superiors. Why did you not kill Partha at Virata’s city when 
you had the protection of Drona, Aswatthaman, Kripa, Bhishma and the 
other Kauravas? Arjuna routed you all like a lion chasing away a pack of 
jackals. What became of your prowess then? Seeing Savyasachi kill your 
brother in front of all the Kuru heroes, you fled. Again, when the 
Gandharvas attacked you beside the Dvaitya Lake, Sutaputra, you deserted 


the Kurus and were the first to run. Finally, it was Partha who vanquished 
the Gandharvas led by Chitrasena and freed Duryodhana and his wife. 

Rama himself spoke of the great prowess of both Arjuna and Krishna 
before the kings in the Kuru court. You have frequently heard Drona and 
Bhishma, in the presence of all the kings, say that the two Krishnas are 
invincible. I have spoken only about those matters in which Dhananjaya is 
superior to you as the Brahmana is superior to all created beings. Soon you 
will meet the son of Vasudeva and the son of Kunti and Pandu riding on 
their great ratha. As the crow in the story, acting with intelligence, sought 
the protection of the swan, you too had best seek their protection. 

O Karna, you will not speak so proudly or confidently when you 
actually face Vasudeva and Dhananjaya. When Partha quells your pride 
with his arrow storms, you will realise the difference between you and him. 
Those two are celebrated among the Devas, the Asuras and Manavas. You 
are only like a firefly among men, Karna, so do not speak foolishly or even 
think disrespectfully of those two resplendent luminaries. Krishna and 
Arjuna are radiant like Surya and Chandra. O learned Sutaputra, do not 
think insolently of Achyuta and Arjuna. Those two noble ones are lions 
among men, so desist from your tawdry boasting.” 


CANTO 42 


: S anjaya says, ‘Karna remains unconvinced by Salya. He says, “I 

know only too well what and who Krishna and Arjuna are. I know 

the Saurin’s skill in managing chariots, and the might of Arjuna’s astras. 

You, Salya, have not experienced them in battle. Knowing what they are, I 
will still fight the two Krishnas, those two greatest of men and warriors. 

However, the curse of Parasurama Bhargava, that best of Rishis, that 
Avatara, haunts me today. When I was young, I lived disguised as a 
Brahmana with Rama, wanting to acquire the devastras from him. One day, 
Indra, who wanted to help Arjuna by weakening me, assumed the form of a 
vicious insect, and came and bit almost through my thigh while my Acharya 
slept with his head in my lap. The creature drew a pool of thick blood from 
me. I was in agony but, not wanting to disturb Rama’s slumber, I did not 
move my leg. When he awoke, the Bhargava, the Kshatriya slayer, saw 
what had happened and how I had endured the pain. 

He said grimly, “You are not a Brahmana. Tell me truly who you are.’ 

I confessed that I was a Suta. The Maharishi’s eyes turned crimson, and 
he cursed me in rage, ‘Because, O Suta, you have acquired this final 
weapon, this Brahmastra, from me through deceit, at the time when you 
need it most, when the hour of your death comes, you will forget the mantra 
to summon it. Brahma surely cannot dwell in one who is not a Brahmana. 


And it is true that I had forgotten that astra and its mantra during this 
war. Today it has returned to me. Among the Bharatas, Arjuna, who is the 
ultimate Kshatriya, has already and will further annihilate many of our 
greatest warriors. But have no doubt that I, Karna, will kill that fiercest and 
most dangerous shura, that savage archer whose tejas is unbearable, that 
Vijaya who always achieves his ends. 

Strangely, I have my greatest astra back today and with it I will 
consume vast numbers of the enemy and Arjuna along with them. The 
immeasurable Ocean, that Lord of all the waters, surges with fierce 
impetuosity and engulfs innumerable beings. The Continent, however, 
holds him at bay. Today, while Arjuna ceaselessly shoots his tides of 
arrows, making each one a killer and destroys my warriors, I will contain 
him as the Continent does the Ocean. 

Salya, O Madraka, today you shall witness the greatest duel of this war, 
why, the very reason for which all this carnage has taken place—the duel 
between great Arjuna and me, a battle that will eclipse every other 
contention, even the most ferocious one between the Devas and the Asuras 
combined. 

That son of Pandu is inordinately proud and today he will face me with 
his great and extraordinary astras. And today, I will set all his weapons at 
naught and vanquish him with my own. I will scathe Dhananjaya with my 
arrows, scorching him as the Sun does his enemies. I will extinguish the 
great son of Kunti like the great torrent of rain from the sky, which puts out 
a blazing fire that threatens the whole Earth. 

With my wide-headed shafts, I will still the son of Kunti, who is like a 
slippery and fearsome serpent; who is like a conflagration that flares up in 
wrath and always consumes its foes. As Himavat withstands fierce, 
devastating Vayu, the wind god, I will, without moving, contain the raging 
Dhananjaya. Yes, O Salya, this momentous day I will face the greatest 
archer in the world, the rampaging and invincible maharatha Arjuna, who 
once conquered all this Earth for his brother to perform the Rajasuya yagna. 
And Salya, who else but me will fight Savyasachi, who has vanquished 
everybody, including the very gods in the land of Khandava? Arjuna is 
proud; his astras strike deep; he has unearthly dexterity; he knows how to 
control horses; he singly harries vast hosts; and he is an Atiratha among 
atirathas. 


Yet, today, I will strike his head from his neck with my arrows and this 
greatest of men will lie dead on this Kurukshetra. 

O Salya, always keeping death or victory before me, I will fight 
Dhananjaya today. When I myself will gladly speak of the prowess of 
Phalguna in the midst of any grand gathering of Kshatriyas, why do you, 
fool that you are, hold forth to me about Phalguna’s abilities? You are a 
doer of unpleasant works, a cruel and mean man, and an unforgiving critic 
of one who is forgiving. I can kill a hundred like you, but I forgive you. You 
are a man of sinful deeds and, like a fool, you have rebuked me and 
attempted to undermine me for the sake of Pandu’s son. 

Crooked as you are, you have said all this to me who am sincere and 
straightforward. Cursed are you that wound your friends. The critical hour 
is upon us, wretched Salya, for Duryodhana himself has come to battle and 
I am determined to see his purposes achieved. You, however, are behaving 
in a manner from which it is plain that you have no friendship for him, but 
great affection for his enemies, your nephews among them! 

A friend is one who shows affection, makes his friend happy and makes 
himself agreeable; who protects the other and honours him, and who 
rejoices in the joys of his friend. I have all these attributes, and Duryodhana 
knows this well. On the other hand, he that subtly undermines, fetches 
doubt and sorrow to his friends and allies, wronging them in diverse ways, 
is no friend but a deadly enemy clasped to our very hearts. 

All these villainous attributes are in you and you will discover all 
qualities of true friendship in me. For the sake of Duryodhana, for the sake 
of doing what is agreeable to you, for the sake of victory, for the sake of 
myself, and for the sake of God himself, I will fight today to the ends of my 
prowess; I will fight both Partha and Vasudeva. Witness today my feats. 
Behold today my Brahmastra and other devastras, as well as those that are 
not divine but deadly still. 

Today is the day of fate on which Arjuna, tameless hero, will find death 
at my hands even as an enraged tusker in musth is killed by another. I will 
cast the Brahmastra at mighty Partha today, and he will not escape it.” 

But now, suddenly, a shadow of doubt clouds his magnificent face, a 
rictus of anguish briefly convulses his noble features. Karna whispers as if 
to himself, “But ah, if only the wheels of my ratha do not sink into the Earth 
in battle today.” 


Next moment, he is himself again and says, “Know this, O Salya, that I 
would not be frightened of Yama armed with his rod; or Varuna with his 
noose; or Kubera with his mace; or the lord of them all, Vasava, armed with 
his Vajra; or, for that matter, I will not fear any enemy of heaven or earth 
who may attack me. Then, why would I fear Partha or Janardana?” 

Now, again, he bites his lip and falls silent as another memory stirs in 
him. Much more softly, confessionally, Karna says, “Once, while practising 
with my bow Vijaya in a solitary forest, I accidently killed a calf of a 
Brahmana’s homa cow with one of my arrows. The Brahmana cursed me 
saying, “Since you have carelessly killed the calf of my homa cow, the 
wheel of your ratha will sink into the earth when you are battling your 
greatest adversary and fear will enter your heart.’ 

Ever since, when I remember the curse of that Brahmana, I feel afraid. 
The kings of the Soma vamsa, the Lunar race, who are lords of other 
people’s weal and woe, offered to give that Brahmana a thousand cows and 
six hundred bulls. But, with even such a gift, O Salya, the Brahmana would 
not be gratified and withdraw his curse. I offered him seven hundred 
elephants with large tusks and many hundred slaves, male and female, and 
yet the Brahmana would not relent. I next took to him fourteen thousand 
black cows, each with a white calf, but he would not forgive me and take 
back his curse. 

I then offered him an opulent mansion, full of every object of desire, 
and whatever wealth I had, with due worship, but he refused to accept it. He 
then said, ‘That which, O Suta, I have said will come to pass. It cannot be 
otherwise. If I withdrew my curse and turned myself into a liar, many 
creatures would die from my sin and their deaths would all be upon my 
head. For that, for the preservation of dharma I never speak a word of 
untruth. Do not, ever again, destroy the means of a Brahmana’s support. 
There is no one in the world who can prevent what I have said from 
happening. Accept my curse with humility, and let that be your atonement 
for the sin of having slain a blameless calf.’ 

Although you have chosen to rebuke me, still for friendship’s sake, 
Salya, I have disclosed all this to you. Hold your tongue now and listen 
further to what I say.” 


CANTO 43 


: S anjaya says, “Thus silencing the king of the Madras, Karna 

continues, “says, you cannot frighten me with your stories of 

crows and swans. If Indra with all his Devas came to fight me, I would not 

be afraid; then how will I fear Arjuna and Krishna? You may unnerve 
another man with your words, but not this Karna. 

Your heart is crooked and dark, Salya, and you are a base man that you 
have said all the bitter things you have to me, and not a word of praise or 
encouragement. Karna was not born, O Madraka, to be afraid of battle. I 
was born to flaunt my valour and to achieve glory for myself. After what 
you have dared say to me, you remain alive because of my friendship for 
you, my affection, and because you are an ally, Salya. 

What I must do today for Duryodhana is crucial and he depends on me. 
That is why you are still alive. Earlier, I agreed to allow you to say what 
you pleased while you are my sarathy. I will keep my word and you will 
live, O Madraka. Although, I can vanquish my enemies without the help of 
a thousand Salyas. I believe that he who harms a friend is the worst sinner. 
It is for this that you are still alive.” 


CANTO 44 


os S alya says, ‘Your ravings, O Karna, are with regard to the enemy. 
As for myself, I can vanquish him without the help of a thousand 
Karnas.’ 

Karna, twice as roughly, says, “Listen closely, O king of the Madras, to 
what I once heard told in Dhritarashtra’s court where sage Brahmanas 
would narrate the tales of different lands and of many kings of ancient 
times. A venerable Brahmana once said this about the Bahikas and 
Madrakas. 

The Brahmana said, “One should always avoid the Bahikas, for those 
impure people are beyond the very pale of dharma. They live away from the 
Himavat, the Ganga, Saraswati, Yamuna, Kurukshetra, and the Sindhu and 
its five tributaries. Once, as a youth, I lived among them when I was on a 
secret mission and so their conduct is well known to me. I remember that a 
slaughterhouse for kine and a hall for storing intoxicating spirits always 
distinguished the entrances to the homes of the Bahika kings. 

There is a town called Sakala, a river named Apaga, and a clan of the 
Bahikas known as the Jarttikas. The Jarttikas constantly drink a strong 
liquor called Gauda, and eat fried barley with it. They also eat beef with 
garlic, cakes of flour mixed with meat, and boiled rice that is bought from 
others. They have no dharma whatever or even any idea of it. Their women, 
intoxicated with drink, laugh and dance naked outside the walls of the 


houses in the cities, without wearing so much as garlands, singing the most 
obscene songs that are as musical as the bray of the ass or the bleat of the 
camel. 

In intercourse, they are without any restraint, and in all other matters, as 
well, they do exactly as they like. Maddened with drink, they call out to one 
another, using many foul and endearing epithets. Addressing many drunken 
exclamations to their husbands and lords, the fallen women among the 
Bahikas, without observing restrictions even on the most sacred days, give 
themselves up to lewd dancing.’ 

One Bahika, who had lived among those arrogant women, who also 
happened to live for some days in Kurujangala, burst out sadly at this, 
saying, “Alas, my ample Bahika woman, wearing the sheerest robe, through 
which her great breasts with their outthrust nipples show clear, even now 
prepares for bed and she thinks of me, while I am in this bland foreign land! 
Oh, when will I cross the Sutlej and the delightful Iravati, and arrive in my 
own country? When will I see those lush, beautiful women with blazing 
circlets of red arsenic on their foreheads, with streaks of jet-black kohl 
lining their eyes, and dancing naked and uttering wild and lascivious cries? 

When will I be happy again in the company of those always drunken 
women, gyrating to the frenzied beat of drums and conches sweet as the 
cries of asses, camels and mules? When will I be among those sweet 
wanton wenches, and eating cakes of flour and meat and balls of pounded 
barley mixed with skimmed milk, and in the forests, with verdant paths 
lined by sami and pilu and karira trees? When will I again be among my 
own countrymen, muster some strength in numbers and fall upon 
unsuspecting wayfarers on the wild roads, and snatch away their robes and 
gold and beat them repeatedly to my heart’s content!’ 

The Brahmana said, ‘Listen to him! What sane man is there that would 
willingly dwell, for even a moment, amongst the Bahikas so fallen and 
wicked, and so completely depraved in their ways?’ 

This is how that Brahmana described those base Bahikas, a sixth of 
whose punya and paapa is yours, O Salya, for you are their king. That pious 
Brahmana then once more spoke at further length about those subjects of 
yours. 

Listen to what he said. ‘In the large and populous town of Sakala, a 
Rakshasa woman used to sing on every fourteenth day of the dark fortnight, 
accompanied by a drum: “When will I next sing the songs of the Bahikas in 


this Sakala town, having gorged myself on beef and drunk the Gauda 
liquor? When will I again, decked in ornaments, and with those ample 
maidens and women, gorge myself on mutton, pork and beef and the meat 
of fowls, asses and camels? For they who do not eat flesh live in vain!” 

And this was what, O Salya, the young and old, among the inhabitants 
of Sakala, drunk out of their minds, sing and cry. How can there be dharma 
among such a people? 

I must yet tell you of what another Brahmana said in the Kuru court: 
‘There where forests of pilus stand, and those five rivers, the Satadru, the 
Vipasa, the Iravati, the Chandrabhaga, and the Vitasa flow with the Sindhu 
being the sixth, there in those regions removed from the Himavat, are the 
countries called the Arattas. 

Those lands are without any virtue and religion. No one should go there. 
The Devas, the Pitris and the Brahmanas never accept dakshina from the 
fallen, or those begotten by Sudras on women of other castes, or from the 
Bahikas, who never perform yagnas and are lustful and blasphemous.’ 

That learned Brahmana went on to add, ‘Without any feelings of 
revulsion, the Bahikas eat from wooden vessels, earthen plates and vessels 
that have been licked by dogs and that are stained with pounded barley and 
other corn. The Bahikas drink the milk of sheep and camels and asses and 
eat curds and other preparations made from those different milks. Those 
degraded people number many bastards among them. There is no food and 
no milk that they will not consume. The Aratta-Bahikas are steeped in 
ignorance and should be avoided.’ 

You may know this, O Salya, but I will still tell you about what yet 
another Brahmana said to me in the Kuru court, ‘How can one go to 
heaven, having drunk milk in the town called Yugandhara, and stayed in the 
place called Achyutasthala, and bathed in the spot called Bhutilaya? There 
where the five rivers flow just after issuing from the mountains, there 
among the Aratta-Bahikas, no respectable person should dwell even for two 
days. 

There are two Pisachas named Bahi and Hika in the river Vipasa. The 
Bahikas are the offspring of those two Pisachas. They are not creatures 
made by Brahma. Being of such dark and unknown origin, how can they be 
conversant with the duties ordained in the shastras? The Karashakas, the 
Mahishakas, the Kalingas, the Keralas, the Karkotakas, the Virakas, and 
other peoples of no religion, also, one should always avoid.’ 


This is what a Rakshasa woman of gigantic hips told a Brahmana who 
once went to that country to bathe in a sacred tirtha and passed a single 
night there. That land is known by the name of Aratta. The people living 
there are called the Bahikas. Only the lowest of Brahmanas live there from 
very early times. They are without the Vedas, without gyana, without yagna 
and without the power to assist at another’s yagnas. They are all fallen and 
many among them have been begotten by Sudras upon other men’s women. 
The gods never accept any offerings from them. The Prasthalas, the Madras, 
the Gandharas, the Arattas, those called Khasas, the Vasatis, the Sindhus 
and the Sauviras are almost as blameworthy as the Bahikas in their 
practices.” 


CANTO 45 


¢ K arna continues, “You know all this, O Salya, but I still want to tell 

you what another Brahmana said, who once came to our house as 

a guest, so listen carefully. He watched our practices, was exceedingly 

happy, and said, ‘I dwelt for a long time on a peak of the Himavat quite 

alone. Since then, I have travelled in various countries and seen the 

practices of different religions. Never, however, have I seen all the people 
of a country live without dharma. 

All the races I have met will admit that the only true religion is the one 
that those who know the Vedas have expounded. Travelling through various 
countries, where different religions were observed, I at last came to the land 
of the Bahikas. There I heard that a Bahika would at first become a 
Brahmana, then a Kshatriya, after that a Vaishya, then a Sudra, and finally 
an Ambatta, a barber. Having become a barber, he would then again become 
a Brahmana. 

Returning to the status of a Brahmana, he would yet again become a 
slave. When one person in a family becomes a Brahmana, all the others 
renounce the path of dharma and do as they like. The Gandharas, the 
Madrakas, and the foolish Bahikas are such people. Having travelled 
through the entire world I have heard of these practices, which is the 
dharma only among the Bahikas.” 


You should know all this, O Salya. But let me share the ugly root of all 
this venality of the Bahikas with you. Once upon a time, robbers from 
Aratta abducted a chaste woman. They raped her horribly so she cursed 
them, ‘Since you have sinfully violated a helpless unwed girl, the women of 
your families will all become unchaste. You lowest of men, never will you 
escape from the consequences of this dreadful sin.’ 

It is for this, O Salya, that the sisters’ sons of the Arattas, and not their 
own sons, become their heirs. The Kauravas with the Panchalas, the Salwas, 
the Matsyas, the Naimishas, the Koshalas, the Kasapaundras, the Kalingas, 
the Magadhas, and the Chedis who are all highly blessed, know what 
sanatana dharma is. Even the vilest ones of these countries know what 
dharma is. The Bahikas, however, live without dharma or any knowledge of 
it. 

Beginning with the Matsyas, the people of the Kuru and the Panchala 
countries, the Naimishas, as well and the other honourable people, the pious 
among all races, know the eternal truths of dharma. This cannot be said of 
the Madrakas and the crooked-hearted race that dwells in the country of the 
five rivers. 

Knowing all these things, O Salya, hold your tongue on things 
connected with dharma. You are the protector and king of such people and 
you share a sixth part of their paapa and punya. Or perhaps, you only share 
in their sins, for you never protect them. In the olden days, when sanatana 
dharma was revered in all lands, Brahma saw the ways of the people of the 
country of the five rivers, and condemned them. Why even in the Krita 
yuga, he censured the wayward conduct of those evil people whom Sudras 
had fathered on others’ wives. When all other people observed the dharma 
of their respective varnas, the Pitamaha found fault with these men, even in 
that purest age. 

You should know all this, O Salya, so let me tell you what a Rakshasa 
named Kalmashapada, while drowning in a tank, said. He said, ‘Cowardice 
is a Kshatriya’s dirt, while the non-observance of vratas is a Brahmana’s 
dirt. The Bahikas are the scum of the Earth, and the Madra women the scum 
of the whole female sex.’ 

A king rescued the sinking Rakshasa and questioned him. Listen to his 
answer: “The Mlecchas are the dirt of humankind; the oilmen are the dirt of 
the Mlecchas; eunuchs are the dirt of oilmen; those who use Kshatriyas to 
perform the priestly ministrations at their yagnas are the dirt of eunuchs. 


The sin of those who have the last-named for their priests, and of the 
Madrakas, will be yours if you abandon me.’ 

The Rakshasa declared that this was the formula that should be used for 
curing a person possessed by a Rakshasa or one killed by a poison. The 
Panchalas observe the duties enjoined in the Vedas; the Kauravas observe 
truth; the Matsyas and the Surasenas perform yagnas, the Easterners follow 
the practices of the Sudras; the Southerners are fallen; the Bahikas are 
thieves; the Saurashtras are ill begotten bastards. They who are ungrateful, 
are thieves, drunkards, commit adultery with the wives of their Acharyas, 
are harsh in their speech, slaughter cows, wander during the night out of 
home from lust and wear other people’s ornaments—what sin is there that 
they do not incur? Shame on the Arattas and the people of the country of 
the five rivers! 

The Panchalas, Kauravas, Naimishas, Matsyas—all these know what 
dharma is. The old men among the Northerners, Angas and Magadhas, 
without themselves knowing what virtue is, follow the practices of the 
pious. Many gods, including Agni, dwell in the East. The Pitris dwell in the 
South and Yama of righteous deeds presides over them. The mighty Varuna 
protects the West and rules over the other Devas there. The divine Soma, 
along with the Brahmanas, rules the North. 

The Rakshasas and Pisachas protect that best of mountains, the 
Himavat. The Guhyakas, O Maharajan, guard the mountains of 
Gandhamadana. Without doubt, Vishnu, otherwise called Janardana, 
protects all creatures. However, the Bahikas have no patrons among the 
Devas. 

The Magadhas read omens and signs; the Kosalas understand what they 
see; the Kurus and the Panchalas comprehend everything even from a half- 
uttered speech; the Salwas cannot comprehend the whole until it is fully 
told. The Mountaineers, such as the Sibis, are stupid. The Yavanas are 
omniscient, the Suras particularly so. The Mlecchas are wedded to the 
creations of their own fancy, which other people cannot understand. The 
Bahikas resent beneficial counsel and the Madrakas are not like any of 
these. 

O Salya, you are like that. So stay quiet and listen! The Madrakas are 
regarded as the scum of every nation so the Madra woman is called the filth 
of all womankind. The Madrakas constantly drink of spirits, violate the 
beds of their Acharyas, destroy unborn embryos through abortion, rob 


others of their wealth—ah, there is no sin that they do not have! Fie on the 
Arattas and the people of the country of the five rivers. Knowing all this, O 
Salya, hold your tongue and do not preach dharma to me. Do not force me 
to kill you before I kill Krishna and Arjuna.” 

Salya replies, “The abandonment of the ill and the sale of wives and 
children are, O Karna, prevalent amongst the Angas, whose king you are. 
Remember the faults of yours that Bhishma enumerated during the 
discussion about the Rathas and Atirathas, and quell your wrath. Do not be 
angry. Brahmanas or Kshatriyas as well as Vaishyas and Sudras, O Karna, 
can be found everywhere; so too chaste women and admirable vratas. 
Everywhere men take delight in jesting with men and wounding one 
another. Lustful men also are found everywhere. 

Everyone, on every occasion, is skillful in speaking of the faults of 
others. No one, however, knows his own faults, or knowing them, feels 
shame. Everywhere you see kings devoted to their respective religions, and 
employed in correcting the wicked. One can also find virtuous men 
everywhere. So, it cannot be, O Karna, that all the people of a country are 
sinful. There are men in many countries that surpass the very Devas in their 
conduct.” 

Then Duryodhana stops Karna and Salya from continuing their duel 
with words that is heating up by the moment. He speaks to the son of Radha 
as a friend, and begs Salya with joined hands. Karna, O sire, refrains from 
saying anything more and Salya too falls silent and faces the enemy. 
Smiling once more, Karna urges Salya, saying, “Onwards! Fly at the 
Pandava army!’”’” 


CANTO 46 


: S anjaya says, ‘Karna, O Bharatarishabha, deploys his troops in a 

counter-array after seeing Dhrishtadyumna’s invincible battle 

vyuha. Next moment, with a roar as of ten lions, he attacks. The rumble of 

his chariot and the loud din of musical instruments shake the earth, while 

that Pravira trembles with pent-up rage. He makes an immense slaughter of 

the Pandava forces like Maghavat annihilating the Asura host. He strikes 
Yudhishtira with countless arrows, while keeping him to his right.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘How, O Sanjaya, did Karna marshal his forces to 
counter the Pandavas’ vyuha with all those invincible bowmen led by 
Dhristadyumna and Bhimasena? Who leads the wings of our army? How 
are the warriors stationed? How does that dreadful battle erupt? Where is 
Arjuna when Karna attacks Yudhishtira? Who can dare attack Yudhishtira 
in the presence of Arjuna who once singly slew all the fell beings of the 
Khandava vana! Who other than Karna would dare fight him?’ 

Sanjaya replies, ‘I will tell you of the battle formations, of Arjuna’s 
strategy and the manner of his attack, and how both sides fought the battle 
led by their respective kings. Kripa, the violent Magadhas, and Kritavarman 
of the Satwata vamsa take up their positions on the right wing. Sakuni, his 
son the maharatha Uluka, leading fearless Gandhara horsemen armed with 
bright lances, and many veteran mountaineers, numerous as flights of 
locusts and grim like Pisachas, protect the right of your army. 


On the left flank of the Kaurava army are your sons and thirty-four 
thousand unrelenting Samsaptaka maharathas, mad with battle lust and all 
eager to kill Krishna and Arjuna. On their left are the Kambojas, Sakas, at 
Karna’s command, with rathas, horsemen and foot-soldiers, also threatening 
Arjuna and the mighty Keshava. At the head of this army stands Senapati 
Karna, clad in beautiful armour, wearing angadas and garlands, to defend 
the centre. With his sons around him, that shura shines resplendent as he 
repeatedly draws his bowstring. 

Dusasana, effulgent as the sun or fire, with tawny eyes and rough 
handsome features, rides on the neck of a huge elephant, leading many 
troops; he is stationed at the rear of the army and gradually makes his way 
forward to join the fray. Behind him comes Duryodhana himself, O Rajan, 
protected by his brothers riding on majestic horses and cased in beautiful 
mail, and the united Madrakas and the Kekayas of furious energy. He looks 
like Indra of a hundred sacrifices surrounded by the celestials. 

Aswatthaman and the other chariot-warriors, and many vicious 
elephants shedding temporal secretions like the very clouds and ridden by 
brash and brave Mlecchas, follow behind. Decked with triumphal standards 
and blazing weapons, those huge creatures, ridden by warriors skilled in 
fighting from elephant back, look like verdant hills. Many thousands of 
inexorable warriors, armed with axes and swords, guard the feet of those 
elephants. The Kaurava vyuha, filled by horsemen, chariot-warriors and 
elephants, is as striking as a vyuha of the Devas or of the Asuras. 

That immense array, wonderfully formed by the norms of Brihaspati, 
seems to dance as it advances and strikes terror into the hearts of its 
enemies. Like bank after bank of clouds scudding into the sky during the 
monsoon, foot soldiers, equestrians, car-warriors and elephants, all agog for 
battle, begin to issue from the wings of the Kaurava vyuha. Yudhishtira sees 
Karna at the head of the enemy troops, and says to Arjuna, “Look 
Dhananjaya at Karna’s mighty vyuha with its countless wings. Ensure that 
this vast force does not overwhelm us.” 

Arjuna replies with folded hands, “Everything will be done just as you 
desire, O Bhaarata. I will target their leading warriors and destroy the 
enemy.” 

Yudhishtira says, “Then attack Radheya, while Bhimasena does 
Suyodhana, Nakula fights Virshasena, Sahadeva contends with Sakuni, 
Satanika faces Dusasana, Satyaki battles Kritavarman, and Pandya does 


Aswatthaman. I myself will face Kripa. Let the sons of Draupadi and 
Sikhandi contend with the rest of the Dhartarashtras, while the other 
warriors of our army assail the rest.” 

Arjuna says, “Tathaastu,” duly issues instructions, and Krishna and he 
forge on to the head of the army, riding the primeval ratha which once 
belonged to Brahma and for which Agni Deva, who derives his effulgence 
from Brahma, became the steeds, the chariot which had successively borne 
Brahma, Ishana, Indra and Varuna. 

Seeing that wondrous chariot advance, Salya says again to Karna, 
“There comes the invincible chariot, with white horses yoked to it with 
Krishna for its charioteer, even like the inevitable fruit of karma. There 
comes the son of Kunti, of whom you have been asking, slaughtering our 
men as he does. From the pandemonium, the roars and screams, there is no 
doubt that it is the noble Vasudeva and Dhananjaya who ride at us. 

Look there at the cloud of dust that rises into the sky and overspreads it 
like a canopy. The whole Earth, O Karna, seems to tremble, cut deep by the 
rims of Arjuna’s chariot wheels. Violent winds blow on both sides of your 
army and carnivores howl, and make other fearful cries. Look, O Karna, 
where the awful and portentous Ketu of vapoury form has appeared and 
covers the Sun, making one’s hair stand on end. Look, where all kinds of 
wild beasts in seething packs, mighty wolves and tigers, look up in awe and 
fear at the Sun. 

Look where the crows and vultures have gathered in their thousands, 
sitting with faces towards one another, as if in conversation. The coloured 
yak-tails attached to your chariot wave restlessly and your standard 
trembles. See your beautiful horses, with their great limbs, and swift like 
soaring birds, also quiver in alarm. 

From all these portents, it is certain that great Kshatriyas and kings, in 
hundreds and thousands, will lay down their lives today. The hair-raising 
boom of conches, the battering of drums and the clash of cymbals, O son of 
Radha, resound on all sides, as well as the dense whizzing of diverse kinds 
of arrows, and the din of chariots, horses and men. Listen also, O Karna, to 
the deafening twang from the bowstrings of noble warriors. Ah, look, 
Karna, how Arjuna’s banners fitted with rows of bells, and decked with 
golden moons and stars, blaze on his ratha, like flashes of lightning in a 
mass of clouds, as they flutter in the wind. Hear those other banners as they 
snap and crackle in the wind. The noble Panchala maharathas, with their 


bright flags and standards, are glorious, O Karna, like the very Devas on 
their unearthly chariots. 

Behold the heroic son of Kunti, the unconquered Bibhatsu, flying his 
splendid and fearful kapi-dhvaja on his ratha, which attracts the gaze of all 
the warriors and strikes terror into his enemies; see where it advances to 
destroy our forces. Krishna, with his chakra, gada, Saranga, Panchajanya 
and his burning ruby, the Kaustubha—ah, he is transplendent as he comes 
urging those white horses fleet as the wind. 

Hark! There twangs Savyasachi’s Gandiva, and his arrow-storms that 
flare at us in tides and raze our forces on every side. Already, the earth is 
strewn with the heads of brave kings, with faces handsome as the full moon, 
with their large and coppery eyes of nobility, which see the world no more. 
Look where seasoned warriors, with raised weapons, fall with their arms 
hewn off, arms that look like spiked iron maces with other weapons in their 
grasp, and smeared with the finest pastes and perfumes. 

Horses with eyes, tongues and entrails gouged out, lie prostrate along 
with their dead riders. Lifeless elephants big as mountain summits, mangled 
by Partha, fall like rows of hills. Ghostly chariots, their royal riders slain, 
collapse like the celestial chariots of the Devas whose punya is exhausted. 

Look, look, Karna, where Arjuna Kiritin churns our army as a mighty 
maned lion might a herd of cattle. There the Pandava warriors massacre our 
kings and vast numbers of elephants, horses, chariot-warriors and foot- 
soldiers of your army. Partha, shrouded by friends, foes, weapons and dust, 
is not to be seen, even like the Sun covered by clouds. Only the top of his 
standard is visible and the twang of his bowstring can be heard. 

Karna, today you will see Shwetavahana, whom you have been seeking, 
with Krishna for his sarathy, the two Naravyaghra of red eyes, annihilate us 
all in battle. If, O Radheya, you succeed in killing him, who has Keshava 
for his charioteer and the Gandiva for his bow, then truly, truly you deserve 
to be our king.” Challenged by the Samsaptakas, Arjuna now turns towards 
them and makes an immense slaughter of their ranks. 

Seeing this, Karna in a froth, says, “Behold O Salya, how the furious 
Samsaptakas assail Partha from all sides and like the Sun shrouded by 
clouds, he is no longer visible. Plunged into that ocean of warriors, Arjuna 
is sure to perish.” 

Salya replies, “Who can kill Varuna with water, or quench Agni with 
fuel? Who is there that can seize the Wind, or drain the Ocean? Your 


wanting to vanquish Arjuna is no different. The Devas and Asuras, united 
and led by Indra himself, cannot quell Arjuna. 

Of course, Karna, you can always satisfy your vanity by bragging that 
you can kill Partha; but vast is the chasm between your hot hollow words 
and the accomplishment of the deed, for Vijaya is invincible. Why don’t 
you turn your mind to any other less impossible task, one that you can 
achieve? Only he who can lift up this Earth in his two arms, burn all its 
creatures in anger, or cast the Devas down from swarga, can vanquish 
Arjuna Parantapa. 

Now turn your gaze to mahabaho Bhima, the other son of Kunti, who 
knows no exhaustion, standing there glowing and resplendent, like another 
Meru. With anger blazing in him and longing for revenge, Bhima 
mahatejasvin has taken the field today seeking victory, and his mind is 
aflame thinking of all the indignities that were heaped on him, his brothers 
and Panchali dearer to him than his life. 

And look where the most noble and pure Dharmaraja Yudhishtira 
stands, that subjugator of hostile cities, equally invincible in battle. 

Look now at those two Naravyaghras, sons of the twin Aswini 
Kumaras: Nakula and Sahadeva, each insuperable in battle. 

Yonder are the five sons of Draupadi with the features of Panchala 
princes. All of them, equal to Arjuna, and burning for battle and victory. 

Beyond them stand the sons of Drupada, with Dhristadyumna at their 
head, surging with pride and energy: heroes endowed with untold tejas and 
valour. 

And look where radiant, magnificent Satyaki, most celebrated Satwata, 
irresistible as Indra, advances against us, like an angry destroyer.” 

While those two lions among men speak together thus, the two armies 
flow into each other with an earthshaking report, like the currents of the 
Ganga and Yamuna flowing into each other in a flashflood.’ 


CANTO 47 


. ‘T) hritarashtra says, “When the two armies clashed in their battle 

formations, O Sanjaya, how did Partha destroy the Samsaptakas, 

and how did Karna assail the Pandavas? I am eager to know about all that 
happened in detail, and you are a skilled raconteur.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘This war is the result of the evil policy of your son. 
Arjuna arrays his troops in a vyuha to counter your vast force deployed by 
Karna. 

The teeming Pandava army under Dhrishtadyumna, with its many 
divisions of horsemen, elephants, infantry and chariots, looks magnificent 
indeed. The son of Prishata, his ratha drawn by horses white as doves, is 
splendid like the Sun or the Moon, and armed with his bow, he is glorious 
like Death embodied. The sons of Draupadi, endued with the prowess of 
tigers, brandish exceptional weapons as they stand by the side of their 
mother’s brother like the stars appearing with the Moon. 

Seeing the Samsaptakas standing in battle formation, Arjuna tears into 
them with fusillades of fire from the Gandiva. The Samsaptakas fight back 
manfully: either to kill Partha or die in the attempt. That engagement 
between the fiery band of shuras, with infantry, cavalry and infuriated 
elephants and the Kiritin is swiftly comparable to the one between Arjuna 
and the Nivatakavachas. Dhananjaya destroys chariots, horses, elephants 
and foot-soldiers with his endless tirades, as well as standards, bows, 


swords, discs and battle-axes, and hacks away arms upraised with weapons 
in their grasp. He exterminates thousands and thousands of his sworn 
enemies in mere moments. 

Seeing Partha’s ratha caught in that deep vortex of warriors, the 
Samsaptakas utter loud shouts and roar like tigers. Partha, however, like 
Rudra in rage slaughtering all living beings, first mows down all his 
enemies immediately before him, and then cuts down those that stand 
further off, and, finally, those who are on his right and behind him. 

Meanwhile, the encounter between the Panchalas, the Chedis and the 
Srinjayas with your troops is torrid and bloody. Kripa, Kritavarman, Sakuni, 
and their battle-hardened veteran fighting men ferociously engage the 
Kosalas, the Kasis, the Matsyas, the Karusas, the Kaikeyas and the 
Surasenas, all themselves valiant in the extreme. The ensuing carnage 
fetches the destruction of body, life and sins, and leads to fame, heaven, and 
virtue, for the Kshatriya, the Vaishya, and the Sudra heroes who are 
embroiled in it. 

O Bharatarishabha, at this same time, Duryodhana with his brothers, 
and many other Kuru heroes and many Madraka maharathas, all protect 
Karna while he takes fire to the Pandavas, the Panchalas, the Chedis and 
Satyaki. Karna destroys that immense division with his arrows, killing 
numberless chariot-warriors, and Yudhishtira soon finds himself hard 
pressed by the meridian Sutaputra. Calm as ever, the Dharmaraja destroys 
the armour and weapons, and mangles the bodies of thousands of his 
enemies and sends them to swarga and eternal fame and brings joy to his 
friends. 

Thus, O Rajan, that battle between the Kurus and the Srinjayas that 
decimates so many men, horses and chariots, is like the war long ago, 
between the Devas and the Asuras.’” 


CANTO 48 


°*T) hritarashtra says, ‘Tell me, O Sanjaya, how, after a bloody 

slaughter of the Pandava troops, Karna strikes at Yudhishtira. 
Which leading warrior among the Parthas withstood his attack? Whom did 
Karna have to overcome before he could reach Yudhishtira?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Finding Dhrishtadyumna leading the Parthas and 
prepared for battle, Karna charges them recklessly. Like swans rushing 
towards the sea, the Panchalas, equally eager for battle, surge out against 
that noble warrior advancing toward them. The blare of thousands of 
conches, piercing the heart, and the fierce sound of thousands of battle 
drums arise from both armies. The sound also of diverse musical 
instruments and the general rumpus made by elephants, horses and chariots, 
and the deafening shouts of warriors is quite unbearable. 

It is as if the whole earth with her mountains, trees, oceans and the 
entire sky covered with wind-tossed clouds, and the whole firmament with 
the sun, the moon and the stars, trembled with that sound. All who hear that 
noise are terribly disturbed, while the weak among them fall dead. Then 
Karna, excited with battle lust, invokes his astras and begins to hack into 
the Pandava army like Maghavat smiting the army of the Asuras. 

Swiftly penetrating the Pandava host, Karna kills seven and seventy of 
the Prabhadrakas and five and twenty Panchalas. With many inexorable 
cloth-yard shafts fitted with wings of gold, he then slaughters the Chedis in 


thousands. While he achieves these superhuman feats, throngs of Panchala 
chariots, O Bhaarata, quickly surround him. Karna looses five irresistible 
shafts and kills Bhanudeva, Chitrasena, Senabindu, Tapana and Surasena, 
five famed Panchala warriors, and loud cries of dismay go up from the 
Panchala host. 

Ten Panchala maharathas surround Karna and them, too, Karna kills in 
moments. His two invincible sons, Sushena and Satyasena, who protect his 
chariot wheels, fight heedless of their very lives while his eldest son, the 
mighty maharatha Vrishasena, protects his father’s back. 

Now Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki, the five sons of Draupadi, Vrikodara, 
Janamejaya, Sikhandi, Nakula and Sahadeva and many other formidable 
Prabhadraka, Chedi, Kaikeya, Panchala and Matsya warriors attack 
Radheya all together inundating him with him different kinds of astras. 
Karna’s sons and many other warriors of your army fight back powerfully 
in his defence. Sushena, with a loud shout, breaks Bhimasena’s bow with a 
broad-headed arrow and pierces him with seven cloth-yard shafts in the 
chest. The dreaded Vrikodara, quite dancing with rage on his chariot, 
sweeps up another immense bow, strings it in a flash, smashes Sushena’s 
bow and pierces him with ten arrows. And in a wink, he rakes Karna with 
seventy more. 

With ten other arrows, Bhima then fells Bhanusena, another son of 
Karna, with his horses, charioteer, weapons, and standard, in the very sight 
of the prince’s friends. He removes his head beautiful as the moon with a 
razor-headed arrow, like a lotus plucked from its stalk, and, never pausing, 
resumes demolishing your troops. 

He destroys the bows of Kripa and Kritavarman, and puts them to flight. 
He gores Dusasana with three solid iron arrows and Sakuni with six, and 
shatters the chariots of Uluka and his brother Patatri. Shouting “You are 
dead!” at Sushena, Bhima fits an arrow to his bowstring, but Karna, quicker 
than thinking, truncates that shaft and strikes Bhima himself with three 
barbs. Bhima losses another perfect barb at Sushena, but Karna cleaves that 
one, too, in flight. 

Incensed by now, and wanting to save his son, Karna plunges seventy- 
three arrows into Bhima in a blur. Now, with a superb bow, Sushena 
lacerates Nakula’s breast and arms with five sizzling barbs. Nakula strikes 
him back with twenty sturdy shafts and gives such a roar that it frightens 
even Karna. 


However, Sushena pierces Nakula with ten arrows and breaks his bow 
as well. Beside himself at this, Nakula takes up another bow and retaliates 
with nine searing shafts. He, O Rajan, shrouds all the quarters with showers 
of arrows, kills Sushena’s charioteer, stabs Sushena deep with three shafts 
and, with three other broad-headed arrows, breaks his wonderful bow into 
three pieces. 

Red-eyed, Sushena seizes up a fresh bow and bores sixty arrows into 
Nakula and seven into Sahadeva. The battle rages intensely between them, 
yes, my lord, even like that between the Devas and the Asuras. 

Satyaki kills Vrishasena’s charioteer, rives his bow with a wedge- 
headed shaft, and gashes his horses with another seven. He first destroys his 
flagpole and then wounds Vrishasena with three cruel barbs through his 
chest. Vrishasena staggers and almost swoons for a moment, but quickly 
recovers and, then armed with a sword and shield, attacks Yuyudhana with 
virile ferocity. But Satyaki, with ten arrows with heads like a boar’s ears, 
knocks his sword and shield out of his grasp. Seeing Vrishasena’s plight, 
Dusasana dashes up to his rescue, taking him into his own chariot, and 
bearing him away like the wind to the edge of the field where he finds him 
another ratha. Vrishasena rejoins the battle and strikes the five sons of 
Draupadi with seventy, Yuyudhana with five, Bhimasena with four and 
sixty, Sahadeva with five, Nakula with thirty, Satanika with seven, Sikhandi 
with ten, and Yudhishtira with a hundred fuming arrows. That formidable 
archer, the son of Karna, continues to assail these and many other fearsome 
watriors and to protect Karna from the rear. 

Meanwhile, Satyaki, with iron quarrels, first destroys Dusasana’s 
charioteer, horses and ratha and then strikes him in the forehead with ten 
shafts. The Kuru prince gains another ratha and once more begins to fight 
the Pandavas, from within Karna’s aksauhini. Then Dhristadyumna finds 
Karna with ten arrows, the sons of Draupadi pierce him with three and 
seventy, and Yuyudhana with seven, Bhimasena with four and sixty arrows 
and Sahadeva with seven; Nakula drills him with thirty shafts, Satanika 
with seven, the heroic Sikhandi with ten and Dharmaraja Yudhishtira with a 
hundred. 

They and other valiant warriors, O Rajan, all wanting swift victory, 
begin to all target Karna. He, manoeuvres his ratha with astonishing 
adroitness, and strikes every one of those warriors with ten arrows each. We 
then witness the wonderful, supernal nimbleness of the noble Karna and the 


power of his astras. No one can distinguish when he draws his arrows, when 
he aims them, and when he shoots them. All we see are his enemies falling 
dead. The sky, the earth, and all the quarters are entirely shrouded with his 
lethal arrows and are uncannily resplendent as if covered with red clouds. 

The valiant, most elegant son of Radha strikes each of his assailants 
with thrice as many arrows as each of them had struck him with. And once 
more piercing each of them, and their horses, charioteer, chariot, and 
flagpoles with ten arrows, he gives a loud roar and deftly flits his way 
between his attackers. After crushing those mighty bowmen with gales of 
arrows, Radheya penetrates, unresisted, into the midst of Yudhishtira’s 
aksauhini, destroys thirty chariots of the ruthless Chedis, and injures 
Yudhishtira himself with a punishing, dangerous volley. 

At this, many Pandava warriors, O Rajan, with Sikhandi and Satyaki, 
rush to Yudhishtira’s rescue and surround Karna. All the greatest archers of 
your army resolutely protect Karna. Then the sound of various musical 
instruments rises up, O Rajan, and the leonine shouts of heroic warriors 
rend the sky. The Kurus under Karna and the Pandavas under Yudhishtira 
once more fearlessly face each other.’ ” 


CANTO 49 


°S anjaya says, ‘Karna, leading a force of a thousand chariots, 
elephants, cavalry and infantry, pierces the Pandava host and, 
marvellously fending off thousands of missiles unleashed at him, attacks 
Yudhishtira Dharmaraja. He cuts off the heads, arms and thighs of his 
enemies, and drops them dead on the earth, and the survivors flee in panic. 

Satyaki leads a determined charge of the Dravida, the Andhaka, and the 
Nishada foot-soldiers against Karna. However, Radheya hews off the arms 
and heads of hundreds, thousands and, soon enough, tens of thousands of 
these warriors and they fall continuously onto the earth, like a forest of sala 
trees cut down with countless axes. Karna, called Vaikartana, moves 
purposefully on the field like the Destroyer himself, while the Pandus and 
the Panchalas try to obstruct him, ineffectually, rather as those that try to 
stop a great epidemic with drugs and mantras. Karna races towards 
Yudhishtira, mowing down all before him. 

Finally, the Pandus, the Panchalas and the Kekayas spring to the 
Dharmarajan’s defence, and Karna finds himself checked, like Death that 
cannot touch those who are conversant with the Brahman. Then 
Yudhishtira, his eyes red with fury, says, “O Karna, Karna, O conceited 
Sutaputra, obedient to the wishes of Duryodhana, you have always tried to 
oppose us and to challenge Phalguna. Show us your might today, your 


energy, and all the hatred that you bear the sons of Pandu. Today, I will 
purge you of your very desire for war.” 

Yudhishtira, O Rajan, pierces Karna with ten solid iron shafts, golden- 
winged, while Karna in return contemptuously strikes Yudhishtira with ten 
arrows with heads like the calf’s tooth. Yudhishtira blazes up in anger like a 
fire fuelled by butter, and, bending his formidable golden bow to its fullest 
stretch, he shoots a whetted arrow that can pierce the very hills and is as 
fatal as the rod of Yama; a missile that flies with a sound like a thunderclap 
and sorely injures Karna deep in his left side. Stricken by the violence of 
that shaft, Karna’s limbs seem to turn to water and he falls in a swoon in his 
chariot, his bow dropping from his hand. 

Seeing Karna fall, the colour drains from the faces of the Dhartarashtra 
army and cries of dismay are heard. The Pandavas, on the other hand, watch 
the success of their king, and leonine shouts and a bedlam of cries of joy 
arise from their ranks. 

However, Karna almost immediately recovers his senses, raises his 
formidable gold-chased bow, the Vijaya, and looses a veritable tempest of 
arrows at Yudhishtira, apparently determined to kill him at once. With two 
razor-headed arrows, he kills the Panchala princes Chandradeva and 
Dandadhara, splendent like the constellation Punarvasu by the side of the 
moon, who stand beside Yudhishtira’s chariot to protect his two wheels and 
flanks. With a roar, Yudhishtira gores Karna with thirty arrows, Sushena and 
Satyasena with three, and all the others who protect Karna, each with 
another three immaculate barbs. The son of Adhiratha then laughs aloud 
and, brandishing his bow, inflicts a deep wound on the Pandava king’s body 
with a flat-headed arrow, and then, in a blur, pierces him with sixty shafts 
more and gives an echoing roar of triumph. 

In some panic to save Yudhishtira from the vicious and indomitable 
Sutaputra, a host of formidable Pandava warriors attack Karna. The 
Panchala prince Janamejaya finds Karna with some telling volleys, while 
Satyaki, Chekitana, Yuyutsu, Sikhandi, the sons of Draupadi, the 
Prabhadrakas, the twins Nakula and Sahadeva, Bhimasena, Shishupala and 
the Karushas, the Matsyas, the Suras, the Kaikeyas, the Kasis and the 
Kosalas, all these redoubtable warriors, together assail Radha’s recalescent 
son. Armed with different kinds of arrows and diverse astras, leading a 
mixed force that consists of chariots, elephants and cavalry, they surround 
the mighty Karna. 


Thus set upon from on all sides by those Pandava warriors, Karna 
invokes the Brahmastra, filling all the points of the sky with arrows past 
count and imagination. Then, like a wind-fanned fire, which has burning 
arrows for its flame tongues, the ineluctable Sutaputra rides unhindered 
across the field as he pleases, burning the vast forest of Pandavas troops at 
his blazing will. 

Karna, incomparable archer, unleashes some powerful astras and 
laughing, first destroys Yudhishtira’s bow and, then, in the blink of an eye, 
cuts away his golden, jewel-encrusted armour. It falls away shimmering 
wonderfully, leaving Yudhishtira exposed. 

The bleeding son of Pritha wrathfully hurls an iron javelin at 
Adhiratha’s son; Karna fluently cuts it into pieces as it courses at him. 
Yudhishtira, roused, pierces Karna with four lances through his arms, brow 
and chest, drawing fonts of blood, and roars repeatedly. The livid Karna, 
hissing like some great Naga, cuts down his antagonist’s standard and 
gashes the Pandava with three flat-headed arrows. He also blows apart 
Yudhishtira’s quivers and then smashes his chariot. 

The Dharmaraja moves to another ratha, to which are yoked his 
favourite battle horses, white as ivory and with black tails, and turns his 
face and begins to beat a retreat. His Parshni charioteer killed, Yudhishtira 
is crestfallen, desperate and cannot face Karna anymore. Radheya pursues 
Yudhishtira, and, in an amazing gesture, cleanses himself by touching his 
unknowing brother on the shoulder with his hand, the palm of which bears 
the auspicious signs of the thunderbolt, the chatra, the hook, the fish, the 
tortoise, and the conch shell. Karna can now easily seize Yudhishtira and 
make him his captive, but then he remembers his vow to Kunti. 

Salya shouts urgently to him, “Karna, do not seize Dharmaraja 
Yudhishtira. As soon as you take hold of him, he will reduce both you and 
me to ashes, such is his punya.” 

Karna, O Rajan, laughs in mockery and says sneeringly to the helpless 
Yudhishtira, “How can you, born of a noble race and who observe 
Kshatriya dharma, flee the battlefield in fear, to save your life? I do not 
think that you know Kshatriya dharma. Endued with Brahma-shakti, you 
are indeed devoted to the study of the Vedas and the performance of yagnas. 
But do not, O son of Kunti, fight Kshatriyas or approach true warriors 
again! Do not disparage Kshatriyas and never again take any part in great 


battles or wars. You may speak as you have done to others, my lord, but not 
shuras like Karna! You have seen today what the consequence are. 

Go back to your tent, O son of Kunti, or go to Keshava and Arjuna. O 
Rajan, Karna will never kill one like you.” 

Saying this, the mighty Karna lets Yudhishtira go, and wades into the 
Pandava army like the Vajradhari slaughtering an Asura host. Seizing the 
opportunity, Yudhishtira does indeed flee, along with the Chedis, the 
Pandavas, the Panchalas, and Satyaki, the sons of Draupadi, the Suras and 
the twin sons of Madri. Seeing the aksauhini of Yudhishtira in flight, Karna 
is absolutely enthused and pursues the retreating force with all the Kuru 
warriors. 

The din of battle-drums, conches and cymbals, the twang of bows, and 
loud shouts of joy arise from the Dhartarashtra troops. 

Meanwhile, Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, O Kurunandana, riding on 
Srutakirti’s ratha, feels the full extent of Karna’s prowess. He is filled with 
biter royal rage on seeing his troops slaughtered, and, losing control over 
himself, yells at his warriors, “Kill these enemies! Why are you like passive 
women?” 

At the king’s command, Bhimasena leads the Pandava maharathas 
against your sons. The shouts of the warriors of both armies, combined with 
the noise of the chariots, elephants, horses, foot soldiers and the clash of 
weapons, is tremendous, as they begin to tear into one another in the 
dreadful encounter. Their showers of shafts cast a shadow like that of 
clouds over Kurukshetra, as they cut down banners, standards, royal 
parasols, horses, charioteers and weapons. 

Kshatriya kings, deprived of life and limb collapse like mountain- 
summits, as do elephants with their riders, falling lifeless like mountains 
struck by thunder. Thousands of horses with their armour and fine 
caparisons all torn, fall dead along with their heroic riders. Maharathas with 
weapons loosened from their grasp die; great phalanxes of foot soldiers die 
in their thousands. 

The earth is strewn with the heads of heroic warriors with large and 
staring coppery eyes, and faces reflecting the intoxication of battle, yet 
handsome, beautiful as the lotus or the moon. The sounds of music and 
song are heard from the sky and on the earth, from choruses of apsaras 
riding on their devarathas, as they continually greet the newly arrived 
heroes above, those killed in war in hundreds of thousands. They are then 


seated in the heavenly chariots and flown towards Indra’s domain. 
Witnessing with their own eyes these wonderful sights and wanting to join 
these fortunate ones in swarga, the living Kshatriyas joyfully slay one 
another. 

Maharathas, other rathikas, foot soldiers, cavalry and elephants confront 
each other wildly and fight magnificently. 

Indeed, the carnage is immense and the battlefield is covered over with 
the dust that the troops raise. Enemies slay enemies and friends kill friends 
in the blind, mad pall of darkness. They drag one another by their hair, bite, 
and tear each other with their nails, strike with clenched fists, and fight with 
bare arms in that fiercest of all wars that consumes both lives and sins. 

As the battle continues, another frothing river of blood runs from the 
bodies of slain men, horses and elephants, and that current carries away 
numbers of dead elephants and steeds. It is mired with torn flesh and it is 
horrific. Yet, compelled by the desire for victory, some warriors ford the 
bloody river, some remain on the bank on which they are, some plunge into 
its depths; some sink in it, while some swim through it, their armour, 
clothes and weapons all bloody. 

Some deranged by all the horrors they have seen bathe in it, some drink 
the blood, O Bharatarishabha. Chariots, horses, men, elephants, weapons, 
ornaments, robes, armour and warriors, the earth, the sky, the firmament, 
and all the points of the compass turn red. With the stench, touch, taste, and 
the crimson sight of the flowing blood and its rushing sound, almost all the 
survivors are plunged in dejection. 

The Pandava heroes, with Bhimasena and Satyaki, once more assail 
your already beaten army and force them to flee the field. Indeed, your army 
with its chariots, cavalry, elephants and soldiers, is no longer a compact 
array, as they break ranks and run in all directions with riven armour, with 
weapons and bows loose in their nerveless hands, with the enemy close on 
their heels—like a herd of frightened elephants in the forest harried by a 
large pride of lions.’” 


CANTO 50 


S anjaya says, ‘Seeing the Pandava warriors rout your host, 
Duryodhana attempts to retrain your fleeing soldiers, O 
Bharatarishabha, but in vain. Then, one of the wings of your army and its 
further wing, as well as Sakuni and his well-armed troops rally the 
Kauravas against Bhimasena. Finding the Dhartarashtra army with all its 
kings fleeing, Karna tells Salya, “Drive towards Bhima’s chariot.” 

The king of the Madras urges the magnificent white horses towards 
Vrikodara’s ratha to join the battle. Seeing him, a livid Bhima says to 
Satyaki and Dhrishtadyumna, “Go and protect Yudhishtira who has escaped 
great peril before my very eyes. Evil Karna cut away his armour and had 
him at his mercy. Either today I will end Karna’s life, or he will kill me. I 
entrust the king to you as a sacred pledge and you must protect him at all 
costs.” 

With that, Bhima rides straight at Karna, his roars resounding all 
around. Seeing him come, Salya tells Karna, “Here comes the vengeful 
Bhima to take his resentment of years on you. I have never before seen him 
look as he does now, not when Abhimanyu or Ghatotkacha were killed. He 
looks like the all-destroying fire at the end of the yuga, and seems as if he 
can consume the three worlds.” 

By this time, Vrikodara reaches Karna’s chariot and Karna, laughing 
blithely, says to Salya, “What you say about Bhima, my lord Salya, is no 


doubt true. He is brave, full of anger, reckless and stronger than anyone else 
is. While living disguised in the city of Virata, he secretly killed Kichaka 
and all his relatives with his bare hands to protect Draupadi. Today, he 
comes wearing armour, insensate with wrath and ready to battle even Yama 
armed with his gada. 

I have always cherished the desire that one day I will either kill Arjuna 
or Arjuna will kill me. That aspiration of mine will be fulfilled today. If I 
kill Bhima or destroy his ratha, Partha will come to fight me. And that will 
please me, so decide quickly whatever you think we should do.” 

Salya says, “O Mahabaho, face mighty Bhimasena first and then you 
will find Phalguna. I suspect that the longing which you have cherished for 
sO many years in your heart will be fulfilled today.” 

Karna says again, “Either I will kill Arjuna or he will kill me. Prepare 
for battle and take me to Vrikodara.” 

Rajan, Salya swiftly drives the chariot to where Bhima is decimating 
your army with torrents of polished shafts. Then, to the blare of trumpets 
and the peal of drums, Bhima and Karna clash and a stunning duel erupts, 
one that leaves them both covered in a thousand gaping wounds, all their 
limbs lacerated and covered in blood. Finally, Bhima, ablaze with wrath, 
fixes an arrow to his bow, a weapon that can pierce mountains and, drawing 
the bowstring to his ear, looses it at Karna with all his enormous force. 
Thundering, that shaft passes right through Karna like a thunderbolt 
piercing a mountain. 

Struck through, spouting blood, your Senapati, O Kuruvarya, buckles 
and faints in his chariot. Seeing this, Salya spirits him away from the 
battlefield, and now Bhimasena begins in earnest to massacre the vast 
Dhartarashtra army like Indra routing the Danavas.’” 


CANTO 51 


. ‘T) hritarashtra says, ‘Bhima accomplished an exceedingly difficult 

feat, O Sanjaya, when he caused the mighty-armed Karna to 

measure his length on the platform of his chariot. Duryodhana would often 

tell me that only Karna was capable of killing the Pandavas and the 
Srinjayas. Now seeing him felled, what does my son do?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Seeing Karna driven off the field, your son, O Rajan, 
says to his brothers, “Fly with my blessings, and protect Radheya who is 
plunged into a fathomless sea of calamity.” 

At this command, his brothers Srutarvan, Durddhara, Kratha, Vivitsu, 
Vikata, Soma, Nishangin, Kavashin, Pasin, Nanda, Upanandaka, 
Duspradharsha, Subahu, Vatavega, Suvarchasas, Dhanurgraha, Durmada, 
Jalasandha, Sala and Saha, at the head of a teeming chariot force, all in fury, 
charge Bhimasena like insects flying into a forest fire, and surround him. 
They shoot showers of arrows of different kinds from every side at him. In 
a flash, Bhima mows down fifty of their leading maharathas and five 
hundred warriors ranged against him. With a broad-headed arrow, he 
decapitates your son Vivitsu, his face like the full moon and adorned with 
earrings and headgear. 

His vengeful brothers fall upon Bhima, who, with two more arrows, 
kills Vikata and Saha, who resemble two Devas and they fall like a pair of 
tempest-uprooted trees. Without pausing a moment, Bhima dispatches 


Kratha to Yama, with a long needle-like arrow through his throat. Cries of 
rage and woe ring out from your other sons. 

Mighty Bhima next kills Nanda and Upananda, at which your sons, 
terrified out of their wits, all turn tail and flee helter-skelter for they see in 
Bhimasena, the Pandava, the Destroyer himself at the end of the yuga. 

Seeing your sons slaughtered, an anguished Karna again urges his 
steeds, white as swans, towards Bhimasena at frenetic speed. The duel 
between Karna and Bhima is the fiercest yet, and dreadful and deafening. I 
too, O Rajan, was most curious to watch the battle between them. 

Bhima and Karna loose relentless torments of winged arrows to engulf 
each other. They are both sorely wounded and bleeding copiously, until 
Karna destroys Bhima’s bow with a broad-headed arrow. An incensed 
Bhima picks up a fearsome golden parigha, wound with hempen cords and 
which resembles Death’s bludgeon, and hurls it at Radheya with a roar. It 
flies true with a tremendous peal of thunder. Karna smashes that spiked 
mace into fragments with a marvel of arrows as it flies towards him. 

Bhima, grasping his bow more tightly, shoots Karna with volleys of 
viciously sharp darts; their duel is a pair of massive lions locked in a death 
struggle. 

Karna draws his bowstring to his very ear and drills Bhimasena with 
three terrible shafts like fire. Deeply struck, Bhima yet responds with a 
fearful shaft of his own, which passes through Karna’s armour and body 
and enters the earth like a snake into an anthill. Karna trembles with the 
pain that plunges through his body; he shows some agitation. But 
recovering quickly, he retaliates with five and twenty shafts, followed by 
blizzards more, none of which miss Bhima. Seizing the moment, the 
rampant Sutaputra cuts down Bhima’s flagstaff, kills his charioteer, rives his 
bow, and at last destroys his ratha. 

Lord of the Bharatas, mahabaho Bhima, who is like his father Vayu in 
prowess, picks up a gada, jumps down from his chariot in a towering rage 
and begins to savagely butcher your troops, smashing heads, limbs, 
spraying blood, brains and flesh everywhere. He puts to rout seven hundred 
war elephants with tusks as big as plough-shafts. With his titanic strength 
and intimate knowledge of the marmas of an elephant, he strikes them on 
their temples and frontal lobes, their eyes and the parts above their gums 
causing the terror-sicken animals to turn tail and run from the monstrous 
human. 


However, their hastikas manage to bring them back and to surround 
Bhimasena once more, like clouds covering the sun. But then, Bhima of 
supernatural strength now smashes down those beasts along with their 
hastikas, weapons and standards, before turning his attention to Sakuni’s 
two and fifty elephants and killing these as well. 

Bhima gone wild, Bhima drenched in the blood of man and beast, 
irresistible, elemental Bhima, a spectre of death runs amok, roaring like a 
hundred lions on Kurukshetra, ravages your army, destroying a century of 
chariots and several hundreds of foot-soldiers in the absolute bedlam and 
mayhem that he brings in his mad wrath. 

Scorched by the sun as well as by the wild Bhima, your army begins to 
shrink like a piece of leather spread over a fire. Your troops, O 
Bharatarishabha, filled with fear of Bhimasena, flee in all directions. Then, 
five hundred maharathas, all cased in fine armour, rush towards Bhima with 
loud shouts, shooting thick showers of arrows. Like Vishnu destroying the 
Asuras, Bhima annihilates all those brave warriors with his mace, with their 
charioteers, chariots, banners and weapons. Sakuni unleashes three 
thousand of his feared horsemen, all armed to the teeth, at Bhima. That 
Paraviraha smashes them all down with his swinging gada, spraying the air 
and strewing the ground with blood, heads, limbs, brain, bone and marrow. 
After exterminating the Gandhara horsemen, he mounts another ratha and 
rides after Karna. 

Meanwhile, O Rajan, Karna engages Yudhishtira in another duel, 
covering him with thick arrow showers; he kills the eldest Pandava’s 
sarathy and pursues Yudhishtira as he tries to escape, loosing sizzling 
volleys of kanka-feathered arrows after him. 

Bhima comes up on them and covers the entire sky and Karna with 
torrents of arrows. Radheya whirls around and, leaving Yudhishtira, attacks 
Bhima hotly. Satyaki joins the fight and, setting himself beside Bhima’s 
chariot, also begins to shoot at Karna. Doubly afflicted, Karna still attacks 
Bhima with undimmed ferocity. Resplendent those two are, and fierce and 
grim, as they loose flights of shimmering shafts at each other that resemble 
shining cranes. 

Their thousands of arrows, O Rajan, obscure the rays of the sun, the 
points of the sky, cardinal and subsidiary. Why, even as Surya lazes at his 
zenith at midday, over Kurukshetra a great dimness falls. Seeing Sakuni, 
Kritavarman, Aswatthaman, Karna and Kripa engage the Pandavas, the 


Kauravas rally and return to the fight. The reverberation of the ensuing 
battle is as that of seas roaring when it rains. 

The sun has reached the meridian and the two armies battle in furious 
exuberance—very likely, a battle such as we have not yet seen, even though 
both armies have been vastly denuded and the war has aged. The sound of 
battle is loud and deep as not one but of several oceans that crash into one 
another. Indeed, they appear no more to be two armies but a single one, 
intent on obliterating itself. 

A desperate battle ensues between the Kurus and the Pandavas, both 
driven by the desire to win immortal fame. A great pandemonium of voices 
is incessantly heard, O Bhaarata, and as I listen to them call each another 
names and ridicule and deride each other about their ancestry or about their 
ways and conduct, I feel certain that their lives have run out and a terrible 
fear grips my heart about the dire consequences that must necessarily 
follow. The carnage continues, O Rajan, as the Pandavas and the Kauravas, 
mighty maharathas all, maul and carve one another.’” 


CANTO 52 


: S anjaya says, ‘Pure and complete hatred filling their every fibre, 
those Kshatriyas massacre each other. Squadrons of chariots and 
divisions of cavalry, infantry and elephants clash in mortal combat. We see 
maces rise and fall, drawing geysers of blood and brain; spiked bludgeons 
do the same; we watch lances and short arrows fly to their marks, and astras 
flare at each other. 

Storms of vicious arrows fly like locust clouds. Elephants gore each 
other horribly, while horsemen, chariot-warriors and foot-soldiers confront 
one another and kill and die, while each moment Kurukshetra becomes a 
more horrific spectacle, until one cannot bear to look at the grisly field. The 
earth, covered with blood, is like a vast plain infested by the red coccinella 
of the monsoon; she resembles a beautiful maiden attired in white virginal 
robes dyed deep scarlet. 

Flesh and blood are the golden ornaments of the spectral field. 
Everywhere other macabre adornments lie thickly strewn—severed heads, 
trunks, arms, thighs, and earrings and other ornaments displaced from the 
bodies of warriors, O Bhaarata, and the collars, cuirasses and mangled 
bodies of brave archers, coats of mail and banners. 

Elephants gore other tuskers and, bathed in blood, the huge creatures 
are stunning to behold, like moving hills shining with metals and with 
streams of liquid chalk running down their breasts. Lances hurled by 


horsemen or held by enemy warriors are snatched out of the air by these 
beasts who then twist and break them like twigs. Many of the great ones, 
who have lost their armour in the battle, look like mountains divested of 
clouds at the advent of winter; those pierced with gold winged arrows are as 
gorgeous as mountains whose summits are lit up with blazing brands. 

Some of these stricken leviathans fall head first, like winged mountains 
of yore with their wings sheared away. Others roar strangely, like lions, 
while some trumpet and scream in almost human voices, and run here and 
there in agony and panic. 

Horses in golden trappings with cruel arrows and spears protruding 
from them run in all directions; many fall down and writhe in agony. Men 
too, struck down, fall uttering cries of pain, O Rajan; many seeing their 
sires, grandsires, relatives and others, retreating, call out their well-known 
names and the names of their races. The chopped off arms of warriors, 
smeared with sandalwood paste and decked with golden ornaments, writhe 
on the ground, falling down and springing up, or dart forward like five- 
headed snakes, like little standards of gold drenched in blood. 

The battle spreads out and rages on; hardly anyone anymore knows 
whom they fight or kill in the dementia that holds them all in its grip. A 
cloud of blood-flecked dust darkens the field and the warriors can no longer 
distinguish friends from enemies. Yet again, a mighty river fed by countless 
bloody rillets begins to flow, the heads of men its rocks and the hair of 
noble warriors its floating weeds and moss. Bones form the fishes of the 
ghastly river; bows, arrows and maces are its little floating rafts, while flesh 
and blood are the mire of the frothing current that flows from Kurukshetra 
to Yamaloka. 

Many plunge into those crimson streams and perish, coursing fear 
through the timid and fetching exhilaration to brave Kshatriyas. Various 
carnivores, O Naravyaghra, roar and yell hideously turning the once 
allowed field of dharma into a precinct in the domain of the king of the 
dead. Innumerable headless trunks rise up everywhere, with naked necks, 
and fearsome creatures, gorging on flesh and drinking fat and blood, O 
Bhaarata, dance on the banks of that second Vaitarani. Crows, vultures and 
cranes, gorged with flesh, fat and marrow and other scavengers move about 
everywhere in glee. 

There are warriors who cast off all fear and observing Kshatriya 
dharma, fearlessly continue to fight. Indeed, on that horrible field where 


arrows and spears beyond all count fly through the air, above the ground 
crowded with scavengers and carnivores both earthly and otherwise, brave 
and noble warriors fight on fearlessly, with lances and _battle-axes, 
displaying their prowess and declaring their names and their lineage, ah, as 
if their eyes have seen no carnage. 

As the battle rages on, the numbers of the Kaurava army dwindle and it 
flounders like a ship on the bosom of a stormy ocean.’” 


CANTO 53 


: S anjaya says, “The loud twang of the Gandiva, O Rajan, is heard 
above the din of battle, as the son of Pandu fights the 
Samsaptakas, the Kosalas and the Narayana forces. The determined 
Samsaptakas unleash a barrage of arrows at Arjuna, which he shrugs off 
and plunges into the thick of the enemy ranks and slaughters many of their 
foremost maharathas. Shooting his whetted arrows fletched with kanka 
feathers in waves, Partha comes face to face with Susarman, king of the 
Trigartas. 

Susarman strikes Partha with ten shafts and Janardana with three in his 
right arm. Next, with a broad-headed arrow, he pierces Arjuna’s kapi- 
dhvaja, made by Tvashtri, the celestial artificer himself, whereupon the 
huge image of that great Vanara fluttering on it begins to utter loud and 
fierce sounds and roars, and your troops freeze in fear. As it stands 
immobilized, your army looks like the Chitraratha forest laden with flowers 
of various kinds. 

They soon recover their senses, O Kurudvaha, and begin to drench 
Arjuna with showers of arrows. They surround his magnificent ratha, and 
assail him with crazed roars although all the while he continues to mow 
them down. They attack his horses, his chariot-wheels, his chariot-shaft, 
and every other part of his ratha with great force. Some of them clutch 
Kesava’s massive arms, while some seize Partha himself with glee as he 


stands tall upon his chariot, but the two Krishnas shrug their assailants off 
as an angry elephant shakes off riders from his back. 

Finding himself cornered by these maharathas and Krishna under attack, 
Arjuna is filled with rage and mows down a large number of the enemy with 
special arrows used in close encounters. 

He says to Krishna, “Behold, O Mahabaho, these countless 
Samsaptakas yet trying to accomplish a fearful task although they are 
slaughtered in their thousands! O Yadusrestha, there is no one on earth but I 
who can withstand such an attack on his chariot.” 

Saying this, he blows his conch; Krishna follows him and the combined 
blast fills the heavens and terrifies the Samsaptakas who begin to waver. 
Then that Paravirahan, greatest of heroes, paralyses the Samsaptakas as he 
repeatedly invokes the Nagastra and they are forced to stand motionless, O 
Rajan, as if turned to stone. Now Arjuna slaughters the motionless warriors 
like Indra long ago slaying the Daityas in the battle with Taraka. 

The Nagastra binds their lower limbs with writhing snakes so that they 
cannot move a step. Seeing his army paralysed, the mighty Susarman 
invokes the Sauparnastra and numberless birds fly down and devour those 
snakes or chase them away. Freed from that astra, the Samsaptaka forces 
look like the sun emerging from behind clouds and shedding light again. 
Once more, they shoot their arrows and cast their spears and axes at 
Arjuna’s chariot. Arjuna cuts down their every volley and fusillade, and he 
continues to slaughter them. 

Then, Susarman plunges a perfect arrow directly into Arjuna’s chest and 
immediately drills three more shafts into Partha closely around the first one. 
With a gasp of pain, his blood spurting from the four wounds, great Arjuna 
sits down on the platform of his ratha. All the troops cry out in alarm, 
“Partha is slain!” 

The blare of conchs, the pounding of drums, the sound of diverse 
musical instruments, and loud shouts of triumph and lament envelop the 
battlefield. However, Arjuna quickly recovers and invokes the Aindrastra. 
Thousands of arrows issue from this single weapon and, screaming forth in 
all directions, kill kings, elephants, horses and warriors in thousands, 
creating a great fear in the hearts of the Samsaptakas and Gopalas, O 
Bhaarata. Not a warrior among them can stand up to Arjuna, and he 
destroys your troops, as he likes. All your foremost maharathas can do 
nothing to contain the unparalleled Dhananjaya, as he first kills ten 


thousand fighting men, then a further seventeen thousand warriors and three 
thousand elephants, and he stands resplendent like an intense and smokeless 
fire. 

Then the Samsaptakas once again encircle the Pandava, and the battle 
between them is an unprecedented bloodbath.’” 


CANTO 54 


¢ S anjaya says, “Kritavarman, Kripa, Aswatthaman, Karna, Uluka, 
Sakuni, Duryodhana himself and his brothers, O Bhaarata, find 

the Kuru army like a ship wrecked on the raging ocean; in abject fear of 
Arjuna and unable to stand together, they still attempt to rescue the rapidly 
sinking craft of your forces; for a short while, a fierce battle rages. 

Kripa shoots dark locust swarms of arrows and envelops the Srinjayas. 
A vengeful Sikhandi pours a cataract of arrows over that bull of a 
Brahmana, which Kripa, master of astras, renders tame, and he wounds 
Sikhandi deep with ten of his own scathing shafts. A breathless exchange of 
arrows follows and, finally, the twice-born Kripa demolishes Sikhandi’s 
ratha, his horses and charioteer and forces him to leap out of his chariot. 

Sikhandi picks up a sword and shield and rushes at the Acharya, and 
though Kripa strikes him with a flurry of thought-swift arrows, it is 
wonderful to see Sikhandi battle on undeterred. Noticing Sikhandi at bay, 
his brother Dhrishtadyumna flies to his rescue but Kritavarman cuts him off. 
Aswatthaman bars Yudhishtira’s way as he, with his son and troops dashes 
towards Kripa’s chariot. Your son Duryodhana holds up Nakula and 
Sahadeva as those maharathas come charging in. Karna holds off 
Bhimasena, the Karushas, the Kaikeyas and the Srinjayas. 

Meanwhile, Kripa unleashes fire tides at Sikhandi, as if he wants to 
incinerate him. However, whirling his sword around, the Panchala prince 


strikes down all Kripa’s livid golden arrows; Kripa demolishes Sikhandi’s 
shield emblazoned with a hundred moons. This draws loud applause from 
your troops. His shield shattered, Sikhandi is at Kripa’s mercy but, sword in 
hand, still attacks the Brahmana, like a sick man running towards the jaws 
of Death. Then, Chitraketu’s noble son Suketu, seeing Sikhandi in dire 
straits, rushes to his defence and swathes Kripa in countless iron-tipped 
missiles. Seeing his chance, Sikhandi, O Kurusattama, makes good his 
escape. 

Suketu and the son of Gautama are soon engaged in a deadly duel and, 
in a fierce exchange, the prince breaks Kripa’s bow and badly injures his 
sarathy. An enraged Kripa picks up a fresh bow and rakes Suketu with 
thirty barbs through all his vital marmas, making that prince sway on his 
ratha like a tree trembling during an earthquake. Next moment, with a 
razor-headed arrow, Kripa strikes off Suketu’s head adorned with a pair of 
blazing earrings and a helmet and it falls like a piece of meat from the claws 
of a hawk. Upon the fall of Suketu, his frightened troops flee from the 
terrible Kripa. 

Meanwhile, the mighty Dhrishtadyumna challenges Kritavarman, “Stop 
and fight, O Bhoja!” 

The two are soon at each other like two hawks fighting over a piece of 
meat. Dhrishtadyumna strikes Kritavarman through his chest with nine 
arrows, drawing spouts of blood from the Bhojaraja. Undeterred, 
Kritavarman mantles his assailant, his steeds and his chariot with such an 
opacity of arrows that he makes him invisible. An _ incensed 
Dhrishtadyumna, with all those golden arrows stuck in him, is magnificent 
to look at, and retaliates with a deluge of fire, which Kritavarman douses as 
it falls on him from the sky. 

Dhrishtadyumna dispatches Kritavarman’s charioteer to Yama, and 
having thus vanquished his mighty antagonist, begins to lay into the 
Kaurava forces. Your warriors, too, O Rajan, charge towards 
Dhrishtadyumna, uttering leonine roars and the battle is fully joined once 


eoo 


more. 


CANTO 55 


: S anjaya says, ‘Seeing that Satyaki and the sons of Draupadi protect 
Yudhishtira, Aswatthaman moves determinedly against him, 
loosing a riptide of golden-winged shafts as he flies at Yudhishtira. A 
master of all kinds of weapons, he fills all the sky with devastras and soon 
Yudhishtira is engulfed in a vast expanse of arrows. Covered over with that 
cupola of golden arrows, the firmament presents a striking spectacle, O 
Kurudvaha, as if a canopy embroidered with gold has been spread there and 
casts a shadow, as that of clouds. It is wondrous to behold, even with the 
carnage continuing without let all around, and not one creature of the air 
could fly through it. The shining dome comprehensively contains Satyaki, 
Yudhishtira, and all the other Pandava warriors. 

The maharathas of the Pandava army are filled with wonder and cannot 
so much as look at Aswatthaman, who blazes like the sun. While Drona’s 
terrible son is slaughtering the Pandava troops, for this is no benign 
covering of golden astras, Yudhishtira, the sons of Draupadi, Satyaki, and 
the Panchala warriors unite and, quite forgetting their fear of death, surge 
forward against him. The seven warriors all assail him violently, supported 
by many other Kshatriyas from every side. Hissing like a serpent, 
Aswatthaman responds with slews of arrows that find them all, bringing 
agony. He destroys Srutakirti’s bow; that prince takes up another and gashes 
Drona’s son with a light-like volley. 


Aswatthaman continues to consume the Pandava troops, with relentless 
tides of fire. Smiling, he breaks Yudhishtira’s bow and plunges three keen 
shafts into the Dharmaraja. Yudhishtira picks up another formidable bow 
and, quick as the mind, drills the Brahmana with seventy arrows through his 
arms and chest. 

Satyaki flashes up and, with a roar, bisects Aswatthaman’s bow with a 
crescent-tipped arrow. Aswatthaman fells Satyaki’s charioteer with a spear 
and, taking up another bow, swathes him with countless arrows. Satyaki’s 
horses without a charioteer run free on the battlefield. The Pandava warriors 
led by Yudhishtira sweep in and attack Drona’s son with great violence. 

Aswatthaman, finding himself under attack, unleashes firestorms of 
astras to consume the Pandava troops as a fire in the forest does dry grass 
and straw. The Pandava army is stricken, threatened like the mouth of a 
river by a whale, and all that watch Aswatthaman’s prowess consider the 
Pandavas to be already dead. 

A raging Yudhishtira cries to Drona’s son, “O Naravyaghra, you have 
neither affection nor gratitude, since you want to kill today. The duties of a 
Brahmana are tapasya, dakshina and study. Only a Kshatriya should bend a 
bow, and you have reduced yourself to being a Brahmana only in name. Do 
whatever you can, Aswatthaman, but I will still vanquish the Kauravas in 
your very sight. You are a wretch amongst Brahmanas.” 

Aswatthaman smiles and reflects but without saying anything, he covers 
Yudhishtira with a shower of arrows like the Destroyer engaged in 
annihilating the creatures at yuga’s end. Yudhishtira quickly retreats from 
the spot, abandoning his large aksauhini and Aswatthaman also does, O 
Rajan. Yudhishtira, avoiding the son of Drona, assails your army, 
determined to annihilate it.’” 


CANTO 56 


: S anjaya says, ‘Meanwhile, Vikartana stands firm against 
Bhimasena supported by the Panchalas, the Chedis and the 
Kaikeyas, covers him with arrows, and kills many of the enemy’s 
maharathas. Bhimasena avoids Karna and rides against the Kaurava troops 
like a blazing fire towards a heap of dry grass, leaving the Sutaputra to 
contend with the mighty bowmen amongst the Panchalas, the Kaikeyas, and 
the Srinjayas, in their thousands. Indeed, while Partha and Vrikodara are 
exterminating the Samsaptakas and the Kauravas, Karna is decimating the 
Panchalas. It is because of your evil policy, O Rajan, that all these 
Kshatriyas are annihilated in the war. 

A stirred Duryodhana wounds Nakula and his four horses, and knocks 
down Sahadeva’s golden standard. The Pandava princes retaliate and strike 
your son with a myriad of shafts and, the battle quickly igniting, the twins 
lose their bows. Duryodhana’s bow, O Bhaarata, seems always drawn into a 
circle and arrows appear to issue ceaselessly from it. Shrouded by 
Duryodhana’s shafts, the Pandava princes cease to shine brightly, like the 
sun and the moon shrouded by masses of clouds, and all that we see is one 
uniform expanse of the work of the Destroyer himself, at he appears at the 
end of the yuga. 

Seeing this remarkable exhibition by your son, all the maharathas 
consider the sons of Madri to have entered the presence of Death. 


Dhrishtadyumna, Senapati of the Pandava army, sees Duryodhana on 
the verge of overwhelming the twins and flies to their rescue loosing a great 
wave of arrows before him as he comes. Your son, that Bharatarishabha, 
turns his attention to the Panchala prince, and they are quickly entangled in 
a duel of razor-faced arrows. Dhrishtadyumna quickly finds his bow broken 
and leather gloves cut to shreds. Standing resplendent on his ratha with red 
eyes and bleeding from his many wounds, he seizes up another bow, O 
Kurudvaha and, with godlike force, looses five and ten cloth-yard shafts 
fletched with kanka and peacock feathers at Duryodhana. These arrows that 
resemble hissing snakes blast right through the golden armour of your son 
and, passing through his body, enter the earth. 

Deeply wounded and weak from his gaping, flowing wounds, your son 
looks like a beautiful and gigantic kinsuka in the spring. He shatters 
Dhrishtadyumna’s bow again and strikes him with ten arrows between his 
brows. Those polished shafts adorn Dhrishtadyumna’s face like a number of 
bees sipping honey from a full-blown lotus! Dhrishtadyumna’s response, 
with a new golden bow, is to kill Duryodhana’s four horses and sarathy and 
to destroy his chariot, the upashkara, the chatra, his spear, sword, mace, and 
his beautiful standard bearing the device of an elephant worked in rare 
jewels. 

Duryodhana’s brothers race up to rescue their defenseless older brother 
and, before Dhrishtadyumna’s very eyes, Durdhara plucks him onto his 
ratha and bears him away from the battle. 

Meanwhile, wanting to rescue Duryodhana, Karna bears down on the 
fierce Dhrishtadyumna, Drona’s slayer. However, Satyaki, who is pursuing 
him, strikes your son with a lucific volley of arrows, like an elephant 
pursuing a rival and stabbing him in his hindquarters with his tusks. A 
fierce battle breaks out between those two noble warriors, while both armies 
look on. 

Meanwhile, when the sun had climbed again to his zenith', Karna 
attacks the Panchalas and an immense slaughter of elephants, horses and 
men takes place on both sides. The Panchalas, O Rajan, anticipating victory, 
fly at Karna like birds towards a home tree. A frothing Karna begins to 
decimate them with a dark plague of arrows, singling out their commanders 
Vyaghraketu, Susharman, Chitra, Ugrayudha, Jaya, Sukla, Rochamana and 
the invincible Singhasena who surround him with their chariots and 


inundate him with their arrows. He seriously injures those eight warriors 
and goes to slay many thousands of other seasoned fighters. 

Karna kills Jishnu, Jishnukarman, Devapi, Chitra, Chitrayudha, Hari, 
Singhaketu, Rochamana, the famed maharatha Salabha, although the Chedi 
warriors bloody him. Karna’s archery causes a great agitation on the field, 
as so many elephants run in fear and others, lethally wounded, utter cries of 
distress and fall like mountains struck by thunderbolts. The corpses of 
elephants, horses, men and ruined chariots are strewn along the path of 
Karna’s chariot. Neither Bhishma nor Drona, nor any other warrior of your 
army has ever achieved such feats as Karna achieves on this day. As a lion 
chases a herd of terrified deer, Karna rides fearlessly among the Panchalas 
and brings murderous havoc to the maharathas that oppose him. 

Even as fire burns everything it touches, the Karnagni burns all the 
Srinjayas who face him. Shouting out his own name as a battle cry, Karna 
single-handedly kills many leading warriors among the Chedis and the 
Panchalas. Looking at his unworldly archery, O Bhaarata, I thought that not 
a single Panchala would escape him, as the Sutaputra demolishes them 
almost contemptuously. 

Dharmaraja Yudhishtira dashes up to help the Panchalas, along with 
Dhrishtadyumna, the sons of Draupadi, and hundreds of his warriors, and 
surround Karna. Sikhandi, Sahadeva, Nakula, Nakula’s son, Janamejaya, 
Satyaki, and innumerable Prabhadrakas are quite magnificent as they ride 
behind Dhrishtadyumna. Like Garuda swooping down upon a writhing nest 
of snakes, Karna, unaided, calmly, splendidly, faces all those Chedis, 
Panchalas and Pandavas, and the battle between them is as atrocious as the 
Devasura yuddha of old. Like the sun dispelling surrounding darkness, 
Karna, fearless and by himself, stands alone and godlike, contending with 
all those renowned archers who shoot ceaselessly at him and inundate him 
with a sea of weapons. 

While Karna engages the Pandavas, Bhimasena imposing as the lord 
Yama, is employed in butchering the Kurus, who include the Bahlikas, the 
Kaikeyas, the Matsyas, the Vasatas, the Madras and Saindhavas. The 
elephants, in their hundreds, which Bhima kills with his cloth-yard shafts, 
fall with their dead riders and make the earth tremble. Horses with their 
riders dead, foot-soldiers pierced with arrows and vomiting blood, 
thousands of chariot-warriors mangled by Bhima’s gales of shafts, litter the 


battlefield. Mauled and terrified by Bhimasena, Duryodhana’s army stands 
stunned and numb, like the ocean during a calm day in autumn. 

Stripped of its pride, your son’s mighty army loses its splendour and 
Bhima continues to make a rill of their blood. While Bhima on the rampage 
annihilates the Kurus, a rabid Karna wades into the Pandava aksauhini. 

As that incomparably brutal battle continues without pause or let, the 
onlookers can only marvel, inured to its horror from which an uncanny 
magnificence emerges, and Arjuna, after killing another host of 
Samsaptakas, says to Krishna, “The Samsaptaka rathikas’ spirit is broken 
and they run from me like deer from the roar of a lion. I have dispersed the 
vast force of the Srinjayas as well. 

Look where Karna’s banner with the device of the elephant’s rope is in 
the midst of Yudhishtira’s aksauhini, where he wreaks great havoc. No other 
maharatha of our army can contain peerless Karna. O Krishna, I want you 
to avoid all the other warriors and take me to the Sutaputra, but, as always, I 
put my faith in your wisdom, and you must do as you please.” 

Krishna smiles and says, “Kill the Kauravas, O son of Pandu, without 
delay!” 

That ratha, flying the kapi-dhvaja and harnessed to pure white horses in 
golden trappings, urged by Krishna, penetrates your vast force with a clatter 
like a battery of thunder on high, like a deva-ratha fleeting through the 
firmament. With blood red eyes, the two Krishnas are fearsome and 
magnificent, like the twin Ashvinis invoked during a yagna. Those 
Naravyaghras are reminiscent of two elephants in a forest, enraged by the 
claps of hunters. 

Like Yama with his paasa, they fall upon your army. To check them, 
your son once more unleashes the Samsaptakas, with a thousand chariots, 
three hundred elephants, fourteen thousand horses, and two hundred 
thousand foot-soldiers—all unerring bowmen, courageous and expert 
warriors — against the Pandavas. They make little impression as, assuming a 
form like that of Death himself, Arjuna slaughters them. He fills the sky 
with a deadly and relucent torrent of golden shafts that fall ceaselessly on 
them. The sound of Partha’s palms slapping his bowstring make us feel that 
the earth, or the vault of the sky, or all the points of the firmament, or the 
several oceans, or the mountains have broken apart. 

Arjuna kills ten thousand Samsaptaka Kshatriyas, and goes on to savage 
the farther wing of the Samsaptakas supported by the Kambojas. Like 


Vasava ravaging the Danavas, he hacks off the limbs and heads of 
elephants, horses, chariot-warriors and foot soldiers and they fall onto the 
earth, like trees in a hurricane. 

The younger brother of Sudakshina, the king of the Kambojas, attempts 
to stop him but quicker than seeing Arjuna severs his arms at the shoulders 
and then his handsome head, felling him from his ratha, his body bathed in 
blood, like the thunder-riven summit of a mountain of red arsenic, like a 
column of gold or like a summit of the golden Sumeru. Now, O Rajan, a 
pitched battle commences and another great carnage follows as warriors of 
the Kamboja, the Yavana, and the Saka races die in lakes of blood, turning 
the indescribable field into a single crimson expanse. 

While Savyasachi is exterminating the wings of the Samsaptakas, 
Aswatthaman rides up, shaking his formidable bow, to challenge him. With 
his mouth wide open and eyes red with rage the mighty Brahmana warrior 
looks like Death himself, gada in hand at the end of the yuga. He penetrates 
the Pandava army and, falling on both Krishna and Dhananjaya, shrouds 
and stupefies them with his arrows. The universe of mobile and immobile 
beings utters cries of dismay, thinking the two Krishnas slain. 

Crowds of Siddhas and Charanas arrive from everywhere, praying 
silently, fervently, “Let good befall all the worlds!” 

Never before, O Rajan, have I seen Aswatthaman fight as he now does 
the two Krishnas. The sound of his bow is like a roaring lion and its string 
flashes like lightning. No one can stand up to him and, Arjuna himself feels 
that he has met his match and his assurance and vigour appear to drain from 
him. Krishna is incensed and draws hot deep breaths. O Rajan, he seems to 
burn both Aswatthaman and Phalguna with his gaze as he looks repeatedly 
from one to the other. 

He then says tightly, “This, O Partha, is exceedingly strange that 
Drona’s son surpasses you today! Where is your tejas and the might of your 
arms? Do you not still have the Gandiva in your hands, and do you not ride 
on own your chariot now? Have your hands suffered some injury? 
Otherwise, why is it that I see the son of Drona prevail over you today? Do 
not spare your enemy, thinking that he is the son of your Acharya, O 
Bharatarishabha. This is not the time for sentiment.” 

In a blur, Arjuna draws fourteen flat-headed arrows and destroys 
Aswatthaman’s bow, standard, parasol, banners, chariot, spear and mace. 
He then strikes Drona’s son through his shoulder with a clutch of calf- 


toothed arrows. Aswatthaman swoons and supports himself by clinging to 
his flagstaff; but he then falls in a dead faint, gushing blood from his 
wounds and his sarathy whisks him away from Arjuna. 

Arjuna turns back to your troops and resumes slaughtering them in 
thousands, in Duryodhana’s very sight. 

Thus, O Rajan, because of your evil policy, unimaginable carnage 
continues, as the two armies massacre each other. Within moments, Partha 
overwhelms the Samsaptakas; Vrikodara, the Kurus; while Vasusena 
overruns the Panchalas. Great and skilled warriors fall and many headless 
trunks weirdly rise all around, for the will to battle has not left them. O 
Kurudhvaha, in great pain from his wounds, Yudhishtira retreats some two 
kosas from the field of battle and rests for some time.’” 


'The sequence of time here is unclear. 


CANTO 57 


: S anjaya says, “Then, going up to Karna, Duryodhana says to him 
and to Salya, as well as the other commanders, “This wonderful 
occasion, when the gates of heaven are wide open, has arrived on its own. 
Happy are those Kshatriyas, O Karna, who find such an opportunity to kill 
the Pandavas in battle and win this wide earth, or die and win the blessed 
realms kept for heroes.” 

Hearing these words, the warriors present utter loud joyful shouts, and 
beat their drums and blow their musical instruments. Gladdening them 
further, Aswatthaman adds, “Dhrishtadyumna murdered my father before 
everyone, after Drona had laid aside his weapons. In revenge and for the 
sake of my friend, I swear today that I will not remove my armour without 
killing Dhrishtadyumna. If I fail to keep this my vow, let me not find 
swarga. I vow that I will crush Arjuna, Bhimasena, or any other who faces 
me today in battle.” 

Another general battle breaks out between the Kaurava and the Pandava 
armies. The clash of the chariot divisions, O Bhaarata, is savage and bloody 
and the destruction of life in the van of the Kurus and the Srinjayas 
resembles the pralaya. Various celestial beings, including the Devas along 
with Apsaras, appear on high to watch the battle. The Apsaras shower 
unworldly garlands down on those Kshatriyas, as well as different kinds of 
heavenly perfumes, and with sparling gemstones. Soft winds carry the 


sweet scents to all the leading warriors and inspire them so that they kill 
one another with greater gusto. 

Strewn with celestial flowers, golden arrows, and with the bodies of so 
many celebrated warriors, the battlefield is as wondrous as the heavens, 
strewn with stars past count. The applause from the sky, the sound of 
musical instruments and the furious passage-at-arms distinguished by the 
virile twanging of bows, the clatter of chariot wheels and the roars and 
screams of warriors makes the uproar on Kurukshetra, dharmakshetra, 
deafening.’” 


CANTO 58 


: S anjaya says, ‘O Rajan, with Arjuna, Karna and Bhimasena 
fighting in fury and beside themselves, such a battle rages 
between those lords of earth. 

After besting Aswatthaman and other maharathas, Arjuna says to 
Krishna, “Look, O Mahabaho, the Pandavas flee while Karna razes our 
famed warriors. However, I see neither the Dharmarajan nor the standard of 
his son. The third part of the day still remains, Janardana, and no one 
among the Dhartarashtras challenges me for a fight. I am anxious, Lord, so 
drive to where Yudhishtira is. Once I know that he is safe and well with our 
younger brothers, we will return to fight the enemy again.” 

Krishna drives the chariot to where Yudhishtira and the powerful 
Srinjaya rathikas are fighting the enemy and making a dreadful slaughter. 
As they go, he says to Arjuna, “Look, Partha, at this bloody carnage of the 
Kshatriyas on earth, and all for the sake of one man—the evil Duryodhana. 
Look at the gold-backed bows of the slain warriors and their costly quivers 
dislodged from their shoulders. Look at the straight gold-winged arrows, at 
the oiled cloth-yard shafts that look like snakes that have recently shed their 
skin. 

Look at the rare and magnificent swords with ivory hilts, and engraved 
with gold; look at the millions of broken and fallen gold embossed shields. 
Look at those golden lances and spears, and those huge maces with gold 


filigree and those gilded scimitars, those axes with golden embellishments, 
and the heads of some battle-axes fallen off from their golden hafts. Look at 
those iron kuntas, those short heavy clubs, those huge bludgeons with 
spiked heads, those fallen chakras, all so beautifully wrought and all for this 
blood-drenched war. All these warriors now lying lifeless came 
energetically to battle armed with different weapons and even now seem 
alive. 

Look at the thousands upon thousands of handsome, noble warriors 
lying on the field, with limbs severed and crushed, or heads broken, or torn 
and mangled by elephants, horses and chariots. Kurukshetra is mantled with 
arrows, spears, swords, axes, scimitars, spiked maces, lances, iron kuntas, 
the corpses of men, horses and elephants, all hacked down and lying in 
streams of blood, all their rich and complex lives lost. 

Bhumi Devi is stunning to behold, even as she was meant to be on this 
day, O Bhaarata, with fallen arms smeared with sandalwood paste, wearing 
golden angadas, keyuras and leather gauntlets, with hewn off thighs like 
elephants’ trunks, with fallen heads, decked with costly gemstones and 
earrings, and with dead heroes with large and noble eyes. Why, Kurukshetra 
resembles a vedi, an altar cluttered with extinguished fires, with headless 
trunks smeared with blood as if in anointment, with severed limbs like 
sacrificial offerings. 

Look at those exquisite chariots with rows of golden bells shattered, and 
those dead horses with arrows protruding from their magnificent bodies. 
Look at the skeletons of the chariots, their quivers, banners, the various 
standards; look at these giant white conches of maharathas, now stained in 
red and littered all over the field. Look at those elephants, big as hills, lying 
dead with innocent tongues lolling out, the dead horses decked with 
triumphal banners. Look at the housings of the elephants, and the skins and 
rich varied cloths, all torn and bloodied. 

Look at those rows of bells broken when the great tuskers fell; look at 
those strong goads set with stones of lapis lazuli now lying forlorn on the 
ground. Look at those whips also decorated with gold and jewels, so many 
still in the grasp of dead horsemen, and those horse coverings of ranku 
deerskins. 

Behold the sad jewels from the crowns of kings and their ample golden 
necklaces, the fallen royal parasols and yak-tail fans. Ah, look at the earth, 


mired with blood, strewn with the faces of heroes, luminous as the moon 
and the stars. 

Look at the wounded warriors in whom life is not yet extinct and who 
wail in pain and sorrow. Casting aside their weapons, look where their 
kinsmen tend to them, hopelessly, weeping inconsolably. And look again 
upon those warriors, who despite all this, are still afire with wrath and the 
mad impulse to fight and win victory after already killing thousands of 
living men, their own kind; look where they yet ride and run headlong 
against their enemies, their bloodlust undimmed. 

Look at those who run here and there in frenzy, fetching water for fallen 
comrades, while others breathe their last. The brave ones return with water 
and, seeing their relatives lifeless now, fling down the water and run away, 
shouting wildly to one another, demented by sorrow. And elsewhere, look, 
Arjuna, many have died after having slaked their dying thirst, while others 
die even while drinking. Others, though loving towards their fallen kin, 
desert them and, entirely in the grip of the dread spirit of war, charge madly 
at the enemy. Others bite their lips and, with brows knit, stand still and 
survey the entirely ghastly and absolutely beautiful battlefield.” 

Thus showing Arjuna the field of battle, Krishna rides on towards 
Yudhishtira and Arjuna, seeing his brother the king, and repeatedly cries to 
his divine sarathy, “Ride on, Krishna! Ride on!” 

Krishna says to Arjuna, “Look at those kings rushing towards 
Yudhishtira. Behold Karna, like a blazing fire on the field of war. Look 
there, where the mighty Bhima rides into battle. Look where the greatest 
Panchala, Srinjaya and Pandava warriors under Dhrishtadyumna follow 
Bhima. And look, the enemy’s vast host is broken once more. O Arjuna, 
look where Karna wild as Death and like Indra in prowess, tries to rally the 
fleeing Kauravas. There goes Drona’s son, greatest of all Brahmana 
warriors, and maharatha Dhrishtadyumna rushes to confront him with the 
Srinjayas close behind.” 

Thus does the immortal Krishna describe what is before them to Arjuna. 
Then, O king, there erupts another torrid and devastating battle. Loud 
shouts and roars ring out as the two hosts clash, O Rajan, with death their 
goal. 

And thus, as a result of your evil policy, unimaginable destruction has 
set in on the earth, O Bhumipala, of both your warriors and those of the 


999 


enemy. 


CANTO 59 


: S anjaya says, ‘Karna leading the Kurus and Yudhishtira the 

Parthas, meet again in a battle that rapidly swells the population 

of Yama’s kingdom. Rivers of blood run again on Kurukshetra, O Bhaarata, 

and only a small remnant of the heroic Samsaptakas survive. 

Dhrishtadyumna, the Pandavas and their maharathas all converge on and 

target Karna; and he, by himself, like a mountain receiving a cataract of 
water, faces them confidently. 

In a hair-raising battle, great Karna repulses all those maharathas. 
Dhrishtadyumna pierces Radheya with a powerful shaft and shouts, “Wait! 
Wait and fight.” 

The supreme warrior Karna, filled with rage, shakes his formidable 
bow, the Vijaya, and destroys Dhrishtadyumna’s bow as well as his arrows 
that resemble snakes of virulent poison. He then strikes the Panchala deep 
with nine burning arrows, which, O Bhaarata, plunge through 
Dhrishtadyumna’s golden armour and, washed in blood, are bright as 
cochineal. The Panchala throws aside his broken bow, sweeps up another 
and looses a volley of serpentine venomous narachas at Karna. Karna 
retaliates with a lovely, lethal golden arrow that resembles a second rod of 
death. This ineluctable shaft flies straight to claim Dhrishtadyumna’s life, 
but, in the nick of time, from a distant flank, and displaying astounding 


skill, Satyaki cuts down that shaft that would otherwise have surely claimed 
the Panchala prince, the Pandava senapati’s life. 

With a mythic tiger’s roar, Karna turns and unleashes a livid fusillade at 
the Satwata. He gores Satyaki with seven cloth-yard shafts but the blithe 
Yuyudhana coolly responds with a shimmering swath of golden arrows. All 
over, the horrible and beautiful battle rages on; it is both fearsome and 
entirely wonderful to behold. 

Meanwhile, Aswatthaman joins battle with Dhrishtadyumna, roaring, 
“Stop! Wait, O Brahmana, you will not escape me alive today.” 

They blast towering volleys at each other. Just as Drona knew that the 
son of Prishata would be the cause of his death, so too now does 
Dhrishtadyumna, seeing Drona’s son before him, know that Aswatthaman 
will be the death of him. However, he remembers that no weapon can kill 
him in battle and so rushes at Aswatthaman fearlessly, like Death running at 
the Destroyer at pralaya at yuga’s end. 

And Drona’s heroic son, drawing deep breaths, charges straight back at 
the Panchala prince, both of them filled with untold rage and hatred. 
Aswatthaman says to Dhrishtadyumna, “O Panchala wretch, I will send you 
to Yama today. The sin that you committed when you slew Drona will fill 
you with regret today, if you fight me without Partha’s protection, or if you 
do not flee, O fool!” 

Dhrishtadyumna replies, “This sword of mine which answered your sire 
in battle, will today answer you as well. If I could kill Drona, why can’t I 
kill you who are only a Brahmana in name?” 

Dhrishtadyumna pierces Drona’s son with a slender, needle sharp arrow. 
The duel blossoms and they mantle each other with thousands of arrows so 
that neither the sky nor the points of the compass, or they themselves, can 
be seen. 

Karna, too, O Rajan, holds at bay the Panchalas, the Pandavas, the five 
sons of Draupadi, Yudhamanyu and the mighty Satyaki and is the radiant 
cynosure of all eyes. 

Dhrishtadyumna rives Aswatthaman’s formidable bow and destroys all 
his venomous arrows, but in a flash, the mighty Brahmana responds by 
breaking the Panchala’s bow, spear, mace, standard, and killing his horses, 
his charioteer, and shattering his chariot. Dhrishtadyumna seizes up a great 
sword and a blazing shield decked with a hundred moons. In the twinkling 


of an eye, before Dhrishtadyumna can alight from his ratha, Aswatthaman 
smashes these weapons also into dust. 

However, despite putting forth all his prowess and skill, when 
Aswatthaman still cannot, O Bharatasrestha, actually kill the injured and 
helpless Dhrishtadyumna with arrows, he flings down his bow and, taking 
up his blue sword, swoops down on his enemy, like Garuda on a large 
snake. 

Seeing this, Krishna tells Arjuna, “Look, Partha, how Aswatthaman 
races toward Dhrishtadyumna’s chariot. Hurry! You must rescue Drupada’s 
son, who is in the very jaws of death.” 

Krishna urges the white horses towards Aswatthaman and, seeing 
Arjuna come, Drona’s son does his best to finish Dhrishtadyumna. Seeing 
him, sword in hand, try to haul Dhrishtadyumna down, mighty Partha 
looses a burst of golden arrows from the Gandiva at the Brahmana, drawing 
copious jets of blood and forcing him to leave the Panchala prince. 
Aswatthaman quickly mounts his chariot and, seizing up his own bow, 
shoots back fiercely at Arjuna. 

Meanwhile, Sahadeva darts up, pulls Dhrishtadyumna into his chariot, 
leaving Arjuna to deal with Drona’s son. Aswatthaman strikes Arjuna 
through his arms and chest, and Partha responds with a long shaft like 
another Yamadanda, which plunges deep into the Brahmana_ hero’s 
shoulder. Aswatthaman collapses from the sheer violence of that shaft and 
he sits down on the floor of his ratha. 

At this, filled with rage, Karna roars again and again and shakes his 
great bow, the Vijaya, and repeatedly eyes Arjuna, wanting single combat 
with him. Aswatthaman’s sarathy, seeing him senseless, swiftly bears him 
away from the field. 

Seeing Dhrishtadyumna rescued and Aswatthaman stricken, the 
Panchalas and the other Pandava warriors, O king, sensing victory, give 
loud shouts and thousands of sweet instruments are sounded. Arjuna says to 
Krishna, “I fervently wish to fight the Samsaptakas.” 

Krishna turns his wonderful steeds and the marvellous ratha, flying 
many banners, and whose speed is as that of the wind or the mind, flashes 
forward.’” 


CANTO 60 


: S anjaya says, “As the ratha flares forward, Krishna points 
Yudhishtira out to Arjuna, and says: “There is your brother, hard 
pressed and fighting desperately against the mighty Dhartarashtra archers 
but the indomitable Panchalas are flying to his rescue. Yonder, Duryodhana, 
king of the world, accompanied by his brothers, leads a large chariot force 
of seasoned warriors in pursuit of Yudhishtira, like desperate men after a 
priceless gemstone. Armed to the teeth, bearing astras whose touch is as 
fatal as that of poisonous snakes, they are intent on killing him. And look, 
Satyaki and Bhima thwart Duryodhana and the Kauravas are again 
nonplussed, like the Daityas whom Sakra and Agni petrified when the 
Demon tried to steal the Amrita. 

The vast ratha divisions of the Kuru army again surge towards 
Yudhishtira like a flashflood rushing towards the ocean in the monsoon. 
Those mighty bowmen give resounding shouts, blow their conches, and 
shake their bows as they charge forward. Attacked viciously by 
Duryodhana, Yudhishtira is already in the jaws of death and is a libation 
already poured on the yagna fire. 

Duryodhana’s army is in full battle array and Indra himself would find it 
difficult to escape once he comes within the range of their arrows. Who can 
withstand Duryodhana, who in his anger resembles Yama himself, and 
shoots his relentless showers of arrows with such awesome force? The 


power of Duryodhana’s shafts, like Drona’s, Aswatthaman’s, Kripa’s or 
Karna’s can bring down the very mountains. Karna always frightens 
Yudhishtira, as we saw when your brother turned his back on the battlefield. 
Then Yudhishtira had the support of other maharathas but he is isolated and 
he is weak from his constant fasting. He has great Brahmana-shakti, but 
alas, not much of Kshatriya might. 

Karna’s assault has put him in grave peril and I fear, O Partha, that 
Yudhishtira Dharmaputra might well have fallen. Indeed, from the fact that 
the wrathful Bhimasena does not respond to the victorious roars and 
blowing of conches of the Dhartarashtra forces, O Bharatarishabha, I fear 
that the king is dead. Look where Karna urges the mighty Dhartarashtra 
chariot-warriors armed with the astras Sthunakarna, Indrasjaha and 
Pasupata, with maces and other weapons, towards Pritha’s son. The king 
must be grievously wounded and weakened, for the Panchalas and the 
Pandava forces fly like the wind to rescue him, rather like strong men 
rushing to save a man sinking in a bottomless sea. 

His standard is no longer visible and Karna has probably struck it down. 
Partha, in the very sight of the twins, and of Satyaki, Sikhandi, 
Dhrishtadyumna, Bhima, Satanika, and of all the Panchalas and the Chedis, 
Karna is destroying the Pandava divisions with his incendiary arrows, like 
an elephant trampling a bank of lotuses. Look, look, Arjuna, the rathikas of 
our army retreat and our elephant divisions, too, are in flight with dismal 
cries of distress. Karna’s great standard, with the device of the elephant’s 
rope, moves freely all over the battlefield. There, Radheya is now attacking 
Bhimasena’s legions, shooting hundreds of arrows as he slaughters our 
army at will. Ah, he destroys the Panchala maharathas even as Indra once 
did the Daityas. 

Look Partha, Karna has defeated the Panchalas, the Pandus, and the 
Srinjayas, and looks around, I believe, seeking you. Ah, as he draws his 
majestic bow, Karna looks as splendid and handsome as Indra in the midst 
of the Devas, after vanquishing his enemies. And seeing the indomitable 
prowess of Karna, the Kauravas roar lustily, lancing fear through the 
Pandus and the Srinjayas. Karna himself addresses his troops and says, 
‘Bless you Kauravas! Unite and attack with such speed that no Srinjaya 
escapes alive. We follow behind you.’ 

With his great chatra of a hundred ribs resembling the full moon held 
over his head, O Bhaarata, Karna looks like the Udaya hills bathed in 


moonlight. Arjuna, he is looking for you and he will surely come here 
swiftly. Behold him, as he shakes his formidable bow and shoots his arrows 
like serpents. Ah, look, he has seen your kapi-dhvaja and turns in this 
direction. Yes, great, great Karna comes looking for his own death, like an 
insect drawn into the mouth of a lamp. 

A noble mahatejasvin, entirely fearless, his only concern has always 
been for Duryodhana; his loyalty is absolute, and, of evil mind, he detests 
you and your brothers. Seeing Karna alone and unsupported, Duryodhana 
resolutely turns towards him, along with his chariot-force, to protect his 
friend whom he loves more than anyone. Put forth your prowess now, 
Arjuna, kill that evil one along with all his allies, and win fame, kingdom 
and happiness. Both of you are gifted with incomparable might and are 
equally famed; so when you fight him, O Partha, like a Deva and a Danava 
in the Devasura yuddha of old, let all the Kauravas see your true strength 
and Duryodhana will not be able to do anything. Remember that you are a 
purified soul, Bharatarishabha, and that the son of Radha harbours 
animosity towards the virtuous Yudhishtira. Succeed, O son of Kunti, in 
what you need to achieve. Set your heart on dharma and ride against that 
senapati of chariot-warriors, O Pravira, and his mighty five hundred 
maharathas, five thousand elephants, and twice as many horses, and 
innumerable foot-soldiers, that are all united and protect one another, and 
advance against you even now. 

Show yourself to Karna and attack him swiftly! I see his standard flying 
towards Dhrishtadyumna’s ratha. He is attacking the Panchalas and will 
wipe them out. But there are some good tidings as well, Partha, for I think 
Yudhishtira Dharmaraja lives! Look, Bhimasena has returned and now leads 
the army with the Srinjayas and Satyaki to support him. Bhima and the 
noble Panchalas are slaughtering the Kauravas, O Kaunteya, and 
Duryodhana’s troops are running helter-skelter from battle with blood 
streaming from their wounds. Bathed in blood, the Bhaarata army presents a 
dejecting sight, as of the earth with its crops destroyed. 

Yellow, red, black and white banners, adorned with stars, moons, suns 
as well as many chatras, O Arjuna, lie scattered everywhere as well as 
standards of gold, silver, brass and copper. Elephants, horses and chariot- 
warriors, lie dead all over the field, slain by the dauntless Panchalas and the 
mighty Bhimasena. 


Through their sheer valour, the Panchalas slaughter the Dhartarashtras, 
like angry lions attacking elephants. If unarmed, they snatch the weapons of 
their enemies and strike off their heads and arms. The Panchala chariots, 
elephants and cavalry charge the Kauravas and the vast Dhartarashtra force, 
like swift swans leaving the Manasa Lake and flying to the Ganga. The 
heroic Kripa, Karna and other commanders defend their positions doughtily 
but the Panchala shuras led by Dhrishtadyumna wreak havoc among the 
Dhartarashtra army already sinking under Bhima’s prodigious assault. 

The greater part of the Dhartarashtra army is panic-stricken as their 
elephants, scourged by Bhima’s cloth-yard arrows, either fall like mountain 
summits riven by Indra’s Vajra or run wildly from battle, crushing their own 
ranks. Do you hear Bhimasena’s deafening shouts and roars of victory, 
Arjuna? And there comes the prince of the Nishadas on his wonderful 
elephants, like Yama with his bludgeon, to meet the son of Pandu in battle. 
Look! Bhima has cut off the roaring prince’s arms at the shoulders, his 
spear still in his grasp, with ten bright cloth-yard shafts. 

And now Bhima turns his violent attention to the other elephants that 
look like masses of blue clouds and are ridden by skillful hastikas. See how 
they strike Vrikodara with multiple darts and javelins. But look how he 
dispatches them with his arrows, seven at a time, and cuts down their 
triumphal standards and slaughters the rest with ten shafts. The triumphal 
shouts of the Dhartarashtras have all died in their throats, now that they 
have encountered Bhima, who is equal to Purandara himself. Bhimasena by 
himself holds full three aksauhini of Duryodhana’s soldiers at bay.” 

Bhimasena, O Bhaarata, achieves impossible feats of grand valour and 
Arjuna finishes off the remnants of your army and routs the mighty 
Samsaptakas, yet again, so they flee in all directions. Many among them, 
who fall and become the guests of Indra in his hallowed halls, attain 
happiness. Arjuna Naravyaghra, with his deadly, unerring volleys, every 
shaft among them a killer, continues to annihilate the Dhartarashtra host of 
the four kinds of forces.’” 


CANTO 61 


. ‘T) hritarashtra says, ‘When Bhima was battling our elephant 

legions, and the Pandus and the Srinjayas were slaughtering my 

troops, when the morale of my vast army was low, what did the Kauravas 
do, O Sanjaya?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Duryodhana confronts Bhima, as Karna rallies the troops 
and then counter-attacks the Pandava chariot-warriors who _ brace 
themselves to meet his charge. Bhimasena, Satyaki, Sikhandi, Janamejaya, 
Dhrishtadyumna, the Prabhadrakas and the Panchalas, sensing an 
opportunity, charge in from every side to support the Pandavas. Your 
maharathas, O Naravyaghra, join battle and the two armies with their 
chariots, elephants, cavalry, and large bodies of foot-soldiers, meet in a 
tremendous melee. 

Sikhandi fights Karna, Dhrishtadyumna clashes with your son Dusasana 
and his large force; Nakula struggles against Vrishasena, while Yudhishtira 
battles Chitrasena. Sahadeva engages Uluka, Satyaki combats Sakuni, and 
the sons of Draupadi take on the other Kauravas. Aswatthaman combats 
Arjuna, Kripa engages Yudhamanyu, while Kritavarman fights Uttamauyjas. 
A lone and unsupported Bhimasena takes on the Kuru divisions led by your 
sons. 

Sikhandi, the slayer of Bhishma, holds Karna in check with his winged 
shafts and the Sutaputra, his lips trembling in rage, hits him with three 


arrows between his eyebrows. The duel heats up and in an exchange of 
arrows, Karna kills his opponent’s horses, charioteer, and then destroys his 
standard. A livid Sikhandi jumps down from his chariot and hurls a dart 
which Karna knocks down and quickly follows up with more arrows which 
badly wound Sikhandi, forcing him to retreat. Karna, unhindered, goes on 
to scatter the Pandava troops like a strong wind disperses a heap of cotton. 

Meanwhile, Dhrishtadyumna and Dusasana engage in a bloody combat 
of their own where they strike and maul each other. An _ irate 
Dhrishtadyumna even splits Dusasana’s bow, earning a loud shout of 
applause from all the troops but your son takes up another bow and blocks 
Dhrishtadyumna with showers of arrows. The soldiers as well as the 
Siddhas and the Apsaras are wonderstruck at this amazing ability of your 
son, to defy the mighty Dhrishtadyumna, like a lion holding a huge elephant 
at bay. Many Panchala chariot-warriors, elephants and cavalry, O 
Dhritarashtra, come to his rescue and surround your son. The resultant 
battle is as frightful, like the destruction at pralaya at yuga’s end. 

Vrishasena, fighting by the side of his father, Karna, duels with Nakula 
in which they injure each other in an exchange of thousands of arrows. 
However, their divisions run away and Karna who was following, tries to 
dissuade them while Nakula turns his attention against the Kauravas. 
Vrishasena, avoiding Nakula, goes to protect his father’s chariot-wheel. 

Sahadeva fights an angry Uluka and kills his four horses and his 
charioteer. Uluka manages to escape and finds refuge among the division of 
the Trigartas. 

Satyaki engages Sakuni in an uneven contest in which he easily cuts 
down his banner, injures his charioteer and kills his horses. Although 
Sakuni responds and pierces Satyaki’s armour and then destroys his golden 
standard, he prudently takes shelter in his son Uluka’s chariot that drives 
him away with great speed from the battlefield. Satyaki, Rajan, turns his 
attention to your army and decimates them mercilessly. 

Yudhamanyu severs Kripa’s bow who picks up a new one and shoots 
down Yudhamanyu’s standard, charioteer and umbrella forcing him to 
retreat, driving his ratha himself. 

Uttamaujas sends a scathing volley of arrows at Kritavarman and a 
bloody battle ensues, O Rajan, such as I have never seen before. 
Kritavarman ultimately injures his opponent severely in the chest, and he 
collapses, forcing his charioteer to flee with him to safety. 


Your son Duryodhana stands firm against Bhimasena until the latter 
destroys his horses, charioteer, ratha and standard, forcing him to retreat, 
which delights the Pandava troops. At this, the whole Kuru army charge 
Bhimasena determined to kill him and the din of battle is frightful, Rajan. 

Dusasana and Sakuni arrive with a large elephant force and attack 
Bhima with small arrows. Vrikodara responds spiritedly, forces Duryodhana 
to retreat and quickly confronts that elephant force with his Devastras like 
Indra against the Asuras. Covered all over with gold mesh and varied 
gemstones, the elephants are spectacular like clouds charged with lightning. 
Bhima’s shafts cover the sky like myriads of insects blanketing a fire, and 
he quickly decimates them. The elephants stampede and some with their 
hearts pierced, collapse with their warriors clad in their studded finery. The 
earth is refulgent, as if someone has strewn it with broken mountains and 
exhausted planets. Bhimasena’s arrows injure the elephants in their temples, 
frontal globes, limbs and trunks, and they are like mountains with liquid 
metals running down their sides as they flee in their hundreds. All that we 
can see are Bhima’s two arms, like two mighty serpents, smeared with 
sandalwood paste and other unguents, continually drawing the bow. The 
elephants hearing the sound of his bowstring and his striking palms that 
sound like the peal of thunder, run away in fear ejecting urine and dung. 
Bhima’s feats are reminiscent of Rudra destroying all beings.’” 


CANTO 62 


°S anjaya says, ‘Riding on his magnificent ratha yoked to white 
horses, with Narayana himself as the sarathy, Arjuna appears on 
the scene like a tempest, agitating your army. Meanwhile, a rampaging 
Duryodhana leads half his troops and surrounds Yudhishtira; the two 
Kshatriyas cover each other with their razor-headed arrows. The Kaurava 
troops try to seize Yudhishtira but the Pandavas send Nakula, Sahadeva, 
Dhrishtadyumna, and a full aksauhini of troops to his rescue. Brushing 
aside your chariot-warriors, Bhimasena also races up to save the cornered 
king. However, shooting furious volleys of shafts, Karna single-handedly 
holds them up. Though they fight with great valour and determination, they 
cannot overwhelm Karna. 

Sahadeva invokes a devastra and rakes Duryodhana with twenty arrows. 
Seeing the Kuru king covered in blood, like an elephant with split temples, 
a furious Karna comes rushing in, summons his astras and routs Yudhishtira 
and Dhrishtadyumna’s troops. Cascades of his shafts fall together, one so 
quickly behind the other that they collide, ignite and a conflagration blazes 
in the sky. His arms smeared with red sandalwood paste and adorned with 
jewels and gold, Karna looses with unearthly force and fills the ten 
directions of the sky with arrows, each one piercing an enemy watrior. 
Yudhishtira is sorely injured yet he strikes back at Karna with fifty fierce 
barbs. 


The dreadful battle continues into the darkness of night, O 
Bharatarishabha, and loud cries of distress arise from your troops, as lethal 
arrows fitted with kanka feathers, swords and clubs annihilate them. 
Wherever Dharmaputra Yudhishtira casts his eyes in anger, there your army 
breaks. An enraged Karna attacks him, shooting cloth-yard shafts and 
crescent-tipped arrows and shafts with calf tooth heads. They shoot 
vigorously at each other until Karna strikes the royal son of Pandu squarely 
through his chest with three heavy arrows and forces him to sit down on the 
platform of his ratha. Yudhishtira tells his sarathy to turn away from the 
duel. 

At this, all the Dhartarashtras, with their king, start shouting, “Seize 
him! Seize him!” and pursue Yudhishtira. Seventeen hundred Kekaya 
troops join some of the Panchala forces and stop the Dhartarashtras. During 
that pitched battle, those two awesome warriors, Duryodhana and Bhima, 
come face to face and duel.’” 


CANTO 63 


: S anjaya says, ‘Meanwhile, Karna takes the offensive against the 
chariot-warriors and archers of the Kaikeyas that face him and 
unleashes howling gales of deadly arrows at them. He despatches full five 
hundred of them to Yamaloka. Those warriors suffer grievous losses and, 
finding the son of Radha irresistible, take refuge with Bhimasena’s troops. 
Karna again rides after Yudhishtira, who, almost insensible from his 
wounds, is driving slowly towards the Pandava encampment flanked by 
Nakula and Sahadeva. He shoots the king with three lethal arrows but 
Yudhishtira strikes back. Madri’s twin sons, who protect Yudhishtira’s 
flanks, sweep down on Karna and fire volleys of arrows at him. Karna first 
quells them and goes on to kill Yudhishtira’s horses, knocks down his 
diadem, destroys Nakula’s horses and immobilises his chariot. The brothers 
are compelled to find refuge in Sahadeva’s ratha. 

Seeing his nephews hard pressed, Salya says to Karna, “You intend to 
fight Phalguna today so why do you waste time on Yudhishtira? You will be 
an object of derision and mirth when you finally encounter Partha, 
wounded, your astras and arrows exhausted, your armour weakened, and 
your charioteer and horses fatigued.” 

Ignoring Salya, Karna continues to assail Yudhishtira and also targets 
the twins. He forces Yudhishtira to turn back and face him and prepares 
with great resolution to make an end of him. Now Salya laughingly tells 


Karna, “Duryodhana has always thought you a better warrior than Partha; 
what will you gain if you kill Yudhishtira? You can hear the boom of 
Krishna’s conch as well as the twang of Arjuna’s bow. Look how he 
devours our troops and strikes down our chariot-warriors with his arrows. 
How ably Yudhamanyu, Uttamaujas, Satyaki and Dhrishtadyumna support 
him! 

And look where Bhimasena has the better of Duryodhana. Do 
something quickly so that he does not kill the king today in front of us all. 
Go and rescue the king from dire peril. What will you gain by killing the 
sons of Madri or Yudhishtira if Bhima kills Duryodhana?” 

At Salya’s urging, O Kuvalayesa, and seeing Bhima about to overpower 
Duryodhana, Karna turns away from Yudhishtira and the twins, and rushes 
to rescue your son. This enables Yudhishtira to retreat on Sahadeva’s ratha, 
his body torn and lacerated, and accompanied by his twin brothers. He 
alights from the chariot at the Pandava camp and immediately sits down on 
his couch. While they extract the arrows from his body, the sorrowful royal 
son of Pandu says to his two brothers, “Go back now and support Bhima.” 

Using another chariot, Nakula and Sahadeva race away towards Bhima 
and take their places by his side.’” 


CANTO 64 


: S anjaya says, ‘Meanwhile, leading a large chariot-force, O Rajan, 
Aswatthaman confronts Arjuna on the field. Like the continent 
dares the surging ocean, Partha and Krishna defy that raging warrior as he 
envelops them with his missiles to the amazement of all the maharathas 
present. Arjuna conjures up a devastra, but Aswatthaman neutralises it, as 
well as all the other astras that Arjuna looses at him. The son of Drona is 
like Yama himself as he envelops the sky with volleys of lethal arrows. He 
wounds Krishna’s right arm but Arjuna strikes back, kills Aswatthaman’s 
horses and destroys a number of his maharathas. 

The battle between them is bloody and takes a fearful toll of horses, 
charioteers, riders and elephants, and soon another river of blood flows 
there. Seeing Partha rampant on the field, Aswatthaman shakes his 
formidable bow and shoots at him from every side, bloodying him. With a 
sizzling volley, Arjuna destroys his opponent’s bow. Picking up a vicious 
spiked mace, Aswatthaman hurls it at Arjuna, but, smiling, Partha 
demolishes it like a thunderbolt splitting a mountain. To overpower Arjuna, 
a livid Aswatthaman invokes an Aindrastra, and a deluge of arrows falls 
from the sky. Arjuna negates it with his own Aindrastra that blankets 
Aswatthaman’s chariot with arrows. The battle continues as both warriors 
launch powerful astras until Aswatthaman is wounded and his charioteer 
dead. Then, in a wonderful demonstration of skill, he guides his horses 


himself and fights Arjuna at the same time, until his adversary severs his 
reins and his horses bolt. 

Meanwhile, with loud yells, the Pandavas charge your troops from all 
sides, loosing deadly storms of arrows at them. They repeatedly rout the 
vast Dhartarashtra host, O Rajan, in the very presence of your sons, and 
Sakuni and Karna! The Sutaputra roars, “Stop! Stop!” but to no avail. 

Seeing the Dhartarashtra army run, the Pandavas let out shouts of 
triumph. 

Duryodhana says urgently to Karna, “Look how despite your presence 
our army is beset by the Pandavas! O Mahabaho, thousands of our warriors 
look to you for guidance. You must rally them!’ Karna replies with a smile, 
“You will see my prowess and the energy of my astras, O Naradeva! Today, 
I will annihilate the Panchalas and the Pandavas.” 

Picking up his magnificent bow, the Vijaya, Karna strings and strums it 
repeatedly. Reassuring his terrified troops, he launches the Bhargavastra, 
which releases millions and millions of blazing arrows fletched with kanka 
and peacock feathers and shrouds the entire Pandava army. Soon, loud wails 
of despair arise and the earth trembles with falling elephants, horses, 
chariots and soldiers killed in their thousands. Karna stands triumphant, 
glorious like a smokeless fire, while the stricken Panchalas and the Chedis 
run wildly all over the field and cry for Arjuna and Krishna to rescue them 
like the spirits of the dead calling for Yama. 

Hearing their cries for help Arjuna tells Krishna, “Behold, O Mahabaho, 
the power of the dreadful Bhargavastra! I fear that no one can contain it. 
Karna is like the Destroyer himself. Look how he repeatedly casts angry 
glances at me, and I feel that I may not escape him. A living man may meet 
with either victory or defeat. However, to the man who is dead, O 
Hrishikesha, even death is victory. How can he who is dead, face defeat?” 

Krishna replies, “Karna has severely wounded Yudhishtira. Go and 
comfort him first, O Partha, before you face Karna.” 

Arjuna agrees, and they drive away avoiding the battle, hoping that, 
meanwhile, Karna will become fatigued. They fail to find Yudhishtira 
anywhere. Arjuna rides on after he fights and defeats Aswatthaman, the 
shura that even the Vajradhari himself may have found hard to subdue.’” 


CANTO 65 


°S anjaya says, ‘After he bests Aswatthaman, Arjuna surveys his 

own troops and applauds the efforts of his warriors. This raises 

their morale and the maharathas continue to fight with vigour. Not seeing 

his brother Yudhishtira, he goes to Bhima and asks him, “Tell me, where is 
the king?” 

Bhima replies, “Gravely wounded by Karna, Dharmaraja Yudhishtira 
left the field. I doubt whether he still lives.” 

Arjuna says, “Go quickly, Bhima, and find out! He has surely retreated 
to our camp. Remember, despite the grievous injuries he sustained in the 
fierce fight with Drona, he remained on the battlefield until we killed the 
Acharya. Our brother was in great danger in today’s battle, so go now and 
ascertain his condition; I will stay here and hold off our enemies!” 

Bhima replies, “O Arjuna, it is best if you go. If I leave now, my 
enemies will accuse me of fleeing the battle!” 

Arjuna says, “The Samsaptakas confront my aksauhini! I cannot leave 
this place without overcoming them.” 

Bhimasena assures Arjuna, “I can contain the Samsaptakas on my own. 
So go, O Kurupravira!” 

Although Arjuna feels that his brother Bhima may be taking too much 
upon himself, he nevertheless says, “Urge the horses on, O Hrishikesha, and 
let us leave this sea of troops. I want to see king Ajatasatru!” 


As he is about to drive away, Krishna says, “The task is not difficult for 
you, Bhima. We are going, so destroy the Samsaptakas!” 

Then, after leaving Bhima in charge of the army and telling him to raze 
the Samsaptakas, Krishna drives his ratha yoked to horses swift as Garuda 
at great speed in search of the king. They find Yudhishtira resting on his bed 
and, alighting from their chariot, they touch his feet. Seeing him safe, the 
two Krishnas are overjoyed, like the twin Ashvinis on seeing Vasava. A 
smile breaks out on Yudhishtira’s careworn, anguished face, and the king 
embraces and congratulates them both like Vivasvat complimenting the 
twin Ashvinis, or like Brihaspati felicitating Sankara and Vishnu after they 
slew the mighty Asura Jambha. He assumes that Karna has been killed and 
is filled with indescribable delight and speaks to them in a voice choked 
with joy.” 


CANTO 66 


- S anjaya continues ‘Yudhishtira says to the two Krishnas, 
“Welcome, Devakiputra and Dhananjaya! The sight of you both, 
O Achyuta and Arjuna, fills me with joy. I see that, without being wounded, 
you two have slain the maharatha Karna! In war, he was like a serpent of 
virulent poison. He was accomplished in the use of all weapons and as the 
senapati of the Dhartarashtras, he was their invincible armour and protector. 
Those great archers Vrishasena and Sushena always guarded his back in 
battle. 

He was energetic and invincible, and he learnt the astra shastra from 
Parasurama Bhargava. He led the Dhartarashtras and was their saviour. 
Unequalled, he always wished for Duryodhana’s good and for this he was 
ever willing and eager to persecute us. As a maharatha, he had no equal in 
all the worlds. He was invincible in battle even to Vasava and the Devas. In 
tejas and oorjas, he was equal to Agni and Vayu. He was unfathomable as 
the Patalas, and this enhancer of the joys of friends was like Yama himself 
to his enemies. 

It is only through good fortune that you could kill Karna, and you have 
now come to me like a pair of Devas after overcoming an Asura! 

Today, I fought a great battle with that shura who was like Rudra 
exterminating all living beings. He cut down my standard, killed my horses 
and two Parshni charioteers; he destroyed my ratha in the very sight of 


Yuyudhana, Dhrishtadyumna, Nakula and Sahadeva, the heroic Sikhandi, as 
also the sons of Draupadi, and all the Panchalas. Having mastered those 
innumerable enemies, Karna mahatejasvin then subdued me, O Mahabaho, 
although I fought resolutely. 

He pursued me, overwhelmed all my protectors and addressed coarse, 
harsh words to me. That I am still alive, O Dhananjaya, is only due to the 
prowess of Bhimasena. What more need I say? I cannot bear the 
humiliation I experienced today. For thirteen years, O Dhananjaya, through 
fear of Karna, I had no sleep at night or any peace during the day. Filled 
with hatred of the Sutaputra, I burned within myself, O Dhananjaya. 

Like the bird baddhrinasa I fled Karna, thinking that the time for my 
own death had come. All my time I spent thinking how I could kill Karna in 
battle. Awake or asleep, the fear of Karna possessed me and the universe 
appeared to me to be full of just him. He vanquished me in battle but left 
me alive. After Karna humiliated me today, of what use is my life or my 
kingdom? At his hands today, I experienced what I never suffered during 
this war at the hands of Bhishma, Kripa or Drona. 

So, O Kuntiputra, tell me in detail how you killed Karna! He was equal 
to Sakra himself in war, to Yama in prowess and to Rama in weaponry. He 
was a mighty chariot-warrior, a master of all modes of warfare, the greatest 
of all archers, and a man among all men! Dhritarashtra and his son always 
worshipped him and they were convinced that Karna would be your death, 
O Bharatarishabha. How then did you kill Karna who was keenly seeking 
you on the battlefield? Does he lie on the bare ground, slain by your keen 
arrows fitted with kanka feathers? Ah, you have accomplished a great deed 
for me today! 

Have you really slain that sinful wretch who always hated and opposed 
you and who, in his arrogance, was looking everywhere for you on the 
battlefield, and offering a magnificent chariot made of gold along with a 
number of elephants, bulls and horses to anyone who would point you out? 

Have you really killed that sinner who, intoxicated with pride about his 
valour, would brag incessantly in the Kuru sabha and who was exceedingly 
dear to Suyodhana? Does he lie on the field today, his limbs mangled with 
your shafts and all steeped in blood? Have Duryodhana’s two arms at last 
been broken? Does his foolish boast, ‘I will kill Phalguna!’ in the midst of 
the kings to gladden Duryodhana, remain unfulfilled? 


O son of Indra, have you killed that foolish Karna, that Sutaputra who 
swore an oath that he would not wash his feet as long as Arjuna lived? 

In the Kuru sabha, vile Karna had said to Panchali, ‘Why don’t you 
abandon the Pandavas, who have lost their power, and are weak and fallen?’ 

Tell me, does the foolish and sinful Karna who vowed that he would not 
return from battle without killing Krishna and Partha, lie dead on the field, 
his body pierced with arrows? You know about the battle between the 
Srinjayas and the Kauravas in which I was brought to this plight. Have you 
slain that Karna today? 

O Savyasachi, have you today, with your relucent shafts from the 
Gandiva, cut his resplendent head from his neck? When he mauled me with 
his dreadful shafts, I prayed fervently that you would kill him. Have you 
answered my prayer, Arjuna? 

Counting on Karna’s protection, the vain Suyodhana disdained us. Have 
you today destroyed that refuge of our evil cousin? 

Have you slain the Sutaputra of unbridled wrath, who once, in the 
presence of the Kauravas and in the midst of the Kuru court, called us 
sesame seeds without kernels? 

Have you killed the malignant Sutaputra, who laughingly told Dusasana 
to forcibly drag Yajnasena’s daughter into the Kuru sabha after Sakuni had 
won her in game of dice? 

Have you today slain that witless Karna who rudely upbraided that our 
Pitama Bhishma, for counting him as only half a maharatha during the 
enumeration of rathas and atirathas? 

Today, finally, you have extinguished, O Phalguna, the fire in my heart 
that was born of revenge and fanned by the wind of humiliation. Tell me 
how you made an end of Karna in battle. The news of Karna’s death is more 
agreeable to me than I can tell you. Tell me, therefore, how he was killed. 
Like the divine Vishnu waiting for the arrival of Indra with the news of 
Vritra’s death, I have waited so long for you, O shura!””” 


CANTO 67 


: S anjaya says, ‘Arjuna of infinite tejas says to Yudhishtira, “O 
foremost of kings, while I was battling the Samsaptakas today, 
Drona’s son Aswatthaman suddenly surrounded me with the Kaurava troops 
and attacked me. I killed full five hundred of their rathikas, before 
Aswatthaman rushed at me like a prince of elephants against a lion. That 
Kurupravira raked Krishna and me with arrows like poison or fire. He 
exhausted thousands of arrows from the eight carts, each drawn by eight 
bullocks, which bore his shafts. He shot them all at me, with skill, force and 
determination, all from his bowstring stretched to his very ear, and they 
were like a black raincloud of the monsoon. 

So quickly did he charge about that we could not discern from which 
direction he shot his arrows, nor could we see when he took up his shafts 
and when he loosed them from his bow drawn into a circle. He pierced both 
Krishna and me with five blazing arrows each. I struck back at him with all 
my prowess and soon he resembled a porcupine with my barbs. He and his 
troops were bathed in blood and he took refuge with Karna’s chariot 
division. 

Seeing his troops overwhelmed and escape with his elephant force and 
cavalry, Karna attacked me with many seasoned rathikas. I killed them all 
and, then avoiding Karna, I have flown here to see you, for both Krishna 
and I feared for your life. All the Panchalas are terrified at the very sight of 


Karna, like cattle at the scent of a lion. The Prabhadrakas, too, are like men 
who have entered the open jaws of Death when they approach him. He has 
already despatched to Yama’s abode full seventeen hundreds of those 
unfortunate rathikas. 

You also encountered Aswatthaman, who took his toll of you before 
Kana attacked you. I hoped that you were not dead but had retreated to our 
camp to rest, but I had to see you for myself. I have seen the great 
Bhargavastra of Karna, which he unleashed against us. There is now no 
other warrior among the Srinjayas who can resist the mighty Sutaputra. 

Let Sini’s grandson Satyaki and Dhrishtadyumna be the protectors of 
my chariot-wheels, while Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas guard my rear. 
Then, come and watch me fight Karna, O Bhaarata, like Sakra fighting 
Vritra. Look there, the Prabhadrakas attack Karna and six thousand princes 
sacrifice themselves in battle to attain swarga. If I do not kill Karna today, 
with all his kin, then let that end be mine, which is his who does not fulfil 
an oath he has sworn. 

I beg you bless me so that victory be mine in battle. Yonder, the 
Dhartarashtras are about to overwhelm Bhima. I will, O lion among kings, 
slay the Suta’s son and his troops and, indeed, all our enemies!””” 


CANTO 68 


: S anjaya says, ‘Hearing that the mighty Karna is still alive, already 
hurting from Karna’s arrows, Yudhishtira flashes angrily at 
Arjuna, “Your army has been routed and set to flight in a way that is 
scarcely honourable! You were afraid, and you betrayed Kunti when you 
deserted Bhima. And now you have come here without killing Karna? In 
the Dwaitavana, Arjuna, you swore to me that you would kill Karna from a 
single chariot. Why then have you come here after avoiding Karna and 
deserting Bhima? If you had confessed to me then that you would not be 
able to face Karna in battle, we could have thought of other ways to deal 
with him. 

You have not kept your solemn word, Arjuna. You have flung us down 
in the midst of our enemies and shattered us. I have always looked to you 
for great things and benefits. I have always blessed you. But today you have 
belied all my expectations, and I am like a man waiting for fruit from a tree 
that he has nourished but getting only flowers from it. Like a fishhook 
hidden within a piece of meat, or poison in food, you promised us the 
kingdom only to betray us in the end. 

For these thirteen years, O Dhananjaya, like seeds sown in earth 
expecting the seasonal showers that the gods send, we have lived in hope 
relying on you. 


O foolish one, a voice from the skies told Pritha on the seventh day after 
your birth, ‘This son of yours will have the prowess of Vasava himself and 
will overcome all his enemies! Gifted with superior tejas, he will vanquish 
all the Devas and other beings at Khandava. He will subjugate the Madras, 
the Kalingas, and the Kaikeyas and he will slay the Kurus. There will be no 
archer superior to him and no being will ever be able to defeat him. With 
his senses under control, and having mastered all the branches of 
knowledge, this son of yours, by merely desiring it, will bring all the world 
under his sway. 

Your noble son, O Kunti, will be as handsome as Soma, quick as Vayu, 
patient as Meru, forgiving as Bhumi, will rival Surya in splendour, Kubera 
in prosperity, Sakra in courage and Vishnu in might. Like Aditi’s son 
Vishnu, he will be famous for destroying his enemies and serving his 
friends. He will, besides, be the founder of a vamsa!’ 

This was what the voice said from the sky on the summit of the 
Satasringa Mountains, in the hearing of many Rishis and Munis. However, 
all that has not come to pass. Alas, it only shows that even the gods may 
speak untruths. 

I have also heard words of praise about you from many of the great 
Rishis, so I never expected that Suyodhana would find such success and 
prosperity, or that you would be afraid of Karna. You ride upon a wonderful 
chariot that the celestial artificer Tvashtri wrought with axles that do not 
creak and which flies the kapi-dhvaja. Your sword hangs from your belt of 
gold and silk; your bow the Gandiva is full six cubits long; and you have 
Kesava as your sarathy. Why, then, are you terrified of Karna and why do 
you run from battle, Partha? O evil one, if you had given your bow to 
Krishna and become his sarathy, he would by now have killed the fierce 
Karna like Sakra, the lord of the Maruts, destroying the Asura Vritra with 
his Vajra. 

If you cannot stand up to the fierce son of Radha today, as he lords it 
over the field of battle, give your Gandiva to some other king, who is your 
superior in the knowledge and use of great weapons. And then the world 
will not find us unhappy, bereft of our sons, wives and kingdom, and sunk, 
O son of Pandu, in a fathomless hell of misery. 

It would have been better for you if you had never been born to Kunti, 
or been aborted in the fifth month of her pregnancy, O Kshatriya, rather 
than to escape like this from battle! Shame on your Gandiva, shame on the 


might of your arms, shame on your inexhaustible quivers, shame on your 
kapi-dhvaja and shame on your chariot that was Agni’s gift to you!””” 


CANTO 69 


°S anjaya says, ‘Arjuna flies into a rage listening to Yudhishtira; 
livid, he draws his sword to kill him. Krishna quickly intervenes 
and says, “Why, Partha, do you draw your sword when there is no one here 
you have to fight? The mighty Bhimasena has the Dhartarashtras at his 
mercy. You came from the battlefront to see the king. Now that you have 
found that Yudhishtira is well, why this madness at a time when you should 
rejoice? I ask you, O son, of Kunti, why do you grasp that formidable sword 
in anger?” 

Looking at Yudhishtira and breathing like an angry serpent, Arjuna says 
to Krishna, “It is my secret vow that I will sever the head of the man who 
says to me “Give your Gandiva to another man.’ 

This king spoke these words in your presence, O Krishna! I dare not 
forgive him, especially one who does not allow the slightest fall from 
dharma. Slaying this Purusavara, I will honour my vow. It is for this that I 
drew the sword, O Yadusrestha. I will kill the king and pay my debt to truth 
and dispel my grief and fever. O Janardana, yet, you tell what you think is 
proper. You know all the past and future of this universe. I will do whatever 
you tell me.” 

Krishna says, “Shame, shame! Arjuna, you have yielded to anger at 
such a time? No one who knows dharma would do what you are doing 
today! The man who flouts dharma, or does what seems to be dharma but 


which the shastras condemn, is the worst of men. You do not know the laws 
of the Rishis, based on the dictates of dharma. The man who is 
unacquainted with these rulings will be baffled and stupefied, O Partha, 
even as you are now confused in discriminating between right and wrong. 

What should be done and what should not can be ascertained only 
through the scriptures. You, however, do not know the scriptures and so you 
are ignorant about dharma. You do not even know, Partha, that the killing of 
living beings is a sin and abstention from injury to even animals is the 
highest virtue. One may even speak an untruth, but one should never kill. 
How then, O Narottama, could you wish to kill your eldest brother, this 
Dharmaraja, who knows all about dharma? The laws of dharma never 
permit the killing of a man not engaged in battle, an enemy who has turned 
his back on a battle, one who escapes from a battle, one who seeks 
protection, joins his hands, yields himself up or is without a chariot. All 
these exist now in Yudhishtira. 

Foolishly you swore this secret vow of yours, O Partha, which now 
drives you toward a heinous act. Why do you rush towards your revered 
brother to kill him, without resolving the most subtle and difficult way of 
dharma? I will explain this particular mystery of dharma that Bhishma, 
Yudhishtira, Vidura, and the renowned Kunti have laid on. Listen carefully, 
Dhananjaya! 

One who speaks truth follows dharma and there is nothing higher than 
that. The essential attributes of truth in pravritti, conduct, is exceedingly 
difficult to understand. In diverse situations, truth when spoken may 
become false, and falsehood become truth. One may lie where there is a 
threat to life, where there is a threat to one’s entire property, in marriage, 
when enjoying a woman and for the sake of a Brahmana. The above five 
kinds of falsehood have been declared to be sinless. On these occasions, 
falsehood becomes truth and truth falsehood. 

Only a fool practises truth without knowing the real difference between 
truth and falsehood. One can be conversant with dharma only when one is 
able to distinguish between truth and falsehood. There is little wonder 
therefore that, even when he perpetrates a cruel deed, a wise man may 
obtain great merit as Valaka did when he killed the blind beast. Similarly, 
there is little wonder that a foolish and ignorant man, from a desire to win 
punya, commits great sin as Kausika did by living among the rivers.” 


Arjuna asks, “Holy one, tell me about Valaka and about Kausika living 
among rivers.” 

Vasudeva says, “There lived a hunter named Valaka. He killed animals 
as a means of livelihood for his family and not from any desire to kill for 
pleasure. Devoted to the duties of his varna and always speaking the truth, 
he never harboured any malice and supported his parents and other 
dependents. One day, despite searching long for an animal to hunt with 
perseverance and care, he found none. Finally, he saw a blind beast of prey, 
whose sense of smell replaced the defect of his eyes, drinking water. 
Although he had never seen such an animal before, he killed it immediately 
and a shower of divine petals fell on him from the skies. A wonderful Deva 
ratha, filled with the songs of Apsaras and the music of their instruments, 
came from heaven to take away the hunter. 

It emerged that the blind beast that the hunter had killed had practised 
great tapasya, had obtained a boon and was indiscriminately killing all the 
creatures of the forest. It was for this reason that the Swayambhu, Brahma, 
had made him blind. Valaka went to heaven as he had killed that animal 
which had resolved to slay all creatures. Dharma, O Arjuna, is difficult to 
understand. 

There lived a Rishi named Kausika who had little knowledge of the 
scriptures, far from any village, at the confluence of many rivers. He took 
an oath, saying, ‘I will always speak the truth.’ 

He then became celebrated, O Dhananjaya, as a speaker of only truth. 
Once, some people escaping from robbers entered Kausika’s vana. Soon the 
robbers came in search of them and asked Kausika, that speaker of truth, ‘O 
holy one, where have the fugitives we are hunting for, gone? If you have 
seen them, tell us in the name of Truth.’ 

Kausika told them the truth, saying, “Those men have entered this 
wood.’ 

Partha, Kausika told them the truth and those cruel bandits searched out 
the men in hiding and slew them all. Ignorant of the subtleties of dharma, 
Kausika committed a great sin by telling the truth and, as a result, he went 
to hell, just as a foolish and ignorant man, unacquainted with the subtleties 
of morality, goes to hell when he fails to ask mature persons for answers to 
his doubts. 

You must have discrimination to distinguish virtue from sin. 
Sometimes, one may acquire that high and unattainable knowledge through 


the exercise of reason, while many feel that the scriptures lay down what 
dharma is. I do not contradict this, although the shastras do not provide for 
every contingency. Thus, they laid down the main principles of morality: 
that which is not offensive to religion. Dharma protects and preserves the 
people, so it is the conclusion of the Rishis that whatever conserves, is 
dharma. 

Arjuna, I have told you the signs and indications of dharma. Knowing 
this now, you decide whether you want to kill Yudhishtira or not.” 

Arjuna says, “O Kesava, what you say is both intelligent and wise. You 
are like our parent, and you are our final refuge. Nothing is unknown to you 
in the three worlds, and you are conversant with the canons of dharma. You 
know my vow that I will instantly kill the man who tells me, ‘Partha, give 
your Gandiva to someone braver than you.’ 

Bhima has also taken a similar oath that whoever calls him ‘tularak’ he 
will kill that person there and then. Yudhishtira has repeatedly said ‘Give 
your bow to someone else’ to me in your presence. O Pravira, if I kill him, I 
will not be able to live in this world for another moment. I have sinned for 
entertaining the thought of killing my king through folly and the loss of my 
discrimination. O Dharmatman, tell me how I can keep my vow, known 
throughout the world, and at the same time ensure that both Yudhishtira and 
I live.” 

Krishna says, “The king was fatigued, grieving, and Karna’s arrows 
lacerated him, even while he left the battle. He laboured under a burden of 
sorrow when he spoke harshly to you in anger. He knows that no one can 
face the wretched Karna other than you. It was for this, O Arjuna, that the 
king provoked you: so that you would kill Karna. The wager in the game of 
today’s battle is the ever alert and invincible Karna. The Dharmarajan 
reasoned that if Karna is killed today, the Kauravas would inevitably be 
defeated. For this he does not deserve death. 

I agree, Arjuna, that you should keep your vow. I will tell you how, 
without actually killing Yudhishtira, he may yet be considered dead. As 
long as a respected man continues to receive respect, one may say that he is 
alive in the world of men. If, however, such a man meets with dishonour, 
one may consider him dead even though he lives. Dharmaputra Yudhishtira 
has always had your respect, as well as that Bhima and that of the twins, as 
well as of all Kshatriyas and venerable men. So, show him disrespect in 
some trifling matter. Address Yudhishtira as ‘you’ when the usual form of 


addressing him is ‘your honour’ or ‘your majesty’, and this insult will in 
effect kill him without depriving him of his life. Both Atharvan and Angiras 
have declared this way to be the best in such a situation. 

Men who desire good should always act in this manner without any 
scruple. Conversant with dharma as you are, address Yudhishtira 
Dharmaraja in the manner I have indicated. He will never regard this death 
at your hands as an offence. After you address him in this manner, you must 
then touch his feet and speak words of respect to him, and soothe his 
wounded honour. Your brother is wise, serene and will never be angry with 
you. Freed from falsehood as well as from fratricide, Arjuna, you can 
happily go forth to face Karna!”’” 


CANTO 70 


°S anjaya says, ‘Arjuna lauds Krishna’s advice and then accosts 
Dharmaraja Yudhishtira in harsh language the like of which he 
has never used before. 

Arjuna says, “O Rajan, do not upbraid me when you are resting a full 
two krosas away from the battle. Bhima, who is fighting alone against some 
of the greatest warriors in the world, has a right to scold me for he has 
routed his enemies, killed many kings and maharathas, great elephants, 
heroic horsemen, countless brave warriors, and in addition, has killed 
another thousand hill elephants and ten thousand Kamboja mountaineers. 
He accomplishes the most difficult feats, the like of which you can never 
hope to achieve. 

Fighting on foot with his gada, sword, bow and broken parts of his 
chariots, he has destroyed numberless horsemen, chariots and elephants. 
Mighty as Kubera and Yama, and powerful as Indra, he kills many enemies 
with his feet and his bare hands and destroys hostile armies single- 
handedly. Such a Bhimasena has the right to reproach me, but not you who 
uses friends for protection. Bhima is now in the midst of the Dhartarashtra 
forces, holding their foremost chariot-warriors, elephants, cavalry and foot- 
soldiers at bay, slaughtering them all the while. That Paraviraha has the 
right to rebuke me, not you. 


He annihilates the Kalingas, the Vangas, the Angas, the Nishadas, and 
the Magadhas, and vast numbers of elephants that look like masses of blue 
clouds. Riding on a worthy chariot and brandishing his bow, holding his 
arrows in his other hand, he unleashes arrows like thunderstorms over his 
enemies. I have seen eight hundred elephants that Bhima slew, lying 
mangled and lifeless. That hero may indeed speak harsh words to me. 

The learned say that the Brahmana’s strength lies in speech, and that the 
Kshatriya’s strength is in his arms. You, O Bhaarata, are strong in words, 
especially heartless ones, and think that I am like you. I always strive to do 
you good with my soul, life and my family. Yet you wound me with words 
more terrible than arrows, and it is evident that we can expect no happiness 
from you. Lying on Draupadi’s bed you dare insult me, although I have 
slain the mightiest of maharathas for your sake. You are indifferent and 
cruel, O Bhaarata, and I have never received any joy or love from you. 

It was for your benefit that our Pitama Bhishma, that Dharmatman, told 
you how he could be killed and Drupada’s son, the noble Sikhandi, 
achieved it with my protection. I am not at all happy to think that you will 
be restored as king for you are addicted to gambling. You sinned grievously 
against us all, including Panchali; you gambled us away as only the vilest of 
men do, and you now want to vanquish your enemies with our help? You 
heard from Sahadeva about the great evils of gambling and yet you did not 
abandon the depraved game of dice. That was the reason that all of us are 
now in this hell. 

Since you began gambling, none of us has had any joy from you. O son 
of Pandu, you brought this calamity down our heads and you now dare 
speak harshly to me? You are the reason why millions of brave and noble 
men lie dead and wounded on this horrible Kurukshetra, the wounded 
among them crying out piteously. It was because of you that the Kauravas 
became offenders and are now being destroyed. Great warriors of both 
sides, from the nations of the north, the west, the east, and the south maim 
and kill one another, after incomparable feats on the battlefield. It was you 
who gambled away our kingdom. All our misfortunes arose from you, O 
Rajan! Do not provoke us now with the cruel goad of your vicious words.” 

After he speaks thus in the most harsh and bitter tone to his eldest 
brother, and thereby commits a sin, Arjuna, who is innately calm, wise and 
who never wanders from the path of dharma, is terribly dejected, remorseful 
and, breathing heavily, draws his sword. Seeing this, Krishna asks him, 


“What is this? Do you again unsheath your sword, blue as the sky? Tell me 
why, Partha.” 

In great sorrow Arjuna says to Kesava, “I will kill myself for this evil 
thing that I have done.” 

Krishna, best of all men of dharma, says to Dhananjaya, “Why are you 
dejected for saying what you did to the king? O Pravira, the tenets of 
dharma do not sanction your intention to take our own life. If, from fear of 
committing sin, you had slain the Dharmarajan today, what would have 
been your remorse and what would you not have done then? 

Dharma is subtle, inscrutable and transcendent, O Bhaarata, especially 
to the ignorant. Listen while I explain it to you. By destroying your own 
self, you will sink into a more horrible hell than if you had killed your 
brother. If you want to expiate your sin and punish yourself, now proclaim 
your own greatness and merit. You will then, O Partha, have slain yourself.” 

Arjuna understands the import of what Krishna says. “I will do so, O 
Krishna.” 

He lowers his bow and says to Yudhishtira, “Listen, O Rajan, there is no 
other archer like me, other than Pinakadhari Rudra, who also holds me in 
high esteem. I can destroy this universe of mobile and immobile creatures 
in the blink of an eye. I vanquished the whole world with all its sovereign 
kings, and brought them to your subjection. The Rajasuya yagna that you 
performed and completed with dakshina and the celestial palace that you 
own are both due to my prowess. I bear the scars on my hands of sharp 
arrows and of a great bow and on the soles of both my feet, the imprint of 
rathas. No one can vanquish a hero like me in battle. 

Nations from the north, the west, the east and the south, have been 
struck down and destroyed, and only a small remnant of the Samsaptakas 
remain. By myself I have slain half of the enemy army. | slaughtered the 
Bhaarata host that was like the army of the Devas and it now lies on the 
field as carrion for scavengers. I only fight those who have powerful astras 
and know how to use them, and this is reason why I have not reduced the 
three worlds to ashes. 

Be of good cheer now, for, riding forth upon my fearsome and 
victorious chariot, Krishna will soon go forth and surely kill the Sutaputra. 
Either I will make the Suta’s mother childless today, or Karna will end the 
life of one of Kunti’s sons. I vow that I will not take off my armour until I 
have killed Karna.” 


Saying these words to Yudhishtira, Partha throws down his weapons 
and his bow, quickly thrusts his sword back into its sheath and, his head 
hung in shame, and with folded hands, says abjectly to his brother and king, 
“Be of good cheer, O Rajan, and forgive me! You will soon understand why 
I have said all this to you and sinned. I bow down to you, O Dharmaputra.” 

Arjuna says again, “This task cannot be delayed and will be 
accomplished soon. Karna comes towards me and I will meet him. I will 
first go and help Bhima before I kill the Suta’s son. I assure you of this and 
devote my life to your cause. Know this for the truth, O Rajan.” 

Saying this, Arjuna of blazing splendour touches the king’s feet and 
rises to go and return to battle. 

Dharmaraja Yudhishtira listens to these harsh words of his brother 
Phalguna, rises up from his bed and, his heart full of sorrow, says, “Partha, 
it is indeed because I sinned during the game of dice that this calamity has 
overwhelmed you. So, strike off my head, because I am the worst of men, 
and the exterminator of my race. I am evil, an idle fool and a coward. I am 
cruel and one who reviles the old. Obedience to a brutal man like me will 
gain you nothing. 

Wretch that I am, I will this very day retire into the forest and may you 
live happily without me. A eunuch that I am, what will I do with 
sovereignty? The noble Bhimasena is fit to be king; let him ascend the 
throne. I cannot bear your harsh and angry words, most of all because they 
are true. After you have slighted me in this manner, O Arjuna, I have no use 
for my life.” 

Saying this, the king suddenly leaves his bed, truly intending to retire 
into the jungle and take sannyasa. Now, Krishna prostrates before him, and 
says, “O Rajan, you are aware of the celebrated vow of Arjuna, who is a 
man of dharma. He had sworn to kill anyone who would ask him to give up 
his Gandiva to another. You, unfortunately, said those words to him. And it 
was at my instance, O Bhumipala, that Partha insulted you—so he would 
not violate his vow, for to insult a superior is considered to be as good as 
killing him. O Rajan, you must forgive me. I bow my head to you for this 
transgression, for both Arjuna and I are committed to maintain dharma. 
Both of us throw ourselves at your mercy. The earth will today drink the 
blood of the despicable son of Radha. I swear to you that we will kill the 
Sutaputra. I, Krishna, swear to you that he whose death you desire will lose 
his life today.” 


In great anguish, Yudhishtira raises the prostrate Hrishikesha up and, 
with folded hands, says quickly, “It is as you say! I have been guilty of a sin 
and, O Govinda, you have awakened and saved me. O Madhava, O 
Achyuta, you have rescued both Arjuna and me from a sea of death. Indeed, 
today, our relatives, our allies and we have sailed over an ocean of grief on 
the raft of your intelligence. With you, O Achyuta, we are never without a 
protector and saviour.” 


CANTO 71 


: S anjaya says, “When he hears the delight in Yudhishtira’s voice, 

Krishna, Yadusreshta, turns to Arjuna who stands downcast after 

speaking so harshly to his brother. Krishna says smilingly to him, “If you 

are heartbroken after saying a few harsh words to your brother, what would 

your condition have been, O Partha, if in pursuit of dharma you had killed 
the son of Dharma with your sword? 

Dharma is so inscrutable, especially to men who are of insufficient 
understanding. Without doubt, your grief would have been unbearable from 
your fear of sin and you would have sunk into a most dreadful hell if you 
had actually killed your brother. I want you to make this Mahatman, this 
Kurudhvaha, happy. After the Dharmarajan has been gratified with your 
devotion, we will go forth to fight the Suta’s son. Kill Karna today and you 
will give Yudhishtira great happiness, O Mahabaho, and the greatest 
purpose of your life will have been achieved.” 

Then Arjuna, O Rajan, in shame, touches king Yudhishtira’s feet with 
his head and repeatedly says, “Be pleased with me. Forgive me all that I 
said to keep dharma and from fear of sinning.” 

Seeing Dhananjaya prostrate and weeping at his feet, Yudhishtira lifts 
up his brother and embraces him. They weep together for a long while, until 
they are freed from grief and become calm and cheerful again. Then 
embracing Arjuna once more with great love, and sniffing the top of his 


head, a happy Yudhishtira praises his brother and says, “Mahabaho, in the 
very sight of all the troops, Karna destroyed my armour, standard, bow, 
spear, horses and arrows. Thinking of my humiliation and seeing his feats in 
battle, Phalguna, I feel weak with grief. My very life holds no meaning for 
me any longer. If you do not kill him today, I will cast away my life’s 
breath. What use have I for my wretched life?” 

Arjuna says, “Rajan, I swear by Truth, by your grace, by Bhima, and by 
the twins, that today I will either kill Karna or be killed by him. I touch my 
weapons to sanctify my oath.” 

Arjuna then says to Krishna, “With your help, O Govinda, I will kill 
Karna today.” 

Kesava replies, “You can, O Pravira, indeed kill the mighty Karna. I 
have been thinking how we can best achieve this.” 

Krishna says again to Yudhishtira, “O Dharmaputra, you must comfort 
Arjuna and command him to kill the Suta’s son. We heard that you had been 
gravely wounded by Karna, and we came here to ascertain your health. 
Fortunately, you are alive and were not taken captive. Comfort Arjuna, and 
bless him that he may prevail.” 

Yudhishtira says, “Come here, Arjuna, and embrace me, my brother. 
You have given me good advice and said what you needed to, and I have 
forgiven you. I command you, Dhananjaya, go forth and kill Karna. Do not 
be angry for the harsh words that I spoke to you.” 

Arjuna prostrates before his brother and fervently seizes his feet. The 
king raises him, hugs him closely, sniffs his head again, and says, “O 
Dhananjaya, O Mahabaho, you have honoured me. Go forth and win 
greatness and victory.” 

Arjuna says, “Today, I will kill Radheya, who is proud of his might, 
along with all his kinsmen and followers. I vow that he, who bent his bow 
and wounded you with his arrows, will taste the bitter fruit of what he did. 
After killing Karna, I will return to pay you my homage and walk behind 
you. This I vow that I will not return from the battle without killing Karna. 
Truly do I swear this by touching your feet!” 

Yudhishtira says joyfully to the Kiritin, “Go and obtain everlasting 
fame, victory, the destruction of your enemies and then live your life as you 
wish. Let the gods grant you prosperity, and may you have and enjoy 
anything you wish for in the measure that you desire. Now go quickly into 


battle, and kill Karna, even as Purandara slew Vritra for his own 
aggrandisement.”’” 


CANTO 72 


: S anjaya says, ‘After he has calmed Yudhishtira and brought some 

hope and cheer to his heart, Arjuna says to Krishna, “Let my 

chariot be prepared afresh and furnished with all manner of weapons. The 

horses are fit and have been trained well. Deck them in their trappings and 

yoke them to my chariot. Let us go swiftly, Krishna, and fight the Suta’s 
son.” 

At this, Krishna commands Daruka, “Do everything that Arjuna has 
asked.” 

After Daruka yokes the horses to the amazing chariot covered with 
tiger-skins and readies it for battle, Arjuna takes Yudhishtira’s leave and 
blessing and, after the Brahmanas perform propitiatory rites and utter their 
blessings over him, he climbs onto his ratha. Great Arjuna, with Krishna for 
his sarathy, drives off to confront Karna. Seeing him go in such splendour, 
all those watching regard Karna as already slain. 

All the cardinal points of earth and sky, O Rajan, become serene. 
Kingfishers, parrots and herons wheel around the son of Pandu and a large 
flight of rare, beautiful and auspicious birds, called pungs, arrive and fly 
around him with joyous cries that make Arjuna go faster. The prospect of 
fresh flesh to feast on fetches fearsome kankas, vultures, cranes, hawks and 
ravens, and they fly in advance of his chariot, an auspicious omen 
foreboding the decimation of the enemy army and the killing of Karna. As 


Arjuna flies along, he perspires profusely as his anxiety about how he can 
fulfil his vow increases. 

Krishna notices this and says, “O Gandivi, no one but you could have 
vanquished all the maharathas whom you have slain with your bow. We 
have seen many heroes, each gifted with Sakra’s very prowess, attain the 
other world after encountering you in battle. Who other than you, O Vibho, 
would still be alive after facing Drona, Bhishma, Bhagadatta, Vinda, 
Anuvinda of Avanti, Sudakshina, the chief of the Kambojas, the mighty 
Srutayudha and Achyutayudha in battle? You have devastras, great power 
and skill and you are never confounded in battle. You also have humility 
that is born of knowledge. You always strike unerringly, with perfect aim, 
and have immaculate presence of mind in battle. Truly, you can destroy all 
the mobile and immobile creatures, including the very Devas and the 
Gandharvas. 

On this earth, there is no human warrior who can face you in battle. 
Amongst all the invincible Kshatriyas and even among the gods, I have not 
seen or heard of any archer who is your equal. Brahma himself created the 
great bow Gandiva that you wield. And for this as well, there is no man 
who is your peer, O Partha. 

However, I must caution and warn you about the duel into which we are 
riding: do not underestimate Karna, that ornament of war! Karna is a 
maharatha, a mighty, proud and accomplished warrior. He is a master of 
every aspect of the astra shastra; he knows better than anyone exactly what 
is needed with regard to time and place. I will be brief, O son of Pandu. 

I regard Karna as being at least your equal, and possibly, your superior. 
Only with the greatest care and resolve can you vanquish mighty Karna. In 
energy, he is equal to Agni, in speed, he is equal to tameless Vayu, in wrath 
he is like Yama. Endowed with inordinate prowess, he resembles a lion in 
the formation of his body. He is exceptionally radiant and handsome; he is 
eight ratnis tall, with magnificent arms and a deep chest. He is invincible. 
He is sensitive. He is not only a hero, Arjuna; Karna is the greatest of all 
heroes. 

With every endowment of a warrior, he is a dispeller of the fears of 
friends. He wants the good of Dhritarashtra’s son, and he has always hated 
the sons of Pandu. That is why I think that no man of flesh and blood, other 
than you, why, not even the Devas with Vasava at their head, can kill 
Radheya. And so, Arjuna, kill him today. 


He is the inveterate enemy of the Pandavas and his hatred for you is not 
out of any consideration of his own interests. So kill Karna, that first among 
maharathas; fulfil the final purpose of your birth and prove your love for 
Yudhishtira. 

Truly, I know, O Partha, that even the Devas and Asuras cannot resist 
your prowess. From overweening pride, the evil Sutaputra is always 
dismissive of the sons of Pandu. Kill him today, Dhananjaya, he who is the 
root of all the other sinners and depending on whom, the wretched 
Duryodhana regards himself as invincible. 

Slay that Naravyaghra, the proud Karna, who has a sword for his 
tongue, a bow for his mouth, and arrows for his teeth. I know your abilities 
well; so kill Karna like a lion killing an elephant. O Partha, slay Vaikartana, 
because of whom Duryodhana is dismissive of you.” 


CANTO 73 


S anjaya says, ‘Once more, as they ride into battle, Krishna says to 
Arjuna, “Today is the seventeenth day, O Bhaarata, of this 
unspeakable massacre of men, elephants and horses, which has so reduced 
your vast army. The Kauravas, too, O Partha, have nearly all been slain. 
Under your lead, these lords of the earth, these Srinjayas, and the Pandava 
troops, yet hold their ground on the battlefield. Also, under your guidance, 
the Panchalas, the Matsyas, the Karushas, and the Chedis have fetched great 
destruction to your enemies. 

Who is there that can vanquish the assembled Kauravas in battle? On 
the other hand, who is there that can vanquish the mighty Pandava 
maharathas that you lead? You alone can subdue the three worlds, 
consisting of the Devas, the Asuras and the Manavas, united together. What 
need I say then of the Kaurava army? Save you, O Naravyaghra, no one, not 
even if he resembled Vasava himself in prowess, could have vanquished 
king Bhagadatta. Partha, all the lords of earth, united together, cannot stand 
up to this vast force that you command. 

It is because of your protection that Dhrishtadyumna and Sikhandi 
succeeded in bringing down Drona and Bhishma. Otherwise, who could 
have vanquished those two maharathas, both of whom were equals of Indra 
himself? 


Other than you, O Naravyaghra, which man in this world can defeat 
those fierce lords of aksauhinis, the invincible Vaikartana, Kripa, 
Aswatthaman, and Duryodhana himself, all masters of weapons and united. 
You have annihilated innumerable fierce Kshatriyas, hailing from diverse 
provinces, as well as teeming divisions of soldiers, their horses, chariots 
and elephants. Vast numbers of diverse Kshatriya clans, like the Govasas, 
the Dasamiyas, the Vasatis, the Easterners, the Vatadhanas, and the Bhojas 
who are very sensitive of their honour, along with their cavalry and 
elephants, have met with destruction at your hands and Bhima’s. 

The extraordinarily ferocious Tusharas, Yavanas, Khasas, 
Darvabhisaras, Daradas, Sakas, Kamathas, Ramathas, Tanganas, 
Andhrakas, Pulindas and the Kiratas, the mighty and powerful Mlecchas, 
the mountaineers, and the races from the seaside, all hardened soldiers 
armed with gadas, fight for Duryodhana. And only you have their measure, 
O Paraviraha! 

Who could dare advance against the vast and swollen Dhartarashtra 
force arrayed in battle order? With your protection, the Pandavas penetrated 
into the enemy host shrouded with dust and resembling a swollen sea, and 
decimated it. Seven days have elapsed since Abhimanyu killed Jayatsena, 
the mighty ruler of the Magadhas, in battle. After that, Bhimasena with his 
mace massacred Jayatsena’s ten thousand war elephants, and hundreds of 
other war tuskers as well, and countless rathikas in an awesome 
demonstration of his might. Thus, O Partha, during the progress of this 
horrific war, the Kaurava forces encountered Bhimasena and you, and 
departed for the realm of Yama. 

The Pandavas overran the van of the Kaurava army, but with his fiery 
fusillades of arrows, Bhishma shrouded the Chedis, the Panchalas, the 
Karushas, the Matsyas, and the Kaikeyas and massacred them. He filled the 
sky with gold-winged, deadly shafts, and slew thousands of rathikas, one 
hundred thousand other warriors and mighty elephants, in all slaughtering 
the Pandava host for ten days without let. He assumed the form of Rudra or 
of Upendra and, fighting singlehandedly, inflicted a great carnage among 
the Pandava, the Chedi, the Panchala and the Kaikeya divisions in the evil 
Suyodhana’s cause. 

Every day, Bhishma rose over Kurukshetra like the sun during the 
pralaya. With your protection, Sikhandi felled that Naravyaghra. It is 


because he made you his enemy, that the Pitamaha now lies on a bed of 
arrows, even like Vritra when he made Vasava his enemy. 

The savage Drona also slaughtered our army for five days. With his 
impenetrable vyuhas, riding against which many maharathas lost their lives, 
he protected Jayadratha for a good while. The son of Bharadwaja, fierce as 
Yama himself, caused an unprecedented carnage during the war at night; he 
consumed warriors past count with his astras until he finally met his end at 
the hands of Dhrishtadyumna. If, on that day, you had not contained the 
enemy’s entire chariot division that Karna led, we could never have killed 
Drona. Which other Kshatriya, save you, could have achieved such 
incredible feats as you did and on the day you killed Jayadratha? Killing so 
many valorous kings, facing the teeming Kaurava host by yourself, you 
found your way to Jayadratha and killed him. Everyone speaks of what you 
did as being awesome and incomparable. I, however, do not regard it so; 
you are a great maharatha and you did what you had sworn you would. 

If all these assembled enemy Kshatriyas can stay alive against you even 
for a day, I would regard them to be truly mighty. With the death of 
Bhishma and Drona, the Dhartarashtra host, O Partha, with all its foremost 
warriors slain, with its horses, chariots, and elephants dead, has lost all its 
heroes and looks like the firmament bereft of the sun, the moon and the 
stars. This prodigious enemy host has been shorn of its splendour today, 
even as the dark Asura host in the old days, after Sakra ruined its 
magnificence. 

Only five great chariot-warriors remain—Aswatthaman, Kritavarman, 
Karna, Salya and Kripa. Kill them all today, O Naravyaghra, and make a 
gift of the earth, with all her islands, cities, waters, and the Patalas and the 
sky above to Yudhishtira. Destroy finally this army as Vishnu in the days 
long ago slaying the Daityas and the Danavas, and bestow Bhumi on the 
king as Hari gave the three worlds to Sakra. 

Let the Panchalas rejoice today that their enemies are dead, like the 
Devas rejoicing after Vishnu decimated the Danavas. Even if you do not kill 
your Acharyas, those great men Drona and Kripa, out of your respect for 
them, or Aswatthaman out of compassion, or Kritavarman because of the 
honour that you bear for your mother’s kinsman, or your uncle Salya, the 
ruler of the Madras out of affection, do not spare Karna today but kill that 
evil one who cherishes the fiercest hatred for you. This is your highest duty 
and there is nothing in it that would be against dharma. 


I approve of it, and there is no blemish in the deed. Karna was the cause 
of the attempt made to immolate your mother and all of you at night in the 
palace of lac, and of Suyodhana’s behaviour towards you after that game of 
dice. Suyodhana has always depended upon Karna as his main strength, and 
has been bold enough to try to injure even me. It is his firm belief that 
Karna will annihilate all the Prithas in battle. Though he knows very well 
how mighty you are, O Kuntiputra, he has still chosen to go to war with 
you, relying entirely on Karna. 

Karna always maintains, ‘I will vanquish the Parthas and that maharatha 
Vasudeva of the Dasarhas.’ 

Always extolling Duryodhana, Karna has successfully had his way in 
the Kuru sabha. Kill him today, for in all the injuries and humiliations 
inflicted upon you, Karna has ever been the leader. 

Six mighty and ruthless maharathas of the Dhartarashtra army killed 
your heroic son Abhimanyu, whose eyes were like those of a bull. He 
fought against Drona, Aswatthaman, Kripa and other great Kshatriyas; he 
deprived elephants of their riders and maharathas of their chariots. 
Abhimanyu, that spreader of the fame of both the Kurus and the Vrishnis, 
shot down horsemen and foot-soldiers, and routed their divisions; he 
quelled many mighty chariot-warriors, and sent innumerable men, horses 
and elephants to Yama. 

I swear to you, O friend, that my body burns at the thought that while 
the noble son of Subhadra was consuming the enemy army with his arrows, 
Karna was plotting to bring him down through base treachery. Unable to 
face Abhimanyu, Karna, bathed in blood and nearly unconscious, was 
forced to draw deep breaths of rage and to turn his back on the battle. 
Demoralised, afraid, stunned and exhausted from his wounds, finally, at the 
clever Drona’s instructions, Karna broke Abhimanyu’s bow from behind 
him. Then five great maharathas slew that unarmed child with dark storms 
of arrows. At Abhimanyu’s death, even his enemies grieved, except the evil 
Karna and Suyodhana who laughed with joy. 

Do you remember the vile words that Karna said to Draupadi in the 
Kuru court, in the presence of the Pandavas and Kurus, ‘The Pandavas, O 
Draupadi, are dead! They have sunk into eternal hell, O you of the large 
hips. 

Choose other lords for yourself now, O you of the sweet voice. Enter 
the palace of Dhritarashtra as a serving woman, O you of curving eye- 


lashes, for your husbands are no more living men. 

O Panchali, the Pandavas will not be of any use to you anymore, since 
you are the wife of men who are now slaves and so are you also a slave! 
Today Duryodhana is the only king on earth; all other kings of the world 
will abide by whatever he says. Look how all the sons of Pandu have fallen! 
Dhritarashtra’s son has overwhelmed them and they can only look mutely 
and helplessly at one another. It is plain that they are all sesame seeds 
without kernels, and have sunk into hell. They will have to serve 
Duryodhana, that king of kings, as his slaves.’ 

These were the foul words that that wretched Karna then spoke in your 
hearing, O Bhaarata. Quench the fire of those words with your arrows 
today, and all the other wrongs that evil one has done to you, along with his 
life. 

Let Karna feel the touch of the arrows from the Gandiva and remember 
the words of Bhishma and Drona. 

Let your deadly cloth-yard shafts, effulgent like lightning, pierce 
Karna’s limbs, plunge into his vital organs, drink his blood and despatch 
him to Yama’s abode. 

Let all the kings of the earth, sorrowful and uttering wails of sorrow, 
watch Karna fall from his chariot, slain by your arrows. 

Let his kinsmen, with sorrowful hearts and faces, see Karna stretching 
his length on the ground, dipped in gore, unbreathing, and with his weapons 
loosened from his grasp. 

Let the lofty standard of Adhiratha’s son, bearing the device of the 
elephant’s rope, fall fluttering onto the earth, cut down by your broad- 
headed arrows. 

Let Salya flee in terror, abandoning his gold-decked chariot, shattered 
by hundreds of your shafts, upon seeing its warrior and horses killed. 

Let your enemy Suyodhana, beholding Adhiratha’s son slain, despair of 
both his kingdom and his life. 

O Partha, there stands Karna, equal to Indra or perhaps even Sankara in 
tejas, razing your troops with his endless rivers of arrows. There the 
Panchalas, though being massacred, yet stand firm in the cause of the 
Pandavas. Know, O Arjuna, that Karna by himself prevails over the 
Panchalas, the five sons of Draupadi, Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandi, the sons 
of Dhrishtadyumna, Satanika, the son of Nakula, Nakula himself, Sahadeva, 
Durmukha, Janamejaya, Sudharman and Satyaki! 


Hear the loud uproar your allies the Panchalas make, as his arrows rake 
them. The Panchalas are neither afraid nor do they run from the battle. 
Those mighty bowmen were utterly fearless of death even when they faced 
Bhishma who enveloped the Pandava army with a great cloud of arrows. 

They always earnestly attempted to vanquish their great enemy, the 
invincible Drona, that Acharya of all archers, that shura who haughtily 
massacred his enemies in battle. They have never turned their backs on 
Karna although he is decimating them in their hundreds as they charge him, 
like a blazing fire incinerating swarms of insects. You must, O Kaunteya, 
become a raft and rescue those brave warriors who have resolved to lay 
down their lives for their allies, and drown in the Karna ocean. 

That awesome astra that Karna had from Maharishi Parasurama has 
been used, consuming our troops with its unworldly energy. Karna’s arrows, 
flying thick as swarms of black bees, are still mowing down your troops. 
Our men who do not have their souls under control, cannot resist Karna’s 
firetides of arrows; the Panchalas, O Bhaarata, flee in all directions. 

And look there, Bhima, in a towering rage, at the head of the Srinjayas, 
gives battle to Karna, although gashed and bleeding from the Sutaputra’s 
shafts. If left alone, Karna will exterminate the Pandavas, the Srinjayas and 
the Panchalas, like an untreated disease whose germ has invaded the body. 

Other than you, Arjuna, I see no one in Yudhishtira’s army who can 
hope to return alive after meeting Karna in battle. Kill him today with your 
keen shafts, O Bharatarishabha; fulfil your vow, and win great fame. Truly, 
O Paraviraha, only you and no one else can vanquish the Kaurava host led 
by Karna. Achieve this great feat now. Kill Atiratha Karna, attain your 
objective and, crowned with success, become joyful, O Arjuna!”’” 


CANTO 74 


: S anjaya says, “Listening to Krishna, all Arjuna’s gloom and doubts 
are dispelled. He rubs the Gandiva’s string, stretches it, and holds 
up the great bow, ready to kill Karna. Arjuna says, “With you to protect me, 
O Govinda, you who know the past and the future, and who are pleased 
with me, victory is sure to be mine today. When I can destroy the three 
worlds with your help, what challenge does Karna pose? I see the Panchala 
army fleeing, O Janardana, and Karna ranges fearlessly across the field. I 
also see Karna’s Bhargavastra flying everywhere, like Shakra’s Vajra. 

This is the battle in which I will kill Karna, the battle of which all men 
will speak as long as the Earth lasts. Today, arrows loosed from the Gandiva 
will drink Karna’s blood and life, and take him to Yama. 

Today, Dhritarashtra will curse his own foolish decision to install the 
undeserving Duryodhana on the throne. 

Today will divest Dhritarashtra of sovereignty, happiness, prosperity, 
kingdom, city and sons. 

I tell you truly, O Krishna, that today, after I kill Karna, Duryodhana 
will despair of both life and kingdom. 

Today, when he sees me kill Karna as Indra once did Vritrasura, 
Duryodhana will recall your efforts to bring peace, which he then mocked. 

Today, let Sakuni know that my arrows are the dice, my Gandiva the 
box for casting them, and my chariot, the chequered cloth. 


O Govinda, I will dispel Yudhishtira’s long sleeplessness when I kill 
Karna. After this day, my brother will be cheerful and happy for ever. 
Today, I will unleash an inexorable arrow that will take Karna’s life. 

Karna vowed, O Krishna, ‘I will not wash my feet until I slay 
Phalguna.’ 

I will prove his vow false, O Madhava, and fell him lifeless from his 
chariot, and the earth will drink the blood of him who in battle brings 
certain doom to all other men in this world. 

With Dhritarashtra’s approval, the Sutaputra boasted, ‘You have no 
husband now, O Draupadi!’ 

My arrows will prove him false. They will drink his life-blood like 
angry serpents. Cloth-yard shafts, bright as lightning and shot from the 
Gandiva, will send Karna on his last journey. Today the son of Radha will 
repent those cruel words that he said to the princess of Panchala in the Kuru 
sabha. They who were then like sesame seeds without kernels, will today 
again become seeds with kernel after the fall of the wretched Vaikartana. 

Karna bragged to the sons of Dhritarashtra, ‘I will save you from the 
sons of Pandu!’ My arrows will prove his assurance false. 

Today, in the very sight of all the warriors, I will kill Karna who said, ‘I 
will slay all the Panchalas with their sons.’ 

Today, O Madhusudana, I will kill Karna, and the panic-stricken 
Dhartarashtras with their king will flee in all directions, like deer from a 
lion. Then Duryodhana will repent for everything he has said and done, 
with his sons and relatives. 

O Krishna, seeing Karna slain, Dhritarashtra, that weak man of wrath, 
will know me to be the foremost of all archers. I will make that king along 
with his sons, grandsons, counsellors and servants shelterless today. 

Cranes, vultures and other birds of carrion, O Keshava, will dance over 
the limbs of Karna that my arrows will cut into pieces today. 

Today, Madhusudana, before the eyes of all the great bowmen, I will 
behead the evil Sutaputra, and sever all his limbs with keen vipathas and 
razor-faced arrows. 

Today, I will make the Dharmaraja Yudhishtira happy so that he will 
cast off the great pain and sorrow that he has borne in his heart all these 
heavy years, when I kill the son of Radha, with all his kinsmen. 

Today, I will annihilate Karna’s soldiers with astras like fire or the 
poison of a serpent. Today I will spread the earth with the bodies of kings 


cased in their golden armour. O Krishna, I will desiccate the bodies and cut 
off the heads of Abhimanyu’s cowardly killers. 

Today, I will either make a gift of the earth, taken back from the 
Dhartarashtras, to my brother, or perhaps you will walk the Earth without 
an Arjuna. 

Today, O Krishna, when I kill Karna, like Maghavat slaying Sambara, I 
will free myself from the debt I owe all archers, to my own wrath, to the 
Kurus, to my arrows, and to this Gandiva. That death will free me from the 
grief that I, too, have carried for thirteen years. After I have killed the Suta’s 
son, let our allies, the mighty chariot-warriors of the Somakas, consider 
their task accomplished. 

I do not know, O Madhava, what the measure of Satyaki’s joy will be 
after I kill Karna and win victory for our side. I will destroy the Sutaputra 
and his maharatha son, and bring joy to Bhima, the twins and Satyaki and 
pay my debt to the Panchalas, Dhrishtadyumna and Sikhandi! 

Today, let everyone see an angry Dhananjaya annihilate the Kauravas 
and the Suta’s son. There is no one as powerful as me in the world. There is 
no one who can equal me in wrath or compassion. With my bow and with 
my strength, I can vanquish the Asuras, the Devas and all other beings 
united. Know, Krishna, that my prowess is higher than the highest. Alone, I 
will attack all the Kurus and the Bahlikas and with the fire of the astras 
from my Gandiva, I will burn them like a heap of dry grass at the close of 
winter. My palms bear the scars of arrows beyond count and of this great 
bow. On each of the soles of my feet are the marks of a chariot and a 
standard. There is no one who can defeat me in battle.” 

After saying this to that Varapurusha Krishna, Arjuna with blood red 
eyes, rides into battle, to support Bhima and to cut Karna’s head from his 
trunk.’” 


CANTO 75 


. “T) hritarashtra. says, ‘What happened in that dreadful and 

fathomless battle of Kurukshetra, between the warriors of my 
army and the Pandavas and the Srinjayas, when Dhananjaya took the field, 
O Sanjaya?’ 

Sanjaya says, “The combined divisions of the Pandava army, swelling 
with pride and prowess, their tall standards flying, march to the beating of 
drums and blasts from other instruments, like masses of clouds thundering 
at the close of summer. The battle that ensues is like a _ baneful, 
unseasonable shower, cruel and destructive. Huge elephants are its clouds; 
weapons are the water they shed; the peal of musical instruments, the rattle 
of chariot-wheels, and the noise of their palms clapping and slapping 
against bowstrings are their roar; weapons decked with gold form the 
flashes of lightning; arrows and swords and astras are the lashing, lethal 
torrents of rain. The incessant strokes of swords, the impetuous flow of 
blood in streams and the great carnage of warriors renders the encounter 
brutal past describing. 

In the general mayhem, chariot-warriors, horsemen, elephants and foot- 
soldiers fight, singly or jointly and send one another to Yama’s presence. 
Partha, with clouds of arrows, despatches enemy chariots, charioteers, 
cavalry, horses, elephants and foot-soldiers to the realm of Yama. Kripa and 
Sikhandi face each other; Satyaki battles Duryodhana; Srutasravas engages 


Aswatthaman, and Yudhamanyu duels with Chitrasena. The Srinjaya 
maharatha Uttamaujas fights Karna’s son Sushena, while Sahadeva battles 
Sakuni, king of the Gandharas, like a hungry lion against a mighty bull. 

The youthful son of Nakula, Satanika, and Karna’s young son 
Vrishasena, shoot torments of arrows at each other. Madri’s son Nakula 
assails Kritavarman, while Dhrishtadyumna, king of the Panchalas and 
Senapati of the Pandavas, attacks Karna, king of Anga and Senapati of the 
Kauravas, with all his forces. Dusasana, leading a large force of 
Samsaptakas, fiercely attacks the formidable Bhima. 

The daring Uttamaujas, fighting vigorously, decapitates Karna’s son 
Sushena and the head falls down on the ground with an uncanny and loud 
sound. A stricken Karna destroys Uttamaujas’ horses, chariot and his flag in 
terrible fury. Uttamaujas turns on Kripa and kills his horses and the warriors 
who guard his flanks, and then quickly takes refuge in Sikhandi’s chariot. 
Finding Kripa without a chariot, Sikhandi hesitates to shoot at him, 
allowing Aswatthaman to ride up quickly and to shield him with his own 
chariot, and to rescue him. 

Meanwhile, Vayuputra Bhima, his golden mail shining and slick with 
blood, truly begins to burn your son’s troops with his arrows, like the mid- 
day sun burning all the world at the height of summer.’” 


CANTO 76 


S anjaya says, ‘During the savage melee, enemies surround Bhima 

who, fighting alone, says to his sarathy, “Ride into the midst of the 

Dhartarashtra army as fast as these horses will take us. I mean to send all 
these enemies to Yama.” 

The charioteer whips the horses and they race recklessly to where 
Bhima wants to fight your army. A seething host of Kaurava troops, with 
elephants, chariots, cavalry and foot soldiers attack Bhima’s splendid ratha 
but he easily repels their barrages of arrows and spears, and mows them 
down with his golden arrows. The Kshatriyas, the elephants, the chariots, 
the horses and the foot soldiers, whom Bhima’s arrows strike set up a deep 
and echoing bewailing, O Rajan, like the sound made when a mountain is 
cloven by lightning, they attack Bhima from every side, like new-fledged 
birds flying towards a tree, but they cannot withstand him at all. Like Death 
with jaws agape, who devours all creatures at the end of the yuga, he 
consumes them. Like masses of clouds that a tempest scatters, the mangled 
and burnt Bhaarata host breaks and flees in all directions. 

Mighty Bhimasena once more cheerfully says to his charioteer, 
“Ascertain, O Suta, whether those assembled chariots and standards that 
advance towards me, are ours or the enemy’s, for I cannot distinguish them. 
Let me not kill our own troops. 


O Visoka, seeing these hostile warriors, chariots and their standards that 
surround me, I am concerned about the king’s injury and also because 
Arjuna has not yet returned to battle. I am worried that Dharmaputra 
Yudhishtira may have left this world, leaving me in the midst of the enemy. 
I do not know whether Arjuna and he are still alive. Yet, though anxiety and 
sorrow tear at my heart, I will destroy these hostile troops and rejoice with 
you today. Inspect all my quivers and tell me, O Suta, how many arrows I 
still have left and of what sort.” 

Visoka says, “You have sixty thousand iron arrows, ten thousand razor- 
faced shafts and an equal number of broad-headed ones left, O Shura. Of 
cloth-yard shafts you have two thousand, and of pradaras you still have 
three thousand. Why, your remaining astras amount to more than a cartload 
drawn by six bullocks. Shoot them and hurl them, for of gadas, swords, 
lances, scimitars, javelins, spears and other weapons used in close combat, 
you have thousands upon thousands. Have no fear that your weapons will 
be exhausted.” 

Bhima says, “O Suta, today my arrows sped fiercely from my bow will 
shroud everything and turn Kurukshetra into the domain of Death! All 
Kshatriyas, including the youngest, will discover whether Bhimasena has 
succumbed in battle or if he has subdued all the Kurus. Today, the world 
will applaud all my feats as I will singly overthrow the lot of them, or let 
them strike me down. 

Let the Devas who aid good deeds, bless me. Let that Paraviraha, 
Arjuna, join me now like Sakra, who when duly invoked, comes quickly to 
a yagna. Look, O Visoka, my brother is coming! The Bhaarata standards 
flee, along with their elephants, horses and foot-soldiers. Savyasachi has 
them on the run with his thunderbolt shafts fitted with wings of gold and 
peacock feathers. Ah, chariots, horses and elephants run in panic with loud 
cries, crushing their own foot-soldiers. Arjuna is here and the Kaurava army 
is in full flight!” 

Visoka asks, “Are you deaf, O great Bhima, that you do not hear the 
twang of Partha’s yawning Gandiva stretched in wrath? All your wishes 
have come true for I can see the kapi-dhvaja in the midst of the enemy’s 
elephant force terrifying the enemy’s divisions. Why, even I am struck with 
fear when I look at that dreadful banner. Behold, the Gandiva’s string 
flashes repeatedly like lightning amid blue clouds. Look, Arjuna’s beautiful 
diadem sparkles brilliantly and the precious jewel on it blazes like the sun, 


and beside him is his white sankha, the Devadatta, with the blare like 
thunder. 

And right beside Arjuna is Janardana, reins in hand, and they scythe 
through the enemy army. Look at Krishna’s effulgent chakra, its nave hard 
as adamant, and its edge sharp as a razor, and which the Yadus worship. 

Look where massive elephants and their hastikas, pierced and split open 
by his arrows, their trunks like trees, struck by the Kiritin, fall onto the 
earth, like hills riven by thunder. 

And behold Krishna’s sankha, the Panchajanya, so utterly beautiful and 
of the hue of the moon, and the blazing red mani, the Kaustubha, on his 
breast and his triumphal, exotic vanamala. What doubt is there that it is 
none other than Arjuna flying towards us, decimating the hostile army on 
his ratha drawn by cloud white gandharva horses and driven by Krishna? 
Look how your younger brother, the Vijaya, whose prowess is Indra’s own, 
annihilates enemy chariots, horses and legions of foot-soldiers. 

Behold, they fall like a forest uprooted by a storm stirred by Garuda’s 
wings. Ah, look, mighty Bhima! Arjuna cuts down four hundred chariot- 
warriors with their horses and charioteers, seven hundred elephants, 
innumerable foot-soldiers and horsemen, and he flies toward us like the 
great constellation of Chitra) O Pandava, your enemies are being 
exterminated and all your wishes are coming true. Long may you live and 
your power ever increase!” 

Bhima says, “O Visoka, you delight me with what you say and I will 
give you four and ten populous villages, a hundred female slaves and 
twenty chariots!” 


CANTO 77 


: S anjaya says, “Hearing the rumble of their chariots and the shouts 
of the enemy warriors, Arjuna says, “Let our steeds fly more 
swiftly still, O Govinda!” 

Krishna replies, “I am going as swiftly as I can to where Bhima is.” 

They race towards the heart of the battle, even like the Vajradhari flying 
at the Asura Jambha. The fearsome Kshatriyas of the Kaurava army, 
supported by a large force of chariots, cavalry, elephants and foot-soldiers 
all move against Arjuna, and make the earth resound with their chariot 
wheels, the thunder of their horses’ hooves, and the great susurrus of their 
arrows. Such a battle erupts between them, reminiscent of the encounter 
between the Asuras and Vishnu for mastery of the three worlds. 

Alone, Partha destroys the mighty astras they loose at him; he cuts off 
their heads and arms with his razor-faced, crescent-tipped and wedge- 
headed arrows. Chattras, yak-tail chamaras, flagstaffs, horses, chariots, 
thick bands of foot-soldiers and elephants, all fall before his searing 
onslaught. Elephants, caparisoned in gold, with triumphal standards and 
ferocious warriors on their backs, are resplendent as arrows with golden 
wings strike them; they are like so many mountains ablaze with light. 
Dhananjaya cuts a path through the enemy to Karna, a makara in that ocean 
of men. Your army, O Rajan, do their best to stop Partha, leaving all fear of 


death and the resultant din is like that made by the ocean when lashed into 
fury by the tempest. 

Arjuna, however, routs them and despatches to Yama’s abode— 
thousands of chariot-warriors, elephants and horses. He kills four hundred 
maharathas and as the arrows from his bow strike them, they seem to vanish 
one after another from their chariots. The Kaurava army founders and 
escapes from Arjuna and the uproar from your men sounds like a surging 
sea breaking upon a rocky shore. 

Arjuna now turns his attention to Karna’s division and the sound with 
which he faces his enemy is like that which Garuda made in the olden days 
when swooping down for serpents. Bhimasena hears the sound with joy, 
and he is eager to catch sight of his radiant. The valiant son of Vayudeva 
falls on your troops, entirely reckless of his life. Your stricken army, O 
Rajan, reels like a wrecked ship in the embrace of the sea. Displaying his 
lightness of hands, Bhima mangles your forces with his fierce arrows, and 
despatches vast numbers to Yamaloka. Your warriors, O Bhaarata, quake 
with fear on seeing the superhuman fury of Bhima, who is like Rudra at the 
end of the yuga. 

Duryodhana quickly marshals his men and commanders, O 
Bharatarishabha, and attacks Bhima, for if Bhima falls, he knows that they 
could then easily kill the other Pandavas. Exhorted and encouraged by your 
son, they renew their assault on him with showers of arrows. They surround 
him with innumerable elephants, soldiers, chariots and cavalry. Vrikodara is 
handsome and luminous like the full moon within his coronet and 
surrounded by the stars. His enemies attack him viciously, their eyes red 
with wrath, determined to kill him in any way they can. 

Bhima flashes out of the press like a fish coming escaping from a net 
and covers that mighty host with torrents of arrows. He kills ten thousand 
advancing elephants, two hundred thousand foot-soldiers, five thousand 
horses and a hundred rathikas. 

Bhima lets flow a river of blood, whose eddies are chariots, elephants 
the crocodiles that fill it, men its large fish, horses its sharks; the hair of 
dead men and animals form its plants and moss, arms lopped off from 
trunks are its water snakes. Thighs constitute its gravel, marrow its mire, the 
floating heads its rocks and countless jewels and gems float along with the 
current on crowns, armlets, earrings and other ornaments. Bows and arrows 
are the rafts by which men seek to cross that frightful river, and maces and 


spiked bludgeons are its serpents. Royal white parasols and flags are the 
swans, headgear its foam, necklaces its lotuses, and floating dust forms its 
froth. 

Noble men cross the gory river with ease while the timid stand frozen 
on its ghastly banks. Warriors are its swimming, wading crocodiles and it 
flows straight towards the kingdom of Yama. 

Wherever dreadful Bhima goes he slaughters the enemy in their 
thousands, quick as thinking, easy as breathing. Seeing Bhima on the 
rampage, Duryodhana says to Sakuni, “Uncle, stop the mighty Bhimasena 
quickly! The fate of the Pandava army and the result of this war both 
depend on him.” 

The doughty son of Subala takes up the challenge and, surrounded by 
his brothers, attempts to contain the fearsome Bhima, like the continent 
resisting the ocean. He pierces the left side of Bhima’s chest with a sizzling 
volley of cloth-yard shafts fitted with golden wings. The fierce arrows, O 
Rajan, fletched with kanka and peacock feathers, pass through Bhima’s 
armour and sink deep into his body. Bhima strikes back with a single deadly 
shaft, also decked with gold, but the nimble Sakuni cuts it into seven pieces 
as it courses towards him. This enrages Bhima, who destroys Sakuni’s bow 
with some ease. Sakuni seizes up another bow and shoots six and ten 
wedge-headed arrows at him, two of which strike Bhima; one destroys his 
standard, two his regal parasol and the remaining four pierce his horses. 

A red-eyed, furious Bhima flings an iron javelin with a golden shaft and 
restless as the tongue of a serpent at Sakuni’s chariot, but the Gandhara 
catches it in flight and hurls it back, and it ploughs right through Bhima’s 
left arm to strike the earth like a shaft of lightning from the sky. The 
Dhartarashtras set up a loud and jubilant roar and begin to fight wildly, 
reckless now of their lives. Bhima cannot bear that triumphant shout and, 
snatching up another bow, in a moment, smothers the enemy soldiers with 
his arrows. 

He kills Sakuni’s four horses, his charioteer, and destroys his standard. 
Abandoning his useless chariot, Sakuni jumps down onto the ground, his 
eyes blood-red, breathing heavily, and shoots dense dark swaths of arrows 
at Bhima. Bhima wards off these shafts, rives Sakuni’s bow and deeply 
pierces his powerful antagonist with flights of burning arrows that make 
him collapse, almost lifeless. An anxious Duryodhana sweeps his uncle into 
his own chariot from under Bhimasena’s nose and rides away like the wind. 


Seeing the king himself retreat, his troops turn their faces from battle and 
flee from Bhimasena in terror. 

Bhima chases them remorselessly, shooting thousands of arrows after 
them. Slaughtered by Bhima, the retreating Dhartarashtras find refuge with 
Karna, O Bharatarishabha, and stand relieved, supporting one another like 
shipwrecked mariners when finding an island. They take courage once more 
and prepare to renew the war for everything.’” 


CANTO 78 


66 D hritarashtra says, “When Bhimasena breached our ranks, what, O 

Sanjaya, did Duryodhana and Subala’s son Sakuni say? What 
did Karna, the Paraviraha, the warriors of my army, Kripa, Kritavarman, 
and Drona’s son Aswatthaman say? I think that the prowess of Bhimasena 
Panduputra is past wonderful, since singlehandedly he fought off all the 
warriors of my army. Did Karna keep his vow? He, O Sanjaya, is the 
prosperity, the armour, the fame and the very hope for life of the Kurus. 
Seeing the terrible Bhimasena rout our army, what did Karna, son of 
Adhiratha and Radha, do? What did they do, my insuperable sons, the other 
kings and the maharathas of our army? Tell me all this, O Sanjaya, for you 
are a skilled narrator indeed!’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘In the afternoon, O Rajan, the intrepid Karna attacks the 
Somakas in the very sight of Bhimasena who meanwhile decimates the 
Dhartarashtra troops. Seeing Bhima mercilessly pound his army, Senapati 
Karna tells Salya, “Drive me to the Panchalas!” 

Salya urges the white chargers, fleet as thought, towards where the 
Chedis, the Panchalas and the Karushas are, and penetrating that mighty 
host, confidently drives the chariot to where Karna wants to go. Finding the 
chariot cased in tiger skins and looking like a cloud, rolling into their midst 
with a sound like the peal of thunder or of a mountain splitting into 
fragments, the Pandus and the Panchalas are terrified. Karna looses 


hundreds upon hundreds of arrows from his bowstring drawn to his ear and 
ravages the Pandava army. 

In counter attack, many great archers and maharathas of the Pandava 
army, including Sikhandi, Bhima, Dhrishtadyumna, Nakula, Sahadeva, the 
five sons of Draupadi, and Satyaki surround and pour showers of arrows 
upon him, intent on finishing him. Satyaki strikes him with twenty shafts in 
the shoulder-joint, Sikhandi with five and twenty shafts, Dhrishtadyumna 
finds him with seven, the sons of Draupadi with four and sixty, Sahadeva 
with seven and Nakula with a hundred and a raging Bhimasena drills him in 
the torso with ninety perfect barbs. 

Karna, laughing in scorn, and drawing his wonderful bow in a circle, 
slashes each of them with five arrows. He destroys Satyaki’s bow and battle 
flag, O Bharatarishabha, and bloodies his chest, and next pierces 
Bhimasena. With flat-headed arrows, he next cuts off Sahadeva’s standard 
and gashes his sarathy. In the twinkling of an eye, he deprives the five sons 
of Draupadi of their chariots, shattering them. 

I saw the exceptionally wonderful feat, O Bhaarata, of the valiant 
Karna, fighting alone and unsupported, holding off all those bowmen who 
do their utmost to overpower him. With lethally accurate archery he forces 
those maharathas back and then begins to massacre the Panchalas and many 
rathikas among the Chedis, gratifying all the Devas, the Siddhas, the 
Charanas and the great bowmen among the Dhartarashtras. 

Then Karna achieves an extraordinary feat, as he sets the Pandava 
troops to flight, so they scatter in all directions screaming in panic. All the 
Pandavas united together cannot contain him, and like a cataract breaking 
against a mountain, the Pandava army is shattered when it meets Karna. 
That shura tirelessly cuts off the arms and heads of his redoubtable enemies, 
their ears decked with resonant kundalas. Swords with hilts of ivory, battle 
flags, spears, horses, elephants and chariots of diverse kinds Karna destroys 
in a myriad of ways, but strictly observes Kshatriya dharma. 

The earth soon becomes impassable and mired with flesh, blood and 
detritus. The thick darkness caused by Karna’s devastras makes it 
impossible for the combatants to distinguish friends from enemies. The 
mighty Pandava maharathas, O Rajan, fight valiantly but Karna repeatedly 
savages them, like an angry lion a herd of deer in a forest or like a wolf 
hunting smaller animals. The Dhartarashtra archers further beset them, 
uttering dreadful roars as they retreat. An overjoyed Duryodhana orders 


diverse drums and musical instruments to be beaten and blown in all parts 
of the army. 

Though beaten, the great Panchala archers return heroically to the fight, 
but to no avail as the son of Radha continues to rout them. He kills twenty 
Panchala rathikas and more than a hundred Chedi warriors and empties the 
platforms of chariots, the backs of horses and the necks of elephants of their 
warriors and looks resplendent like Death himself at the end of the yuga. 
The heroism that the Panchalas display is remarkable, for they refuse to 
back down from that impossible assault. 

Duryodhana, Dusasana, Kripa, Aswatthaman, Kritavarman, Sakuni, and 
the two sons of Karna slaughter the Pandava warriors in hundreds of 
thousands. So, too, the Pandava heroes Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandi and the 
five sons of Draupadi decimate your host. Thus, even as a great slaughter 
takes place among the Pandavas everywhere on the field, your army also 
suffers great loss at the hands of the mighty Bhima and other Pandava 
heroes.”” 


CANTO 79 


: S anjaya says, ‘Meanwhile, O Rajan, Arjuna catches a glimpse of 
Karna as he continues to destroy the four kinds of enemy forces. 
The Sutaputra causes a tawny river of blood to flow, choked with flesh, 
bones and marrow of heroic warriors, where human heads are its rocks and 
elephants and horses form its banks, and which resounds with the cries of 
ravens and vultures. White parasols are its swans or rafts and as that river 
runs, it bears away Kshatriyas like trees along its current. Necklaces form a 
bouquet of lotuses, helmets are its foam, bows and arrows are its fish; and 
the crowns of mangled men float on its surface. Shields and armour are its 
eddies, and chariots are the rafts with which it teems. While men wanting 
victory easily cross it, cowards find it unfordable. 

Arjuna says, “There, O Krishna, the standard of Karna is visible where 
he is locked in battle with Bhimasena and the others. Look, Duryodhana 
with the sovereign white parasol held over his head, fights alongside him as 
they put the Panchalas to flight. There Kripa, Kritavarman and 
Aswatthaman shield Duryodhana, while Karna protects them all. Salya, 
expert charioteer, looks so dashing as he guides Karna’s ratha. Take me 
there, O Krishna, for I will not return without killing Karna. Quickly now, 
Govinda, for otherwise he will annihilate all the maharathas of the Parthas 
and the Srinjayas in my very sight.” 


Krishna drives his chariot swiftly towards Karna to begin the duel 
between Arjuna and the Suta’s son, and the Pandava troops are all 
reassured. The rumble of Arjuna’s ratha as it flashes forward is like the 
tremendous sound of Vasava’s thunder. Seeing Shwetavahana and Krishna 
advance under the kapi-dhvaja, Salya tells Karna, “There he comes, the one 
after whom you were asking, brandishing his Gandiva and massacring our 
greatest warriors. Fight him today Karna, and if you can kill him great will 
be our gain and advantage. Judging by his mien, Partha will not battle 
anybody other than you, especially when you have Vrikodara cornered. 

Learning that Yudhishtira has suffered at your hands, and seeing the 
plight of Sikhandi, Satyaki, Dhrishtadyumna, the five sons of Draupadi, 
Yudhamanyu, Uttamaujas and Nakula and Sahadeva, Arjuna comes straight 
toward you, avoiding all the other warriors. Accept his challenge, O Karna, 
for there is no one else among us who can stand up to the two Krishnas in 
battle. He is alone and there is no one to protect either his flanks or his rear. 
You are the equal of Bhishma, Drona, Aswatthaman and Kripa, so accept 
his challenge and kill Savyasachi who darts at us like a serpent flicking its 
tongue, a roaring bull, or a tiger in the forest. 

There, those kings, those maharathas of the Dhartarashtra army, back 
away from him in fear. Only you can dispel the fears of our fleeing warriors 
who now all look to you as their refuge in this battle. Muster your great 
prowess, O Naravyaghra, and let us ride against the Krishnas.” 

Karna says mildly, “You now seem to have regained your composure 
and seem to be well disposed towards me again. Do not, O Mahabaho, 
entertain any fear of Dhananjaya. Today, you will see my might and skill, 
and single-handedly I will destroy the great Pandava army and those two 
Krishnas as well. Victory in battle is uncertain so I vow that I will not return 
from the field today without killing them and achieving my purpose, or 
dying and sleeping forever on this Kurukshetra.” 

Salya says, “All great maharathas, O Karna, swear that Arjuna, even 
when he is alone, is invincible. Now, when he has Krishna’s protection, 
who can match him?” 

Karna says, “As far as I know, such a great maharatha has never been 
born on earth! So, judge my prowess as I contend with that same Partha in 
battle. This prince of Kuru’s line, this foremost of maharathas, drives into 
war borne on white horses. Perhaps he will send me to Yama today. And if 
Karna dies, the war will be lost and all our army wiped out. 


Arjuna’s two arms are massive, scarred, they never falter or perspire. 
Great are his skills and lightness of hand and he is aggressive past 
imagining when he fights. Indeed, there is no warrior equal to this prince. 
He can unleash a thousand arrows as if they are one. Fitting them to his 
bowstring quicker than the eye can see, he can unerringly find a target that 
is two yojanas away. Which warrior can equal Arjuna? 

This Atiratha, with Krishna, pleased Agni deva in the Khandava vana. It 
was there that the noble Krishna obtained his chakra, and Savyasachi his 
bow, the Gandiva. It was there that invincible Mahabaho also acquired his 
chariot yoked to white horses, his two celestial and inexhaustible quivers, 
and many devastras. In the realm of Indra he received his conch, the 
Devadatta, and slew innumerable Daityas and all the Kalakeyas. Who is 
there on earth that is superior to Arjuna? 

Mahadeva himself once fought the noble Arjuna and pleased him. The 
Pandava gratified the Lord Siva and had the awesome Pasupatastra from 
him, which can destroy the three worlds. The Regents of the world, the 
Lokapalas, all gifted him their astras of immeasurable energy, with which 
he destroyed the Kalakhanjas. In Virata’s city, fighting from a single chariot, 
he defeated all of us. He wrested back Virata’s great herd and, for a trophy, 
took parts of their capes from all our greatest maharathas, and gifted them 
to the princess Uttaraa. 

O Salya, I think of myself as being the bravest man in the world today 
that I dare challenge the very greatest of Kshatriyas, Arjuna Parantapa, who 
is gifted with such tejas and with every virtue. And besides, Krishna, who is 
the unrivalled Narayana himself, that noble Vasudeva, that ever-victorious 
Vishnu, armed with the sankha, chakra and gada, whose attributes the entire 
world cannot finish narrating in ten thousand years of the gods, protects the 
awesome Pandava. 

Seeing the two Krishnas together on the same chariot, both fear and 
courage enter my heart together. Partha is the greatest of all archers, while 
Narayana is unrivalled if he uses his chakra. The mountains of Himavat 
may be moved from their places but not the two Krishnas. Both the praviras 
possess untold proficiency in the use of astras, both are Atirathas, and their 
bodies are as hard as adamant. Who else but I, O Salya, would dare ride 
into a battle against Phalguna and Vasudeva? 

Salya, my long cherished desire for a duel with the third son of Pandu 
will soon be satisfied. Soon a fierce and matchless battle will occur, in 


which either I will overwhelm the two Krishnas or they will conquer me.” 

Paraviraha Karna then lets out some deep roars like those of 
thunderheads, as he drives up to your son and salutes him respectfully. He 
then addresses Suyodhana, as well as all the assembled warriors including 
Kripa and the Bhoja king Kritavarman, the ruler of the Gandharas with his 
son, the Acharyas of his own younger brothers, and all the foot-soldiers and 
horsemen and elephant-riders. 

He says, “Attack Achyuta and Arjuna. Seal all the gaps in our forces 
through which they might escape. Wear them down, wound them sorely, 
and then I will finish them with some ease.” 

The assembled warriors readily acquiesce and swiftly set about 
executing the plan. They begin to shoot Dhananjaya with innumerable 
arrows but Arjuna meets their attack like an ocean receiving all rivers and 
their tributaries. Such is the speed with which he shoots his arrows that his 
enemies cannot discern when he draws the bowstring and when he looses 
his shafts. All that one can see are men, horses and elephants falling dead. 
Like men with infected eyes who cannot look at the sun, the Kauravas are 
unable to gaze at Jaya who is like the all-destroying sun that rises at the end 
of the yuga, with arrows for its rays, and the Gandiva, always drawn into a 
circle of flames for its glorious disc. Partha, effortlessly, marvellously, cuts 
down every enemy arrow shot at him, and quicker than the mind kills the 
bowmen who shot them. Smiling and radiant, dark Arjuna negates the 
missiles of his enemies and consumes your troops, O Vibho, like the 
blazing Sun drying up the land between the months of Jyeshta and Ashadha. 

Ah, with consummate ease, he wards off the most ferocious volleys of 
Kripa, Kritavarman, Duryodhana and Aswatthaman, who attack him with 
veritable torrents of arrows. 

Aswatthaman and Dhananjaya exchange some torrid fire, during which 
Krishna, the four white horses and the kapi-dhvaja are struck, while Arjuna 
destroys his adversary’s full drawn bow, decapitates his charioteer, his four 
horses, his standard and finally fells him from his chariot. Aswatthaman, 
enraged, takes up another priceless bow, chased with gold and studded with 
diamonds, bright as the body of Takshaka, and which indeed resembles a 
mighty Naga caught from the foot of a mountain. Stringing that bow as he 
stands on the ground now, Drona’s terrific, stalwart son unleashes a 
towering gale of shafts, which draws copious blood from his great 
adversaries whom he strikes from close range. Then Kripa, Bhoja and your 


son Duryodhana, from the van of your army, envelop Savyasachi with 
further showers of shafts, which are like clouds shrouding the sun. 

But, with prowess equal to that of the thousand-armed Kartavirya of 
old, Arjuna strikes back, quick as lightning, and destroys Kripa’s bow, his 
standard, and kills his horses and charioteer, like the Vajradhari in days of 
yore assailing the Asura Bali. Thousands of Arjuna’s arrows engulf Kripa, 
just as Ganga’s son Bhishma found himself beset by the same Kiritin on the 
fatal day of his fall. 

Arjuna kills Kritavarman’s handsome horses and destroys his standard. 
He then begins to rapidly eradicate the elephants of the enemy, its chariots 
with their horses, charioteers, bows and flags. Thereupon, your vast army 
breaks into a hundred parts like an embankment washed away by rushing 
waters. Now, Krishna manoeuvres Arjuna’s chariot so he places all his 
enemies on his right, and races away at great speed like Indra flying to kill 
Vritra. Sikhandi, Satyaki and the twins bar their enemies from chasing 
Dhananjaya, and give vent to tigerish roars. 

The Kuru Kshatriyas and the Srinjayas fall upon each other with 
immaculate arrows shot with great force, and the conflict between them is 
like the one between the Asuras and the Devas in the elder days. Elephant- 
warriors, horsemen and rathikas, fighting for victory or death and heaven, 
fall on the field. All the directions of the sky, cardinal and subsidiary, are 
enveloped in gloom from their great gusts of arrows and the very light of 
the sun is entirely shrouded.’” 


CANTO 80 


S anjaya says, ‘O Rajan, in an attempt to rescue Bhima, who is 
under critical attack by the Kuru warriors, Arjuna turns his 
attention from Karna’s troops and begins to thin the enemy ranks opposing 
Bhima. Successive fusillades of Arjuna’s broad, flat-headed and razor-sharp 
shafts fall incessantly from the sky like dense flights of birds, and he is like 
the very Destroyer to the Kurus as he mangles their bodies and cuts off their 
heads, his every arrow finding a target among them. Like the great 
Vaitarani, which separates the regions of the living from those of the dead, 
the field grows ugly, horrible, uneven and impassable from the blood and 
debris of the battle. 

Arjuna kills four hundred highly trained and fierce elephants, with 
warriors cased in golden mail and grim hastikas on their backs, and they fall 
like populated mountain crests. Like the sun piercing through clouds, 
Arjuna’s chariot passes through the dense mass of dead tuskers with 
copious secretions flowing down their bodies. Heaps of dead leviathans, 
horses, broken chariots and lifeless warriors stripped of their weapons and 
armour, litter the trail he blazes on the field of horror. 

The twang of the Gandiva is the peal of thunder in the sky. Varied kinds 
of fatal astras that resemble burning brands, meteors and thunderbolts, shot 
from the Gandiva, burn your army like a forest of bamboo on a mountain in 
the night. Crushed, burnt, maimed, massacred and thrown into absolute 


disorder, they break and run, and are like a fleet of boats on a tempest- 
lashed ocean. The Kuru army that had assailed Bhimasena till then abandon 
him and escape with their lives. 

After he routs the Kurus, the unvanquished Arjuna rides up to 
Bhimasena, to inform him that Yudhishtira’s wounds have been treated and 
dressed and to reassure him that their brother is well. 

Leaving Bhimasena, Dhananjaya moves once more against his enemies, 
making the earth and the sky, O Bhaarata, resound with the rumble of his 
chariot. Ten of Dusasana’s sons, all daring warriors wearing golden armour, 
surround and attack Arjuna with stretched bows, almost dancing on their 
chariots, like hunters cornering an elephant with burning brands. Krishna 
manoeuvres the chariot to place all of them to his right, expecting Arjuna to 
quickly send them all to Yamaloka. Seeing Arjuna’s chariot moving away, 
they rush towards him. Partha first destroys their battle flags, horses, bows 
and, then, with some flat-headed arrows, he cuts off their heads with bitten 
lips and eyes blood-red with battle lust, like striking the blooms of a 
corsage of lotuses. Having killed those ten Kaurava princes, Arjuna’s 
chariot rolls inexorably on.’” 


CANTO 81 


S anjaya says, ‘Ninety Kaurava chariot-warriors charge Arjuna as 

he advances under his kapi-dhvaja, his ratha harnessed to those 

fleetest of horses decked with golden ornaments and covered with pearl 

filigree. Those Naravyaghras attempt to surround Arjuna. Krishna ignores 

them and makes for Karna’s chariot, chased by those ninety Samsaptakas, 

shooting storms of shafts at him. They force Arjuna to stop, and quick as 

thinking kill all his ninety assailants along with their charioteers, and they 

fall dead like Siddhas falling down with their vimanas from heaven upon 
the exhaustion of their punya. 

Next, a large force of Kauravas, with chariots, elephants and horsemen, 
fearlessly besiege Phalguna, shower him with spears, maces, throwing 
swords and thousands of arrows and stop his progress. However, like the 
sun destroying the darkness with his rays, he arrests their attack on him, 
killing many, until an army of Mlecchas, riding thirteen hundred excited 
elephants, under your son Duryodhana, falls on Partha from a flank. They 
harry him with barbed arrows, nalikas, cloth-yard shafts, javelins, kampanas 
and short arrows, some of which the elephants hurl with their trunks. 

Phalguna stops them in their tracks and blasts that elephant force like 
Indra striking mountains with thunderbolts. His gold-winged arrows 
excoriate the elephants decked with golden necklaces and they fall dead, 
like mountains ablaze with volcanic fires. O Rajan, we hear the thunderous 


twang of the Gandiva, above the pandemonium of shouts and screams of 
dying men, elephants and horses. Slashed elephants, horses and chariots, 
with their riders dead, flee on all sides. So prodigious is Arjuna that, 
fighting alone, he razes horsemen, elephants and chariot-warriors in 
thousands, indeed all that attacked him from every side. 

Seeing the still great Kaurava army corner Phalguna, Bhima turns away 
from the small force he had been fighting, and dashes up to support his 
brother, and he demolishes those that remain alive with his gada. Without 
let, in frenzied brutality, Bhima’s awesome, magical gada flies and falls 
incessantly on men, elephants and horses cased in steel armour and strikes 
them down, spraying the air with jets of crimson. Biting the earth with their 
teeth, and bathed in blood, with the crowns of their heads and bows and 
lower limbs crushed, they fall and become food for the waiting carrion 
eaters. Covered with blood, flesh, marrow and pieces of bone, Bhima’s 
occult mace is like the night of death, difficult to look at. Bhima prowls the 
battlefield in rage with that mace and massacres ten thousand horses and 
numberless foot-soldiers, while your troops think that Yama himself, armed 
with his bludgeon, is in their midst. 

He next breaks into the enemy’s elephant division, like a makara into 
the ocean and, within a short time, despatches it to Yama’s abode. Elephants 
in their spiked body armour, with their hastikas and standards, fall 
everywhere like winged mountains. After he destroys the elephants, the 
mighty Bhimasena once more follows Arjuna on his chariot. 

Arjuna, finding your great army harried, slaughtered, on the verge of 
flight, and standing paralysed, sends relentless torments of arrows at it and 
men, horses, chariots and elephants die, emitting loud screams. The 
remnants huddle together and turn tail to flee. The battle, however, 
continues between the Kurus and the mighty Pandavas and there is not a 
single chariot-warrior, horseman, elephant-warrior, horse or elephant that is 
unscathed. The soldiers, bathed in blood, their armour riddled with arrows, 
blaze like a forest of flowering asokas. 

Seeing Savyasachi’s valour, the Kauravas despair for Karna’s life and 
they flee the field, deserting their Sutaputra Senapati, even while calling 
desperately for his help. Arjuna pursues them, hundreds of arrows flaring 
from the Gandiva and swelling the morale of the Pandava warriors under 
Bhimasena. 


Your sons, O Rajan, then ride towards Karna’s chariot, sinking, as they 
seem to be, in a fathomless sea, where Karna is the sole island of safety for 
them. Your sons, like serpents defanged, and driven by fear of the noble 
Arjuna, take shelter with him, like those who seek the protection of dharma 
from fear of death. 

Karna, always unafraid, reassures them, “Do not fear! Come to me!” 

Looking at your shattered army, Karna stretches his bow, draws deep 
breaths and prepares himself to kill Arjuna and have revenge and victory. 
Bending his formidable bow into a circle, he once more assails the 
Panchalas in the very sight of Savyasachi. Soon, many kings of the enemy 
army counterattack and pour their arrows on him like a deluge upon a 
mountain. However, Karna fights for his friends and his arrows kill many 
Panchalas and they scream as they are struck, just before dying.’” 


CANTO 82 


°S anjaya says, ‘While Shwetavahana puts the Kurus to flight, O 
Rajan, Karna decimates the Panchalas with his powerful, 
ineluctable arrows, truly like a tempest chasing massed clouds across the 
sky. He fells Janamejaya’s charioteer with broad-faced shafts called 
anjalikas and then kills his horses. He rakes both Satanika and Sutasoma 
with many broad-headed arrows and shatters their bows. He drills 
Dhrishtadyumna with six arrows and, not losing a moment, kills his horses. 
He kills Satyaki’s horses and then despatches Visoka, son of the king of the 
Kaikeyas. 

At this, Ugrakarman, commander of the Kaikeya division, shoots 
Karna’s son Prasena with a score of arrows, making him tremble; but, with 
three crescent-tipped arrows, Karna cuts off the arms and the head of his 
son’s assailant and fells him from his chariot like a sala tree with its 
branches lopped off. 

Prasena, fairly dancing upon his chariot, covers Satyaki, fighting on foot 
without his chariot, with a slew of arrows; Satyaki kills him with a single 
shaft that bursts his heart apart. Karna, red-eyed seeing this, tells Satyaki, 
“You are dead, O grandson of Sini!” and shoots a deadly arrow at him. 
However, Sikhandi cuts it down in flight and strikes Karna with three 
arrows of his own. Karna shatters Sikhandi’s bow, rends his banner, strikes 
him with another six arrows and finally beheads Dhrishtadyumna’s son in 


his fury. He seamlessly follows this up by wounding Sutasoma deep with a 
long shaft. 

Seeing the fierce battle progress and the death of Dhrishtadyumna’s son, 
Krishna says, “The Panchalas are being slaughtered, Partha. We must stop 
the terrible Karna.” 

Arjuna smiles in anticipation and they ride again towards Karna’s 
chariot. Stretching and fiercely strumming his bow, he creates a darkness 
with his arrows and destroys large numbers of men, horses and chariots that 
come in his way, as the echoes of the Gandiva’s bowstring reach up into the 
sky. Birds no longer finding room in their own element, take shelter in 
mountain caverns. The magnificent Kiritin, holding his full-drawn bow, 
falls upon the enemy forces while Bhimasena protects his rear. Those two 
princes drive furiously towards Karna, demolishing their enemies along the 
way. 

Meanwhile, Karna also covers the sky with his shafts. He mows down a 
vast number of chariot-warriors, horses and elephants, and grinds down the 
Somakas. Soon Uttamaujas, Janamejaya, an enraged Yudhamanyu and 
Sikhandi, uniting with Dhrishtadyumna, attack Vaikartana with loud shouts 
and roars, but they make no impact on him, like the objects of the senses 
failing to entice a man of purified soul from abstinence. He quickly smashes 
their bows, horses, charioteers and banners, and strikes each of them with 
five arrows and then gives a booming roar of triumph himself. 

While he razes his enemies, everybody is terrified and they think that 
the earth, with her mountains and trees, might split at the twang of Karna’s 
bow, the mighty Vijaya, which resembles Indra’s dhanusha. The son of 
Adhiratha is like the sun within his corona, resplendent with blazing rays. 
He carves Sikhandi with a dozen keen barbs, Uttamaujas with half a dozen, 
Yudhamanyu with three, and Janamejaya and Dhrishtadyumna with three 
each. O Rajan, those five powerful maharathas stand as if frozen, beaten by 
the Suta’s son even as the objects of the senses are by a man with a purified 
soul. 

The five sons of Draupadi quickly ride up with other rathikas and rescue 
their uncles who are sinking in the Karna ocean, like shipwrecked 
merchants being rescued from the real ocean. Satyaki cuts down Karna’s 
ceaseless cataract of arrows, and strikes the Sutaputra with a clutch of 
scathing shafts; he then plunges eight heavy iron arrows into Duryodhana’s 
majestic body. Kripa, the Bhoja lord Kritavarman, your son and Karna 


strike back at the brilliant Satyaki. However, with shafts flowing incessantly 
from his bow stretched to its fullest, Satyaki is as irresistible as the meridian 
sun in the autumn sky; he stops those four warriors like the king of the 
Daityas battling the Lokapalas, the Regents of the four quarters. 

Soon some Panchala maharathas come to his support, like the Maruts 
protecting Sakra in battle. 

The battle that now breaks out again resembles the Devasura yuddha of 
old. Wounded, bleeding rathikas, elephants, horses and foot-soldiers stagger 
about with arrows protruding, or utter wails of final distress and fall dead. 
Your younger son Dusasana fearlessly attacks Bhima who happily turns on 
him like a lion springing towards a large ruru deer. The battle between them 
is fierce as the one between Sambara and Sakra in the days of old. They 
lacerate each other with arrows shot with great force; they are like two bull 
elephants in musth with ichor streaming down their bodies, goring each 
other near a she-elephant in season. Vrikodara destroys your son’s bow and 
standard with another winged arrow, he pierces his antagonist’s forehead 
and then decapitates his charioteer. 

Dusasana retaliates with a fresh bow, gashing Bhimasena with a dozen 
virile shafts. Holding his horses’ reins himself, he yet pours torrents of 
arrows over Bhima. Dusasana then unleashes a fulgurous astra, bright as the 
sun, and decked with gold, diamonds, and other precious gems, irresistible 
as Indra’s Vajra. That blazing weapon finds Vrikodara and he collapses with 
languid limbs and outstretched arms, as if dead upon his chariot. But, he 
soon recovers and begins to roar like a whole pride of lions.’” 


CANTO 83 


: S anjaya says, ‘Prince Dusasana fights intensely and rives Bhima’s 
bow with a perfect arrow; with six more shafts he pierces his 
charioteer and then finds Bhima himself, first with nine and then with many 
more barbs, all shot with ferocious power. Bhimasena casts a deadly spear 
at your son, who, seeing it fly at him like a burning brand, cuts it down with 
ten arrows. Dusasana drills Bhima deep with a single violent shaft, which 
plunges deep into the great Pandava’s body, drawing a spout of blood and 
applause and cheers from your troops. 

A livid Bhima says levelly, “You have hit me swift and deep, vile 
Dusasana. Now endure a blow from my gada.” 

Titanic Vrikodara picks up his great mace and says, “O evil one, today I 
will drink your blood on this battlefield.” 

Dusasana flings a short spear like death itself at Bhima, who whirls his 
gada around and hurls it like lightning at his most loathed enemy, who tried 
to strip the precious Panchali naked in the Kuru sabha. That mace breaks 
Dusasana’s fiery spear, flares on to strike him on his head and flings him ten 
bow lengths from his chariot. Dusasana finds all his horses, his chariot 
pulverised, his armour, ornaments, attire and garlands all broken or askew, 
and himself writhing in agony on the ground. Bhimasena, perspiring like an 
elephant with thick juices trickling down his body, standing on the 
battlefield amidst many great warriors of the Kuru army, again remembers 


all the vile deeds of hostility and the humiliation that your sons heaped on 
the Pandavas. He clearly remembers how Panchali was hauled into the 
Kuru court by her tresses, how Dusasana tried to strip her of her single 
garment in the midst of that august and ancient court, even while she was in 
her period, and all, all the other wrongs inflicted on that peerless princess 
while her husbands sat with their faces turned away. His wrath flares up like 
a fire fed with libations of ghrita. 

He addresses Karna, Suyodhana, Kripa, Aswatthaman and Kritavarman 
in a ringing voice, “Today I will make an end of this beast Dusasana. Let all 
your warriors protect him if they can.” 

Bhima suddenly springs at Dusasana like a lion rushing towards a 
mighty elephant, and attacks him before the eyes of Suyodhana and Karna. 
He jumps down from his chariot and, with bloodshot gaze fixed on his 
fallen enemy, draws his sword. Trembling with rage, he sets his foot upon 
the throat of Dusasana, and ripping open the breast of his supine, bends 
down and drinks his warm blood as if it was amrita to him. He then throws 
him down, cuts his head off and, keeping the vow he swore in the Kuru 
sabha, again sips his enemy’s blood, little by little, as if there was nothing to 
rival its taste in any of the worlds. 

Then he looks at him with wrathful eyes and says, “I find the taste of 
my enemy’s blood to be superior to that of my mother’s milk, honey, ghee, 
or the finest wine made from honey. It is better than the purest water, milk, 
the best curd, or all kinds of drink in this world, sweeter than amrita.” 

Once more, looking at Dusasana’s dead body he laughs softly and says, 
“What more can I do to you? Death has rescued you from me.” 

Rajan, those who see Bhimasena stalk the battlefield filled with joy and 
drink his enemy’s blood, either fall down in terror or their weapons drop 
from their nerveless fingers. Many cry out feebly and look at Bhima in 
horror. Indeed, all those that stand around Bhima and see him drink 
Dusasana’s blood, flee with Chitrasena, overwhelmed by fear, and saying to 
one another, “This is no human being! This Bhima has to be a Rakshasa!” 

Then the Panchala prince Yudhamanyu, at the head of his troops, 
pursues the fleeing Chitrasena and pierces him with seven keen arrows shot 
swiftly, one after another. Chitrasena, like a trampled serpent repeatedly 
darting out its tongue and ready to use its venom, turns back and shoots his 
pursuer with three shafts and his charioteer with six. Then, in a flash, with a 
shaft fitted with large wings and an exceptionally sharp point, and shot with 


great care from his bow drawn to its fullest stretch, Yudhamanyu 
decapitates Chitrasena. Upon the fall of his brother Chitrasena, a raging 
Karna puts the Pandava host to flight until Nakula attacks and stops him. 

After killing the vindictive Dusasana in full view of Karna, Bhima 
drinks some more of his blood, and gifted with stentorian lungs, shouts, “O 
wretch, here, I drink your life-blood from your throat. Abuse us again as 
you once did, crying, “Beast, beast!’ 

We will dance and repeat the words of those who once called us ‘beast’. 
We remember our sleep at the Pramanakoti palace, the mixing of deadly 
poison in our food, the bites of black cobras and the setting fire to the house 
of lac. We cannot forget our suffering —the theft of our kingdom at a game 
of dice, our exile in the woods, the cruel seizure of Draupadi’s shining 
tresses, the sting of arrows and the cuts of weapons in battle and all our 
other miseries. We endured all other kinds of hurts in Virata’s palace 
through the evil counsels of Sakuni, Duryodhana, Karna and you. We were 
never allowed a moment’s peace or happiness, and it was the evil designs of 
Dhritarashtra and his son that was the cause of all our suffering.” 

Drenched in blood flowing from his wounds, the victorious Vrikodara, 
his face red and filled with great anger, then says to Krishna and Arjuna, 
“Praviras, what I had vowed to do to Dusasana in battle, I have 
accomplished today. I will soon accomplish my other vow and kill that 
second beast, Duryodhana, in this yagna of war. Only after I stamp on his 
evil head in the presence of the Kauravas, will I find peace.” 

Then, filled with great joy, Bhima finds happy release in loud roars, just 
as the mighty and the noble Indra of a thousand eyes roared after slaying 
Vritrasura.”” 


CANTO 84 


: S anjaya says, “After the killing of Dusasana, O Rajan, ten of your 
sons, Nishangin, Kavachin, Pasin, Dundadhara, Dhanurgraha, 
Alolupa, Saha, Shanda, Vatavega and Suvarchasas, great maharathas who 
have never retreated from battle, and now wanting revenge, shroud 
mahabaho Bhima, red-eyed with rage, his lips bloody, like the raging 
Destroyer, with arrows. But with ten broad-headed shafts, fitted with golden 
wings and shot with great force, Bhima despatches those ten Bharata 
princes to Yamaloka. 

Seeing your ten sons slain in a flash, your army breaks and flees, despite 
Karna’s presence, overwhelmed with terror of the Pandavas. A great fear 
enters Karna’s heart on watching Bhima’s might like Yama’s himself. Salya 
understands Karna’s state of mind, and consoles him, “This is not the time 
for grief, O son of Radha. These kings are all running from fear of 
Bhimasena. Duryodhana is stricken after seeing Bhima kill Dusasana and 
drink his blood. Kripa and others, and those of the king’s brothers that are 
still alive, their hearts heavy, their rage dimmed by sorrow, surround 
Duryodhana to comfort him, while Dhananjaya and the Pandavas advance 
against you for battle. So, collect yourself and face Arjuna with courage. 

Dhritarashtra has given you the entire responsibility for this war. O 
Mahabaho, bear that burden to the best of your prowess and ability. In 
victory there will be great fame, while in defeat heaven is certain. Look, 


Karna, your son Vrishasena sees the stupor that has come over you and 
bears down on the Pandavas.” 

Hearing what Salya says, Karna rides furiously towards Vrikodara, who 
meanwhile decimates your troops with his mace, like Yama wielding his 
danda. Nakula attacks Vrishasena like the victorious Maghavat rushing 
against the Asura Jambha and destroys his proud standard decked with 
gems; he then splits his bow with a golden strap attached to it. Wanting to 
avenge Dusasana, Vrishasena snatches up another bow and strikes fiercely 
back at Nakula. The duel rages and Nakula and Vrishasena harry each other 
with the many devastras they possess. 

From rage as well as from his own brilliance and the natural energy of 
his weapons, Vrishasena blazes like a fire fed with libations of ghee. He 
kills Nakula’s beautiful white horses of the Vanayu breed, decked with 
trappings of gold. Nakula jumps down from his ratha and, taking up a bright 
shield decked with golden moons and a sword blue as the sky, he wheels 
across the field like a great bird, performing diverse exquisite movements 
through the air. He kills many warriors, horses and elephants and they fall 
on the earth like animals being sacrificed in an Aswamedha yagna. Nakula 
singly kills two thousand seasoned warriors from diverse realms with their 
bodies smeared with fragrant sandalwood paste. 

Karna’s son suddenly attacks Nakula again and pierces him from every 
side with countless arrows, determined to have his life. Nakula strikes back 
and, with the support of his brother Bhima, spreads terror through the field, 
and as if in sport, slaughters warriors, horses and elephants. The duel 
continues with both shuras stalking each other like hawks with outstretched 
wings to snatch a piece of meat. Negating his antagonist’s showers of 
arrows, Nakula wheels about in different intricate movements until 
Vrishasena demolishes his shield adorned with a thousand jewel stars. 

Not losing a moment, he rives Nakula’s polished blue sword, keen as a 
serpent’s poison, even while Madri’s son whirls it over his head. Vrishasena 
stabs his enemy deep in his chest with some slim shafts and earns the 
applause of those that watch the duel. Bleeding from Vrishasena’s attack, 
the noble Nakula runs to Bhimasena’s chariot and jumps onto it like a lion 
springing upon a mountain summit. 

The heroic Vrishasena attacks the two sons of Pandu with a relentless 
gale of arrows and, quickly, many other Kuru warriors join him. Bhima and 
Arjuna, burning with wrath like two fires fed with libations of ghrita, 


retaliate powerfully and pour a scathing volley of arrows over Vrishasena 
and the other warriors around him. 

Bhima tells Phalguna, “The son of Karna has Nakula in dire peril. Let 
us move against him.” 

Seeing them, Nakula says, “Kill him quickly.” 

Hearing this, Krishna precipitately drives the formidable Arjuna, his 
kapi-dhvaja flapping in the wind, towards Vrishasena.’” 


CANTO 85 


°S anjaya says, “Learning that Nakula is in dire straits, wounded, 
without his ratha, bow, arrows and sword, the five sons of 
Drupada, the five sons of Draupadi and Satyaki dash to his rescue in their 
rathas driven by expert charioteers, harnessed to wind-swift horses, and 
with banners streaming. They destroy your elephants, chariots, men and 
cavalry with shafts that resemble formidable serpents. Seeing this turn of 
affairs, the Kaurava maharathas Kritavarman, Kripa, Aswatthaman, 
Duryodhana, Sakuni’s son, Vrika, Kratha and Devavridha swiftly counter 
attack, their chariots steaming forward with a sound deep as the booming of 
elephants or clouds, and hold them up. However, the prince of the Kulindas, 
and his elephants that look like mountains and newly formed clouds, 
advance with impetuous speed against the Kaurava heroes. 

Well-equipped and covered with golden armour, the elephants born in 
Himalayan regions and which only accomplished and willing warriors ride 
are like clouds in the sky charged with lightning. They vigorously assail 
Kripa who brings down the prince from his elephant. The younger brother 
of the prince besieges Kripa with a dense flight of bright iron spears and 
loud shouts, but Sakuni cuts off his head even as it still roars. Seeing the fall 
of the Kulindas, the mighty chariot-warriors of your army, blow their 
conches with joy, and charge their enemies. 


A fierce battle ensues between the Kurus and the Pandavas supported by 
the Srinjayas. Arrows, javelins, swords, maces and battle-axes fly and fall 
thickly and chariot-warriors, horses, elephants and foot-soldiers die in their 
hundreds. Kurukshetra takes on the aspect of the sky where fierce winds 
billow from all sides, and masses of clouds charged with lightning peal with 
incessant thunder. Kritavarman of the Bhojas shoots down the huge 
elephants, rathikas, innumerable foot-soldiers, horsemen and Satanika’s 
horse. Aswatthaman also kills three hulking elephants carrying all kinds of 
weapons, ridden by masterly warriors, and adorned with lofty standards, 
and they fall like cliffs riven by thunder. 

The third brother of the Kulinda chief bloodies Duryodhana with a sear 
of arrows through his chest, but your son strikes back at him and his 
elephant with a plethora of whetted shafts. The elephant with the prince on 
his back falls with blood leaking from every part of his body, like a 
mountain of red chalk with red streams running down its breast, split by 
thunder in the monsoon. The Kulinda prince saves himself in the nick of 
time, and mounting another elephant, battles the king of the Krathas who 
fights from his chariot. Both are struck deep and while the prince with his 
elephant falls like a thunderstruck hill, the king struck by the prince’s 
arrows shot from the back of his elephant, falls with his shattered ratha, like 
a mighty tree uprooted by a tempest. 

The Kaurava warrior Vrika deeply wounds that mountain prince from 
the Himavat as he fights from his elephant. However, his great beast quickly 
crushes Vrika underfoot, his chariot and horses and impetuously attacks 
Babhru’s son, the prince of the Magadhas, who already wounded, collapses. 
The Kulinda prince, on his magnificent fighting elephant, attacks Sakuni 
until the king of the Gandharas cuts his head off. 

About this time, Satanika drills elephants, horses and chariot-warriors, 
and large bands of foot soldiers with a dazzle of arrows, and they fall 
paralysed and broken like serpents beaten by a storm stirred by Garuda’s 
wings. Then a Kulinda warrior from the Kaurava army shoots Nakula’s son 
Satanika with a score of shafts but Satanika beheads him. 

Vrishasena pierces Satanika, Arjuna and Bhima, Nakula and Janardana 
with iron quarrels. Seeing his superhuman effort, the Kauravas are filled 
with joy and applaud him while those conversant with Dhananjaya’s 
prowess regard Vrishasena as a libation already poured on the fire of war. 
The Kiritin, seeing Nakula deprived of his horses and Janardana slashed 


with arrows, attacks Vrishasena who stands in front of Karna. Karna’s son 
gashes Partha with an arrow and gives a loud shout of triumph as Namuchi 
did in the olden days after having wounded Indra. He finds Partha and 
Krishna repeatedly with his formidable arrows. 

An annoyed Arjuna decides to put an end to the brilliant prince. His 
brow furrowed and eyes red in wrath, that Pravira, who could kill Yama 
himself if the latter stood against him, laughs terribly and says to Karna and 
all the other Kaurava heroes fighting under Duryodhana and Aswatthaman, 
“Today, O Karna, in your very presence, I will despatch the fierce 
Vrishasena to Yamaloka! Everyone knows that all of you together slew my 
son, when he was alone in his chariot. I, however, will kill your son before 
all of you. Let all the Kaurava maharathas protect him if they can. 

And after that, I, Arjuna, will kill you, Karna, O fool! You are the root 
of this enmity and this war and you have become proud as a result of 
Duryodhana’s patronage. I will kill you and Bhimasena will kill this wretch 
among men, this Duryodhana, through whose evil rule this battle born of a 
game of dice germinated.” 

Arjuna strums the string of his bow, takes aim at Vrishasena, and with 
awful force, O Rajan, looses ten arrows that pierce Vrishasena through all 
his vital organs. With four razor-headed arrows he breaks his bow, cuts 
away his two arms and his head, dropping him onto the ground from his 
chariot like a flowering sala tree falling from a mountain summit. Seeing his 
son die, a wild and inconsolable Karna rushes up on his chariot against 
Partha, wanting instant revenge.’” 


CANTO 86 


: S anjaya says, “The unassailable Karna, whom even the Devas 
cannot match, charges at Krishna and Arjuna with a deep roar like 
the surging sea. Krishna says, “Here comes Karna to fight you, Dhananjaya, 
with his sarathy Salya driving his chariot that looks like a Deva-ratha, 
harnessed to white horses, streaming with banners and festooned with rows 
of bells. Look at his battle flag with the device of the elephant’s rope that is 
like Indra’s bow which divides the firmament with a rainbow. He comes 
shooting showers of arrows like the clouds pouring torrents of rain. He 
comes to win the war for Duryodhana. 

There the king of the Madras, the royal Salya, standing at the head of 
his chariot, guides his horses of immeasurable energy. Hear the roll of their 
drums and the fierce blast of their conches. Hear, O son of Pandu, the 
shouts and roars that come from every side and the terrifying twang of 
Karna’s bow, the Vijaya stretched with such force that it drowns every other 
sound. Look, the mighty chariot-warriors of the Panchalas with their 
followers give way before him, escaping like a herd of deer at the sight of 
an angry lion. 

You must kill the Suta’s son for no one else can withstand his shafts. I 
know that you can subdue the three worlds with all their mobile and 
immobile creatures including the very Devas and Gandharvas. What can be 
said about battling the great Isana Mahadeva, the three-eyed Sarva 


Kapardin? However, you pleased that god of gods himself in battle: Siva, 
that Deva called Sthanu, who is the source of bliss for all beings. All the 
other Devas have also given you their blessings, through the grace of that 
Devadeva, the Deity armed with the trident. 

Slay Karna today, like Indra killing the Asura Namuchi. Let prosperity 
ever be with you, O Partha, and may you find victory in battle.” 

Arjuna says, “My victory, O Krishna, is already assured, for you, O 
Madhusudana, who are the master of all the worlds, are pleased with me. 
Urge the horses forward, Hrishikesha! Today I will not return from battle 
without slaying Karna. You will see him killed, cut to pieces with my 
arrows, or you will see me, Govinda, killed by Karna. The battle that will 
transfix the three worlds is at hand and as long as the earth exists, men will 
speak of it.” 

Saying this to the indefatigable Krishna, Arjuna moves against Karna 
like an elephant against a rival. Once more he says to Krishna, “Urge the 
horses, O Hrishikesha, for time flies!” 

Kesava wishes him victory, gives free rein to the horses, fleet as 
thought, and in moments they are face to face with Karna.’” 


CANTO 87 


: S anjaya says, ‘Burning with rage at Vrishasena’s death, his eyes the 
colour of copper and shedding tears of grief, Karna prepares to 

face Dhananjaya, having challenged him to battle. The two chariots yoked 
to white horses, shining with solar effulgence and covered with tiger-skins, 
when they come together, look like two suns in the sky. All that watch are 
wonderstruck when they look at these two warriors who resemble Indra and 
Virochana’s son Bali, as they prepare for the battle for the conquest of the 
three worlds. All look on in awe as the two maharathas flare at each other 
with rumbling chariot-wheels, the twang of their bows, the sound of their 
palms, the whizz of arrows, and loud roars, their battle flags, Karna’s 
bearing the elephant’s rope and Partha’s the kapi-dhvaja, flying in the wind. 

Seeing them, O Bhaarata, all the kings shout aloud and repeatedly cheer 
them while thousands of warriors slap their armpits and wave their 
garments in the air. The Kauravas beat their drums and blow their 
numberless conches to encourage Karna, while the field also resounds with 
the blare of Pandava trumpets and conches in support of Dhananjaya. The 
resultant tumult and uproar are deafening, unbearable. 

The two Naravyaghras and Atirathas, standing on their chariots, are an 
awesome sight. They are very alike, exceedingly handsome and are both 
armed with formidable bows that seem to flash like lightning, fine quivers 
stocked with arrows, spears and a wealth of astras, and fly a lofty standard 


each. Both wear armour with swords hanging from their belts; their horses 
shine dazzling white and both blow on superb conches. Both are great 
warriors and while one has Krishna for his sarathy, the other has Salya. 
Both wear garlands of gold, have yak-tails chamaras and white chattras. 
With their magnificent limbs smeared with red sandalwood paste and their 
bulging red eyes, they are like infuriated bulls. Both are broad necked like 
the lion, broad chested, with long arms, and powerful past telling. Each 
wants to kill the other and they challenge each other, O Rajan, like humped 
bulls in a cow-pen, like infuriated elephants over a female, like angry 
mountains, like infant serpents of virulent poison or the all destroying 
Yama. Full of fury for each other like Indra and Vritra, they are like the sun 
and the moon in splendour. 

Born of celestial fathers, they resemble Devas in beauty and tejas. Full 
of wrath, they are like two mighty planets sprung up for the destruction of 
the world at the pralaya at yuga’s end. Indeed, they look like the sun and the 
moon arisen of their own accord on the field of battle. Both powerful 
warriors glory in their own might as they ready for war. 

The troops, O Rajan, filled with great joy at the imminent duel between 
the two Naravyaghras, Karna and Arjuna, avidly speculate who will be 
victorious. Both bear every weapon, both are seasoned warriors, both have 
conquered the world once and they resemble the Asura Sambara and the 
Deva Indra. They are equal to Dasaratha’s son Rama in battle, Vishnu in 
splendour and Bhava in fathomless might. The bands of Siddhas and 
Charanas who come to witness the battle look down from their vimanas and 
are amazed. 

The Dhartarashtras support the noble Karna, while the Pandavas under 
Dhrishtadyumna support Arjuna and thus the two armies cease their 
fighting and become anxious, rooted spectators. For Karna and Arjuna, like 
two mighty comets of awesome appearance, either victory or defeat is 
certain as they face each other in this momentous duel to the death. 

Then, O Bharatarishabha, differences and disputes arise in the 
firmament, among the unearthly beings gathered there, over Karna and 
Arjuna. All the men and creatures of this world, and all the Devas, Danavas, 
Gandharvas, Pisachas, Nagas and the Rakshasas, adopt different sides. The 
sky with all the stars is anxious on Karna’s account, while the wide earth 
worries about Partha, like a mother for her son. 


The rivers, the seas, the mountains, the trees, the deciduous plants and 
herbs take the part of the Kiritin Arjuna, while the Asuras, Yatudhanas, the 
Guhyakas, the ravens and other birds of the sky are with Karna. 

All the gems, precious jewels, the four Vedas and the Puranas, the 
Upavedas, the Upanishads, with all their mysteries and compilations, 
Vasuki, Chitrasena, Takshaka and Upatakshaka, all the mountains, all the 
offspring of Kadru with their children, all the great poisonous serpents, and 
the Nagas take Arjuna’s side as do Airavata and his children, the offspring 
of Surabhi and Vaisali, and the Bhogins. 

The smaller serpents all side with Karna. 

Wolves, wild stags and all kinds of auspicious animals and birds wish 
victory for Arjuna as do the Vasus, the Maruts, the Sadhyas, the Rudras, the 
Viswedevas, the Ashwinis, and Agni, Indra, Soma, Pavana and the ten 
directions of the sky. 

All the Adityas, the Vaishyas, the Sudras, the Sutas, and those of mixed 
castes, all favour Karna. The Devas, with the Pitris, and all who are 
numbered with them and their followers, Yama, Vaisravana and Varuna are 
with Arjuna as are the Brahmanas, the Kshatriyas, the Yagnas, and 
Dakshinas. The Pretas and Pishacas, most carnivores and birds of prey, the 
Rakshasas with all the monsters of the sea, the wild dogs and the jackals are 
for Karna. 

The different tribes of Devarishis, Rishis and Rajarishis are for the son 
of Pandu as are the Gandharvas led by Tumburu. 

With the offspring of Pradha and Mauni, the several kinds of 
Gandharvas, Apsaras, and many wise Rishis, riding on wolves, stags, 
elephants, horses, chariots, clouds, the wind, and on foot come there to 
witness the duel between Karna and Arjuna. The Devas, the Danavas, the 
Gandharvas, the Nagas, the Yakshas, the Pakshis, the great Maharishis 
versed in the Vedas, the Pitris that subsist upon dakshina called svadha, 
Tapasya, the Vigyanas and the Divyausadha come, O Rajan, and take up 
stations in the sky, making a great noise. 

Brahman, with the Dvijas, Maharishis, and the Lords of creatures, and 
Bhava himself on his chariot, appears in that part of the sky. Seeing the two 
noble ones, Karna and Dhananjaya, about to fight, Indra himself says, “Let 
Arjuna vanquish Karna.” 

Surya Deva, however, says, “Let my son Karna slay Arjuna, and emerge 
victorious in this battle!” while Vasava says again, “Let my son triumph 


2? 


over Karna 

Thus, Surya Deva and Indra, the two foremost of the Devas, who are 
present, adopt opposing views and dispute with each other. 

The Devas and the Asuras adopt opposite sides and the three worlds 
with the Devarishis, the Devas and all other beings, tremble at the sight 
both above and below. The Devas favour Partha, while the Asuras prefer 
Karna. All beings are committed and involved in what the result of the duel 
will be, all without exception siding with either the Kuru or the Pandava 
hero. 

The gods urge Brahman, the Self-born Lord of Creation, who is also 
present, and say, “O Deva, let these two lions among men have equal 
success. Let not the vast universe be destroyed by this encounter between 
Karna and Arjuna. O Svayambhu, say that these two will meet with equal 
success.” 

Indra Maghavat bows to the Grandsire and says, “You once said that the 
two Krishnas will always triumph. Let it now be as you then said. Be 
pleased with me, O Holy One!” 

At this, Brahma and Rudra say to the king of the Devas, “The victory of 
the noble Vijaya, of the ambidextrous Savyasachi is certain. He gratified 
Agni in the forest of Khandava and he came to swarga and rendered 
assistance to you, O Sakra. Karna is on the side of the Danavas and it is 
appropriate that he should meet with defeat and satisfy the intentions of the 
Devas. 

O lord of the Devas, one’s own svadharma must always be important. 
The noble Phalguna, who is devoted to truth and dharma, will always be 
victorious. He who has pleased the Holy God with the Bull for his mount, 
he who has Vishnu, Lord of the universe, for his sarathy—how will he not 
be victorious? 

Partha is a mahatejasvin warrior, a master of arms and has accumulated 
great punya. He is a master of the entire science of weaponry. Indeed, he 
possesses every accomplishment. He will be victorious, and that will 
accomplish the purposes of the Devas. Because of his greatness, Partha can 
go against destiny itself, favourable or unfavourable, and when he does so, 
a great destruction of beings takes place. When the two Krishnas are angry, 
they show little regard for anything. These two are Nara and Narayana, the 
two ancient and best of Rishis, the Creators of all that is real and unreal, and 
there is no one to rule over them. 


They are perfectly fearless, destroyers of all enemies and rulers over all. 
In swarga or among Manavas, there is no one equal to either of them. The 
three worlds with the Devarishis and the Charanas support them. All the 
Devas and, indeed, all beings follow them. The entire universe exists 
because of the power of these two. 

Let Karna, that Bharatarishabha, obtain the greatest of the regions of 
bliss here. Let him have identity with the Vasus or the Maruts. Let him, with 
Drona and Bhishma, be worshipped in swarga, for Vikartana’s son is brave 
and is a peerless shura. Let victory, however, belong to the two Krishnas.” 

After Brahma and Isana, the greatest of the Devas speak, Indra, deity of 
a thousand eyes, with reverence to their words, salutes all beings and says, 
“You have heard what the two Devas have said for the benefit of the 
universe. What they say will come to pass, so remain calm, remain 
tranquil.” 

When they hear these words of Indra, O Rajan, all beings, high and low, 
are filled with wonder and applaud that Deva. The Devas then shower down 
diverse kinds of fragrant flowers from the sky and blow their trumpets, and 
they wait along with the Danavas and the Gandharvas to witness the 
incomparable duel on Kurukshetra between those two lions among men. 

Many maharathas draw near Vasudeva and Arjuna, as well as Salya and 
Karna, and sound their conches. And then the dreadful battle begins, as they 
challenge each other like Sakra and Sambara. Their bright flags flutter on 
their chariots, like the planets Rahu and Ketu in the firmament at the time of 
the pralaya at yuga’s end. The elephant’s rope on Karna’s banner looks like 
a great serpent and, embroidered with jewels and resonant gemstones, is 
extraordinary and resembles the bow of Indra. Partha’s kapi-dhvaja with 
Hanuman’s jaws agape is terrifying to look at, like the sun showing his 
formidable teeth. 

The impetuous Vanara, impatient for battle, flies out from his banner, 
and falls upon Karna’s standard and attacks it with teeth and nails, like 
Garuda pouncing on a serpent. The elephant’s rope, decorated with rows of 
little bells, hard as iron, and which resembles Yama danda or Varuna’s 
paasa, angrily closes with the Vanara and, as predicted during the game of 
dice, their standards first duel and the horses neigh furiously at each other. 
The lotus-eyed Krishna and Salya shoot keen glares at each other, with 
Salya turning his gaze away first; and so it is with Karna, too, as he locks 
gazes with Arjuna and is the first to avert his eyes. 


Then the Suta’s son smilingly says to Salya, “If Partha kills me in battle 
today, tell me truly, friend, what will you do after that?” 

Salya says, “If, O Karna, Swetavahana kills you in battle today, I 
myself, on a single chariot, will kill both Madhava and Phalguna.” 

Arjuna asks Krishna the same question, but Krishna replies with an 
inscrutable smile, “The Sun may fall down from his place, the Earth may 
split into a thousand pieces; Fire may become cold, but Karna will not be 
able to kill you, O Dhananjaya! And if this impossible thing were to 
happen, know then that the destruction of the universe is at hand. As for 
myself, I will tear both Karna and Salya to shreds with my bare hands.” 

Arjuna smiles at the tireless Krishna, saying, “Salya and Karna, united 
together, are not a match for me alone, O Janardana! You will see me cut 
Karna with his proud standard and banners to pieces, along with Salya and 
his chariot, horses, parasol, armour, spears, shafts and bow, like a tusker 
trampling a sapling into dust in the forest. Today will see Karna’s wives 
widowed and indeed they must have seen signs of the coming evil in their 
dreams last night! I cannot restrain my wrath when I remember how this 
vain fool of little foresight laughed at us and abused us repeatedly in the 
vilest way when he saw Panchali dragged into the Kuru sabha. 

Today, O Govinda, you will see me crush Karna like an infuriated 
elephant does a tree with its load of flowers. Today, O Madhusudana, you 
will hear these sweet words after Karna’s fall: “Destiny, O you of Vrishni’s 
race, has decreed victory for you!’ 

You will comfort Abhimanyu’s mother today with a lighter heart for 
having avenged yourself on the enemy. Today you will joyously comfort 
your aunt Kunti. Today you will, O Madhava, comfort Draupadi of the 
tearful face and Dharmaraja Yudhishtira with words sweet as nectar.””” 


CANTO 88 


: S anjaya says, “Meanwhile, the sky, filled with Devas, Nagas, 
Asuras, Siddhas, Yakshas and with large bands of Gandharvas, 
Rakshasas, Asuras, Maharishis, Rajarishis, Gauda of bright plumage, 
assumes a wonderful aspect. All men on the battlefield see the wonderful 
Devas congregate in the sky, which resounds with the sound of musical 
instruments, song, adulatory hymns, laughter, dance and various other 
enchanting sights and sounds. 

Then the carnage begins, as both the Kaurava and the Pandava warriors, 
filled with exhilaration, wade into each other and the battlefield resounds 
with the sound of trumpets, drums, the blare of conches and loud roars. The 
ground is soon heaped with lifeless bodies crimson with gore, and looks 
quite stunning as men, horses, elephants, chariots and weapons, fall to 
maces, swords, javelins and rapiers. The battle between the Kurus and the 
Pandavas resembles the one between the Devas and the Asuras, of long ago. 

Dhananjaya and Karna, their superb armour shimmering, shroud the ten 
points of the sky and the army opposing them with storms of arrows. 
Darkness falls on the field, and neither your warriors nor the enemy can any 
longer see anything. From fear, all the warriors seek the protection of either 
Karna or Arjuna like rays of light spread out in the sky converging towards 
either the sun or the moon. The two Atirathas negate each other’s astras, 
like the east and the west winds blowing into each other, and dazzle like the 


sun and moon to disperse the darkness caused by the arrow clouds that 
cover the sky. 

They exhort their troops not to flee and the warriors of both armies 
stand their ground, encircling those two awesome warriors, like the Devas 
and the Asuras standing around Vasava and Sambara. The men encourage 
the two heroes with loud shouts, with the sounds of drums and other 
instruments, like thundering clouds greeting Surya and Chandra. The two 
armies are the haloes around the sun or the moon. 

Arjuna and Karna draw their great bows into complete circles and shoot 
thousands of arrows like the rays of the two unendurable suns that rise at 
pralaya at the end of the yuga to destroy the entire universe with its all 
mobile and unmoving creatures. 

Both are invincible, both are redoubtable and both are eager to show 
their skill and finish the other. Karna and Arjuna close fearlessly with each 
other, like Indra and Jambhasura. Invoking the mightiest of astras, the two 
formidable archers slay countless men, horses and elephants, while striking 
each other at the same time. O Rajan! The troops of both the Kurus and the 
Pandavas flee like animals in the forest when a lion sets upon them. Then 
the five maharathas Duryodhana, Kritavarman, Sakuni, Kripa and 
Aswatthaman the son of Sharadvata’s daughter pierce Dhananjaya and 
Kesava with scathing, accurate shafts. Arjuna destroys all their bows, 
quivers, horses, elephants, and their chariots with their charioteers, gashes 
every one of them with perfect arrows, and strikes Karna with a dozen. 

A hundred chariots, a hundred elephants, and a number of Saka, 
Tukhara and Yavana horsemen, and some of the foremost Kamboja warriors 
launch a murderous attack on Arjuna; he, in a blur, strikes down his 
attackers along with their horses, elephants and chariots. This evokes 
applause from the sky as the Devas blow their trumpets and sing praises of 
Arjuna. Gentle breezes waft down showers of unearthly blooms, fragrant 
and auspicious on Arjuna’s head. All witnesses of that encounter, Devas, 
Manavas and, indeed, all beings, are awestruck. 

Only Arjuna and Karna feel neither pain nor wonder. Then 
Aswatthaman, suddenly seizing Duryodhana’s hand, says, “Be satisfied, O 
Duryodhana! Make peace with the Pandavas. There is no need to fight on. 
Shame on war! The Acharya, a master of the mightiest of astras and like 
Brahma himself, is dead. My uncle Kripa and I are chiranjivis but other 
great warriors like Bhishma have also fallen. Rule the kingdom forever, 


sharing it with the sons of Pandu. I can persuade Dhananjaya and Janardana 
to stop the war. Yudhishtira is always concerned about the welfare of all and 
Vrikodara and the twins will obey him. Peace between you and the 
Pandavas will benefit everybody. Let the kings who are still alive go back to 
their homes and let the troops leave in peace. 

If you do not listen to me, Duryodhana, you will only suffer further 
grief in this war. You and the universe have seen what Arjuna of the diadem 
and garlands can achieve. Neither Indra, Yama, Prachetas, Kubera or the 
Yakshas can match him. And if you consider Dhananjaya’s punya, it is 
much greater than his prowess. He will never differ with me and he will 
always agree with you. Be gratified, O Suyodhana, for the benefit of all the 
universe. You have always honoured me and I, too, bear a great friendship 
for you. This is why I say what I do to you now. 

I will dissuade Karna from fighting, provided you want peace. 
Discerning persons say that there are four kinds of friends—those who are 
naturally so, those who are made through conciliation, those who become 
friends through wealth, and lastly those who are made by subjugation and 
the exercise of power. You possess all these elements with regard to the 
Pandavas and they are your cousins and natural friends. Acquire them again 
as firm friends through conciliation. If they agree to befriend you, I suggest, 
O Maharajan, that you do what I say.” 

Duryodhana reflects for a while and, then drawing a deep breath, says 
sadly, “It is as you have said, O my dear friend. But what the evil-hearted 
Vrikodara said after killing Dusasana still burns in my heart. You also heard 
him, so how can there be peace? Arjuna will not be able to quell Karna in 
battle, even as a tempest that is weakened when it meets the mighty 
mountains of Meru. Further, the sons of Pritha have little trust in me 
thinking of my many hostile deeds towards them. Nor, O Aswatthaman, 
should you now tell me, ‘Let Karna abandon the war!’ Arjuna is exhausted 
today and Karna will soon slay him.” 

Your son turns to his own troops, and says, “Why do you stand here like 
spectators? Go, attack your enemies and butcher them!’”’” 


CANTO 89 


: S anjaya says, ‘And when the blare of conches and the peal of 
drums are deafening, Karna and Arjuna meet each other in battle, 
O king, all because of your son’s evil heart. Like two infuriated Himalayan 
elephants, with full-grown tusks, fighting each other for the sake of a she- 
elephant in season, like a mass of clouds encountering another, those two 
warriors, both unleashing torrents of arrows, fight, their bows twanging 
loudly, the wheels of their chariots rumbling and clattering like thunder and 
lighting. They duel like two mountains, both with lofty cliffs and abounding 
with trees, creepers, herbs and both teeming with wild beasts that are native 
to them, moving ever towards each other for fiercer fight. 

The duel swells like the one between Indra and Bali in days gone by. No 
one else can endure what the two shuras, their charioteers and animals 
suffer as they are wounded and spray blood from all over. Like two lakes 
full of varied kinds of lotuses, fish and tortoises, and echoing with the sound 
of different birds that the wind stirs when they approach each other, the 
chariots of the two warriors advance with fluttering banners. Both resemble 
the great and powerful Indra, and they strike each other with arrows that 
resemble his Vajra, and the battle is like the one between that Deva and the 
Asura Vritra. 

Both the armies on the field in their full regalia and those looking down 
from the sky quake with fear to witness the contention between Arjuna and 


Karna. Others among the spectators, filled with joy, utter loud shouts, raise 
their arms, waving their hands or pieces of cloth, when Arjuna charges 
Karna, like one elephant rushing at another. 

The Somakas shout, “Be quick, O Arjuna! Cut off his head and, with 
that, kill Duryodhana’s last hope for the kingdom.” 

Similarly, many of our warriors cry to Karna, “Fly, fly, O Karna, and 
kill Arjuna with your inexorable arrows. And then banish the sons of Pritha 
to the forests forever.” 

Karna strikes Partha with ten mighty shafts and Arjuna retaliates with 
ten long shafts that plunge deep into Karna’s body. They mangle each other 
with arrows past count, all the while wary and keened to catch the least 
lapse in the other. 

Rubbing the string of the Gandiva, Arjuna launches showers of cloth- 
yard shafts, nalikas and arrows with heads like boar’s ears and razors, 
anjalikas, and crescent-tipped arrows at Karna. These spread across the sky 
and, falling in a storm, riddle Karna’s chariot like flights of birds dropping 
into a tree at dusk with lowered heads, to roost for the night. But, O Rajan, 
all those showers of arrows that Arjuna, with furrowed brow and angry 
glances, looses at Karna, the Sutaputra easily destroys with his own 
tremendous volleys. 

The son of Indra then shoots a fiery Agneyastra, which covers earth and 
sky with its blazing lustre, and the very course of the sun, as it spumes up 
and falls in blinding incandescence. The robes of all the warriors and 
soldiers take fire and they scatter. We hear loud crackling, as if a forest of 
bamboos is on fire. Karna invokes a Varunastra to quench it. In a trice, an 
uncanny cloud envelops Kurukshetra in unnatural darkness. The cloud, 
whose extremities look like mountains, spreads out on every side and 
pouring down a deluge of water, floods the earth and puts out Arjuna’s 
conflagration. Nothing but darkness prevails. 

Arjuna unleashes a Vayavyastra, which disperses the clouds of Karna’s 
Varunastra. The indomitable Dhananjaya invokes an Aindrastra, which is 
like the Vajra in energy and ferocity. Immediately, razor-headed arrows, 
anjalikas, crescent-tipped shafts, nalikas, cloth-yard shafts and arrows with 
heads like the boar’s ear, issue in tide from the Gandiva, in thousands, with 
the force of thunder. Fletched with vulture’s feathers, these shafts strike 
limbs, horses, bows, yokes, wheels, and Karna’s standard, piercing all like 
serpents frightened by Garuda burrowing into the earth. 


Struck all over and bathed in blood, the noble Karna, his eyes rolling in 
anger, bends his bow and, with a twang as loud as the roar of the sea, 
launches the Bhargavastra, which extinguishes Partha’s showers of shafts 
from his Aindrastra. After he puts down Partha’s astra, Karna destroys 
chariots, elephants, foot-soldiers and many great warriors of the Pandava 
army with immaculate and fierce arrows. The stricken Panchalas and the 
Somakas, O Rajan, unite and assail the Suta’s son with keen barbs from 
every side. Karna cuts all these down, and ravages the Panchala warriors, 
elephants and the horses, killing many. 

As he routs his opponents, Karna is irradiant as a god, like a golden 
cloud lashing down torrents of deadly rain. Your warriors see the true 
valour of mighty Karna, and believe that he has vanquished the two 
Krishnas; they clap loudly and break into loud shouts of victory. 

Seeing Karna foil Dhananjaya’s astra, Bhima, the choleric son of Vayu, 
his eyes blazing, wrings his hands in rage and, drawing deep breaths, says, 
“How, O Jishnu, can this wretched Sutaputra, fallen from dharma, kill so 
many great Panchala warriors, in your sight? Till now the very gods or the 
Kalakeyas could not conquer you. Sthanu himself blessed you. How could 
this Suta’s son pierce you with ten shafts that common rathikas use? It is 
amazing how he frustrates your astras. 

Remember the suffering of Panchali, and the vile abuse that this evil son 
of a Suta heaped on us, when he called us, ‘Sesame seeds without kernels!’ 

Remember all that, O Savyasachi, and swiftly dispatch the wretched 
Karna. Why are you so tame and indifferent, Arjuna? Use that same 
prowess with which you vanquished all the creatures and fed Agni at 
Khandava, to kill this wretch. And I, too, will use my mace to crush him.” 

Krishna adds to this, “How is it, Kiritin, that Karna succeeds in negating 
your astras? Don’t you see the Kauravas standing behind Karna rejoice 
even now and shout for joy seeing you fail? Use that devotion with which, 
yuga after yuga, you have destroyed those who use darkness for their 
weapons, as well as Kshatriyas, and Asuras born of pride, to kill Karna 
today. Use my Sudarsana chakra, keen as a razor, to strike off his head, as 
Sakra did the head of Namuchi with his Vajra. Summon your dhyana, which 
once so pleased Mahadeva disguised as a hunter, O Shura, and slay the 
Sutaputra with all his followers. 

After killing Karna, bestow the earth and all her seas, towns, villages 
and wealth, free from all enemies, upon Yudhishtira Dharmaraja. Through 


that deed, O Partha, you will also win unrivalled and eternal fame.” 

Thus exhorted by Bhima and Krishna, Arjuna recalls everything that he, 
his brothers and the precious Draupadi had suffered, and remembers the 
very reason for which he had come into this world. He says to Krishna, 
“With your leave, as well as of Brahma, Bhava, and of all those who are 
Brahmavadis, I will now invoke a great astra for the good of the world and 
kill the Suta’s son.” 

Arjuna bows to Brahma and raises the irresistible Brahmastra which he 
can invoke with his mind and looses it at Karna. Karna quite effortlessly 
renders that awesome weapon impotent and continues to lash arrows and 
many fires over Arjuna. An angry Bhima blazes with wrath and asks 
Arjuna, “Men say that you are a master of the Brahmastra, which 
inexorably consumes all enemies. But you, O my brother, seem to use 
another weapon with the same name.” 

Arjuna releases a second Brahmastra from the Gandiva, which envelops 
everything around, above and below with arrows that are like fire serpents 
and blaze like the sun’s rays. From this astra, issue hundreds of arrows with 
golden wings with the effulgence of the yuga fire, as well as battle-axes, 
chakras and cloth-yard shafts in thousands, killing enemy warriors all 
around. The severed heads of some fall naked on the field, spouting blood at 
their necks and terrifying their comrades. The Kiritin wounds, maims and 
kills the warriors of Duryodhana’s army at will with his death-dealing shafts 
that spew from his second Brahmastra. 

Karna responds with thousands of arrows that fall upon the son of 
Pandu in torrents. Karna finds Bhimasena, Krishna and Arjuna, each with 
three terrible shafts and lets out an echoing roar of triumph. Arjuna cannot 
bear to see Karna’s arrows gash Bhima and Krishna, and shoots eight and 
ten arrows in a flash at the Sutaputra. Piercing Karna’s beautiful standard 
with one, he strikes Salya with four and Karna himself with three. With ten 
other elegant shafts he cuts away the Kaurava warrior Sabhapati’s arms and 
head, kills his horses, charioteer, rives his bow and standard, and fells him, 
clad in golden armour, from his chariot like a sala tree cut down with an 
axe. 

He once more rakes Karna with a dense volleys of arrows, and 
massacres four hundred elephants, eight thousand chariot-warriors, a 
thousand horses with their riders, and another eight thousand foot-soldiers. 
Partha envelops Karna, his sarathy, chariot, horses and standard in a cloud 


of arrows. The Kauravas cry out for help, pleading, “O Karna, kill the son 
of Pandu quickly or he will annihilate us all!” 

Karna unleashes a tornado of shining shafts, which spins countless 
Pandavas and Panchalas into Yamaloka. Thus, the two invincible warriors 
strike down their enemies and lacerate each other, with mighty astras. 

His wounds treated with salves and mantras that expert apothecaries 
have applied, his golden armour strapped on again, Yudhishtira arrives to 
witness the duel between Arjuna and Karna. Seeing the Dharmaputra come 
like the full moon emerging in the sky from the jaws of Rahu, a surge of 
delight courses through the Pandava army. The onlookers, both terrestrial 
and celestial, stand motionless. 

As the two shuras, Karna and Arjuna, lacerate each other with their fire 
shafts, the sounds of their bowstrings and striking palms is resounding and 
their flying arrows also make a deafening, incessant noise. 

Suddenly, Arjuna’s bowstring, stretched with immense force, breaks 
with a loud report. Seizing the chance, Karna strikes Partha with a hundred 
small arrows, keen and steeped in oil, winged with bird feathers and like 
serpents freed from their sloughs. He finds Krishna with sixty shafts and 
then Phalguna again with eight more. He inundates Bhima with thousands 
of iron barbs, pierces Krishna, Arjuna’s standard, and fells many among the 
Somakas who follow Partha. However, he is swiftly shrouded in return with 
showers of straight shafts like masses of clouds hiding the sun. 

Yet, the Suta’s son stuns the warriors who assail him with his unearthly 
prowess, cuts down all the astras they shoot at him, destroys their chariots, 
kills horses and elephants and many of their foremost warriors, like an 
angry lion a pack of dogs. The loss of lives among the Panchalas and the 
Kauravas at the hands of Karna and Dhananjaya is incredible, appalling. 
Your troops think that Karna has subdued the two Krishnas and victory is 
theirs and clap furiously, and shout aloud in celebration. 

In the face of Karna’s attack, and furious at being struck by his 
assailant’s arrows, Arjuna strings his great bow in the twinkling of an eye 
and lays ardent siege to the Kauravas. He strums his bowstring, claps his 
hands and causes darkness to fall over Kurukshetra with another astra. He 
pierces Karna and Salya and all the Kurus. As the sky is now dark from the 
astra, the very birds are unable to fly through it and a fragrant wind blows. 
Laughing, Partha strikes Salya’s armour with ten arrows and then pierces 
Karna first with a dozen and again with seven shafts. The whistling winged 


arrows shot with untellable force from Partha’s bow draw spouts of blood 
from Karna, as he stands magnificent on his ratha, his body bathed in blood, 
and resplendent like Rudra at the time of pralaya, sporting in the smasana, 
the burning ground, at noon or dusk. 

Karna responds with three arrows which he plunges deep into 
Dhananjaya’s body, then looses five more blazing golden arrows at Krishna, 
which pass through his armour and body like five serpents, enter the earth, 
bathe in the waters of the Bhogavati in the Patalas, and then fly back to 
Karna! Those shafts are in reality five mighty serpents that had chosen the 
side of Takshaka’s son Aswasena, whose mother Arjuna had killed in the 
Khandava vana. With ten flat-headed arrows, shot with terrific force, Arjuna 
truncates each of the five serpents into three, and drops them dead on the 
earth. 

Seeing Krishna wounded and bleeding from those serpents, Arjuna 
blazes up in fury like fire in a heap of dry grass. He blasts Karna through all 
his vital marmas with sizzling shafts shot from the new bowstring stretched 
to his ear. Karna trembles in pain, summons all his courage and is just able 
to stand upright. A belligerent Dhananjaya fills the sky with showers of 
arrows and soon the very splendour of the sun, and Karna’s chariot, O 
Rajan, all become dim as if a thick forest enfolds them. Savyasachi, that 
Paraviraha, decimates two thousand Kuru warriors, with their chariots and 
horses, as well as the maharathas who protect Karna’s chariot-wheels, his 
wings, his van and rear and those who constitute the very pick of 
Duryodhana’s chariot-force. 

Your sons and the Kauravas that are still alive flee, deserting Karna and 
abandoning their dying and wounded, and their wailing sons and sires. 
Finding himself alone and the field around him empty, Karna, far from 
becoming agitated, O Bhaarata, attacks Arjuna with renewed vigour and 
greater force.’” 


CANTO 90 


os S anjaya says, ‘The shattered divisions of the Kaurava army look on 

helpless from a distance as Arjuna’s astra, swelling with energy, 
flies around like a bolt of lightning and consumes them. With showers of 
deadly astras winged with gold that he had from Parasurama, and which are 
as powerful as Atharvan rites, Karna blows Arjuna’s astra apart and wounds 
him as well. The duel continues and they gash each other like two fierce 
elephants. Karna and Partha make the sky one vast expanse of arrows 
without any space in between and the sun is obscured. In the transcendent 
battle, which swings one way and then the other, each tries to probe the 
other’s weakness; all the other warriors on Kurukshetra are riveted while 
those in the sky applaud both Karna and Arjuna. 

Many shout words of encouragement like, “Excellent, O Karna!” and 
some cry, “Uttamam, O Arjuna!” 

While the duel rages, the serpent Aswasena, who is hostile to Arjuna, 
has made his way up from patala to the surface of the earth. He had escaped 
the conflagration at Khandava, and dived down into darkling patala. The 
serpent had not forgotten that Arjuna killed his mother and he now rises 
from the nether world with great speed and, upon seeing the battle between 
Karna and Arjuna, thinks the time ripe to settle an old score. He darts into 
Karna’s quiver and takes the form of an arrow. 


Karna and Partha make the sky one dense mass of arrows, filling the 
Kauravas and the Somakas with fear for they cannot see anything. Finally, 
having exhausted themselves, those Naravyaghras, those two greatest 
archers in the world, stand still and gaze numbly at each other. Now many 
Apsaras in the sky then fan them with palm leaves and sprinkle fragrant 
sandal-water over them while Sakra and Surya, using their spectral hands, 
gently stroke their faces. 

When he finds that he cannot prevail over Partha and that his wounds 
have weakened him terribly, Karna decides to use that lone shaft which lies 
enveloped in sandal dust in a golden quiver. He has saved the serpent- 
mouthed and fiery astra to kill Arjuna. He fixes that lethal shaft to his 
bowstring, and stretching it to his ear, unleashes it at Partha, aiming to 
behead him. All the surroundings and the sky seem to take apocalyptic 
flames as meteors and thunderbolts fall everywhere. When that serpent in 
the form of an arrow is fitted to the bowstring of the Vijaya, the Lokapalas, 
including Sakra, set up loud lamentations. 

Karna does not know that the serpent Aswasena has entered his arrow 
using yogic power. Seeing Vaikartana aim that arrow, the noble ruler of the 
Madras says urgently, “This arrow, O Karna, will not succeed in striking off 
Arjuna’s head. Look for another astra.” 

At this, the Sutaputra, with eyes burning with wrath, says, “O Salya, 
Karna never aims an arrow twice. Men like me are never crooked warriors.’ 

Taking careful aim, Karna shoots that arrow which he has cherished for 
long years, O Rajan, and cries to his rival, “You are dead, O Phalguna!” 

Sped from Karna’s majestic bow, the arrow, brilliant like the sun, leaves 
the string with a dreadful echo and burns a line across the sky as if to divide 
it, like a woman dividing the tresses on her head. Seeing that serpent in the 
form of an arrow blazing across in the sky, Krishna quickly and easily 
presses down with his feet and forces the chariot to sink about a cubit into 
the ground. At this, his horses, white as the rays of the moon and 
caparisoned in gold, buckle at their knees and prostrate on the earth. There 
is loud applause and shout from the sky for Vasudeva, and countless 
celestial voices are heard crying his praises and unearthly flowers shower 
down upon him. 

For what Krishna does, the arrow which Karna had shot with such care 
merely knocks off Arjuna’s coronet from his head, the kirita celebrated 
throughout the earth, the sky, the waters and the heavens. The Svayambhu 


himself had wrought that splendid diadem, bright as the sun, the moon, fire 
or a planet, and adorned it with gold, pearls, rubies, emeralds and diamonds. 
As priceless as it looks and is, it strikes terror into the hearts of enemies, 
makes its wearer content, and exudes a divine fragrance. Indra himself had 
given that ornament to his son when Arjuna went forth to fight the 
Kalakeyas in Devaloka. 

That crown could not be broken by even the greatest among the Devas, 
not by Rudra, Varuna, Kubera, Yama’s paasa, Indra’s Vajra and even the 
most powerful astra of all. Yet, Karna now smashes it into pieces with his 
serpentine shaft. A great roar arises in all the worlds, O Bhaarata, as if a 
supernatural disturbance of the very elements has agitated the earth, the sky, 
the heavens and the waters. Hearing that tremendous noise, the strongest 
men reel where they stand. Bereft of his kirita, the dark and youthful Partha 
looks like a blue mountain with a soaring peak. Arjuna binds his locks with 
a white cloth, and stands perfectly unmoved, like the Udaya hill illumined 
by the rays of the rising sun. 

The astra like fire that Karna shoots with Arjuna’s deadly enemy, 
Aswasena the serpent, in it, breaks Partha’s crown, flies back to Karna and 
asks to be launched once more at the Pandava. 

Karna sees him but does not know him, and the serpent says, “You shot 
me, O Karna, without seeing me. That was the reason that I could not strike 
off Arjuna’s head. Look at me well and quickly shoot me again. This time I 
will kill your enemy who is also mine.” 

Karna says, “Who are you that possess such a fierce form?” 

Aswasena replies, “I am one whose mother Arjuna killed and for that he 
is my sworn enemy. If the Vajradhari himself protects Partha, I would still 
send him to Pitriloka, where Yama rules. Do not ignore me and I will slay 
your enemy. Do not hesitate, loose me at him once more.” 

Karna replies, “O Sarpa, Karna never relies on another’s might for 
victory. Even if I have to kill a hundred Arjunas, I will still not shoot the 
same shaft twice. I will use my other astras and I will finish Partha. Be you 
content and go away.” 

Aswasena, that prince of serpents, is enraged, and assuming the form of 
an arrow, flies forth on his own to attempt to kill Partha, to fulfil the wish 
that has obsessed him for so long. Krishna says to Partha, “Slay that great 
Naga who bears you such hatred and enmity.” 


Arjuna asks, “Who is this serpent who flies at me, as if into the mouth 
of Garuda?” 

Krishna replies, “While you were in the Khandava satisfying Agni’s 
hunger, this serpent was in the sky, his body ensconced within his mother’s. 
Thinking that it was only a single serpent, you killed the mother. He has 
never forgotten what you did, and comes to seek revenge today, O Shura, 
even like a meteor falling from the sky!” 

In a blink, turning to face the serpent in the sky as it flies towards him, 
Arjuna kills Aswasena with six arrows and he falls in six writhing pieces 
onto the earth. After this, the Lord Krishna himself, O Rajan, raises the 
chariot out of the ground with his mighty arms. 

Glancing obliquely at Dhananjaya, Karna strikes Krishna with ten 
whetted shafts fletched with peacock feathers. Arjuna strikes back from his 
bow drawn to his ear, first piercing Karna with a dozen arrows with tips like 
the boar’s ear, and next with a cloth-yard shaft, virulent as a snake. The 
arrow pierces Karna’s armour, drinks his blood and enters the earth, its 
wings drenched in scarlet. Provoked himself like a serpent prodded with a 
stick, Karna shoots a host of arrows that rake both Janardana and Arjuna, 
and lets out a triumphant roar. 

However, the son of Pandu, whose is Indra’s equal, pierces Karna with 
hundreds of arrows even as Indra had Balasura long ago. He shoots ninety 
arrows, each like the rod of Death at Karna, who is deeply wounded and 
trembles like a mountain split by thunder. 

Dhananjaya knocks down Karna’s helmet of pure gold, studded with 
costly gems and precious diamonds, as well as his earrings. Arjuna shatters 
his priceless and bright armour that many great armourers working for a 
long time had forged with great care. After stripping him of his armour, 
Partha strikes Karna with four powerfully shot arrows and inflicts such pain 
on him, which a man direly sick with diseases of bile, phlegm, wind and 
fever experiences. Never pausing, Arjuna pierces Karna’s very vitals with 
many carefully aimed arrows shot with great force. Bleeding profusely from 
Partha’s onslaught, Karna looks majestic, like a mountain of red chalk with 
streams of red liquid running down its breast. 

Arjuna never stops but, standing like the son of Agni piercing the 
Krauncha Mountain, bloodies Karna’s torso with scores of unerring iron 
shafts with wings of gold and each one like the Yama danda. Karna drops 
his bow and his quiver and, in unendurable agony, stands reeling and in 


great distress. Arjuna, always observant of Kshatriya dharma, does not want 
to take advantage when his enemy is in such distress, but Krishna says, 
“Why, O son of Pandu, are you so tardy? The truly wise never spare their 
enemies even for a moment, however weak they may be. He who is learned 
earns both punya and kirti when he kills his enemies, even when they are in 
distress. 

Karna has always been your enemy and he is the greatest of warriors. If 
you do not kill him now, when he recovers, the Sutaputra will attack you 
with redoubled vigour and ferocity. So kill him now, as Indra did the Asura 
Namuchi.” 

Arjuna says, “So be it, O Krishna!” He salutes the Purushottaman 
Janardana, and drills Karna with several volleys. Partha covers Karna, his 
chariot and horses with calf-toothed arrows; putting forth all his prowess, 
he shrouds all the points of the sky with golden-winged barbs. Adhiratha’s 
broad-chested son, with these arrows sticking out of his body, stands 
glorious like an asoka, a palasa or a salmali tree bowed down with its load 
of flowers, or like a mountain overgrown with a forest of sandalwood trees 
or flowering karnikaras. 

Karna, too, now somewhat recovered, repeatedly shoots showers of 
arrows at Arjuna, and looks like the glorious sun coursing towards the Asta 
hills, his arrows like the sun’s crimson rays. However, the stronger Arjuna’s 
arrows destroy his shafts in the sky. 

Karna recovers his self-assurance and finds Partha and Krishna with 
half a dozen arrows. Dhananjaya gets ready to unleash a mighty devastra, 
which burns like fire and flies with a sound that resembles the peal of 
Indra’s Vajra. The hour of Karna’s death has come and Kaala, Time, comes 
to him invisibly to warn him and reminds him of the Brahmana’s curse, 
“The earth swallows your chariot-wheel!” 

Indeed, O Purushottama, when death came, Karna forgets the mantra for 
the great Brahmastra that the illustrious Bhargava had given him, while the 
earth suddenly opens a deep cleft and traps his chariot’s left wheel. Karna’s 
chariot tilts steeply and is stuck in that spot like a sacred tree with its load 
of flowers standing upon an elevated platform. Seeing his chariot 
immobilised by the Brahmana’s curse, and finding Parasurama’s devastra 
inaccessible to him, and Partha burn up his awesome serpent-mouthed astra, 
Karna is filled with dejection. 


He waves his arms in frustration, and begins to rail at dharma, “Men of 
dharma always claim that it protects those who follow its path and so we 
always endeavour, to the best of our ability and knowledge, to cleave to the 
truth. That very dharma now destroys us instead of protecting us who are 
devoted to it. Ah, dharma does not always protect its worshippers.” 

Meanwhile Arjuna’s arrows rake him, his horses and charioteer, and 
Karna is frantic. The arrows crash into all his vital organs and he no longer 
cares what he does but repeatedly curses dharma. He then pierces Krishna 
in the arm with three arrows, and Partha, too, with seven. Arjuna responds 
and shoots seventeen thunderbolts, straight, fierce, splendid as Agni and 
deadly as Indra’s Vajra, which plummet right through Karna’s body into the 
earth. Trembling with shock, Karna now displays his awesome valour and, 
with a mighty effort, steadies himself and, remembering its mantra, invokes 
the Brahmastra. 

Seeing the Brahmastra, Arjuna invokes the Aindrastra with the proper 
mantras, infusing the Gandiva, its string, and his arrows, also, with other 
mantras, he lets loose a solid swath of arrows even like Purandara pouring 
down rain in torrents. Those numberless arrows flare out of Partha’s chariot, 
but Karna destroys them before they reach his ratha. 

Krishna says to Arjuna, “Use your astras, Partha! The son of Radha will 
confound your other shafts.” 

Karna now fixes the Brahmastra to his string and shoots it, shrouding all 
the points of the sky with arrows, and striking Partha with many. Karna 
follows this up with a slew of searing shafts, and breaks Arjuna’s 
bowstring, eleven times in quick succession, while each time Arjuna tries to 
replace it. Karna, who can shoot a thousand arrows in a single moment, 
does not know that Partha’s bow has a hundred strings. So quickly does 
Arjuna replace each broken string that Karna could not mark when it was 
broken and when replaced. 

Briefly, Karna appears to have the advantage as he dominates Arjuna 
with his astras. Seeing Karna begin to dominate Arjuna, Krishna says, “Use 
your greater astras before he kills you, Partha!” 

At this, Arjuna invokes other greater devastras with their mantras. First 
he summons the astra that is hard like adamant, burns like fire, is as 
venomous as a serpent and unites the Raudrastra with it. At this very 
moment, O Rajan, the earth swallows one of the wheels of Karna’s ratha. 
Alighting quickly from his chariot, Karna seizes the sunken wheel with his 


massive arms and endeavours to lift it up with a great effort. Karna exerts 
immense strength, and the very earth, which has his wheel in her clasp, is 
raised up four fingers’ breadth, with her seven islands and her hills and 
waters and forests. 

Radheya sheds tears of anger, and says to Arjuna, “Partha, Partha, wait 
a moment until I free my sunken wheel. You see the left wheel of my 
chariot is stuck in the earth. Do not shoot at me now, for only cowards 
would do such a vile thing. Brave warriors who follow Kshatriya dharma 
never attack any opponent with dishevelled hair, those who have turned 
their faces from battle, a Brahmana, or one who folds his hands in 
supplication, one who yields himself up or begs for quarter, one who has 
put down his weapon, or whose arrows are exhausted, or whose armour is 
undone, or an enemy whose weapon has fallen down or been broken. 

You are the bravest man in the world and a man of dharma, O Pandava! 
You well know the dharma for battle. So, Dhananjaya, allow me a moment 
to extricate my wheel from the ground. It is not just for you to attack me 
while you are on your ratha and I stand helpless on the ground. I have no 
fear that either Krishna or you, who are born into the Kshatriya varna and 
are a perpetuator of a noble race will forget the tenets of dharma. Give me a 
moment, O son of Pandu!”’” 


CANTO 91 


S anjaya says, ‘But it is Krishna who responds to Karna in a terrible 

voice, “It is good fortune, indeed, O Radheya, that you remember 

dharma today! It is only when they themselves are in distress that those who 
do not live by dharma, complain about fate. 

Suyodhana, Dusasana, Sakuni and you, Karna, were responsible for 
dragging Draupadi, clad in a single cloth, into the Kuru sabha. What 
happened on that day to the dharma you now speak of? 

When in that ancient and noble court, Sakuni, an adept in dice, took 
everything he owned from Yudhishtira by cheating, where was this dharma 
of yours? 

When prompted by you, Duryodhana served Bhimasena poisoned food 
and then tried to kill him by pushing him into a river full of venomous 
snakes, where was this great virtue of yours? 

When the agreed period of exile in the woods was over, as well as the 
thirteenth year, you did not make over their kingdom to the Pandavas. 
Where was this dharma of yours then? 

You plotted to set fire to the house of lac at Varanavrata in order to 
immolate Kunti and the sleeping Pandavas. Where then, Radheya, was the 
dharma you speak of today? 

You laughed at Panchali when Dusasana hauled her by her hair into the 
Kuru sabha, and she stood there scantily clad and in shame because she was 


in her season. Where, O Karna, was this dharma of yours then? 

When innocent Draupadi was dragged out from the women’s 
apartments by the bestial Dusasana, you did not protest. Where, O son of 
Radha, had this dharma of yours gone then? 

You addressed the princess Draupadi, whose gait is as dignified as that 
of the elephant, in shameful words. Karna, you said, “The Pandavas, O 
Krishnaa, are lost. They have sunk into eternal hell. You must choose 
another husband for yourself!” You looked on at that tragic, terrible scene 
with delight. Where then, O Karna, had your dharma gone? 

Coveting their kingdom and relying on the king of the Gandharas, you 
enticed the Pandavas to an unequal game of dice. Where was your dharma 
then? 

When so many maharathas surrounded Abhimanyu, who was a mere 
boy, and slew him brutally, where, Karna, was your dharma then? 

If the dharma that you now speak of was not with you on those 
occasions, what is the use of prating about dharma now? You want that 
dharma be observed now, O Suta, but you will not escape alive. Like Nala, 
whom Pushkara vanquished at dice, but who regained his kingdom through 
skill, the Pandavas, who are free from deceit, will regain their kingdom 
through the strength of their arms, supported by all their friends. After they 
annihilate all their powerful enemies, they and the Somakas will have their 
kingdom back. The Dhartarashtras will meet with destruction at the hands 
of the sons of Pandu who are, indeed, always protected by dharma!” 

Hearing this from Krishna, O Bhaarata, Karna hangs his head in shame 
and makes no reply. With lips white with anger, he raises his bow and 
continues to fight Arjuna with undimmed energy and skill. 

Then Krishna says to Arjuna, “O Mahabaho, strike Karna with a 
devastra, and make an end to him.” 

Arjuna vividly remembers all the incidents that Krishna described and 
blazes up in rage so that flames seem to emanate from all the pores of his 
body. Seeing that uncanny sight, Karna invokes the Brahmastra and again 
inundates arrows upon Dhananjaya, while he tries again to extricate his 
chariot wheel from the rut that holds it so fast. Arjuna, also, responds with a 
Brahmastra and pours a cataract of arrows over Karna. He then shoots 
another favourite astra of his, the burning Agneya, at Karna, which the 
Sutaputra douses with a Varunastra; yet again, the clouds of the astra of the 


Lord cover Kurukshetra over in clouds and darkness falls over the field of 
death. 

Arjuna scatters the clouds of the weapon of water with a Vayavyastra of 
the wind. Karna takes up an arrow of fire and, as he fixes that shaft to his 
bowstring, the earth shudders with all her mountains, waters and forests; 
violent sandstorms blow and the air is thick with blinding dust. Wails of 
lament, O Bhaarata, arise among the gods in the sky when they see the astra 
that Karna has set to his great bow and the Pandavas despair and prepare for 
greater sorrow. Karna looses the astra effulgent as Sakra’s Vajra, and it 
ploughs right through Partha’s chest like some mighty Naga going through 
an anthill. 

The noble Arjuna reels on his ratha; he trembles like the prince of all 
mountains in an earthquake; his grasp on his bow is loosened and the 
Gandiva drops from his hand. Seeing his chance, Karna jumps down again 
from his chariot to try and draw out the wheel that is stuck so firmly in the 
ground. He seizes the wheel with both his mighty arms and attempts to lift 
it out; despite his godly strength, and as destiny would have it, he fails 
again. 

Meanwhile, Arjuna recovers his senses and invokes an astra called the 
Anjalika, lethal as the rod of Death. Krishna says to Arjuna in a tone that 
will not be resisted, “Cut Karna’s head from his body before he can free his 
chariot.” 

While Karna is still striving to free the stuck wheel, Arjuna shoots a 
razor-headed, shining arrow and cuts down Karna’s standard bearing the 
device of a priceless elephant’s rope, adorned with gold, pearls, rubies, 
emeralds and diamonds. That standard celebrated all over the world always 
boosted the morale of your troops and filled the enemy with fear. With that 
standard, falls the fame, pride, hope of victory, and everything else 
precious, as also the hearts of the Kurus, and cries of woe arise from the 
Kuru army. They, O Bhaarata, are convinced that Karna is as good as dead. 

Partha now takes out the Anjalikastra from his quiver, astra brilliant as 
the disc of the sun. The unearthly weapon in the shape of an arrow 
measures three cubits and six feet in length. It is irresistible as Rakshasas 
are in the night, resembles the Pinaka or the Sudarshana Chakra, and is so 
devastating and vicious that not the Devas and Asuras can withstand it. 
Seeing the Anjalika in Partha’s hand, the entire universe trembles and the 
greatest Rishis cry in alarm, “Peace be upon the universe!” 


Arjuna affixes the astra to the Gandiva, unites it with another powerful 
astra and, drawing his bow into a circle, quickly prays, “If I have ever 
performed tapasya, gratified my elders and superiors, and listened to the 
counsels of my well-wishers, let this shaft destroy the body and heart of my 
enemy. Let that Truth and this weapon that I have worshipped slay my 
enemy Karna and take him into the presence of Yama.” 

Then Arjuna looses that great and shining arrow, effective as a rite 
prescribed in the Atharvan of Angiras, which even Yama cannot endure in 
battle, at Karna. The ayudha endowed with the energy of the sun causes all 
the points of the sky to blaze up with light. The Anjalikastra, made into an 
ineluctable weapon with mantras, flashes at Karna bent over his chariot 
wheel and strikes his head off like Indra striking off the head of Vritra with 
his Vajra. Karna’s headless trunk and his head fall onto the earth like the 
bloody disc of the sun slipping from the Asta hills. 

Indeed, that head abandons the magnificent body with great reluctance, 
like a householder leaving his commodious home filled with great wealth. 
His life fled, the tall and splendid body of Karna, with blood gushing from 
its every wound, spraying copiously from its severed throat, crumbles like 
the thunder-riven summit of a mountain of red chalk with crimson streams 
running down its sides after a heavy rain. 

Then, O Rajan, the assembled armies witness a wonderful sight: from 
the fallen Karna’s naked throat, a tremendous light shoots up through the 
sky into the sun. 

Seeing Arjuna kill great Karna, the Pandavas erupt in celebration, 
loudly blowing their conches, and Krishna and Dhananjaya also embrace 
each other in joy. The Somakas, seeing Karna dead and lying headless on 
the field, utter rapturous shouts while the other troops of the Pandava army 
blow their trumpets and wave their arms and garments. They ecstatically 
applaud Partha, O Rajan, while others dance and embrace one another, and 
cheer deafeningly and they say with some fervour, “Through our good 
fortune, Karna is now stretched out on the earth, headless, and mangled by 
Arjuna’s arrows.” 

Karna’s severed head looks like a mountain top loosened in a tempest, a 
doused yagna fire, or like the sun after it has reached the Asta hills. The 
Karna-sun, with arrows for its rays, after it had scorched the hostile army, 
has at last set. Just as the setting sun takes away all his rays with him, 
Arjuna’s astra beheaded Karna, taking his life breath with it. Karna dies, O 


Rajan, at high noon of that day. The handsome Karna, with a face like a 
lotus of a thousand petals and whose feats were like those of the thousand- 
eyed Indra, lies on the battlefield like the thousand-rayed sun at the close of 
day. 

Seeing Karna lying dead on the ground, pierced with arrows and bathed 
in blood, Salya, king of the Madras, drives his chariot away. After the fall 
of their peerless Senapati, the Kauravas, fear lancing through them, flee the 
battlefield, frequently casting their eyes at Arjuna’s lofty and triumphal 
standard.” 


CANTO 92 


°S anjaya says, “Salya drives Karna’s chariot away after Karna’s 
death. His eyes bathed in tears and sighing repeatedly, the very 
picture of despair, Duryodhana takes stock of his army, now deprived of 
Radheya, and sees how his troops have been denuded, with its chariots, 
horses and elephants. Wanting to look at heroic Karna bloodied and 
stretched out on the earth like the sun fallen from the skies, the warriors 
come there and stand surrounding that fallen pravira. Some show joy, some 
fear, some sorrow, some wonder, and some give themselves up to great 
grief, according to their natures. Others among the Kauravas, hearing that 
Dhananjaya has killed Karna, flee in fear like a herd of cows in panic at 
losing its dominant bull. 

Bhima is celebrant and shakes the sky with his dreadful and tremendous 
shouts of joy; he slaps his armpits, jumps up and down, and dances, his 
antics further terrifying the Dhartarashtras. The Somakas and the Srinjayas 
loudly blow their conches and all the Kshatriyas who are with the Pandavas 
embrace one another in joy, knowing that the Sutaputra is dead. 

It was after a dreadful duel that Arjuna was able to defeat Karna, like a 
lion overwhelming an elephant, and to accomplish his vow and to finally 
lay to rest his long enmity towards Karna. 

A stunned Salya quickly reaches Duryodhana, and says with tears 
flowing down his face, “The elephant force, the cavalry, and the best of 


your chariot-warriors are dead and your host now looks like Yamaloka. 
Never before, O Bhaarata, has a battle been fought like the one between 
Karna and Arjuna today. Karna attacked the two Krishnas and the enemy 
forces powerfully, but fate favoured Partha today. It appears that Destiny is 
with the Pandavas and abandoning us, for many of our maharathas have 
died trying to gain victory for you. Great, brave kings who in energy, 
courage and might were equal to Kubera, Yama, Vasava or Varuna, and 
well-nigh immortal, have fallen trying to fulfil your aspirations. Do not 
grieve, O Bhaarata, for this is Destiny. Comfort yourself. Success cannot be 
always attained.” 

Duryodhana hears this and almost swoons; he sighs repeatedly as now, 
the hour of nemesis arrived, he reflects with a sorrowful heart on his own 
evil doings.’” 


CANTO 93 


. “T) hritarashtra says, ‘What was the state of the Kuru and the 

Srinjaya armies on that awful day, as it fled from the battlefield, 

crushed and scorched after the duel on Kurukshetra between Karna and 
Arjuna?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘Listen, O Rajan, to the horrific carnage of men, elephants 
and horses in that battle. When Arjuna lets out a loud roar after Karna’s fall, 
a great terror enters the hearts of your sons and there is no warrior in your 
army ready to rally your troops or to take charge of them. Karna, their 
refuge, slain, they are like merchants whose vessels have been wrecked 
upon the fathomless sea that they wish to cross. After the killing of the 
Suta’s son, the Kauravas, terrified, lacerated, without a leader and 
desperately seeking protection, are like a herd of elephants chased by lions. 

They flee like bulls with broken horns or serpents with broken fangs. 
Their leading warriors slain, their troops flung into confusion, bloodied and 
mangled, your sons flee in panic. Dropping their weapons and their armour 
undone, no longer knowing which way to run, and witless with fear, they 
flee blindly in all directions. 

“It is me that Arjuna is after!” every Kaurava thinks and, then, turning 
white as ghosts in terror, many fall down even as they run. Maharathas try 
to escape, some on horses, some on chariots, some on elephants, and some 
on foot, and the resulting stampede tramples many men. After the fall of the 


Suta’s son, your warriors are like men without protection in a forest full of 
wild predators and brigands, like elephants without riders and men without 
weapons. 

Seeing his troops run in fear in their thousands from Bhimasena again 
on the rampage, Duryodhana cries wildly to his charioteer, “This Partha will 
not vanquish me with the bow. Slow my horses and stay behind the troops. 
If I fight from the rear of my army, the son of Kunti will not overwhelm me 
even as the ocean cannot breach the continent. I will kill Arjuna, Krishna, 
the proud Bhima and the rest of my enemies, and free myself from the debt 
I owe my Karna.” 

At this, his charioteer slows down his magnificent ratha. Then twenty- 
five foot-soldiers of your army, without chariots, cavalry and elephants, 
prepare to battle Bhimasena and Dhrishtadyumna, who surround them with 
the four kinds of forces and begin their ruthless onslaught. Some among 
them challenge the two Kshatriyas by name, and observing the laws of a 
dharma yuddha, and relying upon the might of his arms, Bhima gets down 
from his chariot and prepares to fight his enemies on foot. Taking up his 
massive golden mace, he bludgeons them like Maheswara Himself armed 
with his gada. 

Reckless of their lives by now, the seasoned Kaurava foot-soldiers rush 
at Bhima on foot like insects towards a blazing fire, and perish like living 
beings on beholding the Great Destroyer. Like a tornado of his natural 
father the Wind, mighty Bhima single-handedly annihilates all those 
twenty-five thousand warriors and, dripping with their blood once more 
joins Dhrishtadyumna on his chariot. 

Arjuna takes on the remnant of the Kaurava chariot-force, while the 
twin sons of Madri and Satyaki attack the Gandhara legion, slaughter his 
cavalry and elephants and then bear down on their king Sakuni. Meanwhile, 
Dhananjaya pulls like thunder on the bowstring of his celebrated Gandiva 
as he faces your remaining chariot-force. Seeing Partha on his chariot with 
white horses and Krishna for its sarathy, your troops run from him in terror. 
Equally do they flee, seeing Dhrishtadyumna with Bhimasena riding with 
him on his familiar and formidable chariot, whose lofty standard is made of 
the trunk of a kovidara. 

After swiftly putting the king of the Gandharas to flight, Nakula, 
Sahadeva and Satyaki rejoin the main Pandava force. Chekitana, Sikhandi 
and the five sons of Draupadi, O Rajan, decimate your vast army, blow their 


conches and pursue your troops who are in full flight, like bulls chasing 
away defeated challengers. Arjuna is quick to attack the part of your 
chariot-force that still stands on the field, and shrouds them in a deadly 
cloud of arrows. The dust raised darkens the landscape, and nothing can any 
longer be seen and again your troops flee in abject terror. 

When the Kuru army is thus being mowed down, Duryodhana comes 
rushing to their rescue and challenges all the Pandavas to battle, even as the 
Asura Bali in olden days challenging the Devas. A pitched battle breaks out 
with the Pandava warriors who unite to cover your fearless son with 
invective and missiles, but Duryodhana, alone and unsupported, and full of 
untold grief and rage at Karna’s death, slaughters his enemies in their 
thousands. 

He succeeds in rallying his troops, which have not fled too far and cries 
to them, “I do not see a place on earth where you can be safe from the 
Pandavas! What use is there then in fleeing like cowards? The Pandavas 
now have only a small force and the two Krishnas are sorely wounded. If all 
of us stand and fight, victory will surely be ours, but if we shamefully run, 
the Pandavas will pursue us and kill us all. It is better that we should die 
bravely in battle for that will lead to swarga. Fight by the Kshatriya’s 
dharma. He that is dead knows no misery and enjoys eternal bliss thereafter. 

Listen, all you Kshatriyas assembled here! When Yama the destroyer 
spares neither the brave nor the coward, who that knows Kshatriya dharma 
as we do, would be foolish enough not to fight? Would you place yourselves 
under the power of an angry enemy like Bhimasena? It is disgraceful for 
you to abandon the dharma of your ancestors. There is no greater sin for a 
Kshatriya than to turn his face away from battle. There is no more blessed 
path to heaven, O Kauravas, than the dharma of war. Slain in battle, you 
will find yourselves instantly in swarga, enjoying every felicity and bliss.” 

Even as your son delivers this inspiring speech, the savagely beset 
Kaurava warriors flee in all directions.’” 


CANTO 94 


: S anjaya says, ‘Seeing your son attempt to rally the troops, Salya, 
with fear writ large on his face and his heart numb with grief, says 
to Duryodhana, “Look at this horrible battlefield, O Shura, strewn richly 
with dead men, horses and elephants, past all count. Dead elephants big as 
mountains, their vital organs pierced with cruel arrows, their armour and 
caparisons dislodged, lie like hills split by thunder, their bodies bathed in 
blood. Fallen horses, mangled with shafts, moaning and neighing in pain, 
vomit blood, some biting the earth and rolling their stark eyes. Elsewhere, 
the carnage is too awful to look at, with horsemen, rathikas and elephant- 
warriors fallen from their animals, dead or dying, lying immersed in the 
river of blood that flows, which is like the great Vaitarani in the domain of 
Yama. 

The earth looks as if she is strewn with blazing planets fallen from the 
sky, or like the nocturnal firmament itself shining with planets of serene 
light. The shafts sped from the arms of Karna and Arjuna pierced elephants, 
horses and men and, quickly stilling their lives, entered the earth like 
serpents sliding into their holes with bent heads. Fine chariots shattered 
along with their warriors, weapons and proud standards, lie about piquantly, 
as if in bizarre sorrow. Spiked maces with golden bells, battle-axes, lances, 
heavy clubs, mallets, unsheathed swords and maces covered with cloth of 
gold, lie abandoned on the ground. Golden bows and arrows fitted with 


golden wings, bright naked swords of superb temper, aureate lances, 
scimitars, royal parasols, chamara fans, conches, bright caparisons of 
elephants, standards, chariot fences, heavy necklaces, brilliant crowns, and 
yak-tails lie scattered everywhere, O Rajan. 

Garlands, luminous with corals and pearls, chaplets for the head, 
bracelets for both the wrist and the upper arms, collars for the neck with 
threads of gold, diverse kinds of priceless diamonds, rubies and pearls, 
bodies raised and cared for in great luxury, and heads handsome and 
lambent as the moon, also lie broken and severed across the grim field. 
Abandoning their bodies, their robes and all kinds of pleasures, along with 
the ability to enjoy them, acquiring great punya for the devotion they 
showed to the svadharma of their varna, the heroic Kshatriyas have gone in 
blazes of glory to the realms of bliss. 

Turn back, O Duryodhana! Let the troops retire. O king, retreat towards 
our camp. Look, the sun hangs low in the sky. Ah, remember that you are 
the cause of all this brutal destruction!” 

Salya, with his heart bursting with grief, chokes and cannot go on. 
Duryodhana, however, is a man who has lost his very mind from grief. 
Tears flow incessantly from his eyes, and his white lips utter only one name, 
over and over. Your son weeps for the Suta’s son, crying, “Karna! Oh 
Karna!” 

Aswatthaman and all the kings repeatedly try to comfort Duryodhana, 
and then they retire towards their camp, frequently looking back at the lofty 
standard of Arjuna that seems to be on fire with his fame. At that hour, 
when everything around looks so resplendent, the features of the Kauravas, 
all of whom have resolved to kill or die, are unrecognisable for the blood, 
still flowing and caked, covers them. They cannot see the earth, drenched 
and covered with a patina with blood flowing from the bodies of men, 
horses and elephants, so she looks like a courtesan attired in crimson robes 
and floral garlands and ornaments of gold, O Rajan! Filled with grief at the 
death of Karna, they all lament loudly, crying, “Alas, Karna! Alas, Karna!” 

The sun turns crimson, sinking, and all of them return to their camp. 
Karna, though, lies dead on hallowed Kurukshetra, still shining like the sun 
at his zenith, his body pierced by gold-winged shafts dyed in blood, shot 
from the Gandiva. It seems as if illustrious Surya Deva, ever kindly to his 
worshippers, has lovingly touched the gore drenched body of his child, and 
left, crimson with grief, to the ocean for a bath. The throngs of Devas and 


Rishis, who came to witness the battle, entertain the same thought and leave 
for their respective homes. The crowd of other beings also return to their 
abodes both in swarga and bhumi. The Kuru warriors, too, having witnessed 
that duel without comparison between Arjuna and Karna, retire to their 
camp, filled with the rarest wonder and in their hearts applauding what they 
had seen. 

Though slain in that duel, his armour gone, neither Karna’s lustre nor 
magnificence abandon him, even in death. Everyone who sees his body 
feels that it looks like molten gold. He seems to be alive and radiant like fire 
or the sun. All the warriors, O king, are awestruck and frightened at the 
sight of Karna lying dead on the battlefield, like small animals at the sight 
of the great lion. Why, though dead, that Naravyaghra seems about to 
bellow out his commands; so little in him seems changed. His body clad in 
regal attire, and his severed head with its mighty neck, the Sutaputra’s face 
resembles the full moon in majesty. Wearing ornaments and angadas made 
of bright gold, Vaikartana, though slain, lies like a gigantic tree, like a heap 
of pure gold, or like a blazing fire extinguished by the water of Partha’s 
arrows. Arjuna’s prowess stilled that Naravyaghra along with his sons, and 
he left the world, taking away with him his incomparable nobility, lustre 
and glory, which he had earned always in fair fight on earth. 

He scorched the Pandavas and the Panchalas with the energy of his 
astras; his storms of incendiary arrows had burnt the enemy’s divisions to 
ashes and, after heating the universe like the thousand-rayed Surya, Karna 
left the world, with his sons and followers. Thus died that shura who was a 
refuge to all that who came to him for help, like a kalpa vriksha is a haven 
to swarms of birds. He always said, “Take” but never, “I cannot give, for I 
have not.” 

All men of dharma always regarded him as one of their own. Such a 
warrior was Vrisha who fell in single combat with Arjuna Parantapa. All the 
wealth of that noble warrior had been dedicated to Brahmanas. There was 
nothing, not even his life that he would not give away to holy Brahmanas. 
He was always the favourite of his queens, exceptionally liberal, and a 
mighty Atiratha. Burnt by Partha’s astras, he attained the highest end. He, 
relying upon whom your son had gone to war, has attained swarga, taking 
with him the last hope of victory, the happiness, and the sanctuary of the 
Kauravas. 


When Karna falls, rivers stand still, the sun sets with a pale hue, the 
planet Mercury assumes the colour of fire and moves through the firmament 
in a strange orbit, why, the very sky seems torn in two. The earth utters 
abysmal and sorrowful rumblings from her very core; dread and violent 
winds begin to blow. All the points of the horizon, covered with smoke, 
seem to be on fire. The oceans are agitated and howl awfully. The 
mountains with their forests begin to quake, and all living creatures, O 
Rajan, feel great anguish. 

Jupiter enters the nakshatra Rohini and assumes the colour of the moon 
or the sun. Upon the fall of Karna, the entire battlefield is alight with spirit 
fires while darkness envelops the sky. The earth trembles again and again, 
meteors fall from the sky and Rakshasas and other wanderers of the night 
celebrate. When Arjuna’s Anjalikastra takes off Karna’s head with the face 
as luminous and handsome as the moon, all beings in swarga, akasa and 
bhumi cry in lamentation. 

After his victory over Karna, Arjuna, the favourite of the Devas, the 
Gandharvas, and Manavas, is magnificent in his tejas, as Indra was after his 
conquest of Vritra. The two Krishnas ride on their chariot with its rumble 
like the roar of thunderheads, and brilliance like the meridian sun in an 
autumn sky. The ratha flies banners and a standard with the great Vanara 
and other spirits, the banner incessantly creating bloodcurdling sounds, that 
chariot among chariots whose effulgence resembles that of Himalayan 
snow, the moon, the conch or crystal, and whose horses are like Indra’s 
own. 

The two paravirahas, Arjuna and Kesava, mahatejasvins whose 
ornaments of gold, pearls, rubies, diamonds and corals glow and sparkle, 
even being flecked with blood, wheel fearless and swift as the wind 
triumphantly across all Kurukshetra, and they look like Vishnu and Vasava 
mounted on the same chariot. With the twang of the Gandiva and the slaps 
of their palms, they continue to massacre the Kurus at will. Then Arjuna of 
the kapi-dhvaja and Krishna of the garuda-dhvaja raise their unearthly 
conches white as moonbeams and chased with gold, and setting them to 
their lips, blow a single note together, which fills the earth, the sky and the 
heavens, and pierce the hearts of their enemies with that sound. 

O Kuruvarya, the forests, mountains, rivers and the sky reverberate with 
the sound of their conches which puts all the Kauravas in a panic, fills your 
son’s army with fright, and gladdens Yudhishtira. As soon as the Kauravas 


hear the blast of those conches, all of them leave the field with alacrity, 
deserting Salya and Duryodhana. Then diverse beings unite and, together, 
congratulate Krishna and Arjuna. Pierced with Karna’s arrows, Achyuta and 
Dhananjaya are glorious like the many-rayed moon and sun risen, after 
dispelling darkness. Removing the countless arrows stuck in them, the two 
mighty ones, with well-wishers and friends around them, happily enter their 
own camp, like the lords Vasava and Vishnu when invoked by sacrificial 
priests. 

Upon the death of Karna, the Devas, Gandharvas, Manushas, Charanas, 
Maharishis, Yakshas, and great Nagas worship Krishna and Arjuna with 
great reverence and wish them victory in all things. The two heroes receive 
all their friends, each according to his age, and rejoice with them their 
incomparable feats, like Indra and Vishnu after the overthrow of Bali.’” 


CANTO 95 


: S anjaya says, “Upon the fall of Karna, the defeated Kaurava army 
runs looking for places to hide. Their kings and commanders too, 
O Bhaarata, are anxious to withdraw their troops and your son is unable to 
check their flight. Duryodhana understands this and, acting on Salya’s 
advice, withdraws the army. Kritavarman leads the remaining part of your 
Narayana troops and quickly retreats towards the encampment followed by 
Sakuni and one thousand Gandharas. Kripa, at the head of his large elephant 
force that resembles a mass of clouds, and Aswatthaman, drawing deep 
angry breaths at the Pandavas’ victory, do the same. Susarman leads the 
Samsaptakas, which is still a large force despite their considerable 
decimation, back to their camp. 

Mourning the loss of everything, Duryodhana withdraws, his heart 
broken, and a prey to many desperate thoughts. Salya drives Karna’s chariot 
without its standard sorrowfully towards the camp. The other maharathas of 
the Kaurava army, though still numerous but afraid and filled with shame 
and almost deprived of their minds, quickly melt away, some applauding 
Arjuna, some Karna. Amongst those thousands of warriors of your army, 
there is not a man who still has any wish for war but all of them only long 
for their homes. The Kauravas despair of life, kingdom, wives and wealth. 
Recognising the need to console and guide them with care, your son, 


himself full of grief, is nevertheless determined to rest them for the night 
and fight on the next day. 

His warriors, O Rajan, accept his orders with bent heads and retire from 
the battlefield shattered and with pale faces.’” 


CANTO 96 


S anjaya says, ‘After Karna is slain and the Kaurava troops run, 
Krishna joyfully embraces Partha and exults, “From this day men 
will always speak in the same breath of the death of both Vritra and Karna. 
Indra, the Deva king, killed Vritra with his Vajra and Karna you killed with 
your Gandiva. Go, O son of Kunti, and tell Yudhishtira Dharmaputra about 
your prowess that has made you famous throughout the three worlds. When 
he knows that you have killed Karna and accomplished that which you have 
been trying to for a long time, you will be freed from the debt you owe your 
king and brother. During your duel, he came once to watch, but he could not 
stay long because of his grievous injuries and returned to his tent.” 

Partha says, “So be it!” and they then turn the ratha back. 

Krishna addresses the soldiers, and says, “Bless you all. Stand firm, be 
wary and face the enemy!” 

To Dhrishtadyumna, Yudhamanyu, the twin sons of Madri, Vrikodara 
and Yuyudhana, he says, “Great Kshatriyas, be vigilant and hold your 
positions until we return after we inform the king of Karna’s death.” 

They then set out for the king’s tent and find Yudhishtira, that tiger 
among kings, resting on a comfortable bed of gold. With great joy, they 
touch the Dharmarajan’s feet. Seeing their joy and the extraordinary 
wounds on their bodies, Yudhishtira knows that the son of Radha is dead 


and rises quickly from his bed, repeatedly embraces Krishna and Arjuna 
and then asks Krishna how Karna died. 

A smiling Vasudeva, with joined palms, tells Yudhishtira exactly how 
Karna was killed. “It is through good fortune that Arjuna, Bhima, Madri’s 
two sons, and you are all safe, in this war where great shuras have died. The 
Suta’s son Karna, the mighty Vaikartana, is dead, so do whatever should be 
done next. Destiny has ordained your victory, and your reputation grows in 
stature. The earth today drank the blood of the Sutaputra, that wretch 
among men, who laughed at Draupadi when they won her at the game of 
dice. 

Come and look, Bharatarishabha, your enemy lies today on bare 
ground, pierced all over with this Partha’s arrows. O Mahabaho, now rule 
with love and care this earth that is free of all your enemies, and enjoy with 
us all the benefits that accrue!” 

With inexpressible joy, Yudhishtira salutes Krishna in return and says, 
“Good fortune, great fortune! It is not surprising, Devakinandana, that 
Partha should achieve superhuman feats when he has you for his sarathy.” 

Yudhishtira takes Krishna’s right arm adorned with angadas, and says, 
“Narada told me that you two are the ancient Nara and Narayana, those 
ancient Maharishis who are the protectors and preservers of dharma. The 
sagacious Krishna Dwaipayana, the most blessed Vyasa has also repeatedly 
told me this Deva Purana. O Krishna, it is through your power that 
Dhananjaya has vanquished all his enemies. We were certain of victory 
from the day you agreed to become Partha’s sarathy.” 

Dharmaputra Yudhishtira mounts his majestic chariot, harnessed to 
ivory white horses with black tails and fleet as thought, and with a troop of 
Pandava soldiers for his escort, sets out, conversing pleasantly with Krishna 
and Arjuna, to survey the battlefield where so much has happened. He sees 
Karna lying on Kurukshetra, pierced all over with arrows like a kadamba 
flower with filaments all around its body, and with thousands of golden 
lamps filled with perfumed oil illuminating him. 

Seeing Karna with his son dead from the shafts shot from the Gandiva, 
at first Yudhishtira cannot believe his eyes and then, knowing his own long 
dread has in truth finally ended, lauds the Naravyaghras Madhava and 
Phalguna, and says, “O Govinda, today my brothers and I have become 
kings of the earth, because you are our Lord and our Protector. When the 
vile Duryodhana learns of the slaying of Karna, the ignoble son of 


Dhritarashtra will despair about his life and kingdom. Through your grace, 
O Krishna, we have achieved our ends. Through good fortune, victory has 
been yours, O Govinda! Through great good fortune, we have annihilated 
the enemy. Through destiny, Arjuna has been crowned with victory. We 
passed thirteen years in exile and great sorrow. O Mahabaho, now through 
your grace, we will sleep happily this night.” 

In this way, O Rajan, does Dharmaraja Yudhishtira praise Krishna and 
Arjuna. 

Seeing Karna and his son dead, Yudhishtira regards himself as being 
reborn. The warriors and commanders of the Pandava army, all filled with 
joy, approach Yudhishtira and congratulate him. Nakula, Sahadeva, 
Vrikodara, Satyaki, Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandi, and others among the 
Pandus, the Panchalas, and the Srinjayas, seasoned warriors, great shuras 
and praviras salute the son of Kunti at his victory over Karna. Extolling 
Yudhishtira, they shower their praise over the two Krishnas. Then, 
celebrating their great victory, those great maharathas all turn back towards 
their own encampment. 

Thus, O Rajan, did this profound carnage come to pass because of your 
evil policy! Ah, why do you grieve now?’ says Sanjaya.” 

Vaisampayana said, “The Kuru king Dhritarashtra, on hearing the evil 
tidings, fell on the ground from his throne. Similarly, the farsighted queen 
Gandhari also collapsed, weeping and lamenting the death of Karna. Vidura 
and Sanjaya both raised up the fallen monarch and began to console him. 
Similarly, the royal Kuru women helped Gandhari up and comforted her as 
best they could. Thinking destiny to be ineluctable and all-powerful, that 
blind Rajarishi Dhritarashtra, ravaged by deathly grief, seemed he might 
leave his body. His heart filled with anxiety and sorrow, the king, however, 
did not swoon again. Comforted, he remained still and silent, sunk deep in 
some abyss of despair. 

He who reads an account of this great battle, which is like a yagna, 
between the noble Arjuna and Adhiratha’s son Karna, or those who listen to 
an account of that duel, both obtain, O Bhaarata, the rewards of a great 
yagna properly performed. The learned say that the holy and the eternal 
Vishnu is Yagna, as well as each of those other Devas— Agni, Vayu, Soma 
and Surya. Therefore, he that listens to or recites this Parva without malice 
will be happy and attain every region of bliss. Filled with devotion, men of 
dharma always read this sacred and first of Samhitas. They that do, rejoice, 


obtain wealth, every felicity and great fame, and gain the favour of Vishnu 
Narayana, that foremost of Purushas, of the illustrious Brahma, and of 
Bhava Mahadeva. 

A Brahmana who reads it obtains the benefits of having studied all the 
Vedas; a Kshatriya gains strength and victory in battle; Vaishyas acquire 
immense wealth, and Sudras have health, happiness and freedom from 
disease. Then, again, the illustrious Vishnu is eternal and since it is that 
Deva who has been glorified in this Parva, the man reading or listening to it 
will be blissful and acquire all the objects of his heart’s desire. 

These words of the great Rishi Vyasa can never be untrue! The punya 
that a person earns from listening to the recitation of the Karna Parva is 
equal to his who makes gifts of the finest cows with their calves 
continuously for a whole year.” 


The End of Karna Parva 


Salya Parva 


CANTO 97 


J anamejaya said, “O Maharishi, what do the remnants of the beaten 

Kaurava army do after Arjuna kills Karna? What strategy does 
Suyodhana adopt towards the rampaging Pandavas? Tell me in detail for I 
am eager to listen to the great exploits of my ancestors.” 

Vaisampayana said, “O Bharatasattama, reduced by grief and despair, 
Dhritarashtra’s son Suyodhana staggers back to his camp with the remnants 
of his army, lamenting, “Alas, oh Karna!’ His commanders try to comfort 
him with advice from the Shastras but he finds no peace of mind. He 
contemplates his destiny and the need to perpetuate his sovereignty and 
firmly resolves to continue the war. Making Salya his senapati, he leads his 
remaining forces to battle. 

Another terrible battle erupts between the Kurus and the Pandavas, like 
the one of long ago between the Devas and the Asuras. In the massacre that 
follows, Yudhishtira finally kills Salya at midday. With all his friends and 
kinsmen dead, Duryodhana flees the field and hides at the bottom of a lake. 
Bhimasena surrounds the lake with many maharathas, challenges 
Duryodhana and, after forcing him to come out and confront him, uses his 
great strength to kill him. 

Only three Kuru maharathas— Aswatthaman, Kripa and Kritavarman— 
are still alive after Duryodhana’s death. Burning with revenge, they 
slaughter the Panchala troops in a stealthy night attack. The next morning, 


Sanjaya the Suta sets out from the camp and reaches Hastinapura, sombre 
and sorrowing; his limbs trembling, he enters the palace of the king. He 
weeps and wails, ‘Alas, Rajan! Alas, the death of that noble king has ruined 
all of us. Alas, Kaala is all powerful and unpredictable, for the Pandavas 
have killed all our allies whose combined might was equal to that of Sakra 
himself.’ 

All the people who watch Sanjaya come back to the city in distress, O 
Janamejaya, they weep loudly and lament. 

When the city hears of Duryodhana’s death, the citizens are like a 
people demented. A deeply agitated Sanjaya enters Dhritarashtra’s palace 
and finds him seated, surrounded by Gandhari, Vidura, his grieving 
daughters-in-law, kinsmen, friends and other well-wishers. In a voice 
choked with tears, he says, ‘I am Sanjaya. I bow to you, O Bharatarishabha. 
Salya, the king of the Madras and our senapati, is dead. So, too, are Sakuni 
the gamester, and his son Uluka. Also annihilated are the Samsaptakas, the 
Kambojas, the Sakas, the Mlecchas, the Yavanas the Mountaineers, along 
with the Easterners, the Southerners, the Northerners and the Westerners. 
All the kings and all the princes are dead. Bhima has killed Duryodhana in 
the manner he vowed to. Suyodhana now lies in the dust, with his thighs 
and manhood smashed and covered in blood. 

Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandi, Uttamaujas and Yudhamanyu along with the 
Prabhadrakas, the Panchalas, and the Chedis died in the war. Also ended are 
the lives of the five sons of Draupadi, and Karna’s son, Vrishasena. All the 
troops that you mobilised, all the elephants as well as all the chariot- 
warriors and all the horses, have fallen. Very few are left alive. The 
influence of Kaala is such that because of the feud between the Pandavas 
and the Kauravas, the world now consists only of women. 

Only seven of the Pandava forces still live—the five Pandava brothers, 
Krishna and Satyaki. On your side, Kurudvaha, only three survive—Kripa, 
Kritavarman and Aswatthaman. Fate has used Duryodhana and his hatred 
for the Pandavas as the means to destroy the world.’ 

Hearing this, Dhritarashtra swoons. Vidura, Gandhari, the royal Kuru 
family and the entire royal household all fall on the ground, some senseless 
and others raving deliriously. Finally, slowly and with difficulty, 
Dhritarashtra regains his wits and, with trembling limbs and sorrowful 
heart, he looks around and says, ‘O wise Vidura, you are now my only 
support for I am destitute with no sons left alive.’ 


He faints again and revives only when they sprinkle cold water on him 
and fan him. He remains silent, sighing heavily like a snake imprisoned in a 
jar. Seeing his king suffer, Sanjaya also weeps loudly. All the royal women 
too, including the renowned Gandhari, do the same. After a long while, 
during which Dhritarashtra repeatedly revives and swoons, he tells Vidura, 
‘Let Gandhari, the women and all these friends, retire to their homes and 
chambers. My mind is greatly unsettled.’ 

A trembling Vidura dismisses the women, O Janamejaya. Then Sanjaya 
looks sadly at Dhritarashtra, who is wracked with sobs, and with joined 
hands, comforts him with kind words.” 


CANTO 98 


V aisampayana said, “After the royal women leave, King 

Dhritarashtra, the son of Ambika, plunged into grief greater than 
what he has ever suffered, begins to lament, exhaling audibly and flailing 
his arms. He says, “Alas, Sanjaya, dreadful is your news. You tell me that 
the Pandavas are all safe while my sons are dead. Alas, my hard heart must 
be made of the essence of adamant, since it does not break when I think of 
my sons, their age, and the games they played in their childhood. Although, 
being blind, I have never seen them, I loved them more than my life. I 
attended on their lives and rejoiced at their growth from childhood to youth 
and then to early manhood. 

Hearing now that they lie dead, grief overwhelms me. Ah, come to me, 
Duryodhana! I am blind, old and defenceless, and without you what will 
become of me? Why have you abandoned all your allies, your kinsmen and 
friends and lie pitifully dead on bare ground. Where is your compassion, 
your love and your regard for me? 

How did the Parthas kill you when you were invincible? When I wake 
up in the mornings, who will now lovingly and respectfully call me, “O 
Father,” or “O Maharajan,” or “O Jagatguro,” and affectionately embrace 
me with love in his eyes, and seek my orders, saying, “Command me, O 
Kurudvaha.” 


Speak to me in that sweet voice once more! O my dearest son, I heard 
you say, “This wide earth is as much ours as it is of Pritha’s son. 
Bhagadatta, Kripa, Salya, the two princes of Avanti, Jayadratha, Bhurisrava, 
Sala, Somadatta, Bahlika, Aswatthaman, Kritavarman, Brihadbala, Sakuni 
and many thousands of Mlecchas, Sakas and Yavanas have taken up arms 
for my sake. Sudakshina the king of the Kambojas, and the king of the 
Trigartas, Pitamaha Bhishma, the Acharyas Drona and Kripa, Srutayus, 
Ayutayus, Satayus, Jalasandha, Rishyasringa’s son, the Rakshasas Alayudha 
and Alambusa, Subala, these and countless other kings were ready to cast 
away their lives in this great war. O Naravyaghra, I will fight, with their 
support and with my brothers around me, against all the Parthas, the 
Panchalas, the Chedis, Draupadi’s sons, Satyaki, Kuntibhoja and the 
Rakshasa Ghatotkacha. 

Each of my allies can repel any Pandava attack. Why, Karna and I alone 
are a match for them. All my ally kings are eager to avenge the wrongs of 
the Pandavas and to accept my sovereignty. Moreover, Krishna has assured 
me that he will not put on armour or use weapons against us, Rajan.” 

Listening to what Duryodhana so often told me, I believed that the 
Pandavas would be defeated in this war. Now that the enemy has killed my 
sons and all the shuras who fought gallantly for us, what can I believe but 
that this must be destiny? 

When Pitamaha Bhishma fell at the hands of Sikhandi, like a lion 
brought down by a jackal, what can it be but destiny? 

When the Pandavas could quell Drona Acharya, that master of all 
weaponry, what can it be but fate? 

When the enemy could kill Bhurisrava, Somadatta, Bahlika, Jayadratha 
and Bhagadatta, who were masters in fighting from elephant back, what can 
it be but providence? 

When they could destroy Sudakshina, Jalasandha, as well as Srutayus 
and Ayutayus, what can it be but fate? 

When the Pandavas could defeat and kill maharatha Pandya, what can it 
be but destiny? 

When the enemy could kill Brihadbala, the king of the Magadhas, the 
valiant Ugrayudha, the two princes of Avanti, Vinda and Anuvinda, the king 
of the Trigartas, as well as numberless Samsaptakas, what can it be but 
fate? 


When the Pandavas could kill king Alambusa, the Rakshasas Alayudha 
and Rishyasringa’s son, what can it be but destiny? 

When the enemy could massacre the Narayanas, as well as the Gopalas, 
fighters that were invincible in battle, and many thousands of Mlecchas, 
what can it be but fate? 

When the Pandavas could slay Sakuni and his son Uluka, what can it be 
but fate? 

When the war claimed innumerable Kshatriyas, all-powerful as Sakra 
himself, when the war claimed great warriors from so many different 
kingdoms, Sanjaya, what can this be but destiny? 

It must be fate that killed my valiant sons and grandsons, as well as my 
friends and brethren. 

Without doubt, man is subject to destiny. I am an unfortunate whose 
children are all dead. Old as I am, how can I now submit to my enemies? 
As I am without relatives and kinsmen, I will take sannyasa and seek exile 
in the vana. How will I be able to stand the triumphant shouts of 
Bhimasena, who by himself butchered my hundred sons? He will now 
frequently refer to the killing of Duryodhana in my hearing and I, burning 
with grief and sorrow, will not be able to suffer his savage words.’ 

Dhritarashtra alternately swoons and weeps, thinking about the death of 
his sons. Overwhelmed, he once more enquires of his charioteer Sanjaya 
about the details of the battle. 

Dhritarashtra asks, ‘Whom did my warriors choose as their senapati, 
after Bhishma, Drona and Karna had fallen? The Pandavas have killed all 
our generals: Bhishma, Drona and now the valiant Karna. Long before this 
war started, the noble Vidura told me that Duryodhana would be the cause 
of the decimation of the population of the earth. I am a fool not to have seen 
the truth of his prediction. Fate decreed then that I would ignore his words. 
The results of that evil course are now clear to behold. 

Explain once more to me, O son of Gavalgana, who led our army after 
Karna’s fall? Who were the Kshatriyas who challenged Arjuna and 
Vasudeva? Who protected Salya’s flanks and his rear on the battlefield? 
How could the Pandavas kill the powerful Salya as well as Duryodhana, 
when all of you were present? 

Tell me all the details of the destruction of the Kauravas and of my son 
Duryodhana. Tell me how Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandi, the five sons of 
Draupadi, and all the Panchalas with their followers died. Tell me how the 


five Pandavas, Kripa, Kritavarman, Aswatthaman and the two Satwatas, 
Krishna and Satyaki, escaped with their lives. You are a skilled narrator, 
Sanjaya, so tell me everything.’” 


CANTO 99 


: S anjaya says, ‘Hear, O Rajan, of the great slaughter of the Kurus 
and the Pandavas in the Kurukshetra war. The enemy repeatedly 
routs your troops after Arjuna kills Karna, but they return to fight each time. 
A great fear enters the hearts of your sons as they hear Partha rejoice with 
shouts of triumph. There is no warrior in your army to stand firm and to 
galvanise the Kaurava troops. They look like shipwrecked merchants adrift 
without a raft upon the fathomless ocean. They retire as dusk falls, 
disheartened and demoralised. Finding their commanders dead, your sons 
flee in fear, bloodied and without weapons or armour. In panic, they even 
strike each other, afraid that Arjuna and Bhima may be hunting them 
down.” 

Many great maharathas flee, some on horses, some on chariots, and 
some on elephants leaving their foot soldiers to their fate. The melee results 
in broken chariots, slain elephants, horsemen and the massacre of foot 
soldiers. 

“T will take up my post at the rear of the army, where Arjuna will be 
unable to either surround me or to attack me directly. Today, I will kill 
Arjuna, Krishna, Bhima and the rest of my enemies, and free myself from 
the debt I owe Karna. Quick, whip the horses, Suta,’ Duryodhana 
commands his charioteer. 


Elsewhere on the battlefield, many of your warriors who had lost their 
elephants, horses or chariots along with another twenty-five thousand foot 
soldiers, march to the battlefront. Leading four kinds of forces, Bhimasena 
and Dhrishtadyumna encircle and cut down your soldiers, despite vigorous 
resistance. Many challenge the two by name and attempt to attack them. 
Since the rules of fair combat require that one should not fight from a 
chariot when the opponents are on foot, an enraged Bhima leaps down from 
his chariot. Effortlessly wielding his heavy iron gada stamped with gold, he 
fells all your warriors with crushing blows that spray blood everywhere, 
even like the Destroyer at the end of the yuga, before he joins 
Dhrishtadyumna. 

A powerful force led by Madri’s twin sons and Satyaki engages 
Sakuni’s large cavalry in a fierce battle and easily decimates it. 

Meanwhile, drawing his celebrated Gandiva, Arjuna scythes into the 
Kauravas’ chariot-division. Your troops run on seeing Arjuna’s ratha, driven 
by Krishna, racing towards them. A division of twenty-five thousand foot- 
soldiers unsupported by chariots and cavalry, tries to surround Arjuna but 
Bhimasena and Dhrishtadyumna annihilate them in no time. The sight of 
Dhrishtadyumna on a chariot with a lofty Kovidara flagstaff and drawn by 
horses white as doves, fills your troops with terror. 

Satyaki, Nakula and Sahadeva pursue Sakuni, while Chekitana and the 
five sons of Draupadi blow their conches after destroying a large cohort of 
your troops. Arjuna notices some of your men still holding their ground, 
and shrouds them with a barrage of arrows. The dust of battle envelops the 
scene, and nothing is visible. Soon, darkness falls and your troops flee in 
disarray. 

Seeing his army broken, O Kurupravira, Duryodhana attacks friend and 
foe alike in fury at Karna’ death. He challenges all the Pandavas, like the 
Asura Bali challenging the Devas in battle long ago. The Pandavas upbraid 
him and try to subdue him but he fearlessly holds them off in a mighty 
exhibition of skill. Some way off, he sees some of his battered troops in 
panic. He rallies them saying, “I do not see where you can find shelter from 
the Pandavas. What use then in flight? The Pandava army is greatly reduced 
and the two Krishnas are exhausted. If all of us make a stand here, we will 
surely prevail, while if you break ranks, the Pandavas will overrun you. 

Death is welcome if it is in battle and by Kshatriya dharma, for it 
bestows eternal happiness in the other world. Listen to me, all you 


Kshatriyas. It is better to submit to the power of an angry Bhimasena than 
to abandon your Kshatriya dharma. You Kauravas, there is no better path to 
swarga than a dharma yuddha. A warrior acquires in a day regions of bliss 
in the other world that would otherwise take long years to obtain.” 

At this, the Kshatriya maharathas, led by Duryodhana, once more 
charge the Pandavas firmly resolved to fight to the last. A ferocious battle 
erupts again, like the one between the Devas and the Asuras.’” 


CANTO 100 


os S anjaya says, ‘The stricken Kaurava army, with its broken chariots 

and dead warriors, elephants and foot-soldiers, Rajan, looks like 

Rudra’s playground. After the retreat of your grief-stricken son 

Duryodhana, Partha mows down thousands of hapless Kshatriyas. Their 
screams fill the Kaurava command with despair. 

The venerable Acharya Kripa says angrily, “Listen to me, Duryodhana. 
Having committed oneself to the path of war, he who observes Kshatriya 
dharma must be prepared to fight his father, sons and close relatives. One 
earns great punya if one dies in battle and great sin if one flees. The life of a 
man aspiring to live by Kshatriya dharma is exceptionally difficult. 

Let me give you some advice, O Kurupravira. After the fall of Bhishma, 
Drona, Karna and Jayadratha, after the death of your brothers and your son 
Lakshmana, our hopes of retaining sovereignty are all but over. We are alive 
only to mourn their deaths. 

Even while they lived, we could never have hoped to vanquish Arjuna. 
With Krishna for his eyes, even the Devas cannot defeat him. The sight of 
his kapi-dhvaja, lofty as Indra’s stambha, fills the vast Kaurava army with 
stark fear. Our hearts fail hearing Bhima’s leonine roars, the blare of the 
Panchajanya and the twang of the Gandiva. Moving like lightning and 
blinding our eyes, Arjuna’s golden bow is a circle of fire that shoots forth 
bolts of light as he shakes it. His white horses are marvellous as the moon 


and they fly as if devouring the skies. With their reins in Krishna’s hands, 
they bear Arjuna to battle like the wind driving cloud masses. He raged 
through your great army like a conflagration consuming dry grass in the 
forest in winter. Magnificent as Indra, Dhananjaya is like the four-tusked 
Airavata when he assails us. Those maharathas, the two Krishnas, are 
beyond being awesome. 

Today is the seventeenth day of this dreadful war, O Bhaarata, and 
Arjuna has your army reeling like a tempest-tossed boat on the bosom of 
the sea. Where was Karna, where was Drona, where was Kritavarman, 
where were Dusasana and your other brothers, where was I, where were 
you, when Arjuna killed Jayadratha? What then is there for us to do now? 
The very twang of the Gandiva robs us of our courage, so who remains 
among your warriors who can stop Arjuna and his devastras? 

Your army without a senapati is like a night without the moon, or like a 
dried up river bed that elephants have dug up with their tusks. Like a great 
flame in a heap of grass, Arjuna will easily incinerate your headless army. 

The valour of Satyaki and Bhima can split the mountains or dry up all 
the oceans. Bhima will soon accomplish the vow that he swore in the sabha. 
You have committed many unpardonable wrongs against the Pandavas and 
the results of your evil deeds have now come to haunt you. You and the 
sparse remnants of your army, O Suyodhana, are both in mortal danger. 
Save yourself, for everyone else alive depends upon you. Without your 
asylum, everything is over. 

The strategy advocated by Brihaspati is that he who is losing should 
seek peace and reconciliation, while he who is winning should opt to fight. 
Our army is now lesser and weaker than the Pandava army, and so wisdom 
lies in making peace. He who does not know what is good for him, or 
knowingly disregards it, will soon lose his kingdom and never achieve 
anything worthwhile in this world. If submission to Dharmaraja Yudhishtira 
is the price to pay for retaining our sovereignty, it is preferable to complete 
defeat at his hands. They will allow you to continue as king if Vidura and 
Krishna ask Yudhishtira to. 

None of them can deny Dhritarashtra anything. I have no ulterior 
motives and my advice is only for your benefit. If you do not listen to me 
now, Rajan, you will remember my words when you are taking your last 
breath.” 


The venerable Acharya, Kripa son of Saradwat, is in tears by now and 
he almost swoons.’” 


CANTO 101 


: S anjaya says, ‘Breathing heavily, Duryodhana silently listens to 
Kripacharya. He thinks a while and says, “You have said to me 
whatever a friend is duty bound to say. You have fought for me without a 
thought for your life. The world has seen you penetrate into the midst of the 
Pandava divisions and fight their maharathas valiantly. However, O 
Mahabaho, like bitter medicine that ill pleases a dying man, your valuable 
and reasonable advice does not please me. 

In the past, we took away Yudhishtira’s kingdom by defeating him at a 
game of dice, so why should he trust me now? We deceived Krishna when 
he came to us as an envoy for the Parthas. Why then, O Maharishi, should 
he believe me now? He will never forget that we once dragged the princess 
Draupadi, weeping piteously, into the sabha and that we deprived 
Yudhishtira of his kingdom. 

Today we have confirmed with our own eyes the popular belief that the 
two Krishnas share the same heart. From the time he heard of the death of 
his sister’s son, Abhimanyu, Krishna has passed his nights in grief. We have 
offended him greatly so why should he forgive us? Arjuna, too, is bitter 
after we killed Abhimanyu, so why should he give me a care? 

Bhima swore a terrible oath. He may die but he will never break that 
vow. Madri’s twins breathe animosity towards us, and in battle, they 
resemble a pair of Yamas. 


Dhrishtadyumna and Sikhandi have drawn their blades against me so 
why will they, O best of Brahmanas, desire my good. 

Dusasana viciously hauled princess Draupadi into the Kuru sabha, when 
she was in her season and clad in a single cloth. Burning for revenge, she, 
born for a yagna fire, performs the most stringent tapasya for the success of 
her husbands and for my destruction. She sleeps every day on bare ground, 
intending to do so until the end of the war. Remembering the near naked 
Draupadi in distress, who will now dissuade the Pandavas from war? 

Abandoning all pride, Krishna’s sister Subhadra serves Draupadi as her 
sakhi. It is later than you think, O Kripa—everything is ablaze and no one 
can put out that fire. Once we killed Abhimanyu, peace with the Pandavas 
became impossible. 

I enjoyed ruling over all this earth, by myself. How can I now reign at 
the pleasure of the Pandavas? I once shone like the sun over the heads of all 
the kings of the world. How can I now walk behind Yudhishtira like a 
wretched slave? I cannot accept your mild and benign counsel, for this is 
not the time for peace. 

I regard fighting the dharma yuddha to be good policy. This is not the 
time to act like a eunuch. I have performed many yagnas and given 
generous dakshina to Brahmanas; I have listened to countless Vedic 
recitations, and I have helped anyone who came to me in distress. I have 
conquered foreign lands, stamped on the heads of my enemies, ruled my 
own kingdom wisely, and enjoyed diverse pleasures. My servants are all 
well looked after and I have fulfilled all my desires. Acharya, how will I 
now humble myself before the Pandavas? 

I have pursued dharma, artha and kama. I have paid my debt to the 
Pitris and to Kshatriya dharma. Certainly, there is no happiness left for me 
here. My honour means more to me than my kingdom or my life. 

Fame is all that one should acquire in this world and one can have it 
only through war. For a Kshatriya to die at home in his bed is shameful and 
sinful. Only the man who, after performing yagnas, casts away his body in 
the forest or in battle wins glory. He is no man who dies miserably, weeping 
in pain, afflicted by disease and decay, and in the midst of crying relatives. 
Abandoning all objects of enjoyment, I will now, through dharma yuddha, 
go to the realms of Sakra and find the companionship of others who have 
attained that highest end. 


Beyond doubt, swarga is the habitation of warriors of dharma-neeti, 
who never retreat from battle, who are gifted with intelligence and devoted 
to truth, who perform yagnas, and who have been sanctified in the final 
yagna of war. The different tribes of Apsaras will undoubtedly smile at 
them, while their Pitris in swarga, seeing them worshipped in the sabha of 
the Devas, will rejoice. We should walk down the path, which the Devas 
and our venerable Pitamaha, our Acharya Drona, Jayadratha, Karna and 
Dusasana have all taken. 

So many brave kings who fought for me in this war now lie dead on the 
battlefield. They discharged their Kshatriya dharma in battle, after 
performing yagnas as ordained in the Shastras, and now live in bliss in 
Indra’s abode. They paved the way to that blessed region, a road that will be 
difficult to travel on because of the throngs of warriors that hurry along it to 
reach that goal. I remember with gratitude the efforts of those heroes and 
desire to pay off the debt I owe them, instead of fixing my heart upon my 
kingdom. 

If I save my own life after causing the death of my kith and kin, the 
world will censure me. What kind of sovereignty can I enjoy without 
relatives, friends and well-wishers, and yielding to the son of Pandu? I, who 
have lorded over the Earth, must now acquire Heaven though fair fight. It 
cannot be otherwise.” 

All the assembled Kshatriyas signify their approval by applauding and 
cheering the king. 

Without grieving about their defeat and filled with enthusiasm, they 
decide to display their courage and fight on. They are delighted at the 
prospect of battle and, after they groom their animals, withdraw to their 
tents for the night. They bathe in the red waters of the Saraswati on the 
sacred and beautiful tableland at the foot of Himavat, and quench their thirst 
with that water. Their spirits now raised, and urged by fate, they wait and 
rest, giving courage to one another.’” 


CANTO 102 


: S anjaya says, ‘Happy at the prospect of battle Rajan, Salya, 
Chitrasena, Sakuni, Aswatthaman, Kripa, Kritavarman, Sushena, 
Aristasena, Dhritasena, Jayatsena and all the kings and their warriors, spend 
the night at the foot of Himavat. It is for the first time, after Karna’s death, 
that your sons find peace in the mountains. Now determined to fight, they 
salute the king and request him in the presence of Salya to name another 
senapati and assure him that they will conquer their enemies under that new 
General. 

Duryodhana drives up to that seasoned warrior Aswatthaman. He has 
muscular limbs, a full head of hair, sweet speech, eyes like the petals of a 
full-blown lotus, a face with the dignity of Meru, and a neck with three 
lines like those of a conch shell. His arms are massive and well joined; he 
has a broad and deep chest, and his neck, eyes, tread, and voice are like 
those of Mahadeva’s bull Nandin. In speed and strength, he is like Garuda 
or Vayu. Radiant like the sun, he rivals Usanas in intelligence and the moon 
in beauty, form and countenance. His body, made as if from a number of 
golden lotuses, consists of strong joints, powerful thighs, waist, hips, and 
elegant fingers and fingernails. Apparently, the Creator made him with care 
after collecting all the beautiful and goodly attributes in creation. 

Drona’s son bears every auspicious mark; he is clever; he is an ocean of 
learning and invincible in battle. He knows, in all its details, the astra 


shastra, the science of weaponry consisting of four padas and ten angas. He 
has complete knowledge of the four Vedas as well as of the fifth, the 
Akhyanas. After worshipping Trilochana and observing many vratas, his 
father Drona, who possessed great punya and who was not born of a 
woman, begot him upon a wife also not born of a woman. 

Your son Suyodhana says to him, “Today you are our greatest strength. 
Tell us who is to be our senapati who will lead us to victory against the 
Pandavas.” 

Aswatthaman says, “Let Salya be our senapati. In ancestry, in ability, in 
energy, in fame, in beauty of person, and in every other accomplishment, he 
is our superior. Grateful for the services rendered to him, he fights for us 
abandoning the sons of his own sister. He leads a large army of his own, 
and is like a second Kartikeya, the Deva-Senapati. If he leads us, we will be 
victorious as the Devas were when Kartikeya was their leader.” 

All the kings surround Salya, loudly acclaim him as their senapati, and 
wish him victory. Alighting from his ratha, Duryodhana joins his palms 
and, addressing Salya, that rival of Drona and Bhishma in war, says, “The 
time has come for everyone to distinguish between true and fair weather 
friends. When you lead our army into battle, the Pandavas, Panchalas and 
their allies will be demoralised.” 

Salya says, “I will do all that you expect of me. Everything that I 
possess—my life breath, my kingdom, and my wealth—is at your service.” 

Duryodhana says, “I offer you the leadership of my army, Uncle. 
Protect us and lead us just as Kartikeya commanded the Devasena. 
Obliterate our enemies in battle even as Indra killed the Danavas.”’” 


CANTO 103 


: S anjaya continues, ‘Salya asks Duryodhana, “Why do you consider 

the two Krishnas to be the greatest of maharathas? Why, even 

together they cannot equal me! When roused, I can confront the whole 

world, with all the Devas, Asuras and Manavas. I accept your offer to 

command your army. I assure you that I will form such a vyuha that our 

enemies will not be able to overrun us and then I will vanquish the Parthas 
and the Somakas.” 

Without losing any time, Duryodhana pours sanctified water over Salya, 
performs the rites ordained in the Shastras and invests him with the 
command of the Kaurava army. Loud shouts arise from the now optimistic 
Kaurava and Madrakas warriors who beat and blow diverse musical 
instruments. 

They shout, “Victory and long life to you, Rajan! With your support, let 
the Dhartarashtras rule the wide earth. You can vanquish the three worlds 
with all their Manavas, Devas and Asuras. The Somakas and Srinjayas are 
only mortal!” 

Hearing their praise, Salya experiences the joy that only men with pure 
souls can feel. He says, “Today I will either annihilate all the Panchalas and 
the Pandavas, or die on the field and go to swarga. The Pandavas, Krishna, 
Satyaki, the sons of Draupadi, Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandi, all the 
Prabhadrakas, Parthas, all the Siddhas and the Charanas and the entire 


world will see my prowess, the might of my bow, my dexterity, the strength 
of my arms and the wealth of astras that I possess. Whatever tactics they 
adopt will be of no avail to them and I will put an end to the Pandava 
maharathas today. I will surpass Drona, Bhishma and Karna, and I will fulfil 
your wishes and make you happy.” 

After they see Salya receive command of the army, no one among your 
troops, O Bharatarishabha, any longer grieves over Karna’s death. They are 
happy and consider the Parthas as already defeated and slain. Your troops 
sleep contentedly that night in their newfound peace. 

Hearing the shouts of your army, Yudhishtira tells Krishna in the 
hearing of all the Kshatriyas, “Salya, king of the Madras, the great archer 
whom all the warriors highly regard, O Madhava, has been made the Kuru 
senapati. Tell us what we must do now.” 

Krishna says, “I know Salya intimately, O Bhaarata. He is a formidable, 
renowned and seasoned warrior, and knows all the modes of warfare. Why, 
I think he is equal to Bhishma, Drona or Karna, or perhaps, superior to them 
all. I can think of no warrior who can match Salya in battle. Strong as a lion 
or an elephant, he will range fearlessly on the field like Rudra at the end of 
the yuga. Only you, O Yudhishtira, can vanquish him. Kill him quickly just 
as Vasava did the Asura Namuchi. He is well nigh invincible and only upon 
his fall will you be able to overrun the Dhartarashtra army. 

Do not show him any compassion, thinking that he is your maternal 
uncle; only observe Kshatriya dharma. You have crossed the fathomless 
oceans that were Bhishma, Drona and Karna, so do not drown now with 
your followers in the print of a cow’s hoof that Salya is. Display in battle all 
the power of your tapasya and your Kshatriya tejas and kill the Madra 
king.” 

Krishna withdraws to his tent for the evening, with the Pandavas’ 
salutations. Yudhishtira dismisses his brothers and the Somakas, and retires 
for the night in some contentment, knowing that Karna is no more. He is 
like an elephant from whose body its keepers have plucked out a thousand 
spears and arrows. All the great archers and maharathas of the Panchalas 
and the Pandavas, happy at the fall of Karna, sleep peacefully that night, 
their fears dispelled.’” 


CANTO 104 


: S anjaya says, ‘Next morning, king Duryodhana exhorts his 

warriors as they prepare for war. They put on armour and ready 

the elephants and chariots. The sound of musical instruments reverberates 

in the camp and swells the martial fever of the soldiers. Soon, the Kaurava 

maharathas form themselves in battle array and, with their divisions, stand 
ready for war under the command of Salya. 

All your commanders, with Kripa, Kritavarman, Aswatthaman, Salya, 
Sakuni and the remaining kings, meet your son and take counsel on their 
strategy. They decide that anyone who fights the Pandavas alone and 
unsupported, or he who deserts a comrade, they will consider stained with 
the five grave and all the minor sins. They then sally forth to fight. 

Similarly, the Pandava troops come out in battle array to face the 
Kauravas. O Bharatasattama, the noise of the advancing army with its 
chariots and elephants sounds like the agitated ocean breaking on rocky 
shores.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, “You have told me about the fall of Bhishma, Drona 
and of Karna. Tell me now, Sanjaya, how Yudhishtira killed Salya and how 
Bhimasena killed my son Duryodhana.’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘I will describe the last battle to you, Rajan, which caused 
such great destruction of human lives and those of elephants and horses. 
Your sons had strong hopes that, although Bhishma, Drona and Karna had 


fallen, the Parthas would meet their conqueror in Salya. Your son 
Duryodhana draws comfort from the thought that in Salya he has finally 
found a protector, a victor. 

A grand vyuha Salya forms, in every aspect. His very presence inspires 
your sons with confidence. Mounted upon his chariot, brandishing his 
mighty bow and leading Karna’s sons and the brave Madrakas on the left 
flank of his vyuha, Salya comes into battle. He positions Kritavarman and 
Kripa on the right flank, as well as the Sakas and the Yavanas. 
Aswatthaman defends his rear and the Kambojas, while Duryodhana and 
the Kuru warriors march in the centre along with Sakuni and Uluka. 
Throwing a rough ring around the troops are Trigartas, a large force of 
cavalry, and other troops. 

The Pandava archers divide themselves into three segments. 
Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandi and Satyaki dash ahead and strike swiftly while 
Yudhishtira and his troops try to corner Salya. Arjuna selects Kritavarman 
and the Samsaptakas for himself, Bhimasena and his Somaka maharathas 
attack Kripa, while the two sons of Madri and their troops charge Sakuni 
and Uluka. Your warriors, thousands upon thousands of them, armed with 
diverse weapons and filled with battle lust, rush at the Pandavas.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, “When the battle commences, what, Sanjaya, was 
the strength of each of the armies?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘O Bharatarishabha, eleven thousand chariots, ten 
thousand seven hundred elephants, two hundred thousand cavalry and three 
million foot soldiers is the strength of your army, while six thousand rathas, 
six thousand elephants, ten thousand cavalry, and one million foot soldiers 
are all that remain of the Pandava forces. 

The Kauravas and the Pandavas come to war on another dawn, 
determined to make an end of each other. And a pitched and bloody battle 
breaks out between them.’” 


CANTO 105 


S anjaya says, “The encounter between the Kurus and the Srinjayas, 
Rajan, is as dreadful as the one between the Devas and the 
Asuras. Great chaos holds sway as warriors on elephants and chariots kill 
each other with spears, lances and cloth-yard shafts, while foot soldiers are 
trampled underfoot. The battlefield presents a stunning sight, like a 
flowering forest with hundreds of headless trunks and chatras and yak-tail 
fans. The earth resounds with the tramp and shouts of soldiers, the rumble 
of chariots, the grunts of elephants, the booming of drums, the blasting of 
conches and the blare of other instruments. In the resultant confusion, 
nothing is clear. Littered with mangled heads and crimson with blood, the 
earth looks as if in bloom with golden lotuses. The thudding of falling 
heads sounds like falling fruits of palmyra trees. The lopped off thighs of 
warriors like elephant trunks, arms like tusks smeared with sandalwood 
paste and wearing costly keyuras, jerk and writhe in strange frenzy. 

A river of blood forms again on the field, flowing towards the nether 
world, carrying with it broken chariots, standards and banners, severed 
limbs and other body parts, arms, armour and armaments, and dead 
elephants and horses. Filled with all manner of debris, Kurukshetra looks as 
if it is covered by swarms of chakravakas, trivenus and dandas. The sight, 
while it exhilarates the brave, fills the timid with fear. 


That savage battle, in which no quarter is asked for or shown, results in 
an appalling devastation of all the four kinds of forces. Many warriors 
loudly call out for help from their relatives and friends—in vain, as those 
called upon turn away in fear. 

Arjuna and Bhima shatter your still sizeable army and make your 
soldiers collapse like drunken women. They blow their conches and give 
echoing roars of triumph. Hearing this, Yudhishtira leads Dhrishtadyumna, 
Sikhandi, and the two fierce and invincible sons of Madri, to assail Salya 
and your legions. Loud cries of distress arise from your troops, as your 
commanders try to hold the troops together. For all that, they cannot rally 
your men, who break ranks and run, whipping their horses and elephants, 
deserting their relatives and comrades, worried only about their own 
safety.’” 


CANTO 106 


: S anjaya says, ‘Finding his army fleeing, Salya tells his charioteer, 

“Quick, take me to where Dharmaputra Yudhishtira fights under 

the sovereign white chatra held over his head! I will show them what I can 
do and the Parthas will not stand up to me.” 

Falling upon the Pandava host, Salya stops it like the continent checking 
the surging sea. The fleeing Kauravas seeing the turnaround, return to battle 
with new impetus, and another bloody engagement results. 

Nakula and Karna’s son Chitrasena assail each other with relentless 
flights of arrows. Equally matched, they carefully look for the other’s 
weaknesses. Rending Nakula’s bow at the grip, Chitrasena first buries three 
golden arrows in his forehead and then fells his horses, his standard and 
charioteer. Picking up a sword, Nakula charges his antagonist like a lion, 
while his opponent continues to shoot at him. Deflecting the arrows with his 
shield, he reaches Chitrasena’s chariot and in full view of the troops, hacks 
off Chitrasena’s handsome, diadem-decked head with a swing of his blade. 
All the maharathas present give loud cries of praise and approval. 

Meanwhile, seeing their brother killed, Sushena and Satyasena, the two 
other sons of Karna, sweep on Nakula, like a pair of tigers attacking an 
elephant in the deep forest. Though wounded by their arrows, the Pandava 
swiftly climbs into another chariot, takes up a new bow and stands ready, 
like a furious Yama. The two brothers, O Bhaarata, smash his new ratha but 


Nakula retaliates by killing Satyasena’s four horses and ruins his bow. The 
intense battle continues, with each destroying the other’s bow a number of 
times, and injuring each other severely with well-aimed arrows. Finally, 
Nakula picks up a bright spear, with a golden shaft steeped in oil, which 
resembles a female serpent incessantly flicking its tongue. He hurls it at 
Satyasena, and it plunges cleanly through that prince’s chest and drops him 
dead from his chariot. 

Insensate with rage, Satyasena’s brother Sushena destroys Nakula’s 
chariot and covers him in a solid swath of arrows. Seeing Nakula in trouble, 
Sutasoma, his son by Draupadi, races up to rescue his father. Like a lion 
springing onto a mountaintop, Nakula leaps into Sutasoma’s chariot and 
again engages Sushena. With a crescent-headed shaft, he decapitates his 
opponent; like a lofty tree on the bank of a river, undermined by the current, 
Karna’s son collapses. Your demoralised army streams away from the field, 
O Bharatarishabha, until Salya arrives on the scene. 

With tigerish roars and strumming his bow, Salya rallies his forces. He 
fills your troops with courage, and they flock to him once more and stand 
ready to face the enemy. Also roaring and loosing cataracts of arrows that 
fill the air with a thick buzzing as of swarms of black bees, Yudhishtira, 
Satyaki, Bhima and the twins launch a vicious attack on your troops and 
another bloody battle ensues. 

After razing many Samsaptakas, Arjuna, his kapi-dhvaja flapping in the 
wind, turns on another wing of the Kaurava army. Along with 
Dhrishtadyumna and his warriors, they launch a combined attack, shooting 
tirades of arrows. Utterly overwhelmed, the Kaurava army is petrified, not 
knowing which way to turn. Soon after, they lose their leading warriors, 
then waver and fall apart, and the Pandava warriors decimate them. 

Similarly, your sons also slaughter the Pandava soldiers in their 
thousands. The two armies, like two streams in the monsoon, agitate and 
massacre each other and a great fear enters the hearts of your warriors, 
Rajan, as well as those of the Pandavas.’” 


CANTO 107 


: S anjaya says, ‘A terrible bloodletting occurs on Kurukshetra, as 
Kaurava and Pandava soldiers maul each other. Warriors flee, 
elephants trumpet in pain, foot-soldiers scream, horses run wildly in panic, 
and another carnage follows. The battle begins at about the hour of sunrise 
and, slowly but surely, the Pandavas led by Yudhishtira gain ascendancy as 
the Kuru army weakens and grows frantic like a herd of deer frightened by 
a forest fire. 

Seeing his army struggle helplessly like a cow sunk in a quagmire, 
Salya rushes to their rescue and the Pandavas turn to face his attack. They 
see various portents and omen on the field as the earth with her mountains 
trembles and groans and bright meteors flash through the sky and crash into 
the ground. Deer, bison and birds in large numbers escape from dreadful 
Kurukshetra, with your army to their right. The planets Venus and Mars, in 
conjunction with Mercury, appear behind the Pandavas and in front of the 
Kauravas. Glowing flames issue from the points of astras, dazzling 
warriors’ eyes. Crows and owls perch upon the heads of the combatants and 
on their flagpoles. 

A fierce skirmish breaks out as, mustering all their strength, the 
Kauravas charge the Pandava army. An ebullient Salya pours dense showers 
of arrows over Yudhishtira, like the thousand-eyed Indra lashing the earth 
with torrential rain. He wounds Bhima, the five sons of Draupadi, 


Dhristadyumna, the two sons of Madri, Satyaki and Sikhandi, each with ten 
gold winged arrows. In endless swarms, Salya’s shafts fall like thunderbolts 
from the clouds, and maim and kill elephants, horses, and warriors. He 
decimates the Prabhadrakas and the Somakas and yells in exultation. The 
Pandava army is in a panic and looks to Yudhishtira for protection. 

With another downpour of arrows, Salya strafes Yudhishtira who, with 
some startling archery of his own, checks the Madra as an ankush does an 
infuriated elephant. Then Salya drills an arrow like a snake right through 
Yudhishtira and into the earth. This enrages the Pandavas, and Bhima, 
Sahadeva, Nakula and the five sons of Draupadi target Salya with their 
sizzling shafts. Racing to support him, come Kritavarman, Kripa Uluka, 
Sakuni, Ashwatthaman and all your sons. A hail of shafts from 
Kritavarman’s bow stops Bhimasena in his tracks. 

A rampaging Kripa rakes Dhrishtadyumna with multiple arrows while 
Sakuni confronts the sons of Draupadi, and Aswatthaman faces the twins. 
Duryodhana confronts Krishna and Arjuna and strikes them both with 
several shafts. Hundreds of individual duels break out between your men 
and the enemy on different parts of the field. Kritavarman, king of the 
Bhojas, kills Bhimasena’s brown horses, forcing Bhima to jump down from 
his chariot and fight on foot with his mace. 

Salya kills Sahadeva’s horses and his opponent retaliates by killing 
Sahadeva’s son with his sword. A cautious duel unfolds between 
Kripacharya and Dhrishtadyumna while Aswatthaman calmly bloodies each 
of Draupadi five sons with ten arrows, two for each prince. Bhima mounts a 
fresh chariot but Kritavarman kills his horses again, once more forcing him 
to spring down from his chariot and to rush at Kritavarman with his awful 
gada. Kritavarman escapes narrowly with his life. 

Salya massacres many Somakas and Pandava troops and lacerates 
Yudhishtira with many barbs. Bhima, biting his lower lip in anger, attacks 
Salya with his iron mace with which he has destroyed elephants, horses and 
enemy soldiers. It resembles Yama’s bludgeon, and wrapped in a cloth of 
gold, glows like a meteor. Terrible as a she-snake, it is hard as the Vajra, 
and, smeared with sandalwood paste and other liniments it is like a 
desirable woman. Greased with marrow, fat and blood, it produces harsh 
sounds from the bells attached to it, filling the enemy troops with terror. 
That weapon, as famed all over the world as Indra’s Vajra, can rive 
mountain summits. 


This is the gada with which once Bhima challenged an enraged Kubera, 
Maheswara’s friend and Lord of Alaka and the Nine treasures, on Kailasa. 
Once, when Bhima went to Gandhamadana to fetch saugandhika flowers for 
Draupadi, he used it to kill a host of proud and mighty Guhyakas gifted 
with powers of maya. Hefting his hexagonal mace, Bhima rushes at Salya 
and, with a blow, smashes down his four horses to the ground. 

Salya flings a javelin into Bhima’s massive chest and gives a shout of 
triumph as it pierces the titan’s armour and lodges in his body. However, 
calmly drawing the spear from his body, Vrikodara skewers Salya’s 
charioteer with it. Salya jumps down from his chariot and gazes bleakly at 
Bhima, dumfounded by the Pandava’s feat. Salya also takes up his mace 
and speculatively eyes his enemy. Witnessing Bhima’s fearsome exploit, the 
Parthas are jubilant and applaud the indefatigable son of Vayu.’” 


CANTO 108 


: S anjaya says, ‘With his charioteer dead, Salya stands still on the 
field like the blazing yuga-fire; like the Kailasa Mountain with its 
formidable crest; like Vasava with his Vajra; like Mahadeva with his trisula. 
The sound from thousands of conches, trumpets, and exultant shouts and 
roars inspire the warriors. The watching combatants of both armies applaud 
them, and say, “Wonderful! Other than Salya or Balarama there is no one 
who can match Bhima in a gada yuddha. And only Bhima can dare to face 
Salya, the illustrious king of the Madras, in a mace fight.” 

Evenly matched as they are, they warily circle each other with frequent 
leaps into the air, bellowing like bulls. Salya’s mace with a resplendent 
cloth of gold wound around it, looks like a sheet of fire, while Bhima’s gada 
flashes like lightning in the midst of clouds. When the two maces clash, 
sparks fly like showers of embers, and appear to set the sky ablaze. Like 
two gigantic elephants locking tusks and goring each other, they begin to 
pound each other. Soon they are bathed in blood and look like two 
flowering Kinsukas. 

The sound of the blows from their maces resounds like successive peals 
of thunder. They stop momentarily to catch their breath before they close 
again and belabour each other. Finally, battered and exhausted, they both 
fall down at the same moment. Seeing this, the warriors of both armies 
exclaim in concern and apprehension. 


Sweeping in on his chariot, Kripa arrives just in time and takes Salya to 
safety. Still reeling as if drunk, Bhimasena staggers up and, with uplifted 
mace, shouts a deep challenge to Salya to return and face him. 

To the sound of musical and booming drums, Duryodhana leads your 
warriors against the Pandavas. He singles out Chekitana from the enemy 
forces, and impales him on a spear through his chest, killing him on the 
terrace of his chariot, spouting blood from his wound. Seeing him fall, the 
Pandava maharathas ride around your divisions and pour continuous 
torrents of arrows upon them. In the fight that follows, Salya leads Kripa, 
Kritavarman and Sakuni against Yudhishtira, while Duryodhana confronts 
Dhrishtadyumna. Your son sends three thousand chariots under 
Aswatthaman to contain Arjuna. All the men fight fearlessly, determined to 
win at any cost and, indeed, they succeed in penetrating the Pandava army 
like swans swimming into a large lake. A dust storm engulfs that fierce and 
bloody battle, turning everything invisible. The identities of the soldiers can 
be established only when their names are called aloud by their enemies. 
During that dreadful battle, not one man among either your warriors or 
those of the enemy takes a step back. 

Spurting, spraying blood soon disperses the dusty darkness and the 
warriors vie with each other to display their skills, trying to attain swarga 
and even Brahmaloka through dharma yuddha. They fight either to repay 
their hire, or to fulfil the objectives of their friends and allies. Invoking and 
loosing all kinds of astras, maharathas shout encouragements to each other. 

The fevered duel between Salya and Yudhishtira and their exchange of 
arrows leaves both wounded. Also struck by multiple arrows are Salya’s 
side riders Chandrasena and Drumasena. When Salya finds his two 
wingmen killed, he first kills twenty-five Chedi warriors and then strikes 
Satyaki, Bhimasena and Madri’s twin sons with numerous shafts. 

While Salya thus charges about on the field, Yudhishtira shoots many 
serpentine shafts at him and knocks down his adversary’s standard. An 
enraged Salya looses a scathing volley and his arrows pierce Satyaki, 
Bhimasena, Madri’s twins, and, most of all, draw blood from Yudhishtira. 
Spreading a net of arrows across Yudhishtira’s chest, Salya then mantles 
him with searing shafts, like a mass of rising clouds. Yudhishtira is sorely 
wounded and feels weak and powerless, just as the Asura Jambha had when 
facing Indra, the slayer of Vritra.’” 


CANTO 109 


: S anjaya says, ‘Seeing Dharmarajan Yudhishtira stricken, Satyak1, 

Bhimasena and Madri’s twins try to blockade Salya with their 

chariots, shooting storms of shafts at him. But the towering Madra repels 

their combined onslaught. From above, the watching Siddhas and the Rishis 
applaud delightedly and declare it a remarkable sight and feat. 

Anxious for Yudhishtira, Bhima and Satyaki strafe the irresistible Salya 
with flurries of arrows and soon Nakula and Sahadeva join the attack. Salya 
defends himself resolutely against those maharathas, and shoots at each of 
them from his formidable bow. He splits Sahadeva’s bow and pierces him 
with a hot clutch of shafts. Hastily stringing another bow, Sahadeva gashes 
his great maternal uncle with five blazing arrows. The duel between the 
Pandavas and Salya intensifies and soon Salya is bleeding profusely: a 
mountain of red chalk with crimson streams running down its breast. 

As the battle progresses in frenzy, Satyaki, Bhima, Nakula and 
Sahadeva assail Salya with arrows, lances, darts and every other possible 
weapon, but with little success. With two recondite arrows, Salya even 
destroys the Satagni that Yudhishtira casts at him and gives a deafening yell 
of triumph. O Bhaarata, he comprehensively outdoes the Pandavas and they 
just cannot withstand him. Spellbound by Salya’s prowess, Duryodhana is 
convinced that the Pandavas, the Panchalas, and the Srinjayas are as good 
as dead. 


Yudhishtira finally succeeds in killing one of the Salya’s side riders. 
Salya responds with a torrid swath of barbs, which cover all the Pandava 
troops. Yudhishtira is in a quandary and wonders, “Truly, how will what 
Krishna said come true? I pray that Salya does not annihilate my army.” 

With chariots, elephants and horses, the Pandavas renew their attack on 
Salya. However, that Paraviraha easily dissipates their showers of arrows 
and astras. He scathes them with a burst of gold-winged shafts that flies up 
like a swarm of locusts and falls like swarms of hunting eagles. The Devas 
and the Gandharvas are wonderstruck to see Salya’s arrows cast a heavy 
gloom over the field, and beset the Pandava host. Salya pounds the Pandava 
warriors with his shafts shot from every side, envelops king Yudhishtira and 
repeatedly lets out echoing simhanadas. 

The Pandava maharathas flounder against his incredibly violent 
onslaught. Some, however, like Bhima and king Yudhishtira, manage to 
hold their ground against him.’” 


CANTO 110 


: S anjaya says, ‘Meanwhile, with a solid swath of arrows, 
Aswatthaman and his warriors target Arjuna but the Pandava 
maharathas strike back to defend him. Blanketing your troops with flaring 
showers of golden arrows, Arjuna turns them into strange porcupines with 
his quills sticking out of them, but they respond vigorously, and fill his 
chariot with their shafts and missiles. The Kaurava troops are excited to see 
the unprecedented success that your warriors achieve against Arjuna. Soon, 
his chariot blazes as if with hundreds of torches, and it resembles a 
Devaratha fallen from heaven. 

Arjuna retaliates with flaming volleys of arrows inscribed with his name 
and shot with unearthly precision, and quickly the Kaurava warriors feel 
that he is everywhere. The blazing Partha-fire, fanned by the loud twang of 
the Gandiva, consumes your troops like dry fuel. Broken chariots, piles of 
arms and armaments, dead warriors and body parts, diadems, crowns, and 
assorted jewellery litter the path of Partha’s ratha. Rapidly, the track mired 
with blood and flesh becomes impassable, O Kurudvaha, like Rudra’s 
playground. 

Like the apocalyptic Agni at the end of the yuga, Partha destroys two 
thousand chariots. His banners streaming on his chariot, Aswatthaman 
attempts to stop Arjuna and those two Naravyaghras, both regarded as the 
foremost maharathas of the time, clash and their intense duel carries on for 


a long time. The son of Drona strikes both Arjuna and Krishna with gold- 
winged arrows shot with great force. Though he had initially shown some 
regard for his Acharya’s son, now with a little smile, Arjuna stretches his 
bow Gandiva into a circle and shatters his adversary’s chariot, kills his 
horses and charioteer, and almost casually sinks three arrows into him. 

Aswatthaman remains standing on his crippled chariot and in quick 
succession, flings two heavy maces with iron-spikes, and decked with cloth 
of gold, at the Vijaya; Arjuna smashes those gadas flying towards him into 
fragments, riving the hearts, as it were, of the Kaurava commanders. He 
slashes his fierce opponent with three more arrows; though grievously hurt, 
Drona’s stoic son shows no sign of fear or anxiety. 

Aswatthaman next targets Suratha, the Panchala maharatha, and strikes 
him deep. Riding on his peerless chariot, Suratha valiantly charges 
Aswatthaman and, drawing his great bow to its fullest, burns him with 
arrows like tongues of fire. Aswatthaman, incensed and furrowing his brow 
into three lines and licking the corners of his mouth, glares at Suratha in 
rage and then shoots a cloth-yard shaft, which passes through the heart of 
the Panchala and burrows into the earth. Suratha falls dead like a mountain 
summit split by lightning. 

Quickly commandeering the chariot of his slain foe, Aswatthaman 
supported by the Samsaptakas renews his assault on Arjuna. That battle 
between them, at the hour of noon, with Partha fighting alone, kills 
thousands of your men. Similar to the battle between Indra and the vast host 
of the Asuras in the eldest days, their duel is wonderful to witness.’” 


CANTO 111 


: S anjaya says, “Using arrows and spears, Duryodhana and 

Dhrishtadyumna are involved in a brutal contention in which both 

are severely wounded. Duryodhana’s brothers, with a large force, come 

charging up to help him. They surround Dhrishtadyumna, but in an 

astounding display of skill, the Panchala fire prince staves off those 
Atirathas. 

Sikhandi leads the Prabhadrakas against the two Kuru warriors, 
Kritavarman and the great Kripacharya, in a lethal attack. 

Meanwhile, with his relentless torrent of arrows from all sides, Salya 
inflicts heavy losses among Satyaki’s and Vrikodara’s forces. With patience 
and great strength, he simultaneously takes on Nakula and Sahadeva, each 
of whom is skilled like the Destroyer. Salya’s shafts mangle the Pandava 
maharathas, as they fail to find anyone to protect them. Nakula sees 
Yudhishtira hard pressed by Salya, and flies to confront his uncle and they 
duel savagely bloodying each other with arrows and darts. Then 
Yudhishtira, Bhimasena, Satyaki, and Sahadeva, all furiously engage Salya 
but, in another astonishing exhibition of archery, he holds the four 
maharathas at bay. 

Switching to another ratha and noticing that the Pandavas are making 
no headway against Salya, Satyaki rides up to face him. Salya turns to 
receive his charge and the duel between Satyaki and Salya is fierce and 


awesome, like the one in the olden days between the Asura Sambara and 
Indra. Soon the twins join the battle against their maternal uncle. In the 
general melee, there is copious bloodshed and the scene is reminiscent of a 
confrontation between snarling lions over a kill. Blanketed with dense 
showers of arrows fletched with kanka and peacock feathers, there is 
darkness all around as if cast by a passing cloud. However, their golden 
winged and glimmering serpentine shafts light up the sky as if it is on fire. 
Salya’s feat is all the more incredible since he fights alone and yet manages 
to hold up and denude the Pandava forces, while he prowls the battlefield 
like Sakra when he destroyed the Asuras, long ago.’” 


CANTO 112 


: S anjaya says, ‘Your troops under Salya, Rajan, once more savagely 
assail the Parthas. Although dreadfully beset, your fierce warriors 
not only hold their own against the enemy, but also put them to flight 
despite Bhima’s best efforts to rally them. A furious Arjuna envelops Kripa, 
Kritavarman and their troops with a hurricane of arrows. Sahadeva 
overwhelms Sakuni and his troops, while Nakula tries to burn Salya’s 
flanks. Meanwhile, Draupadi’s five sons confront various commanders of 
the Kuru army and Sikhandi fights Aswatthaman. Armed with his mace, 
Bhima confronts Duryodhana, and Yudhishtira leads his men against Salya. 
Another vicious encounter erupts between all these, none of whom has ever 
turned his back on a battle. 

Truly, my king, Salya achieves a remarkable feat when he contains and 
desiccates the Pandava army by himself. Like the planet Saturn near the 
moon, he skirmishes with Yudhishtira. Using arrows that are like venomous 
nagas, he assails Yudhishtira and Bhima, shrouding them with gales of 
arrows and earning the applause of all the soldiers. The mangled Pandava 
troops take to their heels despite Yudhishtira’s cries to them to stop. He is 
incensed and attacks Salya, resolved to either win the day or meet with 
death. 

He summons all his brothers and Krishna and says to them, “Bhishma, 
Drona, Karna and the other kings who fought for the Kauravas have all 


perished in this war. You have all done your best courageously and 
accomplished the tasks given to you. Only my task to kill Salya remains 
unfulfilled. I am determined to kill him today so listen to what I want you 
all to do for me, to help me succeed. 

Nakula and Sahadeva whom even Vasava cannot defeat will protect my 
flanks. I am confident that all three of us will adhere to our Kshatriya 
dharma and fight our maternal uncle. Today, either Salya or I will survive. 

Prepare my chariot according to the astra shastra and pack it with arms 
in a measure larger than Salya’s. Satyaki and Dhrishtadyumna will protect 
my flanks, Arjuna will secure my rear, and Bhima will safeguard my front 
today. And I will surely be superior and better prepared than Salya in my 
duel with him.” 

All Yudhishtira’s warriors accept his strategy and, once he has prepared 
himself, he rides against Salya and boosts the flagging spirits of the 
Panchalas, the Somakas and the Matsyas. Blowing conches and beating 
drums, the Panchalas charge, uttering loud shouts. The earth resounds with 
the noise of the elephants’ bells as Duryodhana and Salya meet the attack. 
Demonstrating the full range of the archery that Drona had taught him, 
Salya shoots volley after blinding volley at Yudhishtira. 

Like a couple of tigers fighting over a kill, Salya and Yudhishtira, both 
seasoned warriors with great battle skills, maul each other. Bhima confronts 
Duryodhana while the Panchala prince Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki, and 
Madri’s twin sons engage Sakuni and the other Kuru fighters. 

Remember, it is because of your evil policy, Rajan, that yet another 
bloody battle erupts between your warriors and those of the enemy. 

Aiming an arrow at Bhima’s beautiful, gold-decked standard, festooned 
with silver bells, Duryodhana knocks it down before splitting Bhima’s 
beautiful bow shaped like an elephant’s trunk. Bhima responds with a barb 
that pierces your son’s chest so he swoons on the terrace of his chariot. 
Then with a razor-faced shaft, Bhima beheads Duryodhana’s charioteer and 
his horses run away wildly, dragging the chariot behind them, and 
Aswatthaman, Kripa and Kritavarman rush forward to rescue your son. 

Seeing this, your troops are frantic, and loud cries arise from the Kuru 
army. Seizing the opportunity, Arjuna draws his bow and begins to 
annihilate them. An energized Yudhishtira dashes forward to confront 
Salya, the Dharmaputra’s horses white as ivory and fleet as thought. It is 
surprising to see the mild and soft Yudhishtira change into someone fierce 


as, with glaring eyes and his body trembling in rage, he decimates 
thousands of enemy warriors. He is relentless as he wades into the enemy 
forces, Rajan, like thunder splitting mountains. Felling chariots, horses, 
charioteers, standards and rathikas in large numbers, Yudhishtira seems to 
sport on the field. The rampaging and suddenly violent Pandava king 
troubles all your warriors and, after he empties the field on all sides with his 
arrows, he turns his attention on Salya. 

Salya races forward eagerly to meet him and both of them roar and 
blow their conches in challenge as they close and swathe each other with 
dark swarms of arrows. Quickly covered in blood, they look like salmali 
and kinsuka trees in bloom. O Bhaarata, no one can tell who will prevail: 
whether Yudhishtira will kill Salya and rule the earth, or if Salya will slay 
the Dharmaputra and gift the earth to Duryodhana. 

Yudhishtira sets his foe to his right during that battle and they shoot a 
hundred immaculate arrows at each other, quicker than the mind. They lose 
a bow each in the encounter, but Yudhishtira gains ascendancy when he 
kills Salya’s four horses, his two Parshni charioteers and finally fells the 
Madra king’s standard. At this, the Kaurava army breaks ranks and flees. 

Seeing Salya’s plight, Aswatthaman darts in and removes him to safety, 
followed by Yudhishtira’s dreadful roar of triumph. Salya climbs into 
another chariot that is ready and fully equipped with weapons.’” 


CANTO 113 


S anjaya continues, ‘Now wielding a stronger bow, Salya strikes 

Yudhishtira squarely and lets out a simhanada as he unleashes 

vicious flights of deadly arrows at the enemy’s other Kshatriyas. He rakes 

Satyaki, Bhima, Sahadeva and Yudhishtira with his shafts and mows down 

countless enemy archers and soldiers. Soon the earth is scattered with dead 
warriors like a sacrificial altar strewn with blades of Kusa grass. 

The Pandus, the Panchalas, and the Somakas, led by Bhimasena, 
Satyaki, and Madri’s twins all strike Salya with winged arrows and 
Yudhishtira buries one in the centre of his chest with huge force. Seeing 
Salya at bay, Duryodhana sends a thousand armoured troops and chariot- 
warriors to protect him. Salya now quickly takes the attack to Yudhishtira 
and the two shuras cover each other with oiled arrows loosed from 
bowstrings pulled to their ears. They carefully look for each other’s 
weaknesses, and then shoot to draw blood, to wound grievously. The sound 
of their bowstrings reverberate all over the field. They stalk each other like 
two young tigers in the deep forest fighting over a prey; swelling with the 
pride of their own strength, they bloody each other like a couple of 
infuriated tuskers. 

Struck through the chest with a fiery arrow, Yudhishtira responds with a 
perfect blazing shaft that burns into Salya’s breast. The duel intensifies with 
powerful flurries of arrows exchanged, until the Dharmaputra has his bow 


broken. Weeping up another more formidable one, Yudhishtira drills Salya 
with ten terrific shafts. Salya cuts away the golden armour of both 
Yudhishtira and Bhima, slashes Yudhishtira’s arms and rives his bow again, 
and draws fonts of blood from his charioteer and his horses. The Madra 
then turns on the Pandava troops and begins to massacre them. 

Finding his brother cornered, Bhima rushes to his defence and shatters 
Salya’s bow and deeply wounds that king with a brace of tremendous 
shafts. He severs the head of Salya’s sarathy, kills his horses, and covers the 
lord of the Madras with a hundred keening barbs. Sahadeva follows his 
brother and savagely attacks Salya, so their combined assault leaves him 
dazed. His armour ruined by Bhima, an enraged Salya picks up a sword and 
a shield decked with stars and jumps down from his ratha. 

He hacks the axle rod of Nakula’s chariot and runs headlong towards 
Yudhishtira, like Yama himself in wrath. Dhristadyumna, Sikhandi, 
Draupadi’s five sons and Satyaki rush to defend the Dharmaraja. 

Bhima demolishes Salya’s magnificent shield, and breaks his sword at 
the hilt with a deep and echoing roar. All the Pandava maharathas are 
delighted, and they laugh, utter fierce roars and blow their moon white 
conches. Miserable and covered with sweat and blood, your warriors are 
benumbed, lifeless. Despite the attack by the Pandava warriors led by 
Bhimasena, Salya continues his charge towards Yudhishtira, like a lion 
hunting a deer. Without horses or charioteer, Yudhishtira finds himself in 
dire straits when Salya appears before him. He grimly remembers Krishna 
telling him that Salya’s death was his task and picks up a bright golden 
spear embossed with radiant gemstones. 

Rolling his eyes, Dharmaputra Yudhishtira of the pure soul, glares at 
Salya, his heart filled with rage. His very gaze should have reduced the king 
of the Madras to ashes but, strangely Rajan, that does not happen. He hurls 
that candescent spear at Salya with all his might, the long dart, which, like a 
Brahmana’s curse, nothing can stop. It flares through the air like a comet 
falling from the skies at the end of the yuga. 

The sons of Pandu have always worshipped this astra with perfumes, 
garlands, and the rarest offerings of food and drink. The weapon is like the 
Samvartaka fire, as powerful as a dark curse pronounced according to the 
Atharvan of Angirasa. Forged for Rudra himself with great care by the 
celestial artificer, Tvashtri, it is inexorable and can destroy the bodies and 


very prana any enemy, why, even the earth, the sky, all the water bodies, all 
haters of Brahma and creatures of every kind. 

Yudhishtira now infuses it with powerful mantras and casts it at Salya 
like a bolt of lightning, just as, long ago, Rudra unleashed his own astra to 
kill Andhaka. His always gentle eyes unaccustomedly aflame, Yudhishtira 
roars, “Die, wretched Salya!” 

With a yell, Salya tries to catch the lance as it flies at him, even as a fire 
leaps up to catch a jet of clarified butter poured on it. But the long, flaming 
astra plunges through his fair and wide chest and into the earth. Covered in 
the blood that spurts from his nostrils, eyes, ears, mouth, and that which 
flows from his wound, he looks like the Krauncha Mountain when Skanda 
pierced it. His armour destroyed, the illustrious Salya, strong as Indra’s 
elephant, falls onto the earth, his arms outstretched, his face turned towards 
Dharmaputra Yudhishtira. Like a beloved wife advancing to receive her 
dear lord, the earth seems to rise a little in love to receive him, as he dies 
embracing her with all his limbs. 

Slain in a dharma yuddha, Salya is like a large yagna fire extinguished 
on the sacrificial hearth. Though spread-eagled without his weapons and 
standard, and though the astra has pierced his very heart, beauty and 
radiance do not abandon the lifeless king of the Madras. 

Yudhishtira now takes up his bow, splendid as Indra’s, and begins to 
raze his enemies like Garuda killing serpents. With transcendent showers of 
arrows, he routs your troops who, overcome by panic, begin to attack one 
another with their eyes shut in terror. With blood gushing from their bodies, 
they lose their weapons and fall in their thousands. 

Upon the fall of Salya, his youthful younger brother, a maharatha of 
almost equal accomplishment, takes the field against Yudhishtira. 
Determined to pay the last dues of his brother, that Madra Kshatriya lashes 
the Pandava king with numberless shafts. Yudhishtira destroys his 
opponent’s bow and standard with an arrow of fire and decapitates him. O 
Rajan, I saw that head adorned with earrings fall from the chariot like a jiva 
falling from swarga after exhausting his punya. On his death, the Kurus 
wail aloud and run from the Pandavas. 

Satyaki chases the fleeing Kauravas but encounters Kritavarman, who 
comes fearlessly to the rescue of your beaten army. These two illustrious 
heroes of Vrishni’s race confront each other like furious lions. They shoot 
multitudes of arrows at each other and at the end of the exchange, 


Kritavarman finds himself without his chariot, horses and his two Parshni 
drivers. Seeing him in danger, Kripa rescues him in his chariot. 
Duryodhana’s entire army melts away once more. 

A dust cloud shrouds the army from view. However, it is evident that 
the greater portion of your army has perished and that the survivors are 
trying to escape. Soon, the cloud of dust settles as the blood from the battle 
drenches it. Seeing from his vantage point that his army is broken, 
Duryodhana defies the advancing Parthas alone. He covers all of them— 
Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki, and their chariot-warriors— with his arrows and 
the enemy dare not close with him, as mortals fear to approach Yama. In a 
fresh chariot, Kritavarman rides up to support him. With six broad-headed 
arrows shot with great force, Yudhishtira kills his four horses, and wounds 
him deep. Ashwatthaman rescues Kritavarman, and whisks him away from 
Yudhishtira. Kripa, left to face Yudhishtira, rakes him and his horses with 
his masterly shafts. Thus, here and there, the fire of battle still glows. 

O Bhaarata, all this is a result of you and your son’s evil policy. After 
the death of Salya at Kurukshetra, the Parthas, filled with great joy, blow 
their conches, beat their drums and applaud Yudhishtira, just as the 
celestials once greeted Indra after he defeated Vritra in time out of mind.’” 


CANTO 114 


: S anjaya says, ‘After the death of Salya, Rajan, his chariot-warriors 
numbering seventeen hundred take to the field with great 
determination. Riding an elephant big as a hill, with a royal parasol 
unfurled over his head, and fanned with yak-tails, Duryodhana tries to stop 
the Madraka warriors, crying, “Stop. Do not go any further.” 

They pay him no heed and, pulling loudly on their bowstrings, attack 
the Pandava host. Hearing that Yudhishtira has killed Salya and was himself 
wounded by the Madraka maharatha, Arjuna races up to the spot, where, 
along with Bhima, the two sons of Madri, Satyaki, the five sons of 
Draupadi, Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandi, the Panchalas and the Somakas, 
throw a defensive ring around the Dharmaputra. Like makaras agitating the 
ocean, they urge each other on, jostling one another’s chariots. 

The enemy shouts, “Where are king Yudhishtira and the Pandavas? 
Where are Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki, Sikhandi, and the sons of Draupadi?” 

Provoked, the warrior sons of Draupadi begin to cut down the Madraka 
soldiers. Your warriors, O Bhaarata, though forbidden by your son, continue 
to attack the Pandavas. Then Sakuni says to Duryodhana, “How is it that we 
stand impotent while the Madraka host is being slaughtered before our 
eyes? The understanding was that all of us should fight unitedly. Why then 
do you allow our enemies to kill our troops?” 


Duryodhana says, “Though I expressly forbade it, they do not obey me. 
Together, they have penetrated the Pandava host.” 

Sakuni says, “In battle, brave warriors are often carried away by their 
rage and do not obey their commanders. Do not be angry with them and this 
is not the time to stand indifferently by. Let all of us go forth together and, 
with our chariots, horses and elephants, try to rescue the heroic Madra 
soldiers. With care, Rajan, we can protect one another.” 

The Kauravas agree with Sakuni and Duryodhana leads a large force to 
support the Madraka warriors, making loud shouts and causing the earth to 
resound with that noise. 

Meanwhile, the Pandavas have adopted the vyuha called Madhyama. In 
the hand-to-hand fighting that follows, and before Duryodhana and his army 
could come to their rescue, the Madraka warriors perish. Broken chariots, 
dead men and lifeless horses cover the earth. Panic-stricken horses, still 
harnessed to rathas, careen wildly everywhere with their rathikas, dead and 
a few alive, while steeds drag broken or wheel less chariots, hampered by 
their traces. We see headless forms rise all around and meteor showers 
come flaring down from the sun. 

Then the Partha army sees the advancing Kurus and, scenting final 
victory, turn to face them. They ride swiftly, shaking their bows, the sound 
of their charge mingling with the blare of their conches and their battle 
cries. Demoralised by the annihilation of the Madraka forces and the death 
of their heroic king Salya, Duryodhana’s troops once more turn their back 
on the battle in fear.’” 


CANTO 115 


: S anjaya says, ‘Upon the fall of Salya, your disheartened and 
frightened troops look vainly for a leader. Defeated by 
Yudhishtira, they flee the field at midday. 

No one among your troops is prepared either to rally the army or to 
stand firm. We once again experience that fear and that grief that we felt 
upon the fall of Bhishma, Drona and Karna. The surviving Kuru army, 
confused, bewildered and in despair, is easily cut down by the enemy. Two 
thousand experienced war elephants thunder away, urged on by their 
hastikas with hooks and feet. Seeing them attempt to escape, the Panchalas 
and the Pandavas pursue them hotly with loud shouts of triumph. 

They say to one another, “Today Yudhishtira has vanquished his 
enemies. Today Duryodhana has lost his splendour and kingship. Today, 
king Dhritarashtra will lie prostrate on the earth, and feel the most terrible 
anguish on hearing of the death of his sons. Let him know the power and 
great might of Kunti’s son, and recollect Vidura’s advice and censure 
himself. Let him, from this day on, wait upon the Parthas as their slave and 
experience the grief that they have felt for so long. 

Let king Dhritarashtra know today the greatness of Krishna. Let him 
hear today the terrible twang of Arjuna’s bow in battle, know the strength of 
all his astras and the might of his arms. 


Today, king Dhritarashtra will recognize the awesome strength of the 
unrivalled Bhima when he slaughters Duryodhana, just as Indra once killed 
the Asura Bali. 

When he hears of the death of Salya, the invincible king of the Madras, 
he will know the prowess of Yudhishtira. After they kill Sakuni and all the 
Gandharas, he will know the strength of the two sons of Madri. 

Why should victory not be theirs, who have in their ranks king 
Yudhishtira, Arjuna, Satyaki, Bhima, Dhrishtadyumna, the two sons of 
Madri, the five sons of Draupadi, and Sikhandi? 

Why should victory not be theirs who enjoy the protection of Krishna, 
Guardian of the Universe? 

Why should victory not be theirs whom dharma protects? Who else but 
Yudhishtira, who has Krishna, the refuge of dharma for his protector, can 
vanquish Bhishma, Drona, Karna, Salya and hundreds of other kings?” 

The Srinjayas ruthlessly pursue your shattered troops while Arjuna 
moves against the enemy chariot-division, and Satyaki and the two sons of 
Madri corner Sakuni. 

Finding his troops running away in fear of Bhimasena, Duryodhana 
wryly tells his charioteer, “Look at the remains of my once vast host 
pursued by the Pandavas and the pall of dust that hangs over the battlefield. 
Arjuna, standing there with his great bow, bars my way. Drive carefully and 
take me to the rear of the army so that just as the ocean cannot overrun its 
continents, Dhananjaya will not be able to overpower me. If I stay and fight 
the Pandavas, my army will rally and return to battle with vigour.” 

Duryodhana’s sarathy carefully guides his horses to where his master 
wants to position himself. 

Twenty-one thousand foot-soldiers, without the help of elephants, 
cavalry and chariot-warriors, still stand ready for battle and prepared to lay 
down their lives. Bhimasena and Dhrishtadyumna besiege them with the 
four kinds of forces. Your foot-soldiers surround Bhima with fierce yells 
and the slapping of armpits. They shoot at him from all sides and block all 
the efforts of the Pandava forces to rescue him. Finally overcome with fury, 
Bhima alights from his chariot and charges them on foot, wielding his 
massive gada and roaring like a thundercloud. Like Yama armed with his 
club, the raging Bhima smashes down every last foot soldier. They fall, 
covered in blood, like stands of flowering karnikaras laid low by a tempest 
of Vayu, and present an awful and piteous sight. After annihilating that 


division of twenty-one thousand, Bhima rejoins Dhrishtadyumna to 
continue fighting from his chariot. 

Yudhishtira’s forces fail to contain or hem Duryodhana in. His ability to 
hold them off proves prodigious. Addressing his army, which has not fled 
too far, he says again to them, “There is no place where the Pandavas will 
not pursue and kill you. Of what use then is flight? The army of the 
Pandavas is small and the two Krishnas are sorely wounded. If all of us 
make a united stand, victory can still be ours. Listen to me, noble 
Kshatriyas. When Yama always takes heroes and cowards alike, what man 
who calls himself a Kshatriya will not fight? Death in battle according to 
Kshatriya dharma will lead to happiness. If we die, we will enjoy great 
felicity in the other world. O Kauravas, there is no better path to heaven 
than that offered by battle.” 

The Kuru commanders applaud his words and once more take the field 
against the Pandavas. Led by Arjuna, the Parthas arrayed in battle order and 
sensing imminent victory, charge them. The two sons of Madri and Satyaki 
attack Sakuni, and the other Pandava shuras charge your army with final 
ferocity.” 


CANTO 116 


: S anjaya says, ‘The fleeing Kuru army turns and makes a stand and 

Salwa, king of the Mlecchas, leads the attack against the Pandava 

force. He rides a hulking elephant oozing ichor, big as Indradeva’s Airavata. 

Bred from a high and noble strain, this beast is well trained; it can trample 

enemy troops to a pulp and is held in high esteem by Duryodhana. Seated 

on that magnificent elephant, Salwa attacks the Pandavas with fearsome 
shafts that resemble Indra’s Vajra. 

Neither the Kauravas nor the Pandavas see any weakness in his 
defences, as he decimates the enemy warriors with his arrows. The 
Pandavas, the Somakas, and the Srinjayas see that massive elephant 
thundering down at them and run in terror, crushing their own ranks as they 
do. All the warriors of your army blow their conches in triumph. 

Dhrishtadyumna, the senapati of the Pandava and Srinjaya forces, hears 
the Kaurava shouts of joy and the blare of their conches, and rides to block 
the elephant’s charge. Seeing Dhrishtadyumna racing towards him, Salwa 
quickly turns his great beast to confront him. His opponent sinks three 
flaming arrows into the elephant’s lofty forehead and then five more. Blood 
streaming, the beast trumpets in pain and runs wildly, but Salwa manages to 
control it with hooks and goads and to turn back and charge his opponent. A 
terrified Dhrishtadyumna jumps out of his chariot just in time, and the 
mastodon crushes his gold-decked chariot with its horses and charioteer, 


and lifting it up into the air with his trunk, dashes it to the ground. Seeing 
this, Bhima, Sikhandi and Satyaki dash up and with some quicksilver 
archery manage to stop the advancing beast. Meanwhile, Salwa continues to 
rain down his arrows and soon puts the attacking Pandava maharathas to 
flight. The Panchalas, Srinjayas, and the Matsyas, who bear the brunt of his 
assault, finally surround the animal. 

Dhrishtadyumna pounds the elephant with his great mace and splits 
open the elephant’s head; with a dismal cry, it falls like a mountain 
crumbling in an earthquake. Even as the leviathan falls, Satyaki decapitates 
king Salwa with a broad-headed shaft. Like a mountaintop struck by Indra’s 
Vajra, Salwa falls dead with his magnificent animal.’” 


CANTO 117 


: S anjaya says, ‘After the death of the heroic Salwa, your army is 
like a great tree broken by the force of a tempest, and only 
Kritavarman fights on. The Kuru warriors, who had earlier fled, rally and 
come back on seeing the Satwata warrior stand firm like a hill pierced with 
arrows, and another bloody contention takes place between the two armies. 
Encouraged and resolute, the Kauravas give vent to roars that seem to reach 
into the very heavens and now the Panchalas are afraid. 

Storming the battlefield, Satyaki despatches king Kshemakirti to 
Yamaloka with seven shafts that pierce his body deep and strike off his 
head. Kritavarman immediately challenges him and a furious duel ensues 
between the two heroes of the Vrishni-Andhaka vamsa. Manoeuvring their 
chariots in different tracks, the son of Hridika and the bull of Sini’s race 
soon strike each other with showers of arrows that soar into the sky like 
locust swarms and fall like gashes of lightning. Soon Satyaki has his bow 
destroyed and Kritavarman loses his charioteer, horses and his standard. 
They continue to bloody each other with javelins and arrows. The Kaurava 
troops see the great Kritavarman without his chariot and cornered by 
Satyaki. Kripacharya comes charging in and spirits Kritavarman away from 
the press of battle and mortal peril. 

The Kuru army once more retreats from the field. The enemy, however, 
does not see this, for a dust cloud shrouds the Kaurava forces. Only 


Duryodhana, who singly counterattacks the victorious Pandava army, is still 
fighting. Fearlessly, he assails all the Pandus—Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandi, 
the Panchalas, the Kaikeyas, the Somakas, and the sons of Draupadi. Your 
son is like a blazing yagna fire sanctified with mantras. His foes make no 
impression on him, like living beings who cannot approach the Great 
Destroyer. Then Kritavarman returns to the field riding another chariot.’” 


CANTO 118 


: S anjaya says, ‘King Duryodhana, riding on his chariot and filled 
with the courage of despair, stands resolute on the field, like the 
valorous Rudra himself. The arrows he shoots completely cover the earth 
and there is not a man among the Pandavas, not a horse, an elephant, or a 
chariot that his arrows did not find. Your son’s prowess is wonderful, and 
even a united Pandava army cannot contain him. His shafts find all the 
Pandava shuras— Yudhishtira, Bhima, Sahadeva, Nakula, Dhrishtadyumna, 
Satyaki and the sons of Draupadi. They target him from all sides but 
Duryodhana does not waver. His quickness, skill and prowess amaze the 
watching troops. 

Meanwhile, the Dhartarashtras who had not fled too far unite and surge 
back to support Suyodhana against the Pandavas. The noise made by them 
is like the roar of the ocean in the season of rains. Arrows shroud the sky 
and the fighting men can barely see each other. Aswatthaman and 
Bhimasena, their forearms scarred from their bowstrings, duel ferociously, 
frightening the whole universe. 

With a shout, Sakuni attacks Yudhishtira and kills his four horses, as the 
Pandava troops tremble. Sahadeva rescues his brother and the Dharmaraja 
soon returns on another chariot to renew his battle with Sakuni. Fervid is 
their fight and wonderful to behold; it wins the applause of the Siddhas and 
the Charanas. 


Shooting showers of arrows from all sides, Sakuni’s son Uluka and 
Nakula duel and these two evenly matched maharathas also fight 
ferociously. Magnificent like Sakra battling the Asura Bala, Satyaki battles 
Kritavarman. 

Duryodhana splits Dhrishtadyumna’s bow and slashes him with his 
sharp arrows. Dhrishtadyumna takes up another formidable bow and the 
battle between them intensifies, O Bharatarishabha, like a contention 
between two wild and infuriated elephants with ichor trickling down their 
limbs. 

Acharya Kripa fights Draupadi’s five sons, engaging them like a man 
battling his five senses. Both sides show no mercy and the battle between 
them is awe-inspiring. 

The general conflict, O Rajan, is appalling with many bloody duels. A 
dense cloud of dust raised by the chariots and the horses hangs over the 
battlefield and the wind carries it from place to place. It dims the sun and 
covers the earth and all the warriors become invisible. Shortly, when the 
ground is soaked with the blood of the combatants, the cloud of dust 
disappears and everything becomes visible. I can once more clearly see the 
different brutal single combats around me and hear the strange sound of 
thousands of flying arrows, like that made by a vast forest of burning 
bamboo.’” 


CANTO 119 


S anjaya says, ‘Despite the setbacks suffered by your army at the hands 

of the Pandavas, your sons manage to gather your maharathas and 
they continue to battle the enemy, disregarding the darkness everywhere. 
Savagely they fight, using guesswork and by identifying the enemy from 
the names they shout. The devastation is immense. 

First turning on Kripacharya and then on Kritavarman, Yudhishtira kills 
the Bhoja’s four horses. Rescuing him from the battlefield, Aswatthaman 
drives Kritavarman away in his chariot while Kripa easily holds his own 
against his old pupil. Duryodhana sends reinforcements of seven hundred 
chariots to join the attack on Yudhishtira and these maharathas surround and 
rain arrows over him. Sikhandi sees Yudhishtira hemmed in and leads a 
squadron of Pandava chariots to his rescue. 

In a fearful bloodbath, Sikhandi’s forces butcher the seven hundred 
enemy chariot-warriors of the Kuru army. Awful portents appear on the 
field, presaging the destruction of the world. The earth, with her mountains 
and forests, quakes violently. Meteors like blazing brands fall from the sky, 
Rajan, as if from the sun. A hurricane springs up, whipping away rocks and 
stones along its fringes. The elephants shed copious tears and tremble with 
fear. 

Disregarding all these omens, the fighting Kshatriyas consult one 
another and stand prepared on the sacred field of Kurukshetra, just ready to 


find swarga. Then Sakuni says, “Advance the enemy from the front. I will 
attack the Pandavas from behind.” 

The remaining Madraka warriors, followed by others, surge forward 
with enthusiasm and shout out their defiance. The invincible Pandavas 
shake their bows and greet the Madrakas with searing volleys of arrows. 
This disheartens Duryodhana’s troops and, once more, they waver. 

Then, O Bharatarishabha, the full contingent of ten thousand Madraka 
lancers led by Sakuni makes a surprise attack on the Pandava’s from their 
rear, and puts them to flight. Yudhishtira, who is watching the battle from a 
slight remove, says to Sahadeva, “Look, the son of Subala attacks our rear 
and is slaughtering our forces. Take Draupadi’s sons, all our elephants and 
cavalry and some three thousand foot-soldiers, and hold him while I lead 
the Panchalas against his chariot force.” 

Seven hundred war elephants, five thousand cavalry, and three thousand 
foot-soldiers, led by Sahadeva and the sons of Draupadi, ambush Sakuni 
who is attacking the Pandava forces from the rear. The Pandava cavalry 
penetrates Sakuni’s division and overruns his chariot-warriors. These 
horsemen combine with their elephant division and overwhelm the enemy 
host with a great barrage of arrows. 

Rajan, this terrible battle, also, is the consequence of your evil designs. 

The twang of bowstrings is no longer heard, for all the maharathas stand 
as mere spectators. The opponents are evenly matched and the lances and 
javelins they furiously hurl at each other fly like locust swarms or meteor 
showers through the sky and present a beautiful spectacle. Again, a dust 
cloud covers the troops and a thick gloom falls on the battlefield. We see 
many of those brave warriors move away while others fall down on the 
earth, vomiting blood. Wounded horses, with limbs streaming blood, fall in 
their thousands. Many fighting men stagger about wounded and deranged, 
or, their weapons lost, weakly wrestle with each other. Thousands of dead 
warriors in blood-stained armour and still clutching weapons, elephant- 
riders, horses and horsemen, and foot-soldiers litter the earth and lie 
huddled together in that gory carnage. The battlefield is impassable and no 
warrior can take his horse or chariot forward in any direction for any 
distance. 

After fighting for a while, Sakuni retires from the battle with his 
remaining six thousand cavalry. The Pandava maharathas, still determined 
to lay down their lives, say, “When we can no longer fight here on chariots, 


how much less will it be possible to fight on elephants. Let chariots move 
against chariots, and elephants against elephants. Sakuni has left with his 
Gandharas and is unlikely to come again to fight.” 

The sons of Draupadi lead the elephant division to join 
Dhrishtadyumna’s forces, while Sahadeva joins Yudhishtira. Then suddenly, 
Sakuni erupts out of nowhere and falls upon the Panchala prince’s division, 
and another vicious and bloody skirmish follows. In the hair-raising 
bloodletting, close relatives strike each other and fight like hawks fighting 
over pieces of meat. The noise of neighing horses, of shouting men, and of 
spears striking home and swords clashing is thunderous. 

Rajan, all this is the result of your evil policy. 

Finally, overcome with exhaustion, parched with thirst, spent with rage, 
their animals fatigued and they themselves wounded, your men turn away 
from the mayhem. Many maddened by the scent of blood kill friend and foe 
alike. Wolves and jackals howl and scream. Your army suffers great losses. 

Bodies of men and horses are scattered over the earth and cover it with 
rillets of blood. When the deafening noise of war somewhat subsides, 
Sakuni once more attacks the main host of the Pandavas with his remaining 
cavalry and yet again a crimson conflict breaks out.’” 


CANTO 120 


S anjaya continues, ‘Subala’s son Sakuni leads his remaining seven 

hundred horsemen to attack the Pandavas. Looking around for 

their king, they identify him, standing under a large sovereign parasol, 
splendid like the full moon and surrounded by his mail-clad warriors. 

Sakuni moves to meet Duryodhana standing amidst his chariot-force, 
and cheerfully says, “Destroy the Pandavas chariot divisions. I have 
overcome his cavalry but Yudhishtira himself cannot be slain unless one is 
ready to lay down one’s life. After we annihilate his chariot force, we will 
overwhelm his elephants, foot-soldiers and the rest!” 

Encouraged by this news and eager for victory, your warriors jubilantly 
forge ahead, with war cries and shaking their bows, to attack the Pandava 
army. Once more, we hear the fierce twanging of bowstrings and the 
slapping of palms and the rush of arrows. Seeing them come, Arjuna says, 
“O Krishna, delve into this sea of troops and I will end this war today, the 
eighteenth of this mahayuddha. Duryodhana’s once oceanic army is now so 
small that it resembles the mark of a cow’s hoof. Look at the horrible course 
of Destiny! If we had made peace after Bhishma’s fall, everything would 
have been well. Indeed, there was no reason why the war should have 
continued after our Pitama fell. Bhishma pleaded for sanity even then but 
the foolish Duryodhana would not listen to him. 


When Drona, that great Brahmana, fell and when we killed Karna and 
his sons and only a small remnant of the Kaurava army was left alive, the 
madness and slaughter still continued! Why, even after the death of 
Srutayush, of Jalasandha of Puru’s race, of king Srutayudha, after the fall of 
Bhurisrava, of Salya, and of the Avanti heroes, the killing did not cease. 
After the death of Jayadratha, of the Rakshasa Alayudha, of Bahlika, and of 
Somadatta, the war went on. Even after the fall of the heroic Bhagadatta, of 
Sudakshina the Kamboja lord, and of Dusasana, the battle did not stop. 
Despite the death of their great kings, each a ruler of vast lands, even after 
Bhimasena destroyed a full aksauhini of troops, O Krishna, the war did not 
end because of the folly and the greed of the Dhartarashtras. 

What king born into a noble race, a vamsa especially like that of Kuru, 
other than the foolish Duryodhana, would continue this dreadful and 
fruitless war? Which sane and wise man, capable of discriminating good 
from evil, would wage war, knowing his enemy to be superior to him in 
merit, strength, and courage? How could he listen to the counsels of another 
and ignore your wise words to make peace with the Pandavas? What 
specific can be palatable to that man today, who disregarded the Pitamaha, 
Drona and Vidura, when they urged him not to make war? 

How can he accept good advice, Janardana, when he insolently 
disregarded his own aged sire as well as his own well-meaning mother 
when they sought to give him sage advice? It is evident from his conduct 
and policy that Duryodhana was born to exterminate his very race. 

It is my opinion that he still does not intend to give us back our 
kingdom. The noble Vidura warned me of this many times and said, “As 
long as Dhritarashtra lives, that evil man will never give us justice. You can 
vanquish Duryodhana only in battle!” 

When Duryodhana was born, many Rishis foretold that he would 
become the cause of the extermination of all Kshatriya kind. I will decimate 
all his warriors today and Duryodhana will have to fight us alone for his 
own destruction. Only thus will this war end. 

I have come to this conclusion after much thought of my own, reflection 
on everything Vidura said, and taking into account the evil deeds of the vile 
Duryodhana, who has no trace of nobility in him. Ride through the Kaurava 
army, O Purushottama, for I will finish Duryodhana and his army today and 
do what will benefit Yudhishtira.” 


Reins in hand and resplendent on his wonderful ratha, Krishna rides 
deep into the enemy ranks. His white horses seem to cavort, as the ratha 
rolls forward and thousands of gold-winged arrows, steeped in oil, polished 
by the hands of expert smiths, and marked with Arjuna’s name, issue from 
it and cover the sky. Struck by these shafts, the Kauravas wilt like elephants 
when hunters chase them with burning brands, and they fall like dying 
locusts. Like a roaring fire that consumes forests full of dry trees and 
creepers, Arjuna incinerates your son’s troops. No armour can keep out his 
gold-winged arrows shot with superhuman accuracy and force. He does not 
need to shoot a second arrow at anyone. Like the Vajradhari striking down 
the Daityas, Arjuna destroys the enemy’s chariot-warrior division.’” 


CANTO 121 


: S anjaya says, “The Kaurava forces, O Kurudvaha, turn tail, 

deserting their relatives and comrades, unable to face Dhananjaya 

and his Gandiva. However, after they slake their thirst, some indomitable 

warriors groom their animals, change their armour, comfort their injured 

kinsmen and take them to the camp and, obedient to your son’s command, 
once more advance against the Pandavas. 

They attack Dhrishtadyumna’s forces amidst the Pandava divisions, as 
well as Sikhandi, Satanika and the son of Nakula. Then your son joins the 
attack and looses dense swarms of arrows at the Panchala prince. In a fiery 
duel between the two, Duryodhana loses his four horses and charioteer and 
he has to run to Sikhandi’s division for safety. 

With the Kaurava chariot division destroyed, their three thousand 
elephants surround the five Pandavas. Arjuna takes to the great beasts and 
every polished shaft he unleashes claims an elephant’s life. Taking up his 
formidable gada, Bhima jumps down from his chariot, like Yama with his 
cudgel, and rushes at the hulking beasts. Seeing him come with mace aloft, 
your soldiers are terrified. The elephants run in panic with cries of pain, 
their temporal globes split open by his flying, uncanny gada, all their grand 
limbs bathed in blood; and they collapse like the wingless mountains of old. 
Yudhishtira and the two sons of Madri join the horrible fray and massacre 
the elephant-warriors with arrows fletched with vulture’s feathers. 


After routing the Kuru king and seeing him flee on horseback, 
Dhrishtadyumna sees the Pandavas still surrounded by the Kaurava 
elephants. He arrives quickly to give them support. 

Meanwhile, Ashwatthaman, Kripa and Kritavarman, are worried not at 
seeing Duryodhana in that havoc, and fear that he is dead. With sorrowful 
faces, they enquire about him until some men tell them that he has taken 
refuge with Sakuni. Other Kshatriyas there say, “Do look if he is still alive. 
But what need have we for Duryodhana? You fight all united. What will the 
king do for you?” 

Other Kshatriyas, who have lost many of their relatives and who are 
still targeted by the arrows of the enemy, say, “Let us deal with these forces 
that confront us. Look, the Pandavas are coming at us after despatching our 
elephants!” 

Aswatthaman, Kripa and Kritavarman scythe through 
Dhrishtadyumna’s force and meet up with Sakuni in search of Duryodhana. 
Meanwhile, the Pandavas, led by Dhrishtadyumna, attack our troops. 
Although I had only two kinds of forces left, I, too, decide to risk my life, 
join the five leaders of our army and put my troops at Kripa’s disposal. We 
are immediately attacked by Arjuna but we launch a fierce onslaught on 
Dhrishtadyumna’s division. However, he is indomitable and forces us to 
retreat. 

It is then that Satyaki attacks me with four hundred chariots. I had 
managed to escape from Dhrishtadyumna only because his horses were 
tired, but now I fell among Satyaki’s forces even as a sinner falls into hell. 
A brief but brutal skirmish ensues, and I lose my armour and Satyaki 
captures me when I fall insensible on the ground. 

Then, within a short while, Bhima with his mace and Arjuna with his 
arrows destroy our elephant force. The bodies of the dead beasts, big as 
hills, entirely clog the field until the mighty Bhima drags them away bodily 
and makes a path for the Pandavas’ rathas to roll out. 

Ashwatthaman, Kripa and Kritavarman, not finding Duryodhana among 
the chariot-division, continue to search for your royal son and join Sakuni, 
anxious to catch a glimpse of the king after that horrific carnage of the great 
and noble elephants.’” 


CANTO 122 


S anjaya says, ‘Arjuna and Bhimasena between them destroy your 
army and elephant-division, O Bhaarata. Your remaining sons, 
Durmarshana, Srutanta, Jaitra, Bhurivala, Ravi, Jayatsena, Sujata, 
Durvisaha, Durvimochana, Dushpradharsha and Srutarvan, join forces to 
counter Bhima. All of them, equally brave and able warriors, surround him 
from all sides and wildly assail him. 

Mounted once more on his chariot, a berserk Bhimasena first 
decapitates Durmarshana with a razor-headed arrow and, in quick 
succession, kills Srutanta and Jayatsena. Srutarvan shoots Bhima with a 
hundred arrows winged with vulture feathers but, indifferent to his attack, 
Bhima strikes down Jaitra, Ravi and Bhurivala. With another broad-headed 
shaft, he kills Durvimochana and then sends Dushpradharsha and Sujata to 
Yamaloka. Seeing your other son, Durvishaha, rushing towards him, Bhima 
cuts him down in full view of all the bowmen. With so many of his brothers 
dead, Srutavan attacks Bhima with his formidable golden bow, in anger and 
despair. He breaks Bhima’s bow and wounds him, but in the savage battle 
that follows, like the one between Vasava and the Asura Jambha long ago, 
Bhima beheads him. 

Upon his fall, your troops, though terrified, still maintain their siege on 
Bhimasena and attempt to surround him. Like Indra smiting the Asuras, he 
destroys five hundred maharathas and kills seven hundred elephants, ten 


thousand foot-soldiers and eight hundred horses. After killing most of your 
sons, Bhima is satisfied that he has accomplished the purpose of his birth. 
He then slaps his armpits and terrifies the huge elephants with that awful 
sound. By now, your army, Rajan, which has lost a countless number of 
men, is completely demoralised.’” 


CANTO 123 


: S anjaya says, ‘Only two of your sons still live, Duryodhana and 
Sudarsana, who are leading the Kaurava cavalry. 

Krishna tells Arjuna, “Many of our kinsmen and allies are dead but our 
enemy has suffered greater losses. Here comes Satyaki with Sanjaya as his 
captive. Both Nakula and Sahadeva are exhausted, and Dhrishtadyumna, 
after decimating Duryodhana’s troops, leads the Prabhadrakas. Kripa, 
Kritavarman and Aswatthaman have left Duryodhana’s side and taken up 
their positions elsewhere. There, Partha, is Duryodhana at the head of his 
cavalry, with the royal chatra held over his head and casting keen glances 
all around. He has created a new vyuha with the remnants of his army. 

Having slain a large number of your troops, he wears a proud look as if 
he believes that he has vanquished the Pandavas. Destroy his troops and 
then he will certainly come to battle himself. The sinful Duryodhana should 
never escape and you must try and kill him.” 

Arjuna replies, “Bhima has killed almost all the sons of Dhritarashtra. 
Only these two are alive and they also, Krishna, will die today! Bhishma 
lies on his bed of arrows and Drona, Karna, Salya and Jayadratha are dead. 
Barely five hundred horsemen of Sakuni’s troops and two hundred chariots 
remain. A hundred formidable elephants and about three thousand foot 
soldiers are still alive on the field. There remain Aswatthaman, Kripa, the 
king of the Trigartas, Uluka, Kritavarman and a few others from 


Duryodhana’s army. Truly, there may be no escape from death for anybody 
on earth, but look, Duryodhana is still alive!’” 

Today Yudhishtira will be free of all his enemies. I will win back all the 
possessions that the evil Sakuni took from us at the game of dice.” 

The chariot driven by Krishna moves towards Duryodhana’s division 
and, together with Bhimasena and Sahadeva, they launch an attack on him. 
Seeing this, Sakuni and Susarman fly up to obstruct them while your son 
Sudarsana confronts Bhimasena, and Duryodhana, on horseback, confronts 
Sahadeva. 

Duryodhana strikes Sahadeva in the head with a spear forcing him to sit 
down on the terrace of his chariot, his blood streaming and sighing like a 
snake. Regaining his senses, Sahadeva gets up and strikes back at 
Duryodhana with a towering gale of arrows. Arjuna first mows down the 
Kaurava cavalry, then takes on the Trigartha chariot-warriors led by 
Satyakarman. He destroys his adversary’s ratha before he casually strikes 
his head off in a scarlet burst. Next, like a hungry lion pouncing on a deer in 
the forest, he kills Satyeshu. 

Venting an anger nurtured over so many long years, Arjuna attacks 
Susarman, the lord of Prashthala, with a hundred arrows and kills all his 
horses. Then, with a thin smile, Partha buries an arrow like Yama’s danda 
into Susarman’s heart and, at last, the king of the Trigartas dies. Not 
pausing a moment, Arjuna despatches that Samsaptaka’s five and thirty 
sons, maharathas all, and all of dead Susarman’s warriors that still remain 
alive. 

A raging Bhima beheads your son Sudarsana with a razor-faced arrow. 
The dead prince’s followers surround Bhima and rain arrows over him but 
he kills them all, O Bharatarishabha, snarling like a mythic lion out of lost 
times. Soon there is a general battle as many Kaurava commanders charge 
up and engage Bhima and his men. Thousands die on both sides. The rills 
of blood flow again, though they are so much thinner than they were 
earlier.’” 


CANTO 124 


: S anjaya says, ‘During the mayhem of that battle, Sakuni attacks 
Sahadeva while Uluka does Bhima and they target each other with 
their golden arrows fletched with kanka and peacock feathers and sped from 
bow strings drawn to their ears. Bhima and Sahadeva cover the sky with 
their arrows, covering the sun; when the arrows fall on enemy ranks, blood 
gushes free everywhere. Dead horses, riders and the other detritus of battle 
clog the zones of battle across the field. The earth presents another fearsome 
sight where headless and bleeding bodies rise up and seem to dance as 
carnivores of diverse kinds swarm Kurukshetra to feast. Full of heart now, 
the Pandavas despatch the Kauravas in dense throngs to Yama. 

Meanwhile, Sakuni stuns Sahadeva again with another spear to his 
head, driving him onto his knees on the terrace of his chariot. Bhima lets 
out a shattering roar to see this and sets about the whole Kuru army with his 
cloth-yard shafts. All Sakuni’s soldiers with their horses and elephants flee 
in terror of Vayu’s son. 

King Duryodhana tries to stop them, roaring, “Stop, you cowards 
without Kshatriya dharma! Fight! What use of flight? The warrior who dies 
without turning his back on battle will have fame in this world and enjoy 
realms of bliss in the next!” 

Hearing this ringing exhortation, Sakuni’s warriors turn back against the 
Pandavas, with a sound like that of an angry sea. Meanwhile, Rajan, 


Sahadeva recovers and a duel between him and Sakuni develops. Sakuni 
dares to face both Nakula and Bhimasena and his son Uluka comes swiftly 
to support his father. The battle between the three Kshatriyas becomes 
feverish as they decant showers of arrows on each other. Until, with a 
broad-headed arrow, Sahadeva decapitates Uluka and he falls out of his 
chariot, his naked throat spouting blood. Drawing deep breaths, his eyes red 
and teary, Sakuni bitterly remembers what Vidura once said in warning, and 
renews his attack on Sahadeva, who promptly breaks the Gandhara king’s 
bow in his hands. At this, Sakuni hurls, in quick succession, a formidable 
sword, a fearsome mace, and finally a vicious dart at Madri’s stormy son. 
Sahadeva destroys all these with utmost ease as they fly towards him. 

Seeing his son killed and his attack repulsed, Sakuni and all your troops 
take to their heels with Sahadeva and the Pandava forces in hot pursuit. 

Sahadeva soon catches up with Sakuni fleeing with the Gandhara 
cavalry. Aware that killing Sakuni was his task, Sahadeva strings his bow 
and drawing it with great force, rakes the gambler with arrows fletched with 
vulture feathers. Sahadeva says, “Observe Kshatriya dharma and fight me. 
How you enjoyed gambling with the ivory dice, Sakuni. Now reap the fruits 
of your evil deed just as the others have. Only the wretch, your nephew 
Duryodhana, and you are still alive. And now I will take your head like 
plucking a fruit from a tree with a stick!” 

Sahadeva rushes wildly at Sakuni to consume him with his anger; 
forcefully drawing his bow, he wounds Sakuni and his horses and cuts 
down his royal parasol, standard and cleaves his bow. Sakuni raises a 
golden lance to fling at Sahadeva. However, with three wedge-headed 
arrows, in a single moment, Madri’s son breaks that uplifted weapon as well 
as hacks away both Sakuni’s rounded arms and lets out a simhanada. Then, 
with another flat-headed shaft with wings of gold, Sahadeva cuts the vile 
gambler’s head from his neck in a scarlet flash and drops his body onto the 
earth. Thus is that clever, scheming, ruthless head, which was the source, 
the font of the Kuru’s evil policy, finally removed. Seeing Sakuni lying 
headless and bleeding on the ground, your warriors are paralysed with fear, 
and run in all directions. 

The Pandavas, O Bhaarata, are delighted at their success. Rejoicing 
with Kesava among them, they blow their conches and bring cheer to their 
troops. They hail and congratulate Sahadeva with joy and say, “It is fate that 
has allowed you to kill the evil Sakuni and his son today!””” 


CANTO 125 


HRADA-PRAVESA PARVA 


¢ S anjaya says, “After the slaying of Sakuni and his son, his soldiers, 

O Rajan, mad with rage, launch a suicidal attack on the Pandavas. 

They come up against Arjuna and Bhimasena who have ridden hard to 

bring reinforcements for Sahadeva. Arjuna serenely cuts down all the 

weapons with which they shower him and makes short work of them, every 

last man of them, with his Gandiva. Gathering his remaining chariot force, 

which still numbers many hundreds, his elephants, cavalry and foot 

soldiers, Duryodhana sends them against Dhrishtadyumna’s forces. With no 

one to lead or protect them, they are easy prey for the Pandavas who repulse 
their attack, while inflicting heavy losses on them. 

The dust of battle completely obscures the sky as the Pandus and the 
Srinjayas annihilate all your akshauhinis. 

Finally, among the thousands of noble kings on your side, only a 
severely wounded Duryodhana remains alive. Stupefied, he sees the earth 
empty of his troops and contemplates retreat from the battlefield while the 
Pandavas, filled with joy, loudly celebrate their success.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Tell me the strength of the Pandavas troops at that 
time. What does my only surviving son, the wicked Duryodhana, do when 
he sees his army exterminated?’ 


Sanjaya says, ‘Of the mighty Pandava host led by Dhrishtadyumna, 
only two thousand chariots, seven hundred elephants, five thousand horses, 
and ten thousand foot-soldiers remain. Very few warriors from the eleven 
akshauhinis of the Kaurava army are left alive on that eighteenth day of the 
Great War. 

Duryodhana abandons his horse, which indeed dies under him from 
exhaustion, and taking his gada, escapes eastwards on foot, towards the 
Dwaipayana lake. As he goes, the whole world spins around him and he 
remembers the dire warnings of the wise and virtuous Vidura, who, with 
clairvoyant vision, foresaw this great carnage of Kshatriyas on Kurukshetra. 
His heart burning with grief, Suyodhana takes refuge in the depths of the 
lake, submerging himself. 

The Pandavas led by Dhrishtadyumna try to cut him off and attack his 
small escort. Arjuna stands glorious on his chariot, as he picks them off 
with a flurry of arrows from the Gandiva. 

After the annihilation of Sakuni and his forces, your army is like a large 
forest laid low by Vayu himself. Save Aswatthaman, Kritavarman, 
Kripacharya, and your son Duryodhana, not another maharatha remains 
alive. 

Seeing me, Dhrishtadyumna laughingly asks Satyaki, “What is the use 
of capturing him and keeping him alive?” 

Satyaki raises his sword to kill me, but just then, Vyasa, the Island-born 
Maharishi Dwaipayana arrives there and says, “Let Sanjaya go. Do not kill 
him!” 

At once Satyaki joins his palms together in reverence, and sets me free 
saying, “Peace, Sanjaya. You are free to go.” 

I then take off my armour, surrender my weapons, and with my limbs 
bathed in blood, set out for the city. After I travel some two yojanas, I see 
Duryodhana, wounded, bleeding and standing with mace in hand. His eyes 
are full of tears and he looks blankly at me without recognition. I, too, was 
overwhelmed and for a little while could not speak a word. Then I tell him 
about my capture, and my release through the intervention of Vyasa. He 
composes himself, inquires about his brothers and his troops. Since I had 
witnessed everything, I tell him that his brothers are all dead and his troops 
exterminated. I tell the king that the Rishi Vyasa had confirmed that we now 
have only three maharathas left alive. 


Sighing deeply, your son touches me with his hand and says, “Except 
you, Sanjaya, everyone else from my army is dead, while the Pandava and 
their allies are alive. Without friends, sons and brothers, seeing my kingdom 
taken by the Pandavas, who would want to live on? Tell my father, the blind 
king Dhritarashtra that, though badly wounded, I have escaped alive from 
this dreadful war and have entered the depths of Dwaipayana lake to rest 
and heal myself in its sacral waters.” 

With these words, he walks into the lake and using his power of 
illusion, charms the waters to make space for him and disappears. Soon 
after, I see Kripacharya, Aswatthaman and Kritavarman drive up, wounded 
and weary, on their tired animals. They greet me saying, “You are fortunate, 
Sanjaya, to be alive. Is Duryodhana also alive?” 

I then tell them that the king was alive and everything that Duryodhana 
had said to me. I point out the lake that the king had entered. At this 
Aswatthaman cries, “The king does not know that we are still alive! With 
him among us, we can still fight our enemies.” 

Those maharathas stand there and lament until they see the Pandavas 
approaching. Then Kripa takes me up on his magnificent chariot and we 
drive to the Kuru camp. The sun has already set and the troops guarding the 
outposts of the camp weep on learning of the death of all your sons and the 
destruction of the whole army. Then the old men, whose responsibility it 
was to look after the women of the royal household, take the weeping 
princesses to Hastinapura. They rend their bodies with their nails, strike 
their heads with their hands, beat their breasts and, untying their hair, sob, 
wail aloud and shriek dementedly. Their ceaseless cries, like those of a 
flock of female ospreys, overwhelm the earth with the sound of their 
Sorrow. 

The friends of Duryodhana strike camp and set out for the city, taking 
the women of the royal household with them. Others take their wives and 
worldly possessions on mule carts, and hurry towards the city. Those very 
delicate women, O Rajan, who have never bared themselves to even the 
sun, find themselves now exposed to the gaze of the common people. The 
people, filled with panic and fear of Bhima and the Parthas, flee towards the 
city. 

A grief-stricken Yuyutsu, the son of Dhritarashtra’s Vaishya wife, thinks 
about what he should do in this crisis. He thinks, “Duryodhana and eleven 
akshauhinis of troops have been defeated by the Pandavas. All his brothers 


and all the Kauravas, led by Bhishma and Drona, have perished. Destiny 
has ordained that only I should survive. The entire Kuru camp, including 
the women of the royal household, enervated, lord less, and deranged with 
grief, is running like a herd of deer. Ah, no one has seen such a sight ever 
before. I think that the time has come when I, too, should take refuge in the 
city with them.” 

He presents himself before Yudhishtira and Krishna to seek their 
permission; the compassionate king embraces him affectionately and lets 
him go. He leaves to supervise the journey of the women of the royal Kuru 
household to the city. Just as the sun sets, Yuyutsu enters the city of 
Hastinapura with the widowed, weeping women. 

He sees the wise Vidura, who had just left Dhritarashtra, sitting with 
tearful eyes and his heart a stone of grief. He bows to him and stands 
waiting, as Vidura, the dharmatma, says, “It is fortunate, son, that you are 
still alive after the great carnage of the Kurus. But tell me why you have 
come without king Duryodhana?” 

Yuyutsu replies, “After the fall of Sakuni, my lord, with all his kinsmen 
and friends, Suyodhana escaped on foot towards the east while all the rest 
in the Kaurava encampment, and the royal women under escort, fled to the 
city. To protect these people, I myself set out for Hastinapura with 
Yudhishtira and Kesava’s leave.” 

Vidura lauds Yuyutsu and says, “You have acted very properly under the 
circumstances and maintained the honour of your race. You are now, in 
every sense, the sole staff of the blind king bereft of foresight. Afflicted by 
calamity, buffeted by Destiny, and despite all good advice, he continues to 
pursue his evil designs. Rest here today. Tomorrow you may return to 
Yudhishtira.” 

Vidura returns to the sorrowing palace of the king, which has lost all its 
magnificence; comfort, lustre and every happiness seems to have deserted 
it. It is empty and in utter disorder. Seeing this, Vidura’s grief increases and 
sighing deeply, he enters the once hallowed halls. 

Yuyutsu passes that night in untold sorrow and finds no joy at the 
praises of the vabdhis and magadhis that greet him in the morning. He can 
only think about the complete and unthinkable destruction of the Bharatas 
at each other’s hands.’” 


CANTO 126 


ae D hritarashtra says, ‘After the Pandavas kill all the Kaurava troops, 
what do those survivors of my army do—Kritavarman, Kripa 
and Aswatthaman and my evil son Duryodhana?’ 

Sanjaya says, “After the noble Kshatriya women flee and the Kaurava 
camp becomes empty, the surviving three maharathas grow anxious about 
the safety of the king. As they drive anxiously towards the lake, they can 
hear the shouts of the victorious Pandavas. Meanwhile, Yudhishtira and his 
brothers prowl the battlefield in search of Duryodhana. They fail to find him 
since he has already ensconced himself at the bottom of the lake. The 
Pandavas search for him until their mounts are tired, and then retire to their 
camp for the night. 

When all is quiet, Kripa, Aswatthaman and Kritavarman slowly 
approach the lake where the king lies hidden and resting within the waters, 
and say, “Arise, O Rajan, and join us in our fight against Yudhishtira! We 
will either find victory and rule the earth, or die and find swarga for 
ourselves. The Pandavas have suffered heavy losses, and the survivors have 
grievous wounds. They will not be able to stand up to you, especially when 
we are there to support you.” 

Duryodhana says, “It is my good fortune that I see you shuras return 
alive from this vicious war. Your exhortations are not surprising, for your 
hearts are noble and your devotion to me is great. We are all tired and 


wounded while the Pandavas are swelling with triumph. Let us not be 
peremptory but rest for this one night and tomorrow go forth and finish the 
enemy.” 

Aswatthaman replies, “Bless you, Duryodhana. Arise and we will yet 
vanquish the enemy. I swear by all my punya, by all the dakshina I have 
given and by dharma itself, that I will kill the Somakas today! Let no 
rewards that come from performing yagnas accrue to me, if I do not kill the 
Pandavas this night. I swear that I will not take off my armour without 
slaying all the Panchalas.” 

While they are thus conversing, some hunters who regularly supply 
Bhima with wild game come there to slake their thirst. As they sit on the 
banks of the lake, they hear every word of that conversation between 
Duryodhana and the three maharathas. They realise that the king is hiding 
in the depths of the lake, unwilling to fight. A little while earlier, they met 
Yudhishtira searching for the Kaurava king, and he had asked them about 
his cousin’s whereabouts. The hunters decide to tell the Pandavas about 
Duryodhana’s location and are sure that the Dharmaraja would reward them 
generously. 

The hunters make their way to where the Pandavas are resting in their 
camp. The Pandavas’ spies and soldiers had made a futile search of the 
surroundings and reported that they could find no trace of Duryodhana. 
Yudhishtira is worried when the hunters arrive with their news. Though 
they are not allowed to see the king, they tell Bhima whatever they have 
seen and heard at the lake. Vrikodara, O Rajan, rewards them bounteously 
and rushes to Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, saying, “The vetalas have discovered 
Duryodhana. He has hidden himself in the Dwaipayana lake with sorcery.” 

Led by Krishna, Yudhishtira, the Pandavas and the Panchalas hurry to 
the lake, shouting, “The evil son of Dhritarashtra has been found!” 

The noise made by their chariots touches the heavens. Although their 
animals are tired, all of them, Arjuna, Bhimasena, the two sons of Madri, 
Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandi, Uttamaujas, Yudhamanyu, Satyaki, the five 
sons of Draupadi, and the other Panchalas who are still alive, with all their 
elephants and foot-soldiers, come to the lake. The lake is wide as a small 
sea and its waters are cool and transparent. Your son Duryodhana rests 
submerged and invisible in it, armed with his mace. 

Hearing the noise of the Pandavas’ approach, Kritavarman, Kripa and 
Aswatthaman say to Duryodhana, “The jubilant Pandavas are coming! We 


must leave this place for now.” 

Duryodhana submerges again with his mayic powers, and remains 
hidden within. The three maharathas led by Kripa sorrowfully take his 
leave, and go some distance away and sit down under the shade of a banyan 
tree, exhausted and anxious about how the king would deal with the sons of 
Pandu. 

Kripa and the others free the horses from their chariots and rest, hidden, 
under the spreading tree.’” 


CANTO 127 


: S anjaya says, ‘No sooner have the three maharathas left, that the 

Pandavas reach lake Dwaipayana. Yudhishtira says to Krishna, 

“Look, Dhritarashtra’s son has cast a devamaya over the lake and has 

hidden himself beneath its waters. But, Madhava, even if Indra comes to 
help him, I will still kill Duryodhana today.” 

Krishna says, “One who uses maya should be killed with maya. Use 
your own powers, O Bhaarata, and dispel Duryodhana’s illusion that makes 
the water seem like solid ground. This is how Indra himself killed the 
Daityas and the Danavas. The noble Vishnu captured Bali and killed the 
great Asuras Hiranyaksha, Hiranyakasipu and Vritra using maya shakti. 
Rama killed the Rakshasa Ravana of Pulastya’s race and his relatives and 
followers, with the powers of sorcery. 

The Devas used maya long ago, to kill Danavas, Rakshasas and the two 
Daityas, Taraka and Viprachitti, as well as and the Asuras Vatapi, Ilwala, 
Trisiras, Sunda and Upasunda. Indra rules as the lord of heaven, with the 
help of his maya shakti. Yudhishtira, you must also use maya today to kill 
your evil cousin.” 

Yudhishtira taunts your son hidden in the lake, “O Suyodhana, coward, 
you now hide in these waters after you have caused the destruction of your 
own race and of all Kshatriya kind! Where is your sense of honour? I never 


thought you were a coward but I am convinced today that your renown as a 
great hero is unfounded. 

Come out and fight, if you are a Kshatriya. How can you, a scion of the 
Kuru race, hide in the depths of this lake after running away from battle? 
Flight is not the way of men of dharma, nor does it lead to swarga. 

How can you hide now after causing and witnessing the slaughter of 
your sons, brothers, uncles, relatives, other kinsmen and your dearest 
friends and allies? 

You have boasted in the hearing of all men about your courage, but you 
are no Kshatriya! If you are a man of the slightest dharma, how can you 
even think of saving your own life after being the cause of the 
extermination of all your brothers and your entire army? 

Relying on Karna and Sakuni, you considered yourself immortal. You 
were a fool who did not understand himself. After committing such 
grievous sins as you have, causing a carnage such as this world has not seen 
before, how can you hide now? You must come out and fight. Where is that 
manliness of yours, Suyodhana, which nobody could deny, and where is the 
pride that you so cherish? Where is your great prowess as a warrior? 

Come and fight as the Kshatriya dharma dictates. Either rule the world 
after defeating us, or lie dead on the ground as food for scavengers. This is 
your highest dharma, as laid down by the illustrious Brahma himself. Be a 
king and conduct yourself as the shastras say that all Kshatriyas, even the 
least, let alone a great king like you, must, O Maharatha!” 

From beneath the water, in a ghostly voice, Duryodhana says, “It should 
be no surprise, Yudhishtira, that fear enters the hearts of all beings. 
However, I did not flee for fear of my life or from grief. I had no chariot, 
my arrows were exhausted, my Parshni charioteers were dead and I was 
alone, without a single soldier to stand by me in battle. I was also exhausted 
and wanted a little rest. You too, O son of Kunti, rest a while and, when I 
rise from this lake, I will certainly fight all of you.” 

Yudhishtira replies, “We need no rest. We have been searching for you 
for a long time, so come out and give us battle. Either kill us or die!” 

Duryodhana says in a choking voice, “My brothers, for whose sake I 
wanted sovereignty, are all dead and there are no great Kshatriyas left alive. 
I am like a widowed woman who has no wish to enjoy this barren earth. 
Yet, I still hope to vanquish you and curb the pride of the Panchalas and the 
Pandavas. Further, there is no longer any need for battle when Drona and 


Karna are dead and our Pitamaha Bhishma has fallen. Who wants to rule a 
kingdom without friends and allies? So, this desolate earth now exists for 
you. I will put on deerskin and take sannyasa in the forest. You can rule this 
earth as you please, without kings, without warriors, bereft of wealth, and 
without any glory or grandeur.” 

Hearing these poignant words of grief, the illustrious Yudhishtira says 
with unusual harshness, “Do not rave, Suyodhana, from within the waters. I 
am like Sakuni now, and your words do not evoke any compassion in me. 
Accepting a gift is not the duty laid down for a Kshatriya. Moreover, how 
can you give me the earth that you no longer own? Why did you not offer 
this gift when, observing the laws of dharma and wishing the welfare of our 
race, we begged you only for our share? Then you said you would not give 
me even as much land as could be covered by the point of a needle. 

You will not escape me with your life! I will rule this earth only after 
vanquishing you in battle. Either kill us and rule the earth, or die and go to 
swarga. 

If both of us are alive after this war, then all beings will remain in doubt 
about who was the final victor. Your life, fool, now depends upon me. If I 
like, I might allow you to live, but you do not deserve that. In the past you 
tried to kill us with fire, water, serpents and other kinds of poison. You 
wronged us by stealing our kingdom, with your savage words in the Kuru 
sabha, and most of all by humiliating Draupadi. And today, for these 
reasons, O wretched Duryodhana, your life is forfeit. Come out of the water 
and fight us!” 

In this way, O Rajan, those Praviras, the Pandavas, flushed with victory, 
repeatedly rebuke and mock Duryodhana.’” 


CANTO 128 


GADA-YUDDHA PARVA 


: “T) hritarashtra asks, ‘O Sanjaya, how does Duryodhana, who is so 

choleric by nature, react when admonished? He is used to 

receiving the respect due to a king. You saw with your own eyes, how the 

whole earth, with her Mlecchas and nomadic tribes, depend upon him. He 

regrets the need to take shelter of any kind, even from the sun. Now, 

without any supporters, what reply does he give to the bitter and repeated 
taunts of the Pandavas?’ 

Sanjaya replies, “When Duryodhana hears Yudhishtira’s angry words of 
rebuke, from under the lake, he is unhappy. Sighing deeply, he flexes his 
arms and says, “You Parthas now have friends, chariots and animals. 
However, I am alone, without horses or even a charioteer, so how can I 
challenge you? Will you fight me one at a time, for it is not Kshatriya 
dharma for all of you to attack me together? I have not the least fear of 
either you, or Bhima, or Arjuna, or Vasudeva, or the twins, or Yuyudhana, 
or all the Panchalas, or all your other troops. Singly, I can match you all. 

Remember, for all Kshatriyas, fame depends on dharma. Like the year 
that gradually meets the seasons, one by one, I will rise from this lake and 
destroy all you Pandavas. Thus I will free myself from the obligation I owe 
Bahlika, Drona, Bhishma, Karna, Jayadratha, Bhagadatta, Salya, 


Bhurisrava, Sakuni, to my sons, my friends and well-wishers, kinsmen and 
to the many illustrious Kshatriyas who have died for me.” 

Yudhishtira replies, “It is fortunate, O Suyodhana, that you know 
Kshatriya dharma and are ready to battle all of us. Choose your weapon and 
fight any one of us. The rest of us will not participate.” 

Duryodhana says, “You are a brave man to allow me to select any one 
of you to fight. The gada that I hold in my hand is my choice of weapon. 
Any one of you may come forward and fight me on foot. We have seen 
many exciting single combats fought from chariots. Let this be a duel with 
maces, and so suitably modify the rules for the purpose. O Yudhishtira, with 
my mace I will vanquish you, all your younger brothers, as well as all the 
Panchalas, the Srinjayas and your other troops. I do not fear even Sakra 
himself.” 

Yudhishtira says, “Get up, OO Mahabaho, and fight us one at a time with 
your gada. Fight cautiously, for today you will lose your life, even if 
Indradeva becomes your ally.” 

Goaded beyond endurance, your son can no longer stomach 
Yudhishtira’s taunts and, with a long and heavy sigh, rises with great force 
from within the lake. Shining in his effulgence, he emerges like a mountain 
oozing water, shouldering his adamantine golden mace and his body bathed 
in blood. Seeing him, the Panchalas and the Pandavas rejoice. Duryodhana 
sees this as an insult, rolls his eyes in wrath, contracts his brow into three 
furrows and, repeatedly biting his lower lip, he challenges the Parthas to 
battle in his deep voice, “You Pandavas will suffer for your taunts. I will 
send you and the Panchalas to Yamaloka today. Fight me one at a time, for 
it is not Kshatriya dharma to attack a lone warrior without armour, who is 
fatigued, covered in water, injured, without a chariot, horses and troops. Let 
the Devas be the judge of dharma and adharma.” 

Yudhishtira says, “How is it, O Duryodhana, that you did not have this 
knowledge when many of you shuras together killed a lone Abhimanyu? 
All beings when in trouble forget dharma and then think that the gates of 
the other world are closed. Put on your armour and tie up your locks. Take 
anything else that you need. I also agree that if you can kill any one of us 
five Pandavas in a duel, you shall then be king again. Except for your life, 
tell us what other boon you want.” 

Then your son, O Rajan, dons gilded armour with a casque and stands 
glorious as a golden cliff. He then tells the Pandavas, “I am ready to fight 


any one among you—Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula, Sahadeva or you, O 
Bharatarishabha— with a gada and I will certainly win. Today with my gada 
wrapped in a cloth of gold, I will finally end these interminable hostilities 
when I kill all of you one by one. It is not proper for me to boast about my 
prowess but within this very hour, I will prove these words either true or 
false. Let any one among you take up the mace and fight me.”’” 


CANTO 129 


: S anjaya says, “While Duryodhana, O Rajan, repeatedly boasts in 
this manner, an angry Krishna tells Yudhishtira, “You have made a 
reckless promise by agreeing to make him king if he kills one of us. I do not 
see the man in the world today, why not even a Deva, who can defeat 
Duryodhana in a duel with the gada. None of you can match him in a fair 
fight. Duryodhana has always wanted to kill Bhima and has practised with 
the gada upon an iron statue for the last thirteen years. At this moment, I do 
not see anyone who can match him, except possibly Bhima, and he has not 
practiced enough. You have once again gambled everything on a wretched 
game of chance, like the one you lost to Sakuni. 

Your oath, Yudhishtira, has placed our enemy in a strong position and 
made your own untenable. Who relinquishes sovereignty when it is within 
his grasp, and when he has but one enemy to vanquish? How then, O 
Bhaarata, can you offer him a choice of weapons and the kingdom to the 
victor? Without a doubt, the offspring of Pandu and Kunti are born to live in 
exile in the vana, as sannyasis.” 

Bhima says reassuringly, “O Madhusudana, do not despair. However 
difficult, I will end these hostilities today when I kill Suyodhana. My mace 
is one and a half times heavier than Duryodhana’s and I will challenge him 
to fight me. Why, I could quell the three worlds, including the very Devas, 
with my gada, even if they come armed with every kind of weapon.” 


Vasudeva is pleased and lauds him, saying, “Dharmaputra Yudhishtira 
will undoubtedly win back his kingdom after you slay all his enemies, O 
Mahabaho. You have already killed all the sons of Dhritarashtra and 
innumerable kings, princes and elephants. You have obliterated the 
Kalingas, the Magadhas, the Kauravas, the Westerners and the Gandharas. 
You will certainly accomplish your vow and break all Duryodhana’s bones. 
Gift the earth with her oceans to Yudhishtira, even as Vishnu once conferred 
the sovereignty of three worlds upon the Lord of Sachi. Remember to fight 
him with care for he possesses both skill and strength and always revels in a 
fight.” 

Satyaki, Yudhishtira, the Panchalas and the Pandavas all applaud these 
words. Bhima responds, “Today I will purge my heart of the anger that I 
nurse in my bosom against Suyodhana. Like Arjuna who set fire to the 
Khandava forest, I will today pluck out the barb that lies buried in my heart 
for so long. O Vibho, today he will abandon his life’s breath, his prosperity 
and his kingdom, and I will recover your crown for you. Today 
Dhritarashtra will hear of his son’s death and remember all the wrongs the 
Kauravas have inflicted on us at Sakuni’s instigation.” 

With this, Bhima stands ready for battle, like Sakra challenging Vritra. 
Your son springs like a lion to face him for he has no fear, no worry, no 
pain, and no anxiety. Bhima tells him, “Remember all those wrongs that 
king Dhritarashtra and you have visited on us. Recollect what happened at 
Varanavata. Recall how Draupadi, while in her season, was humiliated in 
the Kuru sabha and how Sakuni, through his machinations, cheated 
Yudhishtira at dice. Face now, O evil one, the consequences of these 
actions, as well as of the other wrongs that you inflicted on us. It is because 
of you that the illustrious lord of the Bharatas, the son of Ganga, our 
Pitamaha, lies dying on a bed of arrows; and Drona, Karna and Salya are 
dead along with Sakuni the root of this horrific war. We have exterminated 
your brothers, your sons and all your troops. The battle has taken the lives 
of other great kings, many shuras and Kshatriyas, as well as the wretch 
Dusasana who dragged Draupadi into the Kuru court by her open hair. 

O you exterminator of your race, you vilest among men, now you alone 
remain alive. I will kill you today, destroy your pride, your hopes of 
sovereignty, and have my revenge for all your sins against us.” 

Duryodhana replies, “What is the use of words? Fight, O Vrikodara, and 
I will beat the very desire for battle out of you. Do you not see me standing 


here to fight you with the gada? In a fair fight, not even Purandara can 
vanquish me when I wield this formidable mace. 

So far, you could not do me the slightest injury. I, however, forced you 
to live in the forest, to work as another’s servants, and to conceal yourselves 
in disguises. We have killed many of your friends and allies. Our losses are 
equal. So if I lose this duel, it would indeed be remarkable. Perhaps, Kaala 
will be the cause if such a miracle were to occur. 

I have never been defeated in a fair fight. If you vanquish me by deceit, 
your infamy will last forever. Do not bellow fruitlessly, Bhima, but show 
me what you can do.” 

The Pandavas with the Srinjayas, both sensing victory, applaud the 
contestants. Like men goading an infuriated elephant with clapping of 
hands, all of them then encourage king Duryodhana with accolades and 
cheers. The elephants begin to trumpet and the horses to neigh. The 
weapons of the Pandavas blaze forth of their own accord.’” 


CANTO 130 


S anjaya says, ‘Just as their duel is about to begin, Balarama arrives 
there. His banner bears the device of the palmyra tree and his 
weapon is the plough, the halayudha.’ 

Balarama looks at Krishna, the Pandavas, and at Duryodhana and 
Bhima armed with maces, and says, “I set out in the month of Pushya and 
have come back in Sravana. Two and forty days have passed since I left 
home and I am eager, O Madhava, to watch this duel.” Yudhishtira warmly 
embraces Balarama and welcomes him respectfully, as do the two 
illustrious Krishnas. Similarly, the two sons of Madri and the five sons of 
Draupadi, and the other kings reverentially salute Rohini’s mighty son.’ 

Baladeva embraces the Pandavas and the Srinjayas, and all of them 
greet and welcome him. He snuffles the heads of Krishna and Satyaki and 
they greet him joyfully, like Indra and Upendra worshipping Brahma, lord 
of the Devas. Then the Dharmaputra says, “Witness, O Rama, this clash 
between the two cousins.” 

Clad in brilliant blue robes, the fair, handsome and powerful elder 
brother of Kesava sits down among them. He is like the moon in the 
firmament, surrounded by multitudes of stars. Then, O Rajan, ensues that 
duel to bring to a conclusion the enmity that had raged for so long.’” 


CANTO 131 


J anamejaya said, “On the eve of the great battle of Mahabharata, lord 

Balarama left Dwaraka accompanied by many of the Vrishnis and 
telling Krishna, ‘I am leaving and will help neither the son of Dhritarashtra 
nor the sons of Pandu.’ 

O Brahmana, tell me in detail how Rama happened to arrive there in 
time to witness the duel.” 

Vaisampayana said, “O Mahabaho, after the noble Pandavas began 
living in Upaplavya, they send Krishna to Dhritarashtra to sue for peace. 
Krishna met Dhritarashtra in Hastinapura and spoke to him gravely about 
what would be beneficial for all concerned. However, the king, as I told you 
before, did not listen to him. Krishna returned to the Pandava camp, and 
said to them, ‘It was Fate that forced the Kauravas to disregard my advice. 
We go to war, O sons of Pandu, in this month of Pushya.’ 

Later, while the Pandavas and the Kauravas muster their armies, 
Balarama suggests to his brother Krishna that they side with the Kurus. 
Krishna however, refuses and an angry Balarama, accompanied by all the 
Yadavas, sets out in Maitra, on a pilgrimage to the Saraswati accompanied 
by all the Yadavas. The Bhoja chief Kritavarman joins Duryodhana while 
Krishna and Yuyudhana take the side of the Pandavas. 

Rama leaves from Dwaraka, carrying all things necessary for a 
pilgrimage, including the sacred fire, priests, hundreds of leading 


Brahmanas, gold, silver, robes, horses, elephants, chariots, mules, camels, 
cattle and other draft animals, for a tirtha-yatra to the sacred waters of the 
Saraswati. 

He sets out towards the Saraswati, O Bharatarishabha, and visits all the 
sacred places, the tirthas, along her course. He distributes varied wealth and 
gifts in large measure in diverse countries to the needy, the old and to 
children. At his command, men at different points along the journey store 
food and drink in large quantities. Balarama gives Brahmanas and 
Kshatriyas everywhere whatever they desire—costly garments, fine 
bedsteads and coverlets. Wherever his party journeys, they leave happy and 
satisfied people and their path is like swarga itself. That Yadusreshta gives 
away thousands of milch cattle in excellent trappings, with their horns 
cased in gold; many horses of different breeds he gives, many carriages and 
chariots, and many beautiful slaves. The noble Rama gives away wealth as 
he travels along the Saraswati visiting various tirthas, until he finally 
reaches Kurukshetra.” 

Janamejaya said, “Tell me, O Purushottama, the features, the origin, and 
the merits of the many tirthas on the Saraswati and the rules to be observed 
while visiting these.” 

Vaisampayana said, “O Rajan, I will describe to you in detail, the 
features and the origin of all the various tirthas. Baladeva and his followers 
first visit Prabhasa where Soma the Lord of the constellations found a cure 
for phthisis, a wasting disease he acquired through a curse. He regained his 
lustre and energy, and now illuminates the universe. The tirtha is therefore 
called Prabhasa.” 

Janamejaya asked, “O Mahamuni, how did the adorable Soma contract 
consumption? How did he regain his tejas after bathing in that sacred 
water?” 

Vaisampayana said, “Daksha Prajapati had seven and twenty daughters, 
unrivalled in beauty whom he gave in marriage to Soma. These daughters 
were associated with the constellations that help men in calculating time. 
The most beautiful was Rohini and an enraptured Soma lived exclusively 
with her. His other wives complained to their father Daksha and threatened 
to leave Soma and to perform tapasya. 

Daksha advised Soma to treat all his wives equally and then told his 
daughters to return to their husband. However, Chandrama continued to live 
exclusively with Rohini and the other wives complained again to Daksha, 


who once more warned Soma to behave equally towards all his wives or 
face his curse.’ 

This too had no effect on Soma and an angry Daksha cursed Soma with 
the disease of phthisis. Soon, the Lord of the stars began to slowly waste 
away. He performed many yagnas but could not free himself from that 
curse. As a result, trees and plants failed to grow without the nourishment 
of moonlight; their sap and juices dried up, they become tasteless and lost 
their potency; indeed, soon all living creatures began to decay. The Devas 
learned of the reason for Soma’s decline, rushed to Daksha and pleaded 
with him to take back his curse for all living beings, trees and plants were 
withering away and the gods, too, were starving. They request him to 
forgive Soma for the world was turning into a vast desert. 

Daksha told the Devas, ‘I cannot revoke my curse. However, if 
henceforth Sasin treats all his wives equally and bathes in that tirtha where 
the Saraswati mingles with the western Ocean, and there worships 
Mahadeva, he will shine forth once more. Nevertheless, for half the month 
Soma will wane every day, and for the other half he will wax. At that time, 
he will regain his former lambency and beauty.’ 

At this command of the Devarishi Daksha, Soma visited the Prabhasa 
tirtha on the Saraswati and bathed there on the day of the new moon, and 
regained his cool rays and once more illumined the worlds. The Devas went 
to Prabhasa and escorted Soma to Daksha. 

Daksha was pleased and once more said to him, ‘Do not, O son, 
disrespect women, and never ignore Brahmanas. Go now and 
conscientiously obey my commands.’ 

Soma went back to his own abode and all creatures, filled with joy, 
continued to live as before. 

This is the story of Chandrama and the curse that he suffered, and how 
Prabhasa became the greatest of all tirthas. On every day of the new moon, 
O Rajan, Soma bathes in this tirtha and regains his effulgence. 

Next, Baladeva spends one night at the tirtha called Chamasodbheda, 
duly performs his ablutions and gives away many costly gifts. 

He then visits Udapana where the Saraswati disappears and flows 
through the bowels of the earth.” 


CANTO 132 


V aisampayana said, “At the next tirtha called Udapana, Baladeva 

gives away his wealth as dakshina, worships the Brahmanas, bathes 
there and is filled with ananda, bliss. It was here that the two brothers of the 
illustrious Rishi Trita cast him into a hole and incurred his curse. It was also 
there that the Rishi drank the Soma rasa.” 

Janamejaya said, “Tell me the story of Maharishi Trita and the origin of 
Udapana.” 

Vaisampayana continued, “In a former yuga, there lived three brothers 
called Ekata, Dwita and Trita, all three Mahrishis with tejas like the sun’s. 
They had progeny, punya from their tapasya, and acquired the privilege of 
attaining swarga after death. 

Their sire Gautama, who was devoted to dharma, was pleased with 
them for their tapasya, vratas and niyati and found great joy in them. 
Gautama, after a long life, finally left for a transcendent realm. The kings 
who conducted yagnas and were the Yajamanas of Gautama continued to 
respect his sons after his death. Amongst the three, Trita, through his 
actions and study of the Vedas, became the foremost; all the Rishis and 
Munis began to look up to him even as they had his father Gautama. 

His two brothers Ekata and Dwita were avaricious for wealth and 
decided to perform a yagna. They took Trita with them and collected the 
necessary sacrificial cows and other animals from their Yajamanas for their 


yagna. They travelled east with Trita leading the way and with Ekata and 
Dwita following with the animals. Seeing that large herd of kine, they 
became greedy and decided to appropriate them without giving a share to 
Trita. 

They said, “Trita is skilled in assisting at yagnas, is devoted to the 
Vedas, and is capable of earning more cows on his own. So let us take this 
herd with us and leave Trita to his own devices.’ 

When night fell, they were frightened to see a wolf barring their way 
and ran away in fright. Trita fell into a fathomless well on the bank of the 
nearby Saraswati. He shouted in panic but his two brothers, although they 
heard his cries, deserted him, partly from fear of the wolf and partly out of 
greed for the cows. 

Trita, O Rajan, thought that he had plunged into hell as a sinner. He was 
afraid to die since he had not earned the punya of drinking Somarasa. A 
wise man, he began to plan how he could achieve this from the depths of 
the well. He noticed a creeper growing in the deep hole although the pit was 
dry. Using the power of his imagination, the sage conjured up water and a 
yagna fire there. He imagined himself the Hotri and the creeper to be the 
Soma plant. He then mentally recited the Riks, the Yayuses and the Samans 
that were necessary for the performance of a yagna and converted the 
pebbles lying at the bottom of the well into grains of sugar. Then, in his 
mind, he performed his ablutions, conceived the water to be the ghee 
allotted to the Devas, their respective shares of the yagna offerings, and 
drank the Soma. Then he began to make a reverberantly loud noise. 

The sound he made after performing the yagna penetrated swarga and 
Trita completed that yagna in the manner laid down by worshippers of the 
Brahman. His yagna agitated the whole of Devaloka and no one knew the 
cause. Brihaspati, the Acharya of the Devas, heard that sound and told the 
Devas, “Trita is performing a yagna. We must go there, Devas. He has 
acquired great punya and, if angered, he can even create other Devas.’ 

All the Devas hurried to where Trita was performing the yagna, greeted 
him and said, ‘We have come for our share in your offerings.’ 

Trita duly apportions them their shares with proper mantras and the 
gratified Devas gave him all the boons he desired. He begged that they 
rescue him from the well and asked that all those who bathe in that well 
receive the end that persons who have drunk Soma rasa attain. 


At these words, the river Saraswati appeared within that well and raised 
Trita to the surface where the Devas blessed him, saying “Tathaastu—so be 
it,’ and returned to Devaloka. 

Trita went back to his own home and cursed his two brothers, saying, 
‘Since you deserted me, you will suffer for your sin and roam the forest as 
wolves. Your offspring will become leopards, bears and apes.’ 

Baladeva bathes in the waters of Udapana, gives away wealth and 
worships many Brahmanas. He then moves on to Vinasana, another tirtha 
along the Saraswati.” 


CANTO 133 


V aisampayana said, “Then Baladeva, O Bharatasattama, visits the 

place where the Saraswati once again becomes invisible. The Rishis 
named this tirtha Vinasana because of her dislike for Sudras and Abhiras. 
After he bathes in that tirtha, Baladeva next visits Subhumika. 

This Tirtha, appropriately named Subhumika, is the resort of Brahma 
and many fair and beautiful Apsaras sport innocently here. Every month, 
the Devas and the Gandharvas visit this place and sacred and auspicious 
flowers rain on them. 

Baladeva bathes in that tirtha, and sees shadows of Devas, Gandharvas, 
and Rakshasas there. He distributes more of his wealth to the Brahmanas, 
and enjoys the songs and music of those gods on earth. 

The son of Rohini then moves on to the tirtha inhabited by Viswavasu, a 
great punyavan, and his Gandharvas who pass their time in dance and song. 
Here Baladeva gives away all kinds of riches to the Brahmanas, as well as 
goats, sheep, kine, mules, camels, gold and silver. 

Baladeva next visits the tirtha eponymously called Gargasrota. It was 
here that the venerable Garga, his soul cleansed by tapasya, acquired 
knowledge of Kaala, of astronomy, and the meaning of all portents. Rishis 
came here to acquire knowledge of Kaala from Garga. Smeared with white 
sandalwood paste, Balarama duly gives away wealth to many sannyasis and 
Brahmanas. 


He the visits a gigantic pipal tree called Mohasankha, on the bank of the 
Saraswati. Tall as Meru and visited by Rishis, this vriksha is famous 
throughout the world as a sacred tirtha. Yakshas, Vidyadharas, and 
immensely strong Rakshasas, Pisachas and Siddhas, in their thousands, live 
here. All of them, abandoning other kinds of food, observe vratas and 
niyamas, eat only seasonal fruits from that tree for their sustenance, and 
wander unseen by men, in separate bands. Baladeva gives away as 
dakshina, milch cows, vessels of copper, iron, and other diverse kinds of 
gifts. He worships the Brahmanas who bless him in return. 

He then goes to the Dwaita Lake, where he bathes in its waters, and 
pays his reverences to the Brahmanas and gives them generous dakshina. 
He travels along the southern bank of the Saraswati and _ visits 
Nagadhanwana tirtha, the abode of the Nagaraja Vasuki. Vasuki was once 
installed there with all due rites by the Devas and there is no fear of snakes 
here. Fourteen thousand Rishis live here permanently and Baladeva duly 
gives away dakshina to them. 

He then sets out eastward and visits, one after another, thousands of 
famed tirthas along the way. He bathes at all these tirthas, observes 
upavasas and other vratas as directed by the Rishis. Here, too, he distributes 
wealth generously, salutes the Rishis, and once more sets out to reach the 
spot where the Saraswati turns in an easterly direction. The great river 
changes her course here for a darsana of the noble Rishis dwelling in the 
forest of Naimisa, and viewing the spectacle, Balarama is filled with 
wonder.” 

Janamejaya said, “Why, O best of Adharyus, does the Saraswati bend 
her course there in an easterly direction?” 

Vaisampayana said, “In the Krita yuga, O Rajan, the Rishis dwelling in 
Naimisa performed a mahayagna extending for twelve years after which 
they set out to visit the tirthas. Because of the large number of the Rishis, 
the tirthas on the southern bank of the Saraswati all turned into towns and 
cities. Those Brahmanas, in order to enjoy the punya of tirthas, began 
dwelling on the bank of the river up to Samantapanchaka. The river was 
stunning to behold with blazing homa fires, and the whole region resounded 
with loud Vedic recitations, as those Rishis poured libations of ghee. Also 
present were Balakhilyas, Asmakuttas, Dantolakhalinas, Samprakshanas 
and other Rishis and Munis who were observing diverse kinds of vratas. 


They sanctified and beautified the place with their presence, like the Devas 
adorning the heavenly stream Mandakini. 

However, those Rishis failed to find sufficient room to live on the banks 
of the golden river. The Saraswati saw that large body of Rishis despairing 
for the want of a broad tirtha where they could perform their rites. Then, in 
a wonderful gesture, she turned her course to form those great pools and 
tanks at Naimisa so that Rishis could perform even Mahayagnas there; then 
she flowed again in a westerly direction. A wonderstruck Rama bathed in 
those tirthas and duly gifted away wealth and other gifts to the Brahmanas. 
Blessed by those regenerate ones, he then set out from that greatest of all 
tirthas on the Saraswati called Sapta-Saraswat, where the great ascetic 
Mankanaka had successfully performed his most profound tapasya. 

Numerous birds have their nests there and it is full of Badari, Inguda, 
Kshamarya, Plaksha, Aswattha, Vibhitaka, Kakkola, Palasa, Karira, Pilu, 
and other kinds of trees. Forests of Karushakas, Bilwas, Amratakas, 
Atimuktas, Kashandas, Parijatas and banana plantations adorn it. Various 
groups of Rishis, some called Vaneyas, live there, and it reverberates with 
the chanting of the Vedas, and swarms with varied kinds of animals and is 
the favourite abode of men without malice and devoted to dharma.” 


CANTO 134 


J anamejaya said, “O Maharishi, tell me about the tirtha Sapta-Saraswat. 
Who was Rishi Mankanaka? What were his vratas and how did he 
fulfil them?” 

Vaisampayana replied, “Rajan, seven Saraswatis cover this universe and 
she appears wherever persons of great tejas summon her. The seven forms 
of the Saraswati are Suprava, Kanchanakshi, Visala, Manorama, Oghavati, 
Surenu and Vimalodaka. Once, Brahma performed a great yagna to bring 
prosperity to everyone. The yagnashala resounded with the recitation of 
sacred hymns and the chanting of the Vedas by many Dvijas conversant 
with dharma and artha. Gandharvas sang and Apsaras danced and played 
upon many celestial instruments all the while. The wealth of provisions 
procured for that yagna satisfied even the Devas and filled them with 
wonder. 

Then the Rishis, O Rajan, said, ‘This yagna cannot be said to possess 
great merit, since that foremost of rivers, Saraswati, is not present here.’ 

Hearing this, the divine Brahma joyfully thought of Saraswati and 
summoned her to Pushkara and she appeared there as Suprava, gratifying 
all the Munis. 

At another time, many Munis gathered in Naimisa to discuss the Vedas. 
They thought of Saraswati and that foremost of rivers came there as 
Kanchanakshi. 


Again, while king Gaya was engaged in the performance of a great 
yagna at Gaya, Saraswati, too, was invited. She appeared and the Rishis 
gathered there named her Visala. 

Auddalaka performed a yagna on the sacred plain north of Kosala. 
Before he began his yagna, he thought of Saraswati, and she, sacred river, 
appeared there and the Rishis called her Manorama. 

Again, while the noble Kuru was conducting a yagna at Kurukshetra, 
Vasishta, who was assisting him, summoned Saraswati and she appeared as 
Oghavati. 

A yagna was once performed at the source of the Ganga by Daksha and 
Saraswati appeared there as the fast-flowing Surenu. 

Once, while Brahma was engaged in a yagna in the sacred forest on the 
Himavat Mountains, he summoned Saraswati, and she appeared there, too, 
as Vimalodaka. 

Baladeva finally visits the Sapta-Saraswat tirtha where all these seven 
forms of Saraswati manifested together. 

I will now tell you about the great Rishi Mankanaka, the son of Vayu 
Deva and Sukanya, who led the life of a Brahmachari from his childhood. 
Once while bathing, he saw a beautiful woman sporting naked in the river. 
At this sight, the Rishi could not control himself and ejaculated into the 
Saraswati. He scooped up his sperm and placed it within an earthen pot 
where the fluid separated into seven parts. From those seven portions, the 
seven Rishis, Vayuvega, Vayuhan, Vayumandala, Vayujata, Vayuretas and 
Vayuchakra of great tejas were born. From them sprang the nine and forty 
Maruts. 

Once Mankanaka cut his hand on a blade of Kusa grass and vegetable 
juice came out of the wound instead of red blood. Seeing this, the overjoyed 
Rishi danced about in that place in seemingly mad ecstasy. All mobile and 
immobile beings who witnessed this began to dance too, stupefied by his 
energy. The Devas with Brahma at their head, and all the Tapasvin 
Maharishis, went to Mahadeva, and told him of the strange antics of Rishi 
Mankanaka and implored him to stop the Rishi. 

Mahadeva went to Mankanaka, and asked, ‘What is the cause for such 
joy, O Maharishi, that an ascetic like you walking along the path of dharma, 
should act in this strange way?’ 

The Rishi replied, ‘Why, do you not see, O Brahmana, that vegetable 
juice is flowing from my wound? Seeing this I am dancing in great joy.’ 


Laughing at the Rishi confused by excitement, the Devadeva said, ‘I do 
not wonder at this at all. Behold!’ 

Saying this, Mahadeva cut his thumb with the nail of one of his fingers, 
and ashes, white as snow, came pouring out of that wound. Seeing this, the 
Rishi was mortified, O Rajan, and understood that it was Mahadeva and fell 
at his feet. Filled with wonder, he said, ‘I know that you are none other than 
Rudra, that great and Supreme Being. O Sulin, you are the refuge of this 
universe of Devas and Asuras, which you create. At the universal 
destruction, the Mahapralaya, everything will once more enter you. Even 
the Devas cannot know you so how then can I? Brahma and the Devas 
worship you, O sinless one. It is through your grace that the Devas pass 
their time in joy and perfect fearlessness.’ 

Then the Rishi bowed and said, ‘I pray that this ludicrous lack of 
gravity that I displayed, O Deva, does not destroy my punya.’ 

Mahadeva cheerfully said, ‘Let your punya increase a thousand fold, O 
Brahmana, through my grace. Also, I will always dwell with you in this 
asrama. For the man who worships me in this tirtha Sapta-Saraswat, nothing 
will be unattainable here or hereafter. Without doubt, such a one will go to 
the blessed realm called Saraswat in heaven after dying.’” 


CANTO 135 


V aisampayana said, “Baladeva worships the Munis living at 

Mankanaka, duly distributes large dakshinas to the Brahmanas, and 
after spending one night there and receiving their blessings, he sets out for 
other tirthas. 

He visits Usanas at the Kapalamochana tirtha. The noble Kavi Sukra 
performed his tapasya there and meditated upon the war between the 
Daityas, the Danavas, and the Devas. The whole science of politics and 
morals, named after him, appeared embodied to him by inward light. 
Baladeva arrives at that holy tirtha, and duly gives dakshina to the 
Brahmanas there.” 

Janamejaya then asked, “Tell me about the tirtha called 
Kapalamochana.” 

Vaisampayana said, “Once upon a time, the noble Dasarathaputra Rama 
lived for some time in the forest of Dandaka to rid it of Rakshasas. At 
Janasthana, he cut off the head of an evil Rakshasa, which fell from the sky 
into the deep forest and on to the thigh of the Rishi Mahodara while he was 
wandering through the vana. The head fell on his thigh and stuck there. In 
great pain and with putrid matter flowing from his thigh, Mahodara yet 
visited all the tirthas on earth, went to all the rivers and to the ocean and, 
not finding any relief, he spoke of his sufferings to many Rishis. They 
suggested that he visit the tirtha Usanas on the Saraswati, for it was an 


excellent place to attain success in tapasya. Accordingly, he came and 
bathed in its currents and the Rakshasa’s head left his thigh, fell into the 
water and was lost. Mahodara, freed from the Rakshasa’s head, returned to 
his asrama with cleansed soul and with all his sins washed away. He spoke 
of what happened to other Rishis and they named the tirtha 
Kapalamochana. The great Rishi Mahodara returned once more to that 
tirtha, drank its water and acquired great punya. Here, too, Baladeva 
worships the Brahmanas, gives them much wealth, and then travels to the 
next tirtha, Rushangu. 

Here, O Bhaarata, was where the great Muni Viswamitra, who was 
earlier a Kshatriya, became a Brahmana, and Arshtishena once undertook 
the most austere of tapasyas. That tirtha, capable of granting every wish, 
has always been the home of Munis and Brahmanas. Baladeva visits the 
place where Rushangu, in an earlier time, cast off his body. 

Rushangu was an old Brahmana, always engrossed in tapasya. Endued 
with great punya, he reflected for a long while and decided to cast off his 
body. He then summoned all his sons and told them to take him to a place 
where water was abundant. They took him to a tirtha on the Saraswati. He 
bathed there with due rites, and then cheerfully said to all his waiting sons, 
‘He who casts off his body on the northern bank of the Saraswati while 
mentally chanting sacred mantras, will never again suffer death.’ 

Baladeva bathes in that tirtha and gives away considerable wealth to the 
Brahmanas. His next destination is the tirtha where the Grandsire once 
created the mountains called Lokaloka. Here, through austere tapasya, that 
foremost of Rishis, Arshtishena of rigid vratas, the royal sage Sindhudwipa, 
and the great Rishi Devapi, and the illustrious Muni Viswamitra of great 
tejas acquired true Brahmanatva.” 


CANTO 136 


J anamejaya said, “Why did Arshtishena undergo the austerest of 
tapasyas? I am curious to know how Sindhudwipa, Devapi and 
Viswamitra acquired the status of Brahmanas.” 

Vaisampayana said, “In the Krita age, O Rajan, there lived a regenerate 
Rishi called Arshtishena. Despite living for many years in his Acharya’s 
house, and studying assiduously, he could not master any branch of 
knowledge or the Vedas. In great disappointment, he performed a very 
austere yagna, and just by his tapasya, he acquired the complete 
understanding of the Vedas. In gratitude, he bestowed three boons on that 
place. He said, ‘From this day, a man who bathes in this tirtha will obtain 
all the great benefits of an Aswamedha yagna. No one will have any need to 
fear snakes and wild beasts here. Even small exertions will result in great 
results here.’ 

With these words, mahatejasvin Arshtishena ascended into swarga. 

In that very tirtha, in the Krita yuga, Devapi and Kusika’s son 
Sindhudwipa, O Rajan, acquired the lofty condition of Brahmatva after 
performing an arduous tapasya. There also lived a celebrated Kshatriya 
called Gadhi, the King of Kausika, who became a great Rishi and went to 
swarga after he set his son Viswamitra on his throne. However, despite his 
best efforts, he could not protect his kingdom. Once he took his four kinds 
of forces to meet a threat from some Rakshasas in his kingdom. 


On the way, Viswamitra reached the asylum of Vasishta. His troops, O 
Rajan, caused great mischief there and when the Brahmana saw the 
extensive destruction of his vana, he became angry. He commanded his own 
homa cow to create a number of terrible Savaras. The cow obediently 
created a horde of frightful men who confronted the army of Viswamitra, 
and caused a great carnage among them. 

A determined Viswamitra sat in tapasya in this very tirtha, and began to 
emaciate his own body through vratas and fasts prescribed for Rishis. He 
lived on water, air and the fallen leaves of trees and slept on bare ground. 
The Devas made repeated attempts to stop him but Viswamitra never veered 
from his vows. Because of his tapasya and great devotion, he became like 
the Sun himself in effulgence. 

Pleased, Brahma agreed to grant Viswamitra’s boon to make him a 
Brahmana. The illustrious Viswamitra then wandered the earth like a Deva, 
giving away all kinds of wealth at that tirtha. 

Balarama also gives as dakshina the best kinds of milch cows, carts, 
beds, ornaments, food and drink to many Brahmanas, after having duly 
worshipped them.” 


CANTO 137 


V aisampayana said, “The Yadusreshta then goes on to the asrama of 

Vaka which resounded with the chanting of the Vedas. It was here 
that the great Sage Dalvyavaka, in great anger, once poured Vichitravirya’s 
son Dhritarashtra’s kingdom as a libation on the yagna fire. 

Once upon a time, the Rishis living in the Naimisa forest performed a 
yagna extending for twelve years. During the course of that yagna, after the 
completion of an exalted ritual called Viswajit, the Rishis set out for the 
country of the Panchalas to ask the king for one and twenty strong and 
healthy calves as dakshina for their yagna. Sage Dalvyavaka, however, 
offered them his own animals and said that he would go and ask the great 
king for some more. 

Vaka then went to Dhritarashtra and begged some animals from him. 
The king was in an ill temper for some of his cattle had died without any 
apparent cause, and angrily offered him his dead animals. The Rishi 
resented the words spoken to him in the sabha and decided to teach the king 
a lesson. He cut the flesh from the dead animals, and fed those pieces as 
libations in a yagna fire he built on the tirtha of the Saraswati. 

When that fierce yagna began, according to the due rites, the kingdom 
of Dhritarashtra, O Rajan, began to waste away, like a large forest cut down 
with axes. Overtaken by calamities, the kingdom began to lose its 
prosperity and very life. Seeing his kingdom thus afflicted, the king 


consulted the Brahmanas, but to no avail. He then asked his counsellors 
what he should do and they reminded him of the way he had behaved 
towards Vaka. 

They said, ‘The Muni Dalyavaka is pouring your kingdom as a libation 
on the yagna fire using the flesh of the dead animals you gave him. Go, O 
king, and pacify that Rishi by the side of lake on the bank of the Saraswati.’ 

The king went to the bank of the Saraswati, fell at Vaka’s feet and 
touching them with his head, joined his hands and said, ‘Forgive my 
offence! I am a senseless fool, a greedy wretch. You are my sanctuary and 
protector. Forgive me.’ 

Feeling compassion for him, Vaka forgot his angry feelings, poured 
libations on the yagna fire, freed the kingdom from all calamities, and 
pleased at heart, returned to the Naimisa vana. King Dhritarashtra also 
returned to his own capital, once again prosperous. 

Brihaspati, too, held a yagna at that tirtha for the prosperity of the 
Devas, and poured libations of flesh on the sacrificial fire and destroyed the 
Asuras. 

After offering ample dakshina with due rites there, of horses, elephants, 
carts with mules yoked to them, jewels of great value, immense wealth, and 
much corn to the Brahmanas, Balarama leaves for the tirtha called Yayata. 

Here King Yayati once performed a yagna and, seeing his nobility and 
his immutable devotion, the Devi Saraswati gave the Brahmanas invited to 
the yagna everything that each one of them cherished in his heart. The 
Devas, the Gandharvas and the Manavas were overjoyed and filled with 
wonder at the profusion of wealth at that yagna. The Brahmanas thought 
that the king had made the dakshinas and happily praised and blessed him. 

The noble Baladeva, distinguished by his devotion to dharma and 
generosity, next visits the tirtha called Vasishtapavaha where the current is 
very swift.” 


CANTO 138 


J anamejaya said, “Why is the current so rapid at Vasishtapavaha? Tell 
me the cause of the dispute between Vasishta and Viswamitra?” 

Vaisampayana replied, “A great enmity arose between Viswamitra and 
Vasishta, O Bhaarata, due to their differences over tapasya practices. 
Vasishta lived at the tirtha called Sthanu on the eastern bank, so called 
because Mahadeva once practised the austerest tapasya here. On the 
opposite bank was the asrama of Viswamitra, where the Devas once 
installed Skanda as their senapati. 

The two sages, Viswamitra and Vasishta, challenged each other daily, 
each claiming the superiority of their respective forms of tapasya. 
Viswamitra burned with jealousy at the evidence of Vasishta’s tejas and 
decided that he would cause the river Saraswati to bring Vasishta to him 
through the force of her current and then kill him. 

Rishi Viswamitra concentrated on the river Saraswati and soon she 
became exceedingly agitated. She appeared before him, pale and trembling 
and with joined hands, ready to do his bidding. 

He said, “Bring Vasishta here at once so that I may kill him. Do not be 
afraid.’ 

Knowing the unrivalled prowess of Vasishta, she went to him and 
informed him of Viswamitra’s command. She stood in terror of both of 
them and shook with fear thinking of the grievous curse that either of them 


might pronounce on her. Seeing her pale and anxious, the Dharmatma 
Vasishta, told her, ‘O Devi, bear me away with your rapid current, 
otherwise Viswamitra will curse you. Have no fear.’ 

Hearing these words of that compassionate Rishi, Saraswati began to 
consider what course would be best for her to follow. ‘Vasishta showed me 
great compassion so it is proper for me that I should serve him.’ 

She saw Vasishta engaged in silent recitation of mantras on her bank 
and saw Kusika’s son Viswamitra also engaged in homa and felt that she 
had found the perfect opportunity. She used her swift current to wash away 
one of her banks and bore Vasishta away. While being swept away, Vasishta 
praised her saying: “From the Grandsire’s lake you were born, O Saraswati 
and your waters fill this whole universe as your waters charge the clouds, 
and through you, we exercise our faculties of thought. You are Pushti, 
Dyuti, Kirti, Siddhi and Uma. You are Vak, and you are Svaha. You dwell 
in all creatures, in four forms.’ 

Saraswati speedily bore him towards Viswamitra’s asrama and reported 
the arrival of Vasishta to him. While an angry Viswamitra was looking for a 
weapon, Saraswati, fearful of witnessing and aiding in a Brahmahatya, once 
more carried Vasishta away to her eastern bank. She thus obeyed the orders 
of both, although she deceived Viswamitra in the process. The vindictive 
Viswamitra cursed Saraswati, ‘Since, O Devi, you have gone away after 
deceiving me, let your waters change into blood that Rakshasas relish.’ 

Cursed by Viswamitra, Saraswati flowed for a whole year with her 
waters mixed with blood. Great sorrow filled the Devas, the Gandharvas, 
and the Apsaras, seeing the golden river reduced to that plight. For this 
reason, O Rajan, they call the tirtha Vasishtapravaha.” 


CANTO 139 


V aisampayana said, “Cursed by Viswamitra, O Bhaarata, the river 

Saraswati flowed with blood in her current, attracting many 
Rakshasas who came happily to drink the blood and to sing, dance and 
celebrate there, like souls who have attained heaven. After some time, some 
Maharishis, who were abroad on a yatra to bathe in all the tirthas, arrived 
there and saw the water of the Saraswati mixed with blood and innumerable 
Rakshasas drinking from it. 

They learnt from her about the curse that had reduced her to that state. 
Then all those Brahmanas invoked Mahadeva, that Lord of the universe and 
protector of all creatures, with tapasya, vratas, fasts and diverse kinds of 
abstinences and painful observances, and finally cleansed and freed the 
divine Saraswati, through the grace of Siva. 

Finding the water of Saraswati purified, the Rakshasas living there 
pleaded to the compassionate Rishis, ‘All of us are hungry. We have 
swerved from eternal virtue but it is not out of our free will that we are 
sinful. Through the absence of your grace and through our own evil deeds, 
as well as through the sexual sins of our women, our paapa increased and 
we have become Brahma-Rakshasas. Among Vaisyas, Sudras and 
Kshatriyas, those who hate and injure Brahmanas became Rakshasas. O 
best of Brahmanas, we beg you to help us.’ 


At this, the Rishis requested the great river to provide relief for those 
Rakshasas and she created a new distributary called Aruna. Bathing in it, 
the Rakshasas cast off their bodies and rose into heaven. Hearing of this, 
Indradeva of a hundred yagnas bathed at that tirtha and was cleansed of a 
grievous sin.” 

Janamejaya asked, “What was Indra’s sin and how was he cleansed by 
bathing in that tirtha?” 

Vaisampayana said, “The Asura Namuchi, from fear of Indra, once 
entered a ray of the sun. Indra lulled him into a false sense of security and 
assured Namuchi, saying, ‘O foremost of Asuras, I swear that I will not kill 
you with anything that is wet or with anything that is dry. I will not kill you 
in the night or during the day.’ 

However, lord Indra one day conjured up a fog at twilight to cut off 
Namuchi’s head using foam for his weapon. The severed head of Namuchi 
thereupon pursued Indra from behind, shouting, ‘O slayer of a friend, O 
wretch.’ 

Chased relentlessly by that head, Indra went to Brahma and sorrowfully 
informed him of what had happened. The Supreme Lord said, ‘Perform a 
yagna with due vratas at the sacred confluence of the Saraswati and Aruna. 
Distribute dakshina generously and you will be freed of your sin.’ 

Accordingly, Sakra performed various yagnas there, gave away great 
dakshina and plunged into the Aruna. He then became free from the sin and 
returned to swarga with a joyful heart. The head of Namuchi also fell into 
that stream and the Asura obtained many eternal regions that granted every 
wish. 

Baladeva bathes in that tirtha, and gives away many kinds of dakshina 
and obtains great punya. He then moves on to the great tirtha of Soma. 

In olden days, Soma himself performed the Rajasuya yagna there, in 
which Atri, that noble and wise Brahmana, was the Hotri. Upon the 
conclusion of that yagna, a great battle took place between the Devas and 
the Danavas, the Daityas and the Rakshasas. Skanda commanded the army 
of the Devas and slew the Asura Taraka. In that tirtha there is a mighty 
Aswattha tree under which Skanda resides forever.” 


CANTO 140 


J anamejaya said, “You have described the merits of the river Saraswati, 
O best of Brahmanas. You must now tell me how the Devas invested 
Skanda with the command of the Devasena. Describe the actual rites that 
were performed, and how the Deva Senapati made a great carnage of the 
Daityas.” 

Vaisampayana said, “Once, long ago, Maheswara spilled his seed into a 
blazing fire. However, Agni could not bear its tremendous energy and, at 
Brahma’s instructions, Agni cast it into the river Ganga. Ganga, too, was 
unable to contain it and cast it onto the beautiful breast of Himavat where 
the Devas worshipped. Agni’s son began to grow there, overwhelming all 
the worlds with his tejas. Meanwhile, the six Krittikas seeing the child of 
fiery splendour lying on the heath and wanting a son flew down from the 
sky and adopted him. 

The adorable Skanda understood the state of the minds of his multiple 
mothers, assumed six mouths and allowed all of them to suckle him. The 
beautiful Krittikas were wonderstruck. Since the river Ganga had cast the 
child onto the summit of Himavat, that mountain was stunningly 
transformed, O Kurusrestha, and from then on began producing gold. The 
energetic child was called Gangeya or Kartikeya. At first, he acquired the 
high ascetic powers of a Rishi. Gifted with self-restraint, asceticism and 
great tejas, Kartikeya grew up into a handsome man like Soma, loved and 


praised by Gandharvas and Rishis. Thousands of beautiful Apsaras admired 
him and danced before him. The foremost of all rivers, Ganga, waited upon 
him and the Earth held the child in her lap, while Brihaspati performed his 
jatakarma, the postnatal rites. The Vedas, assuming a fourfold form, 
approached the child with joined hands. The Astra Shastra, the science of 
arms, with its four divisions and all the astras and all kinds of weapons, 
came to him. 

One day, this child of great lustre saw Mahadeva seated with Uma and a 
crowd of unearthly beings, ganas with emaciated bodies and ugly features, 
surrounding them. The faces of some were like those of tigers, lions, bears, 
cats and makaras. Others had the features of scorpions, elephants, camels, 
owls, vultures, jackals, cranes, pigeons and kurus. Many among them had 
bodies like those of dogs, porcupines, iguanas, goats, sheep and cows. 
Some resembled mountains and some oceans, and some carried chakras and 
gadas as weapons. Many looked like masses of antimony and others like 
white mountains. Also present were the seven Matris, the Sadhyas, the 
Viswedevas, the Maruts, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Adityas, the Siddhas, 
the Danavas, the self-born Brahma with his sons, Vishnu and Sakra. All had 
gone there to see that child of unfading glory. Many Devas and Gandharvas, 
led by Narada and other Devarishis and Siddhas led by Brihaspati, and the 
fathers of the universe, the Prajapatis, Lokapalas, the Yamas and the 
Dharmas, were all present there. 

The child approached Maheswara. Seeing the boy coming, Siva, Uma, 
Ganga and Agni each expected that he would come and honour them first. 
Understanding that this was the expectation of those four, the child used his 
Yogic powers and divided himself into four different forms. The three 
forms that stood behind him were Sakha, Visakha and Naigameya and they 
marched on towards the four Divine Ones who sat expectantly. The form 
called Skanda went towards Rudra; Visakha went to Uma, Sakha, which is 
Kartikeya’s Vayu form, walked towards Agni, and Naigameya, that child of 
fiery splendour towards Ganga. 

It was wonderful to see all those radiant forms, identical in appearance, 
walk calmly towards the four Divinities. All the present Devas, Danavas 
and Rakshasas, made a loud noise of appreciation at the wonderful sight. 
Then Rudra, the goddess Uma, Agni, and Ganga, all bowed to Brahma, the 
Lord of the Universe, and said, ‘You must grant to this youth, for our 


happiness, some kind of sovereignty that is suitable for him and which he 
desires.’ 

At this, the revered Pitamaha thought of the charge that he might 
possibly bestow upon Skanda. He had already distributed to the Devas all 
kinds of wealth over which the Devas, Gandharvas, Rakshasas, Pretas, 
Bhutas, Yakshas, Garudas and Nagas have dominion. After he had reflected 
for a moment, O Bhaarata, he conferred upon Kartikeya the status of Deva 
Senapati and ordered all the Devas and other formless beings to wait upon 
him. 

The Devas led by Brahma took that youth with them to a place on the 
bank of the sacred and divine Saraswati, flowing down from Himavat, the 
river which at Samantapanchaka is celebrated throughout the three worlds. 
There, the Devas, the Gandharvas and the others sat down with satisfied and 
happy hearts for the investiture of Kartikeya.” 


CANTO 141 


V aisampayana continued, “After all articles as laid down in the 

shastras for the ceremony of investiture were collected, Brihaspati 
poured libations on the blazing fire. Himavat brought a richly decorated 
throne and seated Kartikeya on it while the Devas brought all kinds of 
auspicious offerings, with the rites and mantras that were necessary for the 
ceremony. The various Devas—Indra, Vishnu, Surya, Chandramas, Dhatri, 
Vidhatri, Vayu, Agni, Pushan, Bhaga, Aryaman, Ansa, Vivaswat, Rudra, 
Mitra, the eleven Rudras, the eight Vasus, the twelve Adityas, the twin 
Ashvinis, the Viswedevas, the Maruts, the Saddhyas, the Pitris, the 
Gandharvas, the Apsaras, the Yakshas, the Rakshasas, the Pannagas, 
innumerable Devarishis, the Vaikhanasas, the Balakhilyas, those Rishis that 
subsist only on air and those that subsist on sunlight—all attended the 
ceremony. 

Also present were the descendants of Bhrigu and Angiras, many high- 
souled Yatis, all the Vidyadharas, all Rishis and Munis, the Grandsire, 
Pulastya, Maharishi Pulaha, Angiras, Kasyapa, Atri, Marichi, Bhrigu, 
Kratu, Hara, Prachetas, Manu, Daksha, the Seasons, the Planets, and all the 
luminaries. 

In attendance O Rajan, were all the rivers in their embodied forms, the 
eternal Vedas, the Seas, the diverse tirthas, the Earth, the Sky and the 
Firmament. All the trees, Aditi the mother of the Devas, Hri, Sri, Swaha, 


Saraswati, Uma, Sachi, Sinivali, Anumati, Kuhu, the Day of the new moon, 
the Day of the full Moon, the wives of the denizens of heaven, were present 
there. 

Himavat, Vindhya, Meru, Airavata with all his followers, the Divisions 
of time called Kala, Kashta, the Fortnight, the Seasons, Night and Day, the 
prince of horses Ucchaisravas, Vasuki the king of the Snakes, Aruna, 
Garuda, the Trees, the deciduous herbs, and the divine Deva Dharma—all 
came there. Also in attendance were Kala, Yama, Mrityu, and the followers 
of Yama. 

I do not mention the other divinities who arrived there to witness 
Kartikeya’s installation ceremony, for they were past enumeration. They 
brought with them all necessary and every auspicious requisite and offering 
needed for the ceremony. 

Filled with joy, the Devas poured upon Skanda’s head the sacred water 
of the Saraswati from golden jars, and made that noble youth the Senapati 
of the Deva forces. Pitamaha Brahma, and Kasyapa of great tejas, and all 
the others poured water upon Skanda just as the Devas had once poured 
water on the head of Varuna, at his investiture as the Lord of seas. A 
pleased Brahma appointed four mighty companions for Skanda, who were 
swift like the wind, who were Mahatapasvins, and gifted with great tejas. 
These were Nandisena, Lohitaksha, Ghantakarna and Kumudamalin. 

Lord Sthanu gave Skanda a companion who had the power to create a 
hundred mayic illusions, and endued with might and energy that he could 
increase at will. In fact, in the great battle between the Devas and the 
Asuras, this one, with his bare hands, slew fourteen million fierce Daityas. 

The Devas then handed charge of the measureless Devasena, invincible 
and capable of destroying forces powerful as Vishnu, to the six-headed 
Sanmukha. Thereupon the Devas and all else present hailed him, shouting, 
‘Jaya Skanda!’ 

Yama gave him two companions, Unmatha and Pramatha, both of 
whom resembled Death and possessed great energy and splendour. Surya 
gave him Subhraja and Bhaswara: Soma gave him Mani and Sumani; both 
huge like the summits of the Kailasa Mountain and always decked with 
white garlands and smeared with white unguents. 

Agni gave him Jwalajihbha and Jyoti while Ansa gave him five 
ferocious and powerful companions, Parigha, Vata, Bhima, Dahati and 
Dahana. Vasava gave him Utkrosa and Panchaka, who were armed 


respectively with a thunderbolt and a cudgel. They slew innumerable 
enemies of Sakra. 

Vishnu gave Skanda three companions—Chakra, Vikrama and the 
mighty Sankrama while the Ashvinis, O Bharatarishabha, gave him 
Vardhana and Nandana who was the master of all the sciences. The 
illustrious Dhatri gave him Kunda, Kusuma, Kumuda, Damvara and 
Adamvara. 

Tvashtri gave him two powerful warriors as companions—Chakra and 
Anuchakra. The lord Mitra presented him with two celebrated and 
handsome companions, Suvrata and Satyasandha, both Tapasvins, learned, 
and able to granting boons. 

Vidhatri presented him with the noble Suprabha and Subhakarman 
while Pushan gave him Panitraka and Kalika, both masters of maya. Vayu 
gave him Bala and Atibala, while Varuna gave him Ghasa and Atighasa, all 
powerful warriors with gaping mouths. 

Himavat gave him two companions, Suvarchas and Ativarchas while 
Meru gave him Kanchana and Meghamalin. Manu gave him Sthira and 
Atisthira while Vindhya gave him Uschrita and Agnisringa. 

The Ocean gave him two mighty companions named Sangraha and 
Vigraha, both armed with maces. The beautiful Parvati gave him Unmada, 
Pushpadanta and Sankukarna while Vasuki, the king of the snakes, gifted 
him two Nagas named Jaya and Mahajaya. Similarly, the Saddhyas, the 
Rudras, the Vasus, the Pitris, the Seas, the Rivers, and the Mountains, all 
gave him commanders of forces armed with lances and battle-axes, all of 
them wearing diverse kinds of ornaments. 

Listen now to the other warrior companions that Skanda received. They 
were Sankukarna, Nilkumbha, Padmai, Kumuda, Ananta, Dwadasabhuja, 
Krishna, Upakrishnaka, Ghranasravas, Kapiskandha, Kanchanaksha, 
Jalandhama, Akshasantarjana, Kunadika, Tamobhrakrit, Ekaksha, 
Dwadasaksha, Ekajata, Sahasravahu, Vikata, Vyaghraksha, Kshitikampana, 
Punyanaman, Sunaman, Suvaktra, Priyadarsana, Parisruta and Kokonada. 

He also obtained the services of Priyamalyanulepana, Ajodara, 
Gajasiras, Skandhaksha, Satalochana, Jwalajibha, Karala, Sitakesa, Jati, 
Hari, Krishnakesa, Jatadhara, Chaturdanshtra, Ashtajihva, Meghananda, 
Prithusravas, Vidyutaksha, Dhanurvaktra, Jathara, Marutasana, Udaraksha, 
Rathaksha, Vajranabha, Vasurprabha, Samudravega, Sailakampin, Vrisha, 
Meshapravaha, Nanda, Upadanka, Dhumra, Sweta, Kalinga, Siddhartha, 


Varada, Priyaka, Nanda, Gonanda, Ananda, Pramoda, Swastika, Dhruvaka, 
Kshemavaha, Subala, Siddhapatra, Govraja, Kanakapida, Gayana and 
Hasana. 

Some other of his companions were Bana, Khadga, Vaitali, Atitali, 
Kathaka, Vatika, Hansaja, Pakshadigdhanga, Samudronmadana, Ranotkata, 
Prashasa, Swetasiddha, Nandaka, Kalakantha, Prabhasa, Kumbhandaka, 
Kalakaksha, Sita, Bhutalonmathana, Yajnavaha, Pravaha, Devajali, Somapa, 
Majjala, Kratha, Tuhara, Chitradeva, Madhura, Suprasada, Kiritin, Vatsala, 
Madhuvarna, Kalasodara. The others were Dharmada, Manma, Thakara, 
Suchivaktra, Swetavaktra, Suvaktra, Charuvaktra, Pandura, Dandavahu, 
Suvahu, Rajas, Kokilaka, Achala, Kanakaksha, Valakarakshaka, 
Sancharaka, Kokanada, Gridhrapatra, Jamvuka, Lohajvaktra, Javana, 
Kumbhavaktra, Kumbhaka, Mundagriva, Krishnaujas, Hansavaktra, 
Chandrabha, Panikurchas, Samvuka, Panchavaktra, Sikshaka, Chasavaktra, 
Jamvuka, Kharvaktra and Kunchaka. 

Besides these, the Grandsire gave him many other noble and strong 
companions, devoted to tapasya and deferential to Brahmanas. Some of 
them were very young in years, some mere youths, while some were old. 
Thousands upon thousands of similar companions joined Kartikeya, all 
different in their looks and appearance. I will describe them to you, O 
Janamejaya. 

Some had faces like those of tortoises, others like cockerels, dogs, 
wolves, hares, owls, asses, camels and hogs. Some had human faces and 
some like those of sheep or jackals. Some were dreadful and had faces like 
those of makaras and porpoises. Some had faces like those of cats others 
like stinging flies, mongooses, owls and the crow. Some faces were like 
those of mice, peacocks, fish, goats, sheep and buffaloes. The faces of some 
were like bears while others resembled tigers, leopards, lions, elephants, 
crocodiles, rhinocerii, wolves, cows, mules, camels, cats, while some 
resembled Garuda. 

Some possessed protruberant stomachs, great legs and other limbs, 
while others had eyes like stars. The faces of some were like those of 
pigeons and bulls and others like those of kokilas, hawks, tittiras, lizards, 
snakes and porcupines. 

Indeed, some had frightful and some very agreeable faces; some wore 
snakes for their clothes. The faces as also the noses of some resembled 
those of cows while some tapered like the bodies of snakes. Some had large 


limbs, bulging stomachs, while others were very lean, attenuated; some had 
large limbs but gaunt bellies while the necks of some were very short and 
their ears very large. 

Some were clad in white robes and others in snake skin, elephant skin 
or deer skin. The mouths of some were on their shoulders, some on their 
stomachs, some on their backs, some on their cheeks, some on their calves, 
some on their flanks, and many on other parts of their bodies. The faces of 
many leaders of troops were like those of insects and worms while the 
mouths of many were like those of beasts of prey. 

Some sported multiple arms and heads while the arms of some 
resembled trees, and the heads of some were on their loins. Many amongst 
them had their abodes on diverse kinds of plants and trees. Some were clad 
in rags, some in diverse kinds of bones, some were diversely attired, and 
some wore garlands and liniments. Dressed so variously, some had skins for 
their robes. Some had headgear; the brows of some were furrowed into 
lines; the necks of some bore marks like those on conch shells, some were 
possessed of great effulgence. 

Some wore diadems, some grew five tufts of hair on their heads, some 
had two, some three, and some seven, and the hair of some was as hard as 
iron wires. Some had feathers on their heads, some had heads that were 
perfectly bald, some had matted locks while the faces of some were covered 
with hair. 

Some were dark complexioned, and the faces of some had no flesh on 
them. Some had very long backs, and some had no stomachs. The backs of 
some were large while those of others were short and squat. The arms of 
some were long while those of some were short. Some were dwarfs, some 
were hunchbacks, and some had short hips. The heads of some were like 
those of elephants, some had noses like those of tortoises, and some like 
wolves. Some had long lips and some had frightful faces facing downwards. 
Some had monstrously large teeth, some tiny ones, and some had only four 
teeth. 

Thousands among them, O Rajan, were exceedingly terrible like 
infuriated elephants. Some had symmetrical limbs and possessed great 
splendour, and were adorned with ornaments. Some had yellow eyes, some 
had ears like arrows, some had noses like ghariyals, O Bhaarata, while 
some had broad teeth, some pendulous lips, and many had green hair. They 
possessed all kinds of feet, lips, teeth, arms, and heads. 


Clad in varied kinds of skins, they spoke diverse kinds of languages. 
Skilled in all provincial dialects, the dominant ones conversed with one 
another and joyously gambolled about, cutting capers around Kartikeya. 

The eyes of some were yellow, the throats of some blue, the ears of 
some long, and the stomachs of some were like masses of antimony. The 
eyes of some were white, the necks of some red, some had eyes of a tawny 
hue and many were dark in colour or of many colours. Several had 
ornaments on their persons that looked like yak-tails, some bore white 
streaks on their bodies, some red streaks; many were vari-coloured, while 
some had golden complexions, and some were brilliant like peacocks. 

These noble companions in arms delighted in battle, and all of them 
were invincible to even the foremost ones amongst the Devas. They had 
great strength, speed and great impetuosity and had various kinds of 
dreadful and magical weapons in their hands. Some wielded Sataghnis and 
Chakras, some carried heavy and short clubs, some brandished swords, 
mallets and bludgeons, while many gigantic ones wielded lances, scimitars, 
maces, bhusundis and spears. Some came from Devaloka, some from the 
aerial realms, and some from the regions of the earth and all of them were 
quick like the wind. Commanded by the Devas, those brave and mighty 
ones became the companions and confederates of Kartikeya. 

At the installation of Kartikeya, these motley and powerful warriors, all 
wearing rows of tinkling bells danced around him in joy. These and many 
millions of mighty others, O Rajan, came to join the noble and illustrious 
Kartikeya and stood surrounding him.” 


CANTO 142 


V aisampayana said, “I will now list the names of these auspicious 

ones: the many mothers, who also became the companions of 
Kumara. They were Prabhavati, Vishalakshi, Palita, Gonasi, Shrimati, 
Bahula, Bahuputrika, Apsujata, Gopali, Brihadambalika, Jayavati, Malatika, 
Dhruvaratna, Bhayankari, Vasudama, Sudama, Vishoka, Nandini, 
Ekachuda, Mahachuda, Chakranemi, Uttejani, Jayatsena, Kamalakshi, 
Shobhana, Shatrunjaya, Shalabhi, Khari, Madhavi, Shubhavaktra, 
Tirthanemi and Gitapriya. 

They included Kalyani, Kadrula, Amitashana, Meghasvana, Bhogavati, 
Subhru, Kanakavati, Alatakshi, Viryavati, Vidyujjihva, Padmavati, 
Sunakshatra, Kandara, Bahuyojana, Santanika, Kamala, Mahabala, Sudama, 
Bahudama, Suprabha, Yashasvini, Nrityapriya, Shatolukhalamekhala, 
Shataghanta, Shatananda, Bhagananda, Bhamini, Vapushmati, 
Chandrashita, Bhadrakali, Samkarika, Nishkutika, Bhrama, Chatvaravasini, 
Sumangala, Svastimati, Vriddhikama, Jayapriya, Dhanada, Suprasada, 
Bhavada, Jaleshvari, Edi and Bhedi. 

They were Samedi, Vetalajanani, Kanduti, Kalika, Devamitra, Lambasi, 
Ketaki, Chitrasena, Bala, Kukkutika, Shankhanika, Jarjarika, Kundarika, 
Kokalika, Kandara, Shatodari, Utkrathini, Jarena, Mahavega, Kankana, 
Manojava, Kantakini, Praghasa, Putana, Khashaya, Churvyuti, Vama, 
Kroshanatha, Taditprabha, Mandodari, Tunda, Kotara, Meghavasini, 


Subhaga, Lambini, Lamba, Vasuchuda, Vikatthani, Urdhvavenidhara, 
Pingakshi, Lohamekhala, Prithuvaktra, Madhurika, Madhukumbha, 
Pakshalika, Manthanika and Jarayu. 

And also there were Jarjaranana, Khyata, Dahadaha, Dhamadhama, 
Khandakhanda, Pushana, Manikundala, Amogha, Lambapayodhara, 
Venuvinadhara, Pingakshi, Lohamekhala, Shasholukamukhi, Krishna, 
Kharajangha, Mahajava, Shishumaramukhi, Shveta, Lohitakshi, 
Vibhishana, Jatalika, Kamachari, Dirghajihva, Balotkata, Kaledika, 
Vamanika, Mukuta, Lohitakshi, Mahakaya, and Haripindi. Ekakshara, 
Sukusuma, Krishnakarni, Kshurakarni, Chatushkarni, Karnapravarana, 
Chatushpathaniketa, Gokarni, Mahishanana, Kharakarni, Mahakarni, 
Bherisvanamahasvana, Shankhakumbhasvana, Bhangada, Gana, Sugana, 
Bhiti, Kamada, Chatushpatharata, Bhutirtha, Anyagochara, Pashuda, 
Vittada, Sukhada, Mahayasha, Payoda, Gomahishada, Suvishana, 
Pratishtha, Supratishtha, Rochamana, Surochana, Naukarni, Mukhakarni, 
Sasira, Stherika, Ekachakra, Megharava, Meghamala and Virochana. 

These and thousands of other matrikas, O Bharatarishabha, of diverse 
forms, became the followers of Kartikeya. Some had long nails, large teeth, 
and protruding lips while others were youthful, lean, with sweet features. 
Others had green eyes, some were tawny, and many had golden 
complexions. Many of them were dark like thunderclouds or smoke, while 
others were brilliant like the morning sun. Many wore their tresses long, 
and were clad in robes of white and wore ornaments. They had the merit of 
punya and could assume any form at will. 

They could grant boons and travel wherever at will and were always 
cheerful. Physically very strong, some of them were like Yama, some like 
Rudra, several were like Soma, some like Kubera, some like Varuna, some 
like Indra, and some like Agni. Many had the temperament of Vayu, some 
of Kumara, some of Brahma, some of Vishnu, several of Surya, and many 
of Varaha. 

They were charming and delightful to look at and beautiful like 
Apsaras. Their voices resembled the kokila and they were prosperous like 
Kubera. They were brilliant like fire, and in battle, they were ferocious like 
Sakra and filled their enemies with terror. Able to assume any form at will, 
they were swift like the wind and their prowess was inconceivable. 

They lived on trees, open plains, crossings of four roads, in caves, 
crematoriums, mountains and springs. Wearing various kinds of ornaments, 


clothes, and speaking myriad languages, these and many other tribes of 
mothers, all of whom could strike fear into enemies, followed Kartikeya at 
the command of the chief of the Devas. 

Indra, the conqueror of Paka, gave Kartikeya a banner effulgent as the 
morning sun and a blazing spear adorned with large bells, to fight the 
enemies of the Devas. 

Siva gave him a vast and invincible army named Dhananjaya, 
exceedingly fierce, armed with all kinds of weapons and endued with great 
energy attained through tapasya. Protecting it were thirty thousand warriors, 
each powerful like Rudra. 

Vishnu gave him a garland that enhanced the might of the wearer. Uma 
gave him two pieces of brilliant cloth. Ganga gave Kumara a celestial 
water-pot, born from amrita, and Brihaspati gave him a sacred staff. Garuda 
gifted him his favourite son, a peacock of beautiful feathers. Aruna gave 
him a cockerel with sharp talons while Varuna gave him a very potent 
snake. The Lord Brahma gifted him with a black deerskin and blessed him 
to have victory in all battles. 

Skanda stood like a magnificent flame and like the autumnal sky 
bespangled with planets and stars, at the head of the awesome and terrible 
Devasena. Much to the joy of all the Devas, he marched his army out while 
the gathering of Devas and different beings beat their drums, blew their 
conches, and played loudly their patahas, jharjharas, krikachas, cow-horns, 
adambaras, gomukhas and dindimas. Led by Vasava, the Devas praised 
Kumara while the Gandharvas and Apsaras sang and danced. 

Pleased by their attentions and love, Skanda swore to destroy all their 
enemies and the illustrious Devas considered all their enemies to be already 
dead and a loud sound of joy arose from all those assembled there. 

Skanda then set out with that incomparable army to destroy the Daityas 
and to protect the inhabitants of swarga. Accompanying Kartikeya, in the 
van of his army, O Rajan, were Karma, Vijaya, Dharma, Siddhi, Samriddhi, 
Dhairya, and the Shastras in their embodied forms. 

Seeing the army advance against them, all the Daityas, Rakshasas and 
Danavas fled in terror hotly pursued by the Devas. A wrathful Skanda 
repeatedly hurled the terrible spear that Agnideva had given him. It fell like 
a comet from the sky and millions of blazing individual darts issued from it. 
O Bharatarishabha, with his energy like a fire fed with libations of ghee, it 
was like the pralaya. 


Finally, Skanda killed Taraka, the hitherto invincible Asura who was 
leading a hundred thousand dreaded Daityas as well as Mahisha at the head 
of eight Daitya padmas. He next destroyed Tripada and a thousand Ajutas 
and Hradodara, protected by ten nikharvas of Daityas. The followers of 
Kumara danced, jumped and laughed in joy as they killed thousands of 
Daityas. Some demons were incinerated, others died of sheer fright. Thus, 
Kartikeya slew the innumerable enemies of the Devas. 

Skanda chased Bali’s son, the great Bana, to the Krauncha Mountain, so 
called because the sound it produced resembled the cry of a crane. 
Kartikeya struck the mountain with Agni’s astra and the apes, elephants, 
leopards, bears, sharabhas, lions, birds and snakes living there ran 
everywhere in fear and frenzy. Other forests on it rang with the cries of 
hundreds upon hundreds of wild beasts. The shock of Skanda’s spear 
frightened the Vidyadharas dwelling on its summits who soared into the air, 
making the Kinnaras anxious. The Daityas came out of that blazing 
mountain, in their hundreds of thousands, all clad in beautiful ornaments 
and garlands. 

Kumara’s followers massacred them all. A raging Skanda killed Bali’s 
son Bana along with his younger brother, just as Indra had killed Vritra long 
ago. He pierced the Krauncha Mountain with his inexorable lance, dividing 
his own self sometimes into many Kartikeyas and sometimes uniting 
himself into one. Such was the glory and prowess of Skanda that his lance, 
repeatedly hurled from his hand, came back to him repeatedly, quicker than 
thoughts. 

They beat drums, blew conches and the celestial women rained floral 
showers to celebrate the successful attack on Krauncha Mountain and the 
killing of Chanda’s son. Auspicious breezes blew bearing unworldly scents. 
The Gandharvas and great Rishis sang hymns in Skanda’s praise. While 
some referred to him as Sanat Kumara, the powerful eldest son of Brahma, 
Some spoke of him as the son of Maheswara, and some as Agni’s son. 
Some again described him as the son of Uma or of the Krittikas or of 
Ganga. Hundreds of thousands spoke of that Lord of yogis of blazing form 
and great might, as the son of any of them. 

I have thus told you, O Rajan, everything about the installation of 
Kartikeya as the Deva Senapati and how he destroyed the enemies of the 
gods. Listen now to the history of the greatest of tirthas on the Saraswati. 
That foremost of tirthas,O monarch, after Kartikeya had killed the enemies 


of the Devas became a second heaven. The puissant son of Agni gave each 
of the Devas diverse kinds of dominion and affluence and finally the 
sovereignty of the three worlds. This was how the Devas installed that 
adorable exterminator of the Daityas as their senapati. 

Taijasa is the other tirtha where in the olden days the Devas created 
Varuna as the Lord of the waters. After bathing in that tirtha and 
worshipping Skanda, Balarama gives the Brahmanas gold, clothes, 
ornaments, and other things as dakshina. He spends one night happily there, 
praising that foremost of tirthas and worshipping its waters. 

I have now told you everything that you wanted to know, and how the 
divine Skanda was elevated by the assembled gods to be their protector and 
general.” 


CANTO 143 


J anamejaya said, “By listening to your narration of the installation of 

Skanda and the destruction of the Daityas, I deem myself cleansed. 
Now I am curious to know how long ago the Devas invested Varuna with 
Lordship over the waters at this tirtha.” 

Vaisampayana replied, “In the Krita yuga, the Devas approached Varuna 
and said, ‘As Sakra, the Lord of the celestials, always protects us from 
every danger, will you be the Lord of the rivers? You dwell in the Ocean, 
the home of makaras. This Ocean and the Lord of rivers will then be under 
your control and you will then wax and wane with Soma.’ 

Varuna agreed and all the Devas assembled and performed the rites laid 
down in the Shastras to make him Lord of the waters. Just as Sakra protects 
the Devas, Varuna began to protect the seas and lakes and rivers and other 
reservoirs of water. 

Bathing in that tirtha and distributing dakshina generously, the wise 
Baladeva, the slayer of Pralamba, then travelled to Agnitirtha, the place 
where Agni, the eater of ghee, had once disappeared from view. Then, the 
panic-stricken Devas approached Brahma and begged him to quickly find 
Agni lest all creatures perish. All the Devas, led by Indra and Brihaspati, 
finally found him hiding in the Sami vana. The fact was that Agni was 
trying to hide from Bhrigu. Cursed by Brahmarishi Bhrigu, Agni became an 
eater of everything. 


Balarama bathes there and then visits Brahmayoni where, long ago, 
Brahma and all the Devas bathed after the Pitamaha performed his acts of 
creation. He also goes to Kaubera tirtha where the great Ailavila, after 
severe tapasya, once acquired all the treasures of the worlds, which 
magically came to him of their own accord. Baladeva bathes in these tirthas 
and gives dakshina to the Brahmanas he finds there. 

Balarama also saw the wonderful vana where, aeons ago, the noble 
Kubera, Lord of the Yakshas, performed tapasya and gained many boons, 
including lordship over all treasures, the friendship of Lord Rudra, the 
status of a Deva, the regency over all of the North, and a son named 
Nakakubara. The Maruts then invested him duly with his sovereignty as the 
Lokapala of the northern direction. He also acquired the utterly marvellous 
Pushpaka Vimana for his celestial chariot, fleet as thought, as also all the 
affluence of a Deva. 

Balarama bathes in that tirtha and gives away great wealth.” 


CANTO 144 


V aisampayana said, “Balarama leaves for Vadarapachana tirtha where 

all kinds of creatures, flowers and fruits of every kind are always 
abundant and where many Rishis and Siddhas live. It was here that the 
beautiful daughter of Bharadwaja, a Brahmacharini named Sruvavati, 
practised severe tapasya in order to woo Indradeva. She observed many 
exceedingly difficult vratas until Indra was impressed and he came to that 
hermitage in the form of Maharishi Vasishta. Sruvavati reverently 
welcomed him, O Bhaarata, according to the rites observed for Maharishis. 
She said, ‘O adorable Maharishi, tell me how I may serve you. However, I 
will not give you my hand, for I am courting Sakra, the lord of the three 
worlds, with stern vrata and tapasya.’ 

The illustrious Sakra smiled, and said, ‘I know that you practise strict 
tapasya, O beautiful Devi, and I know the desire in your heart. Know that 
with tapasya one can obtain everything that belongs to the Devas, and all 
the regions of blessedness. Men who cast off their bodies after practising 
austere tapasya become Devas. I request you now to boil these five jujubes.’ 

The purpose of the task was to test her devotion. Sruvavati cleansed 
herself, and began to cook. Time went by and the day began to wane, but 
the jujubes showed no signs of cooking. With all her fuel consumed and 
seeing the fire about to die, she began to use her limbs as fuel and soon 
Agni consumed her feet. Instead of pain, she felt joy as if she had dipped 


them in cool water. Seeing this, Indra was pleased and revealed his real 
form. He told her that he was pleased with her devotion and that he would 
grant her wish. 

He invited her to live with him in swarga and declared, “This hermitage 
will become the greatest tirtha in the world, capable of cleansing every sin, 
and will hereafter be known as Vadarapachana.’ 

In this very tirtha, seven Rishis on one occasion left Arundhati, the wife 
of one of them, when they were on their way to Himavat to gather fruit and 
roots for their sustenance. However, a twelve-year drought fell upon the 
land, forcing the Rishis to continue to live on Himavat. Meanwhile 
Arundhati devoted herself to tapasya. Seeing this, a highly pleased 
Mahadeva visited her in the form of a Brahmana, and said, ‘I desire alms, O 
auspicious one.’ 

The beautiful Arundhati confessed that her store of food was exhausted, 
and offered jujubes instead. Mahadeva accepted and asked her to cook the 
jujyubes, and while Arundhati did so, Mahadeva expounded on various 
subjects, sacred and otherwise. The twelve years of drought passed as if it 
were a single day, without food, and in cooking and listening to Mahadeva’s 
discourses. Then the seven Rishis returned and Mahadeva, highly pleased 
with Arundhati, appeared in his own form and said, ‘I am happy with your 
tapasya and vratas.’ 

He then told the seven Rishis, “The punya that this Devi has earned is 
much greater than what you have found on the breast of Himavat. Her 
tapasya was exceedingly austere, for she passed twelve years in cooking, 
fasting all the while.’ 

Addressing Arundhati, Siva then said, ‘Ask me for any boon, O 
auspicious one.’ 

She replied, ‘If you are gratified with me, then let this place be named 
Vadarapachana tirtha and let it be the favourite resort of Siddhas and 
Devarishis. Let him who observes a fast and remains here for three nights 
after cleansing himself, obtain the fruit of a twelve years’ fast.’ 

Mahadeva answered her, saying, ‘Tathaastu— Let it be so,’ and returned 
to swarga. 

The Rishis were wonder-struck at the sight of Mahadeva and on finding 
the chaste Arundhati healthy and so capable of bearing hunger and thirst. 

O Sruvavati, this is how Arundhati, like you, acquired punya in the 
olden days, for my sake. However, you have practised more severe 


penances so I will grant you a special and superior varam. Whomsoever 
stays in this tirtha for just one night and bathes here with soul fixed in 
dhyana, will after death, obtain many regions of blessedness that are 
otherwise most difficult to acquire. Having given this blessing to Sruvavati, 
the thousand-eyed Sakra then went back to swarga in a shower of celestial 
flowers of divine fragrance. Everyone heard the sound of kettledrums and 
smelt the auspicious and perfumed breezes. Casting off her body, the 
auspicious Sruvavati became the spouse of Indra.” 

Janamejaya asked, “Who was the mother of Sruvavati and how was she 
reared, O Brahmana?”’ 

Vaisampayana said, “Unable to control himself, Maharishi Bharadwaja 
once ejaculated his vital seed at the sight of the large-eyed Apsara, 
Ghritachi. He kept his seed in a cup made of the leaves of a tree and the girl 
Sruvavati was born in it. Having performed the usual post-natal rites, the 
tapasvin Maharishi named her Sruvavati, after the leaf cup in which she was 
born. She lived in his asrama, while Bharadwaja roamed the forests of 
Himavat. 

Yadusreshta Baladeva bathes in that tirtha and after he gives away 
generous dakshina to many Brahmanas, leaves for the tirtha of Sakta.” 


CANTO 145 


V aisampayana said, “The mighty Yadu lord bathes at Indra’s tirtha 
and gives away wealth and gemstones to Brahmanas. Here, Indra, 
the chief of the Devas, once performed a hundred unstinted Aswamedha 
Yagnas with the assistance of knowledgeable Brahmanas and gave away 
enormous wealth to Brihaspati and generous dakshina to the Brahmanas. 
Having duly completed those hundred yagnas, they named Indra, Satakratu 
and that auspicious and sacred tirtha, able to purify every sin, Indra-tirtha. 

Baladeva next worships at that auspicious tirtha named after Rama of 
Bhrigu’s race. That Brahmana of great punya repeatedly subjugated the 
earth and killed all the leading Kshatriyas of the world. With the help of his 
Acharya, the Mahamuni Kasyapa, Rama performed a Vajapeya yagna and a 
hundred Aswamedha yagnas at that tirtha. There Parasurama gifted his 
Acharya the whole earth with her oceans as dakshina, the yagna fee. The 
Brahmanas also received diverse kinds of gems, kine, elephants, female 
slaves, sheep and goats. 

Baladeva next calls at the Yamuna tirtha and worships the Rishis there. 
Endued with great effulgence, Varuna, the son of Aditi, once performed the 
Rajasuya yagna here, as well as the Mahayagna, after subjugating Devas, 
Gandharvas and Rakshasas. With the start of that great yagna, a battle broke 
out between the Devas and the Danavas filling the three worlds with terror 


and, after the completion of his Rajasuya yagna, a terrible war broke out 
among the Kshatriyas. 

Blessed by the great Rishis, Balarama then visits the tirtha called 
Aditya. It was here that, after performing a yagna, Suryadeva obtained the 
sovereignty of all luminous bodies in the universe and acquired his great 
energy. There, at that tirtha, reside all the Devas including Vasava, the 
Viswedevas, the Maruts, the Gandharvas, the Apsaras, the Island-born 
Vyasa, Suka, Madhusudhana, the Yakshas, the Rakshasas, the Pisachas, and 
thousands of others with great punya. Indeed, Vishnu, after killing the 
Asuras Madhu and Kaitabha, performed his ablutions here. Maharishi 
Vyasa and Rishi Asita-Devala obtained profound yogic powers and 
achieved great felicity after bathing here.” 


CANTO 146 


V aisampayana said, “In that tirtha named Aditya, there lived a 
virtuous Rishi named Asita-Devala, observing his svadharma. He 
led a life of purity and self-restraint and never injured anyone. He 
maintained an equal behaviour towards all beings, in word, deed, and 
thought. He was like Yama, impartial and free from anger. He viewed 
censure and praise, gold and a heap of pebbles, as the same. He daily 
worshipped all the Devas, his guests, and Brahmanas who came to him. He 
always practised the vow of Brahmacharya and was devoted to dharma. 
Once, the great Yogi, Rishi Jaigisavya, came to Devala’s hermitage to 
complete his tapasya. While he lived at the asrama, Devala always kept a 
kindly eye on the Rishi and never neglected him. Once however, Devala 
lost sight of Jaigisavya and he reappeared at dinnertime, as a Sannyasi 
soliciting alms. Devala showed him great honour and worshipped his guest 
in the manner prescribed, for many years. Inevitably, one day a thought 
occurred to the noble Devala. ‘I have spent many years in worshipping this 
Rishi but this idle fellow has yet to speak a single word to me and is like a 
block of wood.’ 
With this thought in mind, the blessed Devala went to the shores of the 
ocean, journeying through the sky, taking his earthen kamandalu with him. 
When he arrived at the coast, Devala saw Jaigisavya already there before 


him and wondered at how the Rishi could reach the ocean and perform his 
ablutions before his own arrival. 

After completing his ablutions and purifying himself, he recited silently 
the sacred mantras before returning to his asrama, taking with him his 
earthen vessel filled with water. As he entered his own hermitage, he saw 
Jaigisavya already seated there. Having seen that Sannyasi complete his 
ablutions in the sea before his own arrival, and now seeing him back at his 
asrama before his own return, he was astounded. Then Devala used mantras 
and soared into the sky, to ascertain who the Sannyasi really was. There he 
saw crowds of sky-ranging Siddhas rapt in meditation reverentially worship 
Jaigisavya. This sight filled Devala with anger. 

He saw Jaigisavya set out, in quick succession, for swarga, to Pitriloka, 
to the region of Yama and to the abode of Soma. He saw him fly to the 
blessed regions of the performers of certain rigid yagnas. From there he 
visited the land of the Agnihotris and then to the realm of those Rishis who 
perform the Darsa and the Paurnamasa Yagnas. Devala then saw him go 
from where men performed yagnas by killing animals to that pure world 
which the Devas worship. Jaigisavya next visited the place where people 
perform the Chaturmasya and other similar yagnas, and from there to where 
the performers of the Agnishtoma yagna, lived. Devala then saw his guest 
fly to the refuge of those Rishis who perform the Yagna called Agnishutta 
and then to the worlds of those wise men who perform the Vajapeya, the 
Rajasuya and the Pundarika yagnas. He then saw him in the regions of 
those foremost of men who perform the Aswamedha yagna, and where they 
sacrifice human beings in yagnas. 

Devala saw Jaigisavya visit those who perform the Sautramani yagna in 
which the flesh of all living animals is offered. He saw Jaigisavya where 
they perform Dadasaha and other similar yagnas. He saw his guest visit the 
region of Mitravaruna and then in that of the Adityas. He saw his guest pass 
through the regions of the Rudras, the Vasus and Brihaspati and soar into 
the blessed region called Goloka, and to those of the Brahmasatris. He also 
saw him flit to those realms reserved for women who are chaste and 
devoted to their husbands. At this point, Devala lost sight of Jaigisavya, 
who vanished from his sight. 

Devala now reflected upon the power of Jaigisavya, the excellence of 
his vratas and upon the unrivalled success of his yoga. Then, with joined 


hands and in a reverential spirit, he asked those great Siddhas living in the 
regions of the Brahmasatris where Jaigisavya had gone. 

The Siddhas told him that Jaigisavya had gone to Brahmaloka, the 
eternal world of Brahma. Devala tried to soar aloft to follow him but he fell 
back down. The Siddhas then told him that he was not competent to follow 
Jaigisavya to the abode of Brahma. Hearing this, Devala descended from 
one region to another in due order, until he reached his own asrama. 

As soon as he entered his home, he saw Jaigisavya seated there, in 
quietude. Devala understood Jaigisavya’s power derived through the yoga 
of tapasya, and approaching that great Rishi, with deep humility, said, ‘I 
desire Moksha and emancipation, O Maharishi.’ 

Jaigisavya gave him lessons and taught him the Yoga Shastra and the 
Sanatana Dharma. The great Rishi understood that Devala was firmly 
resolved, and performed all the ordained steps for his admission into that 
religion. All creatures, with the Pitris, seeing Devala determined to adopt 
the religion of Moksha, began to weep, saying, ‘Alas, who will now give us 
food?’ 

Hearing these lamentations of all these beings, Devala thought about 
renouncing his desire for Moksha. At this, all kinds of sacred fruits and 
roots, O Bhaarata, and flowers and deciduous herbs, in thousands, began to 
weep, saying, ‘The wicked-hearted and mean Devala will, without doubt, 
once more pluck and cut us. Alas, having once assured all creatures of his 
perfect harmlessness, he sees not the wrong that he meditates to do.’ 

At this, Devala began to reflect about which among the two, Moksha or 
Grihasta, would be better for him. He abandoned Grihasta for Moksha and 
obtained the ultimate goal. The Devas led by Brihaspati applauded 
Jaigisavya and his tapasya. 

Then Maharishi Narada told the Devas, ‘There is no tapasya in 
Jaigisavya since he filled Devala with wonder.’ 

The Devas were shocked at Narada’s frightful words, and said, ‘No, 
there is no one superior or even equal to this noble Jaigisavya in force of 
energy, in tapasya or in yoga.’ 

Such was the power of Jaigisavya and Devala. This is the place and the 
tirtha of those two noble Rishis. Balarama bathes there, gives generous 
dakshina to Brahmanas, earns great punya and then leaves for the tirtha of 
Soma.” 


CANTO 147 


V aisampayana said, “There, at Soma tirtha, O Rajan, where the Lord 

of stars had once performed the Rajasuya yagna, a great war took 
place of which Tarakasura was the cause. Balarama bathes there and, after 
distributing dakshina, visits the tirtha of Sarasvata Muni, where, long ago 
during a drought extending for twelve years, the sage Sarasvata had taught 
the Vedas to many great Brahmanas.” 

Janamejaya asked, “Why did the Rishi Sarasvata teach the Vedas during 
the twelve year drought?” 

Vaisampayana said, “Long ago, there lived a Maharishi of great punya 
named Dadhicha who led the life of a Brahmachari. His mahatapasya was 
such that even the offer of every kind of reward could not distract him. This 
frightened Sakra so much that he sent the Apsara Alambusa to tempt him. 
Seeing the beautiful Apsara, Dadhicha involuntarily ejaculated into the 
river, where Saraswati secured his seed with care in her womb. In time, a 
child was born and she took it with her to the Rishi. 

Seeing the Rishi Dadhicha in a gathering, Saraswati handed over the 
child and said, ‘O Maharishi, this is your son from your seed which you 
ejaculated at the sight of the Apsara Alambusa, and which I held in my 
womb through my devotion for you, knowing that your tejas would not be 
destroyed. Accept this innocent child as your own.’ 


Dadhicha accepted the child and, feeling great love, held his son in a 
close embrace for some time. Pleased with Saraswati, Maharishi Dadhicha 
gave her a boon, saying, “The Viswedevas, the Rishis, all the tribes of the 
Gandharvas and the Apsaras, will henceforth, O blessed one, derive great 
happiness from oblations of your water.’ 

He then praised her saying, ‘You were born long ago, O most blessed 
one, from Brahma’s lake created from his mind, and all Mahatapasvins 
know you. You have done me great good. The world will henceforth know 
your child as Sarasvata. He will create new worlds and, during a drought, 
which will last for twelve years, Sarasvata will teach the Vedas to many 
great Brahmanas. O blessed Saraswati, through my grace you will always 
be the greatest of all sacred rivers.’ 

The River Saraswati went away in great joy, taking the child with her. 

Meanwhile, during the war between the Devas and the Danavas, Sakra 
searched the three worlds in vain for astras to kill the Asuras. He then said 
to the Devas, ‘I cannot kill the Asuras without the bones of Dadhicha. O 
Devas, go to that great Rishi and request him for his bones.’ 

Indra was always jealous of Dadhicha’s great tejas. The offspring of 
Maharishi Bhrigu, the son of Lord Brahma, he was born after great tapasya 
and was the strongest man in the world and tall like the king of the 
mountains. At the request of the Devas, Rishi Dadhicha unhesitatingly gave 
up his life and obtained in exchange, many regions of inexhaustible merit. 
Using his bones, Sakra made thunderbolts, chakras and heavy gadas. With 
the thunderbolt born of Brahma energy, and infused with mantras, Indra 
hurled it and slew nine and ninety mighty Daityas. 

Then, after a long time, there came a dreadful drought that lasted twelve 
years, during which, the Rishis and Maharishis went away in order to stay 
alive. Seeing this, the sage Sarasvata also wanted to leave but the river 
Saraswati assured him that she would always provide him with food in the 
form of large fish. He stayed and offered oblations of food to other Rishis 
and the Devas and thus continued to support both himself and the Devas. 

After that period of drought, the Rishis asked each other for instructions 
on the Vedas, which they had forgotten while wandering in search of 
sustenance. Indeed, there was no one among them who could understand 
the scriptures anymore. It so happened that one of them saw Maharishi 
Sarasvata reading the Vedas with undivided attention. He reported this to 
the others, as well as about Sarasvata’s unrivalled splendour and god-like 


mien. All the Maharishis went to him and asked him to teach them. He 
agreed but the Rishis felt that he was too young to be their teacher. 

At this he said, ‘I must act in such a way that my religious punya does 
not suffer a diminution. He who teaches improperly, and he who learns 
improperly, are both lost in no time and will come to hate each other. It is 
not upon years, or decrepitude, or wealth, or the number of relatives that 
Rishis stake their claim to punya. Only he among us who is capable of 
reading and understanding the Vedas is truly great.’ 

Hearing this, those Munis became his disciples and obtained from him 
the knowledge of the Vedas. Though only a boy, sixty thousand Munis 
became his sishyas and each brought a handful of grass and offered it to 
him. 

The mighty son of Rohini, and elder brother of Kesava, gives away 
wealth at that tirtha as dakshina, then joyfully continues his yatra to another 
place where once there lived an old unmarried woman, who undertook an 
unprecedented tapasya.” 


CANTO 148 


J anamejaya said, “O Maharishi, why did that maiden undertake such a 
severe tapasya and what was her vrata? Tell me the story, for I am 
intrigued.” 

Vaisampayana said, “There was a Rishi of great tejas named Kuni- 
Garga who, after practising severe tapasya, created a beautiful daughter 
entirely through his will. Looking at her, an overjoyed Maharishi Kuni- 
Garga abandoned his body and rose into swarga. That wonderful maiden, 
with eyes like lotus petals, began to practise a most severe tapasya. She 
worshipped the Pitris and the Devas with vratas for a long time and refused 
to marry, for she did not see a husband who could be worthy of her. 

In her devotion, she continued happily to emaciate her body, with 
austere penance in that solitary forest. Only when she became very old and 
unable to move even a single step without help, did she wish to depart to 
the other world. 

Seeing her about to cast off her body, Narada said to her, ‘O sinless one, 
great has been your tapasya but you cannot obtain the realms of blessedness 
for you have not cleansed yourself through marriage.’ 

Hearing this, the old woman went to a conclave of Rishis and said, ‘I 
will give half of the punya from my tapasya to anyone who accepts my 
hand in marriage.’ 


Galava’s son, a Rishi named Sringavat, accepted her proposal, with the 
understanding that he would live with her for only one night. She agreed, 
and Sringavat duly poured libations on the fire according to the Shastras 
and married her. On that night, she became a ravishing young woman, 
robed in deva-vastra, ornaments and garlands and smeared with celestial 
liniments and perfumes. Seeing her aglow with beauty, Sringavat very 
happily spent one night with her. 

In the morning, she said to him, ‘Our agreement, O Brahmana, has been 
fulfilled, and I will now leave you. He who passes one night with 
concentration in this tirtha after having gratified the Devas with oblations of 
water, will henceforth obtain that punya which is his who observes the 
vratas of Brahmacharya for eight and fifty years.’ 

With these words, that chaste woman departed for swarga. 

Rishi Sringavat, her husband, became unhappy remembering her beauty 
and accepted with difficulty the fruits of half her tapasya. Infatuated by her 
and moved by sorrow, he cast off his body as well and followed her out of 
this world. 

It was while he is at this tirtha that Baladeva hears of the killing of 
Salya. After giving dakshina to the Brahmanas there, he grieves for the 
dead Maharatha.” 


CANTO 149 


V aisampayana continued, “After Balarama leaves Samantapanchaka, 
he learns from various Rishis about the outcome of the war at 
Kurukshetra. They say, ‘O Rama, this Samantapanchaka is said to be the 
eternal northern altar of Brahma, the Lord of all beings. Here, in the olden 
days, the Devas performed a great yagna. Maharishi Kuru of great tejas 
cultivated this field for many years and so was it called the field of Kuru or 
Kurukshetra.’ 

Balarama asks, ‘Why did the noble Kuru cultivate this field?’ 

The Rishis replied, “In fact, in the olden days, Sakra, coming down from 
swarga, asked Kuru this very question. Kuru replied, saying, “O you of a 
hundred yagnas, those who die upon this plain shall ascend to regions of 
blessedness after being cleansed of their sins.” 

The lord Sakra ridiculed this and went back to swarga. However, 
without being in the least dejected, the royal sage Kuru continued to till the 
soil. Indeed, Sakra always received the same reply whenever he came to 
check, and always ridiculed the Rajarishi. Seeing the king till the soil with 
unflagging perseverance, Sakra summoned the Devas and informed them of 
the monarch’s occupation. The Devas were concerned that if by merely 
dying at Kurukshetra men could go to Devaloka without performing any 
yagnas to the Devas, it would endanger their very existence. They exhorted 
Sakra to stop Kuru by granting him a boon. 


Sakra went back to Kuru and said, “Do not toil any more, O king. I 
assure you that those who starve themselves to death, with all their senses 
awake, and those who die here in battle, will enjoy swarga.” 

King Kuru accepted and Sakra, with a joyful heart, returned to his 
heaven. Brahma, Vishnu, Maheswara, all the Devas, and the sacred Rishis 
duly sanctioned this word given by Sakra. They agreed that there would be 
no more sacred place on earth than Kurukshetra, and men who performed 
tapasya here would go to Brahma’s very loka after death. Further, men of 
punya, who gave away their wealth here, would have their wealth doubled 
and those who lived here in expectation of good would never have to visit 
the land of Yama. Kings who perform great yagnas here would dwell in 
swarga as long as earth herself lasted. 

Listen, O Baladeva, to the hymn that Sakra himself composed and sang 
here. ‘The very dust of Kurukshetra, borne away by the wind, shall cleanse 
evil souls and take them to heaven.’ 

Kurukshetra is the name given to the space between the Tarantuka and 
the Arantuka and the lakes of Rama and Shamachakra. Samantapanchaka is 
the northern sacrificial altar of Brahma, the Lord of all creatures; great 
Devas, Brahmanas and kings like Nriga and others, after performing costly 
yagnas here, died and went straight to heaven. Auspicious, sacred and much 
regarded by the Devas, this tirtha possesses all divine attributes. This is why 
Kshatriyas killed in battle here obtain the sacred realms of eternal 
blessedness.” 


CANTO 150 


V aisampayana said, “Baladeva visits Kurukshetra, O Janamejaya, 

gives away wealth there before going on to a large and beautiful 
asrama overgrown with madhuka and mango trees, and full of plakshas and 
nyagrodhas and with many bilwas and excellent jackfruit and arjuna trees. 
Delighted to see that asrama with so many marks of sacredness, Baladeva 
asked the Rishis whose it was. 

Those Rishis told him, ‘Long ago, Vishnudeva sat in austere tapasya 
here and performed all the eternal yagnas. Here, a maiden, the noble 
Sandilya’s beautiful and chaste daughter, who was self-restrained and 
observed Brahmacharya dharma, who kept austere vratas, performed severe 
tapasya that women are usually unable to, finally went to swarga, 
worshipped by the Devas and Brahmanas.’ 

Baladeva goes to that asrama, performs all the rites and ceremonies of 
the evening twilight on the side of Himavat, and then begins his ascent of 
the mountain. Soon he sees the glory of the river Saraswati, as well as the 
tirtha called Plakshaprasravana. 

He bathes and distributes dakshina at another wonderful tirtha called 
Karavapana and spends a night there with the Rishis before visiting the 
sacred asrama of the Mitra-Varunas. He then visits that place on the 
Yamuna where, long ago, Indra, Agni and Aryaman found great happiness. 
He bathes there and sits down to listen to the discourse between the Rishis 


and the Siddhas. Maharishi Narada, covered with matted locks and attired 
in golden rays, holding a golden danda and a kamandalu, arrives here. 
Accomplished in song and dance and adored by Devas and Brahmanas, 
Narada carries a beautiful tortoise-shell Veena. Rama respectfully receives 
the Devarishi who was a renowned provoker of quarrels, and asks him 
about the details of the war. 

Narada relates everything about the awful extermination of the Kurus 
and says, “Already, Bhishma, Drona and the lord of the Sindhus have fallen. 
Vikartana’s son Karna along with his sons is no more. Bhurisrava and Salya 
are dead. These and many other kings and shuras who fought for 
Duryodhana have all fallen. In Duryodhana’s army, only Kripa, 
Kritavarman and Ashwatthaman remain alive but they have run away in 
fear. A grieving Duryodhana has sought refuge in the depths of the 
Dwaipayana Lake. The Pandavas and Krishna have found him and 
provoked him to fight Bhima. Their terrible duel with gadas, O Balarama, 
will take place today. Go quickly, if you wish to witness that fight between 
your two disciples.’ 

Rama bade a respectful farewell to the Brahmanas. Having listened to 
the discourse of the sages about the great merits of tirthas, Balarama sang 
this verse in their midst: 

“Where else is such happiness as a home by the Saraswati? 

Where else is such punya as in a home by the Saraswati? 

Men have gone to heaven, after reaching her. 

All should ever remember her. 

Saraswati is the most sacred of rivers. 

She always bestows the greatest happiness on men. 

Men, after reaching the Saraswati, will not have to grieve for their sins 
either here or hereafter.’ 


He orders his attendants to return to Dwaraka, and descends from the 
Plakshaprasravana asrama. Repeatedly looking with joy at the Saraswati, 
Baladeva then drives swiftly in a ratha to witness the final duel between his 
two disciples. 

O Janamejaya, this was how that terrible battle took place.” 


CANTO 151 


e K ing Dhritarashtra, in great sorrow, asks, ‘Seeing Balarama arrive 
just as the gada yuddha was about to begin, O Sanjaya, what 
does my son do?’ 

Sanjaya says, “Your valiant son Duryodhana is overjoyed to see 
Baladeva. Yudhishtira stands up to receive Rama, and happily offers him a 
seat and enquires after his welfare. Rama replies, “I have heard Rishis say 
that Kurukshetra is a most sacred place, equal to swarga itself, and adored 
by Devas, Rishis and noble Brahmanas. I say that we repair at once to 
Samantapanchaka, which the Devas consider the northern Yagnavedi of 
Brahma, the Lord of all beings. He who dies in battle at that eternal and 
most sacred of places is sure to find swarga.” 

With his great gada and tread of an infuriated elephant, Duryodhana 
strides towards Samantapanchaka, surrounded by Yudhishtira and _ the 
Pandavas. The Devas in the sky and the Charanas applaud him. The blare of 
conches, the loud percussion of drums and the roars of Kshatriyas fill the 
sky. Moving westward, they reach the sacred tirtha on the southern side of 
the Saraswati and spread out. The ground there is firm and not sandy and 
they choose this spot for the final encounter. 

Clad in armour and hefting his own great mace, Bhima, O Rajan, 
assumes the stance of the Garuda. Wearing helmet and armour made of 
gold, licking the corners of his mouth, his eyes red, and breathing hard, 


Duryodhana dazzles like the golden Sumeru. Shaking his mace, your son 
looks at Bhima and dares him like an elephant challenging a rival. 

Evenly matched, both are Baladeva’s disciples and masters at fighting 
with the gada. Accomplished like Varuna, powerful like Vasudeva, Rama, 
or Ravana, they are like Maya and Vasava or Madhu and Kaitabha or Sunda 
and Upasunda, or Vali and Sugriva or like Kala and Mrityu. Both consider 
the other a worthy opponent and they stand ready, like two suns at the hour 
of the pralaya. 

Duryodhana now says to Yudhishtira standing with his brothers, 
Krishna and Balarama, “Sit with the Kaikeyas and the Srinjayas and the 
high-souled Panchalas and watch my duel with Bhima.” 

That group of kings and warriors sits down, resplendent like an 
assembly of Devas in swarga. The handsome elder brother of Kesava, 
Mahabaho Baladeva, clad in blue robes, sits in the middle and looks like the 
full moon. All those around him salute him respectfully. Meanwhile, those 
two shuras, both invincible at mace fighting, close with each other and, 
goading one another with offensive and bitter words, like Sakra and Vritra 
of old, begin their battle to death.” 


CANTO 152 


V aisampayana said, “Sanjaya says, “At the outset, O Janamejaya, a 

fierce wordy encounter takes place between the two shuras.’ A 
grieving King Dhritarashtra says, “Oh, I pity the man who meets such an 
end. My son was sovereign of the whole world, with kings and eleven 
chamus of troops under his command. Alas, now he is a lone warrior 
fighting on foot with his mace. My poor son, who was the protector of the 
universe, is now himself without protection. This is Destiny! Alas, O 
Sanjaya, great is the grief that my son must have felt.’ Having said this 
Dhritarashtra falls silent with sorrow. 

Sanjaya says, “Duryodhana roars a challenge and provokes Bhima to 
fight. At once, awful portents appear; a fierce wind begins to blow, driving 
showers of hard pebbles before it. A pall of dust hangs on the ground and a 
thick gloom envelops everything. Thunderbolts fall, hundreds of meteors 
crash into the earth with blasting force, Rahu swallows the sun and the 
earth, and the forests and trees shake violently. More hot winds blow and 
the summits of mountains crumble. Wild animals run in all directions, while 
jackals with blazing mouths howl everywhere, making one’s hair stand on 
end. The four quarters seems ablaze and many sinister beasts of ill omen 
appear all around. The water in the wells there swells up of its own accord 
and disembodied voices, asariris, whisper, chatter, growl and moan from 
everywhere. 


Looking at these portents, Bhima says to Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, “This 
evil Suyodhana cannot vanquish me. Like Arjuna burning down the 
Khandava forest, today I will exhaust the wrath that I have carried in my 
heart for such a long time, and I will also pluck out the burning dart that lies 
buried in your heart. I will kill this evil wretch and drape the garland of 
fame around your neck. He will never enter Hastinapura again. 

They set snakes on us when we were asleep, attempted to poison our 
food, to drown us at Pramanakoti on the Ganga and burn us alive while we 
were in the house of lac. They humiliated us in the great Kuru sabha, 
robbed us of all our possessions, and forced us into exile and a last year of 
ajnatavasa. I will settle all our debts today. 

The life of this evil son of Dhritarashtra has run its course and reached 
its end. After today, he will never again look at his father and mother; he 
will never again look at a woman’s beauty. Today, this disgraceful scion of 
Santanu’s line will lie on the bare earth, unbreathing and without his 
prosperity and kingdom. Today Dhritarashtra will hear of the death of his 
son, and remember Sakun1’s atrocities against us.” 

The mighty Bhima shoulders his mace and stands ready, like Sakra 
facing the Asura Vritra. He hisses at Duryodhana, “Remember Varanavata, 
where you humiliated Draupadi, while in her season, before all the Kuru 
sabha. Remember how you and Sakuni cheated Yudhishtira in that game of 
dice. We will never forget our suffering in exile in the forest and 
subsequently living concealed as servants in Virata’s city. I will have my 
revenge for all that today, vile cousin! 

It is my good fortune that you stand before me at last. It is for your sake 
that Bhishma Pitamaha, struck down by Sikhandi, lies on a bed of arrows. 
Drona, Karna, Salya and Sakuni, the root of this enmity and the Great War, 
are all dead. We have killed the wretched Pratikamin, who seized 
Draupadi’s tresses and all your brothers. You are responsible for the death 
of all these and numberless other kings. And now at last it is your time to 
die and I will kill you today with this mace of mine.” 

Duryodhana answers him fearlessly, “As usual, you brag. Fight, 
Vrikodara, and I will quench your thirst for war. Vermin that you are, know 
that you cannot frighten me. I have been waiting for this opportunity a long 
time. Today, fate has brought you within the reach of my gada. Stop 
bragging and do your worst.” 


The Somakas and other kings present there all applaud, and boost 
Duryodhana’s morale. He stands ready, like an angry elephant, bristling for 
fight. Bhima hefts his gada and closes with Duryodhana.’” 


CANTO 153 


: S anjaya says, ‘A confident Duryodhana stalks Bhima and they meet 

like two bulls locking horns. They spar and their maces collide 

like thunderbolts. Their duel, like the one between Indra and Prahlada, is 

hair raising. The Devas, Gandharvas and all the other spectators marvel at 
the two and no one can be sure who will ultimately triumph. 

They brandish their gadas, heavy and lethal like Yama’s Danda or 
Indra’s Vajra, and circle each other warily, seeking an opening to strike. 
Bhima whirls his weapon, producing a loud and appalling sound and 
presents an amazing sight as he shuffles his feet and prances about, 
alternately advancing and retreating, dealing and warding off blows with 
terrific facility. He attacks, feinting right and left, using every subtle and 
challenging ploy to draw his enemy forward while cleverly avoiding his 
blows by ducking under them or jumping high over Suyodhana’s lightning 
swings. 

He smashes his adversary standing toe to toe with him, and then strikes 
him with an unexpected backswing as he dances away from him, so 
amazingly light on his great feet. Both masters of the mace, Bhima and 
Duryodhana fight long and tirelessly, whirling about on the field, striking 
and avoiding each other’s blows before the transfixed onlookers both on the 
ground and in the sky. 


Duryodhana adopts the right mandala, while Bhima prefers the left. 
Bhima circles like an immense lion, most warily, O Rajan, but suddenly 
Duryodhana darts forward like a cobra and strikes him a staggering blow on 
his side. Bhima attempts to counterattack, but Duryodhana nimbly dodges 
his blow and strikes him yet again like thunder. The blow is so swift and 
awesome that it generates a flash of flame and a sickening sound as it lands. 
To all appearances, Suyodhana is gaining the upper hand. A great fear 
enters the hearts of the Pandus and the Somakas, as they mark the violence 
of the very wind that Duryodhana’s whirling mace creates. 

Displaying titanic prowess, the two shuras strike and both draw blood. 
The duel intensifies as the day closes under the gaze of thousands of those 
that watch, holding their breath. The two prodigious maces ring against 
each other deafeningly and sparks fly copiously, even as when two 
thunderbolts might collide. Ah, indescribable is the prowess and skill of the 
two cousins who so despise each other, and so alike are they in the battle of 
maces. 

Bhima recovers quickly from your son’s initial blows and beats back his 
opponent with a flurry of mace strokes so that Duryodhana is taken 
unawares and is briefly baffled and dazed. Flaring up then in rage, he pivots 
on his left foot and rising to his full height, strikes Bhima on the head with 
full, tremendous force. Astonished to see that his opponent neither flinches 
nor takes a step back, all that watch rise as a man and give him a standing 
ovation. 

Bhima now hurls his golden gada at Duryodhana but your prince uses 
the manoeuvre called Kausika, leaps up high and strikes the hurtling gada 
down into the ground like a sparking lightning bolt. Without a moment’s 
pause, Duryodhana rushes at Bhima and crashes a staggering blow squarely 
into his great chest, winding him. The anxiously watching Somakas and the 
Pandavas grow more and more alarmed, for Duryodhana appears to gain the 
advantage with each blow and moment. 

Bhima snatches up his mace and runs furiously at Duryodhana, whirling 
his weapon and he now strikes his enemy in the ribs, knocking him 
sideways and onto his knees. A cry of dismay rises from the throats of the 
Srinjayas. This revives Duryodhana and, seething with rage at his 
humiliation, he staggers to his feet and, breathing like a mighty snake, burns 
Bhima with murderous glances. He gathers himself and crashes a 
thunderous swing of his right into Bhima’s brow. Though blood spurts from 


that wound and through his nose, Bhima stands unmoved like a mountain. 
Swinging his own gada, he fetches Duryodhana a blow that fells him 
senseless to the ground. 

Like a large flower laden sala tree in the forest, uprooted by the violence 
of a storm, Duryodhana lies sprawled and unmoving. The Pandavas are 
ecstatic and shout their elation. However, Suyodhana recovers all too soon 
and, rising like an elephant from a lake, and seemingly quite unaffected, he 
circles, feints and, with great finesse, plunges forward and deals his titanic 
cousin a quite murderous blow. Bhima feels his legs turn to water and 
measures his length on the field. 

The ferocity of this last blow fractures Bhima’s coat of mail and 
Duryodhana lets out a yell of victory. There is a great uproar from Devas 
and Apsaras watching from the sky and a fragrant shower of unearthly 
blooms rains down on the two mighty, mighty adversaries. Seeing Bhima 
prostrate and unconscious on the earth and his coat of mail split open, stark 
terror grips the hearts of the Pandavas. However, Bhima also quickly 
recovers, wipes his bloodied face and, rising again with rolling eyes, 
steadies himself with some effort.’ ” 


CANTO 154 


: S anjaya says, ‘Watching keenly the duel between those two 
magnificent and peerless shuras of the Kuru vamsa, Arjuna asks 
Krishna, “Between these two, who, in your opinion, is the superior?” 

Krishna replies, “They had the same master Balarama, received the 
same training, but Bhima is more powerful, while Duryodhana has the 
greater skill and has practised more. In a fair fight, Bhima can never win. 
However, if he uses guile, he can vanquish Duryodhana just as the Devas 
destroyed the Asuras through trickery. We know that Sakra vanquished 
Virochana and that Indra robbed Vritra of his energy, all through deception. 
Bhima must do the same. During the game of dice, Bhima vowed to break 
Suyodhana’s thighs, which he lasciviously bared and called Draupadi to sit 
on, with his mace. Let him accomplish that now. The way to kill the Kuru 
king, who is full of deceit himself, is only through deceit. 

It is again through Yudhishtira’s foolishness that we find ourselves in 
danger once more. After achieving great success by killing Bhishma and the 
other Kurus, we had almost won the war and attained the end we sought. 
The noble, naive Dharmaraja’s folly has now set the outcome of the war 
entirely upon the result of this duel between Suyodhana and Bhima. Long 
ago, Usanas advised, ‘One must always be wary of the survivors of a beaten 
army who are cornered and fight with their last strength, desperately. For 
they are urgently motivated and have nothing to lose.’ 


Even Sakra, O Arjuna, would find it difficult to stand before the 
desperate fury of those who have abandoned all hope. We routed 
Suyodhana and his army and, despairing of retaining his kingdom, he ran 
away to hide in the depths of a lake. What sensible man would challenge 
such a person to single combat? I am not sure that Duryodhana will not 
succeed in snatching back the kingdom that he has already lost to us. For 
full thirteen years, he practised with the gada with great resolution. Look 
how he leaps and feints and then strikes like a naga, effortlessly, in this 
duel. If Bhima does not kill him through guile, he will surely remain king.” 

Understanding the import of what Krishna says, Arjuna catches Bhima’s 
eye and slaps his own left thigh. Bhima, too, immediately understands that 
signal and begins to look for an opportunity to fulfil his old vow. He knows 
full well that to strike an opponent below the waist is forbidden in a gada 
yuddha of dharma; he also knows what is at stake and that he will never 
prevail over Duryodhana without breaking the law of mace fighting. He 
circles Duryodhana with his uplifted mace, and shows many kinds of 
manoeuvres, like the Yomaka, and shifts his mandala from right to left and 
back again. Sometimes he uses the movement called Gomutraka, to confuse 
his terrible adversary. 

Your son, O Rajan, who is a past master in the art of using the gada, 
shuffles skilfully to keep his enemy always in front of him. Whirling their 
frightful gadas smeared with sandalwood paste and other perfumed 
unguents, the two shuras circle each other like two Garudas wanting to 
snatch the same snake for their meal. No one appears to gain any advantage 
and their colliding gadas make peals of thunder. 

Finally, fatigue overpowers them both, and they rest for a while before 
renewing their savage, outrageous encounter. Resuming after a brief rest, 
they find each other repeatedly with their flashing, stormy mace strokes and 
all their upper limbs are battered and bruised. Covered with blood from 
head to foot, they look like a pair of Kinsukas on the breast of Himavat. 

And now Bhima sets in motion his devious plan. He deliberately leaves 
an opening for Duryodhana to strike at him. The befuddled and prevailing 
Suyodhana is deceived, for he grows more confident of victory by the 
moment and steps forward with a grim smile—to end it all and claim 
victory and kingship. Bhima craftily flings his mace at him and your son, O 
Bhaarata, sidesteps and the weapon passes harmlessly by. Seizing the 
opportunity, Duryodhana quickly strikes him cleanly with great power. The 


blow stuns Bhima and he bleeds copiously. Duryodhana does not suspect 
that a trap has been laid for him; he overestimates the damage his blow has 
done and goes forward to put an end to his detested cousin, to end it all. 

Brave Bhima, meanwhile, braces himself, grits his teeth, summons up 
his last strength, and suddenly appears unhurt to his opponent and ready to 
return the blow. Completely deceived, Duryodhana pauses. This moment 
allows Bhima another few moments to recoup his strength. He catches his 
breath, picks up his mace and attacks Duryodhana with renewed vigour. 
Seeing him come, your surprised son decides to use the manoeuvre called 
Avasthana to meet his charge. This requires him to leap up into the air and, 
anticipating this perfectly, Bhima gives a triumphant yell and hurls his gada 
like lightning directly at his thighs even as he leaps. That wondrous and 
heavy mace hurled by Bhima infused with the force of the wind and thunder 
crashes into Duryodhana’s thighs, breaks them both and smashes his 
manhood as well. 

Your son Duryodhana falls, making the very earth echo with the sound. 
Fierce winds with thunder and lightning begin to blow, showers of dust fall 
and the earth, with her trees and plants and mountains, begins to tremble. 
Meteors in their thousands flare down from the sky, along with lashing 
showers of blood, all sent by Indra Maghavat. The Yakshas, the Rakshasas, 
and the Pisachas set up a huge commotion in the sky. At their terrifying 
yowls and screams, thousands of animals and birds, the surviving horses, 
elephants and soldiers of the Pandava army let out shrill cries. Conches 
blare and the peal of drums and cymbals are resounding as the thunder of 
the apocalypse. A vast and booming roar rises and echoes from within the 
bowels of the earth. 

Upon the fall of your son, O Bharatarishabha, headless and frightful 
beings, with many legs and arms, begin to dance everywhere. Women seem 
to take the appearance of men, and men that of women, and even armed 
warriors begin to tremble. Blood gushes up and breaks the banks of lakes 
and spumes up in geysers from deep wells, while rivers change their 
directions and rush back towards their sources. Seeing these portents, 
anxiety fills the hearts of the Panchalas and the Pandavas. The Devas, 
Gandharvas, Siddhas, and the Charanas return to their homes, applauding 
the wonderful duel between your sons, the gada yuddha to end all mace 
fights, the duel like which even the Great War has seen no other.’ ” 


CANTO 155 


: S anjaya says, “The Pandavas and the Somakas are overjoyed to see 

Duryodhana lying on the earth like a sala tree uprooted by a 

storm. Approaching Duryodhana, Bhima taunts him, “Wretch, you laughed 

at the disrobed Draupadi in the sabha and called her a cow. You bared your 

thigh and asked her to come and sit on it. Now suffer the consequence of 
what you did.” 

Bhima kicks the head of his fallen foe with his left foot. Eyes red with 
fury, he says, “They who danced and mocked, calling us, “Cow, cow!’ We 
will now dance and call them, ‘Cow, cow.’ We have no guile, no fire, no 
guile at dice, and no deception. We only trust the might of our arms to 
defeat our enemies.” 

An exultant Vrikodara once more says deliberately to Yudhishtira, 
Krishna, Srinjaya, Arjuna and the two sons of Madri, “Those Dhartarashtras 
who dragged a pleading Draupadi into the sabha and disrobed her, have 
now been killed by the might of Pandavas and through the tapasya of 
Draupadi. King Dhritarashtra’s base sons, who called us ‘sesame seeds 
without kernels’, and all their relatives and followers, are now dead. The 
consequence of our deeds matters little; we may go to heaven or fall into 
hell.” 

Jubilantly brandishing his mace, he again kicks the prostrate 
Duryodhana’s head with his left foot. The Somaka Kshatriyas, seeing 


Bhima’s shameful act, do not approve at all. King Yudhishtira tells him, 
“You have exhausted your hostility towards Duryodhana and accomplished 
your vow by a fair or an unfair deed. Stop. Do not kick his head, Bhima. Do 
not do such an ignoble thing. Remember, Duryodhana is our brother, a king 
of the Kurus, and commanded eleven Akshauhinis. You should not touch a 
king and a kinsman with your foot. His brothers, sons, and his kinsmen are 
dead; his friends and counsellors are gone and his troops exterminated. He 
is ruined. We have defeated him in battle and in every respect; he deserves 
our pity and not our abuse. 

‘Bhima is a man of dharma’, people used to say of you. Why then, O 
Bhima, do you insult the fallen king in this way?” 

Yudhishtira, emotional with grief, his voice choked with tears, walks up 
to Duryodhana and says, “O lord, you should not give way to anger or 
grieve for yourself. Without doubt, you suffer the dreadful consequences of 
your sins. Undoubtedly, the Creator has ordained this end for us. O 
Kurupravira, it was your avarice, pride and folly that brought you to this 
sorry end. You are the cause of the deaths of your companions, brothers, 
sires, sons, grandsons and others, and now you too are mortally wounded. 
All this is the effect of Fate. You deserve no pity, but your death, O Anagha 
one, is enviable. It is we who are to be pitied in every respect, for now we 
have a miserable existence ahead of us, without friends and kinsmen. Alas, 
how will I face the sorrowing widows of my brothers, sons and grandsons! 
You depart from this world for swarga while we continue to suffer the most 
poignant grief and can expect only naraka as our reward. The grieving 
wives of Dhritarashtra’s sons and grandsons, those widows crushed by 
sorrow, will curse us all.” 

At this point, Dharmaputra Yudhishtira breaks down and _ sobs 
helplessly.’” 


CANTO 156 


¢ “T) hritarashtra asks, ‘O Suta, seeing Bhima strike Duryodhana 
down treacherously, what does Baladeva do, who is an 
acknowledged master of mace fighting and familiar with all its rules?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘The Yadusreshta Rama, greatest wielder of the mace, is 
livid. Raising his arms, he says in an anguished voice, “Shame on Bhima! 
The rules of gada yuddha combat are clear that no combatant should target 
any part below the navel. It is a shameful thing that this ignorant wretch 
Bhima struck Suyodhana a blow below the navel.” 

An incensed Balarama, looking like the gigantic Kailasa Mountain, 
rushes towards Bhima with his halayudha, his ploughshare weapon, raised. 
Just as quickly, Krishna restrains him in his mighty arms. The two great 
warriors of the Yadu’s race are striking; one dark in complexion and the 
other fair, like the sun and the moon in the evening sky. To pacify his angry 
brother, Kesava says, “There are six kinds of situations that a person may be 
faced with: one’s own success, one’s friend’s success, one friends’ friend’s 
success, the failures of one’s enemy, the failures of one’s enemy’s friends, 
and the failures of one’s enemy’s friends’ friends. When one’s oneself or 
one’s friends meet with reverses, one should then realise that one’s fall is at 
hand and should look for a suitable remedy. 

The Pandavas are our natural friends for they are the children of our 
own father’s sister. It is one’s dharma to accomplish one’s vratas. Bhima 


vowed in the midst of the sabha that he would break the thighs of 
Duryodhana with his gada. Moreover, Maharishi Maitreya once cursed 
Duryodhana, saying, ‘Bhima will break your thighs with his mace.’ 

I cannot fault Bhima. Do not give way to wrath, Baladeva. Our births 
and the attraction of our hearts are the basis of our relationship.” 

Hearing Krishna’s words, the noble Baladeva says, “Dharma is 
practised sincerely by the good but is always the victim of two things—the 
desire for Artha, by those who covet it, and the desire for Kama by those 
that are wedded to it. Whoever follows all three— Dharma, Artha and Kama 
—without injuring Dharma and Artha, or Dharma and Kama, or Kama and 
Artha, will always find great happiness. Now, as a result of Dharma 
suffering at the hands of Bhima, this harmony has been disturbed, Govinda, 
whatever you may say.” 

Krishna replies, “You are known as someone free from anger and 
devoted to Dharma. Calm yourself and do not give way to wrath. Know that 
the Kali yuga is at hand. Remember also the vow that this son of Pandu 
made. Accept that he has now paid the debt he owed his hostility and has 
fulfilled his vow.” 

Balarama does not appreciate Krishna’s argument and his anger still 
burns. He then tells the assembled warriors, “Having unfairly killed the 
noble Suyodhana, Bhima will henceforth be known in the world as a false 
warrior, while the noble Suyodhana is a true Kshatriya and will find eternal 
blessedness. Dhritarashtra’s royal son, so foully struck down, fully prepared 
himself for the yagna of war. He undertook the initiatory ceremonies on the 
battlefield and finally poured away his life as a libation. Duryodhana has 
thus fairly completed his yagna and his final ablution is the attainment of 
glory.” 

Rohini’s son, Balarama, magnificent like the crest of a white cloud, 
ascends his chariot and drives away to Dwaravati leaving the Panchalas, 
Vrishnis and the Pandavas, mortified. Krishna approaches a dejected and 
worried Yudhishtira, who is in a quandary about what to do, and says, “O 
Dharmarajan, you know the tenets of Kshatriya dharma; why do you allow 
Bhima to kick the head of the fallen Duryodhana?” 

Yudhishtira answers, “I do not approve of Bhima’s angry deed, O 
Krishna, nor do I rejoice at this extermination of my race. However, 
remember the sons of Dhritarashtra cheated us of our kingdom, exiled us, 
and heaped many indignities on our heads. Bhima has not forgotten all that 


or their many cruel words. This is why I allowed him, after killing 
Duryodhana, a man enslaved by his passions, to gratify his desire, even if it 
was adharma.” 

Krishna listens to Yudhishtira and mildly says, “So be it then.” 

He secretly, knowingly, approves of what Bhima did to bring 
Duryodhana down, not only because he has a soft corner for him but 
because he knows that, otherwise, everything would have been lost. 
Moreover, it was Krishna himself who told Arjuna the only way in which 
Bhima could prevail. His heart is full of joy and pride at their victory, as he 
respectfully salutes Yudhishtira with joined hands. He says, “The earth is 
today yours, O Rajan, to enjoy in peace. Rule over her and observe the 
duties of Kshatriya dharma. He who was the cause of this war with his 
deceit and sins lies on the ground. You have no enemies left alive and the 
earth with her forests and mountains is once more yours.” 

Yudhishtira says, “It is because we always followed Krishna’s advice 
that we rule the earth again. Destiny has allowed you to redeem your 
promise to your mother and to your wrath and blessed you with victory.””” 


CANTO 157 


. ‘T) hritarashtra asks, ‘O Sanjaya, what do the Pandavas and the 
Srinjayas do after Bhima strikes Duryodhana down?’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘The Pandavas, Panchalas, Srinjayas and Krishna are 
jubilant, and their shouts reverberate all over the battlefield. Some stretch 
their bows; others strum their bowstrings. Some blow their cavernous 
conches; others beat their drums. It is as if the earth is unable to bear the 
rapture of those rejoicing warriors. 

Many Kshatriyas repeatedly congratulate Bhima saying, “Your 
achievement in defeating Duryodhana is truly amazing. You were like Indra 
in his war against Vritra. No other warrior could have achieved as much. 
Destiny gave you victory and allowed you to quaff the blood of Dusasana, 
like a lion drinking the blood of a buffalo. Fate has made you Yudhishtira’s 
instrument of revenge. O Bhima, your fame has spread over the whole 
world. We applaud you now just as bards and eulogists lauded Sakra after 
he vanquished Vritra.” 

Then the rejoicing warriors switch to abusing Duryodhana. Krishna 
intervenes and tells them, “O Kshatriyas, it is not proper to abuse a beaten 
foe with such cruel talk. This evil man is already half dead. Wise friends 
like Vidura, Drona, Kripa and Sanjaya begged him to give the sons of 
Pandu their paternal share in the kingdom, but he laughed at them. This 
wretch is no longer fit to be either friend or foe. What is the use in wasting 


your breath upon one who is now just a piece of wood? Mount your 
chariots, and let us leave this place. Fate has already accounted for him and 
his counsellors, his kinsmen and friends.” 

Hearing Krishna’s rebukes, king Duryodhana tries to get up. He raises 
himself on his two arms, and glares venomously at Vasudeva. Indeed, his 
posture resembles that of a snake shorn of its tail. Ignoring his unbearable 
pain, Duryodhana bitterly hisses at Krishna, “O son of Kamsa’s slave, you 
are the most shameless one. Have you forgotten that Bhima treacherously 
struck me on my thighs and manhood, against all the rules of gada yuddha? 
You are responsible, for it was you who told Bhima to do it. Do you think 
that I did not notice you telling Arjuna what you did? 

It was you, cowherd, who caused the death of thousands of kings 
through various forms of deceit, including the fall of our Pitamaha by 
confronting him with Sikhandi. You tricked our Acharya into believing that 
his son Ashwatthaman was dead while it was actually an elephant with the 
same name and Drona laid down his weapons. Then again, when he was 
about to be killed by the vile Dhrishtadyumna, you did not stop the 
Panchala prince. 

You forced Karna to use the Shakti that he had from Sakra against 
Ghatotkacha, the weapon he had saved for Arjuna, the one your precious 
Partha would not have escaped. You encouraged Satyaki to kill Bhurisrava, 
who had lost an arm and while he sat in dhyana observing the Praya vrata. 
Karna almost killed Arjuna with a shaft in which the snake Aswasena had 
hidden himself, but you foiled his attempt. When Karna’s chariot wheel 
sank into the ground and he was helpless as he attempted to free it, you told 
Arjuna to kill him. You would never have won this war if you had fought 
Karna, Bhishma, Drona and me by fair means. Vile Krishna, you employed 
the most crooked and evil methods to cause the death of many great kings 
who observed Kshatriya dharma.” 

Krishna says, “O son of Gandhari, you, your brothers, sons, kinsmen, 
friends, and followers are dead only because you chose a path that was not 
of Dharma. Your evil ways and deeds were the cause of Bhishma, Drona 
and Karna’s deaths. Remember, I implored you to give the Pandavas their 
paternal inheritance, but you listened to Sakuni instead and your own envy 
and greed, and refused. You tried to poison Bhima and to immolate all the 
Pandavas and their mother in the palace of lac. 


Once, you urged the evil Jayadratha to abduct Draupadi when the 
Pandavas were out hunting near the Trinabindu asrama. Then, when you 
dishonoured her in front of the sabha, you more than earned your death at 
Bhima’s hands. 

You used the clever Sakuni to cheat Dharmaraja Yudhishtira, who was a 
novice at dice. For that, you deserve to die. 

You and your warriors surrounded Abhimanyu, who was only a child 
and alone, and treacherously cut him down. For that, wretch, you deserve to 
die. 

The truth, Duryodhana, is that it was you who perpetrated all these foul 
deeds of adharma, and not us. You never listened to the counsels of 
Brihaspati and Usanas. You never honoured the aged and you never sought 
or listened to anybody’s advice at all unless it suited your purposes. 
Enslaved by ungovernable greed and avarice, you committed countless sins 
of every kind. And now you suffer the consequences of everything you did, 
despite being warned time and again by those who wished you well.” 

Duryodhana replies, “I have studied, given dakshina, ruled this wide 
earth, trampled over my enemies and enjoyed all pleasures and 
gratifications worthy of the Devas. Who is more fortunate than I am? Death 
in battle, the end that all Kshatriyas who observe their svadharma desire, is 
now mine. With all my well-wishers, and my younger brothers, I am going 
to swarga. But you, O Varapurusha, will continue to live in this unhappy 
world, your goals unfulfilled and torn by grief.” 

A thick shower of fragrant flowers falls from the sky on Duryodhana 
while the Gandharvas play enchanting musical instruments and the Apsaras 
and the Siddhas sing the glory of king Duryodhana. A redolent breeze 
mildly blows and the sky becomes clear and blue like lapis lazuli. Vasudeva 
and the Pandavas see with consternation the acclaim and worship that 
Duryodhana receives. Hearing invisible voices say that the deaths of 
Bhishma, Drona, Karna and Bhurisrava were achieved through adharma, 
the Pandavas are anxious and aggrieved. 

Then Krishna says in a deep and mighty voice, “All these Maharathas 
were accomplished in the use of weapons, and considered Atirathas in the 
world. Even the very Regents of the Earth, let alone you, could never have 
killed them in a fair fight. Therefore, for your good, for your kingdom, I 
repeatedly used my powers of illusion to effect their deaths in battle. 


You should not take it to heart that you killed your enemy by deceit. 
When one has numerous enemies to quell, it becomes necessary to deal 
with them through wiles. The Devas used the same strategy to overpower 
the Asuras and, since, all are now free to adopt their policy, just as we did 
successfully. Let us retire for the night and rest our horses, elephants and 
chariots.” 

The Pandavas and the Panchalas are relieved, and shout their approval. 
All of them blow their conches and Krishna blows a long, echoing blast on 
the Panchajanya, Bharatarishabha, happy at the sight of Duryodhana struck 
down in battle.” 


CANTO 158 


: S anjaya says, ‘The Pandavas, followed by  Satyaki, 

Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandi, the five sons of Draupadi and all the 

kings return to their tents, their spirits now revived. The Parthas enter 

Duryodhana’s palatial tent, shorn now of its splendours, shabby without its 

lord and resembling an arena after the spectators have left. It contains only 
women, eunuchs and a few aged counsellors. 

Krishna then tells Arjuna, “Take your Gandiva and your two 
inexhaustible quivers and alight. I will dismount after you, O 
Bharatasattama.” 

Arjuna obeys and, as soon as Krishna also steps down, the kapidhwayja, 
which flew on the top of the chariot and which Drona and Karna had tried 
in vain to burn with their Devastras, spontaneously takes fire along with the 
ratha and the Gandharva horses! All these burn down of their own accord. 

The Pandavas are amazed to see the magnificent chariot reduced to 
ashes, and Arjuna, O Rajan, salutes Krishna respectfully and, with bowed 
head and joined hands, says, “O Govinda, will you tell me why this ratha 
has been consumed by fire?” 

Krishna says, “O Arjuna, the energy of the Brahmastra and other astras 
had already destroyed the ratha. It did not become ashes only because I sat 
in it. Now that your purpose has been achieved and I have abandoned it, the 
ratha is needed no more and has become ashes.” 


Then, with a little pride, the divine Krishna embraces Yudhishtira, and 
says, “Destiny has ordained your victory over your enemies, O son of 
Kunti. It is good fortune that allowed Arjuna, Bhima, the two sons of Madri 
and yourself to escape with your lives from this war that has claimed so 
many millions of lives and washed the world in their blood. Now complete 
what you need to do. 

After I arrived at Upaplavya, you approached me with Arjuna and 
offered me the customary arghya of honey, and said, ‘This Dhananjaya, O 
Krishna, is your brother and friend. You must protect him from all danger.’ 

I answered you saying, “Tathaastu—so be it.’ 

I have kept my word and a victorious Arjuna with his brothers has 
survived this dreadful war unscathed.” 

An emotional Yudhishtira replies, “Who else but you, O Mahabaho, 
including the Vajradhari himself, could have withstood the Brahmastras 
loosed by Drona and Karna? It was through your grace that we vanquished 
the Samsaptakas and Arjuna could meet the fiercest challenges and find 
victory. At Upaplavya, Maharishi Krishna-Dwaipayana assured me that 
wherever you are there is dharma, and that victory is always with you.” 

Then, shouting in exultation, they enter your camp, O Dhritarashtra, and 
plunder it, looting the war chest of its vast store of gold, silver, jewels, 
gems, pearls and many costly ornaments, as well as innumerable slaves. 

Krishna suggests that it would not be auspicious to remain in the enemy 
camp that night and the Pandavas and Satyaki, without any enemies left, 
accompany him and return for that night to their camp on the banks of the 
sacred stream Oghavati. 

Krishna asks Daruka to have his horses, Saibai, Sugriva, Meghapuspa 
and Balahaka yoked to his chariot, and drives swiftly to Dhritarashtra in 
Hastinapura. The Pandavas ask him to comfort the helpless Gandhari who 
has lost all her sons.’” 


CANTO 159 


J anamejaya said, “Why does Dharmaputra Yudhishtira send Krishna to 
Gandhari? Krishna first went to the Kauravas to broker peace between 
them and the Pandavas. He failed and the result was the battle of 
Kurukshetra, which resulted in the destruction of the Kauravas and their 
forces and a famous victory for the sons of Pandu. Why then, O foremost of 
all Adharyus, does Krishna once again go to Hastinapura? It must have 
been an important mission for Krishna to make the journey himself.” 
Vaisampayana said, “The reason is that Yudhishtira fears what the 
blessed Gandhari, who possesses immense powers through her tapasya, 
might do when she learns how her son Duryodhana was struck down by 
Bhima who flouted the strict laws of a gada yuddha. He knew that she could 
consume the three worlds with her anger. By sending Krishna ahead, he 
hoped that Gandhari would be comforted and her rage cooled somewhat 
before Yudhishtira’s own arrival. 
He wonders, ‘How will Gandhari endure her grief when she hears her 
son, who always fought fairly with the mace, was slain unfairly by us?’ 
Filled with fear and grief, Dharmaputra Yudhishtira pleads, “Through 
your grace, O Govinda, my kingdom is now free. This is something that we 
could never imagine. As in that war of long ago between the Devas and 
Asuras you supported the Devas, you helped us in in our great battle. By 
agreeing to be Arjuna’s charioteer, you protected us and enabled us to win 


this war. For our sake, O Krishna, you have endured harsh words, blows of 
the mace, and injuries from arrows and spears. Our efforts have not been in 
vain, and we have finally succeeded in killing Duryodhana. Now do 
whatever is needful so that we do not lose what we have so painfully won. 

Although victory is ours, O Krishna, our heart trembles with fear and 
doubt. We fear the pure Gandhari’s wrath. That blessed queen, with her 
many austere tapasyas, has the power to reduce us to ashes when she hears 
of the deaths of her sons and grandsons. You must go there, O Madhava, 
and pacify Gandhari. You are eternal, the Creator and the Destroyer and the 
First Cause of all the worlds, and surely you can pacify that great queen in 
her terrible grief and rage. Our grandsire, the holy Krishna-Dwaipayana, 
will also be there. O Mahabaho, you must dispel the anger of Gandhari.’ 

As soon as Daruka gets his ratha ready, Krishna rides swiftly for 
Hastinapura and seeks audience with Dhritarashtra. He finds Maharishi 
Vyasa already there. Touching the feet of both Vyasa and Dhritarashtra, he 
respectfully salutes Gandhari also. He then seizes Dhritarashtra by the hand 
and begins to weep. After a while, he composes himself, washes his eyes 
and his face, and says eloquently to Dhritarashtra, ‘You know, O Bhaarata, 
the past and the future and are familiar with the course of Kaala. Out of 
regard for you, the Pandavas tried to prevent the destruction of their race 
and the general extermination of Kshatriyas. Yudhishtira and his brothers 
always tried to live in peace with all. 

They went into exile after their defeat at the game of dice and even had 
to live in lowly disguise, and suffered many indignities. On the eve of 
battle, I came and in the presence of so many great and noble men begged 
you for only five villages. Alas, Kaala and greed ensured that you did not 
grant my request. 

You have now become responsible for the extermination of the very 
Kshatriya varna. Bhishma, Somadatta, Bahlika, Kripa, Drona, his son, and 
the wise Vidura always advocated peace, but you never listened to them. 
Alas, it seems that Kaala confounds everybody, O Bhaarata, even you. 

Indeed, Fate is supreme, so do not, O wise one, impute any fault to the 
Pandavas. Judged by the laws of dharma, intellect or affection, they have 
done no wrong. You know that all this is your own fault, so do not cherish 
any ill will towards the sons of Pandu. Race, descent, the final tarpana, and 
everything else that one looks for in our offspring now depend on the 
Pandavas, for both you and Gandhari. Both of you should not harbour 


malice towards them. Reflect upon what I have told you, think of your own 
transgressions, and cherish affection towards the Pandavas. 

You know Yudhishtira’s devotion and his affection for you. He has not 
found any peace of mind after these needless deaths of his enemies. He 
grieves for you and for Gandhari. Overwhelmed with shame and distress, he 
dares not come before you because he knows what you suffer on account of 
your children.’ 

Krishna then says to the sorrowing Gandhari, ‘O daughter of Subala, 
you of stern vratas, listen to me. O auspicious one, there is no woman like 
you in the world. You will remember the wise words that you spoke in the 
sabha in my presence, but which your sons did not obey. You told 
Duryodhana then, “Listen, O foolish prince, victory will go only where 
dharma is.” 

Your words have now come true. Knowing all this, do not grieve or 
think of cursing the Pandavas. O Bhadre, because of the strength of your 
tapasya, you have the power to burn up the whole world with your eyes that 
you have kept bound in virtue for so long.’ 

Gandhari says quietly, ‘It is as you say, O Kesava. My grieving heart 
was shaken by untold fury but, hearing what you say, it is calmed. Now, you 
and the sons of Pandu are the only remaining sanctuary for my blind old 
king Dhritarashtra.’ 

Gandhari covers her face and begins to sob loudly. Lord Krishna 
comforts her with kindly words. Then, suddenly, in his sacred heart, he sees 
a great evil that Drona’s son Ashwatthaman is contemplating. He rises in 
haste, after touching Vyasa’s feet, and says to Dhritarashtra, ‘I take your 
leave, O Bharatasattama. Do not grieve. I leave you so suddenly because I 
fear that the son of Drona is contemplating doing something unspeakably 
evil to destroy the Pandavas this very night.’ 

Both Gandhari and Dhritarashtra say, “Go quickly, O Kesava, and 
protect the Pandavas. We hope to see you again soon.’ 

After he leaves, the noble Vyasa comforts the broken Dhritarashtra. 

Having achieved what he came for, Krishna drives like the wind from 
Hastinapura and arrives at the Pandava camp. There he reports the success 
of his mission.” 


CANTO 160 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, ‘Kicked in the head, his thighs broken, 
prostrate on the ground, what, O Sanjaya, does my exceedingly 
proud son then say?’ 

Sanjaya says, “I and our other subjects come in droves to where your 
son lies dying. King Duryodhana, O monarch, covered with dust, gathers up 
his flowing locks with painful effort and begins to sigh like a snake which 
has had its back broken. Filled with rage, with tears flowing fast from his 
eyes, he glares at me. He strikes his arms against the earth for a while like 
an enraged elephant and, shaking his loose locks, and gnashing his teeth, he 
begins to censure Yudhishtira. Breathing heavily, he tells me, “Alas, I who 
led eleven chamus of troops and had for my protectors Santanu’s son 
Bhishma, the Maharatha Karna, Gotama’s son Kripa, Sakuni, Drona, that 
foremost among all wielders of arms, Ashwatthaman, the heroic Salya and 
Kritavarman, alas, I have come to this sorry plight. It seems that Kaala is 
irresistible and no one can conquer or escape Time. Inform my friends who 
are still alive, how Bhima struck me down sinfully. Bhurisrava, Bhishma 
and Drona also suffered grievous adharma from the cruel Pandavas, for 
which, surely, they will incur the condemnation of all righteous men. 

What pleasure can a man of dharma enjoy at having gained victory by 
sinful means? Who again would approve of a Kshatriya fighting through 
vile perfidy? How can that wretch Vrikodara rejoice after the manner in 


which he struck me down? How could he lay his foot on my head when I 
lay with my thighs and my very manhood broken? Is such a man worthy of 
honour? 

O Sanjaya, tell my suffering parents that I have performed yagnas, 
supported a vast number of servants, ruled the world with her seas, subdued 
my enemies, gifted wealth to my kinsmen, made my friends happy and 
defied all my enemies. I conquered hostile kingdoms and enslaved great 
kings. I was always generous towards all whom I loved. Who is there more 
fortunate than I am? 

I have attended to the three purusharthas— Dharma, Artha and Kama. I 
have studied the Vedas and given dakshina according to the laws. By 
observing the duties of my svadharma, I have earned many realms of 
blessedness in the hereafter. Fate ensured that I was never defeated in battle 
and subjected to anyone’s overlordship. Fate ensured that I fought valiantly 
and did nothing dishonourable or against my Kshatriya dharma. Who can 
be more fortunate than I can? 

Yet now, only after my fall, has fate abandoned me. I have found the 
death that all noble Kshatriyas wish for. I have been killed vilely, sinfully, 
with a low stroke of the wretched Bhima’s mace, for he could never have 
prevailed against me otherwise. Tell the blessed Ashwatthaman, 
Kritavarman of the Satwata vamsa, and Saradwat’s son Kripa, that they 
should never trust the Pandavas, who have perpetrated these many crimes 
of adharma.” 

After this, your royal son tells our messengers, “Bhima has killed me 
treacherously. I who was sovereign of all the world am now like a destitute, 
a vagrant, and I will follow in the wake of Drona, Karna, Salya, Vrishasena, 
Sakuni, Jalasandha, king Bhagadatta, of Somadatta’s son, Jayadratha, king 
of the Sindhus, of all my brothers led by Dusasana, of Dusasana’s proud 
son, of my own son Lakshmana, and the millions of others who fought for 
me and have already attained swarga. 

Alas, how will my sister Dussala, stricken by sorrow, bear the news of 
the death of her brothers and her husband? Alas, what will be the plight of 
the old king, my father, my mother Gandhari, and his daughters-in-law and 
grand-daughters-in-law? Without doubt, the beautiful and large-eyed 
mother of Lakshmana, now that she has lost her son and husband, will soon 
meet with her death. If Charvaka, the mendicant devotee who is a master of 
speech, learns everything, that blessed man will certainly avenge himself 


for my death. By dying upon the sacred field of Samantapanchaka, 
celebrated over the three worlds, I myself will surely gain many eternal 
regions of honour, felicity and bliss.” 

Hearing these lamentations of the king, thousands of grieving men flee 
in all directions. The whole earth, with her forests and seas, with all her 
mobile and immobile creatures, begins to tremble violently, and to emit 
deep roars from her very entrails. All the points of the compass turn dismal 
and murky. The messengers find Ashwatthaman and report to him all that 
had transpired after which they return, thoughtful and grief-stricken.’” 


CANTO 161 


°S anjaya says, “After the messengers convey word of the fall of 
Duryodhana to the remaining severely wounded Maharathas of 
the Kaurava army, Kripa and Kritavarman ride quickly to the spot. They see 
Duryodhana lying on the ground like a sala tree laid low by a tempest, 
covered in blood, in agony and weltering on the bare ground. He is 
surrounded by many ravening carnivores, like wealth-coveting dependants 
around a king lying in state. His forehead contracted into furrows of rage, 
he rolls his eyes in anger and growls at the beasts. Kripa, Kritavarman and 
Aswatthaman alight from their chariots and run towards the king. 

A tearful Ashwatthaman says, “O Naravyaghra, truly there is nothing 
stable in the world of men, since you, the king of the world, now lie on the 
bare earth covered with dust. Where are Dusasana or the maharatha Karna, 
or your many friends? Ah, the ways of time and Yama are truly inscrutable. 
Look at the reverses that Kaala inflicts. Where is your vast army, your pure 
white canopy and your yak-tail fan, O Rajan?” 

Hearing this from the sorrowing Ashwatthaman, your son first consoles 
him and, shedding tears of grief afresh, says, “This liability of all living 
creatures to death is ordained by the Creator himself—that death has now 
come to me, who reigned over the entire earth. I never turned my back on 
battle, whatever calamities overtook me, and always lived in courage and 
perseverance. Fate decreed that I should die at the hands of evil men and 


through deception. My friends, it is great good fortune that you have 
escaped alive from this great slaughter. 

Do not grieve for me. If the Vedas are any authority, I have certainly 
acquired many eternal regions. I am not ignorant of the glory of Krishna of 
immeasurable energy. He did not cause me to deviate from the proper 
observance of Kshatriya dharma. You have striven hard for my success but 
Destiny will always prevail.” 

Duryodhana, with eyes laved with tears, falls silent, his body wracked 
with pain. Seeing him thus, Drona’s son flares up in anger like the fire of the 
pralaya. He takes Duryodhana’s hand and, in a voice hoarse with tears, 
says, “My father was killed by those wretches through a base deceit. Yet, 
that does not burn me as keenly as your distress. Listen to the vow that I 
swear, by Truth, by all my acts of piety, and by my religious merits: today, 
in the very presence of Krishna, I will despatch all the Panchalas to 
Yamaloka. Allow me, Rajan, to fulfil my oath.” 

Duryodhana is pleased to hear these words and asks Aswatthaman to 
bring a pot full of water. Receiving the vessel, your son tells Kripa, “O 
blessed Brahmana, let Ashwatthaman be installed as our Senapati. Those 
learned in the scriptures say that at the command of the king, even a 
Brahmana may fight, especially one who has adopted the ways of a 
Kshatriya.” 

At the king’s command, Kripa, the son of Saraswat, installs 
Ashwatthaman as senapati. He embraces the king and leaves, the ten points 
resounding with his leonine roars. Duryodhana, covered in blood, passes 
that fearful night there in agony while the grieving Maharathas leave the 
battlefield, their hearts unbearably heavy, and reflect anxiously and 
earnestly on what they should do next.’” 


The End of Salya Parva 


Sauptika Parva 


CANTO 1 


a UM! Having bowed down unto Narayana, and Nara the most 
exalted of Purushas, and to the Devi Saraswati, must the spirit of 
Jaya be invoked! 

Sanjaya says, ‘Then, those three heroes, Kripa, Kritavarman and 
Aswatthaman, go together towards the south. At the hour of sunset they 
arrive at a place near the Kuru encampment. Letting their animals loose, 
they are taken with fear. Seeing a forest they enter it stealthily. They set 
themselves down at no great distance from the Kuru camp. Lacerated and 
wounded deep by many savage weapons, they breathe long and hot sighs, 
thinking of the Pandavas. Then, hearing the loud celebrations of the 
victorious Pandavas, they fear a pursuit and quickly flee towards the east. 
Having gone for some way, their animals become tired and they themselves 
are thirsty. Overpowered by wrath and vindictiveness, those great bowmen 
cannot bear what has transpired; they burn with grief at the terrible end of 
Duryodhana. They rest for a while.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Bhima’s feat, O Sanjaya, seems incredible to me, 
since my son whom he brutally felled had the strength of ten thousand 
elephants. In manhood’s prime and possessed of an adamantine body, no 
one could kill Suyodhana. Alas, even that son of mine was struck down by 
the Pandava. 


Without doubt, O Sanjaya, my heart is made of stone, since it does not 
break not into a thousand pieces even after hearing of the slaughter of my 
hundred sons. Alas, what will be the plight of myself and my wife, an old 
couple now destitute of children? I dare not dwell in the dominions of 
Pandu’s son! Having been the sire of a king and a king myself, how shall I 
pass my days as a slave obedient to the commands of Pandu’s son? Having 
laid my command over all the Earth and having stood over the heads of all, 
how shall I live now as a slave in wretchedness? How shall I, O Sanjaya, 
endure the fire-like mockery of Bhima who has single-handedly slain a full 
hundred sons of mine? The words of the high-souled Vidura have come 
true! Alas, Sanjaya, that my son did not pay heed to those words. 

However, tell me, what did Kritavarman, Kripa and Drona’s son do after 
my son Duryodhana had been treacherously struck down?’ 

Sanjaya says, “They have not gone far, O king, when they stop, for they 
see a dense forest. Having rested a little while, they enter that great forest, 
riding in their chariots drawn by excellent steeds whose thirst has now been 
assuaged. That forest abounds with all manner of animals, and with all 
kinds of birds. And it is dense, with great trees and entwining creepers and 
infested by numerous predators. Spangled with many bodies of water and 
adored with various kinds of flowers, it has many lakes overgrown with 
blue lotuses. 

Having entered that dense forest, they cast their eyes about and see a 
gigantic banyan tree with thousands of branches. Repairing to the shade of 
that tree, those maharathas, O king, those foremost of men, see that is the 
greatest tree in that forest. Alighting from their chariots and unyoking their 
horses, they cleanse themselves duly and say their evening prayers. 

The Sun reaches the Asta Mountain, and Night, the mother of the 
universe, arrives. The firmament, strewn with planets and stars, shines like 
an ornamented piece of brocade and is wondrous to behold. The denizens of 
night begin to howl and utter their myriad cries at will, while they that walk 
the day fall asleep. Awful becomes the noise of the night-wandering 
animals. The carnivores are full of glee, and the night, as it deepens, grows 
dreadful. 

At that sinister hour, Kritavarman, Kripa and Drona’s son sit together 
under that mighty banyan, and they begin to give expression to their sorrow 
about the destruction that had overtaken both the Kurus and the Pandavas. 
Heavy with sleep, exhausted, they lay themselves down on the bare earth. 


Blood from their congealing wounds still drips onto the earth; arrows still 
protrude from their magnificent bodies. Kripa and Kritavarman quickly fall 
asleep. However deserving of happiness and undeserving of torment, they 
lie stretched on the bare ground. Indeed, O monarch, those two who had 
always slept on luxurious beds now sleep restlessly, like vagrants, on rough 
earth, afflicted by toil, grief, and their slumber nightmared. 

Drona’s son, however, O Bhaarata, yielded to the influence of wrath and 
reverence, cannot sleep, but lies there breathing like a trodden upon snake. 
Burning with rage, that hero of mighty arms casts his eyes on every side of 
that terrible forest. As he surveys that vana, teeming with many creatures of 
night, the great warrior sees in the branches of the lofty, sprawling banyan a 
covering of crows, thousands of the dark birds roosting in the night, most 
with their wings tucked under shiny wings. Each perched close to its 
neighbour, those crows sleep at ease, O Kauravya. 

Suddenly, as he gazes raptly at the sleeping crows, Ashwatthaman sees 
an owl of terrible aspect make its appearance there. Of gigantic body, with 
green eyes and tawny plumage, its beak is huge and its talons are like 
swords. And the speed with which it comes resembles that of Garuda. 
Uttering soft cries, that awesome owl glides towards the branches of that 
banyan tree. That tawny ranger of the sky, that slayer of crows, alights 
softly on one of the branches of the banyan and, now with horrible cries, 
kills a great number of his sleeping enemies. He tears the wings off some 
and bites off the heads of others; with his razor-like talons he breaks the 
legs of many. With uncanny strength and speed, that great and ghastly owl 
kills some hundreds of crows in mere moments, while Aswatthaman 
watches him from below, entranced. 

In time too short to tell, such is the onslaught of the owl, the ground 
covered by the spreading branches of the banyan is thickly strewn and 
heaped on every side with dead crows. Soon, no crow remains alive, and 
the owl is filled with delight; its great lens-like eyes shine like those of a 
slayer of foes after having prevailed over his enemies at his pleasure. 

Seeing that ferocious deed perpetrated in the night by the owl, Drona’s 
son begins to reflect on it; he considers it a sign to himself and is quickened 
to follow the owl’s murderous example. He says to himself, “This owl 
teaches me a lesson in battle. I am bent upon the destruction of the enemy, 
and the time for the deed has come! I cannot kill the victorious Pandavas 
for they are too mighty. Yet, while I was in Duryodhana’s presence, I swore 


that I would kill them. It would seem that I have pledged myself to a 
suicidal venture, like an insect essaying into a blazing fire. If I were to fight 
them fairly, I shall, without doubt, have to lay down my life. By an act of 
guile, however, success may still be mine and a great destruction overtake 
my foes! 

Men in general, as also those versed in the scriptures, always laud 
means which are certain over those which are uncertain. Whatever of 
censure and evil repute this act may provoke ought to be incurred by the 
man that observes the way of the Kshatriya. The Pandavas of uncleansed 
souls have, at every step, perpetrated ugly and sinful deeds that were also 
full of guile. 

In this regard, certain ancient verses, full of truth, are heard, sung by 
enlightened men of dharma, who sang them after a careful consideration of 
the demands of justice. 

These say: ‘The enemy’s force, even when exhausted, or wounded with 
weapons, or engaged in eating, or when leaving the field, or when resting 
within their camp, should be smitten! They should be dealt with in the same 
way when afflicted with sleep in the dead of night, or when bereft of their 
commanders, or when broken with wounds and grief, or when under an 
erroneous impression of safety.’” 

Having reflected in this way, the valiant son of Drona forms the 
resolution of killing the sleeping Pandavas during the night and the 
Panchalas as well. Having decided upon this evil plan and pledging himself 
repeatedly to its execution, he wakes both his uncle Kripa and Kritavarman, 
lord of the Bhojas. Awakened from sleep, those two illustrious and mighty 
ones hear Ashwatthaman’s vile scheme. Filled with shame, both of them 
give him no reply. Having reflected for a short while, Ashwatthaman says 
with tears in his eyes, “King Duryodhana, that one hero of great might, for 
whose sake we waged war with the Pandavas, has been slain! Deserted and 
alone, though he was the lord of eleven akshauhinis of troops, that 
Kshatriya of unstained prowess has been struck down by Bhimasena and a 
number of wretches banded together in battle. Vrikodara has perpetrated 
another vile and vicious deed - for he kicked the head of a king whose locks 
were given the sacred coronal bath. 

The Panchalas roar and give vent to jubilant cries and raucous laughter. 
Filled with joy, they blow their conches and beat their drums. Listen, do 
you hear the pealing of their drums, the blare of their conches, borne by the 


winds, frightful to the ear, and filling all the cardinal points of the world. 
Loud also is the din made by their neighing steeds and grunting elephants 
and roaring warriors. That deafening noise made by the rejoicing warriors 
as they march to their quarters, as also the clatter of their chariot-wheels 
comes to us from the east. So great has been the havoc wrought by the 
Pandavas on the Dhartarashtras that we three are the only survivors of that 
carnage. 

Some of us were endowed with the might of a hundred elephants, and 
some were masters of all weapons. Yet have they been slain by the sons of 
Pandu. I regard this to be an instance of the reversals brought about by 
Time. And truly, what I say is the end to which such an act leads! Truly, 
although the Pandavas have achieved such difficult feats, even this should 
be the result of those exploits. If your wisdom has not been driven out by 
shock and grief, then say what is proper for us to do in this grave matter.” 


CANTO 2 


K ripa says, “We have heard all that you have said, O mighty one. 

Listen, however, to a few words of mine. All men are subject to and 
governed by two forces, Destiny and Exertion. There is nothing higher than 
these two. Our actions do not become successful in consequence of destiny 
alone, nor by exertion alone, O best of men. Success springs from the union 
of the two. All purposes, high and low, depend on a union of these two. In 
the whole world, it is through these two that men are seen to act as also to 
abstain from action. 

What result is produced by clouds pouring rain upon a mountain? What 
results are not produced by them pouring upon a cultivated field? Exertion, 
where destiny is not auspicious, and absence of exertion where destiny is 
auspicious - both these are fruitless. What I have said about the union of the 
two is the truth. If the rains properly moisten a well-tilled field, the seeds 
yield a fine harvest. Human success is also of this nature. 

Sometimes, destiny, having settled a course of events, acts of itself 
without waiting for exertion. For all that, the wise, aided by skill, have 
recourse to effort. All the purposes of human actions, O bull among men, 
are accomplished through those two coming together. Influenced by these 
two, men are seen to strive or be quiescent. Recourse may be had to 
exertion. But exertion succeeds through destiny. It is in consequence also of 
destiny that one who sets himself to work, depending on exertion, attains to 


success. The exertion, however, of even a competent man, even when well 
directed, when it is without the concurrence of destiny is seen in the world 
to be fruitless. Those, therefore, among men, that are idle and without 
intelligence, disapprove of exertion. This, however, is not the opinion of the 
wise. 

Generally, any action performed is not seen to be unproductive of fruit 
in the world. The absence of action, again, is seen to result in grave misery. 
A man obtaining something of itself, without having exerted himself in any 
way, as also one not obtaining anything even after exertion, is not found. 
One who is busy in action is capable of supporting life. He, on the other 
hand, that is idle, never gains happiness. In this world of men it is generally 
seen that they that are addicted to action are always inspired by the desire of 
earning good. If one devoted to action succeeds in gaining his object or fails 
to acquire the fruit of his deeds does not become censurable in any respect. 
If anyone in the world is seen to luxuriously enjoy the fruits of action 
without doing anything, he is generally seen to incur ridicule and become 
an object of hatred. He who, disregarding this rule about karma, lives 
otherwise, is said to do an injury to himself. This is the opinion of those that 
are endowed with intelligence. 

Efforts become unproductive of fruits in consequence of these two 
reasons: destiny without exertion and exertion without destiny. Without 
exertion, no deed in this world becomes successful. Devoted to action and 
endowed with skill, that man, however, who, having bowed down to the 
gods, seeks the accomplishment of his objects, is never lost. The same is the 
case with one who, desirous of success, properly waits upon the aged, asks 
them what is for his good, and obeys their beneficial counsels. Men 
approved by the old should always be solicited for counsel, while one has 
recourse to exertion. These men are the infallible root of means, and 
success 1s dependent on means. He who applies his efforts after listening to 
the words of the old soon reaps abundant fruits from those efforts. That man 
who, without reverence and respect for wise elders, seeks the 
accomplishment of his purposes, being moved by passion, anger, fear, and 
avarice, soon loses his prosperity. 

This Duryodhana, stained by covetousness and bereft of foresight, 
without taking counsel, foolishly embarked on an ill-considered enterprise. 
Disregarding all his well-wishers and taking counsel with only the wicked, 
though repeatedly dissuaded, he waged war with the Pandavas who are his 


superiors in all good qualities. From the beginning, he was evil. He could 
not restrain himself. He did not do the bidding of friends. For all that, he 
now burns in grief and calamity. 

As for me, since I followed that sinful wretch, this great catastrophe has 
overtaken me. It has scorched my understanding. Plunged in reflection, I 
fail to see where my salvation lies. 

A man that is himself perplexed should ask counsel of his friends. In 
such friends he has his understanding, his humility, and his prosperity. 
One’s deeds should have their root in them. That should be done which 
intelligent friends, having settled by their understanding, do counsel. Let us, 
therefore, repair to Dhritarashtra and Gandhari and the high-souled Vidura 
and ask them what we should do. They will tell us what is for our weal. We 
should do what they say. Even this is my certain resolution. Those men 
whose actions do not succeed even after exerting themselves, should 
beyond doubt be regarded as being afflicted by destiny.”’ 


CANTO 3 


S anjaya says, ‘Hearing these words of Kripa that were auspicious and 
fraught with dharma and artha both, Aswatthaman, O monarch, is 
overwhelmed by sorrow. Burning with grief as if in a fire, he forms an evil 
resolution and then addresses them both, saying, “The faculty of 
understanding is different in different men. Each man, however, is pleased 
with own understanding. Every man regards himself more intelligent than 
others. Everyone respects his own understanding and accords it great praise. 
Every man’s own wisdom is with each a subject of praise. Everyone speaks 
ill of the wisdom of others, and well of his own, in all instances. Men 
whose judgements agree with respect to any unattained object, even though 
there be a variety of considerations, become gratified with and applaud one 
another. The judgements, again, of the same men, overwhelmed with 
reverses through the influence of time, become opposed to one another. 
More particularly, in consequence of the diversity of human intellects, 
judgements necessarily differ when minds are clouded. 

As a skillful physician, having duly diagnosed a disease, prescribes a 
medicine by using his intelligence to effect a cure, even so men, for the 
accomplishment of their deeds, use their intelligence, aided by their own 
wisdom. What they do is again disapproved by others. A man, in youth, is 
affected by one kind of understanding. In middle age, the same does not 
prevail with him, and in the time of age, another kind of understanding 


becomes agreeable to him. When fallen into grave distress or when visited 
by great prosperity, the understanding of a person, O lord of the Bhojas, is 
seen to be much afflicted. In one and the same man, through want of 
wisdom, the understanding becomes different at different times. That 
understanding which at one time is acceptable becomes the reverse of that 
at another. 

Having resolved, however, according to one’s wisdom, that resolution 
which is best should be endeavoured to be accomplished. Such resolution, 
therefore, should force him to put forth exertion. All men, O lord of the 
Bhojas, begin their enterprises joyfully, even those that lead to death, in the 
belief that they can achieve what they set out to do. All men, relying on 
their own judgements and wisdom, endeavour to accomplish diverse 
purposes, feeling them to be beneficial. The resolution that has possessed 
my mind today because of our dire calamity, as something that can dispel 
my grief - I will now disclose that resolve to both of you. 

The Creator, having formed his creatures, assigned unto each his 
dharma. As regards the different varnas, he gave each a portion of 
excellence. To Brahmanas he gave that foremost of all things, the Veda. To 
the Kshatriya he gave superior energy. To the Vaishya he gave skill, and to 
the Sudra he gave the duty of serving the three other varnas. Hence, a 
Brahmana without self-restraint is to be censured. A Kshatriya without 
energy is base. A Vaishya without skill deserves condemnation, as also a 
Sudra who is bereft of humility. 

I am born into a revered and high family of Brahmanas. Through ill- 
fortune, however, I am wedded to Kshatriya ways. If, conversant as I am 
with Kshatriya dharma, I now adopt the ways of a Brahmana and achieve a 
high object, that course would not be consistent with honour. I wield an 
excellent bow and superior astras in battle. If I do not avenge the slaughter 
of my father, how will I dare show my face or open my mouth in the midst 
of men? Paying regard to Kshatriya dharma, therefore, without hesitation, I 
will walk in the steps of my high-souled sire and my fallen king. 

Having removed their armour and flushed with victory, the Panchalas 
will sleep unsuspiciously tonight, exhausted by the toil of battle. While they 
sleep at their ease in their camp, I will launch a terrible attack on them, 
taking them unawares. Like Maghavat slaughtering the Danavas, I will 
attack as they sleep and, putting forth my utmost prowess, kill them all like 
a blazing fire consuming a heap of dry grass. I will kill them all and their 


king Dhrishtadyumna. And having done so, I shall find peace of mind, O 
best of men. 

Why, I will go amongst them with dreadful carnage even like Rudra 
with his Pinaka in rage among living creatures when the age ends. Having 
slain all the Panchalas tonight, I will then, in joy, attack the sons of Pandu, 
taking their lives one after another. Strewing the earth with the bodies of all 
the Panchalas, I will pay the debt I owe to my ruthlessly murdered sire. Yes, 
this very night I will make the Panchalas follow in the wake, hard to tread, 
of Duryodhana and Karna and Bhishma, and Jayadratha of the Sindhus. 
Putting forth my might, I shall tonight grind to a pulp the head, like that of 
an animal, of Dhrishtadyumna, the king of the Panchalas! I shall tonight, O 
son of Gautama, kill the sleeping sons of the Panchalas and the Pandavas. 

Having exterminated the Panchalas tonight, while they lie sunk in sleep, 
I shall, O you of great intelligence, find great happiness and regard myself 
to have done my duty.” 


CANTO 4 


K ripa said, “Through good fortune, O you of unfading glory, your 

heart is set today on vengeance. The wielder of the thunder himself 
will not succeed in dissuading you today. However, both of us will 
accompany you in the morning. Put off your armour and take down your 
standard; rest now and sleep this night. I shall accompany you, as also 
Kritavarman of the Sattvata vamsa, both clad in mail and riding our 
chariots, while you ride forth against the foe. United with us tomorrow, you 
shall indeed kill the enemy, the Panchalas with all their followers, in the 
press of battle, putting forth your awesome might, O greatest of maharathas. 
If you put forth your true prowess, you will certainly achieve the feat you 
have in mind. 

Rest, therefore, this night. You have kept awake for many a night. 
Having rested and slept, and refreshed, O giver of honours, encounter the 
foe in battle. Then shall you certainly prevail and kill the enemy. No one, 
not even Vasava amongst the gods, would venture to attempt to vanquish 
you when you bear the foremost of weapons, O first of maharathas. Who is 
there that would, even if he be Indra himself, fight Drona’s son, when great 
Aswatthaman comes into battle accompanied by Kripa and protected by 
Kritavarman? Having rested and slept this night and shaken off fatigue, we 
shall slay the enemy tomorrow morning. 


You are a master of the devastras. I also am so, without doubt. This hero 
of Sattvata’s race is a mighty bowman, always a master of battle. The three 
of us together, O son, shall indeed succeed in destroying our assembled 
enemies in battle by putting forth our might. And great shall be our 
happiness then! Dispelling your anxieties, rest for this night and sleep 
happily. Armed with bows, clad in mail and well able to scorch our foemen, 
Kritavarman and I will follow you, O best of men, while you ride your 
chariot against the enemy. 

Riding to their camp and proclaiming your name in battle, you will then 
make a great slaughter of the foe. Tomorrow morning, in broad daylight, 
having caused a carnage among them, you will sport like Sakra after the 
decimation of great Asuras. You can truly vanquish the army of the 
Panchalas in battle, even like the slayer of the Danavas vanquishing the 
Danava host in wrath. United with me in battle and protected by 
Kritavarman, not the Vajradhari himself could withstand you. 

Neither I, O son, nor Kritavarman, will ever retreat from battle without 
having razed the Pandavas from this world. Having slain the choleric 
Panchalas along with the Pandavas, we shall come away in triumph, or slain 
by them we shall find Swarga for ourselves. With every means in our 
power, we two will help you in battle tomorrow morning. O Mahabaho, I 
tell you the truth, O sinless one.” 

When Kripa speaks these wise words to his nephew, the son of Drona, 
his eyes turning red with rage, answers his uncle, O king, saying, “Where 
can a man afflicted by defeat, or he that is under the sway of fury, or one 
whose heart is always engaged in evolving schemes for the acquisition of 
wealth, or one that is under the power of lust, find sleep? All these four are 
present in me. Any one of these, singly, would destroy sleep. How great is 
the grief of that man whose heart is always thinking of the slaughter of his 
sire! My heart now burns day and night, and I have no peace. In particular, 
you have both seen the way in which my father was murdered by those 
sinners. The thought of that murder roils my very entrails. 

How can one like me live for even a moment after hearing the 
Panchalas proclaim that they have slain my father? I cannot bear the 
thought of living without having killed Dhrishtadyumna. Indeed, I must kill 
him and all his supporters. Who is there so stone-hearted that would not 
burn after having heard the lamentations that I have heard of the king lying 
with his thighs and manhood broken? Who is there so destitute of 


compassion whose eyes would not fill with tears after hearing the anguished 
words Suyodhana spoke in his anguished state? 

They whose side I took have been vanquished. The thought of this 
enhances my sorrow as a surge of tide swells the sea. 

Protected as they are by Krishna and Arjuna, I regard them, O uncle, to 
be irresistible by Indra himself. Yet, I am unable to restrain this rising wrath 
in my heart. I do not see the man in this world that can assuage this rage of 
mine. The messengers informed me of the defeat of my friends and the 
victory of the Pandavas. That burns my heart. 

However, once I have butchered my enemies in their sleep, I shall find 
rest and live without anxiety.” 


CANTO 5 


K ripa says, “A man who is bereft of intelligence and who does not 

have his passions under control, cannot, even if he waits dutifully 
upon his superiors, understand all the considerations of dharma. This is my 
firm opinion. Similarly, an intelligent person who does not practise humility 
fails to understand the settled conclusions of righteousness. A brave man, if 
he is without understanding, fails to know his duty even if he waits all his 
life upon a Rishi, even as a wooden ladle cannot taste the flavourful food in 
which it may lie immersed. The wise man, however, by waiting upon a 
learned person for even a moment, succeeds in knowing his dharma, like 
the tongue tasting fine food as soon as it comes into contact with it. 

That man who is endued with intelligence, who waits upon his 
superiors, and who has his passions under control, succeeds in knowing all 
the laws of dharma and never disputes with what is accepted by all. An 
ungovernable, irreverent, and evil soul perpetrates sin in seeking his well- 
being by disregarding destiny. 

Well-wishers seek to restrain a friend from sin. He who suffers himself 
to be dissuaded succeeds in winning prosperity. He that does otherwise 
reaps misery. As a man of a distraught mind is restrained by soothing 
words, even so should a friend be restrained by his well-wishers. He that 
suffers himself to be so restrained never becomes a prey to grief. When a 
wise friend is about to commit a sin, well-wishers possessed of wisdom 


repeatedly and to the extent of their power endeavour to restrain him. 
Setting your heart on what is truly beneficial, and restraining yourself by 
your own self, do my bidding, O son, so that you may not have to repent 
afterwards. 

In this world, the killing of sleeping men is not lauded, according to the 
dictates of dharma. The same is the case with men that have laid down their 
arms and alighted from their chariots and horses. They also must not be 
killed who say ‘We are yours!’ and they that surrender themselves, and they 
whose locks are dishevelled, and they whose horses have been killed under 
them or whose chariots have been broken. All the Panchalas will sleep 
tonight, divesting themselves of armour. Trustfully sunk in sleep, they will 
be as dead men. That crooked-minded man who would mortally attack them 
then, it is plain, would sink into a deep and limitless sea of hell without a 
raft save himself. In this world you are celebrated as the foremost of all men 
who know and use weapons. You have not yet committed even a minute 
trespass against dharma. When the sun rises tomorrow and light discovers 
all things, you, like a second sun in effulgence, will conquer the enemy in 
battle. But what you plan to do tonight, ah, this sin so impossible in one like 
you, will look like a glaring red spot upon a white sheet. This is my firm 
opinion.” 

Aswatthaman says, “Without doubt, it is even as you say, O Matulan my 
uncle. The Pandavas, however, have already shattered the bridge of dharma 
into a hundred pieces. In the very sight of all the kings, before your eyes 
also, Dhrishtadyumna murdered my father after my sire had laid down his 
weapons. Karna, also, that greatest maharatha, was slain by Arjuna after the 
wheel of his ratha had sunk into the earth and he was plunged into distress. 
Shantanu’s son Bhishma, after he had laid down his weapons, on seeing 
Sikhandi, Arjuna cut down mercilessly, his own grandsire. So, also, the 
mighty bowman Bhurisrava, while he sat in the prayavrata on the field of 
battle, Satyaki slew, disregarding the cries of protest of all the kings. 

And now, Duryodhana, too, having encountered Bhima in battle with 
the mace, hath been slain unrighteously by the sinful Vrikodara in the very 
sight of all the lords of earth. The king was all alone in the midst of a 
number of mighty maharathas standing around him. Under such 
circumstances was that tiger among men slain by the wretched Bhima. 
Those lamentations that I have heard, of the king lying prostrate on the 


earth with his thighs broken, and from the messengers circulating the news, 
excoriate my very heart and I am in unbearable agony. 

Such are the sinful Panchalas, who have broken all the bounds of virtue. 
Why do you not censure them who have transgressed all dharma? Having 
slain the Panchalas, those murderers of my sire, in the night when they are 
buried in sleep, I care not if I am born as a worm or a winged insect in my 
next life. That which I have resolved is hurrying me towards its 
accomplishment. Then how can I have sleep and happiness? That man is 
not yet born in the world, nor will be, who will succeed in making me 
change this resolution that I have formed for the Panchalas’ destruction.” 

Sanjaya continues, ‘Having said these words, O monarch, the valiant 
son of Drona yokes his steeds to his chariot and makes to set out towards 
his enemies. Kripa and Kritavarman, those great souls, say to him, “Why do 
you yoke your horses to your chariot? Upon what business are you bent? 
We are determined to come with you tomorrow, O bull among men! We 
sympathise with you in weal and woe. It does not become you to mistrust 
us.” 

Remembering the killing of his father, a raging Aswatthaman tells them 
again what he has decided to do. “When, having slain hundreds of 
thousands of warriors with his arrows, my great father had laid down his 
weapons, he was ruthlessly killed by Dhrishtadyumna. I will kill that 
murderer today when he has taken off his armour. With sin I will kill 
Drupada’s sinful son tonight. I have decided to kill Dhrishtadyumna like an 
animal, so the Panchala prince will not attain to realms earned by warriors 
nobly slain in battle. Put on your coats of mail even now, take up your bows 
and swords, and wait for me here, you best of maharathas and parantapas.” 

Having said this, Aswatthaman sets out for the enemy’s camp. And 
now, both Kripa, O king, and Kritavarman follow him and, as they go, the 
three shine like sacrificial fires fed with libations of ghee. They ride, O lord, 
towards the camp of the Panchalas within which all are asleep. Coming to 
the gate, Drona’s son, that maharatha, stops.’ 


CANTO 6 


D hritarashtra says, “Seeing Drona’s son stop at the gate of the 
encampment, what, O Sanjaya, do Kripa and Kritavarman do? Tell 
me this!” 

Sanjaya says, “Calling Kritavarman, as also the mighty Kripa, Drona’s 
son, aflame with rage, approaches the gate of the camp. Suddenly he sees 
there a gigantic being, whose very sight could make one’s hair stand on 
end; he has the effulgence of the Sun or the Moon, and stands guarding the 
entrance. Round his loins is a tiger-skin dripping blood, and he has a black 
deer’s hide for his upper garment. For his sacred thread, he wears a great 
snake. His many arms are long and massive and he holds many kinds of 
uplifted weapons. 

He wears another thick serpent on his upper arm as an angada and his 
mouth seems to be full of spewing flames. His great teeth make his face 
terrible to behold. His maw is open and dreadful. His face is adorned with 
thousands of beautiful eyes. His body I cannot begin to describe, as also his 
attire. The very mountains, upon beholding this one, would split into 
fragments. Blazing flames then issue from his mouth and nose and ears and 
all thousands of eyes. From those flames hundreds and thousands of 
Hrishikesas issue, armed with conches and discs and maces. 

Looking at that extraordinary Being, who would strike terror into the 
whole world, Drona’s son, feeling no fear, covers him with showers of 


devastras. That Being devours them all, even like the Badava fire devouring 
the waters of the ocean. Seeing his arrow showers prove fruitless, 
Aswatthaman casts a long spear at the Being, ablaze. That sorcerous lance 
with the blinding tip the Being consumes like a meteor falling into the Sun. 

Without pausing, Aswatthaman draws a wonderful blue sword the 
colour of the sky and with a golden hilt. It unsheathes like a glimmering 
serpent emerging from its hole. Drona’s son casts that blade at the Being 
like a bolt of lightning. Striking the great one, the sword vanishes like a 
mongoose into its lair. His rage mounting, Aswatthaman hurls a mace afire, 
long as a sacrificial stake for Indra, at the astounding one. That too the 
Being calmly swallows. 

At last, when all his weapons are exhausted Aswatthaman, casting his 
eyes around, sees the whole sky crowded with images of Janardana. Seeing 
that wondrous sight, Drona’s son recollects the words of Kripa and, turning 
pale, says, “He that does not listen to the benign counsel of wise friends is 
obliged to repent, even as I do now, fool that I am for disregarding my two 
well-wishers. That fool who, ignoring the way of the scriptures, seeks to 
slay his enemies, falls from the path of dharma and is lost in the trackless 
wilderness of sin. One should not cast weapons upon kine, Brahmanas, 
kings, women, friends, one’s mother, one’s preceptor, a weak man, an idiot, 
a blind man, a sleeping man, a terrified man, one just arisen from sleep, an 
intoxicated person, a mad man and one that is heedless. The sages of old 
always inculcated this truth into men. I have ignored the eternal way of the 
shastras, essayed along a dark way, and fallen into terrible distress. The 
wise have said it to be a calamity when one falls back through fear from a 
great feat after having set out to achieve it. By putting forth only my skill 
and might, I cannot achieve that which I have vowed to do. 

Human exertion is never regarded more efficacious than destiny. If any 
human action that is commenced does not succeed through destiny, the 
actor becomes as one who, falling from the path of righteousness, is lost in 
the wilderness of sin. The sages speak of defeat as foolishness when, having 
set out upon a course, one swerves from it through fear. Because of the 
wickedness of my essay, this calamity has come upon me, otherwise 
Drona’s son would never had been forced to hold back from battle. 

Again, this Being, whom I see before me, is most wonderful! He stands 
there like the upraised rod of divine chastisement. Even after reflecting 
deeply, I cannot recognise who he is. Without doubt, he is the terrible fruit 


of my sinful determination. He stands here to baffle that dark resolve. It 
truly seems that destiny has ordained that I fail in my evil resolve. It is not 
for me to exert myself to accomplish my purpose unless destiny turns 
favourable to me. So, at this hour, I shall seek the protection of the puissant 
Mahadeva! He will dispel this dreadful danda of divine punishment that 
bars my way. I will seek the shelter of that God, that source of everything 
beneficial, the Lord of Uma, the Kapardin who wears a garland of human 
skulls, that plucker-out of Bhaga’s eyes, who is also called Rudra and Hara. 
In tapasya and prowess, He far surpasses all the gods. I shall, therefore, 
seek the protection of Girisha armed with the trident.” 


CANTO 7 


S anjaya says, ‘Having decided to invoke Rudra’s blessing, Drona’s son 

alights from his chariot and stands with folded hands and head bent in 
worship of Mahadeva Siva, the Supreme God. And he says, “I seek the 
protection of Him called Ugra, Sthanu, Shiva, Rudra, Sarva, Ishana, 
Ishvara, Girisha; and of that boon-giving God who is the Creator and Lord 
of the universe; of Him whose throat is blue, who is Aja, Unborn, who is 
called Sankara, who destroyed the sacrifice of Daksha, and who is called 
Hara; of Him whose form is the universe, who has three eyes, who is 
possessed of multifarious forms, and who is the Lord of Uma; of Him who 
dwells in smasanas, who swells with energy, who is the Lord of diverse 
tribes of ghostly beings, and who is the possessor of undecaying prosperity 
and power; of Him who wields the skull-topped club, who is called Rudra, 
who bears matted locks on his head, and who is a Brahmachari. Purifying 
my soul that is so difficult to make clean, and possessed as I am of little 
tejas, I adore the Destroyer of Tripura, the triple city, and offer myself as the 
sacrificial animal. Hymned you have been, deserving are you of hymns, and 
I hymn your glory! 

Your purposes are never obstructed. You wear skins upon your body; 
you have red hair on your head; you are blue-throated; you are unbearable; 
you are irresistible! You are pure; you are the Creator of Brahma; you are 
Brahma; you are a brahmachari; you are an observer of vratas; you are 


devoted to tapasya; you are infinite; you are the refuge of all tapasvins; you 
are multiform; you are the leader of diverse tribes of bhutas and pretas; you 
are three-eyed; you are fond of those wild beings called ganas; you are 
always seen by Kubera, the Lord of treasures; you are dear to Gauri’s heart; 
you are the sire of Kumara; you are tawny; your vehicle is the most 
excellent bull; you are clothed in subtle attire; you are most fierce; you are 
eager to adore Uma; you are higher than all that is high; you are higher than 
everything; there is nothing higher than you; you are the first wielder of 
weapons; you are immeasurable, and you are the protector of all the 
quarters; you are cased in golden armour; you are divine; you have the 
moon as an ornament on your head! 

With dhyana, I seek your protection, O God of gods! I hereby make an 
offering to you, the purest of the pure, of this my body, composed of the 
five elements, to overcome the dreadful distress that has overtaken me and 
to attain success in the enterprise I have in my heart!” 

Knowing this to be his resolution from his desire to accomplish his 
purpose, a golden altar appears before the mahatman son of Drona. Upon 
the altar, O king, appears a blazing fire, filling all the points of the compass, 
cardinal and subsidiary, with its splendour. Many mighty beings, also, with 
flaming mouths and eyes, of many feet, heads, and arms, adorned with 
angadas set with gems, with uplifted arms, and looking like elephants and 
mountains, appear there. Their faces resemble those of hares and boars and 
camels and horses and jackals and cows and bears and cats and tigers and 
leopards and crows and apes and parrots. And the faces of some are like 
those of mighty snakes, and others have faces like those of ducks. And all 
of them are endowed with great effulgence. And the faces of some are like 
those of woodpeckers and jays, O Bhaarata, and of tortoises and crocodiles 
and porpoises and sharks and whales, and of lions and cranes and pigeons 
and elephants and stags. 

Some have faces like those of ravens and hawks, some have ears on 
their hands; some have a thousand eyes, some large bellies, and some are so 
attenuated that they have no flesh, O Bhaarata! And some, O king, have no 
heads, and some have faces like those of bears. The eyes of some are like 
fire, and some have fiery complexions. The hair on the heads and bodies of 
some blaze and some have four arms, and some, O king, have faces like 
those of sheep and goats. The colour of some is like that of conches, and 
some have faces that resemble sankhas, and the ears of some are like conch 


shells, some wear garlands made of conches, and the voices of some 
resemble the boom of conches. 

Some have matted jata on their heads, and some five tufts of hair, and 
some are quite bald. Some have lean bellies; some have four teeth, some 
have four tongues, some have ears straight as arrows and some wear 
diadems on their brows. Some have strings of grass on their bodies, O 
monarch, and some curly hair. Some have turbans made of cloth, some have 
coronets, some have beautiful faces, and some are adorned with ornaments. 
Some wear ornaments made of lotuses, and some are decked all over with 
flowers. Their numbers are hundreds of thousands. 

Some are armed with sataghnis, some with thunder, and some have 
mushalas in their hands. Some bear bhushundis, some carry nooses, and 
some have maces in their hands, O Bhaarata. On the backs of some are 
slung quivers brimming with exquisite arrows, and all of them are fierce in 
battle. Some have standards with banners and bells, and some are armed 
with battle-axes. Some have large nooses in their upraised arms, and some 
carry clubs and bludgeons. Some have stout posts in their hands, some have 
curved scimitars, and some have snakes with hoods erect for their coronets. 
Some have large snakes wound around their upper arms for angadas, and 
some have stunningly beautiful ornaments on their persons. Some are 
begrimed with dust and dirt, some smutted with mire, and all of them are 
attired in white robes and garments. The limbs of some are blue, while 
others have limbs that are tawny. And some there are that are beardless. 

Those beings, called Ganas, possessed of golden complexions, and 
filled always with joy, play upon drums and horns and cymbals and 
jharjharas and anakas and gomukhas. And some sing and some dance about 
uttering loud cries, and some leap forward and cut capers and leap around 
and sideways. Endowed with great fleetness, they run about most fiercely, 
the hair on their heads waving in the air, like huge elephants infuriated with 
musth and frequently uttering loud roars. Terrible, and of frightful mien, 
and armed with lances and battle-axes, they wear robes of diverse hues and 
beautiful garlands and fragrant liniments. Adorned with angadas, bracelets 
decked with great gems, and with upraised arms, they are all imbued with 
great courage. Capable of forcibly slaying all foes, they are irresistible in 
prowess. Drinkers of blood and fat and other animal matter, they live on the 
flesh and entrails of animals. 


Some have their matted locks tied in tall tufts above their heads. Some 
have single tufts on their heads; some have rings on their ears; and some 
have bellies like earthen pots used for cooking. Some are of very short 
statures, and some are awesomely tall and ferocious. Some have grim 
features, some have pendulous lips, and the genitals of some are incredibly 
long. Some wear costly and diverse kinds of crowns upon their heads; and 
some have bald pates, and the heads of others are covered over with thick 
Jata. 

They are such that they can bring the firmament with the sun, moon and 
stars, down onto the earth, and exterminate the four orders of created things. 
They know not what it is to fear, and can endure the frowns of Hara. They 
always do as they please, and are the lords of the lords of the three worlds. 
Always engaged in merry sport, they are thorough masters of speech and 
are perfectly free from pride. Having obtained the eight kinds of divine 
attributes, they are never elated with pride. The divine Hara is always filled 
with wonder at their feats. They are devout worshippers of Mahadeva. 
Adored by them in thought, word, and deed, the Great God protects these 
worshippers of his, looking upon them, in thought, word, and deed as 
children of his own loins. 

Full of wild rage, they always drink the blood and fat of all haters of 
Brahman. They also always drink Soma rasa that is imbued with four kinds 
of taste. Having adored the trident-bearing God with Vedic mantras, with 
brahmacharya, with tapasya, and with self-restraint they have obtained the 
companionship of Bhava. The divine Maheswara, that lord of the past, the 
present, and the future, as also Parvati, eats with those diverse tribes of 
mighty beings that partake of their own nature. 

Causing the universe to resound with the peal of diverse kinds of 
instruments, with raucous laughter, with loud sounds and shrieks and 
leonine roars, they approach Aswatthaman. Uttering the praises of 
Mahadeva and spreading blinding light all around, desirous of enhancing 
the honour of Aswatthaman and the glory of the Mahatman Hara, and 
wanting to ascertain the extent of Aswatthaman’s tejas, and also of 
beholding the slaughter during the hour of sleep, armed with terrible and 
fierce bludgeons and fiery chakras and battle-axes, that crowd of strange 
beings, of terrible forms, come from every side. They inspire the three 
worlds with dread at their sight. 


The mighty Aswatthaman, however, sees them and feels no fear. 
Drona’s son, armed with bow, and with fingers cased in fences made of 
iguana skins, offers up himself as a sacrificial beast to Mahadeva. Bows are 
the fuel, and sharp shafts are the ladles, and his own soul possessed of great 
might is the libation, O Bhaarata, in that act of sacrifice. The valiant and 
wrathful son of Drona, with propitiating mantras, offers up his own soul as 
the yagnapasu. Having with fierce rites adored Rudra of fierce deeds, 
Aswatthaman, with folded hands, says these words to that Greatest God. 

Aswatthaman says, “Sprung from Angirasa’s line, I am about to pour 
my soul, O Siva, as a libation on this fire. Accept, O Lord, this yagnapasu! 
In this hour of distress, O Soul of the universe, I offer up my own self as the 
sacrificial victim, from devotion to you and with my heart focused in 
dhyana. All creatures are in you and you are in all creatures. An assemblage 
of all transcendent attributes occurs in you! O Lord, you are the refuge of 
all creatures. I wait as a libation for you, since I am unable to vanquish my 
foes. Accept me, O Rudra.” 

Having said these words, Drona’s son ascends that sacrificial altar on 
which a fire blazed brightly, offers himself up as the sacrifice and enters that 
fire. 

Beholding him stand immovable amidst the towering flames, with 
upraised arms, the divine Mahadeva appears there Himself and smilingly 
says, “With truth, purity, sincerity, resignation, ascetic austerities, vows, 
forgiveness, devotion, patience, thought, and word, I have been duly adored 
by Krishna of pure deeds. For this there is none dearer to me than Krishna. 
To honour him and at his word I have protected the Panchalas and shown 
you diverse kinds of maya. By protecting the Panchalas I have honoured 
him. They have, however, been marked by time. The span of their lives has 
run out.” 

Having said these words to Aswatthaman, the divine Mahadeva enters 
Aswatthaman’s body, after giving him a great and polished sword. Filled by 
that divine being, Drona’s son blazes up with tejas. From that energy 
derived from the Godhead, he becomes all-powerful in battle. Many 
invisible beings and rakshasas go along his right and his left as he sets out, 
like the Lord Mahadeva himself, to enter the camp of his enemies.’ 


CANTO 8 


D hritarashtra says, “While Drona’s son, that mighty warrior, went 
towards the Panchala camp, do Kripa and Bhoja stop from fear? I 
hope those two maharathas, checked by vulgar guards, do not flee from 
thinking their opponents to be irresistible? Or, have they, after grinding 
down the camp, the Somakas, and the Pandavas, followed, while still 
engaged in battle, the glorious path along which Duryodhana has gone? 

Are those heroes, slain by the Panchalas, sleeping on the bare earth? 
Did they achieve any great feats? Tell me all this, O Sanjaya!’ 

Sanjaya says, ‘When the noble son of Drona rushes into the camp, 
Kripa and Kritavarman wait at the gate. Seeing them ready to exert 
themselves, Aswatthaman is filled with joy, and addressing them in a 
whisper, O king, says, “If you both put forth your might, you can kill all the 
Kshatriyas in the world! What need I say, then, of this paltry remnant of the 
Pandava army, particularly when it is plunged in sleep? I shall enter the 
camp and careen there like Yama. I am sure that you two will ensure that no 
man escapes you with life.” 

Saying this, the son of Drona enters the vast camp of the Parthas; 
casting off all fear, he goes in through a place where there is no door. The 
mighty-armed hero, having entered the camp, pads very softly towards the 
sprawling tent of Dhrishtadyumna. 


Having achieved great feats in the war, the Panchala princes are 
exhausted. They now sleep deeply, all together in the same tent, next to one 
another, confident of their safety. Entering Dhrishtadyumna’s chamber, O 
Bhaarata, Drona’s son sees the prince of the Panchalas asleep before him on 
his bed. He lies on a beautiful sheet of silk upon an opulent and luxurious 
bedstead. Fine garlands of flowers are strewn upon that bed and it is 
perfumed with powdered dhupa. Aswatthaman, O king, awakens the fire- 
born prince, sleeping trustfully and fearlessly, with a savage kick. Feeling 
that kick, the prince, irresistible in battle and of immeasurable soul, starts 
awakes with a cry and sees Drona’s son standing over him. As he rises from 
his bed with a growl, the mighty Aswatthaman seizes him by his long hair 
and thrusts him down onto the ground with powerful hands. 

From fear as also from being still sleepy, Dhrishtadyumna can summon 
no strength to repel his violent assailant. He can only writhe and roar like 
some animal, O king, while Aswatthaman repeatedly kicks both his throat 
and chest in frenzy. Drona’s son attempts to kill the Panchala prince like 
some lowly beast. Dhrishtadyumna rakes Drona’s son weakly with his nails, 
and says in a whisper, “O Son of my Guru, kill me with a weapon, do not 
tarry. O best of men, let me find the regions of the righteous!” 

Having said this much, Dhrishtadyumna falls silent. Never pausing in 
his bestial attack on the Panchala prince, Drona’s son hisses, “O wretch of 
your race, there is no heaven for those that kill their Gurus. And for that 
crime, evil Panchala, you do not deserve to be killed by any noble weapon!” 

Saying this, Aswatthaman, smoking with rage, renews his assault with 
his feet, kicking all the vital parts of his supine victim, and kills his enemy 
like a lion killing a fallen elephant. 

At the screams of that hero while he was being kicked to death, his 
wives and guards that are in his tent all awaken, O king! Seeing someone 
crushing the prince with superhuman force, they regard the assailant to be 
some preternatural being and remain hushed, uttering no cry or sound from 
sheer terror. Having horribly despatched Dhristadyumna to Yama, 
Aswatthaman of great energy strides out and climbs onto his beautiful 
chariot. Indeed, coming out of Dhrishtadyumna’s abode, O king, 
Aswatthaman causes all the sky to resound with his roars, and then drives 
on his ratha to other parts of the camp to continue his spree of murdering. 

After Drona’s son has gone, the women and all the guards set up a loud 
wailing. Seeing their king slain, all the wives of Dhrishtadyumna sob 


hysterically. At that wailing of theirs many mighty Kshatriyas, awaking, put 
on their armour and come to ask after the cause of that lamentation. Those 
women, terrified at the sight of the predatory Aswatthaman, beg the men to 
pursue him. 

They say, “Whether he is a Rakshasa or a man we do not know! Having 
slain the Panchala king, he stays there on his chariot. Look!” 

Those Panchala warriors run out and surround Drona’s son. In less time 
than it takes to tell, Aswatthaman invokes the Raudrastra and turns them all 
into mounds of ashes. Having killed Dhrishtadyumna and all his followers, 
Drona’s son sees Uttamaujas asleep on his bed. Again attacking him with 
his foot, brutally kicking his throat and chest, Drona’s son kills that great 
hero also, while that prince writhes in agony and his eyes bulge from their 
sockets. 

Running up and believing his brother to have been slain by a Rakshasa, 
Yudhamanyu swiftly strikes Drona’s son in the chest with his mace. 
Rushing towards him, Aswatthaman seizes him and brings him down to the 
ground and kills him also like an animal, while that warrior utters loud 
screams. 

Having killed Yudhamanyu, Aswatthaman finds all the other Panchala 
maharathas and, waking them from sound sleep, kills them all like animals 
being slaughtered at a dark sacrifice. Then taking up the sword Rudra gave 
him he embarks on a rampage of murder, running down all the paths of the 
camp and beheading, slitting the throats of and driving his blade into the 
hearts of all the sleeping warriors he finds. Mad with bloodlust he kills not 
only men with that inexorable blade but all the horses and elephants that he 
comes upon. Covered all over with blood, dripping with the gore of man 
and beast, he seems then to be Death himself commissioned by Time to 
fetch carnage to the world. 

Making his enemies tremble by the repeated blows of his sword, 
Aswatthaman is bathed in blood. Covered with gore and wielding his 
blazing sword, as he careered about in battle, his form grows more ghastly 
and superhuman in appearance with each moment. Those who wake from 
sleep, O Kaurava, are stunned by the awful sounds they hear all around. 
Seeing Drona’s son, they look at each other’s faces and mutely tremble. 
Believing him to be a particularly horrible Rakshasa, those brave Kshatriyas 
shut their eyes in terror. 


Drona’s son rages through the Panchala camp like Yama himself, and 
then he sees the sons of Draupadi and the remaining Somakas. Alarmed by 
the noise, and learning that Dhrishtadyumna had been slain, those mighty 
warriors, the sons of Draupadi armed with bows fearlessly pour their shafts 
over Drona’s son. Awakened by their noise, the Prabhadrakas, with 
Sikhandi at their head, attack Aswatthaman with their arrows. Drona’s son 
gives a bloodcurdling roar and turns, now wanting to kill these maharathas 
before him. 

Remembering his father’s death, Aswatthaman blazes up in fresh rage. 
Leaping down from the terrace of his chariot, he rushes furiously at his 
enemies. Taking up his bright shield with a thousand moons emblazoned 
and his massive celestial sword decked with gold, the mighty Brahmana 
warrior charges the sons of Draupadi and begins to lay about him with his 
weapon. 

That tiger among men strikes Prativindhya through his belly, killing him 
instantly. The valiant Sutasoma pierces Aswatthaman with a lance, and 
rushes at him with his sword raised high. Aswatthaman cuts off Sutasoma’s 
arm with the sword in its hand, and plunges his blade deep into his side. 
Sutasoma falls dead. Nakula’s son, the valiant Satanika, hefts a chariot- 
wheel in both his hands and strikes Aswatthaman a blow like thunder across 
his chest, hurling the wheel at him. The Brahmana spirit of darkness sets 
violently on Satanika, felling him to the ground and then cutting his head 
from his throat with a clean stroke of his sword. 

Hefting a spiked cudgel, Srutakarman rushes at Aswatthaman and 
strikes him a fell blow on the left side of his head. Aswatthaman strikes 
Srutakarman across his face, truncating his features, and that son of 
Panchali also falls dead. At this, the heroic Srutakirti, maharatha, comes 
running up and covers Drona’s dreadful son with a storm of arrows. 
Stanching that gale of shafts with his shield, Aswatthaman cuts off 
Srutakirti’s handsome, why, beautiful head from his neck with its ornate 
earrings now glinting with blood and blood spouting copiously from his 
naked throat. 

The slayer of Bhishma, the mighty Sikhandi, with all the Prabhadrakas, 
attack Aswatthaman from every side with weapons of every kind. Sikhandi 
strikes Aswatthaman with an arrow squarely between his brows. Blazing up 
in fury, Drona’s son dashes up to Sikhandi and with a single stroke of 
Rudra’s sword cuts him in two cleaving him from his head down to the fork 


of his legs. His wrath unabated, he rushes at the other Prabhadrakas as well 
as what remains of Virata’s forces. 

One after another, he kills them all in the sinister night, the sons, the 
grandsons, and all the followers of Drupada. Master swordsman that he is, 
he runs like a storm of death everywhere across that camp hewing down 
mighty warriors like tender saplings with Mahadeva’s ineluctable blade. 

The warriors in the Pandava camp see that Death-Night in her embodied 
form, a black image, mouth bloody and bloody eyes, wearing crimson 
garlands and smeared with crimson unguents, attired in a single piece of red 
cloth, with a noose in hand, and resembling an old crone, chanting a dismal 
note and standing full before their eyes, and about to lead away men and 
horses and elephants all tied with a stout rope. She seems to take away 
diverse kinds of spirits, with dishevelled hair and tied together with that one 
black rope, as also, O king, many mighty maharathas divested of their 
weapons. 

In the days before this, O sire, the foremost warriors of the Pandava 
camp would see in their dreams that figure leading away the sleeping 
warriors and Drona’s son smiting them from behind! The Pandava soldiers 
saw that hag and Drona’s son in their dreams every night from the day 
when the battle between the Kurus and the Pandavas first began. Afflicted 
before by these nightmares, now they find themselves actually ravaged by 
Aswatthaman who terrifies them all with his frightful roars. 

Afflicted by Destiny, the brave men of the Pandava camp now 
remember the sight they had seen in their dreams, and see their nightmare 
turn into ghastly reality, even as they die. 

At the chilling noises that erupt in the dark, thousands of Pandava 
bowmen awake from their slumber. Aswatthaman hacks off the legs of 
some, and divides the hips of others, and pierces some in their flanks, 
cavorting everywhere like the Destroyer himself let loose by Time. The 
Earth, O lord, was soon covered with corpses of men crushed into 
formlessness or trodden down by frightened elephants and horses and with 
others that roar in panic or agony. 

Many cry out, “What is this?” “Who is this?” “What is this noise?” 
“Who is doing this?” 

While they give vent to such shrieks, Drona’s son becomes their 
Destroyer. He despatches all those Pandus and Srinjayas, who are without 
armour and unarmed, to Yama. 


Awakened by the reigning bedlam, others wake from dark dreams, in 
fear, still full of sleep and numb; they all vanish from this world so swiftly 
under the relentless assault of Drona’s raging son. Many find their legs 
paralysed, so they could not run from him, while others do not escape for 
their bodies have lost all energy and they cannot move. Rills of blood 
glisten under the stars. As pandemonium rules the grisly night, others, in the 
grip of utter madness and blind fright, flail out and kill one another. 

Drona’s son again mounts his chariot of the rumbling wheels, takes up 
his bow once more and sends a few hundred more men to their deaths. 
Others awaken, and he kills them before they can come near him and they 
too are bound by the Kaalaratri crone with her rope. Aswatthaman flares 
across that camp and many more dazed men he crushes and truncates 
beneath his chariot, all the while loosing fusillades of arrows around him, 
each shaft claiming a life. Then again, with that beautiful shield of his, 
adorned with a thousand moons, and with that sword which was of the 
colour of the evening sky, he rages among his enemies. Like an elephant 
trampling a lake, Drona’s irresistible son storms about in the Pandava camp. 

Awakened by the mayhem, O king, many other warriors rise sleepily 
and affrighted, and run in all directions to escape the great calamity that is 
upon them. Many shriek harshly while others cry out incoherent 
exclamations. Most cannot get to their armour or weapons. Their long hair 
loose, they now fail to recognise one another and cannot tell friend from 
foe. 

Some just fall flat on the ground from exhaustion even as they get up; 
others wander here and there like men still inside a horrific dream. 
Elephants and horses, breaking their tethers, spray excreta and urine in stark 
fear. Others huddle together, as if that might save them from the terror that 
sweeps the night. Amongst these, some lay themselves down on the earth, 
and the rampaging horses and elephants crush them to death. 

While the camp is in this state, O king, Rakshasas utter abysmal roars of 
joy, filling all the quarters with their demonic voices! Hearing their 
warriors’ wails, more elephants and horses break their tethers and stampede 
everywhere in panic crushing hundreds of their own men. The dust those 
animals raise makes the night doubly dark. When that thick gloom sets in, 
all the warriors in the camp became perfectly stupefied; sires do not 
recognise their sons, brothers do not know their brothers. Elephants attack 
riderless elephants, and horses other steeds without horsemen in the frenetic 


night; they pound and trample to gory pulp men that come in their way. 
Black chaos rules and the warriors run madly at their own comrades, 
making blood, limbs and heads fly everywhere. Men hack their comrades 
into pieces in the ominous gloom. 

Leaving the gates they watched, and the outposts they guarded, panic- 
stricken sentries flee blindly, not knowing where they went. These kill one 
another, the slayers, O lord, not recognising the slain. Afflicted by Fate, 
they cry out for their sires and sons. While they flee, abandoning their 
friends and relatives, they call out to one another, crying out their families 
and names. Others just scream and fall senseless onto the ground. And 
Drona’s avenging son swoops down and puts the lot to sword. 

Other Kshatriyas, while their fellows are being slaughtered, lose their 
courage entirely and, in the grip of fear, try to make good their escape from 
the camp of death. They pass through the gates standing ajar and Kripa and 
Kritavarman cut them all down. Without weapons and armour, and with 
hair loosened, they fall on the ground, fold their hands and, trembling and 
sobbing, beg for their lives. However, the two Kuru warriors at the gates 
give them no quarter but kill them like animals on a hunt. None amongst 
those that escape from the camp escapes Kripa and Kritavarman. 

And then, to please Drona’s son, those two set the Pandava camp on fire 
in three places, barring the way of those that would make a run for their 
lives. When the camp is ablaze, Aswatthaman, that delighter of his sires, 
runs amok as he pleases, sword in hand and hacking down his enemies with 
supernatural skill. Some of his braver enemies run towards him and some 
run from him anyway they can. That tremendous Brahmana kills them all, 
regardless. His anger far from subdued, only burning higher, Drona’s 
valiant son fells some of the enemy, cutting them in halves with his sword 
as if they are sesame stalks. The Earth, O bull of Bharata’s race, is strewn 
all around with the fallen bodies of the best men and horses and elephants, 
while their various screams and cries mingle eerily in the darkness and the 
light of the fires lit by Kripa and Kritavarman. 

When thousands have fallen, innumerable headless trunks rise briefly in 
a macabre dance and fall again, blood spuming from their naked necks. 
Aswatthaman, O Bhaarata, hacks off arms adorned with angadas and 
holding weapons in their fists, and heads, and thighs like trunks of 
elephants, and hands, and feet. The illustrious son of Drona mangles the 
backs of some, and now those left alive seek only to flee from the wild and 


tameless Brahmana. And he, on his rampage, hacks some of them in two at 
the waist, he lops off the ears of others, and takes some arms off at their 
shoulders, and thrusts down the heads of some into their trunks, even after 
the favoured fashion of Bhima. 

As Aswatthaman rages on in this way, like some demon of the pit, 
covered entirely in blood, only his eyes staring white, butchering thousands 
of men, the night deepens and grows ever more ghoulish. The earth, 
scattered over with thousands of corpses, of men and beasts, is too dreadful 
to even look at, while screams and death rattles continue to ring out all 
around. Cut down by the wrathful son of Drona, his enemies fall onto that 
earth, where now yakshas and rakshasas teem, that camp frightful with 
broken chariots and dead steeds and elephants. 

Some call out to their brothers, some to their sires, and some to their 
sons. And some say, “The Dhartarashtras could never do in battle what 
these evil Rakshasas are doing to us during the hour of sleep! It is only 
because the Parthas are not here that this horrible carnage is happening. 
That son of Kunti, who has Janardana for his protector, cannot be 
vanquished by the Devas, the Asuras, the Gandharvas, the Yakshas or the 
Rakshasas. Devoted to Brahman, truthful in speech, self-restrained, and 
compassionate towards all creatures, Arjuna would never kill anyone who is 
asleep, or one that is unprepared, or one that has set aside his weapons or 
one who has joined his hands in supplication, or one who is retreating, or 
one whose hair is undone. Ah, these are demons of the vilest kind who 
perpetrate such terrible deeds upon us.” 

Uttering such words, many lay themselves down in helplessness. 

The din of the cries and groans of men and their beasts dies down 
quickly. The earth being drenched with blood, O king, the thick and 
frightful cloud of dust soon disappears. Thousands of men, crawling feebly 
in agony, overwhelmed with anxiety and overcome by despair, are swiftly 
slain by Aswatthaman like Rudra during the pralaya. Many who lay 
themselves down on the ground clasping one another, and many who seek 
to flee, and others who seek to hide, and those who offer some resistance in 
battle, are all slain by the savage son of Drona. Burnt by the flames of Kripa 
and Kritavarman and slaughtered by Aswatthaman, the men lose their 
minds and kill one another in madness. 

Before half the night is over, the son of Drona, O monarch, sends that 
remaining host of the Panchalas and Pandavas to Yama’s abode. 


That night of horror, so deadly for the men and beasts in that camp, fills 
all the fiendish rangers of the dark with glee. Many rakshasas and pisachas 
of various tribes can be seen gorging upon human flesh and quaffing the 
blood that lies spilt on the ground. They are fierce, tawny in hue, sinister, of 
adamantine teeth, and dyed in gore. With matted locks on their heads, their 
thighs are long and massive; endowed with five feet, their bellies are large 
and protruberant. Their fingers are set backwards. Of harsh temper and ugly 
features, their voices are raucous and fearsome. They have rows of tinkling 
bells tied to their bodies. Possessed of blue throats, they are frightful to 
behold. Cruel and terrible without exception, and without abhorrence for 
anything, they come there with their children and wives. Indeed, diverse are 
the forms seen there of the flesh-eating, blood-drinking rakshasas that come 
to feed at Aswatthaman’s massacre. Lustily drinking the blood that runs in 
streams, they are full of joy and begin to dance in separate bands. 

“This is ambrosial!” “This is pure!” “This is sweet!” they cry in feral 
elation. 

Other carnivores, having gorged upon fat and marrow and bones and 
blood, begin to feed on the more delicate parts of corpses. Others, drinking 
the fat that flowed in streams, run naked over the field. Possessed of diverse 
kinds of faces, other predators and scavengers of ferocity, that live upon 
dead flesh, arrive there in their thousands. More grim and gigantic 
rakshasas, of fell deeds, swarm there in bands as numerous. Other ghostly 
beings, filled with joy and gorged to satiety, O king, are also seen in the 
midst of that zone of hell. 

When finally day dawns, Aswatthaman wants to leave the camp. He is 
covered over in blood, dripping with it, and his sword is clutched so fiercely 
in his grasp that it seems that his hand and that awful blade have become 
one. Having walked that path that warriors of dharma never approach let 
alone tread, Aswatthaman looks like the Fire at the end of the Yuga after it 
has consumed all creatures, leaving only ashes. Having done what he had 
sworn, having trodden the left-handed, untrodden way, Drona’s son, O lord, 
forgets his grief over the killing of his sire. When he leaves the camp of the 
Pandavas and the Panchalas, he leaves it as still as it had been when he 
entered it; only now all its inmates sleep in death, their bodies ravaged by 
beasts and birds of carrion, by foul rakshasas, pisachas and other filthy 
beasts and spirits. 


After the nocturnal slaughter, when all is quiet again, Aswatthaman 
issues from the camp in dark triumph, meets Kripa and Kritavarman and, 
full of black joy, tells them in detail of what he has done. Those two, in 
return, devoted as they are to his good, give him the agreeable intelligence 
of how they had also slaughtered thousands of Panchalas and Srinjayas at 
the gates. Even thus does that night prove terrible to the Somakas who had 
been heedless and buried in sleep. The course of time, without doubt, is 
irresistible. Those who had exterminated us are themselves decimated.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, Why is it that that maharatha son of Drona did not 
achieve such a feat before, although he had resolutely exerted himself to 
bestow victory upon Duryodhana? For what reason did that great bowman 
do this after the slaying of my wretched son? Tell me this!’ 

Sanjaya says, "Through fear of the Parthas, O son of Kuru’s race, 
Aswatthaman could not achieve this feat then. It was owing to the absence 
of the Parthas and the intelligent Kesava, as also of Satyaki, that Drona’s 
son could do what he did. Who is there, the lord Indra unexcepted, who 
could do what Aswatthaman did in the night in the presence of those 
heroes? Besides, O king, Aswatthaman succeeded only because the men 
were all asleep. Having brought great slaughter to the Pandava forces by 
night, those three maharatahas, Aswatthaman, Kripa and Kritavarman, meet 
together, embrace, and exclaim, “Great fortune!” 

In joy Aswatthaman says, “All the Panchalas have been slain, as also all 
the sons of Draupadi. All the Somakas also, as well as all that remained of 
the Matsyas I have slaughtered. Crowned with success, let us at once bring 
this news to Duryodhana. If he is still alive, we must give him this joyful 
news!”” 


CANTO 9 


S anjaya says, “Having killed all the Panchalas and the sons of 

Draupadi, the three Kuru heroes come together to the place where 
Duryodhana lies, struck down by Bhima. They see that the king is still 
alive. Jumping down from their chariots, they surround your son, who lies 
there in agony, his thighs and manhood smashed. He lies in a swoon of 
pain, his life about to ebb away. He is vomiting blood from time to time, 
and his eyes are turned down to the earth. 

A number of carnivores of terrible forms surround him close, wolves 
and hyenas; they wait for life to leave his body and then feed on it. He 
keeps them at bay with difficulty. He writhes upon the earth. Seeing him 
there, bathed in his own blood, the three heroes who are the sole survivors 
of his army, Aswatthaman and Kripa and Kritavarman, are besieged by 
grief and sit surrounding him. With those three maharathas, covered with 
blood and breathing in hot sighs, around him the Kuru king looks like a 
sacrificial altar surrounded by three fires. The three warriors weep 
unrestrainedly seeing that once great king lying there like that. Wiping the 
blood from his face with their hands, they utter piteous lamentations in the 
hearing of Duryodhana who lies dying on the bare earth. 

Kripa says, “There is nothing that destiny cannot bring to pass! Look 
where king Suyodhana, who was the lord of eleven akshauhinis now lies on 
the ground, struck down by his enemies and covered in blood. Look where 


the mace adorned with gold, which he so loved, lies beside him, still 
resplendent. In no battle did that mace abandon this Kshatriya. Even now, 
when he is about to ascend into heaven, that weapon does not leave the 
illustrious hero; why, it lies beside him faithfully even like a loving wife by 
the side of her lord in his bedchamber. Ah, look at the reversal that Time 
brings. This Parantapa, this scorcher of his enemies, who used to walk at 
the head of all the crowned kings of the world, now eats the dust of the 
earth. He who once struck down countless foes and made them lie on bare 
ground, alas, that king of the Kurus himself lies today on the bare ground, 
struck down by his enemy. He to whom hundreds of kings used to bow 
down in fear, lies today on the field of battle, surrounded by beasts of prey. 
Once, great Brahmanas waited upon this lord for the wealth he gave so 
bounteously. Today, wretched wolves and hyenas wait upon him to feast 
upon his body!” 

Sanjaya continues, "Looking at that king of Kuru’s vamsa lying on the 
ground, Aswatthaman, with tears streaming down his face caked with 
blood, O best of the Bhaaratas, utters these piteous lamentations: “O 
Rajavyaghra, tiger among kings, all the people said that you were the 
foremost of all bowmen. They also said that in mace fights you, a disciple 
of Sankarshana, were like the Lord of treasures Kubera himself. How then, 
O sinless one, could Bhima find any weakness in you? You were always 
mighty and possessed of genius at the mace. Bhima, on the other hand, O 
king, is a base and evil fiend. 

Without doubt, O Suyodhana, O greatest king, Time in this world is 
more mighty than everything else, for here we see even you struck down by 
Bhimasena in battle. Ah, how could the base Vrikodara strike you down and 
so sinfully, you who know all about dharma? Yes, beyond doubt, Time is 
irresistible. Having summoned you to a fair fight, Bhimasena struck you 
below the waist, which is forbidden, for there was no other way in which he 
could have prevailed over you. Fie on Yudhishtira who tolerated your 
crowned head being stamped on by Bhima’s foot in contempt. As long as 
this world lasts, in every battle warriors will damn Vrikodara for what he 
did. O great Suyodhana, O king, there is no shred of doubt that you were 
struck down sinfully. 

The mighty Rama of Yadu’s race always said that Duryodhana has no 
equal with the mace. In every sabha he would proudly boast of your 
prowess and say, ‘Duryodhana of the Kuru vamsa is a worthy disciple of 


mine!’ My lord, you have attained to that end which great rishis have 
declared to be the high reward of a Kshatriya slain in battle with his face 
turned towards his enemy. And so I do not, O bull among men, grieve for 
you, O peerless Suyodhana. I grieve only for your mother Gandhari and 
your sire, childless as they now are. Wracked with sorrow, they will have to 
wander over the earth, begging for their food. Fie on Krishna of the 
Vrishnis, and on the evil-minded Arjuna. They regard themselves as being 
great knowers of dharma, yet both of them stood by indifferent while you 
were being treacherously slain. 

How will the other Pandavas, shameless though they are, O king, speak 
of the manner in which they have accomplished your death? You are most 
fortunate, O son of Gandhari, for you have died on the field of battle, O bull 
among men, while facing the enemy squarely, even while outnumbered and 
alone. Alas, what will be the plight of Gandhari, who is now childless, and 
who has lost all her kinsmen and relatives? What will be the plight of the 
blind king, your father? 

Shame be on Kritavarman, on myself, as also on maharatha Kripa, since 
we have not yet ascended into Swarga with you, most regal one, before us. 
Fie on us, lowest of men, since we do not follow you that were the granter 
of all wishes, the protector of all men, and the benefactor of all your 
subjects. Through your power, the homes of Kripa, of myself, and of my 
father, along with those of all our dependants, O tiger among men, are full 
of wealth. Through your grace, have we, with our friends and relatives, 
performed many great yagnas with a profusion of dana and dakshina to 
Brahmanas. Where will sinners such as ourselves now go, since you have 
left us for Swarga, taking with you all the kings of the earth? 

Since we three, O king, do not follow you that are about to obtain the 
highest end, it is for this that we lament, O great one. Deprived of your 
companionship, bereft of wealth, our memories painfully dwelling upon 
your prosperity, alas, what will be our lot since we do not go with you? 
Without doubt, O Lord of Kuru’s race, we shall have to wander across the 
earth in grief. Deprived of you, O king, where can we find peace and where 
happiness? 

Going from this world, O monarch, and meeting those mighty warriors 
that have gone before you, show your regard for them at my request, one 
after another, according to the order of their eminence and years. Having 
offered worship to your guru, my father Drona, that foremost of all wielders 


of bows, tell him, O king, that I have killed Dhrishtadyumna. Embrace king 
Balhika, maharatha, as also the king of the Sindhus, and Somadatta, 
Bhurisrava, and all the other great kings. I beg you, embrace them all for 
me and ask after their welfare.” 

Sanjaya continues, ‘Having said these words to the king deprived of his 
senses and lying broken, Aswatthaman once more casts his eyes on him and 
says, “If, O Duryodhana, you have any life in you still, listen to some words 
that will bring you pleasure. On the side of the Pandavas, only seven are 
alive, and among the Dhartarashtras, only we three. The seven on their side 
are the five brothers and Krishna and Satyaki; on our side, we three are 
Kripa, Kritavarman and me. All the sons of Draupadi have been slain, as 
also all the children of Dhrishtadyumna. All the Panchalas too have been 
slain, as also those that remains alive of the Matsyas, O Bhaarata. 

Behold the vengeance we have taken for what they did. The Pandavas 
are now childless. While they were buried in sleep, we killed all the men 
and animals in their camp. Stealthily entering their sleeping camp in the 
night, O king, I have killed the sinner Dhrishtadyumna as one kills an 
animal.” 

Listening to this, which still brings joy to his heart, Duryodhana opens 
his eyes and says, “That which neither Ganga’s son, nor Karna, nor your 
father, could achieve, has at last been done by you today, O mighty 
Aswatthaman, along with Kripa and the Bhoja. You have killed the 
wretched Dhrishtadyumna who was the Senapati of the Pandava forces, and 
you have killed Sikhandi. For what you have done I regard myself equal to 
Maghavat himself. May every good befall you three. Let all prosperity be 
yours. All of us will meet again in Swarga!” 

Saying this, the high-souled king of the Kurus falls silent. Casting off 
his grief for all his slain kinsmen, he then gives up his prana, his life-breath. 
His soul ascends into sacred heaven, while his only his body remains on 
earth. Even thus, O Dhritarashtra, great king, your son Duryodhana 
breathed his last, his body broken but not his spirit. Having first provoked 
the war, he was at last slain by his enemies. The three heroes repeatedly 
embrace the king and gaze on him for long as if they cannot tear their eyes 
away. They then climb into their chariots. 

Having heard those piteous lamentations of Drona’s son, I came away at 
early dawn towards the city. Even thus the armies of the Kurus and 
Pandavas have been destroyed. Great and terrible has been that carnage, O 


king, caused by your evil policy. After your son ascended into heaven, I 
was afflicted with grief and the spiritual sight which the Rishi gave me has 
left my heart and my eyes!’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Hearing of his son’s death, Dhritarashtra 
breathes long and hot sighs, and is plunged in great anxiety.” 


CANTO 10 


V aisampayana said, “After that night has passed, Dhrishtadyumna’s 
sarathy brings word to Yudhishtira of the great slaughter of the 
night. 

The charioteer says, ‘The sons of Draupadi, O king, have been slain 
with all the sons of Drupada himself, while they were heedless and 
trustfully asleep in their camp. During the night, O Dharmaraja, your camp 
has been razed by the cruel Kritavarman, and Kripa, the son of Gautama, 
and the sinful Aswatthaman. Killing thousands of men and elephants and 
horses with lances and darts and battle-axes, those men have entirely 
exterminated your army. While your forces were being slaughtered like a 
forest cut down with axes, a loud bewailing was heard rising from your 
camp. I am the sole survivor, O lord, of that vast force. I, O virtuous 
Yudhishtira, escaped with some difficulty from Kritavarman when he was 
momentarily distracted.’ 

Hearing these evil tidings, Kunti’s son Yudhishtira falls down on the 
earth, grief having its way with him at the loss of his sons. Coming up 
quickly, Satyaki takes the king in his arms. Bhimasena and Arjuna and the 
two sons of Madri also stretch out their arms to hold their brother. Having 
recovered his senses, the son of Kunti laments in searing grief, his words 
rendered indistinct by sorrow: 


‘Alas, having vanquished the enemy, we have ourselves been 
vanquished in the end! The course of events is difficult to be ascertained 
even by men endowed with spiritual sight. The vanquished have become 
victorious. We ourselves, again, while victorious, are vanquished. Having 
slain brothers and friends and sires and sons and well-wishers, and kinsmen, 
and counsellors, and having quelled them all, we ourselves are at last 
defeated. Misery looks like prosperity and prosperity seems to wear the face 
of misery. This our victory has assumed now the shape of defeat. Our 
victory has ended in defeat. Having won the war, I must now grieve as a 
tormented wretch. How then can I regard ours as a victory? In reality, I have 
been doubly defeated by the enemy. They for whose sake we have incurred 
the sin of victory by slaying our kinsmen and friends, alas, they, after 
victory had crowned them, have been slain by defeated enemies that were 
heedful. 

Alas, through heedlessness have they been butchered that had escaped 
from even Karna, who had barbed arrows and nalikas for his teeth, the 
sword for his tongue, the bow for his gaping mouth, and the twang of his 
bowstring and the sound of his palms for his roars; that always wrathful 
Karna who never retreated from battle, and who was a very lion among all 
men! 

Alas, those princes that succeeded in crossing, by boats that were their 
weapons, the great Drona-ocean having chariots for its deep lakes, showers 
of arrows for its waves, the ornaments of warriors for its gems, chariot 
horses for its animals, darts and swords for its fish, elephants for its 
crocodiles, bows for its whirlpools, mighty weapons for its foam, and the 
signal of battle for its moonrise, making it swell with energy, and the twang 
of the bowstring and the slapping sound of palms for its roar - alas, even 
those princes have been murdered out of heedlessness. 

There is, in this world, no more powerful cause of death, as regards 
men, than carelessness. Prosperity abandons a careless man from every 
side, and every kind of misery overtakes him. 

The tall standard that stood on his ratha was the wreath of smoke that 
infallibly indicated the Bhishma-fire. Arrows were its flames, and wrath 
was the wind that fanned it. The twang of his formidable bow and the sound 
of his palms were the roar of that fire. Armour and diverse kinds of 
weapons were the homa libations that were poured into it. The vast enemy 
army was the heap of dry forest-grass that fire set into. Alas, even they that 


had endured that fierce fire, whose terrible energy was the mighty weapons 
in Bhishma’s hand, have at last fallen through heedlessness. 

A heedless person can never acquire knowledge, asceticism, prosperity, 
or renown. Indra found great happiness after killing all his foes heedfully. 
Behold the survivors among our enemies have, through our heedlessness, 
slain so many sons and grandsons of kings, each of whom was like another 
Indra himself. Alas, they have perished like merchants with rich freight 
drowning through carelessness in a shallow stream after having crossed the 
great ocean. They whose bodies now lie on the bare ground, slain by those 
vengeful villains, have without doubt ascended into heaven. 

I grieve, however, for the princess Krishnaa. Ah, she will be plunged 
today in an ocean of grief. Hearing of the slaughter of her brothers and sons 
and her venerable sire, the king of the Panchalas, without doubt she will fall 
senseless onto the earth. Her body wracked by grief, she will not rise again. 
Unable to bear the pain of such various affliction, and worthy as she is of 
happiness, alas, what will be her plight? Cut to the quick by the slaughter of 
her sons and brothers, she will be like one scorched by fire.’ 

Having indulged in these lamentations, that king of Kuru’s race then 
addresses Nakula, saying, ‘Go and bring the unfortunate princess Draupadi 
here along with all her maternal relations.’ Obedient as always to the king 
who equalled Yama himself in righteousness, Nakula goes swiftly on his 
chariot to the chambers of Draupadi where that princess lived with all the 
wives of the Panchala king. Having despatched the son of Madri, 
Yudhishtira, crushed by grief, with tears in his eyes and accompanied by his 
companions, goes to the field on which his sons had battled and which still 
teems with diverse kinds of creatures, blood-drinkers and flesh-eaters. 
Entering that cursed field abounding with fierce sights, the king sees his 
sons, well-wishers and friends all lying on the ground, covered with blood, 
their bodies mangled, and heads separated from their trunks. Seeing them 
like that, Yudhishtira, foremost of righteous men, is stricken through by 
grief. That lord of the Kurus breaks out into loud sobs and falls unconscious 
on the earth. And so do all his followers.” 


CANTO 11 


V aisampayana said, “Seeing his sons, grandsons, and friends all slain 

in battle, the king’s soul is unhinged by mighty grief, O Janamejaya! 
Recollecting those sons and grandsons and brothers and allies, a profound 
sorrow takes possession of the illustrious sovereign. Senseless and 
trembling, his eyes are bathed in tears. His friends then, themselves filled 
with horror, begin to comfort him. 

At this time, Nakula, skilled in running errands, arrives there on his 
chariot of solar refulgence, accompanied by the princess Krishnaa in 
dreadful distress. She has been living in Upaplavya all this while. Hearing 
the heartrending news about the slaughter of all her sons, she becomes 
uncontrollably agitated. Trembling like a plantain tree shaken by the wind, 
the princess Draupadi arrives in the presence of Yudhishtira, and falls down 
before him. Her face, adorned with eyes like full-blown lotuses, is darkened 
by sorrow like the Sun himself when shrouded by clouds. 

Seeing her prostrate on the earth, the wrathful Vrikodara of inexorable 
prowess runs forward and sweeps her up in his arms in a tight embrace. 
Comforted by Bhimasena, that dark and most beautiful woman on earth 
begins to weep and, addressing the eldest son of Pandu with his brothers, 
says, “O great king, having won the whole world through good fortune, you 
shall enjoy her after the slaughter of your valiant sons in the observance of 
Kshatriya dharma. 


Through good fortune, O son of Pritha, you are joyful at the thought of 
having won the Earth. By good fortune, your thoughts do not dwell on 
Subhadra’s son whose tread resembled that of a great elephant. By good 
fortune, you do not, like me while I remained in Upaplavya, recollect your 
heroic sons slaughtered in the observance of Kshatriya dharma. O son of 
Pritha, hearing of the murder of those sleeping heroes by Drona’s sinful 
son, grief burns me as if I were in the midst of a fire. If Drona’s son is not 
made to reap the fruit of this sin; if, putting forth your prowess in battle, 
you do not take the life of that wretch, along with the lives of his followers, 
then listen to me, you Pandavas, I will sit here in praya until life leaves this 
body of mine!’ 

Having said these words, the hapless Panchali, daughter of Yajnasena, 
sits on the ground beside the eldest son of Pandu, Yudhishtira Dharmaraja. 
The Rajarishi Yudhishtira, of righteous soul, seeing his beloved queen sit in 
praya, says to her, ‘O auspicious one, O you who know dharma well, all 
your sons and brothers have righteously met with noble deaths. It does not 
become you to grieve for them. As for Drona’s son, he has fled to a distant 
forest, O beautiful princess. How will you be assured that we have killed 
him even if we do?’ 

Draupadi answers, ‘I have heard that Drona’s son has a gem embedded 
in his head, a stone with which he was born. I want to see that jewel 
brought to me after the slaughter of that vile man in battle. Setting that 
stone on your head, O king, I will be able to endure living. This is my 
resolve.’ 

Saying this to the royal son of Pandu, the beautiful Krishnaa approaches 
Bhimasena and says gravely, desperately, to him, “Remember the dharma of 
a Kshatriya, O Bhima, and come to my rescue. Kill the sinner Aswatthaman 
as Maghavat did Sambara. There is no one in this world who is equal to you 
in prowess. It is known throughout the world how, when a great calamity 
befell us at Varanavata, you became the refuge of all the Parthas. When, 
again, Hidimba saw us in the deep jungle, it was you who saved us from the 
Rakshasa. Like Maghavat rescuing his queen Sachi, the daughter of 
Puloma, you saved me in Virata’s city from being ravished. Even like those 
great feats, O Bhima, that you achieved in the past, now kill, O Parantapa, 
the son of Drona and then be you joyful.’ 

Hearing these and the other piteous pleas and wails of the princess, 
Bhima cannot bear them. He mounts his great chariot, makes Nakula his 


sarathy and sets out at once to kill Aswatthaman. As he goes he pulls 
violently on his bowstring so the horses fly. Bhima sweeps along on the trail 
of Drona’s son’s chariot.” 


CANTO 12 


V aisampayana said, “After the irresistible Bhimasena has set out, 
Krishna, that bull of the Yaduvamsa, of eyes like lotus-petals, says 
to Yudhishtira, “O son of Pandu, your impetuous brother, spurred by grief at 
the slaughter of his sons, rides alone to kill the Acharya’s son. O 
Bharatarishabha, of all your brothers, Bhima is dearest to you. He is in great 
danger, why do you not bestir yourself? The astra called the Brahmashira, 
which Drona imparted to his son, can consume the whole world. The 
illustrious Drona once gave Arjuna the same weapon. Aswatthaman could 
not bear that and begged his father to give it to him as well. Unwillingly, 
Drona taught his son the mantras to invoke and unleash the Brahmashira. 
Drona knew the restlessness and ruthlessness, when moved, of his son. 

Knowing every nuance of dharma, when he gave that astra to 
Aswatthaman he said, “Even when overtaken by the greatest peril, my 
child, in the thick of battle, you must never use this weapon, particularly 
against human beings.” A little later, he said again sadly, “O bull among 
men, you will not, it seems, walk the path of dharma.” 

Hearing those bitter words, the dark and proud Aswatthaman, 
despairing of obtaining every kind of prosperity, went forth in grief to 
wander over the earth. 

Then, O king of the Kurus, while you were living in the forest, O 
Bhaarata, he came to Dwaraka and stayed there, worshipped by the 


Vrishnis. One day, after he began living in Dwaraka, he came to me, by 
himself, when I was also alone on the sea-coast, and there smilingly said to 
me, “O Krishna, that weapon called Brahmashira, worshipped by the Devas 
and Gandharvas, which my father, the Acharya of the Bharatas, received 
from Agastya after performing the austerest tapasya, is now with me, O 
Dasharha, as much as it is with Drona. O foremost one of Yadu’s race, in 
exchange for that celestial weapon, give me your Sudarshana Chakra!” 

When he begged me for my Chakra with folded hands and in the 
humblest tone, I said to him, “All the Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, 
Manushyas, Garudas and Nagas together do not have even a hundredth part 
of my tejas. I have this Saringa, this Chakra, and this Kaumodaki. I will 
give you whichever among these you want from me. Without giving me the 
Brahmashira that you want to give me, take from among these weapons of 
mine whichever you can wield in battle.” 

When I said this to him, as if challenging me, he asked for my Chakra. 
“Take it,’ said I to him, at which he rose suddenly and seized the Chakra 
with his left hand. However, he could not move the weapon from where it 
lay. He then made to seize it with his right hand. Taking a firm grip on the 
Sudarshana and putting forth all his strength, he failed to budge it. At this, 
Drona’s son was filled with grief and frustration. After he tried again, he sat 
down exhausted, giving up, O Bhaarata. 

When he withdrew from his purpose, I said, “He who is always 
regarded as the best of all men, that wielder of the Gandiva, the warrior 
who has white steeds yoked unto his chariot, upon whose flag Hanuman 
sits, the Kshatriya who pleased Siva himself in a hand to hand encounter, 
that Phalguna than whom I have no dearer friend on earth, that friend to 
whom there is nothing that I cannot give including my very wives and 
children, that dear friend Arjuna of unstained deeds never said to me, O 
Brahmana, what you have done. 

That son whom I obtained through tapasya and perfect brahmacharya 
for twelve years on the breast of Himavat, that son of mine Pradyumna of 
great energy and an amsa of Sanatkumara himself, begotten by me upon my 
wife Rukmini who had kept vows as austere as mine - even he never asked 
for my Sudarshana Chakra, which you of little understanding have done. 

Rama of unrivalled might never said such words to me. Neither Gada 
nor Samba ever asked of me what you have done. No one among the other 
greatest maharathas of the Vrishni and the Andhaka vamsas who live in 


Dwaraka ever asked of me what you have done. You are the son of the 
Acharya of the Bharatas; you are held in high esteem by all the Yadavas. 
Let me ask you, O best of warriors, against whom would you fight using 
this weapon?” 

Drona’s son replied, “After offering worship to you, O Krishna, it was 
my intention to fight you, O you of unfading glory. It was for this, O 
Krishna that I asked for the Sudarshana which is adored by the Devas and 
Danavas. If I had your Chakra, I would then become invincible. Having 
failed, O Kesava, in obtaining my unattainable wish, I am about to leave 
you, O Govinda. Bless me, O Krishna. This terrible weapon is wielded by 
you that are the first of all terrible persons. Unrivalled are you for having 
this weapon! 

There is none else in this world that can own it but you, O Lord.” 

Having said these words to me, the son of Drona left Dwaraka, taking 
with him many pairs of fine horses, much wealth and diverse kinds of gems. 
He is wrathful, wicked, restless, and savagely cruel. He has the 
Brahmashira. Vrikodara must be protected from him!’” 


CANTO 13 


V aisampayana said, “Having said these words, Krishna mounts his 
chariot furnished with every kind of powerful weapon. Two pairs of 
the finest steeds of the Kamboja breed, adorned with garlands of gold, are 
yoked to it. The colour of that best of rathas is of the morning sun. On the 
right is yoked the steed known as Shaibya; on the left is Sugriva; the 
Parshni is borne by two others called Meghapushpa and Balahaka. A 
celestial standard adorns that chariot; it is decked with gold and 
incomparable jewels and Viwakarman, the divine Artificer, had created it. 
Standing tall like the Maya of Vishnu himself, upon that standard is 
Vinata’s son Garuda, shining with great splendour. Indeed, that enemy of 
snakes perches on the standard-top of Kesava who is Truth embodied. 

After Krishna, Arjuna of irresistible feats and Yudhishtira, king of the 
Kurus, ascend the same ratha. Seated on that chariot, by the side of him of 
Dasharha’s race, who wields the bow Saringa, the two sons of Pandu look 
exceedingly handsome, like the twin Aswinis seated by the side of Vasava. 
Then, he of Dasharha’s vamsa urges those majestic steeds endowed with the 
fleetness of the wind, to fly after Bhima. And so they do, with the chariot 
bearing the immortal Krishna and the two sons of Pandu. They course 
ahead with a deafening roar of hooves and wheels, swiftly as birds flying 
through the air. 


Going at that speed, they soon catch up with Bhima. Although they 
meet that Vayuputra, they fail to stop him in his mad careen as, full of 
wrath, he rides fiercely after Drona’s dangerous son. In the very sight of 
those illustrious bowmen, Bhima flies towards the bank of the river of 
heaven, Ganga brought down to earth of old by Bhagiratha. He sees the 
high-souled, illustrious, dark-skinned and island-born Vyasa sitting near the 
edge of the water in the midst of many rishis. And he also sees Drona’s son 
of evil sitting beside them, covered with dust, attired in a piece of cloth 
made of kusa grass, and smeared all over with ghee. Mahabaho Bhimasena, 
the son of Kunti, seizes up his bow with a shaft fixed to it, rushes at 
Aswatthaman, and roars, ‘I have come to kill you, you dog!’ 

Seeing that terrible titan come towards him, bow in hand, and the two 
brothers on Janardana’s chariot, Aswatthaman becomes afraid and thinks 
his hour has come. That Brahmana of staunch soul instantly invokes the 
Brahmashira given him by his father. He pulls up a blade of grass with his 
left hand. In distress, he infuses that blade of grass with the proper mantras 
and turns it into the Brahmashira. Unable to stand the arrows of the 
Pandavas and the presence of those wielders of devastras, in wrath 
Aswatthaman cries out a dreadful curse: ‘For the destruction of all the 
Pandavas!’ 

Having said these words, O tiger among kings, the fallen son of Drona 
unleashes that weapon which stuns all the worlds. A fire erupts in the blade 
of grass, which seems as if it will consume Swarga, Bhumi and Patala like 
the all-destroying Yama at the end of the yuga.” 


CANTO 14 


V aisampayana said, “Knowing Aswatttman’s intention at once, 

Krishna says to Arjuna, ‘Pandava, summon the Brahmashira that 
your Acharya gave you. Partha, to protect yourself and your brothers loose 
that weapon which can contain every other astra.’ 

Arjuna leaps down from the chariot with his Gandiva and the astra fitted 
to its string. Silently wishing weal upon his Guru’s son and then upon 
himself and his brothers, that parantapa bows to all the Devas and all his 
superiors, and unleashes the four-headed weapon of Brahma, thinking of the 
welfare of all the worlds and saying, ‘Let Aswatthaman’s weapon be 
quelled by mine!’ 

That astra blazes up in apocalyptic flames, like those of the pralaya that 
appear at the end of the yuga. So, too, the astra shot by Drona’s son of fierce 
energy blazes up with white flames within a great sphere of fire. 

Thunderclaps echo deafeningly; thousands of meteors fall from the sky; 
and all living creatures quake with dread. The entire firmament seems to 
resound with dreadful noise and assumes a terrible aspect with those flames. 
The Earth, with her mountains and waters and trees, trembles. 

And then seeing the two mahastras scorching the three worlds, the two 
great rishis, Narada, who is the soul of every creature, and Vyasa, the 
grandsire of all the Bharata princes, show themselves there. The two rishis 
seek to pacify the two heroes Aswatthaman and Dhananjaya. Knowers of 


all dharma and wanting the welfare of all creatures, those two sages of 
limitless tejas stand in the very midst of the two blazing weapons, 
themselves immune to every astra, themselves like two flames of the 
pralaya. The two whom no living creature can resist, whom all the Devas 
and Danavas always adore, becalm those two world-destroying weapons, 
indeed saving all of creation. 

The two rishis say, ‘The maharathas who have fallen into this battle are 
masters of every kind of weapon. Yet, never before did they loose such an 
astra at men. What act of rashness is this, you heroes?’” 


CANTO 15 


V aisampayana said, “At the very sight, O tiger among men, of those 

two rishis possessed of splendour like that of Agni, Arjuna quickly 
resolves to withdraw his great astra. Folding his hands, he addresses the 
rishis, saying, ‘I invoked this weapon, saying, “Let it nullify Aswatthaman’s 
Brahmashira!” If I withdraw this high weapon, Drona’s sinful son will 
consume us all with his astra. You two are like Devas. You must devise 
some means by which our welfare as also that of the three worlds may be 
secured.’ 

Saying this, Dhananjaya withdraws his astra. The withdrawal of the 
Bramashira by the gods themselves is exceedingly difficult. Not excepting 
the great Indra himself, there was nobody save the son of Pandu who could 
withdraw that high weapon once it had been unleashed. That astra was born 
of Brahmatejas, and no man whose soul was not pure could call it back; 
only a true brahmachari could. For, if one who has not practised the vow of 
brahmacharya attempts to bring it back after having shot it, it strikes off his 
own head and destroys him. Arjuna is a brahmachari and an observer of 
vratas. Having obtained that unobtainable weapon, he had never used it 
even when plunged in the gravest danger. Observant of the vow of truth, 
possessed of great heroism, leading the life of a brahmachari, the son of 
Pandu is submissive and obedient to all his superiors. It was for this that he 
succeeds in withdrawing his Brahmashira. 


However, Drona’s son, even upon seeing those two rishis standing 
before him, finds he cannot call back his astra loosed in dark fury. His heart 
downcast, Aswatthaman says to the Dwaipayana, the island-born Vyasa, 
‘Threatened by a great danger, and wanting to protect my life, I invoked the 
astra because I was afraid of Bhimasena, O Muni. This Bhima of false ways 
acted sinfully, O holy one, when he slew the son of Dhritarashtra in battle. 
It is for this, O Dvija, that, of uncleansed soul as I am, I invoked and loosed 
the Brahmashira. I dare not, however, withdraw it now. Having inspired this 
irresistible weapon with the energy of agni, I unleashed it for the 
destruction of the Pandavas. And so, indeed, will my Brahmashira destroy 
all the Pandavas. O Mahamuni, I have in wrath done this sinful thing.’ 

Vyasa says, ‘Pritha’s son Dhananjaya knew the astra called the 
Brahmashira. Neither from wrath, nor to kill you in battle, did he summon 
this weapon. Arjuna used it now only to contain your astra. He has 
withdrawn it. Having got even the Brahmashira through your father’s 
instructions, the mighty-armed Dhananjaya did not fall away from 
Kshatriya dharma. Arjuna is possessed of such patience, and such honesty. 
He is a master of every weapon. Why do you seek to destroy such a one and 
all his brothers? That land where a Brahmashira is destroyed by another 
lofty weapon suffers a drought for twelve years, for the clouds do not rain a 
drop of water there for that time. For this reason, the mighty-armed son of 
Pandu, although he had the power, would not from compassion for living 
creatures consume your weapon with his. 

The Pandavas should be protected; you should be protected; the 
kingdom also should be protected. Therefore, O you of mighty arms, 
withdraw this devastra of yours. Dispel the wrath from your heart and let 
the Pandavas be safe. The Rajarishi Yudhishtira never wishes to win victory 
by committing any sin. Give these Pandavas that gemstone which is 
embedded in your head. Taking that, the Pandavas will in return grant you 
your life.’ 

Drona’s son says, “This my jewel is more valuable than all the wealth 
that has ever been earned by the Pandavas and the Kauravas. If this gem is 
worn, the wearer ceases to have any fear from weapons or of disease or 
hunger. He has no fear of Devas and Danavas and Nagas. His 
apprehensions of Rakshasas as also from thieves and bandits will cease. 
Even these are the virtues of this gem of mine. I cannot part with it. 
However, O holy one, I must do what you ask of me. Here is this gemstone. 


Here is my self. But this blade of grass infused with the Brahmashira must 
fall into the wombs of the Pandava women, for this weapon is lofty and 
cannot be frustrated. O Maharishi, having loosed it, I find I cannot withdraw 
it. It will make barren the wombs of all the Pandava women and there shall, 
as I said, be an end of the Pandavas. As for your other commands, O holy 
Vyasa, I shall obey them.’ 

Vyasa says, ‘Do that then. Do not, however, entertain any other purpose, 
O sinless one. Casting this weapon into the wombs of the Pandava women, 


999 


stop yourself with that. 
Vaisampayana continued, “Listening to Vyasa, Drona’s son directs that 


weapon into the wombs of the Pandava women.” 


CANTO 16 


V aisampayana said, “Knowing what the sinner Aswatthaman has 

done, Krishna, blithe as ever, says to him, ‘A certain Brahmana of 
pious vows, seeing Virata’s daughter, who is now Arjuna’s daughter-in-law, 
in Upaplavya, said, “While the Kuru line will become extinct, a son will be 
born to you. And he will pass through death to live, and for this reason be 
called Parikshit, the tested one.” The words of that holy man shall come 
true: I say to you, the Pandavas shall have a son called Parikshit and he 
shall live!’ 

Aswatthaman replies in fury to Krishna, ‘You say this, O Kesava, from 
your partiality for the Pandavas, but it shall not happen. O you of eyes like 
lotus-petals, my words cannot but be fulfilled. Invoked by me, this weapon 
of mine shall fall on the foetus that nestles in the womb of Virata’s daughter 
Uttaraa and destroy that child which, Krishna, you want to protect.’ 

Krishna says, “The fall of this mighty weapon will not be fruitless. The 
embryo will die. But being dead, it will live again and have a long life. As 
for you, all wise men know you for a coward and a sinful wretch. You 
always sinned and now you have turned to murdering unborn children. And 
for this, O Aswatthaman, you must reap the harvest of your sins. For three 
thousand years you will wander over this earth, without a companion and 
without being able to speak to anyone. Alone and without anybody by your 
side, you will wander through diverse countries, O wretch, and you shall 


have no place in the midst of men. The stench of pus and blood will 
emanate from you, and inaccessible forests and dreary moors shall be your 
abode. You will wander over the earth, O sinful soul, with the weight of all 
diseases upon you, the agony of every pestilence. 

Meanwhile, the heroic Parikshit, attaining to age and a knowledge of 
the Vedas and the practice of pious vratas, will acquire all weapons from 
Kripa, the son of Sharadvata. Having gained a knowledge of all the 
devastras, and observant of every Kshatriya duty, that righteous-souled king 
shall rule the earth for sixty years. More, that boy will become the mighty- 
armed king of the Kurus, and be known by the name Parikshit, before your 
very eyes, O evil one. Though burnt by your weapon’s fire, I shall revive 
him. O lowest of men, behold the tejas of my tapasya and my truth.’ 

Vyasa says, ‘Since, disregarding us, you have decided to do this cruel 
thing, and your conduct is such although you are a high Brahmana by birth, 
therefore, what Devaki’s son has said will be realized, for you have adopted 
Kshatriya usages!’ 

Aswatthaman says, ‘With you among all men, O holy one, I will live. 
And let the words of this illustrious and foremost of men become true!’” 

Vaisampayana continued, ‘Then, having made over his precious gem to 
the Pandavas, Aswatthaman makes his forlorn way into the deeper forest. 
The Pandavas who have killed and punished all their enemies set Krishna 
and the island-born Vyasa and the great Narada at their head and, taking the 
gem that was born with Aswatthaman, return quickly to Draupadi who sits 
in prayopavesa, the fast unto death on Kurukshetra. 

Borne by their steeds swift as birds, those tigers among men return with 
him of Dasharha’s vamsa to their camp. Alighting from their chariots, those 
maharathas, themselves stricken with grief, see Panchali in deep, 
implacable mourning. Approaching the princess, the Pandavas with Kesava 
sit around her. 

Urged by Yudhishtira, the mighty Bhimasena gives Aswatthaman’s 
unworldly jewel to Draupadi, and says, *This gem, O precious queen, is 
yours. The killer of your sons has been vanquished. Rise now, casting off 
your sorrow, and recollect the dharma of a Kshatriya queen. O you of black 
eyes, when Vasudeva was about to set out from Upaplavya on his mission 
of peace, you cried out, O tender one, to Madhusudana, “I have no 
husbands! I have no sons, nor brothers! Nor are you alive, O Govinda, since 
the king wishes for peace!” You spoke even those bitter words to Krishna, 


that greatest of all men. Now recollect those words of yours that were so 
becoming of a Kshatriya queen. 

The wretched Duryodhana, that obstacle to our sovereignty, has been 
killed. I have drunk the blood of Dusasana. We have paid the debt we owed 
to our enemy. No one will be able to censure us any longer. Having 
vanquished Drona’s son, we have set him free for the sake of his being a 
Brahmana and for the respect that should be shown to our dead Acharya. 
His fame and honour have been destroyed, O Devi, only his body remains 
alive. He has been divested of his precious jewel and his is bereft of his 
weapons.’ 

Draupadi says, ‘I only wanted to avenge the terrible injury that he did to 
us. The Guru’s son is as worthy of my reverence as the Acharya himself. 
Let the king bind this gem to his head, O Bhaarata!’ 

Then, for Draupadi’s sake and thinking of it as a gift from Drona, 
Yudhishtira sets the jewel on his head. He looks as radiant and regal as a 
mountain with the moon above it. Though stricken with grief at the death of 
her sons, the princess Draupadi, of great strength of mind, abandons her 
vow of praya. 

Now Yudhishtira turns to address Krishna.” 


CANTO 17 


V aisampayana said, “In great grief at the slaughter in the night of his 

sons and the Panchalas, Dharmaraja Yudhishtira says to him of 
Dasharha’s vamsa, ‘How, O Krishna, could my sons, all of whom were 
mighty warriors, be killed by the sinner Aswatthaman of no extraordinary 
skill in battle? How could Drona’s son slay the sons of Drupada, all of 
whom were such great maharathas? How could he kill the fire-born 
Dhrishtadyumna, before whom Drona himself could not stand? What deed 
did the Acharya’s son do, O bull among men, so that he slew all our men by 
himself?’ 

The Holy One says, ‘Drona’s son sought the help of the eternal 
Mahadeva, highest of all the Gods. It was with Siva’s help that he could do 
what he did. If Mahadeva be gratified he can bestow even immortality. 
Girisha can give such valour as will succeed in containing Indra himself. I 
know Mahadeva truly, O bull of the Bharata vamsa! I know of his various 
deeds of old. He, O Bhaarata, is the beginning, the middle, and the end of 
all creatures. This entire universe exists and moves through his power. 

The puissant Grandsire Brahma, wanting to create living creatures, met 
Rudra and the Pitamaha asked him, “Lord, create living creatures!” Thus 
implored, Rudra of the tawny jata, said, “Tathaastu! So be it.” Saying that, 
he plunged into the waters and performed a long tapasya, for he was aware 
of the flaws that all creatures would have. Having waited in expectation of 


Rudra for a very long time, Brahma, through a fiat of his will, invoked 
another being into existence, to make him the Creator of all kinds of living 
things. Beholding Girisha immersed in the waters, this second being said to 
his father, “If there be no being born before me, I will create living 
creatures!” His sire replied to him, “There is no other first-born being 
besides you. This Sthanu has plunged into the water. Go and create living 
creatures, without any anxiety.” 

That being then created many living creatures, Daksha the first, who in 
turn created all these creatures of four kinds. As soon, however, as they 
were created, they ran, O king, towards their sire, afflicted with hunger and 
meaning to devour him. The second being whom Brahma had created ran to 
him for protection from his own offspring. And he said unto the Grandsire, 
“Tllustrious One, protect me from these, and let these creatures be given 
other food to live on!” 

Brahma gave herbs and plants to be their food, and to those that were 
strong and predatory, he gave the weaker creatures to be their means of 
sustenance. Their means of living having been thus given, the newly- 
created creatures all went away where they wanted, and multiplied through 
sexual union, each with their respective species. 

After the creatures had multiplied and the Grandsire had become well 
pleased, the First-born Siva rose from the water and beheld living creation. 
He saw that diverse kinds of creatures had been created and that they had 
multiplied through their own energy. At this sight, Rudra became incensed 
and caused his great Linga to disappear into the bowels of the Earth. 

The unfading Brahma, soothing him softly, said, “O Siva, what were 
you doing so long within the water? For what reason have you caused your 
organ of generation to disappear into the bowels of the Earth?” 

The Lord of the universe wrathfully answered the lord Brahma, 
“Someone else has created all these creatures! What purpose then would be 
served by this Linga of mine? With my tapasya, O Brahma, I have created 
food for all these creatures. These herbs and plants will also multiply like 
those that will subsist upon them!” 

Having said these words, Bhava went away, in cheerlessness and rage, 
to the foot of the Menjavat Mountains to practise yet more severe 
austerities.’” 


CANTO 18 


“kK rishna continues, ’After the Krita-yuga had elapsed, the Devas 

wanted to perform a Yagna and made preparations according to 
the directions laid down in the Vedas. They collected ghrita and the other 
requisites. And they not only devised what the requisites of their sacrifice 
should be, but also determined those amongst themselves that should have a 
share in the sacrificial offerings. 

Not knowing Rudra truly, the Devas, O king, assigned no share for the 
divine Sthanu. Seeing that the gods assigned to him no share in the 
sacrificial offerings, Sthanu, clad in black deer skin, wanted to destroy that 
sacrifice and, with that object in mind, he wrought a bow. There are four 
kinds of Sacrifices: the loka Sacrifice, the Sacrifice of special rites, the 
eternal domestic Sacrifice, and the Sacrifice consisting of the gratification 
derived by man from his enjoyment of the five elements and _ their 
compounds. It is from these four kinds of Sacrifice that the universe has 
sprung. Kapardin created his bow using the first and the fourth kinds of 
Sacrifices. The length of that bow was five cubits. The sacred “Vashat’, O 
Bhaarata, was made its string. The four parts of which a Sacrifice consists 
became the adornments of that bow. 

Then Mahadeva, filled with rage and taking up that bow, went to the 
place where the Devas were engaged in their Yagna. Seeing the unfading 
Rudra arrive there attired as a brahmachari and armed with that bow, the 


Goddess Earth quailed with fear and the very mountains began to tremble. 
The wind ceased to move, and fire itself, though fed, did not blaze forth. 
The stars in the firmament, in anxiety, began to wander in erratic courses. 
The Sun’s splendour dimmed. The disc of the Moon lost its beauty. The 
entire firmament was enveloped in thick gloom. Overwhelmed by fear, the 
Devas did not know what to do. Their Yagna lost its splendour. Indeed, the 
mighty gods were all terrified. 

Rudra in fury pierced the embodiment of Sacrifice, Yagna, with a fierce 
shaft through its heart. The embodied form of Sacrifice assumed the shape 
of a deer and fled into the sky from there with Agni, god of fire. 
Approaching Swarga in that form, he blazed forth in beauty. Rudra, 
however, O Yudhishtira, pursued him through the sky. After Yagna fled, the 
Devas lost their lustre. Why, losing their very senses, the gods were 
stupefied. 

In rage, the three-eyed Mahadeva broke the arms of Savitri, and plucked 
out the eyes of Bhaga and the teeth of Pushana. The gods then fled, as also 
all the several parts of Sacrifice. Some amongst them, reeling as they sought 
to flee, fell down unconscious. The blue-throated Rudra laughed aloud and, 
whirling the horn of his bow, paralysed them. The Devas then uttered a 
great cry. At their command, the string of Siva’s bow broke. The string 
having broken, the bow became stretched into a staff. The gods approached 
the bowless Mahadeva, with the embodied form of Sacrifice, sought his 
mercy and endeavoured to pacify him. 

Being ever easily pacified, the Great God plucked out his wrath and 
flung it into the water, O king. That wrath, assuming the form of fire, 
Badava, is always engaged in consuming that fluid element. He gave Savitri 
his arms, Bhaga his eyes, and Pushana his teeth. And he also restored the 
Sacrifices themselves, O Pandava. The world became safe and calm once 
more. The gods assigned to Mahadeva all the libations of ghrita as the share 
of the Great Deity. O king, when Mahadeva was angry, the whole world 
was dreadfully agitated; when he became calm everything was safe and 
calm again. 

Mahadeva Siva of fathomless power was worshipped and gratified by 
Aswatthaman. It was for this that Drona’s sons could singly kill all your 
sons, those maharathas. It was for this that he could put to sword many 
other heroes, including the Panchalas, with all their followers. Do not suffer 
your mind to dwell on it. It was not Drona’s son who accomplished what 


happened. It was done through the grace of Mahadeva Siva. Compose 
yourself and do now what should next be done.’” 


The end of Sauptika Parva 


Stri Parva 


CANTO 1 


J ALAPRADANIKA-PARVA 


A UM! Having bowed down unto Narayana and Nara, the foremost of 

Purushas, and to the Devi Saraswati, I invoke the spirit of Jaya 
Janamejaya said, “After Duryodhana and all the other warriors have fallen, 
what, O Muni, does king Dhritarashtra do when he hears the news? What 
does the Mahatman, Dharmaputra Yudhishtira, do? What do the three 
survivors of the Kuru army— Kripa, Kritavarman and Aswatthaman—do? I 
have heard everything about the feats of Aswatthaman. Tell me what 
happens after that mutual denunciation of curses. Tell me all that Sanjaya 
says to the blind old king.” 

Vaisampayana said, “After he has lost his century of sons, Dhritarashtra, 
grief-stricken, cheerless, and looking like a tree shorn of its branches, is 
overwhelmed by anxiety and cannot speak. 

Possessed of great wisdom, Sanjaya, approaching the king, says to him, 
“Why do you grieve, O Rajan? Grief does not serve any purpose. Eight and 
ten Akshauhinis of warriors have been slain. The earth has been desolated, 
and is almost empty now. Kings of diverse realms, hailing from diverse 
lands, united with your son and have all laid down their lives. Now let the 
obsequial rites of your sires, sons, grandsons, kinsmen, friends and 
preceptors be performed.’ 


Vaisampayana continued, “Having lost all his sons and counsellors and 
all his friends, king Dhritarashtra of great energy suddenly falls on the earth 
like a tree uprooted by the wind. 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Destitute as Iam of sons and counsellors and all my 
friends, I will have to wander in sorrow over the earth. What need have I 
now of life itself, left as I am without kinsmen and friends and resembling 
an aged bird shorn of its wings? Shorn of kingdom, deprived of kinsmen, 
and without eyes, I cannot, O you of great wisdom, shine any longer over 
the earth, for I am like a luminary shorn of its splendour. I did not follow 
the counsels of friends of Jamadagni’s son, of the Devarishi Narada, and of 
the island-born Vyasa, when they offered it to me. 

In the midst of the Kuru court, Krishna said to me, for my good, 
“Declare a truce to all hostilities, O king! Let your son take the whole 
kingdom. Give but five villages to the Pandavas.” 

Fool that I was, I did not follow even His advice and, for that, today I 
repent so bitterly. I did not listen to the righteous counsels of Bhishma. 
Alas, having heard of the slaughter of Duryodhana, whose roars were as 
deep as those of a bull, having heard also of the death of Dusasana and the 
killing of Karna and the setting of the Drona-sun, my heart yet does not 
break into pieces. I do not, O Sanjaya, remember any evil deed of mine in 
the past, whose consequences I am suffering so sharply today. Without 
doubt, I committed great sins in my past lives, for which the Supreme 
Ordainer has set me to endure such a terrible measure of grief. This 
destruction of all my kinsmen, this extermination of all my well-wishers 
and friends, in this my dotage, has come upon me through the force of 
Destiny. What other man is there on earth who is more afflicted than me? 
Since it is so, let the Pandavas see me this very day, firmly resolved to 
betake myself to the long way that leads to the regions of Brahma!’ 

While Dhritarashtra indulges in such demented lamentation, Sanjaya 
says to him, ‘Cast off your grief, O monarch. You have heard the 
conclusions of the Vedas and the contents of diverse scriptures and holy 
writ from the lips of the old. You have heard what the sages said to king 
Sanjaya when he was stricken with grief at the death of his son. When your 
son caught the pride that is born of youth, you did not accept the wise 
counsels offered to you by your well-wishers. Greedy for benefit, you did 
not do what would truly have benefited you. Like an over sharpened sword 
your own intelligence has wounded you. 


You did generally pay court to those that were of evil conduct and 
deeds. Your son had Dusasana for his counsellor, and the vile Karna, and 
the equally wicked Sakuni and Chitrasena of foolish understanding, and 
Salya, too. Your Suyodhana made the whole world his enemy. O Bhaarata, 
he did not pay any heed to the words of Bhishma, the Pitamaha of the 
Kurus, nor to Gandhari and Vidura, to Drona, O king, or Kripa the son of 
Sharadvata, to the mighty-armed Krishna, to the intelligent Narada, to many 
other great Rishis, or to Vyasa himself of immeasurable tejas. Though 
possessed of great prowess, your son was of little intelligence, proud, 
always eager for battle, evil, ungovernable and discontented. 

You are possessed of learning and intelligence and are always truthful. 
They that are as righteous and as intelligent as you, are never overwhelmed 
by grief. None of your son’s confederates regarded dharma. War was the 
one word on their lips. For this the very Kshatriya varna has been 
exterminated and the fame of your enemies enhanced. You had the position 
of an elder and counsellor, why, of a king of kings, but not a word of 
salutary advice did you utter. Unfit as you were for the task, you did not 
hold the scales of justice evenly. 

Every person should, from the very outset, adopt a righteous course of 
action that he may not have, in the end, to repent. Through blind love and 
favour for your evil son, O king, you did what was agreeable to 
Duryodhana. You are obliged to repent for that now, but it does not become 
you to give way to grief. The man whose eyes are directed towards only the 
honey hanging on the tree growing over a cliff, without being once directed 
to the fall, meets with destruction through his greed. Such a man is obliged 
to repent even as you do now. 

The man who indulges in grief never wins wealth. By grieving one 
loses the fruits one desires. Grief is again an obstacle to the acquisition of 
objects dear to us. The man who gives way to grief loses even his salvation. 
The man who shrouds a burning coal within the folds of his clothes and is 
burnt by the fire that is kindled by it, must be pronounced only a fool if he 
grieves over his injuries. You and your son fanned the Partha-fire with your 
harsh words, and with your covetousness acting as the ghrita caused that 
fire to blaze into consuming flames. When that fire blazed forth your sons 
fell into it like insects and perished. However, it does not befit you now to 
grieve for them now that they have all been burnt in the fire of the enemy’s 
astras. 


The tear-stained face, O king, which you now wear is not approved by 
the scriptures or praised by the wise. These tears, like sparks of fire, burn 
the dead for whom they are shed. Kill your grief with your intelligence, and 
pick yourself up with the strength of your own self!’ Thus does the noble 
Sanjaya comfort his blind king Dhritarashtra. Then, the wisest Vidura 
addresses the king.” 


CANTO 2 


V aisampayana said, “Listen, O Janamejaya, to the nectar-like words 
that Vidura says to the son of Vichitravirya and by which he 
gladdens that bull among men. 

Vidura said, “Rise, O king! Why are you stretched out on the earth? 
Pick yourself up. Rajan, even this is the final end of all living creatures. 
Everything massed together ends in destruction; everything that grows high 
is sure to fall down. Union is certain to end in separation; life is sure to end 
in death. The Destroyer, O Bhaarata, takes both the hero and the coward. 
Why then, O bull amongst kings, should not Kshatriyas engage in battle? 
He that does not fight is seen to apparently escape with life. When, 
however, his time comes he cannot escape death. As regards living 
creatures, they do not exist at first. They exist in the period that intervenes. 
In the end, they once more are no more. What matter of grief then is there 
in this? The man that indulges in grief does not succeed in meeting with the 
dead. By indulging in grief, one does not himself die. When the course of 
the world is such, why do you indulge in sorrow? 

Death drags away all creatures, even the gods. There is none dear or 
hateful to death, O best of the Kurus! As the wind tears off the tops of all 
blades of grass, even so, O bull of Bharata’s race, death masters all 
creatures. All creatures are like members of a caravan bound for the same 
destination. When death will encounter all, it matters little whom he meets 


with first. It does not become you to grieve for those that have been slain in 
battle. If the scriptures are any authority, all of them must have obtained the 
highest end. All of them were versed in the Vedas; all of them had observed 
stern vows. Facing the foe all of them have met with death. What matter of 
sorrow is there in this? Invisible they had been before their births. Having 
come from that unknown region, they have once more become invisible. 
They are not yours, nor are you theirs. 

What grief then is there in their vanishment? If slain, one wins heaven. 
By slaying, fame is won. Both these, with respect to us, are productive of 
great merit. Battle, therefore, is not bootless. No doubt, Indra will contrive 
for them realms that will grant their every wish and more. These, O bull 
among men, become the guests of Indra. Men cannot, by sacrifices with 
profuse gifts, through ascetic penances and by learning, go so quickly to 
swarga as Kshatriyas slain in battle. 

Into the bodies of enemy heroes, which were the sacrificial fire, they 
poured their libations of arrows. And they, in turn, had to endure the 
flaming arrows with which their enemies scathed them. I tell you, O king, 
that in this world there is not a better road to heaven than battle for a 
Kshatriya. They were all high-souled Kshatriyas; possessed of great 
courage, they were ornaments of grand sabhas. They have attained a lofty 
state of blessedness. They are not men for whom we should grieve. Comfort 
yourself and cease to grieve, O Purusharishabha. It does not befit you to 
suffer yourself to be overwhelmed by sorrow and to abandon all your 
duties. 

There are thousands of mothers, fathers, sons and wives in this world. 
Whose are they, and whose are we? From day to day, thousands of causes 
spring up for sorrowing and thousands of reasons for fear. These affect the 
ignorant but are nothing to him that is wise. There is none dear or hateful to 
Time, O best of the Kurus! Time is indifferent to none. All are equally 
hauled along by Time. Time causes all creatures to grow, and it is Time that 
destroys everything. When all else is asleep, Time is awake. Time is 
irresistible. 

Youth, beauty, life, possessions, health, and the companionship of 
friends are all unstable. He that is wise will never covet any of these. It does 
not become you to grieve for what is universal. By indulging in grief, a man 
may himself perish, but grief itself, by being indulged in, never becomes 
lighter. If you feel your grief to be heavy, stand up to it by not indulging it. 


Even this is the specific for grief—that one should not give in to it. By 
dwelling on it, one cannot lessen it; it only grows with indulgence. Upon 
the advent of evil or upon the bereavement of something that is dear, only 
they that are of little intelligence suffer their minds to be afflicted by grief. 
There is neither dharma, artha nor kama in that on which your heart dwells. 

The indulgence in grief is the certain means of losing one’s objectives. 
Through it, one falls away from the three great purusharthas, the ends of 
life. They that are without contentment are stupefied on the accession of 
vicissitudes that depend upon the possession of wealth. They, however, that 
are wise are unaffected by such losses and gains. One should kill mental 
grief with wisdom, just as physical grief is by medicine. Wisdom has this 
power. They, however, that are foolish, can never find peace of mind. 

The karmas of a former life closely follow a man, insomuch that they lie 
by him when he lies down, stand by him when he stands, and run with him 
when he runs. In those conditions of life in which one does well or ill, one 
enjoys or suffers the fruit thereof in similar conditions. In those forms in 
which one performs particular actions, one enjoys or suffers the fruits 
thereof in similar forms. One’s own self is one’s own friend, as, indeed, 
one’s own Self is one’s own enemy. One’s own self is the witness of one’s 
deeds, good and evil. From good deeds springs a state of happiness, from 
sinful karma comes suffering. One always finds the fruit of one’s actions. 
One never enjoys or suffers weal or woe that is not the fruit of one’s own 
deeds. Intelligent men like you, O king, never allow themselves to sink in 
sinful enormities that are contrary to wisdom and that strike at the very root 
of virtue and happiness.’” 


CANTO 3 


. “T) hritarashtra says, ‘O you of great wisdom, you have dispelled 

my grief with your luminous wisdom! But I wish to hear you 
speak again. How, indeed, do those that are wise free themselves from the 
mind’s grief born of the advent of evils and the loss of objects that are 
dear?’ 

Vidura says, ‘He that is wise finds peace by subduing both grief and joy 
through means by which one may escape from grief and joy. All those 
things about which we are anxious, O bull among men, are ephemeral. The 
world is like a plantain tree, without enduring strength. Since the wise and 
the foolish, the rich and the poor, all, divested of their anxieties, sleep 
finally on the funeral pyre, with bodies bereft of flesh and full of bare bones 
and shrivelled sinews, who amongst them will the survivors look upon as 
possessed of distinguishing marks by which the attributes of birth and 
beauty may be ascertained? When all are equal in death, why should human 
beings, whose understandings are always deceived by the things of this 
world, covet one another’s rank and position? 

The learned say that the bodies of men are like houses. In time these are 
destroyed. There is one Being, however, that is eternal. As a person, casting 
off one set of clothes, whether old or new, puts on another, even such is the 
case with the bodies of all embodied beings. O son of Vichitravirya, 
creatures obtain weal or woe as the fruit of their own karma. Through their 


actions they find heaven, O Bhaarata, or bliss, or hell and woe. Whether 
able or unable, they have to bear their burdens which are the result of their 
own deeds. 

As amongst earthen pots some break while still on the potter’s wheel, 
some while partially shaped, some as soon as brought into shape, some after 
being removed from the wheel, some whilst being removed, some after 
removal, some while wet, some while dry, some while being burnt, some 
while being removed from the kiln, some after removal therefrom, and 
some while being used, even such is the case with the bodies of embodied 
creatures. Some are destroyed while yet in the womb, some after coming 
out of the womb, some on the day after, some on the expiration of a 
fortnight or of a month, some on the expiration of a year or of two years, 
some in youth, some in middle age, and some when old. Creatures are born 
or destroyed according to their karma in previous lives. When such is the 
course of the world, why do you indulge in grief? 

As men, while swimming in sport on the water, sometimes dive and 
sometimes emerge, O king, even so creatures sink and emerge in life’s 
stream. They that are of little wisdom suffer or meet with destruction as the 
result of their own actions. They, however, that are wise, observant of 
virtue, and desirous of doing good to all living creatures, they, acquainted 
with the real nature of the appearance and disappearance of creatures in this 
world, attain at last to the highest end.’” 


CANTO 4 


. “T) hritarashtra says, ‘O most eloquent of men, how may the 
wilderness of this world be known? I wish to hear this. Tell me 
of it.’ 

Vidura said, ‘I will describe to you all that creatures do from their very 
conception. At first, the jiva lives in the admixture of blood and the vital 
fluid. Then it grows, little by little. Then, on the expiry of the fifth month, it 
assumes form. It next becomes a foetus with all its limbs complete, and 
lives in a very impure place, covered by flesh and blood. Then, through the 
action of the wind, its lower limbs are turned upward and the head comes 
downward. Arriving in this posture at the mouth of the uterus, it suffers 
manifold woes. In consequence of the contractions of the uterus, the 
creature then comes out of it, endowed with the results of all his previous 
karma. He then encounters in this world other evils that rush towards him. 
Calamities proceed towards him like dogs at the scent of meat. Next, 
diverse diseases approach him while he is enchained by his previous 
actions. 

Bound by the chains of the senses and women and wealth and other 
sweet things of life, diverse evil practices also approach him then, O king. 
Seized by these, he never finds happiness. In that season, he does not obtain 
the fruit of his actions, right or wrong. They, however, that set their hearts 
on dhyana, succeed in protecting their souls. The man governed by his 


senses does not know that death has come to his door. At last, dragged away 
by Yamadutas, the messengers of the Destroyer, he meets with death at the 
appointed time. Agitated by his senses, for whatever good and evil has been 
done at the outset and having enjoyed or suffered the fruits of these, he once 
more becomes indifferent to his acts of self-destruction. 

Alas, the world is deluded, and covetousness brings it under its 
dominion. Deprived of understanding by greed, wrath and fear, one knows 
not one’s own self. Filled with joy at one’s own respectability of birth, one 
is seen to traduce those that are not high-born. Swollen also with pride of 
wealth, one is seen to condemn the poor. One regards others to be ignorant 
fools, but seldom takes an account of oneself. One attributes faults to others 
but is never keen to punish oneself. Since the wise and the ignorant, the rich 
and the poor, the highborn and the lowborn, the honoured and _ the 
dishonoured, all go to the place of the dead and sleep there, freed from 
every anxiety, with bodies divested of flesh and full only of bones united by 
dried-up tendons, who amongst them would the survivors look upon as 
distinguished above the others and by what signs would they ascertain the 
attributes of birth and beauty? 

When all, stretched after the same fashion, sleep on the bare ground, 
why then should men, taking leave of their senses, wish to deceive one 
another? He that, looking at this saying in the scriptures with his own eyes 
or hearing it from others, practises virtue in this unstable world of life and 
adheres to it from an early age, attains to the highest end. Learning all this, 
he that adheres to Truth, O king, succeeds in crossing all paths.’” 


CANTO 5 


ae D hritarashtra says, “Tell me in detail everything about the ways of 
that intelligence by which this wilderness of karma may be 
safely crossed.’ 

Vidura says, ‘Having bowed down to the Self-Born, I will tell you how 
the great sages speak of the wilderness of life. A certain Brahmana, living 
in the great world, once found himself in a large inaccessible forest that 
teemed with beasts of prey. It abounded on every side with lions and other 
animals that looked big as elephants, all of which were roaring aloud. Such 
was the aspect of that forest that Yama himself would take fright at it. 
Beholding the forest, the heart of the Brahmana was exceedingly agitated. 
His hair stood on end, and other signs of fear manifested themselves on his 
person, O scorcher of foes. 

Inside the forest, he began to run here and there, casting his terrified 
eyes everywhere to find someone whose shelter he might seek. Yes, 
desperate to avoid those terrible creatures, he ran in fright. However, he 
could not distance himself from them. He then saw that the terrible forest 
was covered over by a great net and that a frightful woman stood there, her 
arms outstretched. That jungle was also encompassed by many five-headed 
snakes of dreadful forms, tall as cliffs and their hoods touching the very 
heavens. 


Within that vana was a pit whose mouth was covered with many hard 
and unyielding creepers and plants. During his panicked flight, the 
Brahmana fell into that hidden pit. He became entangled in those clusters of 
creepers that were interwoven with one another, and hung there like the 
large fruit of a jack tree hanging by its stalk. He continued to hang there, 
feet up and head down. While he was in that posture, diverse other 
calamities overtook him. He saw a great and mighty snake within the pit. 
He also saw a gigantic elephant near its mouth. That elephant, dark in 
complexion, had six faces and twelve feet. And the animal gradually 
approached that pit covered with creepers and trees. About the twigs of the 
greatest tree that stood at the lip of the pit, flew many bees of frightful 
forms, drinking the honey gathered in their comb about which they 
swarmed in dense numbers. 

The honey fell from the honeycomb in many jets. The one who hung in 
the pit continually drank those ambrosial jets but his thirst was never 
quenched but only grew. Unsatiated with repeated draughts, the Brahmana 
wanted more and more. Even then, O king, he did not become indifferent to 
life. Even there, the man continued to hope to live on. A number of black 
and white rats were eating away the roots of that tree. There was fear from 
the beasts of prey, from that fierce woman on the hem of that forest, from 
that snake at the bottom of the pit, from that elephant near its top, from the 
fall of the tree through the action of the rats, and lastly from those bees 
buzzing about to taste the honey. 

In that plight he continued to dwell, quite deprived of his senses, in that 
wilderness, and never at any time losing the hope of prolonging his life.’” 


CANTO 6 


. “T) hritarashtra says, “Alas, great was the distress of that Brahmana 
and very painful his life! Tell me, O first of speakers, whence 
was his attachment to life and whence his happiness? Where is that region, 
so unfavourable to the practice of virtue, in which that man resides? Oh, tell 
me how will that man be freed from all those great terrors? Tell me all this. 
We shall then exert ourselves properly to save him. My compassion has 
been greatly moved by the difficulties that lie in the way of his rescue.’ 
Vidura says, “They that are conversant, O monarch, with the 
Moskhadharma, the religion of Moksha, cite this as a simile. Understanding 
this properly, a man may attain to bliss in the regions hereafter. That which 
is described as the wilderness is the great world. The inaccessible forest 
within it is the limited sphere of one’s own life. Those that have been 
mentioned as beasts of prey are the diseases to which we are subject. The 
woman of gigantic proportions who dwells in the forest is identified by the 
wise with decrepitude which destroys beauty. That which has been spoken 
of as the pit is the body of embodied creatures. The great snake at the 
bottom of that pit is time, the destroyer of all embodied creatures. It is, 
indeed, the universal destroyer. The creepers growing in that pit and 
attached to whose spreading stems the man hangs down is the desire for life 
which is cherished by every creature. The six-faced elephant, O king, which 
comes towards the tree standing at the mouth of the pit is spoken of as the 


year. Its six faces are the seasons and its twelve feet are the twelve months. 
The rats and the snakes that gnaw at the roots of the tree are said to be days 
and nights that continually lessen the lifespans of all creatures. Those that 
have been described as bees are our desires. The numerous jets that are 
dropping honey are the pleasures derived from the gratification of our 
desires and to which men are seen to be powerfully addicted. The wise 
know life’s course to be even such. Through that knowledge they succeed in 
tearing off its bonds.’” 


CANTO 7 


ae D hritarashtra says, ‘Excellent is this parable that you have related! 
Indeed, you are a knower of the truth. Having listened to 
your nectar like words, I want to hear more.’ 

Vidura says, ‘Listen to me, O king, I shall once more discourse in detail 
on the means which enable the wise to free themselves from the ties of the 
world. As a person, O king, who has to travel a long way is sometimes 
obliged to halt when tired, even so, O Bhaarata, they that are of little 
intelligence, travelling along the long way of life, have to make frequent 
halts in the shape of repeated births into diverse wombs. The wise, however, 
are free from that obligation. For this, men conversant with the scriptures 
describe life’s course as a long way. The wise also call life’s round with all 
its difficulties a forest. 

Creatures, O bull of Bharata’s race, whether mobile or immobile, have 
to repeatedly return to the world. The wise alone escape. The diseases, 
mental and physical, to which mortals are subject, whether visible or 
invisible, are spoken of as beasts of prey by the wise. Men are always 
afflicted and impeded by them. Then, again, the fierce predators, 
represented by their own actions in life, ever cause anxiety to them that are 
of little intelligence. If anyone somehow escapes from diseases, decrepitude 
—that destroyer of beauty —overwhelms him after. Plunged in a slough by 
the objects of the different senses—sound and form and taste and touch and 


scent—man remains there without anything to rescue him thence. 
Meanwhile, the years, the seasons, the months, the fortnights, the days, and 
the nights, coming one after another, gradually despoil him of beauty and 
lessen the lifespan allotted to him. These are all messengers of death. They, 
however, that are of little understanding know them not to be such. The 
wise say that all jivas are governed by the Ordainer through their actions. 

The body of a creature is called the chariot. The living principle is the 
sarathy of that ratha. The senses are said to be the steeds. Our acts and the 
understanding are the traces. He who follows after those running horses has 
to come repeatedly to this world in a round of rebirths. He, however, who, 
being self-restrained, stops them by his understanding does not have to 
return. They that are not bewildered while wandering in this wheel of life 
that does truly revolve like an actual wheel, do not in reality wander in a 
round of rebirths. 

He that is wise should certainly take care to prevent the obligation of 
rebirth. One should not be indifferent to this, for indifference may subject 
us to it repeatedly. The man, O king, who has restrained his senses and 
subdued anger and greed, who is contented, and truthful in speech, succeeds 
in gaining peace. This body is called the chariot of Yama. Those of little 
intelligence are perplexed by it. Such men, O king, obtain that which you 
have done. The loss of kingdom, of friends, and of children, O Bhaarata, 
and other calamities such as these, overtake him who is still under the 
influence of desire. He that is wise should apply the medicament of 
intelligence to all great griefs. Indeed, obtaining the specific of wisdom, 
which is truly efficacious and is also almost unattainable, the man of 
restrained soul would kill that serious sickness called sorrow. Neither 
prowess, nor wealth, nor friends, nor well-wishers can cure a man of his 
grief so effectually as keeping a self-restrained soul. Therefore, observant of 
the great dharma of abstention from causing all injuries, or friendship for all 
creatures, be of pious conduct, O Bhaarata! 

Self-restraint, renunciation and heedfulness are the three steeds of 
Brahma. He who rides on the chariot of his soul, to which these steeds are 
yoked with the help of traces furnished by good conduct, and drives it, 
casting off all fear of death, flies, O king, to the worlds of Brahma. That 
man who gives to all creatures an assurance of his harmlessness, goes to the 
highest of worlds, the blessed realm of Vishnu. The fruit that one obtains by 
an assurance unto all creatures of his harmlessness cannot be obtained by a 


thousand sacrifices or by daily fasts. Amongst all things there is certainly 
nothing dearer than the self. Death is certainly feared and abhorred by all 
creatures, O Bhaarata! Therefore, compassion must certainly be shown to 
all. 

Endowed with diverse kinds of errors, entangled by the net of their own 
intelligence, both they that are wicked and the good wander repeatedly on 
the earth. They, however, that are wise and endued with subtle sight, attain 
to union with the Supreme Brahman.’” 


CANTO 8 


V aisampayana said, “Even after hearing what Vidura says, 

Dhritarashtra, king of the Kurus, afflicted with grief on account of 
the death of his sons, yet again falls senseless to the ground. Seeing him fall 
down in that state, his friends, as also the island-born Vyasa, and Vidura, 
and Sanjaya, and other well-wishers, and the attendants who waited at his 
gates and who enjoyed his confidence, sprinkle cool water over his body, 
fan him with palm leaves and gently massage him with their hands. For a 
long while they comfort the king in that condition. Recovering his senses 
after a time, Dhritarashtra weeps for a long while, thinking only of the death 
of his sons. 

He says, ‘Fie on the human condition! Fie on the human body! The 
woes that are suffered in this life frequently arise from the very state of 
humanity. Alas, O lord, great is the grief, like poison or fire, that one suffers 
at the loss of sons, of wealth, of kinsmen and relatives. That grief causes 
our limbs to burn and our wisdom to be destroyed. Overwhelmed with that 
grief, a person regards death to be preferable to living on. This calamity that 
has overtaken me through ill-fortune is even like that. It will not, I see, end 
except with my life itself. O best of regenerate ones, I shall put an end to 
my life this very day.’ Having said these words to his high-souled sire, that 
foremost of all men conversant with Brahman, Dhritarashtra, overwhelmed 


again with grief, falls deathly silent. Hearing what his son, the blind king, 
says, the puissant Vyasa speaks to him once more. 

Vyasa says, ‘O Mahabaho Dhritarashtra, listen to what I say. You are 
possessed of learning, you have great intelligence, and you, mighty one, are 
skilled in understanding dharma. Nothing of that which should be known is 
unknown to you, O Parantapa! Without doubt, you know the instability of 
all things doomed to die. When the world of life is unstable, when this 
world itself is not eternal, when life is sure to end in death, why then, O 
Bhaarata, do you grieve? Before your very eyes, O king, a concatenation of 
events brought about by Time, making your son the cause, resulted in this 
war. This destruction of the Kurus was inevitable. Why then do you grieve 
for those heroes that have attained to the highest end? Mahabaho, the 
Mahatman Vidura knew everything. With all his might he endeavoured to 
bring about peace. It is my opinion that the course marked out by Destiny 
cannot be controlled by anyone, even if one struggles for all eternity. I 
directly heard the course that was settled upon by the gods. I will relate it to 
you, so that peace of mind may be yours. 

Once, I went to the court of Indra. There I beheld all the denizens of 
heaven assembled together. There were, O sinless one, all the Devarishis 
also, with Narada at their head. There, O monarch, I saw also the Earth, 
Bhumi Devi in her embodied form. She had gone to the Devas for the 
accomplishment of a mission. Approaching the gods, she said, “You have 
already promised that which you all should do for me, O blessed ones, 
while you were in Brahma’s abode. Let that be accomplished soon.” 

Hearing these words of hers, Vishnu, the adored of all the worlds, 
smilingly addressed her in the midst of the heavenly conclave, saying, “The 
eldest of the hundred sons of Dhritarashtra, who is known by the name of 
Duryodhana, will accomplish what you desire. Through that king, your 
purpose will be achieved. For his sake, many kings will assemble together 
on the field of Kuru, and slay one another with great weapons. And, O 
Devi, your burden will be lightened in battle. Go quickly to your own place 
and continue to bear the weight of creatures, O beauteous one!” 

From this you will understand, O king, that your son Duryodhana, born 
in Gandhari’s womb, was an amsa of Kali, sprung for the very purpose of 
causing a universal slaughter. He was vindictive, restless, wrathful, and 
never satisfied. Through the influence of Destiny his brothers also became 
like him. Sakuni became his maternal uncle and Karna his great friend. 


Many other kings were born on earth to help in the task of destruction, in 
order to lighten the burden of the earth. As the king is, so do his subjects 
become. If the king be righteous, even adharma in his dominions assumes 
the form of dharma. Servants, without doubt, are affected by the merits and 
defects of their masters. And your sons, O king, having acquired a bad 
father, have all been destroyed. 

Conversant with the truth, Narada knew all this. Through their own sins, 
your sons have been destroyed, O king. Do not grieve for them. There is no 
cause for grief. The Pandavas have not, O Bhaarata, the least fault in what 
has happened. Your sons were all of evil souls. It is they that caused this 
carnage on earth. Be you blessed. 

Narada told Yudhishtira of all this in his court during the Rajasuya 
yagna, saying, “The Pandavas and the Kauravas, encountering each other, 
will meet with destruction. Do that, O son of Kunti, which you should!” 

At these words of Narada, the Pandavas became filled with grief. I have 
told you an eternal secret of the gods. This will destroy your grief and 
restore to you a love of your life, and cause you to cherish affection for the 
Pandavas, for all that has happened has been due to what was ordained by 
the gods. O Mahabaho, I learnt all this some time ago. I also spoke of it to 
Yudhishtira Dharmaraja on the occasion of his greatest of sacrifices, the 
Rajasuya. When I secretly told him of all this, Dharma’s son did his best to 
preserve peace with the Kauravas. That, however, which was ordained by 
the gods proved too powerful to be frustrated by him. The fiat the Destroyer 
can never be foiled by creatures of this world, mobile and unmoving. 

You are devoted to virtue and possessed of superior intelligence, O 
Bhaarata. You know that which is the way and that which is not the way of 
all creatures. If Yudhishtira learns that you burn with grief and frequently 
faint, he will cast off his very life. He is always compassionate and 
possessed of wisdom. His kindness extends even to all the inferior 
creatures. How is it possible, O king, that he will not show compassion to 
you? At my command, and knowing that what is ordained is inevitable, as 
also from kindness to the Pandavas, continue to endure your life, Bhaarata! 
If you live, your fame will spread in the world. You will be able to acquire a 
true knowledge of all dharma and find many years to gain punya for 
yourself. 

This grief for the death of your sons that has arisen in your heart like a 
blazing fire must be extinguished with the sacral water of wisdom!”” 


Vaisampayana continued, “Hearing these words of Vyasa of 
immeasurable tejas, and reflecting upon them for a while, Dhritarashtra 
says, ‘O best of enlightened ones, I am tormented by a vast load of grief. 
My senses repeatedly forsake me and I am unable to pick myself up. 
However, hearing what you say about what was ordained by the gods, I 
shall not think of casting off my life and I shall live and act without 
indulging this searing grief.’ 

Hearing these words from Dhritarashtra, O monarch, Satyavati’s son 
Vyasa vanishes from there.” 


CANTO 9 


J anamejaya said, “After the holy Vyasa vanished, what, O Maharishi, 

did king Dhritarashtra do? What also did the Kuru king, the Mahatman 
son of Dharma, do? What did those three, Kripa, Kritavarman and 
Aswatthaman do? I have heard of the feats of Aswatthaman and the mutual 
pronouncement of curses. Tell me what happened next and what Sanjaya 
next said to the old king Dhritarashtra.” 

Vaisampayana said, “After Duryodhana has been killed and all the 
troops slaughtered in the night, Sanjaya, deprived of his spiritual sight, 
comes back to Dhritarashtra. 

Sanjaya says, ‘The kings of diverse peoples, who came from different 
realms, have all, O king, gone to the lands of the dead, along with your 
sons. Your son, who was constantly implored for peace but who always 
wished to end his enmity with the Pandavas by killing them in war, has 
caused the very world as we knew her to be destroyed. Do you, O Rajan, 
have the obsequial rites for your sons and grandsons and sires to be 
performed in proper order.’ 

Vaisampayana continued, “Hearing these terrible words from Sanjaya, 
the king falls onto the earth and lies motionless like a dead man. Vidura 
says to the prostrate king, the very same words he had said before ‘Rise, O 
king, why do you lie on the ground? Do not grieve, O bull of Bharata’s 
race! Even this, O lord of the earth, is the final end of all creatures. At first, 


all creatures do not exist. Then, they are alive. At the end, they once more 
cease to be. What cause for sorrow is there in all this? By indulging grief, 
one cannot fetch back the dead. By indulging in grief, one cannot die 
oneself. When such is the course of the world, why do you, of all men, so 
indulge grief? One may die without having fought a battle. Some also 
escape alive after fighting a war. When one’s time comes, O Rajan, one 
cannot escape. Time takes away all creatures, of every kind. 

There is none dear or hateful to Time, O best of the Kurus. As the wind 
tears off the ends of all blades of grass, even so Time brings all creatures 
under its influence. All creatures are like members of the same caravan 
bound for the same destination. What cause of sorrow is there if Time meets 
with one a little earlier than with another? Those, O king, that have fallen in 
battle and for whom you grieve, are not really objects of grief, since all 
those illustrious ones have found swarga. With sacrifices with profuse gifts, 
through tapasya, and even through knowledge, men cannot so easily repair 
to heaven as Kshatriyas by dying courageously in battle. All those heroes 
were conversant with the Vedas; all of them were observant of vows; all of 
them have perished, facing the enemy in battle. What cause then is there for 
grieving? 

They poured their libations of arrows into the bodies of their brave foes 
as into a fire. Foremost among men, they bore in return the arrow libations 
poured upon themselves. I tell you, O Rajan, that there is no better way to 
heaven for a Kshatriya than through battle. All of them were high-souled 
Kshatriyas; all of them were heroes and ornaments of royal sabhas. They 
have attained to a high state of blessedness. One should not grieve for them. 
Do you comfort yourself, and do not grieve, O bull among men! It does not 
become you to suffer yourself to be overwhelmed by sorrow and abandon 
all karma.’” 


CANTO 10 


V aisampayana said, “Hearing these words of Vidura, that bull of 

Bharata vamsa, Dhritarashtra, orders his chariot to be yoked. He 
says again, ‘Bring Gandhari here without delay, and all the royal Bharata 
women. Bring Kunti also, as well as all the other ladies who are with her. 
Having said these words to Vidura, knower of all dharma, Dhritarashtra of 
righteous soul, well-nigh deprived of his senses by sorrow, climbs into his 
arrived chariot. Gandhari, stricken with grief at the death of her sons, 
accompanied by Kunti and the other ladies of the royal household, comes at 
the command of her lord to where Dhritarashtra waits for her. Beside 
themselves with sorrow, they come all together to the king. As they meet, 
they accost each other and utter loud wails of woe. Vidura, who by now has 
become more grief-stricken than those regal women, comforts them. Setting 
them on the chariots that stand ready for them, he sets out with them from 
the city of the elephant. As they go, piercing cries ring out from every Kuru 
house. The whole city, including the children, are pierced through with 
anguish. 

Those proud, exquisite royal women, whom not the gods themselves 
had ever set eyes on, are now bereft of their lords and seen by the common 
people. With their beautiful tresses all dishevelled and their ornaments cast 
aside, those women, each wearing just a single piece of cloth, go forth in 
untold grief. Indeed, they issue from their palaces resembling white 


mountains, like a dappled herd of deer from their mountain caves after the 
fall of their king stag. The royal women emerge in successive bevies, O 
king, and, unhinged with grief, dash here and there as if in panic, somewhat 
like a herd of fillies in a circus pen. 

Seizing each other by the hand, they utter loud cries after their sons and 
brothers and sires. They seem to enact the scene that takes place during the 
pralaya at the end of the yuga. Weeping and crying and running here and 
there, and unhinged by grief, they do not know what to do. Those women, 
who once felt the blush of modesty in the presence of even companions of 
their own sex, now feel no trace of shame, though scantily clad, in 
appearing before their mothers-in-law. Once they would comfort each other 
while afflicted with even slight discomfort. Now, overcome by grief, they 
refrain from even casting their eyes at each other. 

Surrounded by those thousands of wailing women, the king cheerlessly 
issues out of the city and goes swiftly towards the field of war. Artisans and 
traders and Vaishyas and all kinds of mechanics, issuing out of the city, 
follow the king. Shattered by the absolute destruction that has overtaken the 
Kurus, the royal women set up a bewailing that seems to pierce all the 
worlds. All creatures that heard that terrible cry think that the hour of the 
pralaya has come when all things would be consumed by the fire that arises 
at the end of the yuga. The citizens of Hastinapura also, devoted to the 
house of Kuru, their hearts filled with anxiety, set up a piercing cry, O king, 
that was as loud as that uttered by the royal women.” 


CANTO 11 


V aisampayana said, “Dhritarashtra has not gone for more than two 

krosas when he comes upon the three maharathas, Sharadvata’s son 
Kripa, Drona’s son Aswatthaman, and Kritavarman the Bhoja. As soon as 
they see the blind and mighty king, the three heroes sigh in grief and 
address him in voices choked with tears, ‘Your royal son, O king, having 
achieved the most difficult feats, has, with all his followers, gone to the 
world of Indra. We are the only three rathikas of Duryodhana’s army that 
have escaped with our lives. All the others, O bull of Bharata’s race, have 
perished.’ 

Having said these words to Dhritarashtra, Kripa says to the grief- 
stricken Gandhari, “Your sons died while achieving feats worthy of heroic 
Kshatriyas, while fearlessly fighting and striking down large numbers of the 
enemy. Without doubt, having found those bright worlds that are attainable 
only through the use of weapons, they have assumed resplendent forms and 
sport there like gods. 

Amongst those heroes there was not one that turned back from battle. 
Every one of them has fallen at the end or the edge of weapons. None of 
them folded his hands, begging for quarter. Death in battle at the end or 
edge of weapons has been said by the ancients to be the highest end that a 
Kshatriya can obtain. Thus, O queen, it does not befit you to grieve for any 


of them. Their enemies the Pandavas also, O Gandhari, have not been more 
fortunate. Listen to what we, led by Aswatthaman, have done to them. 

Learning that your son had been killed treacherously by Bhima, we 
slaughtered the Pandavas’ men, entering their camp while it lay buried in 
sleep. All the Panchalas have been slain. Indeed, all the sons of Drupada, as 
also all the sons of Draupadi, have been slaughtered. Having caused this 
carnage of the sons of our foes, we now fly from the Pandavas themselves, 
for we three cannot stand against them in battle. The Pandavas are all 
irresistible heroes and mighty bowmen. They will soon catch up with us 
and, filled with rage at the slaughter of their sons, will have their revenge on 
us. 

Having done what we did, O queen, we dare not tarry. Grant us leave, O 
Maharani! It does not become you to set your heart on sorrow. O 
Dhritarashtra, you also give us leave to fly from here. O mighty king, 
summon all your fortitude and observe the dharma of a Kshatriya in its 
highest form.’ 

Having said these words to the king, and circumambulating him in 
pradakshina, Kripa, Kritavarman and Drona’s son, O Bhaarata, hardly able 
to tear their eyes away from Dhritarashtra of great wisdom, urge their 
horses towards the banks of the Ganga. Riding away, those maharathas, 
with hearts plunged in grief and agitation, now take one another’s leave and 
go their separate ways. 

Sharadvata’s son Kripa rides to Hastinapura; Hridika’s son Kritavarman 
flies to his own kingdom; while the son of Drona sets for the asrama of 
Maharishi Vyasa. Even thus, those heroes, who had brought dreadful grief 
to the Pandavas, ride away before the sun rises higher, repeatedly casting 
backward glances at one another, and all of them full of fear. 

It is after this, O Rajan, that the sons of Pandu encounter the son of 
Drona and, putting forth their prowess, vanquish him, as I have already told 


99 


you. 


CANTO 12 


V aisampayana said, “After all the warriors had been slaughtered, king 

Yudhishtira the just hears that his uncle Dhritarashtra has set out 
from the city called after the elephant. Ravaged by grief on account of the 
death of his sons, Yudhishtira, O king, accompanied by his brothers, sets 
out to meet with his uncle, equally full of sorrow at the death of his hundred 
sons. The son of Kunti is followed by the high-souled and heroic Krishna of 
Dasarha’s race, and by Yuyudhana, as also by Yuyutsu. The princess 
Draupadi, also, burning with grief, and accompanied by those Panchala 
ladies that are with her, sorrowfully follows her lord. 

Yudhishtira sees near the banks of the Ganga, O king, the crowd of 
Bharata women crying like a flock of bereaved she-ospreys. The king is 
soon surrounded by those thousands of royal women who, with arms raised 
up in sorrow, indulge in loud lamentations and give vent to all kinds of 
incoherent words, both agreeable and distasteful. 

They cry where, indeed, is that righteousness of the king, where is his 
truth and compassion, for he has slain sires and brothers and preceptors and 
sons and friends? 

‘How, O mighty-armed one, has your heart become tranquil after 
causing Drona, your grandsire Bhishma, and Jayadratha to be slaughtered? 
What need have you of sovereignty, after having seen your sires and 


brothers, O Yudhishtira, and the irresistible Abhimanyu and the sons of 
Draupadi massacred?’ 

Passing by those weeping, screaming women, Yudhishtira comes and 
touches the feet of his eldest uncle. Having saluted their sire according to 
custom, those parantapas, the Pandavas, announce themselves to him, each 
uttering his own name. Dhritarashtra reluctantly embraces the eldest son of 
Pandu, who was the cause of that great carnage. Having embraced the 
Dharmaraja and spoken a few weak words of comfort to him, O Bhaarata, 
the dark-souled Dhritarashtra seeks Bhima, like a fire ready to consume 
everything that would approach it. Indeed, that fire of his wrath, fanned by 
the wind of his grief, seems to be ready to consume the Bhima-forest. 

However, knowing Dhritarashtra’s evil intentions toward Bhima, 
Krishna pulls away the real Bhima, and presents an iron statue of the 
second son of Pandu to the old king. Indeed, with sure prescience of what 
the blind king would attempt to do, Krishna had kept that contrivance ready. 
Seizing the iron Bhima in his awesomely strong arms, king Dhritarashtra, 
strong as ten thousand elephants, clasps it so ferociously that the iron image 
breaks into pieces. Such is his effort that his own chest is bruised and he 
begins to vomit blood. Covered with his own blood, the king falls down on 
the ground like a parijata tree topped with its flowery burden. 

His wise charioteer Sanjaya, son of Gavalgana, lifts up the monarch 
and, soothing and comforting him, says, ‘Do not do such a thing!’ 

His fury exhausted, the demented king returns to his senses. He is 
suddenly wracked with guilt and sorrow, and begins to weep aloud, saying, 
‘Alas, oh Bhima, alas, oh Bhima! What have I done?’ 

Seeing the aged king’s fury has left him and that he is genuinely 
stricken at the thought that he has killed Bhima, Krishna says softly, “Do 
not grieve, O Dhritarashtra, for you have not killed Bhimasena. That was an 
iron statue, O king, which you shattered. I knew that you were full of rage 
and drew Bhima away from you and the jaws of Death. 

O tiger among kings, there is none equal to you in strength of body. 
What man is there, O Mahabaho, that could endure the might of your arms? 
Indeed, even as no one can escape alive from an encounter with Yama 
himself, even so none can come out safely from your angry embrace. It was 
for this that the iron image of Bhima, which Duryodhana had fashioned and 
upon which he daily rained blows of his mace, was kept ready. Through 
grief for the death of your sons, your mind has fallen away from dharma. It 


is for this, O great king, that you seek to kill Bhimasena, though killing 
Bhima would do you no good. Your sons would not come back to life even 
if you killed Pandu’s second son. 

I say you must yourself condemn what we all saw you attempt to do and 
not set your heart on grief!’” 


CANTO 13 


V aisampayana said, “Some maid-servants then come to the king to 

bathe him. After he had been duly bathed, Krishna speaks to him 
again,’ O king, you have read the Vedas and many other Shastras. You have 
heard all the ancient Puranas and Itihasas, and know everything about the 
Rajadharma, the duty of kings. You are learned, possessed of great wisdom, 
and indifferent to strength and weakness. Why then do you harbour such 
anger when all that has overtaken you is the result of your own fault? I 
spoke to you before the battle. Both Bhishma and Drona, O Bhaarata, did 
the same, as also did Vidura and Sanjaya. However, then you did not follow 
our advice. Indeed, though we repeatedly exhorted you to do the right thing, 
you would not listen to us, even while knowing that the Pandavas were 
superior to you and yours, O Kauravya, in strength and courage. 

That king who can see his own faults and knows the signs and the 
distinctions of place and time, finds great prosperity. That king, however, 
who, though wisely counselled by well-wishers, does not accept what they 
say, good or bad, meets with great distress and is obliged to grieve because 
of the evil policy he pursues. Do you now live a different life, O Bhaarata. 
You did not keep your mind under restraint, but suffered yourself to be 
ruled by Duryodhana. That which has come upon you is the result of your 
own sins. Why then do you seek to kill Bhima? 


Recollect your own crimes, and curb your anger now. Bhima has justly 
killed the wretch who, from hubris, had Panchali dragged roughly into the 
Kuru sabha; this revenge properly belonged to Bhima and he swore an oath 
that he would have revenge. Look clearly at your own evil deeds as also at 
those of your evil son. The sons of Pandu are perfectly innocent. Yet have 
they been treated most cruelly by you and by Suyodhana.’ 

Vaisampayana continued, “After he has been told the stark truth by 
Krishna, king Dhritarashtra replies to Devaki’s son, ‘Mahabaho, it is even 
as you say; everything you say is perfectly true. It was a father’s excessive 
love that made me fall away from dharma. By good fortune, you protected 
that tiger among men, the mighty Bhima, and he did not come into my 
embrace when I was full of anger. But now, the fever of my wrath has 
passed. O Madhava, I am eager to embrace that hero, the second son of 
Pandu. When all the kings that went to war are dead, when my children are 
gone, my welfare and happiness depend upon the sons of Pandu.’ 

Saying this, the old king embraces those mighty princes, Bhima and 
Dhananjaya, and the two sons of Madri, and he weeps as he does this and 
comforts and blesses them.” 


CANTO 14 


V aisampayana said, “Commanded by Dhritarashtra, those bulls of 

Kuru’s race, the Pandava brothers, accompanied by Krishna, now 
come to meet Gandhari. The faultless Gandhari, tormented by the death of 
her hundred sons, remembers that Yudhishtira had slain all his enemies, and 
wants to curse him. Understanding her evil intent towards the Pandavas, 
Vyasa addresses himself to the task of preventing the chaste queen of great 
powers from harming the Pandavas. Having cleansed himself with the 
sacred and fresh water of the Ganga, the Maharishi, who can go anywhere 
he pleases by merely willing it, comes quick as a thought to where 
Gandhari is, with darkness in her heart. 

Appearing out of nowhere, seeing clearly into the queen’s heart, Vyasa 
mahatapasvin says to his daughter-in-law, ‘Do not curse the sons of Pandu! 
On the other hand, show them your forgiveness. You are strong and pure 
and you must not be angry with the blameless Pandavas. Set your heart on 
peace. Restrain the curse you are about to pronounce. Listen to my advice. 
Avid for victory, your son said to you every day of the eighteen days of the 
war, “O mother, bless me that I win this war!” Implored every day by 
Duryodhana, you would always say to him, “Victory lies where dharma is!” 

O Gandhari, I do not remember anything that you ever said having ever 
been proven false. And neither were the words you said to Duryodhana 
false. You are always engaged in doing good to all men, why, to all 


creatures. Having successfully crossed the dreadful sea of the war on 
Kurukshetra, the Pandavas have surely won victory as well as increased 
their own dharma. Once you always observed the practice of forgiveness. 
Why would you not observe it now? Subdue the sin in your heart, O you 
who know all about dharma. 

There is victory where dharma is. Remembering your own 
righteousness and the words you yourself spoke; restrain your anger, O 
Gandhari! Do not sin, O you that are beautiful in speech.’ 

Gandhari says, ‘Holy one, I do not have any ill will towards the 
Pandavas, nor do I wish that they should die. However, out of grief for the 
death of my sons, my heart is agitated. I know that I should protect the 
Pandavas with as much care as Kunti herself does, and that Dhritarashtra 
should also do the same. The very race of Kshatriyas has perished through 
the sins of Duryodhana and of Sakuni, and through the deeds of Karna and 
Dusasana. In this matter, not the slightest blame can attach to Arjuna or to 
Pritha’s son Vrikodara, or to Nakula or Sahadeva, or to Yudhishtira himself. 

Swollen with arrogance and pride, the Kauravas have fallen in battle, 
along with many others who came to fight for them. But one thing that 
Bhima did, in your very presence, Krishna, roils me. Vrikodara challenged 
Duryodhana to a duel with maces and, discovering during the fight that my 
son was clearly his superior, Bhima struck him below the waist smashing 
his thighs and his manhood and only thus killing him. This is what stirs my 
anger. How can great Kshatriyas cast aside dharma for the sake of their 
lives, the dharma of even war laid down by the great Mahatamans of old?’” 


CANTO 15 


V aisampayana said, “Bhima hears what Gandhari says and grows 

afraid. Nervously, he attempts to pacify her. ‘Whatever I did, 
whether dharma or adharma, I did through fear and to protect my life. It 
becomes you to forgive me, O my mother. Your mighty son could not be 
killed by anyone in a fair fight with maces. It was for this that I did what I 
was forced to. Duryodhana himself once vanquished Yudhishtira with 
treachery, at dice. He was always vindictive and deceitful towards us. This 
was why I killed him treacherously. 

By then your son was the sole living maharatha on his side. If he had 
killed me during the mace fight, my brothers and I would have lost our 
kingdom yet again. That is why I killed him as I did. You know all that your 
son said to Panchali while she, in her period, wore just a single cloth. 
Without killing Suyodhana, we could never peacefully rule the whole world 
with her seas. It was for this that I did what I had to. 

Your son inflicted many wrongs on us. In the midst of the Kuru sabha 
he bared his left thigh up to his very manhood and asked Draupadi to go 
and sit there. For that, he deserved death at our hands even then. However, 
at the command of Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, we suffered ourselves to be 
restrained by the compact that had been made. But how could we ever 
forget or forgive what Duryodhana said and did on that day? 


Great were our privations and sufferings in the forest. Remembering all 
this, I did what I had to, to kill Duryodhana. With his death, we have ended 
the enmity that simmered for so many years. Yudhishtira has his rightful 
kingdom back and we have been freed from hatred and anger that burned us 
for so long. But your son was invincible with the mace and there was no 
way that I or anyone could kill him in a duel with maces.’ 

Gandhari says, ‘Since you praise my son so for his skill in battle, he did 
not deserve such a death. However, he did do all that you say. But Bhima, 
when Vrishasena had killed Nakula’s horses, O Bhaarata, you drank my son 
Dusasana’s blood on the field. What you did was cruel and unforgivable and 
suited to only the basest of men. It was an evil thing you did, O Vrikodara!’ 

Bhima replies, humbly, ‘It is a sin to drink the blood of even a rank 
stranger, what then need be said about quaffing the blood of one’s own self? 
For one’s brother is, verily, one’s self; there is no difference between the 
one and the other. However, the blood did not, O mother, pass down my lips 
and teeth. Karna knew this. Only my hands were smeared with Dusasana’s 
blood. Seeing Nakula deprived of his horses by Vrishasena, I struck dread 
into the hearts of your rejoicing sons. 

When Dusasana seized Draupadi’s hair on the day of the game of dice, 
and hauled her into the Kuru sabha, I swore a hot oath in rage that I would 
drink Dusasana’s blood one day in battle. If I did not at least appear to fulfil 
my oath, I would swerve from Kshatriya dharma. It was for this, O queen, 
that I set my lips to his blood after killing him, but the blood never passed 
down my throat. O Gandhari, do not impute that sin to me. When you did 
not restrain your own sons in the past, how can you now blame us, who are 
innocent?’ 

Gandhari says, ‘Unvanquished by anyone, you have slain a hundred 
sons of this old man. Oh, why did you not spare, O child, even one son of 
this old couple deprived of kingdom, perhaps one whose offences were 
lighter? Why did you not leave even one crutch for this blind couple? O 
child, although you live unharmed, having killed all my children, yet no 
grief would have been mine if you had adopted the path of dharma while 
killing them.’ 

Still wrathful at the slaughter of all her sons and grandsons, now 
Gandhari asks after Yudhishtira, saying, ‘Where is the king?’ 

Trembling and with folded hands, Yudhishtira approaches her and says 
softly, ‘Here is Yudhishtira, O devi, the cruel slayer of your sons! I deserve 


your curses, for I am the cause of this great destruction. Oh, curse me! I no 
longer have any need for life, for kingdom, or for wealth. Having caused 
my friends and kin to be killed, I have proved myself to be a great fool and 
a hater of near and dear ones.’ 

To Yudhishtira who says this, and who is overcome with fear and stands 
in her presence, Gandhari, drawing long sighs, says nothing. Conversant 
with the laws of dharma, the Kuru queen, possessed of great foresight, 
directs her eyes, from within the folds of the cloth that cover them, to the tip 
of Yudhishtira’s toe, even as the prince, with his body bent forwards, is 
about to fall at her feet. At this glance, the king, whose toenails had all been 
clear and fine, feels a sharp pain on this thumb toe and finds it has been 
burnt ashen! Seeing this, Arjuna quickly darts behind Krishna and the other 
sons of Pandu become pale and restive with fear. Then, having cast off her 
wrath, Gandhari comforts the Pandavas as a mother should. 

With her leave, those heroes of broad chests then go together to present 
themselves before their own mother. Seeing her sons after a long time, 
Kunti, who had constantly been filled with anxiety on their account, covers 
her face with her cloth and begins to weep. Having cried for some time, 
with her sons, Pritha sees the wounds and scars of many weapons on their 
bodies. She then repeatedly embraces and strokes each of her sons, and full 
of sorrow, breaks into tears again, along with Draupadi who has lost all her 
sons and whom she sees lying on the bare earth, lamenting piteously. 

Draupadi says, ‘O venerable devi, where have all your grandsons, with 
Abhimanyu among them, gone? Seeing you in such distress, why do they 
not hurry to come before you? Ah, having lost my sons, what need have I of 
a kingdom?’ 

Raising up the grief-stricken princess of Panchala, Pritha begins to 
comfort that queen of the large eyes. Then Kunti, accompanied by the 
princess of Panchala and followed by her sons, comes toward the grief- 
stricken Gandhari. Seeing the illustrious Kunti with her daughter-in-law, 
Gandhari addresses her, saying, ‘Do not, O daughter, grieve so. Look, I too 
am as stricken with grief as you. I feel certain this universal carnage has 
been brought about by the irresistible course of Time. Inevitable as it was, 
this horrible slaughter has not been caused by the voluntary agency of men. 
Even that has come to pass which Vidura of great wisdom foretold after 
Krishna’s embassy for peace had failed. Do not, therefore, grieve over a 
thing that was inevitable, especially after its occurrence. Having fallen 


bravely in battle, they should not be grieved for. I am in the same plight as 
you. If you yield so to grief, who then will comfort us? Ah, through my 
negligence, this foremost of races has been destroyed.’” 


CANTO 16 


STRI-VILAPA-PARVA 


V aisampayana said, “Having said these words, Gandhari falls silent. 

She remains at a slight remove from the grisly field of war, but with 
her spiritual eye, sees clearly the carnage everywhere, and particularly the 
slaughter of the Kurus. Always devoted to her lord, that most blessed queen 
had always practised stern vratas. Undergoing the severest penances, she 
was always truthful in her speech. Through a boon granted her by Vyasa, 
she is possessed of spiritual knowledge and power. Piteous are the 
lamentations in which that great queen then indulges. 

Endowed with vast intelligence, the Kuru queen sees, from a distance, 
but as if from near, that horrifying field of battle, full of wonderful and 
macabre sights. Scattered all over with bones and hair, and covered with 
streams of blood, Kurukshetra is strewn with thousands upon thousands of 
corpses on every side. Covered with the blood of elephants, horses, rathikas 
and other kinds of warriors, it teems with headless trunks and trunkless 
heads. And it resounds with the cries of elephants and horses and men and 
women; it abounds with jackals and cranes and ravens and kankas and 
crows. And it is the sporting ground of rakshasas that live on human flesh. 
It swarms with ospreys and vultures and resounds with the inauspicious 
howls of jackals and the cackling of hyena packs. 


Then king Dhritarashtra, at the command of Vyasa, and all the sons of 
Pandu with Yudhishtira at their head, along with Krishna and all the royal 
Kuru women, comes onto that field of battle. The regal women see their 
slain brothers and sons and sires and husbands lying on the ground, and 
being devoured by beasts of prey and wolves and ravens and crows and 
pretas and pisachas and rakshasas and diverse other wanderers of the night. 
Seeing that horrific field and its dreadful sights past all dark imagination, 
Kurukshetra whose spectacle resembles the sights seen on the sporting 
ground of Rudra, the women give vent to piercing shrieks and quickly 
alight from their fine carriages and chariots. 

Witnessing sights the like of which they had never before seen or could 
imagine, some of the Bharata ladies feel their limbs turn to water and fall to 
the ground. Others are so horrified that they faint. Indeed, the Panchala and 
the Kuru women are plunged into unutterable distress. Hearing the cries of 
those women pierce the sky all around, Gandhari speaks to Krishna of the 
lotus-eyes, foremost among all men. 

Full of grief, she says, ‘Look, O lotus-eyed Madhava, upon these 
daughters-in-law of mine! Deprived of their lords, their hair loose and wild, 
they utter cries of woe like a flight of she-ospreys. Seeing the corpses past 
all count, they dementedly call out to their great dead Bharata lords. They 
run from their husbands to their sons and then to their slain sires and 
brothers. 

Ah, look Krishna, the field is covered with the mothers of heroes, all of 
whom have lost their sons. Look where the wives of dead heroes swarm, 
flinging themselves across the remains and bodies of their husbands and 
crying inconsolably. Look where the field of battle is adorned with those 
tigers among men, Bhishma and Karna and Abhimanyu and Drona and 
Drupada and Salya, as if with still smouldering fires. 

Look where Kurukshetra is adorned with the golden coats of mail and 
with the priceless gemstones of the greatest warriors, and with their 
angadas, and keyuras and garlands. The field of death strewn with spears 
and spiked clubs hurled by heroic hands, and swords and diverse kinds of 
bows and numberless arrows. 

And beasts of prey and carrion stand around, sporting, or lie down 
where they please, some having fed so they can eat no more and others still 
tearing meat from the bones of noble men. Yes, even such is ghastly 
Kurukshetra, and my heart and all my limbs burn to witness this spectacle 


with mystic sight. Krishna, I feel as if the five elements themselves, the 
panchamahabhutas of which all creation is made, have been destroyed in 
the destruction of the Panchalas and the Kurus. 

Fierce vultures and other vicious birds, in thousands, drag blood-dyed 
corpses and, seizing them by their armour, devour them, tearing away 
chunks of flesh. Who could have imagined the deaths, all together, in a few 
days, of such heroes as Jayadratha, Karna, Drona, Bhishma and 
Abhimanyu? Alas, though they were invincible, yet they have been killed, 
Madhusudana, and vultures, kankas, ravens, kites, dogs and jackals feast 
upon them. 

There, those tigers among men that fought on Duryodhana’s side, who 
took the field in wrath, now lie unmoving like fires that have burned down. 
All of them are worthy of sleeping on soft and clean beds. But, alas, 
plunged into calamity, they sleep today on the bare ground, never to awaken 
again. Once gifted vabdhis and magadhis would sing their praises; now they 
listen to the cries of jackals. Illustrious heroes who once slept on costly 
beds with their limbs smeared with sandalwood paste and powdered aloe, 
alas, they now sleep in the dust. These vultures and wolves and ravens that 
rend their flesh have now become their ornaments. With ominous and fierce 
cries, the birds and beasts of carrion drag those magnificent bodies this way 
and that, fighting over them, ravens gobbling down their eyeballs. 

These Kshatriyas, who always delighted in battle, wear smiles and 
grimaces on their handsome faces, while their hands still clutch keen shafts, 
tempered swords and bright maces, as if life has not yet left them. Countless 
magnificent Kshatriyas, of noble bodies and features, wearing golden 
garlands, lie on the coarse ground as if asleep. And then, the beasts of 
carrion, the scavengers, find them and tear them apart in moments, making 
off with grand limbs. 

Other warriors, with massive arms, sleep with maces clasped to them, as 
if those are their beloved wives. Others, still cased in armour, continue to 
hold brilliant weapons in their hands. And these the jackals and hyenas 
avoid, Krishna, fearing that they are still alive, for so they seem. But others, 
whom the carnivores drag away and dismember have their golden garlands 
broken and the broken pieces glitter like drops of the sun on bloody ground. 

Ah look, where thousands of savage wolves actually haul away the dead 
by thick and heavy golden necklaces. Many, whom bards well-trained to 
their work once used, with their hymns and eulogies of grave import, to 


delight every morning, are now surrounded by mourning women, stricken 
with grief and sobbing hysterically around them, O tiger of Vrishni’s race! 
The faces of those beautiful women, O Kesava, though pale with shock and 
sorrow, look resplendent still, like an assemblage of red lotuses. The Kuru 
women have stopped weeping, with their companions. They are all filled 
with anxiety. Overwhelmed with sorrow, they run here and there, beside 
themselves. And yet, their faces, stained with tears and suffused with anger 
and fear, shine like the morning sun or gold or burnished copper. 

Hearing one another’s incoherent lamentations, wails of woe bursting 
forth from every side, the Kuru women cannot decipher what exactly they 
are crying out. Some of them, drawing long sighs and crying out shrilly and 
repeatedly, are so stricken that they give up their very lives. Many of them, 
seeing the corpses of their sons, husbands, or fathers, wail loudly and 
without let. Others strike their heads with their own soft hands. 

Strewn over with severed heads and hands and other limbs, and often 
raked together into large piles, the earth is awesome with these signs of 
havoc and heroism. The women see headless trunks of great majesty, and so 
many heads cut from their necks that they swoon in large numbers and lie 
unmoving for a long time. 

Uniting heads with trunks in despair, those women, mindless with grief, 
discover that they are mistaken in their pairings, cry out, “This head does 
not belong to this body!” and weep more bitterly still. Others, putting 
together arms and hands, thighs and feet, severed by arrows or swords, then 
fall senseless to look at the restored bodies. 

Some amongst the Bharata women look at the bodies of their lords, 
bodies that have been mangled by animals and birds and their heads torn 
off, and do not recognise them. Others look at their brothers, sires, sons, and 
husbands slain by foes, strike themselves repeatedly, heads, breasts and 
arms, while their loud bewailing never pauses, O Krishna. Miry with flesh 
and blood, the earth in parts is impassable with arms still holding swords in 
their grasp, and with heads adorned with sparkling earrings. Looking at the 
field strewn with their brothers and fathers, and sons, those faultless 
women, who have never before suffered the least distress, are now plunged 
into chasmal dismay. 

Look, O Janardana, at the bevies of Dhritarashtra’s daughters-in-law, 
who look like herds of exquisite fillies adorned with excellent mane. What, 


O Kesava, can be a sadder spectacle for me than this one presented by these 
lovely women who have assumed such a pitiable aspect? 

Without doubt, I must have committed great sins in my past lives, since 
I am now looking at my sons and grandsons and brothers all slaughtered by 
their enemies. Even as she laments thus to Krishna, her subtle gaze wanders 
farther afield, beyond Kurukshetra, and alights upon her son Duryodhana.” 


CANTO 17 


V aisampayana said, “Seeing Duryodhana lying dead and covered in 

blood, Gandhari suddenly falls to the ground in a dead faint, like an 
uprooted plantain tree. She soon regains her senses and begins to weep, 
repeatedly wailing aloud. Going to him, that queen takes him in her arms 
and laments loudly and piteously. 

Stricken with grief, and agitated, the Kuru queen exclaims, ‘Alas, O my 
son! Alas, O son!’ 

Burning with sorrow, she drenches her son’s broken corpse with her hot 
tears. Duryodhana lies unmoving, his massive chest and great shoulders 
now still forever, adorned still with bloodied garlands.’ 

Still addressing Krishna who stands beside her, Gandhari continues, ‘O 
puissant one who have exterminated this race, O you of Vrishni’s vamsa, 
this foremost of kings, my son, said to me, “O mother, wish me victory in 
this war!” Tiger among men, I knew that a great calamity was upon us and 
replied to him, “Where dharma is, there victory shall be. And since, my son, 
your heart is set on war, you will attain to those blessed realms that 
Kshatriyas find and sport there like a god.” 

These were the words that I then said to him. I did not then grieve for 
my son. However, I grieve for the helpless Dhritarashtra bereaved of all his 
friends and kinsmen. Look, O Madhava, where my son, that greatest of 


warriors, wrathful, skilled in weapons, and irresistible in battle, sleeps in the 
dust on the bed of Kshatriyas. Look at the reverses brought about by Time. 

This scorcher of his foes who once walked at the head of all the 
crowned kings of the world now sleeps in the dust. Beyond doubt, my 
heroic Duryodhana, when he sleeps on that bed which is the hero’s, has 
attained the most unattainable end. Inauspicious jackals now delight that 
prince asleep on the Kshatriya hero’s bed, Suyodhana who was once 
delighted by the most beautiful women sitting around him. He who was 
once encircled by kings vying with one another to please him, alas, he, slain 
and lying on the ground, is now encircled by vultures. He who was formerly 
fanned with beautiful chamaras by exquisite women is now fanned by birds 
of carrion with their wings. Ah, how he sleeps on the bare ground, this 
mighty-armed prince, slain by Bhimasena in battle, like an elephant killed 
by a lion. 

Look at my Duryodhana, O Krishna, lying on the naked earth, covered 
with blood, killed by Bhimasena with his mace. This mahabaho who 
gathered eleven akshauhinis of troops, O Kesava, has, through his own evil 
policy, now been killed. Alas, there that great bowman and mighty warrior 
sleeps, struck down by Bhimasena, like a tiger slain by a lion. 

Having disregarded Vidura, as also his own father, this reckless, foolish 
and evil prince has succumbed to death because he ignored his elders. He 
who had ruled the earth without a rival for thirteen years, alas, that prince, 
that son of mine, sleeps today on the bare ground, felled by his enemies. 
Not long ago, O Krishna, I saw the earth, full of elephants and kine and 
horses, and ruled by my Duryodhana. Today, O you of mighty arms, I see 
her ruled by another, and destitute of elephants and kine and horses. What 
need have I, O Krishna, of my life? 

Look again upon this sight that is more painful than the death of my son 
—the sight of these beautiful royal women weeping beside their slain 
heroes. Look, O Krishna, at the mother of Lakshmana, that princess of large 
hips, with her tresses loose, that beloved wife of Duryodhana, she who 
looks yet like a golden vedi. How she of unmatched beauty and intelligence 
once made love in the mighty embrace of her lord. Oh, why does my heart 
not break into a hundred pieces at the sight of my son and grandson slain in 
battle? 

Ah, my son’s wife now sniffs the head of her heroic son covered in 
blood. And now, she moves back to her lord and so sadly and tenderly 


strokes his magnificent form with her fair hand. And thus, she moves from 
one to the other, heartbroken by the deaths of both. Now she casts her teary 
gaze on one, and then the other. Look, O Madhava, striking her head with 
her hands, she falls upon the breast of her heroic lord, the king of the Kurus. 
Her complexion is like that of the filaments of the lotus, and even in her 
bitter grief, she is still lovely as a lotus. The unfortunate princess now 
strokes the face of her son and now that of her lord. If the shastras and the 
srutis be true, this slain king has attained those realms of blessedness that 
one wins only through the use of weapons!’” 


CANTO 18 


¢ °G andhari says, “Behold, O Madhava, all my hundred sons, who 
never tired in battle, have been killed by Bhima with his mace in 
battle. Yet, what grieves me more today is that these, my daughters-in-law, 
of tender years, deprived of their husbands and their sons and with their hair 
unkempt and loose, wander this deathly field of war today like women that 
have lost their very minds. They who once walked only on the terraces of 
godly mansions with their feet adorned with many ornaments, now, in great 
affliction of heart, tread this hard earth, mired with blood and flesh, with 
those same tender feet. Reeling in sorrow, they roam here and there like 
drunken women, driving away vultures and jackals and crows by waving 
their slender arms and screaming shrilly. 

Ah, look, where that royal one of faultless limbs looks at this scene of 
carnage and falls down as if felled with an axe of grief. When I look at 
Duryodhana’s wife, my dead grandson Lakshmana’s mother, I feel as if 
someone tears my heart within my chest into shreds with cruel, burning 
nails. These beautiful regal women, some dark and some fair, their limbs 
and arms so slender and their forms so womanly —some see their brothers, 
some their husbands, and some their sons, lying on the rude earth drenched 
in blood—themselves fall down, seizing the arms of their precious and 
beloved dead. 


Listen, O unvanquished one, to the ringing wails of the elderly women 
and those of middle age at the gruesome sight of the field of war. Look 
where they support themselves weakly against broken chariots and the 
bodies of dead elephants and horses. Look, O Krishna, where one of them 
has picked up the severed head of a kinsman, and holds it in her hands with 
tears streaming down her face. I believe, O sinless one, that both they and I 
of little understanding must have committed great sins in our past lives, 
since, O Janardana, all our men have been slain by Yudhishtira Dharmaraja. 

Whatever we do, good and bad, always bears fruit! Behold, O Madhava, 
the young women of beautiful breasts and bellies, well-born, modest, with 
long, black eye-lashes and tresses as dark on their heads, blessed with sweet 
voices, graceful as swans, now deranged by grief, swoon and fall uttering 
cries shrill as flights of cranes. Look, O lotus-eyed hero, their lovely faces 
like full-blown lotuses, are scorched by the sun. Alas, O Vasudeva, the 
wives of my proud sons who were as strong as great elephants in musth, are 
now exposed to the gaze of the common people. 

Look, O Govinda, at the shields decked with a hundred moons, the 
standards of solar effulgence, the golden coats of mail, the collars and 
cuirasses made of gold and the helmets of my sons, scattered on the earth, 
are still as splendid as sacrificial fires over which libations of ghrita have 
been poured. There Dusasana sleeps, felled by Bhima, and the blood of all 
his limbs quaffed by that parantapa. Look at that other son of mine, O 
Madhava, slain by Bhima with his mace, impelled by Draupadi and the 
recollection of his pain at the time of the game of dice. Addressing the dice- 
won princess of Panchala in the midst of the Kuru sabha, Dusasana, 
wanting to please his elder brother as also Karna, said to Draupadi, “You 
are now the wife of a slave! Panchali, enter our harem now, with Sahadeva, 
Nakula and Arjuna!” 

At that time, O Krishna, I said to Duryodhana, “O my son, rid yourself 
of the envious, deceitful and wrathful Sakuni. Know that your uncle, my 
brother, is entirely evil and addicted to violence. Send him away from you 
at once and make peace with the Pandavas. O you of little intelligence, do 
you not think of Bhimasena filled with anger? You pierce him with vicious 
words even like an elephant being burned with brands of fire.” 

But he ignored me and continued to spew his wordy venom at them, 
like a snake spitting its poison at a great bull. That Dusasana now sleeps on 
bare ground, his massive arms outstretched, slain by Bhimasena like an 


elephant brought down by a lion. Ah, what a horrible thing Bhima did when 
he drank my son’s blood on Kurukshetra.’ ” 


CANTO 19 


¢ °G andhari says, ‘There, O Madhava, my son Vikarna, always 
lauded by the wise, lies on bare ground, slain by Bhima and 
mangled horribly. Lifeless he lies, Krishna, among dead elephants like the 
moon in the autumn sky surrounded by blue clouds. Vultures feed with 
difficulty on his broad palm, cased in its leathern glove, and scarred by 
constant wielding of the bow. His helpless young wife tries ceaselessly to 
drive the vile birds away, but to no avail. The youthful, brave and handsome 
Vikarna, O bull among men, raised in luxury and deserving of every kind of 
weal, now sleeps in the dust, O Madhava! Though all his vital parts have 
been pierced with clothyard shafts and bearded arrows and nalikas, yet the 
magnificence and beauty of his form has not deserted him. 

There, my son Durmukha, that slayer of large bands of foes, sleeps, 
with his face towards the enemy, slain by the inexorable Bhimasena 
keeping his vow that he would singly kill all my hundred sons. Ah, look 
where jackals have eaten away my son Durmukha’s face, O Krishna; what 
they have left so far looks even more splendid like the moon of the seventh 
day of the bright fortnight. Krishna, Krishna, how could they bear to kill 
that son of mine of incomparable beauty and make him lie in the dust? O 
compassionate one, how could they kill Durmukha, before whom no foe 
could stand? 


O Lord of all, cast your eyes again upon that other son of Dhritarashtra 
—Chitrasena, also brutally slain and lying on the ground, that hero who was 
the model of all bowmen? 

Look at all the young women who sit, side by side with the ravening 
vultures and jackals, around his majestic form adorned with blood-stained 
wreaths and garlands. Their loud wailing mingling with the yowls and 
growls of the jackals and the cackling of hyenas is piteous but, ah, also 
strangely wonderful, and I know not why! 

Youthful and handsome, and always waited upon and served by the 
most beautiful women, my son Vivimsati sleeps there, stained with dust. 
His armour has been pierced with many arrows. Slain by Bhima in the 
midst of the general carnage, my heroic Vivimsati is now surrounded and 
waited upon by vultures. Having penetrated the ranks of the Pandava army, 
that Kshatriya now lies on the bed of a hero, on the bed of an exalted 
Kshatriya. 

Look, O Krishna, at his startlingly handsome face, a smile still playing 
on it, with its hooked fine nose and arched thick eyebrows, and resembling 
the luminous moon himself. Yes, in days gone by, large numbers of the 
most beautiful women used to wait upon him, like thousands of apsaras 
upon a gandharva at his sport. 

Who, again, could endure my son Duhsaha, that parantapa, that hero, 
that ornament of sabhas, that irresistible warrior, that resister of all 
enemies? 

Covered with arrows and the blood they have drawn, Duhsaha’s body 
looks resplendent, like a mountain overgrown with flowering karnikaras. 
With his garland of gold and his bright armour, Duhsaha, though dead, is 
lustrous yet, like a white mountain of fire!’” 


CANTO 20 


“ G andhari says, ‘He whose strength and courage were regarded, O 
Kesava, as one and half times superior to those of his sire and 
you, he who resembled a fierce and proud lion, he who, without a follower, 
alone pierced the impenetrable array of my son, he who proved to be the 
death of many, alas, he now sleeps there, having succumbed to death. I see, 
O Krishna, the splendour of that son of Arjuna, of that hero of 
immeasurable tejas, Abhimanyu, has not been dimmed even in death. 
There, the daughter of Virata, the daughter-in-law of the wielder of the 
Gandiva, that girl of flawless beauty weeps pitiably at the sight of her 
young dead husband. That young Uttaraa approaching her slain lord, and 
tenderly strokes his broken body, his noble face. 

Once, drunk with honeyed wines, this most intelligent and exquisite girl 
would shyly, passionately embrace her youthful husband, and kiss the face 
of Subhadra’s son, that face like a full-blown lotus, the head supported on a 
neck adorned with three lines like those of a conch-shell. Taking hold of her 
lord’s golden coat of mail, that young woman now gazes through eyes that 
stream tears at the blood-dyed body of her dead husband. 

Looking at Abhimanyu, Uttaraa says to you, O Krishna, “O lotus-eyed 
one, this hero whose eyes so resembled yours, has been killed. In might and 
energy, and prowess also, he was your equal, O sinless one. He resembled 
you in beauty. Yet he sleeps on the ground, slain by the enemy.” 


Addressing her own lord, the princess says again, “You were raised in 
every luxury. You used to sleep on soft skins of the ranku deer. Ah, does 
your body not feel pain today lying thus on bare ground? Your massive 
arms like elephant’s trunks, adorned with golden angadas, outstretched, 
your arms covered with skin hardened by the frequent drawing of the 
bowstring, you sleep, O lord, in peace, as if exhausted with the toil of too 
much exertion in the training halls. Alas, why do you not speak to me that 
am weeping before you? I do not remember ever having offended you. Why 
then do you not speak to me? Once you would call lovingly to me even 
when you saw me at a distance. 

Beloved Abhimanyu, where will you go now, leaving behind you the 
revered Subhadra, these your sires that resemble the very gods, and my 
wretched self, all wracked with grief?” 

Look, O Krishna, gathering the blood-dyed locks of her lord with her 
petal soft hands and placing his head on her lap, the beautiful Uttaraa 
speaks to him as if he were alive. She says, “How could those great 
maharathas kill you in the midst of battle, you that are Krishna’s sister’s 
son, and the son of the Gandivi? Oh, fie on those warriors of evil deeds, 
Kripa and Karna and Jayadratha and Drona and Drona’s son, who vilely 
banded together and took your life. What was the state of mind of those 
unrivalled maharathas, when they surrounded you like a tiger on a hunt, O 
my love of such tender years, and slaughtered you to my break my heart? 

How could you, O Kshatriya, who had so many protectors, be killed so 
helplessly in the very sight of the Pandavas and the Panchalas? Looking at 
you, O hero, cut down in battle by many vile men fighting together, how is 
that tiger among men, that son of Pandu, your father, able to bear the burden 
of life? Neither the acquisition of a vast kingdom nor the defeat of their 
enemies can make the Parthas bereft of you, O my lotus-eyed one, joyful. 

As for me, through virtue and self-restraint, I will very soon join you in 
those realms of bliss which you have acquired through the use of weapons. 
Protect me, O Kshatriya, when I arrive in those realms. One cannot die until 
one’s hour comes, since, wretched that I am, I still draw breath after seeing 
you slain in battle. Having gone away to the world of the Pitris, who else, 
like me, do you now speak to, O tiger among men, in sweet words mingled 
with smiles? I have no doubt that you will agitate the hearts of the apsaras 
in heaven, with your great beauty and your soft words and wondrous 
smiles. 


Having attained the worlds kept for men of righteous deeds, you are 
now united, O son of Subhadra, with the apsaras. While sporting with them, 
at least at times think of my loving deeds towards you. It seems that your 
union with me in this world was ordained for only six fleeting months, for 
in the seventh, O Abhimanyu, you lost your very life.” 

O Krishna, even as Uttaraa laments in this manner the ladies of the 
royal house of Matsya lead away the stricken princess, deprived of all her 
purposes. Pulling away the afflicted Uttaraa, themselves even more afflicted 
than that girl, those women weep and utter loud wails at the sight of the 
slain Virata. Mangled with the weapons of Drona, prostrate on the ground, 
and covered with blood, Virata is surrounded by screeching vultures and 
howling jackals and crowing ravens. Those black-eyed women approach 
the prostrate form of the Matsya king, over which carnivores, beasts and 
birds, utter cries of joy, and attempt to turn the body, what is left of that 
great king, over. Weak with grief, they cannot do so. Scorched by the sun, 
and worn with exertion and toil, their faces have become pale. Look also, O 
Madhava, at those other young boys besides Abhimanyu— Uttara Kumara, 
Sudakshina prince of the Kambojas, and the handsome Lakshmana—all 
lying dead on the field of war.’” 


CANTO 21 


: °G andhari says, ‘Look now where the mighty Karna, that greatest 
of all bowmen, lies on the ground. In battle he was like a blazing 
fire. However, the fire that was Karna was consumed by the Arjuna fire. 
Look where Vikartana’s son Karna, after having slain so many atirathas, has 
himself been laid low on the field, and lies drenched in blood. Choleric, 
sensitive and a mahatejasvin, he was twice as mighty as any other atiratha. 
Slain by the wielder of the Gandiva, that incomparable hero now sleeps on 
the ground, even like another sun. 

From fear of the Pandavas, my maharatha sons set great, great Karna at 
their head while going into battle, like a herd of elephants do their leader, 
the greatest tusker among them. Alas, like a tiger slain by a lion, or an 
elephant by another infuriated elephant, that awesome warrior was killed by 
Savyasachi. Gathered together, Karna’s wives, their hair loose and their 
faces covered with the dust of Kurukshetra, sit wailing and beating their 
breasts around that noblest of men, that fallen hero. 

Thoughts of Karna would haunt Yudhishtira for thirteen years, filling 
him with dreadful anxiety and robbing him of sleep. Karna was the warrior 
that the Dharmaraja feared most because he knew that Karna was the one 
warrior my sons had who could indeed have killed Arjuna. Invincible 
against all enemies, like Maghavat himself in battle, Karna was like the 
Badava fire of the pralaya itself, and immovable as Himavat. 


That hero became the protector of Dhritarashtra’s son, O Madhava! 
Alas, deprived of life, he also now lies on the bare ground, like a tree felled 
by the wind. Look where Karna’s wife, his son Vrishasena’s mother, flings 
herself again and again on the ground, crying out his name. Listen, she 
exclaims, “Your guru Bhargava’s curse has surely pursued you, O my lord. 
And when your chariot wheel was sunk into the ground, the vicious Arjuna 
cut your magnificent head from your body with his astra. Ah even the 
greatest skill and might are nothing against what fate wills, for surely 
otherwise no one could have killed you.” 

That woman, the mother of Sushena, cries out piercingly and falls 
finally in a dead faint for she cannot bear to look at the great Karna 
prostrate on the ground, his waist still encircled by a wide golden belt. Oh, 
how grievous it is to look at how scavenging beasts and birds of carrion 
have reduced that grand and lustrous body into small pieces with fang and 
claw. 

The sight is not gladdening, Krishna, like that of the moon on the 
fourteenth night of the dark fortnight. Falling onto the earth, the hapless 
woman recovers her senses, rises again, and yet again falls down in a 
swoon. Grief has its way with her not only on account of her lord having 
been slain but also on account of the death of her son. Ah, look how she 
comes and lovingly sniffs Karna’s dead face even like an animal of the wild 
might do with her mate whom she finds killed by some predator!’” 


CANTO 22 


os G andhari says, ‘Slain by Bhimasena, look where the lord of Avanti 
lies, with vultures, jackals and crows feeding on that hero. 
Though he once had many friends, he now lies now perfectly friendless and 
alone. Look, Madhusudana, he lies on a Kshtariya’s bed after having killed 
numberless enemies; he lies covered in blood. Jackals, kankas and other 
carnivores drag him here and there competing for mouthfulls of his flesh. 
Ah, behold the reversals brought about by Time. Gathered together, his 
wives also sit around him and wail aloud in grief. 

Look at Pratipa’s son Balhika, that mighty bowman possessed of great 
ojas, slain with a broad-headed shaft and lying on the ground like a sleeping 
tiger. Though dead, his face is still lustrous as a full moon risen on the 
fifteenth day of the bright fortnight. And there, burning with grief on 
account of the death of his son, and wanting to keep the vow he swore, 
Indra’s son Arjuna slew the son of Vriddhakshatra. Look upon that 
Jayadratha who, though protected by the illustrious Drona, was killed by 
Partha, after Arjuna stormed through eleven akshauhinis of troops. 
Inauspicious vultures, O Janardana, now feed upon Jayadratha, the lord of 
the Sindhu-Sauviras, once so full of pride and vigour. 

Though his devoted wives seek to protect his corpse, look, Krishna, the 
carnivores drag his body away into the nearby woods. The Kamboja and 


Yavana wives of that mighty-armed lord of the Sindhus and the Sauviras 
wait upon him to protect him from the feral scavengers. 

When, O Janardana, Jayadratha, along with the Kekayas, attempted to 
ravish Draupadi, he deserved to be slain by the Pandavas. However, out of 
regard for my daughter Dussala, they set him free. Why, Krishna, did they 
not show some pity once more for Dussala? That daughter of mine, of 
tender years, is now crying in dreadful grief. She strikes her body with her 
own hands and curses the Pandavas. What, O Krishna, can be a greater 
sorrow to me than that my daughter of tender years should be a widow and 
all my daughters-in-law should become husbandless? 

Ah, look where Dussala, having cast off her grief and fears, runs here 
and there, dementedly, in search of the head of her husband. He who held 
up all the Pandavas, save Arjuna, when they wanted to rescue Abhimanyu 
trapped inside the Chakravyuha, himself succumbed to death. His wives, 
with faces as beautiful as the moon, now sob, sitting around that irresistible 
hero who was like an infuriated elephant in battle.’” 


CANTO 23 


°G andhari says, ‘And there lies Salya, the maternal uncle of 

Nakula, slain in battle, O lord, by the pious and virtuous 
Yudhishtira. Everywhere, Salya would boast that he was your equal. Now, 
that maharatha, king of the Madras, lies dead. When he agreed to be 
Karna’s sarathy, he did his best, as I have heard, to dampen Karna’s 
confidence and sap his vitality to give the Pandavas victory. Alas, behold 
the smooth face of Salya, lambent as the moon and adorned with eyes like 
the petals of the lotus, eaten away by crows. There, the tongue of that king, 
of the complexion of molten gold, has been plucked out of his mouth and is 
being devoured by birds of carrion. 

The women of the royal house of Madra, sobbing and wailing aloud, sit 
around the body of that king, that ornament of sabhas, now slain by 
Yudhishtira. Krishna, those women sit around Salya like she-elephants in 
their season around their great tusker sunk in a swamp. Look at the brave 
Salya, that giver of protection, foremost of warriors, stretched out on the 
final bed of Kshatriyas, his body mangled with shafts. 

And there, king Bhagadatta of great prowess, the ruler of a mountain 
kingdom, the foremost of all wielders of the ankusha, the elephant-hook, 
lies on the ground, his life leaked out of his massive frame. Look at the 
garland of gold that he still wears on his head, which is still so splendent. 
Though his body is being eaten away by beasts of prey, that garland still 


adorns the glossy locks on his head. Fierce was the battle that took place 
between this king and Partha, even like that between Sakra and the Asura 
Vritra. This mighty-armed one, having fought Dhananjaya, son of Pritha, 
and having reduced him to dire straits, was at last slain by his antagonist. 

And there, he who had no equal on earth in heroism and prowess, that 
achiever of dread and incomparable feats in battle, the incomparable 
Bhishma, lies. Behold the son of Santanu, O Krishna, that warrior of solar 
refulgence, stretched on the earth, like the Sun himself fallen from the 
firmament at the end of the yuga. Having scorched his foes with the fire of 
his weapons in battle, that valiant warrior, that sun among men, O Kesava, 
has set like the real sun at dusk. Behold that hero, O Krishna, who in his 
knowledge of dharma was equal to Devapi himself, now lying on a bed of 
arrows, ah, so perfectly worthy of Kshatriyas. Having spread his 
exceptional bed of barbed and unbarbed arrows, that aged hero lies on it 
like the divine Skanda in his clump of heath. Indeed, the son of Ganga lies, 
resting his head on that excellent pillow of three arrows given him by the 
wielder of the Gandiva. 

To obey the command of his sire Santanu, this illustrious one drew his 
vital seed up into his body and kept immaculate brahmacharya. Unrivalled 
in battle, that son of Santanu now lies there, O Madhava. Of righteous soul 
and a knower of every dharma through his knowledge of both this world 
and the next, Bhishma, though mortal, still bears his life in his broken body 
and breathes like an immortal god upon the earth. When Santanu’s son lies 
on his bed of arrows today, it seems that no other man remains alive on 
earth that owns learning and prowess competent to achieve great feats in 
battle. Truthful in speech, this virtuous hero, solicited by the Pandavas, told 
them the means by which they could achieve his death. Alas, he who 
revived the line of Kuru that had become extinct, that illustrious one 
possessed of great intelligence, has left the world with all the Kurus in his 
company. Of whom, O Madhava, will the Kurus ask of dharma and karma 
after that bull among men, Devavrata, who is like a god, will have left us 
for swarga? 

And behold Drona, that foremost of Brahmanas, that Acharya of 
Arjuna, of Satyaki, and of the Kurus, lying dead on the ground. Endued 
with unearthly tejas, Drona was as conversant with the four kinds of astras 
as the king of the Devas or Shukra of Bhrigu’s race. Through his grace, 
Bibhatsu the son of Pandu has achieved the most impossible feats. Deprived 


of life, that Brahmana now lies on the ground. Finally, the astras refused to 
come at his bidding. Setting him at their head, the Kauravas challenged the 
Pandavas; at last, that greatest of bowmen was mangled by weapons. As he 
careered in battle, scorching his foes in every direction, his course 
resembled that of a blazing conflagration. Alas, deprived of life, he now lies 
on the ground like an extinguished fire. 

The handle of the bow is yet in his grasp. The leathern fences, O 
Madhava, still encase his fingers. Though slain, he still looks as if he is 
alive. The four Vedas, and all the different kinds of weapons, O Krishna, 
did not abandon that hero even as these never leave the Lord Prajapati 
himself. His auspicious feet, deserving of every adoration and adored 
indeed by bards and eulogists and worshipped by disciples, are now gnawed 
away and taken by jackals. Senseless with grief, Kripi woefully attends on 
Drona who has been slain by Drupada’s son. 

Look at that stricken Brahmana woman fallen upon the earth, with her 
hair in disarray, her face downcast and weeping softly. Alas, she attends in 
inexpressible sorrow upon her lifeless lord. Many brahmacharis, with 
matted jata on their heads, also attend on the body of Drona that is still 
cased in armour rent through with the virile shafts of Dhrishtadyumna. The 
illustrious and delicate Kripi, forlorn and cheerless, attempts weakly to 
perform the last rites on the body of her great husband slain in battle. 

Now look where the Samavedis have set Drona’s sacred body on a 
strange pyre, and set it alight with all due rites, and are singing the three 
great Samans. Those brahmacharis, with matted locks on their heads, have 
piled the funeral pyre of that incomparable Brahmana with bows and arrows 
and chariot-boxes, O Madhava! That Mahatejasvin Acharya is consumed by 
the very fuel of war. And all those brahmacharis at once chant the Samans 
and weep. Having consumed Drona on that fire, like a fire within a fire, 
those twice-born disciples of his now go toward the banks of the Ganga, 
walking along the left side of the pyre and having placed Kripi at their 
head.’” 


CANTO 24 


¢ °G andhari says, ‘Behold the son of Somadatta, who was killed by 

Yuyudhana, being pecked at and torn apart by a swarm of 

predatory birds. Burning with grief at the death of his son, Somadatta, as he 
lies on the field himself seems to censure the great bowman Satyaki. 

There, the mother of Bhurisrava, that faultless woman, overcome with 
grief, addresses her dead lord Somadatta, “It is your good fortune, O king, 
that you do not see this terrible carnage of the Bharatas, this extermination 
of the Kurus, this sight that resembles the scenes that come to pass at the 
end of the yuga. Through good fortune, you do not see your heroic son, who 
bore the device of the sacrificial stake on his banner and who performed 
numerous sacrifices with profuse gifts to all, lying slain on the field of 
battle. By good fortune, you do not hear the wails of woe uttered by your 
daughters-in-law, like the screams of a flight of cranes on the bosom of the 
sea. Bereaved of both husbands and sons, those young women run here and 
there, in madness, each clad in a single piece of raiment and each with her 
black tresses all dishevelled. By good fortune, you do not see your son, that 
tiger among men, without one of his arms, overthrown by Arjuna, and now 
being devoured by beasts of prey. By good fortune, you do not see today 
your son slain in battle, and Bhurisrava deprived of life, and your widowed 
daughters-in-law plunged into grief. Indeed, it is your good fortune that you 
do not see the golden chattra of that illustrious warrior who had the 


sacrificial stake for the device on his banner, torn and broken on the terrace 
of his chariot. Ah, the black-eyed wives of Bhurisrava indulge in piteous 
lamentations, surrounding their lord slain by the ruthless Satyaki. Afflicted 
with grief on account of the slaughter of their lords, those women, weeping 
copiously, fall on the earth with their faces towards the ground, and now 
slowly approach you, O Krishna! 

‘Alas, why did Arjuna of pure deeds commit such a sin, for he struck 
off the arm of a great, great warrior, who was brave and devoted to the 
performance of sacrifices, when Bhurisrava was not watching him? And 
Satyaki committed an even worse sin, for he took the life of a man of 
restrained soul while our lord had laid down his weapons and sat in 
prayavrata. Alas, O righteous one, you lie on the ground, slain unfairly by 
two enemies.” 

Even thus, O Madhava, do those wives of Bhurisrava cry out to you in 
their grief. And look, those wives of that tameless warrior, all of slender 
waists, now take that lopped off arm of their husband onto their laps and 
sob without restraint. 

“Here is that arm which used to invade the girdles, fondle the deep 
bosoms, and touch the navel, the thighs, and the hips, of fair women, and 
loosen the ties of the undergarments they wore! Here is that arm which slew 
foes and dispelled the fears of friends, which gave thousands of kine and 
exterminated Kshatriyas in battle. In the presence of Vasudeva himself, 
Arjuna of unstained deeds hacked it off while you fought Satyaki and had 
that Vrishni at your mercy. What, indeed, will you, O Janardana, say of this 
great feat of Arjuna while speaking of it in the midst of royal sabhas? What 
will the diadem-decked Arjuna himself say of it?’” 

Censuring you in this way, that most gracious woman has finally fallen 
silent. Bhurisrava’s other wives lament with her as if she were their 
daughter-in-law. 

And there lies the mighty Sakuni, the lord of the Gandharas, slain by 
Sahadeva. Once, he would be fanned by golden handled chamara whisks, 
and now birds of carrion fan him with their wings. He was a mayavi, a 
master sorcerer who could assume a hundred different forms at will; all his 
maya has been burnt up by the son of Pandu. An expert dice-player, and an 
expert cheat at the game, it was he who vanquished the naive Yudhishtira in 
the Kuru sabha and won his vast kingdom for Duryodhana using his 
formidable guile. However, now, Pandu’s son has won Sakuni’s life-breaths. 


Look, Krishna, at the swarming numbers of vultures, kites and crows that 
crowd around my dead brother’s corpse. 

That expert dice player acquired his expertise, it would seem, for the 
destruction of my sons; he was the one who kindled the fire of enmity 
between my sons and the sons of Pandu. He was indeed the key enducer to 
the slaughter of all these millions of Kshatriyas. And he, too, that evil one, 
has attained many realms of bliss through the valour he showed on the field 
of war, and he too died a Kshatriya’s death. Madhusudana, knowing my 
brother, my fear is that he will succeed in fomenting dissensions even in 
those worlds of felicity, between my children, all of whom are confiding 
and all too trusting and candid!’” 


CANTO 25 


66 G andhari says, “Behold that irresistible ruler of the Kambojas, that 

bull-necked hero, lying in the dust, O Madhava, though he 
deserves to be stretched out at his ease on the finest Kamboja blankets. His 
stricken wife weeps bitterly at the sight of his blood-stained arms, which 
were once smeared with sandalwood paste. That beautiful woman says, 
“Even now, adorned with beautiful palms and graceful fingers, these two 
arms of yours resemble spiked maces, coming within whose clasp, joy 
never left me for a moment. What will be my end now, O ruler of men, 
when I am deprived of you?” 

Blessed with a melodious voice, the Kamboja queen weeps helplessly 
and her fine frame quivers with emotion. Look, Krishna, at that bevy of 
royal women there. Although tired and worn out with the heat, yet beauty 
does not leave their forms; they are like the unfading garlands the Devas 
wear that the sun cannot scorch or fade. Behold, O Madhusudana, the 
heroic ruler of the Kalingas lying the ground with his mighty arms adorned 
with golden angadas. Behold, O Janardana, those Magadha ladies sobbing 
helplessly as they stand around Jayatsena, the king of the Magadhas. The 
yet charming and melodious wails of those long-eyed and sweet-voiced 
girls, O Krishna, pierce my heart with grief. With all their ornaments put 
away, and wailing loudly in sorrow, alas, those Magadhan queens who 


should be lying in sweet languor on costly beds, now lie tearing their hair 
on bare ground. 

And there, those other women, surrounding their lord, the ruler of the 
Kosalas, prince Brihadbala, also beat their breasts and lament around the 
body of their lord. Look where they draw out the terrible arrows with which 
the mighty Abhimanyu pierced their husband and king; look where, one 
after the other, they fall onto the ground fainting in grief. The faces of those 
exquisite women, Krishna, look like faded lotuses. 

There, the brave sons of Dhrishtadyumna, of tender years and all 
adored with garlands of gold and beautiful angadas, lie, slain by Drona. 
Like insects on a blazing fire, they have all been incinerated by falling upon 
Drona, whose chariot was the chamber of fire, having the bow for its flame 
and shafts and spears and maces for its fuel. Similarly, the five Kekaya 
brothers, of great courage, and also adorned with beautiful angadas, are 
lying on the ground, cut down by Drona and with their faces turned towards 
that hero. Their coats of mail, of the splendour of molten gold, and their tall 
standards and chariots and garlands, all made of the same metal, shed a 
bright light on the earth like so many fires. 

Look, O Madhava, at king Drupada overthrown in battle by Drona, like 
a mighty elephant in the forest slain by a great lion. The bright sovereign 
parasol, white in hue of the king of the Panchalas, shines, O lotus-eyed one, 
like the moon in the autumn sky. The daughters-in-law and the wives of the 
old king, afflicted with grief, having burnt his body on a pyre, walk slowly 
along, keeping the pyre to their right. 

And there more women, mindless with sorrow, take away the brave and 
great Dhrishtaketu, that bull among the Chedis, slain by Drona. This 
scourge of his enemies, O slayer of Madhu, this great bowman, having 
baffled many weapons of Drona before the Acharya killed him, now lies 
there, like a tree uprooted by a mountain wind. Alas, that valiant king of the 
Chedis, that maharatha Dhrishtaketu, after having slain thousands of foes, 
lies himself slain. Hrishikesha, the wives of the lord of the Chedis sit 
around his body, still glowing with black locks and ornate earrings, though 
torn apart by vultures and ravens. Those best among women set the remains 
of the prostrate form of the heroic Dhrishtaketu, born of the Dasharha race, 
on their laps, and sob. 

And nearby, look, O Krishna, at Dhrishtaketu’s beautiful son, also cut 
down ruthlessly by Drona with his astras. He never deserted his father while 


they battled their enemies together. Mark, O Krishna, not even in death does 
he abandon his heroic sire. And even thus, my son’s son, that slayer of 
hostile heroes, the mighty-armed Lakshmana, has followed his father 
Duryodhana out of this world. 

Behold, O Kesava, the two brothers of Avanti, Vinda and Anuvinda, 
lying there on the field, like two blossoming sala trees in the spring 
uprooted by a tempest. Clad in golden armour and adorned with angadas of 
gold, they are still armed with swords and bows. Their eyes like those of a 
bull, and decked with bright garlands, both of them are stretched out lifeless 
on the field. The Pandavas, O Krishna, and you, are surely invincible, for 
they and you have escaped from Drona, from Bhishma, from Karna son of 
Vikartana, from Kripa, from Duryodhana, from the son of Drona, from the 
maharatha, from Somadatta, from Vikarna, and from the bold Kritavarman. 

Ah, look at the reversals brought about by Time! Those bulls among 
men who could slay the very celestials have themselves been slain. Without 
doubt, there is nothing too difficult for destiny to bring about, since even 
these men, these heroes, have been slain by Kshatriya warriors. 

Even when you returned before the war to Upaplavya, having failed in 
your mission to make peace, I knew that my sons all endowed with great 
prowess were already dead. Santanu’s son and the wise Vidura told me 
then, “Cease to harbour love for your sons!” 

What those wise ones then said has not proved vain, for very soon my 
sons have all been killed and consumed into ashes!’ 

Vaisampayana continued, “Having said all this, Gandhari is suddenly 
overwhelmed by sorrow and falls senseless to the ground. Then, rising 
slowly, and filled once more with the wild wrath of a grief-stricken mother 
and woman, her heart in turmoil, Gandhari now blames Krishna for 
everything, for the entire carnage on Kurukshetra. 

Gandhari says, ‘The Pandavas and the Dhartarashtras, O Krishna, have 
both been massacred. Whilst they were being exterminated, O Janardana, 
why were you indifferent to them? You could have prevented the carnage, 
for nothing is beyond you and your Yadavas. You had the eloquence, and 
you had the power to effect peace between the warring cousins. Since, 
Madhusudana, you were deliberately indifferent to this universal slaughter, 
Mahabaho, you must pay for what you did. By the little punya that I have 
acquired through waiting dutifully on my husband, by that merit so difficult 
to attain, I will curse you, O you who wield the discus and the mace. 


Since you were indifferent to the fate of the Kurus and the Pandavas, 
whilst they slew each other, O Govinda, you shall be the slayer of your own 
kinsmen! In the thirty-sixth year from this one, O Krishna, after causing the 
slaughter of all your own kinsmen and friends and sons, you will perish in a 
base and dishonourable manner in the wilderness. The women of your race, 
deprived of their sons, kinsmen, and friends, shall weep and lament even as 
these women of the Bharata vamsa do today!’ 

Vaisampayana continued, “Hearing this curse, with a faint smile the 
Mahatman Krishna says to the venerable Gandhari, ‘There is none in the 
world, save myself, who can possibly exterminate the Vrishnis, for they 
bear my blood in them and will overrun the earth if they are left alive. I 
know this well, and indeed I myself will happily make an end to them when 
the time comes. By cursing me, O Gandhari, you have helped my very 
cause, O you of the most exalted vratas. Not the Devas, the Danavas or men 
can kill the haughty Vrishnis. And therefore, the Yadavas must fall by one 
another’s hands.’ 

The Pandavas are stunned to listen to what Krishna says. Their faces are 
drained of blood and strange fear courses through their hearts and bodies. 
Uncanny hopelessness fills them.” 


CANTO 26 


66 T he Holy One says, ‘Arise, arise, O Gandhari, do not set your heart 
on grief. It is through your own fault that this vast carnage has 
taken place. Your son Duryodhana was evil, envious and arrogant. By 
lauding his sinful deeds, you make good of evil. Ruthless and cruel, he was 
the embodiment of hatred and enmity, and disobedient to the injunctions of 
the old. Why do you wish to ascribe your own faults to me? Dead or lost, 
the person that grieves for what has already occurred finds more grief. By 
indulging in grief, one increases it two-fold. 

A Brahmana woman bears children for the practice of austerities; the 
cow brings forth calves for bearing burdens; the mare brings forth her 
young for acquiring speed of motion; the Sudra woman bears a child for 
adding to the number of servitors; the Vaishya woman for adding to the 
number of keepers of cattle. A Kshatriya princess like you, however, brings 
forth sons for making war and being killed!’ 

Vaisampayana said, “Hearing these words from Krishna, which are 
disagreeable to her, Gandhari, with heart roiled by grief, remains silent. The 
Rajarishi Dhritarashtra, however, restraining the grief that arises from folly, 
says to Yudhishtira, ‘If, O son of Pandu, you know it, tell me the number of 
those that have fallen in this war, as also of those that have escaped with 
their lives!” 


Yudhishtira answers, ‘One billion, six hundred and sixty million and 
twenty thousand men have fallen in this war. Of the heroes that have 
escaped, the number is two hundred and forty thousand and one hundred 
and sixty-five.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, “Tell me, O mighty-armed, for you know all things, 
to what ends have those foremost of men attained.’ 

Yudhishtira say, ‘Those warriors of true prowess that gladly cast off 
their bodies in fierce battle have all attained regions like those of Indra. 
Knowing death to be inevitable, they that have encountered it unhappily 
have attained the companionship of the Gandharvas. Those warriors that 
have fallen at the edge of weapons, while turning away from the field or 
begging for quarter, have attained the world of the Guhyakas. Those high- 
souled warriors who, observant of Kshatriya dharma and regarding flight 
from battle to be shameful, have fallen, mangled by keen weapons, while 
advancing unarmed against fighting foes, have all assumed bright forms and 
attained the regions of Brahma. The remaining, that have randomly met 
with death on the field of battle, have attained the realm of the Uttara- 
Kurus.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, “Through what power of knowledge, O son, do you 
see these things like a great tapasvin? Tell me this, O Mahabaho, if you 
think that I can listen to it without impropriety!’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘While at your command I wandered in the forest, I 
obtained this boon during our tirtha yatra to sacred fords and other holy 
places and shrines. I met with the Devarishi Lomasa and had from him the 
boon of spiritual vision. Thus did I gain second sight through the power of 
knowledge!’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘Our dead must be cremated, with due rites, the 
bodies of both the friendless and the slain that have friends. What shall we 
do with those that have none to look after them and that have no sacred 
fires? The duties and obligations that await us are many. Who are those 
whose last rites we should perform? O Yudhishtira, will they find realms of 
blessedness by the merit of their karma, they whose bodies are now being 
torn apart by vultures and jackals?’ 

Vaisampayana continued, “Thus addressed, Kunti’s son Yudhishtira of 
great wisdom commands Sudharma, the priest of the Kauravas, and 
Dhaumya, and Sanjaya of the Suta varna, and Vidura of profound wisdom, 
and Yuyutsu of Kuru’s race, and all his servants led by Indrasena, and all 


the other Sutas that are with him and says, ‘Have the funeral rites of the 
slain, numbering thousands, to be duly performed, so that nobody may 
perish for want of men to take care of them.’ 

At this command of Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, Vidura, Sanjaya, 
Sudharma, Dhaumya, Indrasena and others collect sandalwood, aloe and 
other kinds of wood used for cremations, as also ghee, oil, perfumes and 
costly silken robes and other kinds of cloth, and large heaps of dry wood, 
and broken chariots and diverse kinds of weapons, cause funeral pyres to be 
heaped and set alight and then, without haste but with grave dignity, burn, 
with all the proper rites the slain kings in appropriate order. 

They duly cremate upon those fires that blaze forth with libations of 
clarified butter poured over them in torrents, the bodies of Duryodhana and 
his hundred brothers, of Salya, and king Bhurisrava; of king Jayadratha and 
Abhimanyu, O Bhaarata; of Dusasana’s son and Lakshmana and king 
Dhrishtaketu; of Brihanta and Somadatta and the hundreds of Srinjayas; of 
king Kshemadhanva and Virata and Drupada; of Sikhandi prince of the 
Panchalas, and Dhrishtadyumna of Prishata’s race; of the valiant 
Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas; of the ruler of the Kosalas, the sons of 
Draupadi, and Sakuni the son of Subala; of Achala and Vrishaka, and king 
Bhagadatta; of Karna and his son of great wrath; of those great bowmen, 
the Kekaya princes, and those mighty warriors, the Trigartas; of 
Ghatotkacha the prince of rakshasas, and the brother of Baka, of 
Alambusha, the foremost of night rangers, and king Jalasandha; and of 
hundreds and thousands of other kings. 

The Pitri-medha rites in honour of some of the illustrious dead are 
performed there, while some sing Samans, and some utter ululating 
lamentations for the dead. With the loud noise of Samans and Riks, and the 
lamentations of the women, all living creatures are quite stupefied that 
night. The funeral fires, smokeless and blazing brightly amid the 
surrounding darkness, look like luminous planets in the firmament 
enveloped by clouds. Those among the dead that had come from diverse 
realms and were utterly friendless are piled together in thousands of heaps 
and, at the command of Yudhishtira, are burned by Vidura through a large 
number of servitors, men acting calmly and influenced by goodwill and 
affection, on pyres of dry wood. Having caused the last rites of all the great 
slain to be performed, the Kuru king Yudhishtira, setting Dhritarashtra 
before him, goes towards the river Ganga.” 


CANTO 27 


V aisampayana says, “Arrived at the auspicious Ganga full of sacred 

water, of many great pools along her course, adorned with high 
banks and broad shores, and having a vast bed, they cast off their 
ornaments, upper garments, and belts and girdles. The Kuru women, crying 
and afflicted by fanged grief, offer oblations of water to their sires and 
grandsons and brothers and kinsmen and sons and revered elders and 
husbands. Conversant with their duties, they also perform the tarpana, the 
water-rite, in honour of their friends. While those wives of heroes perform 
this rite in honour of their heroic lords, the access to the stream turns mild 
and easy, although these magical paths disappear afterwards. The shores of 
the stream, though crowded with those wives of heroes, look as broad as the 
ocean and present a spectacle of gloom and doom. 

Then, suddenly, Kunti, O king, in a sudden paroxysm of grief, tearfully 
says to her sons in a low voice, “That hero and great bowman, that leader of 
leaders of chariot divisions, that warrior distinguished by every mark of a 
Kshatriya, who has been slain by Arjuna in battle; that warrior whom, O 
sons of Pandu, you sent into the next world, that Suta’s child born of Radha, 
that hero who shone in the midst of his forces like the lord Surya himself, 
who battled against all of you and your followers, who looked resplendent 
as he commanded the vast force of Duryodhana, who had no equal on earth 
for tejas; that hero who preferred glory to life, that utterly fearless warrior 


firm in truth and never tired by any exertion, was your eldest brother. Offer 
tarpana to that eldest brother of yours who was in truth born of me by the 
God of day; offer oblations of holy water to dead Karna! 

Ah, that most tragic hero was born with a pair of earrings and clad in 
golden armour, and was like Surya himself in splendour!’ 

It is as if their mother has pierced each of the Pandavas with terrible 
astras. They either stand benumbed or collapse onto the earth in shock. 
Then that tiger among men, the great Yudhishtira, sighing like a snake, 
desperately asks Kunti, ‘That Karna, who was like an ocean, having shafts 
for his billows, his tall standard for his vortex, his own mighty arms for a 
pair of vast makaras, his massive chariot for his deep lake, and the sound of 
his palms for his tempestuous roar, and whose impetuosity none could 
withstand save Dhananjaya—were you the mother of that matchless one? 
How was that son, resembling a very Deva, born of you? 

The prowess of his arms scorched all of us. How, mother, could you 
conceal him like one hiding a fire within the folds of her cloth? His might of 
arms was always worshipped by the Dhartarashtras, even as we always 
worship the might of the wielder of the Gandiva! How was that foremost of 
mighty men, that first of maharathas, who endured the united force of all 
lords of earth in battle, how was he a son of yours? Was that greatest of all 
wielders of weapons our eldest brother? How did you bring forth that child 
of wonderful splendour? Ah, mother, we have been undone by what you 
kept hidden from us! 

The grief I now feel at Karna’s death is a hundred times sharper than 
what I felt at the death of Abhimanyu and the sons of Draupadi, and the 
destruction of the Panchalas and the Kurus. Thinking of Karna, it is as if my 
whole body is on fire. There is nothing we could not have attained, 
including everything that is in swarga. Alas, this horrible carnage, which 
has completely destroyed the Kurus, would never have happened if only we 
had known this secret that you kept!’ 

Lamenting thus, Yudhishtira breaks into loud sobs; he weeps like a 
small child. Finally, collecting himself, he offers tarpana to his elder 
brother, Karna, whom he had never known. All the royal women that throng 
the banks of the river send up a loud, piercing cry of grief. Yudhishtira has 
all the wives and other members of Karna’s family to be brought before 
him. Along with them, the Dharmaraja properly performs the water-rites in 


honour of his elder brother. Having completed the ceremony, the king, with 
all his senses and mind agitated, comes out from the waters of Ganga.” 


The End of Stri Parva 





LoE COM? LE EsE 


MAHABHARATA 


Santi Parva: Rajadharmanusasana Parva @ Apaddharmanusasana Parva 


LSy 


Manjulika Dubey and S.B. Pillay 


series editor: RAMESH MENON 


v/] te \¥ > “ea TF; Bs ‘7 wre 
is a ae: ens ag 


by 


THE COMPLETE 
MAHABHARATA 


Santi Parva 


THE COMPLETE 
MAHABHARATA 


Volume 8 
Santi Parva 
Part I 
Rajadharmanusasana Parva 


Part IT 


Apaddharmanusasana Parva 


Manjulika Dubey and S.B. Pillay 


RUPA 


Published by 
Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd 2016 
7/16, Ansari Road, Daryaganj 
New Delhi 110002 


Copyright © Manjulika Dubey and S.B. Pillay 2016 
All rights reserved. 

No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, or stored in a retrieval system, in any 
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the 
prior permission of the publisher. 

ISBN: 978-81-291-3751-7 
First impression 2016 
10987654321 
The moral right of the author has been asserted. 

This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, 


resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated, without the publisher’s prior consent, in any form of 
binding or cover other than that in which it is published. 


In memory of 
Padmanabha Vijai Pillai 


CONTENTS 


Part I: Rajadharmanusasana Parva 


Part II: Apaddharmanusasana Parva 


PART I 


Rajadharmanusasana Parva 


CANTO 1 


A UM! Bowing down to Narayana and Nara, the foremost of 
Purushas, and to Devi Saraswati, I invoke the spirit of Jaya! 

Vaisampayana said, “After offering oblations of water to all their friends 
and kinsmen, the sons of Pandu, Vidura, Dhritarashtra, and all the Bhaarata 
women continue to dwell on the banks of the sacred stream, Bhagirathi. 
They spend the month of mourning outside the Kuru city. Yudhishtira 
Dharmaraja performs the water-rites, and many great Rishis arrive to see 
the monarch. Among them are the island-born Vyasa, Narada, Devala, 
Devasthana and Kanwa, all accompanied by their best disciples. 

Many other Munis, wise and expert in the Vedas, Grihastas and 
Snatakas, also come to meet the Kuru king. Yudhishtira duly worships the 
Maharishis and seats them on precious carpets. They accept the worship 
suitable for this period of mourning and impurity, and thousands of them sit 
in due order around the king. They offer consolation and comfort to the 
grieving Yudhishtira, king of kings, whose heart is racked by anguish. 

After greeting Vyasa and the Rishis, Narada addresses Yudhishtira, the 
son of Dharma. ‘Through the might of your arms and by the grace of 
Madhava you have righteously won this whole earth, and by your good 
fortune you have emerged alive from this dreadful war. Observant as you 
are of the Kshatriya dharma, do you not rejoice, O son of Pandu? Now that 
you have killed all your enemies and won this victory, will you not gratify 
your friends, O Rajan? I hope grief does not still afflict you.’ 


Yudhishtira replies, “I have indeed subjugated the whole world, through 
the might of Krishna’s arms, the grace of the Brahmanas and the strength of 
Bhima and Arjuna. However, this heavy sorrow is always in my heart, that 
through my greed I have caused this fearsome carnage of my kinsmen. 

Having caused the death of Subhadra’s precious son, and of the sons of 
Draupadi, O holy one, this victory appears to me to be a defeat. What will 
my sister-in-law, Subhadra of Vrishni’s race, say to me? What will the 
people of Dwaraka have to say to Krishna when he returns from here? 
Again, the thought of Draupadi, who has always been considerate of us, and 
is now bereaved of her sons and kinsmen, causes me relentless pain. 

There is another subject, O Narada, about which I will speak to you. It 
afflicts me that Kunti kept from us a great and terrible secret: that Karna— 
strong as ten thousand elephants, Maharatha unrivalled in this world, of 
leonine pride and gait, of vast intelligence and boundless compassion, 
whose generosity and liberality were legend—was her son. Born secretly to 
her, Karna, who kept many high vratas, who was the refuge of the 
Dhartarashtras, who was sensitive about his honour, whose prowess was 
irresistible, who was ever ready to repay every injury and always wrathful 
in battle, who vanquished us in repeated encounters, who was quicksilver in 
the use of weapons, conversant with every kind of warfare, possessed of 
great skill and endowed with wonderful valour— was thus, our own brother. 

Only while we were offering oblations of water to the dead did Kunti 
speak of him as the son of Surya. She had placed that glorious infant in a 
basket made of light wood and committed him to the current of the Ganga. 
He whom the world regarded as a Suta’s child born of Radha was really the 
first son of Kunti—our eldest brother by blood. Alas, by coveting the 
kingdom I have caused my brother to be killed. It is this that burns my 
limbs, like fire a heap of cotton. 

Arjuna of the white steeds did not know Karna for a brother. Neither I 
nor Bhima, nor the twins, knew him for such. However, he, the great archer, 
knew we were his brothers. We learnt that our mother Kunti went to him 
and said, “You are my son! You must make peace with your brothers and 
join their side in battle.” 

The illustrious Karna refused. He said to our mother, “I cannot desert 
Duryodhana! It would be dishonourable, cruel and ungrateful of me. If I 
yield to your wishes and make peace with Yudhishtira, people will say that I 


am afraid of Arjuna Swetavahana. After I have vanquished Arjuna and 
Krishna in battle, I will make peace with Dharma’s son.” 

Kunti said again to her magnificent son, “Fight Arjuna, then, but spare 
my other four princes.” 

With folded hands, Karna told his trembling mother, “If I ever hold your 
four other sons’ lives in my hands, I will not kill them. Have no doubt, O 
Devi, that you will continue to have five sons. If Arjuna kills Karna, you 
will have five. If, on the other hand, I kill Arjuna, you will still have five — 
including me!” 

Wanting the good of us Pandavas, our mother said to him, “Go then, O 
Karna, do good to your brothers whose weal you always seek.” 

And with that, Kunti took his leave and returned home. 

Arjuna has slain this hero, a brother by a brother! Neither Kunti nor 
Karna ever disclosed their secret, O lord. And so did Arjuna kill in battle 
that greatest of Kshatriya bowmen. Only later, Dvijottama, did I learn that 
he was my brother. Why, I learnt from Kunti that he was the first-born, the 
eldest among us. How my hearts burns knowing that I caused my brother’s 
death! If I had both Karna and Arjuna on my side, I could have vanquished 
Krishna himself. 

While the evil sons of Dhritarashtra tormented me in the midst of the 
Kuru sabha, my suddenly risen anger cooled in a moment at the sight of 
Karna. During that game of dice, even while listening to Karna’s harsh and 
bitter words, uttered from his desire to please Duryodhana, my wrath cooled 
at the sight of Karna’s feet. It seemed to me that Karna’s feet resembled the 
feet of our mother, Kunti! I reflected on this strange likeness for a long 
time, but I could not fathom it. 

Muni, why did the earth swallow the wheels of his chariot during the 
battle? Why was my brother cursed? You must tell me. I must hear 
everything from you, O holy one. You know everything in this world, even 
the past and the future!’” 


CANTO 2 


V aisampayana said, “Thus questioned, the Rishi Narada discloses the 
manner in which Karna, whom people believed to be a Suta’s son, 
had been cursed. 

Narada says, ‘It is just as you say, O Bhaarata! Mahabaho, no one could 
resist either Karna or Arjuna in battle. Listen to me carefully, for what I am 
about to tell you is unknown even to the gods. Long ago, a question arose 
about how all the Kshatriyas could be given an opportunity to attain Swarga 
by dying in battle. 

For this, Kunti conceived a child, Karna, in her maidenhood, a son 
capable of provoking a vast and general war. Endowed with tameless 
energy, this child came to have the status of a Suta. He acquired the science 
of weapons from Dronacharya, the foremost descendant of Angirasa’s 
vamsa. 

The young man burned with envy seeing the might of Bhimasena, the 
quickness of Arjuna at archery, your intelligence, Yudhishtira, the humility 
of the twins, the lifelong friendship between Vasudeva and the Gandivi, and 
the affection of the people for all of you. Early in life, he had made friends 
with Duryodhana, partly by accident and partly due to his own nature and 
the hatred he bore you. 

Seeing that Dhananjaya was superior to everyone in the astra shastra, 
Karna one day approached Drona in private and said to him, “You love us, 
your pupils, as much as you do your son. I want to acquire the Brahmastra, 
with all its mantras and the power of withdrawing it, for I want to fight 


Arjuna. I pray that through your grace all the masters of weaponry will 
regard me as a Maharatha.” 

Drona, from partiality for Arjuna, as well as from his knowledge that 
Karna had evil in him, replied, “Only a Brahmana who has duly observed 
all his vows, or a Kshatriya who has practised austere penances, may have 
the Brahmastra, no other man.” 

Hearing this, Karna paid Drona obeisance, took his leave and went to 
Parasurama who lived on the Mahendra mountain. Approaching Rama, he 
bowed and said, “IJ am a Brahmana of Bhrigu’s vamsa.” 

This pleased Rama and he welcomed him so kindly, and with such 
honour, that Karna was overjoyed. While living on the Mahendra mountain, 
which resembled heaven itself, Karna met and mingled with many 
Gandharvas, Yakshas and Devas, and duly acquired all their astras, 
becoming a favourite of the celestial ones and the great Asuras and 
Rakshasas, too. 

One day, O Partha, while Surya’s son roved alone along the sea-coast 
near this asrama, armed with bow and sword, he accidentally slew the homa 
cow of a learned Brahmavadi who was performing his daily Agnihotra puja. 

Karna tried repeatedly to pacify the Brahmana saying, “O holy one, I 
killed your cow unintentionally, forgive me for what I did!” 

But, filled with wrath, the Brahmana cursed him, crying, “Base wretch, 
you deserve to be killed. Let the fruit of this deed be yours, evil one: that 
while fighting him whom you are always challenging, and for whose sake 
you strive so much every day, the earth will swallow the wheels of your 
chariot. And while you are dazed and helpless, your enemy will cut off your 
head! Leave me now, vile man. Just as you have heedlessly killed my cow, 
your enemy too will kill you whilst you are distracted!” 

Karna still sought to gratify that foremost of Brahmanas by offering him 
cattle, wealth and precious gems. The Brahmana, however, said, “Nothing 
can deflect my curse. Go away or remain here, as you please.” Hanging his 
head in sorrow, Karna returned apprehensively to Rama, pondering what 
had happened.’”’ 


CANTO 3 


¢ °N arada continues, ‘Parasurama, tiger of Bhrigu’s race, was well 
pleased with the might of Karna’s arms, his affection for him, his 
self-restraint, and his attention to the needs of his guru. Rama of great 
tapasya joyfully taught his tapasvi sishya everything about the Brahmastra, 
along with the mantras for loosing and withdrawing it. 

Having acquired this knowledge, and endowed with wonderful prowess, 
Karna devoted himself with great enthusiasm to the science of weapons, 
spending his days happily in Bhrigu’s asrama. One day, while roaming with 
Karna in the vicinity of his hermitage, Rama suddenly felt exhausted by the 
rigorous fasts he had kept. The son of Jamadagni affectionately and 
familiarly set his head down on Karna’s lap and slept soundly. 

While his guru was sleeping, a large and frightful insect, which lived on 
phlegm and fat and flesh and blood, and whose bite was agonizing, dug its 
teeth into Karna’s thigh. Afraid of waking his guru, Karna could neither 
pluck out and fling away nor kill that insect. O Bhaarata, though it pierced 
deep into his thigh with its fangs, the son of Surya allowed it to have its 
way, lest his acharya should awake. 

Karna bore the intolerable pain with heroic patience, and continued to 
hold Bhargava Rama’s head on his lap, without making the slightest 
movement. When finally Karna’s blood flowed onto the face of Rama of 
great tejas, the Bhargava awoke and said in some alarm, “Alas, I have been 
sullied! What have you done? Tell me the truth without fear!” 


Karna told him about the insect’s bite and Parasurama beheld the 
creature, which resembled a minute boar with eight feet, vicious teeth and 
needle-like bristles. Called Alarka, its limbs had shrunk with fear. As soon 
as the mighty-armed son of Jamadagni cast his eyes upon it, the creature 
gave up its life, melting into the very blood which it had drawn. 

Then in the sky they saw a Rakshasa of terrible form, dark in hue, with 
a red neck, who could assume any form at will. Staying upon the clouds, his 
object fulfilled, the Rakshasa, with folded hands, addressed Rama, “O 
Mahatapasvin, you have rescued me from the hell I was in. Blessed are you! 
I adore you. You have saved me!” 

Rama asked him, “Who are you, and why did you fall into hell? Tell 
me.” 

The Rakshasa said, “Once I was a great Asura called Dansa. In the Krita 
yuga, O sire, I was of the same age as Bhrigu. I ravished that sage’s beloved 
wife, and in anger your ancestor cursed me, ‘Subsisting on urine, fat and 
phlegm, you will lead a hellish life!’ I fell down onto the earth in the form 
of a hideous insect.’ 

I asked him, ‘When, O Brahmana, will this curse end?’ 

Bhrigu replied, ‘This curse will end through Rama of my race.’ Since 
then I have been living the life of an unclean soul. Righteous one, you have 
rescued me from that sinful life.” 

With these words, the great Rakshasa bowed to Rama and vanished. 
Now Rama turned in wrath on Karna: “Fool, no Brahmana could endure 
such agony. Your patience is that of a Kshatriya. Tell me the real truth about 
yourself and who you are.” 

Karna, fearing a curse and wanting to mollify his master, replied, “O 
Bhargava, know me for a Sutaputra. People call me Radheya Karna, the son 
of Radha. I came here in all humility, only from a desire to acquire your 
astras from you. A revered guru in the Vedas and other branches of 
knowledge is like one’s father, and it was for this that I told you that I was a 
Brahmana, one of your own varna.” 

To the unhappy and trembling Karna, prostrate with folded hands upon 
the earth, Jamadagnya, smiling though his anger, said, “Since you are not a 
Brahmana and have been false, and since you came here from your greed 
for weapons, O wretch, know that when you are engaged in battle with a 
warrior equal to yourself, and death is upon you, this Brahmastra will fade 
from your memory, and will not appear at your bidding. However, on earth, 


no Kshatriya will be your equal in battle. Go now! This is no place for a liar 
like you.” 

Humbly taking his dismissal, Karna came away. Arriving then before 
Duryodhana, he said, “I have mastered all the astras!””’” 


CANTO 4 


6 °N arada says, ‘Having thus obtained weapons from Parasurama of 
Bhrigu’s race, Karna began to pass his days pleasurably in the 
company of Duryodhana. 

About this time, Chitrangada, the ruler of the country of the Kalingas, 
held a swayamvara for his daughter in his opulent capital city of Rajapura. 
Hundreds of kings travelled there to try and win the hand of the princess. 
Hearing of the contest, Duryodhana too went to the city in his golden 
chariot, taking Karna with him. 

Among those assembled were Sisupala, Jarasandha, Bhishmaka, Vakra, 
Kapotaroman, Nila, Rukmi of great prowess, Sringa the ruler of the 
kingdom of women, Asoka, Satadhanwan and the heroic king of the Bhojas. 
Besides these, O Yudhishtira, many others from the countries of the south, 
many master warriors of the Mlechcha tribes, and many rulers from the east 
and the north also came there. With their manly, glowing bodies, adorned 
with splendid golden angadas, all of them were like tigers. 

After the kings had all taken their seats, the maiden princess, 
accompanied by her nursemaid and a guard of eunuchs, entered the arena. 
As she circled the arena, the names of each of the kings present were recited 
to her as she approached each one. 

When the fair princess passed over Duryodhana, the son of 
Dhritarashtra of Kuru’s vamsa could not brook her rejection. Disregarding 
all the kings, he commanded the princess to stop. Intoxicated with the pride 
of power, and relying upon Bhishma and Drona, Duryodhana abducted the 


young woman, forcing her into his chariot. Karna, great hero, riding his 
own chariot, armed with a sword, clad in mail, and with his fingers cased in 
leather fingerlets, rode just behind Duryodhana. 

There was an uproar among the kings, all of whom gathered ready for 
battle. They shouted “Put on your mail! Let the chariots be made ready!” 

Enraged, they pursued Karna and Duryodhana, showering arrows down 
on them like masses of clouds pouring rain upon two hills. Karna kept 
cutting down all their bows and arrows with sure, single shafts of his own. 
Some of the Kshatriyas became bowless; some rushed on, bows in hand; 
some were on the point of shooting their arrows, and some flew after the 
two, armed with spears and maces. 

The dexterous Karna, foremost of all bowmen, crushed them all. He 
killed many of their charioteers until, vanquished, those lords of the earth 
turned away crestfallen from the battle. Protected by Karna, Duryodhana 
forged on with a joyful heart, bringing the princess home with him to 
Hastinapura.’” 


CANTO 5 


¢ °N arada continues, ‘Hearing of Karna’s legendary might, the king 

of the Magadhas, Jarasandha, challenged him to single combat. 

A fierce battle took place between them and both masters of the devastras 

attacked each other with diverse unearthly missiles. Finally, when they had 

exhausted their arrows, broken their bows and swords and lost their 
chariots, the two Mahayoddhas fought with bare hands. 

Karna quickly prevailed and could have severed into two _ his 
antagonist’s body, once united by Jara. Finding himself in mortal danger, 
Jarasandha gladly made peace with Karna: “Enough! I submit.” 

Out of friendship he then gifted Karna the town of Malini. Until then, 
Karna, tiger among men and scourge of all foes, had been king only of the 
Angas, but from then onwards, the Parantapa began to rule over Champa 
too, which, as you know, had the approval of Duryodhana. 

Thus Karna became famed on earth for the valour of his arms. When, 
for your sake, Indra, king of the Devas, tricked him with divya maya and 
begged him for the kundala and kavacha with which he was born, Karna 
gave away those precious talismans that safeguarded his life. Once Karna 
had been deprived of his earrings and divested of his natural armour, Arjuna 
was able to kill him in Krishna’s presence. 

A Brahmana’s curse; the curse of the illustrious Parasurama; the boon 
granted to Kunti; the illusion with which Indra deceived him; his 
humiliation by Bhishma, who mockingly called him an ardharatha, half a 
chariot-warrior, at the naming of Rathas and Atirathas; the undermining of 


his confidence by the sharp-tongued Salya; Krishna’s strategy; and lastly, 
the devastras which Arjuna had received from Rudra, Indra, Yama, Varuna, 
Kubera, Drona and the illustrious Kripa: for these many reasons the wielder 
of the Gandiva succeeded in killing Vikartana’s magnificent son, Karna, 
resplendent as Surya himself. 

Ah, your brother had been cursed and beguiled by many. Yet, because 
he has fallen in battle you should not grieve for him, Naravyaghra!’” 


CANTO 6 


V aisampayana said, “Having said these words, the Devarishi Narada 
falls silent. Filled with sorrow, Rajarishi Yudhishtira plunges into 

deep dejection. Seeing him sighing like a snake, unmanned by sorrow and 

sobbing, Kunti, herself quite deranged with grief, tries to console him. 

She says gravely and gently, ‘Mahabaho, Yudhishtira, it does not 
become you to mourn like this. You of great wisdom, kill this sorrow of 
yours, and listen to me. Before the war, I told Karna that you are his brother. 
Surya Deva also appeared to him in a dream and again in my presence, and 
counselled him like a well-wisher solicitous of his good. But neither Surya 
nor I could change his mind or sway his loyalty away from Duryodhana. It 
was fate that made him your inveterate enemy, bent upon doing you all 
harm and I, too, gave up trying to reason with him.’ 

Yudhishtira is like a smouldering fire, overcome with anxiety and 
despair, to think of his dead sons, grandsons, kinsmen and friends, and most 
of all of Karna. Tears burning his eyes, he says to his mother, ‘This great 
tragedy has overtaken us because you kept your secret from me!’ 

Then, in his terrible sorrow, that mighty king of dharma of blazing tejas, 
curses all the women of the world: ‘From now on, no woman will succeed 
in keeping a secret!’ 

Again, the king thinks of his slain sons and grandsons and other 
kinsmen and friends and is plunged in intolerable woe. The wisest of kings 
resembles a fire covered with smoke, as despair overpowers him.” 


CANTO 7 


V aisampayana said, “With a troubled and sorrowful heart, Dharmatma 
Yudhishtira begins to grieve for the mighty Maharatha, Karna. 

Sighing repeatedly, he says to his brother, ‘O Arjuna, had we been 
beggars in the cities of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, this miserable end 
would not be ours that we have achieved by exterminating our kinsmen. 
Our enemies, the Kurus, have attained Swarga by purifying themselves in 
battle, while we who are guilty of slaughtering our kinsmen have lost all the 
purusharthas, and have no right to the fruits of dharma. 

A curse on the famous might, valour and wrath of Kshatriyas! It is on 
account of these that tragedy has overtaken us. Blessed are forgiveness, 
self-restraint, purity, renunciation and humility, abstention from causing 
injury, and truthfulness of speech on all occasions, such as Rishis and 
Munis practise. Full of pride and arrogance, we have fallen into this plight 
from greed, recklessness and a desire to enjoy the fruits of power. 

Looking at our kinsmen slain on the field of battle, such is our grief that 
not even sovereignty over the three worlds will make us happy. Alas, for 
worldly reasons we sinfully slew those noble lords who did not deserve to 
die at our hands; we are alive, but deprived of friends and stripped of the 
very meaning of life. Like a pack of dogs fighting over a piece of meat, we 
have been overtaken by a great disaster. And that piece of meat means 
nothing to us. It is fit to be thrown away. 

They who have been slain did not deserve to die, not for the sake of 
mountains of gold or all the horses and kine in the entire world. Filled with 


envy and greed, and swayed by anger and pleasure, all of them are now 
dead and gone to Yamaloka. 

Fathers practise asceticism and brahmacharya, truth and renunciation, in 
the hope of getting sons blessed with every kind of prosperity. So, too, with 
fasts, sacrifices, vows, sacred rites and auspicious ceremonies, mothers 
conceive and carry their offspring, anxiously hoping for a safe delivery and 
wondering, “Will they be born safely, grow in might and be honoured on 
earth? Will they be able to give us happiness in this world and the next?” 

Alas, those mothers have had to abandon all their expectations now that 
their sons, glorying in youth and resplendent with ornaments, have been 
slain. Without having enjoyed the pleasures of this world, without having 
paid the debts they owed to their parents and to the gods, they have gone to 
Yamaloka. Alas, OO my mother, those kings have been slain at just the time 
when their parents expected to reap the fruits of their might and wealth. 

They were always governed by envy and greed for earthly pleasures, 
and slaves to rage and desire. Because of their evil deeds, they could never 
enjoy the fruits of victory. I believe that all the Panchalas and the Kurus that 
have fallen in this battle, those slain as well as those who slew them, have 
perished without reaching Swarga as they should have in the normal course. 
The people regard us as the cause of the destruction of the world, although 
it was the sons of Dhritarashtra who were actually responsible. Duryodhana 
was always cunning, always evil and deceitful. Although we never offended 
him, he always treated us perfidiously. Yet, we have not vanquished them, 
nor have they vanquished us. The Dhartarashtras could not enjoy this earth, 
their costly gemstones and well-filled treasury, or their vast territories, 
women or music. They did not heed the counsels of ministers, their friends 
and men learned in the scriptures. Their hatred for us consumed them and 
denied them happiness and contentment. Seeing our prosperity, Duryodhana 
became envious, growing pale and emaciated, and Sakuni reported this to 
King Dhritarashtra. As a doting father, Dhritarashtra tolerated his vile 
policy, disregarding the advice of Vidura and Ganga’s noble son Bhishma to 
restrain his wicked and covetous son Duryodhana, who was entirely 
governed by his passions. The king has met with destruction, just like me. 

Beyond doubt, Suyodhana has tarnished his blazing fame by causing the 
death of his brothers and bringing terrible grief to his parents. What other 
Kshatriya would use such language against his kinsmen as he did, in the 
presence of Panchali? Because of our evil star, Duryodhana, our very race 


has perished. We have killed those whom we should not have slain, and 
thereby incurred the censure of the world. Having installed this sinner as 
king, Dhritarashtra grieves today. We have slain our heroic foes and taken 
their possessions and kingdom. It has pacified our anger but, ah, my grief 
stupefies me! 

O Dhananjaya, we can only make amends by auspicious deeds, by 
confessing to all that we have sinned, by repentance, by alms-giving, by 
penances, by journeys to tirthas after renouncing everything, by constant 
meditation on the shastras. Of all these, the Srutis aver that he who practises 
renunciation escapes from birth and death, and attains Brahman. So, O 
Arjuna, with your leave, I will go to the forest, casting off all worldly 
attachments, adopting mauna, and practising Gyana Yoga, the path of 
wisdom. 

The Srutis declare, and I have seen with my eyes, that a man with 
worldly desires can never find any kind of punya. I have myself committed 
this sin which, as the Srutis have said, causes the cycle of samsara. 
Abandoning my entire kingdom, and my worldy possessions, I shall go to 
the forest, escaping from the ties of the world, freed from grief and 
attachment. 

I beg you, O Kurusthama, rule this earth, to which you have restored 
peace, and which you have divested of all evil, for I have no need for 
kingdom or for pleasure.’ 

Having said these words, Yudhishtira stops. His younger brother Arjuna 
then addresses him in the following words.” 


CANTO 8 


V aisampayana said, “Like one unwilling to forgive an insult, the 

tejasvin Arjuna, betraying some fierceness but smiling the while, 
says gravely, ‘It grieves me to see the distress that urges you to abandon this 
great prosperity which you have gained after such a superhuman victory. 
Having killed your enemies, and having conquered the world legitimately 
through adherence to your svadharma, why should you abandon everything 
through fickleness of heart? 

Where on earth has an impotent or an irresolute man ever acquired 
sovereignty? Why then did you, in blind rage, kill all the kings of the 
world? He who aspires to live like a sannyasi will not want to enjoy the 
good things of the world. Poor and stripped of his wealth, he can never win 
fame or acquire sons and possess great and noble animals. O king, if you 
abandon this vast kingdom and live like a wretched mendicant, what will 
the world say of you? 

Why do you want to renounce your wealth and power, and lead the life 
of a sadhu; you, born a king? Having conquered the whole world, do you 
really wish from folly to live in the forest, abandoning all things of artha 
and kama? 

If you take vanavasa, in your absence evil men will destroy yagnas, and 
the stain of that desecration will certainly be yours. King Nahusha, having 
committed many base sins in a state of poverty, gave up his mendicancy 
and proclaimed that poverty is for vanaprasthas. 


Making no provision for the morrow is a practice for Rishis, as you 
know. Kshatriya dharma depends entirely on wealth, and one who robs 
another of wealth, robs him of his dharma as well. Who among us, O king, 
would forgive such robbery if it is practised against him? A poor man, even 
if he is only an onlooker, is falsely accused of a crime. Poverty is a sin and 
it is wrong for you to applaud it. 

The fallen man, O king, also grieves like a poor man. I do not see the 
difference between them. All kinds of punya and karma flow from the 
possession of great wealth, all religious performances, all pleasures, and 
Swarga itself! Without wealth, a man cannot find the means of sustaining 
existence. The karma of a man of small wit, a fool who allows himself to be 
stripped of his wealth, is dried up like shallow streams in the summer. He 
who has wealth has friends and relatives, and we regard him as a worthy 
and accomplished man in the world. On the other hand, if a man without 
wealth wants to achieve any purpose, he meets with failure. 

Wealth attracts wealth, as tame elephants entice wild ones into captivity. 
Religious acts, pleasures, joy, courage, wrath, learning and dignity, all these 
proceed from wealth, O king! From wealth one acquires family honour, and 
increases one’s religious merit. He who is without wealth has neither this 
world, nor the next, O best of men. He cannot perform deeds of dharma, for 
these spring from wealth like rivers from a mountain. 

He who has few possessions in terms of horses and cows, servants and 
guests is truly leaner than an emaciated man. Judge truly, O king, by the 
conduct of the Devas and the Danavas who forever wish to slaughter their 
kinsmen, the Asuras. If one did not regard as righteous the appropriation of 
wealth belonging to others, how would kings practise their dharma on this 
earth? 

The sages have in the Vedas laid down this injunction: that kings should 
live reciting the three Vedas every day, seek to acquire wealth, and carefully 
perform sacrifices with the wealth thus acquired. 

When the gods have obtained footing in Swarga and won their 
prosperity through great battles, what fault can there be in such strife? The 
Devas act in this way, and the eternal precepts of the Vedas sanction it. 

To learn, teach, sacrifice and assist at others’ yagnas, these are our 
principal duties. The wealth that kings plunder becomes the means of their 
prosperity, and that has never been obtained without some injury to others. 
The reason why kings conquer this world is to acquire riches, and that 


appropriated wealth becomes as much theirs as the riches claimed by sons 
of their sires. The Rajarishis who have gone to Swarga have declared this to 
be the royal dharma, for, like water flowing forth from a replete reservoir, 
wealth runs in every direction from the treasuries of kings. 

This earth which once belonged to king Dilipa, Nahusha, Ambarisha 
and Mandhatri, now belongs to you! You should perform a great yagna, O 
Rajan, making generous gifts of every kind, spending a vast quantity of the 
earth’s produce, or else the sins of this kingdom will be upon you. The 
subjects whose king performs an Asvamedha yagna with bountiful gifts, all 
become purified of sin and sanctified by attending the ablutions at the end 
of the yagna. 

Vishwarupa Mahadeva, in a great sacrifice requiring libations of all 
kinds of flesh, poured all creatures as sacrificial offerings into the fire and 
then his own self. Eternal is this auspicious path, for one can never destroy 
its fruits. This is the great path called Dasaratha, and if you abandon it, O 
Rajan, what other course will you take?’” 


CANTO 9 


¢ =e udhishtira says, ‘For a little while, O Arjuna, if you were to 

concentrate your attention and fix your mind and inner hearing 

on your antaratma, you would approve of what I am about to say. 

Abandoning all worldly possessions and pleasures, I will follow the path of 

dharma—but I will not tread the path that you recommend. Regardless of 

whether you ask me or not, I will show you the only path that is auspicious 
and that one should walk. 

Renouncing the pleasures and activities of the world of men, I will 
perform mahatapasya, living on fruit and roots in the forest and wandering 
with the animals that have their home there. Performing yagnas, pouring 
libations into the sacred fire at the proper times, morning and evening, I will 
reduce my body through starvation and, with matted hair, covering myself 
with skins, enduring cold, wind, heat, hunger, thirst and toil, I will emaciate 
myself with tapasya as laid down in our shastras. 

I will daily listen to the clear strains of the free and joyful birds and 
animals living in the forest, charming to the heart and the ear. I will enjoy 
the fragrance of flower-laden trees and creepers, and the varied fruits that 
grow in the forest. I will spend my time in the company of its many 
excellent sannyasis. I will not do the slightest injury to any living creature 
anywhere. 

Leading a reclusive life and devoting myself to contemplation, I will 
live upon ripe and unripe fruits and gratify the Pitris and the Devas with 
offerings of wild fruits, spring water and grateful hymns. Observing in this 


way the austere regulations of a forest life, I will pass my days calmly 
awaiting death or, living alone in silence, with my head shaved clean. I will 
obtain my food by begging fruit each day of only one tree. 

Smearing my body with ashes, and finding shelter in abandoned houses, 
or lying at the foot of trees, I will cast off all things, dear or hateful. Aloof 
from both grief and joy, regarding with equanimity censure and applause, 
hope and affliction, and prevailing over all the works of maya, I will live in 
detachment: following mauna vrata, assuming the outward form of a blind 
and deaf idiot, living in contentment and deriving happiness from my own 
soul. Without doing the least injury to any of the four kinds of moving and 
unmoving creatures, I will behave equally towards all, be they conscious of 
dharma or merely following the dictates of their senses. 

I will not jeer or frown at anybody and, restraining all my senses, 
always be of cheerful aspect. Asking no one for directions, I will journey 
along any path that I happen to meet, taking no note of the country or the 
points of the compass or looking behind me, divesting myself of desire and 
anger, turning my gaze inwards and casting off pride of soul and body. 

Nature always walks ahead; thus, food and drink will somehow come. I 
will not think of those pairs of opposites that stand in the way of such a life. 
If I fail to find pure food in a small measure in one house, I will go to other 
homes. I shall go to seven houses in succession to satisfy my hunger. When 
the smoke from a house no longer issues forth, its hearth-fires having been 
extinguished; when husking-rods have been kept aside, and all the inmates 
have eaten; when mendicants and guests cease to wander, I will go and beg 
for alms at two, three or five houses at the most. 

I will wander over the earth having broken the bonds of desire and, 
preserving equanimity in success and failure, become a tapasvin, and 
behave as one who is neither fond of life nor at the point of death: viewing 
both with equal indifference. 

If a man strikes off one of my arms, and another smears the other arm 
with sandal-wood paste, I will not wish either evil to the one nor good to 
the other. The only acts I perform will be to open and shut my eyes and take 
as much food and drink as will barely sustain life in my body. Without ever 
being attached to action, and always restraining the functions of the senses, 
I will give up all desires and cleanse the soul of every impurity. Freed from 
all attachments and tearing off all bonds, I will live free as the wind and 
enjoy everlasting contentment. 


Impelled by desire, and from ignorance, I have committed great sins. 
Many grihastas performing both auspicious and inauspicious acts are yoked 
to the wheel of karma, maintaining their wives, children and kinsmen, all 
bound to them in relations of cause and effect. When they die they take 
upon themselves all the effects of their sins, for none but the actual doer is 
burdened with the consequences of his deeds. Bound by karma, men come 
into this ever-turning wheel of life, are born again and again, and, being 
born, meet their fellow men. 

He is sure to find happiness who abandons the worldly course of life, 
which is really a fleeting illusion, though it seems eternal, and is afflicted by 
birth, death, decrepitude, disease and pain. When the very Devas and great 
Rishis, who understand the law of karma, fall down from heaven or from 
their positions of eminence, who would wish to have even heavenly 
prosperity? Insignificant kings, having found success through diverse 
means, often slay another king through some contrivance. 

Through reflection this nectar of wisdom has come to me and, having 
attained it, I want to find a permanent, eternal and unchangeable place for 
myself. By adopting this fearless path of life, I will make an end to this 
physical frame that is subject to birth, death, decrepitude, disease and 
pain.”” 


CANTO 10 


¢ ‘RB himasena says, ‘Your understanding, Rajan, has become blind to 

the truth, like that of a foolish and hollow chanter of the Vedas. If 

you criticize the dharma of kings and want to lead a life of idleness, O 
Bharatarishabha, you had no reason to destroy the Dhartarashtras. 

Do we not find in the Kshatriyas forgiveness and compassion, pity and 
mercy? If we had known that this was your intention, we would have never 
taken up arms or slain a single man. We would have subsisted on alms until 
death took us, and this terrible war between the rulers of the earth would 
have never been fought. 

The learned have said that this mobile and immobile world is the object 
of enjoyment for the strong, and that the Kshatriya’s duty is to eliminate all 
who stand in the way of the one assuming the sovereignty of the earth. 
Accordingly, we killed all those who stood as enemies of our kingdom, so 
that by adherence to our dharma we now rule this earth. Govern it 
righteously, O Yudhisthtira. 

To refuse the kingdom now is to be like the man who, having dug a 
well, stops his work before finding water and comes up covered in mud; or, 
like the man who, having climbed up a tall tree and taken the honey, dies 
before tasting it. It is to be like one who, having set out on a long journey, 
turns back in despair short of his destination; or like one who, having slain 
all his enemies, O Pandava, falls by his own hand. It is to be like the hungry 
man who, having obtained food, refuses to eat it, or like a man under the 


influence of kama who, having obtained a woman reciprocating his passion, 
refuses to take her. 

We follow you, O king of feeble understanding, because you are our 
eldest brother, and you have made us objects of censure. We are all 
maharathas, accomplished in knowledge and endowed with great energy, 
yet we are obedient to the words of a eunuch, as though we were entirely 
helpless. We are the refuge of the helpless but, when the people see us like 
this, they will think we are impotent. 

Consider what I say. The shastras decree that only in times of distress 
should aged and weak kings, or those defeated by enemies, adopt a life of 
renunciation. Men of wisdom, therefore, will not applaud renunciation as 
the dharma of a Kshatriya but regard that course of life as a loss of virtue. 

How can the true Kshatriyas condemn these duties? Indeed, if these 
obligations be blameworthy, why should Ishwara not be censured? It is only 
the poor and non-believers who support this interpretation of the Vedas, that 
a Kshatriya should take sannyasa. In reality, a Kshatriya who adopts the life 
of a sannyasi fails to support life by his prowess and exertions, and thereby 
fails in his dharma. 

Only that man who cannot support his sons and grandsons and worship 
the Devas, Rishis, Atithis and Pitris, can happily lead the life of a solitary 
hermit in the forest. Just as the deer, boars and birds, though they lead a 
forest life, cannot attain heaven, able Kshatriyas who fail to exert their 
power cannot attain Swarga by becoming sannyasis. There are other ways 
for them to seek religious merit. 

If anyone were to gain success from renunciation, then mountains and 
trees would surely have it, for are all Brahmacharins who lead such lives, 
injuring no one and remaining always aloof from worldliness. If it be the 
truth that a man’s success depends upon his own lot in life and not upon that 
of others, then, as a Kshatriya, you should take yourself to a life of action. 

If they who only fill their own stomachs could attain success, then all 
aquatic creatures would be successful, for they have no one to support but 
themselves. Look, the world moves on, with every creature in it employed 
in karma proper to its nature. And so, you must adopt a life of action, for 
the man of inaction can never prosper.’” 


CANTO 11 


66 A rjuna says, ‘In this regard, O Bharatarishabha, an itihasa is told 
of a discourse between certain sannyasis and Sakra. A number of 
well-born Brahmana youths, foolish and immature, abandoning their 
homes, left for vanavasa. Thinking that this would be a virtuous path, these 
rich youths wanted to live as Brahmacharins, and abandoned their brothers 
and parents. It so happened that Indra felt pity for them and, assuming the 
form of a golden bird, the holy Sakra addressed them, saying, “Men who 
perform yagnas and share the leftover sacrificial food acquire great punya 
and their lives are praiseworthy. Having accomplished their purushartha, 
these virtuous men attain the highest end.” 

The Rishis said, “Look, this bird lauds those who subsist upon the 
leftovers (avasesha) of yagnas, and tells us this because we live upon such 
leftovers.” 

The bird replied, “I do not praise you. You are filthy and impure, and 
living on refuse renders you vile, for you do not subsist upon the remnants 
of sacrifice.” 

The Rishis said, “We regard this course of our life to be blessed. Tell us, 
O bird, what is good for us. Your words inspire us.” 

The bird said, “If you do not lose faith in me by fighting against your 
better selves, I will advise you on what is true and beneficial.” 

The Rishis said, “We will listen to your words, for the different paths 
are all known to you, O Dharmatman, and we are ready to obey your 
commands. Instruct us.” 


The bird said, “Among quadrupeds, the cow is the foremost; among 
metals, gold; among words, mantras; and among those who walk on two 
legs, Brahmanas. These mantras regulate all the rites of a Brahmana’s life, 
beginning with those concerning gyana and the period after it, and ending 
with those concerning death and cremation. The Vedic rites are his foremost 
sacrifice and his path to Swarga. If it were not so, how could those in quest 
of heaven find what they seek through mantras? 

He who, in this world, worships his soul, firmly regarding it to be a 
particular Deva, gains success consistent with the nature of that God. The 
seasons measured by fortnights lead to the sun, the moon, or the stars. 
Depending upon the action, these three kinds of success, are desired by 
every man. 

The grihasta’s life is superior and sacred and is called the domain for 
the cultivation of success. What paths do these men take that are against 
action? Foolish and destitute, they incur sin because they live by 
abandoning the eternal paths of the Devas, Rishis and Brahmanas and 
taking instead to the paths disapproved of by the Srutis. 

There is a law in the mantras which says, ‘O Sacrificer, perform the 
sacrifice represented by gifts of valuable things. I will give you happiness in 
the form of sons, kine and Swarga!’ To live thus in accordance with the 
shastras is said to be the highest tapas of the tapasvin. And so you should 
perform yagnas and tapasya in the form of gifts. The due performance of 
these eternal duties—the worship of the Devas, the study of the Vedas, the 
gratification of the Pitris, and respectful services to the gurus—are called 
mahatapasya. 

By performing these arduous penances, the Devas have obtained the 
highest glory and power. And I tell you to bear the burden of the duties of 
the grihasta. Without doubt, tapasya is the foremost of all things and is the 
root of all creatures; however, it is to be practised by leading the life of a 
grihasta, upon which everything depends. 

They who eat the leftovers of feasts, after duly apportioning the food 
morning and evening among kinsmen, attain ends that are hard indeed to 
achieve. They are called eaters of the remnants of feasts who eat after 
having served Sadasyas, Devas, Rishis and kinsmen. 

Thus, those who observe their svadharma, who keep difficult vratas and 
are truthful in speech become objects of great respect in the world, with 
their own faith exceptionally strengthened. Free from pride, these achievers 


of the most strenuous feats go to Swarga and live for endless time in the 
realms of Sakra.””’ 

Arjuna continues ‘Hearing those words, beneficial and full of 
righteousness, those Rishis abandoned the path of renunciation, saying, 
“There is nothing in it,’ and became grihastas. Therefore, O Dharmarajan, 
calling to your aid that same ananta gyana, rule the wide world that is now 
free of your enemies.’” 


CANTO 12 


V aisampayana said, “Hearing these words of Arjuna, O Parantapa, the 

mighty-armed and broad-chested Nakula, bronzed of skin, wise and 
moderate in speech, looked at the king, the foremost of all dharma 
purushas, and spoke, appealing to his brother’s heart. 

Nakula said, ‘The very gods have established their fires in the region 
called Visakha-yupa, O Rajan, so you know that the Devas themselves 
depend upon the fruits of action. The Pitris that support life by dispensing 
rain on earth even to all disbelievers, by observing the laws of Ishwara as 
declared in the Vedas, are engaged in karma. Those who reject the 
declaration of the Vedas recommending action are godless, while the man 
who follows the path of the Devas attains, O Bhaarata, the highest realms of 
heaven. 

The grihasta’s life, all men acquainted with Vedic truths say, is superior 
to all the other modes of life. Knowing this, the man who restrains his soul, 
O Rajan, and gives away his righteously acquired wealth in yagnas to 
Brahmanas well versed in the Vedas is regarded as the true renouncer. 
However, he who disregards the life of a grihasta, the source of much 
happiness, and attempts to leap to the next asrama of life, that of a sannyasi, 
moves in darkness. 

The man who roves the world homeless, O Kaunteya, a mendicant who 
has the foot of a tree for his shelter, who observes the mauna vrata, never 
cooks for himself, and seeks to restrain all the functions of his senses, is 
actually a man who has given up the vows of a sannyasi. The Brahmana 


who, disregarding anger and joy, and especially deceit, employs all his time 
in the study of the Vedas, is actually turning away from the observance of 
the vows of a sannyasi. 

The four different varnasramas were at one time weighed in the balance. 
The wise have said that when grihasta was placed on one side of the scale, 
it required the three others to be placed on the other to counterbalance it. 
Observing the result of this examination, and seeing further that domesticity 
alone contains both heaven and pleasure, grihastasrama became the way of 
the greatest Rishis and the refuge of all men conversant with the ways of 
the world. 

Therefore, O Bharatarishabha, he who adopts the way of the grihasta, 
thinking it to be his duty, and relinquishing all desire for the fruits thereof, 
is a real sannyasi, and not the man of clouded understanding who goes into 
the vana abandoning his home and its surroundings. A man who, in the garb 
of dharma, fails to vanquish his desires even as a vanaprastha, is bound by 
grim Yama with his deadly noose round the sinner’s neck. 

The karma that is performed from vanity is said to be unproductive, 
while the karma done from a spirit of renunciation always bears abundant 
fruit. Tranquillity, self-restraint, fortitude, truth, purity, simplicity, sacrifice, 
perseverance and righteousness are regarded as virtues recommended by the 
greatest Rishis. The deeds of a grihasta, it is said, are intended for Pitris, 
Devas and Sadasyas. 

In this varnasrama alone, O Rajan, are the three-fold aims of dharma, 
artha and kama to be attained. The renouncer who unswervingly adheres to 
this mode of life, in which one is free to perform all karma, does not 
encounter ruin either here or hereafter. 

The sinless Ishwara created living beings with the intention that they 
would adore him through yagnas, which include generous gifts. Creepers, 
trees, leaf-shedding herbs, animals that are clean and ghrita were created to 
be the ingredients of the yagna. For a grihasta, the performance of a yagna 
is fraught with impediments. That is why this asrama is said to be 
exceedingly difficult, well-nigh unattainable. Grihastas who possess wealth 
and corn and animals but do not perform yagnas earn eternal sin, O Rajan. 

Amongst Rishis, there are some that regard the study of the Vedas to be 
a sacrifice, and others that regard dhyana to be a great sacrifice which they 
perform in their minds. O Rajan, the very gods covet the companionship of 


a regenerate man who, as a result of treading the path of dhyana, has 
become equal to Brahman. 

By refusing to spend for yagnas the diverse kinds of wealth that you 
have taken from your enemies, you are only displaying your want of faith. I 
have never seen a king in the observance of grihastasrama renounce his 
wealth in any way but the Rajasuya, the Aswamedha, and other kinds of 
great sacrifices. Like Sakra, the king of the Devas, O Rajan, perform these 
other sacrifices that are praised by the Brahmanas. 

The king through whose heedlessness subjects are plundered by 
robbers, and who does not offer protection to those whom he is called upon 
to rule, is said to be the very embodiment of the demon Kali. If, without 
giving away horses, kine and female slaves, elephants adorned with 
trappings, and villages, populous lands, fields, and houses to Brahmanas, 
we take vanavasa with our hearts harbouring unfriendly feeling towards 
relatives, we will become such Kalis among Kshatriyas. Kshatriyas who do 
not practise charity and give protection to others incur great sin. Sorrow is 
their portion hereafter, not bliss. 

If, O lord, you take to a wandering life without performing mahayagnas 
and the due rites in honour of your deceased ancestors, without bathing in 
sacred tirthas, you will meet with destruction like a small cloud separated 
from a mass and shredded by the winds. You will fall away from both 
worlds and have to be born as a Pisacha. 

A man becomes a true sannyasi by casting off every internal and 
external attachment, not merely by abandoning his home to live in the 
forest. A Brahmana who lives observing these laws in which there are no 
impediments does not fall from this or the other world. Observing one’s 
svadharma, duties respected by the ancients and practised by the best of 
men, who would grieve for having slain prosperous enemies in war, like 
Sakra razing the armies of the Daityas? 

Having observed the Kshatriya dharma and subjugated the world 
through your prowess, O Rajan, and having made gifts to those who know 
the Vedas, you can go to realms higher than heaven. It does not become 
you, O Kaunteya, to indulge in grief.’” 


CANTO 13 


66 S ahadeva says, ‘O Bhaarata, one does not attain felicity by 

renouncing all external objects, or by discarding mental 
attachments. Let our enemies enjoy the religious merit and happiness that 
come to one who has cast off worldly things but whose mind still covets 
them! On the other hand, let our friends enjoy the religious merit and 
happiness that come to him who rules the earth, having relinquished all 
internal attachments. 

The word mama—mine—is Yama, Death’s self; while the opposite, na- 
mama—not mine—is eternal Brahman’s. Brahman and Yama, O Rajan, 
entering invisibly into every soul, cause all creatures to act. If this entity 
that is called Atman is never subject to destruction, then destroying the 
bodies of living men cannot make one guilty of murder. If, on the other 
hand, the Atman and the body of a being are born or destroyed together, 
then the rites and deeds prescribed by the shastras would be futile. 

Therefore, driving away all doubts about the immortality of the Atman, 
the man of intelligence should adopt that path which the men of dharma of 
ancient times have ever trodden. Life is certainly fruitless for a king who, 
having acquired the entire earth with its mobile and immobile creatures, 
does not enjoy it. As for the vanaprastha who lives upon wild fruits and 
roots, but whose attachment to things of the earth has not ceased, such a 
one, O king, lives within the jaws of death. 

Look, O Bhaarata, the hearts and the outward forms of all creatures are 
but manifestations of yourself. They who look upon all creatures as their 


own selves escape the great fear of destruction. You are my father and my 
protector; you are my brother, my elder and guru. So, O lord of the earth, 
forgive these confused and sorrowful utterances of a grief-stricken one, 
which I have spoken out of my love for you.’” 


CANTO 14 


V aisampayana said, “When Kunti’s son, Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, 

remains silent after listening to his brothers tell these truths of the 
Vedas, the noble, beautiful and large-eyed Draupadi speaks to that bull 
among kings, seated like the leader of a herd of elephants in the midst of his 
brothers, themselves like so many lions and tigers. 

Expecting loving regard always from her husbands, especially from 
Yudhishtira, she is always treated with affection and indulgence by the king. 
Conversant with her wifely duties and observant of them in practice, this 
wide-hipped princess, casting her eyes on her lord, wanting his attention, 
speaks in pointed but sweet words. 

‘O Kaunteya, your brothers dry their palates with laments like the 
chataka bird, but you do not make them happy. Gladden with seemly words 
the hearts of your brothers who are like great tuskers in musth, these heroes 
who have drunk the cup of misery. Why, O king, while living beside the 
Dwaita lake, did you reassure your brothers who were with you, suffering 
cold, wind and sun? 

Why did you say to them, “Rushing into battle for victory, we will kill 
Duryodhana and enjoy the earth that can grant every wish. Depriving great 
Maharathas of their chariots, slaying huge elephants, and strewing the field 
of battle with the bodies of great warriors, horsemen and heroes, you, 
Parantapas, will perform mahayagnas of diverse kinds with gifts in 
profusion. All these sufferings of exile in the forest will end in happiness.” 


Having once said these words to your brothers, O foremost of all men of 
dharma, why do you now dismay us with this new resolve? Just as there can 
be no fish in a dry swamp, no eunuch can ever have children or enjoy 
wealth. A Kshatriya, or a ruler without the power to punish, can neither 
shine nor enjoy the earth, nor can his subjects ever have happiness. 

Friendship for all creatures, charity, study of the Vedas, penances— 
these constitute the duties of a Brahmana and not of a Kshatriya, O best of 
kings! Restraining the evil, cherishing the honest and never retreating from 
battle—these are the highest duties of kings. He is said to be conversant 
with dharma in whom both forgiveness and anger exist, giving and taking, 
terrors and fearlessness, and chastisement and reward. It was not through 
study, or gift, or sannyasa that you have acquired the earth. You have 
vanquished and slain the force of the enemy, ready to burst upon you with 
all its might, an army abounding with elephants, horses and chariots, strong 
with three kinds of strength, and protected by Drona, Karna, Aswatthaman 
and Kripa! 

This is why I ask you to enjoy the earth. Once, O king, you conquered 
the realm called Jambu, with all her populous kingdoms, as well as 
Kraunchadwipa to the west of the great Meru, equal to Jambudwipa, 
Sakadwipa to the east of the great Meru, equal to Kraunchadwipa, 
Bhadraswa on the north of the great Meru, equal to Sakadwipa, O 
Purushavyaghra! 

You even penetrated the ocean and captured other realms, islands 
surrounded by the sea and containing many densely peopled provinces. O 
Bhaarata, having achieved such immeasurable feats, and having obtained 
through them the adoration of the Brahmanas, how is it that your soul is not 
gratified? Seeing your brothers, O Bhaarata, these heroes swelling with 
strength and resembling bulls or mighty elephants in musth, why don’t you 
speak words to them that will bring joy to their hearts? 

All of you are like Devas, able to resist any foe and able to scorch your 
enemies. Had only one of you become my husband, my happiness would 
have been immense, O Naravyaghra. What can I say when all five of you 
are my husbands and care for me as the five senses inspire the physical 
frame? The words of my mother-in-law, who has great knowledge and great 
foresight, cannot be untrue. “O princess of Panchala,’ she said to me, 
“Yudhishtira will always keep you happy.” 


I see, O Dharmaraja, that having slain thousands of powerful kings, you 
are about to render this achievement futile through your folly. They whose 
eldest brother has lost his mind now all have to follow him in madness. 
Through your madness, O king, all the Pandavas are about to lose their 
minds. 

Had your brothers been in their senses, O Rajan, they would have 
imprisoned you with all unbelievers and taken upon themselves the 
sovereignty of the earth. One who from dullness of intellect does as you 
now want to do, can never succeed in winning prosperity. The man who 
treads the path of madness should be treated with incense and kohl, with 
drugs infused through the nose, and with other medicaments. 

O best of the Bhaaratas, I am the worst of all my sex, since I want to 
live on even though I am bereaved of my children. You should not disregard 
my words or those of your brothers who are trying to dissuade you from 
your deranged purpose. Indeed, by abandoning all the earth, you urge 
adversity and danger upon yourself. 

Shine, O Rajan, like those two great kings, Mandhatri and Ambarisha, 
admired in their time by all the lords of earth. Protecting your subjects 
righteously, govern Bhumi Devi, this Goddess Earth, with her mountains 
and forests and islands. Do not become downcast, O king; worship the gods 
with many sacrifices, fight your enemies and make gifts of wealth, apparel 
and other objects of enjoyment to Brahmanas, O best of all kings.”” 


CANTO 15 


V aisampayana said, “Hearing these words of Yajnasena’s daughter, 
Arjuna speaks once more, showing proper regard for his mighty- 
armed eldest brother of unfading glory. 

Arjuna says, “The man armed with the rod of punishment, the Neeti 
danda, governs and protects all his subjects with it. This authority is awake 
when everything else is asleep. For this reason, the wise have characterized 
the rod of chastisement to be dharma itself. It protects dharma and artha. It 
is identified with purusharthas, and protects grain and wealth. Knowing this, 
O learned one, take up the rod of punishment and observe the course of the 
world. 

One class of sinful men desist from doing evil through fear of the danda 
in the king’s hands, another from fear of Yama’s danda, another from fear of 
the next world and yet another from fear of society. Thus, O Rajan, in this 
world, everything depends on the punitive danda, and there is a class of 
men for whom the only restraining force from devouring one another is that 
rod. If it did not protect people, they would have sunk into the darkness of 
hell. 

The wise thus named the rod of chastisement, because it restrains the 
ungovernable and punishes the wicked. One should punish Brahmanas by 
oral censure; Kshatriyas, by giving them only as much food as necessary to 
support life; Vaisyas, by the imposition of fines and forfeitures of property, 
while for Sudras there is no punishment. 


Under the name of danda we have established laws in the world to keep 
men aware of their duties and for the protection of property. Wherever dark- 
skinned and red-eyed punishment stands ready to tackle every offender, and 
the king is a Dharmaraja, the subjects never forget themselves. The 
Brahmacharin and the grihasta, the rishi and the sannyasi, all walk in their 
respective ways through fear of punishment alone. 

He who is without the restraint of fear never performs a sacrifice or 
gives anything away, never adheres to any commitment or covenant. 
Without achieving the most difficult feats and without killing, as a 
fisherman kills fish, no man can obtain great prosperity. Without bloodshed, 
no man has been able to achieve fame in this world or acquire wealth or 
subjects. 

By the killing of Vritra, Indra himself became the Great. Men offer their 
worship much more to those of the gods who are given to taking life. 
Rudra, Skanda, Sakra, Agni, Varuna, Kaala, Mrityu, Vayu, Kubera, Surya, 
the Vasus, the Maruts, the Sadhyas, and the Viswadevas, O Bhaarata, are all 
death-dealers. Humbled by their prowess, everybody bends to these gods, 
never to Brahma, Dhatri or Pushan. 

Only a few men who are noble of disposition worship gods who are 
self-restrained, peaceful and equally disposed towards all creatures. I do not 
perceive any creature in this world that supports life without doing any 
injury to others. Animals live upon animals, the stronger upon the weaker. 
The mongoose devours mice; the cat devours the mongoose; the dog 
devours the cat; the dog again is devoured by the spotted leopard. Behold, 
all things in turn are devoured by Yama, the Destroyer, when he comes! The 
gods have wrought this universe, moving and motionless, as food for living 
creatures, and the true gyani is never confused by this. 

It is appropriate for you, O Maharajan, to be what you were born to be. 
Only a foolish Kshatriya, restraining anger and joy, takes refuge in the vana. 
The very sannyasis cannot support their lives without killing creatures. In 
water, on earth, and in fruits, swarm innumerable creatures, and it is not true 
that one does not kill them. 

What higher dharma is there than supporting one’s life? There are many 
creatures so minute that their existence can only be guessed at, and the mere 
falling of one’s eyelids destroys them. There are men who, subduing anger 
and pride, take to an ascetic course of life and, leaving village and towns, 


become hermits in the forest. Arriving there, they become confused and 
adopt the grihasta’s life once more. 

One sees other grihasthas tilling the soil, uprooting herbs, felling trees, 
killing birds and animals, performing yagnas, and finally attaining Swarga. 
O Kaunteya, I have no doubt that the deeds of all creatures are crowned 
with success only when the policy of punishment is properly applied. If one 
were to abolish punishment from the world, all creatures would soon be 
destroyed. 

Like fish in the water, stronger animals prey on the weaker. Remember 
the truth declared long ago by Brahma himself that punishment, properly 
applied, sustains all beings. Look, the very fires, when almost extinguished, 
blaze up again, in fright, when blown upon. Such is the fear of force or 
discipline. If there were no danda, the good could not be distinguished from 
the bad, the whole world would be enveloped in darkness and all things 
would be plunged in chaos. 

Even those who are breakers of laws, who are atheists and scoff at the 
Vedas, become disposed to observe laws and restrictions from fear of 
punishment. Everyone in this world is kept straight by fear of danda. A man 
who is by nature pure and righteous is scarce. 

Yielding to fear of punishment, man becomes disposed to observe rules 
and restraints. Danda was ordained by the Creator himself for protecting 
dharma and artha, for the happiness of all the four orders, and for making 
them righteous and humble. If punishment could not inspire fear, then 
ravens and beasts of prey would have devoured all other animals, men and 
the sacrificial ghrita. 

If discipline did not uphold and protect, nobody would have studied the 
Vedas, nobody would have milked a cow, and no maiden would have 
married. If discipline and fear of punishment did not uphold and protect, 
destruction and chaos would have set in on every side, all barriers would 
have been swept away, and the very idea of property would have 
disappeared. People could then never duly perform annual sacrifices with 
large gifts, and no one, to whatever mode of life he might belong, would 
observe the duties of their particular varnasrama declared in the shastras, no 
one would have succeeded in acquiring knowledge. 

Even if yoked, camels, oxen, horses, mules or donkeys, would not draw 
chariots and carriages, without the application of the danda; on danda 


depend all creatures. The learned, therefore, say that punishment is the root 
of everything, and upon it rests this world and the heaven that men desire. 

Wherever enemy-destroying punishment is well applied, no sin, no 
deception and no evil is seen. If the danda of punishment is not upraised, 
the dog will lick the sacrificial butter and the crow will fly away with the 
first yagna offering. 

Whether through dharma or adharma, this kingdom is now ours, and our 
duty is to abandon grief, to enjoy it and perform yagnas. Men who are 
fortunate, living with their beloved wives and children, eat good food, wear 
rich attire, and cheerfully acquire virtue. All our karma, without doubt, is 
dependent on wealth, which is again dependent on danda. 

Understand, therefore, the importance of discipline. One declares duties 
only for the maintenance of the relations of the world. There are two things 
here: abstention from injury, and injury prompted by dharma; the second, 
being superior as dharma, may be done without fault. 

There is no deed that is wholly meritorious, nor any that is wholly evil, 
since in all karma something exists of both right and wrong. Animals are 
castrated, their horns cut off, and they are made to bear burdens, tethered 
and beaten. 

In this samsara of no substance, this cruel world, rotten with sin and full 
of pain, O Rajan, maintain the ancient customs of men. Perform yagnas, 
give alms, protect your subjects, and practise dharma. Slay your enemies, O 
Kaunteya, and protect your friends. Do not be sorrowful, Rajan, while 
killing your enemies, for you will not incur the slightest sin. He who takes 
up a weapon to cut down an armed foe advancing against him, does not 
incur the sin of murder, for it is the fury of the advancing enemy that 
provokes the wrath of the slayer. 

The inner soul of every creature can never be slain. When the Atman is 
incapable of being slain, how then can one be slain by another? As a man 
enters a new house, even so creatures enter successive bodies, abandoning 
forms that are worn out, acquiring new forms. Those who can see the truth 
view death as being this repeated transformation.” 


CANTO 16 


V aisampayana said, “After Arjuna’s speech, Bhimasena, passionate 

and energetic, mustering all his patience, says to his eldest brother, 
‘O Rajan, you know all about dharma, nothing is unknown to you. We 
always try to emulate your conduct, but alas, we cannot. 

I tried to restrain myself from saying anything. But my anguish compels 
me to speak. Listen to me, O ruler of men. Because of your confusion, 
everything we have is in danger, and we are made unhappy and weak. How 
is it that you, the ruler of the world, familiar with every branch of 
knowledge, have let sorrow cloud your understanding like a coward? 

You know the paths of dharma and adharma of the world, as well as the 
future and the present. So, O puissant one, I will tell you why you should 
assume sovereignty. Listen to me. 

There are two kinds of diseases, physical and mental, each linked to the 
other, and neither of them exists independently. Mental sickness springs 
from physical ailment, the physical from the mental: this is the truth. He 
who feels regret because of past physical or mental grief finds yet more 
sorrow in sorrow, and suffers twice over. 

Cold, heat and wind are the three attributes of the body, and their 
existence in harmony is the sign of good health. If one of the three prevails 
over the rest, there are remedies laid down for it. Cold checks heat, and heat 
checks cold. 

Sattva, rajas and tamas are the three attributes of the mind. The 
existence of these three in harmony is the sign of mental health. If one of 


these prevails over the rest, there are remedies prescribed. 

Grief checks joy, and joy checks grief; one man living in the present, 
enjoying bliss, wants to remember his past sorrows, while another, living in 
present sorrow, wants to recollect his past happiness. You, however, were 
never made sad by misfortune or glad by fortune. So, you should not use 
your memory now to make yourself sad during times of bliss, or glad 
during times of sorrow. Perhaps Destiny is all-powerful, or perhaps it is 
because of your nature that you are so afflicted. 

But how is it that you do not remember the sight of Draupadi being 
dragged before the sabha barely clad while in her period, or our expulsion 
from Hastinapura and our vanavasa wearing deerskins and living in the 
great forests? 

Why have you forgotten the woes inflicted on us by Jatasura, the battle 
with Chitrasena, and what we suffered at the hands of the Sindhu king; how 
Kichaka kicked Draupadi during our ajnatavasa? Parantapa, another fierce 
battle, like that which you fought against Bhishma and Drona, now lies 
before you, but this one will have to be fought with your mind alone, 
without arrows, friends, relatives or kinsmen. 

If you give up your life before winning this battle, you will have to be 
reborn to fight these same enemies again. So, fight that battle this very day, 
O Bharatarishabha. Disregard the concerns of your body, use your own 
ability, identify your mind’s foe and conquer it. I cannot imagine what your 
condition will be if you do not succeed in this battle; whereas, by winning 
it, you will attain the great end of life. Apply your intellect to this, ascertain 
the right and the wrong paths, follow the course that your father did before 
you, and rule your kingdom with dharma. 

By good fortune, the sinful Duryodhana and all his followers are dead, 
and Draupadi has braided her hair again. With due ceremonies and lavish 
gifts, perform the Aswamedha yagna. The tejasvin Krishna and we are your 
servants, O son of Pritha!’”’ 


CANTO 17 


¢ eae udhishtira says, ‘Discontentment, heedless attachment to earthly 

goods, the absence of tranquillity, power, folly, vanity and 
anxiety: all these affect you, and so you covet sovereignty, O Bhima. Try to 
be happy freed from desire, prevailing over joy and grief and attaining 
tranquillity. The peerless king who will rule this unbounded earth will 
nevertheless have but one stomach. Why then do you applaud this course of 
life? 

One’s desires, O Bharatarishabha, cannot be fulfilled in a day, or in 
many months. Desire can never be gratified, cannot, indeed, be exhausted in 
the course of one’s whole life. Fire, when fed with fuel, blazes forth; 
otherwise, it is extinguished. So you should extinguish with a little food the 
fire in your stomach when it appears. He who is ignorant seeks endless food 
for his belly. Conquer your stomach first and you will then be able to 
conquer the earth. 

Once you conquer and win the earth, it will be for your permanent 
good. You applaud desires and enjoyments and prosperity, but those who 
have renounced all enjoyments and have reduced their bodies through 
penance, attain regions of supreme happiness. The acquisition and 
preservation of a kingdom involves both dharma and adharma. The desire 
for them exists in you. Free yourself from your great burdens, and adopt 
renunciation. 

To appease his hunger, the tiger slaughters many other animals. From 
greed, other weaker beasts, scavengers, live off the tiger’s prey. If kings 


practise renunciation while enjoying worldly possessions and pleasures, 
they can never have contentment, and a loss of understanding is noticeable 
in them. However, those who subsist on leaves of trees, or use two stones 
only or their teeth for husking their grain, or live upon water or air alone, 
succeed in conquering Naraka. Between the king who rules this unbounded 
earth, and the man who regards equally stone pebbles and gold, it is the 
latter who attains his purusharthas, not the former. 

So, depend upon that which is the eternal refuge of joy both here and 
hereafter, and stop wishing and hoping and being attached to your wants. 
Those who have given up desire and enjoyment never grieve, while you 
yearn for pleasures to come, and mourn them as they go. It is only after 
discarding desire and its gratification that you will succeed in liberating 
yourself from hypocrisy. 

There are two well-known paths for us: the path of the Pitris and the 
path of the Devas. They who perform yagnas take the Pitri-patha, while 
those who are for moksha, go by the path of the gods. Casting off their 
bodies, the great Rishis attain realms that are above the power of Yama; 
they do this through brahmacharya, tapasya and the study of the Vedas. 

The knowing call worldly enjoyments bonds, bandhana, as well as 
karma. Liberated from those two sins—bondage and action—man attains 
the highest end. One has heard of Janaka, freed from the duality of 
opposites, liberated from desire and enjoyment, observant of the religion of 
moksha, singing a verse: “My treasures are immense, yet I have nothing! If 
fire again destroys the whole of Mithila and reduces it to ashes, nothing of 
mine will be burnt!” 

Like a man on the hill-top looking down upon men on the plain below, 
he who has ascended to the summit of gyana sees people pining for things 
that do not call for grief. He who, casting his eyes on visible things, really 
sees them, is said to have true vision and understanding, because of the 
knowledge he has gained of unknown and incomprehensible things. 

Men who know the words of sages are cleansed souls, and those who 
have attained a state of Brahman, succeed in obtaining great honour. When 
one understands that creatures of infinite diversity are all one and the same, 
and that they spring from the same essence, one attains Brahman. 

Those who reach this highest condition attain the supreme and blissful 
end, not they who are without gyana, or who are of small and narrow 


minds, or are bereft of understanding, or are without tapasya. Indeed, 
everything rests on the trained understanding!’” 


CANTO 18 


V aisampayana said, “When Yudhishtira falls silent, Arjuna, moved by 

what the king said, and afire with sorrow and grief, once more 
addresses his eldest brother. ‘People tell this old story, O Bhaarata, about 
the discourse between the ruler of the Videhas and his queen. It relates to 
the words which his grief-stricken spouse said to her lord when, abandoning 
his kingdom, he resolved to lead the life of a sannyasi. Casting off wealth, 
children, wives and precious possessions of various kinds, the established 
path for acquiring religious merit and the sacred agni itself, King Janaka 
shaved his head and put on the garb of a sannyasi. 

His wife found him without wealth, observing the vows of a mendicant, 
resolved to abstain from inflicting any kind of injury on others. Free from 
vanity of every kind, he was prepared to subsist upon a handful of barley 
fallen from the stalk and obtained by gathering the grains from crevices in 
the field. 

Approaching her lord at a time when no one was with him, the queen, 
endowed with great strength of mind, fearlessly and in anger uttered to him 
these words full of reason: “Why have you adopted the life of a sannyasi, 
abandoning your kingdom full of wealth and corn? A handful of fallen 
barley cannot be proper for you. Your resolution does not suit your karma, 
O Rajan, for you are abandoning your great kingdom but coveting instead a 
handful of grain. With this handful of barley, how will you gratify your 
athithis, the Devas, Rishis and Pitris? Your labour is pointless. Alas, 


abandoned by all of them, you intend to lead the life of a wandering 
mendicant, O king, having cast off all action! 

Until now, you were the supporter of thousands of Brahmanas versed in 
the three Vedas, and of many others besides. How can you now want to beg 
them for your own food, renouncing your blazing prosperity, and looking 
around like a dog for its meagre pickings? Today, your mother has lost a 
son and your wife, the princess of Kosala, is a widow. These helpless 
Kshatriyas, expectant of fruit and religious merit, depend upon you, and 
have all their hopes set on you. By killing their hope, to what regions will 
you go, O king, especially when moksha is uncertain and creatures are 
dependent on karma? Sinful as you are, you have neither this world nor the 
other, for you wish to live abandoning your wife. 

Why do you lead a life of a sannyasi, abstaining from your karma, 
abandoning garlands and perfumes and ornaments and robes of different 
kinds? Once you were a large and sacred lake for all creatures, a mighty 
tree worthy of adoration and granting its shelter to all. Alas, how can you 
wait upon and worship others? If even an elephant desists from all work, 
packs of carnivores and innumerable worms would devour it. What then 
can be said of you in this state? 

How can your heart be set on a mode of life which recommends an 
earthen pot and a triple-headed stick, forces one to abandon his very clothes 
and permits the acceptance of only a handful of barley? You say that your 
kingdom and a handful of barley are the same to you; why then do you 
abandon the first? If, again, a handful of barley becomes an object of 
attachment with you, then your original resolution of renouncing everything 
fails. 

If you live up to your resolution of renouncing everything, what am I to 
you and you to me, and what is your grace to me? If you want to be happy, 
then rule this earth! Those who wish for happiness, but are poor, destitute 
and abandoned by friends, may adopt renunciation. But he who imitates 
such men by giving up palatial mansions, beds and chariots, robes and 
ornaments, does so improperly indeed! One always accepts gifts made by 
others, another always gives gifts. You know the difference between the 
two, but who, indeed, of these two should be considered the superior? If a 
gift be made to one who always accepts gifts, or is proud, that gift becomes 
useless, like clarified butter poured upon a forest fire. As a fire, O Rajan, 


never dies till it has consumed all that has been cast into it, even so a beggar 
can never be silenced until he receives alms. 

In this world, the food that is given by a charitable man is the sure 
support of the pious. If, therefore, the king does not give food, where will 
the pious go who seek salvation? Those who have food in their houses are 
grihastas, and they support sannyasis. Since life flows from food, the giver 
of food is the giver of life. Leaving the life of a grihasta, the sannyasis 
depend upon the very varna from where they come. By doing so, these self- 
restrained men acquire and enjoy fame and power. 

A man does not become a sannyasi by merely renouncing his 
possessions, or adopting a life dependent on charity. Only he who 
renounces the possessions and pleasures of the world with a sincere mind is 
a true sannyasi. Unattached at heart, though attached in outward 
appearance, standing aloof from the world, having broken all his bonds, and 
regarding friend and foe equally, such a man, O king, is regarded to be free! 

Having shaved their heads clean and putting on the ochre robe, men 
may be seen to adopt vanaprastha, but in fact they are bound by many ties 
and ever on the lookout for useless wealth. Those who, after casting off the 
three Vedas, their natural occupations and their children, adopt a life of 
mendicancy by taking up the triple-headed crutch and the brown robe, are 
really fools. 

Understand, O Rajan, that without having shed anger and other faults, 
adopting the ochre robe is only to earn sustenance. Those with clean-shaven 
heads who have set up the banner of virtue have just this objective in life. 
Therefore, O king, keeping your passions under control, do you win regions 
of bliss hereafter by supporting the truly pious amongst men of matted 
locks or clean-shaven heads, naked or clad in rags, skins or ochre robes. 
Who is there more virtuous than he who maintains his sacred fire, who 
performs sacrifices with gifts of animals and dakshina, and who practises 
charity day and night?” 

Arjuna continues, “We regard King Janaka to be a gyani in this world. 
Even he became confused, in this matter of the meaning of dharma. Do not 
yield to bewilderment! This is the way that those who practise charity 
observe the duties of grihasta. By abstaining from violence of all kinds, by 
casting off desire and wrath, by being engaged in protecting all creatures, 
by observing the excellent dharma of dana and, lastly, by cherishing 
superiors and the elderly, we will succeed in attaining the regions of 


happiness to which we aspire. By duly gratifying gods, guests, and all 
creatures, by worshipping Brahmanas, and by truthfulness of speech, we 
will certainly attain realms of bliss.’” 


CANTO 19 


¢ eye udhishtira says, ‘I am conversant with both the Vedas and the 

scriptures that lead to the attainment of Brahman. In the Vedas 
there are principles of both kinds—those that instill action and those that 
teach renunciation of karma. The shastras are confusing but I know their 
well-reasoned conclusions and the truth that is in the mantras. You know 
only weapons and the ways of Kshatriyas, and do not truly understand the 
meaning of the scriptures. 

If you knew your dharma, you would understand that even one with the 
clearest insight into the meaning of the scriptures and the truths of religion, 
should not address such words to me. However, whatever you said out of 
brotherly love was proper. I am thankful to you for that, O Arjuna! 

No one in the three worlds is equal to you in all the ways of battle and 
in the diverse skills of the way of karma. You can surely speak of the 
subtleties connected with these subjects, nuances that are impenetrable to 
others. But, O Dhananjaya, it is not fitting for you to doubt my intelligence. 
You know the science of war, but you have never waited upon the aged and 
do not know the decisions arrived at by those who have studied the subject 
both in brief and at length. Even intelligent men seeking salvation arrive at 
the conclusion that between tapasya while living in the world, sannyasa and 
the knowledge of Brahman, the second is superior to the first, and the third 
to the second. 

To think that there is nothing superior to wealth is an error, and I will 
convince you of it, so that wealth may not again appear to you in that light. 


One sees all men of dharma devoted to sannyasa and the study of the Vedas. 
Since they have the merit of tapasya, the Rishis have many eternal regions 
reserved for them. Others possessed of tranquillity of soul, having no 
enemies, and dwelling in the vana, have gained Swarga through tapasya and 
study of the Vedas. By restraining desire for worldly possessions, and 
casting off that darkness born of folly, pious men go northward by luminous 
paths to the realms kept for practisers of tyaga. 

The lunar regions, the path of the south that leads to regions of light, are 
kept for men devoted to action. Those who are subject to samsara, to birth 
and death, attain these. However, the end which those who desire salvation 
have before their eyes is indescribable. Yoga is the best means for attaining 
it. 

I cannot explain it easily to you. The gyanis live, reflecting on the 
scriptures from a desire to identify what is unreal. But they are often led 
astray in the belief that the object of their search exists in this and that. 
Having mastered the Vedas, the Aranyakas, and the other scriptures, they 
miss the Real, like men failing to find solid timber in an uprooted banana 
plant. 

Some of them, disbelieving in its unity, regard the Atman that dwells in 
this physical frame, consisting of the five elements, to be possessed of the 
attributes of desire and aversion and others. Incapable of being seen by the 
eye, exceedingly subtle and inexpressible through words, the Atman 
revolves in a round of re-births among the creatures of the earth, keeping 
before it that which is the root of karma. 

Having made the Atman, which is the spring of every kind of 
blessedness, advance towards itself, having restrained all desires of the 
mind, and having cast off all kinds of action, one may become perfectly 
independent and happy. When such a path trodden by the righteous exists 
and it is attainable through gyana why, O Arjuna, do you laud wealth which 
is full of every kind of calamity? 

Men of olden times who were conversant with the shastras, who were 
always engaged in distributing gifts, sacrifice and action, were of this 
opinion, O Bhaarata! There are some fools who, accomplished in the 
science of debate, deny the existence of the Atman, based on the strength of 
their convictions of a previous life. It is very difficult to make them accept 
this truth about final emancipation and moksha. 


Those wicked men, though possessed of great learning, travel all over 
the world making empty speeches in assemblies and courts, and deprecating 
the true doctrine of Mukti. O Partha, who else will succeed in 
understanding that which we do not understand? Indeed, since these men 
cannot understand the true meaning of the scriptures, they cannot know 
those wise and pious men who are truly great and who know the shastras 
deeply. 

O son of Kunti, men who know the truth obtain Brahman through 
asceticism and intelligence, and great happiness by renunciation.” 


CANTO 20 


V aisampayana said, “After Yudhishtira stops, the great Rishi 

Devasthana says eloquently and reasonably to the king, ‘Phalguna 
told you that there is nothing superior to wealth. I will discuss this subject 
with you. Listen to me with undivided attention. 

O Ajatasatru, you have righteously won the earth. Having won her, it 
does not become you, O king, to abandon her without cause. Four asramas 
of life are indicated in the Vedas, which you will duly pass through, one 
after another. At present, you should perform great sacrifices with lavish 
gifts. Among the very Rishis, some engage themselves in the tapasya 
represented by Vedic study, and some in that presented by gyana. O 
Bhaarata, you must know that action possesses these very sannyasis. 

The Vaikhanasas preach that the man who does not seek wealth is 
superior to him that seeks it. I believe that he who follows this principle 
makes a grave mistake. Men collect diverse things for performing yagnas, 
simply because the Vedas require it. Tainted by his lack of understanding, 
he who gives away wealth to the undeserving, rather than to the deserving, 
does not know that he incurs the very sin of killing an unborn. 

The exercise of the dharma of daana after discerning the deserving from 
the undeserving is not easy. The Supreme Ordainer created wealth for 
sacrifice, and created man to husband this wealth, and to perform sacrifice. 
For this reason the whole of one’s wealth should be applied to yagnas. 
Pleasure would be a natural consequence. 


Possessed of prodigious energy, Indra, by performing diverse yagnas 
with lavish gifts, surpassed all the Devas. Becoming their king, he shines in 
Swarga. Everything should be applied to sacrifices. 

Clad in deer-skin, the high-souled Mahadeva, having poured his own 
self as a religious offering in the yagna called Sarva, became the first among 
the gods and, surpassing all creatures in the universe, shines in radiant 
glory. 

King Marutta, the son of Avikshit, with his enormous wealth 
vanquished Sakra himself, the lord of the Devas. In the great sacrifice he 
performed, all the vessels were of gold, and Sree herself came to it. You 
have heard that the great king Harischandra, having performed yagnas, 
earned great merit and great happiness. Though a mortal man, he 
vanquished Sakra with his wealth. For this reason everything should be 
applied to sacrifice.’” 


CANTO 21 


¢ “T) evasthana says, ‘Let me tell you in this context an old story 
about the sermon Brihaspati gave Indra at his request. 

Brihaspati said, “Contentment is the highest heaven, the highest bliss, 
and there is nothing higher than it. When a man withdraws from all his 
desires, like a tortoise drawing in all it limbs, the natural splendour of his 
Soul soon shows itself. When one does not fear any creature or frighten any 
creature, when one conquers one’s desire and aversion, then they say one 
sees one’s Soul. When one seeks to injure nobody and cherishes no desire, 
in word and thought, they say one attains Brahman.” 

Thus, O Kuntiputra, men obtain corresponding fruits, whatever religion 
they follow. Awaken yourself to this thought, O Bhaarata! Some praise 
quietude, others action, while there are others who extol contemplation, and 
others again who advocate both quiescence and action. 

Some praise sacrifice, others, renunciation; some praise charity, others, 
acceptance; and some, abandoning everything, live in silent meditation. 
Some praise sovereignty and the cherishing of subjects, after enslaving and 
killing foes, while some are for passing their days in seclusion. Observing 
all this, the learned conclude that only that religion which consists in not 
injuring any creature is worthy of the approval of the righteous. Abstention 
from injury, truthfulness of speech, justice, compassion, self-restraint, 
having children by one’s own wives, good nature, modesty, patience —the 
practice of all these is the best religion, as told by Swayambhuva Manu 
himself. O son of Kunti, observe this dharma with care. 


The Kshatriya who, conversant with the truths of Rajadharma, the royal 
dharma, takes sovereignty upon himself, restraining his soul at all times, 
regarding as equal that which is dear and that which is not, and subsisting 
upon the remains of sacrificial feasts, who restrains the wicked and 
cherishes the righteous, who obliges his subjects to tread the path of virtue 
and who himself treads that path, who at last hands over his crown to his 
son and retires to the forest as a sannyasi, to subsist on the produce of the 
wilderness and to live according to the laws of the Vedas, having cast off all 
idleness, is sure to obtain the most excellent fruits in both this world and the 
next, for he conducts himself in conformity with the well-known duties of 
kings. 

The Moksha of which you speak is exceedingly difficult to gain, and its 
pursuit involves countless difficulties. Those who observe their svadharma 
and practise charity and ascetic penances, who are compassionate, free from 
desire and anger, and who engage in ruling their subjects with 
righteousness, protecting cows and Brahmanas, attain a lofty end. The 
Rudras with the Vasus, the Adityas, the Sadhyas and hosts of kings adopt 
this dharma, O Parantapa, and by practising it with care, they reach 
Swarga.’” 


CANTO 22 


V aisampayana said, “After this, Arjuna once more says to his eldest 

brother, King Yudhishtira, of unfading glory but of doleful heart, ‘O 
Vidheyajala, having through the practice of Kshatriya dharma obtained 
sovereignty that is so difficult to acquire, and having conquered all your 
enemies, why do you burn in grief? 

Rajan, for Kshatriyas, death in battle is regarded as more meritorious 
than the performance of all the diverse sacrifices. The shastras that lay 
down the dharma of Kshatriyas declare that tapasya and renunciation are 
the dharma of Brahmanas. Even this is the law for the two varnas in the 
next world. Indeed, O powerful one, death in battle is for Kshatriyas; their 
dharma is exceedingly fierce and always connected with the use of 
weapons, and the shastras decree that when the time comes, they should 
perish by weapons in the battlefield. 

The life of even a Brahmana, O king, who lives in the observance of the 
Kshatriya dharma, cannot be faulted, for Kshatriyas also spring from 
Brahmanas. Neither renunciation, nor sacrifice, nor penances, nor 
dependence on the wealth of others is for Kshatriyas. You, Bharatarishabha, 
know all your duties and, as a wise king skilled in all karma, can distinguish 
what is right and what is wrong. Cast off this gloom brought about by 
repentance, and with a strong will, prepare yourself for action! 

The heart, especially of a Kshatriya, is as hard as the vajra. Through the 
exercise of the Kshatriya dharma, you have vanquished your enemies and 
acquired an empire, which is now peaceful. Now conquer your soul, O ruler 


of men, engage yourself in the performance of sacrifices and in the practice 
of charity. 

Indra himself, though a Brahmana, became a Kshatriya in his actions 
and battled with his sinful kinsfolk, eight hundred and ten times. His actions 
were commendable and worthy of praise, and as a result, he became the 
king of the Devas. Perform sacrifices with lavish gifts, just as Indra did, O 
Rajan, and liberate yourself from your fever. 

Do not, Bharatarishabha, grieve like this for what is past. The slain men 
have attained Swarga, purified by weapons in accordance to the laws of the 
Kshatriya dharma. That which has happened, had to happen, and Destiny, O 
Purushavyaghra, cannot be resisted.’” 


CANTO 23 


V aisampayana said, “Thus addressed by the wavy-haired Arjuna, 
Yudhishtira remains silent. Then the island-born Vyasa says, ‘The 
words of Arjuna, O amiable Yudhishtira, are true. The highest dharma, as 
declared by the scriptures, depends on the dharma of a grihasta. You know 
all your duties, so practise the dharma of grihasta that is prescribed for you. 

A life of retirement in the forest, casting off garhapatya, is not for you. 
The Devas, Pitris, athithis and dasas, all depend for their sustenance upon a 
man leading the life of a grihasta; you should support all of them, O lord of 
the earth! Men leading domestic lives support birds and animals and various 
other creatures; so is grihasta superior to all the other asramas, and is the 
most difficult of all the four stages of life. 

Live this most difficult life of a grihasta then, O Kaunteya, as you know 
all the Vedas well and have earned great ascetic merit. You must bear like 
an ox the burden of your ancestral kingdom, O Rajan. 

To obtain success Brahmanas should strive to the best of their ability 
after tapasya, tyaga, kshama, gyana, sannyasa, keeping the senses under 
control, dhyana, living in solitude, contentment and knowledge of Brahman. 

Let me now remind you of the duties of Kshatriyas, which you already 
know. As we are told, sacrifice, learning, exertion, ambition, wielding the 
danda, fierceness, protection of subjects, knowledge of the Vedas, practice 
of all kinds of penance, goodness of conduct, acquisition of wealth, and 
gifts to deserving persons—it is these, well performed and acquired by 
Kshatriyas, that secure for them both this world and the next. 


Amongst these, O son of Kunti, wielding the rod of punishment is the 
foremost. Strength must always abide in a Kshatriya, and upon strength 
depends punishment. These duties that I have mentioned are, O king, the 
principal ones for Kshatriyas and contribute greatly to their success. 

Brihaspati, in this connection, sang this verse: “Like a snake devouring 
a mouse, the earth devours a king who prefers peace and a Brahmana who 
prefers the life of a grihasta.” 

One again hears that only by wielding the rod of chastisement did the 
Rajarishi Sudyumna find the highest success, like Daksha himself, the son 
of Prachetas..’ 

Yudhishtira then asks, ‘O holy one, by what deeds did Sudyumna, the 
lord of the earth, obtain the highest success? I want to hear the story of this 
king.’ 

Vyasa replies, “There were two brothers—Sankha and Likhita, of high 
austerities. The brothers had separate houses, both of which were beautiful. 
Situated on the bank of the Bahuda river, these dwellings were always 
adorned with trees laden with flowers and fruits. One day, Likhita visited 
his brother Sankha when he was not at home. Arriving at the hermitage of 
his brother, Likhita plucked many ripe fruits and began to eat them without 
any qualms of conscience. While he was still eating, Sankha returned home. 

Sankha asked his brother, “From where have you plucked these fruits, 
and why are you eating them?” 

Approaching his elder brother and greeting him, Likhita smilingly 
replied, “I have plucked them from here.” 

Filled with great rage, Sankha told him, “You have committed theft by 
taking these fruits without permission. Go to the king and confess what you 
have done. Tell him that you have committed an offence by taking what was 
not given to you and, let him, observing his Kshatriya dharma, punish you 
as a thief.” 

The highly blessed Likhita of rigid vows, at the command of his 
brother, went to King Sudyumna. Hearing from his gate-keepers that 
Likhita had come, Sudyumna, with his counsellors, received the sage. 
Meeting him, the king said to that noble one conversant with dharma, “Tell 
me, O revered one, the reason for your visit. You may consider it done!” 

The Rishi said to Sudyumna, “Promise first that you will grant what I 
ask. And you must keep your word. O bull among men, I ate some fruits 


that my elder brother had not given me. Do you, O Rajan, punish me for it 
without delay.” 

Sudyumna answered, “If the king be regarded as competent to wield the 
rod of danda, he should be regarded as equally competent to pardon. O 
Anuvrata, consider yourself pardoned. Tell me now what other wishes you 
have, and I will certainly do what you want.” 

Vyasa continues, “Thus honoured by the high-souled king, the 
Maharishi Likhita did not ask any other favour. Then the ruler of the earth 
commanded that both his hands be cut off and, after bearing the 
punishment, the Rishi went away. Returning to his brother Sankha, Likhita, 
in great affection, said, “You must now pardon this wretch, whom you have 
punished as he deserved.” 

Sankha said, “I am not angry with you, nor have you injured me, O 
foremost of all persons, O true knower of dharma. Your virtue, however, 
had suffered a setback. I have rescued you from that plight. Go without 
delay to the Bahuda river, gratify the Devas, the Rishis and the Pitris with 
offerings of water, and never again set your heart on paapa.” 

Obeying Sankha, Likhita performed his rites in the sacred stream and 
was about to begin the water-rite when two hands, like two lotuses in 
beauty, appeared at the extremities of his stumps. Filled with wonder, he 
came back to his brother and showed him the two hands. Sankha explained, 
“I accomplished this through my tapasya, so do not be surprised. 
Providence has been the instrument here.” 

Likhita then asked, “O you of great splendour, when such was the 
power of your tapasya, why did you not purify me at first?” 

Sankha replied, “I could not do otherwise, for I am not your punisher. 
The king who punished you has himself been purified, like you, along with 
the Pitris!” 

Vyasa continues, ‘This king, O eldest son of Pandu, became renowned 
for this deed and gained the highest success, like the lord Daksha himself! 
Even this is the dharma of Kshatriyas, the ruling of subjects. Any other 
path, O monarch, would be regarded as a wrong one for them. Do not give 
way to grief. O best of all men, conversant with dharma, listen to the 
beneficial words of your brother. Wielding the danda, O Rajan, is the duty 
of kings, not shaving the head!’” 


CANTO 24 


V aisampayana said, “Once more the great sage Krishna-Dwaipayana 

tells Ajatasatru, the son of Kunti, “Let these great Maharathas of 
abundant energy of mind, your brothers, O Yudhishtira, obtain the wishes 
that they cherished during your vanavasa. Rule the earth, O son of Pritha, 
like another Yayati, the son of Nahusha. 

Misery was yours while you lived in the forest as ascetics. That misery 
has ended, O Purushavyaghra. Enjoy happiness, therefore, for some years. 
Then, O Bhaarata, having earned and enjoyed dharma, artha and kama for a 
goodly period with your brothers, you may seek vanavasa. 

Be freed first from the debt you owe to sannyasis, to the Pitris, and to 
the Devas. Later, O son of Kunti, you can practise all the other asramas that 
follow the grihasta. Perform the yagnas of Sarvamedha and Aswamedha, O 
Rajan, and you will attain Swarga hereafter. Include your brothers also in 
great yagnas, with plentiful gifts for Brahmanas, and you will acquire great 
fame. 

There is a saying, O Naravyaghra, to which you should hearken, for by 
living according to it, Kuruttama, you will not swerve from dharma. Only 
those men, Yudhishtira, who act like robbers are able to influence kings to 
follow the career of war and victory. The king who, guided by 
considerations of place and time and moved by an understanding of the 
scriptures, pardons even a number of robbers, incurs no paapa. The king 
who, realizing his tribute of a sixth, fails to protect his kingdom, acquires a 
fourth part of the sins of his kingdom. 


Listen to how a king will not deviate from dharma. By violating the 
scriptures one incurs sin, while by obeying them one may live fearlessly. 
Guided by an understanding based upon the scriptures and disregarding lust 
and anger, the king who behaves impartially, like a father towards all his 
subjects, never incurs sin, O you of great splendour! If, due to misfortune, a 
king fails to do his duty, such failure will not be called a transgression. By 
force and policy the king should put down his enemies. He must not suffer 
sin to be perpetrated in his kingdom but should cause dharma to be 
practised. 

Brave and honourable men who are virtuous, erudite Brahmanas who 
have mastered Vedic texts and rites, and men of wealth, should especially 
be protected. In judging legal suits and in carrying out religious activities, 
only the most learned men should be employed. 

A prudent king will never repose his confidence upon one individual, 
however accomplished. The king who does not protect his subjects, whose 
passions are ungovernable, who is full of vanity, who is arrogant and 
malicious, is a culpable and tyrannical king. If his subjects perish from want 
of protection and the gods punish them, if robbers ruin them, the sin of all 
this besmirches the king himself. There is no sin, O Yudhishtira, in 
undertaking a task wholeheartedly, after full deliberation and consultation 
with capable advisors. Our tasks fail or succeed through destiny. If the king 
makes an effort, sin would not touch him. 

I will tell you, O tiger among kings, the story of an ancient monarch 
called Hayagriva, heroic and of unstained deeds, who was defeated and 
killed after having himself slain a large number of enemies in battle, while 
he had no follower by his side. He did all that was necessary to keep his 
enemies in check and to protect all his subjects. Hayagriva acquired great 
fame from the battles he fought. Grieviously injured by robbers whom he 
boldly faced, the Mahatman Hayagriva, ever attentive to his dharma, lost 
his life in battle and, having achieved the object of his life, now enjoys 
great bliss in Swarga. 

The bow was his sacrificial stake and the bowstring was the rope to bind 
victims. Arrows constituted the smaller ladle and the sword the large one, 
and blood was the clarified butter that he poured onto the sacrifice of battle. 
His chariot was the altar, the wrath he felt in battle was the fire, and the four 
excellent steeds yoked to his ratha were the four Hotris. 


Having poured upon that sacrificial fire first his enemies as offerings, 
and then his own life-breath at the completion of the sacrifice, this bold lion 
among kings, Hayagriva, was freed from sin, and now sports in Devaloka. 
The high-souled and self-renouncing Hayagriva of potent mind, the 
performer of yagnas, protected his kingdom through good governance and 
intelligence, and filled all the worlds with his fame. He received merit from 
the performance of sacrifices and every kind of punya connected with 
human affairs. He wielded the danda, the rod of punishment, and ruled the 
earth with vigour and without pride. For this the virtuous Hayagriva, 
practising renunciation actuated by his faith, and full of gratitude, left this 
world and won the regions that are reserved for the intelligent and the wise, 
for those that follow the approved customs and conduct and are always 
prepared to die in battle. 

Having studied the Vedas as well as other scriptures, having ruled his 
kingdom ably and caused all the four varnas to adhere to their respective 
dharmas, Hayagriva now rejoices in Devaloka. Having won many battles, 
cherished his subjects, drunk the soma rasa in sacrifices and gratified the 
foremost of Brahmanas with gifts, and having judiciously wielded the rod 
of chastisement over those under his sway, this king, at last, casting away 
his life in battle, dwells happily in heaven. 

His life was worthy of every praise, and learned and honest men extol 
it. Crowned with success, this Mahatman, a king of virtuous deeds, won 
Swarga and acquired the realms reserved for great heroes.’” 


CANTO 25 


V aisampayana said, “Hearing the words of the island-born Rishi and 

seeing Dhananjaya angry, Yudhishtira, the son of Kunti, salutes 
Vyasa and says, “This earthly sovereignty and its enjoyment fail to give any 
joy to my heart. On the other hand, this poignant grief at the loss of my 
kinsmen is eating away its core. Hearing the lamentations of these women 
who have lost their heroic husbands and children, I fail to find peace, O 
sage!’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Thus addressed, the virtuous Vyasa, 
foremost of all men conversant with Yoga, possessed of great wisdom and 
intimately acquainted with the Vedas, says to Yudhisthira, “No man can 
acquire anything by his own actions, neither through sacrifices and worship, 
nor by giving anything to a fellow man. Man acquires everything in the 
course of Time, as intended by Brahma. If Time is unfavourable, men 
cannot by mere intelligence or study of the scriptures acquire any earthly 
possession, while sometimes an ignorant fool succeeds in winning wealth. 
Time is the effective way for the accomplishment of all karma. 

During times of adversity, neither science, nor prayers, nor 
medicaments, yield any result. In times of prosperity, however, those very 
things, properly applied, become successful and bear fruit. By Time the 
winds blow violently, the clouds become rain-charged, tanks become 
adorned with lotuses of different kinds, and trees in the forest become 
decked with flowers. By Time nights become dark or lit, and the moon 
becomes full. If the Time has not come, trees do not bear flowers and fruits, 


the currents of rivers do not gather force, and birds, snakes, deer, elephants 
and other animals never become excited. 

If the Time has not come, women do not conceive. It is with Time that 
winter and summer and the monsoon come. If the Time for it has not come, 
no one is born and no one dies; the infant does not acquire power of speech 
and the child does not grow to youth. It is with Time that the seed sown 
puts forth its sprouts. 

If the Time has not come, the sun does not appear above the horizon nor 
does it repair to the Asta hills; the moon does not wax or wane, nor the 
ocean, with its high billows, rise and ebb. In this connection one remembers 
the old story told, O Yudhishtira, by King Senajit in grief. The irresistible 
course of Time affects all mortals; all earthly things, ripened by Time, come 
to perish. 

Some men, O king, slay others, and others again slay the slayers. This is 
the language of the world. In reality, no one slays and no one is slain: it is 
only a matter of perception. The truth is that, as ordained, the birth and 
death of all creatures must come to pass and are a result of their very nature. 

Upon the loss of one’s wealth or the death of one’s wife, son or father, 
one cries out saying “Alas, what grief!” and dwelling upon this sorrow 
always enhances it. Why do you, like a foolish man, indulge in grief? Why 
do you grieve for them who are beyond grief? Indulgence increases grief, 
just as fear grows if one yields to it. 

This body, or anything on this earth, is not mine, for the things of this 
earth belong as much to others as to me. The wise, seeing this, do not allow 
themselves to be deluded, for there are thousands of causes for sorrow, and 
hundreds of causes for joy. These daily affect the ignorant, but not the wise. 
These, in course of time become objects of affection or aversion and, 
appearing as bliss or sorrow, revolve as if on a wheel and affect all living 
creatures. There is only sorrow in this world but no happiness, and it is for 
this reason that only sorrow is felt. 

Indeed, sorrow springs from the affliction called desire, and happiness 
springs from the affliction called sorrow. Sorrow comes after happiness, and 
happiness after sorrow, and one does not always suffer sorrow or always 
enjoy happiness. Happiness always ends in sorrow, and sometimes proceeds 
from sorrow itself. He, therefore, who desires eternal happiness, must 
abandon both. Since sorrow must arise upon the cessation of happiness, and 
happiness upon the conclusion of sorrow, one should cast off like a snake- 


bitten limb that from which one experiences sorrow or heart-burning, that 
which it nurtures or which is the root of one’s anxiety. 

Be it happiness or sorrow, be it agreeable or disagreeable, whatever 
comes should be borne with an unaffected heart. O agreeable one, if you 
abstain in even a slight measure from doing what is pleasing to your wives 
and children, you will then know who is whose, and for what reason. Those 
who are very stupid or those who are masters of their souls enjoy happiness 
here, while those who occupy an intermediate place suffer misery. This, O 
Yudhishtira, is what was said by Senajit of great wisdom, the king who 
knew what is good and bad in this world, with dharma, and with happiness 
and misery. 

A man can never be happy if other people’s sorrows affect him. There is 
no end to grief, and it arises from happiness itself. Happiness and misery, 
prosperity and adversity, gain and loss, death and life, in their turn, affect all 
creatures. For this reason the wise man with an unagitated soul will neither 
be elated with joy nor be depressed with sorrow. To engage in battle is the 
yagna for a king; a due observance of the science of punishment is his yoga; 
and the gift of wealth in sacrifices, in the form of dakshina, is his 
renunciation. All these should be regarded as acts that sanctify him. 

By governing the kingdom with intelligence and policy, casting off 
pride, performing sacrifices, and looking at everything and all persons with 
kindness and impartiality, a high-souled king sports in Devaloka after death. 
By winning wars, protecting his kingdom, drinking the soma rasa, 
improving the lot of his subjects, judiciously wielding the danda, and 
casting off his body at last in battle, a king enjoys happiness in Swarga. 

Having studied all the Vedas and the other scriptures, having protected 
the kingdom and caused all four varnas to adhere to their respective duties, 
a king becomes sanctified and finally finds and dwells in Swarga. He is the 
best of kings whose conduct is applauded by the inhabitants of cities and 
country, counsellors and friends even after his death.’” 


CANTO 26 


V aisampayana said, “Now the noble Yudhishtira reasons with Arjuna, 

saying, ‘You think, O Partha, that there is nothing superior to 
wealth, and that the poor man can neither have heaven, nor happiness, nor 
the fulfillment of his wishes. This is not true, for we see many men crowned 
with success through sacrifice in the shape of Vedic study, while many 
sages have with tapasya acquired Swarga. 

O Dhananjaya, the gods regard as Brahmanas those who observe the 
practices of the Rishis by adopting brahmacharya, and who become 
knowers of dharma. O son of Pandu, you should always regard as truly 
virtuous those Rishis devoted to the study of the Vedas and those devoted to 
the pursuit of true knowledge. 

All our actions depend upon those who devote themselves to the 
acquisition of gyana. O Bhaarata, we know this to be the opinion of the 
Vaikhanasas, and that the Ajas, the Prishnis, the Sikatas, the Arunas, and the 
Kitavas have all gone to heaven through the merit of Vedic study. O 
Dhananjaya, the Vedas prescribe that it is through battle, by studying the 
scriptures, by sacrifices, and by the restraint of passion, all arduous duties, 
that one goes to heaven by Dakshinayana, the southern path of the sun, 
which, as I told you, belongs to such men. Those who devote themselves to 
Yoga travel by Uttarayana, the northern path, to eternal and bright regions. 

Of the two, those conversant with the Puranas laud the northern path. 
You should know that one acquires heaven through serenity, and that from 
tranquillity springs great happiness. There is nothing higher than serenity. 


For the Yogin who has controlled anger and joy, contentment is his triumph. 
In this connection, one quotes the discourse by Yayati. Listening to this 
discourse, one may succeed in withdrawing all desires, like a tortoise 
drawing all his limbs into his shell. 

When one does not fear anything, and no one and nothing is afraid of 
one, when one cherishes no desire, when one bears no hate, then one attains 
the state of Brahman. When one does not sin against any creature, in act, 
thought or word, one attains Brahman. When one has controlled one’s pride 
and folly, and has withdrawn oneself from all attachments, it is then that the 
pious man of shining soul becomes fit for attaining salvation and the 
annihilation of separate existence. 

Listen now to me with concentrated attention, O son of Pritha. Some 
desire virtue, some good conduct, and some wealth. One may desire wealth 
as a means for acquiring virtue, but it would be better to abandon such 
desires, since there are many hazards attached to wealth and consequently, 
to the religious deeds that one performs with wealth, as we have seen with 
our own eyes. You must understand that he who desires wealth will find it 
very difficult to abandon it later. Good deeds are very rare in those who 
amass riches, for wealth can never be acquired without injuring others and, 
when obtained, it brings numerous troubles. 

A man of narrow heart, and without remorse, tempted by even a little 
wealth, will commit acts of aggression towards others, unconscious all the 
while of the sin of Brahmahatya that he incurs by his karma. After 
acquiring wealth with so much difficulty, such men will burn with grief if 
they have to give a portion of it to their servants, grief equal to what they 
would feel if they were actually robbed by thieves. If one does not part with 
one’s wealth, disgrace becomes one’s lot, while he who has no wealth never 
becomes the subject of censure. 

Withdrawn from all attachments, such a man can become happy in all 
respects by supporting life upon what little he may obtain as alms. The 
acquisition of wealth cannot give anyone happiness. In this connection 
those who know the ancient scriptures recite certain verses relating to 
sacrifices. 

The Creator created wealth for the sake of sacrifices, and created man 
for protecting that wealth and performing yagnas. For this, all wealth should 
be applied to yagnas, and it is not proper to spend it for the gratification of 
desire or enjoyment. 


Understand, O son of Kunti, you that are the foremost of all wealthy 
persons, that the Creator confers wealth upon mortals for the sake of 
yagnas. It is for this that the wise think that wealth does not belong to 
anybody on earth. One should perform yagnas with it and give it away with 
a trustful heart. One should gift away what one has acquired, and not waste 
or spend it in gratifying one’s desires or for enjoyment. What use is there in 
amassing more and more wealth when such proper objects exist on which to 
spend it? 

Men of little understanding who give away wealth to those who have 
swerved from the duties of their order, have to subsist hereafter for a 
hundred years on excrement and dirt. Men give to the undeserving and not 
to the deserving, unable to discriminate between the two. For this reason the 
practice of the virtue of charity is difficult, and even when acquired, these 
two faults connected with wealth remain.’” 


CANTO 27 


6 eae udhishtira says, ‘Grief does not forsake my wretched self as a 

result of the deaths in battle of young Abhimanyu, the sons of 
Draupadi, Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, King Drupada, Vasusena who knew 
dharma well, the royal Dhrishtaketu, and of numerous other kings hailing 
from diverse lands. I am a slayer of kinsmen, inordinately covetous of 
kingdom and an exterminator of my own race. 

Alas, I have cut down in battle, through lust of sovereignty, this Ganga’s 
son upon whose breast and limbs I used to play as a boy. It lacerated my 
heart to see Sikhandin assailing our grandfather, a lion among men, to see 
him trembling and reeling from Partha’s shafts like thunderbolts, and to 
watch his tall form, pierced all over with blazing arrows, turn weak like an 
aged lion. It stunned me to see this destroyer of hostile chariots collapse 
like a mountain summit and fall in his own ratha with his face turned 
towards the east. 

This Kurusthama who, bow and shafts in hand, waged a fierce battle for 
many days with Rama himself of Bhrigu’s line, on the field sanctified by 
Kuru, this son of Ganga, this hero who, at Varanasi, in order to take brides 
for Hastinapura, challenged to battle on a single ratha the assembled 
Kshatriyas of the world, and who burnt that irresistible and foremost of 
kings, Ugrayudha, with the energy of his weapons—alas, I caused this 
Kshatriya to be slain in battle. 

This hero, knowing full well that Sikhandin, prince of Panchala, was his 
nemesis, nevertheless refrained from killing him with his arrows. Alas, 


Arjuna slew that magnanimous warrior. O best of sages, my heart burned at 
that moment when I saw our Pitamaha stretched out on the earth and 
covered in blood. Alas, for lust of a kingdom, I am now the slayer of 
reverend elders, a perfect fool for causing the death of one who protected 
and nurtured us when we were children. All for the sake of a sovereignty 
that will last but a few days. 

I approached our guru, the great archer Drona, adored by all the kings, 
and gave him false news of the death of his son. The memory of this sears 
my limbs. The Acharya said to me, “Tell me truly, O king, whether my son 
still lives.” Expecting truth from me, the Brahmana asked me of all others 
but I lied to him, though silently, saying the word ‘elephant’. I am culpable 
for coveting the kingdom and murdering my revered elders, for, throwing 
off the mantle of truth which everyone believed me to wear, I told my guru 
on the battlefield that we had killed Aswatthaman when, in fact, we had 
only slain an elephant of that name. 

To what hell will I go, having perpetrated such ignominious deeds? I 
also caused my eldest brother Karna to be slain, that awesome warrior who 
never retreated from battle. Who is there more sinful than I? Through greed 
I caused the adolescent Abhimanyu, that Kshatriya who resembled a lion 
born in the hills, to break into the chakra vyuha that Drona himself 
protected. I am like one guilty of infanticide. Since then I have not been 
able to look in the face Arjuna or the lotus-eyed Krishna. I grieve also for 
Draupadi, bereft of her five sons like the earth bereft of her five mountains. 
I am a great offender, a great sinner and a destroyer of the earth. 

Without rising from this seat that I now occupy, I will starve myself to 
death. I, the killer of my guru and exterminator of my race, will sit here in 
the observance of the Praya vrata, in order that I may not be reborn in any 
of the other order of beings. I will forgo food and drink and, without 
moving from this place, O great ascetic, I will dry up my precious life- 
breaths. I beg you humbly to grant me leave to do this and thereafter go 
wherever you please. Let everyone grant me leave to cast off this body of 
mine.” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Restraining Pritha’s son, who uttered these 
words stricken by sorrow on account of his kinsmen’s deaths, Vyasa, the 
best of Rishis, says to him, ‘This cannot be! It does not become you, O 
monarch, to indulge in such an excess of grief. I will repeat what I have said 
earlier. All this is Destiny, O mighty one. Without doubt, all creatures that 


are born display at first a combination of diverse materials and forces which 
at the end, dissolve. Like bubbles in the water they rise and disappear. 

All things held together are sure to crumble, and all things that rise must 
fall. Union ends in dissolution, and life ends in death. Idleness, though 
temporarily agreeable, ends in misery and _ skilfull labour, though 
temporarily distressing, ends in happiness. Affluence, prosperity, modesty, 
contentment and fame dwell in labour and skill, not in idleness. 

Friends are not competent to bestow happiness, nor foes competent to 
inflict misery. Similarly, wisdom does not bring wealth, nor does wealth 
bring happiness. Since the Maker has created you, O son of Kunti, to 
engage yourself in karma, and success springs from karma, it is not fitting 
for you to avoid karma, O king.’” 


CANTO 28 


V aisampayana said, “Vyasa then dispels the grief of the eldest son of 
Pandu who, burning with sorrow on account of the slaughter of his 
kinsmen, has resolved to kill himself. 

Vyasa says, ‘O Purushavyaghra, let me tell you the old story known as 
Asma’s discourse. Listen to it, O Yudhishtira! Janaka, the ruler of the 
Videhas, once filled with sorrow and grief, questioned a wise Brahmana 
named Asma to alleviate his anguish. 

Janaka asked, “How should a man who wishes his own good behave 
upon occasions such as the accession and destruction of both kinsmen and 
wealth?” 

Asma replied, “Immediately after the formation of a man’s body, joys 
and grief attach themselves to it. Either of the two can overtake the man, 
and whichever does, quickly robs him of his reason like the wind driving 
away gathering clouds. 

In times of prosperity, one thinks, ‘I am of high birth! I can do whatever 
I like! I am not an ordinary man!’ His mind becomes soaked with such 
triple vanity. Addicted to earthly enjoyments, he begins to waste the wealth 
accumulated by his ancestors. Impoverished in the course of time, he 
regards it as laudable even to appropriate what belongs to others. Like a 
hunter piercing a deer with his shafts, the king then punishes this wicked 
robber of the possessions of others, this transgressor of law and rule. Such 
men scarcely live beyond twenty or thirty years, and never attain a full 
human span of a hundred years. 


Carefully observing the behaviour of all creatures, a king should, by the 
exercise of his intelligence, apply remedies to allay the great sorrows of his 
subjects. The causes of all mental sorrow are two—delusion of the mind 
and accumulation of suffering; no third cause exists. All these diverse 
sorrows, and those arising from attachment to worldly pleasures that 
overtake man, are as follows. 

Age and Death, like a pair of wolves, devour all creatures, strong or 
weak, short or tall. No man can escape decay and death, not even the 
conqueror of the entire earth circled by the sea. Whether it is happiness or 
sorrow that comes upon creatures, it should be enjoyed or borne without 
elation or dejection, since there is no method of escape. The evils of life, O 
king, can overtake one in early, middle or old age. They can never be 
avoided, while the sources of bliss that one covets never come. The absence 
of what is agreeable, the presence of what is disagreeable, good and evil, 
bliss and sorrow, follow Destiny. The birth of creatures and their death, 
their gain and loss, are all pre-ordained. 

Even as scent, colour, taste and touch spring naturally, happiness and 
misery arise from what is pre-ordained. Fine seats, beds and vehicles, 
luxuries, drinks and food, come and go in the course of time. Even 
physicians fall ill, the strong become weak, and they who enjoy prosperity 
lose all and become indigent. The course of Time is indeed marvellous. 
High birth, health, beauty, prosperity and objects of enjoyment, all are 
gained through Destiny. The poor, although they may not desire it, have 
many children, while one sees the affluent to be childless. Astonishing is 
the course of Destiny. The evils caused by disease, fire, water, weapons, 
hunger, poison, fever, falls from high places and death overtake a man 
according to the Destiny under which he is born. 

One sees that in this world somebody without sinning suffers diverse 
ills, while another, having sinned, is not weighed down by calamity. One in 
the enjoyment of wealth perishes in his youth, while one who is poor drags 
on existence for a hundred years, worn down by decrepitude. One born to 
an ignoble race may have a very long life, while one sprung from a noble 
line may perish as quickly as an insect. In this world, it is common for 
people in affluent circumstances to have no appetite, while the poor can 
digest chips of wood. 

Impelled by destiny, the man with an evil soul, discontented with his 
condition, commits sins, saying, “I am the doer,” which he regards as being 


all for his good. The wise censure hunting, dice, women, wine, fighting, but 
we see many men possessed of extensive knowledge of the scriptures to be 
addicted to them. Objects, whether coveted or otherwise, come upon 
creatures as a result of Time’s course, for one can trace no other cause. Who 
makes and who supports air, space, fire, moon, sun, day, night, the luminous 
bodies in the firmament, rivers and mountains? Cold, heat and rain come 
one after another in the course of Time. Just so is the case with the 
happiness and misery of mankind. 

Neither medicines nor mantras can rescue the man assailed by age or 
overtaken by death. Just as two logs of wood floating on the great ocean 
come together and separate again, creatures come together and, when the 
time comes, part. Time acts equally towards men who are rich and enjoy the 
pleasures of song and dance in the company of women, and towards 
helpless men who live upon food that others give them. 

In this world one contracts a thousand kinds of relationships, such as 
mother and father, son and wife. In reality, however, whose are they and 
whose are we? No one can belong to us, nor can we belong to another. Our 
union here with wives and kinsfolk and well-wishers is like that of 
travellers at a road-side inn. 

Where am I? Where shall go? Who am I? How did I come here? For 
what and for whom do I grieve? Reflecting on these questions, one obtains 
tranquillity. Life and its conditions are constantly revolving like a wheel, 
and the companionship of those who are dear is transitory. The union with 
brother, mother, father and friend is like that of ways-farers at a sarai. 

Men of knowledge perceive the unseen next world, as if with physical 
eyes. Without disregarding the scriptures, one desirous of knowledge 
should have faith. One possessed of knowledge should perform the rites 
laid down in respect of the Pitris and the Devas, practise all religious duties, 
perform sacrifices, judiciously pursue dharma, artha and kama. 

Alas, no one understands that the world is sinking on the ocean of Time 
that is immensely deep and infested with the great crocodiles called 
decrepitude and death. We see many physicians become themselves 
afflicted, with all the members of their families, although they have 
carefully studied the science of medicine. Taking bitter and diverse kinds of 
oily medicaments no more allows them to escape death than the continents 
can escape being submerged in the ocean. 


We see age overcoming men well-versed in the arts of chemistry, 
notwithstanding chemical compounds applied judiciously, even like 
elephants breaking down trees. So, too, we see men of tapasya, devoted to 
study of the Vedas, practising charity, and frequently performing sacrifices, 
fail to escape decrepitude and death. For all creatures that have taken birth, 
neither years, nor months, nor fortnights, nor days, nor nights that have 
once passed, ever return. In due course, man, whose existence is transitory, 
is forced inevitably by Time onto this broad path that every creature 
perforce has to tread. 

Whether the body springs from the creature or the creature springs from 
the body, one’s union with wives and friends is truly like that of transients 
at a wayfarers’ lodgings. No one can obtain a lasting companionship with 
another. One cannot obtain such companionship with one’s own body: how 
then can it be had with anyone else? Where, O king, is your father today, 
and where your grandfather? You do not see them, O sinless one, and they 
do not see you! 

No person can see either heaven or hell. The scriptures, however, are 
the eyes of the virtuous. Frame your conduct, O king, according to the 
scriptures. With pure heart, one should first practise the vow of 
brahmacharya, then have children, and then perform sacrifices, to pay the 
debt one owes to the manes, the gods and men. 

A wise man, after having first kept the vow of brahmacharya, should 
perform yagnas and have children and, after casting off all anxieties of his 
heart, should pay court to heaven, this world, and his own soul. The king 
bent upon the practice of dharma, who strives judiciously to acquire Heaven 
and earth, and who takes only his share of earthly goods, wins a reputation 
that spreads over all the worlds and among all creatures, mobile and 
immobile.” 

The ruler of the Videhas, of clear understanding, having heard these 
wise words, became free from grief and, taking Asma’s leave, returned to 
his home. O Yudhishtira of unfading glory, cast off your sorrow and rise up. 
You are equal to Sakra himself. Suffer your soul to be happy: you have won 
the earth in the exercise of Kshatriya dharma, so enjoy her, O son of Kunti. 
Do not disregard my words.’” 


CANTO 29 


V aisampayana said, “Yudhishtira Dharmaputra, best of kings, remains 

silent. Pandu’s son Arjuna says to Krishna, ‘This Parantapa, 
Dharma’s son, burns with grief on account of his slaughtered kinsfolk. 
Comfort him again, O Madhava. All of us have fallen into great danger. 
You, Mahabaho, must dispel his grief.’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “The lotus-eyed Govinda of eternal glory 
turns his face towards the king. Yudhishtira cannot possibly disregard 
Kesava, for from their earliest years Govinda was dearer to him than even 
Arjuna. 

Taking the king’s hand, smeared with sandalwood-paste and looking 
like a column of marble, the mighty-armed Saurin begins to speak, 
gladdening the hearts of all who listen to him. His face, adorned with 
beautiful teeth and eyes, glows like a full-blown lotus at sunrise. 

Vasudeva says, ‘Do not, Purushavyaghra, indulge in grief that emaciates 
your body. Those slain in this battle cannot be brought back. These 
Kshatriyas, O king, who have fallen in this great war are like objects in 
one’s dreams that vanish when one awakes. All of them were heroes and 
ornaments of battle. 

We vanquished them while they rushed at us, their enemies. They were 
all slain facing us, none had wounds in their backs from fleeing battle. They 
all fought with heroes and, after having cast off their life-breath in the great 
war, ascended into heaven, sanctified by weapons. 


It is not right to grieve for them. All of them, cleaving to the Kshatriya 
dharma, possessed of valour, perfectly conversant with the Vedas and their 
angas, have attained the blissful end reserved for heroes. Set aside your 
grief for them after hearing the stories of ancient days about the high-souled 
lords of the earth who departed from this world. 

There is an old story about the discourse of Narada with Srinjaya who 
was grief-stricken at the death of his son. Narada said, “You, I and all 
creatures, O Srinjaya, are subject to happiness and misery, and will have to 
die. Then what cause is there for sorrow? Listen to me with attention as I 
recite the great blessedness of some ancient kings. Listening to the story of 
these noble lords of the earth, you will cast off your grief and abate your 
Sorrow. 

As I recite their charming and delightful tales to you in detail, the 
malignant stars will be propitiated and the span of your life will increase. 

We hear, O Srinjaya, that there was a king of the name of Marutta who 
was the son of Avikshit, and that even he fell prey to death. The gods, with 
Indra and Varuna and Brihaspati at their head, came to the sacrifice, called 
Viswasrij, performed by this great monarch. Challenging Sakra, the lord of 
the Devas, Marutta vanquished him in battle. 

From a desire to earn Indra’s favour, the learned Brihaspati had refused 
to officiate at Marutta’s sacrifice. Thereupon Samvarta, the younger brother 
of Brihaspati, acceded to the king’s request to be his chief Ritvik. During 
the rule of Marutta the earth yielded crops without being tilled and was 
embellished with diverse kinds of ornaments. At the sacrifice of this king, 
the Viswadevas sat as courtiers, the Maruts were the distributors of food 
and gifts and the high-souled Sadhyas were also present. 

During this sacrifice of Marutta, the Maruts drank soma. The sacrificial 
gifts the king made surpassed in value those ever made by the Devas, the 
Gandharvas and all men. When even Marutta, O Srinjaya, who surpassed 
you in religious merit, knowledge, renunciation and affluence, and who was 
purer than your son, fell prey to death, do not grieve for your son. 

We hear, O Srinjaya, of another king named Suhotra, the son of Atithi, 
who too, fell a prey to death. During his rule, Maghavat showered gold for 
one whole year upon his kingdom. Obtaining this king for her lord, the 
earth became in reality, and not merely in name, Vasumati. 

Indra showered upon the rivers, during the sway of this sovereign, 
golden tortoises, crabs, alligators, sharks and porpoises. Beholding these 


golden fish, sharks and tortoises in hundreds and thousands, Atithi’s son 
became filled with wonder. Collecting the vast wealth of gold that covered 
the earth, Suhotra performed a sacrifice at Kurujangala and gave it away to 
Brahmanas. 

When this King Suhotra, O Srinjaya, who surpassed you in the four 
attributes of tapasya, gyana, vairagya and dhana, and who was purer than 
your son, fell prey to death, do not grieve for your dead son. Your son never 
performed a sacrifice and never made gifts. Knowing this, pacify your mind 
and do not give away to grief. 

We also hear, O Srinjaya, that Brihadratha, the king of the Angas, fell 
prey to death. He gave away a hundred thousand horses and a hundred 
thousand maidens, adorned with golden ornaments, as dakshina at a yagna 
that he performed. A hundred thousand elephants also of the best breed he 
gave away as gifts at another yagna that he performed. 

He also gave away as sacrificial charity a hundred million bulls, 
adorned with golden chains, accompanied by untold thousands of cows. 
While the king of Anga performed his sacrifice by the hill called 
Vishnupada, Indra became intoxicated with the soma he drank, and the 
Brahmanas with the gifts they received. 

During the yagnas, O monarch, numbering hundreds, that this king 
performed in the days of old, the gifts he made far surpassed those ever 
made by the Devas, the Gandharvas and Manavas. No other man born, or 
that will ever be born, will give away so much wealth as did the king of the 
Angas during the seven sacrifices he performed, each of which was marked 
by the consecration of soma. 

When, O Srinjaya, this Brihadratha, who was your superior in the four 
attributes and who was purer than your son, also fell prey to death, do not 
grieve for your dead son. 

We hear also, O Srinjaya, that Sibi, the son of Usinara, fell prey to 
death. This king swayed the whole earth as one does the leather shield in his 
hand. Riding on a single chariot that proved victorious in every battle, King 
Sibi subjugated every other monarch and caused the earth to resound with 
the rattle of his wheels. 

Usinara’s son Sibi gave away in a Sacrifice all the cows and horses he 
had, both domesticated and wild. The Creator himself thought that no one 
among the kings of the past or the future had or would have the ability to 
bear the burden, as this Usinara’s son Sibi did, that foremost of kings, that 


hero who possessed skill equal to that of Indra. Do not, therefore, grieve for 
your son who never performed any sacrifice or made any gift when indeed, 
Sibi, who was far superior to you in the four attributes and who was purer 
than your son, fell prey to death. 

We hear, O Srinjaya, that the high-souled Bharata also, the son of 
Dushyanta and Sakuntala, who had a vast and well-filled treasury, fell prey 
to death. Devoting three hundred horses to the gods on the banks of the 
Yamuna, twenty on the banks of the Saraswati, and fourteen on the banks of 
the Ganga, that king of great tejas, of the olden days, performed a thousand 
Aswamedhas and a hundred Rajasuyas. 

None among the kings of the earth can match the great deeds of 
Bharata, just as no man can, by the might of his arms, soar into the sky. 
Erecting numerous sacrificial altars, he gave away innumerable horses and 
untold wealth to the Rishi Kanwa. When even he, O Srinjaya, who was far 
superior to you in the four attributes and who was purer than your son, fell 
prey to death, do not grieve for your dead son. 

We hear, O Srinjaya, that Rama, the son of Dasaratha, also fell prey to 
death. He always cherished his subjects as if they were his own sons. In his 
dominions there were no widows and no one who was helpless. Indeed, in 
ruling his kingdom Rama was always like his father Dasaratha. The clouds, 
yielding showers seasonably, caused crops to grow in plenitude. During his 
rule, food was always abundant in his kingdom. No death occurred by 
drowning or by fire. 

As long as Rama ruled, there was no fear in his kingdom of any disease. 
Every man lived for a thousand years, blessed with a thousand children. 
During Ramarajya, all men were whole and all men had their wishes 
fulfilled. When even the women did not quarrel, then what can be said of 
the men? During his rule his subjects were virtuous, contented, their desires 
satisfied, fearless, free and wedded to the vow of truth. 

The trees bore flowers and fruit perennially, and met with no injury. 
Every cow yielded milk filling a drona to the brim. Having dwelt in the 
observance of severe tapasya for fourteen years in the forest, Rama 
performed ten Aswamedhas of great splendour to which he invited 
everyone. Young and dark, handsome, with reddened eyes, he looked like 
the leader of an elephant herd, with great and mighty arms stretching down 
to his knees and with shoulders like those of a lion. 


Ascending the throne of Ayodhya, he ruled for ten thousand and ten 
hundred years. When Rama, O Srinjaya, who excelled you by far in the four 
principal attributes and who was purer than your son, fell prey to death, do 
not grieve for your dead son. 

We hear, O Srinjaya, that King Bhagiratha also died. During one of the 
sacrifices of this king, intoxicated with the soma he had drunk, Indra, the 
adorable chastiser of Paka and king of the Devas, put forth the might of his 
arms and vanquished many thousands of Asuras. 

At one of the sacrifices he performed, King Bhagiratha gave away a 
million maidens adorned with ornaments of gold. Each of these maidens sat 
on a chariot attached to four pedigreed steeds. With each chariot were a 
hundred elephants, all of the finest breed and decked with chains of gold. 
Behind each elephant were a thousand horses, and behind each one a 
thousand cows and behind each cow a thousand goats and sheep. 

The river-goddess Ganga, earlier known as Bhagirathi, sat upon the lap 
of this king who dwelt near her stream, and since then came to be called 
Urvasi, ‘one who sits on the lap’. The triple-coursed Ganga had agreed to 
be the daughter of Bhagiratha of Ikshvaku’s race, the monarch always 
engaged in the performance of sacrifices with gifts in profusion to 
Brahmanas. 

When he, O Srinjaya, who transcended you in respect of the four 
principal attributes and who was purer than your son, fell prey to death, do 
not grieve for your son. 

We hear, O Srinjaya, that the Mahatman Dilipa also fell prey to death. 
The Brahmanas love to recite his innumerable deeds. During one of his 
great sacrifices this king, with his heart fully assenting, gave away the entire 
earth, abounding with wealth, to the Brahmanas. At each sacrifice 
performed by him, the chief priest received as sacrificial fee a thousand 
elephants made of gold. 

At one of his yagnas, the stake set up for slaughtering the victims was 
made of gold and exceedingly beautiful. Discharging the duties assigned to 
them, the gods having Sakra for their lord, used to seek the protection of 
this king. Upon this shining golden stake, decked with a ring, six thousand 
Devas and Gandharvas danced in joy, and Viswavasu himself in their midst 
played a raga on his vina. Such was Viswavasu’s music that every creature, 
whatever he might be, thought that the great Gandharva was playing to him 
alone. 


No other monarch could imitate this achievement of King Dilipa. The 
elephants of this king, intoxicated and adorned with trappings of gold, 
would be found lying down on the roads. The men who succeeded in 
obtaining even a sight of the Rajarishi Dilipa, went to heaven, as he was 
ever truthful in speech and his bow could withstand a hundred foes equal in 
energy to a hundred Anantas. 

These three sounds never ceased in Dilipa’s abode—the chanting of the 
Vedas, the twanging of bows, and cries of ‘Let it be given!’ When he, O 
Srinjaya, who transcended you in the four principal attributes and who was 
purer than your son, fell prey to death, do not grieve for your dead son. 

Yuvanaswa’s son Mandhatri also, O Sanjaya, we hear, fell prey to death. 
The Maruts extracted this child from his father’s stomach through one side. 
Sprung from a quantity of clarified butter sanctified by mantras that had by 
mistake been quaffed by his father instead of his mother, Mandhatri had 
been gestated in the belly of Yuvanaswa. 

This most prosperous king, Mandhatri, conquered the three worlds. 
Seeing this child of celestial beauty lying on the lap of his father, the gods 
asked one another, ‘From whom shall this child suckle?’ 

Then Indra came forward, saying, “He shall have it even from me!’ The 
chief of the deities therefore named the child Mandhatri. For the 
nourishment of that great child, the finger of Indra, placed in his mouth, 
began to yield a jet of milk. Sucking Indra’s finger, he grew into a powerful 
youth in a hundred days. In twelve days he looked like one of twelve years. 

The whole earth in one day came under the sway of this high-souled, 
virtuous and brave king who resembled Indra himself for his prowess in 
battle. He vanquished King Angada, Marutta, Asita, Gaya and Brihadratha 
of the Angas. When Mandhatri fought in battle with Angada, the gods 
thought that the firmament was breaking apart with the twanging of his 
bow, and the whole earth from where Surya rises to where he sets was his 
field. 

Having performed a hundred Aswamedhas and a hundred Rajasuyas, he 
gave the Brahmanas many Rohita fish. These fish were each ten yojanas in 
length and one in breadth. The other varnas divided among themselves 
those that remained after gratifying the Brahmanas. 

When he, O Srinjaya, who transcended you in the four principal 
attributes and who was purer than your son, fell prey to death, do not grieve 
for your dead son. 


We hear, O Srinjaya, that Yayati, the son of Nahusha, also fell prey to 
death. 

Having subjugated the whole world with its seas, he journeyed through 
it, decking it with successive sacrificial altars; with throws of a heavy piece 
of wood, he measured the intervals between the altars. Indeed, he reached 
the very shores of the sea as he went performing great sacrifices on those 
altars along his way. 

Having performed a thousand yagnas and a hundred Vajapeyas, he 
gratified the foremost of Brahmanas with three mountains of gold. Having 
slain many Daityas and Danavas in battle, Nahusha’s son Yayati divided the 
earth among his children. At last, discarding his other sons, headed by Yadu 
and Drahyu, he installed his youngest son Puru on his throne and then 
entered the forest with his wife. 

When he, O Srinjaya, who far surpassed you in the four principal 
attributes and who was purer than your son, fell prey to death, do not grieve 
for your dead son. 

We hear, O Srinjaya, that Ambarisha also, the son of Nabhaga, fell a 
prey to death. The subjects regarded this protector of the world and 
foremost of kings as the embodiment of dharma. 

During one of his sacrifices, this sovereign assigned to the Brahmanas, 
to wait upon them, a million kings who had themselves performed 
thousands of sacrifices each. Men of piety praised Ambarisha, the son of 
Nabhaga, saying that such feats had never been achieved before, nor would 
their like be achieved in the future. These hundreds upon hundreds and 
thousands upon thousands of kings, that had at the command of Ambarisha 
waited at his sacrifices upon the presiding Brahmanas, became, through 
Ambarisha’s punya, crowned with the fruits of the Aswamedha and 
followed their lord by the southern-path to regions of brightness and bliss. 

When he, O Srinjaya, who far surpassed you in the four principal 
attributes and who was purer than your son, fell prey to death, do not grieve 
for your dead child. 

We hear, O Srinjaya, that Sasabindu also, the son of Chitrasena, fell 
prey to death. This Rajarishi had a hundred thousand wives, and a million 
consorts, and sons by them, all of whom used to wear golden armour and 
were excellent bowmen. Each of these princes married a hundred 
princesses, and each princess brought a hundred elephants as her dower. 
With each of these elephants were a hundred chariots. With each chariot 


were a hundred steeds, all of good breed and all decked with trappings of 
gold. With each steed were a hundred cattle, and with each cow were a 
hundred sheep and goats. 

This countless wealth Sasabindu gave away, at a horse-sacrifice, to the 
Brahmanas. When he, O Srinjaya, who far surpassed you in the four 
principal attributes and who was purer than your son, fell prey to death, do 
not grieve for your dead child. 

We hear, O Srinjaya, that Gaya also, the son of Amurtarayas, fell a prey 
to death. For a hundred years, this king subsisted upon the remains of 
sacrificial food. Pleased with such devotion, Agni wanted to give him 
boons. The boons solicited by Gaya were, ‘Let my wealth be inexhaustible, 
even if I give endlessly. Let my regard for dharma exist for ever. Let my 
heart take pleasure in Truth forever, through your grace, O consumer of 
sacrificial offerings.’ 

We hear that King Gaya obtained all these wishes from Agni. On days 
of the new moon, on those of the full moon, and on every fourth month, for 
a thousand years, Gaya repeatedly performed the Aswamedha. During this 
period he gave away a hundred thousand cattle and hundreds of mules to 
Brahmanas at the completion of every sacrifice. 

This bull among men gratified the Devas with soma, the Brahmanas 
with wealth, the Pitris with Swadha, and the women with the satisfaction of 
all their wishes. During his great Horse-sacrifice, Gaya caused a golden 
ground to be made, measuring a hundred cubits in length and fifty in 
breadth, and gave it away as the sacrificial fee. This foremost of men, Gaya, 
the son of Amurtarayas, gave away as many cows as there are grains of 
sand in the Ganga river. 

When he, O Srinjaya, who far surpassed you in the four principal 
attributes, and who was purer than your son, fell prey to death, do not 
grieve for your dead son. 

We hear, O Srinjaya, that Sankriti’s son Rantideva also fell a prey to 
death. Having undergone the austerest of penances and worshipped Sakra 
with great reverence, he solicited these boons from him: ‘Let us have 
abundant food and numerous guests. Let not my faith sustain any 
diminution, and let me not have to ask anyone for anything.’ 

The animals, both domesticated and wild, slaughtered at his sacrifice, 
used to come of their own accord to the high-souled Rantideva of rigid 
vows and great fame. The secretions that flowed from the skins of the 


animals slaughtered in his sacrifices produced a mighty and celebrated river 
which to this day is known by the name of Charmanwati. King Rantideva 
would make gifts to the Brahmanas in an extensive enclosure. 

When the king said, ‘I give you a hundred nishkas!’ the Brahmanas 
rejected what was offered. When, however, the king would say, ‘I give a 
thousand nishkas!’ they accepted. All the vessels and plates in Rantideva’s 
palace, all the jugs and pots, the pans, plates and cups, were of gold. On 
nights when guests lived in Rantideva’s abode, twenty-thousand and one 
hundred cattle had to be slaughtered. Yet even on such occasions, the cooks, 
decked in earrings, used to boast to those who sat down to eat: “There is 
abundant soup, take as much as you wish; but we do not have as much meat 
today as we used to.’ 

When he, O Srinjaya, who far surpassed you in the four principal 
attributes and who was purer than your son, fell prey to death, do not grieve 
for your dead son. 

We hear, O Srinjaya, that the high-souled Sagara also fell a prey to 
death. He was of Ikshvaku’s race, a tiger among men, and of superhuman 
prowess. Sixty-thousand sons used to walk behind him, like ten thousand 
stars waiting upon the moon in the cloudless firmament of autumn. His 
sway extended over the whole of this earth. He gratified the gods by 
performing a thousand Horse-sacrifices. He gave away to deserving 
Brahmanas palatial mansions with columns and other parts made of gold, 
containing costly beds and bevies of beautiful women with eyes like lotus 
petals, and diverse other kinds of precious objects. At his command, the 
Brahmanas divided these gifts among themselves. 

Through anger this king caused the earth to be excavated, whereupon 
she came to have the ocean on her bosom, and for this, the ocean has come 
to be named Sagara after him. When he, O Srinjaya, who far surpassed you 
in the four principal attributes and who was purer than your son, fell prey to 
death, do not grieve for your dead son. 

We hear, O Srinjaya, that king Prithu, the son of Vena, also fell prey to 
death. The great Rishis, assembling together in the great forest, installed 
him in the sovereignty of the earth. And because it was thought that he 
would advance all mankind, he was called Prithu, the advancer. And 
because he protected people from injuries—Kshata, he was called a 
Kshatriya. 


Seeing Prithu, the son of Vena, all the creatures of the earth exclaimed, 
“We are now attached to him!’ From this circumstance of the devotion of all 
creatures to him, he came to be called a Raja—one who can inspire 
attachment. The earth, during his sway, yielded crops without being tilled, 
every leaf that the trees had bore honey, and every cow yielded a large 
jugful of milk. All men were healthy, all their wishes granted. They had no 
fear of any kind. They used to live as they pleased, in fields or in houses. 

When Prithu wanted to go over the sea, the waters became solid. The 
rivers also never swelled up when he had to cross them but remained 
perfectly calm. The flag on his chariot moved unobstructed everywhere. 
King Prithu, during one of his grand Aswamedha Yagnas, gave away to the 
Brahmanas twenty-one mountains of gold, each measuring three nalwas. 
When he, O Srinjaya, who far surpassed you in the four principal attributes 
and who was purer than your son, fell prey to death, do not grieve for your 
dead son. 

What, O Srinjaya, are you reflecting in silence? It seems, O king, that 
you do not hear my words. If you have not heard them, then my discourse 
has been a fruitless rhapsody, like medicine or a diet to a person on the 
point of death.” 

Srinjaya said, “I am listening O Narada, to your discourse of excellent 
import and perfumed like a garland of flowers, this discourse upon the 
conduct of Rajarishis of wondrous deeds and great fame that can certainly 
dispel grief. Your discourse, O Maharishi, has not been a fruitless rhapsody. 
The very sight of you has freed me from grief. Like one never replete from 
drinking nectar, I am not satiated with your words. If you of true vision, O 
lord, can show grace towards this man burning with grief on account of the 
death of his son, then this son, through your grace, is sure to be revived and 
to rejoin me once more in this life.” 

Narada said, “I will give back your son bereft of life named 
Suvarnashthivin, whom Parvata gave you. Splendid as gold, this child shall 
live a thousand years.”’” 


CANTO 30 


¢ =e udhishtira asks, ‘How did the son of Srinjaya become 

Suvarnashthivin? Why did Parvata give Srinjaya this child and 

why did he die? When the lives of all men in those days extended for a 

thousand years, why did Srinjaya’s son die in infancy? Or was he 

Suvarnashthivin, gold-secreter, only in name? How did he come to be so? I 
want to know all.’ 

Krishna replies, ‘I will tell you, O king, the facts as they happened. 
There are two Rishis, the foremost ones in the world, named Narada and 
Parvata. Narada is the maternal uncle and Parvata is his sister’s son. With 
cheerful hearts, the uncle Narada and the nephew Parvata, in the olden days, 
left heaven to ramble across the earth and to taste clarified butter and rice. 

Both of them, possessed of great ascetic merit, wandered over the earth, 
subsisting on food eaten by men. Filled with joy and entertaining great 
affection for each other, they entered into a compact that whatever desire, 
good or bad, one of them entertained, he would disclose it to the other and, 
in the event of one of them doing otherwise, he would be subject to the 
other’s curse. 

Agreeing to this understanding, these two great Rishis, adored by all the 
worlds, went to King Srinjaya, the son of Sitya, and told him, “For your 
benefit, both of us will stay with you for a few days. O lord of the world, 
attend to all our wants.” 

The king, saying “So be it!” set himself to attend upon them hospitably. 
One day, the joyful Srinjaya introduced to these illustrious ascetics his fair 


daughter, saying, “This is my daughter Sukumari, and she will wait upon 
you both. Bright as the filament of the lotus, she is beautiful and of faultless 
limbs, accomplished and of sweet manners.” 

“Very well,” said the Rishis in reply, upon which the king instructed his 
daughter, “My child, attend upon these two Brahmanas as you would attend 
upon the gods or your father.” 

Saying, “Tathaastu,” the virtuous Sukumari began to attend upon them 
in obedience to her father’s behest. Her dutiful services and her unrivalled 
beauty very soon charmed Narada, and he began to cherish a tender flame 
towards her. This sentiment began to grow in the heart of the illustrious 
saint like the moon gradually waxing on the accession of the lit fortnight. 

However, overwhelmed by shame, Narada could not disclose this 
growing ardour to his sister’s son, the high-souled Parvata. Through his 
ascetic power, and also by Narada’s behaviour, Parvata understood all. 
Inflamed with rage, he resolved to curse his love-afflicted uncle. 

He said, “Having made a compact with me that whatever desire, good 
or bad, is cherished by either of us will be disclosed to the other, you have 
violated it. These were your own words. O Brahmana! I will curse you for 
this. You did not tell me that the charms of the maiden Sukumari have 
pierced your heart! You are a Brahmacharin, my guru, a Muni and a 
Brahmana. Yet you have broken the compact you made with me. I am angry 
and I will curse even you. Listen to me. This Sukumari will, without doubt, 
become your wife. From the time of your marriage, however, O Great One, 
both she and all men will see you as an ape, for your true features will 
disappear and you will have a monkey’s face!” 

Hearing this, Narada, filled with wrath, cursed his nephew Parvata in 
return, “Although you have ascetic merit and brahmacharya and truth and 
self-restraint, and although you are ever devoted to dharma, you will yet not 
be able to return to Swarga.” 

Thus in rage they cursed each other like two infuriated elephants. From 
that time the high-souled Parvata began to wander over the earth, respected 
as he deserved, O Bhaarata, for his own tejas. Narada, the greatest of 
Brahmanas, obtained with due rites the hand of Srinjaya’s daughter, the 
faultless Sukumari. 

But the princess saw Narada exactly as the curse had said. Indeed, just 
after the priests recited the last of the wedding mantras, Sukumari saw the 
celestial Rishi with the face of an ape. She, however, did not disregard her 


husband; on the contrary, she dedicated her love to him. Indeed, the 
princess, chaste as she was, devoted herself entirely to her lord and did not 
in her heart desire anyone else for a husband, even among the Devas, Munis 
and Yakshas. 

One day, the illustrious Parvata, in the course of his wanderings, entered 
a solitary forest, and saw Narada there. Saluting him, Parvata said, “Show 
your grace to me, O mighty one, by allowing me to return to heaven.” 
Seeing the unhappy Parvata kneeling before him with folded hands, Narada 
felt sorry and told him, “You cursed me first, saying, ‘Be an ape!’ After 
which, I cursed you from anger, saying, ‘From this day you will not live in 
heaven!’ It was not right of you to curse me, since you are like a son to 
me.” 

The two sages then freed each other from their curses. Seeing her 
husband possessed of celestial form and blazing with beauty, Sukumari fled 
from him, thinking him to be somebody other than her lord. Seeing the 
beautiful princess flying from Narada, Parvata said to her, “This is indeed 
your husband. He is the illustrious and powerful Rishi Narada, the foremost 
of virtuous men. He is your husband of one soul with you. Do not have any 
doubt about this.” 

Assured in diverse ways by the high Parvata and informed also of the 
curse, the princess regained her equanimity. Then Parvata ascended to 
heaven and Narada returned to his home.’ 

Krishna continues, ‘The illustrious Rishi Narada, who himself played a 
part in this matter, is here, O best of men. If you ask him he will tell you 
everything that happened.’” 


CANTO 31 


V aisampayana said, “The royal son of Pandu then asks Narada, ‘Holy 
one, I want to hear of the birth of the child whose excreta were 
gold.’ Narada Muni begins to narrate everything about the child of the 
golden secretions. 

Narada says, ‘It is exactly as Kesava has said. Since you asked me I will 
now tell you the remaining part of this story. My sister’s son, the Maharishi 
Parvata, and I once came to stay with Srinjaya, foremost of all victorious 
kings. He honoured us with all ceremony and gratified our every wish when 
we lived with him. 

After the season of rain had passed, and when the time came for our 
own departure, Parvata raised this important and appropriate point with me: 
“We have dwelt in the abode of this king for some time, O Brahmana, and 
have been greatly honoured by him. Think of what we should give him in 
return.” 

I then told Parvata of blessed aspect, “Nephew, this concern becomes 
you, O you of great power, and all this depends upon you. Through your 
blessings let the king be made happy and let him obtain his wishes. Or, if 
you choose, let him be crowned with success through the ascetic merits of 
both of us.” 

At this, having summoned King Srinjaya, Parvata said to him, “You 
have gratified us exceedingly, Rajan, with your sincere hospitality. Think of 
a gift you would like. Let it be such that it may not imply enmity to the 


gods or destruction to men. Accept then, O king, a boon, for we think you 
deserve one.” 

Srinjaya replied, “If I have satisfied you both, then I have gained my 
object, for this is itself my greatest gain and I regard this as the realization 
of all my desires.” 

Parvata once again said, “Ask us, Rajan, for the fulfillment of that wish 
which you have cherished in your heart for a long time.” 

Srinjaya answered, “I desire a son who will be heroic and possessed of 
great energy, firm in his vows and of long life, highly blessed and possessed 
of splendour equal to that of Indra himself.” 

Parvata said, “Your desire will be fulfilled, but your child will not be 
long-lived, for your wish for such a son is also for prevailing over Indra. 
Your son will be known by the name of Suvarnashthivin. He will have 
splendour like Indra, but take care to protect him always from that Deva.” 

Hearing these words of Parvata Mahatman, Srinjaya began to beg the 
Rishis to change his boon, saying, “Let my son be long-lived, O Muni, 
through your tapasya.” 

Parvata remained silent, being partial to Indra. Seeing the king very sad 
I told him, “Think of me, O king, in your distress and I promise to come 
when you do. Do not grieve, O lord of earth! I will give you back your 
beloved child, even if he is dead, in his living form.” 

With that, both of us left his presence to go our different ways, and 
Srinjaya to his palace. In due course, the Rajarishi Srinjaya became the 
father of a son of great ability who blazed with tejas. The child grew up like 
a large lotus in a lake, and became Suvarnashthivin in reality as in name. 

This extraordinary child, O Kuruttama, soon became widely known 
over the world. Indra also came to know that he was the fruit of Parvata’s 
boon. Fearing humiliation at the hands of the child when he grew up, the 
slayer of Bala and Vritra began to watch closely for any lapses by the 
prince. 

He commanded his Vajra, standing before him in embodied form, “Go, 
powerful one, and, assuming the form of a tiger, kill this prince. When 
grown up, this child of Srinjaya may, as Parvata prophesied, humiliate me 
through his achievements.” The Vajra, razer of hostile towns, began from 
that day to continually watch for any lapse from the prince. 

Meanwhile, Srinjaya was filled with joy having got a child whose 
splendour resembled that of Indra himself. The king, accompanied by his 


wives, and the other women of his household, began living in the midst of a 
forest. One day, on the shores of the Bhagirathi, the boy, accompanied by 
his nurse, was playing, running about here and there. Though only five 
years of age, his prowess, even then, resembled that of a mighty elephant. 

While playing, the child met a powerful tiger that came upon him 
suddenly. The infant prince trembled violently as the tiger attacked him, and 
fell lifeless on the earth. His nursemaid gave vent to loud cries of grief. 

Having slain the prince, the tiger, through Indra’s powers of maya, 
vanished. Hearing the screams of the nurse, the king ran to the spot in great 
anxiety, and saw his son drained of blood, lying dead on the ground like the 
moon fallen from the firmament. Taking the boy covered with blood up 
onto his lap, the grief-stricken king began to lament piteously. The royal 
women rushed wailing to King Srinjaya. 

The king thought of me with concentrated attention. Knowing that the 
king was thinking of me, I appeared before him. Stricken as the king was, I 
told him all those stories, Rajan, that this hero of Yadu’s race has already 
related to you. With Indra’s leave, I brought Srinjaya’s child back to life. 

That which is ordained must come to pass, it is impossible that it should 
be otherwise. After this, Prince Suvarnashthivin of great fame and energy 
began to delight the hearts of his parents. Of great prowess, he ascended the 
throne after his father’s death, and ruled for one thousand and one hundred 
years. He worshipped the gods with many great sacrifices distinguished by 
lavish gifts. Possessed of great splendour, he gratified the Devas and the 
Pitris. 

He had many sons, all of whom multiplied the race, and after many 
years he met with a natural death. O best of men, dispel this grief born in 
your heart, as Kesava and Vyasa of austere penances have counselled you 
to. Rise up, Rajan, and bear the burden of this your ancestral kingdom; 
perform high and great sacrifices so that you may obtain hereafter whatever 
regions you desire!’” 


CANTO 32 


V aisampayana said, “To king Yudhishtira, who still remained 

speechless and plunged in grief, the island-born Maharishi Vyasa, 
knower of dharma, says again, ‘O you of eyes like lotus petals, the 
protection of subjects is the dharma of kings. Those who are always 
observant of dharma regard it to be all-powerful. Do, therefore, O Rajan, 
walk in the steps of your ancestors. 

For Brahmanas, tapasya is a duty, as laid down by the eternal law of the 
Vedas. Tapasya, therefore, Bharatarishabha, constitutes the eternal duty of 
Brahmanas. 

A Kshatriya is the protector of all in respect of their dharma. The man 
who, obsessed by earthly possessions, breaks wholesome restraints and 
offends social harmony must be punished with a strong hand. Such a brutish 
man who seeks to offend authority, be he an attendant, a son or even a sage, 
should by every means be chastised, or even killed, along with all men of 
similar sinful natures. 

The king who conducts himself in any other manner incurs sin. He who 
does not protect dharma when someone disregards it is himself a 
transgressor of righteousness. The Kauravas were transgressors of dharma 
and you have slain them along with their followers. Since you have been 
observant of your svadharma, why then, Pandava, do you indulge in such 
grief? 

The king must kill those who deserve death, make gifts to persons 
deserving of charity, and protect his subjects according to the law.’ 


Yudhishtira says, ‘I do not doubt the words that fall from your lips, O 
Mahatapasvin! Everything concerning niti and dharma is well known to 
you. I have, however, for the sake of kingdom, caused numbers to be slain. 
These savage and bloody deeds, O Brahmana, consume me!’ 

Vyasa asks, ‘Is the Paramatman the doer, or is man the doer? Is 
everything the result of chance in this world, or are the fruits that we enjoy 
or suffer the results of karma? If man is responsible for all karma, good or 
bad, being urged to do so by Brahman, the Supreme Being, then the fruits 
of these acts should be for Brahman himself. If a man cuts down a tree in 
forest with an axe, it is he who incurs the sin, not the axe. 

Or, if one says that the axe being only the material cause, the 
consequence of the deed should attach to the animate agent and not to the 
inanimate tool, then the sin may be said to belong to the man who made the 
axe — but this can scarcely be true. If it is not reasonable, Kaunteya, that one 
man should incur the consequence of a thing done by another, then you 
should ascribe all responsibility to the Supreme Being. 

If, again, man is himself the agent of all his actions, virtuous and sinful, 
then there is no Supreme Agent, and so, whatever you have done cannot 
bring evil consequences upon you. No one, O king, can ever turn away 
from what is destined. If, again, destiny be the result of the deeds of former 
lives, then no sin can be attached to one in this life, just as the sin of cutting 
down a tree cannot touch the maker of the axe. 

If you think it is only chance that acts in the world, then such a vast war 
of destruction would never have happened, nor ever will. If you need to 
ascertain what is good and what is evil in the world, attend to the shastras. 
These scriptures have laid down that kings should stand with the danda 
uplifted in their hands. I think, Bhaarata, that karma, good and bad, 
continually revolves here as a wheel, and men obtain the fruits of their 
actions, good or evil. 

One sinful deed proceeds from another. Therefore, Purushavyaghra, 
avoid all evil actions and do not set your heart upon grief. You should 
adhere to the duties, even if reproachable, of your own order. This self- 
destruction, Rajan, is not commendable in you. Atonements have been 
ordained for evil acts. He who is alive can perform them, but he who dies 
fails in their performance. Therefore, O Rajan, without laying down your 
life, perform these expiatory rites. If you do not perform them, you may 
have to repent in the next world.’” 


CANTO 33 


¢ mye udhishtira says, ‘Sons and grandsons, brothers and fathers, 
fathers-in-law, acharyas, maternal uncles and grandfathers, many 
noble Kshatriyas, many relatives by marriage, friends, companions, sisters’ 
sons, and kinsmen have fallen O grandfather, and many great men coming 
from diverse countries. I alone have caused all of them to be slain, from my 
desire for kingdom. Having slain many heroic kings devoted to dharma, all 
of whom had drunk soma during sacrifices, what end will I attain, O wisest 
of all sages? 

My body is on fire, thinking that the earth is bereft of the many 
prosperous lions among kings who were enjoying great prosperity. Having 
witnessed this slaughter of kinsmen and millions of other men, I burn with 
grief, grandfather! 

Oh, what will be the plight of those best of women deprived of their 
sons, of husbands, and of brothers? Reproaching the Pandavas and the 
Vrishnis as cruel murderers, these gaunt-faced women, plunged in grief, 
will throw themselves on the earth and, through sorrow, will cast off their 
life-breath, and go to the halls of Yama, O best of Brahmanas. I have no 
doubt of this! 

The course of dharma is subtle, and it is plain that we will be stained 
with guilt for the deaths of these women. Having killed our kinsmen and 
friends and committed an inexpiable sin, we will fall into hell with our 
heads downwards. 


So, O best of men, we will waste our limbs with the austerest of 
tapasyas. Tell me, O Pitamaha, what asrama of life I should adopt?’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Hearing these words of Yudhishtira, the 
island-born Rishi, having reflected keenly for some time, says, ‘Remember 
the dharma of a Kshatriya, O Rajan, and do not give way to grief. All these 
Kshatriyas have fallen while engaged in performing their svadharma of 
pursuing greater prosperity and greater fame on earth, O Bharatarishabha. 
These great men, all of whom were mortal, have perished through the 
influence of Kaala, inexorable Time. 

You were not their slayer, nor Bhima, nor Arjuna, nor the twins. It is 
Time that took away their lives according to the inviolable law of change. 
Kaala has neither mother, nor father, nor anybody to whom he is disposed 
to show any favour. He is the witness of the actions of all creatures, and it is 
he who has taken them away. This battle, O Bharatarishabha, was only an 
event that he created. He causes creatures to be slain through other 
creatures, and this is how he demonstrates his irresistible power. 

Understand that Kaala in his dealings with creatures is dependent upon 
the bonds of action and is the witness of all karma, good and bad. It is Time 
that brings about the fruits of our deeds, whether bliss or sorrow. Think, O 
Mahabaho, of the deeds of these Kshatriyas who have fallen. Their karma 
was the cause of their destruction, and for that they perished. 

Think also of your own karma, of adhering to vows with a calm soul, 
and also of how the Supreme Ordainer has forced you to do your karma— 
the slaughter of so many men. Just as a weapon made by a smith or 
carpenter is under the control of the one that handles it, and moves as he 
moves it, this universe, controlled by actions done in Time, moves as those 
actions move it. 

Seeing that the births and deaths of creatures take place without any 
assignable cause and in perfect wantonness, grief and joy are entirely 
needless. Although this entanglement of your heart is a mere delusion, still, 
if it pleases you, O king, perform expiatory rites to purify yourself of your 
so-called sin. 

It is heard, O Kaunteya, that the Devas and the Asuras, covetous of 
prosperity, fought each other. The Asuras were the elder, and the gods the 
younger, brothers. Fierce was the battle between them, lasting for thirty-two 
thousand years. Making the earth one vast sea of blood, the Devas slew the 
Daityas and gained possession of Swarga. 


Having obtained possession of the earth, a large number of Brahmanas, 
conversant with the Vedas, armed themselves, and stupefied with pride, 
sided with the Danavas and helped them in the fight. They were known by 
the name of Salavrika and numbered eighty-eight thousand. But the Devas 
slew all of them. So these evil men who desire the extinction of dharma and 
who were promoting adharma deserved to be slain, just as the gods did the 
ferocious demons. 

If by slaying a single individual a family can be saved, or, if by slaying 
a single family the whole kingdom can be saved, such an act of killing will 
not be a transgression. Sin, O king, sometimes assumes the form of virtue, 
and virtue sometimes assumes the form of sin. However, they who are 
learned know which is which. 

Therefore, console yourself, O son of Pandu, for you are well versed in 
the shastras. You, O Bhaarata, have only followed the path that the gods 
formerly trod. Men like you never reach hell. Comfort your brothers and all 
your friends, O Parantapa. 

He who deliberately sins and feels no shame, but continues 
transgressing as before, is called in the shastras a great sinner. There is no 
atonement for him, and his offences know no diminution. You are born into 
a noble race. Forced by the faults of others, you have most unwillingly 
fought this war and, having done so, you repent. 

The great yagna, the Aswamedha, is the expiation for you. Make 
preparations for this sacrifice, O monarch, and you will be freed from your 
sins. 

The divine chastiser of Paka, having vanquished his foes with the help 
of the Maruts, gradually performed a hundred sacrifices and became 
Satakratu. Freed from stain, possessed of Devaloka and having obtained 
many realms of bliss and prosperity, Sakra, surrounded by the Maruts, 
shines in beauty, and illumines all the quarters with his splendour. The 
Apsaras adore the lord of Sachi in the heavens. The Rishis and the other 
gods all worship him with reverence. 

You have won the earth through your prowess. You have vanquished all 
the kings, O sinless one; through your power, go with your friends to their 
kingdom, O king, and install their brothers, sons or grandsons on their 
thrones. Behave with kindness towards even the children in the womb, 
make your subjects glad, and rule the earth. Install on their thrones the 
daughters of those who have no sons. Women are fond of pleasure and 


power, and they will cast off their sorrows and become happy. Having 
comforted the whole empire in this way, O Bhaarata, please the gods with 
an Aswamedha yagna as the virtuous Indra did in earlier days. 

It is not proper for us to grieve for the noble Kshatriyas who have fallen 
in battle. Struck by the power of the Destroyer, they have perished while 
observing their swadharma. You have discharged the duties of a Kshatriya 
and gained the earth without any thorn left in it. 

Observe your swadharma, O Kaunteya, for then you will be able to 
enjoy happiness in the other world, O Bhaarata.’” 


CANTOS 34-35 


¢ may udhishtira says, ‘When does it become necessary for a man to 
perform penance? And what must he do to be freed from sin? 
Tell me, O Pitamaha.’ 

Vyasa says, ‘If a man neglects to do what the Supreme Ordainer has 
ordained for him, or if he does what is forbidden to him, or if he behaves 
deceitfully, he is compelled to perform atonement rites. 

The Brahmachari who forgets a vow; who rises from bed after sunrise, 
or goes to bed while the sun is setting; one who has rotten nails or black 
teeth; one whose younger brother weds first, or who weds before his elder 
brother; one who is guilty of killing a Brahmana; who speaks ill of others; 
who weds a younger sister before the older sister is married or weds an 
older sister after having married a younger one; who kills a Muni; who 
imparts knowledge of the Vedas to a person unworthy of it, or does not 
impart knowledge to one who is worthy of it; who takes many lives; who 
sells flesh; who has abandoned his sacred fire; who sells his knowledge of 
the Vedas; who slays his guru or a woman; who is born into a sinful family; 
who slaughters an animal wilfully; who sets fire to a dwelling house; who 
lives by deceit, or acts in opposition to his guru; one who has violated an 
agreement— they are all guilty of sins requiring expiation. 

I will now mention other actions that are prohibited by both the world 
and the Vedas. Listen to me attentively. 

The rejection of one’s svadharma; the practice of the dharma of others; 
helping at the sacrifice or the religious rites of one unworthy of such 


assistance; eating food that is forbidden; deserting one that craves 
protection; neglecting to maintain servants and dependants; selling salt and 
sweet and other similar substances; killing birds and animals; refusing, 
though competent, to procreate upon a soliciting woman; omitting to 
present daily gifts grass to cows and the like, or to give dakshina; 
humiliating a Brahmana—these are all actions that those conversant with 
dharma have proscribed. 

The son who quarrels with his father, the man who violates the bed of 
his guru, one who neglects to produce offspring with his wedded wife, are 
all sinful, O Naravyaghra. I have now told you, in brief and in detail, those 
actions and omissions by which a man becomes liable to perform expiation. 
Listen now to the circumstances under which men, even after committing 
these deeds, do not become stained with sin. 

If a Brahmana well acquainted with the Vedas takes up arms and rushes 
at you in battle in order to kill you, you can take his life. By such an act the 
slayer does not become guilty of Brahmahatya. There is a mantra in the 
Vedas, O Kaunteya, which lays this down, and I am telling you only of 
those practices that are sanctioned by the authority of the Vedas. 

One who kills a Brahmana who has renounced his own dharma and who 
advances, weapon in hand, with intent to kill, does not truly become the 
slayer of a Brahmana. In such a case it is the anger of the slayer that 
proceeds against the wrath of the slain. 

By drinking alcoholic stimulants, in ignorance or upon the advice of a 
virtuous physician when his life is at peril, a man should have the 
regenerating ceremonies performed once more in his case. All that I have 
told you about the eating of forbidden food can be cleansed by these 
expiatory rites. 

Sexual congress with the guru’s wife at the preceptor’s command does 
not stain the disciple. The Rishi Uddalaka had his son Swetaketu begotten 
by a disciple. Sin does not stain one who commits theft for the sake of his 
acharya in a season of distress. One who takes to theft for his own 
enjoyment, however, becomes tarnished. 

A man is not defiled by stealing from other than Brahmanas in a season 
of distress and for the sake of one’s guru. Sin leaves untouched only one 
who steals under such circumstances without appropriating any portion to 
himself. A falsehood can be spoken for saving one’s own life or that of 


another, for the sake of one’s guru, for gratifying a woman, or for bringing 
about a marriage. 

One’s vow of brahmacharya is not broken by having dreams that cause 
him to ejaculate. In such cases, the expiation laid down consists in the 
pouring of libations of clarified butter onto the sacred fire. If an elder 
brother dies or has renounced the world, the younger brother does not incur 
sin by marrying his brother’s wife. Solicited by a woman, one does not lose 
virtue through intimacy with her. 

One should not kill or cause an animal to be slain, except in a sacrifice. 
Through the kindness manifested towards animals by the Creator himself in 
his laws they have become sacred, and fit for sacrifice. By making a gift in 
ignorance to an undeserving Brahmana one does not incur sin. The 
omission of charity towards a deserving man through ignorance does not 
lead to sin. By casting off an adulterous wife one does not incur sin, for by 
this, the woman herself can be purged while the husband avoids sin. 

One who knows the true use of the soma juice, does not incur sin by 
selling it. By dismissing a servant who is incompetent to render service, sin 
will not touch you. I have now told you those actions by which one does not 
incur sin. I will now tell you how to do penance, in detail.’” 


CANTO 36 


¢ °V yasa says “Through penance, religious rites, and gifts, O 
Bhaarata, a man can wash away his sins if he does not commit 
them again. By subsisting like a sannyasi upon one meal a day procured by 
begging, by doing all his work himself without a servant, by begging with a 
human skull in one hand and a khatvanga in another, by becoming a 
Brahmacharin and always ready for hard work, by casting off all malice, by 
sleeping on bare ground, by announcing his offence to the world—by doing 
all this for full twelve years, a man can cleanse himself from the sin of 
Brahmahatya, having slain a Brahmana. 

By dying at the hands of a warrior of one’s own will and on the advice 
of men learned in the shastras, or by throwing oneself down three times, 
head downwards, into a blazing fire, or by walking a hundred yojanas, all 
the while reciting the Vedas, or by giving away one’s entire property to a 
Brahmana conversant with the Vedas, or at least so much as would secure to 
him a livelihood, or a house properly furnished, and by protecting cattle and 
Brahmanas, one can be cleansed of Brahmahatya, the sin of having slain a 
Brahmana. 

Again, by living upon the scantiest food every day for six years, a man 
can be cleansed of this sin. By observing a more rigorous vow with regard 
to food one can be purified in three years. By living upon one meal a month, 
one can be cleansed in just a year. By observing, again, an absolute fast, one 
can be purified within a very short time. 


There is no doubt, again, that an Aswamedha yagna purifies a man. Men 
guilty of having slain a Brahmana who succeed in taking the avabhrita 
snana, the final bath at the completion of the sacrifice, are washed clean of 
all their sins. This is an injunction of great authority in the Srutis. One 
becomes cleansed of the sin of having killed a Brahmana, and indeed of all 
one’s sins, by dying in a battle undertaken for the sake of a Brahmana, or by 
giving away a hundred thousand cattle to those deserving of gifts. 

One becomes cleansed of all one’s sins by giving away twenty-five 
thousand Kapila cows, all of which have calved, or at the point of death by 
giving away a thousand cows with calves to poor but deserving persons. 

The man, O king, who gives away a hundred steeds of the Kamboja 
breed to deserving Brahmanas, becomes freed from sin. The man, O 
Bharata, who gives to just one man all that he asks for, and who, having 
given it, does not speak of it to anyone, is freed from sin. 

If a person who has once drunk alcohol drinks as expiation hot liquor, 
he sanctifies himself both here and hereafter. One frees oneself of all sins by 
jumping off the summit of a mountain or entering a blazing fire, or by going 
on an everlasting journey after renouncing the world. By performing the 
sacrifice laid down by Brihaspati, a Brahmana who drinks can succeed in 
attaining to Brahmaloka. Brahma himself has said that if a man, after 
having drunk, becomes humble, makes a gift of land and abstains from 
liquor ever after, he becomes sanctified and cleansed. 

The man who has violated his acharya’s bed should lie on a heated sheet 
of iron and, having cut off his manhood, should take sannyasa with eyes 
always turned upwards. By casting off one’s body, one becomes purified of 
all evil acts. 

Women become cleansed of all their sins by leading a regulated life for 
one year. The man who observes a very arduous vow, or gives away the 
whole of his wealth, or perishes in a battle fought for the sake of his guru, is 
purified of all his sins. One who lies to his guru or acts in opposition to him, 
becomes cleansed of that sin by doing something agreeable to his preceptor. 

One who has deviated from the vow of Brahmacharya can be exorcised 
of the sin by wearing the hide of a cow for six months and observing the 
penances laid down in the case of the slaughter of a Brahmana. One who is 
guilty of adultery, or of theft, can become clean by observing rigid vratas 
for a year. When one steals another’s property, one should, by every means 


in his power, return the value of the stolen property and thereby be washed 
clean of the sin of theft. 

The younger brother who has married before the marriage of the elder 
brother, and the elder brother whose younger brother has married before 
him, becomes pure by observing a severe vow, sincerely, for twelve nights. 
The younger brother, however, should marry again for rescuing his 
deceased ancestors. By such a second marriage, the first wife becomes 
cleansed and her husband himself will not incur sin by marrying her. 

Men who know the scriptures declare that women may be cleansed of 
even the greatest sins by observing the vow of chaturmasya, all the while 
living upon scant and sattvik food. Men conversant with the shastras do not 
take into account the sins that women commit in their hearts. Whatever be 
their sins of this description, their menstrual course renders them clean, like 
a metal plate scoured with ash. 

Plates made of the alloy of brass and copper made impure by a Sudra 
eating from them, or a vessel of the same metal that a cow has sniffed at, or 
that a Brahmana’s Gandusha gargle has made unclean, can be cleansed by 
means of the ten purifying substances. 

The shastras have laid down that a Brahmana should acquire and 
practise the full measure of dharma, and a Kshatriya should acquire and 
practise a measure of dharma less by a fourth part. So, a Vaisya should 
acquire a measure a quarter less than a Kshatriya’s and a Sudra a fourth less 
than a Vaisya’s. The heaviness or lightness of sins for purposes of expiation 
of each of the four varnas should be determined upon this principle. 

Having killed a bird or an animal, or cut down living trees, a man 
should make known his sin and fast for three nights. For indulging in 
intercourse with one with whom it is prohibited, the expiation is to wander 
in wet clothes and to sleep on a bed of ashes. These, O king, are the 
atonements for sinful deeds, according to precedent, reason, the shastras 
and the laws. 

A Brahmana can be cleansed of all his sins by reciting the Gayatri in a 
sacred place, while living upon frugal fare, casting off malice, abandoning 
anger and hate, remaining unmoved by praise and blame, and abstaining 
from speech. He should during the day-time be under the shelter of the sky 
and should lie down there even at night. Thrice during the day, and thrice 
during the night, he should plunge with his clothes into a stream or lake and 
perform his ablutions. Observing these rigid vows, he should abstain from 


speech with women, Sudras and sinners. By observing such regulations a 
Brahmana is purified of all sins that he unconsciously commits. 

A man obtains in the other world the fruits, good or bad, of his karma 
which the elements witness. Be it punya or be it paapa, according to the true 
measure that one acquires of either, one enjoys or suffers the consequences 
even in this world. Through gyana, tapasya and by dharma, one enhances 
one’s happiness even here, or one can enhance one’s misery by committing 
sins. One should, therefore, always do what is righteous and abstain 
altogether from deeds that are not. 

I have now indicated how the sins that I have mentioned can be 
expiated. There is atonement for every sin except those that we call 
Mahapatakas or the most heinous sins. 

As regards sins in respect of unclean food, improper speech and the 
like, they are of two kinds: those that one commits consciously and those 
committed unconsciously. All sins that one commits consciously are grave, 
while those that one commits unconsciously are trivial or light. There is 
expiation for both. 

Indeed the observance of the above rules can wash away all sin. 
However, God lays down these laws only for believers and those who have 
faith in Him. They are not for atheists or those who have no faith, or those 
in whom pride and malice predominate. A man who wishes for prosperity 
both here and in the hereafter, O Purushavyaghra, should adopt righteous 
behaviour, listen to the counsels of righteous men and observe the dharma 
that the shastras have ordained for him. 

So, for the reasons I have already given, O Rajan, you will be cleansed 
of all your sins, for you have slain your foes while discharging your dharma 
as a king and for the protection of your life and inheritance. However, if 
you still regard yourself as sinful, perform expiation. Do not cast away your 
life out of grief, in a manner unbecoming of a wise man.’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Thus addressed by the holy Rishi, 
Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, having reflected for a short while, says these 
words to the Muni.” 


CANTO 37 


¢ =e udhishtira says, “Tell me, O Pitamaha, what food is clean and 
what unclean, what gifts are praiseworthy, and who should be 
considered deserving or undeserving of them.’ 

Vyasa says, ‘Let me relate to you the old discussion between the Rishis 
and Manu, the lord of creation. In the Krita yuga, an assembly of Rishis of 
high austerities approached the great and powerful Prajapati Manu while he 
was seated at his ease, and requested him to engage in a discourse on 
dharma, asking, “What food should be eaten, who is to be regarded as a 
person deserving gifts, what gifts should be made, how should a person 
study, and what penances should one perform, how and what deeds should 
be done and what deeds should not? O lord of creation, tell us everything 
about all this.” 

Thus addressed, the divine and swayambhuva Manu told them, “Listen 
to me as I explain the dharma in brief as well as in detail. The shastras have 
laid down that the following deeds and places are expiatory in lands in 
which they are not prohibited—silent recitation of sacred mantras, homa, 
fasts, knowledge of the self, sacred rivers and regions inhabited by men 
devoted to pious deeds. 

Some mountains also are purifying, as also the eating of gold and 
bathing in water in which one has dipped gems and precious stones. Tirtha 
yatra, and eating sanctified butter will also, without doubt, speedily purify a 
man. 


No man would ever be called wise if he is proud and, if he wishes to be 
long-lived, he should for three nights drink hot water as a tapasya for being 
proud. Refusal to take what is not given, charity, the study of scriptures, 
tapasya, abstention from injury, truth, freedom from anger, and worship of 
the gods by means of yagnas, are the characteristics of dharma. 

That which is virtue may, according to time and place, become sin; thus, 
the appropriation of what belongs to others, untruth, and injury and killing, 
may under special circumstances, become virtues. Men capable of judging 
deeds consider them to be of two kinds—virtuous and sinful. From the 
worldly and the Vedic points of view again, punya and paapa are good or 
bad according to their consequences. 

Virtue and sin, everything a man may or may not do, would be either 
action or inaction. Inaction, abstention from Vedic rites and adoption of a 
life of contemplation leads to freedom from rebirth while the consequences 
of action, the practice of Vedic rites, result in repeated death and rebirth. 

From the worldly point of view, deeds that are evil lead to evil and 
those that are good fetch beneficial consequences. Therefore, punya and 
paapa are to be distinguished by the good and the evil character of their 
consequences. 

Deeds that are apparently evil, when undertaken from considerations 
connected with the Devas, the shastras, life itself, and the means by which 
life is sustained, produce consequences that are good. When an action is 
undertaken from the expectation, however doubtful, that it will produce 
harm to some one in the future, or when an action is done whose 
consequence is visibly harmful, the shastras command penance. 

When a deed is done from anger or clouded judgment, then expiation 
should be performed by inflicting pain on the body, guided by precedent, 
the shastras and reason. When, again, anything is done in order to please or 
displease the mind, the sin arising from it may be cleansed by sanctified 
food and recitation of mantras. The king who lays aside the danda in a 
particular instance should fast for one night. The priest who abstains from 
advising the king to inflict punishment in a particular case, should fast for 
three nights as expiation. The man who from grief attempts to commit 
suicide with weapons, should fast for three nights. 

There is no expiation for those who cast off the duties and practices of 
their order and class, country and family, and who abandon their very 
religion. When an occasion for doubt arises respecting what should be done, 


what ten persons versed in Vedic scriptures or three of those who frequently 
recite them may pronounce, should be regarded as the injunction of the 
shastras. 

The bull, earth, little ants, worms generated in dirt and poison, should 
not be eaten by Brahmanas. They should not also eat fish that have no 
scales, and four-footed aquatic creratures like frogs and others, except the 
tortoise. Water-fowls called Bhasas, ducks, Suparnas, Chakravakas, diving 
ducks, cranes, crows, shags, vultures, hawks and owls. Also all four-footed 
animals that are carnivorous and that have sharp, long teeth, birds and 
animals with two teeth and those with four, the milk of the sheep, the she- 
ass, the she-camel, the newly-calved cow, woman and deer, should not be 
ingested by a Brahmana. 

Besides this, food cooked by a woman who has recently given birth to a 
child, or food cooked by an unknown person should not be taken, nor 
should the milk of a cow that has recently calved. If a Brahmana takes food 
that a Kshatriya has cooked, it diminishes his tejas; if he takes the food 
provided by a Sudra, it dims his Brahmanic lustre; and if he takes the food 
provided by a goldsmith or a woman who has neither husband nor children, 
it lessens the span of his life. The food provided by a money-lender is 
equivalent to dirt, while that provided by a woman living by prostitution is 
equivalent to semen. The food provided by men who tolerate the infidelity 
of their wives, and by men whose spouses rule them, is also forbidden. 

A Brahmana should not accept food given by a man selected for 
receiving gifts at a certain stage of a sacrifice; by one who does not enjoy 
his wealth or make any gifts; by one who sells soma, or who is a shoe- 
maker; by an unchaste woman, by a washerman, by a physician, by persons 
serving as watchmen, by a multitude of persons, by one who is pointed at 
by a whole village, by one deriving his income from dancing girls, by men 
married before their elder brothers, by professional singers and bards or by 
gamblers. He should refuse food which is brought with the left hand or 
which is stale, or mixed with alcohol, or has been already tasted, or that 
remains after a feast. 

A Brahmana should not eat cakes, sugarcane, pot-herbs or rice boiled in 
sugared milk, if they have lost their taste, or fried barley powder and other 
kinds of fried grain mixed with curds if they are stale. Brahmanas leading a 
grihasta’s life should not take rice boiled in sugared milk, food mixed with 
the tila seed, meat and cakes that one has not dedicated to the gods. He 


should take his food after first gratifying the Devas, Rishis, Athitis, Pitris 
and household deities. 

By living thus in his own house, a grihasta becomes like a Bhikshu who 
has renounced the world. A man of such conduct, living with his wives in 
domesticity, earns great religious merit. No one should make a gift for the 
sake of acquiring fame, or from fear of censure and the like, or to a 
benefactor. 

A virtuous man would not give gifts to persons living by singing and 
dancing, to professional jesters, to a person who is intoxicated, to one who 
is insane, to a thief, to a slanderer, to an idiot, to an albino, to one who has a 
defective limb, to a dwarf, to an evil man, to one born in a low and evil 
family, or to one who has not been sanctified by the observance of vows. 

No gift should be made to a Brahmana who has no knowledge of the 
Vedas, but only to a Srotriya. An improper gift and an improper acceptance 
produce evil consequences to both the giver and the receiver. Just as a man 
who seeks to cross the ocean with the help of a rock or a mass of catechu 
sinks along with his support, so too do the giver and the acceptor both sink 
together. 

Just as a fire covered with wet fuel does not blaze up, the acceptor of a 
gift who is remiss in penance, study and piety, cannot confer any benefit 
upon the giver. Just as water in a human skull and milk in a bag made of 
dog-skin become unclean due to the uncleaness of the vessels in which they 
are kept, the Vedas too become fruitless in a man who is not of good 
conduct. 

A man may give from compassion to a low Brahmana who is without 
mantras and vows, who is ignorant of the shastras and who harbours envy. 
One may, from compassion, give to a man who is poor or afflicted or ill. 
But he should not give in the belief that he would derive any spiritual 
benefit from it, or that he would earn any religious merit by it. There is no 
doubt that a gift made to Brahmana who is without knowledge of the Vedas 
becomes perfectly fruitless. 

A Brahmana who has not studied the Vedas is like an elephant made of 
wood or an antelope made of leather, as all three are nothing but names. A 
Brahmana without mantras is like a eunuch with women, or a cow with 
another cow, or a featherless bird, all in vain. A gift to a Brahmana devoid 
of learning is like a grain without a kernel, a well without water, or 
offerings poured on ashes. 


An unlearned Brahmana is an enemy to all and the destroyer of the food 
that is offered to the Devas and Pitris. A gift made to him goes for nothing, 
and is like a gift to a robber. He can never succeed in acquiring regions of 
bliss hereafter. I have now told you in brief, O Yudhishtira, all that Manu 
said on that occasion. All should listen to this great conversation O 
Bharatarishabha.”’” 


CANTO 38 


¢ =e udhishtira says, ‘O Maharishi, I wish to hear in detail what the 
dharma of kings is, and the dharma of all the four varnas. I wish 
also to hear, O great Brahmana, what conduct one should adopt in times of 
distress, and how one can subdue the world by treading the path of dharma. 
This discourse on atonement, dealing at the same time with the subject of 
fasts, excites great curiosity, and fills me with joy. The practice of punya 
and the discharge of Rajadharma are always inconsistent with each other. 
My mind is constantly confused thinking of how to reconcile the two.’ 

Then Vyasa, the maharishi who is the greatest master of the Vedas, 
looks at the Devarishi Narada and says, ‘If you wish to hear of dharma in 
detail, ask Bhishma Pitamaha, Mahabaho. A profound knower of dharma 
and possessed of universal knowledge, the son of Bhagirathi will remove all 
your doubts on the difficult subject of duty. 

The Devi, the celestial river of three courses, gave birth to him. He saw 
with his mortal eyes all the Devas with Indra at their head. Having gratified 
with his dutiful services the Devarishis with Brihaspati at their head, he 
acquired a knowledge of the dharma of kings, with its interpretations, from 
Usanas and Brihaspati who is the guru of all the celestial ones. 

Having practised rigid vows, that Mahabaho acquired knowledge of all 
the Vedas and Vedangas from Vasishtha and from Chyavana of Bhrigu’s 
race. In his youth he studied under the eldest-born son of the Pitamaha, 
Sanatkumara of blazing splendour, knower of the deepest truths of mental 


and spiritual science. He learnt the duties in full of the Yatis from the lips of 
Markandeya, and obtained all weapons from Rama and Sakra. 

Although he was born among human beings, his death is yet under his 
own control and will only come when he wills it. We hear that although 
childless, he has many realms of bliss hereafter. Maharishis of great merit 
were always his courtiers. Nothing in the world of objects that should be 
known is unknown to him. Profoundly knowledgeable about all duties and 
acquainted with all the subtle truths of morality, he will also discourse with 
you upon these. Go to him before he abandons his prana.’ 

Thus addressed, Kaunteya of great wisdom says to Satyavati’s son 
Vyasa, ‘Having caused a great and horrible slaughter of kinsmen, I have 
become an offender against all and a destroyer of the earth. Having caused 
Bhishma himself, that warrior who always fought fairly, to be slain by 
deceit, how shall I approach him to ask him about dharma?’ 

Moved by the desire to benefit all the four varnas, the noble and mighty- 
armed Krishna, lord of the Yaduvamsa race, again addresses the great king. 
‘It does not become you to show such obstinacy in grief. O best of kings, do 
what the holy Vyasa has said. The Brahmanas and your brothers of great 
tejas stand before you, Mahabaho, imploring you like men beseeching the 
deity of the clouds at the close of summer. 

The unslain remnant of the assembled kings, and the people belonging 
to all the four orders of your kingdom of Kurujangala, O king, are here. For 
the sake of doing what is agreeable to these noble Brahmanas, in obedience 
to the command of Vyasa of immeasurable tejas, O Parantapa, and at our 
request, we who are your well-wishers and Draupadi’s, do what we ask you, 
and what is beneficial to the world.’ 

Yudhishtira of eyes like lotus petals rises from his seat for the good of 
the whole world. The Naravyaghra of great fame, entreated by Krishna 
himself, by the island-born Vyasa, by Devasthana, by Jishnu, and many 
others, casts off his grief and anxiety. Fully aware of the declarations of the 
Srutis, with the science that treats the interpretation of these declarations 
and with all that men usually hear and all that deserves to be heard, the son 
of Pandu finds peace of mind and resolves upon what he should do next. 

Surrounded by all of them, like the moon by the stars, and placing 
Dhritarashtra at the head of the train, Yudhishtira sets out for the city after 
offering worship to the Devas and thousands of Brahmanas. He ascends a 
new white chariot covered with blankets and deerskins, to which are yoked 


sixteen white bullocks with auspicious marks, sanctified with Vedic 
mantras. Hymned by poets and bards, the king mounts the chariot, like 
Soma ascending his own ambrosial vehicle. His brother Bhima, of awesome 
powers, takes the reins. Arjuna holds a white sovereign parasol of great 
radiance over his head, as beautiful as a white cloud decked with stars. The 
two heroic sons of Madri, Nakula and Sahadeva, take up two yak-tails, 
white as the rays of the moon and adorned with gems, with which to fan the 
king. 

Having ascended the chariot, the five brothers decked with ornaments, 
O Rajan, look like the five elements that permeate all things and beings. 
Riding another white ratha yoked to steeds fleet as thought, Yuyutsu follows 
behind the eldest son of Pandu. 

Upon his own brilliant chariot of gold, yoked to Saibya and Sugriva, 
Krishna with Satyaki follows the Kurus. The eldest uncle of Pritha’s son, O 
Bhaarata, accompanied by Gandhari, goes at the head of the train, upon a 
palanquin borne on the shoulders of men. The other women of the Kuru 
household, including Kunti and Krishna, journey in exquisite palanquins, 
headed by Vidura. Behind, follow a large number of chariots and elephants 
decked with ornaments, and foot-soldiers and horses. 

The Dharmaputra travels towards Hastinapura accompanied by sweet- 
voiced balladeers and bards singing the king’s praises. The progress of King 
Yudhishtira is majestic and beautiful, O Mahabhaho, beyond anything seen 
like it before on earth. During the regal progress of Pritha’s son, the city and 
its streets are adorned with happy citizens who have come out to honour the 
king. Teeming with robust and cheerful men, the streets resound with the 
hum of innumerable voices. The highway along which the king passes is 
festooned with flowers and innumerable banners. The streets of the city are 
perfumed with incense, covered with powdered perfumes and flowers and 
fragrant plants, and adorned with garlands and wreaths. New metal jars, 
brimming with water, are kept at the door of every house, and groups of the 
loveliest young women gather there. 

Accompanied by his friends, the son of Pandu, praised in speeches, 
enters the city through its profusely adorned gate.” 


CANTO 39 


V aisampayana said, “When the Pandavas enter the city, thousands and 

thousands of the citizens come out to watch them. The richly 
adorned squares and streets, swelling each moment with the crowds, are 
like the surge of ocean waves at the rise of the moon. The great mansions, 
Bhaarata, that stand on either side, decked with every ornament and full of 
women, seem to shake with their weight. With soft and modest voices they 
praise Yudhishtira, Bhima, Arjuna and the two sons of Madri, saying, ‘You 
are worthy of all praise, blessed princess of Panchala, who waits by the side 
of these great men even as Gautami did by the side of the seven Rishis. 
Your karma and vows have borne fruit, O Princess Krishnaa!’ 

O Rajan, the women praise her in this manner, and as a result of these 
praises, and their talk among one another, and the shouts of joy by the men, 
the city is filled with a reverberant uproar. After passing through the streets 
in a stately manner, Yudhishtira enters the beautiful palace of the Kurus 
adorned with all manner of ornaments. 

The people of the city and the provinces, approaching the palace, praise 
him: ‘Through good fortune you have vanquished your enemies, Parantapa, 
and recovered your kingdom through virtue and energy. Be our king for a 
hundred years, and protect your people virtuously as Indra protects the 
inhabitants of heaven!’ 

Thus praised and blessed at the palace-gate, and accepting the 
benedictions of the Brahmanas from every side, the king, graced with 
victory and the blessings of the people, enters the palace that resembles 


Indra’s own, and descends from his chariot. Entering the apartments, the 
blessed Yudhishtira worships the household gods, the kuladevas, with 
jewels, perfumes and garlands. He then comes out and sees a number of 
Brahmanas waiting with auspicious offerings in their hands, to pronounce 
blessings on him. Surrounded by them he appears like the full moon in the 
midst of the stars. Accompanied by his priest Dhaumya and his eldest 
uncle, he joyfully worships these Brahmanas with due rites, and gifts of 
sweets, gems, gold in profusion, cows, robes and other diverse things that 
they desire. 

Then loud shouts of ‘This is a blessed day!’ fill the heavens, O 
Bhaarata. Sweet to the ear, the sacred sound is gratifying to the friends and 
well-wishers of the Pandavas. The king also hears these sounds, loud and 
clear like the calls of a flock of swans. He listens to these men familiar with 
the Vedas, whose speech is meaningful and rich with melodious words. 
Then, O Rajan, there is a roll of drums and a delightful fanfare of triumphal 
conches. 

A little while later, when the Brahmanas become silent, a Rakshasa 
named Charvaka, who has disguised himself as a Brahmana, speaks. He is a 
friend of Duryodhana and stands there in the garb of a sannyasi. With a 
rosary, a tuft of hair on his head, and the triple staff in his hand, he stands 
proudly and fearlessly in the midst of all these Brahmanas, all devoted to 
penances and vows, who have come there in their thousands to bless the 
king. Charvaka the Rakshasa, wanting to do evil to the noble Pandavas, 
without consulting these Brahmanas, now tells the king, ‘All these 
Brahmanas, making me their spokesman, say “Shame on you! You are an 
evil king. You are a slayer of kinsmen. What have you gained, O son of 
Kunti, by having exterminated your race? For having also slain your elders 
and guru it is proper for you to cast away your life.” 

Hearing these words of that evil one, the Brahmanas present are deeply 
agitated and beak into a furious uproar. And all of them, including 
Yudhishtira, O Rajan, become speechless with shame and anxiety. 

Yudhishtira says, ‘I bow down to you and beg you humbly, to bear with 
me. It does not become you to shout at me. I will soon lay down my life.’ 

Then all the Brahmanas, O Rajan, cry loudly, ‘These are not our words! 
Prosperity to you, O Rajan!’ 

These maharishis, all with knowledge of the Vedas and understanding 
rendered clear by tapasya, then penetrate the disguise of the speaker with 


their spiritual insight and declare, “This is the Rakshasa Charvaka, 
Duryodhana’s friend disguised as a sannyasi, who seeks the good of his 
dead friend. We have not, O Dharmatman, joined him in what he says. Let 
your anxiety be dispelled and let prosperity be with you and your brothers.’ 

The Brahmanas, insensate with rage, then utter the deadly sound 
‘Hunn’. Cleansed of all sins, they censure the sinful Rakshasa and slay him 
there with the very humkara. Consumed by the tejas of these Brahmavadis, 
Charvaka falls dead like a tree with all its roots and sprouts blasted by 
Vajra, the thunder of Indra. The Brahmanas go away, duly worshipped, 
having gladdened the king with their blessings. The royal son of Pandu and 
all his friends feel great happiness come over them.” 


CANTO 40 


V aisampayana said, “Now Devaki’s son Krishna, Janardana of 

universal knowledge, says to King Yudhishtira and his brothers, ‘For 
me, in this world, Brahmanas are always to be worshipped. They are Devas 
on earth who have poison in their speech, but are exceedingly easy to 
gratify. 

Once, in the Krita yuga, O Rajan, a Rakshasa named Charvaka 
performed austere tapasya for many years in Badari, Mahabaho. Brahma 
repeatedly told him to ask for boons. Finally, the Rakshasa asked for a vara 
that he should be freed from fear of any being in the universe. The Prajapati 
granted the boon, subject to the condition that he should be careful to not 
offend Brahmanas. 

Having obtained the boon, the sinful and mighty Rakshasa, violent and 
powerful, began to harrass the Devas. Persecuted by the might of the 
Rakshasa, the Devas went to Brahma, for help to kill Charvaka. 

Brahma told them, “I have already arranged to bring about the 
Rakshasa’s death. There will be a king named Duryodhana among men, 
who will become the friend of this devil. Bound by affection for him, the 
Rakshasa will insult some holy Brahmanas. Stung by the wrong, the 
Brahmanas, whose power reposes in speech, will curse him in anger and he 
will die.” 

It is that Rakshasa Charvaka, O Rajan, who lies there dead, slain by the 
chant of the Brahmanas. Do not, Bharatarishabha, give way to sorrow. Your 
kinsmen, who perished in the observance of Kshatriya dharma, have all 


gone to Swarga. Attend to your duties now, and do not grieve. Kill your 
enemies, protect your subjects, and worship the Brahmanas.’” 


CANTO 41 


V aisampayana said, “Yudhishtira, free from grief and the fever in his 

heart, sits down with his face turned eastwards, on a magnificent 
throne made of gold. On another blazing golden seat facing him sit the two 
Parantapas, Satyaki and Krishna. On either side of the king, Bhima and 
Arjuna sit on two other resplendent jewel-encrusted thrones. Pritha sits with 
Sahadeva and Nakula on a white throne of ivory decked with gold. 
Sudharman, Vidura, Dhaumya and the Kuru king Dhritarashtra, sit 
separately on other thrones that blaze with the radiance of fire. Yuyutsu, 
Sanjaya and the famed Gandhari, all sit around King Dhritarashtra. 

Dharmaraja Yudhishtira first touches the beautiful white flowers, 
swastikas, vessels full of earth, gold, silver and gems placed before him. 
Then, led by the priest Dhaumya, his subjects approach him, bringing with 
them auspicious offerings: sacred earth, gold, many kinds of jewels and 
other things necessary for the performance of the coronation rites. There are 
golden pots brimming with water, copper, silver and earthen jars, flowers, 
fried paddy, Kusa grass, cow’s milk, sacrificial fuel of the wood of Sami, 
Pippala and Palasa, honey, clarified butter, sacrificial ladles made of 
Udumbara, and conches adorned with gold. 

At the behest of Krishna, the priest Dhaumya constructs an altar 
according to the appropriate rules, gradually inclining towards the east and 
the north. He seats Yudhishtira with Krishnaa, the daughter of Drupada, on 
the resplendent throne called Sarvatobhadra, glowing golden, with feet 


covered with tiger-skin. He pours offerings of ghrita onto the sacred fire, 
chanting the proper mantras. 

Yudhishtira, rising from his seat, takes up the sanctified conch and pours 
the water it contains over his head. Again at the behest of Krishna, the 
Rajarishi Dhritarashtra and all the people do the same. The son of Pandu, 
thus bathed with the sanctified water of the conch, looks radiantly 
handsome. The beating of panavas, anakas and other drums follows, as 
King Yudhishtira the Just accepts the gifts his subjects offer him. As is his 
wont, he in turn bestows gifts lavishly on his people. He gives a thousand 
nishkas to the Brahmanas, all endowed with wisdom and gentle conduct 
from their study of the Vedas, and they chant special blessings over him. 

Happy with their gifts, the Brahmanas wish him prosperity and victory 
and, with voices melodious as those of swans, praise him, saying, 
*Yudhishtira Mahabaho, by good fortune victory is yours, son of Pandu, and 
you have recovered your position through your prowess. By good fortune 
the wielder of Gandiva, Bhimasena, yourself, O Rajan, and the two sons of 
Madri, are all here with us, having slain your enemies and escaped alive 
from a war which caused the death of so many heroes. O Bhaarata! Do 
attend without delay to those karmas that you should perform next.’ 

Thus these pious men worship king Yudhishtira and his brothers and 
friends, and install him on the throne of a vast kingdom, O Bhaarata!” 


CANTO 42 


V aisampayana said, “Hearing these words of encouragement and 

support from his subjects, Yudhishtira says to them, ‘Truly blessed 
are the sons of Pandu, whose merits, true or false, the best of Brahmanas 
assembled together enumerate. Without doubt, we have gained your favour, 
since you so freely attribute all these qualities to us. 

However, King Dhritarashtra is our father and our lord and, if you wish 
to please me, obey him always and do what he likes. I live for him alone, 
having killed all my kinsmen, and my dharma is to always serve him 
punctiliously. If you, like my friends, think I am deserving of your favour, I 
beg you all to behave towards Dhritarashtra as you used to before. He is our 
lord and the whole world, along with the Pandavas, belongs to him. You 
should always bear this in mind.’ 

He then dismisses the citizens and the people of the provinces, and 
appoints his puissant brother Bhimasena as Yuvaraja, the most intelligent 
Vidura as chief advisor and, to oversee the six-fold needs of the state, the 
mature and accomplished Sanjaya as director and supervisor of finances. He 
appoints Nakula to keep the register of the military forces, to give the 
soldiers food and payment and to supervise other affairs of the army. He 
appoints Phalguna to defend the kingdom against hostile forces and to 
punish evil-doers, and Dhaumya, that best of priests, to attend daily to the 
Brahmanas of the kingdom, all rites in honour of the Devas and other 
religious duties. Sahadeva’s duty is to always remain by Yudhishtira’s side 


to protect him in all circumstances. The king also cheerfully employs others 
as he considers suitable. 

Dharmarajan Yudhishtira commands Vidura and Yuyutsu, “You should 
always do everything that my royal father Dhritarashtra wishes with alacrity 
and attention and, after taking his permission, whatever needs to be done in 
respect of the citizens and the people of the provinces in your respective 
capacities.’” 


CANTO 43 


V aisampayana said, “After this, the noble King Yudhishtira orders the 

Sraddha rites of each of his kinsmen slain in battle to be performed. 
King Dhritarashtra, for the good of his sons in the other world, gives away 
to the Brahmanas rich food, kine, vast wealth and many beautiful and costly 
gem-stones. 

Yudhishtira and Draupadi distribute wealth for the sake of Drona, the 
great Karna, Dhrishtadyumna, Abhimanyu, the Rakshasa Ghatotkacha, son 
of Hidimba, Virata, and other well-wishers who had served the Pandavas 
loyally, as well as for Drupada and the five sons of Draupadi. For the 
benefit of each of them, the king gratifies thousands of Brahmanas with 
gifts of gold, jewels, cows and clothes. 

He performs the Sraddha rite for the good of those in the next world, of 
all the kings who had died in battle without leaving kinsmen or friends 
behind. Further, for the souls of all his friends, he constructs halls for 
dispensing food, places for the distribution of water, and tanks to be dug in 
their names. Thus paying off the debt he owes them and avoiding censure in 
this world, the king is happy and continues to protect his people religiously. 

He shows due honour, as before, to Dhritarashtra, Gandhari, Vidura, to 
all the great Kauravas and all his officials. Full of kindness, the Kuru king 
honours and protects all the women who lost their heroic husbands and sons 
in the war. With great compassion, he extends his favour to the destitute, the 
blind and the helpless by giving them food, clothes and shelter. Free from 


enemies and having conquered the whole world, Yudhishtira begins to live 
a life of happiness.” 


CANTO 44 


V aisampayana said, “Having got back the kingdom, and after his 

coronation, the wise King Yudhishtira, with folded hands, says to 
the lotus-eyed Krishna of Dasarha’s vamsa, ‘O Madhava, through your 
grace, guidance, might, intelligence and prowess, I have won back my 
ancestral kingdom. I bow to you again and again, O Parantapa! You are the 
one and only Being, refuge of all worshippers, whom even the Rishis and 
Munis adore with innumerable names. 

Salutations to you, O Prajapati, Creator of the Universe! You are the 
Atman of the Universe, which has sprung from you. You are Vishnu, you 
are Jishnu, you are Hari, you are Krishna, you are Vaikunta, and you are the 
best of all beings. As said in the Puranas, you have taken birth seven times 
in the womb of Aditi. It was you who took birth in the womb of Prishni. 

The learned say that you are the three yugas. All your achievements are 
sacred. You are the lord of our senses. You are the great Lord worshipped in 
yagnas. You are called the Parama Hamsa. You are three-eyed Sambhu. You 
are One, though known as Vibhu and Damodara. You are the great Boar, 
you are Fire, you are the sun, you have the bull as your emblem on your 
banner, and you have Garuda also as your device. 

You are, Parantapa, the Being who pervades every form in the universe, 
of irresistible power. You are the best of all things, you are fierce, you are 
the Senapati in battle, you are the Truth, you are the giver of food, and you 
are Guha the celestial Senapati. Unfading, you cause your enemies to fade 
and waste away. 


You are the Brahmana of pure blood, as well as those who have sprung 
from mixed blood. You are great. You walk high, you are the mountains, 
and you are called Vrishadarbha and Vrishakapi. You are the Ocean, you are 
without attributes, you are the three peaks of Trikuta, you have three 
abodes, and you take human forms on earth, descending from Swarga. 

You are the Emperor, you are Virat, and you are Swarat. You are the 
Lord of the Devas, and you are the cause for the birth of the universe. You 
are Almighty, you are existence in every form, and yet you are formless. 
You are Krishna, you are fire. You are the Creator, you are the father of the 
celestial physicians, you are the sage Kapila, and you are the Vamana. You 
are the Sacrifice embodied, you are Dhruva, you are Garuda, and you are 
Yajnasena. 

You are Sikhandin, you are Nahusha, and you are Babhru. You are the 
constellation Punarvasu stretched across the sky. You are tawny in hue, you 
are the sacrifice known as Uktha, you are Sushena, you are the drum which 
resounds through all space. Light is the track of your chariot-wheels. You 
are the lotus of Prosperity, you are the cloud called Pushkara, and you are 
decked with garlands. You are opulent, you are powerful, you are the most 
subtle, and it is you whom the Vedas describe. 

You are the Ocean, great receptacle of waters, you are Brahma, you are 
the sacred refuge, and you know the abodes of all. You are called 
Hiranyagarbha, you are the sacred mantras Swadha and Swaha, and you are 
Kesava. You are the cause of the birth of all, and you are its dissolution. In 
the beginning it is you who created the universe. It is under your control, O 
Creator! Salutations to you, wielder of the Saringa, the Sudarshana and the 
Kaumodaki!’ 

Thus praised in song by Yudhishtira Dharmatma in the midst of the 
Kuru sabha, the lotus-eyed Krishna is pleased. In turn, the greatest of the 
Yadavas then lauds the eldest son of Pandu with his own words of praise.” 


CANTO 45 


V aisampayana said, “The king dismisses all his subjects, and they 

return to their homes. Comforting his brothers, Yudhishtira, blazing 
in splendour, says to the awesome Bhima, Arjuna and the twins, ‘In the 
Great War, our enemies have lacerated your bodies with different kinds of 
weapons and you are exhausted, as grief and anger have scorched your 
hearts. Through my fault, you, Bharatarishabhas, have suffered the 
privations and miseries of vanavasa like common men. In delight and ease 
now enjoy your victory. Meet me in the morning after you have rested and 
regained your strength.’ 

Then Mahabaho Bhima Vrikodara, like Maghavat entering his own 
beautiful temple, enters the grand palace that Yudhishtira has assigned to 
him with the approval of Dhritarashtra, the palace of Duryodhana, 
consisting of many large mansions and spacious chambers adorned with 
gemstones of diverse kinds, and thronged with servants, male and female. 

The peerless Arjuna, at the command of the king, is given the palace of 
Dusasana, in no way inferior to Duryodhana’s, consisting of many 
magnificent edifices, with a gateway of gold, abounding in wealth and full 
of attendants and servitors, both men and women. 

The palace of Durmarshana, superior even to that of Dusasana, 
ornamented with gold and every kind of gem, looks like Kubera’s own 
mansion. King Yudhishtira gladly gives this to the sensitive Nakula, whom 
the ordeals of vanavasa had affected the most. 


The best of palaces, which once belonged to Durmukha, is embellished 
with gold and contains a plenitude of beds and beautiful women with eyes 
like lotus-petals. The king gives this to Sahadeva, who was always 
considerate to him. Sahadeva is as delighted as the Lord of Treasures was 
upon obtaining Kailasa. 

Yuyutsu, Vidura and Sanjaya, O Rajan, and Sudharman and Dhaumya 
return to the abodes they owned earlier. 

Like a tiger entering his cave in the hills, the Purushavyaghra Saurin, 
accompanied by Satyaki, enters the palace of Arjuna. Feasting on meat and 
drink kept ready for them, the princes pass the night happily. Awakening in 
the morning with rested and satisfied hearts, they present themselves before 
Yudhishtira.” 


CANTO 46 


anamejaya said, “You must tell me, O learned Brahmana, what 

Mahabaho Yudhishtira does after he regains his kingdom and also, O 
Rishi, what the heroic Hrishikesa, the supreme master of the three worlds, 
does after the war.” 

Vaisampayana said, “Listen to me, O Rajan, as I narrate in detail what 
the Pandavas, led by Vasudeva, do after the war. Having won back his 
kingdom, Kunti’s son Yudhishtira enjoins each of the four varnas to 
perform their respective svadharma. Pandu’s eldest son gives a thousand 
noble Brahmanas of the Snataka order a thousand nishkas each. He then 
gratifies the servants who are dependent on him and the guests who visited 
him, including men who are undeserving and those who have heterodox 
views, by fulfilling their wishes. 

He gives his priest Dhaumya kine in thousands and great wealth, gold, 
silver and robes of diverse kinds. Towards Kripa, O Rajan, he behaves in 
the way one should towards one’s acharya. Observing his vows, he 
continues to honour Vidura greatly. This most charitable king gratifies 
everyone with gifts of food, drink, fine robes of diverse kinds, beds and 
seats. Having restored peace to his kingdom, he pays due honour to Yuyutsu 
and Dhritarashtra. Placing his kingdom at the disposal of Dhritarashtra, 
Gandhari and Vidura, Yudhishtira continues to pass his days in peace. 

After gratifying everyone, including the common citizens, O 
Bharatarishabha, Yudhishtira comes with folded palms into Vasudeva’s 
presence where he sees Krishna, of the hue of a blue cloud, seated on a 


large throne adorned with gold and gems. Wearing yellow robes of silk and 
decked with celestial ornaments, Krishna blazes with splendour like a jewel 
set in gold and, with the crimson Kaustubha ruby adorning his chest, he 
looks like the Udaya mountain that adorns the rising sun. No metaphor in 
the three worlds can remotely describe his beauty. 

Approaching Him who is Vishnu incarnate, Yudhishtira sweetly and 
smilingly asks, ‘O most intelligent one, have you passed the night happily? 
You of unfading glory, are all your faculties in their full vigour, and is your 
understanding luminous? We have got back our kingdom and the earth has 
come under our sway. Refuge of the three worlds, O you of the Three Steps, 
through your grace we are victorious and have won great fame without 
violating our svadharma!’ 

To Parantapa Yudhishtira who addresses him in this strain, the divine 
Krishna does not say a word, for he is in deep meditation.” 


CANTO 47 


¢ a udhishtira says, ‘How wonderful is this, O you of immeasurable 

valour, that you are rapt in dhyana! O great refuge of the 

universe, is all right with the three worlds? When you withdraw yourself 

from the world into turiya, the fourth state, O bull among men, I am filled 

with wonder. You still the five life-breaths that move within the body and 
you focus your senses within your mind. 

O Govinda, you concentrate both speech and mind within your 
understanding, and withdraw your senses into your Atman. Your body hair 
stands erect, your mind and understanding are both still, and you are as 
immobile now, O Madhava, as a wooden post. O illustrious Devadeva, you 
are as still as the flame of a lamp in a windless place, as unmoving as a 
stone. 

I beg you as a favour to tell me the cause of your dhyana and dispel my 
doubts, unless it is a secret that I cannot share. You are the Creator and you 
are the Destroyer, you are destructible and you are indestructible. You are 
without beginning and you are without end, you are the first and the greatest 
of Beings. O Dharmatman, tell me the cause of your Yogic abstraction. I, 
your devoted worshipper, bow my head to you and ask your favour.’ 

Thus addressed, the illustrious younger brother of Vasava, recalling his 
mind, understanding and senses to their mundane sphere, says with a gentle 
smile, ‘That Purushavyaghra Bhishma, who lies now on a bed of arrows 
and who is like a fire about to be extinguished, is thinking of me. So my 


mind was turned on him, the twang of whose bowstring and the sound of 
whose palms being clapped together Indra himself was unable to bear. 

I was thinking of him who, having vanquished in a trice all the 
assembled kings at the Swayamvara of the daughters of the king of Kasi, 
abducted the three princesses to marry his brother Vichitravirya. I was 
thinking of him who fought for twenty-three days with Parasurama himself, 
and whom even Rama of Bhrigu’s race was unable to overcome. Collecting 
all his senses and concentrating his mind through his understanding, he 
sought my refuge. It was for this that I turned my mind upon him. 

I was thinking of him whom Ganga conceived and brought forth, and 
whom Vasishtha took as a disciple. I was thinking of that hero of powerful 
energy and great intellect who possesses knowledge of all the celestial 
weapons and of the four Vedas with all their branches. O son of Pandu, I 
was thinking of him who is the favourite disciple of Parasurama, son of 
Jamadagni, and who is the greatest of all men who know dharma; of him, 
Bharatarishabha, who knows the Past, the Future, and the Present. 

When that Naravyaghra, as a result of his achievements, ascends to 
Swarga, O son of Pritha, the earth will seem a moonless night. Therefore, 
Yudhishtira, humbly approach Ganga’s son, the mighty Bhishma, and 
question him about what you wish to learn. Ask him, O lord of the earth, 
about the four branches of knowledge, about the sacrifices and rites laid 
down for the four varnas, about the four modes of life, and about all kingly 
duties. When Bhishma, that Kurusthama, disappears from the world, every 
kind of knowledge will be lost with him. This is why I urge you to go to 
him now.’ 

Hearing Krishna’s precious advice, the righteous Yudhishtira, his voice 
choked with tears, answers Janardana, ‘What you say, O Madhava, about 
the eminence of Bhishma is perfectly true and I have not the slightest doubt 
about it. Indeed, I have heard from noble Brahmanas of the holiness and the 
greatness of the illustrious Bhishma. 

You, Parantapa, are the Creator of all the worlds and there can be no 
doubt about what you say. If your heart be inclined to show grace, O 
Madhava, then let us go together to Bhishma, with you leading us. When 
the divine Surya turns towards the north, Bhishma will leave this world for 
those regions of bliss that he has won. Before this transpires, that 
Kurusthama deserves to see you. If you grant my prayer, Bhishma will have 


a glimpse of you, the first of the gods, destructible and indestructible. 
Indeed, O Lord, you are the infinite receptacle of Brahman.’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Hearing these words of King Yudhishtira the 
Just, Krishna says to Satyaki who is sitting beside him, ‘Let my chariot be 
yoked.’ Satyaki quickly leaves Krishna’s presence and, going out, 
commands Daruka, ‘Let Krishna’s chariot be made ready.’ 

Daruka swiftly yokes Krishna’s ratha, the best of chariots, shining with 
gold, decked with emeralds, moon-gems, sun-gems, and furnished with 
golden wheels. Fleet as the wind, set with fantastic jewels, it is as beautiful 
as the morning sun. It has a radiant standard of Garuda flying, and is 
festooned with numerous other bright banners. It has yoked to it in 
trappings of gold, the best of steeds, swift as thought— Sugriva and Saibya, 
and two others. Having harnessed it, Daruka comes and, with folded hands, 
tells Krishna that his ratha awaits.” 


CANTO 48 


J anameyjaya said, “How did the grandsire of the Bhaaratas who lay on a 
bed of arrows cast off his body, and what kind of Yoga did he adopt 
for this?’ 

Vaisampayana said, “Listen, O king, with pure heart and concentrated 
attention, to how the Mahatman Bhishma cast off his body. As soon as the 
sun, passing the solstitial point, entered Uttarayana, his northerly course, 
Bhishma, with the power of dhyana, caused his atman to enter his Atman. 
Surrounded by many of the foremost of Brahmanas, that hero, his body 
pierced with innumerable arrows, blazed forth in lustrous beauty like Surya 
himself with his innumerable rays. Surrounded by Veda Vyasa, by the 
Devarishi Narada, by Devasthana, by Asmaka, Sumantu, by Jaimini, by the 
high-souled Paila, by Sandilya, by Devarata, by Maitreya of great intellect, 
by Asita and Vasishtha and the high-souled Kausika, by Harita and Lomasa 
and Atri’s son of genius, by Brihaspati and Sukra and the Maharishi 
Chyavana, by Sanatkumara and Kapila and Valmiki and Tumburu and 
Kuru, by Maudgalya and Rama of Bhrigu’s vamsa, and the great Muni 
Trinabindu, by Pippalada and Vayu and Samvarta and Pulaha and Katha, by 
Kasyapa and Pulastya and Kratu and Daksha and Parasara, by Marichi and 
Angiras and Kasmya and Gautama and the sage Galava, by Dhaumya and 
Vibhanda and Mandavya and Dhaumra and Krishnanubhautika, by Uluka, 
that foremost of Brahmanas, and the mighty Markandeya, by Bhaskari and 
Purana and Krishna and Suta, surrounded by these and many other highly 
blessed powerful sages, and possessed of faith and self-restraint and 


tranquility of mind, the Kuru hero looked like the moon in the midst of the 
planets and the stars. 

Stretched out on his bed of arrows, that Naravyaghra, Bhishma, with 
pure heart and palms joined, set his mind, thought and actions on Krishna. 
With a cheerful and strong voice he hymned the praises of the slayer of 
Madhu, the Master of Yoga with the lotus in his navel, the Lord of the 
universe, called Vishnu and Jishnu. With joined hands, that foremost of 
eloquent men, the puissant Bhishma of perfectly virtuous soul, praises 
Janardana. 

Bhishma says, “O Krishna, O foremost of Beings, be you pleased with 
these words that I utter, in brief and in detail, from my desire to hymn your 
praises. You are pure and purity’s self. You transcend all. You are what 
people say to be THAT. You are the Supreme Lord. With my whole heart I 
seek your refuge, O universal Soul and Lord of all creatures! 

You are without beginning and without end. You are the highest of the 
high and Brahman. Neither the Devas nor the Rishis know you. The divine 
Creator, called Narayana or Hari, alone knows you. Through Narayana, the 
Rishis, the Siddhas, the great Nagas, the Devas, and the celestial Rishis 
know a little of you. You are the highest of the high and know no 
deterioration. The Devas, the Danavas, the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the 
Pannagas do not know who you are and whence you came. All the worlds 
and all created things live in you and enter you when the dissolution comes. 
Like gems strung together on a thread, all things that have attributes reside 
in you, the Supreme Lord. Having the universe for your work and for your 
limbs, this universe consisting of mind and matter resides in your eternal 
and all-pervading soul like a multitude of flowers strung together by a 
strong thread. 

You are called Hari, of a thousand heads, a thousand feet, a thousand 
eyes, a thousand arms, a thousand crowns and a thousand faces of great 
splendour. You are called Narayana, divinity, and the refuge of the universe. 
You are the subtlest of the subtle, grossest of the gross, the heaviest of the 
heavy and the highest of the high. In the Vaks, the Anuvaks, the Nishads, 
and Upanishads, You are regarded as the Supreme Being of irresistible 
force. In the Samans also, whose declarations are always true, you are 
regarded as Truth’s self. 

You are of quadruple soul. You are displayed in only the understanding 
of all creatures. You are the Lord of those that are bound to you in faith. O 


God, you are adored by the faithful with four excellent, high, and secret 
names. Penances are ever present in you. Performed by other creatures to 
gratify you, penances live in your form. You are the Universal Soul. You are 
of universal knowledge. You are the universe. You are omniscient. You are 
the Creator of all. 

Like a couple of kindling sticks generating a blazing fire, you have been 
born of the divine Devaki and Vasudeva for the protection of dharma on 
earth. For eternal salvation, the devout worshipper, with mind withdrawn 
from all else and casting off all desires, beholds you, O Govinda, that are 
the Primal Soul, in his own soul. You transcend Surya in glory. You are 
beyond the ken of the senses and the understanding. O Lord of all creatures, 
I place myself in your hands. In the Puranas you have been spoken of as 
Purusha. On occasions of the commencement of yugas, you are said to be 
Brahma, while on occasions of universal dissolution you are spoken of as 
Sankarshana. Adorable you are, and therefore I worship you. 

Though one, you have yet been born in innumerable forms. You have 
your passions under perfect control. Your devout worshippers, faithfully 
performing the rites laid down in the scriptures, sacrifice to you, O granter 
of every wish! You are called the sheath within which the universe lies. All 
created things live in you. Like swans and ducks swimming on the water, 
all the worlds that we see float in you. You are Truth. You are One and 
undecaying. You are Brahman, you are That which is beyond Mind and 
Matter. 

You are without beginning, middle or end. Neither the Devas nor the 
Rishis know you. The Devas, the Asuras, the Gandharvas, the Siddhas, the 
Rishis and the great Uragas always worship you with concentrated souls. 
You are the great panacea for all sorrow. You are without birth and death. 
You are divine. You are self-created. You are eternal. You are invisible and 
beyond ken. You are called Hari and Narayana, O puissant one. The Vedas 
declare you to be the Creator of the universe and the Lord of everything that 
exists in it. You are its Supreme protector. You know no deterioration and 
you are that which is called the highest. You are of the complexion of gold. 
You are the slayer of Asuras. Though One, Aditi brought you forth in 
twelve forms. 

Salutations to you that are the soul of the sun! Salutations to you in your 
form of Soma, said to be the chief of all the regenerate ones, who gratifies 
with nectar the Devas in the lighted fortnight and the Pitris in the dark 


fortnight. You are the One Being of transcendent effulgence dwelling on the 
other side of dense darkness. Knowing you, one ceases to have any fear of 
death. Salutations to you in that form which is an object of knowledge! 

In the grand Uktha sacrifice, the Brahmanas adore you as the great Rik. 
In the great fire-sacrifice, they sing of you as the chief Adhvaryu. You are 
the soul of the Vedas. The Riks, the Yajus and the Samans are your abode. 
You are the five kinds of sanctified libations used in sacrifices. Salutations 
to you! 

You are the seven mantras used in the Vedas. Salutations to you in your 
form of Sacrifice! Libations are poured on the Homa fire to the 
accompaniment of the seventeen monosyllabic sounds. You are the soul of 
the Homa. Salutations to you! You are that Purusha of whom the Vedas 
sing. Your name is Yajus. The Vedic metres are your limbs. The sacrifices 
laid down in the three Vedas are your three heads. The great sacrifice called 
Rathantara is your voice, expressive of gratification. Salutation to you in 
your form of sacred hymns! 

You are the Rishi that appeared during the Mahayagna, lasting for a 
thousand years, performed by the creators of the universe. You are the great 
swan with wings of gold. Salutations to you in your form of the Swan! The 
Mulas, the roots with all kinds of affixes and suffixes are your limbs. The 
Sandhis are your joints. The consonants and the vowels are your ornaments. 
The Vedas have declared you to be the divine word. Salutations to you in 
your form of the Word! 

Assuming the form of the Boar, Varaha whose limbs were constituted 
by sacrifice, you raised up the submerged earth for the benefit of the three 
worlds. Salutations to you in your form of infinite prowess! You sleep in 
Yoga on your serpent bed shaded by the thousand hoods of Anantasesha. 
Salutations to you in your form of Sleep! 

You build the bridge for the good to cross the sea of samsara with Truth, 
with those means by which Mukti can be obtained, and with the means by 
which the senses may be controlled. Salutations to you in your form of 
Truth! 

Men practising diverse creeds, actuated by desire for diverse fruits, 
worship you with diverse rites. Salutations to you in your form of Creed! 

From you all things have sprung. It is you that excite with desire all 
embodied creatures. Salutations to you in your form of Excitement! The 
great Rishis seek your unmanifest self within the manifest. Called 


Kshetrajna, you sit in Kshetra. Salutations to you in your form of Kshetra! 
You are always conscious and present in the self, and the Sankhyas still 
describe you as existing in the three states of wakefulness, dream and sound 
sleep. They further speak of you as possessed of sixteen attributes and 
representing the number seventeen. Salutations to your form as conceived 
by the Sankhyas! Casting off sleep, restraining breath, withdrawn into their 
own selves, Yogins of restrained senses behold you as eternal light. 
Salutations to you in your form of Yoga! Peaceful sannyasins, freed from 
fear of rebirth by the destruction of all their sins and merits, find you in 
liberation. Salutations to you in your form of Emancipation! 

At the end of a thousand yugas, you assume the form of a blazing fire 
and consume all creatures. Salutations to you in your form of Fierceness! 
Having consumed all creatures and making the universe one vast expanse of 
water, you sleep on the waters in the form of a child. Salutations to you in 
your form as Maya! From the navel of the Self-born with eyes like lotus 
leaves, springs a lotus, on which is established this universe. Salutations to 
you in your form as Lotus! 

You have a thousand heads. You pervade everything. You are of 
immeasurable soul. You have subjugated the four kinds of desire that are as 
vast as the four oceans. Salutations to you in your form of Yoga-nidra! 

The clouds are in the hair of your head. The rivers flow in the several 
joints of your limbs. The four oceans are in your belly. Salutations to you in 
your form of Water! Birth and the change represented by death spring from 
you. All things, again, at the universal dissolution dissolve away in you. 
Salutations to your form as Cause! You sleep not in the night. You rest not 
by day. You observe the good and the evil actions of all. Salutations to you 
in your form of universal Witness! There is nothing, no deed, which you 
cannot do. You are, again, ever ready to accomplish actions that are 
righteous. Salutations to you in your form of Work, the form which is called 
Vaikuntha! In wrath you exterminated in battle twenty-one times the 
Kshatriyas who had trampled virtue and authority under their feet. 
Salutations to you in your form of Cruelty! 

Dividing yourself into five portions you have become the five vital 
breaths that act within everybody and cause every living creature to move. 
Salutations to you in your form of Air! You appear in every yuga in the 
forms called month and season and half-year and year, and are the cause of 
both creation and dissolution. Salutations to you in your form of Time! 


Brahmanas are your mouth, Kshatriyas are your two arms, Vaisyas are 
your stomach and thighs, and Sudras live in your feet. Salutations to you in 
your form of Caste! 

Fire constitutes your mouth. The heavens are the crown of your head. 
The sky is your navel. The earth is your feet. The sun is your eye. The 
points of the compass are your ears. Salutations to you in your form of the 
Worlds! You are superior to Time. You are superior to Sacrifice. You are 
higher than the highest. Yourself without origin, you are the origin of the 
universe. Salutations to you in your form of the Universe! Men of the 
world, according to the attributes ascribed to you by the Vaiseshikas, regard 
you as the Protector of the world. Salutations to you in your form of 
Protector! 

Assuming the forms of food, drink and fuel, you increase the humours 
and the life-breaths of creatures and uphold their existence. Salutations to 
you in your form of Life! To support the life-breaths you eat the four kinds 
of food. Assuming also the form of Agni within the belly, you digest that 
food. Salutations to you in your form of assimilating Heat! 

Assuming the form of half-man and half-lion, Narasimha with tawny 
eyes and tawny mane, with teeth and claws for your weapons, you took the 
life of Hiranyakashyapu, the king of the Asuras. Salutations to you in your 
form of swelling Might! Neither the Devas, nor the Gandharvas, nor the 
Daityas, nor the Danavas, know you truly. Salutations to your form of 
exceeding Subtlety! 

Assuming the form of the handsome, illustrious and puissant Ananta in 
the Patalas, you support the world. Salutations to your form of Might! You 
stupefy all creatures by the bonds of affection and love for the continuance 
of the creation. Salutations to you in your form of Stupefaction! Regarding 
that knowledge which is conversant with the five elements to be the true 
Self-knowledge, people approach you through knowledge! Salutations to 
you in your form of Knowledge! Your body is immeasurable. Your intellect 
and eyes encompass everything. You are infinite, being beyond all 
measures. Salutations to you in your form of Immensity! 

You assumed the form of a recluse with a head of matted locks, a staff 
in your hand, a long belly and a begging bowl for your quiver. Salutations 
to you in your form of Brahma! You bear the trident, you are the lord of the 
celestials, you have three eyes, and you are high-souled. Your body is 
always smeared with ashes, and your linga is always turned upwards. 


Salutations to you in your form of Rudra! The half-moon forms the 
ornament of your brow. You have snakes for the sacred thread circling your 
neck. You are armed with Pinaka and Trisula. Salutations to your form of 
Fierceness! 

You are the soul of all creatures. You are the Creator and the Destroyer 
of all. You are without wrath, without enmity, without affection. Salutations 
to you in your form of Peace! Everything is in you. Everything is from you. 
You are Everything, Everywhere. You are ever the All. Salutations to you in 
your form of Everything! Salutations to you whose work is the universe, to 
you that are the soul of the universe, to you from whom has sprung the 
universe, to you that are the dissolution of all things, to you that are beyond 
the five elements that constitute all things! 

Salutations to you that are the three worlds, to you that are above the 
three worlds! Salutations to you that are all the directions! You are all and 
you are the one receptacle of all. Salutations to you, O divine Lord, O 
Vishnu, and O eternal origin of all the worlds! You, O Hrishikesa, are the 
Creator, You are the Destroyer, and you are invincible. I cannot behold that 
heavenly form in which you are displayed in the Past, Present, and the 
Future. I can, however, behold truly your eternal form as manifest in your 
works. 

You have filled heaven with your head, and the earth with your feet; 
with your prowess you have filled the three worlds. You are Eternal and you 
pervade everything in the universe. The directions are your arms, the sun is 
your eye, and prowess is your vital fluid. You are the lord of all creatures. 
You stand, shutting up the seven paths of the Wind whose energy is 
immeasurable. They are freed from all fears that worship you, O Govinda 
of unfading prowess, you that are clad in yellow robes of the colour of the 
Atasi flower. Even one genuflection to you, O Krishna, is equal to the 
completion of ten Horse-sacrifices. The man who has performed ten Horse- 
sacrifices is not freed from the obligation of rebirth. The man who bows to 
Krishna, however, escapes rebirth. They who have Krishna for their vow, 
they who think of Krishna in the night and upon rising from sleep, may be 
said to have Krishna for their body. Those people after death enter 
Krishna’s self, even as libations of clarified butter sanctified with mantras 
enter the blazing fire. 

Salutations to you that dispel the fear of hell, to you, O Vishnu, that are 
a boat unto those that flounder amid the waves of the ocean of worldly life! 


Salutations to you, O God, that are the Brahmana’s self, to you that are the 
benefactor of Brahmanas and kine, to you that are the benefactor of the 
universe, to you that are Krishna and Govinda! The two syllables Ha-ri 
constitute the monetary stock of those that sojourn through the wilderness 
of life, and the medicine that effectively cures all worldly predilections, 
besides being the means to alleviate sorrow and grief. 

As truth is full of Vishnu, as the universe is full of Vishnu, as everything 
is full of Vishnu, so let my soul be full of Vishnu, and my sins be destroyed! 
I seek your protection, devoted to you, desirous of finding a happy end, O 
you of eyes like lotus petals. O best of gods, think of what will be for my 
good! Yourself without origin, O Vishnu, you are the origin of Knowledge 
and Penance. Thus are you praised! O Janardana, thus worshipped by me in 
the Sacrifice constituted by speech, be gratified with me, O God. The Vedas 
are devoted to Narayana. Penances are devoted to Narayana. The gods are 
devoted to Narayana. All is forever Narayana!’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Having uttered these words, Bhishma, with 
mind concentrated upon Krishna, says, ‘Salutations to Krishna!’ and bows 
to him. Learning through his Yoga prowess of the devotion of Bhishma, 
Madhava, otherwise called Hari, entering his body, bestows upon him 
heavenly knowledge compassing the Past, the Present, and the Future, and 
then leaves. When Bhishma falls silent, those utterers of Brahman, the 
Brahmavadis that sat around him, with voices choked with tears, adored 
that high-souled great Lord of the Kurus in excellent speech. Those 
foremost of Brahmanas uttered the praises of Krishna also, that first of 
Beings, and continued in soft voices to laud Bhishma. 

Learning of the devotion of Bhishma for him, that foremost of Beings 
Krishna climbs into his chariot. Kesava and Satyaki ride on one car. On 
another go those two illustrious Kshatriyas, Yudhishtira and Dhananjaya. 
Bhimasena and the twins ride on a third, while those bulls among men, 
Kripa and Yuyutsu, and that Parantapa, Sanjaya of the Suta varna, all ride 
their own rathas, each of which looks like a town. All of them, riding 
together, cause the earth to tremble with the rumble of their chariot-wheels. 

Krishna, foremost of men, as he goes, cheerfully listens to the praises 
sung by the Brahmanas along the way. The slayer of Kesi with a glad heart 
salutes the people lining the streets with joined hands and bowed heads.” 


CANTO 49 


V aisampayana said, “Krishna, Yudhishtira and all their men, led by 

Kripa, along with the four Pandavas in their rathas like fortified 
cities decked with standards and banners, fly to Kurukshetra on their swift 
horses. They descend on the field where millions of noble Kshatriyas have 
cast away their lives, and which is now covered with hair, marrow and 
bones and with hillocks formed of the bodies and bones of elephants and 
horses, scattered with human heads and skulls like conch-shells. With 
thousands of funeral pyres and with armour and weapons lying in heaps, the 
vast plain looks like the drinking garden of the Destroyer himself, used and 
recently abandoned. The Maharathas travel quickly, viewing the battlefield 
haunted by throngs of Pisachas and Rakshasas. 

On the way, the mighty-armed Kesava, delighter of all the Yadavas, 
speaks to Yudhishtira about the prowess of Jamadagni’s son, Parasurama, 
‘There, at a distance, O Kaunteya, are the five lakes of Rama, where he 
offered oblations of Kshatriya blood to the souls of his ancestors! It was 
there that the mighty Rama, having freed the earth of Kshatriyas twenty-one 
times, finally ceased his grisly task.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “I have great doubts about what you say about Rama 
having extirpated the Kshatriyas twenty-one times. When Parasurama burnt 
the very Kshatriya seed, O Yadurishabha, how was it that the Kshatriya 
varna revived, how did the illustrious one exterminate the Kshatriya again 
and again, and how came it to rise yet again? In frightful chariot encounters 
he slew millions of Kshatriyas, and the earth was strewn with the corpses of 


warriors. For what reason did Dharmatman Parasurama Bhargava extirpate 
the Kshatriyas, O tiger among the Yadus? Clear my doubts, O you of 
Vrishni’s race, for you know all things.’” 

Vaisampayana said, “The bird-bannered hero, puissant elder brother of 
Baladeva, then narrates in full everything that happened on earth and how it 
was again peopled with Kshatriyas.” 


CANTO 50 


¢ °V asudeva says, ‘Listen, O son of Kunti, to the story of 

Parasurama’s birth, his vitality, and prowess, as I learnt it from 

some great Rishis. Listen to the tale of how Jamadagni’s son slew millions 

of Kshatriyas and repeatedly slaughtered those who sprang up again in the 
different royal houses of Bharatavarsha. 

Jadu had a son named Rajas, whose son King Balakaswa had an upright 
and virtuous son named Kusika. Resembling the thousand-eyed Indra on 
earth, Kusika underwent many maha-tapasyas in order to petition the Lord 
of the three worlds for a son. Seeing him engaged in the severest tapasyas 
and well able to father a son, the thousand-eyed Purandara himself inspired 
the king with his force. The great Lord of the three worlds, Indra, tamer of 
Paka, was himself born as Kusika’s son, O Rajan, and was named Gadhi. 

Gadhi had a daughter called Satyavati. The powerful Gadhi gave her as 
wife to Richika, a descendant of Bhrigu. Richika was pleased with her for 
the purity of her character. He cooked a sacrificial payasa of milk and rice 
for Gadhi to obtain a son. 

Calling his wife, Richika said, “You must take this portion of the 
sanctified payasa for yourself, and your mother must have this other 
portion. A son will be born to her who will blaze with tejas and be a bull 
among Kshatriyas. Invincible to Kshatriyas on earth, he will be the slayer of 
the greatest of them. As for you, O blessed Satyavati, your portion of the 
food will give you a very wise son, an embodiment of tranquillity, a 
Mahatapasvin, and the best of Brahmanas.” 


Having said these words to his wife, the blessed Richika of Bhrigu’s 
vamsa set his heart on tapasya, and left for the vana. About the same time, 
King Gadhi, who was on a pilgrimage to the holy tirthas, arrived with his 
queen at the asrama of Richika. Seeing them, Satyavati fetched the two 
portions of the sanctified payasa, and told her mother what her husband had 
said. But, in her eagerness and haste, O son of Kunti, the queen-mother 
mistakenly gave the portion intended for herself to her daughter, and ate the 
portion intended for Satyavati. Thus, Satyavati, her body blazing with 
lustre, conceived a child of terrible form, born to become the exterminator 
of the race of Kshatriyas. 

Seeing a Brahmana child lying within her womb Richika, that tiger 
among the Bhrigus, said to his wife Satyavati of divine beauty, “Your 
mother has deceived you by substituting the sanctified payasas, O blessed 
lady. Your son will become a man of cruel deeds and vindictive heart. Your 
brother, born of your mother, will be a Brahmana devoted to maha-tapasya. 
Into the sanctified food intended for you I placed the seed of the supreme 
and universal Brahman, while into that intended for your mother I mixed all 
the essence of Kshatriya energy. Now, O Satyavati, that which I had 
intended will not happen. Your mother will have a Brahmana child, while to 
you will be born a son who will become a Kshatriya.” 

Hearing this, the blessed Satyavati prostrated herself and, setting her 
head at his feet said, trembling, “It does not become you, O holy one, to tell 
me that my son will be a wretch among Brahmanas.” 

Richika replied, “I did not intend this for you, Satyavati. You have 
conceived a son of fierce deeds only because of the substitution of the 
payasas.” Satyavati pleaded, “Maharishi, when you can create other worlds 
if you wish, why not a child? It is only right to give me a son who will be 
righteous and devoted to peace.” 

Richika said, “When I have never lied, even in jest, how can I lie about 
such a solemn matter as preparing sanctified food with Vedic mantras, after 
lighting a holy fire? Destiny ordained it, I have ascertained that through my 
tapasya. All the descendants of your father will be possessed of Brahmanic 
dharma.” 

Satyavati then said, “Mahatapasvin, let our grandson be like that, but let 
me have a son of tranquil pursuits.” 

Richika said, “O you of the fairest complexion, there is no distinction 
between a son and a grandson. It will be as you wish. Tathaastu!” 


Then Satyavati gave birth to Jamadagni, a son in Bhrigu’s race who was 
of regulated vows and devoted to tapasya and other tranquil pursuits. 
Kusika’s son Gadhi had a son named Viswamitra. Possessed of every 
attribute of a Brahmana, this son, though born a Kshatriya, was equal to a 
Brahmana. 

Richika’s son Jamadagni, ocean of penances, later had a son of fierce 
deeds who mastered the shastras, including the science of arms. Like a fire, 
this son was Parasurama, exterminator of the Kshatriyas. Having gratified 
Mahadeva on the mountains of Gandhamadana, he begged weapons of the 
Great Deva, especially his axe of fierce power. With that unrivalled weapon 
of fiery splendour and irresistible sharpness, he became invincible and 
without peer on earth. 

Meanwhile, the mighty son of Kritaviryarjuna of the Kshatriya varna, 
ruler of the Haihayas, endowed with great tejas, most virtuous in conduct, 
and possessed of a thousand arms through the grace of the great Rishi 
Dattatreya, had subjugated the whole world in battle, the earth with her 
mountains and seven islands. He became a powerful Rajadhiraja and finally 
gave away the earth to Brahmanas at an Aswamedha yagna. 

Once, asked by the hungry god of fire Agni, this Arjuna, the thousand- 
armed, gave alms to the deity. Springing from the point of his shafts, the 
fierce Agni consumed what was offered, and incinerated villages, towns, 
kingdoms and hamlets of cowherds. Then with the help of the powerful 
Kritavirya, Agni consumed mountains and great forests. 

With the help of the king of the Haihayas, the god of fire made the wind 
to blaze forth as flames, and to burn the uninhabited but delightful asrama 
of the noble Apava. Possessed of great tejas himself, Apava, seeing his 
hermitage consumed by the powerful Kshatriya, cursed him in wrath, O 
Mahabaho, saying, “Since you have burnt my beautiful wood, O arrogant 
Arjuna, Parasurama will cut off your thousand arms.” 

The charitable and brave Arjuna, always devoted to peace and 
considerate towards Brahmanas, who granted protection to all varnas, did 
not take the curse of Mahatman Apava seriously. Nevertheless, as a result 
of that curse, his powerful sons, always haughty and cruel, became the 
indirect cause of his death. These princes, O Bharatarishabha, seized and 
brought away the calf of Jamadagni’s homa cow, without the knowledge of 
Kritavirya of the Haihayas, which resulted in a dispute between the noble 
Jamadagni and the Haihayas. Jamadagni’s son, the powerful Rama, filled 


with wrath, hewed off the thousand arms of Arjuna and brought back his 
father’s calf, which was wandering within the inner compound of the king’s 
palace. 

The foolish sons of Arjuna raided the asrama of the high-souled 
Jamadagni and struck off the Rishi’s head with the points of their lances 
while the celebrated Parasurama was out fetching sacred fuel and grass. 
Inflamed with anger at the death of his father and burning for vengeance, 
Rama took up arms and vowed to free the earth of the very race of 
Kshatriyas. That tiger among the Bhrigus slaughtered all the sons and 
grandsons of Kritavirya. Massacring thousands of Haihayas in rage, he 
drenched the earth with blood and indeed stripped Bhumi of all her 
Kshatriyas. Filled then with remorse, he retired into the forest. 

When some thousands of years had passed, the mighty Rama, wrathful 
by nature, had imputations of cowardice cast upon him by the grandson of 
Viswamitra and son of Raibya, a Maharishi called Paravasu. Raibya began 
saying in public, “O Rama, were not those righteous men, Pratardana and 
others, who were assembled at a yagna at the time of Yayati’s fall, 
Kshatriyas by birth? Your vows, O Rama, are empty boasts among all 
people! You have taken to the mountains out of fear of Kshatriya heroes.” 

Parasurama, hearing these words of Paravasu, once more took up arms, 
and once more strewed the earth with thousands of Kshatriya corpses. 
However, some hundreds of Kshatriyas, whom he spared, multiplied in time 
and became mighty kings on earth. So Rama once again slaughtered them, 
not sparing even their offspring. Indeed, the earth was strewn again with the 
bodies of Kshatriya children, slain by Parasurama as soon as they were 
born. 

Some Kshatriya women, however, succeeded in protecting their 
children from Rama’s wrath. Having made the earth destitute of Kshatriyas 
twenty-one times, the powerful Bhargava, Parasurama, at the completion of 
an Aswamedha yagna, gave away the earth as a sacrificial gift to Kasyapa. 
In order to save the remaining Kshatriyas, Kasyapa pointed with his hand 
that still held the sacrificial ladle, and said, “O Maharishi, go to the shores 
of the southern ocean. It is not right, Rama, for you to dwell within my 
dominion.” At these words, the Ocean instantly created for Jamadagni’s son 
Parasurama, on his further shore, a realm called Surparaka. 

Having accepted the earth as gift, O Rajan, Kasyapa gave it away to the 
Brahmanas of the world and entered the great forest. Then headstrong 


Sudras and Vaisyas began to ravish the wives of Brahmanas, O 
Bharatarishabha. When anarchy sets in on earth, the weak are oppressed by 
the strong, and no man is master of his own property. Unprotected by 
virtuous Kshatriyas, and oppressed by evil men, Bhumi started rapidly 
sinking to the lowest depths. Seeing this, Maharishi Kasyapa held her on his 
lap—his uru; thus is the earth known as Urvi. The Devi Bhumi gratified 
Kasyapa and begged him for a king for her protection. 

Bhudevi said, “I have concealed a few important Kshatriyas among the 
women, O Muni. They were born in the race of Haihayas. Let them, O 
Rishi, protect me. There is one raised among the bears in the Rikshavat 
mountains, Viduratha’s son, and he is of Puru’s race. The powerful 
Parasara, ever engaged in yagnas, through compassion has protected the son 
of Saudasa. Though born in one of the regenerate orders, yet like a Sudra he 
serves the Rishi and for that has been named Sarvakarman. 

Another is the strong son of Sibi, named Gopati, reared in the forest 
among kine. Let him, O sage, protect me. Let Pratardana’s mighty son 
Vatsa, raised among calves in a cowpen, protect me. The sage Gautama has 
concealed and protected Dadhivahana’s grandson and Diviratha’s son on the 
banks of the Ganga, where wolves and the mountains of Gridhrakuta have 
sheltered him. His name is Brihadratha, and he is endowed with tremendous 
energy and many great qualities. 

The Ocean has protected and nurtured many Kshatriyas belonging to the 
Marutta vamsa, equal in strength to the lord of Maruts. We hear of these 
children of the Kshatriya varna dwelling in different places among artisans 
and goldsmiths. If they protect me I will surely be safe gain. Rama of great 
prowess has slain their fathers and grandfathers for my sake. It is my duty, 
O Maharishi, to see that someone duly performs their funeral rites. I do not 
wish that my present rulers protect me, for they are all sinful. O Maharishi, 
I beg you to do what will enable me to live as before.” 

Kasyapa sought out the powerful Kshatriyas whom the Devi had 
named, and installed them as kings to protect her. The Kshatriya races that 
now exist are the progeny of those princes. This is the answer to your 
question, O son of Pandu, of what happened long ago.’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Conversing thus with Yudhishtira, the 
greatest Dharmatman, the noble Yadava hero rides in his fleet chariot, 
illumining all the points of the compass like divine Surya himself.” 


CANTO 51 


V aisampayana said, “King Yudhishtira, hearing of these feats of 

Parasurama, is filled with wonder and says to Janardana, ‘O you of 
Vrishni’s race, the prowess of the Dharmatman Rama, who in wrath freed 
the earth of Kshatriyas, is like that of Sakra himself. The fear of Parasurama 
has caused the scions of Kshatriyas to be raised in secrecy by the Ocean, 
kine, leopards, bears and apes. Worthy of every praise is this world of men, 
and fortunate are they who dwell in it, where a Brahmana has accomplished 
so awesome and dharmic a feat!’ 

Concluding their conversation, Krishna and Yudhishtira come to where 
the mighty son of Ganga lies on his bed of arrows, resembling in splendour 
the evening sun engulfed by its own rays. Many Rishis surround the 
Kurupravira, like the Devas of Swarga surrounding Indra of a hundred 
yagnas. The place where he lies, on the banks of the Oghavati river, is most 
sacred. Seeing him from a distance, Krishna, Dharma’s royal son 
Yudhishtira, the four other Pandavas and the rest, led by Saradwat alight 
from their rathas and, controlling their restless minds and concentrating all 
their senses, approach the great Rishis. 

Saluting the Maharishis headed by Vyasa, Govinda, Satyaki and the 
others approach the Ganga’s son, and sit around him. Seeing Bhishma like a 
fire about to die out, Kesava addresses him sombrely. 

Krishna says, ‘Is your mind now as clear as before? I hope your 
understanding is not clouded, O greatest of eloquent men. I hope your limbs 
do not feel the pain of the arrows. The body becomes weak from mental 


affliction too. As a result of the boon granted to you by your father, the 
righteous Santanu, your time of death depends on your own will, O puissant 
hero. I myself do not have the punya through which you obtained this boon. 
When the minutest pin inserted in the body produces pain, what need then 
be said, O Rajan, of the hundreds of arrows that have pierced you? Surely, 
pain does not afflict you. You know enough, Bhaarata, to instruct the very 
Devas about the birth and death of living creatures. O you of great gyana, 
you know everything of the past, the future and the present, as well as about 
death and the rewards of dharma, for you are an ocean of dharma and 
karma. 

When you were a powerful ruler and, though sound of body, perfectly 
healthy and surrounded by female companions, I saw you cleave perfectly 
to brahmacharya. We have never heard of anyone else in the three worlds 
other than you, O Santanu’s heroic son Bhishma of great tejas, who is so 
devoted to dharma, your sole pursuit, that, lying on a bed of arrows and at 
the point of death, you still have mastery over your own death through the 
power of your tapasya. 

We have never heard of anyone as devoted as you to truth, to tapasya, to 
giving dakshina and dana, to the performances of yagnas, to the astra 
shastra, to the Vedas, to defending men seeking protection; of one who is so 
harmless to all, so pure in behaviour, so self-restrained, so bent upon the 
good of all creatures, and also as great a Maharathi as you. I have no doubt 
that, from a single ratha, you can vanquish the Devas, Gandharvas, Asuras, 
Yakshas and Rakshasas. 

The Brahmanas always speak of you, Mahabaho Bhishma, as the ninth 
of the Vasus. Through your virtues, however, you have surpassed them all 
and are equal to Vasava himself. I know, O best of men, that you are 
celebrated for your prowess even among the gods. Among men on earth, we 
have never seen or heard of another possessed of such attributes as you, O 
greatest of men. You have surpassed the Devas themselves. With your 
power of tapasya you can create a universe of mobile and immobile 
creatures. Though your dharma and righteous deeds, you have acquired 
many blessed realms. Dispel now the grief of Pandu’s eldest son, who burns 
with sorrow on account of the slaughter of his kinsmen. 

You know well the dharma of the four varnas, and the four varnasramas. 
O son of Ganga, you know everything in the four branches of knowledge, in 
the four Hotras, and also the eternal dharma in Yoga and Sankhya 


philosophy, the duties of the four varnas and the dharma consistent with 
their declared practices—all these, O Bhaarata, along with their 
interpretations. The dharma that has been laid down for those who spring 
from an intermingling of the four varnas, for particular countries, tribes and 
families, and what the Vedas and wise men declare, are well known to you. 
The Itihasas and the Puranas are all known to you. The shastras’ treatment 
of dharma and practice is all in your mind. 

None other than you, O bull among men, can remove the doubts that 
may arise in respect of these subjects of knowledge that one studies in the 
world. With your intelligence, O prince of men, rid Yudhishtira of his 
sorrow. Men possessed of such great and varied knowledge live just to 
comfort clouded minds.” 

Vaisampayana said, “Hearing what Krishna says, Bhishma, raising his 
head a little, says with folded hands, ‘Salutations to you, O divine Krishna! 
You are the origin and the dissolution of all the worlds. You are the Creator 
and the Destroyer. You, O Hrishikesa, cannot be vanquished by anyone. The 
universe is your handiwork. You are the soul of the universe and the 
universe has sprung from you. Salutations to you! You are the end of all 
created things. You are above the five elements. Salutations to you who are 
the three worlds and also beyond the three worlds! 

O Lord of Yogins, salutations to you who are the refuge of everything! 
O Best of beings, what you say about me has enabled me to behold your 
divine attributes as manifest in the three worlds. Govinda, I also see your 
eternal form. You stand barring the seven paths of the Wind of 
immeasurable energy. The sky is your head, and the earth your feet. The 
points of the compass are your two arms, the sun is your eye, and Sakra 
constitutes your prowess. Attired in yellow robes that resemble the hue of 
the atasi flower, you appear to us like a cloud charged with flashes of 
lightning. O best of Devas, think of what would be good for this 
insignificant self which is devoted to you, which seeks your protection, and 
which desires to find a blissful end.’ 

Krishna says, ‘O bull among men, since your devotion to me is so great, 
I have shown my Virata Rupa to you. I do not, O greatest of kings, display 
this form of mine to anyone who is not entirely devoted to me, or to a 
devotee who is not sincere, or, who does not have a disciplined heart. You 
are devoted to me and always follow the path of dharma. Of pure heart, you 


are always self-restrained and ever observant of tapasya and of charity. It is 
because of your tapasya that you are able to see me. 

The regions from where there is no return are ready for you, O 
Bhishma. Fifty-six days still remain for you to live in this world O 
Kurusthama. You will then cast off your body and obtain the blessed reward 
of your karma. The Devas and Vasus, all in their fiery splendour, riding on 
their vimanas, await you invisibly until the moment the sun enters his 
northerly course. Subject to universal time, when the divine Surya turns to 
his Uttarayana, you, O greatest of men, will go to those realms from where 
no man of knowledge ever returns to this earth! 

O Bhishma, when you leave this world, all true Knowledge will perish 
with you. It is for this that these men, assembled together, have approached 
you—to listen to your discourses on dharma. Do you, then, speak of dharma 
and Yoga to Yudhishtira, who is firm in truth but whose grief at the 
slaughter of his kinsmen has clouded his understanding. With your advice 
dispel his grief!” 


CANTO 52 


V aisampayana said, “Hearing these words of Krishna about dharma 
and artha, Bhishma answers him, ‘Master of all the worlds, 
Mahabaho, Siva, Narayana, O you of unfading glory, I am filled with joy to 
hear you speak. But, Master of Speech, what words of instruction can I utter 
in your presence, especially when you have dealt with all of them? 
Whatever in either world is done, or should be done, proceeds from you, 
Deva! Only he who is competent to speak on the subject of Swarga in the 
presence of the Lord of the gods himself can discourse on dharma, kama, 
artha and moksha in your presence. 

O slayer of Madhu, the pain of my arrow-wounds sorely agitates my 
mind; my limbs are weak, my understanding clouded. O Govinda, these 
shafts, like poison or fire, afflict me so that I no longer have the power of 
utterance. My strength is abandoning me and my life-breath is hurrying to 
leave me. 

The very vitals of my body are afire. My understanding is hazy and my 
speech, from weakness, is becoming indistinct. How then can I venture to 
speak? Krishna, be gratified with me. I will say nothing, Mahabaho. Pardon 
my unwillingness. The very master of speech, Brihaspati, would hesitate to 
speak in your presence. 

I can no longer distinguish the points of the compass, or the sky from 
the earth. Through your tejas, Madhava, I am barely alive. Do you, 
therefore, speak for the good of Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, for you are the 
author of all laws. O Krishna, in the presence of you, the eternal Creator of 


the universe, how can someone like me discourse on such subjects, a mere 
disciple in the presence of the acharya?’ 

Vasudeva says, ‘Your words are worthy of you, Kurusthama, you who 
are endowed with consummate tejas, Mahatman of great patience who has 
grasped every subject. As for the pain of your arrow-wounds, receive this 
boon that I grant you, Bhishma, O powerful one, of my grace. 

Discomfort, stupefaction, burning, pain, hunger and thirst will not 
overcome you, O son of Ganga! Your perceptions and memory, sinless one, 
will not be clouded and your understanding will not fail you. Your mind, 
Bhishma, undarkened by passion, will remain subject to the radiance of 
goodness, like the moon emerging from clouds. Your understanding will 
penetrate whatever subject you think of connected with karma, dharma or 
artha. Purushavyaghra, obtaining preternatural vision, you will succeed in 
seeing the four varnas of created things. With your powers of perception, 
Bhishma, all things in creation that you summon to mind will be as clear to 
you as fish in a limpid stream!’ 

Then the assembled Maharishis, with Vyasa among them, worship 
Krishna with hymns from the Riks, the Yajuses and the Samans. A heavenly 
shower of flowers of every season falls on the spot where Krishna sits, with 
Ganga’s son and the son of Pandu. Celestial instruments of every kind play 
in the firmament, and the chorus of Apsaras begins to sing. 

No evil and no portent of any evil can be seen here. A pure, auspicious 
breeze springs up, laden with every kind of fragrance. All the points of the 
compass become clear and quiet and all animals and birds begin to rove in 
peace. Soon, like a fire at the extremity of a great vana, the divine Surya of 
a thousand rays descends to the west. The Rishis then rise and salute 
Janardana, Bhishma and Yudhishtira. Upon this, Kesava and the sons of 
Pandu, along with Satyaki, Sanjaya and Saradwata’s son Kripa, bow in 
reverence to the sages. Devoted to the practice of dharma, these Rishis, thus 
venerated by Kesava and others, return to their respective abodes, saying, 
“We will return tomorrow.’ 

Krishna and the Pandavas, saluting Bhishma and circumambulating 
him, get into their handsome rathas. The heroes depart, accompanied by a 
host of chariots decked with golden kuvaras, mettlesome elephants looking 
like mountains, steeds fleet as Garudas and foot-soldiers armed with bows 
and other weapons. At great speed, the army travels in two divisions, one in 
the van and the other in the rear of the princes. The scene resembles the two 


currents of the great Narmada at the point where it is divided by the 
Rikshavat mountains straddling it. 

Gladdening the great host, the divine Chandramas rises before it in the 
firmament to moisten anew the terrestrial herbs and plants whose juices the 
sun had sucked up. Then Krishna, that bull of Yadu’s race, and the sons of 
Pandu, entering the Kuru city whose splendour resembles that of the city of 
Indra itself, return to their respective mansions like tired lions seeking their 
caves.” 


CANTO 53 


V aisampayana said, “Madhava retires to bed and sleeps contentedly. 

Awaking when only half a yaama remains to usher in the day, he 
commences his meditation. Fixing all his senses, he meditates on the eternal 
Brahma. 

Then a group of sweet-voiced men, versed in Stotras and the Puranas, 
begin to recite the praises of Vasudeva, the lord of all creatures and Creator 
of the universe. Others begin to chant melodious hymns, marking the beat 
by clapping their hands, while minstrels raise their voices in song. 
Thousands blow conch-shells and beat drums. The spacious mansion of 
Krishna, resounding with the delightful strains of vinas, panavas and 
bamboo flutes, seems to be laughing with music. In the palace of King 
Yudhishtira, too, are heard songs, musical instruments and harmonious 
voices expressing auspicious wishes. 

Krishna performs his ablutions. Joining his hands, the Mahabaho of 
unfading glory silently recites his secret mantras and, kindling a fire, pours 
into it libations of clarified butter. Giving away a thousand cattle to a 
thousand Brahmanas accomplished in mastery of the four Vedas, he causes 
them to shower blessings upon him. 

Then, touching diverse auspicious articles and viewing himself 
ceremonially in a clear mirror, Krishna says to Satyaki, ‘Go, O descendant 
of Sini, to Yudhishtira’s abode and ascertain whether that king of great tejas 
is ready to visit Bhishma.’ 


Satyaki hastens to the royal son of Pandu and says, “The best of 
Krishna’s chariots is ready, Rajan, for Janardana to go to see Ganga’s son 
Bhishma. O Dharmarajan of great splendour, he awaits you. You must 
decide what to do now.’ 

Dharma’s son Yudhishtira says, ‘Arjuna, let my best chariot be made 
ready. Soldiers will not accompany us today, and we will go forth alone. We 
should not vex the greatest Dharmatman, Bhishma, with a large gathering. 
Since from today Ganga’s son will speak of things that are great mysteries, 
O son of Kunti, let the guards stay back.’ 

Arjuna leaves and returns with the best chariot harnessed. Yudhishtira, 
the twins, Bhima and Arjuna, like the five elements, then go towards 
Krishna’s abode. While the noble Pandavas are on their way, the sagacious 
Krishna, accompanied by the grandson of Sini, mounts his ratha. 
Exchanging salutions with one another from their chariots and enquiring 
whether the night had passed contentedly, they ride without stopping on 
their chariots which rumble like clouds. Daruka urges on Krishna’s steeds — 
Balahaka, Meghapushpa, Saibya and Sugriva. Endowed with great strength 
and speed, they fly ahead, marking the earth with their hooves and 
devouring the very skies. 

Traversing the sacred field of Kuru, the princes reach the spot where the 
powerful Bhishma lies on his bed of arrows, surrounded by the great Rishis, 
like Brahma himself in the midst of Devas. Krishna, Yudhishtira, Bhima, 
Arjuna, the twins and Satyaki alight from their chariots and salute the 
Rishis by raising their right hands. 

Yudhishtira, like Vasava walking towards Brahma, approaches 
Bhishma, surrounded by the Rishis like the moon thronged by stars. 
Overcome by apprehension, he timidly casts his eyes on the Mahabaho 
lying on his bed of arrows like the sun fallen from the sky.” 


CANTO 54 


anameyjaya said, “Tell me, O Maharishi, what discourse results in that 

meeting after the battle, between the son of Santanu and Ganga, 
named Devavrata or Bhishma of unclouded glory, the Dharmatman of 
immense tejas lying on a hero’s bed, firmly cleaving to truth, his passions 
under complete control, and the sons of Pandu sitting around him.” 

Vaisampayana replied, “Many Rishis and Siddhas, led by Narada, arrive 
at the spot where Bhishma lies on his bed of arrows. The surviving kings 
assembled by Yudhishtira— Dhritarashtra, Krishna, Bhima, Arjuna and the 
twins— approach Bhishma Pitamaha, who resembles the sun fallen from the 
sky, and lament for him. 

Then Narada of godlike aspect, after reflecting for a short while, 
addresses the Pandavas and the surviving kings: “The time, I think, has 
come for you to question Bhishma on dharma and artha, for he is like the 
sun on the point of setting, about to leave us. He is soon to give over his 
life’s breath. All of you should therefore ask him to speak to you. He is 
acquainted with the varied dharma of all the four varnas. Old in years, he 
will attain high regions of bliss after abandoning his body. Request him 
immediately to clear the doubts that exist in your minds.’ 

The princes approach Bhishma, but are unable to ask him anything and 
gaze mutely at one another till Yudhishtira, addressing Krishna, says, 
‘There is none but you who can question the Pitamaha, O greatest of Yadu’s 
race. You are the highest among us all and know every duty and usage. Do 
you, Madhava, therefore speak first.’ 


Illustrious Kesava, of undimmed glory, approaching the unconquerable 
Bhishma, asks him, ‘Have you, O best of kings, passed the night happily? 
Has your understanding become clear? Does your knowledge, sinless one, 
shine in you with inward light? I hope your heart no longer feels pain, and 
your mind is no longer agitated.’ 

Bhishma answers, ‘Through your grace, Vasudeva, the burning, 
stupefaction, fatigue, exhaustion, illness and pain I felt have all left me in a 
single day. O you of incomparable splendour, because of your boon I see as 
clearly as a fruit placed in my hands all the past, future and present. All the 
dharma declared in the Vedas, all those laid down in the Vedantas, the 
dharma that virtuous men of learning have declared, I see clearly and 
remember, O you of unfading glory! 

I also know, Janardana, the duties and practices prevailing in different 
countries and among particular tribes and families. Everything relating to 
the four varnas of life has come back to my memory. I am also acquainted 
with the dharma of kingship. I will say whatever should be said at the right 
time, Krishna, as by your grace I have acquired a blessed understanding. 
Strengthened by meditating on you, I feel as if I have become a young man 
again. Your favour has made me competent to hold a discourse on what is 
beneficial for the world. Why do you not yourself speak to Pandu’s son on 
all that is good, O holy one? Please explain this, O Madhava!’ 

Vasudeva says, “Recognize, Kurusthama, that I am the root of fame and 
of everything that leads to good. All things, good or bad, proceed from me. 
Who on earth will be surprised if the moon is said to be of cool rays? 
Similarly, I who have a full measure of fame already, can scarcely add to it 
by being described as the most illustrious one. It is your fame that I am 
resolved to enhance, and it is for this that I have inspired you with such 
prescience. 

O Bhishma, lord of the earth, as long as the earth lasts will your fame 
travel with undiminished lustre through all the worlds. Whatever you say to 
the inquiring son of Pandu will be regarded everywhere to be as 
authoritative as the declarations of the Vedas. He who conducts himself 
according to your dictates here will obtain henceforth the reward of every 
meritorious action. 

A man’s achievements live as long as his prestige lasts in the world. For 
this reason, Bhishma, I have imparted to you divine understanding, so that 
your glory will be enhanced on earth. The surviving kings are sitting around 


you, eager to listen to your discourses on dharma and karma. Speak to 
them, O Bhaarata! 

You are ripe in years and your life is consistent with the laws of the 
Srutis. You know well the duties of kings and every other aspect of dharma. 
No one has ever observed any transgression in you, from your very birth 
onwards. All the kings know that you have knowledge of all the sciences of 
dharma and karma. Like a father to his sons, advise them about the sanatana 
dharma. 

You have always worshipped the Rishis and the Devas. You must talk 
about these in detail to men who wish to listen to your discourse on dharma 
and karma. A learned man should oblige, especially when asked by men of 
dharma. The Rishis have declared this a duty, O powerful one, and if you do 
not speak on these subjects, you will incur sin. Therefore, when your sons 
and grandsons ask you, O learned one, about the eternal duties of men, you 
must satisfy them, Bharatarishabha.’” 


CANTO 55 


V aisampayana said, “Thus envigorated, Bhishma says, ‘I will 

discourse on dharma. By your grace O Govinda, since you are the 
eternal atman of every being, my speech and mind have become steady. Let 
the Dharmatman Yudhishtira question me about dharma and karma, and I 
will be happy to speak on the subject. 

Let the son of Pandu question me, the Rajarishi whose birth filled all the 
Vrishnis with joy, and who has no equal among all the Kurus, among all 
dharmatman and among men of great fame. 

Let Yudhishtira Brahmacharya, who has intelligence, self-restraint, 
forgiveness, righteousness, mental vigour and energy, question me. 

Let Yudhishtira, who by his good offices always honours his relatives, 
guests, servants and others who are dependent on him, ask me questions. 

Let Yudhishtira, in whom are truth, charity, asceticism, heroism, 
peacefulness, cleverness and fearlessness, ask me questions. 

Let Yudhishtira the Dharmatman, whom kama, artha or fear can never 
influence to commit sin, ask me questions. 

Let the son of Pandu, who is ever devoted to truth, forgiveness, 
knowledge and cordiality, and who always makes gifts to the righteous, ask 
me questions. 

Let Yudhishtira, who is always engaged in tapasya, the study of the 
Vedas and the practice of dharma and duty; who is ever tranquil and who 
has heard all the mysteries, ask me questions.’ 


Krishna says to Bhishma, ‘King Yudhishtira the Just, overcome with 
mortification at having caused a great slaughter, and fearing your curse, 
dares not come near you. Having pierced with arrows those who deserved 
his veneration, those who were devoted to him, his acharyas, relatives, 
kinsmen and those worthy of his highest regard, he cannot pluck up the 
courage to approach you.’ 

Bhishma says, “O Krishna, just as the dharma of the Brahmanas consists 
of practising charity, study and tapasya, the dharma of Kshatriyas is to kill 
or die in battle. A Kshatriya should slay all who engage with him in unjust 
battle — fathers, grandfathers, brothers, gurus, relatives and kinsmen. This is 
his declared dharma. 

That Kshatriya who kills in battle his very acharyas if they happen to be 
sinful, covetous and disregardful of restraints and vows, O Kesava, is only 
doing his duty. 

That Kshatriya who slays in battle the man who from covetousness 
disregards the eternal strictures of virtue, knows his duty. 

That Kshatriya knows his duty who in battle makes the earth a lake of 
blood, with the hair of slain warriors like grass and straw floating on it, 
dead elephants for its rocks and banners for trees on its banks. A Kshatriya, 
when challenged, should always fight a battle, since a combat for dharma 
leads him to both Swarga and fame on earth, as Manu has said.’ 

Hearing Bhishma speak thus, Dharma’s son Yudhishtira, with great 
humility, approaches the Kurupravira and stands in his range of vision. He 
falls at the feet of Bhishma, who in return gladdens him with words of 
affection, lovingly nuzzling his head, and asks him to take a seat, saying, 
Do not fear, Kurusthama! Ask me anything, O child, without any anxiety.’” 


CANTO 56 


V aisampayana said, “Bowing to Hrishikesha, saluting Bhishma and 
taking the permission of all the seniors assembled there, Yudhishtira 
begins to question his Pitamaha. 

Yudhishtira says, “Men with knowledge of dharma and niti say that 
Rajadharma constitutes the highest science of dharma. I, too, think that the 
burden of these duties is exceedingly onerous. Tell us about the dharma of 
kings in detail, Pitamaha. 

Rajadharma is the refuge of the whole world and, with artha and kama, 
is dependent on kingly duties. It is also clear that the practices that lead to 
moksha are equally dependent on them. Just as reins control the horse, the 
ankush or iron hook the elephant, Rajadharma is what keeps the world 
restrained and in check. If one does not grasp the dharma observed by 
Rajarishis, chaos will ensue on earth, and all will become confusion and 
anarchy. 

As the rising sun dispels inauspicious darkness, so does Rajadharma 
prevent every kind of evil in this world. Therefore, O Pitamaha, for my 
sake, discuss the subject of this dharma first, for you are the greatest of all 
men that know dharma. O Parantapa, Vasudeva has declared you the wisest 
of men and so all of us expect to learn the highest knowledge from you.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Bowing to Dharma who is Supreme, Krishna who is 
entirely Brahman and to the Brahmanas, I will discourse on the eternal 
duties of men. Listen to me, Yudhishtira, with concentration, while I 


describe in precise detail the whole range of Rajadharma and other 
responsibilities that you wish to understand. 

Firstly, O Kurusthama, the king, from a desire to please his subjects, 
should wait humbly upon the Devas and the Brahmanas, always abiding by 
the law. By worshipping them, the king pays off his debt to dharma and niti 
and receives the respect of his subjects. 

You should always act promptly, Yudhishtira, for without timely action, 
mere destiny can never accomplish the objects cherished by kings. Effort 
and destiny are equal in their operation. Of the two, I regard action to be the 
superior, for destiny is contingent upon effort. Do not indulge in grief if 
what has begun at first ends disastrously, for you should then exert yourself 
on the same task with redoubled diligence. This is the great duty of kings. 

There is nothing that contributes so much to the success of kings as 
Satya. The king devoted to Truth finds happiness both here and after death. 
For Rishis too, O Rajan, Truth is their greatest wealth. Similarly, there is 
nothing that inspires as much confidence in kings as Satya. The monarch 
who is possessed of every accomplishment and good conduct, who is self- 
restrained, humble and follows his dharma, who has his passions under 
control, who is personable and liberal, never loses prosperity. 

By administering justice, by attending to three principles—concealment 
of his own weaknesses, discovery of the weaknesses of enemies and 
keeping his own counsel—and by the observance of straightforward 
conduct, the king obtains prosperity, O Kurusthama. If he is mild, 
everybody disregards him. On the other hand, if he becomes fierce, his 
subjects are troubled. Therefore, observe both kinds of policy. 

Never punish the Brahmanas, for the Brahmana is the greatest of men 
on earth. The Dharmatman Manu sang two slokas in respect of your duties, 
which you should always bear in mind: “Fire has sprung from water, the 
Kshatriya from the Brahmana and iron from stone. The three—fire, 
Kshatriya and iron—can exert their force on every other thing, but when 
they come into contact with their respective progenitors, their force is 
neutralized.” When iron strikes stone, or fire combats water, or a Kshatriya 
cherishes enmity towards a Brahmana, all three become weak. 

This being so, O Rajan, you will see that the Brahmanas are worthy of 
homage. Those who are the best among the Brahmanas are Devas on earth. 
Duly revered, they uphold the Vedas and the yagnas. But those who want to 


gain such honour but are impediments to the three worlds, Purushavyaghra, 
should always be subdued by the might of your arms. 

Listen with concentrated attention to the two slokas sung by the great 
Rishi Usanas, in the olden days. “The righteous Kshatriya, mindful of his 
dharma, should punish a Brahmana, even though he may be the very master 
of the Vedas, if he rushes to do battle with an uplifted weapon.” The 
Kshatriya who upholds dharma when someone transgresses it, does not 
thereby become a sinner, for the rage of the assailant justifies the wrath of 
the punisher. Subject to these restrictions, you should protect the 
Brahmanas. If they become offenders, you should exile them from your 
dominions. But even when they deserve punishment, you should show them 
compassion. 

No corporal punishment is for them. If a Brahmana is guilty of 
Brahmahatya, or of violating the bed of his acharyas or other revered 
seniors, or of causing miscarriage, or of treason against the king, his 
punishment should be banishment from your dominions. Those who show 
respect towards the Brahmanas should be favoured with offices in the state. 

No treasure is more valuable to kings than the selection and keeping of 
servants. Among the six kinds of citadels cited in the shastras, the ready 
service and love of subjects is the most impregnable. Therefore, the wise 
king should always show compassion towards the four varnas of his 
subjects. The king who is a Dharmatman and truthful will succeed in 
gratifying his people. 

However, you must not always forgive everybody, for the king who is 
mild is regarded like an elephant that is no longer bellicose. In the shastras, 
Brihaspati has composed a sloka which was applicable to this in ancient 
times. Listen as I recite it: “If the king happens to be always forgiving, the 
lowest of men prevail over him, like the man who sits on the head of the 
elephant he guides.” 

The king, therefore, should not always be lenient, nor should he always 
be fierce. He should be like the vernal sun—neither cold, nor hot enough to 
produce sweat. He should judge friends and foes by the direct evidence of 
the senses, by conjecture, by comparisons and by the canons of the shastras, 
O Rajan. 

O you of great kindness, avoid all those evil practices that are called 
Vyasanas. While it is not essential for you never to indulge in them, do not 


be attached to them, for everyone prevails over one who is addicted to 
these. 

A king who has no love for his people fills them with anxiety. The king 
should always conduct himself towards his subjects as a mother towards her 
unborn child—as one who, for the good of her child, relinquishes those 
things that she herself most treasures. 

For the sake of what will benefit his people, Kurusthama, a righteous 
king’s behaviour towards them should always be as towards a cherished 
elder. 

You should always be determined, O son of Pandu. The king who is 
possessed of fortitude and who is known to inflict punishment on wrong- 
doers has no cause of fear. 

You should not indulge in jests with your servants, O foremost of 
speakers. Rajan, observe the drawbacks of such indulgence. If the master 
mingles too freely with them, they begin to disregard him and, forgetting 
their status, overstep that of the master. Ordered to do a job, they hesitate. 
They divulge the master’s secrets. They ask for things that should not be 
asked for, and take the food intended for the master. They go to the extent 
of manifesting annoyance and seeking to outshine the master. They even 
seek to dominate the king by accepting bribes, practising deceit and 
obstructing state business. They cause the state to rot through abuses by 
falsification and forgeries. 

They make love with the female guards of the palace and dress in the 
same style as their master. They become shameless enough to indulge in 
belching and the like, and expectorating in the very presence of their 
master. They do not fear to speak of him with levity before others. If the 
king becomes mild and disposed to jest, his servants, disregarding him, ride 
on horses and elephants and chariots as good as his. His counsellors, 
assembled in court, openly say to their sovereign, “This is beyond your 
capacity. This is a wrong course.” 

If the king becomes angry, they laugh. They are not contented even 
when favours are bestowed upon them, though they may express 
satisfaction for other reasons. They disclose the secret counsels of their 
master and talk about his evil deeds. Without the least anxiety, they annul 
the king’s commands. If the king’s jewels, or food, or the necessaries of his 
bath, or cosmetics are not forthcoming, the servants show no concern, even 
in his presence. Instead of taking what is rightfully theirs, they appropriate 


what belongs to the king. They wish to sport with him as with a bird tied 
with a string, always giving people to understand that he is very intimate 
with them and loves them dearly. If the king is easy-going and disposed to 
jest, O Yudhishtira, these and many other evils spring from his 
demeanour.’” 


CANTO 57 


¢ “RB hishma says, “The king, O Yudhishtira, should always be ready 

for action. That ruler who, like a woman, is unfitted for exertion 

is not worthy of praise. In this connection, the holy Sanas quotes a sloka. 

Listen with attention, as I recite it to you: “Like a snake swallowing mice, 

the earth swallows these two—the king averse to battle, and the Brahmana 

excessively attached to wives and children.” You should always bear this in 
mind, O Purushavyaghra. 

Make peace with those enemies with whom you should make peace 
according to the laws, and wage war with whom you should wage war. 
Whether it is your guru or your friend, you should slay those who act 
inimically towards any of the seven limbs of your kingdom—the king, 
army, counsellors, friends, treasury, territory and forts. 

There is an ancient sloka about the duty of kings, sung by King Marutta, 
which is in concord with Brihaspati’s opinion. According to the shastras, 
there is punishment for even the acharya if he becomes haughty and 
disregardful of what should be done and what should not, and if he 
transgresses all restraints. 

Jadu’s wise son, King Sagara, out of benevolence towards his people, 
exiled his own eldest son Asamanjas. Asamanjas used to drown children in 
the Sarayu, for which his father repudiated him and sent him into exile. The 
Rishi Uddalaka cast off his favourite son Swetaketu, a mahatapasvin in his 
later years, because he used to deceive Brahmanas, after inviting them with 
promises of entertainment. 


The eternal dharma of kings is the happiness of their subjects, 
observance of truth and sincerity of conduct. The king should not covet the 
riches of others, but rather, over time, distribute wealth. If he is proficient, 
truthful in speech and forgiving in temper, prosperity will always attend 
him. With his soul cleansed of vices, the king should be able to govern his 
anger, and all his decisions should be in conformity with the shastras. He 
should always pursue dharma, artha, kama and moksha judiciously, but 
conceal his counsel in respect of these. 

No greater evil can befall the king than the disclosure of his counsel. 
Kings should protect the four varnas in the discharge of their dharma. It is 
their perpetual duty to prevent a confusion of dharmas in respect of the 
varnas. The king should not repose confidence in those other than his own 
servants, nor full confidence even in them. 

He should, by his own judgement, use to advantage the merits and 
defects of the six essential requisites of sovereignty —peace with a stronger 
foe, war with one of equal strength, invading the dominions of one who is 
weaker, halting, seeking protection if weak in one’s own citadel and sowing 
dissension among the chief officers of the enemy. The king who studies the 
lapses of his foes judiciously, pursues dharma, artha and kama, who sets 
clever spies to ascertain secrets and to wean away the officers of his 
enemies by gifts of wealth, deserves commendation. 

The king should administer justice like Yama and amass wealth like 
Kubera. He should observe the merits and defects of his acquisitions and 
losses, as well as those of his own dominions. He should feed those who 
have not been fed and enquire after those who have been fed. He should be 
of sweet speech and speak with a smiling, not sour, countenance. He should 
always attend to his elders and repress procrastination. He should never 
covet what belongs to others, and should be careful to follow dharma in his 
conduct. He should never take wealth from dharmatmans but, instead, seize 
the wealth of those who do not follow dharma and give it to those who do. 

The king should himself be skilful in taking strong action, but should 
also practise kindness. He should have his mind under control. He should 
dress magnificently, give gifts when required, have regular meals and be of 
good conduct. The king who desires prosperity should always have in his 
service men who are brave, devoted, incapable of being deceived by 
enemies, healthy, well-behaved, well-born and connected with families of 
impeccable conduct. They should be respectable, never insult others, 


possess knowledge of all the sciences, be familiar with the world and its 
affairs, be unmindful of the future, always do their duties honestly and 
remain as steadfast as mountains. 

There should be no difference between the king and them as regards the 
objects of enjoyment. The only distinction should consist in his sphere of 
influence and his power of passing orders. His demeanour towards them, 
before or after, should be the same. The king who behaves in this way never 
comes to grief. 

His own servants and relatives soon eliminate the crooked and covetous 
king who suspects everybody and who taxes his subjects heavily. The king 
who follows dharma and sets about attracting the hearts of his people never 
succumbs when enemies attack him. Even if overcome, he soon regains his 
position. 

If the king is not wrathful, not addicted to evil ways and not severe in 
his punishments, if he keeps his passions under control, he becomes an 
object of confidence to all, as the Himavat mountain is to all creatures. 

He is the best of kings who is wise, charitable, personable, prompt in 
action, ready to take advantage of the lapses of foes, who knows what is 
bad for each of the four varnas of his subjects, who has his anger under 
control and is not short-tempered or vindictive, who is high-minded and 
engages in yagnas and other religious rites, who is not given to boasting and 
who vigorously accomplishes all work that he commences. 

He is the best of kings in whose dominions men live fearlessly, like sons 
in the house of their father. He is the best of kings whose subjects do not 
have to hide their wealth and who know what is good and bad for them. 

He is a king indeed whose subjects are engaged in their respective 
svadharmas and do not fear to die in the line of duty, whose people, duly 
protected, are of peaceful behaviour, docile, tractable, unwilling to be 
drawn into disputes, and inclined to liberality. 

That king earns eternal merit in whose dominions there is no 
wickedness, dissimulation, deception and envy. 

That king truly deserves to rule who honours knowledge, who is 
devoted to the shastras and the good of his people, who treads in the path of 
dharma and is liberal. 

That king deserves to rule whose spies, counsels and deeds, 
accomplished and unaccomplished, remain unknown to his enemies. 


O Bhaarata, Usanas of Bhrigu’s race, sang the following verse in olden 
days in the narrative called Ramacharita, on the subject of Rajadharma: 
“One should first select a king in whose dominions one would prefer to live, 
only then seek a wife and acquire wealth. If there is no king, what will 
become of wife and acquisitions?” 

There is no dharma more obligatory for those who seek to rule than the 
protection of subjects. The shelter the king grants to his subjects upholds 
the world. 

Manu, the son of Prachetas, sang two verses respecting the duties of 
kings. Listen to them with attention: “These six men should be avoided like 
a leaky boat on the sea: an acharya who does not speak, a priest who has not 
studied the shastras, a king who does not ensure protection, a wife who says 
what is disagreeable, a cowherd who prefers to rove within the village and a 
barber who longs to go to the the vana.”’” 


CANTO 58 


6 ‘RB hishma says, ‘Security of subjects, Yudhishtira, is the very 

essence of kingly duties. The divine Brihaspati does not applaud 

any duty as much as this one. The Mahatapasvi Kavi Usanas, the thousand- 

eyed Indra, Manu, the son of Prachetas, the divine Bharadwaja and the sage 

Gaurasiras, all devoted to Brahman and Brahmavadis, have composed 

treatises on the dharma of kings. All of them praise the duty of protection in 
respect of kings. 

Yudhishtira, of eyes like lotus leaves and complexion of copper, listen 
to how you can fulfill the duty of safeguarding your subjects: by giving 
them their just dues without haughtiness, collecting taxes with 
consideration, never taking anything from them capriciously and without 
cause, selecting honest men for discharging administrative functions, 
seeking the good of the people, employing spies and servants, producing 
discord and disunion among the enemy by fair or unfair means; it requires 
adroitness in transacting business, heroism and truthfulness. 

It also consists in inflicting corporal punishment and fines justly, never 
abandoning the honest, granting employment and shelter to men of 
respectable birth, storing what should be retained and keeping company 
with intelligent men. 

It always includes the comfort of your troops, Yudhishtira, supervision 
of the people, steadiness in the transaction of business, filling of the 
treasury, absence of blind confidence in the guards of the city, fostering 
disloyalty among the citizens of a hostile town, supporting friends and allies 


living in the midst of the enemy’s country, distrusting and strictly watching 
the servants and officers of the state, personally observing the city, 
comforting the enemy with assurances, steadily observing the dictates of 
policy, remaining ready for action, never disregarding an enemy, and 
eliminating those who are evil. 

Brihaspati has said that readiness for action is the root of Rajadharma. 
Listen to the verses he sang: “Amrita was obtained by toil, the Asuras were 
slain by effort, Indra himself obtained sovereignty in Swarga and on Bhumi 
by exerting himself. The hero of work is superior to the hero of speech. The 
heroes of speech gratify and worship the heroes of work.” 

An intelligent king who does not exert himself is like a snake without 
poison, always overcome by his enemies. A king, however strong, should 
not disregard an enemy, however weak. A spark can kindle a conflagration, 
and a particle of poison can kill. With only one kind of force, an enemy 
from within a fort can hold off the whole country of even a powerful and 
prosperous king. 

The secret utterances of the king, the amassing of troops for seizing 
victory, the crooked purposes in his heart for accomplishing particular 
objects, and the wrong deeds he does or intends to do, should be concealed 
by putting on an appearance of frankness. He should act righteously in 
order to rule over his people. Men of crooked minds cannot bear the burden 
of an extensive empire. A ruler who is mild cannot acquire superior rank, 
which depends upon hard work. 

A kingdom coveted by all like meat can never be protected by candour 
and simplicity. Therefore, Yudhishtira, a king should always conduct 
himself with both frankness and crookedness. If in protecting his subjects a 
king falls into danger, he earns great merit. This is what the conduct of 
kings should be. I have now told you only a portion of the duties of kings. 
Tell me, Kurusthama, what else you wish to know.’ 

The illustrious Vyasa, Devasthana, Aswa, Vasudeva, Kripa, Satyaki and 
Sanjaya, all happy and with faces resembling full-blown flowers, exclaim, 
‘Excellent! Excellent!’ and hymn the praises of Bhishma Purushavyaghra. 

Then Yudhishtira, with a sorrowful heart and in tears, gently touches 
Bhishma’s feet and says, ‘Pitamaha, tomorrow I will ask questions about 
which I have doubts, for today the sun, having sucked the moisture out of 
all terrestrial objects, is about to set.’ 


Kesava, Kripa, Yudhishtira and others, saluting the Brahmanas 
assembled there and circumambulating Ganga’s great son, cheerfully climb 
into their chariots. All of them, strict observers of vows, then bathe in the 
current of the Drishadwati. They offer oblations of water to their ancestors, 
silently reciting the sacred mantras. After performing the evening pujas, 
these Parantapas enter the city of Hastinapura.” 


CANTO 59 


V aisampayana said, “Rising from their beds the next day and 

performing the morning pujas according to the shastras, the 
Pandavas and the Yadavas set out on their chariots, which resemble fortified 
towns, for the place where Bhishma lies. They ride to Kurukshetra, 
approach the sinless Bhishma and enquire whether the best of maharathas 
had passed the night happily. They then salute all the Rishis and, getting 
their blessings in return, the princes take their seats around Bhishma. 

Then the Dharmarajan, Yudhishtira, after paying respects to Bhishma, 
says with joined hands, ‘Tell me O Bhaarata, when did the word Rajan— 
King— begin to be used on earth? 

Parantapa, why does one man—the king, with hands, arms and neck 
like others, with understanding and senses like others, with a back, mouth, 
stomach, bones, marrow, flesh, blood and semen similar to those of the rest 
of the world, inhaling and exhaling like others, with life-breath and body 
like other men, resembling others in birth and death, subject to the same 
kinds of joy and grief, in fact, similar to all others in all attributes of 
humanity, come to govern the rest of the world containing many other men 
possessing equal intelligence and bravery? 

Since when has one man ruled the wide world, teeming with brave, 
powerful and high-born men of dharma? Why do all men try to win his 
favour? Why is it that when this one man is delighted, the whole world is 
delighted, and if this one man is troubled, the whole world is troubled? I 
want to hear this in detail, Bharatarishabha! O greatest of speakers, tell me 


fully, for there must be a serious reason for all this, since we see that the 
whole world bows down to a single man as to a Deva.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘With concentrated attention on every detail, listen to 
how sovereignty first began in the Krita yuga. At first, there was no 
sovereignty, no king, no punishment and no punisher. All men used to 
protect one another righteously. However, with time they found this task to 
be irksome. Uncertainty began to assail their hearts; their perceptions 
became clouded and their virtue began to decline. 

When this happened, they became covetous. Because men sought to 
possess objects they did not own, another passion called greed seized them. 
When they became subject to kama, another passion, krodha or anger, soon 
tainted them. Once subject to wrath, they lost all consideration of what they 
should do and what they should not. Unrestrained sexual indulgence set in. 
Men began to speak as they pleased. All distinctions disappeared between 
clean and unclean food, between virtue and vice. When this confusion set in 
amongst men, the Vedas disappeared. 

Upon the disappearance of the Vedas, dharma was lost. When both the 
Vedas and dharma were lost, the Devas were filled with dread. Overcome 
with fear, they sought the protection of Brahma. 

Having gratified the divine Grandfather of the universe, the Devas 
sorrowfully said to him with folded hands, “O Devadeva, greed and error 
have crept into the eternal Vedas in the world of men, and we are terror- 
stricken. Through the loss of the Vedas, men have lost dharma too, because 
of which we fear that we ourselves are about to descend to the level of 
humans. 

Men used to pour libations and feed us, while we used to pour rain 
downwards. But with the cessation of all pious pujas among men, great 
distress threatens us. O Pitamaha, think of what will benefit us, so that the 
universe which your power created will not be destroyed.” 

Thus addressed, the Swayambhuva and divine Lord said to them, “I will 
think of what should be done for the good to all. Best of Devas, let your 
fears be dispelled!” 

Brahma then composed by his own intelligence a treatise consisting of a 
hundred thousand chapters. He treated in it three subjects, dharma, artha 
and kama, and designated it as the triune aggregate. He treated a fourth 
subject called moksha with opposite meaning and attributes. In it he dealt 
with the attributes of sattwa, rajas and tamas and a fourth—nishkama 


karma, the practice of dharma without hope of bliss or reward in this or the 
other world, which will lead to moksha, liberation. 

He included another triple aggregate connected with punishment— 
conversation, growth and destruction—and in yet another an aggregate of 
six consisting of the hearts of men, place, time, means, overt deeds, 
alliances and causes. In it, Bharatarishabha, he laid down the religious rites 
prescribed in the three Vedas, knowledge and the actions necessary for the 
support of life—agriculture, trade and commerce, and the very extensive 
branch of learning called punitive legislation. 

The treatise also dealt fully with the attributes of princes, behaviour 
towards counsellors, spies, secret agents envoys and agents of other kinds, 
of conciliation, fomenting discord, gifts and punishment, with toleration as 
the fifth one. He described in detail deliberation of all kinds, counsels for 
producing dissension, the errors of deliberation, the results of the success or 
failure of counsels, treaties of three kinds: bad, average and good, made 
through fear, good offices and gifts of wealth. 

In it he also described in detail the four appropriate times for making 
journeys, three kinds of victory that one secures—righteously, by wealth, or 
by deceitful means, and also the three types of qualities—bad, average and 
good—of counsellors, kingdom, fort, army and treasury. 

The treatise dealt in detail with the eight kinds of open punishment and 
the eight kinds of secret punishment. Chariots, elephants, horses, foot- 
soldiers, conscripted labourers and crews, the paid attendants of armies, 
guides taken from the country which is the theatre of war: these are the 
eight instruments, O Kauravya, of open punishment or forces acting openly. 

The work also mentioned the three kinds of things—apparel, food and 
incantations—the use and administration of moveable and immoveable 
poisons, and delineated enemies, allies and neutrals. 

Brahma discussed in the work, the diverse features of roads to be taken, 
depending on astrological configurations, the attributes of the soil on which 
to encamp, protection of oneself, superintendence of the construction of 
chariots and other machinery of war and their use, methods for protecting 
and improving men, elephants, chariots and horses, various kinds of battle 
formations, strategies and manoeuvres in war, planetary conjunctions 
foreboding evil and natural calamities such as earthquakes. 

He wrote of skilful methods of warfare and retreat, knowledge of 
weapons and their proper upkeep, disorders of troops and how to be rid of 


them, the means of inspiring the army with joy and confidence, of diseases, 
times of distress and danger, of how to guide the army in battle, the 
methods of sounding alarms and notifying orders, how to cause fear in the 
enemy by display of standards, the diverse methods of afflicting the 
enemy’s kingdom by means of robbers, fierce wild tribes, fire-raisers, 
poisoners and forgers. 

He discussed how to produce disunion among the chief officers of 
hostile armies by cutting down crops and plants, destroying the efficiency 
of the enemy’s elephants by sounding alarms, and honouring those among 
the enemy’s subjects who are well disposed towards the invader. 

The work discussed the growth, harmony and waste of the seven 
essential requisites of sovereignty: the capacity for projected works, the 
means of accomplishing them, the methods of extending the kingdom, the 
means of winning over men dwelling in the enemy’s territory, the 
punishment and destruction of those who are strong, the exact 
administration of justice, the extermination of evil, wrestling, shooting, 
discharging weapons, the methods of making gifts and of storing requisite 
provisions and diverse matters. 

Brahma wrote on the subject of feeding the hungry and supervising 
those whom one has fed, gifts of wealth in season, freedom from the vices 
called Vyasanas, the attributes of kings, the qualifications of military 
officers, the sources of the aggregate of three and its merits and demerits, 
diverse kinds of evil intents, the behaviour of dependents, suspicion against 
all, the avoidance of negligence, the acquisition of coveted objects, the 
improvement of objects already acquired and the gifting of them to 
deserving men, and the expenditure of wealth for religious purposes, for 
acquiring objects of desire and for dispelling danger and distress. 

In the work, O Kurusthama, the Swayambhuva mentions the four kinds 
of vices which the learned say are born of kama—hunting, gambling, 
drinking and sexual indulgence—and the six kinds of vices born of anger— 
rudeness of speech, fierceness, severity of chastisement, infliction of pain, 
frustrating one’s own objects and suicide. 

The treatise describes diverse kinds of machines and their action. It 
deals with devastation of the enemy’s territories, attacks upon enemies, the 
destruction and removal of landmarks, the cutting down of large trees to 
deprive the enemy and his subjects of their refreshing shade, the siege of 
forts, the supervision of agriculture and other useful operations, the storage 


of necessaries, the robes and attire for troops and the best means of 
manufacturing them, and the characteristics and uses of panavas, anakas, 
conches and drums. 

The work duly deals, Yudhishtira, with the six kinds of articles— gems, 
animals, lands, robes, female slaves and gold—and the means of acquiring 
them for oneself or destroying them to injure the enemy, pacifying newly 
acquired territories, honouring the good, cultivating friendship with the 
learned, knowing the rules in respect of gifts and religious rites such as 
homa, and ceremonial touching of auspicious articles. 

The work deals with how to pay attention to beautifying the body and 
the seventy-two actions laid down in medical works for the protection, 
exercise and improvement of the body, the manner of preparing and using 
food, piety of behaviour, the attainment of prosperity by following one path, 
truthfulness and sweetness in speech, observance of activities undertaken 
on festive occasions, social gatherings within and beyond the household, 
the open and secret actions of men in all places of meeting, the constant 
supervision of men’s conduct, the immunity of Brahmanas from 
punishment, the reasonable infliction of punishment, and honours paid to 
dependents in consideration of kinship and merit. It also deals with the 
protection of subjects and the means of extending the kingdom, the 
counsels that a king who lives in the midst of a dozen kings should pursue 
in respect of the four kinds of enemies, the four kinds of allies and the four 
kinds of neutrals, and the practices of particular countries, tribes and 
families. 

The work covers the subjects of dharma, artha, kama and moksha and 
lays down the desire for diverse kinds of wealth and the diverse means of 
its acquisition, the system of agriculture and other activities that form the 
chief source of revenue, various methods of producing and applying 
illusions and how one can render stagnant water foul. It describes the way, 
O Naravyaghra, by which men can be prevented from deviating from the 
path of dharma and honesty. 

Having composed this highly beneficial treatise, the divine Lord 
cheerfully said to the deities led by Indra, “For the good of the world and 
for establishing dharma, artha and kama, I have composed this tract 
representing the very essense of speech. Assisted by punishment and 
dealing with rewards and punishments, this science will operate among men 
and will protect the world. Moreover, because men are led to the acquisition 


of the objects of their existence by punishment, which in fact leads or 
governs everything, this science will be known in the three worlds as 
Dandaneeti—the science of punishment. 

Containing the essence of all the attributes of the six gunas, this science 
will always be highly regarded by all noble men. I have dealt in it with 
dharma, artha, kama and moksha.” 

After this, the lord of Uma—the divine and multiform Siva of large 
eyes, the source of all blessings, first studied and mastered it. However, in 
view of the gradual decrease of the life-span of human beings, the divine 
Siva abridged this great shastra that Brahma had compiled. Mahatapasvin 
Indra, devoted to Brahma, received the abridged version called 
Vaisalakasha, consisting of ten thousand lessons. 

The divine Indra abridged it further into a treatise consisting of five 
thousand lessons and called it Vahudantaka. Later the powerful and 
intelligent Brihaspati further abridged the work into a treatise consisting of 
three thousand lessons and called it Barhaspatya. 

Finally, the famous and immeasurably wise acharya of Yoga-Kavi 
reduced it further into a work of a thousand lessons. 

Thus did the Maharishis abridge the work for the benefit of the world, in 
view of the shortening life-span of men and their general decline. The gods, 
then, approaching the lord of creatures, Vishnu, said to him, “Indicate, O 
Deva, the one among mortals who deserves to have superiority over the 
rest.” 

The divine and powerful Narayana, reflecting a little, by an order of his 
will created a son to be born of his energy, named Virajas. However, the 
highly blessed Virajas did not desire sovereignty over the earth, as he was 
inclined to the life of a sannyasi. Virajas had a son named Krittimat who 
also renounced pleasure and enjoyment. Krittimat’s son Kardama also 
practised severe tapasya, but his son Ananga was pious, a protector of 
living things, and fully conversant with the Dandaneeti. 

Ananga had a son named Ativala, well versed in policy. However, after 
inheriting an extensive empire at the demise of his father, he became the 
slave of his passions. Mrityu had a daughter born of his mind, named 
Sunita, who was celebrated throughout the three worlds. She was married to 
Ativala and gave birth to a son named Vena. Vena, a slave of wrath and 
malice, became vicious and sinful in his conduct towards all creatures. 


The Rishis, Brahmavadis, slew him with weapons of blades of Kusa 
infused with their mantras. They pierced the right thigh of Vena and from 
that thigh emerged a short-limbed man resembling a charred brand, with 
bloodshot eyes and black hair. 

These Brahmavadis said to him, “Nishida, sit here!” From him have 
sprung the Nishadas—those evil tribes that have the hills and the forests for 
their abode, and the hundreds and thousands of others called Mlechchas, 
who live in the Vindhya mountains. 

The great Rishis then pierced the right arm of Vena, from where sprang 
a man who was a second Indra in form. Clad in mail, armed with swords, 
bows and arrows and adept in the science of weapons, he knew the Vedas 
and their branches thoroughly. He knew all the laws of the Dandaneeti, O 
Rajan, in their embodied forms. 

The son of Vena then, with joined hands, said to these Maharishis, “I 
have attained an understanding that is keen and conforms to dharma. 
Instruct me in what I should do with it. I will accomplish without hesitation 
any task that you indicate.” 

The Devas and the Rishis who were present there said to Vena’s son, 
‘“Fearlessly accomplish all those tasks in which dharma resides. Disregard 
what is dear and what is not, look upon all men with an equal eye. Cast 
away kama, krodha, lobha and distinction and always follow the dictates of 
dharma, punishing with your own hands the man, whoever he may be, who 
deviates from the path of duty. Swear that you will in thought, word and 
deed, always maintain the religion of the Vedas on earth. Pledge that you 
will courageously maintain the dharma laid down in the Vedas with the aid 
of the Dandaneeti, and will never act capriciously. O mighty one, 
acknowledge that Brahmanas are exempt from punishment, and vow also 
that you will protect the world from an intermixture of the castes.” 

Thus addressed, Vena’s son Prithu replied to the assembled deities 
headed by the Rishis, “I will always worship those bulls among men, the 
greatly blessed Brahmanas.” 

These Brahmavadis then said to him, ““Tathaastu! Let it be so!” 

Then Sukra, the vast receptacle of Brahman, became his priest. The 
Balakhilyas became his counsellors and the Saraswatas his companions. 
The great and illustrious Rishi Garga became his astrologer. 

Men believe the high declaration of the Srutis that Prithu is the eighth 
from Vishnu. Before that, two men named Suta and Magadha were born, 


who became his bards and eulogists. Gratified, Prithu, the royal son of 
powerful Vena, gave to Suta the land lying on the sea-coast and to Magadha 
the country since known as Magadha. 

We hear that the surface of the earth was once very uneven. It was 
Prithu who levelled it. In every Manvantara, the earth becomes uneven. 
Vena’s son moved the rocky masses lying all around, O Rajan, with the 
horn of his bow. By this the hills and mountains became lofty. 

Then Vishnu, the Devas of Indra, the Rishis, the Regents of the world 
and the Brahmanas assembled for the coronation of Prithu as the king of the 
world. 

The earth herself, in her embodied form, came to him with a tribute of 
gems and jewels. Varuna, the lord of rivers, Himavat, the king of mountains 
and Sakra bestowed upon him inexhaustible wealth. The great Meru, the 
mountain of gold, gave him enormous masses of the precious metal. Divine 
Kubera, the lord of Yakshas and Rakshasas, gave him wealth, borne on the 
shoulders of human beings, enough to gratify the needs of dharma, artha 
and kama. 

Millions of horses, chariots, elephants and men, O son of Pandu, sprang 
to life as soon as Vena’s son Prithu thought of them. 

Due to the protection promised by Prithu, neither old age, nor famine, 
nor calamity, nor disease on earth burdened mankind, nor fear of reptiles or 
thieves, or from any other quarter. When Prithu went to the sea, its water 
became solidified. The mountains gave him passage, and his standard was 
obstructed nowhere. He drew from the earth, like a milcher from a cow, 
seventeen kinds of crops for the food of Yakshas, Rakshasas, Nagas and 
other beings. That noble king caused all men to regard dharma as the best of 
all things and, because he gratified all the people, he was called Rajan, 
King; and because he also healed the wounds of Brahmanas, he earned the 
name of Kshatriya; and because the earth during his reign became 
celebrated for the practice of dharma, she came to be called Prithvi. 

The eternal Vishnu himself, Bhaarata, confirmed his power, telling him, 
“No one, O Rajan, shall transcend you.” As a result of the tapasya Prithu 
performed, the divine Vishnu entered his body. It is for this reason that the 
entire universe offers worship to Prithu and he is numbered among the 
gods. 

Rajan, your kingdom should always be protected by the science of 
punishment, the Dandaneeti. By careful observation made through the 


movements of your spies, you must also ensure its safety in such a way that 
no one will be able to injure it. All good deeds, Rajan, lead to the benefit of 
the king. The conduct of a king should be regulated by his own intelligence 
and also by the opportunities and means that offer themselves. What cause 
can there be for the multitude to live in obedience to one, save the divinity 
of the king? 

At that time, a golden lotus emerged from Vishnu’s brow and the 
goddess Sree was born of the lotus. She became the spouse of sagacious 
Dharma. Sree and Dharma had a son Artha and all three, Dharma, Artha 
and Sree, became established in sovereignty. 

Upon the exhaustion of his punya, a man comes down from heaven to 
earth and takes birth as a king who knows the science of danda. Such a man 
is endowed with greatness and is really an amsa of Vishnu on earth. He 
acquires great acumen and obtains superiority over others. The Devas 
establish him, so no one can transcend him. It is for this reason that 
everybody acts in obedience to such a one, and that the world cannot 
command him. Good actions, Rajan, engender good. It is for this that the 
multitude obeys the king’s commands, though he belongs to the same world 
and is possessed of similar limbs and organs as all men. 

He who once beheld Prithu’s amiable face became submissive to him, 
esteeming him as handsome, wealthy and highly favoured. It is because of 
the might of his sceptre that the practice of dharma and just behaviour 
became so visible on earth and Bhumi was overspread with virtue. 

Yudhishtira, Brahma’s treatise contained the histories of all past events, 
the origin of the Maharishis, the holy waters, the planets, stars and 
astronomy, the duties in respect of the four varnas of life, the four kinds of 
Homa, the characteristics of the four orders of men and the four branches of 
learning. Whatever objects there are on earth he included in it: the Itihasas, 
the Vedas, the science of Nyaya, tapasyas, gyana, abstention from injury to 
all beings, truth, falsehood and mahadharma. He fully described in it 
reverence towards the elderly, gifts, purity of behaviour, alacrity in exertion 
and compassion towards all men. There is no doubt in this. Since that time, 
O Rajan, the learned began to say that there is no difference between a 
Deva and a Rajan. 

I have now told you everything about the greatness of kings. What 
subject, O king of the Bhaaratas, shall I speak of next?’” 


CANTO 60 


V aisampayana said, “After this, Yudhishtira salutes his Pitamaha 

Bhishma, the son of Ganga, attentively with joined hands and asks 
again, ‘What are the general duties of the four varnas and the special duties 
of each varna? What mode of life should each varna adopt? 

What duties are especially called Rajadharma? By what means does a 
kingdom grow, and what are the means by which the king himself 
advances? How also, O Bharatarishabha, do the citizens and the servants of 
the king progress? What sorts of forts, treasuries, punishments, allies, 
counsellors, priests and acharyas, should a king avoid? Whom should the 
king trust in different kinds of distress and danger? From what evils should 
the king guard himself firmly? Tell me all this, O Pitamaha!’ 

Bhishma says, ‘I make my obeisance to dharma, who is great, and to 
Krishna who is Brahman. Having bowed also to the Brahmanas assembled 
here, I will discuss duties that are ananta—eternal. Suppression of anger, 
truthfulness of speech, justice, forgiveness, legitimate fatherhood, purity of 
conduct, avoidance of quarrels, simplicity and care for dependants —these 
nine duties belong equally to all the four varnas. 

I will now tell you the responsibilities which belong exclusively to 
Brahmanas. Self-restraint, O Rajan, the shastras declare to be the first duty 
of Brahmanas. Study of the Vedas and patience in undergoing tapasya are 
also their responsibility. By carrying out these two, they accomplish all the 
dharma laid down for them. If, while engaged in the observance of his 
svadharma, and without doing anything improper, a peaceful, learned 


Brahmana acquires wealth, he should marry, procreate, practise charity and 
perform yagnas. 

The wise declare that wealth thus obtained should be enjoyed by 
distributing it among deserving men and relatives. By his study of the 
Vedas, the Brahmana accomplishes all the pious work laid down for him. 
Whether or not he achieves anything else, if he devotes himself to the study 
of the Vedas, he becomes known as a Brahmana or friend of all creatures. 

I will also tell you, Bhaarata, the dharma of a Kshatriya. A Kshatriya 
should give, not beg, should himself perform yagnas, but not officiate as a 
priest in the yagnas of others. He should never teach the Vedas but study 
them with the help of a Brahmana acharya. He should protect the people by 
exerting himself always to destroy robbers and evil-doers, and should 
demonstrate his prowess in battle. 

Those among Kshatriya rulers who perform great yagnas, who are 
gyanis of the Vedas and who gain victory in battle, become foremost among 
those who acquire blessed realms in the hereafter through their punya. Men 
who know the ancient shastras do not applaud the warrior who returns 
unscathed from battle but, rather, declare him to be a paltry Kshatriya. 

There is no higher duty for a Kshatriya than the suppression of 
brigands. Gifts, study and sacrifices bring prosperity to kings. Therefore, a 
king who desires to acquire punya should engage in battle. The king should 
ensure not only that all his subjects observe their respective duties, but also 
that they follow the dictates of dharma. If he only protects his subjects, 
whether or not he does anything else, he is considered to be one who has 
accomplished all meritorious deeds and is worthy of being called a 
Kshatriya, the greatest of men. 

I will now tell you, Yudhishtira, what the eternal dharma of the Vaisya 
is. A Vaisya should give gifts, study the Vedas, perform sacrifices and 
acquire wealth by fair means. He should also protect and rear all domestic 
animals with proper care, like a father nurturing his sons. Anything else that 
he does will be inappropriate for him. By protecting his domestic animals, 
he will obtain great happiness, since the Creator, after fashioning these 
animals, bestowed their care upon the Vaisya. Upon the Brahmana and the 
Kshatriya he conferred the care of all living things. 

I will tell you how the Vaisya is to earn the means of his sustenance. If 
he looks after six cattle for others, he can take the milk of one cow as his 
remuneration, and if he keeps a hundred cattle for others, he may take a 


single pair as his fee. If he trades with others’ wealth, he can take a seventh 
part of the profits as his share. One-seventh also is his share in the profits 
arising from the trade in horns, but he should take one-sixteenth if the trade 
is in hooves. If he engages in cultivation with seeds supplied by others, he 
can receive a seventh part of the yield. This should be his annual 
remuneration. A Vaisya should always be ready to tend cattle. If he is ready 
to do so, no one else should be employed for the task. 

I will tell you, O Bhaarata, what the duties of a Sudra are. The Creator 
intended the Sudra to become the servant of the other three varnas, so the 
service of the three other classes is his duty, one that will obtain great 
happiness for him. He should wait upon the three other classes according to 
their order of seniority. A Sudra should never amass wealth, lest he make 
the members of the three superior classes subservient to him. By doing so, 
he will incur sin. With the king’s permission, however, a Sudra may earn 
wealth for performing religious acts. 

I will now tell you the profession he should follow and the means by 
which he can earn his livelihood. The shastras say that the three other 
varnas should certainly maintain the Sudras. Worn-out umbrellas, turbans, 
beds and seats, shoes and fans should be given to Sudra servants. The 
Munis should give the Sudra torn clothes no longer fit to wear. These are 
the latter’s lawful acquisitions. 

Dharmatman decrees that if the Sudra approaches anyone belonging to 
the three orders of Munis from the desire of doing menial service, the latter 
should assign him proper work. To the sonless Sudra, his master should 
offer the funeral cake. The weak and old among them should be looked 
after. The Sudra should never abandon his master, whatever the nature or 
degree of the distress into which the latter may fall. If the master loses his 
wealth, the Sudra servant should support him zealously. A Sudra cannot 
have any wealth that is his own, since whatever he possesses belongs 
lawfully to his master. 

The shastras lay down yagna as a duty of the three other varnas—even 
for the Sudra, O Bhaarata! A Sudra, however, is not competent to utter 
swaha and swadha, or any other Vedic mantra. For this reason the Sudra, 
without observing the vows laid down in the Vedas, should worship the 
gods in minor sacrifices called Paka-yagnas. The dakshina of such sacrifices 
is the gift called Purnapatra. It is said that in days of old a Sudra named 


Paijavana gave, in one of his yagnas, dakshina consisting of a hundred 
thousand Purnapatras, according to the law called Aindragni. 

The Vedas prescribe yagnas as much for the Sudra as for the three other 
varnas. Of all yagnas, devotion is the best, since it is a high deity and 
cleanses all who perform yagnas. Then again, Brahmanas are the greatest of 
Devas to their respective Sudra attendants. They worship the gods in 
sacrifices, for the fruition of various wishes. The members of the three other 
varnas have all sprung from the Brahmanas. The Brahmanas are the gods of 
the very Devas. Whatever they say will be for your great good. Therefore, 
all kinds of yagnas naturally pertain to all the four varnas. The obligation is 
not optional and must be met. One should always worship as a god the 
Brahmana who knows the Riks, Yajuses and Samans. The Sudra, who is 
without Riks, Yajuses and Samans, has Prajapati for his god. 

The shastras lay down mental sacrifice for all the varnas, O Bhaarata! It 
is not true that the gods and other Mahatmans do not wish to share the 
offerings in such sacrifices of even the Sudra. For this reason, it lays down 
for all the varnas the sacrifice that consists in devotion. 

The Brahmana is the best of the gods. It is not true that they who belong 
to that varna cannot perform the sacrifices of the other orders. The fire 
called Vitana, though procured from Vaisyas and inspired with mantras, is 
still inferior. The Brahmana is the performer of the yagnas of the three other 
varnas. For this reason all the four orders are holy. All the varnas are related 
to each other by blood through the intermediate orders, as they have all 
sprung from Brahmanas. In ascertaining the priority of men in respect of 
their creation, it will appear that among all the orders, the first created was 
the Brahmana. 

Originally, Saman was one; Yajus was one and Rik was one. In this 
connection, men who know ancient history sing a verse, O Rajan, in praise 
of a yagna performed by the Vaikhanasa Munis. Before or after sunrise, a 
person of subdued senses, with heart filled with devotion, pours libations on 
the sacrificial fire according to the law. Devotion is a mighty agent. With 
regard to homas again, the one called Skanna is the initial one, while that 
which is called Askanna is the last, but the greatest in point of merit. 

Yagnas are multifarious, with different rites and fruits. The Brahmana 
who is devout, who is acquainted with all the shastras and possesses an 
understanding of them, is competent to perform yagnas. He who wishes to 
perform a sacrifice is regarded as righteous, even if he happens to be a thief, 


a sinner or the worst of sinners, and the Rishis applaud such a man. Without 
doubt they are right. 

Thus, in conclusion, all the varnas should always, and by every means 
in their power, perform yagnas to the best of their abilities, as there is no 
equal to sacrifice in the three worlds. They should be performed with hearts 
free from malice, aided by devotion which is sacrosanct.’” 


CANTO 61 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘O Mahabaho, listen now to me as I name the four 

varnas and their respective dharmas— Vanaprastha, Bhaikshya, 
Garhasthya of great merit and Brahmacharya which Brahmanas adopt. 
Having performed all the dharmas of the stage called Garhasthya—and 
after undergoing the purificatory pujas necessary to ordain matted locks, 
following the rites of regeneration and those relating to the sacred fire and 
study of the Vedas—with soul cleansed and senses restrained, a man should 
retire, alone or with his wife, to the forest for Vanaprastha. 

Having studied the shastras called Aranyakas, drawn up his vital fluid 
and retired from all worldly affairs, the virtuous Vanaprastha can then attain 
absorption with the infinite and eternal Atman. This is what the Munis, who 
have drawn up their vital fluid, suggest that a recluse should practise and 
perform. 

It is well known that the Brahmana who aspires to attain mukti is 
competent to adopt the Bhaikshya varnasrama after the stage of 
Brahmacharya. The Brahmana possessed of learning, with no desire to 
better his situation, wandering without a fixed abode and sleeping wherever 
he finds himself when evening comes, subsisting on whatever food is 
obtained in charity, given to contemplation, practising self-restraint with 
senses under control, free of all craving, without either appetite or aversion, 
and regarding all beings equally, by adopting this varnasrama attains 
absorption with the eternal soul that knows no decay. 


The man entering the Garhasthya varnasrama, after studying the Vedas, 
should accomplish all the religious duties laid out for him. He should have 
children and enjoy pleasures and comforts. He should meticulously perform 
all the dharma of this varna that sages applaud, which is extremely difficult 
to observe with purity. 

He should be satisfied with his own wedded wife and never approach 
her except during her season. He should observe the laws of the shastras 
and not be cunning or deceitful. He should be abstemious in diet, devoted to 
the gods, grateful, mild-mannered, kind and forgiving. He should be of 
tranquil heart, tractable and attentive in making offerings to the Devas and 
the Pitris and always hospitable to Brahmanas. He should be free of pride, 
not confine his charity to any one sect, and devoutly perform the Vedic rites. 

In this connection, the illustrious Maharishis cite an important verse 
sung by Narayana himself, endowed with mahatapasya. Listen to it: “By 
truth, simplicity, proper reverence towards guests, acquisition of dharma 
and artha, and relish of one’s own wives, one should enjoy diverse kinds of 
happiness, both here and in the hereafter.” The Maharishis have said that 
support of sons and wives and study of the Vedas form the dharma of those 
who lead this great varnasrama. 

The Brahmana who, engaged in the performance of yagnas, duly goes 
through this mode of life and properly discharges its dharma, obtains 
blessed recompense in Swarga. Upon his death, the rewards he desired 
become eternal. Indeed, these wait upon him for eternity like menials ever 
on the alert to execute the commands of their master. 

Attending to the Vedas, silently reciting the mantras obtained from his 
acharya, worshipping all the deities, dutifully serving his guru, with his own 
body smeared with clay and dirt, the man following the Brahmacharya 
varna should always observe rigid vows, O Yudhishtira, and, with senses 
under control, pay heed to the instruction he has received. Reflecting on the 
Vedas, discharging all the duties of dhyana and karma, he should live 
dutifully, waiting upon his acharya and always submissive to him. 
Disengaged from the six kinds of work, such as officiating in the sacrifices 
of others, never attached to any actions, showing neither favour nor 
disfavour to any one, doing good even to one’s enemies— this is the dharma 
the shastras lay down for a Brahmacharin!’” 


CANTO 62 


¢ =e udhishtira asks, “Tell us of those duties, in respect of men like 
ourselves, which are auspicious, produce future happiness, are 
benevolent, pleasant, agreeable and approved by all.’ 

Bhishma says, “The other three orders do not adopt the four varnas that 
the shastras lay down for the Brahmana, O Bhaarata! I have already 
mentioned many deeds that lead to Swarga and are appropriate for the 
Kshatriya. These are not relevant to your present query, for the Vedas lay 
them down for those Kshatriyas inclined to ruthlessness. 

The Brahmana who prefers the practices of Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and 
Sudras, incurs censure in this world as a man of evil atman, and goes to 
Naraka in the next world. The names which men give to slaves, dogs, 
wolves and other beasts, O Pandava, are applied to the Brahmana who 
engages in pursuits improper for him. 

The Brahmana who in all the four varnas is duly engaged in the six-fold 
deeds, of regulating the breath, contemplation and others, who performs all 
his duties and is tranquil, who has his passions under control, whose heart is 
pure and who is ever engaged in tapasya, who has no desire of bettering his 
prospects and who is charitable, receives inexhaustible regions of bliss in 
the other world. Everyone derives his own nature from his actions, through 
their circumstances, place, means and motives. 

You should therefore, Rajan, regard the study of the Vedas, of such high 
merit, to be equal to the exertion of kingly power or the pursuits of 
agriculture, trade and hunting. The world is set going by Time, and the 


course of Time settles its operations. Man performs all his karma, good, bad 
and indifferent, entirely under the influence of Time. Among the good deeds 
of a man’s past life, those that exert the greatest influence on the next are 
liable to be exhausted. Men, however, are ever engaged in those actions to 
which their propensities lead. These propensities draw a living entity in 
diverse directions.’” 


CANTO 63 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘Improper occupations for a Brahmana are drawing 

the bow-string, destroying foes, living off agriculture or trade, 
tending cattle or serving others for money. An intelligent Brahmana, 
leading a life of the grihasta, should perform the six Vedic deeds. One 
applauds the retirement of a Brahmana into the vana, after he has duly 
discharged all the garhapatyas. 

A Brahmana should avoid service of the king, wealth obtained through 
agriculture, sustenance from trade, all kinds of crooked conduct, 
companionship with any but his wedded wives, and usury. The miserable 
Brahmana who falls away from his dharma and whose behaviour is impious 
becomes a Sudra, O Rajan. 

The Brahmana who weds a Sudra woman or a dancer or a village 
servant, who becomes debased in conduct, or otherwise sins, becomes a 
Sudra. In that case, whether he recites the Vedas or not, he becomes equal to 
a Sudra, should be assigned a place among Sudras during feasts, and should 
be excluded from occasions of worshipping the gods. If one distributes food 
offered to the Devas and the Pitris to any Brahmanas who have transgressed 
due restraints, who have become impure or addicted to evil pursuits and 
cruel deeds, or who have fallen away from their legitimate dharma, the 
giver gets no punya. 

For this reason, O Rajan, Brahma has laid down self-restraint, purity 
and simplicity as the dharma of a Brahmana. Besides these, he has also 
mentioned the duties of all the four varnas. For Brahma, one is truly a 


Brahmana who is self-restrained, has drunk the soma in yagnas, is of good 
conduct, has compassion for all beings and powers of endurance, is frank 
and simple, mild and forgiving, free from cruelty or any desire to acquire 
wealth to raise his status. 

Men wanting to acquire virtue, O Rajan, seek the assistance of Sudras, 
Vaisyas and Kshatriyas. Therefore, Vishnu never extends his grace to the 
members of these three varnas who are not dutiful in helping others to 
acquire virtue. If one does not please Vishnu, one loses the happiness of all 
men in Swarga—the merit arising from karma laid down for the four 
varnas, the declarations of the Vedas, all kinds of yagnas and all other 
religious deeds and duties in respect of the several varnasramas. 

Listen now, O son of Pandu, to those dharmas that you should observe 
in the four varnasramas. The Kshatriya who wants the members of the three 
other varnas in his kingdom to adhere strictly to the respective duties of 
their varnas, should know these. 

For a Sudra who wishes to hear shastras that are not forbidden to him, 
who has accomplished his dharma, who has fathered a son and between 
whom and the superior varna there is not much difference in purity of 
conduct, all the varnasramas are for him, except the observance of universal 
peacefulness and self-restraint, which are not necessary for him. 

For a Sudra practising all these, and also for a Vaisya and a Kshatriya, O 
Rajan, Brahma has laid down the Bhikshu varnasrama. Having discharged 
the dharma of his varna and having also served his family, a Vaisya of 
venerable years, with the king’s permission, may adopt another varnasrama. 

Having studied the Vedas duly and the treatises on the duties of kings, O 
sinless one, having fathered children and performed other karma of a like 
nature; having taken the soma and ruled over and protected all his subjects 
righteously; having performed the Rajasuya, the Aswamedha yagna and 
other great yagnas; having invited learned Brahmanas for recitation of the 
shastras, and having made gifts to them according to their desires; having 
obtained victories, small or great, in battle; having placed on his throne his 
natural son or some Kshatriya of good birth for the protection of his 
subjects; having honoured the Pitris with due rites laid down for them; 
having devoutly worshipped the Devas by performing sacrifices and the 
Rishis by studying the Vedas; the Kshatriya who in old age desires another 
varnasrama, can adopt it by leaving the one which immediately precedes it. 
Thereby he is sure to obtain success in his tapasya. 


A Kshatriya, to lead the life of a Rishi, may adopt the Bhikshu 
varnasrama, but he should never do so for the sake of enjoyment. Having 
left the Grihastasrama, he can adopt the Bhikshu varna by seeking alms just 
enough to support his existence. Life as a sannyasi is not obligatory upon 
the three varnas— Kshatriya, Vaisya and Sudras. However, they can adopt it 
if they choose and, therefore, this varnasrama is open to the four orders. 

Among men, the highest dharma is the one which the Kshatriyas 
practise. The whole world is subject to the might of their arms. The Vedas 
have declared that the observance of all the duties, principal and 
subordinate, of the three other varnas, depends on the duties of the 
Kshatriya. Know that just as the elephant’s footprints encompass those of 
all other animals, the Kshatriya’s duties engulf all the dharma of the other 
orders, in all circumstances. 

Men who know the shastras say that the duties of the other three varnas 
afford small relief or protection and produce small rewards, while the 
responsibilities of the Kshatriya afford great relief and produce great 
rewards. Kingly duties, Rajadharma, are the foremost of all duties, for they 
protect all the varnas. Every kind of vairagya occurs in Rajadharma, O 
Rajan, and sannyasa is the eternal and the greatest of all virtues. 

If the Dandaneeti, the science of punishment, disappears, the Vedas will 
disappear. All those shastras that inculcate the dharma of men will also be 
lost. Indeed, if one abandons the ancient dharma of the Kshatriyas, all the 
duties in respect of all the varnasramas will be lost. 

One sees all kinds of renunciation in Rajadharma. In them occur all 
kinds of initiation, and connected with them are all kinds of learning and 
worldly conduct. As with animals, if the commoner slaughters them, it will 
destroy the virtue and religious actions of the slaughterers. Thus all other 
duties, deprived of the protection that Rajadharma gives, will fall prey to 
attack and destruction; anxious men will disregard the practices the Vedas 
lay down for them.’” 


CANTO 64 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, “The duties in respect of all the four varnasramas, 

those of Yatis, O Pandava, and the customs relating to the 
conduct of men in general, are included in Rajadharma, kingly duties, as 
part of the Kshatriya’s dharma. If the functions of royalty are disturbed, evil 
will overtake all beings. 

The duties of men are not obvious, as they have many interpretations. 
Misrepresented by many false systems, their eternal nature is sometimes 
violated. Those who pin their trust on the conclusions men have arrived at 
without really knowing the truths that dharma and the shastras declare, find 
themselves stranded and confused by creeds whose ultimate ends are 
unknown. 

The dharma imposed upon the Kshatriya is clear, produces great 
happiness, as is evident from its results, is free from deceit and beneficial to 
all. The whole world, with all good actions, is subject to Rajadharma, 
Yudhishtira, since the shastras say that the responsibilities of the three 
varnas, Brahmanas and of those who have retired from the world, are 
included within those of the sacred varnasrama called Garhasthya. 

I have told you how, in olden days, many brave kings had approached 
the Lord of all creatures, the divine and mighty Vishnu of great prowess, to 
resolve their doubts about the Dandaneeti. Mindful of the declarations of 
the shastras reinforced by examples, those kings waited upon Narayana, 
after having weighed each of their actions against the duties of each of the 
varnas. These gods, the Sadhyas, the Vasus, the Aswins, the Rudras, the 


Viswas, the Maruts and the Siddhas, the first of Devas created in olden 
days, all observe the Kshatriya’s dharma. I will now recite to you a history, 
rich in inferences, of both dharma and artha. 

In olden days, when the Danavas had multiplied and swept away all 
barriers and distinctions, O Rajan, the powerful Mandhatri became king. He 
performed a great yagna from a desire to behold almighty Narayana, the 
God of gods without beginning, middle and end. At this yagna, he humbly 
worshipped the great Vishnu. 

The Supreme Lord, assuming the form of Indra, showed himself to the 
monarch. Accompanied by many worthy kings, Mandhatri offered worship 
to the mighty god. An elevated discourse followed between this lion among 
kings and the illustrious Deva in Indra’s form, regarding Vishnu of great 
effulgence. 

Indra asked, “What is your object, O Mahatman, in seeking to behold 
that Ancient and First of Devas, Narayana of inconceivable tejas and 
infinite maya? Neither I, nor Brahma himself, can obtain a sight of the God 
of universal form. I will grant you any other wish of your heart, for you are 
the greatest of mortals: your soul abides in peace; you are devoted to 
dharma; you have your senses under control; and you are possessed of 
heroism. You are unflinching in wanting to do what is agreeable to the 
Devas. For your intelligence, devotion and high faith as well, I will grant 
you whatever boon you desire.” 

Mandhatri replied, “I bow my head to you, O divine Lord. Certainly I 
desire to see the foremost of Devas! Casting off all earthly longings, I wish 
to earn punya and to lead the most important varnasrama, the path of the 
good esteemed by all. By exercising the mahadharma of a Kshatriya, I have 
spread my fame and earned many realms of inexhaustible merit in the next 
world. I do not, however, know how to discharge the duties flowing from 
the first of Devas, which are the best in the world.” 

Indra said, “They who are not kings, however observant they may be of 
their duties, cannot easily attain the highest rewards of dharma. Kingly 
duties first flowed from the original God, while other dharma followed later 
from his body. Many were other responsibilities of the Vanaprasthasrama, 
which God later created, but the fruits of all these are exhaustible. 
Rajadharma, however, is esteemed above them since it subsumes all other 
duties. For this reason, the shastras consider the Kshatriya dharma to be the 
highest. 


In olden days Vishnu, acting according to the Kshatriya dharma, 
forcibly suppressed and destroyed his foes and thereby afforded relief to the 
Devas and the Maharishis. If the divine Vishnu of inconceivable tejas had 
not slain all his enemies among the Asuras, then the Brahmanas as well as 
Brahma, the Creator of the world, would have been destroyed. The 
Kshatriya dharma and the responsibilities that first flowed from the 
Paramatman would all have been lost. 

If the first and foremost of Devas had not by his prowess subjugated the 
earth’s Asuras, they would have destroyed the Brahmanas and, as a 
consequence, all the dharma of the four varnas, the four varnasramas and 
the sanatana dharma. They were revived through the exercise of the 
Kshatriya dharma. 

In every yuga, the dharma of Brahmanas in respect of attaining 
Brahman is prescribed first. However, since kingly duties protect all, we 
regard them as the most important. Death in battle, compassion for all 
beings, knowledge of the affairs of the world, protection of men from 
danger, relieving the distressed and the oppressed, all are part of the 
Kshatriya dharma that kings practise. 

Men who disregard wholesome restraints, whom lust and wrath govern 
are kept from sin by the fear of kings. As a result, others who are docile 
men of dharma are able to perform all their responsibilities. 

For this reason, we regard Kshatriya duties as righteous. Without doubt, 
all beings live happily in the world, protected by kings exercising the 
Kshatriya dharma, like children protected by their parents. The Kshatriya 
dharma is eternal and the greatest of all duties, and one regards it as the best 
in the world, as it embraces the protection of every being. Itself eternal, it 
leads to eternal mukti.”’ 


CANTO 65 


6 I ndra said, “The Kshatriya dharma, possessing such energy, including 
in its application all other dharmas and being the greatest of all 
dharmas, should be observed by men who are like you, O Rajan, noble and 
always in quest of the good. If these duties are not properly discharged, ruin 
will overcome all living things. Kings who have compassion for all beings 
should regard the following to be the most important of their duties: 
reclaiming the land for cultivation and fertilizing it, performing great 
purificatory yagnas, protecting their subjects and disdaining beggary. 

The best dharma, the Rishis and Munis say, is to give. Of all gifts, that 
of one’s body in battle is the greatest. You have seen yourself how the rulers 
of the earth, ever observant of the Kshatriya dharma, having duly waited 
upon their acharyas and acquired great learning, in the end cast off their 
bodies in battle. The Kshatriya wanting to acquire punya, after having gone 
through the Brahmacharyasrama, should lead a life of a grihasta, which is 
always meritorious. 

In adjudicating ordinary questions of right and wrong between his 
subjects, the king should be thoroughly impartial. The shastras declare that, 
to ensure that the varnas observe their respective duties, for the protection 
of all, for diverse schemes and stratagems and competence in 
accomplishing objectives, most important is the Kshatriya dharma, which 
includes all other duties within its scope. 

The other varnas are able to observe their respective dharmas due to 
Rajadharma. For this reason, the former are said to be dependent upon the 


latter in respect of the merit they produce. Those who disregard all 
wholesome restraints and are attached to the pursuit of worldly objects are 
brutes in nature. The exercise of kingly duties compels them to act 
righteously. These duties therefore, are of the greatest importance. 

Every Brahmana who follows the three Vedas should observe the course 
of conduct prescribed for him, as well as the varnas that the scriptures lay 
down for his varna. If a Brahmana acts in any other way, he should be 
treated like a Sudra. 

A Brahmana should follow the dharma of the four varnas and the rituals 
prescribed in the Vedas, beyond which he has no duties. A Kshatriya should 
not make any arrangement for the sustenance of a Brahmana who lives in 
any other way. His religious merit grows as a result of his actions. A 
Brahmana is like dharma’s self and, if he is employed in deeds that are not 
appropriate for him, he deserves no respect and should not be trusted. 

These are the duties that pertain to the several orders, and it is the 
responsibility of the Kshatriyas to protect them so that their observance can 
be improved. For these reasons, Rajadharma, I believe, is the most 
significant duty of heroes, who are foremost in practising it.” 

Mandhatri then asked, “What are the duties that should be performed by 
the several castes that have sprung up from Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas 
and the Sudras, who reside in the dominions of Arya kings—the Yavanas, 
Kiratas, Gandharvas, Chinas, Savaras, Barbaras, Sakas, Tusharas, Kankas, 
Pathavas, Andhras, Madrakas, Paundras, Pulindas, Ramathas, Kambojas? 
What is the dharma of kings like us regarding the tribes who subsist by 
robbery? I want to hear about this. O illustrious Deva, instruct me since you 
are the friend of us Kshatriyas.” 

Indra said, “All the robber tribes should serve their mothers, fathers, 
their acharyas and other elders, as well as Rishis and Munis living in the 
vana and their kings. They should also follow the duties and rites prescribed 
in the Vedas. They should perform yagnas in honour of the Pitris, dig wells 
and dedicate them to universal service, give water to thirsty travellers, give 
away beds and make other appropriate gifts to Brahmanas. 

Duties that every person of this class who desires his own prosperity 
should practise are truth, abstention from injury, suppression of wrath, 
support to Brahmanas and kinsmen by giving them their due, maintenance 
of wives and children, purity, peacefulness and presenting gifts to 
Brahmanas at yagnas of every kind. Such a person should also perform all 


kinds of Paka-yagnas with costly gifts of food and wealth. These and 
similar duties the shastras lay down from olden days, for those of this class. 
The robber class should also perform all these actions which the shastras 
lay down for all others, O Rajan.” 

Mandhatri said, “In the world of men, such wicked men may be seen 
living in disguise among all the four varnas and in all the four 
varnasramas.” 

Indra said, “Upon the disappearance of Rajadharma and the Dandaneeti, 
all creatures are exceedingly afflicted by the tyranny of kings. After the end 
of this the Krita yuga, confusion will set in regarding the different varnas, 
and innumerable Bhikshus will appear with sectarian marks of different 
kinds. Disregarding the Puranas and the high truths of religion, men, driven 
by lust and anger, will deviate onto erroneous paths. 

When Mahatmans restrain sinful men from evil deeds with the aid of 
Dandaneeti, which is paramount, eternal and the source of all, virtue 
becomes firmly established. Gifts, libations and offerings to the Pitris of any 
man who disrespects the ruler become fruitless. The very Devas do not 
disregard a Dharmarajan, who is truly an eternal god. The divine Lord of 
all, having created the universe, intended the Kshatriya to rule men’s 
inclinations in respect of duties. I revere and worship one who employs his 
understanding to watch over the course of duties that men perform. Upon 
such supervision rests the Kshatriya dharma.”’ 

Bhishma continues, ‘Having uttered these words, the divine and mighty 
Narayana, in the form of Indra, accompanied by the Maruts, returned to his 
eternal abode of inexhaustible happiness. When such was the manner in 
which the virtuous practised duties in the olden days, which learned 
Mahatman can disregard the Kshatriya? 

Like blind men lost on the way, living beings acting or abstaining in an 
unrighteous manner meet with destruction. O Naravyaghra, adhere to the 
circle of dharma the ancients first set going. I know you are capable of 
doing so.’” 


CANTO 66 


66 Y udhishtira asks, “You have spoken about the four varnasramas of 
human life. Please expand on them further, as I seek to know 
more.’ 

Bhishma replies, “O Yudhishtira Mahabaho, you know all the duties that 
Dharmatman practise in this world just as well as I do. Listen, and I will 
explain to you the merit acquired by a king on account of the duties 
practised by those leading other varnasramas, O foremost of virtuous men. 
All the merit that belongs to men practising the obligations of the four 
varnasramas accrues to Dharmarajans. A king free of lust and hate, who 
rules with the aid of Dandaneeti and looks equally on all creatures, fulfils 
the objective of Bhaikshyasrama. 

An adept ruler who makes gifts to deserving men on proper occasions, 
who knows how to favour and to punish, who conducts himself in all things 
according to the injunctions of the shastras, and who has tranquillity of 
soul, attains the object of Garhasthyasrama. The king who venerates those 
who deserve worship by giving them their due, completely fulfils the 
objective of Bhaikshyasrama. 

The monarch who strives to rescue from distress his kinsmen, relatives 
and friends, O Yudhishtira, fulfils the objective of Vanaprasthasrama. The 
king who on every occasion honours the noblest among men and the best 
among Yatis, meets the objective of Vanaprasthasrama, as does the king 
who daily makes offerings to the Pitris and generous offerings to all living 


beings. The king who subdues other kingdoms to protect the righteous, O 
Naravyagahra, also attains the object of the same mode of life. 

For shielding all creatures, as well as properly defending his own 
kingdom, a king earns the merit of as many yagnas as the number of beings 
protected, and accordingly attains the objective of the Sannyasasrama. 

The daily study of the Vedas, propitiation and worship of acharyas and 
services rendered to one’s own guru, lead to attainment of the objective of 
the Brahmacharyasrama. 

The king who silently recites his mantras every day and worships the 
Devas according to the law, O Naravyaghra, attains the objective of the 
Garhasthyasrama. 

The king who engages in battle resolved to protect his kingdom or meet 
death, who is liberal to men leading Vanaprasthasrama and to Brahmanas 
versed in the three Vedas, attains the objective of the Vanaprasthasrama. 

The king who is merciful towards all creatures and abstains from 
cruelty attains the objective of all the varnasramas. The king who shows 
compassion to the young and the old under every circumstance fulfils the 
objective of every varna, O Yudhishtira. 

The king who affords relief to all oppressed people seeking his 
protection, who defends all creatures, mobile and immobile, and honours 
them as they deserve, attains the purpose of Garhasthyasrama. 

Bestowing favours and inflicting punishment upon wives and brothers, 
older and younger, and upon sons and grandsons, are the Garhapatya of a 
king and constitute his best penances. By honouring those who are 
righteous and deserving of reverence, and by protecting those who have by 
their penances acquired knowledge of self, O Purushavyaghra, a king 
attains the purpose of the Garhasthyasrama. 

The Garhapatya of a king, Bhaarata, lies in inviting to his home and 
feeding men who have taken themselves to Vanaprastha and other modes of 
life. The king who duly adheres to the duties laid down for him by the 
Creator obtains the blessed merits of all the varnas. The virtuous king is the 
greatest of men, and the learned say that such a king in effect accomplishes 
Vanaprastha and all the other varnasramas. 

The king who duly honours the office or rank, the race or family, of 
veterans deserving of honour, it is said, O Kaunteya, lives in all the 
varnasramas. The king, by observing the duties of his country and those of 
his family, acquires the merits of all the modes of life. The king who on 


proper occasions bestows upon men of dharma wealth or gifts of value, 
earns the merits of all the modes of life. The king who, while overcome 
with danger and fear, nevertheless keeps his eye on the duties of all men, 
earns the merits of all the varnas. 

The king obtains a share of the merit earned under his protection by 
men of dharma in his realm. On the other hand, if kings do not protect the 
righteous within their dominions, Naravyaghra, they take upon themselves 
the sins of omission and commission. The men who assist kings in 
protecting their subjects also become equally entitled to a share of the merit 
earned by others, by virtue of the protection granted. 

The learned say that the Garhasthya, which we have adopted, is superior 
to all the other varnas. In this respect, the conclusions are clear and 
hallowed. The man who regards all creatures as himself, who does no harm 
and has his anger under control, obtains great happiness both here and 
hereafter. A king can easily cross the ocean of samsara with kingly duties, 
urged on his fast boat by the breeze of gifts, with the shastras for its tackle 
and intelligence for the strength of its helmsman, kept afloat by the power 
of righteousness. 

When he withdraws from every earthly object the feeling of desire in 
his heart, he is regarded as resting on his understanding alone. In this state, 
he soon attains Brahma. Becoming beatific by meditation, by restraining 
desire and other passions of the heart, O Naravyaghra, a king engaged in 
discharging the duty of protection will obtain great merit. Therefore, O 
Yudhishtira, work carefully to protect pious Brahmanas and those devoted 
to the study of the Vedas, as well as other men. Merely by exercising the 
duty of extending shelter, the king earns merit a hundred times greater than 
Munis can earn in their asramas within the vana. 

I have now described the various duties of men, O eldest son of Pandu. 
You must adhere to Rajadharma that is eternal, which great men have 
practised since olden days. If you occupy yourself with concentration with 
the duty of protecting your subjects, Naravyaghra, you will obtain the 
merits of all the four varnasramas and of all the four varnas!’” 


CANTO 67 


¢ ve udhishtira asks, ‘You have told me the dharma of the four 
varnasramas and the four varnas. Tell me now, O Pitamaha, the 
principal duties of a kingdom.’ 

Bhishma replies, “The selection and coronation of a king is the first duty 
of a kingdom, as anarchy makes it weak and robbers soon come to infest it. 
In states racked by anarchy, righteousness cannot dwell and inhabitants 
destroy one another. It is the worst possible state for a kingdom. 

The Srutis declare that in the coronation of a king, it is Indra himself 
who is crowned in the person of the king. A man who desires prosperity 
should worship the king as he would Indra. No one should dwell in 
kingdoms where anarchy prevails, because Agni does not convey to the 
Devas the libations that people there offer. If a powerful king desires to 
annex kingdoms weakened by anarchy, the people should go forward and 
receive the invader with respect, for this is consistent with wisdom. There is 
no evil greater than anarchy, but only if the powerful invader is inclined to 
equity will everything be set right, otherwise he could annihilate all. 

The cow that cannot be easily milked has to endure great pain, whereas 
the cow lending itself to being easily milked does not suffer at all. The iron 
that bends easily does not need to be heated. The tree that bends easily does 
not suffer at the hands of the gardener. Guided by these instances, O 
Kshatriya, men should bend before the powerful. He who bows to a 
powerful man actually bends his head to Indra. For these reasons, men who 
wish for prosperity should elect and crown someone as their king. 


Men who live in countries where anarchy prevails cannot enjoy their 
wealth and wives, because the lawless man derives great pleasure from 
robbing them. However, when others steal his own ill-gotten wealth, he 
wishes for a king. It is evident, therefore, that in times of anarchy, even evil 
men cannot be happy, because two evil men together may snatch away the 
wealth of a third, and many men banding together may in turn rob those two 
of their wealth. Such evil men could enslave those who are free, and 
forcibly abduct women. For these reasons, the Devas created kings to 
protect the people. 

If there were no kings on earth to wield the Dandaneeti, the strong 
would then prey on the weak, as fish do in water. We have been told that in 
olden days of anarchy, men destroyed one another like stronger fish 
devouring weaker ones. We hear that a few among them then joined 
together to make certain compacts, saying, “We will cast off one who 
becomes harsh in speech or violent in temper, one who seduces or abducts 
other men’s wives or who robs others of their wealth.” 

They made such an agreement to inspire confidence in all classes of 
people. However, after some time, they found the arrangement 
unsatisfactory and approached Pitamaha Brahma, saying, “Without a king, 
O divine lord, we are facing doom. Appoint someone as our king so that all 
of us will revere him and he will protect us.” 

The Pitamaha requested Manu but he did not assent, saying, “To govern 
a kingdom is exceedingly difficult, especially among men whose ways are 
always false and deceitful. I fear all sinful deeds.” 

The inhabitants of the earth then said to him, “Do not fear. Sins that 
men commit will affect only those who commit them, without tarnishing 
you in the least. To increase your treasury, we will give you a fiftieth part of 
our animals and precious metals, and a tenth part of our grain. When our 
maidens wish to marry, we will give you the most beautiful ones among 
them. Those among men who are foremost in the use of weapons, in riding 
and driving chariots will follow you as the Devas do Indra. 

With your strength so enhanced, you will become invincible and 
powerful. As our king, you will protect us gladly, like Kubera protecting the 
Yakshas and the Rakshasas. A fourth part of the punya men will earn under 
your protection will be yours. Strengthened by the punya that you will so 
easily obtain, protect us, O Rajan, as he of a hundred yagnas protects the 


gods. Like the sun scorching all with his rays, go and win victories. Crush 
the pride of your foes and let dharma always triumph in the world.” 

Thus addressed by the inhabitants of the earth, the tejasvi Manu of high 
lineage appeared, accompanied by a large force, blazing with power. 
Beholding the might of Manu, like the Devas perceiving the might of Indra, 
the inhabitants of the earth became quiet and set their minds to their 
respective duties. Manu then went through the world like a rain-charged 
cloud in its mission of beneficence, keeping evil in check and getting all to 
perform their respective dharma. 

The men on earth who desire prosperity, Yudhishtira, should first choose 
and crown a king for the protection of all. Like disciples prostrating 
themselves in the presence of the acharya, or the Devas in the presence of 
Indra, all should humble themselves before the king. A ruler honoured by 
his own people becomes an object of respect for his enemies, while a king 
disappointing his people is overthrown, despised by his subjects. 

Therefore, parasols, chariots, outward ornaments, meat, drink, 
mansions, seats, beds and all utensils for use and show, should be assigned 
to the king. By such means he will succeed in discharging his dharma as 
protector and become irresistible. He should speak with smiles and, 
addressed sweetly by others, should in turn address others amiably. Grateful 
to those who serve him, firmly devoted to those who deserve his respect, 
and with passions under control, he should give all their due. Looked after 
by others, he should look upon them mildly, sweetly and generously.’” 


CANTO 68 


6 eye udhishtira asks, “Why, O Bharatarishabha, have the Brahmanas 
said that the king, the ruler of men, is a god?’ 

Bhishma replies, “There is an old story concerning this about a 
discussion between the wise Brihaspati and the intelligent king of Kosala, 
Vasumanas. The king, aware of the value of humility, ever devoted to the 
welfare of all and desirous of securing the happiness of men, duly observed 
the proper obsequies, circumambulating the great sage and bowing to him, 
and questioned the virtuous Brihaspati about the laws of a kingdom. 

Vasumanas asked, “By what means do creatures grow, and what 
destroys them? O you of deep understanding, whom should they worship in 
order to find eternal happiness?” 

Thus questioned by the Kosala king of infinite tejas, the wise Brihaspati 
conversed with him calmly about the respect that one should pay kings. 

Brihaspati said, “The duties of all men, O sagacious one, can be seen to 
have their root in the king. It is only through fear of the king that men 
refrain from destroying one another. It is the king who brings peace on 
earth, through due observance of dharma, and by curtailing lawlessness and 
all kinds of lust. When he achieves this, he shines in glory. 

O Rajan, if the sun and the moon do not rise, all creatures are unable to 
see one another in utter darkness, just as fish in shallow waters and birds in 
sanctuaries swim and rove without restraint, attacking and oppressing one 
another till they meet with extinction. Men, too, like a herd of cattle without 


a herdsman to look after them, will sink into utter darkness and certain 
destruction if they have no king to protect them. 

If the king did not exercise the duty of protection, the strong would by 
force appropriate the possessions of the weak and, if the latter refused to 
surrender them readily, take their very lives. Nobody then would be able to 
say of anything, ‘This is mine.’ Wives, sons, food, all kinds of property, 
would not exist. In the absence of royal protection, ruin would overtake 
everything: evil men would forcibly appropriate the carriages, robes, 
ornaments, precious stones and other kinds of property belonging to others, 
and all kinds of oppression would fall upon those who were righteous, 
forcing them to take to the path of adharma. Men would disregard or even 
injure their own aged parents, their very acharyas, guests and elders. 

If the king did not offer protection, all those possessing wealth would 
have to encounter death, confinement and persecution, and the very idea of 
property would disappear. Everything would be destroyed prematurely, 
brigands would overrun the country and everybody would fall into hell. 

If the king did not offer protection, all restrictions of marriage and 
intercourse due to consanguinity and other kinds of kinship would dissolve. 
All affairs relating to agriculture and trade would fall into confusion. 
Dharma would sink and be lost, and the three Vedas would disappear. 
Yagnas completed with gifts according to the law would no longer be 
performed; no marriage would take place, and society itself would cease to 
exist. If the king did not exercise the responsibility of protection, the very 
bulls would not cover cows, milk-jars would not be churned and people 
living by rearing cattle would be ruined. In the absence of royal protection, 
all creatures, howling and frantic through fear and anxiety, would meet their 
end in no time at all. No sacrifices extending for a year and completed with 
gifts according to the shastras would occur. 

In the absence of royal protection, Brahmanas would never study the 
four Vedas or undergo austerities or be cleansed by knowledge and rigid 
vows, and the slayer of a man guilty of Brahmahatya would not obtain any 
reward, while the perpetrator would enjoy perfect immunity. 

In the absence of royal protection, men would snatch others’ wealth, 
wholesome barriers would be swept away, everybody, terrified, would seek 
safety in flight and all kinds of injustice would set in. An intermixture of 
castes would take place and famine would ravage the kingdom. 


Were the king to exercise the responsibility of royal protection, men 
everywhere could sleep at their ease without shutting up their houses and 
bolting and barring their doors. Nobody would hear evil talk, or fear actual 
attacks. Women decked with ornaments could confidently wander anywhere 
without male relatives to escort them. Men would adopt the path of dharma 
and serve one another because the king exercised his duty of protection. 
The members of the three varnasramas would be able to perform great 
yagnas and concentrate on acquiring learning. The Vedas protect the world 
that depends on farming and trade. 

The king duly protects all people by following his principal dharma 
with the aid of a mighty force and, by taking a heavy load upon himself, 
enables his subjects to live in happiness. Who will not worship the king 
whose existence allows people to survive and in whose downfall they are 
ruined? Those who do what is agreeable and beneficial to the king, and who 
share the burden of royal duties that overawe every varna, conquer both this 
and the next world. He who even thinks of doing an injury to the king will 
certainly come to grief and go to hell hereafter. 

No one should disregard the king by taking him for a mere man, for he 
is in truth a divinity in human form. The king assumes five different forms 
according to five different occasions. He becomes Agni, Aditya, Mrityu, 
Vaisravana and Yama. When, confronted by falsehood, he burns the 
offenders before him with his fierce energy, he assumes the form of Agni. 
When he scrutinizes through his spies the actions of all men and does what 
is necessary for the general good, he assumes the form of Aditya. He 
assumes the form of the Destroyer when in wrath he cuts down hundreds of 
evil men with their sons, grandsons and relatives. He assumes the form of 
Yama when he restrains the evil by inflicting severe punishments on them 
and favours the righteous by bestowing rewards upon them. He assumes the 
form of Kubera on earth, O Rajan, when he gratifies with profuse gifts those 
who have rendered him valuable service and confiscates the wealth and 
jewels of those who have offended him, when he bestows prosperity upon 
some and takes it from others. 

No one who is clever, who is capable of work, who aspires to virtue and 
is free from malice, should ever spread evil reports about the king. No man 
by acting against the king can ever be happy, even if he happens to be the 
king’s son, brother, companion or one whom the king regards as his second 
self. Where Agni, assisted by Vayu, blazing forth among inflammable 


things, may leave a remnant, the wrath of the king leaves nothing to the 
man who incurs it. 

One should turn away at a distance from whatever belongs to the king, 
as though from death itself, else one will meet a speedy end like a deer at 
the touch of poison. The man of intelligence should protect as his own 
whatever belongs to the king, else he will sink senseless into a deep hell of 
eternal gloom and infamy. 

Who will not worship a king whom such terms adorn as ‘delighter of 
the people’, ‘giver of happiness’, ‘possessor of prosperity’ and, most 
important of all, “healer of injuries’, ‘lord of earth’ and “protector of men’? 

Therefore, one should always attach to the king a minister who is 
solicitous of his prosperity, who observes all wholesome restraints, who has 
his soul under control and is master of his passions, who has intelligence 
and memory, and who is adept in the transaction of business. 

The king should duly honour a minister who is grateful, endowed with 
wisdom, large-hearted, loyal, possessed of mastery over his senses, virtuous 
and observant of the dictates of policy. He should entertain the man who is 
loyal, grateful, virtuous, possessed of self-control, brave, magnanimous in 
his deeds and competent to accomplish tasks without assistance. 

Knowledge makes men proud, while the king makes men humble. The 
man whom the king chastises can never find happiness, while one whom the 
king favours, rejoices. The king is the heart of his people; he is their great 
refuge; he is their glory and their greatest happiness. O Rajan, men who are 
attached to the king succeed in conquering both this and the other world. 
Having governed the earth with the aid of self-restraint, truth and 
friendship, and having adored the Devas with great yagnas, the king, 
earning great glory, obtains an eternal abode in Swarga.” 

Being thus instructed by Brihaspati, son of Angirasa, the heroic 
Vasumanas, ruler of Kosala, the best of kings, from then on, began to 
protect his subjects.’” 


CANTO 69 


¢ nave udhishtira asks, ‘O Bhaarata, what other special duties remain 

for the king to discharge? How should he protect his kingdom 
and subdue his foes? How should he employ his spies? How should he 
inspire confidence in the four varnas of his subjects, his own servants, 
wives and sons?’ 

Bhishma says, “Listen, O Rajan, with attention to the diverse duties of 
kings, to the work which the king, or one who is in the position of a king, 
should first do. The king should first master himself, and only then seek to 
subdue his foes. How will a king who has not been able to conquer himself 
be able to conquer his enemies? The conquest of the five senses is regarded 
as the conquest of self, and the king who successfully subdues his senses is 
competent to resist his enemies. 

He should place foot-soldiers within his own palace, in his forts, 
frontiers, towns, parks, pleasure gardens and also in all places he personally 
visits. He should employ as spies men who look like simpletons or appear 
to be blind and deaf. They should all be adroit men who have been 
thoroughly tested for their abilities, and who are able to endure hunger and 
thirst. With proper attention, the king should set his informers upon all his 
counsellors, friends and sons, as well as in his city, in the provinces and in 
the dominions of the chieftains under him. 

His agents should be so employed that they do not know one another. 
He should also, O Bharatarishabha, discover the spies of his enemies by 
setting informers in shops, places of amusement where people congregate, 


among beggars, in his pleasure gardens and parks, in meetings and 
conclaves of the learned, in the country, in public places, in places where he 
holds his own court and in the homes of the citizens. In this way the 
intelligent king will discover the agents his foes dispatch and will derive 
great benefit, O Pandava. 

When the king, through a survey of his own, finds himself weak, he 
should, after consulting his counsellors, make peace with an enemy who is 
stronger. The wise king should quickly make peace with a foe, even when 
he knows that he is not weak, if any advantage can be derived from it. He 
should be engaged in protecting his kingdom righteously, and should make 
peace with those rulers who are accomplished, capable of great exertion, 
virtuous and honest. 

When the king finds himself threatened with danger and on the verge of 
ruin, he should kill all offenders whom he had overlooked in the past and all 
those the people identify as being his enemies. A king should ignore men 
who can neither benefit nor injure him, or those who cannot rescue 
themselves from distress. 

As regards military operations, a king who is confident of his own 
strength should, after first making arrangements for the protection of his 
own capital, march at the head of a large force, cheerfully and bravely, 
without declaring his destination. He should attack those who are without 
allies and friends, or those already at war with another and therefore 
careless of danger from another quarter, or those weaker than himself. 

A king should not forever live in subjection to another more powerful. 
Though weak, he should resolve to undermine the stronger, while 
continuing to rule his own kingdom. He should subvert the stronger by 
means of weapons, fire, application of poison and fomenting discord among 
his counsellors and servants. 

Brihaspati has said that an intelligent king should always avoid war for 
acquisition of territory. The wise king should acquire dominions by means 
of conciliation, gifts and stirring up dissension. 

The king should take a sixth of the incomes of his subjects as tribute to 
meet the expenses of safeguarding them, O Kurusthama. For the protection 
of his subjects, he should also forcibly take away wealth, much or little as 
the case may be, from the ten kinds of offenders mentioned in the shastras. 
A king should certainly look upon his subjects as his own children. 
However, in determining their disputes, he should not exhibit emotion. To 


hear complaints and responses of disputants in judicial suits, the king 
should always appoint wise men possessing knowledge of the affairs of the 
world, for the state in truth rests upon the proper administration of justice. 
The king should have honest and trustworthy men supervise his mines, salt, 
grain, ferries and elephant corps. 

The king who always properly conducts the Dandaneeti earns great 
punya. Regulation of punishment is the lofty duty of kings and deserves 
acclaim. The king should be conversant with the Vedas and their branches, 
possess wisdom, engage in tapasya, be charitable and devoted in 
performing yagnas. All these traits should always be present in a king, for if 
he fails to administer justice he can attain neither Swarga nor fame. 

If a stronger king attacks a weaker the latter, if intelligent, should seek 
refuge in a fort. Assembling his friends for consultation, he should devise 
proper means to defend himself. Adopting the policy of conciliation and 
sowing discord among his enemies, he should devise means to wage war 
with the assailant. He should set the inhabitants of the woods on the high 
roads and, if necessary, cause whole villages to be removed, transplanting 
all the inhabitants to minor towns or the outskirts of great cities. Reassuring 
his wealthy subjects and the principal officers of his army, he should cause 
the inhabitants of the open country to take refuge in forts that are well 
protected. 

He should himself withdraw all stores of grain from the open country 
into his forts. If that becomes impossible, he should destroy them 
completely by fire. He should set men to destroy the enemy’s crops by 
producing disunion among the enemy’s subjects or else, if he fails to do so, 
he should have those crops destroyed by his own troops. He should 
demolish all the bridges over the rivers in his kingdom. He should empty 
the waters from all the tanks in his dominions or alternatively, have them 
poisoned. 

Disregarding the duty of protecting his friends, in view of both present 
and future circumstances, he should seek the protection of another ruler 
who is the enemy of his enemy, and who may be strong enough to vanquish 
his rival on the field of battle. He should destroy all the smaller forts in his 
kingdom and cut down all the smaller trees and branches of the larger trees, 
but he should not touch even a leaf of the Chaitya tree. 

He should raise outer ramparts round his forts with enclosures in them 
and fill his trenches with water, pointed stakes at their base and crocodiles 


and sharks. He should keep small openings in his walls to enable sallies 
from his fort and make careful arrangements for their defence like that of 
the greater gates. At all his gates and on the ramparts of his forts he should 
place weapons and destructive engines such as the Sataghnis. 

He should store wood for fuel and dig and repair wells for supply of 
water to the garrison. He should cause all houses made of grass and straw to 
be plastered over with mud and, if it is summer, withdraw to a place safe 
from fire all the stores of grass and straw. He should order all food to be 
cooked at night so that no fire is lit during the day except for the daily 
homa. Particular care should be taken of fires in smithies and dormitories, 
and fires kept within the houses of the inhabitants should be well covered. 
For the effectual protection of the city, he should proclaim that severe 
punishment will be meted out to anyone who lights fires during the day. 

During such times, O greatest of men, you should drive out of the town 
all beggars, eunuchs, lunatics and mimes, for if you permit them to remain, 
evil will follow. 

Into places of public resort, tirthas, assemblies and in the houses of the 
citizens, the king should send competent spies. He should cause wide roads 
to be constructed and order shops and places for the distribution of water to 
be opened at proper stations. Depots of diverse necessaries, arsenals, camps 
and quarters for soldiers, stables for horses and elephants, trenches, streets 
and bypaths, houses and gardens for retirement and pleasure, should be so 
ordered that their sites are concealed. 

A king threatened by a hostile army should gather and store wealth, oil, 
fat, honey, clarified butter, medicines of all kinds, charcoal and fuel, grass 
and leaves, munja grass, arrows, poisoned arrows, weapons of every kind 
such as darts, swords, lances and others. He should especially keep ready 
drugs of every kind, roots and fruits, the four kinds of physicians, scribes, 
draftsmen, actors, dancers, athletes and men capable of assuming diverse 
disguises. He should decorate his capital and cheer all his subjects. 

The king should lose no time in bringing under his control men of 
whom he has reason to be afraid, be they his servants, counsellors, citizens 
or neighbouring monarchs. When any assigned task of the king is 
performed, he should reward those who helped him to accomplish it with 
wealth, proportionate gifts and words of gratitude. The shastras say that a 
king pays off his debt when he oversets his enemy or slays him outright. 


Listen to me as I recite the seven things a king should take care of. They 
are his own self, his counsellors, his treasury, his machinery for meteing out 
punishments, his friends, his provinces and his capital. He should take care 
to protect these seven limbs of his kingdom. The king who is conversant 
with the aggregate of six, the triple aggregate and the high aggregate of 
three, will succeed in winning the sovereignty of the whole earth. 

Listen, O Yudhishtira, to what is termed ‘the aggregate of six’. These 
are: ruling in peace after concluding a treaty with the foe, marching to 
battle, producing disunion among the enemy, concentrating forces for 
inspiring fear among his enemies, preparing for war with readiness for 
peace and alliance with others. 

Listen now attentively to what is termed ‘the triple aggregate’. They 
are: decreasing what is, maintaining it and increasing it. The ‘high 
aggregate’ of three consists of dharma, artha and kama. These should be 
pursued judiciously. With dharma, a king will succeed in ruling the earth for 
ever. 

On this subject, Angirasa’s son Brihaspati himself has sung the 
following two verses which you should hear: “Having discharged all his 
duties and protected the earth as well as his cities, a king will attain great 
happiness in Swarga. What is tapasya to the king who protects his people 
properly, and what need has he of yagnas? Such a king should be regarded 
as one who knows every dharma!””’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘There is the Dandaneeti, the Raja and the Praja. Tell 
me, O Pitamaha, what advantage they derive each from the other.’ 

Bhishma says, “Listen to me, O Bhaarata, as I expound in sacred and 
solemn words the great blessedness of the Dandaneeti. Dandaneeti forces 
all men to observe the svadharma of their varnas. Properly administered, it 
compels people to be virtuous. 

Understand that men become truly happy when the four varnas attend to 
their respective duties, when they maintain all wholesome boundaries, when 
peace and happiness are brought to flow from Dandaneeti, when the people 
are freed from all fear, and the three higher varnas endeavour, according to 
their respective duties, to maintain harmony. 

You should entertain no doubt about the question whether it is the king 
who makes the age, or the age that makes the king. The truth is that the king 
makes the age. When the king rules with a complete and strict reliance on 


Dandaneeti, one says that the foremost of ages, called the Krita yuga 
prevails, where dharma rules and adharma does not exist. 

The hearts of men belonging to all the four varnas take no pleasure in 
adharma. Assuredly, all men succeed in acquiring the objects they desire 
and preserving those acquired. All the Vedic rites become punya karma, all 
the seasons become delightful and free from evil, and the voices, 
enunciation and thinking of all men become clear and cheerful. Diseases 
disappear and all men become long-lived. Wives do not become widows 
and no one is a miser. The earth yields crops without being tilled, and herbs 
and plants grow in luxuriance. Trees, leaves, fruits and roots become 
vigorous and abundant. No evil is to be seen, and only dharma exists. 

These are the characteristics, O Yudhishtira, of the Krita or Satya yuga. 
When the king relies upon only three parts of Dandaneeti, leaving out the 
fourth, the yuga called Treta sets in. A fourth part of adharma follows in the 
train of such observance of the great science by three-fourths. The earth 
yields crops only if tilled, and herbs and plants grow depending upon 
tillage. 

When the king observes only a half of the great science, leaving out the 
other half, then the yuga that sets in is called Dwapara. Adharma follows in 
the train of such observance. The earth requires tillage, and yields crops by 
half. 

When the king, abandoning the great science totally, oppresses his 
subjects by evil means of diverse kinds, one calls the yuga that sets in Kali. 
During the Kali yuga, adharma becomes pervasive and nothing of dharma is 
seen. The hearts of men of all the varnas fall away from their respective 
dharmas. Sudras live by adopting lives of mendicancy, and Brahmanas live 
by serving others. Men fail to acquire the objects they desire and preserve 
those already acquired. 

Intermixture of the four varnas takes place. Vedic rites fail to produce 
fruit. All the seasons cease to be delightful and become laden with evil. The 
voices, enunciation and minds of men lose vigour. Diseases appear and men 
die prematurely. Wives become widows and one sees many cruel men. The 
clouds do not rain in season, and crops fail. When the king does not protect 
the subjects with proper attention to the great Dandaneeti, drought sets in. 

The king is the creator of the Krita yuga, the Treta and the Dwapara. He 
is the cause of the fourth yuga called Kali. If he causes the Krita yuga, he 
attains everlasting Swarga. If he causes the Treta yuga, he acquires Swarga 


for a period that is limited. If he causes the Dwapara, he attains to 
blessedness in Swarga according to the measure of his merits. By causing 
the Kali yuga, the king incurs a heavy load of sin. Tarnished by evil, he rots 
in hell for innumerable years and for the sins of his subjects, he himself 
incurs great sin and infamy. 

Keeping the great science in mind, the learned Kshatriya should satisfy 
his Purusharthas and protect those he has already acquired. Dandaneeti, 
which establishes all men in the observance of their respective duties, 
which is the groundwork of all wholesome distinctions and which, if 
properly administered, truly upholds the world and sets it going, shields all 
men like a mother and father protecting their children. Understand, O 
Bharatarishabha, that the very lives of creatures depend upon it. 

The highest merit a king can acquire is to acquaint himself with 
Dandaneeti and administer it properly. Therefore, O scion of Kuru, protect 
your subjects righteously with the aid of the great science. By doing so and 
ruling with dharma, you will surely attain blessedness in Swarga.’” 


CANTO 70 


6 =e udhishtira asks, ‘O Pitamaha, since you are familiar with every 

kind of conduct, tell me if, by adopting the way of Dandaneeti, a 

king can succeed in easily acquiring happiness in the end, both here and 
hereafter.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘A king should observe these thirty-six virtues which are 
connected with thirty-six others. By attending to these qualities a 
dharmatman can certainly acquire great merit. The king should observe his 
dharma without anger or malice and adhere to kindness. He should have 
faith and acquire wealth without persecution and cruelty. He should pursue 
pleasure without attachment. 

He should cheerfully utter agreeable words and be brave without 
bragging. He should be liberal, but should not make gifts to undeserving 
men. He should exercise his powers without cruelty, make alliances, avoid 
those who are evil, not behave with hostility towards friends, never employ 
as spies and secret agents men not devoted to him, and never try to 
accomplish his objectives by persecution. 

He should never disclose his purposes before evil men and should speak 
of the merits of others, never of his own. He should take wealth from his 
subjects but not from those who are good, and should never employ or take 
the help of base, vile men. 

He should not inflict punishment without careful enquiry, never disclose 
his counsels and give generously, but not to covetous men. He should 
repose confidence in others, but never in those who have injured him. He 


should not be malicious. He should protect his wedded wives and not 
indulge too much in female companionship. He should take only 
wholesome food, not things that harm him. 

He should be pure, and not be swayed by emotion. He should pay 
reverence humbly to those who deserve it and serve his acharyas and elders 
sincerely and meekly. He should worship the Devas without pride, seek 
prosperity, but never do anything that brings infamy. 

He should be clever in business but always wait for the proper time. He 
should comfort men, never send them away with hollow words and, having 
shown favour to someone, he should not abandon him. He should not strike 
out in ignorance and, once having slain his foe, he should never indulge in 
remorse. He should display temper, but not without occasion. He should be 
mild, but never to those who have committed offences. 

While ruling your kingdom, conduct yourself in this manner, if you 
wish to have prosperity. The king who behaves otherwise incurs great 
danger, while the king who observes all these virtues that I have mentioned, 
reaps many blessings on earth and great rewards in Swarga.’ 

Earnestly attending to these instructions of Santanu’s son, the 
perspicacious king Yudhishtira, protected by Bhima and others, worships 
his Pitamaha and from that time on begins to rule according to his 
teachings.” 


CANTO 71 


C6 Y udhishtira asks, “Tell me, Pitamaha, in what way should the king 
protect his subjects without causing grief and violating his 
dharma?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘I will recite the eternal duties in brief, O Rajan, for if I 
were to list them in detail, I would never reach the end. You must revere 
learned Brahmanas who are devoted to their dharma, regular in worshipping 
the Devas, observe stringent vows and have other accomplishments, and 
employ them to officiate in your yagnas when they come to your abode. 

With your priest accompanying you, you should rise when they 
approach, touch their feet in reverence and do everything else that is 
necessary. Performing these acts of piety and discharging other karma that 
are for your own good, you should, by giving them gifts, make them shower 
blessings on you for the success of your enterprises. 

O Bhaarata, you should be sincere, wise and intelligent and adopt satya 
while avoiding kama and krodha. The foolish king who pursues artha 
without driving away kama and krodha fails to acquire dharma, and 
ultimately sacrifices artha as well. Never employ those who are covetous 
and foolish, in matters connected with kama and artha. You should always 
employ in all your work those who are not covetous and possess 
intelligence. Sullied by kama and krodha and unskilled in the transaction of 
business, foolish men, if vested with authority in matters of artha, always 
oppress the people by diverse methods which lead to mischief. 


A king should fill his treasury with a sixth part, upon fair calculation, of 
the yield of the soil as his tribute, with fines and forfeitures imposed upon 
offenders, with levies according to the shastras upon merchants and traders, 
in return for the protection he grants them. 

Realizing this just tribute and governing the kingdom properly, the king 
should meticulously work so that that his subjects do not feel the pressure 
of want. Men become deeply devoted to the king who discharges the duty 
of protection properly, who is endowed with charity, steady in the 
observance of dharma, vigilant and free from lust and anger. 

Never seek to fill your treasury through adharma or from lobha, greed. 
The king who does not rule in accordance with the shastras fails to earn 
wealth and religious merit. The king who is mindful only of acquiring 
wealth can never acquire religious merit as well. The wealth that he 
acquires by such means is lavished on unworthy objects. 

The avaricious king who, through folly, oppresses his subjects by 
levying taxes that the shastras do not sanction, wrongs his own self. Just as 
a man wanting milk cannot obtain any by cutting off the udders of his cow, 
a kingdom ruled by improper means never yields any profit for the king. As 
one who treats a milch cow with tenderness always gets milk from it, a king 
who rules his kingdom wisely reaps the rewards. 

By protecting a kingdom properly and ruling it judiciously, a king will 
always obtain great wealth, O Yudhishtira. The earth well protected by the 
king yields crops and gold to ruler and ruled alike, like a gratified mother 
yielding milk to her child. Imitate the example of the gardener who waters 
his trees and plants and gathers only their produce, O Rajan, not of the 
charcoal-maker who uproots trees and plants and burns them for making 
coal. Thus, by discharging the duty of protection, you will be able to enjoy 
the earth forever. 

If in attacking an enemy’s kingdom your treasury is exhausted, you may 
refill it by taking wealth from all except Brahmanas. Do not let your heart 
be moved, even when you are in great distress, upon seeing wealthy 
Brahmanas. I need not speak then of what you should do when you are in 
affluence. You should give them wealth as they deserve and you can afford, 
and protect and comfort them on all occasions. Thereby you will gain 
regions after death that are most difficult to attain. 

With such dharma you will gain fame that is great, pure and everlasting. 
Follow your dharma and shield your subjects from injury, O son of Pandu, 


and you will have no feelings of regret or pain, since virtuous men regard 
protection and compassion to all creatures as the highest merit of a king. 

The sin incurred by a king for failing for a single day to defend his 
subjects from fear is such that he has to suffer for it in hell for a thousand 
years, while the merit he earns by protecting them for a single day is reward 
in Swarga for ten thousand years. A king soon acquires, by this dharma, all 
the regions that men find who lead the Garhasthya, the Brahmacharya and 
the Vanaprastha varnasramas. 

O son of Kunti, observe painstakingly the duty of protection and you 
will gain the reward of righteousness. No grief or pain will afflict you and 
you will obtain great prosperity in Swarga. It is impossible for men who are 
not kings to acquire punya like this. None other can earn such rewards. 
Because of your wisdom, you have gained a kingdom. So, safeguard your 
subjects through dharma, gratify Indra with offerings of soma and fulfill the 
desires of your friends and well-wishers.’” 


CANTO 72 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘The king should appoint as his priest one who will 

protect the good and punish the evil, O Rajan. In this regard, 

there is told an old story about the discourse between Pururavas, the son of 
Aila, and Matariswan. 

Pururavas asked Matariswan, “From where have the Brahmana and the 
three other varnas sprung, and why has the Brahmana become the 
foremost?” 

Matariswan answered, “The Brahmana has sprung from the mouth of 
Brahma, the Kshatriya from his two arms and the Vaisya from his two 
thighs. In order to wait upon these three varnas a fourth, the Sudra, sprang 
to life, created from the feet of Brahma. 

Thus the Brahmana takes birth on earth as the lord of all creatures, his 
duty being the custody of the Vedas and the other shastras. Then, to rule the 
world, wield the Danda and protect all creatures, Brahma created the second 
varna, the Kshatriya. He created the Vaisya to support the two other varnas 
and his own by cultivation and trade and, finally, he ordained that the Sudra 
should serve the three other varnas as a menial.” 

Pururavas said, “Tell me truly, O god of winds, to whom does this earth 
rightly belong —to the Brahmana or to the Kshatriya?” 

The god of winds said, “Everything that exists in the universe belongs 
to the Brahmana as a result of his birth and precedence according to the 
Dharmatmans. What the Brahmana eats is his own, the place he inhabits is 


his own and what he gives away is his own. He deserves the veneration of 
all the other varnas, as he is the first-born and the foremost. 

Just as a woman, in the absence of her husband, accepts his younger 
brother in his place, the earth, because of the refusal of the Brahmana, has 
accepted his next-born, the Kshatriya, for her lord. This is the first rule. In 
times of distress, however, there is an exception to this rule. If you seek to 
discharge the duties of the order and wish to obtain the highest place in 
Swarga, then give the Brahmana all the land you conquer, provided he 
possesses learning and virtue, knows his duties, observes penances, is 
satisfied with his svadharma and not greedy for wealth. 

Wise and humble, the well-born Brahmana by his own perspicacity 
guides the king in every matter. By his sound counsels he brings prosperity 
to the king and instructs him in his dharma. As long as a wise king observes 
the dharma of his varna and is willing to listen to the advice of the 
Brahmana without pride, he is honoured and enjoys fame. The king’s priest, 
therefore, has a share in the merit that the king acquires. When the king 
himself behaves thus, all his subjects, relying upon him, become virtuous in 
their behaviour, attentive to their duties and free from every fear. 

The king obtains a fourth part of those righteous deeds which his 
subjects, properly defended by him, perform in his kingdom. The Devas, 
Manushyas, Pitris, Gandharvas, Uragas and Rakshasas, all depend upon the 
offerings made at yagnas for their support and subsistence. Yagna, 
therefore, depends upon the king and in a country without a king there can 
be no yagnas. 

In the summer season, men seek comfort from the shade of trees, cool 
water and cool breezes, while in the winter they derive comfort from fire, 
warm clothes and the sun. The heart of man may find pleasure in sound, 
touch, taste, vision and scent, while the man who is afraid finds no pleasure 
in these things. Therefore, he who dispels the fears of men obtains great 
merit. There is no gift more valuable in the three worlds than the gift of life. 
The king is Indra. The king is Yama. The king is dharma. The king in 
different forms sustains and supports everything.””’” 


CANTO 73 


“BR hishma says, “With an eye on both punya and artha, whose 

considerations are often complex, the king should without delay 
appoint a learned priest who has thorough knowledge of the Vedas and 
other shastras. Those kings who have mahatmans as priests familiar with 
policy and who have similar qualities themselves, enjoy prosperity in every 
way. Both priest and king should have qualities worthy of respect and 
should observe vratas and tapasya. They will succeed in supporting and 
pleasing their praja, their Pitris and the Devas. 

The shastras lay down that the Brahmana and Kshatriya should possess 
similar feelings and should be friends, as a result of which their subjects 
become happy. If they do not respect each other, destruction will overtake 
the people, for the shastras say that the Brahmana and the Kshatriya are the 
progenitors of all men. 

In this connection, listen, Yudhishtira, to an old story about the 
discourse between Aila’s son and Kasyapa. 

Aila asked Kasyapa, “When the Brahmana forsakes the Kshatriya, or 
the Kshatriya abandons the Brahmana, who among them should be regarded 
superior, and upon whom should the other varnas rely and maintain 
themselves?” 

Kasyapa answered, “Ruin overtakes the kingdom of the Kshatriya when 
the Brahmana and Kshatriya fall out, for when confusion prevails, thieves 
and brigands soon infest the kingdom and all good men regard the ruler as a 
Mlechcha, devoid of dharma. Neither their oxen nor their children thrive. 


No one churns their pots of milk and no one performs yagnas. In kingdoms 
where Brahmanas abandon Kshatriyas, wealth does not increase, children 
do not study the Vedas or shastras or perform yagnas. The Kshatriyas who 
abandon Brahmanas become impure in blood and assume the nature of 
robbers. 

The Brahmana and the Kshatriya are connected with each other 
naturally; each protects the other and each is responsible for the other’s 
growth. When each helps the other, both attain great prosperity. If their 
friendship, existing from days of old, breaks, chaos sets in. No one who 
wants to cross the ocean of life succeeds in his task, like a small boat 
floating on the bosom of the sea. 

The four varnas become confused and ruin overtakes all. If one protects 
the Brahmana who is like a tree, it showers gold and honey. If the Kshatriya 
does not protect him, the tree sheds tears and sorrow. In the absence of a 
Kshatriya ruler, if Brahmanas abandon the Vedas and the protection of the 
shastras, Indra does not bless them with rain, and all kinds of calamities 
ceaselessly afflict the kingdom. 

When, having slain a woman or a Brahmana, a vile sinner does not face 
disgrace and shame in society and is not afraid of the king, danger threatens 
the Kshatriya king. As a result of the evils that sinful men perpetrate, 
Rudra, the god of vengeance, appears in the kingdom to destroy everyone, 
the honest and the evil alike, without distinction.” 

Aila then asked, “From where does Rudra spring, and what is his form? 
One sees creatures killing other creatures. Tell me everything, O Kasyapa!” 

Kasyapa answered, “Rudra exists in the hearts of men and he destroys 
the bodies in which he dwells and also the bodies of others. Rudra is like 
atmospheric visitations and his form is like that of the god of winds.” 

Aila said, “Neither does the wind, by blowing, visibly kill men on all 
occasions, nor does the god of the clouds do so by rain or floods. On the 
other hand, one sees that men slay each other through lust and malice.” 

Kasyapa said, “Fire, blazing forth in one house, burns a whole quarter 
or an entire village. Similarly, this Deva stupefies the senses of a few men 
and soon that confusion touches all—the honest and the evil alike, without 
any distinction.” 

Aila asked, “If as a result of the sins committed by the evil, punishment 
touches all, the honest and the wicked alike, why should men, do good 
deeds? Why should they not wantonly sin?” 


Kasyapa replied, “By avoiding all connection with the sinful, men 
become pure and untainted. However, if they are interpolated with the 
sinful, punishment will overtake them, just as fire consumes even wood that 
is wet, if it is stored with wood that is dry. The sinless, therefore, should 
never mingle with the sinful.” 

Aila said, “The earth contains the honest and the evil, for whom the sun 
shines, the wind blows and water cleanses, equally.” 

Kasyapa said, “Such indeed, is the course of this world, O Rajan! 
However, it is not so in the other world, where there is a great difference 
between the dharmatman and the sinner. The regions that good men acquire 
are full of honey, possessed of the splendour of gold or of a fire upon which 
one pours clarified butter, similar to the navel of ambrosia. The good man 
enjoys great happiness as death, old age and sorrow do not there exist. The 
place for the sinful is Naraka—hell, and it is full of sorrow, darkness and 
ceaseless pain. Sinking in infamy, the man of sin suffers with remorse in 
hell for many years. 

Thus, as a result of disunion between Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, 
unbearable grief comes to afflict the people. Knowing this, a king should 
appoint an experienced and sagacious Brahmana priest. He should install 
the priest before even his own coronation, as laid down by the laws 
proclaiming the Brahmana as the best of all creatures. 

Men who know the Vedas say that Brahma first created the Brahmana 
and invested in him all things that are good in this world and made him the 
rightful owner of all the best things that have flowed from the Creator, 
because of the precedence of his birth. Consequently, he is worthy of the 
respect and the worship of all creatures. 

A king, however powerful, should bestow upon the Brahmana 
according to the dictates of the shastras, whatever is best, distinguished and 
above others. The Brahmana and the Kshatriya contribute to increasing 
each others’ wealth, prestige and power. Therefore kings should, above all, 
always worship the Brahmanas.”’” 


CANTO 74 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, “The preservation and growth of the kingdom rest 

upon the king, while the protection and development of the king 

rest upon the king’s priest. That kingdom enjoys true happiness where the 

Brahmana dispels the invisible fears of his subjects and the king dispels all 

their visible fears by the might of his arms. Listen to this old tale of the 
discussion between King Muchukunda and Vaisravana. 

King Muchukunda, having subjugated the whole earth, went to 
Vaisravana, the lord of treasures and the lord of Alaka, to test his strength. 
King Vaisravana created by his ascetic power a large force of Rakshasas, 
who annihilated the forces of Muchukunda. Seeing the slaughter of his 
army, Muchukunda began to rebuke his own learned priest, Vasishtha. The 
Dharmatman Vasishtha sat in severe tapasya and, causing the Rakshasas to 
be slain, ascertained the true reason behind Muchukunda’s action. 

While his Rakshasas were being slaughtered, Vaisravana showed 
himself to Muchukunda and said to him “Many ancient kings, more 
powerful than you, aided by their priests, have approached me, but never 
like this. All of them, mighty and skilful warriors, regarded me as the 
granter of happiness and sorrow and came to me to offer worship. In truth, 
if you have might of arms, by all means, display it. But why, aided by a 
Brahmana’s might, do you act so proudly?” 

Muchukunda boldly replied in apt and just words: “The swayambhuva 
Brahma created the Brahmana and the Kshatriya and they have a common 
origin. If they applied their forces separately, they would never be able to 


defend the world. He bestowed upon Brahmanas the power of tapasyas and 
mantras, and upon Kshatriyas the power of arms and weapons. Supported 
by both kinds of might, kings should protect their subjects. This is the 
reason why I am doing what I do. Why do you, O Lord of Alaka, then 
rebuke me?” 

Vaisravana said to Muchukunda and his priest, “Understand that I 
neither bestow sovereignty upon anyone without Brahma’s command, nor 
do I ever take it away! You are free to rule the whole world.” 

Muchukunda replied, “Rajan, I want to enjoy sovereignty obtained by 
the might of my own arms, not as a vara from you!” Vaisravana, seeing the 
king fearless in the observance of Kshatriya duties, was filled with surprise. 

King Muchukunda, devoted to Kshatriya dharma, continued to rule all 
the earth obtained by the might of his own arms. So the Dharmaraja who 
rules his kingdom, helped by and yielding precedence to the Brahmana, will 
succeed in subjugating the earth and achieving great fame. The Brahmana 
should perform his religious rites every day and the Kshatriya should 
always be armed. Between them they are the rightful owners of everything 
in the universe.’” 


CANTO 75 


C6 Y udhishtira asks, ‘Tell me O Pitamaha, about the conduct by 
which a king can make his people great and thereby earn regions 
of felicity in the other world.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘The king should be liberal, perform yagnas, O Bhaarata, 
do tapasya, observe vows and remain devoted to the duty of guarding his 
subjects by following the path of dharma. He should honour all men of 
dharma by standing up when they come, and by giving them gifts. 

If the king follows dharma, it is respected everywhere. Whatever work 
and other things the king likes, his subjects too like. To his enemies the king 
should always be like Death, with the Dandaneeti uplifted in his hands. He 
should exterminate bandits everywhere in his kingdom and never pardon 
anyone impulsively. 

The king earns a fourth part of the punya that his subjects earn under his 
protection, O Bhaarata, and by protecting them, he obtains a fourth part of 
the merit that his subjects acquire through study, by giving gifts, by pouring 
libations and by worshipping the Devas. The king acquires a fourth part 
also of the sins that his subjects commit, if there is any distress in the 
kingdom arising from his neglect in discharging his duty. Some say that the 
king gains a half, and some say the full measure, of whatever sins he earns 
by becoming cruel and untruthful in speech. 

Attend now to the means by which the king can be cleansed of such 
sins. If he fails to restore to a subject the wealth that thieves have stolen, he 


should compensate the victim from his own treasury or, in case he is unable 
to do so, with wealth obtained from his dependants. 

All the varnas should protect the property of a Brahmana, just as they 
would the Brahmana’s son or his life. The man who offends Brahmanas 
should be exiled from the kingdom, for everything is saved by guarding the 
Brahmana’s wealth. Through the grace of the Brahmana thus obtained, the 
king is crowned with success. Men seek the protection of an able king like 
creatures seeking relief from clouds or birds seeking refuge in a large tree. 
A cruel and covetous king with a lustful soul, always seeking the 
gratification of his desires, will never be able to protect his subjects.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘I do not for a moment wish for the happiness that 
sovereignty bestows, or sovereignty for its own sake; I desire it for the 
punya I can acquire from it. It seems to me that the shastras attach no punya 
to sovereignty, hence I have no need for kingship. I will retire into the 
sacred vanas, lay aside the danda, subdue my senses and seek to acquire the 
merit of dharma by becoming a Rishi subsisting upon fruit and roots.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘I know your heart, Yudhishtira, and how inoffensive 
your nature is. However, by inoffensiveness alone you will not succeed in 
ruling your kingdom. Your heart is inclined to mildness; you are 
compassionate, honourable, virtuous and full of mercy. People, therefore, 
do not regard you much. 

Follow the example of your father and your Pitamaha. Kings should 
never adopt the conduct which you espouse. Do your duty and never be 
touched by anxiety or adopt such inoffensiveness, for by doing so you will 
not earn the merit of following your dharma, which arises from protecting 
your subjects. 

The behaviour you wish to adopt, impelled by your own intelligence 
and wisdom, is not consistent with the blessings which your father Pandu or 
your mother Kunti prayed for to the Devas. Your father always prayed that 
you become courageous, mighty and truthful, while your mother Kunti 
prayed that you become high-minded and liberal. 

The Pitris and the Devas always ask for the offerings with Swaha and 
Swadha in sraddhas and yagnas from children. Whether gifts, study, 
sacrifices and the protection of subjects are meritorious or sinful, you have 
been born to practise and perform them. O son of Kunti, the fame of those 
men who fail to bear the burdens placed on them and to which they are 
yoked in life, is tarnished. 


When a properly trained horse can successfully bear a burden without 
falling down, why cannot a man like you? Success depends upon work and 
words, and one incurs no censure as long as one’s deeds and words are 
proper. No one, be he a man virtuously following the Grihastasrama, or a 
king, or a Brahmacharin, has ever succeeded without failing at some time. 

It is better to do some work which is good and in which there is small 
merit, for total abstention from karma is most sinful. When a high-born 
dharmatman becomes affluent, his king will obtain prosperity in all his 
affairs. A Dharmarajan, having obtained a kingdom, should seek to subdue 
some enemies by gifts, some by force and some by sweet words. 

There is no one more virtuous than one upon whom noble and learned 
men rely, from fear of losing their means of sustenance, and upon whom 
they depend to live in contentment.’ 

Yudhishtira asks, ‘What actions, O Pitamaha, lead to Swarga? What is 
the nature of the great happiness that one derives from them? What is the 
high prosperity that one can then obtain? Tell me all this, if you know.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Anyone amongst us who is able to give a moment of 
relief to someone afflicted with fear is worthy of Swarga. This is verily so, 
Yudhishtira; hence, gladly be the king of the Kurus, protect the good and 
slay the evil, gain Swarga. 

Let your friends and all honest men derive their support from you, like 
creatures from the deity of the clouds and like birds from a large tree with 
delicious fruits. Men seek his protection who is dignified, courageous, 
capable of punishing, compassionate, with senses under control, 
affectionate towards all, equitable and just.’” 


CANTO 76 


66 Y udhishtira asks, ‘O Pitamaha, among Brahmanas some engage in 
duties proper to their varna, while others engage in other work. 
Tell me the difference between these two classes!’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Rajan, the Brahmanas who are learned and 
magnanimous, and who look impartially upon all creatures, are equal to 
Brahma. They who know the Riks, the Yajuses and the Samans and who 
devote themselves to the practices of their order are equal to the very 
Devas. However, those among them who are not well-born, not devoted to 
the duties of their varna and take to evil practices, are like Sudras. 

A virtuous king should realize tribute from, and press into public 
service without remuneration, Brahmanas who do not possess Vedic 
knowledge or their own fires for worship. Those who are employed in 
courts of justice for summoning people, who perform worship for others for 
a fee, who perform the yagnas of Vaisyas and Sudras, who officiate in 
yagnas on behalf of a whole village and who make voyages on the ocean— 
these five are regarded as Chandalas among Brahmanas. 

Among the Brahmanas, those who become Ritwikas, Purohitas, 
counsellors, envoys and messengers, become equal to Kshatriyas. Those 
among them who ride horses, elephants, chariots or become foot-soldiers, 
become equal to Vaisyas. 

If the king’s treasury is not full, he can realize tribute from these, but 
should exclude the Brahmanas who, because of their conduct, are equal to 
the Devas or Brahma. The Vedas say that the king is the lord of the wealth 


belonging to all the varnas, except Brahmanas. He can take the wealth of 
those Brahmanas who stray from their svadharma. But the king should 
never be indifferent towards those Brahmanas who do not observe their 
duties. For the sake of making his people virtuous, he should punish and 
separate them from their superiors. 

The learned regard the king in whose territories a Brahmana becomes a 
thief, as responsible for the sin, O Rajan. Men who know the Vedas declare 
that if a Brahmana well versed in the Vedas, who observes vows but, 
through want of sustenance, becomes a thief, it is the duty of the king to 
provide for his support. If even after he has obtained provision for his 
support, the Brahmana does not abstain from theft, O Parantapa, he should 
be banished from the kingdom with all his kinsmen.’” 


CANTO 77 


C6 Y udhishtira asks, ‘Tell me, O Bharatarishabha, of whose wealth is 
the king regarded to be the lord, and what conduct should he 
adopt?’ 

Bhishma says, “The Vedas declare that the king is lord of the wealth that 
belongs to all men, except Brahmanas, and also of those Brahmanas who do 
not follow their dharma. The king should not spare such Brahmanas, and 
the sages say that this is the ancient custom of kings. 

One regards the king in whose dominion a Brahmana becomes a thief, 
to be responsible for that misdeed, O Rajan, and to have become sinful and 
worthy of reproach on that account. Therefore, all kings who follow dharma 
provide Brahmanas with the means of sustenance. 

There is an old story of what a king said to a Rakshasa when the latter 
was about to abduct him. Once a Rakshasa forcibly seized the king of the 
Kaikeyas who observed strict vratas and had mastered the Vedas while 
living in the forest. 

The king said, “There is no thief in my territories, nor any evil person, 
nor any one who drinks alcohol. There is no one in my dominions who has 
not his sacred fire or who does not perform yagnas. How then have you 
been able to possess my heart? 

There is no Brahmana in my realm who is not learned or who does not 
observe vows or who has not drunk soma. How then have you been able to 
possess my mind? 


In my dominions, no one performs a sacrifice without completing it 
with dakshina, or studies the Vedas and does not observe vows. How then 
have you been able to possess my soul? 

The Brahmanas in my kingdom teach, study, sacrifice, officiate at 
others’ sacrifices, give and receive gifts. All of them observe these six 
sacred karmas and all are devoted to the performance of their swadharma. 
Venerated and provided for, they are mild and truthful in speech. How then 
have you been able to possess my atma? 

The Kshatriyas in my kingdom are all devoted to their swadharma. 
They never beg but give, and are truthful and virtuous. They never teach but 
study, and perform sacrifices but never officiate at the yagnas of others. 
They protect the Brahmanas and never flee from battle. How then have you 
been able to possess my atma? 

All the Vaisyas in my dominion follow their svadharma. With simplicity 
and without deceit, they derive their sustenance from farming, cattle-rearing 
and trade. They are all careful, observe all religious rites, keep admirable 
vratas and are truthful in speech. They give to atithis their due and are self- 
restrained, pure and close to their relatives and kinsmen. How then have 
you been able to possess my heart? 

The Sudras in my kingdom observe their svadharma, humbly and duly 
serve and wait upon the other three varnas without entertaining any malice 
towards them. How then have you been able to possess my heart? 

I support the helpless and the old, the weak, the ill and women without 
guardians, by supplying them with all the necessities of life. I have never 
destroyed any customs of families or of countries existing from ancient 
days. How then have you been able to possess my heart? 

I protect and worship the Mahatapasvins in my kingdom and honour 
and entertain them with food. I never eat without feeding others from my 
table. I never go to other men’s wives and never sport or recreate alone. 
How then have you been able to possess my heart? 

No one in my kingdom who is not a Brahmacharin begs his food, and 
no one who leads the Bhikshu varnasrama wishes to be a Brahmacharin. No 
one who is not a Ritwij pours offerings of clarified butter upon the 
sacrificial fire. How then have you been able to possess my soul? 

I never disregard the learned, the old or those who are engaged in 
tapasya. When the whole world sleeps, I keep awake and vigilant. How then 
have you been able to possess my heart? 


My priest possesses knowledge of the Self. He is given to tapasya and is 
a man of dharma. Highly intelligent, he has absolute power over my 
kingdom. By gifts I aspire to acquire knowledge, and by truth and the 
protection of Brahmanas I aspire to attain regions of blessedness in Swarga. 
By service, I attach myself to my acharyas. I have no fear of Rakshasas. 

In my kingdom there are no widows, no evil Brahmanas, no Brahmana 
who has deviated from his dharma, no deceitful men, no thief, no Brahmana 
who officiates in the yagnas of people for whom he should never officiate 
and no perpetrator of sinful deeds. I have no fear of Rakshasas. There is no 
space in my body, of even two fingers’ breadth, that does not bear the scar 
of a weapon-wound. I always fight for the cause of dharma. How have you 
been able to possess my heart? 

The people of my kingdom ever invoke blessings upon me, that I may 
be always able to protect cattle and Brahmanas and perform sacrifices. How 
then have you been able to possess me?” 

The Rakshasa answered, “Since you observe your dharma under all 
circumstances, O king of the Kaikeyas, go back to your home. I set you 
free. Blessed are they who protect cattle, Brahmanas and all their subjects, 
for they have nothing to fear from Rakshasas and even less from sinful 
men. Those kings who support the Brahmanas, whose might depends upon 
that of the Brahmanas and whose subjects discharge the duties of 
hospitality, will always succeed in acquiring Swarga.” 

You should, therefore protect the Brahmanas. They will protect you in 
return. Their blessings will surely descend upon kings of dharma. 

For the sake of dharma, Brahmanas who do not observe their 
swadharma should be punished and segregated into a distinct class from 
their superiors. A king who conducts himself in this way towards the people 
of his kingdom obtains prosperity here and lives in Swarga with Indra.’” 


CANTO 78 


¢ me udhishtira asks, ‘The shastras say that, in times of adversity, a 

Brahmana can support himself by doing the work of a Kshatriya. 
Can he, however, at any time support himself by doing the work of 
Vaisyas?’ 

Bhishma replies, “When a Brahmana loses his means of support and 
falls into distress, he can certainly do the work of a Vaisya and derive his 
support from farming and keeping cattle, but only if he is not competent to 
perform Kshatriya dharma.’ 

Yudhishtira then inquires, ‘If a Brahmana does the work of a Vaisya, O 
Bharatarishabha, what trade can he engage in without losing his prospect of 
Swarga?’ 

Bhishma responds, “A Brahmana in all circumstances should avoid 
trading in wine, salt, sesamum seeds, animals with manes, bulls, honey, 
meat and cooked food, Yudhishtira, for by selling these he will go to 
Naraka. 

A Brahmana, by selling a goat, incurs the sin of selling Agni Deva; by 
selling sheep, the sin of selling Indra, the god of rain; by selling a horse, the 
sin of selling Surya Deva; by selling cooked food, the sin of selling land; 
and by selling a cow, the sin of selling sacrifice and the soma rasa. 
Therefore a Brahmana should not sell these things. Good men do not 
approve the purchase of uncooked food by giving cooked food in exchange. 
Uncooked food, however, can be exchanged for cooked food, O Bhaarata. 


“We will eat your cooked food if in exchange you cook these raw things 
that we give you,” is an acceptable arrangement bearing no sin. 

Listen, Yudhishtira, I will tell you the age-old practice of men following 
approved customs. “I will give you this, and you will give me this in 
return.” Such barter is permissible. To take things by force, however, is 
sinful. This is the convention the Rishis and others followed and, without 
doubt, this is righteous.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘When all the varnas disregard their svadharma and 
take up arms against the king, of course the power of the king will decrease. 
How then can he become the protector and refuge of the people? Clear my 
doubt, Pitamaha, by explaining this to me in detail.’ 

Bhishma says, “All the varnas that the Brahmanas head should, on such 
occasions, seek their own good by gifts, tapasya, yagnas, peacefulness and 
self-restraint. Those who have Vedic strength should rise up on every side 
and like the Devas strengthening Indra, contribute by Vedic rites to enhance 
the strength of the king. 

One says that the Brahmanas are the refuge of the king when his power 
wanes. A wise king seeks the enhancement of his power through that of the 
Brahmanas. When the king, crowned with victory, seeks the re- 
establishment of peace, all the varnas then take themselves to their 
swadharma. When bandits and thieves, breaking all restraints, spread 
devastation, all the varnas should take up arms. They incur no sin by doing 
so, O Yudhishtira!’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘If all the Kshatriyas become hostile towards the 
Brahmanas, who then will protect the Brahmanas and their Vedas? What 
then should be the duty of the Brahmanas, and who will be their refuge?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘By penances, Brahmacharya, weapons and physical 
might, applied with or without the aid of deceit, they should subjugate the 
Kshatriyas. If the Kshatriya himself commits sins especially towards 
Brahmanas, the Vedas themselves will subdue them. 

The Kshatriyas have sprung from the Brahmanas, fire from water, and 
iron from stone. The energy of fire, the Kshatriya and iron, are irresistible. 
But when these come into contact with the sources of their origin, their 
force becomes neutralized. When iron strikes stone, or fire battles with 
water, or the Kshatriya becomes hostile to the Brahmana, the strength of 
each of these three is destroyed. Thus, Yudhishtira, the strength and might 


of Kshatriyas, however great and irresistible, become quelled as soon as 
they are directed against the Brahmanas. 

When the energy of the Brahmanas turns mild, when Kshatriya energy 
turns feeble, when men misbehave towards the Brahmanas, those who 
engage in battle then without fear of death, in order to protect the 
Brahmanas, dharma and their own selves—these men, moved by righteous 
indignation and possessed of great strength of mind, will win high regions 
of bliss hereafter. 

Everybody should take up arms for the sake of Brahmanas, because 
those brave men who fight for them attain a felicitous region in Swarga 
reserved for men who have always studied the Vedas attentively, who have 
performed the severest tapasya and who have, after fasting, cast their bodies 
into blazing fires. 

The Brahmana, by taking up arms for the three varnas, does not incur 
sin, for people say there is no higher duty than casting away life under such 
circumstances. I bow to them, and blessed be they who so lay down their 
lives in seeking to destroy the enemies of Brahmanas. Let us attain the 
realm intended for them. Manu himself has said that these heroes go to 
Brahmaloka. Just as men become cleansed of all their sins by undergoing 
the final bath in an Aswamedha yagna, men who die at the edge of weapons 
while fighting evil are cleansed of their sins. 

Dharma becomes adharma, and adharma becomes dharma, according to 
circumstances. Such is the power of place and time in determining the 
character of human actions. Friends of humanity, even if they have been 
cruel, have attained Swarga. Kshatriyas of dharma have attained blessed 
ends, even by sinning. By taking up arms on three occasions—to protect 
himself, to compel the other varnas to do their dharma and to punish 
brigands —the Brahmana does not incur sin.’ 

Yudhishtira asks, ‘When robbers raise their heads and Kshatriyas 
become incompetent, and an inter-mixture of varnas begins as a result of 
chaos, what happens if some powerful man other than a Kshatriya tries to 
subdue these outlaws for the sake of protecting the people? Indeed, if this 
powerful man happens to be a Brahmana, a Vaisya or a Sudra, O best of 
kings, and if he is successful in protecting the people through dharma by 
applying the Dandaneeti, is he justified, or do the laws restrain him? It 
seems that others should take up weapons, when the Kshatriyas prove 
unworthy.’ 


Bhishma says, ‘Be he a Sudra or a member of any other varna, he who 
becomes a raft on a raftless current, or a means of crossing where there are 
none, certainly deserves respect in every way. He by whose aid helpless 
men whom brigands have oppressed and made wretched come to live 
happily, O Rajan, deserves to be lovingly revered by all as if he were a near 
kinsman. 

O Kurusthama, he who dispels the fears of others always deserves 
respect. Of what use are bulls that do not bear burdens, cows that do not 
yield milk or a wife who is barren? Similarly, what need is there of a king 
who is not able to provide protection? Are not a Brahmana void of Vedic 
lore and a Kshatriya incapable of granting protection like an elephant made 
of wood, a deer made of leather, a man without wealth, a eunuch or a sterile 
field? Both of them are like a cloud that does not yield rain. 

He who always protects the good and restrains the evil deserves to 
become a king and to rule the world.’” 


CANTO 79 


¢ = udhishtira asks, “Tell me O Pitamaha, what should be the work 
and behaviour of men employed as priests in our yagnas, and 
what sort of men should they be?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘The shastras decree that those Brahmanas who are 
eligible to act as priests should know the Chhandas, including the Samans, 
and all the rites prescribed in the Srutis, and be able to perform all religious 
karma and kriya that lead to the prosperity of the king. 

They should be devoted and loyal, and should shower eulogies on their 
kings. They should also be friendly towards one another and treat 
everybody equally. They should be devoid of cruelty and truthful in speech. 
They should never be money-lenders and always be simple and sincere. 

One who has a peaceful temperament, is without vanity, modest, 
charitable, self-restrained, contented, intelligent, knowledgeable, truthful, 
observant of vows, harmless to all creatures, without lust and malice, 
endowed with the three excellent qualities and devoid of envy, deserves the 
seat of Brahma himself. Men with such qualities make the best priests and 
deserve all respect.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “There are Vedic texts about giving Dakshina at 
sacrifices, but there is no law which lays down how much should be given 
on such occasions. This law about Dakshina has not proceeded from 
motives connected with the distribution of wealth. The command of the law, 
because of the provision in cases of incapacity, is terrible and is blind to the 
ability of the sacrificer. The prescription of the Vedas is that one should 


perform a sacrifice with devotion. But what can devotion do when the 
sacrificer is deceitful?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘No one acquires punya by disregarding the Vedas, by 
deceit or falsehood. Do not ever think so. Dakshina is one of the limbs of 
sacrifice and contributes to the nourishment of the Vedas. A yagna without 
Dakshina can never lead to moksha. However, the worth of a single 
Purnapatra—two hundred and fifty-six handfuls of rice, is equal to that of 
any Dakshina, however lavish. Therefore, everyone belonging to the three 
varnas should perform yagnas. 

The Vedas say that, to the Brahmanas, soma is like the king himself. 
One can sell it for performing sacrifices, but never for gaining a livelihood. 
Maharishis who agree on the dictates of dharma have declared that a yagna 
performed with the proceeds of the sale of soma serves to extend sacrifices. 
However, these three—man, sacrifice and soma—must be of good 
character. A man of bad character is neither for this nor for the other world. 
We have heard that the sacrifice great Brahmanas perform by wealth earned 
by excessive physical labour does not produce great punya. 

The Vedas declare that tapasyas are higher than yagnas. Pay attention to 
me, O learned prince, while I tell you about tapasyas. The wise regard as 
penances not the emaciation of the body, but refraining from causing injury, 
truthfulness in speech, benevolence and compassion. Disregard of the 
Vedas, disobedience of the dictates of the shastras and violation of all 
wholesome restraints lead to self-destruction. 

Listen, O son of Pritha, to what those who pour ten libations upon the 
fire ten times a day have laid down. For those who perform the sacrifice of 
tapasya, the Yoga they endeavour to effect with Brahma is their ladle; the 
heart is their clarified butter; and great knowledge constitutes their Pavitra. 
For them all kinds of crookedness mean death, and all kinds of sincerity are 
Brahma. This is the subject of knowledge which the rhapsodies of system- 
builders cannot affect.’” 


CANTO 80 


¢ ve udhishtira says, ‘No man can accomplish even the most trifling 

work, O Pitamaha, without help. How then can a king manage, 

who has to rule a kingdom? What should be the conduct and the work of the 

king’s minister? In whom should the king repose confidence, and in whom 
should he not?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Kings, O Rajan, have four kinds of friends: those who 
have the same objective, those who are devoted, those related by birth and 
those won over by gifts and kindness. 

A Dharmatman who will serve only dharma is the fifth kind. With such 
a man, the king should never disclose his full intention, since it might not 
enlist his sympathy. 

Kings who want success are obliged to adopt both kinds of paths—of 
dharma and of adharma. Of the four kinds of friends, the second and the 
third are best, but he should always regard the first and the fourth with 
suspicion. However, he should not trust any of the four with work that he is 
required to do himself. 

The king should never be careless in the matter of watching his friends, 
as he could be overthrown. An evil man assumes the garb of honesty, and 
he who is good becomes dishonest. An enemy will become a friend and a 
friend an enemy, for a man cannot always be of the same mind. Who can 
trust him completely? A king should ensure that his chief works are carried 
out in his own presence. A complete reliance on his ministers will destroy 
both dharma and artha. 


However, a want of trust in respect of everyone is worse than death. 
Trustfulness is premature death and dangerous. If one trusts another 
completely, it is said, one lives at the mercy of the trusted person. For this 
reason, everyone should be trusted and at the same time viewed with 
suspicion. This eternal rule of policy should always be kept in view. 

One should always mistrust the man who is covetous of wealth, for the 
wise declare such a man to be one’s enemy. A person whose joy knows no 
bounds upon seeing the elevation of the king, and who is made miserable 
by the king’s downfall, is one of the best friends. You should trust 
completely one whose fall is linked to your own, as you would trust your 
own father. You should promote him to the best of your power when you 
are successful. 

He who seeks to rescue you from harm in your religious rites will try to 
rescue you from harm in every other business. You should regard such a 
man as your best friend. They who wish you harm, on the other hand, are 
your enemies. One says that a friend filled with dread when calamity 
overtakes you and with joy when prosperity shines on you is like your own 
self. A handsome man, fair-complexioned, of excellent voice, liberal, 
benevolent and of good birth, cannot be such a friend. 

An intelligent man with a good memory, who is clever in the transaction 
of business, who is by nature not cruel, never angry and never dissatisfied, 
whether given recognition or not, be he your priest, acharya or honoured 
friend, should always receive your regard, if he accepts the office of your 
counsellor and lives in your home. Such a man can be trusted with your 
most secret counsels and the true state of all your affairs, religious or 
pertaining to matters of business. You may confide in him as you would in 
your own father. 

One task should be given to one man and not to two or three, because 
they may not tolerate each other and will generally disagree among 
themselves. Your leading minister should be one who achieves celebrity, 
observes all restraints, is never jealous of others, is able and competent, 
does no evil, never abandons dharma from lust, fear, greed or wrath, is 
clever in the transaction of business and possesses the gift of wise and 
weighty speech. 

You should appoint as ministers to supervise all your affairs men of 
good birth and good conduct, liberal, not boastful, brave and respectable, 
learned and resourceful. They will work for your good and be of great help 


to you if you honour them and reward them with wealth. Appointed to 
offices connected with revenue and other important matters, they will 
always bring great prosperity. Motivated by healthy rivalry, they will 
discharge all duties connected with profit, consulting with one another when 
necessary. 

You should fear your kinsmen as you would death itself. A kinsman can 
never bear another relative’s prosperity, just as a feudal chieftain cannot 
bear to see the prosperity of his overlord. None but a kinsman can feel joy 
at the destruction of a relative blessed with sincerity, mildness, liberality, 
modesty and truthfulness of speech. 

No one, on the other hand, can be more pitiable than those who have no 
kin, for they are unhappy and easily overcome by enemies. Kinsmen are the 
refuge of one assailed by other men, for relatives will not tolerate seeing 
outsiders destroy a kinsman. When even his friends trouble a kinsman, any 
relative of the persecuted person would regard it as a personal injury. 

In having kinfolk, therefore, there are both merits and faults. A man 
without relatives neither bestows favours nor humbles himself to anyone. 
One should, for this reason, always honour and respect one’s kinsmen in 
words and deeds and give them agreeable offices, never injuring them in 
any way. Remaining sceptical at heart, one should behave towards them as 
if one completely trusted them. If one reflects upon their nature, it would 
seem that they have neither faults nor merits. One who mindfully conducts 
himself in this way will find even his enemies disarmed of hostility and 
converted into friends. One who always behaves thus to kinsmen and 
relatives and treats his friends and enemies accordingly, will win everlasting 
fame.” 


CANTO 81 


¢ ay udhishtira says, ‘If one does not gain influence over one’s 
kinsmen and relatives by this method, they become enemies. 
How then should one conduct oneself so that the hearts of both friends and 
foes can be won?’ 
Bhishma says, “Listen to an old discourse between Krishna and the 
Devarishi Narada. 
Once, Krishna told Narada, “Neither an illiterate and foolish friend, nor 
a learned friend of fickle soul, deserves to know one’s secret counsels. 
Because of your friendship with me, let me tell you something, O Muni 
who can visit Swarga at will! 
One should speak to another only if one is convinced of his intelligence. 
I never flatter my kinsmen by complimenting them on their prosperity. I 
give them half of what I have and forgive their evil words. As a man who 
wants to light a fire grinds a fire-stick, my kinsmen grind my heart with 
their cruel words. Indeed, O Maharishi, these burn my heart every day. 
Might resides in Sankarshana, mildness in Gada and, as for Pradyumna, 
he surpasses even me in personal beauty. Although I have all these on my 
side, yet I am helpless, O Narada! Many others among the Andhakas and 
the Vrishnis possess great prosperity, power, enduring courage and 
perseverance. He who does not side with them meets with death, while he 
whom they support achieves everything. 
Dissuaded in turns by both Ahuka and Akrura, I do not support either of 
them. What can be more painful for one than to have both Ahuka and 


Akrura on his side or against him? I am like the mother of two brothers 
gambling against each other, invoking victory for both. Both afflict me, O 
Narada. Only you can tell me what is good for both my kinsmen and me.” 

Narada replied, “Calamities are of two kinds, O Krishna, external and 
internal. They arise, O Vrishni, from one’s own actions or from the deeds of 
others. The calamity that has now overtaken you is an internal one and is 
born of your own actions. Baladeva and others of the Bhoja race are 
supporters of Akrura and have taken his side, either for the sake of wealth, 
or out of mere impulse, or moved by words, or by hate. As for you, you 
have given away to another the wealth that you have obtained. Though you 
have men who should be your friends, you have by your own actions 
brought calamity on your head. You cannot take back that wealth, just as 
one cannot swallow again the food one has vomited. 

O Krishna, you cannot take back from Babhru and Ugrasena the 
kingdom you gave them, for fear of creating internal strife. Even if you 
succeed, it will be after much trouble and with great difficulty. A great 
slaughter and loss of wealth will ensue, perhaps even total annihilation. 
Use, then, a weapon that is not made of steel, that is very mild and yet 
capable of piercing all hearts. Sharpening and re-sharpening this weapon, 
correct the evil tongues of your kinsmen.” 

Krishna said, “What is this weapon, O Muni, which is not made of steel, 
which is mild, which still pierces all hearts and which I should use to 
correct the tongues of my kinsmen?” 

Narada said, “Distributing food to the best of your power, forgiveness, 
sincerity, mildness and honour to whom honour is due—these constitute a 
weapon that is not made of steel. With soft words alone turn away the anger 
of kinsmen who say cruel things, and mollify their hearts, minds and 
slanderous tongues. 

None other than a great man, accomplished, with a pure soul, who has 
friends, can bear such a heavy burden. Take up this great weight of 
governing the Vrishnis and bear it on your shoulders. All oxen can carry 
heavy loads on a level road, but only the strongest can sustain such burdens 
on a difficult road. From disunity will spring destruction and overtake all 
the Bhojas and the Vrishnis. 

You, O Kesava, are the greatest among them. Work in such a manner 
that the Bhojas and the Vrishnis will not be destroyed. Naught but 
intelligence and forgiveness, restraint of the senses and liberality operate in 


a wise man. Advancing one’s own race is always praiseworthy, glorious and 
conducive to a long life. Therefore, Krishna, act in such a way that your 
clan will not be destroyed. 

There is nothing, Lord, that you do not know of policy and the art of 
war. The Yadavas, the Kukuras, the Bhojas, the Andhakas and the Vrishnis 
all depend on you, Mahabaho, as do the worlds and all the regents of the 
worlds. The Rishis always pray for your success, O Madhava. You are the 
lord of all creatures. You know the past, the present and the future. You are 
the greatest among all the Yadavas, and they rely on you to live in 
happiness.”’” 


CANTO 82 


6 ‘RB hishma says, ‘I have told you what constitutes the first method. 
Listen now, Yudhishtira, to the second one. The king should 
always defend those who seek to advance his interests. 

If someone who is paid or unpaid comes to tell you of the damage being 
done to your treasury by a minister who is embezzling its resources, you 
should grant him an audience in private and protect him from the accused 
minister, since officials guilty of misappropriation will seek to kill such 
informants. They who plunder the royal treasury combine together to 
oppose the man who seeks to protect it, and if you leave him defenceless he 
is sure to be finished. 

Listen to an old story of what the sage Kalakavrikshiya once narrated to 
the king of Kosala. Once upon a time, the Rishi Kalakavrikshiya came to 
Kshemadarsin who had ascended the throne of the kingdom of Kosala. 
Wanting to examine the conduct of all the officers of Kshemadarsin, the 
Rishi, with a crow in a cage in his hand, repeatedly travelled through every 
part of the king’s dominions, telling all men, “Study the corvine science. 
The crows tell me the present, the past and the future.” 

Proclaiming this in the kingdom, the sage, accompanied by a large 
number of men, began to observe the misdeeds of all the officers of the 
king. Having examined all the affairs of the kingdom and having learnt that 
all the officers of the king were guilty of wrongdoing, the Rishi of stern 
vows, with his crow, came to the king and said to him, “I know everything 
about your kingdom.” 


In the presence of the king, he said to his appointed minister that his 
crow had informed him that the minister had committed a crime in a 
particular place and that such and such men knew that he had plundered the 
royal treasury. 

“My crow tells me this. Admit or prove the falsehood of the accusation 
quickly,” he told the minister. The sage then proclaimed the names of other 
officers who had similarly been guilty of embezzlement, adding, “My crow 
never says anything that is false.” 

Thus accused and arraigned by the Muni, all the officers of the king, O 
Kurusthama, united and killed the crow while the sage slept at night. Seeing 
his crow pierced with a shaft within the cage, the Maharishi went to 
Kshemadarsin in the morning and said to him, “O king, I seek your 
protection. You are all-powerful and the master of the lives and wealth of 
all. With your permission, I will tell you what is good for you. 

Grieved on your account, I have come to you, whom I regard as a 
friend, impelled by devotion and ready to serve you with my whole heart. 
You are being plundered of your wealth and I have come to you to disclose 
the truth without showing any consideration for the robbers. Like a rider 
who urges a good steed, I have come here to awaken you, whom I regard as 
a friend. A friend who is alive to his own interests and wants his own 
prosperity and growth, should forgive another who intrudes, urged by 
devotion and anger, for what is beneficial.” 

The king replied, “Why should I not listen to what you say, since I am 
not blind to what is for my good? I grant you permission, O Maharishi! Tell 
me what you please and I will certainly obey your instructions.” 

The Rishi said, “I have come to you compelled by my devotion, to tell 
you everything about your servants after ascertaining their merits and faults, 
and also the dangers you incur at their hands. Our ancient Rishis have 
described the plight of those who serve others. The condition of men who 
serve the king is painful and wretched, akin to associating with virulently 
poisonous snakes. Kings have many friends and also many enemies; so they 
who serve kings have to fear all of them, including the king himself, O 
Rajan. 

A man serving the king cannot with impunity be guilty of negligence in 
doing the king’s work, especially one who wants to win prosperity. His 
inattention can move the king to wrath and may bring down doom upon 
him. 


One should learn to behave in the presence of the king as one would in 
the presence of a blazing fire. Prepared to lay down life itself at any 
moment, one should serve the king attentively, for he is all-powerful and 
master of the lives and the wealth of all, therefore like a venomous snake. 
One should always be afraid to speak evil before the king, to sit gloomily or 
in irreverent postures, to wait in attitudes of disrespect, to walk disdainfully 
or display insolent gestures and motions of the limbs. If the king becomes 
gratified, he can shower prosperity like God. If he becomes enraged, he can 
consume a man to the very roots, like a blazing fire. 

Yama said this, O Rajan. Its truth is seen in the affairs of the world. By 
these precepts, I will now do that which will enhance your prosperity. 
Friends like us can give you the aid of their intelligence in times of peril. 
They have killed my crow for serving you. I cannot, however, blame you 
for this. Those who killed this bird do not love you. 

Ascertain who your friends are and who your enemies. Do everything 
yourself without surrendering your intelligence to others. I have incurred 
the hostility of your servants, who are all embezzlers and do not desire the 
good of your subjects. Conspiring with those among them who have 
constant access to you, they covet your kingdom by planning your 
downfall. However, on account of unforeseen circumstances, their designs 
have not succeeded. 

Through fear of these men, O Rajan, I will leave this kingdom for some 
other refuge. I have no worldly desire, yet these deceitful men have shot 
this shaft at my crow, despatching the bird to Yama’s abode. I have seen 
this, O king, with eyes whose vision tapasya has rendered keen. 

With the help of this single crow I have crossed your kingdom that is 
like a river abounding with alligators, sharks, crocodiles and whales. 
Indeed, with the help of the bird, I have passed through your dominions as 
if to a Himalayan valley, impenetrable and inaccessible because of fallen 
tree trunks, scattered rocks, thorny shrubs, lions, tigers and other beasts of 
prey. 

The learned say that a region inaccessible on account of darkness can be 
passed through with the aid of a torch and a wide river can be crossed by a 
boat. No means, however, exist for penetrating or passing through the maze 
of kingly affairs. 

Your kingdom is like an inaccessible forest enveloped in darkness. 
When you who are the lord cannot trust it, how then can I? Here you view 


good and evil in the same light, so staying here cannot be safe. Here a 
Dharmatman meets with death, while a sinner incurs no danger. 

Justice requires that you slay a man of adharma but never a 
Dharmatman. It is not proper for me to stay long in this kingdom, and a 
sensible man should leave it quickly. There is a river called Sita, O Rajan, 
where boats sink. Your kingdom is like that, for a net of ruin seems to have 
been cast over it. 

You are like the fall from the tree that awaits collectors of honey, or like 
delectable food containing poison. Your nature now resembles that of 
dishonest men, not the good. You are like a pit abounding with snakes of 
virulent venom, or a river full of sweet water but exceedingly difficult to 
access, because of its steep banks overgrown with kariras and thorny canes. 

You are like a swan surrounded by dogs, vultures and jackals. Grassy 
parasites, deriving their sustenance from a mighty tree, swell into luxuriant 
growth and finally overspread it completely. A forest conflagration breaks 
out and, catching these grassy plants first, consumes the lordly tree along 
with them. Your ministers, O Rajan, resemble those parasites of which I 
speak. Check and correct them. 

You have nourished them, but conspiring against you, they are 
destroying your prosperity. Concealing from you the faults of your servants, 
I live in your palace in constant dread, like a man inhabiting a room with a 
snake, or like the lover of a hero’s wife. 

My object is to ascertain the conduct of the king who is my fellow- 
lodger. I want to know whether he has his passions under control, whether 
his servants are obedient to him, whether they love their king and whether 
he loves his subjects. It is to ascertain all this that I have come to you. 

As food to a hungry person, you have become dear to me. However, I 
dislike your ministers as one whose thirst, once slaked, feels averse to 
drink. They find fault with me because I seek your good—there is no other 
cause for their hostility towards me. I do not have any hostile intentions 
towards them. I am engaged only in pointing out their faults. As one fears a 
wounded snake, one should fear an evil-hearted enemy.” 

The king said, “Dwell in my palace, O Brahmana! I will always treat 
you with respect and honour and venerate you. They who dislike you will 
not live with me. You may do whatever is necessary to those of whom you 
have spoken. Ensure that the Dandaneeti is wielded appropriately and that 


everything is orderly in my kingdom. Please reflect upon all this and guide 
me so that I obtain prosperity.” 

The sage said, “Shut your eyes to their first offence—the slaughter of 
my crow, and gradually weaken them one by one. Prove their faults and 
then strike them, one after another. When many men are guilty of the same 
offence, they can, by acting together, soften the very sharpness of thorns. 

In the case of those of your ministers whom you suspect work against 
you and disclose your secret counsels, I advise you to proceed with caution. 
As for us, we are Brahmanas, naturally compassionate and unwilling to 
cause pain to anyone. We desire your good and also the good of others, just 
as we wish our own. 

I speak of myself, O Rajan! I am your friend. I am known as the Rishi 
Kalakavrikshiya and I always adhere to truth. Your father regarded me 
affectionately as his friend. When this kingdom was in distress during your 
father’s reign, I performed many tapasyas to drive it away, abandoning 
every other karma. I tell you this from my affection for you, so that you 
may not repeat the fault of reposing confidence in undeserving men. You 
have gained a kingdom without trouble, so reflect upon everything 
connected with its welfare. You have ministers in your kingdom but why, O 
Rajan, should you be guilty of negligence?” 

After this, the king of Kosala chose a minister from the Kshatriya varna 
and appointed him as his minister and the sage Kalakavrikshiya, bull among 
Brahmanas, as his Purohita. Following these changes, Kshemadarsin, the 
king of Kosala, subjugated the whole earth and acquired great fame. The 
Rishi Kalakavrikshiya worshipped the Devas with many grand yagnas 
performed for the king. Having benefited from the Rishi’s counsels and 
conquered the earth, the king of Kosala ruled his kingdom exactly as the 
Rishi directed.’” 


CANTO 83 


C6 Y udhishtira asks, ‘What should be the characteristics, O Pitamaha, 
of the legislators, the ministers of war, the courtiers, the warlords 
and the counsellors of a king?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘You should have as your legislators men of modesty, 
self-restraint, truthfulness and sincerity, who have the courage to say what 
is proper. O son of Kunti, for ministers of war at times of distress, look for 
those who like you and will be always by your side, who are courageous, by 
nature Munis, and are learned and persevering. 

You should have as courtiers those who are of noble birth and who, 
treated with honour, always put forth their utmost powers for you, O 
Bhaarata, and who will never abandon you in good or bad times, sickness or 
death. You should employ as officers of your army, noble men born in your 
kingdom, who are wise, handsome, learned, dignified and loyal to you. Men 
of low descent and covetous dispositions, who are cruel and shameless, will 
court you only as long as they stand to gain from you. 

The king should appoint as ministers in all his affairs those who are of 
good birth and conduct, who are shrewd and pragmatic, not cruel, and who 
always seek the good of their master. Those whom you have won over with 
gifts of wealth, honours, public regard, and whom you can regard as men 
from whom you will benefit in all your affairs, should always be given a 
share of your happiness. 

Those who are steadfast, learned, well-behaved, large-hearted and 
truthful in speech, and those who observe solemn pledges, will always be 


attentive to your affairs and will never abandon you. On the other hand, you 
should always restrain those who are disreputable, profligate, immoral and 
inclined to evil. 

When you have to choose between two parties, you should not side with 
one man and abandon the majority. However, when one man’s 
accomplishments transcend all the others’, you should abandon the many 
for him. Ability, self-discipline and devotion to work that brings fame 
should be regarded as marks of superiority. 

You should employ as your counsellors those who honour all able men, 
who are never jealous of persons of merit, who do not abandon dharma 
from the urges of kama, bhaya, krodha or lobha, who are humble, truthful in 
speech and forgiving in temper, who have their soul under control, who 
have dignity and whom you have tried in every situation. 

High descent, purity of blood, forgiveness, sagacity and purity of soul, 
bravery, gratefulness and truth, O son of Pritha, are marks of superiority and 
goodness. A wise man who conducts himself thus will disarm his enemies 
and convert them into friends. 

A king who has his atman under restraint, who is wise and who wants 
prosperity, should carefully examine the merits and flaws of his ministers. A 
king who wants prosperity and to shine among his contemporaries, should 
have for ministers men connected with his trusted friends who are noble, 
born in his own kingdom, incorruptible, untarnished by adultery and similar 
vices, well-tested, who belong to good families, are descendants of former 
ministers and are learned and humble. 

The king should employ five men to look after his affairs who are 
intelligent, not proud, who have a pleasant disposition, who are energetic, 
patient, forgiving, pure, loyal, firm, courageous, mature, responsible, free 
from deceit, capable of hard work, and whose merits and faults have been 
well tried. The king should employ in all affairs of the kingdom men who 
are wise in speech, heroic, resourceful, of noble origin, truthful, intelligent, 
free from cruelty, pragmatic and who desire the good of their sovereign. 

One who is lethargic and abandoned by friends can never work with 
perseverance. Such a man, if employed, fails in almost every business. A 
minister who possesses little learning, even if noble and attentive to 
dharma, artha and kama, becomes incompetent to choose a proper course of 
action. Similarly, a man of low descent, even if learned, will always err in 
all actions requiring dexterity and foresight, like a blind man without a 


guide. A man who is indecisive, even if intelligent and learned, and even if 
he has the means, cannot be successful for long. An evil-hearted man who 
is not learned will set his hand to work but will fail to foresee the results of 
his work. 

A king, should never repose trust in a minister who is not devoted to 
him and should, therefore, never disclose his counsels to such. An evil 
minister, combining with the other ministers of the king, can ruin his 
master, like a fire helped by the wind consuming a tree by entering its 
entrails through holes in its trunk. Giving way to rage, a master can one day 
pull down a servant from his office or reprove him in harsh words, and 
restore him to power again. None but a servant devoted to the master will 
endure and forgive such treatment. 

Ministers can sometimes become highly offended with their royal 
masters. The king should consult in all his affairs only one who can control 
his resentment from a desire of doing good to his master and sharing with 
the king his good and ill fortune. 

The king should never consult one who is crooked, even if he is devoted 
to his master, is clever and possesses numerous virtues. He who is allied 
with foes, and who does not regard the interests of the king’s subjects, 
should be considered an enemy. The king should not consult him, or anyone 
who is not learned, who is not pure, who is arrogant, who courts the king’s 
enemies, or is boastful, hostile, wrathful and covetous. 

The king should not consult one who is a stranger, even if he is devoted 
to him and greatly learned in his affairs, although he may honour him and 
employ him. Nor should he ever consult a man whose father had been 
unjustly banished by royal edict, even if the king may have subsequently 
bestowed honours upon him and employed him. The king should not 
consult a well-wisher whose property he had once confiscated for a slight 
transgression, even if he has every accomplishment. 

He who is a wise man, intelligent and learned, who is born within the 
kingdom, who is pure and righteous in all his actions, deserves to be 
consulted by the king. One who is knowledgeable and judicious, who 
understands the dispositions of his friends and enemies, who is like a 
second self to the king, deserves to be consulted. One who is truthful in 
speech, modest and mild, who is contented and honoured, truthful and 
dignified, who hates evil and bad men, who knows policy and is pragmatic 


and courageous, and who is a hereditary servant of the king, deserves to be 
consulted. 

The king who wants to rule according to the dictates of Dandaneeti, O 
Rajan, should consult those who are competent to win over all men by 
conciliation, in whom the inhabitants of both the capital and the provinces 
repose confidence for their dharma, who are competent to fight and who 
know the rules of policy. 

Thus, the king should honour and appoint as his ministers men who 
have such qualities, who discern the dispositions of all and want to achieve 
great deeds. Their number also should not be less than three. The king 
should employ ministers to observe the lapses of their masters, of 
themselves, of subjects and of the foes of their lord. 

The kingdom has its root in the counsels of policy that flow from 
ministers, and its growth proceeds from the same source. Ministers should 
work in such a way that the enemies of their monarch will not detect his 
lapses. On the other hand, when their shortcomings become visible, they 
should be prosecuted. Like the tortoise protecting its limbs by withdrawing 
them into its shell, ministers should keep their own counsels and conceal 
their lapses. Those ministers of a kingdom who can conceal their counsels 
are wise. 

Counsels constitute the armour of a king and the limbs of his subjects 
and officers. A kingdom has its roots in spies and secret agents and its 
strength in counsels of policy. If master and ministers depend on one 
another for support, subduing pride, anger, vanity and envy, they will all 
become happy. 

A king should also consult ministers who are free from the five kinds of 
deceit. He should ascertain first the different opinions of the three among 
them whom he has consulted, and for all subsequent deliberations consult 
his priest, informing him of their opinions and his own. His guru should be 
a Brahmana well versed in all matters of dharma, artha and kama, and the 
king should, with collected mind, ask his opinion. When he arrives at a 
decision after deliberation with his priest, the king should then carry it out 
impartially. 

They who know the conclusions of the science of consultation say that 
kings should always hold consultation in this manner. Having settled 
counsels in this way, they should then be reduced to practice, for then they 
will be able to win over all the subjects. 


There should be no dwarfs, hump-backed men, no one of an emaciated 
constitution, no lame or blind men, no idiots, no women or eunuchs in the 
place where the king holds his consultations. Nothing should move there: 
before or behind, above or below, or in transverse directions. Getting up on 
a boat, or going to an open and bare space without grass or undergrowth, 
from where he can clearly see the surrounding land, the king should hold 
his consultations at the proper time, avoiding faults of speech and gesture.” 


CANTO 84 


C6 B hishma says, ‘An ancient tale has been told, O Yudhishtira, about 
a conversation between Brihaspati and Indra. 

Indra asked Brihaspati, “O Maharishi, what single act should a man 
accomplish to become famous and an object of regard for everyone?” 

Brihaspati replied, “Only by agreeable and pleasant speech, O Indra, 
can a man become an object of regard for all, acquire great celebrity and 
give happiness to all. With this sole skill, one can always obtain 
everybody’s love. Everyone dislikes the man who does not speak a word, 
whose face is always furrowed with frowns and who cannot make agreeable 
conversation. He who, upon meeting others, addresses them first and does 
so with a smile, will please everyone. 

Even gifts, if not made with pleasant words, are like rice without curry 
and do not delight the recipients, O Sakra, whereas if someone even takes 
away the possessions of men with sweet words, they become reconciled to 
the robbery. A king, therefore, even when he wants to punish, should use 
kind words. Sweetness of speech never fails in its purpose and never pains 
any heart. A man of good deeds and agreeable and pleasing words has no 
equal.” 

Thereafter, Indra began to follow the advice of his guru. O son of Kunti, 
you too should practise this virtue.’” 


CANTO 85 


66 Y udhishtira asks, ‘O greatest of kings, by what method can a ruler 
obtain great blessings and eternal fame?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘A king of cleansed soul, who attends to the duty of 
protecting his subjects, by conducting himself as a man of dharma will earn 
merit and fame, both here and hereafter.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “O wise one, tell me how a king should behave and 
with whom, for I believe that the desirable virtues which you have already 
described in a man, cannot be found to exist in any single individual.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘You are very intelligent, O Yudhishtira; it is just as you 
say. A man who has all these good qualities is very rare. To be brief, such 
good conduct in one possessing all the virtues mentioned, is most difficult 
to find even after diligent searching. I will however, tell you what kind of 
ministers you should appoint. 

Four Brahmanas, learned in the Vedas, dignified, belonging to the 
Snataka order, of untainted behaviour; eight physically strong Kshatriyas, 
capable of wielding weapons; twenty-one wealthy Vaisyas and three 
humble Sudras of pure conduct, devoted to their daily duties, and one of the 
Suta caste, with knowledge of the Puranas and the eight cardinal virtues, 
should be your ministers. 

Each one of them should be fifty years of age, possess a sense of 
dignity, be free from envy, familiar with the Srutis and the Smritis, humble, 
impartial, competent to make ready decisions in the midst of disputes, 
suggesting different courses of action, free from covetousness and from the 


seven dreadful vices called Vyasanas. The king should consult with those 
eight ministers and lead them. He should then publish, for the information 
of the subjects in his kingdom, the results of such deliberation. 

You should always watch over your subjects and never confiscate what 
they deposit with you, or appropriate disputed things. Such conduct will 
tarnish the administration of justice, and you and your state will incur sin, 
instilling fear in your subjects akin to what little birds feel at the sight of a 
hawk. Your kingdom will then sink like a boat wrecked at sea. If a king 
governs his subjects without dharma, fear will take possession of his heart 
and the door of Swarga will be closed to him. 

A kingdom, O Bharatarishabha, has its root in dharma. The minister or 
the king’s son occupying the seat of justice who works without dharma, and 
those officers who, having accepted charge, act unjustly, moved by self- 
interest, all go to hell, along with the king himself. Those helpless men 
whom the powerful oppress and who lament piteously and copiously, look 
to the king for protection. In cases of dispute between two parties, the 
decision should be based upon the evidence of witnesses. If one of the 
disputants has no witnesses and is helpless, the king should give the case 
his best consideration. 

The king should punish offenders according to the measure of their 
offences. The wealthy should be punished with fines and confiscations; the 
poor, with loss of liberty. He should mete out corporal punishments to those 
who are evil. He should cherish all good men with praise and gifts of 
wealth. 

He who plans the death of the king should be punished with death, to be 
effected by varied methods. The same should be the punishment of one who 
becomes guilty of arson, or theft, or co-habitation with women which may 
lead to a confusion of varnas. A king who inflicts punishments 
appropriately according to the dictates of Dandaneeti, incurs no sin by the 
deed, but earns eternal merit. The foolish king who inflicts punishments 
capriciously earns infamy in this world and sinks into hell hereafter. 

A king should not punish a man for the fault of another. A man should 
be convicted or acquitted, purely based upon the criminal law. A king 
should never slay an envoy under any circumstances, else he will go to hell 
with all his ministers. The king who espouses the Kshatriya code, if he kills 
an envoy who is only faithfully delivering the message entrusted to him, 


stains the reputation of his ancestors with a sin equal to the sin of killing a 
foetus. 

An envoy should possess these seven accomplishments: he should be of 
a noble family, eloquent and of sweet speech, faithful in delivering the 
message with which he is charged, clever and possessing a good memory. 
The king’s bodyguard and the governor of his capital or citadel should have 
similar qualities. 

The king’s minister should know the conclusions of the shastras and be 
competent in directing wars and making treaties. He should also be 
intelligent, possess courage, be modest and capable of keeping secrets. He 
should also be of high birth, with a strong mind and pure in conduct. If he 
possesses these qualities, he should be regarded as worthy. 

The commander of the king’s forces, his Senapati, should possesses 
similar accomplishments. He should also be an expert in different kinds of 
battle array and in the uses of war engines and weapons. He should be able 
to bear exposure to rain, cold, heat and wind and remain watchful of the 
movements of his enemies. 

The king, O Rajan, should be able to lull his foes into a false sense of 
security. He should not however, himself trust anyone, including his own 
son. I have now, O sinless one, explained to you what the conclusions of the 
shastras are. The refusal to trust anyone is said to be one of the highest 
mysteries of the ways of a king.” 


CANTO 86 


¢ ye udhishtira asks, ‘Tell me, O Pitamaha, in what kind of city 
should the king himself dwell? Should he select an already made 
one or should he get one constructed?’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘It is proper, O Bhaarata, to enquire about the conduct 
one should follow and the defences that one should adopt for the city in 
which a king lives. I will talk to you about it, referring especially to the 
defences of forts, so that you will know and do what is necessary. 

Keeping his eye on the six different kinds of citadels, the king should 
build his cities abounding in every kind of necessity and comfort. The six 
kinds are: water-citadels, surrounded on all sides by a river, earth-citadels, 
built on plains fortified with high walls and encircled with trenches; hill- 
citadels, human-citadels, unfortified cities properly protected by guards and 
a loyal population, mud-citadels and forest-citadels. 

Along with ministers and an army completely loyal to him, the king 
should have a citadel with impenetrable walls and a trench. It should be 
well provisioned with an abundant stock of rice and weapons, teem with 
elephants, horses and chariots and be inhabited by skilled men also versed 
in the mechanical arts. 

The city should have a population that is virtuous and clever in business 
and consists of strong and energetic men and animals. Blazing with beauty 
and resounding with music and song, it should contain many open squares 
and rows of well-stocked shops. 


The houses where many brave and wealthy men live are all spacious 
and echo with the chant of Vedic hymns; there are frequent festivities and 
celebrations and the inhabitants always worship the gods. Here all men 
follow dharma, peace prevails and no danger exists. Dwelling here, the king 
should employ himself in filling his treasury, increasing his forces, 
enhancing the number of his friends and establishing courts of justice. 

He should check all abuses and evils in his cities and his provinces and 
employ himself in filling his arsenals with care, in collecting provisions of 
every kind and increasing his store of rice and other grain, and in 
strengthening his councils with wise men. He should further enhance his 
supplies of fuel, iron, chaff, charcoal, timber, horns, bones, bamboo, 
marrow, oils and ghee, fat, honey, medicines, flax, resinous exudations, 
weapons, shafts, leather catgut for bow-strings, canes, strings and cords 
made of munja grass and other plants and creepers. 

He should also increase the number of tanks and wells with large 
quantities of water, and protect all shady fruit trees. He should entertain 
with honour and attention acharyas of different sciences, Ritwijas, other 
priests, mighty bowmen, architects, astronomers, astrologers, physicians, all 
wise and intelligent men who are self-restrained, clever, courageous, 
learned, noble, energetic of mind and capable of close application to all 
kinds of work. He should honour men of dharma and punish the 
unrighteous. 

Working with determination, the king should set the several varnas to 
their respective duties. Ascertaining diligently through spies the outward 
behaviour and the state of mind of the inhabitants of his city and provinces, 
he should take necessary action based on what he learns. 

The king should himself supervise his spies and advisors, his treasury 
and the agencies for inflicting punishments, for everything depends upon 
these. With spies acting as his eyes, the king should watch all that his 
enemies do and intend, as well as his friends and neutrals. He should then 
carefully plan his own course of action, honouring those who are loyal to 
him and punishing those who are hostile. 

The king should worship the Devas in yagnas and distribute gifts 
without hurting anybody. He should protect his subjects, never doing 
anything to obstruct or thwart dharma, always supporting and protecting the 
helpless, the masterless, the old and widows. 


The king should honour Rishis and give them gifts of clothes, vessels 
and food at appropriate times. The king should take care to inform the 
Munis who live within his dominions of his own condition, of all his 
actions and of the state of the kingdom, and should always behave with 
humility in their presence. When he sees noble Rishis or Munis of high 
birth and great learning who have abandoned all earthly goods, he should 
honour them with gifts of food, beds and seats. 

Whatever the nature of the distress into which he may fall, he should 
confide in a Rishi, for even robbers trust such men of character. The king 
should place his wealth in charge of a Muni and should glean wisdom from 
him. He should not, however, always show favour to such men or pay 
homage to them on all occasions, as it might expose them to robbers. 

From among those living in his own kingdom, he should select one sage 
as a friend. Similarly, he should choose another Muni who lives in the 
kingdom of his foe, as a friend. He should pick a third from among those 
dwelling in the vana and a fourth from the kingdoms paying tribute to him. 
He should show hospitality, bestow honours and give them the means for 
their sustenance. 

He should behave towards the Rishis dwelling in the kingdoms of his 
enemies and in the forests, in the same way as towards those who live in his 
own kingdom. Engaged in tapasya and rigid vows, they will, if calamity 
befalls the king and he solicits their protection, grant him his wish. 

I have now summarized for you the features of the city in which the 
king should dwell.’” 


CANTO 87 


¢ =e udhishtira asks ‘I want to know how a kingdom can _ be 
consolidated and protected. Tell me all about this, O 
Bharatarishabha!’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Listen to me with concentrated attention while I tell you 
how this can be done. A headman should be selected for each village, and 
over ten headmen there should be one supervisor, and over two such 
supervisors there should be one officer who controls twenty villages. Above 
him should be appointed men to oversee a hundred villages, and above 
them officers who control a thousand villages. 

The headman should ascertain the characteristics of everyone in the 
village and also all the faults that need correction. He should report 
everything to the supervisor above him in charge of ten villages, who again, 
should report the same to the officer above him, in charge of twenty 
villages. This officer, in his turn, should report the conduct of all men 
within his dominion to the one above him who is in charge of hundred 
villages. 

The village headman should have control over all the produce and 
property of the village. Every headman should contribute his share for the 
use of the lord of ten villages, and the latter should do the same to support 
the lord of twenty villages. The lord of a hundred villages should receive 
every honour from the king and should have for his support a populous, 
wealthy and large village. Such a village, so assigned to a lord of hundred 
villages, should be within the control of the lord of a thousand villages. 


The lord of thousand villages should have a minor town for himself and 
he should enjoy the grain, gold and other produce from it. He should 
perform all the duties that pertain to it, such as conduct of wars and other 
internal affairs. 

A virtuous minister should exercise strict supervision over the 
administration and mutual relations of officers. Again, in every town, there 
should be an officer to attend to all matters in his jurisdiction. Like some 
fearsome planet moving above all the stars below, this officer should be 
placed with comprehensive powers over all the officers subordinate to him. 
He should ascertain the conduct of those under him through his spies and 
protect the people from all deceitful men, those of murderous disposition or 
evil deeds, robbers and those possessed by demons. 

Taking note of sales and purchases, the state of the roads, stocks of food 
and clothing and the profits of traders, the king should levy taxes on them. 
He should first ascertain the extent of production, the receipts and expenses 
of those engaged in trade, and the condition of the arts, and only then levy 
taxes upon the various artisans. 

The king can levy high taxes, O Yudhishtira, but never such that will 
emasculate his people. He should levy no tax on a product without 
ascertaining the output and the amount of labour that has gone into it, for 
nobody will produce anything without a sufficient margin of profit. The 
king should thoughtfully levy taxes so that both he and the man who 
produces the article taxed share the profit. 

The king should not, on account of greed, destroy his own foundations 
along with those of others. He should always avoid deeds which will make 
his people detest him, and try instead to win their approval. Subjects hate a 
ruler who is rapacious in the matter of taxes and levies. How can a king 
who becomes an object of hatred have prosperity? Such a ruler can never 
acquire any wealth. 

An intelligent king should treat his kingdom like a calf. If you permit 
the calf to suckle, it grows strong and can carry heavy loads. If, on the other 
hand, O Yudhishtira, you milk the cow too much, the calf grows up weak 
and incapable of doing much work for the owner. Similarly, if you drain the 
kingdom, the subjects fail to prosper. The king who protects his kingdom 
himself, is considerate to his subjects in the matter of taxes and duties, and 
collects only what he can easily obtain, will achieve great success. 


This should not lead to the king obtaining so much wealth that the entire 
kingdom becomes his treasury and his treasury becomes his bedchamber. If 
the inhabitants of the cities and the provinces are poor, the king should 
show them compassion to the best of his powers, whether they are 
dependent upon him or not. 

The king should punish all bandits who infest the outskirts of his 
villages, protect his people and make them happy. The subjects then 
become partners in the king’s welfare and feel exceedingly obliged to him. 

To accumulate wealth in the first instance, the king should visit the 
prosperous areas of his kingdom, one after the other, and endeavour to 
alarm the people. He should tell them, “Calamity threatens us and there is a 
great danger from our enemies. However, there is every reason to hope that 
the danger will pass, for the enemy, like a bamboo that has flowered, will 
very soon meet his end. Many enemies of mine have combined with a large 
number of brigands to destroy our kingdom. In view of this imminent 
danger, I need your wealth to devise your protection. When the danger 
passes, I will return what I now take. 

Remember, our enemies will not give back what they will forcibly take 
from you if unopposed, but will kill all your relatives, even your wives. You 
desire wealth only for the sake of your children and wives. I am glad at 
your prosperity and I entreat you as I would my own children, allow me to 
take from you what is within your power to give. I do not wish to trouble 
any one, but in times of calamity and danger, wealth should not be so dear 
to you and you should, like strong bulls, bear such burdens.” 

A king who understands the circumstances that change with time, 
should send his agents to collect taxes from his people with agreeable, 
sweet and complimentary words. He should point out to the Vaisyas of his 
realm the need for him to repair his fortifications and to meet the expenses 
of his establishment and other heads, alarm them with an impending foreign 
invasion and impress them with the need for protection which will allow 
them to live in peace. If he disregards them, they will abandon his 
dominions, take to the forests and become lost to him. He should therefore 
behave with leniency towards the Vaisyas, conciliate and protect them, give 
them a sense of security and always do what is agreeable to them, to ensure 
that they enjoy their possessions. 

The king, O Bhaarata, should always work in such a way towards the 
Vaisyas that their productive powers can grow. Since the Vaisyas increase 


the strength of a kingdom, improve its agriculture and develop its trade, a 
wise king should always gratify them. Acting with thoughtfulness and 
leniency, he should levy mild taxes upon them. It is always easy to behave 
with kindness towards the Vaisyas, as there is nothing more profitable for a 
kingdom.’” 


CANTO 88 


6 ve udhishtira asks, ‘Tell me, O Pitamaha, what the king should do 
if, despite his great wealth, he desires more.’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘A king who wants to earn religious merit should 
devote himself, to the best of his abilities, to the good of his subjects and 
protect them, taking existing circumstances into account. He should adopt 
all such measures in his dominions that he estimates will secure their 
mutual good. 

A king should exploit his kingdom like a bee gathering honey from 
plants, without injuring the source. He should be like a dairy farmer, who 
milks his cow without injuring her udders, or starving her calf. In the matter 
of taxes, the king should work like the leech drawing blood mildly. He 
should conduct himself towards his subjects like a tigress carrying her cubs, 
touching them with her teeth but never piercing them. He should be like a 
mouse, which, despite having sharp and pointed teeth, nibbles the feet of 
sleeping animals in such a manner that they remain unaware of it. 

A flourishing subject should be shorn little by little, the demand 
increased gradually until what is taken assumes a fair proportion. The king 
should enhance the burden of his subjects by degrees, like a man gradually 
increasing the load on a young bullock. If in the end he gently and carefully 
puts the harness on them, they will accept it without complaint. 

Indeed, adequate measures should be employed for making the people 
obedient, for mere entreaties will not reduce them to subjection. Since it is 
impossible to behave equally towards all men, the common people should 


be compelled to be obedient by appeasing their leaders. After using the 
leaders to bring about disunity among the people who bear the burden, the 
king should himself come forward to conciliate them. He will then be able 
to enjoy without trouble what he can extract from them. 

The king should never enforce taxes unreasonably and on men unable to 
bear them. He should impose them progressively, at the proper time, 
formally and with conciliation. The methods that I tell you are legitimate 
means of Rajadharma, and are not considered deceitful. 

He who wants to control horses by violent methods only makes them 
furious. Drinking shops, public women, pimps, actors, gamblers and 
keepers of gambling houses and others of this kind, who are sources of 
disorder to the state, should all be checked. Dwelling within the realm, they 
cause trouble and harm the better class of subjects. 

Manu himself in the olden days has laid down the injunction that 
nothing should be asked of anyone when there is no distress. If all men 
were to abstain from work and take to demanding and begging, the world 
would certainly come to a stop. 

The king alone is competent to control and regulate. Since the Srutis 
declare that the king who does not restrain his subjects earns a fourth part of 
the sins that they commit, due to the absence of royal protection, he should 
check his subjects who are sinful. The king who neglects to restrain them 
becomes sinful and earns a fourth part of their sins, just as he would 
otherwise have earned a fourth part of their merits. The evil that a man 
governed by passion will do will impoverish everyone. Such men, capable 
of anything, indulge in stimulants and meat, appropriate the wives and the 
wealth of other men, and set a bad example for others. 

Those who do not live on alms may beg in times of distress. The king 
should observe true dharma and give gifts to them from compassion, but not 
from fear. Let there be neither beggars nor robbers in your kingdom. It is 
robbers, not virtuous men, who give alms to beggars, for such givers are not 
real benefactors of men. 

Let the men who live in your dominions be such as advance the 
interests of others and bring them benefit, not such as exterminate them. 
The officers who take from subjects more than what is due, Rajan, should 
be punished and replaced by others who will collect only what is due. 

Agriculture, rearing of cattle, trade and other work of similar nature 
should be popularized, based on the principle of the division of labour. If a 


man engaged in agriculture, cattle-rearing or trade feels a sense of 
insecurity on account of thieves and tyrannical officers, the king will be 
disgraced. He should always honour his subjects who are rich and say to 
them, “Advance the interest of the people with me.” 

In every kingdom, the wealthy are assets to the realm and without doubt 
constitute its foremost estate. He who is wise or courageous, wealthy or 
influential, righteous, engaged in penances, truthful in speech or gifted with 
intelligence, assists in protecting his fellow men. 

For these reasons, O Rajan, love everyone and display the qualities of 
truth, sincerity, absence of anger and abstention from doing injury. You 
should wield the Dandaneeti and swell your treasury, support your forces 
and friends and thus consolidate your kingdom!’” 


CANTO 89 


¢ “RB hishma says, ‘Do not cut down the fruit trees in your dominions, 

Yudhishtira. Fruits and roots are the property of the Brahmanas. 

The sages have declared this to be a law of dharma. The surplus, after 

supporting the Brahmanas, should go to meet the needs of other people. 
Nobody should take anything by doing an injury to Brahmanas. 

If a Brahmana wants to leave the kingdom because he has been unable 
to find any livelihood in it, the king should, with affection and respect, 
provide him the means of sustenance. If he still wants to leave, the king 
should call an assembly of Brahmanas and say, “If such a Brahmana leaves 
the kingdom, the people lose in him a friend, teacher and guru. In whom 
will my people then find an authority to guide them?” If even after this, he 
does not give up his intention to leave, the king should ask his forgiveness 
and say to him, “Forget the past.” 

This, O son of Kunti, is the eternal way of Rajadharma. The king should 
further tell him, “Indeed, O Brahmana, people say that only as much should 
be assigned to a Brahmana as will be just sufficient to maintain him. I do 
not accept this opinion, but think rather that a Brahmana should be given 
the means to procure even items of luxury, if he so wishes,” and he should 
be requested to stay. 

Agriculture, cattle-rearing and trade provide all men with the means of 
livelihood. Knowledge of the Vedas however, provides them with the means 
to reach heaven. Therefore, one regards those who obstruct the study of the 
Vedas and Vedic practices as enemies of society. It is for their extermination 


that Brahma created Kshatriyas. Subdue your foes, protect your subjects, 
worship the Devas in sacrifices and fight battles with courage, O 
Kurupravira! 

A king should shield those who deserve protection, and he who does 
this is the best of rulers. The kings who do not exercise this duty live in 
vain. 

For the benefit of his subjects, the king should always try to discover the 
behaviour and thoughts of all, through informers and secret agents. Look 
after your people, O Yudhishtira: protect others from your own, your own 
from others, others from others and your own from your own. 

Wise men say that everything has its root in the self. The king should 
first protect himself and then the earth. The king should always reflect upon 
what his shortcomings are, what bad habits he is addicted to, and what the 
sources of his weakness and faults are. He should employ trusted agents to 
wander through the kingdom and ascertain whether his conduct of the 
previous day has met with the approbation of the people of the provinces, 
and whether or not he has earned a good name in his kingdom. 

Among those who are wise and virtuous, Yudhishtira, you should not 
disregard those who never retreat from battle, those who do not live in your 
kingdom, those who are dependent on you, those who are independent of 
anyone, those who are your ministers and those who praise or blame you. 
No man can earn the good opinion of everybody in the world, since 
everyone has friends, foes and those who are neutrals.’ 

Yudhishtira asks, ‘Among men equal in might of arms and 
accomplishments, how does one gain superiority over all the others and 
succeed in ruling over them?’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘Creatures that are mobile devour things that are 
immobile; animals that have teeth devour those that have no teeth; 
poisonous snakes devour smaller ones of their own species. Similarly, 
among human beings too, the king who is strong preys upon weaker ones. 
He should always pay attention to his subjects and his enemies, or else they 
will fall upon him like vultures. 

Take care, Yudhishtira, that the imposition of heavy taxes does not crush 
the traders in your kingdom. They buy diverse goods at varying prices, high 
and low, to sell, and in the course of their journeys have to seek repose in 
forests and inaccessible areas and undergo many privations. 


Let not your farmers desert your kingdom due to oppression, for they, 
too, bear the burdens of the king and support the other inhabitants of your 
land. The gifts you make in this world support the Devas, Pitris, 
Manushyas, Nagas, Rakshasas, birds and animals. These are the methods of 
governing a kingdom and protecting its rulers. I will talk to you again on 
the subject, O son of Pandu!’” 


CANTO 90 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘I will tell you now, O Yudhishtira, everything that 
Utathya of Angirasa’s race, the leading authority on the Vedas, 
once told Yuvanaswa’s son, King Mandhatri. 

Utathya said, “One becomes a king in the interests of dharma and not to 
indulge in caprice. Understand this, O Rajan: the king is indeed the 
protector of the world. If he acts righteously, he attains the position of a 
Deva and goes to heaven, and if he does not, he sinks into hell. All 
creatures rely upon dharma, which in its turn, depends upon the monarch. 
The ruler, therefore, who upholds dharma is truly a king. 

The king who is a Dharmatman and has every kind of grace is said to be 
an embodiment of virtue. If a king fails to punish adharma, the Devas desert 
his palace and he comes to be defamed among men. The efforts of men who 
observe their swadharma will always be crowned with success. For this 
reason, all men seek to obey the dictates of dharma, which is the root of 
prosperity. When one continues to sin, adharma increases greatly and 
righteousness comes to an end. 

The scriptures lay down that when one does not restrain adharma, no 
one can claim the rights of property and say, ‘This is mine and this is not 
mine.’ Men cannot enjoy ownership of their wives, animals, fields and 
houses; the Devas receive no worship, the Pitris no offerings, the Atithis no 
hospitality; the Dvijas do not study the Vedas or observe great vratas, or 
perform yagnas. When one does not restrain adharma, the human mind 
becomes weak and confused, O Rajan, like the minds of wounded men. 


The Rishis, with their eyes on both worlds, made the king the superior 
being, intending him to be the embodiment of dharma on earth. They called 
him Rajan—one in whom righteousness shines. The king in whom there is 
no dharma they call a Vrishala. Divine dharma or righteousness has another 
name, Vrisha, and he who weakens Vrisha is Vrishala. All creatures grow in 
the development of righteousness and decay with its decline. A king should, 
therefore, advance the cause of dharma, and should never permit it to 
deteriorate. 

We call righteousness dharma because it fosters the acquisition and 
preservation of wealth—dhana. The Rishis have declared, O Rajan, that 
dharma restrains and limits all evil actions of men. The Swayambhuva 
Brahma created dharma for the advancement and growth of men. So a king 
must work according to the dictates of dharma—the greatest of all things, 
for the benefit of his subjects. 

The best of men who rules his subjects righteously is called a king. 
Disregard kama and krodha, and observe the dictates of dharma. It is the 
greatest above all things, O Naravyaghra, that contribute to the prosperity of 
kings. Dharma, again, has sprung from the Brahmana. For this reason, one 
should always revere the Brahmana. You should humbly satisfy the wishes 
of Brahmanas, O Mandhatri. By neglecting to fulfill their wishes, the king 
draws danger to himself, because he fails to gain any more friends, while 
his enemies increase in number. 

Once upon a time, Lakshmi, the goddess of prosperity, became enraged 
and left the Asura Bali—the son of Virochana, with whom she dwelt— 
because of his malice towards the Brahmanas, and went to Indra, the chief 
of the Devas. Seeing the goddess living with Indra, Bali was filled with vain 
regret. This is what comes of malice and pride. Wake up, O Mandhatri, so 
that the Devi of prosperity does not desert you in wrath! 

The Srutis declare that Adharma fathered on Lakshmi Devi a son named 
Ahamkara, Pride. This Ahamkara led many amongst the Devas and the 
Asuras to ruin. Many Rajarishis also suffered destruction due to him. Wake 
up O Rajan! He who can conquer Ahamkara becomes a king, while he 
whom Ahamkara conquers becomes a slave. If you wish for a life of eternal 
happiness, live as a king who does not indulge in these two— Ahamkara and 
Adharma. 

Abstain from becoming friends with one who is proud, dishonest, 
mocks faith, or is cold-blooded, and on no account keep company with 


anyone who has all of these faults. Keep yourself aloof from ministers 
whom you have once punished, from women too, and stay away from 
mountains, uneven lands, inaccessible fastnesses, elephants, horses and 
poisonous snakes. 

You should also give up wandering in the night, and avoid being stingy, 
vain, boastful or angry. Never have intercourse with those who are lewd or 
of ambiguous sex, unknown women, the wives of other men or virgins. 
When the king does not restrain vice, a confusion of castes follows and 
sinful Rakshasas, hermaphrodites, crippled children, or thick-tongued 
imbeciles and idiots begin to take birth even in respectable families. 

Therefore the king should take particular care to act with dharma for the 
benefit of his subjects. If he acts thoughtlessly, great evil follows and 
adharma increases, causing a confusion of castes. Cold sets in during the 
summer months and disappears when its proper season comes. Drought, 
flood and pestilence afflict the people. Ominous stars arise, terrifying 
comets appear and other portents are seen, indicating destruction of the 
kingdom. 

If the king does not take measures for his own safety and protect his 
subjects, the latter meet with destruction, followed by the king himself. Two 
men get together to snatch the wealth of a single individual, many join 
hands to rob them in turn, and men rape maidens. One says that such a state 
of affairs arises from the king’s fault in abandoning dharma and being 
thoughtless, and consequently, all rights of property and dhana come to an 
end among men.’”’ 


CANTO 91 


¢ U tathya said, “If Indra, the Deva of the clouds, ensures rain at the 

right season, and if the king works with dharma, the prosperity 

that follows will bring happiness to his subjects. The washerman who does 

not know how to wash out the dirt from cloth without fading it is not skilled 

in his profession. The king becomes a Sudra, as among the Brahmanas, 

Kshatriyas or Vaisyas, one who has disregarded the proper duties of his 
varna can be compared to a washerman. 

Menial service is for the Sudra; agriculture for the Vaisya; the 
Dandaneeti for the Kshatriya; and Brahmacharya, penances, mantras and 
truth for the Brahmana. The Kshatriya who knows how to correct the faults 
in the behaviour of the other varnas and to wash them clean like a 
washerman, is really their father and deserves to be their king. 

The four yugas called Krita, Treta, Dwapara and Kali are all dependent 
on the conduct of the king, O Bharatarishabha, for it is he who constitutes 
the yuga. The four varnas, the Vedas and the dharma of the four 
varnasramas, all become confused and weakened when the king behaves 
carelessly. The three kinds of Agni, the three Vedas and yagnas with 
dakshina, all are lost when the king becomes heedless. 

The king is the creator of all creatures and he is their destroyer. One 
regards the king who is a Dharmatman as the creator, and a sinful king as 
the destroyer. The king’s wives, sons, kinsmen and friends all become 
unhappy and grieve when the king becomes neglectful. Elephants, horses, 


cattle, camels, mules, asses and all other animals lose their vigour when the 
king becomes unrighteous. 

Brahma created Shakti, which the king represents, O Mandhatri, in 
order to protect weakness. He who defends the weak wins heaven, while he 
who persecutes weakness goes to hell. Weakness is indeed a great being, for 
everything depends upon it. 

All men worship the king and are the children of the king. If, therefore, 
the king takes the path of adharma, all men come to grief. One should 
regard as terrible the reproachful eye of the weak, the curse of a Muni and 
the bite of a deadly poisonous snake. Do not, therefore, make an enemy of 
the weak, or forget that the weak are always subject to humiliation. Make 
sure that the curse of the helpless does not turn you and your kinsmen to 
ashes. No children are born in a lineage which has been cursed by the weak, 
for they destroy the family to its very roots. Hence, do not earn the ill-will 
of the weak, for weakness is more powerful than even the greatest power 
and can even totally exterminate it. 

If one who has been humiliated or beaten cries out in vain for help and 
fails to obtain a protector, divine punishment will overwhelm the king and 
destroy him. While you enjoy power, do not take wealth from the weak. 
Take care that the curses of the weak do not burn you like a blazing fire. 
The tears shed by men wronged through falsehood slay the children and 
livestock of those who have lied. 

A sin does not produce immediate consequences. It is like a cow, and 
the sinner has to wait for milk till it calves. If the effects are not evident in 
the sinner himself, one notices it later in his progeny or descendants. When 
a weak person fails to find a protector, divine punishment falls on the king. 
When distress reduces all subjects of a king to penury and obliges them to 
live by begging like Brahmanas, it will bring destruction upon the king. 

When all the officers of the king posted in the provinces unite and act 
unjustly, it is the king who becomes responsible for the great evil that will 
visit his kingdom. When his officers, by unfair means, or from kama or 
lobha, extort wealth from men who piteously solicit mercy, then a great 
destruction is sure to befall the king. 

O Mandhatri, when a mighty tree first sprouts into life and grows large, 
numerous creatures come and seek its shelter. When, however, it is cut 
down or consumed in a fire, all those who took shelter become homeless. 


When the subjects of a kingdom perform righteous deeds, carry out 
religious rites and applaud the good qualities of the king, the latter reaps the 
rewards. On the other hand, if they take to adharma, due to ignorance, the 
king will suffer. When you allow sinful men, known for their misdeeds, to 
move among the righteous without being punished, Kali then overpowers 
the rulers of those realms; while the king who punishes all evil men thrives 
in prosperity. 

The king who pays proper honours to his ministers, employs them in 
matters of policy and in battles, enjoys the wide earth forever and his 
kingdom certainly thrives. The ruler who duly rewards all good work and 
words, earns great merit. Enjoyment of good things after sharing them with 
others, paying proper respect to the ministers and subjugating vain and 
powerful men, constitute the responsibility of a king. 

Protecting all men by words and physically by deeds and pardoning no 
one who has committed an offence, be it even his own son, constitute the 
great obligation of the king. To share his possessions with those who are 
weak and thereby to increase their strength, to support them and protect the 
kingdom, to exterminate thieves and to conquer on the battlefield, embody 
the duty of the king. 

Never to forgive anyone, however dear, if he has offended by deed or 
word, constitutes the mahadharma of the king. His duty is to protect those 
who seek shelter, as he would his own children, never to deprive anyone of 
the honours to which he is entitled, to worship the Devas with devotion in 
yagnas completed by gifts and to subdue lust and envy. 

His duty is also to wipe the tears of the distressed, the helpless and the 
old and to make them rejoice, to praise friends, to weaken foes and to 
honour the good, and to observe with alacrity the obligations of truth. To 
make gifts of land, to entertain guests and to support dependants are also 
duties of the king. 

The king who shows favours to the deserving and disciplines those who 
deserve punishment, earns great merit both here and hereafter. He is Yama 
himself, O Mandhatri, the Deva incarnate to all, because they expect 
everything from him. By controlling his senses he will acquire great wealth 
and by not subduing them, he incurs sin. 

The duty of the king is to pay proper honours to Ritwijas, priests and 
gurus and to do good work for them. Yama governs all creatures with an 
even hand, without prejudice. The king should do the same in dealing with 


all his subjects. It is said that the king resembles the thousand-eyed Indra in 
every respect, and that one should regard as righteous those whom Indra 
regards as such, O Bharatarishabha. 

You should carefully cultivate forgiveness, intelligence, patience and 
love towards all creatures. You should also ascertain the strengths and 
weakness of men and learn to distinguish between right and wrong. 
Conduct yourself with propriety towards all, give gifts and say agreeable 
and sweet words. You should maintain the people of your city and the 
provinces in happiness. 

A king who is not clever will never be able to protect his subjects. 
Sovereignty is a very happy burden to bear, but only a wise and courageous 
king who knows Dandaneeti can protect a kingdom. One who is without 
energy and intelligence, and who is not well versed in this great science, is 
incompetent to bear the burden of sovereignty. 

Aided by handsome, learned and devoted ministers of noble birth, who 
are clever in business, you should examine the hearts and actions of all 
men, including the Rishis in the vana. If you conduct yourself in this 
manner, you will be able to learn the duties of all varnasramas. This will 
help you to observe your svadharma when you are in your country, or when 
you go to other lands. 

Among dharma, artha and kama, dharma— virtue—is the greatest, and a 
dharmatman obtains great happiness both here and hereafter. If you treat 
men with respect, they will even, for the sake of the honour you give them, 
abandon their own wives and sons. 

A king can win great prosperity by attracting good men to himself by 
such favours as gifts, sweet words, thoughtfulness and purity of behaviour. 
Do not, therefore, O Mandhatri, take these qualities and actions lightly. 

The king should never be unconcerned about his own shortcomings or 
those of his enemies. He should act in such a way that his foes are not able 
to detect his lapses and he should attack them when theirs become evident. 
This is the way in which Indra, Yama, Varuna and all the Rajarishis have 
fought. Do you likewise, O Rajan, quickly adopt this behaviour and take the 
heavenly road which the Rajarishis followed. The Devas, the Rishis, the 
Pitris and the Gandharvas, of great tejas, sing the praises, both here and 
hereafter, of the king whose conduct accords with dharma.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘Mandhatri unhesitatingly did as Utathya directed 
and became the sole lord of the wide earth. Therefore, O Rajan, take the 


path of dharma like Mandhatri. After ruling the earth, you will find a home 
in Swarga.’” 


CANTO 92 


6 oe udhishtira asks, ‘Tell me, O Pitamaha, how should a righteous 
king behave who wants to adhere to the path of dharma?’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘An old story has been told of what the wise, all- 
knowing, mahatapasvin Rishi Vamadeva related long ago to the 
knowledgeable, courageous and chaste king, Vasumanas, who entreated 
him, “Guide me, O holy one, in morality, on how I should conduct myself, 
so that I do not fall away from the dharma prescribed for me.” 

The mahatapasvin Vamadeva said to the handsome _ golden- 
complexioned Vasumanas of great tejas, seated at his ease like Yayati, son 
of Nahusha, “Act with dharma, as there is nothing superior to 
righteousness. The kings who are righteous are able to conquer the whole 
world. The king who regards dharma to be the most effective means to 
accomplish his objectives, and who conducts himself according to the 
counsels of men of dharma, blazes forth with righteousness. The king who 
disregards dharma and works with brute force soon falls away from 
righteousness and loses both dharma and artha. 

His subjects should slay that king with his entire family who acts on the 
advice of a vicious and sinful minister and thus destroys dharma. The ruler 
who is not competent to discharge his duties of Rajaneeti, whom caprice 
governs in all actions and who brags, very soon meets with destruction, 
even if he happens to be the ruler of all the earth. 

On the other hand, the king who wants prosperity, who is free from 
malice, who has his senses under control and who is gifted with 


intelligence, thrives and is prosperous, like the ocean swelling with the 
waters discharged into it by a hundred rivers. He should never regard 
himself as possessing enough virtue, pleasures, wealth, intelligence and 
friends. 

Upon these depends the conduct of the world. By listening to these 
counsels, a king gains fame, achievements, prosperity and subjects. 
Devoted to dharma, the king who seeks wealth only by such means and 
who begins all his enterprises after reflecting on their objectives will obtain 
great prosperity. The king who is illiberal, without affection, who inflicts 
undue punishments on his subjects and is rash in his actions, soon meets 
with destruction. The king who is not intelligent fails to see his own faults. 
Covered with dishonour in this world, he sinks into hell hereafter. 

If the king pays due honour to those who deserve it, gives gifts and, 
recognizing the value of sweet words, always uses them, his subjects will 
take on any calamities that might overcome him, as if these had fallen upon 
themselves. 

The king who has no acharya to instruct him on the ways of dharma, 
who never asks others for advice and who seeks to acquire wealth as his 
fancy suggests, will not long enjoy happiness, while one who listens to the 
instructions of his gurus in matters of dharma, who supervises the affairs of 
his kingdom himself, and whom dharma guides in all his acquisitions, will 
possess happiness for a long time.” 


CANTO 93 


¢ V amadeva continued, “When a powerful king behaves with 

adharma towards the weak, others, including his descendents, 

emulate his conduct. The universal imitation of such a king soon brings 
destruction upon the kingdom. 

While men in general will accept as a role model in conduct a king who 
observes his proper duties, his very kinsfolk will not tolerate a king who 
strays from dharma. The rash king who disregards the injunctions of the 
shastras and rules his kingdom high-handedly very soon meets with ruin. 

The shastras say that the Kshatriya who does not follow the conduct 
observed traditionally by other Kshatriyas, victor or vanquished, fails in his 
dharma. Having captured in battle a royal foe who had done some favour to 
the conqueror in the past, if he, out of malice, does not pay him honour, he 
has failed in his Kshatriya dharma. 

The king should display his power, live happily and do what is 
necessary in times of danger. Such a ruler becomes beloved of all and 
prosperity never abandons him. If you do a disservice to anyone, you 
should, when the opportunity arises, make amends and do him some favour. 

He whom no one loves becomes an object of love if he does what is 
pleasant. Avoid empty words. You should do good to others without being 
asked, and never abandon dharma from kama or krodha. Do not reply 
harshly when someone questions you, or speak in an undignified manner. 
Never be in a hurry to do anything, or indulge in malice. This is how you 
can win over an enemy. 


You should neither be overcome with joy when anything agreeable 
occurs, nor overwhelmed with sorrow when anything unpleasant happens. 
Never be grieved when you face financial distress, and always remember 
the dharma of doing good to your subjects. The kind king who does what is 
beneficial will succeed in all his endeavours and remain prosperous. 

The king should always cherish the devoted servant who works for his 
benefit and refrains from doing anything to injure his master. He should 
appoint to all great affairs of his kingdom devoted men who have control 
over their senses, who are loyal, virtuous and competent. In addition, they 
should please the king and should never be thoughtless in looking after his 
interests. The king loses his prosperity if he appoints to important offices 
foolish men who are slaves to their senses, covetous, disreputable, deceitful, 
hypocritical, malicious, evil, ignorant, low-minded, or drunkards, gamblers, 
womanizers or addicted to shikar. 

The king who first protects himself and then others who deserve 
protection, will have the satisfaction of finding his subjects growing in 
prosperity and will attain greatness. He should watch over the conduct and 
deeds of other kings, so that he can gain superiority over them through 
devoted secret agents. Having injured a powerful king, he should not 
develop a false sense of security by the great distance between them. Such 
an affronted king could very well fall upon him like a hawk swooping down 
upon its prey. A ruler who has consolidated his power and is confident of 
his own strength should attack a neighbour who is weaker than himself, 
never one who is stronger. 

A king devoted to dharma, having acquired the sovereignty of the earth 
by his prowess, should protect his subjects righteously and destroy his 
enemies in battle. In this world, everything is destined for destruction, as 
nothing here is durable. But one who pays heed to five imperatives is the 
best of kings and will succeed in safeguarding and enlarging his kingdom. 
These five are defence of forts, administration of justice, conduct of war, 
consultations on questions of policy and keeping subjects happy. 

It is impossible however, for one man alone to oversee all these matters. 
Handing over such supervision to his ministers, a king can rule the earth 
forever. The people want a liberal man as their king who shares all objects 
of enjoyment with others, who has a mild disposition, who is virtuous and 
who will never abandon his subjects. 


People in the world obey one who accepts wise advice, abandoning his 
own opinions. The ruler who does not tolerate and attend to the advice of a 
well-wisher because it is contrary to his own views, and who does not 
follow the conduct of mighty and noble men, victor or vanquished, strays 
from the path of the Kshatriya dharma. 

The king should always be careful to protect himself, from ministers 
whom he has earlier punished, from the arts of women, and while he is 
climbing mountains or entering inaccessible regions such as forests and 
wooded valleys. He should not ride untamed elephants or horses and should 
guard himself against poisonous reptiles. 

The king who, abandoning his chief ministers, favours base men, soon 
falls into difficulties and never fulfills his plans. The weak-souled ruler who 
yields to the influence of anger and malice and does not love and honour his 
kinsmen who have noble qualities, lives on the very verge of destruction; 
while the king who attaches to himself accomplished men by showing them 
favour, even though he might not like them at heart, enjoys lasting fame. 

Never impose taxes unseasonably. You should neither grieve if anything 
disagreeable occurs, nor rejoice exceedingly if anything agreeable happens. 
Try and accomplish good deeds. Ascertain who among the dependent kings 
is truly devoted to you, who is loyal to you from fear, and who among them 
has faults. 

Even a powerful king should not trust a weak one, for in moments of 
inattentiveness the weak may assail the powerful like a flock of vultures 
seizing their prey. A sinful man seeks to injure his master even if the latter 
is sweet-tempered and possesses every virtue. Do not, therefore, place your 
confidence in such men. In declaring the mysteries of Rajaneeti, Nahusha’s 
son Yayati said that a ruler should slay enemies who are contemptible.” 


CANTO 94 


¢ V amadeva said, “The king should win victories without battles. 

The wise do not speak highly of victories that wars achieve, O 

Rajan. Till a king’s sovereignty is established, it is not proper for him to 
make any new conquests. 

The authority of a king is established when his dominions are wide and 
abound with wealth, when he has a large number of officers and his subjects 
are loyal and contented. Even with a small force, a king can subjugate the 
very earth, if his soldiers are happy with pay and plunder and are competent 
to deceive foes. The power of the king is established when his subjects, 
whether of the cities or the provinces, have compassion for all creatures, are 
wealthy and possess grain. 

When the king thinks that his power is greater than that of an enemy, he 
should intelligently set out to acquire the latter’s territories and wealth. A 
king whose resources are increasing, who is compassionate to all creatures, 
who never loses time by procrastination and who is careful in protecting 
himself, makes progress indeed. The king who betrays his own innocent 
people injures himself like a man cutting down a forest with an axe. If he 
does not always attend to the task of slaying his foes, they will not 
diminish. The king who knows how to control his own temper will have no 
enemies. If he is wise, he will never do anything that good men disapprove. 
He will, on the other hand, always engage himself in work that will benefit 
him and others. 


The king who, having accomplished all his duties, is happy in the 
approval of his own conscience, has never to incur the reproach of others 
nor feel any regrets. The monarch who observes such conduct towards men 
will subjugate both the worlds and enjoy the fruits of victory.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘King Vasumanas did as Vamadeva directed him. 
Without doubt, you, too, by following such advice will conquer both 
worlds.’” 


CANTO 95 


C6 Y udhishtira asks, ‘Tell me, Pitamaha, how should a Kshatriya who 
has conquered another Kshatriya in battle behave after the 
victory?’ 

Bhishma replies, “The sovereign, with or without an army at his back, 
should enter the dominions of the king he has subjugated and say to all the 
people, “I am your king and I will always protect you. Give me just tribute 
or encounter me in battle.” 

If the people accept him as their king, there is no need to fight, for kings 
should only fight other kings. If men who are not Kshatriyas by birth show 
signs of hostility, he should restrain them by every means, as the shastras do 
not prescribe the practice of warfare for them. People of the other varnas 
sometimes do take up arms to resist the invader if they find that their 
Kshatriyas are unarmed, unprepared and afraid to protect them.’ 

Yudhishtira says “Tell me, O Pitamaha, how a Kshatriya king should 
conduct himself in war against another Kshatriya king.’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘A Kshatriya must not put on armour to fight another 
Kshatriya who is not clad in mail. He should engage him in single combat 
and stop when the opponent is disabled. If the enemy comes clad in mail, he 
should also put on mail. If the enemy advances with an army, he should, 
taking his own army, challenge him to battle. 

If the enemy fights with deceit, he should be similarly met. If, on the 
other hand, he fights fairly, you should engage him by fair means. You 
should not ride on horseback against a war chariot, for only a Maharatha 


should battle another Maharatha. You should not attack an unhorsed enemy, 
a vanquished opponent, one who has lost his chariot or weapons, or one 
who is frightened. 

Neither poisoned nor barbed arrows should be used, as these are the 
weapons of the evil. You should fight righteously, without yielding to anger 
or wanting to kill. You should not slay a weak or wounded man; one who 
does not have an heir; one whose weapon has broken; one who is wounded; 
one whose bow-string has been cut; or one who has lost his ratha. You 
should send a wounded opponent to his own home or, if you bring him to 
your own, you should get skilful surgeons to attend to his wounds. 

When, in a battle between kings who follow dharma, a righteous 
warrior is wounded and falls, you should have his wounds attended to and, 
when healed, you should set him free. This is the eternal duty and Manu, 
the son of the Swayambhuva Brahma, has said that battles should be fought 
fairly. The upright should always be righteous towards those who follow 
dharma, adhering to it without destroying it. 

If a Kshatriya, whose duty is to fight nobly, wins a victory by adharma, 
he becomes sinful. A man of deceitful conduct in effect kills himself, for he 
practises evil. Even those who are iniquitous should be subdued only by fair 
means. 

It is better to lay down your life in the observance of dharma, than to 
win victory by sin. O Rajan, sin when committed does not produce its 
effects immediately but overwhelms the sinner after eating away his roots 
and branches. A sinful man acquiring wealth by sinful means rejoices 
greatly, but in the process becomes wedded to sin. Thinking that dharma 
has no value, he jeers at men of upright conduct. Disbelieving in dharma, he 
meets in the end with destruction. Though enmeshed in Varuna’s noose, he 
still regards himself immortal. 

Like a large leather bag puffed up with wind, the sinner dissociates 
himself entirely from dharma. Soon, however, he disappears like a tree on 
the riverside washed away from its very roots. Then people compare him to 
an earthen pot broken on a stony surface and say that he deserved it. The 
king should, therefore, seek both victory and enrichment by just means.’” 


CANTO 96 


“BR hishma says, ‘A king should never try to subjugate the earth 
through adharma, even if it makes him the supreme sovereign. 
Which king will rejoice after having won victory by unfair means? A 
victory achieved through adharma is uncertain and never leads to Swarga 
because, O Bharatarishabha, it weakens both the king and the country. 

A warrior whose armour has fallen off, or who begs for quarter saying, 
“T am yours,” or by joining his hands has surrendered, should simply be 
captured, never killed. If the troops of the invader vanquish a hostile king, 
the invader should not himself fight his vanquished enemy. On the other 
hand, he should bring him to his palace and for a whole year, try and 
persuade him to admit, “I am your slave!” Whether he says this or not, the 
vanquished enemy, by living for a year in the house of his victor, gains a 
new lease of life. 

If a king brings by force a maiden from his vanquished foe’s house, he 
should keep her for a year and ask her whether she will marry him or 
anyone else in his kingdom. If she does not agree, she should then be sent 
back. You should behave similarly in respect of all other kinds of wealth, 
such as slaves, that you acquire by force. 

The king should never appropriate wealth confiscated from thieves or 
men awaiting execution. Cattle forcibly taken from the enemy should be 
given to Brahmanas so that they can drink their milk. Bulls taken from the 
enemy should be sent for agricultural work or returned to the enemy. 


The shastras lay down that a king should fight only another king, and 
that one who is not a king should never strike a king. If a Brahmana 
desirous of peace fearlessly goes between two contending armies, both 
should immediately stop the battle. If any Kshatriya commits Brahmahatya 
or wounds a Brahmana, he breaks an eternal law and earns the contempt of 
his varna. 

The Kshatriya who destroys dharma and transgresses all reasonable 
restrictions does not deserve to be considered a Kshatriya, and should be 
banished. A king who wants victory should never follow such conduct. 

What gain can be greater than victory won fairly? It is good policy for 
the triumphant king to conciliate the frightened people of a kingdom 
recently conquered, be it with soothing words or with gifts. If he rules these 
conquered people roughly, they will leave the kingdom to side with his 
enemies and wait for a chance to strike back. Then in times of danger other 
discontented men, watching for such an opportunity, O Rajan, will promptly 
side with the king’s foes. 

An adversary should not be deceived through unfair means and in no 
case should he be wounded mortally in a fight. If a lesser king is happy, he 
too, will also regard life as great. That king, it is said, has his roots firm 
whose dominions are extensive and wealthy, whose subjects are loyal and 
whose servants and officers are all contented. 

That king, it is said, knows the ways of the world, whose Ritwijas, 
priests, acharyas and others about him are well-versed in all shastras and in 
whose kingdom the deserving are honoured and duly respected. Indra thus 
won the sovereignty of the worlds, and earthly kings will gain the status of 
Indra if they conduct themselves in this way. 

Similarly, King Pratardana, subjugating his foes in a great battle, took 
all their wealth, including their very grain and medicinal herbs, but left their 
land untouched. King Divodasa, however, after subjugating his enemies, 
brought away the very remnants of their sacrificial fires, their clarified 
butter intended for libations and their food. For taking what he should not 
have seized, he lost all the merit of his conquests. 

King Nabhaga, after his conquests, gave away entire kingdoms, except 
the wealth of learned Brahmanas and Munis, along with their rulers, as 
sacrificial gifts to the Brahmanas. The conduct of all ancient kings was 
irreproachable, O Yudhishtira, and I completely approve of it. The king who 


desires his own prosperity should seek to conquer through every kind of 
excellence but never by deceit or with pride.’” 


CANTO 97 


C6 ye udhishtira asks, ‘There is no dharma more sinful than that of the 
Kshatriyas, for the king kills multitudes in wars. Tell me, O 
Bharatarishabha, by what deeds, then, can the king win realms of felicity?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Kings become purified by punishing the evil, by 
attracting and cherishing the good, through yagnas and charity. It is true that 
kings who desire victory cause suffering to many creatures, but after that 
they change and improve the conditions of all. 

By the power of dana, yagnas and tapasya, they destroy their sins and 
their punya swells so as to enable them to do good to all. The farmer who 
weeds his paddy field takes up the blades of the paddy, as well as the weeds. 
His action, however, does not destroy the blades or paddy, but makes them 
grow more vigorously. 

Those who wield weapons destroy many who deserve destruction, but 
that does not retard the growth and advancement of those who remain. One 
who protects the people from plunder, slaughter and affliction by brigands 
is regarded as the giver of wealth, life and food, and similar to one who 
performs a yagna yielding punya. 

By thus worshipping the Devas, by unifying all yagnas whose dakshina 
is the dispelling of fear, the king enjoys every kind of happiness here and 
lives in Swarga hereafter. 

One regards the king who lays down his life in battle for the sake of 
Brahmanas as the embodiment of a yagna with limitless gifts. If a king with 
his quivers full of arrows shoots them fearlessly at his enemies, the very 


gods will not find anyone on earth superior to him. He will enjoy eternal 
realms of felicity, in which his wishes will be granted, equal in number to 
the shafts with which he pierced the bodies of his enemies. 

The blood that flows from his body cleanses him of all his sins, along 
with the pain that he feels. Authorities on the shastras say that the pain a 
Kshatriya suffers in battle operates as penance to enhance his punya. Timid 
men of dharma stay in the rear and beg the Kshatriyas who have rushed into 
battle for their lives, as men solicit rain from clouds. Great becomes their 
merit if they protect these fearful men and go forward themselves to face 
the danger. 

These timorous men can free themselves from fear only if they do what 
is proper and just, which is to appreciate such valorous deeds and always 
respect their defenders. There is a great difference between men apparently 
equal. Some rush into battle, amid its terrible din, against armed ranks of 
enemies. Indeed, the Kshatriya who charges hosts of enemies takes the road 
to Swarga. 

He who feels dread seeks safety in flight and deserts his comrades in 
danger. Let not such wretches be born as Kshatriyas. The very Devas, with 
Indra at their head, send calamities to those who desert their comrades in 
battle and return without a wound. One should beat with sticks or pelt with 
stones, or roll in a mat of dry grass and burn to death, one who deserts his 
comrades to save his own life. One should kill like animals any among 
Kshatriyas who are guilty of such conduct. 

It is sinful for a Kshatriya to die in bed, spitting phlegm and passing 
urine, uttering piteous cries. Men who know the shastras do not applaud the 
death of an uninjured Kshatriya. The death of a Kshatriya at home is not 
praiseworthy. They are heroes, and any action that is not heroic is sinful and 
inglorious. In disease, he may be heard to lament, “What misery! What 
agony! I must be a great sinner.” With a face emaciated and a stench issuing 
from his body and clothes, the sick man plunges his relatives into grief. 
Coveting the condition of those who are healthy, such a man amidst his 
tortures repeatedly wishes for death. He who is a hero, dignified and proud, 
does not deserve such a dishonorable end. 

A Kshatriya should die by the sword, surrounded by kinsmen and 
slaughtering his enemies in battle. Frenzied with battle lust, he fights 
furiously and does not feel the wounds his enemies inflict on him. If he 


encounters death in battle, he earns that high punya filled with the fame and 
respect of the world due to him, and ultimately gains a place in Swarga. 

The Kshatriya who does not show his back but fights with all his might 
at the forefront of the battle, utterly reckless of his very life, obtains the 
companionship of Indra. All Kshatriyas who die in the midst of their 
enemies without displaying shameful fear or despair earn admittance to the 
realms of eternal bliss.’” 


CANTO 98 


6 eve udhishtira asks, ‘Tell me, O Pitamaha, to what realms do 
Kshatriyas go who encounter death in battle?’ 

Bhishma, replies, “There is an old story, O /Yudhishtira, of a 
conversation which took place long ago, between Ambarisha and Indra. 
Ambarisha, the son of Nabhaga, went to Swarga and in those heavenly 
regions, so difficult to reach, he saw his own powerful general Sudeva in 
the company of Indra, in a celestial form blazing with every kind of energy 
and travelling in a very beautiful vimana. Seeing the prosperity of his 
Senapati and observing how he was journeying further up towards still 
loftier regions, the noble Ambarisha, filled with surprise, questioned Indra. 

Ambarisha said, “Having ruled the whole earth bounded by the seas and 
wanting to earn punya, I practised all the dharma that the shastras declare 
are common to the four varnas. I practised with strict austerity the dharma 
of Brahmacharya. I waited with dutiful obedience upon my acharyas and 
other reverend elders and studied with due observances the Vedas and the 
shastras on Rajadharma. I gratified the Devas with many mahayagnas, 
Atithis with food and drink, the Pitris with offerings in Sraddhas and the 
Rishis with attentive study of the scriptures, after proper initiation into 
religious mysteries. 

I duly observed the Kshatriya dharma according to the injunctions of 
the scriptures. I fearlessly faced hostile armies and won many victories in 
battle. This Sudeva, O Indra, was once the general leading my forces. It is 
true that he was a warrior of tranquil soul, but how has he exceeded me? He 


never worshipped the Devas in mahayagnas or gratified the Brahmanas with 
frequent and costly gifts according to the laws. Why then has he succeeded 
in surpassing me?” 

Indra replied, “Sudeva has often performed the great yagna of battle, 
like anyone who engages in battle. Every warrior wearing armour who 
advances against his foes in battle array becomes installed in the yagna. 
Indeed, such a man is indisputably regarded as the yajamana of the yagna of 
battle.” 

Ambarisha said, “What constitutes the libations in this yagna? What 
constitutes its liquid offerings? What is its dakshina? Who, again, are its 
Ritwias? Tell me all this, O performer of a hundred yagnas.” 

Indra said, “Elephants constitute the Ritwijas of this sacrifice and horses 
are its Audharyus. The flesh of enemies constitutes its libations and blood is 
its liquid offering. Jackals, vultures, ravens and also arrows, constitute its 
Sadasyas as they drink the remnants left of the liquid offering in this yagna 
and eat the remnants of its offerings. Heaps of lances, spears, swords, darts 
and axes, blazing, sharp and well-tempered, constitute the ladles of the 
sacrificer. Straight and well-tempered arrows with keen points that can 
pierce the bodies of enemies, loosed from well-stretched bows, constitute 
its large double-mouthed ladles. 

Swords kept in sheaths of tiger skin, with handles made of ivory and 
capable of cutting off the elephant’s trunk, form the Sphises of this sacrifice. 
Strokes inflicted with blazing and keen lances, arrows, swords and axes, all 
made of hard iron, constitute its great wealth collected from illustrious 
people by agreement regarding the amount and period. 

The blood that runs over the battlefield from the fury of an attack 
constitutes the final libation, full of great punya and capable of granting 
every wish, in the homa of this yagna. Cries that one hears in the front ranks 
such as ‘Cut!’ and ‘Pierce!’ constitute the Samans that its Vedic chanters 
sing in the abode of Yama. The front ranks of the enemy’s battle array form 
the vessel to store its libations. 

The herd of elephants, horses and men equipped with shields one 
regards as the Syenachita fire of the sacrifice. The headless trunks that rise 
up after thousands have been slaughtered constitute the octagonal stake, 
made of Khadira wood, for the Kshatriya who performs the sacrifice. The 
screams of elephants goaded with hooks constitute its Ida mantras. The 


drums struck by palms forming the Vashats, O Rajan, are its Trisaman 
Udgatri. 

When someone takes away the property of a Brahmana, the man who 
sacrifices his own body, so dear to him, in order to protect that property, 
thereby acquires the guna of a sacrifice with infinite gifts. The Kshatriya 
who, for the sake of his master, displays prowess at the van of the army and 
does not show his back through fear, earns those regions of felicity that are 
mine. 

He who strews the altar of the battle yagna with swords cased in blue 
scabbards and severed arms resembling heavy bludgeons, will win regions 
of happiness like mine. The warrior who, intent upon victory, penetrates 
into the midst of the enemy’s ranks without waiting for any help, succeeds 
in winning regions of bliss like mine. 

The warrior who in battle creates a river of blood, terrible and difficult 
to cross, with kettle-drums for its frogs and tortoises, bones of heroes for its 
sands, blood and flesh for its marsh, swords and shields for its rafts, the hair 
of slain warriors for its floating weeds and moss, herds of horses, elephants 
and chariots for its bridges, standards and banners for its rushes, the bodies 
of slain elephants for its boats and huge alligators, swords and scimitars for 
its larger vessels, vultures, kankas and ravens for the rafts that float upon it, 
obtains regions of felicity like mine. 

The warrior who creates such a river, difficult of passage even for those 
who possess courage and power, filling all timid men with dread, is said to 
complete the sacrifice by performing its final ablutions. The Kshatriya 
whose altar in such a yagna is strewn with the severed heads of enemies, 
horses and of elephants, obtains regions of happiness like mine. 

The Rishis say that the warrior who regards the vanguard of the hostile 
army as his antapura, the front of his own army as the vessel for the 
sacrificial offering, the warriors standing to his south as his Sadasyas and 
those to his north as his Agnidhras, and who looks upon the hostile forces 
as his wedded wife, will attain all realms of happiness. 

The open space between the two hosts drawn up for the battle 
constitutes the altar of such a sacrificer and the three Vedas are his three 
sacrificial fires. Upon this altar, aided by the chanting of the Vedas, he 
performs his yagna. 

There is no doubt that the cowardly warrior who runs away from the 
fight in fear and is slain by the enemy sinks into hell, while the combatant 


whose blood drenches the sacrificial altar already strewn with hair, flesh and 
bones is sure to attain Swarga. 

The powerful warrior who, having slain the commander of the hostile 
army, mounts the ratha of his fallen antagonist, is regarded as possessing 
the power of Vishnu himself and the intelligence of Brihaspati, the guru of 
the Devas. He who can capture alive the commander of the hostile army, or 
his son, or some other honoured leader, will win regions of happiness like 
mine. 

One should never grieve for a hero slain in battle. A slain hero, if 
nobody grieves for him, goes to Swarga and earns the respect of its 
habitants. Neither do men desire to dedicate food and drink for the hero’s 
salvation, nor do they bathe after receiving the news of his death, nor go 
into mourning for him. 

Listen to me as I enumerate the joys that are in store for such a man. 
The best of Apsaras, numbering thousands, rush out to receive the spirit of 
the slain hero, coveting him for their lord. The Kshatriya who does his duty 
in battle acquires the punya of tapasya and of dharma, since his conduct 
conforms to the sanatana dharma. Such a man gains the punya of all the 
four varnasramas. 

You should not kill the aged, children or women; those who flee, one 
who holds a straw in his lips to indicate unconditional surrender, or one 
who says, ‘I am yours.’ After killing in battle Jambha, Vritra, Vala, Paka, 
Satamaya, Virochana, the irresistible Namuchi, Sambara of innumerable 
illusions, Viprachitti—all these sons of Diti and Danu and also Prahlada, I 
myself have become the Lord of the Devas.” 

King Ambarisha came to understand by these words of Indra how, by 
means of fighting battles, Kshatriyas can win the blissful regions of 
Swarga.’” 


CANTO 99 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘Let me tell you the old story of the battle between 

King Pratardana and Janaka, the Dharmarajan of Mithila. Janaka, 

who knew the truth of everything, showed both Swarga and Naraka to his 
own watriors and gladdened them on the eve of the battle. 

He told them, “Look, these are the regions of great splendour for those 
who fight fearlessly. Full of Gandharva girls, these realms are eternal and 
grant every wish. There, on the other side, are the regions of hell, intended 
for those who flee from battle. They will have to rot there for eternity in 
everlasting disgrace. Resolve, then, to cast away your very lives and 
conquer your enemies. Do not fall into inglorious hell. The laying down of 
life in battle is the happy door to heaven for Kshatriyas.” 

Thus addressed by their king, O subjugator of hostile towns, the 
warriors of Mithila vanquished their enemies in battle and gladdened him. 
Those who are resolute should take their stand in the forefront of battle. The 
maharathas should be placed in the midst of elephants, with the horsemen 
behind them. At their back should be the foot-soldiers, all clad in mail. The 
king who forms his battle vyuha in this manner will vanquish his enemy. O 
Yudhishtira, you should always adopt this vyuha formation. 

Filled with rage, heroes want to earn punya in Swarga by fighting fairly. 
Like makaras agitating the ocean, they charge the ranks of the enemy, 
exhorting one another, so that they hearten even those among them who are 
slackening. 


The victor should protect the newly conquered land from aggression. 
Rajan, you should not allow your troops to hound the vanquished foe too 
far, since the enemy who rallies after being routed is desperate for safety, 
and will assail pursuers ferociously. Another reason why you should not 
pursue the defeated enemy is that brave warriors do not strike at those who 
run away. 

Creatures who are mobile devour things that are immobile; those that 
have teeth devour those that are toothless; the thirsty drink water; heroes 
devour cowards. Cowards ensure defeat though they have the same limbs, 
backs and stomachs as the victors. Those who are afraid join their hands 
and bend their heads before the courageous. 

This world rests on the arms of Kshatriyas, like a son on those of his 
father. Hence, he who is a Kshatriya deserves respect under every 
circumstance. There is nothing higher in the three worlds than heroism. The 
heroic Kshatriya protects and cherishes all, and all things depend upon 
him.’” 


CANTO 100 


6 mye udhishtira asks, “Tell me, O Pitamaha, how kings who want 
victory, should lead their troops in battle, Bharatarishabha, even 
if they have to offend dharma slightly!” 

Bhishma replies, “Some say that one makes dharma secure by truth; 
some by upapatti or reasoning; some by good conduct, and some by the 
application of authority. I will now tell you what the method and strategy of 
authority are which produce immediate results. 

Robbers who break all laws very often become destroyers of property 
and punya. Listen to me and I will tell you about the successful methods the 
shastras prescribe for resisting and restraining them. The king should be 
acquainted with both kinds of wisdom—straight and crooked—but never 
apply dishonest means to injure others, only to defend himself against the 
dangers that may overtake him. Enemies frequently undermine a king by 
sowing seeds of disunity among his ministers, troops, allies or subjects. The 
king, aware of such deception, may use deception to counter these foes. 

You should manufacture and store in abundance armour made of leather 
for protecting the bodies of elephants and bulls, bones, thorns and keen- 
pointed weapons made of iron, coats of mail, yak-tails, sharp and well- 
tempered weapons, all kinds of yellow and red armour, banners and 
standards of diverse hues, sharp swords, lances, scimitars, battle-axes, as 
well as spears and shields. The weapons should all be properly whetted and 
the warriors filled with courage and resolution. 


It is proper to start your campaign and move your troops in the month of 
Chaitra or Agrahayana, when crops ripen and water is not scarce. This time 
of year, O Bhaarata, is neither very cold nor very hot. If, however, the 
enemy is in trouble, troops should immediately be set in motion without 
waiting for a favourable season. These two are the best times to start a 
campaign to subjugate your enemies. 

While moving your troops, you should take that road which has an 
abundance of water and grass, which is level and easy to march on. You 
should ascertain the route in advance, through skilful spies who have 
intimate knowledge of the adjoining terrain and forests. Kings who want 
victory should march their armies along good roads and not through forests 
like animals. In the van should be an akshauhini, a division of brave and 
strong men of noble birth. 

Regarding forts, only those which have walls, a moat and a single 
entrance are favourable, because resistance can be offered from within them 
against invading armies. 

Experienced warriors consider an area lying near a wood much better 
for pitching a camp than one under the open sky, so that the foot-soldiers 
are in a position which they can defend. Danger and distress can be warded 
off if they engage with the enemy as soon as it comes. 

If the warriors fight keeping the Saptarishis behind them and take up 
their stand, immoveable as the hills, they will vanquish even irresistible 
foes. You should have the army in such a position that the wind will blow, 
and the sun and the planet Saturn shine, from behind them. As a force for 
ensuing victory, O Yudhishtira, the wind is superior to the sun, and the sun 
is superior to Sukra. 

Warriors prefer for the operations of cavalry a region that is not miry, 
soggy, uneven or full of bricks and stone, while a field free from mire and 
holes is suitable for rathas. A region overgrown with bushes and large trees 
and one under water is appropriate for elephant-warriors, while an area that 
has many inaccessible spots, that is overgrown with large trees and groves 
of cane or is a mountainous or woody tract is well-suited for the operations 
of infantry. 

One regards an army with a large infantry force as very strong, O 
Bhaarata, and one in which chariots and horsemen predominate as very 
effective on a clear and sunny day. An army in which foot-soldiers and 
elephants predominate is effective in the rainy season. 


Having attended to these points about the character of various forces 
and the manner of marching, quartering and leading them, the king should 
turn his attention to the characteristics of place and time. He should set out 
on his expedition on an auspicious day, determined by the phases of the 
moon and the positions of stars and planets. This will ensure that if he leads 
his troops adroitly, he will gain victory. 

No one should kill one who is asleep, thirsty, fatigued, disarmed or one 
who has his heart set on nirvana, one fleeing, one walking unsuspecting 
along a road, one drinking or eating, one deranged, one mortally wounded 
or severely weakened by his wounds, one who is unaware of the fight, one 
who is conducting a yagna, one who is an expert in some special art like 
mining, one who is in mourning, one who is out of the camp foraging, men 
who set up camps or are camp-followers, dwarapalakas of the king or his 
ministers, or those who do menial services for the chieftains of the army, or 
the overseers of such servants. 

You should honour and double the pay of those warriors who break the 
ranks of enemies, or rally your retreating troops with food, drink and seats 
equal to your own. You should promote those among them who are chiefs 
of ten warriors to chiefs of a hundred, and the Kshatriya who is the chief of 
a hundred warriors, to chief of a thousand. 

Gathering together your principal warriors, you should address them 
saying: “Let us swear to conquer, and never to desert one another. Let those 
who are afraid remain here, who will cause their chiefs to be slain by being 
cowardly in the cauldron of battle. Let such men come who will never 
break in battle or cause their own comrades to be slain, for they can protect 
themselves as well as their comrades and will certainly kill the enemy in a 
fight. The consequences of fleeing from battle are reproach and infamy, loss 
of wealth and death. He who flees from battle, who is shameless, who casts 
away his weapons or is captured by the enemy, will have to hear sharp 
words. Let such evil always befall the warriors of our enemies.” 

Those who flee from battle are the most despicable of men. They are a 
shame on earth and devoid of true manhood, here or hereafter. Bards sing 
the praises of victorious warriors who readily pursue their fleeing enemies 
with taunts. In battle, when an enemy tarnishes the fame of a man, the 
misery he feels is more painful than death itself. 

Understand that victory is the root of punya and of every kind of 
happiness. Kshatriyas bear cheerfully that which cowards regard as the 


highest pain. One should be resolved to fight on, regardless of life itself, 
determined to conquer or die and attain a blessed end in heaven.” 

Having sworn such an oath and prepared themselves to throw away life 
itself, Kshatriyas should valiantly charge the enemy’s ranks. In the van you 
should place an akshauhini of men armed with swords and shields, and in 
the rear the ratha akshauhini. In between you should position other kinds of 
warriors. This should be the array for attack. 

Battle-hardened veterans should fight in the van so that they can protect 
their comrades behind them. Those who are afraid should be solicitously 
cheered and encouraged. You should position the strongest and most 
courageous men in the van. You should keep the weaker men on the field 
without withdrawing them, at least to make the army appear larger to the 
enemy. 

If your troops are few, you should draw them close together for the fight 
or, if their leader wants, the close vyuha can be extended. When a small 
number of troops fight with a greater army, you should form the 
Suchimukha vyuha, in which you draw up the warriors into a wedge-like 
formation. 

When you engage a small force with a large one, the leader of the 
former should shake his men’s hands and utter loud cries saying, “The 
enemy has broken! The enemy has broken!” Those who are strong should 
stand firm against the enemy and shout loudly to their comrades, “Fresh 
comrades have arrived! Fearlessly strike our foes!” 

Those who are in advance of the rest should utter loud shouts and make 
all kinds of noises and blow and beat krakachas, cow-horns, drums, 
cymbals and kettle-drums.’” 


CANTO 101 


66 Y udhishtira says, “Of what temperament, behaviour and physique 
should warriors be, and how clad and armed so that they are fit 
for battle?’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘Brave soldiers, when they engage in battle, use those 
weapons and chariots with which they are familiar. 

The Gandharvas, the Sindhus and the Sauviras are brave and very 
strong and fight best with their swords and lances. Their armies are capable 
of vanquishing all forces. The Usinaras possess great strength and are 
skilled in all kinds of weapons. The Easterners are accomplished in fighting 
from elephant-back and also know how to fight unfairly. The Yavanas, the 
Kambojas and those who dwell around Mathura are skilled in fighting with 
bare hands, and the Southerners with swords. 

It is well known that strong and courageous men are born in almost 
every country. Listen, and I will describe their distinguishing features. 
Those who have voices, eyes and bearings like those of the lion or the tiger, 
and those who have eyes like those of the pigeon or the snake, are all 
Kshatriya parantapas, while those who sound like the deer and have eyes 
like those of the leopard or the bull, are highly energetic. Those who have 
voices that resemble the sound of bells are excitable, malevolent and 
wrathful, while those who have voices deep as that of the clouds, visages 
angry or like those of camels’ hooked noses and tongues, possess great 
speed and can shoot or hurl their weapons great distances. 


Those who have bodies curved like a cat, thin hair and skin, possess 
great speed and are eager, near-invincible in battle, while some of those 
who have eyes closed like those of the iguana, a mild disposition and the 
speed and voice of a horse, can face all foes. 

Those who are handsome, well-built with symmetrical frames, broad 
chests, who become angry upon hearing the enemy’s drum or trumpet, who 
delight in affrays of every kind, who have grave eyes, eyes that bulge, or 
green eyes, or eyes like those of the mongoose, who have faces darkened 
with frowns, are all brave and will gladly give their lives in battle. 

Those who have crooked eyes, broad foreheads and cheekbones not 
covered with flesh, arms strong as thunder-bolts and fingers bearing circular 
marks with arteries and nerves that are visible, will rush in with great speed 
when the clash of battle takes place. They then resemble infuriated 
elephants and become irresistible. 

Those who have greenish hair ending in curls, flanks, cheeks and faces 
plump and fleshy, elevated shoulders, thick necks, fat calves, who have 
fearful visages and are fiery like Vasudeva’s horse Sugriva, or like the 
offspring of Vinata’s son Garuda, or have round heads, large mouths, faces 
like those of cats, shrill voices and quick tempers, who rush wildly into 
battle guided by its din, who are evil and full of haughtiness, who have 
fearsome faces and who live in the outlands, are all reckless of their lives 
and never retreat from battle. 

You should keep such troops in the vanguard. They always slay their 
foes or die without turning back. Of wild conduct and outlandish manners, 
they regard soft speech as a sign of weakness. If treated mildly, they show 
contempt towards their king.’” 


CANTO 102 


¢ ve udhishtira says ‘I would like to know the well-known signs, O 
Bharatarishabha, that portend the success of an army.’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘I will tell you all the well-known indications that 
predict the success of an army. A learned astrologer and a wise priest see 
the future with the eye of celestial knowledge and can perform various 
auspicious karmas and expiatory rites, including homa and the silent 
recitation of mantras, to ward off calamities that unpropitious fate and the 
wrath of the Devas may have in store. 

The army where the troops and animals are all happy and cheerful, 
Yudhishtira, is sure to win a decisive victory. The wind blows favourably 
behind such troops, rainbows appear in the sky, the clouds cast their 
shadows upon them and at times the sun shines upon them. Jackals, ravens 
and vultures become auspicious to them. When these show such regard to 
the army, great victories are sure to be won. 

Their yagna fires blaze up with a pure splendour, the light going 
upwards and the smokeless flames slightly bending towards the south. The 
libations poured on it emit an agreeable fragrance; the conches and drums, 
blown and beaten, send forth sonorous peals, and the warriors are inspired 
with eagerness. These are indications of success. 

If we see deer and other quadrupeds behind or to the left of those who 
have already set out for battle, or of those who are about to set out, we 
regard them as auspicious. If they appear to the right of the warriors when 
they are about to engage in battle, we regard it as an indication of success. 


If, however, they make their appearance in front, it indicates disaster and 
defeat. If certain birds, swans, cranes, satapatras and chashas_ utter 
auspicious cries and all able-bodied warriors become lively, these are 
omens of success. 

The vyuha, which blazes with splendour and becomes terrible to look at 
because of the reflection from its weapons, war-machines, armour, 
standards and the radiant faces of the warriors who stand within the 
formation, will always succeed in vanquishing its enemies. If they are of 
pure conduct, modest deportment and attend to one another with loving 
kindness, it as an indication of success to come. 

If because of the agreeable commands and connections the warriors 
become grateful and patient, we can know this as the root of success. A 
crow on the left of a warrior engaged in battle and on the right of him who 
is about to engage in it, we regard as favourable; again, if it appears at his 
back, it indicates failure, while its appearance in front forebodes danger. 

Even after enlisting a large army consisting of the four kinds of forces, 
you should strive to make peace, O Yudhishtira. Only if your efforts for 
peace fail should you engage in battle. The victory won by battle is inferior 
because it is dependent on luck or destiny. 

When a large army breaks and the troops begin to flee, it is exceedingly 
difficult to check its flight. The spontaneity of the flight resembles that of a 
powerful current of water or of a frightened herd of deer. If a single division 
takes flight the rest will follow, because fear is contagious. Some armies 
have broken without adequate cause, while others break even when they are 
brave and skilled in battle. 

A great army consisting of even brave soldiers is like a large herd of 
Ruru deer. Sometimes even fifty men, resolute and relying upon one 
another, confident and prepared to lay down their lives, succeed in routing 
enemies numerically far superior. Sometimes even five, six or seven great 
Maharathas, unyielding and standing close together, can vanquish large 
armies. 

Armed conflict is never desirable if it can be avoided. You should first 
try the policy of conciliation, or causing internal dissension and giving gifts 
as bribes; battle should be the last resort. At the very sight of a hostile force, 
fear paralyses the timid, like the sight of a blazing bolt from heaven. They 
ask, “Oh, upon what will it fall?” 


Once a battle is raging, sweat drenches the limbs of those who go to 
join it, and of those who are winning. The entire country where a war rages, 
with all its resident and floating population, O Rajan, is agitated and 
affected. The very marrow of living men scorched by the heat of action 
suffers intense pain. 

So a king should on all occasions adopt conciliatory methods, mixing 
them with severity. Men always show a disposition to make peace when an 
enemy oppresses them. Send secret agents to create dissension among the 
allies of the enemy. Discord having been kindled, the enemy will want 
peace with the king who is more powerful than himself, whom he once 
sought to crush. 

If the invader does not proceed in this manner, he can never completely 
conquer his foe. In dealing with the enemy, take care to hem him in from all 
sides. Forgiveness always comes to those who are good and never to those 
who are evil. Listen now, O Partha, to the uses of forgiveness and sternness. 
The fame of a king who displays clemency after a conquest spreads widely. 
The very enemies of a man who is of a forgiving disposition trust him, even 
when he commits a grave transgression. 

Sambara has said that an enemy should be subjugated first and 
compassion shown afterwards, for a wooden pole, if made straight without 
the application of heat in the first instance, very soon assumes its former 
crookedness. However, men skilled in the shastras do not advocate this or 
regard it as an indication of good kingship. Rather, they say, an enemy 
should be subdued and disciplined as a father does a son, without anger and 
without destroying him. 

If a king is cruel, O Yudhishtira, he becomes a universal object of 
hatred. If, on the other hand, he becomes mild, everybody disregards him. 
Do, therefore, practise both severity and mildness. Before striking, O 
Bhaarata, and while striking, utter sweet words; and having struck, show 
your enemies compassion and let them understand that you grieve for them. 

After he has vanquished an army, the king should address the survivors 
and say, “I am not glad that my troops have slain so many of you. Alas, they 
did not listen to me, though I repeatedly dissuaded them. I wish that all your 
dead were all alive. They did not deserve such deaths. They were all good 
men and true, who did not retreat from battle. Such men are rare. I surely do 
not approve of those who have slain such kshatriyas in battle.” 


Having spoken thus to the survivors of the vanquished enemy, the king 
should, in secret, honour those among his own troops who bravely slew the 
foe. To soothe the wounded slayers from their sufferings at the hand of the 
enemy, and to win them over, the king should even weep, seizing their 
hands affectionately. Thus, in all circumstances, the king should behave 
with conciliation. 

A Dharmarajan who is fearless becomes trusted and beloved of all. 
Winning the people’s faith, he succeeds in ruling over the earth as he 
pleases. If he wants to rule the earth, the king should abandon deceit, 
attempt to gain the trust of all and try to protect his subjects from fear.’” 


CANTO 103 


6 ae udhishtira says, ‘Tell me, O Pitamaha, how should one behave 
towards an enemy who is mild, one who is fierce and towards 
one who has many allies and a large force?’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘There is an old tale, Yudhishtira, of a conversation 
between Brihaspati and Indra which took place long ago. Once upon a time, 
Indra, the lord of the Devas, approached Brihaspati and, saluting him with 
folded palms, said, “How, O Maharishi, should I behave towards my 
enemies? How can I subdue them other than by killing them? In a war 
between two armies, either side can win. What should I do so that I do not 
lose this blazing wealth that I have won from my enemies, that scorches 
them?” 

The wisest Brihaspati, skilled in dharma, artha, kama and rajadharma, 
replied, “One should never seek to subdue one’s foes by force. Only boys, 
cruel and volatile by nature, pick an open fight. One who wants to destroy 
an enemy should not put him on his guard and should never exhibit anger, 
fear or joy, but should conceal these within oneself. Without actually 
trusting one’s enemy, one should behave towards him as if one trusts him 
completely. 

One should always speak sweetly to one’s enemy and never do anything 
displeasing to him. One should abstain from pointless hostility and from 
insolent speech. Just as a fowler, carefully imitating the cries of the birds he 
wants to catch or kill, lures and captures them, a king should first lull his 
enemies and then strike them down, if he so chooses. 


Having overcome one’s enemies, one should not sleep at ease. A foe 
who is evil raises his head again, like a carelessly put out fire flaring up 
later. When either side can win, you should avoid a battle. Lull an enemy 
into a false sense of security and then overpower him and gain your 
objective. 

Consult your ministers and intelligent men who understand statecraft. If 
you disregard and forget an enemy who has actually not been subdued at 
heart, he will lie in wait and strike at you at an opportune moment, 
especially when you take a false step. Such an enemy can employ his own 
trusted agents and by sowing dissension, neutralize your forces. 

Feelings of hostility towards his enemies should be nourished in secret 
by a king, and at the same time he should collect definite information about 
his enemy and learn everything he can about him. He should undermine his 
adversary’s forces by bribery, poisoning and fomenting discord. 

A king should never be too friendly with his foes, but wait patiently for 
the right opportunity, so that he can strike at a time when he is least 
expected to, and then make his kill. He should never slay too large a 
number of the enemy’s troops, although he must certainly ensure a decisive 
victory. He should neither do an injury to his enemy that would rankle in 
the latter’s heart, nor cause needless hurt by insults or rudeness. 

If the opportunity to strike comes, he should not let it slip. This is what 
a king who wants to annihilate his enemies should do, O Indra, because if 
such a chance is missed, it will never come again. 

A king should consult his advisors and only break the strength of his 
enemy. However, he should neither try to accomplish this when the 
opportunity is unfavourable, nor persecute his enemy even when the 
opportunity is at hand. The king should work carefully, giving up kama, 
krodha and ahamkara and all the while continually watch for any lapses by 
his enemy. 

Extreme mildness, harshness of punishments, idleness, and 
recklessness: these four faults, and the deceit of his enemy, will ruin a 
foolish ruler, O king of the Devas. The king who can eradicate these and 
counteract the cunning of his enemies will certainly succeed in vanquishing 
all. 

When one minister can accomplish the king’s secret project without any 
help, the king should consult him and no other. If many ministers are 
consulted, they will endeavour to pass the responsibility to one another and 


even give publicity to a project which should have been kept secret. Only if 
there is a need to consult another should the king do so. 

When the enemy is invisible, you should invoke the Brahmadanda 
divine punishment, upon them; when visible, the army consisting of four 
kinds of forces should be deployed on the field. The king should first try 
and create dissension, as well as use conciliation, depending upon the need 
of the moment. 

At times the king should even abase himself before a powerful enemy. 
He should work carefully and seek to ensure the victor’s destruction when 
the latter becomes careless. One should humble oneself before a more 
powerful king by prostrating oneself, with gifts of tribute and by uttering 
sweet words when the occasion demands, never doing anything to arouse 
the suspicions of a powerful enemy. The weaker ruler, under such 
circumstances, should carefully avoid every action that can awaken doubts. 

A victorious king, again, should not trust his defeated enemy, for they 
who are vanquished always remain alert. Men of a restless nature find it 
hard to acquire wealth, Devaraja, so their very existence is dangerous. 
Kings should carefully ascertain who their friends are and who their 
enemies. 

If a king is mild, people disregard him, but if he is fierce, he instills fear 
in them. Therefore, instead of being either fierce or mild, be both. As a 
rapid current ceaselessly eats away a high river-bank and causes large land- 
slips, carelessness and mistakes ruin a kingdom. Never attack many 
enemies at the same time. By adopting a policy of conciliation, giving gifts 
or creating dissension, O Purandara, you should subdue them one by one. 

As for the rest, when they are few in number the victor should behave 
peacefully towards them. An intelligent king, even if he is able to do so, 
should not try to crush all his enemies at once. He should openly strike 
without hesitation only when he thinks he is superior to his enemy in many 
respects, when he has a large army packed with the six-fold forces, 
consisting of foot-soldiers, horses, elephants, rathas, war engines, treasure 
and traders following the camp, all loyal to him. 

If the enemy is strong, adopting a strategy of conciliation towards him 
would be a mistake. On the other hand, you should plan to harass such 
enemies by secret means and not try to be mild in your conduct to him. 
Repeated expeditions would also be a blunder, for you would be risking the 


loss of your crops, the poisoning of your wells and tanks, and suspicion in 
respect of the seven branches of administration. 

On such occasions, you should apply diverse kinds of deception, 
various methods for setting your enemies against one another and different 
forms of misinformation. You should also ascertain, through trusted agents, 
what is happening in the cities and provinces of your enemies, Kings, after 
pursuing their enemies and entering their forts, O slayer of Bala and Vritra, 
should sack, pillage, plunder and simultaneously devise proper plans to 
safeguard their own cities and dominions. 

Making gifts of wealth to them in private and confiscating their 
possessions publicly, proclaiming them as offenders punished for their 
misdeeds without injuring them physically, kings should send their agents 
to the cities and provinces of their enemies. At the same time, in their own 
cities, they should arrange for killing rites to be performed for the enemy, 
by means of powerful mantras through men who are accomplished, learned, 
authorities in the shastras and acquainted with the regulations of the sacred 
books.” 

Indra said, “O best of Munis, what are the signs of an evil person? Tell 
me how I am to identify a wicked man.” 

Brihaspati said, “An evil man is one who proclaims the faults of others 
behind their backs, who is consumed with envy at the accomplishments of 
others and who remains silent, reluctant to join in when someone proclaims 
the merits of others in his presence. Mere silence on such occasions is no 
indication of wickedness; however, an evil person at such times breathes 
heavily, bites his lips and shakes his head. 

Such a man always mixes in society, speaks irrelevantly, never does 
what he promises when the eye of the man to whom he has made the pledge 
is not upon him, or even allude to the subject in his presence. He eats by 
himself and not with others at the same table and finds fault with the food 
set before him, saying, ‘All is not right today, as on other days.’ His 
disposition shows itself when he sits, lies down or rides. 

Mourning on occasions of sorrow and rejoicing on occasions of joy are 
the signs of a friend, while the opposite behaviour indicates an enemy. Keep 
in mind, O ruler of the Devas, that the nature of evil men can never be 
concealed. I have now told you, O greatest of deities, what the signs of an 
evil man are. Now that you have heard the truths that the shastras lay down, 
follow them duly.” 


Purandara, when the opportunity came, conducted himself. strictly 
according to the advice of Brihaspati and, determined to be victorious, the 
Parantapa successfully reduced all his enemies to subjection.’” 


CANTO 104 


¢ = udhishtira says, ‘What should a Dharmaraja do to acquire 
happiness whose own officers oppose him, whose treasury and 
army are no longer under his control and who has no wealth?’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘Listen, Yudhishtira, to the oft-told story of 
Kshemadarsin, the Kosala Rajan. Long ago, Kshemadarsin lost his power 
and fell into great distress. 

He went to the Rishi Kalakavrikshiya and, saluting him humbly, asked, 
“What should a man like me do who deserves wealth but who has failed to 
recover his kingdom despite repeated efforts; what should I do other than 
commit suicide or theft, take sanctuary with others or resort to other such 
degrading actions? O Brahmana, tell me, for one like you, who knows 
dharma and is full of kindness, is the refuge of a man suffering from mental 
or physical illness. 

I have heard that a man like me should give up his desires, abandon joy 
and sorrow, and he will find happiness after he has earned the plenitude of 
knowledge. I grieve for those who believe that worldly happiness is 
dependent on wealth, which after all vanishes like a dream. Those who can 
abandon vast riches achieve a difficult feat, because we are unable to give 
up even wealth which has been lost. I have lost all my prosperity and fallen 
into a miserable and joyless existence. Tell me, O Brahmana, what 
happiness I should still strive for.” 

The sage said, “You have already understood, it seems. You are wise 
and should do as your intellect tells you. You are right in your belief that all 


that you see, as well as yourself and everything that you have, are 
evanescent, as am I and all that I have. Know, O Rajan, that those things 
which you regard as substantial, are in reality non-existent. The wise man 
knows this and is never troubled when confronted by sorrow. 

Once you know what everyone should know, which is that whatever has 
happened and whatever will take place, all are unreal, you will be freed 
from adharma and its misery. 

Whatever those who came before earned and acquired, and whatever 
those who succeeded them got, all have perished. Reflecting on this, who 
will yield to misery? Things that were are no more. Things that are will 
again not exist. Sorrow has no power to restore them. One should not, 
therefore, indulge in grief. 

Where, is your father today, O Rajan, and where is your grandfather? 
You do not see them now, nor do they see you. If you think of your own 
instability, for whom then do you mourn? Reflect carefully and you will 
understand that it is certain that you will cease to exist. I, you, your friends, 
your enemies and indeed everything, will without any doubt cease to be. 
Those men who are now twenty or thirty years of age will all definitely die 
within the next hundred years. 

If a man does not have the heart to give up his possessions, he should 
then endeavour to regard them as being not his own, and with that seek to 
do good. One should regard future acquisitions as well as those that have 
disappeared as being not one’s own, of destiny as being all-powerful. Those 
who reason thus are wise, and the habit of seeing things like this an attribute 
of the good. 

Many men who are equal or superior to you in intelligence and 
application, though deprived of wealth, are not only alive but are not kings. 
But unlike you, they are not unhappy. So, stop distressing yourself in this 
way. Are you not superior to these men, or at least equal to them in 
intelligence and hard work?” 

The king said, “I won my kingdom and everything else with no great 
effort. However, all-powerful Time has swept it away as a river does sand, 
O Maharishi, and I am obliged to subsist on charity.” 

The Muni Kalakavrikshiya said, “Your frame of mind, based on the 
knowledge of reality, should be such that you never mourn for anything in 
life, O prince of Kosala, either in the past or the future. Your desire should 


be to obtain only that which is attainable, and so to enjoy your present 
possessions, not to suffer for what is not there. 

Be delighted, O Kosala Rajan, with whatever you easily win. Even if 
you become poor, do not grieve, but seek to preserve a pure character. Only 
a foolish man, when he loses his wealth, instead of being contented with his 
remaining possessions censures the Supreme Ordainer. Such a man regards 
others, however undeserving, as blessed. For this reason, they suffer more 
who are malicious, vain and filled with self-importance. 

However, such vices do not tarnish you, O king, so endure the wealth of 
others although you are poor. The wise succeed in enjoying the riches of 
others, while prosperity deserts the man who envies others. 

Men of dharma and wisdom who know the duties of Yoga renounce of 
their own accord material possessions, as well as sons and grandsons. 
Others who know earthly wealth to be unstable and unattainable, dependent 
as it is upon ceaseless action and effort, also renounce it. You appear to be 
wise; why then do you grieve and yearn for things undesirable and 
dependent on others? 

You wish to know that frame of mind which would enable you to enjoy 
happiness despite the loss of your possessions. My advice is that you 
renounce all these objects of desire. 

Objects that should be avoided appear attractive, while objects that 
should be pursued appear undesirable. Some lose their wealth in the pursuit 
of riches, while others regard wealth as the root of infinite happiness and 
pursue it avidly. Again, some delighted with wealth think nothing superior 
to it and a man, in his eagerness to acquire material goods, loses all the 
other purusharthas. 

If a man loses his hard-earned and legitimate riches, he despairs, falls 
inert and gives up all hope of material possessions. Some noble men of 
dharma pursue virtue and renounce every kind of worldly pleasure, from a 
desire to win felicity in the other world. 

Some men lay down life itself to amass riches, for they think life 
without affluence is useless. Look at their pitiable condition, their 
foolishness. When life is so short and uncertain, these men, moved by 
ignorance, set their eyes on wealth. Who would set his heart upon hoarding 
possessions when destruction is their end, upon life when death is its end, 
and upon union when separation is its end? 


Sometimes a man renounces wealth, and sometimes wealth abandons a 
man. What wise man would mourn the loss of wealth? There are many 
others in the world who lose their worldly possessions and friends. Use 
your intelligence, O Rajan, and you will understand that the calamities 
which overtake men are all due to their own conduct. 

The remedy is to restrain your senses, mind and speech, for if those 
become weak and inclined to evil, there is no man who can keep himself 
free from the temptation of external objects which always surround him. As 
no one can form an adequate idea of the past or foresee the future because 
of the mutability of time and place, a wise man like you who has such an 
ability should never grieve for union and separation, for good or evil. 

A man of mild disposition such as you, mature and with a disciplined 
soul, observant of brahmacharya, never gives in to woe or becomes restless 
from a desire to acquire or a fear of losing anything of little value. 

It is not proper for a man like you to adopt a deceitful life of begging, a 
life that is sinful, evil, cruel, which only a wretch deserves. Take refuge in 
the great vana and lead a life of happiness there, alone, subsisting upon fruit 
and roots, restraining your speech and soul and filled with compassion for 
all creatures. He is wise who cheerfully leads such a life in the forest, with 
great-tusked elephants for companions, with no human being by his side, 
contented with the produce of the wilderness. 

A large lake, when it becomes turbid, also becomes clear by itself. 
Similarly, a wise man, when disturbed in such matters, will become tranquil 
on his own. I know that someone who has fallen into a plight such as yours 
can still live happily. When it is near-impossible for you to recover your 
wealth, and when you have no ministers and counsellors, such a path opens 
to you. 

Do you hope to reap the benefits that destiny has in store for you?”’ 


CANTO 105 


¢ TT he Rishi Kalakavrikshiya said, “On the other hand, O Kshatriya, if 

you think that you still have any ability, and if you want me to, 

listen attentively while I disclose to you in detail the strategy you can adopt 

to have vast riches and, indeed, to recover your kingdom, kingly power and 
great prosperity.” 

King Kshemadarsin replied, “Tell me, O holy one, what you want me to 
know. I am eager to listen and do whatever you say. Let my meeting with 
you today prove fruitful to my enterprise.” 

The sage said, “Renounce ahamkara, moha, krodha, sukha and bhaya; 
humble yourself and wait upon your very enemies with folded hands. Serve 
Janaka, the king of Mithila, by always doing pure and goodly deeds. Firmly 
devoted to truth, you will then gain the trust of everyone and become as that 
king’s right hand, and the Rajarishi of Videha will certainly give you great 
wealth. 

As a result, you will gain many valiant and resolute allies, pure as fire in 
their deeds and free from the seven principal faults. A man of disciplined 
soul, with his senses under control, who adheres to his karma, will raise 
himself and gladden others. Honoured by the intelligent and prosperous 
Janaka, you will certainly become the right hand of the king and enjoy the 
confidence of all. 

Then muster a large force, consult able ministers, bring about dissension 
among your enemies, set them against one another and break them all, like 
one who breaks a hard bilwa fruit with another. Or, make peace with the 


enemies of your opponent and destroy the latter’s power. Arrange for your 
enemy to become addicted to such things as are not easily attainable— 
beautiful women, inordinately expensive clothes, beds, seats, carriages, 
mansions, birds and animals of diverse species, juices, perfumes and fruits, 
so that he ruins himself through indulgence. 

You could either deal with your enemy thus, or show him indifference. 
One who wants to pursue a successful strategy should never alert the enemy 
to his intentions. 

Follow the conduct that the wise approve of, enjoy every kind of 
pleasure in the dominions of your enemy, imitate the ways of the dog, the 
deer and the crow and behave with apparent friendship towards your 
enemies. Induce them to undertake tasks that are grand and difficult to 
accomplish. See, also, that they engage in hostilities with other powerful 
enemies. 

Draw their attention to pleasant gardens and costly beds and seats; offer 
them objects of enjoyment and thereby drain your enemy’s treasury. Advise 
him to perform sacrifices, make gifts and gratify Brahmanas to excess. 
Since they received the gifts through you, they will do good to you in return 
and perform tapasyas, Vedic yagnas to devour your foes like wolves. 
Without doubt, a dharmatman of virtuous deeds will earn realms of the 
highest felicity in Swarga. 

If you cause the treasury of your enemies to be exhausted, every one of 
them can be subdued. The exchequer is the root of felicity in Swarga and 
victory on earth, and it is because of their treasuries that enemies enjoy such 
happiness. You should, by any means, drain their coffers. 

Do not praise Parishrama or exertion in the presence of your enemies 
but speak highly of Vidhi or destiny. Without doubt, the man who relies too 
much on the worship of the Devas soon meets his destruction. Get your 
enemy to perform the great Viswajit yagna and by that strip him of all his 
possessions. Thus, your objective will be fulfilled. 

You should then inform your enemy that the best men in his kingdom 
are being oppressed with levies to refill the exhausted coffers, and suggest 
some eminent Rishi who knows the duties of Yoga, who will then wean him 
away from his earthly possessions. Your enemy will then want to adopt 
renunciation and retire to the vana to seek mukti. You should then, with the 
help of drugs prepared by boiling potent poisonous herbs and plants with 


artificial salts, kill the elephants, horses and men of your enemy’s 
dominions. 

These and many other well-devised schemes are available, all connected 
with fraudulence. An intelligent man can destroy the entire population of a 
hostile kingdom with poison.” 


CANTO 106 


¢ K ing Kshemadarsin said, “I do not desire to live by deceit or fraud, 

O Brahmana, for I do not want wealth, however great, earned 

other than through dharma. When we began our discussion I explained that 

I will live in this world only by means that would benefit me but not lead to 

censure, and I will only do things that have no harmful consequences. I am 

incapable of following the strategy that you recommend. Indeed, your 
advice does not become you.” 

Rishi Kalakavrikshiya replied, “Your words prove, O Kshatriya, that 
you are truly a man of dharma in temperament and understanding. I will 
strive for the benefit of both you and Janaka, the ruler of Videhas. I will 
arrange a bond, eternal and unbreakable, between you and him. 

Who is there that would not be glad to have a minister like you, born of 
a noble race, learned, who follows dharma, abstains from cruelty, is versed 
in the art of governance and knows how to pacify everyone? I say this 
because, though dispossessed of your kingdom and plunged into great 
misery, you still want to follow dharma. Janaka, who firmly adheres to 
truth, will come soon to my asrama. I have no doubt that he will do what I 
ask of him.” 

The sage then summoned Janaka and said to him, “Kshemadarsin is of 
royal birth. I know his very heart and soul are as pure as the surface of a 
mirror or the disc of the autumn moon. I have tested him in every way and I 
do not see any fault in him. You should be friends. Repose in him the same 
confidence that you have in me. 


A king who 1s without a competent minister cannot rule his kingdom for 
even three days. The minister should be courageous and highly intelligent. 
With these two attributes you can conquer both the worlds. Understand, 
Janaka, that these two qualities are essential to rule a kingdom and 
Dharmarajans have no greater support than a minister who possesses them. 

Kshemadarsin is of royal birth and walks the path of dharma. He who 
always has dharma in his mind is a valuable acquisition. If you treat him 
with honour, he will reduce all your foes to subjection. If he fights you, he 
will do what a Kshatriya should. Indeed, like his father and grandfathers, if 
he fights, it will be to conquer you, and it will then be your duty to fight 
him, observing the Kshatriya dharma. 

However, listen to my advice and you will benefit if you employ him 
and refrain from fighting him in battle. Keep your eyes always on dharma 
and renounce greed, for it is inappropriate for you to abandon the duties of 
your varna from lust for battle. 

Neither Jaya nor Parajaya, victory or defeat, are predictable. Remember, 
peace should be made with an enemy by giving him food and wealth. One 
can see victory and defeat in Kshemadarsin’s own case. Those who seek to 
destroy an enemy are sometimes themselves destroyed.” 

King Janaka saluted and gave due honour to the Maharishi and replied, 
“You are immensely learned and wise and I have no hesitation in saying 
that your sincere advice is sure to be advantageous for us both.” 

King Janaka then addressed the prince of Kosala, “I have conquered the 
world through the Kshatriya dharma and with the help of Neeti. However, 
Rajan, you have conquered me with your qualities. If you remain by my 
side, I will honour you and you will live with me as a victor—a Praptajaya. 
I honour your intelligence and your prowess, and I will not slight you by 
saying that I have conquered you. Live with me in my home with honour, 
and as a victor.” 

Both kings then performed obsequies to Rishi Kalakavrikshiya and, 
with mutual trust, went to the capital of Mithila. King Janaka invited 
Kshemadarsin into his home and duly honoured him with water to wash his 
feet, honey, curds and the other customary offerings. King Janaka also gave 
him the hand of his own daughter, as well as all kinds of gems and jewels. 
The establishment of peace is the greatest dharma of kings, since victory 
and defeat are both uncertain.’” 


CANTO 107 


¢ eae udhishtira says, “You have, O Pitamaha, described the path of 
dharma, the general conduct, the means of livelihood of 
Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras, and its consequences. You 
have also spoken about the duties of kings, of their treasuries and the means 
to fill them, and about conquest and victory. 

You have explained the character of ministers, the measures that lead to 
the betterment of one’s subjects, the characteristics of the six-fold limbs of a 
kingdom, the qualities of armies, how to identify evil, the marks of those 
who are good, the attributes of those who are equal, inferior or superior to 
oneself, how a king who desires progress should conduct himself towards 
his people, and the manner in which the weak should be protected and 
cherished. 

You have discussed all these subjects and laid down instructions that are 
lucid and as prescribed in the sacred texts. You have also discussed what 
kings should do if they wish to conquer their enemies. 

Tell me now, Pitamaha, how I should behave towards the multitude of 
noble Kshatriyas that gather round a king’s court. I want to know how their 
number can be increased, how they can be made loyal to the king, and how 
they can subjugate their enemies and acquire friends. It seems to me that 
disunity alone can bring about their destruction. 

I also think that it is difficult to keep a secret that concerns many men. I 
would like to hear about all this in detail, Parantapa. Tell me also how to 
prevent the nobles from becoming inimical towards the king.’ 


Bhishma replies, ‘Lobha and krodha, greed and anger, O Rajan, cause 
enmity between noblemen and kings. If the king yields to greed, the nobles 
become angry, and if each works with intent to weaken and harm the other, 
both are destroyed. The two sides war with each other; they employ spies, 
use ploys, physical force, adopt the strategy of conciliation, offer bribes, 
cause disssension, try to weaken each other, pillage and spread fear. 

The noblemen of a kingdom, a close-knit body, will dissociate 
themselves from the king if he tries to take too much from them. Once 
distanced from the king, all of them become dissatisfied and, from fear, will 
side with the enemies of their ruler. If the Kshatriyas are not united amongst 
themselves, they will fall easy prey to ouside enemies and will be 
destroyed. The nobles should always work in concert; by their strength and 
prowess they can acquire wealth, and many outsiders will seek their 
alliance. 

Men of knowledge laud those noblemen who are united with bonds of 
love. If they stand together, they will all prosper and, by their example, 
establish dharma in the kingdom. They become prosperous if they restrain 
their sons and brothers, if they teach them their dharma, and behave kindly 
towards all men who have disciplined their ahamkara through gyana. 

The nobles become prosperous if they ensure that their spies are active, 
Mahabaho, if they formulate policy, fill their treasuries, show proper 
reverence to the wise, the courageous and the persevering, and display 
steady proficiency in work. 

By being wealthy and resourceful, through their knowledge of the 
shastras, the arts and sciences, the aristocracy rescues the ignorant masses 
from suffering and danger. A show of anger by the king, disagreement, 
terror, punishment, persecution, oppression and executions, O chief of the 
Bhaaratas, speedily cause the nobility to break from him and side with his 
enemies. 

The king should honour the leaders among the nobility, for Rajaneeti 
depends to a great extent on them. You should hold consultations with only 
those who are the leaders, Parantapa, and have secret agents to watch them. 
The king should not consult every member of the nobility, O Bhaarata, but 
work together with the leaders and do whatever is for the good of the entire 
Kshatriya varna. 

When the nobility fall out or become disunited and leaderless, you 
should adopt other methods, for if they quarrel and act independently 


without unity, their prosperity dwindles and they fall prey to all kinds of 
evil. Those among them who are learned and wise should quell a dispute as 
soon as it arises, because if the elders of a royal house look on with 
indifference, such quarrels will soon destroy them and disunite the entire 
varna of Kshatriyas. 

Fears that arise from outside are of little consequence, Rajan, but 
protect yourself from all fears that arise from within, for this can cut your 
very roots in a single day. When men equal to one another in family and 
blood, provoked by the wrath and greed inherent in their nature, cease to 
speak with one another, it is an omen of imminent defeat and destruction. 

It is not by employing courage, intelligence, beauty, or wealth that 
enemies destroy the nobility. It is only through conflict and bribery that they 
can be subjugated. For this reason, one says that unity is the greatest 
protection of the nobility.’” 


CANTO 108 


¢ eve udhishtira says, ‘The path of dharma is long, O Bhaarata, and 
has many branches. Which are the most important duties that I 
must practise to earn the highest punya, both here and hereafter?’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘I think that the worship of Mata, Pita and guru is most 
important. The man who attends to this duty here will acquire great fame 
and many regions of felicity hereafter. Yudhishtira, you should revere them 
and obey unhesitatingly whatever they command, be it consistent with 
dharma or not! One should never do what they forbid. 

They are the three worlds, the three varnas, the three Vedas and the 
three sacred fires. The Pita, one’s father, one says is the Garhapatya fire; the 
Mata, mother, the Dakshina fire, and the guru is that fire upon which you 
pour libations. These are pre-eminent and, if you attend attentively to these 
three fires, you will conquer the three worlds. 

If one serves one’s father steadfastly, one can cross this sea of samsara. 
If one serves one’s mother in the same way, one can attain regions of 
felicity in the next. If one serves one’s acharya with devotion, one can 
obtain the realm of Brahma. Behave properly towards these three, O 
Bhaarata, and you will gain great fame in the three worlds and be forever 
blessed. 

Great will be your punya and reward. Never disobey them in any matter. 
Never eat before they eat, or eat anything that is better than what they eat. 
Never blame them for anything, and always serve them humbly. You can 


earn fame, merit, honour and regions of felicity hereafter, if you perform 
these deeds of great punya. 

All the worlds honour those who revere these three. On the other hand, 
those who disregard these three will fail to find any punya, fame or merit 
from his karma, either in this world or in the next. 

All that I have given away in honour of these three has returned a 
hundredfold or a thousandfold to me. It is because of this punya, O 
Yudhishtira, that even now the three worlds are clearly before my eyes. One 
acharya is superior to ten Brahmanas learned in the Vedas, and one 
Upadhyaya superior to ten acharyas. The father, again, is superior to ten 
Upadhyayas, and the mother greater in importance than ten fathers or 
perhaps the whole world. It is said that no one deserves as much reverence 
as the mother. 

In my opinion, however, the guru is worthy of greater reverence than 
the father or even the mother. The father and the mother are authors of one’s 
being, O Bhaarata, but they only create the body. The life of the spirit, on 
the other hand, one receives from one’s Acharya, and that is divine. It is 
subject to no decay and is immortal. 

You should never injure your father and mother, however much they 
offend you, and one does not incur sin if one refrains from punishing a 
parent, even if punishment is deserved. Indeed, a parent who enjoys 
impunity does not tarnish the image of a king, and the Devas and the Rishis 
do not withhold their favours from men who strive to cherish reverently 
even sinful fathers. 

One should regard as both father and mother those who favour us and 
impart to us true and immortal knowledge of the Vedas. The disciple in 
gratitude should never do anything that would injure the acharya. 

Those who do not respect the acharyas who instruct them, and do not 
obey them dutifully in thought and deed, incur the sin of killing an unborn, 
and there is no greater sinner in this world. Gurus always show great 
affection for their shishyas, so the latter should show their acharyas equal 
reverence. He who wishes to earn this great punya, which has existed from 
ancient days, should revere and love his acharyas and cheerfully share with 
them every object of enjoyment. 

He who makes his father happy pleases Prajapati himself, and he who 
pleases his mother gratifies the earth herself, but he who pleases his guru 


gratifies Brahma by his karma. For this reason, the acharya is worthy of 
greater reverence than either the father or the mother. 

If you worship your acharyas, the very Rishis and the Devas, together 
with the Pitris, all are pleased. The guru is worthy of the highest reverence 
and the shishya should never disregard him in any manner. Neither the 
mother nor the father deserves as much respect as the acharya. One should 
never insult the father, the mother or the guru, or find fault with anything 
they do. 

The Devas and the great Rishis are pleased with one who behaves with 
reverence towards his gurus. Those who hurt in thought or deed their 
acharya, father or mother, incur the sin of killing a foetus in the womb, and 
there is no sinner in the world equal to them. The son of the father’s loins 
and the mother’s womb, raised by them, who does not support them in his 
turn when he comes of age, incurs the sin of killing an unborn child, and 
there is no greater sinner in the world than him. We have heard that these 
four, he who injures a friend, he who is ungrateful, he who kills a woman 
and he who kills his guru, will never be able to purify themselves. 

I have now told you generally all that a man should do in this world. 
Besides these duties that I have indicated, there is nothing that will bring 
greater happiness. I have told you the essence of all dharma.’” 


CANTO 109 


6 ve udhishtira says, ‘You are wise, O Bhaarata, so tell me how one 

who wants to adhere to dharma should work. Truth and 

falsehood exist in all the worlds. Which of these two should a man of 

dharma accept? What is truth, what is falsehood and what is sanatana 
dharma? When can a man tell the truth and when an untruth?’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘To speak the truth is consistent with dharma, because 
there is nothing higher than truth. I will now tell you that which men do not 
generally know. You should not speak the truth where falsehood can appear 
to be the truth. Then again, you should even lie where truth will appear to 
be false. 

The ignorant man incurs sin when he tells a truth which is not 
connected to dharma. He who can distinguish truth from falsehood knows 
dharma. Even a disreputable, cruel man with an evil, impure soul, can earn 
great punya, like the hunter Valaka, who killed the blind beast that 
threatened to destroy all creatures. 

It is extraordinary that even a Rishi, though foolish, who wanted to 
acquire punya by tapasya, could incur the sin of murder by telling the truth 
to a company of robbers and pointing out the place where certain innocent 
men were hid. 

Again, an owl who did an evil deed and with his beak broke a thousand 
eggs on the banks of the Ganges, obtained great punya and went to Swarga, 
because the eggs were of a deadly poisonous she-serpent. 


The question you have asked me is a complex one, and no one who 
discusses the subject can define dharma accurately. Brahma declared that 
whatever leads to the advancement and growth of all creatures is dharma. 
He declared that whatever restrains creatures from injuring one another is 
dharma. 

Dharma is so called because it supports all creatures. Some say that 
dharma is in the Srutis, while others do not agree. I would not fault those 
who disagree, since the Srutis do not lay down every duty. 

Sometimes brigands seek information to help them identify a victim to 
rob. It is one’s duty never to answer such queries. If by one’s silence, a 
victim can escape, one should remain silent. If, on the other hand, one’s 
silence at a time when one must speak rouses suspicion, it would be better 
to tell a lie. 

It is accepted that there is no sin if one can escape from evil men even 
by swearing a false oath. One should not give wealth to sinful men, for that 
affects even the giver. If a creditor desires to enslave a debtor unable to pay 
off his debt, the witnesses should all lie if the creditor summons them to 
establish the truth of the contract. When life is at risk, or on a matter of 
matriage, one can lie. 

One who seeks dharma does not commit a sin by telling a lie if he says 
it to save the property of others, or for sake of dharma. One is liable to 
fulfill all promises to pay one’s debts and, upon failure, the defaulter may be 
forcibly enslaved. If a man does not fulfill his responsibilities, he should 
certainly be punished with the Dandaneeti. 

A deceitful man who fails in all the duties of his own varna will begin 
to adopt practices of Asuras and live dishonestly. You should never tolerate 
such men but kill them by any means, for they think there is nothing in this 
world higher than wealth. No one should eat with them, and you should 
regard them as inhuman evildoers—pisachas shut out from the grace of the 
gods. Since they do not perform yagnas or tapasya, stay away from their 
companionship for, if they lose their wealth, they will even perform that 
most wretched act, suicide. Among these evil men, there is no one to whom 
you can say, “This is your duty. Let your heart turn to it.” Their strong 
belief is that there is nothing in this world equal to wealth. He who slays 
such a creature would incur no sin, for his own karma has killed him, and 
he is already dead. 


He who swears to slay these mindless men should keep his vow. Such 
evil men are like the crow and the vulture, dependent on deceit for their 
living, and after the dissolution of their human bodies they are reborn as 
crows and vultures. You should behave towards others in the same manner 
as they behave towards you. You should deal with one who practises deceit 
with deceit, and treat an honest man honestly.’” 


CANTO 110 


¢ ve udhishtira says, ‘We see men suffer almost continually on 
various counts. Tell me, O Pitamaha, in what way can one 
overcome all these travails?’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘The Rishis who duly practise the dharma decreed by 
the scriptures for the several varnasramas surmount all their difficulties. 
Those who never practise deceit, who are disciplined and who are in control 
of their worldly desires, master all their troubles. 

Those who do not respond even when provoked, who do not injure 
others though they are themselves hurt, who give but do not take, overcome 
all hardships. Those who are always hospitable to guests, who are not 
malicious, who regularly study the Vedas, overcome all their difficulties. 
Those who know their duties, behave appropriately towards their parents, 
who do not sleep during the day, master all their troubles. Those who do not 
commit any kind of sin in thought, word or deed, who practise ahimsa, 
overcome all tribulations. 

Kings who are not influenced by moha and lobha, who do not levy 
oppressive taxes and protect their own dominions, overcome all problems. 
Those who go to their own wedded wives in season and do not seek the 
companionship of other women, who are honest and attentive to their 
Agnihotras, surmount all difficulties. 

Those who are courageous and engage in battle by fair means, 
unmindful of death, overcome all troubles. Those who always adhere to 
truth in this world, even when life is at stake, and who are models for all 


men to imitate, overcome all obstacles. Those who never deceive by their 
actions, whose words are always agreeable and whose wealth is always well 
spent, overcome all ills. 

Those Brahmanas who study the Vedas only at hours intended for study 
and who practise tapasya with devotion, overcome all obstacles. Brahmanas 
who take to a life of celibacy and brahmacharya, who perform tapasya and 
whom learning, Vedic knowledge and proper vows have cleansed, 
overcome all travails. 

Those who have controlled the gunas of rajas and tamas, are 
Dharmatmans who practise the quality of sattva, and they can overcome all 
pain and sorrow. 

Those whom no creature fears, who do not themselves fear any, and 
look upon all creatures as their own selves, overcome all difficulties. Those 
bulls among men who are good, who are not envious of other people’s 
prosperity and who are noble in their conduct, overcome all difficulties. 

Those who bow to all the Devas and listen to the doctrines of all 
dharmas, have faith and tranquil souls, and overcome all troubles. Those 
who do not desire honour for themselves, who reward others, who bow 
down to those deserving of their worship, overcome all difficulties. 

Those who perform sraddhas on the proper lunar days with pure minds 
for the sake of progeny are blessed with fine children. Those who restrain 
their own anger and pacify the wrath of others, who never lose their temper, 
overcome all difficulties. Those who abstain all their lives from honey, meat 
and intoxicants, overcome all grief. 

Those who eat only in order to support life, who seek the 
companionship of women only for the sake of begetting children, and who 
open their lips only to speak the truth, overcome all difficulties. Those who 
worship with devotion Narayana, the Supreme Lord of all creatures and the 
origin and destruction of the universe, overcome all trials. 

This Krishna here, of eyes red as the lotus, clad in yellow robes, this 
Mahabaho who is our well-wisher, brother, friend and relative, is Narayana 
of unfading glory. He covers all the worlds like a leather case, at his own 
pleasure. He is the powerful Lord of unimaginable Soul. He is Govinda, the 
greatest of all beings. This Krishna who always does what pleases and is 
beneficial to Vishnu and also to you, Yudhishtira, is the first and best of all 
beings, the irresistible one, the abode of eternal felicity. 


Those who devoutly seek the refuge of Narayana, also called Hari, will 
overcome every obstacle. Those who read these verses about how to 
surmount difficulties, who recite them to others and speak of them, will 
surely overcome. 

I have now, O sinless one, told you all those acts by which men can 
transcend all their woes and sorrows, both here and hereafter.’” 


CANTO 111 


my udhishtira says, ‘Many men here who are not serene souls 

outwardly appear calm, while others who are really peaceful 
souls appear otherwise. How, O Pitamaha, can we distinguish between 
them?’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘Let me relate, O Yudhishtira, a conversation between 
a tiger and a jackal. 

Long ago, in a prosperous city called Purika, there was a king named 
Paurika. He was the worst of men, exceedingly cruel, who delighted in 
causing injury to others. On the expiry of his lifespan he died miserably 
and, as a result of the evil deeds of his human life, was reborn a jackal. 

He, however, remembered his former prosperity and in grief, gave up 
meat even when others of his kind brought it to him. He became 
compassionate to all creatures, truthful in speech, firm in the observance of 
strict vratas, and ate only wind-fallen fruits from the trees. The jackal 
continued to live in the vast crematorium where he was born and never 
wished to change it for a better locality. 

Unable to suffer the purity of his conduct, the other members of his 
species tried to make him change his resolve and told him with humility, 
“Though you dwell in this terrible smasana, you still want a lofty life. Isn’t 
this a perversity, since you are by nature a carrion-eater? Be like us. All of 
us will give you food. Eat what is your natural diet, and abandon this 
virtuous conduct.” 


The jackal listened attentively and replied reasonably in these words of 
ahimsa, “I am of low birth, but it is conduct that determines varna, not 
varna that decides conduct. I wish to live in such a way that my fame will 
spread. 

Although I dwell in this smasana, I observe my vratas according to 
dharma. One is the cause of one’s karma and the varnasrama one takes is 
not for religious deeds. If one who follows any varnasrama kills a 
Brahmana, will he not incur the sin of Brahmahatya? If, on the other hand, 
one gives away a cow, though one does not observe any particular 
varnasrama, will that pious gift yield no punya? 

Motivated by selfish needs, you only want to fill your stomachs. You are 
confused and foolishly do not see the three sins that will be the final result. I 
do not want to adopt the life you lead, which is evil both here and hereafter 
and will surely lead to discontentment, temptation and loss of virtue.” 

A renowned tiger happened to overhear this conversation and, finding 
the jackal to be a learned one of pure conduct, greeted him respectfully and 
said, “Righteous one, I know what you are. Come and share the duties of 
kingship with me as my minister. Enjoy whatever you wish and leave 
behind what you do not want. But let me tell you that tigers are known to be 
fierce. If you behave with mildness, you will reap the benefits.” 

The jackal, flattered by these words of the mahatman among animals, 
hung his head a little and said humbly, “O king of beasts, I thank you for 
your kind words. Your wish to seek ministers of pure conduct, familiar with 
dharma and worldly affairs, does you credit. You cannot remain a great 
leader without a pious minister, or with an evil one who is on the lookout to 
destroy you. 

You should regard the ministers who are devoted to you, who 
understand policy, who are independent, who want to crown you with 
victory, who are not greedy, who are free from deceit, wise, ever engaged in 
your welfare and have mental vitality, just as you look upon your acharyas 
or your parents. 

But as I am perfectly happy with my present position, I do not want to 
change it for anything else. I do not covet luxury or the happiness 
associated with it. 

My conduct will not agree with that of your old servants. If they are 
evil, they will produce discord between us. It is not desirable or 
praiseworthy to depend upon another. I am a Dharmatman and highly 


blessed. I cannot show severity even to sinners. I have foresight and a 
capacity for great exertion and do not look at insignificant things. I possess 
great strength, follow dharma and never work fruitlessly. I have every 
object of enjoyment and am never satisfied with a little. 

I have never served another and am unskilled in the matter. I live 
according to my pleasure in the vana. All those who dwell with kings have 
to endure great apprehension because of evil talk against them. Vanavasis 
pass their days fearlessly, without anxiety and contentedly in the observance 
of vratas, living on fruits and roots, with no fear that arises in the heart of 
one whom the king summons. 

Reflect, and you will see that simple food and drink obtained without 
effort, and sumptuous food procured with fear, differ widely from each 
other. I am of the opinion that happiness prevails where there is no anxiety. 
Only a few among those who serve kings are justly punished for their 
offences. A large number of them are falsely accused and suffer death. 

If you still appoint me as your minister, O king of beasts, I want to 
make a compact with you regarding your conduct towards me. You should 
always heed my advice, which will ever be for your good. You will not 
interfere later with the arrangements that you will make for me. 

I will never consult your other ministers because, if I do, they will find 
various faults in me to put me down. I will meet you alone, in secrecy, and 
advise you. In all matters regarding your kinsmen, you will not seek my 
advice. After you have consulted me, you will not punish your other 
ministers later in rage, nor will you punish my followers and dependants.” 

To this the king of beasts answered, “Tathaastu, let it be so!” and 
showed him every respect. The jackal then became the minister of the tiger. 

When they saw the jackal treated with respect and honour, the previous 
servants of the king conspired together and began to show their hatred 
towards him. These evil servants at first tried to gratify and win him over 
with friendly overtures so that he would permit the misappropriation and 
abuse of the property of others, which they had so long enjoyed. 

When they were unable to do as they pleased, they began to lure him 
with sweet talk and large bribes, but the wise jackal showed no signs of 
yielding to these temptations. Then some of them colluded to destroy him, 
stole the well-dressed meat intended for the tiger and placed it secretly in 
the jackal’s house. The jackal knew who had stolen the meat and who the 
conspirators were, but he did nothing because of his covenant with the king. 


When he was made a minister, he had said, “You want my friendship, O 
Rajan, but you will not mistrust me without cause.” 

When the king of beasts, feeling hungry, came to eat, he did not see any 
meat for his dinner and roared, “Find the thief!” 

His deceitful ministers reported to him that his learned minister, the 
jackal, who was so proud of his own wisdom, had stolen the meat. Hearing 
this, the tiger became filled with rage and ordered his jackal to be seized. 
Seeing their opportunity, the former ministers told the king, “The jackal is 
always ready to steal our food.” 

They spoke of the jackal robbing the king of his food and said, “Such 
then is he! What is there that he would not venture to do? He is not as you 
had heard. He is righteous in speech but he is sinful and has disguised 
himself by putting on the garb of dharma. For selfish reasons he has 
practised austerities in diet and vows. If you do not believe us, we will 
show you proof.” 

They then caused the meat to be discovered in the jackal’s home and 
reported it to the king. Based on this evidence and the complaints of his old 
servants, the king ordered the jackal to be executed. 

The venerable mother of the tiger heard of this and came to awaken his 
good sense with wise advice. “Son, you should not accept this deceitful 
accusation. Evil men, out of envy and rivalry, impute faults to an honest 
man, as they cannot endure his exploits and success. 

They ascribe faults even to a Dharmatman engaged in tapasya. Even for 
a Muni in vanavasa, harmlessly practising his svadharma, friends, neutrals 
and foes spring up. They who are greedy hate those who are pure; the idle 
hate the active; the uneducated hate the learned; the poor hate the rich; the 
evil man hates the man of dharma; and the ugly hate the beautiful. Many 
among the learned, the ignorant, the rapacious and the deceitful, would 
falsely accuse an innocent one, even if the latter possessed the virtues and 
intelligence of Brihaspati. 

If the meat has really been stolen from your house, remember, while 
you search for the thief, that the jackal never takes any meat that anyone 
gives him. We notice that evil men sometimes appear good, and the good 
sometimes appear evil. A thorough examination is absolutely necessary. 

The sky appears to be the solid base of a vessel and the firefly a spark of 
actual fire. In reality however, the sky has no base and there is no fire in the 


firefly. Ensure that there is close scrutiny, even of what appears to the eye, 
so that you don’t regret it later. 

It is not at all difficult, O son, for a master to put his servant to death. 
Forgiveness in the powerful, however, is always laudable and celebrated. 
You appointed the jackal as your prime minister and earned great fame 
among all our neighbouring jungle kings. A good minister cannot be found 
easily and, since the jackal is your well-wisher, you should support him. 

The king who condemns an innocent one falsely accused by his enemies 
soon meets destruction at the hands of evil counsellors who influenced that 
decision.” 

After the tiger’s mother had spoken, a good servant of the jackal, 
stepping out of the ranks of his foes, described how his enemies had 
fabricated the false accusation. The jackal’s innocence was proved and the 
tiger acquitted and feted him, affectionately embracing him again and again. 

The jackal, who knew Rajaneeti, however, burned with grief. He saluted 
the king of beasts and sought his permission to give up his life by observing 
the praya vrata. The tiger looked at the virtuous jackal, his eyes brimming 
with affection, and respectfully sought to dissuade him. 

The jackal, seeing his master emotional, bowed to him and in a voice 
choked with tears, said, “You first honoured and later insulted me. Your 
conduct towards me is calculated to make me your enemy. It is not proper 
that I should stay with you any longer. 

Servants who are discontented, who have been stripped of their office or 
deprived of their honour, who have been impoverished or whose enemies 
have ruined them through their master’s anger, who have been weakened, 
who are rapacious, enraged, alarmed, deceived by their employers, whose 
property has been confiscated, who are proud and want to achieve great 
feats but do not have the means to earn wealth, and who burn with grief or 
rage due to some injury done to them, always hope for calamities to 
overcome their masters. Deceived, they leave their masters and become 
effective instruments in the hands of enemies. 

You have insulted me and pulled me down from my place. How will 
you trust me again? How will I on my part continue to stay with you? 

You thought me competent and gave me high office. However, you 
violated our compact and humiliated me. If you refer to someone as a 
Dharmatman, you should not then term him evil, if you want to maintain 
your steadfastness. 


You no longer have any confidence in me, and this fills me with alarm 
and anxiety. Your suspicion and my fear will give our enemies opportunities 
to injure us, leaving your subjects uneasy and anxious. 

Such a state of affairs has many faults, and the wise do not regard a 
situation as happy in which there is honour first and dishonour later. It is 
difficult to reunite two that you have separated, just as it is difficult to 
separate two who are united. If men reunite after separation, their conduct 
will not be affectionate. 

There is no servant who does anything only to benefit his master. 
Service proceeds from the motive of doing good to the master, and also to 
oneself. One lives from selfish motives, because unselfish deeds or motives 
are rare, almost unknown. Kings whose hearts are restless and unquiet 
cannot acquire a true knowledge of men. Only one in a hundred can be 
found to be able or fearless. The prosperity of men and their fall, adversity 
and greatness, all proceed from weakness of understanding.” 

These conciliatory words of advice about dharma, kama and artha made 
the king happy. The intelligent jackal then left for the forest. Disregarding 
the entreaties of the king of beasts, he sat in praya, cast off his body and 
went to Swarga as the reward for his good karma on earth.’” 


CANTO 112 


C6 Y udhishtira says, ‘Tell me in detail, O Dharmatman, what efforts a 
king must make to be happy.’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘I will tell you the established truth about what a king 
should do in this world, and his dharma, so that he can be happy. 
Yudhishtira, a king should not behave like the camel in the story that I am 
about to relate to you! 

There was, in the Krita yuga, a huge camel who could recollect all the 
events of his former life. He sat in tapasya and observed the most rigid 
vratas in the vana. This pleased the great Brahma so much that he granted 
him a boon. 

The camel said, “Let my neck become long by your grace, O Holy One, 
so that I may be able to reach food that lies even at the end of a hundred 
yojanas.” 

The Mahatman, giver of boons said, “Tathaasthu!” and granted the 
wish. 

Having obtained the boon, the camel returned to his own vana. The 
foolish animal, from the day of gaining the boon, became idle and did not 
go out to graze. One day, while the animal had extended his neck of a 
hundred yojanas and was grazing without any effort, a great storm arose. 
The camel, placing his head and a portion of the neck within the cave of a 
mountain, resolved to wait till the storm passed. 

Meanwhile, it began to pour in torrents, inundating the whole terrain. A 
jackal, with his wife, drenched by the rain and shivering with cold, dragged 


himself with difficulty towards the very same cave and ran into it for 
shelter. Living as he did upon meat, and famished and tired as he was, O 
Bharatarishabha, the jackal, seeing the camel’s neck, began to eat as much 
of it as he could. The camel strove desperately to shorten it, but the jackal 
and his wife did not lose their hold. Within a short time the foolish camel 
was dead. Having eaten the camel’s head and throat, the jackals came out of 
the cave after the storm had abated. Thus the stupid camel met its death, 
which followed in the train of idleness. 

As for yourself, control your senses, avoiding idleness, and do 
everything in the world conscientiously. Manu himself has said that victory 
depends upon intelligence. All karma accomplished with your intelligence 
is regarded as the best; karma achieved with the help of arms is average; 
that attained by the use of feet is inferior, while work done by carrying 
loads is the lowest. If the king is clever in the transaction of business and 
restrains his senses, his kingdom will thrive. 

Manu has also maintained that with intelligence an ambitious man can 
achieve victory. Sinless one, in this world those who listen to advice that is 
not generally known, who have allies and who act only after careful 
consideration, achieve all their goals and rule the earth. 

Yudhishtira, you who are powerful as Indra himself, the wise men of 
ancient times who know the shastras have held this view and I, too, say the 
same to you: In this world, Rajan, think before you act!’” 


CANTO 113 


¢ ove udhishtira says, ‘Tell me, O Bharatarishabha, how a ruler who 
has won possession of a precious kingdom behaves towards a 
powerful enemy.’ 

Bhishma replies, “Let me relate to you the old story of the conversation 
between the Ocean and the rivers. 

Long ago, the eternal Ocean, the lord of rivers, the refuge of the foes of 
the Devas, asked all the rivers to clear a doubt that had arisen in his mind. 
“T see that all you rivers bring away along with your rapid currents large 
tree trunks, torn off with their roots and branches. However, you do not ever 
bring me the cane that grows on your banks, which is thin and not strong. 
Tell me, do you refuse to uproot it out of contempt, or because it is of no 
use to you? Indeed, why do you not wash away the stalks of cane uprooted 
from the banks where they grow?” 

The Ganga river replied to the Ocean, the lord of all rivers, wisely and 
sensibly: “Trees stay in one place and do not yield the spot where they 
stand. As a result, they resist our currents and we are obliged to uproot 
them. The cane, seeing the swelling currents, behaves differently. It bends 
and after the flood has subsided, resumes its former posture. The cane 
knows the virtues of time and opportunity, kaala and avasara. It is docile 
and obedient, yields without being obstinate and inflexible, and so remains 
where it grows, without us carrying it away. The plants, trees and creepers 
that bend and rise before the force of wind and water have never to suffer 
the fate of being uprooted.” 


He who does not yield to the power of an enemy greater in might, and 
in a position to imprison or kill him, soon meets with destruction. The wise 
man who acts only after he has fully ascertained the relative strengths and 
weaknesses, the stamina and energy, of himself and his enemy, has never to 
suffer embarrassment. An intelligent man, when he finds his enemy to be 
more powerful than himself, should be like the cane. This is true wisdom.’” 


CANTO 114 


66 Y udhishtira says, ‘How should a learned and modest man behave, 
O Bhaarata, when an ignorant and conceited braggart assails him 
with harsh words in a gathering?’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘Listen, O lord of the earth, to what the shastras 
prescribe as the conduct of a mahatman when he is confronted in this world 
by abuse from unintelligent men. If he does not yield to anger, he is sure to 
take away the punya of all the good karma of the abuser. The sufferer in 
such a case transfers the paapa of all his own bad karma to the angry abuser. 
An intelligent man should disregard insulting language, which, after all, is 
merely like the screeching of a tittibha bird. 

He who yields to hate, lives in vain. A fool can often be heard to say, “I 
addressed that respectable man in these words before an assembly of men,” 
and to even boast of that vicious deed. He will add, “Abused by me, the 
man remained silent as if dead with shame.” 

A shameless man brags about something of which no one should boast. 
You must disregard such a wretch. The wise man should endure anything 
that fools say, for what can a vulgar fellow achieve by his praise or blame? 
He is like a crow that caws pointlessly in the vana. 

If those who accuse others verbally could establish the charges by some 
means, then perhaps their words would be of some value. But empty words 
are as effective as those spoken by fools invoking death upon those they 
abuse. 


Such a man only proclaims his own bastardy by his vile conduct; he is 
like a peacock that dances displaying its intimate body parts, which should 
properly be concealed. A man of pure conduct should never even speak 
with such sinful men, who have no scruples and say or do anything without 
shame. 

He who speaks of someone’s merits when his eyes are upon him, and 
speaks ill of him behind his back, is truly like a dog. Such a man loses 
prospect of bliss in Swarga as well as the fruits of any knowledge and 
dharma that he has earned. He who speaks ill of others behind their backs 
soon loses the punya earned from all his yagnas, libations and gifts made 
even to a hundred men. 

A wise man should unhesitatingly avoid one who is sinful at heart and 
shunned by all honest men, just as he would avoid eating the flesh of a dog. 
The evil one who proclaims the faults of a Mahatman, actually 
demonstrates his own vile nature, just as a snake displays his hood when 
others excite it. The sensible man who seeks to rebut such a back-biter at 
his favourite work, is like a donkey sunk in a heap of ashes. 

A man who always speaks ill of others should be avoided like a 
ferocious wolf, an infuriated elephant which trumpets in madness, or a rabid 
dog. Shame on the sinful, mean men who take to such a senseless path and 
abandoning all wholesome restraints and modesty, who always do what is 
injurious to others without care for their own welfare. 

If an honest man wants to bandy words with such despicable men when 
they set out to humiliate him, you should advise him: “Do not allow 
yourself to be upset.” Men of calm temperament never approve of an 
argument between a high and a low man. We know that an angry, 
slanderous, enraged man can slap another, pelt him with dirt, frighten him 
with snarls or grind his teeth at him. He who endures the complaints and 
abuse of evil men made in public, or who frequently reads these 
injunctions, never suffers any distress through verbal abuse.’” 


CANTO 115 


C6 ye udhishtira says, ‘Wise Pitamaha, as you care for the future of our 

family, you must clear some other doubts that perplex me, apart 

from how to deal with evil men who speak maliciously about us. I want to 

ask you further about what would be beneficial to a kingdom and will 

produce happiness, benefits and advancement in the present and the future 
to the royal line, about beneficial food and drink, and about a healthy body. 

How should a ruling king, surrounded by friends, ministers and 
servants, make his people happy? The king who becomes a victim of his 
baser passions falls into evil company, looks for debased companions, finds 
that all his noble, wellborn and moral servants have abandoned him, and so 
loses their good advice. Such a king never succeeds in gaining the 
objectives whose accomplishment depend upon having good men around 
him. 

You are equal to Brihaspati himself in intelligence and must explain to 
me the Rajadharma, which is difficult to understand. You, Naravyaghra, are 
constantly striving to achieve the good of our vamsa and advise us about the 
dharma of Rajaneeti. 

The learned Kshatri Vidura, too, gives us valuable instructions. I could 
pass my days in happiness like a man who has quaffed amrita, listening to 
your teachings that are so beneficial to us Kshatriyas and the kingdom. 

Which class of servants can one regard as inferior and which 
competent? What type of retainers, of what birth, can help us discharge our 
Rajadharma? If the king chooses to work alone and without assistance, he 


will never succeed in protecting his people. All noble men of high birth 
covet the power of sovereignty.’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘The king, O Bhaarata, cannot rule his kingdom alone. 
Without retainers to help him, he cannot accomplish any goal. Even if he 
succeeds in gaining his objective, he cannot retain it alone. The king whose 
servitors are all knowledgeable and wise, devoted to the good of their 
master, of noble birth and of tranquil disposition, succeeds in enjoying the 
happiness of sovereignty. 

That king enjoys the satisfaction of sovereignty whose ministers are of 
high birth, who cannot be lured away from him by bribes and other 
influences, who live with him and give him advice, who are wise, good, and 
have a knowledge of how matters are interrelated, who can provide for 
future events and contingencies, who have knowledge of the virtues of 
Time and never grieve for what is past. The king whose officials share with 
him his joys and sorrows, who are all faithful, strive to please him and 
direct their attention to the accomplishment of their master’s objectives, 
enjoys the happiness that comes with sovereignty. 

That king enjoys the true happiness of power whose subjects are always 
cheerful, distinguished and tread the path of dharma. He is the best of kings 
if contented and trustworthy men, experts in matters of finance, manage and 
supervise all the sources of his income. The king acquires wealth and great 
punya when incorruptible, trustworthy, devoted and generous servants 
supervise the replenishment of his granaries and stores. 

The king who in his city administers justice lawfully and delivers 
criminal law in the manner of Sankha and Likhita, earns the punya of 
kingship. The king who binds his subjects to himself through kindness, who 
knows the Rajadharma, earns the punya of sovereignty.’” 


CANTO 116 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘An ancient tale relevant to our subject has been 

told which good and wise men regard as an important precedent. 
I heard many Maharishis recount it in the asrama of Rama, the son of 
Jamadagni. 

In a certain large vana, uninhabited by humans, there dwelt a Rishi who, 
with his senses under control, lived upon fruit and roots and observed rigid 
vratas. He was a most perspicacious man, of tranquil and pure soul, who 
always recited the Vedic mantras, observed strict laws and self-restraint 
and, with a heart cleansed by fasts, lived a life of kindness towards all 
creatures. 

When he sat in tapasya, all the creatures that lived in the forest who 
knew of his goodness and wisdom would approach him with affection. 
Fierce lions and tigers, huge choleric elephants, leopards, rhinoceroses, 
bears and other fierce carnivores, blood-drinkers, came and conversed with 
the Rishi, who knew all their tongues. They would greet him courteously 
and depart. Indeed, they always did what pleased him and behaved towards 
him like disciples. 

One domestic animal, a dog, lived there permanently. He had a heart 
like that of a human being, was devoted and exceedingly attached to the 
Rishi and never left him at any time. Weak and emaciated with fasts, he 
subsisted upon fruit, roots and water. He was tranquil and inoffensive in 
nature and always lay at the feet of the great sage because of the love he 
received. 


One day, a vicious leopard of cruel intent, always on the lookout for 
prey, a veritable second Yama, arrived hungry and thirsty, with slavering 
jaws, his tail flicking from side to side, and eyed the dog for his prey. 

When he saw the fierce beast coming, O Rajan, the dog, in fear of his 
life, said to the Rishi, “O Maharishi, this leopard is an enemy of all dogs 
and it wants to kill me. Save me from this beast, wise Mahabaho!”’ 

The Rishi could read the thoughts of every animal and understood that 
the dog had ample cause for fear. Possessed of the six attributes and fluent 
in the voices of all creatures, the Rishi said, “You will have no fear of death 
from leopards any longer. Let your natural form disappear and become a 
leopard, my son!” 

Instantly, the dog was transformed into a leopard with skin bright as 
gold, spots on his body and large fangs, and thereupon began to live in the 
vana fearlessly. Meanwhile, the predatory leopard, seeing before him an 
animal of his own species, lost all feelings of animosity towards it. 

Some time later a fierce and hungry tiger visited the asrama and padded 
with open mouth towards the dog that the Rishi had transformed into a 
leopard. Seeing the hungry tiger, the transfigured leopard sought the Rishi’s 
protection. The Rishi, who had great affection for the leopard because it 
lived with him, now changed him into a powerful tiger. The other tiger, 
when he saw a beast of his own species, Rajan, did him no injury. 

In course of time, the dog, now turned into a powerful carnivore, gave 
up his former diet of fruit and roots. Indeed, from that time, Rajan, the 
transformed tiger lived upon the flesh of other animals of the forest, like a 
true king of beasts.’” 


CANTO 117 


“RB hishma says, ‘The transfigured tiger, replete with the flesh of 

slain animals, slept easy. One day, as he lay in the yard, an 
infuriated elephant who looked like a great cloud, with rent cheeks, a lofty 
forehead, freckled with the dust of lotus filaments on his body, with long 
curved tusks and a trumpet deep as thunder, came to the asrama. 

The tiger saw the enraged elephant approach him and, frantic with fear, 
sought the protection of the Rishi. The Rishi transformed the tiger into an 
elephant. The real elephant, when he saw one of his own kind, big as a mass 
of clouds, was scared away. The Rishi’s elephant from then on frolicked in 
lakes overgrown with lotuses and wandered on their banks riddled with 
rabbit holes. 

A considerable time elapsed in this way. One day, as he cheerfully 
strode along near the asrama, he was confronted by a maned mountain lion 
accustomed to killing elephants. When he saw the lion coming, the Rishi’s 
elephant trembled with fear and sought the sage’s protection. The Rishi 
transformed that prince of elephants into a lion. As the wild lion was of the 
same species, the Rishi’s lion no longer feared him. On the other hand, the 
wild lion, seeing a stronger beast of his own kind before him, was 
intimidated. 

The Rishi’s lion began to live in the asrama within the forest, which the 
other animals no longer ventured to approach as they all feared for their 
lives. One day, a fierce Sarabha with eight legs and eyes on its forehead, 
who preyed on all other animals and petrified them with fear, came to that 


asrama hunting the Rishi’s lion. The Rishi transformed his lion into a fiercer 
and more powerful Sarabha, who quickly put the other to flight. 

Thereafter it lived happily with the Rishi in the asrama and all the 
animals that dwelt in the forest were afraid of it. Their dread and desire to 
save their lives led them to flee the vana. The Sarabha blithely continued 
every day to kill animals for his food and became a carnivorous beast, as it 
no longer cared for the fruit and roots upon which it had once subsisted. 

One day, that ungrateful creature who had first been a dog but who was 
now a Sarabha, thirsting for blood, wanted to kill the Rishi. The wise Rishi, 
through his ascetic power, understood the intentions of the beast and cursed 
him, “O dog, I first converted you into a leopard and then into a tiger. From 
a tiger I changed you into a bull elephant in musth, and then into a lion. 
From a mighty lion I transformed you into a Sarabha. I changed you into 
these diverse shapes out of affection for you. You never belonged by birth 
to any of these species. Since you now want to kill me, one who has done 
you no injury, O sinful one, become a dog again!” 

Immediately, the low, foolish and wicked animal resumed his own 
natural form of a lowly dog.’” 


CANTO 118 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘The dog, after he assumed his natural form, was 
very cast down. The Rishi reprimanded him and drove the sinful 
creature away from his asrama. 

Guided by this precedent, an intelligent king should appoint servants fit 
for the office assigned to each and exercise proper supervision over them. 
He should first ascertain their truthfulness, purity, sincerity and general 
disposition, knowledge of the shastras, conduct, birth, self-restraint, 
compassion, strength, energy, dignity and forgiveness. A king should never 
appoint a minister without first evaluating him. 

If a king gathers round him men of low birth, he will never be happy. A 
man of noble birth, even if unfairly persecuted by his royal master, will 
never try to injure him, while one of mean and low birth who becomes rich 
and powerful through his royal connection, will become his master’s enemy 
even if only verbally rebuked. 

A minister should be of high birth and strength; he should be forgiving, 
self-restrained, with his senses under control; he should not be greedy but 
contented with his just acquisitions, delight in the prosperity of his master 
and friends and know the requirements of time and place—kaala and 
avasara. 

He should always recruit useful men who keep their lord’s dharma in 
mind, remain attentive and faithful in the discharge of their svadharma, are 
masters in the strategy of war and peace, and are loved both by the citizens 
and the inhabitants of the provinces. 


The minister should be a master of all kinds of vyuhas that can cleave 
and shatter his enemies’ ranks, a general skilled in leading the army on the 
march, able to inspire his master’s army with courage and to read signs and 
gestures, adept in the art of training elephants, confident of his own powers, 
free from pride and clever in the transaction of business. 

He should always do what is right, follow svadharma, select noble 
friends, be sweet of speech, good-looking, with marked qualities of 
leadership, well-versed in policy, accomplished, energetic in action, active, 
ingenious, of a sweet temper, modest in appearance, patient, brave, rich, and 
adaptable to the requirements of time and place. The king who finds such a 
minister will never be humiliated or overpowered by anyone. Indeed, his 
kingdom will gradually spread over the earth like the light of the moon. 

A king who knows the shastras, who recognizes the supremacy of 
dharma, who always protects his subjects and who has the following 
virtues, obtains the love of all. He should be patient, forgiving, pure in 
conduct, severe when required, believe in hard work, be respectful towards 
all his elders, know the shastras, remain ready to listen to those who are 
competent to instruct, to give advice and be able to judge correctly between 
conflicting courses of action suggested to him. 

He should be intelligent, have a retentive memory, be just in action, 
self-restrained, sweet-spoken, forgiving even to enemies, practise personal 
charity and have perfect faith in God. He should be of pleasing aspect, 
ready to extend a helping hand to men in distress, be free from egoism, 
never without a wife, refrain from acting in haste, and appoint ministers 
who always seek his good. 

He should always reward his ministers when they achieve anything 
singular. He should avoid idleness, attract men to himself by doing them 
good and cherish those devoted to him. He should always be cheerful and 
attentive to the wants of his servants, and never give way to anger. He 
should be magnanimous and wield the Dandaneeti justly. He should make 
all men around him follow dharma. 

He should use spies for his eyes, to supervise his subjects’ concerns and 
all matters connected with their dharma and artha. A king who has these 
hundred qualifications earns the love of all, so every ruler should strive to 
emulate him. 

The king who wants his own advancement should never disregard his 
army and should enlist able warriors to help him protect his kingdom. If his 


commanders are brave in battle, grateful, well versed in the shastras, if the 
foot-soldiers are familiar with the treatises on religion and dharma, if the 
elephant-warriors are fearless, if the Maharathas are skilled archers and can 
wield other weapons, he will conquer the whole world. 

The king who strives to win over all men, who is ever eager for hard 
work, who has many friends and allies, becomes the greatest of rulers. A 
king who can bond all men to himself, will conquer the whole world, O 
Bhaarata, with just a thousand brave horsemen.’” 


CANTO 119 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘The king who is guided by the moral of this dog’s 

story and appoints his courtiers to offices for which they are fit, 

enjoys the happiness that comes with sovereignty. You should not praise 

and elevate a dog in a position above his competence because he will 

become intoxicated with pride. Ministers should be appointed to offices for 

which they are fit and should be suitably qualified for their occupations. The 
wise do not approve appointments of unworthy men. 

The king who confers on his servitors offices for which each is 
competent will enjoy the happiness that comes with sovereignty. A Sarabha 
should occupy the position of a Sarabha; a lion should bristle with the might 
of a lion; a tiger should be a tiger, and a leopard should remain a leopard. 

Ministers and servitors should be appointed to offices for which each is 
suitable according to the law. If you want to achieve success, never appoint 
them to situations higher than their deserving. The foolish king who, 
ignoring precedent, appoints servants to offices for which they are unfit, 
will not please his subjects. 

A king who wants accomplished retainers should never appoint 
unintelligent, petty-minded men who cannot control their senses and who 
are of low birth. Men who are honest, of noble birth, brave, learned, devoid 
of malice and envy, lofty-minded, pure in conduct and clever in business 
matters, deserve to be appointed as ministers. 

Humble men, prompt in discharging their duties, tranquil in disposition, 
pure in mind, with diverse natural abilities and who are above reproach 


should be advisors to the king. 

A lion should always have only a lion as a companion, otherwise the 
companion will earn all the advantages of the lion, and the lion, none. The 
lion that has only a pack of dogs for his associates will never benefit from 
such a friendship in accomplishing his dharma. 

A king can succeed in subduing the whole world if he has for his 
ministers men of courage, wisdom, learning and high birth. Yudhishtira, 
kings should never keep counsellors who are not learned, sincere, wise and 
wealthy. Men who devote themselves to the service of their master are 
never hindered by any impediments, so kings should always speak to them 
in peaceful terms. 

The king should look after his treasury with great care and always try to 
augment it, since therein lie his roots. Let your granary be filled with corn 
and increase your wealth; but let their supervision be entrusted to honest 
retainers. 

Let your officers be always attentive to their work, acquire skill in battle 
and in managing horses. Yudhishtira, look after the interests of your 
kinsmen and friends, always be in their midst and seek the good of your 
city. 

With this story of the dog, I have instructed you about your dharma 
towards your subjects. What else do you want to hear?’” 


CANTO 120 


oye udhishtira says, “You have, O Bhaarata, discoursed upon the 
many duties of Rajaneeti that wise men who knew the 
Rajadharma of old observed and passed down. You spoke in detail of those 
duties that they approved. Will you now give me a summary of all this, O 
Bharatarishabha, so that I can commit it firmly to memory?’ 

Bhishma says, “Listen, Rajan, to how the protection of all creatures, the 
greatest duty of the Kshatriya, is to be exercised. A king who knows his 
duties should assume many forms, like the peacock that puts forth plumes 
of diverse hues. Keenness, crookedness, truth and sincerity, are the qualities 
that should be present in him. 

With thorough impartiality, he should practise the qualities of goodness, 
if he is to earn happiness. He must assume that particular hue or form which 
is suitable for the particular object he seeks to accomplish. A king who can 
adopt diverse forms will be able to carry out even the most subtle 
objectives. Dumb like the peacock in autumn, he should conceal his 
counsel. He should speak little and the little he speaks should be sweet. He 
should be attractive and well versed in the shastras. 

He should always carefully guard those gates through which danger can 
overcome him, like men taking care of breaks in embankments through 
which the waters of large tanks can rush out and flood their fields and 
houses. He should seek the refuge of Mahatman Brahmanas, like men who 
seek the refuge of great rivers engendered by rainwater collected in 
mountain lakes. 


The king who wishes to amass wealth should behave like religious 
hypocrites who wear a coronal lock. He should retain the danda of 
chastisement uplifted in his hands and levy taxes only after he has carefully 
examined the incomes and expenses of his subjects, as one selects a full- 
grown palmyra tree for drawing its juice. 

He should behave equitably towards his own subjects, get his cavalry to 
trample the crops of his enemies, march against foes when his own wings 
have become strong and, most of all, understand his own weakness. He 
should proclaim the faults of his enemies, crush their supporters and collect 
wealth from outside like a man who plucks flowers from the vana. He 
should destroy the mightier kings who stand with uplifted heads like 
mountains, by placating the governors of their citadels and the garrisons, 
and by ambuscades and sudden attacks. 

He should enter his nightly quarters alone and unseen, like the peacock 
in the rainy season, and enjoy within his inner apartments the 
companionship of his wives. He should protect himself, not take off his 
armour, and avoid the nets that spies and secret agents of his enemies 
spread for him. He should also win over the spies of his enemies, but kill 
them when an opportunity occurs. 

Like the peacock, the king should kill his powerful and angry foes of 
crooked policy, destroy their forces and drive them away from their homes. 
Similarly, he should do what is good for himself and gather wisdom from 
everywhere, as the peacock collects insects from the forest. 

A wise king should thus rule his kingdom and adopt a policy that is 
beneficial to him. He should exercise his own acumen, decide what to do, 
and then consult others to either abandon or confirm such decisions. The 
shastras are useful because they sharpen the intellect and help one to choose 
a proper course of action. 

By the art of conciliation, a king should inspire confidence in the hearts 
of his enemies. He should display his own strength, form his own 
conclusions, and judge different courses of action in his own mind, using 
his intelligence. The king should be wise and well-versed in the arts of 
diplomacy; he must do what is necessary and avoid what is not. 

A wise and intelligent man does not require advice or instruction. If, for 
instance, a man like Brihaspati is disgraced, he soon regains his natural 
disposition, like heated iron dipped in water. A king should accomplish all 
objectives, his own or those of others, in accordance with the shastras. A 


king who knows to acquire wealth should always employ men who are of 
mild disposition, courageous, wise and powerful. When he sees his servitors 
employed in activities for which each is fit, he should work in harmony 
with all of them, like the several strings of a musical instrument tuned to 
their intended tones. 

He should do good to all and never transgress the dictates of dharma. 
The king of whom everybody thinks, “He is mine,” stands unshaken like a 
hill. When he adjudicates between litigants, he should not differentiate 
between whom he likes and dislikes, but uphold justice. 

He should appoint to all his offices men who know the characters of 
particular families, of the masses of the people and of different countries; 
who are mild in speech; of middle age; who have no faults; who are 
devoted to good work; who are never careless; who are free from greed; 
who are learned and self-restrained; who are firm in virtue and always 
prepared to uphold the interests of both dharma and artha. Thus, when he 
has decided on his courses of action and their final objectives, he should 
proceed to achieve them carefully and, advised by his spies in all matters, 
he can live happily. 

The king who never gives way to wrath and joy without sufficient 
cause, who supervises all his actions himself and personally controls his 
income and expenditure, will find great wealth in this world. It is said that 
the king who rewards his officers and subjects publicly for any good they 
do, who chastises those who deserve punishment, who protects himself and 
his kingdom from every evil, knows the dharma of Rajaneeti. Like the sun, 
who casts his rays upon everything below, the king should always look after 
his kingdom himself and, using his intelligence, supervise all his agents and 
officers. 

The king should take wealth from his subjects at the proper time and 
never publicize what he does. Like an able man who milks his cow, he 
should milk his kingdom every day. As the bee collects honey from flowers, 
the king should draw wealth little by little from his kingdom and store it. 
After he has kept apart a sufficient portion, the remainder should be spent 
on the acquisition of punya and the gratification of kama. A sensible king 
who knows his dharma would never waste what he has stored, or disregard 
any wealth for its meagreness; he should never ignore enemies for their 
being powerless; he should exercise his own intelligence, be self-aware and 
never repose confidence in stupid men. 


Steadiness, cleverness, self-restraint, intelligence, health, patience, 
bravery and attention to the demands of time and place: these eight qualities 
lead to the increase of wealth, be it small or great. A little fire, fed with 
clarified butter, may blaze forth into a conflagration. A single seed may 
produce a thousand trees. A king, therefore, even when he hears that his 
income and expenditure are great, should not disregard what appear to be 
small things. Just as an enemy, whether he happens to be a child, a young 
man, or an aged one, can kill a careless man, an insignificant enemy, when 
he becomes powerful, can exterminate a king. A king who is conscious of 
the requirements of time is the best of all rulers. 

A strong or weak enemy can very soon out of malice destroy the 
reputation of a king, obstruct his acquisition of religious punya, and even 
deprive him of his vitality. Therefore, a king with a disciplined mind should 
never be heedless of his foes. 

If a disciplined king desires riches and victory, he should, after he has 
evaluated his expenditure, income, savings and administration, make either 
peace or war. For this reason, the king should seek the help of a clever 
minister, because shrewdness weakens even a mighty protagonist; power 
that is increasing will be protected by astuteness; a growing enemy is 
weakened through cunning. Every action that is undertaken intelligently is 
praiseworthy. 

A patient and impeccable king can satisfy all his wishes even with the 
support of a small force. However, the king who is vain and covetous, who 
surrounds himself with self-seeking flatterers, will never prosper in the 
least. For these reasons, the king should act with consideration when he 
taxes the wealth of his people, for if he continually oppresses them, he will 
be destroyed like a flash of lightning that blazes forth for only a moment. 

Knowledge, tapasya, riches, indeed everything, can be earned through 
hard work. Parisrama, as it occurs in living creatures, is governed by 
intelligence, and one should regard it as the greatest of all things. In the 
human body live many intelligent entities of great energy, like Sakra, 
Vishnu and Saraswati. An intelligent man, therefore, should never disregard 
the body. 

A greedy man can be dominated by constant gifts, as he is never 
satisfied with seizing the wealth of others. However, everyone becomes 
jealous in the matter of enjoying happiness. If a man becomes poor, he loses 
both dharma and kama, which are objects that artha can attain. 


An envious man will try to take the wealth, the enjoyments, the sons 
and daughters and the affluence of others. We can see every kind of fault in 
covetous men, so the king should never take such a man for his minister or 
officer. 

A wise king lacking proper agents should despatch even a low 
functionary to ascertain the disposition and actions of his enemies, in order 
to frustrate their efforts and designs. The trustful and noble king who seeks 
the advice of learned and virtuous Brahmanas, and who is protected by his 
ministers, will be able to keep all his vassals and chieftains under control. 

Rajan, I have briefly spoken to you of all the duties laid down in the 
shastras. Attend to them intelligently, for the king who does so, in 
obedience to his acharya, will surely rule the whole world. The king who 
disregards the satisfaction that comes from following a plan, and depends 
upon what chance will bring, neither enjoys the happiness of kingship nor 
wins the regions of bliss hereafter. 

A king who is vigilant and attentive to the requirements of war and 
peace will be able to destroy even enemies who are famed for their wealth, 
who are esteemed for their intelligence and good conduct, who are brave in 
battle, accomplished and hard-working. 

A king should discover the consequences of different kinds of activities 
and procedures, and never depend upon destiny. One who sees defects in 
faultless men cannot become prosperous and famous. When two friends try 
to complete the same work, a wise man always commends the one who 
takes upon himself the heavier share. Practise this Rajadharma that I have 
told you, be determined to do your duty to protect all your subjects, and you 
will easily obtain the rewards of dharma. 

All the regions of felicity in the hereafter depend upon dharma and 
punya!’” 


CANTO 121 


¢ eave udhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha, you have finished your discourse on 

Rajadharma. From what you have said it is clear that Neeti has a 

crucial position and is the key, for everything depends upon chastisement. It 

seems that Neeti possesses great energy, is omnipresent and is the greatest 

among the Devas, Rishis, high-souled Pitris, Yakshas, Rakshasas, Pisachas 

and Sadhyas, or any of the living beings in this world, including beasts and 
birds. 

You have said that the entire universe, mobile and immobile, including 
Devas, Asuras and Manushyas, depends upon danda. I now want to know 
from you, O Bharatarishabha, who Neeti is truly, of what kind, of what 
form and disposition. Of what is he made, what is his origin, what are his 
features and his grandeur? How does he manage to remain eternally 
wakeful among living creatures, protecting this universe? Who is he, this 
supreme personage called Neeti? Upon what does Neeti depend, and what 
is his path?’ 

Bhishma replies, “Listen, Kurusthama, to who Neeti is and why he is 
also called Vyavahara, and why danda is that upon whom Vyavahara 
depends. Law, sometimes called Vyavahara, is that which upholds the 
dharma of a vigilant and alert king. 

In olden days, Manu first declared this truth: “He who protects all 
creatures, the loved and the hateful equally, impartially wielding the 
Dandaneeti, is the embodiment of dharma.” 


Since Manu began with these words, they are known as the first words 
and represent the transcendent word of Brahma. Since it is with the 
Dandaneeti that we stop the misappropriation of people’s possessions, we 
call it Vyavahara. The traiguna always rests on _ well-administered 
chastisement. 

Danda is a great Deva. In form, he looks like a blazing fire. His 
complexion is dark like that of the petals of the blue lotus. He has four 
teeth, four arms, eight legs and many eyes. His ears are pointed like shafts 
and his hair stands upright. He has matted locks and two tongues. His face 
is the hue of copper and he is clad in a lion’s skin. This irresistible deity 
assumes a fierce shape. 

Danda moves in the world assuming the form of the sword, the bow, the 
mace, the dart, the trident, the mallet, the arrow, the bludgeon, the battle- 
axe, the discus, the noose, the heavy club, the rapier, the lance and in fact of 
every kind of weapon that exists on earth. Indeed, punishment moves on 
earth, piercing, cutting, smiting, lopping, dividing, striking, slaying and 
attacking his victims. 

These, Yudhishtira, are some of the names which Danda bears: Sword, 
Sabre, Dharma, Fury, the Irresistible, the Parent of Prosperity, Victory, 
Punisher, Checker, the Eternal, the shastras, Brahmana, Mantra, Avenger, 
the Greatest of First Legislators, Judge, the everlasting God, the One whose 
course is irresistible, the Unceasing, the First-born, the individual without 
affections, the Soul of Rudra, the eldest Manu and the great Benefactor. 

Dandaneeti is the holy Vishnu, the powerful Narayana, and because he 
always assumes a terrible form, he is called Mahapurusha. His wife Dharma 
is also known by the names of Brahmana’s daughter, Lakshmi, Vriti, 
Saraswati, and Mother of the universe. Dandaneeti thus has many forms. 

Blessing and curse, pleasure and pain, dharma and adharma, strength 
and weakness, fortune and misfortune, merit and demerit, virtue and vice, 
desire and aversion, season and month, night, day and hour, care and 
carelessness, joy and anger, peace and self-restraint, destiny and exertion, 
salvation and condemnation, fear and fearlessness, injury and ahimsa, 
tapasya, yagna and nirvritti, poison and healthy food, the beginning, the 
middle and the end, the result of all murderous deeds, insolence, insanity, 
arrogance, pride, patience, policy, disorder, powerlessness and power, 
respect, disrespect, decay and stability, humility, charity, timeliness and 
untimeliness, falsehood, wisdom, truth, belief, disbelief, impotence, trade, 


profit, loss, success, defeat, ferocity, mildness, death, acquisition and loss, 
agreement and disagreement, that which should be done and that which 
should not, strength and weakness, malice and good-will, disgrace and 
honour, modesty, prosperity and adversity, energy, action, learning, 
eloquence, keenness of understanding: all these, Yudhishtira, are the 
multiple forms of the Dandaneeti in this world. 

If the Law had not existed, all living creatures would have harassed or 
killed one another, for it is fear of punishment that restrains them. When the 
Dandaneeti protects subjects it enhances the might of their ruler, for Danda 
is the best refuge of all. 

It quickly sets the world on the path of dharma, which depends upon 
satya and dwells in Brahmanas. Empowered by dharma, the greatest of 
Brahmanas become attached to the Vedas. From the Vedas the sacrifices 
flow which please the Devas. The gratified Devas then recommend the 
inhabitants of the earth to Indra, who gives them food in the form of rain, 
without which crops and vegetation would fail. The life of all creatures 
depends upon food which provides them with nourishment for growth. 

For this purpose, Danda assumes among them the form of a Kshatriya 
ruler, who remains alert, protecting them, always vigilant and never failing. 

Law has these other eight names—God, Man, Life, Power, Heart, the 
Lord of all creatures, the Atman of all things, and the Living Entity. God 
gave both wealth and the rod of chastisement to the strong king in the form 
of military forces which are a combination of five constituents: Dharma, 
Vyavahara, Dandaneeti, Ishwara and Prani. 

Yudhishtira, the king should seek noble blood, wealthy ministers, 
knowledge, power in the form of strength of body and energy of mind, with 
the eight instruments—elephants, horses, chariots, foot-soldiers, boats, 
slaves as camp followers for doing other work, increase of population and 
cattle—and the other force which depends upon a well-filled treasury. 

The army accoutered in mail and livery, with Maharathas, elephant- 
warriors, cavalry, infantry, officers and surgeons constitute the limbs. 
Beggars, principal judges, astrologers, priests who perform propitiatory and 
Atharvan rites, the treasury, allies, grain and all other requisites, composed 
of seven attributes and eight limbs, constitute the body of a kingdom. Law 
is another powerful limb of a kingdom and in the form of an army is the 
very creator of a kingdom. God himself has with great care sent Danda for 
the use of the Kshatriya, and this eternal universe is impartial Neeti’s self. 


There is nothing more worthy of respect by kings than Danda, by which 
the ways of dharma are defined. Brahma, for the protection of the world and 
for establishing the dharma of different individuals, created chastisement. 
The common law or Vyavahara, arising out of the dispute of litigants, has 
also sprung from Brahma. 

When a suit, civil or criminal, is instituted, the king or those who work 
in the king’s name must call for evidence and decide in favour of one or the 
other party. There follows danda or punishment. Principally characterized 
by a belief in either of the two parties, this Vyavahara is seen to bring about 
good. There is another kind of Vyavahara which has the Vedas for its soul 
and its cause. There is a third kind of Vyavahara, O tiger among kings— 
Kulachara, which deals with family customs consistent with the shastras. 

Vyavahara, based on the belief that either of two litigant parties is right, 
is inherent in the king, and should be also known as Evidence. Although 
judgement and punishment are regulated by Evidence, yet one says it has its 
soul in Vyavahara, which is based upon Vedic precepts. 

That Vyavahara which has the Vedas for its soul, is dharma or duty, and 
benefits all men who believe in it. Mahatmans have spoken of the 
Vyavahara as they have done of ordinary law. 

The third kind of Vyavahara is also an acharya of men and also has its 
roots in the Veda, O Yudhishtira. It upholds the three worlds. It has Truth 
for its soul and produces prosperity. That which is Danda we have seen to 
be the eternal Vyavahara and is actually the Veda, dharma and duty. 

That which is morality and duty is the path of dharma from the 
beginning, and is Pitamaha Brahma, the Lord of all creatures. Brahma is the 
Creator of the entire universe with the Devas, Asuras, Rakshasas, 
Manushyas, Nagas, and of every other entity. Hence the Vyavahara which is 
based on the belief that either of two litigant parties is right, also flows from 
Him. 

For this reason Manu has laid down the following in respect of 
Vyavahara: Neither mother, nor father, nor brother, nor wife, nor priest, are 
above punishment by the king who rules strictly according to his dharma.’” 


CANTO 122 


¢ “RB hishma says, ‘An old story is told about great Vasuhoma, king of 
the Angas. He and his queen were always engaged in pious work 
and practised the most rigid tapasya. 

He went to Munjaprishtha, held in high esteem by the Pitris and the 
Devarishis, where on the summit of Himavat, near the golden mountains of 
Meru, the great Brahmana Rama had sat under the shade of a renowned 
banyan tree, his hair matted in jata. Rishis of rigid vratas call Munjaprishtha 
the favourite haunt of Rudra. 

King Vasuhoma lived there, acquired many spiritual powers, gained the 
esteem of the Brahmanas and came to be regarded as a Devarishi. One day, 
the great Parantapa King Mandhatri, the mighty friend of Indra, came to the 
mountain retreat and stood before Vasuhoma of austere tapasya in an 
attitude of humility. 

Vasuhoma offered arghya to his guest and water to wash his feet, and 
enquired about the well-being of all seven limbs of his kingdom. He then 
asked his royal guest, who faithfully followed the practices of the ancient 
men of dharma, “What can I do for you, O Rajan?” 

Mandhatri, the best of kings, highly gratified, answered the wise 
Vasuhoma seated at his ease, “You have studied all the doctrines of 
Brihaspati, Rajan, and those laid down by Usanas. I want to know what the 
origin of Neeti is. What was awake before Chastisement? What is said to be 
its end? How did Danda come to depend upon the Kshatriya? Tell me all 


this, O you of great wisdom! I come to you as a shishya, acknowledge you 
as my guru and am ready to give you gurudakshina.” 

Vasuhoma said, “Listen, Mandhatri, to how Neeti, the upholder of the 
world, arose. The soul of dharma is eternal, ananta, and was created to 
uphold the appropriate governance of all creatures. We hear that, once upon 
a time, the Pitamaha of all the worlds, the divine Brahma, wanted to 
perform a sacrifice, but failed to find a priest whose competence equalled 
his own. 

He then conceived such a priest in his head and held the embryo there 
for long years. After a thousand years had passed, the great God sneezed, 
and the embryo fell out of his head. The divine being that thus took birth 
from Brahma came to be called Kshupa, a great lord of creatures, who 
possessed enormous powers and became the priest at the yagna of the 
Mahatman Pitamaha. 

When the yagna began, Brahma assumed the mild and peaceful aspect 
of a sacrificer and Chastisement, which had dwelt in his furious form, 
disappeared, causing great confusion among all creatures. There was no 
longer any distinction between what should be done and what should not, 
between clean and unclean food, and between what drink was permissible 
and what was not. 

All creatures began to do violence to one another, and there were no 
restraints in the matter of the union of the sexes. All ideas of property 
ceased, all creatures began to rob and lawlessly take meat from one another. 
The strong began to kill the weak, and nobody had the slightest 
consideration for his neighbour. 

The Pitamaha then worshipped the divine and eternal Vishnu, the great 
boon-giver and said, “Kesava, show mercy and remove this pervasive 
chaos.” 

Thus addressed, the best of gods, Vishnu, reflected long and created his 
own self in the form of Danda. From that form, which had Dharma for its 
legs, Goddess Saraswati created the Dandaneeti, the science of Punishment, 
which soon became celebrated the world over. Mahavishnu again reflected 
awhile and appointed some among the Devas as the lords or rulers of their 
respective varnas. 

It was then that he made the divine Indra, the thousand-eyed, the king of 
the Devas; Yama, the son of Vivaswat, the lord of the Pitris; Kubera, the 
lord of treasures and of all the Rakshasas; Meru, the king of mountains; and 


Sagara, the lord of rivers. He installed the powerful Varuna with the 
sovereignty of the waters and the Asuras, made Yama the lord of life and all 
living things and Agni the lord of all things possessed of energy. 

He made the powerful Isana, Mahatman and eternal Mahadeva of three 
eyes, the lord of the Rudras; Vasishtha, the lord of the Brahmanas, and 
Jatavedas the chief of the Vasus; Surya, the lord of all luminous bodies, 
Chandramas, the king of stars and constellations, Ansumat, the lord of all 
herbs; and the mightiest of deities, Kumara or Skanda, of twelve arms, the 
chief of all the spirits and ghostly beings, the ganas that wait upon 
Mahadeva. 

He made Kaala, Time, who possesses the seeds of both destruction and 
growth, the sovereign of all creatures and also of the four portions of Death 
—weapons, diseases, Yama and deeds and, lastly, of grief and joy. The 
Srutis declare, Rajan, that the supreme God Mahadeva, the Lord of Lords 
armed with his Sula, is the lord of the Rudras. The danda of punishment 
was given to Brahma’s son Kshupa, the lord of all creatures and the best of 
all Dharmatmans. 

On the completion of the yagna according to the prescribed rites, 
Mahadeva Brahma, with due reverence, gave Neeti, the protector of 
dharma, to Vishnu. Vishnu gave it to Angiras Maharishi, who in turn passed 
it down to Indra and Marichi. Marichi gave it to Bhrigu, who gave the 
Dandaneeti, meant for the protection of dharma, to all the Rishis. The 
Rishis gave it to the regents of the world and the Lokapalas gave it again to 
Kshupa. Kshupa then gave it to Manu, the son of Surya and Manu, the Deva 
of Sraddhas, gave it to his sons for the sake of true dharma and artha. 

Chastisement, which is intended to restrain evil, should be applied with 
discrimination, always guided by dharma and not by caprice. Fines and 
forfeitures are meant to strike fear, and not to fill the king’s treasury. 
Sentences of maiming a person’s body or inflicting death or physical pain 
by various means, hurling from mountain-tops and banishment, should 
never be imposed for trivial causes. Surya’s son Manu gave the Dandaneeti 
to his sons for the protection of the world. Danda in the hands of its 
successive bearers remains awake to protect all creatures. 

Above, the divine Indra is awake with the Dandaneeti; below him, Agni 
of blazing flames; followed by Varuna, then Prajapati, then Vairagya, whose 
essence is restraint and discipline, after whom come Dharma, the son of 


Brahma, the eternal Neeti, and then Tejas, always awake and employed in 
the work of protection. 

After Tejas, come the herbs offered in yagnas to support the Devas and 
used as food and medicines; after the herbs, the mountains; after the 
mountains, all kinds of juices and their essences; after these, the Devi Niriti; 
after Niriti, the planets and the luminous bodies in heaven; after these, the 
Vedas; after the Vedas, the powerful Vishnu as Hayagriva; after him, the 
almighty and eternal Pitamaha Brahma. After Pitamaha, the divine and 
blessed Mahadeva; after Mahadeva, the Viswadevas; after them, the 
Maharishis; after the Rishis the divine soma; after soma, the Nitya Devas; 
after them, know that the Brahmanas are awake. 

After the Brahmanas, the Kshatriyas righteously protect all creatures. 
The Kshatriyas keep awake the eternal universe, which consist of mobile 
and immobile creatures, and Chastisement is awake among them. With 
magnificence akin to that of Pitamaha himself, Neeti keeps together and 
upholds everything. Kaala, O Bhaarata, is always awake, in the beginning, 
the middle and the end. The master of all the worlds, the lord of all 
creatures, the powerful and blessed Mahadeva, the Devadeva, is always 
awake. He is called by these names also—Kapardin, Sankara, Rudra, 
Bhava, Sthanu and Umapati, the lord of Uma. Thus, Danda also keeps 
awake in the beginning, the middle and the end. A king of dharma should 
rule justly, guided by the Dandaneeti.” 

He who listens to this teaching of Vasuhoma and conducts himself 
according to its spirit is sure to have all his wishes fulfilled. O 
Bharatarishabha, I have now, told you everything about Danda—the 
restrainer of the universe, which is governed by dharma.’” 


CANTO 123 


6 ay udhishtira says, ‘I want to hear, O Pitamaha, the generally 

accepted conclusions on the subject of dharma, artha, kama, 
their respective roots and outcomes. On which of these does the course of 
life depend? We sometimes observe them to mingle with one another and 
sometimes to exist separately, independent of one another.’ 

Bhishma replies, “When men in this world endeavour with good 
intentions to earn artha with the help of dharma, then the three, dharma, 
artha and kama, will co-exist in a state of union in respect of time, cause 
and action. 

Artha has its root in dharma and kama is the fruit of artha. All three 
again have their root in will. Will is concerned with objects. All objects, 
again, in their entirety, exist for gratifying kama. Upon these does the 
traiguna depend. Complete withdrawal from all objects is mukti. 

Dharma is needed for the protection of the body, artha for the 
acquisition of dharma, and kama for the gratification of the senses. All three 
have the quality of rajas or passion. 

If one seeks dharma, artha and kama for the sake of Swarga or other 
such rewards, they are remote because the rewards themselves are distant. 
When one seeks them for the sake of the Knowledge of the Self, the 
rewards are immediate. One should seek dharma only for achieving purity 
of soul; artha to devote to work undertaken without desire of any reward, 
and kama only to support the body. 


One should not cast off dharma, artha and kama even mentally, until 
one has freed oneself through tapasya. The aim of the first three 
purusharthas is the fourth one, mukti, if only man can obtain it! 

Actions, undertaken and completed even with intelligence, may or may 
not yield the expected results. Dharma is not always the root of artha, for 
things other than virtue lead to wealth, such as service and agriculture. 
There is also a contrary opinion, for some say that one acquires wealth 
through chance, or birth, or other like causes. In some instances, the 
attainment of artha produces evil, while others hold the view that artha 
spent on sacrifices has led to the acquisition of dharma. 

Therefore a dullard, whose understanding ignorance has debased, can 
never acquire the highest aim of dharma and artha, which is mukti. Dharma 
is worthless if sought for reward; artha is impure if wealth is hoarded; but 
when purged of these impurities, they produce great results. 

A discussion is said to have taken place long ago between Rishi 
Kamandaka and King Angaristha. One day, Angaristha saluted Kamandaka 
as he was comfortably seated and, taking advantage of a long-sought 
opportunity, asked him, “If a king impelled by lust and folly commits sins 
for which he later repents, through what actions, O Rishi, can he wash away 
those sins? If an ignorant man commits a sin in the belief that he is acting 
righteously, how will the king stop this sin from gaining currency among 
men?” 

Kamandaka said, “The man who abandons dharma and artha and 
pursues only kama reaps the destruction of his intelligence. Heedlessness 
then follows, destroys both virtue and wealth, and leads to godlessness and 
inveterate wickedness of conduct. 

If the king does not restrain such evil men of sinful conduct, all good 
subjects will live in fear of him, like the inmates of a room where a snake 
has hidden itself. The subjects, including Brahmanas and all pious men, will 
not follow such a king. As a result, he incurs great danger and ultimately 
the risk of death itself. Disgraced and insulted, he has to drag on a 
miserable existence equal to death. 

Men learned in the shastras have indicated the following method for 
checking sin. The king should always dedicate himself to the study of the 
three Vedas, be devoted to dharma and make alliances of marriage with 
noble families. He should respect the Brahmanas, give them good offices 
and wait upon high-minded ones who possess the virtue of mercy. He 


should perform ablutions, chant sacred mantras and thus pass his time 
righteously and happily. 

Banishing all evil subjects from himself and his kingdom, he should 
seek the companionship of Dharmatmans. He should please all with his 
speech or good karma. He should tell everyone ‘I am yours,’ and proclaim 
the virtues of even his enemies. Thus, he will soon cleanse himself of his 
sins and win the high regard of all. 

You should complete all the important duties your elders and gurus tell 
you to perform, and you will be certain to gain great benefits as a result of 
their blessings.””’” 


CANTO 124 


¢ ye udhishtira says, ‘Everyone on earth, O greatest of men, lauds 

conduct that conforms to dharma. However, I have grave doubts 
about this praise. If we are to understand this, I want to hear everything 
about the way in which virtuous behaviour can be acquired and what its 
characteristics are.’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘Once, Duryodhana asked his father Dhritarashtra the 
same question, when he was afire with jealousy at the sight of you and your 
brothers’ opulence in Indraprastha, and for the jeers he received when made 
to look a fool in your magnificent court, the Mayasabha. Listen to what 
happened then, O Bhaarata. When he had seen your grand sabha and your 
great prosperity, Duryodhana spoke of it to his father. 

Dhritarashtra then asked his son and Karna, “Tell me, why do you 
grieve, Duryodhana? If there is adequate reason for your sorrow, I will try 
to advise you. O subjugator of hostile towns, you too have obtained great 
riches; all your brothers, friends and relatives are obedient to you and you 
also wear the best clothes, eat the richest food and ride the finest horses. 
Why, then, have you become pale and emaciated?” 

Duryodhana said, “Tens of thousands of ascetic Snataka Brahmanas 
daily eat at Yudhishtira’s palace from golden plates. When I see the great 
prosperity of my enemies, the sons of Pandu, Yudhishtira’s splendid palace 
adorned with beautiful flowers and fruit, his horses of the Tittiri and the 
Kalmasha breeds, his diverse raiment and his wealth that equals that of 
Vaisravana himself, I burn with grief, father!” 


Dhritarashtra said, “If you wish to become prosperous like Yudhishtira, 
or even richer, endeavour to be virtuous, my son, for then without doubt 
you can conquer the three worlds by conduct alone. There is nothing 
impossible that dharma cannot attain. Mandhatri conquered the whole 
world in course of one night, Janamejaya, in three and Nabhaga, in seven. 
All these kings possessed compassion and were men of dharma, and so won 
the earth with their virtue.” 

Duryodhana said, “I want to hear, O Bhaarata, of that dharma by which 
the kings you named won the earth so swiftly.” 

Dhritarashtra said, “Let me relate the story that Narada once recounted 
on the subject of dharma. Long ago, the Daitya Prahlada, by the punya of 
his karma, snatched from noble Indra his sovereignty and reduced the three 
worlds to subjection. Then Indra, Lord of the Devas, approached the wise 
Brihaspati with folded hands and said to the great Devaguru, ‘I want you to 
tell me what the source of happiness is.’ 

Brihaspati replied that the knowledge which leads to mukti is the source 
of the highest happiness. Indra then asked him again whether there was 
anything still higher. 

Brihaspati said, “There is something still higher. The Mahatman 
Bhargava-Usanas will instruct you better. Go and ask him, O king of the 
Devas!’ 

Indra then went to the great Rishi Sukra Bhargava and obtained from 
him the knowledge of what would be of great good for him. After he had 
the permission of the Maharishi Bhargava, Indra again asked the Rishi 
whether there was any higher happiness to acquire than what the Muni had 
already taught him. 

The omniscient Bhargava said, “The Mahatman Prahlada has better 
knowledge of this.’ 

Indra, the percipient vanquisher of Paka, was delighted and, assuming 
the form of a Brahmana, went to Prahlada and entreated him, ‘I want to 
know what causes happiness.’ 

Prahlada answered, ‘O Mahamuni, I have no time to instruct you for I 
am occupied in the task of ruling the three worlds.’ 

The Brahmana said, “Rajan, when you have leisure, I wish to receive 
instruction from you on what course of conduct produces happiness.’ 

At this King Prahlada was pleased and said, “Tathaasthu!’ 


He then found a favourable opportunity to impart to Indra the deep 
truths of knowledge. Indra duly showed to Prahlada the reverence expected 
from a sishya towards his guru and began with his whole heart to do what 
Prahlada wanted. Many a time he enquired, ‘Parantapa, how have you been 
able to win the sovereignty of the three worlds? Tell me, Dharmarajan, what 
those means are.’ 

Prahlada said, ‘I neither feel any pride in being a king, nor do I cherish 
any hostility towards Brahmanas. On the other hand, I accept and follow the 
guidance they give me on matters of policy, based upon the teachings of 
Sukra. With complete confidence they tell me whatever they wish and 
restrain me from sinful deeds or straying from dharma. 

I am always obedient to the teachings of Sukra. I wait upon and serve 
the Brahmanas and my elders. I bear no malice to any creature; I am a 
Dharmatman. I have conquered wrath, and all my senses are under my 
control. These Munis who are my masters pour beneficial teachings on me 
like bees dropping honey into the cells of their comb. I taste the nectar these 
learned men let fall and, like the moon among the constellations, I live 
among those of my varna. 

To listen to the teachings of Sukra from the lips of Brahmanas and to 
follow their advice, is like nectar on earth, like the clearest eye. In these 
consist the good of a man.’ So said Prahlada to the Brahmana by whom he 
was dutifully served. 

‘Maharishi, I am gratified by your reverential behaviour towards me. 
You are blessed. Ask me for a boon and I will grant you whatever you wish 
for.’ 

Indra the Brahmana said, ‘If you are gratified with me, and if you wish 
to give me what I desire, I want then to acquire your dharma. This is the 
boon that I beg.’ 

At this, though he was pleased, Prahlada became filled with a great fear. 
Indeed, when Indra asked for his boon, the Daitya king guessed that the 
Brahmana could not be an ordinary man. Wondering, Prahlada at last said, 
‘Tathaasthu. Let it be so!’ 

The Brahmana went away, but deep anxiety filled Prahlada, and he did 
not know what to do. While he sat brooding over the matter, a flame of light 
emerged from his body. It had a shadowy form of great splendour and huge 
proportions. 

Prahlada asked the form, “Who are you?’ 


The form answered, ‘I am Neeti, the embodiment of your conduct. Cast 
off by you, I am leaving. I will henceforth, Rajan, dwell in that faultless and 
best of Brahmanas who has become your devoted disciple.’ The form 
disappeared and soon entered the body of Sakra. 

After the disappearance of that form, another of similar shape issued 
from Prahlada’s body. The Daitya king addressed it, ‘Who are you?’ 

The form answered, ‘Know me, Prahlada, for the embodiment of 
Dharma. I will go where the greatest of Brahmanas is, for I reside where 
Neeti dwells.’ 

Upon the disappearance of Dharma, a third form, ablaze with splendour, 
came out of the body of the ascetic. Asked by Prahlada who he was, the 
magnificent form answered ‘Know, O Lord of the Daityas, that I am Satya. 
I will leave you, and follow the way of Dharma.’ 

After Truth had left Prahlada, in the wake of Dharma, another great one 
issued out of his body. Asked who he was by the Daitya king, the mighty 
being answered, ‘I am the embodiment of good deeds. Know, O Prahlada, 
that I live where Satya lives.’ 

After this one had left Prahlada, another being emerged, roaring loudly. 
Questioned by Prahlada, he answered, ‘Know that I am Might, and dwell 
where good deeds are.’ Then Might went away to where good deeds had 
gone. 

After this, a Devi of great brilliance issued out of Prahlada’s body. The 
Daitya king asked her who she was, and she told him that she was Sree, the 
embodiment of prosperity, adding, ‘I dwelt in you, O hero, incapable of 
being obstructed! Cast off by you, I will follow Might.’ 

The noble Prahlada, stricken with fear, once more asked the goddess, 
‘Where do you go, Devi, you who live amid lotuses? You are always 
devoted to truth and are the greatest of deities. Who is that best of 
Brahmanas who was my disciple? I want to know the truth.’ 

The goddess of prosperity said, ‘That Brahmana whom you instructed, 
O mighty one, was Indra, assuming the vow of Brahmacharya. He robbed 
you of the sovereignty that you had over the three worlds. Maharishi, it was 
by your conduct that you had reduced the three worlds to subjection. 
Knowing this, the king of the Devas robbed you of your Neeti. 
Righteousness, Truth, Good deeds, Might and Prosperity, O wise man, all 
have their root truly in Neeti, conduct.’” 


Bhishma continues, ‘With these words, the goddess of prosperity went 
away like all the rest, Yudhishtira! 

Duryodhana once more addressed his father, “Kurupravira, I want to 
know the truth about Neeti. Tell me how it can be acquired.” 

Dhritarashtra told him, “The noble Prahlada revealed these to Indra. 
However I will tell you in brief how you can acquire Dharmaneeti. 
Abstention from injury by act, thought and word, towards all creatures, 
compassion and charity, constitute conduct that is worthy of praise. 

You should never do anything which does not benefit others, or which 
makes you ashamed. On the other hand, you should do what will win praise 
in society. Kurusthama, I have now told you in brief what Dharmaneeti is. 
If men of evil conduct ever win prosperity, O King, they do not enjoy it for 
long and are exterminated by the root. 

Now that you know all this, be of good conduct if you want to have 
prosperity greater than that of Yudhishtira.” 

This even was what King Dhritarashtra said to his son. Act according to 
these instructions, son of Kunti, and you will surely find their reward.’” 


CANTO 125 


6 =e udhishtira says, “You have said, O Pitamaha, that Neeti is the 

primary requirement for any man. But tell me, what is hope, and 

from where does it arise? Only you can clear this grave doubt, which has 

risen in my mind. I had great hope that Suyodhana would do what was 
proper, even when the battle was about to begin. 

Every man cherishes hope and when that hope is dashed, he feels grief 
almost equal to death. Fool that I am, Dhritarashtra’s evil son destroyed the 
hope that I had nurtured. Look at the idiocy of my mind! I think that hope is 
larger than a mountain with all its trees, or perhaps it is vaster than the 
firmament itself, truly immeasurable. Hope is veritably difficult to fathom, 
and equally difficult to subdue. What else, Pitamaha, is as unconquerable as 
hope?’ 

Bhishma replies, “Listen, Yudhishtira, while I narrate to you the 
discussion between Sumitra and Rishabha that took place long ago. 

A Rajarishi of the Haihaya vamsa, called Sumitra, went out to hunt. He 
pursued a deer, which he had struck with an arrow but could not kill. That 
strong deer ran ahead with the arrow sticking out of him, with the virile 
king in hot pursuit. The fleet animal quickly cleared a low ground and then 
a level plain, with the king, young, active, strong, armed with bow and 
sword and clad in mail, still in chase. Alone in the hunt, Sumitra followed 
the deer through the vana, crossing many rivers, streams, lakes and copses. 
The swift animal, struck by many shafts of the king, ran on through one 


forest after another, showing itself now and then tantalizingly to the king as 
if in sport, and lessening the distance between itself and its pursuer. 

At last, that Parantapa drew his sharpest and most terrible arrow, 
capable of piercing the very vitals of any creature, and fitted it to his 
bowstring. The great and mighty deer, as if mocking his pursuer’s efforts, 
suddenly raced away and flew four yojanas out of range, and the 
magnificent shaft fell harmlessly to the ground. The deer entered a large 
vana, but the king still continued the chase.’” 


CANTO 126 


66 B hishma says, “The king entered that great vana and came upon an 

asrama of Rishis. Exhausted by the chase, he sat down to rest. 
The Rishis, when they saw him armed with bow, worn out and hungry, 
approached him and duly honoured him. The king accepted the honours the 
Rishis offered and enquired about the progress of their tapasya. Having 
answered the king’s questions, the Rishis endowed with the wealth of 
tapasya asked him what had led him to their asrama. 

They said, “Blessed Rajan, what delightful pursuit brings you to this 
asrama on foot, armed with sword, bow and arrows? Tell us your vamsa and 
your name.” 

The king gave all the Brahmanas an account of himself, O Bhaarata, 
and said, “I am born into the race of the Haihayas, my name is Sumitra and 
I am the son of Mitra. I chase herds of deer and hunt them in thousands with 
my arrows. 

Accompanied by a large force, my ministers and the women of my 
household, I came out on a hunt. I shot a deer with an arrow, but the animal, 
with the shaft stuck in his body, sped away. While chasing it, I have 
accidentally arrived in this vana and find myself in your presence, in this 
pitiable condition—shorn of all splendour, weary and disappointed. I am 
not at all sorry, august Rishis, at my present plight, being without the signs 
of royalty or far from my capital. However, I feel a poignant grief at my 
hope being dashed. Just as Himavat, prince of mountains, and Sagara, vast 


receptacle of waters, cannot measure the extent of the sky, O Maharishis, I 
cannot measure the limits of hope. 

You are endowed with the punya of tapasya and are infinitely wise; 
there is nothing unknown to you. You are also highly blessed. I beg you to 
resolve my quandary. Which of these two appears vaster to you—hope 
cherished by man, or the wide firmament? I want to know why hope is so 
unconquerable. 

If the subject is not improper for you to discuss, then tell me without 
delay. I do not want to hear from you anything, Maharishis, that is a 
mystery that cannot be revealed, or is harmful to your tapasya, or not a 
worthy matter to speak of. Otherwise, I would like to hear of this, and in 
detail. Devoted to tapasya as you are, I beg you to instruct me.” 


CANTO 127 


¢ “RB hishma says, “The Maharishi Rishabha, who sat in the midst of 
all the other Rishis, smiled a little and said, “Once, Sumitra, 
while I was on a tirtha yatra, I went to the delightful Badrikasrama, the 
beautiful hermitage of the sages Nara and Narayana, near the lake where the 
sacred Ganga rises and where the sage Aswasiras always reads the eternal 
Vedas. I performed my ablutions in that lake, offered, with due rites, 
oblations of water to the Pitris and the Devas and entered the asrama where 
the spirits of those two immortal Rishis, Nara and Narayana, always pass 
their time in true bliss. 

I then went to another asrama not far away to make my home. While 
seated there I saw a very tall and emaciated Rishi named Tanu, clad in rags 
and skins, approaching me. Blessed with a wealth of tapasya, he was eight 
times taller than other men, Mahabaho, and I can say that I have never seen 
anyone like him. His body was as thin as one’s little finger, his neck, arms, 
legs and hair extraordinary, with his head, ears and eyes, proportionate to 
his body. His speech and his movements were exceedingly feeble. 

When I saw this emaciated Brahmana, Bharatarishabha, I was 
frightened and full of dread. I touched his feet, stood before him with joined 
hands, informed him of my name and family, my father’s name, and then 
slowly sat down on a seat that he indicated. Then Dharmatman Tanu, in the 
midst of the Rishis living in that asrama, began to discuss the issues of 
dharma and artha, O Rajan. 


While the discourse was going on, a king with eyes like lotus petals 
came to the asrama in a chariot drawn by fleet horses, accompanied by his 
forces and his women. He was the handsome and famed Viradyumna, who 
was unhappily looking for his missing son Bhuridyumna and had come 
there in the course of his search in the vana. He had urged himself on 
through that forest for days thinking, ‘Surely I will find my son here! I will 
surely find my son here!’ 

Addressing the macilent Rishi Tanu he said, ‘My noble son, my only 
child, is lost. I had great hopes of finding him, but with my hope being 
constantly dashed, I am on the point of death.’ 

When he heard this, the great Rishi Tanu remained for a short while 
with his head hanging down and sunk in dhyana. Seeing him thus 
engrossed, the king became exceedingly disturbed. In great grief, he asked 
slowly and softly, “‘Devarishi, what is unconquerable and what is greater 
than hope? Tell me this, if there is no impropriety in my hearing it.’ 

The Rishi said, ‘Your son has insulted a holy Maharishi through his ill- 
luck and foolishness. The Rishi asked your son for a golden jar and herbal 
bark, which he contemptuously refused to give. His conduct infuriated the 
Maharishi.’ 

Thus addressed, the king paid homage to that Rishi whom the whole 
world revered. Viradyumna sat there, spent with fatigue, as you are now. 
The Maharishi Tanu, in return, according to the rites vanavasis observed, 
offered the king water to wash his feet and the usual ingredients that make 
up the arghya. Then all the Rishis sat around him like the Saptarishis around 
Dhruva, and questioned the unvanquished king about the reason for his 
arrival at the asrama.’” 


CANTO 128 


¢ TT he king said again, ‘I am a king called Viradyumna and my fame 

has spread in all directions. My son Bhuridyumna is lost and I 

have come to this forest in search of him, O noble Brahmanas. He is my 

only son, sinless ones, and of tender years. Since I cannot find him here, I 
wander everywhere in search of him.’ 

Rishi Tanu hung down his head again, remained perfectly silent and did 
not utter a single word. In the past, the king had not honoured Tanu and, in 
chagrin, the ascetic had practised austere tapasya for a long time, resolving 
that he would never accept any gift from either kings or members of any 
other varna, saying to himself, ‘Hope agitates every man of foolish 
understanding. I will drive hope from my mind.’ Such was _ his 
determination. 

King Viradyumna once more questioned the Maharishi: ‘What is the 
measure of the thinness of hope? What in this world is exceedingly difficult 
of acquisition? Tell me this, holy one, for you know dharma and artha well.’ 

The sage Tanu of the straw-lean body remembered all the past incidents 
about the King’s neglect of him, and now brought them to the recollection 
of the king. He said, ‘There is nothing, Rajan, that equals hope in 
flimsiness. I solicited many kings and found that nothing is as difficult to 
attain as an image that Hope sets before the mind.’ 

The king said, ‘From your words, Brahmana, I understand what is thin 
and what is not. I understand also, how difficult it is to acquire the images 
set by hope before the mind. I regard your words as Sruti, but I have one 


doubt in my mind. If it pleases you, and it is a subject that you can discuss 
without impropriety, explain it in detail to me. What is more slender than 
your body?’ 

The emaciated sage said, ‘A contented supplicant is exceedingly 
difficult to meet. Perhaps there is no such person in the world. Rarer still is 
one who never disregards a supplicant. The hope that rests upon such men 
who, after swearing promises, do not render service to others to the best of 
their abilities and according to the supplicant’s merit, is even leaner than my 
body. 

The hope that rests upon an ungrateful man, or on one who is cruel, or 
an idle man, or one who injures others, is even slenderer than my body. The 
hope a father who has but one son cherishes of seeing him once more after 
he has been lost, is slenderer than even my body. The hope that old women 
entertain of giving birth to sons, Rajan, and that which rich men cherish, is 
even thinner than my body. The hope of marriage that springs up in the 
hearts of old maids when they hear anybody talk of it, is leaner than my 
body.’ 

Hearing these words, Rajan, King Viradyumna and the women of his 
household prostrated themselves before the great Brahmana and touched his 
feet with their bent heads. 

The king said, ‘By your grace, O holy one, I want to find my child. 
What you have said is true. There is no doubt of the verity of your words.’” 

Rishabha continued, “The holy Tanu, foremost of Dharmatmans, 
smiled, and with his gyana and his tapasya caused the king’s son to be 
brought to the place. The sage rebuked the king and then revealed himself 
to be Dharma Deva, the god of righteousness himself. After displaying his 
own wonderful and celestial form, he entered an adjacent vana, with heart 
freed from wrath and the desire of revenge. 

I saw all this, Rajan, and heard the words I have said. Drive out your 
hope that is even slenderer than any mentioned by the sage.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘Thus addressed by the Dharmatman Rishabha, 
King Sumitra cast off the hope that was in his heart and which was slimmer 
than any of the kinds of hope the skeletal Rishi had indicated. You, too, O 
son of Kunti, pay heed to what I have said and be calm as Himavat. 
Overcome with distress, you have questioned me and heard my reply. Now 
that you have heard it, Rajan, you should dismiss your regrets!’” 


CANTO 129 


66 Y udhishtira says, ‘Like one who drinks amrita, I am never satiated 

listening to you speak. Just as a person who has knowledge of 
the Atman is never content with meditation, I am never satisfied after I 
drink the nectar of your discourse on dharma. Therefore, Pitamaha, speak 
again on dharma.’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘Then let me tell you the old story of the discourse 
between Maharishi Gotama and the illustrious Yama. Gotama owned an 
extensive asrama on the Paripatra hills, where for sixty thousand years the 
sage sat in tapasya. One day, O Naravyaghra, the regent of the world, Yama, 
arrived there and saw him engaged in the most stern tapasya. 

The Muni, understanding that it was Yama who had come, quickly 
saluted him and sat attentively with folded hands, awaiting his command. 
Lord Dharma in return saluted that bull among Brahmanas and enquired 
what he could do for him. 

Gotama asked, “What does one do to liberate oneself from the debt one 
owes to one’s mother and father? And how does one win regions of pure 
bliss that are so difficult to attain?” 

Yama replied, “One should devote oneself to the dharma of satya, 
practise purity and tapasya ceaselessly, and worship one’s mother and 
father. One should also perform Aswamedha yagnas, with gifts in plenty for 
Brahmanas. Through such deeds one wins many wonderful regions of 
felicity.”’” 


CANTO 130 


¢ =e udhishtira says, ‘O Bhaarata, what course of conduct should a 
king adopt who is without friends and troops, who has many 
enemies and an exhausted treasury? What should be his conduct when evil 
ministers surround him, when all his counsels are divulged, when he does 
not see his way clearly before him while he is attacking or subduing a 
hostile kingdom, or when, though weak, he is at war with a stronger ruler? 

What should be the conduct of a king in whose kingdom affairs are ill- 
regulated, who disregards the requirements of place and time, who is unable 
to bring about peace and cause dissension among his enemies because he is 
oppressed? Should he seek to acquire wealth by evil means, or should he 
lay down his life and not seek artha?’ 

Bhishma replies, “Though you know your dharma, O Bharatarishabha, 
you asked me a question that relates to a mystery about duty. This dharma is 
not something I would have spoken about had you not asked me. Dharma is 
very subtle, and one can understand it with the shastras. 

Some men may become Dharmatmans when they practise the good 
deeds they remember having heard about. By clever and ingenious 
methods, the king can acquire wealth, or he may fail. Now, using your own 
intelligence, can you think of an answer to your question? 

Listen, Bhaarata, to methods which have great punya, and which kings 
can use during times of distress, although I would not say that they conform 
to true dharma. If the king fills the treasury by oppression, this will bring 


him to the verge of destruction. This is also the conclusion of all wise men 
who have deliberated upon the subject. 

The kind of shastras one studies only gives one knowledge which it is 
capable of bestowing and is to his liking. Ignorance stunts the development 
of methods, while knowledge promotes ingenuity and becomes the source 
of great happiness. 

Without any scruples or malice and with a pure heart, listen to these 
teachings. Through the decrease of the treasury, the king’s forces diminish, 
so he should fill his coffers by any means possible, just as he would locate 
water in an arid wilderness. However, in conformity with the code of ethics 
that the ancients practised, the king should show compassion to his people, 
when this times arrives. This is the eternal dharma. 

Under ordinary circumstances, for men who are able and competent, 
dharma is of one kind, while in times of misfortune one’s duties are 
different. A king without wealth may acquire religious punya by tapasya 
and the like. Since life is much more important than punya, and one cannot 
support it without wealth, no punya should be sought which stands in the 
way of gaining wealth. 

A weak king can never obtain just and proper means of sustenance or 
power through religious merit. Since he cannot, even by his best exertions, 
acquire power with the aid of punya, practices during times of misery can 
be condoned, even though the learned opine that they lead to sin. 

When the time of trial is over, the Kshatriya should conduct himself in 
such a way that he does not destroy his punya. He should also work so that 
he will not have to succumb to his enemies. Even these are declared to be 
his dharma. He should not sink into despondency or seek to rescue from the 
peril of destruction his own punya or that of others. On the other hand, he 
must preserve himself. This is the well-established judgement on dharma. 

There is this Sruti, which decides that Brahmanas who know dharma 
should have the expertise to perform. Similarly, the Kshatriya should be 
proficient in exertion, since might of arms is his greatest possession. 

When a Kshatriya has no means of support, what should he take, other 
than what belongs to Munis and Brahmanas? Even a Brahmana in times of 
distress can officiate at the yagna of one for whom he should never officiate 
during ordinary times, and he may even eat forbidden food; so, also, there is 
no doubt that a Kshatriya in distress can take wealth from everyone, except 
Rishis and Brahmanas. 


For one troubled by an enemy and trying to escape, what can be a 
forbidden recourse? For a man imprisoned within a dungeon who wants to 
escape, what outlet can be an improper one? For someone in difficulty, even 
a normally forbidden way out is permissible. 

For a Kshatriya who is in distress because of an empty treasury and a 
weak army, neither a life of mendicancy nor the profession of a Vaisya or a 
Sudra has been prescribed. The profession ordained for a Kshatriya is the 
acquisition of wealth by battle and victory. He should never beg from a 
member of his own varna. 

One who supports himself in ordinary times by following the practices 
primarily prescribed for him, can in times of distress follow alternative 
practices which the shastras have laid down. In times of travail, when a 
Kshatriya cannot follow his ordinary dharma, he may live by even unjust 
and improper means. 

Brahmanas are seen do the same when their means of livelihood are 
destroyed. When they can conduct themselves in this manner, what doubt 
need there be in respect of Kshatriyas? One, indeed, accepts this. Without 
sinking into despondency and ruin, a Kshatriya may forcibly take what he 
can from rich men with a view to protecting the people in the longer term, 
for he is their defender and destroyer as well. 

No one in this world, Rajan, can support life without injuring other 
creatures. Even the Muni who leads a solitary vanavasa is no exception. A 
Kshatriya should not rely upon destiny, especially he who wants to rule. 
The king and the kingdom should always mutually protect each other. This 
is an eternal duty. As the king protects the kingdom when it sinks into 
danger, by making use of all his possessions, the kingdom should also 
protect the king when he is in trouble. 

Even as a last resort, the king should never give up his treasury, his 
weapons to punish evildoers, his army, the chieftains of his kingdom, his 
friends and allies, and other necessary institutions. 

Men who have knowledge of dharma say that one must save one’s seeds 
by deducting them from one’s very food. This is a truth cited from the 
treatise of the Asura Sambara, well-known for his great powers of illusion: 
“Shame on that king whose kingdom languishes! Shame on the life of that 
man who, from want of means, goes to a foreign country for a living! The 
king’s roots are his treasury and army. His army has its roots in his treasury, 
and his religious punya is the root of all.” 


One can never fill the treasury without oppressing others. How, then, 
can the army be kept without oppression? The king in times of distress 
incurs no fault when he persecutes his subjects to fill the treasury. To 
perform yagnas, many adharmic deeds are done, and a king whose object is 
to fill his treasury in times of misfortune incurs no fault by any of these, 
since otherwise evil is certain to befall both him and his kingdom. 

Institutions which cause death and misery exist to collect wealth. An 
astute king must decide what his policy should be in times of distress. He 
should remember that animals and other things are necessary for yagnas, 
which one requires as sacrifices to purify the heart, and that yagnapasus, 
yagnas and purity of the heart are all essential for final mukti. Similarly, 
policy and danda exist for the treasury, which in turn exists for the army, 
while policy, treasury and army, all three exist to vanquish enemies and 
protect or enlarge the kingdom. 

I will give you an example which illustrates the true ways of dharma. 
When a great tree is cut down for making a sacrificial stake, other trees that 
stand in its way have also to be felled. These, when they fall, in turn knock 
down others in their path. Similarly, one should eliminate those who stand 
in the way of a treasury being filled. I do not see how else success can be 
had. 

Through wealth both worlds, this and the next, can be gained, as well as 
truth and punya. A man without wealth is more dead than alive. One should 
acquire wealth by any means for the performance of yagnas. The sin that 
attaches to an action done during times of hardship is not equal to that 
which attaches to the same deed done at other times. 

You cannot possibly see both the acquisition of wealth and its 
abandonment in the same person, Rajan! I have never seen a rich man in the 
forest. All the wealth one sees in this world is attended by struggle. All 
contend with others, saying, “This must be mine! This will be mine!” 

There is nothing more meritorious for a king than the possession of a 
kingdom. While in ordinary times it is sinful for a king to oppress his 
subjects with heavy taxes, in times of trouble it is quite different. Some 
acquire wealth through gifts and yagnas, some who prefer tapasya acquire it 
by penance, and some through their intelligence and ingenuity. A man 
without wealth is considered weak, while he who has wealth is regarded as 
powerful, for he can buy everything. 


A king who has a well-filled treasury can accomplish anything and thus 
earn punya, gratify his kama, and gain this world and the next. One should, 
however, always fill the treasury with the help of dharma, not by practices 
that can pass for dharma in times of need and distress.” 


PART I 


Apaddharmanusasana Parva 


CANTO 131 


¢ mye udhishtira says, “What, besides this, should a weak and 

procrastinating king do, who shrinks from battle through anxiety 
for his friends’ lives, who is timorous and lacking in discretion? What 
should that king do whose cities and kingdom his enemies have annexed 
and partitioned among themselves, who has lost his wealth, who from 
poverty cannot honour and win friends to his side, whose ministers are 
disunited or bought over by his adversaries, who is obliged to face his foes, 
whose army has declined, and whose heart is being agitated by a strong 
enemy?’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘If the invader is principled and conversant with both 
dharma and artha, a king of the kind you have described should 
immediately sue for peace and negotiate for him to restore those parts of the 
kingdom that have been seized. If the invader is powerful and seeks victory 
through unprincipled means, the king should make peace with him 
abandoning a portion of his territories. If the invader is bent upon 
hostilities, the king should abandon his capital and all his possessions and 
make his escape. If he saves his life, he can hope for equivalent gains in the 
future. Which man, knowing his dharma, would sacrifice himself, his most 
precious possession, to encounter danger from which he can escape by 
abandoning his treasury and army? A king should protect the women of his 
household, but if they fall into the hands of the enemy, he should not be 
moved to risking his own capture to save them. As long as he can, he 
should never surrender his own person to the enemy.’ 


Yudhishtira says, “When his own people are dissatisfied with him, when 
invaders oppress him, when his treasury is empty, and when his secrets are 
divulged, what then should a king do?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Under such circumstances, a king, should make peace, 
if his enemy is righteous. If he is not, the king should then show courage 
and try to drive the enemy out of his kingdom; or, fighting bravely, he 
should lay down his life and ascend to Swarga. A king can conquer the 
whole earth with the help of even a small force if it is loyal, spirited, and 
devoted to him. If he kills his enemies, he is sure to enjoy the earth, while, 
if he is killed in battle, he is sure to ascend to heaven. By laying down one’s 
life in battle, one obtains the companionship of Indra himself.’” 


CANTO 132 


¢ ae udhishtira says, ‘When dharmic rule and practices for the good 

of the world disappear, when all the means and resources for 
supporting life fall into the hands of brigands, at such a calamitous time, 
how should a Brahmana survive, O Pitamaha, who from affection is unable 
to abandon his sons and grandsons?’ 

Bhishma replies, “When such a time comes, the Brahmana should live 
by his knowledge. Everything in this world is for those who are good, and 
nothing for the evil. He who makes himself an instrument of acquisition, 
taking wealth from the evil and giving it to the good, is said to know the 
dharma of adversity. The king who wants to maintain his rule without 
driving his subjects to indignation and rebellion, can seize what the owner 
does not give voluntarily, saying, “This is mine!” This conduct of the wise 
man, blameworthy in ordinary times, does not deserve to be censured in 
times of necessity when cleansed by knowledge and power. They who 
always support themselves by force, prefer no other method of living. 
Those who are powerful, Yudhishtira, always live by their strength. 

A king should practise what the ordinary shastras prescribe for times of 
distress without any exceptions. An intelligent king, however, should also 
do something more, such as levy more taxes upon the evil and punishable 
among his own subjects and upon the subjects of other kingdoms. At such 
times, the king should not oppress Ritwijas, Purohitas, Acharyas and 
Brahmanas, who are honoured and esteemed. Even during bad times, he 
will incur censure and sin if he afflicts them. This is the eternal eye, the 


authority by which one should be guided in the world. By this, one judges 
whether a king is to be called good or evil. 

One sees that many men in villages and towns bring accusations against 
one another from jealousy and anger. The king should never honour or 
punish anybody based on such reports. Slander should be neither spoken 
nor heard. When slanderous conversation takes place, one should close 
one’s ears or walk right out, for such talk is characteristic of evil men, an 
indication of depravity. Conversely, those who speak of the virtues of others 
in assemblies of the good, are honest men. 

Just as a pair of sweet-tempered bulls, governable and well-broken, 
bend their necks to the yoke and draw the cart willingly, the king should 
bear his burden in troubled times. Others say that a king at such times 
should conduct himself so as to gain a large number of allies. Some regard 
ancient usage as the highest indication of dharma. Others, such as those 
who favour the conduct of Sankha when his brother Likhita stole a few 
fruits from him, are of a different opinion, but not from malice or 
covetousness. One sees examples of Maharishis who are of the opinion that 
even acharyas, if given to evil practices, should be punished, although no 
authority has approved of such a proposition. The Devas can be left to 
punish men who are vile and guilty of evil practices. 

The king who fills his treasury by fraudulent means certainly falls away 
from dharma. The code of morality should be followed which good men 
honour in every respect in affluent circumstances, and which every honest 
heart approves. He is said to be conversant with dharma who knows that it 
stands on four foundations, as elusive as the legs of the snake. Just like a 
hunter who tracks a shaft-struck deer by observing spots of blood on the 
ground, one should seek to discover the basis of dharma. A man should 
tread humbly along the ancient path trodden by the virtuous, as this was the 
dharma of the great Rajarishis of old, O Yudhishtira!’” 


CANTO 133 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, “The king should fill his coffers by drawing wealth 
from his own kingdom and from those of his enemies. From his 
treasury springs his punya, O son of Kunti, and from it extend the roots of 
his kingdom. For these reasons a king must fill his treasury, augment it and 
carefully husband it by reducing needless expenditure. This is the eternal 
practice. The treasury can neither be filled by pure and dharmic actions, nor 
by heartless cruelty. One should fill it by adopting a middle course. How 
can a weak king acquire a treasury? How can a king who has no treasury 
have strength? How can a weak man have a kingdom? From where can one 
without a kingdom obtain prosperity? 

For a man of high rank, adversity is like death. For this reason the king 
should always increase his resources, army, allies and friends. Men do not 
heed a king with an empty treasury, and his servants will not show any zeal 
in his business if he pays them little. It is on account of his wealth that a 
king succeeds in obtaining great honour, as it covers up his sins like clothes 
that conceal parts of a female body that should not be exposed to view. 

Those with whom the king has formerly quarrelled become jealous at 
the sight of his new affluence, and like dogs they once more take service 
under him. Though they only wait for an opportunity to destroy him, he 
takes to them as if nothing has happened. How, O Bhaarata, can such a king 
obtain happiness? 

The king should strive to acquire greatness, and never bend down 
meekly. Exertion is manliness, He should rather break in adverse 


conditions, take to vanavasa and live there with the wild animals, than bend 
before anyone or dwell among ministers and officers who behave like 
robbers, without restraints. Even the brigands of the forest can furnish a 
large number of fighters for the accomplishment of the fiercest of deeds. O 
Bhaarata! 

If the king transgresses wholesome restraints, everyone becomes 
alarmed. The very robbers, strangers to compassion, dread such a king. For 
this reason, the king should always establish rules and restraints for the 
well-being of his people. The people welcome rules in respect of even 
trivial matters. 

There are men who think that this world is nothing, and the future a 
mirage. One should never trust atheists of this type, even if secret doubts 
agitate his heart. If the brigands of the forest, while observing other dharma, 
commit depredations only to property, one can regard them as harmless, 
since they do not threaten the lives of thousands of people. Even brigands 
regard as evil actions like killing an enemy who is fleeing from battle, 
ingratitude, plundering the property of a Brahmana, depriving a man of the 
whole of his property, violating maidens, ravishing wives, having 
adulterous congress with other people’s wives and occupying villages and 
towns as their lawful lords. 

Certain kings strive to make peace in order to inspire confidence in the 
hearts of the bandits, only to destroy them after their ways have been 
studied. A king should never behave cruelly towards them, thinking that he 
is more powerful. Rather than exterminate the robbers outright, the king 
should bring their families, habitations and property under his control. 
Kings who do not seek to annihilate them need not fear for their own 
existence, while those who do have always to live with that apprehension.’” 


CANTO 134 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘Men learned in the shastras declare that an 

intelligent Kshatriya knows his obvious dharma, the earning of 

punya and the acquisition of wealth. Subtle discussions on duty and on 

unseen consequences in respect of a future world should not stop him from 

performing those two duties. As it is useless to argue, upon seeing certain 

foot-prints on the ground, whether or not they are those of a wolf, so too is 
discussion on the nature of dharma and adharma. 

Nobody in this world ever sees the fruits of dharma and adharma. A 
Kshatriya, therefore, should seek to acquire power. He who is powerful is 
master of everything. Wealth leads to the possession of an army. He who is 
powerful obtains intelligent advisers, while he who is without means is 
truly fallen. One regards too little of anything in the world as the unclean 
remnants of a feast. Even if a strong man performs many bad deeds, 
everybody is afraid to says or do anything to censure or check him. 

Associating power with dharma and truth can rescue men from great 
peril. If one compares the two, power will appear to be superior, since 
dharma springs from and rests upon power, as all immobile things do upon 
the earth, as smoke depends for its motion upon the wind. 

Dharma is dependent on the more powerful, as pleasure is contingent 
upon those who desire enjoyment. There is nothing that powerful men 
cannot do, and everything they do becomes pure. A powerless man 
committing evil actions can never escape, because men are alarmed by his 
conduct as at the appearance of a wolf. One fallen on hard times leads a life 


of disgrace and sorrow, which is akin to death. The learned have said that 
when a man is abandoned by friends and companions as result of his sinful 
conduct, their taunts will pierce him and bring him to burn with grief. 

Acharyas versed in the shastras have suggested that to expiate sin, one 
should study the three Vedas, wait upon and worship the Brahmanas, gratify 
all men by looks, words and acts, cast off meanness, marry into high 
families, proclaim the praises of others while confessing one’s own 
worthlessness, recite mantras, perform the usual water-rites, be mild of 
demeanour and frugal of speech, perform austere yagnas, and seek the 
refuge of Brahmanas and Kshatriyas. One who has committed evil deeds 
should do all this without resenting the reproaches of others. By following 
this course and by sharing his wealth with others, he will redeem himself in 
the regard of the world and come to enjoy different kinds of happiness here, 
and great rewards and punya in the next.’” 


CANTO 135 


¢ “RB hishma says, ‘An old story is told of a brigand who practised 
restraints in this world and so did not meet with destruction in the 
next. Once there lived a robber called Kayavya, born of a Kshatriya father 
and a Nishada mother, who practised Kshatriya dharma. Strong, intelligent, 
courageous, an expert in the shastras, he was devoid of cruelty. He was 
devoted to the Brahmanas, worshipped his elders and gurus with reverence 
and protected the Rishis in the observance of their practices. Though a 
brigand, he earned felicity in Swarga. 
Morning and evening he used to chase deer and drive them to frenzy. 
He knew well all the practices of the Nishadas and the ways of all animals 
living in the forest. Well versed in the requirements of time and place, he 
roved over the mountains. His arrows never missed their aim, his weapons 
were powerful and he could vanquish hundreds of troops single-handedly. 
He worshipped his old, blind and deaf parents daily in the forest. He was 
hospitable to everyone who deserved the honour, entertained them with 
honey, meat, fruits, roots and other kinds of excellent food and did them 
many favours. He showed great respect for those Brahmanas who retired 
from the world for vanavasa, and often took meat for them when he killed 
deer. In the case of those unwilling, from fear of censure, to accept gifts 
from him because of his profession, he went to their homes before dawn 
and left meat at their doorstep. 
One day the entire band of robbers, pitiless and unbridled as they were, 
moved to elect him as their leader. The robbers said, ““You are familiar with 


the requirements of place and time, wise and courageous, and committed to 
everything you undertake. Be our supreme leader, respected by us all, and 
we will do as you direct. Protect us as a father or mother would.” 

Kayavya replied, “Never kill a woman, a child, an ascetic or one who 
from fear abstains from a fight. Never seize women or bring them away 
with force. None of you should ever, amongst all creatures, kill a female. 

Brahmanas should be always blessed, and you must fight for their good. 
Never sacrifice Truth. Never obstruct wedding ceremonies or destroy 
houses in which the Devas, the Pitris and Athitis are honoured. 

Of all creatures, Brahmanas should be exempt from your plundering 
raids. You should worship them by giving away even all you have. He who 
incurs the wrath of the Brahmanas will fail to find a rescuer in the three 
worlds, if they wish to humiliate him. He who speaks ill of the Brahmanas 
and wishes for their destruction, himself meets with destruction like 
darkness at sunrise. 

Living here, you will obtain the fruits of your valour, and troops will be 
sent against those who refuse to give us our dues. The danda of punishment 
is intended for evil, not for self-glorification. Those who oppress the good 
deserve death, and those who seek to increase their fortunes by attacking 
kingdoms in unscrupulous ways, very soon come to be regarded like vermin 
in a dead body. Those brigands whose conduct conform to the restraints 
prescribed by the shastras soon win salvation, though they lead a life spent 
in plunder.” 

By obeying all the commands of Kayavya and desisting from sin, the 
robbers obtained great prosperity, while, by doing good to the honest and 
restraining the robbers from evil deeds, Kayavya won great happiness in the 
next world. He who bears in mind this story of Kayavya will not fear the 
denizens of the forest, or any earthly creature, not even wicked men O 
Bhaarata! If such a man takes to vanavasa, he will be able to live there as 
secure as a king.’” 


CANTO 136 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘Regarding how a king should fill his treasury, men 
who know the shastras cite the following verses that Brahma 
himself sang. One should never take the wealth of those who perform 
yagnas, or wealth dedicated to the gods. A Kshatriya should seize the 
wealth of those who never perform religious rites and yagnas and are 
regarded as equal to brigands. All the creatures who inhabit the earth, all the 
pleasures of sovereignty, and all the earth’s wealth, belong to the Kshatriya 
alone, O Bhaarata. The Kshatriya should use this wealth for the upkeep of 
his army and for the performance of yagnas. 

Men weed out creepers and plants that are not of any use and burn them 
as fuel to cook their food. Similarly the king should, by punishing the 
wicked, cherish the good. Men who know dharma say that one’s wealth is 
useless if it is not used to feed with libations of ghrita the Devas, the Pitris, 
and men. A virtuous ruler, O Rajan, should confiscate such wealth so that a 
large number of good people can be gratified, but he should not hoard that 
wealth in his treasury. He who makes himself an instrument of acquisition 
by taking away wealth from the evil and giving it to the good is said to 
know the whole science of dharma. 

A king should extend his conquests in the next world according to his 
ability, as gradually as vegetables are seen to grow. Like white ants who 
appear and multiply from no apparent cause, yagnas spring for no particular 
external reason. As one drives off flies, gnats and ants from the bodies of 
domestic cattle at the time of milking, one should drive away from the 


kingdom those who are averse to performing yagnas. This is consistent with 
dharma. Just as soil becomes finer and finer with pounding between two 


stones, questions of morality, become finer and finer the more they are 
reflected on and discussed.’”’ 


CANTO 137 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘One who provides for the future, and one who has 

presence of mind, both enjoy happiness, while the man of 

procrastination is lost. Listen attentively to an excellent story concerning 
these types. 

In a lake that was not very deep and which abounded with fish, there 
lived three Sakula fishes, friends and constant companions. Amongst the 
three, one always planned ahead and liked to provide for the future, another 
had great presence of mind, while the third always put things off. One day 
some fishermen who came to the lake began to drain away its water to a 
lower ground through different outlets. Seeing the water of the lake 
gradually decreasing, the fish with foresight perceived the danger and 
addressed his two companions. 

He said, “A great peril is about to overtake all the creatures who live in 
this lake. Let us speedily escape to some other place before our path is 
blocked. One who avoids a future evil through good planning will never 
incur serious danger. Listen to my advice and let us all depart.” The lazy 
one among the three answered, “Well said, but it is my considered opinion 
there is no need for such haste.” The fish with presence of mind said to his 
procrastinating companion, “When the actual time comes for action, I 
always come up with a plan.” 

Hearing the answers of his two companions, the prudent and intelligent 
fish immediately set out by a flowing current and reached another deep lake. 
The fishermen, when they saw that the lake had been drained, shut in the 


remaining fish and, beating the residual water, began to catch numbers of 
fish, including the procrastinating Sakula, and to tie them as they were 
caught to a long string. The Sakula noted for his presence of mind thrust 
himself into the company of those that had been so tied and remained 
quietly among them, biting the string to give the appearance of having been 
caught. The fishermen, believing that all the fish attached to the string had 
been caught, removed them to deeper waters to wash them, at which point 
the quick Sakula left the string and darted away to safety. However the fish 
who had been procrastinating, foolish and bemused as he was, was unable 
to escape, and met with death. 

Thus, like the procrastinating fish, anyone who, from want of 
intelligence, cannot divine the approach of danger, will meet with 
destruction. He who considers himself clever does not seek his own good at 
the appropriate time and thereby incurs great danger, like the Sakula fish 
with presence of mind. Only one who plans in advance, and one with 
presence of mind, can succeed. One who postpones his decisions meets 
with destruction. 

The divisions of time are many, such as Kashtha, Kala, Muhurta, day, 
night, Lava, month, fortnight, the six seasons, Kalpa, and year. We call the 
divisions of the earth place, while Time we cannot see. The success of any 
object or purpose is achieved or not, according to the manner in which the 
mind is set to think of it. The man of forethought and the one with the 
presence of mind, the Rishis declare, in all treatises on dharma and artha 
and in those that deal with mukti, is foremost among men. He who acts 
after reflection and scrutiny, and who uses proper means to accomplish his 
objectives, will always achieve a great deal. However, those who work with 
due regard to time and place, win results better than the mere man of 
presence of mind.’” 


CANTO 138-1 


¢ me udhishtira says, ‘You say, O Bharatarishabha, that intelligence 
which provides for future contingencies and meets present 
emergencies is always superior, while procrastination brings about 
destruction. I ask you, Pitamaha, about that superior intelligence which will 
protect a king who knows the shastras, dharma and artha, and guard him 
from confusion even when he is surrounded by many enemies. I want you 
to tell me, O Kurupravira, everything that the shastras lay down about the 
manner in which a king should conduct himself when enemies assail him. 
When a king is in trouble, a large number of his enemies, provoked by 
his past actions, will range themselves against him and try to vanquish him. 
How can a king, weak and alone, succeed in holding up his head when he is 
challenged from all sides by many powerful kings in league together? At 
such times, how does a king make friends and enemies, O Bharatarishabha, 
and how should he then behave towards both? When those he thought of as 
his friends become his enemies, what should a king do, if he wants 
happiness? With whom should he go to war, and with whom should he 
make peace? Even if he is strong, how should he behave in the midst of 
enemies? O Parantapa, this to me is the greatest of all questions regarding 
the discharge of Rajadharma. Few can hear the answer to this question, and 
none can answer it save Santanu’s son. Firmly wedded to truth, with all 
your senses under control, O blessed one, reflect on this and speak to me!’ 
Bhishma replies, “Yudhishtira, this question is certainly worthy of you. I 
am immensely happy to tell you all the duties generally known that one 


should practice in times of distress, O Bhaarata. An enemy becomes a 
friend and a friend also becomes an enemy, for the course of human actions 
through the play of circumstances is very uncertain. Therefore, what should 
be done and what should not, whether one should either trust one’s enemies 
or make war depend upon the requirements of time and place. One should 
exert oneself to make friends with intelligent and knowledgeable men who 
have one’s welfare at heart. You should make peace with even your 
enemies, O Bhaarata, when your life cannot otherwise be saved. The foolish 
man who never makes peace with enemies will never gain or acquire any of 
those fruits for which others strive. He who makes peace with enemies and 
breaks even with friends, after a full consideration of the circumstances, 
obtains great benefits. 

An old story is told of an exchange between a cat and a mouse under a 
banyan tree. In the midst of a great forest there was a huge banyan. Covered 
with many kinds of creepers, it was the resort of diverse birds. It had a large 
trunk from which numerous branches extended in all directions. Delightful 
to view, it afforded refreshing shade and was home to animals of many 
species. A wise mouse named Palita lived happily at the foot of the tree in a 
hole with a hundred outlets. On the branches of the tree lived a cat called 
Lomasa, contentedly devouring a large number of birds every day. 

After some time, a Chandala came to the vana and built a hut there for 
himself. Every evening after sunset he spread his traps of leathern strings 
and, going back to his hut, slept happily till he re-visited his traps at dawn. 
Diverse animals fell into his nets every night, and it so happened that one 
day the cat, in a careless moment, got caught in the snare. 

O you of great wisdom, the mouse Palita, seeing his enemy the cat thus 
caught in the net, came out of his hole and began to rove about fearlessly. 
While confidently wandering through the forest in search of food, the 
mouse caught sight of the meat spread there as lure. Getting up on the trap, 
the little animal began to eat the flesh. Laughing to himself, he even 
climbed over his old foe entangled helplessly in the net. Intent on eating the 
meat, oblivious to his own danger, he suddenly noticed the presence of a 
terrible enemy, none other than a coppery-eyed, restless mongoose named 
Harita. Living in underground holes, it resembled in form the flower of a 
reed. Attracted by the scent of the mouse, the animal hastened towards his 
prey, standing on his haunches with head upraised, licking the corners of his 
mouth with his tongue. 


The mouse at the same moment beheld, sitting on the branch of the 
banyan tree, another arboreal enemy, the sharp-beaked nocturnal bird called 
Chandraka. When he realized that both the mongoose and the owl had seen 
him, Palita, surrounded by danger and filled with alarm for his safety, began 
to think, and made a great resolution: “At times of such peril, when death 
itself is staring me in the face and fear is all around, what should one do 
who wants his own good? I must try and save my life, warding off by every 
conceivable means even multiple dangers. 

If I descend from this trap to the ground without measures for my 
safety, the mongoose will surely devour me. If I remain on this trap, the owl 
will certainly seize me. If, again, that cat manages to disentangle himself 
from the net, he too is certain to eat me up. But someone of my acumen 
should not lose his wits. I must use my intelligence and do my best to save 
my life. A person of wisdom and intelligence who knows the science of 
strategy never despairs, however great and terrible the danger that threatens 
him. 

At present, I do not see any refuge other than this cat. He is an enemy, 
but himself in distress, so the service that I can do him is great. With three 
enemies trying to make me their prey, what should I do to save my life? I 
should now seek the protection of one of them, the cat. My plan should be 
to advise the cat for his good, so that I can escape from all three. Let me try 
to make this foolish creature understand his own interests in order to get 
him to make peace with me. When one’s life is threatened, say those who 
profess knowledge of Neeti, one should even conciliate an enemy. It is 
better to have a learned person for an enemy than a fool for a friend. My life 
now rests entirely in the hands of my enemy the cat, and so I will now talk 
to him about his own liberation. Perhaps, at this moment, it would not be 
wrong to take him for an intelligent and learned foe.” 

The mouse, surrounded by enemies, pursued his reflections in this strain 
and, familiar with the science of artha and well acquainted with occasions 
when one should declare war or make peace, gently addressed the cat, 
saying, “I speak as a friend, O cat! Are you alive? I wish you to live! I wish 
for the good of us both. O amiable one, have no fear. You will live in 
happiness, and I will rescue you, if you do not kill me. There is an excellent 
plan I have thought of, by which you can escape, and which will benefit me 
as well. The mongoose and the owl are both waiting with evil intent, and 
my life is safe only as long as they do not attack me. There, that wretched 


owl with restless glances and horrid cries is eyeing me from the branch of 
that tree, terrifying me. 

Two good men can become friends in no time by just taking seven steps 
in a walk together. As you are wise, you are my friend and you need have 
no fear now. Without my help, O cat, you will not succeed in tearing the 
net. I will serve you by cutting the net, if you abstain from killing me. You 
have lived on this tree and I have lived at its foot for many long years 
together, as you know. The wise do not approve one whom nobody trusts, 
or one who never trusts another; both are unhappy. For this reason, let our 
love for each other increase, and let there be union among us both. Wise 
men do not approve of trying to do something when the moment for it has 
passed. This is the proper time for such an understanding between us. I wish 
that you survive, and you also want me to live. A man crosses a deep and 
large river on a piece of wood, each taking the other across. Similarly, our 
compact also will bring happiness to both of us, and we will rescue each 
other.” 

The mouse Palita waited expectantly for an answer, knowing that his 
suggestion was reasonable and beneficial to both. 


CANTO 138-2 


¢ H earing the suggestion of the mouse, framed in well-chosen words 
to make it acceptable, the cat, possessed of foresight and 
judgment of his own, answered him politely. Regarding the mouse kindly 
through eyes like lapis lazuli gemstones, the sharp-toothed Lomasa replied, 
“T am delighted with you, O amiable one! Bless you for wishing me to live! 
Do not hesitate to do what you think is helpful, as I am certainly in great 
danger, and you in possibly greater difficulties. Let us have an agreement 
between us, and I will do what is appropriate and necessary for the success 
of our efforts. If you rescue me, your service will not be forgotten. I will 
place myself in your hands, serve you devotedly like a disciple and always 
obey you.” 

The mouse Palita, seeing that the cat was now completely under his 
influence, answered him with grave and judicious words. “You have spoken 
magnanimously, beyond my expectations. Listen to this plan I have hit upon 
to our mutual advantage. I will crouch beneath your body, as I am terrified 
of the mongoose. Save me, do not kill me, for I can rescue you. Protect me 
also from the owl, for that wretch, too, wishes to seize me for his prey. I 
swear by Truth that I will cut the net that entangles you, O friend!” 

Lomasa gazed at Palita with delight and, now converted to cordiality, 
lauded him with exclamations of welcome. Losing no time, he said, “Come, 
quick! You are indeed blessed, a friend dear to me as breath, since through 
your grace I have almost got back my life. Tell me now whatever is in my 
power to do for you and I will do it. Let there be peace between us, O 


friend! Once free from this danger, I and all my friends and relatives will do 
all that is agreeable and beneficial to you, and will always try to please and 
honour you for your services. One can one never become equal to the 
person who did the favour first, even with abundant service in return. One 
does it in return for help received, while the other acts without any such 
motive.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘The mouse, once he convinced the cat of his own 
interests, crept under its breast as trustfully as if it had been the lap of his 
father or mother. Both Harita and Chandraka were shocked and amazed at 
this, and gave up all hope of catching the prey so close to them. They had 
strength, intelligence and enough cleverness to seize their prey, but realized 
they could not break the compact between the mouse and the cat, and went 
away to their respective homes. 

Then the mouse Palita, who knew what to do when, began to gnaw 
through the strings of the net slowly, as he lay under the body of the cat, 
waiting for the opportune moment to finish his work. Distressed by the 
strings that entangled him, the cat grew impatient at the slow progress the 
mouse was making and, wishing to hurry him up, said, “O amiable one, 
how is it that you do not proceed faster with your work? Now that you have 
succeeded in your purpose, do you disregard me? O Parantapa, do cut these 
strings quickly, as the hunter will soon be here!” 

The clever mouse, with his own interest in mind, replied in politic terms 
to the impatient cat, who was less acute, “Wait in silence, O amiable one, 
and drive away your fears. Speed is not essential. We know the 
requirements of time. It will not be wasted. A venture begun at an improper 
time cannot succeed, while one started at the right time will always produce 
splendid results. If I free you at an improper time, I will have to remain in 
great fear of you. So wait for the right one. Do not be impatient, friend, for I 
will cut the strings when I see the hunter approach, armed with his 
weapons, at the moment when both of us are terrified. Set free at that 
instant, you will scramble up the tree thinking of nothing save your safety 
and, as you flee in dread, I will enter my hole.” 

When he heard this, the cat, who was clever and persuasive, and indeed 
had expeditiously fulfilled his own part of the covenant, said to the 
recalcitrant mouse, “I rescued you promptly from a great danger, Alas, this 
is not the way for honest people to do business with their friends! They are 
happy to do their part, but it turns out otherwise. You should work for my 


benefit more speedily. O you of great wisdom, do go a bit faster. If you are 
only waiting for time to slip away, because of our former hostility, know, 
evil one, that the consequence of your act will be to lessen your own life! If 
I have in the past unconsciously done you any wrong, I ask your 
forgiveness.” 

The wise mouse, who knew the scriptures, replied: “O cat, I have heard 
what you have to say in your own interest. Now listen to me as I tell you 
mine. A friendship based and maintained on fear should be sustained with 
great caution, like the hand of the snake-charmer from the fangs of the 
snake. He who does not protect himself after contracting an agreement with 
someone stronger, will find that it causes harm instead of good. Nobody is 
anybody’s friend or well-wisher, for men become friends or enemies only 
from motives of self-interest. Interest attracts interest, just as tame elephants 
catch wild individuals of their species. After an act has been accomplished, 
the doer is barely remembered; therefore all acts should be so done that 
something remains to be completed. When I set you free, you will flee for 
your life without a thought to catch me, out of fear of the hunter. See, I have 
cut all the strings of this net. Only one remains; I will cut that also quickly. 
Be comforted, Lomasa!”’ 


CANTO 138-3 


¢ W hile the mouse and the cat were talking to each other, both in 
serious danger, the night gradually wore away, and a great dread 
pierced the heart of the cat. When at last morning came, the grim-visaged 
Chandala, Parigha, appeared on the scene, armed with weapons and 
accompanied by a pack of dogs. His aspect was fierce and frightful, 
exceedingly filthy, with black and tawny hair, large hips, long ears, and a 
large mouth extending from ear to ear. Seeing Parigha, who appeared 
veritably as an agent of Yama, the cat asked Palita, “What will you do 
now?” Palita rapidly cut the last string and freed the cat, who sped up the 
tall banyan tree, while the mouse darted into his own hole. The Chandala 
saw everything and, with his hopes frustrated, gathered up his nets and 
returned home. 

Liberated from that great peril, and with his precious life intact, the cat, 
from the branches of the tree, addressed the mouse Palita in his hole: “You 
ran away so suddenly, without speaking to me. I hope you do not suspect 
me of any evil intentions. I am certainly grateful for the great service you 
have done me. Since you inspired me with trust and gave me my life, why 
don’t you approach me now, so that we can enjoy the sweetness of 
friendship? 

He who forgets his friends is a wicked person and will never find 
comrades in times of danger and need. You have honoured and served me to 
the best of your power, and it is now proper for you to enjoy the company 
of my poor self who has become your friend. Like disciples who revere 


their guru, all my friends and kinsmen will honour and worship you, your 
friends and your kinsmen, for which grateful individual will not idolize his 
saviour? 

Be the lord of both my body and home, be the disposer of all my wealth 
and possessions, be my honoured counsellor and rule me like a father. I 
swear by my life that you have no fear from us. In intelligence you are 
Usanas himself. By the power of your strategy you have given us our life 
and by the strength of your understanding you have conquered us.” 

Soothed by the comforting words of the cat, the mouse, who knew what 
was good for him, replied in sweet and sensible words: “I have heard you, 
Lomasa, so now listen to me. Friends should be well scrutinized, and 
enemies closely studied. In this world, even the learned regard a task like 
this as difficult, one depending upon acute intelligence. Friends assume the 
guise of enemies, and foes assume the guise of friends. When pacts of 
friendship are formed, it is difficult for the parties to understand whether the 
other parties are really moved by kama and krodha. 

There is no such thing as a foe. There is no such thing as a friend. It is 
force of circumstances that creates friends and foes. He who thinks his own 
interests to be safe if another person lives, and endangered if he dies, 
regards him as a friend as long as their interests do not clash. There is no 
condition that deserves the permanent name either of friendship or hostility. 
Both friends and enemies arise from considerations of interest and gain. 

Friendship changes to enmity in the course of time, and a foe also 
becomes a friend; self-interest is supreme. He who reposes blind trust in 
friends, and is always suspicious of enemies, without any guiding principle, 
will find his life unsafe. He who sets his heart upon affiliating with either 
friend or foe, without consideration of strategy, is regarded as unhinged. 
One should neither place trust in someone undeserving, nor too much faith 
in someone deserving. The danger that arises from blind confidence is that 
it cuts the very roots of him who reposes such assurance. Interest and 
advantage guide even a father, a mother, a son, a maternal uncle, a sister’s 
son, or other relatives and kinsmen. One can even see a father and mother 
discard a dear son faced with disgrace. People take care of themselves; such 
is the efficacy of self-interest. 

O wise one, someone who seeks his enemy’s happiness immediately 
after being freed from danger will find escape very difficult. You came 
down from the tree-top to this very spot and, due to your limitations of 


perception, did not notice the net spread here. How can one who fails to 
protect himself protect others? He is sure to ruin all his work. You tell me in 
sweet words that I am very dear to you. Listen, friend, to my analysis. 

One becomes dear for a reason, and an enemy, too, for some adequate 
cause. The desire for gain, in some form or other, moves this whole world 
of creatures. Friendship between two brothers, love between husband and 
wife, depends upon selfishness. I do not know any kind of affection 
between men that does not rest upon some motive of self-interest. 
Sometimes we see blood brothers or husband and wife quarrel and reunite 
from natural affection; we also see this in men unrelated to each other. You 
cherish one for his liberality, another for his sweet words and a third for his 
religious deeds; all are dear to us for the purpose they serve. 

The amity between us arose for a sufficient cause. That cause no longer 
exists. What reason is there for which I am so dear to you, other than your 
desire to make me your prey? You should know that I will not forget that 
Time erode these reasons. You seek your own interests, just as other wise 
men and I value our own welfare. The world rests upon the example of the 
wise, and I feel that this affection that you show me now is ill-timed. My 
self-interest makes me constant in both peace and war, themselves very 
unstable. The circumstances under which one makes peace or declares war 
change as quickly as clouds change their form. 

This very day you were first my enemy, then my friend, and now once 
more you are an enemy. There was friendship between us as long as there 
was basis for its existence. Once it passed away, so did friendship. You are 
by nature my enemy, but circumstances made you my friend. That state of 
things has now passed and the old natural state of enmity has returned. As I 
understand this principle, why should I, for your sake, enter the net that is 
spread for me? Through your power, I was freed from a great danger. 
Through my power, you have been freed from a similar danger. Each of us 
has served the other through our individual abilities and freed the other 
from peril, and there is no need for us to come together again in friendly 
conversation. 

We have both accomplished our objectives. I am weak and you are 
strong; I am your food and you are my eater. There cannot be a friendly 
union between us when we are situated so unequally. I understand your 
cunning, which is to praise me so that you can all the more easily eat me. 
You got entangled in the net while searching for food. You are freed, and 


once again you feel the pangs of hunger. You can now have no further use 
for me except as a meal. I know you are hungry, and this is your dinner 
time; your gaze is upon me as you seek your prey. Acute from studying the 
shastras, you scheme in truth to eat me up today. You have sons and wives. 
Still you seek a friendly union with me, offer to treat me with affection and 
do me services. Friend, I cannot accept this proposal. If your dear spouse 
and loving children see me with you, they would cheerfully eat me up! 

I will not, therefore, join you in friendship, for there is no longer any 
reason for such a union. If, indeed, you wish not to forget my help, think of 
what will be beneficial for me, and be satisfied. Which wise man would 
place himself in the power of an enemy who is not a distinguished 
dharmatma, who is in the pangs of hunger and on the look-out for a prey? 
Be happy, then. I will presently leave you. I am filled with alarm to see you 
even from a distance. I will not mix with you, so stop your attempts, 
Lomasa! If you think I have done you a service, follow then the rules of 
friendship when I happen to rove confidently or carelessly. Even that would 
be gratitude enough, coming from you. 

Living near a strong and powerful person is never a good thing, even if 
the immediate danger has receded. I will always stand in fear of one more 
powerful than myself. If you do not seek your own interests, tell me what I 
can do for you, and I shall certainly give you everything —except my life. 
For protecting oneself one should even give up one’s own children, 
kingdom, jewels and wealth. If one lives, one can recover all the affluence 
that one has lost. Men who protect and commit themselves only after proper 
consideration and assessment are never in danger. The weak always know 
him for an enemy who has greater strength. Their understanding, firm in the 
truths of the shastras, never loses its focus.””’ 


CANTO 138-4 


¢ TT hus rebuked soundly by the mouse Palita, the cat blushed with 
shame, and said, “Truly, I swear to you that I consider injuring a 
friend to be detestable. I know you are wise and want to do me good. 
Guided by Artha, you say that there is cause for a breach between you and 
me. It does not become you, good friend, to take me for what I am not. I 
regard you as a great friend, for I owe you my life. I, too, am familiar with 
duties, and appreciate other people’s merits. I am very grateful for services 
received, and I am committed to the service of friends, especially to you. 
For these reasons we should fraternize. At your command, I and all my 
kinsmen and relatives will lay down our very lives. Those who are learned 
and wise see abundant reason to place their trust in those of such mental 
disposition as us. So you, who know the truths of dharma, should not 
suspect me.” 

The mouse reflected a little, and said gravely, “You are exceedingly 
good, and I am glad to hear all that you have said. For all that, I cannot trust 
you. It is impossible for you, by such eulogies or by gifts of great wealth, to 
induce me to associate with you again. The wise never place themselves in 
the power of an enemy without sufficient reason. A weak person who has a 
pact with a stronger one, when both are threatened by enemies, should 
conduct himself carefully, and with considerations of expediency, when that 
common danger passes. After he has gained his objective, the weaker of the 
two parties should not again place confidence in the stronger. One should 
never trust someone who does not deserve to be trusted, nor should one 


believe blindly another who merits trust. One should try to inspire others 
with confidence in oneself, but not repose confidence in enemies. Thus one 
should, under all circumstances, protect oneself. 

One’s possessions, children and all, are valuable so long as one is alive. 
In brief, the highest truth of all treatises on policy is mistrust. For this 
reason, mistrust of all produces the greatest good. If weak people mistrust 
their enemies, the latter, even if strong, will never get them under their 
power. O cat, someone like myself should always guard his life from 
someone like you. You too should protect your own life from the Chandala 
whose rage you have excited.” The cat, frightened at the mention of the 
hunter, instantly left the branch of the tree and sped away. The wise mouse 
Palita, who who knew the truths of the shastras, having displayed his power 
of understanding, also left and entered another hole.’ 

Bhishma continues, ‘Thus the mouse Palita, though weak and alone, 
through his intelligence baffled many powerful enemies. A wise man should 
make peace with a powerful enemy. The mouse and the cat owed their 
escape to their reliance upon each other’s services. I have thus pointed out 
to you the course of Kshatriya duties at great length. Listen while I 
summarise it for you. 

When two men who were once engaged in hostilities make peace with 
each other, it is certain that each of them desires to outwit the other. In such 
a case he who is wise by the power of his understanding, will get the better 
of the other. On the other hand, he who lacks wisdom will suffer, if he is 
careless, and will be over-come by the intelligent. It is necessary that one 
should appear to be fearless even when afraid, and appear to be trustful 
even while really mistrusting others. One who acts thus never stumbles or, 
if he stumbles, is not ruined. When the right time comes, one should make 
peace with an enemy, or wage war with even a friend. This is how one 
should conduct oneself, O Rajan, as the authorities on matters of peace and 
war have said. 

Knowing this, O Rajan, one should bear in mind the truth of the 
shastras, and with all his wits about him, behave like one in fear before the 
cause of fear actually presents itself, and make peace with enemies. Such 
fear and alertness sharpen the intellect. If one behaves like a nervous man 
before the cause of fear is at hand, one is not panic-stricken when the cause 
is actually present. From the fear of someone who always behaves 
fearlessly, one sees very great fear arising. You should not advise anyone, 


“Never be afraid.” He who is afraid, spurred by the knowledge of his own 
weakness, seeks the counsel of wise and experienced men. For these 
reasons, one should appear to be fearless even when afraid, and seem to be 
trustful when one mistrusts others. But on the most important matters, one 
should not behave towards others with falsehood. 

You have listened, O Yudhishtira, to the old story of the mouse and the 
cat that I have told. Act as required amidst your friends and kinsmen. 
Derive insight from this story. Learn the difference between a friend and an 
enemy, and the proper time for war and peace, and you will discover a 
means of escape when in danger. Make peace at a time of common danger 
with a powerful one, and think carefully about uniting with the enemy after 
the danger has passed. Indeed, having achieved your purpose, you should 
not trust the enemy again. This path of policy is consistent with the 
aggregate of three, O Rajan! 

Guided by this Sruti, win prosperity by protecting your subjects once 
more, O son of Pandu. Seek the companionship of Brahmanas in all your 
work, as they constitute the great source of benefit both in this world and 
the next. They are teachers of dharma and are always grateful and, if 
worshipped, are sure to do you good. Therefore, O Rajan, you should 
venerate them and then you will duly obtain kingdom, great benefits, fame, 
achievement and progeny, in the proper order. This story of peace and war 
between the mouse and the cat, this history so persuasive and instructive, 
should remain always before his eyes when a king conducts himself in the 
midst of his enemies.’” 


CANTO 139-1 


¢ = udhishtira says, “You have stated, O Mahabaho, that one should 

not trust foes. But how can the king maintain himself if he does 

not trust anybody? You say that kings who trust others face greater danger. 

How can a king conquer his enemies without depending on others? Clear 

my doubts, for my mind has become confused by what you say about 
mistrust.’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘Listen, O Rajan, to the story of King Brahmadatta and 
a bird named Pujani who lived for a long time within the inner apartments 
of the king’s palace at Kampilya. Like the bird Jivajivaka, Pujani could 
mimic the cries of all animals. Although a bird by birth, she had great 
knowledge and knew every truth. 

While living there, she had a child of great splendor, at the very same 
time as the king and his queen also had a son. Pujani, who was grateful for 
the shelter of the king’s roof, used to go every day to the shores of the ocean 
and bring back a couple of fruits for the nourishment of both her own 
nestling and the infant prince. One of the fruits she gave to her chick, the 
other to the prince. Every day she brought them, and every day she 
distributed them the same way. The fruits she brought were sweet as nectar 
and most nutritious. The infant prince derived great strength from Pujani’s 
fruit. 

One day the prince, while with his nurse, saw Pujani’s chick. Getting 
down from the nurse’s arms, he ran towards the little bird, the same age as 
himself, and, moved by childish impulse, began to play with it happily. At 


last, picking up the bird in his hands, the prince stifled the chick’s life. He 
went back to his nurse. When Pujani, who had been out in search of the 
usual fruits, returned to the palace and saw her young one lying dead on the 
ground, killed by the prince, she wept bitterly. With tears gushing down her 
cheeks, her heart burning with grief, she said, “Alas, nobody should live 
with a Kshatriya, or make friends with him, or associate with him. When 
they have a purpose to serve, they are courteous, and when that object has 
been served they discard you. The Kshatriyas do evil to all. They should 
never be trusted. Even after they inflict a wound, they try to pacify the 
injured, at no cost to themselves. I will exact my retribution from the cruel 
and ungrateful betrayer of my trust. He is guilty of a triple sin, because he 
took the life of one who was born on the same day as him, who was reared 
with him and ate with him, and who was dependent on him for protection.” 

With these words to herself, Pujani pierced the eyes of the prince with 
her talons, and, deriving some comfort from her act of reprisal, said again, 
‘A sinful deed, perpetrated deliberately, harms the doer immediately, while 
those who avenge an injury do not lose their punya.” O Rajan, if the 
consequences of a sinful deed are not visited upon the perpetrator himself, 
they will certainly be on his descendants. 

When Brahmadatta saw his son blinded by Pujani, he understood what 
had happened, and said to Pujani. “We did you an injury, and you have 
avenged it. The account has been squared. Do not leave your home, O 
Pujani; continue to dwell here.” 

Pujani replied, “If anyone who causes an injury to another continues 
living with that other, his conduct will not be approved by the learned. In 
the circumstances, it is always better for him to leave his former place. One 
should never trust gentle assurances received from an injured party. The 
fool who trusts such assurances soon meets with death. 

Animosity is not quickly cooled. The very sons and grandsons of men 
who have injured each other can encounter destruction, as enmity is handed 
down like an inheritance. As a result of their offspring being destroyed, they 
lose the next world also. 

Among men who have injured one another, mistrust can be 
advantageous. One who has betrayed a confidence should never be trusted; 
one who does not deserve trust should not be trusted; nor should too much 
trust be placed in anyone, though he may be deserving of trust. The danger 
that arises from blind confidence brings wholesale destruction. While one 


should seek to inspire others with confidence in oneself, one should not 
repose confidence in others. 

One’s father and the mother are only the foremost of friends. The wife 
is merely a vessel for procreation. The son is only one’s seed. The brother is 
an enemy. A friend or companion requires to have his palms oiled, if he is 
to remain one. You alone enjoy or suffer your own happiness or misery. 

It is not advisable to have real peace among men who have injured one 
another. The reasons for which I lived here no longer exist. The mind of one 
who has once injured another becomes naturally filled with mistrust, if he 
sees the injured one pay homage to him with gifts and honours. Such 
conduct, especially when displayed by those who are strong, always fills the 
weak with alarm. 

An intelligent person should leave the place where he was first given 
respect, so as not to meet with dishonour and injury again, despite any 
subsequent honour that he might obtain from his enemy. I have dwelt in 
your home for a long time, esteemed by you. However, a cause for enmity 
has now arisen, and I should leave this place without any hesitation.” 


CANTO 139-2 


¢ B rahmadatta replied, “One who does an injury in return for an 

injury received, is not considered unjust. Indeed, the avenger only 

settles his account. Therefore, Pujani, continue to dwell here and do not 
leave this place.” 

Pujani said, “No friendship can be restored between one who has 
injured another and one who has inflicted an injury in return. The hearts of 
neither can forget what has happened.” 

Brahmadatta replied, “It is necessary for an injurer and the avenger of 
injury to get together. One has seen that upon such a union, mutual 
animosity cools and no fresh injury follows.” 

Pujani said, “That animosity can never die. The person injured should 
never trust his enemies and think, ‘O, I have been soothed with assurances 
of goodwill.’ In this world, men frequently meet with destruction because 
of misplaced confidence. We should no longer meet each other. Those who 
cannot be subjugated even by force and sharp weapons can be conquered by 
conciliation, as she-elephants are used to capture elephants.” 

Brahmadatta said, “Even if one inflicts deadly injury upon the other, 
affection and mutual trust arises naturally between them if they live 
together, as in the case of the Chandala and the dog. Among men who have 
injured one another, living together blunts the keenness of animosity. 
Indeed, it disappears quickly like water poured upon the leaf of a lotus.” 

Pujani said, “The learned know that enmity springs from five causes: 
woman, land, harsh words, natural incompatibility and injury. If the person 


with whom hostility occurs is a liberal man, he should not be killed, 
particularly by a Kshatriya, openly or by covert means. In such a case, the 
man’s fault should be properly weighed. When there is hostility even with a 
friend, no further confidence should be reposed in him. Enmity lies hidden 
like fire in wood and cannot be put out without consuming one of the 
parties outright. Like the Aurvya fire within the waters of the ocean, the fire 
of antipathy can never be extinguished with gifts of wealth, by display of 
prowess, by conciliation or by scriptural knowledge. 

If one has injured a person, he should never be trusted again as a friend, 
even though one might later have lavished wealth and honours on him. The 
fact of the injury inflicted fills the injurer with fear. I never injured you, nor 
did you ever harm me, so I lived in your house. All that has changed, and I 
cannot trust you any more.” 

Brahmadatta said, “Time is responsible for all action. Karma is of 
diverse kinds, all of them proceeding from Time. Who, therefore, injures 
whom? Birth and death happen in the same way: creatures take birth and 
live as a result of Time, and it is also because of Time that they cease to 
live. We see some die all at once some die one at a time, and some live long 
lives. Like fire consuming fuel, Time consumes all creatures. 

O Bird, I am not the cause of your sorrow, nor are you the cause of 
mine. It is Time that decides the happiness or misery of living creatures. So 
continue to live here at your pleasure, with affection for me and without 
fear of any injury from me. I have forgiven you for what you have done and 
you must forgive me too, Pujani!” 

Pujani replied, “If Time to you is the cause of all actions, then of course 
nobody should cherish feelings of enmity towards anybody on earth. Why 
then do friends and kinsmen seek to avenge the slain? Why too did the 
Devas and the Asuras in ancient days attack one another in battle? If it is 
Time that causes happiness and misery, birth and death, why do physicians 
administer medicines to the sick? If it is Time that moulds everything, what 
is the need for medicines? Why do grief-stricken people, deprived of their 
senses, indulge in such delirious lamentions? If Time, according to you, is 
the cause of karma, how can men acquire punya by performing religious 
deeds? 

Your son killed my child and, impelled by grief, I blinded him for it. I 
have by that action, Rajan, become liable to be killed by you. Men desire 
birds either to kill them for food, or keep in cages for their pleasure, and for 


no other reason. Birds, again, from fear of being either killed or caged by 
men, seek safety in flight. Men who know the Vedas have said that death 
and imprisonment are both painful. Life is dear to all. Grief and pain make 
all creatures miserable. All creatures wish for happiness. Misery arises from 
various sources, Brahmadatta. Decrepitude is misery. Loss of wealth is 
misery. The proximity of anything disagreeable or evil is misery. Separation 
from friends and agreeable objects is misery. Misery arises from 
imprisonment and death. Misery arises from causes connected with women, 
and from other natural causes. The misery that arises from the death of 
children alters and afflicts all creatures tremendously. 

Fools say there is no unhappiness in others’ misery. Only he who has 
not felt any pain or sorrow himself can say so in the midst of men, not 
anyone who has felt distress or anguish himself. One who has experienced 
pangs of any kind of misery feels the misery of others as his own. What I 
have done to you, Rajan, and what you have done to me cannot be washed 
away by even a hundred years; there can be no reconciliation. As often as 
you happen to think of your son, your resentment towards me will become 
fresh. 

If a man, after he avenges himself for an injury, wants to make peace 
with the injured, the two can never be properly reunited, even like the 
fragments of an earthen vessel. Men who know the shastras say that trust 
never produces happiness. Usanas himself sang two verses to Prahlada in 
ancient times: ‘He who trusts the words of a foe, true or false, meets with 
death like a honey-gatherer falling into a pit covered with dry grass.’ 

We see antagonisms survive the very death of enemies, for men speak 
of the past enmities of their deceased fathers before their surviving children. 
Kings settle mutual animosities by conciliation but, when the opportunity 
comes, they shatter their enemies like earthen water-jars dashed upon stone. 
If the king wrongs someone, he should never trust him again, else he will 
have to suffer great misery.” 


CANTO 139-3 


¢ B rahmadatta said, “No man achieves anything by distrust of others. 
Nurturing fear obliges one to live like a corpse.” 

Pujani replied, “He whose feet are sore will certainly fall, however 
cautiously he tries to walk. Similarly, a man whose eyes have become sore 
by opening them against the wind will find wind very painful to them. He 
who sets foot on an evil path and persists in walking along it, without 
knowing his own strength, will soon lose his life. He who is lazy and tills 
his land disregarding the season of rain will never reap a harvest. He who 
eats every day food that is nutritious, be it bitter, sharp, palatable or sweet, 
will enjoy a long life, while he who ignores wholesome food and takes what 
is injurious, oblivious of its consequences, will soon meet with death. 

Destiny and effort depend upon each other. Mahatmans achieve good 
and great feats, while eunuchs only pay court to Destiny. Be it harsh or 
mild, one’s karma should be good. The unfortunate man of inaction is 
always overwhelmed by all sorts of calamity. One should use one’s energy 
to do what is beneficial to oneself and abandon everything else. Knowledge, 
courage, cleverness, strength and patience are said to be one’s natural 
friends, and wise men live in this world with the aid of these five. Houses, 
precious metals, land, wife and friends—these are secondary sources of 
good, the learned say, and can be obtained everywhere. 

A wise man can be happy and will stand out everywhere. He never fills 
anybody with fear, or yields to fear even if frightened. The wealth that he 


possesses at any time, however little, is certain to increase. Such a man acts 
with acumen and self-restraint and will win great fame. 

Foolish men have to put up at home with quarrelsome wives who 
devour their flesh like the progeny of a crab eating up their mothers. There 
are men who, through deficiency of understanding, become disconsolate at 
the prospect of leaving home. They say to themselves, “These are our 
friends! This is our country! Alas, how shall we leave these?’ One should 
certainly leave the country of one’s birth if it is afflicted by plague or 
famine. One should live in one’s own country respected by all, or go to a 
foreign country and live there. For this reason I will go to some other 
region, as I no longer dare to live in this place, for I have done a great 
wrong to your child. 

Rajan, one should abandon a bad wife, a bad son, a bad king, a bad 
friend, a bad alliance, and a bad country. One should not place any trust in a 
bad son, and what joy can one have in a bad wife? There can be no 
happiness in a bad kingdom, and in a bad country one cannot hope to obtain 
a livelihood. There can be no lasting companionship with a bad friend, for 
his attachment is very unreliable, and in a bad alliance, when there is no 
compulsion for it, there is disgrace. She is a wife indeed whose utterances 
are agreeable. He is a son who makes the father happy. He is a friend in 
whom one can trust. That certainly is one’s country where one earns one’s 
livelihood. He is a just ruler who does not oppress, who loves the poor and 
in whose territories there is no fear. 

Wife, country, friends, son, kinsmen, and relatives—all these one can 
acquire if the king is accomplished and is virtuous. If the king is sinful, his 
subjects will meet with ruin as a result of his oppressions. The king is the 
root of one’s triple aggregate—Dharma, Dana and Kama. He should 
carefully protect his subjects and take from them only a sixth share of their 
wealth, or else he is in truth a thief. The king who gives assurances of 
protection and does not fulfill them due to greed, takes upon himself the 
sins of all his subjects and ultimately sinks to hell, whereas he who protects 
all his subjects, is a universal benefactor. 

Manu, the lord of all the creatures, has said that the king has seven 
attributes: he is Father, Mother, Guru, Protector, Fire, Vaisravana and Yama. 
One calls the king who shows compassion towards his people their father, 
and the subject who behaves falsely towards him will take birth in his next 
life as an animal or a bird. By nurturing them and caring for the poor, he 


becomes a mother to his people. When he destroys evil, he comes to be 
regarded as Fire; when he restrains the sinful, one calls him Yama; when he 
gives gifts of wealth to those who are dear to him one regards him as 
Kuvera, the granter of wishes; when he gives instruction in morality and 
dharma, he becomes the Guru; and when he exercises the duty of defending 
his subjects he becomes the Protector. 

The king who gladdens the people of his cities and provinces by his 
achievements in observing dharma is never deprived of his kingdom. The 
king who knows how to honour his subjects never suffers misery, here or 
hereafter. The king whose subjects are always anxious or overburdened 
with taxes and evils of all kinds will be defeated at the hands of his 
enemies, while he whose subjects grow like a large lotus in a lake will 
obtain every reward here, and will ultimately be honoured in Swarga. 
Hostility with one more powerful is never applauded, O Rajan. The king 
who incurs the hostility of one more powerful than himself loses both 
kingdom and happiness.” 

Having said these words to Brahmadatta, the bird left for the place she 
had chosen. I have narrated to you O foremost of kings, the discourse 
between Brahmadatta and Pujani. What else do you want to hear?’” 


CANTO 140 


¢ =e udhishtira asks, “When both dharma and men decay due to the 
gradual decline of the Yuga, and when robbers overrun the 
world, how then, O Pitamaha, should a king behave?’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘I will tell you, O Bhaarata, the policy the king should 
adopt at such times of distress, and how he should conduct himself, casting 
off compassion. There is often told an old story of a conversation between 
Bharadwaja and Satrunjaya. King Satrunjaya, the Maharathi ruler of the 
Sauviras, went to Bharadwaja and asked the Rishi about the truths of the 
science of Artha: “How can one acquire an object? How again, when 
acquired, can it be increased? How, when increased, can it be protected? 
And how, when protected, should it be used?” 

The Maharishi set out a reasoned explanation of the science of Artha. 
He said, “The king should always have the rod of Dandaneeti raised in his 
hand. He should strike everyone with awe and thus rule all creatures. He 
should display his prowess and make no mistakes himself, but use his eyes 
to mark the lapses of his foes. Learned men with knowledge of truth 
applaud Punishment, or Danda. Hence, one says that of the four requisites 
of governance, Conciliation, Gift, Disunion and Punishment, Danda is the 
greatest. 

All who seek refuge perish when one destroys the foundation that 
ensures protection. If one cuts away the roots of a tree, how can the 
branches live? A wise king should cut away the very roots of his enemies, 
and then win them over and bring their allies and partisans under his 


control. When calamities occur, the king should lose no time, counsel 
wisely, display his prowess suitably, fight with ability and even retreat 
wisely. The king should exhibit humility in words, while at heart remaining 
sharp as a razor. He should give up kama and krodha and speak sweetly and 
mildly. When the occasion for a parley with an enemy comes, a king with 
foresight should make peace, but without blind trust. When the undertaking 
is over, he should quickly turn away from the new ally. 

One should conciliate an enemy with sweet assurances as if he were a 
friend, but remain wary as though living in a room where there lurks a 
snake. He whose mind your intellect can dominate should be comforted by 
assurances given in the past, an evil one by promises of future benefit, and a 
wise man by present assistance. He who wants to achieve prosperity should 
join his hands together, make pledges, use sweet words, show reverence by 
bowing down his head, and shed tears. One should carry one’s foe on one’s 
shoulders so long as the time is unfavourable. Then, when the opportunity 
comes, one should shatter him like an earthen jar on a stone. 

It is better, O Rajan, for a king to blaze up in a moment like a charcoal 
of ebony-wood rather than to smoulder and smoke like chaff for many 
years. One who has many purposes to serve should have no scruples dealing 
with even an ungrateful man. If one succeeds, one can enjoy happiness but, 
if unsuccessful, one loses esteem; therefore, while dealing with such men, 
one should always leave something unfinished. 

A king should for his own good, imitate a cuckoo, a boar, the mountains 
of Meru, an empty chamber, an actor, and a devoted friend, He should 
diligently visit the homes of his enemies and, if calamities befall them, 
enquire about their well-being. Those who are idle will never be wealthy; 
nor will those who lack manliness and energy; nor those who are vain or 
fear unpopularity; nor those given to procrastination. The king should work 
in such a way that his enemy is unable to detect his shortcomings, while he 
can observe his enemy’s weakness. He should imitate the tortoise who 
conceals its limbs and covers its own weakness. He should think of all 
matters connected with finance like a crane sitting patiently by the water’s 
edge for hours together waiting for fish. He should demonstrate his skill like 
a lion. He should lie in wait like a wolf, and fall upon and strike his foes 
directly like an arrow. 

He should be judicious in enjoying drink, dice, women, hunting and 
music, as addiction to these will produce evil. He should make bows with 


bamboos and such; he should sleep cautiously like the deer, and seem blind 
or deaf when necessary. A wise king should show his prowess according to 
time and place, for if these are not favourable, all his skills will be futile. He 
should get down to work marking the timeliness of his action, reflect upon 
his own strength and weakness and improve his own strength in comparison 
to that of the enemy. The king who does not crush a foe defeated by 
military force provides for his own death like the crab when she conceives. 
A tree with beautiful blossoms may not be strong; one bearing fruits may be 
difficult to climb; and sometimes a tree with unripe fruits may appear like 
one with ripe fruits. These facts should not depress a king, for if he 
conducts himself as explained above, he will succeed against all foes. 

The king should first strengthen the hopes of those who approach him as 
supplicants and then put obstacles in the way of their fulfillment. He should 
represent these obstacles as rare and the circumstances as the results of 
grave causes. As long as the occasion for fear does not actually occur, the 
king should make all his arrangements like one who is nervous. When the 
occasion for fear actually comes, he should strike fearlessly. No man can 
reap benefits without incurring danger. If he succeeds in preserving his life 
amidst peril, he is sure to earn great rewards. 

A king should ascertain all future dangers when they are present and 
overcome them before they grow further; he should, even after vanquishing 
them, consider them unconquered. The abandonment of present happiness 
and the pursuit of future happiness is never the policy of an intelligent man. 
The king who, having made peace with an enemy, sleeps happily in 
tranquility, is like a man sleeping on the top of a tree who awakes only after 
a fall. When one lapses into difficulties, one should raise oneself by every 
means in one’s power, mild or strong, and practise dharma only after one 
has recovered. 

The king should always honour the foes of his enemies. He should 
employ as his own spies agents employed by his foes and ensure that his 
enemies do not discover them. He should use atheists and ascetics as spies 
and send them into his enemy’s territories. Sinful thieves who offend the 
laws of dharma and who are thorns in the side of everyone enter gardens, 
places of amusement, places set up for giving drinking water to thirsty 
travelers, public inns, drinking spots, houses of ill fame, holy places and 
public assemblies. You should recognise them, arrest them and put them 
down. The king should not trust one who does not deserve to be trusted, nor 


should he trust too much one who deserves trust, for danger springs from 
trust. No one should be trusted without prior scrutiny. 

Having by persuasive methods created confidence in the enemy, the 
king should smite him when he makes a false step. The king should fear 
him who is without fear, and also those who should be feared. Fear that 
comes from a quarter one did not suspect can lead to total extermination. 
By attention, by taciturnity, by wearing the reddish garb, matted locks and 
skins of ascetics, one should lull one’s enemy into confidence and then, 
when the opportunity comes, spring upon him like a wolf. A king who 
wants prosperity should not scruple to slay son, brother, father or friend, if 
any of them tries to thwart his plans. One’s very guru deserves to be 
punished, if he happens to be arrogant, ignorant of what should be done and 
what should not, and one who treads the path of adharma. 

Just as certain insects with their sharp mandibles can cut off all flowers 
and fruits of the trees on which they sit, the king should deceive his enemy 
with welcome, honours and gifts and then attack him and take everything 
from him. One cannot acquire great prosperity without stabbing the very 
vitals of others, without accomplishing many grim deeds and without 
slaughtering living creatures like a fisherman. There are no separate species 
of creatures called enemies or friends; they become that from force of 
circumstance. 

The king should never be moved to allow his foe to escape, even if they 
plead piteously, as it is his dharma to destroy any who have done him an 
injury. A king who wants prosperity should take care to win over to himself 
as many men as he can, doing good to them. He should remain free from 
malice while dealing with his subjects, but judiciously control and punish 
the evil and disobedient. After seizing wealth he should say placating 
words. After striking off someone’s head, he should grieve and shed tears. 
A king who wants to prosper should draw others to himself and bind them 
to his service by means of sweet words, honours and gifts. He should never 
engage in fruitless disputes or cross a river with the aid of his own two 
arms. To eat cow-horns is futile and not invigorating, for their taste is not 
pleasing and they break one’s teeth. 

The triple aggregate of dharma, artha and kama has three disadvantages, 
with three inseparable adjuncts. Pursuit of dharma stands as an impediment 
in the way of artha; artha stands in the way of dharma; and kama stands in 
the way of both. Carefully consider these adjuncts, and avoid the 


disadvantages. The unpaid balance of a debt, the unextinguished remnant of 
a fire, and un-slain enemies: these grow and increase, and should therefore 
be completely put out and exterminated. Debt that grows, defeated foes and 
neglected ailments are certain to remain, unless totally eradicated, and will 
lead to a rout. All work should be done thoroughly and carefully, for even a 
minute thing like a thorn, if extracted clumsily, can lead to incurable 
gangrene. 

A king should destroy a hostile kingdom by slaughtering its population, 
by tearing up roads and otherwise damaging them, and by burning and 
pulling down its houses. He should be far-sighted like a vulture, motionless 
like a crane, vigilant like a dog, valiant like a lion, wary like a crow, and 
like a snake sneak into the territories of his foes with ease and unconcern. A 
king should win over a hero by joining his palms, a coward by filling him 
with fear, and a covetous man by gifts of wealth, while, with an equal he 
should wage war. He should be alert to any opportunity to produce disunion 
among leaders of different sects and to conciliate those among them who 
are dear to him. He should protect his ministers from disunion and 
destruction. 

If the king becomes mild, the people ignore him, but if he becomes 
stern, the people feel it as hardship. The rule is that he should be stern or 
mild as the occasion requires. He should treat the mild with mildness, and 
that may even destroy the fierce, for there is nothing that mildness cannot 
achieve. For this reason, one says that mildness is more effective than 
fierceness. The king, who is mild when the occasion requires mildness and 
stern when sternness is required, will accomplish all his objectives and 
defeat his foes. 

Having incurred the animosity of a knowledgeable and wise man, one 
should not draw comfort from the conviction that one is at a distance from 
him. The arms of an intelligent injured man who seeks revenge, reach far. 
One should not try to cross what cannot really be traversed or snatch from 
an enemy something he will be able to recover, or dig for something that 
one will not succeed in unearthing. One should never strike someone whose 
head one cannot cut off. In times of trouble a king should follow this course 
of conduct that I have laid down. I have said all this for your own good and 
to instruct you on how you should bear yourself when enemies attack.” 

The king of the Sauviras listened to these words of the Brahmana who 
had spoken out of a desire to do him good, obeyed them cheerfully and as a 


result he, his kinsmen and friends obtained great prosperity.” 


CANTO 141 


¢ =v, udhishtira asks, “When Mahadharma decays and all disobey it, 
when dharma assumes a reverse form and becomes adharma; 
when all good restraints disappear, and all truths in respect of dharma are 
challenged and disputed; when kings and robbers oppress people; when 
men of all the four varnashramas become confused about their duties and 
all actions lose their merit; when, as a result of kama, lobha and ahankara, 
men have cause for fear from every direction; when all cease to trust one 
another, when they kill one another treacherously and deceive one another 
in their mutual dealings; when houses are burned down throughout the land; 
when the Brahmanas suffer; when the clouds do not bring a drop of rain; 
when everyone’s hand is turned against his neighbor; when all the 
necessities of life fall under the control of robbers; when such a time of 
terrible distress sets in, by what means should a Brahmana maintain himself 
who is unwilling to give up compassion and his children? Tell me this, O 
Pitamaha. When sinfulness sweeps over the world, O Parantapa, how 
should the king live so that he will not stray from both dharma and artha?’ 
Bhishma replies, ‘O Mahabaho, the peace and prosperity of subjects, 
sufficient and seasonal rain, disease, death and other fears, all depend on the 
king. I have no doubt, O Bharatarishabha, that the setting in of Krita, Treta, 
Dwapara and Kali yugas depend on the king’s conduct. When such a season 
of misery as you describe sets in, the righteous should support life by their 
own judgment. 


In this connection, a story has been told of the conversation between 
Viswamitra and a Chandala in a hamlet inhabited by Chandalas. Towards 
the end of Treta and the beginning of Dwapara yugas, a frightful drought 
extending over twelve years occurred, as intended by the Devas. At the end 
of Treta yuga and the commencement of Dwapara yuga, when the time 
came for many creatures to die of old age, Indra, the thousand-eyed deity of 
Swarga, sent no rain. The planet Brihaspati began to move in a retrograde 
course and Soma, abandoning his own orbit, receded towards the south. Not 
even a dew-drop could be seen, let alone clouds gathering together. The 
rivers all shrank into narrow rivulets, and as the Devas ordained, lakes, 
wells and springs everywhere lost their beauty and disappeared. 

Water having become scarce, the places set up by charity for thirsty 
travellers became desolate. The Brahmanas abstained from sacrifices and 
recitation of the Vedas. They no longer uttered Vashats or performed 
propitiatory rites. Agriculture and cattle rearing were given up, markets and 
shops were abandoned and stakes for tethering sacrificial animals 
disappeared. People no longer collected articles for sacrifices, and all 
festivals and amusements perished. Heaps of bones lay scattered around and 
the air was filled with the shrill cries and yells of ferocious creatures. Cities 
and towns became empty of inhabitants. Villages and hamlets were burnt 
down. Some people were assailed by robbers, some by weapons, some by 
evil kings, and all began to flee in fear of one another. Temples and places 
of worship became desolate. The aged were forcibly turned out of their 
houses, and cattle—goats, sheep and buffaloes—fought for food and 
perished in large numbers. Brahmanas began to die on all sides, protection 
came to an end, and herbs and plants dried up. The earth, shorn of all her 
beauty, became ghastly and dreadful, like trees in a crematorium. 

In that period of terror, when dharma was nowhere, O Yudhishtira, 
starving men lost their senses and began to eat one another. The very Rishis 
gave up their vows, abandoned their fires and deities, forsook vanavasa and 
began to wander about in search of food. The holy and wise Maharishi 
Viswamitra, leaving his wife and son in a place of shelter and abandoning 
his homa fire, wandered homeless and hungry, unmindful of clean and 
unclean food. 

One day he came upon a hamlet in the midst of a vana, inhabited by 
savage hunters engaged in the slaughter of living creatures. The village 
abounded with broken earthen jars and pots, and dog-skins lay scattered 


around. Bones and skulls of boars and asses were heaped up, clothes 
stripped from the dead lay strewn around, and huts were decorated with 
withered garlands and filled with sloughed-off snakeskins. The loud 
crowing of cocks and the dissonant bray of asses filled the air, while the 
inhabitants of the village disputed with one another harshly in discordant 
voices. Temples of Devas bearing images of owls and other birds resounded 
with the clang of iron bells, and packs of dogs lolled about. 

Maharishi Viswamitra, moved by the pangs of hunger, entered the 
Chandalas’ village in search of food and tried his best to find something to 
eat. Though he begged and begged, he failed to obtain meat, rice, fruit, root 
or any other kind of food. At last he exclaimed, “Alas, what misery has 
overtaken me!” and collapsed from weakness. 

The sage began to reflect and asked himself, “What is best for me to do 
now?” The one thought that seized him was how to avoid immediate death. 
He found spread on the floor of a Chandala’s hut a large piece of flesh, of a 
recently-killed dog. The sage reflected and decided to steal that meat, 
saying to himself, “When there is no other means to stay alive, theft is 
permitted, even for eminent men, and it will not detract from their fame. It 
is certain that, to save his life, even a Brahmana can do it. One should steal 
first from a low person, failing which one can steal from one’s equal, or 
from even an eminent Dharmatman. Therefore at this time, when my life 
itself is ebbing away, I will steal this haunch of dog’s meat. I see nothing 
wrong in such theft.” 

Maharishi Viswamitra resolved to do so, and lay down to sleep where 
the Chandalas lived. When the night had advanced and the whole Chandala 
village had fallen asleep, the holy Viswamitra stealthily got up and entered 
the hut. The Chandala who owned it, an ugly man with phlegm-covered 
eyes, was lying like one asleep. He called out in a hoarse and dissonant 
voice, “Who is undoing the latch? The village is asleep but I am awake. 
Whoever you are, you are about to die.” 

Filled with fear at these harsh words, his heart palpitating and his face 
crimson with shame at the attempted theft, the sage answered, “O you 
blessed with a long life, I am Viswamitra. I have come here oppressed by 
the pangs of hunger. Do not slay me, O you of righteous understanding, if 
your sight is clear.” 

Hearing these words of the Maharishi, the Chandala rose up in terror 
from his bed and approached him. Joining his palms reverently, his eyes 


bathed in tears, he asked Kusika’s son, “What are you doing here in the 
night, Brahmana?” 

To conciliate the Chandala, Viswamitra said, ““Famished as I am and 
about to die of starvation, I want to take that haunch of dog’s meat. It is 
hunger that is urging me to this misdeed and it has made me sinful and 
shameless. My life-breath is fading, and hunger has destroyed my Vedic 
learning. I have lost my senses through weakness and have no scruple left 
about clean or unclean food. Although I know it is sinful, I still wish to take 
away that haunch of dog’s meat. I wandered from house to house in your 
hamlet, and when I failed to obtain any alms, I decided upon this misdeed. 
Fire is the mouth of the Devas and is also their priest, and should take 
nothing that is not pure and clean. At times, however, the great Agni Deva 
becomes a consumer of everything. Understand that I have now in that 
respect become just like him.” 

The Chandala answered, “O Maharishi, listen to my words of truth 
about your duty and act so that your punya is not destroyed. The wise say 
that a dog is less clean than a jackal, and that the haunch of a dog is a much 
worse part of his body than any other. You have not discerned this, 
Maharishi, for this theft of unclean food belonging to a Chandala is 
inconsistent with dharma. You are blessed, look for some other means for 
preserving your life and let not your tapasyas suffer destruction as a result 
of your craving for dog’s meat. Knowing the duties that the shastras have 
laid down, you should not do something that will result in confusion in your 
dharma. Do not cast off dharma, for you are its greatest observer.” 

Thus addressed, O Bharatarishabha, the famished Maharishi Viswamitra 
once more said, “It has been a long time since I ate anything, and I do not 
see any other means of staying alive. When one is facing death, one should 
preserve one’s life by any means in one’s power, not enquire into their 
character. Later, when one is able, one should seek to acquire punya. 
Kshatriyas should observe the practices of Indra, while it is the duty of 
Brahmanas to behave like Agni. 

The Vedas are fire and, since they constitute my strength, I will eat even 
this unclean food to appease my hunger. That which preserves life should 
certainly be done without scruple, for life is better than death and, as long 
as there is life, one can acquire dharma. I am ready to eat this to save my 
life, knowing that this food is impure. Give me your permission. If I 
survive, I will acquire dharma and, by penances and knowledge, wipe out 


the abomination of my present conduct, like the light of the firmament that 
can banish even the densest darkness.” 

The Chandala said, “By eating this food, someone like you cannot 
obtain long life, for it can neither give you strength nor the gratification 
offered by ambrosia. Pray seek some other kind of alms, and not this dog’s 
meat which is defiled food for Munis.” 

Viswamitra replied, “During a famine like this, any other kind of meat 
cannot be easily obtained. Besides, O Chandala, I have no means to buy 
food, and I am ravenous. I can no longer move and am without any hope. I 
believe that in that piece of dog’s meat I will find all the six kinds of taste.” 

The Chandala said, “The shastras prescribe only five kinds of five- 
clawed animals as clean food for Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and Vaisyas. Do 
not hunger for this unclean food.” 

Viswamitra said, “The great Rishi Agastya, when hungry, ate the Asura 
Vatapi. I am in distress, I am hungry, and I will therefore eat that haunch of 
dog’s meat.” 

The Chandala said, “Ask for some other alms, as it does not become 
you ever to do such a thing. If, however, it pleases you, you can take this 
piece of dog’s meat.” 

Viswamitra said, “Those whom you call good are authorities on matters 
of duty. I am following their example. I now regard this dog’s haunch to be 
better food than anything that is highly pure.” 

The Chandala said, “One can never regard the action of an adharmic 
person as an eternal practice. What is improper can never become proper. 
Do not deceive yourself into committing a sinful deed.” 

Viswamitra replied, “A Rishi cannot do anything sinful. In the present 
case, the deer and the dog to me are the same, both animals. I will, 
therefore, eat this dog’s haunch.” 

The Chandala said, “In the case of the Rishi Agastya, he did as the 
Brahmanas requested him. Under those circumstances it could not be a sin. 
That in which there is no sin is dharma. Besides, one should by all means 
protect and preserve Brahmanas, who are the gurus of three other varnas.” 

Viswamitra said, “I am a Brahmana and my body is a very dear friend, 
worthy of the highest reverence from me. It is to sustain this body that I 
wish to take away that dog’s haunch. So eager have I become that I no 
longer have any fear of you or your fierce brethren.” 


The Chandala said, “Men lay down their lives rather than eat impure 
food. They realise all their desires by conquering hunger. You too must 
conquer your craving and obtain those rewards.” 

Viswamitra said, “I observe strict vows and my heart is set on peace. To 
preserve the root of all religious punya, I will eat food that is unclean. It is 
evident that one would regard such an action as righteous in a Rishi, while 
to someone of unclean soul the eating of dog’s flesh would appear 
sacreligious. Even if the conclusion at which I have arrived is wrong, and if 
I eat this dog’s meat I will not, as a result, become like you.” 

The Chandala said, “I have decided that I must try my best to restrain 
you from this offence. A Brahmana by evil karma falls from his high state. 
It is for this that I am reproving you.” 

Viswamitra retorted, “Cattle continue to drink, regardless of the 
croaking of the frogs. You can claim no knowledge about what is dharma 
and what is not, so don’t think too highly of yourself.” 

The Chandala replied, “I am preaching to you only because I have 
become your friend. Do whatever is beneficial, do not be tempted into 
doing anything wicked.” 

Viswamitra said, “If you are a friend who wishes my happiness, help me 
from this misery. If you willingly give me this dog’s haunch, I can consider 
myself saved by the aid of dharma and not by sin.” 

The Chandala said, “I dare not gift you with this piece of meat, nor can I 
quietly suffer the theft of my own food. If I give you this meat and if you, a 
Brahmana, take it, both of us will sink into regions of sorrow in the next 
world.” 

Viswamitra said, “If I commit this sinful deed today, I will certainly 
save my life which is sacred. After I save my life, I will practice dharma 
and cleanse my soul. Tell me which of these two is preferable, to die 
without food, or save my life by taking this food that is impure.” 

The Chandala said: “In duties concerning one’s varna or varnasrama, 
one is the best judge of propriety or impropriety. You know which of these 
two actions is sinful. I think that he who would regard dog’s meat as clean 
food, would in matters of food abstain from nothing!” 

Viswamitra replied, ‘In accepting an unclean gift, or in eating unclean 
food, there is sin. When, however, one’s life is in danger, there is no sin in 
accepting such a present or eating such food. Besides, the eating of impure 


food that is not accompanied by slaughter and deception, is not a matter of 
much consequence, and will provoke only mild censure.” 

The Chandala said, “If this is your argument for eating unclean food, it 
is clear that you do not respect the morality of the Vedas and Arya. You 
have taught me by your example, O greatest of Brahmanas, that it is not a 
sin to disregard the distinction between food that is clean and unclean.” 

Viswamitra said, “It is not that a man incurs a grave sin by eating 
forbidden food. The precept that one becomes degraded by drinking wine is 
only in order to restrain men. Other strictures of the same type, whatever 
they be, in fact every sin, cannot destroy one’s punya.” 

The Chandala said, “The learned man who takes dog’s meat from an 
unworthy place, from an unclean wretch, from one who leads an evil life, 
commits an action contrary to that one calls good. As a result, he is certain 
to suffer the pangs of repentance.” 

The Chandala, having said these words to Kusika’s son, fell silent. The 
wise Viswamitra, to save his life, then took away that haunch of dog’s meat 
to the woods to eat with his wife. He resolved that he would first gratify the 
deities according to due rites and then eat the meat at his pleasure. 

Lighting a fire according to the Brahma rites, the Maharishi began to 
cook the meat into sacrificial Charu, as the Aindragneya rites prescribe. He 
then began the ceremonies in honour of the Devas and the Pitris, O 
Bhaarata, divided the Charu into as many portions as were necessary 
according to the injunctions of the shastras, and invoked the Devas, with 
Indra at their head, to accept their shares. 

Meanwhile, the chief of the celestials caused heavy rain to fall. The 
showers revived all the creatures and caused plants and herbs to grow once 
more. Viswamitra completed the rites in honour of the Devas and the Pitris 
and, having duly gratified them, ate the meat. Burning away all his sins later 
by his penances, the sage, after a long time, acquired the most wonderful 
ascetic success. 

Even so should a Mahatman proceed who is knowledgeable and can 
devise means to preserve his own life when in trouble. By using his 
understanding thus, a man should survive to win punya and enjoy happiness 
and prosperity. For this reason, O son of Kunti, a learned man of cleansed 
soul should live and work in this world, relying upon his own intelligence 
to discriminate between dharma and adharma.’” 


CANTO 142 


¢ mye udhishtira says, ‘If something so horrible can be commended 

that, like falsehood, should be held in aversion, then from what 

deeds should I desist? Why then shouldn’t robbers be respected? I am 

stunned, my heart is sore, all the ties that bind me to dharma are loosened! I 
cannot calm my mind and venture to act as you suggest.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘I am not instructing you about duty that I have learned 
from the Vedas alone. What I have told you is the result of wisdom and 
experience, the honey that the learned have gathered. Kings should gather 
wisdom from various sources. One cannot make his course through the 
world with the aid of a dharma that is one-sided. Duty must spring from 
understanding and from discovering the practices of those who are good, O 
son of Kuru. Attend to my words. Only kings who have superior 
intelligence can rule and expect victory. A weak-minded king can never 
display wisdom if he has not drawn any from the examples before him. 

Dharma sometimes takes the shape of adharma, and vice versa. He who 
does not know this is baffled when confronted by an actual instance of the 
kind. Before the occasion arises, O Bhaarata, one should understand the 
circumstances under which dharma and its reverse become confused. 
Having acquired this knowledge, a wise king should act according to his 
judgment when the occasion comes. Ordinary people misunderstand what 
he does at such a time. Some possess true knowledge. Some have false 
knowledge. Truly ascertaining the nature of each kind of knowledge, a wise 
king derives understanding from those who are good. 


Those who are breakers of dharma find fault with the shastras. Those 
who have no wealth find inconsistencies in the treatises on gaining wealth. 
Those who seek knowledge only for their livelihood, Rajan, are sinful, 
enemies of dharma. Evil men of immature understanding can never truly 
comprehend things, just as men who do not know the shastras are unable to 
be guided in all their actions by reason. They can only see the faults of the 
shastras and criticize them. Even if they understand the true meaning of the 
shastras, they will still proclaim that scriptural injunctions are unsound. 
Such men proclaim the superiority of their own knowledge by decrying the 
knowledge of others. They use words as weapons and arrows and speak as 
if they were real masters of their sciences. They are traders in learning and 
Rakshasas among men. Through such pretexts they abandon the dharma 
that good and wise men have established. 

We hear that the contents of dharma are not to be understood by either 
discussion or one’s own intelligence. Indra himself says that this is the 
opinion of the sage Brihaspati. Some are of the opinion that no text in the 
shastras has been laid down without a reason. Many, even if they properly 
understand the shastras, never act according to them. A class of wise men 
declares that dharma is nothing else but the approved course of the world. 
The man of true knowledge should find out for himself the dharma laid 
down for the good. If even a wise man speaks of morality under the 
influence of anger, confusion of understanding or ignorance, his efforts are 
in vain. 

Discourses on morality are worthy of praise when made with the aid of 
an intelligence derived from the true letter and spirit of the shastras, not 
those made with the help of anything else. Even words from an ignorant 
man, if they carry sense, can be considered pious and wise. In olden days, 
Usanas revealed this incontrovertible truth to the Daityas, that shastras are 
not shastras if they cannot stand the test of reason. The possession or 
absence of knowledge that is mixed with doubts is the same thing. You 
should get rid of such knowledge, tearing it up from the roots. You should 
regard one who does not listen to my words as someone who has allowed 
himself to be misled. 

Do you not see that you were created for the accomplishment of bold 
deeds? Look at me, dear child, how by performing the dharma of my varna, 
I have dispatched innumerable Kshatriyas to Swarga! There are some who 
are not pleased with me for this. Brahma created the goat, the horse and the 


Kshatriya for the same purpose, to be useful. A Kshatriya therefore, should 
always seek the happiness of all creatures. The sin that attaches to killing a 
man who should not be killed is equal to that which is incurred by not 
killing one who deserves to be killed. This is the established order of things 
which a weak-minded king does not observes. 

Therefore, a king should be severe in making all his subjects observe 
their respective duties. If this is not done, they will prowl like wolves, 
devouring one another. He is a wretch among Kshatriyas in whose 
territories robbers go about plundering the property of other people, like 
crows taking little fishes from water. Appoint high-born men who have 
Vedic knowledge as your ministers, govern the earth and protect your 
subjects righteously. The Kshatriya who is ignorant of customs and 
traditions and levies taxes upon his people improperly is a eunuch of his 
varna. 

A king should be neither severe nor mild, and deserves praise if he rules 
righteously. He should be severe on occasions demanding severity, and mild 
when it is necessary to be so. Painful is the observance of Kshatriya 
dharma. Therefore, rule your kingdom as you are created for the 
accomplishment of great deeds and I have great love for you. The percipient 
Sakra has said that in times of distress the great duty of a king is to punish 
the evil and to protect the good.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “Tell me, Pitamaha, if there is any rule regarding 
Rajadharma which should under no circumstances be violated.’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘One should always worship the Brahmanas venerated 
for their learning, devoted to penances and rich in conduct conformable to 
the injunctions of the Vedas. This indeed, is a great and sacred duty. Let 
your conduct towards the Brahmanas always be that which you observe 
towards Devas. The Brahmanas, if enraged, can inflict diverse kinds of 
wrong, O Rajan. If they are gratified, great fame will be yours. Satisfied, the 
Brahmanas are like nectar, and enraged, they are like poison.’” 


CANTO 143 


¢ ve udhishtira asks, ‘O wise Pitamaha who knows all the shastras, 
tell me, what is the punya earned by one who shelters a 
petitioner seeking protection?’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘It is worthy of you to ask such a question, for great is 
the punya, O Rajan, in cherishing such supplicants. Protecting such people, 
mahatmas of old, king Sivi and others, attained great happiness in Swarga. 
One hears of a pigeon who, in accordance with due rites, even fed his own 
flesh to an enemy who came as a supplicant.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘How did this pigeon of old feed a foe with his own 
flesh, and what did he win in the end by such conduct?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Listen then, Rajan, to this excellent story that cleanses 
the listener of every sin. This very question, O son of Pritha, had been 
humbly put to Bhrigu’s son Rama by Muchkunda, and to him the sage 
narrated the tale of how a pigeon won prosperity. 

The sage said, “O Mahabaho Rajan, I will narrate to you a story about 
the truth connected with dharma artha and kama. A wicked fowler who 
resembled Yama the Destroyer himself used to wander through the great 
vana in the olden days. He was black as a raven, with bloodshot eyes, long 
legs, short feet, a large mouth and bulging cheeks. He had no friend, 
relative or kinsman, since all had cast him off for the exceedingly cruel life 
he led. Indeed, the wise should renounce from a distance a man of evil 
conduct, for he who injures himself cannot be expected to do good to 


others. The heinous men who take the lives of other creatures are like 
poisonous snakes, a source of trouble to all creatures. 

He went to the woods with his nets to trap birds and sell their meat, 
never understanding what a sinful life it was that he led. The evil wretch, 
stupefied by destiny, and preferring no other profession, lived in the forest 
for many long years in this manner with his wife, One day, as he was 
wandering through the vana intent on his business, a great storm arose that 
tossed the trees and seemed about to uproot them. In a moment dense 
clouds covered the sky, lit with flashes of lightning like a sea covered with 
merchants’ boats and vessels. Then Indra Deva entered the cloud and in a 
moment the earth was flooded with torrential rain submerging all the forest 
paths. 

The fowler, crazed with fear and trembling with cold, roved the vana 
looking for high ground but failed to find any. The force of the cloudburst 
had thrown down and killed many birds. Lions, bears and other animals, 
had taken shelter in whatever high ground they could find. Fear filled all the 
denizens of the forest because of that terrifying storm and, frightened and 
hungry, they roamed through the woods in packs small and large. The 
fowler, however, his limbs stiffened by cold, could neither stop where he 
was nor move on. 

While in this state, he spied a she-pigeon lying on the ground, stiffened 
with cold. Though in the same predicament, the sinful wretch, through force 
of habit, picked her up and put her in a cage. Even when he himself was in 
trouble, he had no scruple in harming a fellow-creature. He then saw in the 
midst of that forest a lordly tree, blue as the clouds, the resort of a myriad 
birds seeking shade and shelter. It seemed that the Creator placed it there 
for the benefit of all creatures, like a good man in the world. 

Soon the sky cleared and became spangled with hundreds of stars, like a 
magnificent lake smiling with blooming lilies. Turning his gaze up to the 
firmament rich with stars and clear of clouds, the fowler advanced, 
trembling with cold. Seeing that darkness had already fallen, and realizing 
that his home lay a great distance away, he resolved to pass the night under 
the shade of that tree. Bowing down to it with joined hands, he addressed 
that monarch of the forest, saying, ‘I ask all the deities that have this tree for 
their resort to grant me shelter.’ He then spread some leaves on the ground 
for a bed, and lay down, resting his head on a stone. Though overwhelmed 
with affliction, the man soon fell asleep.””” 


CANTO 144 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘In one of the branches of that tree, O Rajan, a 
pigeon with beautiful feathers lived for many years with his 
family. That morning his wife had gone out in search of food but had not 
returned. Disturbed that the night had come and his wife had not yet come 
back, the bird began to lament: “Ah, what a huge storm and harrowing 
downpour we have had today! Alas, you have not yet returned, dear wife! 
Why has she has not yet come back to us? Is everything right with my 
beloved spouse in the vana? Without her, my home seems empty! A house- 
holder’s home, even if filled with sons and grandsons and daughters-in-law 
and servants, is empty without the housewife. One’s house is not one’s 
home; only one’s wife is one’s home. A house without the wife is a desolate 
wilderness. 

If my dear wife of eyes fringed with red, of multicolored plumes and 
sweet voice, does not come back today, my life itself will become 
worthless. Of excellent vows, she never eats before I eat, never bathes 
before I bathe, never sits before I sit down, and never lies down before I lie 
down. She rejoices when I rejoice, and grieves when I am sad. When I am 
away she is downcast, and even when I am angry she continues to speak 
sweetly. Ever devoted to her lord and ever relying upon her husband, she 
always does what is agreeable and beneficial for him. Worthy of praise is he 
on earth who has such a spouse! That amiable creature knows that I am 
fatigued and hungry. Devoted to me and constant in her love, my celebrated 
spouse is surpassingly sweet-tempered and worships me ardently. 


Even the foot of a tree is one’s home if one lives there in the company 
of one’s spouse; without her, even a palace is veritably a desolate 
wilderness. One’s spouse is one’s associate in all one’s deeds of dharma, 
artha and kama. When one sets out for a strange land, one’s wife is one’s 
trusted companion. One says that the wife is the richest possession of her 
husband. In this world the wife is one’s only associate in all the concerns of 
life, the best of medicines that one can have in sickness and sorrow. There 
is no friend like her. There is no refuge better than her. There is no better 
ally in the world than her in work undertaken for the acquisition of punya. 
He, who does not have in his home a wife who is chaste and of agreeable 
speech, should go to the vana. For such a man there is no difference 
between home and wilderness.”’” 


CANTO 145 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘Hearing these piteous lamentations of the pigeon 

on the tree, the she-pigeon that the fowler seized began to say to 
herself, “Whether I have any merit or not, truly there is no limit to my good 
fortune when my dear lord speaks thus of me. She is no wife with whom 
her lord is not content. In the case of women, if they gratify their lords, all 
the deities are also pleased. Since the marriage union takes place in the 
presence of fire, the husband is the wife’s greatest deity. The wife with 
whom her husband is not pleased gets reduced to ashes, like a flowering 
creeper in a forest fire.” 

Having reflected thus, the kind she-pigeon, overcome with sorrow, and 
casting her eyes upon her lord from inside the cage where the fowler had 
imprisoned her, said to her grief-stricken husband, “Listen while I tell you 
how you can rescue me. This fowler lies here by your home, stricken with 
cold and hunger. Do him the duties of hospitality. The sin that one commits 
by Brahmahatya or by slaying a cow, the mother of the world, is equal to 
that which one incurs by allowing a supplicant to perish for want of help. 
You possess knowledge of self; therefore, follow the course that our 
swadharma has ordained for us. We have heard that the householder who 
practises dharma according to his abilities wins inexhaustible regions of 
bliss hereafter. You have sons and progeny; therefore do not be concerned 
about your own body and, for the sake of winning dharma and artha, offer 
worship to this fowler so that his heart will be pleased. Do not, O bird, 
indulge in any grief on my account. You may continue to live, taking other 


wives!” So said the amiable she-bird, overcome with sorrow, gazing at her 
husband from within the fowler’s cage where she had been immured.’” 


CANTO 146 


“BR hishma says, “Hearing his wife’s words, full of morality and 

reason, the pigeon was thrilled, and his eyes filled with tears of 
joy. He then, according to the rites laid down in the shastras, scrupulously 
honoured the fowler whose avocation was the slaughter of birds. 

He addressed the fowler, “You are welcome today. Tell me what I can 
do for you. This is your home, so tell me your pleasure and what I can do 
for you. Do not fret. I ask you out of regard, for you have solicited shelter at 
our hands, and hospitality should be shown even to one’s foe. Like the tree, 
which does not withdraw its shade even from one who approaches to cut it 
down, one should faithfully carry out the duties of hospitality to those who 
need shelter. Indeed, one is especially bound to do so if one happens to be a 
grihasta, leading a life of domesticity consisting of the five sacrifices. 
According to the shastras, if one blunders in performing the five sacrifices, 
he loses both this world and the next. Tell me then clearly and confidently 
what your wishes are, and I will accomplish them all.” 

The fowler replied, “I am stiff with cold. Let provision be made to 
warm me.” 

The bird gathered together a number of dry leaves on the ground and, 
taking a single leaf in his beak, speedily went to a spot where fire was kept, 
and returned with a little cinder. He then set fire to the dry leaves and, when 
they leapt into vigorous flames, invited his guest, “Come and warm your 
limbs trustfully and without fear.” The fowler said, “Tathaasthu,” and set to 


warm himself. Recovering, he demanded of his winged host, “I am hungry. 
I want you to give me some food.” 

The bird said, “I have no means to appease your hunger. We denizens of 
the woods always live upon what we get every day. Like the Munis of the 
vana we never hoard for the morrow.” Mentally deploring this method of 
living, the bird grew pale with shame and began to reflect silently on what 
he should do. Soon, however, his mind became clear. Addressing the 
slaughterer of his species, the bird said, “I will gratify you. Wait for a 
moment.” 

He stoked the fire with the some dry leaves and, filled with joy, said to 
the fowler, “I heard in former days from Maharishis, Devas and Pitris that 
there is great punya in honouring a guest. O amiable one, be kind to me. I 
tell you truly that my heart is set upon gratifying you, my guest.” Having 
formed his resolution, the high-souled bird thrice circumambulated the fire 
with a smiling face and plunged into it directly. Seeing the bird enter the 
flames, the fowler began to upbraid himself, “Oh, what have I done! Alas, 
dark and terrible will be my sin, without doubt, as a result of my own 
deeds! I am exceedingly cruel and worthy of reproof!” Indeed, observing 
the bird lay down his life, the fowler, filled with remorse for his own 
actions, began to lament like you.’” 


CANTO 147 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘The fowler, seeing the pigeon cast himself into the 

fire, was filled with compassion and began to reproach himself, 

“Alas, cruel and senseless that I am, what have I done! I am certainly a 
mean wretch! Great will be my sin for everlasting years!’ 

He went on repeating, “I am unworthy of any punya. My understanding 
is perverse, and I am sinful in all I do. Alas, I am a cruel wretch for 
discarding any kinds of honourable occupation and becoming a fowler. This 
high-souled pigeon, by laying down his own life, has taught me a grave 
lesson. Abandoning wives and sons, I will certainly give up this life that I 
held so dear. From this day, denying every comfort to my body, I will wear 
it out like a shallow tank in the season of summer. I will suffer hunger, thirst 
and penances and, reduced to emaciation, covered all over with visible 
veins, I will, by diverse methods practise such vows so as to be in touch 
with the other world. By giving up his body, the pigeon has shown the 
worship that one should pay to an atithi. From now on I will follow dharma 
—the highest refuge. Indeed, I will practise such dharma as the righteous 
pigeon, the greatest of all winged creatures, has shown me.” 

Having formed this resolution and said these words, the fowler, once a 
man of fierce deeds, proceeded to make a Mahaprasthana—a tour of the 
world from where there is no return, observing the most rigid vows. He 
threw away his stout staff, his sharp-pointed iron-stick, his nets, snares and 
his iron cage, and set at liberty the she-pigeon that he had captured.’” 


CANTO 148 


6 “RB hishma says, “After the fowler had left, the she-pigeon, grieving 
for her husband, wept copiously and lamented, “I cannot, O dear 
lord, recollect a single instance of you having done me an injury! A widow, 
even if mother of many children, is still miserable without a husband, for 
she becomes helpless and an object of pity with her friends. You always 
cherished and honoured me with sweet, pleasant, charming and delightful 
words. I sported with you in valleys, in springs and on delightful tree-tops. 
You made me happy when we wandered through the skies but, dear lord, 
where are those joys now? 

Limited are the gifts of a father, a brother and a son. The gifts that her 
husband alone makes to her are unlimited. Which woman would not, 
therefore, adore her lord? A woman has no protector like her lord, and no 
happiness like her lord. Abandoning all her wealth and possessions, a 
woman should take to her lord as her only refuge. Life here is of no use to 
me, now that I am separated from you. What chaste woman would venture 
to bear the burden of life when deprived of her lord?” 

Filled with sorrow and lamenting piteously, the she-pigeon, devoted to 
her lord, threw herself onto the blazing fire. She saw her dead husband, 
adorned with bracelets, seated on a celestial carriage, adored by many 
Mahatmans and meritorious beings standing around him. Indeed, there he 
was in the firmament, decked with fine garlands, attired in splendid robes 
and adorned with every ornament. Around him were innumerable divine 
chariots ridden by beings who had acted meritoriously while in this world. 


Seated on his own carriage, the bird ascended to heaven and, obtaining 
honours for his deeds in this world, continued to sport joyfully in the 
company of his wife.’” 


CANTO 149 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘The fowler, O Rajan, was filled with sorrow at the 
sight of that pair of pigeons seated on their heavenly chariot and 
at his own misfortune, and began to reflect on how he could achieve the 
same consummation. He resolved to himself, “By austerities like those of 
the pigeon, I must attain just such a high end!” The fowler, who had lived 
by the slaughter of birds, set out on a journey without return. Living upon 
air alone, without any exertion, he cast off all desires in order to acquire 
Swarga. 

After he had walked for some distance, he saw an extensive and 
delightful lake full of cool and pure water, blooming with lotuses and 
teeming with diverse waterfowl. The very sight of such a lake would slake 
the thirst of a man. The fowler, emaciated with fasts, without even glancing 
at the lake, gladly entered a vana he saw to be large and inhabited by beasts 
of prey. He wandered lacerated by prickles and pointed thorns and covered 
all over with blood, in that forest devoid of men but abounding with 
animals of diverse species. Some time later, a powerful wind caused a forest 
fire to break out from friction between mighty trees. The raging element, 
splendid as if it had been the end of the Yuga, began to consume that large 
forest of tall trees, thick bushes and creepers. With flames fanned by the 
wind and myriads of sparks flying about in all directions, the all-consuming 
deity began to burn that dense forest abounding with birds and beasts. The 
fowler, ready to die, ran with glad heart into the spreading conflagration 
and, consumed by fire, was cleansed of all his sins. The fever of his heart 


dispelled, he beheld himself at last in heaven, shining in splendour like 
Indra in the midst of Yakshas, Gandharvas and men crowned with ascetic 
SUCCESS. 

Thus did the pigeon and his devoted spouse, along with the fowler, 
ascend to heaven for their meritorious deeds. The woman who follows her 
husband thus speedily ascends to heaven and shines there in splendour, like 
the she-pigeon of whom I have spoken. 

This is the old story of the high-souled fowler and the pigeon and how 
they earned a highly meritorious end by their dharmic deeds. No evil befalls 
one who listens to this story or recites it daily, even if error invades his 
mind. O Yudhisthira, foremost of righteous persons, the protection of a 
supplicant is truly meritorious. Even the slayer of a cow, by practising this 
duty, maybe cleansed of sin, but one who slays a supplicant will never be 
purified. By listening to this sacred and sin-cleansing story, one becomes 
freed from distress and attains Swarga.’” 


CANTO 150 


6 ye udhishtira says, ‘Tell me, Bhaaratottama, when a man lacking 
judgment commits sin, how can he be purified?’ 

Bhishma replies, “Let me narrate to you the old story, much-lauded by 
the Rishis, of what the Muni Indrota, the son of Sunaka, advised the valiant 
king Janamejaya. There was in days of yore a king of great energy called 
Janamejaya, the son of Parikshit. That lord of earth, Janamejaya, once from 
lack of judgment slew a Brahmana. At this, all the Brahmanas, together 
with his priests, abandoned him. Deserted by his subjects as well, and 
burning day and night with remorse, the king retired into the vana to 
undergo the most rigid tapasya in order to earn punya, to cleanse himself of 
the sin of Brahmahatya. He questioned many Brahmanas, and wandered 
from country to country over the whole earth. 

One day, in course of his wanderings, he met Indrota, the son of 
Sunaka, of rigid vows and, approaching him, touched his feet in reverence. 
The sage, seeing the king before him, reproved him gravely, saying, “You 
have committed a great sin. You are guilty of foeticide. Why have you come 
here, and what is your business with us? Do not touch me at any cost! Go 
away, your presence does not give me any pleasure. You smell like blood 
and you look like a corpse. Though polluted, you seem to be pure, and 
though dead you move like a living man! Dead within, you are of defiled 
soul, for you are always intent upon sin. Though you sleep and wake, your 
life is miserable and useless, O Rajan. You have been created for ignoble 
and sinful deeds. Fathers wish for sons from a desire to obtain all kinds of 


blessings, and in the hope that their sons will perform tapasyas and yagnas, 
worship the Devas and practise vairagya. Behold, the whole varna of your 
ancestors has fallen into hell as a result of your actions. All the hopes your 
ancestors placed on you have become fruitless. You live in vain, for you 
have treated with hatred and malice the Brahmanas, whom other men 
worship to obtain long life, fame and Swarga. Leaving this world when the 
time comes, you will have to fall headlong into hell, as a result of your 
sinful deeds, and remain in that posture for innumerable years, tortured by 
iron-beaked vultures and peacocks. Returning to this world, you will have 
to take birth in a lowly order of creatures. If you think, O Rajan, that this 
world is nothing and that the next world is the shadow of a shadow, the 
legions of Yama in hell will dispel your disbelief!””’” 


CANTO 151 


¢ ‘RB hishma continues, ‘Janamejaya replied to the sage Indrota, “You 

rebuke one who deserves to be rebuked, you censure one 
deserving censure when you harangue me for my misdeeds. My actions 
have been sinful, but I implore you to be merciful towards me, since I burn 
with remorse as though in a blazing fire! Recalling my deeds makes me 
wretched. Truly, I am afraid of Yama. How can I bear to live without 
extracting that dart from my heart? O Saunaka, suppress your wrath, 
instruct me now. 

I solemnly declare that I will once more show the same regard for 
Brahmanas as I did before. Let not my line become extinct and my race sink 
into the dust. Those who have wronged Brahmanas and thereby forfeited all 
claim to the respect of the world and to social interaction with their 
fellowmen, as decreed in the Vedas, should have no one to bear their names 
or continue their lineage. Utterly desolate, I reiterate my resolve. Protect me 
like sages who protect the poor without accepting gifts. Sinful men who 
abstain from sacrifices never attain heaven and have to pass their time in the 
pits of hell like the unclean Pullindas and Khasas. Ignorant that I am, grant 
me wisdom, like an Acharya to his shishya or a father to his son. Bless me, 
O Indrota, son of Sunaka!”’ 

Saunaka replied, “It is no wonder that a man without wisdom does 
many improper deeds. Knowing this, a person of real understanding is 
never angry with mortals but grieves for others, being then beyond an 


object of others’ regrets. One surveys all creatures in the world like a man 
on a mountain-top surveying people below. 

He who becomes an object of censure, who dislikes good men and 
avoids them, will never obtain blessings and never understand the 
impropriety of his actions. You know the energy and the nobility of the 
Brahmanas, as the Vedas and other scriptures have laid down. Let your acts 
now gain you tranquillity of heart, and let Brahmanas be your refuge. If 
they cease to be angry with you, that will ensure your happiness in heaven. 
If you repent your sin, your vision will be clear and you will perceive 
dharma.” 

Janamejaya said, “I repent my sins, and I will never again seek to 
tarnish my dharma. I desire to be cleansed. Bless me.” 

Indrota said, “Drive out your arrogance and pride, Janamejaya, and 
show your regard for me! Employ yourself in the good of all creatures, and 
always remember the mandates of dharma. I do not reprove you from 
narrowness of mind or avarice. Listen now, with these Brahmanas here, to 
the words of truth that I speak. I ask for nothing but to instruct you in the 
ways of dharma. People will croak and bray and condemn me for what I am 
going to do. They will even call me sinful, and my kinsmen and friends will 
reject me. However, they will benefit from my utterance that will help them 
surmount the difficulties of life. Those possessed of wisdom will understand 
my motives. 

These are my views, O child, regarding the Brahmanas. Listen to me, O 
Bhaarata, and act so that, through my efforts, they procure every blessing. 
Also pledge your word that you will never again injure the Brahmanas.” 

Janamejaya replied, “I swear, even touching your feet, that I will never 
again, in thought, word, or deed, injure the Brahmanas.””’ 


CANTO 152 


¢ S aunaka said, “As your heart has been greatly perturbed, I will 
speak to you about dharma. You are knowledgeable, powerful, and 
now, with a placid heart, of your own will in search of dharma. A king who 
is stern at first and compassionate later, and who acts for the good to all 
creatures, is certainly wonderful. People say that the king who commences 
with severity burns the whole world. You were earlier harsh, but now you 
turn your eyes to dharma. Forsaking luxurious food and articles that you 
have long enjoyed, you have taken to strict tapasya. All this, O Janamejaya, 
is certain to appear wonderful to kings who are sunk in sin. 

That an affluent man should become liberal, or a wealthy one become 
an ascetic reluctant to spend wealth, is not a marvel. Such a man is little 
different from Agastya who was unwilling to create wealth in order to 
gratify his wife; the same cause that makes an affluent man charitable 
operates to make an ascetic careful of his wealth. An ill-judged action 
creates much misery, while one accomplished with the aid of discernment 
has beneficial results. Sacrifice, gift, compassion, the Vedas and truth: these 
five are purifying. The sixth is well-performed tapasya, salutary for kings. 
By conducting it properly, Janamejaya, you are certain to earn great merit 
and punya. It is said that visiting sacred places is also highly cleansing, as 
Yayati sang in the following verses: ‘That mortal who would earn life and 
longevity should, after having performed sacrifices with devotion, renounce 
them and practise penances.’ 


The field of Kuru is held to be sacred, and the river Saraswati more so. 
The tirthas of the Saraswati are more sacred than Saraswati herself; and the 
tirtha called Prithudaka is more sacred than all the tirthas of the Saraswati. 
One who has bathed in Prithudaka and drunk its waters will not have a 
premature death to lament. You will regain life and acquire longevity if you 
go to Mahasaras, to all the tirthas designated by the name of Pushkara, to 
Prabhasa, to the northern lake Manasa and to Kalodaka. Lake Manasa is on 
the spot where the waters of the Saraswati and the Drisadwati mingle, and 
one with Vedic knowledge should bathe in these places. 

Manu has said that charity is the best of all duties, and that renunciation 
is better than charity. In this connection there is a verse composed by 
Satyavat. One should act as a child, innocent, without either goodness or 
sin. In the true nature of all creatures in this world, there is neither misery 
nor happiness. That which is called misery and happiness is the result of a 
troubled imagination. This is also true of all living creatures. The lives are 
superior, of those who have taken to renunciation and abstained from 
action, both meritorious and sinful. 

I will now tell you those actions best for a king. With your might and 
charity, conquer Swarga, O Rajan! He who possesses force and energy will 
attain dharma. Rule the earth for the Brahmanas and for happiness. You 
formerly used to condemn the Brahmanas, so gratify them now. Though 
they have denounced and deserted you, do still, guided by knowledge of 
self, solemnly pledge never to injure them. Engage in work that is suitable 
for you, and seek what is for your greatest good. 

Amongst rulers, some are as cool as snow; some as fierce as fire; some 
become like a plough; and some like a thunder-bolt. He who wishes to 
prevent self-destruction should never mix with evil men for any reason, 
general or specific. For a sinful deed committed only once, one can cleanse 
oneself by repentance, and for one committed twice. by vowing never to 
commit it again. For such an action committed thrice, one can cleanse 
oneself by resolving to bear oneself righteously. By committing such a deed 
repeatedly, one can cleanse oneself by a pilgrimage to sacred places. 

One who wants to obtain prosperity should do all that results in punya. 
Those who live amid fragrant odours, smell sweet, while those who live in 
amid foul odours, smell disgusting. One devoted to the practice of tapasya 
gets soon cleansed of all one’s sins. By worshipping the homa fire for a 
year, one stained by diverse sins becomes purified, and worshipping the fire 


for three years cleanses one guilty of foeticide. One guilty of foeticide 
becomes cleansed at even a hundred yojanas from Mahasaras, or by setting 
out on the tirthas called Pushkara, Prabhasa, or Manasa in the north. 

A slayer can be purified by saving from danger as many creatures of a 
particular species as those he has killed. Manu has said that by diving in 
water after thrice reciting the Aghamarshana mantras, one reaps the fruits of 
the final bath in an Aswamedha. Such an action soon cleanses one of all 
one’s sins, and causes one to regain the esteem of the world. All creatures 
become docile to such a man, like the feeble-minded to those around them. 

Once, long ago, the Devas and Asuras approached the celestial guru 
Brihaspati and humbly asked him, ‘You know, O Maharishi, the rewards of 
dharma, and of those other deeds that lead to hell. Does not he to whom 
good and bad are the same, liberate himself from both punya and paapa? 
Tell us, Maharishi, what the fruits of dharma are and how a dharmatman 
drives out his sins.’ 

Brihaspati answered, ‘If having committed a sin by mistake, one 
understands its nature and performs meritorious acts, one will cleanse 
oneself like dirty cloth washed clean by some saline substance. If one does 
not boast after committing a sin, but through faith, frees oneself from 
malice, one will acquire punya. He who hides the faults of good men, even 
when exposed, earns punya despite committing faults himself. As the sun 
rising in the morning disperses darkness, one dispels all ones sins by acting 
righteously.” 

Indrota, the son of Sunaka, said these words to king Janamejaya and 
personally assisted him in the performance of the Aswamedha yagna. The 
king, cleansed of his sins, regained his punya, shone with splendour like a 
blazing fire, and then entered his kingdom like Soma in his full form 
entering Swarga.’” 


CANTO 153 


6 ay udhishtira asks, ‘Have you, O Pitamaha, ever seen or heard of 
any mortal who was restored to life after death?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Listen, O Rajan, to this story of the conversation 
between a vulture and a jackal which took place long ago in the forest of 
Naimisha. Once upon a time, a Brahmana, after great difficulties, obtained a 
son with beautiful, large eyes. The child died of infantile convulsions. Some 
of his grief-stricken kinsmen, lamenting aloud, picked up that boy of tender 
years, the sole wealth of his family, and took him to the crematorium. There 
they began to pass the child from one breast to another, clamouring more 
bitterly in grief as they recalled the beloved prattle of the child, heavy- 
hearted and unable to go leaving its body on the bare ground. 

Hearing their cries, a vulture came there and told them: “Go away and 
do not tarry, you have to cast off but one child. Thousands of men and 
thousands of women are left here by relatives in the course of time. See, the 
whole universe is subject to happiness and sorrow. Union and disunion can 
be seen, turn by turn. Those who have come to the crematorium bringing 
the dead bodies of their kinsmen, and those who sit by those bodies from 
affection, themselves disappear from the world as a result of their own 
actions, when their allotted life-span run out. There is no need to linger in 
the crematorium, this horrible place full of vultures and jackals, abounding 
with skeletons and fearsome creatures. No one, friend or foe, having once 
succumbed to the power of Time, ever comes back. This is the fate of all 
creatures. In this world of mortals, every one that is born is sure to die. Who 


will restore to life one who is dead and gone on the way, as ordained by the 
Yama? At this hour when men are about to close their daily toil, and the sun 
is retiring to the Asta hills, return to your homes and give up your 
attachment to the child.” 

Hearing these words of the vulture, the grief of the kinsmen seemed to 
abate and, placing the child on the bare ground, they prepared to go away. 
Assuring themselves of the fact that the child was indeed dead, and with no 
hope of seeing him again, they began to leave, with loud plaints. At this 
time a jackal, black as a raven, issued out of his hole and said to the 
departing kinsmen, “Surely you kinsmen of this dead child have no 
affection for him. The sun still shines in the sky, you fools! Indulge your 
feelings without fear. Many are the virtues of the hour, and this one may 
come back to life! Why do you spread a few blades of Kusa grass on the 
ground and with hearts of steel abandon this dear child to the crematorium? 
Surely you have no affection for this young child whose words, as soon as 
they left his lips, used to gladden you so greatly! 

Look at the affection that even birds and beasts bear towards their 
offspring. They get no return for bringing up their young ones. Like the 
sacrifices of the Rishis that are never undertaken from a desire for 
recompense, the affection of animals, birds and insects does not result in 
any reward, either here or hereafter. Yet they cherish their young ones, who 
grow up and never cherish them in return in their old age. Are they not 
grieved when they do not see their little ones? Where, indeed, is affection to 
be seen in human beings, that they claim the influence of grief? Where 
would you go, leaving here this child who is the perpetuator of his race? 
Shed tears for him for awhile, and look at him lovingly a little longer, for 
objects so dear are difficult to abandon. 

They are friends who wait by the side of one who is weak, of one who 
is prosecuted in a court of law, of one who is borne towards the 
crematorium. Life’s breath is dear to all, and all feel the influence of 
affection. Behold the devotion exhibited by even those that belong to the 
intermediate species! How can you leave, casting off this boy with eyes 
large as the petals of the lotus, and handsome as a newly-married youth, 
washed clean and adorned with floral garlands?” Hearing these touching 
words of the jackal, the men turned back for the sake of the corpse. 

The vulture now said, “Alas, you men of no strength of mind, why do 
you turn back at the bidding of a cruel and mean jackal of little 


intelligence? Why do you mourn for that compound of five elements 
deserted by their presiding deities, no longer tenanted, motionless, and stiff 
as a piece of wood? Why do you not grieve for your own selves? Do you 
practice austere tapasya to cleanse yourselves from sin? Everything may be 
had by tapasya, what will your lamentations do? I[]-luck is born with the 
body, because of which this boy has died, plunging you into infinite grief. 
Wealth, cattle, gold, precious gems, children, all have their root in tapasya. 
Tapasya is the result of yoga. 

Among animate beings, the measure of sorrow or joy depends on the 
actions of a previous life. Indeed, everyone comes into the world bringing 
with him his own measure of happiness and suffering. The son is not bound 
by the actions of the father, nor the father by those of the son. Bound by 
their own deeds, good and bad, all have to travel by this common road. 
Duly practise all the duties, and abstain from adharmic acts. Wait 
reverentially upon the Devas and the Brahmanas according to the directions 
of the shastras. Give up sorrow and unhappiness, and abstain from parental 
affection. Leave the child on this exposed ground, and go away without 
delay. 

The doer alone enjoys the fruit of his actions, good or bad. What have 
kinsmen to do with it? Relatives abandon their deceased kinsman, however 
dear. Eyes bathed in tears, they go away and cease to display affection for 
the dead. Wise or ignorant, rich or poor, everyone with their good and bad 
karma succumbs to Time. What will you do by mourning for one who is 
dead? Time is the lord of all and, in obedience to his very nature, casts an 
equal eye on all things. In pride of youth, or in helpless infancy, bearing the 
weight of years, or lying in the mother’s womb, everyone is subject to be 
assailed by Death. Such, indeed, is the course of the world.” 

The jackal said, “Alas, that light-brained vulture has diminished the 
affection cherished by your weeping selves, overwhelmed with sorrow for 
your deceased child. This is obvious because, convinced by his calm and 
well-expressed words, you go back to town, abandoning an affection so 
entrenched. Alas, I had supposed that the grief felt by men who loudly 
lament the death of a child, like cattle who miss their calves, would be 
great. Today, however, I understand what the measure of bereavement is of 
human beings on earth. Witnessing their great attachment, I had shed tears. 
It now seems that their affection is frail! 


One must always strive to succeed with the help of destiny. Hard work, 
hope and destiny, together produce rewards. How can happiness be had 
from despondency? Objects of desire can be won by resolution. Why, then, 
do you go back so heartlessly? Where do you go, abandoning in the 
wilderness your own son, this perpetuator of the race of his fathers? Stay 
here till the sun sets and the evening twilight comes. You may then take 
away this boy with yourselves, or stay with him.” 

The vulture now said, “I am a full thousand years old today, but I have 
never seen a dead creature, male or female, or of ambiguous sex, revive 
after death. Some die in the womb, some soon after birth, some in infancy, 
some in youth and some in old age. The fortunes of all creatures, including 
even beasts and birds, are unpredictable. The life-span of all creatures, 
mobile and immobile, is fixed beforehand. Men who have lost spouses, 
children and dear ones go back to their homes every day with hearts filled 
with sorrow, leaving on this spot their innumerable friends and foes. 

This lifeless body no longer has any animal heat in it and is as stiff as a 
piece of wood! Why, then, do you not depart, leaving the body of this child 
whose life has entered a new body? This affection is meaningless, and 
hugging the child is useless. He does not see with his eyes, or hear with his 
ears. Leave him here and go away without delay to your respective homes. 
My words may appear cruel but are rational and bear directly on the high 
religion of Moksha.” 

Addressed thus by the sagacious vulture in words efficacious in 
awakening understanding, the men resolved to leave the spot and prepared 
to turn their backs upon the crematorium. Grief increases twofold at the 
sight of its object, remembering the actions of that object when alive. 

Just at that time the jackal came with quick steps and looked at the child 
lying in the sleep of death. The jackal said, “Why do you, at the vulture’s 
bidding, leave this child of golden complexion, adorned with ornaments, 
and capable of making offering to his pitris? If you abandon him, your 
affection will not come to an end, nor will your piteous lamentations. On 
the other hand, your grief will certainly increase. We have heard the story of 
how Rama killed a Sudra named Samvuka to uphold dharma, and restored 
to life a Brahmana child who had died prematurely. There is a similar story 
of the son of the Rajarishi Sweta who died too early, but the king, devoted 
to dharma, succeeded in reviving his dead child. In your case, also, some 
sage or deity may be willing to grant your desire and show compassion to 


you who are crying so piteously.” The men, grief-stricken and full of 
affection for the child, retraced their steps and, placing the child’s head on 
their laps, one after another, began to lament loudly. 

Hearing their cries, the vulture, returned and said, “Why are you bathing 
this child with your tears? Why are you pressing him in this fashion with 
the touch of your palms? At the command of the grim king of justice the 
child has been sent to that sleep which knows no waking. Those who are 
endued with the punya of penances, who are wealthy and intelligent, in fact, 
all, succumb to death. This is the place intended for the dead. One sees 
relatives abandon thousands of kinsmen, young and old, and pass their 
nights and days in grief, rolling on the bare ground. Cease this fervor in 
exhibiting your sorrow. It is beyond belief that this child will come back to 
life. He will not get back his life at the jackal’s bidding. If a person once 
dies and takes leave of his body, it can never come to life again. Hundreds 
of jackals, by laying down their own lives, will not succeed in reviving this 
child in hundreds of years. Only if Rudra, or Kumara, or Brahman, or 
Vishnu, grant him a boon, can this child come back to life. The jackal, you, 
and all the kinsmen of this one, and I, with all our merits and sins, are on 
the same road. For this reason, the wise should avoid behaviour that 
displeases others, harsh speeches, inflicting pain on others, adultery, sin and 
falsehood. Carefully seek dharma, truth, good of others, justice, compassion 
for all creatures, sincerity and honesty. They incur sin who do not look after 
their mothers, fathers, kinsmen and friends when alive. What will you do by 
weeping for him, who does not see with his eyes, nor stir in the least, after 
death?” 

Thus addressed, the men, overwhelmed with sorrow and burning with 
grief on account of their affection for the child, departed for their homes, 
leaving the body. 

The jackal said, “Alas, terrible is the world of mortals, where no 
creature can escape! Every creature’s life-span is short, and beloved friends 
are always departing. It is full of vanity, falsehoods, accusations and evil 
reports. This dismal incident makes me dislike the world of men. Alas, 
shame on you, who thus turn back like foolish men at the vulture’s bidding, 
though you are burning with grief for this child. Heartless ones, how can 
you go away, casting off parental affection, upon hearing the words of a 
sinful vulture of uncleansed soul? Happiness is followed by misery, and 
misery by happiness. In this world, enveloped by both, neither of these 


exists uninterruptedly. Men of little understanding, where do you go, 
casting off on the bare ground this child of such beauty, this son who is an 
ornament of your varna? 

Truly, I cannot dispel the idea from my mind that this handsome child, 
blazing with beauty, is alive. He is not meant to die. I feel that you who are 
grief-stricken on his death will surely have good luck today. But you are 
concerned only for your own ease and trying to avoid possible 
inconvenience and discomfort. Where would you go, like fools, leaving this 
darling?” 

Bhishma continued, ‘Thus, O Rajan, the kinsmen of the deceased child, 
unable to decide upon what they should do, were persuaded to remain by 
the sinful and smooth-tongued jackal for his own purpose, the denizens of 
the crematorium who roamed there every night in quest of food. 

The vulture said, “Dreadful is this spot, this wilderness resounding with 
the screech of owls and teeming with spirits, Yakshas and Rakshasas, 
terrible and ghastly like a mass of blue clouds. Give up the dead body and 
finish the funeral rites. Indeed, cast off the corpse and accomplish those 
rites before the sun sets and the points of the horizon are enveloped in 
gloom. Hawks are uttering their harsh cries, jackals are howling fiercely, 
lions are roaring. The sun is setting, the trees in the crematorium are turning 
dark from the blue smoke of the funeral pyres. The flesh-eating dwellers of 
this place are yelling in rage with hunger. Creatures of horrible forms that 
live in this frightful place, all those carnivorous animals of fearful visage 
that haunt this desert, will soon set upon you. This wilderness is terrifying. 
Danger will overpower you. Indeed, if you listen to these false and futile 
words of the jackal against your own good sense, all of you will surely be 
destroyed.” 

The jackal said, “Stay where you are! There is no fear, even in this 
desert, as long as the sun shines. Till the god of day sets, remain here with 
hope, engendered by your love. Lament as you please, unafraid, looking at 
this child with loving eyes. Frightful though this wilderness is, no danger 
will befall you. In reality it is an aspect of quiet and peace. It is here that the 
Pitris by their thousands took leave of the world. Wait as long as the sun 
shines. What are this vulture’s words to you? If with benumbed intellect 
you accept the cruel vulture’s harsh words, your child will never come back 
to life!” 


The vulture then told those men that the sun had set. The jackal said it 
was not so. Both the vulture and the jackal felt the pangs of hunger, 
addressing the kinsmen of the dead child. Both of them had girded up their 
loins to accomplish their respective purposes. Exhausted with hunger and 
thirst, they thus disputed, taking recourse to the shastras. Moved by the 
words of the bird and the beast, sweet as nectar, wise and knowledgeable, 
the kinsmen at one moment wished to go away and at another to remain. 
Finally, moved by grief and sorrow, they waited, wailing bitterly, not 
knowing that the beast and the bird, skilled in accomplishing their own 
purposes, had only confused them by their words. 

While the adroit bird and beast were thus disputing, and while the 
kinsmen of the dead child sat listening to them, the great god Sankara, 
urged by his divine spouse Uma, came there, his eyes moist with 
compassion. Addressing the kinsmen of the deceased child, the Deva said, 
“T am Sankara, giver of boons.” With burdened hearts the men prostrated 
themselves before the great deity and said to him, “We have lost our only 
child, and all of us are at the point of death. We beg you to grant us life by 
granting life to this our son.” 

The Mahadeva, taking up a quantity of water in his hands granted to the 
dead child a life extending a hundred years. Then the ever-benevolent and 
illustrious wielder of the bow Pinaki granted a boon to both the jackal and 
the vulture which appeased their hunger. The men bowed to the Deva, filled 
with delight at their great good fortune, O Rajan, and left that spot in 
jubilation. 

Through persistent hope, firm resolution and the grace of the great god, 
one can obtain the fruits of one’s actions without delay. Witness the 
combination of circumstances and the resolve of those kinsmen: while they 
were crying with agonised hearts, their tears were wiped away. See, how 
within only a short time, through their persistence, they obtained the grace 
of Sankara and, their sorrows dispelled, were made happy. Indeed, O 
Bhaarata, those dejected kinsmen were filled with amazement and delight at 
the restoration of their child to life through Sankara’s compassion. Casting 
off their grief, those Brahmanas, overjoyed, hastened back to their town 
with the restored child. 

Behaviour like this has been ordained for all the four varnas. By 
listening to this auspicious story about dharma, artha, and mukti, a man 
obtains happiness both here and hereafter.’” 


CANTO 154 


my udhishtira says, “What should a weak, worthless and light- 

brained man do, O Pitamaha, who from stupidity provokes, 
through insulting and boastful speeches, a powerful neighbour who can 
favour or punish, and is always ready for action, when the enemy advances 
against him in anger to exterminate him?’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘Let me narrate, O Bhaarata, the old story of the 
discourse between Pavana and the lordly Salmali tree, growing on one of 
the heights of Himavat. Having grown for many centuries, the tree had 
stretched out his branches. His trunk was huge, its girth being four hundred 
cubits, and his myriad twigs and leaves cast a dense shade under which toil- 
worn elephants in rut used to rest, bathed in sweat, as did many animals of 
other species. Loaded with flowers and fruits, he was the abode of 
numberless parrots, male and female. Caravans of merchants and traders 
travelling along their routes, and munis living in the vana, used to rest under 
the shade of the delightful monarch of the forest. 

One day, O Bharatarishabha, the sage Narada, seeing the wide- 
extending and innumerable branches of the tree and the circumference of 
his trunk, approached him and said, “You are delightful and charming, O 
Salmali, greatest of trees. I am always captivated by the sight of you, as 
enchanting birds of diverse kinds live on your branches, and elephants and 
other animals cheerfully dwell in your shade. Your limbs and trunk are 
gigantic, O wide-branched monarch of the forest. I never see any of them 


broken by the god of the wind. Is it the case, child, that Pavana is pleased 
with you and is your friend, that he always protects you in this vana? 

The illustrious Pavana with great speed and force moves from their sites 
the tallest and strongest trees, even mountain summits. The sacred bearer of 
perfumes, blowing whither he wants, dries up rivers, tanks and seas, down 
to the very nether regions. Pavana protects you out of friendship, for 
certain. This is why, though having countless branches, you still bear leaves 
and flowers. O king of the forest, your verdure is delightful since these 
winged creatures sport joyfully on your twigs and branches. During the 
season when you break into bloom, the sweet notes of all these denizens of 
your branches are heard separately singing melodious songs. Then, O 
Salmali, these elephants that are the ornaments of their species, bathed in 
sweat, approach you with cries of delight, and are happy here. Diverse other 
species of animals living in the vana embellish you further. You are 
beautiful like the mountains of Meru inhabited by creatures of every kind. 
Frequented also by rishis and others engaged in tapasya, and by Yatis 
devoted to contemplation, this place, I think, must resemble Swarga itself.” 


CANTO 155 


¢ N arada said, “Without doubt, O Salmali, the terrible and irresistible 

Vayu Deva always protects you out of amity, and a close intimacy 

exists between you and the Wind. It is as if you have told him, ‘I am yours,’ 

and for that reason Vayu Deva shields you. I do not think there is tree or 

mountain or mansion in this world that the Wind has not broken. Assuredly, 

you stand here with all your branches, twigs and leaves intact, simply 
because, for some reason, that Deva shelters you.” 

The Salmali said, “The Wind is neither my friend, nor mate, nor well- 
wisher, nor my great Ordainer, O Narada Muni, that he should protect me. 
My fierce energy and might, O Narada, are greater than the Wind’s. In truth, 
the strength of the Wind comes up to about only an eighteenth part of mine. 
When he advances in rage, tearing up trees and mountains in his path, I 
curb his strength by putting forth mine. Indeed, the Wind that breaks many 
things has himself been repeatedly broken by me. This is why, O Devarishi, 
I am not afraid of him even when he comes in anger.” 

Narada said, “O Salmali, your protection seems to be thoroughly 
perverse. There is no doubt that there is nothing equal to the Wind in 
strength. Even Indra, Yama, or Vaisravana, the lord of the waters, is not 
equal in might to Vayu Deva, whereas you are only a tree! The illustrious 
Wind god is at all times the cause of any act performed by the creatures in 
this world, since it is he that is the giver of life. When that god exerts 
himself with propriety, he makes it possible for all living creatures to live at 
their ease. When he moves with anger, calamities sweep over the creatures 


of the world. What can it be other than feeble understanding that induces 
you to not revere the Vayu Deva, the greatest in the universe, who deserves 
worship? You are worthless and of depraved perception. Indeed, you only 
indulge in meaningless bragging. You utter lies because your intellect is 
confused by anger and other evil passions. 

O Salmali, I am certainly angry with you for speaking thus. I will 
myself report to Vayu Deva all your derogatory words. Chandanas, 
Syandanas, Salas, Saralas, Devadarus, Vetavas, Dhanwanas and other trees 
of good souls that are far stronger than you, have never uttered such 
invectives against the Deva as you of wicked understanding have done. All 
of them know the might of the Wind and their own, and these foremost of 
trees bow down their heads in respect to the deity. You, however, through 
folly, know not the infinite might of the Wind. I shall go to the Deva.”’” 


CANTO 156 


¢ ‘RB hishma continues, ‘Narada, the greatest of all knowers of 
Brahma, reported to the Vayu Deva all that the Salmali had said 
about him. 

Narada said, “There is a certain Salmali, a tree on the breast of Himavat, 
decked with branches and leaves spread wide around and with roots that 
extend deep into the earth. That tree has disparaged you and spoken many 
insulting words about you that are improper for me to repeat. I know that 
you, the foremost of all created things, are a superior and mighty entity, 
resembling in wrath the Destroyer himself.” 

Hearing these words of Narada, the Vayu Deva went to Salmali, and 
said to him in rage, “O Salmali, you have spoken spoken slightingly of me 
before Narada. Know that I am Vayu Deva, and I will certainly show you 
my power and might. You are no stranger to me, I know you well. It is only 
because the great Pitamaha, while he was creating the world, had for a time 
rested under you, that I have so far shown you grace. That is why you stand 
unharmed, O worst of trees, not because of your own might. You regard me 
lightly as if I were a common creature. I will show myself to you in such a 
way that you will not again affront me.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘The Salmali laughed in derision and replied, “O 
Vayu Deva, you are angry with me! Do not hesitate to show me the extent 
of your might. Throw all your anger upon me. What will you do to me by 
giving way to wrath? Even if your strength had been your own, I would not 


be afraid of you, as I am your superior in might. Those are not to be 
regarded as strong who possess physical strength alone.” 

The Vayu Deva left, saying, “Tomorrow I will test your strength.” 

When night fell, Salmali, calculating mentally the extent of the Wind’s 
might, and realising his own self to be inferior to the Deva, said to himself, 
‘All that I said to Narada is false. I am certainly inferior in might to the 
Wind, who is truly powerful. He is always mighty, as Narada said, and I am 
certainly weaker than other trees. But in astuteness no tree is my equal, so, 
relying upon my intelligence I will examine this fear that arises from the 
Wind. If all the other trees in the forest only relied upon the same kind of 
intelligence, surely no injury could result to them from Vayu Deva when he 
becomes angry. All of them, however, are devoid of understanding, and 
therefore do not know, as I do, why or how the Wind succeeds in shaking 
and tearing them up.”’” 


CANTO 157 


6 ‘RB hishma says, ‘Having settled this in his mind, Salmali sadly 
caused all his branches, principal and subsidiary, to be cut off. He 
cast off his branches and leaves and flowers, and in the morning the tree 
looked steadily at the Wind, as he came towards him. Filled with rage and 
breathing hard, the Wind advanced, felling large trees, towards the spot 
where the Salmali stood. When he saw him divested of top and branches 
and leaves and flowers, the Wind smiled exultantly and addressed the lord 
of the forest who earlier had such a gigantic appearance. 

“O Salmali, I would have done to you in my anger precisely what you 
have done to yourself by lopping off all your branches. You are now 
divested of your proud top and flowers, and without your shoots and leaves. 
In consequence of your own evil counsels, you have been brought under my 
power.” 

Salmali felt great shame. He remembered the words of Narada and 
began to repent his folly. Similarly, O Naravyaghra, a weak and foolish 
man, if he provokes the enmity of a powerful one, is obliged to repent like 
the Salmali of fable. Even when of equal might, men do not suddenly 
commence hostilities with those who have injured them. On the other hand, 
O Rajan, they display their might by degrees. 

A foolish man should never provoke the hostility of an intelligent one. 
In such cases the intelligence of the astute man is like fire penetrating a 
heap of dry grass. Intelligence is the most precious possession that one can 
have. Similarly, Rajan, a man can have nothing here more valuable than 


might. One should therefore, overlook the wrongs which one of superior 
strength inflicts, just as one should would kindly overlook the actions of a 
child, an idiot, or a blind or deaf person. 

The wisdom of this saying is witnessed in your case, O Parantapa. The 
eleven akshauhinis of Duryodhana, O you of great splendour, and the seven 
collected by you, were not in might equal to the single-handed mahatman, 
Arjuna. Therefore that illustrious Pandava, son of Paka’s chastiser, routed 
and slew all the troops as he coursed the field of battle, relying on his own 
strength. I have told you of the duties of kings and the morality of duties in 
detail, Bhaarata. What else, Yudhishtira, do you wish to hear?’” 


CANTO 158 


C6 Y udhishtira says, ‘I desire to hear in detail about the source of sin, 
O Bharatarishabha, and the foundation upon which it rests.’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘Listen, Rajan: Lobha, greed alone, is the great 
destroyer. From lobha comes paapa and adharma, and they flow together 
and cause great misery. Covetousness is the source also of cunning and 
hypocrisy, which makes men sin in the world. Lobha causes anger, lust, loss 
of judgment, deception, pride, arrogance and malice, as well as 
vindictiveness, shamelessness, loss of prosperity, loss of virtue, anxiety, 
infamy, miserliness, cupidity, and partiality for every kind of impropriety. It 
causes conceit on account of birth, learning, beauty and wealth, as well as 
insensitivity, malevolence, mistrust, insincerity towards all, appropriation of 
other people’s wealth, ravishment of other people’s wives, harshness of 
speech, propensity to speak ill of others, ravening lust, gluttony, liability to 
premature death, malice, irresistible propensity for falsehood, 
unconquerable appetite for indulging in the passions, insatiable desire for 
gossip and slander, boastfulness, arrogance, neglect of duties, rashness, and 
perpetration of every kind of evil deed: all these proceed from lobha. 

Men, whether infant, youth or adult, are unable to abandon 
covetousness. Such is the nature of greed that it never decays, even with the 
decay of life. Like the ocean that can never be filled, even by the constant 
discharge of innumerable rivers of immeasurable depth, covetousness is 
incapable of being gratified by any extent of acquisitions. However, a Muni 
should conquer this covetousness which is never gratified by acquisitions or 


satiated by the accomplishment of desires, which is not known in its real 
nature by the gods, the Gandharvas, the Asuras, the great snakes—in fact, 
by all classes of beings, this irresistible passion and folly which lures the 
heart to the unrealities of the world. Pride, malice, slander, crookedness, 
and incapacity to bear other people’s good, are vices, O Kurusthama, that 
are seen in men of uncleansed soul in the grip of greed. Even great learned 
men who bear in their minds all the voluminous shastras, and who are 
competent to dispel the doubts of others, show themselves in this respect to 
be weak-minded and undergo great misery in consequence of this passion. 

Greedy men are wedded to envy and anger and are outside the pale of 
good behaviour. With crooked hearts they utter sweet speeches, like dark 
pits with mouths covered with grass. Being of low minds, they rob the 
world wearing the hypocritical cloak of religion and virtue. They use 
equivocation to create diverse schisms in religion and destroy the ways of 
dharma. When evil men under the domination of lobha apparently practise 
the duties of dharma, the desecrations committed by them soon become 
acceptable among men. Pride, anger, arrogance, self-importance, 
insensibility, outbursts of joy and sorrow, all these can be seen in men 
swayed by greed. Understand, they who remain under the influence of 
covetousness are evil. 

I shall now tell you about those who are designated good and whose 
practices are pure. One regards as virtuous, O Bhaarata, those who have no 
fear of an obligation to return to this world after death, and no fear of the 
next world; they who are not addicted to animal food; who cherish salutary 
behaviour and practise self-restraint; for whom pleasure and pain are equal, 
who have truth for their refuge, who are compassionate and give, rather 
than take; who worship Pitris, Devas and Atithis; who are universal 
benefactors, always ready to work for the good of others; whose minds are 
staunch and who observe all the duties laid down in the shastras, who are 
devoted to the good of all, who can give their all and lay down their very 
lives for others! 

These advocates of dharma are incapable of being forced away from the 
path of virtue. Their conduct, conforming to the model set by the 
dharmatman of old, cannot be otherwise. They are fearless, tranquil, mild 
and always adhere to the right path. Full of compassion, they are always 
worshipped by the good. They are free from pride, lust and anger, and are 
not attached to any worldly object. They observe excellent vows and are 


always objects of regard. You should therefore, always wait upon them and 
seek instruction from them. They never aspire to virtue for the sake of 
wealth or fame, O Yudhishtira. They acquire it, rather, because it is a duty, 
like cherishing the body. Fear, wrath, restlessness and sorrow do not dwell 
in them. There is no mystery about them and they do not wear the outward 
garb of religion to mislead their fellowmen. They are perfectly contented, 
and make no error of judgment out of covetousness. They are devoted to 
truth and sincerity, and never fall from righteousness. You should always 
show regard for them, O son of Kunti! 

They are neither delighted at any gain, nor pained at any loss. Free of 
attachment to anything, free of pride, they are wedded to goodness and look 
on everything equally. Gain and loss, happiness and sorrow, the agreeable 
and the disagreeable, life and death, are one in the eyes of these men of 
steady tread, engaged in the pursuit of divine knowledge, and devoted to the 
path of tranquillity and righteousness. Keep your senses under restraint, do 
not yield to imprudence, and always worship those Mahatmans who bear 
such love for dharma. Words cause good only through the favour of the 
Devas, O blessed one. Under different circumstances, they can produce evil 


999 


consequences. 


CANTO 159 


C6 Y udhishtira says, ‘You have said, O Pitamaha, that the foundation 
of all evil is lobha. I wish, O sire, to hear of ignorance, avidya, in 
detail.’ 

Bhishma replies, “The man who commits sin through avidya, who does 
not know that his end is near and who always hates the virtuous, soon 
incurs infamy. Avidya is the source of misery through which one suffers 
hardship, incurs great danger, and sinks into hell.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “O Rajan, I desire to hear in full all the inseparable 
attributes of avidya: its origin, rise, place, growth, decay, root, course, time, 
cause and consequence. The misery that is felt in this world, is all born of 
ignorance.’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘Attachment, hate, loss of judgment, joy, sorrow, 
vanity, lust, anger, pride, procrastination, idleness, desire, aversion, jealousy 
and all other sinful actions are known by their common name of avidya. 
Hear now, O Rajan, about its tendency, growth and other features about 
which you have enquired. These two, ignorance and covetousness, are the 
same. Both produce the same fruits and same faults, O Bhaarata! Avidya 
exists where lobha exists, and grows or shrinks along with lobha. 

Manifold again is the course that it takes. Loss of judgment is the 
inseparable attribute and root of lobha. Eternity is ignorance’s path and 
when avidya is apparent, the objects of covetousness are forfeited. From 
ignorance proceeds covetousness, and vice versa. Lobha should be shunned 
by all. Janaka, Yuvanaswa, Vrishadarbhi, Prasenajit and other kings attained 


Swarga because they repressed Lobha. Therefore let it be seen that you are 
resolute in avoiding covetousness, O Kurusthama. Thus will you obtain 
happiness, both here and in the next world.’” 


CANTO 160 


6 = udhishtira says, ‘O Pitamaha, Mahatman, how can a person 
engaged in the study of the Vedas earn the highest happiness in 
heaven? According to the shastras, diverse kinds of action are considered in 
this world as productive of great punya. Tell me, what is regarded as great, 
both here and hereafter? The path of dharma is long and has innumerable 
branches, O Bhaarata! Amongst those, which are the few that should be 
preferred above others, according to you? Tell me about this, that is so 
inclusive and multifarious.’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘I will tell you how you can attain great punya. Being 
wise, you will be as happy with the knowledge that I will impart to you as if 
you had drunk amrita. Each Maharishi has prescribed many rules of 
dharma, based upon his own wisdom, of which the highest is self-restraint. 
Among the ancients, those acquainted with truth have said that self-restraint 
leads to the highest punya, and that, for the Brahmana, it is his eternal duty, 
from which he obtains the rewards of his actions. In his case, the punya of 
self-restraint enhances tejas and surpasses charity, sacrifice and study of the 
Vedas. 

Self-restraint is highly sacred; by it a man is cleansed of all his sins, is 
imbued with tejas and attains to the highest blessedness. Self-restraint, 
according to all dharmatman, is the highest of virtues in this world, O 
Narottama, and we have not heard of any other dharma that can equal it for 
acquiring the highest happiness both here and hereafter. The self-restrained 
man sleeps sweetly, wakes up happy, and moves through the world 


contentedly, his mind always cheerful. The man who is without self- 
restraint suffers misery and brings upon himself many calamities, all born 
of his own faults. It is said that for all the four varnas, self-restraint is the 
best of vows. 

I will now tell you those attributes whose sum total is called self- 
restraint. Forgiveness, patience, abstention from injury, impartiality, truth, 
sincerity, conquest of the senses, cleverness, mildness, modesty, steadiness, 
liberality, freedom from wrath, contentment, sweetness of speech, 
benevolence, freedom from malice: the union of all these is called self- 
restraint. It also includes, O son of Kuru, veneration for the guru and 
universal compassion. The self-restrained man avoids adulation and slander, 
depravity, infamy, false speech, lust, covetousness, pride, arrogance, self- 
glorification, fear, envy and disrespect. He never incurs disgrace and is free 
from envy. He is not gratified with small acquisitions; he is just like the 
ocean that can never be filled. 

The man of self-restraint is never bound by attachments that arise from 
earthly connections or sentiments like, “I am yours, you are mine, They are 
in me, and I am in them.” Such a man, who adopts the practices of either 
cities or the vana, and who never indulges in slander or adulation, attains 
mukti. He is cheerful and of virtuous conduct, practises universal 
friendliness, has knowledge of the soul and, liberated from the diverse 
attachments of the earth, obtains great reward in the world. A man of 
excellent conduct, observant of duties, cheerful, learned and with 
knowledge of self, wins esteem here and attains to a high end hereafter. 

All actions that one regards as good on earth, all those that dhartman 
practise, constitute the path of the Rishi possessed of knowledge. A good 
man never deviates from that path. Retiring from the world and taking to 
vanavasa, the learned man, having mastered his senses, who treads that path 
in quiet expectation of his death, is sure to attain to the state of Brahma. He 
who has no fear of any creature, and of whom no creature is afraid, has no 
fear to encounter after the dissolution of his body. He who exhausts his 
punya by actual enjoyment, rather than seeking to accumulate it, who views 
equally all creatures and practises a course of universal friendliness, attains 
Brahma. Just as the track of birds along the sky or of fowl over the surface 
of water cannot be discerned, the track of such a man does not attract 
notice. 


For one who, abandoning home, adopts the dharma of moksha, many 
bright worlds wait to be enjoyed for eternity, O Rajan. By abandoning all 
actions, including in due course tapasya and the various branches of study, 
one becomes pure in one’s desires and liberated from all restraints, a 
cheerful soul of pure heart, conversant with self, who then wins esteem in 
this world and at last attains Swarga. That eternal region of Brahman which 
springs from Vedic tapasya, and which is within hidden in a cave, can be 
won by only self-restraint. He who takes pleasure in true knowledge, who 
has become enlightened injures no creature, has no fear of coming back to 
this world, far less, any fear in respect of the others. 

There is one fault in self-control, none other: that men regard one who 
has self-control as weak and unintelligent. Its merits are many, for by 
forgiveness, which is only another form of self-control, a man may easily 
acquire innumerable worlds. What need does he have for self-control who 
dwells in a forest? Similarly, O Bhaarata, of what use is vanavasa to one 
that has no self-control? Wherever a man of self-control dwells is a forest, 
even a sacred retreat.’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Hearing these words of Bhishma, 
Yudhishtira is highly gratified, as if he had imbibed amrita. He asks the 
greatest of Dharmatmans again to speak, and the perpetuator of Kuru’s race 
once more begins to discourse cheerfully.” 


CANTO 161 


¢ “RB hishma says, “The wise say that tapasya is the root of all things. 

The foolish man who has not undergone tapasya does not get the 
rewards of even his own actions. The mighty Brahma created the entire 
universe by tapasya. The Rishis acquired the Vedas through the power of 
tapasya. It was with the aid of tapasya that Pitamaha created food, fruit and 
roots. It is by tapasya that rishis and munis with rapt souls see the three 
worlds. It is through tapasya that medicines and antidotes to injurious 
substances, and diverse processes, produce their intended results. The 
accomplishment of all purposes depends upon tapasya. Things apparently 
unattainable are sure to be won by tapasya. Without doubt the Rishis 
obtained their six-fold divine attributes through tapasya. 

Tapasya, when properly practiced, cleanses one who drinks alcoholic 
stimulants, one who robs others, one guilty of foeticide and one who 
violates his acharya’s bed. Penances are of many kinds and can be seen in 
many different guises. However, of all the tapasyas that can be practised by 
refraining from pleasure and enjoyment, abstaining from food is supreme. It 
is superior, Rajan, to even compassion, truthfulness of speech, gifts, and 
restraining the senses. There is no action more difficult to accomplish than 
gift. There is no mode of life that is superior to serving one’s mother. There 
is no creature superior to those who know the three Vedas. Similarly, 
sannyasa constitutes the greatest tapasya. People keep their senses under 
control for the sake of dharma and Swarga. In respect of such control over 
the senses, and in the acquisition of dharma, there is no tapasya greater than 


complete fasting. The Rishis, the Devas, humankind, beasts, birds, and all 
other creatures, mobile or inert, are all devoted to tapasyas, and whatever 
success they win is won through tapasya. Thus it was through tapasya that 
the Devas acquired their superiority The moon and stars too got their share 
of happiness through tapasya. Without doubt, the very status of godhead 
may be gained through tapasya.’” 


CANTO 162 


¢ a udhishtira says, ‘Brahmanas, Rishis, Pitris and the Devas all 

approve the dharma of truth. Tell me about truth, O Pitamaha! 
What are its characteristics, and how can it be acquired? How can one 
practice truth, and what can one gain by it?’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘Confusion of duties of the four varnas is never 
approved. That which is called Truth always exists in a pure and pristine 
state in every one of the four varnas. With the righteous, Truth is always an 
eternal duty, and one should reverentially bow to it. Truth is the highest 
refuge of all, Truth is dharma; Truth is tapasya; Truth is Yoga; Truth is the 
eternal Brahman. Truth is said to be a yagna of a high order, upon which 
everything rests. 

I will now tell you the forms of Truth and its characteristics, in due 
order, so that you may learn how it can be acquired. Truth, O Bhaarata, as it 
exists in the world, is of thirteen kinds. The forms that Truth assumes are 
impartiality, self-control, forgiveness, modesty, endurance, goodness, 
renunciation, contemplation, dignity, fortitude, compassion, and abstention 
from injury. These, O Rajan, are the thirteen forms of Truth. 

Truth is immutable, eternal and permanent. It can be acquired through 
practices which do not militate against any of the other virtues, and through 
Yoga. 

When desire, aversion, lust and wrath are shed, that trait which allows 
one to look upon oneself and one’s foe, upon one’s good and one’s evil, 
with parity, is called impartiality. 


Self-control consists in never coveting another man’s possessions, in 
gravity and patience, a capacity to allay others’ fears in respect to oneself, 
and immunity from maladies. One can acquire this through knowledge. 

Devotion to the practice of charity and the observance of dharma 
constitutes goodwill, the sages say. One acquires universal goodwill by 
constant devotion to truth. 

Forgiveness is that attribute which enables an esteemed and good man 
to endure both what is agreeable and disagreeable. One can acquire this 
virtue through the practice of truthfulness. 

Modesty is that virtue by which an intelligent man, contented in mind 
and speech, achieves many good deeds and never incurs the censure of 
others. It can be acquired through the aid of dharma. 

Endurance is that virtue which forgives for the sake of dharma and 
artha. It is a form of forgiveness which one acquires through patience, and 
its purpose is to attach people to oneself. 

Sannyasa is the giving up of attachment and also of all earthly 
possessions. Only he who has given up anger and malice can achieve 
renunciation. 

Goodness is that virtue by which one does what is beneficial to all 
creatures with alertness and care. It has no particular form and consists of 
divestment of all selfish attachments. 

Fortitude is that virtue by which one remains tranquil in happiness and 
misery. The wise man, mindful of his own good, practises this virtue which 
teaches forgiveness and devotion to truth. He who casts off joy, fear and 
wrath, succeeds in acquiring fortitude. Abstention from injury to all 
creatures in thought, word and deed, kindness and charity, are the eternal 
duties of those who are good. 

These thirteen attributes, though apparently distinct from one another, 
have but one and the same form, which is Truth. All these, O Bhaarata, 
support Truth and strengthen it. It is impossible, O Rajan, to enumerate the 
merits of Truth. It is for these reasons that the Brahmanas, the Pitris and the 
Devas acclaim Truth. There is no duty higher than Truth and no sin more 
heinous than untruth. Indeed, Truth is the very foundation of dharma. One 
should never destroy Truth. From Truth proceed gifts, and yagna with 
offerings, as well as the threefold Agnihotras, the Vedas, and everything 
else that leads to dharma. Once upon a time a thousand Awamedha yagnas 


and Truth were weighed against each other in the balance. Truth weighed 
more than the thousand Aswamedha yagnas.’” 


CANTO 163 


66 Y udhishtira says, ‘O you of great wisdom, tell me about the source 

of anger, lust, sorrow, loss of judgment, inclination to do evil, 

jealousy, malice, pride, envy, slander, incapacity to bear the good of others, 

unkindness and fear. Tell me everything truly and in detail, O 
Bharatarishabha,’ 

Bhishma says, ‘These thirteen vices are considered powerful enemies of 
all beings. These, O Rajan, approach and tempt men from every side. They 
goad and trouble a reckless man or one who is not in his senses. Indeed, as 
soon as they see a man, they attack him fiercely, like wolves leaping upon 
their prey. From these proceed all kinds of grief, all kinds of sin. Every 
mortal, O Purushottama, should know this. I will now tell you of their 
origin, of the objects upon which they rest, and the means of their 
destuction. Listen with undivided attention, O Rajan, as I tell you precisely 
and in detail about the origin of wrath. 

Anger springs from greed, which is strengthened by others’ faults. 
Through forgiveness it remains dormant and disappears. 

Lust springs from resolution. Indulgence strengthens it. When the wise 
man resolutely turns away from it, it disappears and dies. 

Envy is caused by anger and covetousness. It disappears through 
compassion for all creatures, knowledge of self, and disregard for all 
worldly objects. Envy also arises from seeing the faults of other people, but 
in intelligent men it vanishes with true knowledge. 


Loss of judgment has its origin in ignorance, and grows from sinfulness 
of habit. When one who suffers from this fault begins to take pleasure in the 
society of wise men, this vice at once and immediately hides its head. 

Men perceive conflicting shastras, O scion of Kuru. From this 
circumstance springs the desire for diverse kinds of action. When one gains 
true knowledge, this desire is allayed. 

Grief in a living being is caused by affection intensified by separation. 
When one comes to understand that the dead will not return, it subsides. 

Incapacity to bear others’ good fortune proceeds from anger and greed. 
Through compassion for every creature and a disregard for all earthly 
objects, it gets extinguished. 

Malice proceeds from abandonment of Truth and indulgence in evil. 
This vice, O child, disappears if one serves the wise and the good. 

Pride arises from conceit of birth, learning and prosperity. However, 
when one truly knows these three, it instantly disappears. 

Jealousy springs from hankering and fellowship with ignoble and ill- 
bred people. Wisdom eradicates it. 

Slander takes its rise from errors of conduct and through offensive and 
hateful speech. It disappears, O Rajan, upon seeing the world as it is. 

Hate is born when one who causes affliction is powerful and the injured 
one unable to avenge the injury. It subsides through kindness. 

Compassion proceeds from the sight of helpless and miserable 
creatures, with which the world abounds. The sentiment disappears when 
one understands the strength of dharma. 

Covetousness in all creatures spring from ignorance. It dissolves once 
the impermanence of all objects of enjoyment is perceived. 

One says that tranquillity of the soul alone can subdue all these faults. 
The sons of Dhritarashtra suffered from all these thirteen faults, while you, 
who were always in search of truth, have conquered all these vices because 
of your regard for your elders.’” 


CANTO 164 


oye udhishtira says, ‘From my observation of good men, I know 

what compassion is. However, O Bhaarata, I do not know evil 
men, or the nature of their actions. People avoid cruel men as they avoid 
thorns, pitfalls and fire. It is evident, O Bhaarata, that they will burn both 
here and hereafter. Therefore, O Kurusthama, tell me what, in truth, are the 
acts of such men.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Evil men are irresistibly inclined towards wicked acts. 
They slander others and incur infamy themselves. They always feel 
themselves to be cheated of their due. A spiteful man brags of his own 
deeds of charity, sees others with malicious eyes and is very mean, deceitful 
and full of cunning. He never gives others their due. He is arrogant, boastful 
and keeps evil company. He cannot distinguish the merits and faults of 
others, fears and suspects all with whom he comes into contact and praises 
only his associates. He detests all Munis who have taken to vanavasa. He is 
stupid, discontented, a miser, and a liar. He is cruel, takes delight in injuring 
others, and is exceedingly covetous. 

Such a person regards a virtuous and accomplished man as a pest. 
Thinking everyone else to be like himself, he trusts nobody. He proclaims 
the faults of other people, however unjustified. As for his own faults, he 
does not glance at them because of the advantage he reaps from them. He 
regards someone who does him good as a simpleton whom he has cleverly 
deceived. He is filled with regret if he has at any time made any gift of 
wealth, even to a benefactor. Such a heartless person will calmly eat and 


drink all kinds of choice food by himself, in the presence of others who may 
be looking on longingly. He who dedicates the first portion of food to 
Brahmanas and shares what remains with friends and kinsmen, attains great 
happiness in the next world and infinite happiness here. 

I have now, O chief of the Bhaaratas, told you the indications of an evil 
and malevolent man. Such a person should always be avoided by a wise 
man.” 


CANTO 165 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘O Bhaarata, wealth and knowledge should be 
given to poor Brahmanas who have been robbed of their wealth 
and who know all the Vedas and perform yagnas, in order to acquire the 
punya of dharma, so that they can discharge their obligations to Gurus and 
the Pitris, and pass their days in reciting and studying the shastras. To those 
Brahmanas who are not poor, only the dakshina need be given, while to 
those who have fallen from the status of Brahman due to their sinful deeds, 
uncooked food should be given outside the limits of the sacrificial altar. 

The Brahmanas are the Vedas themselves and all yagnas with generous 
gifts. Their virtuous inclinations drive them to outdo one another in 
performing yagnas. The king should, therefore, make diverse costly gifts to 
them. The Brahmana who can provide for his family for three years or more 
deserves to drink the Soma. If despite the presence of a virtuous king on the 
throne, the yagna someone begins, especially a Brahmana, cannot be 
completed for want of only a fourth part of the estimated expenses, then the 
king should, to ensure the completion of that sacrifice, take away from his 
kinsmen the wealth of a Vaisya possessesing a large herd of cattle who is 
averse to sacrifices and abstains from quaffing Soma. 

As the Sudra is not competent to perform a yagna, the king should take 
wealth away from him for this purpose. He should also, without any 
scruple, take away wealth from kinsmen who do not perform yagna though 
possessing a hundred head of cattle and also from him who abstains from 
yagna though possessing a thousand head of cattle. The king should 


publicly confiscate the wealth of men who do not practise charity, for by 
doing so he earns great punya. 

The Brahmana forced by want to go without six meals, according to the 
rules, can take without permission what he requires for a single meal, from 
the husking tub or field or garden or any other place of a man who cares 
only for today, without any thought of the morrow, even a man of low 
pursuits. He should however, on his own, inform the king of his action. If 
the king knows his duty, he will not inflict any punishment upon such a 
Brahmana, remembering that a Brahmana faces want and hunger only 
through the fault of the Kshatriya. Having ascertained a Brahmana’s 
learning and behaviour, the king should make provision for him, and protect 
him as a father protects a son of his own body. On the expiry of every year, 
one should perform the Vaisvanara sacrifice. 

They who know religion say that the practice of a prescribed alternative 
does not destroy dharma. The Viswedevas, the Sadhyas, the Brahmanas and 
Maharishis, fearing death in times of trouble, have no scruple in following 
any alternative provisions laid down in the shastras. However, one who 
takes the alternative while able to live according to the primary provision is 
regarded as an evil man who will never succeed in winning any felicity in 
Swarga. 

A Brahmana who knows the Vedas should never vaunt his power and 
knowledge to the king. The power of a Brahmana will always be superior to 
that of a king, which is why a king cannot bear or resist the power of the 
Brahmanas. The Brahmana is said to be the creator, ruler, lawmaker and 
god. No word of abuse or sarcasm should be addressed to a Brahmana. The 
Kshatriya should solve all his difficulties with the aid of the might of his 
arms, the Vaisya and the Sudra by wealth, and the Brahmana by mantras 
and homa. None, a maiden or young woman, one unacquainted with 
mantras, an ignorant person, or one who is impure, is competent to pour 
libations on the yagna fire. If any of these do so, he or she is sure to fall into 
hell, along with him for whom they officiate. For this reason, none but a 
Brahmana with knowledge of the Vedas and skilled in all yagnas should 
pour sacrificial libations. They who know the shastras say that the man 
who, having kindled the yagna fire, does not give away the dedicated food 
as dakshina, is not the kindler of a yagna fire. One should, with his senses 
under control and with proper devotion, perform all the acts of punya. One 
should never worship the deities in yagnas in which dakshina is not given. 


A sacrifice not concluded with dakshina, rather than producing punya, 
brings about the destruction of one’s children, animals and Swarga. Such a 
yagna destroys also one’s senses, fame and achievements, one’s very life- 
span. 

Those Brahmanas who lie with women in their season, or who never 
perform yagnas, or whose families have no members who are educated in 
the Vedas, are veritable Sudras. The Brahmana who, having married a 
Sudra girl, resides for twelve continuous years in a village which is supplied 
only by a single well, becomes a Sudra in action. The Brahmana who 
summons to his bed an unmarried maiden, or suffers a Sudra to sit upon the 
same carpet with him, thinking him worthy of respect, can be cleansed only 
if he sits on a bed of dry grass behind some Kshatriya or Vaisya and gives 
him respect in that way. Listen, O Rajan, to my words on this subject. The 
sin that a Brahmana commits in a single night by serving a member of a 
lower varna, or by sporting with him in the same spot or on the same bed, 
can only by cleansed by sitting for three continuous years on a bed of grass 
behind a Kshatriya or Vaisya. 

A falsehood, spoken in jest, or to a woman, is not sinful, O Rajan, nor 
one on the occasion of marriage, or for the benefit of one’s guru, or to save 
one’s own life; these five kinds of falsehood are said not to be sinful. One 
can acquire useful knowledge from even a man of low pursuits, with 
devotion and reverence. One can take up gold, without any scruple, from 
even an unclean place. A woman who is the ornament of her sex is 
acceptable from even a vile varna. Amrita, if extracted from poison, can be 
quaffed; water, women, jewels and other valuables can never be impure or 
unclean, according to the shastras. Even a Vaisya can take up weapons for 
his own safety, for the benefit of Brahmanas and cattle and on occasions of 
transfusion of varna. 

Drinking alcohol, Brahmahatya, and the violation of the Acharya’s bed 
are sins that, if committed consciously, have no reparation except death. 
The same can be said of stealing gold or a Brahmana’s property. By 
drinking alcohol, having sexual congress with someone prohibited, 
mingling with a degraded person or, for a person of any of the other three 
varnas, having congress with a Brahmani, one becomes inevitably sullied. 
By mixing with such a person for one whole year in such matters as 
officiating in yagnas and teaching sexual congress, one too becomes 
corrupted. One, however, does not become so by mixing with a fallen 


person in such matters as riding on the same vehicle, sitting on the same 
seat, and eating in the same line. 

Excluding the five grave sins mentioned above, all other sins have 
expiations prescribed for them by law, provided one does not indulge in 
them again. In the case of those who have been guilty of the first three of 
these five sins, drinking alcohol, Brahmahatya, and violation of the 
acharya’s bed, there is no restriction on their surviving kinsmen about food 
and wearing ornaments, even if their funeral rites remain unperformed 
when they die. A Dharmatman should, in the observance of his dharma, 
discard his very friends and revered elders. In fact, until expiation is 
undertaken, the virtuous should not even talk with sinners. 

A sinful man destroys his sin by acting virtuously afterwards and by 
tapasya. By calling a thief a thief, one incurs the sin of theft. By calling a 
man a thief who, however, is not a thief one incurs a sin twice the sin of 
theft. The maiden who suffers her virginity to be deflowered incurs three- 
fourths of the sin of killing a Brahmana, while the man who deflowers her 
incurs a sin equal to a fourth part of that of Brahmahatya. 

By slandering or striking Brahmanas, one sinks in infamy for a hundred 
years, and by killing a Brahmana one sinks into hell for a thousand years. 
No one, therefore, should speak ill of a Brahmana or slay him. If a person 
strikes a Brahmana with a weapon, he will have to live in hell for as many 
years as the grains of dust that are soaked by the blood flowing from the 
wound. One guilty of foeticide becomes cleansed if he dies of wounds 
received in battle fought for the sake of cattle and Brahmanas. Casting 
himself on a blazing fire can also cleanse him. 

A drinker of alcoholic liquors becomes cleansed by drinking hot 
alcohol. Burning his body with that hot drink, he gets cleansed through 
death in the other world. A Brahmana stained by such a sin obtains regions 
of felicity by such a course, not by any other. For violating the bed of a 
guru, the evil-souled and sinful wretch becomes cleansed by death from 
embracing a heated female figure of iron. Or, he could cut off his organ and 
testicles and, bearing them in his hands, he should go in a straight course 
towards the south-west and then end his life. He could also wash away his 
sin by dying in order to benefit a Brahmana, or by performing an 
Ashwamedha yagna or a cow-sacrifice or an Agnishtoma, and thus regain 
esteem both here and hereafter. 


The slayer of a Brahmana should practise the vow of Brahmacharya for 
twelve years and devoting himself to tapasya and the life of a Muni, 
wander, holding all the while in his hands the skull of the slain, and 
proclaiming his sin to all. This is also the expiation provided for one who 
slays a pregnant woman, knowing her condition. The man who knowingly 
slays such a woman incurs double the sin that follows from Brahmanicide. 
A drinker of alcohol could regain his purity if he lived on frugal fare, 
practiced Brahmacharya vows, slept on the bare ground, performed for 
more than three years the sacrifice next to the Agnishtoma, and then gave 
away a thousand cattle with one bull. 

For slaying a Vaisya one should perform such a sacrifice for two years 
and make a present of a hundred cattle with one bull, and for a Sudra, one 
should perform such a sacrifice for one year and make a present of a 
hundred cattle with one bull. For slaying a dog or bear or camel, one should 
perform the same penance laid down for the slaughter of a Sudra. For 
slaying a cat, a chasa, a frog, a crow, a reptile, or a rat, one says that, one 
incurs the sin of animal slaughter 

O Rajan, I will now tell you of other kinds of expiations in their order. 
For all minor sins one should repent or practise some vow for one year. For 
congress with the wife of a Brahmana adept in the Vedas, one should for 
three years practise the vow of Brahmacharya, taking a little food at the 
fourth part of the day. For congress with any other woman who is not one’s 
wife, one should undergo a similar penance for two years. For taking 
delight in a woman’s company by sitting with her on the same spot or on 
the same seat, one should live only on water for three days to doing cleanse 
oneself. The same is laid down the same for one who defiles a blazing fire. 

The shastras conclude that he who kills his father, mother or acharya, 
without adequate cause, is definitely disgraced, O Kurusthama. Only food 
and clothes should be given to a wife guilty of adultery or one confined in a 
prison. Indeed, the vows that the shastras lay down for a male guilty of 
adultery should also be applied to a woman. In the case of a woman who 
abandons her husband of a superior caste and has congress with a vile 
person of a lower varna, the king should cause her to be devoured by dogs 
in a public place, in the midst of a large concourse of spectators. A wise 
king should cause the male committing adultery under such circumstances 
to be placed upon a heated bed of iron and then, placing faggots underneath, 


burn the sinner. The same punishment, O Rajan, is provided for a woman 
guilty of adultery. 

The sinner who does not perform expiation within a year of the 
commission of the sin incurs paapa that is double of what attaches to the 
original sin. One who associates with such a person for two years must 
wander over the earth, devoting himself to tapasya and living upon alms. 
One associating with a sinner for four years should adopt such a mode of 
life for five years. 

If a younger brother weds before his elder brother, then all three, the 
elder brother, the younger brother and his wife, become tainted. To cleanse 
themselves, they should either observe the vows prescribed for one who has 
neglected his sacrificial fire, or practise the vow of Chandrayana for a 
month, or some other painful vow. The younger brother should give his 
wife to his unmarried elder brother and afterwards, with his permission, 
take her back. By such means all three can be cleansed of their sin. 

By slaying animals except a cow, the slayer is not stained. The learned 
know that man has dominion over all the lower animals. A sinner, holding 
in his hand a yak-tail and an earthen pot, should go about proclaiming his 
sin. He should every day beg only from seven families and live upon what 
he thus obtains. By doing this for twelve days he can be cleansed of his sin. 
He who is unable to carry in his hand the yak-tail while practising the vow 
should observe the vow of the sannyasi for a whole year. Among men such 
expiation is the best. 

For those who are able to practise charity, the shastras lay down the 
practice of in all such cases. By giving away only one cow, those who have 
faith and dharma can cleanse themselves. One who eats or drinks the flesh, 
ordure or urine, of a dog, a boar, a man, a cock, or a camel must have his 
investiture of the sacred thread re-performed. If a soma-drinking Brahmana 
inhales the scent of alcohol from the mouth of one who has drunk it, he 
should drink warm water for three days or warm milk for the same period. 
Alternatively, drinking warm water for three days, he should live for that 
period upon air alone. These are the eternal injunctions laid down for the 
expiation of sin, especially for a Brahmana who has committed these 
offences through ignorance and want of judgment.’” 


CANTO 166 


V aisampayana said, “Upon the completion of this speech, Nakula, an 
accomplished swordsman, questions the Kuru Pitamaha lying on his 
bed of arrows. 

Nakula says, “The bow, O Pitamaha, is regarded in this world as the 
foremost of weapons. I, however, prefer the sword, O Rajan, for when the 
bow is cut off or broken, when horses are dead or weakened, a good 
warrior, well-trained in swordsmanship, can protect himself with his sword. 
He can single-handedly withstand many bowmen, or adversaries armed 
with maces and darts. I have this doubt, and I am curious to know the truth. 
O Rajan, which is really the greatest weapon in battle? How and for what 
purpose was the sword created? Who was the first guru of the weapon? Tell 
me all this, O Pitamaha.’”’ 

Vaisampayana continued, “Hearing these words of the intelligent son of 
Madri, the virtuous Bhishma, the supreme master of the science of archery, 
as he lay stretched upon his bed of arrows, answers the high-souled adept 
Nakula, Drona’s disciple, in profound and melodious words, displaying his 
considerable knowledge on the subject. 

Bhishma says, ‘Hear the truth, O son of Madri, about what you have 
asked me. Your question has caused my excited heart to send a flow of 
blood through my wounds like a hill of red chalk. In ancient times the 
universe was one vast expanse of water, motionless and skyless, and 
without this earth occupying any space in it. Enveloped in darkness and 


intangible, its aspect was exceedingly awesome. In extent it was 
immeasurable, and utter silence reigned over all. 

In his own proper time the Pitamaha of the universe took his birth. He 
then created the wind and fire, and the sun also of great energy. He also 
created the sky, the heavens, the nether regions, earth, the directions, the 
firmament with the moon and the stars, the constellations, the planets, the 
year, the seasons, the months, the two fortnights, lighted and dark, and the 
smaller divisions of time. 

The divine Pitamaha, then, assuming a visible form, obtained by the 
power of his will some sons of great tejas. They are the sages Marichi, Atri, 
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Vasishtha, Angiras, the mighty and powerful lord 
Rudra and Prachetas. The last begot Daksha, who in his turn had sixty 
daughters. Maharishis took away all these daughters with the object of 
fathering children upon them. From them sprang all the creatures of the 
universe, including the Devas, Pitris, Gandharvas, Apsaras, diverse kinds of 
Rakshasas, birds and animals and fishes, monkeys, great snakes and diverse 
species of fowl that range the air or sport on the water, as well as 
vegetables, and all oviparous or viviparous beings or those born of filth. 
Thus the whole universe of animate and inanimate creatures sprang into 
existence. 

The universal Pitamaha, having thus summoned into existence all 
mobile and immobile creatures, then promulgated the eternal religion laid 
down in the Vedas. That was accepted by the Devas, with their Gurus, 
priests, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Sadhyas, the Maruts, the 
Aswins, Bhrigu, Atri, Angiras, the Siddhas, Kasyapa rich in penances, 
Vasishtha, Gautama, Agastya, Narada, Parvata, the Valikhilya Rishis, those 
other Rishis known under the names of Prabhasas, the Sikatas, the 
Ghritapas, the Somavayavyas, the Vaiswanaras, Marichipas, the Akrishtas, 
the Hansas, those born of Fire, the Vanaprasthas, and the Prasnis. All of 
them obeyed Brahman. 

The foremost of the Danavas, however, yielding to wrath and 
covetousness in the night, and against the Pitamaha’s commands, began to 
cause the destruction of dharma. They were Hiranyakasipu, Hiranyaksha, 
Virochana, Samvara, Viprachitti, Prahlada, Namuchi and Vali. These and 
many other Daityas and Danavas, transcending all restraints of duty and 
religion, sported and took delight in all kinds of evil deeds. Regarding 
themselves equal in point of birth with the Devas, they began to challenge 


them and the sages of pure behaviour. They never did any good to the other 
creatures of the universe or showed compassion for any of them. 
Disregarding the three well-known means, they began to persecute and 
afflict all, wielding the rod of chastisement. Indeed, the greatest of Asuras, 
filled with pride, abandoned every friendly interaction with other creatures. 

The divine Brahman, accompanied by the sages, went to a delightful 
summit of Himavat a hundred yojanas in area, adorned with diverse kinds 
of jewels and gems, upon whose surface the stars seemed to rest like so 
many lotuses on a lake. On that prince of mountains, overgrown with 
forests of flowering trees, the greatest of the gods, Brahman, remained to 
carry out the business of the world. After the lapse of a thousand years, the 
powerful god made arrangements for a grand yagna, according to the forms 
laid down in the scriptures. The sacrificial altar was arrayed with Rishis 
adept in performing all yagnas, with faggots of sacrificial fuel and blazing 
fires, and embellished with beautiful sacrificial plates and vessels all made 
of gold. All the chief gods took their seats on the platform which further 
scintillated with the presence of high regenerate Rishis. 

I have heard from the Rishis that soon something very awful occurred in 
that sacrifice. A creature appeared whose splendour equalled that of the 
Moon himself, when he rises in the star-studded firmament. Tall, lean, and 
dark with gleaming, sharp teeth, scattering the flames around him, he 
seemed irresistible and possessed of surpassing energy. Seeing him 
materialize, the earth trembled and the Ocean became agitated with tall 
waves and terrifying eddies. Meteors foreboding catastrophe shot through 
the sky. Inauspicious winds began to blow, branches of trees came crashing 
down, and all the points of the compass became unquiet. Creatures began to 
quake with dread. Seeing the fearful agitation of the universe at the entity 
which had sprung from the sacrificial fire, the Pitamaha said to the great 
Rishis, the Devas, and the Gandharvas, “It was I who thought into existence 
this being of powerful tejas. His name is Asi, sword. I have created him for 
the protection of the world and the destruction of the enemies of the gods.” 

The being, abandoning the form he first assumed, then took the shape of 
a sword of great magnificence, highly polished and sharp-edged, which rose 
like the instrument of annihilation at the end of the Yuga. Then Brahma 
handed over that sharp weapon to the blue-throated Rudra, to enable him to 
put down irreligion and sin. At this, the divine Rudra of immeasurable soul, 
whose emblem on his banner is Nandi, the foremost of bulls, whom the 


Maharishis praised, took up the sword and assumed a different shape. 
Putting forth four arms, he grew so tall that, though standing on the earth, 
he touched the very sun with his head. With eyes turned upwards and with 
every limb extended, he began to vomit flames of fire from his mouth. 
Assuming diverse colours in his complexion, turning from blue to white to 
red, wearing a black deer-skin studded with stars of gold, he bore on his 
forehead a third eye resembling the sun in splendour. His other two eyes, 
one of which was black and the other tawny, glittered brightly. The divine 
Mahadeva, the bearer of the Sula, lacerater of the eyes of Bhaga, took up 
the sword whose splendour resembled that of the all-destructive Yuga fire. 
Wielding an immense shield with three high bosses which looked like a 
mass of dark clouds adorned with flashes of lightning, he began to perform 
diverse transformations. Mighty and powerful, he began to whirl the sword 
in the sky, hungry for an encounter. Loud were the roars he uttered, and 
terrifying the bellow of his laughter. Indeed, O Bhaarata, Rudra’s form was 
exceedingly fearsome. 

The Danavas, hearing that Rudra had assumed the form in order to 
undertake fierce deeds, began to advance upon him exultantly with great 
velocity, showering huge rocks upon him as they came, blazing brands of 
wood, and several terrible weapons made of iron, each as sharp as a razor. 
The Danava host, however, witnessing the swelling might of the 
indestructible Rudra, soon began to tremble with fear. Although Rudra was 
alone and single-handed, he moved on the battle-field like quicksilver, 
sword in hand, so that the Asuras thought there were a thousand identical 
Rudras battling with them. 

Tearing, piercing, afflicting, cutting, lopping off and grinding down, the 
Mahadeva moved among the masses of his foes like a forest fire raging 
through heaps of dry grass. The mighty Asuras, broken by the god whirling 
his sword, their arms, thighs and chests cut off and pierced, their heads 
severed from their trunks, began to fall down on the earth. Others among 
the Danavas, wounded by the strokes of the sword, broke and fled in all 
directions, inciting one another to escape. Some plunged into the bowels of 
the earth, others found cover under mountains, some went upwards and 
others dived into the depths of the sea. 

As the dreadful and fierce battle progressed, the earth became mired 
with flesh and blood, and horrible sights were to be seen all around. Strewn 
with the fallen bodies of blood-drenched Danavas, the earth appeared 


overspread with mountains covered with Kinsukas, or like a beautiful 
woman attired in crimson robes, intoxicated with alcohol. After the 
Danavas had been slain and Dharma re-established on earth, the auspicious 
Rudra cast off his terrifying form and assumed his own benevolent shape. 

All the Rishis and celestials then worshipped the Deva of gods with 
loud acclamations and hailed his conquest. The divine Rudra, gave the 
sword, the protector of religion, dyed with the blood of Danavas, with due 
worship to Vishnu. He presented it to the divine Marichi, who gave it to all 
the Maharishis, who in turn passed it on to Vasava. Vasava presented it to 
the Regents of the world, O Yudhishtara, who gave that large sword to 
Manu, the son of Surya. 

At the time they gave it to Manu, they said, “You are the lord of all 
men. Protect all creatures with this sword that contains religion within its 
womb, meting out punishment to those who have transgressed dharma for 
the sake of the body or the mind. They should be protected in conformity 
with the law, never according to caprice. Some should be punished with 
oral rebukes, fines and forfeitures. Loss of limb or death should never be 
inflicted for slight reasons. These punishments should be regarded as 
diverse forms of the sword, of which verbal censure is the first. These are 
the shapes that the sword assumes as a result of the transgressions of men 
under protection.” 

In time, Manu installed his own son Kshupa as the sovereign of all 
creatures, and gave him the sword for their protection. From Kshupa, 
Ikshvaku took it, and Pururavas from Ikshvaku. From Pururavas, Ayus took 
it, and Nahusha from him. From Nahusha, Yayati took it, and Puru from 
Yayati. From Puru Amurtarya took it, and from him it descended to the 
royal Bhumisaya. From Bhumisaya to Dushmanta’s son Bhaarata. From 
Bhaarata, O Rajan, to righteous Ailavila. From Ailavila king Dhundumara 
took it and from Dhundumara Kamvoja took it, and from Kamvoja, 
Muchukunda. From Muchukunda Marutta took it, and from Marutta 
Raivata. From Raivata Yuvanaswa took it, and from Yuvanaswa Raghu. 
From Raghu the valiant Harinaswa took it. From Harinaswa Sunaka took 
the sword and from him the Dharmatman Usinara. From the last the Bhojas 
and the Yadavas took it and Sivi from the Yadus. From Sivi it descended to 
Pratardana. From Pratardana Ashtaka received it, and from Ashtaka by 
Prishadaswa. From Prishadaswa Bharadwaja received it, and from the last 
Drona. After Drona Kripa took it. From Kripa, you and your brothers 


obtained that best of swords. The constellation under which the sword was 
born is Krittika. Agni is its deity, and Rohini is its Gotra. Rudra is its great 
acharya. 

The sword has eight names, not generally known. Listen to me as I 
reveal them to you. If one mentions these, O son of Pandu, one can always 
win victory. The names then are Asi, Vaisasana, Khadga, Sharp-edged, 
Difficult of Acquisition, Sirgarbha, Victory, and Protector of Righteousness. 
Of all weapons, son of Madravati, the sword is the foremost. The Puranas 
truly declare that it was first wielded by Mahadeva. As regards the bow, 
again, Parantapa, it was Prithu who first created it. It was with the aid of 
this weapon that that son of Vena, while he governed the earth virtuously 
for many years, milked her of crops and grain in profusion. It becomes you, 
son of Madri, to regard what the Rishis have said, as conclusive proof. All 
men skilled in battle should worship the sword. I have now told you truly 
the first portion of your query, in detail, about the origin and creation of the 
sword, Bharatarishabha! One who listens to this excellent story of the origin 
of the sword will succeed in winning fame in this world and eternal felicity 
in the next.’” 


CANTO 167 


V aisampayana said, “When Bhishma falls silent, Yudhishtira and the 

others return home. The king, addressing his brothers, with Vidura 
forming the fifth, says, “The course of the world rests upon dharma, artha, 
and kama. Among these three, which is the greatest, the second, and the 
last, in point of importance? For subduing the triple aggregate, upon which 
of the first three should the mind concentrate? It becomes you all to answer 
this question truthfully and cheerfully.’ 

The highly intelligent Vidura, familiar with the science of artha, with 
the course of the world and with truth, first speaks, recollecting the contents 
of the shastras. Vidura says, ‘Study of the various shastras, asceticism, gift, 
faith, performance of yagnas, forgiveness, sincerety of disposition, 
compassion, truth, self-restraint, these constitute benefits of dharma. Adopt 
dharma, never let your heart stray from it. Both dharma and artha have their 
roots in these, and all these are capable of being included in one term. It is 
by dharma that the Rishis have crossed sansara. It is upon dharma that the 
worlds depend for their existence, that the Devas attained their position of 
superiority. It is upon dharma that artha rests. The wise say that dharma, O 
Rajan, is highest in point of punya, artha is in the middle and kama is the 
lowest of the three. For this reason, one should live with restrained soul, 
paying attention primarily to dharma. One should also behave towards all 
creatures as towards oneself.’ 

After Vidura, Pritha’s son Arjuna, well skilled in the science of Artha, 
and conversant with the truths of both dharma and artha, urged on by the 


drift of Yudhishtira’s question, says, ‘This world, O Rajan, is the field of 
action, and therefore one lauds action. Agriculture, trade, cattle-rearing and 
diverse arts constitute artha, which is the end of all such actions. The Srutis 
declare that without artha or dana, both dharma and moha cannot be won. 
Even men of uncleansed souls, if they have diverse kinds of Wealth, are 
able to perform the highest deeds of dharma and gratify desires apparently 
difficult to attain. The Sruti declares both dharma and moha to be the limbs 
of dana. Through artha, both dharma and objects of moha can be gained. 
Just as all creatures worship Brahman, even men of superior birth worship a 
wealthy man. Even those attired in deer-skins and bearing matted locks on 
their heads, self-restrained men who smear their bodies with mire, who 
have their senses under complete control, even shaven-headed 
Brahmacharins, and those who live separated from one another, cherish a 
need for wealth. The excellence of dana is attested by those attired in 
yellow robes, bearing long beards, graced with modesty, learned, contented, 
and freed from all attachments; those following the practices of their 
ancestors, and their respective duties and others desirous of heaven, 
believers and unbelievers, and rigid practitioners of the highest yoga. It is 
said that he who gives his dependants objects of enjoyment, and afflicts his 
foes with punishments truly possesses dana. Even this O best of intelligent 
men, is truly my opinion. However, listen now to these two speak.’ 

The two sons of Madri, Nakula and Sahadeva, then say, ‘Sitting or 
lying, walking and standing, one should strive to acquire dana even by the 
most vigorous means. If one obtains dana, which is highly prized and 
difficult to acquire, one is certain to get all the objects of moha. The dana 
which is connected with dharma, and also the dharma which is connected 
with dana, is certainly like amrita. For this reason, our opinions are that one 
without wealth cannot gratify any moha; similarly, there can be no dana in 
one lacking dharma. He who is outside the pale of both dharma and dana, is 
therefore to the world an object of fear. For this reason, one should seek 
dana devotedly but without disregarding the requirements of dharma. They 
who believe this succeed in acquiring whatever they desire. One should first 
practise dharma; next acquire dana without sacrificing dharma; and then 
seek the gratification of moha, for this should be the last action of one who 
has been successful in acquiring wealth.’” 

Vaisampayana continues, “The twin sons of the Aswins then fall silent, 
and Bhimasena begins to speak. “One without moha never wishes for dana. 


One without moha never wishes for dharma. One without moha never feels 
any wish. For this reason, moha is the greatest of all the three. It is under 
the influence of moha that the very Rishis devote themselves to tapasyas, 
subsisting upon fruits or living only upon roots or air. Similarly, others who 
have Vedic knowledge study the Vedas and their branches, or rites of faith 
and sacrifice, or on making or accepting gifts. Traders, agriculturists, 
keepers of cattle, artists, artisans, and those who are employed in rites of 
propitiation, all work from moha. There are some who dive into the depths 
of the ocean, induced by moha. Indeed the principle of moha takes various 
forms and pervades everything. A man outside the pale of moha never is, 
was, or will be, seen in this world. 

This is the truth, O Rajan. Both dharma and artha are based upon moha. 
Just as butter represents the essence of curds, moha is the essence of artha 
and dharma. Oil is better than oil-seeds, ghee is better than sour milk, and 
flowers and fruits are better than wood. Similarly, moha is better than 
dharma and artha. As honeyed juice is extracted from flowers, so moha is 
extracted from these two. It is the parent of dharma and artha, and the soul 
of both. Without moha the Brahmanas would never receive sweets or 
wealth, without moha the diverse kinds of action evident in the world would 
never occur. For these reasons, moha is the best of the triple aggregate. 

Attired in excellent robes, adorned with every ornament, and 
exhilarated with sweet wines, you approach beautiful damsels to sport with 
them. Moha, O Rajan, should be for us the greatest of the three. Reflecting 
upon the question to its very roots, this is the conclusion to which I have 
come. Do not hesitate to accept it, O Dharmaputra! My words, not hollow 
but loaded with dharma, will be acceptable to all good men. Dharma, artha, 
and moha should all be minded equally. He who devotes himself to only 
one of them is certainly not a superior man. He who devotes himself to only 
two of them, is average, but he who attends to all the three is the best of his 
species.” Having said these words briefly and comprehensively to the 
heroes, the wise Bhima, smeared with sandal-paste, adorned with beautiful 
garlands and ornaments, and surrounded by friends, falls silent. 

Then king Yudhishtira the Just, that most learned of virtuous men, duly 
reflecting for a while upon the words spoken by everyone and considering 
them all to be false philosophy, says, ‘Without doubt, all of you have settled 
conclusions in respect of the shastras, and all of you know what the 
authorities say. I have heard the words you have spoken with such certainty, 


so listen now with concentrated attention to what I say. He who is not 
employed in punya or in paapa, he who does not attend to artha or dharma 
or moha, who is above all faults, who regards equally gold and a brickbat, 
becomes liberated from pleasure and pain and the need to accomplish his 
purposes. All creatures are subject to birth and death, and are liable to 
change and decay. Awakened repeatedly by the benefits and evils of 
existence, all of them applaud mukti. We do not know, however, what mukti 
is. The self-born and divine Brahma says that there is no mukti for one 
bound by ties of attachment and affection. The learned, however, seek 
Nirvana. For this reason, one should never regard anything as either 
agreeable or disagreeable. This view seems to be the best. No one in this 
world can do as he pleases. I work precisely as I am made to act. The great 
Ordainer, who makes all creatures proceed as He wills, is supreme. 
Understand that no one can, by his deeds, get what is unobtainable; 
whatever is to be, will be. And since he who has withdrawn himself from 
the triple aggregate can win mukti, it is clear that mukti produces the 
highest good.’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Having heard these significant, reasonable 
and persuasive words of Yudhishtira, Bhima and others are filled with 
delight and joining their hands, bow to the Kuru prince and applaud him. 
Indeed, O Rajan, hearing the beautifully turned speech of the king, so 
agreeable to the heart, so well adorned with sweet syllables and devoid of 
discordance and dissonance, those foremost of men begin to applaud 
Yudhishtira enthusiastically. The high-souled son of Dharma, of great tejas, 
in turn praises his auditors. Then, once more, the king addresses the great 
soul, Gangaputra, questioning him about dharma.” 


CANTO 168 


6 ve udhishtira says, ‘O Pitamaha, you who are great in wisdom, I 
will ask you a question which I trust you will answer completely, 
O enhancer of the happiness of the Kurus. What kind of men are of gentle 
disposition? With whom can the most agreeable friendship exist? Tell us 
also who are always able to do good, now and later. I am of the opinion that 
neither immense wealth, nor relatives, nor kinsmen occupy the place of 
friends who wish us well. A friend who will listen to beneficial advice and 
will also do good, is exceedingly rare. O Mahatman, discourse fully on 
these topics.’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘Listen to me, O Yudhishtira, as I tell you in detail of 
men with whom friendships may and may not be formed. You should avoid 
one who is covetous; one who is ruthless; one who has renounced the duties 
of his varna; one who is mean, cruel, or suspicious of all; one who is idle or 
procrastinates; one who is of a crooked disposition, who is an object of 
universal disgrace, who brings dishonour to his Guru; one of sinful 
practices, wedded to sin, addicted to the seven well-known vices; one of an 
evil soul, shameless, whose sight is always directed towards sin; one who is 
an atheist, a slanderer of the Vedas; one whose senses are not controlled, 
who transgresses all restraints, who gives free indulgence to lust; one who 
is untruthful, deceitful and a rogue; one who is foolish; one who is envious, 
whose conduct is bad, whose soul has not been cleansed; one who is a 
gambler, one who is deserted by all, and one who abandons or seeks to 
injure friends, 


You should shun that wicked soul, O Bharatarishabha, who is never 
satisfied with what another may give him according to his means; who 
becomes angry on occasions that do not justify anger and wrangles without 
cause; who is restless of mind, a sinful person; who is never pleased with 
his friends, has no scruple in deserting well-meaning friends, and quarrels 
with friends when they do him a very slight injury or unintentionally inflict 
on him a wrong; one who speaks like a friend but acts like an enemy; a 
wretch of perverse perceptions who is always mindful of his self-interest 
but blind to his own good; one who never takes delight in what is good for 
himself or others. 

Avoid one who drinks alcoholic liquors; one who is engaged in killing 
living creatures; one who hates others, is wrathful and without compassion; 
one who is pained at the sight of others’ happiness; one who injures friends, 
is ungrateful and vile. Never form alliances of friendship with any of them, 
or with one who is always intent upon pointing out the faults of others. 

Listen now to me as I specify those with whom alliances can be formed. 
Kings should accept those who are well-born, from good families, and 
perpetuators of their races; those possessed of agreeable qualities, 
eloquence and politeness of speech, varied knowledge and science; those 
who have accomplishments and merit, who have no faults; those who are 
free from covetousness and avarice; those who are never exhausted by hard 
work; those who are good to their friends, grateful, and firm in truth; those 
who have subdued their senses and are devoted to athletic and other 
exercises; those who are famous for forming alliances of friendship. 

You should regard as persons worthy of friendship, O Rajan, those who 
are contented if one treats them according to the best of one’s powers, who 
do not get angry on occasions that do not justify anger and are never 
displeased without sufficient cause; those who know well the science of 
Artha and who, even when annoyed, succeed in keeping their minds 
tranquil; those who devote themselves to the service of friends at personal 
sacrifice; those who are never estranged from friends but continue 
unchanged in their attachment like a blanket made of wool that retains its 
colour; those who never spurn anyone for being poor, who never dishonour 
young women by yielding to lust and loss of judgment; those who are 
trustworthy, who never point out the wrong way to friends; those who are 
devoted to the practice of dharma, who look equally on gold and brickbats; 
those who adhere with firmness to friends and well-wishers; and those who 


muster their own people to accomplish the business of friends, disregarding 
their own dignity and status. Indeed, the dominions of a king who befriends 
such superior men will spread in every direction like the light of the lord of 
the stars. 

Alliances should be formed with men who are experts in weaponry, who 
have subdued their anger, who are always strong in battle and are of high 
birth, good behaviour and varied accomplishments. Among the vicious men 
that I have mentioned, O Rajan, the vilest are those who are ungrateful and 
who injure friends. Everyone should avoid these men of evil conduct. That 
much is certain.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘I want to hear in detail a description of those who are 
injurers of friends and ungrateful persons.’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘I will narrate to you an old story of what happened in 
the country of the Mlecchas to the north. There was a certain Brahmana 
belonging to the middle country, without any Vedic learning, who entered a 
prosperous village of hunters to beg for alms. In that village lived a wealthy 
robber, conversant with the distinctive features of all the varnas, who was 
devoted to the Brahmanas, firm in truth, and always engaged in charity. 
Going to the den of that robber, the Brahmana begged for alms, including a 
house to live in and such necessities of life as would last a year. The robber 
also bestowed on him a piece of new cloth and a young widowed woman. 
The Brahmana, Gautama, was filled with delight and began to live happily 
in the spacious house which the robber chief assigned to him, 
accommodating as well the relatives and kinsmen of the female slave he 
had been given. In this way he lived for many years in that prosperous 
village of hunters. 

Gautama also began assiduously to practise archery and every day, like 
the other robbers living there, went into the vana and slaughtered wild 
cranes and other living creatures in great numbers. Through his intimacy 
with the robbers he soon forgot compassion, grew adept at killing creatures 
and became like one of the band. Living happily in that robber village for 
many months, he slew large numbers of wild cranes. 

One day a Brahmana came to the village, clad in rags and deer-skins, 
with matted locks on his head. Pure of conduct, he was proficient in his 
study of the Vedas, humble in his disposition, frugal of habit, devoted to 
Brahmanas, and observant of Brahmacharya vows. The Brahmana belonged 
to Gautama’s native area and had been his dear friend. In the course of his 


wanderings, he had come to the robber village where Gautama now lived. 
Since he never accepted food given by a Sudra, he began to search for the 
house of a Brahmana from where he could receive hospitality. Roving 
through the village infested with robber-families, he finally arrived at 
Gautama’s house, just as he was returning home from the vana. Gautama 
was armed with bow and sword, carrying a load of slaughtered cranes, his 
body smeared with the blood that trickled down from the bag on his 
shoulders. The two friends met. 

Recognising the man who had fallen away from the pure practices of 
the varna of his birth and now resembled a cannibal, the newly-arrived 
guest exploded: “What folly is this! You are a Brahmana, and _ the 
perpetuator of a Brahmana family. Born in a respectable family belonging 
to the middle country, how have you become a robber? Recollect, Muni, 
your famous kinsmen of earlier times, who were all well versed in the 
Vedas. Alas, born in their varna, you have become a stigma to it! Awaken 
yourself by your own exertions, O Muni, recollect the energy, the conduct, 
the learning, the self-restraint, the compassion that are yours, and abandon 
this present abode!” 

Gautama answered him, great moved by the words of his well-meaning 
friend, “O Maharishi, I am poor and have no knowledge of the Vedas. 
Understand, O best of Brahmanas, that I abide here for the sake of wealth 
alone. However, today the sight of you is a blessing to me. We shall leave 
this place together tomorrow. Spend the night here with me.” 

The newly-arrived Brahmana, through compassion, passed the night 
there, but refrained from touching anything. Indeed, though hungry and 
invited repeatedly to eat, the guest refused to touch any food in that 
house.’” 


CANTO 169 


6 ‘RB hishma says, “When the night had passed, O Bhaarata, and that 

best of Brahmanas had left, Gautama emerged from his house 
and walked towards the sea. On the way he fell in with some merchants 
setting out to voyage on the ocean, and with them he proceeded onwards. It 
so happened, O Rajan, that while the large merchant caravan was passing 
through a valley, an elephant in musth assailed it and killed almost 
everyone. Having escaped the peril somehow, the Brahmana fled 
northwards to save his life, not knowing where he was going. Parted from 
the caravan and far from where he started out, he began to wander alone in 
a forest like a Kimpurusha. 

At last he came upon the road that led to the ocean, and on it he 
journeyed till he reached a forest abounding with flowering trees, inhabited 
by Yakshas and Kinnaras. Marvellous mango trees that put forth flowers 
and fruits throughout the year adorned that vana, in splendour like the very 
Nandana in Swarga. Salas, palmyras, tamalas with clusters of black aloes, 
and many venerable sandal trees also grew there. Upon that delightful 
tableland, fragrant with manifold perfumes, birds of various species poured 
forth their melodies. Winged creatures called Bharundas, with human faces, 
Bhulingas, and other birds belonging to mountainous regions and the sea, 
warbled sweetly. 

Gautama made his way through the vana, absorbed in the mellifluous 
strains of birdsong. He came upon a level spot of land covered with golden 
sands, like Swarga itself in beauty. On the plot stood a towering and 


graceful nyagrodha with a spherical crown with many branches extending 
like a cupola over the plain, each branch like the parent tree in beauty and 
size. The area beneath the magnificent tree was drenched with water 
perfumed with heady sandal. 

So enchanting was the place that it seemed to him a garden in the sabha 
of Brahma himself. Gautama was entranced by this auspicious glade, like 
the home of a Deva, and sat down with a contended heart. O son of Kunti, a 
delicious breeze, laden with the perfume of many kinds of flowers, began to 
blow softly, cooling his limbs and filling him with bliss. Fanned by that 
redolent breeze, the Brahmana was overcome by a fine languor and fell 
asleep. 

Meanwhile the sun set behind the Asta hills in the west and, with the 
advance of twilight, a marvellous bird, the foremost of its kind, returned 
from the realm of Brahma to that magical glade which was his home. 
Nadijangha was his name and he was a prince of cranes, the wise son of 
sage Kasyapa, and a dear friend of the Creator. He was also well known on 
earth by the name of Rajadharman. Indeed, he surpassed all in fame and 
wisdom. The child of a celestial maiden, herself possessed of great beauty 
and learning, he was like a Deva in splendour. Adorned with many 
ornaments as brilliant as the sun, Rajadharman blazed with beauty. Seeing 
that amazing bird, Gautama was filled with wonder. But, exhausted and 
ravaged as he was by hunger and thirst, the Brahmana could only stare at 
the bird with the thought of killing it for food. 

Rajadharman said affectionately, in exquisite human speech, “Welcome, 
O Brahmana! It is my great good fortune that has brought you to my home. 
The sun has set, and twilight is here. You are today my dear and precious 
guest. Let me worship you according to the rites laid down in the shastras, 
and you can go where you want tomorrow morning.”’” 


CANTO 170 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, “Hearing these sweet words, Gautama was 

astonished. Seized with great curiosity, he gazed fixedly at 
Rajadharman, who said, “O Brahmana, I am the son of Kasyapa by one of 
the daughters of the sage Daksha Prajapati. Welcome, O foremost of 
Brahmanas of great merit, you are my guest today.” 

After he offered him hospitality according to the rites laid down in the 
shastras, the crane made an excellent couch of the Sala flowers that lay all 
around. He also offered Gautama several large fish caught from the deep 
waters of the Bhagirathi, and offered his guest a blazing fire. After the 
Brahmana had eaten and was sated, the bird, possessed of tapodhana, the 
bounty of penances, began to fan him with his wings to drive away 
Gautama’s fatigue. 

Seeing his guest seated at his case, he questioned him about his 
ancestry. Gautama answered, “I am a Brahmana and my name is Gautama,” 
and then fell silent. The bird made his guest a soft bed of tender leaves 
strewn with fragrant flowers. Gautama lay down on it, and was contented. 
The eloquent son of Kasyapa, who was like Yama himself in his knowledge 
of dharma, asked him about how and why he had come there. Gautama 
answered him, “I am very poor, O Mahatman. I want to go to the sea to earn 
wealth for myself.” 

The son of Kasyapa cheerfully told him: “Do not be anxious, you will 
succeed, O best of Brahmanas, and return home with much wealth. The 
sage Brihaspati has spoken of four means to acquire wealth: inheritance, 


sudden luck or the favour of the Devas, by labour, and through the aid or 
kindness of friends. I have become your friend. I cherish kind feelings 
towards you, and I will exert myself to help you acquire wealth.” 

The night faded and morning came. Seeing his guest rise refreshed from 
bed, the crane said to him, “Go, friend, follow this very route and you are 
sure to succeed. At the distance of about three yojanas from this place, there 
is a strong and mighty king of the Rakshasas. His name is Virupaksha, and 
he is a friend of mine. Go to him, O Brahmanottama. At my request, 
Virupaksha will surely give you as much wealth as you want.” 

Thus, Yudhishtira, Gautama cheerfully set out from that place, eating to 
his fill, on the way, fruits sweet as amrita. Gazing at the sandal, aloe and 
birch trees that stood along the road and enjoying their refreshing shade, the 
Brahmana went along quickly till he reached the city of Meruvraja. It had 
lofty archways and high walls of stone, and was surrounded by a deep moat. 
Large rocks and engines of defence were kept ready on the ramparts. 
Gautama was announced to the intelligent Rakshasa as a guest sent to him 
by his friend the crane, and received very gladly. 

O Yudhishtira, the king of the Rakshasas ordered his attendants, “Let 
Gautama be fetched here immediately.” At the king’s command, his men, 
quick as hawks, went from his splendid palace to the gate and accosted 
Gautama, “You may have heard of our king Virupaksha, of boundless 
courage. He is impatient to see you. Make haste, do not tarry.” 

The Brahmana forgot his toil, in his surprise, and ran with the 
messengers. He was awestruck by the great affluence of the city and filled 
with wonder. Soon he entered the king’s palace in the company of the 
messengers, agog for a sight of the king of the Rakshasas.’” 


CANTO 171 


¢ “RB hishma says, ‘Gautama was led into a spacious apartment, and 

introduced to the king of the Rakshasas. Virupaksha welcomed 
him with the customary offerings and gave him an opulent seat to make him 
comfortable. The king asked him about his antecedents and his practices, 
his study of the Vedas and his observance of the Brahmacharya vow. The 
Brahmana, however, only stated his name and vamsa, without answering 
his other queries. 

The king, seeing that his visitor was destitute of Brahmanic splendour 
and Vedic knowledge, went on to ask about his country of residence. He 
asked, “Where do you live, O blessed one, and to what vamsa does your 
wife belong? Speak truly, do not fear. Trust us without anxiety.” 

Gautama said, “I belong by birth to the middle country. I live in a 
village of hunters. I married a Sudra woman, a widow. This is the truth.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘The king then began to reflect as to what he should 
do, and how he might acquire punya. He thought to himself, “This man is 
by birth a Brahmana and a friend of the high-souled Rajadharman who has 
sent him to me. I must do what is agreeable to my beloved friend. He is is 
my brother, a dear relative and a true friend of my heart. 

On this day of this month of Kartika, a thousand of the foremost 
Brahmanas are to be entertained in my house. This Gautama also shall be 
entertained with them, and I shall give wealth to him too. This is a sacred 
day and Gautama has come here to me as a guest. The wealth that is to be 
given away to the Brahmanas is ready. What is there, then, to think about?” 


Even as Virupaksha was pondering this, a thousand learned Brahmanas 
came to the palace, purified by baths, anointed with sandalwood paste and 
flowers, attired in long robes of linen. The Rakshasa king received the 
guests according to the rites laid down in the shastras. At his command, O 
best of the Bhaaratas, skins were spread out for them for them to sit upon. 
The royal servants placed mats of kusa grass on the ground. 

Those thousand Dvijottamas, having been duly honoured by the king sat 
down on those kusasanas. The Rakshasa chief ritually worshipped his 
guests, as decreed by the shastras, with sesame seeds, green blades of grass 
and water. Those among them who were selected to represent the 
Viswedevas, the Pitris and the deities of fire, were smeared with sandal- 
paste and received flowers as well as other kinds of costly offerings. After 
such worship, every one of them looked as effulgent as the moon in the 
heavens. 

Then bright and polished plates of gold, adorned with engravings, and 
filled with excellent food prepared with ghee and honey, were laid before 
those Brahmanas. Every year on the days of full moon of the months of 
Ashadha and Magha, a large number of Brahmanas would be honoured thus 
by the Rakshasa chief and fed the rarest delicacies they could desire. 

On the day of the full moon in the month of Kartika, after the end of 
autumn, the king used to give to the Brahmanas diverse wealth—gold, 
silver, priceless jewels and gems, pearls, magnificent diamonds, lapis lazuli, 
deer-skins, and hides of the Ranku deer. Indeed, O Bhaarata, having piled 
up a heap of wealth of many kinds to distribute as Dakshina to his blessed 
guests, the mighty Virupaksha would say to those Brahmanottamas, “Take 
from these jewels and gems as much as you wish and can carry away.” He 
also used to urge them, ““Take these plates of gold and vessels which you 
have used for your meal and go your way, O foremost of Brahmanas.” 

Invited by the high-souled Rakshasa king, those bulls among 
Brahmanas took as much wealth as each desired. Worshipped with treasures 
and clothed in excellent robes, those best of Brahmanas were elated. 
Meanwhile Virupaksha restrained the Rakshasas that had come to his palace 
from diverse lands and said again to the thousand Brahmanas, “This one 
day, regenerate ones, have no fear from the Rakshasas here. Sport as you 
wish, then leave us quickly when your hearts are full.” 

The Brahmanas then, having taken all they wanted, streamed out of 
Virupaksha’s city with celerity. Losing no time, Gautama also took a 


sizeable quantity of gold and went his way. Carrying his burden with 
difficulty, he reached that same banyan under which he had met the crane. 
He sat himself down, exhausted and hungry. 

While Gautama was resting there, O king, that best of birds 
Rajadharman came to him. Devoted to his friends, the marvellous krauncha 
gladdened Gautama by bidding him a warm welcome. Flapping his wings, 
he fanned his guest to dispel his fatigue. The wise crane worshipped 
Gautama, and made arrangements for his food. 

Having eaten and refreshed himself, Gautama began to think, “Moved 
by greed and foolishness, I have taken this heavy load of bright gold. I have 
a long way to travel and no food to eat on my journey. How will I keep 
myself going?” He thought and thought, but could not devise how he would 
find any food to eat on his way home. Then, O Naravyaghra, a vile thought 
struck him, ungrateful as he was: “This prince of cranes, so large and amply 
fleshed, is here by my side. I will remain here quietly until I bag him, and 
then leave this spot and travel with great speed.”’” 


CANTO 172 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘There, under that majestic banyan tree, the prince 

of birds had kindled and kept up a fire with high and blazing 
flames for the warmth and protection of his guest. On one side of the fire, 
the bird slept trustfully. The ungrateful and evil-souled wretch, with a 
flaming branch from that very fire, killed his sleeping host. He was 
delighted at having dispatched the crane, never thinking that he had 
committed a sin. Peeling off the feathers and skin, he roasted the flesh on 
the fire. Then, taking the cooked meat up with the gold he had brought, the 
Brahmana departed quickly from the glade of golden sand and the great 
nyagrodha tree. 

The next day, the Rakshasa king Virupaksha, said to his son, “Alas, my 
son, I do not see Rajadharman, that best of birds, even today. Every 
morning he goes to the abode of Brahma to worship the Pitamaha, and 
never returns home without paying me a visit. Two mornings and two 
nights have passed without him visiting me and my mind is not at peace. Go 
and enquire after my friend. 

Gautama, who came here, is without Vedic learning and Brahmanic 
tejas. He has found his way to the abode of my friend. I greatly fear that 
worst of Brahmanas has slain Rajadharman. I saw through him by the signs 
he showed of an evil mind and evil ways. Of cruel and grim visage, without 
compassion, that vile man is like a robber. This Gautama has gone to the 
abode of my friend, and my heart has grown very anxious. Fly, my son, to 


Rajadharman’s home and find out whether that pure-souled bird is still 
alive. Hurry!” 

The prince, accompanied by other Rakshasas, set forth with great speed 
and, at the foot of the banyan, beheld the remains of Rajadharman. Sobbing 
with grief, the son of the Rakshasa king ran as fast as he could to seize 
Gautama. The Rakshasas did not have to go far before they caught the 
Brahmana and found on him the remains of Rajadharman, without wings, 
bones and feet. The Rakshasas hastened to Meruvraja with their captive. 
They showed the king the mutilated body of Rajadharman, and thrust the 
ungrateful sinner down at his feet. 

Seeing the remains of his friend, the king, with his counsellors and 
priest, began to weep aloud. Indeed, the voices of lamentation were heard in 
his home and in the entire city of the Rakshasa king, as men, women, and 
children were plunged in grief. The king then said to his son, “Let this 
sinful wretch be slain, and let these Rakshasas here feast on his flesh. He is 
of sinful deeds, sinful habits, sinful soul, and inured to sin. You must kill 
this brute yourself.” 

Though commanded by their king, many fearsome Rakshasas of terrible 
prowess declared their unwillingness to eat the flesh of that sinner. Indeed, 
those wanderers of the night said to the king, “Let this vilest of men be 
given away to the cannibals of the forest.’ Bending their heads to their king, 
they told him, “It does not become you to give us this sinful wretch for our 
food.” The king said, “Tathaastu! Let this ungrateful creature then be given 
to the man-eating brigands without delay.” 

The Rakshasas, armed with lances and battle-axes, hacked that vile 
wretch into pieces and gave his flesh away to the cannibals. However, even 
they refused to eat the flesh of that ungrateful man. For one who slays a 
Brahmana, drinks alcohol, who steals, or who has fallen away from a vow, 
there is expiation, O Rajan, but there is none for an ingrate. The cruel and 
heinous man who injures a friend will neither be eaten even by savage 
cannibals, nor even by the worms that feed on carrion.’” 


CANTO 173 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, “The Rakshasa king then had a funeral pyre made 

for the prince of cranes and adorned it with jewels, gems, 
perfumes and costly robes. Setting the body of the prince of birds upon it, 
the mighty chief of the Rakshasas had the obsequial rites of his friend 
performed according to the law. 

Just then, the auspicious Devi Surabhi, the celestial cow and daughter of 
the sage Daksha, appeared in the sky above the place where the pyre had 
been set up. Her breasts were full of milk. From her mouth, O sinless king, 
froth mixed with milk fell upon Rajadharman’s funeral pyre. At this, the 
prince of cranes revived and was whole again. Rising, he approached his 
friend, the king of the Rakshasas. The chief of the celestials himself also 
appeared in the city of Virupaksha. Indra said to the Rakshasa king, “How 
fortunate it is that you have revived the prince of cranes!” The lord of the 
Devas narrated to Virupaksha the story of the curse that Brahma had called 
upon Rajadharman, the best of birds. 

Indra said, “Once upon a time, Rajan, this prince of cranes absented 
himself from Brahmaloka when his attendance was expected. In wrath the 
Pitamaha said, ‘Since this vile krauncha has not presented himself today in 
my assembly, that wicked one will not die quickly so as to be able to leave 
the earth.’ Because of the curse of Brahma, the prince of cranes, though 
slain by Gautama, has come back to life, through the virtue of the nectar 
with which his body was drenched.” 


After Indra had fallen silent, Rajadharman, bowing to the chief of the 
celestials, said, “O first of devas, if your heart is inclined graciously towards 
me, let my dear friend Gautama be restored to life!” 

At this, O Narottama, Vasava sprinkled nectar over Gautama and 
restored him to life. Rajadharman, the prince of cranes, approached his 
friend Gautama, who still bore on his shoulders the load of gold that he had 
got from the king of the Rakshasas, embraced him joyfully and, dismissing 
the sinful Gautama, with his wealth, returned to his own home. 

The next day, at the appointed time, he went to the Pitamaha, who 
honoured the high-souled bird with such attentions as are shown to a 
cherished guest. Gautama, too, returned to his home in the village of the 
hunters and sired many sinful children upon his Sudra wife. A dire curse 
was pronounced on him by the gods, that the ungrateful sinner should sink 
into a terrible hell for many years along with his children and wife. 

This is the story that Narada once told me, Yudhishtira, and, recollecting 
the incidents of this weighty narrative, O Bharatarishabha, I have told you 
all its details. Whence can an ungrateful person derive repute? Where is his 
place? Whence can he derive happiness? An ingrate does not deserve to be 
trusted and can never escape a dire fate. He who injures a friend sinks into 
terrible and everlasting hell. 

Everyone should be appreciative of friends and try to help them. 
Everything can be obtained from friends, honours and all kinds of objects of 
enjoyment. Through their efforts, one can escape from various kinds of 
danger and distress. A wise person should distinguish his friend with his 
best attentions. He should shun ungrateful men, for the shameless and sinful 
person who mistreats his friends is a wretch of his varna and the vilest of 
creatures. 

I have thus told you, Yudhishtira, what the characteristics of that sinner 
are who is tainted by ingratitude and who harms his friend. What else do 
you want to hear?’” 

Vaisampayana said, “O Janamejaya, hearing these words spoken by 
Bhishma, Yudhishtira is deeply gratified.” 





THE COMPLETE 
MAHABHARATA 


Santi Parva: Mokshadharma Parva 


THE COMPLETE 
MAHABHARATA 


Volume 9 
Santi Parva 


Part Ill 
Mokshadharma Parva 


‘Tushar C. Shah 





RUPA 


Published by 
Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd 2016 
7/16, Ansari Road, Daryaganj 
New Delhi 110002 


Sales centres: 
Allahabad Bengaluru Chennai 
Hyderabad Jaipur Kathmandu 

Kolkata Mumbai 


Copyright © Tushar C. Shah 2016 


All rights reserved. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, or stored in a retrieval system, in any 
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the 
prior permission of the publisher. 


ISBN: 978-81-291-4209-2 


First impression 2016 


10987654321 


The moral right of the author has been asserted. 


In memory of my beloved parents, 
Mrs Pramodini C. Shah 
and 
Mr Chimanlal V. Shah. 


Contents 


PART III: Mokshadharma Parva 
CANTO 174 
CANTO 175 
CANTO 176 
CANTO 177 
CANTO 178 
CANTO 179 
CANTO 180 
CANTO 181 
CANTO 182 
CANTO 183 
CANTO 184 
CANTO 185 
CANTO 186 
CANTO 187 
CANTO 188 
CANTO 189 
CANTO 190 
CANTO 191 
CANTO 192 
CANTO 193 
CANTO 194 


CANTO 195 
CANTO 196 
CANTO 197 
CANTO 198 
CANTO 199 
CANTO 200 
CANTO 201 
CANTO 202 
CANTO 203 
CANTO 204 
CANTO 206 
CANTO 207 
CANTO 210 
CANTO 211 
CANTO 212 
CANTO 214 
CANTO 215 
CANTO 217 
CANTO 218 
CANTO 223 


CANTO 230 
CANTO 231 
CANTO 233 
CANTO 234 
CANTO 235 
CANTO 236 
CANTO 237 
CANTO 239 
CANTO 240 
CANTO 241 
CANTO 243 
CANTO 244 
CANTO 245 
CANTO 246 
CANTO 247 
CANTO 249 
CANTO 251 
CANTO 252 


CANTO 253 
CANTO 254 
CANTO 255 
CANTO 256 
CANTO 257 
CANTO 258 
CANTO 259 
CANTO 260 
CANTO 261 
CANTO 262 
CANTO 263 
CANTO 264 
CANTO 265 
CANTO 266 
CANTO 267 
CANTO 268 
CANTO 269 
CANTO 270 
CANTO 271 
CANTO 272 
CANTO 273 
CANTO 274 
CANTO 275 
CANTO 276 
CANTO 277 
CANTO 278 
CANTO 279 
CANTO 280 
CANTO 281 


CANTO 288 
CANTO 289 
CANTO 290 
CANTO 291 
CANTO 292 
CANTO 293 
CANTO 294 
CANTO 295 
CANTO 296 
CANTO 297 
CANTO 298 
CANTO 299 
CANTO 300 
CANTO 301 
ENDNOTES 





PART III 
Mokshadharma Parva 


CANTO 174 


V aisampayana said, “Yudhishtira says, ‘O Pitamaha, you have spoken 

of the auspicious karma to be performed by men in distress, with 
regard to the Rajadharma, the dharma of kings. Now tell me the main duties 
of the four asramas, the stages of life.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Dharma has many doors. The observance of dharma 
can never be in vain. Duties or kartavyas have been laid down for every 
asrama of life. The fruits of these karmas are invisible here, being attained 
in the next world. The fruits, however, of tapasya directed towards realising 
the Atman are obtained in this world. 

Whatever be the object to which one devotes oneself, that object, O 
Bhaarata, and nothing else, appears to one as the highest of acquisitions 
fraught with the greatest of blessings. When one reflects properly and one’s 
heart is purified by such dhyana, one knows that the things of this world are 
as straw. Beyond doubt, one is then freed from attachment to all things 
mundane. When the flawed world, O Yudhishtira, is an illusion, every man 
of intelligence should surely strive for the emancipation of his Soul.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “Tell me, Pitama, through what means should one 
kill one’s grief when one loses one’s wealth, or when one’s wife, son, or 
father, dies.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘When one’s wealth is lost, or one’s wife, son or father 
dies, one says to oneself “Alas, this is a great sorrow!” But then one should, 
through dhyana, seek to quell that sorrow. The old story is told of the 


discourse that a Brahmana friend of his, coming to Senajit’s court, made to 
that king. 

Seeing the king burning with sorrow because of the death of his son, 
the Brahmana said to the troubled sovereign, “Why are you so stricken? 
You have no intelligence. Yourself an object of grief, why do you grieve for 
others? Just some few days hence, others will grieve for you, and in their 
turn, others will grieve for them. You, me, and all who wait upon you, O 
king, shall all return to that place from where all of us have come.” 

Senajit said, “What is that buddhi, what is that tapasya, what is that 
dhyana, O Tapodhana, what is that gyana, and what is that vigyana, by 
acquiring which you do not yield to sorrow?” 

The Brahmana said, “Behold, as a result of their various deeds, their 
karma, all creatures, the superior, the middling, and the inferior, are 
entangled in grief. I do not regard my own body to be mine; I regard the 
whole world as being mine. I again think that all this that I see is as much 
mine as it belongs to others. Because of this firm conviction, grief cannot 
approach me. Having acquired this understanding, I do not yield either to 
joy or to sorrow. As two pieces of driftwood floating on the ocean come 
together momentarily and again separate—even such is the union of living 
creatures in this world. 

Sons, grandsons, relatives and dependants are all like this. One should 
never feel attachment or indeed affection for them, for separation from them 
is certain. Your son came from an invisible realm; he has returned thence. 
He did not know you and you did not know him. Who are you and for 
whom do you grieve? Grief arises from the sickness created by desire. 
Happiness again results from the disease of desire being cured. From joy 
also comes sorrow, and thus sorrow arises repeatedly. Sorrow follows joy, 
inevitably, and joy comes after sorrow. The joys and sorrows of human 
beings revolve on a wheel. 

After joy, sorrow has come to you, and in time, you will again have 
happiness. No one suffers sorrow for ever, and no one enjoys happiness 
forever. The body is the refuge of both sorrow and happiness. 

Whatever karma an embodied creature does with his body, he has to 
reap the fruit of those deeds in the body. Life begins with the coming into 
existence of the body. The two exist together, and the two perish together. 

Men of tainted Souls, bound to things worldly by various bonds, meet 
with death like sandbanks dissolving in water. Woes of diverse kinds, born 


of ignorance, act like grinders of oil-seeds, to punish all creatures for their 
attachments. These sorrows press them like oil-seeds in the great oil-press 
of the circle of births and rebirths. For the sake of his wife and others, a 
man commits many sins, but he suffers alone for them both in this and the 
next world. Attached to children, wives and relatives, all sink in the sea of 
grief, even like wild elephants in a marsh when their strength is gone. 
Indeed, upon the loss of wealth or a son or relatives, man suffers great 
distress; he burns with grief like a forest fire. 

All this joy and grief, existence and non-existence, depends on 
destiny. One having friends as one destitute of friends, one having enemies 
as one without foes, one having wisdom as one of no wisdom—every one 
of these finds happiness through destiny. 

Friends are not the cause of one’s happiness. Enemies are not the 
cause of one’s misery. Wisdom is not competent to bring an accession to 
wealth, nor is wealth able to bring an accession to joy. Intelligence is not 
the cause of wealth, nor is stupidity the cause of penury. Only he that is 
possessed of wisdom, and none else, understands the order of the world. 
Amongst the intelligent, the heroic, the foolish, the cowardly, the learned, 
the weak or the strong, happiness comes to him for whom it is ordained. 
Among the calf, the cowherd that owns her, and the thief, the cow belongs 
to him who drinks her milk. 

They whose minds are quiescent, and they who have attained that state 
which lies beyond the sphere of the intellect, succeed in finding bliss. Only 
they that are between these two conditions suffer. 

The wise delight in the two extremes but not in the states that are in 
between. The sages have said that the attainment of any of these two 
extremes constitutes happiness. Suffering consists of the states that are 
between the two. 

They who have succeeded in attaining true felicity, which samadhi 
alone can confer, and who have become free from the pleasures and pains 
of this world, and who are without envy, are never agitated by either the 
acquisition of wealth or its loss. They who have not succeeded in acquiring 
the intelligence which leads to true bliss, but who have transcended folly 
and ignorance through a knowledge of the shastras, give way to excessive 
joy and excessive sorrow. Men without all notions of right or wrong, 
insensate with pride and with success over others, yield to transports of 
delight like the gods in heaven. 


Such transport must surely end in misery. Idleness is misery; while 
genius in action is the cause of true joy. Affluence and prosperity dwell in 
one possessed of intelligence, but not in one that is idle. Be it happiness or 
be it sorrow, be it agreeable or be it disagreeable, what comes to one should 
be enjoyed or endured with an unconquered heart. Every day a thousand 
occasions for grief, and a hundred occasions for fear assail the man of 
ignorance and folly but not the man of wisdom. Sorrow can never touch the 
intelligent man who has acquired wisdom, who is mindful of the 
instructions of his elders and superiors, who is without envy, and who is 
self-restrained. Relying upon such wisdom, and protecting his heart from 
the influence of desire and the passions, should the man of wisdom live in 
this world. Sorrow cannot touch him who knows that Supreme Self, the 
Paramatman from which everything springs and into which everything 
disappears. 

The very root of that for which grief is felt, or by which one is 
impelled to exertion, should be removed, even if it be a part of one’s body. 
That object, whatever it may be, for which the idea of the self and ego is 
cherished, becomes a source of grief and torment. 

Whatever objects, amongst things that are desired, are relinquished 
become sources of happiness. The man that pursues objects of desire meets 
with destruction in the course of his pursuit. Neither the happiness that is 
derived from a gratification of the senses nor that great rapture, which one 
may enjoy in swarga, approaches to even a sixteenth part of the bliss which 
arises from the destruction of all desire. 

The deeds of a former life, right or wrong, visit, with their 
consequences, the wise and the foolish, the brave and the timid. It is even so 
that joy and sorrow, the agreeable and the disagreeable, continually revolve, 
as on a wheel, among living creatures. Relying on an understanding of this, 
the man of intelligence and wisdom lives at ease. A man should disregard 
all his desires, and never allow his anger to get the better of him. This anger 
springs up in the heart and grows there into vigour and luxuriance. This 
wrath that dwells in the bodies of men and is born in their minds is spoken 
of by the wise as death. 

When a man succeeds in withdrawing all his desires like a tortoise 
withdrawing all its limbs, then his Soul, which is self-luminous, succeeds in 
looking into itself. 


That object, whatever it may be, for which the idea of mine is 
nourished becomes a source of grief and suffering. 

When a man himself feels no fear, and is feared by no one, when he 
nurtures no desire and no aversion, he attains the state of Brahman. 

Casting off both truth and falsehood, grief and joy, fear and courage, 
the agreeable and the disagreeable, you can become a tranquil Soul. When a 
man abstains from doing wrong to any creature, in thought, word or deed, 
he attains the state of Brahman. True happiness is his who can cast off that 
thirst which the misguided cannot renounce; he finds bliss, which does not 
decay, and leaves desire that is a fatal sickness. 

In this regard, O king, listen to what Pingala said about the manner in 
which she acquired eternal punya even at a most unfavourable time. A 
fallen woman, Pingala, having gone to the place of an assignation, was 
denied the company of her lover through an accident. Even at that time of 
great anguish, she succeeded in acquiring peace. 

Pingala said, ‘Alas, I have lived for long years and many lives, all the 
while overcome by frenzy, by the very side of that self in whom there is 
nothing but peace. Death has been at my door, yet until now I did not 
approach that essence of purity. Now I will cover this house of one column 
and nine doors with true knowledge. What woman is there that regards that 
Paramatman as her beloved lord, even when he comes near? 

I am now awake. I have been roused from the sleep of ignorance. I am 
no longer influenced by desire. Human lovers, who are embodied forms of 
hell, will no longer deceive me by approaching me lustfully. Evil produces 
good through destiny or the deeds of a former life. Awakened now from the 
sleep of ignorance, I have discarded all desire for worldly things. I have 
acquired complete mastery over my senses. One freed from desire and hope 
rests in bliss. Freedom from every hope and desire is felicity. Having driven 
off desire and hope, this Pingala now rests in that freedom and bliss.’ Thus 
spoke the Brahmana to King Senajit.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘Convinced with this and other wisdom told him 
by the learned Brahmana, King Senajit cast off his grief, experienced 
delight again and became truly happy.’ 


CANTO 175 


Y udhishtira says, ‘Time, which destroys every created thing, passes 
swiftly. Tell me, O Pitama, what is that final human goal which 
should be sought?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘In this regard, O king, the old itihasa of a discourse 
between a father and his son is often told. A certain Brahmana, who was 
devoted to the study of the Vedas, had a most intelligent son who was called 
Medhavin. One day, Medhavin, who knew the truths of the Mokshadharma, 
the religion of emancipation, as also the affairs of the world, spoke to his 
father thus. 

The son said, “What should a wise man do, O father, seeing that 
human life passes away so very quickly? Tell me the successive course of 
duties that one should perform, as well as the fruits of each. Having listened 
to you, I wish to observe those karmas.” 

The father said, “O son, observing brahmacharya, a man should first 
study the Vedas. He should then wish for children and enter into the 
grihastasrama to save his ancestors. Setting up his fire next, he should seek 
to perform the prescribed sacrifices with their due rites. At last, he should 
enter the forest as a vanaprastha and devote himself to dhyana and tapasya.” 

The son said, ““When the world is assailed on all sides, and when such 
irresistible things of deathly consequences fall upon it, how can you say this 
so calmly?” 


His sire said, “How is the world assailed? What is that by which it is 
shrouded? What, again, are those irresistible things of mortal consequences 
that fall upon it? Why do you frighten me so?” 

The son said, “Death is that by which the world is assailed. Decay 
encompasses it. The inexorable things that come and go are the days and 
nights, which continually lessen human life. When I know that death tarries 
for none but approaches every creature inexorably, how can I waste my 
time without covering myself in the kavacha of knowledge? 

When each night lessens the allotted span of one’s life, the man of 
wisdom should regard the day to be fruitless. When death stalks ever closer, 
who is there that would, being like a fish in shallow water, feel happy? 
Death comes to a man before his desires have been gratified. Death snatches 
away a man while he is plucking flowers and when his heart is otherwise 
set, ah, death comes like a tigress bearing away a ram. 

This very day, accomplish that which is for your good. Let not this 
death come to you. Death snatches away his victims before their deeds are 
accomplished. The actions of tomorrow should be done today, those of the 
afternoon in the forenoon. Death does not wait to see whether the tasks of 
its victim have all been achieved. Who knows that death will not come to 
him even today? 

In one’s very prime, one should betake oneself to the practice of 
dharma. Life is transitory and brief. If virtue is practiced, fame here and 
felicity hereafter will be the consequences. Overwhelmed by ignorance, one 
is ready to exert oneself for sons and wives. Through virtuous or vicious 
acts, one aggrandises them. Like a tiger bearing away a sleeping deer, death 
snatches away the man addicted to the gratification of desire and engaged in 
the enjoyment of his wives, sons, his wealth and animals. Before he has 
been able to pluck the flowers on which he has set his heart, before he has 
gratified his desires, death bears him away in its jaws. 

Death overpowers a man while he is still in the midst of the hollow 
pleasure that accrues from the gratification of desire, and while still 
thinking, “This has been done; this is to be done; this has been half-done.’ 
Death bears away the man, whatever his profession, attached to his field, his 
shop or his home, before he has obtained the fruit of his actions. Death 
bears away the weak, the strong, the brave, the timid, the foolish and the 
learned, before any of these enjoys the fruits of his work. When death, 


decrepitude, disease and sorrow arising from diverse causes, all dwell in 
your body, how is it that you live as if you are perfectly hale? 

As soon as a creature is born, decay and death pursue him to fetch his 
end. All existent things, mobile and immobile—chala and achala—are 
affected by these two. The attachment that one feels for villages and towns, 
in the midst of fellowmen, is the very maw of death. The forest, on the 
other hand, is the fold within which the senses may be penned. This is what 
the srutis declare. The attachment a man feels towards living in a village or 
town in the midst of men is like a rope that binds him fast. They that are 
good break that rope and attain mukti, while they that are wicked do not 
succeed in breaking the bonds of attachment. 

He, who never injures living creatures by thought, word or deed, is 
never injured by the agencies that destroy life and property. Nothing can 
resist the messengers of death when they advance other than truth, which 
devours illusion and falsehood. In truth is immortality. For these reasons 
one should practice the Satyavrata, the vow of truth; one should devote 
oneself to a union with truth; one should accept truth for one’s Veda; and 
restraining one’s senses, one should vanquish death with truth. 

Both immortality and death are planted in the body. One comes to 
death through ignorance and the loss of judgement; while immortality is 
achieved through truth. I will, therefore, abstain from injury and seek to 
achieve truth, and transgressing the sway of desire and wrath, regard 
pleasure and pain with an equal eye and, attaining peace, avoid death like 
an immortal. 

Upon the advent of Uttarayana, when the sun will turn towards his 
northern course, restraining my senses, I will set myself to the performance 
of the Santi-yagna, the Brahma-yagna, the Manasa-yagna and the Karma- 
yagna. How can one like me worship his maker with animal sacrifices 
involving cruelty, or sacrifices of the body, such as only Pisachas, demons, 
can perform and such as yield fruit that are transitory? 

That man whose words, thoughts, penances, renunciation and yoga 
dhyana, all rest upon Brahman, succeeds in earning the highest good. There 
is no eye that is equal to the eye of knowledge. There is no penance like that 
involved in truth. There is no sorrow equal to attachment. There is no 
happiness like renunciation. I have sprung from Brahman, through 
Brahman. I will devote myself to Brahman, even though I am childless. I 
shall return to Brahman. I do not need a son to save me. 


A Brahmana can have no wealth comparable to the state of ekanta, 
being alone, through which he can regard everything with an equal eye, 
practice truthfulness, good conduct, patience, ahimsa, simplicity and avoid 
all rituals and visible sacrifices. What use have you, O Brahmana, of wealth 
or kinsmen and relatives, of wives, when you will have to die? Seek your 
Soul, which is concealed in a cave deep within you. Where are your 
grandsires now, and where your sire?” 

Bhishma continues, “Do you also, O king, conduct yourself in the way 
in which the father in this story does, devoting himself to the Satyavrata, 
after having listened to his son.’ 


CANTO 176 


Y udhishtira says, “Tell me, O Pitamaha, whence and how joy and 
sorrow come to the rich, as also the poor, who live in the observance 
of different dharma and karma.’ 

Bhishma continues, “Listen to the ancient tale of what was declared by 
Sampaka who had gained peace and achieved mukti for himself. Once, a 
Brahmana, rendered miserable by a bad wife, tattered clothes, and hunger, 
and living in the observance of the vow of renunciation, said this to me: 

“Diverse kinds of sorrow and happiness overtake everyone, from the 
day of their birth into this world. If he could ascribe them to the action of 
destiny, he would not then feel either glad when happiness came or 
miserable when sorrow overtook him. Even though your mind is divested of 
desire, you bear a heavy burden. You do not seek to achieve moksha. Are 
you not successful in controlling your mind? 

If you renounce home and possessions, you will taste true happiness. 
A person divested of everything, sleeps in happiness, and wakes in 
happiness. Complete poverty in this world is happiness. It is a great 
regimen; it is the source of blessings; it is freedom from danger. This foe- 
less path cannot be attained by those that cherish desire, and is easily 
attained by those that are free from desire. Casting my eyes on every part of 
the three worlds, I do not behold anyone who is equal to a poor man of pure 
conduct and without attachment to worldly things. 


I weighed poverty and sovereignty in a balance. Poverty weighed 
heavier than sovereignty and seemed to possess greater punya. Between 
poverty and sovereignty there is this great distinction—that the sovereign, 
possessed of every affluence, is always agitated by anxiety and seems to 
live in the very jaws of death. However, the poor man, because of being 
without any wealth has freed himself from hope, and emancipated himself. 
Neither fire, nor foe, nor death nor robbers can get the better of him. The 
very gods applaud such a man who wanders the world at his sweet will, 
who lies down on bare ground with his arm for a pillow, and who is 
possessed of peace. 

Affected by anger and lust, the man of affluence is stained by a wicked 
heart. He casts oblique glances and makes dry speeches. He becomes sinful, 
and his face is always darkened by frowns. Biting his lips, and excited with 
anger, he utters harsh and cruel words. If such a man desires to even make a 
gift of the whole world, who would like even to look at him? 

Constant companionship with prosperity stupefies a person of weak 
judgement; why, it drives out his judgement like the wind blowing away 
autumn clouds. Companionship with prosperity induces him to think J am 
handsome. I am rich. I am high-born. I meet with success in whatever I 
undertake. I am not an ordinary man! These three intoxicate his very heart. 
With his heart deeply attached to worldly possessions, he wastes the wealth 
hoarded by his ancestors. Reduced to want, he then regards the 
appropriation of other people’s wealth as being blameless. At this stage, 
when he transgresses all bounds of dharma and violates other men to 
appropriate the possessions of others from every side, the rulers of men 
attack him like hunters a deer in the forest. Such a man is then 
overwhelmed by many afflictions that originate in fire and weapons. 
Therefore, disregarding all worldly propensities, such as your desire for 
wives and children, together with all fleeting delusions, even as the body 
itself, one should, helped by one’s intelligence, use the appropriate specifics 
to cure those painful afflictions. 

Without renunciation, one can never attain happiness. Without 
vairagya one can never acquire what is one’s highest good. Without 
renunciation, one can never sleep at ease. Therefore, renouncing everything, 
make happiness your own.” 

All this was told to me once in Hastinapura by a Brahmana about what 
Sampaka had sung in olden days. For this reason, I regard renunciation to 


be the foremost of all things.’ 


CANTO 177 


Y udhishtira says, “If anyone who wants to give dana, dakshina or 
perform yagnas fails to find the necessary wealth for these, and 
thirst for wealth overwhelms him, what must he do?’ 

Bhishma says, “He that regards all things, joy and sorrow, honour and 
insult, with an equal eye, who never exerts himself to gratify his desire for 
earthly possessions, who is always truthful in speech, who is free from all 
kinds of attachment, and who has no desire for action, is, O Bhaarata, a 
happy man. These five, the ancients say, are the means for the acquisition of 
perfect peace, of moksha. These are called swarga. These are the sanatana 
dharma, the true religion. These constitute the highest happiness. 

Yudhishtira, hear the old story and song of Manki in this regard, when 
he found mukti! Desirous of wealth, Manki found that he was repeatedly 
doomed to disappointments. At last, selling a small remnant of his property 
he bought a pair of young bulls and a yoke to train them to plough the earth. 
One day, the two bulls were taken out to the fields. At the sight of a great 
camel that lay supine on the road, the bulls bolted towards the camel, and 
fell upon its neck. Enraged at this, the great camel sprang up and ran, 
carrying away the two helpless young bulls dangling on either side of its 
neck. 

Seeing his bulls borne away by the mighty camel, and seeing that they 
were on the very point of death, Manki cried, “If wealth be not ordained by 
destiny, it can never be acquired by even a clever man exerting himself with 


attention and confidence, and accomplishing with skill all that is needed 
towards that end. Before this, I have, through diverse means and with 
devotion, endeavoured to earn wealth. Ah, behold the misfortune brought 
by destiny to the property I had. My bulls are borne away, rising and falling, 
as the camel runs an uneven course. Alas, my precious bulls dangle on the 
camel’s neck like a couple of gemstones. 

This is surely the result of destiny. Exertion is futile against fate. Else, 
even if effort were admitted as being an agent in yielding fruit, a deeper 
investigation would discover destiny to be at its source. So, the man who 
wants happiness should renounce all attachment. The man _ without 
attachments or desires can sleep peacefully.” 

That was well said by Suka while going into the great forest from his 
father’s asrama, renouncing everything. 

Amongst these two, the one who gains the fruition of all his wishes, 
and the one who casts off every wish, the second, who renounces all, is 
superior to the first, even if the first acquires the fruition of all his desires, 
which would then multiply. 

No one can ever attain the end of desire. Only he that is destitute of 
knowledge and judgement feels avid to protect his body and life. Forbear 
from every desire for action. O my Soul, which is possessed by lust, adopt 
serenity by freeing yourself from all attachments. Repeatedly, you have 
been deceived by desire and hope. How is it that you still do not free 
yourself from attachment? If I am not one that deserves destruction at your 
hands, if I am one with whom you should sport in delight, then, O my 
wealth-coveting Soul, do not induce me towards greed. You have repeatedly 
lost your hoarded wealth. O my wealth-coveting and foolish Soul, when 
will you succeed in freeing yourself from the desire for wealth? 

Ah, shame on my foolishness! I have become a toy of yours. It is thus 
that one becomes a slave of others. No one born on earth did ever attain the 
end of desire, and no one that will be born will succeed in attaining it. 
Casting off all action, I have at last been roused from sleep. I am now 
awake. Without doubt, O desire, your heart is as hard as adamant, since 
though afflicted by a hundred distresses, you do not shatter in a hundred 
pieces. I know you, O want, and all those things that are dear to you. By not 
seeking what is dear to you, I shall know joy in my own self. O desire, I 
know your root. You spring from will. I will, therefore, avoid will and 
effort, and you will be destroyed along with all your roots. 


The want for wealth can never fetch real happiness. If acquired, great 
is the anxiety that the acquirer feels. If lost after acquisition, that is felt as 
death. Lastly, regarding acquisition itself, it is so uncertain. Wealth cannot 
be got by even the surrender of one’s person. What can be more painful 
than this? When acquired, one is never satisfied with its measure, but one 
continues to seek more of it. Like the sweet water of the Ganga, wealth only 
increases one’s hankering. It has been my destruction, and I am now 
awakened. Do you, O desire, leave me. Let the need, which has taken 
refuge in this my body, this compound of five elements, go wherever it 
chooses and live happily wherever it likes. You all that are not of the Soul, I 
have no joy in you, for you follow the lead of desire and lust. 

Abandoning all of you, I will take refuge in the quality of goodness, 
which is sattva. Beholding all creatures in my own body and my own mind, 
and devoting my reason to yoga, my life to the teachings of the wise, and 
my Soul to Brahman, I will rove happily through the world, without 
attachment and without losses or disasters of any kind visiting me, so that 
you, O desire, O moha, may never again plunge me into such sorrows. If I 
continue to be agitated by you, O want, I shall necessarily be without a path 
by which to effect my deliverance. You, O desire, are always the progenitor 
of thirst, of grief, fatigue and toil. I think the grief that one feels at the loss 
of wealth is sharp and keen, and far greater than any other. Relatives and 
friends disregard him that has lost his wealth. 

With various kinds of humiliation that number in their thousands, 
there are many faults in property that are more painful still. On the other 
hand, the very small happiness that dwells in wealth is always mingled with 
pain and sorrow. Robbers kill, in the sight of all, the man who has wealth, 
or afflict him with various kinds of threats and danger, always filling him 
with dread. At last, after a long time, I have understood that the desire for 
wealth is fraught only with sorrow. 

Whatever the object, O desire, upon which you set your heart, you 
force me to pursue it. You are without discernment or judgement. You are a 
fool. You are difficult to satisfy; indeed, you can never be gratified. You 
burn like fire, always demanding fresh fuel. You do not ask, while pursuing 
an object, whether it is easy or difficult to attain. You cannot be filled to the 
brim, being even like the patalas. You wish only to plunge me into sorrow. 

From this day, O desire, I cannot live with you! I who felt despair 
once, at the loss of my property, have now attained the high state of perfect 


freedom from attachment. At this moment, I no longer think of you and 
your train. I once felt great misery on your account. I do not now regard 
myself as being destitute of intelligence. Having adopted renunciation in 
consequence of the loss of my property, I can now rest, freed from every 
kind of fever. I cast you off, O desire, with all the passions of my heart. You 
will not again dwell with me or sport with me. I shall forgive them that will 
slander or speak ill of me. I shall not injure even when injured. If, from 
aversion, anyone speaks harshly of me, disregarding what they say, I will 
address them agreeably. In contentment of heart and with all my senses at 
ease, I will always live upon what fate gives me. I shall not contribute to the 
gratification of the wishes entertained by you that are my enemy. 

Freedom from attachment, emancipation from desire; contentment, 
tranquillity, truth, self-restraint, forgiveness and universal compassion are 
the qualities that have now come to me. Therefore, let desire, greed, thirst 
and miserliness avoid me. I have now adopted the path of dharma. Having 
cast off desire and greed, great now is the joy surging in my heart. I will no 
longer yield to the influence of desire and no longer suffer like a man with 
an impure Soul. One is certain to obtain happiness according to the measure 
of the desires he is able to cast off. Truly, he who yields himself up to desire 
always suffers. Whatever passions linked to want are cast off by a man, all 
pertain to the Rajoguna, the quality of passion. 

Sorrow, shamelessness and discontent all arise from desire and wealth. 
Like a man plunging in the hot summer into a cool lake, I have now entered 
into Brahman. I have abjured work. I have freed myself from grief. Pure 
happiness has now come to me. The felicity that results from the 
satisfaction of desire, or that other purer felicity which one enjoys in 
heaven, does not come to even a sixteenth part of that which arises upon the 
abandonment of all kinds of thirst. Killing the very principle of desire, 
which along with the body makes an aggregate of seven, and which is a 
bitter enemy, I have entered the immortal city of Brahman and shall pass 
my days there in happiness like a king!” 

Relying upon such wisdom, Manki freed himself from attachments, 
casting off all desires and attaining Brahman, that abode of the ultimate 
felicity. Because of the loss of his two bulls, Manki attained immortality. 
Indeed, because he cut the very roots of desire, he attained perfect bliss.’ 


CANTO 178 


B hishma continues, ‘In this matter, the old tale of the verses sung by 

Janaka, king of the Videhas, who had attained mukti, is also told. 
What the monarch said was, “Unlimited is my wealth. At the same time I 
have nothing, and if the whole of my kingdom, Mithila, be consumed in a 
conflagration, I shall incur no loss.” The great Bodhya also spoke about 
freedom from attachments. Listen to what he said, Yudhishtira. 

Once on a time, Yayati, the royal son of Nahusha, questioned the Rishi 
Bodhya who had, through the abandonment of desire, attained peace and 
had an intimate knowledge of the scriptures. The monarch said, “O you of 
great wisdom, instruct me about peace and emancipation. What is that 
intellect, relying on which, you succeed in wandering over the world in 
serenity and disengaged from all karma?” 

Bodhya said, “I conduct myself according to the instructions of others 
but never instruct others myself. I will, however, mention the indications of 
those teachings. You may glean their spirit through reflection. My six 
preceptors are Pingala, the osprey, the snake, the bee in the forest, the 
maker of arrows and the maiden. 

Hope is very potent in agitating the heart, O king. Freedom from hope 
is high felicity. Reducing hope to an absence of expectation, Pingala sleeps 
in peace. Beholding an osprey with meat in his beak, others that have not 
found any meat attack and destroy him. A certain osprey, by altogether 
abstaining from meat found felicity. To build a house for one’s own self 


produces sorrow and not happiness. The snake, taking up his dwelling in 
another creature’s abode, lives in peace. Betaking themselves to 
mendicancy, ascetics live happily, without being injured by any creature, 
even like bees in the forest. A certain maker of arrows, while employed at 
his work, was so deeply attentive to it that he did not notice the king who 
passed by his side. When many are together, dispute ensues. Even when 
two live together, they are sure to converse. I, however, wander alone like 
the bracelet made of seashells on the wrist of the maiden in the story.” 


CANTO 179 


Y udhishtira says, ‘O you who know the ways of men, tell me with 

what conduct a man may succeed in this world, and be freed from 
grief. How also should a man conduct himself in this world so that he may 
attain an excellent end?’ 

Bhishma says, “Listen to the old story of the discourse between 
Prahlada and the sage Ajagara. Once on a time, King Prahlada of great 
intelligence questioned a wandering Brahmana of untold wisdom, and a 
purified and tranquil Soul. 

Prahlada said, “Freed from desire, with a cleansed Soul, possessed of 
humility and self-restraint, without desire for action, free from malice, 
agreeable in speech, endowed with dignity, intelligence and wisdom, you 
live in simplicity like a child. You never covet any kind of gain, and never 
grieve over any kind of loss. You are always contented, O Brahmana, and 
do not seem to regard anything in the world. While other men are being 
borne away upon the currents of desire and passion, you are perfectly 
indifferent to everything that has to do with dharma, artha and kama. You 
seem to be in a state of quietude that can never be disturbed. Disregarding 
all objects of the senses, you move about like an emancipated Soul, only 
witnessing all things but never taking part in any. What, O Muni, is your 
wisdom, what your learning, and what your conduct, because of which this 
becomes possible for you? Tell me this, if, O Brahmana, you think it will do 
me good.” 


The intelligent Brahmana, who knew well the dharma of the world, 
answered Prahlada in sweet words of grave import. “O king, the origin of 
creatures, their growth, decay and death, are traceable to no intelligible 
cause. It is for this that I do not indulge in either joy or sorrow. All the 
propensities that exist in the universe are seen to flow from the very natures 
of the creatures to which they inhere. All things in the universe depend on 
their respective natures. Hence, I am not delighted with anything. O 
Prahlada, all kinds of union have an inherent aptitude for disunion. All 
acquisitions are certain to end in loss. Hence, I never set my heart upon 
acquiring any object. 

All things possessed of attributes are certain to meet with death. What 
then remains for one like me to do, who knows both the origin and the end 
of things? Of all things, large or small, born in the ocean of waters, the end 
I see. I see also the death, which is manifest, O King of Asuras, of all 
things, chala and achala, that belong to the earth. Best of Danavas, death 
comes in season to even the mightiest of winged creatures that range the 
sky. I see again that the luminous bodies, large and small, which move in 
the firmament, fall and are extinguished when their time comes. 

Beholding all created things possessed of knowledge to be liable to 
death, and thinking all things to possess the same nature, I sleep in peace 
without any anxiety of heart. If I find without exertion a copious repast, I do 
not scruple to enjoy it. On the other hand, I pass many days together 
without eating anything. Sometimes people feed me with costly viands in 
profusion, at times with a small quantity, at others with even less, and 
sometimes I get no food whatever. I sometimes eat only a portion of a 
single grain, at times the dry sesame cakes from which the oil has been 
pressed out and I sometimes eat rice and other food of the richest kind. 

At times, I sleep on an elevated bedstead of the most luxurious kind. 
At others, I sleep on bare ground. Sometimes my bed is made within a fine 
palace or mansion; at others in the wilderness. I am at times clad in rags, at 
other times in sackcloth, at yet others in raiment of fine texture, sometimes 
in deerskin, sometimes in robes of the costliest fabric. I never reject such 
enjoyments as are consistent with dharma and as I come by without effort. I 
do not, at the same time, strive to attain such objects as are difficult of 
acquisition. 

The rigid vrata I have adopted is called Ajagara. That vow can secure 
immortality. It is auspicious and griefless. It is incomparable and pure. It is 


consistent with the counsels of the wise. It is disapproved of by men of 
foolish intellects, who can never follow it. With a pure heart, I conduct 
myself according to it. My mind naturally never swerves from this vow. I 
have not swerved from the practices of my order. I am abstemious in 
everything. 

I know the past and the present. Divested of fear, wrath and greed, and 
errors of judgement, I follow this vow with a pure heart. There are no 
restrictions in respect of food and drink and other objects of enjoyment for 
one practising this vow. As everything is dependent on destiny, there is no 
observance of considerations of time and place for one like me. The vow I 
follow contributes to true happiness of the heart. Those that are evil never 
observe it. I follow it with a pure mind. 

Induced by greed, men pursue different kinds of wealth. If thwarted in 
the pursuit, they are plunged in sorrow. Reflecting properly upon all this 
with my intelligence, which has penetrated the truths of things, I follow this 
vow with a pure heart. 

I have seen persons in distress seeking, for the acquisition of wealth, 
the shelter of men, good and bad. Devoted to serenity, and with my passions 
under control, I follow my vrata with a pure heart. 

Seeing, with the help of truth, that joy and sorrow, gain and loss, 
attachment and renunciation, life and death, are all ordained by destiny, I 
follow this vow with a pure heart. 

Rid of fear, attachment, errors of judgement and pride, imbued with 
wisdom, intelligence, intellect, and devoted to calm, and hearing that large 
snakes, without moving, enjoy the fruit that comes to them of itself, I 
follow their practice with a pure heart. 

Without restrictions of any kind in respect of food and where I sleep, 
endowed by my very nature with self-restraint, abstemiousness, pure vows, 
truth and purity of conduct, and without any desire to store, for future use, 
the rewards of action, I follow, with a delighted and pure heart, this vow. 

All causes of sorrow have fled from me once I had driven out desire. 
Having received an accession to light, I follow this vow with a pure heart to 
control my Soul which is thirsty and unrestrained, yet with proper culture, 
is able to depend upon itself without needing external objects to keep it 
engaged. Without paying any heed to the concerns towards which my heart, 
mind and words would like to lead me, and marking that the happiness 


connected with these is both difficult of acquisition and fleeting in duration, 
I follow this vow with a pure heart. 

Learned men possessed of great intelligence, wanting to proclaim their 
own feats, while establishing their own theories and censuring those of 
others, have said this and that on a subject which can never be settled by 
disputation. Foolish men fail to understand this vrata in a proper light. I, 
however, see it as destructive of ignorance. Regarding it also as being full 
of immortality and as a remedy against diverse kinds of evil, I wander 
among men, having subdued all faults and having freed myself from every 
thirst.” 

That Mahatman who, having freed himself from attachments and 
divested himself of fear, greed, foolishness and anger, follows this Ajagara 
vrata, or indulges in this sport, as it might be called, certainly succeeds in 
passing his days in great delight.’ 


CANTO 180 


Y udhishtira says, ‘Which of these, O Bhishma, kinsmen, actions, 
wealth or wisdom should be the refuge of a man? Answer me this.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Wisdom is the refuge of creatures. Wisdom is regarded 
as the highest of acquisitions. Wisdom is the highest felicity in the world. 
Wisdom is heaven in the estimation of the good and virtuous. It was 
through wisdom that Bali, Prahlada, Namuchi and Manki, when they lost 
their earthly prosperity, succeeded in acquiring felicity. What is there that is 
superior to wisdom? In this regard, the old story is told of the discourse 
between Indra and Kasyapa. Listen to it, O Yudhishtira. 

Once upon a time, a prosperous Vaisya, in the enjoyment of prosperity, 
and proud of his affluence, ran down, by driving his chariot negligently, a 
Rishi’s son of rigid vows named Kasyapa, devoted to penances. Prostrate on 
the ground, the young man, in exceeding pain, gave way to his wrath; and 
under the influence of despair, resolved, “I shall cast off my life. A poor 
man has no need of life in this world.” 

While the Brahmana lay in that state, silent and agitated, deprived of 
energy and on the point of death, Indra appeared on the scene in the form of 
a jackal and, addressing him, said, “All inferior creatures covet birth in the 
human race. Among men, again, the status of a Brahmana is much desired. 
You, O Kasyapa, are a human being. Amongst Manavas, you are again a 
Brahmana. Among Brahmanas, you are still one that knows the Vedas. 


Having obtained that which is attainable with very great difficulty, it does 
not become you to give up your life from folly. 

All kinds of worldly acquisitions are fraught with pride: that 
declaration of the srutis is perfectly true. You look the picture of 
contentment. In deciding to die, you make a most foolish and base resolve. 
O, they are crowned with success that have hands. I eagerly wish for the 
condition of those creatures that have hands. We covet hands as eagerly as 
you covet riches. There is no acquisition that is more valuable than the 
acquisition of hands. Behold, O Brahmana, I cannot extract this thorn that 
has entered my body, or crush these insects and worms that bite me 
constantly. They that have bestowed upon them two hands with ten fingers, 
succeed in removing or crushing the insects that bite their limbs. They 
succeed in constructing shelters for themselves from rain, cold and heat. 
They succeed also in enjoying excellent clothes, fine cooked food, 
comfortable beds and excellent habitations. 

On this earth, they that have hands enjoy kine and other animals and 
cause them to carry burdens or haul their vehicles, and with the help of 
diverse means bring those animals under sway for their own purposes. 

Those living creatures that are without tongues, that are helpless, of 
little strength, and without hands, bear the several kinds of misery I have 
told you of. By good fortune, O Brahmana, you are not like them. Through 
good fortune, you are not a jackal, a worm, a mouse, a frog or an animal of 
any other miserable species. With this measure of gain that you have won, 
you should, O Kasyapa, be contented. How happy, again, should you feel at 
the thought that amongst living creatures you are a superior Brahmana. 

Ah, these worms and insects bite me incessantly. For want of hands I 
am unable to drive them off. Behold my miserable plight. I do not cast off 
my life because to do so is the greatest sin, and I am afraid that I might fall 
into a yet more miserable order of existence. This order of existence, that of 
a jackal, to which I now belong is tolerable. Miserable as it is, there are 
many kinds of existence below it that are still worse. By birth, some 
creatures become happier than others that are subject to great woe. But I 
never see that there is any order of being which can be said to be in the 
possession of perfect happiness. 

Human beings, obtaining affluence, next wish for sovereignty. Having 
achieved sovereignty, their next wish is to become gods. Having won that, 
they then wish for the lordship of the celestials. If you become affluent, you 


will never succeed in becoming a king—for you are a Brahmana by birth— 
nor in becoming a deity because, in truth, your status of Brahmanahood is 
equal if not superior to that of a Deva. If by any means, led away by the 
alluring prospect of heavenly bliss, you do become a god, you will then 
covet lordship over the gods. 

In no condition will you be contented. Contentment does not result 
from acquiring desirable objects. Thirst is never slaked although there is a 
profusion of water. The thirst for acquisitions only blazes up with each fresh 
acquisition like a fire with new fuel fed into it. In you, there is grief. 
However, joy also dwells in you. Both happiness and misery dwell in you. 
Why then should you yield to grief? One should restrain, like birds in a 
cage, the very springs—the intellect and the senses—of all one’s desires 
and actions. 

There can be no cutting of a second head, nor of a third hand. That 
which does not exist can inspire no fear. One that is not acquainted with the 
enjoyment a certain object affords never feels desire for it. Desires arise 
from the actual experience of the pleasures that touch or sight, or hearing, 
give. 

You have no idea of the taste of the wine called Varuni or of the meat 
of the birds called Ladwaka. There is no drink and no food more delicious 
than these. You have no idea also, O Kasyapa, of every other superior kind 
of drink and food that exists among men, for you have never tasted these. 
Without doubt, therefore, not to taste, not to see, should be the vow of a 
man if he is to win happiness. Creatures that have hands become strong and 
earn wealth. Men are reduced by other men to servitude, and are repeatedly 
afflicted at the hands of their own kind with imprisonment, death and other 
tortures. Although such is their condition, even they do not yield to grief but 
laugh, play and indulge in merriment. 

Others, again, though imbued with might of arms, and possessed of 
knowledge and great energy of mind, follow censurable, sinful and 
miserable callings. They seek to change such professions for other pursuits 
that are more dignified but then they are bound by their own actions of a 
previous life and by the force of destiny. 

The vilest man of the Pukkasa or the Chandala orders never wishes to 
cast off his life. He is quite contented with the order of his birth. Behold the 
illusion in this. Looking at those amongst your species that are without 
arms, or struck with palsy, or afflicted with other diseases, you can regard 


yourself as very happy and possessed of valuable endowments amongst the 
members of your own species. If your regenerated body remains safe and 
sound, and free from disease, and all your limbs remain perfect, you are 
sure of never incurring any reproach amongst men. It would not become 
you, O Brahmana, to cast off your life even if any blame, founded on fact 
and bringing about your being excommunicated from your varna, attached 
to you. Arise, and practice virtue. It is not right that you should throw away 
your life. 

If, O Dvija, you listen to me and place credence in my words, you will 
have the highest reward of the dharma set down in the Vedas. Set yourself 
to Vedic studies, duly maintain your sacred fire, and observe truth, self- 
restraint and charity. Never compare yourself boastfully with another. They, 
who, by devoting themselves to the study of the Vedas, become competent 
to perform sacrifices for themselves and others, have no need to indulge in 
any kind of regret or fear any kind of evil. They that are born under an 
auspicious constellation on an auspicious lunation and at an auspicious 
hour, and strive to perform sacrifices, practice charity, beget children and 
wish to pass their time gladly in such karma, eventually win very great 
happiness. 

They, on the other hand, that are born under evil constellations, 
inauspicious asterisms and at evil hours, become destitute of sacrifices and 
progeny and at last fall into the Asura order. In my former life, I had much 
useless learning. I always sought after reasons and had little faith. I was a 
slanderer of the Vedas. I was without the four purusharthas, and was 
devoted to the empirical science of argumentation, which is based upon 
ocular or tangible proofs. I would utter bold, brash words based on 
plausible logic. Indeed, in assemblies, I always spoke of reason, and never 
of faith. I would speak irreverently of the declarations of the srutis and 
address Brahmanas in taunting, haughty tones. I was an unbeliever, 
sceptical of everything, and though ignorant, proud of my learning. 

This state of a jackal that I have acquired in this life is the result, O 
Brahmana, of those sins of mine. If even after hundreds of days and nights 
that I am a jackal, I can once again become a man, I will pass my life in 
contentment, heedful of the true purposes of existence, and engaged in 
sacrifices and giving gifts. I will know what should be known, and avoid 
what should be avoided.” 


Thus addressed, the ascetic Kasyapa stood up, and said, “O, you are 
certainly possessed of knowledge and great intelligence. I am truly 
surprised by all this.” 

With eyes whose vision was extended by knowledge, the Brahmana 
then beheld that being who had addressed him as Indra, king of the Devas 
and the lord of Sachi. Kasyapa then worshipped that god who has the best 
of steeds, Uchchaisravas, for his mount. Then, receiving Indra’s leave, the 
Brahmana returned to his abode.’ 


CANTO 181 


Y udhishtira says, “Tell me, O Pitamaha, if gifts, sacrifices, penances 
and dutiful services rendered to preceptors, yield wisdom and high 
rewards.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘If the mind becomes affected by desire, anger and 
other evil passions, it then runs towards sin. If one’s actions are stained by 
sin, one is obliged to dwell in painful hells. Sinful men are born in indigent 
circumstances and repeatedly suffer the pangs of famine, woe, fear and 
death. Those that are virtuous in their deeds, and possessed of faith, and that 
have their senses under control, are born as affluent men and repeatedly 
sport in festivities, swarga and joy. 

Unbelievers, with their arms manacled, are sent to regions rendered 
inaccessible by carnivorous beasts and wild elephants, and full of terrors 
from snakes and brigands. What more needs be said of them? They, on the 
other hand, who have reverence for the gods and guests, who are liberal, 
who are fond of good and honest men, go, because of their actions of 
charity, along that happy way which belongs to those of cleansed Souls. 
They that have no reverence for virtue are as vile among men as seedless 
grains among corn or the gnat among winged creatures. That which is 
ordained due to the deeds of a past life pursues the doer even if he strives 
with all his might to leave it behind. It sleeps when he sleeps and does 
whatever else he does. Like his shadow it rests when he rests, goes forth 
when he goes, and acts when he acts. Whatever karma a man does he has 


certainly to experience the fruits of it. Death hauls along all creatures who 
are inexorably destined to fall into the orders of existence they deserve, and 
who are surely liable to enjoy or suffer that which has been ordained as the 
fruit of their actions. 

The deeds of a past life develop repercussions in their own time even 
as flowers and fruits, without extraneous effort of any kind, unfailingly 
appearing when their time arrives. After the consequences, as ordained, of 
the karma of a past life have been exhausted, through enjoyment or 
suffering, honour and disgrace, gain and loss, decay and growth, they cease 
to flow or appear. This occurs repeatedly. A creature while still in the 
mother’s womb enjoys or suffers the happiness or the sorrow that has been 
ordained for him because of his own actions. In childhood, youth or old 
age, at whatever period of life one does something good or bad, the results 
thereof are sure to visit him in his next life at the very same time of his life. 
As a calf recognises and approaches its mother in the midst of even a 
thousand kine, even so the deeds of a past life recognise and visit the doer 
in his new life. Washed in water a dirty piece of cloth becomes clean. 
Similarly, men burning in repentance gain endless happiness through proper 
penances. 

Those that can live in the forest and, by performing tapasya for a long 
time, wash themselves of their sins, succeed in acquiring the objects on 
which they set their hearts. As no one can mark the trail of birds in the sky 
or of fish in the water, similarly, the trail of those whose Souls have been 
cleansed by knowledge cannot be marked by anyone. There is no need of 
any more eloquence or any more reference to sinful deeds. Suffice it to say 
that one should, with proper judgement and as befits one best, do what is 
good for one’s own weal. This is the means by which wisdom and high 
rewards can be achieved.’ 


CANTO 182 


Y udhishtira says, ‘Whence has this universe consisting of mobile and 

unmoving creatures been created? Whom does it go to when 
destruction sets in? Tell me this, Pitamaha. Indeed, by whom has this 
universe with its oceans, its firmament, its mountains, its clouds, its lands, 
its fire and its wind, been created? How were all objects created? Whence 
this division into separate orders of existence? Whence are their purity and 
impurity, and the ordinances about virtue and vice? Of what kind is the life 
of living creatures? Where do they go who die? Tell us everything about 
this and the other world.’ 

Bhishma says, “Listen to the old story of the sacred words that Bhrigu 
said in reply to the questions of Bharadwaja. Beholding the Maharishi 
Bhrigu, blazing with energy and splendour, seated on the summit of 
Kailasa, Bharadwayja said to him, “By whom was this world with its ocean, 
its firmament, its mountains, its clouds, its lands, its fire and its wind, 
created? How were all creatures first created? Whence this distinction of 
castes? Whence the purity and the impurity of conduct, and whence the 
ordinances about virtue and vice for living creatures? Of what kind is the 
life of living creatures? Where do they go who die? It befits you to tell me 
everything about this and the other world.” 

Thus addressed by Bharadwaja, the illustrious and illumined 
Maharishi Bhrigu, who resembled Brahma himself, replied, “There is a 
primeval being, known to the great Rishis as Manasa. He is without 


beginning and without end. Weapons cannot pierce that Divine Being. He is 
without decay and is immortal. He is said to be unmanifest. He is eternal, 
undecaying and unchangeable. Through Him are creatures born and through 
Him, they die. He first created a second Divine Being known by the name 
Mahat. Mahat created Chitta, consciousness. Chitta created Akasa. That 
puissant being is the holder of all created objects. 

From Akasa was born Apah, water, and from Apah were born Agni 
and Vayu, fire and wind. Through the union of fire and wind was born 
Bhumi, the earth. Self-born Manasa then created a divine lotus pregnant 
with tejas, energy. From that lotus sprang Brahma, that ocean of Veda. 

The srutis say that as soon as born, the Divine One uttered the words, 
‘I am He!’ For this, He came to be called by the name of Chitta. He has all 
created things for his body and He is their creator. Five elements that we see 
are that Brahma of great energy. The mountains are His bones. The earth is 
His fat and flesh. The oceans are His blood. Space is His stomach. The wind 
is His breath. Fire is His energy. The rivers are His veins and arteries. Surya 
and soma, the sun and the moon, are His eyes. The firmament above is His 
head. The earth is His two feet. The cardinal and subsidiary points of the 
horizon are His arms. Beyond doubt, He is unknowable and his Soul is 
inconceivable by even those crowned with the highest ascetic success. 

The Divine Being, who pervades the whole universe, is also known by 
the name of Ananta, the infinite. He lives in consciousness, and cannot be 
known by those of impure Souls. Asked by you, I have now told you of 
Him who created consciousness to fetch into existence all created objects, 
and from whom this universe has sprung.” 

Bharadwaja said, “What is the extent of the firmament, of the cardinal 
points of the horizon, of the surface of this earth, and of the wind? Tell me 
of these.” 

Bhrigu said, “The sky you see above is infinite. It is the abode of Souls 
crowned with ascetic success and of Divine Beings. It is blissful, and 
consists of various regions. Its limits cannot be ascertained. The sun and the 
moon cannot see, above or below, beyond the range of their own rays. 
There, where the rays of the sun and the moon cannot reach, are luminaries 
which are self-effulgent and which possess splendour like that of the sun. 
Know this, O giver of honours, that, possessed of far-famed splendour, even 
these do not behold the limits of the firmament due to the inaccessibility 
and infinity of those boundaries. This space, which the very gods cannot 


measure, is full of many blazing and self-luminous worlds each above the 
other. 

Beyond the limits of land are oceans of water. Beyond water is 
darkness. Beyond darkness is water again, and beyond that is fire. 
Downwards, beneath the patalas, is water. Beneath water is the region that 
belongs to the great Nagas. Beyond that is sky once more, and beyond the 
sky is water again. Thus, there is water and sky alternately, without end. 
Even such are the limits of the divinity, water. The very gods are unable to 
ascertain limits of fire and wind and water. The nature of fire, wind, water 
and land is like that of space. They are distinguished through want of true 
knowledge. Sages read in diverse scriptures the limits that have been 
declared of the three worlds and the ocean. Who is there, however, that 
would set limits to what cannot be grasped by vision and what is 
inaccessible in its totality? 

Even if it becomes possible to ascertain the limits of the firmament, 
which is the trail of the gods and beings, crowned with tapodhana, it can 
never be possible to set limits to that which is limitless and known as 
infinite, to that which corresponds with the name by which it is known— 
what has been called the high-Souled Manasa? When again his form is 
sometimes contracted and sometimes expanded, how can any except one 
that is equal to him, be able to comprehend his limits? From the lotus, of 
which I have already spoken, was first created the omniscient Lord Brahma, 
endued with form, of essence comprised of dharma, and the creator of all 
mobile and immobile things.” 

Bharadwaja said, “If Brahma sprang from the lotus, then it is the lotus 
that should be regarded as the first-born and not Brahma. Why, however, is 
Brahma said to be the first? Remove this doubt of mine.” 

Bhrigu said, “The earth it is that is called the lotus. It was created to 
give a seat unto that form of Manasa, which became Brahma. Reaching up 
to heaven itself, Sumeru became the pericarp of the lotus. Remaining within 
it, the puissant lord of the universe created all the worlds.” 


CANTO 183 


B haradwaja said, “Tell me, O best of Brahmanas, how the puissant 
Brahma, dwelling within Meru, created these diverse kinds of 
objects, great and small.” 

Bhrigu said, “The great Manasa, in his form of Brahma, created the 
diverse kinds of objects by fiat of will. For the protection then of all 
creatures, he first created water. Water is the life of all creatures, and it is 
water which enables their growth. If there were no water, all creatures 
would perish. The whole universe is pervaded by water. Earth, mountains, 
clouds and all things which have form, should all be known as 
transformations of water. They have all been made by that element 
solidifying in various degrees.” 

Bharadwaja said, “How did water first appear? How did fire and wind 
come into being? How was the earth created? I have great doubts on these 
matters.” 

Bhrigu said, “O Dvija, in very ancient times called the Brahma-kalpa, 
the Maharishis assembled together and felt this same doubt about the 
creation of the universe. Restraining speech, they remained unmoving, 
engaged in profound dhyana. Having renounced all food, they subsisted on 
air alone, and remained thus for a thousand celestial years. At the end of 
that time, certain words as sacred as those of the Vedas simultaneously 
reached the ears of them all. 


Indeed, an asariri was heard in the firmament to say, “Formerly, there 
was only infinite space, perfectly motionless and immovable. With the sun, 
moon, stars and wind, it seemed to be asleep. Soon water sprang into 
existence like something darker within darkness. Next from the pressure of 
water arose the wind. As an empty vessel appears at first to be without any 
sound, but when filled with water, air appears and makes a great noise, even 
so, when infinite space was filled with water, the wind arose with a great 
noise, reverberating through the water. That wind, thus generated by the 
pressure of the ocean of water, still moves. Coming into space, its motion 
never ceases. Then, from the friction of wind and water, fire possessed of 
great might and blazing energy sprang into existence, with flames directed 
upwards. This fire dispelled the darkness that had covered space. Helped by 
the wind, fire drew space and water together. Indeed, combining with the 
wind, fire had form. While falling from the sky, the liquid portion of fire 
had form again and became what is known as the earth. The earth, or land, 
in which everything is born, is the origin of all kinds of taste, of all kinds of 
scent, of all kinds of liquids, and of all kinds of animals.” 


CANTO 184 


B haradwaja said, “When the Mahatman Brahma has created millions 

of creatures, why is it that only these five elements that he created 
first, which pervade all the universe and which are great spirits, have come 
to have the name of elements applied to them exclusively?” 

Bhrigu said, “All things that belong to the category of the infinite or 
the vast are called Mahat. Hence, these five elements are named 
Mahabhutas. Activity is wind. The sound that is heard is space. The heat 
that is within it is fire. The fluids occurring within it are water. Solidified 
matter, flesh and bones, are earth. The bodies of living creatures are thus 
made of the five primeval elements. All mobile and immobile objects are 
made of these five. The five senses also of living creatures partake of the 
five. The ear partakes of the properties of space; the nose of earth; the 
tongue of water; touch of wind; and the eyes of light, fire.” 

Bharadwaja said, “If all mobile and immobile objects be composed of 
these five elements, why is it that in all immobile objects those elements are 
not visible? Trees do not appear to have any heat. They do not seem to have 
any motion. They are again made up of dense particles. The five elements 
are not noticeable in them. Trees do not hear; they do not see; they are not 
able to sense scent or taste. They have not also the perception of touch. 
How then can they be regarded as being composed of the five primeval 
elements? It seems to me that because of the absence of any liquid in them, 


of any heat, earth, wind and space, trees cannot be regarded as compounds 
of the five primeval elements.” 

Bhrigu said, “Indeed, although possessed of density, trees have space 
within them. The creation of flowers and fruits is always taking place in 
them. They have heat within them because of which the leaf, bark, fruit and 
flower are seen to droop. They sicken and dry up. This shows they have 
perception of touch. Through the sound of wind and fire and thunder, their 
fruits and flowers fall. Sound is perceived through the ear. Trees have ears 
and do hear. A creeper winds around a tree and goes about all its sides. A 
blind thing cannot find its way. For this reason, it is evident that trees have 
vision. Then again, trees recover vigour and produce flowers in 
consequence of odours, good and bad, of the sacred perfume of diverse 
kinds of dhupas. It is plain that trees have scent. They drink water with their 
roots. They catch diseases of diverse kinds. The diseases again are cured by 
different specifics. It is evident that trees have perceptions of taste. 

As one can suck up water through a bent lotus-stalk, trees also, with 
the help of the wind, drink through their roots. They are susceptible to 
pleasure and pain, and grow when cut or trimmed. From all these, I see that 
trees have life. They are not inanimate. Fire and wind cause the water 
sucked up by trees to be digested. According, again, to the quantity of the 
water taken up, the tree advances in growth and becomes moist. In the 
bodies of all mobile things, the five elements occur. In each, the proportions 
are different. It is because of the five elements that mobile objects can move 
their bodies. Skin, flesh, bones, marrow, veins and arteries, which exist 
together in the body, are made of earth. Energy, wrath, eyes, internal heat 
and heat that digests food—these five constitute the fire that occurs in all 
embodied creatures. 

The ears, nostrils, mouth, heart and stomach—these five constitute the 
element of space that occurs in the bodies of living creatures. Phlegm, bile, 
sweat, fat, blood are the five kinds of water that occur in mobile bodies. 
Through the breath, called prana, a living creature is enabled to move. 
Through that called vyana, they create strength for action. That called apana 
moves downwards. That called samana dwells within the heart. Through 
that called udana one eructates and is enabled to speak because of its rising 
through the lungs, the throat and the mouth. These are the five kinds of 
wind that cause an embodied creature to live and move. 


An embodied creature knows the properties of scent through the earth 
in him. From the water element, he perceives taste. From the fire, he 
perceives forms, and from the wind he has the perception of touch. Scent, 
touch, taste, vision and sound are regarded as the common properties of 
every mobile and unmoving being. I will first speak of the several kinds of 
scent. They are agreeable, disagreeable, sweet, pungent, far-going, varied, 
dry and indifferent. All these kinds of scent are founded in earth. Light is 
seen by the eyes and touch through the wind. Sound, touch, vision and taste 
are the properties of water. I will speak in detail now of the perception of 
taste. 

Maharishis have spoken of diverse kinds of taste. They are sweet, 
salty, bitter, astringent, sour and pungent. These are the six kinds of taste 
that pertain to water. Light contributes to the vision of form. Form is of 
diverse kinds. Short, tall, thick, four-cornered, round, white, black, red, 
blue, yellow, reddish, hard, bright, smooth, oily, soft and terrible: these are 
the seventeen different kinds of form which constitute the property of light 
or vision. 

The property of wind is touch. Touch is of various kinds: warm, cold, 
agreeable, disagreeable, indifferent, burning, mild, soft, light and heavy. 
Both sound and touch are the two properties of the wind, the Vayu 
Mahabhuta. These are the ten properties that pertain to wind. 

Space has only one property —sound. I will now tell you the different 
kinds of sound. They are the seven original notes called shadja, rishabha, 
gandhara, mahdhyama, panchama, dhaivata and nishada. These are the 
seven kinds of the property that pertains to space. Sound inheres like the 
Supreme Being in all space though attached especially to drums and other 
instruments. Whatever sound is heard from drums, small and large, 
conches, clouds, chariots and animate and inanimate creatures, are all 
included in these seven kinds of sound. Thus, sound, which is the property 
of space, is of various kinds. The learned have said sound is born of space. 
When raised by the different kinds of touch, it may be heard. It cannot, 
however, be heard, when the different kinds of touch are inceptive. 

The elements, merged with their counterparts in the body, increase and 
grow. Water, fire, wind are always awake in the bodies of living creatures. 
They are the roots of the body. Pervading the five life-breaths, they dwell in 
the body.” 


CANTO 185 


B haradwaja said, “How does bodily fire or heat dwell within the 
body? How also does the wind enter and cause the body to move and 
exert itself?” 

Bhrigu said, “I will, O Dvija, speak to you of the course in which wind 
moves, and how, O sinless one, the mighty element causes the bodies of 
living creatures to move and exert themselves. Heat resides within the head 
and protects the body. The wind or breath called prana, dwelling within the 
head and the heat that is there, causes all kinds of exertion. Prana is the 
living creature, the universal Soul, the eternal being, and the mind, intellect 
and consciousness of all living creatures, as also all the objects of the 
senses. Thus, the living creature is, in every respect, caused by prana to 
move about and exert itself. 

Due to the other breath called samana, every one of the senses is made 
to act as it does. The breath called apana, with recourse to the heat that is in 
the urethra and the abdominal intestines, moves and engages in excreting 
urine and faeces. 

The single breath, which operates in these three, is called udana by 
those that know vigyana. The breath that operates, residing in all the joints 
of the body, is called vyana. There is heat in the bodies of living creatures, 
which is circulated all over the system by samana. Present thus in the body, 
that breath operates upon the different kinds of watery and other elementary 
substances and all bad humours. The heat, dwelling between apana and 


prana, in the region of the navel, operates with the help of these two 
breaths, and digests all the food consumed by a living creature. There is a 
duct beginning from the mouth down to the anal canal. Its extremity is the 
anus. From this main duct numerous subsidiary ones branch out in the 
bodies of all living creatures. Due to the rush and flow of the several breaths 
named above, through these ducts, the breaths mingle together. 

The heat that dwells in prana is called ushman. It is this heat that 
causes digestion in all creatures possessed of bodies. Prana, the bearer of a 
current of heat, descends from the head downwards to the extremity of the 
anal canal and then is sent upwards once more. Coming back to its seat in 
the head, it once more sends down the heat it bears. Below the navel is the 
region of digested matter. Above it is that for the food which is eaten. In the 
navel are all the forces of life that sustain the body. Urged by the ten kinds 
of breaths having prana for their first, the ducts, branching out from the 
heart, convey the fluids that food yields, upwards, downwards and in 
transverse directions. 

The main passage leading from the mouth to the anus is the path by 
which yogins, vanquishers of fatigue, of perfect equanimity in joy and 
sorrow, and possessed of great patience, succeed in attaining Brahman by 
holding the Soul within the thousand-petalled lotus in the brain. Even thus 
is heat breathed in prana, apana and the other breaths in all embodied 
creatures. That heat is always burning there like a fire placed in a vessel.” 


CANTO 186 


B haradwaja said, “If it is the wind that keeps us alive, causes us to 

move and exert, to breathe and to speak, then it seems that life is 
worth little. If the animal heat, which digests all food, be of the nature of 
fire, and if it is fire which assists digestion by dissolving the food we eat, 
then life is worth little. When an animal dies, that which is called its life is 
never seen leaving it. Only the breath leaves it, and the internal heat 
becomes extinguished. 

If life were nothing else than wind, or if life depended only on wind, 
then it could have been seen like the external sea of air, and when passing 
out it would have mingled with that air. If life depends upon air, and if it 
ended with the escape of that air from the body, it would then mingle with 
another portion of air that exists externally, like a portion of water escaping 
into the ocean and thereby only changing the place of its dwelling. If a 
portion of water were thrown into a well, or if the flame of a lamp be cast 
into a blazing fire, either of them, entering a homogeneous element, would 
lose its separate existence. If life were air it, also, when the animal died, 
would mingle with the great ocean of air outside. 

How can we say that there is life in this animal body, which is made 
up of the five primal elements? If one of the elements disappear, the union 
of the other four becomes dissolved. The element of water dries up if food 
is not eaten. The element of air disappears if the breath is restrained. The 


element of space disappears if the excretions cease. So, too, the element of 
fire becomes extinguished if food is not ingested like fuel. 

The element of earth breaks into pieces because of diseases, wounds 
and other sufferings. If only one of the five becomes afflicted, the union is 
dissolved, and all the five depart in five different directions. When the body, 
which is a union of the elements, becomes separated into five ingredients, 
where does life go? What does it then know? What does it then hear? What 
does it then say? 

This cow that is given away to a holy Brahmana, it is said, will save 
me in the other world. The animal, however, that is given away, itself dies. 
Whom then will this cow deliver? The taker of the cow in dakshina and the 
giver are both equal in being both subject to death. Both of them meet with 
extinction in this world. How then will they meet again? How will the 
person that has been eaten by birds, or that has been broken by a fall from a 
mountain, or that has been consumed by fire, regain life? The root of a tree 
that has been cut down does not grow again. Only the seeds put forth 
sprouts. Where is the person who having died comes back to some sort of 
new existence? Only seeds were originally created. All this universe is the 
result of seeds appearing, and sprouting in succession. They that die, die to 
perish. Only seeds result from seeds.” 


CANTO 187 


B hrigu said, “There is no destruction of the living creature, or of what 

is given, or of our other deeds. The creature that dies only goes into 
another form. The body alone dissolves away. The living creature, the jiva, 
although depending upon the body, does not meet with destruction when the 
body is destroyed. It is not seen after the destruction of the physical frame 
just as fire is not seen after the consumption of the fuel with which it was 
kindled.” 

Bharadwaja said, “If there the living creature does not perish at death, 
I submit that fire itself is not seen after it consumes the fuel that ignited it. 
When the supply of fuel ends, the fire is extinguished, and, as far as I know, 
annihilated. That should surely be regarded to have met with destruction 
which no longer has any action, which furnishes no proof of its existence, 
and which no longer occupies any space.” 

Bhrigu said, “It is true that upon its fuel being consumed, fire is no 
longer seen. It mingles with space because there is no longer any visible 
object in which to inhere, and hence it can no longer be perceived. 
Similarly, upon leaving the body, the jiva lives in ethereal space, and cannot 
be seen for it becomes extremely subtle, sukshma. It is fire or heat that 
sustains prana and the other breaths. Know that that heat is called life, the 
living agent. The heat which is the sustainer of the breaths is extinguished 
when suspiration ceases and the breaths no longer move in the body, 
enlivening it. 


Upon the heat in the body being extinguished, the body itself loses 
animation. Falling, it is transformed into earth, for that is its ultimate 
destination. The breath that is in all mobile and immobile objects mingles 
with space, and the heat that is in them follows that breath. These three — 
space, air and fire—mingle. The other two elements, water and earth, exist 
together in the form of earth. There is wind where space is, and there is fire 
where wind is. They are formless, it should be known, and become 
endowed with form only in embodied creatures.” 

Bharadwaja said, “If in the physical bodies of all living creatures there 
exist heat, wind, earth, space and water, what, then, are the indications of a 
living agent? Tell me of these, O sinless one. I want to know the nature of 
the life that is in the bodies of living beings—bodies made up of the five 
primal elements, engaged in the five functions, endowed with the five 
senses and possessed of animation. Upon the dissolution of the body, that 
which is the living agent cannot be seen. If this body, composed of the five 
elements, were destitute of life, who or what then is that which suffers upon 
the appearance of either bodily or mental pain? 

The living agent hears through the ears. Yet, O Maharishi, the same 
agent does not hear when its mind is preoccupied. It seems, therefore, that 
the living agent serves no purpose. Everything that the jiva sees acting in 
concert with the mind, the eye does not behold, even when it lies before it, 
if the mind were otherwise engaged. Then again, when it is under the 
influence of sleep, the living creature neither sees nor smells, hears nor 
speaks, nor experiences the perceptions of touch and taste. Who or what 
then is that which feels joy, becomes angry, gives way to sorrow and 
experiences tribulation? What is that which wishes, thinks, feels aversion 
and speaks?” 

Bhrigu said, “The mind also is made of the five elements in common 
with the body. For this reason it is of no consequence with regard to the 
activities you speak of. Only the one internal Soul sustains the body. It is he 
that perceives smell, taste, sound, touch, form and other properties that exist 
in external nature. That Soul, pervading the body, is the witness of the 
actions of the mind imbued with five attributes and living within the body 
composed of the five elements. It is he who feels pleasure and pain and, 
when separated from him, the body no longer experiences them. In the 
absence of any perception of form or touch, when there is no heat in the fire 


that resides within the body—indeed, when the animal heat becomes 
extinguished — the body, bereft of the Soul, meets with death. 

The whole universe is composed of water. Water is the form of all 
embodied creatures. Therein lies the Soul, which is displayed in the mind. 
That Soul is the creator Brahma who exists in all things. When the Soul 
becomes endowed with gross attributes, it is called kshetrajna. When freed 
from those attributes, it is known as Paramatman. Know that Supreme Soul. 
He is inspired with universal benevolence. He resides in the body like a 
drop of water in a lotus. Know well the kshetrajna that has universal 
benevolence. Darkness, passion, goodness—tamas, rajas and sattva—are 
the attributes of the living agent. 

The learned say that the Soul has consciousness and exists with the 
attributes of life. The Soul exerts and causes everything to act, to 
experience. Those who have a knowledge of the Soul say that it is different 
from life. It is the Supreme Soul that has created the seven worlds and sets 
them in motion. There is no death of the jiva when the dissolution of the 
body takes place. Men of no intelligence say that it dies. That is untrue. All 
that the jiva does is to go from one to another body. That which is called 
death is only the dissolution of the body. It is thus that the Soul, wrapped in 
diverse forms, migrates from form to form, unseen, unnoticed. 

Those possessed of true knowledge see the Soul with their keen and 
subtle vision. The man of wisdom, living on frugal fare, and with heart 
cleansed of all sins, devoted to yoga dhyana, succeeds every night, before 
and after sleep, in seeing his Atman with the help of his Atman. With a 
contented heart, and with all actions, good and bad, abandoned, one can 
obtain infinite happiness by depending upon one’s own Soul. The king, of 
fiery effulgence, dwelling within the mind is called the Atman. It is from 
that lord of everything that this creation has sprung. This is the conclusion 
arrived at in the enquiry into the origin of creatures and the Soul.” 


CANTO 188 


B hrigu said, “Brahma first created a few Brahmanas called Prajapatis, 

lords of creation. Possessed of splendour equal to that of the sun, 
they were created from the energy of the first-born Being. The puissant lord 
next created truth, duty, penance, purity, the eternal Vedas and all kinds of 
pious rituals, to enable creatures to attain heaven by practising them. After 
this, the Devas and the Danavas, the Gandharvas, the Daityas, the Asuras, 
the great Nagas, the Yakshas, the Rakshasas, the Sarpas, the Pisachas and 
Manavas with their four varnas—Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and 
Sudras— and all the other orders of beings that exist, were created. 

The complexion of the Brahmanas was white; the Kshatriyas obtained 
red; the Vaisyas got yellow; and the Sudras were given black.” 

Bharadwaja said, “If the distinction between the four varnas of human 
beings be made by means only of colour, then it seems that all the four 
orders have been mingled. Lust, wrath, fear, cupidity, grief, anxiety, hunger 
and toil, possess and prevail over all men. How can men be distinguished 
by the possession of attributes? The bodies of all men emit sweat, urine, 
faeces, phlegm, bile and blood. How then can men be distributed into 
varnas? Of mobile objects the number is infinite; the species also of 
immobile objects are innumerable. How, then, can objects of such great 
diversity be distributed into different classes?” 

Bhrigu said, “There is really no distinction between the different 
orders. The whole world initially consisted of Brahmanas. Created equal by 


Brahma, men have, due to their actions, become divided into different 
varnas. They that became fond of indulging desire and enjoying pleasures, 
possessed of the attributes of severity and anger gifted with courage, and 
unmindful of the duties of piety and worship, such Brahmanas endowed 
with the attribute of rajas, became Kshatriyas. Other Brahmanas, who 
disregarded the duties laid down for them, became possessed of both the 
attributes of sattva and rajas, and took to the professions of cattle-rearing 
and farming, became Vaisyas. Whereas the Brahmanas that became fond of 
untruth and violence, injuring other creatures, who were possessed by lust 
and greed, engaged in all kinds of sinful actions for a living, fell away from 
purity of conduct, and adhered to tamas, became Sudras. Separated by these 
occupations, Brahmanas, fallen from their own order, became members of 
the other three castes. All the four varnas, therefore, have always the right 
to the performance of all pious duties and sacrifices. 

Even so were the four orders at first created equal by Brahma, who 
ordained for all of them the observances declared in the Vedas. Through 
greed alone, many fell away, and became possessed by ignorance. The 
Brahmanas are always devoted to the scriptures on the Brahman; and 
mindful of vows and restraints, are equal to grasping the concept of 
Brahman. Their penances, therefore, never go in vain. They amongst them 
are not Brahmanas that cannot understand that every created thing is the 
Supreme Brahman. These fallen ones, became members of diverse inferior 
varnas. Bereft of knowledge, and taking to an unrestrained and wayward 
course of conduct, they take birth as Pisachas, Rakshasas, Pretas and as 
individuals of diverse Mleccha tribes. 

The Maharishis who at the beginning sprang into life through 
Brahma’s will subsequently created, through their tapasya, men devoted to 
the svadharma ordained for them and attached to the rites laid down in the 
eternal Vedas. That other creation, however, which is eternal and 
undecaying, which is based upon Brahman and has sprung from the 
primeval being, and has its refuge in yoga, was a mental one.” 


CANTO 189 


B haradwaja said, “Through what actions does one become a 
Brahmana? By what, a Kshatriya? O Dvijottama, with what karma 
again does one become a Vaisya or a Sudra? Tell me this, O most eloquent.” 
Bhrigu said, “He is called a Brahmana who has been sanctified by 
such rites as those called jaata and the others; who is pure in behaviour; 
who is engaged in studying the Vedas; who is devoted to the six well- 
known karmas of ablutions every morning and evening, silent recitation of 
mantras, pouring libations on the sacrificial fire, worshipping the Devas, 
offering humble hospitality to guests, and offering food to the Viswedevas; 
who is properly observant of all pious deeds; who never takes food without 
having offered it first to the gods and his guests; who is filled with 
reverence for his guru; and who is always devoted to vows and truth. He is 
called a Brahmana in whom are truth, charity, non-violence, compassion, 
shame, benevolence and penance: satya, dana, ahimsa, karuna, lajja, 
vinamrata and tapasya. 

He who is engaged in the profession of battle, who studies the Vedas, 
who gives dakshina to Brahmanas and accepts wealth from those he 
protects is called a Kshatriya. 

He who earns fame from keeping cattle, who is employed in farming 
and acquiring wealth, who is pure in behaviour and attends to the study of 
the Vedas, is called a Vaisya. 


He who takes pleasure in eating every kind of food, who does any 
kind of work, however vile, who is impure in his behaviour, who does not 
study the Vedas, and whose conduct is unclean, is said to be a Sudra. If 
these characteristics are seen in a Brahmana, and if they are not found in a 
Sudra, then such a Brahmana is no Brahmana, and such a Sudra is no Sudra. 

By every means should lust and wrath be restrained. This, as also self- 
restraint, are the highest results of knowledge. The two passions, anger and 
lust, should be resisted with one’s whole heart. They exist to destroy one’s 
highest good. One should always protect one’s prosperity from one’s wrath, 
one’s penances from pride, one’s knowledge from honour and disgrace, and 
one’s Soul from every error. 

The intelligent person, O Dvija, who performs all his duties without 
desire for their fruit, whose entire body of wealth exists for charity, and who 
performs the daily homa, is the real tyagi, a true renouncer. 

One should conduct oneself as a friend to all creatures, and abstain 
from all acts of injury. Refusing all gifts, one should, with the help of one’s 
own intelligence, be a complete master of one’s passions. One should abide 
in one’s Soul where there can be no grief. One would then have no fear here 
and attain a fearless realm hereafter. One should live always devoted to 
tapasya, and with all passions completely restrained observe the vow of 
taciturnity. With the Soul concentrated on itself, one should live desirous of 
conquering the senses, and remain unattached in the midst of attachments. 

All things that can be perceived by the senses are called manifest. All, 
however, that is unmanifest, beyond the ken of the senses, that can be 
ascertained only by the subtle senses, should be sought to be known. 

If there is no faith, one will never succeed in attaining that subtle, 
spiritual sense. Therefore, one should hold oneself in faith. The mind 
should be united with prana, and prana should then be held within 
Brahman. By dissociating oneself from all attachments, one will find 
absorption into Brahman. There is no need to attend to any other thing. A 
Brahmana can easily attain Brahman by the path of renunciation. The 
indications of a Brahmana are purity, good conduct and compassion for all 
creatures.” 


CANTO 190 


B hrigu said, “Truth is Brahman; truth is japa; it is truth that creates all 

creatures. It is by truth that the whole universe is upheld; and it is 
with the help of satya that one ascends into swarga. Untruth is only another 
form of darkness. It is darkness that leads downwards. Those who are 
afflicted by tamas and covered by it, fail to behold the lustrous regions of 
heaven. It has been said that heaven is light and hell is darkness. The 
creatures that dwell in the universe may gain both heaven and hell. In this 
world also, truth and untruth lead to opposite courses of conduct and 
opposite indications, such as dharma and adharma, light and darkness, 
pleasure and pain. Amongst these, truth is dharma; dharma is light; and 
light is happiness. Similarly, asatya is adharma; adharma is tamas; and 
tamas is misery. 

It is said that the wise notice how life is overwhelmed by sorrow, both 
physical and mental, and how happiness is sure to end in misery; this being 
so, they never let themselves be perplexed or stupefied. The wise man will 
strive to save himself from sorrow. The happiness of living creatures is 
unstable both here and hereafter. The joy of beings that are overwhelmed by 
darkness disappears like the splendour of the moon when afflicted by Rahu. 
For the sake of achieving happiness, both in this and the other world, the 
visible and the invisible fruits of action are specified in the Vedas. There is 
nothing more important than happiness among the rewards of the traiguna. 
Joy is desirable. It is an attribute of the Soul. Both dharma and artha are 


sought for its sake. Virtue is its root; This, indeed, is its origin. All actions 
have for their end the attainment of kama.” 

Bharadwaja said, “You have said that happiness is the highest object. I 
do not comprehend this. This attribute of the Soul that you say is so 
desirable is not sought by the Rishis engaged in practices promising a 
higher reward. It is heard that the creator of the three worlds, the puissant 
Brahma, lives alone, observing the brahmacharya vrata. He never devotes 
himself to the pleasure to be had from the gratification of desire. In 
addition, Shiva, the Divine Master of the universe, the lord of Uma, reduced 
Kama, the deity of desire, to ashes. For this reason, kama or pleasure is not 
acceptable to the Mahatman. Nor does it appear to be a high aspect of the 
Soul. I cannot believe in what you, divine one, have said: that there is 
nothing higher than happiness. That there are two kinds of outcomes to our 
actions—that happiness springs from good deeds and sorrow from sinful 
ones is only a saying that is current in the world.” 

Bhrigu said, “From untruth springs darkness. Those overwhelmed by 
darkness pursue only adharma and not dharma. Subjugated by anger, 
covetousness, malice, falsehood and other evils, they never find sukha 
either here or hereafter. On the other hand, they are afflicted by various 
kinds of disease, pain and troubles. They are also tortured by death, 
imprisonment, diverse other griefs, and by sorrows attending on hunger, 
thirst and toil. They are furthermore pained by the numerous bodily 
discomforts that arise from rain, wind, burning heat and extreme cold. They 
are also overwhelmed by numerous mental sufferings caused by loss of 
wealth, separation from friends, as also by anguish caused by decrepitude 
and death. Those who are untouched by these diverse kinds of physical and 
mental afflictions, know what happiness is. 

These evils are never found in swarga. There, delicious breezes blow. 
In heaven, there is also perpetual fragrance. In heaven there is no hunger, no 
thirst, no decay, no sin. In this world there is both joy and sorrow. In hell 
there is only misery. Therefore, happiness is the highest object of 
acquisition. The earth is the progenitrix of all creatures. Females partake of 
her nature. The male animal is like Prajapati himself. The vital seed, you 
must know, is the creative energy. In this way did Brahma ordain in days of 
old that the creation should continue. Each being, affected by his own 
actions, gains joy or sorrow.” 


CANTO 191 


B haradwaja said, “What is the effect of giving dakshina or dana? 

What of dharma? What of pravritti, conduct? What of penances? 
What of the study and recitation of the Vedas? And what of pouring 
libations on the fire?” 

Bhrigu said, “By pouring libations on the sacred fire, sin is burnt. By 
study of the Vedas one finds blessed peace. By giving charity, one finds 
pleasure and the things of enjoyment. Through tapasya, one acquires 
blessed swarga. Dakshina is said to be of two kinds: gifts for the other 
world, and those for this. Whatever is given to the good attends the giver in 
the other world. Whatever is given to those that are not good yields fruit 
that are enjoyed here. The results of gifts are commensurate with the gifts 
themselves.” 

Bharadwaja said, “What dharma should be performed by whom? What 
are the characteristics of dharma? How many kinds of dharma are there? 
Tell me of these.” 

Bhrigu said, “Wise men engaged in the practice of their svadharma 
succeed in attaining heaven as their reward. By doing otherwise they 
become guilty of folly.” 

Bharadwaja said, “Tell me about the four asramas of life that were 
once ordained by Brahma, and the practices prescribed for each of them.” 

Bhrigu said, “In days of yore, to benefit the world, and for the 
protection of dharma, the divine Brahma indicated four asramas of life. 


Amongst them, brahmacharya, living in the home of the guru is the first. He 
who is in this stage of life has his Soul cleansed by purity of conduct, Vedic 
rites, restraints, vows and humility. He should worship the morning and 
evening twilights, the sun, his own sacred fire, and the Devas. He should 
shun procrastination and idleness. He should purify his Soul by saluting his 
preceptor, by studying the Vedas, and by paying heed to his guru’s 
instructions. He should perform his ablutions thrice: in the morning, noon 
and evening, during the three sandhyas. He should lead a life of celibacy, 
attend to his sacred fire, dutifully serve his guru, daily go out on a round of 
mendicancy to support himself; and give ungrudgingly to his guru the 
whole of what he receives as alms. 

Willingly accomplishing everything that his master commands, he 
should be ready to receive such Vedic instruction as his preceptor may give 
him, as a favour to him. On this subject, a hymn that tells us that the 
Brahmana, who obtains his Veda by attending with reverence upon his 
preceptor, succeeds in attaining swarga and obtains the fruition of all his 
desires. 

Grihastasrama, the domestic life, is the second. I will tell you about 
that asrama. Those who complete their tutelage in the guru’s abode and 
return home, who are of pious conduct, who desire the fruits of a virtuous 
course of behaviour with their wives, have this asrama ordained for them. 
In it dharma, artha and kama are all gained since domesticity is suited for 
their cultivation. With wealth acquired by irreproachable actions, or with 
high efficacy gained in reciting the Vedas, or living upon such means as 
Rishis do, the householder should live this stage of his life. 

With the produce of mountains and mines, or with wealth from the 
offerings made in sacrifices and on termination of vows and other 
observances, and those made unto Devas, should the grihastha lead his life. 
Grihastasrama is regarded as the root of all the others. They who live with 
their gurus, who lead lives of mendicancy, and others who live in the 
observance of vows and restraints, derive from this life of the householder 
the means they live upon, the offerings they make to the Pitris and the 
Devas, and, indeed, their entire support. 

The third stage of life is called vanaprastha, the forest life. For those 
that lead it, there is no storing of wealth and possessions. Generally, these 
pious men subsist upon good food, and engaged in studying the Vedas, 
roam ceaselessly over the earth, journeying to tirthas and visiting diverse 


lands. Standing up, advancing forward, sweet speeches uttered in sincerity, 
gifts given according to the measure of the giver’s means, the offering of 
excellent food, seats and beds of the best kind, are some of the ways to 
show them respect. On this subject, there is a saying: If a guest turns away 
from a house with his expectations unfulfilled, he takes away the merits of 
the householder and leaves behind all his sins. 

Then again in grihastasrama, the Devas are gratified with sacrifices 
and other religious rites; the Pitris by the performance of obsequial rites; the 
Rishis by the cultivation of Vedic knowledge, by listening to the 
instructions of preceptors, and by committing to memory the scriptures, and 
lastly, Brahma himself by begetting children. 

On this subject, there are two hymns: One in the observance of this 
stage of life should speak to all creatures words of affection that are always 
agreeable to the ears. To give pain, to inflict mortifications and harsh words 
are all censurable. Insults, arrogance and deceit should also be avoided. 
Non-violence, truth and the absence of wrath yield the merit of tapasya in 
all the four stages of life. 

In grihastasrama, these are allowed: the use and enjoyment of flower 
garlands, ornaments, robes, perfumed oils and liniments; the enjoyment of 
pleasures derived from music, dance and all sights and scenes that please 
the eyes; the enjoyment of various kinds of viands and drinks; the 
enjoyment of pleasures derived from sports and every kind of amusement, 
and the gratification of sexual desires. He, who, in the observance of the 
householder’s life, seeks the acquisition of dharma, artha and kama, with 
the three attributes of sattva, rajas and tamas, enjoys great happiness here 
and at last attains the end that is kept for those who are virtuous and good. 

Even the householder who observes the duties of his mode of life by 
following the practice of picking up fallen grains of corn from the cracks in 
fields and who abandons sensual pleasure and attachment to action, does 
not find it difficult to attain swarga.” 


CANTO 192 


B hrigu said, “Forest recluses seeking the acquisition of virtue go to 

sacred waters, rivers, springs, and undergo penances in secluded 
forests abounding in deer, bison, boars, tigers and wild elephants. They 
forsake all kinds of clothes, food and enjoyments for which people living in 
society have a taste. They subsist abstemiously upon wild herbs, fruits, 
roots and leaves of diverse kinds. The bare ground is their seat. They lie 
down on the plain earth, rocks, pebbles, gravel, sand or ashes. They cover 
their limbs with grass, animal skins and the bark of trees. They never shave 
their heads and beards or clip their nails. They perform their ablutions at 
regular intervals. They pour libations onto the ground, as also into the 
sacred fire at the proper time and without fail. 

They never enjoy any rest until completing their daily gathering of the 
fuel for their homa fires and sacred grass, flowers for sacrifice and worship, 
and until they have swept, washed and rubbed clean their sacrificial altars. 
They bear, without the least regard, cold and heat, rain and wind, so that the 
their skin is rough, cracked all over; and from observing various kinds of 
rites and vows, their bodies become emaciated, skin and bones. Endowed 
with great patience and fortitude, they live, always in the sattva guna. He 
who, with a restrained Soul, observes such a course of life, originally 
ordained by enlightened Rishis, burns all his sins as in a fire and obtains 
regions of felicity that are most difficult to attain. 


I will now describe the lives of the Parivrajakas. Liberated from 
attachment to the sacred fire, wealth, wife, children, fine clothes, seats, 
beds, and other such objects of enjoyment, and unshackled from the bonds 
of affection, they roam the world, regarding with an equal eye a clod of 
earth, a rock and a nugget of gold. They never set their hearts on the 
acquisition or enjoyment of dharma, artha and kama. They cast an equal eye 
on foes, friends and strangers. They never injure, in thought, word or deed, 
any creature, mobile or immobile. They have no homes. They range over 
hills and mountains, upon shores of rivers or seas, lie in the shade of trees, 
and among temples. They may go into towns or villages. However, they 
should not live for more than five nights in a town, while in a village their 
stay should never exceed one night. Entering a town or a village, they 
should, for sustenance, go only to the homes of Brahmanas of liberal deeds. 
They should never ask for any alms except what is given into the wooden 
bowls they carry. They should free themselves from lust, wrath, pride, 
greed, delusion, miserliness, deceit, slander, vanity and violence to living 
creatures. 

On this subject, too, there are some hymns: One who observes the vow 
of mowna, and roves without giving any creature cause for fear is never 
given any fear himself by any creature. The learned one who performs the 
agnihotra not by kindling an external fire but with the fire that is his own 
body, indeed, who pours libations into his own mouth and on the fire that 
burns in his own body, succeeds in attaining numerous regions of grace 
because he feeds the fire with such libations obtained by a life of 
mendicancy. The Brahmana who observes this mode of life with moksha 
for its end, with a pure heart and with an intellect freed from resolution, 
attains Brahman like a tranquil ray of light that is not fed by any blazing 
fuel.” 

Bharadwaja said, “Beyond this world that we inhabit there is a world 
that we have heard of but never seen. I wish to know all about it. Tell me 
about that realm.” 

Bhrigu said, “Towards the north, on the other side of Himavat, which 
is sacred and has every merit, there is a realm that is sacred, blessed and 
most desirable. It is called Paraloka, the other world. Men who inhabit this 
world are virtuous, pious, of pure hearts, freed from greed and errors of 
judgement, and not subject to afflictions of any kind. That realm is, indeed, 
equal to swarga, for its exalted attributes. Death comes there at the proper 


season. Diseases never touch its inhabitants. Nobody harbours any desire 
for the wives of other men; everyone is devoted to his own wife. These 
people do not afflict or kill one another, or covet one another’s possessions. 
No sin occurs there, and no doubt arises. 

The fruits of all good deeds are plainly manifest there. There some 
enjoy seats, drinks and food of the best kind, and live in palaces and 
mansions. Some, adorned with ornaments of gold, surround themselves 
with every object of enjoyment. Again, some eat very abstemiously, only to 
keep body and Soul together, while others, with great toil, seek to control 
their life-breaths. 

Here, in this world that we inhabit, some men are devoted to dharma 
and some to adharma. Some are happy and some miserable; some are poor 
and some rich. Here toil, fear, delusion and painful hunger make their 
appearance. Here lust for wealth is also seen, a passion that deludes even 
the wise. Here diverse opinions prevail, broached by those that live in both 
punya and paapa. The learned one who knows all the opinions that may be 
divided into two kinds is never stained by sin. Deceit, with fraud, theft, 
slander, malice, oppression, violence, treachery, untruth and vices decreases 
the merit of the tapasya of those who perform penance. The wise person, on 
the other hand, avoids these sins, and finds the punya of his tapasya 
increased. Here there is much reflection about actions that are of dharma 
and ones that are of adharma. This realm that we inhabit is the field of 
actions, the karma-kshetra. Having done good and evil here, one finds 
rewards for one’s good deeds and evil for sins. 

Here Brahma himself, in the days of yore, and all the Devas with the 
Rishis, performed tapasya, became purified and attained Brahman. The 
northern portion of the earth is the most auspicious and sacred. Those 
belonging to this world that do deeds of dharma or show regard for yoga are 
born in the northern realm. 

Others, of a different disposition, take their births in the intermediate 
species. Some, again, when their allotted life spans run out, become lost on 
earth. Engaged in feeding upon one another and stained by greed, lust and 
delusion, these men return to this very world, without being able to go to 
the northern blessed region, after dying. Intelligent men who observe 
brahmacharya and keep vratas, who listen with veneration to the 
instructions of preceptors, succeed in knowing the ends reserved for all 
kinds of men. 


I have now told you in brief the course of duties ordained by Brahma. 
He, indeed, is said to be possessed of intelligence who knows what dharma 
is and what its opposite, in this world.” 

Bhishma continue, “Thus, O Rajan, did Bhrigu speak to Bharadwayja. 
The virtuous Bharadwaja became filled with wonder and worshipped 
Maharishi Bhrigu with deep reverence. Thus, I have described the origin of 
the universe to you in detail. What do you wish to hear next?’ 


CANTO 193 


Y udhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha, I believe that you know all things, O you 
who know dharma. I want to hear you discourse, O Anagha, on the 
ordinances about pravritti, conduct.’ 

Bhishma says, “They that are of bad conduct, of sinful deeds, of 
wicked understanding and excessive rashness, are called evil men. They, 
however, that are called good are distinguished by the purity of their 
conduct and practices. They are good men who never answer calls of nature 
on the high roads, in cow-pens or in fields of paddy. After the defecation, 
one should perform one’s ablutions in river water and gratify the gods with 
oblations of water. This is said to be the duty of all men. 

Surya should be always worshipped. One should not sleep after 
sunrise. Morning and evening prayers prescribed in the scriptures should be 
recited while sitting with one’s face turned towards the east at dawn and 
towards the west at dusk. Washing the five limbs, one should eat silently 
with the face turned towards the east. One should never disparage the food 
that one eats. One should eat food that is pure, well-prepared and tasty. 
After eating one should wash one’s hands and rise. One should never go to 
sleep at night with wet feet. The Devarishi Narada said that these are 
indications of good conduct. 

Every day one should circumambulate a sacred spot, a bull, a holy 
image, a cow-pen, a place where four roads meet, a pious Brahmana and a 
sacred tree. One should not make distinctions between one’s guests and 


servants and relatives in matters of food. Equality in this regard with 
servants is lauded. Eating twice a day, in the morning and evening, is an 
ordinance of the Devas. To eat again at any intermediate time is not 
allowed. He who eats like this acquires the punya of an upavasa, a fast. 

At the hours appointed for homa, one should pour libations on the 
sacred fire. Without seeking the companionship of other men’s wives, the 
wise man who seeks out his own wife in her season acquires the punya of 
brahmacharya. The leavings of a Brahmana’s food are like amrita. They are 
like mother’s milk. Men prize those leavings called vighasa. By eating 
them, virtuous men attain Brahman. He who pounds turf to clay to make 
sacrificial altars, he who cuts grass to make sacrificial fuel, he who uses 
only his fingers and nails, and not weapons of any kind to eat sanctified 
meat, he who always subsists on the remnants of a Brahmana’s food, he 
who acts, induced by desire for the high reward, has not to live long in the 
world. One who has vowed to abstain from meat should not eat any meat 
even if it were sanctified with mantras from the Yajurveda. One should also 
avoid the flesh from the vertebral column of any animal and the flesh of 
animals not slain in sacrifices. 

Whether at one’s own home or in a strange land, one should never 
cause one’s guest to go without food. One should offer alms received to 
one’s elders. One should offer seats to one’s elders and salute them with 
respect. By worshipping his elders, a man obtains a long life, fame and 
prosperity. One should never look at the sun at the moment of its rising, nor 
should one turn one’s gaze towards a naked woman who is another man’s 
wife. Congress with one’s wife in her season is not sinful but it must always 
be done in privacy. 

The heart of all sacred tirthas and shrines is the guru. The heart of all 
pure and cleansing things is fire. All deeds done by a pious person are 
laudable, including the touching of the hair of a cow’s tail. Every time one 
meets with another, one should make polite enquiries after their health and 
well-being. The reverencing of Brahmanas every morning and evening is 
ordained. In the temples of gods, amidst cows, in performing the rites of 
dharma laid down for Brahmanas, in reading the Vedas, and in eating, the 
right hand should be raised. The worship of Brahmanas, morning and 
evening, with due rites, yields great punya. From such worship the stock-in- 
trade of the merchant becomes abundant as does the produce of the farmer. 


Great also becomes the yield of all kinds of corn and the supply of all things 
that the senses can enjoy becomes copious. 

When serving another person food, one should inquire, “Is it enough?” 
When pouring a drink, one should ask, “Will it satisfy you?”’, and when 
giving payasa, or the sugared gruel of barley, or milk with sesame or peas, 
one should ask, “Has it fallen?” After shaving, spitting, bathing and eating, 
people should worship Brahmanas with reverence. Such worship is sure to 
bestow longevity on sickly men. One should not pass urine with one’s face 
turned towards the sun, nor should one look at one’s own excreta. One 
should not lie on the same bed with a woman, or eat with her. In addressing 
elders, one should never use the familiar pronoun or take their names. This 
is not the case with those equal to or younger than one is in age. 

The hearts of sinful men betray the sins committed by them. Those 
sinners that conceal their conscious sins from good men meet with 
destruction. Only fools seek to hide the sins that they commit knowingly. It 
is true that human beings do not see those sins but the gods always witness 
them. A sin concealed by another sin leads to fresh sins. An action of merit, 
again, if hidden by another deed of merit, increases the punya. The actions 
of a virtuous man always follow in the wake of virtue. A man devoid of 
intellect never thinks of the sins committed by him. Such sins, however, 
overtake the doer who has fallen away from the scriptures. As Rahu comes 
to Chandra at his proper time, these sins come to the foolish man. 

Objects stored with expectation are scarcely enjoyed. Such hoarding is 
never lauded by the wise, for death waits for no one but snatches away his 
prey whether he is prepared or not. The wise have said that the dharma of 
all creatures is an attribute of the mind. For this reason, one should, in one’s 
mind, think well of and wish good to all. One should practice virtue singly. 
In the practice of virtue, one has no need for the help of others. If one has 
the ordinances of the scriptures, what can an associate do? Dharma is the 
origin of humankind. Dharma is the ambrosia of the gods. After death, 
through their dharma, men enjoy eternal happiness.’ 


CANTO 194 


Y udhishtira says, ‘Tell me, O Pitamaha, what and of what nature is 

that which is called Adhyatma and which is ordained for every 
person. O you who know Brahman, whence has this universe of mobile and 
unmoving things, been created? When universal destruction, the Pralaya, 
sets in, to whom does it go? Tell me of all this.’ 

Bhishma says ‘ Yudhishtira, I will speak of this Adhyatma that you ask 
about. It is most agreeable and yields great felicity. Great teachers have 
always revealed the truths about the creation and destruction of the 
universe. Knowing these truths, a man may find, even in this world, great 
satisfaction and prosperity. Such knowledge may also lead to the acquisition 
of great rewards and is highly beneficial to all creatures. Earth, air, space, 
water and light numbered as the fifth, are regarded as great spirits, 
Mahabhutas. These constitute both the origin and the destruction of all 
created things. Unto him from whom these great primal elements take their 
origin, they return repeatedly, severing themselves from all creatures into 
whose compositions they enter, even as the waves of the ocean subside into 
that from which they seem to rise. As the tortoise stretches its limbs and 
withdraws them again, so does the Supreme Soul create the universe and 
again withdraws it into Himself. 

The creator imbues all created being with the five primal elements in 
different proportions. The living creature, however, does not see this 
through ignorance. Sound, the organs of hearing and all apertures—these 


three spring from space, with Akasa as their progenitor. Touch, action, and 
skin are the triple attributes of Vayu, wind. Form, eye and digestion are the 
triad attributes of fire, Agni. Taste, all liquid secretions, and the tongue 
represent the three attributes of water, Apah. Scents, the nose and the body 
are the three properties of Bhumi, the earth. The great primal elements are 
five, the Panchamahabhutas. The mind, buddhi, is the sixth. The senses and 
the mind, O Bhaarata, are the sources of all the perceptions of a living 
creature. The seventh is called the manas, intellect; and the eighth is the 
Soul, the Atman. 

The senses are for perceiving; the mind, unable to deal with 
perceptions, creates uncertainty. Awareness reduces all perceptions to 
certainty. The Soul exists as a witness, never acting itself. All that is above 
the two feet, all that is behind, and all that is above, are seen by the Soul. 
Know that the Soul pervades the entire being without any space being left 
untenanted. All men should know the senses, the mind and the intellect 
fully. 

The three attributes called darkness, passion and goodness, or the 
gunas known as tamas, rajas and sattva exist, dependent on the senses, the 
mind and the intellect. Man, by apprehending with the help of his 
knowledge, the manner in which creatures come into and leave the world, is 
sure to gradually attain steadfast calm. The traigunas lead the awareness to 
worldly attachments. In this respect, the intellect is identical with the senses 
and the mind. Knowledge, therefore, is identical with the six: the five senses 
and the mind, and with the world perceived by them. When, however, the 
intellect is destroyed, the three gunas of tamas, rajas and sattva can no more 
lead to any action. 

This universe, chala and achala, consists of that manas. It is from the 
mind that everything arises and it is into it that everything subsides. For this 
reason, the scriptures indicate that everything is a manifestation of manas. 
That by which one hears is the ear. That by which one smells is the nose 
and that through which one distinguishes the tastes is the tongue. Through 
the coat of skin that covers the body one has the perception of touch. 

That which is called manas undergoes modifications. When the 
intellect desires anything, it comes to be called the mind. The foundations 
upon which the intellect rests are five, each serving a different purpose. 
These are the senses. The invisible principle, intelligence, rests upon them. 
The mind that exists in a living creature concerns itself with the three gunas 


—sattva, rajas and tamas. Sometimes it finds joy and at other times, grief. 
Sometimes it becomes divested of both joy and misery. Even thus, wisdom 
exists in the minds of all men. Sometimes the intelligence, which is made 
up of the traiguna, transcends those three through yoga, communion with 
Brahman, like the lord of rivers, the ocean, transgressing the continents 
with tides of vast waves. 

The intellect, which transcends the traigunas, exists in the mind in a 
pure state of unmodified existence: alone. The quality of darkness, however, 
which impels one to action, soon pursues it. At that time, the intellect sets 
all the senses to action. The properties of the three are even thus: joy dwells 
in goodness; sorrow in passion; delusion in darkness. All the states that 
exist of the mind are included in the three. I have now, O Bhaarata, told you 
about the course of the intellect. An intelligent man should subdue all his 
senses. 

The three gunas are always attached to living creatures. Three kinds of 
intelligence also are seen in every creature—that which depends upon 
sattva, that upon rajas and that upon tamas. The sattva guna brings 
happiness; rajas produces sorrow; and if these two combine with the quality 
of tamas then neither happiness nor sorrow ensues but only delusion and 
error. Every state of happiness that appears in the body or the mind is said 
to be due to the sattva guna. A state of sorrow, disagreeable to oneself, is 
due to nothing but rajoguna. One should never think of it with fear. That 
state, again, which is allied to delusion and dark sin, from which one knows 
not what to do, which is unascertainable and unknown, belongs to the 
tamoguna. 

Gladness, satisfaction, delight, happiness, peace of mind are the 
properties of sattva. Man sometimes obtains a measure of them. Discontent, 
heartache, grief, greed, anger, lust and vindictiveness are all indications of 
rajas. They are seen with or without adequate cause to make them spring 
up. Disgrace, delusion, sin, error, torpor, sleep and stupefaction, which 
overtake one through a surfeit of misfortune, are the various properties of 
tamas. 

The one whose mind is far-reaching, able to extend in all directions, 
mistrustful of winning the objects it desires, and well restrained, is happy 
both here and hereafter. Mark the distinction between these two subtle 
things, the intellect and the Soul—manas and Atman. One of these, the 
intellect, puts forth qualities. The other, the Soul, does nothing of the kind. 


Although a gnat and a fig may be seen together, each is distinct from the 
other. Similarly, intelligence and the Soul, though separate from each other, 
by their very natures, may always be seen to exist in a state of union. A fish 
and water exist in a state of union. Each is entirely different from the other. 
So it is with the intellect and the Soul. 

The gunas do not know the Atman, but the Atman knows them all. 
The Soul is the spectator of the qualities and regards them all as proceeding 
from itself. The Soul, acting through the senses, the mind and intellect 
being the seventh, all of which are inactive and have no self-consciousness, 
discovers the objects amidst which it exists like a covered lamp revealing 
everything around it by shedding its rays through an opening in the 
covering. The mind creates all the qualities. The Soul only beholds them as 
a witness. Even such is the connection between the mind and Soul. 

There is no refuge on which either the intellect or the Soul depends. 
The intellect creates the mind, but never the qualities. When through the 
mind the Soul sufficiently restrains the rays that emanate from the senses, it 
becomes manifest to the mind like a lamp burning within a vessel that 
envelops it. 

He who renounces all mundane activities, practices tapasya, devotes 
himself to study the Atman, takes delight therein, and regards himself as the 
Soul of all creatures, acquires a high end. As a water bird, while moving 
over the water, is never drenched, even so does a person of wisdom move in 
the world among other creatures. Using one’s intelligence, one should live 
and behave in the world after this fashion, without grief, without joy, with 
an equal eye for all, and without malice and envy. One living in this way 
succeeds in creating the qualities, rather than being affected by them, like a 
spider spins its web. The gunas should, indeed, be regarded as the threads 
of the spider’s web. 

Some say that for such men the gunas are not lost; some say that they 
are all lost. Those who say that they are not lost rely upon the revealed 
scriptures, the srutis, which do not contain any declaration to the contrary. 
They, on the other hand, who say that the gunas are all lost, rely on the 
smritis. Reflecting upon both these opinions, one should judge which of 
them is right. One should thus go beyond this hard and knotty question that 
can disturb the intellect with doubt, and thereby win happiness. When doubt 
is removed, one will no longer have to experience sorrow of any kind. 


Men of vile hearts may through knowledge gain spiritual success even 
like men who plunge into a clear well-filled swift river to purify themselves 
of all dirt. He who has to cross a wide river does not feel happy at merely 
seeing the other shore. If by just looking at the other shore he could reach it 
in a boat, then he might become happy. The matter is otherwise with one 
who knows the truth. The mere knowledge of truth will bring him 
happiness. As soon as such knowledge begins to bear fruit, it may be 
regarded that he has reached the other shore. They, who know the Soul as 
free from all worldly objects and being but the One, find high and liberating 
knowledge. 

By knowing the origin and the end of all creatures, and by reflecting 
upon this, a man gradually gains infinite happiness. He who has understood 
and reflects upon the idea that the traiguna are mortal and not eternal, casts 
them aside, and succeeds through yoga to behold the truth and obtain 
perfect felicity. The Soul cannot be seen unless the senses, which are 
absorbed by diverse objects and are difficult to control, are restrained. He 
who knows this is wise. What other indication is there of a wise man? With 
this knowledge, men of intelligence consider themselves to be crowned 
with final success. That which inspires the ignorant with fear can never 
inspire fear in men of knowledge. There is no higher end for anyone than 
mukti. 

However, because of the excess or otherwise of good qualities, the 
sages say that differences exist with the degree of moksha. By acting 
without expecting any fruit for his deeds, a man succeeds by those very 
actions in annihilating his sins of a former lifetime. To the wise, the karma 
of a past life having been thus washed away and the karma of this life also 
regarding actions performed without expectation of reward, do not fetch 
any disagreeable consequence, such as immurement in hell. But how can 
action, if one continues to be engaged in karma, bring about mukti? 

The sages censure a man who is ruled by lust, envy and other evil 
passions. Such vices hurl the jiva in his next life into diverse inferior orders 
of being. Mark closely the vicious people in this world who grieve so much 
over the loss of their possessions, sons, wives and others. Look also at those 
who are gifted with judgement and never grieve when cast into similar 
circumstances. Men conversant with both—gradual moksha and instant 
moksha—deserve to be called truly wise.’ 


CANTO 195 


B hishma says, ‘I will now, O son of Pritha, tell you about the four 

kinds of yoga-dhyana. Gaining knowledge of these, the Maharishis 
attain eternal moksha even here, in this world. Maharishis gratified with 
knowledge, with hearts set upon mukti, and conversant with yoga, perform 
karma in such a manner that their dhyana might progress effectively. 
Liberated from the faults of the world, Yudhishtira, these never return to 
rebirth. Free from birth and death, they live in their original state, absorbed 
in the Brahman. Freed from the influence of all the pairs of opposites such 
as heat and cold, joy and sorrow, and the rest, ever dwelling in their own 
pristine Soul, liberated from attachments, never accepting anything as gifts, 
they live in places free from the companionship of wives and children, 
without others with whom disputes may arise, places favourable to perfect 
peace of mind. 

There, such a one, with speech restrained, sits like a block of wood, all 
his senses subdued, with his mind undividedly united through dhyana with 
the Paramatman. He has no perception of sound, none of touch; no 
perception of form, none of scent, and none of taste. Immersed in yoga, he 
abandons all things, and is rapt just in dhyana. Possessed of great energy of 
mind, he has no desire for anything that excites or stirs the five senses. 

The wise man, withdrawing his five senses into the mind, should then 
fix the unstable mind with the five senses in the intellect. Possessed of 
patience, the yogin stills his constantly wandering mind, so that the five 


portals to his body are sealed from all distracting worldly objects. In the 
firmament of the heart, he focuses his mind in meditation, making it 
independent of the body or any other refuge. I have spoken of the path of 
meditation as the first path, since the yogin has first to quell his senses and 
his mind and direct them singly to that path. 

When thus restrained, the mind, which is the sixth sense, seeks to flash 
out like capricious lightning frolicking among the clouds. As a drop of 
water on a lotus leaf is unstable and moves about in all directions, even so 
is the yogin’s mind when first turned to the path of dhyana. When focused 
for a while, the mind stays on that path. When it strays again onto the path 
of the wind, it becomes as flighty as the wind. The one adept with the ways 
of yoga-dhyana, is not discouraged by this. He ignores the loss of his effort 
and, with idleness and malice cast aside, he returns to direct his mind again 
to meditation. 

When one yokes one’s mind in yoga, in silence, one gains 
discrimination, knowledge and the power to avoid evil. Though annoyed by 
the flightiness of his mind, the seeker should constantly draw it back and fix 
it repeatedly in dhyana. The yogin should never despair, but seek his own 
good. As a heap of dust, ashes or burnt cowdung, when only partially 
wetted with water is not fully drenched, and, indeed, continues to dry again 
and must be incessantly watered before it gradually becomes soaked 
through, even so should the yogin strive to control his senses. He should 
withdraw them gradually. Then he succeeds in controlling them. 

O Bhaarata, by directing one’s mind and senses to the path of 
meditation, one succeeds in bringing them under perfect control through 
steadfast yoga. The bliss felt by a person who has succeeded in controlling 
his mind and senses is such that its like can never be found through exertion 
or destiny. United with such felicity, he continues to find deep bliss in 
meditation. Even in this way yogins attain nirvana.’ 


CANTO 196 


Y udhishtira says, ‘You have spoken on the four stages of life and their 
duties. You have also spoken of the dharma of kings. You have 
recounted many ancient tales of diverse kinds and dealing with diverse 
subjects. I have also heard from you, O you of great intelligence, many 
discourses about dharma. I have, however, one lingering question. I wish, O 
Bhaarata, to hear about the fruits that silent chanters of sacred mantras, the 
japis, acquire through their practice of japa. What are the fruits that have 
been indicated for such men? Which is the world to which they go after 
death? Also, O sinless one, tell me all the laws that have been laid down for 
japa. When the word japi is uttered, what shall I understand by it? Is such a 
man to be regarded as following the ordinances of samkhya, yoga or 
karma? Or does he observe the laws of yagna? What is the path of the japis 
called? You have, as I believe, universal knowledge. Tell me all this.’ 
Bhishma says, ‘Listen to the old itihasa of what transpired between 
Yama, Kaala and a certain Brahmana. Sages conversant with the means of 
attaining moksha have spoken of two paths: samkhya and yoga. Amongst 
these, in the first, otherwise called the Vedanta, renunciation has been 
preached with regard to silent japa. The declarations of the Vedas preach 
that abstention from rites is fraught with tranquillity, and is concerned 
directly with Brahman. Indeed, the two paths spoken of by sages bent on 
achieving their weal are such that both concern, as well as do not concern, 


japa. I will explain the manner in which silent chanting is connected with 
each of the two paths and its cause. 

In both samkhya and yoga, as in the case of japa, the senses must be 
subdued and the mind fixed in dhyana after withdrawing it from the outer 
world. Truth is also prescribed, keeping the sacred fire lit, living in solitude, 
penance, self-restraint, forgiveness, benevolence, abstemiousness in food, 
withdrawal from worldly attachments, silence and serenity. These constitute 
a yagna in deeds, in karma. 

Listen now to the course that consists of abstention from karma. The 
manner in which the karma of the japi observing the vow of brahmacharya 
may cease, I will speak of presently. Such a man should conduct himself in 
every way according to what I have already said. Setting himself on the 
path of abstention, he should seek to extinguish his dependence on both the 
outer and the inner attachments. Sitting on kusa grass, with kusa in his 
hand, and binding his hair with kusa, he should surround himself with kusa 
and wear kusa as his raiment. 

Bowing to all earthly concerns, he should take leave of them and 
never then think of them. Assuming equability with the help of his mind, he 
should fix his mind on the mind itself. Reciting the most sacred mother of 
all mantras, the Gayatri, he meditates with his intellect on Brahman alone. 
Afterwards, he leaves off even that, then becoming absorbed in the highest 
dhyana. This highest dhyana will come of itself because of the power of the 
Gayatri that he recites. Through tapasya, he attains purity of the Soul, self- 
restraint and the cessation of aversion and desire. Freed from attachment 
and delusion, above the influence of all the pairs of opposites—heat and 
cold, joy and sorrow and all the others—he never grieves and never suffers 
himself to be drawn towards worldly objects. He does not regard himself as 
the doer, or the enjoyer or sufferer of the results of his actions. He never, 
through selfishness, sets his mind on any object of desire. 

Without being employed in the acquisition of wealth, he abstains also 
from disregarding or insulting others, but not from work. The work in 
which he is engrossed is that of meditation; he is devoted to meditation, and 
seeks meditation unalterably. Through meditation, he succeeds in bringing 
about concentrated dhyana, and then gradually leaves off meditation itself. 
In that state, he enjoys the felicity that attaches to the abandonment of all 
things. With complete control over desire, he casts off his life-breaths and 
enters into the Brahmic body. Alternatively, if he does not wish to enter into 


the Brahmic body, he ascends into Brahmaloka and is never reborn. Having 
become tranquillity’s self, and freed from every kind of trouble, depending 
upon his own intelligence, such a one succeeds in attaining that Soul which 
is pure, immortal and without any stain.’ 


CANTO 197 


Y udhishtira says, ‘You have said that japis find this very high end. Is 
this their only end or there is any other to which they aspire?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Listen, O mighty king, to the end that silent japis attain, 
and to the diverse kinds of hell into which they sink. The japi who does not 
at first conduct himself according to the prescribed method, and who cannot 
complete the ritual or course of discipline laid down, must sink into hell. 
The chanter who is without faith, who is not content with his work, and 
who takes no pleasure in it, finds hell for himself. They who follow the 
ritual with pride in their hearts, all go to hell. The reciter who insults and 
disregards others will find naraka. The man who betakes himself to silent 
chanting under the influence of tamas and from a desire for fruit, gains all 
the things upon which his heart becomes set. 

The japi, whose heart is intent upon the attributes that go by the name 
of sattva, has to incur hell. The chanter who takes to recitation under the 
influence of attachments to earthly objects such as wealth, wives and others, 
obtains the objects upon which his heart is set. The reciter of evil intellect 
and uncleansed Soul, who sets himself to his work with an unstable mind, 
finds an unstable end or falls into naraka. The chanter who is unwise, 
foolish, stupefied or deluded falls into hell where he suffers fierce regrets. If 
a man of even firm heart, and resolved to complete the discipline, takes to 
japa, but fails to attain its culmination because he has freed himself from 


attachments by a violent wrench without genuine conviction of their 
uselessness or harmful character, he too finds naraka.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘After the japi acquires the essence of that which is 
Supreme, indescribable, inconceivable, which dwells in Pranava, the 
syllable AUM that is the subject of both japa and dhyana, indeed, when 
japis attain the state of Brahman, why is it that they still have to be born 
again in embodied forms?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘As a result of the absence of true knowledge and 
wisdom, chanters fall into diverse hells. The discipline followed by japis is 
certainly a superior one. These, however, are its faults.’ 


CANTO 198 


Y udhishtira says, “Describe the hells to which a japi goes. I feel, O 
Pitamaha, a curiosity to know about them.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘You have sprung from an amsa of Dharma Deva. You 
are by nature observant of dharma. Listen, O Anagha, with undivided 
attention, to these words that rest on dharma. 

The realms that belong to the high-Souled Devas are of diverse 
aspects, colours, descriptions, which yield myriad fruits, and are of great 
excellence. The chariots again that move at the will of their riders, the 
beautiful mansions and halls, the various pleasure-gardens embellished with 
golden lotuses, the realms that belong to the four Lokapalas, Sukra, 
Brihaspati, the Maruts, Viswedevas, Sadhyas, Aswins, Rudras, Adityas, 
Vasus and other lords of swarga are spoken of as hells, when compared with 
the region of the Paramatman. 

The realm of the Brahman is free from any fear, uncreated, the first 
and the last, without pain of any kind, without ignorance and delusion, 
without any agreeable or disagreeable element, beyond the reach of sattva, 
rajas and tamas. It is free from the five primal elements, the senses, mind 
and intellect. It is without the three distinctions between the knower, the 
known and knowing; free also from the four actions of seeing, hearing, 
thinking and knowing, without the four-fold causes of relative knowledge, 
without joy, sorrow and disease. 


Time in his forms of past, present and future arises there for use at 
will. Kaala is not the ruler there. The supreme world is the ruler of time as 
also of heaven. The japi who becomes identified with his Soul by 
withdrawing everything into it goes there, he never has to feel any sorrow. 
This world is called Supreme. All the other realms of which I first spoke are 
hells. I have not told you of all the worlds that are called hells. Indeed, in 
comparison with the best of worlds, all the others are called hell.’ 


CANTO 199 


Y udhishtira says, “You referred to the dispute between Kaala, Mrityu, 
Yama, Ikshvaku and a Brahmana. Relate that story to me in full.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Listen to the Purana of what transpired between 
Surya’s son Ikshvaku, a certain Brahmana, and Kaala and Mrityu. Listen to 
what happened, the conversation that took place between them, and the 
place where it transpired. 

There was a certain Brahmana of great fame and pious conduct. He 
was a japi. Possessed of deep wisdom, he was well conversant with the six 
Angas of the Vedas. He was of the Kusika vamsa and the son of Pippalada. 
Through his tapasya, he acquired spiritual insight into the Angas. He lived 
at the foot of Himavat, and was devoted to the Vedas. Silently reciting the 
Gayatri mantra, he practiced severe austerities to attain Brahman. A 
thousand years passed while he was engaged in the observance of vows and 
fasts. The goddess of the Gayatri, she who is called Savitri, showed herself 
to him and said, “I am gratified with you.” 

Continuing to recite the sacred mantra, the Brahmana remained silent 
and spoke not a word to the Devi. The goddess felt compassion for him and 
became most gratified. The mother of the Vedas lauded the japa in which 
the Brahmana had been engaged. After finishing his chanting for the day, 
the Brahmana stood up and, with head bowed, prostrated himself before 
Devi Savitri’s feet. 


The exalted japi said, “Through great fortune, O Devi, you have 
become pleased with me and have shown yourself to me. If, indeed, you are 
gratified with me, the boon I ask is that my heart may take pleasure in being 
engrossed in japa.” 

Savitri said, “What do you ask for, O Rishi? What wish of yours shall 
I accomplish? Tell me, O best of japis, and everything will be as you wish.” 

The Brahmana replied, “Let my desire to continue my japa increase 
with each passing moment. Let also, O auspicious Devi, the absorption of 
my mind into samadhi be more complete.” 

The goddess sweetly said, “Let it be as you wish.” Wanting to bless 
the Brahmana, the Devi said again to him, “You will not have to go to the 
hell where other great Brahmanas go. You will go into the realm of 
Brahman, which is uncreated and free from every fault. I will leave you 
now, but that which you have asked me shall come to pass. Continue 
chanting with a restrained Soul and rapt attention. The god Dharma will 
come to you in person. Kaala, Mrityu and Yama also will all approach you. 
There will be a dispute here, between them and you, on a question of 
dharma.” 

With these words, the Devi Savitri returned to her own abode and the 
Brahmana continued his japa for a thousand celestial years. With anger 
restrained, bereft of malice, in control of himself, he passed his time firmly 
devoted to truth. Upon the completion of his observance, Dharma Deva, 
gratified with him, showed his person to the enlightened one. 

Dharma said, “O Dvija, behold me, I am Dharma. I have come here to 
see you. You have won the reward of your long japa. I will tell you what the 
reward is. You have won all the realms of felicity that belong to either the 
gods or men. O virtuous Soul, you will ascend above all the realms of the 
Devas. O sannyasi, cast off your prana and go to whatever realm you 
please. By discarding your body you will win many worlds of bliss.” 

The Brahmana said, “What have I to do with the worlds of bliss of 
which you speak? O Dharma, go wherever you please. I will not, O puissant 
lord, shed this body that is subject to great happiness and pain.” 

Dharma said, “Dvijottama, your body must be cast aside. Ascend to 
swarga, O Brahmana! Or tell us what else would please you, sinless one.” 

The Brahmana said, “I do not wish to dwell in heaven itself without 
this body of mine. Leave me, O Dharma. I have no desire to go to swarga 
without my own body.” 


Dharma said, “Do not set your heart so on your body; discard it and be 
happy. Go into regions that are free from the Rajoguna and where you will 
never have to feel any pain or grief.” 

The Brahmana said, “O highly blessed one, I find great bliss in japa. 
What need have I for the immortal lokas of which you speak? Indeed, O 
mighty Lord, I do not wish to go to swarga even with this body of mine.” 

Dharma said, “If you do not wish to cast off your body, behold, O 
Dvija, here is Kaala, there is Mrityu, and Yama, who are all approaching 
you!” 

After Dharma had said this, Vivaswat’s son Yama, Kaala and Mrityu, 
the three who snatch away all creatures from the earth, approached the 
Brahmana and addressed him thus. 

Yama said, “I am Yama. I say unto you that a high reward awaits you 
for this excellent tapasya of yours, and for this pious conduct that you have 
observed.” 

Kaala said, “You have won a high reward which is in proportion to the 
japa that you have completed. The time is come for you to ascend into 
swarga. I am Kaala and I have come to you.” 

Mrityu said, “O you that are a knower of dharma, know me for Mrityu 
herself in her true form. I have come to you in person, urged by Kaala, to 
bear you away from here, O Brahmana.” 

The Brahmana said, “Welcome to Surya’s son, to Kaala, to Mrityu and 
to Dharma! What can I do for you all?” 

The Brahmana gave them padya, water to wash their feet, and the 
usual offerings of the arghya. He then said, “What can I do for you all? 
Everything I possess is at your disposal.” 

Just at that time, King Ikshvaku, who had set out on a yatra to the holy 
tirthas and shrines, came to the place where the Devas were. The Rajarishi 
Ikshvaku bowed his head and paid homage to them; he enquired after the 
welfare of each one. The Brahmana gave the king a seat, as also padya to 
wash his feet, and arghya. He made the customary enquiries of courtesy, 
and said, “Welcome, O great sovereign. How may I serve you? For your 
wishes are my command.” 

The king replied, “I am a king. You are a Brahmana under the vows of 
the six renowned dharmas. It is not my place to ask you for anything, but on 
the other hand, only proper I should be the one to give you whatever you 


may need. Tell me how I may be of service to you, be it in kind or in 
wealth.” 

The Brahmana said, “There are two kinds of Brahmanas, O Rajan. 
Dharma is also of two kinds; he who is addicted to work, and the one that 
stays away from work do both live by their own dharmas. As regards 
myself, I do not accept gifts. Give gifts to them, O monarch, that are drawn 
to the way of karma and its fruits. I will not take anything from you. On the 
other hand, I ask you: what, indeed, shall I give you? Tell me, O 
outstanding king, and I will accomplish it with the help of my tapasya.” 

The king said, “I am a Kshatriya, a warrior. I do not know how to say 
the word ‘give’. The only thing, O best among the reborn, that we can say 
by way of asking is: Give us battle!” 

The Brahmana said, “You are content with the observance of the 
duties of your order, your svadharma. Similarly, I am content with the 
duties of mine, O regent. There is little difference between us. Do as you 
please!” 

The king said, “Earlier you declared: ‘I will give you all that is within 
my power.’ I, therefore, ask you, O bestower of new life— give me the fruits 
of the japa that you have performed.” 

The Brahmana said, “You boast that your asking is always only for 
battle. Why then do you not seek battle with me?” 

Ikshvaku said, “It is said that Brahmanas are armed with the thunder 
of speech, and Kshatriyas have the might of arms. Hence, learned 
Brahmana, we are now engaged in this battle of words.” 

The Brahmana said, “Let me once again impress upon you that all that 
is within my power along with all of my wealth is for your asking. Come, 
rid yourself of this hesitation.” 

The king said, “And I, too, repeat on my part: if, indeed, you wish to 
give me anything, then give me the fruits of your japa of the past thousand 
years.” 

The Brahmana said, “Take the highest fruit of my japa. Feel free to 
take half of the fruit. Indeed, why just half, O king? If you wish, do not 
hesitate to take all the fruits of my japa.” 

The king said, “I am grateful for your generosity and may a shower of 
blessings be upon you, but I have no need for the fruits of your japa, even 
though I asked for them. But before I leave, tell me more about these 
fruits.” 


The Brahmana said, “I am not aware of what fruits I may have won 
through my japa. With Dharma, Kaala, Yama and Mrityu as my witnesses, 
all I know is that I have now given those fruits to you.” 

The king said, “What could I do with fruits that you have no 
knowledge of? If you do not tell me what the fruits are, let them be yours, 
for I have no wish for them. Undoubtedly, I would rather not accept such 
rewards, than possess them and remain ignorant of their worth.” 

The Brahmana said, “Enough! Speak no more. I have given you the 
fruits of my japa. Let us now honour our words, O Rajarishi. As for my 
japa, I never undertook it in order to fulfil any specific desires. How then, O 
tiger among kings, should I have any knowledge of what the fruits are of 
the japa? You said, ‘Give!’ And I said, ‘I give!’ I will not betray my word. 
Keep the truth. Be calm. If you refuse to keep your word, O king, great sin 
will fall on you. Speaking falsely, O Parantapa, is not becoming of you. 

Similarly, I dare not render false what I have said. I readily said, ‘I 
give!’ So, if you are firm in truth then accept my gift. After all, Maharajan, 
you did come here and ask me for the fruits of my japa. So take what I have 
offered, if you are honest. He who is addicted to deceit has no place in this 
world nor the next. Such a one fails to redeem his ancestors. How can he 
even succeed in doing any good to his unborn progeny? 

The rewards of sacrifices and gifts, as also of fasts and religious 
observances, are not so effective in saving a man from evil and hell as the 
truth is, O bull among men, in both this and the next world. All the 
penances that you have undergone and all those that you will undergo in the 
future for hundreds and thousands of years do not possess an efficacy 
greater than that of truth. 

Truth is the one undecaying Brahman. Truth is the one unfailing 
tapasya. Truth is the one undiminishing yagna. Truth is the one 
undeteriorating Veda. Truth is awake in the Vedas. The fruits attached to 
truth are said to be the highest. From Satya arise dharma and niyama. 
Everything rests on truth. Satya is the Vedas and their Angas. Truth is 
knowledge. Truth is the law. Truth is the observance of vows and fasts. 
Satya is the primeval AUM. Truth is the origin of creatures. Truth is their 
progeny. It is by truth that the wind moves. It is by truth that the sun gives 
heat. It is by truth that fire burns. It is on truth that heaven rests. Satya is 
parityaga, tapasya, the chanting of Samans. Satya is the Vedas and 
Saraswati. 


It is said that once truth and all religious observances were placed on a 
pair of scales. When both were weighed, truth was seen to be heavier. 

Satya and dharma stand side by side. Everything is enhanced through 
truth. Why, O king, would you wish to do something that is stained with 
untruth? Be rooted in satya. Do not act falsely, O monarch. Why would you 
go back on your word of ‘Give me’? 

If you refuse, O Rajan, to accept the fruits of my japa, you will wander 
in the world, fallen from dharma. He who does not give what he promised, 
as also the one who does not accept what he sought, are both guilty of 
deceit. Therefore, it is vital for you not to break your word.” 

The king said, “To fight and protect are the duties of Kshatriyas. It is 
said that Kshatriyas are givers of gifts. How then can I take anything from 
you as a gift?” 

The Brahmana said, “I never insisted that you, O king, accept anything 
from me in the first place. I did not come to your house. In fact, you came 
to me asking for the fruits of my japa. Why do you not take them now?” 

Lord Dharma said, “Be aware, both of you, that I am Dharma. Let 
there be no dispute between you. Let the Brahmana receive the reward for 
his gift, and let the king, too, obtain the merit of satya.” 

Now Swarga said, “Know, O great king, that I am heaven manifest in 
person. Let this dispute between you cease. You are both equal in merit or 
rewards earned.” 

The king said, “I have no use for heaven. Return, O Swarga, to where 
you have come from. If this learned Brahmana desires a remedy through 
you, then let him take the rewards that I have won by my deeds in life.” 

The Brahmana said, “In my youth, through ignorance, I did stretch out 
my hand for alms. Now, however, I recite the Gayatri, while observing 
vairagya. Why do you, O king, tempt me like this, I who have for a long 
time been in tapasya? I will myself do what my dharma is. I do not wish to 
have any share of the rewards won by you, O Kshatriya. I am devoted to 
tapasya and the study of the Vedas, and I have abstained from acceptance.” 

The king said, “If, O Brahmana, you really want to give me the 
rewards of your japa, then let half those rewards be mine. And you must 
take half the reward that I have won by my deeds. Brahmanas are engaged 
in the dharma of acceptance. Men born into the Kshatriya varna engage in 
the duty of giving. If you are not aware of the dharma laid down for both 
the varnas, let our fruits be equal. Or, if you do not wish to be my equal in 


our rewards, take all the rewards that I may have won. Ah, take the punya I 
have won, if you wish to show me charity.” 

At this juncture, two ungraceful individuals came there. Each had his 
arm upon the other’s shoulder; both were badly dressed. They said these 
words, “You owe me nothing. In fact, I really owe you. If we quarrel in this 
way, here is the king who rules over men. I say truly, you owe me nothing!” 

“You speak falsely. I do owe you a debt!” 

Both of them, waxing hot in debate, then addressed the king, saying, 
“See, O monarch, that neither of us may become stained with sin.” 

The one called Virupa said, “I owe my companion Vikrita, O king, the 
merits of the gift of a cow. I am willing to repay the debt. This Vikrita, 
however, refuses to take repayment.” 

Vikrita said, “This Virupa, O king, owes me nothing. He tells lies 
dressed in the garb of truth.” 

The king said, “Tell me, O Virupa, what is it that you owe your friend 
here? I am determined to hear you and then do what is proper.” 

Virupa said, “Listen carefully about the circumstances in detail, of 
how I owe my companion Vikrita, O ruler of men. Vikrita, in the past, for 
the sake of winning punya, O Anagha, gave away an auspicious cow to a 
Brahmana devoted to tapasya as also the study of the Vedas. Going to him, 
O king, I begged of him the reward of his devotions. With a pure heart, 
Vikrita made a gift to me of the reward. 

Later on, to purify myself, I did some good deeds. I also bought two 
Kapila cows with calves, both of which yielded goodly quantities of milk. 
Next, according to the due rites and with proper devotion, I made a gift of 
the two cows to a poor Brahmana living by the unchha vrata. Since I 
accepted the gift from my companion, I now wish to give him twice the 
reward he gave me. O tiger among men, who between the two of us is 
innocent and who guilty in your eyes? Who performs due rites and with 
proper devotion? At odds about this, we have come to you, O great king. 
Whether you judge right or wrong, establish peace between both of us. If 
my companion does not wish to accept in return from me a gift equal to 
what he gave me, then you will have to judge patiently and set us both on 
the right path.” 

The king said, “Why do you not accept the payment that is owed to 
you? Do not delay, but accept what you know is your due.” 


Vikrita said, “This one says that he owes me. I say to him that what I 
gave him I gave away. He does not, therefore, owe me anything. Let him go 
wherever he wishes.” 

The king said, “He is ready to give you; you, however, are unwilling 
to accept it. This does not seem proper to me. | think that you deserve 
punishment for this. There is little doubt in this.” 

Vikrita said, “I made a gift to him, O Rajarishi! How can I take it 
back? If I am guilty in this, you pronounce the punishment, O puissant 
one.” 

Virupa said, “If you refuse to accept when I am ready to give, this king 
will certainly punish you, for he is an upholder of nyaya.” 

Vikrita said, “Upon his request I gave him what was mine. How will I 
now take that back? You may go away; please leave.” 

The Brahmana said, “You have heard, O king, the words of these two. 
Do you accept without doubt what I have pledged to give you?” 

The king said, “This matter is, indeed, as deep in importance as an 
abyss. How will this debate end? If I do not accept what has been given by 
this Brahmana, how do I avoid being stained with a great sin?” 

The Rajarishi then said to the two supplicants, “Go away both of you; 
you have won your respective objects. I should see that the Rajadharma 
vested in me does not become futile. It is settled that kings should observe 
the dharma laid down for them. To my misfortune, however, the course of 
dharma prescribed for Brahmanas has possessed my wretched self.” 

The Brahmana said, “Accept, O king! I owe you. You did ask, and I 
pledged to give you. If, however, you refuse to accept, I will undoubtedly 
curse you.” 

The king said, “Fie on Rajadharma, for such a thankless resolution. I 
will, however, take what you give, only in order to render the two courses 
of dharmas as exact equals. Here is my hand, which was never before 
stretched out for the acceptance of gifts; it is now stretched out to receive as 
also to give. Give me what you owe me.” 

The Brahmana said, “If I have won any fruits by chanting the Gayatri, 
accept them all.” 

The king said, “These drops of water, behold, O best of Brahmanas, 
have fallen upon my hand. I also desire to give to you. Accept my gift. Let 
there be equality between us.” 


Virupa said, “Know, O king, that we two are Kama and Krodha. 
Because of us, you have been provoked to act in this way. You have made a 
gift in return to the Brahmana. Let there be equality between you and this 
Dvija in respect of regions of grace in the next world. Vikrita really does 
not owe me anything. We appealed to you for your own sake. Kaala, 
Dharma, Mrityu and we two have examined everything about you in your 
very presence by creating this friction between you and the Brahmana. Go 
now, as you please, to the worlds of bliss which you have won through your 
deeds.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘I have now told you how japis obtain the fruits of 
their chanting and what, indeed, is their end—what is the place, and what 
are the worlds that a japi may attain. A japi of the Gayatri mantra goes to 
Brahma, to Agni, or enters Suryaloka. If he dallies there in his new 
energetic form, then stupefied by such attachment, he acquires the attributes 
of those particular realms. The same becomes the case with him if he goes 
to Soma, Vayu, Bhumi or Akasa. The fact is, he dwells in all these, with 
attachment, and displays the traits peculiar to those worlds. 

If, however, he goes to these regions without any attachment, and is 
wary of the felicity he enjoys and wishes for that which is Supreme and 
Immutable, he then enters even that. As such, he attains the ambrosia of 
ambrosias, to a state free from desire and devoid of a separate 
consciousness. He becomes Brahman’s very self, freed from the influence 
of opposites, happy, peaceful and without pain. Indeed, he attains that 
condition which is free from suffering, which is serenity’s self, which is 
Brahman, the One from where there is no return. 

He is freed from the four causes of apprehension, the six conditions, 
and the other sixteen attributes. Transcending the creator Brahma, he attains 
absorption into the One Supreme Soul. Or, if under the influence of 
attachments, he does not wish for such absorption, but desires to have a 
separate existence dependent on the supreme cause of everything, he then 
obtains everything for which he cherishes a wish. Alternatively, if he looks 
with distaste upon all realms of felicity, which have been previously called 
hells, then, bereft of desire and free from everything, he enjoys supreme 
grace and bliss even in those very worlds. 

Thus, O monarch, I have told you about the goal attained by japis. I 
have told you everything. What else do you wish to hear?’ 


CANTO 200 


Y udhishtira says, ‘Tell me, O Bhishma, what reply was given by 

either the Brahmana or the king to Virupa after the conclusion of 
what he said. How did it end between those described by you? What was 
the dialogue between them, and what did they do there?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘The Brahmana affirmed, “Let it be as you have said,” 
and began his worship of Dharma, Yama, Kaala, Mrityu and Swarga, all of 
whom were worthy of adoration. He also worshipped all the eminent 
Brahmanas that had come there by bowing his head to them. Addressing the 
king next, he said, “Bestowed with the reward of my japa, O Rajarishi, 
attain a position of eminence. With your leave, I will set myself to my japa 
again. O mighty one, the Devi Savitri gave me a boon, saying, “Let your 
devotion to japa be eternal.’ 

The king said, “If your success in japa has become fruitless because 
you have given away those fruits to me, and if your heart is set upon 
sadhana again, then, O learned Brahmana, let half your japa accrue to me 
and half remain with you, and let the reward of your japa be yours.” 

The Brahmana said, “You have made great efforts before all these 
persons to make me a partner in the rewards in store for you as the result of 
your own deeds. Let us then become equal in our rewards in the next life, 
and let us go to receive the end which is ours.” 

Knowing the determination with which they came there, Indra, the 
king of the Devas, appeared there, accompanied by the other Devas, 


Lokapalas, and other regents of the world. The Sadhyas, Viswas, Mantras, 
diverse kinds of loud and sweet music, rivers, mountains, seas, sacred 
waters, penances, ordinances of yoga, Vedas, the sounds that accompany 
the singing of the Samans, Saraswati, Narada, Parvata, Viswavasu, the 
Hahas, the Huhus, the Gandharva Chitrasena with all the members of his 
family, the Nagas, Sadhyas, Munis, Prajapati, Devadeva, and _ the 
inconceivable thousand-headed Vishnu himself, arrived there. Drums and 
trumpets were beaten and blown in the heavens. Celestial flowers were 
showered down upon the high-Souled beings. Bands of apsaras danced all 
around. Swarga, in his embodied form, came there. 

Addressing the Brahmana, he said, “You have achieved success. You 
are blessed.” Next he addressed the king, and said, “You also, O emperor, 
have achieved success.” 

Later, with good done to each other, the Brahmana and the king 
withdrew their senses from the objects of the world. With the vital breaths 
prana, apana, samana, udana and vyana fixed in their hearts, they 
concentrated their minds in prana and apana united as one. They set the two 
united breaths in the abdomen, and directed their gazes to the tip of the nose 
and then immediately below the eyebrows. They next held the two breaths, 
with the help of the mind, in the point between the two eyebrows, bringing 
them there very gradually. With bodies perfectly still, they remained 
absorbed with fixed gaze. In control of their Souls, they raised it within the 
brain. Then piercing the crown of the divine Brahmana, a fiery flame of 
great splendour ascended into the sky. Loud exclamations of awe, uttered 
by all creatures, rent the air on all sides. 

Its praises sung by all, that flame then entered Brahma’s Self. The 
Pitamaha stepped forward, and addressed the radiance that had assumed a 
form of tremendous height, with the words, “Welcome!” Furthermore, he 
said, “Verily, japis attain the same goal as do the yogins. The achievement 
by the yogin of his goal is an object directly visible to everyone here. As for 
japis, there is this distinction that they have the honour of Brahma coming 
forward to receive them after their departure from earth. Come merge 
yourself in me.” 

Thus spoke Brahma and once more imparted consciousness into that 
towering lustre. The Brahmana, freed from all anxieties, entered the mouth 
of the creator. King Ikshvaku similarly entered the divine Pitamaha like the 
best of Brahmanas. The gathered Devas saluted the Self-born and said, “A 


very superior goal is indeed ordained for japis. What we have seen you do 
is for japis. As for ourselves, we came here to witness it. You have made 
these two equal, given them equal honour, and bestowed upon them an 
equal goal. We have seen today the high goal reserved for both yogins and 
japis. Transcending all the worlds of bliss, these two can go wherever they 
wish.” 

Brahma said, “Even he who reads the great smriti like the Veda, as 
also he who reads the other auspicious smritis, Manu’s and the rest, would, 
in this way, attain the same world with me. Also, the one who is devoted to 
yoga, will, undoubtedly acquire in this manner, after death, the lokas that 
are mine. I take my leave. All of you return to your homes in order to 
achieve your goals.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘With these words, Brahma disappeared. The 
assembled Devas returned to their respective abodes. All the Divine Beings 
honoured Dharma, and went happily, walking behind the great Deva. 

These are the rewards of japis and this their attainment. I have 
described them to you as I myself heard them. What else, O king, do you 
wish to hear?’ 


CANTO 201 


Y udhishtira says, ‘What are the fruits of the yoga represented by 
knowledge of all the Vedas, and of the various observances and 
vows? How also may the Soul be known? Tell us this, O Bhishma.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Listen to the ancient narrative of the discourse 
between the lord of creatures, Manu, and Maharishi Brihaspati. 

In days of old, the best of celestial Rishis, Brihaspati, who was a 
disciple of Manu, bowed to his preceptor and said, “What is the cause of the 
universe? From where have the laws about yagnas and other pious 
observances come? What are the fruits that the learned say are attached to 
knowledge? Tell me also truly, O illustrious one, what is that which the very 
Vedas have not been able to reveal? What are the fruits adored by eminent 
men well versed with the science of artha, the Vedas and mantras, through 
yagnas and plentiful gifts of kine? From where do those fruits arise? Where 
are they to be found? 

Tell me also the itihasa of from where the earth, all earthly objects, 
wind, sky, aquatic creatures, water, heaven and the denizens of heaven, 
have come. Man tends to incline towards the object of which he seeks 
knowledge. I have no knowledge of the Ancient and Supreme One. How 
will I rescue myself from a false display of inclinations towards Him? 

I have studied the Riks, all the Samanas, the Yajuses, Chhandas, 
Jyotisha-shastra, Nirukta, Vyakarana, Sankalpa and Siksha. However, I have 
no knowledge of the nature of the great creatures, the Panchamahabhutas, 


which enter into the composition of everything. Tell me about all this in 
simple terms. Tell me what the fruits are of knowledge and those of 
sacrifices and other religious rites. Explain to me also how an embodied 
being departs from his body and how he acquires another body.” 

Manu said, “That which is agreeable to one is said to constitute one’s 
happiness. Similarly, that which is disagreeable is said to constitute one’s 
sorrow. ‘By this I will obtain happiness and keep sorrow away’ —from this 
sentiment flow all religious actions. The efforts to acquire knowledge, 
however, arise from a desire to avoid both happiness and sorrow. The laws 
about sacrifices and other observances, which occur in the Vedas, are all 
connected with desire. He, however, who liberates himself from desire, 
succeeds in attaining Brahman. One, who, out of a desire of winning 
happiness, seeks it in myriad ways and with diverse actions, falls into hell.” 

Brihaspati said, “Man’s aspirations are concerned with the means to 
acquire happiness, and to avoid pain and sorrow. Such acquisition and 
avoidance again are accomplished through karma.” 

Manu said, “It is by liberating oneself from karma that one succeeds in 
attaining Brahman. The laws of karma are meant for that very end. These 
laws bind only those who are not free from desire. By liberating oneself 
from karma, one acquires the highest state. The desire for mukti leads one 
to religious rites and actions aimed at freedom from attachments and the 
purification of the Soul. By freeing oneself from karma, one achieves the 
highest goal, Brahman, which is far beyond the reward that karma bestows. 

Creatures have all been created by manas and karma. These again are 
the two best paths adored by all. Outward actions yield fruits that are 
temporary as also eternal. To acquire the everlasting there is no other means 
than the relinquishment of fruits, by the mind. Just as the eye distinguishes 
light from darkness, so does awareness recognise and evade evil. Men avoid 
snakes, sharp kusa blades and dangerous pits, which cross their path. If 
some tread upon or fall into them, they do so through ignorance. Such is the 
superiority of knowledge over ignorance. 

Mantras chanted duly, yagnas, dakshina, bhiksha and dhyana are the 
five karmas that are solely said to yield fruits. Karmas have the three 
attributes of sattva, rajas and tamas for their Soul. The Vedas say this. The 
Vedas consist of mantras. The mantras, therefore, have the same three 
attributes, since it is with mantras that karma is to be accomplished. The 
ritual also must be liable to the same three gunas. 


The fruits of action depend upon the mind. The embodied creature 
enjoys the fruits. All excellent kinds of sound, form, taste, touch and scent, 
are the fruits of actions, attained in swarga. However, man, right here, 
acquires the fruits of knowledge before death. 

The fruits of all actions are achieved through the body, and enjoyed in 
a state of physical existence. The body is, indeed, the framework to which 
both happiness as well as suffering inhere. Rewards of actions 
accomplished by means of words, are enjoyed in a state of spoken words. 
Similarly, the fruits of deeds accomplished by the mind are enjoyed in a 
state within the realms of the mind. Devoted to the fruits of karma, whether 
sattvika, rajasika or tamasika, a person receives rewards, good or bad, and 
accordingly shares their nature. Like fish swimming against a current of 
water, the karma of a past life comes to the doer. The embodied creature 
experiences happiness for his good karma, and suffering for his evil doings. 

He from whom this universe has sprung; He by knowing whom 
persons of cleansed Souls transcend this world; He who has not been 
expressed by Vedic mantras and words—Him I will now indicate. Listen to 
me as I speak of the highest of the high. 

Himself free from the several kinds of taste, scent, sound, touch and 
form, He is incapable of being grasped by the senses. Unmanifest, without 
colour, the One, He has created the five kinds of objects for His creatures. 
He is neither female nor male, nor of the neuter sex. He is neither existent, 
nor non-existent, nor both existent and non-existent. Only those acquainted 
with Brahman behold Him. He knows no direction.” 


CANTO 202 


M anu said, “From the eternal and unfailing one, first sprang space; 
from space came wind; from wind came light; from light came 
water; from water came the universe; and from the universe, all things that 
occur in it. The bodies of all earthly beings, after their demise, first enter 
into water, then into light or fire, then into the wind, and then into space. 

Those who seek mukti need not return from ethereal space. They 
attain Brahman. Brahman is neither hot nor cold, neither mild nor harsh, 
neither sour nor astringent, neither sweet nor bitter. He is not attributed with 
sound, scent or form. He transcends all these and everything, and is without 
dimensions. 

The skin perceives touch; the tongue, taste; the nose, scent; the ears, 
sounds; and the eyes, forms. Men unfamiliar with Adhyatma do not succeed 
in seeing what is above these. With the tongue withdrawn from tastes, the 
nose from scents, the ears from touch and the eyes from forms, one 
succeeds in beholding one’s own self as independent of the senses and the 
mind and, therefore, of the three gunas. 

It is said, that which is the cause of the doer, the deed, that which is 
used for the deed, the place and the time of the deed, and the tendencies 
towards happiness and sorrow, is called the self or the Soul. That which 
pervades everything, which does everything in the form of living creatures, 
that which exists in the universe as the mantras declare, that which is the 


cause of all, that which is the highest of the high, and that which is one 
without a second and does all things, is the cause. Everything else is effect. 

It is seen that, in keeping with his actions, a man obtains results both 
good and evil, which though apparently incompatible with each other, still 
dwell together in harmony. Indeed, as the good and evil fruit born of their 
own actions abide in the bodies of creatures, so does knowledge reside in 
the body. As a burning lamp reveals objects before it, so do the five senses, 
like lamps set high on trees, discover their respective objects with the light 
of knowledge. 

As the various ministers of a king gather to give him counsel, even so 
the five senses in the body willingly obey knowledge. Gyana is superior to 
all of them. 

Like the flames of a fire, currents of the wind, rays of the sun and 
waters of the rivers, wax and wane repeatedly, even so the bodies of 
embodied creatures appear and disappear perennially. 

As aman who cleaves a piece of wood with an axe does not find either 
smoke or fire in it, even so one cannot cut open the arms, feet and stomach 
of a person to behold the principle of knowledge, which, indeed, has 
nothing in common with the stomach and the limbs. 

Just as one sees smoke and fire by rubbing together two pieces of 
wood, so does a person of well-directed intelligence, who unites the senses 
and the Soul through yoga, view the Supreme Soul, which, verily, exists in 
its own nature. 

In a dream, one sees one’s body lying on the ground as something 
apart from one’s own self; likewise does a person, possessed of the five 
senses, the mind and the intellect, see his own body after death, and goes 
from one body into another. 

The Soul is not subject to birth, growth, decay and death. By the laws 
of karma, the jiva, upon the demise of one body passes into another, unseen 
by others. None can see the form of the individual Soul, nor can it be felt by 
touch. With the senses, the Atman accomplishes no deeds. The senses do 
not approach the Soul. The Atman, however, controls them all. As anything 
placed in a blazing fire assumes a certain colour based on the light and heat 
that works upon it, without taking any other hue or attribute, even so the 
Soul’s form is seen to take its appearance from the body it inhabits. 

Likewise, man discards one body and enters another, unseen by all. 
Indeed, with his body cast to the Panchamahabhutas, he assumes a form 


that is made of the same five elements. Upon his demise, the embodied 
creature enters space, wind, fire, water and earth in such a way that each 
particular element in his body mingles in tune with its correlate outside his 
body. 

The senses, too, already engaged in diverse occupations and 
dependent on the five elements for their functions, enter the 
Panchamahabhutas. The ear derives its capacity from space; and the sense 
of scent from the earth. Form, which is the property of the eye, is the result 
of light or fire. Fire or heat is said to be the dependent cause of water. The 
tongue with taste for its attribute merges into water. The skin, which has 
touch for its quality, becomes lost in the wind whose nature it shares. The 
fivefold attributes, sound and the rest, dwell in the Panchamahabhutas. The 
fivefold objects of the senses, space and the others, dwell in the five senses. 
All these in turn, the fivefold attributes, the fivefold elements and the five 
senses follow the lead of the mind. The mind follows the lead of the 
intellect, which is guided by that which exists in its true and undefiled 
nature—the Paramatman. 

The karmi in his new body receives the fruits of all the good and bad 
deeds done by him as also of all actions done by him in his past lives. All 
deeds done in this life and ones to come follow the mind like aquatic 
creatures that ride a friendly current. As a moving, restless thing draws 
attention to itself, as a minute object appears enlarged when seen through a 
magnifying glass, as a mirror shows a person his own face, even so the Soul 
though subtle and invisible becomes an object of the intellect’s 
apprehension.” 


CANTO 203 


M anu said, “Over time, manas united with the indriyas retains 

impressions received in the past. When the senses are all 
suspended from their functions, the Paramatman in the form of buddhi 
exists in its own true nature. When the jivatma completely disregards all the 
sense objects with regard to their simultaneity or contrarily gathers them 
from all directions and clings to them, he inevitably wanders around 
aimlessly. He is, therefore, the silent witness. Hence the embodied Soul has 
a distinct and independent existence. 

Along with rajas, tamas and sattva there are also three states of 
awareness —jagrata awastha, swapna awastha and sushrupta awastha. The 
Soul has knowledge of the pleasures and pains, which are all opposites of 
these states, and share the nature of the traigunas. The Atman enters the 
senses like the wind that blows into a piece of burning wood. One cannot 
see the form of the Soul, nor can it be known by the sense of touch, or by 
the ear. It may, however, be seen with the help of the srutis and the 
instructions of the sages. 

As regards the senses, the particular sense that grasps it, in turn, loses 
its existence as a sense. The senses cannot themselves apprehend their own 
forms by themselves. The Soul is omniscient inasmuch as it knows both the 
knower and the known. It witnesses all things. The omniscient Atman 
knows the senses without, but the senses are unable to know it. Nobody has 
seen the other side of the Himavat mountains, or of the moon. Yet it cannot 


be said that these do not exist. Similarly, though never known by the senses, 
it cannot be said that the subtle Soul that dwells in all creatures, does not 
exist. We see the earth reflected on the moon’s surface in the form of 
shadows, when the moon waxes and wanes. Yet they do not know that it is 
the earth that is so reflected there. Likewise is the knowledge of the Atman. 
That knowledge must come of itself. 

The Soul depends upon itself. Sages and seers, who reflect on the 
formlessness of visible objects before birth and after death, behold with the 
help of intelligence, the formlessness of objects that have apparent forms. 
Likewise, although the sun’s movement cannot be seen, yet, by watching it 
rise and set, men conclude that the sun has motion. Similarly, though the 
Atman is at a great distance from them, the wise behold the Soul with the 
help of the lamp of intelligence, and seek to merge the Panchamahabhutas 
in Brahman. 

Verily, an end cannot be accomplished without the application of 
means. Fishermen cast nets to catch fish. Animals are captured with the 
help of other animals. Birds of prey are engaged to snare other birds. 
Elephants are taken by those who use elephants. In this way, the Soul may 
be apprehended by knowledge. We have heard that only a snake can see a 
snake’s legs. Similarly, through knowledge one sees the subtle Soul abide 
within the gross body. Men cannot, through their senses, know the senses. 
Likewise, mere intellect at its highest cannot behold the Soul that is 
Supreme. 

On the fifteenth day of the dark fortnight, when the moon becomes 
invisible, still, it cannot be averred that the moon is destroyed. Similar is the 
case with the Soul within the body—when liberated from the body, the 
Atman cannot be seen or known. As the moon shines anew when it ascends 
to another position in the sky—so does the Soul manifest itself once more 
when it acquires a new body. The eye can directly view all the birth, growth 
and disappearance of the moon. These phenomena, however, relate to the 
gross form of that luminary. The like are not the qualities of the Soul. The 
lunar disc, which reappears after the dark fortnight, is regarded as the same 
moon that had become invisible. Likewise, irrespective of the changes 
represented by birth, growth and age, a person is regarded as the same 
individual without any doubt of his identity. 

It cannot be distinctly seen how Rahu approaches and leaves the 
moon. Similarly, it cannot be discerned how the Soul leaves one body and 


enters another. Rahu is visible only when it exists with the sun or the moon. 
Likewise, the Atman becomes an object of perception only when it exists 
with the body. Separated from the sun or the moon, Rahu can no longer be 
seen. Similarly, liberated from the body, the Soul can no longer be seen. 
Although the moon disappears during the dark fortnight, it is not deserted 
by the constellations and the stars; the Atman also, though separated from 
the body, is not deserted by the fruits of its actions in that body.” 


CANTO 204 


M anu said, “As in a dream where this gross body lies inactive and 

the subtle life-giving spirit detaches itself from the body, and 
enters into the state of deep slumber of death, the sukshma sarira with all 
the senses becomes inactive and the detached intellect remains awake. The 
same is the case with existence and non-existence. 

As when water is clear, images reflected in it can be seen by the eye, 
likewise, if the senses be still and calm, the Soul can be seen by the 
intellect. If, however, the water is stirred, the person standing by it can no 
longer see the images. Similarly, if the senses are disturbed, the Soul can no 
longer be seen by the intellect. Ignorance creates delusion. Delusion affects 
the mind. When the mind becomes deluded, the five senses housed within it 
are compromised as well. 

Surcharged with avidya, sunk in the swamp of worldly objects, one 
cannot enjoy the sweetness of contentment or peace. In such a state, 
undetached from its good and evil actions, the jiva returns repeatedly to the 
objects of the world. Because of sin, its thirst is never quenched. This thirst 
is satisfied only when its sin is destroyed. Because of the attachment to 
worldly things, which has a tendency to proliferate, one wishes for things 
other than the necessary, and hence fails to attain the Supreme Brahman. 

From the destruction of all sinful deeds, knowledge arises in men. 
Upon the appearance of gyana, one’s Soul can be witnessed in the intellect, 
like a reflection in a polished mirror. Misery is the outcome of unrestrained 


senses, whereas restrained senses lead to happiness. Therefore, one should 
restrain one’s mind with effort from objects sought by the senses. 

Above the senses is the mind; above the mind is the intellect; above 
intellect is the Soul; above the Soul is the Supreme Brahman. 

From the unmanifest has sprung the Soul; from the Soul has sprung 
the intellect; from the intellect has sprung the mind. When the mind 
becomes associated with the senses, it recognises sound and other objects of 
the senses. He who renounces such objects, and liberates himself from all 
things that arise from primordial matter, eventually enjoys immortality. 

As when the sun rises, he spreads his rays and draws them into himself 
when he sets, so too, when the Atman enters the body, it obtains the fivefold 
sense-objects by energising them with the senses. When, however, he leaves 
the body, he is said to set by withdrawing the senses into himself. 
Repeatedly led along the path that is created by karma, he finds the fruits of 
his deeds in keeping with their nature. Desire itself for the objects of the 
senses is kept at bay from a person who does not seek them. The very 
principle of desire leaves him who has seen his Atman. 

When the intellect, unencumbered from all attachments is fixed in the 
mind, it succeeds in attaining Brahman; for it is there that the mind with the 
intellect withdrawn can be extinguished. Brahman is not an object of touch, 
hearing, taste, sight, smell or any deductive inference from the known. Only 
the intellect in its purity can attain it. All objects that the mind apprehends 
through the senses can be withdrawn into the mind; the mind into the 
intellect; the intellect into the Soul, and the Atman into the Supreme 
Brahman. The senses cannot contribute to the success of the mind. The 
mind cannot apprehend the intellect. The intellect cannot seize the 
manifested Soul. The subtle Soul, however, sees them all.” 


CANTO 205 


M anu said, “Upon the appearance of physical and mental sorrow, one 

is not able to practice yoga. As a remedy, it is advisable not to 
brood over such sorrow, for it becomes aggressive and increases in 
violence. One should relieve mental sorrow with wisdom, while physical 
sorrow should be cured with medicaments. Wisdom teaches this. In 
sadness, one should not behave like a child. 

The wise should never cherish a desire for youth, beauty, longevity, 
health, accumulation of wealth and the companionship of those that are 
dear: all of which are transitory. One should not grieve alone for a sorrow 
that affects a whole community. Without grieving, one should, if one sees 
an opportunity, seek to apply a remedy. Undoubtedly, in life the measure of 
sorrow is much greater than that of happiness. To one who is content in life, 
death that is disagreeable comes due to his bewilderment. He who avoids 
both sorrow and happiness succeeds in attaining Brahman. The wise need 
never grieve. Worldly possessions bring about sorrow. There is no 
happiness in protecting them. They are, again, earned with toil and 
heartbreak. One should, therefore, ignore their loss. 

Pure knowledge or Brahman is regarded by ignorance as existing in 
the diverse forms that are objects of knowledge. Know that the mind is only 
an attribute of knowledge. When the mind becomes united with the 
faculties of knowledge, then the intellect sets in. When intellect is 
unencumbered by actions and, withdrawn from outward objects, is focused 


on the mind through dhyana or yoga, it attains Brahman, or samadhi. The 
intellect that flows from ignorance possessed of the senses and attributes 
runs towards external objects, like a river from a mountaintop flowing 
towards other lands. 

When the intellect, withdrawn into the mind, succeeds in absorbing 
itself into contemplation that is free from attributes, it attains knowledge of 
Brahman like the touch of gold on a touchstone. The mind is the 
apprehender of the objects of the senses. It must first be extinguished before 
Brahman can be attained. Dependent upon the attributes of objects that are 
before it, the mind can never show that which is without attributes. With all 
the doors availed by the senses shut, the intellect should be drawn into the 
mind. In this state, when absorbed in meditation, it attains the knowledge of 
Brahman. 

As the Panchamahabhutas become withdrawn into their subtle form 
called tanmatras on the destruction of the gunas they are known by, 
similarly buddhi may dwell in manas alone, with all senses withdrawn from 
their objects. Even when the intellect, though possessed of the quality of 
certainty, deliberates inwardly, it is nothing but the mind without anything 
superior to it. When consciousness, which attains excellence through 
contemplation, successfully identifies attributes with what are considered as 
their possessors, then can it cast off all aspects and attain the Brahman that 
is nirguna, without attributes. 

There is no suitable indication to provide knowledge of the Avyakta 
Brahman, the unmanifest. What cannot be described, cannot be acquired by 
anyone. With a purified Soul, through penances, inferences, self-restraint, 
practices and observances prescribed for one’s varna, and through the 
Vedas, should one seek to approach the Supreme Brahman. Persons of clear 
vision besides seeing the Supreme within themselves, seek Him in even 
external forms by freeing themselves from the gunas. 

From the absence of all attributes or because of its own nature, the 
Supreme, known as the Gneya, that which should be known, can never be 
apprehended by debate. When the intellect is rid of qualities, only then can 
it attain Brahman. Attached to attributes, it regresses from the Supreme. 
Indeed, such is the nature of the intellect that it rushes towards the gunas 
and moves among them like fire among fuel. In the state called sushupti, the 
five senses exist freed from their respective functions, just as the Supreme 
Brahman exists high above prakriti, freed from all its attributes. Embodied 


creatures thus perform karma because of the gunas. When they abstain from 
doing so, they attain moksha. Yet others, through karma, go to swargaloka. 

The living creature, primordial nature, intellect, objects of the senses, 
the senses, consciousness, conviction of personal identity, are all called 
creatures for they are subject to death. The original creation of all these 
flowed from the Supreme Brahman. Their second or succeeding creation is 
due to the action of pairs of opposite sexes and is confined to all things save 
the primal five, and is restrained by laws because of which the same species 
replicate themselves. With dharma living creatures find a high end, and 
from adharma, they earn a lowly and vile end. He who is not free from 
attachments encounters rebirth; while he who is liberated, attains 
knowledge or Brahman.” 


CANTO 206 


M anu said, “When the fivefold attributes are united with the five 

senses and the mind, then Brahman is seen by the individual like a 
thread passing through a gem. Just as a thread may lie within gold, pearl, 
coral or any earthly thing, even so one’s Soul, through one’s own deeds, 
may live within a cow, a horse, a man, an elephant, a worm, an insect or any 
other creature. The good deeds an individual performs in a particular body 
bring rewards that he enjoys in that particular body. Soil, drenched with a 
specific liquid, supplies each different herb or plant that grows on it, with 
the specific nourishment needed for its growth. The intellect, whose course 
is witnessed by the Soul, is obliged to follow the path defined by the deeds 
of previous lives. 

From knowledge springs desire. From desire springs resolution. From 
resolution flows action. From action proceed fruits, good and bad. Fruits, 
therefore, depend on karma as their cause. Actions have the intellect for 
their cause. The intellect has knowledge for its cause; and gyana has the 
Atman for its cause. The excellent result of the destruction of knowledge, 
fruits, intellect and actions, is called Brahmagyana. Magnificent and exalted 
is the self-existent essence, which yogis behold. Those devoid of wisdom, 
whose intellect is devoted to worldly possessions, never perceive that which 
exists in the Soul itself. 

Water is superior to earth in extension; light is superior to water; wind 
is superior to light; space is superior to wind; the mind is superior to space; 


the intellect is superior to the mind; time is superior to the intellect. The 
divine Vishnu, lord of this universe, is superior to Kaala. He is without 
beginning, middle and end. He is unchangeable. He transcends all sorrow. 
Vishnu has been called the Supreme Brahman. He is the refuge of the 
highest order. Rishis liberated from the power of Kaala, know Him and 
attain moksha. All that we perceive are displayed in the gunas. Nirguna, 
bereft of attributes, Brahman is superior to these. 

Selfless action is the highest dharma, which is sure to lead to mukti. 
The Riks, Yajuses and Samans have the body for their refuge. They flow 
from the tip of the tongue. They cannot be acquired without effort and are 
subject to destruction. The knowledge of Brahman, however, cannot be 
acquired in this way, for without depending upon the body it depends upon 
the Knower, the Atman, which has the body for its refuge. Without 
beginning, middle or end, Brahman, unlike the Vedas, cannot be acquired 
through effort. The Riks, Yajuses and Samans, each have a beginning. 
Those that have a beginning have also an end. But Brahman is said to be 
without beginning. And because Brahman has neither beginning nor end, it 
is said to be infinite and unchangeable. Thus, Brahman transcends sorrow as 
also dvesha-advesha, and all the pairs of opposites. 

Through unfavourable destiny, an inability to discover the proper 
means, and due to impediments of karma, mortals are unable to find the 
path by which Brahman may be reached. Because of attachment to worldly 
possessions, a vision of the joys of the highest heaven, and a desire for 
something other than Brahman, men fail to reach the Parabrahman. Others 
beholding worldly objects desire their possession and, as such, do not long 
for Brahman. How will one, attached to inferior qualities, gain knowledge 
of Him who is possessed of attributes that are superior? It is by inference 
that one can arrive at a knowledge of Him who transcends all this in aspects 
and form. By subtle intelligence alone can we know Him. We cannot 
describe Him in words. The mind is seized by the mind, the eye by the eye. 
By knowledge, the intellect is purified. Intellect may be employed to purify 
the mind. By the mind should the senses be controlled. When one achieves 
all this, one may attain the unchangeable Brahman. One who, through 
dhyana, becomes free from attachments, and is enriched by the possession 
of a discerning mind, successfully reaches Brahman, which is without 
desire and above all the gunas. 


As the wind keeps away from the fire embedded within a piece of 
wood, even so persons agitated by desire for worldly possessions keep 
away from the Supreme. Upon renunciation of all earthly objects, the mind 
attains that which is higher than the intellect; while upon their separation, 
the mind acquires that which is below the intellect. He who engages in the 
destruction of earthly desires attains absorption into the body of Brahman. 

Though the Soul is unmanifest, yet when adorned with gunas, its 
actions become manifest. Upon the dissolution of the body, it once more 
manifests in the form of a fresh body. The Soul is inactive. It exists, united 
with the senses that create either happiness or sorrow. Unified with all the 
senses and endowed with a body, it takes refuge in the Panchamahabhutas. 
Through want of power, however, it fails to function when deprived of force 
by the Supreme and changeless Brahman. 

No one sees the end of the earth but knows that the end is imminent. 
Man, agitated by attachments, is surely led to his last refuge; as a ship 
tossed about at sea is finally blown by the wind to a safe harbour. The sun, 
with rays spread at dawn, attains a quality: Illuminator of the world. At 
dusk, however, with rays withdrawn, the sun once again becomes an object 
divested of attributes. Similarly, with all distinctions and attachments 
withdrawn, one who practices tapasya ultimately enters the indestructible 
Brahman, which is without gunas. 

When one discerns him who is without birth, who is the highest refuge 
of dharma, who is self-born, from whom everything originates and to whom 
all things return, who is unchangeable, who is without beginning, middle 
and end, and who is certainty’s self, the Supreme Brahman, then one attains 
moksha.” 


CANTO 207 


Y udhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha, I wish to hear of the lotus-eyed 
indestructible one, who is the creator of everything, yet created by 
none. Who is called Vishnu, O lord of the Bharatas, since he pervades 
everything. Wisest, tell me in detail about him who is the origin of all 
creatures and unto whom all beings return, who cannot be vanquished by 
anyone, and is known as Narayana, Hrishikesa, Govinda and Kesava.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘I have heard of this from Jamadagni’s son Rama, from 
the Devarishi Narada, and from Krishna-Dwaipayana. Asita-Devala, O 
putra, Valmiki of austere tapasya, and Markandeya speak of Govinda as the 
most wonderful and Supreme Being. Kesava, O king of Bharata’s vamsa, is 
the divine and puissant lord of all. He is called Purusha, and pervades 
everything in multiple forms. 

Listen now, Yudhishtira, to the attributes, which great Brahmanas say, 
are to be found in the exalted wielder of the saranga. Prince of men, I will 
also recount the deeds ascribed to Govinda, by men conversant with old 
itihasas. He is said to be the Soul of all creatures, the high-Souled one, and 
the best of all beings. He created by his will the five-fold elements, wind, 
light, water, space and earth. 

The mighty lord of all things, the Divine One, the Supreme Being, 
created the earth, and lay down on the surface of the waters. While he 
floated upon the waters, the Supreme Being, refuge of every kind of energy 
and splendour, created Chitta, the first-born of beings in the universe. We 


have heard that he created consciousness along with the mind. 
Consciousness, which is the refuge of all creation, upholds all creatures 
along with the past and the future. After the emergence of consciousness, an 
exceedingly beautiful lotus, with effulgence like the sun’s, grew out of the 
navel of the Supreme Being floating on the waters. The illustrious and 
divine Brahma, the ancestor of all creatures, materialised within the lotus, 
illuminating all the cardinal points of the horizon with his lustre. 

O Mahabaho, after the high-Souled Pitamaha materialized from the 
primeval lotus, a great Asura named Madhu appeared from the tamoguna, 
the attribute of darkness. In order to help Brahma, the lord of all beings, the 
Supreme Divinity, slew the fierce Asura who sought to kill Brahma. From 
this slaying of the Asura Madhu, O Putra, all the Devas, Danavas and 
Manavas came to call the king of all persons faithful to dharma, by the 
name Madhusudana. 

Next, by his will, Brahma created seven sons with Daksha being the 
first. They were Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and 
Daksha. The eldest born, Marichi, by a command of his will, fathered a son 
named Kasyapa, master of all realisers of Brahman. From his toe, even 
before the birth of Marichi, Brahma created another son, Daksha, who, O 
king of Bharata’s vamsa, was the ancestor of creatures. 

Unto Daksha were first born thirteen daughters, the eldest of whom 
was called Diti. Marichi’s renowned son, the noble Kasyapa, married these 
thirteen daughters. The blessed Daksha next fathered ten more daughters. 
The progenitor of creatures, Prajapati Daksha, bestowed these upon 
Dharma, who became father of the Vasus, Rudras, Viswedevas, Sadhyas 
and the Maruts. Daksha next fathered twenty-seven other younger 
daughters. The luminous Soma became the husband of them all. 

The other wives of Kasyapa gave birth to Gandharvas, Kimpurushas, 
horses, birds, kine, fish, trees and plants. Danu gave birth to the Danavas 
with Viprachitti for their first. Diti gave birth to all the Asuras of immense 
strength. Aditi gave birth to the Adityas. Amongst them Vishnu took birth 
as a dwarf. Also called Govinda, he became the first of them all. Through 
his prowess, the Danavas were vanquished, and the prosperity of the Devas 
increased. 

Madhusudana created the day and the night, the morning and the 
evening, and the seasons in their order. After reflection, he also created the 


clouds, and other immobile and moving beings. Possessed of boundless 
energy, he also created the Viswas and Bhumi with all that is upon her. 

Later the divine and mighty Krishna, O Yudhishtira, created from his 
mouth a hundred outstanding Brahmanas. From his two arms, he created a 
hundred Kshatriyas, and from his thighs a hundred Vaisyas. Next, O bull of 
Bharata’s race, Kesava created from his two feet a hundred Sudras. 

Possessed of great ascetic merit, Madhusudana created the four varnas 
of men, and made Dhatri Brahma the lord and ruler of all creation. Of 
immeasurable radiance, Brahma also became an exponent of the knowledge 
of the Vedas. Additionally, Kesava made Virupaksha the ruler of the bhutas, 
pretas and of the goddesses called the Matrikas, the mothers. And he made 
Yama the ruler of the Pitris and of all sinful men. The Paramatman also 
made Kubera the lord of all treasures. He then created Varuna, the lord of 
waters and ruler of all aquatic creatures. The mighty Vishnu made Vasava 
king of all the Devas. 

In those times, men lived as long as they chose to live, without any 
fear of Yama. Sexual congress, O lord of the Bharatas, was not necessary 
for perpetuating the species—offspring were begotten through will, from 
the mind. In the age that followed, Treta yuga, children were begotten by 
touch alone. Even in this age, humans were above the necessity of sexual 
congress. It was only in the next, Dwapara yuga, O king, that the practice of 
sexual congress came to prevail among men. In the Kali yuga, O regent, 
men have come to marry and live in couples. 

I have now told you of the Supreme Lord of all creatures. He is also 
called the ruler of all and of everything. Listen to me now, O son of Kunti, 
as I speak to you about the sinful creatures of the earth. 

Such men are born in the southern region and are called Andrakas, 
Guhas, Pulindas, Sabaras, Chuchukas and Madrakas. Those born in the 
northern realms are Yamas, Kambojas, Gandharas, Kiratas and Barbaras. 
All of them are sinful, and roam this earth, defined by practices similar to 
those of Chandalas, ravens and vultures. They did not exist on earth in the 
Krita yuga. They took root, O lord of Bharata’s vamsa, and began to 
multiply from the Treta yuga onwards. Once the terrible yugasandhi 
conjoining the Treta and the Dwapara yugas dawned, the Kshatriyas 
confronted each other in battle. 

Thus, O lord of Kuru’s race, did the divine Krishna manifest this 
universe. The celestial observer of all the worlds, Rishi Narada, says that 


Krishna is the Supreme God. Mahabaho of Bharata’s vamsa, even Narada 
admits the supremacy and eternity of Krishna. Thus, O monarch, is Kesava 
of unconquerable valour. The lotus-eyed one is not a mere man. He is 
inconceivable.’ 


CANTO 208 


Y udhishtira asks, “Who were the first Prajapatis, O Bharatarishabha? 
What exalted Rishis are there in existence and where does each of 
them dwell?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Hear me, and I will tell you who the Prajapatis were 
and where these Rishis are said to abide on earth. 

At first, there was one eternal, divine, Svayambhuva Brahma. The 
self-born Brahma fathered seven illustrious sons. They were Marichi, Atri, 
Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and the eminent Vasishta who was equal to 
Brahma himself. These seven sons have been mentioned in the Puranas as 
seven Brahmanas, the Saptarishis. I will enumerate all the Prajapatis who 
came after these. 

In Atri’s race was born the eternal and divine Barhi, the ancient, who 
had tapasya for his origin. From Barhi, were born the ten Prachetasas. The 
ten Prachetasas had one son between them, Prajapati Daksha, known in the 
world as both Daksha and Kasyapa. Marichi also had one son called 
Kasyapa, also known by two names. Some call him Arishtanemi, and some, 
Kasyapa. Atri had another son, the handsome and princely Soma of 
tremendous tejas. He performed tapasya for a thousand celestial yugas. The 
divine Aryaman, and his sons, O Raja, have been described as ordainers of 
divine laws, and creators of all creatures. 

Sasabindu had ten thousand wives. On each of them their lord fathered 
a thousand sons, and so they were ten hundred thousand. These sons 


refused to regard anyone save themselves as Prajapatis. The ancient 
Brahmanas bestowed a title on the descendants of Sasabindu. In time, the 
extensive vamsa of Prajapati Sasabindu established the Vrishni vamsa. 
These that I have mentioned are noted as the illustrious Prajapatis. 

I will now name the Devas that are the lords of the three worlds. 
Bhaga, Ansa, Aryaman, Mitra, Varna, Savitri, Dhatri, Vivaswat, Tvashtri, 
Pushan, Indra and Vishnu are the twelve Adityas, all born from Kasyapa. 
Nasatya and Dasra are the two Aswins. These two are the sons of the 
illustrious Martanda, the eighth in the lineage. These were called first the 
Devas and the two classes of Pitris. 

Tvashtri had many sons. Amongst them were the handsome and 
famous Viswarupa, Ajaikapat, Ahi, Vardhana, Virupaksha and Raivata. 
Then there were Hara and Bahurupa, Tryambaka, Savitrya, Jayanta and 
Pinaki. The eight divine Vasus I have already named. These were seen as 
Devas at the time of Prajapati Manu. Amongst the Siddhas and Sadhyas, 
there were two classes based on conduct and youth. Of yore, Devas were 
considered to be of two classes, the Ribhus and the Maruts. Thus, I have 
specified the Viswas, the Devas and the Aswins. Amongst them, the 
Adityas are Kshatriyas, and the Maruts are Vaisyas. The two Aswins are 
said to be Sudras. The Devas born from Angirasa’s line are Brahmanas. 
This is certain. So have I told you about the fourfold varnas among the 
Devas. One who rises before dawn and recites the names of these lords, is 
cleansed of all his sins whether committed intentionally, unwittingly, or 
born from his association with others. 

Yavakrita, Raivya, Arvavasu, Paravasu, Aushija, Kashivat and Bala 
are the sons of Angiras. These, and Kanwa son of Rishi Medhatithi, 
Barhishada, and the renowned Saptarishis, all reside in the east. Unmucha, 
Vimucha, Svastyatreya, Pramucha, Idhmavaha, Dridhavrata and 
Mitravaruna’s son Agastya, these twice-born Rishis all dwell in the south. 
Upangu, Karusha, Dhaumya, Parivyadha, the Maharishis Ekata, Dwita and 
Trita, Atri’s son, the illustrious Saraswata, these divinities dwell in the west. 
Atreya, Vasishta, Maharishi Kasyapa, Gautama, Bharadwaja, Viswamitra, 
the son of Kusika, and Jamadagni, the son of Richika, these seven live in 
the north. 

Thus have I told you about the Maharishis of fiery tejas who live in the 
different directions of the world. These blessed Souls are the witnesses of 
the universe, and creators of all the worlds. In this manner do they live in 


their respective quarters. By reciting their names, one is cleansed of all 
one’s sins. One who visits these places becomes purified of all his sins and 
succeeds in returning home in safety.’ 


CANTO 209 


Y udhishtira says, “O Bhishma of great wisdom and invincible valour 

in battle, I wish to hear in detail of Krishna who is immutable and 
omnipotent. Tell me truly everything about his tejas and the awesome feats 
he achieved in days of old. Why and to what end did the mighty one assume 
the form of an animal? I wish to know, O magnificent Kshatriya!’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Once, while out hunting, I arrived at the hermitage of 
Markandeya. There I saw diverse classes of ascetics seated in their 
thousands. The Rishis honoured me by the offer of arghya, made from 
honey and curds. I accepted their worship, and reverentially saluted them in 
return. Maharishi Kasyapa narrated what I am about to recount there. Listen 
attentively to the excellent and charming tale. 

In earlier days, innumerable invincible Danavas, filled with wrath and 
avarice, and hundreds of mighty Asuras drunk with might, became 
exceedingly jealous of the unrivalled prosperity of the Devas. Eventually, 
attacked and oppressed by the Danavas, the Devas and Devarishis, unable 
to find peace, fled in all directions. The denizens of heaven saw the earth 
sunk in sore distress. Overspread with mighty Danavas of terrible aspect, 
Bhumi seemed to be burdened with an insupportable weight. Cheerless and 
grief-stricken, she appeared to plunge down into the Patalas. Struck with 
fear, the Devas went to Brahma and said, “How will we continue to bear 
these depredations of the Danavas?” 


The creator answered, “I have already ordained what is to be done in 
this matter. Endowed with boons, possessed of might and swollen with 
pride, these senseless wretches do not know that Vishnu of invisible form, 
the Devadeva who cannot be vanquished even by all the Devas together, has 
assumed the form of a boar. The Supreme Lord will plunge down to the 
place below the earth, where the wretches among Danavas dwell in their 
thousands, and he will kill them all.” 

These words of Brahma brought immense joy to the magnificent 
Devas. 

Very soon, the puissant Vishnu, manifested as Varaha, plunged into the 
patalas and charged the offspring of Danu and Diti. The very sight of the 
extraordinary creature confounded the Daityas and they stood transfixed. 
Then they rushed forward as one and surrounded the boar. Together they 
seized the beast. Full of rage, they tried to dismember the animal from 
every side. The mighty, horrible Danavas failed, O Rajan, to bring any harm 
to Varaha. They were filled with wonder and fear. All the thousands of 
enormous demons saw their last hour had come. And so, rapt in yoga with 
his Soul as his companion, the Devadeva began to emit tremendous roars, 
terrifying the Daityas and Danavas. All the worlds and the ten cardinal 
directions resounded with the roars and filled the living with abject fright. 
The very Devas, with Indra at their head, were petrified as the whole 
universe was stilled by that sound. It was a dreadful moment. 

All mobile and immobile beings were benumbed by the awful sound. 
Terrified by the thunder, paralysed by the power of Vishnu, lifeless, the 
Danavas crumpled to the ground. With its hooves, the boar began to trample 
and rend asunder the flesh, fat and bones of the enemies of the Devas. 
Because of the tremendous roars, Vishnu came to be called Sanatana. He is 
also known as Padmanabha, the lotus-navelled; guru of yogins; preceptor 
and Supreme Lord of all creatures. 

Soon, all the tribes of the Devas approached Brahma, the lord of the 
universe, and said, “What sort of noise is this, O mighty one? We do not 
understand it. By whose sound is the universe so petrified? Behold, the 
Devas and Danavas have all been rendered senseless by the terrible urjas of 
this sound.” 

Meanwhile, O Mahabaho, the assembled Devas saw Vishnu in his 
Varaha rupa, and the Maharishis sang his praises. 


Brahma said, “That is the Supreme Lord, creator of all beings, Soul of 
all creatures, guru of all yogins. Of immense body and infinite strength, he 
has slain all the Danavas, and arrived here. He is the Almighty, of 
immeasurable splendour, the great refuge of all blessings. He has achieved a 
most difficult feat, impossible of being accomplished by any other, and 
returned to his own sattvic nature. He is the lord and Soul of all beings, 
master of yoga, great ascetic. Listen, all of you. He is Krishna, the destroyer 
of all obstacles and impediments. 

It is He from whose navel the primeval lotus emerged. He is the 
Paramatman, the Mahayogi; He is Brahma. Excellent Devas, there is no 
need for sorrow, fear or grief. He is the Ordainer. He is Brahman. He is all- 
devouring Kaala. He upholds the world. The roars that alarm you are of that 
divine one. Mahabaho, He is the object of universal worship. Immortal, 
lotus-eyed, He is the lord and origin of all beings.’ 


CANTO 210 


Y udhishtira says, “O Bhaarata, tell me about the lofty yoga through 
which I may obtain moksha. O eloquent one, I truly wish to know 
everything about this yoga.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Listen to an old story of a guru and his sishya on the 
subject of moksha. There was a twice-born guru, a Maharishi. He was 
splendid in appearance. A Mahatman, he was firm in truth and a complete 
yogi. 

Once, an outstanding sishya approached the guru with a desire to 
obtain what was for his highest good. With folded hands he stood before his 
master, then touched his guru’s feet, and said, “If, O illustrious one, you are 
pleased with my worship, it befits you to answer some questions and doubts 
that I have. Who am I and who are you? Tell me this fully. Tell me also 
what Paramartha is. And when the material cause in all beings is identical, 
why do their births and death happen in such dissimilar ways? It is also 
appropriate for you, with your vast knowledge, to explain the purpose of the 
declarations in the Vedas about the difference of rites for different classes of 
men, the meaning of the injunctions of the smritis and the rulings which 
apply to all classes of men.” 

The guru said, “Listen, O my wise sishya. Answers to your question 
are not revealed in the very Vedas and this is the highest subject for thought 
or discourse. It is called Adhyatma and is the most valuable of all branches 
of learning and of all sacred institutes. Vasudeva is the supreme cause of the 


universe. He is the origin of the Vedas, AUM. He is truth, knowledge, 
sacrifice, renunciation, self-restraint and dharma. Those who know the 
Vedas know him as all-pervading, immutable, eternal, omnipresent, creator 
and destroyer, the unmanifest Brahman.” 

Hear now the story of him who was born in Vrishni’s vamsa. A 
Brahmana should hear of the greatness of Devadeva Vishnu of 
immeasurable tejas, from the lips of Brahmanas. A Kshatriya should hear it 
from other Kshatriyas. A Vaisya should hear it from Vaisyas, and a high- 
Souled Sudra should hear it from Sudras. You deserve to hear it. Listen now 
to the auspicious tale of Krishna, the most excellent of all legends. 

Vasudeva is the wheel of Kaala, without beginning and without end. 
Existence and non-existence are the attributes by which his real nature is 
known. The universe revolves like a wheel depending upon the lord of all 
beings. O best of men, the Supreme Being Kesava, is said to be the 
indestructible, unmanifest, immortal, immutable Brahman. The highest of 
the high, without change or deterioration himself, he created the Pitris, 
Devas, Rishis, Yakshas, Rakshasas, Nagas, Asuras and Manavas. He also 
created the Vedas, the eternal duties and the customs of men. 

After he reduces everything into non-existence, again, at the beginning 
of a new yuga, he creates Prakriti. As diverse phenomena of several seasons 
appear sequentially, similarly, beings come into existence at the beginning 
of every celestial yuga. With the beings that are born comes the knowledge 
of laws and duties, neeti and dharma, in order to regulate the world’s 
course. 

At the end of every celestial yuga when the Pralaya sets in, the Vedas 
and all other scriptures disappear along with the rest. By the grace of the 
self-born, the Maharishis by their tapasyas, first regain the lost Vedas and 
other shastras. Brahma first acquired the Vedas. The Devaguru Brihaspati 
initially received their branches, the Vedangas. Bhrigu’s son Sukra was the 
first to acquire the science of neeti, which is so beneficial for the universe. 
The art of sangita, music, was acquired by Narada; that of the astra-shastra, 
by Bharadwaja; the history of the Devarishis by Gargya; that of Aushadha, 
by the dark-complexioned son of Atri. Diverse other Rishis, proclaimed 
sciences such as Nyaya, Vaiseshika, Samkhya, Patanjala and the rest. 

Let that Brahman which the Rishis have indicated by arguments drawn 
from reason, by means of the Vedas, and by inferences drawn from the 
direct evidence of the senses, be adored. Neither the Devas nor the Rishis 


were at first able to comprehend Brahman who is without beginning and 
who is the highest of the high. Only the divine creator of all things, the 
mighty Narayana, had knowledge of Brahman. The Rishis, the best among 
the Devas and the Asuras, and the ancient Rajarishis had the knowledge of 
the highest remedy for sorrow from Narayana. When primordial matter 
creates life through the action of the primal energy, the universe with all its 
potencies begins to flow from it. Just as one lamp can kindle thousands of 
other lamps, similarly, primordial matter creates thousands of living beings. 
And because of its infinity, primordial matter is never exhausted. 

From the Unmanifest flows the awareness determined by deeds. 
Awareness creates consciousness. From consciousness ensues space. From 
Space arises wind. From wind transpires heat. From heat results water, and 
water creates earth. These eight constitute the primordial Prakriti. The 
universe rests on them. 

From these eight have originated the five organs of knowledge, the 
five organs of action, the five objects of the initial five organs, and the one, 
mind, forming the sixteenth. The ears, the skin, the two eyes, the tongue 
and the nose are the five organs of knowledge. The two feet, the lower duct, 
the organ of generation, the two arms and speech, are the five organs of 
action. Sound, touch, form, taste and smell are the five objects of the senses, 
covering all the things. 

The mind dwells upon all the senses and their objects. In the 
perception of taste, it is the mind that becomes the tongue, and in speech, it 
is the mind that becomes words. Provided with the different senses, it is the 
mind that becomes all the objects that exist within its preserve. These 
sixteen, existing in their respective forms, are known as Adityas. These 
worship him who creates all knowledge and dwells within the body. 

Taste is the attribute of water; scent is the attribute of earth; hearing is 
the attribute of space; vision is the attribute of fire or light; and touch, the 
attribute of the wind. This is the case with all creatures at all times. The 
mind is said to be the attribute of existence. 

Existence springs from Avyakta Prakriti, which rests in that which is 
the Soul of all existent beings. These existences, founded in the Supreme 
Divinity that is above Prakriti and is without any inclination for action, 
uphold the entire universe of the living and non-living. This sacred edifice 
of nine doors, the body, is endowed with all these existences. That which is 


high above them—the Soul—dwells within it, pervading it. For this reason, 
it is called Purusha. 

The Atman is without decay and not subject to death. It has 
knowledge of what is manifest and what is unmanifest. It is forever all- 
pervading, saguna—possessed of attributes—subtle, and the refuge of all 
existences and qualities. As a lamp discovers all objects great or small 
irrespective of its own size, likewise the Atman dwells in all creatures as 
the principle of knowledge regardless of the qualities or flaws of those 
beings. Urging the ear to hear what it hears, it is the Soul that hears. 
Similarly, employing the eye, the Atman sees. This body furnishes the 
means by which the Soul derives knowledge. The bodily organs are not the 
doers; the Atman is the doer of all deeds. 

There is fire in wood, but it can never be seen by cutting open a log of 
wood. Similarly, the Soul dwells within the body, but it can never be seen 
by dissecting the body. The fire that dwells in wood may be seen by rubbing 
the wood with another piece of wood. In like manner, the Atman that dwells 
within the body may be seen by engaging proper means, of yoga. Water 
must exist in rivers. Rays of light are always attached to the sun. Likewise, 
the Soul has a body. This connection does not cease because of the constant 
succession of bodies that the Atman has to enter. 

In a dream, the Soul, possessed with the fivefold senses, leaves the 
body and roams far and wide. Likewise, when death comes, the jiva with 
the senses in their subtle forms passes out of one body to enter another. The 
Jivatman is bound by its own previous deeds. Hence, compelled by its own 
karma of one state of existence, it attains another state. Indeed, it is led from 
one into another body by its own actions, which are inexorable in their 
results. 

I will now tell you about the evolution of how the possessor of a 
human body, the jiva, leaves his body, enters another and then yet another; 
how, indeed, the entire range of beings exists as the result of their respective 
karmas of past and present lives.’ 


CANTO 211 


B hishma says, ‘All inert and mobile beings, distributed into four 

classes, are to be of unmanifest birth and unmanifest death. Since it 
exists only in the unmanifest Soul, the mind is said to possess the attributes 
of the Unmanifest. 

AS a vast tree is ensconced within a small seed of the aswattha flower 
and becomes visible only when it takes root, even so birth takes place from 
what is unmanifest. A lifeless piece of iron flies towards a magnet. 
Similarly, inclinations and propensities caused by natural instincts, all fly 
towards the Soul in a new life. Indeed, even as the propensities and 
possessions born of ignorance and delusion, and inanimate in nature, are 
united with the Soul when reborn, the other tendencies and ambitions of the 
Soul that have their gaze directed towards Brahman become united with the 
jiva, and at last with Brahman himself. 

Once, neither earth nor sky, not heaven or matter, or the vital breaths, 
or virtue and vice, or anything else, existed, save the Atman. Nor have they 
any connection with even the Soul defiled by ignorance. The Soul is eternal. 
It is indestructible. It exists in every creature. It is the cause of the mind. It 
is nirguna, without attributes. The universe that we perceive has been 
declared in the Vedas to be due to ignorance or delusion. The Soul’s 
apprehensions of form are because of past desires. The Jivatman, bestowed 
with those causes, desires, is led to its being engaged in karma. These in 


turn create more desires to end in further actions, and so on. Thus this vast 
wheel of existence revolves, without beginning and without end. 

The unmanifest, awareness, along with the desires, is the hub of this 
wheel. The manifest, the body with the senses, constitutes its spokes; the 
perceptions and actions form its circumference. Propelled by the quality of 
rajas, the Soul presides over it—a witness to its revolutions. Like oilmen 
pressing oilseeds in their machine, the fruit born of ignorance affect the 
universe of creatures moistened by rajas, and grind it in the wheel. In the 
succession of existences, the living creature, seized by the idea of selfhood 
out of desire, engages itself in deeds. In the union of cause and effect, these 
actions again become new causes. Effects do not enter into causes. Nor do 
causes enter into effects. In the creation of effects, Kaala is the cause. The 
eight primordial essences, and their sixteen variations, exist in a state of 
union, as they are always presided over by the Soul. 

As dust follows the wind that moves it, the Soul, divested of the body, 
yet bestowed with inclinations born of rajas, tamas and principles of causes 
constituted by the karmas of the past life, moves on following the direction 
that the Supreme Soul gives it. The Atman, however, is never touched by 
the inclinations and propensities. Nor are these touched by the Soul that is 
superior to them. The dust it bears never stains the wind, which is naturally 
pure. As the wind is separate from the dust, even so, the wise should know, 
is the connection between existence and the Soul. No one should take it that 
the Atman, due to its apparent union with the body, the senses, other 
propensities, beliefs and disbeliefs, is really bestowed with all these as its 
necessary and absolute gunas. On the other hand, the Soul should be taken 
as existing in its own nature.” 

Thus did the divine Rishi solve the doubt that vexed his sishya’s mind. 
Despite all this, people depend upon means consisting of actions and 
scriptural rites to dispel grief and win happiness. Seeds scorched by fire do 
not sprout. Similarly, if everything that contributes to suffering be 
consumed by the fire of true knowledge, the Soul escapes the obligation of 
rebirth into the world.’ 


CANTO 212 


B hishma says, ‘Persons engaged in activity regard the practice of 

karma highly. Similarly, those devoted to knowledge do not value 
anything other than gyana. Individuals fully conversant with the Vedas and 
depending upon their declarations are rare. Men of greater wisdom desire 
the path of abstention from actions as the better of the two. Such conduct, 
therefore, is laudable. The intelligence, which urges abstention from 
actions, is that by which one attains moksha. 

Possessed of a body, a person, through folly, along with wrath, 
yearning and all the vasanas born of rajas and tamas, becomes attached to 
earthly objects. One, therefore, who desires to destroy one’s connection 
with the body, should never indulge in any impure deed. On the other hand, 
one should create by one’s actions a path to attain liberation, without 
wishing for welfare in the next world. As gold, when tainted with iron, 
loses its purity and fails to shine, even so knowledge existing with 
attachment to earthly objects and such other faults, fails to put forth its 
brilliance. 

He who, influenced by greed, follows the dictates of desire and anger, 
and transgresses the path of dharma to turn to adharma, meets with 
complete destruction. One who is desirous of gaining the Atman should 
never follow, with excess of attachment, earthly possessions that are the 
objects of the senses. If one does so; anger, joy and sorrow arise from each 
other and make one miserable. When everyone’s body is made up of the 


five original elements as also of the three gunas of sattva, rajas and tamas, 
whom will one adore and whom will one blame, and with what words? 
Only fools become attached to the objects of the senses. Because of folly, 
they do not know that their bodies are only transitory. As a house made of 
earth is plastered over with earth, even so this body, which is made of earth, 
is kept from death by food, which is only a produce of earth. Honey, oil, 
milk, butter, meat, salt, treacle, grains, fruits and roots are all variations of 
earth and water. 

Recluses living in the wilderness, abandon all desire for rich, savoury 
food, and eat simple fare, only for sustenance. Similarly, a person who 
dwells in the wilderness of the material world should be ready for exertion 
and should eat for sustenance, like a patient taking medicine. A noble man 
who wishes to find peace, should restrain his senses and examine all earthly 
objects that he encounters, with the help of truth, purity, candour, 
renunciation, enlightenment, courage, forgiveness, fortitude, intelligence, 
reflection and austerities. 

All creatures, dazzled, because of ignorance, by the gunas, sattva, 
rajas and tamas, continually revolve as on a wheel. All faults, therefore, that 
are born of ignorance, should be closely examined and the idea of ahamkara 
that creates sorrow, with its origin in ignorance, should be avoided. The 
fivefold elements, the senses, the attributes of sattva, rajas and tamas, the 
three worlds with the Supreme Being himself, and karma, all rest on Chitta, 
consciousness. 

As Kaala, under its own laws, always displays the phenomena of the 
seasons one after another, even so one should know that consciousness in 
all creatures is the inducer to action. Tamas from which proceeds Chitta 
creates delusions. It is darkness and is born of ignorance. To the three gunas 
of sattva, rajas and tamas are attached all the joys and sorrows of creatures. 
Listen now to the effects that spring from the attributes of sattva, rajas and 
tamas. 

Contentment, satisfaction derived from joy, certainty, intelligence and 
memory, are the results of the attributes of sattva. Desire, anger, error, 
greed, confusion, fear and fatigue, belong to the quality of rajas. Despair, 
grief, discontent, vanity, pride and wickedness, all belong to tamas. 
Examining the gravity or lightness of these and other faults that dwell in the 
jiva, one should reflect upon each of them to ascertain which of them exist, 


which have become strong or weak, which have been driven off, and which 
remain.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “What faults are discarded by persons who seek 
moksha? Who are they that are weakened by them? What are the faults that 
come repeatedly and cannot be got rid of? What, again, are regarded as 
weak, caused by perplexity and, therefore, permissible? What are the faults 
upon whose strength and weakness a wise man should reflect with the help 
of intelligence and reason? I am confused about these. Speak to me of them, 
O Pitamaha.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘He who has a pure Soul, and extracts all his faults by 
their roots, succeeds in finding moksha. As an axe made of steel cuts a steel 
chain and in the process breaks itself, likewise, the one with a purified soul, 
who destroys all the faults that spring from tamas and those that are born 
with the jiva upon rebirth, succeeds in dissolving his connection with the 
body and attains moksha. 

The qualities that have their origin in rajas, those that spring from 
tamas, and ones defined by purity under sattva, constitute the seed from 
which all embodied creatures have grown. Among these, the sattva guna 
alone is the path by which those of cleansed souls succeed in attaining 
moksha. He who has a purified soul should, therefore, abandon all the 
qualities born of rajas and tamas. For, when the sattva guna becomes free of 
rajas and tamas, it becomes even more resplendent. 

Some say that sacrifices and other rituals performed with the help of 
mantras, although they certainly contribute to the purification of the soul, 
are evil and cruel. This view is incorrect. On the contrary, such karmas and 
kriyas are the principle means to dissociate the Atman from all worldly 
attachments, and to find dispassion. All unrighteous actions, all deeds 
encumbered with earthly gains and all activities fuelled by desire are 
accomplished through the influence of the qualities of rajas. 

Through qualities born of tamas, one performs all deeds charged with 
avarice and wrath. Because of the guna of tamas, one embraces sleep and 
idleness, and becomes addicted to all kinds of cruelty and carnal pleasures. 
He, however, who, possessed of faith and scriptural knowledge, is mindful 
of the sattva guna, attends only to all things good, and becomes gifted with 
moral beauty and is flawless.’ 


CANTO 213 


B hishma says, ‘From rajas arises delusion or loss of judgement. 

Tamas, O Bharatarishabha, gives birth to wrath, lust, fear and pride. 
When all these are destroyed, one becomes pure. Invested with purity, one 
successfully gains knowledge of the Paramatman, which is changeless, 
resplendent, undecaying and all pervasive, has the Unmanifest for his 
refuge, and is the foremost of all the Devas. 

Trapped in maya, men stray from knowledge, become foolhardy and 
yield to wrath. From wrath, they become subject to desire, which in turn 
creates lust, delusion, vanity, pride and selfishness. From such selfishness 
come forth various kinds of frenzied activity. From these actions arise 
diverse bonds of affection that lead only to sorrow, and from karma fertile 
with joy and sorrow accrues the accountability to birth and death. 

Because of the onus of birth, the liability is incurred by a jiva within 
the womb, from conception. The jiva is defiled with excreta, urine, phlegm 
and blood generated there. Overwhelmed by desire, the jiva becomes bound 
by wrath, greed, lust and all the rest. It seeks, however, to escape those 
evils. In view of this, women are regarded as instrumental in setting the 
stream of creation flowing. By their nature, women are kshetra, and men are 
kshetrajna, with regard to the gunas. For this reason, wise men should not 
pursue women exclusively among other objects of the world. Indeed, 
women are like fearful mantra-shaktis. They bewilder the unwise. They are 


steeped in the gunas of rajas. They are the eternal embodiment of the 
senses. 

Because of the keen desire that men have for women, children are 
born from them. As one discards from one’s body germs that are born there 
but are not part of oneself, likewise should one attend to one’s children, 
who, though regarded as one’s own, are not so in reality. From the vital seed 
as from sweat and other impurities, creatures are born from the body, 
influenced by the karma of previous lives or by the course of nature. 
Therefore, the wise should feel no concern for them. 

The attribute of rajas rests on that of tamas. The trait of sattva rests on 
that of rajas. Ignorance that is unmanifest envelopes knowledge, and causes 
the phenomena of intelligence and consciousness. The knowledge that 
possesses qualities of Chitta and buddhi is said to be the seed of embodied 
souls. That, again, which is the seed of such knowledge is called the jiva. 
Because of karma and the principle of time, the soul goes through birth and 
repeated cycles of rebirth. As in a dream, the soul exhibits a body 
influenced by the mind, correspondingly, it attains in the mother’s womb a 
body based upon attributes and dispositions of its past karmas. All the 
senses while it is still in the womb, are awakened by past deeds as the 
Operative cause, and develop in consciousness because of the mind co- 
existing with attachments. 

Because of the past awareness of sound that are awakened in it, the 
jiva, subjected to these influences, receives the organs of hearing. Similarly, 
from attachment to forms, its eyes are created, and from its longing after 
scent, its organ of smell. From impressions of touch, it acquires skin. 
Likewise the five breaths —prana, apana, vyana, udana and samana— which 
contribute to keep the body alive. Encased in a body with all organs fully 
developed according to past actions, the jiva is born with inherent physical 
and mental distress. Know that grief emerges from the moment of 
acceptance of the body into the womb. It swells with the idea of selfhood. 
From renunciation of these attachments, which are the cause of birth, grief 
meets with an end. He that is conversant with sorrow’s end attains moksha. 

Both the origin and the destruction of the senses rest in the rajoguna. 
The wise should act with proper inquiry and concentration empowered by 
the shastras. The senses of knowledge, even if they succeed in acquiring all 
their goals, never succeed in overwhelming the man who is without desire. 


The embodied soul that overcomes its senses, escapes the obligation of 
rebirth.’ 


CANTO 214 


B hishma says, ‘I will now tell you the means to conquer the senses as 

seen in the scriptures. O king, a man will attain the highest end with 
the help of such knowledge and by framing his conduct accordingly. 
Amongst all living creatures, man is said to be the foremost. Among men, 
those that are twice-born are pre-eminent, and conversant with the Vedas. 
These ones blessed are regarded as the souls of all living creatures. Indeed, 
the Brahmanas who know the Vedas are regarded as being divine and 
omniscient. They have become knowers of the Brahman. As a blind man, 
without a guide, encounters many difficulties on a road, so does one without 
knowledge encounter many obstacles in the world. For this reason, those 
that possess knowledge are regarded as superior to the rest. Individuals 
keen on gaining virtue practice diverse kinds of rites according to the 
dictates of the scriptures. They do not, however, succeed in attaining 
moksha; all that they gain are merits of which I will now tell you. 

Purity of speech, body and mind; forgiveness, truth, steadiness and 
intelligence: those that observe both kinds of dharma display these sattvik 
qualities. That which is called brahmacharya is regarded as the means to 
acquire Brahman. It is the best of all dharmas. It is through the practice of 
brahmacharya that one obtains the highest end, mukti. 

Brahmacharya is without any connection to the five vital breaths, 
mind, intellect, the five senses of perception and the five senses of action. 
Hence, it is free from all the perceptions of the senses. It is heard only as a 


word, and its form, without being seen, can only be conceived. It is a state 
of existence that depends only on the mind. That sinless state should be 
attained through the intellect alone. He who practices it duly attains 
Brahman; he who practices it half-heartedly, attains the condition of the 
Devas; while he who practices it moderately is born among Brahmanas and, 
possessed of knowledge, attains greatness. 

Brahmacharya is exceedingly difficult to practice. Let me tell you the 
means by which one may do so. The awakened person who is drawn to it 
should subdue the rajoguna of passion as soon as it begins to manifest itself 
or as soon as it becomes dominant. He that has taken a vow of celibacy 
should not speak with women. He should never cast his eyes on an 
undressed woman. The sight of women, under even _ indifferent 
circumstances, fills irresolute men with passion. If a celibate feels a desire 
for a woman rising in his heart, he should as an atonement observe the vow 
called krichara and also spend three days immersed in water. If desire 
comes during a dream, one should, diving into water, mentally repeat three 
times the three Riks in that immersion aghamarshana. The wise man who 
has taken this vow should, with a broad and enlightened mind, burn the sins 
in his mind which are all due to the guna of passion. 

Just as the duct that bears away the refuse of the body is an intimate 
part of the body, so is the embodied Soul intimately connected with the 
body that confines it. The different kinds of fluids, coursing through the 
network of arteries, nourish the body’s wind, bile, phlegm, blood, skin, 
flesh, intestines, bones, marrow—and the organism as a whole. There are 
ten principal ducts that assist the functions of the five senses. From the ten, 
branch out thousands of others that are microscopic. Like rivers filling the 
ocean in the proper season, all these passages replete with fluids nourish the 
body. Leading to the heart is the artery called manovaha; it draws from 
every part of the human body the sperm that is born of desire. Numerous 
other passages, which branch out from that principal one, extend into every 
part of the body and, bearing the element of heat, cause the sense of vision 
and the rest. 

As butter is churned from milk, so do desires generated in the mind by 
the sight or thought of women, draw together the sperm that lies within the 
body. In the midst of even our dreams passion generated by imagination 
works on the mind, with the result that the manovaha ejects the sperm born 
of desire. 


The great Devarishi Atri is well-versed in the subject of the generation 
of the sperm. The fluids that are yielded by food, the manovaha and the 
desire born of imagination: these three are the causes that create the sperm, 
which has Indra as its presiding deity. The passion that helps in the 
emission of this fluid is, therefore, called indriya. 

Those who know that the path of vital seed is the cause of the sinful 
state of affairs called varnasamkarshana, the mixture of castes, are men of 
restrained passions. Their sins have been burnt, and they are never 
subjected to rebirth. He that performs karma only to sustain his body, who 
reduces with the help of the mind the three attributes of sattva, rajas and 
tamas into a state of uniformity, and brings his last dying breaths to the 
manovaha, escapes the obligation of rebirth. 

The mind is sure to gain knowledge. The mind takes the form of all 
things. The minds of all Mahatmans, who attain success through meditation, 
become desireless, luminous and eternal. Therefore, to destroy the mind as 
mind, one should do only sinless deeds and disentangle oneself from the 
attributes of passion and darkness. Doing this, one is sure to attain a most 
desirable end. Knowledge ordinarily acquired in youth weakens with age. 
One, of ripe intellect, however, succeeds through the auspicious effects of 
past karmas in destroying his desires. Such a person, who transcends the 
bonds of the body and the senses like a traveller traversing a path full of 
obstacles, and destroys all faults that he sees, succeeds in tasting the nectar 
of moksha.’ 


CANTO 215 


B hishma says, ‘Living creatures that grow attached to objects of the 

senses, which are always fraught with evil, become helpless. The 
Mahatmans, however, who are detached from sensual things, attain the 
highest. The man of intelligence, who sees the world overwhelmed with the 
evils of birth, death, decay, sorrow, disease and anxiety, should strive for the 
attainment of moksha. He should be pure in speech, thought and deed; he 
should be free from pride. Of peaceful soul and possessed of knowledge, he 
should lead a life of mendicancy, and pursue happiness without being 
attached to any worldly object. Yet, if attachment were seen to possess the 
mind because of compassion towards living creatures, he should, keeping in 
mind that the universe is the result of karma, show indifference to 
compassion itself. 

Whatever good deeds are done, or whatever sin is committed, the doer 
reaps the consequences. Hence, one should, in speech, thought and deed, do 
only deeds that are pure and good. He succeeds in obtaining happiness who 
practices non-violence, truthfulness of speech, honesty towards all 
creatures, forgiveness and, always, heedfulness. Hence, exercising one’s 
intelligence, one should dispose one’s mind, by focusing on peace and 
goodwill towards all creatures. The man who regards the practice of such 
virtues as the highest dharma, conducive to the happiness of all creatures, 
and destroying all kinds of sorrow, possesses the highest knowledge, and 
succeeds in finding mukti. 


One should never think of doing evil to others. One should not covet 
what is far beyond one’s power to attain. One should not turn one’s 
thoughts towards objects that are non-existent. One should, on the other 
hand, train one’s mind towards knowledge with such persistent efforts that 
are sure to succeed. With the help of the affirmations of the srutis and with 
determined efforts calculated to bring success, knowledge is sure to flow. 
He who wants to speak amiable, kindly words or observe a law that is 
refined of all impurity, should utter only such truth as is not fraught with 
any malice or reprimand. He who is possessed of a sound heart should utter 
words that are not dishonest, not harsh, not cruel, not evil and not long- 
winded. The universe is bound in speech. 

If inclined to renunciation then should one admit, with humility and a 
pure intellect, one’s own evil actions. He who acts influenced by rajas of 
passion, finds much misery in this world and at last sinks into hell. One 
should, therefore, practice self-restraint in body, speech and mind. Ignorant 
persons bearing the burdens of the world are like robbers laden with their 
loot of scrambling sheep. The robbers are always wary of roads 
unfavourable to them due to the presence of the king’s guard. Just as thieves 
have to discard their spoils if they wish for safety, so should one shed all 
actions dictated by passion and darkness in order to obtain Dliss. 
Undoubtedly, a man who is without desire, free from the bonds of the 
world, content to live in solitude, moderate in diet, devoted to penances 
with the senses under control, who has burnt all his sorrows with his 
knowledge, who enjoys the practice of yoga, and has a purified soul, 
succeeds, as a result of his mind withdrawn into itself, in attaining Brahman 
or moksha. 

One gifted with patience and a pure heart, should assuredly control his 
intellect. With the intellect disciplined, he should next control his mind, and 
then with the mind, overpower the objects of the senses. With the mind 
under control and the senses subdued, the senses will become luminous and 
gladly enter into Brahman. When one’s senses are withdrawn into the mind, 
Brahman becomes manifested in it. Indeed, when the senses are destroyed, 
and the Soul returns to pure being, it is merged into Brahman. Remember, 
one should never make a display of one’s mastery over yoga. Yet, one 
should always strive to restrain one’s senses by practising the laws of yoga. 
Indeed, one engaged in the practice of yoga should live in a manner by 
which his conduct and demeanour may become pure. 


Excluding one’s yoga powers as a means to one’s subsistence, one 
should rather live upon broken grains of corn, ripe beans, dry cakes of 
seeds, pot herbs, half-ripe barley, and the flour of fried pulses, fruits and 
roots, obtained as alms. Based upon time and place, one should according to 
one’s inclinations observe, after proper examination, vows and rules about 
fasts. One should not suspend a course once begun. Like one slowly 
creating a fire, one should gradually extend a way of life that is prompted 
by knowledge. By doing so, Brahman gradually shines in one like the sun. 

Ignorance, which has knowledge for its burial ground, extends its 
influence over all the three states of waking, dreaming and dreamless 
slumber. Knowledge, borne by intellect, is repeatedly invaded by ignorance. 
The corrupt person fails to understand the Soul, thinking of it as being one 
with the three states while in reality it transcends them all. When, however, 
he succeeds in recognising the limits under which the two, union with the 
three states and separation from them, are manifested, it is then that he 
becomes divested of attachment and attains moksha. When such a 
realisation occurs, one transcends the effects of age, rises above the 
consequences of infirmity and death, and obtains Brahman which is eternal, 
deathless, immutable and undiminishing.’ 


CANTO 216 


B hishma says, ‘The yogi who wishes to practice pure brahmacharya 

and who is affected by dreams of lust should whole-heartedly seek to 
renounce sleep. In dreams, the embodied soul, affected by the rajas and 
tamas, seems to possess another body and functions influenced by kama. 
Out of the earnestness for the acquisition of knowledge and focused 
meditation and communion, the yogi remains ever awake. Indeed, the yogi 
can keep himself always awake by devoting himself to gyana. 

On this subject, it has been asked what this state is in which the jiva 
thinks itself surrounded with and engaged in sensual objects and actions. 

It is true that the embodied being, with its senses in truth suspended, 
still thinks itself to be possessed of a body with all the senses of knowledge 
and action. In reply to the question, it is said that the master of yoga, Hari, 
comprehends truly how this transpires. The Maharishis say that the 
explanation offered by Hari is correct and consistent with reason. The 
learned say that it is due to the senses being worn out with fatigue that all 
creatures experience dreams. Though the senses are suspended, the mind 
never disappears or becomes inactive, and the mind gives rise to dreams. 
This is said by all to be the noted cause of dreams. 

As the imagination of a man who is awake and engaged in actions, is 
confined to the creative power of the mind, likewise the impressions in a 
dream relate only to the mind. A person with desire and attachment has 
dreams based upon the impressions of countless forgotten lives of the past. 


Nothing that impresses the mind once is ever lost, and the Soul, being 
aware of all those impressions, causes them to surface from obscurity. 

Whichever among the three attributes of goodness, passion and 
darkness is fetched out by the influence of past actions and by whichever 
amongst them the mind is affected temporarily, its elements are subtly 
exhibited as images. After such images are projected, the particular aspect 
of goodness, passion or darkness that may have been brought by past 
actions rises in the mind and leads to its result of happiness or misery. Such 
images, with wind, bile and phlegm for their origins, and which men 
perceive through ignorance and from inclinations infused with passion and 
darkness, cannot be easily discarded. Whatever objects a person perceives 
in the waking state through the senses in a state of lucidity are seized by the 
mind in dreams while the senses are dimmed. 

The mind exists unhindered in all things. This is due to the nature of 
the soul. The soul should be understood. All the elements and the 
phenomena they create exist in the soul. In the state called dreamless 
slumber, sushupti, the manifest human body that is the gateway of dreams, 
disappears in the mind. Occupying the body, the mind enters the manifest 
Soul upon which all existent and non-existent things depend, and is 
transformed into a wakeful witness with the certainty of realisation. Thus 
inherent in pure consciousness, the Soul of all things is regarded by the 
learned as transcending both consciousness and all things in the universe. 
The yogi who desires any of the divine attributes of knowledge, 
renunciation and the rest, should regard a pure mind to be identical with the 
object of his desire. All things rest in a pure mind or the Atman. This is the 
result attained by one who is engaged in tapasya. The yogi, however, who 
has crossed darkness or ignorance, becomes possessed of transcendent 
radiance. When ignorance has been transcended, the embodied Atman 
becomes Supreme Brahman, the cause of the universe. 

The Adityas have penances and Vedic rites. Darkness or pride, which 
destroys the Devas, is the way of the Asuras. This, Brahman, which is said 
to have knowledge as its attribute, is difficult to attain by either the Adityas 
or the Asuras. It should be noted that the gunas, sattva, rajas and tamas, 
belong to the Adityas and the Asuras. Sattva is the attribute of the Adityas, 
while the two others belong to the Asuras. 

Brahman transcends all the gunas. It is pure knowledge. It is deathless. 
It is pure splendour. It is everlasting. Persons of cleansed souls who realise 


Brahman attain the highest end. With knowledge one can indeed say this 
much with the help of reason and inference: Brahman which is 
indestructible can be comprehended only by withdrawing the senses and the 
mind from external objects into the Atman.’ 


CANTO 217 


B hishma says, ‘He cannot be said to know Brahman who does not 

know the four states of dreams, dreamless slumber, Brahman as 
saguna, indicated by attributes, and Brahman as nirguna, transcending all 
attributes, as also what is Vyakta, manifest, and what is Avyakta, 
unmanifest, which Maharishi Narayana has described as tattvam. That 
which is manifest should be known as liable to death. That which is 
unmanifest transcends death. 

Rishi Narayana has described the principle of pravritti, action. Upon it 
rests the whole universe with its mobile and immobile creatures. 

The principle of nivritti, actlessness, again leads to the unmanifest and 
eternal Brahman. The creator Brahma has described the doctrine of 
pravritti. Pravritti implies rebirth or return. Nivritti, on the other hand, 
implies the highest end, liberation. The ascetic who wants to discriminate 
with accuracy between good and evil, who is always bent on understanding 
the nature of the Soul, and who devotes himself to nivritti, attains that 
highest end. He, who wishes to accomplish this, should know both Prakriti 
and Purusha of which I will now tell you. 

That which is different from both Prakriti and Purusha, which 
transcends them both, and is distinguished from all beings, should be 
particularly known by the wise. Both Prakriti and Purusha are without 
beginning and without end. Both are beyond the grasp of their ken. Eternal 


and indestructible, both are greater than the greatest of beings. In these, they 
are similar; there are points of dissimilarity between them. 

Let me explain. Prakriti is filled with the traigunas. It is also engaged 
in creation. The true aspects of the kshetrajna Purusha is known to be 
different. Purusha is the apprehender of all the transformations of Prakriti 
but cannot himself be apprehended. He transcends all attributes. As regards 
Purusha and the Paramatman, both of them are unimaginable. And being 
without attributes by which they can be distinguished, both are prominent 
and apart from all else. Just as a man with his head circled by three folds of 
a cloth, a turban, is not identical with the turban he wears, the embodied 
Jivatman invested with the traigunas is not identical with those gunas. 

Hence, these four subjects, which are covered by these fourfold 
studies, should be understood. One who understands this is never 
bewildered when drawing conclusions in his enquiry. 

He that wants to attain high prosperity should become pure in mind, 
and taking to austere practices of the body and the senses, should devote 
himself to yoga without desire for their fruits. The universe is pervaded by 
yoga-shakti quietly circulating through every part of it and illumining it 
resplendently. The sun and the moon shine with splendour in the glory of 
the heart because of yoga-shakti. 

The result of yoga is gyana, knowledge. Yoga is spoken of highly in 
the world. Whatever actions are destructive of passion and darkness 
establish yoga in its true character. Brahmacharya and ahimsa establish the 
yoga of the body, while restraining the mind and speech properly establish 
the yoga of the mind. The food obtained in alms from the twice-born is 
superior to all other food. By eating such food moderately, one’s sins born 
of passion begin to fade. A yogi subsisting upon such food finds his senses 
gradually withdrawn from their objects. Hence, he should take only as 
much food as is strictly necessary for sustenance. It is also advisable that 
the knowledge that one gains gradually with one’s mind devoted to yoga, 
should readily be garnered during one’s last moments by a forcible stretch 
of power. 

The embodied Jivatman divested of rajas does not immediately attain 
moksha but assumes a subtle form, a sukshma rupa with all the senses of 
perception, and moves about in space. When his mind becomes unaffected 
by actions, because of renunciation, he loses that subtle form and merges 
into Prakriti without, however, yet attaining Brahman. After the destruction 


of this gross material body, one who thoughtfully escapes from all the three 
bodies—the gross, the subtle and the causal, succeeds in attaining moksha. 

The birth and death of creatures always depend upon the cause 
constituted by avidya. When knowledge of Brahman arises, one needs no 
longer to pursue the jiva. Those, however, who accept what is the reverse of 
truth by believing the ego to be the self are men whose beliefs are 
accounted for during the birth and death of all beings. Such men never even 
dream of mukti. 

Yogins who patiently support their bodies, renounce all external 
objects with the help of their intellect, and withdraw themselves from the 
world of senses, come to admire the senses for their subtlety. Some amongst 
them, with the mind cleansed by yoga, who journey in accord with the 
scriptures and reach the highest, succeed in knowing it with their intellect 
and abide in that which is the highest. 

Some worship Brahman in images. Some worship Him as existing 
with attributes. Some repeatedly realise the highest divinity, which has been 
described to be like a flash of lightning and indestructible. Others, who have 
burnt their sins with tapasya, attain Brahman in the end. All Mahatmans 
attain the highest end. Mindful of the scriptures, one should observe the 
subtle attributes of the several forms of Brahman that are worshipped by 
men. The yogi who has transcended the necessity of depending on the body, 
who has cast aside all attachments, and whose mind is absorbed in yoga, is 
known as another embodiment of infinity, as the Supreme Divinity, or as 
that which is unmanifest. Men whose hearts are devoted to the acquisition 
of knowledge first succeed in freeing themselves from the world of mortals. 
Subsequently, by casting off attachments they enter into the nature of 
Brahman, and at last attain moksha, the highest end. 

So have persons conversant with the Vedas spoken of the teaching that 
leads to the attainment of Brahman. All those who follow the path 
according to their ability and acumen, successfully find mukti. They, who 
succeed in acquiring the knowledge that cannot be shaken by doubt and 
scepticism and which makes its possessors free from all attachments, attain 
various high realms after death and at last find emancipation. 

The pure-hearted who have imbibed contentment from knowledge, 
and have cast off all desires and attachments, gradually approach Brahman, 
which has the unmanifest for its sole attribute, which is divine, and without 
birth and death. With the realisation that Brahman dwells in their own 


Souls, they become themselves eternal and have never again to be reborn. 
They reach the supreme state, which is indestructible and eternal, and so 
exist in bliss. The observation with regard to this world, samsara, is this: It 
exists in the case of the ignorant; it does not exist for the enlightened. 

The whole universe, bound in desire, is spinning like a wheel. As the 
strands of a lotus-stalk spread into every part of the stalk, so do the strands 
of desire, which have neither beginning nor end, spread themselves over 
every part of the body. As a weaver drives his threads into a cloth with his 
shuttle, so does the shuttle of desire weave the threads that form the fabric 
of the universe. He who properly knows the characteristics of Prakriti, 
Shakti and Purusha, is freed from desire and attains moksha. The divine 
Rishi Narayana, the shelter of the universe, out of compassion for all 
creatures, clearly proclaimed these means to acquire immortality.’ 


CANTO 218 


Y udhishtira says, ‘By following pravritti, O you that are skilled in all 

courses of conduct, did Janaka, the ruler of Mithila, adept in the way 
of moksha, succeed in attaining mukti, after casting off all worldly 
pleasures?’ 

Bhishma says, “Listen to an ancient story of the manner in which a 
particular ruler, thoroughly conversant with all the asramas, succeeded in 
achieving the highest bliss. There was a king in Mithila named Janadeva of 
Janaka’s race. He was ever engaged in deliberation upon the paths that 
might lead to the attainment of Brahman. One hundred acharyas always 
lived in his palace, to instruct him upon the diverse dharmas followed by 
people from various walks of life. Masterful in the Vedas, he was not 
convinced by the speculations of his teachers on the nature of the Soul, nor 
on their views of death and rebirth. 

One day the son of the devi Kapila, a great ascetic called Panchasikha, 
who ranged over the whole world, arrived in Mithila. Endowed with true 
conclusions about all speculations about the diverse duties connected with 
renunciation, he was above all conflict, and unequivocal. He was regarded 
as the best of Rishis. Through his travels, he wanted to place within reach 
of all men the eternal bliss that is so difficult to attain. It seems that he went 
everywhere amazing the world, during the avatara of none other than the 
Maharishi whom the followers of the Samkhya faith called Kapila. 


He was the most excellent of all the disciples of Asuri and was called 
Amara, the deathless. He had performed a silent japa that lasted a thousand 
years. He was firm in mind, and had completed all the rites and sacrifices as 
required in the scriptures that lead to the attainment of Brahman. He was 
fully conversant with the five sheaths that cover the Soul. He was devoted 
to the five karmas with which Brahma is worshipped, and possessed the five 
qualities of peace, self-restraint, non-violence, compassion and charity. 
Thus known as Panchasikha, he once approached a large assembly of Rishis 
of the Samkhya faith and enquired about the highest goal of human 
acquisition: was it the unmanifest or that upon which the five Purushas or 
Koshas rest? 

In order to obtain knowledge of the Atman, Asuri had questioned his 
guru and, because of the teacher’s instructions and of his own tapasya, 
Asuri understood the distinction between body and soul, and acquired 
divine insight. In that assembly of ascetics, Asuri gave his account of the 
Immutable One, and Indestructible Brahman that is seen in diverse forms. 

Panchasikha became a disciple of Asuri. He lived on human milk. 
There was a certain Brahmani named Kapila, who was the wife of Asuri. 
She adopted Panchasikha as a son and he would suckle at her breasts. 
Consequently, he came to be known as the son of Kapila and his mind 
became fixed on Brahman. The Devarishi Narada who also told me about 
the omniscience of Panchasikha brought particulars of his birth and how he 
became the son of Kapila, to my knowledge. Conversant with all the 
asramas, Panchasikha acquired great knowledge. Next, he approached 
Janaka and, fully aware that the king had equal reverence for all his 
teachers, began to amaze the hundred acharyas with a presentation of his 
own opinion charged with abundant logic. Janaka, who witnessed the gifts 
of Panchasikha Kapileya, grew exceedingly attached to him. He abandoned 
his hundred teachers, and began to follow Kapileya exclusively. 

Kapileya addressed Janaka, who sat with his head traditionally bowed 
and who was fully able to understand the sage’s instructions on the 
transcendent tenet of moksha as explained in Samkhya treatises. Beginning 
with the sorrows of birth, he spoke of the burdens of religious deeds. Then 
he explained the hardships of all states of life right up to Brahmaloka, the 
sacred domain of the creator. He also spoke on maya for whose sake 
dharma and rituals are followed, and of their fruits, which are 
untrustworthy, destructible, fleeting, unsteady and uncertain. 


Kapileya said, “Sceptics say that when death is evidently witnessed by 
all, those who maintain, out of their faith in the scriptures, that something 
distinct from the body, called the Atman, exists, are eventually defeated in 
argument. They also urge that one’s death means the extinction of one’s 
Atman, and that sorrow, age and disease imply the partial death of the Soul. 
Furthermore, he who maintains, in ignorance, that the Atman is distinct 
from the body and exists after the loss of the body, entertains an opinion 
that is illogical. If the non-existent were regarded as existing, then it may be 
said that the king, being regarded so, is in truth never liable to age or death. 
However, is he, on that account, to really be believed to be above age and 
death? 

When the question is whether an object exists or does not exist, and 
when that whose existence is asserted reveals all the indications of non- 
existence, what is that upon which ordinary people rely in settling the 
affairs of life? Direct evidence is the root of both belief and the scriptures, 
bhakti and the shastras. The scriptures can be contradicted by direct 
evidence. As to faith, its evidences do not amount to much. Whatever be the 
subject, cease to reason basing your logic on belief alone. There is no jiva 
other than this body. 

In a banyan seed inheres the capacity to yield leaves, flowers, fruits, 
roots and bark. From the grass and water that a cow consumes come milk 
and butter, substances whose nature is different from that of the creative 
causes. Elements of different kinds when allowed to decompose in water 
produce intoxicating liquors whose nature is quite different from that of the 
materials that produce them. Likewise, from the sperm is produced the body 
and its attributes, with the intellect, consciousness, mind and other 
possessions. Two pieces of wood, rubbed together, produce fire. The stone 
called suryakantam, meeting the rays of the sun, produces fire. Any metallic 
object, heated in fire, vapourises water when immersed in it. Similarly, the 
material body creates the mind and its attributes of perception, memory, 
imagination and the rest. As the magnet moves iron, similarly, the senses 
are controlled by the mind. So reason the sceptics. 

The sceptics, however, are mistaken. For, the disappearance of only 
the vitalising force, when the body becomes lifeless, and not the 
simultaneous disappearance of the body on death, is evidence that the body 
is not the Soul but that the Soul is separate from the body, and outlives it. If, 
indeed, body and Soul had been one and the same, both would disappear at 


the same time. Instead, the dead body may be seen for some time after the 
occurrence of death. Death, therefore, means the flight from the body of 
something that is other than the body. The entreaty of the divinities by the 
very men who deny the separate existence of the Soul is another good 
argument for the premise that the Soul is separate from the body and has an 
existence that is independent of a material state. The divinities to whom 
these men pray cannot be seen or touched. They are believed to exist in 
subtle forms. Truly, if a belief in divinities divested of material forms does 
not violate their logic, why should the existence of an immaterial Soul alone 
do their logic such harm? 

Another argument against the sceptic is that his hypothesis implies a 
destruction of karma; for if body and Soul die together, the actions of this 
life would also perish: a conclusion to which no man can possibly come if 
he is to explain the inequalities witnessed in the universe. These examples, 
and material forms, cannot be the causes of the Jivatman, its sensory 
accompaniments of perception, memory and the like. The identity of 
immaterial existences with objects that are material cannot be 
comprehended. Hence, objects that are themselves material cannot by any 
means be causes for the creation of things immaterial. 

There are individuals of the opinion that there is rebirth and that it is 
caused by ignorance, the desire for actions, greed, disdain and attachment to 
other vices. They say that avidya is the Atman. Actions constitute the seed 
that is sown in the soil. Desire is the water that causes the seed to sprout and 
grow—in this way they explain rebirth. They maintain that ignorance is 
ingrained in a subtle manner, and when one mortal body is destroyed, 
another body immediately generates the ego from it. Furthermore, that 
when this ego is consumed with the help of knowledge, the destruction of 
existence itself follows, and the person attains nirvana. This opinion also is 
erroneous. This is the doctrine of the Bouddhas, Buddhists.! 

It may be asked that when the being that is thus reborn is a different 
one in its nature, birth and purposes connected with virtue and vice why 
should the ahamkara then be regarded to have any identity with the being 
that was? Indeed, the only inference that can be drawn is that the entire 
chain of existences of a particular being is not really a chain of connected 
links but separate existences in succession that are unconnected with one 
another. On the other hand, if the being that is the result of rebirth is really 
different from what it was in a previous birth, what satisfaction can come to 


a person from the exercise of the virtue of charity or from the acquisition of 
knowledge or of asceticism, since the deeds performed by one are to accrue 
to another person in another birth without the performer himself being 
present to enjoy them? 

Another result of this false doctrine would be that one in this life may 
be rendered miserable by the actions of another in a previous life, or having 
become miserable may again be rendered happy. However, by looking at 
what actually takes place in the world, a proper conclusion may be drawn 
with respect to the unseen. The separate consciousness that is the result of 
rebirth is, from what may be inferred from the Bouddha theory of life, 
different from the consciousness that had preceded it in a previous life. The 
manner, yet, in which the rise of a separate consciousness is explained by 
this theory, does not seem to be either consistent or reasonable. 

The Chitta as it existed in the previous life was the very opposite of 
eternal; being only transitory, it extended as it did till death of the body. 
That which has an end cannot be taken as the cause for the creation of a 
second consciousness appearing after the occurrence of the end. If, again, 
the very loss of the previous Chitta were regarded as the cause of the 
creation of the second consciousness, then upon the death of a body, a 
second form would arise from the inert corpse. Once more, their doctrine of 
extinction of life, nirvana or sattva-samkshaya is exposed to the criticism 
that such extinction will become a recurring phenomenon like that of the 
seasons, the year, the yuga, heat, cold or objects that are agreeable or 
disagreeable. 

If to avoid these criticisms, the followers of this doctrine assert the 
existence of a soul that is permanent and to which each new consciousness 
attaches; they expose themselves to the new charge that the permanent 
substance, overcome with age, and with death that brings about destruction, 
may in time be itself weakened and destroyed. If the supports of a mansion 
are weakened by time, the mansion itself is sure to finally fall down. The 
senses, mind, wind, blood, flesh, bones, successively meet with destruction 
and enter each into its own original cause. If again the existence of an 
eternal Soul is asserted to be changeless, the refuge of the intellect, 
consciousness and other attributes, and yet is dissociated from all these, 
such an assertion would be exposed to a serious protest, for then all that is 
usually done in the world would be meaningless, especially with reference 
to the attainment of the fruits of charity and other religious acts. 


All the declarations in the srutis encouraging all the actions connected 
with the conduct of men in the world, would be equally unmeaning, for the 
Soul being dissociated from the intellect and the mind, there is no one to 
enjoy the fruits of good deeds and Vedic rites. 

So, diverse kinds of speculations arise. Whether this opinion is right or 
the other is true, there is no conclusion to be reached from these disputes. 
Engaged in reflection on such opinions, careful persons follow meticulous 
lines of thought. The intellect of these, directed to specific theories, 
becomes absorbed with them until at last, it is entirely lost in them. Thus, 
all men are rendered miserable by all pursuits, good or bad. The Vedas lead 
them back to the right path, guide them along it, like mahouts their 
elephants. Many men, with weakened minds, desire objects that are filled 
with great happiness. These, however, have soon to meet with a much larger 
measure of sorrow, and then, forcibly torn from their heart’s desires, they 
have to accept the might of death. 

What use has one, who is destined to die and whose life is unstable, 
for relatives, friends, wives and other possessions? He who encounters 
death after he abandons all these, passes easily out of the world and has 
never to return. Earth, space, water, heat and wind always support and 
nourish the body. After such deliberation, how can one feel any affection 
for one’s body? Indeed, the body, which is subject to death, has no joy in 
it.” 

After King Janadeva heard the faultless words of Panchasikha, 
unconnected with delusions arising from daunting sacrifices and other Vedic 
rituals, highly salutary, and regarding only the Atman, the king was filled 
with wonder, and prepared himself to address the Rishi once more.’ 


CANTO 219 


B hishma says, ‘Janadeva of the race of Janaka, thus instructed by the 
great Rishi Panchasikha, once more questioned him on the subject of 
existence or non-existence after death.’ 

Janadeva said, “O illustrious one, if no one retains any knowledge 
after departing from this state of being, and if, indeed, this is true, where 
then is the difference between ignorance and knowledge? What do we gain 
then by knowledge and what do we lose by ignorance? Consider, O 
Dvijottama, that if moksha be such, then all religious actions and vows end 
only in annihilation. Of what avail would then the distinction be between 
heedfulness and heedlessness? If mukti means dissociation from all objects 
of pleasure or an association with objects that are not eternal, why then 
would men cherish a desire for action, or, resolved to action, continue to 
find ways for the accomplishment of desired ends? What is the truth of 
this?” 

Bhishma continues, ‘Seeing the king helplessly enveloped in thick 
darkness, and stupefied by failure, Panchasikha consoled him thus, “In 
moksha the achievement is not extinction. Nor is it any kind of existence 
that one can easily conceive. This that we see is a union of body, senses and 
mind. They exist independently and control one another. In this manner, 
they continue to function. The elements that constitute the body are water, 
space, wind, heat and earth. These come together forming the body 


according to their own nature. They separate again in accordance with their 
own nature. The body is not one element. 

Intellect, fire and breath, are all wind; these three are said to be organs 
of action. The senses, the objects of the senses, sound, form and the rest, the 
energy that dwells in those objects due to which they can be seen, the 
faculties lodged in the senses through which they succeed in perceiving 
them, the mind, prana, apana and the rest, the various fluids and impulses 
that are the results of the digestive organs, flow from the three. 

Hearing, touch, taste, vision and scent, are the five senses. They derive 
their attributes from the mind, which, indeed, is their cause. The mind that 
exists as an aspect of Chitta has three states: pleasure, pain and the absence 
of both pleasure and pain. Sound, touch, form, taste, scent, and the objects 
to which they belong, until the moment of one’s death are causes for the 
attainment of knowledge. Upon the senses, rest all actions that lead to 
nirvana, as also renunciation, which ushers one to the attainment of 
Brahman, along with the discovery of truth with regard to all subjects of 
enquiry. 

The learned say that discovery of truth is the highest objective of 
existence, and that it is the root of moksha; and of intelligence, they say that 
it leads to moksha and Brahman. The person, who regards this union of 
perishable attributes called the body and the objects of the senses as the 
Soul, feels, because of such flawed knowledge, great misery that proves to 
be unending. Those, on the other hand, who regard all worldly objects as 
Anatman, not-Soul, and who on that account cease to have any affection or 
attachment for them, have never to suffer any sorrow, for sorrow, in their 
case stands in need of some foundation upon which to rest. 

In this connection, there exists the unrivalled branch of knowledge 
that speaks of renunciation. It is called samyagradha. I will speak to you 
about it. Listen to it for the sake of your mukti. 

Renunciation of actions is expressed for all persons who strive 
earnestly for moksha. Those who have not been taught correctly and 
subsequently think that serenity may be attained without renunciation have 
to bear a heavy burden of sorrow. Vedic sacrifices and other rites exist for 
the relinquishment of wealth and other possessions. For disavowal of all 
enjoyments, exist vows and fasts of diverse kinds. For renunciation of 
pleasure and happiness, exist tapasya and yoga. The renunciation, however, 
of everything or vairagya is the highest kind of abstinence. What I am about 


to tell you is the one path pointed out by the learned in order to renounce 
everything. Those who tread the path succeed in driving off all sorrow, 
while those who deviate from it reap distress and suffering. 

Before speaking of the five organs of knowledge, with the mind for the 
sixth, and all of which occupy the intellect, I will tell you of the five organs 
of action, which have strength for their sixth. The two hands define two 
organs of action. The two legs are the two limbs for movement. The sexual 
organ exists for both pleasure and the continuation of the species. The anal 
canal, leading down from the stomach, is the organ for the expulsion of 
waste. The organs of speech exist for the expression of sounds. Know that 
these five organs of action relate to the mind. These are the eleven organs of 
knowledge and of action, including the mind. One should quickly reject the 
mind with the intellect. For hearing, three causes must exist together, the 
ears, sound and the mind. The same is the case with the senses of touch, 
form, taste and smell. These fifteen are needed for the several kinds of 
perception. 

Everyone, because of these, becomes aware of three separate aspects 
of those perceptions: a material organ, its particular function, and the mind 
from which that function works. Again, with regard to all perceptions of the 
mind, three qualities relate to goodness, passion and darkness. In them, 
function three kinds of consciousness, including all feelings and emotions. 
Rapture, satisfaction, joy, happiness and peace, which arise in the mind 
from any perceptible cause or without any apparent cause, belong to the 
sattva guna. Discontent, regret, grief, desire and spite, causeless or 
occasioned by a perceivable cause, are the signs of rajas. Misjudgement, 
confusion, distraction, dreams and lethargy, however caused, belong to the 
tamoguna. 

Whatever state of consciousness exists, of either the body or the mind, 
united with joy or satisfaction, is from the sattva guna. Whatever state of 
consciousness exists united with any feeling of discontent or cheerlessness 
is from the rajoguna in the mind. Whatever state, either of the body or the 
mind, exists with error or distraction indicates tamas, which is 
incomprehensible and inexplicable. 

The organ of hearing relies on space; it is to an extent space itself. 
Sound has that organ for its port. Sound, therefore, is a modification of 
space. On hearing sound, one may not immediately acquire knowledge of 
the ear and space. However, when sound is heard, the ear and space do not 


long remain unknown. By destroying the ear, sound and space may be 
destroyed. In addition, by destroying the mind, all may be destroyed. The 
same is the case with the skin, the eyes, the tongue and the nose. They exist 
in touch, form, taste and smell. They constitute the faculty of perception 
and they are the mind. With each employed in its own function, all the five 
organs of action and five of knowledge exist together, and upon the union of 
the ten dwells the mind as the eleventh, and upon the mind, the intellect as 
the twelfth. If it were said that these twelve do not exist together, then the 
outcome would be death in dreamless slumber. However, as there is no 
death in dreamless slumber, it must be conceded that these twelve exist 
together as regards themselves but separately from the Soul. 

The co-existence of these twelve with the Atman, which is referred to 
in conversation, is only a common form of speech for the ordinary purposes 
of the world. The dreamer, from the appearance of past sensual impressions, 
becomes conscious of his senses in their subtle forms, and equipped as he 
already is with the three attributes of goodness, passion and darkness he 
regards his senses as existing along with their respective objects and, so, 
acts and moves about with an imaginary body just as he does while awake. 
The dissociation of the soul from the intellect, and the mind from the 
senses, which quickly disappear without stability, and which the mind 
causes to arise only when influenced by darkness, is happiness that feeds off 
the tamoguna and is experienced only in this material body. 

The bliss of moksha certainly differs from it. The same subtle, truth- 
concealing darkness seems to envelop the bliss of mukti, and the ecstasy 
awakened by the inspired teaching of the Vedas. In reality, moksha is 
unstained by darkness. Similar to what occurs in dreamless sleep, in 
moksha also, subjective and objective existences, from consciousness to 
objects of the senses, which have their origin in one’s actions, are all 
eliminated. In some individuals overwhelmed by ignorance these exist, 
firmly grafted. To others who have transcended avidya, they never come at 
any time. 

They who are enlightened about the aspects of Atman and anatman 
say that this sum of the senses, and the rest, is the kshetra, the field of 
karma. That prevailing element which remains, transcending the mind, is 
called kshetrajna, the knower of the field. When all creatures exist because 
of the known causes of ignorance, desire and actions, in addition to their 
primary nature of union between the Soul and body, which of these two is 


destructible, and how can the Atman, which is said to be eternal, suffer 
destruction? 

As when small rivers that merge into larger ones lose their forms and 
names, and the larger ones that flow into the ocean also lose their forms and 
names, likewise occurs the state of moksha. This being the case, when the 
Jivatman merges into the Paramatman, and all its attributes disappear, how 
can it be an object of distinctness? 

One who is acquainted with the awareness directed towards the 
accomplishment of mukti and who heedfully seeks to know the evil fruits of 
his actions, never soils the Atman, even as a lotus leaf though dipped in 
water is never soaked by it. 

When one becomes free from the myriad vigorous bonds, occasioned 
by affection for children and spouses, and love for sacrifices and other 
rituals; when one discards both joy and sorrow and transcends all 
attachments, one then attains the highest end and entering into Brahman 
loses one’s individuality. 

When one has understood the edicts of the srutis that lead to correct 
inferences about Brahman and has practiced the auspicious virtues which 
these and other scriptures impart, one may rest at ease, setting aside the 
fears of age and death. 

When both punya and paapa disappear, and their fruits in the form of 
joy and sorrow are destroyed, men, unattached to everything, take refuge, at 
first, in the saguna Brahman invested with personality, and then, behold the 
nirguna, impersonal Brahma. 

In the course of its descent under the influence of avidya, jiva lives 
within its body formed by karma just like the silkworm within its cocoon 
made of threads woven by itself. And like the silk-worm that abandons its 
cocoon, the jiva too abandons its body generated by its karma. Finally, its 
sorrows are destroyed like a clod of earth falling violently upon a rock. As 
the ruru discards its old horns or the snake sheds its skin and lives on, a 
detached person sheds all his sorrows. As a bird deserts a tree that is about 
to fall and flies to a new nest, the man freed from attachments casts off both 
joy and sorrow, and dissociates even from his subtle and subtler forms, his 
sukshma and linga sariras, attains the end which is filled with the highest 
weal. Your own ancestor Janaka, king of Mithila, who watched his city burn 
in a blaze, himself proclaimed, ‘In this inferno nothing of mine is afire.’” 


After King Janadeva listened to Panchasikha speak these words that 
could yield immortality, on careful reflection, he arrived at the truth, shed 
his sorrows, and lived on in the enjoyment of great bliss. He who reads this 
discourse, O king, and always reflects on it, is never pained by any 
calamity, and freed from sorrow attains moksha like Janadeva, the ruler of 
Mithila.’ 


CANTO 220 


Y udhishtira says, ‘With what deeds does one acquire happiness, and 

what are the actions that bring woe? What also is that, O Bhaarata, 
by doing which one becomes free from fear and progresses here, in this 
world, crowned with success in the purusharthas?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘The ancients, who had their awareness directed to the 
srutis, highly approved the duty of samyama, restraint, for all the asramas 
generally, but especially so for the Brahmanas. Success in religious rites 
never occurs in the case of one that is not restrained. Religious rites, 
penance, truth, all these are founded in abstinence. Moderation enhances 
one’s energy. Abnegation is said to be sacred. The man of self-restraint 
becomes sinless and fearless and wins great rewards. A disciplined man 
sleeps happily and wakes happily. He lives happily in the world and his 
mind always remains cheerful. Every kind of excitement is quietly 
controlled through abstention. One who is not disciplined fails in a similar 
objective. The man of continence realises his innumerable enemies in the 
forms of lust, desire, wrath and the rest, as if these live in a separate body. 

Like tigers and other predators, those lacking restraint always fill 
everyone with dread. To control these men, Brahma created the Kshatriyas 
and kings. In all the four asramas of life, the practice of abstinence is 
distinguished above all other virtues. The fruits of moderation are much 
greater than those obtainable in all the asramas of life together. 


I will now tell you the traits of individuals who prize samyama highly. 
Their attributes are nobility, peace, contentment, faith, forgiveness, 
invariable simplicity, controlled speech, humility, reverence for elders and 
superiors, benevolence, compassion for all creatures, candour. They abstain 
from gossip, false and useless conversation, and from praising and insulting 
others. The self-restrained man becomes desirous of moksha. He quietly 
suffers current joys and grief, and is never exhilarated or depressed by 
anticipated ones. Without vindictiveness and all kinds of guile, he is 
unmoved by praise and blame, is well behaved, has good manners, is pure 
of heart, has firmness or fortitude and is a complete master of his passions. 

Honoured in this world, such a man in the afterlife finds swarga. When 
with his help all creatures acquire what they cannot otherwise have, such a 
man rejoices and becomes happy. Devoted to universal benevolence, he 
never harbours animosity towards anyone. Peaceful like the ocean during 
low tide, wisdom fills his soul and he is ever cheerful. Possessed of 
intelligence, and worthy of universal reverence, the man of restraint never 
fears any creature and in return is feared by none. He, who never rejoices 
even at large attainments and never feels sorrow when overtaken by 
calamity, is possessed of contented wisdom. Such a man is said to be self- 
restrained. Indeed, such a man is said to be a being reborn, a true Dvija. 

Versed with the scriptures and endowed with a pure soul, the man of 
abstinence, accomplishes all the actions done by the good, and enjoys their 
pure fruits. They, however, that have a wicked Soul never take to the path of 
benevolence, forgiveness, peace, contentment, sweetness of speech, truth, 
generosity and comfort. Their path consists of lust, wrath, greed, envy of 
others and boastfulness. The Brahmana should overcome lust and wrath, 
practice the vow of brahmacharya, achieve complete mastery of his senses, 
exert himself with endurance in the severest of penances, and observe the 
most rigid restraints. Thus he should live in this world, and calmly bide his 
time like one with a body but knowing fully that he is not subject to death.’ 


CANTO 221 


Y udhishtira says, ‘The three higher castes, who undertake sacrifices 

and other rituals, sometimes eat the remnants, of meat and wine, of 
sacrifices in honour of the Devas, in order to beget children and heaven. 
What, O Pitamaha, is the character of what they do?’ 

Bhishma says, “Those who eat forbidden food regardless of the 
sacrifices and vows ordained in the Vedas are considered wayward men. 
They are deemed fallen. Those, on the other hand, who eat such food in the 
observance of Vedic sacrifices and vows, and induced by the desire of fruits 
in the shape of heaven and children, ascend to heaven but fall again on the 
exhaustion of their punya.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Common people say that fasting is tapasya. Is it 
really so, or is penance something else?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘People do regard upavasa, fasting, measured by 
months or fortnights or days, as penance. In the opinion, however, of the 
wise, this is not tapasya. On the contrary, fasting is an impediment to the 
acquisition of the knowledge of the Soul. The renunciation of being the 
doer and the humility contained in the worship, and compassion for all 
creatures, constitute the highest tapasya, distinguished above all tapasyas. 

He who undertakes such penance is regarded as one that is always 
fasting and always leads a life of brahmacharya. Such a Brahmana will 
become a Muni always, a Deva evermore, watchful forever, and engaged 
purely in the pursuit of dharma, even if he lives amidst a family. He will 


remain a vegetarian always, and pure forever. He will always partake of 
amrita, and ever adore the gods and his guests. Indeed, he will be regarded 
as one who always subsists on vighasa, sacrificial remnants, forever 
devoted to the duty of hospitality, eternally full of faith, and one who 
invariably worships Devas and Athitis.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘How is one engaged in such penance deemed as one 
that is daily fasting or as one that is ever devoted to the vow of 
brahmacharya, or as one that invariably subsists upon vighasa, or even as 
one that is always regardful of his guests?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘He will be regarded as one that is always on a fast if 
he eats once in the day and once at night, at the fixed hours, without eating 
anything in the interval. With consistency of truth in his speech and a 
ceaseless adherence to wisdom, who approaches his wife only in her season 
and never at other times, such a Brahmana becomes a Brahmacharin. By 
never eating meat of animals not killed for sacrifice, he will be a strict 
vegetarian. Ever charitable he will be eternally pure, and by abstaining from 
sleep during the day, he will remain always alert. Know, O Yudhishtira, that 
the man who eats only after he has fed his servants and guests becomes an 
eater of ambrosia. The Brahmana who never eats until Devas and Athitis 
are fed wins heaven itself. He is said to subsist upon prasadam, who eats 
only what remains after the Devas, Pitris, Sevakas and Athitis have dined. 
Such men win numberless realms of heaven in the next life. To their homes 
come, with Brahma himself, the Devas and the apsaras. They who share 
their food with the Adityas and the Pitris pass their days in constant 
happiness with their sons and grandsons, and at last leaving off this body, 
attain a very high end.’ 


CANTO 222 


Y udhishtira says, ‘In this world, O Bhaarata, deeds good and bad 

attach themselves to man to yield fruits for enjoyment or suffering. 
Is man to be regarded as their doer or is he not to be regarded so? Doubt 
fills my mind. I wish to hear about this in detail from you, O Pitamaha!’ 

Bhishma says, ‘O Yudhishtira, listen to an old story of a dialogue 
between Prahlada and Indra. The king of the Daityas, Prahlada, was 
unattached to all worldly objects. His sins had been washed away. Of 
respectable parentage, he had great wisdom. Free from confusion and pride, 
ever observant of the sattva guna, and devoted to various vows, he accepted 
praise and blame equally. With self-restraint, he spent his time in a state of 
sunya. Conversant with the origin and the destruction of all created things, 
chala and achala, he was never angry at what displeased him and never 
rejoiced at the gains of what was agreeable. He knew what is supreme and 
what is not, among all things omniscient and omnipresent. He cast an equal 
eye upon gold and a clod of earth. Steadily engaged in the study of the 
Atman and the achievement of moksha, firm in knowledge, he arrived at 
fixed conclusions in respect of satya. 

Once, as he sat withdrawn, with his senses subdued, Sakra approached 
him, and with a wish to awaken him, said these words, “O king, I see all 
those qualities permanently set in you by which a person wins the esteem of 
all. Your intellect seems to be like that of a child, free from attachment and 


aversion. You know the Soul. What, do you think, is the best means by 
which a knowledge of the Atman may be attained? 

You are now bound in chains, fallen from your erstwhile position, 
restrained by the power of your foes, and divested of prosperity. Your 
present circumstances inspire grief. Yet how is it, O Prahlada, that you do 
not lament? Is this due, O son of Diti, to the acquisition of wisdom or is it 
because of your resolve? Look at your miseries, O Prahlada, and yet you 
seem to be happy and peaceful.” 

Thus urged by Indra, the lord of the Daityas replied in these sweet 
words of great wisdom. 

Prahlada said, “He who is unacquainted with the origin and the 
destruction of all created things is stupefied by his ignorance. He who 
knows these two things is never bewildered. All kinds of entities and non- 
entities come into being or cease because of their own svabhava, their 
innate nature. No manner of individual will is required for the creation of 
such phenomena. In the absence, therefore, of individual will, it is evident 
that no achiever exists for the creation of all this that we perceive. Although 
in reality the Jivatman or the Chitta never does anything, yet out of 
ignorance, a consciousness of anger overspreads itself over it. He, who 
regards himself as the doer of deeds good or bad, possesses a wisdom that is 
corrupt. Such a one, in my judgement, is unacquainted with the truth. 

If, O Sakra, the jiva were really the doer, then all actions undertaken 
for his own benefit would certainly be crowned with success. None of those 
deeds would be defeated. Among even men who strive their utmost, the 
suspension of the undesired and the occurrence of what is desired are not to 
be found. What becomes then of individual will? In the case of some, we 
see that without any exertion on their part, what is not desired is suspended 
and what is desired is accomplished. This then must be the result of 
svabhava. Others, again, are seen to present extraordinary aspects, for, 
although of superior intelligence, they have to plead for their livelihood 
from others who are vulgar in their ways and of little intelligence. 

Indeed, when all qualities, good or bad, enter a person, fated by innate 
nature, what ground is there for one to boast of one’s superior possessions? 
All these flow from svabhava. This is my undoubted conclusion. Even 
moksha and knowledge of self, I believe, flow from the same source. In this 
world all fruits, good or bad, that attach themselves to jivas, are regarded as 


the result of karma. I will now speak to you in depth on the subject of 
karma. Listen to me. 

As a crow, while eating food, proclaims with its repeated cawing the 
presence of food to others of its species, likewise, all our actions only 
proclaim the indications of svabhava. He, who is acquainted with only the 
transformations of innate nature but not with the Atma-tattva that is 
supreme and exists by itself, feels bewilderment because of his ignorance. 
He, however, who understands the difference between Atma-tattva and her 
transformations, is never befuddled. All living things have their origin in 
Atma-tattva. 

Having an assured conviction in this respect, one will never be 
affected by pride or arrogance. When I know what the origin is of all the 
laws of dharma, and when I am acquainted with the instability of all 
objects, it is impossible for me, O Sakra, to indulge in grief. All this is 
provided with an end. Without attachments, without pride, without desire 
and without hope, freed from all bonds, and dissociated from everything, I 
bide my time in great happiness, engaged as a witness to the appearance 
and disappearance of all created objects. For one who is wise, self- 
restrained, contented, without desire and hope, who beholds all things with 
the light of Atmagyana, no trouble or anxiety exists, O Sakra. I have no 
affection or aversion for either the Atman or its transformations. I do not 
see anyone as my enemy nor anyone as my own. I do not, O Indra, at any 
time crave either swarga, bhumi or Patala. It is not that there is no happiness 
in realising the Atman. However, as the Soul is dissociated from everything, 
it cannot enjoy bliss. Hence I desire nothing.” 

Sakra said, “Tell me the means, O Prahlada, by which this kind of 
wisdom may be attained and by which this kind of peace may be made 
one’s own. I beg you.” 

Prahlada said, “With simplicity, with attention, with a purified Soul, 
with mastery over the passions, and with service to elders, O Sakra, a man 
succeeds in attaining moksha. Know this, however, that one acquires 
wisdom from the Atman, and that the acquisition of peace is also from the 
same source. Indeed, all that you perceive is due to the Atman.” 

Thus addressed by the lord of the Daityas, Indra was filled with awe, 
and praised these words, O king, with a joyous heart. The lord of the 
Trilokas then worshipped the lord of the Daityas, and took his leave to 
return to his own realm.’ 


CANTO 223 


Y udhishtira says, “Tell me, O Pitamaha, what sort of intelligence may 
a king divested of prosperity and crushed by time’s heavy blow 
adopt, in order to endure life on this earth.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Related to this is an old story of the conversation 
between Vasava and Virochana’s son, Bali. One day, after Vasava had 
subjugated all the Asuras, he approached Brahma with folded hands, bowed 
to him and enquired after the whereabouts of Bali. 

“Tell me, O Brahma, where I may now find the charitable Bali of 
boundless wealth? He was the god of wind. He was Varuna. He was Surya. 
He was Soma. He was Agni that used to warm all creatures. He became 
Apah for the use of all. I do not see him anywhere. Indeed, O Brahma, tell 
me where I may find Bali now. Once, he would illumine all the cardinal 
directions as Surya and thereafter set at dusk. Bereft of idleness, he would 
pour rain down upon all creatures at the proper season. I do not now see 
that Bali. Indeed, tell me, O Brahma, where I may find the king of the 
Asuras now.” 

Brahma said, “It is not becoming in you, O Maghavat, to enquire after 
Bali in this manner now. One should not, however, lie when another 
questions one. I will tell you the whereabouts of Bali. O lord of Sachi, Bali 
may now have taken his birth among camels, bulls, mules or horses, and as 
the best of his species, may now abide in Mahasunyata.” 


Sakra said, “If, O Brahma, I happen to meet Bali, should I kill him or 
spare him? Tell me what should I do?” 

Brahma said, “Do not injure Bali, O Sakra, he does not deserve death. 
You should, on the other hand, seek instruction from him about dharma.” 

Bhishma continues, “Thus addressed by the divine creator, Indra 
roamed the earth, seated astride Airavata and escorted by an entourage of 
great splendour. He managed to meet Bali, who, as Brahma had said, abided 
in Mahasunyata, embodied in the form of an ass.’ 

Sakra said, “You are now, O Danava, born as an ass and subsist on 
chaff for food. This order of birth is surely a low one. Do you or do you not 
grieve for it? I see what I had never seen before—you brought under the 
might of your enemies, divested of prosperity and friends, and shorn of 
energy and prowess. Once, you journeyed through the lokas with your 
convoy of thousands of chariots and thousands of relatives. You blazed 
along, and seared everybody with your radiance; and you regarded us with 
scant regard. The Daityas looked up to you as their protector, for they lived 
under your reign. Through your power, the earth would yield crops without 
waiting for tillage. Today, however, I see you overtaken by this dire 
condition. Do you or do you not grieve over this? 

Time was, when, with pride reflected in your face, you would divide 
your vast wealth among your kinsmen, on the eastern shores of the ocean. 
What was the state of your mind then? When, for many years, you shone 
with radiance, and frolicked, while thousands of apsaras danced before you. 
All of them were adorned with garlands of lotuses and all had companions 
bright as gold. What, O lord of Danavas, was the state of your mind then 
and what is it now? 

You had a large canopy of gold, adorned with jewels and gems. As 
many as forty-two thousand Gandharvas, in those days, sang and played 
music before you. In your sacrifices, you had a great sceptre made entirely 
of gold. On such occasions, you would give away millions upon millions of 
kine. What, O Daitya, was the state of your mind then? Once, engaged in a 
sacrifice, you went around the very earth, in keeping with the custom of the 
hurling of the samya. What was the state of your mind then? No longer do I 
see that golden sceptre of yours, or the canopy of gemstones, nor all your 
followers and admirers. I see not also, O king of the Asuras, the garland that 
was given to you by Brahma.” 


Bali said, “You see not now, O Vasava, my sceptre, canopy or any 
followers or admirers. Nor do you see my garland, the gift from Brahma. 
Those precious possessions of mine are now buried in the darkness of a 
cave. When my time returns, you will surely see them once again. This 
conduct of yours, however, does not suit your position or fame. In your 
prosperity, you wish to mock my misery. Those who have acquired wisdom, 
and received contentment from it, who are of peaceful souls, and virtuous 
among all creatures, never grieve in misery, nor rejoice in happiness. Led, 
however, by a low intelligence, you indulge in glory, O Purandara. When 
you become like me you will not then regale yourself with such talk.” 


CANTO 224 


B hishma says, “Yet, laughing at Bali, who sighed like a snake, Indra 
said something more hurtful than before. 

Sakra said, “You are now deserted by both kinsmen and friends. In view 
of this miserable plight that has overtaken you, do you or do you not 
grieve? Time was when all the worlds were under your reign and great was 
your joy. I ask, do you or do you not grieve now, for this fall of yours from 
glory and splendour?” 

Bali said, “Considering all this to be transitory, and caused by the 
inexorable course of time, I do not, O Indra, indulge in grief. All things 
have an end. These bodies that creatures own, O Devaraja, are all 
evanescent. For this reason, Sakra, I do not grieve for this asinine form of 
mine. Nor is this form due to any fault of mine. The life force and the body 
come into existence together, because of their own nature. They grow and 
meet with death together. Having this form of existence now, I have not 
been permanently enslaved by it. Since I know this, I have no cause for 
sorrow. As the final resting place of all rivers is the ocean, even so the end 
of all embodied creatures is death. Those who know this well are never 
confused, O Vajradharin. Those, however, who are overwhelmed by passion 
and the loss of judgement, do not know this; those whose intellect is lost 
sink under the weight of misfortune. 

A person who acquires a keen awareness succeeds in destroying all his 
sins. A sinless person acquires the sattva guna, and becomes joyous. They, 


however, that deviate from the attribute of goodness, and find repeated 
births, are obliged to grieve and sorrow, led on by desire and the objects of 
the senses. Success or its reverse, in respect of the attainment of all objects 
of desire, life or death, the fruits of karma that are pleasure or pain, I neither 
abhor nor celebrate. 

When one slays another, one kills only his body. The man who thinks 
that it is he who kills another is himself slain. Indeed, both of them are 
ignorant of the truth, he who kills and he who is killed. The man, O 
Maghavat, who brags about his manliness after he has vanquished or killed 
another, should know that he is not the doer but the action of which he 
boasts has been accomplished by a real actor who is different. When the 
question arises about who is it that causes the creation and destruction of all 
things in the world, it is generally regarded that a man who has himself 
been caused or created, is the cause of creation or destruction. Know, 
however, that the one, who is so regarded, has himself a creator. 

Earth, light, space, water and wind—from these five do all creatures 
emerge. When I know this much, what sorrow can I feel for this change in 
my condition? One who is possessed of great wisdom, one who is bereft of 
knowledge, one who is strong, one who is without strength, one who owns 
personal beauty, and one who is uncomely, one who is fortunate and one 
who is unfortunate, are all swept away by Kaala. When I know that I have 
been vanquished by time, what sorrow can I feel for this change in my 
circumstances? 

One who burns anything burns a thing that has been already burnt. 
One who kills, only slays a victim already slain. One who is destroyed has 
been already destroyed. A thing acquired by a person is that which has 
already arrived and intended for his acquisition. Time is like an ocean. 
There is no island in it. Where, indeed, is its other shore? Its boundary 
cannot be seen. Even upon profound deliberation, I do not foresee the end 
of this continuous stream that is the great ordainer of all things and is 
certainly divine. If I did not understand that it is Kaala that destroys all 
creatures, then, perhaps, I would have felt the emotions of joy, pride and 
wrath, O Sachindra. Tell me, have you come here to belittle me, now that 
you have ascertained that I bear the form of an ass that survives on chaff 
and passes his days in a lonely place remote from the habitations of men? If 
I wish, O Indra, even now I can assume various awful forms, seeing any of 
which you would beat a hasty retreat from my presence. 


It is time that gives everything and again takes away everything. It is 
time that ordains all things. Do not, O Sakra, brag about your manliness. In 
days of yore, Purandara, at my wrath everything used to tremble. However, 
I am acquainted with the eternal attributes of all things in the world. Do you 
also know the truth? Do not suffer yourself to be filled with wonder. 
Affluence and its origin are not under one’s control. Your mind seems to be 
like that of a child. It is the same as it was before. Open your eyes, O 
Maghavat, and adopt an understanding established on faith and truth. The 
Devas, Manushyas, Pitris, Gandharvas, Nagas and the Rakshasas, were all 
under my reign in days gone by. You know this, O Vasava. Their intellects 
stupefied by ignorance, all creatures used to flatter me, saying, ‘Salutations 
to the cardinal place where Virochana’s son Bali may now abide!’ 

O lord of Sachi, I do not at all grieve when I think of the honour that is 
no longer paid to me. I feel no sorrow for this fall of mine. My belief is firm 
that I will live obedient to the will and puissance of the Great Ordainer. 

We see that one of noble birth, handsome and awarded with great 
prowess, lives in misery amidst his advisers and friends. This happens 
because it has been ordained to be so. Similarly, someone born in a humble 
vamsa, devoid of knowledge, with even a stain on his birth, is seen, O 
Sakra, to live in happiness amidst his fellow men. This, too, occurs because 
it has been so ordained. An auspicious and beautiful woman, O Sakra, is 
seen to pass her life in sorrow, while an unseemly woman with every 
inauspicious mark, is seen to pass her days in great happiness. 

That we have now become so is not due to any deeds of ours, O Sakra. 
That you are now so is not due, O wielder of the thunderbolt, to anything 
you have done. No, you have nothing, O you of hundred sacrifices, because 
of which you now enjoy this affluence. Nor have I done anything by which 
I am presently divested of affluence. Affluence and dearth come one after 
another. I now see you ablaze with splendour, endued with prosperity, 
possessed of beauty, placed at the head of all the Devas, as you roar at me. 
This would never be but for the fact of time having ruined me. Indeed, if 
time had not turned against me I would have killed you today with just a 
blow of my fist even though you are armed with the vajra. But this is not the 
time for me to exercise my prowess. On the other hand, it is the time to 
adopt peace and calmness. 

Kaala establishes all things. Time works upon all things and leads 
them to their final realisation. I was the worshipped lord of the Danavas. 


Burning down everything in my way with my tejas, I would roar in pride. 
When Kaala has ruined even me, who is there whom he will not ruin? 
Earlier, O king of the Adityas, singly I endured the urjas of all the twelve 
Adityas with yourself amongst them. I used to vaporise water and then 
shower it down as rain. I would give both light and heat unto the three 
worlds. It was I that protected and it was I that would destroy. It was I that 
gave and it was I that took. It was I that used to bind and it was I that would 
set free. 

In all the worlds, I was the one powerful master. The sovereign reign 
that I had, O king of the Devas, is no more. I am now ruined by the forces 
of time. Those things of old are no longer seen to shine in me. I am not the 
doer of actions that are apparently done by me. You are not the doer of your 
actions. None, O lord of Sachi, is the doer. It is Kaala, O Sakra, that protects 
or destroys all things. 

Those who know the Vedas say that Kaala is Brahman. The fortnights 
and months are his body, which is invested with days and nights as its 
garments. The seasons are his senses. The year is his mouth. Some 
individuals of superior intelligence say that all this, the entire universe, 
should be conceived as being Brahman. The Vedas, however, teach that the 
five sheaths that cover the Soul should be regarded as Brahman. Brahman is 
like a vast ocean, deep and inaccessible. It has neither beginning nor end, 
and it is both immortal and mortal; it is the final mystery. Though it is 
nirguna, without attributes by itself, yet it enters all things that exist and so 
assumes the gunas, becoming saguna. 

Men who know the truth regard Brahman as eternal. Through 
ignorance, Brahman causes the delusions of samsara to infuse the Atman, 
which is immaterial spirit with only pure knowledge for its single attribute. 
Samsara is not the essential quality of the Atman, for upon the dawning of 
knowledge of the true cause of everything, the very universe ceases to exist 
for the Soul. 

Brahman in the form of Kaala is the refuge of all creatures. Where 
would you go transcending time? Time or Brahman cannot be avoided by 
running nor by remaining still; it flows on inexorably. All the five senses are 
incompetent to perceive Brahman. Some have said that Brahman is 
Prajapati; some say he is fire; some call him the seasons; some say he is the 
month; some call him the fortnight; some declare he is the days; some claim 
he is the hours; some state he is the morning; some say he is the noon; some 


that he is the evening; and some declare he is the present moment. Thus 
diverse people speak diversely of Him who is One and singular. 

Know that he is eternity, under whose reign all things exist. Many 
thousands of Indras have passed away, O Vasava, each of whom was 
possessed of great strength and prowess. You also, O lord of Sachi, will 
have to pass in the same manner. You, too, O Indra, who possess swelling 
might and are the monarch of the Adityas, when your hour comes, all- 
powerful Kaala will extinguish you. Time sweeps away all things. So, O 
Indra, do not boast and do not gloat. Time cannot be stilled by either you or 
me, nor by our ancestors. The regal prosperity that you have attained, which 
you think is beyond comparison, I once had. It is unsubstantial and unreal. 
Lakshmi does not dwell long in one place. Indeed, she had graced 
thousands of Indras before you, all of whom, again, were very superior to 
you. Restless as she is, deserting me she has now approached you, king of 
the Adityas. Do not, Sakra, be boastful again. It befits you to remain calm. 
Knowing you to be full of vanity, Sri will very soon desert you.” 


CANTO 225 


B hishma says, ‘Thereafter, Sakra saw the Devi Lakshmi in her own 

embodied form that blazed in splendour issue out of the form of the 
venerable Bali. When the Deva saw the goddess in her fiery radiance, he 
addressed Bali in these words, with eyes agape in wonder. 

Sakra said, “Ah! Who is this one, O Bali, resplendent with such 
opulence, with wondrous plumes of light over her head, adorned with 
golden bracelets on her arms, who exudes a halo of glory on all sides with 
her tejas? Who is she that issues out of your body?” 

Bali said, “I know not whether she is an Asuri, an apsara or a Manavi. 
You may ask her yourself.” 

Indra said, “O you of sweet smiles, who are you that have such 
blinding radiance, and adorned with brilliant plumes of light, emerge from 
the body of Bali? I do not know you. O tell me your name. Who, indeed, 
are you that stands here as Maya herself, afire with your own splendour, 
after deserting the lord of the Daityas? O, tell me this!” 

Sree said, ““Virochana did not know me. His son Bali also knows me 
not. The learned called me Duhsaha, the unbearable. Some knew me by the 
name of Vidhitsa. I have other names too, O Vasava: Bhuti, Lakshmi and 
Sree. You know me not, O Sakra, nor do any among the Adityas know me.” 

Sakra said, “O auspicious Devi, why do you forsake Bali now, after 
you have abided in him for such a long time? Is it because of any actions of 
mine or is it due to anything that Bali has done?” 


Sree said, “Neither the creator nor the ordainer rules me. It is time that 
moves me from one place to another. Do not, O Sakra, mock Bali.” 

Sakra said, “For what reason, O goddess adorned with refulgent 
plumes, do you desert Bali? Why also do you grace me? Tell me this, O you 
of sweet smiles.” 

Sree said, “I live in truth, in gifts, good vows, penances, prowess and 
in virtue. Bali fell from all these. Once, he was devoted to the Brahmanas. 
He was truthful and had controlled his passions. Lately, however, he began 
to cherish feelings of animosity towards the Brahmanas and handled ghrita 
with soiled hands. Once, he was always engaged in the performance of 
sacrifices. At last, blinded by ignorance and changed by time, he began to 
boast before one and all that his attachment towards me was endless. For 
these faults do I leave him and henceforth, O Sakra, I will dwell in you. You 
should bear me without neglect, with penances and valour.” 

Sakra said, “O you that lives amid lotuses, there is not a single one 
among Devas, Manavas and Pashus that can bear you forever.” 

Sree said, “Truly, O Purandara, there is none among Devas, 
Gandharvas, Asuras or Rakshasas that can bear me eternally.” 

Sakra said, “O benevolent Devi, tell me how I should conduct myself 
so that you may always abide in me. I will obey your command. It befits 
you to answer me truly.” 

Sree said, “O lord of the Adityas, I will tell you how you may enable 
me to abide in you always. Divide me into four parts according to the law 
laid down in the Vedas.” 

Sakra said, “I will assign the habitations according to their strength 
and power to bear you. As for myself, I will always take care, O Lakshmi, 
that I do not offend you in any way. Amongst men, the earth will bear a 
fourth part of yourself. I think she has the strength for that.” 

Sree said, “Here, I grant one quarter amsa of myself. Let it be 
established on Bhumi. Do you now find a home, O Sakra, for my second 
quarter.” 

Sakra said, “The waters perform various services to humans. Let the 
waters bear a fourth part of your person. They have the endurance to bear a 
portion of you.” 

Sree said, “I grant another quarter of mine that is to be established in 
Apah. Now, O Sakra, assign a proper abode to my third quarter.” 


Sakra said, “The Vedas, the Yagnas and the Devas are all established 
in Agni. He will bear your third quarter.” 

Sree said, “I give my third quarter to be founded in Agni. Do you, O 
Sakra, now assign a proper dwelling for my last quarter.” 

Sakra said, “They that are good among men, devoted to Brahmanas, 
and truthful in speech, may bear your fourth quarter. The good have the 
power to bear you.” 

Sree said, “I give my fourth quarter to be placed among the good. My 
amsas thus assigned to different creations, do you, Indra, continue to protect 
me.” 

Sakra said, “I have distributed you equally among different creations. 
Those that will offend you will be chastised by me.” 

The king of the Daityas, Bali, forsaken by Sree, then said these words: 
‘‘At present the sun shines as much in the east as in the west, and as much in 
the north as in the south. When, however, the sun withdraws himself from 
all sides and shines only upon the realm of Brahman situated in the heart of 
Sumeru, then will there be another great Devasura yuddha, a war between 
the Devas and the Asuras, and in that contention I will vanquish all of you.” 

Sakra said, “Brahma has commanded never to kill you. It is for this 
reason, O Bali, that I do not cast my vajra at your head. Go wherever you 
wish, O lord of the Daityas. O great Asura, peace be upon you. The time 
will never come when the sun will shine from only the meridian. Brahma 
has already established the laws that regulate the sun’s motion. Giving light 
and heat to all creatures, he journeys ceaselessly. For six months, he travels 
in a northward course and for the other six in a southward direction. The 
sun travels these paths one after another, creating winter and summer for all 
creatures.” 

Thus addressed by Indra, O Bhaarata, Bali went towards the south. 
Purandara travelled towards the north. The thousand-eyed Indra, who heard 
Bali speak with such humility, then flew up into the skies.’ 


CANTO 226 


B hishma says, ‘Yudhishtira, on this subject there is also an ancient 

story of the conversation between him of a hundred sacrifices and 
the Asura Namuchi. When Namuchi was seated bereft of prosperity but 
untroubled at heart, like the vast ocean in perfect stillness, Purandara said to 
him, “Fallen from your place, bound with ropes, brought under the rule of 
your enemies, and divested of prosperity, do you, O Namuchi, grieve or 
pass your days cheerfully?” 

Namuchi answered, “By indulging in such sorrow as cannot be 
averted one only wastes one’s body and gladdens one’s foes. Then, again, 
no one can lighten another’s sorrow by taking any portion of it upon 
himself. For these reasons, O Sakra, I do not indulge in sorrow. All this that 
you see has but one end. Indulgence in sorrow destroys personal grace, 
prosperity and life, and virtue itself, O lord of the Devas. Doubtlessly, the 
wise should suppress the sorrow one experiences born of an improper 
attitude of mind and deliberate on that which yields the highest good, that 
which dwells in the heart. When one fixes one’s mind in this manner, verily, 
the result is that one’s objects are all accomplished. 

There is one Ordainer, and no second. His control extends over the 
being that lies within the form. Controlled by the great Ordainer, I journey 
by his will like water that runs along a downward path. I know what is self 
and what is moksha, and as I am also aware that liberation is superior to the 


jiva. I do not, however, strive for mukti. My actions that tend towards virtue 
or even towards vice, I do by His will. 

One acquires things that are destined to be had. That which is to 
happen will happen. One must repeatedly endure such forms in which the 
Ordainer places one. There is no choice in the matter. He is never dismayed 
who, when he finds himself in any particular condition, accepts it as his 
destiny. Men are affected by pleasure and pain that come by turns in the 
course of time. There is no individual achievement in the matter of pleasure 
or pain to anyone. In this lies the misery: that he who abhors sorrow regards 
himself as the doer. 

Amongst Rishis, Devas, Asuras, sannyasins and men who fully know 
the three Vedas, who is there whom anguish does not approach? Those, 
however, that are aware of the Atman and that which is anatman never fear 
sorrow. The wise one, steadfast like Himavat, never gives way to wrath, 
never suffers himself to be attached to the objects of the senses, never 
languishes in sorrow or rejoices in happiness. When overwhelmed by even 
great afflictions, such a one never gives way to grief. Indeed, he is a very 
superior man whom even great success cannot gladden, nor dire calamities 
afflict, who bears pleasure and pain, and that which is between them both, 
dispassionately. Into whatever state a man may fall, he should summon 
cheerfulness without yielding to sorrow. Surely, even so should one dispel 
one’s mental grief, which if not dispelled is sure to fetch pain. 

A conclave of sages engaged in the debate on dharma based upon the 
srutis and the smritis is not a goodly assembly; indeed, it does not deserve 
to be called an assembly of the wise, if upon entering it an evil man is not 
impaled by fear. Such a man is the best of his species who has delved into, 
enquired after dharma, and thereby gained success in behaving according to 
the conclusions to which he arrives. The actions of a wise man are not 
easily understood. A sage is never dismayed when calamities come upon 
him. Even if he falls from his position like Gautama in his dotage, he does 
not permit himself to be dismayed. 

Through incantations, strength, energy, wisdom, prowess, conduct or 
the affluence of wealth—through any of these, can a person acquire that 
which has not been destined to become his? What sorrow then is there for 
not receiving that upon which one has set one’s heart? 

Before I was born, the powers that be had ordained what I am to do 
and to suffer. I only fulfil what was ordained for me. What then can death 


do to me? One receives only what has been destined to become one’s own. 
One goes where one was always meant to go. The sorrows and joys one 
draws for oneself are those that were always fated to be. He who knows this 
fully does not allow himself to be dismayed, and he who is contented under 
both happiness and sorrow is regarded as the most excellent of his species.” 


CANTO 227 


Y udhishtira says, “What, indeed, O monarch, is good for a man 

foundering in dire straits, when he has lost friends or his kingdom? 
In this world, O bull of Bharata’s vamsa, you are the best of our gurus. So 
do I ask you this. It befits you to answer my question.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘For one that has lost sons, wives, wealth and pleasures 
of every kind, and finds himself in dire straits—courage, viryata, is the 
highest good. Of the brave, the body is never weak. The refusal to indulge 
grief bears happiness within it, and health. A healthy body also helps 
acquire prosperity. The wise man, O sire, who stays with dharma, even 
when in distress, acquires prosperity, patience and perseverance; and 
achieves all his objectives. Yudhishtira, listen further to the ancient tale of 
the conversation between Bali and Vasava. 

After the battle between the Devas and the Asuras, in which a large 
number of Daityas and Danavas fell, had ended, Bali became king. He was 
then deceived by Vishnu who once more established his reign over all the 
worlds. Indra of a hundred sacrifices was once more invested with the 
sovereignty of the Devas. After the rule of the Devas was re-established, 
and the four asramas of men restored, the three worlds once more swelled 
with prosperity, and the self-born became glad at heart. At that time, 
accompanied by the Rudras, Vasus, Adityas, Aswins, Devarishis, 
Gandharvas, Siddhas and other superior orders of beings, the mighty Indra, 


seated in splendour astride Airavata, his four-tusked prince of elephants, 
ranged through all the worlds. 

On one of his journeys, the wielder of the thunderbolt saw Bali within 
a mountain cave on the seashore, and he approached the prince of the 
Danavas. Although he saw the king of the Devas seated on the back of 
Airavata, surrounded by all the celestial ones, Bali showed no signs of 
sorrow or agitation. Indra also, noted that Bali remain unmoved and 
fearless. He addressed Bali from the back of his awesome elephant, and 
said, “How is it, O Daitya, that you are so calm? Is it because of your 
heroism or because you have waited with reverence upon your elders? Is it 
due to your mind that you have purified through tapasya? To whatever 
cause it may be due, this serenity is surely difficult to attain. Cast down 
from a position that was highest, you are now deprived of all your 
possessions, and brought under the sway of your foes. O son of Virochana, 
what is that which you have access to by which you do not grieve, although 
there is occasion for grief? 

Once, when you ruled your own empire, unrivalled pleasures were 
yours. Now you are stripped of all your wealth and your supremacy. Tell us 
why you are so unmoved. You were before this, a very god, seated on the 
throne of your sire and grandsires. Even though you now find yourself 
stripped bare of all felicity by your enemies, why do you not grieve? You 
are bound in Varuna’s noose and have been struck by my vajra. Your wives 
have been taken away from you, and your wealth too. Tell us why you do 
not grieve. Bereft of every prosperity and affluence, you do not grieve. This 
is indeed remarkable. Who else, O Mahabali, but you, could bear the 
burden of existence after being shorn of the sovereignty of the three 
worlds?” 

Calmly hearing these and other cutting words from Indra, as he 
asserted his superiority over him, Bali fearlessly answered his questioner. 

Bali said, “When calamity has already struck me, O Indra, what do 
you gain by your bluster now? Today I see you, O Purandara, stand before 
me with the thunderbolt raised in your hand. Once, however, you could not 
do this; now you have gained that power. Indeed, who other than you could 
utter such cruel words? He who, though able to punish, shows compassion 
towards a heroic foe vanquished and brought under his control, is truly a 
superior one. When two persons fight, victory in battle is uncertain. One of 
the two becomes victorious, and the other is vanquished. 


O lord of the Devas, let this not be your demeanour. Do not imagine 
that you have become the sovereign of all creatures because you have 
conquered all with your might and prowess. That I have become so is not, 
O Sakra, the result of any deed of mine. That you have become so, O 
Vajradharin, is not the result of any action of yours. What I am now you 
will be in the future. Do not slight me, thinking that you have achieved an 
exceedingly difficult feat. A person obtains joy and sorrow, one following 
the other, in the course of time. You, Indra, have gained sovereignty over 
the universe because of time and not from any special merit in you. It is 
Kaala that leads me also on in his course. That very Kaala leads you as 
well. It is for this that Iam not in your place today, and you are not in mine. 

Dutiful services rendered to parents, reverential worship of Devas, due 
practice of any good quality, none of these can confer felicity or happiness 
on anyone. Neither knowledge nor penances, gifts or friends, or kinsmen 
can help one that is marked and tormented by time. Men are impotent to 
avert, by even a thousand means, an impending disaster. Intelligence and 
strength are useless against time. There is no rescuer of men that are 
plagued by Kaala’s course. 

That you, O Sakra, regarded yourself as the doer lies at the root of all 
sorrow. If the ostensible doer of an action were the real performer thereof, 
that doer then would not himself be the work of someone else, the Supreme 
Being. So, because the supposed doer is himself the creation of another, that 
other is the Brahman above whom there is nothing higher. With the help of 
time, I once vanquished you. Likewise, time has helped you vanquish me. 
Kaala is the mover of all animated beings. Kaala destroys all beings. 

Indra, because your intelligence is unrefined you do not see how 
destruction inevitably awaits all things. Some, indeed, regard you highly, as 
one that has gained sovereignty of the universe. For all that, how can I who 
know the course of the world indulge in grief because I have been felled by 
time? How can I suffer my intellect to be overwhelmed, or succumb to the 
influence of grave error? Even when brought down by time, subjected to a 
calamity, how can my mind suffer itself to be destroyed like a wrecked 
vessel at sea? You, I, and all those who will in future become the lords of 
the Devas, shall have to go the way along which hundreds of Indras have 
gone before you. As it has destroyed me, when your hour matures, time will 
surely destroy you, who are now so invincible, and shine with unrivalled 


splendour. In Kaala’s wake, many thousands of Indras and Adityas have 
been swept tracelessly away, yuga after yuga. Time, indeed, is irresistible. 

Now that you have arrived at your present position, you regard 
yourself highly, why, even as the creator of all beings, the divine and eternal 
Brahma. Many before you had attained this position of yours. With none 
did it prove stable or eternal. Due, albeit, to a foolish intellect, you alone 
regard it to be immutable and immortal. You trust in that which does not 
deserve to be trusted. You deem that eternal which is not permanent. O king 
of the Devas, it is he that is stupefied by Kaala that regards himself in this 
manner. 

Foolishly, you regard your present regal prosperity to be yours. Know 
that it is never stable for you, any others or me. It belonged to innumerable 
great ones before you. Moving on, it has now become yours. It will stay 
with you, O Vasava, for some time and then prove its evanescence. As a 
cow abandons one drinking trough for another, fortune will surely desert 
you for someone else. So many sovereigns have gone before you that I will 
not venture to enumerate them. 

In the future also, Purandara, countless sovereigns will rise after you. I 
do not see those rulers now that once enjoyed this earth with her trees, 
plants, jewels, living creatures, waters and mines. Prithu, Aila, Maya, 
Bhima, Naraka, Sambara, Aswagriva, Puloman, Swarbhanu, Prahlada, 
Namuchi, Daksha, Viprachitti, Virochana, Hrinisheva, Suhotra, Bhurihan, 
Pushavat, Vrisha, Satyepshu, Rishabha, Bahu, Kapilaswa, Virupaka, Vana, 
Kartaswara, Vahni, Viswadanshtra, Nairiti, Sankocha, Varitaksha, Varaha, 
Aswa, Ruchiprabha, Viswajit, Pratirupa, Vrishanda, Vishkara, Madhu, 
Hiranyakasipu, the Danava Kaitabha and many others that were Daityas, 
Danavas and Rakshasas, all these and many more unnamed, from remote 
and lost ages, great Daityas and extraordinary Danavas, whose names we 
have heard, as well as many excellent Daityas of earlier times, have 
departed, leaving this earth. All of them were vanquished by time. Kaala 
proved stronger than all of them. 

They all worshipped the creator with hundreds of sacrifices. You are 
not the only one to do so. All of them were devoted to dharma and always 
performed great mahayagnas. Each one was able to range through the skies, 
and were heroes that never shrank from battle. Endowed with mighty 
physiques, they had arms that resembled heavy clubs. All of them were 


masters of hundreds of illusions, and could assume any form they wished. 
We have never heard that any of them ever sustained a defeat in battle. 

All were firm observers of the vow of truth, and all of them revelled as 
they wished. Devoted to the Vedas and Vedic rites, all of them possessed 
great wisdom. Invested with great prowess, all of them had acquired the 
highest prosperity and affluence. Still none of these high-Souled monarchs 
had the least tinge of pride of their sovereignty. They were all liberal, giving 
unto each what he deserved. All of them behaved kindly and justly towards 
all creatures. 

They were the progeny of Daksha’s daughters. Gifted with great 
strength, all of them were lords of creation. Each sparkled with such 
splendour that they illuminated everything around with their tejas. Alas, 
Kaala swept each of them away. 

As for you, O Sakra, it is evident that after you have enjoyed your stay 
on the earth, when it is time for you to finally leave her, you will not be able 
to contain your grief. Shed this desire that you cherish for objects of 
affection and enjoyment. Shed this pride that is born of prosperity. If you do 
so, you will be able to bear the grief that attends the loss of sovereignty. 
When the hour of sorrow comes, do not yield to anguish. Likewise, at the 
hour of joy, do not rejoice. Disregard both past and future, and live 
contentedly with the present. If sleepless time did confront me, who have 
always been heedful of my duties, then, take heed and awaken, O Indra, and 
turn your heart to the ways of peace, for the same Kaala will very soon 
confront you. 

You wound me with your words, and seem bent upon terrorising me. 
Finding me calm, you still regard yourself highly. Time first attacked me; it 
is even now stalking you. Kaala first vanquished me, and so were you able 
to defeat me, yet now you roar in hubris for what you did not yourself 
accomplish. Once, when I would become wrathful, what man on earth 
could stand up to me in battle? Time, however, is stronger. He has 
conquered me. It is for this reason, Vasava, that you are able to stand before 
me today. 

The thousand celestial years, which are the measure of your reign, will 
end. You will fall then and your limbs will become as lustreless and 
miserable as mine are now, even though I am possessed of mighty tejas. I 
have fallen from the high place that belongs to the sovereign of the three 
worlds. You are now Indra in heaven. In this delightful world of living 


beings, because of Kaala’s course, you are now an object of universal 
adoration. Can you say by dint of which achievement of yours you have 
become Indra today and due to what means I have fallen from the position 
that was mine? Time is the one creator and destroyer. Nothing else is a 
cause in the universe of any effect. Decline, fall, sovereignty, happiness, 
misery, birth and death—when a wise man encounters any of these, he 
neither rejoices nor indulges in sorrow. You, O Indra, know me. I also, O 
Vasava, know you. Why then do you boast before me in this fashion? Why 
do you forget, shameless one, that it is Kaala that has made you what you 
are today? 

You have seen my valour in those days. The energy and might that I 
displayed in my battles are enough proof of my heroism. The Adityas, the 
Rudras, the Sadhyas, the Vasus and the Maruts, O lord of Sachi, I 
vanquished them all. You know it well, Sakra, that in the Great War 
between the Devas and the Asuras, how swiftly I routed all the assembled 
Devas with the fury of my assault. Mountains with their forests and 
denizens, I repeatedly hurled at your forces. Many were the mountain peaks 
with craggy edges that I broke on your head. Yet, now, what can I do? Time 
cannot be resisted. If this were not so, do not think that I would not have 
killed you, despite your vajra, with just one blow of my fist? 

This present time, however, is not in my favour for the display of my 
prowess. The hour is such that I should adopt patience and tolerance of 
everything. Therefore, Sakra, do I tolerate your insolence. Know, however, 
that I am even less tolerant of insolence than you. Realise, that you boast 
before one who is surrounded by time’s inferno and bound fast in Kaala’s 
shackles. Look, there stands the dark one who cannot be resisted by the 
world. Of fierce form, he stands there, having restrained me like a dog 
bound in chains. 

Gain and loss, happiness and sorrow, lust and anger, birth and death, 
captivity and release, all these one encounters in the course of time. Neither 
am I the doer nor are you. He is the doer who, indeed, is omnipotent. Time 
ripens me to be plucked like a fruit from a tree. One man finds happiness by 
some deeds. However, the very same deeds bring misery to another, all in 
the course of time. Versed as I am with the virtues of Kaala, it does not befit 
me to indulge in grief when it is Kaala that has ruined me. Therefore, Sakra, 
I do not grieve. Grief cannot do us any good. Mourning over it never 


dispels one’s dire condition. On the other hand, it destroys one’s power. 
Hence, I do not grieve.” 

Thus addressed by the lord of the Daityas, He of a hundred sacrifices, 
the mighty and thousand-eyed chastiser of Paka, restrained his wrath and 
spoke calmly to Bali. 

Sakra said, “Behold this upraised arm of mine, with the vajra, and the 
paasas of Varuna. Who is there that would not be afraid, including Yama 
himself who brings death to all beings? Your mind, however, so firm and so 
empowered with the vision of the truth, is not in the least disturbed. O you 
of invincible prowess, verily, you are unmoved today because of your 
fortitude. 

When everything in this universe is seen to be fleeting, who would 
venture to repose confidence in either his body or the objects of his desires? 
Like yourself I, too, know that this universe is transient, and that it has been 
thrown into Kaala’s invisible dreadful fire that burns endlessly. Everyone 
here is accosted by time. None among subtle or gross beings enjoys 
immunity from time’s might. Everything simmers in Kaala’s cauldron. 
Kaala has no master. It is ever watchful and always astir within itself. No 
one who has entered the realm of time can escape it. All embodied beings 
may pay no heed to it, but Kaala is ever vigilant as it stalks them. No one 
has ever averted time. Ancient, eternal and the embodiment of justice, time 
is uniform towards all living creatures. Kaala cannot be avoided, and there 
is no revering its course. 

As a banker tallies his interest, time sums up its subtle divisions 
represented by kaalas, lavas, kashtas, kshanas, masas, divasas and ratras. 
Just as the current of a river washes away a tree whose roots it has reached, 
Kaala hunts and sweeps away him, who says, “This I will do today, but this 
other task I will do tomorrow’. Time whisks us away and men exclaim, ‘I 
saw him just a while ago. How did he die?’ Wealth, comforts, rank, 
prosperity, all fall prey to Kaala who approaches every living creature and 
snatches his life away. 

All things that proudly raise their heads high are destined to fall. That 
which exists is only an illusory form of the non-existent. Everything is 
transitory and unstable. Such conviction is, however, difficult to arrive at. 
Your intellect, so firm and endued with true vision, is unmoved. You do not, 
even mentally, realise what you were but some time ago. Time assails the 
universe, reshapes it within itself and sweeps away everything without 


consideration for age. Yet, one who is hauled along by time is unaware of 
the noose thrown round his neck. Those given to jealousy, vanity, greed, 
lust, wrath, fear, desire, impulsiveness and pride, allow themselves to be 
traumatised by time. You, however, know the truth of existence. You are 
knowledgeable and empowered with wisdom and penance. You see time as 
clearly, as if it were an amla berry lying on the palm of your hand. 

O son of Virochana, well versed are you with Kaala’s conduct. You are 
adept in all the branches of knowledge. You have a purified soul and are a 
thorough master of your being. You are, for this, an object of affection with 
wise men. With your intelligence, you have fully comprehended the whole 
universe. Though you have enjoyed every kind of happiness, you remain 
unattached, and hence you have not been stained by anything. The gunas of 
passion and darkness do not tarnish you for you have conquered your 
senses. You rest only in your Atman, which is without both joy and sorrow. 
A friend to all creatures, without animosity, with your heart set upon peace, 
seeing you as you are, my heart turns merciful towards you. I do not wish to 
afflict an enlightened one like you with enslavement. Ahimsa is the highest 
dharma. I feel sympathy for you. These coils of Varuna, with which you 
have been bound, will loosen in due course from the misconduct of men. 
Blessed be you, O great Asura! 

When the daughter-in-law will set the aged mother-in-law to work, 
when the son, through delusion, will command the father to work for him, 
when Sudras will have their feet washed by Brahmanas and fearlessly have 
sexual congress with women of twice-born families, when men will 
discharge their vital seed into forbidden wombs, when the refuse of houses 
will begin to be carried upon plates and vessels made of white brass, and 
when sacrificial offerings intended for the Devas will be carried upon 
forbidden platters, when the four asramas will transgress all limits, then 
these bonds of yours will begin to loosen, one by one. From me you need 
have no fear. Be at peace. Be happy. Be without sorrow. Let your heart be 
cheerful. Let no illness befall you.” 

With these words, Indra mounted Airavata, that prince of all elephants, 
and rode on. 

With his conquest of the Asuras, the king of the Devas rejoiced and 
became the sole sovereign of all the Lokas. The Maharishis sang praises of 
the lord of all mobile and unmoving creatures. Agni once more began to 
bear the offerings of clarified butter poured into his visible form, and the 


great Devendra took charge of the Amrita that was committed into his care. 
His praises sung by the best of Brahmanas engaged in sacrifices, the lord 
Indra, ablaze with splendour, his wrath pacified, and his heart appeased, 
became joyous as he returned to his swarga to pass his days in untold 
happiness.’ 


CANTO 228 


Y udhishtira says, “Tell me, O Pitamaha, the signs of the future 
greatness and the imminent downfall in a man.’ 

Bhishma says, “The mind itself, blessed be you, indicates the fateful 
signs of one’s future prosperity and subsequent fall. In this regard is an 
ancient tale of the conversation between Sree and Sakra. Listen to it, O 
Yudhishtira. 

Maharishi Narada, of tejas as immeasurable as Brahman itself, bereft 
of sins, adept at seeing through the prosperity of his tapasya in both this and 
the other world, a peer of the Devarishis in Brahmaloka, roved as he 
pleased through the Trilokas. Once, at dawn, he wished to perform his 
ablutions, so he went to the Ganga river as she flowed through the Dhruva 
valley and he plunged into the stream. At the time, Indra too arrived at the 
very bank where Narada bathed. The Maharishi and the Deva finished their 
ablutions, completed their silent japas, and sat down to pass the hour as they 
recited and listened to the excellent stories narrated by the Devarishis, 
which describe many good and lofty deeds. Indeed, they sat with rapt 
attention, engaged in a pleasant discourse on ancient history. 

While so engaged they saw the advent of the thousand rays of the sun 
as he rose. Once the fiery orb was in full view, both of them stood up and 
sang his praises. Suddenly, in a direction opposite to that of the rising star, 
they witnessed a resplendent object; it appeared to be a second star! They 
stood by, O Bhaarata, and watched as the magnificent object gradually 


approached them. Astride Vishnu’s chariot adorned with Garuda and Surya 
himself, the presence blazed forth with unrivalled splendour, and seemed to 
illumine the three worlds. The entity they saw was none other than the Devi 
Sree herself, attended by many apsaras of great beauty. Indeed, she 
resembled a large sun herself, her effulgence like that of fire. Embellished 
with ornaments that looked like veritable stars, she wore a garland of pearls. 

Indra watched Goddess Padma as she alighted from her magnificent 
chariot, and approached the lord of the Trilokas and the celestial Rishi 
Narada. Followed by Narada, Maghavat also went towards her. With folded 
hands, he offered himself up to her, and worshipped her with unsurpassed 
reverence and sincerity. The adorations over, the king of the Devas 
addressed Sree. 

Sakra said, “O you of sweet smiles, who are you, and what brings you 
here? O you of fair brows, from where do you come and where will you 
proceed, O auspicious Devi?” 

Sree said, “In the three worlds full of felicitous seeds, all creatures, 
mobile and unmoving, strive with their whole hearts to be with me. I am 
Padma, I am Sree graced with lotuses, who emerged from the lotus that 
blooms at the touch of Surya’s rays for the prosperity of all creatures. I am 
called Lakshmi, Bhuti and Sree, O slayer of Bala. I am Swaha, I am 
Swadha. I am Bhakti, I am Buddhi, I am Samriddhi, I am Jaya and I am 
Akshara. I am Kshama, I am Vijaya, I am Lakshmi. I am sraddha, I am 
bhagya, and I am smriti. 

I dwell at the forefront of armies and on the standards of victorious, 
virtuous sovereigns, as in their homes, cities and dominions. I always 
reside, O vanquisher of Bala, with superior men, heroes breathless for 
victory and ambitious in battle. I also reside forever with those firmly 
attached to virtue, gifted with great intelligence, devoted to Brahma, 
truthful in speech, possessed of humility and generous. Once, I lived with 
the Asuras because by nature I am bound to truth and merit. But I see how 
the Asuras have assumed adverse traits, and so I have left them and wish to 
dwell in you.” 

Sakra said, “O you of fair face, from what conduct of the Asuras did 
you live with them? What did you see there that made you desert the 
Daityas and the Danavas, and come here?” 

Sree said, “I attach myself steadfastly to those that are devoted to the 
duties of svadharma, to those that never lose patience, to those that take 


pleasure in treading the path that leads to swarga. I always dwell with those 
that are distinguished for their generosity, for their study of the scriptures, 
for sacrifices and other scriptural rites, and for their worship of Pitris, 
Devas, Gurus, Agrajas, Sresthas and Atithis. 

Once, the Danavas kept their dwellings clean, their women under 
control, poured havis on the sacrificial fire, waited dutifully on their gurus, 
restrained their passions, were obedient to the Brahmanas, and truthful in 
their speech. They were full of faith; they kept their anger under control; 
they practiced the virtue of charity; they never envied others; they looked 
after their friends, advisers and spouses; they were never envious. In those 
days, they never assaulted one another in anger. They were all contented 
and never felt pain at the sight of other people’s affluence and prosperity. 
They were all charitable and never wasteful, of honourable conduct and 
gifted with compassion. They were excessively inclined to grace, possessed 
simplicity of behaviour and steadfastness in faith, and had their passions 
under perfect control. They kept their servants and counsellors contented. 
They were grateful and gifted with sweet speech. They served everyone in 
accord with his position and merit. 

They were endowed with self-reproach. They were of rigid vows. 
They would perform their ablutions on every sacred day. They smeared 
themselves properly with perfumes and favourable pastes. They also 
adorned their persons appropriately. They were observant of fasts and 
penances, were trustful, and chanters of Vedic hymns. The sun never rose 
over them while they lay asleep. They never out-slept the moon. They 
always abstained from eating curd and pounded barley. Each morning they 
looked at ghrita and other auspicious things, and with senses withdrawn, 
they would recite the Vedas and worship Brahmanas with dakshina. 

Their speech was always virtuous, and they never accepted gifts. 
Regularly they went to sleep by midnight and never slept during the day. 
They invariably took pleasure in showing compassion for the distressed, the 
helpless, the aged, the weak, the sick and women. They enjoyed all their 
possessions by sharing these with them. They would constantly pacify and 
comfort the agitated, the cheerless, the anxious, the terrified, the diseased, 
the weak, the starved, the robbed and the afflicted. They followed the 
dictates of dharma and never injured one another. They were ready and well 
disposed towards action of every kind. 


They would serve and wait with reverence upon elders and the aged. 
They duly worshipped the Pitris, the Devas and Athitis, and ate their 
leftovers after gratifying them. They were firmly devoted to truth and 
penances. None amongst them ate singly, nor had congress with the wives 
of others. As for compassion, they behaved towards all creatures as towards 
their own selves. They never allowed the emission of the vital seed into 
empty space, into inferior animals, into forbidden wombs or on sacred days. 

They were ever distinguished by the gifts they made, cleverness, 
simplicity, optimism, humility, friendliness and forgiveness. Moreover, O 
mighty one, traits such as truth, charity, penance, purity, compassion, soft 
speech and goodwill towards friends always inhered in them. Torpor, 
procrastination, fretfulness, envy, want of foresight, discontent, melancholy 
and greed never assailed them. Because the Danavas were distinguished for 
these sterling qualities, I stayed with them from the advent of creation, for 
many yugas together, for they are the first-born race of creation. 

Times changed, and brought change to the character of the Danavas. I 
saw virtue and morality desert them and they came under the sway of lust 
and anger. Though themselves inferior in attainments, they began to cherish 
animosity towards elders and superiors, and while the elders with virtue and 
merit, discoursed on appropriate subjects in the midst of assemblies, the 
unworthy began to ridicule or even laugh at them. When revered elders 
entered, the younger men, seated at their ease, refused to adore the old ones 
by rising and saluting them with respect. In the presence of fathers, sons 
began to exercise power in matters that concerned the fathers alone. Those 
from a higher vamsa accepted employment with those from a lower clan, 
and proudly proclaimed the fact. Individuals that amassed great wealth with 
unrighteous deeds came to be held in esteem. 

At nightfall, the Danavas would celebrate with loud cries and screams. 
Their sacrificial fires no longer blazed with bright and heavenward flames. 
Sons began to rule over fathers, and wives dominated husbands. Mothers, 
fathers, elders, teachers, guests and guides ceased to command respect. 
Their people no longer raised their children with affection and even 
deserted them. Without giving alms, nor reserving the fixed portion to offer 
the Devas, everyone ate as he pleased. Indeed, without tendering their 
wares to the Devas in sacrifices and without sharing them with the Pitris, 
Atithis and Agrajas, they shamelessly appropriated them for their own use. 


Their cooks no longer professed any consideration for purity of mind, 
deed and word. They ate what had been left uncovered. Their corn lay 
scattered in the yards, exposed to crows and rats. Their milk remained 
uncovered, and they began to touch ghrita after eating with unwashed 
hands. Their spades, kitchen knives, baskets, dishes, cups and other utensils 
began to lie scattered in their homes. Housewives no more looked after 
these. They no longer attended to the repairs of their houses and walls. They 
tethered their animals and did not give them food and drink. They ignored 
children who only looked on, and without concern to feed their dependants, 
the Danavas ate what they had. They prepared payasa, krisara, dishes of 
meat, cakes and sashkuli, not for Devas and Atithis, but for themselves, and 
began to eat the flesh of animals not killed in sacrifices. 

They continued to sleep even after the sun had risen. They made night 
of their mornings. Day and night, disputes and quarrels waxed in every 
house. The most disrespectable amongst them no longer showed any regard 
for those that deserved respect. Fallen from their defined duties, they ceased 
to revere those that took themselves to the forest to lead a life of peace and 
meditation. They intermixed castes freely. They ceased to attend to purity of 
person or mind. Learned Brahmanas ceased to command respect among 
them and the ones that disregarded the riks were not castigated; in fact, both 
were treated equally—those that merited respect and those that deserved 
none. Their servant girls became wicked in their ways, and began to wear 
necklaces of gold and other ornaments and fine clothes beyond their station. 
They would enter and leave their homes at their own free will. The Asuras 
started to derive great pleasure from sports and diversions in which their 
women were dressed as men and their men as women. 

While the affluent amongst their ancestors had made gifts of wealth to 
deserving persons, the descendants of the Danavas, even though 
prosperous, began to repossess, to their eternal discredit, those very gifts. 
When faced with difficulties in the accomplishment of any task, and a 
friend sought the counsel of a friend, the supposed well-wisher for the petty 
satisfaction of doing so thwarted the intention. 

Amongst even their better classes appeared traders intent upon taking 
the wealth of others. The Sudras amongst them have taken to the practice of 
tapasya. Some have begun to study without any proper schedule for work 
and food, while others persevere with rules that are hollow and useless. 


Sishyas no more rendered obedience and service to Acharyas. Mentors in 
turn have come to treat disciples as friendly companions. 

Fathers and mothers are worn out with work, and refrain from all 
festivity. Parents in old age, divested of power over their sons, are forced to 
beg food from their offspring. Even scholars of the Vedas, akin to the ocean 
itself in gravity of deportment, have taken to farming and other such 
pursuits, while the illiterate and the ignorant are fed at sraddhas. 

Every morning, disciples, who once approached their teachers to 
enquire after and ascertain their duties, tasks, and instructions that awaited 
accomplishment, are now themselves waited upon by preceptors to 
discharge the functions. Daughters-in-law, in the presence of their 
husbands, mothers and fathers, rebuke and chastise servants and maids, and 
summon their husbands to rebuke them as well. Fathers, with great care, 
seek to keep sons in good humour, or through fear divide their wealth 
among children, and live their lives in woe and affliction. Even friends, who 
see the plight of victims that have suffered loss of wealth in fires or from 
robbers or by the king, indulge in laughter and mockery of the victim. 

The Danavas have become ungrateful, agnostic, sinful and addicted to 
adulterous congress with even the spouses of their Acharyas. They have 
taken to consuming forbidden food, transgressed all bounds and restraints, 
and have lost the splendour that once distinguished them. Because of these 
and other indications of evil conduct and the very reversal of their past 
nature, I will not, O king of the Devas, dwell among them any longer. I 
have come to you of my own accord. Receive me with respect, O lord of 
Sachi. 

Honoured by you, O king of the Devas, I will receive respect from all 
the other Devas. Wherever I reside, Jaya and the seven Devis, Apeksha, 
Shradha, Prajna, Tripti, Avajiti, Unnati and Kshama, who adore me, will 
live with me. The eighth Devi Jaya occupies the highest place amongst 
them, O scourge of Paka. All of us have deserted the Asuras and have come 
to your realms. We will henceforth reside among the Devas who are 
devoted to dharma and bhakti.” 

In order to please the Devi after she had spoken, Devarishi Narada and 
Vasava offered her a joyful welcome. Vayu Deva began to blow gently 
through heaven, bearing delicious fragrances that refreshed all creatures, 
and increased the felicity of each of the senses. All the Devas gathered in a 


pure and desirable place and waited there in expectation to behold 
Maghavat seated with Lakshmi beside him. 

Then the thousand-eyed lord of the Devas, accompanied by Sree and 
his friend the Maharishi, borne by a splendid chariot drawn by green horses, 
arrived at the gathering of the celestials, and they received him with honour. 
Maharishi Narada observed a sign, approved by Sree, that the wielder of the 
thunderbolt made, and accordingly welcomed the advent of the Devi and 
proclaimed it as exceedingly auspicious. 

Heaven’s firmament became clear and bright as it began to shower 
nectar from the region of the self-born Brahma. The unearthly kettledrums, 
though struck by none, began to beat of themselves, and all the cardinal 
points of the horizon seemed ablaze with glory. Indra began to pour rain 
upon crops that appeared according to their season. Not a soul deviated 
from the path of dharma. The earth was adorned with countless mines filled 
with jewels and gemstones; the chant of Vedic mantras and other melodious 
sounds swelled on the triumph of the Devas. 

Humans endowed with firm minds, and all those who adhered to the 
auspicious path of dharma, began to enjoy Vedic and other religious rites 
and rituals. Manavas, Devas, Kinnaras, Yakshas and Rakshasas were all 
blessed with prosperity and joy. Not a flower, what need then be said of 
fruits, dropped untimely from a tree even if Pavana Deva shook it with 
force. All kine began to yield sweet milk, and no cruel, harsh words were 
anymore uttered by anyone. 

Wishing for advancement, those who approach gatherings of 
Brahmanas and read this narrative of the glorification of Sree by all the 
Devas led by Indra, succeed in achieving great prosperity. 

These then, O lord of the Kurus, are the best indications of prosperity 
and adversity. Urged by you, I have revealed all. It befits you to understand 
what I have said after careful reflection and conduct yourself according to 
the instructions conveyed herein.’ 


CANTO 229 


Y udhishtira says, ‘By what disposition, what course of duties, what 
knowledge, and what energy, does one attain Brahman, which is 
immutable and beyond the reach of primordial Prakriti?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘One who is engaged in the practice of nivritti, who 
eats abstemiously, and has his senses under complete control, can attain 
Brahman which is immutable and above primeval nature. In this regard, 
listen to the old story, O Bhaarata, of the discourse between Jaigishavya and 
Asita. Long ago, Asita-Devala addressed the wise Jaigishavya who fully 
knew the truths of dharma and neeti. 

Devala said, “You are not gladdened when praised. You do not give 
way to anger when blamed or censured. What, indeed, is your wisdom? 
From where have you got it? And what is the haven of that wisdom?” 

Thus questioned by Devala, the pure Jaigishavya of austere tapasya 
replied with words of high import, fraught with perfect faith and profound 
sense. 

Jaigishavya said, “O best of Rishis, I will tell you of that which is the 
highest, the supreme goal, and full of peace in the eyes of all who practice 
dharma. They, O Devala, who behave equally towards those that praise and 
those who blame them; they who conceal their own vows and good deeds; 
those who never indulge in recriminations, who never even mention what is 
good when it is calculated to injure; they who do not desire to return injury 
in retribution, are said to be men of wisdom. 


They never grieve for what is yet to come but remain concerned only 
with what is before them and respond appropriately. Neither do they 
indulge in sorrow for the past nor recall it for reminiscence or nostalgia. 
Imbued with power and regulated minds, they do as they please, in a 
manner suitable, O Devala, with what needs to be done in respect of all 
things. Mature of knowledge, highly intelligent, serene with passions kept 
under restraint, they never inflict injury upon anyone in thought, word or 
deed. Bereft of envy, they are never pained at the sight of the prosperity of 
others. Such men never indulge in exaggerations in speech, or set 
themselves to praise others or speak ill of them. Neither are they ever 
affected by praise and blame of themselves. 

They are calm in respect of all their desires, and engaged in the good 
of all creatures. They never give way to anger, indulge in transports of joy 
or injure any creature. Without emotional attachments, they live quite 
happily. They have no friends nor are they the friends of others. They have 
no enemies nor are they inimical toward other creatures. Indeed, men that 
can live in this way can pass their days for ever in happiness. O best of 
Dvijas, they who acquire a knowledge of the laws of niti and dharma, who 
observe these in practice, succeed in winning joy, while they who fall away 
from the path of dharma are afflicted by anxieties and sorrow. 

I have now embarked upon the path of dharma. Decried by others, 
why must I become annoyed with them, or when praised by others, why 
should I be pleased? Let men obtain whatever objects they please from 
whatsoever pursuits in which they engage themselves. I am indifferent to 
acquisitions and losses. Praise and blame cannot contribute to my 
advancement or failure. He who has understood the truth becomes gratified 
with even disregard as if it were ambrosia. The man of wisdom is truly 
annoyed by regard, as if it were poison. 

He who is freed from all faults sleeps fearlessly both here and 
hereafter even if insulted by others. On the other hand, he who insults him 
suffers destruction. Sages, who seek to attain the highest end, succeed in 
obtaining it by observing such conduct. He who has vanquished all his 
senses is regarded to have performed all the sacrifices. Such a one attains 
the highest condition, that of Brahman, which is eternal and which 
transcends the reach of primordial Prakriti. The very Devas, Gandharvas, 
Pisachas and Rakshasas, cannot reach the level of the one who has attained 
the highest end.” 


CANTO 230 


Y udhishtira says, ‘What man is there who is dear to all, who gladdens 

all persons, who is endowed with every merit and accomplishment?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Here let me recount the words of Kesava in reply to a 
question Ugrasena once asked him.’ 

Ugrasena said, “Everyone seem to be anxious to speak of the merits of 
Narada. I think the Devarishi must really be possessed of every kind of 
merit. I beseech you to tell me about this, O Krishna!” 

Vasudeva said, “O king of the Kukuras, listen to me as I briefly 
mention some of the great qualities of Narada that I am acquainted with. 
Narada is as learned in the scriptures as he is good and pious in his conduct. 
Yet, he eschews pride, which makes one’s blood run so hot. Hence he is 
worshipped everywhere. Discontent, wrath, levity and fear do not exist in 
Narada. He is courageous and free from procrastination. Hence he is 
worshipped everywhere. 

Narada deserves the reverent worship of all. He never falls back from 
his words through desire or greed. Hence he is worshipped everywhere. He 
is fully conversant with the principles that lead to the knowledge of the 
Atman; he is disposed to peace, possessed of great energy, and is a master 
of his senses. He is free from guile, and is truthful in speech. Hence, he is 
worshipped with respect everywhere. 

He is distinguished by energy, fame, intelligence, knowledge, 
humility, birth, penances and years. Hence, he is everywhere worshipped 


with regard. He practices good behaviour. He clothes and houses himself 
adequately. He eats pure food. He adores all. He is pure in body and mind. 
He is silver-tongued. He is free from envy and malice. Hence, he is 
everywhere worshipped with respect. 

He is entirely employed in doing good to all. No sin dwells in Narada. 
He never rejoices at other people’s misfortunes. Hence, he is everywhere 
worshipped with respect. He always seeks to conquer earthly desires by 
listening to Vedic mantras and attending to the Puranas. He is a great 
renouncer and he never disregards anyone. Hence, he is everywhere 
worshipped with regard. 

He casts an equal eye on all; therefore, he has no one whom he loves 
and none that he hates. His words are ever delightful to the listener. Hence, 
he is everywhere worshipped with respect. He is a scholar of the scriptures. 
His conversation is varied and enchanting. His knowledge and wisdom are 
vast. He is free from cupidity. He is also free from deception. He is large- 
hearted. He has conquered wrath and avarice. Hence, he is everywhere 
worshipped with respect. He has never quarrelled with anyone over any 
subject connected with artha or kama, profit or pleasure. All faults have 
been torn asunder by him. Hence, he is everywhere worshipped with 
respect. 

His devotion to Brahman is firm. His Atman is blameless. He is well 
versed in the srutis. He is free from cruelty. He is beyond the influence of 
delusion or faults. Hence he is worshipped everywhere with respect. He is 
unattached to all objects of attachment. Yet he appears to be attached to 
everything. He is never for long subject to the influence of any doubt. 
Hence, he is everywhere worshipped with respect. He yearns not for objects 
of artha and kama. He never glorifies himself. He is free from malice, mild 
in speech. Hence, he is everywhere worshipped with respect. 

He observes the hearts, different from one another, of all men, without 
judgement or condemnation. He is versed in all matters connected with the 
origin of things. He never disregards or shows hatred for any kind of 
science. He lives in accord with his own standards of dharma. He never 
suffers his time to pass away fruitlessly. His soul is under his control. 
Hence, he is everywhere worshipped with respect. 

He has toiled in matters that deserve exertion. He has earned 
knowledge and wisdom. He is never satiated with yoga. He is ever 
attentive. Hence, he is everywhere worshipped with respect. He has never 


to feel shame for any deficiency of his. He is always engaged by others to 
accomplish what is for their good. He never divulges the secrets of others. 
Hence, he is everywhere worshipped with respect. 

He never yields to transports of joy even when making valuable 
acquisitions. He is never pained at losses. His intellect is firm and stable. 
His Soul is unattached to all things. Hence, he is everywhere worshipped 
with respect. 

Who, indeed, is there that will not love him who is so possessed of 
every merit and accomplishment, who is clever in all things, who is pure in 
body and mind, who is entirely auspicious, who is well-versed with the 
course of time and its advantages for particular deeds, and who is well- 
acquainted with all agreeable things?” 


CANTO 231 


Y udhishtira says, ‘I want, O you of Kuru’s race, to know about the 

origin and the end of all creatures. What is the nature of their 
deliberation and their actions? What are the divisions of time, and the 
allotted periods of life in the various yugas? I wish also to know in full the 
truth about the genesis and the conduct of the world; the origin of creatures 
into the world and the manner of their survival. Indeed, whence their 
creation and destruction? O best of virtuous persons, if you are inclined to 
favour us, then tell us about all this. Ever since I once heard you recount 
this excellent discourse of Bhrigu to the sage Bharadwaja, my intellect, 
purged of its ignorance, has become most attached to yoga and, withdrawn 
from worldly objects, rests upon heavenly purity. I ask you to repeat what 
you said. It becomes you to tell me this in detail.’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘I will recite to you an old narrative of the divine 
Vyasa’s reply to his son Suka’s question. Listen to it. 

After he studied the illimitable Upanishads and Vedas with all their 
Angas, Suka wanted to lead a life of brahmacharya. He, therefore, 
addressed the very same questions, and had his queries answered by his 
father who had removed through enquiry and contemplation all ambiguities 
with regard to the subject of the true import of dharma.’ 

Suka said, “It befits you to tell me who the creator is of all beings, as 
revealed by your knowledge of time, and what are the duties a Brahmana 
should accomplish.” 


In response to his son’s queries, the father, with his knowledge of both 
the past and future, conversant with all duties and endued with omniscience, 
so replied. 

Vyasa said, “Only Brahman, which is without beginning and without 
end, unborn, of intense effulgence, beyond decay, immutable, 
indestructible, inconceivable, who transcends knowledge — exists before the 
creation. The Rishis who measured time have given names to particular 
portions. Fifteen winks of the eye make a kashtha. Thirty kashthas make a 
kaala. Thirty kaalas, with the tenth part of a kaala added, make a muhurta. 
Thirty muhurtas make up one day and a night. Thirty days and nights make 
a month, and twelve months make a year. 

Persons conversant with mathematical science say that a year is made 
up of two ayanas that depend on the sun’s movement, the northern and the 
southern, uttarayana and dakshinayana. The sun makes the day and the 
night for the world. Night is for the sleep of living creatures, and the day is 
to engage in activity. 

A month of human beings is equal to a day and night of the Pitris. The 
division of the time of the Pitris is thus: a bright fortnight of the days of 
men is one day for the Pitris to conduct their activities. And the dark 
fortnight is their night for sleep. A year of the humans is equal to a day and 
night of the Devas. The division with respect to the Devas consists in this: 
The half year in which the sun travels from the vernal to the autumnal 
equinox, uttarayana, is the day of the Devas, and the half year for which the 
sun travels in the southern direction, dakshinayana, is their night. 

Calculating by the days and nights of Manavas, I will now speak of 
the day and night of Brahma and his years also. I will, in their right order, 
tell you the number of years that are, for different reasons and purposes, 
measured differently in respect of the Krita, Treta, Dwapara, and the Kali 
yugas. 

Four thousand years of the Devas is the duration of the Krita yuga. 
The dawning of that epoch consists of four hundred years, as does its 
evening sandhya. The total duration, therefore, of the Krita yuga is four 
thousand and eight hundred years of the Devas. As regards the other yugas, 
the duration of each gradually decreases by a quarter in respect of both the 
substantive period along with the conjoining portion, and the conjoining 
portion itself. Hence, the duration of the Treta yuga is three thousand years 
and its dawning is for three hundred years and its evening for three 


hundred. Likewise, the duration of the Dwapara is two thousand years, and 
its morning is two hundred years and its evening another two hundred 
years. The duration of the Kali yuga is one thousand years, and its morning 
is one hundred years, and its evening another hundred years. 

These periods always sustain the never-ending, eternal worlds. They 
who are conversant with Brahman, O child, regard this as being the 
immutable Brahman. 

In the Krita yuga all of dharma exists in its entirety, along with truth. 
No knowledge or object came to men of that age through immoral or 
forbidden means. In the other yugas, dharma, ordained in the Vedas, is seen 
to gradually decline, by a quarter part in each. Sinfulness grows out of theft, 
lies and deception. In the Krita yuga, all beings are free from disease and 
crowned with success in their achievements, and live for four hundred 
years. In the Treta yuga, the span of life decreases by a quarter. We have 
also heard that, in subsequent yugas, the words of the Vedas, the periods of 
life, the grace of Brahmanas and the fruits of Vedic rites, all steadily 
decrease. 

The dharmas ordained for the Krita yuga is of one kind. Those for the 
Treta yuga are otherwise. Those for the Dwapara are different. And those 
for the Kali are again separate. This is in accordance with the decline that 
marks every succeeding yuga. 

In the Krita yuga, tapasya occupies the first place. In the Treta, gyana 
is at the forefront. In the Dwapara, tyaga is said to be first, In the Kali yuga, 
dana is the only thing that has been prescribed. 

The learned say that these twelve thousand years of the Devas 
constitute what is called a yuga. A thousand such yugas compose a single 
day of Brahma. A thousand yugas form Brahma’s night as well. With the 
commencement of Brahma’s day, the universe begins to awaken into life. 
During the period of the Pralaya and the universal dissolution, the creator 
sleeps in Yoganidra. When the period of slumber expires, he awakes. 

That then which is Brahman’s day extends for a thousand yugas. His 
nights also extend for a thousand yugas. They who know this are said to 
know day and night. At the end of his night, Brahma awakens and alters the 
indestructible Chitta to be overlaid with Avidya. He then causes 
consciousness to arise, wherefrom proceeds manas, the mind, which is 
identical with the manifest universe.” 


CANTO 232 


V yasa said, “Brahma is the effulgent seed from which the whole 

universe of two kinds of beings, the chala and the achala, has come. 
As he awakens at the dawn of his day, Brahma creates this universe with the 
help of Avidya. At first emerges Mahat. That Great Being is swiftly 
transformed into manas, which is the Soul of all the manifest. Manas 
overwhelms Chitta, pure consciousness, with Avidya and creates seven 
Great Spirits. Urged by the desire to create, manas begins to create diverse 
kinds of objects through modifications of itself. 

First there comes from it Akasa, space. Know that its property is 
sound. From space arises the bearer of all scents, Vayu, the pure and mighty 
wind. It possesses the attribute of touch. From wind comes light endued 
with effulgence. Also called Sukram, it possesses the attribute of form. 
Light gives rise to Apah, water that has taste for its attribute. From water 
springs Bhumi, earth with scent for its quality. These Mahabhutas represent 
initial creation. 

These, one after another, acquire the attributes of the immediately 
preceding elements from which they have sprung. Each has not only its own 
special aspect but each succeeding one has the qualities of all the preceding 
ones. Hence, space has only sound for its attribute. After space comes wind, 
which has both sound and touch for its qualities. From wind comes fire, 
which has sound, touch and form. From fire emerges water, which has 
sound, touch, form and taste for its attributes. From water is earth, which 


has sound, touch, form, taste and scent for its features. If anyone who 
perceives scent in water, were to ignorantly infer it to belong to water, he 
would be in error. For scent is the attribute of earth though it may exist in a 
state of attachment with water as also with wind. 

These seven entities, which possess diverse kinds of energy at first, 
existed separately from one another. They could not create objects without 
them coming together as one. As such, they form the constituent parts of the 
body, which are called limbs. Along with the limbs, the sum total, invested 
with form and sixteen constituent parts, becomes what is called the body. 
When the material body is so formed, the subtle Mahat, with the 
unexhausted residue of karma, enters the body. Next, the original creator of 
all beings divides himself with his maya and enters the subtle form to 
witness everything. And inasmuch as he is the original creator of all beings, 
he is called the lord of all beings. 

He creates all beings mobile and immobile. In the avatara of Brahma, 
he creates the worlds of the Devas, the Rishis, the Pitris and Manushyas; as 
also the rivers, the seas, the oceans, the cardinal points of the horizon, 
countries and provinces, hills and mountains and large trees. Kinnaras, 
Rakshasas, Garudas, Pasus and Sarpas are also his creation. Indeed, he 
creates both kinds of existent things, those that are mobile and those that do 
not move; those that can and those that cannot be destroyed. 

Of these creatures, each obtains the attributes, which it had during the 
previous creation; and each, verily, has the same qualities at every 
subsequent creation. Determined in respect of character by either violence 
or peace, mildness or fierceness, righteousness or unrighteousness, 
truthfulness or falsehood, each creature, at every new creation, acquires that 
guna which it had cherished before. It is due to this that the particular 
attribute attaches to it. 

It is the Ordainer Himself who attaches variety to the great entities of 
space, earth and the others; to the objects of the senses, form and the rest, 
according to the size or scale of existent matter, and He appoints the 
relations of creatures with those multiform entities. 

Amongst men who have devoted themselves to the science of 
phenomena, there are some who say that, in the creation of effects, exertion 
is supreme. Some scholars say that destiny is supreme, and some say that it 
is nature that is the operative. Others claim that actions flowing from both 
exertion and destiny create effects, helped by nature. Instead of regarding 


any of these as singly competent for the creation of effects, they say that it 
is the union of the three that produces all effects. 

In this, there are some who aver that such is the case, while others 
claim that such is not the case; some even say that both of these are not the 
case. These, of course, are the contentions of those that depend on actions 
with reference to objects. They, however, whose vision is directed to truth, 
regard Brahman as the cause. 

Tapasya is the highest good for living creatures. The roots of penance 
are peace and self-restraint. Through tapasya, one obtains everything one 
wishes for. With penance, one attains the Being who creates the universe 
and hence oneself becomes the mighty Master of all beings. It is by tapasya 
that the Rishis are enabled to read the Vedas ceaselessly. 

At the outset, the Svayambhu created the excellent Vedic sounds to 
emerge and flow from guru to sishya. From these sounds have sprung all 
kinds of karmas, the names of the Rishis, the varieties of form seen in 
existence; in fact, all of creation has its origin in the Vedas. Indeed, the 
Supreme Master of all beings, in the beginning, created all things from the 
words of the Vedas. The names of the Rishis, and all else that has been 
created, occur in the Vedas. Upon the expiration of his night, at the dawn of 
his day, the self-existent Brahma creates, from archetypes that existed 
before, all things that are, of course, perfectly made by Him. 

In the Vedas the subject of the Soul’s emancipation has been 
described, along with the ten means to achieve mukti: study of the Vedas, 
adoption of the grihastasrama, penances, the observance of duties common 
to all the asramas of life, sacrifices, performance of karmas that lead to pure 
fame, three kinds of meditation, and the kind of mukti known as siddhi. The 
incomprehensible Brahman, which has been declared in the words of the 
Vedas, and which has been indicated more clearly in the Upanishads by the 
seers, can be realised by gradually following these practices. 

To a person who thinks he has a body, this consciousness of duality, 
fraught with pairs of opposites, is born only of the actions in which he is 
engaged. This consciousness of duality ceases during dreamless sleep or 
when moksha is attained. He, however, who has attained mukti, helped by 
his knowledge, forcibly rids himself of the consciousness of duality. 

Two Brahmans should be noted, the Brahman represented by sound— 
the Vedas; and the other which is beyond the Vedas and is supreme. One 


who realises the Brahman of sound succeeds in attaining the Parabrahman 
that is supreme. 

The slaughter of animals is the sacrifice laid down for the Kshatriyas. 
The growing of corn is the sacrifice prescribed for the Vaisyas. Tapasya or 
worship of Brahman is the sacrifice ordained for the Brahmanas. Serving 
the three other varnas is the sacrifice ordained for the Sudras. 

In the Krita yuga, the performance of sacrifices was not necessary; 
such performance became necessary in the Treta yuga. In the Dwapara 
yuga, sacrifices had begun to fall off, as they have done in the Kali yuga. In 
Krita yuga, men worshipped only one Brahman and looked upon the Riks, 
Samans, Yajuses, rites and sacrifices performed from motives of gain, as all 
different from the object of their worship, and practiced only yoga, 
achieved through tapasya. 

In the Treta yuga, many mighty men appeared who ruled all mobile 
and immobile things. Though general, men were not naturally inclined to 
the practice of dharma, yet the great leaders forced them to such practice. 
Hence, the Vedas, sacrifices, distinctions between the several orders and the 
four modes of life, existed in a compact state. As a result, however, of the 
decrease in the span of life in the Dwapara yuga, all these fell away from 
that united condition. 

In the Kali yuga, all the Vedas become so scarce that men may not 
even see them. Afflicted by iniquity, they suffer extermination along with 
the rites and sacrifices laid down in them. The dharma that is seen in the 
Krita yuga is now visible in such Brahmanas who are of pure souls and are 
devoted to tapasya and the study of the scriptures. 

As regards the other yugas, it is seen that without abandoning the 
karmas and kriyas that are consistent with dharma, men who observe their 
svadharma, and know the ordinance of the Vedas, are led by the authority of 
the scriptures to perform yagnas, keep vratas, make pilgrimages to sacred 
tirthas and other holy places, in order to obtain punya. As during the rains 
numerous things burst forth into life, likewise many new kinds of religious 
observances are brought about in each yuga. As the same phenomena repeat 
with the seasons, even so, at each new creation identical attributes appear in 
each new Brahma and Hara. I spoke to you earlier of Kaala, which ordains 
this variety in the universe. It is Kaala that creates and swallows all 
creatures. All the innumerable creatures that exist have time for their 


refuge. It is Kaala that assumes all those forms and Kaala that upholds 
them. 

I have in this manner, O putra, answered your queries about creation, 
time, sacrifices, rites, the Vedas, the real doer in the universe, action and the 
results of action.” 


CANTO 233 


V yasa said, “I will now tell you how the Supreme Lord makes this 
material universe exceedingly subtle and merges everything into his 
Soul. 

At the time of the Pralaya, a dozen Suryas and Agni come ablaze and 
the universe erupts in a vast apocalyptic inferno. Everything on earth 
disappears and merges into the element of which this world is composed. 
Bhumi, shorn of trees and herbs, resembles a tortoise shell. Apah, water, 
thereupon acquires gandha, the attribute of earth. When earth becomes 
shorn of its principal attribute, that element is on the verge of dissolution. 
Water then prevails and surges into mighty billows that give vent to awful 
roars and fills this vacuum as it moves about or even remains still. 

Agni next adopts the aspect of water, which finds rest in fire. Dazzling 
flames dance all around as they envelop the sun. Indeed, space itself is 
ablaze in an immense conflagration. 

Thereafter Vayu, wind, acquires the quality of Agni, heat, and 
extinguishes it. As a result, it obtains its own feature of sabda, sound, 
becomes awfully agitated and begins to traverse all the ten cardinal points 
of the horizon. 

Akasa, space next subsumes the attribute of sound from wind; space 
smothers Vayu and enters into a phase of existence described as unheard or 
unuttered sound. Hereafter space is all that remains, as sound in its 
unmanifest state. Consequently, sound is absorbed by the mind, which is the 


essence of all things manifest. Unmanifest manas withdraws all that it has 
manifested. This subtle withdrawal of Mahat’s manifestations is called the 
Maha-pralaya. 

Thereafter chandramas absorbs manas whereby all that remains are the 
attributes owned by Iswara. Chandramas is also called sankalpa, and in 
time, it is brought under Iswara’s reign, as it has to perform the very 
difficult task of the annihilation of Chitta. When this is accomplished, the 
condition reached is said to be of mahagyana. Later, Kaala swallows this 
gyana, and as the sruti declares, is itself devoured by shakti. However, 
shakti is again absorbed by Kaala, which is eventually brought under her 
sway by vidya. 

Iswara, the lord of vidya, then swallows unbeing itself into his Atman, 
which is the unmanifest and Supreme Brahman, eternal, and the highest of 
the high. In this manner, all creatures, great and minute, are withdrawn into 
Brahman. 

Upon actual experience, conceived with the help of the shastras and as 
a subject of vigyana, have this truly been so declared by Mahayogins. Even 
so does the unmanifest Brahman repeatedly undergo the process of 
elaboration and withdrawal, creation and destruction, and likewise 
Brahma’s day and night each consist of a thousand yugas.” 


CANTO 234 


V yasa said, “You asked me about the creation of all beings; I have 
narrated that to you in full. Listen to me now as I tell you what the 
duties are of a Brahmana. The rituals of all ceremonies for which dakshina, 
sacrificial fees, is enjoined, from the jatakarma to the jamavartana, depend 
for their performance upon a guru competent in the Vedas. Once the sishya 
has completed his studies at the guru’s asrama and gained knowledge of the 
Vedas, he should return home with a thorough knowledge of all yagnas. 

With his teacher’s leave, he should adopt one of the four asramas of 
life and live in accordance with its duties until he leaves his body. He 
should either lead a life of a grihasta with wives and raise children, or live 
as a brahmacharin, or dwell in the forest with his guru, or practice the duties 
laid down for a yati. 

A family life is said to be the root of all the other asramas of life. A 
self-restrained grihasta who has conquered all his attachments to worldly 
objects always attains the great aim of life. A Brahmana who begets 
children acquires knowledge of the Vedas, and performing sacrifices, pays 
off the three debts he owes. So cleansed by his actions, he should then enter 
the other asramas. He should settle in the place, which he ascertains to be 
the most sacred on earth, and strive towards fame and eminence. 

The fame of Brahmanas increases through austere penances, mastery 
of the various branches of knowledge, sacrifices and through charity. A man 
enjoys endless regions of dharma in the next world as long as his deeds or 


their memory lasts in this world. A Brahmana should teach, study, officiate 
at other people’s sacrifices and offer sacrifices himself. He should not give 
away in vain nor accept others’ gifts in vain. Sufficient wealth that may 
come from one who is assisted in a sacrifice, from a pupil, or from the 
kinsmen of a married daughter, should be spent in the performance of 
sacrifice or some other benign deed. A Brahmana should never enjoy such 
wealth singly. For a Brahmana who leads a domestic life there is no means 
save the acceptance of gifts for the sake of the Devas, Rishis, Pitris, his 
guru, the old, the sick or to appease hunger. 

To those persecuted by unseen foes, or those who strive to the best of 
their power to acquire knowledge, one should make gifts from one’s own 
possessions, including cooked food, more than one can fairly afford. To a 
man of punya there is nothing that cannot be given. The good and the wise 
deserve to have even the prince of steeds, Uchchaisravas, who belongs to 
Indra himself. 

See how the noble King Satyasandha, humbly offered his own prana 
to save the life of a Brahmana, and ascended into heaven. Sankriti’s son 
Rantideva merely gave lukewarm water to Vasishta, and gained swarga. 
Atri’s son Indradamana gave wealth to a worthy Brahmana, and acquired 
diverse regions of felicity in the next world. Usinara’s son Sibi, who gave 
away his own limbs and a dear son for the sake of a Brahmana, went 
directly into swargaloka from this world. Pratardana, the ruler of Kasi, gave 
away his very eyes to a Brahmana, and found great fame both here and 
hereafter. 

King Devavridha donated a very beautiful and costly chatra, with 
eight golden ribs, and rose into heaven with all the people of his kingdom. 
Sankriti of Atri’s vamsa imparted instruction to his disciples on the subject 
of the nirguna Brahman, and reached regions of great felicity. Valiant 
Ambarisha bestowed eleven arbudas upon the Brahmanas of kine, and so 
found swarga for himself, along with all his subjects. Savitri gave away her 
earrings, and King Janamejaya relinquished his own body; both found high 
regions of felicity. Yuvanaswa, the son of Vrishadarbha, who donated 
diverse kinds of gemstones, a fine mansion and many beautiful women, 
ascended into heaven. Nimi, the ruler of the Videhas, gave away his 
kingdom, Jamadagni’s son Rama gave away the whole earth; and Gaya 
gave away the earth with all her towns and cities, unto the Brahmanas. 


Once during a drought, Vasishta, resembling Brahma himself, kept 
alive all creatures with his energy and kindness. Karandhama’s son Marutta 
bequeathed his daughter to Angiras, and swiftly ascended into heaven. 
Brahmadatta, the ruler of the Panchalas, donated two precious jewels called 
Nidhi and Sankha to prominent Brahmanas, and obtained many worlds of 
felicity. 

King Mitrasaha gave his own wife Madayanti to Vasishta, and rose 
into swarga with his wife. Rajarishi Sahasrajit, of great fame, surrendered 
his life itself for the sake of a Brahmana, to gain regions of great felicity. 
King Satadyumna gave Mudgala a mansion made of gold and full of every 
object of comfort and luxury, and found swarga. The king of the Salwas, 
Dyutimat, gave Richika his entire kingdom and found heaven for himself. 
The Rajarishi Madiraswa bestowed his daughter upon Hiranyahasta, and 
obtained such regions as are held in esteem by the very Devas. Rajarishi 
Lomapada, bestowed his daughter Santa upon Rishyasringa, and acquired 
the fruition of all his wishes. King Prasenajit, of great tejas, gave a hundred 
thousand cows with calves, and acquired majestic realms of grace. 

These and many others have, through dana and tapasya, gained 
swarga. Their fame will last as long as the earth herself will last. All of 
them have, through gifts, sacrifices and procreation, been rewarded with 
swargaloka.” 


CANTO 235 


V yasa said, “The knowledge called trayi which occurs in the Vedas 

and their Angas should be acquired. It is to be derived from the 
Riks, Samans and the vigyanas called Varna and Akshara. Besides these, 
there are the Yajuses and the Atharvans. In the six kinds of karma indicated 
in these, dwells the Divine Being. Atmagyanis who are adept in the 
revelations of the Vedas are attached to sattva guna, and highly blessed, 
succeed in understanding the origin and the end of all things. 

A Brahmana should live in accordance with the dharma prescribed in 
the Vedas. He should perform all his karma as a good man of restrained 
soul. He should earn his livelihood without injuring any creature. Invested 
with the knowledge derived from the good and wise, he should control his 
passions and inherent propensities. Well-versed in the scriptures, he should 
practice the duties laid down for him, and live in this world guided by the 
sattva guna. Even as a householder, the Brahmana should observe the six 
karmas. Faithfully, he should worship the Devas in the five main sacrifices. 
Endowed with patience, never heedless, with self-control, proficient with 
duties, with a pure heart, divested of joy, pride and anger, the Brahmana 
should never sink into torpor. Charity, study of the Vedas, sacrifices, 
penances, modesty, openness and _ self-restraint—these enhance one’s 
energy and destroy one’s sins. 

The wise man should be abstemious in his diet and should conquer his 
senses. Indeed, with lust and wrath subdued, and with his sins washed 


away, he should strive to reach Brahman. He should worship Agni and 
Brahmanas, and bow to the Devas. He should avoid all kinds of 
inauspicious speech and all actions of violence and injury. 

This preliminary course of conduct is recommended for a Brahmana. 
Subsequently, with gyana, he should engage himself in deeds, for in actions 
lies success. The Brahmana who is imbued with intelligence succeeds in 
crossing the river of life that is so difficult to navigate, being so furious and 
terrible with the five senses for its waters, passion as its source and wrath 
for its mire. He should always remain awake to the fact that Kaala stalks 
him as a constant threat. Time, who is the great astounder of all things, is 
armed with irresistible force, and issued from the almighty Ordainer 
himself. 

Generated by the current of Prakriti, the universe is ceaselessly borne 
along the mighty river of time. Kaala, overspread with eddies constituted by 
the years, with the months for its waves and the seasons for its current, with 
the fortnights for its floating moss, and the rise and fall of the eyelids for its 
froth, with the days and the nights for its water, and desire and lust for its 
crocodiles, the Vedas and yagnas for its rafts, and dharma for its islands, 
with artha and kama for its springs, satya and mukti for its shores, 
benevolence for the trees that float along it, and the yugas for the lakes 
along its course—the mighty river of Kaala—with an origin as 
inconceivable as that of Brahman itself, ceaselessly bears away all beings 
created by the great Ordainer towards the abode of Yama. 

The wise and patient successfully cross this awful river with the use of 
the rafts of knowledge and wisdom. What, however, can fools, bereft of 
similar vessels, do when thrown into this furious stream? Only the man of 
wisdom, and never the fool, succeeds in crossing this river. The astute 
behold from a distance the merits and faults of everything, and succeed in 
discerning what deserves to be embraced and what merits rejection. 
However, the unstable man, of little intellect, whose heart is full of desire 
and greed, is always full of doubt and he never succeeds in fording that 
river. Neither can the one who sits idly ever pass over it. 

The man without the raft of wisdom, he who is weighed down with 
heavy faults, quickly sinks under the waters. Even a wise man, who is 
seized by the crocodile of desire, can never hope to make knowledge his 
lifeboat. The man of wisdom and intelligence should strive hard to cross 


over the frothing stream of time, without sinking in it. Keeping himself 
afloat with wisdom, he becomes conversant with Brahman. 

One born into a noble race, who abstains from the three duties of 
teaching, officiating at other’s sacrifices and accepting gifts, and conducts 
only the three other functions: studying, sacrificing and giving, should 
strive to swim across the rushing current of time. Such a man is sure to gain 
the far shore in the boat of wisdom. One who is pure in conduct, is self- 
restrained and keeps good vratas, whose soul is under his control, and who 
is learned, surely finds success in this and the other world. 

The Brahmana who lives as a householder should conquer anger and 
envy, practice the virtues already named, and worship the Devas in the five 
sacrifices. He should eat only after he feeds the Devas, Pitris and Athitis. 
He must conform to the duties that the righteous observe; he must perform 
karma with a mastered soul, and he should, without injuring any creature, 
stand firm by adopting a course that is above censure. 

One who is skilled in the truths of the Vedas and the other branches of 
knowledge, whose behaviour is that of a well-guided soul, who is blessed 
with clear vision, who observes his svadharma, who never by his actions 
defiles a yagna, who attends to the observances set down in the scriptures, 
who is full of faith, who is self-restrained, who is wise, who is bereft of 
envy and malice, and who knows well the distinctions between dharma and 
adharma: he succeeds in surviving all his trials and tribulations. 

The Brahmana, who has fortitude, is always heedful, self-restrained, 
aware of dharma, whose heart is under control, and who has transcended 
joy, pride and anger, will never languish in grief. This is the course of 
conduct ordained of old for a Brahmana. He should strive to acquire 
knowledge and perform all the scriptural rites. By living thus, he is sure to 
find success. 

One who is bereft of clear vision does wrong even when he wishes to 
do right. Such a man exercises blind judgement, and performs outwardly 
virtuous deeds that become entangled in sin. Wanting to do what is right, he 
does what is wrong; wishing to do what is wrong he might do what is right. 
Such a man is a fool. Ignorant of the two kinds of karma, he must 
experience repeated rebirths and deaths.” 


CANTO 236 


V yasa said, “If mukti be desirable, then knowledge must be acquired. 

For a person who drifts along the course of Kaala, wisdom is the raft 
by which he can reach the shore. Sages invested with intelligence are able 
to guide the ignorant to cross the deadly river of life. The naive, however, 
fail to save either themselves or others. 

One who is free from desire, and all other faults, should attend to these 
twelve requirements of yoga: a comfortable place, proper actions, a keen 
interest, sacred articles for rituals, proper posture, worldly renunciation, 
faith, attentiveness, pure food, dispassion, mental alertness and 
introspection. 

He, who wishes to obtain superior knowledge, needs, with the help of 
his intellect, to control his speech and his mind. He who wants to have 
peace, should, with the benefit of his wisdom, restrain his soul. Whether he 
becomes compassionate or cruel, whether he becomes conversant with all 
the Vedas or remains ignorant of the Riks, whether he turns to dharma and 
observes sacrifices or becomes the worst of sinners, whether he becomes 
eminent for prowess and wealth or plunges into misery, the man who directs 
his mind towards these twelve attributes, is certain to cross samsara, the 
arduous ocean of life. 

Without mention of the results of the attainment of Brahman through 
yoga, it may be said that he who sets himself to only enquiring after the 
Atman transcends the necessity to observe the karmas ordained in the 


Vedas. The body with the jiva within it is an excellent chariot. When 
sacrifices and religious rites are made its seat, embarrassment its shield, 
means and destruction its pole to make fast the yoke, the breath apana its 
wheel, prana its yoke, knowledge and the allotted span of existence its 
pillars to secure the steeds, heedfulness the beautiful clasp of the yoke, the 
assumption of good pravritti the rims of its wheels, vision, touch, scent, and 
hearing its four horses, wisdom its centre, all the scriptures its long whip, 
certain knowledge of the scriptural declarations its sarathy, the Soul its 
firmly-seated rider, faith and self-restraint its fore-runners, renunciation its 
inseparable companion following behind and bent upon doing it good, 
purity the path along which it goes, yoga or union with Brahman its goal— 
then may the ratha reach Brahman and shine there in effulgence. 

I will now tell you the swift means to be adopted by one who would 
equip his chariot in such a fashion to pass through this wilderness of the 
world in order to reach the goal that is Brahman, which is above decay and 
death. 

To fix the mind upon one thing at a time is called dharana. The yogin 
who observes proper vows and restraints, practices all seven kinds of 
dharana. There are, again, as many kinds of concentrations of the mind 
arising out of these upon subjects that are near or remote. Through these, 
the yogin gradually acquires mastery over earth, wind, space, water, fire, 
consciousness and intellect. After this, he gradually acquires a grasp of the 
unmanifest. I will now describe to you the gradual realisations of 
individuals engaged in yoga. I will also tell you of the nature of the success 
that attaches to yoga commenced by him who looks within himself. 

The yogin, who follows his guru’s instructions and abandons his 
material body, beholds his Soul display various forms due to its subtlety. To 
him in the first stage, the sky seems to be filled with a subtle substance akin 
to a foggy vapour. Such becomes the form of the Soul, which has been 
freed from the body. When this fog dissipates, a second, new form appears. 
Subsequently, the yogin beholds within himself the form of water. After the 
disappearance of water, fire displays itself. This gives way to the 
appearance of wind glowing as a well-tempered weapon. Gradually, the 
form displayed by wind turns to resemble the sheerest gossamer. Finally, 
after it has acquired whiteness, and the subtlety of air, the Brahmana’s Soul 
attains the supreme pureness and subtlety of ethereal space. Let me tell you 
the outcome of these diverse conditions as they occur. 


The yogin, who has achieved the conquest of the earth element, attains 
by such lordship to the power of creation. Like a second Prajapati endued 
with perfect composure, he can, from his own body, create all kinds of 
creatures. With only his toe, or with his hand or feet, he who has achieved 
mastery over the wind, can singly cause the very earth to tremble. Such is 
the attribute of the wind as declared in the sruti. 

The yogin, who has achieved the lordship of space, can exist brightly 
in it, and disappear at will as he has attained oneness with the akasic 
element. With control over water, like Agastya, he can drain rivers, lakes 
and oceans, drinking them down. With mastery over fire, the yogin becomes 
so effulgent that his form cannot be looked at. He becomes visible only 
when he extinguishes his consciousness of individuality. 

When the intellect, which is the soul of the five elements and of the 
consciousness of individuality, is conquered, the yogin attains omnipotence, 
and perfect knowledge. Consequently, the manifest merges into the 
unmanifest Paramatman from which the world emanates and becomes 
manifest. 

Listen closely as I explain the science of the unmanifest. First, hear 
about all that is manifest as illustrated in the Samkhya philosophy. In both 
the yoga and the Samkhya systems, twenty-five subjects of knowledge have 
been treated in almost the same way. Listen to me as I mention their 
cardinal features. 

That is said to be manifest, which owns the four attributes of birth, 
growth, decay and death. That which does not possess these is called 
unmanifest. The two Souls mentioned in the Vedas and the Vigyanas are 
based upon them. The first called Jivatma is imbued with the four qualities 
and it longs for the four purusharthas of dharma, artha, kama and moksha. 
This Soul is called manifest, and it is born of the unmanifest Supreme Soul. 
It is both intelligent and unintelligent. I have clearly told you about sattva 
and kshetrajna. 

The Vedas say that both kinds of Soul become attached to objects of 
the senses. The doctrine of the Samkhyas state that one should keep oneself 
aloof or dissociated from objects of the senses. The yogin who is freed from 
attachment and pride, who transcends all the pairs of opposites, pleasure 
and pain, attraction and revulsion and the rest, who never gives way to 
anger or hatred, who never tells a lie; who, though slandered or struck, still 
shows friendship for the violator, who never thinks of doing harm to others, 


and who restrains speech, actions and thought, and behaves uniformly 
towards all creatures, succeeds in approaching the presence of Brahman. 

One who harbours no desire for earthly objects, who willingly accepts 
his lot, who depends on earthly objects just for his sustenance, who is free 
from avarice, who has driven out all grief, who has restrained his senses, 
who undertakes all necessary karmas, who ignores personal appearance and 
attire; whose senses are all collected for devotion to the true aims of life, 
whose purposes are never left unaccomplished, who bears himself with 
equal friendliness towards all creatures, who regards a clod of earth and a 
lump of gold with an equal eye, who is equally disposed towards friend and 
foe, who is patient; who accepts praise and blame equally, who is free from 
longing of all objects of desire, who practices brahmacharya, and who is 
firm and steadfast in all his vows and observances; who has no malice or 
envy for any creature in the universe, is in the eyes of the Samkhya system, 
a yogin who has attained moksha. 

I will now speak about the ways and the means by which a person may 
gain mukti through yoga. He, who lives and acts after transcending the 
strength achieved through yoga, succeeds in gaining moksha. I have duly 
spoken to you on mukti according to the Samkhya doctrine and as rendered 
by the yoga system, which appear dissimilar if the speaker, be disposed to 
treat them as such; in reality, they are identical. Thus one can transcend all 
the pairs of opposites, and so attain Brahman.” 


CANTO 237 


V yasa said, “Tossed about in life’s ocean, it is through dhyana that 
one seizes the raft of knowledge, and clings to it without foundering 
while trying to reach mukti.” 

Suka said, “What is that knowledge? Is it the learning by which, when 
ignorance is dispelled, truth becomes discovered? Or is it the course of 
duties consisting of the karma to be performed, with the help of which the 
object sought may be realised? Or still, is it the way of abstaining from 
actions, by which a realisation of the Atman is to be sought? Do you tell me 
what it is, so that with its help, birth and death may be avoided.” 

Vyasa said, “A fool believes that all this exists due to its own nature 
without any refuge or foundation. With such instruction, he fills the 
aspirations of his disciples, destroying with his sophistries the reasons a 
pupil might put forth to the contrary, and he never succeeds in attaining any 
truth. Others, who firmly believe that all cause inheres in the nature of 
things and not to a source, also fail to acquire any truth even by listening to 
Rishis who are competent to instruct them. 

Those of little intelligence who abandon their speculations, by 
adopting either of these doctrines, those who regard nature as the only 
cause, never succeed in finding any benefit for themselves. This ignorant 
belief in Prakriti as being the creating and the sustaining cause brings about 
the destruction of the person who cherishes it. Listen now to the truth about 
these two doctrines that maintain that things exist by their own nature and 


that they flow from their own nature, and how the two differ from other true 
philosophies that precede them. 

Wise men apply themselves to farming and tillage to grow crops and 
vehicles for conveyance. They attend also to the laying of pleasure-gardens, 
to owning luxurious seats, carpets and houses, the construction of 
commodious mansions, and the preparation of medicines for diseases of 
every kind. Wisdom is the active component in the means that lead to the 
fruition of a man’s purposes. Wisdom wins beneficial results. Wisdom 
enables kings to exercise and enjoy sovereignty. It is through wisdom that 
the high and the low among beings are distinguished. It is by wisdom that 
the superior and the inferior among created things are understood. Wisdom 
is the highest refuge of all things. 

All the myriad creations have four kinds of birth. They are viviparous, 
Oviparous, vegetative and those born of filth. Creatures that are mobile 
should be known to be superior to those that are inert. Intelligent energy 
must be regarded as being superior to unintelligent matter. 

Mobile creatures are innumerable, and of two kinds: those that have 
many legs and those that have two. Bipedal humans are the superior of the 
two. Bipeds, again, are of two species, those that live on land and those that 
are otherwise. Of these, the ones that dwell on land are superior to the 
others. The superior ones eat diverse kinds of cooked food. 

Land-living bipeds are of two kinds, the superior and _ the 
undistinguished. Of these, it is commonly, albeit incorrectly ceded, that the 
multitude are regarded as superior of the two from their observance of the 
duties of caste in contrast to the exalted who have transcended the needs of 
such distinctions. The undistinguished ones are said to be of two kinds, 
those that are conversant with duties, and those that are otherwise. Of these, 
the first are superior because of their discrimination in respect of what 
should be done and what should not. 

Again, the ones conversant with duties are said to be of two kinds: 
those that know the Vedas and those that do not. Of these the first ones are 
superior, for the Vedas are said to dwell in them. Those that are acquainted 
with the Vedas are yet said to be of two kinds, those who discourse on the 
Vedas and those who do not. Of these, the previous, who are adept with the 
Vedas, their duties, their rites and the fruits of these duties and rites, are 
superior because they promulgate all of those. Indeed, all the Vedas with the 
duties laid down in them are said to flow from such men. Preceptors of the 


Vedas are of two kinds: those who have knowledge of the Atman and those 
that do not. Of these, the first are superior because of their knowledge of the 
meaning of birth and death. 

As for duties, they are, again, of two kinds, pravritti and nivritti. He 
who is conversant with duties is said to be omniscient or possessed of 
universal knowledge. Such a man is a renunciate. He is firm in the 
accomplishment of his objectives, truthful, pure, both outwardly and 
inwardly, and possessed of might. The Devas know him for a Brahmana 
who is devoted to the knowledge of Brahman and not him who is only 
conversant with the duties of pravritti. Such a man is versed in the Vedas 
and also earnestly devoted to the study of the Atman. They that have true 
knowledge behold their own Soul as existing both within and without. Such 
men, O child, are truly enlightened and are as Devas. 

Upon these rests this world of beings, in them dwells this whole 
universe. There is nothing that is equal to their greatness. Transcending 
birth, death, distinctions and actions of every kind, they are the lords of the 
four kinds of creatures and are the equals of Brahma himself.” 


CANTO 238 


V yasa said, “These, then, are the obligatory karmas ordained for 

Brahmanas. The man of knowledge always attains success by 
performing the prescribed karmas. If no questions arise in respect of one’s 
efforts, then karmas and kriyas well performed are sure to lead to success. 
The query to which we refer is this: whether the karmas are obligatory or 
whether they are optional. As regards the inquiry about the true character of 
karma, it should be said that if deeds are ordained for man to induce 
knowledge by which alone Brahman or moksha is to be attained, then they 
should be regarded as mandatory. I will now discourse on them by the light 
of both experience and inferences. Listen well to me. 

With respect to karma, some men say that exertion is their cause, 
others that necessity is their cause. Others, again, maintain that nature is the 
cause. Yet others say that actions are the result of both exertion and 
necessity, while there are those who maintain that actions flow from time, 
exertion and nature, all three. Some say that of the three, exertion, necessity 
and nature, one only and not the other two is the cause. Others are of the 
opinion that all the three combined are the cause. Then there are those 
engaged in the performance of karma who, with respect to all objects, say 
that they exist, and yet they do not exist; that they cannot be said to exist, 
yet they cannot be said not to exist. These then are the diverse views 
entertained by different men. 


The yogins, however, behold Brahman to be the universal cause. The 
men of the Treta, Dwapara and Kali yugas are inspired with queries. Those, 
however, of the Krita yuga are devoted to tapasya, possess peaceful souls 
and observe dharma, all without effort. Notwithstanding their apparent 
diversity, they regard the Riks, the Samans and the Yajuses as one, and thus 
the Veda itself as one. They investigate desire and aversion, and worship 
only tapasya. Devoted to the practice of penances alone, steadfast in them 
and rigid in their observance, one obtains the fruition of all desires. With 
penance, one attains that by becoming which one creates the universe. With 
tapasya, one becomes the puissant master of all things. 

Brahma is expounded in the declarations of the Vedas. For all that, 
Brahma is inconceivable by even those that are conversant with such 
declarations. Once more Brahman is affirmed in the Vedanta. Brahman, 
however, cannot be apprehended through karma. 

The sacrifice ordained for Brahmanas consists in japa, for Kshatriyas 
in the slaughter of clean animals for the gratification of the Devas; for 
Vaisyas in the production of crops and the upkeep of domestic animals; and 
for Sudras in menial service to the three other varnas. He who observes his 
duties and studies the Vedas and other scriptures becomes a true Dvija, a 
twice-born one. Whether one performs any other karma or not, he who 
befriends all creatures becomes a Brahmana. 

In the beginning of the Treta yuga, the Vedas, yagnas, the divisions of 
kulas and the asramas of life existed in their entirety. However, from the 
duration of life being decreased in Dwapara, those are overtaken by decline. 
In the Dwapara as also in the Kali yuga, the Vedas are overwhelmed by 
perplexity. Towards the close of Kali yuga, it is questionable if they ever 
become visible. 

In that age of dark wrath, the duties of the respective varnas disappear, 
and men are afflicted by iniquity. The gracious attributes of kine, of the 
earth, of water, medicinal and edible herbs, all disappear. Through universal 
adharma, the Vedas vanish along with all the duties inculcated by them, as 
also the dharma of the four asramas of life. They who maintain their 
svadharma are direly afflicted, and all things, mobile and unmoving, change 
for the worse. As the showers of heaven cause all products of the earth to 
grow, likewise the Vedas, in every age, cause all the Angas to grow. 

Without question, time assumes diverse forms. It has neither 
beginning nor end. It is time that makes all creatures and again devours 


them. I have already spoken of it to you. Kaala is the origin of all creatures; 
it is that which makes them grow. Time is their destroyer, and it is their 
ruler. Subject to pairs of opposites, such as pleasure and pain, heat and cold, 
joy and sorrow and the rest, creatures of infinite variety rest on Kaala 
according to their own natures as ordained by the Supreme Brahman.” 


CANTO 239 


B hishma continues, ‘Suka was delighted with these instructions of the 
Maharishi, his father, and he now asked a question that relates to the 
import of duties that lead to moksha.’ 

Suka said, “By what means do the wise, who know the Vedas, who 
perform sacrifices, who are endued with wisdom, and free from malice, 
succeed in attaining Brahman, which is incapable of being apprehended by 
either direct evidence or inference, and unlikely of being indicated by the 
Vedas? I beseech you; tell me by what means can Brahman be 
apprehended? Is it with tapasya, brahmacharya, sannyasa, gyana, the 
Samkhya philosophy, or by yoga? With what means may what kind of 
singleness of purpose be attained by men, with respect to both the mind and 
the senses? It befits you to elucidate all this to me.” 

Vyasa said, “No man ever attains success by means other than the 
acquisition of knowledge, the practice of penances, the subjugation of the 
senses and renunciation of everything. The five great entities represent the 
first creation of the Self-born. They have been substantially placed in the 
embodied creatures of the world. 

The bodies of all embodied creatures are derived from earth. The 
humours are from water. Their eyes are derived from light. Prana, apana 
and the three other vital breaths have wind for their source. And, lastly, all 
orifices within them such as the nostrils, the cavities of the ear, and the 
others, are from akasa, space. In the feet of living beings is Vishnu. In their 


arms is Indra. Within the stomach is Agni. In the ears are the cardinal points 
of the horizon representing the sense of hearing. In the tongue is speech, 
which is Saraswati Vakdevi. The ears, skin, eyes, tongue and nose are the 
senses of knowing. These exist for the purposes of apprehension of their 
respective objects. Sound, touch, form, taste and scent are the objects of the 
five senses. These should always be regarded as being separate from or 
independent of the senses. 

Like the charioteer setting his well-trained steeds along the paths he 
pleases, the mind sets the senses along directions it likes. The mind, in its 
turn, is employed by the knowledge seated in the heart. The mind is the lord 
of all these senses in using them in their functions, and guiding or 
restraining them. Similarly, knowledge is the lord of the mind in employing, 
and guiding or restraining it. The senses, the objects of the senses, the 
attributes of those objects represented by nature, knowledge, mind, the vital 
breaths and the jiva dwell in the bodies of all embodied creatures. 

The body within which knowledge dwells has no real existence. The 
body, therefore, is not the refuge of knowledge. Prakriti, with its three 
attributes of goodness, passion and darkness is the refuge of knowledge, 
which exists only in the form of sound. The Soul also is not the refuge of 
knowledge. It is desire that creates knowledge; it, however, never creates 
the three gunas. 

The wise man regards the Atman as surrounded by sixteen attributes. 
The Soul cannot be observed with the eye or with any or all of the senses. 
Transcending all, the Atman is visible only to the enlightened mind. 
Divested of the properties of sound, touch, form, without taste or scent, 
indestructible, without a material or subtle body and without senses, it is 
nevertheless perceived within the body. Unmanifest and supreme, it dwells 
in all mortal bodies. 

Following the teachings of the guru and the Vedas, he who finds the 
Atman within himself hereafter becomes Brahman’s very self. The wise 
regard a learned Brahmana, his disciples, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a 
chandala with an equal eye. Transcending all things, the Atman dwells in all 
creatures, chala and achala. Indeed, all things are pervaded by it. When a 
living creature beholds his own Soul in all things, and all things in his Soul, 
he attains Brahman. One occupies that much of the Supreme Soul as is 
commensurate with the measure of the acquisition of Brahman in one’s own 
Soul. 


He who can always realise the identity of all things with his own self 
certainly attains immortality. The very Devas are stupefied by the way of 
the pathless man who himself constitutes the Soul of all creatures, who is 
engaged in the good of all beings, and who desire to attain Brahman. 
Indeed, the path pursued by men of knowledge is as invisible as those of 
birds in flight or of fish in water. 

Time, of its own power, cooks all entities within itself. No one, 
however, knows the Brahman in which Kaala, in its turn, is itself cooked. 
That of which I speak does not occur above, in the middle, below or in any 
other direction. It is an Absolute Entity, and not to be found in any one 
place. All these worlds are within it. There is nothing in these worlds that 
exists out of it. Even if one flies with the swiftness of an arrow, even if one 
goes with the speed of the mind itself, one would still not reach the end of 
That which is the cause of all this. That is so complete that there is nothing 
greater. 

His hands and feet extend everywhere. His eyes, head and face are 
everywhere. His ears are all over the universe. He exists, overwhelming all 
things. That Brahman is smaller than the minutest part of an atom. That is 
the heart of all entities. Existing, without question, That is still 
imperceptible. 

Immortal and mortal: these are the dual forms of existence of the 
Paramatman. In all mobile and immobile entities the existence it displays is 
mortal, while the presence it exhibits in pure Chaitanya is divine, immortal 
and without decay or destruction. Though the lord of all existence, chala 
and achala, albeit inactive and nirguna, enters, nevertheless, the familiar 
mansion of nine doors and becomes engaged in karma. 

Sages who can perceive the other shore say that the Unborn or the 
Supreme Soul becomes invested with the attribute of action due to motion, 
pleasure, pain, variety of form and the nine other attributes. The immortal 
Soul, which is invested with the karma guna, is nothing other than the 
immortal and actless Brahman. A man of knowledge, who attains the 
deathless essence, gives up for good both life and birth.” 


CANTO 240 


V yasa said, “O Uttama putra, at your behest I have truly answered 

your question according to the doctrine of the Samkhya system. 
Hear me now explain all that should be done, for the same end, according to 
the yoga tradition. 

The consolidation of the intellect, mind, senses and the all-pervading 
Atman is said to be knowledge of the highest kind. This vidya should be 
acquired through a guru by one of a calm disposition, who has mastered his 
senses, who is able to turn his focus on the Soul with dhyana, who enjoys 
such meditation, who is gifted with intelligence and who is pure in his 
actions. 

One should try to acquire this knowledge by abandoning the five 
impediments of yoga known to the wise. Desire, anger, greed, fear and 
sleep are the five obstacles to yoga. With the help of a calm nature, anger 
can be conquered. Desire is overcome by renouncing all objectives. 
Patience and intelligent deliberation on worthy subjects will help forgo 
sleep. Fear can be avoided with watchfulness. With steady endurance, one 
should restrain one’s organs of procreation and digestion from unworthy 
indulgence. 

One should see to it that one’s hands and feet are adequately protected. 
One must guard one’s eyes and ears with the help of one’s mind, and defend 
one’s mind and speech by one’s actions. One should shun pride by serving 


the wise. Without delay, one should, by these means, subdue the 
impediments to yoga. 

One should worship Agni and the Brahmanas, and bow one’s head to 
the Devas. One must avoid all kinds of inauspicious talk, and words fraught 
with malice, and those that are painful to other minds. 

Brahman is the effulgent seed of everything. It is, furthermore, the 
essence of that seed itself whence all this emanates. Brahman, with a glance 
of his eyes, became the Soul of this mobile and immobile universe, of all 
entities that took birth. 

Meditation, study, gift, truth, modesty, simplicity, forgiveness, purity 
of body, and purity of conduct, subjugation of the senses: these enhance 
one’s tejas, which duly destroys one’s sins. With an impartial demeanour 
towards all creatures and by living in contentment upon what is acquired 
effortlessly, one receives the fruits of all one’s objectives and obtains 
knowledge. 

Cleansed of all sins, endowed with energy, abstemious in diet, with the 
senses, desire and wrath subdued, one should seek to attain Brahman. With 
inwardly focus, in the still hours of eventide or in those before dawn, one 
should firmly unite the senses that are withdrawn from all external objects 
and fix one’s mind upon gyana. If even one of the five senses of a man is 
kept unrestrained, all his wisdom may escape as water seeps through a hole 
in a bag. 

The mind, in the first instance, should be restrained by the yogin, just 
as a fisherman at the outset renders powerless the fish from which there is 
the greatest danger to his nets. With the mind subdued first, the yogin 
should then proceed to restrain his ears, eyes, tongue, nose and his sense of 
touch. Thus with the mind withdrawn from all objectives, the yogin should 
focus it on knowledge. Indeed, with the five senses subdued, the yati should 
fix them on the mind. When the senses and the mind become concentrated 
and steadfast in gyana, Brahman becomes perceptible like a towering fire or 
the sun. Indeed, he then sees in his self, in his Soul, like lightning in the sky. 
Everything then appears in it and it appears in everything from its 
infinitude. 

The most learned Brahmanas, imbued with fortitude, and engaged in 
the weal of all creatures, succeed in perceiving it. Seated in solitude and 
immersed in the observance of austere vows, the yogin who conducts 
himself so for six months attains oneness with the Indestructible. 


Death, life, the power to present varied aspects in the same person or 
body, celestial scents, sounds and sights, the most agreeable sensations of 
taste and touch, pleasurable sensations of coolness and warmth, parity with 
the wind, insight into the meaning of the scriptures and every work of 
profound truth, companionship of the apsaras—the yogin who acquires 
these through yoga, should disregard and merge them all in gyana. 

Seated on a mountain summit, or at the foot of a significant tree, or in 
front of such a tree, with speech and the senses controlled, he should 
practice yoga after dusk, and at dawn. As a worldly man contemplates 
wealth and other valuable possessions, he should restrain all the senses 
within the heart and fix the mind on the eternal and the immortal. He should 
never become distracted during yoga, but devoutly restrain the restless mind 
from straying. With the senses and the mind thus withdrawn, the yogin 
should turn to empty mountain caves, consecrated temples and abandoned 
houses, for abodes to dwell in. 

A yogin should not associate with another in either speech, action or 
thought. He must disregard one and all, eat abstemiously and look with an 
equal eye upon objects acquired or lost. He should behave equally towards 
the one that praises and one that censures him. He must not seek the good 
or the evil of one or the other. He should not rejoice at an acquisition or 
suffer anxiety when he meets with failure or loss. Of uniform behaviour 
towards all beings, he should remain unattached, as the wind. 

To one whose mind is thus turned to itself, who leads a life of purity, 
and who casts an equal eye upon all things, indeed, to one who is ever 
engaged in such yoga for even six months, Brahman as Pranava, AUM, 
appears vividly. 

Adequately aware of how men are afflicted by anxiety in pursuit of 
wealth and comfort, the yogin should view a clod of earth, a stone and a 
lump of gold with an equal eye. Indeed, he should abandon the pursuit of 
wealth with a keen aversion for it, and never suffer himself to be tempted or 
bewildered. Even if a seeker belongs to an inferior varna, or is a woman, 
both will surely attain the highest end if they follow the path indicated 
above. 

He who has subdued his mind witnesses in his own self, with the help 
of his own intelligence, the Uncreated, Ancient, undeteriorating and eternal 
Brahman, which is subtler than the subtlest, and grosser than the most 
gross, which is moksha’s self.’”’ 


Bhishma continues, ‘With confirmation from the lips of gurus and by 
their own deliberation upon these immaculate words of the Maharishi, the 
wise attain oneness with Brahman.’ 


CANTO 241 


S uka said, “The declarations of the Vedas are twofold. They command, 

‘Perform all karma’. They also say the reverse: “Renounce actions.’ I 
ask you, what do men attain with gyana and what do they achieve with 
karma? I desire to know this. Tell me about this. Indeed, these declarations 
about knowledge and actions are dissimilar and even contradictory.” 

Thus addressed, the son of Parasara replied to his son, “I will clarify 
for you the two paths, the destructible and the indestructible, which depend 
respectively upon karma and gyana. Listen carefully, O child, as I tell you 
the goal attained with knowledge, and the other through actions. The 
difference between these two places is as great as the infinite sky. The 
question that you have asked me has given me such pain, as an atheistic 
discourse gives a man of faith. These are the two paths upon which the 
Vedas are established: the duties indicated by pravritti, and those based on 
nivritti. 

By actions, a living creature is destroyed. With knowledge, however, 
he is emancipated. For this reason, yogins who perceive the other shore of 
the ocean of life never take to karma. Through karma, one is forced to be 
reborn, with a body composed of the sixteen elements. Through knowledge, 
however, one is transformed into that which is eternal, unmanifest and 
immutable. 

Those that are of small intelligence laud actions, because of which 
they successively assume bodies in a ceaseless cycle of rebirths. Whereas 


truly intelligent men of sharp perceptions of dharma never encourage 
karma, even as persons that depend for their drinking water upon running 
streams never favour wells and ponds. 

The fruit that one gains from actions consists of pleasure and pain, of 
birth and death. With knowledge, one reaches where there is no occasion 
for grief; where one is freed from both birth and death; where one is not 
subject to decrepitude; where one transcends the state of conscious 
existence. Where there is Supreme Brahma, unmanifest, immutable, ever- 
existent, imperceptible, beyond pain, immortal and above destruction; 
where all become freed from the influence of duality, from the opposites 
like pleasure and pain and the rest, as also from aspirations. In such a stage, 
they view everything equally, become universal friends and devoted to the 
good of all creatures. 

There is a wide gulf, my son, between one committed to gyana and 
one dedicated to karma. Know that the man of knowledge is indestructible; 
he remains eternally present like the moon that exists on the last day of the 
dark fortnight, invisible but undestroyed. The Maharishi Yagnavalkya in the 
Brihadaranayaka has said this more elaborately. For the man devoted to 
deeds, his transitory nature may be inferred from observing the new moon, 
which appears like a bent thread, a sliver in the firmament and is subject to 
wax and wane. 

Know, O Suka, that he who performs actions is reborn with a body 
with eleven entities for its ingredients, along with a subtle form, with its 
own essences, which all together are sixteen. The Soul that takes refuge in 
the material form, like a drop of water on a lotus leaf, should be known as 
kshetrajna, which is eternal, and which through yoga, transcends both the 
mind and knowledge. 

Tamas, rajas, and sattva are the attributes of knowledge. Knowledge is 
the aspect of the individual soul that abides within the body. The Jivatman, 
in turn, comes from the Paramatman, the Supreme Soul. The body with the 
Soul is said to be the attribute of the jiva. The jiva animates and causes all 
bodies to live. Those acquainted with kshetra and kshetrajna declare that the 
creator of the seven worlds is above the jiva.” 


CANTO 242 


S uka said, “I have now understood that there are two kinds of creation, 
one commencing with kshara, the mortal which is universal, and 
which is from the universal Soul. The other, consisting of the senses with 
their objects, is traceable to the power of knowledge. This last transcends 
the other and is regarded to be the best. I wish to hear once more of the 
course of dharma which runs in this world, regulated by Kaala, and based 
on which all good men frame their conduct. 

In the Vedas are both kinds of declarations: perform karma and abstain 
from karma. How will I ascertain the propriety of one above the other? It 
befits you to explain this clearly. Now that I have gained, through your 
instructions, a thorough knowledge of the conduct of human beings, 
purified myself with the practice of dharma, and cleansed my intellect, I 
will discard my body and behold the indestructible Soul.” 

Vyasa said, “The course of conduct that was first established by 
Brahma was duly observed by the wise and pious, the Maharishis of ancient 
times. The great Rishis conquer all the worlds with the practice of 
brahmacharya. He who seeks good for himself with a focus on knowledge, 
who practices severe austerities in the forest and subsists on fruits and roots, 
attains Brahman. He who visits tirthas and other sacred places, practices 
universal benevolence, and goes on his rounds of mendicancy at the proper 
time to the huts of forest dwellers, achieves Brahman. Abstain from flattery 


and do not belittle yourself to others, avoid both good and evil, live in the 
forest by yourself and appease hunger by any means that comes your way.” 

Suka said, “In the opinion of the graceless the proclamations of the 
Vedas with regard to karma are contradictory. When there is this conflict, 
how can such edicts be called scriptural? I want to hear about this: how can 
both be regarded as authoritative? How, indeed, can mukti be obtained 
without violating the directive about the obligatory character of karma?” 

The son of Gandhavati, the Rishi Vyasa praised these words of his son, 
and answered his queries.’ 

Vyasa said, “The brahmacharin, the grihasta, the vanaprastha, and the 
sannyasin all reach the same transcendent goal with the due observance of 
the duties of their different modes of life. Alternatively, if he who is freed 
from desire and aversion ceaselessly practices all the four asramas of life 
according to their regulations, he is certainly qualified to attain Brahman. 
The four asramas constitute a flight of steps that is attached to Brahman. By 
climbing this stairway, one successfully reaches Brahman. 

For the fourth part of his life, the brahmacharin, who knows the 
distinctions of duty, and is free from malice, should live with his guru or his 
guru’s son. While he stays in his guru’s house, he should sleep after his 
preceptor has retired to bed, and arise before the teacher awakens. All such 
duties as done by a disciple, as also those undertaken by a menial servant, 
should be accomplished by him. After he has finished his tasks, he should 
stand humbly by the side of the preceptor. Skilled in every kind of work, he 
should conduct himself like a menial, and attend to every kind of work for 
his guru. 

With every task accomplished in its entirety, he should sit at the feet of 
his preceptor, and study eagerly. He should always behave with simplicity, 
avoid vile talk and be ready for his lessons at the summons of his teacher. 
With purity in body and mind, endued with cleverness and other virtues, he 
should speak but occasionally and in an appropriate manner. With his 
senses subdued, he should submissively look upon his guru. 

He should never eat before his mentor has eaten, never drink before he 
has drunk; never sit before he has sat down; and never go to bed before his 
teacher has retired for the night. He should gently touch his preceptor’s feet 
with upturned palms, the right foot with the right and the left with the left. 
Reverentially saluting the master, he should say to him, ‘O illustrious one, 
teach me. I will undertake this work! O exalted one, this other work I have 


already accomplished. O reborn one, I am ready to do whatever else you 
may be pleased to command.’ 

Once he has said all this, and has duly offered himself thus to the guru, 
he should complete whatever tasks his teacher needs accomplished, and 
inform the master once more of their completion. 

Whatever scents or tastes the brahmacharin may abstain from during 
the life of brahmacharya; he may resume them upon his return from the 
guru’s abode. This is consistent with the ordinance. All the customs 
elaborately laid down in the shastras for brahmacharins, he should practice 
regularly. He should, again, always be at the beck and call of his mentor. 

After he has satisfied his teacher to the very best of his abilities, the 
disciple should move on to the other asramas in succession, and practice the 
dharma of each. And so, with a fourth part of his life passed in the study of 
the Vedas, observance of vows and fasts, the sishya should offer his guru- 
dakshina, take leave of his preceptor and return home to lead a life in 
grihastasrama. 

He should marry in accordance with the customs, and carefully 
establish garhapatya, the domestic fire. He should observe all vows and 
fasts, become a true householder, and thus pass the second period of life.” 


CANTO 243 


V yasa said, “As regards the domestic life, four kinds of conduct have 

been prescribed by the learned. The first consists in keeping a store 
of grain sufficient to last for three years; the second of maintaining a stock 
to last for one year; the third consists of providing for the day without 
thinking of the morrow; and the fourth consists of collecting grain left 
behind in the fields by reapers, as done by pigeons. Of these, the shastras 
say, each succeeding one is superior in punya to that which precedes it. 

A householder who observes the first kind of conduct may practice all 
the six established duties—sacrifice on his own account, sacrifice because 
of others, teach, study, bestow gifts and accept gifts. He who respects the 
second kind of conduct need practice only three of these duties— studying, 
giving and taking. He who follows the third kind of conduct should practice 
only two of the duties—learning and giving. The householder who adopts 
the fourth kind of domesticity should observe only one duty, imbibing the 
scriptures. 

All the duties of the grihasta are exceedingly meritorious. The 
householder should never cook any food for only his own use, nor should 
he slaughter animals for food except in sacrifices. If it is an animal which 
the grihastha wishes to kill for food, or if it is a tree which he wants to cut 
down for fuel, he should do either deed in accordance with the ritual laid 
down in the Yajuses—for that much is the due of both animate and 
inanimate beings. 


The householder should never sleep during the day, or the first part of 
the night, neither should he sleep during the last yaama of the night and be 
sure to awaken before dawn. He should never eat twice between morning 
and evening, and should never summon his wife to bed except in her 
season. In his house, no Brahmana should be suffered to remain unfed or go 
without being worshipped. He should always venerate such guests as are 
givers of sacrificial offerings, are cleansed by Vedic lore and the observance 
of excellent vratas, are high-born and conversant with the scriptures; who 
follow the duties of their svadharma, are self-restrained, mindful of all 
religious karmas and devoted to tapasya. The shastras ordain that what is 
offered to the Devas and the Pitris in sacrifices and religious rites is also 
meant for the service of guests like these. 

In this asrama of life, the scriptures ordain that a share of food should 
be given to every creature irrespective of birth or character: to the one who 
for the sake of show grows his nails and beard, to one who from pride 
displays what his own religious practices are, to one who has abandoned his 
sacred fire and even to one who has injured his guru. 

He who leads a grihasta’s life should offer food to brahmacharins and 
sannyasins. The householder should eat vighasa, and thus partake of amrita 
every day. The grihastha who eats after relatives and servants have been fed 
eats vighasa. The food mixed with clarified butter that remains after the 
sacrificial offerings is called amrita. 

He who has sex as a householder should be content with his own wife. 
He should be self-restrained, avoid malice and subdue his senses. He should 
never quarrel with his ritwik, purohita, acharya, his matulan—maternal 
uncle— guests and dependants, the aged or the young. He should avoid any 
dispute with those that are ailing, or with physicians, kinsmen, relatives, 
friends, parents, women from his paternal family, his brother, son, wife, 
daughter and his servants. With differences thus kept at bay, the 
householder becomes cleansed of all sins. By conquering the tendency for 
disputes, he conquers all the regions of felicity in the hereafter. There is no 
question about this. 

A duly worshipped guru is able to lead one to the regions of Brahma. 
The adequately revered pita can lead a man to the realms of Prajapati. A 
guest is empowered to provide access to the region of Indra. The ritwik has 
influence over the world of the Devas. Female relatives of the paternal line 
have power over the domains of the apsaras, and relatives by blood, over 


the realms of the Viswedevas. Relatives by marriage have power over the 
several quarters of the horizon, north, south, east, west and the intermediate 
rest, while the mother and the maternal uncle wield authority over the earth. 
The old, the young, the afflicted and the wasted have dominance over the 
sky. The eldest brother is like a father to all his younger brothers. The wife 
and the son are one’s own body. One’s menial servants are one’s own 
shadow. The daughter is an object of great affection. 

For these reasons, a householder imbued with wisdom, observant of 
dharma, and possessed of endurance, should bear, without attachment or 
anxiety of heart, every kind of annoyance and even censure from these last- 
named relatives. No virtuous householder should do anything, urged by 
considerations of wealth. 

There are three courses of duty in respect of a life of domesticity. Of 
these, that which comes next in the order of specification is more 
meritorious than the preceding one. As regards the four principal modes of 
life also, the same rule of merit applies: the one that comes after is superior 
to the one preceding it. Hence, grihasta is superior to brahmacharya, 
vanaprastha is superior to domesticity, and sannyasa or complete 
renunciation is superior to the forest life. One desirous of prosperity should 
accomplish all such duties and rites as are ordained in the scriptures. 

The kingdom grows in prosperity where these deserving people live — 
those who lead a family life according to the Kumbhadhanya method, ones 
who lead it in accordant with the Unchha path, and they who lead it in 
agreement with the Kapoti system. 

He, who joyfully lives as a householder, succeeds in sanctifying ten 
generations of his ancestors and ten generations of his descendants. 
Furthermore, he obtains a goal that yields felicity equal to what occurs in 
the realms attained by great kings and emperors. Such is the goal that is 
ordained for those who have subdued their senses. Swarga is decreed in the 
Vedas for all high-souled householders, a heaven that is furnished with 
wonderful chariots that move at the will of the rider. For all grihastas of 
restrained minds, the regions of swarga constitute the high reward. The 
Self-born Brahma ordained that grihastasrama should be the very cause of 
heaven. Therefore, by gradually attaining the second asrama of life, a man 
finds happiness and respect in swargaloka. 

After this comes the high and superior, third, asrama of life for those 
who want to disown their bodies. This asrama is superior to that of the 


householders: the life of forest recluses, vanaprasthas who waste their 
bodies through diverse kinds of austerities into skeletons covered by dried, 
parchment-like skins. Listen as I tell you about vanaprastha.””’ 


CANTO 244 


B hishma says, “Thus have the duties of domesticity, grihastasrama, 

been ordained by the wise. Listen now, O Yudhishtira, to what these 
duties are. The householder should gradually abandon the domestic life and 
enter the third asrama, which is so excellent. It is the stage in which wives 
attenuate themselves through severe austerities. It is the asrama practiced by 
those that live as forest recluses. Blessed be you, O son, listen to the dharma 
observed by those that lead this way of life in which occur the practices of 
all men and all the asramas. Listen, indeed, to the responsibilities of those 
that are denizens of sacred places and have resorted to this course after 
proper deliberation. And at the proper time. 

Vyasa said to his son Suka, “When the householder has grandchildren, 
observes wrinkles on his body and grey hair on his head, he should retire 
into the forest. The third part of his life he should pass in the observance of 
the vanaprasthasrama. He should attend to the sacrificial fires to which he 
attended as a householder. Desirous of performing yagnas, he should 
worship the Devas in accordance with stipulated rituals. Keeping vratas and 
abstemious in diet, he should eat only once, in the sixth part of the day. He 
should be ever heedful, attend to his sacrificial fire, rear cows and tend to 
them dutifully. He should attend to all the rituals of a sacrifice. 

He should live upon rice and wheat grown by himself, on various 
grains growing wild and belonging to none. He should eat what remains 
after guests have eaten. In this third stage of life, he should offer ghrita in 


the five established sacrifices. Four methods have been ordained down for 
observance in the vanaprasthasrama. Some gather only what is needed for 
the day. Some collect stores to last for a month. Some store grain and other 
necessities sufficient to last for twelve years. 

Forest recluses may act in these ways to honour guests and perform 
sacrifices. During the monsoons, they should expose themselves to rain and 
take to standing in water in autumn. During the summer, they must sit in the 
midst of four fires with the sun burning overhead. Throughout the year, 
however, they remain abstemious in diet. They sit and sleep on bare earth. 
They stand only on their toes. With no other means to provide seats or beds, 
they remain satisfied with the bare earth and small mats of grass. 
Preparatory to sacrifices, they perform their ablutions morning, noon and 
evening, during the three sandhyas. 

Some amongst them use only teeth for cleaning grain, while others use 
only stones. A few drink very lightly boiled gruel of wheat or other grain, 
only during the bright fortnight, when the moon waxes, while there are 
many who take similar gruel only during the dark fortnight. Some eat only 
what comes their way without seeking it. Others duly adhere to the path 
followed by the Vaikhanasas who adopt rigid vows and survive only on 
roots, a few only upon fruits, and yet some others of them upon only 
flowers. Such men of wisdom and piety, the forest recluses embrace these 
and other diverse practices. 

Based upon the Upanishads, the fourth asrama is called sannyasa. The 
customs laid down for it may be seen equally in all the asramas of life. This 
stage differs from the others and comes after domesticity and the forest life. 
In this very yuga, O putra, many learned Brahmanas conversant with the 
truths of all things, have been known to take to sannyasa. Agastya, the 
Saptarishis, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Vasishta, Narada, Kratu, 
Madhucchandas, Aghamarshana, Sankriti Sudivatandi who lived wherever 
he pleased, Ahovirya Kavya, Tandya, Medhatithi, Karmanirvaka and 
Sunyapala who once put in great effort to acquire ascetic powers, all 
faithfully followed sannyasa, and attained swarga. 

Many Maharishis, O son, numerous ascetics known as Yayavaras, 
many Rishis of austere tapasya, and countless Brahmanas adopted 
vanaprastha. The Vaikhanasas, Balakhilyas, Saikatas, all of whom were 
used to realising the fruits of their penances immediately, adopted this mode 
of life and finally ascended into swargaloka. Freed from fear and not 


counted among the stars and planets, these have become visible in the 
firmament as luminous bodies. 

When the last part of life is arrived at, and one is weakened by 
advanced age and afflicted by disease, one should abandon the 
vanaprasthasrama and embrace sannyasa. He should conduct a sacrifice that 
can be completed in a single day, a yagna in which the dakshina should be 
all his possessions. In addition, he should perform his own sraddha. 
Withdrawn from every object, he should devote himself to his Atman, 
taking pleasure in himself and resting on his own self. He should establish 
all his sacrificial fires thereafter within himself, and renounce all kinds of 
ties and attachments. 

If he fails to attain complete renunciation, he must perform such 
sacrifices and rites as are completed in a single day. Once sacrificial rites 
and the chanting of mantras result in yoga, he may then discontinue all 
outward rituals, and to the three inner fires that burn within himself, 
surrender mind and knowledge for the sake of moksha. 

Without finding fault with his food, he should eat five or six morsels, 
duly offered to the five vital breaths, while reciting the mantras of the 
Yajurveda. Engaged in tapasya as a vanaprastha, one should keep one’s 
head and face shaved, nails trimmed, cleanse oneself with karmas and 
kriyas, and only then pass into the fourth and final stage of life that is 
replete with great sacredness. The reborn person, who enters the fourth 
mode of life with a pledge of universal compassion to all creatures, 
achieves many regions of splendour hereafter and finally attains the Infinite. 

Of excellent disposition and conduct, with sins all washed away, the 
person who realises the Atman never desires to indulge in any action for 
either this or the other world. Freed from anger and error, without anxiety 
and friendship, such a one lives in this world very uninterested in its 
concerns. A sannyasin should not feel reluctant to discharge the duties of 
yama and niyama. Such a sannyasin should live enthusiastically by the 
ordinances laid down for his asrama, and eschew Vedic study along with the 
sacred thread that is indicative of the varna of his birth. Devoted to dharma, 
with senses subdued, such a one possessed of Atmagyana unquestionably 
attains his ultimate goal. 

The fourth asrama of life is the most superior one, and fraught with 
numerous high virtues. In merit, it transcends the three other stages of life, 


and occupies the highest place. Pay heed to what I tell you about the duties 
of this sannyasasrama which is the high refuge of all.” 


CANTO 245 


S uka said, “How should one who observes the ways of the best of 
asramas, and seeks to achieve that which is the highest, set his soul on 
yoga?” 

Vyasa replied, “Once one has purified himself by progressing through 
the brahmacharya and grihastha asramas, one should fix one’s soul on yoga 
during vanaprastha. Listen carefully to what should be done to attain the 
highest object of acquisition. Once all the faults of the mind and heart are 
subdued with ease in the first three asramas, one should take to the most 
excellent and most eminent of all the asramas — sannyasa. 

Now you pass your days in utter purity. The sannyasin practices yoga 
alone, without assistance or company, in order to acquire the highest object 
of acquisition. 

He never turns back from mukti who practices yoga in solitude, 
perceives everything as a reflection of his own self, and never disregards 
anything since everything is pervaded by the universal Soul. Such a man, 
who does not maintain sacrificial fires or a fixed abode, should only ever 
enter a village to beg for his food. He should provide himself for the day 
without storing for the morrow. He should not eat more than once in a day 
and eat very little just to keep his body alive. He should take to tapasya, 
with his heart fixed on the Supreme Brahman. 

The other characteristics of a religious mendicant are the human skull 
for a begging-bowl, trees for shade, and rags for clothing, habitual solitude, 


and indifference to all creatures. 

Just as panic-stricken elephants that have fallen into a well are unable 
to climb out from it, he from whose lips harsh words do not emerge in 
response to the ones he has received—such a one is fit to lead the life of a 
sannyasi, which has moksha for its goal. 

The mendicant should never pay heed to the evil actions of any 
person. He should never listen to what is said in criticism of others. He 
should especially avoid speaking ill of a Brahmana. He should always say 
only what is agreeable to the Brahmanas. When anything offensive is said 
about himself, he should remain silent. Such silence, indeed, is the balm 
prescribed for him. 

He who perceives himself to be in everything and everything to be in 
himself, and with the help of yoga-shakti withdraws his senses and mind, to 
even make a place teeming with thousands of men and things, appear to 
himself as perfectly solitary or unoccupied, is regarded by the Devas to be a 
true sannyasin. 

Him the gods know for a Brahmana who clothes himself with 
whatever comes by the way, who subsists upon whatever he gets, and who 
sleeps on whatever ground he finds. 

Him the gods know for a Brahmana who is afraid of company as of a 
snake; of the full measure of satisfaction from sweet viands and drinks as of 
hell; and of women as of a corpse. 

Him the gods know for a Brahmana who is never glad when honoured 
and never angry when insulted, and who has pledged compassion to all 
creatures. 

One in adherence of the last mode of life should not view death with 
sorrow. Nor should he view life with joy. He should only await his hour like 
a servant waiting for his master’s summons. 

He should purify his heart of all blemishes. He should purify his 
speech of all faults. He should cleanse himself of all sins. 

As he has no foes, what fear can assail him? He who fears no creature 
and whom no creature fears, can have no fear from any quarter, freed as he 
is from misdeeds of every kind. 

As the footprints of all other creatures are enclosed within those of 
elephants, likewise all ranks and eminence are absorbed within yoga. 
Similarly, every other duty and observance is supposed to be engulfed 


within the one duty of non-violence. He lives an everlasting life of felicity 
who avoids injuring other creatures. 

One who abstains from injury, who perceives all creatures equally, 
who is devoted to truth, who is endued with fortitude, who has mastered his 
senses and who grants protection to all beings, attains an end that is beyond 
compare. 

The condition called death succeeds not in transcending such a person 
who is content with self-knowledge, who is free from fear, and who is 
divested of desire and expectancy. On the other hand, such a person 
succeeds in transcending death. 

Him the gods know for a Brahmana who is freed from attachments of 
every kind, who is observant of penances, who lives like space which while 
holding everything is yet unattached to anything, who has nothing which he 
calls his own, who leads a life of solitude, and whose Soul is tranquil. 

The Devas know him for a Brahmana whose life is for the practice of 
righteousness, whose righteousness is for the weal of those who wait 
dutifully upon him, and whose days and nights exist only for the acquisition 
of merit. 

The gods know him for a Brahmana who is freed from desire, who 
never exerts himself for doing such actions as are done by worldly men, 
who never bows his head to anyone, who never flatters another and is free 
from attachments of every kind. 

All creatures are pleased with happiness and filled with fear at the 
prospect of grief. The man of faith, therefore, who should feel distressed at 
the prospect of filling other creatures with grief, must abstain entirely from 
actions of every kind. 

The gift of assurances of harmlessness to all creatures transcends in 
point of merit all other gifts. He who, at the outset, forswears the religion of 
injury, succeeds in attaining emancipation in which there is the assurance of 
harmlessness to all creatures. 

He who refrains from partaking even the five or six mouthfuls that are 
laid down for the forest recluse, is said to be the navel of the world, and the 
refuge of the universe. 

The mind and other senses, as also the actions good and bad, are all 
consigned to the sacrificial fire within. Such a man, who sacrifices in his 
own self, makes a liberation of his senses and mind into the fire that dwells 
within the limited space of his own heart. From his pouring of such a 


libation into the sacrificial fire within his own self, the universe with all 
creatures including the very gods, becomes gratified. 

They who comprehend the radiant jiva, the Soul that is enveloped in 
three sheaths, and has three attributes for its characteristics; to be Iswara 
partaking of that which is foremost, the nature of the Supreme Soul, 
become objects of great regard in all the worlds. The very gods, along with 
all human beings speak highly of their merits. 

He who succeeds in perceiving in his Soul all the Vedas, space and the 
other objects of perception, the rituals that occur in scriptures, all those 
entities that are comprehensible in sound only and the superior nature of the 
Supreme Soul—is sought to be worshipped by the very deities as the 
foremost of all beings. 

He who sees in his Soul, that foremost of beings which is not attached 
to the earth, which is immeasurable in even the infinite firmament, which is 
made of gold, which is born of the universe and resides within the universe, 
which is equipped with many arms, which has two wings like a bird, and 
which is rendered effulgent by many rays of light, is sought to be 
worshipped by the very gods as the foremost of all beings. 

The very Devas worship him in whose intellect is set the wheel of 
Kaala, which is constantly revolving, which knows no decay, which 
swallows up the period of existence of every creature, which has the six 
seasons for its naves, which is equipped with twelve spokes consisting of 
the twelve months, which has excellent joints, and towards whose gaping 
mouth proceeds this universe ready to be devoured. 

The Supreme Soul is the capacious unconsciousness of dreamless 
slumber. That unconsciousness is the body of the universe. It pervades all 
creation. Jiva, occupying a portion of that expansive unconsciousness 
gratifies the Devas. These last, being gratified, in turn gratify the open 
mouth of that unconsciousness. Endued with brilliance along with the 
principle of eternity, jiva is without a beginning. It acquires infinite regions 
of eternal happiness. 

He of whom no creature is afraid, has never to fear any creature. He 
who never does anything censurable and who never derides another, is said 
to be a truly reborn person. Such a man succeeds in beholding the Supreme 
Soul. 

He whose ignorance has been dispelled and whose sins have been 
washed away, never enjoys either here or hereafter the happiness that is 


enjoyed by others but attains moksha. A person in the observance of the 
fourth mode of life wanders on the earth like one unconnected with 
everything. Such a one is freed from wrath and error. Such a one regards a 
clod of earth and lump of gold with an equal eye. Such a man never stores 
anything for his use. Such a one has no friends and foes. Such a one is 
utterly regardless of praise or blame, and of the agreeable and the 
disagreeable.” 


CANTO 246 


V yasa said, “The Jivatman is endued with all those elements that are 

qualifications of Prakriti. These do not know the Soul but the Soul 
knows them all. Like a good charioteer steers his strong, well-broken and 
brave steeds along his path the Soul acts with the help of the senses, having 
the mind for their sixth. 

The objects of the senses are superior to the senses themselves. The 
mind is superior to those objects. The intellect is superior to the mind. The 
Soul, also called Mahat, is superior to the intellect. Superior to Mahat is the 
unmanifest, Prakriti. Superior to the unmanifest is Brahma. There is nothing 
superior to Brahma. That is the highest limit of excellence and the highest 
goal. 

The Supreme Soul is concealed in every creature. It is not displayed 
for ordinary men to see. Only yogins with subtle vision witness the 
Supreme Soul with the help of their keen and subtle intellect. 

Merging the senses having the mind for their sixth and all the objects 
of the senses into the inner Soul by the aid of the intellect, and reflecting 
upon the three states of consciousness; the object thought, the act of 
thinking and the thinker; and abstaining by contemplation from every kind 
of enjoyment, equipping his mind with the knowledge that he is Brahma’s 
self; appropriately laying aside all consciousness of power, and thereby 
making his Soul perfectly tranquil—the yogin obtains that to which 
immortality inheres. 


That person, however, who happens to be the slave of all his senses 
and whose ideas of right and wrong have been confounded; already liable 
as he is to death, actually meets with death by such surrender of the self to 
the passions. 

Destroying all desires, one should merge the mind into one’s subtle 
intellect. Having done so, one is sure to become a second Kalanjara 
mountain. 

By purifying his heart, the yogin transcends both righteousness and its 
reverse. By purifying his heart and by living in his own true nature, he 
attains the highest happiness. The indication of that purity of heart is the 
one who has experienced the state of unawareness of all one’s surroundings 
which one experiences in dreamless slumber. The yogin who has attained 
that state lives like the steady flame of a lamp that burns in an enclosed 
place. 

Becoming abstemious in diet, and having cleansed his heart, that 
yogin who connects his self to the Soul succeeds in beholding the self in the 
Soul. 

This discourse, O son, intended for your instruction, is the essence of 
all the Vedas. The truths herein disclosed cannot be understood through 
inference alone or with mere study of the scriptures. One must understand it 
with the help of faith. 

By churning the wealth contained in all the religious works and in all 
discourses based on truth, as also the ten thousand riks, this nectar has been 
raised. As butter from curds and fire from wood, even this has been raised 
for the sake of my son—this that constitutes the knowledge of all truly wise 
men. 

This discourse, O son, replete with solid instruction, is intended for 
delivery to Snatakas. It should never be imparted to one who is not of a 
tranquil Soul, or one who is not self-restrained, or one who has not 
undergone penances. 

It should not be communicated to one who is not conversant with the 
Vedas, one who does not humbly wait upon one’s preceptor, one who is not 
free from malice, one who is not possessed of sincerity and candour, or one 
who is of reckless behaviour. It should never be communicated to one 
whose intellect has been consumed by the science of argumentation, or one 
that is vile or low. 


To that person, however, who is possessed of fame, or who deserves 
applause for his virtues, or who is of a tranquil Soul, or possessed of ascetic 
merit, to such a Brahmana, to one’s son or obedient disciple, this discourse 
containing the very essence of duties should be communicated, but on no 
account should it be imparted to others. 

If any person makes a gift of the whole earth with all her treasures, to 
one conversant with truth, the gyani would still regard the gift of this 
knowledge to be very much superior to that gift. 

I will now speak to you on a subject that is a greater mystery than this, 
a subject that is connected with the Soul, that transcends the ordinary 
understandings of human beings, that has been beheld by the foremost of 
Rishis, that has been treated in the Upanishads, and that forms the topic of 
your inquiry. 

Tell me what, after this is in your mind? Tell me if you still have any 
queries? Listen, for here I am, O son, faces turned towards all directions. 
The sun and the moon are seated before you! On what indeed, can I once 
more speak to you?” 


CANTO 247 


S uka said, “O illustrious one, O foremost of Rishis, once again speak 
to me on Adhyatma more elaborately. Tell me what, indeed, is 
Adhyatma and where does it come from?’ 

Vyasa said, “Listen, O son, as I explain to you regarding Adhyatma 
with reference to human beings. 

Earth, water, light, wind and space are the great entities that form the 
component parts of all creatures, and, though really one, are yet regarded 
different from one and others like the waves and the ocean. 

Like a tortoise stretching out its limbs and withdrawing them again, 
these great entities, by dwelling in numberless small forms, undergo 
transformations called creation and destruction. This whole universe of 
mobile and immobile objects has for its component parts these five entities. 
Everything, in respect of its creation and destruction, is referable to this 
pancha tattva. 

These five entities occur in all existent things. The creator of all 
things, however, has made an unequal distribution of those entities by 
placing them in different things in different proportions for serving different 
ends.” 

Suka said, “How may one succeed in understanding this unequal 
distribution of the five great entities in the diverse things of the universe? 
Which amongst them are the senses and which the attributes? How may this 
be understood?” 


Vyasa said, “I shall explain you this duly one after another. Listen 
intently to the subject as I elaborate how what I have said actually happens. 

Sound, the sense of hearing, and all the cavities within the body— 
these three—have space for their origin. The vital breaths, the action of the 
limbs and touch form the attributes of the wind. Form, eyes and the 
digestive fire within the stomach, are originated by light. Taste, the tongue, 
and all the humours—these three—are from water. Scent, the nose and the 
body—these three—are the attributes of earth. These, then, as I have 
elucidated, are the variations of the five great entities with senses. 

Touch is said to be the attribute of the wind; taste of water; form of 
light. Sound is said to have its origin in space, and scent is said to be the 
property of earth. 

The mind, intellect and nature—these three—spring from their own 
previous states, and attaining at each rebirth a position higher than the 
attributes which form their respective objects, do not transcend those 
attributes. 

As the tortoise stretches out its limbs and withdraws them once again 
within itself, even so the intellect creates the senses and once again 
withdraws them into itself. 

The consciousness of personal identity that arises in respect of that 
which is above the soles of the feet and below the crown of the head, is 
principally because of the action of the intellect. 

It is the intellect that is transformed into the five attributes of form, 
scent and the rest. Just as it is also transformed into the five senses with the 
mind for the sixth. 

When the intellect is absent, where are the attributes? 

In man there are five senses. The mind is called the sixth sense. The 
intellect is called the seventh. The Soul is the eighth. 

The eyes and the other senses are for only receiving impressions of 
form, scent and all. The mind exists to question the accuracy of those 
impressions. The intellect settles those doubts. 

The Soul is said only to witness every operation without mingling 
with them. 

Rajas, tamas, and sattva—these three—arise from their own 
counterparts. These exist equal in all creatures, deities, human beings and 
all. These are called attributes and should be known by the actions they 
induce. 


As regards those actions all such states in which one becomes 
conscious of oneself as united with cheerfulness or joy and which are 
tranquil and pure, should be known as due to the attribute of sattva. 

All such states in either the body or the mind, as are united with 
sorrow, should be regarded as because of the influence of the attribute 
called rajas. 

All such states again as exist with astonishment of the senses, the 
mind or the intellect whose cause is unascertainable, and which are 
incomprehensible by either reasons or inward light, should be known as 
ascribable to the action of tamas. 

Delight, cheerfulness, joy, equanimity, contentment of heart, from any 
known cause or arising otherwise, are all effects of the attribute of sattva. 

Pride, untruthfulness of speech,  cupidity, bewilderment, 
vindictiveness, whether arising from any known cause or otherwise, are 
indications of the quality of rajas. 

Stupefaction of judgement, heedlessness, sleep, lethargy and 
indolence, from whatever cause these may arise, are to be known as 
indications of the quality of tamas.” 


CANTO 248 


V yasa said, “The mind creates within itself numerous ideas of objects 

or existent things. The intellect settles which is which. The heart 
discriminates which is agreeable and which is disagreeable. These are the 
three forces that motivate actions. 

The objects of the senses are superior to the senses. The mind is 
superior to those objects. The intellect is superior to the mind. The Soul is 
regarded as superior to the intellect. As regards the ordinary purposes of 
man, the intellect is his Soul. 

When the intellect, of its own accord, forms ideas of objects within 
itself, it then comes to be called the mind. Out of the senses being different 
from one another both in respect of their objects and the manner of their 
operation, the intellect which is identical presents different aspects as a 
result of its different qualifications. 

When it hears, it becomes the organ of hearing, and when it touches, it 
becomes the organ of touch. Similarly, when it sees, it becomes the organ of 
vision, and when it tastes, it becomes the organ of taste, and when it smells, 
it becomes the organ of scent. 

It is the intellect that appears under different guises for different 
functions by adaptation. It is the qualifications of the intellect that are called 
the senses. Over them is placed as their presiding overseer, the invisible 
Soul. 


Residing in the body, the intellect exists in the three states of sattva, 
rajas and tamas. Sometimes it obtains cheerfulness, sometimes it gives way 
to grief; and sometimes its condition becomes such that it is united with 
neither cheerfulness nor grief. The intellect, however, whose main function 
is to create entities, transcends those three states even as the ocean, that lord 
of the rivers, prevails against the mighty river currents that fall into it. 

When the intellect craves for anything, it is known as the mind. The 
senses again, though apparently different, should all be taken as included 
within the aforementioned. 

The senses, which are engaged in bearing impressions of form, scent 
and the rest, should all be subdued. When a particular sense becomes 
subservient to the manas, the intellect though in reality not different from 
that sense, enters the mind in the form of existent things. Also, this is what 
happens with the senses sequentially with reference to the ideas that are 
said to be apprehended by them. 

All the three states —sattva, rajas and tamas—inhere to these three, the 
mind, intellect and consciousness, and like the spokes of a wheel acting out 
of their attachment to the circumference of the wheel, they follow the 
different objects that exist in the mind, intellect and consciousness. 

The mind must make a lamp of the senses for dispelling the darkness 
that shuts out the knowledge of the Supreme Soul. This knowledge that is 
acquired by yogins specifically with the help of yoga, is acquired without 
any exceptional efforts by men that abstain from worldly objects. 

The universe is of this nature, it is only a creation of the intellect. The 
man of knowledge, therefore, is never bewildered by attachment to things 
of this world. Such a man never grieves, never rejoices and is free from 
envy. 

The Soul is incapable of being seen with the aid of the senses whose 
nature is to wander among all earthly objects of desire. Even righteous men, 
whose senses are pure, fail to behold the Soul, what then should be said of 
the wicked whose senses are impure? 

When, however, a man, with the help of his mind, tightly holds their 
reins, it is then that his Soul discovers itself like an object in darkness 
appearing to the view due to the light of a lamp. Indeed, as all things 
become visible when darkness is dispelled, even the Soul becomes visible 
when the darkness that covers it is removed. 


As an aquatic fowl, though moving on water, remains dry, similarly 
the emancipated yogin, is never soiled by the imperfections of the three 
attributes of sattva, rajas and tamas. 

Likewise, the wise man who enjoys all earthly objects without being 
attached to any of them, is never stained by faults of any kind that arise in 
the case of others from such enjoyment. 

Having duly performed his duties in accordance with the preceding 
three stages of life he who finally avoids actions, and thereafter takes 
delight in the one really existent entity, the Soul; who has constituted 
himself the Soul of all created beings; and who succeeds in keeping himself 
aloof from the three attributes, gains an intellect and senses that are created 
by the Soul. 

The qualities are incapable of apprehending the Soul. The Soul, 
however, apprehends them always. The Soul is the witness that beholds the 
qualities and duly calls them up into being. Note, this is the difference 
between the intellect and the Soul, both of which are exceedingly subtle. 
One of them creates the qualities. The other never creates them. 

Though they are different from each other by nature, yet they are 
always united. The fish living in the water is different from the element in 
which it lives. But as the fish and the water forming its home are always 
united, likewise sattva and kshetrajna exist in a state of union. 

The gnat born within a rotten fig is really not the fig but different from 
it. Nevertheless, as the gnat and the fig are seen to be united with each 
other, even so are sattva and kshetrajna. 

As the blade in a clump of grass, though distinct from the clump, 
nevertheless exists in a state of union with it, even so these two, though 
different from each other, each existing in its own self, are to be seen in a 
state of constant union.” 


CANTO 249 


V yasa said, “The objects by which one is surrounded are created by 

the intellect. The Soul, without being connected with them, stands 
aloof, presiding over them. It is the intellect that creates all objects. The 
three primary qualities are continually being influenced for the creation of 
objects. 

The kshetrajna or Soul, endued with energy, presides, over them all, 
without, however, mingling with them. The objects which the intellect 
creates partake of its own nature. Indeed, as the spider creates threads 
which partakes of its own material substance, the objects created by the 
intellect partake of the nature of the intellect. 

Some maintain that the attributes, when driven away by yoga or 
knowledge, do not cease to exist. They say this because when once gone, 
the indications only of their return are not perceptible. But that is no 
evidence of their actual destruction. 

Others say that when dispelled by knowledge, they are at once 
destroyed, never to return. Reflecting upon these two opinions properly, one 
should strive one’s best according to the way one deems to be proper. In this 
manner one should solely attain eminence and take refuge in one’s own 
Soul. 

The Soul is without beginning and without end. Comprehending his 
Soul properly, man should move and act, without giving way to wrath, 
without indulging in joy, and always free from envy. 


Severing by this means the knot that is in one’s heart, the knot whose 
existence is out of the operation of the faculties of the intellect, which is 
hard to untie or cut, but which nevertheless can be destroyed with 
knowledge; one should live happily, without giving way to any grief, and 
with one’s misgivings dispelled. 

Know that they who mingle in the affairs of this world are as 
distressed in body and mind as persons ignorant of the art of swimming 
when they slip from the land and fall into a large and deep river. The man of 
learning, however, being conversant with the truth, is never distressed, for 
he feels like one walking over solid land. 

Indeed, he who apprehends his Soul to be such, as presenting only the 
character of Chitta which has knowledge alone for its indication, is never 
distressed. 

Indeed, in this manner, comprehending the origin and end of all 
creatures, and so apprehending their inequalities or distinctions, one 
succeeds in attaining high felicity. This knowledge is the possession of a 
Brahmana specially by virtue of his birth. 

Knowledge of the Soul, and happiness like that which has been 
referred to, are each fully sufficient to lead to emancipation. By acquiring 
such knowledge one really becomes learned. 

What else is the indication of a person of knowledge? Having acquired 
such knowledge, they that are wise among men regard themselves crowned 
with success and become emancipated. 

Those things that become sources of fear to men destitute of 
knowledge do not become sources of fear to those that are endued with 
knowledge. There is no end higher than the eternal end which is obtained 
by a person possessed of knowledge. 

One considers with aversion all earthly objects of enjoyment which 
are, of course, replete with faults of every kind. While another, watching 
others taking pleasure of such objects, is filled with sorrow. In this matter, 
however, those who know both the objects, regard, that which is fictitious 
and that which is not so, never indulge in sorrow and are truly happy. 

That which one does without expectation of fruits destroys one’s 
actions of a previous life. The actions, however, of such a person both of 
this and his previous life cannot lead to emancipation. On the other hand, 
such destruction of earlier deeds and such efforts of this life cannot lead to 
what is disagreeable, hell, even if the man of wisdom engages in actions.” 


CANTO 250 


S uka said, “Let your reverence tell me of that which is the foremost of 
all duties, indeed, of that duty above which no higher one exists in 
this world.” 

Vyasa said, “I shall now tell you of duties having a very ancient origin 
and laid down by the Rishis, duties that are distinguished above all others. 
Listen to me with undivided attention. 

The senses that are maddening should carefully be restrained by the 
intellect like a father restraining his own inexperienced children liable to 
fall into diverse evil habits. The withdrawal of the mind and the senses from 
all unworthy objects and their due concentration upon worthy objects is the 
highest penance. That is the foremost of all duties. Indeed, that is said to be 
the highest duty. 

Directing, with the help of the intellect, the senses having the mind for 
their sixth, and without, indeed, thinking of worldly objects which have the 
virtue of inspiring innumerable kinds of thought, one should live contented 
with one’s own self. 

When the senses and the mind, withdrawn from the pastures among 
which they usually graze, come back for residing in their proper abode, it is 
then that you will witness in your own self the eternal and Supreme Soul. 

Those exalted Brahmanas that are wise, succeed in perceiving that 
Supreme and Universal Soul which is akin to a blazing fire in effulgence. 


As a large tree provided with numerous branches and possessed of 
many flowers and fruits does not know in which part it has flowers and in 
which it has fruits, likewise the Soul as adapted by birth and other 
attributes, does not know from where it has come and where it is to go. 

There is, however, an inner self, which witnesses everything. One sees 
the Soul with the help of the lamp of knowledge. Witnessing, therefore, 
yourself with your own self, cease to regard your body as yourself and 
attain mukti. 

Cleansed of all sins, like a snake that has cast off its skin, one attains 
high intelligence here and becomes free from every anxiety and the 
obligation of acquiring a new body in a subsequent birth. 

Its current spreading in diverse directions, frightful is this river of life 
bearing the world onward in its course. The five senses are its crocodiles. 
The mind and its purposes are the shores. Cupidity and stupefaction of 
judgement are the grass and straw that float on it, covering its bosom. 

Lust and wrath are the fierce reptiles that live in it. Truth forms the 
tirtha by its miry banks. Falsehood forms its surges, anger its mire. Rising 
from the unmanifest, rapid are its currents, which cannot be crossed by men 
of tainted Souls. With the help of the intellect do you cross that river with 
desires for its alligators. 

The world and its concerns comprise the ocean towards which that 
river runs. Genus and species form its unfathomable depth that none can 
understand. One’s birth, O child, is the source from which that stream takes 
its rise. Speech constitutes its eddies. 

Difficult to cross, only men of learning and wisdom and intellect 
succeed in crossing it. Crossing it, you will succeed in freeing yourself from 
every attachment, acquiring a tranquil heart, knowing the self and becoming 
pure in every respect. Relying on a purged and elevated intellect, you will 
succeed in becoming Brahma’s self. 

Having dissociated yourself from every worldly attachment, having 
acquired a purified Soul and transcending every kind of sin, look you upon 
the world like a person looking from the mountain top upon creatures 
creeping below on the earth’s surface. 

Without giving way to wrath or joy, and without forming any cruel 
wish, you will succeed in beholding the origin and the destruction of all 
created objects. They that are endued with wisdom regard such an action to 
be the foremost of all things. Indeed, this act of crossing the river of life is 


regarded by the foremost of righteous persons, by ascetics conversant with 
the truth, to be the highest of all actions that one can accomplish. 

This knowledge of the all-pervading self is intended to be imparted to 
one’s son. It should be inculcated to one who is of restrained senses, is 
honest in behaviour and who is docile or submissive. This knowledge of the 
self, of which I have just now spoken to you, O child, and the evidence of 
whose truth is furnished by the self itself, is a mystery — indeed, the greatest 
of all mysteries, and the very highest knowledge that one can attain. 

Brahman has no sex—male, female or neuter. It is neither sorrow nor 
happiness. It has for its essence the past, the future and the present. 
Whatever one’s sex, male or female, the person who attains the knowledge 
of Brahman has never to undergo rebirth. This duty of yoga is inculcated to 
attain exemption from rebirth. 

These words that I have used for answering your question lead to 
emancipation in the same way as the myriad other opinions advanced by 
diverse sages that have addressed this subject. I have explicated the subject 
to you in the appropriate manner. Those opinions sometimes produce fruit 
and sometimes not. 

The words, however, that I have used are of a different kind, for these 
are sure to lead to success. For this reason, O good child, a preceptor, when 
asked by a contented, meritorious and self-restrained son or disciple, 
should, with a delighted heart, instil, according to their true import, these 
instructions that I have imparted for the benefit of you, my son!” 


CANTO 251 


V yasa said, “One should not show any affection for scents and tastes 

and other kinds of enjoyment. Nor should one accept ornaments and 
other articles contributing to the enjoyment of the senses of scent and taste. 
One should not covet honour and achievements and fame. Such is the 
behaviour of a Brahmana possessed of vision. 

He who has studied all the Vedas, having waited dutifully on his guru 
and observed the vow of brahmacharya, he who knows all the Rik, Yajuses 
and Samans, is not a reborn person. 

One who behaves towards all creatures as if one is their kinsman, and 
one who is acquainted with Brahman, is said to be conversant with all the 
Vedas. 

One that is divested of desire being contented with knowledge of the 
Soul, never dies. It is by such a behaviour and such a frame of mind that 
one becomes a truly reborn person. 

Having performed only various kinds of religious rites and diverse 
sacrifices completed with the gift of Dakshina, one does not acquire the 
status of a Brahmana if he is devoid of compassion and has not given up 
desire. 

When one ceases to fear all creatures and when all creatures cease to 
fear one, when one never desires anything nor cherishes aversion for 
anything, then one is said to attain the status of a Brahmana. When one 


abstains from injuring all creatures in thought, speech and action, then he is 
said to acquire the status of a Brahmana. 

There is only one kind of bondage in this world, the bondage of desire, 
and no other. One that is freed from the bondage of desire attains the status 
of a Brahmana. 

Freed from desire like the moon that has emerged from murky clouds, 
the man of wisdom, purged of all stains, lives in patient expectation of his 
time. 

The one in whose mind all sorts of desire enter like diverse streams 
falling into the ocean without being able to enhance its limits by their load, 
succeeds in obtaining tranquillity, but not he who cherishes desire for all 
earthly objects. 

Such a person becomes happy in consequence of the fruition of all his 
wishes, and not he who cherishes desire for earthly objects. The aspirer, 
even if he attains heaven, has to fall away from it. 

The Vedas have truth for their recondite object. Truth has the 
subjugation of the senses for its concealed aspiration. The subjugation of 
the senses has charity for its ideal intent. Charity has penance for its 
mysterious goal. Penance has renunciation for its transcendental objective. 
Renunciation has happiness for its inner end. Happiness has heaven for its 
subtle aim. Heaven has tranquillity for its exquisite goal. 

For the sake of contentment, you should wish to obtain a serene 
intellect which is a precious possession, being indicative of emancipation, 
and which, scorching grief and all purposes or doubts together with 
yearning, destroys them completely in the end. 

One possessed of those six attributes, contentment, happiness, 
freedom from attachment, peacefulness, cheerfulness and freedom from 
envy, is sure to become full or complete. 

They that, transcending all consciousness of the body, know the self 
which resides within the body and which is understood by only the wise 
with the aid of the six aforementioned entities, the Vedas and truth and the 
rest; when endowed with only the attribute of sattva, and with the aid also 
of the other three, instruction, meditation and yoga, succeed in attaining 
moksha. 

The man of wisdom, by understanding the self which presides within 
the body, which is divested of the attributes of birth and death, which exists 
in its own nature, which being divested of attributes requires no action of 


purification, and which is identical with Brahman, enjoys beatitude that 
knows no end. 

The fulfilment that the man of wisdom gains by restraining his mind 
from wandering in all directions and fixing it wholly on the self is such that 
it cannot be attained by one through any other means. 

He is said to be truly conversant with the Vedas who is conversant 
with that which satiates one whose stomach is empty, which pleases one 
who is penniless and which invigorates one whose limbs are withered. 

Suspending his senses that have been duly restrained from unworthy 
indulgence, he who lives engaged in yoga-dhyana is a Brahmana. Such a 
person is distinguished above others. Such a person derives his joys from 
the self. 

With regard to one who lives after having weakened desire and 
devoting himself to the highest subject of existence, it should be said that 
his happiness is continuously enhanced like the lunar disc in the lighted 
fortnight. 

Like the sun dispelling darkness, felicity dispels the sorrows of that 
yogin who transcends both the gross and the subtle elements, as also mahat 
and the unmanifest. 

Decrepitude and death cannot assail that Brahmana who has got 
beyond the sphere of actions, who has transcended the destruction of the 
gunas themselves, and who is no longer attached to worldly objects. 

Indeed, when the yogin, freed from everything, lives in a state 
transcending both attachment and aversion, he is said to transcend even in 
this life his senses and all their objects. 

That yogin, who having transcended Prakriti attains the highest cause, 
becomes freed from the obligation of rebirth because of his having attained 
that which is the highest.” 


CANTO 252 


V yasa said, “For a disciple wishes to enquire after emancipation after 

having transcended duality and accomplished the concerns of both 
profit and religion, an accomplished teacher should first recount all that has 
been said in the foregoing Canto, which is elaborate, on the subject of 
Adhyatma. 

Space, wind, fire, water and earth counted as the fifth, and bhava, 
abhava and Kaala, exist in all living creatures having the five for their 
constituent ingredients. 

Space is an unoccupied interval. The organs of hearing consist of 
space. One conversant with the science of entities endued with form should 
know that space has sound for its attribute. 

The feet that assist movement have wind for their essence. The vital 
breaths are made of wind. The sense of touch, skin, has wind for its 
essence, and touch is the attribute of wind. 

Heat, the digestive fire in the stomach, light that discovers all things, 
the warmth that is in the body, and vision counted as the fifth, are all of fire 
which has the form of diverse colours for its attribute. 

Liquefied discharges, solubility and all kinds of fluids are of water. 
Blood, marrow and all else in the body that is cool, should be known to 
have water for their essence. The tongue is the sense of taste, and taste is 
regarded as the attribute of water. 


All solid substances are of earth, as also bones, teeth, nails; facial, 
head and body hair, nerves, sinews and skin. The nose is called the sense of 
scent. The object of that sense, scent, should be known as the attribute of 
earth. 

Each subsequent element possesses the attribute or attributes of the 
preceding one besides its own. In all living creatures again are the three 
supplementary entities, avidya, kama and karma. 

In this way did the Rishis declare the five elements and the effects and 
attributes flowing from or belonging to them. 

The mind forms the ninth in the count, and the intellect is regarded as 
the tenth. The Soul, which is infinite, is called the eleventh. It is regarded as 
all this and as the highest. 

The mind has doubt for its essence. The intellect discriminates and 
causes certainty. The infinite Soul, becomes known as jiva invested with 
body, or Jivatman, through consequences derived from actions. 

He who perceives the entire assemblage of living creatures to be 
unstained, though endowed with all these entities having time for their 
essence, has never to revert to actions affected by error.” 


CANTO 253 


V yasa said, “Those that are conversant with the scriptures discern, 

with the help of actions laid down in the scriptures, the Soul which 
is clothed in an exceedingly subtle body and which is dissociated from the 
gross body in which it resides. 

As the rays of the sun that course in dense masses through every part 
of the firmament cannot be seen by the naked eye though their existence can 
be inferred by reason, similarly, existent beings freed from gross bodies and 
wandering in the universe are beyond the ken of human vision. 

As the blazing reflection of the sun is seen in water, likewise the yogin 
observes the reflection of the self within gross bodies. 

All those Souls as well, that are encased in subtle forms after being 
freed from the gross bodies in which they resided, are perceptible to yogins 
who have conquered their senses and are gifted with knowledge of the self. 
Indeed, aided by their own Souls, yogins behold those invisible beings. 

Whether asleep or awake, during the day as in the night, they who 
apply themselves to yoga after dismissing all the creations of the mind and 
the rajas born of actions, as even the very power that yoga creates, succeed 
in keeping their linga form under complete control. 

The jiva that dwells in such yogins, always endued with the seven 
subtle entities, mahat, consciousness, and the five tanmatras of the five 
elemental entities, roams in all regions of bliss, freed from decrepitude and 


death. I say ‘always’, and ‘freed from death’ only in accordance with the 
common form of speech, for in reality, that linga form is terminable. 

He, however, who without having been able to transcend them is 
under the influence of his mind and intellect; discriminates, even in his 
dreams, his own body from that of another and experiences even then both 
pleasure and pain. 

Yes, in even his dreams he enjoys happiness and suffers misery; and 
yielding to wrath and cupidity, meets with calamities of various kinds. 

In his dreams he acquires great wealth and feels highly gratified: 
accomplishes meritorious deeds, and sees, hears and all, as he does in his 
wakeful hours. 

Wonderful it is to note that jiva, which has to lie within the uterus and 
amid much internal heat, and which has to pass a period of full ten months 
in that place, is not digested and reduced to destruction like food within the 
stomach. 

Men overwhelmed by the qualities of rajas and tamas never succeed in 
seeing within the gross body: the jiva, the Soul which is a portion of the 
Supreme Soul of transcendent effulgence and which lies within the heart of 
every creature. 

They take to the science of yoga for the purpose of obtaining 
knowledge of that self transcending the inanimate and gross body, the 
imperceptible linga body and the karana body that is not destroyed on the 
occasion of even the universal destruction. 

Amongst the duties that have been laid down for the different modes 
of life including sannyasa, these to which I have referred, having yoga for 
their foremost, and which imply a cessation of every operation of the mind 
and the intellect, have been laid down by Sandilya in the Chandogya 
Upanishad. 

Having fathomed the seven subtle entities,; the senses, the objects of 
the mind, mind, intellect, mahat, unmanifest or Prakriti, and Purusha, 
having comprehended also the supreme cause of the universe with the six 
attributes —omniscience, contentment, unlimited comprehension, 
independence, eternal wakefulness and omnipotence—and lastly, having 
understood that the universe is only a modification of avidya endued with 
the three qualities; guided by the scriptures, one witnesses divine Brahma.” 


CANTO 254 


V yasa said, “There is a wonderful tree, called Desire, in the heart of a 

man. It is born of the seed called Error. Wrath and pride constitute 
its large trunk. The wish for action is the water-bearing trough at its base. 
Ignorance is the root of that tree, and heedlessness is the water that gives it 
sustenance. 

Envy constitutes its leaves. The evil actions of past lives supply it with 
vigour. Loss of judgement and anxiety are its twigs; grief forms its large 
branches; and fear is its sprout. Thirst for diverse objects forms the creepers 
that twine round it on every side. 

Excessively greedy men, bound in chains of iron, sitting around that 
fruit-yielding tree, sing its praises, in expectation of gaining its fruit. He 
who, unshackling those chains, cuts down that tree and seeks to terminate 
both sorrow and joy, succeeds in attaining the end of both. A fool who 
nourishes this tree by indulgence in the objects of the senses is destroyed by 
those very objects in which he indulges, like a poisonous pill, destroys the 
patient to whom it is administered. 

A dexterous person, however, with the help of yoga, forcibly rips and 
cuts with the sword of samadhi, the far-reaching root of this tree. One who 
knows that the end of all actions undertaken from only the desire of fruit is 
rebirth or chains that bind, succeeds in transcending all sorrow. 

The body is said to be a city. The intellect is said to be its mistress. 
The mind dwelling within the body is the minister, of that mistress, whose 


essential function is to decide. The senses are the citizen that are employed 
by the mind to serve the mistress. 

For encouraging these citizens, the mind displays a strong inclination 
for actions of diverse kinds. In the matter of these tasks, two great faults are 
visible, tamas and rajas. 

Upon the fruits of these deeds rest those citizens along with the leaders 
of the city, the mind, intellect and consciousness. The two faults earlier 
mentioned, live upon the fruits of those actions that are accomplished by 
forbidden means. 

This being the case, the intellect, which of itself is unconquerable by 
either rajas or tamas, descends to a state of equality with the mind by 
becoming as much tainted as the mind that serves it. In turn the senses, 
agitated by the stained mind, lose their own stability. 

Thinking them to be beneficial, the objects that the intellect tries to 
acquire, ultimately generate grief and are destroyed. Having been 
destroyed, these objects, are recollected by the mind, and accordingly they 
afflict the mind even after they are lost. 

The intellect is afflicted at the same time, for the mind is said to be 
different from the buddhi only when the manas is considered in respect of 
its chief function of receiving impressions about whose certainty it is no 
judge. In reality, however, the mind is identical with the intellect. 

The rajas, productive of only sorrow and evil of every kind, that is in 
the intellect; then overwhelms the Soul which lies over the rajas-stained 
intellect, like an image upon a mirror. 

It is the mind that first allies with rajas. Having done so, it seizes the 
Soul, the intellect and the senses—like a deceitful minister in conspiracy 
with a foe, seizes the king and the citizens, and hands them over to rajas 
with which it has forged an alliance.” 


CANTO 255 


B hishma says, ‘Listen once again, O son, O sinless one, with feelings 
of great pride, to the words that fell from the lips of the island-born 
Rishi on the subject of the enumeration of the entities. 

Like unto a blazing fire for having transcended all ignorance, the great 
Rishi said these words to his son who resembled a fire wrapped in smoke. 
Instructed by what he said, I also will again expound to you that knowledge 
which dispels ignorance. 

The properties possessed by earth are immobility, weight, hardness, 
productiveness, scent, density, the capacity to absorb scents of all kinds, 
cohesion, habitableness and that attribute of the mind which is called 
patience. 

The properties of water are coolness, taste, moisture, liquidity, 
softness, agreeableness, tongue, fluidity, the capacity to be congealed and 
the power to melt many earthly products. 

The properties of fire are irresistible energy, inflammability, heat, the 
capacity to soften, light, sorrow, disease, speed, fury and invariably upward 
motion. 

The properties of the wind are touch that is neither hot nor cool, the 
capacity to assist the organ of speech, independence of motion, strength, 
celerity, the power to assist all kinds of emission or discharge, the power to 
raise other objects, breaths inhaled and exhaled, life as the attribute of 
Chitta and birth, including death. 


The properties of space are sound, extension, the capacity of being 
enclosed, the absence of refuge for resting upon—the absence of all 
necessity for such refuge, the status of being unmanifest, the capacity for 
accommodation, the incapacity for producing resistance, the material cause 
for producing the sense of hearing and the empty cavities of the human 
body. 

These, as stated, are the fifty properties, that constitute the essence of 
the five elementary entities. Patience, reasoning or disputation, 
remembrance, forgetfulness or error, imagination, endurance, propensity 
towards good or evil, and restlessness—these are the properties of the mind. 
Destruction of both good and evil thoughts, dreamless sleep, perseverance, 
concentration, decision and ascertainment of all things resting upon direct 
evidence, constitute the five properties of the intellect.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘How can the intellect be said to have five 
properties? How again, can the five senses be spoken of as properties of the 
five elementary entities? Please clarify, O Pitamaha, all this that seems to be 
very abstruse.’ 

Bhishma says, “The intellect is said to possess altogether sixty 
properties, as it includes the five elements. All those properties exist in a 
state of union with the Soul. 

The Vedas declare, O son, that the elements, their fifty properties 
together with the mind and the intellect and their fourteen properties are all 
created by Him who is above all deterioration. These seventy-one entities, 
therefore, are not eternal like the Soul. 

The theories contradicting the revelation, that have in the previous 
Vedas been placed before you, O son; about the origin of the universe and 
its other incidents, are all defective in the eye of reason. Carefully 
attending, however, in this world to all that I have said to you about the 
Supreme Brahma, you should, after attaining the power that the knowledge 
of Brahma offers, seek to win tranquillity of heart.’ 


CANTO 256 


Y udhishtira says, ‘These once mighty lords of the earth now lie 
lifeless on the ground amidst their slain hosts. Every one of these 
great kings was as strong as ten thousand elephants. 

Men of equal prowess killed them all; no one else in the world could 
have done so, for such was their tejas. They, who were also so wise, now lie 
dead on bare ground. 

Of terrible prowess, all these kings are dead. I have a question: what 
gives rise to life and death? Who is it that dies? Is it the gross body, the 
subtle body or the soul? Why does death take away living beings? O 
Pitamaha, tell me this!’ 

Bhishma says, ‘In the Krita yuga, O son, there was a king named 
Anukampaka. His enemies decimated his chariots, elephants, horses and 
men. His son, Hari, equal to Narayana in strength, was slain in that battle 
along with all his followers and troops. The vanquished, grief-stricken king 
took to a life of peace. 

One day, while wandering aimlessly, he met the Rishi Narada to whom 
he narrated all that had happened. Narada then told him the following story 
to dispel his grief at his son’s death. 

Narada said, “Listen now, O Rajan, to an ancient tale, which I myself 
once heard. 

When he first created the universe, Brahma created a large number of 
immortal beings. These multiplied vastly, and none of them or their progeny 


was subject to death. Living creatures populated every inch of the universe. 
Choked with living beings, the three worlds became breathless. Brahma 
wondered how he should destroy the multiplying beings, but he could not 
find any solution to his quandary. 

This enraged Brahma so much, O Rajan, that a fire leapt from his 
body, and burnt all the habitats of the universe. Indeed, the inferno scorched 
heaven and earth, the firmament and the whole universe along with all 
living beings, chala and achala. 

Thereupon, the divine Sthanu, lord of the Vedas, was moved to pity 
and sought to appease Brahma. When Shiva approached Brahma, that 
blazing lord turned to him and said, ‘You deserve my boons. I will grant 
whatever your heart desires.’ 


CANTO 257 


S thanu said, ‘Lord, I appeal to you on behalf of all created beings. Do 

not be angry with them, O Brahma! Look how the fire of your tejas 

consumes them all. I am filled with compassion at their plight. Have mercy 
on them, O lord of the universe.’ 

Brahma said, ‘Neither am I angry, nor is it my wish to destroy 
creation. I do this only to lighten the burden of the earth. Overburdened 
with creatures, Bhumi Devi beseeched me, Mahadeva, to destroy them, for 
otherwise she would sink beneath the waters and be lost. When even after 
deep deliberation, I could not find a way to help her, fury seized my heart.’ 

Shiva said, ‘Do not give way to fury, O lord of the Devas. Be pacified. 
Do not destroy these mortal and immortal beings. The lakes, grasses and 
herbs, immobile and mobile creatures face destruction. Your anger will 
denude the entire universe. Be calmed, O divine lord! O, you of dharma, 
this is the boon that I plead from you. 

If you continue to destroy them, all these creatures will become 
extinct. So, be merciful, O Brahma, let these living beings and their 
progeny live on. 

You made me Pasupati, the guardian of living creatures. I beseech you, 
O God of gods, to allow these beings to live on, on earth, in a cycle of 
births and deaths.’” 

Narada continued, “Pacified by what Shiva said, Brahma grew calm. 
Withdrawing the apocalyptic fire into himself, Brahma now ordained that 


all creatures would experience both birth and death. 

Then, from the pores of Brahma’s body, emerged a woman attired in 
robes of black and red and stood at his right. With black eyes and black 
palms, she wore wondrous earrings, and divine ornaments. 

Both the great gods gazed upon her, O king, then Brahma greeted her 
and said, ‘O Mrityu, slay these creatures of the universe. You are here 
because of my wrath and resolve to annihilate all creatures. Go forth, O 
Devi, kill them all without exception. At my command you will win great 
prosperity.’ 

At these words, Mrityu Devi, who wore a garland of lotuses, shed 
copious tears, which she held in her palms, O Rajan, and did not let them 
fall to the ground. Wishing the weal of mankind, she pleaded with 
Brahma.” 


CANTO 258 


N arada said, “The large-eyed Devi composed herself and with joined 

hands and bending in humility like some exquisite vine, said to 
Brahma, ‘How will a woman like me, who has emerged from you, 
accomplish such a terrible feat, which will fill all living creatures with 
dread? I fear to do anything that is unjust. Appoint such work for me as 
befits dharma. You see that I am frightened. 

Oh, spare me. I will not be able to cut down infants, youths and the 
aged, who have done me no harm. O lord of all creatures, I beg you, show 
mercy. I cannot slay dear sons, beloved friends, brothers, mothers and 
fathers. If these die at my hands, their surviving relatives will surely curse 
me. Their tears will burn me for eternity. The prospect fills me with horror. 

I seek your protection. All sinful creatures that I kill will sink into the 
infernal regions. I seek to appease you, O boon-giving lord! Extend your 
grace to me, puissant Brahma. I seek this boon for all the worlds. O lord of 
all the gods, grant me leave to perform severe tapasya.’ 

Brahma said, ‘O Mrityu, I have assigned to you the task of destroying 
all creatures. Go, and set yourself to your task. Do not reflect upon what 
you must accomplish. This must be done. It cannot be otherwise. O sinless 
one, O Devi of faultless limbs, go forth and fulfil my command.’ 

Thus addressed, O Mahabaho, Mrityu humbly stood there in silence 
with her eyes turned towards the mighty lord of all creatures. Brahma 
exhorted her repeatedly, but the Devi seemed to be without life. Seeing her 


so, the creator fell silent. Indeed, the Svayambhu became pleased with her. 
With a smile, the lord of all the worlds gazed upon the universe. 

When Brahma subdued his wrath, Mrityu, without the promise to 
destroy the living, quickly left his side. She went, O king, to the sacred 
place called Dhenuka. There, the Devi stood upon one foot and practiced 
the severest austerities for fifteen billion years. 

After her tapasya was over, Brahma of great energy once more said to 
her, ‘Go forth and perform my bidding, O Mrityu!’ 

However, the Devi disregarded his command, and standing on one 
foot began another tapasya that lasted twenty billion years. Later, O son, she 
led a life in the forest with its denizens for another ten thousand billion 
years. Additionally, she passed twenty thousand years, subsisting just on air 
for sustenance. Furthermore, O monarch, she observed a mowna vrata of 
silence, standing in water for eight thousand years. Then, she went to the 
Kausiki river, where she passed her days with only water and air for 
sustenance. 

Then, O king, the blessed Devi went to the Ganga and to the 
mountains of Meru. There, in order to do good to all living creatures, she 
stood as still as a block of wood. On the summit of Himavat, where the 
Devas perform great yagnas, Mrityu stood on her toes, in order to please 
Brahma, for another hundred billion years. 

The creator and destroyer of the universe went to her and spoke to her 
once again, “With what are you engaged, O daughter? Carry out my 
command.’ 

The Devi once more replied, ‘I cannot slay living creatures, O lord! I 
want to please you so that I may be relieved of this horrible task.’ 

She was frightened at the prospect of sin and prayed she may not obey 
his command. Brahma silenced her, and repeated, ‘No sin will accrue to 
you, O Mrityu. Go forth, O auspicious Devi, set yourself to your task. You 
cannot contravene what I have said, O gentle, amiable one. Eternal dharma 
will now take refuge in you. All the Devas and I will ever engage ourselves 
in the quest for your weal. I will grant all your other wishes. 

Disease will afflict the living, and you will bear the blame for their 
death. You will become a male in all male beings, a female in all female 
beings, and a eunuch in all those of the third sex.’ 

When the Devi heard Brahma, she joined her hands to the exalted lord, 
and said, ‘I cannot obey your command.’ 


Brahma said again, ‘Mrityu, O Death, go forth and destroy! I declare 
that what you do will incur no sin, O auspicious one. The tears still cradled 
in your palms will take the form of terrible diseases and they, too, will 
destroy men when their time comes. At the end of the lives of living beings, 
you will launch desire and wrath against them. Immeasurable punya will be 
yours. You will incur no paapa, for you are so compassionate in your 
nature. Doing what I say, you will only observe dharma. Go, set your heart 
upon the task at hand, and command Kama and Krodha to slay all the 
living.’ 

Now, Mrityu feared Brahma’s curse and answered, ‘As you wish!’ 
From that time, she sent desire and wrath at the last hours of living beings 
to end their life-breaths. Her tears are the diseases that afflict humankind. 
Therefore, knowing this as the cause behind death, one should never give 
way to sorrow. 

Just as the senses disappear in dreamless sleep and return upon 
awakening, with the dissolution of their bodies, all the living go to the other 
world and from there return to this world through rebirth, O Rajasimha. 

Wind, imbued with terrible energy, mighty prowess and deafening 
roars, operates as the breath in all living creatures. Upon their death, prana 
escapes from the old and enters myriad new bodies. Hence, they call Vayu 
the lord of the senses, distinguished above the other elements. 

When their punya is exhausted, the Devas, without exception, are born 
as mortals on earth. Similarly, when mortal creatures acquire sufficient 
merit, they attain the status of Devas. Therefore, O lion among kings, do not 
grieve for your son. He has attained swarga and enjoys great happiness 
there. 

It was thus, O emperor, that Brahma created Mrityu, and she smites all 
beings at their hour of death. Her tears turn into diseases, and snatch away 
all living beings in their final hour.” 


CANTO 259 


Y udhishtira says, ‘All men who live on earth have questions about the 
nature of dharma. What is this dharma? Where does it come from? 
Tell me this Pitamaha. Is it for use in this world or for the next? Or, is it for 
both here and the hereafter? I beseech you, tell me this!’ 

Bhishma says, “The practice of sadachara—good conduct—the 
smritis, and the Vedas, are the three sources of dharma. Additionally, the 
learned say that the purpose behind an action is its fourth indication. The 
Rishis of antiquity have declared actions that are virtuous and divided them 
as superior or inferior, in point of merit. The laws of dharma are established 
for the conduct of the affairs of the world. In both the worlds, here and 
hereafter, dharma produces felicity and joy as its fruits. 

Unable to acquire punya through subtle means, a sinner remains in sin. 
Some suggest that evildoers can never be free of their sins. In times of 
distress, one who even tells a lie acquires the merit of truthfulness, even as 
aman in a crisis, who performs an ignoble deed, gains the merit of virtue. 

Good conduct is the refuge of dharma. It is an indication of honour. It 
is man’s nature that he neither sees nor admits his own faults but notices 
and proclaims those of others. The thief spends his loot in actions of 
apparent virtue. In times of anarchy, he is happy to appropriate what 
belongs to others, but, when others rob him of his loot, he seeks their heads 
as punishment. Even when his indignation is at its highest, he secretly 
covets the wealth of those who are content with their own. When he is 


himself the victim of a robbery, he boldly stands at the king’s gate without 
any guilt in his heart for his own sins. 

To speak the truth is dharma. There is nothing higher than honesty. 
Veracity upholds everything, and everything rests upon satya. On principle, 
even sinful and ferocious men, who swear to keep honour amongst 
themselves, band together to go about their criminal business. If they betray 
one another, they would surely bring destruction upon themselves. 

One should never take what belongs to others. Powerful men regard 
this as an eternal obligation created by the weak, but when fate serves 
misfortune to these powerful men, they hail the injunction. Furthermore, 
they who surpass others in strength or prowess do not necessarily become 
happy. Therefore, it is best not do any wrong. He who conducts himself in 
this way has no fear of dishonest men, thieves or the king. 

The man, who follows ahimsa, lives fearlessly, with a pure heart. A 
thief fears everybody, like a deer driven from the woods into the midst of a 
village. He thinks others to be as sinful as himself. The chaste man is 
always full of joy and has no need to see his own sinfulness in others. 

Good men say charity is a noble duty. The wealthy call it an idea born 
from the needy. However, when misfortune leads the same rich men into 
poverty, then the practice of charity recommends itself to them. Therefore, 
wealth does not necessarily meet with happiness. 

He who knows pain should never do unto others what he dislikes done 
to himself. What can the lover of another man’s wife possibly say to a 
person guilty of the same transgression? An adulterer cannot forgive what 
he himself does when he sees his wife with her lover. How can he who 
himself breathes prevent another from doing so by committing murder? 
Whatever wishes one entertains for oneself, one should certainly cherish for 
another. 

A rich man should relieve the wants of the needy with his surplus 
wealth. This is why the creator ordained trade and other fair means to 
increase one’s wealth. One should faithfully walk the path that leads to the 
Devas; the performance of yagnas and giving dana is also laudable. The 
Rishis have said that the accomplishment of goals by just and agreeable 
means is dharma. 

O Yudhishtira this is what you must bear in mind to distinguish both 
dharma and adharma. 


Once Brahma created Nyaya, justice, with the power to hold the world 
together. Dharma is liable to numerous restraints in order to acquire honour, 
which depends upon many delicate considerations. 

I have now recounted the indications of dharma to you, O pinnacle of 
Kuru’s race. Never set your heart on any sinful deed.’ 


CANTO 260 


Y udhishtira says, ‘You say dharma depends on _ delicate 

considerations, seen in the conduct of the virtuous. That it is fraught 
with restraints from numerous actions, and that the Vedas contain 
explanations for these. Still, I believe that I have a certain insight to help me 
discriminate between right and wrong. 

You have answered many questions of mine. Yet, there is one question 
left that I will ask. It is not prompted, O Pitama, by a desire for empty 
debate. It seems to be the nature of all embodied beings, to be born, exist 
and eventually die. Dharma and its reverse, therefore, cannot be 
ascertained, O Bhaarata, through the study of the scriptures alone. The 
burden of a wealthy man is of one kind, while that of the poor man is of 
another. In times of adversity, how can one ascertain his duty through the 
scriptures alone? 

You claim that the actions of the good constitute rectitude. Even so, it 
is from their actions that one ascertains the good. The definition, therefore, 
is based on ambiguity, so that the meaning of, “conduct of the virtuous”, 
remains unclear. 

We know how an ordinary person commits dishonourable deeds yet 
achieves respectability. We also know how an extraordinary person may 
achieve virtue even while he commits ignoble deeds. Additionally, those 
who know the shastras well have furnished proof that the ordinances of the 
Vedas dwindle and disappear gradually in every successive age. The duties 


in the Krita yuga are of one kind. Those in the Treta yuga are of another 
kind. In the Dwapara, they are quite different. And in the Kali age, they are 
entirely of another kind. 

It seems, therefore, that dharma adapts to the nature and abilities of 
men in different yugas. When none of the declarations in the Vedas applies 
uniformly to all the ages, to say that the proclamations of the Vedas are true, 
is only a popular expression for the sake of general appeasement. 

The claim that the smritis originate from the srutis is again very 
general and ambiguous. If the Vedas were the final authority on everything, 
then they would apply to the smritis also since they emanate from the srutis. 
When the srutis and the smritis contradict each other, how can either be 
authoritative? Yet we see wicked men in authority arrest certain courses of 
dharma, even discontinue them forever. Whether we know or do not, 
whether we can see it or not, the way of dharma is finer than the edge of a 
razor and grosser than even a mountain. 

Dharma, in the form of sacrifices and rituals, at first appears as the 
romantic edifices of vapour seen in the distant sky. Under the scrutiny of the 
learned, it vanishes. Like small ponds or shallow aqueducts that quickly dry 
up, the eternal practices inculcated in the smritis weaken in the Kali yuga, 
and finally disappear. 

In order to acquire honour, amongst evil men, those who perform 
tapasyas fraught with desire, are hypocrites who torment themselves falsely. 
It is the same with those who are urged by the wishes of others. Myriad 
others tread the same path, influenced by various selfish motives. Even so, 
such deeds, although accomplished under the influence of evil passions, are 
yet virtuous. 

Fools say that dharma is an empty sound among the righteous. They 
ridicule such righteous men, and regard them as being mad. Then there are 
many great men, who abandon the duties of their own varna, to engage in 
the dharma of the Kshatriya varna. Therefore, no conduct can be universally 
lauded or condemned. 

A certain course of conduct makes one man meritorious. The same 
way can deny merit to another man. Another man, who does as he pleases, 
remains unchanged. Thus, the conduct that acquires punyas for one man 
obstructs merit for another. 

So, one may see how all courses of conduct appear to lose singleness 
of purpose and character. It seems, therefore, that only that which the 


ancient Rishis called dharma remains true to this day; and through the 
dharma, as declared by them, the distinctions and limitations have become 
eternal.’ 


CANTO 261 


B hishma says, ‘Listen to the ancient tale of the discourse on dharma, 

between Tuladhara and Jajali. There once lived a Brahmana named 
Jajali. He lived as a recluse in a forest, where he performed austere 
penances. Once, he went to the seashore to practice the most severe tapasya. 
He observed many vows, restraints and fasts; he clothed his body in rags 
and animal skins, matted locks adorned his head, his entire person was 
smeared with filth and clay. Thus, the sagacious Brahmana passed many 
years in silent dhyana. The twice-born Rishi was endowed with great tejas, 
O Rajan, and he lived in the sea. With a desire to see everything, he roamed 
through all the worlds with the speed of thought. 

After he had seen all the earth, bounded by the ocean, adorned with 
rivers, lakes and woods, the hermit sat submerged in water, and began to 
ruminate thus: “In this world of animate and inanimate creatures there is 
none equal to me. Who can roam with me among the stars and planets in 
the firmament and also dwell within the waters?” 

Unseen by the Rakshasas, the Pisachas said to him, “It does not befit 
you to speak so. There is a man named Tuladhara, who is a trader and has 
great wisdom and fame. Even he, O best of Dvijas, is not worthy of saying 
what you do.” 

Jajali replied, “I will see this famous Tuladhara who is so wise.” 

As soon as the Rishi spoke, the superhuman beings lifted him from the 
sea, and said, “O best of the twice-born, go along this road.” Jajali travelled 


with a heavy heart to Varanasi, where he met Tuladhara.’ 

Yudhishtira interrupts his grandsire, ‘Describe to me Jajali’s arduous 
feats, O Pitamaha, which helped him acquire such high success.’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘Jajali practiced the severest austerities. He 
performed ablutions morning and evening. Carefully tending his fires, he 
studied the Vedas earnestly. Adept with the duties laid down for forest 
hermits, Jajali blazed with effulgence. 

He continued to live in the forest, engaged all the while in tapasya. 
Yet, he never thought of himself as one who had acquired any punya by 
what he did, although in the monsoons, he slept under the open sky, in 
autumn, he sat in water and in summer, he exposed himself to the sun and 
the wind. 

He slept on diverse kinds of painful beds and on the bare earth. Once, 
it rained incessantly on his head as he stood under the open sky. There were 
jungles that he had to traverse constantly. Exposure to the rains and the mud 
tangled the sinless Rishi’s hair into a thick jata. 

Once, the Mahayogi abstained entirely from food, lived just upon air 
and stood in the forest like a post of wood, never moving. A pair of Kulinga 
birds, O Bhaarata, took him for the stump of a tree and built their nest on 
his head. Filled with compassion, the Maharishi remained and endured the 
feathery couple, which happily lived among his matted locks, into which 
they placed blades of grass. 

The rains passed and autumn came. The birds, taken with desire, 
mated on the sage’s head and laid their eggs there. Although Jajali was 
aware of what the birds had done, he remained. Firmly resolved to acquire 
punya, he would not disturb, let alone injure any creature. 

Each day, the birds flew to and from his head. Mighty king, they lived 
there happily. When in time, the eggs matured and young ones emerged, the 
hatchlings began to grow in that, nest, while Jajali stood still. The 
Dharmarishi nurtured the young ones, as he stood motionless and rapt in 
dhyana. 

In course of time, the Muni saw the young birds sprout wings and, 
along with the parent birds, he was delighted. Together with their young 
ones, the parent birds continued to live in the Rishi’s head, in perfect safety. 

Jajali soon watched the young birds take to the air each evening, and 
return to his head without going too far, and he stood rooted to the place. At 
times, he observed them leave without their parents and return by 


themselves. A while later, the young birds flew away in the morning, passed 
the whole day out of his sight, only to return to the nest in the evening, and 
Jajali never moved. Later, they left the nest for five days at a time, and 
returned on the sixth day. Jajali remained. 

Later, when their strength was fully developed they left him and did 
not return for many days. Until at last, they flew away and did not return 
even after a month. It was then, O king, that Jajali finally moved from his 
place. When the birds had gone, Jajali wondered much, and thought that he 
had achieved ascetic success, and pride entered his heart. When the great 
yogi saw the birds leave after he had raised them on his head, he began to 
think highly of himself, and was filled with delight. He bathed in a stream, 
poured libations on the sacred fire, and worshipped the rising sun. Indeed, 
having encouraged the Kulinga birds to be born and grow on his head, Jajali 
began to slap his armpits and proclaim loudly to the sky, “I have won great 
punya!” 

Then an asariri, an ethereal voice, rose in the sky and Jajali heard 
these words, “In point of dharma, O Jajali, you are not equal to Tuladhara 
of great wisdom, who lives in Varanasi. 

Jajali was furious to hear the disembodied voice and wanted to meet 
Tuladhara. He ranged over the whole world, keeping a vow of silence, and 
slept wherever he found himself at nightfall. After a considerable while, he 
reached the city of Kasi, where he saw Tuladhara engaged in selling sundry 
essences and perfumes, ghrita, honey and oils. As soon as the trader saw the 
Brahmana, he joyfully stood up and worshipped the guest with proper 
salutations. 

Tuladhara said, “O Brahmana, I knew that you were coming to me. O 
Dvijottama, listen to what I have to say. You lived on a low land near the 
seashore and performed severe tapasya, but you never felt that you had 
achieved dharma or punya. When you did at last attain ascetic success, 
some birds were born on your head and you took great care of the little 
creatures. 

In time, the birds grew wings and flew away in search of food. Due to 
your giving shelter to the little sparrows, you began to feel a sense of pride, 
O Brahmana, thinking you had achieved great merit. Then, you heard a 
voice in the sky that spoke of me. These words filled you with anger, and 
brought you here. Tell me, what can I do for you, O best of Brahmanas?” 


CANTO 262 


B hishma says ‘Thus addressed by Tuladhara, Jajali said “You sell all 

kinds of extracts and scents, O Vaisya, as also bark, leaves, herbs, 
fruits and roots of various trees. How did you acquire your wisdom and 
certitude? Where has this knowledge come from? O you of great 
intelligence, tell me all this in detail.” 

Tuladhara of the Vaisya varna, who knew the truths of dharma and 
was graced with gyana, said, “O Jajali, I know dharma, which is eternal. 
With all its mysteries, it is nothing other than the ancient virtue that is 
known to all. It consists of universal compassion, and is fraught with 
beneficence to all creatures. The way of life, which relies on ahimsa 
towards all creatures or, in case of necessity, upon a minimum of such 
harm, is the highest dharma. I live according to that dharma, O Jajali. 

My house is built with wood and grass cut by other people’s hands. 
With the exception of wines, O enlightened Rishi, I purchase from other 
men lac, dye, the roots of lotus, its filaments, diverse kinds of fine perfumes 
and various lotions, to sell in fair trade. 

He, O Jajali, who is ever the friend and always engaged in the good of 
all creatures, in thought, word and deed, knows godliness. I never solicit 
anyone, or desire anything. I never quarrel with anyone, nor cherish 
aversion for anyone. I consider all objects and creatures to be equal. Jajali, 
this is my vrata. 


My scales are in perfect balance, for all creatures. I neither praise nor 
blame the actions of others. I view the diversity in the world, O Brahmana, 
like the array seen in the sky. Know, O Jayali, that I view all creatures with 
an equal eye. 

Wisest of intelligent men, I see no difference between a clod of earth a 
piece of stone and a lump of gold. As the blind, the deaf and the ignorant 
are perfectly accustomed to the loss of their senses, in the same way am I 
conformed to my vows of abstinence from pleasures. 

As they who are feeble, ailing, weak and starved, have no relish for 
amusements of any kind, similarly have I ceased to feel any zest for wealth, 
pleasure or luxuries. 

When a man fears nothing and nothing fears him, when he cherishes 
no desire and has no aversion for anything, he attains Brahman. When a 
man does not sin, in thought, word or deed, towards any creature, he attains 
Brahman. 

There is no past or future. There is no neeti or dharma. He who does 
not rouse fear acquires a state in which there is no fear. On the other hand, 
the man of harsh speech and violent temper, who is like death itself to all 
creatures, certainly attains a condition that abounds with fear. 

I follow the practices of exalted, benevolent elders who with their 
children and grandchildren live in accord with the ordinance laid down in 
the shastra. He, who falls prey to the errors of the good and wise, entirely 
abandons the sanatana dharma recommended in the Vedas. The wise man or 
he who has subdued his senses, or he who has strength of mind, attains 
moksha. The learned man who restrains his senses, and practices dharma 
with a heart cleansed from the very craving for himsa, violence, is sure, O 
Jajali, to acquire the merit of dharma and the fruit of mukti. 

Look upon worldly unions as pieces of driftwood that float along the 
river and briefly meet. And having briefly touched, they drift apart again. 
Grass, sticks and floating cakes of cowdung come together, and then part 
forever. He who no creature fears in the least is himself, O sannyasi, never 
frightened of any creature. While he, of whom every creature is afraid, as of 
a wolf, is himself filled with terror like creatures of the sea forced to leap 
onto the shore from fear of the roaring Badava fire. 

This is how the practice of universal ahimsa has arisen. Man must 
follow it by every means within his power. Kings and men of wealth may 
seek to adopt it. It is sure to lead to bhagya and swarga as well. Because of 


their ability to dispel the fears of others, the learned consider wealthy men 
and their followers to be outstanding. Men who seek ordinary happiness 
practice ahimsa for the sake of fame, while the truly skilled practice it to 
attain Brahman. 

The path of ahimsa provides all the rewards one enjoys through 
tapasya, yagnas, dana, satya and the cultivation of gyana. He who assures 
protection to all creatures receives the boon of all sacrifices and wins 
fearlessness for himself as his reward. There is no dharma superior to 
ahimsa. He, of whom everybody is frightened, as one is of a snake within 
one’s bedroom, never acquires any punya in this world or in the hereafter. 

The very Devas are bewildered by the one who transcends all states, 
who himself constitutes the Soul of all creatures and looks upon all 
creatures as identical with his own self. Of all gifts, ahimsa is of the highest 
value. It is true, O Jajali believe me. One who takes to karma at first wins 
prosperity, but on the exhaustion of his punyas, he once more encounters 
adversity. Aware of the inevitable destruction of such gains, the wise do not 
praise karma. 

There is no duty, O Jajali, without motive. Dharma, however, is most 
tenuous. They are in the Vedas for the sake of both Brahman and 
swargaloka. The subject of dharma has many secrets and mysteries. It is so 
subtle that it is almost impossible to understand fully. Amongst diverse 
conflicts in precepts, few men who observed the deeds of the virtuous have 
understood dharma. 

Why do you not destroy those that geld bulls, bore their noses, and 
cause them to bear heavy burdens, bind them and put them under diverse 
kinds of restraint? Why indeed do you not eliminate men who eat the flesh 
of living creatures they have slain? 

There are men that live by trafficking in living beings! They are seen 
to own humans as slaves. They strike, bind and otherwise subject them to 
restraints and torture. They make them labour day and night. These people 
are not ignorant of the pain that results from such torment. When they earn 
a living by such sins, what scruples need they feel in selling cadavers? 

The Devas—Surya, Chandramas, Vayu, Brahma, Prana, Kratu and 
Yama— all dwell in living creatures. The goat is Agni. The sheep is Varuna. 
The horse is Surya. The earth is Virat. The cow and the calf are Soma. The 
man who sells these can never gain success. 


Such being the case, O Dvija, what fault can attach to the sale of taila, 
ghrita, madhu or hanu. Many animals grow up in ease and comfort in places 
free from gnats and other insects. Still, there are men who persecute them in 
diverse ways, and lead them into marshes that abound with stinging insects, 
even though they are aware that their mothers bear them great love. 

Many draft animals are laden with heavy burdens. Others, again, have 
to languish because of treatment not sanctioned by the scriptures. I believe 
that such himsa against animals amounts to foeticide. Men regard 
agriculture to be sinless, although it is surely fraught with cruelty. The iron- 
faced plough wounds the soil and the many creatures that live therein. Cast 
your eyes, O Jajali, on the bullocks yoked to the plough. In the srutis, kine 
are deemed as being not fit for slaughter. He perpetrates a great sin who 
slays a bull or a cow. 

Once, many Rishis approached Nahusha, and said, “You have, O king, 
killed a cow which is declared in the scriptures to be like one’s mother. You 
have also slain a bull, which the shastras say is akin to Brahma himself. You 
have perpetrated an evil act, O Nahusha, and we are pained.” 

To purify Nahusha, the Rishis divided his sin into a hundred and one 
parts, transformed the fragments into diseases and cast them among all 
creatures. Then, O Jajali, the blessed Rishis turned to Nahusha, who was 
guilty of foeticide, and said, “We will not be able to pour libations in your 
sacrifice.” 

So spoke the Maharishis and Yatis, after they ascertained that king 
Nahusha was not intentionally guilty of the sin. 

These, O Jajali, are some of the evil and dreadful practices that are 
current in this world. You perform them because men from ancient times 
have done so, and not because they agree with the dictates of your purified 
intellect. Guided by reason, one should practice what one considers dharma, 
instead of blindly following the practices of the world. 

Listen now, O Jajali, to what my conduct is towards him that injures 
me and him that praises me. I regard both of them in the same light. I have 
none whom I like and none whom I dislike. The wise laud such a behaviour 
as consistent with dharma and the Yatis concur as well. The virtuous always 
observe it with sharp insight.” 


CANTO 263 


ajali countered, “This course of dharma that you preach, O upholder of 

nyaya, shuts the door of swarga on all creatures and puts a stop to the 
very means of their subsistence. From agriculture comes food. That food 
offers nourishment even to you. It is the help of animals, crops and herbs, O 
trader, which enables humans to support their existence. From animals and 
food do sacrifices flow. Your doctrines seem laden with atheism. This world 
will come to an end if the means by which life is supported must be 
abandoned.” 

Tuladhara replied, “I will tell you of the means of sustenance. I am 
not, O Brahmana, an atheist. I do not blame sacrifices. He is very rare who 
truly knows yagna. I bow to the yagna that is ordained for Brahmanas. I 
bow also to them that are conversant with that yagna. 

Alas, the Brahmanas have abandoned the sacrifice ordained for them, 
and have taken to the performance of yagnas meant for Kshatriyas. Many 
believers, O enlightened one, that are covetous and fond of wealth, cannot 
understand the true meaning of the srutis, and proclaim falsehoods as being 
truth. They have introduced many kinds of sacrifices, and said, “This should 
be given away in this particular yagna, while that is to be offered in that 
other yagna. The first of these is laudable’, and so on. The outcome of all 
this, O Jajali, is the emergence of theft and other evils. 

Be aware that only the sacrificial offering acquired through dharma 
can satisfy the Devas. There are abundant indications in the scriptures that 


the worship of the gods may be accomplished with vows, libations poured 
on the sacred fire, recitations of the Vedas and with plants and herbs. 

From their religious karmas and mere hollow rituals, sinful men have 
wicked offspring. To covetous men greedy children are born, and to the 
contented are born happy children. 

If the performer of sacrifices and the priest-in-attendance wish for 
rewards from their yagnas, their children are visited with that stain. If, on 
the other hand, they do not wish to reap the rewards of the yagna, then their 
children become desireless. From sacrifices appear progeny like pure water 
from the firmament. 

The libations poured on the yagna fire rise up to the sun. From the sun 
comes rain. From rain, crops grow. From food living creatures are born. 
Long ago, men of dharma, devoted to selfless sacrifices, obtained the 
fruition of all their wishes. The earth would yield crops without tillage and 
the blessing of Rishis sufficed to produce herbs and plants. Ancient men 
never conducted yagnas from a wish for their fruits, and never regarded 
themselves as beneficiaries. Those who somehow perform sacrifices, while 
questioning their efficacy, are born in their next lives as dishonest, wily and 
greedy men, obsessively covetous of wealth. 

He, who with the help of false logic claims the authoritative scriptures 
as fraught with evil, is certain to enter into the realms of sin. Surely, O lord 
of Brahmanas, such a man, bereft of wisdom, possesses a sinful soul, and 
always remains here in this world of sin. 

He, who regards those tasks the Vedas ordain to accomplish every day, 
as obligatory, and fears lest he fails to finish them, who considers all the 
essentials of yagnas identical with Brahman, and never views himself as the 
doer, is truly a Brahmana. If the duties of such a one remain incomplete, or 
hindered by unclean yagnapasus, even then, such actions are of superior 
efficacy. However, if such deeds are done from a craving for their fruit and 
their completion be obstructed, then atonement becomes necessary. 

Those who, bereft of all desire for worldly wealth, renounce all 
provision for the future and covet mukti, while being free from envy, 
embrace dharma and samyama as their yagna. Men who know the 
distinction between body and soul, who are devoted to yoga, and meditate 
on Pranava, AUM, always, succeed in gratifying others. 

The universal Brahman, which is the Soul of the Devas, dwells in him 
who realises Brahman. When such a man’s hunger is satiated, all the gods, 


O Jajali, are pleased. He who satisfies all his desires and no longer desires 
anything, and who is consummate in knowledge, gains eternal mukti, which 
to him is a source of perfect bliss. 

Wise men are the refuge of dharma. They are virtuous men who are 
clear about their norms of conduct. He who owns such wisdom always sees 
everything in the universe to have sprung from his own self. 

A few learned men, who faithfully strive to reach the other shore of 
this ocean of samsara, attain the world of Brahma, which is full of great 
blessings, most sacred and inhabited by the righteous. It is a world that is 
free from sorrow, upheaval and pain, a place from which there is no return. 

Such men do not covet swarga. They do not worship Brahma in costly 
sacrifices. They walk the path of dharma. Ahimsa is paramount in their 
yagnas and no harm befalls any creature. These men know trees, herbs, 
fruits and roots as the only sacrificial offerings. 

Greedy priests never officiate at the sacrifices of these simple 
enlightened men. Although all their duties are complete, they still perform 
sacrifices from a desire for the good of all creatures and offer their own 
selves as sacrificial offerings. This is why selfish priests officiate at the 
yagnas of only the misguided, who seek only swarga, without trying to gain 
moksha. Whereas those who are good forever seek to help others find 
freedom and bliss. In view of both these ways, O Jajali, I have come to 
embrace all creatures with an equal heart. 

Endowed with wisdom, many peerless Brahmanas perform yagnas of 
two kinds; some lead to mukti from where there is no return, and others 
lead to regions of bliss from where there is a return. The sacrifices help 
them advance, O Maharishi, along paths taken by the Devas. 

Those who sacrifice from a desire for reward, return from their goals, 
for further rewards; for the truly wise, who sacrifice selflessly, there is no 
return. Although both these kinds of yajamanas, sacrifice performers, O 
Jajali, travel along the path of the Devas, such is the difference between 
their final ends. 

Because of the success achieved by such men of true dharma, their 
bulls willingly set their shoulders to the plough for tillage, and to the yoke 
to pull their carriages. Their cows yield milk from udders untouched by 
human hands. These men create sacrificial wood and other ritual needs 
simply by willing it, and perform various sacrifices replete with abundant 
gifts. 


Those of such purified souls may slaughter a cow as a sacrificial 
offering. While others, who are not of that stature, should beware and 
perform yagnas only with herbs and plants, and not with animals. 

Since renunciation has such punya, I stress on it when I speak to you. 
The Devas know him for a Brahmana who has given up all expectation of 
gains, who makes no effort to achieve worldly duties, who no longer serves 
anyone, who never utters the praises of others, and although his actions are 
weak, he is endowed with strength. 

What, O Jajali, will be the fate of him who does not recite the Vedas, 
of the others, who do not perform proper yagnas, those who do not offer 
gifts to Brahmanas, and those who follow an avocation in which every kind 
of desire is indulged? Through perfect reverence for the dharma that is 
renunciation, one is sure to gain Brahman.” 

Jajali said, “I had never before, O son of a Vaisya, heard of these 
mystical and profound dharmas of ascetics who perform only mental 
sacrifices. It is for this reason that I inquire about them. The sages of old did 
not follow those doctrines of yoga. Hence, the yogins that succeeded them 
have not propounded them for general acceptance. If you say that men of 
brutish minds fail to achieve sacrifices beneficial to their soul, then, O 
Vaisya, how else will they achieve their happiness? Tell me this, O wise 
one. Great is my faith in your words.” 

Tuladhara replied, “At times, yagnas are not effective because of the 
absence of faith in the yajamana. Such men are not worthy of performing 
any sacrifice. 

As for the faithful, only one thing, the cow, is enough to maintain all 
sacrifices through libations of clarified butter, milk, curds, and the hair at 
end of her tail, her horns and her hooves. 

The Vedas declare that unmarried men should not perform sacrifices. 
Nevertheless, should it be necessary for an unmarried man to perform a 
yagna, then he must take sraddha, faith, as his wedded wife in order to 
make his offerings to the Devas. Through proper reverence in such 
sacrifices, he is sure to attain Brahman. 

To the exclusion of all animals, which are certainly unclean as 
offerings in yagnas, the rice-ball is a worthy offering. All rivers are as 
sacred as the Saraswati, and all mountains are holy. O Jajali, do not wander 
needlessly on earth to visit sacred places; the Soul itself is a tirtha. He, who 


observes these duties, and seeks to acquire merit within his ability, certainly 
acquires blessed regions hereafter.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘These are the dharmas, O Yudhishtira, which 
Tuladhara praised: responsibilities that are consistent with reason, and 
always observed by those who are good and wise.’ 


CANTO 264 


TT uladhara said, “Observe, O Jajali, who, amongst the good or the 

sinful, have adopted this path of dharma of which I have spoken. You 
will then clearly understand the truth. Look, amongst the hawks and other 
numerous birds that range in the sky, are the ones reared on your head! 
Look, O Brahmana, how the birds have contracted their wings and legs to 
enter their nests. Summon them, O enlightened one, for the birds you 
treated with affection display their love for you who are their father. Indeed, 
O Jajali, you are their father. Do summon your children.” 

Beckoned by Jajali, the birds responded joyfully to the voice of 
dharma, which ordains ahimsa towards all creatures. All deeds of ahimsa, 
performed towards any creature, become beneficial both here and hereafter. 
The deeds that involve harm to others destroy faith, and with faith 
destroyed, ruin follows the destroyer. The sacrifices of those who view 
acquisition and non-acquisition in the same light, who are invested with 
bhakti and are self-restrained, who are of peaceful minds, and perform 
yagnas from a sense of duty and not from a desire for benefits—men like 
these become worthy of reward. 

Bhakti and sraddha towards Brahman is the daughter of Surya, O 
Dvija. She is the protector and she is the giver of good birth. Devotion is 
superior to the punya born of Vedic mantras and dhyana sraddha redeems 
an action vitiated by a defect of speech, and salvages a deed poisoned by a 


defect of the mind. However, neither speech nor the mind can save a deed 
that is defiled through want of devotion. 

Men who have experienced past events recall what Brahma said on 
this subject: after deliberation, the Devas concluded that the sacrificial 
offerings made by a man, who is pure but lacking in faith, and of another 
who is impure, hence unworthy of acceptance; of one who knows the Vedas 
but is miserly, and that of a moneylender who is generous, are worthy of 
equal approval. 

Brahma, the Supreme Lord of all creatures, then told them that they 
had committed an error. He asserted that sraddha sanctifies the offerings of 
a liberal person, while the food of the faithless man is lost. The offering of a 
liberal usurer is acceptable but not that of a miser. Furthermore, there is 
only one person in the world, he who is faithless, unfit to make offerings to 
the Devas. This is also the opinion of men who understand dharma. 

Faith is a purifier of sins, while the lack of faith is a high sin. As a 
snake sheds its slough, the man of belief casts off all his sin. Abstention 
with faith is the most sacred of all. He sanctifies himself who turns to 
sraddha and abstains from all faults of conduct. What need has such a one 
of tapasya, aachara or dridatha? 

Every man has sraddha, which is of three kinds—as influenced by 
sattva, rajas and tamas. The way to recognise a man is through his belief. 
Those gifted with sattva and insights into the true import of righteousness 
have accordingly established the subject of dharma. 

I have, because of my enquiries, gathered this knowledge from the 
Rishi Dharmadarsana. O wise one, take to faith, for you will then gain that 
which is superior. Know this, O Jajali, he who has faith in the srutis, and 
who follows their import, is certainly a man of dharma, and he who 
faithfully adheres to his own path is surely a superior man.” 

Soon, Tuladhara and Jajali, both gifted with great wisdom, who had 
acquired their punya through their good deeds ascended to swarga and 
revelled there in great happiness. 

A great deal is told of Tuladhara, who understood ahimsa completely 
and hence proclaimed these eternal duties. The enlightened Jajali, O son of 
Kunti, heard these words of celebrated tejas, and became calm. In this 
manner, Tuladhara spoke many truths of grave import and illustrated them 
with examples. Tell me, O Bhaarata, what else do you wish to hear?’ 


CANTO 265 


B hishma says, “There is an old story of what King Vichakhi said about 

karuna, compassion for all creatures. When the king witnessed the 
mangled body of a bull during a cow-sacrifice, heard the agonised bellows 
of the animal and saw the cruel Brahmanas that gathered there to assist in 
the rituals, the king shouted, “Jaya to all kine!” 

He pronounced this blessing on the helpless animals, even at the time 
of slaughter. And Vichakhi further said, “Only those who are atheists and 
sceptics, bereft of intelligence, who transgress defined limits, who desire 
fame through sacrifices and religious rites, speak highly of the slaughter of 
animals in yagnas. Manu has lauded ahimsa in all actions. 

Hence, guided by the shastras, with regard to himsa and ahimsa, one 
should practice the true course of dharma, which is most subtle. Ahimsa 
towards all creatures is the highest dharma. 

The householder should ignore the rewards of Vedic rituals and give 
up his family life. He should embrace sannyasa, live near an inhabited place 
and observe rigid vows. Only selfish men wish for benefit of their actions. 

Men do not eat defiled meat obtained from animals which are not 
killed in sacrifices. This practice is not worthy of praise, since all meat is 
tainted, including that of animals killed in yagnas. 

Knaves have introduced wine, fish, honey, meat, alcohol and 
preparations of rice and sesame seeds. The use of these in sacrifices is not 


sanctioned in the Vedas. The craving for these arises from pride, error of 
judgement and cupidity. 

True Brahmanas realise the presence of Vishnu in every sacrifice. He 
should be worshipped with delicious payasa, and the leaves and flowers of 
trees described in the Vedas. All worthy actions and all which is held pure 
by eminent sages, are excellent oblations to the Supreme Deity and deserve 
his approval.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘The body and all sorts of dangers and calamities are 
constantly at war, with each trying to destroy the other. How then is it 
possible for a non-violent man to refrain from harmful deeds in order to 
survive?’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘One should, if possible, acquire merit and behave in 
such a way that one’s body may not languish, suffer pain and invite death.’ 


CANTO 266 


Y udhishtira says, ‘You, O Pitamaha, are our highest guru for deeds 

that are difficult to accomplish. I ask, how should we judge an 
action to be either our obligation to perform or abstain from? Is it to be 
determined soon or in course of time?’ 

Bhishma answers, ‘Listen to an ancient tale of what happened to 
Chirakarin of the Angirasa vamsa. May the man who reflects long before he 
performs a task, be twice blessed. Such a man certainly possesses great 
intelligence and never offends in any manner. 

There was once a very wise man named Chirakarin, the son of Rishi 
Gautama. Everything he did was done after deep consideration. He was 
named Chirakarin because he deliberated for long upon everything; he 
would remain awake for a long time, sleep for a long time and take a long 
time to begin the tasks he was entrusted with. The blame of being an idle 
man adhered to him. Men of small minds and poor foresight regarded him a 
fool. 

Once, Pitamaha Gautama saw his wife do a terrible thing. He was so 
furious that he ordered Chirakarin, “Slay this woman.” The learned 
Gautama spoke these words without much thought, and departed for the 
vana. 

Chirakarin took a long time to assent to his father’s command, before 
saying, “So be it.” Still, due to his very nature, and habit of never 


embarking on any task without long reflection, he began to ponder upon the 
propriety or otherwise of his father’s instruction. 

How will I obey the command of my father and yet avoid killing my 
mother? How can I not drown in sin, like any evil man, in this situation 
where contradictory obligations pull me in opposite directions? 

Obedience to the commands of the father is essential and constitutes 
the highest merit. The protection of the mother again is equally a clear duty. 
The status of a son is fraught with dependence. How will I avoid this sin? 
What can I do so that both responsibilities may be discharged? Who can kill 
a woman, especially his own mother, and remain happy? Who can disregard 
his own father and yet gain prosperity and fame? 

The father places his own self within the mother’s womb and is born 
as the son, so that he may continue his vocation, conduct, name and race. 
My parents have begotten me as their son. Since I know my origin, why 
should I not have this knowledge of my relationship with both of them? 

The words spoken by the father during the initial rite after birth, and 
those at the time of the subsidiary rites settle the reverence due to him and 
confirm the respect paid to him. 

Since it is the father who raises and educates his son, he is the son’s 
primary elder and his highest dharma. The Vedas assertively stipulate that 
the son’s supreme dharma is to follow the sire’s instructions. 

Unto the father, the son is only a source of joy. Whereas for the son, 
the father is everything. The body and all else that the son owns have the 
father alone as the provider. Hence, the wishes of the father should be 
obeyed without ever questioning them in the least. His very sins are 
cleansed of the man who obeys his pita. 

The father provides sustenance, teaches the Vedas and imparts the 
knowledge of the world. He is the performer of such rites as garbhadhana 
and simantonnayana. He is dharma. He is swarga. He is the highest tapasya. 
Through his satisfaction, all the Devas are satisfied. The words spoken by 
the father turn to blessings for the son. His joyous speech washes away all 
the sins of the son. The flower falls away from the stalk. The fruit drops 
from the tree. However, the father, whatever be his distress, never abandons 
the son. These then are my views on the reverence due from the son to the 
father. To the son, the sire is not an ordinary being. I will now reflect upon 
what is due to the mother. 


As much as firewood is essential to fire, in the same manner the 
mother is the main cause of this union of the Pancha Mahabutas within my 
body. She is as tinder to the bodies of all men. She is the panacea for all 
kinds of calamities. Her existence invests one with protection; whereas her 
absence robs one of all shelter. 

The impoverished man who enters his house, with the words, “O 
mother!” need never indulge in sorrow. Nor will weakness ever assail him. 
Even if a man has sons and grandsons, and is a hundred years old, he still 
looks like a two-year-old child as long as his mother is alive. Able or 
disabled, lean or robust, the son is always protected by the mother. The 
teachings state that none other than the mother is the son’s guardian. In the 
event of her demise, the son becomes old; he is grief-stricken, and to him 
the world begins to look empty. There is no refuge, nor any defence, like 
the mother. There is no one as dear as the mother is. 

Because she carried him in her womb, the mother is the son’s Dhatri. 
As the principal cause of his birth, she is his Janani. For nourishing his 
young limbs into growth, she is called Amba. For delivering a courageous 
child, she is known as Virasu. For nursing and looking after the son, she is 
named Sura. 

The mother is one’s own body. What rational man is there who would 
kill his mother, to whose care alone belongs the reason why his own head 
did not lie by the street like a dry gourd? 

When husband and wife procreate, both of them harbour the wish for a 
son; but its success depends more upon the mother than on the father. 

The mother knows the family in which the son is born and the man 
who fathered him. From the moment of conception, the mother begins to 
show affection to her child and takes delight in him or her. Yet, the 
scriptures state that the offspring belongs to the father alone. 

If married men, who are pledged to earn religious punya, seek 
congress outside their marriage, they cease to be worthy of respect. Because 
the husband supports his wife, he is called Bhartri, and, since he protects 
her, he is called Pati. When these two functions disappear from him, he 
ceases to be both Bhartri and Pati. 

Then, again, a woman can commit no fault. The mantle of faults lies 
upon a man’s shoulders. By committing adultery, he becomes stained with 
guilt. 


It has been said that the husband is the wife’s highest goal, an idol of 
worship to her. My mother surrendered her sacred self to the one who came 
to her in the form and guise of her husband. Indeed, because of the natural 
weakness of their sex, and their liability to solicitation, women cannot be 
regarded as offenders. Conversely, the sinfulness is evident of Indra himself 
who, though guilty of committing brahmahatya, caused a third part of this 
sin to be cast upon the woman, at her request. 

There is no question about my mother’s innocence. She whom I have 
been commanded to kill is a woman. That woman, again, is my mother. She 
occupies, therefore, a place of greater reverence. The very beasts that are 
irrational know that the mother is not to be harmed. The father must be 
known to be a combination of all the Devas put together. To the mother 
attaches a union of all the mortal creatures and all the gods. 

Because of his habit of long deliberations before initiating any action, 
Chirakarin pondered in this manner for a long while. 

After many days of tapasya, and intense dhyana, Gautama returned 
home. Endowed with great wisdom, he came back convinced of the 
impropriety of the chastisement he had commanded to be inflicted upon his 
wife. 

Burning with sorrow and shedding copious tears of repentance, he 
said, “The lord of the three worlds, Purandara, came to my asrama in the 
guise of a Brahmana seeking comfort. I welcomed him with words of 
reverence, with padya to wash his feet and arghya. I also granted him the 
rest that he sought. I further told him how I had found a protector in him. 

I thought that such conduct on my part would encourage him to 
behave amicably towards me. On the contrary, he misbehaved himself, and 
my wife Ahalya, could not be regarded to have committed any fault on her 
part. It seems that while Indra was coursing through the sky, he had seen 
my wife and lost his good sense on seeing her extraordinary beauty. 

Neither my wife nor I, not even Indra, can be held responsible for the 
offence. In fact, the blame really lies with my carelessness of not protecting 
her through my yoga shakti. The Rishis have said that all calamities spring 
from envy, which, in turn, arises from error of judgement. It is by such envy 
that I have been dragged from where I was and plunged into this sea of sin. 

Alas, I have slain my wife. She is known as Vasita as she shares in her 
lord’s calamities. And since she is under my care, she is known as Bhariya. 
Who can save me from this sin? In haste I ordered Chirakarin to kill my 


wife. Even now, if he proves true to his name he may still deliver me from 
this guilt. Twice blessed be you, O Chirakaraka! If in this instance you have 
delayed accomplishing your task, then you are truly worthy of your name. 
Save your mother, yourself, as also me and my tapasya, from grave sin. Be 
really a Chirakaraka today! Ordinarily, you are judicious before you begin 
any activity. Let not your conduct be otherwise today. Be you a true 
Chirakaraka. Your mother awaited your arrival for a long time while she 
bore you in her womb. O Chirakaraka, let your introspective nature yield 
beneficial results today. 

Perhaps in view of the sorrow it would cause me, my son Chirakaraka 
will delay doing my bidding today. Maybe, he deliberates on it, while 
bearing it in his heart. Perchance, he procrastinates, in view of the grief it 
would cause us both.” 

While steeped in such repentance, O king, Maharishi Gautama saw 
Chirakarin seated before him. The sight of his father’s return overwhelmed 
Chirakarin with sorrow, as he cast away his weapon, bowed his head and 
began to pacify Gautama. When Gautama saw his son prostrate before him, 
and also saw his wife well-nigh petrified with shame, the Rishi was filled 
with great joy. From that time, the Maharishi Gautama never went 
anywhere to live away from his wife or his heedful son. 

Having issued the order that his wife should be slain, Gautama had left 
his home to attend to some personal task. Since then his son had humbly 
stood by, with weapon in hand, ready to execute his mother. 

Seeing his son prostrated at his feet, the Rishi thought that struck with 
fear, Chirakarin was seeking mercy for taking up a weapon to kill his own 
mother. Gautama held Chirakaraka in a close embrace, showered him with 
praise and affection, and blessed him saying, “May you live long!” 

Joyful and satisfied with the turn of events, Gautama, O wise one, 
addressed his son with these words, “Blessed be you, O Chirakaraka! May 
you always be thoughtful of your actions. Because of your delay in 
accomplishing my bidding you have made me eternally happy today.” 

The king of Rishis then spoke of the merits of masters who reflect for 
a long time before setting their hands to any task. He said, “If it is the 
matter of the death of a friend, one should accomplish it after due 
deliberation. If it is about abandoning a project already begun, it should be 
left for after long consideration. A friendship that is time tested will last a 
long time. In giving way to wrath, haughtiness, pride, disputes, sinful 


actions and doing unpleasant tasks he who exercises patience, deserves 
praise. When an offence is not clearly proved against a relative, a friend, a 
servant or a wife, he who reflects long before passing judgement is 
commendable.” 

Bhaarata, this is why Gautama was pleased with his son’s delay in 
carrying out his order. He who never nurses his anger for long, and reflects 
patiently before discharging any action, does not ever repent. One should 
tolerantly wait upon the aged, and show them reverence. One should attend 
to one’s duties submissively and ascertain them faithfully. He, who 
patiently pleases the learned, reverentially serves the good-natured, and 
persistently keeps his soul under control, succeeds in enjoying the respect 
of the world for a long time. One engaged in instructing others on the 
subject of dharma and svadharma, should, upon being questioned, calmly 
reflect before giving an answer so as to avoid any regret.” 

Rishi Gautama faithfully worshiped the Devas in his asrama, and 
finally ascended into swarga with his circumspect son.’ 


CANTO 267 


Y udhishtira says, “How, indeed, should the king protect his subjects 
without harming anybody? I ask you this, O Pitamaha; tell me, O 
best of good men.’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘For this, listen to an old story of the conversation 
between Dyumatsena and King Satyavat. 

I have heard that, once, when a few men were about to be executed at 
the behest of his father Dyumatsena, Prince Satyavat said certain words that 
had never been spoken before. He said, “Sometimes dharma assumes the 
form of paapa, and paapa assumes the form of dharma. Under no 
circumstances can the killing of men ever be considered good.” 

Dyumatsena replied, “If the sparing of ones that deserve to be slain be 
virtuous, if robbers be spared, O Satyavat, then all distinctions between 
virtue and vice would disappear. “This is mine’, ‘That is not his’: ideas like 
these will not prevail in the Kali yuga. The affairs of the world will come to 
a standstill. If you know of a way that the world may persist without 
punishment, then tell me about it.” 

Satyavat said, “The Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras should be placed 
under the control of the Brahmanas. If these three varnas were kept within 
the ambit of niti, then the lower classes will imitate them in their practices. 
Those who transgress the laws will be reported by the Brahmanas to the 
king, for punishment. 


Without killing the offender, the king should dispense punishment as 
prescribed by the shastras. He must not neglect to thoroughly examine the 
nature of the crime and reflect on the science of niti. 

By executing one guilty man, the king in truth kills a number of 
innocent persons as well. See, how with the death of a single robber, his 
wife, mother, father and children are all killed for they become deprived of 
the means of a livelihood. Hence, the king must deliberate deeply on the 
question of punishment. 

Sometimes an evil man is seen to imbibe good conduct from a man of 
virtue. At times, good children are born to wicked men. The wicked, 
therefore, should not be torn up by their roots. Their extermination is not 
consistent with sanatana dharma. 

A gentle reprimand may be given to correct their offences. 
Confiscation of their wealth, incarceration, even disfigurement may be 
meted out to punish them. However, their relatives should not be persecuted 
through the infliction of capital sentences on them. If in the presence of the 
purohita and others, they surrender to him, and swear, saying, “O 
Brahmana, we will never again commit any sinful deed,” they would then 
deserve to be let off without any punishment. This is the edict of Brahma 
himself. Even a Brahmana should be punished for a crime. If great men 
transgress, then their chastisement should be proportionate to their 
greatness. Habitual offenders do not deserve any leniency as might be 
shown for their first offence.” 

Dyumatsena said, “As long as the laws are not broken, dharma 
prevails. If dire offenders were not punished with death, dharma would 
soon be destroyed. Men of old were governed with ease as they were 
honourable and not easily given to disputes and quarrels. They seldom gave 
way to anger, or, if they did so, they never yielded themselves wildly to 
wrath. In those days the mere crying of ‘Fie!’ at offenders was sufficient 
punishment, followed by the punishment represented by censures, penalties 
of fines and forfeitures. In this age, however, the punishment of death has 
become common. The measure of evil has increased to such an extent that 
even the penalty of death is no longer a deterrent. 

The srutis declare that the robber has no affiliation towards the 
Manavas, Devas, Gandharvas or the Pitris. The habitual thief steals the 
ornaments of corpses from cemeteries, and clothes from men possessed by 


spirits. It is foolish to make any covenant with such wretches or trust their 
word.” 

Satyavat said, “If you do not succeed in making honest men of such 
rogues by means other than execution, then uproot them through a sacrifice. 
Kings are ashamed when thieves and robbers multiply in their kingdoms; 
therefore, for the sake of their subjects’ happiness and prosperity, they 
practice severe tapasya. 

Fear of the king can make honest subjects. Good kings never execute 
the wicked for retribution. They are successful in ruling their subjects with 
the help of their own good conduct. If the king performs justly, the superior 
subjects imitate him, and in turn, are imitated by their subordinates. Men 
are so constituted that they imitate their superiors. 

On the other hand, a corrupt king who tries to deter others from evil 
ways becomes an object of ridicule. 

He, who, through arrogance or misjudgement, offends the king in any 
manner, should be detained by all means, so that he may not repeat the 
offence in future. The emperor should first control his own self if he wishes 
to check offences in others. If the need arises, even his erring friends and 
kin must be severely punished. In a kingdom where a dire criminal does not 
receive harsh justice, for sure, adharma increases, and dharma wanes. 

Long ago, a learned Brahmana invested with clemency taught me this. 
My ancestors too, who were sworn to ahimsa, gave me similar instruction. 
They said, “In the Krita yuga, kings must rule their subjects in an entirely 
harmless manner. In the Treta yuga, they should conduct themselves in 
ways that conform to dharma fallen away by a fourth from its full 
complement. In the Dwapara yuga, they must adapt to dharma fallen away 
by a half, and in the Kali yuga, they should adjust to dharma fallen away by 
three-fourths. 

In the Kali yuga, due to evil kings and the nature of the epoch itself, 
fifteen parts of even the fourth portion of dharma disappears, leaving behind 
just a sixteenth portion. 

If, O Satyavat, confusion sets in by adopting ahimsa, the king must 
then consider the human life-span, the strength of human beings and the 
nature of the prevailing yuga, before he metes out punishments. 

Indeed, Manu, the son of Brahma, has shown compassion for human 
beings and indicated the path by which men may adhere to knowledge for 
the sake of mukti.’ 


CANTO 268 


Y udhishtira says, ‘You have already explained to me, O Pitamaha, 

how yoga dharma, may be adopted and practiced along with ahimsa. 
Tell me now about the dharma which leads to both bhoga and moksha, and 
which among these two is superior?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Both these paths are highly blessed. They are 
extremely difficult to accomplish, and yield great benefits. The two are 
practiced by the good. To answer your questions about their true meaning, I 
will tell you about the efficacy of both courses. Listen carefully, 
Yudhishtira, to the ancient tale of the discourse between Kapila and the 
cow. 

I have heard that once when Lord Tvashtri visited the palace of King 
Nahusha, that king, for the sake of hospitality, was on the verge of killing a 
cow agreeably to the eternal precept of the Vedas. 

Seeing the cow tied up for slaughter, Kapila, ever observant of the 
duties of sattva, exclaimed, “Alas, ye Vedas!” Suddenly, a Rishi named 
Syumarasmi, appeared there, through his yoga shakti, in the form of a cow. 
He turned to the Yati Kapila, and said, “Listen O Kapila! If the Vedas 
sanction the slaughter of living beings, then by what right does ahimsa 
deserve to be regarded as authoritative? There are men devoted to tapasya 
and invested with buddhi, with the srutis and gyana for their insight, who 
regard the tenets of the Vedas to be the words of Iswara himself. What can 
anybody say about the contents of the Vedas when they are the words of the 


Paramatman, who is free from any desire for reward, who is beyond envy 
and aversion, who is addicted to nothing, and because of the instant fruition 
of all his wishes, for him, the word ‘effort’ does not even exist?” 

Kapila said, “I do not criticise the Vedas. I have no wish to say 
anything derogatory about them. I have heard that the different dharmas 
established for the brahmacharin, the grihastha, the vanaprastha and the 
sannyasa asramas, all lead to the same goal. The four asramas have always 
been regarded as the Devayana marga. The relative superiority or inferiority 
of these are revealed in the nature of their individual objectives. 

Know these and perform such karmas which will lead to swarga and 
other blessings, say the Vedas. At the same time, they also proclaim—do 
not perform any karma. If abstention from karma were meritorious, then 
their achievement must be reprehensible. When the scriptures take such a 
stand, the strength or weakness of particular declarations must be most 
difficult to ascertain. If you know of any dharma which is superior to 
ahimsa, and which depends upon direct evidence instead of that of the 
scriptures, do tell me about it.” 

Syumarasmi said, “The sruti that is constantly heard by us is that one 
should perform sacrifices with a wish to reach swarga. Depending on the 
benefits one wishes for, one makes appropriate preparations for the yagna. 
Goats, horses, cows, domestic and unfettered birds, herbs and plants, are 
some of the foods available to living creatures. Daily consumption of food 
is recommended in the Vedas. In addition, the sruti says that animals and 
grains are the limbs of a sacrifice, and that Brahma created them along with 
yagna, with instructions to the gods to perform sacrifices with their help. In 
all, seven domestic and seven wild animals are identified as fit for sacrifice. 
Instead of them all being equally fit to be yagnapasus, each succeeding one 
is inferior to each preceding one. The Vedas also declare that the whole 
universe, including Purusha, is appointed for sacrifice. Men of ancient times 
confirm this. 

Is there a learned man who does not select, according to his own 
intelligence, individuals from among living creatures for sacrifice? The 
lesser animals, human beings, trees and herbs, all wish to attain heaven. The 
only means to fulfil their wishes is through sacrifice. 

There are altogether seventeen angas of a yagna. These comprise 
deciduous herbs, animals, trees, creepers, clarified butter, milk, curds, meat, 
other approved articles of sacrifice, land, the cardinal directions, faith and 


Kaala, which are thirteen. The Riks, Yajuses, Samans, the Yajamana and 
Agni, which should be known as the grihastha, bring the tally to nineteen. 

The sruti declares that sacrifice is the root of the world and its course. 
Along with ghrita, milk, curds, cowdung, skin, the hair in her tail, horns and 
hooves, the cow alone is able to furnish all the needs of a sacrifice. 
Particular items among these, coupled with ritwijas and upaharas for the 
pujaris and Brahmanas are gathered by Yajamanas, sacrificers, to perform 
specific yagnas. We hear from the sruti that everything is created for 
sacrifices, and it is in this manner that men of ancient times performed 
sacrifices. 

As regards he who conducts sacrifices more out of faith than for the 
sake of benefit, it is seen that he does not harm any creature nor bear 
himself with any hostility, nor does he set himself to achieve any worldly 
task. The things known as the limbs of sacrifice, and its other requirements, 
support each other when used according to the approved rituals. 

I have seen Rishis who follow the Brahmanas regard the smritis into 
which the Vedas are introduced, as authoritative. The Brahmanas are the 
source and support of yagnas. The universe and_ sacrifice are 
interdependent. 

The syllable AUM is the root of the Vedas. Every rite, therefore, 
should begin with the expression of that syllable of vast import. He who 
utters the sounds AUM, namas, swaha, svadha and vashat, and performs 
sacrifices and other rites, need not fear the afterlife in all the three worlds. 
So say the Vedas, and the best of Rishis. 

He in whom abide the Riks, the Yajuses, the Samans and the 
inflections necessary for completing the rhythm of the Samans in accord 
with the rules of Vedic grammar, is indeed a Brahmana. 

You know, O adorable Brahmana, about the benefits of Agnihotra, the 
Soma yagna, and other great yagnas. Hence, one should sacrifice and assist 
at other’s sacrifices, without scruples of any kind. He who performs the 
Jyotishtoma yagna, and the rest that lead to swarga, acquires high rewards 
hereafter in the form of heavenly beatitude. This is certain, that those who 
do not perform sacrifices have neither this world, nor the next. 

Those who know the revelations of the Vedas regard both kinds of 
explanations, the ones that urge actions and those that preach abstention, to 
be equally authoritative.” 


CANTO 269 


K apila said, “Knowing that all the fruits of karma are terminable, 

Yatis embrace samyama and shanti, to attain Brahman through the 
path of knowledge. There is nothing in any of the worlds that can stop 
them, for, by mere exercise of their will, they achieve all their wishes. 

They are freed from the influence of duality. They never bow down to 
anything or anyone. They are wise and above all the bonds of want. They 
are free from every sin. Pure and spotless, they live and roam blissfully 
wherever they will. Their minds are clear about all moral things and 
renunciation. 

Devoted to Brahman, akin to Brahman, they have taken refuge in 
Brahman. Transcending sorrow, and freed from rajas, they have acquired 
the eternal. When the high goal is within reach, where is the need to live as 
a grihasta?” 

Syumarasmi said, “If Brahman is the highest object of acquisition, if it 
truly is the highest end attained by renunciation, then the importance of the 
grihastasrama becomes evident. Because, without the grihastasrama no 
other asrama of life can ever become possible. Indeed, as all living 
creatures survive because of their dependence on their mothers, so do the 
three other asramas exist as a result of their dependence on the 
grihastasrama. 

For the welfare of his family, the householder performs sacrifices, and 
practices penances. Hence, the roots of happiness lie within the domestic 


life. All living beings consider procreation of children as a great source of 
joy. In any asrama other than the family life, this is impossible to achieve. 

Every kind of grass and straw, all plants, herbs and crops that yield 
corn or grain, and others of the kind that grow on hills and mountains, have 
the grihastasrama as their source. The life of living beings depends upon 
these crops, and since nothing else other than life is seen in the universe, 
domesticity may be considered as the haven of the entire universe. Who 
then speaks the truth that says that domesticity cannot lead to moksha? 

Only those who are destitute of faith, wisdom and insight, who are 
bereft of reputation, idle and toil-worn, who are miserable due to their past 
evil karma, and those who are ignorant, perceive the abundance of peace in 
a life of mendicancy. The eternal and clear Vedic distinctions are the causes 
that sustain the three worlds. The illustrious man of the highest order, who 
knows the Vedas, is worshipped from the moment he is born. Besides the 
garbhadhana, men of the enlightened varnas need Veda mantras to 
accomplish all their tasks in both this and the other world. 

Veda mantras are necessary for cremation, to attain and nourish the 
next body, while gifting cows and other animals to help cross the river that 
divides the shores of prana from those of Yama, and for the ceremony of 
pinda dana to ancestors. Even the three classes of Pitris—the Archishmats, 
Barhishads and Kravyadas—approve of the need of mantras and their 
efficacy at the time of rites in honour of the deceased. 

When the Vedas are so clear about this and it is evident that all human 
beings are indebted to the Pitris, Rishis and Devas, how then can anyone 
attain moksha? This false doctrine of ethereal existence called mukti, 
apparently dressed in colours of truth, but subversive of the real purport of 
the revelations of the Vedas, has been introduced by learned men robbed of 
prosperity and consumed by idleness. 

A Brahmana who performs approved sacrifices is never seduced by 
sin. In fact, he attains high regions of felicity along with the animals he has 
slain in the sacrifices, and gratified by achieving his wishes, succeeds in 
pleasing the very animals. No one ever succeeds in attaining the Supreme 
through disregard of the Vedas, not with guile, or deception. On the 
contrary, one achieves Brahman through practising the rites prescribed in 
the Vedas.”’Kapila said, “If actions are obligatory, there are the Darsa, 
Paurnamasa, Agnihotra, Chaturmasya and others for the man of buddhi. 
They are full of eternal merit. Why then do something that involves cruelty? 


Those who have taken to sannyasa, and know Brahman, succeed in 
paying their debts to the Devas, Rishis and Pitris. The very gods are unable 
to trace the path of the trackless person who appoints himself as the soul of 
all creatures and who looks upon all creatures as one. 

Through the guru, one learns about how that which dwells within this 
body has a fourfold nature, with four doors and four mouths. Endowed with 
two arms, the organ of speech, a stomach and the organ of pleasure, even 
the gods are said to have four sensory doors. One should, therefore, strive 
one’s best to keep the senses under control. 

Men should not gamble, nor appropriate what belongs to another. 
They should not assist at the sacrifice of an ignoble person, nor yield to 
wrath and strike another with hands or feet. The wise man who conducts 
himself in this way is in control of his limbs. 

He should not indulge in vociferous abuse or censure, nor speak words 
that are vain. He should forbear from duplicity and slander. He should be 
truthful, sparing in speech and always heedful. In this manner, one should 
be pure and restrained of speech. 

He must not abstain from food entirely, nor should he eat too much. 
He should renounce greed, and always seek the company of the good. He 
should eat only as much as is needed for sustenance. Through such 
behaviour, one controls the stomach. 

He should not lustfully take another wife, when he is already married, 
nor summon a woman to bed except in her season. He should be content 
with his own wife and not seek congress with other women. Through this 
manner, he controls his organ of pleasure. 

A wise man, who has all these four senses under control, is truly 
enlightened. 

Everything becomes useless to him whose sensory doors are not in 
check. What can the tapasya of such a man achieve? What can his sacrifices 
bring about? What can be accomplished by his body? 

The Devas know him for a Brahmana who, with a serene heart, sheds 
his upper garment, sleeps on the bare ground, and makes his arm a pillow. 
The one who singly enjoys all the happiness that married couples enjoy, 
who is not distracted by the joys and sorrow of others, and remains focused 
in meditation, should be known as a Brahmana. 

He who rightly understands all this as it exists in reality with its 
numerous transformations, and who knows what the end is of all created 


things, is known by the gods for a Brahmana. He who does not fear any 
creature and whom no creature fears, who constitutes himself the soul of all 
creatures, should be known for a Brahmana. 

Purity of heart is the true result of all pious deeds. Even when 
explained by gurus, foolish men bereft of such purity, are not able to gather 
what is required for the making of a Brahmana. These ignorant men wish 
for fruits of a different kind—swarga and its passing joys. 

Unable to practice even a small part of the good conduct which has 
descended from time immemorial, which is eternal, and characterised by 
certainty, it enters as a thread into all our duties, which intelligent men from 
all modes of life embrace, and transform their individual dharma and 
penances into formidable weapons to destroy the ignorance and evils of 
worldliness. Actions that are eternal and fraught with the highest energy, 
which present visible gains, are considered by fools to be not sanctioned by 
the scriptures, and thus fruitless and deviations from the proper path. 

In truth, however, such karmas are the very opposite of those that are 
seen in times of distress; it is the very core of heedfulness and is never 
affected by lust, wrath and other passions of the kind. 

As to sacrifices—it is difficult to ascertain all their particulars. If 
determined, it is exceedingly hard to observe them in practice. If practiced, 
their fruits are terminable. Mark this well and walk the path of knowledge.” 

Syumarasmi said, “The Vedas acknowledge karma but also disapprove 
of it. Where is their authority when their statements contradict each other? 
Besides, renunciation of actions, yields great benefit. Both these have been 
indicated in the Vedas. Do speak to me on this subject, OO Brahmana!” 

Kapila replied, “Through the direct evidence of your senses, you are 
able to realise the benefits of yoga in this very life. What are the visible 
results of your actions in pursuit of other objects?” 

Syumarasmi replied, “O Brahmana, I am Syumarasmi. I have come 
here to acquire knowledge. I have begun this conversation in artless 
candour out of a need for my own good, and not from a thirst for debate. 
The dark question has taken possession of my mind. O illustrious one, 
dispel the darkness. 

You have said that those who embrace yoga, which leads to Brahman, 
realise its fruits through the direct evidence of their senses. What, indeed, is 
so realised by this direct evidence that you also pursue? I have avoided all 
sciences that have controversy for their sole objective, and studied the 


Agamas with enough intensity to have mastered their true meaning. 
Through the Agamas, I understand the declarations of the Vedas. I also 
include all those vigyanas based on logic, which are aimed at revealing the 
real and inner meaning of the Vedas. 

Without circumventing the duties laid down for his asrama, one should 
pursue the practices laid down in the Agamas, which are sure to meet with 
success. Because of the certainty of its conclusions, the success to which 
the Agamas leads may be said to be almost realisable by direct evidence. 
Just as passengers of a ship cannot be taken to the port of their will by being 
towed by another ship bound for a different port, similarly we can never 
cross the interminable river of birth and death by being bound to our past 
karmas. 

Speak to me on this subject, O illustrious one! Teach me as a guru 
does his sishya. There is not a man who has completely renounced all 
worldly objects, who is perfectly content with himself, who has transcended 
sorrow, and is perfectly free from disease. No one has entirely abstained 
from activity of every kind, is free from the need for action or has an 
absolute distaste for companionship. Like us, even you are seen to give way 
to joy and indulge in despair, and like other beings, your senses have their 
functions and objects. Tell me, if we are to investigate happiness, where can 
pure felicity be found for the four varnas and four asramas, which have the 
same foundation for their tendencies?” 

Kapila said, “Whichever shastras one may follow to perform one’s 
duties, the niyamas, ordinances, laid down in it to rule one’s actions never 
become fruitless. Whatever again the patha that one may tread, with yoga, 
one is sure to attain the highest only through observing dharma. 

Knowledge helps the one who pursues it; even so, deviating from 
gyana is the cause for suffering. It is evident that you are knowledgeable 
and dissociated from worldly objects, but have any of you, at any time, 
acquired the knowledge with which everything is viewed as identical with 
the one Universal Soul? 

There are men who lack proper awareness of the scriptures, and are 
only happy with debate. Because they are overwhelmed by thirst and 
aversion, they become slaves of pride and arrogance. These arrogant 
ignorers of the shastras, these mistaken depredators of Brahman, who do 
not fully understand the meaning of scriptural tenets, refuse to pursue shanti 
and samyama, peace and restraint. These men behold emptiness on every 


side, and, if perchance they succeed in acquiring the power of knowledge, 
they never impart it for the benefit of others. 

Yielded entirely of the tamoguna, they have tamas as their only refuge. 
One becomes prone to all the incidents of the nature, which one imbibes. 
Accordingly, for the one with tamas for his sanctuary, the passions of envy, 
lust, wrath, pride, falsehood, and vanity are constantly on the rise. Thinking 
in this strain and considering these faults, Yatis who seek the highest goal, 
abandon both good and evil, and take to yoga.” 

Syumarasmi said, “O Brahmana, all that I said in praise of action and 
renunciation, is agreeable to the scriptures. Nevertheless, it is true that, 
without proper realisation of the meaning of the scriptures, one does not 
feel inclined to abide by what they declare. Whatever conduct is consistent 
with dharma is proper with the shastras. Even the sruti confirms this. 
Similarly, whatever conduct is inconsistent with dharma, is in conflict with 
the scriptures. This too is affirmed by the sruti. It is certain that no one can 
do anything scriptural by transgressing the scriptures, and that which is 
against the Vedas is unscriptural. The sruti confirms this. 

Many men, who believe only what directly appeals to their senses, 
witness only this world. They do not perceive what the scriptures declare as 
faults. Like us, they have to give way to sorrow. The objects of the senses 
with which men like you are concerned are the same ones by which other 
living creatures are affected. Yet, because of your knowledge of the Soul, 
and their ignorance of it, how vast is the difference between the two of you. 

The four varnas, and the four asramas, with their different dharmas, 
seek the same single end, Akhanda-Ananda, Universal Bliss. 

You possess unquestioned talents and abilities. By identifying a 
specific path, which is appropriate to reach the goal, and by speaking to me 
on the infinite Brahman, you have filled my soul with peace. As for us, 
because we are unable to comprehend the Atman, we are robbed of a proper 
grasp of reality. Our wisdom is concerned with things that are low, and we 
are enveloped in thick darkness. The path that you have indicated in order 
to attain moksha is exceedingly difficult to practice. Only a dispassionate 
yogi, who has discharged all his karmas, and brought his soul under perfect 
control, can transgress the declarations of the Vedas with regard to actions, 
and say that he has mukti. Still, for one who lives in the midst of relatives, 
this course of conduct is indeed difficult to follow. 


If the practices of giving gifts, sacrifices, studying of the Vedas, 
begetting children, simplicity of conduct, do not bestow mukti on anyone — 
then fie on him who seeks it, and fie on moksha itself! It seems that the 
labour spent in its pursuit is fruitless. 

One is accused of atheism if he disregards the directives of the Vedas. 
O illustrious one, I wish to hear about mukti as described in the Vedas after 
the declarations in favour of karma. Do you tell me the truth, O Brahmana. I 
sit at your feet as a disciple. Teach me, kindly! I wish to know as much 
about moksha as is known to you, O learned one.” 


CANTO 270 


K apila said, “Everyone accepts the authority of the Vedas. People 

never disregard them. Brahman is of two kinds—as represented by 
sound, sabdabrahman, and as supreme and intangible, nirguna Brahman. 
One who knows Brahman represented by sound succeeds in attaining 
Supreme Brahman. Beginning with garbhadhana, insemination, the body 
that the progenitor creates with the help of Vedic mantras is cleansed upon 
birth. Thereafter, its living entity is known as a Brahmana who becomes a 
vessel fit to receive knowledge of the Brahman. Know that the reward of 
actions is purity of heart, which leads to mukti. 

The person who has gained it can only know whether purity of heart is 
acquired. The Vedas or inference can never know it. Those who do not 
cherish any expectation, who give away surplus wealth, who are not 
covetous, and are free from every kind of affection and aversion, believe 
that it is their dharma to perform sacrifices. Charity towards deserving 
persons is the right use of all wealth. 

Long ago, there were many men who were never addicted to sinful 
ways; they performed the prescribed rites of the Veda, and easily achieved 
what they wished for. Gyana provided them with positive views, through 
which they did not give in to anger or envy, and helped them remain free 
from pride and malice. These men were true yogis of pure birth devoted to 
the good of all creatures. They lived as grihastas very faithful to their 
svadharma. 


There were many kings as well, like Janaka, and many Brahmanas like 
Yajnavalkya, and others too—all equally blessed and endowed, and devoted 
to yoga. They were sincere and equal in their behaviour towards all beings. 
They were satisfied men, gifted with infallible knowledge, and the fruits of 
their dharma were plainly visible. With pure hearts and good conduct, these 
men duly observed all vows and believed in Brahman of both forms. Even 
in times of distress and hardship, they never flinched from their obligations 
to dharma. Together they performed meritorious deeds in which they found 
great happiness. And because they never erred, no need ever arose for them 
to perform any atonement. 

Their reliance upon the true course of dharma invested them with 
irresistible tejas, and in order to earn punya, they ignored their own 
intelligence and chose to live by the dictates of the scriptures alone. In this 
way, they were never guilty of guile in the matter of performing deeds of 
dharma. Because of their undivided observance of the absolute precepts of 
the scriptures, they were never required to perform penances. There is no 
expiation for men who observe the edicts of the scriptures. The sruti 
declares that tapasya exists for only men that are weak and unable to follow 
the absolute requirements of the sacred law. 

In olden days, there were many famed Brahmanas of profound 
knowledge of the Vedas, who were pure and of righteous conduct. They 
always worshipped Brahma in the sacrifices, and were free from greed. 
Gifted with great wisdom, they transcended all the bonds of life. With their 
yagnas, their vidya, their ethical karmas, their devoted study of the shastras, 
these men were free from lust and wrath, and they observed pious carriage 
and actions in the face of all difficulties. 

Renowned as they were for performing the duties of their own varnas 
and asramas, purified as their souls were by their very nature, characterised 
as they were by thorough sincerity, devoted as they were to peace, and 
mindful as they were of their svadharma—these men were identical with 
infinite Brahman. Furthermore, the eternal sruti informs us about how the 
tapasya of exalted men become efficacious weapons for the destruction of 
all earthly yearnings. 

The Brahmanas say that sadachara, good conduct, and its eternal 
unchangeable characteristics may be traced to the most ancient times. Even 
though good men may deviate from it in some situations, they eventually 
turn to it in times of distress. As it is identical with awareness —lust, wrath 


and other evil passions can never prevail upon it. This is why, in days of 
old, in all humankind, there was no sin or transgression. Men, who were 
unable to practice good conduct in its entirety, subsequently distributed it 
into four divisions that correspond with the four asramas of life. 

Good men who observe sadachara from all the four asramas, 
beginning with sannyasa, vanaprastha, grihasta and brahmacharya, all attain 
the highest goal of Brahman. As affirmed in the Vedas, countless 
Brahmanas have acquired ananta and now reside as shining stars and 
constellations across the firmament—as a result of renunciation. If such 
men are reborn, they are never tainted by residual sins accumulated from 
previous lives. 

Indeed, the brahmacharin who has dutifully served his guru, devoted 
himself to yoga and realised the Atman, is truly a Brahmana. Who else 
would deserve to be called a Brahmana? Actions alone determine who is a 
Brahmana—deeds must be held accountable for the happiness or misery of 
a person. Once again, we hear from the sruti about men who conquer evil 
passions and acquire purity of heart. Of how they perceive everything to be 
Brahman, because of the infinity they attain and of the knowledge of 
Brahman that they acquire. 

The duties for these chaste men who have moksha and brahmagyana 
as their sole aim are equally laid down for all the four varnas and the four 
asramas of life. Truly, Brahmanas of pure hearts and restrained Souls 
always acquire that knowledge. He who is content and his Soul is set on 
renunciation, is seen as the refuge of true knowledge. 

Parityaga, in which there is wisdom that leads to moksha, is essential 
for a Brahmana. Since ages, times out of mind, it has passed down from 
guru to sishya. Nirvritti, abstention, sometimes exists mixed with the duties 
of other asramas, but whether it exists in that state or by itself, one practices 
it in keeping with the measure of one’s spiritual maturity. Abstinence is of 
supreme benefit to everyone. Only the weak fail to practice it. The pure- 
hearted man who seeks to attain Brahman is rescued from the world of 
suffering.” 

Syumarasmi said, “Among those who have surrendered to joys of 
ownership, men who are charitable, others who perform sacrifices, some 
who study the Vedas, and even the sannyasin, O Brahmana, who indeed 
from these, acquires the highest place in swarga when they depart from this 
world? I ask you this, O Brahmana. Do you tell me truly.” 


Kapila replied, “The grihastas are certainly auspicious and acquire 
excellence of every kind. Still, they are unable to enjoy the felicity that 
attaches to parityaga. Even you must see this.” 

Syumarasmi said, “You depend upon knowledge as the means for 
mukti. The grihastas have invested their faith in dharma. Even so, it is said 
that the goal of all the asramas of life is mukti. No difference, therefore, is 
distinguished between them with regard to either their superiority or 
inferiority. O illustrious one, please tell me then how this matter truly 
stands.” 

Kapila said, “Karma only cleanses the body. Gyana, however, is the 
highest goal. When the heart is pure, and the bliss of Brahman abides in 
knowledge, then, benevolence, forgiveness, peace, compassion, truthfulness 
and candour, non-violence, absence of pride, modesty, renunciation and 
abstention from work are all naturally attained. 

These form the path that lead to Brahman. By them, one attains the 
highest. To the wise, it becomes clear that the purification of the heart is 
attained by performing one’s svadharma. This, indeed, is the highest goal to 
be gained by Brahmanas. 

He, who acquires knowledge of the Vedas, and the finer aspects of 
kriya, is well versed in the Vedas. Any other man is only as a bag of wind. 
He who understands the Vedas knows everything, for everything is 
established on them. Truly, the past, present and future all exist in the 
Vedas. 

The one conclusion deducible from all the shastras is that this universe 
both exists and does not exist. To the gyani, all that is perceived is both 
satya and asatya. To him, all this is both the end and the middle. This truth 
rests upon all the Vedas, that when complete nirvritti occurs one receives 
what is sufficient. 

Then again, the highest satisfaction follows and rests upon moksha, 
which is absolute, exists as the soul of all mortal and immortal things, is 
acclaimed as the Paramatman soul, and is the highest goal of gyana. 

It is identical with all being, chala and achala, is complete, and is 
perfect felicity; it is without duality, and is the most excellent of all things. 
It is the Avyakta Brahman, as well as the cause from where the unmanifest 
has emerged, and is without decay of any kind. 

The three causes of perfect joy are an ability to subdue the senses, 
forgiveness and abstention from activity, which is born from an absence of 


desire. With the help of these three qualities, sages successfully reach the 
uncreated Brahman, which is the prime cause of the universe, is 
unchangeable and beyond destruction. I bow to that Brahman, which is 
identical with him who knows it.” 


CANTO 271 


Y udhishtira says, “Bhaarata, the Vedas speak of dharma, labha and 
ananda. Tell me, even so, O Pitamaha, the attainment of which 
amongst these three is superior.’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘There is an old tale about this, of the boon that 
Kundadhara once conferred upon one of his devotees. Listen to it. 

Once upon a time, a poor Brahmana was in search of dharma. In order 
to perform sacrifices he constantly sought wealth for which he practiced 
austere tapasya. Committed to accomplish his purpose, he worshipped the 
Devas with great devotion, but he failed to acquire wealth by such worship. 
Hence, he reflected to himself, “Who is the Deva, hitherto neglected by 
men, who may be favourably disposed to reward me without delay?” 

While calmly meditating in this manner, he beheld stationed before 
him the retainer of the Devas, the cloud-named Kundadhara. 

As soon as he saw the mighty-armed being, the Brahmana’s feelings 
of devotion were excited, and he said to himself, “This one will surely 
bestow prosperity upon me. Indeed, his form indicates as much. He lives in 
close proximity to the gods and other men do not yet worship him. He will 
verily give me abundant wealth, instantly.” 

The Brahmana, then, worshipped Kundadhara with dhupa, sugandha 
and malyadaman, garlands of flowers, of the most superior kind, and 
diverse other offerings. 


Worshipped in this manner, Kundadhara was very pleased and spoke 
these favourable words to the Brahmana, “The wise have ordained 
redemption for he who is guilty of brahmahatya, who drinks alcohol, steals 
or neglects punya vratas. There is no atonement, however, for the man who 
is ungrateful. 

Expectation has a child named sorrow. Ire is the child of envy. 
Cupidity is the child of deceit. Whereas ingratitude is barren and has no 
children.” 

After this, the Brahmana stretched out on a bed of kusa grass, and 
infused with the tejas of Kundadhara, he beheld all living beings in a dream. 
Indeed, because of his absence of passion, his penances and devotion, the 
chaste and celibate Brahmana witnessed that night the result of his devotion 
to Kundadhara. 

Truly, O Yudhishtira, he saw the high-souled and resplendent 
Manibhadra stationed in the midst of the Devas, engaged in dispensing 
wisdom and instruction. The gods were engrossed in bestowing kingdoms 
and riches upon men, prompted by their good deeds, and in seizing them 
from men who declined from dharma. 

Then, O bull of Bharata’s race, Kundadhara bowed low, and prostrated 
himself on the ground before the Devas in the presence of all the Yakshas. 
At the behest of the Devas, Manibhadra addressed Kundadhara and said, 
“What does Kundadhara wish?” 

Kundadhara replied, “If, indeed, the lords are pleased with me, that 
Brahmana there reverences me greatly and I pray for some favour being 
shown to him, something that may bring him happiness.” 

Hearing this, Manibhadra said, “Rise, O Kundadhara! Your boon is 
granted. Rejoice! If this Brahmana wishes for affluence, let as much wealth 
as he needs be given to him. At the behest of the Devas I will give him 
untold riches.” 

Kundadhara was aware of the fleeting nature of humankind, O 
Yudhishtira, so he decided to inspire the Brahmana towards tapasya. 

Kundadhara said, “I do not, O giver of wealth, beg for prosperity on 
behalf of this Brahmana. I wish that you bestow another boon upon him. 
For this devotee of mine, I do not seek mountains of pearls and gems nor 
the whole earth with all her riches. I desire, however, that he should be 
virtuous. Let his heart find pleasure in goodness. Let him have purity. Let 


dharma be the loftiest of all objectives with him. Such is the boon that 
meets with my approval.” 

Manibhadra replied, “The fruits of virtue are always sovereignty and 
happiness of diverse kinds. Ever freed from physical pain of every kind, let 
him enjoy such rewards.” 

Nevertheless, Kundadhara repeatedly pleaded for dharma alone for the 
Brahmana, and the Devas were greatly pleased with this. 

Manibhadra said, “The gods are all pleased with you and the 
Brahmana, who will become a virtuous man, and his mind will be devoted 
to dharma.” 

Kundadhara was delighted, O Yudhishtira, with the fulfilment of his 
wish. The boon that he received was unattainable by anybody else. 

The Brahmana saw, scattered around him, reams of delicate silks and 
other priceless things. With a total disregard for them, he came to loathe the 
world. 

The Brahmana said, “When Kundadhara does not value good deeds, 
who else will? I had better go into the forest to lead a life of tapasya.” 

With an abhorrence for the world, and through the grace of the gods, 
the peerless Brahmana entered the jungle and began the austerest of 
penances. 

Subsisting upon fruits and roots left over after serving the Devas and 
Atithis, the mind of the enlightened one, O monarch, was firmly set upon 
dharma. Gradually, the Brahmana renounced fruits and roots, and took to 
eating leaves for his food. Later, he forsook these as well and survived just 
on water, until at last he passed many years by living on air alone. All the 
while, his strength did not diminish. This seemed most marvellous. Devoted 
to dharma, and engaged in the severest austerities, he eventually acquired 
spiritual perception. 

He then reflected to himself, “If someone pleases me, and I wish 
wealth upon him, my words will come true.” His face sparkled with smiles, 
as he once more took to even stricter tapasya. Now that he had won even 
greater ascetic success, he thought that he could create the very highest 
objects, through sheer power of his will. “If I merely wish sovereignty upon 
someone I am pleased with, he will immediately become a king, for my 
wish will instantly come true.” 

While he was thinking in this way, Kundadhara, inspired by his 
friendship for the Brahmana and no less in his yoga shakti, materialised, O 


Bhaarata, before his friend and devotee. Seeing him, the Brahmana offered 
the customary adorations. The Brahmana, however, soon felt some surprise, 
O king. 

Turning to the Brahmana, Kundadhara said, “Through this excellent 
spiritual vision you have now realised, observe the end that is achieved by 
kings, and survey all the worlds besides.” From a distance, the Brahmana 
observed thousands of kings sunk in hell. 

Kundadhara said, “You feel that even though you worshipped me with 
devotion, all you received in return is sorrow. Of what use and value is my 
boon to you? Look at the end for which men crave the satisfaction of carnal 
pleasures. The door of heaven is shut to them.” 

The Brahmana witnessed many men living in this world, embracing 
lust, anger, cupidity, fear, pride, sleep, hesitation and idleness.’ 

Kundadhara said, “Human beings are enslaved with these vices. The 
gods are afraid of men. At the behest of the Devas, these vices mar and 
disconcert Manavas on every side. No man can become virtuous unless 
permitted by the Devas. It is with their consent that you are able to give 
away kingdoms and wealth through your tapasya.” 

When the Brahmana heard this, he prostrated on the ground before 
Kundadhara, and said, “You have indeed opened my eyes. Unconscious of 
your great affection towards me, through the influence of desire and 
cupidity, I failed to show gratitude to you.” 

Kundadhara embraced him and replied, “I forgive you.” And there and 
then, Kundadhara disappeared. 

The Brahmana then ranged through all the worlds with the help of the 
yoga shakti bestowed on him through Kundadhara’s grace. One is able to 
sail through the skies and to fructify all one’s wishes and purposes, and 
finally reach the highest goal, with the energy gained from sattva and 
tapasya. 

The Devas, Brahmanas, Yakshas, Charanas and Sajjanas, good men, 
always adore those that are virtuous but never those that are rich or given 
up to the indulgence of their desires. The gods are truly propitious to you 
since your mind is devoted to dharma. In wealth there may be some brief 
happiness but in dharma the measure of happiness is endless.’ 


CANTO 272 


Y udhishtira says, ‘Amongst the myriad sacrifices, all of which are 

regarded to have but one object, the cleansing of the heart or the 
glory of God, tell me, O Pitamaha, which of these yagnas is assigned only 
for the sake of dharma and not for the acquisition of either heaven or 
prosperity?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘About this, Narada once spoke of a Brahmana who 
lived in the Unchha vrata to perform yagnas. Listen to that story. 

Narada said, “In one of the superior kingdoms distinguished for virtue, 
there once lived a Brahmana who worshipped Vishnu in sacrifices and, 
devoted to penances, lived according to the Unchha vrata. 

For his sustenance, he ate syamaka, suryaparni, suvarchala and other 
herbs that are bitter to the taste; but, because of his tapasya, they tasted 
sweet. 

At peace with all the animals, he lived as a hermit in the forest, and 
gained ascetic success. 

With roots and fruits, O scorcher of foes, he adored Vishnu in 
sacrifices that were intended to bestow swarga upon him. 

The Brahmana’s name was Satya, and his wife was Pushkaradharini 
and her garments were made of fallen plumes of peacocks. She was pure- 
minded, and had liberated herself through many austere vows. A benevolent 
woman, she did not approve of her husband’s addiction to performing 
sacrifices that were cruel. Still, summoned as she was to take her rightful 


seat by his side to perform a yagna, she tolerated his conduct lest she incur 
his curse. At the behest of her lord who was its hotri, she performed the 
yagna, unwillingly. 

In the forest near the Brahmana’s asrama, there lived a neighbour, the 
virtuous Parnada of Sukra’s vamsa, in the form of a deer. 

He addressed Satya, in a clear voice and said, “Your yagna will be 
most inappropriate if you perform a sacrifice in a manner which is defective 
in mantras and other rituals. I, therefore, ask you to slay and cut me into 
pieces as an offering for your sacrificial fire. Do this and you will ascend to 
swarga without any sin or guilt.” 

At once, Savitri, the presiding Goddess of the Sun, appeared in her 
embodied form and insisted that the Brahmana take heed of the deer’s 
words. Despite her insistence, the Brahmana replied, “I will not kill this 
deer who lives with me as my neighbour.” 

Since Devi Savitri did not wish to see defects in the sacrifice, she 
acceded to the words of the Brahmana and entered the yagna to survey the 
nether world. 

The deer joined his hands and once again pleaded with Satya to be cut 
into pieces and sacrificed. Nevertheless, Satya embraced him in friendship 
and told him to go his way. The deer obeyed him and went away. Hardly 
had he taken eight steps when he returned, and pleaded once more, “Indeed, 
slay me. For if you do, I will surely acquire dharma. Let me give you 
spiritual drishti, whereby you will witness the celestial apsaras and the 
beautiful rathas of the exalted Gandharvas.” 

Satya examined the sight at length with longing. He also noted the 
deer’s willingness to be sacrificed, and thinking that swarga was attainable 
only through slaughter, he admired the deer’s counsel. 

It was Dharma himself who had become a deer that lived in those 
jungles for many years. He provided for the Brahmana’s salvation and 
counselled him, saying that the slaughter of living creatures is not 
harmonious with the ordinances laid down for yagnas. 

The great magnitude of the penances of Satya, whose mind had 
entertained the need for killing the deer, diminished vastly because of the 
very thought. Thus, himsa towards living creatures forms no part of a true 
yagna. 

The illustrious Dharma at once assumed his real form and assisted 
Satya to perform the sacrifice. Thereafter, the Brahmana’s inner nature was 


as one with that of his wife Pushkaradharini. 

Ahimsa is that dharma which is complete in respect of its rewards. 
The religion, however, of cruelty is beneficial only insofar as it leads to a 
terminable heaven. I have spoken to you of dharma, which, indeed, is the 
religion of those who speak of Brahman.’ 


CANTO 273 


Y udhishtira says, “By what means does a man become paapi, a 
sinner? How does he achieve punya, how does he attain parityaga, 
and how does he achieve moksha?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘You are well aware of all dharma. Your question is 
only for affirmation of your own findings. Listen now about sin, virtue, 
renunciation and emancipation, to their very roots. 

Upon the perception of any one of the five senses—form, taste, scent, 
sound and touch—desire, or aversion, as the case may be, responds to it at 
first. Accordingly, one performs various laborious tasks and actions. As in 
the case of pleasure, one struggles hard to experience it repeatedly. 
Gradually, attachment, aversion, greed and errors of judgement arise. 

The mind of the man overwhelmed by greed and error, and who is 
affected by attachment and aversion, is never fixed on dharma. Instead, it 
turns to hypocrisy to perform good deeds. Indeed, with the help of deceit 
and deception it then seeks to acquire wealth and virtue, artha and dharma. 

When a man succeeds, O son of Kuru’s vamsa, in winning wealth with 
duplicity, his heart becomes fixed on such means of acquisition. He then 
begins to perform sinful deeds, unmindful of the admonitions of the wise 
and of well-wishers. He responds to them with answers plausibly consistent 
with reason and agreeable to the injunctions of the scriptures. Born of 
attachment and error, his sins rapidly increase, for he thinks, speaks, and 
acts sinfully. 


His advent on the path of sin and his evil ways are marked by the 
virtuous. And, even as birds of similar species fly together, those with 
similar sinful traits embrace him as a friend. He does not succeed in 
winning happiness even here. Where then would he succeed in winning 
happiness hereafter? In this manner, he becomes a paapi, a sinner. 

Listen now as I speak to you of the righteous man. As long as such a 
man seeks the good of others, he succeeds in winning well-being for 
himself. By practising duties that are fraught with other people’s weal, he 
eventually attains a highly pleasant end. 

He, who foresees the faults, mentioned earlier, who is adept in judging 
happiness and sorrow and how each is brought about, and who respectfully 
attends on those that are righteous, makes progress in achieving virtue. The 
mind of such a man takes delight in sattva, and he lives on, making dharma 
his support. 

If he sets his heart on the acquisition of wealth, he desires only such 
wealth as may be gained through dharma. Surely, he nurtures the roots of 
only such things in which he sees punya. In this way, he becomes a man of 
dharma and acquires friends that are virtuous. With good friends, wealth 
and children acquired, he revels in happiness both here and in the hereafter. 

Remember this, O Bhaarata, the mastery that a man attains over 
sound, touch, taste, form and scent, represent the fruits of dharma. Even 
though he gains these rewards, O Yudhishtira, he does not give in to joy; 
instead, guided by gyana, he takes to sannyasa, and ceases to indulge in 
gratifying the senses, whereby he succeeds in freeing himself from passion. 
Even so, he does not discard virtue or righteous actions. Once he realises 
the transitory nature of all the worlds, he strives to abandon even punya 
karma with its rewards of swarga and sukha, and endeavours to attain 
moksha. In time, he abandons all indulgence and sin, embraces 
renunciation, becomes chaste, and eventually does attain mukti. 

O Bhaarata, I have now replied to your queries on papam, dharma, 
vairagya and moksha. You should, therefore, O Yudhishtira, adhere to sattva 
in all situations. Eternal will be the success, O son of Kunti, of you who 
respect dharma.’ 


CANTO 274 


Y udhishtira says, “You say, O Pitamaha, that mukti is to be won by 
certain means and not through others. I wish to know more about 
these methods, O Anagha.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘O Rajarishi, your question about this subtle subject is 
worthy of you, for you always try to accomplish your goals through 
appropriate means. The image of a jar remains in the potter’s mind as long 
as he is moulding it, and disappears once it is complete. Similarly, the 
cause, which urges men who regard dharma as the root of advancement and 
prosperity, ceases to function for those who seek mukti. The path to the 
eastern ocean is not the same as the one that leads to the western ocean. 
There is only one path that leads to moksha, and it is different from those 
that lead to earthly possessions. Listen, as I explain this in detail. 

To overcome anger, one practices forgiveness and discards all 
ambition to uproot desire. To overcome sleep, embrace the sattva guna, and 
resist fear through awareness. To conquer prana, meditate upon the Atman. 

Patience dispels desire, aversion and lust, whereas the study of truth 
eliminates error, ignorance and suspicion. In pursuit of knowledge, one 
should avoid insouciance and inquiry after things of no value. 

Through frugal and easily digestible food, one should rid oneself of all 
disorders and diseases. With contentment, one should dispel greed and 
confusion, and all worldly concerns should be avoided by a knowledge of 
the truth. 


Through benevolence, one should quell iniquity, and with love for all 
creatures, one should acquire virtue. One should avoid expectation with the 
observation that it is concerned with the future; and one should discard 
wealth by abandoning desire itself. 

With the knowledge that the world is transitory, the wise should forgo 
affection. Through yoga, they should subdue hunger, with benevolence 
shun all ideas of self-importance, and by being content, banish all manner 
of craving. Procrastination must be overcome with timely action and 
uncertainty through confidence. With the help of taciturnity and courage, 
one should overcome every kind of fear. 

Speech and the mind must be controlled by buddhi, which in turn is 
restrained with gyana. Gyana, again, is disciplined through awareness of the 
Atman, and finally the Paramatman masters the Atman. This last is 
attainable by those who are pure of actions and gifted with serenity of the 
Soul. 

Discard desire, wrath, greed, fear, sleep, and silently practice 
meditation, study, charity, truth, modesty, candour, forgiveness, purity of 
heart and of food, and mastery over the senses. These are all favourable to 
yoga, and help increase one’s energy, dispel sins, fulfil wishes and help gain 
inclusive knowledge. 

When a man purifies his paapa, acquires tejas and mastery of his 
indriyas, he then proceeds to subdue kama and krodha, in order to attain 
Brahman. 

Gyana, yoga, freedom from desire and wrath, absence of pride and 
haughtiness, freedom from anxiety and paucity of attachment to home and 
family, constitute the road to moksha. This path is gentle, delightful and 
pure. Similarly, to restrain speech, the body and the mind, from a lack of 
desire, also comprises the path to mukti.’ 


CANTO 275 


B hishma says, ‘There is an ancient tale of a discourse on this subject 

that took place between Narada and Asita-Devala. Once upon a time, 
Narada queried the most intelligent of men, Devala, about the origin and the 
destruction of all creatures. 

Narada said, “From where, O Brahmana, has this universe, been 
created? Whence again does the universal destruction come, and into whom 
does the universe merge? O Muni, explain this to me.” 

Asita-Devala said, ““When the Paramatman wishes to exist in manifold 
forms he creates all beings, and the gyanis say that the materials from 
which he creates them are known as the five great essences, the 
Panchamahabhutas. Buddhi thereafter urges Kaala to create other objects 
from the five. He, who claims that there is anything else besides these, is 
wrong. Realise, O Narada, that these five are eternal, indestructible and 
without beginning or end. With Kaala as their sixth, Apah, Akasa, Prithvi, 
Vayu and Agni are naturally endowed with great tejas. Surely, there is 
nothing higher or superior to these in energy. No one can affirm the 
existence of anything else based on conclusions reached from the srutis or 
from arguments drawn from reason. If anyone does so, his assertion would 
be idle or vain. 

Know that these six influence the cause of all effects. All of this, 
which you perceive, is called asat. These five, and time, along with the 
effects of past deeds, and ignorance, which form the eight eternal essences 


are the causes of the birth and the destruction of all creatures. On their 
death, creatures return to the five Mahabhutas, and when they are born, they 
emerge from the very same source. 

Indeed, his body is made of earth; his ear has its origin in space; his 
eye has light for its cause; his breath is of wind and his blood is of water. 
The eyes, nose, ears, skin and the tongue are the senses. These, the learned 
know, exist for the perception of the objects of the senses. Sight, sound, 
smell, touch and taste are the functions of the senses that are concerned 
with five objects in five ways. Realise their likeness in qualities, through the 
inference of reason. 

Although form, scent, taste, touch and sound appear to be individually 
apprehended by the five senses in five different manners, in reality, it is the 
Soul that experiences them through the senses, which are inert by their very 
nature. 

Chitta is superior to the five senses. Manas is higher than Chitta. 
Greater than manas is buddhi, and kshetrajna transcends buddhi. 

At first, a living creature perceives different objects through the 
senses. With manas, he reflects over them, and with the help of buddhi, he 
arrives at a certitude of knowledge. Equipped with buddhi, he ascertains 
objects perceived through the senses. Men who know the science of 
Adhyatma consider the five indriyas, Chitta, manas and buddhi, as 
instruments of knowledge. 

The hands, feet, the anal duct, generative organ and the mouth, form 
the five organs of action. The mouth is considered an organ of action 
because it contains the means of speech, and of eating. The feet are 
mediums of motion and the hands of conducting various activities. The anal 
duct and the penis are two organs that exist for a similar purpose— 
evacuation. The first is for excretion of faeces, the second for that of urine 
as also of the vital seed in times of mating. 

Besides these, there is a sixth channel of action: physical energy. 
These then are the six instruments of kama according to the shastras. I have 
now identified all the organs of knowledge and action, and all the qualities 
of the five primal essences. 

When the organs get fatigued, they cease to function and grow 
lethargic, and the entity within the body, falls asleep. Even so, the functions 
of the mind do not cease, and it continues to concern itself with its goals. 
This is known as the svapnavastha, the dream state. 


In jagratavastha, the wakeful state, there are three aspects of the mind 
—those of sattva, rajas and tamas: goodness, passion and darkness. In 
svapnavastha too, the mind relates with the same three states. When these 
gunas connect with enjoyable actions, and appear in dreams, they meet with 
approval. 

Happiness, success, knowledge and neutrality are the signs of sattva. 
The states that the living beings experience in their wakeful hours are 
replayed in their memory when they sleep and dream. 

The passage of our impressions from wakefulness to dreams, and the 
reverse, become transparent in the state of consciousness known as 
sushupti, dreamless sleep, which is eternal, and desirable. 

There are five means of gyana, and five of karma. Along with saririka 
shakti— physical energy — manas, buddhi, Chitta and the traigunas, they are 
seventeen. These seventeen, with avidya making eighteen, dwell in the 
body attached to the Jivatma that owns the body. When the Jivatma leaves 
the body, the eighteen cease to co-exist in the body. The eighteen attributes, 
along with the eternal entity, which abides in the body, and ruchira, 
digestion, bring the total to twenty, and form that which is known as the 
Panchamahabhutas, the combination of the five. 

There is a being called Mahat, which, with the help of prana, supports 
this combination of the twenty qualities, and in the event of the destruction 
of the body, Vayu, wind, is the only element left with Mahat. 

Every living being resolves into the five constituent elements once his 
merits and demerits are exhausted; and receives a new body based on the 
punya and paapa accumulated through his deeds in the previous one. As his 
elements result from avidya, kama and kriya, and moved by Kaala, like a 
man who changes houses in succession, he repeatedly migrates from one 
body to another. The wise who witness this migration, do not give in to 
sorrow at seeing death. Only the ignorant, who are erroneously attached to 
relationships, where none exists in reality, look at such physical transitions 
and mourn. 

Jiva is no one’s relative; there is none again who belongs to him. Ever 
alone, he creates his own body, happiness, and sorrow. He is never born, nor 
does he ever die. Freed from the bond of the body, he succeeds sometimes 
in gaining the highest end. Deprived of the body, liberated through the 
exhaustion of paapa and punya, jiva at last attains Brahman. 


The Samkhya school advocates gyana, in order to exhaust paapa and 
punya. When jiva gains the condition of Brahman, the Rishis consider it to 
have attained its highest goal.” 


CANTO 276 


Y udhishtira says, ‘Cruel and sinful that we are, alas, we have slain 

brothers, fathers, grandsons, kinsmen, friends and sons. How, O 
Pitamaha, will we dispel this thirst for kingdom and wealth? Ah! Through 
this thirst have we perpetrated so many sinful deeds.’ 

Bhishma says, “Listen to this old story which narrates the reply of the 
ruler of the Videhas to the queries of Mandavya. 

The king of the Videhas said, “I own nothing, yet I live in great 
happiness. If my entire kingdom of Mithila were to be reduced to ashes in a 
great fire, still I would lose nothing. Tangible possessions, however 
valuable, are a source of despair to the wise, while belongings of even little 
value fascinate the ignorant. All worldly joys and heavenly bliss do not 
measure up to even a sixteenth part of the felicity that attends the complete 
absence of desire. 

Like the cow’s horns that grow as she ages, likewise the thirst for 
wealth increases with each new acquisition. Any object for which one feels 
an attachment turns into a source of pain when it is lost. Therefore, one 
should not cherish cupidity, for it leads to sorrow. One should abandon 
aspiration and utilise wealth for the purpose of dharma. 

The wise man always sees himself in others and, since he has purified 
his soul as well as acquired success, he lets go of everything. Through 
discarding of truth, falsehood, grief, joy, the agreeable and disagreeable, 
fearlessness and fear, one meets peace and freedom from anxiety. 


Foolish men find it difficult to discard the thirst for worldly objects. 
The thirst wanes not with the decay of the body, and is perceived as a fatal 
disease by the wise. He, who succeeds in shunning it, is sure to find felicity. 

The man of dharma, who observes how his own behaviour has become 
bright as the moon and free from evil, succeeds in happily attaining great 
fame both here and in the hereafter.” 

The Brahmana was overjoyed with these words of the king, and 
appreciating them, Mandavya advanced along the path of moksha.’ 


CANTO 277 


Y udhishtira says, “Kaala, the terror of all creatures, is running his 
course. What is the source of dharma after which one should strive? 
Tell me this, O Pitamaha.’ 

Bhishma says, “There is an ancient tale of a conversation between a 
father and his son. Listen to it, O Yudhishtira. 

Once, O son of Pritha, a twice-born man devoted only to the study of 
the Vedas had a very intelligent son named Medhavin, who was a pandita 
on the subject of moksha dharma. The son one day asked a question of his 
father, who although ignorant of dharma, followed the precepts of the 
Vedas.’ 

The son said, “When the life span allotted to men is so short, O pita, 
what should a learned man do? Tell me this truly, O father, so that with your 
guidance, I may gain dharma.” 

The father said, “After the study of the Vedas is completed as a 
brahmacharin, O son, one should, as a grihasta, aspire for children for the 
salvation of one’s ancestors. Later, after installing one’s sacred fire, and 
completing the customary yagnas, one should retire into the jungle to live in 
solitude as a vanaprastha. After this, one should become a sannyasi and 
calmly await death.” 

The son said, “When the world is under attack and besieged on all 
sides; while such inescapable thunderbolts of fate fall in every direction, 
how can you speak so calmly?” 


The father said, ““What assails the world? What smothers it? What are 
the powerful calamities that fall on every side? Do you wish to frighten me 
with your words?” 

The boy said, “Death storms the world. Decrepitude surrounds it. 
Days and nights constantly descend on it like thunderbolts. Why do you not 
take heed of these? 

When I know that death waits for no one, how can I possibly wait for 
him, wrapped as I am in the ignorant pursuit of my petty concerns? Who 
can be happy in the knowledge that his life wears away with the passage of 
each night. Indeed, his position is similar to that of a fish that lives in 
shallow water, which evaporates each day. 

As carefree as a man who casually plucks flowers, death strikes in the 
very midst of one’s tasks and ambitions. Hence, that which is kept for 
completion tomorrow should be done today, and that which one thinks of 
doing in the afternoon should be done in the morn. Death does not wait; it 
does not care if a man’s concerns are achieved or not. Therefore, do not 
delay, and attend to your needs today. Beware of Yama, from whom there is 
no escape, that he may not crush you before you finish your tasks. Can 
anyone be certain that death will not arrive this very day? 

Life is uncertain and before one’s deeds are accomplished, Yama drags 
one away. One should, therefore, begin to embrace the sattva guna while 
one is still young. Through dharma, one is ensured eternal happiness both 
here and hereafter. 

Overpowered by folly, man girds up his loins to slave on behalf of 
sons and wives. He satisfies these relatives through foul or fair means. Even 
such a man who is so devoted to his family—death seizes him, and makes 
off, like a tiger taking a sleeping deer. Even though man is busy fulfilling 
diverse wishes, and his desires remain unsatisfied, Yama seizes him and 
runs away as a she-wolf snatches a sheep. 

‘This has been done’, ‘This remains to be done’, ‘This other is half 
done’, are words that one may say in one’s defence. However, death does 
not heed them, and hauls one away. Yama carries away the man who is yet 
to acquire the fruit of his labour. Yama claims the weak, the strong, the 
wise, the brave, the foolish, the learned, and him who has not yet realised 
his hopes. 

From the moment a man is born, it is impossible for him to avoid 
death, decrepitude, disease, sorrow and their like. How, then, O father, can 


you sit so relaxed? These two, decay and death, own all forms of life, chala 
and achala. 

When Yama’s soldiers are on the march, nothing except the power of 
truth can resist them. For in satya alone dwells immortality. The delight of 
being in the midst of men is the pasture of death. The sruti says that the 
forest is the true range for the Devas, while the joy one feels in the midst of 
men, is the cord that binds one in helplessness. Men of dharma cut this cord 
and escape. Whereas sinners fail to sever it. 

He who practices ahimsa with fellow beings, through thought, word 
and deed, and does not deprive them of their means of sustenance, is never 
harmed by any creature. Therefore, one must exercise the vow of truth, be 
firmly honest and seek nothing but satya. 

One must restrain one’s senses and look upon all creatures equally, 
and overcome death with the help of dharma. Both immortality and death 
are founded in the body. Death is met from ignorance, and immortality is 
won by truth. 

Once I transcend kama and krodha, and practice ahimsa, I will 
embrace dharma and happily avoid death like an immortal. 

When the sun moves northwards, I will restrain my senses and 
perform the Santi yagna, the Brahma yagna and the yagnas of speech, mind 
and actions. How can I conduct a brutal Pasu yagna? Gifted as I am with 
wisdom, how can I, like a savage Pisacha, commit hatya for a yagna, in the 
manner of Kshatriyas? That, too, a yagna with temporary benefits? I am 
atmaja, self-born, O pita, and without taking recourse to procreation, I will 
rest in my own atmabhava. For my salvation, I have no need of children; I 
will perform the yagna of the Atman. 

He who is moderate in words and thoughts, he who performs tapasya, 
keeps vairagya and engages in yoga, is sure to acquire everything through 
these. There is no perception equal to knowledge, nor a reward to match 
awareness, nor a sorrow like attachment and no happiness like renunciation. 

For a Brahmana, there is no wealth like solitude, an equal view 
towards all creatures, veracity in speech, unwavering good conduct, total 
abandonment of chastisement, simplicity and the gradual abstention from 
all actions. What need have you with wealth, relatives, friends and wives? 
You are a Brahmana and you have Mrityu to meet. Seek within yourself. 
Where have your forefathers gone and your father too?” 


The father paid heed to his son’s words and conformed to their 
directions, O Rajan! You also must behave in the same manner, and devote 
yourself to dharma.’ 


CANTO 278 


Y udhishtira says, ‘Of what conduct must a man be, of what actions, of 
what kind of knowledge, and to what must he be devoted, in order to 
attain Brahman, which is immutable and transcends Prakriti?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘He who worships the moksha dharma, is frugal with 
food, and the master of his senses, gains the realm which is changeless and 
transcends Prakriti. He should leave being a grihasta, evaluate gain and loss 
in the same light, restrain his senses, ignore all objects of need even when 
they are at hand, and embrace sannyasa. 

Neither with the eye, nor with word, nor in thought, should he 
disparage another. He should speak no evil of any person either in or out of 
his hearing. He must abstain from himsa to any creature, and conduct 
himself observing the course of the sun. Born into this life, he should not 
dislike any creature. He should disregard opprobrious speeches, and never 
in arrogance deem himself superior to another. When provoked by another, 
he must still respond in agreeable words. Even when calumniated, he 
should not defame in return. 

He should remain unbiased amidst fellow human beings. He must not 
visit many houses to collect alms, nor should he revisit the same houses. 
Even when abused by others, he should remain firm and refrain from 
addressing his abusers in unpleasant or obscene words. Instead, he must 
show compassion and abstain from himsa. He should be fearless, and 
control self-laudation. 


The man of moderate senses should seek charity in a house where the 
food is already prepared, and the family has finished their meal and the 
dishes have been washed. He must content himself with only as much as is 
necessary for his sustenance. Even the smallest morsel that causes pleasure 
he should covet. 

When he fails to get what he wants, he should not cherish discontent, 
nor be pleased with his gains. He should never wish for such things as 
yearned for by ordinary men, and never accept an invitation to dine at 
anybody’s house. A man like him must shun gains even though they may be 
obtained with honour. 

He should never find fault with the food placed before him, nor should 
he praise its merits. He must seek a bed and a seat away from populated 
places—a deserted house, the foot of a tree, a forest or a cave. 

Without allowing his practices to be known by others, or concealing 
their real nature by appearing to adopt others, he should enter his own self. 
Through yoga and sannyasa, he must remain perfectly equable, constant 
and steadily fixed. He should not earn either merit or demerit through 
actions. He should be ever satisfied, joyous, fearless, always engaged in 
mantra japa, mowna, and wedded to sannyasa. 

Aware of the cycle of birth and death of his body with the senses, and 
seeing how other beings appear and vanish, he should become free from 
want and learn to view everyone uniformly. 

Subsisting frugally upon both cooked and uncooked food, he must 
subdue his senses, and gain peace of the self through the self. He should 
control the rising impulses of words, mind, wrath, envy, hunger and lust. He 
should devote himself to tapasya to purify his heart, and never allow 
censure to affect him. 

He should come to accept a condition of neutrality to all creatures, and 
view praise and blame with indifference. This, indeed, is the holiest and the 
highest path of sannyasa. The venerable sannyasin should restrain his 
senses from all things and remain aloof from all attachments. He should 
never visit places already known to him, nor meet acquaintances from his 
earlier asramas of life. 

A nomad, and friend to all creatures, he must devote himself to 
meditation of the Atman, and never mingle with grihastas and Munis. He 
should eat such food as he may receive without effort and design, and never 
allow pleasure to ensnare his heart. To the wise, sannyasa is the means for 


the attainment of mukti. For the ignorant, the practice of these ways is 
exceedingly laborious. 

The Rishi Harita declared all this to be the path by which moksha is 
achieved. He who leaves his home with an assurance of total ahimsa 
towards all creatures, gains many bright regions of eternal felicity.’ 


CANTO 279 


Y udhishtira says, “O Pitamaha, all men speak of us as being highly 

fortunate. In truth, there is no one more wretched than we are. 
Though honoured by the world, O best of the Kurus, and while born among 
men, we were begotten by the very Devas, yet, when so much anguish has 
been our fate, it seems, O sublime lord, that the cause of all sorrow is to be 
born in an embodied form. Alas, when will we adopt sannyasa, which 
annihilates this anguish? 

To never incur rebirth, Rishis, in addition to their rigid vows, must be 
freed from the five breaths, mind, intellect, desire, wrath, greed and fear. 
Furthermore, they should be free from the ten organs of knowledge and 
action, the five faults of yoga, and sleep—that constitute the main causes 
for binding man to repeated births—and from the five objects of the senses 
and the traigunas. Ah, Parantapa, when will we succeed in forsaking 
sovereignty to adopt a life of sannyasa?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Everything, O great monarch, has an end. Everything 
has bounds assigned to it. Even rebirth, it is well known, has an end. In this 
world, there is nothing that is immutable. 

You consider, O king, your affluence to be a fault in you. In our 
present subject of disquisition, this is not untrue. Still, you know dharma, 
and you have zeal. Therefore, it is certain that, in time, your sorrows will 
end. 


The embodied jiva is not the author of his punya and paapa. He is 
enveloped by the darkness of avidya that is born of his merits and demerits. 

As the wind charged with the dust of antimony acquires its 
efflorescence and assumes its hues, it tinges the cardinal points of the 
horizon with these. Likewise, the embodied jiva, though himself colourless, 
assumes a hue from the darkness that envelops it, and dappled with the 
fruits of action, travels from body to body. When jiva is able to dispel the 
darkness of avidya, immutable Brahman becomes visible in all His glory. 

The sages say that karma is not the means to merge with eternal 
Brahman. You, and the rest, as well as the Devas, should worship those who 
have achieved moksha. All the great Rishis never stray from the path of 
Brahman. 

In this regard, long ago, there is mention of a discourse given by 
Sukracharya, the guru of the Daityas. Listen attentively, O monarch, to the 
course of conduct that the Daitya Vritra followed after he was divested of 
all his prosperity. Depending only upon his intelligence, he did not indulge 
in sorrow, O Bhaarata. 

Unto Vritra, Guru Usanas said, “I hope, O Danava, that you do not 
harbour any grief because of your defeat.” 

Vritra said, “Certainly, with the help of truth and penance, I have 
understood the circumstances of birth and death of all living creatures, and 
have ceased to indulge in either sorrow or joy. Compelled by time, creatures 
sink helplessly into naraka, or some, as the sages say, find swarga. All of 
them pass their allotted periods in contentment, in heaven and hell. Once 
again, impelled by time, with some portion of their paapa and punya 
unexhausted, they are born and die several times. Chained by the bonds of 
desire, jivas pass through myriad species of intermediate life and helplessly 
fall into hell. In this manner, I have seen many creatures appear and 
disappear. 

The lesson that the scriptures teach is that one’s acquisitions 
correspond to one’s actions. Creatures are born as men, animals or as gods, 
and then move on to hell. All creatures live a life that they deserve and 
subject to the laws of the destroyer, they meet with either happiness or 
misery, the agreeable or the disagreeable. Once the beings have done with 
enjoying the weal or suffering the agony that corresponds with their deeds, 
they always return through the old path, which is appraised by the 
touchstone of karma.” 


Thereupon, Usanas addressed Vritra, who was speaking of the highest 
refuge of the creation, saying, “O intelligent Daitya, why, O putra, do you 
indulge in such foolish raptures?” 

Vritra said, “My severe tapasya for want of victory are well known to 
all of you. My swollen pride, over the conquests of the diverse scents and 
myriad tastes that other creatures enjoy, afflicted the three worlds. Because 
of my invincibility, I feared no one and adorned with countless effulgent 
rays I ranged through the skies. I achieved great prosperity through my 
tapasya and lost it again with my own doings. Even so, I rely on my 
fortitude, and do not grieve for this change. 

I once wished to fight the great Indra, and in the battle, I saw the 
illustrious Hari, mighty Narayana, who is also known as Vaikuntha, 
Purusha, Ananta, Sukla, Vishnu, Sanatana, Munjakesa, Harismasru and the 
pita of all creatures. Surely, there is still a residue of the rewards attached to 
my tapasya by which I saw the great Hari. It is because of this unexhausted 
remnant that I wish to ask you, O divine one, about the fruits of karma. 

On which order of men has high Brahmana prosperity been bestowed? 
In what manner, again, does profuse prosperity decline? From whom do 
creatures emerge and live? Through whom again are their actions? What is 
the lofty fruit by attaining which a creature succeeds in living eternally as 
Brahman? Through what action or knowledge can this reward be achieved? 
It befits you, O learned Sukracharya, to explain these to me.””’ 

Bhishma says, ‘O lion among kings, let me refresh for you and your 
brothers what the sage Usanas once said to the prince of Danavas. O bull 
among men, listen carefully.’ 


CANTO 280 


¢ S ukra Usanas said, “I bow to the divine, illustrious and puissant 

Being who holds this earth in the firmament in his arms. I will 

speak to you of the pre-eminence of Vishnu whose head, O best of the 
Danavas, is the infinite moksha.” 

While they were conversing with each other, Maharishi Sanatkumara 
arrived there to dispel their doubts. Worshipped by the prince of Asuras and 
by Usanas, the best of Rishis sat upon a bejewelled seat. After Sanatkumara 
was comfortably seated, Usanas said, “Discourse to this lord of the Danavas 
on the pre-eminence of Vishnu.” 

Hearing this, Sanatkumara spoke these words of grave import on the 
pre-eminence of Vishnu, to the king of the Danavas, “Listen, O Daitya, to 
everything about the greatness of Vishnu. Know this, O cremator of foes, 
that the entire universe rests upon Vishnu. O Mahabaho, it is he who creates 
all creatures, chala and achala. In course of time, it is he, again, who 
withdraws all things and it is he who once more casts them forth from 
himself. 

Into Hari all things merge at the universal destruction and from Him 
everything emerges once again. Men possessed of scriptural lore cannot 
attain Him with such knowledge, nor can He be gained through penance, or 
sacrifices. The only means by which he can be attained is through 
controlling the senses. Not that yagnas are entirely useless towards such an 
end. For, he who relies on both external and internal karma, and on his 


mind, can purify them with his own intellect. And such a one succeeds in 
enjoying infinity in this world. 

As a goldsmith purifies the dross of his metal by repeatedly casting it 
into fire, likewise the jiva sanctifies himself through hundreds of births. 
Some may even be purified in just one life, by mighty efforts. 

As one carefully wipes the stains off his body, before they coagulate, 
similarly he must vigorously wipe away his faults. By mixing only a few 
flowers with them, grains of sesame cannot be made to shed their own 
odour. It is only when the sesame seeds are mixed and perfumed with the 
help of a large quantity of flowers that they cast off their own odour and 
imbibe the fragrance of the flowers. Similarly, one cannot behold the Soul 
through just a little cleansing of the heart. 

So, through the course of many lives, faults such as attachments to all 
our environs, are dispelled through the intellect, with the help of abundant 
sattva, and fervent tapasya. 

Listen attentively now, O Danava, as I recount the means through 
which creatures attached to karmas and those unattached to them achieve 
the causes that lead to their individual states of mind. I will tell you the 
order in which creatures perform karma and how they forgo them. 

The Supreme Lord creates all beings, mobile and unmoving. He is 
without beginning and without end. Unladen with attributes of any kind, He 
assumes features at will. He is the Universal Destroyer, the refuge of all 
things, the Supreme Ordainer and pure Chitta. In all creatures, He dwells as 
the mutable and the immutable. He quaffs this universe through his 
consuming rays. 

Know that for His feet he has bhumi; His head is swarga; His arms, O 
Daitya, are the diks, cardinal points of the horizon; for His ears, He has 
Akasa; the light of His eyes is Surya; His mind is Chandramas; His intellect 
dwells always in gyana, and His tongue is formed of apava, water. O best of 
Danavas, the planets, the grahas, are in the midst of His brows. The stars 
and constellations are made from the light of His eyes. 

O Danava, know also that the traigunas of rajas, tamas and sattva are 
his. He is the goal of all the asramas of life, and he it is who should be 
known as the fruit of all japas and yagnas. The highest and immutable, he is 
also the blessing of abstention from all karma. The Chchandas are the hair 
on his body, and akshara is his word. The diverse varnas and asramas are 
his refuge. He has numberless mouths. Dharma is planted in his heart. 


He is Brahman, he is the highest dharma, he is sat and he is asat; he is 
sruti, he is the shastras, he is the yagna patra, he is the sixteen Ritwiyas. He 
is all the yagnas, he is Brahma, he is Vishnu, he is the Aswins, and he is 
Purandara; he is Mitra, he is Varuna, he is Yama and he is Kubera, the lord 
of treasures. 

Although the Ritwijas deem him as being separate and apart, they still 
perceive him as one and the same. Know that this entire universe is under 
the control of this one Divine Being. The Vedas, O prince of Daityas, view 
the unity in all creatures. When a being realises this oneness through true 
knowledge, he then attains Brahman. 

The period of time for which one creation exists or for which it ceases 
to exist is called a kalpa. Living creatures exist for a thousand millions of 
such kalpas. Immobile creatures also exist for an equal period. 

The period for which a particular creation exists may be likened to 
many thousands of lakes, O Daitya! Conceive a lake that is one yojana in 
width, one krosa in depth, and five hundred yojanas in length. Imagine 
many thousands of such lakes. Try to dry up the lakes by taking from them, 
only once a day, as much water as may be taken up on the end of a single 
hair. The number of days it would take to dry them up completely is the 
period of one creation from its inception to the time of its destruction. 

The highest sruti, revelation, says that creatures have six spirit colours, 
black, brown, blue, red, yellow and white. These colours proceed from 
blend in various proportions of the three qualities of rajas, tamas and sattva. 

Where tamas predominates, sattva falls and rajas remains where it is, 
the resulting colour is black. When tamas reigns as before, but when the 
relations between sattva and rajas are reversed, it creates brown. 

When rajas predominates, sattva recedes and tamas remains steady, it 
creates blue. While rajas prevails as before and the proportion is reversed 
between sattva and tamas, the result is red, which is a more agreeable 
colour. 

When sattva predominates, rajas diminishes and tamas holds fast, it 
forms yellow, which produces happiness. Whereas while sattva holds sway 
and the proportion between rajas and tamas is reversed, it brings forth the 
colour white, which is productive of immense felicity. 

White is the excellent colour. It is pure as it is free from attachment 
and aversion. It is without sorrow, and free from the travail involved in 
pravritti. Hence, white, O prince of Danavas, leads to mukti. 


It takes thousands of years for the jiva to achieve success. This success 
is identical to the one that the divine Indra declared on completion of his 
study of many spiritual treatises. The objective that creatures gain depends 
on their colour, which, in turn, depends on the nature of the prevalent time. 
The stages of existence through which the jiva must pass are not unlimited. 
They are fourteen hundreds of thousands in number. In these, the jiva 
ascends, remains and diminishes. 

The end that a jiva of dark hue meets is very low, for he becomes 
addicted to wild deeds and because of his iniquity, he leads a life in hell. 
The learned say that the life of a jiva in such a state is measured by many 
thousands of kalpas. After living many hundred thousands of years in this 
condition, the jiva acquires a tan colour and is born as an ordinary creature, 
and he lives long years in absolute helplessness. With all the accompanying 
wretchedness endured, at last, his sins are exhausted and his mind sheds all 
attachments, to cherish renunciation. 

When the jiva is endued with sattva, with the help of his buddhi, he 
dispels everything connected with tamas, and strives for his own welfare, 
due to which he acquires a red hue. Still, if he is unable to gain the sattva 
guna, he then acquires a blue colour and travels in a circle of rebirths in a 
world of inertia. 

When the jiva acquires a human birth and is afflicted for the duration 
of one creation through the bonds of his own actions, he gains a yellow 
colour and becomes a Deva. In this state, he lives for a hundred creations, 
and leaves it to become a manava. Thus, the jiva exists for thousands of 
kalpas, as a Deva, in the yellow colour. As he is not yet liberated, he 
remains in hell, to enjoy or endure the fruits of his actions of past kalpas 
and wanders through nineteen thousand rounds of birth and death. 

Know that the jiva is freed from the hell of duties as comprised by 
swarga or godhood. He evades the births corresponding to the other colours. 
The jiva revels for many long kalpas in the world of Devas before he 
declines and once again becomes human and lives so for a hundred and 
eight kalpas, until he regains the prominence of a Deva. 

If, again, while a human being, he falls through evil deeds as 
represented by Kaala in the form of Kali, he then sinks to the dark colour 
and occupies the very lowest of all stages of existence. 

I will tell you now, O lord of Asuras, how the jiva succeeds in 
effecting his mukti, his emancipation. 


Wishful of moksha, the jiva relies upon seven hundred kinds of 
karmas, each one characterised by a predominance of the sattva guna, as he 
gradually flows through red, yellow and finally — white. 

Here, the jiva travels through several sacred and blissful worlds that 
have the eight well-known domains of felicity beneath them, and pursues 
the effulgent form of existence, which is moksha’s self. Know that these 
eight are identical to the sixty hundreds, which are only creations of the 
mind. 

The highest goal for the man, who has the white hue, is the state of 
turiya, which transcends the three other modes of consciousness— 
wakefulness, dream and dreamless sleep. 

The yogin, who cannot abandon the felicities gained through yoga- 
shakti, must dwell for a century of kalpas in auspiciousness and later in the 
four regions of mahar, jana, tapas and satya. This is also the ultimate aim of 
he who belongs to the sixth colour, who, though endowed with success, and 
has transcended all attachments and passions, is yet a failure. 

Also, the eminent yogin who forgoes yoga, dwells in swarga for a 
century of kalpas with the unexhausted remnant of his past karma, along 
with the five senses of knowledge, mind and intellect, purged of all their 
stains. 

At the end of this period, such a being must re-enter the world of 
humans where he receives great eminence. Turning back from the world of 
men, he proceeds to gain new forms of existence that grow in prominence. 
So engaged, he travels through seven regions, seven times, and because of 
his samadhi and enlightenment, his energy continues to increase. 

The yogin who yearns for mukti suppresses the seven, and moves 
ahead freed from attachments. He sees these seven as a sure means of 
sorrow, and casts them aside to attain indestructible and infinite moksha. 
Some call it the region of Mahadeva; others call it that of Vishnu; some say 
it is of Brahma; and some of Sesha; there are a few, who say it is the realm 
of Nara; while others call it that of the refulgent Chitta; and some say it is 
realm of the all-pervading Parabrahman. 

When the Mahapralaya, universal destruction, comes, men who have 
succeeded in completely consuming their gross, subtle and causal bodies, 
always enter into Brahman. All their senses that have action for their 
essence and are different from Brahman, also merge into Brahman. 


When the time of total annihilation draws nigh, jivas who have 
acquired the condition of Devas and have residual fruits of karmas yet to 
enjoy or endure, in the subsequent kalpa, revert to their previous stages of 
life. This is because of the similarity of each successive kalpa to the 
previous one. 

At the time of obliteration, jivas whose karmas are exhausted through 
enjoyment or suffering, are born among men in the subsequent kalpa. For 
without gyana, man cannot destroy his actions in even a hundred kalpas. 

When a new creation emerges, all superior beings invested with 
similar powers and forms, return to their individual destinies, ascending and 
descending in precisely the same manner, as during the dissolved creation. 

Let us now turn to the man who realises Brahman. As long as he 
continues to enjoy and endure the residual fruits of his karmas of previous 
kalpas, so long do all creatures and the two pure vigyanas abide in him. 
When his Chitta is purified with yoga, and he practices samyama, restraint, 
this perceptible universe appears to him as only his own fivefold senses. 
Enquiring with a fresh mind, this jiva attains a high and chaste end. 
Thereupon he gains a position, which knows no decay, and further attains 
eternal Brahman. 

Thus, O you of great might, I have discoursed to you on the eminence 
of Narayana!” 

Vritra said, “I can see how your words resonate perfectly with dharma. 
Indeed, when this is so, I have no cause for anguish. Through these words, 
O Mahamuni, I am now free from sorrow and sin of every kind. O 
illustrious Rishi, O holy one, I see how this wheel of Kaala, endowed with 
the infinite tejas of the most effulgent and eternal Vishnu, is set in motion. 
Eternal is the station, from which all kinds of creation spring. Vishnu is the 
Supreme Soul. He is the lord of Beings. In him this entire universe rests.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘With these words, O son of Kunti, Vritra released 
his pranas; uniting his soul with the Supreme Soul, he attained the highest 
eminence.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “Tell me, O Pitamaha, whether this Krishna is the 
illustrious and puissant lord of whom Sanatkumara spoke to Vritra in days 
of old.’ 

Bhishma says, “The highest Deva, endued with the six attributes is at 
the root. Staying there, the Supreme Soul, with His own energy, creates all 
these diverse existences. Know that this Krishna, who knows no 


deterioration, is from His eighth amsa. Gifted with the highest intelligence, 
Kesava creates the three worlds with an eighth portion of His energy. 

Coming immediately after Him who lies at the root, eternal Krishna 
changes at the end of each kalpa. Nevertheless, when the pralaya draws 
near, he who exists at the source, who is endowed with supreme might and 
puissance, rests on the primordial waters, the ekarnava, in the form of the 
potential seed of all things. 

Kesava is the creator of the pure Soul who flows through all the 
worlds. Infinite and eternal, he fills all space and pervades all the universes. 
Limitless in every manner, he allows himself to be invested with avidya and 
awakened to Chitta— Kesava of the Supreme Soul creates all things. In him 
rests this wondrous universe in its entirety.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “O you who knows the highest goal of knowledge, I 
think that Vritra saw beforehand the excellent end that awaited him. This is 
why he was happy and did not yield to sorrow. 

He who is white of spiritual hue, born into a pure race, and a Sadhya, 
does not, O Anagha, return to the world in re-birth. Such a being, O 
Pitamaha, is freed from both hell and the condition of ordinary creatures. 

Meanwhile, he who has acquired either the yellow or the red hue is at 
times overwhelmed by tamas and falls among the order of average beings. 
Whereas, we are exceedingly afflicted and attached to objects that produce 
sorrow, indifference or joy. Alas, what will be our end? Will it be the blue 
or the black, which is the lowest of all colours?’ 

Bhishma continues, ‘You are Pandavas. Born into a flawless vamsa. 
You are of rigid vows. You have revelled in joy in the realms of the Devas 
—you will return to the world of men. You will live happily as long as this 
creation lasts, and at the next creation, you will all be admitted among the 
Devas. You will enjoy all kinds of felicities and at last be included among 
the Siddhas. Have no fears, and be of good cheer.’ 


CANTO 281 


Y udhishtira says, “How deeply did Vritra, that great devotee of 

Vishnu, worship dharma? The status occupied by Vishnu of 
immeasurable energy is most difficult to understand. How, O tiger among 
Kshatriyas, could Vritra, an Asura, comprehend it so well? 

Although I have faithfully listened to you speak of Vritra’s deeds, still, 
there is a portion of your discourse, which is unintelligible to me. Hence, 
my curiosity to question you once again. 

How, indeed, O best of men, was Vritra, knower of the Upanishads 
and Vedanta, vanquished by Indra? O lord of the Bharatas, give me an 
answer. Tell me truly how Sakra vanquished Vritra. O Mahabaho, recount 
details of the battle, for my curiosity knows no bounds.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Once, Indra was travelling in his chariot in the 
company of the celestial army, when he saw the Asura Vritra standing right 
before him, like a mountain. He was a full five hundred yojanas tall, O 
chastiser of foes, and three hundred yojanas in girth. 

Seeing Vritra in this form, Indra knew that it would be impossible for 
even the three worlds, united together, to vanquish him. At this, the Deva 
was struck through with fear and anxiety. Indeed, O king, the sudden sight 
of this gigantic form of his antagonist, paralysed Indra. 

On the eve of the great battle between the Devas and the Asuras, there 
arose loud shouts from both sides; drums and other musical instruments 
began to beat and blow. Beholding Sakra positioned before him, O you of 


Kuru’s vamsa, Vritra felt neither awe nor fear, nor was he able to muster all 
his energies for the fight. Soon, the battle began between Indra, the lord of 
the Devas, and the exalted Vritra. The Trilokas trembled with terror. The 
entire sky was full of the swords, axes, lances, darts, spears and heavy 
clubs, rocks of diverse sizes, bows of loud twang, myriad celestial weapons, 
fires and burning brands, freely hurled by the warriors of both sides. 

All the celestials led by Brahma, and all the highly blessed Rishis, 
arrived to witness the battle, seated on their best chariots. Even the Siddhas, 
O bull of Bharata’s vamsa, and the Gandharvas, with the apsaras on their 
own beautiful rathas, gathered to see the epic war. 

Vritra quickly overwhelmed the Lord of the Devas with a shower of 
rocks that darkened the sky. The enraged gods shattered this thick onslaught 
of rocks with a storm of their bright arrows. Next, Vritra stupefied Indra as 
he began to fight solely with maya, his astounding magical sorceries. When 
he of a hundred yagnas stood bewildered, Rishi Vasishta restored him to his 
senses by chanting somanas. 

Vasishta said, “You are the Devapati, O slayer of Daityas and Asuras! 
The tejas of the Trilokas lives in you! Why, then, O Sakra, do you languish 
so? Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva, the lord of the universe, divine Soma, and 
all the Maharishis, are gathered, watching you. Do not, O Indra, yield to 
weakness, like an ordinary man. Stand firm in battle, and slay your foes, O 
king of the Devas! 

See there, the master of all the worlds, the three-eyed Shiva, the 
adored of all the worlds, is watching you. Discard this stupor, O lord of the 
Devas. Look, the Devarishis, led by Brihaspati, praise you with divine 
hymns.” 

When Vasava was fetched out of his daze by Vasishta, his strength 
became greatly enhanced. The illustrious chastiser of Paka, took recourse to 
powerful yoga shakti, and with its help dispelled the illusions of Vritra. 

Soon, Brihaspati, the son of Angiras, and the Maharishis, turned to 
Mahadeva, and for the benefit of the three worlds, urged him to destroy the 
great Asura. Thereupon, Shiva’s tejas turned into a fierce jvara, a dire fever, 
and flared into Vritra of the Asuras. 

Divine Vishnu next entered Indra’s vajra. Brihaspati and Vasishta, and 
all the Maharishis, ran to Hara. Vasava, the bestower of boons, addressed 
him, saying, “Do not delay, O mighty one, slay Vritra at once!” 


Maheswara said, “There, O Sakra, stands the illustrious Vritra, 
surrounded by a great force. He is the soul of the universe, and with his 
enormous powers of illusion, he can travel anywhere he wishes. This king 
of Asuras cannot be vanquished even by the three worlds united together. 

With the help of yoga, slay him, O lord of the Devas. Do not 
underestimate him. For full sixty-thousand years, O Indra, Vritra practiced 
the severest tapasya to acquire prowess. Brahma gave him the boons he 
sought—the grandeur of yogins, extreme powers of maya, a surfeit of 
might, and superabundant energy. I impart to you my energy, O Vasava. The 
Danava has lost his composure. Kill him now with your vajra!” 

Sakra said, “Before your eyes, and through your grace, O Mahadeva, I 
will slay this invincible son of Diti with my vajra.” 

When the great Asura was overcome with the fever of Mahadeva’s 
tejas, the Devas and the Rishis were overjoyed and rent the air with loud 
cheers. Simultaneously, drums, deafening conches, kettle-drums and tabors 
began to beat and blow in their thousands. All the Asuras suddenly lost 
their memory. Gone, in a trice, were their magical powers. Seeing the 
enemy stricken, the Rishis and the Devas sang praises of Sakra and Isana, 
and urged Indra to destroy Vritra immediately. 

Indra sat on his ratha, and the Rishis sang his glories. The form that 
Indra assumed was such that none could look at it without awe.’ 


CANTO 282 


B hishma says, ‘Listen, O king, to the symptoms that appeared on 
Vritra’s form when he was struck with fever. The heroic Asura’s 
mouth spewed flames of fire, and he became pale. As his breath became 
hard and heavy, his body began to tremble. His hair stood on end. His 
memory, O Bhaarata, sprang out of his mouth in the form of a fierce, 
dreadful and inauspicious jackal. Fiery meteors fell on his right and left. 
Gridhras, kanakas and bakas uttered harsh cries, as they wheeled over 
Vritra’s head. 

Armed with his vajra, O Rajan, Indra looked hard at the Daitya whose 
violent fever was such that he yawned awfully and screamed inhuman cries 
of agony. Seeing the Asura in this state, Indra at once hurled his vajra that 
was endowed with such tejas that it resembled the fires of the Pralaya, and 
in a trice, the gigantic form of Vritra toppled down lifeless. When the Devas 
saw Vritra slain, they rent the sky all around, with loud and triumphant 
shouts, O bull of Bharata’s vamsa. 

With Vritra fallen, Maghavat entered swarga with his vajra still 
infused by Vishnu’s tejas. 

Suddenly, from the body of Vritra emerged a fierce and horrific being 
that filled all the worlds with terror. She was the sin of Brahmahatya, 
personified. Of horrendous teeth, she was dark, tawny and grotesque, O 
Bhaarata. With hair dishevelled, dreadful eyes, a garland of skulls round her 
neck, she was the epitome of a dark Atharvan spell. As she emerged from 


Vritra’s body, she was smeared with blood, and clad in rags and the bark of 
trees. In such a dreadful form, she sought the wielder of the thunderbolt. 

Soon after, O you of Kuru’s vamsa, Vritra’s slayer, on a mission for 
the weal of the three worlds, was travelling again towards heaven. Seeing 
Indra, she seized the lord of the Devas and cleaved to him. With the sin of 
Brahmahatya fastened to his body, Indra was so filled with terror that he 
entered the fibres of a lotus-stalk and lived there for many long years. 
However, the Brahmahatya clung to him tighter, O son of Kuru, so that 
Indra lost all his lustre and energy. All his efforts to drive her away were in 
vain. 

Devaspati at last presented himself before Brahma and worshipped 
him by bending his head low. Understanding that Sakra was possessed by 
the sin of Brahmahatya, Brahma began to reflect upon the means of freeing 
his supplicant. 

Finally, Brahma turned to the Brahmahatya and, to pacify her, spoke to 
her in a sweet voice, “O amiable one, let the king of the Devas, who is a 
favourite of mine, be free from you. Tell me, what must I do for you to let 
him go? What wish of yours should I accomplish?’ 

Brahmahatya said, “When the creator of the trilokas is pleased with 
me, I regard my wishes already granted. Tell me where I shall dwell now. 
With a wish to preserve the worlds, it was you, O lord, who introduced this 
great law for the torment of the slayers of Brahmanas and Vritrasura was 
the son of a Brahmana and himself a Brahmana. Since you are happy with 
me, O Brahma, I will certainly leave Sakra. But grant me an abode to dwell 
in.” 

Brahma said, “So be it!” Indeed, Brahma found a way to release Indra 
from the clutches of the Brahmahatya. Next, Swayambhu summoned Agni, 
who appeared instantly and said, “O illustrious and divine lord, here I am. 
Tell me what needs to be done.” 

Brahma said, “I will divide this embodied sin of Brahmahatya into 
several portions. To free Sakra from her, you will take a fourth portion of 
the sin.” 

Agni said, “How will I be saved from her, O Brahma? You must show 
me the way. I wish to know the means of my own deliverance, O mighty 
lord.” 

Brahma said, “When the man who, under the sway of tamas, denies 
offering seeds, herbs and juices in your yagnas, your portion of 


Brahmahatya will instantly leave you to go and possess him. O bearer of 
oblations, let the fever of your heart subside.” 

So addressed by Brahma, the conveyor of sacrificial offerings 
accepted his command, and a fourth of the sin entered him, O king. 

Brahma next summoned the trees, the herbs and all kinds of grass to 
him, and entreated them to carry a fourth of the sin. Like Agni, they too, 
were agitated with the request and said, “How will we, O creator of all the 
worlds, be saved from this sin? It becomes you not to afflict us who already 
suffer from our own fates. O Brahma, we forever endure heat, cold and the 
rain driven by the winds, in addition to cutting and tearing at the hands of 
men. We are willing, O lord of the three worlds, to obey your command and 
take a fourth of this sin of Brahmahatya. Even so, let the means of our 
salvation be pointed out to us.” 

Brahma said, “The portion of the sin that you accept will possess the 
man who through stupefaction of judgement will cut or tear any of you 
during the days of Parva, festivals.” 

Hearing the divine Brahma, the trees, herbs and grasses worshipped 
the creator and left without further delay. 

The lord of all the worlds then summoned the apsaras, O Bhaarata, 
and charming them with sweet words, said, “This sin, most excellent of 
women, has come out of Indra’s person. At my request, will you take a 
fourth portion of her unto yourselves?” 

The apsaras said, “O lord of all the gods, we are entirely willing to 
obey you and accept a portion of this sin. But, O Almighty, think of the 
means by which we may be freed from the effects of this covenant.” 

Brahma said, “Let the fever of your hearts be dispelled. The portion of 
the sin that you take upon yourselves will instantly leave you to possess 
men who will seek intercourse with women in their menstrual season.” 

Thus addressed by Brahma, the diverse tribes of the apsaras repaired 
to their homes and began to revel in delight. 

The creator of the Trilokas next beckoned the waters, which 
immediately came to him. They stood before Brahma, bowed and said, “We 
are here, O chastiser of foes, at your command. O puissant master of all the 
worlds, tell us what needs be done.” 

Brahma said, “This dreadful sin has taken possession of Indra, because 
he killed Vritra. I want you to take a fourth part of this Brahmahatya.” 


The waters said, “Let it be as you command, O master of all the 
worlds. It befits you, still, O mighty lord, to think of the means of our 
deliverance from the outcome we will face. You are the lord of all the 
Devas, and the supreme refuge of the universe. Who else is there to whom 
we may pray for our salvation?” 

Brahma said, “To the dim-witted, who will consider you lightly, and 
cast into you phlegm, urine and excreta, will this sin immediately go and 
reside in them. In this manner, your salvation will be accomplished.” 

Finally, O Yudhishtira, the sin of Brahmahatya left the king of the 
Devas, and went to the abodes that the Almighty arranged for her. This is 
how, O ruler of men, Indra was afflicted by that dreadful sin, and how he 
was rid of her. 

With Brahma’s leave, Indra then resolved to perform an Asvamedha 
yagna, a horse sacrifice. I hear,O monarch, that it was through this sacrifice 
that Indra was finally cleansed of the paapa of Brahmahatya. Great was 
Vasava’s joy, O lord of the earth, when he slew thousands of foes and 
regained his prosperity. 

From the blood of Vritra, O son of Pritha, were born high-crested 
roosters. For this reason, such fowl are unclean as food for the twice-born 
classes, and for ascetics. Under all circumstances, O king, you must fulfil 
what is agreeable to the Brahmanas, for these, Yudhishtira, are known as 
gods on earth. 

It was in this way that Sakra engaged a combination of subtle 
intelligence and might to kill the mighty Asura Vritra. You too, O son of 
Kunti, one day, will be another Indra and a slayer of all your foes. Men, 
who will recite this sacred narrative of Vritra in the midst of Brahmanas on 
every Parva day, will never be stained by any sin. I have now narrated one 
of the greatest and most wonderful feats of Indra, that of killing Vritrasura. 
What else do you wish to hear?’ 


CANTO 283 


Y udhishtira says, ‘O Pitamaha, you possess great wisdom and know 

every branch of learning. This very story of the downfall of Vritra, 
has given rise to a question in my mind. You say, O Rajan, that Vritra was 
first benumbed by fever, and subsequently slain by Vasava with the vajra. 
How did this fever, O wise one, arise? My lord, I wish to hear about the 
origin of this fever.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Bhaarata, let me tell about the universally accepted 
cause of fever and also give you details of how it first came into existence. 

In ancient times, the mountains of Meru had a summit named Savitri, 
which was endowed with great splendour and adorned with exquisite 
gemstones. The summit was immeasurable in extent and no one could reach 
it. 

With the radiant daughter of the king of mountains by his side, the 
divine Mahadeva would luxuriate on this crest in all his magnificence, as if 
on a golden bed. 

The great Devas, the Vasus, the Aswins, best of Vaidyas, and 
Vaisravana, lord of the Yakshas, with his abode on the summit of Kailasa 
and attended by many a Guhyaka, all waited upon Mahadeva. Maharishi 
Usanas, the best of Rishis with Sanatkumara as their leader, other celestial 
Devarishis headed by Angiras, the Gandharva Viswavasu, the Rishis 
Narada and Parvata, and the diverse tribes of apsaras arrived there to serve 
the master of the universe. 


A pure and auspicious breeze, wafting various and heavenly 
fragrances, blew gently through the air and the trees were adorned with 
flowers of every season. A large number of Vidyadharas, Siddhas and 
Rishis, too, settled there to serve Mahadeva Pasupati, the lord of all 
creatures. Ghostly beings, dreadful Rakshasas and mighty Pisachas, mad 
with joy, and armed with countless weapons, trailed Shiva. Each one’s tejas 
resembled a Pralaya fire. 

Ablaze with his energy, armed with a fiery lance, glorious Nandiswara 
stood by at the will of Mahadeva. Even Ganga, born of all the sacred waters 
in the universe, waited in her embodied form, on the wondrous Devadeva. 
So adored by the Devarishis and the Devas, the magnificent Shiva of tejas, 
remained on the summit of Meru. 

Soon, Prajapati Daksha began a yagna, which all the Devas agreed to 
attend with Indra at their head. I hear that, with Mahadeva’s blessings, the 
sublime Devas mounted their chariots that matched the sun in splendour, 
and departed for Gangadvara, from where she issues. 

Seeing the gods leave, the daughter of the king of mountains, 
addressed her divine lord, the lord of all creatures, and said, “O illustrious 
one, where is Sakra leading the Devas? O you who know the truth, answer 
me this for a strange pang grips my heart.” 

Maheswara said, “O divine Devi, Prajapati Daksha is worshipping the 
Devas with a Asva yagna, and these denizens of swarga are going there.’ 

Uma said, “Why, O Mahadeva, do you not attend that sacrifice?” 

Umapati said, “Long ago, the Devas made a pact whereby no share of 
sacrificial offerings was assigned to me. In keeping with this covenant, the 
Devas follow the old custom, and do not offer a share of the yagnas to me.” 

Uma said, “O glorious one, among all beings you are the Almighty. In 
merit, in energy, in fame and in prosperity, you yield to none, and are 
indeed superior to all. This refusal to offer you a share of the havis fills me 
with sorrow, O Anagha, and a tremor comes over me from head to foot.” 

The Devi Parvati said these words to her divine lords, and fell silent 
for her heart was filled with anguish. Mahadeva realised the pain she was 
in, and he turned to Nandin, and said, “Wait here.” 

With his yoga-shakti, the lord of Mahayogins, the wielder of the 
Pinaka, Mahatejasvin Shiva flew instantly to Daksha’s yagnashala, taking 
with him all his horrific Ganas, to destroy the yagna. 


As they plundered the sacrifice, Rudra’s followers gave horrible cries 
and shrieks, and roared with dreadful laughter. Some, with grotesque faces, 
pulled out the sacrificial stakes and whirled them about, while others began 
to devour those that were attending to the sacrifice. Then there were those 
who extinguished the yagna and its fire, with blood. 

Beset from every side, the sacrifice suddenly assumed the form of a 
deer and tried to flee through the sky. Seeing this, the puissant Mahadeva 
gave chase with bow and arrow. Because the heart of the lord of all Devas, 
possessed of immeasurable energy, was filled with wrath, a dreadful drop of 
sweat appeared on his forehead. When this drop fell on earth, it instantly 
gave rise to a raging fire, which resembled the fire at the end of a yuga. 

From this fire emerged a short, dreadful being, with blood-red eyes 
and a green beard. His body was covered entirely with feathers and hair like 
a hawk’s and stood erect. Of dreadful aspect, his complexion was dark and 
his attire was scarlet. As a fire burns a heap of straw, this creature quickly 
consumed the flying deer, the embodied form of sacrifice. With this task 
done, he next rushed towards the gathered Devas and Rishis. The terrified 
gods fled in all directions, and the earth trembled. Exclamations of “Oh!” 
and “Alas!” rent the universe. Watching all this, Brahma appeared before 
Mahadeva, to speak with him. 

Brahma said, “Almighty one, the Devas will henceforth yield you a 
share of the sacrificial offerings. O Devadeva, let your wrath abate. O 
cremator of foes, because of your anger, the Devas and Rishis are panic- 
stricken. A ghastly creature that has sprung from your sweat, O 
Parameswara, will wander among beings, and be known as jvara, fever. O 
Aja, if the dire energy of this being remains one and focused, the earth will 
not be able to bear him. Let him, therefore, be distributed into many parts.” 

Once his rightful share of sacrificial offerings was determined, 
Sambhu answered Brahma, saying, “Tathaastu. So be it.” Indeed, Bhava, 
the wielder of Pinaka, was joyous and smiled a little as he accepted his 
share of the havis. Sarva, then, for the peace of all creatures, distributed 
fever into many portions. 

Listen, O son, to how this was done. The heat seen on the heads of 
elephants, the bitumen of mountains, the moss that floats on water, the 
slough of snakes, the sores in the hooves of bulls, the salt-laden and sterile 
tracts of the earth, the dullness of vision of all animals, the diseases in the 
throats of horses, the crests on the heads of peacocks, the diseased eye of 


the koel—each of these was called jvara by Mahadeva. This is what I have 
heard. The liver-sickness of sheep, and the hiccup of parrots are also known 
as forms of fever. To this must be added the toil that tigers undergo, for that, 
too, is known as a form of fever. Besides these, O Bhaarata, jvara enters 
everybody at the time of birth, death and on other occasions of sickness as 
well. 

Fever then is known to be the dreadful energy of Maheswara. He is 
invested with authority over all creatures and should, therefore, be held in 
reverence and worshipped by all. When Vritra yawned, it was through 
Ananta that he was overthrown. It was then that Sakra hurled his vajra, 
which split Vritra in two. Divided in this manner, the mighty Asura went to 
the domain of Vishnu of immeasurable tejas. 

Because of his devotion to Vishnu, Vritra had conquered the whole 
universe, and this was why, upon his death, he gained the realm of Vishnu. 

Thus, O son, Yudhishtira, in the context of the death of Vritra, I have 
told you about fever. Is there anything else that I can tell you? He who 
keenly reads this account of jvara with a joyous heart will be free from 
disease and forever enjoy happiness. In felicity, all his wishes will come 
true.’ 


CANTO 284 


Y udhishtira says, ‘O Pitamaha, in the epoch of Vaivaswata Manu, 

how was the son of Prachetas, Prajapati Daksha’s Asva yagna 
destroyed? At the sight of Devi Uma filled with rage and sorrow, the 
puissant Mahadeva, who is the soul of all things, gave way to wrath. How, 
again, through his grace, did Daksha again join the detached and 
dismembered limbs of the yagna? Tell me all this, O Bhishma, truly as it 
occurred.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘In days of yore, Daksha arranged to perform a great 
sacrifice on the breast of Himavat, in the sacred region inhabited by Rishis 
and Siddhas, where the Ganga flows from the mountains. Lush with 
countless trees and vines, the place abounded with Gandharvas and apsaras. 
Surrounded by Rishis, Daksha was waited upon by the denizens of the 
earth, the firmament and the heavens, with their hands joined together in 
reverence. 

The Devas, the Danavas, the Gandharvas, the Pisachas, the Nagas, the 
Rakshasas, the two Gandharvas Haha and Huhu, Tumburu and Narada, 
Viswavasu, Viswaksena, the apsaras, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the 
Sadhyas and the Maruts, all came there with Indra to share in the yagna. 

The drinkers of soma, the carousers of Ajeya, the Rishis and the Pitris 
arrived with the Brahmanas. These, and many other beings of the four 
species, viviparous, Oviparous, filth-born and vegetative, were invited to the 


sacrifice. The Devas, too, with their consorts, all dazzling, arrived on their 
celestial rathas. 

Looking at them, the Rishi Dadhichi became filled with grief and 
wrath, and said, “This is neither a sacrifice nor a meritorious rite of religion, 
since Rudra is not adored in it. You are certainly exposing yourselves to 
bondage and death. Alas, how untoward is the course of time. Stupefied by 
ignorance you do not perceive the destruction that awaits you. A terrible 
calamity stands at your door and you are blind to it!” 

Having said these words, that great seer meditated on the future. He 
saw Mahadeva, and his divine consort, the granter of excellent boons, 
seated atop Kailasa with Narada sitting beside the Devi. 

Conversant with yoga, Dadhichi became gratified, for he had 
ascertained what was about to happen. All the Devas and others that had 
assembled at Daksha’s yagna were of one mind with regard to the omission 
to invite the Pasupati. 

Dadhichi, alone, wanting fervidly to leave that place, said, “By 
worshipping one who should not be worshipped, and by refusing to worship 
him who should be worshipped, a man incurs forever the sin of murder. I 
have never before spoken a lie, and I never shall. Here, in the midst of the 
Devas and the Rishis, I speak the truth. Maheswara, protector of all 
creatures, creator of the universe, the lord of all, the puissant master, the 
receiver of sacrificial offerings, will soon come to this sacrifice and you all 
shall see him.” 

Daksha said, “We have indeed Rudras armed with lances and bearing 
matted locks on their heads. They are eleven in number. I know them all, 
but I do not know who this Maheswara is.” 

Dadhichi said, “This seems to be the counsel of all that are here—that 
Maheswara should not be invited. However, I do not see any Deva here that 
can be said to be superior to him. I am sure that destruction will certainly 
overtake this sacrifice of Daksha.” 

Daksha said, “Here, in this vessel of gold, intended for the lord of all 
sacrifices, is the sacrificial offering sanctified by mantras according to the 
Niyama. | intend to make this offering to Vishnu who is beyond compare. 
He is mighty and the master of all, and to him should sacrifices be 
dedicated.” Meanwhile, the Devi Uma, seated beside her lord, said, ““What 
are the gifts, the vows and what penances, that I should offer or undergo, by 


means of which my illustrious husband may be able to obtain a half or a 
third share of the offerings in sacrifices?” 

To his wife who was agitated with grief and who repeated these words, 
the illustrious Mahadeva said with a joyous countenance, “You do not know 
me, O Divine Uma. You know not, O you of delicate limbs, what words 
should be addressed to the lord of sacrifices. 

O Devi of the large eyes, I know that it is only sinners, who, bereft of 
tapasya, do not understand me. It is through your power of illusion that the 
Devas with Indra at their head, and indeed the three worlds, all become 
perplexed and fall into stupor. 

It is to me that the chanters recite their praises in sacrifices. It is to me 
that the Saman-singers sing their Rathantaras. It is to me that Brahmanas 
conversant with the Vedas perform their yagnas. And it is to me that the 
Adhvaryus dedicate the shares of sacrificial offerings.” 

The Devi said, “There is no doubt that men of even meagre abilities 
praise themselves in the presence of their wives.” 

Holy Shiva said, “O Queen of all the Deities, I do not glorify myself. 
See now, O woman of the slender waist, what I do. Watch the being that I 
will create, O Gauri, to destroy this sacrifice that has displeased you, O my 
exquisite one.” 

Having said these words to his consort Uma, who was dearer to him 
than his own life, the Almighty Mahadeva created from his mouth a 
horrendous being whose very sight made one’s hair stand on end. The 
blazing flames that emanated from his body made him awful to behold. His 
arms were many in number and in each was a weapon that struck the 
onlooker with fear. 

The being, so created, stood before the great lord, with joined hands, 
and said, “What tasks will I have to accomplish?” 

Maheswara answered him, saying, “Go and destroy the sacrifice of 
Daksha.” 

The being of leonine prowess, who had emerged from the mouth of 
Mahadeva, immediately wanted to destroy the sacrifice of Daksha, with 
ease and without the help of anyone, in order to appease the wrath of Uma. 

Urged by her fury, Uma herself assumed the dreadful form of 
Mahakali, went forth in the company of the monstrous being, to see with 
her own eyes the destruction, which she desired. 


The dreadful being then set out, having received the leave and 
blessings of Mahadeva. 

In energy, prowess and form, he resembled Maheswara himself. 
Indeed, he was the living embodiment of Mahadeva’s wrath. 

Of immeasurable tejas and urjas, of boundless virya, he came to be 
called Virabhadra, he who was the dispeller of Kaali’s wrath. From the 
pores of his body, he extruded a number of ghouls known as Raumyas. 

Those fierce bands of spirits, themselves endued with terrible ferocity 
and prowess, and resembling Rudra himself, rushed with the force of 
thunder to the place where Daksha was making preparations for his 
sacrifice. Of dreadful and gigantic forms, they were hundreds of thousands 
in number. They filled the sky with their raging roars and cries and shrieks. 

The clamour filled the denizens of heaven with fear. The very 
mountains were riven and the earth trembled. Whirlwinds began to blow. 
The ocean rose in great surges. The fires that were kindled would not blaze 
up in flames. The sun grew dim. The planets, the stars, the constellations 
and the moon no longer shone. The Rishis, the Devas and Manavas grew 
pale. A universal darkness spread over earth and sky. 

The enraged Rudras ran amok and began to set fire to everything at 
Daksha’s yagna. Some amongst them began to smite and strike all around 
them, wildly. Some tore up the sacrificial stakes. Some began to grind those 
present and others to crush with enormous hands and feet. Endowed with 
the speed of thought, they flew everywhere at will. Some broke the 
sacrificial vessels and stamped on the celestial ornaments. The scattered 
fragments of these were strewn on the ground like stars across the 
firmament. 

The heaps of excellent viands, the piled bottles of drink looked like 
mountains. Rivers of milk ran on every side, with ghrita and payasa for 
their mire, creamy curds for their water and crystallised sugar for their 
sands. Those rivers contained food and drink to satisfy all the six tastes. 

There were lakes of kshira that were beautiful to see. The wild and 
teeming host of Rudras began to gorge, with mouths great and small, wide 
and bizarre, on the meats of diverse kinds, of the best quality, and other 
delicacies of various sorts, and many excellent kinds of drink, and several 
other foods that could be licked and sucked. And as they gorged, they flung 
great handfuls of all that exquisite food in all directions. 


Because of Shiva’s wrath, every one of those gigantic beings looked 
like the all-consuming yuga-fire. Agitating the celestial troops, they made 
them tremble with fear and fly in all directions. Those fierce demons 
frolicked with one another, and seizing the apsaras, had their way with them 
and then flung them roughly aside. 

Of fierce deeds, these beings, impelled by Rudra’s fury, quickly burnt 
that yagna down, although it was protected by all the Devas. Deafening 
were the roars they uttered, which struck every living creature with dread. 
Having torn off the head of sacrifice embodied as a deer, they roared and 
yelled in glee. 

Now, the Devas led by Brahma, and his son, Prajapati Daksha, folded 
their lustrous hands and said to the awful being who led the Raudra force, 
“Tell us, who are you?” 

Virabhadra said, ‘I am neither Rudra nor his consort, the Devi Uma. 
Nor have I come here for partaking of the fare provided in this sacrifice. 
Knowing Uma’s rage, the puissant lord who is the soul of all creatures has 
given way to ire. 

I have not come here to see these greatest of Brahmanas. I have not 
come here urged by curiosity. Beware, for I have come here to destroy this 
sacrifice of yours. 

I am known by the name of Virabhadra and I have sprung from the 
fury of Rudra. This dark woman, who is my companion, is called 
Bhadrakali, and she has emerged from the wrath of the Devi. We have both 
been dispatched by the Devadeva, and we have come here to destroy. O lord 
of Brahmanas, seek the protection of that Mahadeva, the husband of Uma. 
It is preferable to incur the wrath of Shiva than to gain boons from any 
other deity!” 

Hearing this from Virabhadra, Daksha bowed down to Maheswara and 
sought to gratify him by reciting the following hymn: “I throw myself at the 
feet of the effulgent Isana, who is Eternal, Immutable and Indestructible; 
who is the foremost of all Devas, who is endued with the highest Soul, who 
is the lord of all the universe.” 

His praises having been sung, the almighty Mahadeva, suspending 
both prana and apana by shutting his mouth tight, and casting glances on 
every side, presented himself there. 

Possessed of many eyes, the vanquisher of all foes, the lord of lords, 
suddenly arose from within the pit, the agni kunda in which the sacrificial 


fire was housed. Endowed with the refulgence of a thousand suns, and 
looking like another Samvartaka, the Divine One smiled gently at Daksha 
and said, “What, O Brahmana, should I do for you?” 

At this, Brihaspati, the guru of all the Devas adored Mahadeva with 
the Vedic hymns contained in the moksha samhitas. Next, Daksha, joining 
his hands in reverence, filled with dread, trembling, and with his eyes and 
face bathed in tears, addressed the Supreme Lord. 

Daksha said, “If the Almighty has been gratified with me, if indeed, I 
have become an object of favour with him, if I have deserved his kindness, 
if the great lord of all creatures is disposed to grant me boons, then let all 
that was mine, which have been burnt, eaten, drunk, swallowed, destroyed, 
broken and polluted, again be of use to me. Such is the boon that I crave.” 

So that the many long years Daksha had spent in preparing for his 
yagna, with great care and effort, were not wasted, the illustrious Hara, the 
remover of Bhaga’s eyes, said, “Let it be as you wish!” 

These were the words of the illustrious progenitor of all creatures, the 
Deva of three eyes, the protector of dharma. Having obtained his boon from 
Bhava, Daksha knelt down before him and worshipped the deity with the 
bull for his mark, by reciting his thousand and eight names.’ 


CANTO 285 


Y udhishtira says, ‘It becomes you, O sire, to tell me those names with 
which Daksha adored the almighty Shiva. O sinless one, a fervent 
curiosity impels me to listen to them.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Hear, O Bhaarata, what the names, both secret and 
proclaimed, are of the lord of the gods, the deity of extraordinary feats, the 
mahayogin of secret vows.”’> 

Daksha said, “I bow to you, O Supreme Lord, to the destroyer of the 
forces of the Asuras. You are the paralyser of the strength of the Deva king 
himself. Both Devas and Danavas adore you. You are thousand-eyed, you 
are fierce-eyed and you are three-eyed. 

You are the friend of the ruler of the Yakshas. Your hands and feet 
extend in every direction. Your eyes, head and mouth face all sides. Your 
ears, too, are everywhere in the universe, and you are omnipresent, O lord! 

You are shaft-eared, you are large-eared and you are pot-eared. You 
are the receptacle of the ocean. Your ears are like those of the elephant, or 
of the bull or like extended palms. 

Salutations to you! You have a hundred stomachs, a hundred 
revolutions and a hundred tongues. I bow to you. 

The Japis of the Gayatri sing your praises in reciting the Gayatri, and 
the worshippers of the sun revere you in glorifying the sun. The Rishis 
regard you as Brahma, as Indra and as the firmament above. 


O you of mighty form, the ocean and the sky are your two forms. All 
the celestials dwell in your form even as kine inhabit meadows. 

In your body, I perceive soma, and Agni, and the lord of the waters, 
and Aditya, and Vishnu, and Brahma, and Brihaspati. You, O illustrious 
one, are the cause and effect, and the action and instrument of everything 
unreal and real, and you are the creation and destruction. 

I bow to you that are called Bhava and Sarva and Rudra. I offer 
obeisance to you, O giver of boons. I prostrate always to you who are the 
lord of all creatures. 

Salutations to you that are the slayer of Andhaka. I bow to you who 
have three matted locks, with three heads, and are armed with an excellent 
trident; possessing three eyes and, hence, called Tryambaka and Trinetra. 
Obeisance, O destroyer of the Tripura. Salutations to you that are called 
Chanda, and Kunda; who are the universal nucleus and the bearer of the 
infinite embryo; to you who are the holder of the ascetic’s staff, the one who 
has ears everywhere and are called Dandimunda. 

Salutations to you whose teeth and hair are turned upwards, and are 
pure white, and stretched all over the universe; to you that are red, tawny 
with a blue throat. Salutations to you of incomparable form, and dreadful 
appearance, who are highly auspicious, You are Surya, with a garland of 
suns round your neck, and have standards and flags bearing the device of 
Surya. I bow to you, O lord of spirits and ghosts, which are bull-necked, 
and armed with the bow; you who crush all foes, are the personification of 
chastisement and are clad in leaves and rags. 

Salutations to you that bear gold in your stomach, cased in golden 
mail, you are gold-crested, O lord of all the gold in the world. I prostrate 
before you who have been adored, that deserve to be worshipped, and are 
still being venerated; you that are all things, which devour all objects, and 
are the soul of all the elements. Salutations to you that are the hotri in 
sacrifices, the mantras, and own white flags and standards. Obeisance to 
you that are the navel of the universe, are both the cause and effect, and the 
refuge of all shelters. 

Salutations O Krisanasa, of slender limbs, and slim frame. Salutations 
to you that are always cheerful and are the personification of confused 
sounds and voices. Salutations to you that are about to span the earth, that 
are already spread across, and standing upright. Salutations to you that are 


unshakeable, who are unceasing, smooth of skin with matted locks on your 
head. 

I bow to you that are fond of dancing and who strike your puffed 
cheeks, making your mouth a dumara. Salutations to you that are fond of 
lotuses that blow in rivers and that are always fond of singing and playing 
on musical instruments. I prostate in front of you who are Adi, the first of 
all creatures, and are the crusher of the Asura Bala. Salutations to you that 
are the master of time, the personification of kalpa; and the embodiment of 
all kinds of destruction, great and small. 

Salutations to you who laugh awfully and as loud as the beat of a 
drum, and observe dreadful vows. Obeisance forever to you that are fierce, 
and possess ten arms. Salutations to you who are armed with bones and are 
fond of the ashes of funeral pyres. Salutations to you that are awful, and 
terrible to witness, and an observer of dreadful vows and practices. 

I prostrate before you who own an ugly mouth, with a tongue 
resembling a scimitar and large teeth. Salutations to you that are fond of 
both cooked and uncooked meat, and regard the gourded vina as priceless. 
Salutations to you who creates rain, and helps the cause of dharma, are 
identifiable with the form of Nandi, and are dharma personified. Salutations 
to you that are ever moving like wind and the other forces, are the controller 
of all things and always engaged in stirring all creatures in the cauldron of 
Time. 

I bow to you, O lord of all creatures, who are superior, and the giver of 
boons. Salutations to you who have the best of garlands, most outstanding 
of scents, and the finest of robes, and who give the highest of boons to 
creatures, without parallel. Obeisance to you that are attached, and yet are 
free from all attachments, you of the form of yoga dhyana, adorned with a 
garland of akshas. Salutations to you that are united as cause and disunited 
as effects that are the form of shadow and of light. 

Salutations to you that are amiable, and are frightful, and exceedingly 
so. Salutations to you that are auspicious, tranquil and most serene. My 
obeisance to you who are of one leg and many eyes, having only one head; 
you are fierce, you who are gratified with small offerings and are fond of 
equity. Salutations to you that are the artificer of the universe, and are ever 
united with the attribute of stillness. 

Salutations to you that bears a foe-frightening bell, who are of the 
form of the peal made by a bell and are of the form of sound when it is not 


perceptible by the ear. I bow to you that are like a thousand bells rung 
together, who are fond of a garland of bells, and are like the sound that the 
life-breaths make, that are of the strain of all scents and of the confused 
noise of bubbling fluids. Salutations to you who are beyond three hums, and 
that are fond of two hums. I prostrate before you that are entirely tranquil, 
and have the shade of mountain trees for your habitation. 

You are fond of the heart-flesh of all creatures, who purges all sins, 
and are of the form of sacrificial offerings. Salutations to you that are the 
soma of sacrifice, that are the sacrificer himself, who are the Brahma into 
whose mouth is poured the sacrificial butter, and are the agni into which is 
poured the ghrita inspired with mantras. Salutations to you that are of the 
form of Ritwijas, who have your senses under control, who are made of 
sattva, and have rajas also in your make. 

I prostrate before you that are of the banks of rivers, of rivers 
themselves, and of the lord of all rivers, the ocean. Salutations to you, who 
are the giver of food, are the lord of all food and who are identical with him 
that takes food. I bow to you that has a thousand heads and a thousand feet, 
to you that has a thousand tridents raised in your hands, and a thousand 
eyes. Salutations to you that are of the form of the rising sun, and who are 
of the frame of a child, that are the protector of ganas all of whom have the 
build of children, and that are, besides, shaped like children’s toys. 

My obeisance to you that are old, that are covetous, that are already 
agitated and that are about to be agitated. Salutations to you who has locks 
of hair marked by the flow of the Ganga and resembling blades of munja 
grass. Salutations to you that are gratified with the six actions and that are 
devoted to the performance of the three deeds. Salutations to you that have 
assigned the duties of the respective asramas of life. Salutations to you that 
deserves to be praised in sounds that are a variant of sorrow, and constitute 
deep and confused noise. 

Salutations to you who have eyes both white and tawny, as also dark 
and red. Salutations to you who have conquered your vital breaths, who are 
of the shape of weapons, that cleaves all things, and are exceedingly lean. 
Salutations to you who always speak of dharma, artha, kama and moksha. 
Salutations to you who are a Samkhya, who are the lord of Samkhyas, and 
are the introducer of the Samkhya Yoga. 

I prostrate before you who have a chariot and who are without a 
chariot. Salutations to you that have the intersection of four roads for your 


chariot; to you that have the skin of a black deer for your upper garment, 
and a snake for your sacred thread. I bow to you who are Isana, who are of 
body as hard as a thunderbolt, and that are of green locks. Salutations to 
you that are of three eyes, who are the lord of Ambika, who are Manifest 
and Unmanifest. 

Salutations to you that are desire, that are the giver of all desires, that 
are the slayer of all desires, and are the discriminator between the gratified 
and the ungratified. Salutations to you that are all things, the giver of all 
things, and the destroyer of all things. Salutations to you that are the colours 
that appear in the evening sky. Salutations to you that are of mighty 
strength, of mighty arms, are a mighty being and are of great effulgence. 

Salutations to you who look like a mighty mass of clouds, and are the 
embodiment of eternity. Salutations to you that are of a well-developed 
body, who are of emaciated limbs, that bear matted locks on your head, and 
are clad in the bark of trees and skins of animals. Salutations to you that 
have jata as effulgent as the sun or the fire, and have tree-bark and skins for 
your attire. Salutations to you who are possessed of the effulgence of a 
thousand suns, and that are ever engaged in penances. 

Obeisance to you that are the excitement of fever and that are endued 
with matted locks drenched with the waters of the Ganga, of hundreds of 
eddies. Salutations to you who repeatedly rotates the moon, the yugas and 
the clouds. You are food, you are he who eats that food, you are the giver of 
food, you are the grower of food and you are the creator of food. 
Salutations to you that cooks food and eats cooked food, and are both wind 
and fire. 

O lord of all the lords of the deities, you are the four orders of living 
creatures. You are the creator of the mobile and immobile universe, and you 
are its destroyer. O highest of all those conversant with Brahman, they that 
are conversant with Brahman regard you as Brahman. The extollers of 
Brahman say that you are the supreme source of the mind, and the refuge 
upon which space, wind and light rest. 

You are the Riks and the Samans, and the syllable AUM. O first of all 
deities, those proclaimers of Brahman that sing the Samans constantly sing 
of you when they speak the syllables Hayi-Hayi, Huva-Hayi, and Huva- 
Hoyi. You are made of the Yajuses, of the Riks and of the offerings poured 
on the sacrificial fire. The hymns contained in the Vedas and the Upanishads 
adore you. 


You are the Brahmanas and the Kshatriyas, the Vaisyas and the 
Sudras, and the other castes formed by their intermixture. You are those 
masses of clouds that appear in the sky; you are lightning; and you are the 
roar of thunder. 

You are the year, and the seasons; you are the month, and the 
fortnight. You are the yuga, the time represented by the twinkling of an eye, 
you are Kashtha, the Mandalas and the Grahas; you are Kaala. 

You are the treetops, the crown of all mountains. Among animals, you 
are the tiger; among birds, you are Garuda, and among snakes, you are 
Ananta. Among oceans, you are the kshirasagara, the ocean of milk, and for 
all astras, you are the bow. You are the vajra among weapons, and truth 
among vows. 

You are aversion and you are avarice; you are attachment and you are 
bewilderment; you are forgiveness and you are ruthless. You are exertion, 
and you are patience; you are cupidity, and you are wrath; you are victory 
and you are defeat. 

You carry a mace, and you hold a spear; you carry a bow, and you bear 
the khatvanga and the jharjharas in your hands. You are he who slashes, 
pierces and strikes. You are he who leads and he who gives pain and 
sorrow. You are dharma with ten virtues; you are wealth of every kind, and 
you are pleasure. 

You are the Ganga, the oceans, rivers, lakes and the pools. You are the 
slender vines, the thicker creepers; you are all kinds of grass, and deciduous 
herbs. You are all the animals and the birds. You are the origin of all objects 
and actions; you are the season that yields fruits and flowers. 

You are the beginning and the end of the Vedas; you are Gayatri, and 
AUM. 

You are green, you are red, you are blue, you are dark; you are of a 
bloody hue, you are of the colour of the sun, you are tawny, you are brown 
and you are dark blue. You are colourless, you are of the best colour, you 
are the maker of colours and you are without comparison. Your name is 
gold, and you are fond of gold. 

You are Indra, you are Yama, you are the giver of boons, you are 
Kubera and you are Agni. You are the eclipse, you are the fire called 
Chitrabhanu; you are Rahu, and you are the sun. 

You are the fire on which men pour sacrificial ghrita. You are he who 
pours the ghee. You are he in honour of whom men pour the ghrita, you are 


the butter itself and you are the puissant lord of all. 

You are the samhitas called Trisuparna, you are all the Vedas; and you 
are the hymns known as Satarudriya. You are the holiest of holies, most 
auspicious of all auspicious things. You animate the breathless body. You 
are Chitta. 

Endowed with gunas, you are subject to destruction. You are the 
indestructible Jivatman. As jiva’s body, you are full, yet liable to decay and 
death. You are prana, you are sattva, you are rajas, you are tamas and you 
are faultless. You are the breaths —prana, apana, samana, udana and vyana. 

You are the blink of the eye. You are the sneeze and the yawn. You are 
of red eyes that ever look inwards. You are of the great mouth and belly. 
The bristles on your body are like needles. Your beard is green. Your hair is 
erect. You are swifter than the swiftest. You adore and know the principles 
of music both vocal and instrumental. 

You are a fish gliding in the waters, and you are a fish entangled in the 
net. You are full, you love sport, and you are quarrels and disputes 
incarnate. You are Kaala: you are the hard time, the premature time and the 
ripe time. You are the killing, you are the scimitar and you are the kill. 

You are the ally and the adversary; you are the destroyer of both allies 
and adversaries. You are the moment when clouds appear; you have large 
teeth, and you are Samvartaka and Balahaka. 

You are manifest as splendour. Maya conceals you. You are he who 
connects creatures with the fruits of their karma. 

You have a bell in your hand. You play with all things, chala and 
achala, like toys. You are the cause of all causes. You are Brahman in the 
form of Pranava, and you are svaha. You carry the danda, you are clean- 
shaven, and you are the controller of your words, deeds and thoughts. 

You are the four yugas, and the four Vedas; you are the source of the 
four sacrificial fires. You are the authority of all the duties of the four 
asramas. You are the maker of the four varnas. 

You are always fond of dice. You are cunning. You are the lord and 
master of the Ganas. Red garlands and red robes adorn you. You sleep on 
the mountain-breast, and you are fond of the red hue. 

You are the artisan, you are the supreme artist and all the arts flow 
from you. You are fierce; you plucked out Bhaga’s eyes and broke Pusan’s 
teeth. 


You are svaha, you are svadha, you are vashat; you are salutation 
incarnate, and you are the words namas-namas. No one knows your 
observances and your penances. You are Pranava; you are the sky strewn 
with millions of stars. You are Dhatri, Vidhatri and Sandhatri. In the form of 
the Supreme Cause, you are the refuge of everything, and you are 
independent of all refuge. 

You know Brahman. You are tapasya, you are dharma, you are the 
soul of Brahmacharya and you are simplicity. You are the Soul of creatures, 
you are the creator of all creatures; you are absolute existence, and you are 
the cause of the past, the present and the future. 

You are Bhumi, you are Akasa and you are swarga. You are eternal, 
self-restrained and you are Almighty. You are an initiate, and not a novice. 
You are forgiving, unforgiving and you are the chastiser of heretics. 

You are the lunar month, you are the Kalpa, you are destruction, and 
you are creation. You are lust, you are the vital seed; you are subtle, you are 
gross and you adore karnikara garlands. You have a face like Nandi; you 
have a terrible face, you have a handsome face, you have an ugly face and 
you are without a face. You have four faces, you have many faces and you 
have a fiery face in battles. 

You are the golden-bellied Narayana Hiranyagarbha; you are 
unattached to everything; you are Ananta, and you are Virat. You are the 
destroyer of adharma, you are Mahaparswa, you are Chandradhara, and 
king of the spirit-clans. You low like a cow, you are the protector of kine 
and the lord of bulls is your attendant. 

You are the protector of the Trilokas; you are Govinda; you are the 
controller of the senses, and the senses cannot seize you. You are the best of 
all creatures; you are fixed, you are immobile, you are steadfast and you are 
the incarnation of tremors. 

You are irresistible, and you destroy poisons. Undefeatable in battle, 
you cannot be shaken, transcended or measured. You are victory. None can 
vanquish you. 

You are swift; you are the moon, and you are Yama. Without flinching, 
you bear the cold, heat, hunger, weakness and disease. You are mental 
anguish, and physical disease. You are the disease and the cure for all 
diseases. You are the advent and departure of all diseases. 

You are the destroyer of my sacrifice that tried to escape in the form of 
a deer. You have a lofty brow. You have eyes like lotus-petals. Your abode 


is in the midst of a lotus forest. 

You hold the Rishi’s staff. You have the three Vedas for your three 
eyes. Your chastisements are fierce and savage. You destroy the embryo 
from which the universe springs. 

You drink poison and fire; you are the monarch of all Devas, you drink 
soma, and you are the lord of the Maruts. You are the amrita. You are the 
master of the universe. You shine in glory, and you are the lord of all the 
luminous ones. 

You protect from poison and death, and you drink kshira and soma. 
You are the pre-eminent protector of those who have fallen from swarga, 
and you defend the best of the Devas. 

Golden is your vital seed, your Hiranyaretas. You are male, you are 
female and you are without gender. You are an infant, you are a youth; you 
are aged with worn-out teeth; you are the supreme Naga, you are Sakra and 
you are the destroyer and creator of the universe. 

You are Prajapati, and worshipped by the Prajapatis; you support the 
universe, and the universe is your form; you have the gift of great tejas, and 
have faces in every direction. 

The sun and the moon are your eyes, and the Brahman is your heart. 
You are the ocean. Devi Saraswati is your speech. Fire and wind are your 
might. You are day and you are night. You are all actions including the 
blinking of the eye. 

Neither Brahma, nor Govinda, nor the ancient Rishis, can know your 
greatness, O auspicious lord. Your subtle forms are invisible to us. 

Rescue me and protect me like a father. I deserve your protection. I 
bow to you, O Anagha. You are merciful to your devotees, and I am ever 
devoted to you. Let him who lives alone on the other side of the ocean of 
samsara always protect me. 

I bow to the very Soul of yoga, whom men of sattva see as an 
effulgent light. Obeisance to him who has matted locks, who bears the 
Rishi’s staff; who has a body with a long torso, who has a dumaru tied to 
his back, and who is the Soul of Brahma. 

I prostrate before him who is the Soul of water, in whose hair are the 
clouds, in the joints of whose body are the rivers and whose stomach holds 
the four oceans. I seek the protection of him who, at the end of the yuga, 
devours all creatures and reclines on the Ekarnava, the single expanse of 


water that covers the universe. He who entered Rahu’s mouth to drink 
soma, and as Swarbhanu devoured Surya, may he protect me. 

My obeisance to the Devas who enjoy their shares of sacrificial 
offerings. Let them enjoy the offerings made with svaha and svadha, and let 
them be pleased with the offerings. 

Let the thumb-sized beings who dwell in all bodies, the linga sariras, 
always protect and gratify me. I always bow to the embodied beings who 
make creatures cry, and gladden them as well, without it affecting 
themselves. 

I prostrate to the Rudras who live in rivers, oceans, hills, mountains 
and mountain caves; who abide in the roots of trees, cow-pens, remote 
jungles, crossroads, in-roads and open squares. Who dwell on riverbanks, 
lakes and oceans, elephant-shelters, and stables, in chariot-shacks, deserted 
gardens and houses, in the five primal elements and in the cardinal and 
subsidiary directions. 

Repeated salutations to the ones that dwell in the space between the 
sun and the moon, as in their rays, and they that live in the nether regions, 
as also the ones that have taken to sannyasa and other superior practices for 
the sake of attaining the Supreme. I bow always to them that are 
unnumbered, unmeasured and formless, to the Rudras that have the gift of 
infinite gunas. 

Because you are the creator and Soul of all creatures, O Hara, I did not 
invite you to my sacrifices. After all, you are the one adored in all sacrifices 
with plentiful offerings. Perhaps, stupefied by your subtle illusion I failed to 
invite you. Be appeased with me, O Bhava, my mind, intellect and 
consciousness all dwell in you.” 

Hearing these adorations, Mahadeva ceased inflicting further violence 
on Daksha. Indeed, he addressed the Prajapati, saying, “Daksha, I am 
pleased with your worship. You need not praise me more. You will have my 
friendship. Through my grace you will earn the fruit of a thousand 
Asvamedhas, and a hundred Vajapeyas. 

“Be you the best of all creatures in the world. Feel no sorrow for the 
violence done to your sacrifice. Even in earlier Kalpas, I had to destroy your 
yagna. 

O Mahavrata, once more will I grant you boons. Accept them. Dispel 
this sadness that spreads across your face, and listen to me attentively. With 
the help of sound debate, the Devas and Danavas have extracted a faith 


from the six Angas of the Vedas, and from Samkhya and yoga, because of 
which they practice austere tapasya. 

Even so, the religion, which I have extracted, is without equal, and 
yields all felicity. It is open to practice for men in all asramas. It leads to 
moksha. It may take many years to acquire, through punya by those who 
have restrained their senses. Mystery shrouds it. The ignorant see it as 
censurable. It contradicts the dharma of the four varnas and four asramas, 
and agrees with them in only a few instances. Adept men in the science of 
conclusions understand its propriety, and those who transcend all the 
asramas are its worthy recipients. 

Daksha, in days of old did I create this auspicious dharma called 
Pasupata; its proper observance confers immense benefits. Shed this fever 
of your heart and let those benefits be yours.” 

With these words, Mahadeva, Devi Uma and all his followers 
vanished from Daksha’s view. He who recites this hymn, the Shiva 
Sahasranama stotra, first sung by Daksha, or hears it, will never meet with 
the smallest evil and will gain a long life. Indeed, as Shiva is the lord of all 
the Devas, so is this stotra, agreeable with the srutis, supreme among all 
stutis. Men covetous of fame, kingdom, happiness, pleasure, profit and 
wealth, as those yearning for vidya, must earnestly listen to this hymn. 

He who suffers from illness, distressed by pain, plunged into gloom, 
afflicted by thieves or fear, or who has incurred the king’s ire, is freed from 
fear by listening to or reciting this hymn. Indeed, even in this earthly body, 
it can help him attain equality with Mahadeva’s Ganas. Verily, it enhances 
his energy and fame, and purifies his sins. 

Neither Rakshasas nor Pisachas, not Bhutas or Vinayakas disturb the 
house where men recite this stotra. The woman, who piously listens to this 
hymn while practising Brahmacharya, wins worship as a goddess in the 
family of her father and her husband. 

Every venture of the man, who hears or recites this hymn with rapt 
attention, meets with success. The singing of this stotra fulfils all one’s 
silent and spoken wishes. 

He who practices Samyama, makes offerings to Mahadeva, Guha, 
Uma, Nandi, and sincerely chants their names, gains all things of 
enjoyment, pleasure and his every wish comes true. 

When such a being dies, he ascends into swarga, and never again takes 
birth among animals or birds. Even the puissant Vyasa, son of Parasara, 


affirms this.’ 


CANTO 286 


Y udhishtira says, “Tell me, O Pitamaha, what is Adhyatma with 
regard to man and where does it arise?’ 
Bhishma says, ‘With the help of Adhyatma one may know everything. 
It is, again, superior to all things. To the extent of my knowledge, I will 
explain the Adhyatma about which you ask. Listen attentively. 

The earth, wind, space, water and light are the Panchamahabhutas. 
These are the cause and the destruction of all creatures. The bodies of living 
beings, both subtle and physical, are the result of the combination of gunas 
of these five. These qualities repeatedly come into existence and 
unceasingly merge into the original cause of all things—the Paramatman. 

The Panchamahabhutas create all creatures, and into these five 
elements, all beings eternally resolve themselves, like the endlessly rising 
and subsiding waves of the ocean. As a tortoise stretches out and withdraws 
its legs into itself, even so the infinite number of creatures emerge from and 
enter these five primal elements. 

Verily, sound springs from space, and all touch, from earth. Life is 
from the wind. Taste is from water. Form is the property of fire. And so, the 
entire universe, mobile and unmoving, is the combination of the 
Panchamahabhutas in various proportions. When the Pralaya comes, the 
endless creatures resolve themselves into these five, and when creation 
begins anew, they re-emerge from them. 


The creator places the same five elements in all the beings, in 
proportions that he thinks best. Sound, the ears and all the cavities, have 
space, Akasa, as their causal element. Taste, all liquids and the tongue, are 
the properties of Apah, water. Form, the eye and the digestive fire in the 
belly, partake of the nature of Agni, fire. Scent, the nose and the body, are 
the properties of Bhumi, earth. Life, touch and action are the properties of 
wind, Vayu. 

Rajan, I have explained to you all the properties of the 
Panchamahabhutas. After Mahadeva created these, he united with them 
sattva, rajas, tamas, Kaala, Chitta and manas as the sixth. 

The intellect dwells in the interior of what you see above the soles of 
the feet and below the crown of the head. Humans have five senses, and the 
mind is the sixth. The seventh is the intellect. The kshetrajna is the eighth. 

Knowledge of their individual functions determine the senses and the 
doer. Sattva, rajas and tamas depend upon the senses for their formation. 
Chitta exists only to seize the impressions of objects. Manas has ambiguity 
for its function. Buddhi is for ascertainment. Kshetrajna is only an inactive 
witness of all activity. 

Sattva, rajas, tamas, Kaala and karma, O Bhaarata, these are the 
qualities that direct the buddhi. The intellect is the senses and their five 
aspects. When intellect is wanting, the senses with the mind, and the five 
other attributes cease to be. 

That with which the buddhi sees is the eye. When the intellect hears, it 
is the ear. When it smells, it is the nose, and when it tastes, it is the tongue. 
When it feels objects, it is the skin. In this manner, the intellect undergoes 
diverse and frequent modifications. When the intellect desires anything, it 
becomes the mind. The five senses, with the mind, are the creations of 
buddhi. They are the indriyas. To stain them is to taint buddhi as well. 

While intellect dwells in the jiva, it exists in three gunas. Sometimes 
she is joyful, at times, she indulges in sorrow, and often she exists in a state 
that is neither pleasure nor pain. With these conditions for her essence, the 
intellect decides between the three gunas. As the surging ocean ever 
remains within its continents, likewise, the intellect exists in the mind. 

When rajas increases, buddhi transforms into rajas. Felicity and 
satisfaction are the properties of sattva. Heartache, sorrow, discontentedness 
and damnation, are the result of rajas. Ignorance, attachment, error, 


heedlessness, stupefaction, terror, meanness, sleep and procrastination, are 
the properties of tamas. 

Whenever the body and mind connect with joy or happiness, the state 
it gives rise to, is the result of sattva. Regard everything fraught with sorrow 
and disagreeable to oneself as rising from rajas. Therefore, before 
undertaking such actions of passion, one should reflect on them. See 
anything fraught with error or bewilderment, which is inconceivable and 
mysterious, as connected with tamas. 

This then, is the explanation of how things in this world dwell in the 
intellect. Understand this and you will be wise. For, what else can be the 
sign of wisdom? 

Let me tell you the difference between intellect and soul. The buddhi 
creates gunas, whereas the Atman does not. Although by nature they are 
distinct from each other, yet they always exist together. A fish is different 
from the water in which it dwells, but fish and water must exist together. 

The gunas cannot know the Atman, but the Atman knows them. 
Ignorant men regard the Soul to always act together with the gunas, but this 
is not so. The Atman is truly only an inactive witness of everything. 

The intellect has no refuge. Life arises because of the gunas coming 
together. Other causes create the knowledge that dwells in the body. No one 
can apprehend the gunas in their real nature or form of existence. The 
intellect creates the attributes, whereas the soul simply watches them. This 
union between buddhi and Atman is eternal. 

The indwelling insight apprehends all things through the senses that 
are themselves inanimate and ignorant. Really, the senses are only like 
lamps that shed light for others without themselves being able to see. Such 
is the nature of the senses, intellect and the soul. With this knowledge, one 
should live cheerfully, without yielding to either sorrow or joy. Such a man 
is beyond the influence of pride. 

Just as a spider weaves its web naturally, it is the nature of the intellect 
to create all the gunas on its own. Hence, one can call these attributes a 
spider’s web. Upon their destruction, their essences do not cease to exist; 
they only become invisible. Although, when something is beyond the 
knowledge of the senses, its existence, or otherwise, is concluded through 
inference. This is the opinion of one school of philosophers. Others insist 
that with death, the gunas cease to be. One must resolve this difficult 


problem through reflection and the intellect, and dispel the confusion, 
before one can discard sorrow and live in happiness. 

As men unacquainted with its mystery feel distress, when they are 
born into this earth, which is like a sea of bewilderment. Likewise is the 
anxiety of he who loses his intellect and so his discernment. Still, men who 
know Adhyatma possess fortitude, and they can reach the other shore of 
samsara. Indeed, gyana is an efficient raft, and intelligent men escape the 
terrors that alarm the ignorant. 

As for men of dharma, none of them arrives at an end that is superior 
to that of any of their companions. Indeed, in this matter, the virtuous show 
an equality. 

Through the sole means of knowledge, the gyani destroys whatever 
karma he does both in ignorance and knowingly, though these be replete 
with great iniquity. Moreover, when he receives true vidya, he naturally 
ceases to perpetrate both these. He censures the evil doings of others as well 
as any of his own sins committed under the influence of attachment.’ 


CANTO 287 


Y udhishtira says, ‘Living creatures are always in fear of sorrow and 
death. Tell me, O Pitamaha, how the occurrence of these two may be 
prevented.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Listen, O Bhaarata, to an old story of the conversation 
between Narada and Samanga. 

Narada said, “While others respect their superiors with only a bow of 
the head, you honour them by prostrating before them on the ground. You 
seem to be crossing the river of life by yourself. You appear to be always 
free from sorrow and full of great joy. I do not see that you ever have the 
least anxiety. You are always content and happy and you revel in constant 
wonder like a child.” 

Samanga said, “O bestower of honours, I know the truth about the 
past, the present and the future. Hence, I am never sad. I also know about 
the advent of deeds in this world, of the accession of their fruits and about 
the varied nature of these fruits. Therefore, I never yield to sorrow. 

Watch the illiterate, the destitute, the prosperous, O Narada, the blind, 
fools, madmen, and us, as well. See how we all live by virtue of the karma 
of our past lives. The very Devas exist because of their past karma. The 
strong and the weak, all, live according to past actions. It is fitting, 
therefore, that you should hold us in esteem. The owners of thousands of 
karmas, live. The owners of hundreds also, live. They that are overwhelmed 
by sorrow, live. See, we too, are living! 


When we, O Narada, do not give in to sorrow, how can the practice of 
dharma or performing rites and rituals affect us? Moreover, since all joys 
and sorrows are transient, they cannot agitate us at all. Indeed, the very root 
of wisdom is the freedom of the senses from ignorance. It is the senses that 
yield to errors and sadness. He whose faculties are subject to nescience, can 
never attain wisdom. The pride that a man indulges in out of ignorance, is 
only a form of the same ignorance. The man of delusion has neither this 
world nor the next. 

Remember that sorrow and happiness cannot be eternal. With all its 
vicissitudes and tribulations, I would never adopt a worldly life. Neither 
would I care for desirable objects nor think of their attending pleasure. And, 
indeed, I would not dwell upon the sorrows that present themselves. 

A self-reliant man would never covet the possessions of others; he 
would not think of undeserved gains; even immense wealth begotten 
without toil would bring him no joy. Furthermore, he would not be 
sorrowful at the loss of such wealth. 

Neither friends nor wealth, nor high birth or scriptural learning, or 
mantras can save a man from sorrow in the next world. It is only through 
karma that he can attain felicity there. One cannot direct the intellect of the 
one inept in yoga towards moksha. He who is ignorant of yoga can never 
know happiness. 

Patience, and the resolve to disown sorrow, are the two means to true 
bliss. Anything pleasant leads to pleasure. Pleasure induces pride. Pride 
fetches sorrow. Hence, I avoid them all. 

Misery, fear and pride stupefy the heart; and to pleasure and pain, I am 
a mere spectator. Abandoning wealth and pleasure, craving and misdeeds, I 
range over the earth, free from sorrow and anxiety. 

Like one who has drunk amrita, I do not fear death, here or in the 
hereafter. Nor am I afraid of iniquity, cupidity or any such thing. Through 
my severe tapasya, I have gained this knowledge. This is why, O Narada, 
even if sadness comes to me, it will not afflict me.” 


CANTO 288 


Y udhishtira says, “Tell me, O Pitamaha, what is good for he who is 

inexperienced with the dharma of the scriptures, who is always 
unsure, who has no self-restraint, and other practices that lead to 
Atmagyana, the knowledge of the Soul.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Worship of the guru, reverential care of elders and 
listening to Brahmanas recite the shastras are of supreme benefit to such a 
man. 

For this, listen to another old tale of a conversation between Galava 
and the Devarishi Narada. 

Long ago, Galava, for his weal, approached Narada, and said, “I see, 
O Muni, that the virtues through which a man gains respect in the world are 
permanently inherent in you. You have gyana and it befits you to clear the 
minds of men like us who are unacquainted with dharma. We are uncertain 
about what we should do, for simultaneously with a fiat to perform karmas, 
the revelations of the shastras exhort us to acquire gyana. Speak to us on 
this subject. 

O Narada, the different asramas approve different courses of action. 
‘This is beneficial, and this other is beneficial’: in this manner, do the 
scriptures command us. 

Observing the followers of the four asramas, and seeing how we are 
equally content with our own teachings, we still fail to understand what is 
truly beneficial. 


If the shastras were all uniform and one, then the truth would be easy 
to discern. Yet, because the scriptures are multifarious, it shrouds what is 
truly valuable with mystery. This, I feel, is what creates all the confusion 
about beneficial deeds. O Devarishi, speak to me on this subject. I await 
your guidance.” 

Narada said, “There are four asramas, O child. All of them serve their 
own purposes, and their duties differ from one another. Understand them 
first from competent gurus, and reflect on them, O Galava. Notice the 
variations in the proclamations of the merits of the asramas with regard to 
their form, their divergence with regard to their matter and the 
contradictions in the observances they embrace. Notice how all the asramas 
refuse to clearly yield their true intent of Atmagyana. Yet, men with the gift 
of subtle vision clearly perceive their highest goal. 

Good offices to friends, suppression of enemies and the possession of 
the aggregate of three, dharma, artha and kama: these, the wise affirm, are 
certainly beneficial, and of supreme excellence. Abstention from sin, the 
inclination towards dharma and good conduct surely constitute excellence. 
Mildness towards all creatures, a sincere nature and sweet speech do indeed 
create greatness. A fair distribution of one’s belongings, among the Devas, 
the Pitris and Athitis, and loyalty towards one’s servants certainly establish 
virtue. 

Truthfulness is the highest punya, but the knowledge of truth is 
difficult to acquire. I say, truth is exceedingly beneficial to all creatures. 
Renunciation of pride, the elimination of impulse, contentment and living in 
solitude, embody supreme purity. The study of the Vedas, and their Angas, 
with enquiry, and pursuits of gyana, are meritorious. 

He who aims for perfection should never excessively enjoy sound, 
form, taste, touch and scent. Wandering at night, sleeping during the day, 
revelling in idleness, roguery, arrogance, extravagance — these are habits he 
must relinquish. To achieve success, he should pursue his goal with total 
abstention from all indulgence of the senses. 

He should not seek to elevate himself by discrediting others. Indeed, 
through his merits alone should he seek distinction over eminent men, but 
never over the inferior. Men, who have no merit, and are full of pride, 
demean meritorious men by asserting their own virtues and affluence. They 
enlarge their own importance, and if left unchecked regard themselves 
superior to eminent and worthy men of prestige. The wise and the righteous 


acquire great fame by refraining from speaking ill of others and from never 
indulging in vanity. 

Flowers spread their fragrance without proclaiming their own 
excellence. The sun silently casts his radiance through the sky. Similarly, 
eminent men discard their faults and calmly shine in the world, without any 
boastfulness. A fool can never sparkle in the world by singing his own 
praises— while, the one with real punya and gyana has splendour even if he 
is hidden in a pit. 

Men may shout loud and evil words from the top of their lungs but, 
eventually, such words will die. Even so, good words, spoken ever so softly, 
will illuminate the world. As the sun only appears to shine in the 
Suryakantam gem, the frivolous words of vain fools display only the 
meanness of their hearts. Hence, men seek gyana. I think that of all 
possessions, that of wisdom is the most valuable. 

One should not speak until spoken to, nor reply if someone questions 
one impolitely. Even if one is intelligent and wise, one should remain silent, 
even like a fool, until one is questioned in a respectful and appropriate 
manner. 

One should live among men of dharma and liberality, who observe the 
duties of their own varna. He who wishes for excellence, should never 
dwell in a place where there is a conflict of the duties of the several orders. 
A person may abide abstaining from all works, and be content with 
whatever he receives without exertion. By living amid men of dharma, one 
succeeds in acquiring dharma oneself. Likewise, by living amid sinners, he 
taints himself with sin. 

As the touch of water, fire or the moon’s rays, instantly convey their 
sensations, the impressions of dharma and adharma produce sukha or 
dukha. 

Men who eat vighasa do not care for the flavours of food. Men who 
minutely judge the tastes of the dishes are still bound by the bonds of 
karma. 

There are places where a Brahmana discourses on duties regarding 
Atmagyana. However, the disciples listen without any reverence. A man of 
dharma should immediately leave such a place. On the other hand, who 
would wish to leave the place where perfect decorum exists between the 
guru and sishya? 


What self-respecting gyani will stay in the place where people spread 
false rumours about the wise? Who is there that will not forsake such a 
place where greedy men seek to break down the barriers of dharma? 

One should live among pious men who humbly practice dharma 
without fear. Nevertheless, one must avoid the place where men do so just 
to acquire wealth and other temporal benefits—for, such people are sinful. 
One should instantly flee from there, as if from a room full of snakes. 

At the outset, he who seeks his own weal should relinquish any action 
that causes strain or duress, and invests him with sinful karmas. 

Virtuous men should leave the kingdom where the king and his 
officers exercise equal authority and where they habitually eat before 
feeding visiting relatives. One should live in a country where Brahmanas 
eat first; where they devote themselves to dharma, teach and officiate at 
sacrifices. One should surely dwell in a country where there is constant 
recitation of the sounds svaha, svadha and vashat. 

Like poisoned meat, one should avoid a kingdom where Brahmanas 
perform unholy practices, for a livelihood. With a contented heart, a noble 
man should live in a country whose inhabitants joyfully offer before anyone 
even asks. One should befriend righteous men devoted to good deeds, in a 
country where chastisement falls upon the wicked and where respect and 
good offices are the rewards for men of subdued and cleansed souls. 

One should gladly reside in the country, which is ruled by a just king 
who is devoted to dharma, where severe punishment awaits those who 
befriend vain, choleric men, who behave evilly towards the upright, and 
who are greedy and practice himsa. When affluence is about to abandon his 
subjects, kings invested with character bring prosperity to them. 

I have answered your questions about what is beneficial. Due to its 
exceptionally high and hermetic nature, no one can describe that which is 
beneficial for the Soul. 

The man of dharma who, for his livelihood, conducts himself with 
dharma, and devotes himself to the good of all creatures, will achieve 
numerous lofty qualities and rewards.’ 


CANTO 289 


Y udhishtira says, ‘Keeping the ultimate goal in mind, O Pitamaha, 
how should a king behave in this world? What qualities should he 
possess to free himself from attachments?’ 

Bhishma says, “Listen to the old story that was told by Arishtanemi to 
Sagara. 

Sagara said, “What is the dharma, O Brahmana, by which to enjoy 
felicity here? How, indeed, may one avoid sorrow and turmoil? I want to 
know this!” 

Arishtanemi of Tarkshya’s vamsa realised Sagara deserved his 
instruction, and said, “The bliss of mukti is true felicity in the world. The 
ignorant man who is wealthy, and attached to children, and his animals, 
does not know this. The mind that attaches itself to worldly objects and the 
intellect that suffers from thirst, baffle all remedy. The ignorant man, bound 
in the chains of affection, cannot acquire moksha. 

Listen closely as I tell you about all the bonds that spring from 
affections and attachments. Indeed, they can benefit the gyani. 

Once your children are grown and able to earn their livelihood, you 
should arrange for their marriage and be free to travel in happiness. With 
the highest goal of mukti in mind, leave your wife when she is older and 
attached to her son. Whether you have a son or not, having indulged your 
senses in the early years of your life, indulge no more. Free yourself from 
attachments, and range the world carefree in natural joy. Satisfied with your 


effortless and unsought-after gains, and perceiving all creatures and objects 
equally, you must travel in felicity. 

This is briefly the way to free yourself from attachments. Listen now, 
to the details of the attraction of moksha. 

Men, who live free from attachments and fear, gain happiness. While, 
men who are attached to worldly objects, meet with death. Worms and ants 
engage in procuring food, and die in the pursuit. 

If you wish to attain mukti you must never worry about your relatives, 
by thinking, ‘How will they live without me?’ A living being is born alone, 
grows by himself, gains joy, sorrow and death, all by himself. 

People enjoy food, raiment and other acquisitions, earned either by 
their parents, or by themselves. This is solely the result of past karma. All 
creatures live governed by their own doings, and receive their fruits as 
ordained by Him. 

A being is but a lump of clay, and ever dependent on outside forces. In 
such a position, what rational consideration can a man have to protect and 
feed his relatives? In spite of your utmost efforts to save them, Mrityu 
carries away your relatives, in your very presence. This should be enough to 
awaken you. While your relatives are alive, you may yourself die, before 
your duty to feed and protect them is over. After your kin have died, you 
cannot know what becomes of them—whether they are happy or sorrowful. 
This ought to awaken you. 

Whether you live or die, your kith and kin maintain themselves 
because of the fruits of their own karma. Reflect on this and do what is for 
your own good. When this is the case, to whom do we connect with in the 
world? Therefore, set your heart on the attainment of moksha. Listen still, 
for I need to say something more. 

The man of resolve, who has conquered hunger, thirst, anger, avarice 
and the rest, is certainly liberated. He who does not forget himself, through 
the folly of gambling, drinking and chasing courtesans, is ever a 
Jivanmukta. 

One whom sorrow touches because of the needs of daily sustenance, 
knows the flaws of life. He who regards his repeated births to be due only to 
sexual congress with women, is free from attachments. 

He is certainly a Jivanmukta who knows the true nature of janma, 
mrityu and karma. He who takes just a handful of corn for his sustenance, 


from millions of carts loaded with grain, and who ignores the difference 
between a bamboo shed and a palatial mansion, is certainly a jivanmukta. 

He is surely free who observes that death, disease and famine afflict 
the world. Indeed, such a man is content, while he who fails to see the 
world in such a light, meets with destruction. The one who is content with 
basic needs is a Jivanmukta. 

One who perceives the world to consist of consumers and the 
consumed, while not being part of either, whom pleasure and pain cannot 
affect, is liberated. He who sees no difference between a soft mattress and 
the hard ground, and views fine rice and thick rice equally, is liberated. The 
one who regards soft linen and rough cloth made of grass as equal, and in 
whose appreciation fabrics of silk and the bark of trees are the same, who 
sees no difference between clean sheep-skin and unclean leather, is a 
Jivanmukta. 

He who considers this world as the result of the combination of the 
Panchamahabhutas, attains mukti. A person who regards pleasure and pain 
as equal, and gain and loss at par, in whose appraisal victory and defeat 
differ not, to whom like and dislike are the same, and whom fear and 
anxiety do not change, is wholly liberated. 

The one who regards his imperfect body as only a mass of blood, urine 
and excreta, and also a home of all manner of disorders and diseases, finds 
emancipation. He who always remembers that decrepitude, wrinkles, white 
hair, gauntness, paleness will eventually overcome and bend his body, is 
liberated. He who remembers his body is liable to loss of virility, weakness 
of sight, loss of hearing and strength, attains moksha. He, who knows that 
the Rishis, the Devas and the Asuras too must depart from their individual 
realms, is a Jivanmukta. The one who knows that thousands of powerful 
kings have left this earth, gains emancipation. 

He who knows that the acquisition of objects is always difficult, that 
pain is abundant, and that tending to relatives is fraught with pain, becomes 
liberated. Witnessing the copious faults of children and adults, is there 
anybody who would not worship moksha? One who awakens through the 
scriptures and worldly experience, and perceives every human concern to 
be unsubstantial, is a Jivanmukta. 

Whether you choose to be a grihastha or pursue mukti, remember my 
words, and act like a Jivanmukta.” 


Sagara heard these virtuous words that lead one towards moksha, and 
with their help he continued to rule his subjects.’ 


CANTO 290 


Y udhishtira says, ‘There is another thing that I wish to know all about 

from you, Pitamaha; tell me everything about it. Why did the 
Devarishi Usanas, also known as Kavi, favour the Asuras and oppose the 
Devas? Why did he diminish the tejas of the Devas? Why did the Danavas 
always engage in enmity with the Devas? 

Having the splendour of an immortal, why did Usanas gain the name 
of Sukra? How also did he acquire such superior powers? Tell me, even 
though he has awesome energy, why does he not travel to the centre of the 
firmament? Pitamaha, I wish to know everything about this.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Rajan, listen closely to the actual events, as I heard 
and understand them. For a good reason, Usanas engaged in doing what is 
disagreeable to the Devas. The royal Kubera, lord of the Yakshas and the 
Rakshasas, is the lord of the treasury of Indra. With his yoga-shakti, 
Maharishi Usanas entered Kubera’s body, to overpower him and rob him of 
his wealth. Great anguish overcame Kubera at the loss of his wealth. Full of 
anxiety and wrath, he approached Mahadeva, the greatest of gods. 

Kubera represented the matter to the fierce and amiable Shiva of 
various forms. He said, “By entering my body through his yoga, Usanas 
deprives me of liberty, and all my wealth, and in the same way, leaves me as 
he pleases.” 

Hearing these words, Maheswara was enraged. His eyes turned red, 
and with his mighty trident, he was eager to strike Usanas down, and he 


shouted, “Where is he? Where is he?” 

Meanwhile, from a distance, Usanas determined Mahadeva’s intent, 
and waited in silence. Indeed, Usanas gauged Shiva’s wrath, and reflected 
whether he should approach Maheswara, flee or remain where he was. 

Meditating on the Divine Mahadeva, Usanas set himself on the point 
of Mahadeva’s spear. Rudra realised he could not cast the spear now, so he 
bent the weapon into a bow, which is now known as pinaka. 

Umapati saw Sukra Bhargava on the palm of his hand. He opened his 
mouth and quickly swallowed Usanas, who went down into his stomach 
and began to wander there.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘How could Usanas wander within the belly of the 
Highest? What did the illustrious lord do while the Brahmana was within 
his stomach?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘In days of old, after swallowing Usanas, Mahadeva 
entered the waters and, like a wooden stake, remained there in yoga-dhyana 
for millions of years. He completed his great tapasya and emerged from the 
mighty lake. Brahma approached him and enquired after his tapasya and 
well-being. 

The lord with Nandi for his emblem answered, “My tapasya is 
successful.” 

Sankara, of inconceivable soul, saw that Usanas within his stomach 
had become greater because of his penance. The greatest of yogins, Usanas, 
rich with the wealth of his penances and Kubera’s wealth, shone brightly in 
the Triloka. 

After this, with the Pinaka by his side, Mahadeva once again sat down 
in dhyana, while Usanas anxiously continued to wander in Maheswara’s 
belly. Seeking to escape, the Maharishi began to sing the praises of the lord, 
but Rudra blocked all his apertures. 

From within Mahadeva’s stomach, Usanas repeatedly addressed the 
Mahadeva, saying, “Show me your mercy!” Since all his other orifices were 
shut, Mahadeva said, “Come out through my linga.” 

Confined on every side and unable to locate this orifice, the ascetic 
began to run here and there, burning all the while with Mahadeva’s tejas. At 
last, he found the opening and emerged through it. This is why his name is 
Sukra, or semen, and why he is unable to attain the core of the firmament. 

The sight of Sukra emerging from his stomach, shining with bright 
energy, filled Bhava with anger, and he stood with the trisula in his hand. 


Devi Uma quickly intervened and forbade her angry lord from killing the 
Brahmana. Because of Uma’s intervention, Usanas became the son of the 
Devi.’ 

Uma said, “Since he is now my son, you can no longer kill this 
Brahmana. O Lord, he who emerges from your stomach does not deserve 
death at your hands.” 

Devi Uma’s words pacified Bhava, and he smiled and said, “Let this 
one go wherever he likes.” 

Bowing to Mahadeva and to Goddess Uma, Usanas went away where 
he wished. 

This, O king of the Bharatas, is the story of Sukra Bhargava, the 
Asuraguru.’ 


CANTO 291 


Y udhishtira says, ‘O Mahabaho, now tell me about what is beneficial 

for our weal. Your words are like amrita, with which I am never 
satiated. What are the good deeds, which help a man acquire what is for his 
highest benefit both here and in the hereafter?’ 

Bhishma says, “Let me tell you what King Janaka once asked the 
peerless Parasara Muni. That king of Mithila said, “What is beneficial for 
all creatures, in this world and the next? Teach me about these things.” 

Parasara, who knew the precepts of every religion, said, “Dharma 
earned through karma is of supreme benefit in this world and the next. 
Ancient Rishis say there is nothing higher than dharma. By accomplishing 
the duties of dharma, a man receives honour in swarga. The dharma, again, 
of embodied creatures, lies in the tenets of karma. 

All good men from the different asramas establish their faith in 
dharma, and accomplish their respective svadharmas. The shastras advise 
four methods of living in this world. These are the acceptance of gifts for 
Brahmanas, the realisation of taxes for Kshatriyas, farming for Vaisyas and 
service to the three other classes for the Sudras. 

Wherever men live, the means of support come by themselves. After 
concluding various virtuous or sinful deeds, when living beings die and 
merge into their constituent elements, they attain diverse ends. If you steep 
vessels of white brass in liquid gold or silver, they catch the hue of these 
metals. Even so, a living being takes diverse portions of his past karma. 


Nothing sprouts without a seed. None can gain happiness without 
performing karma that leads to happiness. When one’s body disintegrates 
into its elements, one attains felicity only because of the righteous deeds of 
previous lives. 

The sceptics argue, saying, “I do not see that anything in this world is 
the result of destiny or the virtuous and sinful deeds of past lives. Inference 
cannot establish the existence or operation of destiny. The Devas, the 
Gandharvas and the Danavas have become what they are due to their own 
nature and not because of past karmas. Men never remember in their next 
lives, actions of previous ones. They seldom credit the four kinds of karma 
of past lives with the rewards of their present life. The declarations in the 
authoritative Vedas mean to regulate the conduct of men, and keep their 
minds calm. These, the sceptics say, cannot represent the utterances of men 
possessed of true wisdom.” 

This opinion is wrong. In reality, one gains the fruits of whichever of 
the four kinds of acts one does, with the eye, the mind, the tongue and the 
muscles. As to the fruit of his deeds, O king, a person sometimes gains 
happiness wholly, utter misery at other times, and yet again, a blend of 
happiness and misery. Whether of punya or paapa, karmas remain. 

There are times when, in the case of the man who is sinking in life’s 
ocean of samsara, happiness remains concealed in such a way that it does 
not manifest until all his sorrows disappear. Know this, O king, that upon 
the exhaustion of the fruits of good deeds, the sinful ones begin to manifest 
themselves. 

Self-restraint, forgiveness, patience, energy, contentment, honesty, 
modesty, non-violence, freedom from evil vasanas and intelligence —these 
produce happiness. 

No creature is eternally subject to the fruits of his good or bad actions. 
The wise should always strive to remain composed. One never has to enjoy 
or endure the good and bad karmas of another. Indeed, one enjoys and 
endures the rewards of only what one does oneself. The man who shuns 
both happiness and sorrow walks along a special path—that of gyana. 
While men who choose to adhere to worldly objects, tread an entirely 
different path. 

He who behaves in a manner that he would chastise in another, should 
rot in hell. Indeed, by doing something that one censures in others, one 
incurs ridicule. A Kshatriya bereft of courage, a Brahmana who eats every 


kind of impure food, a Vaisya incapacitated in pursuit of a livelihood, a 
Sudra that is idle and averse to labour; a scholar without good conduct, a 
man of high birth destitute of dharma, a Brahmana fallen away from truth, a 
wicked and impure woman, a yogin invested with attachments, one who 
cooks just for himself, a fool who preaches, a kingdom without a king and a 
king that cherishes no affection for his subjects —all these are pitiful.” 


CANTO 292 


P arasara said, “The man, who reins in the steeds of his senses through 

his knowledge, is certainly intelligent. The homage paid to an 
enlightened sannyasin is worthy of high praise. Such reverence, O Dvija, is 
the result of instructions he receives from one who transcends karma and 
not from conversations with men engaged in karma. Given that the allotted 
period of life is rife with difficulties, one should not diminish its worth with 
self-indulgence. On the other hand, through virtuous means, one should 
always strive for one’s spiritual progress. 

Among the six different colours that the jiva attains at various stages 
in his life, he who falls away from a superior colour deserves censure. 
Hence, he who receives the result of good karma should avoid the guna of 
rajas so that it may not stain him. Man gains a superior colour through 
deeds of dharma. Unable to acquire a superior hue, he who sins, only kills 
himself. 

Tapasya destroys all sinful acts done in ignorance. While a sinful deed, 
done knowingly, produces profound sorrow. Hence, one should never 
wilfully commit any sin. The gyani never does anything sinful even if it 
leads to the greatest benefit, just as a chaste man would never touch a 
Chandala. How miserable is the fruit of sin! Through sin, the very vision of 
the sinner becomes perverse, and he confounds his body, and its unstable 
elements, along with the soul. The fool who fails to take sannyasa in this 


world, afflicts himself with untold sorrow when he departs for the next 
world. 

A soiled white cloth can be made white again with one wash, but not a 
black one. Beware, likewise is the case with sin. The one who sins 
knowingly, and performs appropriate penance to expiate the sin, must enjoy 
and suffer the fruits of his good and bad deeds, separately. 

The Brahmavadis claim that acts of dharma negate all injuries that one 
inflicts in ignorance. Nevertheless, dharma never erases a sin that a man 
commits consciously. 

In my opinion, whatever actions, be they righteous or sinful, be they 
done knowingly or otherwise, remain until their fruition. Whatever deeds 
done by the mind with full deliberation, produce fruits, according to their 
physicality or subtlety. Still, ignorant deeds that are fraught with grave 
himsa unfailingly produce results and reactions that lead to hell. The 
difference is that such outcomes are disproportionate in severity to the 
actions that produce them. As to the deeds of a dubious nature done by the 
Devas or Rishis, a man of dharma should never imitate or censure them. 

He who reflects, ascertains his own ability and accomplishes deeds of 
dharma, certainly gains what is for his weal. Pour water into an unbaked 
vessel and it will gradually evaporate. Nevertheless, store it in a baked 
vessel, and it remains without diminishing. Likewise, actions done without 
reflection are not beneficial, while ones made with judgement yield 
happiness. Furthermore, even as water added to a vessel already containing 
water increases the quantity, all actions, equitable or otherwise, done with 
awareness, only add to one’s store of dharma. 

A king should properly rule and protect his kingdom by subjugating 
his foes and all who seek to assert their superiority. He must tend to his 
sacred fires and pour libations on them during sacrifices. In his mid-life or 
old age, he must retire into the forest to practice the duties of the last two 
asramas. With self-restraint, and noble conduct, he should look upon all 
creatures as he does on his own self. One should always revere one’s 
superiors. By the practice of truth and of good conduct, O king, one is sure 
to gain joy.” 


CANTO 293 


P arasara said, “No one selflessly does good for another, nor makes 
gifts to others, selflessly. Everyone does things for their own selves. 
People abandon their very parents and brothers when these are no longer 
affectionate. What need be said then of relatives of other degrees? Gifts to a 
distinguished person and acceptance of the gifts made by a distinguished 
person both lead to equal merit. Of these two, however, the giving of a gift 
is superior to the acceptance of a gift. In order to receive virtue, one must 
carefully protect the wealth that one acquires and augments through proper 
means. This is an accepted truth. He who wishes to acquire dharma should 
never earn wealth through means involving himsa to others. Without 
zealously pursuing wealth, he should finish his tasks within his abilities. 
Offering water with devotion to a guest amounts to earning the punya 
of feeding a hungry man. The enlightened Rantideva received success in all 
the worlds through the worship of Rishis through offerings of just leaves, 
roots and fruits. When the royal son of Sibi pleased Surya and his friends 
with offerings of the same kind, he too, won the highest regions of felicity. 
Every human that is born incurs a debt to the Devas, Athitis, Dasas, 
Pitris and themselves. Everyone should do his best to free himself from 
these debts. One repays his debts to Maharishis by studying the Vedas, to 
the Devas by performing yagnas. By conducting the rites of sraddha, one 
frees oneself from one’s debts to the Pitris. One pays one’s debt to one’s 
fellowmen by serving them well. One pays debts to oneself by listening to 


Vedic recitations and reflecting on their import, by eating the remnants of 
sacrifices, and by sustaining one’s body. 

From the beginning, one should discharge all the duties that one owes 
to one’s servants. Even if destitute of wealth, men attain success through 
great exertions. Munis reach their goal by adoring the Devas and by pouring 
libations of clarified butter on the sacred fire. 

Richika’s son became the son of Viswamitra. He attained success in 
the afterlife by worshipping the Devas with Riks. Usanas gratified 
Mahadeva and became Sukra. Indeed, by singing the praises of Uma, he 
revels in the firmament, in great splendour. 

Asita and Devala, Narada and Parvata, Kakshivat, and Jamadagni’s 
son Rama, the chaste Tandya, Vasishta, Jamadagni, Viswamitra and Atri, 
Bharadwaja, Harismasru, Kundadhara and _ Srutasravas—all these 
Maharishis attained their goals by adoring Vishnu with the help of Riks, and 
with tapasya. 

Many undeserving men, too, gain great distinction by venerating Lord 
Narayana. A man should not seek his progress through any evil or 
condemnable means. True wealth is what he earns through the ways of 
dharma. Fie on the wealth he earns with ignoble means. Dharma is eternal. 
No one should ever abandon it from a thirst for wealth. The man of dharma 
who kindles his sacred fire and offers daily homage to the Devas is the best 
of virtuous men. 

Great king, the three sacred fires—Dakshina, Garhapatya and 
Ahavaniya—are the foundation of all the Vedas. A Brahmana, whose 
karmas and kriyas exist in their entirety, possesses the sacred fire. While 
abstaining from all karma, it is better to abandon the sacred fire than to keep 
it. 

One should wait upon and humbly serve the sacred fire, the mother, 
the father and the teacher. The one who discards pride, and merely serves 
the aged, who is knowledgeable and bereft of lust, who looks upon all 
creatures with love, who has no wealth, does noble actions and lacks the 
desire of himsa, is truly a venerable one whom men of dharma adore.” 


CANTO 294 


Pp arasara said, “It is proper that the lowest varna should derive their 

sustenance from the other three varnas, by serving them. Performing 
such service with affection and reverence makes them honourable. Even if 
his ancestors did not serve anyone, a Sudra should not engage himself in 
any other occupation than service. It is proper for Sudras to associate with 
righteous men of dharma, but never with the sinful. 

As in the eastern hills, jewels and metals blaze with greater splendour 
because of their proximity to the sun, so does the lowest varna shine with 
splendour because of its association with Dvijas. A piece of white cloth 
assumes the colour of its dye. Likewise is the case with Sudras. All men 
should embrace all virtuous qualities but never those that are evil. The life 
of human beings in this world is fleeting and transitory. 

The sage who, in happiness and in misery, does only what is good, is a 
true observer of the scriptures. An intelligent man would never do anything 
that is discordant with dharma, however high the immediate benefits may 
seem by doing so. Deeds of adharma are never truly beneficial. A lawless 
king who snatches thousands of kine from their lawful owners, and donates 
them in charity, acquires no fruit beyond a hollow fame. In fact, he incurs 
the sin of theft. 

Svayambhu first created Dhatri, who has universal respect. Dhatri 
created a son who engaged in upholding all the worlds. The Vaisya who 
engages in farming and the rearing of cattle, worships this Deva. 


The Kshatriyas should occupy themselves in protecting all the other 
varnas. The Brahmanas should only enjoy whatever they receive. While the 
Sudras should humbly and honestly gather sacrificial articles, clean vedis 
and other places for worship and yagnas. 

If each varna performs his svadharma in this manner, the sanatana 
dharma would not suffer any diminution. All creatures inhabiting the earth 
would be joyful through the preservation of dharma in its entirety. Seeing 
the happiness of all creatures on earth will bring joy to the Devas in swarga. 
Hence, the king who abides by his duties to protect the other castes, the 
Brahmana who studies the shastras, the Vaisya who engages in earning 
wealth and the Sudra who serves the other three other varnas, all become 
equally worthy of respect. 

While, a contrary conduct, in evil, makes each order fall from dharma. 
Leave alone gifts by thousands, even twenty cowries that a man earns 
honestly, and offers grudgingly, will earn great benefit. 

He, who reverentially makes gifts to Brahmanas, reaps great rewards. 
A gift that the donor makes after seeking out and honouring the recipient is 
invaluable. A gift that the donor makes upon solicitation is mediocre, 
whereas the gift which is made contemptuously and without any reverence, 
is the most inferior. 

This is what the glorifiers of dharma, the holy Rishis, say. While 
sinking in this ocean of life, man should always seek to cross it by various 
means. Indeed, he should so exert himself so that he may free himself from 
the bonds of samsara. 

The Brahmana shines with samyama, restraint, the Kshatriya by jaya, 
victory, the Vaisya through artha, wealth, while the Sudra always shines in 
glory through skilful service rendered to the three other varnas.” 


CANTO 295 


P arasara said, “Irrelevant of its quantity, the wealth that the Brahmana 
acquires through gifts, the Kshatriya through victory in battle, the 

Vaisya by following the duties of his varna, and which the Sudra earns 
through service of the three other varnas, is worthy of praise. Additionally, 
when a man spends the wealth to acquire dharma, it produces great benefits. 

The Sudra is the constant servitor of the three other classes. If, out of a 
need for survival, the Brahmana takes to the duties of either the Kshatriya 
or the Vaisya, he does not decline from dharma. If however, he performs the 
tasks of the lowest varna, he certainly falls from his status. 

When the Sudra is unable to earn his living by serving the three other 
orders, then trade, rearing of cattle and the practice of the mechanical arts 
are lawful for him. 

Appearing on the boards of a theatre and disguising oneself in various 
forms, exhibition of puppets, the sale of spirits and meat and trading in iron 
and leather works should never be taken up as a livelihood by one who is a 
novice in these professions. Furthermore, each one of these occupations is 
censurable in the world. I even hear that if anyone working in any of these 
trades, leaves it, he acquires great merit. 

When, out of arrogance, a successful person acts sinfully, what he so 
does can never pass for authority. 

I also hear, from the Puranas of old, when dharma was held in great 
esteem among reasonable men and their livelihood was consistent with 


propriety and the shastras, the only punishment, enough to chastise their 
faults, was to cry fie on them. 

At the time of which we speak, O king, men were full of praise for 
dharma, and nothing else. Men with remarkable evolution in dharma only 
worshipped good qualities. However, the Asuras could not bear to see 
dharma being prevalent in the world. Multiplying in number and energy, 
they entered into the bodies of men, followed by pride. From pride came 
arrogance, with wrath on its heels. 

When wrath overwhelmed men, modesty and shame left them. They 
became careless and could no longer see clearly, as before, and they began 
to oppress one another to acquire wealth without any compunction. Then, 
the punishment of just crying fie on offenders was no longer effective. Men 
showed no reverence for either the Devas or Brahmanas, and began to 
indulge their senses to vile and vulgar surfeit. 

Thereafter, the Devas approached Shiva in swarga to seek his 
protection from the three Asuras, Lobha, Krodha and Kama, now ruling in 
swarga. The Devas combined their tejas and imparted it to Mahadeva, who, 
with a single stroke of his trisula, felled the three Asuras down to Bhumi. 

Rudra also killed the fierce king of the Asuras who terrorised the 
Devas. When the Asuras were dead, men regained their normal demeanour, 
and once again studied the Vedas and the other shastras. 

The Saptarishis arrived and installed Vasava as the lord of the Devas 
and ruler of swarga. Moreover, they took upon themselves the duty of 
holding the rod of chastisement over mankind. In the wake of the 
Saptarishis, came Rajarishi Viprithu, and many other kings, all of the 
Kshatriya varna, to separately rule various clans and kingdoms of Manavas. 

However, in those ancient times, there were certain elder men in 
whom evil vasanas were still awake, because of which there appeared many 
kings of terrible prowess who indulged in only such deeds as were fit for 
Asuras. Even to this day, exceptionally foolish men adhere to such evil 
ways, and establish them as authorities to follow and practice. This is why I 
say, O king, reflect properly upon the shastras, abstain from all actions 
fraught with himsa or malice, and seek Atmagyana. 

The wise do not seek wealth to perform religious rites by ways of 
adharma that involve an abandonment of righteousness. Wealth gained from 
such means can never be beneficial. Become such a Kshatriya, O Rajan. 
Restrain your senses, be agreeable to your friends, and cherish your 


subjects, servants and children. The union of prosperity and adversity give 
rise to friendships and animosities. Thousands and thousands of existences 
continually revolve, and in every kind of jiva’s life, these must of necessity 
occur. Therefore, embrace virtuous qualities, but never faults. Such is the 
nature of dharma, that it brings joy to even the most foolish person, bereft 
of every honour, who hears praise of any of his good qualities. 

Virtue and sin exist only among men, and not among other creatures. 
Hence, whether in need of food and other essentials, or transcending them, 
one must cultivate a righteous disposition, acquire knowledge, always look 
upon all creatures as one’s own self, and abstain from himsa. A man should 
divest his mind of yearnings and dispel its ignorance so as to succeed in 
gaining what is auspicious.” 


CANTO 296 


P arasara continued, “I have spoken to you on the precepts of the 
grihastasrama. I will now tell you about the way of tapasya. Listen to 
what I say. 

Because of sentiments fraught with rajas and tamas, one sees the sense 
of possession spring up in the heart of the grihasta. In this asrama, one 
acquires kine, fields, wealth, wives, children and servants. One’s 
attachments and aversions increase, and one begins to regard one’s 
possessions as eternal and indestructible. When attachment and aversion 
overcome a man, and he yields to the acquisition of earthly objects, the 
reckless craving for enjoyment, kama, seizes him. 

Considering the man with the largest share of enjoyments in this world 
to be fortunate, an indulgent man does not recognise any other happiness 
besides the gratification of the senses. As lust and greed flood him, he seeks 
to increase his relatives and attendants, and for their satisfaction strives to 
augment his wealth through every possible means. By now, he is replete 
with affection and attachment for his children, hence, for the sake of wealth, 
does all manner of base things that he knows to be evil, and gives way to 
sorrow if his wealth is lost. He earns honours and, ever on guard against the 
defeat of his plans, he uses any means that will satisfy his craving for power 
and pleasure. Finally, as the inevitable result of the path he pursues, he 
meets with destruction and death. 


True felicity belongs to the intelligent, to the ones who chant of the 
eternal Brahman, who seek to accomplish only auspicious tasks, and who 
abstain from all karma that springs from desire. 

The loss of persons we love, the loss of wealth, and physical diseases 
and mental anguish, all cause great despair. This pain gives rise to the 
awakening of the soul, which in turn creates an interest in the study of the 
shastras. From the contemplation of the scriptures, O king, one sees the 
value of tapasya. 

A man who discerns between the essential and the trivial is rare. 
Indeed, the truth that the happiness he derives from wives and children 
ultimately leads to misery, is enough to make him take to tapasya. Tapasya, 
O child, is for all. Even the lowest order of men may undertake penance. 
Tapasya sets the man of self-restraint on the path to swarga. 

It is through tapasya that the puissant lord of all creatures creates all 
existence. The Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, Agni, the Aswins, the 
Maruts, the Viswedevas, the Saddhyas, the Pitris, the Yakshas, the 
Rakshasas, the Gandharvas, the Siddhas and other Swargavasis— indeed, 
every other Deva—achieve success through tapasya. The Brahmanas whom 
Brahma created in the beginning succeeded through their tapasya in 
honouring not Bhumi alone, but swarga as well. 

In this world of mortals, kings and grihastas of high families, owe 
their positions to tapasya. Their silken robes, their exquisite ornaments, the 
animals and chariots they ride and the fine seats they use are all because of 
tapasya. 

The thousands of charming and beautiful women that they enjoy, and 
their palatial mansions, are all because of tapasya. Expensive beds and 
diverse kinds of delicious foods await men of dharma. There is nothing in 
the Triloka, O scorcher of foes, that tapasya cannot attain. Even men, 
destitute of true knowledge, win renunciation because of tapasya. 

Whether rich or poor, a man should reject greed, and with the help of 
his intellect, he must ponder upon the scriptures. 

Discontent produces sorrow, which is the result of lust and greed, 
which further leads to the bewilderment of the senses. Once a man confuses 
his senses, his wisdom disappears, and he fails to distinguish between right 
and wrong. All this leads to anguish. And so, one must practice austere 
tapasya to gain happiness. The failure to do so results in sorrow. 


Notice the benefits between practising and abstaining from tapasya. 
Through exemplary penances, men always receive auspicious returns. 
Conversely, he who takes to penance to earn a reward, meets with many 
unpleasant results, disgrace and sorrow. Despite the joy of practising 
dharma, tapasya and dana, he wishes to indulge in all kinds of illicit acts. 
Through such sinful actions, he goes to hell. Still, O Rajan, he who remains 
firm in dharma, in happiness and sorrow, does not lose his regard for the 
scriptures. 

I hear that the pleasure from sensual gratification lasts only so long as 
the flight of an arrow, and on its cessation, one experiences the utmost pain. 
Only the insane do not praise the felicity of moksha. Witnessing the anguish 
that attends gratification of the senses, the wise cultivate the virtues of santi 
and dama, peace and self-restraint, to attain mukti. Because of their 
righteous pravritti, wealth and pleasure, artha and kama, cannot affect them. 
Grihastas, without any compunction, may enjoy wealth and other 
possessions that they gain without effort. However, they should make an 
effort to discharge the duties of their varna. 

Sinful men cannot imitate the practice of honourable men whose 
attention is fixed upon the shastras. Every vain act that a man commits 
meets with destruction. Hence, men who are noble and follow dharma, need 
make no other effort, other than tapasya. While grihastas, whose addiction 
lies in actions, must wholeheartedly devote themselves to karmas. 
Additionally, they must attend to their duties and perform sacrifices and 
other religious rites with dexterity and attention. Indeed, as all rivers have 
their refuge in the ocean, men from all the varnas have their sanctuary in the 
grihastasrama.” 


CANTO 297 


anaka said, “Maharishi, from where does this difference of colour arise 

among men of different varnas? Tell me this, O best among speakers. 
The srutis say that our children are our own self. Since all inhabitants of the 
earth originate from Brahma, they should all be Brahmanas. Born from 
Brahma, why do men take to practices that differ from those of 
Brahmanas?” 

Parasara said, “You are right, O king. The children of the creator are 
none else than the creator himself. However, because of their decline from 
tapasya, this distribution into classes of different hues has occurred. When 
the soil and the seed are fertile, the offspring can only be exceptional. But if 
the soil and seed are less than immaculate, the progeny will be inferior. 

Men who know the scriptures are aware that when Iswara sets himself 
to create the worlds, some creatures spring from his mouth, some from his 
arms, others from his thighs and a few from his feet. They who emerge 
from his mouth are Brahmanas. The ones born from his arms are 
Kshatriyas. Those born from his thighs are Vaisyas. Lastly, the ones born of 
his feet are the Sudras. He creates only these four varnas, O Rajan. Those 
who belong to classes other than these are an admixture of these. 

The Atirathas, Ambashtas, Ugras, Vaidehas, Swapakas, Pukkasas, 
Tenas, Nishadas, Sutas, Magadhas, Ayogas, Karanas, Vratyas and 
Chandalas, are all Kshatriyas born of the four original orders by 
intermixture with one another.” 


Janaka said, “When all are born from Brahma alone, how do Manavas 
have diversity in race? O Maharishi, we see an infinite diversity of races in 
this world. How can men of indiscriminate origin, who devote themselves 
to tapasya, become Brahmanas? Indeed, those born of pure wombs and 
those of impure, all tapasvins became Brahmanas.” 

Parasara said, “We cannot judge Jivanmuktas in light of their low 
births. Maharishis, with their shakti, confer the status of Rishis on the 
children they father in impure wombs. 

My grandfather Vasishta, with Rishyasringa, Kasyapa, Veda, Tandya, 
Kripa, Kakshivat, Kamatha, Yavakrita, and Drona, Ayu, Matanga, Datta, 
Drupada and Matsya: all these, O ruler of the Videhas, have become what 
they are because of their tapasya. 

Originally, there were only four gotras—those of Angiras, Kasyapa, 
Vasishta and Bhrigu. In time, because of karma and pravritti, many more 
gotras came into existence. The names of these gotras originate in their 
founders. Righteous men use them.” 

Janaka said, “Tell me, O holy one, the particular duties of the various 
varnas. Tell me also what their common duties are. You know everything.” 

Parasara said, “Acceptance of gifts, presiding over the sacrifices of 
others, and teaching disciples, are the special duties of the Brahmanas. The 
protection of the other varnas is the svadharma of the Kshatriyas. 
Agriculture, cattle rearing and trade are the occupations of the Vaisyas— 
while, servicing the twice-born castes is the vocation of the Sudras. These 
are the special duties of the four orders. Listen now, O child, as I tell you of 
the common duties for all the four varnas. 

Compassion, ahimsa, heedfulness, charity, sraddhas in honour of the 
Pitris, hospitality, truthfulness, subjugation of anger, contentedness with 
one’s wives, purity, freedom from malice, knowledge of the Atman, and 
renunciation—these, O king, are common to all the varnas. Brahmanas, 
Kshatriyas and Vaisyas are the three pre-eminent castes. All of them have 
an equal right to perform these karmas. Even as they acquire great merit by 
drawing inspiration from a man of dharma among their order, these three 
varnas meet with sorrow if they perform karmas beyond what is ordained 
for them. 

The Sudra never falls down from not performing Vedic rites, nor is he 
worthy of any of the rites of redemption. The course of duties that flow 


from the Veda is not for him. Nevertheless, he has the sanction to practice 
the thirteen duties common to all the orders. 

O Janaka, Brahmanas regard a virtuous Sudra as equal to Brahma 
himself. Yet, I perceive such a Sudra as the effulgent Vishnu, the First One 
in all the worlds. 

Persons of the lowest varna, who wish to extinguish their evil 
passions, may follow the conduct of the higher-born orders. Furthermore, 
they may earn great punya by performing all rites, other than the chanting 
of mantras, which are only for the other orders. Wherever Sudras adopt the 
behaviour of the higher castes, they attain happiness because of which they 
are able to abide in felicity both here and in the hereafter.” 

Janaka said, “O Maharishi, is it the man’s karma or is it his varna that 
makes him impure?” 

Parasara said, “Certainly, O king, karma and janma, are two sources of 
impurity. Listen to their difference. Irrespective of birth and actions, the 
criterion to remain pure is abstention from sin. If a high-born man sins, 
what he does stains him despite his superior birth. Hence, between actions 
and birth, karma stains man more than janma. 

Janaka said, “What are the acts of dharma that do not inflict himsa 
upon other creatures?” 

Parasara said, “Let me tell you about ahimsa that is the saviour of 
mankind. Men who dissociate themselves from all worldly attachments are 
free from all anxieties. Gradually ascending the path of yoga, they finally 
see moksha before them. Through faith, humility, self-restraint, keen 
intelligence and abstinence from all activity, they attain eternal bliss. 

There is no question that all classes of men, who properly discharge 
dharma, and abstain from adharma, ascend to swarga.” 


CANTO 298 


P arasara said, “The fathers, friends, preceptor, even the spouses of 

gurus, of men who are bereft of bhakti, cannot give them the punya 
that accompanies devotion. Only men who are firm in their devotion to 
elders, who speak pleasantly to them, who seek their welfare, and are 
humble in behaviour to them, can gain the merit of bhakti. 

The father is the highest of Devas for his children. He is superior to 
the mother. The highest acquisition is that of knowledge. Men who subdue 
the objects of the senses acquire mukti. 

The Kshatriya prince who goes to battle, receives wounds from fiery 
arrows, and burns therewith, certainly finds realms to which even the Devas 
cannot attain, where he enjoys the joys of swarga. 

When a Kshatriya meets a warrior who is overcome with fatigue, fear 
and tears, who has no further will left to fight, has no weapons, nor armour, 
nor horse, nor chariot, nor infantry for support, then, O king, the Kshatriya 
should spare such a warrior. Neither should he strike one who surrenders, 
one who is ill, one who cries for mercy, one of tender years or one who is 
old. 

A Kshatriya should fight another Kshatriya who bears armour, has 
chariots, horse and foot-soldiers, and who besides is ready for battle and is 
an equal. Death at the hands of one who is equal or superior is laudable, but 
not at the hands of one who is low, a coward or any other kind of wretch. 
This is well known. Death at the hands of one who is sinful, or of low birth 


and evil ways is inglorious and leads to hell. No one can rescue the man 
whose time has run out and whose life is over. Similarly, no one can kill the 
man whose time has not yet come and whose life is not yet over. 

One should prevent one’s loving elders from doing menial work, and 
acts fraught with himsa. One should never wish to extend one’s own life by 
taking the lives of others. When they die, it is laudable for grihastas who 
live in sacred places to lay down their lives on the banks of sacred rivers. 

When one dies, one dissolves into the Panchamahabhutas. Sometimes, 
death occurs suddenly through accidents, and at times gradually, from 
natural causes. He, who treads the path of moksha but accidentally meets 
with death, acquires a similar body and remains a traveller like a person 
going from one room to another. The only cause for such a man to acquire 
another body is his accidental death in a sacred place. There is no second 
cause. Such a body comes into being and attaches itself to Rudras and 
Pisachas. 

Men who know Adhyatma say that the body is an agglomerate of 
arteries, sinews, bones and a great deal of repulsive and impure matter 
besides. They say that it is a compound of gunas, along with the senses and 
objects of the senses born of yearning, all of which have an outer sheath to 
clothe them. Bereft of beauty and other skills, this combination, through the 
force of cravings of a previous life, assumes a human form. 

The body that the soul abandons becomes inanimate and motionless. 
Indeed, when the primal ingredients return to their individual nature, the 
body blends with dust and ashes. Because of its association with actions, 
the jiva’s past karmas determine the circumstances under which it 
reappears. Verily, O Janaka, under whatever circumstances that this body 
meets with dissolution, its next birth enjoys and endures the fruits of all its 
past actions. 

When the jiva parts from the body, it is not immediately born in a 
different form. Like a large cloud, it roves through the sky for some time 
until it assumes a new body. 

The soul is above the mind. The mind is above the senses. Animate 
creatures are the most outstanding beings of all creation. Of all mobile 
beings, those that have two legs are superior. Among the bipeds, the Dvijas, 
the twice-born, are foremost. Amidst them, the wise ones are the best. 
Beyond them, are the ones who acquire knowledge of the Soul. Finally, 


there are the ones who have the gift of humility; these are superior even to 
the Atmagyanis. 

Indubitably, death follows birth. Creatures, under the influence of 
sattva, rajas and tamas, pursue actions that meet with an end. 

He is a man of dharma who dies under a sacred constellation, at an 
auspicious time when the sun is in the northern declension, during 
Uttarayana. He is a man of dharma, who purifies himself of all sins and 
completes all his tasks. He is a man of dharma who abstains from himsa to 
any man, and meets Mrityu serenely, when she comes. 

Death by taking poison, or hanging, or burning, or at the hands of 
robbers or by the jaws of animals, is inglorious. Men of dharma never incur 
such deaths even if mental and physical diseases of the most agonising kind 
afflict them. The lives of the men of dharma, O king, pierce through the 
sun, and ascend into the world of Brahma. The lives of those who follow 
dharma, who are yet sinful, range in the middle regions. While the spirits of 
the sinful sink into the lowest depths. 

There is only one foe and not another. That enemy is ignorance, O 
king. Under its spell, one perpetrates frightful and cruel deeds. To resist 
such an adversary one should use one’s energy by serving elders in accord 
with the srutis. Only through steady attempts with the help of wisdom can 
one destroy the curse that follows one’s sins. 

He who wants to acquire punya should first become a brahmacharin, 
study the Vedas and observe tapasya. He should then enter grihastasrama to 
perform yagnas. Once he establishes his vamsa, he should enter the jungle 
as a vanaprastha, restrain his senses, and seek moksha. 

One should never emasculate oneself by abstaining from any 
enjoyment. Of all births, to be born as a human is best, even if as a 
Chandala. Indeed, amidst all orders of birth, humanity is the best, because it 
offers an avenue to save one’s self through punya karmas. 

So that they do not fall from humanity, men, with the guidance of the 
srutis, always perform deeds of dharma. As a Manava, he who disregards 
dharma, indulges in malice, and succumbs to greed and lust, certainly meets 
with betrayal by his desires. 

He who loves all creatures, cherishes them, consoles and feeds them, 
addresses them with respect, who rejoices in their happiness and grieves in 
their sorrows, and disregards all kinds of wealth, will never suffer misery in 
the next world. 


Repairing to the Saraswati river, the Naimisa jungles, the Pushkara 
lakes and other places of Tirtha, one should give gifts, practice 
renunciation, render one’s form amiable, O king, and purify one’s body 
with baths and tapasya. 

Of those who die at home, one should perform their last rites, carry 
their bodies to the smasana on a ratha, and assign them to the flames 
according to scriptural rites. 

Religious rites, ceremonies, charity, the performance of sacrifices, 
presiding at yagnas, performing other meritorious deeds, fulfilling sraddhas 
beneficial to one’s ancestors: all these one does for one’s own weal. The 
Vedas with their six Angas, and the other shastras, O king, are made for the 
welfare of the chaste.” 


CANTO 299 


B hishma says, “Once again the ruler of Mithila, Janaka, questions 
Parasara.’ 

Janaka asked, “What yields punya? What is the best path? Which is the 
accomplishment that cannot meet with destruction? What is the place from 
where one does not have to return? Tell me all this, O sage.” 

Parasara said, “Dissociation from attachments is the root of all that is 
beneficial. Knowledge is the highest path. Penances never meet with 
destruction, gifts made to deserving persons are not lost. A man achieves 
success when he breaks the bonds of sin, revels in dharma, makes the 
highest of all gifts and pledges ahimsa to all creatures. 

He who gives away thousands of kine, hundreds of horses and 
promises ahimsa, receives in return the same pledge from all. 

One may abide in the midst of all kinds of wealth and enjoyment, yet, 
because of gyana, remain impervious to their influence. Whereas the 
ignorant man steeps himself in objects of enjoyment that are not even 
substantial. 

Sin cannot cling to a wise man, just as water cannot drench the leaves 
of the lotus. Sin adheres more firmly to him who has ties, even as lac and 
wood cleave to each other. Sin never abandons the sinner, only the 
endurance of its fruits can smother it. Verily, the sinner must face its 
consequences, when the time comes. 


Fruits of karma never afflict pure men who realise the existence of 
Brahman. While immense fear afflicts ignorant men who, unaware of their 
evil doings, attach themselves to good and evil. But sin never stains the man 
who is entirely free from attachments and anger, even if he lives in the lap 
of luxury. 

As a dam across a river causes its waters to swell, the man without 
attachments creates the levee of dharma, which protects him from suffering. 
In fact, his punya and tapasya increase. 

As the Suryakantam gem attracts and absorbs the rays of the sun, so 
does dhyana help in the advancement of yoga. 

As the frequent blending of sesame seeds with fragrant flowers, 
increases the quality of the seeds, even so the nature of sattva in men arises 
in proportion to the measure of their association with men of dharma. 

He who wishes to live in swarga, leaves his wife, wealth, rank, 
chariots and various karmas and kriyas. Indeed, when one reaches such a 
frame of mind, one’s mind dissociates from the objects of the senses. 
Whereas, he who fixes his heart on objects of the senses becomes blind to 
his welfare, and his own heart, like a fish drawn to bait, drags him to his 
ruin. 

Just as different limbs and organs form the body, all mortals depend 
upon each other for existence. They are as weak as the pith of the banana 
plant. Left to themselves, like a fragile boat, they sink in the ocean of 
samsara. 

There is no fixed time to acquire dharma. Death waits for no man. 
When man is constantly flying to meet his end, the accomplishment of good 
karma is paramount at all times. Like a blind man, who moves about his 
house by instinct, the wise man who focuses on yoga successfully advances 
along his chosen path. 

Death emerges from birth. Birth is subject to the sway of death. He 
who is unfamiliar with the moksha dharma spins like a wheel between birth 
and death, unable to free himself from that fate. He who walks along the 
true path with buddhi for his guide, earns happiness both here and in the 
hereafter. 

In indulging in diversity lies misery, while in discernment abides 
happiness. Fruits of karma, which the Jivatma represents, constitute the 
diverse. Whereas, tyaga, sacrifice, constitutes the select. 


As the lotus stalk quickly sheds the mire that attaches to it, even so the 
Soul can speedily disown the mind. The mind initially inclines the Atman to 
yoga, and then merges the mind into itself. When the Atman achieves yoga, 
communion, it sees itself free of all attributes. 

When a man occupies himself with sensory pleasures, and believes 
this to be his vocation, he fails from his true mission. Through its deeds of 
dharma, the wise man’s Soul attains a state of high felicity in swarga, while 
that of the ignorant one sinks low or finds birth among intermediate 
creatures. 

Just as water will not evaporate from a baked earthen vessel, a man of 
severe tapasya remains full of joy. The one who steeps himself in worldly 
trappings can never know mukti. He who shuns mundane things succeeds in 
enjoying great bliss hereafter. 

When a man suffers from congenital blindness, he is unable to find his 
way anywhere. Similarly, the sensualist who confines his soul in an opaque 
cage feels as if a mist surrounds him and fails to see the true objective of 
life. 

As seafaring merchants make profits in proportion to their investment, 
even so mortal beings appropriate ends according to their actions. Like a 
snake breathing air, Mrityu wanders in this world in the guise of 
decrepitude and devours all creatures. 

A being enjoys or suffers the fruits of karmas from previous lives. 
There is nothing pleasant or disagreeable, which one experiences, without it 
being the result of past actions. Whether resting or moving, idle or working, 
whatever state a man may be in, his past deeds always overtake him. One 
who reaches the other shore of samsara has no wish to return to where he 
set sail from. 

As with the help of a rope, the fisherman draws in his net sunk in the 
water, so does the mind, through yoga-dhyana, save the jiva from drowning 
in samsara. As rivers flow towards the ocean to merge with it, even so the 
mind, through yoga, becomes one with Purusha. 

When affection traps the minds of men and ignorance envelops them 
in darkness, men crumble like castles made of sand. He who views his body 
as only a vessel and purity as its holy water, and walks along the path of 
wisdom, gains happiness both here and hereafter. 

Friends that we acquire with our affluence, kinsmen of selfish motives, 
one’s wives, sons and servants—each one devours one’s wealth. In the next 


world, neither the mother nor the father can confer the slightest benefit upon 
one. 

Charity creates the fare on which one can subsist. Indeed, one must 
enjoy the fruits of one’s own actions. The mother, son, father, brother, wife 
and friends, are like lines that one merely traces with gold, but in reality are 
not gold itself. 

From the moment of conception, a creature acquires all the karmas, 
good and bad, of his past lives. Through actions of his past lives, man gains 
wealth, animals, wives, children, honour of birth and other valuable 
possessions. Knowing that everything one enjoys or endures is the result of 
the actions of past lives, the Soul urges the intellect in different ways to 
avoid dark fruits. 

Relying on earnest efforts, through proper means, he who sets forth to 
accomplish his tasks meets with success. As his rays of light never abandon 
the sun, even so prosperity never abandons the faithful. The work that a 
man does without pride, and with intelligence, is never lost. 

Like wind that scatters sawdust, Mrityu, with the help of Kaala, leads 
all beings to their deaths.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘Janaka derives immense joy, O king, from these 
words of Rishi Parasara, words so consistent with dharma.’ 


CANTO 300 


Y udhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha, wise men praise truth, self-restraint, 
forgiveness and wisdom. What is your opinion of these virtues?’ 
Bhishma says, ‘Here, I will recite an old account, O Yudhishtira, of the 
discourse between the Sadhyas and a swan. Once upon a time, the unborn 
and eternal Brahman assumed the form of a golden swan, and ranged 
through the Trilokas until he came across the Sadhyas. 

The Sadhyas said, “O Lord, we are the Devas called the Sadhyas. We 
have a question for you. Indeed, we ask about the moksha dharma. You 
know it well. We hear, O bird, that you possess great learning, and are 
eloquent of speech. O hamsa, what do you think is the highest of all 
objects? O divine one, what gives you pleasure? Lord of all birds, instruct 
us in what you regard as the best of actions to free oneself from all bonds.” 

The swan said, “You who have drunk amrita, I hear that one should 
take recourse to penances, self-restraint, truth and the subjugation of the 
mind. Untying all the knots of the heart, one should also bring dvesha and 
advesha, the agreeable and the abhorrent, under one’s control. One should 
not wound the very hearts of others with harsh, cruel words. One should 
never receive scriptural learning from an unkind person. One should never 
use words that inflict pain on others, or cause misery, and so find hell for 
oneself. 

When wordy barbs pierce a man, he burns incessantly. Such arrows 
strike straight at his heart. Hence, wise men must never aim them at others. 


If a man of wisdom is deeply hurt by sharp words, he should remain 
calm. When someone tries to anger him, and he rejoices instead of yielding 
to ire, the provoker loses all his merits. The joyous man of dharma, who 
subdues his wrath instead of indulging in it, whereby it would lead him to 
speak ill of others and become their enemy, takes away the punya of others. 

I, for one, never respond, when others speak ill of me. If it happens, I 
always forgive the abuser. Dharma teaches that forgiveness, truth, sincerity 
and compassion are the best of all virtues. 

Satya is the Arcanum of the Vedas. The secret of truth is Dama. The 
deep mystery of Samyama is moksha. This is the teaching of all the 
shastras. 

I view him as a Brahmana and a Muni, who subdues the rising impulse 
of rash speech, the urge of ire, the greed for unworthy things, and the 
cravings of the stomach and the organ of pleasure. 

One who does not yield to anger is superior to one who does. The one 
who practices renunciation is superior to one who does not. He who 
possesses the virtues of manhood is superior to the one bereft of them. One 
who has knowledge is superior to the one who is without it. 

A man should not respond in manner or kind to harsh words. Indeed, 
by desisting, he succeeds in foiling his assailant and takes away all his 
punya. He who does not retaliate with coarse speech, he who does not 
return praise with applause, he who has the fortitude to forbear from 
striking back in return to any provocation, and eschew ill wishes on the 
attacker, finds that even the Devas covet his friendship. 

One should forgive the sinful man who insults, injures and 
calumniates, even while pretending to be a man of dharma. Through such 
poise, one attains success. 

Although I have nothing left to accomplish, I always wait reverentially 
on men of dharma. I have no thirst. I have no anger. If greed attempts to 
seduce me, I do not slip away from the path of dharma. I do not approach 
anyone for wealth. If someone curses me, I do not retaliate. I know that 
self-restraint is the door to immortality. 

I disclose unto you a great mystery. There is no condition superior to 
that of humanity. Like the emerging moon from behind murky clouds, the 
pure, wise man shines in resplendence, and attains success by patiently 
biding his time. 


The man who restrains his soul, and becomes an outstanding pillar of 
the very universe, of whom men speak only pleasant words, becomes a 
friend of the Devas. 

Revilers never speak of the merits of a man as they speak of his faults. 
He who restrains his speech and mind, and devotes himself to the Supreme, 
acquires the fruits of the Vedas, tapasya and of yagna. 

The wise man should never villify men of no merit with criticism or 
insults. He should not extol others and nor should he hurt them. The gyani 
perceives revilement of himself as nectar. In damnation, he sleeps without 
anxiety. The reviler, on the other hand, meets with destruction. 

The sacrifices that one performs in anger, the gifts one makes in ire, 
the penance one performs in rage, and the offerings and libations one makes 
to the sacred fire in pique, are such that Yama himself robs their punya. 
Hence, the efforts of an angry man becomes entirely fruitless. 

O Sadhyas, he who conquers his four portals of desire and rage, the 
organ of pleasure, the stomach, his two arms, and speech, realises dharma. 
One, who always practices truth, self-restraint, sincerity, compassion, 
patience and renunciation, and devotes himself to the study of the Vedas, 
does not covet what belongs to others, and pursues what is good with a 
singleness of intent, succeeds in reaching swarga. 

As acalf sucks all the four teats of its dam’s udders, one should devote 
oneself to the practice of all these virtues. I do not know of anything more 
sacred than dharma. I move among the Manavas and the Devas, and I 
proclaim that dharma is the only means to gain swarga. 

A man becomes like those he lives with, like those whom he admires 
and what he wishes to be. If a man waits with respect on a man of dharma, 
or him who is otherwise, if he serves with devotion a sage or a thief, he 
absorbs their characters. 

The Devas always commune with those who possess wisdom and 
goodness. They never entertain the wish to even watch the enjoyments that 
men indulge in. The person, who knows that all objects of earthly pleasure 
bear the stamp of vicissitudes, has few rivals, and is superior to the moon 
and the wind. 

When the Purusha that dwells in one’s heart is free from blemish, and 
walks in the path of dharma, the Devas take delight in him. Even if men 
expiate their offences with appropriate rites, the Devas distance themselves 


from such men, who worship sense gratification, indulge in harsh words and 
who are habitual thieves. 

Men who have a mean soul, who keep no restrictions on what they eat, 
and whose deeds are sinful, never please the gods. On the other hand, the 
Devas associate with men who keep the vow of truth, are grateful and 
engage in the practice of dharma. 

Silence is better than speech. To speak the truth is better than silence. 
Truth, together with dharma, is even better. In addition to being words of 
satya and dharma, words that one can depend upon are the best.” 

The Sadhyas said, “What is it that covers this world? Why does one 
fail to shine? What causes people to discard their friends? Why do people 
fail to attain swarga?” 

The swan said, “Ignorance envelops the world. Men fail to shine 
because of malice. Greed is the cause for people to shun friends. Men fail to 
gain swarga due to attachment.” 

The Sadhyas said, “Who alone among the Brahmanas is always 
happy? Who alone amongst them can observe the vow of silence though he 
dwells in the midst of many? Who alone amongst them, albeit weak, 
remains strong? And who alone amongst them does not quarrel?” 

The swan said, “Only the Brahmana who has wisdom is ever happy. In 
the midst of many, only the wise Brahmana succeeds in keeping the vow of 
silence. Only the wise Brahmana remains strong in weakness. He alone 
amidst them who has wisdom avoids quarrels.” 

The Sadhyas said, “Where can we find such holy Brahmanas? 
Wherein does their purity lie? And where their impurity? In what lies their 
condition of being human?” 

The Swan said, “In the study of the Vedas lies the divinity of the 
Brahmanas. In their vows and observances, is their purity. In censure is 
their impurity. In death lies their mortality.” 

Bhishma continues, “This is the wonderful story of the discourse 
between the Sadhyas and the swan. The body, both physical and subtle, 
sthula and sukshma, is the origin of karmas, and the Jivatman is dharma.’ 


CANTO 301 


Y udhishtira says, ‘O Pitamaha, you know everything, explain to me 
the difference between the Samkhya and the yoga systems of 
philosophy.’ 

Bhishma says, “The followers of Samkhya praise the Samkhya system 
and the yogins laud the yoga system. To establish the superiority of their 
individual faiths, each claims his own system to be the better. 

Wise yogins assign proper and valid reasons to show that one who 
does not believe in the existence of God cannot attain moksha. 

Whereas, sages who believe in the Samkhya doctrines advance good 
reasons to prove that one who acquires the highest knowledge, and 
dissociates himself from all worldly objects, attains mukti when he dies, 
and that it cannot be otherwise. This is how men of great wisdom explain 
the Samkhya philosophy of moksha. 

When logic is thus equal on both sides, one should accept the reasons 
that one is otherwise likely to adopt as one’s own. Indeed, one must 
acknowledge such teachings as being beneficial. Good men abound on both 
sides. Men like you may adopt either opinion. 

The ways of yoga directly address the ken of the senses, while the 
shastras are the basis of the Samkhya testimonies. I approve of both the 
systems of philosophy, O Yudhishtira. Furthermore, even the good and wise 
concur with both practices. If one employs them properly, O king, then 
either tradition is adequate for a person to attain the highest end. 


Both teachings equally recommend purity and compassion towards all 
creatures. Both lay equal emphasis on the observance of vows. It is only the 
shastras that explicate their paths that are different.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘If the vows, the purity, the compassion and the 
fruits that both methods recommend are the same, tell me, O Pitamaha, why 
then are their scriptures different?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘By discarding the five faults, attachment, heedlessness, 
affection, lust and wrath, one attains moksha. Even as large fish break 
through the net and pass into their own element, yogins who transcend lust, 
wrath and the rest, purify their sins and gain the eternal bliss of moksha. As 
powerful animals tear through the hunter’s snares, and escape into the 
exuberance of freedom, likewise, yogins, freed from all bonds, attain the 
sinless path that leads to mukti. 

Truly, O Anagha, strong yogins who sever the bonds of desire, attain 
the sinless, auspicious and high path of moksha. Feeble animals, caught in 
nets, surely die. Likewise is the case with persons destitute of the power of 
yoga. 

As the fisherman’s net snares fishes, and the weak ones die, even so, 
men bereft of yoga shakti, encounter death amidst the bonds of samsara. 

The fowler’s net captures the weak birds, while the strong ones 
escape. So too with yogins. Bound by the bonds of karma, the weak meet 
with destruction, while the strong break free. 

As large logs of wood extinguish a small and weak fire, even so the 
weak yogin meets with ruin in the world of attachments. Nevertheless, 
when the same fire burns strongly, it could consume the very earth. Even so, 
the strong and powerful yogin, ablaze with his tejas, can scorch the entire 
universe, like the sun that rises at the time of the Pralaya. 

As a strong current sweeps away a weak man, so do objects of the 
senses carry away a weak yogin. As an elephant withstands a mighty 
current, a mighty yogin withstands all objects of the senses. Independent of 
all things, great yogins enter into the hearts of the lords of creation, the 
Rishis, the Devas and the Mahatmans. 

Neither Yama, nor Ugra, nor Mrityu can overcome the yogin who has 
immeasurable tejas. Through his yoga shakti, he can assume thousands of 
forms and range over the earth. A few among them enjoy objects of the 
senses and then once again return to stern tapasya, and just as the sun 


withdraws his rays, these yogins withdraw themselves from their tapasya. 
The powerful yogin certainly attains moksha. 

O Rajan, you are now aware of yoga. Let me tell you of the subtle 
powers of yoga, along with their traits. Listen, O lord of Bharata’s vamsa, to 
the subtle signs of the dharana and the samadhi of the Soul. 

As the archer whose aim is true succeeds in striking his mark, so does 
the yogin who merges into his Atman attain mukti. As a man with a pot of 
water on his head carefully climbs a flight of stairs, even so is the yogin, 
who meditates, enters into his soul, purifies it and makes it as radiant as the 
sun. 

As in rough waters, an expert sailor guides his boat to the other shore, 
likewise, O monarch, the wise man fixes his soul in samadhi, and attains 
moksha. Like a skilful charioteer steers the Kshatriya to an advantageous 
position, similarly the yogin, alert and absorbed in dhyana, swiftly attains 
mukti. 

The yogin, who remains immovable after he absorbs himself in 
samadhi, destroys his sins and gains the indestructible condition of men of 
enlightenment. 

The yogin, who observes high vows, unites his Jivatman with the 
Paramatman, in the navel, throat, head, heart, chest, sides, eyes, ears and the 
nose, burns all his good and bad karma, and with yoga, communion, attains 
moksha.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “Tell me, O Pitamaha, about the kinds of food a 
yogin must eat, and the things that he must conquer, for him to acquire yoga 
shakti.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘O Bhaarata, subsisting upon broken grains of rice and 
sodden cakes of sesame, abstaining from oil and butter, the yogin acquires 
yoga tejas. Eating just dry barley powder, and confining himself to one meal 
a day, the yogin acquires yoga shakti. 

Drinking just a blend of water and milk, at first, once during the day, 
then once in a fortnight, then once in a month, then once in three months, 
and then just once in a whole year, the yogin acquires yoga tejas. 

By abstaining from meat, subduing lust, wrath, heat, cold, rain, fear, 
grief and the vital breath, the purified yogin acquires yoga shakti. By 
overcoming the desire for delightful sounds, and other fine objects of the 
senses, and the frustration born of abstention from sexual congress; 
conquering extreme thirst, and the pleasures of touch, sleep and idleness 


that is almost impossible to defeat, Mahayogins, with the help of their 
intellect, meditation and study, cause the most subtle Atman to reveal itself 
in all its glory. 

This lofty path of yoga is exceptionally difficult to follow. No one can 
tread this path with ease. The trail is like a terrible forest, teeming with 
innumerable snakes and vermin. It has pitfalls everywhere, without water to 
slake one’s thirst and, dense with thorns, it is virtually inaccessible. 

Indeed, the way of yoga is like a road along which nothing to eat 
grows, which runs through a desert with all its trees burnt down, where 
bands of savage bandits rule. Very few young men can traverse it safely. 
Only a few evolved Brahmanas can tread such a path, with any ease and 
comfort. He who stops and turns his back on this path is guilty of many 
faults. Pure men easily persist with the razor sharp yoga-dhyana, while 
sinful men do not last on it for long. 

If there is any disturbance or obstruction to dhyana, it can never lead 
the yogin to an auspicious goal. The man, O son of Kunti, who practices 
dhyana in accord with the precepts, successfully discards birth, death, 
happiness and sorrow. 

All this that I tell you is from the diverse treatises upon yoga. One sees 
the highest benefit of yoga—the identification with Brahman, in twice-born 
men. 

The excellence that the exalted yogin acquires is such that, at his will, 
he can enter into and come out of Brahma, and Vishnu, and Bhava, and 
Dharma, and the six-faced Kartikeya, and the sons of Brahma. Therefore, 
he can enter and leave tamas, rajas, sattva, and even Prakriti. 

At his volition, he can enter and leave the Devi Siddhi, who is the 
consort of Varuna. He can do the same with all kinds of energies, the bright 
lord of the stars in the firmament, the Viswas, the Nagas, the Pitris, the 
mountains and hills, the vast and terrible oceans, all the rivers, and the 
clouds, the trees, Yakshas, the cardinal and subsidiary points of the horizon, 
the Gandharvas and all male and female beings. 

This discourse, O king, which is in accord with the Supreme Being of 
infinite lustre, is auspicious beyond description. The yogin has Narayana for 
his soul. Prevailing over all things, such a yogin can create all things.’ 


ENDNOTES 


1. Surely an interpolation, among many others in the Santi and Anusasana 


Parvas. 

2. Thousand names 

1 Aum Sthirayai nama 

2 Aum Sthanave nama 

3 Aum Prabhave nama 
4 Aum Bheemayai nama 
5 Aum Pravarayai nama 
6 Aum Varadayai nama 
7 Aum Varaayai nama 


8 Aum Sarvaathmane nama 

9 Aum Sarva Vikhyathayai 
nama 

10 Aum Sarvasmai nama 

11 Aum Sarvakarayai nama 

I2 Aum Bhavayai nama 

13 Aum Jatine nama 

14 Aum Charmine nama 

15 Aum Shikhandine nama 


Salutations to Him who is perennial 
Who is the axis of the world 

Who is the lord of all the world 
Who is the source of fear 

Who is very special 

Who gives boons 

Who spreads everything and makes 
it invisible 

Who is the soul of every being 
Who is famous everywhere 


Who pervades everything 

Who does everything 

Who is the source of everything 
Who has matted hair 

Who clothes himself in hide 

Who has hair flowing like the 
peacock’s feathers 


16 
17 


18 
19 


20 


21 
22 
pie) 
24 


2D 
26 
21 


28 


29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 


36 


37 


38 
59 


40 


Aum Sarvaangaaya nama 


Aum — Sarvabhavanaayai 
nama 

Aum Haraya nama 

Aum Harinaakshaayai 
nama 


Aum Sarvabhoothaharayai 
nama 

Aum Prabhave nama 

Aum Pravruthaye nama 
Aum Nivruthaye nama 
Aum Niyathaya nama 


Aum Saswathaya nama 
Aum Druvaya nama 

Aum Smasana __ vasinee 
nama 

Aum Bhagawathe nama 


Aum Khacharaya nama 
Aum Ghocharaya nama 
Aum Ardhanayai nama 
Aum Abhivadyaya nama 
Aum Mahakarmane nama 
Aum Thapasvine nama 
Aum Bhooha Bhavanayai 
nama 

Aum Unmatha 
Veshaprachannayai nama 
Aum Sarva 
Lokaprajapathae nama 
Aum Maharoopayai nama 
Aum Mahakayayai nama 


Aum  Vrusha_ Roopayai 


Who has all the world as his organs 
Who creates and looks after 
everything 

Who destroys everything 

Who has deer-like eyes 


Who destroys all beings which 
exist 
Who enjoys everything 
Who is the form of work 
Who is the form of total sacrifice 
Who is a sage and has conquered his 
senses 
Who is permanent 
Who is stable 
Who lives in the cremation ground 


Who is the source of wealth, charity, 
fame, renunciation and salvation 
Who travels in the sky 

Who can be felt only by intuition 
Who apprehends evil men 

Who is fit to be saluted 

Who does great deeds 

Who is a sage doing meditation 

Who creates the five great elements 
—sky, earth, fire, air and wind 

Who hides himself as a madman 


Who is the lord of all beings of all 
worlds 

Who has a very great form 

Who has the whole universe for his 
body 

Who has the form of a bull 


4] 
42 
43 


44 


45 
46 


47 


48 
49 


50 
51 
a2 
33 


54 
aD 


56 


a) 
58 
a 
60 
61 
62 


63 
64 
65 


nama 
Aum Mahayasase nama 
Aum Mahatmane nama 
Aum Sarva 
Bhoothathmane nama 
Aum  Viswa_ Roopayai 
nama 

Aum Mahahanave nama 
Aum Loka Palaya nama 


Aum Anthar Hithathmane 
nama 

Aum Prasadaya nama 
Aum — Hayagardhabhaye 
nama 

Aum Pavithraya nama 
Aum Mahathe nama 


Aum Niyamaya nama 
Aum Niyamasrithaya 
nama 

Aum Sarva karmane nama 
Aum Swayambhoothaya 
nama 


Aum Aadhaye nama 


Aum Aadhikaraya nama 
Aum Nidhaye nama 

Aum Sahasrakshata nama 
Aum Visalakshaya nama 
Aum Somaya nama 

Aum Nakshatra 
Sadhakayai nama 

Aum Chandraya nama 
Aum Suryaya nama 

Aum Sanaya nama 


Who has great fame 
Who has a very great mind 
Who is the soul of all beings 


Who is seen everywhere 


Who has very jaw 

Who is of the form of the Lokapalas 
who protect the earth 

One who has atttributes which are 
within him and not visible 

Who has the form of love 

Who travels in the chariot drawn by 
zebras 

Who is pure 

Who is fit to be worshipped 

Who is the rules of life 

Who is the refuge to those who 
follow rules of life 

Who does all actions 

Who created himself 


Who is most ancient; who is first 
among beings 

Who created Lord Brahma 

Who is a treasure 

Who has a thousand eyes 

Who has very great eyes 

Who is with Uma 

Who created the stars 


Who has the form of the moon 
Who has the form of the sun 
Who has the form of Saturn 


66 
67 
68 
69 
70 


71 


ee 


73 
74 
as 
76 


Ey 


78 


To 
80 
81 


82 
83 
84 
85 
86 
87 


88 
89 
90 


91 


Aum Kethave nama 
Aum Grahaya nama 
Aum Graha pathaye nama 
Aum Varaaya nama 
Aum Athraye nama 


Aum Adryaa 
Namaskarthre nama 

Aum Mruga Banarpanayai 
nama 

Aum Anagaya nama 

Aum Mahathapse nama 
Aum Gorathapase nama 
Aum Adheenaya nama 


Aum Dheena Sadhakayai 
nama 


Aum  Samvathsarakaraya 
nama 
Aum Manthraya Nama 


Aum Pramanaya nama 
Aum Pramaya Thapase 
nama 

Aum Yogine nama 

Aum Yojyaya nama 

Aum Maha Beejaya nama 
Aum Maha Rethase mana 
Aum Mahabalaya nama 
Aum  Swarna_ Rethase 
nama 

Aum Sarvagnaya nama 
Aum Subeejaya nama 
Aum  Beeja_ vahanayai 
nama 

Aum Dasa Bahave nama 


Who has the form of Ketu 

Who has the form of the planets 

Who is the lord of all planets 

Who is the best 

Who is the form of Mercury born in 
Atri’s clan 

Who saluted Anasuya, the wife of 
Sage Atri 

Who shot an arrow at the deer sent by 
sages of the Daruka forest 

Who cannot be approached by sins 
Who has great penance 

Who does terrible penance 

Who is not poor though he looks as if 
he is 

Who fulfils desires of poor people 


Who makes the wheel of time 
revolve 

Who is the sacred mantras 

Who is the source of intuition 

Who himself is the great penance 


Who is a yogi 

Who can be attained by yoga 
Who is the great seed 

Who is the great semen 

Who has great strength 

Who has golden semen 


Who knows everything 
Who is the good seed 
Who rides on the seed 


Who has ten hands 


92 
93 
94 
95 
96 


97 
98 
99 
100 
101 


102 
103 
104 


105 


106 
107 


108 
109 
110 
Li 
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 


118 
119 
120 


Aum Animishaya nama 
Aum Neelakandaya nama 
Aum Umapathaye nama 


Who does not blink his eyes 
Who has a blue throat 
Who is the consort of Uma 


Aum Viswa Roopaya nama Who is of universal form 


Aum Swayam Sreshtaya 
nama 

Aum Bala veeraya nama 
Aum Abhalokanaya nama 
Aum Gana karthre nama 
Aum Ganapathaye nama 
Aum Digvasase nama 


Aum Kaamaya nama 

Aum Manthravidhe nama 
Aum Paramaya manthraya 
nama 

Aum Sarva Bhavakaraaya 
nama 

Aum Haraaya nama 

Aum  Kamandaludaraaya 
nama 

Aum Dhanvine nama 

Aum Banahasthaya nama 
Aum Kapalavathe nama 
Aum Asanaye nama 

Aum Satagnine nama 

Aum Gadgine nama 

Aum Pattissine nama 

Aum Ayudhine nama 

Aum Mahathe nama 

Aum sthruvahasthaya 
nama 

Aum Surupaya nama 

Aum Thejase nama 

Aum Theskaraaya Nidhaye 


Who is himself great 


Who is the mighty hero 

Who is the splendour of the worlds 
Who creates the Ganas 

Who is the leader of the Ganas 

Who is clad in the directions; 
naked; sky-clad 

Who is loved by all 

Who is an expert in mantras 
Who is the _ greatest 
personified 

Who is the maker of all emotions 


mantra 


Who is the stealer of our hearts 
Who has with him the kamadalu 


Who carries a bow 

Who carries an arrow in his hand 
Who carries a skull 

Who sits enthroned 

Who carries the Satagni 

Who carries a sword with him 

Who carries the knife called Pattisi 
Who carries weapons 

Who is great 

Who carries the ladle Sthruva in his 
hand 

Who is handsome 

Who is lustrous 

Who is like the treasure giving light 


121 
122 
122 
124 
125 
126 
127 
128 
129 


130 
131 
132 


133 
134 
135 
136 
137 


138 


139 
140 
141 
142 
143 
144 
145 
146 


147 


148 


nama 
Aum Ushneeshine nama 
Aum Suvakthraya nama 
Aum Udagraya nama 

Aum Vinathaya nama 
Aum Deerghaya nama 
Aum Harikesaya nama 
Aum Sutirthaya nama 
Aum Krishnaaya nama 
Aum Srugala Rupaya 
nama 

Aum Siddharthaya nama 
Aum Mundaya nama 

Aum  Sarvashubamkaraya 
nama 

Aum Ajaya nama 

Aum Bahurupaya nama 
Aum Ganda Darine nama 
Aum Kapardhine nama 
Aum Oordhwarethase 
nama 

Aum Oordhwa_ Lingaya 
nama 

Aum Oordhwasayine nama 
Aum Nabha Sthalaya nama 
Aum Trijadine nama 

Aum Cheeravasase nama 
Aum Rudraya nama 

Aum Senapathaye nama 
Aum Vibhave nama 

Aum Ahacharaya nama 


Aum 
nama 
Aum Thigma Manyava 


Nakthancharaya 


to devotees 

Who wears a turban 

Who has a handsome face 

Who has a stable form 

Who is humble 

Who is tall 

Who has black hair turned to grey 
Who is of the form of a sacred ford 
Who is ever happy 

Who assumes the form of a jackal 


Who is the acme of occult powers 
Who is of the form of an ascetic 
Who grants all good things 


Who does not have birth 
Who assumes many forms 
Who wears fragrant unguents 
Who has matted hair 

Who has vanquished passion 


Whose linga is erect 


Who sleeps facing upwards 

Who has a place in the sky 

Who has triad dreadlocks 

Who wears the hide of trees 

Who removes sorrows 

Who is the commander of the army 
Who assumes a variety of forms 
Who is of the form of Devas 
travelling by day 

Who is of the form of Devas who 
move at night 

Who has great anger 


149 
150 
151 
152 
153 
154 
155 


156 


157 


158 


159 
160 


161 
162 
163 


164 
165 
166 
167 


168 
169 


nama 
Aum Suvarchasaya nama 


Aum Gajagne nama 


Aum Daityagne nama 
Aum Kaalaya nama 
Aum Loka Dathre nama 
Aum Gunaakaraya nama 


Aum Simha 
Sardhoolaroopaya nama 
Aum Ardhra 
Charmambaraavruthaya 
nama 

Aum Kaala Yoginee nama 


Aum Maha Naadaya nama 


Aum Sarva Kaamaya nama 
Aum Chathush Padaya 
nama 


Aum Nisha Charaya nama 
Aum Prethacharine nama 
Aum  Bhootha  Charine 
nama 

Aum Maheswaraya nama 
Aum Bahu Bhutaya nama 
Aum Bahudaraya nama 
Aum Swarbhanave nama 


Aum Amithaya nama 
Aum Gathaye nama 


Who has the resplendent light of 
knowledge 

Who killed the Asura who took the 
form of an elephant 

Who killed Asuras 

Who is of the form of time 

Who rules over this world 

Who is the storehouse of good 
qualities 

Who is of the form of the tiger and 
the lion 

Who uses’ the _ blood-soaked 
elephant hide to cover himself 


Who through yoga has defeated 
time 

Who is the personification of the 
great sound 

Who is all desires 

Who can be worshipped in four 
ways; Who can be worshiped as 
Viswa, Taijasa, Prajna and Shiva. 
Who moves at night 

Who travels with pretas, corpses 
Who travels with ghosts 


Who is the great God 

Who also has the form of strength 
Who bears this great universe 

Who shines like a sun by his own 
light or Who is of the form of planet 
Rahu 

Who is beyond measurement 

Who is the Destination to reach 


170 


171 


LIZ 


173 


174 
175 
176 


177 
178 
179 
180 


181 
182 


183 
184 
185 


186 
187 
188 
189 
190 
191 


192 
193 


Aum Nruthya  Priyaya 
nama 
Aum Nithya Narthaya 
nama 


Aum Narthakaaya nama 
Aum Sarva 
nama 

Aum Ghoraaya nama 
Aum Maha Thapase nama 
Aum Pasaaya nama 


Laalasaya 


Aum Nithyaya nama 

Aum Giri Ruhaya nama 
Aum Nabhase nama 

Aum Sahasra_ Hasthaya 
nama 

Aum Vijayaya nama 

Aum Vyavasayaya nama 


Aum Athandrithaya nama 
Aum Adarshanaya nama 
Aum Darshanathmane 
nama 

Aum Yagnagne nama 


Aum Kama _ Nasakaya 
nama 
Aum Daksha 


Yagaapahaarine nama 
Aum Susahaya nama 

Aum Madhyamaya nama 
Aum Thejopahaarine nama 
Aum Balagne nama 

Aum Mudhithaya nama 


Who likes dancing 
Who dances always 


Who is the dancer or who makes 
everything dance 
Who likes everyone 


Who has a terrible form 

Who is the great penance 

Who ties every one with the rope of 
illusion 

Who is perennial 

Who lives on the mountain 

Who is unattached like the sky 

Who has thousands of hands 


Who is of the form of victory 

Who is industrious or who is of the 
form of definite action 

Who is not lazy 

Who is unshakable 

Who is the soul of fear for others 


Who destroys fire sacrifice done 
with egoism 
Who killed the god of love 


Who destroyed the fire sacrifice of 
Daksha 

Who is greatly patient 

Who is unbiased 

Who steals the strength of others 
Who kills those bloated by strength 
Who is always happy 


194 
195 
196 
197 


198 
199 


200 


201 


202 


203 
204 


205 
206 
207 


208 
209 


210 


211 


212 


212 
214 


Aum Arthaya nama 
Aum Ajithaya nama 
Aum Avaraya nama 


Aum Gambheera 
Ghoshaya nama 

Aum Gambheeraya nama 
Aum Gambheera 
Balavahanaay nama 

Aum Nyagrodha Roopaya 
nama 


Aum Nyagrodhaya nama 


Aum Vruksha 
Karmasthithaye nama 
Aum Vibhave nama 

Aum Sutheeshna Dasanaya 
nama 

Aum Maha Kayaya nama 
Aum Mahananaya nama 
Aum  Vishvak  Senaya 
nama 

Aum Haraye nama 

Aum Yagnaya nama 


Aum Samyuga 
Peedavahanaya nama 

Aum Theeshna Thaapaya 
nama 

Aum Haryaswaya nama 


Aum Sahaayaya nama 
Aum Karma _ Kalavidhe 


Who is liked by everyone 

Who cannot be defeated by anyone 
Who does not have anyone above 
him 

Who produces great sound 


Who is beyond the intellect 

Who rides on a bull which cannot 
be shaken by others 

Who is of the form of the tree of 


day-to-day life which grows 
downwards 
Who assumes the form. of 


Dakshinamurthy, under a banyan 
tree 

Who is on the top of the ear like a 
leaf of the tree during a deluge 

Who is the favourite god of all 

Who has very sharp teeth 


Who has a very big body 

Who has a very big face 

Who scatters the Asura army in 
different directions 

Who destroys everything 

Who is the personification of fire 
sacrifice 

Who has the bull as the flag as well 
as stride 

Who is of the form of burning fire 


Who is the form of the sun with 
green horses 

Who is the help for life 

Who knows the proper time to 


215 
216 
2AF 
218 
219 
220 


221 
222 


220 
224 
225 


226 


Zod 


228 


229 
230 


231 
Dae 
259 


234 
235 
236 
27 


nama 
Aum Vishnu Prasadithaya 
nama 

Aum Yagnaya nama 

Aum Samudhraya nama 
Aum Badavamukhaya 
nama 

Aum Huthasana Sahayaya 
nama 
Aum 
nama 
Aum Huthasanaya nama 
Aum Ugra Thejase nama 


Prasanthathmane 


Aum Maha Thejase nama 
Aum Janyaya nama 

Aum Vijaya _ Kalavidhe 
nama 

Aum  Jyothishamayanaya 
nama 

Aum Siddhaye nama 


Aum _ Sarva 
nama 

Aum Shikhine nama 
Aum Mundine nama 


Vigrahaya 


Aum Jadine nama 
Aum Jwaline nama 
Aum Moorthijaya nama 


Aum Moordhajaya nama 
Aum Baline nama 

Aum Vainavine nama 
Aum Panavine nama 


perform duties 

Who has been pleased by the 
devotion of Vishnu 

Who is of the form of Vishnu 

Who is of the form of the ocean 
Who is the form of fire which dries 
water 

Who is the form of wind 


Who is as peaceful as an ocean after 
tide 

Who is of the form of fire 

Who has the terrific power of a 
flame 

Who has great light and shines 

Who is very able in war 

Who knows the time for victory 


Who is of the form of astrology 


Who is of the form of proper 
completion 
Who makes everything as his body 


Who has well-grown hair 

Who is the form of clean-shaven 
sage 

Who has a matted lock 

Who is of the form of a flame 

Who appears in the form of man 
and animals 

Who is on the head 

Who is strong 

Who has a flute in his hand 

Who has a shaking drum in his hand 


238 


229 
240 


241 


242 
243 


244 
245 
246 
247 
248 
249 


250 


251 
252 


253 
254 
ZS 
256 
Zo 
258 


259 


260 


Aum Thaline nama 


Aum Khaline nama 


Aum Kalakatamkataya 
nama 
Aum Nakshatr 


Vigrahamathaye nama 


Aum Guna Budhaye nama 
Aum Layaya nama 


Aum Agamaya nama 
Aum Prajapathaye nama 
Aum Viswabahave nama 
OM Vibhagaya nama 
Aum Sarvagaya nama 
Aum Amugaya nama 


Aum Vimochanaya nama 
Aum Susaranaya nama 
Aum 
Hiranyakavachodbhavaya 
nama 

Aum Medrajaya nama 
Aum Balacharine nama 


Aum Mahee Charine nama 
Aum Sruthaya nama 


Aum Sarva 
Thooryavinodhine nama 
Aum Sarvathodhya 


Parigrahaya nama 
Aum Vyalaroopaya nama 


Aum Guhaavasinee nama 


Who has metallic cymbals in his 
hand 

Who is the owner of a paddy store 
Who is the gate for the god of death 
who is of the form of time 

Who has a body and intellect which 
shine 

like stars 

Who knows/measures qualities 

Who is the source where everything 
merges in the end 

Who does not have any movement 
Who is the god of the people 

Who has arms everywhere 

Who cannot be divided 

Who is everywhere 

Who is_ faceless/Who is__ not 
interested in enjoyment 

Who grants salvation 

Who can be attained easily 

Who appears with golden apparel 


Who arises from the linga 

Who moves about with a strong 
army 

Who travels throughout the earth 
Who is spread everywhere 

Who enjoys all types of instrumental 
music 

Who considers all beings as_ his 
family 

Who is of the form of A serpent in 
Adhisesha 

Who lives in the cave of one’s mind. 


261 


262 
263 


264 


265 


266 


267 


268 


269 


270 
271 


Dae 
213 
274 
275 
276 
247 
278 
219 


280 
281 


Aum Guhaaya nama 


Aum Maline nama 
Aum Tharangavidhe nama 


Aum Tridasaya nama 
Aum Trikaladruthe nama 


Aum Karma Sarvabhanda 
Vimochanaya nama 


Aum Asurendranaam 
Bandanaya nama 
Aum Yudhi 


Shathruvinasanaya nama 
Aum Sankhya Prasadaaya 
nama 

Aum Durvasase nama 
Aum Sarva 
Sadhunishevithaya nama 
Aum Prasakandanaya 
nama 

Aum Vibhagagnaya nama 


Aum Athulyaya nama 
Aum Yagna Vibhagavidhe 
nama 

Aum Sarva Vasaya nama 
Aum Sarvacharine nama 
Aum Durvasase nama 


Aum Vasavaaya nama 
Aum Amaraya nama 
Aum Haimaya nama 


Who is of the form of Lord 
Subrahmanya 

Who wears a garland 

Who has the waves of creation, 
upkeep and destruction 

Who is the source of birth, life and 
death of all beings 

Who wears the three periods—past, 
present and future 

Who cuts of the ties of karma 


Who is. the’ reason for the 
imprisonment of the kings of Asuras 
Who kills enemies in war 


Who gets pleased by the discussion 
of Sankhya philosophy 

Who took the form of sage Durvasa 
Who is served by all good people 


Who makes all others slip during a 
deluge all others die 


Who is an expert in giving 
boons/punishments according to 
their deeds 


Who is incomparable 

Who is an expert in giving the share 
of each in the fire sacrifice 

Who is everywhere 

Who travels everywhere 

Who cannot be clothed because he 
is everywhere 

Who is in the form of Indra 

Who does not have death 

Who is of the colour of gold 


282 
283 
284 
285 


286 
287 


288 
289 
290 
291 
292 
293 
294 
295 
296 
297 
298 
299 
300 
301 
302 


303 
304 


305 


Aum Hemakaraaya nama 
Aum Nishkarmaaya nama 
Aum Sarva Dharine nama 
Aum Darothamaya nama 


Aum Lohithakshaya nama 
Aum Mahakshaya nama 


Aum Vijayaakshaya nama 


Aum Visaaradhaya nama 
Aum Sangrahaya nama 
Aum Nigrahaya nama 
Aum Karthre nama 


Aum Sarpacheera 
Nivasanaya nama 

Aum Mukhyaya nama 
Aum Amukhyaya nama 
Aum Dehaya nama 

Aum Kahalaye nama 

Aum Sarva Kamadhaya 
nama 

Aum Sarvakala Prasadaya 
nama 

Aum Subalaya nama 


Aum Bala Roopadruthe 
nama 

Aum Sarva Kamavaraya 
nama 

Aum Sarvadaya nama 
Aum Sarvathomukhaya 
nama 


Aum Aakasanirviroopaya 


Who makes gold 

Who does not do any work 

Who wears /carries every thing 
Who is the greatest among those 
who carry 


Who has red eyes 

Who has senses which are spread 
everywhere 

Who has a chariot which wins 
everybody 


Who knows everything 

Who recognises devotees 
Who punishes bad people 
Who creates and_ looks 
everybody 

Who ties a serpent over his apparel 


after 


Who is the chief 

Who does not have a chief 

Who is of the form of the body 
Who has a drum called Kahala 

Who fulfils all desires of his 
devotees 

Who showers his grace at all times 


Who has the strength that serves 
others 
Who is strong as well as handsome 


Who is the best among all gods 
whom we desire 

Who gives everything 

Who has faces everywhere 


Who makes several forms from the 


306 


307 


308 


309 


310 


311 
az 
a3 
314 
a15 
316 
317 
318 
319 
320 
321 
S22 
923 


324 


325 


326 


327 


328 
329 


nama 
Aum Nibhadine nama 


Aum Avasaya nama 
Aum Khagaya nama 
Aum  Roudra 


nama 
Aum Amsave nama 


roopaya 


Aum Adithya nama 

Aum Bahurasmaye nama 
Aum Suvarchisine nama 
Aum Vasu Vegaya nama 
Aum Maha Vegaya nama 
Aum Manovegaya nama 
Aum Nisacharaya nama 
Aum Sarva Vasine nama 
Aum Sriyavasine nama 
Aum Upadesakaraya nama 
Aum Akaraya nama 

Aum Munaye nama 

Aum Athma Niralokaya 
nama 

Aum Sambhagnaya nama 


Aum Sahasradaya nama 


Aum Pakshine nama 


Aum  Paksha Roopaya 
nama 
Aum Athideepthaya nama 


Aum Visampthaye nama 


sky like himself 

Who appears to have entered our 
body and fallen there 

Who cannot be under the control of 
anybody 

Who is like the bird which is always 
with the tree of life 

Who has a very angry appearance 


Who is of the form of the ray of 
light 

Who is of the form of the sun 
Who has several rays of light 
Who has pretty rays 

Who has the speed of wind 

Who has very great speed 

Who has the speed of the mind 
Who travels at night 

Who resides in everything 

Who lives in Srividya 

Who gives counsels/Who teaches 
Who does not do anything 

Who is the sage 

Who sees carefully each Jivatma 


Who is being depended on by 
everybody 

Who gives in 
thousands 

Who is Garuda, the best among the 
birds 

Who helps in the form of our 
friends 

Who has great brilliance 

Who is the lord of the citizens 


thousands and 


330 


331 
552 
250 
334 
335 
336 


337 
338 
339 
340 
341 


342 
343 


344 
345 
346 
347 
348 
349 
350 
351 


352 
353 


Aum Unmadaya nama 


Aum Madanaya nama 
Aum Kamaya nama 
Aum Aswathaya nama 
Aum Arthakaraya nama 
Aum Yasase nama 

Aum Vamadevaya nama 


Aum Vamaaya nama 
Aum Prache nama 
Aum Dakshinaya nama 


Aum Vamanaya nama 
Aum Siddha Yogine nama 


Aum Maharshaye nama 
Aum Sidharthaya nama 


Aum Sidha 
nama 
Aum Bikshave nama 


Sadhakaya 


Aum Bikshu 
nama 

Aum Vipanaya nama 
Aum Mrudhave nama 
Aum Avyayaya nama 
Aum Maha Senaya nama 
Aum Vishakhaya nama 


Roopaya 


Aum Sashti Bagaya nama 
Aum Gavampathaye nama 


Who makes us 
devotion 

Who gives us immense happiness 
Who is liked by everybody 

Who is in the form of a banyan tree 
Who gives what is desired 

Who blesses his devotees with fame 
Who gives the prize deserved 
according to one’s actions 

Who is very handsome 

Who is before everybody 

Who is capable of ruling all the 
three worlds 

Who came in form of Vamana, an 
avatara of Vishnu 

Who is a great yogi who is also a 
sidha 

Who is the greatest among sages 
Who is the perfect one who has 
everything 

Who grants the desires of Siddhas 


develop mad 


Who is of the form of one who eats 
what he gets as alms 
Who looks like a beggar 


Who does not specify a price 

Who has a very soft heart 

Who is consistent 

Who has a great army 

Who is of the form of Lord 
Subrahamanya 

Who has sixty parts 

Who makes the sensory organs 
function 


354 


355 
356 


aa] 


358 


a59 


360 


361 


362 


363 


364 
365 
366 
367 
368 


369 
370 


a1 
S12 
373 
374 
315 


Aum Vajrahasthaya nama 


Aum Vishkambhine nama 
Aum Chamusthambhanaya 
nama 

Aum Vruthavruthakaraya 
nama 


Aum Thalaya nama 


Aum Madhave nama 


Aum  Madhukalochanaya 
nama 
Aum Vachaspathyaya 
nama 


Aum Vajasanaya nama 


Aum Nithyamasritha 
Poojithaya nama 

Aum Brahmacharine nama 
Aum Loka Charine nama 
Aum Sarva Charine nama 
Aum Vichara Vidhe nama 
Aum Ishanaya nama 


Aum Ishwaraya nama 
Aum Kaalaya nama 


Aum Nisha Charine nama 
Aum Pinaka Bruthe nama 
Aum Nimithasthata nama 
Aum Nimithaya nama 
Aum Nandaye nama 


Who holds the vajrayudha in his 
hand 

Who is spread everywhere 

Who paralyses the enemy army 


Who circles the enemy in_ his 
chariot and who returns after 
defeating them without wounds 
Who knows the bottom of the ocean 
of day-to-day life 

Who is of the form of the spring 
season 

Who has honey-like eyes which are 
red 

Who is of the form of Brahaspati, 
the teacher of Devas 

Who made the Vajasena branch of 
Vedas in the form of the sun 

Who is daily being worshipped by 
his devotees 

Who is one with Brahman 

Who travels between the worlds 
Who travels everywhere 

Who knows the enquiry of truth 
Who conducts everything with 
attention 

Who spreads everything 

Who judges the sins and good 
actions over time 

Who travels on the night of a deluge 
Who holds the bow called Pinaka 
Who resides in causes 

Who is the cause 
Who is_ the 
knowledge 


treasurehouse of 


376 
S17 


378 


ao 
380 
381 


382 
383 


384 
385 
386 
387 


388 
389 
390 
ao 1 
392 


393 
394 


395 
396 


397 
398 


Aum Nandikaraya nama 
Aum Haraye nama 


Aum 
nama 
Aum Nandine nama 

Aum Nandanaya nama 
Aum Nandi Vardhanaya 
nama 


Nandeeswaraya 


Aum Bhaga Haarine nama 
Aum Nihanthre nama 


Aum Kaalaya nama 

Aum Brahmane nama 
Aum Pithamahaya nama 
Aum Chathurmukhaya 
nama 

Aum Mahalingaya nama 
Aum Charu Lingaya nama 


Aum Lingadhyakshaya 
nama 

Aum Suradhyakshaya 
nama 

Aum Yogadhyakshaya 
nama 

Aum Yuga Vahaya nama 
Aum Bheejadyakshaya 
nama 


Aum Bheejakarthre nama 
Aum 
Adhyathmanugathaya 
nama 

Aum Balaya nama 

Aum Ithihasya nama 


Who gives wealth 

Who is Anjaneya in the form of 
monkeys 

Who is the lord of the Nandi 


Who has also been called the Nandi 
Who makes us happy 

Who increases happiness’ of 
devotees/Who destroys the wealth 
of his enemies 

Who steals wealth and fame 

Who takes away life in the form of 
Lord Yama 

Who is the seat of arts 

Who is very great 

Who is the father of a father 

Who has four faces when he takes 
the form of Brahma 

Who is the great linga 

Who is pretty 

Who presides over in the form of a 
linga 

Who is the lord of all devas 


Who is the lord of all yugas 


Who creates yugas 
Who is the lord of the root cause 


Who makes nature function 
Who follows the tenets of the 
Adhyatma shastras 


Who has strength 
Who is the form of epics 


399 


400 


401 
402 
403 
404 


405 
406 
407 


408 
409 
410 
411 
412 
413 


414 


415 
416 
417 
418 


419 
420 
421 
422 
423 


424 


Aum Sakalpaya nama 
Aum Gowthama nama 


Aum Nishakaraya nama 
Aum Dhambaya nama 
Aum Adhambhaya nama 
Aum Vaidhambhaya nama 


Aum Vasyaya nama 
Aum Vasakaraya nama 
Aum Kalaye nama 


Aum Loka Karthre nama 
Aum Pasupathaye nama 
Aum Maha Karthre nama 
Aum Anoushadhaya nama 
Aum Aksharaya nama 
Aum Paramaya Brahmane 
nama 

Aum Bhalavathe nama 


Aum Chakraya nama 

Aum Neethyai nama 

Aum Aneethyai nama 
Aum Shuddhathmane 
nama 

Aum Shudhaya nama 

Aum Maanyaya nama 
Aum Gathagathaya nama 
Aum Bahu _ Prasadaya 
nama 

Aum Suswapnaya nama 


Aum Darpanaya nama 


Who is in the form of Kalpa 
shastras 
Who is 
Gowthama 
Who created darkness 

Who controls his enemies 

Who cannot be controlled by others 
Who is dear to those who are not 
proud 

Who can be controlled by devotion 
Who makes all others his 

Who is of the form of war between 
Asuras and Devas 

Who has created the worlds 

Who is the lord of all beings 

Who created the five bhoothas 

Who does not eat food 

Who does not have decay 

Who is the incomparable Brahman 


in the form of sage 


Who is of the form of Devas who 
control strength 

Who created strength 

Who is the law 

Who cannot be ruled by others 

Who has a very clean mind 


Who is clean 

Who is fit to be worshipped 
Who appears and vanishes 
Who is greatly pleased 


Who is 
dreams 
Who is like a mirror 


Thaijasa who controls 


425 
426 
427 
428 
429 
430 


431 
432 


433 
434 
435 
436 
437 
438 
439 


440 
44] 


442 


443 
444 


445 


446 


447 


Aum Amithrajithe nama 


Aum Vedakaraya nama 
Aum Mathrakaraya nama 
Aum Vidhushe nama 

Aum Samarthanaya nama 
Aum Maha Meghanivasine 
nama 

Aum Mahagoraya nama 
Aum Vasine nama 


Aum Karaya nama 

Aum Agnijwalaya nama 
Aum Mahajwalaya nama 
Aum Athidhoomraya nama 
Aum Huthaya nama 

Aum Havishe nama 

Aum Vrushanaya nama 
Aum Sankaraya nama 


Aum Nithyamvarchaswine 
nama 


Aum  Dhoomakethanaya 
nama 

Aum Neelaya nama 

Aum Angalubhdhaya 
nama 


Aum Shobhanaya nama 
Aum Niravagrahaya nama 


Aum Swasthithaya nama 


Who has won over internal and 
external enemies 

Who created the Vedas 

Who created mantras 

Who is an expert in all arts 

Who destroys enemies in war 

Who resides in the clouds at the 
time of a deluge 

Who is of a very fearful form 

Who keeps everything under his 
custody 

Who destroys 

Who is like the flame of the fire 
Who has the light of a great flame 
Who creates a lot of smoke as he 
burns everything 

Who is satisfied by everybody in the 
fire sacrifice 

Who is the offering in the fire 
sacrifice 

Who showers boons/punishment for 
our actions 

Who gives us pleasure 

Who is always resplendent 


Who is the fire which produces 
smoke 

Who is blue 

Who is present in a part of his body 


Who is of the form which is always 
good 

Who does not have anything to stop 
him 

Who is in himself 


448 


449 
450 


451 
452 
453 
454 


455 


456 
457 


458 
459 
460 
461 
462 


463 


464 
465 


466 
467 
468 
469 
470 
471 


472 


Aum 
nama 
Aum Bhagine nama 

Aum Bhagakaraya nama 


Swasthibhavaya 


Aum Laghave nama 
Aum Uthsangaya nama 
Aum Mahaangaya nama 
Aum 
Mahagarbhaparaayanaya 
nama 
Aum 
nama 
Aum Suvarnaya nama 
Aum Sarva 
Dehinaamindriyaya nama 
Aum Maha Padaya nama 
Aum Maha Hasthata nama 
Aum Maha Kayaya nama 
Aum Maha Yasase nama 


Krishnavarnaya 


Aum Maha Moordhne 
nama 
Aum Maha Maathraya 
nama 


Aum Maha Nethraya nama 
Aum Nisalayaya nama 


Aum Mahanthakaya nama 
Aum Maha Karnaya nama 
Aum Mahoshtaaya nama 
Aum Maha Hanave nama 
Aum Maha Nasaya nama 
Aum Maha Khambhave 
nama 


Aum Maha Greevaya 


Who has a good place to stay in 


Who has a share in the fire sacrifice 
Who gives the shares to other devas 
in the fire sacrifice 

Who easily showers his grace 

Who is not attached 

Who is in the form of big linga 
Who carries in his belly the entire 
world during a deluge 


Who is black in colour 


Who is golden 

Who is the sensory organs of all 
animals 

Who has very big feet 

Who has very big hands 

Who has a very big body 

Who has very great fame 

Who has a very big head 


Who has a very big measure 


Who has very big eyes 

Who is the place where darkness 
hides 

Who is the god of death 

Who has very big ears 

Who has very big lips 

Who has very big jaws 

Who has a very big nose 

Who has a very big neck 


Who has a very big head 


473 
474 
475 
476 
477 
478 


479 
480 
481 
482 


483 


484 
485 
486 
487 
488 
489 
490 
49] 


492 
493 
494 
495 
496 
497 


498 
499 


nama 
Aum Smasanabhaaje nama 
Aum Maha Vaksase nama 
Aum Mahoraskaya nama 
Aum Antharathmane nama 
Aum Mrugalayaya nama 
Aum Lambanaya nama 


Aum Labhidoshtaya nama 
Aum Mahamayaya nama 
Aum Payonidhaye nama 
Aum Maha _ Danthaya 
nama 

Aum Maha Damshtraya 
nama 

Aum Mahe Jihwaya nama 
Aum Maha Mukhata nama 
Aum Maha Nakhaya nama 
Aum Maha Romaya nama 
Aum Maha Kesaya nama 
Aum Maha Jadaya nama 
Aum Prasannaya nama 
Aum Prasadaya nama 


Aum Prathyaya nama 
Aum Giri Sadhanaya nama 
Aum Snehanaya nama 
Aum Asnehanaya nama 
Aum Ajithaya nama 

Aum Mahamunaye nama 


Aum Vrukshakaraya nama 
Aum Vruksha _ kethave 
nama 


Who lives in the cremation ground 
Who has a very big chest 

Who has a very wide chest 

Who is the soul within 

Who keeps deer with him 

Who keeps _ several universes 
hanging on him like a fruit hangs on 
a tree 

Who has hanging lips during deluge 
Who has very great illusions 

Who is the ocean of milk 

Who has very big teeth 


Who has very big incisor teeth 


Who has a very big tongue 

Who has a very big mouth 

Who has very big nails 

Who has very long hair 

Who has long hair in his tuft 

Who has matted locks 

Who has pity towards his devotees 
Who is the personification of love 
and grace 

Who is wisdom itself 

Who uses Mount Meru as a bow 
Who is like a friend to his devotees 
Who is detached 

Who cannot be defeated 

Who is a very great sage, silent and 
devout 

Who is of the form of the tree of life 
Who has a flag of a tree 


500 
501 
502 
503 
504 


505 


506 
507 


508 


509 


510 


511 
a2 


513 
514 
515 
516 
517 
518 
519 
520 


521 
322 
523 
524 


Aum Analaya nama 

Aum Vayu Vahanaya nama 
Aum Gandaline nama 
Aum Meru Damne nama 
Aum Devadithipathaye 
nama 

Aum Atharva Seershaya 
nama 

Aum Samaasyaya nama 
Aum 
Riksaharamithekshanaya 
nama 

Aum Yaju Padabhujaya 
nama 

Aum Guhyaya nama 


Aum Prakasaya nama 


Aum Jangamaya nama 
Aum Amogharthaya nama 


Aum Prasadaya nama 
Aum Abhigamyaya nama 
Aum Sudarsanaya nama 
Aum Upakaraya nama 
Aum Priyaya nama 

Aum Sarvaya nama 

Aum Kanakaya nama 

Aum — Kanchancchavaye 
nama 

Aum Nabhaye nama 

Aum Nandikaraya nama 
Aum Bhavaya nama 

Aum Pushkara 
Sthapathaye nama 


Who never gets satisfied 
Who makes the wind blow 
Who lives on the hilly terrain 
Who lives on Mount Meru 
Who is the lord of the Devas 


Who has Atharva Veda as his head 


Who has Sama Veda as his face 
Who has thousands of Rig Veda 
mantras as eyes 


Who has Yajur Veda as hands and 
legs 

Who is the Upanishads with secret 
meanings 

Who is the Karma Kanda which 
shines 

Who travels everywhere 

Who is the god who always answers 
prayers 

Who is very kind-hearted 

Who can be attained easily 

Who has a very beneficial look 
Who helps 

Who is dear to everybody 

Who comes facing us 

Who is gold 

Who is golden 


Who is the support to the world 
Who grants happiness 

Who is of the form of attention 
Who created the lotus-like universe 


320 
526 


S27 
528 
529 
530 


531 
532 


333 


534 


535 


536 
J) 
538 


539 
540 
541 
542 
543 
544 


545 
546 


Aum Sthiraya nama 
Aum Dwadasaya nama 


Aum Thrasanaya nama 
Aum Adhyaya nama 
Aum Yagnaya nama 


Aum Yagna Samahithaya 
nama 

Aum Naktham nama 

Aum Kalaye nama 


Aum Kaalaya nama 


Aum Makaraya nama 


Aum Kala 
nama 

Aum Saganaya nama 

Aum Ganakaraya nama 
Aum Bhootha 
Vahanasarathaye nama 
Aum Basmachayaya nama 


Poojithaya 


Aum Basma Gopthre nama 


Aum 
nama 
Aum Tharave nama 
Aum Ganaya nama 
Aum Loka Palaya nama 
Aum Alokaya nama 
Aum Mahathmane nama 


Basmabhoothaya 


Who is as stable as a mountain 

Who is the twelfth stage called 
salvation 

Who makes us afraid 

Who came even before the world 
Who is the sacrifice which unites 
the Soul and God 

Who can be attained by conducting 
sacrifices 

Who is night 

Who is the kama and krodha which 
lead to great passion 

Who creates the life of birth and 
death over time 

Who resides in the Shimsumara 
chakra which is shaped like a 
crocodile 

Who is being worshipped by Kala, 
the god of death 

Who is with various Ganas 

Who made Asuras his servants 
Whose charioteer is Brahma who 
leads the Ganas 

Who exists in vibhoothi, the sacred 
ash 

Who protects the world using sacred 
ash 

Who himself is the form of sacred 
ash 

Who is of the form of a tree 

Who is of the form of the Ganas 
Who is the protector of the world 
Who is beyond the worlds 

Who is the great soul which is 
everywhere 


547 


548 
549 


550 
551 
2 


553 


554 
355 


556 
557 


558 
309 


560 


561 
562 
563 
564 
565 
566 
567 


568 
569 


570 
571 


Aum Sarva 
nama 

Aum Shuklaya nama 
Aum Trishuklaya nama 


Poojithaya 


Aum Sampannaya nama 
Aum Suchaye nama 

Aum Bhootha 
Nishevithaya nama 

Aum Ashramasthaya nama 


Aum Kriya Vasthaya nama 
Aum Viswa 
Karmamathaye nama 

Aum Varaaya nama 

Aum Vishala — shakaya 
nama 

Aum Thamroshtaya nama 
Aum Ambhujalaya nama 


Aum Sunischalaya nama 


Aum Kapilaya nama 
Aum Kapichaya nama 
Aum Shuklaya nama 
Aum Ayushe nama 

Aum Parya nama 

Aum Aparaya nama 
Aum Gandharwaya nama 


Aum Adithaye nama 
Aum Tharkshyaya nama 


Aum Suvigneyaya nama 
Aum Susaradaya nama 


Who is 
everybody 
Who is white in colour 

Who has a white mind, words and 
body 

Who is filled up everywhere 

Who is very clean 

Who is_ being worshipped by 
teachers of yore 

Who is the god of the four different 
asramas 

Who is in rituals like yoga 

Who understands all actions of the 
world 

Who is liked by everybody 

Who has long hands/Who has wide 
branches 

Who has red lips 

Who is in the sea in the form of 
water 

Who has a form which is totally 
stable 

Who is reddish-blue fire 

Who is golden 

Who is white and wears white ash 
Who is the soul 

Who is earlier than the earliest 

Who is behind everyone 

Who is of the form of celestial 
beings called Gandharvas 

Who is the goddess called Aditi 
Who is of the form of Garuda 
among birds 

Who can be easily attained 

Who has sweet speech 


being worshipped by 


572 


573 
574 
575 
576 


S17 
578 
579 
580 
581 
582 


583 


584 
585 


586 
587 
588 
589 
590 
591 
392 


593 


594 


595 


Aum 
nama 
Aum Devya nama 

Aum Anukarine nama 
Aum Subandhavaya nama 


Parasvayudhaya 


Aum Thumbhaveenaya 
nama 
Aum Maha_ Krodhaya 
nama 


Aum Urdhwarethase nama 
Aum Jalesayaya nama 
Aum Ugraya nama 


Aum Vasankaraya nama 
Aum Vamsaya nama 

Aum Vamsa  Nadhaya 
nama 

Aum Anindhidhaya nama 
Aum Sarvanga Roopaya 
nama 

Aum Mayavine nama 

Aum Suhrudhaya nama 
Aum Anilaya nama 

Aum Analaya nama 

Aum Bandhanaya nama 
Aum Bandhakarthre nama 
Aum Subandhana 
Vimochanaya nama 

Aum Sayagnaraye nama 


Aum Sakamaraye nama 


Aum Maha Damshtraya 


Who holds an axe as a weapon 


Who has a wish to win 

Who obeys the wishes of devotees 
Who is a good relation 

Who has a lyre made out of two 
bottle gourds, the rudra veena 

Who is very angry at the time of 
destruction 

Who has the greatest gods like 
Brahma and Vishnu as subjects 

Who sleeps on water in the form of 
Vishnu 

Who swallows everything at the 
time of a deluge 

Who makes everything as his 

Who is the flute 

Who is the sweet music of the flute 


Who is blameless 
Who has pretty body parts 


Who creates the world by illusion 
Who has a good heart 

Who is of the form of wind 

Who is of the form of fire 

Who is the chord binding life 

Who ties us to day-to-day life 

Who releases us from the ties of life 
Who is with Asuras who are 
enemies of yagna 

Who is with yogis who have 
conquered passion 

Who has long incisors 


596 
597 


598 
599 
600 
601 
602 
603 
604 
605 
606 
607 
608 
609 


610 


611 
612 


613 


614 


615 
616 


617 


618 
619 
620 
621 


nama 
Aum Mahayudhaya nama 
Aum Bahudha Nindithaya 
nama 

Aum Sarvaya nama 

Aum Sankaraya nama 
Aum Sankaraya nama 
Aum Adanaya nama 

Aum Amaresaya nama 
Aum Maha Devaya nama 
Aum Viswa Devaya nama 
Aum Surarigne nama 

Aum Ahirbudhnyaya nama 
Aum Anilabhaya nama 
Aum Chekithanaya nama 
Aum Havishe nama 


Aum Ajaikapadhe nama 


Aum Kapaline nama 
Aum Trisankave nama 


Aum Ajithaya nam 
Aum Shivaya nama 


Aum Danvantharye nama 
Aum Dhooma_ Kethave 
nama 

Aum Skandaya nama 


Aum Vaisravanaya nama 
Aum Dhathre nama 
Aum Chakraya nama 
Aum Vishnave nama 


Who has great weapons 

Who has been insulted in several 
ways 

Who troubles people who insult him 
Who grants pleasure 

Who destroys doubts 

Who does not have wealth 

Who is the god of the Devas 

Who is the greatest God 

Who is the God of the universe 
Who kills enemies of the Devas 
Who is of the form of Adhisesha 
Who is like the wind 

Who knows everything fully well 
Who is the cooked rice offered to 
God 

Who is the one among the eleven 
Rudras 

Who is the lord of the universe 

Who is the axis for the three 
qualities of sattva, rajas and tamas 
Who cannot be won by the three 
qualities 
Who is 
condition 
Who is the doctor for all diseases 
Who is in the form of a comet 


the purest under any 


Who is of the form of Lord 
Subrahmanya 

Who is in the form of Kubera 

Who is in the form of Lord Brahma 
Who is in the form of Devendra 
Who is in the form of Lord Vishnu 


622 
623 


624 
625 


626 


627 


628 
629 
630 
631 
632 
633 
634 


635 
636 


637 


638 


639 


640 


641 


642 
643 


Aum Mithraya nama 
Aum Thwashtre nama 


Aum Druvaya nama 
Aum Dharaya nama 


Aum Prabhavaya nama 


Aum Sarva kayaVayave 
nama 


Aum Aryamne nama 


Aum Savithre nama 

Aum Ravaye nama 

Aum Ushangave nama 
Aum Vidhathre nama 

Aum Mandhatre nama 
Aum Bhootha Bhavanaya 
nama 

Aum Vibhave nama 

Aum Varna _ Vibhavine 
nama 

Aum Sarva kamaGunaa 
Ahaaya nama 

Aum Padma  Nabhaya 
nama 

Aum Maha _ Garbhaya 
nama 

Aum Chandra Vakthraya 
nama 

Aum Anilaya nama 


Aum Analaya nama 
Aum Bala Vathe nama 


Who is in the form of the sun god 
Who is in the of Viswakarma, the 
architect 

Who is in the form of the Druva star 
Who is in the form of Vasu called 
Dara 

Who is in the form of Vasu called 
Prabhava 

Who is in the form of air within all 
beings/Who is in the form of wind 
which is everywhere 

Who is in the form Aaryama who is 
a god of manes 

Who creates everything 

Who is in the form of the sun god 
Who possesses scorching rays 

Who is the one who orders 

Who looks after the soul called ‘me’ 
Who looks after all that is created 


Who is the lord of the three worlds 
Who divided colours into four/ Who 
has many-coloured splendour 

Who creates qualities liked by all 


Who keeps the lotus in his belly- 
button/Who is of the form of Vishnu 
Who carries all in his belly at the 
time of deluge 

Who has a face resembling the 
moon 

Who does not have anybody who 
can command him 

Who has limitless power 

Who has very great strength 


644 


645 
646 


647 
648 
649 
650 
651 
652 
653 
654 
655 
656 
657 
658 
659 
660 
661 
662 


663 
664 


665 


Aum Upa Santhaya nama 


Aum Puranaya nama 
Aum Punyasanchave nama 


Aum Ye nama 


Aum Kuru Karthre nama 
Aum Kuru Vasine nama 


Aum Kuru Bhoothaya 
nama 
Aum Gunoushadhaya 
nama 


Aum Sarvasayaya nama 
Aum Darbhacharine nama 


Aum Sarveshaam 
Praninaampathaye nama 
Aum Devadevaya nama 
Aum Sukhaskthaya nama 
Aum Sathe nama 

Aum Asathe nama 


Aum Srava Rathnavidhe 
nama 


Aum Kailsa  Girivasine 
nama 
Aum Himavad 


Giriamsrayaya nama 
Aum Koola Haarine nama 


Aum Koola Karthre nama 
Aum Bahu Vidhyaya nama 


Aum Bahu Pradhaya nama 


Who controls his power and does 
not show it 

Who is very ancient 

Who can be known only through 
good acts 

Who is of the form of Goddess 
Lakshmi 

Who created Kurukshethra 

Who lives in Kurukshethra 

Who is the Karma _ sthana and 
Upasana sthana at Kurukshethra 
Who encourages good conduct and 
helps it grow 

Who is the place where everything 
resides 

Who receives Havirbhagas kept on 
Darbha grass 

Who is the lord of all living things 


Who is the God of all gods 

Who is not interested in pleasures 
Who is the God of all beings 

Who is the God who is the truth 
Who has all precious stones with 
him 

Who lives on the Kailasa mountain 


Who possesses _ the 
mountains 

Who breaks the shore in the form of 
the tide 

Who has made the shores of tanks 


Himalaya 


Who knows several aspects of 
knowledge 
Who gives in plenty 


666 
667 
668 
669 
670 
671 
672 
673 
674 
675 
676 


677 


678 


679 


680 
681 


682 
683 
684 
685 
686 
687 


688 


Aum Vanijaya nama 
Aum Varthakine nama 
Aum Vrukshayta nama 
Aum Vakulaa nama 


Aum Chandaaya nama 


Aum Chchadhaya nama 
Aum Sara Greevaya nama 
Aum Maha Jathrave nama 
Aum Aloalaya nama 


Aum Mahoushadhaya 
nama 

Aum Sidhartha Karine 
nama 

Aum Sidhartha 
Chandovyakanotharaya 
nama 

Aum Simha Nadaya nama 


Aum Simha Damshtraya 
nama 


Aum Simhakaya nama 
Aum Simha Vahanya nama 
Aum Prabhavathmane 
nama 

Aum — Jagatkalasthaalaya 
nama 


Aum Loka Hithaya nama 
Aum Tharave nama 

Aum Sarangaya nama 
Aum Nava Chakrangaya 
nama 

Aum Kethumaline nama 


Who took the form of a merchant 
Who is in the form of a carpenter 
Who is in the form of a tree 

Who is in the form of the tree 
yielding bakula flowers 

Who is in the form of a sandalwood 
tree 

Who is in the form of pala tree 

Who has a very firm neck 

Who has firm neckbones 

Who does not have any desires 

Who is the greatest medicine in the 
form of food 

Who does good to Siddhas 


Who is the occult power which 
answers grammar, meter and so on 


Who has a royal voice like that of a 
lion 
Who has teeth like a lion 


Who has a gait like a lion 

Who rides on a lion, which is the 
vehicle of his consort 

Who has the fame that he is the truth 
of all truths 

Who has the god of death as his food 
plate 

Who does good to the world 

Who makes us cross the ocean of life 
Who has perfect organs 

Who has the Sri chakra with nine 
parts as his body 

Who shines in his flag/Who is of the 


689 
690 


691 


692 


693 


694 


695 


696 
697 


698 
699 
700 
701 
702 
703 
704 
705 


706 
707 


708 
709 


Aum Sabhavanaya nama 
Aum Bhothalayaya nama 


Aum Bhoothapathaye 
nama 


Aum Ahorathraya nama 


Aum Anindhithaya nama 


Aum Sarva 
Bhoothaanamvaahithre 
nama 


Aum Nilayaa nama 


Aum Vibhave nama 
Aum Bhavaya nama 


Aum Amoghaya nama 


Aum Samyathaya nama 
Aum Aswaya nama 

Aum Bhojanaya nama 
Aum Pranadharanaya 
nama 

Aum Druthimathe nama 


Aum Mathimathe nama 
Aum Dakshaya nama 


Aum Sathkruthya nama 
Aum Yugadhipaya nama 


Aum Gopalaye nama 
Aum Gopathaye nama 


form of birds with a crown 

Who protects societies 

Who has’ the’ temple = in 
Panchabhoothas 

Who is the God of all beings 


Who is there throughout night and 
day 

Who is without any stain 

Who makes all animals exist/work 


Who is the resting place of all 
beings 

Who does not have birth 

Who is the reason for the creation of 
all beings 

Who does not’ waste his 
connection/thought/Who is in plenty 
Who is bound by his devotees 

Who us in the form of a horse 

Who provides food for everybody 
Who saves lives 


Who is of the form of a stable- 
minded being 

Who is of the form of an intelligent 
being 

Who is very capable 

Who is worshipped by everyone 
Who is the king of conflicting 
emotions like hot /cold/Who is the 
chief in a yuga 

Who protects sense organs 

Who rules the earth 


710 
711 


TAZ 
143 


714 


715 
716 
Ad 
718 
719 
720 
WA 


722 
723 
724 
72) 
726 


q2t 
728 


729 
730 
131 
732 
133 


734 


Aum Gramaya nama 

Aum Gocharma Vasanaya 
nama 

Aum Haraye nama 

Aum  Hiranya  Bahave 
nama 

Aum Pravesinaam 
Guhapalaya nama 

Aum Prakrushtaraye nama 
Aum Maha Harshaya nama 
Aum Jitha Kamaaya nama 
Aum Jithendriyaya nama 
Aum Gandharaya nama 
Aum Suvasaya nama 

Aum Thapassakthaya 
nama 

Aum Rathaye nama 


Aum Naraya nama 

Aum Maha Geethaya nama 
Aum Maha _ Nruthyaya 
nama 

Aum Apsara 
Ganasevithaya nama 

Aum Maha Kethave nama 
Aum Maha _ Dhathave 
nama 

Aum Naika Sanucharaya 
nama 

Aum Chalaya nama 

Aum Avedaniyaya nama 
Aum Adesaya nama 

Aum Sarva Gandhasukha 
Vahaya nama 

Aum Thoranaya nama 


Who is the human society 
Who wears the hide of cows 


Who puts an end to sorrow 
Who has golden arms 


Who protects those who meditate on 
him 

Who completely wipes out enemies 
Who is greatly happy 

Who has won the god of love 

Who has won over his sense organs 
Who wears the earth 

Who has a great place to reside in 
Who is greatly drowned in penance 


Who is the personification of 
pleasure 

Who makes everything work 

Who likes very good music 

Who likes god dancing 


Who is served by the community of 
celestial dancers 
Who has flag with bull is there 
Who has Mount Meru which has lot 
of minerals 
Who travels on several mountain 
peaks 
Who cannot be caught 
Who can be known through a teacher 
Who is in the form of instructions 
Who takes pleasure of all good scents 


Who is the gate to salvation 


735 
736 
1d 
738 


139 


740 
741 
742 


743 


744 


745 
746 
747 


748 


749 
750 
751 
V2 
1953 
754 


755 
756 
Tad 
758 


159 


Aum Tharanaa nama 

Aum Vathaa nama 

Aum Paridhine nama 

Aum Pathikecharaya nama 


Aum Samyogaya 
Vardhanaya nama 

Aum Vrudhaya nama 

Aum Athivrudhaya nama 
Aum Gunadikaya nama 
Aum Nithya Mathma 
Sahayaya nama 

Aum Devasura_ Pathaye 
nama 

Aum Pathye nama 

Aum Yukthaya nama 

Aum Yuktha Bahave nama 


Aum _ Divi 
Devaya nama 
Aum Ashadaya nama 

Aum Sushadaya nama 
Aum Druvaya nama 

Aum Harinaya nama 

Aum Haraaya nama 

Aum  Aavarthamanebhyo 
Vapushe nama 

Aum Vasu Sreshtaya nama 
Aum Mahapadhaya nama 
Aum Siroharine Vimarsaya 
nama 


Suparvana 


Aum Sarva Lakshana 
Lakshithaya nama 
Aum  Akshaya_ Radha 


Who makes us cross the ocean of life 
Who is in the form of gases 

Who protects us like a fort 

Who is in the form of the king of 
birds, Garuda 

Who is the process of reproduction 


Who is an old man 

Who is older than the oldest 

Who is great because of his good 
conduct 

Who is forever helping mortal souls 


Who is the lord of the Asuras and 
Devas 

Who is the leader 

Who is merged with every being 
Who has hands which does proper 
work 

Who is God to even Indra who is in 
heaven 

Who can tolerate everything 

Who can easily forgive 

Who is stable 

Who is white 

Who destroys sorrow 

Who gives bodies to those who take 
birth several times 

Who is better than all things 

Who is the best path 

Who is the critic who cut off 
Brahma’s head 

Who is the treasurehouse of all good 
qualities 

Who is like the axis of a chariot 


760 
761 
762 
763 
764 


765 
766 
767 
768 
769 


770 


771 


wi2 


4dS 


774 
775 


776 
regi 


778 
779 
780 
781 
782 
783 
784 
785 


Yogine nama 
Aum Sarva Yogine nama 
Aum Maha Balaya nama 


Who is merged with everything 
Who has immense strength 


Aum Samanmayaya nama Whois of the form of the Vedas 


Aum Asamamnaya nama 
Aum Theertha Devaya 
nama 

Aum Maharadhya nama 
Aum Nirjeevaaya nama 
Aum Jeevanaya nama 
Aum Manthraya nama 
Aum Shubakshaya nama 


Aum Bahu 
nama 

Aum Rathna Prabhoothaya 
nama 

Aum Rathangaya nama (or 
Aum Rakthangaya nama) 
Aum Maharnava 
Nipanavidhe nama 

Aum Moolaya nama 

Aum Vishalaya nama 


Karkasaya 


Aum Amruthaya nama 
Aum — Vyakthavyakthaya 
nama 

Aum Thaponidhaye nama 
Aum Aarohanaya nama 
Aum Athirohaya nama 
Aum Sheeladarine nama 
Aum Maha Yasase nama 
Aum Sena Kalpaya nama 
Aum Maha Kalpaya nama 
Aum Yogaya nama 


Who is beyond the Vedas 
Who is the holy god 


Who has a very big chariot 


Who is even in lifeless objects 

Who is the soul 

Who is the sacred chants 

Who has the vision that leads to 
salvation 

Who is very strict in real life 


Who has a very large quantity of 
gems 
Who has organs shining like gems 


Who drinks the oceans at time of a 
deluge 

Who is like root of the world 
Who is all roads and 
everywhere 

Who is like nectar 

Who is clear to devotees and 
invisible to others 

Who is a very great sage 

Who makes devotees climb 

Who is in the top level 

Who protects good conduct 

Who has very great fame 

Who creates armies by just thought 
Who has the great ornaments 

Who is of the form of yoga 


spread 


786 
787 
788 
789 


790 


791 
192 


793 
794 
795 
796 
WD 
798 


729. 


800 
801 
802 
803 


804 


805 
806 
807 


808 
809 
810 
811 
812 


Aum Yuga Karaya nama 
Aum Haraye nama 

Aum Yuga Roopaya nama 
Aum Maha Roopaya nama 


Aum Maha Naagahanaya 
nama 

Aum Avadhaa nama 

Aum Nyaya Nirvapanaaya 
nama 

Aum Paadaya nama 

Aum Pandithaya nama 
Aum Achalopamaya nama 
Aum Bahu Maalaya nama 
Aum Mahaamaalaya nama 
Aum Sasine 
Harasulochanaya nama 
Aum Visthara 
Lavanakoopaya nama 
Aum Triyugaya nama 
Aum Saphalodayaya nama 
Aum Trilochanaya nama 
Aum Vishannangaya nama 


Aum Mani 
nama 

Aum Jada Dharaya nama 
Aum Bindhave nama 
Aum Visarggaya nama 


Viddhhaya 


Aum Sumukhaya nama 
Aum Saraya nama 

Aum Sarvayudhaya nama 
Aum Sahaya nama 

Aum Nivedanaya nama 


Who is the one who creates yugas 
Who is of the form of Lord Vishnu 
Who is the form of yugas 

Who is beyond limits and has a big 
shape 

Who killed Gajasura who had 
immense form 

Who is of the form of death 

Who gave the Nyaa sasthra to the 
world 

Who is the final destination 

Who is the very wise one 

Who is very stable like a mountain 
Who has variety of playful acts 
Who wears very many garlands 
Who has eyes much prettier than the 
moon 

Who is like a very broad saltish well 


Who is in the three yugas 

Who comes out for the good 

Who has three eyes 

Who has organs which are the eight 
moorthies like earth 

Who wears ear-studs 


Who has matted locks 

Who is of the form of a dot 

Who is like a Visarga in the form of 
Ardha Nareeswara 

Who has a pleasant face 

Who is of the form of a bow 

Who wears all weapons 

Who has great patience 

Who informs about everything 


813 
814 


815 
816 


817 


818 


819 
820 


821 


822 
823 


824 
825 


826 
827 


828 


829 
830 
831 
832 
833 
834 
835 
836 


Aum Sukha Jadaya nama 
Aum Sugandharaya nama 


Aum Maha Danushe nama 
Aum Gandhapaline 
Bhagawathe nama 


Aum Sarva 
Karmanamukthaya nama 
Aum Mandhanaya 


Bahulayavayave nama 
Aum Sakalaya nama 

Aum Sarva Lochanaaya 
nama 

Aum Thalasthalaya nama 


Aum KaraSthaline nama 
Aum Urdhwa 
Samhananaya nama 

Aum Mahathe nama 

Aum Chchathraya nama 


Aum Succhathraa nama 


Aum Vikhyathaya 
Lokaaya nama 
Aum Sarvaasrayaya 


Kramaya nama 

Aum Mundaya nama 
Aum Viroopaya nama 
Aum Vikruthaya nama 
Aum Dandine nama 
Aum Kundine nama 
Aum Vikurvanaya nama 
Aum Haryakshaya nama 
Aum Kakhubhaya nama 


Who is of the enjoyable form 


Who is like a good horse of 
Gandhara 

Who has a very great bow 

Who saves the memories of 


previous births at the time of a 
deluge 

Who makes all jobs rise up again 
after a deluge 

Who is the wind which churns life at 
the time of a deluge 

Who is everywhere 

Who sees everything 


Who is of the form of a clapping 
hand 

Who has his own hand as a vessel 
Who has very great strength 


Who is great 

Who reduces discomfort like an 
umbrella 

Who has a very pretty umbrella 
Who is being seen from everywhere 


Who has discipline in everything 


Who has a shaved head 

Who has very bad looks 

Who has various forms 

Who has a stick in his hand 

Who has a water jug in his hand 
Who cannot be attained by rituals 
Who is of the form of a lion 

Who is of the form of directions 


837 
838 
839 
840 


841 


842 
843 


844 
845 
846 


847 
848 


849 
850 


851 
852 
853 
854 
855 
856 
857 
858 


859 
860 


Aum Vajrine nama 

Aum Satha Jihwaya nama 
Aum Sahasrapathe nama 
Aum Sahasra Moorthne 
nama 

Aum Devendraya 
Sarvadeva Mayaya nama 
Aum Gurave nama 
Aum — Sahasra 
nama 

Aum Saranyaya nama 
Aum Sarvangaya nama 
Aum Sarva Lokakruthe 
nama 

Aum Pavithraya nama 
Aum Trikakudhe Mantraya 
nama 

Aum Kanishtaya nama 
Aum Krishna Pingalaya 
nama 

Aum Brahma Dandavinir 
Mathre nama 


Bahave 


Aum Sathagni 
Pasashakthimathe nama 
Aum Padma _ Garbhaya 
nama 

Aum Maha Garbhaya 
nama 

Aum Brahma _ Garbhaya 


nama 
Aum Jalodhbhavaya nama 
Aum Gabasthaye nama 
Aum Brhama Kruthe nama 
Aum Brahmine nama 
Aum Brhama Vidhe nama 


Who is of the form of Devendra 
Who has hundreds of tongues 
Who has millions of legs 

Who has thousands of heads 


Who is of the form of Devendra and 
also all other devas 

Who is the teacher 

Who has thousands of hands 


Who can take care of others 
Who has everything 
Who creates all the worlds 


Who makes others holy 

Who is the mantra with three parts, 
Bheejam, Shakthi and Keelagam 
Who is younger 

Who is blackish-red in colour 


Who punishes Lord Brahma 


Who has a weapon called Sathagni, 
pasa, Shakthi 

Who is of the form of Brahma who 
was born in a lotus 

Who keeps everything within himself 


Who keeps the Vedas within himself 


Who rose from the water of deluge 
Who has rays of light 

Who composed the Vedas 

Who recites the Vedas 

Who is an expert in the Vedas 


861 


862 
863 


864 
865 


866 
867 
868 
869 
870 
871 
872 
873 
874 
875 
876 
877 
878 
879 


880 
881 


882 


Aum Brahmanaya nama 


Aum Gathaye nama 

Aum Anantha Roopaya 
nama 

Aum Naikathmane nama 


Aum Swayabhuva 
Sthigmathejase nama 

Aum Urdhwagathmane 
nama 


Aum Pasupathaye nama 
Aum Vatharamhaya nama 
Aum Manojavaya nama 
Aum Chandanine nama 
Aum Padmanalagraya 
nama 

Aum Surabhyutharanaya 
nama 

Aum Naraya nama 


Aum Karnikara 
Mahasthravigne nama 
Aum Neelamoulaye nama 


Aum Pinaka Druthe nama 
Aum Umapathaye nama 
Aum Uma Kanthaya nama 


Aum Jahnavi Druthe nama 


Aum Umadhavaya nama 
Aum  Varaya_ Varahaya 
nama 

Aum Varadaya nama 


Who in the form of a Brahmana 
teaches the Vedas 

Who is the place of refuge 

Who has several forms 


Who does not have a body 

Who has the power which could not 
be tolerated by Brahma 

Who has a form beyond the universe 


Who is the God of all beings 

Who has the speed of wind 

Who has the speed of mind 

Who is being bathed in sandal paste 
Who was before Brahma was born in 
a lotus 

Who down-graded Kama Dhenu for 
his false testimony 

Who does not take anything out of 
desire 

Who wears garlands made of golden 
flowers 

Who wears a crown embedded with 
a blue stone 

Who carries the bow called Pinaka 
Who is the consort of Goddess Uma 
Who has been married by Uma out 
of love 

Who wears the Ganga river on his 
crown 

Who is the husband of Goddess Uma 
Who took the form of Varaha 


Who shows mercy to the world in 
several forms 


883 
884 


885 
886 
887 
888 
889 
890 
891 


892 
893 


894 
895 


896 


897 


898 


899 


900 
901 


902 
903 


904 


Aum Varenyaya nama 
Aum Sumahaswanaya 
nama 

Aum Mahaprasadaya nama 
Aum Damanaya nama 
Aum Shatrugne nama 
Aum — Shwethapingalaya 
nama 

Aum Peethathmane nama 
Aum Paramatmane nama 


Aum Prayathathmane 
nama 

Aum Pradhna Druthe nama 
Aum Sarva 


Parswamukhaya nama 
Aum Trayakshaya nama 


Aum Dharma 
Sadharnovaraya nama 
Aum Chacharathmane 
nama 

Aum Sikshmathmane 
nama 

Aum Amruthaya 


Govrusheswaraya nama 
Aum Sadyarshaye nama 


Aum Vasuradithyaya nama 
Aum Vivaswathe 
Savithamruthaya nama 
Aum Vyasaya nama 

Aum Sargaya 
Susamkshepayavistharaya 
nama 


Aum Paryayonaraya nama 


Who can be asked for a boon 
Who has a very musical voice 


Who is greatly pleased 

Who controls bad people 

Who kills his enemies 

Who is white on one side and red on 
the other 

Who is golden 

Who is the soul which is everywhere 
Who has the purest mind 


Who wears nature 
Who has faces on all sides 


Who has three eyes 

Who is the proper compensation for 
good deeds 

Who is the soul of moving and non- 
moving beings 

Who has a form which is beyond the 
intellect 

Who is the god of perennial dharma 
which is the lord of the earth 

Who gives knowledge to Sadhyas 
who are devas for devas 

Who is a Vasu, the son of Aditi 

Who is the moon who drenches the 
world by his nectar-like rays 

Who is the form of Veda Vyasa 

Who is the author of Suthras which 
is abbreviated knowledge and also 
the Puranas which are knowledge in 
detail 

Who is the soul of Virat Purusha 


905 
906 
907 
908 
909 


910 


911 


912 


913 


914 


915 
916 


O17 


918 
919 


920 
921 


922 
923 
924 
25 
926 
O77 


Aum Ruthave nama 

Aum Samvathsaraya nama 
Aum Masaya nama 

Aum Pakshaya nama 

Aum Samkhya 
Samapanaya nama 

Aum Kalabhyo nama 


Aum Kashtaabhyo nama 
Aum Lavebhyo nama 
Aum Maathraabhyo nama 


Aum Muhurthaha 
Kshapebhyo nama 

Aum Kshanebhyo nama 
Aum Viswa_ Kshethraya 
nama 

Aum  Prajaa 
nama 

Aum Lingaya nama 

Aum Aadhyaya Nirgamaya 
nama 

Aum Sathe nama 

Aum Asathe nama 


Bheejaya 


Aum Vyakthaya nama 
Aum Avyakthaya nama 
Aum Pithre nama 

Aum Mathre nama 

Aum Pithamahaya nama 
Aum Swarga Dwaraya 
nama 


which is spread everywhere 

Who is the season 

Who is the year 

Who is the month 

Who is the lunar fortnight 

Who is the days of completion of 
seasons and lunar fortnights 

Who is the shorter part of the day 
called Kala 

Who is the Kashtaas which are 
small measurement of time 

Who is Lavas, which are small sub- 
division of time 

Who is Mathras, 
measurement of small time 
Who is the period of the holy time 
in a day 

Who is seconds 

Who is the area from which the 
universe grew 

Who is the seeds of citizens 


another 


Who is the principle called ‘Mahat’ 
Who is the first germinating seed of 
the world 

Who is the truth 

Who is the truth hiding behind 
apparitions 

Who is clarity to those who know 
Who cannot be described clearly 
Who is the father 

Who is the mother 

Who is the father of a father 

Who is the gateway to heaven 


928 
929 


930 
931 
032 


933 
934 


935 


936 


937 


938 
939 


940 


941 


942 


943 


944 
945 


946 


947 


948 


Aum Praja Dwaraya nama 
Aum Moksha Dwaraya 
nama 

Aum Trivishtapaya nama 
Aum Nirvanaya nama 
Aum Hladhanaya nama 


Aum Brahmalokaya nama 


Aum Parayai Gathyai 
nama 
Aum Devasura 


Vinirmathre nama 
Aum Devasura Parayanaya 
nama 


Aum Devasura Gurave 
nama 

Aum Devaya nama 

Aum Devasura 


Namaskruthaya nama 

Aum Devasura 
Mahamathraya nama 

Aum Devasura 
Ganasrayaya nama 

Aum Devasura 
Ganadhyakshaya nama 
Aum Devasura Agraganyai 
nama 

Aum Devathidevaya nama 
Aum Devarshaye nama 


Aum Devasura 
Varapradhaya nama 

Aum Devasureswaraya 
nama 


Aum Viswaya nama 


Who is the gateway to more people 
Who is the gateway to salvation 


Who is heaven 

Who is detachment 

Who is the one who creates 
happiness 

Who is the world of Brahma 

Who is the best way to salvation 


Who is the one who created Asuras 
and Devas 

Who is the support for Devas and 
Asuras 

Who is the teacher for Devas and 
Asuras 

Who is the propeller of life 

Who is being saluted by Devas and 
Asuras 

Who is the best among Devas and 
Asuras 

Who is the one being depended on 
by Devas and Asuras 

Who is the chief of Devas and 
Asuras 

Who is the first among Devas and 
Asuras 

Who is the god of Devas 

Who is of the sage form of Devas 
like Narada 

Who is the giver of boons to Devas 
and Asuras 

Who is the ruler of Devas and 
Asuras 

Who is the universe 


949 


950 


951 


952 
953 


954 
955 


956 


957 
958 


959 
960 
961 


962 


963 
964 
965 
966 


967 
968 
969 


970 
971 
972 


Aum Devasura 
Maheswaraya nama 

Aum Sarva Devamayaya 
nama 

Aum Achinthyaya nama 


Aum Devadathmane nama 
Aum Athma Sambhavaya 
nama 

Aum Uthbhidade nama 
Aum Trivikramaya nama 


Aum Vaidyaya nama 


Aum Virajaya nama 
Aum Neerajaaya nama 


Aum Amaraya nama 
Aum Eedyaya nama 
Aum Hastheswaraya nama 


Aum Vyagraya nama 


Aum Deva Simhaya nama 
Aum Nararshabhaya nama 
Aum Vibhudhaa nama 
Aum Agravaraya nama 


Aum Sookshmaya nama 
Aum Sarva Devaya nama 
Aum Thapo Mayaya nama 


Aum Suyukthaya nama 
Aum Shobhanaya nama 
Aum Vajrine nama 


Who is the ruler of rulers of Devas 
and Asuras 

Who is the personification of all 
Devas as one 

Who cannot be reached by a thought 
process 

Who is the soul of Devas 

Who created himself 


Who appears breaking ignorance 
Who has spread in all the three 
worlds 

Who is full of knowledge/Who is 
the doctor 

Who is crystal clear 

Who does not’ have _ royal 
qualities/Who is born out of water 
Who does not die 

Who is suitable to be praised 

Who resides in Kala hasthi/Who is 
the form of air 

Who is’ the god _— called 
Vyagreswara/Who is the tiger 

Who is a lion among devas 

Who is the chief among men 

Who has specialised knowledge 
Who is the first among those given 
Havirbhaga in sacrifices 

Who has the minutest knowledge 
Who is all gods rolled in to one 
Who is the personification of 
penance 

Who is very careful 

Who is the good augury 

Who is as hard as a diamond 


973 


974 


O15 
976 
OTF 
978 


O79 
980 
981 
982 
983 
984 
985 
986 


987 
988 


989 
990 
991 
992 
993 
994 
995 


996 


Aum Prasanaam 
Prabhavaya nama 
Aum Avyaya nama 


Aum Guhaya nama 

Aum Kanthaya nama 

Aum Nijaya Sargaya nama 
Aum Pavithraya nama 


Aum Sarva 
nama 

Aum Srungine nama 

Aum Srunga Priyaya nama 
Aum Babruve nama 


Bhavanaya 


Aum Rajarajaya nama 
Aum Niraayaa nama 
Aum Abhiramaya nama 
Aum Sura Ganaya nama 


Aum Viramayata nama 
Aum Sarva  Sadhanaya 
nama 

Aum Lalatakshaya nama 
Aum Viswa Devaya nama 
Aum Harinaya nama 

Aum Brahma Varchasaya 
nama 


Aum Sthavaraanaam 
Pathaye nama 
Aum Niyamendra 


Vardhanaya nama 
Aum Sidharthaya nama 


Aum Siddha Bhootharthata 


Who is affected by ornamental 
language 

Who can_ be __ attained iby 
singleminded devotion 

Who is in hiding 

Who is the upper limit of happiness 
Who is in truth evolved himself 
Who is holy/Who saves us from 
thunder 

Who makes everything holy 


Who is high above 

Who loves peaks of mountains 

Who is the one who carries the 
world 

Who is the king of kings 

Who is without any blemishes 

Who is pleasing to the mind 

Who is the form of the society of 
Devas 

Who is not connected with subjects 
Who joins all benefits 


Who has an eye on his forehead 
Who plays with the universe 

Who is golden/Who is like a deer 
Who is the splendid light of Brahma 


Who is the king of mountains 


Who controls all his senses through 
penance 

Who keeps 
ordinary thing 
Who is the benefit got by people 


salvation aS some 


997 


998 


999 


1000 
1001 


1002 
1003 


1004 
1005 


1006 
1007 
1008 


nama 
Aum Achinthyaya nama 


Aum 
nama 
Aum Suchaye nama 


Sathya  Vrathaya 


Aum Vrathadhipaya nama 
Aum Parasmai nama 


Aum Brahmane nama 
Aum Bhakthanaam 
Paramayaigathaye nama 
Aum Vimukthaya nama 
Aum Muktha  Thejase 
nama 

Aum Sree Mathe nama 
Aum Srivardhanaya nama 
Aum Jagathe nama 


who do penance 
Who cannot be 
meditation 

Who has made truth his unfailing 
credo 

Who is interested in cleanliness in 
nature 

Who protects fasting practices 

Who is Turiya which is beyond 
sleep 

Who is the ultimate truth 

Who is the ultimate destination of 
devotees 

Who is completely free of bonds 
Who is the light which is 
detached/Who does not have a body 
Who is richly intelligent 

Who gives wealth to his devotees 
Who is the universe itself 


reached by 


3. There are possibly four different and unique sets of Shiva Sahasranama 
stotras—two in the Mahabharata (later found repeated in many Puranas 
with minor variations), one unique set in the Shiva Purana and one unique 
set in the Rudrayamala Tantra. The version found in the Linga Purana is 
essentially from the Mahabharata. 


The version here is from the Shiva Purana. As with the Linga Purana 


version, in the Shiva Purana, Shiva is eulogised by Vishnu. 


Shiva Sahasranama Stotram 

Shiva Purana, Kotirudra Samhita 

(Book IV), Chapter 35, 1-133 

Suta said: 

May this be heard, O great sages, I shall now recount the hymn of a 


thousand names of Shiva, whereby Shiva was pleased. 


Vishnu said: 
Shiva; Hara; Mrida; Rudra; Pushkara; Pushpalochana; Arthigamya; 


Sadachara; Sharva; Shambhu; Maheshvara; Chandrapida; Chandramouli; 


Vishva; Vishvamareshvara; Vedantasara-sandoha; Kapali; Nilalohita; 
Dhyanadhara; Aparicchedya; Gouribharta; Ganeshvara; Ashtamurti; 
Vishvamurti; Trivargasvargasadhana; Jnanagamya; Dridaprajna; Devadeva; 
Trilochana; Vamadeva; Madadeva; Patu; Parivrida; Drida; Vishvarupa; 
Virupaksha; Vagisha; Shuchisattama; Sarvapramanasamvadi; Vrishanka; 
Vrishavahana; Isha; Pinaki; Khatvanga; Chitravesha; Chirantana; 
Tamohara; Mahayogi; Gopta; Brahma; Dhurjati; Kalakala; Krittivasah; 
Subhaga; Pranavatmaka; Unnadhra; Purusha; Jushya; Durvasa; 
Purashasana; Divyayudha; Skandaguru; Parameshthi; Paratpara; 
Anadimadhyanidhana; Girisha; Girijadhava; Kuberabandhu; Shrikanatha; 
Lokavarnottama; Mridu; Samadhivedya; Kodandi; Nilakantha; 
Parashvadhi;  Vishalaksha; Mrigavyadha; Suresha;  Suryatapana; 
Dharmadhama. Kshamakshetra; Bhagavana; Bhaganetrabhida; Ugra; 
Pashupati; Tarkshya; Priyabhakta; Parantapa; Data; Dayakara. 

Daksha; Karmandi; Kamashasana; Shmashananilaya; Suksha; 
Shmashanastha; Maheshvara; Lokakarta; Mrigapati; Mahakarta; 
Mahoushadhi; Uttara; Gopati; Gopta; Jnanagamya; Puratana; Niti; Suniti; 
Shuddhatma; Soma; Somarata; Sukhi; Sompapa; Amritapa; Soumya; 
Mahatejah; Mahadyuti; Tejomaya; Amritamaya; Annamaya; Suhapati; 
Ajatashatru; Aloka; Sambhavya; Havyavahana; Lokakara; Vedakara; 
Sutrakara; Sanatana; Maharshi; Kapilacharya; Vishvadipti; Vilochana; 
Pinakapani; Bhudeva; Svastida; Svastikrita; Sudhi; Dhatridhama; 
Dhamakara; Sarvaga; Sarvagochara; Brahmasrika; Vishvasrika; Sarga; 
Karnikara; Priya; Kavi; Shakha; Vishakha; Goshakha; Shiva; Bhishaka; 
Anuttama; Gangaplavodaka; Bhaya; Pushkala; Sthapati; Sthira; Vijitatma; 
Vishayatma; Bhutavahana; Sarathi; Sagana; Ganakaya;  Sukirti; 
Chinnasamshaya; Kamadeva; Kamapala; Bhasmoddhulita-vigraha; 
Bhasmapriya; Bhasmashyai; Kami; Kanta; Kritagama; Samavarta; 
Nivritatma; Dharmapunja; Sadashiva; Akalmasha; Chaturvahu; Durvasa; 
Durasada;  Durlabha; Durgama; Durga; Sarvayudhavisharada; 
Adhyatmayoganilaya; Sutantu; Tantuvardhana. 

Shubhanga; Lokasaranga; Jagadisha; Janardana; Bhasmashuddhikara; 
Meru; Ojasvi; Shuddhavigraha; Asadhya; Sadhusadhya; 
Bhrityamarkatarupadhrika; Hiranyareta; Pourana; Ripujivahara; Bala; 
Mahahrada; Mahagarta; Vyali; Siddhavrindaravandita; 
Vyaghracharmambara; Mahabhuta; Mahanidhi; Amritasha; Amritavapu; 
Panchajanya; Prabhanjana; Panchavimshatitattvastha; Parijata; Para-vara; 


Sulabha; Suvrata; Shura; Brahmavedanidhi; Nidhi; Varnashramaguru; 
Varni; Shatrujita; Shatrutapana; Ashrama; Kshapana; Kshama; Jnanavana; 
Achaleshvara;Pramanabhuta; Durjneya; Suparna; Vayuvahana; 
Dhanurdhara; Dhanurveda; Gunarashi; Gunakara; Satyasatyapara; Dina; 
Dharmaga; Ananda; Dharmasadhana; Anantadrishti; Danda; Damayita; 
Dama; Abhivadya; Mahamaya; Vishvakarma; Visharada; Vitaraga; 
Vinitatma; Tapasvi; Bhutabhavana; Unmattavesha; Pracchanna; Jitakama; 
Ajitapriya; Kalyanaprakriti; Kalpa; Sarvalokaprajapati; Tarasvi; Tavaka; 
Dhimana; Pradhanaprabhu; Avyaya; Lokapala; Antarhitatma; Kalpadi; 
Kamalekshana; Vedashastrarthatattvajna; Aniyama; Niyatashraya; Chandra; 
Surya; Shani; Ketu; Varanga; Vidrumacchavi; Bhaktivashya; Anagha; 
Parabrahm-amrigavanarpana; Adri; Adryalaya; Kanta; Paramatma. 

Jagadguru; Sarvakarmalaya; Tushta; Mangalya; Mangalavrita; 
Mahatapa; Dirghatapa; Sthavishtha; Sthavira; Dhruva; Aha; Samvatsara; 
Vyapti; Pramana; Parmatapa; Samvatsarakara; Mantra-pratyaya; 
Sarvadarshana; Aja; Sarveshvara; Siddha; Mahareta; Mahabala; Yogi; 
Yogya; Siddhi; Mahateja; Sarvadi; Agraha; Vasu; Vasumana; Satya; 
Sarvapaphara; Sukirti; Shobhana; Shrimana; Avanmanasagochara; 
Amritashashvata; Shanta; Vanahasta; Pratapavana; Kamandalundhara; 
Dhanvi; Vedanga; Vedavita; Muni; Bhrajishnu; Bhojana; Bhokta; 
Lokanantha; Duradhara; Atindriya; Mahamaya; Sarvavasa; Chatushpatha; 
Kalayogi; Mahanada; Mahotsaha; Mahabala; Mahabuddhi; Mahavirya; 
Bhutachari; Purandara; Nishachara; Pretachari; Mahashakti; Mahadyuti; 
Ahirdeshyavapu; Shrimana; Sarvacharyamanogati; Vahushruta; Niyatatma; 
Dhruva; Adhruva; Sarvashaska; Ojastejodyutidara; Nartaka; Nrityapriya; 
Nrityanitya; Prakashatma; Prakashaka; Spashtakshara; Budha; Mantra; 
Samana; Sarasamplava; Yugadikrida; Yugavarta; Gambhira; Vrishavahana; 
Ishta; Vishishta; Shishteshta; Shalabha; Sharabha; Dhanu; Tirtharupa; 
Tirthanama; Tirthadrishya; Stuta. 

Arthada; Apamnidhi; Adhishthana; Vijaya; Jayakalavita; Pratishthita; 
Pramanajna; Hiranyakavacha; Hari; Vimochana; Suragana; Vidyesha; 
Vindusamshraya; Balarupa; Vikarta; Balonmatta; Gahana; Guha; Karana; 
Karta; Sarvabandhavimochana; Vyavasaya; Vyavasthana; Sthanada; 
Jagadadija; Guruda; Lalita; Abheda; Bhavatmatmasamsthita; Vireshvara; 
Virabhadra; Virasanavidhi; Virata; Virachudamani; Vetta; Tivrananda; 
Nadidhara; Ajnadhara; Tridhuli; Shipivishta; Shivalaya; Balakhilya; 
Mahachapa; Tigmamshu; Badhira; Khaga; Adhirma;  Susharana; 


Subrahmanya; Sudhapati; Maghavana; Koushika; Gomana; Virama; 
Sarvasadhana; Lalataksha; Vishvadeha; Sara; Samsarachakrabhrita; 
Amoghadanda; Madhyastha; Hiranya; Brahmavarchasi; Paramartha; Para; 
Mayi; Shambara; Vyaghralochana; Ruchi; Virinchi; Svarbandhu; 
Vachaspati; Aharpati; Ravi; Virochana; Skanda; Shasta; Vaivasvata; Yama; 
Yukti; Unnatakirti; Sanuraga; Paranjaya; Kailashadhipati; Kanta; Savita; 
Ravilochana; Vidvattama; Vitabhaya; Vishvabharta; Anivarita; Nitya; 
Niyatakalyana; Punyashravanakirtana; Durashrava; Vishvasaha; Dhyeya; 
Duhsvapnanashana; Uttarana; Dushkritiha. 

Vijneya; Duhsaha; Bhava; Anadi ; Bhurbhuvakshi;  Kiriti; 
Ruchirangada; Janana; Janajanmadi; Pritimana; Nitimana; Dhava; Vasishta; 
Kashyapa; Bhanu; Bhima; Bhimaparakrama; Pranava; Satpatchachara; 
Mahakasha; Mahaghana; Janmadhipa; Mahadeva; Sakalagamaparaga; 
Tattva; Tattavit; Ekatma; Vibhu; Vishvavibhushana; Rishi; Brahmana; 
Aishvaryajanmamrityujaratiga; Panchayajnasamutpatti; Vishvesha; 
Vimalodaya; Atmayoni; Anadyanta; Vatsala; Bhaktalokadhrika; 
Gayatrivallabha; Pramshu; Vishvavasa; Prabhakara;; Shishu; Giriraha; 
Samrata; Sushena; Surashatruha; Amogha; Arishtanemi; Kumuda; 
Vigatajvara; Svayamyjyoti; Tanujyoti; Achanchala; Atmayjyoti; Pingala; 
Kapilashmashru; Bhalanetra; Trayitanu; Jnanaskandamahaniti; 
Vishvotipatti; Upaplava; Bhaga; Vivasvana; Aditya; Yogapara; Divaspati; 
Kalyanagunanama; Papaha; Punyadarshana; Udarakirti; Udyogi; Sadyogi; 
Sadasanmaya; Nakshatramali; Nakesha; Svadhishthanapadashraya; Pavitra; 
Paphari; Manipura; Nabhogati; Hrit; Pundarikasina; Shatru; Shranta; 
Vrishakapi; Ushna; Grihapati; Krishna; Paramartha; Anarthanashana; 
Adharmashatru; Ajneya;  Puruhuta; Purushruta; Brahmagarbha; 
Vrihadgarbha; Dharmadhenu; Dhanagama. 

Jagaddhitaishi; Sugata; Kumara; Kushalagama; Hiranyavarna; 
Jyotishmana; Nanbhutarata; Dhvani; Araga; Nayandyaksha; Vishvamitra; 
Dhaneshvara; Brahmajyoti; Vasudhama; Mahajyotianuttama; Matamaha; 
Matarishva; Nabhasvana; Nagaharadhrika; Pulastya; Pulaha; Agastya; 
Jatukarnya; Parashara; Niravarananirvara; Vairanchya; Vishtarashrava; 
Atmabhu; Aniruddha; Atri; Jnanamurti; Mahayasha; Lokaviragranti; Vira; 
Chanda; Satyaparakrama; Vyalakapa; Mahakalpa;  Kalpaviriksha; 
Kaladhara; Alankarishnu; Achala; Rochishnu; Vikramonnata; 
Ayuhshabdapati; Vegi; Plavana; Shikhisarathi; Asamsrishta; Atithi; 
Shatrupreamathi; Padapasana; Vasushrava; Pratapa; © Havyavaha; 


Vishvabhojana; Japaya;  Jaradishamana;  Lohitatma; Tanunapata; 
Brihadashva; Nabhoyoni; Supratika; Tamisraha; Nidagha; Tapana; Megha; 
Svaksha; Parapuranjaya; Sukhanila; Sunishpanna; Surabhi; Shishiratmaka; 
Vasanta; Madhava; Grishma; Nabhasya; Vijavahana; Angira; Guru; Atreya; 
Vimala; Vishvavahana; Pavana; Sumati; Vidvana; Travidya; Naravahana; 
Manobuddhi; Ahamkara; Kshetrajna; Kshetrapalaka; Jamadagni; Balanidhi; 
Vigala; Vishvagalava; Aghora; Anuttara; Yajna; Shreye. 

Nishshreyahpatha; Shaila; Gaganakundabha; Danavari; Arindama; 
Rajanijanaka; Charuvishalya; Lokakalpadhrika; Chaturveda; Chatrubhava; 
Chatura; Chaturapriya; Amlaya; Samamlaya;  Tirthavedashivalaya; 
Vahurupa; Maharupa; Sarvarupa; Charachara; Nyayanirmayaka; Nyayi; 
Nyayagamya; Nirantara; Sahasramurddha; Devendra; 
Sarvashastraprabhanjana; Munda; Virupa; Vikranta; Dandi; Danta; 
Gunottama; Pingalaksha; Janadhyaksha; Nilagriva; Niramaya; Sahasravahu; 
Sarvesha; Sharanya; Sarvalokadhrika; Padmasana; Paramjyoti; Parampara; 
Paramphala; Padmagarbha; Mahagarbha; Vishvagarbha; Vichakshana; 
Characharajna; Varada; Varesha; Mahabala; Devasuraguru; Deva; 
Devasuramahashraya; Devadideva; Devagni; Devagnisukhada; Prabhu; 
Devasureshvara; Divya; Devasuramaheshvara; Devadevamaya; Achintya; 
Devadevatmasambhava; Sadyoni; Asuravyaghra; Devasimha; Divakara; 
Vibudhagravara; Shreshtha; Sarvadevottamottama; Shivajnanarata; 
Shrimana; Shikhi-shriparvatapriya; Vajrahasta; Siddhakhadgi; 
Narasimhanipatana; Brahmachari; Lokachari; Dharmachari; Dhanadhipa; 
Nandi; Nandishvara; Ananta; Nagnavratadhara; Shuchi; Lingadhyaksha; 
Suradhyaksha; Yogadhyaksha; Yugavaha; Svadharma;  Svargata; 
Svargakhara; Svaramayasvana; Vanadhyaksha; Vijakarta; Dharmakrit; 
Dharmasambhava; Dambha. 


Alobha; Arthavit; Shambhu; Sarvahbutamaheshvara; 
Shmashananilaya; Tryksha; Setu; Apratimakriti; Lokottaras-phutaloka; 
Trymbaka; Nagabhushana; Andhakari; Makhaveshi; 


Vishnukandharapatana; Hinadosha; Akshayaguna; Dakshari; 
Pushadantabhit; Dhurjati; Khandaparashu; Sakala; Nishkala; Anagha; 
Akala; Sakaladhara; Pandurabha; Mrida; Nata; Purna; Purayita; Punya; 
Sukumara; Sulochana; Samageyapriya; Akrura; Punyakirti; Anaymaya; 
Manojava; Tirthakara; Jatila; Jiviteshvara; Jivitantakara; Nitya; Vasureta; 
Vasuprada; Sadgati; Satkriti; Siddhi; Sajjati; Kalakantaka; Kaladhara; 
Mahakala; Bhuasatyapraryana; Lokalavanyakarta; Lokottarasukhalaya; 


Chandrasanjivana; Shasta; Lokaguda; Mahadhipa; Lokabandhu; Lokanatha; 
Kritajna; Krittibhushana; Anapaya; Akshara; Kanta; Sarvashastrahadvara; 
Tejomaya; Dyutidhara; Lokagranti; Anu; Shuchismita; Prasannatma; 
Durjjeya; Duratikrama; Jyotirmaya; Jagannatha; Nirakra; Jaleshvara; 
Tumbavina; Mahakopa; Vishoka; Shokanashana; Trllokapa; Trilokesha; 
Sarvashuddhi; Adhokshaja; Avyaktalakshana; Deva; Vyaktavyakta; 
Vishampati; Varashila; Varaguna; Saramandhana; Maya; Brahma; Vishnu; 
Prajapala; Hamsa; Hamsagati. 

Vaya; Vedha; Vidhata; Dhata; Srashta; Harta; Chaturmukha; Kailasa- 
Shikharavasi; Sarvavasi; Sadagati; Hiranyagarbha; Druhina; Bhutapa; 
Bhupati; Sadyogi; Yogavit; Yogi; Varada; Brahmanapriya; Devapriya; 
Devanatha; Devajna; Devachintaka; Vishamaksha; Vishalaksha; Vrishada; 
Vrishavardhana; Nirmama; Nirahamkara; Nirmoha; Nirupadrava; Darpha; 
Darpada; Dripta; Sarvabhutaparivartaka; Sahasrajit; Sahasrarchi; Prabhava; 
Snigddhaprakritidakshina; Bhutabhavyabhavannatha; Bhutinashana; Artha; 
Anartha; Mahakosha; Parakaryaikapandita; Nishkantaka; Kritananda; 
Nirvyaja; Vyajamardana; Sattvavana; Sattvika; Satyakirti; Snehakritagama; 
Akampita; Gunagrahi; Naikatma; Naikakarmakrit; Suprita; Sumukha; 
Suksha; Sukara; Dakshinaila; Nandiskandhadhara; Dhurya; Prakata; 
Pritivardhana; Aparajita; Sarvasattva; Govinda; Adhrita; Sattvavahana; 
Svadhrita; Siddha; Putamurti; Yashodhana; Varahabhringadhrika; Bhringi; 
Balavana; Ekanayaka; Shrutiprakasha; Shrutimana; Ekabandhu; Anekakrit; 
Shrivatsalashivarambha; Shantabhadra; Sama; Yasha; Bhushaya;Bhushana; 
Bhuti; Bhutakrit; Bhutabhavana; Akampa; Bhaktikaya; Kalaha; Nilalohita; 
Satyavrata; Mahatyagi; Nityashantiparayana; Pararthavritti; Vivikshu; 
Visharada; Shubhada; Shubhakarta; Shubhanama; Shubha; Anarthita; 
Aguna; Sakshi; Akarta. 


Sahasranama Stotra 

- the hymn of a thousand names - 

Sahasranama means thousand (sahasra) names (nama), and 
Sahasranama Stotra is a hymn eulogising the lord by recounting one 
thousand of His names. As the various sects of Hindu-tradition (Shaivism, 
Shaktism and Vaishnavism) grew and spread, it must have become 
extremely popular to write hymns of a thousand names for the primary 
deity of worship. There are various Sahasranama Stotras, but obviously 
here, we concentrate on the Shiva Sahasranama Stotra. 


What makes the Shiva Sahasranama Stotra unique is the number of 
times and variations of the hymn, that are found in ancient texts. The 
appearance of the Shiva Sahasranama Stotra in at least eighteen different 
texts is a testament to the fact that Shaivism in various forms was once 
immensely popular throughout the Indian subcontinent. In fact, Shaivism 
was the most widespread and influential form of Hinduism prior to 1200 CE 
(before the beginning of the Islamic era and the pan-Indian Vaishnava 
devotional movements). 


Below is a list of the texts in which Shiva Sahasranama Stotras are 
found. 


. Mahabharata (Anushasanaparva version) 
. Mahabharata (Shantiparva version) 

. Linga Purana (version 1; chapter 65) 
. Linga Purana (version 2; chapter 97) 
. Shiva Purana (Kotirudra Samhita) 

. Vayu Purana 

. Brahmanda Purana 

. Devi Mahabhagavata Upapurana 

. Padma Purana 

10. Skanda Purana 

11. Vamana Purana 

12. Markandeya Purana 

13. Saura Purana 

14. Bhairava Tantra 

15. Bhringiridi Samhita 

16. Rudrayamala Tantra 

17. Shiva Rahasya Itihasa 

18. Akasa Kalpa Tantra 


OMANANNNABWN 


Using the reductionist approach, we arrive at four different major 
variants of the Shiva Sahasranama: 


1. Mahabharata (Anushasanaparva version) 
2. Mahabharata (Shantiparva version) 

3. Shiva Purana 

4. Rudrayamala Tantra 


The two Mahabharata versions were copied into most of the Puranas, 
including the Linga Purana, with minor variations. An exception is the 
Shiva Purana version which appears to be original. Another original version 
is found in the Rudrayamala Tantra, which was later copied into the Shiva 
Rahasya Itihasa. If we were to hazard a guess as to which school the Shiva 
Sahasranama Stotras came from, it would be fairly reasonable to say that 
the Mahabharata (and most Purana) versions belong to the Smartas, the 
Shiva Purana version belongs to the Pashupatas, and the Rudrayamala 
Tantra version belongs to the Tantrik Shaivas. 

The most ancient form of the Shiva Sahasranama Stotra is found in the 
Anushasanaparva book of the Mahabharata, wherein Shiva is eulogised by 
Krishna. The next most ancient version is likely the one found in the Shanti 
Parva book of the Mahabharata, which is thought to have been inserted later 
into the book, and not found in standard critical editions of the 
Mahabharata. The 1000 names given below are from the Linga Purana and 
are probably based on the Shanti Parva book of the Mahabharata with some 
variations. In the Linga Purana, it is not Krishna, but Vishnu who eulogises 
Shiva. 

It is important to remember that in any given Sahasranama, several 
names are repeated more than once, and in most there are actually more 
than 1000 names. Given here are only the first 1000 names as found in the 
Linga Purana. 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The divine grace of my spiritual masters, Guruji B.K. Subiah and Sri 
Ramana Maharishi. 

In loving memory of Yamuna Y. Kakodkar, Bharati C. Shah, Kusum 
B. Maniar, Jagdish Shah, Suhasini Phatarpekar, Rajendra Y. Kakodkar, 
Ravindra Hudalikar, Prince Varghese and Mona Saigal. 

I am deeply indebted to Bina Om Prakash for taking me much further 
in my quests, spiritual and otherwise, for standing by me through hard times 
and for planting the seed in me to write. 

A special thanks to Jyoti Bhargava, who saw me through a critical 
time during the early stages of this book when I had almost quit after my 
mother’s sudden demise. Also, for the daily infusion with black tea that 
kept me alert. And thank you Tania for always telling me, you should one 
day sit down and write. 

My sincere gratitude to Ramesh Menon for all his experienced 
guidance, encouragement and for the valuable criticism, which kept me 
from going astray. This book would not have been written if he hadn’t, out 
of the blue, invited me on this arduous but enchanting and profound 
journey. 

Last and by no means least, much love and gratitude to my sister 
Neeta and my nephew Karan for enduring the full force and array of my 
moods during the year-and-a-half that it took for me to write this book. 





DHE COMPLETE 


MAHABHARATA 


Santi Parva and Anusasana Parva 


{10} 


Anjuli Kaul 
series editor: RAMESH MENON 





THE COMPLETE MAHABHARATA 


Santi Parva and Anusasana Parva 


THE COMPLETE 
MAHABHARATA 
Volume 10 
Santi Parva (Part IID) 


and 


Anusasana Parva (Part I) 


Anjuli Kaul 





RUPA 


For Richa, naturally. 
And for Akshay, necessarily. 


Published by 
Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd 2017 
7/16, Ansari Road, Daryaganj 
New Delhi 110002 


Sales centres: 
Allahabad Bengaluru Chennai 
Hyderabad Jaipur Kathmandu 

Kolkata Mumbai 


Copyright © Anjuli Kaul 2017 


All rights reserved. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, or stored in a retrieval system, in any 
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the 
prior permission of the publisher. 


ISBN: 978-81-291-45 13-0 
First impression 2017 
10987654321 


The moral right of the author has been asserted. 


CONTENTS 


Part III: Santi Parva 
Part I: Anusasana Parva 


Acknowledgements 


PART III 
Santi Parva 


CANTO 302 


¢ NE udhishtira says, ‘Rajan, you have recommended to me the 

judicious path of yoga as a loving guru does for his sishya. I now 
ask about the principles of the Samkhya yoga. Speak to me about those 
doctrines, in their entirety. You are erudite about all the knowledge that 
exists in the three worlds!’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Listen now to the subtle teachings of the followers of 
the Samkhya yoga established by all the great and puissant Yatis beginning 
with Kapila. There are no errors in that philosophy. Its merits are many. 
Truly, it is flawless. I understand that all things are imperfect. Manavas, 
Pisachas, Rakshasas, and Yakshas, Nagas, Gandharvas and Pitris, 
intermediate orders of beings like birds and animals, great avians like 
Garuda, the Maruts, royal and enlightened sages, Asuras and Viswadevas, 
divine Rishis and yogins, the Prajapatis and Brahma himself are all 
enmeshed with these objects that are difficult to discard, and they all strive 
to free themselves. 

The Samkhyas understand the limits of one’s time in this world. Aware 
of the highest, transcendent truth as well, they also know the truth about 
what is called happiness in this world, and the sorrows that befall those 
concerned with transient objects of desire. Aware of the grief of those who 
have fallen into the intermediate orders of being and of those who have 
sunk into hell, they see the merits and shortcomings of swarga, O Bhaarata, 
and all the merits and flaws of the Vedas, and the yoga and the Samkhya 
systems of philosophy. They realise also that the sattva guna has ten 
properties, that rajas has nine, and that tamas has eight, that the intellect, 
Buddhi, has seven properties, Manas, the mind, has six, and Akasa, space, 


has five; they discern that the understanding has four properties and tamas 
has three, and the rajas has two and sattva has one. 

Knowing the path that is followed by all creatures when death overtakes 
them and the course of Atmagyana, self-knowledge, the wise and 
experienced Samkhyas, exalted by their discernment and awareness of 
causes, and acquiring true wisdom thorough auspicious living, attain the 
bliss of moksha like the rays of the sun or the wind taking refuge in Akasa. 

Vision is attached to form, the sense of scent to smell, the ear to sound, 
the tongue to taste, and the skin to touch. The wind is housed in space. Dark 
stupor harbours in tamas. Greed takes refuge in the objects of the senses. 

Vishnu is the Lord of the organs of motion; Indra that of the organs of 
strength; Agni of the stomach, and Bhumi of the waters. 

The waters have heat for their haven. Agni has Vayu; and the wind has 
Akasa; Akasa has Mahat for its refuge, and Mahat has the understanding. 
The understanding is housed in tamas, tamas in rajas; rajas is founded in 
sattva and sattva is attached to Atman. 

Atman has the glorious and puissant Narayana for its refuge. Narayana 
resides in moksha. Moksha has no need for any dwelling. The followers of 
the Samkhya yoga know that this body, imbued with sixteen attributes, is 
the outcome of sattva. Fully understanding the nature of the physical 
organism and the character of the Chetana that dwells within it, they 
recognise the one existent Being that lives in the body, the Atman, detached 
and sinless, and realising the nature of the actions of persons attached to the 
objects of their senses, they also know the character of the senses and the 
sensual objects which have their refuge in the Atman. 

The Samkhyas appreciate the difficulty of moksha and the sacred texts 
that describe it, and recognise the nature of the vital breaths called Prana, 
Apana, Samana, Vyana and Udana, as also the two other breaths: the one 
going downward and the other moving up. Indeed, they know those seven 
breaths ordained to carry out seven different functions. 

Parantapa, establishing the nature of the Prajapatis and the Rishis and 
the many high paths of righteousness, and the Saptarishis and the countless 
Rajarishis, the great Devarishis and the other Maharishis radiant like the 
sun, they see all these falling away from their power in the course of many 
long ages. 

Hearing of the destruction of all the mighty beings in the universe, the 
Samkhyas understand the inauspicious end of sinful creatures, and the 


miseries of those that fall into the river of hell, Vaitarani in Yamaloka. 

They grasp the ill-fated wanderings of beings through diverse wombs, 
housed in the unholy uterus in the midst of blood and water and phlegm and 
foul-smelling urine and faeces, and then in bodies, resulting from the union 
of blood and the vital seed, of marrow and sinews, supplied by hundreds of 
nerves and arteries, forming an execrable abode of nine doors. 

O Lord of the Bharata vamsa, the followers of the Samkhya yoga, fully 
conversant with the Soul, know what produces good, and they clearly see 
the vile conduct of those whose natures are characterised by tamas, rajas or 
sattva—darkness, passion or goodness—and their sins that prevent them 
from attaining moksha. 

They see the eclipse of the moon and the sun by Rahu, the falling of 
stars from their fixed positions and the deflection of constellations from 
their orbits, and recognise the sad division of all that was once united, the 
diabolical behaviour of creatures in devouring one another, the absence of 
all intelligence in the infancy of human beings, and the deterioration and 
destruction of the body. 

The Samkhyas observe how little men value the sattva guna because 
they are overcome by anger and confusion. They see that only one among 
thousands of human beings struggles to achieve moksha; indeed they 
understand the difficulty of attaining moksha in accordance with the 
shastras, the scriptures. 

They recognise the great anxiety that creatures have for unattained 
objects and unfulfilled desires and their comparative indifference to those 
that have been attained and gratified; son of Kunti, they mark the sins that 
result from the pursuit of the senses, the lifeless repulsive bodies of those 
who live miserably even in the midst of spouses and children. 

The Samkhyas know the end of terrible dissolute men who are guilty of 
killing Brahmanas, and of evil Brahmanas addicted to intoxicants; they are 
also aware of the equally wretched death of those who lust after the wives 
of their acharyas, and of those who do not revere their mothers and the 
Devas. 

After studying the diverse declarations of the Vedas, their knowledge 
helps them to understand how evil men will die; and also what will befall 
those who are born in the intermediate varnas. 

Establishing the recurrent pattern of seasons, the passing of years, 
months, fortnights, and of days, they see the waxing and the waning of the 


moon, the rise and ebb of the seas, the increase and diminution of wealth, 
and the separation of unified objects, the end of yugas, the destruction of 
mountains, the drying up of rivers, and the degeneration of the purity of the 
varnas and also the end of that deterioration, repeating endlessly. 

Beholding the birth, decay, death and sorrows of creatures, knowing 
truly the weaknesses of the body and the anguish of human beings, and 
their vicissitudes, the followers of the Samkhya philosophy, understand all 
the flaws of their own souls and bodies, and attain moksha.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “O you of immeasurable tejas, what are those faults 
that you ascribe to one’s body? Dispel all my doubts on this matter.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Listen, O Parantapa! The Samkhyas, followers of 
Kapila, who are wise and conversant with all paths, say that there are five 
faults in the human body. They are desire, anger, fear, sleep and breath. All 
mortals have these faults, which are found in their bodies. 

The wise cut the root of wrath with the help of forgiveness. Desire is 
destroyed by giving up all goals. By cultivating sattva sleep is defeated, and 
fear is conquered by honing mindfulness. Breath is vanquished by an 
abstemious diet, Rajan. 

They truly understand gunas aided by hundreds of gunas, hundreds of 
flaws, and diverse causes through hundreds of causes. They realise that the 
world is like the foam of water, cloaked in hundreds of illusions flowing 
from Vishnu, like a painted edifice, and as fragile as a reed, and they see it 
as a terrible dark abyss, as unreal and as short-lived as bubbles on water 
when compared to the duration of eternity. 

The sagacious Samkhyas discard even tenderness towards their own 
children, knowing the world to be devoid of permanence and joy, with 
inescapable destruction for its end, sunk in rajas and tamas, and helpless 
like an elephant stuck in mire. 

With their comprehensive yoga of knowledge, and the power of their 
penances, these Yatis sever and bludgeon all inauspicious vasanas born of 
rajas and those from tamas, and indeed all auspicious vasanas arising from 
sattva, and all pleasures of touch and the other bodily senses arising from 
the same three gunas, and in doing so, these Yatis cross samsara, the 
illusory ocean of life. 

That terrifying ocean has sorrow for its waters. Anxiety and grief 
constitute its deep lakes. Disease and death are its colossal crocodiles. The 
great fears that pierce the heart at every step are its massive serpents. 


The deeds inspired by tamas are its tortoises. Those inspired by rajas are 
its fish. Wisdom is the raft for crossing it. Sensual desires are its marshes. 
Decay constitutes its region of sorrow and turmoil. 

Parantapa, knowledge is its island. Deeds make up its great depth. Truth 
is its shores. Pious practices form the lush weeds floating on its breast. Envy 
constitutes its swift tide. The emotions of the heart make up its mines. The 
diverse kinds of gratification are its precious jewels. Grief and fever are its 
winds. Misery and thirst form its mighty eddies. Agonising and fatal 
diseases are its colossal tuskers. 

The collections of bones are its flights of steps, and phlegm is its froth. 
Gifts form its pearly banks. The lakes of blood are its corals. 

Deafening laughter constitutes its roars. Diverse sciences make it 
impenetrable. Tears are its brine. Solitude is the high refuge of those that 
seek to cross it. 

Children and wives are its countless leeches. Friends and kinsmen are 
the cities and towns on its shores. Non-violence and truth are its shorelines. 
Death is its last tempest. 

The knowledge of Vedanta is its island that can harbour those tossed 
upon its waters. Compassion towards all creatures constitute its buoys, and 
moksha the priceless treasure offered to those voyaging on its waters 
seeking merchandise. 

Like a horse spewing flames of fire, this ocean too, has its fiery terrors. 
Having transcended the limitations of dwelling within the gross body, so 
difficult to transcend, the Samkhyas enter into Akasa. 

With his rays, Surya then bears those righteous men, followers of the 
Samkhya yoga. Like the fibres of the lotus-stalk sending water to the flower 
into which they all converge, Surya imbibes all things from the universe, 
and delivers them to those good and wise men. 

Son of Kunti, these Yatis are carried by a gentle, cooling, fragrant wind, 
their attachments destroyed, animated with tejas, filled with the treasures of 
penances and crowned with success. That wind, the best of the seven winds, 
and which blows in blissful lands of great felicity, bears them, son of Kunti, 
to that which is the highest end in Akasa. 

Then Akasa conveys them to the highest end of rajas. Rajas then bears 
them to the highest end of sattva. Sattva then lifts them to the Supreme 
Narayana. 


Through himself, the puissant and pure-souled Narayana at last bears 
them to the Paramatman. Having reached this, Rajan, those pure ones attain 
immortality, and they never have to return from that condition. 

That is the highest goal, O son of Pritha, which is achieved by those 
Mahatmans who have transcended the influence of all the contradictions 
and pairs of opposites.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “O sinless one, after attaining this puissance and bliss, 
do these men of firm vows have any recollection of their lives including 
birth and death? O you of the Kuru vamsa, it is fitting that you tell me the 
truth about this, even as it is appropriate for me to ask none other but you 
this question. 

On the subject of moksha, the scriptures are inconsistent and seem 
flawed, for some declare that consciousness disappears in the emancipated 
state, while others hold the very opposite. 

If in this exalted condition the Yatis continue to live in consciousness, it 
would seem that the religion of Pravritti is superior. If, again, consciousness 
disappears from this state and the liberated one only resembles a person 
sunk in dreamless slumber, then it is wrong to say that there is no 
consciousness in moksha for of all that happens in dreamless sleep is that 
one’s consciousness is temporarily eclipsed and suspended, but never lost, 
for it returns when one awakes.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘However difficult to answer, your question, my son, is 
proper. Bharatarishabha, this kind of question unsettles even the most 
learned. For all that, hear the truth about this as I tell it to you. 

The high-souled followers of Kapila have set their lofty intellects to this 
subject. The senses of knowledge, planted in the bodies of embodied 
creatures, are used for perception. They are the instruments of the Soul, for 
it is through them that subtle Being perceives. 

Separated from the Atman, the senses are like bits of wood, quickly 
consumed, vanishing like the froth on the ocean’s breast. When the Jiva, the 
embodied creature, along with his senses, sinks into sleep, the subtle Atman 
roams among all the realms of perception like the wind through ethereal 
space. 

During its slumber, it continues to perceive all the fields of the senses 
just as well as it does when awake. However, without their ability to act 
during sleep, the senses are stilled in their places, losing their powers like 
snakes deprived of poison. 


At such times, the Atman moves into the respective place of all the 
senses and fulfils all their functions. 

All the qualities of sattva, all the attributes of the intellect, as also those 
of mind, and space, and wind, and all the characteristics of water, and of 
earth, the senses with these qualities, Yudhishtira, which adhere to 
Jivatman, along with the Jivatman itself, are engulfed in Brahman, the 
Paramatman. 

Pious and evil karma, deeds, also overwhelm that Jivatman. Like 
sishyas waiting upon their guru with reverence, the senses too, wait upon 
the Jivatman; it reaches Brahman, which is Narayana, the highest, 
changeless, beyond all the pairs of opposites, and transcends Prakriti. 

Freed from both punya and paapa, the Jivatman enters the Paramatman 
which is nirguna, without all attributes; from this abode of all 
auspiciousness, it does not return, O Bhaarata. What remains, O son, is the 
mind with the senses. These have to come back once more at the appointed 
time to do the bidding of their great master. 

Soon after the sloughing off of this body, the Yati striving for moksha, 
endowed with knowledge and wishing for freedom, succeeds in achieving 
that eternal peace of mukti, which is his who becomes bodiless. 

The Samkhyas, Rajan, are exceedingly wise. They succeed in attaining 
to the highest end through this kind of knowledge. There is no knowledge 
that is equal to this gyana. Do not doubt this. 

The knowledge described in the system of the Samkhyas is regarded as 
the highest. That gyana is immutable and is everlasting. It is eternal 
Brahman in fullness. It has no beginning, middle and end. It transcends all 
contradictions. 

It is the cause of the creation of the universe. It is complete and stands 
in fullness. It is without any kind of change or decay. It is uniform and 
perpetual. Thus the wise sing its praises. 

From it flow creation and destruction, and all change. The great Rishis 
speak of it and laud it in the scriptures. All learned Brahmanas and all 
righteous men regard it to flow from Brahman, supreme, divine, infinite, 
immutable and undiminishing. 

All Brahmanas that are attached to sensual objects adore and praise it by 
ascribing illusory attributes to it. The same is the view of yogins so 
observant of tapasya and dhyana, and of the Samkhyas of fathomless 
insight. 


Son of Kunti, the Srutis declare that the Samkhya yoga is the very form 
of that Formless One. According to it, all cognitive knowledge is the 
knowledge of Brahman. 

There are two kinds of creatures on Bhumi, Lord of the earth—the 
moving and the immobile, of which the mobile are superior. That supreme 
gyana which exists in persons conversant with Brahman and that which is 
contained in the Vedas, that which is found in other scriptures and that in 
yoga, that which is seen in the diverse Puranas, is all found in Samkhya 
philosophy. 

Whatever knowledge exists in the itihasas and in vigyana, pertaining to 
the acquisition of wealth as approved by the wise; whatever other 
knowledge exists in this world—all flows from the lofty gyana of the 
Samkhyas. 

Serenity, puissance, all subtle scriptural knowledge, tapasya of spiritual 
force, and all kinds of felicity, Rajan, have all been duly ordained in the 
Samkhya yoga. If they fail to achieve that complete knowledge 
recommended in their system, the Samkhyas attain the status of deities and 
pass many years in pleasure and happiness. Reigning over the celestials at 
will, at the end of the allotted time of their punya, they fall among learned 
Brahmanas and Yatis. 

Like the Devas who ascend into the sky, the truly regenerate Samkhyas 
cast off this body and enter into the superior state of Brahman by devoting 
themselves entirely to their philosophy which is revered by all wise men. 
Faithful to the acquisition of Samkhya gyana, even if they fail to reach that 
eminence, they never fall among intermediate creatures, or sink to the status 
of sinful men. 

That Mahatman who is fully conversant with the ancient, vast, ocean- 
like and profound Samkhya doctrines that are pure and tolerant and 
agreeable, becomes equal to Narayana. I have now told you the truth about 
the Samkhya yoga. It is the embodiment of Narayana, of the universe as it 
exists from the earliest time. 

When the time of creation arrives, He causes the generation of life, and 
when the time comes for destruction, he swallows everything. Having 
withdrawn everything into his own body he falls into sleep, that inner 
Atman, Soul of the universe.’” 


CANTO 303 


¢ Ne udhishtira says, ‘What is that state known as Akshaya, the 

immutable, attaining which no one has to return? What, again, is 

that which is called Kshaya, decaying, from which one has to return once 

more? O Mahabaho, tell me the distinction between the two so that I may 
truly understand them both. 

Delighter of the Kurus, Brahmanas who know the Vedas speak of you 
as an ocean of knowledge. Highly blessed and Mahatman Rishis and Yatis 
do the same. You now have but very few days to live. 

When the sun turns from Dakshinayana, the southern path, to enter 
Uttarayana, the northern, you will attain to your high end. When you have 
left us, from whom shall we hear of all that benefits us? You are the lamp of 
Kuru’s race. You shine with the light of knowledge. Perpetuator of the Kuru 
vamsa, I want to hear all this from you. Listening to your discourses, sweet 
as amrita, my curiosity in never satisfied but only increases!’ 

Bhishma says, ‘In this regard, I will tell you the ancient story of the 
conversation that took place between Vasishta and King Karala of Janaka’s 
race. 

Once upon a time when that foremost of Rishis, Vasishta, effulgent like 
the sun, was seated undisturbed, King Janaka asked him about that highest 
knowledge which is for our supreme good. 

Erudite in the domain of Atmagyana and having vast learning in all 
branches of that science, as Maitravaruni Vasishta was seated at his ease, 
the king approached him with folded hands; in humble words, sweet and 
well-spoken and lacking in all contentiousness he asked, “Holy one, I want 


to know about the Supreme and Eternal Brahman by attaining to which men 
of wisdom do not have to return. 

I also wish to know that which is called Kshaya, destructible, and that 
into which this universe enters when destroyed. Indeed, what is that which 
is said to be indestructible, mysterious, beneficial and free from all evil?” 

Vasishta said, “Lord of the earth, listen to how this universe is 
destroyed, and about that which was never and can never be destroyed. 
According to the measure of the Devas, twelve thousand years make a 
yuga; four such yugas taken a thousand times, make a kalpa which 
measures one day of Brahma. Brahma’s night, also, Rajan, is of the same 
duration. 

When Brahma himself is destroyed, Sambhu of formless soul, in whom 
the attributes of Anima and Laghima are inherent awakens, and once more 
creates that First, most primeval of all creatures, having vast proportions, of 
infinite deeds, imbued with form, and identifiable with the universe. That 
Sambhu is also called Isana, the Lord of everything. 

He is pure effulgence, and transcends all decay, his hands and feet 
stretching in all directions, with eyes and head and mouth everywhere, and 
with ears also in every place. That Being exists, pervading the entire 
universe. 

The eldest-born Being is called Hiranyagarbha. In the Vedanta this Holy 
One has been called the Buddhi. In the yoga scriptures he is called Mahat, 
Virinchi, and Aja, the unborn. In the Samkhya scriptures, he is indicated by 
diverse names, and regarded as having Infinity for his Soul. 

With many forms, constituting the soul of the universe, he is regarded as 
One and immutable. The three infinite worlds have been created by him 
alone and filled also only by him. In all these forms, he is said to be of 
Viswarupa, universal form. 

In all these variations he creates himself by himself. Filled with great 
energy, he first creates Consciousness and that Great Being Prajapati 
endowed with Chit, Consciousness. The manifest, Hiranyagarbha, is created 
from the unmanifest. This the wise refer to as the creation of knowledge. 
The creation of Mahat or Virat, and Chetana, by Hiranyagarbha, is the 
creation of ignorance. 

This gives rise to the assigning of attributes worthy of worship and their 
destruction, what interpreters of the Srutis call avidya and vidya, ignorance 


and knowledge; after these two, arose, the other of the three—known as 
Akshara, Hiranyagarbha, or Virat. 

Rajan, know, then, that the creation of the subtle elements from 
consciousness 1s the third. In all kinds of consciousness, the fourth creation 
flows from the modification of the third. This fourth creation comprises 
wind and light, space and water and earth, with their properties of sound, 
touch, form, taste and smell. This aggregate of ten arises simultaneously. 

The fifth creation arises from the combination of these primal elements. 
This comprises the ear, the skin, the eyes, the tongue, the nose, and speech, 
and the two hands, the two legs, the anus and the organs of generation. 

The first five make up the organs of knowledge, and the last five the 
organs of action. All these, with the mind, arose simultaneously. These 
twenty-four exist in the bodies of all living creatures. 

By understanding these properly, Brahmanas with insight into the truth 
never have to yield to sorrow. In the three worlds a combination of these, 
called the sarira, body, is possessed by all embodied creatures. 

Indeed, Rajan, this combination is known as such in Devas and 
Manavas and Danavas, and Yakshas and Gandharvas and Kinnaras, and 
Nagas, and Charanas and Pisachas, in divine Rishis and Rakshasas, in 
biting flies, and worms, and gnats, and vermin born of filth, rats and dogs, 
and Swapakas and Chaineyas, and Chandalas and Pukkasas, in elephants 
and horses, donkeys and tigers, and trees and cows. 

All creatures that exist in water or space or on earth, for there is no 
other place in which creatures exist as we have heard, have this 
combination. All these, the manifest, are destroyed every day, and day after 
day. Hence, all creatures produced by a union of these twenty-four are said 
to be Kshaya, destructible. 

This then is the Akshaya. And since the universe, made up of Vyakta 
and Avyakta, decays, it is said to be destructible. The very Being called 
Mahat who is the eldest-born is always spoken of as Kshaya. 

I have now told you, O king, all that you asked me. Beyond these 
twenty-four, is the twenty-fifth called Vishnu. That Vishnu, because he is 
nirguna, is not a subject of gyana though, as he pervades all the tattvas, he 
has been called so by the wise. Since that which is destructible has created 
all that is manifest, all this has form. 

The twenty-fourth, Prakriti, is said to preside over all that has sprung 
from her variations. The twenty-fifth, which is Vishnu, is formless and, 


therefore, cannot be said to activate or enliven the universe. 

That unmanifest Prakriti, which, in union with Chit, is endowed with a 
body dwells in the hearts of all creatures with bodies. Eternal Chetana, the 
Akshaya, although he is without attributes and without form, assumes all 
variations as a consequence of a union with Prakriti. 

When he unites with Prakriti, which has the attributes of birth and 
death, he, the Purusha, also assumes these qualities. From such a union he 
becomes an object of perception even though in reality he is without all 
attributes. 

It is in this way that the Mahat, Hiranyagarbha, fuses with Prakriti and 
suffused with avidya, ignorance, undergoes changes and becomes conscious 
of selfhood, ahamkara. As a result of his forgetfulness and becoming 
involved in ignorance, uniting with the gunas of sattva, rajas and tamas, He 
becomes identified with diverse creatures belonging to diverse orders of 
being. 

As a result of his birth and death arising from the fact of his dwelling 
with Prakriti, he thinks himself to be what he seemingly appears to be. 
Regarding himself as this or that, he assumes and follows the attributes of 
sattva, rajas and tamas. 

Under the influence of tamas, he attains those states that are shaped by 
tamas. Under the influence of rajas and sattva, he similarly acquires the 
conditions influenced by rajas and sattva. 

There are three colours in all—white, red and black. All these colours 
pertain to Prakriti; according to the nature of Prakriti he is identified with 
for the time, he becomes white or red or black. 

Through tamas one goes to hell. Through rajas one acquires and 
remains in the state of humanity. Through sattva, people ascend to 
Devaloka and share in great felicity. By sinning continuously one sinks into 
the intermediate order of beings. By acting both righteously and immorally, 
one attains the status of the gods. 

Thus, the wise say, Akshara, the indestructible, by union with Prakriti, 
the unmanifest, is transformed into Kshara, destructible. By means of 
gyana, knowledge, however, the indestructible is once more apparent in his 
true nature.’”’ 


CANTO 304 


B hishma continues, ‘Vasishta said, “As a result of his forgetfulness, 

the Atman pursues ignorance and obtains thousands of bodies one 
after another. He attains thousands of births among the intermediate orders 
and sometimes even among the Devas because of his union with particular 
gunas and the power of those attributes. 

From the state of humanity he goes to Swargaloka, and from heaven he 
returns to humanity, and again from humanity he sinks into Yamaloka for 
many long years. Just as the worm that spins the cocoon shuts itself 
completely within the very threads it weaves, the Soul, too, though nirguna, 
free of all attributes, in reality, acquires these gunas and deprives himself of 
freedom. 

Though in his real nature he transcends both joy and sorrow, in this way 
he subjects himself to pleasure and despair. Thus, although he is beyond all 
disease, the Soul regards himself to be afflicted by pain in the head, eyes 
and teeth, suffering in the throat and abdomen, and by burning thirst, and 
enlargement of glands, and cholera, and vitiligo, and leprosy, and burns, and 
asthma and phthisis, and epilepsy, and all other diseases that afflict the 
bodies of living creatures. 

He considers himself to be born wrongly among thousands of beings in 
the intermediate orders, and sometimes among the Devas; he bears 
suffering and also enjoys the fruits of his good deeds. 

Steeped in ignorance, he regards himself as robed sometimes in white 
cloth and sometimes in a full dress of four pieces, or as lying on floors 
instead of on beds, or with hands and feet contracted like those of frogs, or 
as seated upright in the yogic posture of dhyana. 


At other times, he sees himself as covered in rags or lying or sitting 
under the canopy of the sky, or within mansions built of bricks and stone or 
on rugged stones or on ashes, or on the bare earth or on beds or on 
battlefields, or in water or in swamps, or on wooden planks or on diverse 
kinds of beds. 

Goaded on by desire of benefits, he sees himself as clad in a kaupina 
made of grass or totally naked, or robed in silk or in the skin of the black 
antelope, or in cloth made of flax, or in sheep-skin or in tiger-skin, or in 
lion-skin or in fabric of hemp, or in barks of trees or in cloths made from 
the skins of prickly plants, or in attire made of threads woven by worms, or 
in torn rags or in other countless kinds of garments, too many to describe. 

The Soul regards himself also as wearing a variety of ornaments and 
jewels, or as eating diverse kinds of food. He regards himself as sometimes 
eating at intervals of one night, or once at the same hour every day, or at the 
fourth, the sixth and the eighth hour every day, or once in six or seven or 
eight nights, or once in ten or twelve days, or once in a month. 

He also sees himself as eating only roots, or fruits, or surviving on air or 
water alone, or on cakes of sesame husk, or curds or cowdung, or the urine 
of the cow, or herbs or flowers or moss, or raw food, or just on leaves fallen 
from trees or fruits that lie on the ground, or other kinds of food—driven by 
the desire of achieving ascetic success. 

The Soul regards himself as observing Chandrayana according to the 
scriptural rites, or other vows and ceremonies, and the duties prescribed for 
the four asramas of life, and even derelictions of duty, and the duties of 
other subsidiary modes of life included in the four principal ones, and the 
many kinds of practices that are signs of the wicked and sinful. 

The Soul regards himself as enjoying secluded places and delightful 
shades of mountains, and the cool banks of streams and fountains, and 
solitary riversides and sheltered forests, and sacred groves of the gods, and 
lakes and waters withdrawn from the busy haunts of men, and isolated 
mountain caves providing the shelter that houses and mansions do. 

The Soul regards himself as employed in the recitation of different 
kinds of hidden mantras or as observing various vows and laws and 
different kinds of penances, and a variety of sacrifices and rituals. 

The Soul sees himself as sometimes assuming the ways of traders and 
merchants, sometimes the practices of Brahmanas and Kshatriyas and 


Vaisyas and Sudras, and also making many kinds of gifts made to those that 
are destitute, blind or helpless. 

As an outcome of being affected by ignorance, the Soul adopts the 
attributes of sattva, rajas and tamas, and dharma, artha and kama. 
Influenced by Prakriti, the Soul himself undergoes modification, observes, 
adopts and practises all these myriad forms and changes, and regards 
himself as being them all. 

Indeed, the Soul recites the sacred mantras Svaha and Svadha and 
Vashat, and bows to his superiors; he considers himself as officiating at the 
sacrifices of others, as teaching sishyas, making gifts and accepting them, 
performing sacrifices and studying the scriptures, and engaging himself in 
all other karmas and kriyas of this kind. 

The Soul regards himself as concerned with birth and death, disputes 
and killing. All these, the learned say, constitute the paths of dharma and 
adharma. It is the Goddess Prakriti who causes birth and death. 

When the time for the Pralaya, universal destruction, approaches, all 
existing objects and attributes are withdrawn by the Paramatman which 
then exists alone like the sun withdrawing his rays at dusk; when the time 
for creation arrives, he once again creates and sends them forth as the sun 
his rays at dawn. Thus the Atman at play repeatedly regards himself 
invested with all these conditions, which are his own infinite forms and 
aspects, his maya, his leela, so pleasing to himself. 

In this way the Soul, though really transcending the three gunas, 
becomes attached to the path of karma and creates Prakriti invested with the 
attributes of birth and death and identical with all deeds and works 
characterised by the three gunas of sattva, rajas and tamas. 

Once on the path of karma, the Atman knows that particular acts have 
special characteristics and produce specific results. Rajan, the whole of this 
universe, with all things in it, has been blinded by Prakriti and 
overwhelmed by rajas and tamas. 

The Soul, being invested by Prakriti, repeatedly gives rise to these 
gunas that produce all the pairs of opposites, dvesha and advesha, joy and 
suffering, pleasure and pain, and the rest. In consequence of this ignorance, 
the Jiva considers these sorrows to be his and imagines them as pursuing 
him. 

Through that ignorance the Jiva imagines he should somehow move 
beyond those sorrows, and, finding Devaloka, enjoy the felicity that awaits 


all his good deeds. It is through ignorance that he thinks he should enjoy 
these delights of heaven and endure the woes here in samsara, this world. 

Through ignorance the Jiva thinks: I should secure my happiness. By 
continually doing good deeds, I may have happiness till the end of this life 
and I shall be happy in all my future lives. My sins, though, may earn me 
unending anguish. 

The human condition is fraught with great misery, for from it one sinks 
into naraka. From naraka, it will take many long years before I can return to 
a human condition. From being human I shall once more rise to attain to 
swarga. From that superior state I will have to come back again to being 
human only to sink again into hell. 

One who always regards this combination of the primal elements and 
the senses, with the reflection of Chit in it, to be thus invested with the 
characteristics of the Soul, repeatedly wanders among the gods and men 
and sinks into demonic tenures in hell. Filled with the ideas of me and 
mine, the Jiva is forced to make an interminable round of such births. 

The Jiva must endure millions upon millions of births in the successive 
forms he assumes, all of which are mortal. He who lives and acts in this 
manner, the way fraught with good and evil consequences, has to take 
successive births, forms and deaths in the three worlds, and to enjoy and 
endure the fruits of his good deeds and his sins. 

It is Prakriti that generates good and evil karma; and it is Prakriti that 
enjoys and suffers their consequences in the three worlds. Indeed, Prakriti 
follows the course of karma. 

The state of the intermediate beings, of humans, and of the gods as well, 
originate in Prakriti, she who is regarded as nirguna, without attributes. Her 
existence is affirmed only because of her doings, beginning with Mahat. 

In the same manner, the existence of Purusha, the Soul, though without 
qualities himself, is affirmed by his reflection in the acts of the body. 
Although the Soul is not subject to any kind of change and is the active 
principle setting Prakriti into motion, yet he enters a body with all its senses 
of cognition and action, and regards all these as his own. 

The five senses of knowledge begin with the ear, and those of action 
begin with speech—these unite with the attributes of sattva, rajas and tamas 
to become engaged and embroiled in their numerous objects. The Jiva 
imagines that it is he who is the doer, and that the senses belong to him, 
though in reality he has no senses. 


Without form, he imagines he has a body. Though bereft of gunas, he 
thinks he is imbued with them, and though transcending time, envisions 
himself to be under time’s control. 

Though lacking in cognisance, he regards himself as filled with it, and 
though transcending the twenty-four subjects of the senses and the mind, he 
considers that he is one among them. Though immortal, he deems himself 
mortal, and though motionless believes himself to be an active being. 

Without a material body, he still thinks he possesses one, and though 
unborn he regards himself as endowed with birth. Though transcending 
tapasya, he sees himself engaged in penances, and though he has no goals to 
strive for, he still thinks that he must achieve a variety of ends. 

Without birth and movement, he deems himself to have both, and 
though beyond fear, believes that he is subject to it. Though indestructible, 
he sees himself as mortal. Invested with ignorance, the Soul thinks thus of 
himself.’”’ 


CANTO 305 


B hishma says, ‘Vasishta said, “Thus, as a result of his ignorance and 

his association with others who are shrouded by ignorance, the Jiva 
has to take millions and millions of births, each one ending in dissolution. 
The consequence of his transformation into Chit invested with ignorance is 
that the Jiva is born into millions of bodies, among intermediate beings and 
men and the gods, all of which will end in being destroyed. 

On account of avidya, ignorance, the Jiva, like Chandramas, the moon, 
has to wax and wane thousands and thousands of times. This is truly the 
nature of the Jiva when invested with ignorance. 

Know that Chandramas has in reality sixteen parts. Of these only fifteen 
increase and decrease. The sixteenth, that portion which remains invisible 
and appears on the night of the new moon, remains unchanging, constant. 

Like Chandramas, the Jiva too has sixteen parts. Only fifteen of these, 
namely, Prakriti with Chetana’s reflection, the ten senses of knowledge and 
action, and the four inner faculties, appear and disappear. The sixteenth, that 
is, Chit in its purity is not subject to any change. 

Endowed with ignorance, the Jiva is repeatedly and continually born 
into these fifteen portions. With these births, the eternal and immutable 
portion in the Jiva, the primal essence, becomes united with the fifteen, and 
this union takes place repeatedly. That sixteenth portion is subtle. It is also 
known as Soma, eternal and immutable. It is never upheld by the senses. On 
the other hand, the senses are sustained by it. Rajan, since those sixteen are 
the cause of the birth of creatures, no creature can be born without them. 
They are called Prakriti. The final end of the Jiva’s propensity to be united 
with Prakriti is called moksha mukti. 


The Mahat-Soul, which is the twenty-fifth part the unmanifest, must 
repeatedly assume bodies of the sixteen divisions. The Soul, which is pure, 
becomes sullied since it is embroiled in avidya, dark unknowing that which 
is in reality pristine and untainted, becomes impure from being involved 
with what is both pure and unclean... 

Devoted thus to ignorance, the Jiva, though essentially characterised by 
knowledge, becomes repeatedly associated with ignorance. Though free 
from every kind of flaw, yet in consequence of its bonding with the three 
gunas of Prakriti, it becomes itself steeped in them.” 


CANTO 306 


J anaka said, “O holy one, it has been said that the relation between 
the male and the female is like that which exists between Purusha, 
the indestructible, and Prakriti, the destructible. 

Without a male, a female of any species cannot conceive. Without a 
female, a male also cannot create form. The forms of living creatures flow 
out of their union with each other. This is so with all orders of living beings. 

Living creatures are born through sexual union, each depending upon 
the attributes of the other, and in their fertile seasons. I shall tell you about 
these. Listen to which are the traits that belong to the sire and which to the 
mother. 

Bones, muscles, sinews and marrow, O regenerate one, we know to be 
derived from the man. Skin, flesh and blood, we know are drawn from the 
mother. We read about this in the Vedas and other scriptures. 

What can be read as stated in the Vedas and other scriptures can be 
taken on authority. The authority of the Vedas and other consistent 
scriptures is eternal. Moksha cannot exist if Prakriti and Purusha are always 
joined in this way by both opposing and depending on the other’s attributes. 

Holy One, you have a spiritual vision that enables you to see all things 
as if they are present before your very eyes. If you know of any direct 
evidence of the existence of moksha, speak to me about it. We desire to 
attain it. Indeed, we wish to realise that which is auspicious, formless, not 
subject to decay, eternal beyond the reach of the senses, indeed, supreme.” 

Vasishta said, “What you say about what the Vedas and the other 
scriptures say in this matter is true. You have understood as they should be. 


However, you are only familiar with the texts of the Vedas and the other 
shastras. You are not, Rajan, truly conversant with the real meaning of those 
scriptures. 

One who understands merely the texts without knowing with their inner 
meaning, knows them in vain. Indeed, he who memorises the contents of a 
work without comprehending their meaning bears a useless burden. 

On the other hand, he who gleans the true meaning of a treatise is said 
to have studied it with actual purpose. Questioned about the meaning of a 
text, it is fitting for him to explain that meaning acquired by careful study. 

It is an unintelligent man who refuses to elucidate the meanings of texts 
in an assembly of the learned; indeed such a man never succeeds in 
expounding them properly. An ignorant person trying to explain the true 
meaning of treatises incurs ridicule. Even those who have knowledge of the 
Atman are mocked on such occasions if they try to explain something that 
has not been acquired through proper study. 

Listen now to me, Rajan, on the subject of mukti that has been 
expounded by gurus to sishyas since the most ancient times among 
Mahatmans with the gyana of the Samkhya and the yoga systems of 
philosophy. 

What the yogin beholds is that which the Samkhyas attain. He who 
knows the Samkhya and the yoga systems to be one and the same is deemed 
wise. Skin, flesh, blood, fat, bile, marrow, and muscles, and the senses of 
both knowledge and action, about which you speak, do exist. Objects flow 
from objects; the senses from the senses. From the body one acquires a 
body, as a seed is obtained from a seed. 

When the Paramatman, the Supreme Being, is without senses, without 
seed, without matter, without body, He must be without all attributes, 
nirguna. 

Akasa and the other elements arise from the gunas of sattva and rajas 
and tamas, and disappear ultimately into them. Thus they are born from 
Prakriti. Skin, flesh, blood, fat, bile, marrow, bones and muscles, these eight 
arisen from Prakriti, may sometimes be produced by the vital seed of the 
male alone. 

The Jiva and the universe both partake of Prakriti characterised by the 
three gunas. The Paramatman, the Supreme Soul, is apart from both the Jiva 
and the universe. Just like the passing seasons may be inferred from the 


appearance of certain fruits and flowers, Prakriti, too, though formless, can 
be inferred from the attributes of Mahat and the rest that spring from it. 

The existence of Chaitanya in the body allows the Paramatman, without 
any gunas and perfectly pristine, to be inferred. Without beginning and 
without end, the foremost and most auspicious, that Paramatman is 
endowed with these elements as a result of its apparently identifying itself 
with the body and other gunas, as if in play. 

Those who truly know these gunas recognise that only the ephemeral 
objects can be invested with sattva, rajas and tamas. That which transcends 
all attributes can have none. When the Jiva overcomes all the gunas born of 
Prakriti, only then does it gaze upon the Supreme Soul. 

Only the highest Rishis conversant with the Samkhya, and true yogins 
know the Paramatman, which all the diverse philosophies and _ their 
adherents agree is beyond the Buddhi, the intellect which is regarded as the 
knower. He is endowed with the highest wisdom for he has cast off all 
consciousness of identification with Prakriti. 

He transcends ignorance, is unmanifest, is nirguna beyond all attributes, 
and is called the Supreme. Dissociated from all gunas, he ordains all things, 
and is eternal and immutable. He surpasses Prakriti and all that is born of 
Prakriti; indeed transcending the twenty-four subjects that constitute 
enquiry, he forms the twenty-fifth. 

When the wise, who stand in fear of birth, of the many conditions of 
living consciousness and of death, succeed in knowing the unmanifest, they 
gain understanding of the Supreme Soul at the same time. An intelligent 
man regards the union of the Jiva with the Paramatman as due and fitting, 
and consistent with the scriptures; the foolish man regards the two as being 
distinct from each other. This is the difference between the man of 
intelligence and he who lacks it. 

The indications of both Kshara, the destructible, and Akshara, the 
indestructible, have now been expounded to you. Akshara is Oneness or 
unity, while Kshara denotes multiplicity, diversity. When one studies and 
properly understands the twenty-five subjects of enquiry, only then does one 
comprehend that the Oneness of the Atman is in accord with the scriptures, 
while its multiplicity is in opposition to them. 

These are the many signs of what is included in the account of the 
created and what transcends that account. The wise have stated that there 


are only twenty-five themes to the entire tale of creation. Transcending 
these, and beyond those, forms the twenty-sixth. 

The comprehension of these twenty-five created subjects, according to 
their aggregates of five, is the study of material elements. Transcending 
these is that which is eternal.’”’ 


CANTO 307 


¢ J anaka said, “O foremost of Rishis, you have said that unity is the 

attribute of Akshara, the indestructible, and variety or multiplicity is 

the attribute of Kshara, the destructible. I have not yet clearly understood 
the nature of these two. Doubts still lurk in my mind. 

Ignorant men look upon the Atman, the Soul, as imbued with the 
phenomenon of multiplicity. Wise men know it to be one and undivided. 
My intellect is dull, and so I am bewildered and unable to comprehend all 
this. My restless intellect has made me almost forget the causes you 
assigned for the unity of Akshara and the multiplicity of Kshara. I want you 
to once more instruct me on unity and multiplicity, on him who is knowing, 
on what is without knowledge, on the Jiva, vidya, avidya, Akshara, Kshara, 
and on the systems of Samkhya and yoga, in detail, individually and 
frankly.” 

‘Vasishta said, “I will tell you what you ask. Listen to me, Rajan, as I 
expound to you the practices of yoga separately. An obligatory practice 
with yogins, dhyana, contemplation, is their highest power. Those 
conversant with yoga say that contemplation is of two kinds. One is the 
concentration of the mind, and the other is pranayama, the regulation of 
breath. Pranayama is said to have physicality while the pure concentration 
of mind is without it. 

Except for the three times when a man urinates, defecates and eats, he 
should devote all his time to dhyana. Withdrawing the senses from the 
objects of their perception, through the mind, an intelligent man, having 
purified himself with the twenty-two ways of pranayama, unites the Jivatma 
with that which transcends the twenty-fourth subject, namely Prakriti, 


which is also ignorance, the Paramatman which, according to the wise, 
dwells in every part of the body, and thereby transcends decay and death. 

We have heard that it is through those twenty-two methods that the Soul 
may always be known. Only one whose mind is free of sinful passions can 
engage in this practice of yoga. No other may. 

Detached, abstemious in diet, and controlling all the senses, one should 
fix one’s mind on the Atman; O king of Mithila, during the first and the last 
part of the night, having subdued the senses, quieted the mind by Buddhi, 
the understanding, one should assume a posture as still as a stone. 

When men of knowledge, who know the laws of yoga, become as fixed 
as a post of wood, and as immovable as a mountain, they are said to be in 
yoga, communion. When one does not hear, or smell, or taste, or see, when 
one is not conscious of any touch, when one’s mind becomes perfectly free 
from every purpose, when one is not conscious of anything, when one 
cherishes no thought, when one becomes like a block of wood, then one is 
in perfect yoga. 

In this state one burns like a lamp where there is no wind, steadily; at 
such a time one is freed even from one’s sukshma sarira, one’s subtle form, 
and perfectly united with Brahman. When one has achieved this, one no 
longer ascends or falls among intermediate beings. 

When we say that there has been a complete identification of the 
knower, the known, and knowledge, then is the yogin said to behold the 
Supreme Soul. While in yoga, the Paramatman reveals itself in the yogin’s 
heart like a blazing fire, or like the irradiant sun, or like dazzling lightning 
in the sky. 

That Supreme Soul which is unborn and which is the essence of amrita, 
nectar, that is seen by Mahatman Brahmanas, endowed with wisdom and 
knowers of the Vedas, is subtler than the subtle and greater than the great. 
Though dwelling in all creatures, that Atman is not perceived by them. 

The Creator of the worlds is seen only by one who is rich in the 
intelligence guided by the lamp of the mind. He dwells beyond tamas, 
darkness, and transcends even Iswara. Those acquainted with the Vedas and 
imbued with omniscience call him the dispeller of darkness, transcending 
darkness, pure, and nirguna. 

This is what is called the yoga of yogins. What else marks yoga? Such 
practices allow yogins to glimpse the Supreme Soul that transcends death 
and decay. 


I have told you about the science of yoga in detail. I will now discourse 
upon that Samkhya philosophy by which the Paramatman is seen through 
the gradual destruction of darkness, ignorance and faults. 

The Samkhyas, whose system is built on Prakriti, say that Prakriti, 
which is unmanifest, is foremost. The second principle, Mahat, arises from 
Prakriti. 

We have heard that from Mahat flows the third principle called Chit, 
Consciousness. The Samkhyas blessed with vision of the Soul say that the 
five senses of sound, sight, touch, taste and smell flow from Consciousness. 
All these eight, together, they refer to as Prakriti. 

The modifications of these eight are sixteen in number. They are the five 
gross or material essences, of Akasa, Agni, Bhumi, Jala and Vayu—space, 
light, earth, water and wind—and the ten senses of action and of knowledge 
including the mind. Wise men devoted to the path of Samkhya, and who 
know all its laws and dispensations, regard these twenty-four subjects as 
encompassing the whole range of Samkhya enquiry. 

That which is created is merged into the creating. Created by the 
Paramatman, one after another, these principles are destroyed in reverse. 
With every new creation, the gunas come into existence in the order I have 
told you, and with destruction they merge, each into its Creator, in a reverse 
order, like the waves of the ocean vanishing into the very ocean that gives 
them birth. Rajan, this is the manner in which Prakriti is created and 
destroyed. 

The Supreme Being is all that remains at the time of Pralaya, and it is he 
that assumes multifarious forms when creation breaks into life. This is what 
men of knowledge have established. 

It is Prakriti that causes Purusha to assume diversity and then revert to 
unity. Prakriti herself also has the same indications. Those who know the 
nature of the themes of enquiry know that Prakriti also assumes the same 
kind of diversity and unity; when destruction is at hand she reverts into 
unity and when creation flows she assumes diversity of form. 

The Atman makes Prakriti, which contains the principles of creation or 
growth, and acquires manifold forms. Prakriti is called Kshetra, the field in 
which karma is sown, also identified as the body. Transcending the twenty- 
four principles of nature is the Atman, Soul, which is great. It, the 
Kshetrajna or knower of the field, presides over Prakriti or Kshetra. 


Thus, the foremost of Yatis say that the Soul is the controller. He is so 
regarded as he presides over all kshetras. Aware of that unmanifest Kshetra, 
he is also called Kshetrajna, the Knower of Kshetra. And because the 
Atman enters into unmanifest Kshetra, the body, he is called Purusha. 
Kshetra is distinct from Kshetrajna. Kshetra is unmanifest. 

The Soul, which transcends the twenty-four subjects, is called the 
Knower. Knowledge and the object known are discrete. Knowledge has 
been said to be unmanifest, while the object of knowledge is the Soul which 
transcends these principles. 

The unmanifest is called Kshetra, sattva, Mahat, and also Iswara, the 
Supreme One, while Purusha is the twenty-fifth, unsurpassed, principle; 
though regarded a subject, it is not one, for it transcends them all. This, 
Rajan, is an account of the Samkhya philosophy. 

The Samkhyas see the cause of the universe, and merging all the grosser 
principles into the Chit, gaze upon the Paramatman, the Supreme Soul. 
Studying the twenty-four subjects properly, along with Prakriti, and 
determining their true nature, the Samkhyas succeed in beholding that 
which transcends these twenty-four principles. 

In reality the Jivatma is that very Soul which transcends Prakriti and is 
beyond the twenty-four principles. When he succeeds in knowing that 
Paramatman by dissociating himself from Prakriti, he then merges into that, 
the Supreme Soul. 

I have now told you everything about the Samkhya yoga, in all its 
aspects. Those who know these doctrines succeed in attaining direct 
cognisance of Brahman. They achieve peace and tranquillity. 

Indeed, as men whose understanding have direct awareness of 
Brahman, reach that state from which they do not have to return to this 
world after the dissolution of their bodies, those that are said to be 
emancipated in this life, they attain the great power and ineffable felicity of 
Samadhi, and immutability, through attaining the nature of Akshara, the 
indestructible. 

They who perceive this universe as many instead of as one and unified 
are said to see falsely. These men are blind to Brahman. O Parantapa, such 
men have repeatedly to return to the world and assume bodies in the diverse 
orders of being. Those who realise the Brahman become omniscient, and 
when they pass from this body they are free forever of all physical forms. 


All things, the entire universe, are said to be the result of the 
unmanifest. The Atman, which is the twenty-fifth tattva, transcends all 
things. They who know it, the Soul, have no fear of returning to the 
world.” 


CANTO 308 


¢ V asishta said, “I have discoursed to you thus far on the Samkhya 

philosophy. Now I will tell you what is vidya, knowledge, and 

what is avidya, ignorance. The learned say that that Prakriti, which is 

fraught with the attributes of creation and destruction, is called avidya; 

while Purusha, who is free from these and who transcends the twenty-four 
tattvas, is called vidya. 

Listen to me first as I speak to you on the nature of vidya among the 
other successive concepts in the Samkhya philosophy. 

Among the senses of knowledge and those of action, the senses of 
knowledge are said to constitute vidya. We have heard that vidya comprises 
the senses of knowledge and the objects of their perception. The wise say 
that of the objects of the senses and the mind, the mind constitutes vidya. 
Between the mind and the five subtle essences, the latter make up vidya. Of 
the five subtle essences and Consciousness, consciousness is vidya. Of Chit 
and Mahat, the latter, O king, is vidya. Of all the principles beginning with 
Mahat and Prakriti, it is Prakriti, unmanifest and supreme, that is regarded 
as vidya. 

Of Prakriti, and that called Vidhi which is Supreme, Vidhi should be 
known as vidya. Transcending Prakriti is the twenty-fifth principle, called 
Purusha, who should be known as vidya. Of all knowledge that which is the 
object of knowledge has been said to be the unmanifest, Rajan. 

Again, knowledge has been said to be unmanifest and the object of 
knowledge to be that which transcends the twenty-four. I repeat, knowledge 
is unmanifest, and the Knower is that which transcends the twenty-four. 


I have now told you the true significance of vidya and avidya. Listen 
now as I tell you about the indestructible and the destructible. Both the Jiva 
and Prakriti have been said to be indestructible, and both of them have been 
said to be destructible. I will tell you why this is so, as I have understood it. 

Both Prakriti and the Jiva are without beginning and without end, 
without birth and without death. With regards to creation, both are regarded 
as supreme. As a consequence of its attributes of repeated creation and 
destruction, the unmanifest Prakriti, is called Akshara, indestructible. That 
unmanifest is continually modified, in order to create the evolutes. And 
because the principles beginning with Mahat are produced by Purusha as 
well, and also because Purusha and the Avyakta are mutually dependent 
upon each other, therefore is Purusha also, the twenty-fifth, called Kshetra, 
Akshara, indestructible. 

When the yogin withdraws and merges all the principles into the 
unmanifest Brahman, then along with all the others, the twenty-fifth 
evolute, the Jiva or Purusha, also dissolves into it. When the principles 
merge, each into its Creator, then the one that remains is Prakriti. 

When Kshetrajna too, O son, vanishes into what produces him, all that 
remains is Brahman; thus, Prakriti along with all its evolutes becomes 
Kshara, is destroyed, and becomes nirguna, and attains to the condition of 
being without attributes, from becoming detached from all the tattvas. 

We have heard that Kshetrajna, when his knowledge of Kshetra 
disappears, becomes devoid of gunas, attributes. When he becomes Kshara 
he takes on gunas. 

When, however, he attains to his own real nature, he succeeds in 
understanding his own condition of truly being nirguna. By casting off 
Prakriti and beginning to realise that he is different from her, the intelligent 
Kshetrajna comes to be regarded as pristine and taintless. 

When the Jiva no longer exists in a state of union with Prakriti, then he 
becomes identifiable with Brahman. While he remains united with Prakriti, 
he remains distinct from Brahman. Indeed, when the Jivatman shows no 
attachment for Prakriti and her tattvas, he then succeeds in beholding the 
Supreme; having once beheld him he wishes that he not fall away from that 
felicity. 

When the knowledge of truth dawns upon him, the Jiva begins to 
lament: Alas, my ignorance and foolishness have made me fall into this 
mesh of Prakriti, like a fish entangled in a net. 


Through ignorance I have migrated from body to body like a fish from 
water to water thinking that this in the only element in which it can live. 
Just as a fish does not know anything other than water to be its natural 
element, I also have never known anything other than my own family, my 
children and wives. Shame on me that through ignorance I have been 
repeatedly wandering from body to body forgetful of the Paramatman. 

The Paramatman alone is my friend. I have the capacity for friendship 
with him. Whatever be my nature and whoever I may be, I am able to be 
like him and to merge with him. I see my similarity with him. I am indeed, 
like him. He is pure, untainted. It is clear that I am of the same nature. 

Through ignorance and torpor, I have become associated with inanimate 
Prakriti. Though really detached, I have passed this long time in a state of 
attachment with Prakriti. Alas, without being aware of it, I have so long 
been subdued by her. 

Prakriti assumes various forms: high, middling and low. Oh, how will I 
dwell in those forms? How will I live conjointly with her? It is on account 
of my ignorance that I repair to her companionship. 

I will now immerse myself in Samkhya or yoga. I will no longer keep 
her companionship. When I consider how long I have been with her, I think 
that I have been too long deceived by her, for being really unchanging and 
free myself, how could I keep company with one that is subject to constant 
change? 

But she cannot be held responsible for this. The blame is mine, since 
turning away from the Paramatman I freely became attached to her. In 
consequence of that attachment, though in reality formless I have had to 
live in multifarious forms. 

Though formless by nature I am endowed with forms because of my 
sense of me and mine, and thereby disturbed and agitated. As a result of my 
false sense of selfhood in Prakriti, I am forced to take birth in diverse orders 
of being. 

Alas, though without any true sense of ego, yet in consequence of 
affecting it, I have sinned in a myriad of ways in those orders in which I 
took birth while I remained in them as a Jivatman who had lost all true 
knowledge. I will no longer have anything to do with her whose essence is 
consciousness, who divides herself into many and who seeks to bind me 
with these many. 


Only now have I been awakened and have understood that I am by 
nature without any sense of ego and without that consciousness which 
creates the forms of Prakriti that appear all around. Discarding that ego, 
with respect to her and whose essence is made up of consciousness, and 
casting off Prakriti herself, I shall take refuge in him who is auspicious. 

I shall be united with him, and not with Prakriti which is essentially 
without reality. It will be to my benefit if I unite with him for I share no true 
similarity of nature with Prakriti. 

The twenty-fifth principle, which is the Jivatman, when he thus 
succeeds in understanding the Paramatman, is able to cast off the Kshara, 
the mortal, and merge with that which is Akshara, immortal, the essence of 
all that is auspicious. In reality, the Jiva is nirguna and Avyakta, without 
attributes and unmanifest, but becomes invested with what is Vyakta, 
manifest, and assumes gunas. 

O lord of Mathura, when he succeeds in gazing upon that which is 
nirguna and which is the source of the unmanifest, he achieves union with 
it. 

I have told you the indications of what is indestructible and what is 
destructible, according to the best of my knowledge of what has been 
expounded in the scriptures. I shall now speak to you about what I have 
heard as to how knowledge that is subtle, stainless and certain arises. Listen 
to me. 

I have already discoursed to you on the features of the Samkhya and the 
yoga systems of philosophy as described in their respective texts. Indeed, 
the science that has been explained in the Samkhya treatises is identical 
with what has been laid down in the yoga shastras. 

Rajan, the knowledge which the Samkhyas preach can enlighten 
everyone. In the Samkhya doctrines that knowledge has been explicated for 
the benefit of its disciples. The learned say that this Samkhya system is 
extensive. Yogins have great regard for this system as also for the Vedas. 

In the Samkhya philosophy no subject transcending the twenty-fifth is 
accepted. I have duly described to you the highest principles of the 
Samkhyas. In the yoga philosophy, it is said that Brahman, the essence of 
knowledge without duality, Advaita, becomes the Jiva only when suffused 
with ignorance. The yoga scriptures speak of both Brahman and Jivatman.”’ 


CANTO 309 


B hishma says, ‘Vasishta said, “I will now discourse to you on Buddha, 
the Supreme Soul, and Abuddha, the Jiva which is the dispensation 
of the attributes of sattva, rajas, and tamas. 

Under the influence of maya, illusion, the Paramatman, becoming the 
Jiva, assumes myriad forms and comes to regard them all as real. As a 
consequence of regarding himself indistinguishable from such 
transformations, the Jivatman fails to understand the Supreme Soul, for he 
bears the gunas of sattva and rajas and tamas, creating and drawing into 
himself what he creates. 

O Rajan, the Jiva undergoes ceaseless changes for his sport, and 
because he is capable of understanding the action of the Avyakta, the 
unmanifest, he is called Buddhyamana, the comprehender. 

The unmanifest or Prakriti can never comprehend Brahman which is, in 
reality, nirguna, without attributes, even when it manifests itself with gunas. 
Hence Prakriti is called unintelligent. The Srutis declare that if ever Prakriti 
does succeed in knowing the twenty-fifth tattva, the Jiva, Prakriti will then 
be identified and united with the Jiva, instead of being apart from It. 

However Prakriti can never comprehend the Paramatman, which is ever 
detached and which transcends the twenty-fifth evolute. As a result of his 
attachment to and union with Prakriti, the Jiva or Purusha, who in his real 
nature is unmanifest and not subject to change, comes to be called the 
unawakened or ignorant. 

Indeed, because the twenty-fifth tattva can realise the Avyakta, the 
unmanifest, that he is called Buddhyamana, or comprehender. He cannot, 


however, easily grasp the twenty-sixth, which is stainless, which is 
knowledge without duality, immeasurable and eternal. 

The twenty-sixth tattva, however, can know both the Jiva and Prakriti, 
who are the twenty-fifth and the twenty-fourth principles respectively. O 
radiant son, only the wise succeed in knowing that Brahman which is 
unmanifest, which inheres in its real nature in all that is seen and unseen, 
and which is the one independent essence in the universe. 

When the Jiva considers himself distinct from, and other than what he 
truly is, when he thinks of himself as fat or lean, fair or dark, a Brahmana or 
a Sudra, it is only then that he fails to recognise the Supreme Soul and 
himself, and Prakriti with which he is united. 

When the Jiva succeeds in understanding Prakriti, and knowing that she 
is something apart and different from him, only then is he restored to his 
true nature and attains to that exalted knowledge which is pure and 
untainted and which is of Brahman. When the Jiva reaches that highest 
understanding, he then attains to that pure and non-dual knowledge, which 
is the twenty-sixth principle, Brahman. 

He then casts off the manifest, Prakriti fraught with the attributes of 
creation and destruction. When the Jiva recognises Prakriti, unintelligent 
and subject to the influence of sattva, rajas and tamas, he then becomes 
nirguna, without attributes himself. 

When he understands that the unmanifest is different from him, he 
acquires the nature of the Paramatman, the Supreme Soul. The learned say 
that when the Jiva is freed from the attributes of sattva and rajas and tamas, 
and united with the Supreme Soul, he becomes identified with that Soul. 

The Paramatman is called tattva as well as atattva, and transcends decay 
and death. O bestower of honours, the Soul, despite resting in the body, 
with its manifest principles, cannot be said to have acquired the nature of 
those principles. 

The wise say that there are in all twenty-five principles, including the 
Jivatman. Indeed the Soul does not possess either Consciousness or any 
other principle. Invested with pure intelligence, it transcends the tattvas. It 
quickly discards even that principle which is the indication of the knowing 
or awakened one. 

When the Jiva considers himself as the twenty-sixth being, not subject 
to decay and death, he succeeds through his own light in attaining identity 
with that twenty-sixth. Though awakened by the twenty-sixth, pure 


intelligence, the Jiva still becomes subject to ignorance. This is the cause of 
the Jiva’s myriad forms as explained in the Srutis and the Samkhya 
scriptures. 

When the Jiva, endowed with Chetana and unintelligent Prakriti, loses 
all consciousness of a distinct or individual self, then he discards his 
multifariousness and resumes his oneness. When the Jivatman who lives in 
joy and suffering, seldom free from the consciousness of self, succeeds in 
merging with the Paramatman which is beyond the reach of the 
understanding, he is then liberated from virtue and vice. 

Indeed, when the Jiva attains to the twenty-sixth tattva, which is unborn 
and puissant and apart from all attachments, comprehending it thoroughly, 
he himself becomes possessed of infinite puissance and entirely casts off 
Prakriti. Once he understands the twenty-sixth tattva, the first twenty-four 
lose all significance and worth. 

I have now narrated to you, according to the indication of the Srutis, the 
nature of the Abuddhya or Prakriti, and of the Jiva; I have also told you 
about that which is pure knowledge, the Paramatman, the Supreme Soul. 
Guided by the scriptures, variety and oneness are to be thus understood. 

The difference between the gnat and the udumbara, or that between the 
fish and water, illustrates the difference between the Jivatman and 
Paramatman, the Supreme Soul. The multiplicity and unity of these two are 
then similarly understood. 

This is called emancipation, mukti, this comprehension or knowledge of 
oneself as something distinct from unintelligent Prakriti. By making him 
know the unmanifest, the Paramatman, which transcends Buddhi, intellect, 
the twenty-fifth tattva, which dwells in the bodies of living creatures, is 
emancipated. 

Indeed, that twenty-fifth is capable of achieving moksha in this manner 
only and by no other means. Though really different from the Kshetra in 
which he dwells for the time being, he partakes of the nature of that kshetra 
as a result of his union with it. 

Uniting with what is pure, he becomes pure. Merging with the 
intelligent, he becomes Intelligent. By joining with one that is emancipated, 
he is liberated. By uniting with one that has been free from every 
attachment, he too, is freed from all attachment. 

By uniting with one striving for mukti, imbibing the nature of his 
companion, he himself strives for emancipation. By mingling with one of 


pure deeds he becomes pure, of pure deeds himself, and blazes with 
effulgence. By uniting with one of unstained Soul, he becomes of unstained 
Soul himself. 

By fusing with the one immaculate and independent Atman, he 
becomes one and independent. Uniting with the one that is dependent on its 
own self, he acquires the same nature and attains to freedom. 

Rajan, I have duly told you this that is perfectly true. I have honestly 
discoursed to you on the subject of the eternal and stainless and primeval 
Brahman. You may impart this high knowledge, able to awaken the Soul, to 
that person who though not conversant with the Vedas is nevertheless 
humble and has a keen desire to acquire Brahmagyana, the knowledge of 
Brahman. 

It should never be given to one who is false, or cunning or roguish, or is 
weak-minded or devious, or to one who is jealous of learned men, or one 
who gives pain to others. Listen to me as I speak of those to whom this 
knowledge may safely be divulged. It should be given to one who has faith, 
who is meritorious, who abstains from speaking ill of others, who is 
devoted to tapasya from the purest of motives, who is wise, and who knows 
the sacrifices and other rites laid down in the Vedas. 

This knowledge may be revealed to one with a forgiving disposition, 
who is compassionate and kind to all creatures; or one who is fond of 
dwelling in solitary quietness, who lives and acts in accord with the 
scriptures, or to one never given to quarrels and disputes, or one possessed 
of great learning or one endowed with wisdom, forgiveness, self-restraint 
and tranquillity of soul. 

This high knowledge of Brahman should never be imparted to one who 
does not possess such qualities. It has been said that there can be no 
advantage or punya when such knowledge is given to one who is not suited 
to receiving it. This high knowledge should never be revealed to one who 
disregards any vows and restraints even if, in exchange, he gives all of 
Bhumi, the earth, brimming with jewels and diverse wealth as dakshina. 
However, without doubt, this knowledge should indeed be given to one who 
has conquered his senses. 

O Karala, let no fear be yours any longer, since you have listened to 
what I have said about the high Brahman. I have told you about the holy 
Brahman, without beginning, middle and end, and who can dispel all kinds 
of grief. 


Seeing Brahman can dispel both birth and death, O king, the Brahman 
full of auspiciousness that removes all fear, Brahman who bestows true 
weal. And having acquired this essence of all knowledge, cast off all error 
and stupor today. I acquired this gyana from the eternal Hiranyagarbha 
himself, Rajan, who divulged it to me when I had gratified that great Being 
of the most superior soul. 

Asked by you today, I have imparted to you the knowledge of eternal 
Brahman, just as I myself acquired it from my guru. Indeed, I have given 
you this highest knowledge, the Brahmagyana, which is the refuge of all 
conversant with mukti exactly as I once received it from Brahma himself.”’ 

Bhishma continues, ‘I have now told you what the great Rishi Vasishta 
said to King Karala of the Janaka vamsa, about the twenty-fifth tattva, 
attaining which the Jiva has never to come back into the world. It is only 
when the Jivatman does not truly recognise the Paramatman, the Supreme 
Soul, which is not subject to decay and death that it has to frequently leave 
and return to this world. 

When the Jiva attains to that high knowledge, he has no longer to come 
back. Having heard it from the Devarishi, I have, O son, discoursed to you 
on this Brahmagyana from which arises the highest good. 

This knowledge was obtained from Hiranyagarbha by the high-souled 
Rishi Vasishta. From Vasishta, it was acquired by Narada. From Narada I 
have learnt it, the knowledge that is indeed the eternal Brahman. 

O Kurusattama, foremost of Kurus, having heard this discourse of high 
import, filled with sacred wisdom, do not grieve any longer. That man who 
knows Kshara and Akshara is free from fear. Only he who is bereft of such 
knowledge is obliged to cherish fear. 

As a result of this ignorance of Brahman, the soul of the foolish man 
has to repeatedly come back into this world. Dying, he has to be born into 
thousands upon thousands of orders of being, every one of which ends in 
death. 

Now in the world of the gods, now among men, and now among 
intermediate orders of being—he must appear again and again. In course of 
time, if he succeeds in crossing samsara, the ocean of ignorance in which he 
is plunged, he then succeeds in avoiding rebirth altogether and merges with 
the Paramatman, the Supreme Soul. 

The ocean of ignorance is fearsome and terrible. It is bottomless and 
called the unmanifest. O Bhaarata, day after day, creatures fall and sink into 


that sea. Since you, Rajan, have been freed from that eternal, boundless 
ocean of darkness, you are also liberated from both rajas and tamas.’ 


CANTO 310 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘Once upon a time a king of Janaka’s royal house, 
while hunting for deer in the uninhabited forests, saw a superior 
Brahmana, a Rishi of Bhrigu’s vamsa. Bowing before the Rishi who was 
seated at his ease, King Vasuman approached him and, when he also sat, 
with the sage’s leave, asked him this question: 

“O holy one, tell me what is of the highest benefit, both here and 
hereafter, to a man who has an unstable body and is the slave of his 
desires?” Thus questioned, and properly honoured by the king, that Rishi of 
profound ascetic merit replied with these most beneficial words. 

The Rishi said, “If you desire what is agreeable to you both in this 
world and the next, be self-restrained and abstain from injuring all 
creatures. Righteousness is beneficial to the virtuous. Dharma is the refuge 
of those who are good. 

The three worlds with their moving and still creatures flow from 
dharma. You who so eagerly wish to enjoy all pleasures, how is it that you 
are not yet satiated with the objects of desire? You see the honey, O you of 
small understanding, but are blind to the fall. 

As one who wants to earn the fruits of knowledge should set himself to 
the acquisition of knowledge, so also one who desires the fruits of dharma 
should set himself to the acquisition of righteousness. 

Desiring virtue, a wicked man finds it impossible to fulfil his desire 
despite striving to act in a pure and taintless manner. On the other hand, if a 
good man is impelled by the desire to earn punya, he accomplishes even a 
difficult deed with ease. Living in the forest, if one acts in a manner so as to 
delight in the pleasures of a dwelling among men in towns, he is regarded 


not as a forest recluse but as a townsman. Similarly, while living in towns, 
if a man desires the felicity enjoyed by a forest recluse, he is considered not 
a town dweller but a vanaprastha. 

Know then the merit of performing and abstaining from religious 
karma; concentrate on and be devoted to the practices of dharma in 
thoughts, words and deeds. Ascertain the propriety of time and place, purify 
yourself by rituals and vows, and when entreated, without malice make 
endowments to the virtuous. 

Acquiring wealth by righteous means, one should offer it to the 
deserving. One should bestow gifts, discarding anger; and having made 
these offerings one should neither regret nor extol those gifts with one’s 
own mouth. 

The Brahmana who is full of compassion, honest, and whose birth is 
pure, is one regarded as deserving of gifts. A man is said to be pure in birth 
when he is born of a mother that has only one husband and who belongs to 
the same varna as her husband. 

Indeed, such a Brahmana, conversant with the three Vedas—Rig, Yajur 
and Sama—learned, and who observes the six duties of performing yagnas 
himself, of officiating at those of others, of learning, teaching, offering dana 
and receiving gifts, is regarded as being worthy of receiving gifts. 

Dharma becomes adharma, and unrighteousness becomes righteousness, 
according to the character of the doer, of time, and of place. Sin is washed 
away like the dirt on one’s body, with a little exertion and more when the 
effort is greater. 

After purging his bowels, a man should take ghee, a tonic which makes 
his system healthy. In the same manner, having cleansed oneself of all 
faults, if one sets oneself to acquire dharma, such righteousness will 
produce the highest happiness in the next world. 

Good and evil thoughts exist in the minds of all creatures. Withdrawing 
the mind from evil thoughts, it should always be directed towards those that 
are pure. One should always revere one’s svadharma, the practices of one’s 
own varna. Strive, then, to act in a manner that you may have faith in the 
duties of your varna. 

O you of impatient soul, undertake the practice of patience. You of 
small understanding, seek to become endowed with intelligence. Bereft of 
serenity, seek to be calm; and lacking in wisdom as you are, try to act 
wisely. 


He who moves in the company of the righteous succeeds, through his 
own efforts, in acquiring the means of accomplishing what is beneficial for 
him both in this world and the next. Indeed, the root of this benefit is 
unwavering steadfastness. 

The Rayjarishi Mahabhisha fell from heaven through want of this 
firmness. Yayati, also, was boastful and arrogant, exhausted his punya, and 
was cast down from swarga; he succeeded in regaining the realms of felicity 
through steadfastness. You will surely attain to great intelligence and your 
highest good by paying heed to virtuous and learned men of ascetic merit.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘Hearing these words of the sage, King Vasuman, 
possessed of a good character, withdrew his mind from the pursuit of desire, 
and set it upon the acquisition of dharma.’” 


CANTO 311 


Y udhishtira says, ‘It befits you, Pitamaha, to discourse to me on that 

which is free from dharma and its opposite, which is free from every 
doubt, which transcends birth and death, as also virtue and sin, which is 
auspiciousness, eternal fearlessness, indestructible and immutable, which is 
always pure, and which is ever free from the toil of exertion.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘In this regard I will narrate to you the ancient story, 
Bhaarata, of the discourse between Yajnavalkya and Janaka. Long ago, the 
famous King Daivarati of Janaka’s royal house, fully conversant with the 
import of all questions, asked this question of Yajnavalkya, that foremost of 
Rishis. 

Janaka said, “O regenerate Rishi, how many kinds of senses are there? 
How many kinds are there of Prakriti? What is the Avyakta, unmanifest and 
highest Brahman? What is higher than Brahman? What is birth and what is 
death? What are the limits of age? 

O Dvijottama, instruct me on these subjects; I am ignorant while you 
are an ocean of knowledge. Truly, I wish to hear you speak on all these 
matters.” 

Yajnavalkya said, “O king, listen to my answers to these questions of 
yours. I shall impart to you the supreme knowledge valued by yogins and 
especially that which the Samkhyas possess. 

Nothing is unknown to you; still you have asked me. And, on being 
questioned, one should answer. This is the eternal practice. 

Eight main principles, tattvas, have been named as being of Prakriti, 
while sixteen have been called indriyas, modifications. Of the Vyakta, the 


manifest, there are seven. These are the views of those conversant with the 
science of Adhyatma. 

The unmanifest, or original Prakriti, Mahat, Consciousness, and the 
Panchamahabhutas — five suksma or subtle elements of Bhumi, earth; Vayu, 
air; Akasa, space; Jala, water, and Agni, fire—these eight are together 
known as Prakriti. The indriyas are certainly manifest or gross, sthula. 
Listen now to the enumeration of those called indriyas. They are the ear, the 
skin, the tongue and the nose; and sound, touch, form, taste and scent; as 
also speech, the two arms, the two feet, the anus and the organs of pleasure 
and generation. 

Amongst these, the ten beginning with sound, and having their origin in 
the five Panchamahabhutas, the great evolutes, are called Visesha. The five 
senses of cognition, are called Savisesha. Those who know the Adhyatma 
vigyana regard the mind, Manas, as the sixteenth. 

This is in consonance with your own views and those of other learned 
men who know these truths. 

From the unmanifest, Rajan, springs the Mahat. The wise regard this to 
be the first Prakriya, creation relating to Pradhana or Prakriti: From Mahat 
is produced Chit, Consciousness. This has been called the second Prakriya, 
having Buddhi, the intellect, for its essence. 

From Consciousness has sprung Manas, the mind, which is the essence 
of sabda, sound, and the others that are the attributes of Akasa and the rest. 
This is the third creation, related to Chit. From Manas have sprung the five 
great elements. Truly I say, know that this is the fourth Prakriya called 
sukshma, subtle or spiritual. 

Those who know the primordial elements say that sabda, sound, sparsa, 
touch, rupa, form, rasa, taste, and gandha, scent, are the fifth creation, 
related to the great primal elements. The creation of the ear, the skin, the 
tongue and the nose, forms the sixth; this is regarded as having multiplicity 
of thought for its essence. 

After this arise the senses that follow the ear and the others, those of 
action, karma, O Rajan. This is called seventh Prakriya and relates to the 
senses of cognition. Then comes prana, the breath that rises upward, 
followed by samana, udana and vyana, those that have a transverse motion. 
This is the eighth creation and is called Arjava. 

After these breaths that course transversely in the lower parts of the 
body—samana, udana and vyana—comes that called apana flowing 


downwards. This ninth creation is also called Arjava, O king. 

These nine Prakriyas, and these twenty-four tattvas, I have expounded 
to you according to what has been laid down in the sacred shastras. Now, O 
Rajan, listen to me as I tell you about the durations of time as indicated by 
the learned in respect of these tattvas.””’ 


CANTO 312 


¢ Y ajnavalkya said, “Listen to me, O foremost of men, as I tell you 

about the duration of time with respect to the unmanifest, the 

Supreme Purusha. Ten thousand kalpas are said to constitute his single day. 
Equal is the duration of his night. 

When his night passes, he awakes, and first creates herbs and plants that 
sustain all embodied creatures. He then creates Brahma who springs from a 
golden egg. 

We have heard that Brahma is the form of all created things. Having 
dwelt for a whole year within that egg, the great ascetic Brahma, also called 
Prajapati, Lord of all creatures, emerged from it and created Bhumi, the 
earth, and swarga, the heavens above. 

Brahma, then, it is said in the Vedas, placed the sky between; heaven 
and earth separated from each other. Seven thousand and five hundred 
kalpas comprise one day of Brahma. Those who know the science of 
Adhyatma say that his night also is of an equal duration. Brahma, called 
Mahan, then creates Consciousness, Bhuta, which is unsurpassed in 
essence. 

Before creating any physical bodies out of what are called the 
Mahabhutas, the Great Elements, Mahan or Brahma, imbued with tapasya, 
created four others referred to as his sons. They are the sires of the original 
Pitris. 

Rajan, we have also heard that the senses of knowledge along with the 
four inner faculties, have sprung from the Pitris, the five great elements, and 
that the entire universe of mobile and immobile Beings has been filled with 
those Panchamahabhutas. 


The puissant Consciousness created the five Bhutas. These are Bhumi, 
earth; Vayu, air; Akasa, space; Jala, water, and Agni, fire or light. This 
Consciousness, this Great Being, from whom springs the third Prakriya, 
creation, has five thousand kalpas for his night, and his day is of equal 
length. 

Sound, touch, form, taste and smell—sabda, sparsa, rupa, rasa and 
gandha—are called Visesha. They inhere in the five great elements. All 
creatures are continually pervaded by these five; they desire one another’s 
companionship, become subservient to one another; they challenge and 
transcend one another; led by these immutable and compelling urges, 
creatures kill one another and wander in this world entering into numberless 
orders of being. 

Three thousand kalpas represent the duration of their day. Equal is the 
measure of their night. Manas, the mind, roves over all things, Rajan, led on 
by the senses. The senses do not themselves perceive anything. It is Manas 
that perceives through them. 

The eye sees forms when helped by the mind but never by itself. When 
Manas is distracted, the eye fails to see even the objects directly before it. It 
is commonly held that the senses perceive. This is not true, for it is the mind 
that perceives through the senses. 

When the activity of Manas, the mind, ceases, the cessation of the 
activity of the senses follows. That is the end of the activity of the senses, 
which is the end of the mind’s activity. One should thus know that the 
senses are controlled by the mind. Indeed, Manas is the Lord of all the 
senses. O illustrious king, these are all the twenty Bhutas in the universe.” 


CANTO 313 


6 Y ajnavalkya said, “I have, in succession, told you the order and 

duration of the Prakriyas, the creations, and the total number of 

their various tanmatras or evolutes. Listen now to me as I tell you of their 

destruction. Listen to how Brahman, who is eternal and undecaying, and 

who is without beginning and without end, repeatedly creates and destroys 
all created things and beings. 

When his day ends and night comes, he desires sleep. At such a time the 
unmanifest and Holy One urges the Being called Maharudra, who is 
conscious of his great powers for destroying the world. Compelled by the 
Avyakta, Maharudra assumes the form of Surya of countless rays, and 
divides himself into a dozen amsas each resembling a blazing fire. With his 
tejas, he then swiftly consumes the four kinds of created beings, the 
viviparous, Oviparous, bacterial and vegetable. 

Within moments all mobile and immobile creatures are annihilated, and 
the whole of Bhumi, the earth, becomes as bare as a tortoise shell. Having 
burnt everything on the face of Bhumi, Rudra of immeasurable power then 
inundates it with water of immense force. 

He then creates the fire of dissolution, which dries up that Jala into 
which Bhumi has been dissolved. The water disappears, leaving the 
Mahabhuta Agni, the fire, to burn fiercely. 

Then arises the mighty Vayu, wind of immeasurable force, in his eight 
forms, who swiftly swallows that inferno of transcendent force, with seven 
flames, and which is indeed identifiable with the heat existing in every 
creature. Having consumed that Agni, Vayu courses in every direction, 
upwards, downwards, and transversely. 


Then Akasa, immeasurable space, swallows that wind of transcendent 
energy. Then Manas, the mind, effortlessly swallows Akasa. Then 
Consciousness, Chitta, the Soul of everything, consumes Manas. 

In his turn, Chitta is swallowed by the Mahat who is and knows the 
past, the present and the future. The incomparable Mahat, or universe, is 
then swallowed by Sambhu, that Lord of all things, in whom the attributes 
of yoga, anima, laghima, prapti, and others, naturally inhere. He is the 
supreme and immutable light. 

His hands and feet extend over every part; his eyes and head and face 
are everywhere, his ears reach every place; his existence overwhelms all 
things. He is the heart of all creatures and his measure is of a digit of the 
thumb! 

That Infinite and Supreme Soul, Paramatman, that Lord of all, thus 
swallows the universe. After this, what remains is the undying and the 
immutable. That One is flawless, immaculate, the Creator of the past, the 
present, and the future, and is perfect. 

I have thus, O Rajan, told you about the Pralaya, the great destruction. I 
will now tell you about Adhyatma, Adhibhuta and Adhidaivata.”’ 


CANTO 314 


¢ y ajnavalkya said, “Brahmanas conversant with these subjects of 
enquiry speak of the two feet as Adhyatma, the act of walking as 
Adhibhuta, and Vishnu as Adhidaivatam of those two limbs. The anus is 
Adhyatma; its function of ejecting faeces is Adhibhuta, and Mitra, or Surya, 
is its Adhidaivata. 

The organ of generation is called Adhyatma. Its gratifying function is 
called Adhibhuta, and Prajapati is its Adhidaivata. The hands are 
Adhyatma; their function as represented by doing is Adhibhuta; and Indra is 
the Adhidaivata of the hands. 

The organs of speech are Adhyatma. The words uttered by them are 
Adhibhuta; and Agni is their Adhidaivata. The eye is Adhyatma. Rupa, 
form, is its Adhibhuta; and Surya is the Adhidaivata of that organ. The ear 
is Adhyatma. Sabda, sound, is Adhibhuta; and the points of the horizon are 
its Adhidaivata. 

The tongue is Adhyatma. Rasa, taste, is its Adhibhuta; and Jala is its 
Adhidaivata. The nose is Adhyatma. Gandha, scent, is its Adhibhuta; and 
Bhumi is its Adhidaivata. The skin is Adhyatma. Sparsa, touch, is its 
Adhibhuta; and Vayu is its Adhidaivata. 

Manas has been called Adhyatma; that with which it is exercised is 
Adhibhuta; and Chandramas is its Adhidaivata. Consciousness, Chitta, is 
Adhyatma. Conviction in one’s identity with Prakriti is its Adhibhuta; and 
Mahat or Buddhi is its Adhidaivata. Buddhi is Adhyatma. That which is to 
be understood is its Adhibhuta; and Kshetrajna is its Adhidaivata. 

Rajan, I have thus truly expounded to you, who fully know these 
original tattvas, in detail, one by one, the puissance of Brahman, the 


Paramatman as he manifests himself in different forms, in the beginning, 
the middle and the end. 

Prakriti, as if for sport, O king, of her own accord, by undergoing 
modifications, playfully produces thousands upon countless thousands of 
combinations of her original transformations that are called gunas. As men 
can light countless lamps from a single one, Prakriti, too, transforms herself 
and multiplies the three gunas of Purusha—sattva, rajas and tamas—into 
numberless creations. 

The qualities of sattva include patience, joy, prosperity, and satisfaction, 
the lustrousness of all faculties, happiness, purity, health, contentment, 
faith, liberality, compassion, forgiveness, steadfastness, benevolence, 
equanimity, truth and the acquittance of one’s svadharma. 

Mildness, modesty, calmness, outward purity, simplicity, observance of 
obligatory customs and practices, dispassion, fearlessness of heart, 
disregard for the appearance of banishment of good and evil as also for past 
deeds, accepting only what is offered as a gift, the absence of greed, 
concern for others, compassion for all creatures: these have been said to be 
the qualities ascribed to the sattva guna. 

The tale of the qualities of rajas include pride of personal beauty, 
assertion of power, war, the absence of munificence and compassion, 
indulgence in kama, and so enduring of happiness and misery, delight in 
speaking ill of others, and an eagerness for fights and disputes of every 
kind. 

Arrogance, rudeness, anxiety, indulgence in hostilities, sorrow, usurping 
what belongs to others, shamelessness, crookedness, disunions, roughness, 
lust, wrath, pride, assertion of superiority, malice and slander are also said 
to spring from rajas. 

I will now tell you about the assemblage of qualities which spring from 
tamas. They are the torpor of judgement, obscuration of every faculty, 
darkness and utter, blind darkness. By darkness is implied death, and blind 
darkness is great wrath, kali. 

Besides these, the other indications of tamas are greed with respect to 
all kinds of food, an insatiable appetite for both food and drink, taking over 
much pleasure in perfumes, royal attire, sporting events, luxurious seats and 
beds, and sleep during the day, lies and reckless deeds springing out of 
heedlessness, delighting in dancing and music on account of ignorance of 


purer sources of joy, and an aversion for every kind of religion. These, 
indeed, are the indications of tamas.’”’ 


CANTO 315 


¢ Y ajnavalkya said, “O best of men, sattva, rajas and tamas are the 

three gunas of Prakriti. These attach to all things of the universe 

and always inhere to them. The unmanifest Purusha invested with the six 

attributes of yoga, by embracing these trigunas, transforms himself by 
himself into millions and millions of forms. 

Those who know the science of Adhyatma say that to sattva is assigned 
a high, to rajas a middling and to tamas, a low place in the universe. With 
the help of pure dharma, righteousness, one attains to a high position, 
alongside the Devas and other divinities. 

Through righteousness tainted with sin one attains to the condition of 
humankind. Finally, through unmixed sin, one sinks into depravity, a vile 
end, by becoming an animal or a vegetable. Listen now to me, Rajan, as I 
speak to you about the mixture or compounds of the trigunas of sattva, rajas 
and tamas. 

Sometimes rajas is seen existing with sattva. Tamas also exists 
alongside rajas. With tamas may also be seen sattva. Sattva and rajas and 
tamas can exist together and in equal proportions. They constitute the 
Avyakta, the unmanifest, or Prakriti. 

When the unmanifest Purusha is suffused with only sattva, he attains to 
the regions of the gods. Imbued with both sattva and rajas, he takes birth 
among human beings. And with rajas and tamas, he takes birth among the 
intermediate orders of beings. With all three, sattva, rajas and tamas, he 
attains to the condition of humanity. 

Those Mahatmans that transcend both righteousness and sin, attain to 
that place which is eternal, immutable, undecaying and immortal. Gyanis, 


men of knowledge, attain to births that are unrivalled, and their place is 
immaculate and undecaying, transcending the realm of the senses, free from 
ignorance, above birth and death, and full of light that dispels all kinds of 
darkness. 

You asked me about the nature of the Paramatman that dwells in the 
unmanifest Purusha. I will tell you, Rajan; listen to me. 

Even when dwelling in Prakriti, Purusha is said to dwell in his own 
nature without partaking of the nature of Prakriti. Prakriti is without reality 
and inert. Only when presided over by Purusha can she create and destroy.” 

Janaka said, “Wise one, both Prakriti and Purusha are without beginning 
and without end. Both of them are without rupa, form. Both are undecaying. 
Both are, again, unfathomable. How then, Maharishi, can it be said that one 
of them is inanimate and unintelligent? And how can the other be said to be 
animate and intelligent? 

And why is the latter called Kshetrajna? O foremost of Brahmanas, you 
know the entire dharma of moksha. I want to hear in full and in detail about 
emancipation. 

Speak to me then of the existence and oneness of Purusha, of his 
separateness from Prakriti, of the deities that attach to the body of the place 
to which embodied creatures repair when they die, and that place to which 
they may go ultimately, in the course of time. 

Tell me also of the knowledge described in the Samkhya philosophy, 
and of the yoga system, separately. O best of men, it befits you also to speak 
of the premonitory symptoms of death. All these principles are as well 
known to you as the lines and signs in the palm of your hand!” 


CANTO 316 


¢ Y ajnavalkya said, “That which is without gunas cannot be 
explained by ascribing gunas to it. Listen to me and I will 
expound to you what possesses attributes and what is nirguna. 

High-souled and wise Munis, who know the truth about all the tattvas 
say that when Purusha seizes attributes like a crystal catching the reflection 
of a red flower, he is said to be imbued with gunas; but when freed from 
them, like the crystal freed from reflection, he can be viewed in his true 
nature, that is, nirguna, beyond all attributes. 

Unmanifest Prakriti is by her nature filled with gunas. She cannot 
transcend them. Inert by nature, she becomes attached to attributes. 
Avyakta, she cannot know anything, while Purusha, by his nature, possesses 
gyana, knowledge. 

There is nothing higher than myself—this is what Purusha is always 
conscious of. For this reason the unmanifest or Prakriti, although inherently 
without reality and inert, becomes animate and intelligent in consequence of 
her union with Purusha who is eternal and indestructible. 

When Purusha, through ignorance, repeatedly becomes associated with 
gunas, he fails to realise his own true nature and thus he fails to attain 
moksha. As a result of Purusha’s reign over the tattvas that flow from 
Prakriti, he is said to partake of the nature of those evolutions. In 
consequence also of his agency in the matter of Prakriya, creation, he is said 
to possess the attribute of creation. In consequence of his agency in the 
matter of yoga, he is said to possess the attribute of yoga. For his lordship 
over those particular tattvas or tanmatras known as Prakriti, he is said to 
possess the nature of Prakriti. 


For his agency in the matter of creating the seeds of all immobile things, 
he partakes of the nature of those seeds. And because he causes the several 
principles to initiate life, he is as subject to decay and destruction as are 
these principles themselves. 

Since he is the witness of everything, and besides him there is nothing 
else, and for his consciousness of identity with Prakriti, Yatis crowned with 
ascetic success, knowers of Adhyatma, and freed from fever of every kind, 
regard him as existing by himself without a second; he is immutable, 
Avyakta, unmanifest, in the form of cause, unstable, and Vyakta, manifest, 
in the form of effects. 

This is what has we have heard. The Samkhyas who depend upon gyana 
alone for their Liberation, and the practice of compassion for all creatures, 
say that it is Prakriti which is One while Purushas are many. 

In fact, Purusha is different from Prakriti which, though unstable, still 
appears to be stable. As a blade of a reed is different from its outer sheath, 
even so is Purusha different from Prakriti. Indeed, the worm that is 
ensconced within the udumbara tree is distinct from the udumbara. Though 
existing with the udumbara, the worm is not to be regarded as forming a 
part of the tree. 

The fish is distinct from the water in which it lives, and the water is 
separate from the fish that lives in it. Though the fish lives in the water, it is 
never drenched by water. 

The fire that is contained in an earthen pot is distinct from the pot, and 
the pot is distinct from the fire it contains. Although the fire exists in and 
with the pot, it is not to be regarded as forming any part of it. 

The lotus-leaf that floats on the surface of some water is distinct from 
the water on which it floats. Its co-existence with water does not make it a 
part of the water. 

The perennial existence of these things in and with other things is never 
correctly grasped by ordinary people. They who behold Prakriti and 
Purusha in any other light are said to possess a flawed vision. It is certain 
that they have to repeatedly sink into naraka, terrifying hell. 

I have now instructed you in the philosophy of the Samkhyas, that 
excellent science through which all things have been correctly ascertained. 
Knowing the nature of Purusha and Prakriti in this way, the Samkhyas 
attain moksha. I have also told you of the systems of those others who are 


conversant with the great principles of the universe. I will now describe to 
you the vigyana of the yogins.’””’ 


CANTO 317 


¢ Y ajnavalkya said, “Rajan, I have already spoken to you of the 

science of the Samkhyas. Listen now as I discourse on the way of 

the yogins as heard and seen by me. There is no knowledge that can 

compare with that of the Samkhyas. There is no power that compares with 

that of yoga. These two ordain the same practices, and both are regarded as 
leading to moksha. 

Men who are not blessed with intelligence regard the Samkhya and the 
yoga systems to be distinct from each other. We, however, look upon them 
as one and the same; we have arrived at this conclusion after study and 
reflection. 

That which the yogins say and do is the very same which the Samkhyas 
have in view. He who sees both the Samkhya and the yoga systems to be 
one and the same is to be regarded as truly conversant with the principles 
that ordain the universe. 

O Rajan, know the vital breaths and the senses are the chief means for 
practising yoga. Just by regulating those breaths and the senses, yogins can 
go everywhere at will. 

Sinless one, when the gross body is destroyed, yogins endowed with 
subtle bodies, possessing the eight siddhis of yoga, such as anima, laghima 
and prapti, among others, wander throughout the universe, enjoying in that 
body all kinds of bliss. 

In the shastras, the wise have spoken of yoga as conferring eight kinds 
of powers. They have spoken of yoga as having eight limbs. Indeed, O king, 
they have not spoken of any other kind of yoga. 


It has been said that the excellent and effective practices of yogins are 
of two kinds. These, according to the indications in the scriptures, are those 
with attributes and those free of them: saguna and nirguna. 

Dhyana, the concentration of the mind on the sixteen named objects, 
with the simultaneous regulation of the breath, is of one kind. The 
concentration of the mind in such a way as to destroy all difference between 
the contemplator, the object contemplated, and the act of dhyana, along 
with subjugation of the senses, is of another kind. 

The first kind of yoga is said to be that possessed of gunas, attributes; 
the second kind is said to be that free of them. 

Pranayama, regulation of the breath, is yoga with attributes. In nirguna 
yoga, the mind, freed from its functions, should be still. King of Mithila, at 
first, only saguna pranayama should be practised, otherwise if the inhaled 
and suspended breath is exhaled without mentally focusing upon a definite 
image furnished by a limited mantra, the increase of wind in the neophyte’s 
body will cause him great injury. 

In the first yaama of the night, twelve ways of holding the breath are 
recommended. After sleep, in the last yaama of the night, another twelve 
ways have been laid down. Without doubt, one who is calm, of subdued 
senses, living in solitude, rejoicing in his own self, and fully conversant 
with the import of the scriptures, should focus his Atman on_ the 
Paramatman by regulating his breath in these twenty-four ways. 

Dispelling the five faults of the five senses, by removing them from 
their objects of sabda, rupa, sparsa, rasa and gandha, and dispelling the 
conditions called Pratibha and Apavarga, all the senses should be fixed 
upon Manas, the mind. Manas should then be fixed on Chitta, 
Consciousness; Chitta should be set on Buddhi, intelligence, and Buddhi 
should then be fixed on Prakriti. 

Thus merging these, one after another, yogins contemplate the Supreme 
Soul which is One, which is freed from rajas, which is stainless, immutable 
and infinite, pure and perfect; who is the eternal Purusha, who is 
unchangeable, who is indivisible, without decay and death, who is 
everlasting, who transcends diminution, and who is the immutable 
Brahman. 

Rajan, listen now to the indications of one that is in yoga, communion. 
All the indications of cheerful contentment of one who rests in perfect 
peace are seen in him who is in Samadhi. The wise say that the man in 


Samadhi looks like the still flame of a lamp full of oil and burning in a 
windless place. 

He is like a rock which cannot be moved even slightly, not by a 
torrential cloudburst. He cannot be shaken by the blasting of conches and 
beating drums, or by songs, or the sound of hundreds of musical 
instruments played together. 

These are the signs of one in Samadhi. Like a poised, brave and 
determined man who, while climbing a flight of stairs with a vessel full of 
oil in his hands, does not spill even a drop even if threatened by armed men, 
the Yogin, when his mind has been concentrated and when he beholds the 
Paramatman in Samadhi, remains unmoved, for he has entirely stilled his 
senses. 

These are the signs of the yogin while he is in Samadhi. While in 
Samadhi, the yogin beholds Brahman, supreme and immutable, and which 
is a blazing light in the midst of deep and heavy darkness. By these means 
he attains, after long years, to moksha, after casting off this inanimate body. 

This is what the eternal Sruti declares. This is called the yoga of the 
yogins. What else is it? They know it, they that are enlightened with 
wisdom, and regard themselves as crowned with final success.” 


CANTO 318 


¢ 7 ajnavalkya said, “Listen now to me attentively, Rajan, as I speak 
of the places to which those who die will go. 

If the Jivatman escapes through the feet, it is said that the man goes to 
the region of Vishnu. If through the calves, we have heard that the man goes 
to the regions of the Vasus. If through the knees, he attains to the company 
of the divinities called Sadhyas. 

If through the anus, the man attains to the realms of Mitra. If through 
the back, he returns to Bhumi, and if through the thighs to the world of 
Prajapati. If through the flanks, the man attains to the realms of the Maruts, 
and if through the nostrils, to the realm of Chandramas. 

If through the arms, the man goes to Indraloka, and if through the chest, 
to that of Rudra. If through the neck, he goes to the excellent loka of the 
great Rishi Nara. If through the mouth, the man attains to the world of the 
Viswadevas, and if through the ears, to the world of the Lokapalas. 

If through the nose, the man attains to the realm of Vayu, and if through 
the eyes, to that of Agni. If through the brows, the man goes to the loka of 
the Aswins; and if through the forehead, to that of Pitris. If through the 
crown of the head, the man repairs to the world the puissant Brahma, 
greatest of gods. 

Janaka, I have thus told you about the several realms to which men 
attain according to the manner in which their Jivatmans escape from their 
bodies. 

I will now tell you the premonitory indications for those who have but 
one year to live, as laid down by the wise. Having previously seen 
Arundhati, the fixed star, or the other called Dhruva, one who fails to see it, 


or one that sees the full moon or the flame of a burning lamp to be broken 
towards the south, has but a year to live. 

Those men who can no longer see images of themselves reflected in the 
eyes of others have but one year to live. One, who, though radiant, loses 
lustre, or being endowed with wisdom loses it, indeed, one whose inner and 
outer nature are thus changed, has but six months more to live. 

He who disregards the gods, or has altercations with Brahmanas, or one 
who, being naturally of a dark complexion, becomes pale, has just six 
months to live. One who sees the moon as having many lacunae like a 
spider’s web, or one who sees the sun with such gaps, has but one week 
more to live. 

On smelling fragrances in temples, if a man perceives them to be as 
being offensive like the smell of corpses, he has but one week more to live. 
The depression of the nose or of the ears, the discolouring of the teeth or of 
the eye, the loss of consciousness, and of all bodily heat, are symptoms 
indicating death that very day. 

If, without any perceptible cause a stream of tears suddenly flows from 
his left eye, and if vapours are seen to issue from his head, that is a sure 
indication that the man will die before that day ends. Knowing all these 
premonitory symptoms, the man of cleansed soul should, day and night, 
unite his Atman with the Paramatman in Samadhi. 

Thus should he go on till the day for his dissolution arrives. If, however, 
instead of wishing to die he desires to live in this world, he can cast off all 
pleasures of gandha and rasa and live on in abstinence. In this manner he 
conquers death by fixing his Atman on the Paramatman. 

Indeed, the man who is blessed with knowledge of the Atman practises 
the way of life recommended by the Samkhyas and conquers death by 
uniting his soul with the Supreme Soul. At last, he attains to what is entirely 
indestructible, which is without birth, auspicious and immutable, eternal 
and stable, and which is incapable of being attained to by men of impure 
souls.” 


CANTO 319 


¢ Y ajnavalkya said, “You have asked me about that Supreme 

Brahman which resides in the Avyakta, the unmanifest. Your 

question relates to a deep mystery. Listen to me with close attention, O 
Rajan. 

Having conducted myself with humility according to the ordinances laid 
down by the Rishis, I obtained the Yajuses from Surya. With the austerest 
penances I earlier adored the sun god. 

The mighty Surya, pleased with me, said, ‘Ask, O twice-born Rishi, for 
the boon upon which you have set your heart; however difficult it may be to 
obtain, I will gladly grant it to you. It is not easy to incline me to grace!’ 

Bowing and paying obeisance to him, I addressed that supreme heat- 
giving luminary in these words: ‘I have no knowledge of the Yajuses. I 
want to know them without delay.’ 

Thus solicited, the divine one told me, ‘I shall impart the Yajuses to 
you. Made up of the essence of speech, Goddess Saraswati will enter into 
your body.’ 

Surya Deva then commanded me to open my mouth. I did as I was told. 
Devi Saraswati entered into my body, O Anagha. At this, I began to burn. 
Unable to endure the pain I plunged into a river. Not knowing that what the 
high-souled Surya had done for me was for my benefit, I even grew angry 
with him. 

While I was burning with the fierce energy of the goddess, the holy 
Surya said, ‘Endure this burning for only a short while. It will soon cease 
and you will feel cool.’ Indeed, soon my body was cool again. 


Seeing me restored to ease, the Giver of light said to me, “The whole of 
the Vedas with their Angas, together with the Upanishads, will appear 
within you through inner light, O Dvija! You will also know and abbreviate 
all of the Satapathas. 

After that, your understanding will turn to the path of moksha. And you 
will attain to that end which both Samkhyas and yogins covet.’ Having said 
these words to me, the divine Surya set beyond the Asta hills. 

Hearing his parting words, and after he had gone from where I stood, I 
came home in joy and then remembered Devi Saraswati. As I thought of 
her, the auspicious Saraswati appeared instantly before my eyes, adorned 
with all the sacred vowels and the consonants; I first uttered the syllable 
Aum and then, according to the ordinance, offered the goddess the 
customary arghya, and dedicated another portion to Surya. 

I discharged my duty and sat down, in devotion to both those deities. 
Thereupon, all of the Satapatha Brahmanas, with all their mysteries and 
with all their abstractions as also their angas, appeared of themselves before 
my inner eye, and I was filled with great joy. 

I then taught these to a hundred good sishyas and thereby gave 
displeasure to my great Matulan, my maternal uncle Vaisampayana, with 
his disciples gathered round him. Radiant in the midst of my disciples, like 
the sun himself with his rays, I undertook to manage the yagna of your 
Mahatman father, O king of Mithila. 

In that yagna a dispute arose between me and Vaisampayana as to who 
should be permitted to receive the dakshina that was paid for the recitation 
of the Vedas. In the very presence of Devala, I took half of that dakshina, 
the other half going to my uncle. Your sire and Sumantra and Paila and 
Jaimini and others all acquiesced in that arrangement. 

I thus received from Surya Deva the fifty Yajuses. I then studied the 
Puranas with Romaharshana. Keeping before me those original mantras and 
the Devi Saraswati, helped by Surya’s inspiration, I set myself to compile 
the excellent Satapatha Brahmanas, and succeeded in the task never before 
undertaken by anyone else. 

I have taken that path which I wanted to take and I have also taught it to 
my sishyas. Indeed, I have imparted the whole of those Vedas with their 
angas and antas to them. As a result of my teachings, pure in mind and 
body, all those disciples have been filled with joy. 


Having established for the benefit of others this gyana of fifty branches, 
which I had from Surya, I now meditate on the great goal of that final 
knowledge, the Brahman. 

The Gandharva Viswavasu, well-conversant with the Vedanta 
scriptures, who wanted to know what is beneficial for Brahmanas in this 
knowledge, what truth occurs in it, and what its objective is, once 
questioned me. 

He put altogether twenty-four questions to me relating to the Vedas. 
Finally, he asked me the twenty-fifth question relating to that branch of 
knowledge which is concerned with nyaya, the inferences of ratiocination. 

Those questions are as follows: What is the universe and what is the 
not-universe? What is Aswa and what, again, is Aswa? What is Mitra? 
What is Varuna? What is gyana? What is the object of knowledge? What is 
unintelligent? What is intelligent? Who is Kah? 

Who possesses the principle of change? Who does not possess it? What 
is he that devours the sun and what is the sun? What is vidya and what is 
avidya? What is immobile and what Mobile? What is without beginning, 
what is Akshara, indestructible, and what is Kshara, destructible? 

The best of the Gandharvas asked me these excellent questions. After 
he, King Viswavasu, asked me these questions one after another, I answered 
them truly. At first, however, I told him to wait for a brief time, while I 
reflected on his queries! ‘So be it,’ the Gandharva said, and sat in silence. 

Once again, in my mind, I thought of Goddess Saraswati. Then the 
replies to those questions arose naturally in my mind like butter from curds. 
Keeping in view the high science of inferential reasoning, I churned, with 
my mind, the Upanishads and the angas of the Vedas. 

The fourth vigyana that deals with moksha, on which I have already 
discoursed to you, and which is based upon the twenty-fifth, the Jiva, I then 
expounded to him. 

Having said all this, O Rajan, to King Viswavasu, I said to him, ‘Listen 
now to the answers to the several questions that you have put to me. I now 
turn to the question, O Gandharva: What is the universe and what is the not- 
universe? 

The universe is Avyakta, unmanifest, and the original Prakriti is 
endowed with the principles of birth and death, which are terrible to those 
who desire mukti. It possesses the three gunas of sattva, rajas and tamas, 
since it creates the tattvas, all of which are fraught with those attributes. 


That which is the not-universe is Purusha divested of all gunas. By 
Aswa and Aswa are meant the female and the male, the former being 
Prakriti and the latter Purusha. Similarly, Mitra is Purusha, and Varuna is 
Prakriti. Gyana is Prakriti, while the object of knowledge is Purusha. 

The unawakened Jivatman, and the knowing or intelligent are both the 
nirguna Purusha, for it is Purusha that becomes the Jiva when invested with 
ignorance. You have asked what Kah is, who is changeable and who is not. 

I answer, Kah is Purusha. That which is changeable is Prakriti. He that 
is not is Purusha. Similarly, that which is called avidya, unknowing, is 
Prakriti; and that which is called vidya is Purusha. 

You have asked me about the mobile and the immobile. That which is 
mobile is Prakriti, which undergoing change, constitutes the cause of 
creation and destruction. The Immobile is Purusha, for, without undergoing 
variations himself, he assists at creation and destruction. 

According to a different system of philosophy, that which is Vedya is 
Prakriti; while that which is Avedya is Purusha. Both Prakriti and Purusha 
are said to be unintelligent, stable, indestructible, unborn, and eternal, 
according to the conclusions of philosophers conversant with the 
Adhyatma. 

Prakriti, in the matter of creation, is indestructible, and is unborn; hence 
Prakriti is not subject to decay or destruction. Purusha, again, is 
indestructible and unchangeable, for change it has none. The attributes of 
Prakriti may be destroyed, but not Prakriti herself. The learned, therefore, 
call Prakriti Akshara. 

Prakriti also, by undergoing changes, operates as the cause of creation. 
The created outcomes appear and disappear, but not original Prakriti. For 
this reason also is Prakriti called indestructible. Thus have I told you of the 
conclusions of the fourth science, the turiya vigyana based on the principles 
of logical inference with mukti as its aim. 

Having acquired by the science of Nyaya, inference, and by waiting 
upon gurus, the Riks, the Samans and the Yajuses, all the obligatory 
practices should be observed and all the Vedas studied with reverence, O 
Viswavasu! Foremost of Gandharvas, they who study the Vedas and all 
their angas, but who do not know the Paramatman from which all things 
take their birth and into which all things merge at the time of the Pralaya, 
and which is the one subject whose knowledge the Vedas seek to inculcate 
— indeed, they—who have no acquaintance with that which the Vedas seek 


to establish, study the Vedas to no purpose and bear the burden of such 
study in vain. 

If a man wants butter and churns the milk of the female donkey, he does 
not find what he seeks but only encounters a substance as foul- smelling as 
ordure. In the same manner if, having studied the Vedas, one fails to grasp 
what is Prakriti and what is Purusha, one only demonstrates one’s own 
foolishness and bears a useless burden in the form of Vedic lore. 

With bhakti and dhyana, devotion and meditation, one should 
contemplate both Prakriti and Purusha, so that one may avoid repeated 
births and deaths. Reflection upon the fact of one’s repeated births and 
deaths and avoiding the religion of rituals that produces at best only mortal 
results, one should take to the immortal religion of yoga. 

Kasyapa, if one continuously reflects on the nature of the Jivatman and 
its connection with the Paramatman, one then succeeds in divesting oneself 
of all attributes and in beholding the Supreme Soul. Ignorant men regard the 
eternal and Avyakta Paramatman to be different from the Jiva, the twenty- 
fifth tattva. 

Those who see both as truly one and the same are wise. Frightened by 
repeated births and deaths, the Samkhyas and yogins regard the Jivatman 
and the Paramatman to be identical.’ 

Viswavasu then said, ‘Best of Brahmanas, you have said that the 
Jivatman is indestructible and indistinguishable from the Paramatman. This 
is difficult to grasp. Discourse on this topic to me once more. 

I have heard discourses on this subject from Jaigishavya, Aista, Devala, 
the regenerate Parasara, the intelligent Varshaganya, Bhrigu, Panchasikha 
Kapila, Suka, Gautama, Arshtisena, the high-souled Garga, Narada, Asuri, 
the wise Pulastya, Sanatkumara, the great Sukra and my sire Kasyapa. 

Subsequently I heard the discourses of Rudra and the Viswarupa 
Mahabuddhi, of several of the Devas, of the Pitris and the Daityas. I have 
gathered all that they say, for they generally speak on that eternal goal of all 
knowledge. 

I desire, however, to hear what you, in all your wisdom, may say on 
those matters. You are the foremost of all, and a learned teacher of the 
shastras, and endowed with great intelligence. There is nothing that is 
unknown to you. 

You are an ocean of the Srutis, as described in the world, of both the 
Devas and Pitris. The great Rishis who dwell in the world of Brahma say 


that Aditya himself, the eternal lord of all luminaries, is your guru in this 
knowledge. 

Yajnavalkya, you have acquired the entire science of the Samkhyas, and 
in particular, the scriptures of the yogins. Without doubt, you are 
enlightened, and fully conversant with the mobile and immobile universe. I 
wish to hear you discourse on that knowledge, which may be likened to 
sweet ambrosial payasa.’ 

Yajnavalkya said, ‘Best of Gandharvas, you are able to fathom every 
knowledge. Yet, since you ask me, hear me instruct you in that which I 
myself learned from my guru. 

Prakriti, which is unintelligent, is apprehended by the Jiva. The Jiva, 
however, cannot be apprehended by Prakriti. As a result of the Jivatman 
being reflected in Prakriti, Prakriti is called Pradhana by Samkhyas and 
yogins who know the original Mahatattvas contained in the Srutis. Sinless 
one, the other, beholding, sees the twenty-fourth tattva, Prakriti, and the 
twenty-fifth, the Purusha; finally, not beholding, it beholds the twenty-sixth. 

The twenty-fifth tattva thinks that there is nothing higher than itself. In 
reality, however, though seeing, it does not perceive the twenty-sixth tattva, 
which beholds it. Wise men should never accept the twenty-fourth, Prakriti, 
which is unintelligent, inert, as identifiable with the twenty-fifth, or the 
Purusha which has a real and independent existence. 

The fish lives in water. It goes there impelled by its own nature. As the 
fish, though living in the water, is regarded as separate from it, the twenty- 
fifth tattva should be apprehended similarly: though it exists in a state of 
contact with the twenty-fourth, Prakriti, in its real nature, it is distinct from 
and independent of Prakriti. 

When overwhelmed with the Consciousness of Ahamkara, and when 
unable to understand its identity with the twenty-sixth; in fact, in 
consequence of the illusion that fills it, of its co-existence with Prakriti, and 
of its own manner of thinking, the Jivatman always sinks down, but when 
freed from such Consciousness it rises upwards. 

When the Jivatman succeeds in understanding that it is one, and Prakriti 
with which it resides is another, only then does it succeed in beholding the 
Paramatman and becomes one with the universe. Rajan, the Supreme is one, 
and the twenty-fifth, or the Jivatman is another. However, since the 
Supreme overlies the Jivatman, the wise regard both to be one and the 
same. 


For these reasons, yogins and followers of the Samkhya, terrified by 
birth and death, blessed with the vision of the twenty-sixth tattva, pure in 
body and mind, and devoted to the Paramatman, do not recognise the 
Jivatman as Akshara, indestructible. When one beholds the Supreme Soul 
and merges with it, losing all consciousness of individuality, one then 
becomes omniscient, and possessed of omniscience one is freed from the 
obligation of rebirth. 

I have thus spoken to you truly about Prakriti which is unintelligent, and 
the Jivatman which is intelligent, and the Paramatman which is omniscient, 
all according to the indications in the Srutis. That man who sees no 
difference between the knower or the known is both Kevala and Akevala, is 
the original cause of the universe, and is both Jivatman and _ the 
Paramatman.’ 

Viswavasu said, ‘You have duly and adequately discoursed on that 
which is the origin of all the deities and which leads to mukti. You have 
spoken of what is true and excellent. May inexhaustible blessings always 
attend on you, and may your mind be ever united with intelligence!’ 

Yajnavalkya continued, ‘Having said those words, the prince of the 
Gandharvas flew up towards heaven, shining in resplendent beauty. Before 
leaving me, he duly honoured me by circumambulating around my person 
in pradakshina, and I looked at him, highly pleased. 

He taught the science he had obtained from me to those divinities that 
dwell in the regions of Brahma and other gods, to those that dwell on earth, 
to the dwellers of patala, and to those who have adopted the mukti-marga. 

The Samkhyas are devoted to the practices of their system. The yogins 
are devoted to their practices. There are others too who desire to achieve 
moksha. To them this vigyana yields visible fruits, O lion among kings. 

Mukti flows from gyana; without knowledge it can never be attained. 
Rajan, this is what the wise have said. Hence, one should strive to acquire 
true knowledge in all its depth and detail, and so succeed in freeing oneself 
from birth and death. 

Acquiring knowledge from a Brahmana or a Kshatriya or Vaisya or 
even a Sudra of low birth, one must devotedly revere such gyana. Birth and 
death cannot assail one that has faith. 

All orders of men are Brahmanas. All are sprung from Brahman. All 
men are Brahmavadis and utter Brahman. Helped by an understanding that 


is derived from and directed to Brahman, I inculcated this vigyana of 
Prakriti and Purusha in myself. Indeed, this whole universe is Brahman. 

From the mouth of Brahma sprung the Brahmanas; from his arms, 
sprang the Kshatriyas; from his navel, the Vaisyas; and from his feet, the 
Sudras. All the varnas, having thus originated, should not be regarded as 
thieving from one another. 

Impelled by ignorance, all men die and take birth once more, birth that 
is the cause of karma, deeds. Without knowledge, men of all varnas, 
dragged down by terrible avidya, fall into varied orders of being due to the 
tattvas that flow from Prakriti. For this reason, all must, by every means, 
seek to acquire knowledge. 

I have told you that every person is entitled to strive for its attainment. 
One who possesses knowledge is a Brahmana. Others, Kshatriyas and 
Vaisyas and Sudras, also possess gyana. Hence, this science of mukti is 
always open to them all. This has been revealed by the wise. 

I have answered all the questions you had asked me, and I have 
answered them all honestly. Discard all sorrow. Cross over the end of this 
quest. Your questions were excellent. Blessings be on you for ever!’” 

Bhishma continues, ‘Thus instructed by Yajnavalkya, the king of 
Mithila was filled with joy. The king honoured that best of sannyasis by 
circling around him in pradakshina. Given permission by the monarch, the 
sage left his court. 

Having acquired the knowledge of mukti dharma, King Daivarati took 
his seat, and touching a million cows and vast quantities of gold and jewels, 
gave them away to numerous Brahmanas. Installing his son as the sovereign 
of the Videhas, the old king began to live according to the practices of the 
Yatis. 

Meditating mainly on all ordinary duties and their derelictions as laid 
down in the shastras, the king began to study the entire science of the 
Samkhyas and the yogins. Regarding himself to be infinite, he began to 
reflect on only the Eternal and Independent One, the Brahman. He rejected 
all ordinary duties and their derelictions, punya and paapa, satya and asatya, 
janma and mrityu, and all other things pertaining to the tattvas of Prakriti. 

Both the Samkhyas and yogins, in consonance with their sciences, 
regard this universe to be caused by to the action of the Vyakta, manifest, 
and the Avyakta, unmanifest. The learned say that Brahman is free from 
good and evil, is self-dependent, the Highest of the high, Eternal, and Pure. 


Therefore, you too, O Rajan, become pure! The giver, the receiver of 
the gift, the gift itself, and that which is ordered to be given away, are all to 
be deemed as the unmanifest Atman. The Atman is the Atman’s one 
possession. Who, therefore, can be a stranger to one? 

Always think in this manner, never otherwise. He who does not know 
what Prakriti is with gunas and what is Purusha transcending them, only he, 
without knowledge, repairs to sacred waters and performs yagnas. 

Not by the study of the Vedas, not by penances, nor by sacrifices, son of 
Kuru, can one attain to the condition of Brahman. Only when one succeeds 
in grasping the Supreme or Avyakta, does one come to be revered. 

They who wait upon Mahat attain to the regions of Mahat. They who 
wait upon Chit, Consciousness, attain to the realm of Chetana. They who 
wait upon what is higher attain to places that are higher than these. 

Those gyanis who succeed in apprehending eternal Brahman, who is 
higher than unmanifest Prakriti, succeed in obtaining that which transcends 
birth and death, which is free from attributes and qualities, and which is 
both existent and non-existent. I received this knowledge from Janaka, who 
had it from Yajnavalkya. 

Gyana, knowledge, is the highest. Yagnas, sacrifices, cannot compare 
with it. With the help of gyana one succeeds in crossing samsara, the 
world’s ocean so full of obstacles, suffering and danger. One can never 
cross that ocean with sacrifices. Men of knowledge say that one cannot 
prevail over birth and death, and other obstacles through yagnas, Rajan; 
indeed they declare that one cannot pass over samsara by ordinary exertion. 

Men attain to heaven through yagnas, tapasya, vratas and other 
observances. But they again fall down into this world. Therefore, adore 
with reverence that which is Supreme, most pure, blessed, stainless, and 
sacred, and which transcends all states, being moksha itself. 

By understanding Kshetra, and by performing the sacrifice that consists 
in the acquisition of knowledge, you will become truly wise. In an earlier 
age, Yajnavalkya did that good to King Janaka which can be derived from a 
study of the Upanishads. The eternal and immutable Paramatman was the 
subject on which the great Rishi discoursed to the king of Mithila. It 
enabled him to attain to that Brahman which is auspicious, and immortal, 
and which transcends every kind of sorrow.’ 


CANTO 320 


¢ ae udhishtira says, ‘Having acquired great power and great wealth, 

and having obtained a long life, how can one avoid death? By 

which of these means can one succeed in avoiding decay and death: 

tapasya, vratas, the diverse karmas laid down in the Vedas, or by knowledge 
of the Srutis, or the application of medicaments?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Listen to the old story of Panchasikha, who was a 
bhikshu in his practices, and Janaka. Once upon a time Janaka, the ruler of 
the Videhas, questioned the Maharishi Panchasikha, the foremost of all who 
knew the Vedas and whose doubts about the purpose and significance of all 
duties had been dispelled. 

The king asked, “Through what conduct, O holy one, may one 
transcend decrepitude and death? Is it by tapasya, or by gyana? Or by 
religious deeds like yagnas and vratas, or by the study and knowledge of the 
shastras?” 

Thus addressed by the ruler of the Videhas, the learned Panchasikha, 
knower of all things unseen, answered, “Decay and death cannot be 
prevented under any circumstances. Neither days nor nights, nor months, 
ever cease. 

Only that man, who, though transient, adopts the eternal path of the 
religion of Nivritti, abstention from all actions, succeeds in evading birth 
and death. Destruction overtakes all creatures. All are ceaselessly borne 
along the infinite current of time. 

Those that are borne along this infinite river infested by the two mighty 
crocodiles of decrepitude and death, without any rescue boat, sink down 
without anyone coming to their help. As they are swept along that current, 


men fail to find any friend for assistance and do not take an interest in any 
one else. 

One meets with wives and other friends on one’s way. A man 
encounters enjoyable companions but never for any length of time. 
Creatures, as they are borne along the river of time, become repeatedly 
attracted towards one another, and, like masses of clouds, blown by the 
wind, collide with a report of thunder. 

Decay and death devour all creatures, like wolves. Indeed, they devour 
the strong and the weak, the short and the tall. In all transitory creatures, 
only the Soul exists eternally. 

Why should he, then, rejoice when creatures are born or grieve when 
they die? Where do I come from? Who am I? Where shall I go? Whose am 
I? Before what do I rest? What shall I be? Why do you grieve and for what? 
Who else but you will behold swarga or patala? Thus, without discarding 
the shastras, we should offer dakshina and perform yagnas!’” 


CANTO 321 


¢ se udhishtira says, “Rajarishi of Kuruvamsa, who ever attained 

mukti, the annihilation of Buddhi, understanding, and the other 

faculties, without abandoning the domestic life, grihasta? Tell me this! How 

can the sthula and sukshma sariras, the gross and the subtle bodies, be cast 
off? Pitamaha, also tell me what the supreme excellence is.’ 

Bhishma says ‘In this regard, the old tale is told of the discourse 
between Janaka and Sulabha. In days of yore, there was a king of Mithila 
by the name of Dharmadhyaja, of Janaka’s vamsa. He was devoted to the 
practices of the religion of Vairagya, which is renunciation. He was deeply 
learned in the Vedas, with the scriptures on mukti, and with the shastras 
bearing on his own dharma as a king. 

Subduing his senses, he ruled this earth. Hearing of his good conduct in 
the world, many wise men wanted to emulate him. In the same Satya yuga 
lived a woman called Sulabha who was a sannyasini; she practised the 
dharma of yoga and wandered over the whole world. 

In the course of her wanderings, Sulabha heard from many Brahmana 
Dandis of different places that the ruler of Mithila was devoted to the 
dharma of mukti. Hearing this about Janaka and wishing to ascertain its 
veracity, Sulabha wanted to meet the king in person. 

Using her powers of yoga, Sulabha abandoned her natural form and 
features, and assumed the most faultless figure and unrivalled beauty. In the 
twinkling of an eye and with the speed of the quickest arrow, the fair- 
browed devi of eyes like lotus-petals flew to the capital of the Videhas. 
Arriving at the city of Mithila, teeming with people, she adopted the guise 
of a mendicant and presented herself before the king. 


Seeing her elegant and delicate form, the king was filled with wonder 
and asked who she was, whose she was, and where she came from. 
Welcoming her, he offered her an excellent seat, honoured her by giving her 
water to wash her feet, and gratified her with fine refreshments. 

Refreshed and gratified with the hospitality offered to her, Sulabha 
urged the king, who was surrounded by his ministers and seated in the midst 
of learned scholars, to speak upon his adherence to the moksha dharma. 

Doubtful of whether Janaka had succeeded in attaining to Mukti by 
following the religion of Nivritti, Sulabha, who had yoga-shakti, entered the 
mind of the king with her own mind. Wanting to know the truth, she 
blocked the rays issuing from the eyes of the king with the rays of light 
from her own eyes and bound Janaka with bonds of yoga. 

That best of kings, who prided himself upon his own invincibility, 
foiled the intentions of Sulabha and indeed seized her will with his own. In 
his sukshma rupa, the king was without the royal chatra, parasol and 
sceptre. Sulabha, in hers, was without the tridanda, her mendicant’s triple 
staff. 

Both remained in the same sthula rupas, and so conversed with each 
other. Listen to that conversation as it transpired between Janaka and 
Sulabha. 

Janaka said, “O sannyasini, to what course of conduct are you devoted? 
Whose are you? Where have you come from? After finishing your work 
here, where will you go? Only with questioning can one ascertain another’s 
knowledge of the scriptures, their age or varna. 

Since you have come to me, you must answer my questions. Know that 
I am truly free of all vanity for my raja chatra and raja danda, my royal 
parasol and sceptre. I wish to know you well. You truly deserve my respect. 

Listen to me as I speak to you of mukti, for no one else can discourse to 
you on that subject. I will also tell you about the person from whom, in 
ancient times, I acquired this transcendent knowledge. 

I am the beloved sishya of the high-souled and venerable Panchasikha, 
belonging to the pravarajya, the mendicant order of Parasara’s vamsa. My 
doubts have been dispelled and I fully know the Samkhya and the yoga 
philosophies, and the Vidhis, the ordinances with respect to yagnas and 
other rites, which constitute the three well-known paths to moksha. 

Wandering over the earth and pursuing the path pointed out in the 
shastras, the learned Panchasikha once lived joyfully in my palace for four 


months during the monsoons. That foremost of Samkhyas discoursed to me 
on the many means of attaining mukti, honestly and clearly, so that even I 
could easily comprehend them. He did not, however, command me to give 
up my kingdom. 

Freed from attachments, and fixing my Soul on the supreme Brahman, I 
lived unmoved by companionship, practising in its entirety that threefold 
Pravritti which is laid down in the treatises on mukti. Renouncing all 
attachments is the highest means prescribed for emancipation. 

It is from knowledge that Vairagya, the renunciation by which one is 
freed, is said to flow. The endeavour after yoga arises from gyana, and 
through that endeavour one attains to knowledge of the Atman. Through 
knowledge of the Atman one transcends joy and sorrow. This enables one to 
transcend death and achieve high success. 

I have acquired that Chetana, the knowledge of the Atman, and 
accordingly, I have transcended all the pairs of opposites. Even in this life 
have I been freed from stupor and have risen above all attachments. 

Just as soil, saturated with and softened by water, causes the sown seed 
to sprout, so do the actions of men cause rebirth. As a seed once fried 
cannot sprout, though it once could, has my heart been freed from desire; by 
the instruction of the holy Panchasikha of sannyasa, my mind no longer 
produces its fruit in the form of attachment to the objects of the senses. 

I never experience love for my wife or hatred for my enemies. Indeed, I 
keep aloof from both, clearly knowing the futility of attachment and anger. I 
regard both equally: him that smears my right hand with sandalwood-paste 
and him that wounds my left. 

Having attained my true goal, I am content, and look equally upon a 
clod of earth, a piece of stone, and a nugget of gold. Though engaged in 
ruling a kingdom, I am free from attachments of every kind. In consequence 
of all this I am superior to all bearers of tridandas. 

Some great men, who are conversant with the subject of mukti, say that 
it has three paths: gyana, yoga and karma, the way of yagnas and kriyas and 
other acts. Some regard gyana, having all worldly things for its objects, as 
the means to mukti. Some hold that the total renunciation of outer and inner 
actions is the means. 

Another class of men who know the scriptures of emancipation say that 
gyana is the only means. Yatis, with subtle vision, hold that karmas, actions, 
are the means. The high-souled Panchasikha, discarding both the opinion 


about gyana and karma, knowledge and deeds, regards the third way, yoga, 
as the only means to mukti. 

If men leading the grihasta life are endowed with yama and niyama, 
they become the equals of sannyasins. If, on the other hand, sannyasins are 
filled with desire and aversion, and attached to wives and honour, and 
vanity and affection, they become the equals of householders. 

If one can attain mukti through knowledge, then emancipation may 
exist in tridandas, for nothing prevents the bearers of such staffs from 
acquiring the requisite gyana. Why then can emancipation not exist in the 
chatra and the danda as well, especially when there is equal reason in taking 
up the tridanda and the sceptre? 

One becomes attached to all those objects and deeds which one needs 
for one’s own self for particular reasons. If a man sees the faults of 
domestic life and discards it to adopt another mode fraught with great merit, 
he cannot, merely for such rejection and adoption, be regarded as one free 
from all attachments; for all that he has done is to attach himself to a new 
method after having freed himself from a previous one. 

Sovereignty is fraught with the rewarding and the chastising of others. 
The life of a mendicant is equally fraught with the same, for they too 
reward and chastise those they can. Since they are akin to kings in this 
respect, why would they alone attain mukti, and not kings? 

Notwithstanding sovereignty, one is cleansed of all sins through of 
gyana alone, living the while in the Supreme Brahman. The wearing of 
brown cloths, shaving of the head, bearing the tridanda and the kamandalu, 
these are the outward signs of one’s mode of life. These have no value in 
attaining mukti. 

Notwithstanding the adoption of these symbols of a particular way of 
life, when knowledge alone is the cause of one’s emancipation from sorrow, 
it would appear that the adoption of mere emblems is perfectly useless. Or, 
if you see the mitigation of sorrow in these symbols of sannyasa, why then 
should not the alleviation of sorrow be seen in the chatra and the danda that 
I have adopted? 

Mukti does not exist in poverty; nor is bondage to be found in affluence. 
One attains to it through gyana, illumination, alone, whether one is indigent 
or wealthy. 

For these reasons, know that I am living in a condition of freedom, 
though ostensibly engaged in the enjoyments of dharma, artha and kama, in 


the form of kingdom and wives, which, for most men, constitute bondage. I 
have severed the bonds of kingdom and prosperity, and the bondage to 
attachments, with the sword of renunciation, whetted on the stone of the 
scriptures on mukti. 

As regards myself, I tell you that I have become liberated in this way. O 
sannyasini, I hold you in high esteem. But that should not prevent me from 
telling you that your conduct does not match the practices of the very mode 
of life that you have embraced! 

You have great elegance and delicacy of form. You are shapely and 
beautiful. You are young. You have all these, and you have niyama, 
subjugation of the senses. I doubt it verily. By entering into me with the 
power of yoga, you have invaded my body to ascertain whether I am really 
emancipated or not. 

Your action ill suits that mode of life whose emblems you bear. The 
tridanda is unfit for a yogin filled with desire. As regards yourself, you do 
not adhere to your staff. As regards those that are free, it is fitting that they 
protect themselves from falling. 

Let me tell you about your transgression in consequence of your contact 
with me and having entered into my sthula sarira, this gross body, with the 
help of your understanding. Why have you entered my kingdom or my 
palace? At whose bidding have you entered into my heart? 

You belong to the foremost of all the varnas, being, as you are, a 
Brahmana woman. As regards myself, however, I am a Kshatriya. There 
can be no union between us. Do not cause a varnasamkarsana, a mixing of 
castes. 

You live by practising those dharmas that lead to mukti. I live in the 
grihasta mode of life. This deed of yours is thus another evil that you have 
done, for it produces an unnatural union of two opposite ways of life. I do 
not know whether you belong to my own gotra or not. 

You, too, do not know who I am, and to what gotra I belong. If you are 
of my own gotra, by entering into my body you have created another evil— 
that of an unnatural union. If, again, your husband is alive and in a distant 
place, your union with me has produced the fourth sin of adultery, for you 
are not one with whom I may be lawfully united. 

Do you perpetrate all these sins, driven by the motive of achieving a 
particular goal? Do you act from ignorance or from a_ perverted 
intelligence? If, again, because of your decadent nature, your behaviour has 


become thoroughly independent or unrestrained, I tell you that if you have 
any knowledge of the scriptures, you will understand that everything you 
have done has generated evil. 

As a result of your actions, a third fault attaches to you, a fault that 
destroys peace of mind. By trying to display your superiority, you reveal the 
signs of an immoral woman. 

Desirous of asserting victory as you are, it is not just me that you want 
to defeat, for it is clear that you wish to obtain a victory over my entire 
court consisting of these learned and superior Brahmanas; by casting your 
eyes in this manner towards all these meritorious Brahmanas, it is evident 
that you desire to humiliate them all and glorify yourself at their expense. 

Bewildered by the pride and might of yoga born of your envy of my 
power, you have fused your understanding with mine and have mingled 
nectar with poison. 

The union of man and woman, when each desires the other, is sweet as 
nectar. When, however, a woman desires a man who does not want her, the 
union of the two, instead of being a merit, becomes a flaw as noxious as 
poison. 

Do not continue to touch me. Know that I am righteous. Conduct 
yourself according to your svadharma. Your search into whether I am or I 
am not emancipated is finished. 

It is fitting for you not to conceal all your secret motives from me. It is 
not correct for you to disguise and hide from me what your purpose is: 
whether your action has been prompted by the desire of accomplishing your 
own objective or that of some other hostile king. 

One should never appear fraudulently before a king; nor before a 
Brahmana; nor before one’s wife when she is virtuous. Those who appear in 
deceitful guise before these three are soon ruined. 

The power of kings lies in their sovereignty. The power of Brahmanas 
conversant with the Vedas is in the Vedas. Women wield high power 
because of their beauty, youth and blessedness. Possessing these strengths, 
all three are powerful. 

He who wishes to accomplish his own goal should always approach 
these three with sincerity and honesty; insincerity and deceit fail to produce 
success in these three quarters. It is right for you to tell me your varna of 
birth, about your learning and conduct, and disposition and nature, and also 
why you have come here!” 


Bhishma continues, ‘Though rebuked by the king in these harsh, 
offensive, and unseemly words, Sulabha was not at all abashed. After 
Janaka had spoken, the beautiful Sulabha replied in words more handsome 
than her person. 

Sulabha said, “Rajan, speech should always be free of the nine verbal 
faults and the nine errors of judgement. While lucidly explaining the 
meaning of anything, speech should possess the eighteen well-known 
merits. 

Ambiguity, ascertaining the merits and flaws of premises and 
conclusions, weighing the relative strength or weakness of those faults and 
merits, establishment of the conclusion, and the element of persuasiveness 
or otherwise that attaches to the conclusion arrived at: these five 
characteristics pertaining to the senses constitute the authoritativeness of 
what is said. 

Listen now to the characteristics of all these requirements, as I expound 
them according to the combinations, beginning with ambiguity. As regards 
the comprehending of the subject, when knowledge rests on distinguishing 
the objects to be known being different from one another, and when the 
understanding rests upon many points that follow each other, the 
combination of words is said to be vitiated by ambiguity. 

By ascertaining merits and flaws, the establishment, by elimination in 
premises and conclusions, adopting tentative meanings is called Samkhya. 
Krama or weighing the relative strength or weakness of the faults or merits, 
determined by the above process, consists in settling the appropriateness of 
the priority or sequence of the words used in a sentence. Those who are 
conversant with the interpretation of sentences or texts give this meaning to 
the word Krama. 

Nigamana or Samapana, conclusion, means the final determination, 
after examining what has been said on the subjects of dharma, artha, kama 
and moksha, in respect of what it is that has specifically been stated in the 
text. 

The sorrow born of attraction or revulsion increases to a great measure. 
The conduct, O Rajan, which one pursues to dispel the sorrow experienced 
is called Prayojanam. 

Take my word for it, O king, that these characteristics of ambiguity and 
the others, numbering five in all, when occurring together, constitute a 
complete and intelligible sentence. What I say will be full of sense and 


meaning, judicious and free from ambiguity because each word will not 
symbolise many things. 

They are logical, free from pleonasm or tautology, smooth, certain, free 
of bombast, sweet and agreeable, truthful, consistent with dharma, artha and 
kama, refined to be free from Prakriti, not elliptical or imperfect, gentle and 
easily grasped; they are characterised by correct order, not far-fetched in 
respect of sense, connected with one another as cause and effect, and each 
having a specific purpose. 

I shall not tell you anything prompted by desire or wrath, fear or greed, 
abjectness or deceit or shame, compassion or pride. I will answer you 
because it is proper for me to respond to what you have asked. 

When the speaker, the hearer and the words said, completely agree with 
one another in the course of speech, then the sense or meaning is revealed 
clearly. When, in the matter of what is said, the speaker shows disregard for 
the understanding of the hearer by uttering words whose meaning only he 
himself understands, then, however fine those words may be, they cannot be 
grasped by the hearer. 

That speaker’s words are faulty, again, if he abandons all regard for his 
own meaning and uses words that, though of excellent sound and sense, 
arouse only mistaken impressions in the mind of the listener. 

That speaker, however, who uses words that are, while expressing his 
own meaning, intelligible to the hearer as well, truly deserves to be called a 
speaker. No other man deserves the name. It befits you, therefore, Rajan, to 
hear with concentrated attention my words that are laden with meaning and 
a wealth of significance. 

You have asked me who I am, whose I am, and where I come from. O 
king, listen to me with an undivided mind as I answer your questions. As 
lac and wood, as grains of dust and drops of water, exist commingled when 
brought together, even so do the lives of all creatures. 

Sabda, sparsa, rasa, rupa and gandha, these and the senses, though 
diverse in their essences, still exist in a state of commingling like lac and 
wood. It is well known that nobody asks any of these: who are you? Each of 
them also has no knowledge either of itself or of the others. 

The eye cannot see itself. The ear cannot hear itself. The eye, again, 
cannot discharge the functions of any of the other senses, nor can any of the 
senses carry out the functions of any other sense save its own. Even if all of 
them combine together, they will fail to know their own selves, just as dust 


and water mingled together cannot know each other though existing in a 
state of union. 

In order to discharge their respective functions, they await the contact 
with objects external to them. The eye, form and light, constitute the three 
requirements for seeing. The same is the case with respect to the working of 
the other senses and the ideas that result from them. 

Again, between the functions of the senses, like vision and hearing, and 
the ideas which are their result, like form and sound, Manas, the mind, is an 
entity other than the senses and is regarded as having a function of its own. 
To arrive at certainty, one uses Manas to distinguish what is existent from 
what is non-existent in the matter of all ideas derived from the senses. 

With the five senses of knowledge and five senses of action, Manas 
makes a total of eleven. The twelfth is the Buddhi, understanding. When 
doubt arises in respect of what is to be known, Buddhi comes forward and 
settles all doubts to help discernment. 

After the twelfth, sattva is the thirteenth tattva. With its help creatures 
are distinguished as possessing more of it or less of it in their constitutions. 
After this, Chitta, Consciousness of self, is another tattva, the fourteenth. It 
helps one to understand the self as distinguished from what is not self. 

Desire is the fifteenth principle. Unto it inheres the whole universe. The 
sixteenth principle is avidya. Unto it inhere the seventeenth and the 
eighteenth tattvas called Prakriti and Vyakti, which is maya and prakasa. 

Joy and sorrow, decrepitude and death, acquisition and loss, the 
agreeable and the unpleasant—these constitute the nineteenth tattva and are 
called pairs of opposites. Beyond the nineteenth principle is another, Kaala, 
time, called the twentieth. Know that the births and death of all creatures 
are due to the action of this twentieth tattva. 

These twenty exist together. Besides these, the Panchamahabhutas, the 
five great primal elements, and existence and non-existence, bring the total 
to twenty-seven. Beyond these are three others named Vidhi, Sukra and 
Bala, which make the tally reach thirty. These thirty tattvas occur in the 
body. 

Some regard unmanifest Prakriti to be the source or cause of these thirty 
principles. This is the view of the atheistic Samkhya school. The Kanadas 
of gross vision regard the manifest or anus, atoms, to be their cause. 

Whether the Avyakta, unmanifest, or the Vyakta, manifest, be their 
cause, or whether the two, the Supreme or Purusha and the Vyakta, be 


regarded as their cause, or whether the four together, the Supreme or 
Purusha and his maya, and the Jiva and avidya, ignorance, be the cause, 
they that are conversant with Adhyatma behold Prakriti to be the cause of 
all creatures. 

That Prakriti, which is Avyakta, becomes manifest in the form of these 
tattvas. I, you, O king, and all others possessing a body are the result of that 
Prakriti so far as our bodies are concerned. 

Insemination and other embryonic conditions are due to the mixture of 
the vital seed and eggs. In consequence of insemination the result which 
first appears is called Kalala. From Kalala arises Budbuda or the embryonic 
bubble. 

From the stage called Budbuda springs what is called Pesi. From Pesi 
that stage arises in which the various limbs become manifest. From this last 
condition appear nails and hair. 

Upon the end of the ninth month, king of Mithila, the creature takes its 
birth so that, its sex being known, it comes to be called a boy or girl. When 
the creature issues out of the womb, the form it presents is such that its nails 
and fingers seem to be of the colour of burnished copper. 

The next stage is infancy, when the form that was seen at the time of 
birth changes. From infancy one reaches youth, and from youth, old age. As 
the creature advances from one stage into another, the form presented in the 
previous stage is altered. 

The constituent elements of the body, which serve diverse functions, 
undergo change every moment in every creature. Those changes, however, 
are so minute that they cannot be observed. The birth of particles, and their 
death, in each successive condition, cannot be marked even as one cannot 
distinguish the changes in the flame of a burning lamp. 

When such is the state of the bodies of all creatures— when that which 
is called the body is changing incessantly even like the swift movement of a 
horse of fine mettlke— who then comes from where, or not, or whose is it or 
whose is it not, or from where does it not arise? What connection, in fact, 
exists between creatures and their own bodies? 

As fire is generated from the contact of flint with iron, or from two 
sticks of wood rubbed against each other, even so are creatures generated 
from the combination of the thirty tattvas. Indeed, as you see your own 
body in your body, and your soul in your own soul, why is it that you do not 
see your own body and soul in the bodies and souls of others? 


If it is true that you can identify yourself with others, why did you ask 
me who I am and whose? If it is true that you, O king, are free from the 
shackle of duality that says, ‘this is mine and this other is not mine’, then 
what use are such questions as ‘who are you, whose are you and from 
where do you come?’ 

What indications of mukti can be said to be in a king who acts as others 
act towards enemies and allies and neutrals, and in victory and truce and 
war? What signs of mukti occur in him who does not know the true nature 
of the aggregate of three, dharma, artha and kama as manifested in seven 
ways in all deeds and who, on that account, is attached to that aggregate of 
three? 

What indications of mukti exist in him who fails to cast an equal eye on 
the agreeable, on the weak, and the strong? You are unworthy, and your 
pretence of mukti should be put down by your advisors. 

With so many faults, your efforts to attain emancipation is like the use 
of medicine by a patient who indulges in all kinds of forbidden foods and 
practices. Parantapa, reflecting upon spouses and other sources of 
attachment, one should find these in one’s own soul. What else can be 
regarded as the indication of mukti? 

Listen now to me as I speak fully of these and certain other minute 
sources of attachment pertaining to the four well-known actions of sleeping, 
pleasure, eating and dressing to which you are still bound though you 
profess have adopted mukti dharma. 

That man who has to rule the whole world must, indeed, be an absolute 
king without a second. He is obliged to live in only a single palace. In that 
palace he has again only one sleeping chamber. In that chamber he has only 
one bed to lie on. Half that bed again he is obliged to give to his queen. This 
may serve as an example of how little a king’s share is of all he is said to 
own. 

This is the case with his objects of enjoyment, with the food he eats and 
with the garments he wears. He is thus attached to a very limited share of 
all things. Again, he is attached to the duties of rewarding and punishing. 

The king is always dependent on others. He enjoys a very small share of 
all that he is supposed to own, and to that small share he is forced to be 
attached just as others are attached to their possessions. 

In the matter of war and peace, the king is not independent. In the 
matter of women, of sport, and other kinds of enjoyment, the king’s 


inclinations and choices are very constrained. In the matter of taking 
counsel and in the assembly of his councillors what independence can the 
king be said to have? 

When he commands other men, he is said to be absolutely independent. 
But the very next moment, his autonomy is barred by the very men whom 
he has commanded. 

If the king wishes to sleep, he cannot satisfy his desire, thwarted as he is 
by those who want to transact business with him. He must sleep when 
permitted, and while sleeping he is obliged to wake up to attend to those 
that have urgent business with him. ‘Bathe, touch, drink, eat, pour libations 
on the fire, perform sacrifices, speak, listen’—these are the words which 
kings have to hear from others, and hearing them he becomes a slave to 
those that utter them. 

Men come in groups to the king and ask him for gifts. As the guardian 
of the general treasury, however, he cannot make gifts to even the most 
deserving. If he makes these endowments, the treasury becomes exhausted. 
If he does not, he disappoints his solicitors who become hostile towards 
him. He is vexed and inimical feelings invade his mind. 

If many wise and heroic and wealthy men live together, the king’s mind 
becomes distrustful. Even when there is no reason to fear, the king becomes 
fearful of those that always wait upon him. These very men also find fault 
with him. Behold, in what ways the king’s fears may arise from even them. 

All men are kings in their own houses. All men are also householders in 
their own homes. Janaka, like kings, all men mete out rewards and 
punishments in their own homes. They, too, like kings, have sons and wives 
and themselves, treasuries and friends and stores. In these respects the king 
is not different from other men. 

Like them, shouts of ‘the kingdom is ruined’, ‘the city is consumed by 
fire’, ‘the best of elephants is dead’, fill the king with anguish, and he yields 
to grief, not knowing that these impressions are all caused by ignorance and 
delusion. 

The king is seldom free from mental suffering caused by desire, 
aversion and fear. He is also commonly afflicted by headaches and other 
similar maladies. Like others, he is troubled by the contradictory pairs of 
opposites like pleasure and pain. He is anxious about everything. Since the 
kingdom is full of enemies and impediments, the king, while he enjoys it, 
passes sleepless nights. 


Sovereignty is thus blessed with an extremely small share of happiness, 
while it is imbued with great misery. It is as insubstantial and fleeting as 
burning flames fed by straw or bubbles seen on water. 

Who would actually like to gain sovereignty, or having acquired it ever 
hope to win tranquillity? You regard this kingdom and this palace to be 
yours. You think that this army, this treasury and these advisors are yours. 
In reality, whose are they, and whose are they not? 

Allies, ministers, the capital, the provinces, punishment, the treasury, 
and the king, these seven constitute the limbs of a kingdom and, depending 
upon one another, stand like pillars that together support one another and 
the kingdom. The merits of each are complemented by the merits of the 
others. 

Which of them are superior to the rest? At certain times, some particular 
ones are regarded as more distinguished than the rest, when some important 
end is served through their agency. Superiority, for the time being, is said to 
belong to that which is most effective. 

These seven limbs, along with the three others, form an aggregate of 
ten, support one another, and enjoy the kingdom like the king himself. 

That king who is filled with great energy, and who is firmly attached to 
the Kshatriya dharma, should be satisfied with only a tenth part of the 
produce of his subject’s field. Some kings are seen to be content with less 
than a tenth part of such produce. There is no one who owns the kingly 
office without someone else also owning it in the world; there is no 
kingdom without a king. 

If there be no kingdom, there can be no righteousness, and if there be no 
dharma, from where can mukti arise? The most sacred and highest merit 
belongs to kings and kingdoms. 

By ruling a kingdom well, a king earns the punya that attaches to the 
Aswamedha yagna with the whole earth given away as dakshina. But how 
many kings are there who rule wisely? Janaka, I can mention hundreds and 
thousands of faults like these that attach to kings and kingdoms. Then, 
again, when I have no real connection with even my body, how then can I 
be said to have any contact with the bodies of others? 

You cannot charge me with having attempted to bring about 
varnasamkarsana, a mixing of castes. Have you not heard the mukti dharma 
explained in its entirety by Panchasikha, together with its means, its 
methods, its practices and its conclusion? 


If you have prevailed over all your bonds and freed yourself from all 
attachments, may I ask you, O king, why do you still keep your connections 
with this royal chatra and these other symbols of sovereignty? I think you 
have not listened to the shastras, or that you have listened to them without 
any benefit, or, perhaps, you have listened to some other works passing for 
the shastras. 

It seems that you have mere worldly knowledge, and that like an 
ordinary man of the world you are bound by the bonds of touch, wives, 
palaces and the like. If it be true that you have been emancipated from all 
bonds, what harm have I done you by entering your body with only my 
intellect? 

With Yatis, among all varnas men, the custom is to live in uninhabited, 
deserted places. What harm then have I done, and to whom, by entering 
your understanding which is truly of real knowledge? I have not touched 
you, Rajan, with my hands, or arms, or feet, or thighs, or with any other part 
of my body. 

You are born into a high race. You are modest. You have foresight. 
Whether the act has been good or bad, my entrance into your body has been 
a private one, concerning us two only. Was it not improper for you to 
publish that private act before your whole court? 

These Brahmanas are all worthy of reverence. They are the foremost of 
gurus. Being their king, you are also entitled to their respect. Paying them 
reverence, you are deserving of receiving reverence from them. 

Reflecting on all this, if you really know propriety with respect to 
speech, it was not right for you, before these foremost Brahmanas, to 
proclaim the fact of this intercourse between two persons of opposite sexes. 

King of Mithila, I stay within you without touching you at all even as a 
drop of water stays on a lotus-leaf without wetting it. Despite the 
instructions of Panchasikha of the pravarajya, the mendicant order, your 
knowledge has become abstracted from the sensual objects to which it 
relates. 

It is clear that while you have given up the grihasta way of life you have 
not yet attained mukti that is so difficult to achieve. You linger between the 
two, pretending that you have reached the goal of muktas. 

The contact of one who is emancipated with another that is also free, or 
Purusha with Prakriti, cannot lead to an intermingling of the kind you 
dread. Only those who regard the Atman to be identical with the body, and 


who think that the varnas and asramas are really different from one another, 
err in supposing such an intermixing to be possible. 

My body is different from yours. But my Atman is not different from 
your soul. When I am able to realise this, I have not the slightest doubt that 
my Buddhi is really not dwelling in yours, though I have entered into you 
by yoga. 

A pot is carried in the hand. In the pot is milk. On the milk is a fly. 
Though the hand and pot, the pot and milk, and the milk and the fly, exist 
together, yet are they all distinct from each other. The pot does not share the 
nature of the milk. Nor does the milk have the nature of the fly. The 
condition of each is independent, and can never be altered by the condition 
of that other with which it may temporarily exist. 

In this manner, varna and dharma, though they may exist together with 
and in one who is emancipated, do not really attach to him. How then can 
varnasamkarsana result from this union of ours? 

Then, again, my varna is not superior to yours. I am not a Vaisya, nor a 
Sudra. I am, O king, of the same varna as you, born of a pure race. There 
was once a Rajarishi known as Pradhana. It is clear that you have heard of 
him. I am born in his vamsa, and my name is Sulabha. 

Indra, accompanied by Drona and Satasringa and Chakradwara, and 
other great mountains, would attend the yagnas performed by my ancestors. 
Being born in such a vamsa, it was established that no fitting husband could 
be found for me. I was then instructed in the moksha dharma and now I 
wander over the earth alone, practising sannyasa. 

I do not practise any hypocrisy in the matter of the life of renunciation. I 
am not a thief that appropriates what belongs to others. I do not confuse the 
practices of the different varnas. I am firm in the practices of that mode of 
life to which I properly belong. I am firm and resolute in my vows. 

I never utter any word without reflecting on its propriety. Rajan, I did 
not come to you without careful deliberation. Having heard that your 
understanding has been purified by the kukti dharma, I came here to derive 
some benefit from it. Indeed, I came to ask you about emancipation. 

I do not say this to glorify myself and humiliate my opponents. But I 
say it, impelled by sincerity alone. What I say is, he that is emancipated 
never indulges in that intellectual battle which is implied by a dialectical 
disputation for the sake of victory. He, on the other hand, is really liberated 
who devotes himself to Brahman, that sole seat of peace. 


As a person of the mendicant order resides for only one night in an 
empty house, leaving the next morning, I too, shall remain for this one night 
in your body, which is like an empty chamber, destitute of knowledge. 

You have honoured me with both speech and other offers that are due 
from a host to a guest. Having slept this one night in your body, O ruler of 
Mithila, which is as it were my own chamber now, I shall depart tomorrow.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘Hearing these words full of reason and excellent 
sense, King Janaka failed to give any answer.’ 


CANTO 322 


¢ Ne udhishtira says, ‘How was Suka, the son of Vyasa, in ancient 

days, won over to renunciation? I want to hear you narrate the 

story. My curiosity in this matter is irrepressible. You of the Kuru vamsa, it 

is fitting for you to instruct me about the conclusions in respect of the 

unmanifest, the cause, the manifest, the effects, and of the truth, and about 

Brahman that is in them, but unattached to them, as also of the acts of the 
Swayambhu Narayana, as you know them.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Beholding his son Suka living fearlessly as ordinary 
men do in practices that are considered harmless by them, Vyasa taught him 
all the Vedas and then discoursed to him one day in these words: 

Vyasa said, “O son, becoming a master of the senses, do you suppress 
extreme cold and heat, hunger and thirst, and the wind also, and having 
subdued them, as yogins do, do you practise dharma? Do you duly observe 
truth and sincerity, and freedom from wrath and malice, and self-restraint 
and tapasya, and the duties of benevolence and compassion? 

Do you pursue the truth, firmly devoted to righteousness, abandoning all 
sort of insincerity and deceit? Do you sustain yourself on vighasa, what 
remains of food after feeding the Devas and Atithis? 

Your body is as transitory as the bubbles on the surface of water. The 
Jivatman sits unattached in it as a bird on a tree. The companionship of all 
agreeable objects is extremely short-lived. Why then, O son, do you sleep in 
such forgetfulness? 

Your enemies are attentive and alert and ever ready to spring on you, 
always waiting for their chance. Why are you so foolish as to not know 
this? 


As the days pass, one after another, your life is always being reduced. 
Indeed when your life is being incessantly shortened, why do you not hurry 
to learn the means of saving yourself? 

Only they that are lacking in faith in the existence of the next life set 
their hearts on things of this world that only have the effect of increasing 
flesh and blood. They are totally unmindful of all that is concerned with the 
next world. Those men that are bewildered by erroneous understandings 
display a hatred for dharma. 

The man who follows misguided persons who have adopted devious 
and sinful paths is equally afflicted by the ways of sin. Mahatmans, 
however, who are content, devoted to the scriptures, and possessed of 
immense power, pursue the path of righteousness. 

Do you wait upon them with reverence and seek their instruction. Do 
you act according to the teachings of those wise men whose eyes are set 
upon dharma. With your understanding cleansed by such lessons and 
rendered superior, do you then restrain your heart which is ever ready to 
deviate from the right course. 

They whose Buddhi is always concerned with the present, who 
fearlessly regard the future as something remote; they who do not observe 
any restrictions in the matter of food are really foolish men who fail to 
understand that this world is only a temporary field of trial. 

Repairing to the flight of steps of dharma, climb those steps one after 
another. At present you are like a worm that weaves its cocoon around itself 
and so depriving itself of all means of escape. 

Do you keep to your left, without any scruple, the atheist who 
transgresses all restraints, and courts destruction, who stands like a house 
beside a fierce and surging river, and who, to others, appears to stand like a 
bamboo with its tall head erect in pride. 

Using the raft of yoga, cross the ocean of the world, this samsara, whose 
waters are constituted of your five senses. Its fierce monsters are moha, 
krodha and mrityu—desire, wrath and death; its vortex is janma, birth itself. 
With the raft of dharma, you must traverse the world affected by death and 
afflicted by decay, and upon which the thunder-bolts of days and nights fall 
incessantly. 

Death seeks you at all moments, whether you are sitting or lying down; 
it is certain that you will be death’s victim at any time. From where then 
will you find your rescue? Like the she-wolf taking a lamb, death snatches 


away one that is still engaged in earning wealth and still unsatiated in the 
indulgence of his pleasures. 

When you are destined to enter into the dark, you hold up the blazing 
lamp of righteous understanding, whose flame has been kindled. Falling 
into various forms one after another in the world of men, a creature obtains 
the birth of a Brahmana with great difficulty. You have obtained that birth. 
Son, endeavour to maintain it properly. 

A Brahmana has not been born for the gratification of desire. On the 
other hand, his body is intended to be subjected to mortification and 
penances in this world so that incomparable happiness may be his in the 
next. The status of Brahmanatva is acquired with the help of long, sustained 
and austere tapasya. 

Having acquired that condition, one should never waste one’s time in 
the indulgence of one’s senses. Always engaged in penances and self- 
restraint, and desiring what is good for you, live and act in peace and 
serenity. 

The life of every man is like a horse. The nature of that steed is 
Avyakta, unmanifest. The sixteen elements constitute its body. Its character 
is most subtle. 

Kshanas, and trutis, and nimeshas are the hair on its body. The 
sandhyas, the twilights, constitute its shoulder joints. The light and the dark 
fortnights are its two eyes of equal power. Months are its other limbs. 

That steed runs incessantly. If your eyes be not blind, see that charger 
race forward on its invisible course; set your heart on dharma, after hearing 
what your gurus have to say on the subject of the next world. 

They that fall away from dharma and those who conduct themselves 
recklessly, who always display malice towards others and take to sin, are 
obliged to assume physical bodies in the regions of Yama and suffer diverse 
afflictions and torments. 

That king who is devoted to dharma and who protects the good and 
punishes the evil, with discrimination, attains to those regions that belong to 
men of righteous deeds. Through diverse kinds of good karma, he attains to 
such faultless felicity which cannot be acquired by even thousands of births. 

Furious dogs of frightful mien, crows with iron beaks, flocks of ravens 
and vultures and other dark birds, and blood-sucking worms torment the 
man who transgresses the commands of his parents and preceptors when he 
goes to hell after death. That sinful wretch who, because of his recklessness, 


violates the ten boundaries that have been fixed by Swayambhu himself is 
obliged to pass his time in great suffering in the wild wastelands in the 
dominions of the king of Pitris. 

That greedy man, who is in love with falsehood, who always takes 
delight in deception and cheating, and who injures others by practising 
hypocrisy and deceit, has to go to a bottomless hell and suffer great anguish 
and tortures for his sins. 

Such a man is forced to bathe in the broad Vaitarani river whose waters 
are boiling, to enter into a forest of trees whose leaves are as sharp as 
swords, and then to lie on a bed of battle-axes. He has thus to pass his days 
in dreadful hell in great agony. 

You see only the regions of Brahma and other deities, but you are blind 
to that which is the highest—mukti! Alas, you are also blind to old age and 
decay that are followed by death. 

Go along the path of mukti! Why do you delay? A frightful terror, 
destructive of your happiness, lies before you. Take swift steps to achieve 
liberation. 

Soon after death you are sure to be taken before Yama. To obtain 
felicity in the next world, strive to attain to righteousness through the 
practice of difficult and austere vratas. 

Regardless of the sufferings of others, the all-powerful Yama takes the 
lives of all, yours and your friends’. No one can resist him. Very soon the 
wind of Yama will blow and bear you into his presence. Very soon you will 
be taken to that dread presence all alone. 

Do you achieve here what will be for your good there. Where now is 
that death-wind which will blow before you very soon? Are you mindful of 
it? Very soon, when that moment arrives, the points of the horizon will 
begin to spin before your eyes. Are you mindful of that? 

O son, soon the Vedas will vanish from your sight as you are helplessly 
sucked into that terrifying presence. Set your heart, then, on that most 
excellent yoga of mukti. Seek to attain that sole treasure so that, after death, 
you will not have to grieve at the recollection of your former deeds, good 
and evil, all of which are characterised by error. 

Decrepitude very soon weakens your body and robs you of your limbs, 
strength and beauty. Therefore, seek that unique treasure. Very soon the 
Destroyer, with disease for his sarathy, in order to take your life, will pierce 
and break your body with a mighty hand. Practise, then, austere penance. 


Very soon those terrible wolves, which reside within your body, will 
attack you from every side. Endeavour, therefore, to achieve acts of 
righteousness. Very soon all alone, you will behold a thick darkness, and 
very soon you will see golden trees on the top of the mountain. Swiftly you 
must perform deeds of dharma. 

Very soon your evil companions and enemies, your senses, dressed in 
the guise of friends, will swerve you from true vision. Do you, then, strive 
to achieve that which is of the highest good. 

Earn that wealth which has no fear from either kings or thieves, and 
which one does not have to abandon even at death. Earned by one’s own 
actions, that wealth has never to be shared with others. In the other world, 
each enjoys that which he has earned for himself. 

O son, give that to others by which they may be able to live in the next 
world. Also set yourself to acquiring that wealth which is indestructible and 
eternal. 

Do not think that you should first enjoy all kinds of pleasures and then 
turn your heart towards mukti, for before you are satiated with enjoyment 
you may be overtaken by death. In view of this, hasten to do acts of 
goodness. 

Neither mother nor son, nor relatives, nor dear friends, even when 
implored honourably, accompany the man who dies. One has to go oneself, 
unaccompanied, to the regions of Yama. 

Only those deeds, good and bad, that one did before dying, accompany 
the man into the other world. The gold and riches that one has earned by 
good and bad means do not benefit one when one’s body meets with 
dissolution. 

There is no better witness than the Atman, of all actions done or not 
done in life, of men that have gone to the other world. When the acting 
Chaitanya, the Jivatman, enters into the witness Chaitanya the destruction 
of the body takes place; this is seen by yoga-buddhi when yogins enter the 
firmament of their hearts. 

Even here, Agni, Surya and Vayu, these three Devas, reside in the body. 
Beholding as they do all the deeds and practices of one’s life, they become 
one’s witnesses. 

Days and nights, the former characterised by the virtue of revealing all 
things and the latter by concealing all things, run incessantly; touching all 
things they reduce their allotted periods of life. 


Therefore, be observant of the duties of your own varna. The road in the 
other world, leading to the realms of Yama, is infested by many enemies in 
the form of iron-beaked birds and wolves, and by many repulsive and 
terrifying insects and worms. 

Take care of your own actions, for only these will accompany you along 
that road. One does not share one’s karma with others, but everyone enjoys 
or endures the fruits of his own actions. 

As Apsaras and Maharishis attain to fruits of great felicity, in the same 
manner, men of righteous deeds, as the fruits of their respective righteous 
acts, obtain in the other world chariots of transcendent radiance that move 
everywhere at the will of the riders. Men of taintless deeds, cleansed souls 
and pure birth obtain the fruits, in the next world, which correspond with 
their own righteous acts in this life. 

By walking along the high road marked by the duties of grihasta, men 
acquire happy ends and attain to the region of Prajapati or Brihaspati, or of 
him of a hundred yagnas. I can give you thousands and thousands of 
instructions. Know, however, that dharma, the mighty cleanser, keeps all 
foolish persons in the dark. 

You have passed twenty-four years. You are now full twenty-five years 
of age. Your years are passing away. Do you begin to lay your store of 
righteousness. The Destroyer that dwells within error and heedlessness will 
very soon deprive your senses of their powers. Relying on your body alone, 
swiftly perform your duties before that consummation comes. 

When it is your duty to go along that road on which you alone shall be 
in front and you alone behind, what need then do you have of either your 
body or your wife and children? 

When men have to go by themselves, without companions, to the land 
of Yama, it is clear that in view of such a terrifying situation, you should 
seek to acquire that one unique treasure—dharma or yogasamadhi. The 
puissant Yama, regardless of the afflictions of others, snatches away and 
uproots the friends and relatives of one’s vamsa. There is no one that can 
thwart him. 

Seek to gather a stock of righteousness. Son, I impart to you these 
lessons that are all in accord with the shastras I follow. Observe them by 
acting according to their truth. 

He who supports his body by following the duties laid down for his 
varna, and who gives dakshina to earn whatever fruits may attach to such 


deeds, is freed from the consequences born of ignorance and delusion. The 
knowledge which a man of righteous deeds acquires from Vedic practices 
leads to omniscience. 

That omniscience is identical with moksha dharma, the vigyana of the 
highest object of human acquisition. Instruction in this, imparted to the 
grateful, is beneficial for it leads to the attainment of emancipation. 

The pleasure that one takes in living amidst the dwellings of men is 
truly a shackle that binds fast. Breaking that shackle, men of righteous 
deeds repair to regions of great felicity. Evil men, however, fail to break 
that bond. 

Since you have to die, what use have you of wealth, or of relatives, or 
with children? Employ yourself in searching for your soul which is hidden 
in a cave. Where have all your grandsires gone? 

Do today that which you would keep for tomorrow. Do that in the 
morning which you would defer for the afternoon. Death does not wait for 
anyone, to see whether he has or has not accomplished his tasks. Following 
the body after one’s death to the cremation ground, one’s relatives and 
kinsmen and friends return quickly after throwing it on the funeral pyre. 

Without hesitation avoid those who are sceptics, who are without 
compassion, and who are attached to evil ways; endeavour to seek, without 
listlessness or apathy, that which is for your highest good. When, therefore, 
the world is afflicted by death, do you wholeheartedly achieve dharma, 
aided all the while by unswerving patience. 

That man who is conversant with the means of attaining mukti and who 
discharges his svadharma, certainly attains to great felicity in the other 
world. There is no destruction for you who never stray from the path of 
dharma and do not recognise death in the attainment of a different body. 

He who increases his store of righteousness is truly wise. He who, on 
the other hand, falls away from dharma is said to be a fool. One who is 
engaged in doing good deeds attains swarga and other rewards as the fruits 
of those deeds; but he who is given to evil ways has to sink into naraka. 

Having acquired the human condition, so difficult to attain, which is the 
stepping-stone to heaven, one should fix one’s soul on the Brahman so that 
one may not once more fall away. One whose understanding, directed 
towards the path to swarga, does not stray from it, is regarded by the wise 
as a man of dharma, and when he dies his friends should indeed grieve. 


The man whose understanding is not restless and is directed to 
Brahman, and who has attained swarga, is freed from naraka, a great terror. 
They who are born in the asramas of sannyasis and die there, do not earn 
much punya by abstaining from enjoyments and the indulgence of desire 
even for their entire lives. 

However, he who possessing objects of pleasure casts them off and 
engages himself in tapasya succeeds in acquiring everything. I regard the 
fruits of the penances of such a man to be much higher. 

There have been, and will be, hundreds and thousands of mothers and 
fathers, sons and wives in this world. Who, however, were they and whose 
are we? I am quite alone. I have no one whom I may call mine. Nor do I 
belong to anyone else. I do not see that person whose I am, nor do I see him 
whom I may call mine. They have nothing to do with you. You have 
nothing to do with them. 

All creatures are born according to their karma, their acts of past lives. 
You, too, will go hence and be born into a new varna determined by your 
own deeds. In this world we see that the friends and followers of only those 
that are rich show devotion to the rich. The friends and followers of the 
poor fall away during their very lifetime. 

Man commits countless heinous sins for the sake of his wife and 
children. From those evil deeds he derives much distress both now and in 
the next world. The wise man beholds the world of life destroyed by the 
actions of every living being. 

Therefore, O son, act according to all the instructions I have given you! 

The man of true vision, seeing this world to be only a field of karma, 
action, should, from desire of felicity in the next world, do good deeds. 
Time exerts his irresistible power, and cooks all creatures in his own 
cauldron with his ladle made of months and seasons, using the sun for his 
fire, and days and nights for his fuel; these days and nights are the witnesses 
of the fruits of every creature’s karma. 

Of what use is that wealth which is not given away and which is not 
enjoyed? For what purpose is that strength which is not employed in 
resisting or subjugating one’s enemies? For what purpose is that knowledge 
of the scriptures which does not compel one to righteous deeds? And for 
what purpose is that atman which does not subdue the senses and abstain 
from evil?” 


Bhishma continues, “Having heard these most beneficial words spoken 
by the island-born Vyasa, Suka leaves his father and goes forth to seek a 
guru who could teach him the moksha dharma.’” 


CANTO 323 


¢ Ne udhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha, if there is any value in dakshina, 
yagnas, and in tapasya well-performed, and in obedience 
rendered to gurus and other revered elders, speak to me of them.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘An understanding, associated with evil, causes the mind 
to fall into sin. In this state one taints one’s actions, and then falls into great 
misery. 

Those who sin have to be born into the most indigent circumstances. 
They move from famine to famine, from pain to pain, and from fear to fear. 
They are deader than those who are dead. 

Those who are possessed of bhakti, self-restrained and devoted to 
dharma, are prosperous, and go forth from joy to joy, from heaven to 
heaven, from bliss to bliss. Unbelievers have to pass, with groping hands, 
through realms infested by beasts of prey and elephants, and pathless tracts 
teeming with snakes and robbers and other terrors. What more need be said 
of these? 

On the other hand, those who revere the Devas and Atithis, are 
generous, considerate to the virtuous, and offer dakshina in yagnas, walk on 
the path of felicity that belongs to men of cleansed and subdued souls. 
Those who are unrighteous will not be counted among men even as grains 
without kernel are not counted as grain, and as cockroaches are not counted 
among birds. 

One’s deeds follow one even when one runs fast. As the doer lays 
himself down, so also do his actions lie with him. Indeed, one’s sins sit 
when the doer sits, and run when he runs. The sins act when the doer acts, 
and, in fact follow him like his very shadow. The doer’s karma, by whatever 


means and under whatever circumstances, endures, and is sure to be 
enjoyed or endured with respect of its fruits by the doer in his next life. 

From every side time always drags along all creatures, duly observing 
the laws of the distance to which they are flung, which is in keeping with 
their actions. As flowers and fruits, without being urged, never fail to 
blossom and appear at their proper time, even so one’s past deeds make 
their appearance at their time. 

Honour and dishonour, gain and loss, destruction and growth, are seen 
to set in. No one can resist them. None endure, for disappearance follows 
appearance. 

The sorrows one suffers is the result of one’s karma. The happiness one 
enjoys flows from one’s karma. From the time when one lies within a 
mother’s womb one begins to enjoy and suffer one’s deeds of a past life. 
The consequences of good and evil deeds of one’s childhood, youth, or old 
age are experienced in one’s next life at the same ages. 

As the calf recognises its mother among thousands of her kind, one’s 
past exploits, without doubt, seek one out in one’s next life, unerringly, 
although one may live among thousands of one’s kind. As a piece of dirty 
cloth is whitened by being washed in water, in the same manner, cleansed 
by continuous exposure to the fire of fasts and penances, the righteous at 
last attain to unending bliss. 

You of high intelligence, the desires and purposes of those whose sins 
have been washed away by sustained and well-performed tapasya are 
crowned with fruition. The path of the righteous cannot be discerned even 
as that of birds in the sky or that of fishes in water. 

There is no need to speak ill of others, or to talk about the fall of others. 
On the other hand, one should always do what is pleasing, agreeable, and 
beneficial to one’s own self.’” 


CANTO 324 


¢ ag udhishtira says, “Tell me, O Pitamaha, how Mahatman Suka of 

austere penances was born as the son of Vyasa, and how did he 

succeed in attaining the highest goal? Which woman bore the son of Vyasa, 

rich in tapodhana? We do not know who Suka’s mother was, nor do we 

know anything of the birth of that high-souled sannyasi. How was it that, 

when he was a mere boy, his mind became entirely drawn to the knowledge 
of the subtle Brahman? 

Indeed, in this world, there is no other in whom such predilections have 
been marked at so early an age. I want to hear all this in detail. I am never 
satiated by your excellent and amrita-like words. Pitamaha, tell me, in their 
proper order, of Suka’s greatness and knowledge, and of his union with the 
Paramatman|’ 

Bhishma says, “The Rishis did not make punya depend upon life span, 
or decay, or wealth, or friends. They said that he who studied the Vedas was 
great. What you wish to know is rooted in tapasya. 

Son of Pandu, that tapa rises from the subjugation of the senses. 
Without doubt, one errs in giving the reins of one’s life to one’s senses. It is 
only by restraining them that one finds true success. 

The merit that attaches to a thousand Aswamedha yagnas or a hundred 
Vajapeyas is not even a sixteenth of the punya that arises from yoga. I will 
now tell you about the circumstances of Suka’s birth, the fruits of his 
tapasya, and what he achieved by his deeds, subjects that cannot be grasped 
by those of uncleansed souls. 

Once upon a time on Meru’s peak, Mahadeva, adorned with karnikara 
flowers, sported with his terrible ganas. The daughter of Himavat-king of 


the mountains, Devi Parvati, was also there. Near that peak, the island-born 
Vyasa practised extraordinary austerities. 

O best of the Kurus, using yoga he withdrew himself into his own 
Atman, engaged in dharana, and performed many penances to have a son. 
He addressed Mahadeva with a prayer “O puissant one, let me have a son 
who will have the power of Agni and Bhumi, Jala, Vayu and Akasa.” 
Engaged in the most austere tapasya, the Rishi begged Siva, who cannot be 
supplicated by men of impure souls, using not words but his yoga-shakti. 

The mighty Vyasa remained there for a hundred years, surviving on air 
alone, engaged in adoring Mahadeva of multifarious form, the lord of Uma. 
There stood all the Devarishis and Rajarishis and the Lokapalas and the 
Sadhyas along with the Vasus, and the Adityas, the Rudras, and Surya and 
Chandramas, and the Maruts, and the oceans, and the rivers and the Aswins, 
the Devas, the Gandharvas, and Narada and Parvata and the Gandharva 
Viswavasu, and the Siddhas, and the Apsaras. 

There sat Mahadeva, also known as Rudra, decked with an excellent 
garland of karnikara flowers, blazing with effulgence like the moon with his 
rays. In those delightful, divine forests, peopled with Devas and heavenly 
Rishis, Maharishi Vyasa remained, engaged in high yoga dhyana, in order 
to obtain a son. His strength did not diminish, nor did he feel any pain. 

The three worlds gazed at this penance in amazement. While the Rishi, 
of immeasurable energy, sat in yoga, his matted locks, in consequence of 
his tejas, were seen to burn like flames of fire. I heard this from the 
illustrious Markandeya. He would always narrate to me the exploits of the 
Devas. It is on account of that tejas that the matted jata of the Mahatman 
Krishna-Dwaipayana to this day seem to be of the colour of fire. 

Gratified with the Rishi’s tapasya and his fervent bhakti, Mahadeva 
resolved to grant him his wish. The three-eyed one smiled with pleasure, 
and said to him, “O island-born one, you will get a son as you wish! 
Possessed of greatness, he shall be as pure as Agni, as Vayu, as Bhumi, as 
Jala and as Akasa! He will possess the Consciousness of his being 
Brahman; his understanding and soul shall be devoted to Brahman, and he 
shall completely depend upon Brahman even so that he will be merged and 
one with Brahman!’” 


CANTO 325 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘Having obtained this great boon from Mahadeva, 

one day the son of Satyavati was rubbing sticks to make a fire. 

While thus engaged, the illustrious Rishi saw the Apsara Ghritachi, who, 

because of her tejas, was of arresting beauty. Yudhishtira, seeing her in that 
forest Vyasa was overcome with desire. 

Seeing the Rishi’s heart aflame with by desire, Ghritachi transformed 
herself into a she-parrot and flew to that place. Although Vyasa now saw the 
Apsara in another form, his desire did not subside but spread over every 
part of his body. 

Summoning all his patience, the Muni tried to suppress his desire; 
despite all his effort, however, Vyasa could not control his agitated mind. 
With fate moving him, inexorably, the Rishi’s heart was smitten by 
Ghritachi’s beautiful form. 

To repress his lust, he earnestly continued with the task of making a fire, 
yet he helplessly ejaculated and his seed fell onto the ground. That best of 
Dvijas, however, continued to rub the sticks without feeling any misgivings 
for what had happened. From the seed that fell, a son was born to him, 
called Suka. It is because of these circumstances attending his birth that he 
was named Suka, after the parrot. Indeed, for the form his mother took, he 
himself often assumed a great parrot’s head! 

Thus, from the two arani sticks his father used for kindling a fire, was 
born that greatest of Rishi, and the highest of yogins. As in a yagna a 
blazing fire sheds its radiance all around when libations of ghee are poured 
upon it, so did Suka take his birth, radiating effulgence because of his own 
tejas. 


Son of Kuru, assuming the excellent form and complexion of his father, 
Suka, of pure soul, shone like a smokeless fire. The greatest of rivers, the 
Ganga in her embodied form, came to the breast of Meru and bathed Suka 
after his birth with her sacred waters. 

An ascetic’s staff and a dark deer-skin fell from the sky for Mahatman 
Suka. The Gandharvas sang, the diverse tribes of Apsaras danced, and 
divine booming drums sounded. The Gandharva Viswavasu, and Tumburu 
and Varada, and others called Haha, and Huhu, eulogised the birth of Suka. 

There arrived the Lokapalas with Sakra at their head, as also the other 
Devas and the Devarishis. Vayu rained showers of divine flowers upon the 
place. The entire universe, mobile and immobile, was infused with surging 
Joy. 

Accompanied by the Devi, and moved by love, Mahadeva of great 
refulgence came there, and soon after the birth of the Muni’s son himself 
invested him with the sacred thread. Sakra lovingly bestowed upon him a 
celestial kamandalu of great beauty, and divine raiment. 

Hamsas and satapatras and kraunchas in their thousands, and many 
sukas and chasas, O Bhaarata, wheeled over his head. Blessed with great 
splendour and intelligence, Suka, having obtained his birth from the two 
fire-sticks, continued to live there, engaged the while in the attentive 
observance of many vratas and upavasas. 

As soon as Suka was born, the Vedas with all their mysteries and all 
their antas, came to dwell in him, even as they did in Vyasa. For all that, 
remembering the universal practice, Suka selected Brihaspati, who knew all 
the Vedas together with their angas, as his guru. 

Having studied all the Vedas together with all their mysteries and 
abstractions, as also all the itihasas and the Artha Shastra, the Mahamuni 
Suka returned home, after paying his guru dakshina. Adopting the vow of a 
Brahmacharin, he then began practising the most severe tapasya, focusing 
all his being in dhyana. 

In even his childhood, he came to be revered by the Devas and Rishis 
for his knowledge and penances. The mind of the great Muni, Rajan, took 
no pleasure in the three asramas of life, including the grihasta; his heart was 
set on just the mukti dharma.’” 


CANTO 326 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, “Thinking of mukti, Suka humbly approached his 

father and desiring to achieve his highest good, he saluted his 
great guru and said, “You are well versed in the mukti dharma. O illustrious 
one, discourse to me upon it, so that my mind may achieve the supreme 
peace.” 

Hearing his son’s words, the Maharishi said to him, “Son, you must 
study the mukti dharma and all the various duties of life.” 

At his father’s command, Suka, that foremost of men of dharma, 
mastered all the treatises on yoga, and also the Samkhya vigyana of Kapila. 
When Vyasa saw his son to be possessed with the knowledge of the Vedas, 
infused with the tejas of Brahman, and fully conversant with the mukti 
dharma, he said to him, “Go to Janaka, the ruler of Mithila. He will show 
you the way to your mukti.” 

Suka went forth to Mithila to ask its king about the truth of dharma and 
the refuge of emancipation. Before he set out, his sire further told him, “Go 
there by that path which ordinary men take. Do not use your yoga shakti 
which lets you fly through the skies.” 

Being humble by nature, Suka was not at all surprised by this. He was 
further told to go there with simplicity and not from any desire for pleasure: 
“Along your way do not seek friends and wives, since they are the causes of 
attachment to the world. 

Although we preside over his yagnas, do not regard yourself superior to 
Janaka while you stay with him. Obey him and live under his direction. He 
alone will dispel all your doubts. 


The king of Mithila is well versed in all dharma and fully knows the 
mukti shastras. He is one at whose yagnas I officiate. Without any 
hesitation, do what says.” 

Thus instructed, the righteous-souled Suka went to Mithila on foot 
although he was able to traverse through the skies over the whole earth with 
her seas. Passing over many hills and mountains, many rivers and lakes, and 
countless forests abounding with beasts of prey and other feral animals, he 
crossed the two Varshas of Meru and Hari successively and next the Varsha 
of Himavat, and came at last to the Varsha known by the name of Bharata. 

Having seen many kingdoms inhabited by Chins and Huns, Mahamuni 
Suka at last reached Aryavarta. Obeying his father’s commands and bearing 
them constantly in his mind, he gradually passed along his way over the 
earth like a bird passing through the air. Going through many delightful 
towns and thronging cities, he saw diverse kinds of wealth but waited not to 
observe them. 

On his way he crossed many delightful gardens and many sacred 
waters. Soon he reached the realm of the Videhas that was protected by the 
virtuous Mahatman Janaka. There he saw many populous villages, and 
many kinds of food and drink and habitations of cowherds swelling with 
men and many herds of kine. 

He saw many fields abounding with rice, barley and other grain, and 
many lakes inhabited by swans and cranes and adorned with beautiful 
lotuses. Passing through the Videha country with its prosperous subjects, he 
arrived at the wonderful gardens of Mithila rich with many species of trees. 

Full of elephants and horses and chariots, and men and women, he 
passed by them without pausing to observe any of them closely. Bearing the 
thought, and ceaselessly dwelling upon it—the desire to master the mukti 
dharma—Suka of the cheerful soul who took his joy in only dhyana thus 
reached Mithila at last. 

At the gate, he sent word through the dwarapalakas. Calm, devoted to 
dhyana and yoga, he entered the city, after having obtained permission. 
Walking down the main highway full of fine, rich men, he reached the 
king’s palace and entered it without hesitation. 

The guards forbade him with rough words. Without any anger, Suka 
stopped and waited. Neither the sun nor the long distance he had walked 
had fatigued him in the least. Neither hunger nor thirst, nor the exertion he 


had made, had weakened him. The heat of the sun had not seared him, or 
pained him even slightly. 

Among those guards there was one who felt compassion for him, to see 
him stand there himself like the brilliant midday Surya. Worshipping him 
with due form and revering him properly, with folded hands he led him to 
the first chamber of the palace. 

Seated there alone, Suka began to meditate on mukti. Possessed of 
serene splendour he looked with an equal eye upon both a shady spot and 
one exposed to the sun’s rays. Soon, Janaka’s minister came up to him with 
folded hands and led him to the second chamber of the palace. 

That chamber led to a spacious garden which formed a part of the inner 
apartments of the palace. It looked like a second Chaitraratha. Beautiful 
pools of water he saw here and there, at regular intervals. Lustrous trees, all 
in bloom, graced the garden. 

Women of transcendent beauty were in attendance. The minister led 
Suka from the second chamber to that enchanted place. Ordering those 
damsels to give the Muni a seat, the minister left him there. 

Those exquisite women were young, of beautiful forms and faces, and 
shapely hips; they were clad in fine red raiment, decked with ornaments of 
burnished gold. They were skilled in pleasing conversation and maddening 
revelry, and thorough mistresses of the arts of singing and dancing. 

Always smiling, they were equal to the very Apsaras in beauty. 
Accomplished in all the ways of dalliance, consummate in reading the 
thoughts of men upon whom they waited, fifty young women, of high varna 
and of easy virtue, surrounded Suka the ascetic. 

Giving him padya, water to wash his feet, and worshipping him 
respectfully with the usual offerings or arghya, they gratified him with 
excellent foodstuffs suitable to the season. After he had eaten, one after 
another, they singly led him through the grounds, showing him every thing 
of beauty and interest, O Bhaarata. So knowing of the thoughts of all men, 
sporting and laughing and singing, they entertained that auspicious Muni of 
noble soul. 

The pure-souled ascetic born from the two aranis, dutiful, having 
perfect control over all his senses, and a thorough master of his wrath, was 
neither pleased nor annoyed at all this. Then those foremost of beautiful 
women gave him an excellent asana to sit upon. 


Washing his feet and his limbs, Suka said his sandhya vandana, his 
evening prayers, sat on that fine seat, and began to think of the object for 
which he had come there. In the first part of the night, he devoted himself to 
yoga. The puissant ascetic passed the middle portion of the night in sleep. 
Waking from his slumber, he went through the necessary rites of cleansing 
his body, and though surrounded by those beautiful women, he once again 
dedicated himself to yoga. 

It was in this way, O Bhaarata, that the son of the island-born Vyasa 
passed the second half of that day and the whole of that night in the palace 
of King Janaka.’” 


CANTO 327 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, “The next morning, King Janaka, accompanied by 

his minister and his whole household, and with his priest going 

before him, came to Suka. Bringing with him costly asanas and diverse 

kinds of jewels and riches, and bearing the ingredients of the arghya on his 
own head, the monarch approached the son of his revered guru. 

The king took that beautiful and costly asana, decked with jewels and 
overlaid with gold, from his priest, and, with his own hands, presented it 
with great reverence to Suka. After the son of the island-born Krishna had 
sat upon it, Janaka worshipped him according to prescribed kriyas. 

He first offered him padya to wash his feet, and then gave him the 
arghya and kine as dakshina. The Muni accepted that worship offered with 
due kriyas and mantras. That Dvijottama accepted the worship and the cows 
the king offered and saluted the monarch. 

Possessed of great tejas, he asked after Janaka’s wellbeing and 
prosperity. Suka also included in his enquiry the wellbeing of the king’s 
followers and ministers. With Suka’s permission, Janaka sat down with all 
his party. 

Of high birth and blessed with a high soul, the king of Mithila, with 
folded hands, sat down on the bare ground and in turn enquired after the 
wellbeing and unabated prosperity of Vyasa’s son. Janaka then asked his 
guest about the purpose of his visit. 

Suka said, “Be you blessed; my father said to me that his Yajamana, the 
ruler of the Videhas, known the world over by the name of Janaka, is well- 
versed in the mukti dharma. He commanded me to come to him promptly, if 


I ever wanted to dispel any doubts in the matter of the dharma of either 
Pravritti or Nivritti. 

He gave me to understand that the king of Mithila would dispel all my 
doubts. I have, therefore, come here, at the command of my sire, for the 
purpose of learning from you. It is fitting for you, O foremost of all 
righteous ones, to instruct me! 

What is the svadharma of a Brahmana, and what is the essence of mukti 
dharma? How is moksha to be obtained? Can it be acquired through the 
way of gyana or by tapasya?” 

Janaka said, “Hear what the duties are for a Brahmana from the time of 
his birth. After his upanayana, investiture with the sacred thread, he should 
devote his attention to the study of the Vedas. By practising tapasya and 
dutifully serving his guru and observing the dharma of Brahmacharya, O 
puissant one, he should pay off the debt he owes to the Devas and the Pitris, 
and cast off all malice. Having studied the Vedas closely, subjugated his 
senses, and paying his guru dakshina, he should, with his guru’s permission 
return home. 

Returning home, he should adopt the grihasta way of life by marrying a 
woman and confining himself to her, and by freeing himself from every 
kind of evil, and establishing his grihapatya, his domestic fire. In this 
asrama, he should procreate sons and grandsons. 

After that, he should retire into the forest, and continue to worship the 
same fires and receive guests with cordial hospitality. Living righteously in 
the forest, he should at last establish his fire in his Atman, and freed from 
all the pairs of opposites, and casting off all attachments from the soul, he 
should spend his days in sannyasa, otherwise known as the asrama of 
Brahman.” 

Suka said, “If one attains to such an understanding, purified by study of 
the scriptures and of the true conception of all things, and if the heart frees 
itself permanently from the effects of all pairs of contradictions, is it still 
necessary for one to adopt the three asramas of brahmacharya, grihasta and 
vanaprastha in succession? This is what I ask you. It is proper for you to tell 
me. O ruler of men, tell me this according to the true import of the Vedas!” 

Janaka said, “Without a mind cleansed by study of the shastras and 
without that true conception of all things which is known by the name of 
vigyana, the attainment of moksha is impossible. That purified 


understanding, again, it is said, is unattainable without one’s connection to a 
guru. 

The guru is the helmsman, and gyana is the boat; both help one to cross 
samsara, the ocean of the world. After having acquired that boat, one is 
crowned with success; and having crossed the ocean, one may abandon 
both. 

To prevent the destruction of all the worlds and to prevent the 
destruction of the karma upon which the worlds depend, the wise practised 
the dharma of the four asramas as the sages did in ancient days. By 
gradually abandoning karma, good and bad, agreeably to this order of 
asramas, over the course of many births, one attains mukti. 

That man who, through penances performed during the course of many 
births, obtains a pure mind and understanding and soul is able to attain 
mukti in the very first stage of brahmacharya itself in a fresh birth. With a 
cleansed understanding, he attains mukti; with this knowledge in respect of 
all visible things, what further desire remains to be satisfied by observing 
the three other asramas? 

One should always discard faults born of the gunas of rajas and tamas. 
Adhering to the path of sattva, one should know the self by the self. 
Beholding one’s self in all creatures and all creatures in one’s self, one 
should live without attachment like fish who live in water without being 
drenched by it. 

He who succeeds in transcending all pairs of opposites and resisting 
their influence, succeeds in casting off every attachment, and attains to 
infinite bliss in the next world, going there like a bird soaring into the sky. 
In this connection, there is an ancient story narrated by King Yayati and 
remembered by all who are conversant with the shastras bearing on mukti. 

The radiance of the Paramatman exists only in one’s Atman, nowhere 
else. It is found equally in all creatures. One can see it oneself if one’s heart 
is devoted to yoga. When a man lives in such a way that another does not 
fear his very sight, and when he is not himself frightened at the sight of 
others; when a man ceases to cherish, desire and hate, he is then said to 
attain to Brahman. 

When a man does not sin against any creature in thought, word and 
deed, he then attains Brahman. By restraining the mind and the Atman, by 
discarding malice that darkens the mind, and by abjuring desire and torpor, 
one is said to reach Brahman. 


When he equally respects all objects that he perceives with all his 
senses, and also all living creatures, and transcends all pairs of opposites, a 
man is then said to attain Brahman. When he casts an equal eye upon praise 
and censure, gold and iron, happiness and misery, heat and cold, good and 
evil, the agreeable and the disagreeable, life and death, he is then said to 
attain to Brahman. 

On observing the practices of the mendicant orders, one should subdue 
one’s senses and withdraw the mind even like a tortoise withdraws its 
outstretched limbs. A house cloaked in darkness can be seen with the help 
of a lamp; in the same manner can the Atman be kindled with the lamp of 
Buddhi, the understanding. 

O Mahabuddhi, I see that all this knowledge already dwells in you. 
Whatever else should be known by one wishing to learn about the mukti 
dharma, you already know. O Devarishi, I am convinced that through the 
grace of your guru and his teachings, you have already transcended all the 
objects of the senses. 

O Mahamuni, through your father’s blessings, I have attained to 
omniscience, and hence know you well. Your knowledge is vaster than what 
you think you own. Your perceptions resulting from intuition are much 
greater than what you think you own. Your powers are mightier than what 
you are aware of. 

Whether as a consequence of your tender age, or of the doubts you have 
been unable to dispel, or of the fear that is due to not having attained mukti, 
you are not conscious of that knowledge founded in intuition although it has 
arisen in your mind. After your doubts have been dispelled by those like 
me, you succeed in loosening the knots that bind your heart and then, by a 
righteous exertion, attain and become conscious of that gyana. 

You have already acquired gyana. Your mind is calm and steady. You 
are free from greed and covetousness. For all that, O Brahmana, without 
effort you will not attain the Brahman, which is the highest acquisition. 

You see no distinction between happiness and sorrow. You are not 
covetous. You have no longing for dance and song. You have no 
attachments. You have no attachment to friends. You have no fear of things 
that inspire fear. O blessed one, I see that you cast an equal eye upon a lump 
of gold and a clod of earth. 

We, I and others possessed of wisdom, see you well set on the highest 
and indestructible path of tranquillity. You are true to the dharma which 


allows the Brahmana to obtain that fruit which should be his, which is 
identical with the essence of mukti. What else do you want to ask me?’” 


CANTO 328 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, “Having heard these words of King Janaka, Suka of 

cleansed soul and settled conclusions began to stay in his Soul 

with his Soul, having of course seen the self with his self. Having achieved 

his objective, he became happy and serene, and without questioning Janaka 

further, he flew northwards to the mountains of Himavat with the speed of 
the wind. 

These mountains abounded with diverse tribes of Apsaras and echoed 
with exalted sounds. Teeming with thousands of Kinnaras and Bhringarajas, 
it was adorned, besides, with many Madgus and Khanjaritas, and many 
Jivajivakas of varied colours. 

And there were many peacocks also of wonderful hues, uttering their 
shrill cries. Many flocks of swans, and many flights of joyful kokilas too, 
adorned the place. Garuda, the prince of birds, dwelt constantly on that 
peak. 

The four Lokapalas, the Devas and diverse classes of Rishis always 
came there from the desire to do good to the world. It was there that the 
high-souled Vishnu had undergone the severest austerities to have a son. 

It was there that the divine Senapati Kumara, in his younger days, 
disregarded the three worlds with all its inhabitants, hurled his spear and 
pierced the earth with it. As he hurled it, Skanda challenged the universe, 
crying, “If there is anyone mightier than me, or who holds Brahmanas 
dearer, or who can compare with me in devotion to the Brahmanas and the 
Vedas, or has tejas like mine, let him draw up this spear or at least shake it!” 

Hearing this challenge, the three lokas become anxious, and all 
creatures asked one another, “Who will draw out this lance?” Vishnu saw 


that all the Devas and Asuras and Rakshasas were distraught. He reflected 
upon what best could be done. Unable to bear that challenge of the spear, he 
cast his eyes on Skanda, the son of Agni. 

With his left hand, Vishnu seized that blazing spear and began to shake 
it. Shaken by the awesome power of Vishnu, the whole earth with her 
mountains, forests, and seas, shuddered along with the spear. Although 
Vishnu was fully able to pull it out, he contented himself with shaking it. In 
this, the puissant Narayana kept the honour of Skanda intact. 

Having shaken it himself, the divine Vishnu addressed Prahlada, saying, 
“Behold the might of Kumara. None else in the universe can move this 
lance!” 

Unable to bear this, Prahlada resolved to pull out the spear. He seized it, 
but was unable to Hiranyakasipu plunged down onto the earth. 

Taking himself to the northern side of those grand mountains, 
Mahadeva, the bull his emblem, had performed the austerest tapasya. The 
asrama where Siva had undergone those austerities is encircled on all sides 
with a blazing fire. 

Only men of pure souls can approach that mountain known by the name 
of Aditya. There was a fiery girdle all around it, of the width of ten yojanas, 
and it cannot be approached by Yakshas and Rakshasas and Danavas. 

The illustrious and tejas-filled Agni lived there and was engaged in 
removing all obstacles from the side of Mahadeva of fathomless wisdom 
who remained there for a thousand celestial years, all the while standing on 
one foot. Dwelling on the side of Himavat, Mahadeva Mahavrata scorched 
the Devas in their heavens with his fiery tapasya. 

At the foot of those mountains, in a quiet and secluded place, Parasara’s 
son, Mahamuni Vyasa, taught the Vedas to his sishyas. Those disciples were 
the highly blessed Sumantra, Vaisampayana, Jaimini of great wisdom, and 
Tapodhana Paila. Suka went forth to that delightful asrama where his father, 
the great Muni Vyasa, lived with his sishyas. 

Seated here, Vyasa watched his son advance like a radiant fire scattering 
flames, resembling the sun himself. As Suka approached, he appeared not to 
touch the trees or the rocks of the mountain. Completely dissociated from 
all objects of the senses, engaged in yoga, the Mahatman Rishi came 
swiftly, even like an arrow loosed from a bow. 

Born from the aranis, Suka drew near his sire and touched his feet. With 
due reverence he then approached his father’s disciples. Joyfully, he 


narrated all the particulars of his conversation with King Janaka. 

Vyasa, the son of Parasara, after the arrival of his great son, continued to 
dwell on Himavat engaged in teaching his disciples and his son. One day he 
was seated at his ease, and his sishyas, all proficient in the Vedas, with 
subdued senses, and with tranquil souls, sat around him. All of them had 
thoroughly mastered the Vedas with their angas. All were observant of 
penances. With folded hands they addressed their guru with the following 
words: 

“Through your grace, we have been blessed with great tejas. Our fame 
also has spread. There is one boon that we humbly beg you to grant us.” 

Hearing these words, the regenerate Rishi answered them, saying, 
“Sons, tell me what is the boon you wish me to grant you?” 

Hearing this reply from their preceptor, the disciples were filled with 
joy. Once more bowing their heads low before their guru and joining their 
hands, Rajan, in one voice all of them spoke these excellent words: 

“If our guru is pleased with us, then, O best of sages, we are sure to be 
crowned with success! We all ask you, Maharishi, to grant us a boon. Be 
you graceful to us. Let no sixth sishya, besides us five, become famed. We 
are four. Our guru’s son is the fifth. Let the Vedas shine forth in only us five. 
This is the boon that we seek.” 

Hearing them, Vyasa, the son of Parasara, of great intelligence, deeply 
learned in the meaning of the Vedas, having a righteous soul, and always 
engaged in thoughts that confer benefits on a man in the next world, spoke 
these virtuous words to his sishyas: 

“The Vedas should always be given unto him who is a Brahmana, or 
unto him who desires to listen to Vedic teachings, and by him who eagerly 
wishes to dwell in the world of Brahma. Go forth and multiply. Let the 
Vedas spread through your exertions. 

The Vedas should never be imparted to one who has not formally 
become a disciple. Nor should they be given to one who does not observe 
pure vratas. Nor should they be bestowed on one of impure soul. 

These are the attributes of those who can be accepted as sishyas for the 
communication of Veda gyana. No knowledge should be imparted to one 
without a proper scrutiny of his character; just as pure gold is tested by heat, 
cutting and rubbing, so also should disciples be tested by their birth and 
accomplishments. 


You should never set them tasks beyond their abilities, or tasks that are 
fraught with danger. One’s knowledge is always commensurate with one’s 
understanding and diligence. Let all sishyas overcome all obstacles, and let 
all of them meet with auspicious success. 

You are competent to teach the shastras to persons of all the varnas. 
While teaching you must address a Brahmana, putting him first. These are 
the laws that govern the study of the Vedas; and this is regarded as a noble 
task. 

The Vedas were created by the Self-born to praise the Devas. That man 
who, through the clouding of his mind, speaks ill of a Brahmana who 
knows the Vedas, is certain to face humiliation. 

He who disobeys all the laws while seeking knowledge, and he who 
disregards dharma while imparting knowledge both fall from grace; instead 
of the devotion which should prevail between guru and sishya, such 
questioning and such instruction are certain to create distrust and suspicion. 

I have now told you everything about the way in which the Vedas must 
be studied and taught. You must bear this instruction in mind while dealing 
with and teaching your sishyas.’” 


CANTO 329 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, “Hearing these words of their guru, Vyasa’s tejasvin 

sishyas were filled with joy and embraced one another. 
Addressing one another, they said, “We will always remember what our 
illustrious teacher has said for our future good, and we shall do as he has 
said.” 

Having said this to one another with joyful hearts, the disciples of 
Vyasa, who were thorough masters of words, once more addressed him, 
“Mahamuni, if it pleases you, we wish to go down from this mountain into 
the world to undertake the task of dividing the Vedas!” 

The mighty son of Parasara replied to them in words suffused with 
dharma and artha. “You may go to Bhumi or to Swargaloka, as you please. 
You should always be attentive, for the Vedas are such that they are always 
liable to be misunderstood.” 

Granted permission by their guru of truthful speech, the sishyas left him 
after circling around him in pradakshina and bowing their heads before him. 
Descending to the earth they performed the Agnishtoma and other yagnas; 
and they began to officiate at the sacrifices of Brahmanas and Kshatriyas 
and Vaisyas. Happily passing their days in the grihastasrama, they were 
revered by the Brahmanas. Famed and prosperous, they were employed in 
teaching the Veda and performing yagnas. 

After his disciples had departed, Vyasa remained in his asrama with 
only his son in his company. The Rishi passed his days in anxious 
thoughtfulness and silence, sitting in a secluded corner of the hermitage. At 
that time Mahamuni Narada of great punya came there to see Vyasa, and 
spoke to him in mellifluous words. 


Narada said, “O regenerate Rishi of Vasishta’s vamsa, why have the 
Vedic mantras fallen silent? Why are you sitting quiet and alone, in 
meditation like one engrossed in some thought? Alas, shorn of Vedic 
echoes, this mountain has lost its beauty, like the moon shorn of splendour 
when assailed by Rahu or enveloped in a cloud. 

Without the Vedas being heard, though inhabited by the Devarishis, the 
mountain no longer looks wondrous but resembles a village of Nishadas. 
The Rishis, the Devas and the Gandharvas, too, no longer shine forth as 
before, for they are without the Veda nadam!” 

Hearing these words of Narada, the island-born Vyasa answered, “O 
Devarishi, you know all the declarations of the Vedas; I agree with all that 
you have said and it is right for you to say this to me. Omniscient one you 
have seen everything. 

Your knowledge also embraces all things within its sphere. All that has 
ever occurred in the three worlds is known to you. O great Narada, 
command me. Tell me what I what should I do now. Separated from my 
sishyas, my mind has become despondent.” 

Narada said, “If the recitation of Vedas is suspended they are tainted. 
The Brahmanas are tainted by the non-observance of their vratas. The 
Balhika vamsa is the stain of the earth. Curiosity renders women impure. 
Recite the Vedas along with your most intelligent son, and drive out the 
terrors arising from Rakshasas with the echoes of their mantras.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘Vyasa, the foremost of all who understand dharma 
and who are devoted to Vedic recitation, was filled with joy and said to 
Narada, “So be it.” With his son Suka, he began to chant the Vedas in a loud 
sonorous voice, observing all the laws of orthoepy, correct pronunciation, 
and filling the three worlds with that sacred sound. 

One day, as father and son, both conversant with all dharma, were 
engaged in chanting the Vedas, a violent wind arose that seemed to be 
driven by the storms that blow on the ocean’s breast. Knowing that the hour 
was inauspicious, Vyasa immediately told Suka to stop chanting. 

Suka was filled with curiosity. He asked his sire, “O Dvija, where does 
this wind come from? Tell me everything about what this wind is and 
means.” 

Vyasa heard Suka’s question and was full of amazement at what had 
happened. He answered Suka telling him that such an omen indicated that 
the chanting of the Vedas should be stopped. 


“You have attained spiritual vision. Your mind has of itself been 
cleansed of every impurity. You have been freed from the gunas of rajas and 
tamas. You now dwell in sattva. You now behold your Soul with your soul, 
even as one gazes at one’s own reflection in a mirror. Establishing yourself 
in your own Atman, do you contemplate the Vedas. 

The path of the Paramatman is called Devayana, the path of the gods. 
The path composed of tamas is called Pitriyana, the path of manes. These 
are the two paths in the next world. By one, men go to swarga. By the other, 
they go to naraka. 

The winds blow over the earth’s surface and in the sky. They blow in 
seven courses. Listen to me as I recount them one after another. The body is 
furnished with the senses which are controlled by the Sadhyas and many 
great beings of immeasurable power. These gave birth to an invincible son 
named Samana. 

From Samana sprang a son called Udana. From Udana sprang Vyana, 
who gave rise to Apana; and lastly from Apana sprung the wind called 
Prana. That invincible scorcher of all enemies, Prana, remained childless. 

I will now tell you about the different functions of those winds. Prana is 
the cause of the diverse functions of all living creatures, and because they 
live by it, it is called Prana, life. 

The first wind is known by the name of Pravaha— Samana which blows 
along the first masses of clouds born of smoke and heat. Coursing through 
the sky, and coming into contact with the water contained in clouds, that 
wind reveals itself in effulgence among the flashes of lightning. 

The second wind called Avaha blows deafeningly. This wind causes 
Soma and the other luminaries to rise and appear. Within the body, which is 
a microcosm of the universe, that wind is called Udana by the wise. 

The third wind, known as Udvaha, sucks up water from the four oceans, 
and conveys it to the clouds in the sky; and, having done this, offers them 
up to Indra, the god of rain. 

The wind called Samvaha supports the clouds and divides them into 
many parts, turns them into vapour in order to pour down rain and once 
more makes them liquid; it is the roar of the thunderheads, which exist for 
the preservation and nurture of the world. The wind Samvaha bears the 
chariots of all celestial beings along the sky. The fourth in the enumeration, 
it is strong, with the power to destroy the very mountains. 


The fifth wind is swift and forceful. It is dry and uproots and smashes 
down all trees. The clouds beside it are known by the name Balahaka. That 
wind causes diverse kinds of natural calamities, and roars deafeningly in the 
firmament. It is known by the name Vivaha. 

The sixth wind bears the celestial waters through the skies and prevents 
them from falling down. That wind blows and supports the sacred waters of 
the Akasa Ganga, preventing them from falling down. 

Obstructed by that wind from a distance, the sun, the source of a 
thousand rays, and which illumines the world, appears as a luminary of but 
one ray. Through the action of that wind, the moon, after waning, waxes 
again till he displays a full disc. Best of Rishis, that wind is known by the 
name Parivaha. 

Stealing the life of all living creatures when the proper hour comes, its 
path is followed by Surya’s son Yama; this wind is the source of that 
immortality attained by yogins of subtle vision who are always engaged in 
yoga dhyana. 

This wind, Parivaha, in ancient times, helped the thousands of 
grandsons of Daksha Prajapati, by his ten sons, to attain to the ends of the 
universe. The touch of that wind Parivaha enables one to attain mukti by 
freeing oneself from the obligation to return to the world of samsara. No 
one can resist this foremost of all winds. 

Marvellous are these winds, all sons of Diti. They can go everywhere 
and support all things, and they blow all around you without being attached 
to you at any time. 

It is truly wonderful that this foremost of mountains should thus be 
suddenly shaken by this wind that now blows here. This wind is the breath 
of Vishnu’s nostrils. When driven swiftly forward, it begins to blow with 
such great force that it agitates the whole universe. 

When the wind begins to blow violently, persons who know the Vedas 
do not chant their mantras. The Vedas are a form of wind. If forcefully 
uttered at the wrong time, the outer wind is tortured.” 

Having said these words, and once the wind had ceased, the mighty son 
of Parasara bade his son to recommence his Vedic chanting. He then left 
that place to bathe in the waters of the celestial Ganga.’” 


CANTO 330 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘After Vyasa had left the place, Narada, traversing 
the sky, came there and saw Suka studying the shastras. The 
Devarishi had come to ask Suka about the meaning of certain sections of 
the Vedas. Seeing the Devarishi Narada in his hermitage, Suka revered him 
by offering him the arghya according to Vedic rites. 

Gratified with the honours bestowed upon him, Narada addressed Suka, 
saying, “Righteous one, tell me, how can I bring about what is for your 
highest good?” 

Hearing Narada’s words, Suka said to him, “Instruct me in that which 
may benefit me.” 

Narada said, “In ancient times, the illustrious Sanatkumara spoke these 
words to certain pure-souled Rishis who had approached him seeking the 
truth: “There is no eye like that of gyana. There is no penance like sannyasa. 

Abstaining from evil acts, steady practice of dharma, sadachara, good 
conduct, the correct observance of all religious duties, these constitute the 
highest good. Having obtained the condition of humanity, full of sorrow, he 
that becomes attached to it, is bewildered; such a man never succeeds in 
emancipating himself from grief. 

A man’s intellect becomes increasingly enmeshed in the net of stupor 
when he is attached to worldly things. Such a man becomes sorrowful, both 
in this world and the next. 

One should, by every means in one’s power, restrain both desire and 
wrath if one seeks to achieve what is for one’s good. Desire and anger arise 
for only destroying one’s wellbeing. 


One should always protect one’s tapasya from wrath, and one’s 
prosperity from pride. One should always protect one’s knowledge from 
honour and dishonour, and one’s Atman from error. 

Compassion is the highest virtue. Forgiveness is the highest power. The 
knowledge of the Atman is the highest knowledge. There is nothing higher 
than truth. It is always fitting to speak the truth. It is better again to speak 
what is beneficial than to speak what is true. I hold that to be truth which 
most benefits all creatures. 

That man is said to be truly learned and wise who abandons every deed, 
who never indulges in hope, who is completely dissociated from all worldly 
surroundings, and who has renounced everything that pertains to the world. 

He who, without attachment, enjoys all sensual desires with the help of 
restrained senses, who has a serene soul, who is never moved by joy of 
sorrow, who is engaged in yogadhyana, who lives in the company of the 
Devas controlling his senses, yet detached from them, and who, though 
having a body, never identifies himself with it, becomes emancipated and 
attains to the highest good. 

O Muni, one who never sees others, never touches others, and never 
talks with others, soon achieves that highest good. One must not injure any 
creature. On the other hand, one must be friendly towards all. Having 
obtained the human condition, one should never behave inimically towards 
any being. 

A complete disregard for all worldly things, perfect contentment, 
abandonment of all kinds of hope, and patience: these constitute the highest 
good of a man who has subdued his senses and acquired a knowledge of the 
self. Casting off all attachments, you must subjugate all your senses, and so 
attain felicity both here and in the next world. 

They that are free from greed never have to suffer any sorrow. One 
should discard all covetousness from one’s soul. By casting off greed, O 
amiable and blessed one, you will be able to free yourself from sorrow and 
pain. 

One who wishes to conquer that which is unconquerable should live in 
tapasya, self-restraint, silence and a subjugation of the Atman. Such a man 
should live amidst attachments without being attached to them. 

That Brahmana who lives in the midst of attachments without being 
attached to them and who always lives in seclusion, soon attains to the 
highest bliss. That man who lives in happiness by himself, surrounded by 


many creatures who delight in leading lives of sexual union, is one whose 
thirst has been slaked by knowledge. It is well known that he whose thirst 
has been slaked by knowledge never experiences grief. 

One attains the status of the Devas through good karma and to the 
condition of Manavas through karma good and bad. By evil actions, one 
helplessly falls down among the lower animals. Always assailed by sorrow 
and decay and death, a living creature is being cooked in this world in the 
cauldron of time. Do you not know this? 

You frequently regard that to be beneficial which is really harmful; that 
to be certain which is really uncertain; and that to be desirable and good 
which is undesirable and evil. Alas, why do you not awaken to a correct 
understanding of these? 

Like a silkworm that ensconces itself in its own cocoon, you have 
wrapped yourself in a cocoon made of your own countless acts born of 
stupor and error. Alas, why do you not awaken to a clear awareness of your 
real state? 

You have no need to attach yourself to worldly things. Attachment to 
worldly objects gives rise to evil. The silk-worm that weaves a cocoon 
round itself is finally destroyed by its own action. Those who become 
attached to sons and spouses and relatives meet with destruction in the end, 
even as wild elephants who sink into the mire of a lake are gradually 
weakened until they die. 

Behold, all creatures that allow themselves to be enmeshed by love 
suffer great anguish just as fish do on land, dragged there by cruel nets. 
Relatives, sons, wives, the body itself, and all one’s possessions stored with 
care, are insignificant and useless in the next world. Only one’s good and 
evil karma follow one to the other world. 

When it is certain that you will have to go helplessly to the other world, 
leaving behind all these things, why are you attached to such 
inconsequential and worthless objects, paying no attention to that which 
constitutes your real and lasting wealth? 

The path you must travel is without any resting place. Along that way, 
there is no support one can use. The land through which it passes is 
unknown and undiscovered. It is cloaked in thick darkness. 

Alas, how will you pass along that way without equipping yourself with 
the necessary means? When you go along that road, nobody will follow 


you. Only your deeds, good and bad, will follow when you leave this world 
for the next. 

One seeks that foremost of goals by learning, actions, internal and 
external purity, and great knowledge. When that is attained, one is freed 
from rebirth. 

The desire that one feels for living amidst human habitations is like a 
binding cord. The virtuous succeed in severing that bond and freeing 
themselves. Only the sinful do not succeed in breaking these ties. 

Samsara, the ocean of life, is terrifying. Personal beauty of form, rupa, 
constitutes its banks. The mind is the speed of its current. Sparsa, touch, 
forms its island. Rasa, taste, constitutes its current. Gandha, scent, is its 
mire. Sabda, sound is its waters. That particular part of it which leads 
towards swarga is beset with great difficulties. 

The body is the boat by which one must cross samsara. Forgiveness is 
the oar by which it is rowed. Truth is the ballast to steady that boat. The 
practice of dharma, righteousness, is the rope that must be attached to the 
mast to draw that boat along dangerous waters. 

Dana is the wind that lifts the sails of that boat. It is with that swift boat 
that one must cross samsara. Shed both virtue and vice, truth and falsehood. 
Having cast off truth and falsehood, discard the means by which these are to 
be cast off. 

By casting off all purpose, cast off virtue; by casting off all desire cast 
off sin also. Using the help of Buddhi, discard truth and falsehood; and, 
finally, by knowledge of the highest subject, the Paramatman, dispense with 
intelligence itself. 

Cast off this body. It has bones for its pillars, sinews for its binding 
cords, flesh and blood for its outer plaster, and the skin for its outermost 
casing. It is full of urine and faeces and emits a stench. 

Exposed to the assaults of decrepitude and sorrow, it is the seat of 
disease and is weakened by pain. With the attribute of rajas in 
predominance, it is neither permanent nor durable, serving only as the 
temporary abode for the creature it houses. 

This entire universe of matter, and that which is called Mahat or 
Buddhi, are made up of the five Mahabhutas. That which is called Mahat is 
due to the action of the Paramatman. 

The five senses, the three gunas of tamas, rajas and sattva, together with 
those which have been mentioned before, constitute a tale of seventeen. 


These seventeen, known as the unmanifest, with the manifest, that is the 
five objects of the five senses, rupa, rasa, sabda, sparsa and gandha, along 
with Chit and Buddhi, form the well-known account of the twenty-four 
principles. 

When one possesses these twenty-four tattvas, one comes to be called 
Jiva or human. He who knows the aggregate of three, dharma, artha and 
kama, as also happiness and sorrow, life and death, truly, and in all their 
details, is said to know growth, decay and destruction. 

The objects of knowledge should be known gradually, one after another. 
All objects that are grasped by the senses are called Vyakta, manifest. Those 
that transcend the senses and are known only by their indications are said to 
be Avyakta, unmanifest. 

By restraining the senses, one wins great gratification, even like a 
thirsty and parched traveller at a torrent of rain. Having subdued the senses 
one beholds one’s soul expand to embrace all objects within itself. Having 
its roots in gyana, the power of the man who beholds Narayana in his own 
self, who sees all creatures in all conditions in his own soul, is never lost. 

He who uses knowledge to transcend all kinds of pain born of error and 
stupor is never touched by evil when he comes into contact with other 
creatures. Such a man, his understanding being fully displayed, never finds 
fault with the course of conduct that prevails in the world. 

One conversant with mukti says that the Paramatman is without 
beginning and without end; that it takes birth as all creatures; that it resides 
as a witness in the Jivatman; that it is inactive, and without form. Only he 
who encounters pain as a consequence of his own misdeeds, slays many 
beings to ward off that pain. 

As a result of such sacrifices, the actors have to attain rebirths and have 
necessarily to perform countless actions. Such a man, blinded by error, 
regards what is in fact a source of grief to be bliss and is always unhappy 
even like a sick man who eats food that is unfitting. Such a man is pressed 
and crushed by his actions like a substance that is churned and pounded. 

Bound by his karma, he is reborn, the order of his life being determined 
by the nature of his acts. Suffering many kinds of torture, he travels in a 
repeated round of rebirths even like a wheel that turns ceaselessly. You, on 
the other hand, have cut through all your bonds. 

You abstain from all karma! Omniscient and the master of all things, 
achieve success and be liberated from all existent objects. In earlier times, 


through control of their senses and the power of their tapasya, many have 
destroyed the bonds of karma and attained uninterrupted felicity.’” 


CANTO 331 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘Narada said, “By listening to the blessed shastras 
that bring about peace, dispel grief, and produce happiness, one 
attains a pure understanding, and having attained it obtains high felicity. 

A thousand causes of sorrow, a hundred causes of fear, from day to day, 
afflict one that is bereft of Buddhi, but not one that is wise and learned. 
Listen, therefore to these ancient narratives as I recite them to you, in order 
to ease your sorrows. If one can conquer one’s understanding, one is sure to 
attain happiness. 

By associating with the undesirable and dissociating from what is 
agreeable, only foolish men are subject to mental anguish of every kind. 
One should not grieve over things past, thinking of their merits. He who 
thinks of the past with attachment can never emancipate himself. 

One should always try to discover the faults in things one has become 
attached to. One must regard such things as fraught with much evil. By 
doing so, one can be freed from them. 

The man who laments for what is past fails to acquire either wealth or 
fame or punya. That which no longer exists cannot be obtained. When such 
things pass away, they do not return, however keenly one may regret their 
passing. 

Creatures sometimes acquire and sometimes lose worldly objects. No 
man in this world can mourn all that happens to him. Dead or lost, he who 
grieves for what is past, becomes unhappy. Instead of just one sorrow, he 
experiences two. 

With the help of their intelligence, those men see clearly who do not 
weep when they behold the course of life and death in the world. They 


never have to shed tears at anything that takes place. When any such 
calamity, causing either physical or mental pain, which cannot be warded 
off by the best of efforts, occurs, one should stop reflecting on it with 
sorrowful regret. 

Not to think about it, this is the medicine for sorrow. By thinking of it, 
one can never dispel it; on the other hand, by brooding on sorrow, one only 
increases it. Mental agony should be destroyed by wisdom; physical pain 
should be dispelled by medicines. This is the power of knowledge, gyana. 

In such matters, one should not behave like men of little understanding. 
Youth, beauty, life, treasures, health and association with loved ones: all 
these are fleeting. One who is wise should never covet them. 

One should not lament individually for a painful occurrence that 
concerns an entire community. Instead of indulging in grief, once stricken 
by it, one should seek to avert it and apply a remedy as soon as one sees the 
opportunity for doing so. 

There is no doubt that in this life the measure of misery is far greater 
than that of joy. There is no doubt that all men show attachment for objects 
of the senses and that death is regarded as disagreeable. 

The man who discards both joy and sorrow, is said to attain Brahman. 
When such a man leaves this world, sage men never grieve. 

In spending wealth there is pain. In protecting it there is pain. In 
acquiring it there is pain. Hence, when one’s riches are destroyed, one 
should not be sad. 

Men of little understanding attain many levels of prosperity but fail to 
achieve contentment, and at last perish in misery. Men of wisdom, however, 
are always content. All are destined to end in dissolution. 

All things that are high are fated to fall down and become low. Union is 
sure to end in disunion, and life is certain to end in death. Thirst is 
unquenchable. Contentment is the highest happiness. Hence, the wise 
regard contentment to be the most precious wealth. 

One’s allotted lifespan runs continually. It does not stop in its course for 
even a single moment. When one’s body itself is not eternal, what other 
thing in this world can be considered so? Those who reflect on the nature of 
all creatures and conclude that it is beyond the mind’s grasp, turn their 
attention to the highest path, and, when they advance on it, do not have to 
feel sorrow. 


Like a tiger who seizes and flees with its prey, death seizes and makes 
off with the man who is engaged in unprofitable occupations and is 
unsatisfied with objects of desire and pleasure. 

One should always seek to free oneself from sorrow. One should seek to 
dispel sorrow by acting joyfully, without indulging in grief, and having 
freed oneself from a particular sorrow, should act in such a manner as to 
ward off sadness by abstaining from all faults of conduct. 

After enjoying sabda, sparsa, rupa, gandha and rasa, the rich and the 
poor alike find that these are hollow and futile. Before union with these, 
creatures are never subject to sorrow. One who is steadfast in one’s original 
nature is never saddened when that union is ended. 

One should control one’s stomach and sexual appetite patiently. One 
should protect one’s hands and feet with the help of the eye. One’s eyes and 
ears and other senses should be protected by the mind. One’s mind and 
speech should be governed by wisdom. 

Casting off love and affection for those who are known and those 
unknown, one should conduct oneself with humility. Such a man is said to 
possess wisdom, and such a one surely finds bliss. 

He who is pleased with his own Atman, devoted to yoga, who depends 
upon nothing beyond the self, who is without greed, and who conducts 
himself without depending on anything but his self, succeeds in attaining 
felicity.” 


CANTO 332 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘Narada said, “When the vicissitudes of happiness 

and sorrow appear or disappear, these transitions cannot be 

avoided by either wisdom, policy or effort. Without allowing oneself to fall 
away from one’s true nature, one should strive to protect one’s own self. 

He who takes such care and exertion, never perishes. Regarding the self 
greatly, one should always seek to rescue oneself from disease, decay, and 
death. 

Mental and physical diseases afflict the body, like keen-pointed shafts 
shot from the bow by a mighty archer. The body of a man tormented by 
thirst, tortured by agony, perfectly helpless, and who wants to prolong his 
life, is dragged towards destruction. 

Days and nights course ceaselessly, bearing away on their current the 
lives of all men. Like gushing rivers, these flow eternally without ever 
turning back. 

The unending succession of the light and dark fortnights wastes away 
all mortals without ceasing for even a moment. Rising and setting, day after 
day, the sun, who is himself undecaying, continually stirs the joys and 
sorrows of all men in the cooking pot of time. The nights pass, taking with 
them all the unexpected good and bad that overtake man, that depend on 
karma and fate. 

If the fruits of man’s actions were not dependent on external 
circumstances, he would obtain everything he desires. Even men who are 
clever, intelligent, of restrained senses, if they do not act, they never 
succeed in earning any fruits. 


Others, lacking in intelligence, without talents or accomplishments of 
any kind, and who are truly the lowest of men, even when they do not long 
for success, are seen to be crowned with the fruits of all their desires. 

He who is always ready to injure all creatures, and who is engaged in 
deceiving all the world, is seen to bathe in happiness. One who sits idly 
obtains great prosperity, while another, exerting himself earnestly, is seen to 
miss desirable fruits that are almost within his reach. 

Would you ascribe this to be one of the faults of man? The vital seed, 
Originating in one’s nature, with mere looking, passes from one to another. 
When placed in the womb, it sometimes produces an embryo and 
sometimes fails. When sexual union fails, it resembles a mango tree that 
puts forth a great many flowers without, however, producing a single fruit. 

Often, one who desires progeny and who strives vigorously to achieve 
their objective by worshipping many Devas, fails to procreate. Another, 
fearing the birth of a child as one fears a poisonous snake, finds a long-lived 
son born unto him, seeming to be his own self come back to the stages 
through which he has himself passed. 

Despondent men who ardently long for offspring, and at last beget 
children born after ten long months, after countless yagnas to many Devas 
and undergoing severe austerities, find them to be veritable wretches of 
their race. Others are blessed by progeny, obtained with the same blessed 
karmas and kriyas, who instantly inherit wealth and grain and other sources 
of enjoyment earned and stored by their sires. 

In an act of sexual union between two persons of opposite sexes, the 
embryo is born in the womb, like a calamity afflicting the mother. Very 
soon after the suspension of the vital breaths, other physical forms possess 
that embodied creature whose gross body has been destroyed but whose 
deeds have all been performed with that gross body made of flesh and 
blood. 

Upon the dissolution of the body, another body, just as destructible as 
the one that is destroyed, is ready for the burnt creature to migrate into even 
as one boat transfers its passengers into another. As a result of sexual union, 
a drop of the vital seed, which is inanimate, is placed in the womb. 

I ask you, through whose or what care is the embryo kept alive? That 
part of the body into which the food that is eaten goes and where it is 
digested, is the place where the embryo resides, but it is not digested there. 
The fertilised egg does not reside in that part of the body where the food 


eaten is digested. It is in the womb, enveloped in urine and faeces, one’s 
sojourn is regulated by nature. 

In the matter of where it lives and from where it escapes, the born 
creature is not a free agent. He is perfectly helpless in these. Some foetuses 
fall from the womb prematurely, as yet undeveloped. Some come out alive 
and continue to live. As regards some, after being quickened with life, they 
are destroyed while still in the womb in consequence of some other bodies 
being ready for them because of their past karma. 

A man inserts the semen in an act of sexual union, and obtains from it a 
son or daughter. The offspring thus gained, when the time comes, performs 
a similar act. When a man’s allotted life span draws to a close, the five 
primal elements of his body attain to the seventh and the ninth stages and 
then cease to be. The man himself does not change. 

Without doubt, when afflicted by diseases, as small animals assailed by 
hunters, men lose their powers of standing and moving. Even if such men 
want to spend vast wealth, the best efforts of physicians cannot alleviate 
their pain. This occurs even when skilled and knowledgeable doctors, 
equipped with excellent medicines, are themselves afflicted by disease like 
hunted animals. 

Even if men drink many astringents and all kinds of medicated ghee, 
they are broken by age and disease like trees by mighty tuskers. When 
animals and birds and beasts of prey and poor men are ailing, who treats 
them with medicines? Indeed, they are not even regarded as being ill. Like 
larger animals attacking smaller ones, sicknesses afflict even fierce kings 
with inexorable prowess and ferocity. All men, unable to even utter cries of 
pain, and overwhelmed by grief, are seen to be borne away along the 
powerful current into which they have been flung. Embodied creatures, 
even when seeking to vanquish nature, are unable to conquer it, despite 
using wealth, sovereign power, or the most austere penances. 

If all attempts men make were crowned with success, then they would 
never be subject to decay, would never experience anything disagreeable, 
and would be crowned with success in all their desires. 

All wish to attain ultimate superiority of position. To gratify this, they 
strive to their utmost. The result, however, does not fulfil their desires. Even 
men that are perfectly attentive and honest, brave and powerful, are seen to 
look up to men intoxicated with the arrogance of wealth and wine. 


There are those whose calamities disappear before even these are 
marked or noticed by them. There are others who have no riches and yet are 
free from all miseries. A great disparity may be observed with respect to the 
fruits of karma. Some are seen to bear chariots on their shoulders, while 
some are seen to ride them. 

All men desire wealth and prosperity. Only a few have chariots and 
elephants and horses in their processions. Some do not have a single spouse 
when their first-wedded ones are dead; while others have hundreds to call 
their own. 

Misery and happiness exist side by side. Men have either one or the 
other. Behold, this is a subject of wonder. Do not be bewildered at such a 
sight. 

Cast off both dharma and adharma. Cast off also truth and falsehood. 
Having discarded both, then cast off that which helps you to cast them off! 
O best of Rishis, I have now told you about that which brings great 
unhappiness. With these instructions, the Devas, once all human beings, 
succeeded in leaving the earth and became the inhabitants of swarga.” 

Hearing these words of Narada, the wise and serene Suka reflected upon 
the teachings he received, but could not arrive at any certainty of 
conclusion. He understood that one suffers great misery because of children 
and spouses, and that one has to take great pains to acquire scientific and 
Vedic knowledge. 

He, therefore, asked himself, “What is that situation which is eternal 
and which is free from misery of every kind but in which there are great 
riches?” Reflecting for a moment upon the path ordained for him, Suka, 
who was well acquainted with the beginning and the end of all duties, 
resolved to attain to the highest end that is fraught with the greatest felicity. 

He questioned himself, saying, “How shall I break free from all 
attachments, and become perfectly free and attain that excellent goal? How, 
indeed, shall I reach that from which there is no return to samsara, the 
ocean of diverse kinds of birth? 

I desire that condition of existence from which there is no return. 
Casting off all kinds of attachments, with the help of the mind, I will attain 
that goal after reflection and arriving at certainty. I shall reach that realm in 
which my Atman will be at peace, and I will be able to dwell for eternity 
without being subject to decay or change. 


It is, however, certain that this end cannot be attained without yoga. He 
who reaches the state of perfect knowledge and enlightenment does not 
experience attachments through base deeds. 

I shall, therefore, have recourse to yoga, and casting off this body which 
is my present home, I will transform myself into wind and enter the sun, 
that mass of effulgence. When the Jivatman enters the sun’s radiance, he no 
longer suffers like Soma who, with the gods, upon the exhaustion of merit, 
falls down on the earth and having once more acquired sufficient merit 
returns to heaven. 

The moon is always seen to wane and then wax. Seeing this waning and 
waxing that continue repeatedly, I do not wish for a form of existence in 
which there are such changes. The sun heats up all the world with his fiery 
rays. His disc never diminishes. Remaining unchanged, he saps the energy 
from all things. Hence, I desire to immerse myself into the blazing sun. 
Having discarded my body in the solar realms, I shall live there, invincible, 
my inner soul freed from all fear. With the great Rishis I shall enter the 
unbearable energy of the sun. 

I declare unto all creatures, to these trees, these elephants, these 
mountains, the earth herself, the cardinal points of the horizon, the sky, the 
Devas, the Danavas, the Gandharvas, the Pisachas, the Uragas and the 
Rakshasas, that I shall enter into all creatures in the world. Let all the Devas 
along with the Rishis behold the prowess of my yoga today!” 

With these words, Suka made his intentions clear to the illustrious 
Narada. Obtaining his permission, Suka then went to his father’s dwelling. 
Arriving in the presence of the Mahamuni, the high-souled and island-born 
Krishna, Suka circled round him and enquired after his wellbeing. 

Hearing of Suka’s intention, the Maharishi was greatly pleased. 
Addressing him, Vyasa said, “O son, beloved son, do stay a while here so 
that I may look upon you and gratify my eyes.” 

Suka, however, did not heed that request. Freed from attachment and all 
doubt, he began to think only of mukti, and focused himself on the journey 
ahead. He left his father and walked to the majestic breast of Kailasa 
inhabited by thousands of enlightened ascetics.’” 


CANTO 333 


¢ “RB hishma says, ‘Having ascended the peak of the mountain, O 

Bhaarata, the son of Vyasa sat down upon an even grassless place 
and retired from the dwellings of other creatures. In accordance with the 
shastras and the laws laid down, the ascetic, conversant with the sequence 
of the successive processes of yoga, held his soul first in one place and then 
in another, starting with his feet and proceeding upwards through all the 
limbs. 

Soon after the sun rose, Suka sat humbly, with his face turned 
eastwards, in a yogic posture, hands and feet drawn in. Where he sat, 
prepared for yoga, there were no flocks of birds, no sound, and no sight that 
was repulsive or terrifying. He beheld his own Atman freed from all 
attachments. Beholding that highest of all things, he laughed joyfully. 

He readied himself for yoga to attain to emancipation. Becoming a great 
master of yoga, he transcended the element of space. He then circled around 
Narada, the Devarishi, in pradakshina and told him about his intentions to 
address himself to the highest yoga. 

Suka said, “I have succeeded in beholding the path of mukti, and I have 
addressed myself to it.O you, blessed with the wealth of tapasya. Splendid 
one, through your grace, I will attain to the highest goal!’”’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Having received the permission of Narada, Suka the son 
of the island-born Vyasa saluted the divine Rishi and once more set himself 
to yoga and entered Akasa. He ascended from Kailasa and soared into the 
sky. 

Identifying himself with Vayu, the blessed Suka of unchanging ends 
flew across the sky. All creatures watched him as he traversed the skies 


shining with the radiance of Garuda at the speed of the wind or thought 
itself. 

Filled with the splendour of fire and the sun, Suka regarded the three 
worlds in their entirety as one homogenous Brahman, and travelled along 
that long path. Indeed, all creatures mobile and immobile cast their eyes 
upon him as he advanced with concentrated attention, and a tranquil, 
fearless soul. In accordance with the laws and their powers, all worshipped 
him with reverence. 

The inhabitants of swarga rained showers of celestial flowers over him. 
On seeing him, all the tribes of Apsaras and Gandharvas were filled with 
wonder. The enlightened Rishis were equally amazed. And they asked 
themselves, “Who is this one that has attained to success by his tapasya? 
With his gaze withdrawn from his own body but turned upwards, he fills us 
all with joy with his glances!” 

Of righteous soul and celebrated throughout the three worlds, Suka 
walked in silence, his face turned towards the east and his gaze directed 
towards the sun. As he went, he seemed to fill the entire sky with an all- 
pervading sound. 

As they watched him approach, all the Apsaras were filled with awe and 
amazement. Led by Panchachuda and others, they looked at Suka with eyes 
wide with wonder. And they asked one another, “What deity is this one that 
has attained to such a high end? Without doubt, he comes here, freed from 
all attachments from all desires!” 

Suka then went to the Malaya Mountains where Urvasi and Purvachitti 
dwelt. Both of them were awestruck as they beheld his tejas. 

And they said, “How wondrous is the fixed attention to yoga of a 
Brahmana youth who was accustomed to the recitation and study of the 
Vedas. Soon, like the moon, he will traverse the whole sky. 

He acquired this superior understanding through dutiful service and 
humble ministrations to his father. Of austere penances, he is firmly 
attached to his sire, and is much loved by him in return. Alas, why has he 
been dismissed by his inattentive father to tread a path from which there is 
no return?” 

Hearing these words of Urvasi, and noting their significance, Suka, that 
foremost of all persons conversant with dharma, looked around him, and 
once again perceived the sky, all the earth with her mountains and forests, 
and her lakes and rivers. All the Devas and Devis folded their hands, paid 


reverence to the son of the island-born Rishi, and gazed upon him with 
wonder and respect. 

That foremost of all righteous men, Suka, addressed them with these 
words, “If my sire should follow me and repeatedly call after me by my 
name, do all of you together give him my answer. Moved by the affection 
that you all bear for me, fulfil my request!” 

Hearing Suka’s words, all the points of the horizon, all the forests, all 
the seas, all the rivers, and all the mountains, answered him from every 
side, saying, “We accept your command, O regenerate one! It shall be as 
you say. Thus do we answer the words spoken by the Rishi!””’ 


CANTO 334 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, “Having spoken to all in this way, Suka, the twice- 

born Rishi of austere penances, cast off the four kinds of faults. 

Casting off also the eight kinds of tamas, he dismissed the five kinds of 

rajas. Radiant with intelligence, he discarded even the sattva guna. All this 
was marvellous. 

He then dwelt in that eternal place devoid of attributes, freed from every 
indication—that is, in Brahman, blazing like a smokeless fire. Meteors 
began to shoot out in every direction. The points of the horizon seemed to 
be ablaze. The earth trembled. All those phenomena were awesome to 
behold. 

The trees began to shed their branches and the mountains their peaks. 
Loud claps of thunder were heard that seemed to rive the Himavat 
Mountains. The sun seemed at that moment to be shorn of splendour. Fire 
refused to blaze forth. 

The lakes and rivers and seas were all agitated. Vasava poured torrents 
of fragrant rain. A pure breeze, bearing the scent of unearthly perfumes, 
began to blow. 

As he coursed through the sky, Suka saw the two beautiful peaks of 
Himavat and Meru. These were close to each other. One of them was made 
of gold and appeared yellow; the other was white, being made of silver. O 
Bhaarata, both were a hundred yojanas in height and in breadth. As he 
journeyed towards the north, Suka saw those two magnificent peaks. 

He dashed fearlessly against the two crests that appeared joined to each 
other. Unable to bear the force, they were rent in two. That sight was 
breathtaking. 


Suka pierced through those peaks; they were unable to stop his onward 
course. Watching, the inhabitants of swarga cried out loud. The Gandharvas 
and the Rishis, and others who dwelt in those mountains were divided in 
two as Suka passed through. 

A deafening echo was heard everywhere at that moment, and 
exclamations of “Uttamam! Excellent!” He was adored by the Gandharvas 
and the Rishis, by hosts of Yakshas and Rakshasas, and all tribes of the 
Vidyadharas. 

Rajan, the whole sky was strewn with celestial flowers showered from 
heaven at the very moment when Suka breached that impenetrable barrier! 
From a height, the righteous-souled Suka saw the beautiful and divine 
Mandakini flowing below through a region adorned by many flowering 
groves and forests. Delightful Apsaras played in these waters. Seeing Suka 
who was bodiless those naked sprites felt shame. 

Learning that Suka had undertaken his great journey, Vyasa, filled with 
love, followed him along the same path. Meanwhile, Suka, who moved 
through the sky higher than the region of the wind, displayed his prowess of 
yoga and united himself with Brahman. 

In a flash, adopting the subtle path of high yoga, Vyasa of austere 
penances, reached the spot from where Suka began his journey. Travelling 
the same way, Vyasa saw the peaks Suka had cloven in two as he passed 
through them. 

When they encountered Vyasa, the Rishis began to describe to him his 
son’s achievements. Vyasa, however, began to lament, loudly calling his 
son’s name, causing the three worlds to resound with his cries. 

Meanwhile, the righteous-souled Suka, who had entered the very 
elements, had become their soul and acquired omnipresence, answered his 
father with a resounding Bhoh. At this, the entire universe of mobile and 
immobile creatures echoed Suka’s reply by crying Bhoh. 

From that time to this, as if to answer Suka, whenever sounds are 
uttered in mountain-caves or on mountainsides, the echo comes back— 
Bhoh! 

By casting off all the attributes of sound, and disappearing with his 
yoga-shakti, Suka attained to the highest condition. Seeing that glory and 
power of his son of immeasurable energy, Vyasa sat down and sorrowfully 
began to think of him. 


Seeing him seated there, the Apsaras, who sported on the banks of the 
divine Mandakini, became restless, embarrassed and despondent. To hide 
their nakedness, some of them plunged into the stream, some entered the 
forests nearby, and some quickly gathered up their clothes. None of them 
had, however, betrayed any such signs of agitation at the sight of his son 
Suka. 

Seeing these movements, the Rishi understood that his son had been 
liberated from all attachments, but that he, Vyasa himself, was not free from 
them. He was filled with both joy and shame. As Vyasa sat there, Siva, 
armed with Pinaka, surrounded by many Devas and Gandharvas, and 
adored by all the Maharishis, came to that place. 

Consoling the island-born Rishi who was burning with grief because of 
his son, Mahadeva said to him. “You once prayed to me for a son with the 
energy of Agni, Jala, Vayu and Akasa. Generated by your tapasyas that very 
kind of son was born to you. 

By my grace, he was pure and full of Brahmatejas. He has attained to 
the highest end, one that cannot be won by anyone who has not completely 
subdued his senses; nor can it be acquired by any of the Devas even. Why 
then, O Rishi, do you grieve for that son? 

As long as the mountains exist, as long as the ocean lasts, so long will 
your son’s fame endure undiminished. With my blessings, Maharishi, you 
will, in this world, perceive a shadowy form resembling your son, moving 
ever at your side, never deserting you even for a moment!” 

Thus favoured by the illustrious Rudra himself, Vyasa saw the shadow 
of his son by his side. He returned from that place, now filled with joy. 

I have now told you, Bharatarishabha, everything regarding the birth 
and life of Suka. Devarishi Narada and the great Vyasa repeatedly told all 
this to me in ancient days when asked about it. One who serenely listens to 
this sacred history dealing with the subject of mukti is certain to attain to 
that highest end.’” 


CANTO 335 


¢ Ne udhishtira says, ‘If a man be a grihasta or a brahmacharin, a 

vanaprastha or a sannyasi, and if he desires to achieve success, 
what deity should he adore? How can he with certainty attain swarga and 
mukti? 

According to what laws should he perform the homa in honour of the 
Devas and the Pitris? What is the realm to which one goes when one is 
emancipated? What is the essence of mukti? What should one do so that, 
having attained swarga, one will not fall from there? 

Who is the Deity of the deities? And who is the Pitri of the Pitris? Who 
is he that is superior to him? Who is the Deva of the Devas? Tell me all this, 
Pitamaha!’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Conversant with the art of questioning, O Anagha, you 
have asked me a question that that touches a deep mystery. Even if one 
were to strive for a hundred years, one would be unable to answer it using 
reason and the science of argumentation. Rajan, your question cannot be 
answered without the grace of Narayana, or of the highest gyana. Parantapa, 
though your subject is one of profound mystery, I shall yet expound it to 
you. 

Let me narrate to you the ancient itihasa of the discourse between 
Narada and the Rishi Narayana. I heard it from my father that, in the Krita 
yuga, during the epoch of the Swayambhu Manu, the eternal Narayana, the 
Paramatman of the universe, took birth as the son of dharma in a quadruple 
form, as Nara, Narayana, Hari and the self-created Krishna. 

Amongst them all, Narayana and Nara underwent the severest 
austerities by repairing to the Himalayan retreat of Badari, riding on their 


golden chariots. Each of these were furnished with eight wheels, constituted 
of the five primal elements, and were beautiful indeed. 

Those original lords of the world, who had been born as the sons of 
Dharma, became emaciated because of the tapasya they had undergone. On 
account of those austerities and their tejas, the very Devas could not look at 
them. 

Only that deity whom they propitiated could behold them. Devoted to 
them, and compelled by an ardent desire to see them, Narada descended 
onto Gandhamadana from a peak of the lofty mountains of Meru, and 
wandered over all the world. 

At last he swiftly repaired to Badari’s asrama. Driven by curiosity he 
entered it at the hour that Nara and Narayana performed their daily kriyas. 

He said to himself, “This is truly the retreat of that Being in whom are 
established all the worlds including the Devas, the Asuras, the Gandharvas, 
the Kinnaras and the Nagas! 

There was only one form of this great Being before. That single rupa 
took birth in four forms for the expansion of the race sired by Dharma. How 
wonderful it is that dharma has thus been honoured by these four great 
Devas—Nara, Narayana, Hari and Krishna! 

Krishna and Hari lived here in earlier times. Nara and Narayana now 
dwell here, engaged in tapasya to increase their punya. These two are the 
highest refuge of the universe. 

What is the nature of their daily rites? They are the procreators of all 
living things, and the illustrious Lords of all beings. Filled with high 
intelligence, which Deva do these two worship? Who are those Pitris whom 
these two Pitris of all beings adore?” 

Reflecting on this, filled with devotion towards Narayana, Narada 
suddenly appeared before the two Devas. After they had finished 
worshipping their Devas and Rishis, they looked at the Devarishi who had 
arrived at their asrama. The latter was honoured with those eternal 
ceremonies that are ordained in the shastras. 

Watching that extraordinary conduct of the two primordial Devas in 
themselves worshipping other Devas and Pitris, Rishi Narada took his seat 
there, pleased with the homage he had received. With a cheerful soul he 
gazed at Narayana, and bowing to Mahadeva he said: 

“In the Vedas and the Puranas, in the angas and the subsidiary angas 
you are praised and revered; you are unborn and eternal. You are the 


Creator. You are the Mother of the universe. You are the embodiment of 
immortality and the foremost of all things. 

The past and the future, indeed, the entire universe is founded in you! 
Men in all the four asramas of life ceaselessly propitiate you who have 
many forms. 

You are the father and the mother and the eternal guru of the universe. 
Who is that Deva or that Pitri for whom you are performing yagnas today?” 

The holy one replied, “This is one subject about which nothing should 
be said. It is an ancient mystery. But your devotion to me is great. Hence, O 
Dvija, I will openly discourse to you about it. 

That which is minute, which is inconceivable, unmanifest, immobile, 
durable, without any connection with the senses and the objects of the 
senses, that which is dissociated from the five elements—that is called the 
Soul that dwells in all existent creatures. That is known by the name 
Kshetrajna. 

It transcends the three gunas of sattva, rajas and tamas, and is regarded 
as Purusha in the shastras. From him has come the unmanifest that 
possesses the three attributes of sattva, rajas and tamas. 

Though really Avyakta, unmanifest, she is the indestructible Prakriti and 
dwells in all manifest forms. Know that she is the source from which we 
two have sprung. That all-pervading Soul, which is made up of all existent 
and non-existent things, is adored by us. 

Even he is what we worship in all the rites that we perform in honour of 
the Devas and the Pitris. There is no higher Deva or Pitri than he. O 
regenerate one, He should be known as our Atman. It is him that we 
worship. 

He has propagated the path of dharma followed by men. It is his law 
that we should duly perform all the necessary kriyas for the Devas and the 
Pitris. 

Brahma, Sthanu, Manu, Daksha, Bhrigu, Dharma, Yama, Marichi, 
Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Vasishta, Paramesthi, Vivaswat, 
Soma, he that has been called Kardama, Krodha, Avak, and Krita: these 
twenty-one Prajapatis were the firstborn. 

All of them obeyed the eternal law of Narayana. Those most evolved of 
all men observed every rite ordained to honour the Devas and the Pitris, in 
detail, and achieved what they sought. 


The divinities of heaven bow to that Supreme Deity and through his 
grace they attain to those fruits he ordains for them. This is the established 
conclusion of the shastras: those men are liberated who, freed from these 
seventeen attributes—the five senses of knowledge, the five senses of 
action, the five vital breaths, and Manas and Buddhi—have cast off all 
karma and are divested of the fifteen elements which constitute the sthula 
sarira, the gross body. 

That which the emancipated attain to as their ultimate end is called 
Kshetrajna. In the shastras he is regarded both possessing and also free from 
all the gunas. He can be grasped by knowledge alone. 

We two have sprung from him. Knowing him in that way, we adore that 
eternal Soul of all things. The Vedas and all the asramas of life, despite their 
differences of opinion, are all devoted to him. 

Quick to be moved to grace, he grants them noble and blessed aims. In 
this world, those who are filled with his spirit, and are fully and absolutely 
devoted to him, attain to higher ends, for they succeed in entering and 
becoming merged in him. 

Narada, I have now revealed to you this exalted mystery, as I am moved 
by the love I bear for you because of your devotion to me. Indeed, it is on 
account of this devotion that you have succeeded in listening to my 
discourse!””’ 


CANTO 336 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, “Thus addressed by Narayana, foremost of all 
beings, Narada, foremost of men, spoke again to Narayana for 
the good of the world. 

Narada said, “O Swayambhu, let that objective be achieved for which 
you have taken birth in four forms in the house of Dharma! I will now 
repair to Sweta dwipa, the White Island, to gaze upon your true nature. 

I always worship my elders. I have never divulged the secrets of others 
and I have studied the Vedas carefully. I have undergone austere tapasya. I 
have never lied. As ordained in the shastras, I have always protected the 
four varnas. 

I have always behaved in the same manner towards friends and 
enemies. Wholly and steadfastly devoted to him, I ceaselessly adore the 
Paramatman, that first among Devas. Having cleansed my soul by these 
meritorious deeds, why will I not succeed in seeing that Infinite Lord of the 
universe?” 

Hearing these words of Paramesthi’s son, Narayana, protector of the 
shastras, gave him leave to go. Before dismissing him, he worshipped the 
Devarishi with those rites and rituals laid down in the scriptures. Narada 
also offered due adoration to the Rishi Narayana. After this worship had 
been mutually given and received, Narada left that place. 

Blessed with high yogic powers, Narada soared into the sky and reached 
the peak of the mountains of Meru. Going to a secluded place there, the 
Maharishi rested for a while. 

He then gazed towards the north-west and saw a magnificent sight there. 
Towards the north, in the ocean of milk, there is a great island named Sweta 


dwipa, the White Island. The learned say that its distance from the 
mountains of Meru is more than thirty-two thousand yojanas. 

The inhabitants of that realm have no senses. They live without eating 
any kind of food. Their eyes do not blink. They always exude wonderful 
fragrances perfumes. Their complexions are white. They are unblemished 
by any trace of sin. They scorch the eyes of those sinners that look at them. 

Their bones and bodies are as hard as the vajra. They regard honour and 
dishonour equally. They appear to be divine. All of them bear auspicious 
marks and have great strength. 

Their heads appear like parasols. Their voices are deep like the roar of 
thunderclouds. Each of them has four Mushkas. The soles of their feet are 
marked by hundreds of lines. 

They have sixty large white teeth and eight smaller ones. They have 
many tongues. With those tongues they seem to lick the very sun, which 
faces every direction. Indeed, they seem capable of devouring that deity 
from whom the entire universe has emerged, the Vedas, the Devas and the 
serene Munis.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “O Pitamaha, you have said that those beings have no 
senses, that they do not eat anything, that their eyes do not blink, and that 
they always exude fragrant aromas. 

I ask you, how were they born? What is the nature of their superior 
goal? Bharatarishabha, are the signs of those emancipated men the same as 
those by which all the inhabitants of the White Island are distinguished? 

Dispel my doubts. I feel deeply curious. You are the repository of all 
histories and discourses. As for us, we depend entirely on you; we look to 
you for knowledge and instruction.’ 

Bhishma continues, ‘Rajan, this story, which I heard from my father, is 
long. I will tell it to you. Indeed, it is regarded as the essence of all other 
narratives. 

In ancient times, there lived a king on earth by the name of Uparichara. 
He was known to be the friend of Indra of the Devas. He was devoted to 
Narayana, who is also known as Hari. 

He was observant of all the duties laid down in the shastras. Devoted to 
his father, he was always obedient and ready for any worthy action. He 
became the sovereign of the world on account of a boon he received from 
Narayana. 


Following the ancient sattvata ritual established by Surya himself, King 
Uparichara worshipped Narayana, the Devadeva, and when this worship 
was over he adored the Pitris of the universe. After worshipping the Pitris, 
he worshipped the Brahmanas. He then divided the offerings among those 
who were dependent on him. With what remained after serving them, the 
king satisfied his own hunger. 

Devoted to truth, Uparichara abstained from injuring any creature. With 
his whole soul, the king was devoted to Janardana, who is without 
beginning, middle and end, who is the Creator of the universe, and who 
does not decay or die. 

Seeing Parantapa’s devotion to him, Narayana shared his throne and 
palace with him. The king regarded his kingdom and wealth and spouses 
and animals as gifts from Narayana. He in turn offered up all his 
possessions to that great God. 

Adopting the Sattvata ritual, King Uparichara would perform all his 
yagnas and ceremonies, both optional and obligatory, with the fullest 
concentration. In his palace, many great Brahmanas, well conversant with 
the Pancharatra ritual, would eat before all others the food offered to 
Narayana. 

That Parantapa ruled his kingdom righteously; no untruth ever passed 
his lips and no wicked thought ever entered his mind. He never committed 
even the slightest sin. 

The seven celebrated Saptarishis—Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, 
Pulaha, Kratu and Vasishta of great tejas, who came to be known as the 
Chitra-sikhandins—uniting together on Meru, proclaimed an excellent 
treatise on the duties consistent with the four Vedas. 

That discourse was uttered by seven mouths, and represent the best 
compendium of human duties and observances. Known by the name of 
Chitra-sikhandins, those seven Rishis constitute the seven Pravriti elements 
of Mahat, Ahamkara, and the rest, and Swayambhu Manu, who is the eighth 
in the enumeration, is the original Prakriti. 

These eight uphold the universe, and it was these eight that promulgated 
this treatise. With their senses and minds under perfect control, and ever 
devoted to yoga, these eight Munis, with concentrated souls, know fully the 
past, the present and the future, and are devoted to the religion of truth. 

Reflecting in their minds, that this is good, this is Brahman, this is 
valuable, those Rishis created the worlds, and the science of morality and 


duty that governs those worlds. In that treatise the authors discoursed on 
dharma, artha, kama and mukti. 

In it they also laid down the various restrictions and limitations intended 
for Bhumi and also for swarga. They composed that discourse after having 
worshipped, along with many other Rishis, the puissant and illustrious 
Narayana, called also Hari, with tapasya for a thousand celestial years. 

Gratified with their penances and worship, Narayana commanded 
Saraswati, the goddess of learning and speech, to enter into the bodies of 
those Rishis. For the good of the worlds, the Devi did as she was told. As a 
result of her entering into the Rishis, rich in penances, they were able to 
compose those most excellent treatises marked by the harmony of words, 
good sense and strong reasoning. 

Having composed that treatise sanctified by Pranava, the syllable AUM, 
the Rishis first recited it to Narayana, who was delighted. The foremost of 
all Beings then addressed those Rishis in a divine voice and said, “These 
hundred thousand verses that you have composed are excellent. This 
treatise of a hundred thousand verses you have composed is exceptional. 

The dharma and kriyas of all the worlds will flow from this your work! 
In complete accordance with the four Vedas, the Yajuses, the Samans, and 
the Atharvans of Angiras, this treatise will be an authority with respect to 
both Pravritti and Nivritti in all the worlds. 

In accordance with the shastras I have created Brahman from the 
attribute of grace, Rudra from my wrath, and yourselves, O Brahmanas, as 
representing the Pravriti-elements, of Mahat, Ahamkara, and the rest; Surya 
and Chandramas, Vayu and Prithvi, Jala and Agni, all the stars and planets 
and constellations, all creatures, and utterers of Brahma, the Vedas, all live 
and act in their respective spheres and all are respected as authorities. 

This treatise you have composed shall be regarded by all men as a work 
of the highest authority. This is my command. 

Guided by this treatise, Swayambhu Manu himself will declare to the 
world its course of duties and observances. When Usanas and Brihaspati 
arise, they also will promulgate their respective treatises on dharma, guided 
by and quoting from this your treatise. 

After the promulgation of this treatise by Manu and of that by Usanas, 
and also by Brihaspati, this science composed by you will be acquired by 
King Vasu, also known as Uparichara. Indeed, O Dvijottamas, that king will 
acquire knowledge of this your work from Brihaspati. 


That king, filled with all good thoughts, will become devoted to me. 
Guided by this treatise, he will perform all his karmas and kriyas. Verily, 
this treatise composed by you will be the best of all treatises on dharma. 
This excellent treatise, rich in wondrous mysteries, is fraught with 
instructions to acquire both material and spiritual punya. 

As a result of this treatise, you will be the progenitor of a vast race. 
King Uparichara also will become great and prosperous. Upon his death, 
however, this eternal work will disappear from the world.” 

Having said these words to all those Rishis, the invisible Narayana left 
them and went to an unknown place. Then those sires of the world, those 
Rishis that bestowed their thoughts on the ends pursued by the world, duly 
promulgated that treatise which is the eternal origin of all kriya and karma. 

Subsequently, when Brihaspati was born in Angiras’s race in the Krita 
yuga, those seven Rishis gave him the task of promulgating their treatise 
which was consistent with the Upanishads and the Vedangas. These 
upholders of the universe and the first promulgators of duties and religious 
observances went forth to their chosen place, having resolved to devote 
themselves to tapasya.’” 


CANTO 337 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, “With the end of the great kalpa, when the divine 

Purohita Brihaspati was born in the race of Angiras, all the Devas 
were delighted. The words Brihat, Brahma and Mahat all mean the same. 
Brihaspati was so called because he possessed all these qualities. King 
Uparichara, otherwise called Vasu, became a disciple of Brihaspati and 
soon became the foremost of his sishyas. 

At the feet of his acharya, he then began to study the science composed 
by the seven Rishis known as Chitra-sikhandins. With his soul purified by 
tapasya and other rituals, he ruled the earth like Indra ruling swarga. 

The illustrious king performed an Aswamedha yagna in which his guru 
Brihaspati became the Hota. The sons of Prajapati themselves, Ekata Dwita, 
and Trita, became the Sadasyas in that yagna. 

There were others also who became Sadasyas at that sacrifice: 
Dhanusha, Raivya, Arvavasu, Parvavasu, the Rishi Medhatithi, the great 
Rishi Tandya, the blessed Rishi Santi otherwise called Vedasiras, Maharishi 
Kapila, who was the father of Salihotra, the first kalpa, Tittiri the elder 
brother of Vaisampayana, Kanwa and Devahotra, in all sixteen. 

Rajan, all the required samagrahis were gathered for that great yagna. 
No animals were slaughtered. The king had so ordained it. He was full of 
compassion. Pure and tolerant of mind, he had discarded all desires, and 
knew all the rituals and ceremonies. The produce of the forests were used in 
that yagna. 

Hari, the god of devas, was gratified with the king on account of that 
yagna. Hidden from everyone else, Narayana showed himself to his bhakta. 
Accepting his share, by imbibing its scent, he himself took up the Purodasa. 


Unseen by anyone, Narayana took the offerings. Brihaspati was angered 
by this. Seizing the ladle he hurled it violently at the sky, and shed tears in 
wrath. 

Addressing King Uparichara, he said, “Here, I place this as Narayana’s 
share of the sacrificial offerings. Without doubt, he shall take it before my 
eyes.” 

Yudhishtira says, “At the great sacrifice of Uparichara, all the Devas 
appeared openly to take their share of the arghya and were seen by all. Why 
is it that only Hari acted otherwise by taking his share without being seen?’ 

Bhishma continues, ‘When Brihaspati was enraged, the great King Vasu 
and all his Sadasyas sought to pacify the Maharishi. Calmly they addressed 
Brihaspati, saying, “It befits you not to give way to anger. 

In this Krita you, your wrath should not characterise anyone. The great 
God, for whom you set aside the share of the sacrificial offerings, is himself 
free from anger. O Brihaspati, he cannot be seen either by us or by you! 
Only he can behold him to whom He extends his grace.” 

Then the Rishis Ekata, Dwita and Trita, who knew the science of 
morality and duties compiled by the seven sages, addressed that assembly 
and began the following narration. 

“We are the sons of Brahma, begotten by a command of his will, not in 
the ordinary way. Once upon a time we went to the north in order to obtain 
that which is for our highest good. Having undergone tapasya for thousands 
of years and acquired great punya, we again stood on only one foot like 
fixed stakes of wood. 

The land where we performed tapasya lies to the north of the mountains 
of Meru and on the shores of the ocean of milk. Our goal was to behold the 
divine Narayana in his own form. 

Upon the completion of our penances and after we had performed the 
final ablutions, we heard a divine voice, at once deep as that of the clouds 
and exceedingly sweet, filling our hearts with rapture. 

The voice said, “You Brahmanas have performed these penances with 
cheerful souls. Devoted to Narayana, you seek to know how you may 
succeed in beholding that God of great puissance! 

On the northern shores of the ocean of milk there is a magnificent island 
called Sweta dwipa, White Island. The complexions of the men that inhabit 
that island are as white as the rays of the moon and they are devoted to 
Narayana. 


Worshippers of that foremost of all Beings, they are devoted to him with 
all their souls. They all enter that eternal and illustrious deity of a thousand 
rays. 

They are without any senses. They do not live on any kind of food. 
Their eyes do not blink. Their bodies are fragrant. Indeed, the inhabitants of 
the White Island worship only one God. Rishis, go there, for there I have 
revealed myself!’ 

Hearing these divine words, all of us went forth to the island described 
to us. Eagerly desiring to behold him, our hearts full of him, at last we 
arrived at that great island called Sweta dwipa. 

There, we could see nothing. Indeed, our vision was blinded by the 
lustre of the Devadeva and so we could not see him. At this, the idea, due to 
the grace of the great God himself, arose in our minds—that one that had 
not undergone sufficient penances could not swiftly behold Narayana. 

Under the influence of this idea, we once more set ourselves to the 
practice of rigorous tapasya, suited to the time and place, for a hundred 
years. Upon the completion of our vratas, we saw many men of auspicious 
features. 

All of them were white like the moon with every mark of 
auspiciousness. Their hands were always joined in prayer. The faces of 
some were turned towards the north and of some towards the east. They 
were engaged in silently meditating upon the Brahman. 

The japa performed by those Mahatmans was a silent, mental one with 
an audible recitation of any mantras. As a result of their minds and hearts 
being entirely focused upon him, Hari was gratified. 

Maharishi, the effulgence emitted by each of those men resembled the 
splendours that Surya assumes at the time of the Mahapralaya, the 
dissolution of the universe. Indeed, we thought that that island was the 
home of all light. All the inhabitants were equal in energy. There was no 
superiority or inferiority among them. 

Suddenly, we saw a light burning with the concentrated effulgence of a 
thousand suns. Together, the inhabitants ran joyously towards that light, 
with hands joined in reverence, uttering the one word Namas, we bow to 
you. 

We then heard a booming sound made by them in unison. It seemed that 
those men were engaged in offering up a sacrifice to the great God. 


We ourselves suddenly lost our senses by his unbearable tejas. Deprived 
of sight and strength and all our senses, we could not see or feel anything. 
We only heard a thundering voice in which those gathered there spoke as 
one. 

They said, ‘Victory to you, O you of eyes like lotus-petals! Salutations 
to thee, O Creator of the universe! Salutations to you, Hrishikesa, foremost 
of Beings, you who are the First-born!’ 

This is what we heard, uttered distinctly and in agreement with the laws 
of pronunciation. A pure and redolent breeze blew, bearing perfumes of 
divine flowers, and of certain herbs and plants germane to the occasion. 

Those men, suffused with great devotion, with hearts full of reverence, 
conversant with the ordinances laid down in the Pancharatra, were 
worshipping Narayana with thought, words and action. Without doubt, Hari 
appeared in that place from where the sound they made arose. 

Bewildered by his illusion, we could not see him. After the breeze had 
subsided and the yagna ended, our hearts were troubled with anxiety, O 
foremost of Angira’s vamsa. 

As we stood among those thousands of men, all of purest descent, no 
one honoured us with a glance or nod. Those ascetics, joyful and pious, all 
practising the Brahmatva, did not show any kind of feeling for us. 

We were exceedingly weary. Our tapasya had emaciated us. At that 
moment, a divine Being spoke to us from the sky, saying, ‘These white 
men, who are without their outer senses, have the capacity to behold 
Narayana. 

Only those Dvijottamas whom these white men honour with their 
glances become competent to gaze upon the great God. Munis, go now to 
the place from where you have come. 

That great deity cannot be perceived by one that is devoid of bhakti. 
Incapable of being seen because of his dazzling radiance, that illustrious 
deity can be beheld only by men who, in the course of long ages, succeed in 
devoting themselves only and absolutely to him. 

You have a great duty to perform. After the passing of this, the Krita 
yuga, when the Treta yuga comes in the course of the Vivaswat cycle, a 
great disaster will engulf the worlds. O Munis, you will then have to join 
with the Devas to dispel that calamity.’ 

Having heard these wonderful words that were sweet as amrita, we soon 
returned to the place we desired, through the power of that great Deity. 


When we, with the help of even such austere tapasya and arghya, have 
failed to catch a glimpse of him, how can you expect to see him so easily? 

Narayana is the Great Being, he is the Creator of the universe. He is 
adorned in sacrifices with offerings of ghee and other special food 
accompanied by the chanting of Vedic mantras. He has no beginning and no 
end. He is Avyakta. Both the Devas and the Danavas worship him.” 

Encouraged by these words spoken by Ekata and commended by his 
companions, Dwita and Trita, and entreated by the other Sadasyas, the high- 
minded Brihaspati brought that sacrifice to completion after duly offering 
the accustomed adorations to the Devas. King Uparichara also completed 
his mahayagna and began to rule his subjects righteously. 

At last, casting off his body, he ascended into swarga. After some time, 
through the curse of the Brahmanas, he fell from those blissful realms and 
sank deep into the bowels of the earth. 

O tiger among monarchs, King Vasu was always devoted to the true 
dharma. Although sunk deep in the bowels of the earth, his devotion to 
virtue did not abate. Ever devoted to Narayana, and ever reciting sacred 
mantras to him, he once more ascended to heaven through Narayana’s 
grace. 

Rising from the bowels of the earth, because of attaining that highest 
end, King Vasu went to a place even higher than Brahmaloka, dominion of 
Brahma himself.’” 


CANTO 338 


¢ Ne udhishtira says, ‘Despite being wholly devoted to Narayana, 
why did the great King Vasu fall from swarga and why did he 
have to sink below the surface of Bhumi?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘O Bhaarata, in this regard listen to the old narrative of a 
discourse between the Rishis and the Devas. Long ago, the Devas addressed 
many foremost of Brahmanas and told them that yagnas should be 
performed by offering up Ajas as dakshina. Aja should be understood as the 
goat and no other animal. 

The Rishis said, “The Vedic Sruti declares that in sacrifices the offerings 
should consist of seeds of vegetables. Seeds are called ajas. It befits you not 
to kill goats. The slaughter of animals is not prescribed in the dharma of the 
virtuous. This, again, is the Krita yuga. How can animals be killed in this 
age of righteousness?” 

Bhishma continues, ‘While this discourse was underway between the 
Rishis and the Devas, King Vasu came that way. Abounding in prosperity, 
the king moved through the sky accompanied by his soldiers, chariots and 
animals. 

Beholding the king arriving there, the Brahmanas said to the Devas, 
“This one will remove our doubts. He performs sacrifices. He is liberal in 
making gifts. He always seeks the good of all creatures. How could the 
great Vasu speak otherwise?” 

Having thus spoken to each other, the Devas and the Rishis approached 
King Vasu and asked him, “Rajan, with what should one conduct yagnas? 
Should one sacrifice with the goat or with herbs and plants? Dispel our 
doubts. We regard you as our judge in this matter.” 


Thus addressed, Vasu humbly joined his hands and said to them, “Tell 
me truly, O supreme Brahmanas, what in your opinion is entertained by you 
in this matter?” 

The Rishis said, “In our understanding, yagnas should be performed 
with grain. The Devas, however, maintain that sacrifices should be done 
using animals. You be our judge and tell us which of view is correct.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘Learning the position of the Devas on this matter, 
Vasu, moved by a partiality for them, said that yagnas should be performed 
with animals. All the Rishis, blazing with the splendour of the sun, were 
enraged at this choice. 

To Vasu, who was seated on his chariot and who had wrongly taken up 
for the Devas, they said, “Since you have mistakenly taken the side of the 
Devas, you will fall from heaven. From this day on, you will lose the power 
of journeying through the sky. Through our curse you will sink deep below 
the surface of the earth.” 

After the Rishis had spoken, King Uparichara immediately plunged 
down into an abyss. But at the command of Narayana, Vasu retained his 
memory. To his good fortune, pained at the curse pronounced on him by the 
Brahmanas, the Devas began to think how that curse might be neutralised. 

They said, “This high-souled king has been cursed for our sake. We, the 
inhabitants of heaven, must unite for his good in return for what he has 
done for us.” Having swiftly reflected and decided thus, the Devas went to 
where King Uparichara was. 

Arriving in his presence, they said to him, “You are devoted to 
Narayana, the great God of the Brahmanas. He, the ruler of both the Devas 
and the Asuras, is pleased with you and will save you from the curse. It is 
proper, however, that the high-souled Brahmanas should be honoured. 
Rajan, their penances must necessarily fructify. Indeed, you have already 
plunged from the sky to the earth. We desire, however, to favour you in one 
respect. O Anagha, as long as you live in this abyss, you will receive food 
and sustenance through our boon. 

Those streaks of ghee which Brahmanas pour in yagnas_ with 
concentrated minds, accompanied by sacred mantras, and known as 
Vasudhara, shall be yours, throughout blessings. Indeed, neither weakness 
nor distress will touch you. 

While dwelling in this hollow, neither hunger nor thirst will afflict you 
for you will drink those streams of ghrita called Vasudhara. Your energy 


will continue undiminished. As a consequence, the boon that we grant you, 
Narayana will be pleased with you, and he will bear you to the realm of 
Brahma!” 

Having granted these boons to the king, the Devas and all those 
Tapodhana Rishis returned to their respective abodes. Then Vasu began to 
adore the Creator of the universe and to silently recite the sacred mantras 
that had come forth from Narayana’s mouth in ancient days. 

Parantapa, though dwelling in a pit of the earth, the king still 
worshipped Hari, the Lord of all the gods, in the five celebrated yagnas that 
are performed five times every day. As a result of these adorations, 
Narayana was pleased with him who had controlled his senses, and had 
shown himself to be entirely devoted to him, by relying upon him as his 
sole refuge. 

The illustrious Vishnu, that giver of boons, addressed that foremost of 
birds, Garuda of great speed, who waited upon him as his servant. “O 
excellent and most blest Garuda, listen to what I say. There lives a great 
king by the name of Vasu who is of righteous soul and rigid vows. Through 
the wrath of the Brahmanas, he has fallen into an abyss of the earth. 

The Brahmanas have been sufficiently honoured, since their curse has 
fructified. Go now to that king. At my command, Garuda, go to King 
Uparichara who now dwells in the depths of patala and can no more course 
through the sky. Go, Garuda, and swiftly raise him up.” 

Hearing Vishnu’s words, Garuda spread his wings and going like the 
wind, entered the pit in which King Vasu was. He lifted up the king in his 
beak, soared into the sky and there he released Vasu. At that moment, King 
Uparichara once more acquired his divine form and re-entered the realm of 
Brahma. 

Son of Kunti, in this manner did that great king first plunge down into 
the depths of the earth through the curse of the Brahmanas for a fault of 
speech, and once more ascend to swarga at the command of Vishnu. 

Uparichara devoutly worshipped only the puissant Lord Hari, that 
foremost of all Beings. It was for this reverence that the king was freed 
from the curse of the Brahmanas and regained the felicitous regions of 
Brahmaloka.’ 

Bhishma continues, ‘I have now told you everything regarding the 
origin of the spiritual sons of Brahma. Listen to me with undivided 


attention, for I will now narrate to you how Devarishi Narada went to the 
White Island in ancient times.’” 


CANTO 339 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, “Arriving at Sweta dwipa, the illustrious Rishi saw 

those same white men possessed of lunar splendour of whom I 

have already spoken to you. Worshipped by them, the Rishi venerated them 
in return by bowing his head and revering them in his mind. 

Wishing to behold Narayana, he began to live there, engaged in the 
silent recitation of sacred mantras, and observing the most difficult vratas. 
With dhyana, the regenerate Rishi, arms upraised, stood in yoga, and recited 
this mantra to the Lord of the universe, he, who is both saguna, the essence 
of attributes, and nirguna, without all attributes. 

Narada said,' “Salutations to you, O God of gods, you who are free 
from all deeds! You are he who is nirguna, who is the Anudarshin of all the 
worlds, who is called Kshetrajna, who is the foremost of all Beings, who is 
infinite, who is called Purusha, who is the great Purusha, who is the 
foremost of all Purushas, who is the soul of the three attributes, who is 
called the Foremost, who is amrita, nectar, who is called Immortal, who is 
called Anantasesha, who is Akasa, space, 

You are he who is without beginning, who is both Vyakta, manifest, and 
Avyakta, unmanifest, as existing and not-existent things, who is said to have 
his home in Satya, who is the foremost among the Devas; Narayana, who is 
the giver of wealth, the fruits of one’s actions, who is identified with 
Daksha and other Lords of the creation, who is the Aswattha and other 
mighty trees, who is the four-headed Brahma, who is the Lord of all created 
Beings, who is the Lord of speech. 

You are he who is the Lord of the universe, Indra, who is the all- 
pervading Atman, who is the sun, who is prana, the breath, who is the Lord 


of the waters, Varuna, who is the Emperor or the king, who can be identified 
with the Lokapalas of the several points of the horizon, who is the refuge of 
the universe at the time of the final dissolution. 

You are he who is concealed, who is the giver of the Vedas unto 
Brahma, who is associated with the sacrifices and Vedic studies achieved by 
Brahmanas with the help of their bodies, who is linked with the four 
principal orders of the Devas, who is every one of those orders, who shines 
radiantly with great effulgence, unto whom is offered the seven largest 
arghya along with the Gayatri and other mantras. 

You are he who is Yama, who is Chitragupta and the other attendants of 
Yama, who is the wife of Yama, who is the Tushita order of the Devas, who 
is that other order called Mahatushita, the universal grinder, death, who is 
desire, and all diseases that have been created to ensure death. 

You are he who is health and freedom from disease, who is subject to 
desire and passions, who is free from the influence of desire and passions, 
who is infinite as exhibited in species and forms, who is he that is chastised, 
who is he that is the chastiser, 

You are he who is all the minor sacrifices of Agnihotra and others, who 
is all the principal sacrifices, those like Brahma, who is all the Ritvijas, who 
is the origin of all Vedic yagnas, who is fire, the very heart of all sacrifices, 
the mantras uttered in them, who is he who is revered in yagnas, who takes 
those shares of the arghya offered to him, who is the embodiment of the five 
sacrifices. 

You are he who is the maker of the five divisions of time, day, night, 
month, season and year, who cannot be understood except by those shastras 
called Pancharatra, who fears nothing, who is unvanquished, who is only 
the mind, without a form, who is known only by name, who is the Lord of 
Brahma himself, who has completed all the vows and rituals told of in the 
Vedas. 

You are he who is the Hamsa, bearer of the staff, who is the 
Paramahamsa without the staff, who is the foremost of all yagnas, who is 
Samkhya yoga, who is the embodiment of the Samkhya philosophy, who 
dwells in all Jivas, who lives in every heart, who resides in every sense, 
who floats on the ocean, who lives in the Vedas, who lies on the lotus as the 
egg from which the universe has sprung, who is the Lord of the universe, 
and whose forces spread far and wide to protect his devotees. 


You take birth as all creatures. You are the origin of the universe. Your 
mouth is fire. You are that fire which courses through the waters of the 
ocean, gushing out from a horse’s head. You are the sanctified ghee that is 
poured into the sacrificial fire. You are the charioteer, the fire and heat that 
charges the body and causes it to live and grow. 

You are Vashat. You are the syllable AUM. You are Tapasya. You are 
Manas. You are Chandramas. You purify the sacrificial ghrita. You are 
Surya. You are the Dikgajas that are stationed at the four cardinal points of 
the horizon. You illuminate the cardinal points. You also brighten the 
subsidiary points. You are the Hayagriva and the Badava mukha. 

You are the first three mantras of the Rig Veda. You are the protector of 
the varnas—Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras. You are the five 
fires beginning with Garhapatya. You are he who has three times lit Nachi, 
the sacrificial fire. 

You are the refuge of the six angas of the Vedas. You are the foremost 
of those Brahmanas that are employed to recite the Samans in yagnas and 
kriyas. You are Pragjyotisha, and you are he who sings the first Saman. 

You keep the Vedic vratas and those observed by singers of the Samans. 
You are the embodiment of the Upanishad known as the Atharvasiras. You 
are he who is the subject of the five foremost scriptures, those that pertain to 
the worship of Surya, of Sakti, of Ganesa, of Siva and of Vishnu. 

You are called the guru who subsists on only the froth of water. You are 
a Balakhilya. You are the embodiment of him who is steadfast in yoga. You 
are the epitome of the correct judgement of logic. 

You are the beginning of the yugas, you the middle of the yugas and 
you are their end. You are Indra, Akhandala. You are the Rishis Prachina- 
garbha and Kausika. You are Purusthuta, You are Puruhuta, You are the 
Creator of the universe. 

The universe has your form. Your movements are infinite. Your bodies 
are infinite; you are without end, without beginning and without middle. 
Your centre is unmanifest. Your end is unmanifest. 

Your abode is in your vratas. You live in the ocean. Your home lies in 
fame, in penances, in self-restraint, in wealth, in knowledge, in grand 
achievements, and in everything belonging to the universe. 

You are Vasudeva. You grant every wish. You are Hanuman who bore 
Rama on his shoulders. You are the mighty Aswamedha yagna. You receive 
your share of arghya in great sacrifices. 


You bestow boons, joy and wealth. You are devoted to Hari. You are the 
subduer of the senses. You are vrata and kriya. You are mortifications, you 
are harsh mortifications, and you are the most relentless of mortifications. 

You are he who observes vows and religious rites. You are free from all 
errors. You are a Brahmacharin. You were born in the womb of Prishni. 
From you have emerged all Vedic rites and karmas. You are unborn. 

You pervade all things. Your eyes are on all things. You cannot be 
grasped by the senses. You are not subject to decay. You possess infinite 
power. Your body is inconceivably vast. 

You are holy, beyond the ken of logic or argument. You are 
unknowable. You are the foremost of causes. You are the Creator of all 
creatures and you are their destroyer. You hold immense powers of maya. 
You are called Chitra-sikhandin. 

You are the giver of boons. You take your share of the sacrificial 
offerings. You have acquired the punya of all yagnas. You are he who has 
been freed from all doubts. You are omnipresent. You have the form of a 
Brahmana. You are devoted to the Brahmanas. 

The universe is your form. Your body is immeasurable. You are the 
greatest friend. You are kind to all your devotees. You are Brahmanyadeva, 
the great deity of the Brahmanas. 

I am your devoted sishya. I seek to behold you. Salutations to you who 
are mukti.”’ 


' This is the Vishnu Sahasranama stotra. 


CANTO 340 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, “Thus worshipped with names unknown to others, 
the Divine Narayana, having the universe for his form, revealed 
himself to the ascetic Narada. 

His form, though purer than the moon, differed from the moon in some 
ways. He somewhat resembled a blazing fire in hue. The puissant Lord was 
somewhat of the form of Vishti. 

He resembled in some respects the feathers of the parrot, and in some a 
mass of pure crystal. He appeared like a hill of antimony and also like a 
mass of pure gold. 

His colour somewhat resembled the first formed coral, and was 
somewhat white. In some respects that complexion shone with the colour of 
gold and in some that of lapis lazuli. To some extent it radiated the blue of 
lapis lazuli and in some that of sapphire. In some respects it resembled the 
hue of the peacock’s neck, and in some that of a string of pearls. 

Bearing these diverse hues on his person, Narayana appeared before 
Narada. He had a thousand eyes and was splendid to behold. He had a 
hundred heads and a hundred feet. He had a thousand bellies and a thousand 
arms. 

He was still inconceivable to the mind. With one of his mouths he 
uttered the syllable AUM and then the Gayatri following Pranava. With the 
mind under complete control, the great deity, called by the names of Hari 
and Narayana, by his other countless mouths, chanted many mantras from 
the Aranyaka of the four Vedas. 

The Lord of all the Devas, he who is adorned in sacrifices, held a 
kamandalu in his hands, some awesome and sparkling jewels, a pair of 


sandals, and a bundle of kusa grass, a deer-skin, a staff and a small blazing 
fire. 

With blissful soul, that foremost of Brahmans, Narada, bowed before 
Narayana and revered him. And he, the foremost of all the Devas, spoke the 
following words to Narada who bowed low in worship. 

Narayana said, “The great Rishis Ekata, Dwita and Trita came to this 
realm to behold me. However, their wish remained unfulfilled. Nor can 
anyone have a vision of me other than those who are devoted to me with 
their whole being. 

As for you, you are truly the foremost of all men who love and worship 
me with all their souls. These are my forms, the best ones that I assume. 
These were born, O Dvija, in the house of Dharma. Worship them always, 
and perform those kriyas that are laid down in the Vedas regarding that 
worship. 

O Brahmana, ask of me the boons you desire. I am gratified with you 
today, and I appear to you now in my universal form free from decay and 
death.” 

Narada said, “Since, Holy One, I have succeeded in seeing you today, I 
consider that I have instantly gained the fruits of all my penances, of my 
self-restraint, and of all my vratas and punya karmas. 

This, indeed, is the highest boon you have granted me for you have 
revealed yourself to me today. Eternal Lord, holiest one, the universe is 
your eye. You are Narasimha. Your form is identifiable with everything. 
Narayana, you are mighty and infinite.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘Having thus shown himself unto Narada, the son 
of Paramesthi, Narayana said to that Rishi, “Narada, go hence, do not 
delay! My devotees with moonlike complexions are without any senses and 
do not live on any food. They are, again, all emancipated. With minds 
wholly fixed on me, men should think only of me. 

Such worshippers will never face any obstacles. These men are all 
crowned with ascetic success and are highly blessed. In ancient times, they 
deeply revered me. They have been freed from rajas and tamas. Without 
doubt, they are proficient to merge into my self. 

He is that One who cannot be seen with the eye, touched with the sense 
of touch, smelt with the sense of scent, and who is beyond the sense of 
taste, who is untouched by sattva, rajas and tamas, who pervades all things 


and is the one witness of the universe, and who is described as the Soul of 
the entire universe. 

He is that which is not annihilated upon the destruction of the bodies of 
all created things, who is unborn and unchangeable and eternal, who is 
freed from all attributes, who is indivisible and undivided; He who 
transcends the twenty-four tattvas, is regarded as the twenty-fifth. 

He who is called by the name of Purusha, who is inactive, and who can 
only be grasped by true gyana, he into whom the foremost of the regenerate 
enter and attain mukti. He who is the eternal Paramatman is known by the 
name of Vasudeva. 

Behold, O Narada, the greatness and puissance of Narayana. He is never 
touched by dharma and adharma, good and evil deeds. 

Sattva, rajas and tamas are said to be the three original gunas. These 
dwell and act in the bodies of all creatures. The Jivatman, called Kshetrajna, 
enjoys and sanctions the action of these gunas. He, however, transcends 
them and they cannot touch him. 

Freed from these attributes, he supports them and gets pleasure from 
them. Having created them himself, the Jivatman is above them all. 
Devarishi, when the hour of universal dissolution arrives, Bhumi, which is 
the refuge of the universe, disappears into Jala, Jala disappears into Agni, 
Agni into Vayu, Vayu disappears into Akasa, and Akasa into Manas. 

Manas is a wondrous creature, and it disappears into Avyakta Prakriti. 
Unmanifest Prakriti disappears into inert Purusha. There is nothing higher 
than Purusha, which is eternal. There is nothing among mobile and 
immobile things in the universe that is immutable, other than Vasudeva, the 
eternal Purusha. Imbued with great power, Vasudeva is the Atman of all 
creatures. 

Earth, wind, space, water and light are the Panchamahabhutas of great 
power. Merging together they form the body. Having subtle potency and 
invisible to all eyes, Vasudeva then enters the body, the combination of the 
five primal elements. This is called his birth, and taking birth. 

He causes the body to move about and act. Without a combination of 
the five Mahabhutas, no body can be created. Without the entry of the Jiva 
into the body, the mind dwelling within it cannot cause it to move and act. 
He that enters the body is powerful and is called Jiva. 

He is known also by other names, Sesha and Samkarshana. He that 
arises from that Samkarshana, by his own actions, Sanatkumara, and in 


whom all creatures merge at the end of the yuga, is the mind of all 
creatures, and is called by the name Pradyumna. 

From Pradyumna arises he who is the Creator, and who is both cause 
and effect. It is from this that the mobile and immobile universe originates. 
This one is called Aniruddha. He is otherwise called Isana, and he is 
manifest in all deeds. 

That illustrious one, Vasudeva, who is called Kshetrajna, and who is 
without gunas, should be known as the puissant Samkarshana, when he 
takes birth as the Jiva. From Samkarshana arises Pradyumna who is called 
‘He that is born as Manas.’ From Pradyumna is he who is Aniruddha. He is 
Chit, Consciousness, he is Iswara, Supreme Lord. 

It is from me, that the entire mobile and immobile universe springs. It is 
from me, Narada, that the indestructible and destructible, the existent and 
the non-existent, flow. They that are devoted to me enter into me and 
become free. 

I am known as Purusha. Without karma, I am the twenty-fifth tattva. 
Transcending attributes, I am complete and indivisible. I am above all pairs 
of contradictions and free from all attachments. Narada, this you will not 
understand. 

You see me as having a body. If I so wish I can dissolve this form in a 
moment. I am the Paramatman and the Jagadguru, the preceptor of the 
universe. What you see is only maya, an illusion. I appear to be endowed 
with the attributes of all created things. You are not consummate enough to 
know me. 

I have now revealed my fourfold form to you. I am, Narada, the doer, I 
am cause, and I am effect. I am the sum of all living creatures. All beings 
have their refuge in me. Do not think that you have seen the Kshetrajna. 

I pervade all things. I am the Jivatman of all creatures. However, when 
their bodies are destroyed, I am not annihilated. Those blessed ascetics who 
become wholly devoted to me are liberated from the rajas and tamas gunas, 
and succeed in uniting with me. 

He who is called Hiranyagarbha, Brahma who is the beginning of the 
world, who has four faces, who cannot be understood through Nirukta, who 
is an eternal deity, attends to my work. Rudra, born of my wrath, springs 
from my forehead. 

Behold, the eleven Rudras protrude on the right side of my body. The 
twelve Adityas are on the left. Behold, the eight Vasus, those best of Devas, 


are in my front, and look, the Aswini Kumaras, Nasatya and Dasra, the two 
divine physicians, are at my back. 

Behold all the Prajapatis and the Saptarishis also in my body. Behold 
the Vedas, and all the countless yagnas, the amrita and all the medicinal 
plants and herbs, the tapasyas, and all the diverse vratas and kriyas. Behold 
the eight attributes of puissance, particularly those of sovereignty, all 
dwelling together in my body in their united and embodied forms. 

Behold also Sree and Lakshmi, and Kirti, and Bhumi Devi with her 
mountainous undulations, and Saraswati, the mother of the Vedas, dwelling 
in me. Behold Dhruva, that foremost of luminaries ranging the skies, as also 
all the oceans and lakes and rivers dwelling in me. Behold the four most 
excellent Pitris in their embodied forms, and the three gunas, sattva, rajas 
and tamas, dwelling formlessly within me. 

The actions performed to honour the Pitris are superior in punya to 
those done in honour of the Devas. I am the Pitri of both the Devas and the 
Pitris, and have existed before even them. Becoming the Badava mukha, I 
course through the western and the northern oceans, drinking sacrificial 
libations duly poured with mantras and arghya offered with devotion. 

In ancient times, I created Brahma who adored me in sacrifices. 
Gratified with him, I granted him many excellent boons. I said to him that 
in the beginning of the kalpa he would be born to me as my son, and the 
sovereignty of all the worlds would be vested in him, and that diverse 
names would be bestowed on diverse objects that mark the creation of 
Ahamkara. 

I also told him that none would ever violate the limits and boundaries he 
would assign for all creatures to observe and, further, that he would grant 
boons to those who asked him through yagnas and fitting deeds. I further 
assured him that he would be revered by all the Devas and Asuras, all the 
Rishis and Pitris, and the diverse beings of creation. 

I also explained that I would always manifest myself to accomplish the 
ends of the Devas and that I would suffer myself to be commanded by him 
even as a son by his father. Gratified with Brahma, I granted these and other 
agreeable boons to him and once more embraced the course dictated by 
Nivritti. 

The highest Nivritti is identical with the annihilation of all dharma and 
karma. By adopting Nivritti one should conduct oneself in complete felicity. 
Learned gurus, with firm convictions deduced from the truths of the 


Samkhya philosophy, have spoken of me as Kapila full of gyana, dwelling 
within the effulgence of Surya, and concentrated in yoga. 

In the Chchandas, I have been repeatedly addressed as Hiranyagarbha. 
In the yoga shastras, I have been spoken of as one who delights in yoga. I 
am eternal. Assuming a form that is manifest, I dwell now in swarga. 

At the end of a thousand yugas I shall once more withdraw the universe 
into myself. Having withdrawn all beings, mobile and immobile into 
myself, I shall exist all alone with only gyana for my companion. After the 
passing of time I will once again create the universe, with the help of that 
knowledge. 

My fourth form creates the indestructible Sesha. That Sesha is called by 
the name of Samkarshana. Samkarshana creates Pradyumna. From 
Pradyumna I am born as Aniruddha. Repeatedly, I create myself. From 
Aniruddha springs Brahma, from Aniruddha’s navel. From Brahma are born 
all creatures. 

Know that creation springs forth in this way repeatedly at the beginning 
of every kalpa. Creation and destruction succeed each other even as do 
sunrise and sunset. As time, infused with immeasurable energy, forcefully 
brings back the sun after his disappearance, in the same way I will assume 
the form of Varaha, the boar, and bring back the earth from her 
submergence, with her girdle of oceans, to her rightful place, for the benefit 
of all creatures. 

I will then kill the proud powerful son of Diti, Hiranyaksha. For the 
good of the Devas, I will assume the form of Narasimha and slay 
Hiranyakasipu, the other son of Diti, who is a great destroyer of sacrifices. 

Unto Virochana, the son of Prahlada, will be born a mighty son named 
Bali. That great Asura will be indestructible by the Devas, Asuras and 
Rakshasas. He will wrest sovereignty from Sakra. 

After overthrowing the Lord of Sachi, when that Asura usurps the 
sovereignty of the three worlds, I will be born in Aditi’s womb, by 
Kasyapa, as the twelfth Aditya. I will seize overlordship of the three worlds, 
restore it to Indra, and reinstate the Devas to their rightful places. As for 
Bali, that foremost of Danavas, who cannot be slain by all the Devas, I will 
thrust him down into patala. 

In the Treta yuga, I will be born as Rama in the Bhrigu vamsa and 
annihilate the arrogant Kshatriyas, who boast of their strength and 
possessions. Towards the close of Treta and the beginning of Dwapara, I 


shall be born as Rama, the son of Dasaratha, in the Ikshvaku vamsa, in the 
royal house of the sun. 

In that yuga the two sons of Prajapati, the Rishis Ekata and Dwita, 
harmed by their brother Trita, must be born as vanaras, losing their 
beautiful human forms. 

Those vanaras that are born in the Ekata and Dwita vamsa, will be 
suffused with strength and tejas, equalling Sakra himself in prowess. They 
will become my allies for accomplishing the work of the Devas. I shall then 
slay the awesome ruler of the Rakshasas, that wretch of Pulastya’s vamsa, 
the ferocious Ravana, along with his progeny and his followers. 

Towards the close of the Dwapara and beginning of the Kali yuga, I will 
reappear in the world, taking birth in the city of Mathura for the purpose of 
slaying Kamsa. There, after destroying countless Danavas who incense the 
Devas, I will live in Kusasthali in Dwaraka. 

While dwelling in that city I will slay the Asura Naraka, the son of 
Bhumi, who will assail Aditi and other Danavas, Muru and Pitha. Slaying 
also the king of Pragjyotisha, I will transplant his delightful city filled with 
diverse kinds of wealth into Dwaraka. 

I will then subjugate Maheswara and Mahasena, who will become fond 
of the Danava Bana, their devotee, and protect him and exert themselves 
vigorously for him. Next defeating Bana, the son of the Danava Bali, with a 
thousand arms, I will obliterate all the inhabitants of the airborne Danava 
city called Saubha. 

I will next, O foremost of Brahmanas, cause the death of Kalayavana, a 
mighty Danava endowed with the energy of Gargya. A proud Asura will 
appear as a king in Girivraja, his name Jarasandha, and he will oppose all 
the other kings of the world. His death will be compassed by me through 
another guided by my intelligence. 

I will next annihilate Sisupala at the sacrifice of Dharmaraja 
Yudhishtira, a yagna to which all the kings of the world will bring tribute. 
In some of these feats, only Arjuna, the son of Vasava, will be my equal. I 
will establish Yudhishtira with all his brothers in his ancestral kingdom. 

The people will call Arjuna and me Nara-Narayana, when we put forth 
our might and consume an untold number of Kshatriyas, for the good of the 
world. Having lightened the burden of the earth according to our wishes, I 
will absorb all the principal sattvas, and Dwaraka, my beloved city, into my 
own self, recollecting my all-embracing knowledge. 


In this way I will accomplish many marvellous feats and finally attain 
those blessed realms of felicity created by me and honoured by all 
Brahmanas. Appearing in the forms of Hamsa, a swan; Matsya, a fish; 
Kurma, a tortoise; Narasimha, a man-lion; and Vamana, a dwarf, I will then 
incarnate myself as Rama of Bhrigu’s race, then as Rama, the son of 
Dasaratha, then as Krishna the son of the Sattvata vamsa, and finally as 
Kalki the Destroyer. 

When the auditions in the Vedas disappeared from the world, I brought 
them back. The Vedas with their auditions were recreated by me in the Krita 
yuga. They have again vanished or may only be partially heard scattered in 
the Puranas. 

Many of my finest appearances in the world have become events of the 
past. Having achieved the good of the worlds in those forms in which I 
appeared, they have merged into my own Prakriti. Brahma himself has not 
seen this form of mine, which you, O Narada, have seen today because of 
your absolute devotion to me. I have now told you everything, you who are 
so totally devoted to me; I have disclosed my past and future incarnations to 
you, together with all their mysteries.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘The holy and illustrious deity, of universal and 
immutable form, having said these words unto Narada, disappeared 
instantly. Narada, having obtained the high favour that he had sought, went 
swiftly to the hermitage called Badari, to have a vision of Nara and 
Narayana. 

This great Upanishad, perfectly consistent with the four Vedas, in 
harmony with Samkhya yoga, named the Pancharatra scriptures, and recited 
by Narayana himself, was repeated by Narada in the presence of many in 
the abode of his father, Brahma, in exactly the same way in which 
Narayana, when he had revealed himself to him, had recited it, and which 
he had himself heard.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Was not Brahma, the Creator of all things, acquainted 
with this wonderful narrative of the glory and wisdom of Narayana that he 
had to hear it first from the mouth of Narada? Is the illustrious Pitamaha of 
all the worlds in any way different from or inferior to the great Narayana? 
How then is it that he was unfamiliar with the puissance of Narayana of 
immeasurable energy?’ 

Bhishma continues, ‘Hundreds and thousands of Mahakalpas, hundreds 
and thousands of creations and dissolutions have come and gone in the past. 


In the beginning of every cycle of creation, Brahma, puissant Creator of all 
things, is remembered by Narayana. 

Rajan, Brahma knows well that Narayana, that foremost of all Devas, is 
superior to him. He knows that Narayana is the Paramatman, that he is the 
Supreme Lord, that he is the Creator of Brahma himself. 

This ancient story, perfectly consistent with the Vedas, was recited by 
Narada to that conclave of Rishis crowned with ascetic success. Surya 
Deva, having heard that account from those blessed Rishis, repeated it to 
the sixty-six thousand Rishis that follow in his train. 

And Surya, who gives light to all worlds, repeated that narrative to 
those pure Beings who have been created by Brahma to always journey 
alongside him. The high-souled Rishis that follow in Surya’s train, repeated 
that excellent tale unto the Devas assembled on the breast of Meru. 

The best of Rishis, the regenerate Asita, having heard this from the 
Devas, repeated it to the Pitris. I heard it from my sire Shantanu who recited 
it to me. Myself having heard it from my father, I have repeated it to you, O 
Bhaarata. 

Devas and Munis, who have heard this venerable Purana all adore the 
Supreme Soul. This narrative, belonging to the Rishis and thus handed 
down from one to another, should not be passed on by you to anyone who is 
not a devotee of Vasudeva. This one is really the essence of the hundreds of 
other narratives that you have heard from me. 

In ancient times the Devas and the Asuras united to churn the ocean and 
to bring forth the amrita. In the same way, the Brahmanas united and 
churned all the scriptures and raised this narrative which resembles the 
nectar of immortality. He who frequently reads this narrative, and he who 
listens to it, with concentration and devotion, in a secluded place, succeeds 
in becoming an inhabitant possessing a lunar complexion of the vast island 
known as Sweta dwipa, the White Island. 

Without doubt, such a man enters into Narayana of a thousand rays. By 
listening to this narrative from the beginning, a sick man is freed from his 
illness. The man who simply desires to read or listen to this narrative 
obtains the fruition of all his wishes. By reading or listening to it, the bhakta 
attains to the highest end that is kept for devout worshippers. 

You, too, must always adore and worship that foremost of all Beings. 
He is the father and the mother of all creatures, and he is an object of 
reverence for the entire universe. Mahabaho Yudhishtira, let the illustrious 


and Eternal God of the Brahmanas, Janardana of high intelligence, be 
pleased with you!’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Having listened to the best of narratives, O 
Janamejaya, Dharmaraja Yudhishtira and all his brothers became devoted to 
Narayana. And from that day on, all of them began to practise silently 
meditating upon Narayana, and uttered these words to adore him, ‘Victory 
to that holy and illustrious Being.’ 

Rishi Vyasa, best of gurus, devoted to tapasya, recited the word 
‘Narayana’, that sublime mantra which is worthy of being recited in silence. 
Coursing through the sky to the ocean of milk which is always the abode of 
nectar, and worshipping the great God there, he came back to his own 
hermitage. 

Bhishma continues, ‘I have now repeated to you the tale that was told 
by Narada to the assembly of Rishis in the abode of Brahma. That narrative 
has descended from one person to another from the most ancient times. I 
heard it from my sire who told it to me.’” 

In the Naimisa vana, among the Rishi Saunaka’s sages, the Suta 
Romaharshana continued, ‘I have now told you all that Vaisampayana 
narrated to Janamejaya. Having listened to Vaisampayana’s narration, King 
Janamejaya discharged all his duties according to the rules laid down in the 
shastras. 

You have all undergone severe tapasya and observed many high and 
excellent vratas. Living in this sacred forest of Naimisa, you are conversant 
with the Vedas. Foremost of regenerate ones, you all have come to this great 
yagna of Saunaka. 

Adore and worship that Eternal and Supreme Lord of the universe in 
yagnas, properly pouring offerings of ghee into the fire, reciting mantras, 
and dedicating them to Narayana. As for myself, I heard this excellent 
account that has descended from generation to generation from my father 
who narrated it to me in earlier times.’ 


CANTO 341 


S aunaka said, ‘How is Narayana, fully conversant with the Vedas and 

their branches, at once the doer and the enjoyer of sacrifices? Ever 
forgiving, he has adopted the religion of Nivritti, abstention. He himself has 
established the duties of Nivritti. 

Why then has he made many Devas take shares in yagnas, which, of 
course, are all due to the disposition of Pravritti? Why has he created some 
with a contrary disposition, for they follow the rules of Nivritti? 

O Suta, dispel our doubt. This doubt seems to be eternal and intertwined 
with a great mystery. You have heard all discourses on Narayana, discourses 
that are consistent with the shastras.’ 

Sauti said, ‘Excellent Saunaka, I shall recite to you what Vaisampayana, 
the disciple of the intelligent Vyasa, said when questioned on these very 
subjects by King Janamejaya. Having heard the discourse on the glory of 
Narayana who is the Soul of all embodied creatures, wise Janamejaya asked 
Vaisampayana these very questions. 

Janamejaya said, “The whole world of Beings, with Brahma, the Devas, 
the Asuras and humans, is one that is deeply attached to actions which 
produce prosperity. You have said that mukti is the highest felicity marked 
by the end of existence. 

Those who are without both paapa and punya succeed in becoming 
liberated when they enter the great God of a thousand rays. Brahmana, it 
appears that this mukti dharma is exceedingly difficult to practise. Turning 
away from it, all the Devas now take pleasure in the pouring of ghee on 
sacrificial fires along with the chanting of mantras, and offering other 
customary havis. 


Brahma, Rudra, the puissant Sakra the slayer of Bala, Surya, 
Chandramas, Vayu, Agni, Varuna, the living Akasa, the universe as 
conscious agent, and the other inhabitants of swarga, all seem to be ignorant 
of the way to make an end to conscious existence, which can be had 
through Atmagyana, self-realisation. 

This is perhaps why they have not be taken themselves to the path that 
is certain, indestructible, and immutable. Hence perhaps, turning away from 
that path, they have adopted the religion of Pravritti which leads to 
conscious existence measured by time. This, indeed, is one great flaw in 
those attached to karma, for all their gains are terminable. 

This doubt, regenerate one, is planted in my heart like a dagger. 
Remove it by narrating some old discourses on this subject. I am 
profoundly curious to listen to you. 

Why do the Devas take their respective shares of havis offered to them 
with the help of mantras in yagnas of diverse kinds? Why are the 
Swargavasis revered in sacrifices? And, O Dvijottama, to whom do they, 
who take their shares of offerings in sacrifices performed in their honour, 
themselves make offerings when they perform mahayagnas?” 

Vaisampayana said, “Rajan, the question you have asked me relates to 
another deep mystery. One who has not undergone tapasya and is not 
familiar with the Puranas, cannot answer it. I will answer you, however, by 
narrating what my guru Vyasa, the island-born Krishna, the Maharishi who 
divided the original Veda, said to us when we once questioned him. 

Sumanta, Jaimini and Paila of firm vows, Suka and I were Vyasa’s 
sishyas. Numbering five in all, endowed with self-restraint and purity of 
rituals, we had completely subdued wrath and controlled our senses. Our 
guru used to teach us the four Vedas, and the Mahabharata as the fifth. 

Once while we were engaged in studying the Vedas on Mount Meru, 
inhabited by the Siddhas and Charanas, this very doubt, as expressed by 
you today, arose in our minds. We questioned Vyasa about it. I heard his 
reply. 

I will now narrate that answer to you, O Bhaarata. Hearing these words 
addressed to him by his disciples, that dispeller of all kinds of darkness 
represented by avidya, the blessed Vyasa, the son of Parasara, said, “I have 
undergone most severe, the austerest of tapasya. I am fully aware of the 
past, the present and the future. 


On account of my tapasya and self-restraint, as I lived on the shores of 
the ocean of milk, Narayana was gratified with me. His pleasure granted me 
my desire for this Trikalagyana, perfect knowledge of the past, the present 
and the future. Listen now to me as I address this great doubt that has 
disturbed your minds. 

With the eye of knowledge, I have seen all that has happened since the 
beginning of the kalpa. He whom both the Samkhyas and yogis call by the 
name of Paramatman comes to be regarded as Mahapurusha as a 
consequence of his own actions. 

From him springs forth the unmanifest, Avyakta, whom the learned call 
Pradhana. From the unmanifest rises the manifest, Vyakta, for the creation 
of all the words. He is called Aniruddha. That Aniruddha is known among 
all creatures by the name of Mahat Atman. 

It is that Aniruddha who, becoming manifest, created the Pitamaha 
Brahma. Aniruddha is known by another name, Ahamkara, endowed with 
every kind of energy. Bhumi, Vayu, Akasa, Jala and Agni are the five 
Mahabhutas that have sprung from Ahamkara. Having created these five 
Mahabhutas, he then created their attributes. 

Combining the Mahabhutas, he created diverse embodied beings. Listen 
to me as I recount them to you. Marichi, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, 
Kratu, Vasishta and the Swayambhu Manu, these should be known as the 
eight Prakritis. Upon these rest all the worlds. 

Then, for the fulfilment of all creatures, Brahma created the Vedas with 
all their angas, as also the yagnas with their constituent limbs. From these 
eight Prakritis have sprung all this vast universe. 

Then emerged Rudra from the principle of wrath, and he created ten 
others like him. These eleven Rudras are called Vikara Purushas. The 
Rudras, the eight Prakritis, and the several Devarishis, having being born, 
approached Brahma with the objective of upholding the universe and its 
workings. 

Addressing the grandsire, they said, ‘Holy One, we have been created 
by you. Pitamaha, tell us about our respective spheres of influence and 
authority. What particular jurisdictions have been created by you for 
supervising the various affairs of creation? 

What kind of consciousness should each of us have, and which of these 
areas should we take charge of? Also endow each of us the measure of 
power that we are to have to discharge our duties.’ 


Thus addressed by them, Brahma replied unto them in the following 
way: ‘You deities have done well in speaking to me of this matter. Blessed 
be you all! I was thinking of this very matter that has engaged your 
attention. How should the three worlds be upheld and kept stable? How 
should your powers and mine be employed towards that end? 

Let all of us leave this place and repair to that unmanifest and foremost 
of Beings, who is the witness of the world, to seek his protection. He will 
inform us what is for our good.’ 

Those Devas and Rishis, with Brahma, went to the northern shores of 
the ocean of milk, wishing to do good to the three worlds. 

Arriving there, they began to practise those austere tapasyas advocated 
by Brahma in the Vedas, those penances known by the name of 
Mahaniyama. They stood there with minds fixed, unmoving as wooden 
posts, with eyes and hands raised up above their heads. 

For a thousand celestial years they engaged in rigorous tapasya. At the 
end of that period they heard these sweet words in harmony with the Vedas 
and their angas. 

‘I welcome you Devas and Rishis, blessed with the wealth of 
asceticism, with Brahma in your company, and to you I say that I know 
what is in your hearts. Your thoughts are indeed for the good of the three 
worlds. 

I will increase your energy and strength with Pravritti, the propensity 
for action. You have devoutly worshipped me with tapasya. Foremost of 
Beings, enjoy now the fruits of your austerities. 

This Brahma is the Lord of all the worlds. Endued with puissance, he is 
Prajapati of all creatures. You too are the best of the Devas. With dhyana, 
perform yagnas for my glory. 

In these sacrifices always give me a portion of the sacrificial offerings. I 
will then assign to each of you your respective jurisdictions and ordain what 
will be for your good!”” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Vyasa said, ‘Hearing these words of the God 
of gods, all those Devas, Maharishis and Brahma were filled with such 
delight that the hair on their bodies stood on end. They immediately made 
arrangements for a yagna in honour of Vishnu according to the niyamas laid 
down in the Vedas. 

In that sacrifice, Brahma himself dedicated a portion of the offerings to 
Vishnu. The Devas and Devarishis also dedicated similar portions each unto 


him. These portions, offered with great reverence, were in accordance with 
the rules established for the Krita yuga, both in measure and excellence. 

In that yagna, the Devas and the Rishis and Brahma worshipped Vishnu 
Narayana as one with the complexion of the sun, as the foremost of Beings, 
situated beyond the reach of tamas, vast and infinite, pervading all things, 
the Supreme Lord of all, the giver of boons. Thus adored by them, invisible 
and formless, bodiless, He addressed those assembled divinities, saying to 
them: 

“The offerings dedicated by you in this sacrifice have all reached me. I 
am gratified with all of you. I shall bestow rewards on you that will 
however be fraught with destinations from which there will be return. 

Devas, because of my grace and compassion for you this shall be your 
distinctive feature from this day onwards. Performing sacrifices in every 
yuga, with large gifts, you will enjoy the fruits born of Pravritti. Men who 
perform yagnas according to the rules of the Vedas will give unto all of you 
shares of their havis. 

In such yagnas, according to the Veda-sutras I compel a man to receive 
a share similar to that which he has himself offered in that sacrifice. You 
have been created to look after those affairs within your respective 
domains; uphold the worlds according to the measures of your power, 
which depend on the shares you receive in those sacrifices. 

Indeed, drawing strength from those rites and rituals prevailing in the 
several worlds, arising from the fruits of Pravritti, and continue to uphold 
the affairs of those worlds. Strengthened by the yagnas that will be 
performed by men, you will strengthen me. 

This is what I intend for you all. It is for this purpose that I have created 
the Vedas and sacrifices and plants and herbs. Duly revered by humans on 
earth, the Devas will be gratified. Foremost of deities, till the end of this 
kalpa I have ordained your creation, making your constitution depend upon 
the consequence of Pravritti dharma. Now, with regard to your respective 
spheres of influence, engage yourselves in seeking the good of the three 
worlds. 

Marichi, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vasishta, these 
seven Rishis have been created by a fiat of the will, Manas. They will 
become the foremost of those conversant with the Vedas. In fact, they will 
become the teachers of the Vedas. They will be wedded to Pravritti dharma, 
for they are intended to devote themselves to procreation. 


I reveal to you this eternal path of creatures engaged in kriyas and 
karmas. The puissant Lord who is charged with the creation of all the 
worlds is Aniruddha; Sana, Sanatsujata, Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatkumara, 
Kapila and Sanatana, these seven Rishis are known as the spiritual sons of 
Brahma. 

Their knowledge comes to them of itself, not dependent on study or 
exertion. These seven are wedded to Nivritti dharma. They are the foremost 
of all yogis. They possess deep knowledge of the Samkhya philosophy. 

They teach the dharma of the shastras, and it is they who introduce the 
duties of Nivritti and cause them to arise in the worlds. From unmanifest 
Prakriti has flowed Consciousness and the three great gunas of sattva, rajas, 
and tamas. Transcending Prakriti is he called Kshetrajna. I myself am that 
Kshetrajna. 

The path of those wedded to karma emerging out of Ahamkara is 
fraught with return. That path does not reach the place from where there is 
no return. Different creatures have been created with different ends. Some 
are intended for the path of Pravritti and some for that of Nivritti. One 
enjoys the reward of the particular path he follows. 

This Brahma is the master of all the worlds. With his power he creates 
the universe. He is your mother and father, and he is your grandfather. At 
my command, he will be the giver of boons unto all creatures. 

His son Rudra, who has sprung from his brow at his command, will 
uphold all created beings. Go to your respective realms and, according to 
the laws, seek the good of the worlds. Let all the karma based on the 
shastras flow in all the worlds. Do not delay. 

Most excellent divinities, ordain the deeds of all creatures and their 
goals. Determine also the limits of the periods for which all creatures are to 
live. This present yuga that has begun is the foremost of all, and should be 
known by the name of Krita. 

In this yuga, living creatures should not be killed in the yagnas that may 
be performed. It should be as I command and not otherwise. In this age, 
righteousness, dharma, will flourish in its fullness. 

After this age will come the Treta yuga. In that yuga, the Vedas will lose 
one quarter of themselves. Only three of them will exist. In the sacrifices 
performed in that epoch, animals, after dedication with sacred mantras, will 
be killed. Dharma, too, will lose one quarter; only three quarters of 
righteousness will flourish. 


At the end of the Treta will come Dwapara, the mixed yuga. In that age, 
dharma will lose two quarters and only two quarters will thrive. 

Upon the end of Dwapara, Kali yuga, under the influence of the Tisya 
constellation. Righteousness will lose full three quarters. Only a quarter 
thereof will exist in all places.” 

When Narayana spoke these words, the Devas and the Devarishis said 
to him, “If only a fourth part of dharma is to exist in that yuga in every 
place, tell us where shall we then go and what shall we do?” 

The blessed and Holy One said, “In that yuga, you should repair to such 
places where the Vedas and yagnas, tapasya and satya and self-restraint, 
accompanied by duties filled with compassion for all creatures, still 
continue to flourish. Evil will never be able to touch you at all!” 

Vyasa continued, ‘Thus commanded by the great God, the Devas with 
all the Rishis bowed their heads and went away to their destinations. After 
the Rishis and Devas had left, Brahma remained there, desirous of 
beholding the great deity in the form of Aniruddha. 

The foremost of Devas then manifested himself to Brahma, having 
assumed a form that had a gigantic equine head. Bearing a kamandalu and 
the tridanda, he manifested himself before Brahma, reciting the while the 
Vedas with all their angas. 

Beholding him in that form crowned with a badava mukha, a horse’s 
head, Brahma, the creator of all the worlds, moved by the desire of doing 
good to his Creation, worshipped him with bowed head and folded hands. 
The great Deity embraced Brahma and then said: 

“O Brahma, duly think of the paths of karma that creatures are to 
follow. You are the great ordainer of all created beings. You are the lord of 
the universe. Placing this burden on you I will soon be free from anxiety. 

When it becomes difficult for you to achieve the purposes of the Devas 
I will appear in incarnate forms according to my Atmagyana.” Having said 
these words that grand form with the horse’s head disappeared in a flash. 
Having received his command, Brahma too, went swiftly to his own realm. 

It is for this that Vishnu, Padmanabha with the lotus in his navel, 
accepted the first share offered in sacrifices and because of this he came to 
be called the eternal upholder of all yagnas. He himself adopted Nivritti 
dharma, the goal of those seeking everlasting felicity. 

At the same time, he established Pravritti dharma for others, in order to 
furnish variety to the universe. He is the beginning, he is the middle, and he 


is the end of all created Beings. 

He is their Creator and he is their one object of meditation. He is the 
actor and he is the act. Having withdrawn the universe into himself at the 
end of the yuga, he falls asleep, and awakening at the beginning of another 
yuga, he once again creates the universe. 

Bow unto that illustrious one of high soul and who transcends the three 
gunas, who is un-born, whose form is the universe, and who is the abode or 
refuge of all the inhabitants of swarga. Bow unto him who is the Supreme 
Lord of all creatures, who is the Lord of the Adityas, and of the Vasus as 
well. 

Bow unto him who is the Lord of the Aswins, and the Lord of the 
Maruts, who is the Lord of all the sacrifices ordained in the Vedas, and the 
Lord of the Vedangas. Bow unto him who always resides in the ocean, and 
who is called Hari, and whose hair is like the blades of the munja grass. 

Bow unto him who is peace and serenity, and who imparts mukti 
dharma to all. Bow to him who is the Lord of penances, of all kinds of 
energy, and of fame, who is ever the Lord of speech and the Lord of all the 
rivers. 

Bow unto him who is called Kapardin, Rudra, who is the Great Boar, 
and who possesses great intelligence, who is the sun, and who took the form 
with the horse’s head; he Lord who is always displayed in a fourfold form. 
Bow unto him who is unrevealed, who is capable of being grasped through 
gyana alone, and who is both Akshara and Kshara. 

The Supreme Deity, who is immutable, pervades all things. He is the 
Supreme Lord who can be only known with the eye of knowledge. It was 
with gyana that I perceived him in ancient times. 

Sishyas, I have told you all that you asked me; now act according to 
what I have said and serve the Supreme Lord called Hari. Sing his praises in 
Vedic mantras; adore and worship him with all due rites!’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “It was thus that Vyasa, the arranger of the 
Vedas, discoursed to us, when we questioned him. His son, the righteous 
Suka, and us, all his sishyas, listened avidly to him as he addressed us. We 
and our gurus then adored the great deity with verses, Riks extracted from 
the four Vedas. 

I have now told you all that you asked me. Rajan, thus did our island- 
born preceptor instruct us. 


He who has surrendered to Narayana and listens, with dhyana, to this 
discourse or reads or recites it to others, is filled with intelligence and 
health, beauty and strength. If ill, he is freed from that illness; if bound, he 
is freed from his bonds. 

The man who desires receives the fruits of all his desires, and also 
attains to a long life. By doing this, a Brahmana becomes conversant with 
all the Vedas, and a Kshatriya is crowned with success. Following this a 
Vaisya makes vast profits, and a Sudra attains great felicity. 

A sonless man obtains a son. A woman finds a desirable husband. A 
woman that has conceived gives birth to a son. A barren woman conceives 
and attains to the wealth of sons and grandsons. 

He who recites this discourse on the way succeeds in passing joyfully 
along this path without any obstacles. If one reads or recites this story, he 
attains whatever objects he cherishes. 

Hearing these assured and true words of the Maharishi, embodying the 
gunas of that high-souled one, listening to this narrative of the great 
assembly of Rishis and other inhabitants of swarga, men devoted to the 
Supreme Deity find great bliss.” 


CANTO 342 


anamejaya said, “Holy one, tell me the significance of those diverse 

names uttered by Maharishi Vyasa and his disciples to praise 
Madhusudana, the slayer of Madhu. I am keen to hear those names of Hari, 
that Supreme Lord of all creatures. By listening to those names, I shall be 
purified and cleansed like the bright autumn moon.” 

Vaisampayana said, “Listen, Rajan, to the significance of those names, 
diverse because of the many attributes and actions of Hari, as the puissant 
Hari himself explained them to Arjuna. That Parantapa once asked Krishna 
about the importance and meaning of some of the names by which he was 
adored. 

Arjuna said, “Krishna, Supreme ordainer of the past and the future, 
Creator of all Beings, immutable One, Refuge of all the worlds, Lord of the 
universe, dispeller of the fears of all men, from you I desire to know in 
detail the significance of all your names which have been enumerated by 
the great Rishis in the Vedas and the Puranas because of your awesome and 
diverse deeds. None other than you, Kesava, is competent to explain this.’ 

Krishna said, ‘Arjuna, in the Rig Veda, in the Yajur Veda, in the 
Atharvans and the Samans, in the Puranas and the Upanishads, as also in 
the treatises on jyotisha, astrology, in the Samkhya and yoga shastras, and 
in the treatises on Ayurveda, the science of life, many are the names that 
have been mentioned by the great Rishis. 

Some of those names are derived from my attributes and some of them 
relate to my deeds. Listen with concentration of the import of each of those 
names with reference to my exploits. I will recite them to you. 


It is said that in ancient times you were half my body. Salutations to him 
of great glory, who is the Paramatman of all embodied creatures. 
Salutations to Narayana, unto him who is the universe, unto him that 
transcends the three primal gunas of sattva, rajas and tamas, unto him that is 
the Soul of those attributes. 

From his grace has arisen Brahma and from his wrath Rudra. He is the 
source from which all mobile and immobile creatures emerge. Sattva is 
made up of eighteen qualities. 

That attribute is Supreme Nature; her soul consists of Akasa and Bhumi 
and she upholds the universe with her creative forces. That Prakriti is 
identical with the fruit of all karma, in the form of the diverse realms of 
felicity which creatures attain through their actions. 

She is also the pure Chit. She is immortal, and invincible, and is called 
the Soul of the universe. From her flows all the modifications of both 
creation and destruction. She is identical with my nature. Without sex, she 
or he is the tapasya that men undergo. 

He is both the yagna performed and the sacrificer that performs it. He is 
the ancient and the infinite Purusha. He is otherwise called Aniruddha and 
is the source of the creation and the destruction of the universe. 

When Brahma’s night ended, through the grace of that Being of 
immeasurable energy, a lotus appeared, O you of eyes like lotus-petals. 
Within that lotus Brahma was born, springing from Aniruddha’s grace. 

Towards the evening of Brahma’s day, Aniruddha was filled with anger, 
and from this there sprang from his forehead a son called Rudra with the 
power of destroying everything at the hour of Pralaya. Brahma and Rudra 
are the foremost of all the Devas, having sprung respectively from the 
auspiciousness and the wrath of Aniruddha. 

Acting according to Aniruddha’s command, these two Devas create and 
destroy. Although capable of granting boons to all creatures, in the matter 
of creation and destruction, they are mere instruments in the hands of 
Aniruddha. It is Aniruddha that does everything, making Brahma and Rudra 
the visible driving forces in the universe. 

Rudra is otherwise called Kapardin. He sometimes has matted locks of 
hair; at other times he reveals a shorn head. He favours living in samsanas, 
cremation grounds, which are indeed his home. 

He is an observer of the austerest vratas. He is a yogin of great power 
and energy. He is the destroyer of Daksha’s sacrifice and of Bhaga’s eyes. 


Son of Pandu, it should be understood that Rudra always has Narayana 
for his Atman. If Maheswara is worshipped, then the puissant Narayana is 
also worshipped. I am the soul of all the worlds, of all the universe. Rudra, 
again, is my Soul. 

It is for this that I always venerate him. If I do not adore the auspicious 
and boon-giving Isana nobody would then adore me. The laws I establish 
are followed by all the worlds. These must always be revered and for this 
reason I do adore them. 

He who knows Rudra knows me, and he who knows me knows Rudra. 
He who follows Rudra follows me, Rudra is Narayana. Both are one; and 
the one is displayed in two different forms. Rudra and Narayana, forming 
one person, pervade all visible things and cause them to act. 

Son of Pandu, no one other than Rudra can grant me a boon. Having 
realised this, in olden times, I revered Rudra to obtain the boon of a son. In 
adoring Rudra thus I adored my own self. Vishnu never bows his head to 
any god other than his own self. It is for this reason that I adore Rudra, for 
Rudra is my own self. 

All the Devas, including Brahma and Indra, and the Maharishis worship 
Narayana, that foremost of deities, also known by the name of Hari. Vishnu 
is the foremost of all Beings past, present or future, and as such should 
always be adored and revered. 

Bow to Vishnu. Bow your head unto him who protects everyone. 
Arjuna, bow to that great boon-giving God, that foremost of deities, who 
consumes the offerings made to him in yagnas. 

I have heard that there are four kinds of worshippers: those who are 
eager for a religious life, those who are seekers, those who strive to 
understand what they learn, and those who are wise. Among them all, they 
who devote themselves to realising the self and do not adore any other 
deity, are the best. I am the end they seek, and though engaged in karma, 
they never seek its fruits. 

The three other categories of my worshippers are those that desire the 
fruits of their actions. They attain to realms of great felicity, but once they 
have exhausted their punya they must fall from those realms. Those 
amongst my devotees who are fully awakened, and know that all happiness 
is transitory, other than what is attained by those who become united with 
me, obtain what is most invaluable. 


Those enlightened ones may be engaged in adoring Brahma or Siva or 
the other Devas in heaven but they succeed at last in realising me. I have 
now told you about my diverse devotees. 

Arjuna, you and I are known as Nara and Narayana. Both of us have 
assumed human bodies only for the purpose of lightening the burden of the 
earth. I am fully aware of my self. 

I know who I am and from where I come. I know Nivritti dharma, and 
all that is responsible for the prosperity of all creatures. I am eternal and the 
sole refuge of all men. The waters have been called by the name Naara, for 
they sprang from him called Nara. And since the waters, in former times, 
were my refuge, I am, therefore, referred to as Narayana. 

Assuming the form of the sun, I envelop the universe with my rays. And 
because I am home to all creatures, I am called by the name of Vasudeva. I 
am the end of all creatures and their beginning, Bhaarata. 

I pervade the entire firmament and the earth, and my splendour 
transcends every other splendour. I am he whom all creatures wish to attain 
to at the hour of death. And because I pervade all the universe, I have been 
called the name Vishnu. Desiring mukti through subduing their senses, 
people seek to me, I who am swarga and Bhumi and the sky between the 
two. For this I am called Damodara. 

The word prishni includes food, water, the Vedas and amrita. These four 
are always in my belly. Hence am I called Prishnigarbha. The Rishis once 
said that when the Rishi Trita was thrown into a well by Ekata and Dwiti, 
the distressed Trita invoked me, saying, “O Prishnigarbha, rescue the fallen 
Trita!” Having thus implored me, Trita, the spiritual son of Brahma, was 
indeed rescued from the fathomless well. 

The rays that emanate from the sun who gives heat to the world, from 
the blazing fire, and from the moon, constitute my hair. Hence do learned 
Brahmanas call me by the name of Kesava. 

The Mahatman Utathya having impregnated his wife disappeared from 
her side through an illusion of the gods. The younger brother Brihaspati 
then appeared before her. To him who had approached Utathya’s wife with 
the desire of sexual union, the child in her womb, whose body had already 
been formed of the five primal elements, said, “Giver of boons, I have 
already entered into this womb. It befits you not to assail my mother.” 

Hearing these words of the unborn child, Brihaspati was angered and 
cursed him, “Since you obstruct me so when I have come to you from 


1? 


desire of the pleasures of union, I curse you to be born blind 

Through this curse the child of Utathya was born blind, and blind he 
remained for a long time. It was for this reason that that Rishi came to be 
known by the name of Dirghatamas, or long darkness. 

He, however, acquired the four Vedas with their angas and subsidiary 
angas. After that he frequently invoked me by this secret name of mine. 
Indeed, according to the established rules, he repeatedly called upon me by 
the name Kesava. 

Through the punya he acquired by uttering this name repeatedly, he was 
cured of his blindness and came to be called Gotama. Arjuna, this name of 
mine gives boons to them who that utter it, among all the Devas and the 
Devarishis. 

Agni and Soma combine and fuse into one substance. It is for this 
reason that the entire universe of mobile and immobile creatures is said to 
be pervaded by them. 

In the Puranas, Agni and Soma are spoken of as complementary to one 
another. They have Agni for their mouth. As their natures lead to their 
mingling, they balance each other and uphold the universe.”” 


CANTO 343 


66 A rjuna said, ‘How did Agni and Soma come to be so similar in 
their original natures? This doubt has arisen in my mind. Dispel 
it, slayer of Madhu.’ 

Krishna said, ‘I shall narrate to you an ancient story of events 
originating from my own energy. Listen carefully. 

When four thousand yugas according to divine measure pass, the 
dissolution of the universe comes. The Vyakta, manifest, disappears into the 
Avyakta, unmanifest. All creatures, mobile and immobile, are destroyed. 
Agni, Bhumi and Vayu disappear. Tamas, darkness, spreads over the 
universe which becomes one infinite expanse of water. 

When that vast expanse of water, Ekarnava, exists like Brahman without 
another, it is neither day nor night. Neither all nor nothing nor aught exists; 
neither the manifest nor the unmanifest. Then only undifferentiated 
Brahman exists. 

When this is the condition of the universe, the foremost of Beings 
emerges from tamas—the eternal and immutable Hari who is _ the 
combination of all the attributes, including omnipotence, of Narayana, who 
is indestructible and eternal, without senses, inconceivable and unborn, who 
is truth’s self fraught with compassion, who exists like the rays of the 
Chintamani jewel. 

He is One that causes diverse kinds of desires to flow in many 
directions, who is devoid of hostility, and decay, death and destruction, who 
is formless and all-pervading, and who is endowed with the principle of 
universal creation and of eternity without beginning, middle or end. 


There is a basis for this assertion. The Sruti declares: Day was not. 
Night was not. All was not. Nothing was not. In the beginning there was 
only tamas in the form of the universe, and she is the night of Narayana of 
universal form. This is the meaning of the word tamas. 

That Purusha called Hari, thus born of tamas and having Brahman for 
his sire, gave birth to Brahma. Wishing to create creatures, Brahma caused 
Agni and Soma to spring from his own eyes. 

After this, men were created in their proper order as Brahmanas and 
Kshatriyas. He who began life as Soma was none other than Brahma; and 
they who were born as Brahmanas were in reality all Soma. Those who 
started into being as Kshatriyas were none other than Agni. 

The Brahmanas gained greater energy than the Kshatriyas. If you ask 
why, the answer is that this superiority of the Brahmanas to the Kshatriyas 
is manifest through the whole world. It happened thus. 

With regards to men, the Brahmanas represent the oldest creation. None 
higher than them were created before. He who offers food into the mouth of 
a Brahmana pours libations into a blazing fire to gratify the Devas. 

I say that having ordained things in this manner, Brahma then created 
all creatures. Having established all created beings in their respective 
places, he upholds the three worlds. 

There is a similar declaration in the mantras of the Srutis: Agni, you are 
the Hotri in yagnas and the benefactor of the universe. You support the 
Devas, all men and all the worlds. There is no other authority for this 
purpose. 

Agni, you are the Hotri of the universe and of sacrifices. You are the one 
through which the Devas and men do good to the universe. Agni is truly the 
Hotri and the performer of sacrifices. 

Agni is again the Brahma of the yagna. No libations can be poured into 
the sacrificial fire without uttering mantras; there can be no tapasyas 
without someone to perform them; the Devas, Rishis and Manavas are 
worshipped by these offerings accompanied by mantras. Hence, O Agni, 
you have been regarded as the Hotri in sacrifices. 

You are, again, all the other mantras that are have been associated with 
the Homa rites. It is the ordained duty of the Brahmanas to preside over 
yagnas. 

The other two twice-born varnas, the Kshatriyas and Vaisyas, do not 
have the same duty. Brahmanas, like Agni, uphold sacrifices. The yagnas 


performed by them strengthen the Devas. Thus maintained they fructify the 
earth thereby supporting all living creatures. 

But the result that may be achieved by the best of yagnas may as well 
be accomplished through the mouth of the Brahmanas. That learned man 
who offers food into the mouth of a Brahmana is said to pour libations into 
the sacred fire to gratify the Devas. In this way the Brahmanas have come to 
be regarded as Agni. 

Those who are wise adore Agni. Agni is, again, Vishnu. Entering all 
creatures, he upholds their life-breaths. 

In this regard there is a verse sung by Sanatkumara. Brahma, in creating 
the universe, first created the Brahmanas. The Brahmanas become immortal 
and ascend into swarga by studying the Vedas. Their Buddhi, kriyas and 
karmas, tapasyas, speech and faith, sustain both the earth and heaven like 
ropes of strings holding up nectarine milk. 

There is no dharma higher than truth. There is no one more worthy of 
reverence than the mother. There is none more efficient than the Brahmana 
for conferring felicity both in this life and the next. 

In places where Brahmanas are unsupported by gifts of land, the 
inhabitants become dejected. There, oxen do not carry the people or draw 
the plough, nor are they borne by carts or chariots. There milk kept in jars is 
never churned to yield butter. 

On the other hand, the people become destitute and take to stealing 
instead of being able to enjoy the blessings of peace. 

In the Vedas, the Puranas and other authoritative texts, it is said that 
Brahmanas, who are the souls of all creatures, who are the creators of all 
things, and who can be identified with all existing beings, sprang from the 
mouth of Narayana. It is said that the Brahmanas originated when he 
subdued his speech as a penance; the other varnas arose from the 
Brahmanas. 

The Brahmanas are honoured above the Devas and Asuras, since they 
were created by me in my ineffable form as Brahma. As I have created the 
Devas and the Asuras and the Maharishis so have I placed the Brahmanas in 
their respective stations and have at times to punish them. 

On account of his licentious assault on Ahalya, Indra was cursed by her 
husband Gautama, and had a green beard. Through that curse Indra also lost 
his testicles, which were later replaced by the testicles of a ram out of the 
compassion of the other Devas. 


At the yagna of King Sarjati, when Maharishi Chyavana wanted to 
make the Aswins share in the Soma rasa, Indra objected. When Chyavana 
insisted, Indra wanted to hurl his thunderbolt at the sage. The Rishi 
paralysed Indra’s arms. 

Incensed at the destruction of his sacrifice by Rudra, Daksha once more 
began to practise severe tapasya and, attaining to high puissance, caused a 
third eye to appear on Rudra’s forehead for the destruction of Tripurasura. 

When Rudra tried to destroy this city of the Asuras, Sukra Usanas, the 
acharya of the Asuras, was provoked to tear a matted lock from his own 
head and cast it at Rudra. From that matted lock of Usanas sprang many 
serpents. Those serpents bit Rudra turning his throat blue. 

In the ancient times of Swayambhuva Manu, it is said that Narayana 
seized Rudra by the throat, turning it blue. When the ocean was churned to 
raise up the amrita, Brihaspati of Angira’s vamsa sat on its shores to 
perform the Puruscharana rite. When he took up a little water for the initial 
achamana, the water appeared murky. 

Brihaspati was enraged and cursed the ocean, saying, “Since you 
continue to be so filthy despite my having come to you to touch you, since 
you have not become clear and transparent, from this day on you will be 
defiled with fish, sharks, tortoises and other aquatic creatures.” From that 
time, the waters of the ocean have been infested with diverse kinds of sea 
creatures and monsters. 

Viswarupa, the son of Tvashtri, once was the Hotri priest of the Devas. 
On his mother’s side he was related to the Asuras, his mother being the 
daughter of a Danava. While publicly offering the Devas their shares of 
sacrificial offerings, he privately offered havis to the Asuras. 

The Asuras, led by Hiranyakasipu, then went to their sister, the mother 
of Viswarupa, and obtained a boon from her, saying, “Viswarupa by 
Tvashtri, otherwise called Trisiras, is now the priest of the Devas. While he 
gives them their shares of sacrificial offerings publicly, he gives us our 
shares secretly. Thus the Devas are strengthened and we are weakened. 
Sister, prevail upon him to take up our cause.” 

The mother of Viswarupa went to her son who was dwelling in the 
Nandana forests of Indra and said to him, “How is it, son, that you advance 
the cause of your enemies and weaken that of your maternal uncles? It is 
not fitting for you to act in this manner.” 


Thus entreated by his mother, Viswarupa reflected on her words, paid 
his respects to her, and went over to the side of Hiranyakasipu. Upon his 
arrival, King Hiranyakasipu dismissed his old Hotri, Vasishta, the son of 
Brahma, and appointed Trisiras to that office. 

Incensed, Vasishta cursed Hiranyakasipu, “Since you have dismissed 
me and appointed another as your Hotri, your yagna will not be completed, 
and some Being the like of whom has not existed before will destroy you!” 
As a result of this curse, Hiranyakasipu was slain by Vishnu in the form of a 
manticore, the Narasimha. 

Viswarupa, having gone over to the side of his maternal relations, 
employed himself in severe tapasyas to elevate them. In order to distract 
him from his vows, Indra sent many beautiful Apsaras to him. Seeing these 
divine nymphs of transcendent beauty, Viswarupa’s heart was agitated. 
Soon he became exceedingly attached to them. 

Recognising this, one day these Apsaras said to him, “We will not stay 
here any longer. We will return to the place from where we came.” The son 
of Tvashtri said to them, “Where will you go? Stay with me. I shall be good 
to you.” 

Hearing him say this, the Apsaras rejoined, “We are divine Apsaras. In 
the past we chose the illustrious and boon-giving Indra of great puissance.” 

Viswarupa then said to them. “This very day I will make all the Devas 
with Indra at their head cease to exist.” 

Saying this, Trisiras began to inwardly recite certain powerful sacred 
mantras. By virtue of those mantras he began to grow in tejas. With one of 
his mouths he began to drink all the Soma that Brahmanas poured on their 
sacred fires in their yagnas. With a second mouth he began to eat all food 
offered in those sacrifices. With his third mouth he began to consume the 
energy of all the Devas with Indra at their head. 

Seeing him swelling with power and energy in every part of his body 
strengthened by the Soma he swallowed, all the Devas led by Indra flew to 
Pitamaha Brahma. Arriving in his presence, they said to him, “All the Soma 
that is offered in the yagnas performed everywhere is being drunk by 
Viswarupa. We no longer receive our due shares. The Asuras are being 
empowered while we are being weakened. Ordain what is for our good.” 

The Pitamaha replied, “The Maharishi Dadichi of Bhrigu’s vamsa is 
even now engaged in performing severe austerities. Go to him and ask him 


for a boon. Do so that he may cast off his body. With his bones let a new 
weapon, the vajra, an adamantine thunderbolt, be created.” 

Thus instructed, the Devas set off for where the holy Dadichi was 
engaged in his tapasya. The Devas addressed the sage, saying, “Holy one, 
we hope that your austerities are being performed without hindrances.” 

Dadhichi said, ““Welcome to all of you. Tell me what I may do for you. I 
will certainly do what you ask.” 

They said to him, “Cast off your body for the good of all the worlds.” 

The sage Dadhichi, who was a great yogin who regarded joy and sorrow 
equably, calmly focused his Atmashakti using his yoga and cast off his 
body. 

When his soul left its temporary home, Dhatri took his bones and 
created an irresistible weapon, the vajra. Made with the bones of a 
Brahmana, it was indestructible, inexorable and pervaded by the energy of 
Vishnu; using that weapon, Indra struck Viswarupa, the son of Tvashtri. 

Having slain the son of Tvashtri, Indra severed his head from the body. 
The energy still dwelling in the lifeless body of Viswarupa, when it was 
kneaded, gave birth to a mighty Asura by the name of Vritra. Vritra became 
Indra’s enemy, but Indra killed him also with the vajra and with deceit. 

With this doubling of the sin of Brahmahatya, Indra was overcome with 
a great fear and he had to forsake the sovereignty of swarga. He entered a 
cool lotus stalk that grew in the Manasa Lake. Using the yoga siddhi of 
anima, he became minute and entered the fibres of that lotus-stalk. 

When the Lord of the three worlds, the husband of Sachi, had thus 
vanished through the fear of the consequences of the sin of killing a 
Brahmana, the universe became lordless. The gunas, rajas and tamas, 
assailed the Devas. The mantras uttered by the great Rishis lost all efficacy. 
Rakshasas appeared everywhere. The Vedas were about to disappear. 

Without a king, the inhabitants of all the worlds lost their strength and 
Rakshasas and other evil beings began to attack them. Then the Devas and 
the Rishis united and crowned Nahusha, the son of Ayusha, king of the 
three worlds. 

Nahusha had on his forehead full five hundred luminaries of blazing 
effulgence, which had the power to destroy every fell creature of energy. 
Thus endowed he continued to rule heaven. The three worlds were restored 
to balance. Their inhabitants once more became happy and cheerful. 


Nahusha then said, “Everything that Indra used to enjoy is mine. Only 
his wife Sachi is not.” Saying this, he went to Sachi and said to her, 
“Blessed Devi, I have become the Lord of the Devas. You too, accept me.” 

Sachi replied, “You are, by your very nature, wedded to righteous 
behaviour. You also belong to the vamsa of Soma. It is not right for you to 
importune another’s wife.” 

Nahusha said, “I now hold Indra’s position and wield his power. I 
deserve to enjoy his dominions and all his precious possessions. Hence 
there can be no sin in my desiring to enjoy you. You were Indra’s and 
should, therefore, now be mine. 

Sachi said to him, “I am observing a vrata that has not yet been 
completed. After performing the final ablutions I will come to you, in a few 
days.” Extracting this promise from Sachi, Nahusha left. 

Sachi, indignant and grief-stricken, anxious to find her husband, and 
fearing Nahusha, she went to Brihaspati. Brihaspati instantly understood her 
agitation. Through the power of yoga, he understood that she was 
determined to restore her husband to his rightful place. 

Brihaspati said to her, “With your tapasya and punya as a result of your 
vow, pray to the boon-giving Goddess Upasruti. Invoked by you, she will 
appear and show you where Indra dwells. 

Sachi, observing her strict vrata, with the help of appropriate mantras, 
invoked the Devi. The goddess appeared before her and said, “I am here at 
your bidding. What is your wish?” 

Bowing before her, Sachi said, “O Devi, show me where my husband is. 
You are truth. You are Rita.” 

Thus addressed, the Devi Upasruti took her to the Manasa Lake. 
Arriving there, she pointed out to Sachi her Lord Indra dwelling within the 
fibres of a lotus-stalk. Seeing his wife looking pale and emaciated, Indra 
was alarmed. 

And the Lord of heaven said to himself, “Alas, great is my sorrow. I 
have fallen from the position that is mine. My wife, afflicted with grief on 
my account, seeks my lost self and comes to me.” 

Reflecting in this train, Indra said to Sachi, “In what condition are you 
now? What is your situation?” She answered him, “Nahusha called me to 
make me his wife. I obtained a week’s brief respite from him, which has 
already elapsed.” 


Indra said to her, “Go and say to Nahusha that he should come to you on 
a chariot never used before—one yoked to some great Rishis; arriving in 
that manner he should marry you. Indra has many kinds of beautiful and 
wondrous chariots. All these have borne you. Nahusha should come on one 
such that Indra himself does not possess.” 

Thus advised by her husband, Sachi left that place with a hopeful heart. 
Indra once more entered the fibres of the lotus-stalk. 

Seeing Indra’s queen return to swarga, Nahusha said to her, “The time 
you had fixed to become mine has passed.” Sachi repeated to him what 
Indra had directed her to say. Harnessing a number of great Rishis to his 
chariot, Nahusha set out from his palace for where Sachi lived. 

Agastya, born in a jar, of the vital seed of Mitra and Varuna, saw those 
Maharishis being insulted by Nahusha in that way. Nahusha kicked him 
with his foot. 

Agastya said, “Wretch, you have acted vilely and you will plunge down 
to the earth. You will be transformed into a snake and will continue to live 
in that form as long as the earth and her mountains exist.” 

As soon as these words were uttered by the great Rishi, Nahusha fell out 
of his chariot. The three worlds once more lost a master. The Devas and the 
Rishis united and went to Vishnu and appealed to him to restore Indra. 

Approaching him, they said, “Holy one, it is right for you to rescue 
Indra who is blighted by the sin of killing a Brahmana.” 

Vishnu replied, “Let Sakra perform an Aswamedha yagna in my honour 
and he will be restored to his former position and glory.” 

The Devas and the Rishis began to search for Indra; not finding him, 
they went to Sachi and said to her, “O blessed one, go to Indra and bring 
him here.” 

Sachi went once more to the Manasa Lake. Indra rose from the waters 
and came to Brihaspati. 

Devaguru Brihaspati made arrangements for a great Aswamedha, 
substituting a black deer for a regal back steed fit in every way to be offered 
up in sacrifice. Brihaspati had Indra, the Lord of the Maruts, ride on that 
horse he saved from slaughter, stole away, and led him to his own palace for 
Indra to perform his Aswamedha yagna. The king of swarga was then 
adored with mantras by all the Devas and the Rishis. 

He continued to rule in swarga, cleansed of his sin; that paapa of 
Brahmahatya, the killing of the Brahmana Asura Vritra, was divided into 


four parts and ordained to dwell in woman, fire, trees and cows. It was thus 
that Indra, strengthened by the energy of a Brahmana, succeeded in slaying 
his enemy, and when, as the result of that act of his, he was overpowered by 
sin, it was the energy of another Brahmana that rescued him. In this manner 
Indra once again regained his place as the ruler of heaven.’ 

Krishna continued, ‘Once, in olden times, while the great Rishi 
Bharadwaja was saying his prayers beside the celestial Ganga, one of the 
three feet of Vishnu, in his three-footed form, came to that place. Seeing 
that strange sight, Bharadwaja splashed Vishnu with a handful of water, 
upon which Vishnu’s breast received a mark called the srivatsa. 

Cursed by Rishi Bhrigu, Agni was obliged to become a devourer of all 
things. 

Once upon a time, Aditi, the mother of the deities, cooked some food 
for her sons. She thought that, eating that food and being strengthened by it, 
the Devas would succeed in slaying the Asuras. After the food had been 
cooked, Budha, the presiding deity of the planet known by that name, 
having completed the observance of an austere vow, came before Aditi and 
asked her for dana. 

Aditi did not offer him the food she had cooked, thinking that no one 
should eat it before her sons, the Devas, did. Enraged at her refusing him 
alms, Budha, who was Brahma’s self through his vrata, cursed her, saying 
that she would have a pain in her womb when Vivaswat, in his second birth 
in her womb, was born in the form of an egg. 

Aditi reminded Vivaswat at the time of his birth of Budha’s curse, and it 
is for this reason that Vivaswat, who is adored in sraddhas, on emerging 
from Aditi’s womb came to be called by the name of Martanda. 

Prajapati Daksha became the father of sixty daughters. Of them, he gave 
thirteen to Kasyapa, ten to Dharma, ten to Manu and twenty-seven to Soma. 
Though all the twenty-seven, called Nakshatras, bestowed upon Soma were 
equal in beauty and accomplishments, Soma became most attached to just 
one, Rohini. 

His other wives became jealous and left him; they went to their father 
and told him of Soma’s conduct. “Father, although all of us are equally 
beautiful, Soma is attached only to our sister Rohini.” 

Angered by this treatment of his daughters, Prajapati Daksha cursed 
Soma, declaring that his son-in-law would be beset with phthisis and that 


disease would dwell in him. Through Daksha’s curse, phthisis assailed the 
mighty Soma and entered into his body. Suffering, Soma came to Daksha. 

Daksha said to him, “I have cursed you because of your unequal 
treatment of your wives. You are being weakened by this disease. There is a 
sacred body of water called Hiranyasara in the western ocean. Go and bathe 
there.” 

Reaching Hiranyasaras, Soma bathed in its holy waters. Performing his 
ablutions he washed away his sin. And because those waters were 
illumined, abhasita, by Soma, from that day they were called Prabhasa. 

As a result, however, of Daksha’s ancient curse, to this day Soma begins 
to wane from the night of the full moon until his total disappearance on the 
night of the new moon when he once more he begins to wax until the night 
of the full moon. 

From that time on the bright moon was blemished, for since then the 
body of Soma has shown some dark spots, and has been tarnished by these. 
In fact, the splendid disc of the moon has, from then on revealed the mark 
of a hare. 

Once upon a time, a Rishi called Sthulasiras was engaged in severe 
austerities on the northern breast of the mountains of Meru. While engaged 
in those tapasyas a pure breeze, suffused with many fragrant perfumes, 
began to blow and fan his body. 

Scorched as he was by his rigorous tapasya, and living as he did only 
upon air, he was gratified by that delightful air which wafted around him. 
While he enjoyed this cool breeze that fanned him, the trees around him 
became envious and burst into a display of flowers to win his heart. 
Annoyed at this display, because it was prompted by jealousy, the Rishi 
cursed the trees, “Henceforth, you will not be able to flower in all seasons.” 

Once Narayana took birth as the Maharishi Badavamukha for the 
benefit of the world. While practising severe austerities upon the breast of 
Meru, he summoned the ocean into his presence. The ocean ignored his 
call. Infuriated at this, the Rishi, with the heat of his body, caused the 
waters of the ocean to become as salty as human sweat. 

The sage said, “From now your waters will be undrinkable. Only when 
the equine-head eddying within you drinks from you, will they again 
become as sweet as honey. On account of this curse, the waters of the ocean 
remain salty to this day and are drunk by no one other than the 
Badavamukha. 


Uma, the daughter of Himavat, was desired by Siva. After Himavat had 
promised her hand in marriage to Mahadeva, Maharishi Bhrigu approached 
Himavat, and said, “Give your daughter to me in marriage.” 

Himavat replied, “Siva is the bridegroom I have chosen for my 
daughter.’ Angered by this reply, Bhrigu said, “Since you refuse my 
proposal for your daughter’s hand and insult me, you will lose your wealth 
of jewels and precious stones.” And to this day the mountains of Himavat 
are without any jewels. 

Such is the glory of the Brahmanas. It is through their favour that the 
Kshatriyas are able to possess the undecaying and eternal Bhumi Devi as 
their wife and enjoy her. The power of the Brahmanas is also made up of 
Agni and Soma. The universe is upheld by their united power. 

It is said that Surya and Chandramas are the eyes of Narayana. The rays 
of Surya are my eyes. The sun and the moon respectively warm and 
rejuvenate the universe. And for this reason they have come to be regarded 
as the joy, the harsha, of the worlds. 

Arjuna, it is because these actions of Agni and Soma that uphold the 
universe that I have come to be called Hrishikesa. Indeed, I am the boon- 
giving Isana, the Creator of the universe. 

Through the punya of the mantras with which libations of ghee are 
poured into the sacred fire, I receive and imbibe the principal share of the 
sacrificial havis. My colour too is that of the most excellent of jewels called 
Harita. For these reasons I am known as Hari. I am the highest abode of all 
creatures and am known by knowers of the shastras to be identical with 
truth or amrita. For this reason I am called Ritadhama, the abode of truth, 
by learned Brahmanas. 

When the Earth was submerged in the waters and disappeared from 
view, I retrieved her and raised her from the depths of the ocean. For this 
reason the Devas adore me by the name of Govinda. Sipivishta is another 
name of mine. Sipi means one without hair on his body. He who pervades 
all things in the form of Sipi is known by the name of Sipivishta. 

The Rishi Yaksha in many a sacrifice invoked me by the name 
Sipivishta. It is for this that I bear this secret name. The Yaksha of great 
intelligence, having worshipped by the name Sipivishta, succeeded in 
restoring the Niruktas who had disappeared from the surface of the earth 
and sunk into the patalas. 


I was never born. I never take birth. Nor shall I ever be born. I am the 
Kshetrajna of all creatures. Hence am I called by the name of Aja, unborn, 
birthless. 

I have never spoken anything dishonourable or dissolute. The divine 
Saraswati who is truth’s self, who is the daughter of Brahma and is 
otherwise known as Rita, represents my speech and always dwells in my 
tongue. The existent and the non-existent are united by me in my Atman. 

The Rishis in Pushkara, the abode of Brahma, called me by the name of 
truth. I have never swerved from the attribute of sattva; know that this guna 
has flowed from me. Arjuna, even in this birth, my ancient sattva guna has 
not left me, so that in this life, establishing myself in sattva, I perform my 
karmas without wishing for their fruit. 

Free of all sins through sattva, which is my nature, I can be perceived 
only by the knowledge that arises from the pursuit of sattva. I am counted 
among those who are devoted to this guna. For these reasons I am known as 
sattvata. 

I plough the earth, taking the form of a large ploughshare of black iron. 
And because my complexion is black, I am called Krishna. 

I have united Bhumi with Jala, Akasa with Manas, and Vayu with Agni. 
Therefore I am called Vaikuntha. The highest state for a living being to 
attain is the cessation of separate conscious existence by union with 
Supreme Brahman. And since I have never swerved from that state I am 
Achyuta. 

The earth and the sky are known to extend in all directions. And 
because I uphold them both, I called Adhokshaja. Those who know the 
Vedas and engage in interpreting their words adore me in yagnas by 
invoking me by this name. In elder days, while practising severe tapasyas, 
Maharishis said, “No one in the universe other than Narayana can be called 
by the name of Adhokshaja. 

Sustaining the lives of all creatures in the universe, ghrita, ghee, 
constitutes my effulgence. It is for this reason that Brahmanas learned in the 
Vedas call me Ghritarchis. 

There are three well-known constituent elements of the body. They have 
their origin in karma, and are called vata, pitha and kapham, or wind, bile 
and phlegm. The body is a union of these three. All living creatures are 
upheld by them, and when they abate, living creatures are also weakened. It 
is for this that those who know the shastra on Ayurveda call me Tridhatu. 


Dharma is known among all creatures by the name of Vrisha. Hence I 
am called Vrisha in the Vedic text, Nighantuka. The word Kapi signifies the 
foremost of boars, and dharma means Vrisha. It is for this reason that that 
lord of all creatures, Kasyapa, the father of both the Devas and the Asuras, 
called me Vrishakapi. 

The Devas and the Asuras have never been able to ascertain my 
beginning, my middle or my end. For this reason that I am praised as Anadi, 
Amadhya and Ananta. I am the Supreme Lord imbued with absolute 
puissance, and I am the eternal witness of the universe, for I witness its 
successive creations and destructions. 

I always listen to words that are pious, pure and holy, Dhananjaya, and 
never speak anything that is sinful. Hence I am called Suchisravas. 

Assuming the form of a boar with a single tusk, I raised the submerged 
earth from the bottom of the sea. For this reason am I named Ekasringa. In 
this form of a mighty boar I had three humps on my back. On account of 
this peculiarity I have come to be called by the name Trikakud. 

Those conversant with the Samkhya expounded by Kapila call the 
Paramatman Virincha. That Virincha is otherwise called Prajapati or 
Brahma. Verily I am identical with Virincha, since I breathe life into all 
living creatures, for I am the Creator of the universe. 

The teachers of the Samkhya philosophy have clear knowledge of all 
subjects, and they call me the eternal Kapila dwelling in the sun with only 
gyana as my companion. On earth I am identified with him who has been 
revered in the Vedic mantras as the effulgent Hiranyagarbha who is 
worshipped by yogins. 

I am regarded as the embodied form of the Rig Veda, which has twenty- 
one thousand verses. Men that know the Vedas also call me the embodiment 
of the Samans of a thousand branches. Learned Brahmanas who are my 
faithful devotees sing my praises in the Aranyakas. 

In the Adhyaryus I am sung of as the Yajur Veda of six and fifty, and 
eight and seven, and thirty branches. Brahmanas conversant with the 
Atharvans regard me as identical with the Atharvans consisting of five 
kalpas and all the krityas. 

Arjuna, know that all the angas of the Vedas and all their verses, and all 
the vowels in those verses, and all the rules in respect of their 
pronunciation, are my work. I am he who emerges at the beginning of 


creation from the ocean of milk at the earnest invocation of Brahma and all 
the Devas, and he who grants boons to all the Devas. 

I am he who is the repository of the science of pronunciation contained 
in the angas of the Vedas. It was through my grace that, following the path 
indicated by Vamadeva, the Maharishi Panchala obtained from that eternal 
Being the techniques for reading the Vedas with respect to the division of 
syllables and words. 

Born into the Babhravya vamsa, and having achieved great ascetic 
victory and obtained a boon from Narayana, Galava compiled the rules 
regarding the division of syllables and words for reading the Vedas. He also 
compiled the rules about the required emphasis and accent in reciting them, 
and shone as the first scholar who became knowledgeable in these two 
subjects. 

Favoured by me, Kundrika and King Brahmadatta, thinking of the 
sorrow that attends birth and death, attained to that prosperity which is 
achieved by those devoted to yoga in the course of seven births. In ancient 
times, I was born as the son of Dharma, and in consequence of this birth I 
was celebrated as Dharmaja. 

I took birth in two forms—Nara and Narayana. Riding on the vahana 
that helps in the performance of scriptural and other duties, I practised, in 
those two forms, undying austerities on the breast of Gandhamadana. 

At that time Daksha performed his great yagna of Daksha. However, he 
refused to give a share of the havis to Rudra. Urged by the sage Dadichi, 
Rudra destroyed that sacrifice. He cast an arrow of blazing flames that 
consumed all the preparations for Daksha’s yagna, and then coursed 
forcefully towards us, Nara and Narayana at Badari’s asrama. That brutal 
barb fell squarely upon the chest of Narayana. Assailed by its energy the 
hair on Narayana’s head became green. As a result of this change in the 
colour of my hair I came to be called Munjakesa. 

Narayana blew off this arrow, its energy spent, and it returned to Siva. 
Enraged and fired by the power of his tapasya, Siva charged towards the 
Rishis Nara and Narayana. Narayana seized the advancing Rudra by his 
throat. Held by Narayana, the Lord of the universe, Rudra’s neck changed 
colour and became dark. From that time Rudra came to be called Sitikantha. 

Meanwhile, Nara pulled up a blade of grass and suffused it with mantras 
to kill Rudra. The blade of grass was transformed into a mighty battle-axe. 


Nara cast the axe at Rudra but it shattered into pieces. Because of that 
weapon being smashed, I received the name Khandaparasu.’ 

Arjuna said, ‘Krishna, in that battle which could destroy the three 
worlds, who was victorious? Tell me this!’ 

Krishna said, ‘When Rudra and Narayana were engaged in battle, all the 
universe trembled with anxious. Agni ceased to accept libations of even the 
purest ghee offered with Vedic mantras in yagnas. The Vedas no longer 
shone inward light in the minds of the Rishis of cleansed souls. 

Rajas and tamas possessed the Devas. The earth shook. The vault of the 
sky appeared to be rent in two. All the stars were deprived of their 
brilliance. Brahma himself fell from his throne. 

The ocean became dry. The Himavat Mountains were riven. When such 
terrible omens appeared everywhere, Brahma surrounded by all the Devas 
and the Devarishis, rushed to the raging battleground. 

Brahma, who can be grasped only with the help of the Niruktas, joined 
his hands and said to Siva, “Bestow good upon the three worlds. Discard 
your weapons, Lord of the universe, and benefit all the Akhanda. 

That which is unmanifest, indestructible, immutable, supreme, the 
origin of the universe, uniform, and the supreme actor, that which 
transcends all pairs of opposites, and is inactive, choosing to be manifested, 
has assumed this one blessed form, though it appears as two. This Nara and 
Narayana, the manifest forms of Supreme Brahman, have taken birth in the 
vamsa of Dharma. 

The foremost of all deities, these two observe the highest vratas and 
severest tapasyas. Through some reason best known to him, I myself have 
sprung from his grace. Eternal as you are, for you have existed ever since 
all the past creations, you too, have sprung from his wrath. 

Along with me, the Devas and all the Maharishis revere this form of 
Brahma, and let peace prevail in all the worlds without any delay.” 

Thus addressed by Brahma, Rudra instantly cast off the fire of his anger, 
and began to worship Narayana. Indeed, he placed surrendered himself to 
Narayana. And Narayana, with his anger and senses subdued, was gratified 
and reconciled with Rudra. 

Adored by the Rishis, by Brahma and by all the Devas, the Lord of the 
universe, also known as Hari, then addressed the illustrious Isana, “He that 
knows you, knows me. He that follows you, follows me. There is no 
difference between you and me. Never think otherwise. 


The mark that your spear made on my chest will from this day assume 
the form of a beautiful whorl; and the mark of my hand on your neck will 
also assume a beautiful shape and for this you shall from this day be called 
Sreekantha.” 

Krishna continued, ‘Having mutually made marks on each other’s 
bodies, the two Rishis Nara and Narayana were reconciled with Rudra; 
dismissing the Devas, they once more set themselves to the practice of 
penances with tranquil souls. 

Son of Pritha, I have now told you how, in that ancient battle between 
Rudra and Narayana, the latter triumphed. I have also told you the many 
secret names of Narayana and the significance of one of those names which 
the Rishis bestowed upon him. 

Arjuna, assuming diverse forms I roam the earth, the realm of Brahma 
himself and Golaka, that other high and eternal realm of felicity. Protected 
by me in the maha yuddha, you have won a great victory. 

That Being whom you saw lurking in your chariot, during your battles, 
is none other than Rudra Kapardin. Otherwise known by the name Kaala, 
he should be known as one that has sprung from my wrath. Those enemies 
whom you have killed were all, in the first instance, slain by him. 

Bow your head before that powerful God of gods, that Lord of Uma. 
With concentrated soul, bow unto that illustrious Lord of the universe, that 
indestructible deity, otherwise called by the name of Hara. 

As I have told you, he is none other than one who has manifested from 
my anger. Arjuna, you have, before this, heard of his puissance and 
energy!’” 


CANTO 344 


S aunaka said, ‘O Sauti, how excellent is this story that you have 
narrated. Verily, these ascetics, having heard it, have all been amazed. 
It is said that a discourse on Narayana is rewarded with more punya than 
pilgrimages to all the sacred asramas and ablutions performed in all the 
holy tirthas on earth. Having listened to your divine discourse on Narayana, 
which can cleanse one of every sin, all of us have certainly been blessed. 

Adored in all the worlds, even the Rishis and the Devas, even Brahma, 
cannot easily behold that most celebrated of all gods. That Narada was able 
to obtain a glimpse of Narayana, otherwise called Hari, was because his of 
the special grace of that divine and powerful Lord. 

Why then did Devarishi Narada, having succeeded in seeing the 
Supreme Lord of the universe, dwelling in the form of Aniruddha, go 
swiftly to Badarikasrama on the breast of Himavat to behold Nara and 
Narayana? O Sauti, tell us the reason for this.’ 

Sauti said, “During his snake-sacrifice, Janamejaya, the royal son of 
Parikshita, availing himself of an interval in the sacrificial rites, when all 
the learned Brahmanas were resting, addressed the grandfather of his 
grandfather, the island-born Krishna, otherwise called Vyasa, that ocean of 
Vedic lore, that foremost of ascetics endued with power, with these words. 
Janamejaya said, “What did Devarishi Narada do next when he returned 
from the White Island, reflecting, as he came, on the words spoken to him 
by Narayana? Arriving at Badarikasrama upon the breast of the Himavat 
Mountains, and seeing the two Rishis Nara and Narayana engaged in stern 
tapasya, how long did Narada dwell there and on what subjects did they 
speak? 


This discourse on Narayana, that is really an ocean of knowledge, has 
been culled by you by churning that vast histories of a hundred thousand 
verses, the Mahabharata. As butter is raised from curds, sandalwood from 
the mountains of Malaya, the Aranyakas from the Vedas, and amrita from 
medicinal plants, in the same manner, O Tapodhana, you have raised this 
ambrosial discourse that has Narayana for its subject from diverse itihasas 
and Puranas existing in the world. 

Narayana is the Supreme Lord. Illustrious and formidable, he is the soul 
of all creatures. Indeed, Dvijottama, the energy of Narayana is irresistible. 
At the end of the kalpa, all the Devas led by Brahma, all the Rishis with the 
Gandharvas, and all things living and non-living enter into Narayana. 

There is nothing holier on earth or in heaven, and nothing higher, than 
Narayana. A pilgrimage to all the sacred asramas on earth, and ablutions 
performed in all the holy waters, will not yield as much punya as a 
discourse on Narayana. Having listened from the beginning to this 
discourse on Hari, the Lord of the universe, which destroys all sins, we feel 
that we have been completely purified and sanctified. 

It was not my ancestor Arjuna who was the real victor in the great battle 
on Kurukshetra; it should be remembered that Krishna was his ally. There is 
nothing unattainable in the three worlds for a man who has Vishnu himself 
for his ally. My forebears were extremely fortunate and worthy, for they had 
Krishna safeguarding their temporal and spiritual prosperity. 

Adored by all the worlds, the holy Narayana can be seen only through 
tapasya. They, however, succeeded in seeing him, Narayana, adorned with 
the beautiful srivatsa on his chest. More fortunate than my ancestors was 
the Devarishi Narada, the son of Paramesthi. I am thankful that 
Mahatejasvin Narada, who transcends all destruction, went to Sweta dwipa, 
and that he had succeeded in seeing Hari. 

It is clear he saw the Supreme Lord as a result only of the grace of that 
immortal Being. Fortunate was Narada to behold Narayana as existing in 
the form of Aniruddha. 

Having seen Narayana in that form, why did Narada hasten once more 
to the asrama of Badari to behold Nara and Narayana? What was the reason 
for this? After his return from the White Island and on his arrival at Badari, 
where he met with the two Rishis? How long did Narada continue to live 
there, and what conversations did he have with them? What did those two 
Mahatman Rishis say to him? It is fitting that you tell me!” 


Vaisampayana said, “Salutations unto the holy Vyasa of immeasurable 
energy. Through his grace I will relate this story of Narayana. 

Arriving at the White Island, Narada beheld the immutable Hari. 
Leaving that place he hurried to the mountains of Meru, bearing in his mind 
the momentous words spoken by the Paramatman Narayana. Arriving at 
Meru he was struck at the thought of what he had achieved. And he said to 
himself, “How wonderful it is! The journey I undertook was a long one. 
Having journeyed so far, I have returned safely.’ 

From the Meru mountains he moved towards Gandhamadana. Coursing 
through the skies he descended upon the vast retreat of Badari. There he 
beheld those ancient deities Nara and Narayana, engaged in tapasya while 
observing high vratas, and devoted to the worship of their own selves. 

Both those revered beings bore the beautiful whorls called srivatsa on 
their chests, and both had matted jata on their heads. And because of their 
dazzling radiance with which they illumined the world they seemed to 
surpass even the energy of the sun. Their hands bore the mark of the swan’s 
foot. The soles of their feet bore the sign of the discus. 

Their chests were broad; their arms reached down to their knees. Each 
of them had four mushkas. Each had sixty teeth and four arms. Their voices 
were deep like rolling thunder. 

Their faces were striking, their foreheads broad, their brows fair, their 
cheeks well-formed, and their noses aquiline. The heads of those two deities 
were big and round like parasols unfurled. All these features gave them a 
magnificent appearance. 

Seeing them, Narada was filled with joy. He saluted them with 
reverence and was saluted by them in return. They received the Devarishi, 
welcomed him and enquired after his wellbeing. 

Seeing them, Narada began to reflect, ‘These two foremost of Rishis 
seem to be very alike in appearance to those I have seen in Sweta dwipa.’ 
Thoughtfully, he circled around them in pradakshina and then sat down to 
rest on the seat made of kusa grass offered to him. 

After this, those two famed Rishis, who were the abode of tapasya and 
tejas, of tranquil hearts and self-restraint, went through their morning 
rituals. With subdued senses, they worshipped Narada with arghya and 
water to wash his feet. Having finished their morning kriyas, necessary for 
receiving their guest, they sat down on two seats made of wooden planks. 


When those two Rishis sat, that place began to glow with an unusual 
beauty even as the sacrificial altar does with the beauty of sacred fires when 
libations of ghee are poured upon them. Seeing Narada refreshed from 
fatigue, seated at his ease and gratified with the hospitality he had received, 
Nara and Narayana spoke to him. 

Nara and Narayana said, ‘In Sweta dwipa have you seen the 
Paramatman, who is eternal and divine, and who is the source from which 
we have sprung?’ 

Narada said, ‘I have seen that beautiful Being who is immutable and 
who has the universe for his form. In him dwell all the worlds, and all the 
Devas with the Rishis. Even now I behold him in you two. Those marks and 
indications that characterise Hari of unrevealed form, characterise you that 
now have forms revealed to the senses. 

Indeed, I see both of you by his side. Sent by the Paramatman, I have 
come here today. In energy and fame and beauty, who else in the three 
worlds can equal him than you both that have been born into the dharma 
vamsa? He has related to me the entire course of Kshetrajna dharma. He has 
also instructed me in all his future incarnations in this world. 

The inhabitants of the White Island, whom I have seen, are without the 
five senses that ordinary men possess. All of them are of awakened souls, 
endowed with true gyana. They are entirely devoted to the foremost of 
Beings, the Supreme Lord of the universe. 

They are always engaged in worshipping that great deity, and he always 
sports with them. The Holy and Supreme Soul loves those that are devoted 
to him. He also cares for such Dvijas. Compassionate to his bhaktas, he 
dallies with them. 

Enjoyer of the universe, pervading everything, Madhava is ever loving 
towards his worshippers. He is the actor; he is the Cause; and he is the 
Effect. He is omnipotent and magnificent. 

He is the Cause from which all beings originate. He is the embodiment 
of all the rules of the shastras. He is the embodiment of all the tattvas. He is 
renowned. Uniting himself with tapasya, he radiates a splendour that is said 
to represent an energy that is higher than what is found in Sweta dwipa. Of 
the Soul cleansed by tapasya, he has ordained peace and tranquillity in the 
three worlds. 

With such an auspicious intellect, he is observes a very superior vrata 
which is the very embodiment of holiness. The sun does not warm and the 


moon does not shine in his realm where he lives engaged in austere 
penance. There the Wind does not blow. 

Having built a vedi measuring eight fingers’ breadth there, the Creator 
of the universe is engaged in rigorous tapasya, standing on one foot, with 
arms raised and with his face turned towards the east, reciting the Vedas 
with their angas. 

All libations of ghee or meat poured on the sacrificial fire according to 
the decrees of Brahma, by the Rishis, by Pasupati himself, by the rest of the 
principal Devas, by the Daityas, the Danavas and the Rakshasas, all reach 
the feet of that Great Divinity. Whatever karmas and kriyas are performed 
by those souls who are entirely devoted to him, are all received by him on 
his head. 

No one is dearer to him in the three worlds than those who are 
awakened and enlightened. Dearer even is one completely devoted to him. 
Sent by him who is the Paramatman, I have come here at his command. 

Henceforth, I shall dwell with you two, devoted to Narayana in the form 
of Aniruddha.’” 

Vaisampayana said, “Nara and Narayana said, “You are deserving of the 
highest praise, and have been highly favoured, since you have seen the 
puissant Narayana himself in the form of Aniruddha. No one else, not even 
Brahma who was born from the primal lotus, has been able to behold him. 
That foremost of Purushas is of unmanifest origin and cannot be seen. 

What we say to you is the truth, O Narada. There exists no one in the 
universe that is dearer to him than one that adores him with devotion. It is 
for this that he revealed himself to you. 

No one can repair to that realm where the Paramatman is engaged in 
tapasya other than us. The splendour of the place adorned by him resembles 
the effulgence of a thousand suns gathered together. 

From him who is the origin of the creator of the universe springs the 
attribute of forgiveness which attaches to the earth. It is from that illustrious 
Being who seeks the welfare of all beings, that the rasa of taste has arisen. 
That rasa attaches to the waters which are liquid. 

It is from him that Agni, having the attribute of form or sight, has 
arisen. It attaches itself to the sun which then is able to shine and radiate 
heat. It is from that illustrious and foremost of Beings that touch also has 
arisen. It is attached to Vayu, which enables it to move about in the world 
producing the sensation of touch. 


It is from that Lord of the entire universe that sound has arisen. It 
attaches to Akasa, which allows it to exist uncovered and unconfined. It is 
from him that Manas, Mind, which pervades all Beings, has arisen. It 
attaches to Chandramas, and so Chandramas has the quality of revealing all 
things. In the Vedas, where Narayana, that partaker of the libations and 
other offerings, resides, with gyana alone for his companion, has been 
called Sat, the generative cause of all things. 

The path of those who are stainless and free from both virtue and sin, is 
fraught with auspiciousness and felicity. Aditya, who is the dispeller of the 
darkness of all the worlds, is said to be the doorway through which the 
emancipated must pass. Entering Aditya, the bodies of such men are 
consumed by his fire. They then become invisible and cannot be seen by 
anyone at any time. 

Reduced into invisible atoms, they pass into the form of Aniruddha, 
Narayana in manifested form, who dwells in the heart of the realm of 
Aditya. Losing all physical attributes and being transformed into pure mind, 
they then enter into Pradyumna. Passing out of Pradyumna, those that are 
conversant with Samkhya yoga and those that are devoted to the Supreme 
Deity then enter Samkarsana otherwise called Jiva. 

After this, divested of the three primal gunas of sattva, rajas and tamas, 
those foremost of regenerate beings quickly enter the Paramatman, also 
called Kshetrajna, and which itself transcends these three primal attributes. 
Know that Vasudeva is he when called Kshetrajna. 

Surely you must know that Vasudeva is the abode or original refuge of 
all things in the universe. Only those whose minds are focused, who 
practise restraint and subdue their senses, and who are devoted to him, 
succeed in entering Vasudeva. 

We two have taken birth in the house of Dharma. Living in this 
delightful and vast hermitage we undergo the austerest tapasya. We are thus 
engaged being moved by the desire to benefit those manifestations of the 
Supreme Deity, dear to all the Devas, which will occur in the three worlds 
to achieve diverse and unrivalled feats. 

In accordance with such rare rules that apply to us two only, we observe 
all excellent and high vratas fraught with the most rigorous of penances. O 
Devarishi, with the power of our tapasya, we saw you when you were in the 
White Island. 


Having met Narayana, you have made a particular resolution, which is 
known to us. In the three worlds consisting of mobile and immobile beings, 
there is nothing that is unknown to us. Maharishi, of the good or evil that 
will occur or has occurred or is occurring, that Devadeva has informed 
you.” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Having heard these words of Nara and 
Narayana, Narada joined his hands in reverence and became entirely 
devoted to Narayana. He spent his time in mentally reciting countless 
sacred mantras that are in praise of Narayana. 

Worshipping him, and adoring those two ancient Rishis who were born 
in the dharma vamsa, Rishi Narada continued to dwell in Nara and 
Narayana’s asrama of Badari on Himavat for a thousand years of the 
Devas.’” 


CANTO 345 


V aisampayana said, “On one occasion, while dwelling with Nara and 

Narayana, Narada the son of Paramesthi, having duly completed the 
rites and rituals to honour the Devas, set himself to perform the kriyas in 
honour of the Pitris. 

Seeing him thus prepared, the eldest son of Dharma, Nara, addressed 
him, saying, “Which Devas and Pitris are you worshipping with these rites 
and rituals? O foremost of all wise men, tell me this, in accordance with the 
shastras. What is this that you are doing? What are the fruits you desire by 
performing these rites?’ 

Narada said, ‘On an earlier occasion you said to me that rites and rituals 
in honour of the Devas should be done. You said that the kriyas in their 
honour constitute the highest sacrifice equal to the worship of the eternal 
Paramatman. Instructed by that teaching, I perform these rites in honour of 
the immutable Vishnu. 

It is from that Supreme Deity that Brahma, the Pitamaha of all the 
worlds, arose in the ancient times. That Brahma, or Paramesthi, filled with 
ananda, caused my father Daksha to come into being. I was the son of 
Brahma, created before all others, by a command of his will, although later, 
through the curse of that Rishi, I had to be born as the son of Daksha 

O righteous and illustrious one, I am performing these kriyas in honour 
of the Pitris for the sake of Narayana, and conforming to the rules that were 
laid down by him. Narayana is the father, mother and grandfather of all 
creatures. In all yagnas performed in honour of the Pitris, it is that Lord of 
the universe who is adored and worshipped. 


On one occasion, the Devas taught their children the Srutis. Having lost 
this knowledge themselves they had to again acquire it from those very sons 
unto whom they had communicated it. In this manner, the sons, who had to 
thus convey the mantras to their sires, achieved the status of fathers, and the 
fathers, who received the mantras from their sons, attained the status of 
sons. 

Without doubt, what the Devas did on that occasion is known to you 
two. Sons and fathers had thus to worship each other. Having first spread 
some blades of kusa grass on the ground, the Devas and the Pitris, their 
children, placed three pindas there and worshipped each other. I now wish 
to know why the Pitris in ancient days acquired the name of Pindas.’ 

Nara and Narayana said, ‘In the past, the earth, with her belt of seas, 
disappeared. Govinda, assumed the form of a colossal boar and raised her 
with his mighty tusk. Having restored the earth to her former position, that 
foremost of Purushas, his body smeared with water and mud, set himself to 
do what was necessary for the world and its inhabitants. 

When the sun reached the meridian, and it was the hour for saying the 
morning prayers, Vishnu suddenly shook off three lumps of mud from his 
tusk and set them upon the earth in the place where he had spread blades of 
the kusa grass. He dedicated those lumps of mud to his own self, according 
to the rules laid down in the shastras. 

After shaking off those lumps from his tusks as Pindas, he sat facing the 
east and himself performed the rites of dedication with the oil of sesame 
seeds that arose from the heat of his own body. Impelled by the desire to 
establish rules of conduct for the inhabitants of the three worlds, Vishnu, 
Vrishakapi, said these words: “I am the Creator of the worlds. I have 
resolved to create the Pitris.” 

Saying this, he began to think of those worthy laws that should regulate 
the rituals to be performed in honour of the Pitris. While thus engaged, he 
saw that the Pindas had fallen towards the south. 

He then said to himself, “These Pindas have fallen on the surface of the 
earth towards the south. Based on this, I declare that these should from now 
on be known by the name of Pitris. Let these three round lumps come to be 
regarded as Pitris in the world. 

In this way I am creating the eternal Pitris. I am the father, the 
grandfather and the great-grandfather, and I should be regarded as dwelling 
in these three Pindas. There is no one that is higher than me. Who can I 


worship and adore? Who is my father in the universe? I myself am my 
grandfather. I am, indeed, the Pitamaha and the sire. I am the one cause of 
all the universe.” 

Learned Brahmana, having said these words, Vrishakapi offered those 
Pindas on the breast of the Varaha Mountains, with elaborate rituals. With 
these he worshipped his own self, and having finished the worship, 
vanished. Hence the Pitris came to be called by the name of Pinda. 

In accordance with these words of Vrishakapi on that occasion, the 
Pitris receive the worship offered by all. They who perform yagnas in 
honour of and adore the Pitris, the Devas, gurus or other revered elder 
guests, cows, superior Brahmanas, Devi Bhumi, and their mothers, in 
thought, word and deed are said to adore and sacrifice to Vishnu himself. 

Pervading the bodies of all existent creatures, the illustrious Lord is the 
Soul of all things. Detached from happiness or misery, he regards all 
equally. Narayana has been said to be the Soul of all things in the 
universe.’” 


CANTO 346 


¢ V aisampayana said, “Having heard these words of Nara and 

Narayana, Narada was filled with bhakti for the Supreme Being. 

With his whole being he devoted himself to Narayana. Having lived a full 

thousand years in the retreat of Nara and Narayana, having beheld the 

immutable Hari, and heard the excellent discourse on the subject of 

Narayana, the Devarishi repaired to his own asrama on the breast of 
Himavat. 

Those foremost of Munis, Nara and Narayana, however continued to 
dwell in the delightful Badarikasrama, engaged in the practice of the 
severest tapasyas. You are born into the Pandava vamsa. You are of 
immeasurable energy. Having heard this discourse on Narayana from the 
beginning, you have certainly been cleansed of all your sins and your soul 
has been sanctified. 

He who hates instead of loving and worshipping Hari, his is neither this 
world nor the world hereafter. The ancestors of those who hate Narayana, 
the foremost of gods, plunge into naraka forever. 

Vishnu is the soul of all beings. How, then, can Vishnu be hated, for in 
hating him one would hate one’s own self. He who is our guru, the Rishi 
Vyasa, the son of Gandhavati, has himself recited this discourse on the 
glory of Narayana to us, that glory which is the highest. I heard it from him 
and have narrated it to you exactly as I heard it. 

Rajan this dharma, with its mysteries and the summary of its details, 
was obtained by Narada from Narayana himself. Such are the particulars of 
this great sect. I have earlier explained this to you in the Hari-Gita, with a 
brief reference to its niyamas. 


Know that the island-born Vyasa is Narayana on earth. Who other than 
he could compile such an itihasa as the Mahabharata? Who else than that 
puissant Rishi could discourse upon the diverse kinds of duties and 
religions for men to adopt and follow? 

You have resolved upon performing a great sacrifice. Let your yagna 
continue as determined by you. Having listened to the many kinds of duties 
and paths, let your yagna proceed.’”’ 

Sauti continued, ‘Having heard this great discourse, Janamejaya began 
all those kriyas established in the shastras for the completion of his 
mahayagna. Saunaka, I have duly narrated that great sermon on Narayana to 
you and all these Rishis who dwell in the Naimisa vana. Formerly Narada 
recited it to my guru in the hearing of many Rishis and the sons of Pandu, 
and in the presence of Krishna and Bhishma also. 

Narayana is the Lord of all the foremost of Rishis, and of the three 
worlds. He is the upholder of this vast Bhumi herself. He is the vessel that 
holds the Srutis and of the attribute of humility. 

He is the great receptacle of all those laws that must be adhered to in 
order to attain peace of mind, as also of all those with the name Yama. He is 
always accompanied by the foremost of Dvijas. Let that Great Deity be 
your refuge. 

Hari always does what is agreeable and beneficial to the inhabitants of 
swarga. He is the slayer of Asuras who trouble the three worlds. He is the 
receptacle of tapasya. He has great renown. 

Known as Madhu and Kaitabha, he is also the slayer of the Daityas. He 
ordains the goals of those who know and observe scriptural and other 
duties. He dispels the fears of all. He takes the best of the havis offered in 
sacrifices. He is your refuge and protection. 

He is Saguna, blessed with gunas; he is Nirguna, free from gunas. He 
has a quadruple form. He shares the punya arising from the dedication of 
holy tanks and the observance of similar religious rites. Unvanquished and 
mighty, it is he that always proclaims the goal of the Atmans of righteous 
Rishis. 

He is the witness of the worlds. He is unborn. He is the one ancient 
Purusha. With the radiance of the sun, he is the Supreme Lord and is the 
refuge of all. Do all of you bow your heads before him, since Narayana 
himself who sprang from the primordial waters bows before him. 


He is the origin of the universe. He is that Being who is called amrita, 
deathless. He is minute. He is the refuge upon whom all things depend. He 
is the one Being to whom the attribute of immutability attaches. The 
Samkhyas and yogins, of restrained souls, uphold him to be their eternal 
knowledge.’ 


CANTO 347 


S auti said, ‘Janamejaya said, “I have heard from you of the glory of the 

divine Paramatman. I have heard also of the birth of the Supreme 
Deity in the house of Dharma, in the forms of Nara and Narayana. I have 
also heard about the origin of the Pinda from the mighty Varaha, the form 
that Vishnu assumed to raise the submerged earth. 

I have heard from you about the Devas and Rishis that were ordained 
for Pravritti dharma and of those that were ordained for Nivritti dharma. 
You have also discoursed to us on other subjects. You have spoken to us of 
that vast form, Hayagriva with the equine head, of Vishnu, that partaker of 
the libations and other offerings, the form that appeared in the great ocean 
towards the north-east. 

That form was seen by Paramesthi, the illustrious Brahma. What were 
the exact features, and what was the tejas, the like of which had never been 
seen before, of that form which Hari, upholder of the universe, revealed on 
that occasion? What did Brahma do after having seen him, whose likeness 
had never been seen before, him of immeasurable energy, him with the 
equine head, and who was sacredness itself? 

On this ancient subject, this question arises in our mind. Why did the 
Supreme Deity assume that form and display himself in it to Brahma? You 
have certainly sanctified us by speaking to us on these diverse sacred 
subjects!” 

Sauti said, ‘I shall recite to you that itihasa which is perfectly consistent 
with the Vedas, and which Vaisampayana recited to the son of Parikshita on 
the occasion of the great snake-sacrifice. Having heard the account of this 


mighty form of Vishnu, with the horse’s head, the royal son of Parikshita 
too, had the same doubt and put the same questions to Vaisampayana. 

Janamejaya said, “Tell me for what reason did Hari appear in that 
mighty form with a horse-head, which Brahma saw on the shores of the 
great northern ocean?” 

Vaisampayana said, “Rajan, all existing objects in this world are the 
result of a combination of the five primal elements, a combination caused 
by the intelligence of the Supreme Lord. The puissant and infinite Narayana 
is the Supreme Lord and Creator of the universe. 

He is the inner Soul of all things, and the giver of boons. Without gunas, 
he also possesses them. Listen now to me as I tell you about the Pralaya and 
how all things are destroyed. 

At first, Bhumi merges in Jala and then nothing is seen save one vast 
expanse of water on all sides — the Ekarnava. Jala then merges into Agni, 
and Agni into Vayu. Vayu merges into Akasa which in turn merges into 
Manas, mind. Manas merges into the Vyakta, the manifest, or Chitta, 
Consciousness. The Vyakta merges into the Avyakta, the unmanifest or 
Prakriti. Prakriti merges into Purusha, the Jivatman, and Purusha merges 
into the Paramatman, or Brahman. 

Then tamas spreads over the face of the universe, and nothing can be 
seen. From that primal darkness arises Brahma endowed with the principle 
of creation. Tamas is primeval and immortal. Brahma arising from this 
darkness develops by his own power into the idea of the universe, and 
assumes the form of Purusha. 

This Purusha is called Aniruddha. Without gender, it is otherwise called 
Pradhana, supreme or primary. Rajan, It is also known by the name of 
Vyakta, a combination of the triguna. He exists with only gyana for his 
companion. 

That renowned Being is otherwise called by the name of Viswaksena or 
Hari. Yielding to yoga-nidra, he lays himself down on the waters of the 
ocean Ekarnava. He then thinks of the creation of the universe with its 
diverse phenomena and immeasurable attributes. While engaged in thinking 
of creation, he recollects his own lofty gunas. 

From this springs the four-faced Brahma who represents the 
consciousness of Aniruddha. Brahma, otherwise called Hiranyagarbha, is 
the Pitamaha of all the worlds. With eyes like lotus-petals, he is born within 
the lotus that springs from the navel of Aniruddha. 


Seated on that lotus, the illustrious eternal Brahma saw himself 
surrounded by water. Adopting the attribute of sattva, Brahma Paramesthi, 
then began to create the universe. 

In the primeval lotus, radiant like the Sun, two drops of holy water had 
been cast by Narayana. He, Narayana, looked at those two drops of water. 

One of those two drops, beautiful and bright in form looked like a drop 
of honey. At the command of Narayana, a Daitya of the name of Madhu, 
with the attribute of tamas, sprang from that drop. The other drop of water 
within the lotus was very hard. From it sprang the Daitya Kaitabha 
composed of the attribute of rajas. 

As soon as they were born, imbued with tamas and rajas, the two 
mighty Daityas armed with maces began to roam within that vast primeval 
lotus. In it they beheld the effulgent Brahma, engaged in creating the four 
Vedas, each with the most delightful form. 

Seeing the four Vedas, the powerful Asuras suddenly seized the Vedas 
before the very eyes of their Creator. With the Vedas, the two Danavas 
dived into the ocean and swam to its bottom. Seeing the Vedas forcibly 
taken from him, Brahma was grief-stricken and addressed the Supreme 
Lord Narayana in these words. 

Brahma said, ‘The Vedas are my great eyes. The Vedas are my great 
strength. The Vedas are my great refuge. The Vedas are my high Brahman. 
They have been taken from me by the two Danavas. Deprived of the Vedas, 
the worlds I have created are plunged in darkness. 

Without the Vedas, how can I bring creation into existence? Alas, great 
is the grief I suffer because of the loss of the Vedas. My heart is wounded 
and has become the home of a great sorrow. 

Who is there that will rescue me from this ocean of grief in which I am 
drowning? Who is there that will bring me the Vedas I have lost? Who is 
there that will take pity on me?’ 

While he spoke, Brahma decided to sing the praises of Hari in these 
words. He joined his hands in reverence, grasped the feet of his Progenitor, 
and sang this hymn in honour of Narayana. 

Brahma said, “I bow to you, O heart of Brahman. I bow to you that was 
born before me. You are the origin of the universe. You are the foremost of 
all abodes. You are the ocean of yoga with all its angas. You are the Creator 
of both the Vyakta and the Avyakta. 


You walk the path of vast and immeasurable auspiciousness. You 
devour the universe. You are the Antaraloka, the Inner Soul, of all creatures. 
You have no origin. You are the refuge of the universe. You are 
Svayambhu; your origin is none other than yourself. 

As for myself, I have sprung through your grace. I have been born from 
you. My first birth, which is regarded sacred by all regenerate persons, was 
from a fiat of your mind. My second birth was from your eyes. Through 
your grace, my third birth was from your speech. 

My fourth birth was from your ears. My fifth birth was from your nose. 
O Lord, My sixth birth was, through you, from an egg. This is my seventh 
birth. It has occurred, O Lord, within this lotus, and it is meant to stimulate 
the intellect and desires of all creatures. 

In each birth I am born as your son. Indeed, I take birth as your eldest 
son constituted of sattva, the purest of the three gunas. Your own nature is 
Supreme. You are born from yourself. 

I have been created by you. The Vedas are my eyes. Hence, I transcend 
Time itself. Those Vedas, which care my eyes, have been taken from me 
and I have become blind. Awaken from your yoga-nidra. Give me back my 
eyes. I am dear to you as you are to me.’ 

Thus praised by Brahma, the illustrious Purusha, with face turned in 
every direction, shook off his slumber and resolved to recover the Vedas 
from the Daityas that had taken them. With his yoga-shakti, he assumed a 
second form. His body, with an excellent nose, became as luminous as the 
moon. He assumed an equine head of great effulgence, which was the abode 
of the Vedas. 

The sky, with all its stars and constellations, became the crown of his 
head. His locks of hair were long and flowing, and had the splendour of the 
rays of the sun. The realms above and below became his two ears. The earth 
became his forehead. The two rivers Ganga and Saraswati became his two 
hips. 

The two oceans became his two eyebrows. The sun and the moon 
became his two eyes. The twilight became his nose. The AUM became his 
memory and intelligence. Lightning became his tongue. The Soma-drinking 
Pitris became his teeth. Goloka and Brahmaloka became his upper and 
lower lips. 

The terrible night that follows the Pralaya, transcending the three 
attributes, became his neck. Having assumed this form with the horse’s 


head and having diverse things for its diverse limbs, the Lord of the 
universe disappeared in an instant, and plunged down into patala. 

Having reached that realm, he set himself to high yoga. Adopting a 
voice regulated by the rules of the science called siksha, he began to recite 
the Vedic mantras aloud. His enunciation was distinct and melodious, and 
reverberated through the air. The sound of his voice filled patala from end 
to end. Suffused with the properties of all the elements, it produced great 
grace and merit. 

The two Asuras determined to return to the Vedas quickly, flung them 
aside and ran towards the place from where those sweet sounds issued. 

Meanwhile, the Supreme Lord with the horse’s head, otherwise called 
Hari, picked up all four Vedas. Returning to Brahma, he gave him Vedas to 
him. Having restored the Vedas to Brahma, Narayana once more returned to 
his own nature. 

Narayana returned to his form with the equine head in the northeastern 
region of the great ocean. Having re-established Brahma who was the abode 
of the Vedas, he once more became the equine-headed form that he was. 
The two Danavas, Madhu and Kaitabha, did not find the source of the 
sounds and swiftly returned to that place. They looked around but did not 
find the Vedas. The Asuras rapidly rose from the nether region. Returning to 
the primeval lotus from which they had taken birth, they saw the puissant 
Being, the original Creator, dwelling in the form of Aniruddha of fair 
complexion and the splendour of the moon. 

Of immeasurable prowess, he was under the influence of yoga-nidra, 
asleep, his body stretched on the waters and occupying a space as vast as 
itself. Glowing with great effulgence and the stainless sattva guna, the body 
of Vishnu lay on the hood of a resplendent snake that emitted flames of fire. 

Beholding the Lord thus, the two Danavas roared with laughter. Imbued 
with the attributes of rajas and tamas, they said, ‘This is that Being of white 
complexion. He now lies asleep. Without doubt, this one has brought the 
Vedas away from patala. Whose is he? Who is he? Why is he thus asleep on 
the hood of a snake?’ 

These words of the two Danavas awakened Hari from his yoga-slumber. 
Narayana, thus awakened, understood that the two Danavas intended to 
fight him. Seeing this, he also set his mind to gratify their desire. 

A battle broke out between those two on one side and Narayana on the 
other. The Asuras Madhu and Kaitabha were embodiments of rajas and 


tamas. To please Brahma, Narayana killed them both. Thus he came to be 
called Madhusudana, the slayer of Madhu. Having destroyed the two 
Asuras and restored the Vedas to Brahma, Vishnu assuaged Brahma’s grief. 

With the help of Hari and the Vedas, Brahma created all the worlds with 
their mobile and immobile creatures. Granting the intelligence of creation to 
Brahma, Hari disappeared from there and returned to where he had come 
from. 

It was thus that Narayana, having assumed the form with the horse- 
head, slew the two Danavas Madhu and Kaitabha. Once more he assumed 
the same form to cause Pravritti dharma to flow in the universe. Thus did 
the blessed Hari assume that grand form of Hayasiras. This is celebrated as 
the oldest and most powerful of all his forms. He who frequently listens or 
mentally recites the story of how Narayana assumed that form will never 
lose his Vedic knowledge. 

Having adored this illustrious deity with rigorous tapasya, the Rishi 
Panchala, also known as Galava, acquired the knowledge of Krama by 
treading the path shown by Rudra. Rajan, I have now recited to you the 
ancient story of Hayasiras, consistent with the Vedas, about which you 
asked me. 

Whatever forms the Supreme Deity desires to assume with a view to 
ordain the affairs of the universe, he assumes those forms within himself by 
exercising his own inherent powers. Narayana is the receptacle of the 
Vedas. He is the receptacle of tapasya as well. Hari is yoga. 

He is the embodiment of the Samkhya yoga. He is that Parabrahman of 
which we hear. Truth has Narayana for its refuge. Rita has Narayana for its 
Atman. Nivritti, from which there is no return, has Narayana for its abode. 
The basis of Pravritti equally has Narayana for its soul. 

The foremost of all the attributes that belong to the earth is smell. Scent 
has Narayana for its soul. The attributes of water are various kinds of tastes. 
These too have Narayana for their soul. 

The foremost attribute of light is form. Form also has Narayana for its 
soul. Touch, which is the attribute of wind, also has Narayana for its soul. 
Sound, which is an attribute of space, has like the others Narayana for its 
soul. Mind also, which is the attribute of the unmanifest Prakriti, has 
Narayana for its soul. 

Time which is computed by the movement of the celestial luminaries 
has similarly Narayana for its soul. The Devas of fame, of beauty and of 


wealth have him for their soul. Both the Samkhya philosophy and yoga 
have Narayana for their soul. 

As Purusha, the Supreme Being is the cause of all this. He is the origin 
of everything, as Pradhana or Prakriti. He is Svabhava, the basis on which 
all things rest. Through his agency we witness the variety in the universe. 

He is the various kinds of energy that act in the universe. In these five 
ways he is that all-controlling invisible influence of which men speak. 
Those who study the many areas of knowledge regard Hari to be identical 
with these five causes and as the final refuge of all things. 

Narayana, endowed with the highest yoga-shakti 1s the only one topic of 
enquiry. The thoughts of the all the inhabitants of all the worlds, including 
Brahma and the high-souled Rishis, of those that are Samkhyas and yogins, 
of those that are Yatis, and of those that are conversant with the Atman are 
fully known to Kesava, but none of these can know what his thoughts are. 

Whatever deeds are performed in honour of the Devas or the Pitris, 
whatever gifts are made, whatever penances are performed, have Vishnu 
established by his own laws for their refuge. He is named Vasudeva because 
he is the abode of all creatures. He is immutable. He is Supreme. 

He is the foremost of Rishis. He is mighty. He transcends the three 
gunas. Just as time which runs seamlessly manifests itself in the form of 
succeeding seasons, even so, though nirguna, does he manifest himself. 

Even they that are Mahatmans cannot understand what he does. Only 
those foremost of Rishis with knowledge of their Atmans succeed in 
beholding in their hearts that Purusha who transcends all gunas.”” 


CANTO 348 


anamejaya said, “The illustrious Hari is gracious to those who are 
devoted to him with their entire beings. He accepts also all that is 
offered to him in accordance with the shastras. 

Men who have burnt away their karma, those without paapa and punya, 
and those who have attained the knowledge handed down from guru to guru 
always attain that fourth and highest end, the essence of the Purushottama 
or Vasudeva. Devoted to Narayana with their whole souls, they attain that 
highest goal instantly. 

Undoubtedly, bhakti dharma seems to be superior to that of gyana, and 
is very dear to Narayana. Those who adhere to it, without going through the 
three successive stages of Aniruddha, Pradyumna, and Samkarshana, at 
once attain to the immutable Hari. 

In my view, the end that is attained by Brahmanas, who duly study the 
Vedas with the Upanishads according to the niyamas regulating such study, 
and by those that adopt the religion of Yatis, is inferior to that attained by 
persons devoted to Hari with all their heart.” 

Janamejaya said, “Who first promulgated this bhakti dharma? Was it 
some Deva or some Rishi that declared it? What are the practices of those 
that are said to be devoted with their entire souls? When did those practices 
begin? I have questions about these subjects. Dispel these doubts. Great is 
my interest in hearing you explain these to me.” 

Vaisampayana said, “When the eighteen aksauhinis of the Pandava and 
the Kaurava armies were drawn up ready for the battle and when Arjuna 
became despondent, Krishna himself explained what is and what is not the 


end attained by persons of different characters. I have earlier narrated his 
words to you. 

The dharma taught by the Holy One between two teeming armies is 
difficult to understand. Men of uncleansed souls cannot grasp it at all. 
Rajan, having created this dharma in the ancient Krita yuga, in perfect 
consonance with the Samans, it is borne by the Supreme Lord Narayana 
himself. 

Arjuna asked this very question of Narada in the midst of the Rishis and 
in the presence of Krishna and Bhishma. My guru, Vyasa, heard what 
Narada said. Receiving it from the Devarishis, Vyasa imparted it to me in 
exactly the same way in which he had obtained it from Narada. 

I will now tell it to you in the same way as it was received from Narada. 
Listen to me. 

In that kalpa when Brahma took his birth in the mind of Narayana and 
emerged from his mouth, Narayana himself performed his Daiva and Paitra 
rites in accordance with bhakti dharma. Those Rishis that subsist upon the 
froth of water then obtained it from Narayana. 

From the froth-eating Rishis, this dharma was obtained by the 
Vaikanasa Rishis. From the Vaikanasas, Soma had it. Later, it disappeared 
from the universe. 

After his second birth, when he sprang from the eyes of Narayana, 
Brahma received this bhakti dharma from Soma. Having received it thus, 
Brahma instructed Rudra in it. 

In the Krita yuga of that ancient kalpa, Rudra, devoted to yoga, 
imparted it to all the Balakhilya Rishis. Through the illusion of Narayana, it 
once more vanished from the universe. 

In the third birth of Brahma, which was from the speech of Narayana, 
this dharma once more arose from Narayana himself. Rishi Suparna 
obtained it from that foremost of beings. Suparna used to recite it three 
times during the day. Hence it came to be called Trisauparna. 

This religion has been referred to in the Rigveda. Its duties are 
strenuous to practise. Vayu, who sustains the lives of all creatures, obtained 
this eternal dharma from Rishi Suparna. 

Vayu transmitted it to those Rishis who live on the sacrificial offerings 
that remain after feeding guests and others. From those Rishis this dharma 
was obtained by the Great Ocean. It once more disappeared from the 
universe and merged into Narayana. 


Listen now to what happened in the kalpa when, in his next birth, 
Brahma sprang from the ear of Narayana. When Hari resolved upon 
creation, he thought of a being who would have the power to create the 
universe. While thinking of this, a being sprang from his ears, one that was 
competent to create the universe. The Lord called him by the name Brahma. 

Addressing Brahma, the Supreme Narayana said to him, ‘Son, create all 
kinds of creatures from your mouth and feet. I will do what benefits you, for 
I shall empower you with both energy and strength needed to make you 
equal to this task. You will also receive from me the sattvata dharma. With 
it you will create the Krita yuga and duly establish it.’ 

Thus addressed, Brahma bowed his head before Hari, and received from 
him that foremost of all paths with all its mysteries and its details, together 
with the Aranyakas, which emanated from Narayana’s mouth. 

Narayana then instructed Brahma in that dharma and said to him, ‘You 
are the creator of the duties that are to be observed in the respective yugas.’ 
Having said this, Narayana disappeared and went to the place which is 
beyond the reach of tamas, where the Avyakta, unmanifest, resides and 
which is known to those whose deeds are without the desire for fruits. 

After this, the boon-giving Brahma, the Pitamaha of the worlds, created 
the different worlds with their mobile and immobile creatures. The age that 
first commenced was perfectly auspicious and came to be called Krita. In 
that age, only the sattva dharma existed, pervading the entire universe. With 
that primeval religion of righteousness, Brahma, the Creator of all the 
worlds, worshipped the puissant Hari Narayana. 

To spread that dharma for the welfare of the worlds, Brahma instructed 
that Manu who is known by the name of Svarochisha in that dharma. 
Svarochisha Manu gave that knowledge to his own son Sankhapada. 

Sankhapada communicated this knowledge to his own son Suvarnabha 
who was the ruler of the cardinal and subsidiary directions. When the Krita 
yuga ended, the Treta yuga began and the dharma once more disappeared 
from the world. 

In a subsequent birth of Brahma, which was derived from the nose of 
Narayana, with eyes like lotus petals, the Lord himself recited this doctrine 
in the presence of Brahma. Then Sanatkumara, the son of Brahma, created 
from his thought, studied this doctrine. 

From Sanatkumara, in the beginning of the Krita yuga, the Prajapati 
Virana learned the dharma. Having studied it, Virana taught it to the ascetic 


Raivya. Raivya, in his turn, imparted it to his pure and wise son Kushki, of 
high vratas, that righteous ruler of the cardinal and subsidiary points of the 
horizon. Again, this dharma, born of the mouth of Narayana, vanished from 
the world. 

In the next birth of Brahma, when he emerged from an egg which 
sprang from Hari, this doctrine once more issued from the mouth of 
Narayana. It was received by Brahma who practised it duly in all its 
aspects. Brahma then transmitted it to those Rishis known as Barhishada. 

From the Barhishadas it was obtained by a Brahmana known as 
Jyeshtya, learned in the Sama Veda. And because he was knowledgeable 
about the Samans, he is also known by the name of Jyeshtya-Samavrata 
Hari. It was obtained by a king of the name of Avikampana from this 
Brahmana. After this, the doctrine once more disappeared from the world. 

At the beginning of this kalpa, in the seventh birth of Brahma from the 
lotus that sprang from the navel of Narayana, this dharma was re- 
established by Narayana himself, and given to the creator of all the worlds. 
Brahma gave it to Daksha, one of his sons Created by a thought of his mind. 

Daksha, in his turn, imparted it to the eldest of all the sons of his 
daughters, Aditya, who was older than Savitri. From Aditya, Vivaswat 
obtained it. In the beginning of the Treta yuga, Vivaswat transmitted this 
knowledge to Manu. To protect and support all the worlds, Manu gave it to 
his son Ikshvaku. 

Promulgated by Ikshvaku, the bhakti dharma spreads across the whole 
world. When Pralaya comes, it will once more return to Narayana and be 
merged in him. The religion which is practised by the Yatis, has been earlier 
narrated to you in the Hari Gita, with a summary of all its rules. 

Along with its mysteries and details, Devarishi Narada got it from 
Narayana himself. This foremost of doctrines is primeval and eternal. 
Difficult to grasp and arduous to practise, it is always upheld by persons 
devoted to the sattva guna. 

Hari becomes gratified by actions performed with a full knowledge of 
dharma without injury to any creature. Some adore Narayana with only a 
single form, that of Aniruddha. Some adore him as having two forms, that 
of Aniruddha and Pradyumna. 

Some adore him as having three forms, Aniruddha, Pradyumna and 
Samkarshana. Others revere him as consisting of four forms, Aniruddha, 
Pradyumna, Samkarshana, and Vasudeva. 


Hari is himself the Kshetrajna. He is whole, without parts. He is the Jiva 
in all creatures, transcending the five Mahabhutas. He is Manas, the mind 
that directs and controls the five senses. Having the highest intelligence, He 
is the ordainer of the universe, and its Creator. 

He is both active and inactive. He is both cause and the effect. He is the 
one immutable Purusha, who sports as he likes. Thus have I recited to you 
the dharma of those who worship without desire, one that cannot be 
understood by those of uncleansed souls; this knowledge I acquired through 
the grace of my guru. 

Men who are devoted to Narayana with their whole souls are rare. If the 
world had been full of such men with universal compassion, having 
Atmagyana, always engaged in doing good to others, then the Krita yuga 
would have set in. All men would have set themselves to deeds without 
desire of fruit. 

In this way, my preceptor, that foremost of regenerate ones, knower of 
all duties, Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa, discoursed to Dharmaraja 
Yudhishtira on this bhakti dharma, in the presence of many Rishis and in 
the hearing of Krishna and Bhishma. He himself had received it from 
Tapodhana Narada. 

Those who worship Narayana with all their souls and are without desire, 
succeed in attaining to the realm identical with Brahma, pure in 
complexion, possessing the effulgence of the moon and immutable.” 

Janamejaya said, “I see that those Dvijas whose souls have been 
awakened practise diverse kinds of dharmas. Why is it that other 
Brahmanas, instead of practising these, observe other kinds of vratas and 
kriyas?” 

Vaisampayana said, “Bhaarata, three kinds of dispositions have been 
created for all embodied creatures, that which relates to the attribute of 
sattva, that which relates to the attribute of rajas, and lastly that which 
relates to the attribute of tamas. 

One who is devoted to the sattva guna will certainly attain mukti. This 
guna allows one to understand him who knows Brahman. 

Mukti is entirely dependent upon Narayana. Hence those who strive for 
emancipation are considered to be endowed with this sattva guna. By 
thinking of Purushottama, the man who revers Narayana acquires great 
wisdom. 


Those who are wise and have taken up the practices of Yatis and mukti 
dharma, and have quenched their longing, always find that Hari favours 
them with the fruits of their desire. 

That mortal man subject to birth and death upon whom Hari looks 
kindly should be known as one endowed with the sattva guna and devoted 
to mukti. The dharma of one devoted to Narayana is regarded as similar or 
equal in merit to the system of the Samkhyas. By adopting that doctrine one 
attains to the highest end, moksha which has Narayana for its soul. 

That person upon whom Narayana looks with compassion succeeds in 
becoming awakened. No one, Rajan, can become enlightened through his 
own wishes. That nature which partakes of both rajas and tamas is said to 
be mixed. 

Hari is not benevolent towards one with such a mixed nature, with 
Pravritti dharma, who is subject to birth and death. Only Brahma, the 
Pitamaha of the worlds, looks kindly upon such a man because his mind is 
overwhelmed by the two inferior attributes of rajas and tamas. 

Without doubt, the Devas and the Rishis are devoted to the sattva guna. 
But they do not have that attribute in its subtle form and hence are of a 
mutable nature.” 

Janamejaya said, “How can one that is fraught with the principle of 
change succeed in attaining to that Purushottama? Tell me this, which, no 
doubt, is known to you. Discourse to me also of Pravritti.” 

Vaisampayana said, “That which is the twenty-fifth tattva in the 
Samkhya system, when it becomes able to abstain entirely from karma, 
succeeds in attaining to the subtle Purushottama, which is invested with the 
sattva guna, and which is filled with the Spirit symbolised by the letters A, 
U and M. The Samkhya system, the Aranyaka Veda, and the Pancharatra 
shastras are all one and the same and form parts of one whole. This is the 
dharma of those devoted to Narayana with their whole souls, that which has 
Narayana for its essence. 

As waves of the ocean, rising from the ocean, rush away from it only to 
return to it in the end, even so diverse kinds of knowledge, springing from 
Narayana, return to Narayana in the end. I have thus explained to you, son 
of the Kuru vamsa, what the sattva dharma is. If you are able, then practise 
it fittingly. 

Thus did Narada explain to my guru Vyasa the eternal and immutable 
course, called Ekanta, followed by the white- as also by the yellow-robed 


Yatis. Vyasa, in turn, imparted this to the wise and just Yudhishtira. 

I, too, received it from Vyasa and have passed it on to you. For these 
reasons this dharma is difficult to practise. Hearing it, others are as 
bewildered as you have been. It is Krishna who is the protector of the 
universe and its beguiler. It is he who is the destroyer and the cause.” 


CANTO 349 


anamejaya said, “The Samkhya yoga, the Pancharatra shastras and the 

Aranyaka- Vedas, all these different systems of gyana or dharma are 
prevalent in the world. Do they all teach the same course of duties, or are 
these different from one another? I ask you to instruct me on Pravritti in the 
proper order.” 

Vaisampayana said, “I bow to that great Rishi who dispels darkness, 
whom Satyavati bore to Parasara in the midst of an island, who possesses 
vast knowledge and who is endowed with a great and liberal soul. 

The learned say that he is the origin of Brahma; that he is the sixth form 
of Narayana; that he is the foremost of Rishis; that he has the might of 
yoga; that as the only son of his parents he is an incarnate amsa of 
Narayana; and that, born under extraordinary circumstances on an island, he 
is the inexhaustible receptacle of the Vedas. 

In the Krita yuga, Narayana of great tejas created him as his son. The 
Mahatman Vyasa is unborn and ancient, and the limitless vessel that 
contains the Vedas.” 

Janamejaya said, “Best of the regenerate, you earlier told me that the 
Rishi Vasishta had a son by the name Saktri and that Saktri had a son named 
Parasara, and that Parasara had a son named the Krishna Dwaipayana or 
Vyasa. Now you tell me that Vyasa is the son of Narayana. I ask you, was it 
in some former birth that Vyasa was born from Narayana? Tell me of that 
birth of Vyasa from Narayana.” 

Vaisampayana said, “Wanting to understand the meaning of the Srutis, 
my guru, that ocean of tapasya devoted to observing all scriptural duties and 
the acquisition of knowledge, lived for a while in a particular realm of the 


Himavat Mountains. Because of the great effort of composing the 
Mahabharata, he was worn out by his penances. At that time, Sumanta and 
Jaimini, and Paila, and myself the fourth, and Suka his own son, attended 
on him. All of us waited dutifully upon him, engaged in doing all that was 
necessary to dispel his exhaustion. 

Surrounded by his five sishyas, Vyasa shone in beauty on the breast of 
the Himavat Mountains like Mahadeva in the midst of his ghostly ganas. 
One day, with great reverence, we approached our guru who, having 
divided and summarised the Vedas with all their angas, and also the 
meanings of all the verses in the Mahabharata, and having subdued his 
senses, was at that time immersed in thought. 

Availing ourselves of an interval in the conversation, we asked him to 
expound to us the meanings of the Vedas and the verses in the Mahabharata, 
and also to narrate to us the events of his own birth from Narayana. 
Knowing as he was of all subjects of enquiry, he first spoke to us on the 
interpretations of the Srutis and the Mahabharata, and then began to tell us 
the following incidents. 

Vyasa said, “Listen, my sishyas, to this most excellent narrative, to this 
best of histories, which tells of the birth of a Rishi. Pertaining to the Krita 
yuga, I have learnt of it through my tapasya. On the occasion of the seventh 
creation, that which was due to the primeval lotus, Narayana, endowed with 
the austerest penances, transcending both good and evil, and possessing 
unrivalled splendour, at first created Brahma from his navel. 

After Brahma was born, Narayana said to him, “You have sprung from 
my navel. You possess the powers of creation so set yourself to the task of 
creating diverse kinds of creatures, rational and irrational.” 

Thus addressed by his Creator, Brahma felt troubled by the magnitude 
of this charge and was reluctant to do as he was commanded. 

Bowing his head before Hari, the Lord of the universe, Brahma said to 
him, “I bow to you, O Lord of the Devas, but what powers do I have to 
create diverse creatures? I have no wisdom. Knowing this, direct me to do 
what is possible.” 

Thus addressed by Brahma, Narayana vanished instantly from Brahma’s 
sight. The Supreme Lord then began to meditate. The goddess of 
intelligence appeared before Narayana. Himself transcending all Yoga, 
Narayana, by dint of yoga, appealed to the goddess of intelligence. 


The immutable Hari, said to the Devi who was endowed with the 
goodness and power of yoga, “To accomplish the task of creating all the 
worlds you must enter into Brahma.” And she entered Brahma. 

When Hari saw that Brahma had been united with intelligence, he once 
more addressed him, saying “Now create diverse kinds of creatures.” 
Brahma reverently accepted the command of his creator. 

Narayana then disappeared from Brahma’s presence, and in a moment 
repaired to his own place, known by the name of Divya, light or effulgence. 
Returning to his own nature of being unmanifest, he remained in that state 
of oneness. 

After the task of creation by Brahma, another thought arose in 
Narayana’s mind. He reflected, “Brahma, otherwise called Paramesthi, has 
created all these creatures, Daityas and Danavas, Gandharvas and 
Rakshasas. The fragile earth has become burdened with the weight of these 
creatures. 

Many among the Daityas and Danavas and Rakshasas will become 
mighty. With tapasya, they will at times succeed in acquiring many 
powerful boons. They will swell with pride and strength because of those 
boons, and will oppress and afflict the most powerful Devas and Rishis. 

Thus, from time to time, it is fitting for me to lighten the burden of the 
earth by assuming diverse forms for each occasion. I will achieve this task 
by destroying the evil and upholding the righteous. In this manner, 
protected by me, the earth, the embodiment of truth, will succeed in bearing 
her load of creatures. 

Assuming the form of a mighty snake I will have to uphold the earth in 
empty space. Thus, she will be able to support all creation, mobile and 
immobile. In the different ages, I will incarnate on Bhumi in different forms 
to rescue her from danger.” 

Having reflected in this way, Madhusudana created diverse forms in his 
mind in which to appear from time to time. And he thought, “Assuming the 
forms of Varaha, of Narasimha, of Vamana, and of men, I shall defeat and 
destroy all the enemies of the Devas.” After this, Narayana once more 
uttered the syllable Bhoh, making the air resound with it. From this syllable, 
Saraswati, arose a Rishi named Saraswat. This son, born of the speech of 
Narayana, also came to be called Apantaratamas. Powerful and all-knowing 
of the past, the present and the future, he was firm in the observance of 
vratas and truthful in speech. 


Narayana, the original Creator of the Devas, possessing an immutable 
nature, said to the Rishi Saraswat, “You must devote your attention to the 
dissemination of the Vedas. O Rishi, accomplish what I command.” 

Obeying this command of the Supreme Lord from whose speech he had 
sprung into existence, Rishi Apantaratamas organised and distributed the 
Vedas in the Kalpa named after Swayambhuva Manu. Hari became gratified 
with the Rishi and his well-performed penances, his vows and observances, 
and his subduing of his senses and passions. 

Narayana said, “In each Manvantara, you will disseminate the Vedas, 
and as a result you will be immutable and unsurpassable. 

When the Kali yuga sets in, certain princes of Bharata’s vamsa, called 
the Kauravas, will be born from you. They will be celebrated over the earth 
as high-souled princes ruling over powerful kingdoms. However, 
dissensions will break out among them ending in their destruction at one 
another’s hands. 

Dvijottama, in that age also, you will spread the Vedas to the diverse 
varnas. Indeed, in that dark age, your complexion, too, will darken. You 
will cause various kinds of dharma and gyana to surge. 

Although steeped in austere penances, you will never be able to free 
yourself from desire and attachment to the world. Your son, however, 
through the grace of Madhava, will be freed from every attachment and be 
united with the Paramatman. It shall not be otherwise. 

He whom learned Brahmanas call the mind-born son of the wise 
Vasishta, an ocean of tapasya, whose splendour exceeds that of the sun 
himself, will be the progenitor of a vamsa into which Maharishi Parasara, 
filled with tejas and prowess, will be born. That foremost of men, that ocean 
of Vedas, that abode of penances, will be your father in the Kali yuga. 

You will be born to an unmarried woman through her union with Rishi 
Parasara. You will have no doubts about the significance of things past, 
present and future. Imbued with penances and instructed by me, you will be 
able to see the events of thousands of ages past. You will also see thousands 
of yugas into the future. 

In that birth, you will behold me on earth, I who am without birth and 
death, as Krishna of the Yadava vamsa, armed with the Sudarsana Chakra. 
All this will occur through the punya you will have acquired as a result of 
your ceaseless devotion to me. These words of mine shall come true. 


You will be among the foremost of all the created. Great will be your 
fame. Surya’s son Sani, Saturn, will be born as the great Manu in a future 
Kalpa. During that Manvantara, your punya will be superior to all the 
Manus of the several ages. This you will be through my grace. 

Whatever exists in the world is the outcome of my exertion. The 
thoughts of others may not correspond with their actions. As for me, I 
always ordain what I think, without the slightest hindrance!””’ 

Vyasa continued, “Having said these words to the Rishi Apantaratamas, 
the Supreme Lord dismissed him. Sishyas, I am he that was born as 
Apantaratamas through Narayana’s command. Once more I have been born 
as Krishna-Dwaipayana of the Vasishta vamsa. 

I have thus told you the circumstances of my former birth, which was 
due to the grace of Narayana in so much that I was a very part of Narayana 
himself. In ancient times, I undertook the severest of penances with the help 
of the highest abstraction of the mind. 

Moved by my great love for you who revere me, I have told you 
everything you wished to know about me, from my first birth to the present 
one!’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “As desired by you, Rajan, I have told you 
about the circumstances connected with the former birth of our revered 
guru, Vyasa of unstained mind. Now listen to more. There are many kinds 
of doctrines that go by the names of Samkhya, yoga, the Pancharatra, Vedas 
and Pasupati. 

The creator of the Samkhya yoga is the great Rishi Kapila. The 
primeval Hiranyagarbha is the promulgator of the yoga system. The Rishi 
Apantaratamas, also called Prachina-garbha, is said to be the teacher of the 
Vedas. 

The Pasupata doctrine was disseminated by the son of Brahma, the Lord 
of Uma, that master of all creatures, the always joyful Siva, otherwise 
known as Sreekantha. Narayana himself is the promulgator of the contents 
of the Pancharatra shastras. 

In all these, it is seen that Narayana is the sole subject of exposition. 
According to these shastras and the knowledge they contain, Narayana is 
the only object of worship. 

Those who are blinded by tamas, fail to understand that Narayana is the 
Paramatman who pervades the entire universe. Those wise men, the authors 
of the shastras, say that Narayana, who is a Rishi, is the one object of 


reverent worship in the universe. I say that there is no other being like him. 
The Supreme Deity, called Hari, lives in the hearts of those who, with the 
help of the scriptures and of inference, have succeeded in dispelling all 
doubts. 

Madhava never dwells in the hearts of those who doubt and dispute 
everything using false dialectics. They who are conversant with the 
Pancharatra shastras, who are duly observant of prescribed duties, and who 
are devoted to Narayana with their very souls, succeed in entering into 
Narayana. 

The Samkhya and the yoga systems are eternal. All the Vedas are 
eternal. All the Rishis have declared that this universe existing from ancient 
times is Narayana’s self. You must know that all actions, whether good or 
bad, are laid down in the Vedas and all events in heaven and earth, between 
the sky and the waters, are caused by and flow from that ancient Rishi 
Narayana.” 


CANTO 350 


J anamejaya said, “Regenerate one, are there many Purushas or is there 
only one? Who in the universe is the foremost of Purushas? What, 
again, is said to be the source of all things?” 

Vaisampayana said, “In the speculations of the Samkhya and the yoga 
systems many Purushas have been spoken of. Those that follow these 
systems do not accept that there is but one Purusha in the universe. In the 
same manner in which the many Purushas are said to have one origin in the 
Supreme Purusha, it may be said that this entire universe is identical with 
that one Purusha of superior attributes. 

I shall explain this now, after bowing to my guru Vyasa, who knows the 
Atman, who is observant of tapasya and self-restraint, and is worthy of 
reverence. Rajan, this speculation on Purusha occurs in all the Vedas. It is 
well known to be identical with Rita and Satya. Vyasa has reflected upon it. 

Many Rishis, descended from Kapila, have contemplated about, and 
commented on what is called Adhyatma. Through the grace of Vyasa, I will 
expound to you what Vyasa has said on this subject of the Oneness of 
Purusha. There is an ancient story of the discourse between Brahma and the 
three-eyed Mahadeva on this matter. 

In the midst of the ocean of milk, there is a lofty mountain of great 
golden radiance known as Vaijayanta. Going there alone, from his own 
abode of great splendour and felicity, Brahma would often spend his time 
contemplating the course of Adhyatma. 

While the four-faced Brahma was seated there, his son Mahadeva, who 
had sprung from his forehead, encountered him in course of his wanderings 


through the universe. While coursing through the sky, Mahayogi Siva saw 
Brahma seated on that mountain and descended on its peak. 

Joyfully he appeared before his Creator and worshipped his feet. 
Beholding Mahadeva prostrated at his feet, Brahma raised him up with his 
left hand. Having raised him up, Brahma, Lord of all creatures, on meeting 
his son after a long time, spoke to him. 

Brahma said, ‘Mahabaho, you are welcome. It is my good fortune to see 
you after such a long time. I hope, my son, that all is well and proper with 
your penances and Vedic studies and your japa. You always observe the 
most austere tapasya. So I ask you about their practice and wellbeing.’ 

Rudra said, “Through your grace, all is well with my penances and 
Vedic studies. All is also well with the universe. I saw you long ago in your 
own dwelling of felicity and effulgence. I am come from there to this 
mountain that is now your abode. 

I am curious about your withdrawal into such a solitary place from your 
usual realm of splendour. Great must the reason be, Pitamaha, for this. 

Your own foremost abode is free from the pains of hunger and thirst, 
and inhabited by both Devas and Asuras, by Rishis of immeasurable 
radiance, as also by Gandharvas and Apsaras. Abandoning such a place of 
felicity, you live alone on this best of mountains. The reason for this must 
be grave.’ 

Brahma said, “This foremost of mountains called Vaijayanta is always 
my dwelling. Here, with my mind concentrated in dhyana, I meditate on the 
one universal Purusha of infinite proportions.’ 

Rudra said, “You are Swayambhu, self-born. Many are the Purushas that 
have been created by you. More yet are still being created by you. The 
Infinite Purusha, of whom you speak, is one and single. Who is that 
Purusha, Brahma, on whom you meditate? I am greatly curious about this. I 
beg you, dispel my doubt.’ 

Brahma said, ‘Son, many are those Purushas of whom you speak. The 
one Purusha, of whom I am thinking, is hidden and transcends all other 
Purushas. That one Purusha is the foundation of the many Purushas that 
exist in the universe; and since that one Purusha is the source of all the 
countless Purushas, the rest, if they succeed in divesting themselves of 
gunas, succeed in entering into that one Purusha who is all the universe, 
who is supreme, who is eternal, and who is himself without and above all 
attributes.” 


CANTO 351 


¢ ‘RB rahma said, “Listen now to the description of that Purusha. He is 
eternal and immutable. He is undecaying and immeasurable. He 
pervades all things. 

That Purusha cannot be seen by you, or by me, or any other. Those who 
are filled with the understanding and the senses but lacking in self-restraint 
and tranquillity of soul cannot catch a glimpse him. The Supreme Purusha 
is said to be one that can be seen only with the help of gyana. 

Though without a form, he dwells in every body. Though he lives in 
bodies, he is never touched by the actions of men. He is my Antaratma, my 
inner soul. He is your inner soul. He is the all-seeing witness dwelling 
within every embodied creature and marks their deeds. No one can totally 
grasp him at any time. 

The universe is the crown of his head. The universe is his arms. The 
universe is his feet. The universe is his eyes. The universe is his nose. 
Alone he ranges freely through all kshetras without any restriction. 

Kshetra is another name for body. And because he knows all kshetras, 
as also all good and bad deeds, therefore he, who is the soul of yoga, is 
named Kshetrajna. No one can perceive how he enters into embodied 
creatures and how he leaves them. 

In accordance with the Samkhya shastra, with the help of yoga, duly 
observing its rules, I am engaged in meditating upon the origin of that 
Purusha, but, alas, I cannot comprehend that cause. According to the 
measure of my knowledge, I will discourse to you upon that eternal Purusha 
and his Oneness and supreme greatness. 


The learned speak of him as the singular Purusha. That one eternal 
Being deserves the name of Mahapurusha. Fire is an element, but it may be 
seen to blaze up in a thousand places under thousand different 
circumstances. The sun is one and single, but his rays spread over the 
universe. Penances are of diverse kinds, but they have one common origin 
from which they flow. 

The wind is one, but it blows in many forms in the world. The great 
ocean is the one parent of all the waters in the world seen in different 
circumstances. Nirguna, that one Purusha, is the universe displayed in 
infinite forms and ways. Flowing from him, the infinite universe enters into 
him again at the time of the pralaya. 

By casting off the consciousness of body and the senses, by casting off 
all acts good and bad, by casting off both truth and falsehood, one succeeds 
in ridding oneself of gunas. The person who realises that inconceivable 
Purusha and grasps his subtle existence in the four forms of Aniruddha, 
Pradyumna, Samkarshana and Vasudeva, and who, as a result of such 
understanding, attains perfect tranquillity of heart, succeeds in entering into 
and identifying himself with that one auspicious Purusha. 

Some wise men speak of him as the Paramatman. Others regard him as 
the one Soul. A third class of learned men describe him just as the Atman. 
The truth is that he who is the Supreme Soul is always nirguna, without 
attributes. He is Narayana. 

He is the universal soul, and he is the one Purusha. He is never affected 
by the fruits of actions even as the leaf of the lotus is never drenched by the 
water one may throw upon it. 

The Karmatman, the soul of actions, is different. That soul is sometimes 
engaged in karma and when it succeeds in discarding karma, attains mukti 
or union with the Paramatman. The soul of karma has seventeen attributes. 

Thus it is said that there are many kinds of Purushas in due order. In 
reality, however, there is but one Purusha. He is the abode of all the laws 
that govern the universe. He is the highest subject of knowledge. He is at 
once the knower and the object to be known. He is at once the thinker and 
the object of thought. He is the one that eats and the food that is eaten. 

He is the smeller and the scent that is smelled. He is at once he that 
touches and the object that is touched. He is the agent that sees and the 
object that is seen. He is the hearer and what is heard. He is the conceiver 


and that which is conceived. He possesses attributes and is also free from 
them; he is both saguna and nirguna. 

What has earlier been called Pradhana, and is the mother of the Mahat 
tattva, is no other than the effulgence of the Paramatman because he is 
eternal, without destruction, without end, and ever changeless. He it is who 
creates the prime ordinance in respect of Dhatri himself. 

Learned Brahmanas call him by the name Aniruddha. All karma, 
possessing excellent merits and fraught with blessings, flowing in the world 
from the Vedas, have been caused by him. All the Devas and all the Rishis, 
with tranquil souls, occupying their places on the vedi, honour him with the 
first share of their sacrificial offerings. 

I, Brahma, the primeval master of all creatures, was born from him, and 
you have been born from me. From me have flowed the universe with all its 
mobile and immobile creatures, and all the Vedas, with their mysteries. 
Divided into four parts, Aniruddha, Pradyumna, Samkarshana and 
Vasudeva, he sports as he pleases. That illustrious and divine Lord is 
awakened by his own knowledge. 

I have answered your questions, my son, according to the manner in 
which the matter is expounded in the doctrines of Samkhya and yoga.’” 


CANTO 352 


S auti said, ‘After Vaisampayana had explained to king Janamejaya the 

glory of Narayana, he began to discourse on another subject by 
narrating Yudhishtira’s question and the answer that Bhishma, who lay on 
his bed of arrows, gave in the presence of all the Pandavas and the Rishis, 
and also of Krishna himself. 

Vaisampayana said, “Yudhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha, you have discoursed 
to us on the duties pertaining to mukti dharma. Now tell us about the 
foremost duties of men belonging to the various asramas.’ 

Bhishma says, “The kartavyas or dharmas ordained for each asrama, if 
well performed, can lead to swarga and the high fruit of truth. Duties are 
like doors to yagnas, and none of their practices is futile. Bharatarishabha, 
one who adopts particular duties with dedication and reverence praises 
these to the exclusion of the rest. 

This is the very subject which, in ancient times, was the focus of the 
conversation between Devarishi Narada and Indra. Narada, revered by all 
the world, is a siddha, one whose sadhana has been met with fulfilment. He 
wanders through all the worlds without hindrance, like the all-pervading 
wind itself. 

Once upon a time he repaired to the abode of Indra. Duly honoured by 
the king of the Devas, he sat close to his host. Seeing him seated at his ease 
and free from fatigue, the Lord of Sachi addressed him, saying, “Maharishi, 
is there anything wonderful that you have beheld? Crowned with ascetic 
success, you roam through the universe of mobile and immobile objects, 
witnessing all things. There is nothing in the universe that is unknown to 


you. Do tell me, therefore, of any wonderful occurrence that you may have 
felt, seen or heard of.” 

Thus questioned, Narada began to recite to Indra the vast history that 
follows. Listen to me as I narrate that story which unfolded. I shall recount 
it in the same manner in which the Devarishi did, and for the same purpose 
that he had in mind.” 


CANTO 353 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘In the town of Mahapadma, situated on the 

southern side of the Ganga, there lived a Brahmana of 
concentrated Soul. Born into the Atri vamsa, he was blessed with an 
amiable nature. With his doubts dispelled by faith and contemplation, he 
was well conversant with the path he was to follow. 

Ever observant of his dharma, he had his anger under perfect control. 
Always content, he was a master of his senses. Devoted to tapasya and the 
study of the Vedas, he was respected by all good men. 

He earned wealth by righteous means and his conduct in all things was 
true to his varnasrama and svadharma. The family to which he belonged 
was large and celebrated. He had many kinsmen and relatives, and many 
wives and spouses. His behaviour was always respectable and faultless. 

Seeing that he had many children, the Brahmana undertook religious 
karmas on a large scale. His observances were in accordance with the 
customs of his own family. 

The Brahmana reflected that three kinds of duties have been laid down 
for observances. Firstly, there were the duties ordained in the Vedas with 
regard to one’s varna and asrama, namely that of a Brahmana observing the 
rules of grihasta. 

Secondly, there were the duties prescribed in the scriptures, namely in 
the Dharmashastras. And, thirdly, there were those duties that famed and 
revered men in earlier times had followed though these were not to be 
found in the Vedas or the Dharmashastras. 

Which of these duties should I follow? Which of them, if followed by 
me, are likely to lead to my benefit? Which, indeed, should be my refuge? 


Thoughts like these always troubled him. He could not resolve his doubts. 

While troubled with such reflections, another great Brahmana came to 
his house as a guest. The grihasta duly honoured his atithi according to the 
niyamas of worship laid down in the shastras. When his guest appeared 
refreshed and was seated at ease, the Brahmana addressed him in the 
following words. 

The Brahmana said, “Sinless one, I have become devoted to you 
because of your agreeable conversation. You have become my friend. 
Listen to me, for I want to ask something. After handing over the duties of a 
householder to my son, I wish to discharge the highest purushartha of man. 
What, O Dvija, should be my path? 

Relying upon the Jivatman, I wish to live in the one Paramatman. Alas, 
bound to the ties of attachment, I do not have the will to actually set myself 
to accomplish that task. And since the best part of my life has passed away 
in the duties of a grihasta, I now want to devote the rest of my life to 
acquiring the means to meet the expenses of my future journey. 

I desire to cross samsara, the illusory ocean of life. Where will I find the 
raft of dharma to realise my purpose? I hear that even the Devas must 
endure the fruits of their actions; beholding the rows of Yama’s standards 
and flags floating over the heads of all creatures, my heart fails to derive 
pleasure from the diverse sensual objects with which it comes into contact. 

I do not respect the dharma of the Yatis as they, too, depend upon alms 
for their sustenance. My revered guest, you who are endowed with 
intelligence and reason, set me on the right path of kartavya and karma!” 

Bhishma continues, “The wise guest, hearing his host’s righteous words, 
said these sweet words in a melodious voice. 

The guest said, “I, too, am puzzled about this subject. The same thought 
occupies my mind and I am unable to arrive at any definite conclusions. 
Swarga has many doors. 

There are some that commend mukti. Some praise the fruits attained by 
tapasya. Some take refuge in sannyasa way of life. Some follow 
grihastasrama. 

Some rely upon the punya attained by an observance of Kshatriya 
dharma. Some rely upon the fruits of self-restraint. Some believe that the 
merits of dutiful obedience to gurus and elders are efficacious. 

Some undertake to restrain their speech. Some have attained felicity by 
waiting dutifully upon their departed ancestors. Some have risen to swarga 


by practising compassion, and some by practising truth. 

Some rush into battle and, after laying down their lives, attain heaven. 
Some attain it by practising the Unccha vrata. Some have devoted 
themselves to the study of the Vedas. These men, of intelligence and 
tranquil souls, having subdued their senses, attain swarga. 

Others characterised by simplicity and truth have been slain by evil 
men. These have become honoured inhabitants of heaven. In this world, it is 
seen, that men attain swarga passing through a thousand doors of dharma, 
all standing wide open. My understanding has been troubled by your 
question, like a soft cloud by the wind.””’” 


CANTO 354 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘The guest continued, “For all that, Brahmana, I 

will duly instruct you. Listen to me as I recite what I have heard 

from my guru. In the Naimisa forest situated on the banks of the Gomati, 

where the wheel of dharma was set in motion during a former age of 

creation, there is a city named after the Nagas. There, in ancient times, the 

assembled Devas had performed a mahayagna. There Mandhatri, the 
foremost of earthly kings, defeated Indra, the king of the gods. 

In that city lives a mighty Naga. He is known by the name of 
Padmanabha or Padma. Walking in the triple path of karma, gyana and 
bhakti, he gratifies all creatures in thought, word and deed. Reflecting upon 
all things with great attention, he protects the good and punishes the 
evildoer with the fourfold system of conciliation, provoking dissensions, 
giving gifts or bribes, and using force. 

Go there and ask him all the questions you want. He will show you 
what is truly the highest dharma. That Naga is welcoming towards all 
guests. 

He is wise and knows the shastras. He has all the desirable virtues not to 
be seen in any other. By nature he is always observant of those duties which 
are performed with or in water. 

He is devoted to the study of the Vedas. He is marked by penances and 
self-restraint. He has great wealth. He performs yagnas and offers dakshina, 
abstains from inflicting injury and practises forgiveness. His conduct in all 
respects is exemplary. Truthful in speech and free from malice, his 
behaviour is righteous and his senses are under control. He eats only after 
feeding all his guests and attendants. 


He is kind of speech. He has knowledge of what is beneficial, and what 
is simple and right and what is censurable. He takes stock of what he does 
and what he leaves undone. He never acts with hostility towards anyone. He 
is always engaged in doing what is beneficial to all creatures. He belongs to 
a family that is as pure as the water of a lake in the midst of the Ganges.””” 


CANTO 355 


“BR hishma continues, ‘The host replied, “I hear your comforting 

words with as much gratification as a heavily burdened man feels 
when his load is taken from his head or shoulders. I am filled with the 
delight that a traveller who has made a long journey on foot feels when he 
at last lies down on a bed, that which a man feels when he finds a seat after 
having stood for a long time, or that which is felt by one who is thirsty 
when he finds cold water to drink. 

On hearing your words, I am suffused with the pleasure felt by a hungry 
man when he finds tasty food set before him, or that which a guest feels 
when satisfying food is placed before him at the proper time, or that felt by 
an old man when he gets a long coveted son, or that which is experienced 
by one when meeting a dear friend or kinsman about whom one has been 
anxious. 

Like one with upturned gaze I have heard what has fallen from your lips 
and am reflecting upon their significance. With your wise words you have 
truly instructed me. Yes, I shall do what you have commanded me to. 

You may leave tomorrow at dawn, after passing the night happily with 
me and dispelling your fatigue by resting. Behold, the rays of the divine 
Surya have been dimmed and he is setting.” 

“Bhishma continues, “Hospitably waited upon by that Brahmana, the 
learned guest passed that night in the company of his host. Both talked 
cheerfully with each other on the subject of the sannyasa dharma. So 
engrossing was the nature of their conversation that the night passed 
swiftly. 


When morning came, the guest was worshipped with due rites by the 
Brahmana whose heart was now set upon the accomplishment of what 
would be beneficial for him, according to the discourse of the guest. The 
righteous Brahmana, resolved to achieve his purpose, took leave of his 
kinsmen, and soon set out for the abode of that foremost of Nagas, with his 
mind steadily directed towards it.’” 


CANTO 356 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, “Passing through enchanted forests, lakes and 

sacred pools, the Brahmana at last arrived at the asrama of a 
certain sannyasi. On arriving there, he asked the ascetic, in fitting manner, 
about the Naga of whom he had heard from his guest, and instructed by him 
he continued on his journey. Focused upon his purpose, the Brahmana 
arrived at the dwelling of the Naga. 

Entering, he announced himself, saying, “Ho! Who is within? I am a 
Brahmana, come here as a guest.” 

Hearing him, the virtuous wife of the Naga, of great beauty and devoted 
to the observance of every dharma, came out. Attentive to the duties of 
hospitality, she welcomed and revered her guest, and said, ‘What can I do 
for you?’ 

The Brahmana said, ‘I am sufficiently honoured by your gentle words. 
My weariness has also been dispelled. O blessed devi, I wish to see your 
husband. This is my goal and the one object of my desire. It is for this that I 
have come today to the abode of the Naga.’ 

The wife of the Naga said, ‘Revered one, my husband has gone to draw 
Surya’s chariot for a month. Learned Brahmana, he will be back in fifteen 
days, and will meet you then. I have now told you the reason of my 
husband’s absence. What else can I do for you? Tell me.’ 

The Brahmana said, ‘I have come here to see your husband. I will 
remain in the nearby forest and await his return. When he comes home, 
kindly tell him that I have arrived in this place driven by the fervent desire 
to meet him. 


You should also inform me of his return. Devi, until then, I will dwell 
on the banks of the Gomati, waiting for his return and living upon frugal 
fare.’ 

Having said this repeatedly to the wife of the Naga that Brahmana went 
to the riverbank to live there until the Naga’s return.’” 


CANTO 357 


¢ ‘RB hishma continues, “The Nagas of that city were distressed when 

they saw that Brahmana, devoted to tapasya, continued to live in 

the forest, entirely abstaining from food, as he waited for the return of the 

Naga lord. All the kinsmen and relatives of the great Naga, including his 
brother, children and wife, came together to the Brahmana. 

Reaching the banks of the Gomati, they saw him seated in solitude, not 
eating but engaged in observing vratas and silently reciting certain mantras. 
Approaching, the Naga’s kinsmen and family revered him, and then spoke 
to him words of simple sincerity. 

“O Tapodhana, this is the sixth day since your arrival here but you have 
not said a word about your food. You are devoted to righteousness. You 
have come among us. We are here in attendance upon you. It is vital that we 
should fulfil our duties of hospitality towards you. 

We are all kinsmen of our Naga lord whom you wish to see. Roots or 
fruits, leaves, or water, or rice or meat, you must partake of some food. By 
your living in this forest and completely abstaining from food, the entire 
community of Nagas, young and old, does suffer, since this your fast 
implies negligence on our part to discharge the duties of hospitality and we 
do not know the reason for it 

None amongst us has been guilty of killing a Brahmana. None of us has 
ever lost a son immediately after birth. No one has been born in our vamsa 
that has eaten before serving the Devas or atithis or kinsmen coming to his 
house.” 

The Brahmana said, “I will break my fast for your entreaties. I will wait 
eight more days for the lord of the Nagas to return. If he does not come 


back with the passing of the eighth night, I will break this fast by eating. 
This vow of abstaining from all food that I am observing is on account of 
my high regard for the Naga lord. 

You should not grieve for what I am doing. Return to your homes. This 
my vrata is on his account. You should not do anything to mar it.” 

Thus addressed, the assembled Nagas were dismissed by the Brahmana, 
and they returned to their homes.’” 


CANTO 358 


66 B hishma says, ‘Upon the expiry of full fifteen days, the Naga Lord 

Padmanabha, having finished his task of drawing Surya’s chariot 

and taking the sun god’s leave, returned home. His wife washed his feet and 
dutifully discharged other tasks of a similar nature. 

She then took her seat by his side. The Naga, refreshed and rested, 
addressed his wife, saying, “During my absence I trust that you have not 
been unmindful of worshipping the Devas and atithis in keeping with the 
instructions I gave you, and according to the laws laid down in the shastras. 

I hope that during my absence, without yielding to your impure Buddhi, 
you have been firm in the observance of the duties of hospitality. I trust you 
have not transgressed the boundaries of karma and dharma.” 

The wife of the Naga said, “The duty of sishyas is to wait with 
reverence upon their guru doing his bidding; that of Brahmanas is to study 
and memorise the Vedas; that of servants is to obey the commands of their 
masters; that of the king is to protect his people by defending the good and 
punishing the evil. 

It is said that Kshatriya dharma includes the protection of all creatures 
from wrong and oppression. The duty of the Sudra is to serve with humility 
persons of the three higher varnas, Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and Vaisyas. 

The dharma of the householder, O my Lord of the Nagas, consists in 
doing good to all creatures. Frugality of fare and observance of vows in due 
order constitute punya for men of all classes, because of the connection that 
exists between the senses and the duties of religion. 

Who am I? From where have I come? What are others to me and what 
am I to others? These are the thoughts to which the mind should ever be 


directed by him who leads a life which leads to mukti. 

Chastity and obedience to the husband constitute the highest dharma of 
the wife. I have learnt this well through your teaching. I am fully conversant 
with my kartavya. 

I have you, who are devoted to righteousness, for a husband; why then 
will I, swerving from the path of duty, walk on the path of disobedience and 
sin? During your absence from home, I have continued to worship the 
Devas. I have also, without the slightest negligence, attended to the duties 
of hospitality towards those who arrived as guests in your home. 

Fifteen days ago a Brahmana has arrived here. He has not disclosed his 
purpose to me. He desires to speak with you. Dwelling on the banks of the 
Gomati he anxiously awaits your return. Of firm vows, that Brahmana sits 
there, engaged in chanting the Vedas. 

Lord of the Nagas, I have given him my word that I will send you to 
him as soon as you return. Having heard what I have said, it is fitting for 
you to go to him. You who hear with your eyes, you must grant that Dvija 
whatever has brought him here!”’’” 


CANTO 359 


¢ ‘RB hishma continues, ‘The Naga said, “O you of delightful smiles, 

what have you taken that Brahmana for? Is he really a human 
being or is he some god that has come here in the guise of a Brahmana? 
Who is there among humans that would want to see me and be fit to meet 
me? 

Can a Manava who wishes to see me dare leave a command with you to 
send me to him? Among the Devas and Asuras and Devarishis, the Nagas 
are endowed with great tejas. 

Nagas are swift and fragrant. They deserve to be revered for they can 
grant boons. Indeed, we too, are worthy of our followers. We cannot be 
seen by men.” 

The wife said, “Judging by his simplicity and openness I know that this 
Brahmana is not any Deva who lives on air. I also know that he reveres you 
with all his heart. His heart is set upon the accomplishment of some goal 
that depends on your help. 

As the chataka waits eagerly for rain to quench its thirst, even so does 
that Brahmana keenly wait to meet you. Let no misfortune befall him on 
account of his failure to see you. No one born into an honourable family as 
you are can be considered worthy of honour if he neglects a guest arrived at 
his house. 

Discard that anger that is so innate in you and go and meet the 
Brahmana. It befits you not to be consumed by sin through disappointing 
the Dvija. By refusing to wipe the tears of one who has come to him with 
hopes of succour, even a king incurs the sin of foeticide. 


By abstaining from speech one attains wisdom. By giving generous 
dakshina one acquires great fame. By being truthful in speech, one acquires 
the gift of eloquence and is honoured in swarga. By giving away land one 
attains to that high end which is ordained for Rishis living in sannyasa. 

By earning wealth through righteous means one attains many desirable 
rewards. By doing what is beneficial to oneself, one avoids going to naraka. 
That is what the wise say.” 

The Naga said, “I had no arrogance caused by conceit. However, 
because of my birth, my arrogance was once great but no more. Of wrath 
born of desire, I have none. It has all been destroyed by the fire of your 
profound instructions. 

I do not consider any darkness to be more impenetrable than anger. As 
the Nagas have a surfeit of anger, they have become objects of reproach 
with all men. By succumbing to the influence of wrath, the ten-headed 
Ravana became the rival of Sakra, and for that reason was killed by Rama 
in battle. 

Hearing that Rama of Bhrigu’s vamsa had entered the inner rooms of 
their palace to take away their father’s calf of the Homa cow, the sons of 
Kartavirya yielding to anger deeming it an insult to their royal house, and 
they met with destruction at the hands of Rama. Indeed, Kartavirya, who 
was like the thousand-eyed Indra himself, was slain in battle by Rama of 
Jamadagni’s vamsa because he yielded to anger. 

And so, my beloved wife, I have heeded your words and have curbed 
my fury, that enemy of tapasya that destroys all that is good. I am fortunate 
to have you for my wife, you who possess every virtue and have 
inexhaustible merits. 

I will go at once to the Brahmana. I will address him in a respectful 
manner and he will leave only when his wishes have been fulfilled.’”’” 


CANTO 360 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘Having said these words to his wife, the lord of the 

Nagas went to that place where the Brahmana sat awaiting him. 

As he went, the Naga thought of the Brahmana and wondered about what 
had brought him to the Naga city. 

When he arrived in the Brahmana’s presence, that righteous Naga 
addressed his guest in sweet words, “O Brahmana, do not be angry for I 
come to you in peace. What has brought you here? What is your purpose? 
Dvijottama, whom do you worship in this secluded place on the banks of 
the Gomati?” 

The Brahmana said, “Know that my name is Dharmaranya, and that I 
have come here to see the Naga Padmanabha. I have some work with him. I 
have heard that he is not at home and so I sit here waiting for him to return. 

Like a chataka waiting in expectation of the clouds, I am waiting for 
him whom I esteem highly. To dispel all evil from him and bring about 
what is beneficial to him, I am engaged in reciting the Vedas until he comes, 
and I am engaged in yoga and pass my time blissfully.” 

The Naga said, “Your behaviour is upright. You are pious and devoted 
to the good of all righteous persons. Blessed Brahmana, every praise is due 
to you. 

You behold the Naga with a loving gaze. Learned Rishi, I am that Naga 
whom you seek. Command me as you wish, tell me what is agreeable to 
you and what I can do for you. Having heard from my wife that you are 
here, I have come to meet you. 

You have come here, and you are certain to return with your desire 
fulfilled. Use me for any task with full confidence. We are all in your 


service on account of your punya, for you have disregarded your own good 
and have spent your time in seeking our welfare.” 

The Brahmana said, “Most blessed Naga, I have come here driven by 
the desire to see you. I am ignorant, and I have come here to ask you 
something. I wish to attain to the Paramatman, the Supreme Soul that is the 
end of the Jivatman. I am neither attached to nor detached from samsara. 

You shine with the effulgence of your punya with a radiance that is as 
enchanting as the moon’s. You who live on air alone, first answer this 
question of mine. Afterwards, I will reveal to you the object of my visit!””” 


CANTO 361 


¢ ‘RB hishma continues, “The Brahmana said, “You have been away to 

draw the single-wheeled chariot of Surya. Describe to me 

anything wonderful that you may have seen in those realms through which 
you journeyed.” 

The Naga said, “The divine Surya is the refuge of innumerable 
wonders. All the creatures that inhabit the three worlds have flowed from 
him. Countless Munis crowned with ascetic success, together with all the 
Devas, dwell in the rays of Surya like birds perching on the branches of 
trees. 

What, again, can be more wonderful than this that the mighty Vayu, 
issuing from Surya, takes refuge in his rays and courses over the universe? 
What can be more wonderful than this that Surya, dividing Vayu into many 
parts to do good to all creatures, creates the rain that falls in the monsoon? 

What can be more wonderful than this that the Paramatman, himself 
bathed in blazing effulgence, looks out upon the universe from within the 
solar orb? What can be more wonderful than this that Surya has a dark ray 
which transforms itself into clouds charged with rain and pours down that 
rain when the season comes? 

What can be more wonderful than this that after absorbing water for 
eight months, he pours it down once again in the monsoon? The soul of the 
universe is said to dwell in certain rays of Surya. From him comes the seed 
of all things, and it is he that upholds the earth with all her mobile and 
immobile creatures. 

Brahmana, what can be more wonderful than this that the foremost of 
Purushas, eternal, powerful and effulgent, and without beginning and 


without end, dwells in Surya? Listen to one more thing that I will now tell 
you. It is the most marvellous wonder. I have seen it in the clear sky, from 
having been close to Surya. 

One day, at the hour of noon, while Surya was shining in all his glory 
and emanating heat we saw a Being come towards him, who seemed to 
shine with a brilliance equal to that of Surya himself. Causing all the worlds 
to blaze up with his glory and filling them with his energy, he came towards 
Surya, rending the sky, as it were, to make his path through it. 

The rays of his body seemed to resemble the blazing radiance of 
libations of ghee poured into the sacrificial fire. His splendour did not allow 
anyone to look directly at him. His form was indescribable. Indeed, he did 
appear to us to be a second Surya. 

As soon as he was near, Surya extended his two hands receiving him 
respectfully. To honour Surya in return, he also extended his right hand. 
Piercing through the sky, he entered into Surya’s disc. Merging with Surya’s 
energy, he seemed to be transformed into Surya’s self. 

When the two blinding energies thus united, we were so bewildered that 
we could not distinguish between them. We could not make out who was 
Surya we bore on his chariot, and who was the Being we had seen coming 
through the sky. Confused, we addressed Surya, saying, ‘Illustrious One, 
who is this Being that has united himself with you and has been 
transformed into your second self?’”’” 


CANTO 362 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘The Naga continued, “Surya said, ‘This Being is 

not Agni, and he is not an Asura. Nor is he a Naga. He is a 

Brahmana who has attained swarga because he has succeeded in observing 
the Unccha vrata. 

This person had lived only upon fruits and roots and the fallen leaves of 
trees. He sometimes subsisted upon water, and sometimes upon air alone, 
passing his days in dhyana. Siva Mahadeva was gratified by his constant 
recitation of the Samhitas. 

He had tried to accomplish those deeds that lead to heaven and bliss. 
Through their punya he has now attained swarga. Without wealth and 
without any desire, he kept the Unccha vrata to sustain himself. This 
learned Brahmana had been devoted to the good of all creatures. 

Neither Devas nor Gandharvas, neither Asuras nor Nagas can be 
regarded as superior to those creatures that are merged into Surya. Such was 
the most wondrous incident I saw on high. That Brahmana, who was 
crowned with success by the observance of the Unccha vrata, continues, 
even to this day, to circle the earth, remaining within the body of the 
incandescent Surya Deva!’’”” 


CANTO 363 


“°R hishma continues, “The Brahmana said, “Naga, this is indeed 

marvellous and I am gratified by listening to you. With your 
words, subtle in their meaning, you have shown me the way I must follow. I 
wish to leave now; remember me occasionally and enquire after me by 
sending your servant.” 

The Naga said, “You have not yet revealed to me the reason that 
brought you here. Where will you go? Tell me, Dvija, what I can do for 
you, and what is it that brought you here? 

After you have accomplished your task, whatever it may be, revealed or 
hidden in speech, you may take my leave, and I will let you go cheerfully. 
You have conceived a friendship for me. 

O Rishi, sitting under the shade of this tree, do not leave so soon after 
merely seeing me. Certainly, you have become dear to me and I to you. All 
the inhabitants of this city are yours. What objection could you have to 
passing some time in my home?” 

The Brahmana said, “You are wise, Naga, and have acquired a 
knowledge of the Atman. It is true that the Devas are not superior to you in 
any respect. He that is you is also me, as he that is me is truly you. You, I 
and all other creatures will all have to enter into the Paramatman. 

Doubt had seized my mind, king of Nagas, with regard to the best 
means to win punya. What you said has dispelled that doubt, for I have 
learnt the value of the Unccha vrata. I will now practise that most 
efficacious vow and attain to my goal. 

I am certain of this now and I take your leave. Blessings be upon you. O 
Naga, my objective has been achieved.” 


CANTO 364 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, “Having saluted that foremost of Nagas, and having 

firmly resolved to follow the Unccha way of life, Dharmaranya 

went to Chyavana of Bhrigu’s vamsa, to seek formal instruction and to be 

initiated in that lofty and recondite vrata. Chyavana performed the samskara 

rites of the Brahmana and formally initiated him into the Unccha way of 
life. 

Rajan, the son of Bhrigu recited this history to King Janaka in his 
palace. King Janaka, in his turn, narrated it to Devarishi Narada. Finding 
himself in the palace of Indra one day, Narada instructed Indra in this 
itihasa upon being asked by him. 

Indra, having obtained it from Narada, recited this blessed history to an 
assembly of all the foremost Brahmanas. When I encountered Rama of 
Bhrigu’s vamsa on Kurukshetra, the celestial Vasus narrated it to me. 

Since you asked me, I have recited this history that is sacred and filled 
with great merit. You asked me what constitutes the highest dharma, Rajan. 
This itihasa is my answer to your question. 

A brave man he was that practised the Unccha vrata in this way, without 
expectation of any reward. Instructed by Padmanabha, the Naga king about 
his dharma, that Brahmana Dharmaranya began the practice of Yama and 
Niyama; he lived only on such food as was allowed by the Unccha vow, and 
went away to another forest.’” 


PART I 
Anusasana Parva 


CANTO 1 


A UM! HAVING BOWED down to Narayana, and Nara the most 
exalted of Purushas, and also the Devi Saraswati, I invoke the spirit 
of Jaya! 

Vaisampayana said, “Yudhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha, serenity is said to be 
subtle and of diverse forms. Despite listening to all your discourses, I have 
not achieved this tranquillity. You have spoken of many ways of stilling the 
mind, but how can actual peace of mind be had from mere knowledge of the 
various kinds of peace, when I myself am the means of realising this? 

Seeing your body covered with arrows and festering with wounds, I 
cannot find any peace at the thought of the evil I have brought about. Great 
Kshatriya, seeing your body drenched in blood, like a mountain overrun 
with water from its springs, I suffer like a lotus in the rains. 

What can be more agonising than this, that you, O Pitamaha, have been 
reduced to this plight because of me and my allies fighting our enemies on 
this Kurukshetra? Other princes also, with their sons and kinsmen, have 
been destroyed on my account. What can be more painful than this! 

Pitamaha, tell us what is our destiny and that of the sons of 
Dhritarashtra, who, driven by fate and anger, have acted in this terrible 
manner? Master of men, I think Duryodhana fortunate that he does not see 
you like this. But I, who am the cause of your death as well as of that of our 
friends, am denied all peace of mind seeing you fallen on the bare earth in 
this wretched condition. 

Evil Duryodhana, the most infamous of his vamsa, with all his forces 
and his brothers, has perished in battle, observing his Kshatriya dharma. 
That malevolent one does not see you lying on your cruel bed. And for this 


I regard death as being preferable to life. Virtuous Kshatriya, if only I along 
with my brothers had been killed by our enemies on Kurukshetra, I would 
not see you like this, fallen and pierced with arrows. Surely, we were born 
to become perpetrators of evil deeds. Pitamaha, if your wish me well, 
instruct me so that my sins may be washed away at least in the next world.’ 

Bhishma replies, ‘Fortunate one, why do you consider your Soul, which 
is dependent on God and destiny and time, to be the cause of your actions? 
Its inaction is subtle and imperceptible to the senses. Listen, in this regard 
to the ancient story of the conversation between Mrityu and Gautami with 
Kaala and the hunter and the serpent. 

There was once an old woman called Gautami who was patient and 
tranquil. One day she found her son lying dead having been bitten by a 
snake. An angry hunter, Arjunaka, bound the snake with a rope and brought 
it before Gautami. 

He said to her, “This wretched serpent caused your son’s death. Tell me 
quickly how I should killed it. Shall I throw it into the fire or hack it into 
pieces? This killer of a child does not deserve to live.” 

Gautami replied, “Arjunaka of little understanding, release this serpent. 
It does not deserve death at your hands. Who is so foolish as to ignore 
inevitable destiny and burden himself with such folly to sink into sin? 

Those who are virtuous manage to cross samsara as a ship crosses the 
ocean. But those who make themselves heavy with sin sink to the bottom, 
like an arrow shot into the water. 

By killing the serpent, my son will not be restored to life, and by letting 
it live, no harm will come to you. Who would go to the realm of Yama by 
killing this living creature?” 

The hunter said, “I know you know the difference between right and 
wrong, and that the great suffer the pain of all creatures. But these your 
words are filled with instruction for only a serene person and not for one 
plunged into sorrow. Therefore, I must kill this snake. 

Those who value peace of mind assign the cause of everything to the 
passage of Kaala, but practical men assuage their grief with revenge. 
Through constant delusion, men fear the loss of grace in the next world for 
acts like these. Allay your grief by allowing me to kill this serpent.” 

Gautami replied, “People like us are never afflicted by such misfortune. 
Good men are always intent on virtue. The death of the boy was 
predestined; I cannot approve of your killing this snake. Brahmanas do not 


harbour resentment, because resentment leads to pain. Good hunter, forgive 
this serpent and release him out of compassion.” 

The hunter replied, “Let us earn great and inexhaustible punya hereafter 
by killing this creature, even as a man acquires great merit, and also confers 
it on his victim sacrificed upon the vedi. Punya is acquired by killing an 
enemy: by killing this despicable creature, you will acquire true merit in the 
hereafter.” 

Gautami replied, “What good is there in tormenting and killing an 
enemy, and what good is won by not releasing an enemy in our power? You 
of benign countenance, why should we not forgive this serpent and try to 
earn punya by releasing it?” 

The hunter replied, “Many creatures ought to be protected from the evil 
of this one, instead of this single creature being spared. Virtuous men 
abandon the vicious to their doom; therefore, kill this evil snake.” 

Gautami replied, “By killing this serpent my son will not be restored to 
life, nor do I see that any other end will be attained by its death. Hunter, 
release this living creature.” 

The hunter said, “By killing Vritra, Indra secured the best part of the 
havis, and by destroying a yagna Siva secured his share of sacrificial 
offerings. You must destroy this snake immediately without any 
misgivings!” 

Bhishma continues, ‘Though repeatedly incited by the hunter to kill the 
snake, Gautami was not swayed to that sin. Bound with the rope, the 
serpent wriggled and groaned in pain but then, finding its composure spoke 
slowly in a human voice. 

The serpent said, “O foolish Arjunaka, what fault is mine? I have no 
independent will of my own. Mrityu sent me for this task. Directed by him I 
bit this child, not out of any anger or choice on my part. If there be any sin 
in this, it is Mrityu’s.” 

The hunter said, “If you have been led by another to do this evil deed, 
the sin is yours also for you are the instrument in the act. As in the making 
of an earthen vessel the potter’s wheel and axle are regarded as causes, so 
are you the cause that has produced this effect. He that is guilty deserves 
death at my hands. Serpent, you are guilty. Indeed, you have yourself 
confessed to it!” 

The serpent said, “As all these, the potter’s wheel and rod are not 
independent causes, even so I am not an independent cause. Therefore, you 


should concede that this is no fault of mine. If you think otherwise, then 
these are to be considered as causes working in unison with one another. 

Working with one other, a doubt arises regarding their relation as cause 
and effect. This being the case, it is no fault of mine, nor do I deserve death 
on this account, nor am I guilty of any sin. Or, if you think that even in such 
causation there is sin, the sin lies in the aggregate of causes.” 

The hunter said, “Even if you are neither the prime cause nor the agent 
in this matter, you are still the cause of this child’s death. And so you do 
deserve death. If you think that when an evil deed is done, the doer is not 
implicated in it, then there can be no cause in this matter; but having done 
this, you certainly deserve to die. What else do you think?” 

The serpent said, “Whether any cause exists or not, no effect is 
produced without an intermediate act. Therefore, causation being of no 
moment in either case, only my agency as the cause ought to be considered 
in its proper context. If you truly think me to be the cause, then the guilt of 
this act of killing a living being rests on the shoulders of another who 
incited me.” 

The hunter said, “Wretch, you do not deserve to live; why do you rant 
so much? You deserve death at my hands. You have done a terrible thing by 
killing this child.” 

The serpent said, “Hunter, as the Brahmanas presiding at a yagna do not 
acquire the merit of their actions by making offerings of ghee into the fire, 
so should I be viewed with regard to the outcome in this matter.” 

Bhishma continues, “After this, Mrityu, who had sent the snake, himself 
appeared there and spoke to the creature. 

Mrityu said, “Guided by Kaala, O serpent, I sent you to this task, but 
neither you nor I is the cause of this child’s death. As the clouds are tossed 
in all directions by the wind, I, like the clouds, am influenced by Kaala. All 
deeds pertaining to sattva, rajas or tamas are goaded by Kaala, in all 
creatures. 

All creatures, mobile and immobile, in heaven and on earth, are 
influenced by Kaala. The whole universe is imbued with this influence of 
time. All actions in this world and all abstentions, as also all their 
modifications, are provoked by Kaala. 

Surya, Soma, Vishnu, Jala, Vayu, Agni, Varuna, Bhumi, Mitra and 
Parjanya, Aditi and the Vasus, rivers and oceans, all existent and non- 
existent objects, are created and destroyed by Kaala. Knowing this, why do 


you, O serpent, consider me to be guilty? If any fault attaches to me, then 
you, too, are to be blamed.” 

The serpent said, “Mrityu, I do not blame you, nor do I absolve you 
from all blame. I only insist that I am directed and influenced by you in my 
actions. If any blame attaches to Kaala, or it does not, is not for me to 
decide. We have no right to do so. Just as I want to absolve myself of this 
charge, so is it my duty to see that no blame attaches to Mrityu.” 

The serpent then said to Arjunaka, “You have listened to what Mrityu 
has said. Since I am innocent it is not right that you bind me with this rope 
and torment me.” The hunter said, “I have listened to you and to Mrityu, but 
these words, serpent, do not absolve you from all blame. Mrityu and you 
are the causes of the child’s death. I consider both of you to be the cause 
and you truly are that cause. Cursed be the evil and vengeful Mrityu that 
brings affliction to the innocent and the good. And you who are guilty of 
sinful deeds, I shall kill you too!” 

Mrityu said, “We are both not free agents, but are dependent on Kaala, 
and ordained to do our appointed work. If you think carefully about this, 
you will not find fault with us.” 

The hunter said, “If both Mrityu and you are dependent on Kaala, I am 
curious to know how pleasure, arising from doing good, and anger, arising 
from doing evil, are caused.” 

Mrityu said, “Everything is done under the influence of Kaala. Kaala is 
the cause of all, and that for this reason we both, acting under Kaala’s 
command, do our appointed work; hence we do not deserve to be censured 
by you in any way!” 

Bhishma continues, “Then Kaala arrived at that place where the serpent 
and Mrityu and Arjunaka were disputing this point of dharma and spoke to 
them. 

Kaala said, “Hunter, neither Mrityu nor this serpent nor I are guilty of 
the death of any creature. We are merely the immediate causes of the event. 
Arjunaka, the karma of this very child is the existing cause of our action. 
There is no other cause of this child’s death. It was killed as a result of its 
own karma. 

It has met with death as the result of its karma of the past. Its own 
karma has been the cause of its dying. We all are subject to the influence of 
our respective karma. Karma is a means to salvation even as sons are, and 


karma also is an indicator of virtue and vice in man. We incite one another 
even as acts provoke one another. 

As men make what they wish from a lump of clay, even so do they 
achieve the results determined by karma. As light and shadow are related to 
each other, so are men related to karma through their own actions. 
Therefore, neither you nor I, neither Mrityu nor the serpent, nor this old 
Brahmana woman is the cause of this child’s death. He himself is the 
cause.” 

When Kaala expounded the matter in this way, Gautami, convinced that 
men suffer according to their deeds, said to Arjunaka, “Neither Kaala nor 
Mrityu, nor the serpent is the cause. This child met with death as the result 
of its own karma. That my son has died is also the consequence of my past 
actions. Let Kaala and Mrityu now leave this place, and Arjunaka, you must 
release this snake.””’ 

Bhishma continues, “Then Kaala and Mrityu and the serpent went back 
to their respective abodes, and Gautami and the hunter were pacified. Rajan, 
having heard this, put aside all grief, and find peace of mind. 

Men attain swarga or naraka as the result of their own karma. This evil 
is neither your creation nor Duryodhana’s. Know this that these lords of 
earth have all been slain in this war as a result of the actions of Kaala.’” 

Vaisampayana said, “Having heard all this, Yudhishtira was appeased, 
and asks his next question.” 


CANTO 2 


¢ Ne udhishtira says, ‘Wisest Pitamaha, you are learned in all the 

shastras, and I have listened to this mahakatha. I want now to 
hear some story full of religious instruction, and you must satisfy my 
craving. Tell me if any grihasta has ever succeeded in conquering Mrityu 
through the practice of dharma.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘This ancient story is told to illustrate the subject of a 
grihasta’s victory over Mrityu through the practice of virtue. Prajapati Manu 
had a son called Ikshvaku. Illustrious as Surya, a hundred sons were born to 
him. 

His tenth son was named Dasaswa, and this virtuous prince of infallible 
prowess became the king of Mahismati. Dasaswa’s son was a righteous 
ruler who was devoted to the practice of truth, devotion and benevolence. 
He was known as Madiraswa and ruled over the earth as her lord. He was 
devoted to the study of the Vedas and of the science of arms. Madiraswa’s 
son was King Dyutimat who had great fortune and power, strength and 
energy. Dyutimat’s son was the devout and pious king famed in all the 
worlds as Suvira. His soul was dedicated to dharma and he possessed 
wealth like another Indra. 

Suvira, too, had a son who was invincible in battle; known by the name 
Sudurjaya, he was the best of all warriors. And Durjaya, too, possessed of a 
body like that of Indra, and had a son who radiated the splendour of Agni. 
He was the great King Duryodhana who was among the foremost of royal 
sages. Indra would send down timely and ample rain into the kingdom of 
this king who was brave and heroic as Vasava himself. 


His cities and all his lands overflowed with wealth and jewels, and cows 
and grain. There was no miser in his kingdom nor any person afflicted by 
suffering or poverty. Nor was there in his kingdom any person who had a 
weak or sickly body. 

Duryodhana was intelligent and skilled, eloquent in speech, without 
envy, a master of his passions, of a righteous soul, full of compassion, and 
humble. He performed sacrifices, and was self-restrained, devoted to 
Brahmanas and truth. He never humiliated others, was charitable, and 
learned in the Vedas and the Vedanta. 

The celestial river Narmada, auspicious and sacred and of cool waters 
came embodied and courted him. She gave birth to a lotus-eyed daughter 
named Sudarsana. Yudhishtira, no woman had ever borne such a beautiful 
child as the daughter of Duryodhana. 

Agni himself courted the exquisite princess Sudarsana, and coming as a 
Brahmana, sought her hand from the king. The king was unwilling to give 
his daughter in marriage to the Brahmana, who was poor and not of the 
same status as himself. Thereupon Agni disappeared from his mahayagna. 

The sorrowful king said to the Brahmanas, “What sin have I or you, 
excellent Brahmanas, been guilty of that Agni should disappear from this 
yagna, as good done to sinful men vanishes from their estimation. Our sin 
must be great for Agni to thus disappear. Either the sin must be yours or 
mine. Do you fully examine the reason for this.” 

The Brahmanas silently concentrated their minds on seeking the 
protection of the god of fire. Agni, resplendent as the autumnal sun, 
appeared before them, enveloped in glorious radiance. 

Agni said to the Brahmanas, “I seek the daughter of Duryodhana for 
myself.” 

Those Brahmanas were astounded, and the next day they told the king 
what Agni had said. The wise ruler was delighted and said, “Let it be so!” 

The king asked the fire god for a boon, “You, O Agni, remain here with 
us always.” 

“Tathaastu,” said the divine Agni to that Lord of the earth. For this 
reason, to this very day, Agni has always been present in the kingdom of 
Mahishmati and was seen by Sahadeva in course of his southern conquests. 

King Duryodhana gave his daughter, dressed in new clothes and decked 
with jewels, to the Mahatman Deva, and Agni too, accepted, according to 
Vedic rites, the princess Sudarsana as his bride, even as he accepts libations 


of ghee at yagnas. Agni was well pleased with her appearance, her beauty, 
grace, character and nobility of birth, and was eager to beget offspring upon 
her. 

And a son by Agni was soon born to her. Also named Sudarsana, he, 
too, was as handsome as the full moon, and even in his childhood he 
attained to a knowledge of the supreme and everlasting Brahman. 

There was another king called Oghavat, who was the grandfather of 
Nriga. He had a daughter named Oghavati, and a son by the name of 
Ogharatha. King Oghavat gave his daughter Oghavati, with goddess-like 
beauty, to the learned Sudarsana for his wife. Sudarsana lived the life of a 
grihasta with her in Kurukshetra. He took a vow to conquer Mrityu even 
while leading the life of a householder. 

Sudarsana said to Oghavati, “You never act contrary to the wishes of 
those that seek our hospitality. You should not have any misgivings about 
the means by which guests are to be welcomed, even if you have to offer 
your own person to an atithi. Beautiful one, this vrata must always be 
remembered, since there is no higher virtue for grihastas than hospitality 
accorded to guests. 

If my words carry any authority with you, always bear this in mind 
without ever doubting it. Sinless and blessed one, if you have any faith in 
me, you must never disregard a guest whether I am at your side or far 
away!” 

With hands folded and placed on her head, Oghavati replied, “I will do 
everything that you have commanded.” 

Mrityu, wanting to trick Sudarsana, began to watch him to discover his 
lapses. Once, when the son of Agni went out to collect firewood from the 
forest, a handsome Brahmana sought the hospitality of Oghavati saying, “O 
beautiful devi, if you have any you faith in the virtue of hospitality as laid 
down for householders, then I ask you to extend that hospitality to me 
today.” 

Oghavati welcomed him according to the rites prescribed in the Vedas. 
Having offered him a seat, and water to wash his feet, she asked, “What is 
your wish? What can I offer you?” 

The Brahmana said to her, “I desire you. Give yourself to me without 
any hesitation in your mind. If the duties established for grihastas are 
acceptable to you, gratify me.” 


Though tempted by Oghavati with offers of other gifts, the Brahmana 
refused to accept any dakshina other than the offer of her own person. 
Seeing his resolve, and remembering her husband’s instructions, although 
overcome with shame, she said to the Brahmana, “Let it be so.” 

Remembering the words of her husband who wished to attain the virtue 
of grihastas, she calmly approached the visiting Rishi. Meanwhile, having 
collected his firewood, the son of Agni returned home. The fierce and 
inexorable Mrityu was constantly by his side, as one attending upon a 
devoted friend. 

Reaching his asrama, Sudarsana called out to Oghavati repeatedly, and 
receiving no answer, exclaimed, “Where have you gone?” Locked in the 
Brahmana’s embrace, the chaste woman, devoted to her husband, did not 
reply. Indeed, that virtuous woman, regarding herself defiled, was overcome 
with shame and remained silent. 

Sudarsana again exclaimed, “Where can my faithful wife be? Where 
has she gone? Nothing can be of greater importance to me than her. Why 
does my simple and dutiful wife not answer my call today with sweet 
smiles as she has always done?” 

Then that Brahmana, who was within the hut, replied to Sudarsana, 
“Son of Pavaka, know that a Brahmana guest has arrived, and though 
tempted by your wife with many offers of welcome I desired only her 
person, and the beautiful woman is engaged in satisfying me. You are free 
to do whatever you think to be appropriate.” 

Mrityu, armed with his iron mace, pursued the Rishi at that moment, 
wanting to destroy him who would, he thought, deviate from his promise. 
Sudarsana was astonished, but discarding all jealousy and anger of gaze, 
word, deed or thought, said, “Enjoy yourself, Brahmana. It gives me great 
pleasure. A grihasta gains the highest punya by honouring a guest. 

The wise say that there is no higher merit for a householder than what 
accrues to him from a guest departing from his house after having been duly 
honoured. My life, my wife, and my other worldly possessions are all 
dedicated for the use of my guests. 

This is the vow I have taken. With this I will attain to the knowledge of 
the Atman. The five elements of fire, air, earth, water and sky, and the mind, 
the intellect and the soul, and time and space, and the ten organs of sense, 
all exist in the bodies of men, and always witness the good and evil deeds 
that men do. 


I have uttered this truth today, and let the gods bless me for it, or 
destroy me if I have spoken falsely.” At this, Bhaarata, a voice arose in all 
directions, in repeated echoes, crying: This is true, this is not false. 

Then the Brahmana came out of the hut and, like the wind rising and 
encompassing both earth and sky, and making the three worlds echo with 
Veda nadam, called out to that virtuous man by name and praised him 
saying, “Sinless one, I am Dharma. All glory to you. I came here to test 
you, and I am pleased to know that you are virtuous. 

You have subdued and conquered Mrityu, who always pursued you, 
seeking your lapses. No one in the three worlds has the ability to insult this 
chaste woman, devoted to her husband, even with looks, far less to touch 
her person. She has been protected from defilement by your virtue and by 
her own purity. 

There can be nothing contrary to what this honourable woman will say. 
Imbued with austere tapasya, she will metamorphose into a mighty river for 
the salvation of the world. And you will attain to all the worlds in this your 
body, and, as truly as the vigyana of yoga is within her control, this blessed 
woman will follow you with only half of her earthly self, and with the other 
half she will be celebrated as the river Oghavati! 

And along with her, you will attain all the worlds that are acquired 
through penances; and even in your gross body you will attain those eternal 
and everlasting worlds from which no one returns. You have conquered 
Mrityu, and attained to the highest of all felicities, and with your own 
power of mind, with the speed of thought, you have risen above the power 
of the five elements! 

By thus cleaving to the duties of a grihasta, you have subdued your 
passions, desires and anger, and Oghavati by serving you has conquered 
affliction, desire, illusion, enmity and lassitude!’”’ 

Bhishma continues, “Riding a fine chariot drawn by a thousand white 
horses, the glorious Vasava then approached that Brahmana. Mrityu and 
Yama, all the worlds, all the elements, Buddhi, Manas, Kaala and Akasa, as 
also kama and krodha were all conquered. And so, bear this in mind that to 
a householder there is no higher divinity than the guest. 

It is said by sages that the blessings of an honoured guest are more 
valuable than the merit of a hundred yagnas. Whenever a deserving guest 
seeks the hospitality of a householder and is not honoured by him, he takes 
away with him all the virtues of the grihasta and leaves behind his sins. 


I have now told you this ancient story about Mrityu was defeated by a 
grihasta. This narration confers glory, fame and a long life upon those who 
listen to it. The man that seeks worldly prosperity should consider it useful 
for removing every evil. 

Bhaarata, he who recites this story of the life of Sudarsana every day 
attains the realms of the blessed.’” 


CANTO 3 


66 Y udhishtira says, “Rajan, if Brahmanatva is so difficult to attain by 

Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras, how did the high-souled 

Viswamitra, though a Kshatriya by birth, become a Brahmarishi? I want to 
know this. I beg you, tell me all about it. 

With his tapasya shakti, Viswamitra instantly annihilated the hundred 
sons of the Mahatman Vasishta. Under the influence of his rage, he created 
countless mighty Rakshasas who resembled the great destroyer Kaala 
himself. 

He established the great and learned Kusika vamsa, numbering 
hundreds of regenerate sages praised by all Brahmanas. Sunashepa of 
austere penances, the son of Richika, was to be sacrificed as a yagnapasu in 
the Ambarisha mahayagna, but found deliverance through the grace of 
Viswamitra. 

Having pleased the gods at a sacrifice, Harishchandra became a son of 
the wise Viswamitra. For not honouring their eldest brother Devarata, 
whom Viswamitra got as a son from the Devas, his other fifty brothers were 
cursed by their father, and all of them became Chandalas. 

Trisanku, the son of Ikshvaku, also became a Chandala through the 
curse of Vasishta; when he was abandoned by his friends and remained 
suspended head down in the sky it was Viswamitra who sent him up into 
swarga. Kaushika, the sacred and most auspicious river of Viswamitra, was 
frequented by Devarishis, Devas and Rishis. 

For disturbing his devotions, the famed Apsara Rambha was cursed and 
turned into a rock. In olden times, fearing Viswamitra, the glorious Vasishta 
bound himself with creepers and threw himself into a river, but he rose up 


released from his bonds. Because of this, that mighty and holy river became 
celebrated by the name Vipasa. 

Viswamitra prayed to the glorious and puissant Indra who, gratified by 
him, released him from a curse. Remaining in the northern sky, he sheds his 
lustre from a position in the midst of the Saptarishi and Dhruva, the son of 
Uttanapada. These, among others, are his achievements. 

Descendant of Kuru, as all these were performed by a Kshatriya, my 
curiosity has been roused. So do I ask you to explain this to me truly. 
Without casting off his body and taking on another, how could Viswamitra 
become a Brahmana? 

Pitamaha, tell me about this just as you narrated to the story of 
Matanga. Matanga was born as a Chandala, and, despite all his tapasya, 
could not become a Brahmana; so how could this Kaushika become a 
Brahmarishi?’” 


CANTO 4 


aD hishma says, ‘Listen truly in detail as to how in olden times 
Viswamitra attained the status of a Brahmana Rishi. 

In the Bharata vamsa there was a king named Ajamida, who performed 
many yagnas and was a virtuous man. His son was the great King Jahnu. 
Ganga was the daughter of this righteous Kshatriya. The famed and equally 
virtuous Sindhudwipa was the son of this prince. 

From Sindhudwipa sprang the great Rajarishi Balakaswa. His son was 
named Vallabha and was like a second Dharma. His son was Kusika who 
had radiant glory like the thousand-eyed Indra. Kusika’s son was the 
illustrious King Gadhi who, being childless and wanting to have a son, went 
into the forest. 

Whilst living there, a daughter was born to him. She was called 
Satyavati, and in beauty she had no equal on earth. The illustrious son of 
Chyavana, celebrated by the name of Richika, of the Bhrigu vamsa, of 
austere penances, sought the hand of this woman to be his wife. Gadhi, 
thinking him to be poor, did not give her in marriage to Richika. 

But when the latter, thus dismissed, was leaving, the king said to him, 
“If your give me a marriage dowry you will you have my daughter for your 
wife.” 

Richika said, “Rajan, what dowry can I offer you for the hand of your 
daughter? Tell me truly, without feeling any hesitation.” 

Gadhi said, “Descendant of Bhrigu, give me a thousand horses as swift 
as the wind, with the colour of moonlight, and each having one ear black.”’ 

Bhishma said, “That mighty son of Chyavana, who was the foremost of 
Bhrigu’s race, entreated Varuna, the son of Aditi, who was the lord of all the 


waters, “Best of Devas, I pray to you to give me a thousand horses, all swift 
as the wind, with a complexion as luminous as the moon’s, but each having 
one black ear.” Varuna said to Richika, “Be it so. Wherever you are, the 
horses will appear before you.” 

As soon as Richika thought of them, there arose from the waters of the 
Ganga a thousand high-mettled horses, as lustrous as the moon. Not far 
from Kanyakubja, the sacred bank of Ganga is still famed among men as 
Aswatirtha because of the appearance of those horses at that place. 

The delighted Richika, that best of sannyasis, gave those thousand 
excellent horses to Gadhi as the marriage offering. King Gadhi was filled 
with wonder and, fearing that he would be cursed, gave his daughter, 
decked with jewels, to that son of Bhrigu. And he accepted her hand in 
matriage according to the prescribed rites. 

The princess, too, was pleased becoming the wife of that Brahmana. 
That foremost of Rishis was happy with her conduct and expressed a wish 
to grant her a boon. She related this to her mother. 

The mother said to her unassuming daughter who stood before her, “My 
daughter, it is fitting for you to secure a favour for me also from your 
husband. That sage of austere tapasya has the power to grant me a boon: the 
birth of a son.” 

Returning to her husband, the princess told him what her mother had 
asked for. Richika said, “By my favour, blessed one, she will soon give 
birth to a virtuous son. From you, too, there will be born a mighty and 
glorious son who, full of dharma, shall perpetuate my vasma. Truly do I say 
this to you! 

When you two shall bathe in your fertile season, she should embrace a 
pipal tree, and you should likewise embrace a ficus tree, and by doing so 
you will attain the object of your desire. Both she and you will partake of 
these two portions of charu, along with mantras, and then you will have 
your sons.” 

Satyavati was delighted and told her mother all that Richika had said 
and also about the two balls of charu. Then the mother said to her daughter 
Satyavati, “Daughter, as I deserve greater consideration from you than from 
your husband, you must do as I say. 

You must give me the charu which your husband has given you and take 
the one that has was meant for me. O joyful and pure daughter, if you have 
any respect for me, let us exchange the trees designated for us. 


Everyone desires to possess an excellent and stainless being for his own 
son. The glorious Richika, too, must have acted from a similar motive, as 
will be revealed later. For this reason, my heart inclines towards your charu, 
and your tree, and you too, must consider how to secure an exceptional 
brother for yourself.” 

The mother and the daughter Satyavati pursued this plan and both 
conceived their children, Yudhishtira. And that great Rishi was happy to 
find his wife pregnant, but he said to her, “Devi, you have not you done 
well in exchanging the charu as will soon become apparent. It is also clear 
that you have exchanged the trees. 

Know that I infused your charu with Brahmatejas and Kshatriya energy 
in the charu of your mother. I intended that you would give birth to a 
Brahmana whose virtues would be famed throughout the three worlds, and 
that your mother would give birth to a redoubtable Kshatriya. 

But now you have reversed the charu, and your mother will give birth to 
a splendid Brahmana and you will bring forth a fierce Kshatriya. You have 
not done well by acting out of love for your mother.” 

Hearing this, Satyavati was grief-stricken and fell to the ground like a 
beautiful creeper cut in two. When she regained her senses, she bowed her 
head before her lord and said, “Dvija, you who know Brahman, take pity on 
me, your wife, who pleads with you so that a Kshatriya son may not be born 
to me. Let my grandson be the one to be famous for his terrible 
achievements, but not my son. I beg you, do this for me.” 

“So be it,” said Richika to his wife and she gave birth to a blessed son 
named Jamadagni. Her mother, the celebrated wife of Gadhi, gave birth to 
the Rishi Viswamitra, knower of Brahmatva. 

The devout Viswamitra, though a Kshatriya, attained to the status of a 
Brahmarishi and became the founder of a vamsa of Brahmanas. His sons 
became high-souled progenitors of many races of Brahmanas who were 
devoted to austere penances, were learned in the Vedas, and founders of 
many clans. 

The adorable Madhuchchanda and the mighty Devarata, Akshina, 
Sakunta, Babhru, Kaala patha, the celebrated Yajnavalkya, Sthula of strict 
vratas, Uluka, Mudgala, and the sage Saindhavayana, the illustrious 
Valgujangha and the great Rishi Galeva, Ruchi, the celebrated Vajra, as also 
Salankayana, Liladhya and Narada, the one known as Kurchamuka, and 
Bahuli, and Mushala were all sons of Viswamitra. 


So also were Vakshogriva, Anghrika, Naikadrik, Silayupa, Sita, Suchi, 
Chakraka, Marrutantavya, Vataghna, Aswalayana, Syamayana, Gargya and 
Javali, as also Susruta, Karishi, Sangsrutya, Para Paurava and Tantu. 

The Maharishi Kapila, Tarakayana, Upagahana, Asurayani, Margama, 
Hiranyksha, Janghari, Bhavravayani, and Suti, Vibhuti, Suta, Surakrit, 
Arani, Nachika, Champeya, Ujjayana, Navatantu, Vakanakha, Sayanya, 
Yati, Ambhoruha, Amatsyasin, Srishin, Gardhavi Urjjayoni, Rudapekahin, 
and the great Naradin—these Munis were all sons of Viswamitra and were 
proficient in the knowledge of Brahman. 

Yudhishtira, the austere and devout Viswamitra, although a Kshatriya 
by birth, became a Brahmana because Richika had infused the charu meant 
for his wife with the tejas of the supreme Brahman. I have now told you the 
story of the birth of Viswamitra who was possessed of the energy of Surya, 
Chandramas and Agni. 

Rajan, if you have doubts with regard to any other matter, do you tell 
me, so that I may remove them.’” 


CANTO 5 


¢ Ne udhishtira says, “You who know the truths of dharma, I wish to 
hear of the merits of compassion, and of the characteristics of 
devout men. Pitamaha, describe them to me.’ 

“Bhishma says, ‘Listen to the ancient tale of Vasava and the high- 
minded Suka. In the kingdom of Kasi, a hunter went from his village on a 
hunt with poisoned arrows in search of antelope. In a vast forest, while in 
pursuit of the chase, he discovered a herd of antelope not far from him, and 
discharged his arrow at one of them. 

The arrow missed the deer and pierced a mighty tree instead. Struck by 
that arrow tipped with virulent poison, the tree withered away 
instantaneously, shedding its leaves and fruits. 

The tree died, but a parrot that lived in a hollow of its trunk all his life 
did not leave his nest out of love for the towering Lord of the forest. 
Motionless and without food, silent and grieving, that grateful and virtuous 
parrot also perished slowly after the tree. 

Indra was amazed by that great and generous bird’s extraordinary 
resolve and detachment. He thought, “How has this bird come to possess 
such extraordinary humane and generous emotions which are not found 
among the lower creatures? Yet, perhaps there is nothing wonderful about 
this, for all creatures appear to exhibit kind and generous feelings towards 
others.” 

Assuming the form of a Brahmana, Sakra descended onto the earth and 
came to the bird. “Suka, O parrot, Daksha’s granddaughter Suki is blessed 
to bear you as her child. I ask you, why do you not leave this dead tree?” 


Thus questioned, Suka bowed to him and replied, “Welcome to you, 
Indra. I have recognised you by the merit of my tapasya.” 

“Uttamam! Well done!” exclaimed Indra. He praised Suka in his mind, 
thinking how great was his gyana. Although Indra knew that the parrot was 
virtuous in character and noble in deed, still he pressed him about the 
reason for his love for the tree. 

“This tree has withered; it is without leaves and fruits and is unfit to be 
the refuge of birds. Why do you cling to it? This forest is vast and in it are 
many other fine trees whose hollows are covered with leaves, and you can 
choose freely from them. Patient one, discern wisely and abandon this old 
tree that is dead and useless, shorn of all its leaves and no longer of any 
good to you.” 

Hearing this from Sakra, Suka heaved a deep sigh and replied sadly, 
“Consort of Sachi, and king of the Devas, the laws of the gods must always 
be obeyed. Listen to my reasoning on this matter. 

Here, within this tree, I was born, and here in this tree I acquired all the 
good traits of my character, and here in this tree I was protected in my 
childhood from predators. Sinless one, why, in your kindness, do you seek 
to taint my principles in life? 

I am compassionate, virtuous and steadfast in my conduct. Kindness is 
the great test of virtue amongst the good, and this same compassion is the 
source of everlasting felicity to the virtuous. All the Devas look to you to 
remove their doubts on dharma, and for this reason you have sovereignty 
over them. 

It is not fitting for you to tell me to abandon this tree. When it was 
capable of good, it supported my life. How can I forsake it now?” 

The virtuous destroyer of Paka was pleased with these words of the 
parrot and said to him, “I am gratified with your compassionate nature. Ask 
any boon of me.” 

The loyal parrot said, “Let this tree revive!” Knowing the great 
attachment of the noble parrot to that tree, Indra showered amrita on the 
tree. That tree was restored and attained its former grandeur through the 
tapasya of the parrot, who, by virtue of his compassion, found Indra’s own 
companionship at the end of his life. 

Thus, Lord of men, through friendship and association with the pious, 
men attain all the objects of their desire even as the tree did through its 
companionship with the parrot.’” 


CANTO 6 


¢ Ne udhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha, tell me which is more powerful, 
effort or fate.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Hear this ancient story of the conversation between 
Vasishta and Brahma. In ancient times, Vasishta asked Brahma what 
influenced a man’s life more: the karma acquired in this life, or that 
acquired in previous lives, which is called fate. Brahma, who had sprung 
from the primeval lotus, answered him in these exquisite and well-reasoned 
words, full of meaning. 

Brahma said, “Nothing comes into existence without seeds. Without 
seeds, fruits do not grow. From seeds spring other seeds. Hence fruits are 
known to be generated from seeds. As good or bad is the seed that the 
farmer sows in his field, so are the fruits that he reaps. 

Just as the soil, unsown with seeds, becomes fruitless, so also karma is 
of no use without individual exertion. One’s own actions are like the soil, 
and destiny, the sum of one’s deeds in previous births, can be compared to 
the seed. The union of the soil and the seed produces the harvest. Every day 
in the world, we see that the doer reaps the fruit of his good and evil deeds; 
that happiness results from good deeds, and pain from evil ones; that 
actions always bear fruit; and that, if not done, there is no fruit. A man of 
good deeds acquires merit with good fortune, while a lazy man loses his 
lands, and reaps evil like the infusion of alkaline matter injected into a 
wound. 

With devoted application, one acquires beauty, fortune, and wealth of 
many kinds. Everything can be secured through exertion, but nothing can be 
gained by a lazy man through destiny alone. Even so does one attain 


heaven, and all the objects of enjoyment, as also the fulfilment of one’s 
heart’s desires—by well-directed individual effort. 

All the luminous stars and planets in the sky, all the Devas, the Nagas 
and the Rakshasas, as also the sun and the moon and the winds, have 
attained to their lofty positions by evolution from a human condition, by 
dint of their own deeds. Riches, friends, prosperity from generation to 
generation, as also the blessings of life, are difficult to attain without 
exertion. 

The Brahmana attains prosperity through pure and virtuous living, the 
Kshatriya by prowess, the Vaisya with manly exertion, and the Sudra 
through service. Riches and other pleasures do not follow the miser, nor the 
weak, nor the idler. Nor are these ever attained by the man who is not active 
or manly or devoted to the performance of religious austerities. 

Even he, the adorable Vishnu, who created the three worlds with the 
Daityas and all the Devas, even he is engaged in tapasya in the depths of the 
ocean. If one’s karma bore no fruit all actions would become fruitless, and 
relying on destiny all men would become idlers. He who follows destiny 
alone, without pursuing the human modes of action, acts in vain, like the 
woman with an impotent husband. 

In this world, the dread that accrues from doing good or evil deeds is 
not so great if destiny is unfavourable, as one’s fear in the other world if 
one make no effort in this world. Man’s powers, if properly exerted, only 
follow his destiny, but destiny alone cannot confer any good where exertion 
is wanting. 

When we see that even in swarga the position of the Devas is unstable, 
how would they maintain their position or that of others without proper 
karma? The Devas do not always encourage the good deeds of others in this 
world, and they even thwart such actions fearing their own overthrow. 

There is a constant rivalry between the Devas and the Rishis, and even 
if they must perform karma, it can never be asserted that there is no such 
thing as destiny, for it is the latter that initiates all karma. If destiny is the 
source of human action, how does karma originate? It does so through an 
accumulation of many virtues in the divine realms. 

One’s own self is one’s friend and one’s enemy too, as also the witness 
of one’s punya and paapa. Good and evil manifest themselves through 
karma. Good and evil actions do not have adequate results. Dharma is the 


refuge of the Devas, and through dharma everything is attained. Destiny 
does not obstruct the man who has attained virtue and righteousness. 

In olden times, falling from his high position in heaven, Yayati 
descended onto the earth but was again restored to the celestial realms by 
the good deeds of his virtuous grandsons. The royal sage Pururavas, the 
celebrated descendant of Ila, attained swarga through the intercession of 
Brahmanas. 

Though exalted by the performance of the Aswamedha and other 
yagnas, Saudasa, the son of Kosala, became a man-eating Rakshasa through 
the curse of a great Rishi. Aswatthaman and Rama, though both warriors 
and sons of Munis, failed to attain swarga because of their own fell deeds in 
this world. 

Though he performed a hundred yagnas like a second Vasava, Vasu was 
sent to naraka for uttering a single falsehood. Bound by his promise, Bali, 
the son of Virochana, was consigned to the patalas below the earth by the 
power of Vishnu. 

Was not Janamejaya, who followed in the footsteps of Sakra, thwarted 
by the Devas for killing a Brahmana woman? Was not the Rishi 
Vaisampayana, who unwittingly killed a Brahmana, and was tainted by the 
slaying of a child, censured by the Devas? 

In ancient times, the Rajarishi Nriga was transformed into a lizard. He 
had made great gifts of cows to the Brahmanas at his mahayagna, but to no 
avail. 

The royal sage Dhundhumara was overtaken by age, decay and fatigue 
even while engaged in performing his sacrifices, and forgoing all their 
merits he fell asleep at Girivraja. The Pandavas, too, regained their lost 
kingdom, which had been seized by the powerful sons of Dhritarashtra, not 
through the intercession of the fates, but by recourse to their own valour. 

Do the Munis of rigid vows, and devoted to the practice of austere 
tapasyas, denounce their curses with the help of any supernatural power or 
by the exercise of their own power attained by individual deeds? All the 
punya possessed by dissolute men, attained with difficulty in this world, 
they soon lose. 

Destiny does not help the man steeped in spiritual ignorance and greed. 
When fanned by the wind, even as a small fire becomes a conflagration, so 
does destiny, when joined with individual exertion, increase in its potential. 


As the oil in the lamp reduces, its light is extinguished; so also is the 
influence of destiny lost if one’s actions cease. 

Having gained vast wealth, women, and all the enjoyments of this 
world, the man without action is not able to enjoy them long; but the high- 
souled man, who is ever diligent, is able to find treasures buried deep in the 
earth and watched over by spirits. The good man who is prodigious in 
giving religious charity and performing sacrifices is sought by the very 
Devas for his conduct, but the house of the miser, though abounding in 
wealth, is regarded by the Devas as a home of the dead. 

The man who does not exert himself is never content in this world nor 
can destiny alter the course of a man that has gone wrong. So there is no 
authority inherent in destiny. As the sishya follows his own individual 
perception, so does destiny follow exertion. Destiny reveals itself in the 
matters in which one’s own efforts are put forth. 

Vasishta, having known their true significance with my yogic powers, I 
have thus described all the merits of individual exertion. By the influence of 
destiny, and by exerting individual effort, men attain swarga. The union of 
destiny and exertion is effective.”’” 


CANTO 7 


66 Y udhishtira says, “Bharatarishabha, I wish to know what the fruits 
are of good deeds. Do you enlighten me on this subject.’ 

Bhishma said, ‘Yudhishtira, listen to what I tell you; it is the secret 
knowledge of the Rishis. Listen to me as I explain what desirable ends are 
attained by men after death. 

Whatever actions are performed by particular beings, their fruits are 
reaped by the doers in similar bodies. The fruits of actions done with the 
mind are enjoyed in dreams, and those actions performed physically are 
enjoyed in the waking state. 

In whatever states creatures perform good or evil deeds, they reap the 
fruits in similar states of succeeding lives. No action done with the five 
organs of the senses is ever lost. The five sense organs and the immortal 
soul, which is the sixth, remain eternal witnesses. 

One should devote one’s eye and one’s heart in the service of the atithi; 
one should speak words that are agreeable; one should also follow and 
worship one’s guest. This is called Panchadakshina yagna, the sacrifice with 
five gifts. 

He who offers good food to unknown and weary travellers after a long 
journey, attains great punya. Those who use the sacrificial platform as their 
only bed in this birth, obtain commodious palaces and beds in subsequent 
births. Those who dress only in rags and barks of trees obtain luxurious 
clothes and ornaments in their next births. 

The man who possesses tapasya and fixes his soul on yoga, gets chariots 
and horses as the fruit of his renunciation in this life. The king who lies 
down beside the sacrificial fire attains vigour and valour. 


The man who renounces the enjoyment of all delicacies attains 
prosperity, and he who abstains from animal flesh, receives children and 
kine. He who sleeps with his head hanging down, or who lives in water, or 
who lives in seclusion practising brahmacharya, attains to all the desired 
ends. 

He who offers refuge to a guest and welcomes him with water to wash 
his feet, as also with food and rest, attains to the merits of the 
Panchadakshina yagna. He who lies down on a warrior’s bed on the 
battlefield in the posture of a warrior, goes to those eternal realms where all 
desires are fulfilled. 

A man who makes charitable endowments finds riches. One secures 
obedience to one’s command through the vow of silence, all the enjoyments 
of life with the practice of tapasya, long life by brahmacharya, and beauty, 
prosperity and freedom from disease by ahimsa, non-violence. 

Sovereignty is theirs who subsist on fruit and roots. Swarga is attained 
by those that live only on the leaves of trees. A man is said to gain 
happiness by abstaining from food. By restricting one’s diet to just herbs, 
one becomes wealthy. By living on grass one attains to the celestial realms. 

By foregoing sexual union with one’s wife, performing ablutions three 
times during the day and by inhaling only air for subsistence, one gains the 
merit of a sacrifice. Swarga is attained by the practice of truth, nobility of 
birth by yagnas. 

The Brahmana of pure practices that subsists on water alone, performs 
the Agnihotra ceaselessly, and recites the Gayatri, obtains a kingdom. By 
giving up food or by regulating it, one attains swarga. 

Rajan, by abstaining from all but the prescribed diet while engaged in 
sacrifices, and by making a pilgrimage for twelve years, one attains to a 
place better than the realms reserved for Kshatriyas. By reading all the 
Vedas, one is instantly liberated from misery, and by practising virtue in 
thought, one attains to swarga. That man who is able to renounce that 
intense yearning of the heart for pleasure and material enjoyments—a 
yearning that is difficult for foolish men to conquer, and which does not 
decrease with the abatement of bodily strength and that clings like a fatal 
disease to him—is assured bliss. 

As the young calf is able to recognise its mother from among a 
thousand cows, so does the past karma of a man pursue him in all his 
transformations. As the flowers and fruits of a tree, without any visible 


influences, never miss their proper season, so does karma from a previous 
existence unerringly bring its fruit in proper time. With age, man’s hair 
grows grey, his teeth become loose, and his eyes and ears become dim; but 
the one thing that does not weaken is his desire for pleasure. 

Prajapati is pleased with those deeds that please one’s father, the earth is 
pleased with those acts that please one’s mother, and Brahma is adored with 
those that please one’s acharya. Dharma is honoured by him who honours 
these three. Those who do not respect these three do not benefit from them, 
whatever they may do.” 

Vaisampayana said, “The princes of Kuru’s vamsa are filled with 
wonder upon listening to this discourse of Bhishma. All of them are 
overwhelmed with joy. Like mantras that are recited only to have victory, or 
the performance of the Soma yagna without proper dakshina, or offerings 
poured on the fire without proper mantras are rendered useless and lead to 
evil consequences, even so sin and evil results flow from false speech. 

O prince, I have thus narrated to you the doctrine of the fruition of good 
and evil acts, as told by the ancient Rishis. What else do you wish to hear?” 


CANTO 8 


V aisampayana continued, “Yudhishtira says, ‘Who are deserving of 

worship? Who are they unto whom one may bow? Who are they, 
Bhaarata, before whom you would bend your head? Who, again, are they 
whom you love? Tell me all this. 

What does your mind dwell upon when you are overwhelmed by 
misery? Speak to me about what is beneficial in this world of humans, and 
also hereafter.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘I revere those evolved men whose highest wealth is 
Brahman, whose swarga consists of the knowledge of the Atman, and 
whose tapasya is constituted by their diligent study of the Vedas. My heart 
yearns for those in whose vamsa both the young and the old diligently bear 
their ancestral burdens without being weighed down by them. 

Skilled in several branches of knowledge, self-restrained and gentle in 
speech, conversant with the shastras, dutiful, possessing the knowledge of 
Brahman and righteous in conduct, Brahmanas discourse in auspicious 
conclaves like flocks of swans. 

Yudhishtira, their words are auspicious, pleasing, excellent and finely 
pronounced; they speak with voices deep as thunderheads. Suffused with 
joy both earthly and spiritual, they speak such words in the courts of kings, 
where they are received with honour and served with reverence by those 
rulers of men. Indeed, my heart yearns for those who listen to the words 
spoken in such pure assemblies or royal sabhas by those endowed with 
gyana and all desirable gunas, and respected by others. 

My heart longs for those who offer, with devotion, food that is clean, 
well cooked and wholesome to gratify Brahmanas. It is easy to fight in 


battle, but not so to make a gift without pride or vanity. 

In this world, Yudhishtira, there are brave men and heroes by the 
hundreds. While counting them, he who is heroic in gifts must be regarded 
as superior. Even if I had been a common Brahmana, I would have regarded 
myself as great, not to speak of one born into a Brahmana family replete 
with righteousness of conduct, and devoted to penances and learning. 

Son of Pandu, there is no one that is dearer to me than you are in this 
world, but those Brahmanas are dearer to me than even you. And since I 
love these Brahmanas more than you, it is through that truth that I hope to 
attain to all those realms of felicity in which my father Santanu dwells. 
Neither my sire, nor his sire, nor anyone else related to me by blood, is 
dearer to me than the Brahmanas. 

I do not expect any reward, small or great, from my worship of the 
Brahmanas, for I revere them as Devas. Even though I am lying on a bed of 
arrows, because of what I have done for Brahmanas in thought, word and 
deed, I do not feel any pain. 

People would refer to me as the one devoted to Brahmanas. This 
manner of address always pleased me most. To do good to Brahmanas is the 
most sacred of all sacred acts. Having walked with adoration behind 
Brahmanas, I behold many realms of grace waiting for me. Very soon shall 
I repair to those lustrous realms for ever. 

In this world, Yudhishtira, the duties of women allude to and depend on 
their husbands. To a woman, the husband is the deity and he is the highest 
end after which she should strive. As the husband is to the wife, even so are 
the Brahmanas unto Kshatriyas. If there be a Kshatriya of full hundred 
years of age and a good Brahmana child of only ten years, the latter should 
be regarded as a father and the former as a son, for among the two the 
Brahmana is undeniably superior. 

A woman in the absence of her husband takes his younger brother for 
her lord; even so Bhumi Devi, not having obtained the Brahmana, made the 
Kshatriya her master. Brahmanas must be protected like sons and 
worshipped like fathers or gurus. Indeed they must be adored even as 
people wait with reverence upon their homa fires. 

The Brahmanas are filled with simplicity and virtue. They are devoted 
to truth. They are always engaged in the good of every creature. Yet when 
enraged they are like poisonous snakes. For these reasons, they must always 
be waited upon and served with reverence and humility. 


Yudhishtira, always be wary of both tejas and tapasya. Both these must 
be avoided or kept at a distance. The effects of both are swift. However, 
tapasya is the more powerful, that is why tapodhana Brahmanas, if angered, 
can easily make ashes of the object of their wrath regardless of the tejas of 
that man. 

Tejas and tapasya, each in the largest measure, are powerless if applied 
against a Brahmana who has conquered anger. If the two are set against 
each other, then both will be destroyed. However, if energy is applied 
against penances it is sure to be destroyed without leaving a trace; but 
tapasya applied against tejas cannot be completely annihilated. 

As the herdsman, stick in hand, protects the herd, even so must the 
Kshatriya always protect the Vedas and the Brahmanas. Indeed, the 
Kshatriya should protect all righteous Brahmanas even as a father protects 
his sons. He must watch over the houses of the Brahmanas and ensure that 
they do not lack in their means of livelihood.’” 


CANTO 9 


Ne udhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha, what happens to those men who, 

through inertia and torpor, do not make gifts to Brahmanas after 
having promised to make those offerings? You who are the most righteous 
of men, tell me what the laws are in this respect. Indeed, what is the end of 
those who do not give after having promised to give.’ 

Bhishma says, “One who having promised does not give, be it little or 
much, has the mortification of seeing his hopes in all directions become 
fruitless like the hopes of a eunuch who wishes for children. Whatever good 
deeds such a man does between the day of his birth and that of his death, 
Bhaarata, whatever libations he pours on the sacrificial fire, whatever gifts 
he makes, and whatever penances he performs, all become fruitless. 

They that know the shastras declare this to be their opinion, having 
arrived at it with the help of a studied understanding. These learned men are 
also of opinion that such a man may be redeemed by giving away a 
thousand pale horses with dark ears. 

Listen to the old story of the conversation between a jackal and a 
monkey. Once, when both were humans, they were intimate friends. After 
they died, in their next birth one of them became a jackal and the other a 
monkey. 

One day, seeing the jackal eating the carcass of an animal in a cremation 
ground, the monkey, remembering his own and his friend’s past birth as 
men, said to him, “What terrible sin did you commit in your last birth that 
in this one you are obliged to feed upon the putrid carcass of an animal in 
the samsana?”’ 


The jackal replied to the monkey, “Having promised to give gifts to a 
Brahmana I did not do so. It is for that sin that I have fallen into this 
wretched existence. It is for this reason that, when hungry, I am obliged to 
eat such repugnant food.’”’ 

Bhishma continues, “The jackal then said to the monkey, “What sin did 
you commit for which you have become a monkey?” 

The monkey said, “In my past life I used to steal fruits belonging to 
Brahmanas. And so I have been born as a monkey. It is clear that one who 
has intelligence and learning must never take what belongs to Brahmanas. 
One must also avoid all disputes with Brahmanas. Having promised, one 
must necessarily give them the promised gift.”’ 

Bhishma continues, “Rajan, I heard this from my guru while he 
discoursed upon the subject of Brahmanas. I heard this from that righteous 
man when he recited the old and sacred pronouncement on this subject. I 
heard this from Krishna also, while he was speaking of Brahmanas. 

The property of a Brahmana should never be seized. They should 
always be left undisturbed. Poor, miserly, or young, they should never be 
disregarded. Brahmanas have always taught me this. 

Having promised to make them a gift, the gift must be made. A superior 
Brahmana’s expectations must always be fulfilled. It has been said that a 
Brahmana whose expectation has been raised is like a blazing fire. That 
man upon whom a Brahmana with raised expectations casts his angry eye is 
certain to be consumed even as a pile of dry grass is by a blazing fire. 

When the Brahmana who is honoured by the king with gifts addresses 
the king in agreeable and loving words, that Brahmana becomes a source of 
great benefit to the king, for he continues to live in the kingdom like a 
physician, combating the many diseases of the body. Such a Brahmana, 
with his power and grace, is sure to sustain the sons and grandsons, animals 
and relatives, ministers and other officers, and the city and provinces of the 
king. 

This great tejas of the Brahmana is like that of the radiance of Surya 
himself on Bhumi. Yudhishtira, if one wishes to attain an honourable and 
happy next birth, having promised a Brahmana a gift, one must not neglect 
to bestow that gift. 

By making gifts to a Brahmana one is sure to attain to the highest 
heaven. The giving of gifts is the highest of human deeds. With the gifts 
one makes to a Brahmana, one supports the Devas and the Pitris. Hence one 


who is wise must always make gifts to Brahmanas. Lord of the Bharatas, 
the Brahmana is regarded as the highest entity unto whom gifts must be 
made. At no time should a Brahmana be received without being properly 
worshipped.” 


CANTO 10 


¢ as udhishtira says, ‘Tell me whether any fault is incurred by one 
who, whether from interested or disinterested friendship imparts 
instruction to one who belongs to a low varna. Pitamaha, expound this to 
me in detail. The course of dharma is so subtle, and men are often 
bewildered in respect of that path.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘I will narrate to you what I heard certain Rishis say in 
olden days. Instruction should not be imparted to one who belongs to a low 
or mean caste. It is said that the guru who instructs such a person incurs 
great blame. 

Listen, Yudhishtira, to this ancient story of the evil consequences of 
instructing a low-born person fallen into distress. This event occurred in the 
asrama of those illumined sages who lived on the auspicious breast of 
Himavat. 

There, on the breast of that prince of mountains, was a sacred asrama 
adorned with trees of diverse kinds. Covered with diverse species of 
creepers and plants, it was the home of many animals and birds. Inhabited 
by Siddhas and Charanas, it was delightful because of the trees that 
flowered in every season. 

Many brahmacharins and vanaprasthas lived there. Many Brahmanas 
residing there were highly blessed and resembled Surya or Agni in energy 
and refulgence. Ascetics of many kinds lived there, observant of various 
restraints and vows, and others who had taken diksha and were frugal in 
fare and possessed pure souls. 

Large numbers of Balakhilyas and many who had taken the sannyasa 
vrata also dwelt there. The asrama echoed with the chanting of the Vedas 


and other sacred mantras by its inhabitants. 

Once upon a time, a Sudra who loved all creatures came to that asrama. 
On arriving, he was duly honoured by all the ascetics. The Sudra was 
delighted to see those sannyasis of great tejas, who resembled the Devas in 
purity and power, observing diverse kinds of vratas. 

Beholding everything, he felt persuaded to devote himself to the 
practice of tapasya. Touching the feet of the Kulapati, he said to him, “With 
your blessings, I want to learn and practise the duties of dharma. 

Discourse to me on those duties and with the rites of initiation induct 
me into a life of sannyasa. I am certainly inferior in varna, illustrious one, 
for I am a Sudra. I desire to wait upon and serve you here. I humbly seek 
your refuge; I beg you, oblige me.” 

The Kulapati said, “It is impossible that a Sudra should adopt the 
practices of sannyasis. If it pleases you, you may stay here, engaged in 
waiting upon and serving us. Have no doubt that by such service you will 
attain to many realms of high felicity.” 

Bhishma continue, “Thus addressed by the sannyasi, the Sudra reflected 
and said, “What should I do now? Great is my reverence for dharma, which 
leads to punya. But I will do what will benefit me.” 

Going to a remote place, he made a hut from the branches and leaves of 
trees. He erected a sacrificial platform and, making a little space to sleep, 
and a vedi for the Devas, he began to lead a life regulated by demanding 
vratas and tapasya, while abstaining entirely from speech. 

He began to perform ablutions three times a day, to observe other vratas 
of food and sleep, perform yagnas for the Devas, pour libations on the 
sacrificial fire, and worship the deities. Subduing all sensual desires, living 
abstemiously upon fruits and roots, controlling all his senses, every day he 
welcomed and honoured all who came to his hermitage, offering them roots 
and fruit that grew all around in abundance. In this way he lived in that 
asrama for a long time. 

One day an ascetic came to that Sudra’s asrama to meet him. The Sudra 
welcomed and worshipped the Rishi with the due rites, and gratified him. 
Possessing great tejas and a righteous soul that Rishi talked with his host on 
many pleasant subjects and told him from where he had come. 

That Rishi came to the Sudra’s asrama several times. On one of these 
occasions, the Sudra said to the Rishi, “I want to perform the rites that are 
ordained for the Pitris. You must instruct me in this matter.” 


“Very well,” replied the Brahmana. 

The Sudra purified himself by bathing and brought water for the Rishi 
to wash his feet; he also brought some kusa grass, and wild herbs and fruits, 
and a sacred seat called Vrishi. The Sudra, however, placed the Vrishi 
towards the south, with its head facing west. 

On seeing this and knowing it to be against the laws, the Rishi said to 
the Sudra, “Set the Vrishi with its head turned towards the east and, having 
purified yourself, sit with your face facing the north.” The Sudra did as the 
Rishi directed. 

Possessed of great intelligence and righteousness, the Sudra received 
every instruction from the sage about the sraddha, as laid down in the 
shastras—regarding the manner of spreading the kusa grass, and placing the 
offerings, and the rites to be observed in the matter of the libations to be 
poured and the food to be offered. After the rituals in honour of the Pitris 
had been completed, dismissed by the Sudra, the Rishi returned to his own 
abode. 

After passing a long time in the practice of such penances and vows, the 
Sudra ascetic died in the forest. As a result of the punya he acquired 
through those practices, in his next life the Sudra was born into the family 
of a great king, and in the course of time became endowed with great 
splendour. 

The Rishi also, when the time came, died. In his next life, he was born 
into the family of a priest. It was in this way that those two were reborn, 
that Sudra who had lived a life of tapasya and that Rishi who had 
generously instructed the Sudra in the rites performed in honour of the 
Pitris: the one as a son of a royal vamsa and the other as the member of a 
Brahmana’s family. 

Both of them acquired great knowledge in the customary branches of 
study. The Brahmana became well versed in the Vedas as also in the 
Atharvans. The reborn Rishi attained excellence in the matters of all yagnas 
ordained in the Sutras, of that Vedanga which deals with religious rites and 
observances, astrology and astronomy. He also took great delight in the 
Samkhya philosophy. 

When the king, his father, died, the reborn Sudra who had become a 
prince performed his last rites; and after he had purified himself by 
performing all the necessary ceremonies, his father’s subjects enthroned 


him as their king. Soon after his being crowned, he appointed the reborn 
Rishi as his priest. 

Indeed, having made the Brahmana his purohita, the king began to pass 
his days in great happiness. He ruled his kingdom righteously and protected 
and cherished all his subjects. Every day, however, when he received 
blessings from his priest and during the performance of religious and other 
sacred rites, the king smiled or laughed at him loudly. In this way, the Sudra 
who had been reborn as a king laughed at the very sight of his purohita on 
countless occasions. 

Marking that the king always smiled or laughed whenever he looked at 
him, the Brahmana became angry. One day, he met the king alone and 
pleased the king with an agreeable discourse. Taking advantage of that 
moment, he said to the king, “Splendid one, I entreat you to grant me a 
single boon.” 

The king said, “I am ready to grant you a hundred boons, why do you 
speak of only one? With the love I bear you and the reverence in which I 
hold you, there is nothing that I cannot give you.” 

The priest said, “You are gratified by me; Rajan, I desire only one boon. 
Swear that you will tell me the truth and not any lie.” 

“Thus addressed by the priest, Yudhishtira, the king said to him, ‘So be 
it. If what you ask me is known to me, I will certainly speak of it to you 
truthfully. If, on the other hand, the matter is unknown to me, I will not say 
anything.’ 

The Brahmana said, “Every day, when you take my blessings, and again 
when I am engaged in the performance of religious rites on your behalf, and 
also during the homa and other kriyas of propitiation, why is it that you 
laugh when you see me? My mind shrinks with shame when you do that. 

I have asked you to swear that you will answer me truthfully. It fitting 
that you will not lie to me. There must be some solemn reason for your 
behaviour. Your laughter cannot be without cause. I am curious to know 
what it is. Speak to me honestly.” 

The king said, “When you have spoken to me in this way, I am bound to 
enlighten you, even if it is a matter that should not be divulged in your 
hearing. I must tell you the truth. Listen to me with close attention, O Dvija. 
Listen to me as I disclose what happened to both of us in our last births. I 
remember that birth. Listen and I will tell you everything. 


In my past life I was a Sudra engaged in the practice of severe tapasya. 
You were a Rishi of austere penances. Gratified with me, and wishing to do 
me good, you once gave me some instruction in the kriyas I performed in 
honour of my Pitris. 

The instructions you gave me were in respect of the manner of 
spreading the Vrishi and the kusa blades and of offering libations and meat 
and other food to the manes. As a result of your transgression you have 
been born as a purohita, and I have been born as a king. 

Behold the vicissitudes of Kaala. You have reaped this fruit because you 
instructed me in my previous birth. It is for this reason, O Brahmana, that I 
smile or laugh when I see you. I certainly do not do so to ridicule or 
disrespect you. You are my guru. 

I am repentant for this change of circumstances; my heart seethes at the 
thought. I smile or laugh in remorse when I see you because I remember our 
former births. Your tapasya was lost because you taught me. 

Relinquish your present position of purohita and endeavour to regain a 
superior birth. Exert yourself so that, in your next life, you may not obtain a 
birth inferior to your present one. Take as much wealth as you need, learned 
Brahmana, and purify your soul.” 

Dismissed by the king, the Brahmana made many gifts of wealth, land 
and villages to persons of his own varna. He observed many rigid and 
severe vratas as laid down by the foremost of sages. He travelled to many 
sacred tirthas and made many gifts to Brahmanas in those places. 

Making gifts of cows to those of twice-born varnas, his soul was 
purified and he succeeded in attaining Atmagyana. Repairing to that very 
asrama where he had lived in his past birth, he practised severe tapasya. As 
the result of all this, that Brahmana succeeded in attaining to the highest, 
indeed to mukti. He was revered by all the sannyasis who lived in that 
asrama. 

In this way, that Rishi fell into great distress; therefore, Brahmanas 
should never impart knowledge to Sudras. The Brahmana should avoid 
instructing the low-born, for it was because of his teaching the Sudra in the 
forest that the Brahmana came to grief. 

Rajan, the Brahmana should never desire to obtain instruction from or 
instruct one that belongs to the lowest varna. Brahmanas and Kshatriyas 
and Vaisyas, the three varnas, are regarded as being twice-born. By giving 


instruction to these, a Brahmana does not incur any fault. Righteous men 
should never discourse on any subject before persons of the fourth varna. 

The course of dharma is exceedingly subtle and cannot be grasped by 
men of impure minds. It is for this reason that sannyasis adopt the vow of 
silence, and being respected by all, they pass through diksha, initiation, 
without using words. 

For fear of saying what is false or what may offend, ascetics often 
forego speech itself and take the mowna vrata. Even righteous and 
accomplished men, of honest and simple conduct, have been known to incur 
great fault because of unfittingly spoken words. 

Instruction should never be given on any subject unthinkingly. If in 
consequence of teachings imparted, the one taught commit, any sin that sin 
attaches to the Brahmana who taught him. The wise man, who desires to 
earn punya, should always act with wisdom. Knowledge which is taught in 
exchange for money always pollutes the teacher. 

Solicited by others, one should say only what is correct after reflecting 
upon it. One should teach in such a way that one may earn merit. I have 
thus told you everything on the subject of sacred instruction. Very often 
men suffer because of wrongly teaching knowledge. Hence it is proper that 
one should abstain from giving instruction to others.’ 


CANTO 11 


¢ Ne udhishtira says, “Tell me, Pitamaha, in what kind of man or 
woman does the Devi Lakshmi of prosperity always dwell?’ 

“Bhishma says, “Listen while I narrate to you what I have heard 
happened. Once upon a time, beholding the goddess of wealth radiant with 
beauty, blessed with the complexion of the lotus, the princess Rukmini, the 
mother of Pradyumna whose banner bore the makara emblem, was filled 
with curiosity and asked this question in the presence of Devaki’s son 
Krishna. 

“Who are those beings by whose side you remain and whom do you 
favour? Who are those whom you do not bless? You who are dear to Him 
that is the Lord of all creatures, tell me this truly, you that are equal to a 
Maharishi in penances and power.” 

Thus addressed by the beautiful princess and moved by grace, in the 
presence of Krishna who has Garuda on his banner, Lakshmi replied with 
pleasing words. 

Sree said, “Blessed devi, I always dwell with him that is eloquent, 
active, attentive to his work, free from anger, given to the worship of the 
Devas, grateful, has his passions under complete control, and is high- 
minded. 

I never remain with one who is inattentive to his work, is an unbeliever, 
who causes an intermingling of varnas through his lust, who is ungrateful, 
of impure practices, uses harsh and cruel words, who is a thief, malicious 
towards his gurus and other elders, those that have little energy, strength, 
life and honour, and that are troubled by everything trivial, and are always 
choleric. 


I never live with these that think in one way and act in another. I also 
never remain with him who never desires anything for himself, who is so 
blinded as to be content with his lot without any effort, or with those that 
are contented with few possessions. 

I dwell with those that observe the duties of their own varna, or those 
that are conversant with dharma, or those that are devoted to the service of 
the aged or those that have subdued their passions, those that have pure 
souls, those that observe the virtue of forgiveness, those that are capable 
and timely in action, or with such women as are forgiving and self- 
restrained. 

I reside also with women that are devoted to truth and sincerity, and 
who worship the Devas. I do not dwell with women that do not attend to 
household duties, leaving furniture and provisions scattered everywhere in 
the house, and who always utter words contrary to the wishes of their 
husbands. I always avoid those women that are fond of the houses of other 
people and that have no modesty. 

On the other hand, I reside with those women that are devoted to their 
husbands, that are blessed in conduct, and who are always well-dressed and 
decked in ornaments. I always dwell with those women that are truthful in 
speech, who are of handsome and pleasant features, and are blessed and 
accomplished. 

I always avoid such women as are sinful and unclean or impure, who 
always lick the corners of their mouths, who have no patience or fortitude, 
and as are fond of disagreement and quarrelling, as are given to much sleep, 
and are slothful. 

I always dwell in chariots and the animals that draw them, in young 
girls, in ornaments and good clothing, in sacrifices, in clouds charged with 
rain, in blooming lotuses, and in those stars that deck the autumn sky. I 
reside in elephants, in the cow shed, in fine asanas, and in lakes adorned 
with lotuses. 

I live also in such rivers that murmur sweetly in their course, melodious 
with the music of cranes, with rows of diverse trees on their banks, where 
Brahmanas and Rishis dwell. I always dwell in those rivers that are deep 
with surging waters muddied by lions and elephants plunging into them to 
bathe or slake their thirst. 

I reside in angry elephants, in bulls, in kings and good men. I always 
dwell in that house in which the inhabitant pours libation on the sacrificial 


fire and worships cows, Brahmanas and the Devas. I live in that house 
where offerings are made unto the deities at the auspicious times during the 
course of worship. 

I always live in those Brahmanas who are devoted to the study of the 
Vedas, in Kshatriyas devoted to the observance of dharma, in Vaisyas 
devoted to cultivation, and the Sudras devoted to the service of the three 
higher varnas. 

With a firm and steadfast heart, I reside in Narayana, in my embodied 
self. In him is dharma in its perfection and full measure, devotion to 
Brahmanas and the quality of enchantment. 

Dear devi, I do not live in my embodied form in any of these places that 
I have mentioned, other than in Narayana. He in whom I reside in spirit, 
increases in dharma, kirti and artha and gains the objects of his desire.”’”’” 


CANTO 12 


¢ Ne udhishtira says, ‘Rajan, tell me truly which of the two, man or 
woman, derives the greater pleasure from an act of sexual union 
with each other. Pitamaha, dispel my doubts in this matter.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘In this regard, I will tell you the ancient story of the 
discourse between Bhangaswana and Sakra. 

In the olden days, there lived a king named Bhangaswana. He was 
righteous and was known as a Rajarishi. He was, however, childless, and 
performed a sacrifice to have children. The mighty ruler performed the 
Agnishtuta yagna. 

This sacrifice, which worships only Agni Deva, is always abhorred by 
Indra. Yet it is the sacrifice that is performed by men when they seek to 
purify themselves of their sins in order to have children. 

When Indra learned that the king desired to perform the Agnishtuta, 
from that moment he began to look for the weaknesses of that royal sage of 
tranquil soul, for if he did find any he could then punish the king who had 
shown him disrespect. Despite all his vigilance, Indra failed to find any flaw 
or weakness in the king. 

One day, the king went on a hunting expedition. Indra saw this as an 
opportunity to baffle Bhangaswana. Riding alone on his horse, the king 
suddenly found himself confounded because Indra had stupefied his senses. 
Afflicted with hunger and thirst, the king’s panic was so great that he could 
not even determine where he was. Parched with thirst, he began to wander 
aimlessly in a daze. 

He then saw a crystalline lake shimmering with clear water. Alighting 
from his horse, he drank deeply and then led his horse to drink. When his 


mount’s thirst was quenched, the king tied the steed to a tree and plunged 
into the lake to perform his ablutions. 

To his amazement he found that he had been transformed by the waters 
into a woman. The king was overcome with shame. With his senses and 
mind agitated, he began to reflect deeply in this strain: 

“Alas, how will I ride my horse now? How will I return to my capital? 
As a result of the Agnishtuta sacrifice I have got a hundred mighty sons, all 
children of my own loins. What shall I say to them? What shall I say to my 
wives, my relatives and well-wishers, and to the subjects of my city and my 
kingdom? 

Rishis who know the truths of dharma say that mildness and softness 
and being prone to extreme agitation are the attributes of women, and that 
action, strength and energy are those of men. Alas, my manliness has 
disappeared. For what reason have I been overcome with femininity? Being 
so transformed, how will I mount my horse again?” 

Thinking these sad thoughts, the king, though transformed into a 
woman, mounted his steed with some effort and returned to his capital. 
Seeing that extraordinary transformation, his sons and wives and servants, 
and his subjects were astounded. 

That royal sage, that most eloquent men, said to them all, “I was on a 
hunt, accompanied by a large force. Driven by destiny, losing all knowledge 
of the points of the horizon, I entered a thick and terrible forest. In that 
forest, I was afflicted by a strange thirst and quite lost my senses. I then saw 
a beautiful lake abounding with birds of every description. Plunging into 
those waters to perform my ablutions, I was transformed into a woman!” 

The king summoned his wives and counsellors, and all his sons by their 
names, and said to them, “My sons, enjoy this kingdom in happiness. As for 
myself, I shall go away into the forest.” 

Having said this to his children, the king Bhangaswana, now a woman, 
set off for the vana. There, she came upon an asrama inhabited by a 
sannyasi. By him the transformed king gave birth to a hundred sons. Taking 
these sons to the capital, to where her former children were, she said to the 
latter, “You are the sons of my loins while I was a man. These are my 
children brought forth by me as a woman. My sons, all of you must enjoy 
my kingdom together, like brothers born of the same parents.” 

At this command, all the brothers, united together, began to take delight 
in their kingdom jointly. Seeing those children enjoying the kingdom as 


brothers born of the same parents, Indra, filled with wrath, began to reflect, 
“By changing this royal sage into a woman, it appears that I have done him 
good instead of an injury.” 

Saying this, Indra assumed the form of a Brahmana and went to 
Bhangaswana’s capital and, meeting all the princes, succeeded in disuniting 
them. He said to them, “Brothers never remain at peace even when they are 
born of the same father. The sons of Rishi Kasyapa—the Devas and the 
Asuras —fought against each other for the sovereignty of the three worlds. 

As for you princes, you are the sons of Rajarishi Bhangaswana. These 
others are the sons of a sannyasi. The Devas and the Asuras are the progeny 
of a common sire, and yet they fought. How much more, therefore, will you 
fall out among yourselves? This kingdom, your paternal inheritance, is 
being enjoyed by these children of an ascetic.” 

Thus Indra succeeded in causing a rift between them, so that they 
fought and annihilated one another. Hearing this, Bhangaswana, who was 
living as an ascetic woman, burned with grief and poured forth her 
lamentations. 

Indra, in the disguise of a Brahmana, came to where the sannyasini was 
living and on meeting her said, “O beautiful one, what sorrow burns you so 
that you lament so loudly?” 

The woman said to him in a pitiful voice, “Two hundred sons of mine 
have been slain by Kaala. Learned Brahmana, I was once a king, and in that 
state I had a hundred sons. These I begot in my own likeness. Then, one day 
I went on a hunt. Suddenly dazed, as if someone had cast a spell on me, I 
wandered in a dense forest afire with thirst. 

At last seeing a fine lake, I plunged into it. Emerging from the water, I 
found that I had become a woman. Returning to my capital I installed my 
sons in the sovereignty of my dominions and came into the forest. Now as a 
woman, I bore a hundred sons to my husband who is a high-souled ascetic. 
All of them were born in the sannyasi’s asrama. 

I took them to the capital. Through the influence of time, my sons 
fought each other and they all died. And afflicted by festiny, I am 
sorrowing. 

Indra addressed her in these harsh words, “In the past, you injured me 
greatly by performing a yagna that I loathe. Indeed, though I was present, 
you did not invoke me with any honour. You of little understanding, I am 
Indra. It is me with whom you have crossed swords.” 


Beholding Indra revealed before him, the Rajarishi fell at his feet, 
touching them with his head, and said, “Be gratified with me, foremost of 
all Devas. I performed the yagna of which you speak from a desire to have 
sons and not from any wish to offend you. I beg you, forgive me.” 

Seeing the transformed monarch prostrate himself before him, Indra 
was gratified and, wanting to grant him a boon, asked, “Which of your sons 
do you wish to revive? Those that were brought forth by you as a woman, 
or those that you sired as a man?” 

The ascetic woman folded her hands and said to Indra, “Vasava, let 
those sons of mine come to life that were borne by me as a woman.” 

Filled with wonder at this reply, Indra asked her, “Why do you feel less 
fondness for those children born to you as a man? Why is your love greater 
for the sons borne by you as a woman? I wish to hear the reason for this 
difference. Tell me everything.” 

Bhangaswana said, “The love experienced by a woman is much greater 
than that which is felt by a man. Hence it is, O Sakra, that I wish those sons 
to be revived that were borne by me as a woman.” 

Bhishma continued, ‘Thus addressed, Indra was pleased and said to her, 
“Let all your sons come back to life. Ask for another boon, foremost of 
kings, whatever boon you like. Take from me whatever gender you choose, 
that of a woman or of a man.” 

The sannyasin said, ‘Sakra, I want to remain a woman. I do not wish to 
be restored to manhood, Vasava.” 

Hearing this answer, Indra asked her, “Why is it, powerful one, that you 
seek to remain a woman?” 

Bhangaswana replied, ‘In acts of sexual union, the pleasure that women 
enjoy is always far greater than what is enjoyed by men. It is for this reason 
that I wish to remain a woman. Indra, truthfully do I say to you that I derive 
greater pleasure in my womanhood. I am content with this that I now have. 
You may leave me now, O Swargaraja.” 

Hearing these words, Indra said, “So be it”, and bidding her farewell, 
returned to swarga. Yudhishtira, thus it is well known that a woman derives 
much greater pleasure than a man during sexual union.” 


CANTO 13 


¢ oN udhishtira says, “What should a man do in order to pass 
pleasantly through this and the next world? How should one 
conduct oneself? What practices must one adopt with this end in view?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘One must avoid the three sins that are done with the 
body, the four that are done with speech, the three that are done with the 
mind, and the ten paths of sin. 

The three physical sins to be avoided are killing, theft and the 
enjoyment of other men’s wives. The four sins of speech, never to be 
indulged in or even thought of, are evil talk, harsh words, talking about 
other people’s faults and lies. 

Coveting the possessions of others, doing injury to others, and doubting 
the rules of the Vedas, are the three sins of the mind which should always 
be avoided. Hence, one must never do any evil at all with body word or 
mind. By doing good and evil deeds, one is sure to enjoy or endure their 
consequences. Nothing can be more certain than this.’” 


CANTO 14 


66 Y udhishtira says, “‘O Gangaputra, you have heard all the names of 

Maheswara, the Lord of the universe. Pitamaha, tell us all the 
names that are applied to him who is called Isa and Sambhu. Tell us all 
those names that are applied unto him who is called Babhru or vast, him 
that has the universe for his form, him that is the illustrious guru of all the 
Devas and the Asuras, who is called Swayambhu and who is the cause of 
the origin and dissolution of the universe. Describe to us the puissance of 
Mahadeva.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘I am not competent to recite the virtues of Mahadeva. 
He pervades all things in the universe and yet is not seen anywhere. He is 
the Creator of the universal self and the Prajna, the knowing self, and he is 
their master. All the Devas, from Brahma down to the Pisachas, adore and 
worship him. 

He transcends both Prakriti and Purusha. It is of him that Rishis, who 
know yoga and have a knowledge of the tattvas, think and reflect. He is 
indestructible and the Supreme Brahman. He is both existent and non- 
existent. Agitating both Prakriti and Purusha with his energy, He created 
Brahma. 

Who is there that is competent to speak of the virtues of that God of 
gods that is endowed with supreme intelligence? Man is subject to 
conception in the mother’s womb, to birth, decay and death. Being such, 
what man like me has the capacity to understand Bhava? 

Only Narayana, that bearer of the discus and the mace, can comprehend 
Mahadeva. He is without deterioration. He is the foremost of all beings in 


attributes. He is Vishnu, because he pervades the universe. He is 
omnipotent. 

Imbued with spiritual vision, he is possessed of supreme tejas. He sees 
all things with the eye of yoga. It is in consequence of the devotion of 
Krishna to Siva, whom he gratified through tapasya in Badarikasrama, that 
Krishna succeeded in permeating all the universe. 

It is through Maheswara of divine vision that Krishna has obtained the 
attribute of universal charm, which is more delightful than all the wealth in 
the world. For a full thousand years he underwent the austerest penances 
and at last succeeded in gratifying the illustrious and boon-giving Siva, that 
master of all the mobile and the immobile universe. 

In every new yuga, through such tapasya, Krishna has gratified Siva. In 
every yuga Mahadeva has been pleased with the devotion of Krishna. How 
wonderful is the puissance of the Mahatman Mahadeva, that original cause 
of the universe, who was seen by Hari, who himself transcends all decay, 
when he was engaged in tapasya to obtain a son in the asrama of Badari. 

Bhaarata, I do not hold anyone superior to Mahadeva. Only Krishna is 
competent to expound the names of Siva fully and absolutely. This 
Mahabaho of Yadu’s race alone can speak of the attributes of the illustrious 
Siva. Only he is able to discourse on the power, in its entirety, of the 
Supreme Deity.’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Having said this, Bhishma Pitamaha 
addresses Krishna and speaks on the subject of the greatness of Bhava. 

Bhishma says, ‘You are the master of all the Devas and the Asuras. You 
are famed and illustrious. You are Vishnu because you pervade the whole 
universe. It is fitting that you discourse on Siva of universal form about 
whom Yudhishtira has asked me. 

In ancient times, the Rishi Tandin, sprung from Brahma, recited in 
Brahma’s realm before Brahma himself, the thousand names of Mahadeva. 
Recite those names before this gathering so that these tapodhana Rishis, 
who observe high vratas, who possess self-restraint, Vyasa among them, 
may hear you. Discourse on the holiness of him who is immutable, who is 
always joyful, who is hotri, who is the universal Protector, who is Creator 
of the universe, and who is called Mundin and Kapardin.’ 

Krishna says, ‘The Devas, including Indra and Brahma, and the 
Maharishis, cannot fathom the course of Mahadeva’s actions. He is the end 


that all righteous people attain. The very Adityas who have keen sight, 
cannot gaze upon his abode. How then can a mere man comprehend him? 

I will tell you some of the attributes of that illustrious slayer of Asuras, 
who is regarded as the Lord of all tapasya and vratas.’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “And after purifying himself by touching 
water, Krishna began his discourse on the attributes of Siva. 

Krishna says, “Hear, you best of Brahmanas and you also Yudhishtira, 
and hear you too, Ganga’s son, the names of the Kapardin. Listen to how I 
obtained a vision, so difficult to have, of that Great God, for the sake of 
Samba. In those days I saw him through the power of yoga. 

Twelve years after wise Pradyumna, the son of Rukmini, killed the 
Asura Sambara, my wife Jambavati came to me and, seeing Pradyumna, 
Charudeshna and my other sons born to Rukmini, Jambavati, herself 
wanting a son, said to me, “Give me a heroic son, the foremost of mighty 
men, handsome in appearance, sinless in conduct, and like you in every 
way. And let there be no delay on your part in granting this wish of mine. 
There is nothing in the three worlds that is unattainable to you, O 
perpetuator of Yadu’s vamsa; you can create other worlds by merely 
wishing it. 

Observing a vow for twelve years and purifying yourself, you 
worshipped Siva and then begot upon Rukmini her sons Charudeshna and 
Sucharu and Charuvesa and Yasodhana and Charusravas and Charuyasas 
and Pradyumna and Samba. Grant to me a son like those powerful sons of 
Rukmini.” 

Thus addressed by the princess, I replied, “Give me leave to go away 
for some time. I will certainly obey your command!” 

She said to me, “Go, and may you always be accompanied by success 
and prosperity. Let Brahma and Siva and Kasyapa, the great rivers, those 
Devas that preside over the mind, all plants, those chchandas that bear the 
libations poured in sacrifices, the Rishis, Bhumi, the oceans, the sacrificial 
dakshina, and those syllables that are uttered for completing the intonations 
of Samans, all protect you. 

Yadava, let the Rikshas, the Pitris, the Navagrahas, the consorts of the 
Devas, the Apsaras, the Devis, the great kalpas, cows, Chandramas, Savitri, 
Agni, Savitri, the knowledge of the Vedas, the seasons, the year, the small 
and great divisions of time, the kshanas, the labas, the muhurtas, the 
nimeshas, and the yugas in succession, protect you, and keep you in 


happiness, wherever you may dwell. Let no danger overtake you on your 
way, and be not careless.” 

Thus blessed by her, I took her leave. I then went into the presence of 
my father, of my mother, of the king, and of Ahuka, and I told them what 
the sorrowing daughter of the Vidyadhara prince had said to me. Taking 
their leave as well, I went sadly to Gada and to Rama of vast might. 

They said to me, “Let your tapasya increase without any obstacle.” 
Having received their leave, I thought of Garuda. He came instantly to me 
and, at my bidding, bore me to Himavat. Arriving at Himavat, I let him go. 

There on that foremost of mountains, I saw many wonderful sights. I 
saw a pleasant asrama in which to perform tapasya. That delightful asrama 
was presided over by the high-souled Upamanyu who was a descendant of 
Vyaghrapada. It is celebrated and revered by the Devas and the Gandharvas, 
and appeared to be mantled in Vedic beauty. 

It was adorned with dhavas and kakubhas and kadambas and cocas, 
with kuruvakas and ketakas and jambus and patalas, with nyagrodhas and 
varunakas and vatsanabhas and bilwas, with saralas and kapitthas, and 
piyalas and salas, and palmyras, with badaris and kundas and punnagas, and 
asokas and amras and kovidaras and champakas and panasas, and other 
trees laden with flowers and fruit. That asrama was also decked with the 
straight stems of the sweet banana. 

Truly, that hermitage was adorned with diverse trees laden with fruit 
that formed the food of many kinds of birds. Heaps of the ashes of 
sacrificial fires were scattered all around, adding to the beauty of the scene. 
It abounded with ruru deer, monkeys, tigers, lions and leopards, with deer 
of diverse species and peacocks, and with wild cats and snakes. Indeed, 
many bison and bears could also be seen there. 

Pleasant breezes blew bearing the melodious voices of Apsaras. The 
murmur of mountain streams and springs, the sweet notes of winged 
choristers, the deep grunts of elephants, the delicious strains of kinnaras, 
and the auspicious voices of ascetics singing the Samans, and other kinds of 
music, rendered that asrama utterly charming. 

The mind cannot imagine another asrama as delightful as the one I saw. 
There were large housings for the sacred fire, all covered with flowering 
creepers. It was adorned with the clear and sacred water of the river Ganga. 
The daughter of Jahnu always lived there. 


Many sannyasis, the foremost of all righteous men, endowed with great 
souls, and who resembled Agni himself in tejas, were its ornaments. Some 
of those ascetics subsisted on air and some on water, some were devoted to 
japa, and some were engaged in purifying their souls by practising the 
virtues of compassion, while some among them were yogins devoted to 
yoga dhyana. 

Some amongst them subsisted upon only smoke, and some on fire, and 
some on milk. Thus was that asrama adorned with many great and evolved 
men. And some there had taken the vow of eating and drinking like cows; 
they no longer used their hands. And some used only two pieces of stone to 
husk their grain, and some used only their teeth. And some existed by 
drinking only the rays of the moon, and some by drinking only froth. And 
some had vowed to live like deer. 

There were some who lived on the fruits of the ficus tree, and others 
who survived on water. Some dressed themselves in rags and some in 
animal skins and some in barks of trees. Indeed, I saw diverse ascetics of 
the best orders observing these and other painful vratas. I then wished to 
enter that asrama. 

That retreat was honoured and adored by the Devas and all high-souled 
beings, by Siva, and by all righteous creatures. It stood in all its beauty on 
the breast of Himavat, like the moon in the sky. The mongoose sported 
there with the snake, and the tiger with the deer, as friends, forgetting their 
natural enmity, and this was because of the blissful tejas of those sannyasis 
of blazing tapasya and for their proximity to those Mahatmans. 

As soon as I entered that asrama, enchanting to all creatures, inhabited 
by many great Brahmanas, all knowers of the Vedas and their angas, and by 
many high-souled Rishis celebrated for their difficult vratas, I saw a mighty 
Rishi with matted locks on his head and dressed in rags, who seemed to 
blaze forth like fire with his tapasya and tejas. Waited upon by his disciples 
and of tranquil soul, that foremost of Brahmanas was young. His name was 
Upamanyu. 

I bowed to him and he said, “You are welcome, you of eyes like lotus 
petals. Today, with your visit, we see that our penances have borne fruit. 
You are worthy of our adoration, yet you revere us. You are worthy of being 
seen, but you come to see me.” 

With folded hands, I asked him about the well-being of the animals and 
birds that lived in his asrama, about the progress of his spiritual 


advancement, and his disciples. The illustrious Upamanyu said to me 
sweetly, “Krishna, you will undoubtedly have a son like yourself. Gratify 
Isana, the Lord of all creatures, with stern tapasya. 

That divine master sports here with his wife beside him. It was here that 
in ancient times the Devas with all the Rishis pleased him with their 
penances and celibacy, their truth and self-restraint, and had their wishes 
fulfilled. That illustrious God is the infinite vessel of all tejas and tapasya. 

Projecting into existence and withdrawing once more unto himself all 
good and evil things, that inconceivable deity whom you seek lives here 
with his wife. The Danava Hiranyakashipu, whose strength was so great 
that he could shake the very mountains of Meru, succeeded in obtaining 
from Mahadeva the power of all the Devas and enjoyed it for ten millions 
of years. 

Mandara, foremost among all Hiranyakashipu’s sons, also has a boon 
from Siva and succeeded in fighting Indra for a million years. Vishnu’s 
terrible Sudarsana Chakra and Indra’s vajra, both, could not make the 
slightest impact upon the body of that great cause of universal affliction. 

The discus that you bear was given to you by Mahadeva after he had 
slain a Daitya who was proud of his strength and once lived within the 
waters. Siva created that chakra, blazing with energy like Agni. Wonderful 
and irresistible, he gave it to you. Because of its blazing energy no one 
could look upon it other than Siva Pinakin himself. 

Indeed, it was for this reason that Siva named it Sudarsana. From that 
time the name Sudarsana came to be used in all the worlds. Krishna, even 
that weapon failed to have the slightest effect on the body of 
Hiranyakashipu’s son Mandara, who appeared like an evil planet in the 
three worlds. Having obtained a boon from Mahadeva, hundreds of chakras 
like yours and thunderbolts like those of Indra, could not inflict even a 
scratch on the body of that malignant planet. 

Afflicted by the mighty Mandara, the Devas fought hard but in vain 
against him and his supporters, all of whom had received boons from 
Mahadeva. Pleased with another Danava named Vidyutprabha, Siva granted 
to him the sovereignty of the three worlds. That Danava remained the ruler 
of the three worlds for a hundred thousand years. 

And Mahadeva said to him, ‘You will become one of my ganas.’ He 
further bestowed upon him the boon of a hundred million sons. The Lord of 


all creatures further gave the Danava the realm of Kusadwipa for his 
kingdom. 

Another great Asura, Satamukha, was created by Brahma. For a 
hundred years he poured the flesh of his own body on the sacrificial fire as 
an offering to Siva. Gratified with such tapasya, Sankara said to him, “What 
can I do for you?’ 

Satamukha replied, “Let me have the power of creating new creatures. 
Give me also eternal power.’ 

Siva said to him, ‘So be it.’ 

In earlier times, Swayambhu Brahma, concentrating his mind in yoga, 
performed a yagna for three hundred years, with the aim of having children. 
Mahadeva granted him a thousand sons with the attributes befitting the 
merits of the sacrifice. 

Krishna, you doubtless know him who is praised by the Devas. The 
Rishi Yajnavalkya is exceptionally virtuous. By adoring Mahadeva he has 
acquired great fame. The great ascetic Vyasa, who is Parasara’s son, with 
soul set on yoga, has gained great renown by adoring Sankara. 

One day the Balakhilyas were disregarded by Indra. In anger, they 
worshipped Siva. That Lord of the universe, thus gratified by the 
Balakhilyas, said to them, ‘By your tapasya, you will succeed in creating a 
bird that will rob Indra of the amrita.’ 

In the past, on account of the wrath of Mahadeva, all the waters of the 
world disappeared. The Devas worshipped him by performing the 
Saptakapala yagna, and through his grace caused other waters to flow. 
Truly, when he was pleased, water once more appeared in the world. 

The wife of Atri, who knew the Vedas well, left him in anger and said, 
‘I shall no longer live in subjection to that sannyasi.’ And she sought the 
protection of Siva. Through fear of her lord, Atri spent three hundred years 
without all food. And all this time she slept on wooden blocks to gratify 
Bhava. 

Mahadeva appeared before her and smilingly said to her, ‘You shall 
have a son. And you will get that son without needing a husband, but just 
through the grace of Rudra. That son, born in his father’s vamsa, will be 
celebrated for his worth, and take a name after you.’ 

Devoted to Siva, the illustrious Vikarna also successfully gratified him 
with severe tapasya. 


Sakalya, too, adored Bhava in a mental sacrifice that he performed for 
nine hundred years. Pleased with him the illustrious deity said to him, ‘You 
will become a great Kavi. Your fame will be boundless in the three worlds. 
Your vamsa also will be infinite and will be adorned by many great Rishis 
that shall take birth in it. Your son will become the foremost of Brahmanas 
and will arrange the Sutras of your work.’ 

In the Krita yuga there was a celebrated Rishi of the name of Savarni. 
Here, in this asrama, he underwent austere penance for six thousand years. 
Siva said to him, ‘I am pleased with you, sinless one. Without being subject 
to decay or death, you will become a poet renowned through all the worlds.’ 

In ancient days, in Varanasi, Sakra, filled with bhakti, adored Mahadeva 
who is clothed by empty space and who is smeared with ashes. Having 
done so, Indra obtained the sovereignty of the Devas. 

Once Narada, too, adored the great Bhava with a devoted heart. 
Gratified with him, Mahadeva, that guru of the divine guru, said, ‘No one 
will be your equal in tejas and tapasya. You will always attend upon me 
with your singing and your vina.’ 

Krishna, hear also how I succeeded in obtaining a sight of that God of 
gods, that master of all creatures; hear also in detail for what purpose. With 
senses and mind subdued I invoked that Deva of supreme energy. I will tell 
you all that I succeeded in obtaining from Maheswara, that God of gods. 

In the Krita yuga there was a famed Rishi named Vyaghrapada. He was 
celebrated for his knowledge and mastery over the Vedas and their angas. I 
was born as the son of that Rishi, and Dhaumya as my younger brother. 

Once, accompanied by Dhaumya, I came upon the asrama of certain 
evolved Rishis. There I saw a cow that was being milked. I saw the milk 
and it resembled amrita itself in taste. I then came home, and impelled by 
childishness, I said to my mother, ‘Give me some food prepared with milk.’ 

There was no milk in the house, and so my mother was saddened by my 
asking for it. My mother took a lump of cooked rice and boiled it in water. 
The water became white and my mother placed it before us saying that it 
was milk and told us to drink it. 

Once before this I had drunk milk when my father took me to the house 
of some of our great kinsmen at the time of a yagna. A divine cow, who 
delights the Devas, was being milked. Drinking her milk that was like 
amrita in taste, I knew what the qualities of milk were. I knew at once what 
our mother had set before us as milk. Its taste gave me no pleasure at all. 


Again, I childishly said to my mother, ‘This, O mother, is not any 
preparation of milk.’ 

Filled with sorrow at this, and embracing me lovingly and sniffing the 
top of my head, Madhava, she said to me, ‘My child, where can ascetics of 
pure souls get food prepared with milk? We live in the forest and subsist 
upon bulbs and roots and fruits. Where will we, who live by the banks of 
rivers that are the resort of the Balakhilyas, we who have mountains and 
forests for our home, from where shall we get milk? 

We live sometimes on air and sometimes on water. We dwell in the 
hearts of forests. We habitually abstain from all kinds of food that are eaten 
by those who live in villages and towns. We are accustomed to only such 
food as the wilderness provides. Child, there cannot be any milk in the 
wilderness where there are no offspring of Surabhi. 

Dwelling on the banks of rivers or in caves or on mountainsides, or in 
tirthas and other wild places, we pass our time in the practice of tapasya and 
the chanting of sacred mantras, with Siva as our highest refuge. Without 
gratifying him of unfading glory, he who has three eyes, from where can 
one obtain food prepared with milk or grand robes and other objects of 
worldly enjoyment? 

Devote yourself, dear son, to Sankara with your whole soul. Through 
his grace you are sure to receive all that will satisfy your desires.’ 

On hearing these words of my mother, I joined my hands in reverence 
and bowing to her, said, “O mother, who this Mahadeva? In what manner 
can one gratify him? Where does that God dwell? How can he be seen? 
With what is he seen? What also is the form of Sarva? How may one 
succeed in gaining knowledge of him? If gratified, will he show himself to 
me?’ 

Govinda, after I had said these words to my mother, with tears in her 
eyes she lovingly sniffed my head. Gently patting my arms, she spoke to me 
with great humility. 

She said, ‘Mahadeva is very difficult to be known by those uncleansed 
souls. Impure men cannot bear him in their hearts, indeed they cannot 
comprehend him at all. They cannot retain him in their minds. They cannot 
grasp him, nor can they obtain a vision of him. 

Men of wisdom aver that his forms are many. Many, again, are the 
places in which he dwells. Many are the forms of his grace. Who is there 
that can understand the deeds of Isa in all their aspects, or all the forms he 


has assumed in times gone by? Who can relate how he sports and how he is 
gratified? 

Maheswara of universal form lives in the hearts of all creatures. While 
Munis discoursed on his auspicious and extraordinary deeds, I have heard 
from them how, impelled by compassion towards his bhaktas, he grants 
them a glimpse of himself. To honour the Brahmanas, the inhabitants of 
swarga recited to them the diverse forms that were taken by Mahadeva. You 
have asked me about these and I will recite them to you.’ 

My mother continued, ‘Siva assumes the forms of Brahma and Vishnu 
and the king of the Devas, of the Rudras, the Adityas and the Aswins; and 
of those Devas that are called Viswadevas. He assumes the forms also of 
men and women, of Pretas and Pisachas, of Kiratas and Savaras, and of all 
marine animals. That illustrious God assumes the forms of also those 
Savaras that dwell in forests. 

He assumes the forms of tortoises, fishes and conches. He it is that takes 
the forms of those corals used as ornaments by men. He assumes also the 
forms of Yakshas, Rakshasas and Nagas, of Daityas and Danavas. Indeed, 
he assumes the forms of all those creatures that live hidden in hollows. 

He takes the forms of tigers and lions and deer, of wolves and bears and 
birds, of owls and of jackals as well. It is he that assumes the forms of 
swans and crows and peacocks, of chameleons and lizards and storks. He it 
is that assumes the forms of cranes and vultures and chakravakas. Truly, it 
is he that assumes the forms of chasas and of mountains. 

It is Mahadeva that assumes the forms of cows and elephants and horses 
and camels and donkeys. He also takes the forms of goats and leopards, and 
diverse other animals. It is Siva who assumes the forms of a variety of birds 
of beautiful plumage. It is Mahadeva who assumes the forms of men with 
staffs and those with umbrellas and those with swords, among Brahmanas. 

He sometimes becomes six-faced and sometimes multi-faced. He 
sometimes assumes forms having three eyes and forms having many heads. 
And he sometimes assumes forms having many millions of legs and forms 
having countless bellies and faces, and forms with many arms and sides. He 
sometimes appears surrounded by innumerable bhutas and pretas, spirits 
and ghosts. 

He it is that assumes the forms of Rishis and Gandharvas, and of 
Siddhas and Charanas. His form is sometimes rendered white with the ashes 
he smears on it and is adorned with a half-moon on his forehead. Adored 


with diverse mantras uttered in diverse kinds of voice and worshipped with 
diverse mantras filled with encomiums, he, that is sometimes called Sarva, 
is the destroyer of all creatures in the universe, and it is upon him, again, 
that all creatures rest. 

Mahadeva is the soul of all creatures. He pervades all things. He 
discourses on dharma and karmas. He dwells everywhere, in the hearts of 
all creatures in the universe. He knows the desires of each of his devotees. 
He becomes one with the object which one reveres. If it pleases you, do you 
seek his protection. 

He sometimes rejoices, and sometimes yields to wrath, and at others 
utters a deafening humkara. At times, he sometimes arms himself with the 
chakra, at times with the trisula, at times with the gada, sometimes with the 
Pinaka, and sometimes with the khatvanga. He it is that assumes the form of 
Sesha who holds the world on his head. 

He has snakes for his girdle, and his ears are adorned with earrings that 
are snakes. Snakes form also the sacred thread he wears. His upper garment 
is an elephant skin. He sometimes laughs and at others sings, and 
sometimes dances most wondrously and madly. 

Surrounded by many spirits and ghosts, he plays on musical 
instruments. Diverse are these instruments, and sweet are their sounds. He 
roams across cremations grounds, yawns, cries, and makes others weep. 

He assumes the guise of one who is mad, and also of one who is 
intoxicated, and he sometimes speaks words that are exceedingly sweet. He 
laughs fiercely, frightening all creatures with his dreadful eyes. He sleeps 
and remains awake and sometimes yawns as he pleases. 

He recites sacred mantras and becomes the deity of those mantras. He 
performs tapasya and becomes the one who is adored by those penances. He 
makes gifts and receives those very gifts; at times he immerses himself in 
yoga and at times becomes the object of the yoga dhyana of others. 

He may be seen on the vedi, the sacrificial platform, or in the stamba, 
the sacrificial stake; in the goshala or in the Agni. Again, he may not be 
seen there. He may be seen as a child or as an old man. He dallies with the 
daughters and the wives of the Rishis. 

His hair is long and straight. He is perfectly naked, for he has the sky 
for his raiment. He has terrifying eyes. He is fair, he is dark; he is dark, he is 
pale; he is the colour of smoke, and he is red. He has big and fierce eyes. 
Akasa is his covering and it is he who covers all things. 


Who is there that can comprehend the limits of Mahadeva who is 
formless, who is one and indivisible, who conjures up illusions, who is the 
cause of all creation and destruction in the universe, who assumes the form 
of Hiranyagarbha, and who is without beginning and without end, and who 
is without birth? 

He lives in the heart of every creature. He is the prana, he is Manas, and 
he is the Jiva. He is the soul of yoga, and it is that which is called yoga. He 
is the yoga dhyana into which yogins enter. He is the Paramatman. Indeed 
Maheswara, the purity in essence, can be understood not by the senses but 
only through the Atman seizing his existence. 

He plays on many musical instruments. He sings. He has a hundred 
thousand eyes, he has one mouth, he has two mouths, he has three mouths, 
and he has many mouths. Devote yourself to him, set your heart upon him, 
depend upon him, and accept him as your only refuge; you adore Mahadeva 
and then you will have the fruits of all your wishes.’ 

Hearing these words of my mother, from that day my devotion was 
focused solely on Mahadeva. I applied myself to the practice of the 
austerest penances to gratify him. For one thousand years I stood on my left 
toe. 

After that I passed one thousand years subsisting only upon fruits. The 
next one thousand years I lived on the fallen leaves of trees. The next 
thousand years I passed subsisting upon water only. After that I passed 
seven hundred years on air alone. 

In this way, I adored Siva for a full thousand years of the Devas. After 
this, the Master of the universe was gratified with me. Wanting to know 
whether I was solely devoted to him and him alone, he appeared before me 
in the form of Sakra surrounded by all the Devas. 

As the celebrated Sakra, he had a thousand eyes and was armed with the 
vajra. And he rode on a pure white elephant with four tusks, with eyes red, 
ears folded, the temporal juice trickling down his cheeks, with trunk 
contracted, and terrifying to behold. Indeed, riding on such an elephant, the 
illustrious chief of the Devas seemed to blaze forth with splendour. 

With a beautiful crown on his head and adorned with garlands round his 
neck and bracelets round his arms, he neared where I stood. A white chatra 
was held over his head. And he was waited upon by many Apsaras, and 
many Gandharvas sang his praise. Addressing me, he said, “Dvijottama, I 
am pleased with you. Ask me for whatever boon you desire.’ 


These words of Sakra did not please me. Krishna, I answered him in 
these words: ‘I do not desire any boon from you or any other god. I tell you 
truly that it is only from Mahadeva that I seek boons. That I say to you is 
nothing but the truth. 

Only words which relate to Maheswara fill me with joy. At the 
command of Pasupati, I am ready to become a worm or a tree with many 
branches. If I do not receive the blessings of Mahadeva’s boons, the very 
sovereignty of the three worlds would not be acceptable to me. 

Let me be born among the very Chandalas but let me still be devoted to 
the feet of Siva. Without being devoted to him, I would not like to be born 
in the palace of Indra himself. If a man lacks devotion to him, that master of 
the Devas and the Asuras, he will suffer even if he can subsist upon only air 
and water for want of food. 

No other discourses on dharma are needed by those who live every 
moment thinking of the feet of Mahadeva. When the Kali yuga comes, one 
must devote one’s heart every moment to Mahadeva. 

One that has drunk the amrita of devotion to Siva is freed from the fear 
of samsara. One that has not obtained the grace of Mahadeva can never 
succeed in devoting oneself to him for a single day, or for half a day, or for 
a muhurta, or even for a kshana or a lava. At the command of Mahadeva I 
would cheerfully become a worm or an insect, but I have no wish for even 
the sovereignty of the three worlds, if you, Sakra, were to bestow it upon 
me. 

At his word I would become even a dog. In fact, that would be my 
highest wish. If not given by Maheswara, I would not have the sovereignty 
of the very Devas. I do not wish to have dominion over swarga. I do not 
wish to have the sovereignty of the celestials. I do not wish to have the 
realm of Brahma. Indeed, I do not even wish to have moksha, that cessation 
of individual existence and a complete identification with Brahman. 

But I want to become the dasa of Hara. As long as that Lord of all 
creatures, with crown on his head and luminous body of the moon, does not 
become gratified with me, so long shall I endure all the afflictions, due to a 
hundred cycles of decay, death and birth that befall all embodied beings. 

Who can obtain peace without gratifying Rudra, who is free from decay 
and death, who is imbued with the effulgence of the sun, the moon, or the 
fire, who is the root or original cause of everything real and unreal in the 
three worlds, and who exists as one indivisible entity? If I am reborn 


because of my faults, I will, in those new births, devote myself solely to 
Mahadeva.’ 

Indra said, ‘What reason can you assign for the existence of a Supreme 
Being or for his being the cause of all causes?’ 

I, Upamanyu, said, ‘I solicit boons from that great deity named Siva 
who has been described as existent and non-existent, manifest and 
unmanifest, eternal and immutable, one and many. I solicit boons from Him 
who is without beginning and middle and end, who is knowledge and 
puissance, who is inconceivable and who is the Paramatman. I solicit boons 
from he from whom comes all power, who has not been created by anyone, 
who is immutable, and who, though himself not sprung from any seed, is 
the seed of all things in the universe. 

I solicit boons from him who is blazing effulgence, beyond tamas, who 
is the essence of all tapasya, who transcends all our faculties that we may 
use to understand him, and by knowing whom we are liberated from 
sorrow. Purandara, I worship him who is conversant with the creation of all 
elements and the thought of all living beings, and who is the original cause 
of the existence or creation of all creatures, who is omnipresent, and who 
has the power to give everything. 

I solicit boons from him who cannot be grasped by reason, who is the 
focus of the Samkhya and the yoga systems of philosophy, and who 
transcends all things, and whom all wise men worship and adore. I solicit 
boons from him who is the soul of Maghavat himself, who is said to be the 
God of the gods, and who is the master of all creatures. 

I solicit boons from him who it is that first created Brahma, Creator of 
all the worlds, having filled space with his energy and brought the primeval 
egg into existence. Who else than that Supreme Lord could be the creator of 
Agni, Jala, Vayu, Bhumi, Akasa and Manas, and that which is called 
Mahat? 

Sakra, tell me, who else than Siva could create Manas, Buddhi, Chitta 
or Ahamkara, the Tanmatras, and the indriyas? Who is there higher than 
Siva? 

The wise say that Brahma is the Creator of this universe. Brahma, 
however, acquired his puissance and prosperity by worshipping and 
gratifying Mahadeva. Consisting of the three attributes of creation, 
preservation and destruction, that power, which dwells in that illustrious 
Being who is endowed with the quality of being One, who created Brahma, 


Vishnu and Rudra, was derived from Mahadeva. Tell me who is there that is 
superior to the Supreme Lord? 

Considering the sovereignty and oppressive power of the Daityas and 
the Danavas, who else can unite the sons of Diti and confer upon them 
power and dominion? Know that the different points of the horizon, time, 
the sun, all fiery entities, the planets, wind, water, and the stars and 
constellations come from Mahadeva. Tell me who is higher than the 
Supreme Lord? 

Who else is there, other than Mahadeva, in the matter of the creation of 
sacrifice and the destruction of Tripura? Who else other than Mahadeva, 
that Parantapa, has given regency to the principal Devas? 

What need is there of clever and refined speech, when I behold you of a 
thousand eyes, best of the Devas, who are worshipped by Siddhas, 
Gandharvas and the other Devas and the Rishis? All this is due to the 
blessings of Mahadeva.’ 

Krishna, know that this all, consisting of animate and inanimate 
existences with swarga and other unseen entities, which occur in this world, 
and which has the all-pervading Lord for their soul, has flowed from 
Maheswara and has been created by him for the Jiva’s enjoyment. In the 
worlds that are known as Bhur, Bhuvah, Svah, and Maha, in the midst of 
the mountains of lokaloka, in the islands, in the Mountains of Meru, in all 
things that yield happiness, and in the hearts of all creatures, there resides 
Mahadeva. 

If the Devas and the Asuras could see any other more powerful than 
Siva, would both of them, especially the former when attacked by the latter, 
not have sought that other’s protection? In all conflicts between the Devas, 
the Yakshas, the Uragas and the Rakshasas, which end in mutual 
destruction, it is Siva who assigns them their respective positions dependent 
upon their karma. 

Tell me, who else is there than Maheswara to bestow boons upon, and 
then again punish Andhaka, Sukra, Dundubhi, many great Maharishis, 
Yakshas, Indra and Bala, and Rakshasas and the Nivatakavachas? 

Was not the vital seed of Mahadeva, master of both the Devas and the 
Asuras, poured as a libation upon the fire? From that seed sprang a 
mountain of gold. Who else is there whose seed can be said to be of such 
power? 


Who else in this world is praised for having only the very sky for his 
garments? Who else can be said to be a brahmacharin with his always vital 
seed drawn up? Who else is there that has half his body occupied by his 
Devi? Who else is there that has been able to subdue Kama, the god of 
desire? 

Tell me, Indra, what other Being possesses that high realm of supreme 
felicity which is lauded by all the deities? Who else has the cremation 
ground for his playing field? Who else is there that is extolled for his 
dancing? 

Whose puissance and worship remain immutable? Who else sports with 
bhutas and pretas? Tell me who else has companions who possess strength 
like his own and who are thus proud of that vigour and power? 

Who else is there whose status is acclaimed as unchangeable and 
revered by the three worlds? Who else pours rain, gives heat, and blazes 
forth with tejas? From whom else do we derive our treasure of herbs and 
plants? Who else upholds all kinds of wealth? Who else sports as much as 
he pleases in the three worlds of mobile and immobile beings? 

Indra, know Maheswara to be the original cause of everything. He is 
adored by yogins, by Rishis, by Gandharvas, and by Siddhas, with the help 
of gyana, of tapasya, and of the rites laid down in the shastras. He is adored 
by both the Devas and the Asuras using tapasya and karma, and the rituals 
laid down in the sacred scriptures. 

The fruits of action can never touch him for he transcends them all. 
Being such, I call him the original cause of everything. 

He is both sthula and sukshma, embodied and pure spirit. He is without 
equal. He cannot be conceived by the senses. He is both with and without 
attributes. He is the Lord of gunas, for he controls them. Such is 
Maheswara’s standing. 

He is the cause of the creation and preservation of the universe. He is 
the cause of the universe and the cause also of its destruction. He is the past, 
the present and the future. He is the sire of all things. Truly, he is the cause 
of everything. 

He is that which is mutable; he is the unmanifest, he is vidya; he is 
avidya; he is every action, he is every omission; he is dharma and he is 
adharma. Him I call the cause of everything. 

Indra, behold the features of both the genders in the image of 
Mahadeva, the Ardhanariswara. He is the cause of both creation and 


destruction, and unites in his body the characteristics of both male and 
female as the one cause of the creation of the universe. My mother told me 
that he is the cause of the universe and the one cause of everything. 

There is no one that is higher than Isa. If it pleases you, surrender 
yourself to his kindness and protection. You know that the universe has 
sprung from the union of the sexes, as represented by Mahadeva. You know 
the universe to be the sum of what is endowed with attributes and what else 
is divested of attributes and has the seeds of Brahma and others for its 
immediate cause. 

Brahma and Indra and Hutasana and Vishnu and all the other Devas, 
along with the Daityas and the Asuras, crowned with the fruition of a 
thousand desires, always say that there is none that is higher than 
Mahadeva. I am compelled to seek that God known to all the mobile and 
immobile universe, he who has been spoken of as the highest of all the 
gods, and who is auspiciousness itself, so that I may attain, without delay, 
mukti, that highest of all acquisitions. 

What need is there to find any more evidence to prove what I believe? 
The supreme Mahadeva is the cause of all causes. We have never heard that 
the Devas worship the emblem of another god. Tell me, if you ever heard of 
any other whose sign has been or is being worshipped by all the deities? 

He whose emblem is always worshipped by Brahma, by Vishnu, by you 
Indra, with all the other Devas, is the foremost of all deities. Brahma has for 
his sign the lotus, Vishnu has for his the discus, and Indra has the thunder- 
bolt. But the creatures of the world do not bear any of these. 

On the other hand, all creatures bear the signs that mark Mahadeva and 
Uma. Hence, all creatures must be regarded as belonging to Maheswara. All 
creatures of the female sex, have their origin in Uma’s nature, and so bear 
the mark of femininity, the yoni that distinguishes her; all creatures that are 
male, having sprung from Siva, bear the masculine mark, the linga that 
distinguishes him. 

Anyone who says that there is, in the three worlds with their mobile and 
immobile creatures, any other cause than the Supreme Lord, and that which 
is not marked with the mark of either Mahadeva or his consort should be 
regarded as wretched and should not be counted among the creatures of the 
universe. Every being with the mark of the male sex should be known to be 
of Isana, while every being with the mark of the female sex should be 


known to be of Uma. This universe of mobile and immobile creatures has 
either a male or female form. 

It is from Mahadeva that I wish to obtain boons. Failing in this, I would 
prefer death itself. Slayer of Bala, go or remain as you wish. I wish to have 
boons or curses from Mahadeva. No other deity shall I ever accept, nor 
would I want my wishes to be granted by any other.’ 

Having said these words to Indra, I was overwhelmed with grief at the 
thought of Mahadeva not having been gratified with me despite my severe 
austerities. However, in an instant, I saw the celestial elephant before me 
transformed into a bull as white as a swan, or the jasmine flower, or a stalk 
of the lotus, or silver, or an ocean of milk. 

Of a massive body, the tuft of its tail was black and the colour of its 
eyes was brown like honey. Its horns were hard as steel and had the colour 
of gold. With their sharp red points, the bull seemed to cleave the earth. The 
animal was adorned all over with ornaments made of the purest gold. 

Its face and hooves and nose and ears were exceedingly beautiful and its 
loins well-formed. Its flanks were handsome and its neck was broad. Its 
whole form was utterly beautiful to behold. Its hump radiated great beauty 
and appeared to occupy the whole of its shoulder. And it looked like the 
peak of a mountain of snow or like a cliff of white clouds in the sky. 

Upon the back of that animal I saw seated the illustrious Mahadeva 
along with Uma. He shone like the lord of stars, the moon while he is at his 
full. The fire born of his energy was brilliant like the lightning that flashes 
amidst clouds. It looked as if a thousand suns rose there, filling every side 
with dazzling splendour. The tejas of the Supreme Lord was like the 
Samvartaka fire which destroys all creatures at the end of the yuga. 

Suffused with that tejas, the sky darkened and I could see nothing. I was 
filled with anxiety and wondered what it could mean. That dark energy did 
not pervade every side for long, through Siva’s illusion, and soon the 
horizon cleared. 

I then saw Maheswara seated on the back of his bull, of blessed and 
benign appearance and looking like a smokeless fire. And the Great God 
was accompanied by Parvati of unblemished features. Indeed, I beheld 
Nilakanta, blue-throated Sthanu, detached from everything, that wielder of 
all kinds of force, as having eighteen arms and adorned with all kinds of 
ornaments. 


Clad in white raiment, he wore white garlands and had white liniments 
smeared upon his limbs. His matchless banner was white in colour. His 
sacred thread was also white. With powers equal to his own, he was 
surrounded by his ganas, who were singing or dancing or playing on 
various musical instruments. 

A pale crescent moon formed his crown, and set on his brow it was like 
the moon that rises in the winter sky. He seemed ablaze with splendour, 
because of his three eyes that were like three suns. The garland of the purest 
white on his body shone like a festoon of lotuses, adorned with jewels. 

I also saw Siva’s weapons in their embodied forms bursting with every 
kind of energy. The deity held a vari-coloured bow whose colours were like 
those of the rainbow. 

That bow, the famed Pinaka, is really a mighty snake. Indeed, that male 
snake of seven heads and immense body, of ample neck, of sharp fangs and 
virulent poison, was twined round with the rope that served as its 
bowstring. 

And there was a shaft as splendid as the sun or the fire that appears at 
the end of the yuga. Indeed, that arrow was the mighty and unrivalled 
Pasupata, indescribable for its power, and striking fear into every creature. 

Of vast proportions, it seemed to constantly shoot out tongues of fire. It 
has one foot, large teeth, a thousand heads and thousand bellies, a thousand 
arms, a thousand tongues and a thousand eyes. It seemed to continually 
emit fire. 

Mahabaho, that weapon is superior to the Brahma, the Narayana, the 
Aindra, the Agneya, and the Varuna astras. It can make ashes of every other 
weapon in the universe. Using that astra Mahadeva had once, burnt down 
the Tripura, the triad cities of the Asuras in a flash. With that single arrow, 
Krishna, he, Siva, achieved that impossible feat with the greatest ease. 

Shot by Mahadeva’s arms, that astra can consume the entire universe 
with all its mobile and immobile creatures in the twinkling of an eye. 
Everyone in the universe, including even Brahma and Vishnu and the 
Devas, that weapon can slay. I saw that incomparable astra in the hand of 
Mahadeva. 

There is another mysterious and powerful weapon which is equal, even 
superior to the Pasupata. I also saw that one. It is celebrated in all the 
worlds as the sum of the Sula-armed Mahadeva. Cast by him, it can rive the 
earth, dry up the waters of the ocean or indeed annihilate the universe. 


In the past that Sula made ashes of Yuvanaswa’s son, King Mandhatri, 
conqueror of the three worlds, ruler of a vast empire and endowed with 
prodigious energy, along with all his army. Mighty, and like Sakra himself 
in prowess was Mandhatri, but the Rakshasa Lavana killed him with the 
Sula which he received from Siva. 

The Sula has such sharp prongs that they verge on being invisible. It can 
terrify all and make the hair of the mightiest stand on end. I saw that trident 
in Mahadeva’s hand, and it seemed to roar with rage, having contracted its 
forehead into three furrows. It resembled, Krishna, a smokeless fire or the 
sun that rises at the end of the yuga. The handle of that Sula, was a mighty 
snake. It is indescribable. It looked like Yama himself armed with his noose 
with which he draws out souls from living creatures. I saw this astra in the 
hand of Mahadeva. 

I beheld also another weapon, the battle-axe Khatvanga, which the 
gratified Siva once gave to Parasurama Bhargava and with which Rama 
exterminates all the Kshatriyas of the world. It was with this weapon that 
Rama destroyed the great Kartavirya in furious battle. It was with that 
weapon that Jamadagni’s son was able to annihilate the Kshatriyas on 
twenty-one occasions. 

Searingly sharp, that axe hung on Siva’s shoulder, adorned with his 
snake. Indeed, it glowed on Mahadeva’s body like the flame of a blazing 
fire. | saw many other divine weapons with Mahadeva. I have named only a 
few most important ones. 

On the left side of the Great God was Brahma seated on a chariot drawn 
by swans swift as the mind. On the same side Vishnu could also be seen 
riding on Garuda, and bearing the sankha, chakra and gada. 

Close to the Goddess Parvati was Skanda on his peacock, bearing his 
deadly arrow and bells, and looking like another Agni. In front of 
Mahadeva stood Nandi armed with his Sula and looking like a second 
formidable Siva. 

The Munis led by Manu and Rishis led by Bhrigu, and the Devas with 
Indra at their head, all came there. All the tribes of bhutas and pretas, and 
the divine matrikas, stood surrounding Mahadeva and worshipping him. 

The Devas were singing hymns in his praise. Brahma recited a 
Rathantara to praise Mahadeva. Narayana chanted the Jyeshta Saman to 
eulogise him and Indra did the same with the Sata-Rudriyam. 


Brahma, Narayana and Sakra shone there like three sacrificial fires. In 
their midst the illustrious Siva blazed like Surya in the midst of his corona, 
emerged from behind dark clouds. I beheld many suns and moons in the 
sky. I then praised the illustrious Lord of everything, the supreme master of 
the universe. 

Upamanyu continued,” “I said, ‘Salutations to you, illustrious one, you 
that are the refuge of all things, you that are called Mahadeva! Salutations 
to you that assume the form of Sakra, that are Sakra, and that disguise 
yourself in the form and robes of Sakra. 

Salutations to you that are armed with the thunderbolt, to you that are 
tawny, and you that are always armed with the Pinaka. Salutations to you 
that always bear the conch and the trisula. 

Salutations to you that are clad in black, to you that have dark and 
matted hair, to you that possess a dark deer-skin for your upper garment, to 
you that preside over the eighth lunation of the dark fortnight. Salutations to 
you that are of white complexion, to you that are called auspicious, to you 
that are clad in white robes, to you that have limbs smeared with white 
ashes, to you that are ever engaged in pure deeds. 

Salutations to you that are red in colour, to you that are clad in red 
vestments, to you that have a red banner with red pennants, to you that wear 
red garlands and use red unguents. Salutations to you that are brown in 
colour, to you that are clad in brown vestments, to you that have a brown 
banner with brown pennants, to you that wear brown garlands and use 
brown liniments. 

Salutations to you that have the royal parasol over your head, to you 
that wear the best of crowns. Salutations unto you that are adorned with half 
a garland and half an armlet, to you that are decked with one ring for one 
year, to you that are endowed with the speed of the mind, to you that are 
filled with great refulgence. Salutations to you that are the foremost of 
deities, to you that are the foremost of ascetics, to you that are the foremost 
of divinities. 

Salutations to you that wear half a wreath of lotuses, to you that cover 
your body with many lotuses. Salutations to you that have half your body 
smeared with sandalwood paste, to you that have half your body decked 
with garlands of flowers and smeared with fragrant oils. 

Salutations to you that are of the complexion of the sun, you are like 
Surya, to you whose face is like that of the sun, to you whose eyes are each 


like the sun. Salutations to you that are Soma, to you that are as gentle as 
the moon, to you that bear the lunar disc on your brow, to you that are of 
lustre like the moon, to you that are the foremost of all creatures, to you that 
are adorned with bright teeth. 

Salutations to you that are of a dark complexion, to you that are of a fair 
complexion, to you that have a form half-tawny and half-white, to you that 
has a body half-male and half-female, to you that are both male and female. 
Salutations to you that have Nandi for your vahana, to you that ride on the 
most majestic of elephants, to you that are obtained with difficulty, to you 
that can easily access places inaccessible to others. 

Salutations to you whose praises are sung by the Ganas, to you that are 
devoted to the Ganas, to you that follow the path of the Ganas, to you that 
are steadfast in your devotion to the Ganas. 

Salutations to you that are white like the clouds, to you that glow like 
the evening clouds, to you that are indescribable, to you that are unique and 
incomparable. 

Salutations to you that wears a beautiful red garland, to you that are 
dressed in red robes. Salutations to you that wears a jewelled crown, to you 
that are adorned with a crescent moon, to you that have eight flowers on 
your head. 

Salutations to you that have a fiery mouth and burning eyes, to you that 
have eyes as lustrous as a thousand moons, to you that have the form of fire, 
to you that are handsome and enchanting, to you that are inconceivable and 
mysterious. Salutations to you that range through the firmament, to you that 
love and dwell in the pastures of cows, to you that walk on the earth, to you 
that are the earth, to you that are infinite, to you that are auspicious. 

Salutations to you that are digambara, clothed only by the sky, to you 
that make a joyful home of every place in which you find yourself. 
Salutations to you that have the universe for your home, to you that have 
both knowledge and grace for your Soul. 

Salutations to you that wears a crown, to you that wears a magnificent 
armlet, to you that has a snake for the garland round your neck, to you that 
wears many beautiful ornaments. Salutations to you that have Surya, 
Chandramas and Agni for your three eyes, to you that possess a thousand 
eyes, to you that are both male and female, to you that are without gender, 
to you that are a Samkhya, to you that are a yogin. 


Salutations to you that are of the grace of those Devas who are 
worshipped in yagnas, to you that are the Atharvans, to you who alleviate 
all kinds of disease and pain, to you that dispel every sorrow. Salutations to 
you that roar like resounding thunder, to you that create illusions, to you 
that preside over the soil and over the seed that is sown in it, to you that are 
the Creator of everything. 

Salutations to you that are the Lord of all the Devas, to you that are the 
master of the universe, to you that are swift like the wind, to you that are of 
the form of the wind. Salutations to you that wear a garland of gold, to you 
that sport on hills and mountains, to you that are adored by all the Asuras, 
to you that possess fierce speed and energy. 

Salutations to you that tore out one of Brahma’s heads, to you that slew 
Mahishasura, to you that assume three forms, to you that bear every form. 
Salutations to you that are the destroyer of the Tripura of the Asuras, to you 
that are the destroyer of Daksha’s yagna, to you that are the destroyer of 
Kama’s body, to you that wield the rod of destruction. 

Salutations to you that are Skanda, to you that are Visakha, to you that 
are the staff of the Brahmana, to you that are Bhava, to you that are Sarva, 
to you that are of universal form. Salutations to you that are Isana, to you 
that are the destroyer of Bhaga, to you that are the slayer of Andhaka, to 
you that are the universe, to you that are possess maya, to you that are both 
conceivable and inconceivable. 

You are the one goal of all creatures, you are the foremost, and you are 
the heart of everything. You are Brahma of all the Devas, you are the 
Nilardhita of the Rudras. You are the Atman of the creatures, you are he 
that is called Purusha by the Samkhyas, you are the Rishabha among all 
things sacred, you are that which is called auspicious by yogins and which, 
according to them, is indivisible. 

Among those in the various asramas, you are the grihasta, you are the 
great Lord amongst the lords of the universe. You are Kubera among the 
Yakshas, and you are Vishnu among all sacrifices. 

You are Meru among mountains, you are the moon among all 
luminaries of the firmament, you are Vasishta amongst Rishis, and you are 
Surya among the planets. You are the lion among all wild beasts, and 
among domestic animals you are the bull that is worshipped by all men. 

Among the Adityas you are Vishnu, among the Vasus you are Pavaka, 
among birds you are Garuda, and among snakes you are Ananta. Among 


the Vedas you are the Saman, among the Yajuses you are the Sata- 
Rudriyam, among yogins you are Sanatkumara, and among Samkhyas you 
are Kapila. 

Among the Maruts you are Sakra, among the Pitris you are Devarata, 
among all the realms created for living you are Brahmaloka, and among all 
the ends that creatures attain to, you are moksha. You are the ocean of milk 
among oceans, among all lofty mountains you are Himavat, among all the 
varnas you are the Brahmana, and among all learned Brahmanas you are he 
that has undergone and is observant of the Diksha. 

You are the sun among all things in the world, you are the destroyer 
Kaala. You are whatever else possesses the superior tejas of eminence that 
exists in the universe. You are supremely powerful. This is my certain 
conclusion. 

Salutations to you, you that are kind to all your devotees. Salutations to 
you, Lord of yogins. I bow to you, the original cause of the universe. Be 
you gratified with me, your worshipper dejected and powerless; Eternal 
Lord, you become the refuge of this weak and wretched one who adores 
you. 

It is fitting for you to pardon all my sins, taking pity on me because I am 
your devoted worshipper. I was mystified by you, on account of the disguise 
in which you appeared before me. O Maheswara, I did not even give you 
the arghya or padya to wash your feet.’ 

Having sung the praises of Isana in this way, I offered him, with great 
devotion, water to wash his feet and the ingredients of the arghya, and then, 
with folded hands, I surrendered myself to him, being prepared to do 
whatever he commanded. 

An auspicious shower of flowers fell upon my head, possessing divine 
fragrance and sprinkled with cool water-drops. The Gandharvas began to 
play on their drums. A perfumed breeze began to blow and fill me with 
delight. 

Then Mahadeva accompanied by his wife, having been gratified with 
me, addressed the divinities gathered there, his words filling me with great 
joy, ‘Behold, you Devas, the devotion of Upamanyu. It is steadfast and 
great, and entirely immutable, for it exists unalterably.’ 

Thus addressed by the great God armed with the Sula, the Devas bowed 
before him and said with reverence, ‘Illustrious one, God of the gods, 


master of the universe, Lord of all, let this Dvijottama obtain from you the 
fruit of all his desires.’ 

Thus addressed by all the Devas including Brahma, Mahadeva, also 
called Isa and Sankara, said these words as if smiling upon me. Sankara 
said, ‘Upamanyu, I am pleased with you. Foremost of Munis, learned Rishi, 
you are firmly devoted to me and have been well you tested by me. I have 
been delighted with you because of your bhakti. Today I will satisfy all your 
desires.’ 

Thus addressed by Mahadeva, so great was my emotion that I wept 
tears of joy and my hair stood on end. Kneeling down and bowing to him, 
with a voice choked with rapture, I said to him, ‘Siva, I feel that until now I 
did not live and that only today have I been born, and that my birth has 
borne fruit today, since I am now in the presence of Him who is the master 
of both the Devas and the Asuras! 

Who else is more praiseworthy than I, since my eyes behold him of 
immeasurable power, whom the very Devas cannot see without worship? 
The wise and the learned say that the highest of all subjects, which is 
eternal, which is distinguished from all else, which is unborn, which is 
gyana, which is indestructible, is identical with you; you that are the 
beginning of all, you that are immortal and unchanging, you that know the 
laws that govern all things, you that are the foremost of Purushas, you that 
are the highest of the high. 

You are he that created from your right side Brahma, the Creator of all 
things. You are he that has created from your left side Vishnu to preserve 
that creation. You are that puissant Lord who created Rudra at the end of the 
yuga for the dissolution of that creation. 

That Rudra, who sprang from you destroyed creation with all its moving 
and immobile beings, assuming the form of Kaala, of the cloud Samvartaka 
full of water which all the oceans cannot hold, and of the all-consuming 
fire. When the time for the dissolution of the universe arrives, that Rudra 
stands ready to swallow it. 

You are that Mahadeva, who is the original Creator of the universe with 
all that it contains. You are he who, at the end of the kalpa, withdraws all 
things into yourself. You are he that permeates all things, are the soul of all 
things, for you are the Creator of the creator of all things. 

You cannot be seen even by the Devas; you are he that encompasses all 
entities. If you are gratified with me and if you can grant me boons, let this 


be my one boon, Lord of all the gods—that my devotion to you may remain 
unwavering. Let me, through your grace, have knowledge of the present, 
the past and the future. Let me, with all my kinsmen and friends, always eat 
food mixed with milk. And you, O celebrated Lord, always be present in 
our asrama.’ 

Mahatejasvin Maheswara, that Jagadguru of all things, who is 
worshipped by all, spoke these words to me. 

Siva said, ‘Be you free from every sorrow and pain, and above decay 
and death. May you possess fame, be filled with great tejas, and let atma- 
gyana be yours. Through my blessings, you will always be sought after by 
the Rishis. 

May your conduct ever be good and righteous, may every desirable 
attribute be yours, may you obtain universal knowledge, and may you be 
radiant and handsome. Let your youth be undiminished, and let your energy 
be like that of fire. Wherever you desire the presence of the Kshirasagara, 
ocean of milk, there that ocean will appear before you to be used by you 
and your friends for your food. May you and your friends always obtain 
food prepared with milk, and with amrita also mixed with it. 

After the expiration of a kalpa you will have my companionship. Your 
family and kinsmen will be limitless. Your devotion to me will be eternal. 
And, best of Brahmanas, I shall always be present in your asrama. Live 
wherever you like, and without worry. Merely think of me, and I will grant 
you a vision of myself again.’ 

Having said these words, and granted me these boons, Isana, shining 
with the splendour of millions of suns, disappeared. Krishna, in this 
manner, with austere tapasya, I saw that God of gods. I also received what 
he said. Krishna, behold these Siddhas living here, and these Rishis and 
Vidyadharas and Yakshas and Gandharvas and Apsaras. Behold these trees 
and creepers and plants yielding all sorts of flowers and fruits. Behold them 
bearing the flowers of every season, with beautiful leaves, and spreading 
sweet fragrance all around. 

Mahabaho, all these are endowed with a divine nature through the grace 
of that God of gods, that Supreme Lord, that Mahatman Mahadeva.” 

Krishna continues, ‘Hearing his words and seeing before my own eyes 
all that he narrated to me, I was filled with wonder. I then said to Mahamuni 
Upamanyu, “You are worthy of great praise, for whose hermitage, other 


than yours, enjoys the honour of the presence of Siva? Will the great 
Sankara also reveal himself to me and show me kindness?” 

Upamanyu said, “Without doubt, you will soon obtain a vision of 
Mahadeva, even as I succeeded in beholding him. I see with my spiritual 
eyes that you will behold Mahadeva in the sixth month from now. Foremost 
of the Yadavas, Maheswara and his consort will grant you twenty-four 
boons. I tell you this truly. 

Through Siva’s grace, the past, the present and the future are known to 
me. The great Hara has favoured thousands of Rishis. Why will he not show 
you his favour? 

The meeting of the gods is always praiseworthy, more so with you, with 
one devoted to Brahmanas, with one that is full of compassion and faith. I 
will give you some mantras. Chant them repeatedly. With this you are 
certain to gain a vision of Sankara.’”’ 

The blessed Krishna continues, ‘I said to him, “Mahamuni, through 
your grace, I shall behold the Lord of the Devas, that destroyer of the whole 
host of Diti’s sons.” 

Bhaarata, eight days passed there as but an hour, all of us being 
immersed in talk about Mahadeva. On the eighth day, I underwent the 
diksha according to the due rites at the hands of that Brahmana and received 
the danda from his hands. I underwent the prescribed shaving of my head. I 
took up some kusa blades in my hand. I wore rags for clothes. I rubbed my 
body with ghee. I tied a cord woven of munja grass around my waist. 

For one month I lived on fruits. The second month I subsisted upon 
water. I passed the third, fourth and the fifth months by living on air alone. I 
stood all the while, foregoing sleep, supporting myself on one foot and with 
my arms also raised over my head. 

Then I saw a blinding radiance in the sky like that of a thousand suns 
combined. At its heart I saw a cloud like a mass of blue hills, adorned with 
rows of cranes, embellished with many magnificent rainbows, with flashes 
of fiery lightning and thunder. 

Within that cloud was the luminous Mahadeva, accompanied by Uma. 
The great God seemed to shine with his penances, energy, beauty, 
effulgence, and also his wife beside him. The puissant Maheswara and Uma 
shone in the midst of that cloud. He looked like the sun among a bank of 
clouds, with the moon by his side. 


Son of Kunti, the hair on my body stood on end, and my eyes were wide 
with wonder upon beholding Siva, the refuge of all the Devas and the 
dispeller of all their sorrows. Mahadeva wore a crown on his head. He was 
armed with his Sula. His loins covered in tiger-skin, his hair was matted and 
he carried the staff of the ascetic in one of his hands. He was armed with his 
Pinaka and the trisula. 

His teeth were sharp. His upper arm was decked with an incomparable 
bracelet. His sacred thread was a snake. He wore a garland of many colours 
on his chest, a mala reached down to his toes. I saw him like a radiant moon 
on a winter evening. 

Surrounded by diverse clans of spirits and ghosts, he was like a sun 
difficult to gaze at. Eleven hundred Rudras stood around him of restrained 
soul and pure deeds, who was seated upon Nandin. All of them were 
singing his praises. The Adityas, the Vasus, the Sadhyas, the Viswadevas 
and the twin Aswins praised that Lord of the universe with the mantras 
from the shastras. The puissant Indra and his brother Upendra, the two sons 
of Aditi, and Pitamaha Brahma, all recited the Rathantara Saman before 
him. 

Countless masters of yoga, all the greatest Rishis with their sons, all the 
Devarishis, the Devi Bhumi, the sky, the constellations, the planets, the 
months, the fortnights, the seasons, night, the years, the kshanas, the 
muhurtas, the nimeshas, the yugas one after another, all the divine vigyanas 
and angas of knowledge, and all beings conversant with truth, were seen 
bowing down before that Supreme Guru, that great Father, that giver of 
yoga. 

Yudhishtira, I saw Sanatkumara, the Vedas, the itihasas, Marichi, 
Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, the seven Manus, Soma, the 
Atharvans, and Brihaspati, Bhrigu, Daksha, Kasyapa, Vasishta, Kasya, the 
Chchandas, Diksha, the Yagnas, Dakshina, the Agnis, the Havis poured in 
sacrifices, and all the elements of the yagnas, all standing there in their 
embodied forms. 

All the Lokapalas, all the Nadis, all the Nagas, the Parvatas, the divine 
Matrikas, all the Devastris and Devaputris, millions of sannyasis were seen 
to bow down to Him who is the soul of serenity. The mountains, the oceans 
and the cardinal directions also did the same, while the Gandharvas and the 
Apsaras sang in divine voices the praises of the ineffable Siva. The 


Vidyadharas, the Danavas, the Guhyakas, the Rakshasas, and all created 
beings, mobile and immobile, adored him in thought, word and deed. 

Before me, that Lord of all the Devas appeared, seated in all his glory. 
Seeing that Isana had showed himself to me by being seated before my 
eyes, the whole universe, along with Brahma and Indra, looked at me. I, 
however, had not the power to look at Mahadeva. 

Siva then said to me, “Look at me, Krishna, and speak to me. You have 
worshipped me hundreds and thousands of times. There is no one in the 
three worlds that is dearer to me than you.” 

After I had bowed to him, Devi Uma became pleased with me. I then 
spoke these words to Him whose praises are sung by all the Devas.’ 

Krishna continues, ‘I bowed to Mahadeva, saying, “Salutations to you, 
you that are the eternal origin of all things. The Rishis say that you are the 
Lord of the Vedas. The righteous say that you are tapasya, you are sattva, 
you are rajas, you are tamas, and you are satya. You are Brahma, you are 
Rudra, you are Varuna, you are Agni, you are Manu, you are Bhava, you are 
Dhatri, you are Tvashtri, you are Vidhatri, you are the puissant master of all 
things, and you are everywhere. 

All beings, mobile and unmoving, have sprung from you. This threefold 
world with all its entities has been created by you. The Rishis say that you 
are superior to the senses, the mind, the vital breaths, the seven sacrificial 
fires, all others that have their refuge in the all-pervading Soul, and all the 
deities that are adored and worthy of adoration. You, O illustrious one, are 
the Vedas, the yagnas, Soma, Dakshina, Pavaka, Havi, and all other 
components of sacrifice. The punya obtained through sacrifices, gifts made 
to others, the study of the Vedas, vratas, rules of restraint, modesty, fame, 
prosperity, splendour, contentment and success, all exist for the one purpose 
of leading to you. Desire, anger, fear, greed, pride, stupor, and malice, pain 
and disease, are your children. 

You are the actions of all creatures, you are the joy and sorrow that flow 
from those deeds, you are the absence of joy and sorrow, you are that 
ignorance which is the indestructible seed of desire, you are the high origin 
of Manas, you are strength, and you are eternity. 

You are the unmanifest, you are Pavana, you are inconceivable, you are 
the thousand-rayed sun, you are the effulgent Chit, you are the first of all 
the subjects, and you are the refuge of life. The use of words like Mahat, 
Atman, Buddhi, Brahma, Brahmanda, Sambhu, and Swayambhu recurring 


in the Vedas show that your nature has been judged as identical with Mahat 
and Atman by men conversant with the Vedas. Verily, regarding you as all 
this, knowing Brahmanas overcome that ignorance which lies at the root of 
the world. 

You dwell in the heart of all creatures, and you are adored by the Rishis 
as Kshetrajna. Your arms and feet extend to every place, and your eyes, 
head and face are everywhere. You hear everywhere in the universe, and 
you pervade all things. You are the fruit of all acts that are performed in the 
nimeshas and other divisions of time that occur on account of the sun. 

You are the original brilliance of the supreme Chit. You are Purusha, 
and you live in the hearts of all things. You are the yogic attributes of 
success, subtlety and grossness, and fruition and supremacy, effulgence and 
immutability. Understanding and intelligence, and all the worlds, rest upon 
you. 

They that are devoted to meditation, that are always engaged in yoga, 
that are devoted to satya and that have subjugated their passions, seek you 
and rely on you. They that know you to be immutable, the one that dwells 
in all hearts, the one that is endowed with supreme power, or the ancient 
Purusha, or pure gyana, or the effulgent Chit, or the highest refuge of all 
wise men, are certainly of great intelligence. Truly, such men transcend 
intelligence. 

By understanding the seven subtle entities and the tanmatras, by 
comprehending your six attributes, of ommiscience, contentment, 
knowledge without beginning, independence, flawless and infinite power, 
and being conversant with yoga freed from every falsity, the man of 
knowledge succeeds in entering into your great self.” 

After I had said these words to Bhava, the universe, both mobile and 
immobile, sent up a roar to show their approval of what I said. The 
countless Brahmanas present there, the Devas and the Asuras, the Nagas, 
the Pisachas, the Pitris, the Garudas, diverse Rakshasas, bhutas and pretas, 
and all the Maharishis, then bowed down before that Great Deity. Showers 
of fragrant flowers showered down upon me and cool winds began to blow. 

Siva looked at the Devi Uma and at Indra and at me and said, “Krishna, 
we know that you are devoted to us. Do what is for your good. My love for 
you is great. Ask for eight boons. I will grant them to you. Name what you 
wish for. However difficult to attain they may be, you will still have 
them.””” 


2 This is Siva Sahasranama of the Mahabharata. 


CANTO 15 


¢ “kK rishna said, ‘Bowing my head to that mass of energy and 

radiance, I said, “Firmness in virtue, the slaying of enemies in 

battle, the highest renown, the greatest strength, devotion to yoga, your 

presence, and hundreds upon hundreds of children, these are the boons I ask 
of you.” 

“So be it”, said Siva repeating the words I had uttered. 

After this, Uma, the mother of the universe, the upholder and purifier of 
all things, that vast vessel of tapasya, said, “Mahadeva has granted you a 
son who shall be named Samba. Take from me another eight boons.” 

Bowing to her, I said, “From you I ask for peace with the Brahmanas, 
the blessings of my father, a hundred sons, the highest enjoyments, love for 
my family, and the grace of my mother, the attainment of tranquillity and 
peace, and intelligent action!” 

Uma said, “They shall be yours. I never say what is untrue. You will 
have sixteen thousand wives. Your love for them and theirs for you shall be 
limitless. You will also receive the highest devotion from all your kinsmen. 
Your body shall be most beautiful. Seven thousand guests will dine every 
day at your palace.” 

Krishna continued, ‘Having granted me boons, Mahadeva and Uma 
along with their Ganas disappeared from sight. I narrated all those 
wonderful facts to Upamanyu, that Brahmana from whom I had obtained 
diksha before worshipping Mahadeva. Bowing down unto the great God, 
Upamanyu said these words to me. 

Upamanyu said, “There is no God like Sarva. There is no end or refuge 
like Sarva. There is none that can give so many or such boons. There is 


99999 


none that equals him in battle. 


CANTO 16 


66 K rishna continues, ‘Upamanyu said, “In the Krita yuga there lived 

a renowned Rishi named Tandi. With yoga-dhyana and great 

devotion he adored Siva for ten thousand years. Listen as I tell you about 
the fruits of such extraordinary devotion. 

He succeeded in having a vision of Mahadeva and praised him by 
reciting great and holy mantras. With tapasya, meditating on him who is the 
Paramatman, immutable and unchanging, Tandi was filled with wonder, and 
said, ‘I seek the refuge of Him whom the Samkhyas describe and the yogins 
think of as the Supreme, the Foremost, the Purusha, the Pervador of all 
things, and the master of all existence. 

I seek the protection of him who, the learned say, is the cause of both 
the creation and the destruction of the universe, of him who is superior to 
all the Devas, the Asuras and the Munis, of him who has nothing higher, 
who is unborn, who is the Lord of all things, who has neither beginning nor 
end, and who is endowed with supreme power, possessed of the highest 
felicity, and who is irradiant and sinless.’ 

After he had said these words, Tandi beheld before him that ocean of 
tapasya, that Great Deity who is immutable and eternal, who is without 
equal, who is inconceivable, who is indivisible, who is whole, who is 
Brahman, who transcends all attributes being nirguna, and who is imbued 
with attributes being saguna, who is the highest ecstasy of yogins, who is 
imperishable, who is mukti, who is the refuge of Manas, of Indra, of Agni, 
of Vayu, of the entire universe, and of Pitamaha Brahma. Through Manas, 
Tandi saw him who is inconceivable, who is immutable, who is pure, who 
can be understood only through surrender and who is immaterial as the 


mind; who is hard to comprehend, who is immeasurable, who cannot be 
attained by those impure souls, who is the origin of the universe, and who 
transcends both the universe and the Tamoguna; who is ancient, who is 
Purusha, who is radiant, and who is higher than the highest. 

Wanting to behold him who endowed with life-breaths, resides in what 
results from it, who is Jiva in the form of that effulgence which is called 
Manas, Rishi Tandi passed many years in the practice of the severest 
tapasya, and having succeeded in beholding Siva as the reward of that 
penance, eulogised Mahadeva in the following terms: 

Tandi said, ‘You are the most blessed of all that is sacred and the refuge 
of all. You are the fiercest among all kinds of tejas. You are the austerest of 
all tapasyas. You are the giver of blessings. You are the supreme truth. 

Salutations to you, you of a thousand rays, O sanctuary of all felicity. 
You are the giver of that nirvana which Yatis strive for, who fear birth and 
death. Brahma, Indra, Vishnu, the Viswadevas and the Maharishis cannot 
comprehend you and your real nature. How then can we hope to fathom 
you? 

From you flows everything. Upon you rests everything. You are called 
Kaala, you are called Purusha, and you are called Brahman. Devarishis who 
know the Puranas say that you have three bodies, that pertaining to Kaala, 
that pertaining to Purusha and that pertaining to Brahman, or the three 
forms of Brahma, Vishnu and Siva. 

You are Adi-Purusha, occupying the physical frame from head to foot, 
you are Adhyatma, you are Adi-bhuta, and Adi-Daivata, and you are Adi- 
Loka, Adi-Vigyanam and Adi-Yagna. Men of wisdom, when they succeed 
in knowing you that dwells in them, and that cannot be known by the very 
Devas, become freed from all bonds and pass into a state of existence that 
transcends sorrow. They that do not wish to know you have to experience 
innumerable births and deaths. 

You are the door of swarga and of mukti. You are he that projects all 
beings into existence and withdraws them again into yourself. You are the 
great giver. You are swarga, you are mukti; you are desire that is the seed of 
karma. You are the wrath that inspires creatures to action. 

You are sattva, you are rajas, you are tamas; you are patala, and you are 
swarga. You are Brahma, you are Bhava, you are Vishnu, you are Skanda, 
you are Indra, you are Savitri, you are Yama, you are Varuna and Soma, you 


are Dhatri, you are Manu, you are Vidhatri and you are Kubera, the Lord of 
wealth. 

You are Bhumi, you are Vayu, you are Jala, you are Agni, you are 
Akasa; you are speech, you are Buddhi, you are steadiness, you are 
intelligence; you are the kama of creatures, you are satya, you are asatya, 
you are existent and you are non-existent. You are the senses, you are that 
which transcends Prakriti, and you are unalterable. 

You are superior to the universe of existent objects, you are superior to 
the universe of non-existent objects; you are capable of being conceived, 
you are inconceivable. That which is supreme Brahman, the highest entity, 
that which is the end of both the Samkhyas and the yogins, is, without 
doubt, identical with you. 

Truly, today I have been rewarded by you as you have granted me a 
vision of yourself. I have attained the end which the righteous alone attain. I 
have been rewarded with that goal which is sought by those whose 
intellects have been purified by gyana. 

Steeped in ignorance for so long, I was a mindless fool; I had no 
knowledge of you that are the Supreme Deity, you that are the only eternal 
One that only wise men can know. In the course of countless lives I have at 
last succeeded in acquiring that devotion towards you as a result of which 
you have shown yourself to me. You are ever inclined to extend your grace 
to those that are devoted to you. 

He that succeeds in knowing you enjoys immortality. You are that 
which is ever a mystery with the Devas, the Asuras and the sannyasis. 
Brahman is concealed in the cave of the heart. Even the greatest sannyasis 
are unable to behold or know him. 

You are he who is the doer of everything and whose face is turned 
towards every direction. You are the soul of all things, you see all things, 
you pervade all things, and you know all things. You create a body for 
yourself, and bear it. You are an embodied Being. 

You enjoy a body, and you are the refuge of all embodied creatures. You 
are the Creator of the pranas, you possesses the life-breaths, you are one 
that is filled with the life-breaths, you are the giver of the pranas, and you 
are the refuge of all beings with prana. You are that Adhyatma which is the 
refuge of all righteous ones that are devoted to yoga-dhyana and conversant 
with the Atman and that are diligent in avoiding rebirth. You are that 
Supreme Lord identical with that refuge. 


You give unto all creatures what ends become theirs, whether fraught 
with happiness or misery. You are he that ordains all created beings to birth 
and death. You are the mighty Lord who grants success to Rishis. Having 
created all the worlds beginning with Bhu, together with all the inhabitants 
of heaven, and uphold and cherish them all, you have divided yourself into 
your celebrated eight forms. 

Everything flows from you. All things rest upon you. All things, again, 
disappear into you. You are the sole object that is eternal. You are that 
region of truth sought by the righteous and regarded by them as the highest. 
You are that cessation of individual existence which yogins seek. You are 
that Oneness which is sought by those conversant with the Soul. 

Brahma and the Siddhas expounding the mantras have concealed you in 
a cave to prevent the Devas and Asuras and Manavas from seeing you. You 
live in the heart, yet you are concealed. Devas, Asuras and Manavas are all 
bewildered and unable to understand you truly and in all your aspects, O 
Bhava. You reveal yourself of your own accord to those that attain you after 
having cleansed themselves through bhakti. 

By knowing you one can avoid both death and rebirth. You are the 
highest object of knowledge. By knowing you no higher object remains to 
be known. You are the greatest object of realisation. He that is truly wise, 
after attaining you, thinks there is no higher object to acquire. By reaching 
you that are subtle and the highest object of attainment, the wise become 
immortal and changeless. 

The followers of the Samkhya system, who know their own philosophy 
and possess a knowledge of sattva, rajas and tamas and of those tattvas that 
are the subjects of enquiry, and those learned men who transcend the 
perishable by attaining to a knowledge of the subtle or indestructible by 
knowing you, succeed in liberating themselves from all bonds. 

Those who know the Vedas regard you as the one object of knowledge, 
which has been expounded in those highest shastras. These men, devoted to 
pranayama, always meditate on you and enter into you as their final end. 

Riding on the chariot made of AUM, those men enter into Maheswara. 
Of that which is called the Devayana, the path of the Devas, you are the 
door called Aditya. You are also the door called Chandramas, of that which 
is called the Pitriyana. You are Kashta, you are the cardinal directions of the 
horizon, you are the year, and you are the yugas. You are the sovereign of 


all the heavens and of the earth; you are Uttarayana and Dakshinayana, the 
northern and the southern declensions. 

You who are called Nilalohita, in olden times Brahma sang your praises 
by reciting mantras and urged you to create living creatures. Regarding you 
as unattached to all things and divested of all forms, Brahmanas conversant 
with the Riks praise you by intoning those sacred Riks. Adhvaryus pour 
libations in yagnas, chanting Yajuses in honour of you that are the sole 
object of knowledge according to the three paths. 

Men of pure intellects, who know the Samans, sing your praises with 
the Samans. Those Dvijas that know with the Atharvans, extol you as Rita, 
as truth, as the highest, and as Brahman. You are the highest cause, from 
which sacrifice has flowed. You are the Lord, and you are Supreme. 

The night and day are your sense of hearing and sight. The fortnights 
and months are your head and arms. The seasons are your energy, tapasya 1s 
your patience, and the year is your anus, thighs and feet. 

You are Mrityu. You are Yama, you are Hutasana, you are Kaala; you 
are swift in destruction, you are the original cause of time, and you are 
eternal Kaala. You are Chandramas and Aditya. With all the stars and 
planets and the atmosphere that fills space, you are Dhruva, the polestar, 
you are the constellation called the Saptarishi, and you are the seven realms 
beginning with Bhu. 

You are Pradhana and Mahat, you are unmanifest, and you are this 
world. You are the universe beginning with Brahman and ending with the 
lowest forms of vegetation. You are the beginning or origin of all creatures. 
You are the eight Prakritis. You are, again, above the eight Prakritis. 

Everything that exists represents a portion of your divine self. You are 
that supreme felicity which is eternal. You are the end attained to by all 
things. You are that highest existence which is sought by the righteous. You 
are that state which is freed from every anxiety. You are eternal Brahman. 

You are that highest state which constitutes the meditation of those 
knowers of the shastras and the Vedangas. You are the highest kashta, you 
are the highest Kaala. You are the highest success, and you are the highest 
refuge. You are the highest tranquillity. You are the highest cessation of 
existence. By attaining you, yogins think that they attain the highest success 
that is open to them. 

You are contentment, you are success; you are the Sruti, and you are the 
Smriti. You are that refuge of the Atman which yogins strive for, and you 


are that indestructible Prapti which men of knowledge pursue. You are that 
goal sought by those who perform yagnas and offer sacrificial libations, and 
make ample gifts on such occasions. 

You are that high end which is sought by those that waste and scorch 
their bodies with severe penances with ceaseless japa, with those rigid vows 
and fasts that pertain to their peaceful lives, and with other means of self- 
affliction. Eternal one, you are that end which is theirs that are detached 
from all things and that have renounced all action. You are that end which is 
theirs that wish to attain mukti from rebirth, that live aloof from all 
pleasures, and that desire the annihilation of the elements of Prakriti. 

You are that high end, which is indescribable, which is stainless, which 
is the one beyond change, and which is theirs that are devoted to gyana and 
vigyana. These are the ends that have been affirmed in the Vedas and the 
Puranas and the other true shastras. It is through your grace that men attain 
to those ends or if they fail to attain to them, it is through the denial of your 
blessings to them.’ 

It was thus that tapodhana Tandi praised Isana. And he sang also that 
high Brahman which in ancient days was sung by Brahma in honour of 
Mahadeva.” 

Upamanyu continued, “Thus praised by Tandi, Mahadeva, who was 
accompanied by Uma, spoke. Tandi had further said, ‘Neither Brahma, nor 
Indra nor Vishnu, nor the Viswdavas, nor the Maharishis know you.’ 
Gratified at this, Siva said the following words. 

The Holy One said, “You will be indestructible and eternal. You will be 
freed from all sorrow. Great fame shall be yours. You will be full of tejas. 
Spiritual knowledge shall be yours. All the Rishis shall seek you, and 
through my grace your son shall be the author of profound Sutras. What can 
I give you today? Tell me, my son, what do you desire?’ 

At this, Tandi folded his hands and said, ‘Let my devotion to you be 
unwavering.’” 

Upamanyu continued, “Having given these boons to Tandi and having 
received the adorations of the Devas and the Rishis, Siva vanished. When 
he left with all his Ganas and other bhaktas, the Rishi came to my asrama 
and told me all that had happened to him. Listen now to all those celebrated 
names of Mahadeva that Tandi recited to me for your spiritual success. 

Brahma had once recited ten thousand names that pertain to Mahadeva. 
In the shastras, Siva is known by a thousand names. These names are not 


known to all. In ancient times Brahma recounted these names to worship 
the high-souled deity. Having received them through the grace of Brahma, 
Tandi related them to me!”’” 


CANTO 17 


¢ “kK rishna says, “Yudhishtira, the regenerate Rishi Upamanyu, with 
hands joined together in reverence recited the names of 
Mahadeva, starting from the beginning. 

Upamanyu said, “I shall adore that great deity who deserves the 
adorations of all creatures, by reciting those names that are celebrated over 
all the worlds, some of which were uttered by Brahma, some by the Rishis, 
and some of which occur in the Vedas and the Vedangas. 

Those names have been used for Siva by renowned men. Those names, 
applied to Mahadeva by Tandi, who extracted them from Vedic lore with his 
devotion, are true and can surely bestow all the aims of the one who recites 
them. 

Indeed, with those names that have been uttered by many righteousness 
men and by ascetics conversant with dharma, I shall adore him who is the 
foremost, who is the first, who leads to heaven, who grants boons to all 
creatures, and who is auspicious. These names have been heard everywhere 
in the universe, having spread from the realm of Brahma, where they were 
originally created. All of them are suffused with Truth. 

With those names I shall adore him who is the Parabrahman, who has 
been declared unto the universe by the Vedas, and who is eternal. I shall 
now tell you, Lord of Yadu’s vamsa. Hear them with rapt attention. You are 
a devoted bhakta of the Supreme Deity. Worship the illustrious Bhava 
above all the Devas. And because you are devoted to him, I will recite those 
names in your hearing. 

Mahadeva is Eternal Brahman. Even those endowed with yoga and its 
achievements are unable to grasp, even in a hundred years, the full glory 


and power of Siva. Truly, the beginning or middle or end of Mahadeva 
cannot be known by the very Devas. Then who can recite the attributes of 
Mahadeva in their entirety? For all that, through the grace of that illustrious 
and supreme God of perfect wisdom, granted to me for my devotion to him, 
I will recite his attributes summarised in a few words. 

The Supreme Lord cannot be adored by anyone if he does not grant his 
leave to the devotee. As for me, it is only when I become fortunate enough 
to receive his blessing that I succeed in worshipping him. 

I shall mention only a few names of that Mahadeva who is without birth 
and without death, who is the original cause of the universe, who has the 
highest Soul, and whose origin is unmanifest. Krishna, listen to these, a few 
names that were uttered by Brahma himself of that giver of boons, that 
adorable deity, that puissant one who has the universe for his form, and who 
is possessed of supreme wisdom. 

These names that I shall recite are extracted from the ten thousand 
names, the Koti Rudriyam that Brahma recited in ancient times, even as 
ghee is extracted from butter. Just as gold represents the essence of rocky 
mountains, as honey represents the essence of flowers, as Manda represents 
the extract from ghrita, even so have these names been extracted from and 
represent the essence of those ten thousand names spoken by the Pitamaha 
Brahma. 

This brief abstract of names can cleanse every sin, however heinous. It 
possesses the same punya as that in the four Vedas. It should be received 
with attention by spiritual aspirants and engraved on the memory. These 
auspicious names, great purifiers, leading to spiritual advancement, capable 
of destroying Rakshasas, should be imparted to only him that is devoted to 
Siva, to him that has faith, to him that believes. 

Unto him that has no faith, him that is an unbeliever, him that has not 
subjugated his soul, it should never be communicated. That creature who 
harbours malice towards Mahadeva who is the original cause of everything, 
who is the Paramatman, and who is the great Lord, will certainly to go to 
naraka along with all his ancestors before and all his children after him. 
This abstract of names that I shall recite to you is regarded as yoga. 

This is looked upon as the highest object of dhyana. This is that which 
one should constantly recite as japa. This is equivalent to gyana. This is the 
highest mystery. If one, even during his last moments, recites it or hears it 
recited, he will attain the supreme end. 


This is holy. This is auspicious; this is filled with every kind of benefit. 
This is the best of all things. Brahma, the Pitamaha of all the universe, 
having composed it, assigned to it the foremost place among all excellent 
mantras. From that time, this chant to the greatness and glory of Mahadeva, 
which is held in the highest esteem by all the Devas, has come to be 
regarded as the king of all mantras. 

This king of mantras was first passed down from the realm of Brahma 
to swarga. Tandi then obtained it from there. Hence is it known to be 
composed by Tandi. Tandi brought it from swarga to Bhumi. It is the most 
auspicious of all auspicious things, and is capable of purifying the heart of 
all sins however terrible. 

Mahabaho, I will recite to you that best of all mantras. This sings of him 
who is the Veda of the Vedas, and the most ancient of all ancient objects, of 
him who is the energy of all energies, and the penance of all penances; of 
him who is the most calm of all peaceful creatures, and who is the 
splendour of all splendours. 

It sings the praises of him who is looked upon as the most subtle of all 
subtle creatures, and him who is the intelligence of all intelligent creatures; 
of him who is looked upon as the Deity of all deities, and the Rishi of all 
Rishis; of him who is regarded as the sacrifice of all sacrifices and the most 
auspicious of all auspicious things. 

It sings of him who is the Rudra of all Rudras and the effulgence of all 
things effulgent; of him who is the Yogin of all yogins, and the cause of all 
causes; of him from whom all the worlds come into existence, and unto 
whom all the worlds return when they cease to exist; of him who is the Soul 
of all existent creatures, and who is called Hara of immeasurable energy. 

Hear me recite those thousand and eight names of the great Sarva. This 
is the Siva Sahasranama stotra*. Hearing these names, all your wishes will 
be fulfilled. 

Aum! You are immobile, you are unchanging, you are powerful, you are 
terrifying, you are the foremost, you are boon-giving, and you are supreme. 
You are the Atman of all creatures, you are celebrated above all creatures, 
you are all things, you are the Creator of all, and you are Bhava. 

You are the bearer of matted hair on your head. You wear animal skins 
for your garments. You wear a crown of matted hair on your head like the 
peacock. You are he who has the whole universe for your limbs. You are the 
creator of all things. You are Hara for you are the destroyer of all things. 


You are he that has the eyes of the gazelle. You are the destroyer of all 
creatures. You are the supreme enjoyer of all things. You are Pravritti from 
which all actions flow. You are Nivritti or abstention from deeds. You keep 
fasts and vows, you are eternal, and you are unchangeable. 

You are he that dwells in the cremation ground, you possess the six 
famed gunas of sovereignty, you live in the heart of every creature, you are 
he that enjoys all things with the senses, and you are the slayer of all sinful 
creatures. 

You are he that deserves the salutations of all, you are of great feats, you 
are tapodhana, you create all the elements at your will, and you conceal 
your real nature by disguising yourself as a madman. You are the master of 
all the worlds and of all living creatures. 

You are of immeasurable form, you are of vast body, you are of the 
form of righteousness, you are of great fame, you are of high soul, you are 
the Atman of all creatures, and you have the universe for your form. You 
have a great maw for you swallow the universe at the time of the 
dissolution. You are the protector of all the lokas. 

You are the soul residing in the inner heart and devoid of ahamkara 
originating from ignorance, one and undivided; you are ananda. Your 
chariot is borne by mules. You are he that protects Jiva from the thunderbolt 
of rebirth. You are adorable. 

You are obtained by purity and self-restraint and vratas. You are again 
the refuge of all kinds of vows and observances including purity and self- 
restraint. You are the divine artist that knows every art. You are Swayambhu 
for no one has created you. You are the beginning of all creatures and 
things. You are Hiranyagarbha, the Creator of all things. You are 
inexhaustible puissance and felicity. 

You have a hundred powerful eyes. You are Soma. You are he that 
makes all good creatures assume shapes of glory that shine in the sky. You 
are Chandramas, you are Surya, you are Sani, you are the waxing moon, 
you are the waning moon, you are Mangala, and you are Brihaspati and 
Sukra and Budha, you are the worshipper of Atri’s wife, you are he who 
shot his arrow in anger at a sacrifice when Yagna fled from him in the form 
of a deer. You are sinless. 

You possess tapasyas with the power to create the universe. You have 
tapasyas that empower you to annihilate the universe. You are high-minded 


and generous towards your devotees. You fulfill the wishes of all who 
surrender themselves to you. 

You are the maker of the year for it is you who sets the wheel of Kaala 
revolving, by assuming the form of the sun and the planets. You are mantra 
in the form of Pranava and other sacred words and syllables. In the form of 
the Vedas and other shastras, you are the authority for all deeds. You are the 
highest penance. You are devoted to yoga. 

You are he who merges himself in Brahman through yoga. You are the 
great seed, the cause of causes. You reveal what is unmanifest in the 
manifest form in which the universe exists. You possess infinite might. You 
are he whose seed is gold. 

You are omniscient; you are all things and the great knower. You are the 
cause of all things. You are he that has the seed of action, ignorance and 
desire, for the means of moving from this world to the other and the other to 
this. 

You have ten arms. Your unblinking eyes see at all times. You have a 
blue throat where you bear the poison that arose when the ocean was 
churned that would have otherwise destroyed the universe. You are the Lord 
of Uma. You are the origin of all the infinite forms that occur in the 
universe. 

You are he whose authority is due to yourself. You are heroic because of 
such grand feats as the swift razing of the triple city of the Asuras. You are 
inert matter which cannot move unless it co-exists with the Atman. You are 
all the tattvas, subjects of enquiry of the Samkhyas. You are the ordainer 
and ruler of the tattvas. You are the chief of the Ganas who wait upon you. 

You cover infinite space. You are Kama. You know the mantras, gyana 
being your tapasya. You are the highest mantra for you are that philosophy 
which defines the nature and attributes of the Soul and its distinction from 
the non-Soul. You are the cause of the universe as all that exists has sprung 
from your Atman. You are the universal destroyer and all that ceases to 
exist merges into you who are the unmanifest Brahman. 

You bear the calabash in one of your hands, and the bow in another; in 
another hand you bear shafts and in yet another a skull. You bear the 
thunder-bolt. You are armed with the Satagni. You are armed with the 
sword. You wield the battle-axe. You are armed with the Sula. You are 
adorable. You hold the sacrificial ladle in one of your hands. 


You are of beautiful form. You are endowed with abundant tejas. You 
generously give all that adorns those that are devoted to you. You wear a 
turban on your head. You are of a beautiful face. You are he who swells 
with splendour and power. You are he that is humble and modest. You are 
of great height. Your senses are your rays. You are the greatest of acharyas. 
You are Parabrahman, the state of pure blessed existence. 

You are he that took the form of a jackal to console the Brahmana who 
had resolved to commit suicide when insulted by a rich Vaisya. You are he 
whose aims are achieved by themselves, without waiting for the power that 
derives from tapasya. You are one with the shaved head, a sign of the order 
of sannyasis. 

You are the one who does good to all creatures. You are unborn. You 
have countless forms. Your body is covered with all kinds of fragrances. 
The matted locks on your head swallowed the river Ganga when she first 
descended from heaven, though you released the waters at the plea of King 
Bhagiratha. You are the giver of sovereignty. 

You are a brahmacharin without ever having fallen away from the rigid 
vow of abstinence. You are renowned for your sexual restraint. You always 
lie on your back. You have your abode in puissance. You have three matted 
locks on your head. You are dressed in rags. You are the fierce Rudra. 

You are the divine senapati, and you are all pervading. You are he that 
moves during the day. You are he that moves in the night. You are of fierce 
wrath. You possess a dazzling radiance that is born of Vedic study and 
tapasya. 

You are the slayer of the mighty Asura who took the form of an enraged 
elephant to destroy your sacred city of Varanasi. You are the slayer of those 
Daityas who become the oppressors of the universe. You are Kaala, time 
which is the universal destroyer. 

You are the supreme ordainer of the universe. You are a wealth of 
accomplishments. You are of the form of the lion and the tiger. You are he 
that is clad in the hide of an elephant. You are the yogin who deceives 
Kaala by transcending its irresistible influence. You are the original sound. 
You are the fruition of all desires. You are he that is adored in four ways. 

You are a night-wanderer, like a Vetala. You are he that wanders in the 
company of spirits. You are he that wanders in the company of ghostly 
beings. You are the Supreme Lord of even Indra and the other Devas. You 


are he that has multiplied himself infinitely in the form of all existent and 
non-existent things. 

You are the upholder of both Mahat and all the innumerable 
combinations of the five Mahabhutas. You are the primeval ignorance or 
tamas known as Rahu. You are without measure and infinite. You are the 
supreme end that is attained by the emancipated. 

You love to dance. You are he that is always dancing. You are he that 
causes others to dance. You are the friend of the universe. You are he whose 
appearance is calm and gentle. Your penances endow you with power to 
create and destroy the universe. You are he who binds all creatures with the 
bonds of your maya. You are he that transcends death. 

You are he who dwells on Kailasa. You transcend all bonds and, like 
space, you are detached from all things. You possess a thousand arms. You 
are victory. You are that perseverance which leads to success or victory. 
You are devoid of sloth or procrastination that hinders firm action. 

You are fearless. You are fear. You are he who put a stop to Bali’s 
sacrifice. You fulfill the desires of all your devotees. You are the destroyer 
of Daksha’s yagna. You are good-natured. You are amiable. You are fierce 
and rob all creatures of their energy. You are the slayer of the Asura Bala. 

You are always joyful. You are of the form of wealth which is coveted 
by all. You have never been defeated. There is none more adorable than 
you. You are he who, as the ocean, roars resoundingly. You are that space 
which is so deep that it cannot be measured. You are he whose power and 
the might of whose Ganas and Nandi have never been determined. 

You are the tree of the world whose roots extend upwards and branches 
hang downwards. You are the banyan. You are he that sleeps on a human 
leaf when the universe, after dissolution, becomes one infinite expanse of 
water. You are he that shows compassion to all worshippers assuming the 
form of Hari or Hara or Ganesa or Arka or Agni or Vayu. 

You have sharp teeth and you can masticate countless worlds even as 
one crunches and swallows nuts. In all your forms you are of vast 
dimensions. You have a mouth wide enough to swallow the universe in a 
moment. You are he whose forces are adored everywhere. 

You are he who dispelled the fears of the Devas when the prince of 
elephants had to be captured. You are the seed of the universe. You are he 
whose bull is both your mount and the emblem on your banner in battle. 
You have Agni for your soul. You are Surya who has green steeds yoked to 


his chariot. You are the friend of the Jiva. You are he that knows with the 
proper time for the performance of all religious kriyas. 

You are he whom Vishnu worshipped to obtain his celebrated chakra. 
You are yagna in the form of Vishnu. You are the ocean. You are the 
Varavanala horse’s head that ranges within the ocean, ceaselessly heaving 
fire and drinking the salt waters as if they were sacrificial butter. 

You are Vayu, the friend of Agni. You are of tranquil soul like the ocean 
when at rest and unstirred by the mildest wind. You are Agni that drinks the 
libations of ghee poured in yagnas with the help of mantras. You are he 
whom it is difficult to seek out. You are he whose lustre spreads over the 
infinite universe. You are ever skilful in battle. You well know the time 
when one should engage in battle so that victory may be achieved. You are 
that science of jyotisha, which treats of the movements of the stars and 
planets. 

You take the form of jaya, of success or victory. You are he whose body 
is Kaala, never subject to death. You are a grihasta for you wear a tuft of 
hair on your head. You are a sannyasi for your head is shaven. You wear 
matted locks, as you are a vanaprastha. 

You are distinguished for your fiery rays: the bright path on which the 
righteous walk is identical with you. You are he that appears in the sky 
within the heart in the body of every creature. You are he who enters into 
the skull of every creature. You bear the wrinkles of age. 

You bear the bamboo flute. You also have the tabor. You bear the 
musical instrument called tali. You hold the wooden vessel used for husking 
grain. You are he who shrouds the illusion which covers Yama. You are an 
astrologer whose understanding is always directed towards the motion of 
the wheel of time made up of the stars in the sky. 

You are Jiva whose understanding is directed to things that are the 
outcome of sattva, rajas and tamas. You are that in which all things merge 
when dissolution engulfs them. You are stable and fixed, there being 
nothing in you that is subject to change of any kind. You are the Lord of all 
creatures. Your arms extend all over the universe. 

You reveal yourself in many forms that are but iotas of yourself. You 
pervade all things. You are he that has no mouth for you seek not to enjoy 
the objects of your creation. You are he who frees your creatures from the 
bonds of the world. You are easy to attain. 


You are he that manifested himself with golden armour. You are he that 
appears in the linga. You are he that roams the forests in search of birds and 
animals. You are he that wanders across the earth. You are he that is 
omnipresent. You are the blast of all the conches blown in the three worlds. 
You are he that has all creatures for his kinsmen. 

You have the form of a snake for you are identical with the mighty 
Sesha Naga. You are he that lives in mountain caves like Jaigishavya or 
other yogins. You are identical with Guha, the divine senapati. You wear 
garlands of flowers. You are he who enjoys the happiness that springs from 
the possession of worldly objects. 

You are he from whom all creatures have derived their three states of 
birth, existence, and death. You are he that upholds all things that exist or 
occur in the three stages of Kaala—the past, the present and the future. You 
are he that frees creatures from the outcomes of all deeds of previous lives 
as well as those of the present life, and from all the bonds due to ignorance 
and desire. 

You are he who binds the Asura lords. You are he who is the slayer of 
foes in battle. You are that can be attained through gyana alone. You are 
Durvasas. You are he who is served and adored by all the righteous. You are 
he who causes the fall of even Brahma. You are he that gives unto all 
creatures the just share of joy and sorrow that each deserves according to 
his actions. 

You are he that is incomparable. You are conversant with the havis 
given and appropriated in yagnas. You dwell in every place. You range 
everywhere. You are he that wears simple garments. You are Vasava. You 
are immortal. You are identical with the Himavat Mountains. You are the 
maker of pure gold. 

You are devoid of karma. You uphold in yourself the fruits of all karma. 
You are the foremost of those who sustain and uphold. You are he that has 
red eyes. You are he with a vision extending across the infinite universe. 
You are he that has a chariot whose wheels are ever victorious. 

You are he that has vast learning. You are he that accepts your devotees 
as your servants. You are he that restrains and subdues your senses. You are 
he that acts. You wear clothes whose warp and woof are made of snakes. 
You are supreme. You are he who is the lowest of the celestials. You are he 
that is mature. You own the musical instrument called the kahala. 


You grant all wishes. You are the embodiment of grace in all the three 
stages of time, the past, the present and the future. You have power that is 
well used. You are he who had assumed the form of Balarama, the elder 
brother of Krishna. 

You are the foremost of all coveted things, being yourself mukti, the 
highest of all ends to which creatures attain. You are the giver of all things. 
Your face is turned in all directions. You are he from whom diverse 
creatures have sprung even as all forms have sprung from Akasa or are 
variations of that primal element. You are he who falls into the pit called 
deha or the body. You are he that is helpless; you fall into that pit and 
cannot transcend the sorrow that is your lot. 

You live in the firmament of the heart. You are terribly fierce in form. 
You are the deity called Amsu. You are the companion of Amsu and are 
called Aditya. You radiate innumerable rays. You are of blinding 
effulgence. 

You have the speed of the wind. You possess speed greater than that of 
the wind. You possess the speed of the mind. You are Nishachara since you 
enjoy all things filled with the night of avidya. 

You dwell in every body. You dwell with prosperity as your companion. 
You are he that imparts knowledge and instruction. You are he who teaches 
in absolute silence. You are he that observes the vow of reticence for you 
teach with silence. You are he who leaves the body, gazing at the soul. 

You are he that is well adored. You are the giver of treasures, for 
Kubera, the Lord of all the treasures, obtained his riches from you. You are 
the prince of birds, being Garuda, the son of Vinata and Kasyapa. You are 
the friend that helps. Your radiance is like that of a million suns risen 
together. You are the master of all created beings. 

You are he who rouses the appetites. You are Kamadeva. You are of the 
form of beautiful women that are coveted by all. You are the tree of the 
world. You are the Lord of wealth. You are the giver of fame. You are the 
God that distributes the fruits of actions, joy and sorrow to all creatures. 
You are yourself those rewards which you distribute. 

You are the most ancient, having existed from a time when nothing else 
was. You can cover all the three worlds with a single step. You are Vamana 
who tricked the Asura king Bali; depriving him of his sovereignty you 
restored it to Indra. You are the yogi crowned with success, like 
Sanatkumara and others. 


You are a Maharishi like Vasishta. You are one whose objects are 
always crowned with success like Rishabha or Dattatreya. You are a 
sannyasin like Yagnavalkya. You are he that is adorned with the marks of 
the mendicant. You are he that is without such markings. You are he that 
transcends the practices of the sannyasasrama. 

You are he that protects all creatures from every fear. You are without 
any passions yourself so that glory and dishonour are alike to you. You are 
Kartikeya, the divine senapati. You are Visakha who was born from that 
senapati when Indra hurled his vajra at him. You are conversant with the 
sixty tattvas, the subjects of enquiry in the universe. 

You are the Lord of the senses that achieve their respective functions 
guided by you. You are he that is armed with the thunder-bolt that rives 
mountains. You are infinite. You are the confounder of the Daitya ranks on 
the battlefield. You are he that drives his chariot in circles among his own 
ranks and that makes similar circles among the ranks of his enemies, 
returning safe after devastating them. 

You are he that knows the lowest depth of the world’s ocean because of 
your knowledge of Brahman. You are Madhu, the founder of the vamsa into 
which Krishna was born. Your eyes are honey-coloured. You are he that has 
been born after Brihaspati. 

You are he that performs the karmas which Adhvaryus do in yagnas. 
You are he who is always adored by men of all asramas. You are devoted to 
Brahman. You wander among the habitations of men in the world as a 
sannyasi. You are he that pervades all beings. You are he that is conversant 
with truth. You know and guide every heart. You are he that ranges over the 
whole universe. 

You are he that gathers the good and bad deeds of all creatures in order 
to award them the fruits of their actions. You are he that lives during even 
the night that follows the Mahapralaya. You are the protector who wields 
the bow Pinaka. You dwell even among the Daityas that are the targets of 
your arrows. You are the source of prosperity. 

You are the mighty Hanuman who helped Vishnu in his Rama avatara 
during his mission to slay Ravana. You are the lord of the Ganas. You are 
each of those diverse Ganas. You are he that gladdens all creatures. You 
enhance the joys of all. 

You deprive even Indra of his sovereignty and prosperity. You are the 
universal destroyer in the form of death. You are he that resides in the sixty- 


four Kaalas. You are the very great. You are the Pitamaha, the father of 
Brahma. You are the supreme linga that is adored by both Devas and 
Asuras. You are of benign and beautiful countenance. 

You are he who presides over the varied propensities for action and 
inaction. You are the Lord of sight. You are the Lord of yoga since you 
withdraw all the senses into the heart and unite them there. You are he that 
upholds the Krita and the other yugas by causing them to run ceaselessly. 
You are the Lord of seeds, giving the fruits of all virtuous and base actions. 
You are the original cause of such seeds. 

You act in the ways that have been indicated in the shastras beginning 
with those that speak of the Atman. You are he in whom dwell rajas and the 
other gunas. You are the Mahabharata and other itihasas. You are the 
treatises called Mimamsa. You are Gautama, founder of the science of 
dialectics. You are the author of the great treatise on grammar named after 
the moon. 

You are he who punishes his enemies. You are he whom none can 
chastise. You are he who is sincere in religious kriyas. You are he that 
becomes obedient to those that are devoted to you. You are he who 
inexorably subjugates all others. You are he who incites wars among the 
Devas and the Asuras. 

You are he who has created the fourteen worlds beginning with Bhu. 
You are the protector of all beings beginning with Brahma and ending with 
the lowest forms of vegetation like grass and straw. You are the Creator of 
the very Panchamahabhutas. 

You are he that never enjoys anything for you are always detached. You 
are free from decay. You are the highest form of felicity. You are a deity 
proud of his strength. You are Sakra. You are the punishment described in 
the shastras on dharma and meted out to offenders. You are of the form of 
that tyranny which prevails throughout the world. 

You are of pure soul. You are unstained without any faults. You are 
worthy of adoration. You are the world that appears and disappears, 
endlessly. You are he whose grace is infinite. You are he that has good 
dreams. You are a mirror in which the universe is reflected. You are he that 
has subdued all internal and external enemies. 

You are the Creator of the Vedas. You have made those declarations that 
are contained in the Tantras and the Puranas and that are embodied in 


language of humans. You are possessed of profound learning. You are a 
Parantapa in battle. 

You are he that resides in the awesome clouds that appear at the time of 
the pralaya. You are most fierce as you bring about the dissolution of the 
universe. You are he who subdues all persons and all things. You are the 
great Destroyer. You are he that has fire for his energy. You are he whose 
tejas is mightier than fire. You are the yuga-fire that consumes all things. 

You are he that is gratified with sacrificial libations. You are water and 
other liquids that are offered in yagnas along with the chanting mantras. 
You take the form of the Dharma, the deity of righteousness, the one who 
dispenses the fruits that attach to good and bad deeds. You are the giver of 
felicity. You are always endowed with light. You are of the form of fire. You 
are of the colour of the emerald. You are always present in the linga. You 
are the source of blessedness. 

You cannot be confounded by anything in the pursuit of your goals. You 
are the giver of blessings. You are of the form of blessedness. You are he 
unto whom a share of the havis is always given. You are he who distributes 
unto each his share of that is offered in sacrifices. You are swift. You are he 
that is detached from all things. You are he that has the most powerful arms 
and legs. You are he that is ever engaged in the act of creation. 

You are of a dark hue, being of the form of Vishnu. You are of a white 
colour being of the form of Samba, the son of Krishna. You are the senses 
of all embodied creatures. You possess enormous feet. You have mighty 
hands. You have a colossal body. You are widely renowned. You have a 
great head. You are of vast size. 

You are of infinite vision. You are the home of the darkness of 
ignorance. You are the Destroyer of the destroyer. You are of immense age. 
You have huge ears. You have a vast mouth. You are he that has ample 
cheeks. You have a great nose. You have a tremendous throat. You have a 
gigantic neck. You are he that rends the bonds of the body. You have a deep 
and immense chest. 

You are the inner soul which dwells in all creatures. You have a deer on 
your lap. You are he from whom countless worlds hang like fruits from a 
tree. You are he who opens his mouth at the time of the pralaya to swallow 
the universe. You are the ocean of milk. 

You have enormous teeth. You have great vast jaws. You have a dense 
beard. You have hair of infinite length. You have a gigantic belly. You have 


matted locks of great length. You are ever cheerful. You are of the form of 
grace. You are of the form of belief. You are he whose bow and astras are 
the size of mountains. 

You are he that is full of love for all creatures like a parent towards his 
children. You are he that has no love. You are unvanquished. You are 
devoted to yoga dhyana. You are of the form of the tree of life. You are he 
that is symbolised by the tree of the world. 

You are never satiated when eating because you are of the form of fire 
which is never sated with its offerings. Identified with Agni, you are he that 
has Vayu for your vahana. You are he that ranges over hills and mountains. 
You are he that lives on the mountains of Meru. You are the king of the 
Devas. 

You have the Atharvans for your head. You have the Samans for your 
mouth. You have the thousand Riks for your immeasurable eyes. You have 
the Yajuses for your feet and hands. You are the Upanishads. You are the 
entire body of rituals in the shastras. 

You are all that moves. You are he whose desires are always fulfilled. 
You are he who is always inclined to grace. You are he of beautiful form. 
You are of the form of the good that one does to another. You are that which 
is beloved. You are he that always advances towards your devotees in the 
proportion as they advance to meet you. 

You are gold and other precious metals that are treasured by all. Your 
radiance is like that of burnished gold. You are the navel of the universe. 
You are he that makes the fruits of sacrifices grow for the benefit of those 
that perform yagnas for your glory. You are of the form of that faith and 
devotion, which the righteous have for sacrifices. You are the Creator of the 
universe. 

You are all that is unmoving in the form of mountains and other inert 
objects. You are the twelve stages of life through which a person passes. 
You are he that causes fear by assuming the intermediate states between the 
stated ten. You are the beginning of all things. You are he that unites the 
Jiva with Supreme Brahman through yoga. You are that yoga which causes 
such a union between the Jiva and the Parabrahman. 

You are unmanifest, inspiring the deepest awe. You reign over the 
fourth yuga because of your association with lust, wrath, greed and other 
evil passions that flow from that Kali. You are eternal Kaala because of 
your form is that unending succession of births and deaths in the universe. 


You are of the form of Kurma, the tortoise. You are worshipped by 
Yama himself. You live in the midst of your Ganas. You accept your 
devotees as your Ganas. Brahma himself drives your chariot. You sleep on 
ashes. You protect the universe with ashes. You are he whose body is made 
of ashes. You are the tree that grants all desires. You are of the form of 
those that are your Ganas. 

You are the protector of the fourteen realms. You transcend all of them. 
You are complete without any imperfection. You are adored by all 
creatures. You are white, pure and stainless. You are he that has an 
untainted body, speech and mind. You are he who has attained to that purity 
of existence called mukti. You are he who cannot be sullied by any kind of 
impurity. 

You are he who has been attained by the great ancient acharyas. You 
dwell in the form of dharma in all the four asramas. You are that dharma 
which is of the form of kriyas and yagnas. You have the power of the divine 
Creator of the universe. You are he who is adored as the primeval form of 
the universe. 

You are Mahabaho, of mighty arms. Your lips are of a coppery hue. You 
are like the vast waters of the ocean. You are steadfast and firm as 
mountains. You are Kapila. You are brown. You are all the colours which 
when mixed produce white. 

You are the span of life. You are ancient. You are recent. You are a 
Gandharva. You are the mother of the Devas in the form of Aditi, or the 
mother of all things in the form of Bhumi. You are Garuda, the prince of 
birds, also called Tarkshya, born of Vinata and Kasyapa. 

You can be understood with ease. You are of excellent and agreeable 
speech. You are he that is armed with the battle-axe. You are he that is 
desirous of victory. You are he that helps others to achieve their goals. You 
are the greatest, closest and best friend. 

You are he that bears a vina made of two hollow gourds. You are of 
terrifying wrath that you display at the time of the Apocalypse. Your 
children Brahma and Vishnu are beings higher than all Manavas and Devas. 
You are that form of Vishnu who floats upon the waters after the universal 
dissolution. You devour all things with great ferocity. 

You are he that procreates. You are family and race, continuing from 
generation to generation. You are the venu nadam, the sound of a bamboo 


flute. You are faultless. Every limb of your body is beautiful. You are full of 
illusion. You do good to others without expecting any return. 

You are Vayu. You are Agni. You are the bonds of the worlds which 
bind the Jiva. You are the Creator of those bonds. You are the render of 
such bonds. You are he that dwells with even the Daityas, the enemies of all 
sacrifices. You dwell with those that are the adversaries of all action, and 
with those that have abandoned all karma. 

You have large teeth, and you have the mightiest astras. You are he that 
has been greatly reproached. You are he that astounded the Rishis dwelling 
in the Daruka forest. You are he that did good even to your detractors, those 
same Rishis living in the Daruka vana. You are he who dispels all fears and 
who, in doing so, bestowed mukti on those Rishis. You are he that has no 
riches as can be seen from your lack of clothes. 

You are the Lord of the Devas. You are the greatest of them, being 
adored by even Indra and other high divinities. You are adored by even 
Vishnu. You are the slayer of the enemies of the Devas. You are he that, in 
the form of Sesha, lives in patala. 

You are invisible but can be perceived, even as the wind which though 
invisible is felt by all. You are he whose knowledge extends to the roots of 
everything, and to whom all things, even in their hidden nature, are known. 
You are that which is enjoyed by him that enjoys it. 

You are he among the eleven Rudras who is called Ajaikapat. You are 
the sovereign of the entire universe. You are of the form of all Jivas in the 
universe since you own the three gunas of sattva, rajas and tamas. You are 
he that is not subject to those three attributes. You are he that transcends all 
gunas and is a state of pure existence which cannot be described by any 
adjective that language can yield. 

You are Dhanwantari, prince of physicians. You are a comet who brings 
calamities to the sinful. You are Skanda, the divine senapati. You are 
Kubera, king of the Yakshas, who is your inseparable companion and the 
Lord of all treasures in the world. 

You are Dhatri. You are Sakra. You are Vishnu. You are Mitra. You are 
Tvashtri. You are the Dhruvatara. You are he that upholds all things. You 
are he called Prabhava amongst the Vasus. You are the wind which goes 
everywhere, being the Sutratman that connects all things in the universe 
with a thread. 


You are Aryaman. You are Savitri. You are Ravi. You are that ancient 
celebrated king known as Ushangu. You are he who protects all creatures in 
diverse ways. You are Mandhatri for you gratify all creatures. You are he 
from whom all creatures are born. You are he who exists in many forms. 
You are he who causes the various colours to exist in the universe. You are 
he who upholds all desires and all attributes because they originate from 
you. 

You are he who has the lotus on your navel. You are he within whose 
womb are countless mighty creatures. You face is as beautiful as the moon. 
You are wind. You are fire. You are powerful. You are of serene soul. You 
are old. You are he that can be known through dharma. 

You are Lakshmi. You create the very arena of actions, the karma 
kshetra through which persons worship the Supreme Deity. You are he who 
lives in the field of karma. You are the Soul of that field. You are the answer 
and the cause of the attributes of sovereignty. All things lie in you for, as the 
Srutis declare, all things becomes one in you, you being of the nature of that 
unconsciousness which reveals itself in dreamless sleep. 

You are the Lord of all creatures endowed with prana. You are the God 
of the gods. You are he who is grace. In the form of cause you are Sat. In 
the form of effect you are Asat. You are he who possesses the best of all 
things. You are he who dwells on the mountains of Kailasa. You are he who 
repairs to the mountains of Himavat. You wash away all things near you 
like a mighty river washing away trees and other objects standing on its 
banks. You are the maker of Pushkara and other large lakes and water 
bodies. 

You possess knowledge of infinite kinds. You are the giver of infinite 
blessings. You are a merchant who carries the goods of this land to another 
and brings the goods of that realm to this for the welfare of men. You are a 
carpenter. 

You are the tree that provides the wood for your axe. You are the tree 
called bakula. You are the chandana, the sandalwood tree. You are the tree 
called chchanda. 

You are he whose neck is powerful. You are he whose shoulders are 
vast. You are not restless; you are constant in all your actions that ensue 
from all your powers. You are the principal herbs and crops with their 
produce, rice, wheat and other grain. 


You are he that helps men attain the objects of their desire. You are all 
the fitting end of the Vedas and Patanjali’s grammar. You are he who roars 
like a lion. You have the fangs of the lion. To journey you ride a lion. Your 
chariot is drawn by a lion. You are he called the truth of truth. 

You are the Destroyer of the universe. You always seek the welfare of 
the worlds. You are he who rescues all creatures from distress and lead 
them to moksha. 

You are the bird called saranga. You are the young one of a swan. Like a 
cock or peacock you flaunt your beauty with the crest on your head. 

You are he who protects the place where conclaves of the wise sit to 
dispense justice. You are the abode of all creatures. You are the cherisher of 
all creatures. You are day and night which are the constituent elements of 
eternity. You are he that is without fault and therefore never censured. 

You are the upholder of all creatures. You are the refuge of all creatures. 
You are without birth. You exist. You are ever fruitful. You are imbued with 
dharana and dhyana and Samadhi. You are the steed Uchchaisravas. You are 
the giver of food. You are he who upholds the life-breaths of living 
creatures. 

You are suffused with patience. You are possessed of fathomless 
intelligence. You are dexterous and energetic. You are honoured by all. You 
are the dispenser of the fruits of dharma and adharma. You are the senses 
and so they succeed in performing their respective functions since you 
preside over them. 

You are the Lord of all the stars. You are all collections of objects. You 
are he whose garments are of leather. You are he who dispels the sorrow of 
his devotees. You have a golden arm. You protect the bodies of yogins who 
seek to enter their own selves. You are he who has reduced all his enemies 
to nothingness. 

You are full of boundless joy. You are he who achieved victory over the 
irresistible Kamadeva. You are he who has subdued his senses. You are the 
gandhara in the musical scale. You are he who has a beautiful home which 
rests upon the delightful Mountain Kailasa. You are he who is ever attached 
to tapasya. You are of the form of happiness and contentment. You are 
infinite. 

You are he in whose honour the best of mantras has been composed. 
You are he who dances in long strides and great leaps. You are he who is 
revered by the diverse tribes of Apsaras. You are he whose standard bears 


the emblem of the bull. You are the Meru Mountain. You are he who roves 
among all the peaks of that great mountain. You are so quick that it is 
difficult indeed to apprehend you. 

You can be explained by gurus to their sishyas but cannot be described 
in words. You are of the form of that teaching which gurus impart to 
sishyas. You are he that can perceive all fragrances in an instant. 

You take the form of the entrances to cities and palaces. You take the 
form of the moats and ditches that surround fortified towns and enable their 
besieged forces to be victorious. You are the wind. You take of the form of 
fortified cities and towns encompassed by walls and moats. 

As Garuda, you are the ruler of all winged creatures. You proliferate 
creation by the union of the two sexes. You are the unsurpassed in dharma 
and gyana. You are superior to even him who is the first of all in goodness 
and knowledge. You transcend all morality and knowledge. 

You are eternal and unchanging, as also dependent on just yourself. You 
are the master and protector of the Devas and Asuras. You are the master 
and protector of all creatures. You are he who wears a coat of armour. You 
are he whose arms can raze all enemies. You are an object of adoration for 
Suparvan in swarga. 

You are he who grants the power to uphold all things. You are by 
yourself able to bear all things. You are unchanging and perfectly stable. 
You are white and perfectly pure, without any stain or blemish. You bear 
the trident that can destroy all things. You give physical forms to those that 
constantly revolve in the universe of births and deaths. You are more 
precious than wealth. As goodness and courteousness, you are the path of 
the righteous. 

You are he who once tore off Brahma’s fifth head, not out of anger but 
careful deliberation. You are he who is marked with all those auspicious 
marks that are spoken of in the sciences of palmistry and phrenology and 
other branches of knowledge that regard the physical frame as the indicator 
of mental attributes. You are the aksha, that wooden axle of a chariot and, 
therefore, are the one who is attached to the chariot of the body. You are 
attached to all things by pervading all things as their soul. 

You are mighty, a Kshatriya of all Kshatriyas, a hero of heroes. You are 
the Veda. You are the Smritis, the itihasas, the Puranas, and other shastras. 
You are the illustrious deity of every sacred shrine. You are he who has the 
earth for his chariot. You are the inert elements in the composition of every 


creature. You are he who breathes life into every combination of those inert 
element. You are Pranava and other sacred mantras that instil life into dead 
matter. 

You are he that casts serene glances everywhere. As the Destroyer, you 
are stern, even cruel. You are he who has countless precious attributes and 
possessions. You have a body that is red in colour. All the oceans are as so 
many pools filled for your drinking. 

You are the root of the tree of the world. You are beautiful and shine 
with unsurpassed grandeur. You are of the form of amrita. You are both 
cause and effect. As a great yogi, you are an ocean of tapasya. You are he 
that desires to rise to the highest state of existence. You are he that has 
already attained to that state. You are he who is distinguished by the purity 
of his conduct, and his actions and observances. You are he who is 
renowned for the righteousness of his ways. 

In the form of strength and courage, you are the jewel of armies. You 
are he who is adorned with celestial ornaments. You are Yoga. You are he 
from whom flows eternal time measured in yugas, manvantaras and kalpas. 
You are he who moves all creatures from place to place. You are of the form 
of dharma and adharma and their intermixing as can be seen in the 
successive yugas. You are great and formless. 

You are he who killed the mighty Asura that attacked the sacred city of 
Varanasi in the form of an irate tusker. You are of the form of death. You 
grant the wishes of all creatures in accordance with their punya. 

You are amiable. You are conversant with all things that are beyond the 
senses. You are conversant with the tattvas and hence unchanging. You are 
he who always radiates supernal beauty. You wear garlands that extend 
from your neck to your feet. You are that Hara who has the moon for his 
eye. You are the vast ocean. 

You are the first three yugas—Krita, Treta and Dwapara. You are he 
whose appearance benefits others. The shastras, the guru and dhyana are 
your three eyes. You are he whose forms are very subtle for you are the 
subtle forms of the primal elements. You are he whose pierced ears are 
adorned with jewelled kundalas. You are the wearer of matted dreadlocks. 

You are the bindu in the alphabet which indicates the nasal tone. You 
are the visarga, the two dots which denote the sound of the aspirated letters 
in Sanskrit. You have an incomparable face. You are the shaft that is shot by 


the warrior to destroy his enemy. You are all the astras used by great 
walriors. 

You have limitless patience to bear all things. You are he whose 
knowledge has arisen from the cessation of all physical and mental activity. 
You are he who has become satya with the ending of all the other senses. 
You are the note which arises from the realm of Gandhara and is melodious 
to the ear. 

You are he who is armed with the mighty bow, the Pinaka. You are he 
who is the understanding and the desires that exist in all creatures, and also 
the supreme upholder of all beings. You are he from whom all actions flow. 
You are that wind which rises at the time of the universal dissolution and 
which churns the entire universe even as the rod in the hands of the gopis 
churns the milk in the earthen pot. 

You are he that is full. You are he that sees all things. You are the sound 
that arises from clapping one hand against another other. You are he whose 
palm serves as the plate from which to eat. You are he who has a body of 
steel. You are inconceivably great. You are of the form of the chatra, a 
parasol. You are he who carries a parasol. You are celebrated to be identical 
with all creatures. You are he who covered the universe with two steps and 
wanted space for the third one. You are he whose head is without hair. You 
are he whose form is ugly and fierce. You are he who has undergone infinite 
modifications and become all things in the universe. 

You are he who bears the danda, the sign of sannyasa. You are he who 
has a kundala. You are he who cannot be attained with deeds. You are he 
who is identical with the lion, the green-eyed king of beasts. You are of the 
form of all the points of the compass. You are he who is armed with the 
thunderbolt. You are he who has a hundred tongues. You are he who has a 
thousand feet and a thousand heads. 

You are the Lord of the Devas. You are he that is comprised of all the 
Devas. You are the Great Master. You are he who has a thousand arms. You 
are he who can grant all wishes. You are he whose protection is sought by 
everyone. You are he who is the Creator of all the worlds. You are he who 
purifies all from every kind of sin, in the form of shrines and sacred waters. 
You are he who has three high mantras. 

You are the youngest son of Aditi and Kasyapa, the dwarf Upendra, 
who beguiled the Asura Bali and took from him his sovereignty of the three 
worlds and restored it to Indra. You are both black and incarnadine, in the 


form known as Hari-Hara. You are the maker of the Brahmana’s danda. You 
are armed with the satagni, the paasa, and the astra. You are he that was 
born within the primeval lotus. 

You are he who has a cavernous womb. You are he who has the Vedas 
in his womb. You are he who rises the infinite waters, the Ekarnava which 
succeeds the Pralaya. You are he who radiates brilliant light. You are the 
creator of the Vedas. You are he who studies the Vedas. You are he who 
knows the meaning of the Vedas. 

You are devoted to Brahman. You are the refuge of all devoted to 
Brahman. You are of infinite forms. You host many bodies. You are filled 
with compelling prowess. You are the Soul that transcends the three 
universal gunas of sattva, rajas and tamas. You are the Lord of all Jivas. 

You have the speed of the wind. You possess the swiftness of the mind. 
You are always smeared with sandalwood-paste. You are the tip of the stalk 
of the primeval lotus. You are he who caused the divine cow Surabhi to fall 
from her superior position by cursing her. You are that Brahma who was 
unable to see your end, the tip of the first linga of flames. 

You are adorned with a large wreath of karnikara flowers. You are 
adorned with a crown of blue jewels. You are the wielder of the Pinaka. You 
are the master of that knowledge which deals with Brahman. You are he 
who has subdued his senses with your knowledge of Brahman. You are he 
who bears the Ganga on your head. 

You are the husband of Uma, the daughter of Himavat. You are 
powerful, having assumed the form of the Varaha to lift up the submerged 
earth. You are he who protects the universe by assuming various 
incarnations. You are worthy of adoration. You are that primeval Being with 
the equine head who recited the Vedas in a thundering voice. You are he of 
great felicity. 

You are the great conqueror. You are he who has slain all his enemies in 
the form of passions. You are both white and tawny being as you are half- 
male and half-female. The colour of your body is like that of gold. You are 
he that is of the form of pure joy, being, as you are, above the five layers of 
the Jiva, the anna-maya, the prana-maya, the mano-maya, the vigyana- 
maya, and the ananda-maya. You are of a restrained soul. 

You are the foundation upon which rests that ignorance known as 
pradhana and which, consisting of the three gunas of sattva, rajas and 
tamas, is the cause of the emergence of the universe. You are he whose 


faces are turned in every direction. You are he who has three eyes in the 
forms of the sun, the moon and fire. You are he who is superior to all 
creatures in your vast righteousness. You are the Soul of all mobile beings. 
You are of the form of the subtle soul which cannot be perceived. You are 
the giver of immortality in the form of mukti as the fruit of all virtuous 
deeds achieved by creatures without desire of rewards. 

You are the acharya of even those that are the Gods of the gods. You are 
Vasu, the son of Aditi. You are he who is filled with countless rays of light, 
who brings forth the universe, and who is the Soma which is drunk at 
yagnas. You are Vyasa, author of the Puranas and other sacred itihasas. 
Being identical with the Puranas and other itihasas, both long and short, you 
are the creations of Vyasa’s mind. You are the sum of all Jivas. 

You are the season. You are the year. You are the month. You are the 
fortnight. You are those sacred days that end these periods. You are the 
kaalas. You are the kashtas. You are the lavas. You are the matras. You are 
the muhurtas and days and nights. You are the kshanas. 

You are the soil upon which the tree of the universe stands. You are the 
seed of all creatures being of the form of that Avyakta Chaitanya, 
unmanifest consciousness, imbued with maya from which all creatures 
spring. You are Mahatattva. Being the form of Chit, which appears after 
Mahatattva, you are the beginning of the jiva. You are Sat or cause. You are 
Asat or effect. You are manifest, able to be grasped by the senses. 

You are the father. You are the mother. You are the Pitamaha. You are 
the door to swarga because of your tapasya. Because you are desire, you are 
the beginning of the generation of all creatures. And because you are the 
absence of desire, which alone leads to uniting with Brahman, you are the 
door to moksha. You are those acts of dharma which lead to the felicity of 
heaven. You are nirvana, that cessation of individual or distinct existence, 
which is mukti. 

You give joy to every creature. You are that realm of satya which the 
righteous attain. You are superior to even that realm of truth. You are he 
who is the Creator of both the Devas and the Asuras. You are he who is the 
refuge of both the Devas and the Asuras. You are the guru of both the 
Devas and the Asuras, being as you are both Brihaspati and Sukra. 

You are he who is ever victorious. You are he who is ever worshipped 
by the Devas and the Asuras. You are he who guides the Devas and the 
Asuras even as the mahamatra guides the elephant. You are the refuge of all 


the Devas and the Asuras, You are he who is the Lord of both the Devas and 
the Asuras being both Indra and Virochana. You lead both the Devas and 
the Asuras in battle, being both Kartikeya and Kesi who lead their armies. 

You are he who transcends the senses and excels by himself. You take 
the form of the Devarishis like Narada and the others. As Brahma and 
Rudra you grant boons to the Devas and Asuras. You are he who rules the 
hearts of the Devas and the Asuras. You are he into whom the universe 
enters when it is dissolved. Thus you are the refuge of even he who rules 
over the hearts of both the Devas and the Asuras. You are he whose body is 
made up of all the deities. 

No being is superior to you. You are he who is the inner soul of the 
gods. You are he who has sprung from his own self. You are of the form of 
immobile things. You are he who covers the three worlds with three strides. 
You possess vast knowledge. You are without blemish. You are he who is 
freed from rajas. You are he who transcends destruction. 

You are he in whose honour mantras must be chanted. You are the 
master of the inexorable elephant represented by Kaala. You are that Lord 
of tigers who is worshipped in the kingdom of the Kalingas. On account of 
your great strength, you are he who is called the lion among the gods. You 
are he who is the foremost among men. 

You are filled with great wisdom. You are he who takes the first share of 
the offerings at yagnas. You are invisible. You are the sum of all the Devas. 
You are he in whom penances prevail. You always excel in yoga. You are 
auspicious. You are armed with the vajra. You are the source of the origin of 
the astras called paasas, the nooses. You are he whom your devotees attain 
to in diverse ways. You are Guha. You are the supreme limit of grace. 

You are identical with your creation. You are he who rescues all 
creatures from death by liberating them. You purify all, including Brahma 
himself. You take the form of bulls and other horned animals. You are he 
who delights in mountain peaks. You are the planet Sani. You are Kubera, 
Lord of the Yakshas. You are perfection without flaw. 

You are he who inspires happiness. You are all the gods united. You are 
the cessation of all things. You are all the duties of all the asramas. You are 
he who has an eye on his forehead. You are he who sports with the universe 
for his marble ball. You take the form of deer. You have the energy that is of 
the form of gyana and tapasya. As Himavat and Meru you are the Lord of 
all immobile things. 


You are he who has subdued his senses with rules and vows. You are he 
whose aims have all been fulfilled. You are identical with mukti. You are 
different from him whom we worship. You have truth for your penances. 
Your heart is pure. 

You are he who presides over all vratas and upavasas, being the giver of 
their fruits. You are the highest as you take the form of Turiya. You are 
Brahman. You are the highest refuge of devotees. You are he who 
transcends all bonds. You are freed from the linga sarira. You are filled with 
every kind of prosperity. You are he who enhances the wealth of your 
devotees. You are that which changes unceasingly.’ 

Krishna, I have now sung the praises of the illustrious deity, reciting his 
names in the order of their importance. Who is there that can sing the 
praises of the Lord of the universe, that great Lord of all who deserves our 
adorations and worship and reverence, whom the very gods with Brahma at 
their head are unable to adequately praise and whom the Rishis also fail to 
extol. 

With my devotion and his leave, I have praised that Lord of sacrifices, 
that Supreme Deity, that wisest of all creatures. By reciting these auspicious 
names of the great and blessed One, a worshipper of devoted soul and pure 
heart succeeds in attaining his own Atman. 

These names constitute a mantra that is the best means of attaining 
Brahman. With these one is sure to attain mukti. The Rishis and the Devas 
all praise the Highest Deity with this mantra. Sung by men of restrained 
soul, Mahadeva is pleased with them. 

The illustrious deity is always full of compassion towards his devotees. 
He is omnipotent and grants moksha to those that worship him. So also the 
best among men, that possess faith and devotion, hear and recite for others 
and utter with reverence the praises of that highest and eternal Isana, in all 
their successive lives and adore him in thought, word and deed, and adoring 
him thus at all times, while lying or seated or walking or awake or while 
opening their eyes or shutting them, and thinking of him repeatedly, come 
to be revered by other men and derive great gratification and happiness. 

When a creature is cleansed of all his sins in the course of millions of 
births, in diverse varnas, it is then that devotion springs up in his heart for 
Mahadeva. It is through good fortune alone that undivided devotion to 
Bhava who is the original cause of the universe wells up in the heart of one 
that knows every way of worshipping him. 


Such flawless and pure devotion to Rudra, which has singleness of 
purpose and that is irresistible in its course, is seldom to be found among 
even the Devas, and never among men. It is through the grace of Rudra that 
such devotion arises in the hearts of Manavas. As a result of such bhakti, 
identifying themselves wholly with Mahadeva, men attain to the highest 
SUCCESS. 

The illustrious deity who always blessed those that seek him with 
humility, and surrender themselves completely to him, rescues them from 
samsara. Except for him who frees creatures from rebirth, all other gods 
only efface men’s tapasyas, for men are powerless before such great power. 

In this manner, Tandi of tranquil soul, resembling Indra himself in 
splendour, praised the illustrious Lord of all existent and non-existent 
things, that great deity clad in animal skins. Indeed, Brahma once sung this 
hymn, the Siva Sahasranama in the presence of Sankara. You are a 
Brahmana for you are yourself conversant with Brahman and devoted to 
those conversant with Brahman. You will thus understand it well. This great 
stotra purifies, and washes away all sins. It confers yoga and mukti, and 
heaven and contentment. 

He who recites this mantra with undivided devotion to Sankara 
succeeds in attaining to that high end which is theirs that are devoted to the 
doctrines of the Samkhya philosophy. That worshipper who recites this 
every day for one year with single-minded devotion succeeds in obtaining 
the end that he desires. 

This hymn is a great mystery. It originally dwelt in the heart of Brahma. 
Brahma imparted it to Sakra. Sakra gave it to Mrityu. Mrityu imparted it 
unto the Rudras. From the Rudras, Tandi received it. Indeed Tandi acquired 
it in the realm of Brahma as reward for his severe austerities. Tandi gave it 
to Sukra, and Sukra of Bhrigu’s race taught it to Gautama. 

Gautama in his turn communicated it to Vaivaswata Manu. Manu 
communicated it to Narayana who was a sadhya and loved by him. The 
illustrious and glorious Narayana, gave it to Yama. Vaivaswata Yama 
communicated it to Nachiketa. 

Nachiketa taught it to Markandeya. I had it as the reward for my vratas 
and upavasas from Markandeya. To you, O Parantapa, I give that mantra 
unheard by others. This mantra leads to swarga. It dispels sickness and 
bestows a long life. This is worthy of the highest praise, and is consistent 
with the Vedas.”’ 


Krishna continues, ‘Arjuna, he who recites this awesome hymn with a 
pure heart while observing brahmacharya, and with his senses under 
control, consistently for a full year, succeeds in obtaining the fruits of an 
Aswamedha yagna. Danavas, Yakshas, Rakshasas, Pisachas, Yatudhanas, 
Guhyakas and Nagas cannot harm him.’” 


3The hymn of the 1008 names of Siva. 


CANTO 18 


V aisampayana said, “After Krishna has finished, Mahayogi Vyasa 
says to Yudhishtira, “My son, recite this mantra of the thousand and 
eight names of Mahadeva, and let Siva be gratified with you. 

In the past, I performed severe austerities on the mountains of Meru to 
have a son. I chanted this very mantra and my wish was granted. By doing 
the same, obtain from Sarva the fruition of all your wishes.’ 

After this, Kapila, the Rishi who spread the Samkhya doctrines, and 
who is honoured by the Devas themselves, says, ‘I have worshipped Bhava 
with great bhakti for many lives. The illustrious deity was at last gratified 
with me and gave me the knowledge that enables men to free themselves 
from rebirth.’ 

The Rishi Charusirsa, who is Indra’s loving friend, otherwise known as 
Alampana, says, ‘In former days, I went to the Gokarna Mountains and 
performed a severe tapasya for a hundred years. As the reward for my 
penance, I had a hundred sons from Sarva, all of whom were born without 
sexual union with any woman; they were of restrained soul, righteous, 
possessed of great splendour, free from disease and sorrow, and endowed 
with lives of more than a hundred thousand years.’ 

The illustrious Valmiki says to Yudhishtira, ‘Once upon a time, in 
course of a dialectical argument, some Rishis who possessed the homa fire 
accused me of killing a Brahmana. As soon as they had denounced me in 
this manner, the sin of Brahmahatya possessed me. To purify myself, I 
sought the protection of the sinless Isana of overpowering tejas. I was 
cleansed of all my sins. That dispeller of sorrows, the destroyer of the triad 
city of the Asuras, said to me, ‘Your fame shall be great in the world.’ 


Jamadagni’s son Rama, foremost of all righteous men, shining like the 
sun in the midst of that gathering of Rishis, says to Yudhishtira, ‘I was 
afflicted by the same sin for having killed my brothers who were all learned 
Brahmanas. To purify myself, I sought the protection of Mahadeva. I sang 
the praises of the great deity by reciting his names. Bhava became gratified 
with me and gave me a battle-axe and many other celestial astras. 

And he said to me, “You will be freed from sin and invincible in battle; 
Yama himself shall not succeed in vanquishing you, for you will be freed 
from disease.” Thus did the illustrious and crowned deity of auspicious 
form speak to me. Through his grace I obtained all that he had said.’ 

Viswamitra says, ‘I was once a Kshatriya. I worshipped Bhava with the 
desire of becoming a Brahmana. Through the grace of that great deity I 
attained the high status of a Brahmarishi that is so difficult to obtain.’ 

The Rishi Asita-Devala says to the royal son of Pandu, ‘Once, through 
the curse of Sakra, all the punya I had accumulated through my righteous 
deeds was destroyed. It was the puissant Mahadeva who gave me back that 
merit together with fame and a long life.’ 

The illustrious Rishi Gritsamada, also Indra’s dear friend who 
resembled the Devaguru Brihaspati himself in splendour, says to 
Yudhishtira, ‘In antique times Sakra performed a yagna extending over a 
thousand years. During that sacrifice, Sakra engaged me to recite the 
Samans. 

Vasishta, the son of that Manu who sprung from the eyes of Brahma, 
came to that yagna and said to me, “Dvijottama, you are not singing the 
Rathantara properly. Do not find sin like this, and chant the Samans 
correctly. Ah, why do you commit such a sin as despoils the yagna?” 

Having said these words, the Rishi Vasishta gave way to his anger and 
said to me, “I curse you to become an animal devoid of intelligence, always 
subject to grief, ever fearful, and an inhabitant of pathless forests without 
wind and water, and abandoned by other creatures. I condemn you to live 
thus for ten thousand years, and another eighteen hundred more. That forest 
in which you will pass this period will have no sacred trees and will be the 
haunt of Rurus and lions. You will have to become a cruel deer plunged into 
sorrow.” 

As soon as he had said these words, I was transformed into a deer. I 
then sought the protection of Maheswara. The great deity said to me, “You 
will be freed from all disease, and immortality shall be yours. You will 


never be afflicted by any anguish. Your friendship with Indra will remain 
unchanged, and may both Indra and your sacrifices multiply.” 

The puissant Mahadeva favours all creatures in this way. He is always 
the great dispenser and ordainer of the joy and sorrow of all living 
creatures. That illustrious God cannot be grasped by thought, word or deed. 
Best of warriors, through the grace of Mahadeva, there is none that is equal 
to me in learning.’ 

After this, Krishna speaks again, ‘Mahadeva of golden eyes was 
gratified by my tapasya. Pleased he said to me, “Krishna, through my grace, 
you will be cherished more than wealth that is coveted by all. You will be 
invincible in battle. Your tejas will equal that of Agni’s.” 

On that occasion, Mahadeva granted me thousands of other boons. In 
another former birth, I adored Mahadeva on the Manimanta Mountain for 
millions of years. Gratified, the illustrious deity said to me, “Blessed be 
you, ask me for any boons you desire.” 

Bowing to him, I said, “Isana, if the puissant Mahadeva has been 
gratified with me, then let my devotion to him be eternal! This is the boon 
that I ask.” Mahadeva said to me, “Be it so”, and disappeared.’ 

Jaigishavya says, ‘Yudhishtira, once in the city of Varanasi, Mahadeva 
sought me and conferred upon me the eight attributes of sovereignty.’ 

Garga says, ‘Son of Pandu, pleased with me because of a great mental 
sacrifice that I performed, Siva bestowed upon me, on the banks of the 
sacred Saraswati, that wonderful science, the knowledge of Kaala with its 
sixty-four branches. He also bestowed upon me a thousand sons, all with 
equal merit and all masters of the Vedas. Through his grace, our lives were 
expanded to ten million years.’ 

Parasara says, ‘In a previous Manvantara, I gratified Sarva. At the time, 
I wanted a son with great ascetic punya, endowed with superior tejas, given 
to high yoga, who would earn world-wide fame, arrange the Vedas, and 
become a repository of prosperity; who would be devoted to the Vedas and 
the Brahmanas, and be distinguished for his compassion. Even such a son 
did I ask for from Maheswara. 

Knowing that this was my heart’s desire, Mahadeva said to me, “I will 
grant your wish and you will have a son named Krishna. In that 
Manvantara, which will be known as Savarni Manu, that son of yours will 
be reckoned among the seven Rishis. He will divide and re-arrange the 
Veda, and be the propagator of Kuru’s race. In addition, he will be the 


author of the ancient itihasas and do great good to the universe. Blessed 
with austere tapasya, he will be a loving friend of Sakra. Free from diseases 
of every kind, that son of yours will be immortal.” 

Having said these words, the Great Deity vanished. Even such is the 
good, Yudhishtira, that I have obtained from that indestructible and 
immutable God, of the highest penances and supreme energy.’ 

Mandavya says, ‘In former times, though I was not a thief, I was 
wrongly suspected of theft and was impaled on a stake on the orders of a 
king. I then worshipped Mahadeva who said to me, “You will soon be freed 
from this impalement and live for millions of years. Meanwhile, you will 
not experience any pain. You will also be freed from every kind of affliction 
and disease. And since your body has sprung from the fourth foot of 
Dharma, you will be unrivalled on earth. Make your life fruitful. Without 
any obstacles, you will be able to bathe in all the sacred tirthas of the earth. 
And after your body decays, I you will enjoy the pure felicity of swarga for 
all eternity.” 

Having said these words, Maheswara of unrivalled splendour and clad 
in animal skin, disappeared with all his Ganas.’ 

Galava says, ‘Formerly, I studied at the feet of my guru Viswamitra. 
Taking his leave, I set out for home to see my father. But he had died and 
my sorrowing mother, weeping bitterly, said to me, “Alas, your father will 
never see his youthful son who, adorned with Vedic knowledge, filled with 
self-restraint, has been allowed by his guru to come home.” 

Hearing these words of my mother, I despaired of ever seeing my father 
again. I worshipped Maheswara with a rapt soul; He was gratified, revealed 
himself to me and said, “Your father, your mother, and you will all be freed 
from death. Go and enter your home without delay; you will find your 
father there.” 

Yudhishtira, hearing this from Siva and paying him homage, I left for 
home and saw my father appear before me after having completed his daily 
yagna. He came out bearing in his hands some homa, some kusa grass and 
some fallen fruits. And he seemed to have already eaten, for he had washed 
himself. Throwing down what he carried, shedding tears of joy, my father 
raised me up, for I had prostrated myself at his feet. 

Embracing me he sniffed the top of my head and said, “It is my good 
fortune to see you again. You have returned, having acquired knowledge 
from the guru.””” 


Vaisampayana continued, “Hearing of these wonderful feats of 
Mahadeva recited by the sannyasis, the son of Pandu is amazed. Then 
Krishna speaks once more to Yudhishtira, like Vishnu speaking to Puruhuta. 

Krishna says, ‘Upamanyu, who seemed to blaze with lustre like the sun, 
said to me, “Men that are stained with sin do not succeed in attaining to 
Isana. Their dispositions being tainted by rajas and tamas, they can never 
approach the Supreme Deity. It is only those evolved men of pure souls that 
succeed in attaining to him. 

Even if a man lives in the enjoyment of every pleasure and luxury, he is 
regarded as equal to a vanaprastha of cleansed soul if he be devoted to the 
Supreme Deity. If Rudra be gratified with a person, he can confer upon him 
the states of Brahma or Krishna, or of Sakra above all the Devas, or the 
sovereignty of the three worlds. Men who worship Bhava even inwardly 
succeed in freeing themselves from all sins and attain a place in swarga 
with the Devas. 

One who razes homes to the ground and destroys tanks and lakes, why, 
one who destroys the whole universe is not stained with sin if he adores and 
worships Mahadeva. One who is without any auspicious sign and is stained 
by every sin has all his sins washed away by meditating on Siva. Even 
worms, insects and birds that devote themselves to Mahadeva range 
fearlessly. 

This is my firm conviction that those men who devote themselves to 
Mahadeva Siva are certainly liberated from rebirth.” 

After this, Krishna again says to Yudhishtira, ‘Aditya, Chandra, Vayu, 
Agni, swarga, Bhumi, the Vasus, the Viswedevas, Dhatri, Aryaman, Sukra, 
Brihaspati, the Rudras, the Saddhyas, Varuna, Brahma, Sakra, Maruts, the 
Upanishads that deal with knowledge of Brahman, satya, the Vedas, the 
yagnas, dakshina given during sacrifices, Brahmanas reciting the Vedas, 
Soma, the Sacrificer, the havis of the Devas or ghee poured in yagnas, 
raksha, diksha, have all sprung from the Creator of all creatures. 

All kinds of restraints in the form of vows and fasts and other rigid 
observances, swaha, vashat, the Brahmanas, the divine cow, the foremost 
acts of dharma, the wheel of Kaala, strength, fame, self-restraint, the 
steadfastness of all intelligent men, all deeds of goodness and _ their 
opposite, the Saptarishis, Buddhi, all kinds of excellent touch, the success 
of all religious acts, have emerged from him. 


The diverse tribes of the Devas, those beings that drink Agni, those that 
are drinkers of Soma, clouds, Suyamas, Rishitas, all creatures having 
mantras for their bodies, Abhasuras, those beings that live upon just scent, 
those that live upon sight only, those that restrain their speech, those that 
restrain their minds, those that are pure, those that can assume diverse 
forms through yoga have been born from that Creator. 

Those Devas that live on touch for their food, those that subsist on 
vision and those that subsist upon the ghee poured in sacrifices, those 
beings that can create with their wills whatever they want, they that are 
regarded as the foremost ones among the Devas, and all the other deities, 
the Suparnas, the Gandharvas, the Pisachas, the Danavas, Yakshas, the 
Charanas, and the Nagas have been born from him. 

All that is gross and all that is subtle, all that is soft and all that is not, 
all sorrows and all joys, all sorrows that come after joy and all joy that 
comes after sorrow, the Samkhya philosophy, yoga, and that which 
transcends objects that are regarded as foremost and superior, all objects of 
veneration, all the Devas, and all the Viswadevas of the universe who, 
entering into the physical forces, sustain and uphold this ancient creation of 
that illustrious deity have sprung from that Creator of all creatures. 

All this that I have said is grosser than that which the wise perceive with 
the help of tapasya. Indeed, that subtle Brahman is the source of life. I bow 
my head in reverence to It. Let that immutable and indestructible master, 
always adored by us, grant us desirable boons. 

That man who, subduing his senses and purifying himself, recites this 
mantra, without interruption for one month, succeeds in acquiring the merit 
that is attached to an Aswamedha yagna. By reciting this the Brahmana 
succeeds in acquiring all the Vedas; the Kshatriya becomes crowned with 
victory, O son of Pritha; the Vaisya succeeds in gaining wealth and 
cleverness; and the Sudra, in winning happiness here and a good end 
hereafter. 

Famed men, by reciting this prince among mantras, the Siva 
Sahasranama, the thousand and eight holy names of Mahadeva, sacred and 
able to purify all sins, set their hearts on Rudra. By chanting this best of 
mantras a man succeeds in living in swarga for as many years as there are 
pores on his body.’” 


CANTO 19 


66 Y udhishtira says, ‘Lord of the Bharata vamsa, what is the origin of 
the adage that, during the grihastasrama, when married, the 
husband and wife must perform all duties together? Does that saying refer 
to discharging all karmas together, due only to what is laid down by the 
great Rishis in ancient times, or does it refer to the duty of begetting 
children from religious motives, or has it reference only to carnal pleasure? 

My mind is greatly troubled by this matter. In my opinion, what the 
Rishis have spoken of as joint duties is incorrect. That which in this world 
is called the union to discharge all duties together ceases with death and is 
not to be seen to continue in the next. This union to discharge all karmas 
together leads to swarga. 

But swarga is attained by persons that are dead. Of a married couple it is 
seen that only one dies at a time. Where does the other remain? Do you tell 
me this. 

Men attain to diverse kinds of fruits by practising diverse kinds of 
karmas. The occupations of men also are of many kinds. Diverse, again, are 
the narakas to which they go based on this diversity of dharma and karma. 
Women, in particular, the Rishis have said, are deceitful. When human 
beings are such, and when women in particular have been declared to be 
false, how can there be a union between the sexes for the purpose of 
discharging all duties together? 

In the very Vedas one may read that women are untrue. The word 
dharma, as used in the Vedas, seems to have been coined in the first 
instance for general application. Hence applying that word to the rites and 
life of marriage, where it has no real relevance, is erroneous. 


I cannot understand this although I constantly reflect upon it. Pitamaha, 
it is fitting for you to expound this to me in detail, clearly and according to 
what has been laid down in the Sruti. In fact, explain to me what its 
characteristics are, and the way in which it has come to be.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘In this regard is cited the old story of the discourse 
between Ashtavakra and the woman known by the name Disa. In earlier 
days, Ashtavakra wished to marry and begged the Mahatman Rishi Vadanya 
for his daughter. Her name was Suprabha. 

She was matchless in beauty. In virtues, dignity, conduct and manners, 
she was superior to all others. With a mere glance, she of the beautiful eyes 
had robbed him of his heart even as a delightful garden adorned with 
flowers does in spring. 

The Rishi said to Ashtavakra, “Yes, I shall bestow my daughter on you. 
But first make a journey to the sacred north. You will see many things 
there.” 

Ashtavakra said, “Tell me what I shall see in that region. Indeed, I am 
ready to obey whatever command you give me.” 

Vadanya said, “Passing over the dominions of Kubera you will cross the 
Himavat Mountains. You will then behold the Kailasa Mountain on which 
Rudra dwells. It is inhabited by Siddhas and Charanas. It abounds with the 
Ganas of Mahadeva, of diverse forms, playful and lovers of dance. 

It is also inhabited by many Pisachas of diverse forms and all covered 
with fragrant colourful powders, and dancing with joyful hearts 
accompanied by different kinds of instruments. Mahadeva dwells there, 
surrounded by these who move swiftly in the mazes of the dance or refrain 
at times altogether from forward, backward or transverse movement of 
every kind. 

We have heard that he and his Ganas are always present in this 
delightful place on the Rudra Mountain. It was there that the goddess Uma 
performed the severest tapasya for the sake of acquiring Siva for her lord. 
Hence, it is said, that place is loved by both Mahadeva and Uma. 

In ancient days, on the heights of the Mahaparswa Mountains, which lie 
to the north of these sacred mountains, many Devas and also the foremost 
of Manavas adored Mahadeva. 

You will cross that realm on your northward journey. You will then see 
a beautiful blue forest resembling a mass of clouds. There, in that forest, 
you will see a beautiful female ascetic who looks like Sree herself. 


Venerable in age and highly blessed, she is in the observance of Diksha. 
When you see her, you must duly worship her. 

After you have seen that Devi, you will return here and marry my 
daughter. If you are willing to do this, proceed on your journey and do as I 
have said.” 

Ashtavakra said, “So be it. I will do your bidding. I will go to that realm 
of which you speak. On your part, be true to your given word.” 

The illustrious Ashtavakra set out on his journey. He went towards the 
north and at last reached the Himavat Mountains peopled by Siddhas and 
Charanas. Arriving there, he came upon the sacred river Bahuda whose 
waters produce great punya. He bathed in one of its delightful tirthas in 
clear water, and worshipped the Devas with offerings of water. 

His ablutions completed, he spread some kusa grass and lay down to 
rest awhile. Passing the night in this way, the Brahmana rose with the dawn. 
He once more performed his ablutions in the sacred waters of the Bahuda 
and then lit his homa fire and worshipped it with Vedic mantras. 

He then worshipped both Rudra and Uma with appropriate kriyas, and 
rested for some more time on the shore of a lake in the Bahuda. Refreshed, 
he set off from there towards Kailasa. 

He saw a golden gate ablaze with beauty. He saw also the Mandakini 
and the Nalini of the Mahatman Kubera. Seeing him arrive, all the Yakshas 
and Rakshasas with Manibhadra at their head, who protected that lake 
covered with unworldly lotuses, came out all together to welcome and 
honour the renowned traveller. In return the Rishi worshipped those beings 
of awesome strength and asked them to report his arrival to Kubera. 

The Rakshasas said to him, “Without waiting for the news from us, 
King Vaisravana is coming into your presence of his own accord. He knows 
well the objective of your journey. Behold that blessed master, radiant with 
his own energy.” 

Then Kubera Vaisravana approached Ashtavakra and asked after his 
wellbeing. After these polite inquiries, the Lord of treasures said to the 
regenerate Rishi, “You are welcome here. Tell me what it is that you seek 
from me. I will do what you bid me to accomplish. Do you enter my abode 
as you like. Duly entertained by me, and after your business is complete, 
you may go without any hindrance.” 

Having said these words, Kubera led the Brahmana into his palace. He 
offered him his own throne and also padya to wash his feet and the 


customary arghya. After the two had taken their seats, the Yakshas of 
Kubera, led by Manibhadra, and many Gandharvas and Kinnaras, sat down 
before them. 

After all of them had taken their seats, Kubera said, “Understanding 
what you desire, the Apsaras will dance for your pleasure. It is right for me 
to entertain you and you must be served with proper care.” 

Sannyasi Ashtavakra said in a sweet voice, “Let the dance begin.” 

Then Urvara and Misrakesi, Rambha and Urvasi, Alambusha and 
Ghritachi, Chitra, Chitrangada and Ruchi, and Manohara, Sukesi and 
Sumukhi, Hasini and Prabha, and Vidyuta, Prasami and Danta, and Vidyota 
and Rati, and many other exquisite Apsaras began to dance. And the 
Gandharvas present played on diverse musical instruments—music that 
made the heart soar and time stand still. 

The Rishi Ashtavakra passed a full celestial year there in the abode of 
Lord Vaisravana and he never knew how much time had passed while he 
listened to that music and watched the dance. 

Then Vaisravana said to the Rishi, “Learned Brahmana, behold, a little 
more than a year has passed since you came here. This music and dance, 
especially known as Gandharva, is a stealer of the heart and of time. Do as 
you wish or let this continue if that be your pleasure. You are my guest and, 
therefore, worthy of worship. This is my house. Command us. We are all 
bound to you.” 

Ashtavakra, greatly pleased, replied, “I have been duly honoured by 
you. I now wish to leave. I am pleased beyond all measure. All this befits 
you. Through your grace, and in accordance with Rishi Vadanya’s 
command, I will now proceed to my journey’s end. May you prosper, O 
Lord Kubera!” 

Saying this, the Rishi left Kubera’s abode and went northwards again. 
He crossed the Kailasa and the Mandara Mountains as also the golden 
Meru. Beyond those great mountains lay the realm where Mahadeva lived 
as a humble ascetic. With utmost concentration and reverence, the sage 
bowed and circled that place. 

Descending again from that auspicious place, he now considered 
himself sanctified as he had seen that sacred abode of Mahadeva. Having 
circled that mountain three times, the Rishi, with his face still turned 
towards the north, went on with a joyful heart. 


He saw another forest that was delightful in every respect. It was 
adorned with the fruits and roots of every season, and it resounded with the 
music of thousands of birds. There were many delightful groves throughout 
the forest. The illustrious Rishi then saw a pleasing hermitage. 

Ashtavakra also saw many golden mountains in diverse forms, decked 
with precious stones. In the bejewelled earth he also saw many lakes and 
tanks. And he saw other marvels and, seeing these, his mind was filled with 
bliss. 

He then saw a magnificent palace made of gold and adorned with 
jewels. It surpassed the place of Kubera himself in every way. Surrounding 
it were many mountains of precious stones. There were also many 
shimmering chariots and piles of jewels. 

The Rishi saw the river Mandakini whose waters were strewn with 
countless mandara flowers. Luminous gemstones and especially diamonds 
were strewn everywhere across the grounds. 

The palace contained many vast halls and chambers whose arches, too, 
were embellished with various kinds of precious stones. These were also 
adorned with filigree nets of pearls interspersed with many other fine 
jewels. Many unearthly sights that captivated the heart and the eye 
surrounded that palace. That delightful asrama was inhabited by numberless 
Rishis. 

Beholding these sights all around, the Rishi began to think of where he 
would take shelter. He reached the palace gate and said, “Let those that live 
here know that a guest has come asking for shelter.” 

Hearing the Rishi’s voice, many young girls came out together from that 
palace. Seven in number, they were of different kinds of beauty, each one 
lovelier than the next. Every one of those maidens stole the Rishi’s heart. 
With his best efforts, the sage could not control his mind. Indeed, his heart 
lost all its serenity. 

Observing himself succumbing to such wild emotions, the Rishi made a 
determined effort and, being wise, finally succeeded in controlling himself. 
The women said, “Let the illustrious one enter.” 

Curious about those maidens and about that palatial mansion, the 
regenerate Rishi entered as he was told. Going in, he saw an old woman in a 
state of decay, attired in white robes and adorned with every kind of 
ornament. The Rishi blessed her formally. 


The old woman returned his good wishes in a fitting manner. She rose 
and offered him a seat. Having taken his seat, Ashtavakra said, “Let all the 
girls go to their chambers. Let only one stay here. That one who remains 
here must be wise and of tranquil heart. Let all the others leave.” 

Thus addressed, all of them circled the Rishi in pradakshina and then 
left the grand hall. Only the old woman remained there. The day quickly 
passed and night came. The Rishi, seated on a splendid bed, said to the old 
woman, “Blessed devi, the night deepens. You may go to sleep.” 

When the Rishi ended their conversation thus, the old woman laid 
herself down on an ample bed. But soon she rose from that bed and, 
pretending to shiver with cold she went to the bed of the Rishi. Ashtavakra 
courteously welcomed her. She stretched out her slender arms and tenderly 
embraced the Rishi. 

Seeing him unmoved as a piece of wood, she was saddened and began 
to speak. “There is no pleasure, save that which waits upon Kama, which 
women can derive from a man. I am under the influence of desire and I seek 
you out. Do you embrace me in return. Be joyful and unite yourself with 
me. Embrace me, learned one, for I desire you greatly. This union with me 
is the reward of the stern tapasya that you have performed. 

Even at first sight I wanted you. Do you also make love to me. All this 
wealth, and everything else that you see here, are mine. Along with my 
heart and body, you will become master of all this. I will satisfy all your 
wishes. Dally with me in these delightful forests that can fulfil every desire. 

I will give you complete obedience in everything, and you can sport 
with me for your pleasure. We will enjoy every desire, human and divine. 

There is no pleasure more agreeable to women than that which she 
derives from the companionship of a man. Indeed, sexual union with a man 
is the most delicious fruit of joy that we can reap. When urged by Kama, 
women become wanton and capricious. At such times, they do not feel any 
pain, even if they walk over a desert of burning sand.” 

Ashtavakra said, “‘Blessed one, I never approach another’s wife. Union 
with another man’s wife is condemned by those conversant with the dharma 
shastras. I am a stranger to all kinds of pleasure. You should know that I 
want to marry in order to have children. I swear this by truth itself. 

Through these children, righteously acquired, I will go to those realms 
of felicity which cannot be otherwise attained. Good devi, know what is 
consistent with dharma and do not attempt to seduce me.” 


The old woman said, “The very deities of wind and fire and water, or 
other divinities, are not as agreeable to women as Kama, the god of desire. 
Women are always drawn to sexual union. Among a thousand women, even 
among hundreds of thousands, only one may perhaps be found that is 
devoted to her husband. When under the influence of desire, they do not 
care for family, father, mother, brother, husband, sons or husband’s brother 
but blindly pursue the path of lust. 

Pursuing what they consider happiness, they destroy their families by 
birth and marriage even as many mighty rivers erode the banks that contain 
them. The Creator himself had observed these grave faults in women.” 

Determined to further know the good in women, the Rishi said, “Do not 
speak to me like this. Yearning springs from affection. Tell me what else I 
should do.” 

That woman said, “In time, you will see if I have anything good in me. 
Live here for some time and I shall regard myself abundantly rewarded.” 

Yudhishtira, thus addressed by her, the Rishi agreed, saying, “I will live 
with you in this place as long as I can.” 

The Rishi looked at the old woman and began to reflect on the matter. 
He was tortured by his very thoughts. His eyes derived no pleasure from 
any part of her body. On the other hand, he was repelled by the ugliness of 
her limbs. 

“This woman is definitely the goddess of this palace. Has she been 
rendered ugly through some curse? I will gradually discover the cause of 
this.” Reflecting thus within himself, and beside himself with curiosity, 
Ashtavakra passed the next day in some anxiety. 

The woman then said to him, “Illustrious one, look at the evening 
clouds reddened by the setting sun. What can I do for you?” 

The Rishi said, “Bring water for my ablutions. Having bathed, I will do 
my sandhya vandana, restraining my speech and my senses.” 


CANTO 20 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, “Thus commanded, the woman said, “Be it so.” She 

brought oil with which to rub the Rishi’s body and a piece of 

cloth for him to wear during the ablutions. Allowed by the ascetic, she 

rubbed every part of his body with the fragrant oil she had brought. Gently 

was the Rishi massaged, and when that was over, he went to the room kept 
for his ablutions. There he sat upon a new and splendid asana. 

After Ashtavakra sat, the old woman began to wash his body with her 
soft hands and tender fingers. One by one, in correct order, she served the 
Rishi in his ablutions. Between the warm water with which he was washed, 
and the soft hands that washed him, the Rishi did not realise that the whole 
night had passed. 

Rising from the bath he was astounded. He saw that the sun had risen 
above the horizon in the east. He asked himself in some amazement, “Is this 
real or an illusion?” Ashtavakra duly worshipped Surya Deva. This done, he 
asked the woman what he should do next. 

The old woman cooked some food for the sage that was like amrita 
itself. So delicious was that food that the Rishi could not eat much of it. In 
partaking that little, the day passed and evening arrived. The old woman 
asked the Rishi to go to bed and sleep. A marvellous bed was assigned to 
him and she lay on another one. 

At first the Rishi and the old woman lay on different beds, but at 
midnight she left her own bed and came to his. And lo, now she was young 
and beautiful in her face and every limb. 

Ashtavakra said, “My mind rejects sexual union with one who is 
another’s wife. Leave my bed. Blessed are you; refrain from this of your 


own accord.” 

Thus dissuaded by that Brahmana of self-restraint, the woman said to 
him, “I am my own mistress. You will not earn any sin by taking me.” 

Ashtavakra said, “Women can never be their own mistresses. It is the 
opinion of Brahma himself that a woman never deserves to be 
independent.” 

The woman said, “Learned Brahmana, I am tormented by desire. You 
have seen my devotion to you. You incur sin by refusing to meet me 
lovingly.” 

Ashtavakra said, “Diverse faults drag away the man that does as he 
likes. As for myself, I am able to control my desire. O good devi, return to 
your own bed.” 

The woman said, “Look, I bow to you, bending my head. It becomes 
you to show me your grace. O sinless one, I prostrate myself before you; do 
you become my refuge. If indeed you see such sin in congress with one that 
is not your wife, I yield myself to you. Do you, O Dvija, take my hand in 
marriage. You will incur no sin. I tell you truly. Know that I am my own 
mistress, and if there be any sin in this let it be mine alone. My heart is 
devoted to you. Iam my own mistress. Do you accept me.” 

Ashtavakra said, “How is it that you are your own mistress? Tell me the 
reason for this. There is not a single woman in the three worlds that 
deserves to be regarded as her own mistress. The father protects her while 
she is a girl. The husband protects her while she is in her youth. Sons 
protect her when she is old. Women can never be independent as long as 
they live.” 

The woman said, “Since my childhood I have adopted the vow of 
brahmacharya. Do not doubt it. I am still a virgin. Make me your wife, 
Brahmana, do not destroy my devotion for you.” 

Ashtavakra said, “As you are inclined to me, so am I inclined to you. 
There is this question, however, that should be settled. Can it be that by 
yielding to my desire I will not break my word given to the Rishi Vadanya? 
All that here is wonderful. Yet, will it lead to what is truly beneficial? Here 
is a maiden adorned with fine ornaments and garments. She is exceptionally 
beautiful. Why did decay cloak her beauty for so long? Now suddenly she 
looks like a young and most lovely maiden. But there is no knowing what 
form she may take later. 


I shall never swerve from the control which I have over desire and the 
other passions, or from my contentment with what I already have. It cannot 
lead to any good if I do so. I will keep myself united with the truth!” 


CANTO 21 


¢ Ne udhishtira says, ‘Tell me why, despite his great tejas, did that 
woman not fear Ashtavakra’s curse? Also, how did Ashtavakra 
succeed in returning from that place?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Ashtavakra asked her “How do you change your form 
as you please? I want to know this and you must not lie to me. Speak truly 
before a Brahmana.” 

The woman said, “Best of Brahmanas, wherever you may be, in heaven 
or on earth, this desire for sexual union is to be found. Now listen with 
attention to what I have to say. I devised this trial to test you. You have 
conquered all the worlds for being true to your resolve. 

Know that I am the embodiment of the north. You have seen the 
fickleness of woman. Even old women are tormented by the desire for 
sexual union. Brahma himself and all the Devas along with Indra have been 
pleased with you. I know the reason why you have come here. 

You have been sent by the Rishi Vadanya, the father of your bride, in 
order that I may instruct you. In accordance with his wishes, I have already 
done so. You will return home safely. Your journey back will not be 
arduous. 

You will have the girl you have chosen for your wife. She will bear you 
a son. I had sought you through desire and you answered me well. The 
desire for sexual union cannot be transcended in any of the three worlds. 
But you have achieved that punya; return now to your home. 

What else do you wish to hear from me? Ashtavakra, I will tell you 
anything truthfully. The Rishi Vadanya worshipped me for your sake. I have 
said all this to you to honour him.” 


After receiving many further instructions from her, Ashtavakra joined 
his hands in reverence. He then asked the wonderful woman for her 
permission to return. Taking her leave, he came back to his own asrama. 
Resting there for a while, he sought the leave of his kinsmen and friends 
and went to the Brahmana Vadanya. 

Welcomed by Vadanya, the Rishi Ashtavakra narrated all that he had 
seen during course of his sojourn in the north. He said, “Commanded by 
you I went to the mountains of Gandhamadana. North of these mountains, I 
found a devi, who welcomed me courteously. She mentioned you and also 
instructed me in various matters. Having listened to her I have now 
returned. 

The learned Vadanya said to the Rishi, “Take my daughter’s hand with 
the proper rites and under the proper constellations. You are the best 
husband I can choose for her.” 

Ashtavakra said, “So be it” and took the hand of Vadanya’s daughter in 
marriage. Indeed the Rishi was overjoyed. Having taken that beautiful 
woman for his wife he continued to live in his own asrama, freed from 
passion of every kind.’” 


CANTO 22 


¢ Ne udhishtira says, ‘Whom do the eternal Brahmanas that keep 

strict vratas regard as worthy of receiving gifts? Is a Brahmana 
that bears the signs of a brahmachari regarded as such or even one who 
does keep brahmacharya?’ 

Bhishma says, “Rajan, it has been said that gifts should be made to a 
Brahmana that observes his svadharma, the duties of his own varna, 
whether he bears the signs of a brahmachari or not, for both are without 
blemish.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “What blame does an impure man incur, if he makes 
gifts of sacrificial butter or food with great devotion to Brahmanas?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Even one without self-restraint becomes, without doubt, 
cleansed by devotion. Such a man is purified in every act and not with 
regard to making gifts alone.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “It has been said that a Brahmana who is engaged in 
worshipping the Devas must never be scrutinised. The learned, however, 
say that a Brahmana’s behaviour and ability must be examined with respect 
to such actions as have reference to the Pitris.’ 

Bhishma says, “The actions karmas that have reference to the Devas 
bear fruit not as a result of the Brahmana who performs the deeds but 
through the grace of the Devas themselves. Without doubt, those who 
perform yagnas obtain the punya of those actions through the blessing of 
the gods. Brahmanas are always devoted to Brahman. The Rishi 
Markandeya, one of the greatest Rishis endowed with intelligence in all the 
worlds, said this in ancient times.’ 


Yudhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha, why are these five types of men regarded 
highly: he that is a stranger, he that has knowledge of the duties of his 
varna, he that is connected by marriage, he that is rich in tapasya, and he 
performs yagnas?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘The first three—strangers, relatives and ascetics, when 
pure of birth, devoted to religious acts, learning, compassion, modesty, 
sincerity and honesty, are regarded as fitting. The other two, men of 
learning and those devoted to sacrifices, when endowed with five of these 
attributes—purity of birth, compassion, modesty, sincerity and truthfulness, 
are also held in high regard. 

Listen now to me as I tell you the opinions of Bhumi Devi, the Rishi 
Kasyapa, Agni and the sannyasi Markandeya. 

Bhumi said, “As a lump of mud quickly dissolves when cast into the 
sea, even so every kind of sin disappears in the three high attributes of 
presiding at yagnas, teaching and receiving dakshina.” 

Kasyapa said, “The Vedas with their six branches, the Samkhya 
philosophy, the Puranas and high birth, all fail to save a Brahmana person if 
he falls away from good conduct.” 

Agni said, “If a Brahmana who regards himself as learned and is 
engaged in study seeks to destroy the reputation of others using that 
knowledge, he falls from dharma, and is regarded as being untruthful. A 
man of such destructive ways can never attain the realms of grace.” 

Markandeya said, “If a thousand Aswamedha yagnas and satya were 
weighed in the balance, I do not know if the former would weigh even half 
as much as the latter.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘Having spoken these words, those four, Bhumi 
Devi, Kasyapa, Agni and Markandeya, each invested with great tejas, left.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘If Brahmanas observant of the brahmacharya vrata 
seek the offerings one makes to one’s deceased ancestors in Sraddhas, will 
the Sraddha be regarded as properly performed, if those offerings are made 
to such Brahmanas.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Even if this brahmacharya vrata is practised for the 
prescribed period of twelve years and a Brahmana has mastered the Vedas 
and their angas, if a Brahmana himself seeks such offering and eats the 
same, he is regarded to fall away from his vow. The Sraddha itself, 
however, is not regarded as tainted in any way.’ 


Yudhishtira says, ‘The wise have said that dharma has many ends and 
many doors. Pitamaha, tell me what are the definite conclusions in this 
matter.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Abstention from injury to others, truthfulness, 
forgiveness, compassion, self-restraint, and sincerity are the indications of 
dharma. There are men who roam the earth praising righteousness, but 
without practising what they preach and engaged all the while in sin. 

He who gives gold, jewels or horses to such men has to sink into naraka 
and to live there for ten years, eating the faeces of those who subsist upon 
the flesh of dead cows and buffaloes, of base men called Pukkasas, of others 
that live on the outskirts of cities and villages, of untouchables, and of men 
that proclaim, under the influence of wrath and folly, the actions and the 
omissions of others. Those foolish men who do give the offerings made in 
Sraddhas to a Brahmana observant of the vow of brahmacharya have to 
descend into realms of untold misery.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “Tell me what is superior to brahmacharya? What is 
the highest indication of virtue? What is the highest kind of purity?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘I say to you that abstention from honey and meat is 
superior even to brahmacharya. Dharma consists of self-restraint; the best 
indication of righteousness is renunciation, which is also the highest kind of 
purity.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘When should one practise dharma? When should 
artha be sought? When should kama be enjoyed? Pitamaha, tell me this.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘One should earn wealth in the first part of one’s life. 
Then should one earn righteousness, and then enjoy pleasure. One should 
not, however, attach oneself to any of these. One should honour the 
Brahmanas, worship one’s guru and one’s elders, show compassion for all 
creatures, and be of mild disposition and amiable speech. To utter a lie in a 
court of justice, to behave deceitfully towards the king, to act falsely 
towards teachers and elders, are considered to be as heinous as killing a 
Brahmana. One should never be violent towards a king. Nor should one 
ever strike a cow. Both these offences are equivalent to the sin of foeticide. 

One should never abandon one’s homa fire. One should also never 
disregard one’s study of the Vedas. One should never attack a Brahmana in 
word or deed. All these offences are equivalent to Brahmahatya.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘What kind of Brahmanas should be regarded as 
good? What kind of Brahmanas should one make gifts to in order to acquire 


great punya? What kind of Brahmanas must one feed? Tell me all this, 
Pitamaha!’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Those Brahmanas that are free from anger, devoted to 
acts of righteousness, firm in truth, and that practise self-restraint are 
regarded as good. By making gifts unto them one acquires punya. One wins 
great merit by making gifts unto Brahmanas who are free from pride, 
capable of bearing everything, firm in the pursuit of their aims, with a 
mastery over their senses, devoted to the good of all creatures, and friendly 
towards all. 

One earns punya by making gifts to Brahmanas who are free from 
greed, are pure of heart and conduct, who possess learning and modesty, are 
truthful in speech and observant of their svadharma as laid down in the 
shastras. The Rishis have declared that Brahmana to be deserving of 
dakshina who studies the four Vedas with all their angas and is devoted to 
the six duties laid down in the shastras. One acquires great punya by 
making gifts to Brahmanas possessing these qualities. 

The man who makes gifts to a deserving Brahmana multiplies his merit 
a thousand-fold. A single righteous Brahmana with wisdom and Vedic lore, 
observant of the dharma and kartavyas laid down in the shastras, 
distinguished by purity of behaviour, is competent to save a whole vamsa. 

One should make gifts of cows, horses, wealth and food to such a 
Brahmana. By making such gifts one earns great felicity and happiness in 
the next world. As I have already told you, even one such Brahmana can 
save the entire vamsa of the giver. What then can I say about the punya of 
making gifts to many Brahmanas of such attributes? 

In making gifts, therefore, one should always judiciously choose the one 
to whom the gifts are to be made. Hearing of a Brahmana with the proper 
attributes and respected by all good people, one should invite him to one’s 
home even if he lives far away, welcome him when he arrives and worship 
him with all one’s means.’” 


CANTO 23 


¢ = udhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha, I want you to tell me about the laws 
that have been laid down with regard to the Devas and Pitris on 
occasions of Sraddhas.’ 

Bhishma says, “Having purified oneself by bathing and performing the 
known auspicious rites, one should carry out all karmas relating to the 
Devas in the morning, and all those relating to the Pitris in the afternoon. 
What is given to men should be given at midday with love and reverence. 
An untimely gift will be appropriated by Rakshasas. 

Gifts of articles that have been stepped over by anyone, or been licked 
or sucked, that which is not given gently or has been seen by menstruating 
women, do not produce any merit. Such gifts are regarded as the portion 
belonging to the Rakshasas. Gifts of things that have been announced 
before many people or from which a portion has been eaten by a Sudra, or 
that have been seen or licked by a dog, form portions for Rakshasas. 

Food which is mixed with hair or in which there are worms, or which 
has been stained with saliva or which has been gazed at by a dog, or into 
which tear-drops have fallen or which has been trampled upon must be 
considered as forming the share of a Rakshasa. Food that has been eaten by 
one who cannot pronounce Pranava, the AUM, or that has been eaten by a 
person bearing arms, or that has been eaten by an evil man must be 
regarded as forming the portion of Rakshasas. 

Food eaten by one from which a part has already been eaten by another, 
or which is eaten without a part being offered to Devas, guests and children, 
is appropriated by Rakshasas. Such tainted food, if offered to the Devas and 
Pitris is never accepted by them but is taken by Rakshasas. The food offered 


in Sraddhas by the three twice-born varnas, in which mantras are either not 
recited or recited incorrectly, and in which the niyamas laid down in the 
shastras about distributing to guests are not adhered to, is appropriated by 
Rakshasas. 

Food distributed to guests without having been previously dedicated to 
the Devas or the Pitris with the aid of libations poured on the sacred fire, 
which has been stained in by a portion having been eaten by an evil or 
profane man, should be known to form the share of Rakshasas. 

I have told you what the portions are of the Rakshasas. Listen now to 
me as I explain the rules for ascertaining the Brahmana deserving of 
dakshina. All Brahmanas that have become outcastes because of 
committing heinous sins, as also Brahmanas that are fools and madmen, do 
not deserve to be invited to Sraddhas in which offerings are made to either 
the Devas or the Pitris. That Brahmana who is afflicted with leukoderma, or 
he that is lacking in virility, or he that has leprosy, or he that has got phthisis 
or he that is epileptic with sensory delusions, or he that is blind, must not be 
welcomed. 

Brahmanas that are physicians, those that receive regular pay for 
worshipping the images of deities established by the rich, or live upon the 
service of the Devas, those that observe vratas out of pride or other false 
motives, and those that sell Soma, do not deserve to be invited. Brahmanas 
that recite the shastras aloud without regard for time or place, or are singers, 
dancers or players of instruments, or warriors and athletes, do not deserve 
to be invited. 

Brahmanas who pour libations on the sacred fire for Sudras, or who are 
teachers of Sudras, or are servants of Sudra masters, do not merit an 
invitation. That Brahmana who is paid for his services as teacher, or who, as 
a sishya, attends the talks of a guru because of some allowance that is made 
to him, does not deserve to be invited, for both of them are regarded as 
merchants of Vedic knowledge. The Brahmana who has been induced to 
accept the gift of food in a Sraddha at the very start, as also he who has 
married a Sudra woman, even if he possesses of every kind of knowledge, 
does not deserve to be invited. 

Brahmanas without garhapatya, domestic fire, and they that attend upon 
corpses, they that are thieves, and they that have otherwise sinned should 
not be invited to Sraddhas. Brahmanas whose antecedents are not known or 


are base, and they that are Putrika-putras, do not deserve to be invited on 
occasions of Sraddhas. 

Rajan, that Brahmana who loans money, or he who lives upon the 
interest of the loans given by him, or he who lives by selling living 
creatures, does not deserve invitation. Men who have been subordinated by 
their wives, or they who live by becoming the lovers of unchaste women, or 
they who abstain from their morning and evening prayers do not deserve to 
be invited to Sraddhas. 

Listen now to me as I tell you about the Brahmana that has been 
ordained for revering the Devas and the Pitris. Indeed, I will tell you about 
those merits because of which one may become a giver or a receiver of gifts 
in Sraddhas, despite all these faults. 

Brahmanas that observe of the rites and ceremonies laid down in the 
shastras, or they that possess punya, or they that chant the Gayatri mantra, 
or they that are observant of the nitya karmas of Brahmanas, even if they 
take to farming for a living, can be invited to Sraddhas. If a Brahmana 
happens to be high-born, he deserves to be invited to Sraddhas even if he is 
a soldier fighting another’s battle. 

That Brahmana who takes to trade for a living should be rejected even if 
he possesses punya. The Brahmana who pours libations every day on the 
sacred fire, or who dwells in a fixed place, who is not a thief and who is 
hospitable to guests who arrive at his house, deserves to be invited to 
Sraddhas. The Brahmana who recites the Savitri mantra morning, noon and 
night, or who lives on charity, who is observant of the rites and ceremonies 
laid down in the shastras for those of his varna, deserves to be invited to 
Sraddhas. 

That Brahmana who having earned wealth in the morning becomes poor 
in the afternoon, or who poor in the morning becomes wealthy in the 
evening, or who is lacking in malice, or is stained only by a minor fault, 
deserves to be welcomed at Sraddhas. That Brahmana who is without pride 
or sin, who is not given to empty argument, or who subsists upon alms 
obtained as he roams from house to house, deserves to be invited to 
sacrifices. 

One who does not observe vratas, or who is addicted to falsehood in 
both speech and conduct, who is a thief, or who lives by selling living 
creatures or by trade in general, only becomes worthy of invitation to 
Sraddhas if he happens to offer all to the Devas first and subsequently drink 


Soma. That man who having acquired wealth by dishonest or cruel means 
but subsequently spends it in adoring the Devas and fulfilling the duties of 
hospitality, becomes worthy of being invited to Sraddhas. 

The wealth that one has acquired by selling Vedic knowledge, or which 
has been earned by women, or which has been gained by deceit like giving 
false evidence in a court of law should never be given to Brahmanas or 
spent in making offerings to the Pitris. That Brahmana, who upon 
completing a Sraddha refuses to utter the words Astu Swadha, incurs the sin 
of taking a false oath in a suit for land. 

Yudhishtira, the time for performing a Sraddha is when one finds a good 
Brahmana, and curds and ghrita, and the sacred day of the new moon, and 
the meat of wild animals such as deer. 

Upon the completion of a Sraddha performed by a Brahmana the word 
Swadha should be uttered. If performed by a Kshatriya the words that 
should be uttered are: Let your Pitris be gratified. Upon the completion of a 
Sraddha performed by a Vaisya the words that should be spoken are: Let 
everything become inexhaustible. Similarly, upon the conclusion of a 
Sraddha performed by a Sudra, the word that should be uttered is Swasti. 

In respect of a Brahmana, the declaration regarding Punyaham should 
be accompanied with the chanting of AUM. In the case of a Kshatriya, such 
declaration should be without the chanting of AUM. In the kriyas 
performed by a Vaisya, instead of AUM, the words that should be uttered 
are: Let the Devas be gratified. 

Listen now to me as I tell you the rites that should be performed for all 
the varnas. All the karmas called Jatakarma are necessary for the three 
twice-born varnas. All these rites, Yudhishtira, in the case of Brahmanas, 
Kshatriyas and Vaisyas, are to be performed using mantras. 

The girdle of a Brahmana must be made of munja grass. That of a 
Kshatriya should be a bowstring. The Vaisya’s must be made of the valwaji 
grass. This is what has been laid down in the shastras. 

Listen now as I explain to you what constitutes the merits and faults of 
both givers and recipients of gifts. A Brahmana becomes guilty of a 
dereliction of duty by telling lies. Such an act on his part is sinful. A 
Kshatriya incurs four times and a Vaisya eight times the sin that a 
Brahmana incurs by uttering a falsehood. 

Having been earlier invited by another Brahmana, a Brahmana should 
not eat elsewhere. By eating at the house of one such, he becomes inferior 


and even incurs the sin that attaches to the slaughter of an animal on 
occasions other than those of yagnas. 

Also if he eats elsewhere after having been invited by a Kshatriya or 
Vaisya, he falls from his position and incurs half the sin that attaches to the 
slaughter of an animal on occasions other than those of sacrifices. That 
Brahmana who eats on occasions of such rites as are performed in honour 
of the Devas or the Pitris by Brahmanas and Kshatriyas and Vaisyas, 
without having performed his ablutions, incurs the sin of uttering a lie about 
a cow. 

That Brahmana who is tempted into eating on occasions of similar rites 
performed by persons belonging to the three higher varnas, at a time when 
he is impure as a result of either a birth or a death in his family, knowing 
well that he is impure, incurs the same sin. He who lives upon wealth 
obtained under false pretences, like that of pilgrimages to sacred places, or 
who solicits another for money pretending that he would spend it in 
religious acts, incurs the sin of lying. 

A man who belongs to any of the three higher varnas incurs sin if he 
distributes food with the help of mantras at Sraddhas to such Brahmanas 
who do not study the Vedas, or who do not keep vratas, or are impure in 
their conduct.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha, I want to know to whom one should give 
the offerings dedicated to the Devas and the Pitris in order to earn abundant 
rewards.’ 

Bhishma says, *Yudhishtira, feed those Brahmanas whose wives wait 
for the leftover food from their husbands’ plates, like farmers waiting in 
reverence for timely showers of rain. One earns great punya by making gifts 
to those Brahmanas that are always pure in conduct, that are emaciated 
through abstaining from all luxuries and even full meals, that are devoted to 
the observances of such vratas that lead to the emaciation of their bodies, 
and that approach givers with the desire of receiving gifts. 

By giving dakshina to such Brahmanas who regard conduct in this light 
of food, as regard conduct in the light of spouses and children, as regard 
conduct in the light of strength, as regard conduct in the light of their refuge 
for crossing this samsara and attaining to felicity in the next, and as seek 
wealth only when wealth is absolutely needed, one earns great merit. By 
making gifts to those men who approach you on account of having lost 
everything to thieves or oppressors, one acquires great punya. 


One earns great merit by making gifts unto such Brahmanas who ask for 
food from the hands of an even poorer person of their varna who has just 
received something from others. One acquires great punya by making gifts 
to such Brahmanas who beg for alms after having lost everything in times 
of universal suffering. 

By making gifts to Brahmanas who keep vows, and subject themselves 
freely to painful rules and practices, are respectful in their conduct to the 
laws laid down in the Vedas, and seek wealth for spending it upon the 
karmas necessary to complete their vratas and other observances, one earns 
great punya. By making gifts to Brahmanas who keep their distance from 
the ways of the sinful and the evil, are weak and without sufficient support, 
and are poor in material possessions, one earns great punya. 

One earns great merit by making gifts to such Brahmanas who have 
been robbed of all their possessions by powerful men, and who desire to fill 
their stomachs with any food without heed for its quality. One earns great 
punya by making gifts to such Brahmanas who beg on behalf of others that 
perform tapasya and are satisfied with even small gifts. 

You have now listened to the declarations in the shastras in respect of 
the acquisition of great merit by the giving of gifts. Listen now to those acts 
that lead to hell or heaven. Yudhishtira, they that lie on occasions other than 
those when such an untruth is needed to serve the guru or assure the safety 
of one who fears for his life, sink into naraka. 

They who lust after other people’s spouses, or have sexual union with 
them, or assist in such wrongdoing, sink into hell. They who rob others of 
their wealth, destroy the wealth and possessions of others, or proclaim the 
faults of others, sink into naraka. They who destroy the troughs of water 
used by cows to quench their thirst, damage buildings used for public 
meetings, who destroy bridges and roads, and raze the homes of people, 
must sink down to hell. 

They who deceive helpless women, girls, or old women, or women who 
have been frightened, find hell for themselves. They who destroy the 
livelihood of men, they who raze men’s homes, they who steal others’ 
wives; they who sow dissension among friends, and they who devastate the 
hopes of others, fall into naraka. They who declare the faults of others, they 
who demolish bridges or roads, they who live by doing work not allowed to 
them, and they who are ungrateful to their friends for help given, have to 
descend into hell. 


They who have no faith in the Vedas and show no reverence for them, 
they who violate their own vratas or force others into breaking theirs, and 
they who fall away from their positions through sin, fall into naraka. They 
who behave improperly, they who are usurious, and they who make unduly 
large profits on sales, will find hell. 

They who gamble or unscrupulously indulge in other depravity, and 
they who are given to the slaughter of living creatures, have to sink into 
naraka. They who incite masters to dismiss loyal servants that hope for 
rewards, or are needy or are earning due wages or are waiting for rewards 
for valuable services rendered, have to plunge into hell. 

They who themselves eat without offering portions to their spouse, their 
sacred fires, their servants or their guests, and they who abstain from 
performing the rites laid down in the shastras to honour the Pitris and 
Devas, have to sink into naraka. They who sell the Vedas, they who find 
fault with the Vedas, and they who commit the Vedas into writing, have all 
to descend into hell. 

They who are outside the four varnas, they who take to practices 
forbidden by the Srutis and the Smritis, and they who live by immoral 
deeds or that do not belong to the varna of their birth, have to sink into 
naraka. They who live by selling hair, poisons, or milk must go down into 
hell. They who put obstacles in the path of Brahmanas, cows and women, 
Yudhishtira, have to descend into hell. 

They who sell weapons, they who forge weapons, they who make 
arrows, and they who make bows, have all to find hell for themselves. They 
who obstruct paths and roads with stones and thorns and pits must sink into 
naraka. They who desert teachers and servants and loyal followers for no 
offence fall into naraka. 

They who set young bulls to work, they who pierce the noses of bulls 
and other animals to control them while they work, and they who always 
keep animals tied, go to hell. Kings that do not protect their subjects while 
forcibly taking from them a sixth share of the produce of their fields, and 
they who, though able and rich, do not give gifts, find hell. 

They who reject men who are imbued with forgiveness, self-restraint 
and wisdom, or those with whom they have associated for many years, 
when these are no longer of use to them, will surely sink into naraka. Men 
who eat without giving portions of the food to children, the aged and 
servants, inexorably descend into hell. 


All such men have to go to hell. Listen now to me as I tell you who 
those men are that ascend into heaven. The man who transgresses against a 
Brahmana by impeding the rituals with which he worships the Devas is 
afflicted with the loss of all his children and animals. They who do not 
transgress against Brahmanas by obstructing their religious rites ascend into 
swarga. 

Men who follow their svadharma laid down for them in the shastras and 
practise the virtues of charity, self-restraint and truthfulness, find heaven. 
Men who having acquired knowledge by rendering obedient service to their 
gurus, and observing austere tapasya are not greedy for gifts, rise into 
swarga. Men through whom others are saved from fear and sin, poverty and 
disease, and the difficulties that lie in their path go into heaven. 

Men who have a forgiving nature, who are patient, who are prompt in 
performing all righteous deeds, and who are of auspicious conduct, succeed 
in gaining swarga. Men who abstain from honey and meat, who abstain 
from sexual union with the wives of other men, and who abstain from wines 
and spirits, ascend into heaven. 

Men that help establish asramas for sannyasis, who become founders of 
families, who open up new lands for habitation, and lay out towns and 
cities, rise into swarga. Men who give away clothes and ornaments, food 
and drink, and who assist in marriage ceremonies, ascend to heaven. 

Men that have abstained from any kind of harm to all creatures, who 
can endure everything, and who have made themselves the refuge of all 
creatures, ascend into swarga. Men who humbly serve their fathers and 
mothers, who have subdued their senses, and who love their brothers, 
succeed in gaining swarga. Men that control their senses despite being rich 
in worldly goods, enjoying their youth and power, ascend to heaven. 

Men that are kind even towards those that offend against them that have 
a calm temperament, who have a liking for all who are peaceable, and that 
contribute to the happiness of others by serving them with humility, surely 
succeed in finding swarga. Those that protect thousands of people, that 
make gifts to thousands of people, and that rescue thousands of people from 
distress, find heaven. 

Those who make gifts of gold and of cows, and of chariots and animals, 
gain swarga. Those who make gifts of articles needed in marriages, and 
serve men and women, and give clothes and robes, succeed in acquiring 
heaven. 


Men who make public pleasure-houses and gardens and wells, resting 
houses and halls for public meetings, and tanks for cows and men to quench 
their thirst, and fields for cultivation, succeed in gaining swarga. Those who 
make gifts of houses and fields and populated villages to those who want 
them, do indeed find heaven. 

Men who having made sweet and tasty drinks offer them to others, as 
also seeds and rice, find swarga for themselves. Men, whether born into 
high or low families, bear hundreds of children and live long lives 
practising compassion and keeping anger under complete control, succeed 
in ascending to heaven. 

Bhaarata, I have expounded to you the rites in honour of the Devas and 
the Pitris which are performed for the sake of the other world. I have 
explained what the laws are for making gifts, and the views of the ancient 
Rishis with respect to both the items of gift and the manner of giving 
them.’” 


CANTO 24 


66 Y udhishtira says, ‘Bharatarishabha, it is fitting that you answer my 

next question truly and in detail. What are those circumstances 

under which a man may become guilty of Brahmahatya without actually 
killing a Brahmana?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Rajan, I once asked Vyasa to explain this very subject to 
me. Listen closely to what Vyasa said to me. 

Once, repairing to the presence of Vyasa, I said to him “Maharishi, you 
are the fourth in descent from Vasishta. Do you explain to me what those 
circumstances are under which one becomes guilty of Brahmahatya without 
actually killing a Brahmana.” 

Vyasa gave me an excellent and assured reply, “You should know a man 
to be guilty of Brahmahatya who, having invited a Brahmana of righteous 
conduct to his house to give him alms, subsequently refuses to give 
anything to him on the pretence of there being nothing in the house. You 
should know that man as guilty of Brahmahatya who destroys the livelihood 
of a Brahmana learned in the Vedas and their angas, and who is free of 
attachments to worldly creatures and goods. 

You should know that man to be guilty of Brahmahatya, who prevents 
thirsty cows from drinking water to quench that thirst. You should regard 
that man as guilty of Brahmahatya who, without studying the Srutis that 
have been transmitted from guru to sishya from age to age, finds fault with 
the Srutis or with those shastras that have been composed by the Rishis. 
You should know that man as guilty of Brahmahatya who does not give his 
beautiful and accomplished daughter to a suitable bridegroom. 


You should know that foolish and sinful man to be guilty of 
Brahmahatya who inflicts such grief upon Brahmanas as wound the very 
core of their hearts. You should know that man to be guilty of Brahmahatya 
who robs the blind, the lame and fools. You should know that man to be 
guilty of Brahmahatya who burns down the asramas of sannyasis, or forests, 
villages or towns.” 


CANTO 25 


66 Y udhishtira says, ‘It has been said that pilgrimages to sacred rivers 

are filled with punya; that bathing in such waters is meritorious; 

and that listening to the cadence of these waters is also most worthy. 

Pitamaha, I want to hear you speak on this subject. It befits you to tell me 
about such rivers on this earth.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Maharishi Angiras has spoken about the sacred tirthas 
of the earth. If you listen to what he said you will earn great punya. 

Once, Gautama approached the great and learned Rishi while he was 
living in a forest and said to him, “Illustrious one, I have some questions 
about the merits of sacred waters and shrines. I want to hear you discourse 
on that subject. Speak to me of this. By bathing in sacred waters on earth, 
what punya is earned with regard to the next world? Do you expound to me 
this truly and according to the ordinance.” 

Angiras said, “A man who bathes for seven days in succession in the 
Chandrabhaga or the Vitasta, whose waters dance in waves, observing a fast 
the while, is sure to be cleansed of all his sins and suffused with the punya 
of a sannyasi. The many rivers that flow through Kasmira plunge into the 
great river Sindhu. By bathing in these rivers one is sure to become 
endowed with good character and to rise into swarga after leaving this 
world. 

By bathing in Pushkara, and Prabhasa, and Naimisa, and the ocean, and 
Devika, and Indramarga, and Swarnabindu, one is sure to fly into swarga in 
a celestial chariot, filled with joy at the adorations of Apsaras. By diving in 
the waters of Hiranyabindu with concentration, and revering that sacred 


stream, and bathing next at Kusesaya and Devendra, one becomes cleansed 
of all one’s sins. 

Repairing to Indratoya close to the Gandhamadana Mountains and near 
Karatoya in the kingdom of Kuranga, one should fast for three days and 
then bathe in those sacred waters with a contemplative heart and pure body. 
By doing this, one is sure to acquire the punya of an Aswamedha yagna. 
Bathing in Gangadwara and Kusavarta and Bilwaka in the Nita Mountains, 
as also in Kankahala, one is sure to become cleansed of all one’s sins and 
then ascend into heaven. 

If one becomes a brahmacharin and subdues one’s anger, devotes 
oneself to truth and practises compassion towards all creatures, and then 
bathes in the Jala pada, one is sure to acquire the punya of an Aswamedha 
yagna. The Bhagirathi-Ganga flows in a northward direction from the 
sangama of swarga, Bhumi and patala. 

Fasting for one month and bathing in that sacred tirtha which is known 
to be loved by Maheswara, allows one to behold the Devas. Even if one has 
to be reborn, he who gives offerings of water to his Pitris at Saptaganga and 
Triganga and Indramarga obtains amrita for food. The man who in a pure 
state of body and mind attends to his daily agnihotra, and observes a fast for 
one month and then bathes in Mahasrama, is sure to attain success within 
one month. 

By bathing in the Bhrigu Kunda, after an upavasa of three days and 
purifying the mind of all evil passions, one becomes purified of even the sin 
of killing a Brahmana. By bathing in Kanyakupa and performing one’s 
ablutions in Balaka, one acquires great fame among the very Devas and 
shines in glory. Bathing in Devika and the lake known as Sundarika, as also 
in the tirtha called Aswini, one acquires great beauty in one’s next life. 

By fasting for a fortnight, and bathing in the Mahaganga and 
Krittikangaraka, one is cleansed of all one’s sins and ascends into swarga. 
Bathing in Vaimanika and Kinkinika, one acquires the power of going 
everywhere at will and is highly respected in the celestial realm of the 
Apsaras. If a man controls his anger, observes the vow of brahmacharya for 
three days, and bathes in the river Vipasa at the Kalika asrama, he succeeds 
in transcending rebirth. 

Bathing in the grove that is sacred to the Krittikas and offering oblations 
of water to the Pitris, and then gratifying Mahadeva, one becomes pure in 
body and mind and rises into heaven. If, observing a fast for three days with 


a purified body and mind, one bathes in the Mahapura, one is freed from the 
fear of all mobile and immobile animals as also of all animals having two 
legs. By bathing in the Devadaru forest and offering oblations of water to 
the Pitris and dwelling there for seven nights with a pure body and mind, 
one attains swarga. 

Bathing in the waterfalls at Sarastambha and Kusastambha and 
Dronasarmapada, one is sure to attain to the realm of the Apsaras where 
they will dutifully serve that man. If one observes a fast and bathes at 
Chitrakuta and Janasthana and the waters of the Mandakini one is sure to 
become rich. 

By repairing to the Samyasrama, living there for a fortnight and bathing 
in the sacred river there, one acquires the power of disappearing at will, 
delighting in the joy that has been ordained for the Gandharvas. Going to 
the Kausiki tirtha, living there with a pure heart and abstaining from all 
food and water for three days, one acquires the power of dwelling in the 
realm of the Gandharvas in one’s next life. 

Bathing in the delightful tirtha that goes by the name of Gandhataraka 
and living there for one month, abstaining all the while from food and 
water, one acquires the power of vanishing at will and then of ascending 
into swarga after twenty-one days. He that bathes in the Matanga Lake is 
sure to attain to success in a single night. He that bathes in Analamba or in 
eternal Andhaka, or in Naimisa, or the tirtha called swarga, and offers 
oblations of water to the Pitris, while subduing his senses, acquires the 
punya of a human sacrifice. 

Bathing in Gangahrada and the Utpalavana tirtha, and daily offering 
oblations of water there for a full month to the Pitris, one acquires the 
punya of an Aswamedha yagna. Bathing in the confluence of the Ganga and 
the Yamuna as also at the tirtha in the Kalanjara Mountains and offering 
every day oblations of water to the Pitris for a month, one acquires the 
punya of ten Aswamedha yagnas. Bathing in the Sashti Lake one acquires 
merit much greater than what is attached to the gift of food. 

Ten thousand tirthas and thirty million other tirthas come to Prayaga at 
the confluence of the Ganga and the Yamuna in the month of Magha. He 
who bathes in Prayaga, with a restrained soul and observing rigid vows, in 
the month of Magha, is purified of all his sins and attains swarga. 

Bathing in the tirtha that is sacred to the Maruts, as also in that which is 
located in the asrama of the Pitris, and also in that which is known by the 


name Vaivaswata, one becomes cleansed of all one’s sins and becomes 
oneself as pure and sanctified as a tirtha. Going to Brahmasaras as also to 
the Bhagirathi and bathing there and offering oblations to the Pitris every 
day for a full month, while abstaining from all food, one is sure to attain to 
the realm of Soma Deva. 

Bathing in Utpataka and then in Ashtavakra and offering oblations of 
water to the Pitris every day for twelve days in succession, abstaining the 
while from food, one acquires the punya of an Aswamedha yagna. Bathing 
in Gaya, in Asmaprishtha and the Niravinda Mountains and Kraunchapadi, 
one is purified of the sin of Brahmahatya. A bath in the first place cleanses 
one of a single Brahmahatya; a bath in the second cleanses one of two such 
evil doings; and a bath in the third cleanses one of three. 

Bathing in Kaalapinga, one acquires a large volume of sacred water for 
use in the next world. By bathing in the city of Agni, a man acquires such 
merit as entitles him to live during his next birth in the city of Agni’s 
daughter. Bathing in Visala in Karavirapura and offering oblations of water 
to one’s Pitris, and performing one’s ablutions in Devahrada too, one 
becomes identified with Brahma and shines in splendour. 

Bathing in Punaravarta-nanda as also Mahananda, a man of restrained 
senses and universal compassion repairs to Indra’s garden, the Nandana, 
and is waited upon by Apsaras of many kinds. Bathing with concentrated 
soul in the tirtha named after Urvasi, in the river Lohitya, on the day of full 
moon of the month of Kartika, one attains to the punya of the Pundarika 
yagna. 

Bathing in Ramahrada and offering oblations of water to the Pitris in the 
river Vipasa, and observing a fast for twelve days, one becomes cleansed of 
all sins. Bathing in the Mahahrada tirtha with a pure heart and after 
observing a fast for one month, one is sure to attain to the end which was 
that of the Rishi Jamadagni. By exposing oneself to the sun in the tirtha 
called Vindhya, one devoted to truth and humility, and filled with love for 
all creatures, should perform austere tapasya. 

By so doing, he is sure to attain to ascetic success in the course of a 
month. Bathing in the Narmada as also in the Surparaka tirtha, observing a 
fast for a full fortnight, one is sure to become a royal prince in one’s next 
birth. If one goes to the tirtha known as Jambumarga one is sure to attain to 
success in a single day and night. 


By repairing to Chandalikasrama and bathing in the tirtha called 
Kokamukha, having lived on herbs alone and worn rags for clothes, one is 
sure to acquire ten beautiful girls for wives. One who lives near the tirtha 
known as Kanya-hrada will never go to the realms of Yama. Such a man is 
sure to ascend to the regions of felicity that belong to the Devas. 

Mahabaho, he who bathes on the day of the new moon in the Prabhasa 
tirtha is sure of attaining success and immortality. Bathing in the tirtha 
known as Ujjanaka in the asrama of Arshtisena’s son, and next in the tirtha 
in the asrama of Pinga, one is cleansed of all one’s paapa. Observing a fast 
for three days and bathing in the tirtha known as Kulya and reciting the 
sacred Aghamarsana mantras one attains the punya of an Aswamedha 
yagna. 

Observing a fast for one night and bathing in Pindaraka, one becomes 
purified on the dawn of the next day and attains to the merit of an 
Agnishtoma yagna. He who goes to Brahmasaras, which is adorned by the 
forests of Dharmaranya, is purified and attains to the punya of the 
Pundarika yagna. Bathing in the waters of the Mainaka Mountain, and 
saying one’s morning and evening prayers there, and living there for a 
month, subduing one’s desires, one attains to the merit of all the great 
yagnas. 

Setting out for Kalolaka and Nandikunda and Uttara-manasa, and 
reaching a place a hundred yojanas away from them, one becomes cleansed 
of the sin of killing an embryo in its mother’s womb. One who succeeds in 
obtaining a glimpse of the image of Nandiswara, is cleansed of all paapa. 
Bathing in the tirtha called Swargamarga one is sure to reach Brahman. 

The celebrated Himavat is sacred. That prince of mountains is the 
father-in-law of Sankara. He is a mine of all jewels and is the home of the 
Siddhas and Charanas. That twice-born one who is fully conversant with 
the Vedas and who, regarding this life to be transient, casts off his body on 
those mountains, while abstaining from all food and water in accordance 
with the rites laid down in the shastras, after having worshipped the Devas 
and the Rishis, is sure to attain the eternal Brahman. 

Subduing his passions and anger, everything can be attained by him 
who dwells in a tirtha. In order to journey to all the tirthas in the world, one 
should think of those that are almost inaccessible or those that are filled 
with overwhelming difficulties. 


Tirtha yatras produce the punya of yagnas. They can purify anyone of 
sin. Truly excellent, they lead straight to swarga. This subject is a great 
mystery. The very Devas should bathe in tirthas. They too will be purified.” 

This discourse on tirthas should be imparted to Brahmanas, and to 
righteous men who strive to achieve what is truly for their own good. It 
should also be recited in the hearing of one’s well-wishers, friends and 
devoted disciples. Angiras possessed of great ascetic merit imparted this 
knowledge to Gautama. 

Angiras himself had obtained it from Kasyapa. The great Rishis regard 
this discourse as worthy of constant repetition. It is the foremost of all 
purifying things. If one recites it regularly every day, one is sure to be 
cleansed of every sin and to ascend into heaven after this life. One who 
listens to it, this great mystery, is sure to be born into a good family in one’s 
next life and, what is more, he will be endowed with a clear memory of his 
previous life.’” 


CANTO 26 


V aisampayana said, “Equal to Brihaspati in intelligence and Brahma 

himself in forgiveness, resembling Sakra in prowess and Surya in 
energy, Bhishma, the son of Ganga, of vast power, had been overthrown in 
battle by Arjuna. Accompanied by his brothers and many other people, 
King Yudhishtira asks him these questions. The aged warrior lies on a bed 
of arrows, such as Kshatriyas covet, waiting for that auspicious time when 
he can leave his physical body. 

Many great Rishis have come there to see that foremost one of 
Bharata’s vamsa. Amongst them are Atri and Vasishta, Bhrigu and Pulastya, 
and Pulaha and Kratu. There are also Angiras and Gotama and Agastya and 
Sumati, and Viswamitra and Sthulasiras and Samvarta and Pramati and 
Dama. There, are also Brihaspati and Usanas, and Vyasa and Chyavana and 
Kasyapa and Dhruva, and Durvasas and Jamadagni and Markandeya and 
Galava, and Bharadwayja and Raibhya and Yavakrita and Trita. 

Sthulaksha and Savalaksha and Kanwa and Medhatithi are present, and 
Krisa and Narada and Parvata and Sudhanwa and Ekata and Dwita. 
Nitambhu and Bhuvana and Dhaumya and Satananda and Akritavrana and 
Rama, son of Jamadagni, and Kacha have come. All these high-souled 
Maharishis Rishis have come there to Bhishma lying on his bed of arrows. 

Yudhishtira, with his brothers, duly worships those Mahatman Rishis, 
one after another in proper order. Receiving that worship, those Rishis sit 
on the ground and begin to talk to one another. Their conversation relates to 
Bhishma, and is sweet and agreeable to all the senses and the mind. 

Hearing them speak of him, Bhishma is filled with delight and regards 
himself to be already in swarga. Then, having taken Bhishma’s leave and 


that of the Pandava princes, those Rishis vanish in a moment from the sight 
of all the beholders. Even after they have disappeared, the Pandavas 
repeatedly bow and offer their adorations to those most blessed sages. 

They then wait on Bhishma, even as Brahmanas well-versed in mantras 
wait with reverence upon the rising sun. The Pandavas see the cardinal 
directions blaze with splendour because of the tejas of the Munis’ tapasya 
and are filled with wonder at the sight. Thinking of the blessedness and 
puissance of those Rishis, the Pandavas begin to speak again to their 
Pitamaha. Yudhishtira touches Bhishma’s feet with his head and then 
continues asking his questions about dharma. 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha, which kingdoms, which provinces, which 
asramas, which mountains, and which rivers are the most holy?’ 

Bhishma says, “Listen to the old story of a conversation between a 
Brahmana who was observing the Sila and the Unccha vratas and a Rishi 
crowned with hermetic success. Once upon a time, a man who had roamed 
all the earth arrived at the house of a grihastha who was observing the Sila 
vrata. The grihastha welcomed his atithi with all the due rites. Received 
with such hospitality, the happy Rishi spent the night in his host’s home. 

The next morning the Brahmana completed all his morning ablutions 
and worship, and having purified himself, cheerfully approached the Rishi. 
Meeting with each other and seated at their ease, the two began to talk 
about pleasing subjects connected with the Vedas and the Upanishads. 

Towards the end of the discourse, the Brahmana respectfully addressed 
the Rishi. He asked this very question which you, Yudhishtira, have put to 
me. 

The poor Brahmana said, “What kingdoms, what provinces, what 
asramas, what mountains, and what rivers should be regarded as the most 
sacred? Discourse to me on this.” 

The Rishi said, “Those kingdoms, those provinces, those asramas and 
those mountains through or near which the Bhagirathi flows are the most 
sacred. Only by living beside the Bhagirathi and bathing in her blessed 
waters can a man achieve the goals that can be attained by brahmacharya, 
by tapasya, by yagnas or by practising vairagya, renunciation. Those 
creatures whose bodies have been sprinkled with the sacred waters of the 
Bhagirathi or whose bones have been laid in the bed of that holy river will 
never fall from swarga. Those men who use the waters of the Bhagirathi 
surely ascend into heaven after leaving this world. Even those men who 


have sinned during the first part of their lives can attain to a superior end if 
in their later years they take to living on the banks of the Ganga. Hundreds 
of yagnas cannot produce that punya that men obtain by bathing in the 
sacred waters of the Ganga. 

A man is treated with respect and worshipped in heaven for as long as 
his bones lie in the Ganga. Even as the rising sun blazes forth in splendour, 
having dispelled the shadows of night, in the same way the man that has 
bathed in the waters of the Ganga, cleansed of all his sins, shines brilliantly. 
Those kingdoms and realms that are empty of the sacred waters of the 
Ganga are like nights without the moon or like trees without flowers. 

A world without the Ganga is like the varnas and the asramas without 
dharma or like yagnas without Soma. Without doubt, kingdoms and places 
without the Ganga are like the sky without the sun, or the earth without 
mountains, or without air. If offered the sacred waters of the Ganga, all the 
creatures in the three worlds are filled with joy unlike any other. 

He who drinks Ganga jala that has been heated by the sun derives punya 
greater than that which attaches to the vrata of subsisting upon the wheat or 
other grains retrieved from cowdung. It cannot be said which is superior: he 
who performs a thousand Chandrayana rites to purify his body or he who 
drinks the water of the Ganga. It cannot be said whether the two are equal 
or not: one who stands for a thousand years on one foot and one who lives 
for only a month beside the Ganga. 

One who lives permanently by the side of the Ganga is superior in merit 
to one who stays for ten thousand yugas suspended head down. As thread 
burns and vanishes without trace when set on fire, so are the sins of a man 
that bathes in the Ganga consumed. There is no end higher than the Ganga 
for those who, afflicted by sorrow, seek to attain that which could dispel 
their sorrow. 

As snakes lose their poison at the very sight of Garuda, even so is one 
cleansed of all one’s sins at the very sight of the sacred Ganga. They that 
are without renown and sinful in deeds have the Ganga for their fame, their 
protection, their means of liberation or their refuge. Many wretches among 
men, who are afflicted with heinous sins, and about to sink into naraka, are, 
despite all their sins, rescued by the Ganga in the next world if they seek 
her help and sanctuary. 

They who bathe every day in the sacred waters of the Ganga become 
equals of Mahamunis and the very Devas with Vasava at their head. 


Brahmana, those wretches among men that are sinners without any trace of 
humility or shame become righteous and good by placing themselves before 
the Ganga. As amrita is to the Devas, as swadha is to the Pitris, as sudha is 
to the Nagas, even so is Ganga jala to the Manavas. 

As children afflicted with hunger ask their mothers for food, in the same 
manner do those desiring their highest good seek out the Ganga. As the 
realm of Svayambhuva Brahma is said to be the foremost of all places, even 
so is the Ganga said to be best of all rivers. As the earth and the cow are 
said to be the main sustenance of the Devas, even so is the Ganga the main 
sustenance of all living creatures. 

As the Devas nourish themselves upon the amrita that occurs in the sun 
and the moon and that is offered in yagnas, even so do humans sustain 
themselves with Ganga water. One smeared with the sand taken from the 
banks of the Ganga regards oneself as an inhabitant of swarga adorned with 
celestial liniments. He who bears on his head the mud taken from the banks 
of the Ganga presents an effulgence equal to that of Surya himself, who 
dispels the surrounding darkness. 

When that wind that is moistened with drops of Ganga water touches 
one’s body, it purifies him immediately of every sin. A man afflicted and 
weighed down by calamities, finds all his misfortunes dispelled by the very 
joy which wells up in his heart on seeing that sacred river. With the calls 
and songs of the swans and kokas and other water fowls that play on her 
breast, the Ganga challenges the very Gandharvas, and with her high banks 
the very mountains of the earth. 

Heaven, too, is humbled beholding her surface teeming with swans and 
diverse other birds. The bliss which one enjoys by dwelling on the banks of 
the Ganga is greater than that of living in Swargaloka. 

I have no doubt that he who is afflicted with impurity of speech, thought 
and deed is cleansed at the very sight of the Ganga. By holding that sacred 
river, touching it, and bathing in its waters, one purifies one’s ancestors to 
the seventh generation, one’s descendants to the seventh generation, and 
other ancestors and descendants as well. By hearing of the Ganga, by 
wishing to go to that river, by drinking its waters, by touching its waters, 
and by bathing in them a man saves both his paternal and maternal families. 

By seeing, touching and drinking the waters of the Ganga, or even by 
praising her, hundreds and thousands of sinful men are washed of all their 
sins. They who wish to make their birth, life and learning fruitful, should 


repair to the Ganga and gratify the Pitris and the Devas by offering them 
tarpana of water. The punya that one earns by bathing in the Ganga cannot 
be earned through the acquisition of sons or wealth, or the performance of 
good deeds. 

Those who are physically able but do not seek out the auspicious Ganga 
can be compared to those who are blind or those that are dead or those that 
are lame. What man is there that would not revere this sacred river that is 
adored by Maharishis that know the present, the past and the future, as also 
by the very Devas with Indra at their head? What man is there that would 
not seek the protection of the Ganga whose protection is sought by 
sannyasis and grihastas, and by Yatis and brahmacharins? 

The man of righteous conduct who, with rapt soul, thinks of the Ganga 
at the time of his dying, succeeds in attaining the highest end. That man 
who dwells by the side of the Ganga and worships her up to the time of his 
death, is freed from fear of every kind of calamity, of sin and of kings. 
When that blessed river plunged down from the sky, Maheswara bore her 
fall on his head. It is that very stream which is adored in swarga. Bhumi, 
swarga and patala are all adorned by the three streams of this sacred river. 
The man who uses her waters is crowned with success, material and of the 
spirit. As the sun’s rays are to the Devas in heaven, as Chandramas is to the 
Pitris, as the king is to his subjects, even such is the Ganga to all rivers. 

One who loses his mother or father, his sons or wives, or his wealth is 
not as grief-stricken as he that loses the Ganga. The joy that one gets from 
catching a glimpse of the Ganga one does not obtain through pious deeds 
that lead to Brahmaloka, or through such yagnas and kriyas that lead to 
swarga, or through sons or wealth. 

The pleasure that men derive from seeing the Ganga is equal to what 
they derive from seeing the full moon. That man is cherished by the Ganga 
who adores her with deep devotion, with his mind wholly fixed upon her, 
with a reverence that is shared by no other object, with a feeling that there 
is nothing in the universe worthy of similar adoration, and with an absolute 
steadfastness. 

Creatures that live on earth, in the sky, or in heaven, even the most 
superior beings, should always bathe in the Ganga. This is the first of all 
duties of the righteous. The fame of the Ganga’s sanctity has spread across 
the entire universe since she revived all the sons of Sagara, whom Kapila 
reduced to ashes. 


Men who are washed by the bright, beautiful, high, and swift waves of 
the Ganga, whipped up by the wind, are washed of all their sins and 
resemble the sun in its splendour. Men of tranquil souls that have cast off 
their bodies in the waters of the Ganga, whose sanctity is as great as that of 
the ghee and other oblations poured onto the fire in yagnas and which 
confer merits equal to those of the greatest of sacrifices, have certainly 
attained to a position equal to that of the Devas. 

Ganga, with her fame and expanse, identical with the entire universe, 
and revered by the Devas, the Munis and men, can grant the wishes of even 
those that are blind, foolish and destitute. They that sought the refuge of the 
Ganga, that guardian of all the universe, she that flows in three streams, 
filled with sacred water, sweet as honey and powerful, succeed in attaining 
the blessings of swarga. 

The man who dwells beside Ganga and beholds her every day, is 
purified by her sight and touch. The Devas grant him every kind of 
happiness in this world and the next. The Ganga can save every creature 
from sin and lead him to the felicity of swarga. 

She is one with Prishni, the mother of Vishnu. She is the Vakdevi, 
Saraswati. She is aloof, and not easy to attain. She is the embodiment of 
auspiciousness and prosperity. She can bestow the six well-known attributes 
beginning with power. She is always generous with her grace. 

She reveals all things in the universe, and she is the refuge of all 
creatures. Those who sought her protection in this life have surely attained 
heaven. The fame of the Ganga has spread all over the earth, the sky and 
swarga, and all the cardinal and subsidiary points of the horizon. Mortals 
use the waters of her streams to be crowned with success. He who, on 
beholding the Ganga, points her out to others, finds that she frees him from 
rebirth and confers mukti upon him. 

The Ganga held the senapati of the Devas, Guha, in her womb. She also 
bears gold, the most precious of all metals, in her womb. They who bathe 
daily in her waters in the morning succeed in obtaining dharma, artha and 
kama. Her waters are as sacred as the ghrita that is poured into the 
sacrificial fire, while chanting mantras. Able to cleanse one from every sin, 
she has descended from swarga and is cherished by all. 

The Ganga is the daughter of Himavat and Hara, and the jewel of both 
heaven and earth. She bestows everything auspicious, and grants the six 


renowned gunas beginning with puissance. Rajan, truly the Ganga is the 
one holy being in the three worlds and confers punya upon all. 

The Ganga is righteousness in liquid form. She also is tejas that runs in 
liquid form over the earth. She is suffused with the beauty and power of the 
ghee that is poured along with mantras on the sacrificial fire. She is always 
adorned with high waves as also with Brahmanas who can be seen 
performing their ablutions in her waters at all times. Descending from 
swarga, she was contained by Siva on his head. The very mother of the 
heavens, she has sprung from the highest mountain and courses over the 
plains conferring the most precious benefits on all creatures of the earth. 
She is the highest cause of all things; she is perfectly pure. She is as subtle 
as Brahman. 

She offers the best bed for the dying. She leads creatures to heaven. She 
carries an incalculable volume of water. She bestows great fame on all. She 
is the protector of the universe. She is identical with every form. She is 
greatly desired by those crowned with success. Indeed, for those who have 
bathed in her waters, the Ganga is the path to swarga. 

The Brahmanas hold the Ganga as equal to the earth in forgiveness, and 
in the protection and upholding of those that live on her banks; further, as 
equal to Agni and Surya in energy and splendour; and also equal to Guha 
himself in bestowing favours upon the twice-born varna. 

Men who seek, even in their minds, with all their souls, that ancient and 
sacred river praised by the Rishis, she that emerges from the feet of Vishnu, 
achieve the realms of Brahma. Men of subdued souls who want to attain 
Brahman, knowing that children and other possessions, and realms of 
felicity, are transient, always pay their adorations to the Ganga with that 
reverence and love that a son shows his mother. 

Men of cleansed souls who wish for success should seek the protection 
of the Ganga who is like a cow that yields amrita instead of milk, who is 
prosperity itself, who is omniscient, who exists for all creatures, who is the 
source of all kinds of food, who is the mother of all mountains, who is the 
refuge of all righteous men, who is immeasurable in power and energy, and 
who enchants the heart of Brahma himself. 

Having gratified all the Devas along with Vishnu with austere tapasya, 
Bhagiratha brought the Ganga down to the earth. Men go to her to free 
themselves from every kind of fear both here and in the next world. I have 
told you only some of the merits of the Ganga. My powers are not enough 


to speak of all the merits of the sacred river, or to measure her strength and 
blessedness. 

With one’s greatest powers, one may count the rocks in the mountains 
of Meru or measure the waters of the ocean, but one cannot determine the 
punya of the waters of the Ganga. Having listened to these merits of the 
Ganga, which I have described with great devotion, you should, in thought, 
word and deed, revere them with faith. Having listened to the merits that I 
have recited, you are sure to fill all the three realms with fame and attain 
great success and that is so difficult to have. 

After that, you will sport in bliss created by the Ganga herself for those 
that worship her. The Ganga always extends her grace to those that are 
devoted to her with humility. She unites her devotees with every kind of 
happiness. I pray that the most blessed Ganga will always fill our hearts 
with righteous qualities.” 

Bhishma says, ‘Having spoken to that poor Brahmana observing the 
Sila vrata on the infinite merits of the Ganga, the learned and enlightened 
Rishi rose into the sky. The Brahmana, awakened by his words, duly 
worshipped the Ganga and attained high success. Son of Kunti, seek the 
Ganga with great devotion, for then you, too, will be rewarded with 
excellent success.’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Hearing this discourse on the punya of the 
Ganga from Bhishma, Yudhishtira with his brothers are filled with rare and 
great delight. He who recites or hears this sacred discourse is purified of 
every sin.” 


CANTO 27 


¢ oN udhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha, you are old and wise, learned in the 

shastras, and marked by excellent gunas and unblemished 
conduct. You are celebrated above others by your gyana and tapasya. 
Foremost of all righteous men, I now ask you about dharma. 

There is not another man in all the worlds, who is worthier of being 
questioned on such subjects. How can a Kshatriya, a Vaisya or a Sudra 
succeed in acquiring the status of a Brahmana? It is fitting that you tell me 
the means. Is it with austere tapasya or by religious kriyas, or through 
knowledge of the shastras that one belonging to any of the three lower 
varnas succeeds in acquiring the status of a Brahmana? Do tell me this.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Yudhishtira, the status of a Brahmana cannot be 
acquired by one belonging to any of the three other varnas. That is the 
highest condition for all creatures. After living through countless rebirths 
one is born finally as a Brahmana. 

Listen to an ancient itihasa of a conversation between Matanga and a 
female donkey. Once, a Brahmana had a son who, though born of a woman 
of another varna, followed the laws laid down for Brahmanas in his 
childhood and youth. The child was named Matanga and possessed every 
accomplishment. 

Wishing to perform a yagna, his father ordered him to collect the 
required articles. Having received his father’s commands, Matanga set out 
on a swift chariot drawn by a donkey. It so happened that the donkey yoked 
to that chariot was young. Instead of obeying the reins, the animal ran with 
the chariot to his mother. 


Matanga was angry and began to beat the animal on its nose with his 
goad. Seeing those marks of violence on her child’s nose, full of 
compassion for him, the mother donkey said, “Do not grieve for his 
treatment, my child. This is a Chandala that is driving you. A Brahmana can 
never be so severe. The Brahmana is said to be the friend of all creatures. 
He is also the teacher and the master of all creatures. Can he punish any 
creature so cruelly? 

This however is a sinful man. He has no compassion to show even to a 
being of such tender years as you. He is only reveals the varna of his birth 
by behaving in this way. The nature which he has inherited from his father 
prevents him from feeling the pity and kindness that are natural to the 
Brahmana.” 

Hearing these harsh words from the mother donkey, Matanga 
dismounted from his chariot and said to her, “Tell me by what fault is my 
mother stained? How do you know that I am a Chandala? Answer me at 
once. How do you know that I am a Chandala? How has my status as a 
Brahmana been lost? You of great wisdom, tell me all this in detail, from 
beginning to end.” 

The donkey said, “You were born to a Brahmana woman by a Sudra 
barber excited by desire. You are, therefore, a Chandala by birth. You do 
not enjoy the status of a Brahmana.” 

Thus addressed by the female donkey, Matanga returned home. Seeing 
him return, his father said, “I sent you on the difficult mission of gathering 
the requirements for my yagna. Why have you come back without having 
accomplished your task? Is all not right with you?” 

Matanga said, “How can he who belongs to no definite varna, or an 
inferior varna, ever be regarded as well or happy? How can he whose 
mother is tainted be happy? Father, this female donkey, who seems to be 
more than a human being, tells me that I have been begotten upon a 
Brahmana woman by a Sudra. And for this reason, I will undergo the 
severest of penances.” 

Having said these words to his father, and firmly resolved upon what he 
had said, Matanga went to the great forest and sat in the most austere 
tapasya. He began to scorch the very Devas with the heat of his asceticism, 
undertaken to become a Brahmana. 

While he sat unmoving in tapasya, Indra appeared and said, “Matanga, 
why do you pass your time in such grief, abstaining from all kinds of 


human enjoyment? I shall grant you boons. Name the boons you desire. Do 
not hesitate, but tell me what is in your heart. Even if it is unattainable, I 
will bestow it on you.” 

Matanga said, “I want to attain the status of a Brahmana with my 
tapasya. Only after becoming a true Brahmana will I go home. This is the 
boon I seek.” 

Indra said to him. “You cannot attain this status of a Brahmana which 
you desire. It is true you seek it, but it cannot be acquired by men who are 
born of those of uncleansed souls. Imprudent one, you are sure to meet with 
destruction if you persist in this pursuit. 

Stop this vain endeavour at once. This object of your desire, of 
becoming a Brahmana, who is the foremost of all beings, cannot be 
achieved by tapasya. By craving this status, you will be only destroyed. One 
born as a Chandala can never attain to that status which is regarded as the 
most sacred among the Devas and Asuras and Manavas!” 


CANTO 28 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘Matanga paid no heed to the counsels of Indra and 
stood on one foot for a hundred years, searing Devaloka even 
more. 

Sakra appeared before him again and said, “The status of a Brahmana is 
unattainable. Although you covet it, it is impossible for you to acquire it. 
Matanga, by longing for that lofty condition you are sure to be destroyed. 
Do not be reckless. This cannot be a righteous path for you to follow. 

You are foolish: it is impossible for you to become a Brahmana in this 
world. By craving that which is unattainable, you are sure to meet 
destruction. I repeatedly forbid you but you are intent on destroying 
yourself. 

From the order of animal life one attains to the status of humanity. If 
born as a human being, he is first sure to be born as a Pukkasa or a 
Chandala. Having been born in this sinful order of existence one has to 
wander in it for a long time. After one thousand years in that varna, one 
next attains the status of a Sudra. 

One has to live and die and be reborn in the Sudra varna for a long time. 
After thirty thousand years, one is born as a Vaisya. In that varna, a jiva 
again has to live for a long time. He is born a Kshatriya after sixty times the 
duration of his existence as a Sudra. 

One has to pass a very long time in the Kshatriya varna. After a 
duration sixty times the previous length of time, one is born as a fallen 
Brahmana. One has to wander for a long time in this condition. 

After two hundred times the previous length of time, one is born in the 
vamsa of a Brahmana who lives by fighting. In that one has to spend a great 


deal of time. After three hundred times the duration of his previous 
condition, one takes birth in the vamsa of a Brahmana that recites the 
Gayatri and other sacred mantras. 

In that state also one has to remain for a long period. After a time 
measured by multiplying the last named period by four hundred, one takes 
birth into the family of a Brahmana conversant with all the Vedic shastras. 

In that order again, one spends many a year. In that state of existence, 
joy and sorrow, desire and loathing, vanity and malicious speech try to enter 
into him and reduce him to wretchedness. If he succeeds in subduing those 
adversaries, he then attains a high end. If, on the other hand, those enemies 
triumph over him, he falls from that high state like one falling to the ground 
from a tall palm tree. 

Knowing this for certain, I say to you, Matanga, ask for some other 
boon, for you who have been born a Chandala cannot dream of becoming a 
Brahmana!” 


CANTO 29 


¢ ‘RB hishma said, ‘Matanga still refused to accept Indra’s advice. On 

the other hand, with regulated vows and a cleansed soul, he 

practised austere tapasya for a thousand years, standing on one foot and 

deep in dhyana. After a thousand years, Indra came again to him. The slayer 
of Bala and Vritra repeated the same advice. 

Matanga said, “I have passed these thousand years standing on one foot 
in deep dhyana, observing of the brahmacharya vrata. Why is it that I have 
not yet succeeded in acquiring the status of a Brahmana?” 

Indra said, “One born to a Chandala cannot become a Brahmana by any 
means. Therefore, name some boon so that all your efforts are not wasted.” 

Matanga was filled with grief. He journeyed to Prayaga, and lived there 
for a hundred years, standing all the while on just his toes. He became 
emaciated and his arteries and veins were swollen and visible. He was 
reduced to mere skin and bones. Indeed, while performing tapasya at Gaya, 
the Dharmatman Matanga collapsed from sheer exhaustion. 

When Indra, who looks after the welfare of all creatures, saw him fall, 
the Lord and giver of boons came to that place and held him. 

Indra said, “It seems, Matanga, that the status of a Brahmana which you 
seek is ill-suited to you. You cannot attain it. In fact, for you it is fraught 
with many dangers. One who worships a Brahmana finds happiness; 
abstaining from such worship, he finds sorrow. 

For all creatures, the Brahmana is the giver of what they prize or covet 
and the protector of what they already have. It is through the Brahmanas 
that the Pitris and the Devas are gratified. The Brahmana is said to be 


foremost of all created beings. The Brahmana grants all objects of desire 
and in the way that they are desired. 

Wandering through innumerable orders of being and undergoing 
repeated rebirths, one succeeds in some distant birth in being born as a 
Brahmana. Men of impure souls cannot obtain that condition. Give up this 
sinful and impossible ambition. Name some other boon. This boon cannot 
be granted to you.” 

Matanga said, “Already I am filled with anguish; Indra, why do you 
further torment me by what you say? You strike one that is already dead. I 
do not envy you for having acquired the status of a Brahmana; you fail to 
retain it for you show no compassion for one like me. 

You of a hundred yagnas, you say that the status of a Brahmana cannot 
be attained by any of the three other varnas; yet, men that have succeeded in 
acquiring that high status through natural means do not adhere to it, for 
what sins do even Brahmanas not commit? Like wealth, the status of a 
Brahmana is difficult to acquire, and those who having acquired it do not 
seek to persevere with it by practising the necessary duties, must be 
regarded to be the lowest wretches in this world. Indeed, they are the most 
sinful of all creatures. 

Without doubt, the status of a Brahmana is most difficult to attain, and 
once attained is difficult to maintain. It can dispel every kind of sorrow. 
Having attained to it, men do not always seek to maintain it by practising 
dharma and the duties attached to it. When even such men are regarded as 
Brahmanas, why is it that I, who am content with my own self, who am 
above all duality, who am detached from all worldly things, who am 
compassionate towards all creatures, and self-restrained in conduct, cannot 
be regarded as deserving of that status? 

How unfortunate I am that through the fault of my mother I have been 
reduced to this condition, although I am not sinful in my behaviour. Without 
doubt, destiny cannot be avoided or conquered by individual exertion, since 
with all my efforts I am unable to acquire what I have set my heart upon. 
When such is the case, Indra, it is fitting for you to grant me some other 
boon if I have become worthy of your grace or if I have earned even a little 
punya.”’ 

Indra said to him, “Name the boon.” 

Matanga said, “Let me be possess the power of assuming any form at 
will, and moving through the skies, and let me enjoy whatever pleasures I 


may set my heart upon. And let me also have the willing adorations of both 
Brahmanas and Kshatriyas. I bow to you, great Sakra. Also ensure that my 
fame lives forever in the world.” 

Indra said, “You will be celebrated as the deity of a particular measure 
of verse and you will be worshipped by all women. Your fame will be 
unrivalled in the three worlds.” Having granted him these boons, Indra 
vanished from sight. Matanga also cast off his life-breath and attained a 
high place. 

Yudhishtira, you see that the status of a Brahmana is very high indeed. 
As the great Indra himself said, that condition of being cannot be acquired 
except by birth.’ 


CANTO 30 


66 Y udhishtira says, “I have now heard this great narrative. You have 

said that the status of a Brahmana is difficult to acquire. Yet, it 

has been said that in former times Viswamitra attained the status of a 
Brahmarishi. You, however, say that it cannot be obtained. 

I have also heard that King Vitahavya in ancient times succeeded in 
obtaining Brahmatva. Pitamaha, I desire to hear the story of Vitahavya’s 
advancement. With what deeds did that best of kings succeed in acquiring 
Brahmatva? Was it through some boon obtained from some powerful one or 
was it through the virtue of tapasya? Tell me everything.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Rajan, listen to how the famed Rajarishi Vitahavya 
succeeded in becoming a Brahmana, a condition that is so difficult to attain 
and that is held in such high reverence by all. While the high-souled Manu 
ruled his subjects wisely, he had a son of righteous soul who became 
renowned under the name of Saryati. 

Two kings, Haihaya and Talajangha, were born into Saryati’s vamsa. 
Both of them were sons of Vatsa. Haihaya had ten wives. Through them, a 
hundred sons, all great Kshatriyas, were born to him. All of them resembled 
one another in features and prowess. All of them were strong and all of 
them possessed great skill in battle. They all studied the Vedas and the 
science of weapons thoroughly. 

In Kasi also there was a king who was the grandfather of Divodasa. He 
was known by the name Haryaswa. The sons of King Haihaya, also known 
as Vitahavya, invaded the kingdom of Kasi and, advancing to the doab 
between the Ganga and Yamuna, fought a battle with King Haryaswa and 
killed him. 


Having slain King Haryaswa, the sons of Haihaya, those daring 
Maharathikas, returned to their own delightful city in the kingdom of the 
Vatsas. Meanwhile Haryaswa’s son Sudeva, who was like a god in 
splendour and who was a second Dharma Deva, was installed on the throne 
of Kasi as its ruler. The righteous prince had ruled his kingdom for a while 
when the hundred sons of Vitahavya once more invaded his dominions and 
defeated him in battle. 

Having vanquished King Sudeva, the victors returned to their own city. 
After that Divodasa, the son of Sudeva, was crowned king of Kasi. 
Recognising the strength of the sons of Vitahavya, King Divodasa rebuilt 
and fortified the city of Varanasi at the command of Indra. 

The kingdom of Divodasa was full of Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, and 
abounded with Vaisyas and Sudras. And they teemed with fine articles and 
provisions of every kind, and were adorned with shops and markets 
swelling with prosperity. Those territories stretched northwards from the 
banks of the Ganga to the southern banks of the Gomati, and resembled 
Amravati, the immortal city of Indra. 

Bharta, the Haihayas once again attacked that tiger among kings. The 
splendid Divodasa sallied forth from his capital city and fought them. The 
battle between them was as fierce as that between the Devas and the Asuras 
in ancient times. King Divodasa fought the enemy for a thousand days 
becoming distraught at the vast number of his subjects and animals that 
were killed. 

Having lost his army and exhausted his treasury, Divodasa fled his 
capital. Repairing to the delightful asrama of the wise Bharadwaja, the king 
humbly sought the Rishi’s protection. Seeing the king before him, 
Bharadwaja, who was the king’s purohita, said to him, “What is the reason 
for your coming here? Tell me everything, Rajan. I shall do what is 
agreeable to you without any hesitation.” 

The king said, “Holy one, the sons of Vitahavya have slain all the 
children and men of my house. I alone have escaped with my life, totally 
routed by the enemy. I seek your protection. Protect me with the love you 
bear for a sishya. Those sinful princes have slaughtered my entire vamsa, 
leaving only me alive.” 

To him who pleaded so piteously, Bharadwaja said, “Do not fear! Do 
not fear! Son of Sudeva, dismiss all your fears. I will perform a yagna 


which will give you a son through whom you will be able to annihilate 
thousands upon thousands of Vitahavya’s forces.” 

After this, the Rishi performed a yagna in order to bestow a son on 
Divodasa. A son named Pratardana was born to Divodasa. On being born, 
he instantly grew into a boy of full thirteen years and quickly mastered all 
the Vedas and their angas. 

Helped by his powers of yoga, Bharadwaja himself had entered into the 
prince. Gathering all the energies in the universe, Bharadwaja put them 
together in the body of Prince Pratardana. With shining armour and bow, 
Pratardana, his praises sung by Pauranikas and Devarishis, shone 
resplendent like the risen sun. Mounted on his chariot with his sword tied to 
his waist, he shone like a blazing fire. With his sword and shield whirling, 
he went to his father. 

Seeing him, King Divodasa was filled with joy. Indeed, the old king 
considered the sons of his enemy Vitahavya as already slain. Divodasa 
installed his son Pratardana as the Yuvaraja, and regarding himself to be 
successful became exultant. He next commanded that parantapa, Prince 
Pratardana, to march against the sons of Vitahavya and destroy them in 
battle. 

Pratardana, subduer of enemy cities, quickly crossed the Ganga on his 
chariot and rode against the city of the Vitahavyas. Hearing the clatter of his 
chariot’s wheels, the sons of Vitahavya, riding on their own powerful 
chariots that looked like forts, came out of their city. Emerging from their 
capital, the sons of Vitahavya, all skilful warriors cased in mail, charged 
with weapons raised at Pratardana and enveloped him with fusillades of 
arrows. 

Surrounding him with countless chariots, the Vitahavyas poured 
showers of astras upon Pratardana like clouds pouring torrents of rain on 
the breast of Himavat. Confounding their weapons with his own, mighty 
Pratardana killed them all with his shafts that resembled Indra’s vajra. 
Beheaded by thousands of broad arrows, the bloodied bodies of the warriors 
of Vitahavya lay scattered like kimsuka trees felled by woodcutters with 
their axes. 

After all his warriors and sons had fallen in battle, King Vitahavya fled 
from his capital to the asrama of Rishi Bhrigu. There the royal fugitive 
sought the protection of the sage. Bhrigu assured the defeated king of his 
protection. Pratardana followed Vitahavya. 


Reaching the Rishi’s asrama, the son of Divodasa said in a loud voice, 
“Listen, all you disciples of the Mahatman Bhrigu, I wish to see the sage. 
Go and inform him of this.” 

Recognising that it was Pratardana who had come, Bhrigu himself came 
out of his asrama and worshipped that best of kings with the due rites. The 
Rishi said, “Tell me, Rajan, what is it that you want.” The king told the 
Rishi the reason for his presence. 

The king said, “Brahmana, Vitahavya has come here. Surrender him to 
me. His sons destroyed my very vamsa. They laid waste the territories and 
the wealth of the kingdom of Kasi. I have slain a hundred sons of this proud 
king. By killing that king himself I will today pay the debt I owe my 
father.” 

The compassionate Maharishi Bhrigu replied, “There is no Kshatriya in 
this asrama. Here they are all Brahmanas.” 

Accepting Bhrigu’s words to be true, Pratardana touched the Rishi’s feet 
and, filled with delight, said, “Without doubt, on account of my prowess, I 
am now crowned with success, since this king has been abandoned by the 
very varna of his birth. Brahmana, allow me to leave you, and let me ask 
you to pray for my welfare. Because of my might, Vitahavya has been 
compelled to leave the very varna of his birth.” 

Dismissed by Bhrigu, Pratardana returned from the Rishi’s asrama to 
his kingdom, even as a snake vomits out its real poison. Thus did King 
Vitahavya attain the status of a Brahmana sage—purely by virtue of 
Bhrigu’s words. He also acquired a complete mastery over all the Vedas in 
the same manner. 

Vitahavya had a son named Gritsamada who was as handsome as Indra. 
Once, the Daityas harassed him greatly, believing him to be none other than 
Indra. With regard to that Rishi, one of the greatest srutis in the Riks says, 
“He with whom Gritsamada stays, Brahmana, is held in high regard by all 
Brahmanas.” 

Observing brahmacharya, the wise Gritsamada become a_ true 
Dvijottama, a twice-born sage. Gritsamada had a son named Sutejas. 
Sutejas had a son called Varchas, and the son of Varchas was known by the 
name Vihavya. Vihavya had a son named Vitatya and Vitatya had a son 
named Satya. Satya had a son named Santa. Santa’s son was the Rishi 
Sravas. 


Sravas begot a son named Tama. Tama had a son named Prakasa, who 
was a most superior Brahmana. Prakasa had a son named Vagindra who was 
the foremost of all silent reciters of sacred mantras. 

To Vagindra was born a son named Pramati who was a complete master 
of all the Vedas and their angas. The Apsara Ghritachi bore Pramati a son 
who was named Ruru. Ruru had a son through his wife Pramadvara. That 
son was the great Rishi Sunaka. Sunaka gave birth to Saunaka. 

It was thus that King Vitahavya, though a Kshatriya by birth, acquired 
the status of a Brahmana through the grace of Bhrigu. I have also told you 
the genealogy of the vamsa that sprung from Gritsamada. What else would 
you like to ask?’” 


CANTO 31 


¢ Ne udhishtira says, ‘Bharatarishabha, which men are worthy of 
reverence in the three worlds? Tell me this in detail. I am never 
satiated with hearing you discourse on these subjects.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Hear the ancient story of the discourse between Narada 
and Krishna. Seeing Narada once worshipping many excellent Brahmanas, 
Krishna said to him, “Whom do you worship? Whom among these 
Brahmanas do you worship with such great reverence? If it is something 
that I can be told, I wish to hear it. Foremost of righteous men, tell me.” 

Narada said, “Listen to the names of those whom I worship. Krishna, 
who else in this world deserves to hear this? I worship the Brahmanas who 
always worship Varuna and Vayu and Aditya and Parjanya and Agni, and 
Sthanu and Skanda and Lakshmi and Vishnu and the Brahmanas, and the 
Lord of speech, and Chandramas, and the waters and the earth and Devi 
Saraswati. 

I always revere those Brahmanas that are imbued with tapasya, that are 
conversant with the Vedas, that are always devoted to Vedic study, and that 
possess high worth. I bow my head before those who are free of pride, who 
perform the rites in honour of the Devas while fasting, who are always 
content with what they have and who are forgiving. I adore them that 
perform yagnas, who are of a forgiving nature, and self-restrained, that are 
masters of their own senses, that worship truth and righteousness, and that 
give away land and cows to virtuous Brahmanas. 

I bow unto them that are devoted to the observance of tapasya, that 
dwell in forests, that live upon fruits and roots, that never store anything for 
the next day, and that are observant of all the kriyas and karmas laid down 


in the shastras. I bow to them that feed and cherish their servants, that are 
always hospitable to guests, and that eat only the leftovers of what is 
offered to the gods. 

I worship them that have become formidable by studying the Vedas, that 
are eloquent in discoursing on the shastras, that are observant of the 
brahmacharya vrata, and that are always devoted to the duties of presiding 
at others’ yagnas and of teaching sishyas. 

I worship them that are compassionate towards all creatures, and that 
study the Vedas all day. I bow to them that strive to obtain the grace of their 
gurus, that labour in their learning of the Vedas, that are firm in the 
observance of vows, that obediently wait upon their teachers and elders, and 
that are free from hatred and envy. I bow to them that observe excellent 
vratas, that practise mowna, that have knowledge of Brahman, that are 
resolute in truth, that offer libations of ghee and offerings of meat. 

I bow to them that live upon alms, that are emaciated for want of 
adequate food and drink, that have lived in their gurus’ homes, that are 
detached from all enjoyments, and that are poor in material goods. I bow to 
them that have no love for material wealth, that have no quarrel with others, 
that do not clothe themselves, that have no wants, that have become 
powerful through the acquisition of the Vedas, that are eloquent in the 
teaching of dharma, and that speak of Brahman. 

I bow before those that are compassionate towards all creatures, firm in 
the observance of truth, self-restrained, and calm in their behaviour. 
Yadava, I bow to them devoted to the worship of Devas and Atithis, that 
belong to grihasta asrama, and that follow the way of pigeons in their 
manner of living. I always bow to those whose actions are marked by the 
triguna, without being weakened, and who are observant of truth and 
righteous conduct. 

I bow unto them who are conversant with Brahman, who are endowed 
with knowledge of the Vedas, who are attentive in the pursuit of dharma, 
artha and kama, that are free of greed, and that are righteous. I bow unto 
them that survive only upon water, or upon air alone, or upon the leftovers 
of the food that is offered to gods and guests, and that observe diverse kinds 
of excellent vratas. I always worship those who have taken the vow of 
celibacy, who have wives and the domestic fire, that are the refuge of the 
Vedas, and that are the loving sanctuary of all creatures in the universe. 


Krishna, I always bow to those Rishis that are the Creators of the 
universe, that are the elders of the universe, that are the eldest of the vamsa 
or the family, that dispel tamas, and that are the most righteous and most 
learned in the universe. For these reasons, you too, must worship those 
twice-born ones of whom I speak every day. 

Deserving of reverence, they will, when worshipped, bestow happiness 
on you. Those of whom I speak always grant happiness in this world as well 
as in the next. Revered by all, they roam about in this world, and, if 
worshipped by you, are sure to grant you bliss. 

They who are hospitable to all that come to them as guests, and who are 
always devoted to Brahmanas and cows, as also to truth in words and deeds, 
succeed in overcoming all calamities and obstacles. They who are always 
devoted to peace, as also they who are free from malice and envy, and they 
who are always attentive to the study of the Vedas, succeed in conquering 
all misfortunes and difficulties. They who bow before all the Devas without 
showing a preference for any, they who take refuge in any one Veda, they 
who are steadfast and self-restrained, prevail over all hardships and 
impediments. 

They who worship the foremost of Brahmanas with reverence, are firm 
in the observance of vratas and practise the virtue of charity, overcome all 
calamities and obstacles. They who are engaged in the practice of tapasya, 
who are always observant of the vow of celibacy, and whose souls have 
been cleansed by tapasya, overcome all calamities and obstacles. They who 
are devoted to the worship of the Devas and atithis and Parvivara, 
dependents, as also of the Pitris, and they who eat the remnants of the food 
that is offered to Devas, Pitris, guests and dependents, conquer all problems 
and obstructions. 

They who, having lit the domestic fire, duly keep it burning and worship 
it with reverence and they who duly pour libations in Soma yagnas, succeed 
in overcoming all difficulties. Krishna, they who behave as you do towards 
their mothers and fathers and gurus and elders triumph over all obstacles.” 
Having said these words, the Devarishi fell silent.’ 

Bhishma continues, “For these reasons, you must also always worship 
with great reverence the Devas, the Pitris, the Brahmanas and atithis who 
arrive at your palace, and as a result of such conduct you, too, will attain a 
lofty and desirable end.’” 


CANTO 32 


¢ Ne udhishtira says, “Wise Pitamaha conversant with all branches of 

knowledge, I want to hear you discourse on subjects related to 

kartavya and dharma, duty and righteousness. Tell me what are the merits 

are of those that grant protection to living creatures of all the four varnas 
when they entreat it?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Dharmaputra, listen to this ancient history on the great 
merit of granting protection to others when it is humbly sought. Long ago, a 
beautiful pigeon, pursued by a hawk, flew down from the skies and sought 
the protection of the king, Usinara Vrishadarbha. 

The king comforted the terrified pigeon, saying, “Be reassured; do not 
fear. What has frightened you so much? What have you done and where, 
that you have lost your senses in fear and are more dead than alive? Your 
colour, beautiful bird, resembles that of a newly bloomed blue lotus. Your 
eyes are the colour of the pomegranate or the Asoka flower. 

Do not be frightened. Set your mind at rest. When you have sought 
refuge with me, know that no one will have the courage to even think of 
harming you. For your sake, I will give up the very kingdom of Kasi and, if 
needed, my life too. Be comforted and feel no fear.” 

The hawk said to the king, “This bird has been ordained to be my food. 
It does not befit you to shelter him from me. I have hunted and overpowered 
this bird with great effort. His flesh and blood and marrow and fat will 
make good food for me. This bird will gratify me. Rajan, do not place 
yourself between him and me. 

The thirst that tortures me is fierce, and hunger gnaws at my stomach. 
Release the bird and let me have him. I cannot bear the pains of hunger any 


longer. I pursued him as my prey. Look at his body, bruised and torn by my 
wings and talons. Look, how his breath has turned weak. It is not just for 
you to protect him from me. 

In the exercise of that power which rightly belongs to you, you may 
intervene to protect men when other men try to kill them. You cannot, 
however, claim any power over a flying bird afflicted with thirst. Your 
power may extend over your enemies, your servants, your relatives, and the 
disputes that take place between your subjects. Indeed, it may extend over 
every part of your dominions and also over your own senses. Your power, 
however, does not extend to the sky. 

Displaying your prowess over your enemies, you can establish your 
dominion over them. Your rule, however, does not extend over the birds 
that range the sky. Indeed, if you wish to earn punya by protecting this 
pigeon, it is your duty to also consider me and help me appease my hunger 
and save my life.’”’ 

Bhishma continues, ‘Hearing the hawk’s words, the royal sage was 
filled with some wonder. Wanting to heed these words and comfort the 
hawk, the king spoke to him. 

The king said, “Let a bull, a boar, a deer or a buffalo be cooked for you 
today. Today appease your hunger on that food. I have taken a vow never to 
abandon anyone that seeks my protection. This bird will not leave my lap.” 

The hawk said, “I do not eat the flesh of the boar or the bull, the deer or 
the buffalo. What need have I of such food? My concern is only with that 
food which has been ordained for beings of my order? Hawks feed on 
pigeons, this is the eternal law. Sinless Usinara, if you feel such love for this 
pigeon, then give me flesh from your own body, equal in weight to that of 
this pigeon.” 

The king said, “You have shown me great respect by saying this to me. 
Yes, I shall do what you command.” 

Saying this, the king began to cut off his own flesh and weigh it in a 
balance against the pigeon. 

Meanwhile, in the inner rooms of the palace, the wives of the king, 
adorned with jewels, heard what was happening, and came out grief- 
stricken and lamenting. Their cries, and those of the ministers and servants, 
rose in the palace like thunder. The clear sky was suddenly enveloped with 
dense clouds on every side. The earth began to quake because of the king’s 
virtuous act. 


Usinara continued to cut the flesh from his sides, from his arms, and 
from his thighs, and to fill one side of the scales to weigh it against the 
pigeon. Even after he had cut away a great deal of his flesh, the pigeon 
continued to weigh heavier. When at last the king was reduced to a fleshless 
skeleton of bones, covered with blood, he desired to give up his whole 
body, and climbed on to the scale in which he had placed his flesh. 

At that moment, the three worlds, led by Indra, arrived there to see him. 
Celestial drums began to roll, played upon by spirits of the sky. King 
Vrishadarbha was bathed in a shower of amrita that was poured upon him. 
Garlands of heavenly flowers, of wonderful fragrance and texture, also 
rained down on him. 

The Devas, Gandharvas and Apsaras began to sing and dance around 
him even as they do around Brahma. King Usinara ascended a celestial 
chariot that was more grand and beautiful than a palace made of gold; its 
arches were encrusted with gemstones and adorned with columns made of 
lapis lazuli. In this manner, the royal sage Usinara, also known as the great 
Sibi, went to swarga through his righteous act. 

Yudhishtira, you too, must treat those that seek your protection in the 
same way. He who protects those that are devoted to him, those that are 
devoted to him, and those that depend upon him, and who has compassion 
for all creatures, attains great felicity in the next world. A virtuous king who 
is honest and honourable acquires every worthy reward by his actions. 

The Rajarishi Sibi, of pure soul and great wisdom and indomitable 
prowess, the ruler of the kingdom of Kasi, became celebrated throughout 
the three worlds for his righteous deeds. He who protects one who seeks 
refuge in the same way will certainly attain the same happy end as Sibi did. 
He who narrates this history of Vrishadarbha is sure to be purified of every 
sin, and he who hears it recited is sure to attain to the same end.’” 


CANTO 33 


¢ NE udhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha, what is the best conduct out of all 
those that have been established for a king? By doing what is a 
king able to enjoy both this world and the next?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘The foremost dharma that has been laid down for a duly 
consecrated king, if he desires to obtain great happiness, is the worship of 
Brahmanas. This is what the best of all kings should do. Bharatarishabha, 
know this well. The king should always revere all righteous Brahmanas 
who possess Vedic knowledge. 

The king must worship all learned Brahmanas living in his city or 
kingdom, with bowed head, elevating words, and gifts of all things of 
enjoyment. This is the foremost of all kartavyas laid down for the king. 
Indeed, the king must always be focused on this. He should protect and 
cherish the Brahmanas, even as he does himself or his own children. With 
even greater reverence the king must worship those Brahmanas who are 
learned and righteous. 

When such men are free of all worries, the whole kingdom is ablaze 
with grace and beauty. Such men are worthy of adoration. The king must 
bow his head before them. They must be honoured, even as one honours 
one’s fathers and grandfathers. Even as the existence of all creatures 
depends upon Vasava, so does the conduct of men depend on such 
Brahmanas. So compelling are their powers and tejas that if angered such 
men can raze the entire kingdom to ashes merely by their will, or with 
mantras, or by other means acquired through tapasya. Nothing can destroy 
them. Their power appears to be boundless, stretching to the ends of the 
universe. When angry, their glances fall upon men like a blazing fire upon a 


forest. The bravest of men are terrified by them. Their virtues and powers 
are vast and extraordinary. 

Some among them are like wells and holes with their mouths covered 
by grass and creepers, while others resemble the bright and cloudless sky. 
Some among them, like Durvasas, are of fierce dispositions. Some, like 
Gautama, are as soft in nature as cotton. Some among them are cunning like 
Rishi Agastya who devoured the Asura Vatapi. 

Some among them are devoted to the practice of tapasya; some are 
employed in farming like Uddalaka’s guru; some are engaged in caring for 
cows as did Upamanyu, while attending on his guru. Some among them live 
on alms; some are even robbers like Valmiki in his early years and 
Viswamitra during a famine. Some, like Narada, enjoy inciting quarrels and 
disputes. Some, like Bharata, are actors and dancers. 

Some can achieve all ordinary and extraordinary feats, like Agastya 
who swallowed the entire ocean as if it were a palmful of water. The 
Brahmanas are of diverse natures and behaviour. One must always sing the 
praises of the Brahmanas who are conversant with all duties, who are of 
righteous behaviour, who are devoted to virtuous deeds of many kinds, and 
who are seen to derive their sustenance from diverse kinds of occupations. 

The Brahmanas who are older in origin than the Pitris, the Devas, men 
of the other three varnas, the Nagas and the Rakshasas are the most highly 
blessed. These regenerate men cannot be defeated by the Devas or the 
Pitris, the Gandharvas or the Rakshasas, the Asuras or the Pisachas. The 
Brahmanas can make one who is not a deity into one. They can also divest a 
Deva of his position. 

He whom they wish to make a king becomes one. He whom they do not 
love or favour, on the other hand, is degraded. Rajan, I tell you truly that 
those foolish men who dishonour the Brahmanas meet with destruction. 
Skilled in praise and censure, and themselves the cause of other men’s fame 
and disgrace, Brahmanas are always angered by those that seek to harm 
others. 

That man whom the Brahmanas praise grows in prosperity. The man 
who is censured and cast off by the Brahmanas is disgraced. As a result of 
the absence of Brahmanas from among them, the Sakas, the Yavanas, the 
Kambojas and other Kshatriya tribes have fallen and devolved into Sudras. 
Similarly, the Dravidas, the Kalingas, the Pulindas, the Usinaras, the 


Kolisarpas, the Mahishakas and other Kshatriyas have become Sudras 
because of the absence of Brahmanas from among them. 

Defeat at their hands is better than victory over them. The killing of a 
single Brahmana is a more heinous sin than the slaying all other living 
creatures in the world. The great Rishis have said that Brahmahatya is the 
worst sin. One must never humiliate or defame the Brahmanas. Where such 
condemnation of Brahmanas is pronounced, one should hang one’s head in 
shame or leave that place in order to avoid both the speaker and his words. 

That man has not as yet been, nor will be, born in this world who has 
been or will be able to pass his life in happiness after falling out with the 
Brahmanas. One cannot seize the wind in one’s hands. One cannot touch 
the moon with one’s hand. One cannot support the earth on one’s arms. 
Similarly, one cannot vanquish the Brahmanas in this world.’” 


CANTO 34 


66 B hishma says, ‘One must always offer the most respectful worship 

to the Brahmanas. Soma is their king, and they confer happiness 

and sorrow upon others. They must always be loved and protected as one 

loves and protects one’s own fathers and grandsires, and they should be 

adored with reverence, gifts of food and ornaments, and other articles of 
enjoyment and desire. 

The peace and happiness of the kingdom flow from such respect shown 
to Brahmanas, even as the peace and happiness of all living creatures flow 
from Indra. Let pure and radiant Brahmanas be born in a kingdom. Let 
Kshatriyas that are splendid maharathikas able to scorch all enemies, settle 
in a kingdom. Narada said this to me. 

Rajan, there is nothing better than having a Brahmana of good birth, 
with a knowledge of neeti and dharma, morality and righteousness, and 
resolute in the observance of excellent vratas reside in one’s palace. This 
will confer every kind of blessing. The sacrificial offerings given to 
Brahmanas reach the very Devas who accept them. Brahmanas are the 
fathers of all creatures. There is nothing higher than a Brahmana. 

Aditya, Chandramas, Vayu, Jala, Bhumi, Akasa and the Diks, the 
cardinal directions, all enter the body of the Brahmana and partake of what 
the Brahmana eats. In that house where Brahmanas do not eat, the Pitris 
refuse to eat. The Devas also never eat in the house of the wretch who hates 
the Brahmanas. When Brahmanas are gratified, the Pitris also are gratified. 
There is no doubt about this. 

They that give away the sacrificial ghrita to Brahmanas are themselves 
gratified in this and the other world. Such men can never be destroyed. 


They succeed in attaining to lofty ends. Those particular offerings in yagnas 
with which one gratifies the Brahmanas go to gratify both the Pitris and the 
Devas. 

The Brahmana is the cause of that sacrifice from which all creation has 
sprung. The Brahmana knows that from which this universe has 
materialised and that to which, when apparently destroyed, it returns. The 
Brahmana knows the path that leads to swarga and the one that leads to 
naraka. The Brahmana is conversant with what has happened and what will 
happen. 

The Brahmana is the foremost of all men. The Brahmana is fully 
acquainted with the dharma that has been laid down for his varna. Those 
that follow the Brahmanas are never destroyed. Even when they leave from 
this world, they never meet with death. They always triumph. Those 
Mahatmans, those that have subdued their souls, who accept the words 
spoken by the Brahmanas, are never defeated. They always prevail. 

The tejas and shakti of Kshatriyas who scorch everything are impotent 
when they encounter the energy and power of Brahmanas. The Bhrigus 
conquered the Talajanghas. The son of Angiras conquered the Nipas. 
Bharadwaja conquered the Vitahavyas and the Ailas. Though all these 
Kshatriyas were masters of diverse kinds of astras, those Brahmanas, with 
only black deer skins for their emblems, overcame them decisively. 

Bestowing the earth upon the Brahmanas and illuminating both the 
worlds with the splendour of such a deed, one must do that by which one 
may attain the end of all things. Like fire hidden within wood, everything 
that is said, heard or read in this world lies latent in the Brahmana. Listen to 
the itihasa of the conversation between Krishna and Bhumi Devi. 

Krishna asked, “Mother of all creatures, auspicious Devi, I want to ask 
you to dispel a doubt. By what karma does a grihasta succeed in purifying 
himself of all his sins?” 

Bhumi Devi replied, “One must serve the Brahmanas. This conduct is 
cleansing and excellent. If a man serves Brahmanas with reverence all his 
impurities are washed away. Prosperity arises from such behaviour; fame 
stems from this. And from this springs forth Atmagyana, the knowledge of 
the Soul. Through such conduct a Kshatriya becomes a maharathika and a 
parantapa, and acquires great renown. 

This is what Narada said to me: if one desires many kinds of prosperity, 
one must always revere a Brahmana that is well-born, of firm vows and 


conversant with the shastras. He who is praised by Brahmanas, who are 
higher than all other men, grows in riches. He who speaks ill of the 
Brahmanas is soon disgraced, even as a lump of unbaked earth is destroyed 
when cast into the sea. 

In the same manner, any cruelty to the Brahmanas is sure to bring 
shame and ruin. Behold the dark spots on the moon and the salty waters of 
the sea. The great Indra, too, had once been marked all over with a thousand 
phalluses. It was through the power of the Brahmanas that those penises 
were transformed into a thousand eyes. 

Krishna, look at how all those events transpired. Desiring fame and 
prosperity and diverse realms of felicity in the next world, a man of pure 
conduct and soul must live in accordance with the dictates of the 
Brahmanas.” 

Bhishma continues, “Hearing these words of the Devi, Krishna 
exclaimed, “Uttamam! Uttamam!” and duly worshipped her. Son of Pritha, 
having heard this discourse between Bhumi Devi and Madhava, you too, 
must always worship all superior Brahmanas with a rapt soul. Doing this, 
you will surely obtain what is highly beneficial for you!’” 


CANTO 35 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, “Brahmanas, by birth alone, become beings adored 

by all creatures, and as guests are entitled to eat the first portion 

of all cooked food. From them flow the great Purusharthas, the goals of life: 

dharma, artha, kama and moksha. They are the friends of all creatures in the 

universe. They are also the mouths of the Devas for food placed into 
Brahmanas’ mouths is eaten by the gods. 

Worshipped with reverence, they bless us with prosperity by uttering 
auspicious words. Scorned by our enemies, may the enraged Brahmanas 
curse them. Those who know ancient history recite the following Riks of 
how Brahma, after having created the Brahmanas, ordained their duties: 

A Brahmana must never do anything other than what has been 
established for him. Protected, they should protect others. By conducting 
themselves in this way, they are sure to attain what is beneficial for them. By 
doing what has been ordained for them, they are sure to acquire spiritual 
wealth. They will be both the high standards for all creatures to aspire to, 
and the reins for restraining them. A learned Brahmana must never do that 
which is laid down for Sudras. By such a deed, a Brahmana loses merit. 

With Vedic study he is sure to obtain prosperity and intelligence, and 
energy and puissance to overcome all enemies, as also glory of the most 
exalted kind. By offering oblations of ghrita to the Devas, the Brahmanas 
are blessed and become so worthy that they take precedence over even 
children in the matter of all kinds of cooked food. 

Suffused with faith, marked by compassion towards all creatures, and 
devoted to self-restraint and the study of the Vedas, all your wishes will be 
fulfilled. Whatever exists in the world of Manavas, whatever occurs in the 


realm of the Devas, can all be acquired with through tapasya and gyana, 
and the observance of vratas and subduing the senses. 

I have thus recited to you the verses that were sung by Brahma himself, 
moved by his deep love for the Brahmanas and his great wisdom. The 
power of those devoted to tapasya is equal to the power of kings. 

They are compelling, fierce, and as swift as lightning in what they do. 
Among them are those with the strength of lions and then those that possess 
the might of tigers. Some of them have the power of boars, some with that 
of the great stag, and others with that of crocodiles. Some among them have 
the lash and venom of poisonous snakes, and the bite of some resembles 
that of sharks. 

Some of them can decimate their enemies with words, while others can 
destroy with a mere glance of their eyes. While some are like snakes of 
virulent poison, some of them have gentle natures. The dispositions of the 
Brahmanas are of diverse kinds. 

The Mekalas, the Dravidas, the Lathas, the Paundras, the Konwasiras, 
the Saundikas, the Daradas, the Darvas, the Chauras, the Savaras, the 
Varvaras, the Kiratas, the Yavanas, and numerous other tribes of Kshatriyas 
have become Sudras by the wrath of Brahmanas. By disdain of the 
Brahmanas, the Asuras were forced to take refuge in the depths of the 
ocean. Through the grace of the Brahmanas, the Devas have become 
Swargavasis. 

Akasa cannot be touched. The Himavat Mountains cannot be moved 
from their place. The flow of Ganga cannot be checked by a dam. The 
Brahmanas cannot be subjugated. Kshatriyas cannot rule the earth without 
seeking the favour of the Brahmanas. 

The Brahmanas are high-souled beings. They are the gods of the very 
Devas. If you wish to enjoy the sovereignty over the earth and her seas, 
worship them with gifts and dutiful service. When they accept a gift, their 
fierce energy and power abates. Rajan, you must protect your vamsa from 
those Brahmanas that do not want to accept gifts.’” 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


I am grateful to Ramesh Menon, my editor, for guiding my learning in this 
journey. 

And to Jayashree Kumar, my friend, for drawing me into its joys and 
struggles and staying by my metaphorical side. 

And to Roshan Ghose and Sheila Menon, my gurus, for instructing me 
in the ways vital for understanding the world of this compelling epic. 





Cee) OMe EEE 


MAHABHARATA 
{11 } 


Ramesh Menon 
series editor: RAMESH MENON 





THE COMPLETE 
MAHABHARATA 


Anusasana Parva 


THE COMPLETE 
MAHABHARATA 


Volume 11 


Anusasana Parva (Part IT) 


Ramesh Menon 





RUPA 


Published by 
Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd 2017 
7/16, Ansari Road, Daryaganj 
New Delhi 110002 


Copyright © Ramesh Menon 2017 
All rights reserved. 

No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, or stored in a retrieval system, in any 
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the 
prior permission of the publisher. 

ISBN: 978-81-291-3683-1 
First impression 2017 
10987654321 
The moral right of the author has been asserted. 

This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, 


resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated, without the publisher’s prior consent, in any form of 
binding or cover other than that in which it is published. 


To 
The Suta Romaharshana, Vyasa's disciple Vaisampayana, all the anonymous pauranikas throughout 
the holy land, who swelled this greatest of epics across the centuries, 
and 
Kisari Mohan Ganguli 
on whose majestic nineteenth-century translation of the Mahabharata this present rendering is 
based. 


CANTO 36 
CANTO 37 
CANTO 38 
CANTO 39 
CANTO 40 
CANTO 41 
CANTO 42 
CANTO 43 
CANTO 44 
CANTO 45 
CANTO 46 
CANTO 47 
CANTO 48 
CANTO 49 
CANTO 50 
CANTO 51 
CANTO 52 
CANTO 53 
CANTO 54 
CANTO 55 
CANTO 56 
CANTO 57 


CONTENTS 


CANTO 58 
CANTO 59 
CANTO 60 
CANTO 61 
CANTO 62 
CANTO 63 
CANTO 64 
CANTO 65 
CANTO 66 
CANTO 67 
CANTO 68 
CANTO 69 
CANTO 70 
CANTO 71 
CANTO 72 
CANTO 73 
CANTO 74 
CANTO 75 
CANTO 76 
CANTO 77 
CANTO 78 
CANTO 79 
CANTO 80 
CANTO 81 
CANTO 82 
CANTO 83 
CANTO 84 
CANTO 85 
CANTO 86 





CANTO 87 

CANTO 89 

CANTO 90 

CANTO 93 

CANTO 94 

CANTO 96 

CANTO 100 
CANTO 101 
CANTO 102 
CANTO 103 
CANTO 104 
CANTO 105 
CANTO 106 
CANTO 107 
CANTO 108 
CANTO 109 
CANTO 110 
CANTO 111 
CANTO 112 
CANTO 113 
CANTO 114 
CANTO 115 





CANTO 116 
CANTO 117 
CANTO 118 
CANTO 119 
CANTO 120 
CANTO 121 
CANTO 122 
CANTO 123 
CANTO 124 
CANTO 125 
CANTO 127 
CANTO 129 
CANTO 130 
CANTO 131 
CANTO 132 
CANTO 133 
CANTO 134 
CANTO 135 
CANTO 136 
CANTO 137 
CANTO 138 
CANTO 139 
CANTO 140 
CANTO 141 
CANTO 142 
CANTO 143 
CANTO 144 





CANTO 145 
CANTO 146 
CANTO 147 
CANTO 148 
CANTO 149 
CANTO 150 
CANTO 151 
CANTO 152 
CANTO 153 
CANTO 154 
CANTO 155 
CANTO 156 
CANTO 157 
CANTO 158 
CANTO 159 
CANTO 160 
CANTO 161 
CANTO 162 
CANTO 163 
CANTO 164 
CANTO 165 
CANTO 166 
CANTO 167 
CANTO 168 





PART I 


Anusasana Parva 


CANTO 36 


V aisampayana said, “Bhishma says, “Listen, O Yudhishtira, to the old 

itihasa of the discourse between Sakra and Sambara. Once upon a 
time, assuming the guise of an ascetic, with matted locks on his head and 
his body smeared all over with ashes, Indra rode on an ugly chariot and 
went into the presence of the Asura Sambara. 

Indra said, “Through what conduct, Sambara, have you been able to 
become sovereign of all your kind? For what reason do all people regard 
you as being superior? Tell me this truly and in detail.” 

Sambara said, “I never harbour any ill-will towards the Brahmanas. 
Whatever instructions they impart I accept with unquestioning reverence. 
When Brahmanas are engaged in interpreting the scriptures, I listen to them 
with great happiness. Having heard their interpretations I never disregard 
them, nor do I ever offend them in any way. I always worship Brahmanas 
who are endowed with intelligence, seek knowledge from them and worship 
their feet. 

Approaching me with confidence, they always address me with 
affection and enquire after my welfare. If they ever happen to be heedless, I 
am always heedful. If they happen to sleep, I remain wakeful. Like bees 
drenching the cells of the comb with honey, they who are my instructors 
and rulers, always drench me with the nectar of knowledge. I am thus 
always devoted to the path pointed out by the shastras, and am perfectly 
free from malice or evil passion. 

Whatever they say with cheerful hearts, I always accept, using my 
memory and understanding. I am careful of my own faith in them and I 


think of my own inferiority to them. I lick the nectar that dwells at the tips 
of their tongues, and this is why I occupy a position far above that of all 
others of my kind, like the moon transcending all the stars. The scriptural 
wisdom, which falls from the lips of the Brahmanas and listening to which 
every wise man acts in the world, constitutes amrita on earth and may be 
likened to eyes of remarkable vision. 

Witnessing the war between the Devas and the Asuras in days of old, 
and understanding the power of the instructions of the Brahmanas, my 
father became filled with delight and wonder. 

Beholding the puissance of the high-souled Brahmanas, my sire asked 
Chandramas, ‘How do the Brahmanas attain success?’ 

Soma said, ‘Brahmanas become crowned with success through their 
tapasya. Their strength consists in speech, while the prowess of Kshatriyas 
resides in their arms. Brahmanas, however, have speech for their weapons. 

A Brahmana should study the Vedas or at least Pranava, AUM, while 
undergoing privations and hardships in his guru’s asrama. Divesting himself 
of anger and renouncing earthly attachments, he should become a Yati, 
looking upon all things with an equal eye. If he masters all the Vedas and 
acquires great knowledge in his master’s home, he attains a position that 
will command respect and no one will denounce him as being untutored or 
as one who has not travelled or seen the world. Like a snake swallowing 
mice, the earth swallows up these two: a king who is unwilling to fight and 
a Brahmana who is unwilling to leave home to acquire knowledge. Pride 
destroys the prosperity of persons of little intelligence. An unwed maiden, if 
she conceives, becomes stained. A Brahmana incurs reproach by staying 
home.’ 

This is what my father heard from Soma of wonderful aspect. My father 
began to reverence the Brahmanas. Like him, I also worship and adore 
them.” 

Hearing these words from a prince among Danavas, Indra began to 
worship the Brahmanas, and as a result he acquired lordship over the 
Devas.’” 


CANTO 37 


: me udhishtira says, ‘Which amongst these three persons should be 

regarded as the best to make gifts to: one who is a stranger, one 

who lives with and who is known to the giver, or one who presents himself 
before the giver, coming from a long distance?’ 

Bhishma says, “All these are equal. The eligibility of some consists in 
their soliciting alms to perform sacrifices, or to pay their guru dakshina or 
maintain their wives and children, or to follow the vow of wandering over 
the earth, never soliciting anything but taking when given. We should, 
however, make gifts without afflicting those that depend upon us. By 
afflicting one’s dependants, one afflicts one’s own self. The stranger, who 
has come for the first time, should be regarded as a proper deserver of gifts, 
in the same light as the one who has been living with the giver, and the one 
who comes from a distant place.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘It is true that we should make gifts to others without 
depriving anyone or violating the injunctions of the scriptures. One should, 
however, ascertain that the person is deserving of receiving gifts. He should 
be such that the gift itself, by being made over to him, may not grieve.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘If the ritwik, the purohita, the guru, the acharya, the 
sishya, the sambandhi, and one’s own kinsmen are learned and free from 
malice, they should be deemed worthy of respect and worship. Those in 
whom these qualities are not found cannot be so regarded. 

Hence, one should, with deliberation, examine those with whom one 
comes into contact. Absence of wrath, truthfulness of speech, abstention 
from causing injury, sincerity and peaceful conduct, the absence of pride, 


modesty, renunciation, self-restraint and contentment of soul: he in whom 
these are inherent, and in whom there is no evil, should be regarded as 
being deserving. A sage is such a one who deserves every honour and 
hospitality, whether he is well-known and familiar, or a stranger recently 
come, or seen for the very first time. 

He who disregards the Vedas, and the shastras, or approves of all 
breaches of restraint in society, only brings about his own ruin, and should 
never be regarded as worthy of receiving honour or gifts. A Brahmana who 
is vain of his learning, who speaks ill of the Vedas or who is devoted to 
pointless argumentation, or who just wants to be victorious in disputations 
amongst good men by disproving the existence of neeti and dharma, who 
ascribes everything to chance, and censures and reproaches others, who 
reproves Brahmanas, who is suspicious of all, who is foolish and bereft of 
judgment, or who is rude, should be known to be as hateful as a dog, for he 
spends his breath in vain, barking all the while, always wanting to bite, and 
seeks to destroy the authority of all the scriptures. 

Those practices that support society, the duties of dharma, and all deeds 
that benefit oneself, must be attended to. A man who lives attending to these 
grows in prosperity for everlasting time. By paying off the debt one owes to 
the Devas by performing sacrifices, that to the Rishis by studying the Vedas, 
that to the Pitris by procreating children, that to the Brahmanas by giving 
gifts to them and that to Sadasyas by feeding them, in due order, and with 
purity of intention, and properly keeping to the laws of the shastras, a 
grihasta, a householder, does not fall away from righteousness.’” 


CANTO 38 


Y udhishtira says, “O best of the Bhaaratas, I wish to hear you 
discourse on the disposition of women. Women are said to be the 
root of all evil, and fickle and frail.’ 

Bhishma cites a discourse between the celestial Rishi Narada and the 
Apsara Panchachuda. ‘In ancient times, the Rishi Narada, having roamed 
over all the world, met the Apsara Panchachuda of faultless beauty, who 
dwelt in Brahmaloka, and her every limb was endowed with great beauty. 
Narada addressed her, saying, “O you of the slender waist, I have a doubt in 
my mind. Can you resolve it?” 

The Apsara said to him, “If the subject is known to me and if you think 
me competent to speak upon it, I shall certainly tell you what I think.” 

Narada said, “O amiable one, I shall not appoint you to any task that is 
beyond your competence. Beautiful one, I wish to hear from you of the 
nature and disposition of women.” 

Hearing this from the Devarishi, Panchachuda replied, “Being myself a 
woman, I cannot speak ill of women. You know what women are and with 
what natures they are endowed. It does not become you, O Devarishi, to set 
me to such a task.” 

Narada said, ““While that is true indeed, slender-waisted one, one incurs 
fault by saying what is untrue. However, in speaking the truth there can be 
no sin.” 

Now the Apsara Panchachuda, of sweet smiles, consented to answer 
Narada’s question. She then addressed herself to mention what the eternal 
faults of women are! 


Panchachuda said, “Even if a high-born woman is blessed with beauty 
and has protectors, these women want to transgress the restraints assigned 
to them. This fault truly stains them, O Narada. There is nothing that is 
more sinful than women. Verily, women are the root of all sins. That, 
certainly, is known to you. Having husbands of fame, wealth, handsome 
features, and completely obedient to them, they are still prepared to be 
unfaithful to them if they get an opportunity. This, mighty one, is a great 
weakness with women that, casting off their modesty, they cultivate 
companionship with men of sinful habits and intentions. Women betray a 
liking for men who court them, who approach their presence, and who 
respectfully serve them to even a slight extent. 

Only through want of solicitation, or fear of relatives, women, who are 
naturally impatient of all restraints, do not transgress those that have been 
ordained for them, and remain by the side of their husbands. They never 
take into consideration the age of the person they are prepared to favour. 
Ugly or handsome, if he merely happens to belong to the opposite sex, 
women are ready to enjoy his company. That women remain faithful to their 
husbands is due not to their fear of sin, to compassion, wealth, or affection 
that springs up in their hearts for kinsmen and children. 

Women living in the bosom of respectable families envy the condition 
of other women who are young and well-adorned with jewels and 
ornaments, and who lead a carefree life. Even those that are loved by their 
husbands, and treated with great respect, are seen to bestow their favours 
upon men that are hump-backed, blind, idiots, or dwarfish. Women may be 
seen to like the companionship of even men that cannot walk or who are 
ugly. 

O great Rishi, there is no man in this world whom women regard as 
unfit for companionship. Unable to find men, out of fear of relatives, of 
death and imprisonment, women remain within the constraints prescribed 
for them. They are exceedingly restless, wanton and ever hanker after new 
companions and lovers. In consequence of their very natures being fickle, 
they are incapable of being faithful in love. Their disposition is such that, 
when bent upon transgression, they can never be restrained. Verily, women 
are truly as the wise say they are. 

Fire is never sated with fuel. Oceans can never be filled with the waters 
that rivers bring into them. Death is never satisfied with killing all living 
creatures. Similarly, women are never satiated with men. This, O Devarishi, 


is another mystery connected with women. As soon as they see a handsome 
and charming man, unfailing signs of desire appear. They never show 
sufficient regard for husbands, who satisfy their wishes, do what is 
agreeable and protect them from want and danger. Women never regard so 
highly even articles of enjoyment in abundance, ornaments or other 
possessions as they do the intimate company of men. 

Yama, Vayu, Mrityu, the Patalas, the equine mouth, Badavamukha, that 
roves through the ocean, vomiting ceaseless flames, the sharpness of the 
razor, virulent poison, the snake, and fire—all these exist together in 
women. That eternal Brahman from where the five great elements have 
sprung into existence, from where the Creator Brahma ordained the 
universe, and whence, indeed, men have sprung, verily, from the same 
eternal source have women sprung into existence. At that same time, O 
Narada, when women were created, these faults that I have enumerated 
were planted in them.’” 


CANTO 39 


Y udhishtira says, ‘All men, O king, in this world, are seen to attach 

themselves to women, overcome by the illusion that is created by 
the Divine Being. Similarly, women too, are seen to attach themselves to 
men. 

This happens all over the world. On this subject a question exists in my 
mind. Why, O delighter of the Kurus, when women are stained with so 
many faults, do men still attach themselves to them? Who, again, are those 
men with whom women are most pleased and who are they with whom they 
are not? Pitamaha, explain to me how men can protect women. While men 
take pleasure in women and sport with them, women, it seems, are engaged 
in deceiving men. 

Then, again, if a man once falls into their hands, it is difficult for him to 
escape. Like cows ever seeking fresh pastures, women seek new men, one 
after another. That maya which the Asura Sambara possessed, the Asura 
Namuchi, Bali or Kumbhinasi, the sum of all those is possessed by women. 

If men laugh, women laugh. If man weeps, they weep. If the time 
requires, they receive the man that is disagreeable to them with agreeable 
words. The neeti which Sukra, the preceptor of the Asuras, and the 
Devaguru Brihaspati knew, cannot be regarded as being deeper or more 
distinguished for its subtlety than what woman’s intelligence naturally 
brings forth. How can women, then, be restrained by men? They make a lie 
appear as truth, and a truth appear as a lie. They who can do this, I ask, O 
Kshatriya, how can they be ruled by those of the other sex? 


It seems to me that Brihaspati and other great thinkers, O slayer of foes, 
evolved the science of policy from observing women. Whether treated by 
men with respect or with disdain, women are seen to turn the heads and 
agitate the hearts of men. 

Living creatures, O Mahabaho, are naturally virtuous. This is what has 
been heard; hence how can this be consistent with fact? For treated with 
affection and respect, or otherwise, women are seen to deserve censure for 
their wanton conduct towards men. 

Great doubts fill my mind: when such is their very nature, how can men 
restrain them within the bounds of dharma? Tell me this, O most blessed 
scion of Kuru’s race! It becomes you to tell me whether women can at all be 
restrained within the bounds prescribed by the scriptures or if anyone before 
our time did succeed in so restraining them.’ 


CANTO 40 


B hishma says, ‘It is even so as you say, mighty one, and there is 

nothing untrue in all that you say. You are truly a scion of Kuru’s 
vamsa, and on the subject of women, I will narrate the old story of how, in 
yesteryears, the noble Vipula succeeded in restraining women within the 
bounds laid down for them. I will also tell you, O king, how women were 
created by the Grandsire Brahma and the object for which they were 
created. 

There is no creature more sinful, O son, than woman. Woman is a 
blazing fire, an illusion that the Daitya Maya created. She is the sharp edge 
of the razor, poison, a snake and fire; and verily, all these together. I have 
heard that, once, all the human race was distinguished by dharma, and that, 
in course of natural evolution, they attained the status of gods. This alarmed 
the Devas. They, Parantapa, went together to the Pitamaha, and, heads 
bowed in reverence, told him what troubled them, and then stood silent in 
his presence, with eyes cast down. The mighty Grandsire, having 
ascertained what was in the hearts of the Devas, created women, using an 
Atharvan rite. In a former creation, son of Kunti, all women were virtuous. 

Those, however, that sprang from this new creation of Brahma’s, using 
an illusion, were sinful. The Grandsire bestowed upon women the ravening 
lust for enjoyment, all kinds of carnal pleasures, thereby tempting them to 
pursue the other sex, men. 

The powerful Lord of the gods created wrath to be the companion of 
lust. Men, yielding to the power of kama and krodha, sought the company 
of women. Women have no special dharma prescribed for them. Even this is 


the niyama that was laid down. The Sruti declares that women are endowed 
with the most powerful senses, with no scriptures to follow, and they are as 
living lies. 

Beds, seats, ornaments, food and drink, and the absence of all that is 
respectable and righteous, indulgence in disagreeable words, love of sexual 
companionship: these were bestowed by Brahma upon women. The Creator 
himself cannot keep them within the limits of propriety; then what need be 
said of mere men? 

Mahabaho, I once heard how Vipula succeeded in protecting his guru’s 
wife in ancient times. 

There was in days of yore a most blessed Rishi called Devasarman, of 
great celebrity. He had a wife, Ruchi, who was unequalled on earth for 
beauty. Her loveliness intoxicated everyone who saw her among the Devas, 
Gandharvas and Danavas. Indra, the chastiser of Paka, the slayer of Vritra, 
was particularly enamoured of her and coveted her person. The great Rishi 
Devasarman was fully cognisant of the nature of women, and, to the best of 
his power, he protected Ruchi from every kind of evil influence. The Rishi 
knew that Indra was held back by no scruples in slaking his lust with other 
men’s wives, and the sage put forth all his power to constantly safeguard his 
wife. 

Then, there came a time when the Rishi wanted to perform a sacrifice. 
He began to think of how his wife could be protected from Indra while he 
was away. Blessed with high punya, he hit upon the course he would adopt. 
Summoning his favourite disciple, whose name was Vipula and who was of 
Bhrigu’s race, Devasarman said, “I shall leave home for a while to perform 
a yagna. The king of the Devas always covets this Ruchi of mine. Do you, 
during my absence, protect her, putting forth all your energy. You will pass 
your time vigilantly because of Indra. O foremost of Bhrigu’s vamsa, 
beware, for Purandara assumes many disguises.” 

Bhishma continues, “Thus addressed by his guru, the ascetic Vipula, his 
senses under control, always engaged in stern tapasya, possessed of the 
splendour of Surya or Agni, knowing of all the duties of dharma, and ever 
truthful in speech, answered him, saying, “Tathaastu, so be it.” 

However, as his master was about to set out, Vipula asked him again, 
“Tell me, Muni, what forms does Sakra assume? Of what kind is his body 
and what is his maya? You must tell me all this.” 


The illustrious Rishi described to the great Vipula all the illusions of 
Sakra, O Bhaarata. 

Devasarman said, “The mighty Indra, Rishi, is full of maya and he 
assumes whatever forms he chooses. Sometimes he wears a diadem and 
holds the vajra; sometimes wearing a crown on his head, he adorns himself 
with earrings and in a moment he transforms himself into a devil. 
Sometimes, he appears with coronal locks on his head; soon again, O son, 
he shows himself with matted jata and clad in rags. 

At times, he assumes a godly and gigantic frame. The next moment, he 
transforms himself into one of emaciated limbs, and again wearing rags. 
Always contradictory in appearances—fair, dark, ugly, handsome, young, 
old—at times he appears as a Brahmana, at others as a Kshatriya, as a 
Vaisya and as a Sudra. 

He of a hundred sacrifices appears at times as a man born of impure 
order, mixed castes, varnasamkarsana: the son of a superior father by an 
inferior mother or of an inferior father by a superior mother. Frequently, he 
appears in various bird and animal forms. He shows himself as a Deva, then 
again as a Daitya, and then he assumes the guise of a human king. At times 
he appears as being plump or fat; at others, as one whose limbs have been 
broken by wayward Vayu in the body. 

Able to assume any form, he can appear as an idiot, destitute of all 
intelligence. He also assumes the forms of flies and gnats. 

O Vipula, no one can make him out because of these innumerable 
guises that he is master of, not even the Creator of the universe. 

He makes himself invisible when he chooses, except to the eye of 
knowledge. Indra transforms himself into the wind; yes, the mighty one 
always assumes these myriad disguises. Will you, therefore, Vipula, protect 
this slender-waisted wife of mine with great care? O best of the Bhargavas, 
will you see that the Devaraja does not defile my wife, like a wretched dog 
licking the havis kept for a sacrifice?” 

With these words and intent upon performing his yagna, Devasarman 
set out from his asrama. 

Vipula thought, “I will certainly protect this devi Ruchi in every way 
from Indra. But what means should I use to protect my guru’s wife? Sakra 
has great powers of maya, awesome tejas, and is irresistible. Indra cannot 
be kept out by enclosing this retreat of ours, or by fencing the yard, since he 
can assume innumerable and subtle forms. 


Assuming the form of the wind, he may ravish my guru’s wife. I believe 
the best course for me would be to enter the devi’s body through yogic 
power, and remain there. There is no other way than through my yoga 
shakti to protect her from the king of the Devas. If, on his return, my master 
sees his spouse defiled, he will surely curse me in anger, for he has great 
tapasya and possesses mystic vision. 

Yes, this devi cannot be safeguarded as other women are because of 
Indra’s powers of maya. Alas, critical is the situation in which I find myself, 
and I must obey my guru’s command. And if I do watch over her 
successfully with yoga shakti, my feat will be regarded by all as being 
wonderful. 

So, with yoga, I will assume control of her body, even as a drop of 
water lies on a lotus-leaf and yet does not wet it. If I am free of the taint of 
passion, I cannot incur any sin by doing what I wish. As a wayfarer shelters 
for a day in any empty dwelling he finds shall I spend this day within the 
body of my guru’s wife. Verily, with my mind rapt in yoga, I shall dwell in 
her today!” 

Carefully considering these points of dharma of all the Vedas and their 
angas, and with an eye on the great measure of tapasya, which both his 
preceptor and he possessed, Vipula concluded that the only way to protect 
the devi Ruchi was to enter her body, in occult fashion, and he went to some 
pains to accomplish what he planned. 

Listen now to me, O king, and I will tell you what he did. Vipula, of 
much penance, sat himself down beside Ruchi, of faultless features, in her 
kutila, her cottage. He then began to speak to her gently, bringing her over 
to the cause of dharma. 

Fixing his gaze to hers, uniting the light from her with that which issued 
from his, Vipula, in a subtle form, a sukshma rupa, entered the devi’s body, 
even as the element of Vayu, wind, does Akasa, ethereal space. Vipula 
remained unmoving within her, invisibly, like her shadow; and every part of 
her in his control, he stayed thus, to protect her from Indra. 

Ruchi herself knew nothing of this! It was in this way, Rajan, that 
Vipula continued to keep his guru’s wife safe until his master Devasarman 
returned after completing the sacrifice he had gone to perform.’ 


CANTO 41 


B hishma says, ‘One day, assuming a form of divine beauty, Indra 

came to Rishi Devasarman’s asrama. Verily, O king, he came as an 
Apsara-like beauty who would inspire envy in even other women. As the 
Deva entered the hermitage, he saw Vipula, who sat still as a post, gazing 
vacantly before him, as if his eyes had no sight, like a figure in a painting. 
Ruchi was also there, she of the long and enchanting eyes, rounded hips and 
deep and full breasts. Her great eyes were like lotus petals, and her face was 
as radiant as the full moon. 

Seeing Indra in his assumed guise, Ruchi wanted to welcome him. She 
was wonderstruck and curious about who this dazzling beauty was. Yet, try 
as she would to rise to make the visitor welcome, Vipula, who had taken 
subtle possession of her body, prevented her. She found she could not move 
at all. 

Then Indra spoke softly and sweetly to her, “O sweet smiles, know that 
I am Indra, come here for you, for I am stricken with desire, and driven to 
distraction thinking of you, and time goes on.” 

Vipula heard Indra and saw everything from within Ruchi’s body. And 
even though Ruchi heard every word Indra spoke, she could not move at all 
to welcome him, since Vipula controlled her body and senses, and she 
remained speechless. Using his yoga shakti, binding her with bonds of 
occult power, Vipula of mighty tejas restrained her from speaking or 
stirring. 

Indra, abashed a little, said again to Ruchi, “Come, come to me, my 
lovely one!” 


She tried to answer him warmly, but Vipula did not let her utter a word 
that she meant to. Instead, the words that he made her say were, “Why have 
you come here?” 

She said them in chaste, formal language, Ruchi who was as beautiful 
as the moon. No sooner did she speak, than she felt ashamed at what she 
said and her own tone of voice, which so surprised her. 

Hearing her, Indra was crestfallen. Then, O king, Indra sensed 
something amiss, and with his mystic eye he saw Vipula within Ruchi’s 
body, like some reflection in a strange mirror. Indra trembled that the Rishi 
would curse him. Now the mighty Vipula left the body of his guru’s wife, 
and returned to his own body. 

He addressed the terrified Indra. Vipula said, “Purandara of the sinful 
mind, you have no control over your senses and neither the gods nor men 
will worship you in times to come. Have you forgotten, O Sakra, when 
Gautama cursed you, and your body sprouted a thousand phalluses, which 
the merciful sage later changed into eyes? 

Ah, you are exceedingly foolish and your soul is still lascivious and 
unclean, and your mind unstable. O sinner, I protect Ruchi, so fly back to 
where you belong. Truly, you are so foolish that I am filled with pity for 
you, and have no wish to kill you. My preceptor, of vast intelligence, has 
terrible power. If he saw you like this, come to seduce his wife, a look from 
his wrathful eyes would turn you to ashes. 

Never dream of committing such a sin again. You must hold great 
Brahmanas in the highest esteem. See that you and your kin do not meet 
your deaths through the might of an angry Brahmana. Being immortal does 
not give you liberty to do whatever you please. Never take a Brahmana 
lightly, or cause him offence. And, also, know that there is nothing you 
cannot attain through tapasya.” 

Hearing these words of the Mahatman Vipula, Indra, overwhelmed with 
shame, vanished from there. A mere moment later, Devasarman of great 
tapasya and punya, having completed his yagna, returned to his asrama. On 
his guru’s return, Vipula returned Ruchi, of faultless beauty, whom he had 
protected against Indra’s lascivious designs. He then stood fearlessly, in 
reverence, before his guru and paid homage to his preceptor. 

Devasarman rested awhile and when the couple were together, Vipula 
narrated the entire incident with Indra. Devasarman was pleased with what 


his sishya had done, as he always was with his conduct and disposition, his 
vows and his penance. 

Exclaiming, “Uttamam, excellent!” the most righteous Devasarman 
blessed Vipula with a boon, which the disciple received with a solemn vow 
that he would never stray from dharma. 

Vipula went away to practise the most severe tapasya. Devasarman and 
Ruchi lived on together in that asrama in the solitary forest, fearless and 
content.’ 


CANTO 42 


B hishma says, ‘Having served his master so admirably, Vipula of great 

tejas observed the most fervid tapasya, and in time came to own 
what he considered sufficient punya; and with some satisfaction and pride at 
his achievements, he wandered fearlessly over the earth. And, indeed, he 
was famed for his feat everywhere. 

The mighty Bhargava was widely regarded as having conquered this 
world and the next by that exceptional protection he gave his guru’s wife, as 
well as by his fierce tapasya. After a while, Kurunandana, the occasion 
arose for the ceremony of gifts for Ruchi devi’s sister, at which abundant 
wealth and grain were to be given away. 

Meanwhile, a certain Apsara of vivid beauty was ranging through the 
skies. From her body, as she coursed along, some flowers dropped down to 
the earth. Those flowers of celestial fragrance fell close to Devasarman’s 
asrama. Ruchi picked up the flowers. Soon thereafter, Ruchi was invited to 
the country of the Angas; Ruchi’s sister, Prabhavati, was the queen of 
Chitraratha, king of the Angas. Ruchi, her complexion superior, wore the 
unearthly blooms and went to the kingdom of Anga and to her sister’s 
palace. 

On seeing the heavenly flowers that Ruchi wore, Prabhavati wanted 
some for herself. Ruchi of the beautiful face told her husband of her sister’s 
wish, and the Rishi agreed to grant his sister-in-law’s desire. Summoning 
Vipula into his presence, Devasarman of austere tapasya commanded his 
disciple to bring him some flowers of the same kind, saying, “Go, go!” 


Without hesitation, Vipula replied, “So be it!” and hurried to the place 
where Ruchi had picked up the flowers. Arriving where the flowers had 
fallen from the sky, he found a few still lying strewn on the ground. They 
were as fresh as if they had been newly plucked from the plants on which 
they grew; none had wilted or even drooped in the least. He gathered those 
exquisite flowers of mesmerising fragrance. 

O Bhaarata, Vipula found those flowers as the result of his tapasya. 
Having got them, he happily set out for the city of Champa, adorned with 
festoons of unworldly Champakas. On his way, he saw a couple moving in 
a circle, hand in hand. One of them made an abrupt movement and broke 
the cadence of their movement; a dispute arose, with each one blaming the 
other. “You took a quicker step!” The other retorted, “No, verily!” 

Both were obstinate, O king, and they began arguing, and then they 
swore an angry oath. Vipula was startled to hear himself being mentioned in 
that oath! 

They both said, “Let the one among us who spoke falsely meet the fate 
of Vipula in the next world! That most painful of all fates.” 

Hearing this, Vipula’s face became pale. He began to reflect, “I have 
performed stern tapasya. The dispute between the couple is searing and 
painful to me. What sin have I committed that they should refer to my end 
in the next world as the most painful one of all?” 

O best of kings, with his head hung down, and with a dejected heart, 
Vipula began to think of what sin he had committed. 

Walking ahead, he saw six men playing with dice made of gold and 
silver. Engrossed in the game, they seemed to be so excited that the hair on 
their bodies stood on end. A dispute arose among them, and Vipula heard 
them swear the same oath as the couple. 

“The one among us who spoke falsely shall meet the most dreadful fate 
of Vipula in the next world!” 

Hearing this again, Vipula strove earnestly to recollect any transgression 
of his from his early years, but failed, O Kurunandana. Ah, he began to 
burn like a fire within a fire, his mind aflame with grief. After deep and 
anguished reflection, Vipula at last remembered what he had done to protect 
the chastity of his guru’s wife Ruchi from the lascivious Indra. 

“T entered the body of that devi, limb within limb, face within face, and, 
having done this, I hid that truth from my guru!” 


Indeed, most blessed king, without doubt that was a grave sin. Coming 
to the city of Champa, he gave the flowers to his guru. In devotion, he 
worshipped his preceptor.’ 


CANTO 43 


B hishma says, ‘Seeing Vipula returned from his mission, Devasarman 
spoke to him. Listen to what the Rishi said, O king. 

“Vipula, during the course of your journey through the great forest, 
what did you see? My sishya, the people you saw knew you, and both my 
wife and I knew the manner in which you protected Ruchi.” 

Vipula said, “O illumined Rishi, who are the two whom I first saw? And 
the six that I saw subsequently? Do all of them know me? And how do you 
know about them?” 

Devasarman said, “The first couple, who were dancing seamlessly, 
moving in an unbroken circle, were Day and Night, and the six men whom, 
learned Brahmana, you saw playing cheerfully with the dice, are the Six 
Seasons. All of them knew the sin of which you have been guilty. Having 
committed a sin in secrecy, no sinner should assume that his sin is known 
only to himself. When a man sins in secret, the Seasons as well as the Day 
and the Night are witness to it. 

You thought your sin was hidden; you were pleased and did not tell me 
the whole truth. But the Seasons and Day and Night know everything that 
happens in this world, and all that is good or bad within us. They spoke to 
you as they did to remind you that everything is known, even that which 
you did not have the courage to tell me. 

For this reason those regions that are reserved for the sinful will be 
yours. You hid what you did from me. You protected my wife whose 
character by nature, as a woman, is sinful. I am grateful, and no sin was 


committed. Vipula, if I had known that you had sinned, I would have cursed 
you. 

However desirable the union of women with men may be, you protected 
Ruchi in a different and pure spirit. If you had done otherwise, I would have 
cursed you. My son, you protected my wife in manner even as if I had 
knowledge of it. | am grateful and now relieved of all anxiety, and you shall 
find not hell but swarga for yourself!” 

Saying this to Vipula, Devasarman and his wife themselves ascended 
into heaven, leaving Vipula relieved and happy. 

During the course of our conversation, O king, the great Rishi 
Markandeya narrated this tale on the banks of the Ganga. I, therefore, say to 
you that you must always safeguard women from every temptation and 
opportunity to sin. Amongst them, some are virtuous and some are not. 
Virtuous women are blessed and they are the very mothers of the universe, 
for it is they who love and cherish all creatures everywhere. They support 
the earth with all her waters and forests. 

Sinful women, on the other hand, are the very destroyers of their races. 
Their hearts and their resolves are evil, and they are known by the evil 
manifested in their bodies. 

Only great men, Mahatmans, can protect women, and they cannot be 
protected in any other way. Women, O king, are fierce and possess great 
power. They bear no one any love and only their insatiable lust for sexual 
union drives them. Why some women are even like the most fell mantras 
from the Atharva, those that kill. 

Even after being married, they abandon their husbands for other men 
since they are never satisfied with one. Pandava, men should neither feel 
affection, nor should they harbour possessiveness or jealousy for women. O 
king, a man must have dealings with women always keeping dharma before 
him; and not with enthusiasm and attachment, but with reluctance and 
detachment; otherwise a man will meet his end. Kurunandana, this must be 
borne in mind at all times and under all circumstances. 

Only one man, Vipula, ever succeeded in protecting a woman. There is 
none else in the three worlds who can do what he did, and without himself 
sinning.” 


CANTO 44 


Y udhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha, tell me what is the first dharma of man, 

which is the root of the welfare of kinsmen, of the home, of the 
manes and of guests? I believe the marriage of one’s daughter should be 
regarded as the first duty. But upon what sort of man should one bestow 
one’s daughter?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘There are five different kinds of weddings: the 
Brahmana, Kshatriya, Gandharva, Asura and the Rakshasa. 

The one in which the birth, conduct and character of the groom are 
ascertained, and then the daughters are given in marriage, is the Brahmana 
way of marriage; and this is how all good Brahmanas give their daughters 
away. 

Where the father decides to give his daughter in marriage, with gifts of 
diverse kinds to the groom, is the Kshatriya form of marriage. 

The Gandharva vivaha is where the father of the girl, disregarding his 
own wishes, marries his daughter to her liking; and this is also in accord 
with the Vedas. 

The wedding where a girl is purchased at a high cost and only after 
gratifying the greed of her kinsmen is known as the Asura vivaha. 

The final kind of marriage, where there is the brutal slaying and cutting 
off the heads of weeping kinsmen, and where the bridegroom forcibly takes 
the girl, is called Rakshasa vivaha. Of the five, three are righteous, 
Yudhishtira, and two are sinful. The Rakshasa and the Asura forms should 
never be resorted to. 


The Brahmana, Kshatriya and Gandharva forms are righteous, O king. 
Pure or mixed, these are the forms one engages in. A Brahmana can take 
three wives; a Kshatriya can take two wives and the Vaisya should take a 
wife from only his own order. The children born of these wives should all 
be regarded as equal. 

Both in the Brahmana and Kshatriya forms of marriage, the woman 
chosen from the groom’s own varna should be regarded as the best of all 
wives. Some say that men belonging to the three higher orders may take a 
woman from the Sudra order for enjoyment, but not dharma. Others, 
however, forbid the practice. 

The righteous condemn the practice of begetting children from Sudra 
women. A Brahmana who begets children from a Sudra woman must 
perform expiation. A thirty-year-old man should wed a ten-year-old girl, 
called a Nagnika. 

Or, a twenty-year-old should marry a seven-year-old girl. A girl who 
has neither a brother nor a father should not marry for she may be intended 
to become a putrika of her sire. 

After attaining puberty, if the girl remains unmarried for three years, 
then in the fourth year she should look for a husband herself, without 
waiting any longer for her kinsmen to choose one for her. The children of 
such a girl do not lose their respectability nor does marriage with such a girl 
become disgraceful. If, instead of choosing a husband for herself, she does 
otherwise, she incurs the wrath of Prajapati. One should marry a girl who is 
not a sapinda of one’s mother or of the same gotra of one’s father. This is a 
practice consistent with the sacred law which Manu has declared.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “‘Desirous of marriage, the groom gives a dower to the 
bride’s kinsmen; some say the girl’s kinsmen promise to give a dower; 
some grooms say, J will abduct the girl by force!; others simply display 
their wealth to the girl’s kinsmen, intending to offer a portion thereof as 
dower; some actually take the hand of the girl with the rites of wedlock. I 
ask you, Pitama, whose wife does the girl actually become? To those who 
want to know the truth, you are the eye with which to see.’ 

Bhishma says, “Actions of men, which have been approved, or settled in 
consultation, by the wise, are seen to be good. Falsehood, however, is 
always sinful. 

The girl who becomes the wife, the sons born of her, the ritwiks, the 
gurus, sishyas and Upadhyayas present at the marriage, all become liable to 


sin and expiation if the girl gives her hand to a man other than he whom she 
promised to marry. Some of the wise, though, are of the opinion that no 
expiation is necessary for this. Manu does not laud a girl living with a man 
whom she does not like. 

Living as a wife with a man whom she does not like leads to disgrace 
and sin. Why, less sin is incurred when a girl is forcibly abducted for 
matriage, then bestowed upon the abductor by the girl’s kinsmen with due 
rites and also a dower paid and accepted. 

On the girl’s kinsmen expressing their consent, mantras should be 
chanted and homa performed, as these truly accomplish their purpose. 
Mantras and homa recited and performed for a girl who has not been 
bestowed by her kinsmen do not accomplish their purpose. 

The engagement made by the kinsmen of a girl is no doubt binding and 
sacred. But the engagement that is entered into by the man and the woman 
with the help of mantras is very much more so, for it is such an engagement 
which really creates the relationship of husband and wife. According to the 
scriptures, a husband should regard his wife as an acquisition due to his 
own karma of a previous life, or to what has been ordained by God. A man, 
therefore, incurs no reproach by accepting as his wife a girl who has been 
promised to another by her kinsmen or for whom dower has been accepted 
by them.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “When, after receiving dower, a girl’s father seeks out 
a more eligible man, to present himself for her hand—one that is blessed 
with the three gunas in judicious proportions—does that father incur 
reproach by rejecting the man from whom he first received dower, in favour 
of the one that is more eligible? In such a case, both alternatives seem to be 
wrong —discarding a man to whom the girl has been promised, or rejecting 
the more eligible one, since we must consider a father’s solemn duty to give 
his daughter to the best suitor. In such a case, what should a father do? 

To me, of all duties, this seems to demand the utmost measure of 
deliberation. I want to know the truth of it from you, for you are indeed my 
eyes of dharma. I beg you, explain this to me, Pitama, ah, I am never sated 
with listening to you!’ 

Bhishma says, ‘The giving of dowry does not determine or confirm the 
acquisition of a wife, and this is well-known to the person paying it. He 
pays it only as the nominal price of the girl. Also, the good never bestow 
their daughters for the sake of the dowers that others offer. When a groom 


possesses such qualities that are not agreeable to the girl’s kinsmen, then a 
dower is demanded from him. However, when a father is pleased with a 
suitor’s qualities and accomplishments, he says to him, “Do you wed my 
child, adorning her with proper ornaments of gold and gems.” 

And neither the bride’s father nor the man who does as he is asked can 
be said to have demanded or given any dower, for such a transaction, in 
truth, is no sale at all. Bestowing a daughter, on acceptance of gifts given 
out of love and affection is an eternal practice. In matters of marriage, some 
fathers say, “I will give my daughter to a man with certain qualities.” Some 
say with passion, “I will give my daughter only to such an individual!” 

Such declarations do not amount to actual marriage. People are seen to 
solicit one another for the hands of maidens, give their word, and then break 
their pledge. Until it is actually solemnised with the proper rites and vows, a 
matriage cannot be said to have taken place. I have heard that that this was 
a boon granted to men of old by the Maruts themselves, regarding unwed 
daughters. 

The ancient Rishis have declared that unless the groom is indeed fit and 
eligible, a young woman must not be given to a man in marriage, for a 
daughter is the very root of desire and of the descendants of a race. I, also, 
concur with this; it is indeed so. The practice of giving and taking a dowry 
to buy and sell daughters is known to men from days of great antiquity, and 
upon close examination you may well find many faults with this ancient and 
familiar practice. And indeed, the gift or acceptance of dowry alone cannot 
be regarded as solemnising a marriage or creating a husband and a wife. 
Listen to what I have to say on this matter. 

Once, after defeating the Magadhas, the Kasis and the Kosalas, I 
brought away by force three maiden princesses for Vichitravirya. Two of 
them he married with the proper rites; the other he never formally wed, 
because the dowry had been paid in the form of valour. 

My uncle, King Bahlika of the Kuru vamsa said, “The princess brought 
and not married with the due rites should be set free.” 

Vichitravirya was asked to marry that maiden princess with proper 
ceremonies. Doubting Bahlika’s words, I asked others for their opinion. 
Since my uncle was profoundly learned and exceedingly punctilious in 
matters of dharma, and how men of dharma act with respect to marriage, I 
went to him, O king, and asked, “Sire, tell me what righteous men do in 
such a circumstance.” 


I repeated this several times with eagerness and curiosity, and Bahlika 
answered me, “If in your opinion a man and a woman become husband and 
wife on account of gifts and acceptance of dowry and not the actual taking 
of the young woman’s hand with the proper rites, the father of the maiden, 
who permits and acknowledges such a marriage, allowing his daughter to 
go with the giver of the dowry, would follow a new creed, setting him apart 
from the scriptures. This is also what the shastras themselves declare. Men 
conversant with dharma and kartavya do not acknowledge a marriage 
declared through gifts and acceptance of dowry, but only one in which the 
groom takes the bride’s hand with the prescribed rituals. 

There is a well-known saying that a marriage is truly solemnised when 
the father actually bestows his daughter and she is accepted by the husband 
with all due rites. 

The status of “wife” cannot be bestowed on young women acquired 
through sale and purchase and those who regard such transactions to be 
equal to marriage are unacquainted with the scriptures. No one should give 
his daughter to men who are not eligible by their worth and qualities; 
neither should a wife ever be bought, nor should a father sell his daughter. 
Only those with sinful souls, and driven by greed, besides, to sell and buy 
women to make slaves of them, regard a wife as arising from the gift and 
acceptance of a dowry. 

On this subject, some once asked Prince Satyavat the following 
question, “If a man who gives dowry to the kinsmen of a young woman dies 
before the marriage, can another man marry the girl? O Satyavat, we are 
full of doubt about this, and beg you to clear our doubt for you are blessed 
with great wisdom and honoured by the wise. Enlighten us who want to 
know the truth.” 

Prince Satyavat answered them, “The kinsmen should bestow the bride 
on a groom whom they find eligible and do so without misgiving or 
hesitation. Without any doubt, the righteous would act in this way, why, 
even if the giver of the dowry is alive. Some say that the virgin wife or 
widow, whose marriage has not been consummated, either because of her 
husband’s absence or death, may marry her husband’s younger brother or 
another such relation. She also has a choice to become a sannyasin, and live 
a life of tapasya. 

In the opinion of some, the younger brother of the husband or any other 
such relative may use the unused wife or widow. Others maintain that such 


practice, though prevalent, is not the law of the scripture but that which 
arises from one’s own desire. They also say the father of the bride can 
bestow her upon a different eligible man despite accepting the dowry from 
another. If, after the hand of a maiden is promised and even if all the rites 
before those of actual marriage are performed, the girl can still be given to a 
man other than the one to whom she had been promised. 

The giver only incurs the sin of falsehood, of breaking his word: but the 
matriage performed with the due rituals to another man will be held sacred. 
The mantras chanted during a marriage accomplish their objective of 
bringing about an indissoluble union at the seventh step taken around the 
sacred fire. The woman becomes a wife to him who gives a gift of holy 
water. Young women must be given away in the following way; the wise 
know this for certain. A superior Brahmana should wed a maiden who is 
not unwilling, who belongs to a family equal to his own, in purity or status, 
and who is given away by her brother. Such a girl should be wed in the 
presence of fire, with the due rites, causing her, amongst other things, to 
circumambulate the sacred Agni for the ordained number of times.” 


CANTO 45 


Y udhishtira says, ‘After giving dowry for a young woman, if the giver 
goes away, what should her father or other kinsmen do? Tell me this, 
Pitamaha!’ 

Bhishma says, ‘If the girl’s father is sonless and he is wealthy, he should 
support her and return the dowry to the man who gave it. Indeed, if the 
father does not return the dowry to the giver, the daughter should be 
regarded as belonging to the giver. She may even raise a child for the giver 
during his absence by the means ordained in the scriptures. No other man, 
however eligible and able, can marry her, even with all the lawful rites. 

Commanded by her father, Princess Savitri, in the days of old, chose a 
husband; some lauded what she did, but others conversant with the 
scriptures, condemned it. Some say that the righteous do not act in this 
manner, while others hold that dharma is even what the righteous do, their 
deeds being dharma’s foremost evidence. Sukratu, the grandson of the high- 
souled Janaka, king of the Videhas, declared his opinion on this matter, 
“The holy scriptures have declared that women may enjoy freedom at any 
time of their life. If the righteous did not follow this path, how could this 
scriptural declaration exist? How can there be any question or doubt in 
respect of this matter? How can men violate their own dharma by acting 
differently? Such disregard of scriptural law is said to be the practice of the 
Asuras, which is unheard of even among the ancients.” 

The relationship of a husband and wife is very subtle, being acquired 
through destiny, and therefore, understood only with the help of the inspired 
revelations of the scriptures. It is different from the relationship of a man 


and woman that consists only in the desire for sexual pleasure. This also 
was Said by the king from Janaka’s race.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘On what authority to daughters inherit their fathers’ 
wealth? Should the father regard both the daughter and son as equal?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘A son is like one’s own self; and since the son and the 
daughter are alike, both their father’s children, how can any outsider inherit 
a man’s wealth when he lives in the form of his daughter? Whatever wealth 
is called Yautuka property is maternal wealth, which belongs to the maiden 
daughter. If the maternal grandfather dies without having sons, the 
inheritance goes to the daughter’s son. The daughter’s son offers pindas to 
his own father as well as to his maternal grandfather. Hence, by law, there is 
no difference between the son and the daughter’s son. When a father has 
only a daughter, he grants her the status of a son. If he then happens to have 
a son, the son then shares the inheritance with his sister. 

Then, again, when a daughter is granted the status of a son, and the 
father takes a son by adoption or purchase, then she is regarded to be 
superior to such a son, for she takes three shares of her father’s wealth 
while the adopted son receives only two. Where the daughter has been sold 
by her father, I do not see any reason why the status of the sold daughter’s 
son should attach to the sons of one’s own daughter. The sons born to a 
daughter who has been sold belong exclusively to her husband, even if he 
has not sired them himself, but acquired them according to the laws of the 
scriptures with regard to the bearing of children through the agency of 
others. Such sons can never belong, even as daughter’s sons, to their 
maternal grandfather because of his having sold their mother for a price and 
lost all his rights in or to her by that act. 

Such sons, again, become full of malice, evil in their ways, the 
misappropriators of others’ wealth, and cunning and deceitful, having 
sprung from the Asura form of marriage, which is both sinful and vile. 
Those who know the ancient Itihasas, the histories of times of yore, and 
who also know dharma, and are devoted to the shastras, sing a legend once 
narrated by Yama himself. This is what Yama said: 

“That man who acquires wealth by selling his own son, or bestowing 
his daughter by accepting a dower for his own livelihood, has to sink in 
seven terrible hells, one after another, all known as Kalasutra. 

That wretch has to feed on sweat, urine and faeces all the time. In the 
Asura vivaha, the groom has to give a bull and a cow to the father-in-law. 


Some agree this is a dower and some do not. The truth is that any gift, 
however small or big, O king, should be regarded as dowry. The practice of 
giving a daughter under such circumstances should be viewed as a sale. The 
fact that it has been practised by a few persons cannot be taken as the 
eternal usage. 

In some forms of marriage, men marry girls after abducting them by 
force from amidst their kinsmen, and others have sexual intercourse with a 
maiden by force; both are regarded as perpetrators of sin. They have to fall 
into darkest hell. No human being should be subjected to sale, irrespective 
of whether they are related by blood or not. What need then be said of one’s 
own child? No action which leads to punya can be performed with wealth 
acquired by sin.” 


CANTO 46 


B hishma says, “Those who know ancient history recite the following 
verse of Daksha, the son of Prachetas: A maiden cannot be 
considered to have been sold if no dowry is taken by her kinsmen. 

The bride should be treated with respect and kindness, and everything 
else that is agreeable; her father, her brothers, her father-in-law and her 
husband’s brothers should all adorn her with jewellery and ornaments, for 
this will bring happiness and all felicity to the family. A husband cannot 
have children to increase his vamsa, if his wife dislikes and fails to please 
him. Women, O king, should always be worshipped and treated with 
affection and when this is done, the very gods are pleased; and where 
women are not respected and worshipped, everything, all karma, becomes 
fruitless. 

If a family ill-treats a woman, making her grieve and shed tears, and she 
curses them, that family soon becomes extinct. Houses cursed by women 
meet with ruin and destruction, as if scorched by some Atharvan rite. Such 
houses lose their splendour, growth and their prosperity ends. O king, on 
the eve of his departure for swarga, Manu made over women to the care and 
protection of men, saying that they are weak, that they fall an easy prey to 
the seductive wiles of men, and are naturally disposed to accept the love 
that is offered to them, and also that they are devoted to truth. 

There are other women that are full of malice, covetous of honours, 
fierce in disposition, unlovable, and impervious to reason. All women, 
however, deserve to be honoured, and men must show them respect because 
the dharma of men depends upon women, all the artha and kama of men 


depend upon women. So men must serve and worship them, bend their 
wills before them. The conception and birth of children, the nursing and 
nurture of children already born, and the accomplishment of all karma 
which upholds the needs of society — behold, all these have women for their 
cause! 

By honouring women, one is sure to attain the fruition of all desires. In 
this connection, a princess of the house of Janaka, king of the Videhas, 
sang: “Women have no sacrifices ordained for them, and they are not called 
to perform sraddhas and are not required to regard facts or tell the truth. 
Serving their husbands with reverence and willing obedience is their only 
dharma. They succeed in conquering heaven by discharging just this duty. 
A woman is protected by her father during her childhood, by her husband in 
her youth and by her sons in her old age; indeed, she must be protected at 
all times. 

Those who wish for affluence and prosperity should honour women, for 
they are the goddess of prosperity. By cherishing women, O Bhaarata, one 
cherishes the goddess of prosperity herself, the Devi Sri, and by oppressing 
her, one afflicts the goddess of fortune.” 


CANTO 47 


Y udhishtira says, “You know all the niyamas of all the scriptures, you 

know the dharma of kings and you are celebrated the world over as 
a great dispeller of doubts. I have a doubt; clear it for me, Pitamaha. I will 
not ask this of another, but only you, Mahabaho. How should a man who 
wants to tread the path of duty and righteousness conduct himself? It has 
been declared that a Brahmana can take four wives, one of his own varna, 
one a Kshatriya woman, a Vaisya and a Sudra woman, if the Brahmana 
desires sexual intercourse. Tell me, best of the Kurus, in what order do sons 
born to these different wives deserve to inherit their father’s wealth, who 
amongst them shall inherit what share of the paternal wealth and how is the 
distribution ordained?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘The Brahmana, the Kshatriya and the Vaisya are 
regarded as the three twice-born varnas, whom the Brahmana has been 
ordained to marry. Only through erroneous judgment or greed or lust, O 
scorcher of foes, does a Brahmana take a Sudra wife, even though the 
scriptures forbid him from doing so, and he finds a lowly end in the next 
world by taking a Sudra woman to his bed and he must perform expiation 
for this sin by the rites prescribed in the shastras. That expiation must be 
twice as severe if the Brahmana begets children by a Sudra woman. 

I will now tell you, O Bharata, how paternal wealth is to be distributed 
among the children of different wives. First of all, the son born of the 
Brahmana wife shall have from his father’s wealth a bull of auspicious 
markings, and the best chariot or carriage. After this, what remains of the 
Brahmana’s possessions should be divided into ten equal portions. The son 


by the Brahmana wife shall take four of these, and although the son born of 
the Kshatriya wife has, doubtless, the status of a Brahmana, in consequence 
of the distinction attaching to his mother, he shall take three of the ten 
shares into which the father’s property has been divided. 

The son born to the Vaisya wife, belonging to the third varna, shall take 
two of the three remaining shares of the father’s property. It has been said, 
the son born of the Sudra wife is not considered an heir and hence should 
not inherit his father’s wealth; however, out of compassion, one remaining 
share should be given to such a son. 

Even this should be the order of the ten shares into which the 
Brahmana’s wealth is to be divided. All sons born of the same mother or of 
mothers of the same caste, shall equally share their portion. The son born of 
the Sudra wife is untutored in the scriptures and the karmas ordained for 
Brahmanas, and is neither regarded nor invested with the status of a 
Brahmana. Only children born of wives of the three higher varnas should be 
recognised and given the status of Brahmanas. It has been said that there are 
only four varnas, and no fifth. The son by the Sudra wife shall take his part 
of the wealth after the distribution among the other children, as ordained; 
and he shall not take even this unless it is given to him. However, some 
portion of the sire’s wealth should without doubt be given to the son of the 
Sudra wife. 

Compassion, known as karuna or daya, is one of the cardinal virtues, 
and wherever it exercised, it always results in great punya. It is through 
compassion that some portion of a Brahmana father’s property is given to 
the son of the Sudra wife. Irrespective of whether the Brahmana has 
children belonging to wives of other castes, to the son of a Sudra wife O 
Bhaarata, only a tenth part of the sire’s wealth should be given, and no 
more. 

A Brahmana should never acquire wealth without a purpose; if he has 
more wealth than what is necessary to maintain his family and himself for 
three years, he should perform sacrifices with that wealth. 

The highest amount that a husband should give his wife is three 
thousand coins of the prevailing currency which can be spent as the wife 
pleases. However, she should never take wealth without her husband’s 
knowledge, although upon her husband’s death she can enjoy all his wealth 
by herself, if he leaves no child as his heir. However, she shall not sell or 
otherwise dispose any portion of his property and possessions. 


Whatever wealth, Yudhishtira, the Brahmana wife receives as a gift 
from her father, should be taken after her death by her daughter, for the 
daughter is equal to a son as ordained in the scriptures, O delighter of 
Kurus. Thus has the law of inheritance been ordained, Bharatarishabha. 
Bearing in mind these laws about the distribution and disposal of wealth, 
one should never acquire wealth heedlessly or in vain.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘If the son born of a Sudra woman by a Brahmana 
father has been declared in the scriptures to be not entitled to any wealth, by 
what exceptional rule then is a tenth part of the paternal property to be 
given to him? A son born of a Brahmana wife by a Brahmana is 
unquestionably a Brahmana. One born of a Kshatriya wife or of a Vaisya 
wife, by a Brahmana husband, is similarly invested with the status of a 
Brahmana. Why then, best of kings, are such sons to share the paternal 
wealth unequally? All of them, you have said, are Brahmanas, having been 
born of mothers that belong to the three higher orders equally entitled to be 
called deviyas.’” 

“Bhishma says, ‘O Parantapa, all spouses in this world are called data. 
Although that name is applied to all, yet there is this great distinction to be 
observed. If, having married three wives belonging to the three other orders, 
a Brahmana takes a Brahmana wife the very last of all, yet shall she be 
regarded as the first in rank among all the wives, and as deserving of the 
greatest respect. Indeed, among all the co-wives, she shall be the foremost 
in consideration. In her apartments should be kept all such articles that are 
necessary for the husband’s baths, personal adornments, the cleaning of his 
teeth and application of kohl to his eyes. In her apartments should be kept 
the havya and the kavya and all else that the husband may require for the 
performance of his religious karmas. 

If the Brahmana wife is in the house, no other wife is entitled to attend 
to these needs of the husband. Only the Brahmana wife, O Yudhishtira, 
should assist in these kriyas of the husband. The husband’s food and drink, 
garlands, clothes and ornaments—all these should be given by the 
Brahmana wife to the husband, for she is the foremost in rank and 
consideration among all his wives. These are the niyamas of the scriptures 
as laid down by Manu, O joy of the Kurus. Even this, O monarch, is seen to 
be the course of eternal usage. If a Brahmana, O Yudhishtira, led by lust, 
acts in a different way, he shall come to be regarded as a Chandala among 
Brahmanas. 


Sons born to Brahmana and Kshatriya wives may be said to be equal in 
status. For all that, the Kshatriya woman cannot be regarded as being the 
Brahmana woman’s equal, and so a son born of the Brahmana wife must be 
also regarded as superior to that of the Kshatriya wife and he takes the best, 
O Yudhishtira, of his father’s possessions. 

Similarly, the Vaisya and the Kshatriya cannot be regarded as being 
equals by birth. Prosperity, kingdom and treasury, O Yudhishtira, belong to 
the Kshatriya as they have been ordained. All the earth, O king, with her 
girdle of seas, is seen to belong to him; he acquires an extensive affluence 
by following the svadharma of his caste. The sceptre of royalty is held by 
him, for without the Kshatriyas there can be no protection. 

The Brahmanas are blessed indeed, for they are the gods of the very 
gods. Kshatriyas should worship the Brahmanas with due rites, even as 
ordained by the ancient Rishis, for this is the sanatana dharma. Coveted by 
thieves and others, the possessions of all men, their wealth, wives and 
everything else would have been taken forcibly from them but for the 
protection given them by Kshatriyas in observing the duties assigned to 
their varna. The Kshatriya, as the king, becomes the protector or rescuer of 
all the others. Hence, the son of the Kshatriya wife shall, without doubt, be 
held as superior to that of the Vaisya wife. He for this takes a larger share of 
the paternal property than the son of the Vaisya mother.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “You have declared the laws that apply to Brahmanas. 
What are the laws that apply to others?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘For the Kshatriya, O Kurunandana, two wives have 
been ordained; and they may take a third wife from the Sudra class. Even 
though such practice prevails, it is not sanctioned by the scriptures. The 
property of a Kshatriya should, O king, be divided into eight shares. Four 
shares of the paternal property must go to the son of the Kshatriya wife, 
three to the son of the Vaisya wife, and one remaining share to the son of 
the Sudra wife, but the last only if father gives it. 

For the Vaisya, only one wife has been decreed and a second wife is 
taken from the Sudra order, although this is not sanctioned by the shastras. 
If a Vaisya has two wives, a Vaisya and the other a Sudra, there is a 
difference in status between them. 

The wealth of a Vaisya should be divided into five portions and it is to 
be distributed to sons of the Vaisya wife and the inferior Sudra wife in the 
following manner. The son of the Vaisya wife shall take four shares and the 


fifth share will go to the son of the Sudra wife, but only when the father 
gives it, not otherwise. The son of a Sudra wife fathered by men of the three 
higher varnas shall never be entitled to any part of his paternal wealth. 

The Sudra should have only one wife taken from his own varna and 
under no circumstances should he take any other. 

Even if a Sudra has a hundred sons by such a spouse, they will share the 
wealth left behind equally. As ordained, children born to the wife of the 
same varna will share the paternal wealth equally, and the eldest of them 
gets a larger share than all his brothers, and best belongings of his father. 

Even this is the law of inheritance, O son of Pritha, as declared by the 
Svayambhuva Manu himself. Among children born from the wife of the 
same caste, there is a distinction for marriage, O king: the elder ones 
precede the younger. Wives being equal in the varna of birth and children 
being equal in their mother’s status, the first son will inherit a greater share 
than his brothers, the next son, by age, shall take a share next in value and 
the youngest shall have the share that belongs to the youngest. 

Thus, among wives from all varnas, the ones belonging to the husband’s 
own caste are regarded as the first. Even this is what was declared by the 
great Rishi Kasyapa, the son of Marichi.’ 


CANTO 48 


Y udhishtira says, “Through inducements offered by wealth, or through 

mere lust, or through ignorance of the true order of birth, of both 
sons and daughters, or through folly, varnasamkarshana, or interbreeding of 
castes, occurs in all the varnas. What, O Grandsire, is the dharma and the 
karma laid down for those born in the mixed classes?’ 

Bhishma says, “In the beginning, the Lord of all creatures created the 
four varnas and laid down their respective dharmas and prescribed karmas, 
for the sake of sacrifice. The Brahmana may take four wives, one from each 
of the four varnas. The children from the Brahmana and Kshatriya wives 
are invested with the status of a Brahmana. But sons born of the two other 
wives, of the Vaisya and Sudra order, are inferior and their status is 
determined by that of their mothers and not the father. 

The son of a Brahmana begotten from a Sudra wife is called Parasara, 
implying one born of a corpse, for the Sudra woman’s body is as 
inauspicious as a corpse. He should serve his father’s family and it is 
improper for him to give up the duty of service that has been ordained for 
him. By doing all that he can, he should support the burdens of his family. 
He must dutifully serve his brothers and sisters, even if he is the eldest and 
they are younger, and give them his earnings. 

A Kshatriya may take three wives; in two of them, the one from his own 
caste and the other from the Vaisya varna, he takes birth himself. His 
children born to wives of his own varna are invested with the status of 
Kshatriyas. His third wife of the Sudra caste is regarded as most inferior 
and the son from her is called an Ugra. 


The Vaisya may take two wives, one from his own varna, and the other 
from the lowest, Sudra caste. He is born himself as the children born to the 
wife of his own varna, and these are invested with a Vaisya’s status. The 
Sudra can take only one wife and she is to be from own caste and their son 
becomes a Sudra. 

A son born under circumstances other than those mentioned above, is 
looked upon as an inferior one. If a man of a lower caste begets a son upon 
a woman of a superior varna, such a son is regarded as outside the pale of 
the four pure orders. Indeed, such a son is an object of censure with the four 
principal varnas. 

A son born of a Brahmana woman to a Kshatriya, without being 
included in any of the four pure varnas, is called a Suta and his duties are 
connected with the reciting of eulogies and encomiums of kings and other 
great men. A son born of a Brahmana woman to a Vaisya man is known as a 
Vaidehaka and his duties consist of being in charge of locks, bars and bolts 
for protecting the privacy of women of respectable households. Such sons 
have no cleansing rites laid down for them. 

If a Sudra marries a woman belonging to the foremost of the four 
varnas, the son that is begotten is called a Chandala. Endowed with a fierce 
disposition, he must live on the city outskirts and his assigned duty is that of 
a public executioner; and such sons are always regarded as wretches of their 
race. 

These, O foremost of intelligent men, are the children of mixed varnas. 
The son begotten by a Vaisya upon a Kshatriya woman becomes a Vandi or 
Magadha. His duties are the eloquent recitations of praise. The son begotten 
through transgression, by a Sudra upon a Kshatriya woman, becomes a 
Nishada and his dharma is to be a fisherman. If a Sudra unites with a Vaisya 
woman, a son begotten upon her is called Ayogava and his work is that of a 
Takshan, a carpenter. 

Brahmanas should never accept gifts from such persons, for these are 
not entitled to possess any kind of wealth. Men belonging to the mixed 
castes take wives from their own kind and their children are invested with 
the same status. When they beget children in women taken from inferior 
castes, these children become inferior to their fathers and they are invested 
with the status of their mothers. Thus, as regards the four pure varnas, men 
beget children invested with their own status upon wives taken from their 
own varnas, as also upon them that are taken from the varnas immediately 


below their own. When, however, children are begotten from other wives, 
they have a status that is outside the pale of the four pure varnas. 

When such sons beget progeny in women taken from their own varnas, 
those sons are given the status of their fathers. It is only when they take 
wives from other varnas that the children they beget are given an inferior 
status. 

If a Sudra marries a Brahmana woman, the son born of that union is 
called a Chandala. If such a Chandala also begets a son from a Brahmana 
woman, that child is considered to be even lower than his father. From those 
born outside the pale of the four varnas and those again that are further 
inferior, children multiply because of their union with women of castes 
superior to their own. In this way, fifteen progressively mixed classes spring 
up. 

Mixed varnas arise solely from the sexual union of women with men 
who should abstain from such a union. Among the classes that are outside 
the pale of the four principal or pure varnas, children are begotten upon 
women belonging to the class called Sairindhri by men of the caste known 
as Magadha. The occupation of such offspring is the adornment of the 
bodies of others, and they are knowledgeable in the preparation of 
liniments, lotions and unguents, the making of garlands, and other 
adornments. Although free by the status they have by birth, they should yet 
lead a life of service. 

Another, Ayogava, caste comes from the union of Magadhas of a certain 
kind with women of the Sairindhri caste. Their occupation is weaving nets 
used for fishing, and hunting fowl and animals. The union of Vaidehas with 
women of the Sairindhri caste begets children called Maireyakas, whose 
occupation is the making of wines and spirits. From Nishadas spring a caste 
called Madgura and also the Dasas, whose profession is plying boats. From 
the Chandala springs a race called Swapaka, whose employment is keeping 
guard over the dead. 

If women of the Magadhi caste unite with these four castes of vile 
dispositions, they produce Mansa, Swadukara, Kshaudra and Saugandha 
children, who live by deceit. From the Vaideha springs up a cruel and sinful 
caste that also lives by practising deception. From the Nishadas spring 
Madranabhas who ride on carriages drawn by donkeys. From the Chandalas 
arise the Pukkasas, who are seen eating the flesh of animals like donkeys, 


horses and elephants. These cover themselves with garments obtained by 
stripping human corpses and eat from cracked or broken earthenware. 

From the union of fathers from different castes with an Ayogava 
women, three castes of a base and most inferior kind originate. The 
Kshaudras spring from the Vaidehakas; the Andhras, who live in the 
outskirts of towns and cities, also come from the Vaidehakas. The Karavara 
caste arises from the union of a Charmakara with a Nishada woman. From 
the Chandala again there springs the caste known as Pandusaupaka, whose 
occupation is weaving baskets and other similar articles using cleft and 
shaven bamboo. An Ahindaka comes from the union of a Nishada man with 
a woman of the Vaidehi caste. The son of a Chandala begotten upon a 
Saupaka woman has the status and occupation of a Chandala. A Nishada 
woman uniting with a Chandala man brings forth a son who lives on the 
outskirts of villages and towns. Such offspring live in smasanas, crematoria, 
and are regarded by the very lowest varnas as unworthy of being counted 
among them. 

Thus, further mixed castes are born from unlawful and sinful unions of 
fathers and mothers belonging to different castes. Whether they live in 
concealment or openly, they should be known by their occupations. Duties 
have been ordained in the scriptures for only the four principal varnas and 
there is no mention of any svadharma for any other varnas. By the 
scriptures, they need not fear for what they do and how they earn their 
livelihood. By uniting with women of other castes, led not by 
considerations of righteousness but by uncontrolled lust, men unaccustomed 
to the performance of sacrifices or for whom yagnas have not been 
ordained, and who are deprived of the company and the instruction of the 
righteous, whether numbered among the four principal orders or not, cause 
numerous mixed castes to come into existence, whose occupations and 
abodes depend on the circumstances connected with the irregular unions to 
which they owe their births. 

Having recourse to crossroads, or crematoria, or hills and mountains, or 
forests and trees, they build their habitations there and wear ornaments 
made of iron. Living in such places openly, they earn their livelihood from 
producing diverse kinds of domestic and other utensils, and adorn their 
persons with crude ornaments. Without doubt, by helping with kine and 
serving Brahmanas, practising the virtues of abstention from cruelty, 
compassion, truthfulness of speech, forgiveness and, if need be, preserving 


others by sacrificing their very lives, persons of the mixed castes may 
achieve success. I have no doubt that such virtues become the cause of their 
salvation. 

An intelligent man should take all things into consideration and beget 
offspring upon a woman that is fit for him, as ordained in the scriptures. A 
son begotten from a woman belonging to a degraded caste brings him to 
grief instead of rescuing him, even as a heavy weight drowns a swimmer 
who wants to cross a body of water. 

Lust and wrath are natural attributes of humanity in this world, 
irrespective of a man being learned or not. Women, therefore, may always 
be seen as dragging men onto the wrong path, of darkness and sin. The very 
nature of women is such that a man’s contact with her brings him misery 
and ruin. Hence, wise men do not suffer themselves to be excessively 
attached to women.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “There are men who belong to the mixed castes, and 
who are of very impure birth. Though presenting the features of 
respectability, they are in reality anything but so. In consequence of their 
external aspects we might not be able to know the truth about their birth. 
Are there any signs, Pitamaha, by which the truth can be known about the 
origin of such men?’ 


CANTO 49 


B hishma says, ‘A person born of an irregular union shows diverse 

features of character. One’s purity of birth, again, must be 
ascertained from one’s actions which must resemble the actions of those 
who are good and righteous. One’s impure origin is proclaimed by 
disreputable behaviour, deeds that violate those laid down in the scriptures, 
crookedness, cruelty, abstention from sacrifices and other spiritual practices 
which fetch punya. A son either receives his father’s character or his 
mother’s, and sometimes both. 

A man of impure birth cannot conceal his true character. Just as a tiger 
or a leopard’s cub inherits stripes or spots, a man cannot hide his origin; his 
impure descent will manifest itself, to some degree, despite all attempts to 
conceal it. For his own purposes a man may choose to walk an insincere, 
hypocrite’s path while outwardly displaying such conduct as might seem 
righteous. However, his demeanour will inevitably betray him, and the truth 
of his varna, good or base. 

Creatures in the world have different characters and are seen to conduct 
themselves in diverse ways. Amongst all the living, there is none better than 
he who is of pure birth and of righteous conduct. A man born into a lower 
varna, even though he is thorough with the scriptures, fails to prevent his 
body from committing vile deeds. 

Absolute goodness of understanding may be of different degrees; it may 
be high, middling, or low. Even if such sattva does manifest in a man of 
lowly birth, it disappears like autumn clouds which never bring any rain, 


without any consequence. On the other hand, the goodness which shows 
itself in those of better lineage will invariably reveal itself in his actions. 

If a man is born into a superior varna, but yet shows no righteous 
conduct, he deserves neither respect nor regard. And one may worship even 
a Sudra if he is lives by his svadharma and is of good conduct. A man 
proclaims himself by his own good deeds as much as by his good or bad 
nature and birth. 

If one’s vamsa is dishonoured for any reason, one soon elevates it and 
makes it splendid and famed by one’s deeds. For these reasons the wise 
should avoid women of the diverse castes, mixed or pure, upon whom they 
should not beget offspring.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Can you speak to us, Pitamaha, about the varnas and 
classes separately, on different kinds of sons begotten from different types 
of women, and about men entitled to have them as sons, and their status in 
life ? It is known that disputes frequently arise with regard to sons. I beg 
you, resolve the doubts that have seized our minds, for we are bewildered 
by this matter.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘The son of one’s loins is regarded as one’s own self. 
The son that is begotten upon one’s wife by a man who has been invited for 
the task is called niruktaja, and if the father was uninvited, such a son is 
called prasritaja. The son begotten upon his own wife by a man fallen away 
from his caste is called patitaja. There are two other sons: the one given, the 
one created, and there is another called adhyudha. 

The son born of a maiden in her father’s house is called kanina. Besides 
these, there are six other kinds of sons called apadhwansaja and six others 
yet that are called apasadas. These are the several kinds of sons mentioned 
in the scriptures.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Who are the six that are called apadhwansajas and 
who are the apasadas? I beg you, explain all these to me in detail.’ 

Bhishma says, “The sons of a Brahmana begotten upon women taken 
from the three inferior varnas, by a Kshatriya upon women taken from the 
two varnas inferior to his own, and sons that a Vaisya begets upon a spouse 
taken from the Sudra varna, the one inferior to his own, are all called 
apadhwansajas. The six kinds are thus explained. 

Listen now to who the apasadas are. The son that a Sudra begets upon a 
Brahmana woman is called a Chandala; the son begotten upon a Kshatriya 
woman by a Sudra man is called a Vratya. He who is born of a Vaisya 


woman by a Sudra father is called a Vaidya. These three kinds of sons are 
called apasadas. 

The Vaisya, by uniting himself with a Brahmana woman, begets a son 
that is called a Magadha, while the son that he begets upon a Kshatriya 
woman is called a Vamaka. The Kshatriya can beget but one kind of son 
upon a woman of a superior order. Indeed, the son begotten by a Kshatriya 
upon a Brahmana woman is a Suta. These three also are called apasadas. It 
cannot be said, O king, that these six kinds of sons are no sons at all.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “Some say that one’s son is he that is born in one’s 
soil. Some, on the other hand, say that one’s son is he who has been 
begotten from one’s seed. Are both these kinds of sons equal? Whose, 
again, is the son to be? Do you tell me this, O Grandsire!’ 

Bhishma says, “His is the son from whose seed he has sprung. If, 
however, the owner of the seed abandons the son born of it, such a son then 
becomes his upon whose spouse he has been begotten. The same rule 
applies to the son called Adhyudha. He belongs to the man from whose 
seed he has taken his birth. If, however, the owner of the seed abandons 
him, he becomes the son of the husband of his mother. Know that even this 
is what the law declares.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘We know that the son becomes his from whose seed 
he has taken birth. Whence does the husband of the woman that brings forth 
the son derive his right to the latter? Similarly, the son called Adhyudha 
should be known to be the son of him from whose seed he has sprung. How 
can they be sons of others by reasons of the engagement about owning and 
rearing them having been broken?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘He who begets a son from his own loins and then 
abandons him for some reason, cannot be regarded as the father, for the 
vital seed alone does not confer fatherhood and the son also must be held to 
belong to the man who owns the maternal soil and raises him. Wanting a 
son, if a man marries a pregnant girl, the son of his wife will belong to him, 
for he is the fruit of his own soil; and the man from whose seed the son has 
sprung can have no right to such a child. 

The son born from a man’s wife but not begotten by him bears all traits 
of the actual father and not those of he who is only his mother’s husband. 
The son thus born cannot conceal the evidence of his natural physiognomy, 
and will be known at once upon sight as belonging to another. 


The son adopted is sometimes regarded as the child of the man who has 
made him a son, and who thus raises him. In his case, neither the seed of his 
birth nor the soil in which he is born makes him a son.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “What kind of a son is he who has been adopted and 
who is neither his father nor mother’s natural son?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘When a man brings home and raises a son, cast off on 
the streets by his parents, and when he fails to find his natural parents after 
searching, he becomes the father of such a son and the latter becomes what 
is called his created son. Having no one else to own him, he becomes 
owned by him who raises him. Such a son, again, comes to be regarded as 
belonging to that varna to which his adoptive father belongs.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘How should one perform the purificatory rites of such 
a man and what sort of rites should be performed? What girl should he 
marry? Tell me all this, Pitamaha!’ 

Bhishma says, ‘A son who is cast off by his parents obtains the varna of 
the man raising him, hence the rites of purification should be performed by 
the adoptive father raising him, according to his own race and kinsmen. 
Such a son should marry a girl belonging to the varna of the adoptive father, 
and this is done only when the varna of the son’s true mother cannot be 
ascertained. 

Among sons, he that is born to an unwed mother and he who is born to 
a mother who conceived before her marriage but brought him forth after 
matrying, are regarded as disgraceful and degraded. 

Even those two, however, should receive the same rites of purification 
that are laid down for sons begotten by the father in lawful wedlock. With 
respect to the son who becomes his father’s because of his birth from his 
father’s wife and of those sons that are called apasadas and those conceived 
by the woman in her maidenhood but brought forth after marriage, 
Brahmanas and others should apply the same rites of purification that hold 
good for their own varnas. These are ordained in the scriptures with respect 
to the different varnas. I have told you everything pertaining to your 
questions. What else do you wish to hear?’” 


CANTO 50 


oe Y udhishtira says, ‘What is the nature of the compassion that is felt 

at the sight of another’s woe, and that which one feels because of 

living in companionship with the other? What is the nature and degree of 
the high blessedness that attaches to kine? Pitamaha, explain all this to me.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘In this regard, O you of great radiance, I will narrate to 
you an ancient narrative of a conversation between Nahusha and Rishi 
Chyavana. In days of yore, Maharishi Chyavana of Bhrigu’s race, always 
observant of high vows, wanted to lead the way of life called Udavasa for 
some time and set himself to embark on it. Casting off pride, wrath, joy and 
grief, the ascetic pledged himself to observe that vow for twelve years. The 
Rishi inspired all land creatures with a happy trust and inspired similar 
confidence in all creatures living in water. The powerful sage resembled the 
moon himself in his behaviour towards all; bowing to all the deities and 
having cleansed himself of all sins, he entered the water at the confluence of 
the Ganga and the Yamuna and stood there motionless. 

Placing his head against it, he bore the fierce and roaring current of the 
two rivers united together, whose speed was like that of the wind itself. 
Instead of drowning the Rishi, the Ganga, the Yamuna, the other streams 
and lakes, whose waters come together at the confluence at Prayaga, flowed 
past him in respect. Assuming the aspect of a wooden post, the great Muni 
laid himself down in the water and slept at ease; and sometimes, Lord of the 
Bharatas, the most intelligent sage stood upright. He was at ease with all 
aquatic creatures, without the least fear; all these would come and gently 
sniff the Rishi’s lips. 


In this way, the Rishi spent a long time at the grand confluence of 
waters. One day, a large number of fishermen came to that place with their 
nets. Well-built and broad-chested, endowed with great strength, courage, 
and not afraid of the water, those men lived by fishing. They tied all their 
nets together and approached the water that teemed with every kind of fish. 

All those Kaivartas together cast their strong nets, all made from fresh 
string, across a wide area of the waters of the Ganga and the Yamuna. 
Working in cheerful unison, the fishermen entered the water all together, 
quite fearlessly, and began to haul in their net in which they had caught a 
vast number of fish and other water creatures. As they did this, they also 
hauled up Chyavana Muni, his body overgrown with river moss so even his 
matted jata and long beard were green, and conch shells and other molluscs 
covered him, having attached themselves by their heads. 

Seeing the sage, that master of the Vedas, the fishermen stood before 
him with bowed heads and folded hands; they prostrated repeatedly before 
him. Meanwhile, all the fish those men had caught died in agony. Seeing the 
great and cruel slaughter of the fish, Chyavana was filled with pity and he 
sighed repeatedly. 

The fishermen said, “We have sinned by dragging your holy self from 
the water in our ignorance. Be merciful to us! What wish of yours shall we 
accomplish? Command us, O great sage.” 

From among the heap of dead fishes around him, Chyavana said, 
“Attentively hear what my most cherished wish is. I shall either die with 
these fish or you must sell me with them, for I have lived with them for a 
long time in the water. I do not wish to abandon them now.” 

When he said these words to them, the fishermen became terrified. With 
pale faces they went to King Nahusha and told him what had happened.’” 


CANTO 51 


: ‘RB hishma says, ‘When he heard what had chanced with Chyavana, 

Nahusha immediately went to the Rishi, taking his ministers and 

priests with him. Having purified himself, the king introduced himself, with 

joined palms and concentrated attention, to Chyavana Mahatman. The 

king’s priests worshipped the Rishi with due ceremony, that sage who 

observed the satya vrata, the vow of truth, and who resembled a god in 
splendour and vitality. 

Nahusha said, “Tell me, O Dvijottama, what shall we do to please you? 
However difficult it may be, there is nothing, Holy One, that I will not be 
able to accomplish at your bidding.” 

Chyavana said, “These men that live by fishing have all been sorely 
tried with labour. Pay them the price that may be set upon me along with 
the value of these fish.” 

Nahusha said, “Let my priest give these Nishadas a thousand coins as 
the price for these fish, as you, Swami, have commanded.” 

Chyavana said, “A thousand coins cannot be my price. Use your 
discretion and intelligence to set a fair price on their catch.” 

Nahusha said, “Let, O great Brahmana, a hundred thousand coins be 
given to these Nishadas. Will this be fair price, O Holy One, or do you think 
otherwise?” 

Chyavana said, “I will not be bought for a hundred thousand coins, O 
best of kings! Give them a just price. Do you want to consult with your 
ministers?” 


Nahusha said, “Let my priest give these Nishadas a crore of coins. If 
even this does not meet your price, let more be paid to them.” 

Chyavana said, “O king, I do not deserve to be bought for a crore of 
coins or even more. Let the fishermen be given a fair and proper price. Do 
you want to consult with the Brahmanas?” 

Nahusha said, “Let half of my kingdom or even the whole be given to 
these Nishadas. I think that would be a fair price. But what do you think, O 
Dvijottama?” 

Chyavana said, “I do not deserve to be bought with half of your 
kingdom or even the whole of it, O king! Let a fair price be given to these 
men. Do you consult with your Rishis.” 

Hearing these words of the great Muni, Nahusha was grief-struck. He 
deliberated on the matter with his ministers and priests. Then an ascetic 
who was living in the forest came to King Nahusha. This sage lived on fruit 
and roots and was born of a cow. Addressing the king, the Holy One said, 
“O king, I shall soon gratify you and the Rishi as well. I never tell a lie, not 
even in jest, what then should I say of otherwise? You should, without any 
scruple, do what I tell you.” 

Nahusha said, “Illustrious one, you tell me what the price is of the 
Maharishi of Bhrigu’s race. Save me, my kingdom and my vamsa from this 
terrible pass! If the holy Chyavana became angry, he would destroy the 
three worlds. What then need I say of me, who is destitute of any tapasya 
and who depends only upon only the might of my arms? O Maharishi, 
become a raft to us, for we have fallen into a fathomless ocean with all our 
counsellors and priests. I beg you, settle what the price should be before the 
Rishi.” 

Hearing these words of Nahusha, the ascetic born of a cow and 
endowed with great tejas spoke in this strain, gladdening the monarch and 
all his counsellors, ““Brahmanas, O king, belong to the foremost of the four 
varnas, and no value, however great, can be set upon them. Cows also are 
invaluable, therefore, Lord of men, regard a cow as the value of the Rishi!” 

Hearing these words of the great Rishi, Nahusha, his counsellors and 
priests were filled with joy. Going then to the presence of Bhrigu’s son, 
Chyavana of rigid vows, he addressed him thus, to gratify him to the best of 
his ability. 

Nahusha said, “Rise, rise, O enlightened Rishi, you have been bought, 
O son of Bhrigu, with a cow as your price. O foremost of men of dharma, I 


think this is your price.” 

Chyavana said, “Yes, O king of kings, I do rise up. I have been properly 
bought by you, O sinless one! You of unfading glory, I do not see any 
wealth that is equal to kine. To speak of kine, to hear others speak of them, 
to make gifts and to see kine, O king, are all acts that are lauded, Kshatriya, 
as being most auspicious and sin-cleansing. Cows are always the root of 
prosperity and there is no fault in them. They always afford the best food, in 
the form of havi, to the Devas, and sacred mantras, Swaha and Vashat, are 
always established in them. 

They are the chief conductresses of sacrifices for they constitute the 
mouth of sacrifice. They bear and yield excellent and strength-giving amrita 
and receive the worship of all the worlds and are regarded as the source of 
nectar. On earth, cows resemble fire in energy and form. Verily, they bestow 
great happiness upon all creatures. That country where kine, established by 
their owners, breathe fearlessly, shines in beauty and the sins of that country 
are washed away. They constitute the stairs that lead to heaven and are 
adored in heaven itself. They are goddesses that are competent to give 
everything and grant every wish; there is nothing else in the world that is so 
high or so superior!””’ 

Bhishma continues, ‘On the subject of the glory and superiority of 
cows, this is what I have to say, Lord of the Bharata vamsa. I am competent 
to proclaim only a part of the punya attached to cows, I cannot exhaust the 
subject! 

The Nishadas then said, “Muni, you have met and also spoken to us; it 
has been said that friendship with those that are good depends upon just 
seven words. 

Will you then, Lord, show us your grace? The blazing sacrificial fire 
consumes all the oblations of clarified butter poured upon it. Of righteous 
soul and great energy, you are among men a blazing fire of tejas. We 
worship you, learned one! We surrender ourselves to you. Do you, to show 
us favour, take from us this cow?” 

Chyavana said, “The eye of a poor man or a distressed one, the eye of 
an ascetic, or that of a venomous snake consumes a man with his very roots, 
as a fire fanned by the wind blazing up consumes a stack of dry grass or 
straw. I will accept the cow that you wish to gift me. Fishermen, freed from 
every sin, go you to swarga without any delay along with these fishes you 
have caught in your nets.” 


After this, because of the great Rishi’s tejas and his cleansed soul, 
Fishermen and the fish, through virtue of those words that he had uttered, 
ascended into heaven and King Nahusha was filled with wonder. 

The two Rishis, the one born of a cow and the other, Chyavana of 
Bhrigu’s race, pleased Nahusha by granting him many boons. Then King 
Nahusha of great tejas, Lord of all the earth, filled with joy, said, “Enough!” 

Like a second Indra, he accepted the boon about his own steadfastness 
in virtue. The delighted king worshipped both the Rishis who had blessed 
him with great reverence. As for Chyavana, he returned to his own asrama 
for his vrata was completed. The Rishi born of a cow and of great tejas, also 
went back to his own retreat. 

All the Nishadas ascended into swarga with the fishes they caught, O 
monarch, King Nahusha, too, having obtained those valuable boons, entered 
his own city. I have thus, O son, told you everything that you asked of me. 
The affection generated by the mere sight of others beings, as also by living 
with them, O Yudhishtira, and the high blessedness of the cow, and the 
ascertainment of true dharma, are the matters upon which I have discoursed. 
Tell me, O Kshatriya, what else is in your heart.’ 


CANTO 52 


Y udhishtira says, ‘O wisest one, a doubt as vast as an ocean has 

engulfed me, Listen to it, OQ Mahabaho, and having learnt what it is, 
resolve it for me. I am taken with great curiosity about Jamadagni’s son 
Parasurama, that foremost of all men of dharma. Pitamaha, tell me how 
Rama, who was endowed with prowess that could never be baffled, was 
born. He belonged by birth to a race of regenerate Rishis. How did he 
become a follower of the ways of a Kshatriya? 

Lord, tell me in detail about the circumstances of Rama’s birth. Also tell 
me how Viswamitra, who was a son of the race of Kusika and born a 
Kshatriya, became Brahmana and a Brahmarishi. Ah, great indeed was the 
puissance of the high-souled Rama, as also that of Viswamitra. Why did 
Richaka’s grandson and not his son become a Kshatriya in deeds? Why did 
the Kusika’s grandson and not his son become a Brahmana? Why did such 
an exceptional fate overtake the grandsons of both, instead of their sons? I 
implore you, explain the truth of both these to me.’ 

Bhishma says, “O Bharata, an ancient itihasa is related with regard to 
these, of a discourse between Chyavana and Kusika. Endowed with great 
intelligence, Chyavana of Bhrigu’s race, that best of Rishis, saw with his 
spiritual eye the stain that would affect his own race because of his 
descendant marrying a Kshatriya. Reflecting upon the merits and faults of 
that marriage, as also its strength and weakness, Chyavana, possessed of 
tapodhana, wanted to consume the race of the Kusikas, for he knew it was 
from that race that the taint of Kshatriya dharma stained his own vamsa. 


Chyavana went into the presence of King Kusika, and said to him, “O 
sinless one, the desire has arisen in my heart to stay with you for some 
time.” 

Kusika said, “Holy One, living together is something which the wise 
ordained for girls when they are given away and only in this context do the 
sages always approve this practice. O Rishi endowed with a wealth of 
asceticism, the residence which you seek with me is not sanctioned by any 
law. Yet, however opposed to the dictates of neeti and dharma, I will do 
what you command.” 

Ordering a seat to be fetched for Maharishi Chyavana, Kusika, 
accompanied by his wife, stood in the presence of the Rishi. From a small 
jar of water, the king offered him water to wash his feet and then, through 
his servants, caused all the appropriate rites to be duly performed to honour 
his high-souled guest. Kusika, who always observed his vows and was self- 
restrained, cheerfully presented the arghya of honey and the other 
prescribed ingredients to the great Rishi and induced him to accept it. 

Having welcomed and honoured the learned Brahmana, the king 
addressed him and said, ““We two await your command. Tell us what we are 
to do for you, Holy One. If it is our kingdom or wealth or cows, O you of 
rigid vows, or all that is given away as dakshina in sacrifices which do you 
want, only tell us and you shall have them all. This palace, the kingdom, 
this throne of justice, all await your pleasure. You are the Lord of all these. 
Do you rule the earth, for I am entirely dependent upon you.” 

Addressed in these words by Kusika, Chyavana of Bhrigu’s race, filled 
with great delight, said to Kusika in reply, “I do not, O king, covet your 
kingdom, wealth, young women, cows, provinces, or your golden vessels of 
sacrifice. If it pleases you and your wife, I will observe a certain vrata. I 
want you and your wife to serve me during that period without any scruple 
or reserve.” 

Thus addressed by the Rishi, the king and the queen were filled with joy 
and answered him, saying, “Tathaastu! Be it so, Rishi.” Delighted with the 
Rishi’s words, the king led him into an apartment of the palace. Kusika 
showed Chyavana everything in that room and said, “This, Holy One, is 
your bed. Live here as you please. O you imbued with a wealth of 
intelligence, and my queen and I will strive to provide you every comfort 
and pleasure.” 


While they were thus conversing with each other, the sun passed the 
meridian. The Rishi commanded the king to bring him food and drink. King 
Kusika, bowing to the Rishi, asked him, “Whatever kind of food is 
agreeable to you will be brought to you.” 

Filled with delight, the Rishi answered, “Let food that is proper be 
given to me.” 

Respectfully, the king said, “So be it!” and fetched the Rishi food of the 
best and proper kind. Having finished his meal, the holy Chyavana, knower 
of every dharma, said, “I want to sleep, O powerful one, for slumber steals 
over me now.” 

Going into the bedchamber prepared for him, that best of Rishis laid 
himself down upon a bed and the king and queen sat themselves down 
beside him. The Rishi said to them, “Do not, while I sleep, awake me. Keep 
yourselves awake and continually press my feet for as long as I sleep.” 

Without hesitation, Kusika said, “So be it!” 

The king and the queen, duly engaged in tending to the Rishi, kept 
themselves awake all night, and accomplished his bidding with earnestness 
and attention. Meanwhile the holy Brahmana, having laid his commands 
upon the king, slept deeply, never once stirring, not even to turn or change 
his position, for twenty-one days. That whole time, with his wife beside 
him, and without so much as eating, the king sat contentedly, happily 
watching over the Muni. 

When twenty-one days passed, Chyavana of the Bhrigus awoke and 
arose of his own accord and went out of the bedchamber without 
acknowledging the king and queen. Famished and exhausted they followed 
him, but that foremost of Rishis did not deign to cast a single glance at 
them. Going a short way, the Rishi abruptly vanished from before their 
eyes, making himself invisible with his powers of yoga. At this, the king, 
struck with grief, fell to the ground. Recovering in some moments, he rose 
and, with his queen, Kusika of great splendour began to look everywhere 
for the Rishi.’” 


CANTO 53 


: eye udhishtira says, ‘After the Rishi disappeared, what did the king 
and his most blessed queen do? Tell me this, Pitamaha.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘When the Rishi vanished, the king, overwhelmed by 
tiredness and shame, stricken by grief, returned to his palace with his queen. 
Entering his palace dejectedly, he spoke not a word to anyone, but was 
plunged in the thought of Chyavana’s inexplicable behaviour. His heart full 
of despair, Kusika repaired to his private chambers. 

There he saw the son of Bhrigu stretched out as before on his bed. 
Beholding the Rishi there, they were wonderstruck, and reflected again 
upon that strangest incident. The sight of the Rishi dispelled their fatigue. 

They sat beside him again and gently began to press his feet as before. 
Meanwhile, the great Rishi slept soundly as before but this time he lay on 
another side. Endowed with great tejas, he slept for another twenty-one 
days. Fearful of him, the royal couple showed no change in their attitude or 
sentiment towards the Rishi. 

Waking from his slumber, the Rishi addressed the king and his queen, 
saying, “Rub my body with oil, for I want to bathe.” 

Though they were famished and tired, they readily assented and 
approached the Rishi with a costly oil which had been prepared by boiling it 
a hundred times. While massaging the Rishi who was seated at ease, they 
refrained from speaking. Without saying a word to make them stop, the 
Muni suddenly rose and entered the bathing chamber. Everything fit for a 
king’s bath was ready there. But not so much as casting a glance at any of 


those excellent ablutionaries, let alone using them, Chyavana yet again 
vanished from before their eyes, using his yoga shakti. 

This, however, Lord of the Bharatas, failed to disturb the equanimity of 
the royal couple. The next time, they saw great Rishi seated, after a bath, on 
a throne; indeed, it was thus that he showed himself again to the king and 
the queen. King Kusika with his wife cheerfully offered the Rishi food with 
great reverence. Endowed with wisdom and with an unmoved heart, Kusika 
made this offering. “Let the food be brought” were the words that the Rishi 
then spoke and, assisted by his queen, the king soon brought forth the food. 
There were diverse kinds of meat, in different preparations, a large variety 
of vegetables, pot-herbs, juicy cakes too, among those viands, several kinds 
of sweets, and preparations of milk payasas. Indeed, all the food offered 
different kinds of taste. 

There was also some produce of the wilderness which Rishis like, 
among them diverse kinds of fruit, fit to be eaten by kings. There were also 
badaras, ingudas, kasmaryas and bhallatakas, all of which grihastas eat, as 
also wild produce that vanaprasthas take. 

Fearing the Rishi’s curse, the king had all kinds of food fetched and 
prepared for his guest. All this was brought from the kitchen and placed 
before Chyavana. A fine seat was also set out and a bed, too, was laid. All 
the food was covered with white cloth. Chyavana of Bhrigu’s race, 
however, set fire to all the dishes and reduced them to ashes. Possessed of 
great intelligence, the royal couple showed no annoyance at the conduct of 
the Rishi, who once more made himself invisible before their very eyes. 

The Rajarishi Kusika and his queen stood in silence throughout the 
night, never moving. Endowed with great prosperity, he did not give way in 
the least to pride or anger. Every day, diverse kinds of good and pure food, 
excellent beds, abundant bathing oils and herbs and fine clothes of various 
kinds were kept in readiness in the palace for the Rishi. Indeed, Chyavana 
could find not the slightest fault in the king. 

Then the illumined Rishi said to King Kusika, “Yoke a chariot, O king, 
and you and your queen take me in it wherever I tell you to.” 

Without any hesitation, the king answered Chyavana, saying, “So be it!” 
and he further enquired of the Rishi, “Which chariot shall I fetch? Shall it 
be my pleasure-carriage or shall it be my war chariot?” 

On being asked this by the delighted and contented monarch, the Rishi 
said, “Yoke your war chariot with which you besiege hostile cities. Indeed, 


ready your battle-car with every weapon, with its standard and flags, its 
arrows and javelins and golden columns and poles. It is adorned with 
tinkling bells and with arches of pure gold. It is always furnished with high 
and excellent weapons in hundreds.” 

The king said, “So be it!” and quickly had his battle ratha yoked and 
fetched, and himself mounted the right side and set his wife upon the left. 
Among its other accoutrements, Kusika furnished that mighty chariot with 
his goad of three handles and a point hard as the vajra and sharp as a needle. 

Having placed every requisite upon the chariot, the king said to the 
Rishi, “Holy One, where shall the chariot proceed? Let the son of Bhrigu 
issue his command. This chariot shall go to the place which you indicate.” 

Thus addressed, the holy man replied to the king, saying, “Let the ratha 
go hence, dragged slowly, step by step. Obedient to my will, you two must 
pull me along in such a way that I do not feel any fatigue and should be 
borne along pleasantly. Let all your people come out and watch this 
progress that I make through their midst. Let none approaching me be sent 
away, I shall give gifts of wealth to all. To the Brahmanas, I shall grant their 
wishes and bestow upon them wealth without stint. Let this be 
accomplished, O king, and do not entertain any scruples.” 

Hearing these words of the Rishi, the king summoned his servants and 
said, “You should, without any fear, give away whatever the Rishi orders.” 

Then jewellery and gemstones in abundance, beautiful women, and 
pairs of sheep, coined and uncoined gold, elephants resembling hills or 
mountain summits, and all the ministers of the king began to follow the 
Rishi as he was borne away on that chariot. Cries of “Oh!” and “Alas!” 
arose from every part of the city which was plunged in grief at that 
extraordinary sight. 

And suddenly the royal couple were struck by the Rishi with that goad 
with the sharp point. Though they were struck on their backs and faces, 
Kusika and his queen still showed no sign of protest or agitation. On the 
other hand, they continued to bear the Rishi on as before. Trembling from 
head to foot, for no food had passed their lips for fifty nights, and 
exceedingly weak, the heroic couple somehow succeeded in hauling along 
that chariot. Being repeatedly and deeply cut by the goad, the royal couple 
was covered in blood. Indeed, they looked like a pair of Kimsuka trees in 
the flowering season. Seeing the plight to which their king and queen were 


reduced, the people were grief-stricken, but fearing the Rishi’s curse, they 
remained silent. 

Gathering in knots they said to each other, “Behold the might of 
tapasya! Although we are angry, we still cannot even look at the holy Rishi. 
Such is his tejas, such the dazzling splendour of his purified soul. Ah, look 
also at the endurance of the king and his royal queen. Though bleeding, and 
worn with toil and hunger, they still drag the chariot along. And 
notwithstanding the misery and pain the sage has inflicted on Kusika and 
his queen, they show no sign of their anguish to Chyavana.” 

Seeing the king and the queen unmoved, Chyavana began to give away 
large sums of wealth from the king’s treasury, as if he were a second 
Kubera, a Lord of treasures. Even at this, King Kusika showed no mark of 
dissatisfaction; he did just as the Rishi had commanded regarding the 
disbursal of gifts. Seeing this, that illustrious and best of Rishis became 
delighted. Alighting from that excellent chariot, he unharnessed the royal 
couple. 

Having freed them, he said to them in a soft, deep and delighted voice, 
“Tam ready to grant you both any boon you want!” 

The son of Bhrigu, moved by fond affection, saw their delicate royal 
bodies pierced with the goad and bleeding, and laid his blessed palms, 
whose healing powers were like those of amrita, on their wounds, which 
promptly vanished. 

Then the king answered the Rishi, “My wife and I have felt no toil or 
pain.” And indeed, all their exhaustion and pain had been dispelled by the 
power of the Rishi. 

Pleased no end with them, the illustrious Chyavana said, “I have never 
before spoken an untruth and it must, therefore, be as I have said. This place 
on the banks of the Ganga is both delightful and auspicious. I shall keep a 
vrata here for a while, O king. Do you return to the city for you are 
exhausted. Come with your wife again tomorrow and you will see me here. 
You should not give way to wrath or grief, the time has come for you to 
reap a great reward. That which you covet in your heart shall verily be 
accomplished.” 

King Kusika, with a joyful heart, replied to the Rishi in these words of 
grave import, “I have cherished no wrath or grief, O most blessed one. We 
have been purified and sanctified by you, Holy One. We have become 
youthful again. Behold our bodies have become exceedingly beautiful and 


strong, I do not see those wounds and scars anymore, which you inflicted on 
us. Verily, my wife and I are in good health. I see my devi has become as 
beautiful as an Apsara and she is much more comely and radiant than ever 
before. All this, O great Rishi, is due to your grace and there is nothing 
astonishing in all this, O most holy and powerful Rishi, who are forever 
unbaffled.” 

Chyavana said to him, “Return here with your queen tomorrow, O 
king.” 

With these words, the Rajarishi Kusika was dismissed. Saluting the 
Rishi, the king, now endowed with a handsome body, returned to his capital 
like a second Indra. His ministers and priests, his troops, dancing women 
and all his subjects came out to receive him. Surrounded by them, King 
Kusika, blazing with beauty and splendour, entered his city with a delighted 
heart, and his praises were sung by bards and encomiasts. 

Having entered his city, he performed all his morning rites and ate with 
his wife. Endowed with great splendour and the handsome and beautiful 
forms they had obtained as a boon from Chyavana Muni, the royal couple 
spent the night happily at love. With all their afflictions and pains having 
ceased, they saw each other with youth renewed and looking like divine 
beings. Meanwhile, Chyavana, the Rishi possessed of tapodhana, the wealth 
of tapasya, used his yogic powers to transform the delightful wood on the 
banks of the Ganga into a magnificent palace full of wealth of every kind, 
and adorned it with a variety of unearthly jewellery and gems, so that it 
surpassed Indra’s own palace in beauty and splendour.’” 


CANTO 54 


: ‘RB hishma says, ‘When the night passed, King Kusika awoke and, 

after completing his morning rites, and taking his queen with 
him, he went to the wood where the Rishi had chosen to stay. Arriving 
there, the king saw a palace made entirely of gold, with a thousand 
columns, each of which was made of gems and precious stones. It looked 
like an edifice belonging to the Gandharvas. 

Kusika saw in every part of that edifice evidences of celestial design. 
He saw hills with delightful valleys, lakes with lotuses on their bosom, 
mansions full of costly and curious artefacts, gateways and arches, O 
Bhaarata, and the king also saw many wide glades of grassy verdure and 
resembling level fields of gold. There were many sahakaras adorned with 
blossoms, ketakas, uddalakas, dhavas, asokas, flowering kundas, and 
atimuktas. He saw many champakas, tilakas, bhavyas, panasas, banjulas, 
and karnikaras laden with flowers. The king saw many varanapushpas and 
creepers called ashtapadika all clipped and tonsured. 

The king saw trees on which lotuses of all kinds bloomed in great 
beauty, and some of which bore flowers of every season. He noticed many 
mansions that looked like celestial vimanas or like great mountains. In 
some places, O Bhaarata, there were tanks and lakes full of cool water and 
others had warm or steaming water. There were diverse kinds of excellent 
seats, costly beds, bedsteads made of gold, encrusted with jewels, and 
overlaid with cloths and carpets of exquisite appearance and value. Of 
foodstuffs, there were vast quantities, all deliciously prepared and ready to 
eat. There were talking parrots, she-parrots, bhringarajas, kokilas, and 


katapatras with koyashtikas and kukkubhas, and peacocks, cockerels, 
datyuhas, jivajivakas, chakoras, monkeys, swans, sarasas and chakravakas. 

Here and there he saw bevies of rejoicing Apsaras and conclaves of 
happy Gandharvas, some of whom were sporting with their wives. The king 
saw these sights and sometimes the wonderful beings seemed to disappear. 
The monarch heard melodious songs and pleasing voices of gurus 
discoursing to their sishyas on the Vedas and the other shastras; and in the 
lakes he saw geese swim and play harmoniously. 

Seeing such wonderful sights, the king began to reflect inwardly, “Is 
this all real or a dream? Or is it a delusion of my mind? I have, without 
casting off my earthly body, attained this heaven. This land is either the 
sacred country of the Uttara-Kurus, or the abode, called Amaravati, of 
Indra. What are these wonderful sights that I see?” 

Reflecting in this strain, the monarch at last saw Chyavana in the golden 
palace supported by the columns made of jewels and gems, as he lay 
stretched on a priceless and gorgeous bed. The royal couple approached the 
Rishi with delighted hearts. Chyavana, however, vanished along with the 
very bed that he lay upon. The king then saw the Rishi in another part of 
those woods seated on a mat made of kusa grass, and engaged in silently 
chanting some high mantras. Thus by his yoga shakti, the Brahmana 
surprised the king. Then, in a moment all the delightful woods, bevies of 
Apsaras, bands of Gandharvas and towering, exotic trees disappeared. The 
banks of the Ganga became as silent as usual, and presented the old aspect 
of being covered with kusa grass and anthills. King Kusika and his wife, 
having seen a wonderful sight and its sudden disappearance, were amazed. 

With a delighted heart, the monarch addressed his wife and said, “O 
delightful one, the various scenes and sights found nowhere else, which we 
have just witnessed, are due to the grace of Chyavana and the power of his 
tapasya. All that one cherishes in one’s imagination can be attained by 
tapasya and it is superior to sovereignty over the three worlds. Well- 
performed tapasya leads to mukti. 

Behold the power of the high-souled and celestial Rishi Chyavana 
derived from his tapasya. He can, at his pleasure, create even other worlds 
than those which exist. Only Brahmanas are born in this world to attain to 
speech and understanding, and deeds that are so sacred. Who other than 
Chyavana could do all this? Kingship may be acquired with ease, but the 


status of a Brahmana is not thus attainable. It was through the power of a 
Brahmana that we were harnessed to a chariot like well-broken animals!” 

Chyavana became aware of these thoughts that passed through the 
king’s mind. The Rishi said to him, “Come here quickly.” The royal couple 
approached the great sage and, bowing their heads, they worshipped him 
who deserved worship. Praising the monarch, the most knowing Rishi 
comforted the king and said, “Sit down on that asana.” 

After this, O monarch, Chyavana, without guile or deceit of any kind, 
gratified the king with many soft words, and then said, “O king, you have 
completely conquered the five organs of action, and the five of knowledge, 
with the mind as their sixth. You have emerged unscathed from the fiery 
ordeal I prepared for you. Son, you have properly honoured and adored me, 
O foremost of all persons possessed of speech. You have no sin, not even a 
minute one, in you. Give me your leave, O king, for I will now return to the 
place from which I came. I have been exceedingly pleased with you. Do 
you accept the boon that I am ready to give you. 

Kusika said, “In your presence, Holy One, I have lived like a man in the 
midst of a fire. That I have not been consumed, Chyavana, is sufficient for 
me. That you are gratified with me is the highest boon that I can have, 
Brahmana. I have succeeded in rescuing my race from destruction, sinless 
one, and this for me is the best of boons. I regard this as distinct evidence of 
your grace. The very goal of my life and kingship has been accomplished; 
this is the highest fruit of my tapasya. If you have been pleased with me, 
Chyavana, then I beg you explain some doubts that are in my mind.” 


CANTO 55 


C hyavana said, “Accept a boon from me, and tell me what the doubts 
are in your mind, O king, and I shall certainly clear them.” 

Kusika said, “If you are pleased with me, Chyavana, tell me your 
objective in living in my palace for some time, for I desire to hear it. What 
was your objective in sleeping on the bed I assigned to you for twenty-one 
days continuously, without changing sides? In going out of the room 
without speaking a single word? Without any apparent reason, making 
yourself invisible, and becoming visible again? 

Why did you lay down once more and slept as before again for twenty- 
one days? Go out after you were massaged with oil before your bath? Burn 
diverse kinds of foods served in my palace? Your sudden journey through 
my city on the ratha? Your purpose in giving away so much wealth? Your 
motive in showing us the wonders of the forest created by yoga shakti? 

What was your motive for showing us, great Rishi, so many palatial 
mansions made of gold, bedsteads supported on posts of jewels? Why did 
all these wonders vanish from our sight? I wish to hear the cause of all this. 
Thinking of all that you did, Chyavana, I was amazed repeatedly and I 
failed to find the motive the influenced you. Being endowed with the wealth 
of tapasya as you are, I wish to hear the truth about everything that you did 
in detail.” 

Chyavana said, “Listen to me as I detail the reasons which impelled me 
to all these actions. Since you have asked me, I cannot refuse to enlighten 
you, O king. Once, when the Devas assembled together, I heard the 
Grandsire Brahma say that because of a conflict between Brahmana and 


Kshatriya tejas, there will occur a fusion in my race. And your grandson, O 
king, will become endowed with great energy and prowess. 

Hearing this, I came here, resolved to exterminate your race, in fact, to 
turn all your descendants into ashes. Inspired by this motive I came to your 
palace, and said to you, ‘I mean to observe a vrata, attend upon me and 
serve me dutifully. While living, however, in your house I failed to find any 
faults in you. It is for that reason, Rajarishi, that you are still alive. 

With this resolve I slept for twenty-one days in the hope that somebody 
would awaken me before I woke up myself. You, however, with your wife, 
did not awaken me. Even then I was pleased with you. Rising from my bed, 
I went out of the chamber without saying a word to either of you. I did this, 
O king, in the hope that you would ask me where I had gone, and thus have 
an opportunity to curse you. 

I then made myself invisible, showed myself in the room in your palace, 
and once more resorting to yoga shakti, slept for twenty-one days again. I 
thought that worn out with toil and hunger, you two would be angry with 
me and do something that would be distasteful to me. That is why I caused 
you and your wife to be afflicted by hunger. In your heart however, O king, 
not the slightest feeling of vexation arose. I was delighted with you, king. 
When I had you bring me diverse kinds of food and then burned them, I 
hoped that at seeing this you and your wife would yield to anger. However, 
you accepted whatever I did with no murmur of protest. Ascending your 
chariot, then, I said to you, “You and your wife bear me.’ You did what I 
asked, without the least hesitation, king. This delighted me. The gifts of 
wealth I gave away did not provoke you. Being pleased with you, I created 
with my yoga shakti the forest which you and your wife saw. 

Listen, O king, to the purpose I had. To gratify you and your queen, in 
your earthly bodies, I showed you a glimpse and a taste of heaven itself in 
these woods. All this I did to show the power of tapasya and the reward that 
is in store for righteousness. I know the desire that arose in your heart at the 
sight of those enchantments: you wanted to acquire the condition of being a 
Brahmana and the punya which accrues from it, O Lord of the earth; you no 
longer wanted sovereignty or even Swarga. 

To become a Brahmana is exceedingly difficult, Rajan, and after 
becoming a Brahmana to evolve into a Rishi is even more so. And for a 
Rishi to become a true Sannyasi is still harder. But I say to you that your 
wish will be granted. From you, O Kusika, will spring a Brahmana, who 


shall be called after your name. That man will be the third in descent from 
you and will attain the status of a Brahmana. 

Through the shakti of the Bhrigus, your grandson, O king, will be a 
Rishi endowed with the splendour of fire. He shall always strike fear into 
the hearts all men, indeed, into the inhabitants of the three worlds. O 
Rajarishi, accept the boon that is now in your mind. I shall soon set out on a 
tirtha yatra to all the sacred waters and fords. My time is running out.” 

Kusika said, “Even this, magnificent Rishi, is a great boon, for you have 
been gratified by me. Let what you have said come to pass. Let my 
grandson become a Brahmana and the status of Brahmatva attach itself to 
my race, O sinless one. This is the boon I ask for, but Bhrigunandana, most 
Holy One, tell me in detail how will the lofty condition of Brahmanahood 
attach to my race? Who will be my friend? Who will have my affection and 
respect?” 


CANTO 56 


C hyavana said, “I should certainly tell you everything about the 

reasons for which I came here to exterminate your vamsa. It is well 
known that, in sacrifices, Kshatriyas must always have the assistance of the 
sons of Bhrigu. Through an irresistible decree of destiny, the Kshatriyas and 
the Bhargavas will fall out. The Kshatriyas, O king, afflicted by a law of 
fate, will slaughter the race of Bhrigus, not even sparing infants in their 
mothers’ wombs. Then, in Bhrigu’s race a Rishi with the name of Urva will 
be born. Endowed with great tejas, he will resemble fire or the sun in glory. 
He will know such wrath upon hearing of the extermination of his race that 
it will do for him to consume the three worlds. He will be powerful enough 
to reduce all the earth, with all her mountains and forests, to ashes; and for a 
while he will quell the flames of that fiery rage, by casting it into the mouth 
of the Mare that wanders through the ocean deeps. He will have a son 
named Richika. through a decree of destiny all the science of arms in its 
embodied form will come to him, for the extermination of the entire 
Kshatriya race. Receiving that science by inward light, he will, through 
yoga shakti, communicate it to his son, the most blessed Jamadagni of pure 
soul. 

That tiger of Bhrigu’s race will bear that astra shastra in his mind. O 
righteous one, Jamadagni will marry a girl from your race, to spread its 
glory, lord of the Bharatas. Having acquired the daughter of Gadhi, and 
your granddaughter, that great Rishi will beget an enlightened son imbued 
with Kshatriya gunas. A Kshatriya son will be born into your vamsa, 
blessed with the virtues of a Brahmana. Possessed of great dharma, he will 


be the son of Gadhi. Known by the name of Viswamitra, he will in tejas 
come to be regarded as the equal of Brihaspati himself. The illustrious 
Richika will give this son to your vamsa, this Kshatriya of lofty tapasya. 
Two women shall be the cause of this exchange of sons, a Kshatriya son 
into the race of Bhrigu and a Brahmana son into your vamsa. 

All this will come to pass at the command of the Grandsire and not 
otherwise. To Brahmanatva will be attached one who is third in descent 
from you, and you will become a kinsman of the Bhargavas through 
matriage.’” 

“Bhishma continues, ‘Hearing these words of Maharishi Chyavana, 
King Kusika was filled with joy, and cried, “Indeed, O best of the Bharatas, 
so be it!” 

Chyavana spoke to the king again and urged him to accept a boon for 
himself. 

The king replied, “Very well. From you, O Mahamuni, I shall obtain the 
fruition of my wish. Let my race become invested with the status of 
Brahmanatva, and let it always set its heart upon dharma.” 

Chyavana Muni granted the king’s prayer and, bidding farewell to the 
monarch, set out on his tirtha yatra. 

I have now told you everything, Bhaarata, about how the Bhrigus and 
the Kusikas became connected to each other by marriage. Indeed, O king, 
everything fell out as Rishi Chyavana had said. The birth of Rama of 
Bhrigu’s vamsa and of Viswamitra of Kusika’s came to pass in the way that 
Chyavana had indicated.’” 


CANTO 57 


66 Y udhishtira says, “Pitamaha, I am overwhelmed to hear what you 
say. Reflecting that the earth is now destitute of almost all her 
kings and Kshatriyas, all of great power and prosperity, my heart is full of 
grief. Having conquered the earth and acquired kingdoms, counted by 
hundreds, Bhaarata, I am roiled with sorrow at the thought of the millions 
of men I have slaughtered. Alas, what will be the plight of those royal 
Kshatriya women whom we have deprived of their husbands and sons and 
fathers, uncles and brothers? Having slain those Kurus—our kinsmen, our 
friends and well-wishers—we shall have to fall into hell, with our heads 
hanging down. There is no doubt about this. 

I want, O my Grandsire, to mortify my body with the most extreme 
penance. With that end in view, I beg you, instruct me what I should do.’” 

“Vaisampayana continued, ‘The Mahatman Bhishma listens to what 
Yudhishtira says, reflects upon it deeply for a while, then replies. 

Bhishma says, ‘Listen to what I say to you, Yudhishtira, for what I have 
to say is exceedingly wonderful, and constitutes a great mystery. I will tell 
you about what ends men acquire after death as the rewards for particular 
deeds or courses of action they follow. 

One attains swarga through tapasya. By penance one attains fame. 
Through tapasya, O powerful king, one attains a long life and all things of 
enjoyment. Through penance one attains to knowledge, to wisdom, to 
health and freedom from disease, to beauty and radiance of person, to 
prosperity, and to blessedness, Lord of the Bharata vamsa. With tapasya one 
attains to wealth. 


By observing the vow of mowna, of silence, one succeeds in bringing 
the whole world under one’s sway. By giving dana, one acquires all kinds of 
pleasures and things of luxury. 

By observing the rite of diksha one finds birth into a good and high 
family. Those that spend their lives subsisting upon fruits and roots, and 
avoiding cooked food, succeed in gaining kingdom and sovereignty. Those 
that live upon the leaves of plants and trees as their food succeed in 
attaining to swarga. He that subsists drinking only water surely attains 
swarga. 

By giving gifts one merely increases one’s wealth. By serving one’s 
guru with reverence one acquires gyana. By performing sraddhas every day 
in honour of one’s Pitris, one gains a large number of children. By 
observing diksha upon herbs and vegetables, one acquires a large number of 
kine. Those that subsist upon grass and straw succeed in attaining to 
heaven. 

By bathing thrice every day with the necessary rites, one gains many 
wives. By living upon just water one acquires the regions of Prajapati. The 
Brahmana, who bathes every day and recites sacred mantras during the 
three sandhyas, becomes possessed of the status of Daksha Prajapati 
himself. By worshipping the Devas in a wilderness or desert, one acquires a 
kingdom or some great sovereignty, and by observing the vow of casting off 
the body through a long fast one goes straight into swarga. 

One who owns the wealth of tapasya and who always passes his days in 
yoga acquires fine beds to lie upon, and seats and chariots and carriages. 
Casting off the body by entering a blazing fire, one becomes an object of 
reverence in Brahmaloka. Those that lie on bare and hard ground gain 
opulent houses and furnishings. Those that clothe themselves in rags and 
tree-bark obtain rich robes and ornaments. By not indulging the several 
agreeable tastes one succeeds in acquiring great prosperity. By abstaining 
from meat and fish, one gets long-lived children. 

He who passes some time in the way of life called Udavasa becomes the 
very Lord of heaven. The man who speaks the truth, O best of men, 
succeeds in living in joy with the Devas themselves. By giving dana and 
dakshina one finds great fame in consequence of one’s lofty achievements. 
Through abstention from cruelty one acquires health and freedom from 
disease. By serving Brahmanas with reverence one attains to kingdom and 
sovereignty, and the status of a Brahmana. By making gifts of water and 


other drinks, one acquires eternal fame. By making gifts of food one 
acquires diverse articles of enjoyment. One who gives peace to all 
creatures, by refraining from doing them any injury, is freed from every 
world. 

By serving the Devas, a man obtains a kingdom and celestial beauty. By 
lighting lamps and bringing light to dark places frequented by men, one 
acquires excellent vision. By giving away goodly and beautiful objects one 
acquires a good memory and understanding. By giving away scents and 
garlands, one acquires fame that spreads far and wide. Those who abstain 
from shaving their hair and beards succeed in having noble children. By 
observing vratas and diksha and regular snanas, for twelve years, according 
to the shastra, a man acquires a realm superior to those attained by 
Kshatriyas who die in battle. 

By bestowing one’s daughter on an eligible bridegroom, according to 
Brahma vivaha, one gains, O best of men, male and female slaves and 
ornaments and fields and houses. By performing sacrifices and keeping 
fasts, one ascends to swarga. The man who gives away flowers and fruits 
succeeds in acquiring the most auspicious knowledge. The man who gives a 
thousand kine with horns adorned with gold, finds heaven. Even this has 
been said by the very Devas in a conclave in Devaloka. 

He who gives away a Kapila cow with her calf, with a brazen pot for 
milking, and horns adorned with gold, and possessed of diverse other 
auspicious qualities, finds the fruition of all his wishes from that cow. Such 
a man, because of that gift, dwells in swarga for as many years as there are 
hairs on the body of the cow and, why he rescues his sons and grandsons 
and all his clan to the seventh generation from naraka in the next world. 

The regions of the Vasus become accessible to that man who gives away 
a cow with horns beautifully adorned with gold, accompanied with a brazen 
jar for milking, along with a piece of cloth embroidered with gold thread, a 
measure of sesame and a sum of money as dakshina. A gift of kine rescues 
the giver in the next world when he finds himself falling into the deep 
darkness of hell; he finds himself restrained by his own punya karma in this 
world, like a boat with sails that have caught the wind, saving a man from 
being drowned at sea. 

He who bestows a daughter according to Brahma vivaha upon an 
eligible and deserving groom, or who makes a gift of land to a Brahmana, 
or who gives food to a Brahmana with due rites, attains to Indraloka, the 


kingdom of Purandara. That man who makes a gift of a house, well 
furnished, to a Brahmana given to Vedic studies and possessed of every 
accomplishment and good conduct, finds residence in the country of the 
Uttara-Kurus. 

By making gifts of draft bullocks, one acquires the realm of the Vasus. 
Gifts of gold lead to swarga. Gifts of pure gold lead to greater punya still. 
By making a gift of a fine parasol or chatra one acquires a palatial mansion. 
By making a gift of a pair of sandals or shoes one acquires fine 
conveyances. The reward attached to a gift of cloths is personal beauty, and 
by making gifts of scents one becomes a fragrant person in one’s next life. 

One who gives flowers and fruit, plants and trees to a Brahmana 
acquires, without any labour, a palatial mansion with beautiful women and a 
plenitude of wealth. The giver of food and drink of different tastes and of 
other things of pleasure gains a copious wealth of even such things of every 
enjoyment. 

The giver, again, of houses and clothes receives houses and clothes. 
There is no doubt about this. The man who makes gifts of garlands and 
incense and scents and lotions and unguents such as men use after bathing, 
and floral wreaths, to Brahmanas, is freed from every disease and gains 
great personal beauty, and sports in joy in the world kept for great kings. 
The man, O king, who makes to a Brahmana the gift of a house that is 
stocked with grain, furnished with comfortable beds and mattresses, and 
full of gold and other wealth, a mansion auspicious and altogether 
delightful, receives for himself an even more palatial dwelling. He who 
gives to a Brahmana a good bed perfumed with fragrant scents, covered 
with fine sheets, and soft pillows, wins without any effort on his part a 
beautiful wife, belonging to a high family and loving, agreeable and 
obedient. 

The man who dies a Kshatriya’s death on the field of battle becomes the 
equal of the Pitamaha Brahma himself. There is no end higher than this. 
Even this is what the great Rishis have declared.’ 

Hearing these words of his grandfather, Yudhishtira, the delighter of the 
Kurus, becomes eager for the end that is kept for Kshatriyas and no longer 
expresses any disgust at leading a grihasta’s life. Then, O foremost of men, 
Yudhishtira, addressing all the other sons of Pandu, says to them, ‘Let the 
words which our Grandsire has spoken command your faith.’ 


At this, all the Pandavas, with the famed Draupadi amongst them, laud 
the words of Yudhishtira and say, ‘Yes, so be it.’” 


CANTO 58 


¢ ove udhishtira says, ‘I desire, lord of the Bharatas, to hear from you 
what rewards accrue from the planting of trees and the digging 
of tanks.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘A piece of land that is pleasing to look at, fertile, 
situated in a scenic place, adorned with diverse kinds of precious metals, 
and inhabited by all sorts of living creatures, is regarded as the best. A part 
of such a piece of land should be chosen for digging a tank. I will tell you, 
in due order, about the different kinds of tanks. I will also tell you what the 
merits are that attach to the digging of tanks, with a view to draw water for 
the benefit of all creatures. 

The man who causes a tank to be dug becomes entitled to the respect 
and worship of the three worlds. A tank full of water is as agreeable and 
beneficial as the house of a friend. It is gratifying to Surya himself. It also 
contributes to the nurture of the Devas. It is the foremost of all things that 
lead to fame for the one who causes it to be excavated. The wise have said 
that the excavation of a tank contributes to the three purusharthas— dharma, 
artha and kama. A tank is said to be properly excavated if it is dug on land 
that belongs to those worthy of respect. A tank is said to serve all the four 
purposes of living creatures. Tanks, again, are regarded as enhancing, 
indeed constituting, the beauty and grace of a country. 

The Devas and Manavas and Gandharvas and Pitris and Uragas and 
Rakshasas, and even immobile beings all resort to a tank full of fine water 
as their refuge. I shall, therefore, tell you what the merits are that have been 
said by great Rishis to be attached to tanks, and what the rewards are that 


are attained by men that have them created. The wise have said that blessed 
indeed is the man whose tank is a repository for rainwater during the 
monsoon. The reward reaped in the world by the one who makes a gift of a 
thousand kine is won by that man whose tank contains water in autumn. 
The man whose tank holds water during winter acquires the merit of one 
who performs a sacrifice with plentiful gifts of gold. 

He whose tanks have water in the season of dew wins, the wise have 
said, the merits of an Agnishtoma sacrifice. That man in whose well- 
wrought tank water occurs in the season of spring acquires the punya of the 
Atiratra yagna. That man in whose tank water occurs in summer acquires, 
the Rishis say, the merits that attach to an Aswamedha yagna. 

That man rescues all his race in whose tank kine are seen to allay their 
thirst and from which righteous men draw their water. That man in whose 
tank cows slake their thirst, as also other animals and birds, and humans, 
surely acquires the punya of a horse sacrifice. Whatever measure of water is 
drunk from one’s tank and whatever measure is taken therefrom by others 
to bathe, becomes stored punya for the weal of the excavator of the tank and 
he enjoys the fruit of that merit for unending days in the next world. 

Water, especially in the other world, is difficult to obtain, O son. A gift 
of drink produces eternal happiness. Make gifts of sesame here. Make gifts 
of water. Do you also give lamps to light dark places. While alive and 
awake, you sport in happiness with your kinsmen. These are things which 
you will not be able to do in the other world. 

The gift of drink, O chief of men, is superior to every other gift. In 
regard to punya it is distinguished above all other gifts. Therefore, do you 
make gifts of water. 

Even thus have the Rishis declared the lofty punya of the excavation of 
tanks to be. I will now tell you about the planting of trees. Of immobile 
beings, the achalas, six classes have been spoken of—Vrikshas, Gulmas, 
Latas, Vallis, Twaksaras, and Trinas of diverse kinds. These are the several 
kinds of plants. Listen now to the punya that attaches to their planting. 

By planting trees one acquires fame in the world of men and auspicious 
rewards in the world hereafter. Such a man is lauded and reverenced in the 
world of the Pitris. Such a man’s name does not perish even when he 
becomes a dweller in Devaloka. The man who plants trees redeems the 
ancestors and descendants of both his father’s and his mother’s vamsas. Do 
you, therefore, plant trees, O Yudhishtira. 


The trees that a man plants become the planter’s children. There is no 
doubt about this. Leaving this world, such a man goes straight into swarga; 
many eternal regions of bliss become his. Trees gratify the Devas with their 
flowers; the Pitris by their fruits; and all guests and strangers by the shade 
they provide. Kinnaras, Uragas, Rakshasas, and Devas, Gandharvas and 
Manavas, as also Rishis, all have recourse to trees as their refuge. Trees that 
bear flowers and fruit gratify all men. The planter of trees is saved in the 
next world by the trees he plants, even like children saving their father. 
Thus, the man who wises his own weal should plant trees by the side of 
tanks and cherish them like his own children. The trees that a man plants 
are, according to both reason and the scriptures, certainly the children of the 
planter. 

That Brahmana who excavates a tank, and he that plants trees, and he 
that performs sacrifices, are all worshipped in heaven even as men that are 
devoted to perfect truthfulness of speech. Hence should one cause tanks to 
be dug and trees to be planted, worship the deities in diverse sacrifices, and 
speak the truth.’” 


CANTO 59 


: eye udhishtira says, ‘Amongst all the gifts that are mentioned in the 

treatises other than the Vedas, which gift, O Lord of the 
Kuruvamsa, is the most distinguished in your opinion? O puissant one, 
great is the curiosity I feel about this. Do you also discourse to me about 
that gift which follows the giver into the next world.’ 

Bhishma says, “An assurance to all creatures of love and affection and 
abstention from every kind of injury, acts of kindness and favour done to a 
person in distress, gifts made to one that solicits with thirst and satisfying 
the solicitor’s wishes, and whatever gifts are given without the giver ever 
thinking of them as gifts made by him, constitute, O Yudhishtira, the 
highest and best of all dana. 

Gifts of gold, gifts of kine, and gifts of land—these are regarded as sin- 
cleansing. They rescue the giver from his evil deeds. Do you always make 
such gifts to those that are righteous. Without doubt, gifts save the giver 
from all his sins. The man who wishes to make his gifts eternal should 
always give to deserving persons, and give whatever they wish for and 
whatever things are the best in his home. The man who makes gifts of 
agreeable things and who does unto others what is agreeable to them, 
always succeeds in acquiring things that are agreeable to himself. Such a 
man certainly becomes beloved of all, both here and hereafter. 

That man, O Yudhishtira, is a cruel wretch who, through vanity, does 
not to the extent of his means attend to the wishes of one who is poor and 
helpless and solicits his help. And he is verily the best of men who shows 
favour to even a helpless enemy fallen into distress, when such an enemy 


presents himself and prays for help. No man is equal to him in merit who 
satisfies the hunger of an emaciated person who is possessed of learning, 
destitute of the means of support, and weakened by misery. One should 
always, O son of Kunti, dispel by every means in one’s power, the distress 
of righteous men who keep vows and whose deeds are in accord with 
dharma, and who, though destitute of sons and wives and plunged in 
misery, do not yet solicit others for any kind of assistance. 

Those who do not utter blessings upon the gods and men in expectation 
of gifts, who are deserving of reverence and always contented, and who 
subsist upon such alms as they get without solicitation of any kind, are 
regarded as veritable snakes of virulent poison. Do you, O Bhaarata, always 
protect yourself from them by giving them generous gifts. Such men are 
competent to make the foremost of Ritwiks. You must seek them out 
through your spies and agents. You should honour those men with gifts of 
fine houses, furnished with every necessity and luxury, with slaves and 
serving men, with fine robes and vestments, O son of Kuru, and indeed with 
everything that can contribute to their pleasure and happiness. 

Righteous men of righteous deeds should make such gifts, impelled by 
the motive that it is their duty to act in this manner and not from the desire 
of reaping any rewards. Verily, good men should give in this way so that the 
virtuous men I have described might not, O Yudhishtira, feel any 
disinclination to accept those gifts sanctified by devotion and faith. There 
are persons bathed in learning and immersed in vows. Without depending 
upon anyone they obtain their means of subsistence. These Brahmanas of 
rigid vows are devoted to Vedic study and penance, without ever 
proclaiming their practices. Whatever gifts you make to such men of pure 
conduct, of thorough mastery over their senses, and always contented with 
their own wives in the matter of desire, are sure to win for you a merit that 
will go with you into all the worlds into which you may go. 

One reaps the same punya by giving dana to regenerate men of 
restrained souls that one wins by properly pouring libations into the sacred 
fire morning and evening. Even this is the sacrifice laid out for you—a 
sacrifice that is sanctified by bhakti and sraddha and that is endowed with 
dakshina. It is distinguished above all other sacrifices. Let that sacrifice 
ceaselessly flow from you even as you give. Performed in the view of such 
men, O Yudhishtira, a sacrifice in which the water that is sprinkled to 
dedicate gifts constitutes the oblations in honour of the Pitris, and the 


devotion and worship rendered to such superior men, serves to free one of 
the debts one owes to the Devas. 

Those that do not yield to wrath and that never desire to take even a 
blade of grass that belongs to others, as also they that are of agreeable 
speech, deserve to receive from us the most reverent worship. Such men 
and others, because they are free from desire, never pay their regards to the 
giver; nor do they strive to receive any gifts. They should, however, be 
cherished by givers even as they cherish their own sons. I bow my head 
down to them; from them both heaven and Hell may become one’s own. 

Ritwiks and Purohitas and Acharyas, who are knowers of the Vedas and 
who yet behave mildly towards disciples, become such men. Beyond doubt, 
Kshatriya prowess and energy lose their force upon encountering a 
Brahmana. Thinking that you are a king, that you possess great power, and 
that you have vast affluence, do not, O Yudhishtira, think to enjoy your 
prosperity without giving anything to the Brahmanas. Observing your 
svadharma, worship the Brahmanas with whatever wealth you have, O 
sinless one, to embellish your fortune and to sustain your power. 

Let the Brahmanas live in whatever way they like; you must always 
bow your head before them with reverence. Let them always rejoice in you 
as your children, living happily and according to their wishes. Who other 
than you, O Kurusattama, can provide their means of subsistence for such 
Brahmanas as are endowed with eternal contentment, as are your well- 
wishers, and as are gratified by having only a little? As women have one 
eternal duty in this world—dependence upon and obedient service to their 
husbands—and as such duty constitutes their only end, even so is the 
service to Brahmanas our eternal duty and purpose. 

If, at the sight of cruelties and other sinful deeds in Kshatriyas, the 
Brahmanas, O son, dishonoured by us, forsake us all, I say to you, of what 
use would life be to us in the absence of all contact with the holy ones, most 
especially since we shall then have to drag our lives on without being able 
to study the Vedas to perform sacrifices, to hope for worlds of bliss 
hereafter, and to achieve great feats? Let me, in this connection, tell you 
what the eternal usage is. 

In days of yore, O king, the Kshatriyas used to serve the Brahmanas. 
The Vaisya, similarly, in those antique days worshipped the Kshatriyas, and 
the Sudra worshipped and served the Vaisya. Even this is what we have 
heard. 


The Brahmana was like a blazing fire. Without being able to touch him 
or approach his presence, the Sudra would serve the Brahmana from a 
distance. It was only the Kshatriya and the Vaisya who could serve the 
Brahmana by touching his person or approaching his presence. The 
Brahmanas are endowed with a mild disposition. They are truthful in their 
conduct. They are followers of the sanatana dharma, the true religion. When 
angry, they are like snakes of virulent poison. Such being their nature, do 
you, O Yudhishtira, serve and attend upon them with obedience and 
reverence. 

Brahmanas are superior to even those that are higher than all the high 
and the low. The tejas and tapasya of even those Kshatriyas who blaze forth 
with energy and might, become as nought when they are faced with the bala 
of the Brahmanas. My father himself is not dearer to me than the 
Brahmanas. My mother is not dearer to me than they. My Grandsire, O 
king, is not dearer, my own self is not dearer, and my life itself is not dearer 
to me than the Brahmanas. 

On this earth there is nothing, O Yudhishtira, that is dearer to me than 
you are. But, Lord of the Bharata vamsa, the Brahmanas are dearer to me 
than even you. 

I tell you this truly, O son of Pandu. I swear by this truth, through which 
I hope to acquire all those realms of bliss that have become my father 
Santanu’s. Even now I behold those sacred regions with Brahma shining 
conspicuously before them. I shall repair thence, my son, and dwell in those 
worlds for unending days. Seeing these worlds, O best of the Bharatas, with 
my spiritual eyes, I am filled with joy at the thought of everything that I 
have ever done to help and honour the Brahmanas, O king.’” 


CANTO 60 


¢ move udhishtira says, “To which of two Brahmanas, when both are 

equally pure in their conduct, equally possessed of learning and 
purity, of birth and blood, but differing from each other in only that one 
solicits and the other does not—Pitamaha, to whom would a gift be more 
meritorious?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘It has been told, son of Pritha, that a gift made to an 
unsoliciting person produces greater punya than one made to a person who 
asks. One possessed of contentment is certainly more deserving than that 
person who is destitute of that virtue and is, therefore, helpless amidst the 
storms and buffets of the world. The strength of a Kshatriya consists in the 
protection he gives to others. The strength of a Brahmana consists in his 
refusal to solicit. The Brahmana possessed of steadfastness and learning and 
contentment gladdens the very gods. The wise have said that an act of 
solicitation on the part of a poor man is a great reproach. Those that beg 
from others are said to annoy the world like thieves and robbers. The man 
who begs is said to meet with death; the one who gives, however, does not 
meet death. The giver is said to grant life to him who asks. Through an act 
of giving dana, O Yudhishtira, the giver is said to save his own self as well. 

Compassion, karuna, is a very high virtue. Let people make gifts from 
compassion for those that ask. Those, however, that do not beg, but are 
plunged into poverty and distress should be respectfully and reverently 
invited to receive assistance. If such Brahmanas, who must be regarded as 
the foremost of their varna, live in your kingdom, you should look upon 
them as fire covered with ashes. Blazing with tapasya, they are capable of 


consuming the very earth. Such men, O son of Kuru’s race, though not 
generally worshipped, must still be regarded as deserving of worship in 
every way. Endowed with gyana and dhrishti, tapasya and yoga, such men 
always deserve our worship. O Parantapa, always offer worship to such 
Brahmanas. One should go of one’s own accord to those greatest 
Brahmanas that do not beg or ask anything from anybody, and make gifts of 
diverse kinds of wealth to them, in abundance. 

The merit that flows from properly pouring libations into the sacred fire 
every morning and evening is won by the person who gives dana to a 
Brahmana endowed with knowledge, with the Vedas and with high and 
excellent vratas. You should, O son of Kunti, invite to you such 
Brahmanottamas as are cleansed by gyana and the Vedas and by vows, who 
live in independence, whose Vedic studies and penances are hidden without 
being proclaimed from any house-top, and who are observant of noble 
vratas, and honour them with gifts of well-constructed and delightful houses 
furnished with servitors, fine robes and every amenity, and all things of 
pleasure and enjoyment. Being conversant with every duty and possessed of 
acute vision, those greatest of Brahmanas, O Yudhishtira, might accept the 
gifts offered to them with devotion and respect, thinking that they should 
not refuse these and disappoint the giver. 

You should invite to you those Brahmanas whose wives wait for their 
return like tillers in expectation of rain. Having fed them well, you should 
make gifts of additional food to them so that upon their return home their 
waiting wives be able to distribute that food among their children that 
clamoured for food but were pacified with promises. Brahmacharins of 
restrained senses, O son, by eating at one’s house in the forenoon, cause the 
three grihapatyas, the sacrificial fires of the home, to be gratified with the 
grihasta in whose house they eat. Let the sacrifice of dana proceed in your 
house at midday, O son, and do you also give away kine and gold and fine 
garments to your guests after feeding them well. 

By conducting yourself in this way, you are sure to gratify the king of 
the Devas himself. And that would constitute your third sacrifice, 
Yudhishtira, in which offerings are made to the Devas, the Pitris and the 
Brahmanas. By such sacrifice you are sure to gratify the Viswedevas. Let 
compassion, or daya, towards to all creatures, giving to them all creatures 
what is their due, restraining the senses, renunciation, steadiness, and truth, 


constitute the final bath, the avabhrita snana, of that sacrifice which is 
constituted by dana. 

Even this is the sacrifice that is spread out for you—a yagna that is 
sanctified by bhakti and sraddha, and that has a vast dakshina attached to it. 
This sacrifice of giving is distinguished above all other sacrifices, my son, 
and so let this sacrifice always be performed by you.’” 


CANTO 61 


66 Y udhishtira says, ‘I wish to know in detail, O Bhaarata, where one 
meets with the high rewards of gifts and sacrifices. Are those 
rewards earned here or are they to come in the hereafter? Which amongst 
these two, dana and yagna, is said to yield the superior punya? To whom 
should gifts be made? In what manner are gifts and sacrifices to be made? 
When, also, are they to be made? I ask you all these. Most learned 
Pitamaha, discourse to me on the dharma of dana. Tell me what leads to the 
higher reward— gifts made from the sacrificial platform or those made out 
of that place?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘A Kshatriya is usually engaged in deeds of fierceness. 
In his case, sacrifices and gifts are regarded as purifying or sanctifying him. 
They that are good and righteous do not accept the gifts of those of the 
royal order who are given to sinful deeds. For this reason, the king should 
perform sacrifices with abundant gifts in the form of dakshina. 

If the good and the righteous accept the gifts made to them, the 
Kshatriya should incessantly give dana to them with devotion and faith. 
Dana is productive of great punya; giving is a most purifying act. Observing 
vows, one should perform sacrifices and gratify with wealth such 
Brahmanas as are friends to all creatures, possessed of righteousness, 
conversant with the Vedas, and pre-eminent for their deeds, their conduct, 
and their tapasya. If such Brahmanas do not accept your gifts, no merit 
becomes yours. 

Perform sacrifices with copious dakshina, and make gifts of good and 
agreeable food to those that are righteous. While giving dana, you should 


regard yourself as performing a sacrifice. With generous gifts you adore 
those Brahmanas who perform sacrifices. By doing this you will acquire a 
share in the punya of their yagnas. 

You must always support such Brahmanas as have children and as are 
capable through their power of sending men into swarga. By conducting 
yourself in this manner you are sure to beget numerous and noble progeny, 
why, they say as many as the Prajapati himself. 

They that are righteous support and advance the cause of all deeds of 
dharma. Even by giving up one’s all, support such men, as also those that 
do good to all creatures. Yourself being in the midst of the enjoyment of 
affluence, do you, O Yudhishtira, make gifts of cows and bullocks and food 
and parasols and fine umbrellas, and rich robes and sandals or shoes to 
deserving Brahmanas. 

To sacrificing Brahmanas give ghrita, as also other fine and sattvic food 
and chariots and carriages with horses harnessed, and dwellings and 
mansions and soft beds. Such gifts are fraught with prosperity and affluence 
to the giver, and are regarded as pure, O Bhaarata. Those Brahmanas who 
cannot be censured for anything they do, and who have no means of 
support, should be sought out. Covertly or publicly do you cherish such 
Brahmanas by giving them the means of support. Such karma always 
confers higher punya upon Kshatriyas than even the Rajasuya and the 
Aswamedha yagnas. For through such karma, you will cleanse yourself of 
sin and become sure of attaining swarga. 

Filling your treasury, you should do all the good that you can to your 
kingdom. Through this you are sure to win great wealth and become a 
Brahmana in your next life. O Bhaarata, protect your own wealth and 
livelihood, as well as your power to do good to others, especially to provide 
the needy with the means of sustenance. You support your servants as your 
own children. Protect the Brahmanas so that they can peacefully enjoy what 
they have and also give them whatever they do not have. 

Let your life be devoted to the cause of the Brahmanas. Let it never be 
said that you do not grant protection to Brahmanas. Too much wealth or 
affluence, when possessed by a Brahmana, becomes a source of evil to him. 
Constant association with affluence and prosperity is certain to fill him with 
pride and cause him to be blinded to his true svadharma. If the Brahmanas 
become torpid and steeped in folly, dharma and karma are sure to be 


destroyed. Without doubt, if righteousness and duty are destroyed, that will 
lead to the destruction of all creatures. 

That king who, having amassed wealth, makes it over for safe-keeping 
to his treasury officers and soldiers and guards, and then begins again to 
plunder his kingdom, saying to his men, “Bring me as much wealth as you 
can extort from the kingdom,” and who spends the wealth, collected at his 
command through fear and cruelty, in the performance of sacrifices, should 
know that those yagnas of his are never approved, let alone lauded by the 
righteous. 

The king should perform sacrifices with such wealth as is willingly paid 
into his treasury by prosperous and unpersecuted subjects. Sacrifices should 
never be performed with wealth acquired through severity and extortion. 
The just king should perform mahayagnas, great sacrifices, with large gifts 
in the form of dakshina, only when, because of his being devoted to the 
good of his subjects, they of their own accord shower him with copious 
wealth brought willingly by them for him to spend in offering worship. 

The king must protect the wealth of the old, of minors, of the blind, and 
of those that are otherwise weak or handicapped. The king should never 
take any wealth from his people, if they, in a season of drought, succeed in 
growing any corn using water from wells. Nor should he take any wealth 
from weeping women. The wealth taken from the poor and the helpless is 
sure to destroy the kingdom and the prosperity of the king. The king should 
always make gifts of all things of enjoyment in abundance to the good and 
the righteous. He should assuredly dispel all fear of starvation which such 
men may have. 

There are no men more sinful than those upon whose food children look 
with wistfulness without being able to eat. If within your kingdom any 
learned Brahmana languishes from hunger like any such children, you will 
incur the sin of foeticide for having allowed this. 

King Sibi himself had said, “Fie on that king in whose kingdom a 
Brahmana or even any other man goes hungry.’ The kingdom in which a 
Snataka Brahmana goes hungry is quickly overwhelmed with adversity. 
Such a kingdom, with its king, incurs dire censure. That king is more dead 
than alive in whose kingdom women are easily abducted from the midst of 
husbands and sons, even as they scream and cry in outrage and sorrow. 

The people of a king who does not protect them should arm themselves 
to slay him, who only plunders their wealth, who confounds all 


discrimination, who is ever incapable of leading them in dharma, who is 
without compassion, and who is regarded as the most sinful of rulers. 

That king who tells his people that he is their protector but who does not 
or is unable to protect them, should be killed by his people, even like a dog 
that has become rabid. 

A fourth part of whatever sins that his subjects commit cling to that 
king who does not protect them. Some say that all the sins of his people fall 
on the head of such a king. Others are of the opinion that half of his 
people’s sins become his. However, bearing in mind the Manu smritis, it is 
my opinion that a fourth part of his people’s sins becomes the unprotecting 
king’s. 

That king, who properly protects his subjects, gains a fourth part of 
whatever punya his people acquire while living under his protection. 
Yudhishtira, rule your kingdom in such a way that all your subjects look 
upon you as their refuge as long as you are alive, even as all living creatures 
seek the succour of the god of rain or as the winged denizens of the air seek 
the refuge of a large tree. Let all your kinsmen and all your friends and 
well-wishers, O scorcher of your enemies, seek you out as their refuge even 
as the Rakshasas do Kubera or the Devas do Indra.’” 


CANTO 62 


: ad udhishtira says, ‘People accept with love and joy the 

declarations of the Srutis which say, “This is to be given. This 

other thing is also to be given!” As regards kings, again, they make gifts of 

various things to various men. What, however, Pitamaha, is the best or the 
foremost of all gifts?’ 

Bhishma says, “Of all kinds of gifts, the gift of land has been said to be 
the first in point of merit. Land is immovable and indestructible. It yields to 
him who owns it all the best things upon which his heart may be set. It 
yields robes and vestments, ornaments and gemstones, animals, paddy and 
barley. Amongst all creatures, the giver of land grows in prosperity for ever 
and ever. As long as the earth lasts, so long does the felicity of the giver of 
land grow. 

There is no gift that is higher, O Yudhishtira, than bhumidana. I have 
heard that all men have given a little quantity of earth; and since all men 
have made gifts of earth, hence do all men enjoy a little of the earth. 
Whether in this or in the next world, all creatures live under conditions that 
depend upon their own actions. The earth is prosperity’s self. She is a 
mighty goddess. She makes him her Lord in the next life who makes gifts 
of her in this life to others. That person, O best of kings, who gives away 
earth, which is indestructible, as dakshina, is born in his next life as a man 
and also becomes a lord of lands. The measure of one’s enjoyment in this 
life is commensurate with the measure of one’s gifts in a previous life. This 
is the conclusion to which all the scriptures point. 


A Kshatriya should either give away the earth in dakshina or cast off his 
life in battle. Even this constitutes the highest source of prosperity with 
regard to Kshatriyas. We have heard that land, bhumi, when given away, 
purifies and sanctifies the giver. The man of sin, who is guilty of even 
Brahmahatya, the killing of a Brahmana, and of every falsehood, is purified 
of his sin by giving a gift of earth. Indeed, a gift of land saves even the 
worst sinner from all his sins. 

The righteous accept only gifts of land and no other thing from kings 
that are sinful. Like one’s mother, the earth, when given away, cleanses both 
the giver and the taker. And this is an eternal and secret name of the earth— 
Priyadatta. Given away or accepted in gift, the name that is dear to her is 
Priyadatta. The gift of earth is the most desirable. That king who makes a 
gift of earth to a learned Brahmana, obtains from that gift a kingdom. 

Upon being reborn in this world, such a giver without doubt attains to a 
position equal to that of a king. Hence, a king as soon as he gets earth, 
should make gifts of land to the Brahmanas. None but a Lord of earth is 
competent to make gifts of land. Nor should one who is not a deserving one 
accept a bhumidana. They who desire land should, without any doubt, make 
gifts of earth. 

That man who takes away earth belonging to a righteous man never 
receives any earth. By making gifts of earth to the righteous, one gets good 
earth. Of virtuous soul, such a giver acquires great fame both here and 
hereafter. That righteous king about whom the Brahmanas say, “We live on 
land given to us by him,” is such that his very enemies cannot utter the least 
reproach about his kingdom. 

Whatever sins a man commits from want of the means of support, are 
all washed away by a gift of only so much earth as is covered by a cow- 
hide. Those kings that are mean in their actions or are of fierce deeds, 
should be taught that bhumidana is exceedingly cleansing and is the highest 
gift in respect of punya. The ancients thought that there was always very 
little difference between the man who performs an Aswamedha yagna and 
him that makes a gift of earth to one that is deserving and righteous. The 
learned doubt the acquisition of punya through all other acts of dharma. The 
only karma about which they do not entertain any doubt is the bhumidana, 
which is the foremost of all gifts. 

The man of wisdom who makes gifts of land, gives away all these— 
gold, silver, cloth, gems, pearls and other precious stones. Penances, 


sacrifice, Vedic lore, good conduct, absence of greed, firmness in truth, 
worship of elders, preceptors and the deities—all these dwell in him who 
makes a gift of land. They who ascend to the world of Brahma by giving 
their lives in battle, after having fought without any regard for themselves 
and only to secure their master’s weal—even they cannot surpass the merit 
of those that make gifts of earth. 

As the mother always nourishes her own child with milk from her 
breast, even so does the earth, this sacred Bhumi, gratify all the tastes and 
desires of the person that makes a gift of land. Mrityu, Vaikinkara, Danda, 
Yama, Agni who is possessed of great fierceness, and all the heinous and 
terrible sins cannot touch or come near the person that makes a gift of earth. 
That man of tranquil soul who makes a gift of land gratifies the Pitris 
dwelling in their own world and the Devas in theirs. The man who makes a 
gift of land to one that is emaciated and cheerless, destitute of the means of 
livelihood and languishing from weakness, and who thereby gives another 
in want the means of subsistence, becomes entitled to the honour and the 
great merit of performing a sacrifice. 

Even as a loving cow runs towards her calf with full udders dripping 
milk does the most-blessed earth go in love after the one who makes a gift 
of land. That man who makes a gift of tilled land to a Brahmana, or land 
sown with seeds, or land that has standing crops, or a mansion well- 
furnished with every necessity, succeeds in the hereafter in becoming the 
accomplisher of the wishes of everybody. 

The man who makes a Brahmana, possessed of a livelihood, owning a 
domestic fire and of pure vows and practices, accept a gift of earth, never 
falls into any danger or distress. As the moon waxes day by day, even so the 
punya of a gift of land is enhanced every time such earth yields crops. 

Those conversant with ancient history sing this sloka in connection with 
the bhumidana. Hearing that sloka, Jamadagni’s son Rama gave away all of 
this Bhumi to Kasyapa. This is that sloka: Receive me in gift. Give me away. 
By giving me away, you, O giver, shall gain me again! 

That which is given away in this life is re-acquired in the next. The 
Brahmana who recites this high declaration of the Vedas at the time of a 
sraddha finds the highest reward. A gift of earth is a high expiation for the 
sin of such powerful men who betake themselves to Atharvan rites for 
doing harm to others. Indeed, by making a gift of earth one rescues ten 
generations of one’s father’s and one’s mother’s vamsas. That person who is 


even conversant with this Vedic declaration regarding the merits of a 
bhumidana, succeeds in redeeming ten generations of both his mother’s and 
father’s families. 

The earth is the original source of all creatures, for it is from Bhumi that 
all creatures derive their sustenance. It has been said that Agni, the deity of 
fire, is the presiding genius of the earth. After the coronation ceremony of a 
king, this Vedic declaration should be recited to him, so that he may make 
gifts of earth and may never take away land from a righteous man. Without 
the least doubt, all the wealth owned by the king belongs to the Brahmanas. 
A king who properly knows dharma is the first requisite for the kingdom’s 
prosperity. A people whose king is unrighteous and godless in his ways and 
beliefs can never be happy. Such a people can never sleep or wake in peace. 
Because of his evil deeds his subjects are always filled with anxiety. 
Protecting what his subjects already have and new acquisitions, by lawful 
means, is never seen in the kingdom of such a sinful ruler. 

A people who have a wise and righteous king sleep happily and wake 
up in happiness. Through the blessed and righteous deeds of such a king his 
subjects are freed from all anxiety. The subjects, restrained from evil, grow 
in prosperity through their own pure conduct. Capable of keeping what they 
have, they continue to make new acquisitions in dharma. That king who 
makes gifts of earth is regarded as well-born. He is regarded as a man. He is 
a friend. He is righteous in his actions. He is a giver. He is regarded as 
possessing true prowess. 

Those who make gifts of ample and fertile earth to Brahmanas who 
know the Vedas always shine in the world in consequence of their tejas, like 
so many suns. As seeds scattered in fertile soil grow and return a goodly 
crop, even so all one’s wishes become crowned with fruition because of 
one’s making gifts of earth. Aditya and Varuna and Vishnu and Brahma and 
Soma and Hutasana, and the illustrious and trident-bearing Mahadeva, all 
laud the man that makes a gift of earth. Living creatures spring into life 
from the earth and it is into the earth that they are merged when they die. 

Living creatures of the four kinds all have earth for their essence. The 
earth is both the mother and father of the universe of creatures, O king. 
There is no element that can compare with Bhumi. 

In this regard, Yudhishtira, listen to the old narrative of a discourse 
between the Devaguru Brihaspati and Indra, king of swarga. Having adored 
Vishnu with a hundred sacrifices, each of which was distinguished by 


plentiful dakshina, Maghavat put a question to Brihaspati, that greatest of 
all the wise and the eloquent. 

Indra said, “Illustrious one, by what gift does one succeed in coming to 
swarga and attaining beatitude? O foremost of the eloquent, tell me of that 
gift which bestows truly high and inexhaustible punya.” 

Thus addressed by the Deva king, the Devaguru Brihaspati of great tejas 
said these words in reply to him of a hundred sacrifices: “Endued as he is 
with the punya that attaches to the bhumidana, the realm of felicity reserved 
for the man who makes a gift of such earth as is auspicious and rich with 
every desirable thing, is never lost or exhausted. That king, O Sakra, who 
wishes for prosperity and who wants to win lasting happiness for himself, 
should always make gifts of earth, with due rites, and to the deserving. If 
after committing many sins a person makes gifts of earth to Brahmanas, he 
casts off all those sins like a snake casting off its slough. He that makes a 
gift of earth is said to make gifts of everything—of seas and rivers and 
mountains and forests. By making a gift of earth, the person is said to give 
away lakes and tanks, wells and streams. 

Because of the moistness of earth, one is said to give away things of 
diverse tastes by making a gift of earth. The man who makes a gift of land 
is regarded as giving away herbs and plants possessed of high and 
efficacious virtues, trees adorned with flowers and fruit, delightful woods, 
and hillocks. 

The punya that a man acquires by making a gift of earth cannot be 
gained by the performance of even such great sacrifices as the Agnishtoma 
and others, with plentiful gifts in the form of dakshina. The giver of earth 
rescues ten generations of both his father’s and his mother’s races. 
Similarly, by taking away earth that was given away, one casts oneself into 
hell and casts ten generations of both one’s paternal and maternal lines into 
the same place of misery. That man who having promised to make a gift of 
earth does not actually make it, or who having made a gift takes it back, has 
to pass a long time in great torment from being bound with the paasa, the 
noose, of Varuna at the command of Yama. 

Men never to go to Yama who honour and worship those best of 
Brahmanas that pour libations every day on their domestic fire, who are 
always engaged in the performance of sacrifices, who have scant means of 
livelihood, and who receive with hospitality every guest seeking shelter in 
their homes. The king, O Purandara, should free himself from the debt he 


owes to the Brahmanas and protect the helpless and the weak belonging to 
the other varnas. The king should never take back land that has been given 
away by another to a Brahmana who is destitute of a livelihood. The tears 
that fall from the eyes of such Brahmanas can destroy the ancestors and 
descendants to the third generation of the one who takes their lands. 

That man who succeeds through his endeavours in re-establishing a 
king driven out from his kingdom, gains heaven and is much honoured by 
the denizens of swarga. The king who makes gifts of land with standing 
crops of sugarcane or barley or wheat, or with kine and horses and other 
draft animals—earth that has been won with the might of the giver’s arms— 
land that has mineral wealth in it and that is covered with every kind of 
natural verdure and richness, wins inexhaustible regions of felicity in the 
next world; and such a king is said to perform the earth sacrifice, the Bhumi 
yagna. 

That king who makes a gift of earth is washed of every sin and becomes 
pure and approved of by the righteous. In this world he is highly honoured 
and lauded by all men of dharma. The merit that attaches to a bhumidana 
increases every time the land given away bears crops for the owner, even as 
a drop of oil, falling upon water, is seen to spread on every side and cover 
the water’s surface. Those heroic kings and ornaments of great sabhas who 
cast off their lives in battle with faces towards the enemy, attain, O Sakra, to 
Brahmaloka. Beautiful women, skilled in music and dancing and adorned 
with garlands of celestial flowers, receive the giver of earth as he comes to 
swarga after leaving the world. 

The king who makes gifts of earth with due rites to deserving 
Brahmanas, sports in bliss in the celestial realms, in the constant company 
of the Devas and Gandharvas. A hundred Apsaras, wearing unearthly 
garlands, approach the giver of earth as he ascends into Brahmaloka. 

Flowers of exquisite fragrance, a majestic conch and throne, a royal 
chatra and matchless horses and magnificent and elegant rathas, await the 
one who has given gifts of lands. By making gifts of earth a king can 
always enjoy flowers of transcendent and intoxicating redolence and untold 
quantities of heaven’s gold. Possessed of all kinds of wealth, the commands 
of such a king can never be flaunted anywhere, and cries of ‘Jaya’—hail him 
wheresoever he may go. 

The rewards that attach to gifts of earth consist of dwelling in swarga, O 
Purandara, and gold, and unimaginable flowers, and plants and herbs of 


great medicinal virtue, and mineral wealth and verdant, sacred kusa grass. 
By making a gift of land a man acquires in his next life nectar-yielding 
earth. 

There is no gift that is equal to a gift of land. There is no elder worthy 
of greater respect than the mother. There is no duty higher than truth. There 
is no wealth more precious than that which is given away.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘Hearing these words from Brihaspati, the son of 
Angiras, Vasava made a gift to him of the whole earth with all her jewels, 
gemstones and gold and all her wealth of diverse kinds. If these verses 
declaring the merit attaching to gifts of earth be recited on the occasion of a 
sraddha, neither Rakshasas nor Asuras can appropriate even the least share 
of the offerings made. Without doubt, the offerings one makes to the Pitris 
at such a sraddha become inexhaustible. Hence, during sraddhas, the man of 
learning should recite these verses on the subject of the punya that attaches 
to gifts of land, in the presence and hearing of the invited Brahmanas even 
while they are engaged in eating. 

And so, O king of the Bharatas, I have told you at length about that gift 
which is the foremost of all gifts. What else do you wish to hear?’” 


CANTO 63 


: eye udhishtira says, ‘When a king grows desirous of making gifts in 

this world, what are the gifts which he should make, O best of 
the Bharatas, to such Brahmanas as possess superior virtue and 
accomplishments? What gift is that by which Brahmanas become 
immediately gratified? What rewards do they bestow in return? O 
Mahabaho, tell me about the lofty rewards attained through the punya 
arising from dakshina. What gifts yield rich fruit both here and hereafter? I 
wish to hear all this from you. I beg you, discourse to me upon it all in 
detail.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Once I asked the divine Narada these same questions. 
Listen to me and I will tell you what that Devarishi said to me in reply. 

Narada said, “The Devas and all the Rishis laud annrita, food, greatly. 
The course of the world and the intellectual faculties have all been 
established on food. There has never been, nor will there be any gift that is 
equal to the gifts of anna. Hence, men always particularly want to make 
annadana, gifts of food. In this world, food is the cause of energy and 
strength. The life-breaths are founded on food. It is food that upholds the 
wide universe, O mighty one. All classes of men, householders and 
mendicants and ascetics, exist depending upon food. The pranas depend 
upon food. There is no doubt about all this. 

Depriving, if need be, his own family, a man who wishes for his own 
prosperity should make annadana to a Mahatman Brahmana or a sannyasi. 
That man who gives food to an accomplished Brahmana who solicits it, 
secures for himself in the world to come wealth of untold value. The 


grihasta who wishes his own prosperity should receive with reverence a 
deserving old man who is spent with toil while wayfaring far from home, 
when such a man honours the householder’s home with his presence. That 
man who, casting off wrath that overleaps every bound, and becoming 
righteous in disposition and freed from malice, makes dana of food, is sure 
to attain to happiness, O king, both here and hereafter. 

The householder should never ignore a man that comes to his home, nor 
should he insult him by sending him away. A gift of food made to even a 
Chandala or a dog is never lost or in vain. That man who makes a gift of 
clean food to a person on a yatra, who is toil-worn and unknown to the 
giver, is sure to acquire great punya. The man who gratifies with annadana 
the Pitris, the Devas, the Rishis, the Brahmanas and Atithis arrived at his 
home, gains immeasurable merit. 

That man, who having committed even a heinous sin, makes a gift of 
food to one that solicits, or to a Brahmana, is never struck down by that sin. 
Annadana made to a Brahmana becomes well-nigh inexhaustible. That 
made to a Sudra becomes productive of great punya. Even this is the 
difference between the merits that attach to gifts of food made to 
Brahmanas and Sudras. Solicited by a Brahmana, one should not enquire 
about his vamsa, gotra, conduct or Vedic lore. Asked for food, one should 
give food to him that asks. There is no doubt, O king, that he who gives 
food obtains both here and hereafter many wonderful kalpa vrikshas that 
yield rare fruit and every other object of desire. 

Like tillers expecting auspicious showers of rain, the Pitris always 
expect that their sons and grandsons will make offerings of food to them in 
sraddhas. The true Brahmana is a great being. When he comes into one’s 
home and asks, saying, ‘Give me’, the owner of the abode, whether 
influenced or not by the wish to acquire merit, is sure to win great punya by 
giving in response to that solicitation. The Brahmana is the guest of all 
creatures in the universe. He is entitled to the first portion of every meal and 
offering of food. That house swells in prosperity to which Brahmanas come 
for alms and from which they return honoured by their desires being amply 
fulfilled. The owner of such a house takes birth in his next life in a family, 
O Bhaarata, which can command all the comforts and luxuries of life. 

By making gifts of food in this world, a man is sure to attain to an 
exalted place in the hereafter. He who makes gifts of sweets and indeed any 
food that is sweet, attains to a residence in swarga where he is honoured by 


all the Devas and the others. Food constitutes the prana, the life-breath, of 
men. Everything is founded upon food. He who makes gifts of food gains 
many animals, many children, considerable wealth, and an abundance of all 
things of comfort, luxury and enjoyment. 

The giver of food is said to be the giver of life. Indeed, he is said to be 
the giver of everything. Hence, O king, such a man acquires both strength 
and beauty of form in this world. If food be duly given to a Brahmana 
arrived at the giver’s house as a guest, the giver attains to great happiness, 
and is adored by the very Devas. The true Brahmana, O Yudhishtira, is a 
great being. He is also a fertile field. Whatever seed is sown in that field 
yields an abundant crop of punya. 

A gift of food visibly and immediately produces happiness for both the 
giver and the receiver. All other gifts produce fruits that remain unseen. 
Food is the origin of all creatures. From food comes satisfaction and 
delight. O Bhaarata, know that dharma and artha both flow from food. The 
cure of disease or the enjoyment of health also flow from food. 

In an olden Kalpa, Prajapati, the Lord of all creatures, said that food is 
amrita, the very source of immortality. Food is Bhumi, food is Swarga, and 
food is Akasa. Everything is established in food. In the absence of food, the 
five elements that constitute the physical organism cease to exist in a state 
of union. Without food, the strength of even the strongest man fails. 
Invitations and marriages and sacrifices all cease in the absence of food. 
The very Vedas disappear when there is no food. Whatever mobile and 
immobile creatures, chala and achala, exist in the universe are dependent on 
food. Religion and wealth, dharma and artha, in the three worlds are 
entirely dependent on food. Hence the wise should make gifts of food. The 
strength, energy, fame and achievements of the man who makes gifts of 
food constantly increase in the three worlds, O king. Prananatha, the Lord 
of prana, the life-breaths, Vayu Deva, takes the water evaporated by the sun 
up above the clouds. The water thus borne to the clouds, Sakra causes to be 
poured upon the earth as rain, O Bhaarata. The sun, through his rays, sucks 
up the moisture of the earth. The deity of wind causes the moisture to fall 
down from the sun. 

When water falls down from the clouds upon the earth as rain, 
Bhumidevi, the goddess of earth, becomes moist. Then do people sow 
diverse kinds of crops upon whose harvest the universe of living creatures 
depends. It is in the food, the annrita, thus created that the flesh, fat, bones 


and the vital seed of all beings have their origin. From the vital seed, the 
retas, spring diverse kinds of living creatures. Agni and Soma, the two 
agents living within the body, create and maintain the vital seed. Thus from 
annrita, food, the sun and the wind god, and the vital seed spring and act. 

All these are said to constitute one element or quantity, and it is from 
these that all creatures come. That man who gives food to one who comes 
into his house and solicits it, is said to give both life and energy to living 
creatures.” 

Having been told this by Narada, O king, I have always made gifts of 
food. Do you also, therefore, freed from malice and with a cheerful heart, 
make gifts of annrita. By giving food to deserving Brahmanas with the 
proper rites, you can be sure, O mighty one, of attaining swarga. 

Hear me, O Rajan, as I tell you of the realms that await those that make 
gifts of food. In swarga, the mansions of those Mahatmans shine with 
resplendence. Bright as the stars in the firmament, and supported upon 
many columns, white as the disc of the moon, and adorned with many 
tinkling bells, and roseate like the newly risen sun, those palatial edifices 
are fixed and also move as they will. Those palaces are filled with hundreds 
upon hundreds of creatures that live on land and as many as live in water. 

Some of them are endowed with the deep effulgence of lapis lazuli and 
some are possessed of the splendour of the sun. Some of them are made of 
silver and some of gold. Within those mansions are many kalpa vrikshas 
which yield every desire of those that dwell in them. Innumerable tanks and 
roads and halls and wells and lakes are to be found all around. Thousands of 
grand, colourful and exotic carriages with horses and other animals 
harnessed, and with wheels whose clatter is always loud, you will see. 
Mountains of food and all things of enjoyment and pleasure, and heaps of 
rich, unworldly cloths and ornaments you will find in plenitude. 

Rivers that run milk, and hills of long, peerless rice and other delicacies 
past describing, will you come upon. Many palatial dwellings there are in 
Swargaloka, which seem like great white clouds; opulent golden bedsteads 
and other furnishings and artefacts past anything you can dream of in this 
world will you come upon in the heavenly mansions of men who have 
given food to the deserving in this world. 

Therefore, become a giver of food. For, verily, such are the realms that 
are kept for those high-souled and righteous ones that give food generously 
in this world. 


And so I say to you again, men should always give dana and dakshina 
of annrita in this Bhumi.’” 


CANTO 64 


: ove udhishtira says, ‘I have listened carefully, Pitamaha, about the 

law with regard to the giving of food. Can you discourse to me 
now about the conjunction of the planets and the stars in relation to the 
making of gifts?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Listen to this ancient tale of the discourse between 
Devaki and Narada, that foremost of Rishis. Once upon a time, when 
Narada of god-like features and knower of every dharma, arrived in 
Dwaraka, Devaki asked him this same question. To her that had asked him, 
the Devarishi Narada replied as follows. Do you listen to what he said. 

Narada said, “‘By gratifying, O blessed devi, deserving Brahmanas with 
payasa mixed with ghrita under the constellation Krittika one attains to 
regions of great felicity. Under the nakshatra Rohini, to free oneself from 
the debt one owes to the Brahmanas, one should give to them many cuts of 
venison along with rice and ghee and milk, and other kinds of foods and 
drink. One giving away a cow with a calf under the constellation called 
Somadaivata, or Mrigasiras, goes straight from this world of humans to a 
realm of great felicity in swarga. 

One keeping a fast and giving away krisara mixed with sesame, 
transcends all obstacles in the next world, including the mountains with 
rocks sharp as razors. By giving gifts, O beautiful one, of auspicious rice 
cakes and other foods under the constellation Punarvasu one becomes 
possessed of personal beauty and great fame and takes birth in one’s next 
life in a family in which there is abundance of food. Making a gift of 
wrought or unworked gold, under the nakshatra Pushya, one shines in 


effulgence like Soma himself in zones of surrounding gloom. He who 
makes a gift under the asterism of Aslesha of silver, of a bull, is freed from 
every fear and attains to great affluence and prosperity. By making a gift 
under the star of Magha of earthen dishes filled with sesame, one becomes 
possessed of children and animals in this world and attains to every felicity 
in the next. 

For making gifts to Brahmanas under the constellation called Purva- 
Phalguni of food mixed with phanita, the giver observing a fast the while, 
the reward is great prosperity both here and hereafter. By making a gift 
under the nakshatra Uttara-Phalguni, of ghee and milk with rice called 
shashthika, one attains to great honour in heaven. Whatever gifts are made 
by men under the asterism of Uttara-Phalguni yield great punya, which, 
again, is inexhaustible. This is certain. 

Observing a fast, the person who makes, under the star Hasta, a gift of a 
ratha with four elephants, attains to regions of untold grace that bestow the 
fruition of every wish. By making a gift, under Chitra, of a bull and of fine 
perfumes, one sports in bliss in regions of Apsaras even like the Devas 
sporting in the woods of Nandana. By making gifts of wealth under Swati, 
one attains to such transcendent worlds as one desires and also wins great 
fame. By making gifts under the Visakha nakshatra of a bull, and a cow that 
yields copious milk, a cart full of paddy, with a prasanga covering it, and 
also clothes for wearing, a man gratifies the Pitris and the Devas, and attains 
to endless merit in the other world. Such a man never meets with any 
calamity and gratifies the Pitris and the Devas and attains to inexhaustible 
punya in the hereafter. Such a one certainly finds swarga. 

By making gifts to deserving Brahmanas of whatever they solicit, one 
attains to whatever means of life one desires, and is saved from hell and 
every disaster that visits a sinner after death. This is the certain conclusion 
of the scriptures. 

By giving gifts under the constellation Anuradha of embroidered cloth 
and other vestments and of food, observing a fast the while, one is honoured 
in swarga for a hundred yugas. By giving dana under Jyeshta of the herb 
called kalasaka with its roots, one attains to great prosperity in the next 
world, to whatever end he desires. By giving to Brahmanas under the Mula 
nakshatra, fruits and roots, with a restrained soul, one gratifies the Pitris and 
attains to whatever he might wish for. By making under the star 
Purvashadha gifts to a Brahmana conversant with the Vedas and of good 


family and conduct, of cups filled with curd, while one observes a fast, one 
is born in one’s next life into a family possessed of abundant kine. 

One obtains the fruition of every wish by giving dana under the asterism 
Uttarashadha, of jars full of barley-water, with ghee and the juice of sugar 
cane in abundance. By making a gift under Abhijit, of milk with honey and 
ghee to men of wisdom, a righteous man attains to heaven and becomes an 
object of attention and honour there. By giving under Sravana a gift of 
blankets or other cloth of thick texture, one roves freely through every 
realm of bliss, riding a white chariot of pristine resplendence. By making 
with a restrained soul, under Dhanishtha, a gift of a carriage with bulls 
yoked, or generous cloths and wealth, one goes directly into swargaloka in 
one’s next life. 

By making gifts under Satabhisha of perfumes with holy water and 
sandalwood, one attains in the next world to the companionship of Apsaras, 
as also eternal perfumes of diverse kinds. By making gifts under Purva- 
Bhadrapada—or Rajamasha—the giver attains to great happiness in the 
next life and an abundant store of every kind of food and fruit. He who 
makes, under Uttara, a gift of mutton, gratifies the Parees and attains to 
endless merit in the next world. To one who makes a gift, under the 
nakshatra Revati, of a cow with a vessel of white copper for milking her, 
the cow so given away comes to him in the next world, ready to grant the 
fruition of his every wish. 

By giving dana during the day of Aswini, a ratha with steeds yoked, one 
is born in one’s next life into a family that owns many elephants and horses 
and chariots, and he becomes endowed with great tejas. By making, under 
Bharani, a gift to Brahmanas of kine and sesame, one acquires in one’s next 
life great fame and an abundance of kine.” 

Even thus did Narada speak to Devaki upon the subject of what gifts 
should be made under what nakshatras. Devaki, having listened to the sage, 
told it to her daughters-in-law, the wives of Krishna.’” 


CANTO 65 


¢ ‘RB hishma says, ‘The illustrious Atri, the son of the Grandsire 
Brahma, said, “They who make gifts of gold are said to make 
gifts of everything in the world.” King Harischandra said that the gift of 
gold is sin-cleansing, leads to long life, and yields inexhaustible merit to the 
Pitris. Manu has said that a gift of drink is the best of all gifts; therefore, 
should a man cause wells and tanks and lakes to be created. A well full of 
water and from which diverse folk take water, is said to remove half the sins 
of the man who excavated it. The whole vamsa of a person is rescued from 
hell and sin in whose well or tank or lake, kine and Brahmanas and 
righteous people constantly quench their thirst. That man transcends every 
kind of calamity from whose well or tank everyone draws water without 
restraint during the parched summer. 

Ghee is said to gratify the illustrious Brihaspati, Pushan, Bhaga, the 
twin Aswins, and Agni Hutasana. Ghrita is possessed of high medicinal 
virtues. It is a most sacred requisite for every sacrifice. It is the best of all 
oblations. The merit that a gift of ghee creates is superior indeed. The man 
who wishes for happiness in the next world, who wishes for fame and 
prosperity, should, with purified body and soul, with his own hands make 
gifts of ghrita to good and great Brahmanas. 

Upon that man who makes gifts of ghee to Brahmanas in the month of 
Aswina, the twin Aswins, gratified, confer personal beauty. Rakshasas 
never invade the home of that man who gives payasa mixed with ghrita to 
deserving Brahmanas. That man never dies of thirst who makes gifts to 
Brahmanas of jars filled with pure and holy water. Such a man obtains 


every necessity of life, in abundance, and has never to undergo any 
misfortune or distress. 

That man who, with deep devotion and restrained senses, makes gifts to 
the best Brahmanas, is said to take a sixth part of the punya won by those 
Brahmanas through their tapasya. The man who gives gifts to Brahmanas of 
firewood with which to cook and also to keep the cold at bay, finds all his 
purposes and all his actions crowned with success. Such a one is seen to 
shine with great splendour and prevail over all his enemies. The illustrious 
deity of fire becomes pleased with such a man. As another reward, he is 
never robbed of his cows, and he is sure to achieve victory in battles. 

The man who makes a gift of a goodly chatra gains children and great 
prosperity. Such a one is never affected by any weakness of sight, and the 
punya of performing a sacrifice becomes his. That man who makes a gift of 
a fine umbrella during summer or the rains, has never to meet with any 
sorrow on any account. Such a man quickly succeeds in freeing himself 
from every difficulty and impediment. 

The most blessed and illustrious Rishi Sandilya has said that, of all 
gifts, the gift of a chariot, O king, is the best.’” 


CANTO 66 


2. Y udhishtira says, ‘I want to hear, Pitamaha, what punya accrues to 
him who makes the gift of a pair of sandals to a Brahmana 
whose feet are burnt by hot earth or sand, while he is walking.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘The man that gives to Brahmanas sandals, padukas to 
protect their feet, succeeds in crushing all thorns along the journey of life 
and overcomes every kind of difficulty. Such a man, O Yudhishtira, remains 
above the heads of all his enemies. Carriages of pure splendour, made of 
silver and gold, with mules harnessed, approach him. He who makes a gift 
of padukas is said to earn the merit of making the gift of a chariot with 
well-broken steeds yoked.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Tell me in detail once more, O Grandsire, of the 
punya that attaches to gifts of sesame and land and kine and food.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Listen, O son of Kunti, to what merits attach to tiladana, 
the gift of sesame, and having heard me, do you, then, O best of the Kurus, 
make gifts of sesame according to the law. Sesame seeds were created by 
the Self-born Brahma as the best food for the Pitris. Hence, gifts of sesame 
seeds always gladden the Pitris greatly. The man who makes gifts of sesame 
seeds in the month of Magha to Brahmanas has never to enter naraka, 
which abounds with all manner of terrible creatures. He who adores the 
Pitris with offerings of sesame seeds is regarded as worshipping the Devas 
at all the known sacrifices. One should never perform a sraddha without 
offerings of sesame seeds or without cherishing some purpose. 

Sesame seeds sprang from the limbs of the great Rishi Kasyapa. Hence, 
in the matter of gifts, they have come to be regarded as possessing great 


virtue. Sesame seeds bestow both prosperity and personal beauty and wash 
the giver of all his sins. For this the gift of sesame seeds is distinguished 
above the gift of everything else. Apastamva of great intelligence, and 
Kankha and Likhita, and the great Rishi Gautama all ascended into swarga 
by making gifts of sesame seeds. 

Brahmanas that perform homa with offerings of sesame, who abstain 
from sexual intercourse, and observe the dharma or karma of vyavahara, are 
regarded as equal in purity and power to ghrita, the havi of the cow. The gift 
of sesame seeds is distinguished above all gifts. Amongst all gifts, the gift 
of sesame is regarded as yielding inexhaustible merit. In ancient times, 
when once the Rishi Kusika could not find havi, O Parantapa, he made 
offerings of sesame seeds to his three sacrificial fires and succeeded in 
gaining whatever he wished for. 

This, O Lord of the Kurus, is what I have learnt about the excellent 
offering of sesame seeds, and this is why that offering has come to be 
regarded as being imbued with the most superior punya. 

Now listen to what I would tell you next. Once upon a time, the Devas, 
desirous of making a sacrifice, repaired to the presence of the Self-born 
Brahma. Wanting to perform their yagna on Bhumi, they begged him for a 
piece of auspicious earth, saying, “We want it for our sacrifice.” 

The Devas said, “O illustrious one, you are the Lord of all the earth as 
also of all the gods. With your leave, O most blessed one, we want to 
perform a yagna. They who have not acquired lawful means, the earth upon 
which to erect their vedi, their sacrificial altar, do not earn the merit of the 
sacrifice they perform. You are the Lord of all the universe of all mobile and 
unmoving beings, and it behoves you to grant us a piece of earth for the 
sacrifice we wish to perform.” 

Brahma said, “You best of gods, I will give you a piece of earth 
whereon, O sons of Kasyapa, you shall perform your sacrifice.” 

The Devas said, ‘Our desires, O Holy One, have been crowned with 
fruition. We shall perform our sacrifice even here with lavish dakshina. Let, 
however, the Munis always adore this piece of earth. Then there came to 
that place Agastya and Kanwa and Bhrigu and Atri and Vrishakapi, and 
Asita and Devala. The great gods, O you of unfading glory, performed their 
sacrifice. Those foremost of Devas concluded their yagna in due time. 
Having completed that sacrifice of theirs on the breast of that foremost of 
mountains, Himavat, upon the land given them by Brahma Pitamaha, the 


Devas attached to the very gift of earth a sixth part of the punya arising 
from their sacrifice. The man who makes a gift of even a small span of earth 
with reverence and faith, has never to languish from any difficulty and 
neither to meet with any calamity. 

By making the gift of a house that keeps out cold, wind and sun, and 
that stands upon a piece of clean land, the giver attains to Devaloka and 
does not fall from there even when his punya is exhausted. By making a gift 
of a dwelling, the giver, possessed of wisdom, lives, O king, in joy in the 
company of Sakra. Such a one receives great honour in swarga. That man in 
whose house a Brahmana of restrained senses, well versed in the Vedas, and 
belonging by birth to a family of preceptors, dwells in contentment, 
succeeds in attaining to and enjoying a world of the highest bliss. In the 
same manner, by giving away a goodly shelter for kine, a substantial 
construction that keeps out cold and rain, the giver redeems seven 
generations of his race from hell. 

By giving away a piece of arable land, the giver attains to excellent 
prosperity. By giving a piece of earth containing mineral wealth, the giver 
aggrandises his family and race. One should never give away any earth that 
is barren or that is burnt or otherwise arid; nor should one give away any 
earth that is in close vicinity to a smasana, a cremation ground, or that has 
been owned and enjoyed before by a sinner. 

When a man performs a sraddha in honour of the Pitris on land 
belonging to another, the Manes render both the gift of that land and the 
sraddha itself futile. Hence, a man of wisdom should buy even a small piece 
of earth and make a gift of it. The pinda that is offered to one’s ancestors on 
earth that has been properly purchased becomes inexhaustible. 

Forests, and mountains, and rivers, and tirthas are regarded as having no 
owners. No earth need be purchased in these for performing sraddhas. 

Even this is what has been said, O king, on the subject of the merits of 
making gifts of earth. Now, Anagha, I will speak to you on the subject of 
Godana, the gift of kine. Cows are regarded as superior to all the Rishis. 
And since it is so, the divine Mahadeva for that reason performed his 
tapasya in their company. Cows, O Bhaarata, dwell in Brahmaloka, in the 
company of Soma. That being the highest end, evolved Rishis crowned with 
ascetic success strive to attain to that very world. 

Cows benefit humans with their milk, ghee, curds, dung, skin, bones, 
horns and hair, O Bhaarata. Cows do not feel cold or heat. The monsoons 


do not affect them at all. And since kine attain to the highest end, 
Brahmaloka in the company of Brahmanas, even so do the wise say that 
sacred cows and Brahmanas are equal. 

In days of yore, King Rantideva performed a grand sacrifice in which an 
immense number of kine were offered up and slaughtered. From the juice 
that was secreted by the skins of the slaughtered animals, a river formed 
that came to be called the Charmanwati, after flowing from their skin. After 
that, kine were no longer animals fit for sacrifice. They are now animals fit 
for dana. That king who makes gifts of kine to the best of Brahmanas is 
sure to overcome any calamity that he might fall into. The man who makes 
a gift of a thousand kine has never to go into hell. Such a man, O ruler of 
men, gains victory everywhere. 

The king of the Devas has said that the milk of cows is amrita. For this 
reason, one who makes a gift of a cow is regarded as making a gift of 
nectar. Those who know the Vedas have declared that ghrita, the ghee made 
from cows’ milk, is the very best of all oblations poured into the sacrificial 
fire. For this reason, the man who makes a gift of a cow is regarded as 
making a gift of a libation for sacrifice. 

A fine bull is the very embodiment of heaven. He who makes the gift of 
a bull to an accomplished Brahmana receives great honour in swarga. Kine, 
O Lord of the Bharata vamsa, are said to be the prana of living creatures. 
Hence, the man who makes the gift of a cow is said to make the gift of life- 
breath. Men who know the Vedas have said that kine constitute the great 
refuge of living creatures. Hence, the man who makes the gift of a cow is 
regarded as making the gift of sanctuary for all creatures. 

The cow should never be given away for slaughter to one who will kill 
her; nor should the cow be given to a tiller of the soil; nor should the cow 
be given to a godless unbeliever, an atheist. The cow should not also, O 
chief of the Bharatas, be given to one whose occupation is the keeping of 
kine for profit. The wise have said that a person who gives away the cow to 
any of such sinful persons has to sink into hell. 

One should never give to a Brahmana a cow that is lean, or that births 
calves that do not live, or that is barren, or that is diseased, or that is 
defective of limb, or that is worn out with toil. The man that gives away ten 
thousand cows attains to heaven and sports in bliss in the company of Indra. 
The man who makes gifts of a hundred thousand cows acquires many 
regions of untold and inexhaustible felicity. 


Thus have I recited to you the punya attaching to the gift of sesame and 
of kine, as also to the gift of earth. Listen to me now and I will tell you of 
annadana, the gift of food, O Bhaarata. The gift of food, O son of Kunti, is 
regarded as a superior gift. King Rantideva, in days of yore, ascended into 
heaven from having made gifts of food. That king who makes a gift of food 
to one that is toil-worn and hungry, attains to Brahmaloka region of 
supreme felicity which is the Self-born’s own. 

Men fail to attain with gifts of gold and fine robes and other excellent 
things to that punya to which givers of food attain, O you of great 
puissance. Food is, indeed, the first among all created things. Food is the 
highest prosperity. It is from food that life springs, as also energy and 
prowess and strength. He who always makes gifts of food, with attention, to 
the righteous, never falls into any distress. Even this has been said by the 
great Parasara. 

Having worshipped the Devas duly, food should be first dedicated to 
them. It has been told, O king, that the kind of food that is eaten by good 
men is also consumed by the gods that those men worship. 

The man who makes a gift of food during the bright fortnight of the 
month of Kartika, succeeds in overcoming every difficulty here, and attains 
to unending bliss in the hereafter. The man who makes a gift of food to a 
hungry guest arrived at his home attains to all those worlds that are kept for 
those who know the Brahman. The man who makes gifts of food is sure to 
overcome every obstacle and distress. Such a one rids himself of every sin 
and cleanses himself of every evil deed. 

And so I have told you about the merits of making gifts of food, of 
sesame, of earth and of kine.’” 


CANTO 67 


¢ eave udhishtira says, ‘I have heard, O sire, of the merits of the 

different kinds of gift upon which you have dwelt. I understand, 

O Bhaarata, that the gift of food is particularly superior and laudable. What, 

however, is the great punya attached to making gifts of drink? I want to hear 
of this in detail, Pitamaha.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘I shall, O Bharatakulapati, tell you about this; listen to 
me carefully, O you of unbaffled prowess. Anagha, I will tell you about 
charity, dana, beginning with that of drink. The punya that a man acquires 
by making gifts of food and drink is such that the like of it, I think, cannot 
be acquired through any other gift. There is no dana that is superior to that 
of either food or drink. 

I say to you again that it is by food that all living creatures are able to 
exist. For this reason, food is regarded as a superior thing in all the worlds. 
From food the strength and energy of living creatures constantly increases. 
Hence, the Lord of all creatures has himself said that the gift of food is a 
most high one. 

You have surely heard, O son of Kunti, the auspicious words of Savitri 
herself about food or annrita. You know for what reason she said those 
words, what those words were, and how they were said during the chanting 
of sacred mantras, O Mahabuddhi. By making a gift of food, a man really 
makes a gift of life itself. There is no gift in this world that is superior to the 
gift of life. You are not unacquainted with this saying of Lomasa, O you of 
mighty arms. The end that King Sibi attained of old in consequence of his 
having granted life to the pigeon is acquired by him, O Yudhishtira, who 


makes a gift of food to a Brahmana. Hence have I heard that they that give 
life in this world attain to very lofty regions of bliss in the after-life. 

Yet, food, anna, O Kurusattama, may or may not be superior to drink. 
Nothing can exist without the help of what springs from water. The very 
Lord of all the planets, the illustrious Soma, once came forth from jala, 
water. Amrita and sudha and swadha and kshira, milk, as indeed every kind 
of food, the herbs, O king, and creepers and vines, medicinal and of other 
virtues, all come from water. From these, the life-breath of all living 
creatures flows. The Devas have amrita for their food. The Nagas have 
sudha. The Pitris have Swadha for theirs. The animals have herbs and plants 
for their food. The wise have said that anna, rice and grain, and the rest, is 
the food of the Manavas, humans. 

All these spring from water. Hence, there is nothing superior to the gift 
of water. If a man wishes to secure prosperity for himself, he should always 
make gifts of water. The gift of water is regarded as being truly 
praiseworthy. It leads to great fame and bestows a long life on the giver. 
The giver of water, O son of Kunti, always remains above the heads of his 
enemies. Such a man obtains the fruition of all his wishes and earns 
everlasting fame as well. The giver of water, O Lord of men, is washed 
clean of every sin and gains unending felicity hereafter as he goes forth into 
heaven, O you of great splendour. Manu himself has said that such a one 
earns realms of immortal bliss in the other world.’” 


CANTO 68 


¢ eae udhishtira says, ‘Ah, Pitamaha, tell me again of the punya 
attaching to gifts of sesame and of lamps for lighting darkness, 
as also of food and clothes.’ 

‘Bhishma says, ‘Listen, O Yudhishtira, to the narrative of the discourse 
that took place in ancient times between a Brahmana and Yama. In the 
country lying between the rivers Ganga and Yamuna, at the foot of the hills 
called Yamuna, there was a large town inhabited by Brahmanas. The town 
was celebrated by the name of Parnasala and was delightful in appearance, 
O king. A large number of learned Brahmanas lived in it. 

One day, Yama, the ruler of the dead, commanded a messenger of his, a 
Yamaduta clad in black, with blood-red eyes and hair standing erect, and 
possessed of black feet, eyes and a nose, all of which resembled those of a 
crow, saying, “Go to the town inhabited by Brahmanas and fetch hither the 
man known by the name of Sarmin who belongs by birth to the race of 
Agastya. He is intent on mental tranquillity and possessed of learning. He is 
a preceptor engaged in teaching the Vedas and his tapasya is famed. Do not 
bring me another man who also belongs to the same vamsa and lives in the 
same neighbourhood. This other man is equal to him that I want, in virtues, 
study and birth. In his children and conduct, this other resembles the 
intelligent Sarmin, but bring the individual I have in view. He should be 
worshipped with respect and not dragged here with irreverence.” 

Arriving in the town, the messenger did the very opposite of what he 
had been bidden. Setting roughly upon the wrong man, he brought him who 
had been forbidden by Yama to be brought. Possessed of great energy, 


Yama rose up at the sight of the Brahmana and worshipped him duly. The 
king of the dead then commanded his messenger, saying, “Let this one be 
taken back, and let the other one be brought to me.” 

When the great judge of the dead said these words, that Brahmana 
addressed him and said, “I have completed my study of the Vedas and am 
no longer attached to the world. Whatever term might yet remain of my 
mortal existence, I wish to pass, dwelling even here, O you of unfading 
glory!” 

Yama said, “I cannot ascertain betimes the exact period, ordained by 
Kaala, of anyone’s life, and since Time has not urged me in your case I 
cannot allow you to live here. I take note of the deeds of dharma, or 
otherwise, that a man does in the world. Do you, O learned Brahmana of 
great splendour, return immediately to your home. Also, tell me what is in 
your heart and what I can do for you, O you of unfading glory.” 

The Brahmana said, “You must tell me what those deeds are by which 
one may earn great punya. O best of all beings, you are the foremost 
authority on the subject, why, in the three worlds.” 

Yama said, “Listen, O Dvija, to the laws regarding gifts. The gift of 
sesame seeds is a very superior one. It produces everlasting merit. 
Dvijottama, one should make gifts of as much sesame as one can. By 
making gifts of sesame every day, one is sure to attain the fruition of one’s 
every wish. The gift of sesame at sraddhas is lauded. Verily, the gift of 
sesame is a most superior one. Do you give dana of sesame to Brahmanas 
according to the rites ordained in the shastras. 

On the day of the full moon of the month of Vaisakha, you should give 
sesame to Brahmanas. They should also be made to eat and to touch sesame 
on every occasion that you can afford. They that wish to achieve what is 
beneficial to them should, with all their souls, do this in their homes. 
Without doubt, men should also make gifts of water and create shelters of 
rest where drinking water is given to wayfarers. One should have tanks, 
lakes and wells to be excavated. Such deeds are rare in the world. Do you 
always make gifts of water, for such dana is fraught with great punya. 

O goodly Brahmana, you must also build wayside shelters where water 
is given to tired yatris. After a man has eaten, the gift he wishes most for is 
that of pure water to drink.” 

When Yama had said these words to him, the Yamaduta who had carried 
the Brahmana from his home conveyed him back. The Brahmana, on his 


return, obeyed the instructions he had received. Having thus returned him to 
his dwelling, Yama’s messenger fetched Sarmin, the one whom Yama had 
actually sought. Taking Sarmin to the Lord of death’s halls, he informed his 
master that he had accomplished his task. 

Possessed of terrible tejas, the judge of the dead worshipped that 
righteous Brahmana and, having conversed with him awhile, dismissed him 
to be returned to his home. To him also Yama gave the same advice and 
instructions. Sarmin, too, coming back into the world of men, did all that 
Yama had said. 

Like the gift of water, Yama, from a desire of doing good to the Pitris, 
lauds the gift of lamps to light dark places. Hence, the giver of a lamp for 
lighting a dark place is regarded as benefiting the Pitris. So, indeed, one 
should always give lamps to light dark places. The giving of lamps 
enhances the vision of the Devas, the Pitris, and one’s own self. 

It has been told, that the gift of gemstones is a superior gift. The 
Brahmana, who, having accepted a gift of gems, sells them to perform a 
sacrifice, incurs no fault. The Brahmana, who having accepted a gift of 
gems makes a gift of them to Brahmanas, acquires inexhaustible merit 
himself and confers inexhaustible merit upon him from whom he originally 
received the gems. Conversant with all dharma, Manu himself has said that 
he, who, observing proper restraint, earns and makes a gift of gems to a 
Brahmana, also observant of shastraic injunctions, earns inexhaustible 
punya himself and confers inexhaustible merit upon the recipient. 

The man who is content with his own wife and who makes a gift of 
clothes, gains an excellent complexion and fine vestments for himself. I 
have told you, O best of men, what the merits are that attach to gifts of kine, 
of gold, and the sesame in accord with the precepts of the Vedas and the 
shastras. One should marry, and beget and raise progeny from one’s wives. 
Of all acquisitions, O son of Kuru’s race, that of a male child is regarded as 
the highest.’” 


CANTO 69 


: mae udhishtira says, ‘Do you, O Kurusattama, expatiate to me once 
again the noble law regarding gifts, with especial reference, O 
you of great wisdom, to bhudana, the gift of land, earth. A Kshatriya should 
make gifts of earth to a Brahmana of righteous deeds. Such a Brahmana 
should accept the gift with due rites. None else, however, than a Kshatriya 
is competent to make gifts of earth. It befits you now to tell me what 
persons of all the classes are free to bestow if moved by the desire to earn 
punya. Also tell me what has been said in the Vedas on this subject.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘There are three gifts that go by the same name and that 
yield equal rewards. Indeed, these three confer the fruition of every wish. 
The three are kine, earth and knowledge. The man who speaks to his 
disciple words of righteous import drawn from the Vedas acquires punya 
equal to that won by giving earth and kine. Similarly are cows praised as 
objects of gifts. There is no dana higher than they, for cows confer merit 
immediately. They are also, O Yudhishtira, such that a gift of them cannot 
but lead to great punya. Cows are the mothers of all creatures. They bestow 
every kind of happiness. 

The man that desires his own prosperity should always make gifts of 
cows. No one should ever kick cows or walk brashly through their midst. 
Cows are goddesses and homes of auspiciousness; they always deserve 
worship. Formerly, while tilling the earth whereon they performed a great 
sacrifice, the Devas used a goad to strike the bullocks yoked to the plough. 
Hence, while tilling the earth for a yagna, one may, without incurring 
censure or sin, apply the goad to bullocks. Otherwise, however, bullocks 


should never be struck with a goad or a whip. When kine are grazing or 
lying down no one should annoy them in any way. When the cows are 
thirsty and they do not get water, because someone obstructs their access to 
a pool or tank or river, they can destroy him with all his relatives by merely 
looking at such a one. 

What creatures can be more sacred than cows when with their very 
dung, cleansed and sanctified, altars are made, on which sraddhas are 
performed in honour of the Pitris, or those on which the Devas are 
worshipped? That man who, before eating, himself gives every day, for a 
year, only a handful of grass to a cow belonging to another, is regarded as 
keeping a vrata which bestows the fruition of every wish. Such a man gains 
children, fame, wealth and prosperity, and dispels all evils and nightmares.’ 

“Yudhishtira says, ‘What should be the signs of cows that can be given 
as dana? Which are those cows that should be passed over in the matter of 
gifts? What should be the character of those to whom kine should be given? 
Who, again, are those to whom cows should not be given?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘A cow should never be given to one that is not righteous 
in conduct, or to a sinful man, or one that is covetous or one who is 
untruthful, or a man that does not make offerings to the Pitris and Devas. 
By giving a gift of ten cows to a Brahmana learned and rich in the Vedas, 
poor in earthly wealth, possessed of many children, and owning a home, 
one attains to numerous regions of great felicity. 

When a man performs any deed that is fraught with merit, helped by 
what he has got in gift from another, a portion of the punya attaching to that 
karma becomes his forever, with whose wealth the karma has been 
accomplished. He that begets a child, he who saves another from danger, 
and he that gives the means of sustenance to another are regarded as the 
three sires. Services dutifully rendered to the guru destroys sin. But pride 
destroys even great fame. Having three children destroys the blame of being 
childless, and the possession of ten cows dispels the reproach of being 
impoverished. 

To one who is devoted to the Vedanta, who is imbued with great 
learning, who has been filled with wisdom, who has complete control over 
his senses, who keeps vratas laid down in the scriptures, who has 
withdrawn himself from all worldly attachments, to him that speaks 
pleasantly to all creatures, to him that would never do an evil thing even 
when impelled by hunger, to one that is mild and possessed of a peaceful 


disposition, to one that is hospitable to all guests—verily to such a 
Brahmana should a man, possessed of similar conduct and blessed with 
children and wives, give the means of sustenance. 

The measure of punya that attaches to the gift of kine to a deserving 
person is exactly the measure of the sin that attaches to the act of robbing a 
Brahmana of what belongs to him. Under all circumstances you must avoid 
despoiling what belongs to a Brahmana, and keep his wives at a distance 
from yourself.’” 


CANTO 70 


B hishma says, “In this matter, O perpetuator of Kuru’s race, the Rishis 

narrate the great calamity that overtook King Nriga because of his 
despoiling what belonged to a Brahmana. Some years by, some young men 
of Yadu’s race, while looking for water, came upon a large well covered 
with grass and creepers. Wanting to draw water from it, they laboured to 
remove the creepers that covered its mouth. After the mouth had been 
uncovered and cleaned, they saw within the well a very large lizard that 
lived there. The young men made strong and repeated efforts to rescue the 
lizard. Like a very hill in size was that lizard and they sought to free it with 
ropes and leather thongs. Not succeeding, the young men then went to 
Krishna, and said, “Covering the entire hollow of a great well, we saw a 
great lizard. Despite all our efforts we could not set it free.” 

Hearing this, Krishna went with them to the well, easily fetched the 
lizard out from it, and asked it who it was. The lizard replied that it was the 
soul of the great King Nriga who had flourished in days of old and 
performed countless sacrifices. 

Krishna said to the lizard, “You did indeed perform many deeds of 
dharma, and no sin did you ever commit. Why then, O king, have you come 
to such a distressing end? Explain to us what this strange fate is and why it 
has befallen you. I have heard that you repeatedly gave dana to Brahmanas 
—why, of hundreds upon hundreds of thousands, and once again eight 
times hundreds upon hundreds of ten thousands of kine. Why, then, has this 
sorry plight overtaken you?” 


Nriga replied to Krishna, “Once a cow belonging to a Brahmana who 
regularly worshipped his home fire, escaped from the owner’s dwelling 
while he was away from home and entered my herd. The keepers of my 
cattle included that cow in their count of a thousand. In time, I gave away 
that cow to another Brahmana, with the wish of acquiring punya that would 
take me into swarga, and grant me joy there. Returning home, the true 
owner of that cow found her missing and set out in search of her. He found 
her in the yard of another Brahmana, the one to whom I had made a gift of 
her. 

Finding her, her real owner said, “This cow is mine!’ The other 
Brahmana contested his claim, till both, disputing and excited with wrath, 
came to me. Addressing me, one of them said, “You have been the giver of 
this cow!’ 

The other one cried, ‘You have robbed me of this cow; she is mine!’ 

I then asked the Brahmana to whom I had given the cow to return the 
gift in exchange for thousands of other cows. 

Without acceding to my earnest solicitation, he said to me. ‘The cow I 
have got is well suited to time and place. She yields a copious measure of 
milk, besides being quiet and fond of us. The milk she yields is very sweet. 
She is regarded as worthy of every praise in my house. She is nourishing, 
besides, a weak child of mine that has just been weaned. I cannot give her 
away.’ 

Saying this, the Brahmana left. I then solicited the other Brahmana 
offering him an exchange, “Will you take a hundred thousand kine for this 
one cow.’ 

The Brahmana, however, replied, “I do not accept gifts from Kshatriyas. 
I am able to manage without your help. So, lose no time but give me that 
very cow which was mine.’ 

Even thus, O Krishna, did that Brahmana speak to me. I offered him 
gifts of gold and silver, and horses and chariots. That best of Brahmanas 
refused to accept any of these and he also went away. Meanwhile, urged by 
time’s irresistible influence, I had to leave this world. Finding my way to 
Pitriloka, I was taken into the presence of the king of the dead. 

Worshipping me duly, Yama addressed me, ‘The end cannot be 
calculated, O king, of your deeds, so great has your life been. There is, 
however, a small sin which you unknowingly committed. Suffer the 
punishment for that sin now or later, as it pleases you. When you ascended 


your throne, you swore that you would protect all your people in the 
enjoyment of what belonged to them. You did not, however, blemishlessly 
keep that oath. Besides, you took what belonged to a Brahmana. This was a 
two-fold sin you have committed.’ 

I answered Yama, saying, ‘I will first endure the distress of punishment, 
and when that is over, I shall enjoy the happiness that is in store for me, O 
Lord.’ 

After I said those words to the king of the dead, I fell down to the earth. 
Though fallen, I could still hear some other words that Yama said to me 
ringing loudly in my mind. Those words were: ‘Krishna, the son of 
Vasudeva, will rescue you. Upon the completion of a full thousand years, 
when your sin will have been exhausted, you shall attain to the many realms 
of inexhaustible bliss that you have acquired through your great deeds of 
dharma.’ 

Falling down into this world, I found myself, head downwards, in this 
well, transformed into a creature of an intermediate order—this great lizard 
that I am. My memory, however, did not leave me. And today I have been 
rescued by you, gracious Lord! What else can I attribute this to than the 
puissance of your tapasya? Give me your leave, O Krishna—let me rise into 
swarga!” 

Then through Krishna’s grace and with his leave, King Nriga bowed his 
head to him and mounting a celestial vimana flew up into swarga. After 
Nriga had gone, Krishna spoke this sloka: No one should knowingly 
appropriate anything that belongs to a Brahmana. The property of a 
Brahmana, if taken, destroys the taker even as the Brahmana’s cow 
destroyed King Nriga! 

I tell you, again, O Kaunteya, that a meeting with the good never proves 
fruitless. King Nriga was rescued from hell through meeting with one that 
was indeed good, the best of all men. As giving dana yields punya even so 
does taking from a Brahmana lead to sin and punishment. So, also, 
Yudhishtira, one should avoid doing any injury to kine.’” 


CANTO 71 


¢ mae udhishtira says, ‘Sinless one, tell me in more detail about the 
merits attainable by making gifts of kine. Mahabaho, I am never 
satiated with listening to you.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘In this regard the old story of the discourse between 
Rishi Uddalaki and his son Nachiketa is often told. Once on a time, Rishi 
Uddalaki of great intelligence approached his son Nachiketa, and said to 
him, “Do you wait upon and serve me.” 

Upon the completion of the vow he had undertaken, the great Rishi 
once more said to his son, “Engaged in performing my ablutions and deeply 
absorbed by my Vedic study, I have forgotten to bring firewood with me, as 
also the kusa grasses, the flowers, the water jar and the herbs I had gathered. 
Bring me these things from the riverside.” 

The son went to the place which his father described but saw that all 
those things had been washed away by the current. Coming back to his 
father, he said, “I do not see the things you left.” 

Roiled as he then was with hunger, thirst and fatigue, Rishi Uddalaki of 
great punya, cursed him in sudden wrath, “Do you meet with Yama today!” 

Struck by his sire with the thunder of his curse, the son, with joined 
palms, said, “Be appeased with me.” 

Soon, however, he fell down on the ground, lifeless. Seeing Nachiketa 
prostrated upon the earth, his father became unhinged with grief. Crying, 
‘Alas, what have I done!” he also fell to the ground. Stricken by grief, as he 
indulged in lamentations for his son, the rest of that day passed and night 
came. Then Nachiketa, O son of Kuru’s race, drenched by the tears of his 


father, gave signs of returning to life as he lay on a mat of kusa grass. His 
being restored to life by the tears of his father resembled the sprouting forth 
of seeds when drenched with auspicious showers. The son just restored to 
consciousness was still weak. His body was smeared with fragrant liniments 
and he looked like one waking from a deep slumber. 

The Rishi asked him, “Have you, O son, acquired auspicious realms 
through your own karma? By good fortune, you have been restored to me. 
But your body does not seem to be human!” 

Nachiketa made the following reply in the midst of all the gathered 
Rishis, “In obedience to your command I journeyed to the vast world of 
Yama which is possessed of a charming effulgence. There I beheld a 
palatial mansion which extended for thousands of yojanas and emanated a 
golden splendour from its every part. As soon as Yama saw me approach 
with my face towards him, he commanded his attendants, saying, ‘Give him 
a fine seat.’ 

Verily, for your sake, the Lord of the dead worshipped me with the 
arghya. Thus worshipped by Yama and seated in the midst of his 
counsellors, I said mildly, ‘I have come to your abode, O judge of the dead. 
Do you assign to me those realms which I deserve for my actions.’ 

Yama answered me, ‘You are not dead, O amiable one. Endowed with 
tapasya, your father said to you, “Do you meet with Yama today!” The tejas 
of your father is like a blazing fire. I could not possibly make what he said 
false. You have met me now, child, do you go hence. For the author of your 
body indulges in heartbroken lamentations for you. You are my dear guest 
today. What wish that you cherish in your heart shall I grant you? Ask me 
for the fruition of whatever desire you may have.’ 

I replied to the king of the dead, saying, ‘I have arrived in your 
dominions from which no traveller ever returns. If I truly deserve your 
kindness, I wish, O Lord of the dead, to see the regions of high felicity and 
happiness that are earned by the doers of righteous deeds.’ 

Immediately, Yama made me mount a chariot of splendour, effulgent as 
the sun, and to which were harnessed many unworldly steeds. Bearing me 
on that ratha, he showed me himself, O Dvijottama, all those realms of bliss 
and fascination that are kept for the righteous. I saw in those worlds many 
mansions of great resplendence intended for Mahatmans. 

Those palaces are of diverse forms and are adorned with every kind of 
gemstone of heaven. Bright as the disc of the moon, they are adorned with 


rows of tinkling bells. Hundreds among them are of many storeys. Within 
their precincts are enchanting groves and woods, with transparent pools and 
lakes. Possessed of the lustre of lapis lazuli and the sun, and made of silver 
and gold, their complexion resembles the colour of the dawn. Some of them 
are immovable and some go anywhere. 

Within them are extravagant mounds of unearthly food and drink, other 
things of enjoyment, and rich robes and soft beds in abundance. Within 
them are so many trees, kalpa vrikshas that grant every wish. There are also 
many rivers and roads and spacious halls, and lakes and large tanks. 
Thousands of chariots with rattling wheels can be seen there, with excellent 
steeds harnessed. Many rivers that flow milk, many hillocks of heaven’s 
ghrita, and sparkling pools of lucid water are seen all around. 

Verily, I beheld many such realms, which I never saw before, wondrous 
worlds of happiness and joy, all given by the king of the dead. Seeing all 
these, I addressed that ancient and powerful judge of the dead, saying, “For 
whose use and enjoyment have these rivers with eternal currents of kshira 
and ghrita been ordained?’ 

Yama answered me saying, “These streams of milk and ghee, know you, 
are for the enjoyment of those righteous ones that make gifts in the world of 
men. Other eternal worlds there are which are filled with such mansions of 
light free from sorrow of every kind. These are kept for those that make 
gifts of kine. The mere gift of kine is not worthy of praise. There are other 
considerations about the person to whom kine should be given, the time for 
making those gifts, the kind of cows that should be given, and the rites that 
should be observed in making the gifts. Godana, the gift of kine, should be 
made after ascertaining the character and excellence of both the Brahmanas 
who are to receive them and the kine themselves which are to be given. 

Cows should not be given to one in whose dwelling they are likely to 
suffer from fire or the sun. That Brahmana who is possessed of Vedic lore, 
who is of austere penances, and who performs sacrifices, is regarded as 
worthy of receiving kine in dana. Cows that have been rescued from 
distress, or that have been given by poor householders from want of 
sufficient means to feed and cherish them, are reckoned as being of great 
value. 

Abstaining from all food and living upon water alone for three nights 
and sleeping the while on the bare earth, one should, having properly fed 
the cows one intends to give away, bestow them on deserving Brahmanas 


after having gratified the holy men with other gifts as well. The cows given 
away should be accompanied by their calves. They should, again, be such 
as will bring forth good calves in the proper seasons. They should be 
accompanied with other accoutrements. Having completed the dakshina, the 
giver should live for three days on only milk and forbear from food of every 
other kind. He who gives a cow that is gentle and not vicious, that brings 
forth good calves at proper intervals, and that does not run away from the 
owner’s house, and accompanies such a gift with a vessel of white brass for 
milking her, enjoys the bliss of heaven for as many years as are measured 
by the number of hairs on the animal’s body. 

He, who gives a Brahmana a bull well-broken and able to bear fair 
burdens, strong and young in years, disinclined to any mischief, big and 
energetic, enjoys the regions that are reserved for givers of kine. He is 
regarded as a proper person for receiving a cow in gift who is known to be 
mild towards kine, who takes cows for his refuge, who is grateful, and who 
has no means of subsistence. When an old man falls ill, or when a 
Brahmana intends to perform a sacrifice, or when one wishes to till the 
earth for farming, or when one has a son through the efficacy of a homa 
performed, or for the use of one’s guru, or for the nurture of a child born 
naturally, one should give away a beloved cow. 

Even these are the considerations that are lauded in the matter of 
making gifts of cows, in respect of place and time. The cows that deserve to 
be given away are those that yield copious measures of milk, or those that 
are well known for their docility and other virtues; or those that have been 
purchased for a price, or those that have been acquired through the giver’s 
learning, or those that have been obtained in exchange for other living 
creatures such as sheep and goats, or those that have been won by prowess 
of arms, or those that have been gained as a marriage-dower from fathers- 
in-law and other relatives of the giver’s wife.’” 

Nachiketa continued, “Hearing these words of Vaivaswata, I once more 
addressed him, saying, ‘What are those things by giving which, when kine 
are not available, givers may yet go to regions reserved for men making 
gifts of kine?’ 

The wise Yama answered, explaining further what the end is that is 
attainable by making gifts of cows. He said, ‘In the absence of kine, by 
making gifts of what has been regarded as the substitute for cows, a man 
wins the punya of making gifts of the sacred creatures. If, in the absence of 


kine, one makes a gift of a cow made of ghee, observing a vrata the while, 
one gets for one’s use these rivers of ghee, all of which approach one like 
an affectionate mother approaching her beloved child. If, in the absence of 
even a cow made of ghee, one makes a gift of a cow made of sesame seeds, 
observing a vow the while, one succeeds with the help of that cow to 
overcome all calamities in this world and to enjoy great happiness hereafter 
from these rivers of milk that you see before you. If in the absence of a cow 
made of sesame seeds, one makes a gift of a cow made of water, one 
succeeds in coming to these happy realms and enjoying this river of cool 
and transparent water, which is, besides, capable of granting the fruition of 
every wish.’ 

The king of the dead explained to me all this while I was his guest, and, 
O you of unfading glory, great was the joy that I felt at sight of all the 
wonders he showed me. I shall now tell you what will certainly be 
agreeable to you. I have now found a great sacrifice whose performance 
does not require much wealth. That sacrifice of the dakshina of cows may 
be said to flow from me, O my sire. Others will obtain it also. It is in 
consonance with the laws of the Vedas. 

The curse that you pronounced upon me was no curse but in reality a 
blessing, since it enabled me to see the great Lord Yama of the dead. In his 
world I have seen the rewards that attach to giving dakshina. I shall, 
henceforth, O Mahatman, practise the dharma of giving dana without any 
doubt lurking in my mind about its rewards. And, O great Rishi, the 
righteous Yama, filled with joy, repeatedly told me, “One, who, by making 
frequent gifts, has succeeded in acquiring purity of mind should then 
especially make gifts of kine. This subject of giving dakshina is fraught 
with sanctity. Do you never disregard the dharma of giving. Gifts, again, 
should be made to deserving persons, when time and place are both 
suitable. Do you, therefore, always make gifts of kine. Never entertain any 
doubts in this respect. 

Devoted to the path of giving, many Mahatmans in days of yore would 
make gifts of kine. Fearing to practise austere tapasya, they made gifts 
according to the extent of their means. In time, they cast off all sentiments 
of pride and vanity, and purified their souls. Engaged in performing 
sraddhas in honour of the Pitris and in all acts of dharma, they would make, 
according to the extent of their ability, gifts of cows, and as the reward of 


those gifts they have attained to swarga and they shine in effulgence for 
their righteousness. 

O the eighth day of the moon known as Kamyashtami, make gifts of 
kine, properly won, to Brahmanas after ascertaining the eligibility of the 
recipients. After making the gift, you should then subsist for ten days upon 
only the milk of cows, their dung and their urine, while abstaining from all 
other food. 

The punya that one acquires by making a gift of a bull is equal to that 
which attaches to the Daiva vrata. By making a gift of a bull and cows one 
acquires, as the reward thereof, a spontaneous mastery of the Vedas. By 
making a gift of chariots and carriages with bulls yoked, one acquires the 
merit of baths in sacred waters, the holy tirthas. By making a gift of a cow 
of the Kapila species, one is purified of all one’s sins. Verily, by giving 
away even a single Kapila cow that has been acquired by legitimate means, 
one is cleansed of all the sins one may have ever committed. 

There is nothing higher in taste than the milk yielded by cows. The gift 
of a cow, godana, is regarded as the most superior gift. By yielding their 
precious milk, cows save all the worlds from every calamity. It is cows, 
again, that produce the food upon which all creatures live. He, who, 
knowing the extent of the service that cows render, does not entertain in his 
heart love for cows, is a sinner who is certain to fall into hell. 

If one gives a thousand or a hundred or ten or five kine, verily, if one 
gives to a righteous Brahmana even a single cow which brings forth good 
calves at proper intervals, one is sure to see that cow approach one in 
heaven in the form of a river of sacred water which grants every wish. In 
respect of the prosperity and the growth that cows confer, in the matter also 
of the protection that kine grant to all creatures of the earth, cows are equal 
to the very rays of the sun that fall on the earth. 

The word that signifies the cow, Aditi, stands also for the rays of the 
sun. The giver of a cow becomes the progenitor of a great vamsa that 
extends over a large tract of the earth. Hence, he that gives a cow shines 
like a second sun in splendour. The disciple should, in the matter of godana, 
carefully choose his preceptor. Such a disciple is sure to find swarga for 
himself. The choosing of a guru for the performance of pious deeds is 
regarded as a sacred duty by those who know the shastras. This is, indeed, 
the first law; all others depend upon it. 


Choosing, after examination, an eligible Brahmana, one should give 
him the dakshina of a cow that has been acquired by legitimate means, and 
having made the gift cause him to accept it. The gods and men and we, also, 
in wishing each other well, say, ‘Let the punya of dana be yours in 
consequence of your dharma!’” 

Even thus did the Lord of the dead speak to me, O Dvija. I then bowed 
my head to the righteous Yama. With his leave, I left his dominions and 
have now returned to worship at your feet.’””’ 


CANTO 72 


Y udhishtira says, “You have, Pitamaha, spoken of godana in speaking 

of Rishi Nachiketa. You have also implicitly discoursed, O mighty 
one, on the efficacy and pre-eminence of that act. You have also told me, O 
Grandsire of great intelligence, of the terrible fate that overtook the 
Mahatman King Nriga because of a single fault. He had to spend a long 
time in Dwaravati in the form of a mighty lizard until Krishna saved him 
from that plight. I have, however, one question. It is on the subject of 
Goloka, the higher realm of cows. I wish to hear, in detail, about those 
regions which are kept for those that make gifts of kine.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Listen, then, to the old tale of the discourse between 
him who sprang from the primeval lotus and him who performed a hundred 
sacrifices. 

Sakra once said, “I see, O Pitamaha, that those who are dwellers in 
Goloka surpass in both their resplendence and their prosperity the denizens 
of Swargaloka and pass them by as beings of inferior station. And this has 
raised a query in my mind. Of what kind, O Holy One, are the worlds of 
kine? Tell me all about them, O sinless one. Verily, what is the nature of 
those realms that are inhabited by givers of cows? I wish to know of what 
kind they are. What fruits do they bring? What is the highest objective there 
which the denizens of Goloka succeed in winning? What are its virtues? 

How also do men, freed from every kind of anxiety, succeed in going to 
those sacred realms? For what period does the giver of a cow enjoy the 
fruits that are borne by his gift? How may they make gifts of many kine and 


how gifts of a few cows? What are the merits attaching to gifts of many 
kine and what those that attach to gifts of a few only? 

How also do some become givers of kine without actually giving any 
kine? Do you tell me all this, O Brahma. How does one making gifts of 
even many kine, O most mighty Lord, become the equal of one that has 
made gift of only a few kine? How also does one who make gifts of only a 
few kine succeed in becoming the equal of one who has made gifts of many 
kine? What kind of dakshina is regarded as distinguished for pre-eminence 
in the matter of godana? It behoves you, O holy Grandsire of worlds, to 
discourse to me on all this agreeably to truth.” 


CANTO 73 


T he Grandsire said, “The questions you have asked me about kine, 

beginning with their gift, are such that there is none else in the three 
worlds, O you of a hundred sacrifices, who could have asked. There are 
many kinds of worlds, O Sakra, which are invisible to even you. I see those 
realms, O Indra, as do women that are chaste and have been attached to 
only one husband. Rishis observant of stern vows, through their deeds of 
righteousness and piety, and Brahmanas of righteous souls, succeed in 
repairing to them even in their bodily forms. Men that observe the loftiest 
vows behold those regions which resemble the bright creations of dreams, 
for they are helped by their cleansed minds and by that temporary mukti 
which succeeds the loss of one’s consciousness of body. 

Listen, O you of a thousand eyes, and I will tell you what the attributes 
are with which those regions are endowed. There the very course of Time is 
suspended. Decrepitude is not there, nor fire which is omnipresent in the 
universe. There the slightest evil does not come, nor disease, nor weakness 
of any kind. The sacred kine that live there, O Vasava, obtain the fruition of 
every desire which they cherish in their hearts. I have direct experience of 
what I say to you. Able to go everywhere at will and actually journeying 
from place to place with ease, they enjoy the fruition of wish after wish 
even as these arise in their minds. 

Lakes and tanks and rivers and forests of diverse kinds, and mansions 
and hills and all kinds of wonderful objects, delightful to all creatures, are 
found there. There is no world of felicity that is superior to any of these of 
which I speak. All those best of men, O Sakra, who are forgiving to all 


creatures, who endure everything, who are full of affection for all things, 
who render dutiful obedience to their gurus, and who are free from pride 
and vanity, attain to those realms of supreme bliss. 

He who abstains from every kind of flesh, who is possessed of a purified 
heart, who is blessed with righteousness; who worships his parents with 
reverence, who is truthful in speech and demeanour, who attends with 
obedience upon Brahmanas, who is faultless in conduct, who never behaves 
with anger towards cows and towards Brahmanas; who is devoted to the 
accomplishment of every duty, who serves his preceptors with reverence, 
who is devoted for his whole life to truth and to giving, and who is always 
forgiving towards all transgressions against himself; who is mild and self- 
restrained, who is full of reverence for the deities, who is hospitable to all 
guests, who is endued with the utmost compassion—verily, he who is 
adorned with these attributes succeeds in attaining to Goloka, the eternal 
and immutable world of kine. 

He who is stained with adultery never sees such a world; nor he who is 
a slayer of his guru; nor he who speaks falsely or indulges in idle boasts; 
nor he who always disputes with others; nor he who behaves with hostility 
towards Brahmanas. Indeed, that evil one who is stained with such faults 
fails to attain even a glimpse of these regions of felicity; also he that injures 
his friends; also he that is full of guile; also he that is ungrateful; also he 
that is a cheat; also he that is crooked in his ways; also he that is a 
disregarder of dharma; also he that is a killer of Brahmanas. Such men 
cannot behold in even imagination Goloka that is the abode of only the 
righteous of deeds. 

I have told you everything about the world of kine, O Lord of the 
Devas. Hear now, O you of a hundred sacrifices, the merit that is theirs who 
are engaged in making gifts of kine. He who make gifts of kine, after 
purchasing them with wealth obtained through inheritance or acquired 
lawfully by him, attains, as the fruit of such an act to many realms of 
inexhaustible felicity. He who makes a gift of a cow, having acquired it with 
wealth won at dice, enjoys felicity, O Sakra, for ten thousand years of the 
Devas. He who acquires a cow as his share of ancestral wealth is said to 
acquire her legitimately. Such a cow may be given away. They that make 
gifts of kine so acquired attain to many eternal regions of inexhaustible 
bliss. 


That man who, having acquired a cow in gift, makes a gift of her with a 
pure heart, attains without doubt, O Lord of Sachi, eternal regions of 
beatitude. He who, with restrained senses, speaks the truth from his birth to 
the time of his death, and who endures everything at the hands of his guru 
and of Brahmanas, and who practises forgiveness, attains to an end that is 
equal to that of holy kine. Speech that is harsh or vulgar, O Indra, should 
never be addressed to a Brahmana. One should not, in even one’s mind, do 
any injury to a cow. One should, in one’s conduct, imitate the cow in 
mildness and gentleness, and show compassion towards the cow. 

Hear, O Sakra, what the fruits are that become his who is devoted to the 
dharma of truth. If such a one gives away a single cow, that one cow 
becomes equal to a thousand. If a Kshatriya possessed of such qualities 
makes a gift of a single cow, his merit becomes equal to that of a 
Brahmana’s. That single cow, Sakra, which such a Kshatriya gives away 
becomes the source of as much punya as the single cow that a Brahmana 
gives away under similar circumstances. Even this is the certain conclusion 
of the shastras. 

If a Vaisya of similar accomplishments were to make the gift of a single 
cow, that cow would be equal to five hundred kine in the merit she would 
produce. If a Sudra blessed with humility were to make the gift of a cow, 
such a cow would be equal to a hundred and twenty-five kine in punya. 
Devoted to penances and truth, proficient in the scriptures and all good 
karma through dutiful service rendered to his guru, blessed with forgiveness 
of disposition, engaged in the worship of the gods, possessed of a tranquil 
soul, pure in body and mind, enlightened, observant of all dharma, and 
freed from every kind of egotism, the man who makes a gift of a cow toa 
Brahmana, certainly attains to great punya through that dakshina of his— 
the gift, according to proper rites, of a cow yielding copious milk. Hence, 
with singleness of devotion, observant of truth and humbly serving one’s 
preceptor, one should always make gifts of kine. 

Hear, O Sakra, what the punya is of that man who, duly studying the 
Vedas, shows reverence for kine, who always grows glad at the sight of 
cows, and who, since his birth has always bowed his head to kine. The 
punya that becomes one’s by performing the Rajasuya yagna, the punya that 
becomes one’s by making gifts of piles of gold—that lofty merit is acquired 
by him who shows such reverence for kine. Righteous Rishis and other 
Mahatmans, crowned with true success, have said so. Devoted to truth, 


possessed of a tranquil soul, free from greed, always truthful in speech, and 
behaving with reverence towards kine with the steadiness of a vow, the man 
who, for a whole year before himself taking any food, regularly feeds cows, 
wins the punya of making a gift of a thousand kine. 

That man who eats only one meal a day and who gives away the entire 
quantity of his other meal to kine—verily, the man who thus reverences 
cows with the steadfastness of a vrata and shows such compassion towards 
them, enjoys ten years of limitless felicity. That man who confines himself 
to one meal a day and with the other meal saved over some time, buys a 
cow and makes a gift of it, earns, through that gift, O you of a hundred 
sacrifices, the eternal punya that attaches to the gift of as many kine as there 
are hairs on the body of that single cow he gives. These are immutable 
declarations in respect of the merit that Brahmanas acquire by making gifts 
of kine. 

Listen now to the punya that Kshatriyas may win. It has been said that a 
Kshatriya, by buying a cow in this manner and making a gift of it to a 
Brahmana, acquires uninterrupted felicity for five years. A Vaisya, by such 
conduct, acquires only half the merit of a Kshatriya, and a Sudra earns half 
the punya that a Vaisya does. That man, who sells himself and with the 
proceeds thereof purchases kine and gives them away to Brahmanas, enjoy 
bliss in heaven for as long as cows seen on earth. It has been said, O most 
blessed one, that in every hair of such cows as are bought with the proceeds 
gained by selling oneself, there is a whole world of inexhaustible felicity. 

The man who having acquired kine by battle makes gifts of them to 
Brahmanas, acquires as much merit as he who makes gifts of kine after 
having bought them by selling himself. The man who, in the absence of 
kine, makes a gift of a cow made of sesame seeds, restraining his senses the 
while, is saved by such a cow from every kind of danger or distress. Such a 
man sports in great felicity. 

The mere godana is not laden with merit. The considerations of 
deserving recipients, of time, of the kind of kine, and of the ritual to be 
observed while giving, must be attended to. One should ascertain the proper 
time for making a gift of kine. One should also ascertain the distinctive 
merits of both the Brahmanas who are to receive them and of kine which 
are to be given away. Cows should not be given to one in whose abode they 
are likely to suffer from fire or the sun. One, who is rich in Vedic lore, who 
is of pure lineage, who is endowed with a tranquil soul, who is devoted to 


the performance of sacrifices, who fears the commission of sin, who is 
possessed of varied knowledge, who is compassionate towards cows, who 
is mild in behaviour, who accords protection to all that seek it of him, and 
who has no means of sustenance assigned to him, is regarded as a proper 
person to receive a gift of cows. 

To a Brahmana who has no means of sustenance, to him while he is 
afflicted for want of food—for instance, in a time of famine—for farming, 
for a child born as a result of homa, for the purposes of his guru, for the 
nurture of a child born naturally and lawfully, a cow should be given. 
Verily, the gift should be made at a proper time and in a proper place. 

Those kine, O Sakra, whose gentle and auspicious dispositions are well 
known, which have been acquired as a reward for knowledge, or which 
have been bought in exchange for other animals such as goats and sheep, or 
which have been won by prowess of arms, or obtained as marriage-dower; 
or which have been acquired by being rescued from danger, or which, 
unable to be maintained by their impoverished owner have been made over 
for careful keep to another, are regarded as appropriate gifts. Such kine that 
are strong of body, which have good dispositions, and which emit an 
agreeable fragrance, are lauded as gifts. As Ganga is the foremost of all 
rivers, even so is a Kapila cow the foremost of all bovines. 

Abstaining from all food and living only upon water for three nights, 
and sleeping for the same period on bare earth, one should make gifts of 
kine to Brahmanas after having gratified them with other offerings. Such 
kine, free from every fault, should be accompanied by healthy calves that 
have not been weaned. Having made the gift, the giver should live for the 
next three days on food consisting only of the produce of the cow. 

By giving away a cow that is of a good disposition, that quietly suffers 
herself to be milked, that always brings forth living and healthy calves, and 
that does not run away from her owner’s home, the giver enjoys prosperity 
in the next world for as many years as there are hairs on her body. Similarly, 
by giving to a Brahmana a bull that can bear heavy burden, that is young 
and strong and docile, that quietly bears the yoke of the plough, and that is 
possessed of such energy as he can endure great labour, one attains to such 
regions as are his who gives away ten cows. 

That man who rescues kine and Brahmanas from danger in the 
wilderness is himself rescued from every kind of peril and calamity. Hear 
what his punya is. The merit such a man acquires is equal to the eternal 


punya of a horse sacrifice. Such a one attains to whatever end he wishes for 
at the hour of his death. Many a region of felicity—in fact, whatever 
happiness he covets in his heart—becomes his through what he has done. 
Verily, such a man, blessed by kine, lives honoured in every realm of 
heaven. 

That man, who follows his herd every day in the forest, himself 
subsisting the while on grass and cow dung and leaves of trees, his heart 
freed from desire of reward, his senses restrained from every improper 
object and his mind purified of all dross—that man, O you of a hundred 
sacrifices, lives in joy and freed from the dominion of desire in my world, 
Brahmaloka, or in any other realm of bliss that he wishes, in the company 
of the Devas.” 


CANTO 74 


¢ I ndra said, “I wish to know, O Grandsire, what end he attains who 
steals a cow or who sells one from motives of greed.” 

The Grandsire said, “Hear what consequences overtake those that steal 
a cow for killing her for food, or selling her for wealth, or making a gift of 
her to a Brahmana. He who, without being checked by the restraints of the 
scriptures, sells a cow, or kills one, or eats the flesh of a cow, or they, who, 
for the sake of wealth, suffer a person to kill kine—all these, he that kills, 
he that eats, and he that permits the slaughter, rot in hell for as many years 
as there are hairs on the body of the cow that is slain. 

O you of great puissance, all those sins that attach to one that obstructs 
a Brahmana’s sacrifice attach to the sale and the theft of kine. That man 
who having stolen a cow makes a gift of her to a Brahmana, enjoys felicity 
in heaven as the reward of the gift but suffers misery in hell for the sin of 
theft, for as long a period. 

Gold has been said to constitute the dakshina, O you of great splendour, 
in godana, the gifts of kine. Indeed, gold has been said to be the best 
dakshina in all sacrifices. By making a gift of kine one is said to redeem 
one’s ancestors to the seventh generation as well as one’s descendants, also 
to the seventh. By giving away kine with a dakshina of gold one saves one’s 
ancestors and descendants of twice that number. The gift of gold, 
suvarnadana, is the best of gifts. Gold is, again, the best dakshina. Gold is a 
great cleanser, O Sakra, and is, indeed, the best of all purifying agents. O 
you of a hundred sacrifices, gold has been said to be the sanctifier of the 


entire race of him who gives it away. I have thus, O you of great splendour, 
told you in brief about dakshina.”’ 

Bhishma says, “Even this is what the Pitamaha Brahma said to Indra, O 
king of the Bharatas. Indra imparted this to Dasaratha, and Dasaratha in his 
turn to his son Rama; Rama of Raghu’s vamsa imparted it to his dear 
brother Lakshmana of great fame. While dwelling in the forest, Lakshmana 
taught it to the Rishis. It has then come down from generation to generation, 
for the Rishis of rigid vows held it amongst themselves as also the righteous 
kings of the earth. My guru, Bhargava, O Yudhishtira, taught it to me. That 
Brahmana, who recites it every day in assemblies of Brahmanas, at 
sacrifices or during godanas, or when two pure men meet, acquires hereafter 
many regions of inexhaustible bliss where he always dwells with the gods 
as his companions. The holy Brahma, the Supreme Lord, said so to Indra on 
the subject of kine, and godana.’” 


CANTO 75 


: me udhishtira says, ‘I have been greatly assured, O mighty one, by 
you thus discoursing to me on dharma. I must, however, give 
expression to the doubts and questions that I still have. Do you clear them 
for me, Pitamaha. What are the fruits, declared in the scriptures, of the vows 
that men observe? Of what nature are the fruits, O you of great splendour, 
of observances of other kinds? What, again, are the fruits, of one’s studying 
the Vedas thoroughly? What are the fruits of gifts, and what those of 
holding the Vedas in one’s memory? What are the fruits that attach to the 
teaching of the Vedas? I want to know all this. 

What, O Grandsire, are the merits that attach to not accepting dana in 
this world? What fruits are seen to attach to him who gives gifts of 
knowledge? What is the punya acquired by persons that observe their 
svadharma, as also by Kshatriyas that do not flee from battle? What are the 
fruits that have been declared to attach to the observance of purity and to 
the practice of brahmacharya? What are the merits that attach to the service 
of one’s father and mother? What also are the merits of serving gurus and 
acharyas, and what are the merits of compassion and kindness? 

I want to know all these, Pitamaha, truly and in detail, O you that know 
all the shastras. Great is the curiosity that I feel.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Eternal regions of rapture become his, who, having 
properly commenced a vrata, a vow, completes its observance according to 
the scriptures, without a break. The fruits of niyamas, O king, are visible 
even in this world. These rewards that you have won are those of niyamas 
and yagnas. The fruits that attach to the study of the Vedas are seen both 


here and hereafter. The one who is devoted to the study of the Vedas is seen 
to live in joy both in this world and in the world of Brahma. 

Listen now to me, O king, as I tell you in detail what the fruits are of 
yama or niyati or self-restraint. They that are self-restrained are happy 
everywhere. They that are self-restrained are always in the enjoyment of 
that bliss which attaches to the absence or the subjugation of desire. They 
that are self-restrained are able to go everywhere at will. They that are self- 
restrained can destroy every enemy. Without doubt, they that are self- 
restrained succeed in obtaining everything they seek. 

They that are self-restrained, O son of Pandu, have their every wish 
fulfilled. The happiness that men enjoy in swarga, through tapasya and 
prowess at arms, through dana, and through diverse sacrifices, also becomes 
theirs that are self-restrained and forgiving. Self-restraint is more 
meritorious than a gift. A giver, after making a gift to Brahmanas, may still 
yield to the influence of anger. A self-restrained man, however, never yields 
to wrath. Hence, self-restraint is superior in punya to charity. The man who 
makes gifts without yielding to anger, succeeds in attaining to eternal 
regions of bliss. Anger destroys the merit of a gift. Hence, is yama superior 
to dana. 

There are countless invisible realms, O king, numbering millions, in 
swarga. They are spread across the face of heaven, and these worlds belong 
to the Rishis. Men leave this world, attain to them and become transformed 
into deities. Rajan, the great Rishis go to them, taken only by their self- 
restraint, and as the end of their efforts to attain to a world of superior 
happiness. Hence, self-restraint is indeed superior in spiritual efficacy to 
giving charity and gifts. 

The Brahmana, who becomes an acharya who teaches the Vedas, and 
who duly worships the holy fire, leaves all his sorrows and afflictions in this 
world, and goes to enjoy inexhaustible ecstasy in the world of Brahma. That 
Brahmana who, having himself studied the Vedas, imparts a knowledge of 
them to righteous disciples, and who praises his own guru, attains to great 
honour in swarga. 

The Kshatriya, who takes to the study of the Vedas, to the performance 
of yagnas, to the giving of dana, and who saves the lives of others in battle, 
similarly attains to great honour in heaven. The Vaisya, who, observing his 
svadharma, makes gifts, reaps as the fruit of those gifts a crowning reward. 
The Sudra, who duly observes the dharma of his varna, which consists of 


service rendered to the three other orders, wins swarga as the reward of 
such service. 

Diverse kinds of heroes have been spoken of in the scriptures. Listen to 
me as I tell you what the rewards are that they attain to. The rewards are 
fixed of a hero belonging to a heroic vamsa. There are heroes of sacrifice, 
heroes of self-restraint, heroes of truth, and others equally entitled to the 
name of vira. There are heroes of battle, and shuras of gift and of liberality 
among men. There are many who may be called the heroes of the Sankhya 
faith as, indeed, there are many others that are called nayakas of Yoga. 

There are others that are regarded as heroes in vanaprastha, of grihasta, 
and of renunciation, sannyasa. Similarly, there are others that are called 
viras of the intellect, and also heroes of forgiveness. There are other men, 
who live in tranquillity and who are regarded as nayakas of dharma, 
righteousness. There are many other kinds of heroes that practise diverse 
other kinds of vows and observances. There are masters devoted to the 
study of the Vedas and heroes devoted to the teaching of the Vedas. There 
are, again, men that come to be regarded as viras for the devotion with 
which they wait upon and serve their preceptors, as indeed, shuras in 
respect of the reverence they show to their sires. 

There are heroes of obedience to their mothers, and heroes for the life of 
mendicancy they lead. There are heroes in the matter of hospitality to 
guests, while living as grihastas. All these great men attain to transcendent 
regions of joy which, of course, they acquire as the rewards of their own 
karma. Holding all the Vedas in memory, or ablutions performed in all the 
tirthas, the sacred waters, may or may not be equal to telling the Truth every 
day of one’s life. A thousand Aswamedha yagnas and Truth were once 
weighed in a balance. It was seen that Truth weighed heavier than a 
thousand horse sacrifices. 

It is by Truth that the sun gives heat and light, it is by Truth that fire 
burns, it is by Truth that the winds blow; verily, everything rests upon 
Truth. It is Truth, Satya, that gratifies the Devas, the Pitris and the 
Brahmanas. Truth has been said to be the highest dharma. Therefore, no one 
should ever transgress Truth. The Munis are all devoted to Truth. Their 
prowess depends upon Satya. They also swear by Truth. Hence, Satya is 
pre-eminent. All truthful men, O Lord of the Bharatas, succeed by their 
truthfulness in attaining swarga and sporting there in bliss. 


Niyati, self-restraint, is the attainment of the reward that attaches to 
Truth. I have discoursed on it with my whole heart. The man of humble 
heart who is possessed of self-restraint, beyond doubt attains to great 
honour in heaven. 

Listen now to me, O Bhumipala, as I expound to you the merits of 
brahmacharya, celibacy. That man, who practises the vow of brahmacharya 
from his birth to the time of his death—know, O king, that for such a man 
nothing is unattainable. Millions of Rishis dwell in the world of Brahma. 
All of them, while here, were devoted to Truth, and self-restrained, had 
their vital seed drawn up. The vow of brahmacharya, O king, duly observed 
by a Brahmana, is sure to consume all his sins. The Brahmana is said to be 
a blazing fire. In those Brahmanas that are devoted to tapasya, the god of 
fire becomes plainly visible. If a Brahmacharin yields to wrath from being 
slighted in any way, the king of the Devas himself trembles in fear. Even 
this is the visible fruit of the vow of Brahmacharya that is observed by the 
Rishis. 

Listen to me, O Yudhishtira, what the punya is that attaches to the 
worship of one’s father and mother. He who dutifully serves his father 
without ever crossing him in anything, or similarly serves his mother or 
elder brother or other elder or preceptor, know, earns a place in heaven. The 
man of purified soul, because of such service rendered to his elders, has 
never to even catch a glimpse of the hell that is naraka.’” 


CANTO 76 


66 Y udhishtira says, ‘I desire, O king, to hear you discourse in detail 

upon those high laws which regulate godana, for it is by making 

gifts of kine according to those laws that one attains to innumerable regions 
of eternal prosperity and joy.’ 

Bhishma says, “There is no dana, O Lord of earth, which is higher in 
merit than the godana. A righteously acquired cow, if given away, 
immediately redeems the entire vamsa of the giver. That ritual which first 
came to be for the benefit of the righteous, was subsequently declared to be 
for the weal of all creatures. That ritual has come down from primeval time. 
Why, it existed even before it was revealed. Verily, O Rajan, listen to me 
and I will tell you about the ritual which affects the gift of kine. 

In days of yore, when a number of kine intended to be given away were 
brought before him, King Mandhatri, filled with doubt about the ritual with 
which he should give them away, questioned the Devaguru Brihaspati to 
clear his doubt. 

Brihaspati said, “Duly observing self-restraint all the while, the giver of 
kine should, on the previous day, properly honour Brahmanas and appoint 
the actual time of dana. As regards the kine to be given away, they should 
be of the kind called Rohini. The cows should be addressed with the words 
Samange and Bahule. Entering the fold where the kine are kept, the 
following Srutis should be uttered—The cow is my mother. The bull is my 
sire. Give me heaven and earthly prosperity. The cow is my refuge! 

Entering the fold and saying these words, the giver should pass the 
night there. He should again utter the same chant when actually giving 


away the kine. Thus staying with the kine in the fold without doing 
anything to restrain their freedom, and lying down on the bare earth, 
without driving away the gnats and other insects that annoy him as they 
annoy the cows, the giver is immediately purified of all his sins through 
reducing himself to a state of perfect similitude with the kine. 

When the sun rises in the morning, you should give away the chosen 
Rohini cow, along with her calf and a bull. As the reward for such a gift, 
you will surely become worthy of attaining swarga. The blessings that are 
declared by the holy mantras will also be yours. 

The mantras speak thus of kine: Cows are endued with strength and 
energy. Kine have in them wisdom. They are the source of that immortality 
which sacrifice achieves. They are the refuge of all tejas. They are the steps 
by which earthly prosperity is won. They constitute the eternal course of the 
universe. They lead to the extension of one’s race. Let the kine that I give 
away destroy my sins. They have that in them which partakes in the nature 
of both Surya and Soma. Let them help me attain heaven. Let them betake 
themselves to me as a mother to her child. Let all other blessings also be 
mine that have not been named in the mantras I have uttered! 

In the alleviation or cure of phthisis and other wasting sicknesses, and 
in the matter of achieving freedom from the body, if a person takes the help 
of the five precious things that the cow yields, kine become inclined to 
confer blessings upon the giver even like the Saraswati river. O sacred 
cows, you are always bestowers of all kinds of punya. Gratified with me, do 
you appoint a desirable end for me.I have today become what you are. By 
giving you away, I give myself away. 

After these words have been uttered by giver, the receiver should say, 
You are no longer owned by him who gives you away. You have now become 
mine. Possessed of the nature of both Surya and Soma, do you cause both 
the giver and the receiver to blaze forth with all kinds of prosperity! 

Thus the giver should utter the first part of the above verse. The twice- 
born receiver, who knows the ritual that regulates godana, utters the words 
occurring in the latter half of the mantra. 

The man who, instead of a cow, gives away cloths or gold of the same 
value as a cow, comes to be regarded as the giver of a cow; the giver, when 
giving away the value of a cow in other form should say—This cow with 
face upturned is being given away. Do you accept her. 


The man who gives away cloths in the place of a cow should say— 
Bhavitavya! meaning that the gift should be regarded as representing a cow. 
The man who gives away gold in place of a cow should utter the word 
Vaishnavi! meaning this gold that I give is of the form and nature of a cow. 
These are the words that should be uttered for the particular dana. 

The reward reaped by making such vicarious gifts of kine is a term in 
swarga for six and thirty thousand years, eight thousand years, and twenty- 
thousand years, respectively. These are the merits of gifts of things that are 
given in the stead of kine. As regards him who gives an actual cow, all the 
punya that attaches to vicarious gifts of cows become his at the eighth step 
homewards of the recipient. 

He that gives an actual cow is endowed with righteous conduct in this 
world. He that gives the value of a cow is freed from every kind of fear. He 
that gives a cow or a gift of like value never meets with sorrow. All the 
three, as also they that regularly go through their ablutions and other kriyas 
at dawn, and he that knows the Mahabharata well, all attain to the worlds of 
Vishnu and Soma. 

Having given away a cow, the giver should for three nights keep a vrata 
and pass one night with kine. Beginning again from that lunation, on the 
eight tithi, which is known as kamya, he should pass three nights, 
supporting himself entirely on the milk, urine and dung of the cow. By 
giving away a bull, one attains to the punya that attaches to the divine vow 
of brahmacharya. By giving away two kine, a bull and a cow, one acquires 
mastery of the Vedas. 

The man who performs a sacrifice and makes gifts of kine agreeably to 
the ritual laid down, attains to many regions of a superior character. These, 
however, are not attainable by one who does not know or perform that ritual 
and who, therefore, gives godana without observing the scriptural 
declarations. That man who gives away even a single cow that yields a 
copious measure of milk, acquires the merit of giving away all the desirable 
things on earth collected together. What need, therefore, be said of the gift 
of many such kine as yield havya and kavya for their teats being full? 

The merit that attaches to the gift of superior oxen is greater than that 
which attaches to the gift of kine. One should not, by imparting a 
knowledge of this ritual, benefit a person that is not one’s disciple or who 
does not observe vratas, or that is bereft of faith or possessed of a crooked 
understanding. Truly, this dharma is a mystery, unknown to most. One that 


knows it should not speak of it in every place. There are, in the world, many 
men that are without faith. There are among men many persons that are 
mean and that resemble Rakshasas. This religion, if imparted to them, 
would lead to evil. Indeed, it would produce equal evil if imparted to such 
sinful men as have taken shelter in godlessness. 

Listen to me, O king, and I will recite to you the names of those great 
kings of dharma that attained to regions of great felicity as the reward of the 
godana which they gave agreeable to the dictates of Brihaspati: Usinara, 
Viswagaswa, Nriga, Bhagiratha, the celebrated Mandhatri, son of 
Yuvanaswa, King Muchukunda, Bhagiratha, Naishadha, Somaka, 
Pururavas, Bharata of imperial sway to whose vamsa all the Bharatas 
belong, the heroic Rama, son of Dasaratha, and many other celebrated kings 
of great achievements, and also King Dilipa of widely known deeds, all, 
because of their gifts of kine agreeable to the ritual, attained to swarga. 

King Mandhatri was always observant of yagnas, dakshina, tapasya, 
rajadharma and godana. Therefore, O son of Pritha, do you also bear in 
mind those behests of Brihaspati which I have recited to you regarding 
godana. 

Having acquired the kingdom of the Kurus, do you, with a cheerful 
heart, make gifts of the finest kine to the foremost of Brahmanas!’ 

Thus addressed by Bhishma on the proper way to make gifts of kine, 
King Yudhishtira did all that Bhishma wished. Verily, Yudhishtira 
Dharmaraja bore in his heart the whole of that dharma which the Devaguru 
Brihaspati imparted to the royal Mandhatri. Yudhishtira, from that time, 
began to give godana and to support himself on grains of barley and on cow 
dung and the urine of kine, as both his food and drink. The king also began 
to sleep from that day on the bare earth, and with restrained soul and 
resembling a bull in strength and conduct, he became the greatest of 
monarchs. 

From that day, the Kuru king became most attentive to cows and always 
worshipped them, hymning their praises. From that day, the king gave up 
the practice of yoking bullocks to his carriages. Wheresoever he had 
occasion to go, he went on chariots drawn by horses of mettle.’” 


CANTO 77 


V aisampayana said, “King Yudhishtira, endowed with humility, yet 
again questioned the royal son of Santanu on the subject of godana, 
in further detail.’ 

The king said, ‘Do you, O Bhaarata, once more discourse to me in depth 
on the merits of giving away cows. Verily, O Kshatriya, I am not satiated 
with listening to your amrita-like words.’ 

Thus addressed by Yudhishtira the just, Santanu’s son Bhishma begins 
to discourse to him again on the punya attached to godana. Bhishma says, 
‘By giving to a Brahmana a cow possessed of a calf, endued with docility 
and other virtues, young in years, and wrapped round with a piece of cloth, 
one is cleansed of all one’s sins. There are many regions in naraka which 
are sunless, lightless. One who makes the gift of a cow has never to go to 
such hells. That man, however, who gives to a Brahmana a cow that cannot 
drink or eat, who has not milk for her teats have run dry, whose body and 
senses are enfeebled, who is diseased and decrepit, and which may be 
likened to a tank whose water has dried up—indeed, the man who gives 
such a cow to a Brahmana and thereby inflicts only pain and 
disappointment upon him, has certainly to enter into the darkest hell. 

That cow that is ill-tempered and vicious, or sickly or weak, or which 
has been bought without the price agreed upon having been paid, or which 
would only afflict the Dvija with distress and frustration, should never be 
given. The realms of grace such a giver may otherwise acquire as rewards 
of other deeds of dharma he has performed would all fail to bring him any 
happiness or impart to him any tejas. Only such kine as are strong, docile, 


young in years, and possessed of fragrance, are praised by all for being 
given in godana. And truly, as Ganga is the foremost of all rivers, even so is 
a Kapila cow the best of all kine.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “Why, O Grandsire, do the righteous especially laud 
the gift of a Kapila cow, when all good kine that are given away should be 
regarded as equal? O mighty one, I wish to hear what the distinction is that 
attaches to a Kapila cow. You are, for certain, competent to discourse to me 
on this matter.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘I have, O son, heard old men recite this history 
regarding the circumstances under which the Kapila cow was created. I 
shall recite that old tale to you. In days of yore, the Self-born Brahma 
commanded Rishi Daksha, “Do you create living creatures!” 

From the desire of doing good to living creatures, Daksha first created 
annrita, food. Even as the Devas exist, depending upon amrita, all living 
creatures live depending upon the sustenance of food assigned by Daksha. 
Among all creatures chala and achala, mobile and unmoving, the mobile are 
superior. Among mobile creatures Brahmanas are the most superior, for the 
yagnas are all established upon them, and it is through sacrifice that Soma 
rasa is obtained. 

Sacrifice has been established upon kine. The gods become gratified 
through sacrifices. As regards creation, then, the means of support came 
first, and the creatures came next. As soon as creatures were born, they 
began to cry aloud for food. All of them then approached their Creator to 
feed them like children going to their father or mother. 

Knowing what his creatures craved, Daksha Prajapati, the holy Lord of 
all the living creatures, himself drank a quantity of amrita, for the sake of 
the beings he had created. He became gratified with the nectar he quaffed 
and thereupon an eructation came from him, exuding a most divine 
fragrance all around. And from that wondrous and ambrosial belching, there 
arose the original and divine cow, which Daksha named Surabhi. 

This Surabhi was thus a daughter of his that sprang forth from his 
mouth. The cow called Surabhi brought forth a number of daughters who 
came to be regarded as the mothers of the world. Their complexion was that 
of gold, and they were all Kapilas. They were the means of sustenance for 
all creatures. As those kine, whose complexion resembled that of amrita, 
began to pour forth milk, the froth of that milk rose up and began to spread 


on every side, even as when the waves of a river dash against one another, 
copious froth is created that spreads on every side. 

Some of that froth fell from the mouths of the calves that were suckling 
upon the head of Mahadeva who was seated upon the earth. Thereupon, the 
puissant Mahadeva, filled with wrath, cast his eyes upon those kine. With 
the third eye which adorns his forehead, he seemed to burn those kine as he 
looked at them. Like the sun tingeing cloud masses with colours, the energy 
that issued from the third eye of Mahadeva produced, O monarch, diverse 
complexions on those kine. Those among then which escaped from the 
glare of Siva by fleeing into Somaloka, remained the same colour as they 
were born—pristine white. 

Seeing that the Lord Siva was incensed, Daksha Prajapati said to him, 
“You have, O Mahadeva, been drenched with amrita. The milk or the froth 
that escapes from the mouths of calves sucking at their dams is never 
impure. Chandramas drinks the rasa and pours it forth once more; but it is 
not regarded as being unclean. Even so, the milk that these kine yield, being 
born of amrita, is not considered impure even though the calves have 
touched the cows’ teats with their mouths. 

The wind can never become unclean. Fire can never become unclean. 
Gold can never become unclean. The ocean can never become unclean. 
Amrita, even when drunk by the Devas, can never become impure. And the 
milk of a cow, even when her udders are sucked by her calf, can never 
become impure. These kine will support all these worlds with the milk they 
will yield and the ghrita that will be made from it. 

All creatures want to enjoy the sacred and ambrosial wealth that cows 
possess and yield.” 

Saying this to Siva, Daksha made a gift of a bull and some cows to 
Mahadeva. Daksha gratified the heart of Rudra, O Bhaarata, with that 
dakshina and, gratified, Siva made that bull his mount. And it was after the 
form of that great bull, Nandin, that Mahadeva adorned the standard on his 
battle-chariot; and so did Siva become known as Vrishabdhvaja or the Bull- 
bannered One. 

It was on that occasion also that the celestials, uniting together, made 
Mahadeva the Pasupati, the Lord of animals. Indeed, the great Rudra 
became the master of kine and is called the Bull-signed God. 

Hence, O king, in the matter of giving away kine, the gift of Kapila 
cows is regarded as being the best of all, for they are endowed with great 


tejas and retain their original white hue. Thus are kine the foremost of all 
creatures in the world. It is from them that the means have flowed for the 
sustenance of all the worlds. They have Rudra for their master. They yield 
Soma rasa in the form of milk. They are auspicious and sacred, and granters 
of every wish and givers of life. By making a gift of a cow a man comes to 
be regarded as making a gift of every desirable thing that men enjoy. That 
man who wishes to attain to prosperity reads, with a pure heart and body, 
these slokas on the origin of kine, and is cleansed of all his sins and indeed 
attains to prosperity and children and wealth and animals. 

He who makes a gift of a cow, O king, always succeeds in acquiring the 
punya that attaches to gifts of havya and kavya, to the offer of tarpana, 
oblations of water to the Pitris, to other religious kriyas whose performance 
brings peace and happiness, to the gift of chariots and carriages and fine 
cloths, and to cherishing children and the old.’ 

Hearing these words of his Grandsire, Pritha’s son, the royal Yudhishtira 
of Ajamida’s race, with his brothers, began to make gifts of both bulls and 
cows of different colours to the best Brahmanas. Verily, in order to conquer 
realms of grace in the next world, and of winning great fame, Yudhishtira 
performed many sacrifices and, as sacrificial dakshina, gave away hundreds 
of thousands of kine to such Brahmanas.’ 


CANTO 78 


B hishma says, ‘In days of yore, King Saudasa born of Ikshvaku’s race, 

foremost of eloquent men, once went to his kulaguru, his family 
priest Vasishta, that greatest of Rishis, crowned with ascetic success, who 
could range through all the worlds at will, Vasishta the receptacle of 
Brahman, and blessed with eternal life, and put him the following question. 

Saudasa said, “O holy, sinless one, what is that in the three worlds, 
which is sacred and by reciting which at all times a man may acquire the 
highest punya?”’ 

To King Saudasa who stood before him with head bent in reverence, the 
learned Vasishta, having first bowed to sacred kine and purified himself in 
body and mind, discoursed upon the rahasya relating to cows, a subject 
fraught with rewards most beneficial to all. 

Vasishta said, “Kine are always fragrant with the auspicious redolence 
of amrita that their bodies exude. Cows are the great refuge of all creatures. 
Cows constitute the great source of blessing to all. Kine are the past and the 
future. Kine are the source of eternal growth. Kine are the root of 
prosperity. Anything given to kine is never lost. Kine constitute the highest 
food. They are the best havi for the Devas. The mantras called Swaha and 
Vashat are forever established in kine. Cows are the fruit of sacrifices. 
Sacrifices are established in kine. Kine are the future and the past, and 
sacrifice rests upon them. Morning and evening, cows yield havis to Rishis 
for use in homa, O you of great effulgence. 

They who make a gift of kine succeed in transcending all their sins and 
avoiding every kind of calamity into which they may fall. The man who 


owns ten cows and makes a gift of one cow, he that owns a hundred kine 
and makes a gift of ten, and he who has a thousand cows and makes a gift 
of a hundred, all earn the same measure of merit. 

The man who, though he owns hundred cows, does not establish a 
domestic fire for daily worship; the man who, though he owns a thousand 
kine, does not perform sacrifices; and that man who owns wealth but is a 
miser who gives no gifts and never discharges the dharma of hospitality, are 
all three not worthy of any respect. 

Those men who make gifts of Kapila cows with their calves and with 
vessels of white brass for milking them—cows that are gentle and not 
vicious and which, while given away, are richly caparisoned—conquer both 
this and the other world. Men who make a gift of a bull that is still in his 
prime of youth, strong, and the best bull in hundreds of herds, who has big 
horns adorned with ornaments of gold or silver, to a Brahmana possessed of 
Vedic knowledge, succeed, O scorcher of your foes, in attaining to great 
prosperity and affluence every time they are born into the world. 

One should never go to bed without reciting the names of one’s cows; 
neither should one rise from bed in the morning without a similar recitation. 
Morning and evening one should bend one’s head in reverence to kine. With 
this, one is sure to attain to great prosperity of every kind. 

One should never feel the least repugnance for the urine and the dung of 
the cow. One should never eat the flesh of cows. If a man lives in this law, 
he is sure to attain to great felicity. Indeed, one should always take the 
names of cows, and never show the slightest disregard for kine in any 
manner. If evil dreams visit a man’s sleep, he should chant the names of 
holy cows. One should smear oneself with cow dung while bathing. One 
should sit on dried cow dung. One should never urinate or excrete or let 
other bodily secretions fall on cow dung. 

One should never obstruct kine in any way. One should eat, sitting on a 
cowhide purified by dipping it in water, and then cast one’s eyes towards 
the west. Sitting with restrained speech, one should eat ghee, using the bare 
earth as one’s dish. Through this, a man reaps that prosperity of which kine 
are the source. One should pour libations on the fire, using ghrita. One 
should cause Brahmanas to utter blessings upon oneself, with gifts of ghee. 
One should make other gifts of ghrita. One should also eat ghee. As a 
reward for all this, one is sure to attain to that prosperity which kine confer. 


That man who inspires an idol made of sesame seeds by uttering the 
Vedic mantras known by the name of Gomati, and then adorns that form 
with every kind of gem and makes a gift of it, has never to suffer any grief 
on account of all his sins of omission and commission. 

Let cows that yield copious measures of milk and that have horns 
adorned with gold—cows that are Surabhis or the daughters of Surabhis— 
come to me even as rivers flow to the ocean. I always gaze at cows. Let 
cows always look gently at me. Cows are ours. We are theirs. We are there 
where cows are! 

Even thus, at night or day, in happiness or sorrow, surely, in times of 
even great fear, should a man exclaim. By uttering these words he is certain 
to be freed from every fear.” 


CANTO 79 


: V asishta said, “The kine that were created in a bygone yuga 
practised the austerest tapasyas for a hundred thousand years with 
the desire to attain to a position of great pre-eminence. O Parantapa, they 
said to themselves, We shall, in this world, become the best of all kinds of 
dakshina in sacrifices, and we shall not be liable to be stained by any sin. 
By bathing in water mixed with our dung, the people shall be sanctified. The 
gods and men shall use our dung to purify all creatures, mobile and 
unmoving. They also that give us away shall attain to those regions of bliss 
which will be ours. 

The all mighty Brahma appeared to them at the conclusion of their 
tapasya, and gave them the boons they sought, saying, Jt shall be as you 
wish. Do you save all the worlds! 

Crowned with the fruition of their wishes, they all rose up, those 
mothers of both the past and the future. Every morning, men and women 
should bow with reverence to the sacred cows, and they will surely win 
every prosperity. At the conclusion of their penances, O king, cows became 
the refuge of the world. It is for this that kine are said to be the most 
blessed, sacred, and the foremost of all creations. It is for this that cows are 
said to stay at the very head of all other creatures. 

By giving away a Kapila cow with a calf resembling herself, yielding a 
copious measure of milk, free from any viciousness, and covered with a fine 
cloth, the giver attains to great honour in Brahmaloka. By giving away a red 
cow, with a calf like herself, and milk-yielding and free from every vice, 


and covered with an auspicious cloth, one attains to great honour in 
Suryaloka. 

By giving away a cow of mottled, variegated hue, with a calf like 
herself, and yielding milk, free from every fault, and covered with a cloth, 
one attains to great honour in the world of Soma. 

By giving away a white cow, gentle and yielding copious milk, along 
with a calf like herself, and caparisoned, one attains to great honour in 
Indraloka. By giving away a dark cow, milk-yielding and gentle, with a calf 
like her, and covered with a piece of cloth, one attains to great honour in the 
world of Agni. 

By giving away a cow of the hue of smoke, mild and milk-yielding, 
with a calf similar to herself, and covered with a rich cloth, one attains to 
great honour in Yamaloka. 

By giving away a cow of the complexion of the foam of water, with a 
calf and a vessel of white brass for milking her, and covered with a piece of 
cloth, one attains to the world of Varuna. By giving away a cow whose 
complexion is like that of the dust blown by the wind, with a calf, and a 
vessel of white brass for milking her, and covered with a piece of cloth, one 
attains to great honour in the world of Vayu, the wind god. By giving a cow 
of golden hue, having tawny eyes, with a calf and a vessel of white brass for 
milking her and covered with a piece of cloth, one enjoys the felicity of the 
realm of Kubera. 

By giving away a cow of the complexion of the smoke of burning straw, 
with a calf and a vessel of white brass for milking her, and covered with a 
piece of cloth, one attains to great honour in Pitriloka, realm of the Manes. 
By giving away a plump cow with the flesh of its throat hanging down and 
accompanied by her calf, one attains with ease to the lofty realm of the 
Viswedevas. By giving away a Gouri cow, with a calf similar to her, 
yielding milk, free from every viciousness, and covered with a piece of 
cloth, one attains to the region of the Vasus. 

By giving away a cow of the complexion of a soft white blanket, with a 
calf and a vessel of white brass, and covered with a piece of cloth, one 
attains to the realm of the Sadhyas. 

By giving away a bull with a high hump and adorned with every jewel, 
the giver, O king, attains to the world of the Maruts. By giving away a bull 
of blue complexion, that is full-grown in respect of years and adorned with 
every ornament, the giver attains to the regions of the Gandharvas and the 


Apsaras. By giving away a cow with the flesh of her throat hanging down, 
and adorned with every ornament, the giver, freed from every grief, attains 
to those regions that belong to Prajapati himself. 

That man, O king, who habitually makes gifts of cows, travels piercing 
the clouds on a chariot of solar lustre to swarga and shines there in 
splendour. That man who habitually makes gifts of kine comes to be 
regarded as the foremost of his species. When thus entering into heaven, he 
is received by a thousand Apsaras of beautiful hips wearing celestial 
raiment and ornaments. These girls wait upon him there and minister to his 
delight. He sleeps there in peace and is awakened by the musical laughter of 
those gazelle-eyed women, the sweet notes of their vinas, the soft strains of 
their vallakis, and the melodious tinkle of their nupuras. The man who 
makes gifts of cows dwells in swarga and is honoured there for as many 
years as there are hairs on the bodies of all the kine he gives away. Falling 
away from heaven upon the exhaustion of his punya, such a man takes birth 
in the order of Manushyas and into a superior family among men.”’ 


CANTO 80 


¢ V asishta said, “Kine are yielders of ghee and milk. They are the 

sources of ghrita and they have sprung from ghrita. They are 

rivers of ghrita, and eddies of ghrita. Let cows ever be in my house. Ghee is 

always my heart. Ghee is established in my navel. Ghee is in every limb of 

mine. Ghee dwells in my mind. Cows are always before me. Cows are 

always behind me. Cows are always all around me on every side of my 
person. I live in the midst of kine. 

Having purified oneself by touching water, one should, morning and 
evening, recite these mantras every day. By this, one is sure to be cleansed 
of all the sins one may commit during the course of the day. They who 
make gifts of a thousand kine, departing from this world, journey to the 
regions of the Gandharvas and the Apsaras where there are numberless 
palatial mansions made of gold and where the Akasa Ganga runs, river of 
heaven, called the current of Vasu. 

Givers of a thousand cows go to where many rivers run, having milk for 
their water, and cheese for their mire, and curds for their floating moss. That 
man who makes gifts of hundreds of thousands of kine in accord with the 
ritual laid down in the scriptures, attains to high prosperity in this world and 
untold honours in the next. Such a man causes both his paternal and 
maternal ancestors to the tenth generation to attain to regions of great 
felicity, and sanctifies his whole race. Kine are sacred. They are the 
foremost of all things in the world. They are verily the refuge of the 
universe. They are the mothers of the very gods. They are incomparable. 


They should be dedicated in sacrifices. While making journeys, one should 
travel on their right, keeping them to one’s left. 

After ascertaining the proper time, they should be given away to 
deserving persons. By giving away a Kapila cow with large horns, 
accompanied by a calf and a vessel of white brass for milking her, and 
covered with a piece of cloth, one succeeds in entering, freed from fear, the 
palace of Yama that is so difficult to enter. 

One should always recite this sacred mantra: Cows are of beautiful 
form. Cows are of diverse forms. They are of universal form. They are the 
mothers of the universe. O, let kine always approach me. 

There is no gift more sacred than godana, the gift of kine. There is no 
gift that produces more blessed merit. There has been nothing equal to the 
cow, nor will there be anything that will equal her. With her skin, her hair, 
her horns, the hair of her tail, her milk, and her fat, and with all these 
together, the cow upholds yagna. What is there that is more useful than the 
cow? Bending my head to her with reverence, I adore the cow who is the 
mother of both the past and the future, and by whom the entire universe of 
mobile and unmoving creatures is covered. 

O Purushottama, I have related to you only a portion of the high punya 
of cows. There is no gift in this world that is superior to the gift of kine. 
There is also no refuge in this world that is higher than kine.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘That high-souled Bhudani, King Saudasa, accepted 
these words of the Rishi Vasishta to be of the greatest import, and made 
gifts of a very large number of kine to good Brahmanas, restraining his 
senses the while; and as the consequence of those gifts, the monarch 
succeeded in attaining to many regions of ineffable felicity in the next 
world.’” 


CANTO 81 


¢ Eve udhishtira says, “Tell me, Pitamaha, what is the most sacred of 
all sacred things in the world, other than what you have already 
spoken of, and which is the highest of all sanctifying objects.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Cows are the foremost of all things. They are the most 
sacred and they save men from all kinds of sin and distress. With their milk 
and with the havi made therefrom, cows uphold all creatures in the 
universe. O best of the Bharatas, there is nothing that is more sacred than 
kine. The foremost of all things in the three worlds, kine are themselves 
sacred and can purify and make others holy as well. 

Kine dwell in Goloka, a world higher than Devaloka. When given away, 
they bestow salvation upon their givers. Men of wisdom succeed in 
attaining swarga by making gifts of kine. Yuvanaswa’s son Mandhatri, 
Yayati, and his sire Nahusha would always give away cows in thousands. 
As the reward of those gifts, they have attained to such realms as are 
unattainable by the very Devas. There is, in this connection, O Anagha, a 
discourse delivered of old. I will relate it to you. 

Once on a time, the most intelligent Suka, having finished his morning 
rites, approached, with a restrained mind, his sire, that foremost of Rishis, 
the island-born Krishna Vyasa, who knows keenly the distinction between 
that which is superior and that which is inferior, and saluting him, said: 

‘What is the sacrifice which appears to you as the best of all sacrifices? 
What is that karma by doing which men of wisdom succeed in attaining to 
the highest world? What is that sacred deed by which the Devas enjoy the 
bliss of heaven? What constitutes the character of sacrifice as yagna? What 


is that upon which yagna rests? What is regarded as the best by the gods? 
What is that sacrifice which transcends the sacrifices of this world? Do you 
also tell me, O my father, what is the most sacred of all things.” 

Having heard these words of his son, O king of the Bharata vamsa, 
Vyasa, the foremost of all knowers of dharma, discoursed to him as follows. 

Vyasa said, “Kine constitute the stay of all creatures. Kine are the refuge 
of all creatures. Kine are the embodiment of punya. Kine are sacred, and 
kine are sanctifiers of all. Formerly, cows were hornless as I have heard. To 
have horns they worshipped the eternal and mighty Brahma. Brahma, 
seeing the kine sitting in praya and paying their adorations to him, granted 
to each of them what each desired. Thereafter their horns grew and each got 
what each desired. 

Of diverse colours, and endowed with horns, they began to shine forth 
in beauty, O son. Favoured by Brahma himself with boons, cows are 
auspicious and yielders of havya and kavya. They are the embodiments of 
punya. They are sacred and blessed. They are possessed of excellent form 
and attributes. Cows constitute lofty and most exalted tejas. The gift of kine 
is very highly praised. Those good men who, freed from pride, make gifts 
of kine, are regarded as doers of righteous deeds and, indeed, as givers of 
all things. 

Such men, O sinless one, attain to Goloka, the most sacred and blissful 
world of cows. The trees there produce ambrosial fruits. Indeed, those trees 
are always adorned with the most exquisite flowers and incomparable fruit. 
Those flowers, O Dvija, exude divine fragrance. 

The soil of that world is entirely made of gems. The sands there are all 
gold. The climate there is such that the excellences of every season are 
perennial. There is no dirt, no dust. Ah, all the realm is, indeed, 
indescribably auspicious. The rivers that run there shine in resplendence for 
the red lotuses blooming upon their waters, and for the jewels and gems and 
gold on their banks, all of which have the radiance of the morning sun. 
Many are the shimmering lakes in that realm upon whose breasts are 
countless ethereal lotuses, their very petals made of living jewels, and their 
filaments adorned with a complexion like that of gold. 

They are also adorned with flowering forests of unearthly trees, all of 
enchanting celestial fragrance, with thousands of beautiful creepers twining 
round them, as also with forests of Santanakas bearing their joyous flowery 
burdens. There are rivers whose banks are strewn with numberless lambent 


pearls and other splendid gemstones and shining gold. Parts of those realms 
are forested with trees that are decked with supernal jewels of every kind. 
Some of them are made of gold and some display the splendour of fire. 

There tower many mountains, also of gold, and many hills and other 
eminences made solidly of deeply lustrous jewels and glittering gemstones. 
These glow and sparkle in untold beauty for their lofty summits are made of 
all manner of jewels. 

The trees that adorn those worlds always put forth flowers and fruits, 
and are covered with lush foliage. The flowers always exude a divine 
fragrance and the fruits are exceedingly sweet, Lord of the Bharata vamsa. 

Men of dharma, of righteous deeds, O Yudhishtira, can be found there 
always sporting in bliss. Freed from grief and wrath, they pass their time 
there, crowned with the fruition of their every wish. Righteous souls, 
possessed of fame, dally there in undiluted happiness, moving from place to 
place as they will, O Bhaarata, in charmed vimanas of great beauty. Bands 
of Apsaras constantly amuse them, with music and dance and lovemaking. 

Indeed, O Yudhishtira, a man goes to such worlds as the reward of his 
making gifts of kine. Those regions, which have for their Lords Pushan and 
the Maruts of great puissance, are attained to by givers of kine. In affluence 
the royal Varuna is regarded as pre-eminent. The giver of cows attains to 
affluence like that of Varuna himself. One should, with the steadfastness of 
a vrata, daily recite the mantras declared by Prajapati himself in respect of 
kine, Viswarupa and Yugandharah, Surupah, Bahurupah and Matara. 

He who serves cows with reverence and who follows them with 
humility, succeeds in obtaining many invaluable boons from the cows who 
become gratified with him. One should never, in even one’s heart, do an 
injury to cows. One should, indeed, always confer happiness on them. One 
should always reverence cows and worship them, bowing one’s head. He 
who does this, restraining his senses the while and filled with joy, succeeds 
in attaining to that peace which is enjoyed by kine and which cows alone 
can confer. 

One should for three days drink the hot urine of the cow. For the next 
three days one should drink the hot milk of the cow. One should next drink 
hot ghee for three days. One should subsist for the next three days on air 
only. That sacred thing through which the Devas enjoy worlds of felicity, 
that which indeed is the most sacred of all sacred things, ghrita, should then 
be borne on one’s head. 


With ghee one should pour libations on the sacred fire. By making gifts 
of ghee, one should cause Brahmanas to utter blessings upon oneself. One 
should eat ghee and make gifts of ghee. As the reward for this, one attains 
to that prosperity which belongs to holy kine. 

That man who, for a month, subsists upon the gruel of barley picked out 
every day from cow dung is cleansed of sins as grave as the slaying of a 
Brahmana. After their defeat at the hands of the Daityas, the Devas 
practised this expiation, and through it regained their position as gods. 
Verily, it was through this that they regained their strength and were 
crowned with success. 

Kine are sacred. They are embodiments of punya. They are great and 
the most efficacious purifiers of all. By making gifts of kine to Brahmanas, 
one attains to swarga. Living in a pure state, in the midst of kine, one should 
after touching pure water mentally recite those sacred mantras that are 
known by the name of Gomati. By doing this, one is purified of all sins. 
Brahmanas of righteous deeds, who have been cleansed by knowledge, a 
study of the Vedas, and observance of vows, should, only in the midst of 
sacred fires or cows or assemblies of Brahmanas, impart to their disciples a 
knowledge of the Gomati mantras, which are in every way like a 
Mahayagna for the merit they create. 

One should observe a fast for three nights in order to receive the boon 
constituted by a knowledge of the import of the Gomati mantras. The man 
who is desirous of obtaining a son will have one by adoring these mantras. 
He who wishes to possess wealth shall have his desire gratified by 
worshipping these mantras. The girl who wishes for a good husband will 
have her wish fulfilled by them. In fact, one can acquire the fruition of 
every wish one may cherish, by worshipping these most sacred mantras. 

When kine are gratified with the service one renders them, they can, 
without doubt, grant every wish. Even so, are kine so highly blessed. They 
are the essential requisite for sacrifices. They are the granters of every wish. 
Know that there is nothing superior to sacred cows.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘Thus addressed by his high-souled sire, Suka, of 
great energy, began to worship kine every day. Do you also, O son, do the 


999 


same. 


CANTO 82 


oe Y udhishtira says, ‘I have heard that the dung of the cow is imbued 
with the Devi Sri. I want to hear how this was brought about. I 
have doubts, O Pitamaha, which you must dispel.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘In this connection the old story is told, O king, of the 
conversation between cows and Sri, O best of the Bharatas. Once upon a 
time, the Goddess Sri, assuming a very beautiful form, entered a herd of 
cows. Seeing her wealth of beauty, the cows were filled with wonder. 

The kine said, “Who are you, O devi? How have you become unrivalled 
on earth for beauty? O most blessed goddess, we are filled with wonder at 
your wealth of beauty. We want to know who you are. Ah, who, indeed, are 
you? Where will you go? O you of peerless splendour and complexion, tell 
us all that we wish to know.” 

Sri said, “Blessed be you, I am dear to all creatures. Indeed, I am known 
by the name Sri. Forsaken by me, the Daityas have been lost for ever. The 
Devas—Indra, Vivaswat, Soma, Vishnu, Varuna and Agni—having found 
me, sport in joy and will do so for ever. Verily, only when they are invested 
with me, the Devas and the Rishis have success. You kine, those beings 
meet with destruction into whom I do not enter. Dharma, artha and kama 
become sources of happiness only when I am in them. O cows, who are 
givers of happiness, know that I am possessed of even such tejas. 

I wish to always dwell in every one of you. Coming into your presence, 
I solicit you. Be all of you blessed and endowed with Sri.” 

The kine said, “You are fickle and restless. You suffer yourself to be 
enjoyed by many. We do not wish to have you. Blessed be you, go wherever 


you please. As for ourselves, all of us are of good forms. What need have 
we with you? Go wherever you like. You have already gratified us by 
answering our questions.” 

Sri said, “Is it proper, you kine, that you do not welcome me? I am 
difficult of being attained. Why then do you not accept me? It seems, you 
creatures of excellent vows, that the old adage is true: That it is certain that 
when one come to another of one’s own accord and without being sought, 
one meets with disregard. 

The Devas, the Danavas, the Gandharvas, the Pisachas, the Uragas, the 
Rakshasas and Manavas succeed in obtaining me only after undergoing the 
severest austerities. You who have such energy, do you take me. Amiable, 
gentle ones, I am never disregarded by anyone in the three worlds of mobile 
and immobile creatures.” 

The kine said, “We do not disregard you, O devi. We do not show you 
any slight. You are fickle and of a very restless heart. It is only for this that 
we take our leave of you. What need of much talk? Do you go wheresoever 
you choose. All of us are blessed with excellent forms. What need have we 
with you, O sinless one?” 

Sri said, “You givers of honours, cast off by you in this way, I shall 
certainly become an object of disregard with all the world. Do you show me 
grace. You are all highly blessed. You are always ready to grant protection 
to those that seek it. I have come to you soliciting your sanctuary. I have no 
fault. Do you save me from this predicament. Know that I shall always be 
devoted to you. 

I wish to dwell in any part, however odious, of your bodies. Indeed, I 
would dwell in even your rectum. Sinless ones, I do not see that you have 
any part in your bodies that may be regarded as repulsive, for you are 
sacred, and sanctifying, and so highly blessed. Do you grant my prayer. Tell 
me in which part of your bodies I may dwell.” 

‘Thus addressed by Sri, the cows, always auspicious and inclined to 
kindness to all who are devoted to them, took counsel with one another, and 
then said to the Devi Sri, “O you of great fame, it is surely desirable that we 
should honour you. Do you live in our urine and dung. Both these are 
sacred, O auspicious goddess!” 

Sri said, “It is my good fortune that you have shown me such grace and 
your wish to favour me. Let it be even as you say. Blessed be you all, for 
you have truly honoured me, O givers of happiness.” 


Having, O Bhaarata, made this compact with the kine, the devi, in the 
very sight of those cows, rendered herself invisible. I have thus told you, O 
son, the glory of the dung of kine. I shall once again tell you further about 
the glory of cows. Do you listen to me.’ ” 


CANTO 83 


“BR hishma says, ‘They who make gifts of kine, and who subsist 

upon the remnants of libations offered on the sacred fire, are 
regarded, O Yudhishtira, as always performing sacrifices of every kind. No 
sacrifice can be performed without the help of curds and ghee. The very 
character as yagna which sacrifices have, depends upon ghrita. Hence are 
ghee, and the cow from which it is comes, regarded as the very root of 
sacrifice. 

Of all kinds of dana, godana, the gift of kine, is praised as the highest. 
Kine are the foremost of all things. Themselves sacred, they are the best of 
purifiers and sanctifiers. All should cherish kine in order to gain prosperity 
and even peace. The milk, curds and ghee that cows yield can cleanse one 
from every kind of sin. Cows are said to represent the highest tejas both in 
this world and the world that is above. There is nothing that is more sacred 
or sanctifying than the cow, O Lord of Bharata vamsa. 

In this connection, an ancient tale is told, O Yudhishtira, of the 
discourse between Brahma, the Grandsire, and Indra, king of the Devas. 

After the Daityas had been defeated and Sakra became the Lord of the 
three worlds, all creatures grew in prosperity and became devoted to the 
true dharma. Then, once, the Rishis, the Gandharvas, the Kinnaras, the 
Uragas, the Rakshasas, the Devas, the Asuras, the Avians and the Prajapatis, 
all came together and worshipped the Grandsire. There were Narada and 
Parvata and Viswavasu and Haha-Huhu, who sang in divine strains to adore 
that mighty Lord of all creatures. Vayu bore the fragrance of celestial 
flowers thence. The seasons also, the ritus in their embodied forms, bore the 


perfumes of flowers peculiar to each, to that conclave of celestial ones, that 
gathering of all creatures of the universe, where Apsaras danced and sang to 
unearthly music. 

In the midst of that assembly, Indra, folding his hands to the Lord of all 
the gods and bowing his head to him with reverence, asked him: “I wish, 
Pitamaha, to know why Goloka, the world of sacred kine is higher, O Holy 
One, than Devaloka, world of the Devas themselves, who are the lords of 
all the worlds. What austerities, what brahmacharya, O Lord, did kine 
perform because of which they dwell in bliss in a realm that is beyond even 
that of the gods?” 

Thus questioned by Indra, Brahma said to the slayer of Bala, “You have 
always, O Indra, disregarded kine. Hence, you know nothing of their 
glorious pre-eminence. Listen now to me, mighty one, as I explain to you 
the transcendent energy and splendour of kine, O Devaraja! 

Cows have been said to be the limbs of sacrifice. They represent 
sacrifice itself, Vasava. Without them, there can be no yagna. With their 
milk and the havi made therefrom, they nurture all creatures. Their male 
calves are engaged in tillage and thereby produce many kinds of paddy and 
other seeds. From them flow sacrifices and havya and kavya, and milk and 
curds and ghrita. Hence, O Devaraja, are cows sacred. 

Even while afflicted by hunger and thirst, they bear heavy and diverse 
burdens. Kine support the Munis. They uphold all creatures in a myriad of 
ways, O Vasava, and cows are guileless in their conduct. Because of their 
gentleness and the varied and great services they render, they will always 
dwell in worlds that are above even ours. This, O you of a hundred 
sacrifices, is why cows dwell in a realm that is high above that of the Devas. 

Vasava, cows gained many excellent boons, and are themselves givers 
of boons to others. They are called Surabhis. Of sacred deeds and imbued 
with many auspicious signs, they are most sanctifying. Listen also, O Indra, 
to why cows, the offspring of Surabhi, have come down to the earth. In day, 
of yore, O son, when in the Devayuga, the Mahatman Danavas became 
Lords of the three worlds, Aditi performed the severest tapasya and 
conceived Vishnu in her womb as her reward. She stood on one leg for 
many long years in order to have a son. 

Seeing the great Devi Aditi thus performing the sternest tapasya, the 
daughter of Daksha, the illustrious Surabhi, herself devoted to dharma, also 
undertook the most trying penance upon the breast of the magnificent and 


enchanting mountains of Kailasa that are the resort of both the Devas and 
the Gandharvas. Established in the highest yoga she also stood upon one leg 
for eleven thousand years. The Devas with the Rishis and the great Nagas 
were all scorched by the ferocity of her tapasya. Going then with me to that 
holy mountain, all of them began to adore that auspicious goddess. 

I then said to that devi adorned with tapa, ‘O faultless devi, for what 
purpose do you perform such severe austerities? Most blessed one, I am 
gratified with your tapasya, O beautiful one! Do you, O goddess, ask for 
whatever boon you desire, and I will grant what you ask.’ 

Even these were my words to her, Purandara. Surabhi answered me, ‘I 
have no need, O Pitamaha, of boons. Even this, O Anagha, is a great boon 
to me that you are pleased with me.’ 

I replied to the illustrious Surabhi, ‘Devi, I am more gratified than I can 
tell both by your tapasya and by your freedom from greed, O you of the 
beautiful face. And so I grant you the boon of immortality. Through my 
grace you shall dwell in a world that is higher than all the Trilokas. That 
world shall be known to all by the name of Goloka. 

Your daughters, who are ever engaged in doing good karma, will live in 
the world of men. All kinds of enjoyment, divine and mundane, which you 
merely think of, will immediately be yours. Whatever bliss exists in swarga, 
will also be yours, O most blessed one.’ 

The realms, O you of a hundred eyes, that are Surabhi’s instantly gratify 
every wish and desire no sooner than they appear in the heart. Not death, 
decay, or fire can touch its denizens. No ill luck, O Vasava, exists in 
Goloka. Many forests of fascination and enchantment, and wondrous 
ornaments and other things of great beauty embellish that realm. There you 
will see, O Vasava of the eyes like lotus petals, so many indescribable 
chariots, all plentifully equipped, and which move at the will of the rider. It 
is only through brahmacharya, by tapasya, with truth, self-restraint, by gifts, 
by diverse kinds of righteous deeds, through pilgrimages to sacred tirthas, 
in fact, by the most severe austerities and righteous deeds well-performed, 
that one can attain to Goloka. 

O Sakra, I have answered what you asked me in full. O slayer of 
Asuras, you should never disregard sacred kine.” 

Bhishma continues, “Having heard these words of the self-born Brahma, 
O Yudhishtira, Sakra of a thousand eyes began from that time to worship 
kine every day and to show them the greatest reverence. I have told you 


everything about the sanctifying character of cows, O you of great 
splendour, explaining the sacred nature, the glory and the lofty pre- 
eminence of kine, which can exorcise every sin. That man who, with senses 
withdrawn, recites this account to good Brahmanas, on occasions when 
havya and kavya are offered, or at yagnas, or while adoring the Pitris at 
sraddhas, succeeds in conferring upon his ancestors an inexhaustible felicity 
fraught with the fruition of every wish. 

The man who is devoted to kine obtains the fruition of his every wish. 
Indeed, even women that are devoted to cows succeed in fulfilling every 
wish of theirs. He that wishes for sons obtains them. He that desires 
daughters obtains those. He that wishes for wealth succeeds in aquiring it 
and he that wants punya wins that as well. He that wants gyana gains it and 
he that desires kama enjoys every pleasure. Indeed, O Bhaarata, there is 
nothing unattainable to one that is devoted to sacred kine.’” 


CANTO 84 


¢ me udhishtira says, “You have, O Pitamaha, discoursed to me on 

godana, which is fraught with great punya. In the case of kings 
who observe their svadharma, the gift of cows is especially meritorious. 
Kingship is always painful; it is a burden that can never be borne by men of 
impure souls. Thus, generally, kings fail to attain to auspicious ends. By 
constantly making bhumidana, gifts of earth, they succeed in purifying 
themselves of all their sins. 

You have, O prince of Kuru’s race, discoursed to me on many duties. 
You have spoken to me about the godana made by King Nriga in days of 
old. Rishi Nachiketa, in ancient times, discoursed on the punya of this dana. 
The Vedas and the Upanishads, also, have declared that in all sacrifices, in 
fact, in all kinds of religious karmas and kriyas, the dakshina should be of 
earth, kine or gold. 

The Srutis, however, declare that in all dakshinas, gold is superior and 
is, indeed, the best. I want to hear about this from you. What is gold? How 
did it come to be? When did it come? What is its essence? Who is its 
presiding deity? What are its fruits? Why is it regarded as the foremost of 
all things? For what reason do men of wisdom laud suvarnadana, the gift of 
gold? For what reason is gold regarded as the best dakshina in all sacrifices? 
Why is gold regarded as a purifier superior to earth and kine? Why is it 
regarded so superior as a dakshina? 

Do you, O Pitamaha, discourse to me on all this!’ 

Bhishma says, “Listen, O king, with concentrated attention to me as I 
tell you in detail of the origin of gold, as I understand it. 


When my father Santanu of great tejas left this world, I went to 
Gangadwara to perform his sraddha. Arrived there, I commenced the 
sraddha of my father. Coming there, my mother Jahnavi rendered me great 
help. Inviting many Rishis, crowned with spiritual success, and having them 
sit before me, I began the preliminary rites of gifts of water and other 
auspicious things. Having performed all the preliminary rituals, as 
prescribed in the shastras, with a concentrated mind, I set myself to offer 
the pinda, the obsequial cake. I then saw, O king, that a handsome arm, 
adorned with angadas and other ornaments, rose up, piercing the ground, 
through the blades of kusa grass which I had spread. Beholding this arm 
rise from the ground, I became filled with wonder. Indeed, O king of the 
Bharata vamsa, I thought that my father had come himself to accept the 
pinda I was about to offer. 

I grew thoughtful and, by the light of the scriptures, the conviction soon 
came upon me, and indeed seized my mind, that the law does occur in the 
Vedas that the obsequial cake should never be given into the actual hand of 
him whose sraddha is being performed. The Pitris do not come in their 
visible forms to take the pinda. On the other hand, the scripture does 
provide that the offering should be made on blades of kusa grass spread on 
the earth. 

Ignoring that hand which seem to constitute an indication of my father’s 
presence, and remembering the true law which is declared in the shastras, I 
offered the entire pinda upon those blades of kusa grass that were spread 
before me. Know, O Kshatriya, that what I did was perfectly consistent with 
scriptural law. When I made my offering, the arm of my father vanished in 
our very sight. 

That night, as I slept, the Pitris appeared to me in a dream. Gratified 
with me they said, “We are pleased with you for your adherence today to 
the law of the shastras. We are gratified to see that you did not swerve from 
the injunctions of the scriptures. Having been followed by you, O king, the 
scriptural law has become more authoritative. With your conduct, you have 
honoured and maintained the authority of yourself, the shastras, the 
auditions of the Vedas, the Pitris and the Rishis, the Pitamaha Brahma 
himself, and the Prajapatis. 

Adherence to the scriptures has been strengthened. You have today, O 
Bhaarata, conducted yourself honourably and rightly. You have made gifts 
of earth and kine. Do you now make gifts of gold. The gift of gold is most 


purifying. O you who know dharma well, know that through such a gift, 
both we and our forefathers will all be washed clean of our every sin. Such 
dakshina saves both the ancestors and descendants to the tenth generation of 
the one who makes it.” 

Even these were the words that my ancestors, appearing in my dream, 
spoke. I then awoke, O king, and was full of wonder. I set my heart upon 
making gifts of gold. 

Listen now, monarch, to this old itihasa. It is praiseworthy and it 
lengthens the span of his life who listens to it. It was first recited to Rama, 
the son of Jamadagni. 

In former days Jamadagni’s son Rama, filled with great wrath, wiped 
the Kshatriyas from the face of the earth, twenty-one times. Having 
subjugated the entire world, the heroic Rama of eyes like lotus-petals began 
to make preparations for performing an Aswamedha yagna, which is 
praised by all Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, and which can grant the fruition 
of every wish. That sacrifice purifies all creatures and enhances the energy 
and splendour of those who succeed in performing it. Rama of untold tejas 
was purified of the awesome violence he committed, by the performance of 
that sacrifice. 

Yet, even after performing that greatest of sacrifices, the Mahatman 
Rama failed to attain to perfect lightness of heart. Going to Rishis who 
knew every branch of learning as also to the Devas, Rama of Bhrigu’s race 
questioned them. Filled with repentance and compassion, he addressed 
them, saying, “You most highly blessed ones, do you declare to me that 
which is more purifying still for men engaged in fierce and savage deeds.” 

Those great Rishis, profound knowers of the Vedas and the other 
shastras, answered him, saying, “O Rama, guided by the authority of the 
Vedas, do you honour all learned Brahmanas. After doing this for some 
time do you once more ask the regenerate Rishis what you should do to rid 
yourself of your sins. Follow the advice that those sages of great wisdom 
give you.” 

Going then to Vasishta and Agastya and Kasyapa, that delighter of the 
Bhrigus asked them, “You foremost of Brahmanas, this is the wish that has 
arisen in my heart. How can I purify myself and be rid of my sins? By what 
karmas and kriyas can I achieve this? Or, if by dana, what shall I give away 
that I am washed of my sins of violence sins and have peace again? You 
greatest of the righteous and the wise, if your hearts be inclined to favour 


me, then tell me this, you who are endowed with the inestimable wealth of 
tapasya— what is my way to wash my sins from me?” 

The Rishis said, “O Bhrigunandana, as we have heard, the mortal that 
has sinned purifies himself by making gifts of kine, of earth, and of wealth. 
There is another dakshina that is regarded as a great cleanser. Listen to us, 
O great Dvija, as we tell you of it. 

That thing of which we speak is most excellent and imbued with 
wonderful aspect and is, besides, the progeny of fire. 

In days of yore, the god Agni burnt all the world. From his seed sprang 
gold of bright complexion. It came to be celebrated as Suvarna or golden- 
complexioned. By making gifts of gold you are certain to have your wish 
crowned with fruition.” 

Then the illustrious Vasishta, in especial, he of rigid vows, said, “Hear, 
O Rama, how gold, which has the splendour of fire sprang into existence. 
That gold will confer merit on you. In matters of dakshina, gold is highly 
lauded. I will also tell you what gold is, whence it has come, and how it has 
come to be invested with superior attributes. Listen to me, O Mahabaho, 
with attention. 

Know this as certain that gold is of the essence of Agni and Soma. The 
goat is Agni for if given it leads to the region of the deity of fire; the sheep 
is Varuna for it leads to the realm of Varuna lord of waters; the horse is 
Surya, for if given it leads to Suryaloka; elephants are Nagas, for they lead 
to Nagaloka; buffaloes are Asuras for they lead to the world of Asuras; 
cocks and boars are Rakshasas, for they lead to the regions of the 
Rakshasas, O Bhrigunandana. Earth is sacrifice; kine, water and Soma, for 
it leads to the merits of sacrifice, and to the region of kine, that of the lord 
of waters, and of Soma. Even these are the declarations of the Smritis. 

Churning the entire universe, a mass of blinding tejas was found. That 
energy is gold. Hence, O regenerate Rishi, compared to all these things 
which I have named above, gold is the most superior. It is a precious thing, 
exalted and excellent. 

It is for this that the Devas and Gandharvas and Uragas and Rakshasas 
and Manavas and Pisachas hold it with care. All these beings, O son of 
Bhrigu’s race, shine in splendour with the help of gold, after converting it 
into crowns and armlets and diverse kinds of ornaments. It is also for this 
reason that gold is regarded as the most cleansing of all cleansing things 
like earth and kine and all other kinds of wealth, O prince of men. 


Suvarnadana, the gift of gold, O powerful king, is the highest gift. It is 
distinguished above the gifts of earth, of kine, and of all other things, O you 
that have the effulgence of an immortal, gold is an eternal purifier. Do you 
make gifts of it to the foremost of Brahmanas as it is the best of things that 
purify. Of all kinds of dakshina, gold is the best. They who make gifts of 
gold are said to be givers of all things. Indeed, they who make gifts of gold 
come to be regarded as givers of deities. Agni is all the gods in one, and 
gold has Agni for its essence. Hence it is that the person who makes gifts of 
gold gives away all the gods. Thus, O Lord of men, there is no gift higher 
than the gift of gold.” 

Vasishta continued, “Listen once more, O twice-born Rishi, as I speak 
about the pre-eminence of gold, O foremost of all wielders of weapons. I 
heard this formerly in the Purana, O Bhriguputra. What I say to you is the 
speech of Prajapati himself. 

After the wedding was over of the illustrious and high-souled Rudra, 
armed with the trident, with the goddess who became his wife, upon the 
breast of that greatest of mountains, Himavat, Mahadeva Siva wished to 
unite himself with the goddess. Thereupon, all the gods, pierced by anxiety, 
approached Rudra. Bending their heads with reverence and gratifying 
Mahadeva and his boon-giving wife Uma, both of whom were seated 
together, they addressed Rudra, saying, ‘This union, O illustrious and 
sinless one, of yours with the devi, is a union of one endowed with 
penances with another of tapasya as severe. Verily, it is the union, O Lord, 
of one possessed of infinite energy with another whose tejas is scarcely less. 

You, most illustrious, are of tejas that is irresistible. The devi Uma, also, 
is possessed of urjas that is equally inexorable. The offspring from a union 
like this, will, without doubt be endowed with untold might. Verily, O 
puissant Lord, that child will consume all things in the three worlds without 
leaving any remnant. Do you then, Lord of all the universe, O you of large 
eyes, grant to these Devas prostrated before you, a boon for the weal of the 
three worlds. Do you, mightiest one, restrain your terrible hiranyaretas, 
your golden seed, which might otherwise become the seed of your progeny. 
Verily, that retas is the essence of all forces in the three worlds. 

Besides, you two, by an act of coition, are sure to scorch the universe. 
The son born to you will certainly be powerful enough to cower and afflict 
the Devas. Neither Bhumidevi, Akasa, or swarga, O omnipotent one, nor all 
of them together, will be able to bear your awesome seed. The entire 


universe is certain to burn through the force of your hiranyaretas. It befits 
you, O mighty one, to show us favour, O illustrious Lord. That favour 
consists in your not begetting a son, O Mahadeva, upon the devi Uma. Do 
you, with patience, restrain your fiery seed.’ 

To the Devas that said this, the most holy Mahadeva, having the bull for 
his sign, replied, “Tathaastu, so be it!’ Having said so, Vrishavaha, he who 
rides the great bull, drew up his vital seed. From that time he came to be 
called by the name of Urdhvaretas, one that has drawn up his seed. 

However, at this endeavour of the gods to stop procreation, Rudra’s 
wife, the devi Uma grew incensed. Being a woman, and endowed with 
small control over her temper, she used harsh words. ‘Since you have 
stopped my Lord from begetting a child upon me when he wanted to do so, 
you Deva shall all become sonless. Since you have stood in the way of my 
having children, you shall all be childless yourselves!’ 

When Uma pronounced her curse, O Bhargava, Agni was not there. It is 
in consequence of the curse of the goddess that the Devas have become 
childless. Implored by them, Rudra held his seed within himself, his retas of 
incomparable power. A small quantity, however, that came out of his 
lingam fell onto the earth. Instantly, that golden seed ignited into a blazing 
fire and began to grow prodigiously in size and power. Coming in contact 
with Agni’s energy of great might, Rudra’s seed became one with it. 

Meanwhile, all the Devas, led by Sakra, were tormented intolerably by 
the terrible Asura Taraka. The Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Maruts, 
the Aswins and the Sadhyas were all afflicted by the tameless prowess of 
that son of Diti. All the realms of the Devas, their beautiful chariots, and 
their palatial mansions, and the asramas of the Rishis, the Asuras took for 
themselves at will. The Devas and the Rishis, with sombre, dejected hearts, 
sought the protection of Brahma of unfading glory.” 


CANTO 85 


¢ a li he deities said, ‘The Asura Taraka, who has boons from you, O 

almighty one, torments the Devas and the Rishis. Let his death be 

ordained by you. O Grandsire, great has been our fear from him. O 
illustrious one, do you save us. We have no other refuge than you.’ 

Brahma said, ‘I am equal in my disposition towards all creatures. Yet, I 
cannot condone adharma. Let Taraka, enemy of the Devas and Rishis, be 
quickly destroyed. The Vedas and the sanatana Dharma shall not perish, you 
best of gods. I have ordained what is right and just. Let the fever of your 
hearts be dispelled.’ 

The Devas said, “Because of your having granted him boons, that son of 
Diti has been proud of his might. We Devas cannot kill him. How then will 
he die? The boon which, O Pitamaha, he has obtained from you is that he 
cannot be killed by Devas or Asuras or Rakshasas. We Devas have also 
been cursed by the devi Uma, when we stopped Siva from begetting a son 
in her. She cursed us that none of us will ever have any children.’ 

Brahma said, ‘You foremost of Devas, Agni was not there when the 
goddess pronounced her curse. Even he will beget a son for the destruction 
of your enemies. Transcending all the Devas and Danavas and Rakshasas 
and Manavas and Gandharvas and Nagas and Garudas, the son of Agni, 
with his spear, which in his hands will be a weapon that cannot be baffled if 
once cast, will destroy Taraka from whom your fear has arisen. Verily, he 
will kill all your other enemies as well. 

Will is eternal. That will is known by the name of kama and is identical 
with Rudra’s seed, a portion of which fell into the blazing form of Agni. 


That mighty retas, which is like a second Agni, will be cast by Agni into the 
Ganga to create a child who will destroy the enemies of the Devas. Agni 
was not affected by Uma’s curse. The consumer of havis was elsewhere 
when the devi cursed the rest of you. 

So seek out the god of fire and set him to this task. Sinless ones, I have 
told you the means by which you can kill Taraka. The curses of those that 
are of tejas do not affect them who are themselves of great energy. Any 
force, when it meets a greater force, grows weak. They that are endowed 
with tapasya can destroy the very boon-giving Devas who are immortal. 
Will, or love, or desire, which is Agni, sprang up of old and is the most 
eternal of all creatures. 

Agni is the Lord of the universe. He is cannot be fathomed or described. 
He goes everywhere and exists in all things; he is the Creator of all beings. 
He lives in the hearts of all creatures. Endued with great puissance, he is 
older than Rudra himself. Let that eater of havis, who is a mass of pure 
tejas, be sought out. That illustrious one will accomplish what your hearts 
desire.’ 

Hearing what Brahma said, the Devas went forth, with hope kindled in 
their hearts, to seek out the god of fire. The Devas and the Rishis, all 
endowed with tapasya, all possessed of prosperity, all crowned with ascetic 
success, all famed across the three worlds, scoured every part of the three 
worlds, their minds fixed on just Agni and beside themselves to discover 
him. O best of Bhargavas, they failed to find he that feeds on the havis of 
sacrifice, for he had hidden himself by withdrawing his atman into his 
Atman. 

At this time, a frog living in water appeared on the surface from the 
nethermost Patalas, for he had been scalded by the fierce heat of Agni. The 
little creature addressed the Devas who were stricken by fear and anxious to 
find the god of fire. The frog said, “You Devas, Agni now dwells in the 
nethermost underworld. Scorched by the heat of that god have I come here. 
The lustrous bearer of havis, O Devas, is under the deepest waters of Patala. 
He has created a great water mass within which he is hidden. All of us have 
been seared by his fierce heat. If, Devas, you wish to see him or have any 
business with him, go to him thence. Yes, take yourselves there. As for me, 
I will flee this place now for I am in fear of terrible Agni.’ 

Having said this much, the frog dived into the water. Agni, who devours 
the havis of every yagna learnt of the treachery of the frog. Coming to that 


creature he cursed its entire species, ‘You shall all cease to have taste in 
your mouths!’ Having cursed the frog, Agni swiftly left that place to find 
another sanctuary. The most powerful god did not show himself at all. 
Seeing the plight to which the frogs were reduced for having done them a 
service, the Devas, O best of the Bhrigus, showed favour to those creatures. 
I will tell you about it, listen to me, O Mahabaho. 

The Devas said, ‘Though deprived of their tongues through the curse of 
Agni, and bereft of the sense of taste, you will be able to utter diverse kinds 
of speech. Living within holes, deprived of food, without consciousness, 
wasted, dried up and more dead than alive, all of you will yet be succoured 
by the earth herself. You shall also be able to range where you will at night 
when the world is cloaked in darkness.’ 

Having said this to the frogs, the Devas once more combed every part of 
the earth to find the god of blazing flames. Despite all their efforts, they 
failed to find him. Then, O perpetuator of Bhrigu’s race, an elephant, as 
large and mighty as Airavata, the elephant of Sakra, spoke to the gods, 
saying, ‘Agni now lives within this Aswattha tree!’ 

Incensed with wrath, Agni cursed all the elephants, O Bhargava, ‘Your 
tongues will be bent backwards!’ Having cursed the elephants, Agni swiftly 
flew into a Sami tree in which he had for some time wished to dwell. Listen 
now, O hero, to what favour was shown to the elephants by the Devas, who 
were pleased by the service that one of them had rendered. 

The Devas said, ‘Even with your tongues bent inwards you shall be able 
to eat all things, and with even those tongues you shall be able to utter cries 
as you will, though they will be indistinct.’ 

Having blessed the elephants in this way, the denizens of heaven once 
more resumed their search for Agni, who, having flared out of the Aswattha 
tree, had entered the heart of the Sami. A parrot divulged Agni’s new abode 
to the Devas, who at once went to that tree. Enraged with the parrot, the fire 
god cursed the species of parrots, ‘From this day you shall no more have the 
power to speak!’ Indeed, the devourer of havis curled the tongues of all 
parrots upwards. 

Seeing Agni in the place pointed out by the parrot, and witnessing the 
curse that fell upon the bright bird, the Devas were moved to compassion 
for the poor creature, and blessed him, saying, “You will not entirely lose 
your power to speak. Though your tongue has been turned backwards, yet 


speech you shall have, but confined to the sound of Ka. Like that of a child 
or an old man, your speech shall be sweet and indistinct and wonderful.’ 

Having said this to the parrot, and seeing Agni within the heart of the 
Sami, the gods made Sami wood a sacred fuel fit for kindling in all religious 
rites. It was from that time that fire is seen to dwell in the heart of the Sami. 
Men came to regard the Sami as an auspicious wood to light fires for 
sacrifices. 

The waters that occur in the deepest Patalas had been touched by Agni 
Deva. Those heated waters, Bhargava, are spewed forth by mountain 
springs. Meanwhile, seeing the Devas, Agni became aggrieved. He asked 
them, ‘What is the reason for your coming here?’ 

The Devas and the Maharishis said, ‘We wish to set you to a great task, 
which you must accomplish. When you have done so, it will add greatly to 
your credit.’ 

Agni said, “Tell me what your business is. I shall, O Devas, accomplish 
it. I am always willing to be set by you to any task you wish. Do not 
hesitate to command me.’ 

The Devas said, ‘There is an Asura of the name Taraka who has been 
filled with hubris because of the boon he has from Brahma. Through his 
great prowess he opposes and discomfits us as he likes. Do you ordain his 
destruction. O Sire, rescue these Devas, these Prajapatis, and these Rishis, 
O most blessed Pavaka. Mighty one, beget a heroic son possessed of your 
own terrific tejas, who will dispel, O bearer of the havis, our fear of that 
Asura. We have been cursed by the great Goddess Uma. There is nothing 
other than your energy which can now be our refuge. Do you, O powerful 
one, save us all!’ 

Thus addressed, the illustrious and irresistible bearer of sacrificial 
libations answered, saying, ‘Be it so’, and he then went away towards 
Ganga, who is also called Bhagirathi. He united himself in congress with 
her and caused her to conceive. In the womb of Ganga, the seed of Agni 
began to grow even as Agni himself blazes up when fed with fuel and 
fanned by the wind. Ganga became direly agitated at heart with the wild 
energy of the fire god. She suffered such distress that she could not bear it. 
When the deity of blazing flames cast his fulgurous seed into the womb of 
Ganga, a certain Asura, for purposes of his own, uttered a dreadful roar. 
Ganga was terrified by that roar which was in no way meant for her; her 
eyes rolled in fear and she fainted. She could no longer bear Agni’s terrific 


seed within her, and Jahnu’s daughter trembled violently as if with a 
seizure. 

Overwhelmed by the fulminant tejas of the fiery seed in her womb, 
Brahmana, she cried to Agni, ‘Illustrious one, I cannot bear your seed 
within me for another moment! Ah, your seed makes me weak and I feel 
worn and ill. Terrible anxiety and agitation have their way with me, O Agni, 
and my heart seems dead within me, sinless one. 

O greatest of all that are blessed with tapasya, no, I cannot bear your 
flaming seed inside me for a moment longer. By no whim, but by the agony 
that compels me I must cast it out of me. 

There has been no fleshly contact between us, O you of blazing flames. 
The cause for our union is the distress that has come upon the Devas, O 
splendid one. Whatever punya, or otherwise, there may be in this thing that 
I am meant to do, let it all belong only to you, O Agni. Truly, I believe the 
dharma or adharma of this deed must be just yours.’ 

To her the god of fire said, ‘Do you bear the seed. Do, indeed, bear the 
foetus imbued with my tejas. It will lead to great rewards. You, verily, can 
bear all the earth. You will gain nothing by casting my child out from your 
womb.’ 

But that greatest of rivers, though thus pressed by Agni, as also the 
other Devas, cast the flaming seed out from her womb onto the breast of 
Meru, first of all mountains. She who might have contained that burning 
seed was roiled by the tejas of Rudra—for Agni and Rudra are one— 
succumbed to its ferocity and cast it from her with a scream. 

Agni saw her, and asked, ‘Is all well with the embryo that you have 
expelled from yourself? Of what complexion is it, O devi? Of what form is 
it? With what energy does it seem to be endowed? Do you tell me all about 
that child!’ 

Ganga said, “The child has the complexion of molten gold. In tejas it is 
even like you, O Anagha. Perfectly stainless, and blazing with splendour, it 
illuminates the entire mountain. O greatest of tapasvins, its fragrance is that 
of the highest, rarest lakes adorned with lotuses, mingled with the scent of 
the kadamba. Everything around it seemed to be transformed into gold with 
the splendour of that child even as all things on mountain and plain seem 
turned into gold by the rays of the sun. The resplendence of that embryo, 
spreading far, falls upon mountains and rivers and springs. Why, it seems 
that the three worlds, with all their mobile and immobile creatures, are lit up 


by your child. Even thus is your son, O Agni, bearer of havis. Brilliant like 
Surya or your blazing self, in beauty he is even like a second Soma.’ 

Having said these words, the devi Ganga disappeared. Pavaka, also, 
having accomplished the work of the Devas went where he wished, O 
Bhrigunandana. It was because of what happened then that the Rishis and 
the Devas gave Agni the name Hiranyaretas, he of the golden seed. And 
because the earth held that seed, after Ganga had cast it upon her, she also 
came to be called Vasumati. 

Meanwhile, that foetus, which had sprung from Pavaka and been held 
for a time by Ganga, having fallen into a forest of reeds, began to grow and 
at last assumed a most wonderful form. The six goddesses of the 
constellation Krittika beheld that form resembling the rising sun, and she 
began to rear that child as their son, nurturing him at their breasts. For this, 
that child of pre-eminent splendour came to be called Kartikeya. And 
because he grew from seed that fell out of Rudra’s body, he was called 
Skanda. Having been born in the solitude of a forest of reeds, hidden from 
the view of all, he was called Guha. 

It was in this way that gold came into existence as the son of Agni, god 
of flames. And so was it that gold came to be looked upon as the best of all 
things and the ornament of the very gods; and so also gold was called 
Jatarupam. It is the foremost of all dear things, and among ornaments, also, 
it is the first. The greatest of all purifying things, it is the most auspicious of 
all that is auspicious. 

Gold is truly the illustrious Agni, the Lord of all things, and the first of 
all Prajapatis. The most sacred of all sacred things is gold, O Dvijottama. 
Verily, gold is said to have for its essence both Agni and Soma.” 

‘Vasishta continued, “This other history, also, O Rama, called 
Brahmadarsana, I heard in the eldest days, about the achievement of the 
Grandsire Brahma, who is verily the Paramatman, the Supreme Soul. To a 
sacrifice performed in the most ancient days, by Mahadeva, Lord Rudra, 
who on that occasion had assumed the form of Varuna, there came the 
Munis and all the Devas with Agni at their head. To that sacrifice also came 
all the sacrificial Angas in their embodied forms, and the mantra called 
Vashat; also embodied. All the Samans also and all the Yajuses, in their 
thousands and in their embodied forms, as well, came there. The Rig Veda 
came there, adorned with the laws of diction and prosody. The Lakshanas, 
the Suras, the Niruktas, the Swaras arranged in rows, and the syllable 


AUM, as also Nigraha and Pragraha, all came there and took their places 
under the eye of Mahadeva. 

The Vedas with the Upanishads, Vidya and Savitri, as also, Bhutakaala 
the past, Vartamanakaala the present, and Bhavishyakaala the future, all 
came there and were held by the illuminous Siva. The puissant Lord of all 
then poured libations himself into his own self. Indeed, the wielder of 
Pinaka caused that sacrifice of multifarious form to appear and be ineffably 
beautiful. He is Swarga, Akasa, Bhumi and Vayu. He is called the Lord of 
the earth. He is the Lord whose sway removes all obstacles. He is endowed 
with Sri and he is identical with Agni of all flames. 

That lustrous deity is called by many names. Even he is Brahma and 
Siva and Rudra and Varuna and Agni and Prajapati. He is the auspicious 
Pasupati, Lord of all creatures, yagna and tapa, and all the rites of yoga, and 
Goddess Diksha blazing with vratas, the several points of the horizon with 
the deities that preside over them, the consorts of all the deities, their 
daughters, and the Matrikas, the celestial mothers, all came together in a 
body to Pasupati, O you of Bhrigu’s race. Verily, beholding that sacrifice of 
the Mahatman Mahadeva who had assumed the form of Varuna, all of them 
were full of joy. Seeing the Apsaras of exquisite beauty there, the seed of 
Brahma, excited, fell out upon the earth. For the seed having fallen on the 
earth, Pushan—Surya—took up that earth mingled with Brahma’s seed in 
his hands and cast it into the sacrificial fire. 

Meanwhile, the yagna with the sacred fire ablaze had begun and was 
underway. Brahma, as the hotri, was pouring libations on the fire. It was 
while so engaged that the Pitamaha became excited with desire and 
ejaculated on the earth. As soon as his seed spurted out, he took it up with 
the sruva, the sacrificial ladle, and poured it as a libation of ghrita, with the 
apposite mantras, into the blazing fire. 

From that seed of his, Brahma of great tejas caused the four orders of 
creatures to spring into existence. That seed of the Grandsire was imbued 
with the three gunas of sattva, rajas and tamas. From the part of it which 
was of Rajas, sprang all mobile creatures infused with the principle of 
pravritti or action. From the part which was of tamas, sprang all inert 
creatures. The principle of sattva, however, which dwelt in that seed, 
entered both kinds of existences, the animate and the still. 

The sattva guna is of the nature of tejas or light, and is identical with 
buddhi, understanding. It is eternal and of it is Akasa, unending space. In all 


creatures the attribute of sattva is present and is identical with the light 
which shows what is right and what is wrong. When the seed of Brahma 
was poured as havis on that sacrificial fire, there sprang from it, O mighty 
one, three beings. They were three male persons, with bodies that partook 
of the characters of the circumstances from which they respectively sprang. 

One arose first from the flames of the fire that are called bhrig, and 
hence he came to be known by the name Bhrigu. A second came from the 
burning coals called angara, and he came to be known as Angiras. The third 
sprang from a heap of extinguished coals, kavya, and he came to be called 
by the name Kavi. The first came out with flames spewing from his body 
and he was called Bhrigu. From the rays of the sacrificial fire sprang 
another called Marichi. From Marichi, later, came Kasyapa. From the 
burning coals sprang Angiras. The diminutive Rishis called Balakhilyas 
sprang from the blades of kusa grass spread out in that sacrifice. From the 
same blades of kusa grass, O you of great puissance, also sprang Atri. From 
the ashes of the fire sprang all those that are numbered among the illumined 
Rishis—the Vaikhanasas—endowed with tapasya and devoted to Vedic lore 
and every noble and excellent accomplishment. 

From the eyes of Agni sprang the twin Aswins blessed with great 
beauty of person. At last, from his ears, sprang all the Prajapatis. The Rishis 
emerged from the pores of Agni’s body. From his sweat sprang Chchandas, 
and from his strength sprang Manas, mind. For this has Agni been said to 
be all the Devas in his individual self, by Rishis who know the Vedas 
deeply, and guided by their authority. 

The logs of wood that keep alive the flames of Agni are regarded as the 
masas, the months. The juices that the fuel yields constitute the Fortnights. 
The liver of Agni is the day and the night, and his fierce light are the 
muhurtas. The blood of Agni is regarded as the source of the Rudras. From 
his blood sprang also the gold-complexioned deities called the 
Maitradevatas. From his smoke sprang the Vasus. From his flames sprang 
the Rudras as also the twelve Adityas of great refulgence. The navagrahas 
and the nakshatras, and the other stars that have been set in their respective 
places in the firmament, are regarded as the burning coals of Agni. The first 
Creator of the universe declared Agni to be the Supreme Brahman and 
eternal, and the granter of all wishes. And this is truly a mystery. 

After all these births, Mahadeva, who had assumed the form of Varuna 
for his sacrifice, and who had Pavana for his soul, said, ‘This excellent 


sacrifice is mine. I am the grahapati in it. The three beings that first sprang 
from the sacrificial fire are mine. Without doubt, they should be regarded as 
my sons. Know this, you gods who range through the skies: they are the 
fruits of this sacrifice.’ 

Agni said, ‘These children have sprung from my limbs. They all have 
me as the cause of their life. They must be regarded as my children. 
Mahadeva, in his form of Varuna, is mistaken about this.’ 

After this, the master of all the worlds, the Grandsire of all creatures, 
Brahma, said, “These children are mine. The seed was mine that I poured 
upon the sacrificial fire. | am the Yajaman of this sacrifice. It was I who 
poured on the sacrificial fire the seed that came out of myself. The fruit is 
always his who has planted the seed. The cause of these births is the seed 
that is mine.’ 

The Devas then went into the presence of the Grandsire and, bowing 
their heads to him, joined their hands in reverence, and they said to him, 
‘All of us, O illustrious one, and the entire universe of mobile and immobile 
creatures, are your children. O sire, let Agni of blazing flames, and the 
powerful Mahadeva, who has, for this sacrifice, assumed the form of 
Varuna, both have their wish.’ 

At these words, although born of Brahman, the mighty Mahadeva in the 
form of Varuna, the ruler of all aquatic creatures, received the firstborn one 
Bhrigu with the lustre of the sun, as his own child. Brahma then made 
Angiras the son of Agni. Conversant with the truth of everything, the 
Pitamaha then took Kavi as his own son. Engaged in procreating creatures 
to people the earth, Bhrigu who is a Prajapati, then came to be known as 
Varuna’s son. Blessed with every prosperity, Angiras came to be called the 
son of Agni, and the celebrated Kavi came to be known as the child of 
Brahma himself. 

Bhrigu and Angiras, who had sprung from the flames and the coals of 
Agni, became the progenitors of vast races and tribes of the world. Verily, 
these three, Bhrigu and Angiras and Kavi, regarded as Prajapatis, are the 
progenitors of races and tribes beyond count. All are the children of these 
three. Know this, great hero. Bhrigu begot seven sons, all of whom became 
equal to him in merits and accomplishments. Their names are Chyavana, 
Vajrasirsha, Suchi, Urva and Sukra, that giver of boons, Vibhu, and Savana. 
These are the seven sons of Bhrigu and are hence Bhargavas. They are also 
called Varunas because of their ancestor Bhrigu having been adopted by 


Mahadeva in the form of Varuna. You, O Rama, belong to the race of 
Bhrigu. 

Angiras begot eight sons. They also are known as Varunas. Their names 
are Brihaspati, Utathya, Payasya, Santi, Dhira, Virupa, Samvarta and 
Sudhan was the eighth. These eight are regarded also as the sons of Agni. 
Free from every evil, they are devoted only to knowledge. The sons of 
Kavi, who was taken by Brahma himself, are also known as Varunas. 
Numbering eight, all of them became progenitors of teeming races and 
tribes. Auspicious by nature, they are all knowers of the Brahman. The 
names of the eight sons of Kavi are Kavi, Kavya, Dhrishnu, Usanas endued 
with great intelligence, Bhrigu, Viraja, Kasi and Ugra conversant with every 
dharma. 

These are the eight sons of Kavi. By them has the whole world been 
peopled. They are all Prajapatis, and by them have been begotten countless 
progeny. Thus, O greatest Bhargava, has the whole world been peopled with 
the progeny of Angiras and Kavi and Bhrigu. The supreme Lord Mahadeva, 
in the form of Varuna which he assumed for his sacrifice, had first, O 
learned Brahmana, adopted both Kavi and Angiras. Hence, these two are 
regarded as being of Varuna. 

After that the consumer of sacrificial libations, deity of blazing flames, 
adopted Angiras. Hence, all the progeny of Angiras are known as belonging 
to the race of Agni. The Grandsire Brahma was, in the most antique days, 
gratified by all the Devas, who said to him, ‘Let these Lords of the universe, 
Bhrigu, Angiras and Kavi, and their descendants, save us all. Let all of them 
become progenitors of varied races and tribes to people the earth. Let all of 
them become endowed with tapasya. Through your grace, let all these save 
the world from becoming an uninhabited wilderness. 

Let them become procreators and extenders of races and tribes and let 
them increase your glory and tejas. Let all of them become thorough 
masters of the Vedas and let them be achievers of great deeds. Let all of 
them be friends to the cause of the Devas. Indeed, let all of them be blessed 
with auspiciousness. Let them become founders of teeming races and tribes 
and let them be great Maharishis. Let all of them be blessed with lofty 
tapasya and let all of them be devoted to brahmacharya. All of us, as also all 
these, are your progeny, O you of great puissance. 

You, Pitamaha, are the Creator of both the Devas and the Brahmanas. 
Marichi is your first son. All these also that are called Bhargavas are your 


progeny. We also are so. Looking at this, O Grandsire, we shall all help and 
support one another. All these shall, in this way, multiply their progeny and 
establish you at the commencement of each prakriya, every creation after 
each universal pralaya.’ 

Thus addressed by them, Brahma, the Grandsire of all the worlds, said, 
‘Tathaastu, So be it. I am gratified with you all!’ 

Having said so to the Devas, he returned to where he had come from. 
Even this is what happened in days of old at that Mahayagna of the 
Mahatman Mahadeva, that greatest of all the gods, in the beginning of 
creation, when he assumed the form of Varuna to perform his sacrifice. 

Agni is Brahma. He is Pasupati. He is Sarva. He is Rudra. He is 
Prajapati. It is well-known that Suvarna, gold, is the child of Agni. When 
fire is not available for a sacrifice, gold is used as a substitute. Guided by 
the indications afforded by the Veda, the sacrificer who knows the scriptural 
law, and who knows the identity of gold with fire, places a piece of gold on 
some blades of kusa grass spread out on the ground, and pours libations 
over it. 

Upon also the pores of an anthill, upon the right ear of a goat, upon a 
piece of level earth, upon the waters of a tirtha, or into the hand of a 
Brahmana, if libations are poured, the great Agni Deva is gratified and 
regards such havis as a source of his own aggrandisement as also that of the 
Devas through him. Hence it is that we have heard that all the Devas regard 
Agni as their refuge and are devoted to him. Agni sprang from Brahma, and 
from Agni sprang gold. Hence, men of dharma who make gifts of gold, 
suvarnadana, are regarded as giving away all the Devas. The man who 
makes gifts of gold attains to a very high end. Realms of splendorous 
radiance are his. Verily, O Bhargava, he is installed as a king of kings in 
swarga. 

He who, at sunrise, makes a gift of gold according to the shastra with 
proper mantras, succeeds in warding off the evil consequences 
foreshadowed by ominous dreams. The man who, as soon as the sun has 
risen, makes a gift of gold is cleansed of all his sins. He who makes a gift of 
gold at midday destroys all his future sins. He who with restrained soul, 
makes a gift of gold at the second sandhya succeeds in attaining to an abode 
with Brahma and Vayu and Agni and Soma in their various lokas. 

Such a man attains to auspicious fame in realms of great felicity that 
belong to Indra himself. Attaining to resounding fame in this world also, 


and washed clean of all his sins, he sports in bliss. Verily, such a man 
attains to many other realms of joy and becomes unequalled for his glory 
and fame. His course perfectly unobstructed, he succeeds in going 
everywhere at will. He has never to fall from the transcendent realms to 
which he attains and the glory he acquires is vast indeed. 

Truly, by making gifts of gold one attains to numberless regions of 
felicity all of which the giver enjoys for eternity. That man who, having lit a 
fire at sunrise, makes gifts of gold while observing a particular vrata, 
succeeds in attaining the fruition of all his wishes. It has been said that gold 
is identical with Agni. The gift of gold, therefore, yields untold prosperity. 
Suvarnadana leads to the possession of all those merits and 
accomplishments that are desired, and cleanses the heart. 

I have told you, O sinless one, of the origin of gold. Listen now to how 
Kartikeya grew up. After a long time did Kartikeya grow to young maturity. 
He was then, O Bhargava, chosen by all the Devas with Indra at their head 
as the senapati of the celestial forces. He slew the Daitya Taraka as also 
many other Asuras, at the command of Indra and also actuated by the desire 
to benefit all the worlds. 

I have, O you of great might, discoursed to you on the merits of making 
gifts of gold. Do you, therefore, O best of all the eloquent, make gifts of 
gold.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘Thus addressed by Vasishta, Jamadagni’s son of 
great prowess then made gifts of gold to Brahmanas and was washed of his 
sins. I have told you everything about the merits of suvarnadana and about 
its origin, Yudhishtira. Do you also, therefore, make abundant gifts of gold 
to Brahmanas. Verily, by giving such dakshina, you will surely be purified 
of all your sins.’” 


CANTO 86 


66 Y udhishtira says, ‘You have, Pitamaha, discoursed to me, in detail, 
on the merits that attach to the gift of gold according to the laws 
laid down in the scriptures as indicated in the auditions of the Vedas. You 
have also described the origin of gold. Tell me now how Taraka met with 
destruction. You have said that the Asura had become impervious to the 
gods. Tell me in detail how his death was brought about. O perpetuator of 
Kuru’s race, I wish to hear in detail from you of how Taraka was killed. 
Indeed, I am agog to listen to this tale.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘The Devas and the Rishis, O monarch, reduced to great 
distress by Taraka’s prowess and by Ganga casting off Agni’s flaming seed, 
urged the six Krittikas to rear that child. Amongst the celestial Devis there 
were none, save these, that could bear the fierce seed of Agni in their 
wombs. The god of fire was exceedingly gratified with those goddesses for 
being prepared, even eager, to nurture the child born from his seed, the 
child endowed with his own tremendous energy. When the retas of Agni 
was divided into six portions and placed within their yonis, the six Krittikas 
began to nourish the portion that each held in her womb. 

As the high-souled Kumara grew within their wombs, they were sorely 
afflicted by his terrific tejas, and had no peace anywhere. At last, the time 
came for them to deliver their awesome child. All of them delivered at the 
same time. Though held in six different wombs, yet all the portions as they 
came out united into one. The earth goddess held the child, taking it up 
from a heap of gold, and he of handsome and immaculate form blazed with 
splendour even like Agni himself. 


Incomparably handsome, he began to grow in a delightful forest of sara 
reeds. The six Krittikas saw that child of theirs like the morning sun in 
splendour and, filled with consuming love, began to feed him at their 
breasts. As I have told you, because he was born of the Krittikas and raised 
by them, he came to be known throughout the three worlds as Kartikeya. 
Having sprung from the seed which had fallen from Rudra, he was named 
Skanda, and because of his birth in the solitude of a forest of reeds he came 
to be called by the name of Guha: the secretly born. 

The thirty-three Devas, the cardinal points of the horizon in their 
embodied forms, together with the deities that rule over them, and Rudra 
and Dhatri and Vishnu and Yama and Pushan and Aryaman and Bhaga, and 
the Angas and Mitra and the Sadhyas and Vasava and the Vasus and the 
Aswins and the waters and the wind and the firmament and Chandramas 
and all the constellations and the planets and Surya, and all the Riks and 
Samans and Yajuses in their embodied forms, came there to behold that 
wonderful child who was the son of Agni, Lord of flames. 

The Rishis uttered hymns of praise and the Gandharvas sang in honour 
of that child called Kumara of six heads, twice six eyes, and absolutely 
devoted to Brahmanas. His shoulders were broad, and he had a dozen arms, 
and the splendour of his person resembled that of Agni and Aditya. As he 
lay on a bed of heath, the Devas with the Rishis looked at him and were 
filled with wonder they had never known before; they regarded the great 
Asura Taraka as already slain. The gods began to bring him diverse kinds of 
toys and other things that could amuse him. As he played like any child, 
every kind of plaything, birds and small creatures among them, were given 
to him. 

Garuda of splendid feathers gave Kartikeya a child of his—a peacock 
with brilliant plumes of many hues. The Rakshasas gave him a boar and a 
buffalo. Aruna, the sun’s legless sarathy, gave him a cockerel of fiery 
splendour. Chandramas gave him a sheep, and Aditya bestowed upon him 
some of his dazzling rays. The mother of all cows, Surabhi, gave him 
hundreds of thousands of cows. 

His sire Agni gave him a goat possessed of many extraordinary 
qualities. Ila gave him an abundant quantity of flowers and fruit. 
Sudhanwan gave him a chariot and a vimana of Kubera. Varuna gave him 
many most auspicious and beautiful treasures of the ocean, along with some 
great elephants. Indra, king of the Devas, gave Kartikeya lions and tigers 


and leopards, and diverse kinds of birds of the air, and many other terrible 
beasts of prey and many chatras, royal parasols, also of diverse kinds. 

Rakshasas and Asuras, in large bands, began to walk in the train of that 
mighty child. Beholding the son of Agni grow up, Taraka sought, by 
various means, to effect his death, but he failed to do anything to that 
mighty young god. In time, the Devas invested Agni’s son Guha, born in 
the solitude of a forest of reeds, with the command of their armies. And 
they told him of the oppressions visited upon them by the Asura Taraka. 

The senapati of the celestial forces grew up and became possessed of 
untold energy and might. In time, Guha slew Taraka with his irresistible 
spear of flames. Verily, Kumara slew the Asura as easily as if in sport. 
Having killed Taraka he re-established Indra to his sovereignty of the three 
worlds. Of unmatched prowess, the celestial senapati blazed with beauty 
and splendour. The great Skanda became the protector of the Devas and did 
what was agreeable to Sankara, his sire. The illustrious son of Agni had a 
golden form. 

Verily, Kumara is always the leader of the hosts of heaven. Gold is the 
potent energy of the god of fire and was born with Kartikeya from the same 
seed. Hence is gold so auspicious and imbued with inexhaustible punya. 
Even thus, O son of the Kurus, did Vasishta speak to Rama of Bhrigu’s race 
in days of old. Do you, therefore, O king of men, try to make gifts of gold. 
By making gifts of gold, Rama became cleansed of all his sins, and finally 
attained to a high place in heaven that is unattainable by other men.’” 


CANTO 87 


V aisampayana continued, “Yudhishtira says, “You have told me, O 

Mahatman, about the duties of the four varnas. Do you now, after 
the same manner, O king, discourse to me on all the laws regarding the 
sraddha for departed ancestors.’ 

Thus addressed by Yudhishtira, the son of Santanu sets himself to 
declare to him the following ritual, consistent with the law of the sraddha. 

Bhishma says, “Listen, O king, with close attention, and I will tell you 
about the ritual of the sraddha. That ritual is auspicious, worthy of praise, 
productive of fame and progeny, and is regarded as a sacrifice, O scorcher 
of your foes, in honour of the Pitris. Devas or Asuras or Manavas, 
Gandharvas or Uragas or Rakshasas, Pisachas or Kinnaras—all of them 
should always worship the Pitris. It is seen that man worship the Pitris first, 
and gratify the Devas next by offering them their adorations. One should 
always worship the Pitris with every care. 

It is told, O king, that the sraddha performed in honour of the Pitris may 
be performed later. But this general rule is restrained by a special one, 
which deems that the sraddha in honour of the Pitris should be performed 
on the afternoon of the day of Amavasya, the new moon. The departed 
Grandsires become gratified with the sraddha that is performed on any day. 
I shall, however, tell you now what the merits and demerits are of the 
respective lunar days in view of the performance of the sraddha. I will tell 
you, O sinless one, what fruits are attained on what days by performing the 
sraddha for the Pitris. Listen to me with close attention. 


By adoring the Pitris on the first day of the lighted fortnight, a man 
obtains in his home beautiful wives all able to give him many children, all 
of them noble and accomplished. By performing the sraddha on the second 
day of the lighted fortnight one gets many daughters. By performing it on 
the third day, one acquires many horses. By performing it on the fourth day, 
one receives a large herd of smaller animals like goats and sheep. They, O 
king, who perform the sraddha on the fifth day have many sons. Those who 
perform the sraddha on the sixth day acquire great personal radiance. By 
performing it on the seventh day, one acquires great fame. 

By performing it on the eighth day, one makes great profits in trade. By 
performing it on the ninth day one acquires many animals of uncloven 
hoofs. By performing it on the tenth day, one acquires a wealth of kine. By 
performing it on the eleventh day, one becomes the possessor of a great 
wealth of clothes and utensils of brass and other metals. Such a man also 
has many sons all of whom are blessed with Brahmatejas. By performing 
the sraddha on the twelfth day, one always beholds, if one desires, various 
kinds of objects and artefacts of exceptional beauty, made of silver and 
gold. By performing the sraddha on the thirteenth day, one attains eminence 
over one’s kinsmen. Without doubt, all the young men in the family of he 
who performs the sraddha on the fourteenth day, meet with death. Such a 
man becomes entangled in war. 

By performing the sraddha on the day of the new moon, one obtains the 
fruition of every wish. In the dark fortnight, all the days commencing with 
the tenth, and ending with that of the new moon, leaving only the fourteenth 
day, are laudable days for the performance of the sraddha. Other days of 
that fortnight are not so. Then, again, as the dark fortnight is better than the 
lighted one, so the afternoon of the day is better than the forenoon in the 
matter of the sraddha.’” 


CANTO 88 


: mye udhishtira says, ‘You of great power, tell me what that object is, 

which, if dedicated to the Pitris, becomes inexhaustible. What 

havi, again, lasts for all time? What, indeed, is that which if offered 
becomes eternal?’ 

Bhishma says, “Listen, O Yudhishtira, what those havis are which those 
who know the ritual of the sraddha regard as suitable and what the fruits are 
that attach to each. With sesame seeds and rice and barley and masha and 
water and roots and fruits, if given at sraddhas, the Pitris, O king, remain 
gratified for the period of a month. Manu has said that if a sraddha is 
performed with a copious measure of sesame, such a sraddha becomes 
inexhaustible. Of all kinds of food, sesame seeds, tila, are regarded as the 
best. 

With fish offered at sraddhas, the Pitris remain gratified for a period of 
two months. With mutton they remain gratified for three months and with 
the flesh of the rabbit for four. With the flesh of the goat, O king, they 
remain gratified for five months, with the boar for six months, and with the 
flesh of birds for seven. With venison obtained from the deer called 
Prishata, they remain gratified for eight months, and with that obtained from 
the Ruru for nine months, and with the meat of the Gavaya for ten months. 

With the meat of the buffalo, their satiation lasts for eleven months. 
With beef presented at the sraddha, their satisfaction, it is said, lasts for a 
full year. Payasa mixed with ghrita is as acceptable to the Pitris as beef. 
With the meat of the Badrinasa, the satisfaction of the Pitris lasts for twelve 
years. The flesh of the rhinoceros, offered to the Pitris on the anniversaries 


of the lunar days on which they died, becomes inexhaustible. The herb 
called kalasaka, the petals of the kanchana flower, and meat of the goat also, 
thus offered, prove inexhaustible. 

On this matter, Yudhishtira, there are some slokas originally sung by the 
Pitris, which are also sung in the world. They were shared with me once by 
Sanatkumara— He that has taken birth in our vamsa should give us payasa 
mixed with ghrita on the thirteenth day of the dark fortnight, under the 
Magha Nakshatra, during Dakshinayana, the sun’s southern course. One 
born in our race should, under the asterism Magha, as if in the observance 
of a vow, offer the meat of a goat or the petals of the kanchana flower. He 
should also offer us, with the due rites, payasa mixed with ghee, dedicating 
it on a place covered by the shadow of an elephant. Many sons should be 
coveted so that at least one may go to Gaya to perform the sraddha of his 
ancestors, to holy Gaya where stands the great Nyagrodha, the banyan that 
is celebrated across all the worlds and that makes all offerings made under 
its branches inexhaustible. 

Even a little water, roots, fruits, meat and rice, mixed with honey, if 
offered on the anniversary of the day of death become inexhaustible.’” 


CANTO 89 


¢ ‘RB hishma continues, “Listen to me, Yudhishtira, as I tell you what 

those optional sraddhas are that should be performed under the 

different nakshatras and that were first spoken of by Yama to King 

Sasabindu. That man who always performs the sraddha under the Krittika 

nakshatra is regarded as performing a sacrifice after establishing the sacred 
fire. Such a one, freed from fear, ascends into heaven with his children. 

He that wishes for children should perform the sraddha under the star 
Rohini, while he that wants tejas should do it under Mrigasiras. By 
performing the sraddha under Ardra, a man becomes the doer of fierce 
deeds. A mortal, by performing the sraddha under Punarvasu, gains much 
through farming. 

The man that is desirous of growth and advancement should perform 
the Sraddha under Pushya. By doing it under the Aslesha nakshatra, one 
begets heroic children. By doing it under the three Maghas, one attains to 
pre-eminence among kinsmen. By doing it under the prior Phalgunis, the 
doer is endued with good fortune. By performing the sraddha under the later 
Phalgunis, one gains many children; while by performing it under Hasta, 
one attains to the fruition of one’s wishes. 

By performing it under the star Chitra one has children endowed with 
great beauty. By doing it under Swati, one makes much profit through trade. 
The man that wants children acquires the fruition of his wish by performing 
the sraddha under the Visakha nakshatra. By doing it under Anuradha, one 
becomes a king of kings. By making offerings in honour of the Pitris under 


the Jyeshta nakshatra, with devotion and humility, one attains to 
sovereignty, O Kurusattama. 

By performing the sraddha under Mula one finds health, and under the 
prior Ashadha, one acquires excellent fame. By performing it under the 
later Ashadha, one succeeds in roving over the whole world, freed from 
every sorrow. By undertaking the sraddha under Abhijit, one attains to high 
knowledge. By doing it under Sravana, one departing from this world 
attains to a very high end. The man that performs the sraddha under the 
Dhanishtha nakshatra becomes the ruler of a kingdom. By performing it 
under the nakshatra presided over by Varuna—Satabhisha—one attains to 
success as a physician. By performing the sraddha under the stellation of 
the prior Bhadrapada, one acquires large herds of goats and sheep; while by 
doing it under the later Bhadrapada, one acquires thousands of kine. By 
performing the sraddha under the asterism Revati, one acquires great wealth 
in utensils of white brass and copper. 

By performing the sraddha under Aswini one acquires many horses, 
while under Bharani, one attains to longevity. 

Listening to these laws about the sraddhas, King Sasabindu performed 
them accordingly, and succeeded in easily subjugating and ruling all the 
earth, this Bhumi.’”’ 


CANTO 90 


¢ ve udhishtira says, ‘It befits you, O best of the Kurus, to tell me to 
what kind of Brahmanas, O Pitamaha, the offerings made at 
sraddhas be given away.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘The Kshatriya who knows the laws about dana should 
never examine Brahmanas when making gifts to them. In all acts, however, 
that relate to the worship of the Devas and the Pitris, an examination has 
been said to be proper. The Devas are worshipped on earth by men only 
when they are filled with devotion that comes from the Devas themselves. 
Hence, with regard to dakshina offered to the Devas one should make gifts 
to all Brahmanas without any examination of their merits. 

In sraddhas, however, the man of intelligence should examine the 
Brahmanas to be engaged to assist the undertakers of the sraddha both in 
the performance of the ritual and giving dakshina to them of the offerings 
made to the Pitris. Such investigation should concern itself with their birth 
and conduct, their age and appearance, their learning and the nobility or 
lack of parentage. Amongst the Brahmanas, there are some that pollute the 
vamsa and gotra and some that sanctify it. Listen to me, O king, as I tell you 
who the Brahmanas are that should be excluded. 

The Brahmana that is full of guile, or is guilty of foeticide, or he that is 
ill with consumption, or he that keeps animals, or is destitute of Vedic 
study, or is a common servant of a village, or lives upon the interest of 
loans, or he that is a singer, or he that sells all things, or he that is guilty of 
arson, or he that is a poisoner, or he that is a pimp by profession, or he that 
sells Soma, or he that is a professor of palmistry, or he that is in the employ 


of the king, or he that is a seller of oil, or he that is a cheat and bearer of 
false witness, or he that has a quarrel with his father, or he that tolerates a 
lover of his wife in his house, or he that has been cursed, or he that is a 
thief, or he that lives by some mechanical art, or he that puts on disguises, 
or he that is deceitful in his conduct, or he that is hostile to those he calls his 
friends, or he that is an adulterer, or he that is a preceptor of Sudras, or he 
that has betaken himself to the profession of arms, or he that wanders with 
dogs to hunt, or he that has been bitten by a dog, or he that has married 
before his elder brothers, or he that has undergone circumcision, he that 
violates the bed of his guru, he that is an actor or mime, he that lives by 
setting up an idol and he that lives by calculating the conjunctions of stars 
and planets and asterisms, are all regarded as fit to be excluded. 

Those conversant with the Vedas say that the offerings made at 
sraddhas, if eaten by such Brahmanas, go to fill the stomachs of Rakshasas 
instead of filling those of the Pitris, O Yudhishtira. The man who, having 
eaten at a sraddha, does not abstain that day from study of the Vedas or who 
has sexual congress that day with a Sudra woman, must know that his Pitris, 
because of these acts of his, have to lie for a month in his excrement. If 
given to a Brahmana who sells Soma, spirituous liquor, the offerings made 
at sraddhas are converted into human faeces; if given to a Brahmana 
engaged in the practice of medicine, they become converted into pus and 
blood; if given to one who lives by setting up an idol, they fail to produce 
any fruit; if to one who lives upon the interest of loans, they lead to 
ignominy; if given to one engaged in trade, they yield no fruits either here 
or hereafter. If gifted to a Brahmana born of a widowed mother, by a second 
husband, they become as fruitless as libations poured on ashes. 

They who give dakshina of the havya and kavya offered at sraddhas to 
such Brahmanas as are divested of the duties ordained for them and of the 
good conduct that persons of their varna should observe, find that such 
dakshina yields no punya. The man of little intelligence who makes gifts to 
such Brahmanas, knowing their dispositions, obliges, by their conduct, his 
Pitris to eat human excrement in the next world. You should know that 
these wretches among Brahmanas deserve to be excluded from their 
lineage. 

Those Brahmanas, also, of little vitality, who are engaged in teaching 
Sudras are the same. A Brahmana who is blind stains sixty individuals of 
his line; one that is impotent, a hundred; while one that is afflicted with 


white leprosy stains as many as he looks upon, O king. Whatever offerings 
made at sraddhas are eaten by one with his head wrapped round with a 
cloth, whatever is eaten by one with his face turned southwards, and 
whatever is eaten while wearing shoes or sandals, all go to gratify the 
Asuras. 

Whatever, again, is given with malice, and whatever is given without 
reverence, have been ordained by Brahma himself as the portion of Bali, the 
prince of Asuras. 

Dogs, and such Brahmanas as are polluters of their gotras, should not be 
allowed to look upon the offerings made at sraddhas. For this reason, 
Sraddhas should be performed in a place that is properly cordoned around 
or concealed from view. The place for a sraddha should also be strewn with 
sesame seeds. That sraddha which is performed without sesame seeds, or 
that which is done by a person in anger, has its havi stolen by Rakshasas 
and Pisachas. Equal to the number of Brahmanas seen by one that deserves 
to be excluded from the gotra, is the loss of punya he causes to the foolish 
performer of the sraddha who invites him to the feast. 

I will now tell you who sanctifiers of the vamsa are. Do you find them 
out through examination. All Brahmanas that are purified by knowledge, 
Vedic study, and vows and observances, and they that are of good and 
righteous behaviour, should be known as sanctifiers of everything. I will tell 
you who deserve to sit in the sacred line. 

He that is conversant with the three Nachiketas, he that has set up the 
five sacrificial fires, he that knows the five Suparnas, he that is conversant 
with the six angas of the Veda, he that is a descendant of sires who were 
engaged in teaching the Vedas and is himself so engaged, he that is well- 
conversant with the Chchandas, he that is acquainted with the Jyeshta 
Saman, he that is obedient to the sway of his parents, he that knows the 
Vedas and whose ancestors have been so for ten generations, he that has 
congress with only his lawfully wedded wives and this in their seasons, and 
he who has been cleansed by knowledge, by the Vedas, and by vows and 
observances—such a Brahmana sanctifies the lineage. 

He who reads the Atharva-siras, who is devoted to the observance of 
brahmacharya, and who is steady in the observance of righteous vratas, who 
is truthful and of good and pure conduct, and who is duly observant of his 
svadharma; they, also, that have undergone fatigue and labour to bathe in 
the waters of tirthas, and have taken the avabhrita snana, the final bath, after 


performing sacrifices with proper mantras, who are free from the sway of 
wrath, who are not restless, who are blessed with forgiving dispositions, 
who are self-restrained masters of their senses, and they who are devoted to 
the good of all creatures—these should be invited to sraddhas. Anything 
given to such men becomes inexhaustible. These indeed are sanctifiers of 
lineages. 

There are others also, highly blessed, that should be regarded as 
sanctifiers of the vamsa. They are Yatis and those that are knowers of the 
religion of moksha, and they that are devoted to yoga, and they that 
properly observe excellent vratas and they that, with collected mind, recite 
sacred Itihasas to the best of Brahmanas. They that are conversant with 
Bhashyas, they also that are devoted to grammatical studies, they that study 
the Puranas and they that study the Dharmashastras and, having studied 
them, live by them; he that has lived for the required period in the home of 
his guru, he that is truthful in speech, he that is a giver of thousands, they 
that are the very best in their knowledge of all the Vedas and the scriptural 
and philosophical aphorisms — these sanctify the parampara as far they look 
at it. And because they sanctify all who sit in the parampara, they are called 
sanctifiers. 

Brahmavadis, utterers of Brahman, say that even a single person who is 
the descendant of sires who were teachers of the Vedas and who is himself a 
Vedic teacher, sanctifies full seven yojanas around him. If he that is not a 
ritwik and that is not a Vedic acharya takes the pre-eminent seat at a 
sraddha, with even the permission of the other ritwiks there, he is said to 
take the sins of all who may be sitting there. If, on the other hand, he 
happens to be a knower of the Vedas and free from all the faults that are 
regarded polluting the line, he shall not, be regarded as fallen by taking the 
foremost seat in a sraddha. Such a man would then truly be a sanctifier of 
the lineage. 

For these reasons, you should properly examine Brahmanas before 
inviting them to sraddhas. You should invite only such among them as are 
devoted to their svadharma, and as are born into good families, and as are 
possessed of great learning. He who performs sraddhas for feeding only his 
friends and whose havi does not gratify the Devas and the Pitris, fails to 
ascend into swarga. He who gathers only his friends and relatives on the 
occasion of the sraddha he performs, without properly honouring deserving 
persons by inviting and feeding them, fails, when he dies, to leave the world 


by the path of the Devas, which is a lighted one and free from all afflictions 
and impediments. 

The man who makes the sraddha he performs just an occasion for 
gathering his friends, never succeeds in attaining to swarga. Verily, the man 
who converts the sraddha into an occasion for feteing and feeding his 
friends, is separated from heaven even as a bird from its perch when the 
string tying it breaks. Therefore, he that performs a sraddha should not use 
it as an occasion to honour his friends. He may gather them together and 
make gifts of wealth to them on other occasions. The havi and the kavi 
offered at sraddhas should be served to them that are neither friends nor 
enemies but are only indifferent or neutral to him. As seed sown in sterile 
soil does not sprout, or as one that has not sown does not receive a share of 
the harvest, even so, the sraddha in which the offerings are eaten by an 
unworthy person yields no fruit either here or hereafter. 

That Brahmana who is destitute of Vedic study is like a fire made by 
burning grass or straw, and is soon extinguished just like such a fire. The 
offerings made at sraddhas should not be given to him even as libations 
should not be poured on the ashes of the sacrificial fire. When the offerings 
made at sraddhas are exchanged by the performers with one another, instead 
of being given away to the truly worthy, they come to be regarded as 
Pisacha dakshina. Such offerings gratify neither the gods nor the manes. 
Instead of reaching the other world, they wander even here like a cow that 
has lost her calf wandering listlessly within the fold. As those libations of 
ghee that are poured upon the extinguished ashes of a sacrificial fire never 
reach either the Devas or the Pitris, a gift that is made to a dancer or a 
singer or a dakshina given to a lying or deceitful person, produces no 
punya. 

The dakshina that is given to a liar or a deceitful man destroys both the 
giver and the receiver without benefiting them in any least respect. Such a 
dakshina is only pernicious and entirely censurable. The Pitris of the person 
making it have to fall from the path of the Devas. The gods know them to 
be Brahmanas who always walk, O Yudhishtira, within the bounds ordained 
by the Rishis who are knowers of all dharma, and who have firm faith in 
their efficacy. Those Brahmanas that are devoted to Vedic study, to gyana, 
to tapasya, and to karma, O Bhaarata, should be known as Rishis. The 
offerings made at sraddhas should be given to those that are devoted to 


knowledge. Verily, they are regarded as true men who never speak ill of 
Brahmanas. 

Men who speak ill of Brahmanas in public should never be fed at 
sraddhas. If Brahmanas, be disparaged with calumny, they will destroy 
three generations of the one who sullies their pure name. This is the 
declaration of the Vaikhanasa Rishis. Brahmanas conversant with the Vedas 
should be examined from a distance. Whether one likes them or feels a 
dislike for them, one must give to such Brahmanas the offerings made at 
Sraddhas. That man who feeds thousands upon thousands of false 
Brahmanas acquires merit that is attainable by feeding even one Brahmana 
if that Brahmana is possessed of a knowledge of the Vedas, O Bhaarata!” 


CANTO 91 


: me udhishtira says, ‘By whom was the sraddha first conceived and 

at what time? What is its essence? During the time when the 
world was peopled by only the descendants of Bhrigu and Angiras, who 
was the Muni that established the sraddha? What karmas should not be 
done at a sraddha? What are those sraddhas in which fruits and roots are to 
be offered? What kinds of paddy should be avoided in sraddhas? Do you 
tell me all this, Pitamaha!’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Listen to me, O ruler of men, and I will tell you how the 
sraddha was introduced, the time of its introduction, the essences of the rite, 
and the Muni who conceived it. 

From the Self-born Brahma sprang Atri, O you of Kuru’s race. In Atri’s 
race was born a Muni of the name of Dattatreya. Dattatreya begot a son 
called Nimi possessed of tapodhana, the wealth of asceticism. Nimi begot a 
son named Srimat who was blessed with great beauty of person. Upon the 
expiration of a full thousand years, Srimat, having undergone the severest 
tapasya, succumbed to time and departed this world. 

His sire Nimi, having performed the purificatory rites according to the 
ritual laid down in the shastras, became filled with great grief, thinking 
continually of the loss of his son. Thinking of that cause of his sorrow, the 
Mahatman Nimi collected various agreeable items of food and drink, on the 
fourteenth day of the moon. The next morning, aching as his heart did with 
sorrow, he rose from bed and managed to withdraw his mind from the 
single pain which held it fast. He succeeded in busying his mind with other 
matters. 


With his mind rapt in dhyana, he then conceived the idea of conducting 
a sraddha. All the fruits and roots which he himself ate, and all the different 
staple grains that were agreeable to him, that sage carefully thought of — 
Nimi who owned the wealth of tapasya. 

On Amavasya, the day of the new moon, he invited seven Brahmanas 
worthy of worship to his asrama. Nimi, of great wisdom, made them sit 
upon asanas of kusa grass, and revered them by walking around their 
persons in pradakshina. Approaching the seven Brahmanas whom he had 
brought to his hermitage, the great Nimi fed them syamaka rice, unmixed 
with salt. At the feet of those Brahmanas who were eating the food served 
to them, kusa grass was spread out on the asanas upon which they sat, with 
the sharp ends of the blades of grass pointing towards the south. 

With a pure body and mind and with concentrated attention, Nimi, 
having placed those blades of sacred grass in the way indicated, offered rice 
cakes as pinda to his dead son, uttering his name and family. Having done 
this, that foremost of Munis was suddenly filled with dismay at the thought 
of having performed a kriya that had not to his knowledge been laid down 
in any of the scriptures. Indeed, he began to regret what he had quite 
spontaneously done. 

“Never done before by the Munis, alas, what have I done? How shall I 
avoid being cursed by the Brahmanas for this abomination as a heretic and a 
performer of unholy rites?” 

He then thought of the original progenitor of his race. As soon as he 
was thought of, Atri tapodhana came there. Seeing Nimi deranged with 
grief at the death of his son, the immortal Atri comforted him. He said to 
him, “O Nimi, this rite that you have conceived is a sacrifice in honour of 
the Pitris. Let no fear be yours on its account, for the Pitamaha Brahma 
himself, in days of old, ordained it. Yes, this ritual that you have conceived 
was laid down by the Self-born himself. Who other than the Svayambhuva 
could ordain this ritual in sraddhas? 

I will tell you, O son, the excellent law created by none other than 
Brahma in respect of sraddhas; O son, do you follow it. Listen to me. 
Having first performed the karana on the sacred fire with the chanting of 
mantras, one should next always pour libations to Agni, and Soma, and 
Varuna. To the Viswedevas also, who are always the companions of the 
Pitris, the Self-born then ordained a portion of the offerings. The earth also, 
as the goddess that sustains the offerings made at sraddhas, should then be 


praised under the names of Vaishnavi, Kasyapi and Akshaya, the 
inexhaustible. When water is being fetched for the sraddha, Varuna of great 
puissance should be given praise. After this, both Agni and Soma should be 
invoked with reverence and gratified with libations, O sinless one. 

The deities that are known by the name of Pitris were created by the 
Svayambhu. Others, highly blessed, the Ushnapas, were also created by 
him. For all these, shares have been ordained of the offerings made at 
sraddhas. By adoring all these deities at sraddhas, the ancestors of the 
persons performing them are freed from all sins. 

The Pitris created by the Self-born Brahma number seven. The 
Viswedevas having Agni for their mouth, for it is through Agni that they 
feed, I have mentioned before. I will now name those high-souled deities 
who deserve shares of the offerings made at sraddhas. They are Bala, 
Dhriti, Vipapa, Punyakrit, Pavana, Parshni, Kshemak, Divysanu, Vivaswat, 
Viryavat, Hrimat, Kirtimat, Krita, Jitatman, Munivirya, Diptaroman, 
Bhayankara, Anukarman, Pratia, Pradatri, Ansumat, Sailabha, Parama 
krodhi, Dhiroshni, Bhupati, Sraja, Vajrin and Vari—these are the eternal 
Viswedevas. 

There are others also, whose names are Vidyutvarchas, Somavarchas, 
and Suryasri. Others numbered amongst them are Somapa, Suryasavitra, 
Dattatman, Pundariyaka, Ushninabha, Nabhoda, Viswayu, Dipti, 
Chamuhara, Suresa, Vyomari, Sankara Bhava, Isa, Kartri, Kriti, Daksha, 
Bhuvana, Divya, Karmakrit, Ganita Panchavirya, Aditya, Rasmimat, 
Saptakrit, Somavachas, Viswakrit, Kavi, Anugoptri, Sugoptri, Naptri and 
Iswara—these most blessed ones are numbered among the Viswedevas. 
They are eternal and conversant with all that occurs in Time. 

The kinds of paddy which should not be offered at sraddhas are those 
called kodrava and pulka. Asafoetida also, among ingredients used in 
cooking, should not be offered, as also onions and garlic, the meat of 
animals slain with venomed shafts, and black salt. Other offerings that 
should not be made at sraddhas are the flesh of the domesticated pig, the 
meat of all animals not slaughtered at sacrifices, salt of the variety called 
vid, the herb called sitapaki, all sprouts like those of the bamboo. Indeed, all 
kinds of salt should be excluded from the offerings made at sraddhas, and 
also the fruits of the jambu. 

Anything upon which anyone has spat or upon which tears have fallen 
should not be offered at sraddhas. Among offerings made to the Pitris or 


with the havya and kavya offered to the Devas, the herb sudarsana should 
not be included. Havi mixed with this is not acceptable to the Pitris. From 
the place where the sraddha is being performed, the Chandala and the 
Swapacha should be excluded, as also all who wear clothes dyed yellow, 
and those affected with leprosy, or one who has been declared outcast for 
his or her transgressions, or one who is guilty of Brahmahatya, or a 
Brahmana of mixed descent or one who is the relative of an outcast. All 
these should be excluded by men of wisdom from the place where a sraddha 
is being performed.” 

Having said these words in days of old to Rishi Nimi of his own race, 
the illustrious Atri tapodhana went back to the Grandsire Brahma’s sabha in 


999 


swarga. 


CANTO 92 


: ‘RB hishma says, ‘After Nimi had innocently conceived and 
performed the first sraddha, all the great Rishis began to perform 
the sacrifice in honour of the Pitris according to the law. Firmly devoted to 
the discharge of all dharma, the Rishis, having performed sraddhas, began 
to also offer oblations to the Pitris of sacred waters, with careful attention. 
However, in consequence of consuming all the offerings made by persons 
of all the varnas, the Pitris and the Devas with them suffered from dreadful 
indigestion. Afflicted by the heaps of food that all men began to offer them, 
they repaired to the presence of Soma. Approaching Soma, they said, “Alas, 
great is our affliction from all the food offered to us at sraddhas. You say 
what is needed for our ease.” 

To them Soma answered, saying, “If, Devas and Pitris, you want relief 
from your distress, you must take yourselves to the Lord Brahma. He will 
accomplish what you need.” 

At these words of Soma, O Bhaarata, the Devas and the Pitris went to 
Brahma who was seated on the summit of the mountains of Meru. 

The Devas said, “O illustrious one, we suffer from all the food that is 
offered to us at yagnas and sraddhas. Lord, show us grace and help us.” 

Hearing what they said, the Svayambhu said to them in reply, “Here, 
Agni is sitting beside me. He will help you and do what will make you 
well.” 

Agni said, “You Pitris, when a sraddha comes, we will eat the offerings 
made to us together. If you eat those offerings with me, you shall digest 
them easily.” 


Hearing this from the fire god, the Pitris became easy of heart. It is for 
this reason, also, that in making offerings at sraddhas a share is first offered 
to the deity of fire, O king. If a portion of the offerings at a sraddha be first 
made to Agni, O prince of men, Rakshasas, even of regenerate origin, 
cannot do any injury to such a sraddha. Beholding the deity of fire at a 
sraddha, Rakshasas fly away from it. 

The ritual of the sraddha is that the pinda, the rice-cake, should first be 
offered to the deceased sire. Next, a cake should be offered to the 
Grandsire. After this, should one be offered to the Great-grandsire. Even 
this is the niyama in respect of the sraddha. Over every cake that is offered, 
the offerer should, with concentrated attention, utter the Savitri mantras. 
This other mantra also should be uttered—the one to Soma who is fond of 
the Pitris. 

A woman who has become impure from the advent of her period, or one 
whose ears have been cut off, should not be allowed where a sraddha is 
being performed. Nor should a woman be brought from a gotra other than 
that of the person who is performing the sraddha, to cook the rice to be 
offered at the sraddha. 

While crossing a river, one should offer oblations of water, tarpana, to 
one’s Pitris, naming them all. Indeed, when one comes upon a river one 
should gratify one’s Pitris with oblations of water. Having offered tarpana 
of water first to the ancestors of one’s own vamsa, one should next offer 
such oblations to one’s departed friends and relatives. When one crosses a 
river or stream on a chariot yoked to oxen of variegated hue, or in boats, the 
Pitris expect oblations of water. Those that know this always offer oblations 
of water with concentrated dhyana to the Pitris. Every fortnight on the day 
of the new moon, one should make offerings to one’s deceased ancestors. 

Growth, longevity, energy and prosperity are attained through devotion 
to the Pitris. The Grandsire Brahma, Pulastya, Vasishta, Pulaha, Angiras, 
Kratu and the great Rishi Kasyapa—these, O prince of Kuru’s race, are 
regarded as great masters of yoga. They are numbered among the Pitris. 
Even such is the high ritual of the sraddha. 

Through sraddhas performed on earth, the departed of one race are 
saved from sorrow in the next world. Kurusattama, I have thus explained to 
you the niyamas in respect of sraddhas. 

I will now tell you once again about dakshina, gifts or charity.” 


CANTO 93 


: ad udhishtira says, ‘If Brahmanas that are keeping a fast eat, at the 

invitation of a Brahmana, the havi offered at a sraddha, can they 

be charged with the transgression or a violation of their vow, or should they 
refuse the invitation of a Brahmana to eat? Tell me this, Pitamaha.’ 

Bhishma says, “Let those Brahmanas eat, impelled by desire, who are 
keeping such vows as are not indicated in the Vedas. As regards those 
Brahmanas, however, that keep vratas indicated in the Vedas, they are 
regarded as guilty of a breach of their vow, O Yudhishtira, by eating the 
havi of a sraddha at the request of him who performs the sraddha.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “Some say that fasting is a penance. Is tapasya truly 
identifiable with fasting, or is it not so? Tell me this, Pitamaha.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘A regular fast for a month or a half month is not 
regarded as a tapasya. The truth, however, is that one who mortifies one’s 
own body is not to be regarded either as an ascetic or as one that knows 
dharma. Renunciation, however, is regarded as the best of penances. A 
Brahmana should always be an abstainer from food, and observe the vow of 
brahmacharya. A Brahmana should always practise self-denial, restraining 
even speech, and recite the Vedas. 

The Brahmana should marry and surround himself with children and 
relatives, from his desire of achieving dharma. He should never sleep. He 
should abstain from meat. He should always read the Vedas and the 
shastras. He should always speak the truth, and practise self-denial. He 
should eat vighasa, what remains after serving the deities and guests. 
Indeed, he should be hospitable towards all that come to his home. He 


should always eat amrita, the food that remains in the house after all the 
family, including guests and servants, have eaten. He should duly observe 
all ordained rites and perform sacrifices.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘How may one come to be regarded as being always 
observant of fasts? How may one become observant of vratas? How, O 
king, may one come to be an eater of vighasa? By doing what may one be 
said to be hospitable to one’s guest?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘He who eats only morning and evening at the prescribed 
hours and abstains from all food during the time between, is an abstainer 
from food. He who has congress with only his wedded wife and that only in 
her season, is said to be observant of the vow of brahmacharya. By always 
making gifts, one comes to be regarded as being truthful in speech. By 
abstaining from all meat from animals slaughtered for just the sake of meat, 
one becomes an abstainer from meat. 

By making gifts one is cleansed of all sins, and by abstaining from sleep 
during the day one is regarded to be always awake. He who always eats 
what remains after serving the needs of guests and servants is said to always 
eat amrita. He who abstains from eating until Brahmanas have first partaken 
of his food, is regarded as conquering heaven by such abstention. He who 
eats what remains after serving the Devas, the Pitris, and his relatives and 
dependants, is said to eat vighasa. 

Such men acquire many regions of felicity in the world of Brahma 
himself. There, O king, they dwell in the company of Apsaras and 
Gandharvas. Indeed, they sport and enjoy all manner of unworldly delight 
in those realms, with the Devas, Sadasyas and the Pitris in their company, 
and surrounded by their own children and grandchildren. Even such is the 
lofty end to which they attain.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Men are seen to make diverse kinds of gifts unto the 
Brahmanas. What, however, is the difference, Pitamaha, between the giver 
and the receiver?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘The Brahmana accepts gifts from him that is righteous, 
and also from him that is unrighteous. If the giver happens to be righteous, 
the receiver incurs little fault. If on the other hand, the giver happens to be 
an adharmi, the receiver sinks into hell. In this regard an old story of the 
conversation between Vrishadarbhi and the Saptarishis is told, O Bhaarata. 

Kasyapa and Atri and Vasishta and Bharadwaja and Gautama and 
Viswamitra and Jamadagni, and Vasishta’s wife, the chaste Arundhati, all 


had a common serving maid whose name was Ganda. A Sudra called 
Pasusakha married Ganda and became her husband. Kasyapa and others, in 
days of old, observed the austerest penances and roved over the world, 
desirous of attaining to the eternal region of Brahma through yoga-dhyana. 

About that time, O delighter of the Kurus, there came a severe drought. 
Tormented by hunger, the whole world of living creatures grew weak and 
emaciated. At a sacrifice which had been performed in former times by 
Sibi’s son, he had given away to the ritwiks a son of his as the sacrificial 
dakshina. From being not blessed with longevity, the prince died of 
starvation during the famine. 

The Rishis I have named, ravaged by hunger, approached the dead 
prince and sat surrounding him. Indeed, those greatest of Munis saw the son 
of Sibi, at whose sacrifice they had officiated, dead from starvation, and 
began to cook the body in a large vessel, for they were compelled by pangs 
of hunger. All food having disappeared from the world of men, those 
ascetics, who wished to save their lives, took recourse, for their very lives, 
to such a wretched deed. 

While they were thus engaged, Vrishadarbha’s son, King Saibya, abroad 
on his travels, came upon those Rishis. Indeed, he met them on his way, 
even while they were cooking the dead body. 

The son of Vrishadarbha said, “Accepting a dakshina from me will 
immediately relieve you all. Do you all, therefore, accept a gift for the 
support of your bodies. O Munis endowed with the wealth of tapasya, listen 
to me as I declare to you what wealth I have. That Brahmana who solicits 
me for dana is ever dear to me. Verily, I shall give you a thousand mules. To 
each of you I shall give a thousand cows of white coats, each one with a 
well-born calf, and yielding milk. I shall also give you a thousand white 
bulls of the best breed, all capable of bearing heavy burdens. I shall also 
give you a further large number of kine, of good disposition, the foremost 
of their kind, all fat, and each of which, having brought forth her first calf, 
is quick with her second. 

Tell me what else I should give you—the finest villages, grain, barley, 
and even rarer and priceless jewels. 

But, I beg you, do not seek to eat this food that you are engaged in 
cooking. Tell me instead what I should give to you for the support of your 
bodies.” 


The Rishis said, “O king, accepting gifts from a monarch is very sweet 
at first but poison in the end. Knowing this well, why do you tempt us with 
these offers? The body of the Brahmana is the kshetra of the gods. With 
penance, it is purified. Then again, by gratifying the Brahmana, one gratifies 
the Devas. If a Brahmana accepts the gifts made to him by the king, he 
loses the merit that he would otherwise acquire through his penances on 
that day. Indeed, accepting such dana consumes that punya even as a 
blazing conflagration does a forest. Let happiness be yours, O king, as the 
result of the dakshina you give to those that solicit you.” 

Saying this, they left the place, going another way. The flesh those high- 
souled ones had intended to cook remained uncooked. Indeed, abandoning 
that flesh, they went away and entered the forest in search of food. After 
this, the ministers of the king, urged by their master, entered that forest, and 
plucking some figs, attempted to give them to those Rishis. The king’s 
officers filled some of those figs with gold and mixing them with others 
sought to induce those ascetics to accept them. Atri picked up some of those 
figs, and finding them heavy, refused to take them. 

He said, “We are not destitute of knowledge. We are not fools. We know 
that there is gold within these figs. We have our wits about us. Indeed, we 
are awake and not asleep. If accepted in this world, these will produce bitter 
fruit in the next. He who seeks happiness both here and hereafter should 
never accept these.” 

Vasishta said, “If we accept even one gold coin, it will be counted as a 
hundred or even a thousand in assigning the sin that attaches to us. If we 
accept many coins, we shall surely attain to a most unhappy end.” 

Kasyapa said, “All the paddy and barley on earth, all the gold and 
animals and women in the world cannot satisfy the desire of a single man. 
Hence, one possessed of wisdom should dispel greed, and embrace 
contentment.” 

Bharadwaja said, “The horns of a ruru, after their first appearance, begin 
to grow as the animal grows. The greed of man is even like this. It has no 
measure.” 

Gautama said, “All the objects of pleasure that exist in the world cannot 
together satisfy even one person. Man is even like the ocean, for he can 
never be filled, even as the ocean can never be filled by all the waters that 
are poured into it by the rivers.” 


Viswamitra said, “When one desire cherished by a man is satisfied, 
there immediately springs up another which pierces him like an arrow and 
whose satisfaction he seeks.” 

Jamadagni said, “Abstention from taking dana supports tapasya as its 
very foundation. Acceptance, however, destroys the inestimable wealth of 
penance.” 

Arundhati said, “Some men opine that things of the world may be 
stored with a view to spending them upon the acquisition of dharma 
through dana and yagnas. I however, think, that the acquisition of dharma is 
better than that of worldly wealth.” 

Ganda said, “When these my lords, who are imbued with great energy, 
are so very afraid of this which seems to be a great terror, a weak man such 
as I fear it the more.” 

Pasusakha said, “There is nothing superior to the wealth there is in 
dharma. That wealth is known to the Brahmanas. I wait upon them as their 
servant, only to learn to value that wealth.” 

The Rishis, all together, said, “Let happiness be his, as the result of the 
dana he gives, who is the king of the people of this land. Let his dana be 
successful who has sent these fruits to us, hiding gold within them.” 

Having said these words, those Rishis of steadfast vows, renouncing the 
figs with gold in them, left that place and went wherever they wanted. 

The ministers said, “O king, knowing that gold was hidden within the 
figs, the Rishis have gone away.” 

Thus addressed by his ministers, King Vrishadarbhi was filled with 
wrath against all those Rishis. Indeed, to have revenge upon them, the king 
entered his own chamber. Observing the austerest of penances, he poured 
libations of ghrita on his sacred fire, accompanying each pouring with 
mantras that he uttered. From that fire there then arose a dreadful female 
form that could strike terror into anyone. Vrishadarbhi named _ her 
Yatudhani. She looked as terrible as the Last Night, who had appeared with 
joined hands before the king. 

Addressing Vrishadarbhi, she said, “What shall I accomplish for you?” 

Vrishadarbhi said, “Go and follow the seven Rishis, as also Arundhati, 
and the husband of their maid-servant, and the maid-servant herself, and 
understand what the meanings are of their names. Having understood their 
names, do you slay all of them. After killing them, you may go whatever 
you please.” 


Saying, “So be it!” the Rakshasi who had been named Yatudhani flew to 
the forest in which the great Rishis wandered in constant search of food. 
Indeed, O king, those great sages, with Atri among them, roved within the 
forest, subsisting upon fruits and roots. In the course of their wanderings, 
they saw a mendicant of broad shoulders, and plump arms and legs, and a 
well-nourished face and belly. Of limbs that were all adipose, he was 
walking along with a dog for company. Seeing that mendicant whose limbs 
were all well-developed and handsome, Arundhati exclaimed, “None of you 
will ever be able to show such well-developed limbs or features!” 

Vasishta said, “The sacred fire of this person is not like ours for while 
he can pour libations on it, morning and evening, none of us is able to do 
the same. This is why we see both him and his dog so healthy.” 

Atri said, “This man does not feel the pangs of hunger as we do. Unlike 
ours, his energy has sustained no diminution. Acquired with the greatest 
difficulty, his Vedas have not, like ours, disappeared. Hence, it is that we 
see both him and his dog so plump and healthy.” 

Viswamitra said, “Unlike us, this man is able to observe the eternal 
duties inculcated in the scriptures. I have become idle. I feel the pangs of 
hunger. I have lost the knowledge I had acquired. This man is not like us in 
this respect. Hence I see both him and his dog so fit and healthy.” 

Jamadagni said, “This man has not to think of storing his annual grain 
and fuel as we are compelled to. Hence do I see both him and his dog so 
well-developed.” 

Kasyapa said, “This man has not, like us, four brothers of full blood 
who are begging from house to house, constantly crying, Give, Give! Hence 
it is that I see him and his dog in such fine fettle.” 

Bharadwaja said, ‘This man has no regret like ours for having 
condemned and cursed his spouse. He has done nothing so base and 
senseless. Hence I see both him and his dog so strong and healthy!” 

Gautama said, “Unlike us, this man does not own only three pieces of 
covering made of kusa grass, and a single ranku-skin, each of which again 
is three years old. Hence it is that I see both him and his dog in such rude 
health.” 

Meanwhile, seeing those great Rishis, the wandering mendicant 
approached them, and accosted them all by touching their hands according 
to the custom. They spoke together about the difficulty of finding 
sustenance in that forest and the consequent necessity of bearing the pangs 


of hunger, and all of them left that place. They continued to wander through 
that wilderness, all bent upon the common purpose of plucking fruits and 
digging up roots for sustenance. 

One day, as they went along they saw a beautiful lake overgrown with 
lotuses. Its banks were covered with trees that stood thickly near one 
another. The waters of the lake were pure and transparent. Indeed, the 
lotuses that adorned the lake were all of the hue of the morning sun. The 
leaves that floated on the water were of the colour of lapis lazuli. Diverse 
kinds of water birds swam and frolicked upon its bosom. There was but one 
path leading to the lake. The banks were not miry and access to the water 
was easy. 

Urged by Vrishadarbhi, the Rakshasi of frightful mien, who had sprung 
from his incantations and named Yatudhani, guarded the lake. Those 
foremost of Rishis, with Pasusakha in their company, went towards the 
lake, thinking to collect some lotus-stalks. Seeing Yatudhani of frightful 
aspect standing on the banks of the lake, those great Rishis addressed her, 
saying, “Who are you that stand alone in this solitary jungle? For whom do 
you wait here? What is your purpose? What do you do here on the banks of 
this lake adorned with lotuses?” 

Yatudhani said, “It matters not who I am. I deserve not to be questioned 
about my purposes. You that are possessed of ascetic wealth, know that I 
am the guardian set to watch over this lake.” 

The Rishis said, “All of us are hungry. We have nothing else to eat. 
With your leave we would gather some lotus-stalks.” 

Yatudhani said, “If you strike a compact with me, you may gather lotus- 
stalks as you please. You must, one by one, give me your names. And then 
you may have the stalks.” 

Ascertaining that her name was Yatudhani and that she was there to kill 
them after learning the extent of their strength from the meaning of their 
names, Atri, who was famished, addressed her, “I am called Atri because I 
cleanse the world of sin. For, again, thrice studying the Vedas every day, I 
have made days of my nights. That, again, is no night in which I have not 
studied the Vedas. For these reasons also I am called Atri, O lovely 
woman.” 

Yatudhani said, “O you of great effulgence, I cannot understand the 
meaning of your name, nor the explanation you have given me of it. Do you 
go and plunge into this lake filled with lotuses.” 


Vasishta said, “I am endowed with the wealth of the yoga of power. I 
lead, again, a grihasta’s life, and am regarded as the foremost of all men that 
lead this way of life. Because of owning such wealth, of my living as a 
householder, and of my being regarded as the foremost of all grihastas, I am 
called Vasishta.” 

Yatudhani said, ‘The etymology of your name is_ perfectly 
incomprehensible to me, insofar as the inflections which the original roots 
have undergone are unintelligible. Go and plunge into this lake of lotuses.” 

Kasyapa said, “I always protect my body, and because of my tapasya I 
have become blessed with illustriousness. For thus protecting my body and 
for this effulgence that is due to my penances, I have come to be called by 
the name of Kasyapa.” 

Yatudhani said, “O you of great effulgence, I cannot fathom the 
etymology you have given of your name. Go and plunge into this lake filled 
with lotuses.” 

Bharadwaja said, “I always support my sons, my disciples, the Devas, 
the Brahmanas, and my wife. In consequence of supporting all these with 
ease, I am called Bharadwayja.” 

Yatudhani said, “The etymology you have given me of your name is 
entirely incomprehensible, because of the many changes of inflection the 
root has undergone. Go and plunge into this lake filled with lotuses.” 

Gotama said, “I have conquered heaven and earth through samyama, 
self-restraint. Because of my looking upon all creatures and objects with an 
equal eye, I am like a smokeless fire. Hence, you cannot subdue me. When, 
again, I was born, the refulgence of my body dispelled the surrounding 
darkness. For these reasons I am called Gotama.” 

Yatudhani said, “The explanation you have given me of your name, O 
Maharishi, I cannot fathom. Go and plunge into this lake of lotuses.” 

Viswamitra said, “The gods of the universe are my friends. I am also the 
friend of the universe. Hence, O Yatudhani, know that I am called 
Viswamitra.” 

Yatudhani said, “I can make no sense of the explanation you have given 
me of your name for the changes the root has undergone. Go and plunge 
into this lake of lotuses.” 

Jamadagni said, “I have sprung from the sacrificial fire of the Devas. 
Hence am I called Jamadagni, O you of beautiful features.” 


Yatudhani said, “The etymology of your name is beyond me for the 
transformations its root has known. Do you go and plunge into this lake of 
lotuses.” 

Arundhati said, “I always stay by the side of my husband, and hold the 
earth together with him. I always incline my husband’s heart towards me. I 
am, for these reasons, called Arundhati.” 

Yatudhani said, “I cannot make anything of your name for the 
modifications its root has undergone. Go and plunge into this lake of 
lotuses.” 

Ganda said, “The Ganda means a portion of the cheek. As I have that 
portion a little raised above the others, I am, O you that have sprung from 
the sacrificial fire of Saibya, called by the name Ganda.” 

Yatudhani said, ‘The explanation which you have given me of your 
name is incomprehensible to me because of the inflections which the root 
has undergone. Go and plunge into this lake of lotuses.” 

Pasusakha said, “I protect and tend to all animals that I see, and I am 
always a friend to all of them. Hence am I called Pasusakha, O you that 
have sprung from the sacrificial fire.” 

Yatudhani said, “I cannot understand the meaning of your name. Go and 
plunge into this lake of lotuses.” 

Sunahsakha said, “I cannot explain the etymology of my name after the 
manner of these Munis. But know, O Yatudhani, that I am called by the 
name of Sunahsakha.” 

Yatudhani said, “You have spoken your name only once. I have not 
heard any explanation of its roots. Indeed, I have not heard your name 
properly. Do you tell it to me again, O Dvija.” 

Sunahsakha said, “Since you have not heard my name because I spoke 
it only once, I will strike you with my tridanda, my triple staff, and be you 
ashes from my blow!” 

Struck on the head by the sannyasin with his tridanda, a blow that was 
indeed like the chastisement inflicted by a Brahmana, the Rakshasi who had 
sprung from the incantations of King Vrishadarbhi fell onto the earth and 
became ashes. Having thus destroyed the mighty Rakshasi, Sunahsakha 
thrust his stick into the ground and sat himself down on a grassy patch of 
land. 

Having plucked as many lotuses as they liked, and gathered as many 
lotus-stalks as they wanted, the other Rishis emerged from the lake, 


brimming with joy. They put down the flowers and the stalks, gathered with 
some labour, on the banks of the water and entered the lake again, now to 
offer tarpana, oblations of water, to the Pitris. Coming out again, they came 
to the place where they had left the lotus-stalks, and those greatest of sages 
found that the stalks were nowhere to be seen.’ 

The Rishis said, ““What stone-hearted sinner has stolen the lotus-stalks 
we gathered to appease our hunger?” 

Those Dvijottamas suspected one another, O Parantapa, and said, “We 
shall each have to swear our innocence!” 

Famished as they were and worn with toil, all those Rishis agreed and 
swore their innocence, one by one. Atri said, “Let him who has stolen the 
lotus-stalk touch sacred cows with his foot, make water facing the sun, and 
study the Vedas on forbidden days!” 

Vasishta said, “Let him who has stolen the lotus-stalks never study the 
Vedas, let him be a dog catcher, be a wandering mendicant unrestrained by 
the laws laid down for that life, be a murderer of those that seek his 
protection, live upon the proceeds of the sale of his daughter, solicit wealth 
from those that are low and vile!” 

Kasyapa said, “Let him who has stolen the lotus-stalks utter all kinds of 
loose and wretched words in all places, give false evidence in courts of law, 
eat the flesh of animals not killed in sacrifices, make gifts to undeserving 
persons or to deserving ones at unseasonable times, and have sexual 
congress with women during the day!” 

Bharadwaja said, “Let him who has stolen the lotus-stalks be cruel and 
sinful in his conduct towards women and kinsmen and kine. Let him 
humiliate Brahmanas in disputations by brashly displaying his superior 
knowledge and skill. Let him study the Riks and the Yajuses on his own, 
disregarding his preceptor. Let him pour libations upon fires made with dry 
grass or straw!” 

Jamadagni said, “Let him who has stolen the lotus-stalks be guilty of 
casting filth into pure sacred water. Let him be inspired with animosity 
towards kine. Let him be guilty of having sexual congress with women at 
times other than their season. Let him incur the aversion of all men and 
women. Let him derive his maintenance from the earnings of his wife. Let 
him have no friends and have many enemies. Let him be another’s guest for 
receiving in return the hospitality which he has shown that other!” 


Gotama said, “Let him who has stolen the lotus-stalks be guilty of 
casting aside the Vedas after having studied them. Let him cast off the three 
sacred fires. Let him be a seller of the sacred Soma. Let him live with that 
Brahmana who dwells in a village which has only one well from which 
water is drawn by all the varnas and who has married a Sudra woman 
besides!” 

Viswamitra said, “Let him who has stolen the lotus-stalks be fated to 
see his preceptors and elders and his servants maintained by others during 
his own life-time. Let him not have a good end. Let him be the father of too 
many children. Let him be always impure and a wretch among Brahmanas. 
Let him be proud of his possessions. Let him be a tiller of the soil and let 
him be filled with malice. Let him wander the world during the season of 
rains. Let him be a paid servant. Let him be the priest of the king. Let him 
assist at the sacrifices of such corrupt men as do not deserve to be helped at 
their sacrifices!” 

Arundhati said, “Let her who has stolen the lotus-stalks always 
humiliate her husband’s mother. Let her be always vexed with her husband. 
Let her eat whatever good things come to her house without sharing them. 
Disregarding the kinsmen of her lord, let her live in her husband’s house 
and eat, at the day’s end, the flour of fried barley. Let her come to be 
regarded as unenjoyable because of the stains that tarnish her. Let her be the 
mother of a heroic son!” 

Ganda said, “Let her who has stolen the lotus-stalks be always a liar. Let 
her always quarrel with her kinsfolk. Let her sell her daughter in marriage 
for a dowry. Let her eat the food which she has cooked, alone and without 
sharing it with anybody. Let her pass her whole life in slavery. Indeed, let 
her who has stolen the lotus-stalks be quick with child because of sexual 
congress under guilty circumstances!” 

Pasusakha said, “Let him who has stolen the lotus-stalks be born of a 
slave-mother. Let him have many children all of whom are worthless. And 
let him never worship the gods.” 

Sunahsakha said, “Let him who has taken the lotus-stalks obtain the 
merit of bestowing his daughter in marriage upon a Brahmana, who has 
studied all the Samans and the Yajuses and who has carefully observed the 
vow of brahmacharya. Let him perform the final ablutions after having 
studied all the Atharvans!” 


All the other Rishis said, “The oath you have taken is no oath at all, for 
all the consequences which you have wished upon the thief are most 
desirable for all Brahmanas. It is evident, O Sunahsakha, that you have 
taken our lotus-stalks.” 

Sunahsakha said, “The lotus-stalks are missing, and what you say is 
perfectly true, for it is I who have stolen them. In the very sight of all of 
you, I have caused the stalks to disappear. You sinless ones, I did this thing 
from a desire to test you. I came here to protect you. That woman who lies 
slain there, as ashes, was called Yatudhani. She was sprung from the dark 
mantras of King Vrishadarbhi, and she had come here to kill you all. You 
Rishis endowed with the wealth of tapasya, the king sent her for your lives, 
but I have killed her. Otherwise the fierce and sinful spirit sprung from the 
Agni would have taken all your lives. It was to kill her and save you that I 
came here, learned Brahmanas. 

Know that I am Vasava! You have entirely freed yourselves from the 
influence of greed, and thus you have won many eternal realms where every 
desire is fulfilled as soon as it appears in the heart. Rise up at once, 
Mahamunis, and ascend from this world into those realms of beatitude, 
Dvijas, that await you.” 

Exceedingly gratified, the great Rishis replied to Purandara, saying, 
‘Tathaastu, so be it!’, and they then rose into heaven in company of Indra 
himself. Even thus, those Mahatmans, though famished with hunger and 
though tempted at such a time with the offer of diverse kinds of objects of 
enjoyments, did not yield to temptation. As the result of their self-denial, 
they attained to swarga. It seems, therefore, that one should, under all 
circumstances, renounce greed. Even this, O king, is the highest dharma: 
that greed must be abandoned. 

The man who narrates this account of the deeds of the righteous Rishis 
in assemblies of men, succeeds in acquiring wealth. Such a man has never 
to attain to a distressful end, for the Pitris, the Rishis and the Devas all 
become pleased with him. Hereafter, again, he is blessed with kirti, fame, 
and punya, religious merit, and great artha, wealth.’ 


CANTO 94 


B hishma says, “Listen to, the old itihasa of the oaths taken by many 

Rishis, one after another, during a tirtha yatra. Bharatottama, Indra 
had committed the theft, and the oaths were taken by many Rajarishis and 
Maharishis. 

Once on a time, the Rishis, having assembled together, journeyed to the 
western Prabhasa. They held a consultation there which resulted in a 
resolve on their part to visit all the holy tirthas, the sacred waters on earth. 
Sukra and Angiras and Kavi of great learning were there, and Agastya and 
Narada and Parvata; and Bhrigu and Vasishta and Kasyapa and Gautama 
and Viswamitra and Jamadagni, O king. Also present were Rishi Galva, and 
Ashtaka and Bharadwaja and Arundhati and the Balakhilyas; and Sibi and 
Dilipa and Nahusha and Ambarisha and the royal Yayati and Dhundhumara 
and Puru. 

Setting the Mahatman Satakratu, Indra, slayer of Vritra, at their head, 
those greatest of men went to the holy tirthas, one after the other, all of 
which are naves of utmost auspiciousness and grace upon the earth, and at 
last reached the most sacred Kausiki on Purnima, the day of the full moon, 
in the month of Magha. Having washed themselves of all their sins by 
ablutions performed in all the sacred waters, they finally went to the sacred 
Brahmasara. 

Bathing in that lake, those Rishis endowed with tejas like that of fire 
began to gather and eat the stalks of the lotus. Amongst those Brahmanas, 
some had gathered the stalks of the lotus and some the stalks of the stellar 
lily. Soon they found that the stalks that Agastya had drawn up and left on 


the bank of the lake had been stolen. Agastya, best of sages, said, “Who has 
taken the good stalks which I gathered and left in this place? I suspect that 
one amongst you must have done this thing. Let him who has taken them 
give them back to me. It does not befit you to steal what was mine. 

It is heard that time weakens the strength of dharma. That time has 
come upon us, and dharma is afflicted. It is meet that I should go to swarga 
for good, before adharma assails the world and establishes itself here. 
Before the time comes when Brahmanas, loudly chanting the Vedas, within 
the precincts of villages and inhabited places, cause the Sudras to hear 
them; before the Time comes when kings misrule and sin against the laws 
of dharma from motives of policy, I must go into swarga for good. Before 
men cease to regard the distinctions between the lower, the middle and the 
higher varnas, I shall go to swarga for ever. Before ignorance envelops the 
world and all things in darkness, I shall go to heaven for good. Before the 
time comes when the strong begin to oppress the weak and treat them like 
slaves, I must go to heaven for good. For, indeed, I dare not remain on earth 
to witness these things.” 

Greatly concerned by what he said, the others said to that great Muni, 
“We have not stolen your stalks. You should not harbour suspicion against 
us. O Mahamuni, we shall pronounce the most fearsome curses.” 

Having said these words, and conscious of their own innocence, and 
wanting to uphold the cause of dharma, those Rishis and Rajarishis then 
began to swear, one after another, the following curses. 

Bhrigu said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks censure when 
censured, assail when assailed, and eat the flesh that is attached to the spine 
of animals slaughtered in sacrifice!” 

Vasishta said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks neglect his Vedic 
studies, catch dogs, and having taken himself to mendicancy yet live in a 
city or town!” 

Kasyapa said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks sell sundry and 
vulgar things in all places, become a thief of sacred wealth, and bear false 
witness!” 

Gautama said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks live displaying 
coarse pride in all things, with an understanding that does not see all 
creatures with an equal eye, and always yield himself to the influence of 
desire and wrath. Let him be a tiller of soil, and let him be inspired by 
malice!” 


Angiras said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks be always impure. 
Let him be a censurable Brahmana for his sins. Let him leash hounds. Let 
him be guilty of Brahmahatya. Let him be averse to expiations after having 
sinned!” 

Dhundhumara said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks be ungrateful 
to his friends. Let him take birth in a Sudra woman. Let him eat alone any 
good food that comes to his house, without sharing it with any others!” 

Dilipa said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks descend to those 
regions of misery and infamy which are reserved for that Brahmana who 
lives in a village having but one well and who has sexual congress with a 
Sudra woman!” 

Puru said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks adopt the occupation of a 
physician. Let him be supported by the earnings of his wife. Let him have 
his sustenance from his father-in-law!” 

Sukra said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks eat the flesh of animals 
not slain in sacrifices. Let him have sexual congress by day-time. Let him 
be a servant of the king!” 

Jamadagni said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks study the Vedas on 
forbidden days or occasions. Let him feed friends at sraddhas performed by 
him. Let him eat at the sraddha of a Sudra!” 

Sibi said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks die without having 
established a fire for daily worship. Let him be guilty of obstructing the 
sacrifices of others. Let him quarrel with those that are tapasvins!” 

Yayati said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks be guilty of having 
sexual congress with his wife when she is not in her season and when he is 
himself in the observance of a vow and bears jata on his head. Let him also 
disregard the Vedas!” 

Nahusha said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks live in grihasta after 
having betaken himself to the vow of sannyasa. Let him live waywardly, 
doing as he pleases and without restraint of any kind, even after having 
undergone the initiatory rites for a yagna or some other solemn vrata. Let 
him take pecuniary payment for imparting any branch of knowledge to 
disciples that they come to learn!” 

Ambarisha said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks be cruel and 
unrighteous in his behaviour towards women and kinsmen and kine. Let 
him be guilty also of Brahmahatya!” 


Narada said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks be one that identifies 
the body with the soul. Let him study the scriptures with an ignorant and 
sinful preceptor. Let him chant the Vedas, offending at each step against the 
laws. Let him flout all his elders!” 

Nabhaga said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks always lie and have 
altercations with those that are righteous. Let him bestow his daughter in 
matriage after accepting a pecuniary dower offered by his son-in-law!” 

Kavi said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks he guilty of kicking a 
sacred cow. Let him make water facing the sun. Let him turn away the 
person that seeks shelter from him!” 

Viswamitra said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks become a servant 
that is deceitful towards his master. Let him be the priest of a king. Let him 
be the ritwik of one that should not be assisted at his sacrifices!” 

Parvata said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks be the chieftain of a 
village. Let him make journeys on donkeys. Let him tie up dogs for a 
living!” 

Bharadwaja said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks be guilty of all 
the sins that become his who is cruel in his deeds and untruthful in speech!” 

Ashtaka said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks be a king destitute of 
wisdom, capricious and sinful in his behaviour, and disposed to rule the 
earth with adharma!” 

Galava said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks be more infamous 
than a sinner. Let him be sinful in his conduct towards his kinsmen and 
relatives. Let him arrogantly proclaim the gifts he makes to others.” 

Arundhati said, “Let her who has stolen your stalks speak ill of her 
mother-in-law. Let her feel disgust for her lord. Let her eat alone any good 
food that comes to her house.” 

The Balakhilyas said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks stand on one 
foot at the entrance of a village to earn his subsistence. Let him, while 
knowing all his duties, be guilty of every breach of them!” 

Sunahsakha said, “Let him who has stolen your stalks be a Brahmana 
that sleeps in happiness, having disregarded his daily homa. Let him, after 
becoming a sannyasi, behave in whatever way he pleases, without 
observing any restraint!” 

Surabhi said, “Let her who has stolen your stalks be milked, with her 
legs bound with a rope of human hair, and with the help of a calf not her 
own, and, while milked, let her milk be held in a vessel of white brass!” 


After the Rishis and the Rajarishis had pronounced these diverse curses, 
the thousand-eyed lord of the Devas, filled with joy, cast his looks on the 
incensed Rishi Agastya. Addressing the sage, Maghavat declared what was 
in his mind. Listen to what Indra said in the midst of those Rishis and 
Rajarishis. 

Sakra said, “Let him who has stolen your lotus-stalks be possessed of 
the punya of him who bestows his daughter in marriage upon a Brahmana 
who has observed the vow of brahmacharya, or who has studied the Samans 
and the Yajuses. Let him also have the merit of one that undergoes the final 
bath after completing the study of the Atharva Veda. Let him who has 
stolen your stalks have the merit of having studied all the Vedas. Let him be 
observant of all duties and righteous in his conduct. Indeed, let him go to 
Brahmaloka!” 

Agastya said, “You have, O slayer of Bala, uttered a blessing instead of 
a curse. You have taken my lotus-stalks. Give them to me, for that is the 
eternal dharma.” 

Indra said, “Holy one, I did not take your stalks out of greed. Indeed, I 
removed them from the desire of hearing this sacred conclave recite what 
the dharmas are that we should observe. Do not give way to anger. Dharmas 
are the foremost of Srutis. Dharmas constitute the eternal path to cross over 
this samsara of the world. I have listened to this exalted discourse of you 
Rishis on the sanatana dharma that is eternal and immutable, and that 
transcends all change. Do you now, O foremost of learned Brahmanas, take 
back these stalks of yours. Mahamuni, it befits you to forgive my 
transgression, O you that are free from every fault.” 

Bhishma continues, ‘Thus addressed by the king of the Devas, Agastya 
Muni, who had been so wrathful, took back his stalks. Endowed with great 
intelligence, the Rishi became cheerful. After this, those great ones 
journeyed on their pilgrimage to many other sacred tirthas. Indeed, 
repairing to those holy waters, they performed their ablutions everywhere. 

The man who reads this narrative with close attention on every Parva 
day, will not have to become the father of an ignorant and evil son. He will 
never be destitute of learning. No calamity will ever touch him. He will, 
besides, be free from every kind of sorrow. Decrepitude and decay will 
never be his. Freed from stains and evil of every kind, and endued with 
merit, he is sure to attain to swarga. He who studies this shastra observed by 


the Rishis, is certain, O prince of men, to attain to eternal Brahmaloka that 
is full of felicity.’” 


CANTO 95 


: ad udhishtira says, ‘King of the Bharata vamsa, by whom was the 

custom of giving chatras and padukas at sraddhas introduced? 

Why was it introduced and for what purpose are those gifts made? They are 

given not only at sraddhas but also at other religious rites. They are given 

on many occasions with a view to acquiring religious punya. I want to 
know, in detail, Pitamaha, the true meaning of this custom.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Do you, O Kshatriya, listen attentively to what I tell you 
about the custom of giving away chatras and padukas at religious rites, and 
to how and by whom it was introduced. I shall also tell you in full, O 
Kshatriya, how it acquired the force of a permanent observance and how it 
came to be viewed as an act of punya. I will, in this regard, narrate the 
discourse between Jamadagni and the Mahatman Surya. 

In ancient times, the illustrious Jamadagni of Bhrigu’s race was engaged 
in practising with his bow. Taking aim, he shot arrow after arrow. His wife 
Renuka would pick up the shafts and bring them back to her husband, the 
Bhargava of blazing tejas. Pleased with the whizzing sound of his arrows 
and the twang of his bow, he amused himself by repeatedly discharging his 
arrows which Renuka brought back to him. 

One day, at noontide, O monarch, in that month when the sun was in 
Jyesthamula, the Brahmana, having discharged all his arrows, said to 
Renuka, “O doe-eyed devi, go and fetch me the shafts I have shot from my 
bow. I would loose them again.” 

Renuka went on her errand but her feet and her head were scorched by 
the sun and she was forced to sit down in the shade of a tree. Having rested 


for only some moments, and fearing her husband’s curse, the black-eyed 
and graceful Renuka quickly addressed herself again to the task of 
collecting and bringing back the arrows. Taking them with her, the 
renowned beauty came back, distressed in mind and her feet smarting with 
the heat that lay on the earth. 

Trembling with fear, she approached her husband. The Rishi, filled with 
quick wrath, repeatedly cried to his exquisite wife, “Renuka, why have you 
been so long returning?” 

Renuka said, “O you who are endowed with the wealth of tapasya, my 
head and feet were seared by the rays of the sun. Oppressed, I went into the 
shade of a tree. Only this delayed me and, knowing why I was late, my lord, 
do not be angry with me anymore.” 

Jamadagni said, “Renuka, this very hour with my astras, I will make 
ashes of the fiery star of day who caused you pain with his burning rays.” 

Drawing his unearthly bow, and invoking many terrible astras, 
Jamadagni stood, his face towards the sun and watching him as he moved 
across the sky. Kaunteya, Surya saw the Brahmana thus in wrath, and came 
to him in the guise of a Brahmana, and said, “What has Surya done to 
displease you, Jamadagni? Coursing through the firmament, he draws up 
the moisture from the earth, and he pours it down once more on her as 
nourishing rain. It is through this rain, O Dvija, that food grows for men, 
food that they so delight in. The Vedas say that it is food that constitutes 
prana, the life-breaths. O Brahmana, hidden in the clouds and irradiant, the 
sun drenches the seven Dwipas with wondrous showers of rain. Mighty 
Jamadagni, the rain he pours down becomes the sap of leaf, fruit, plant and 
herb, which become food. 

Bhargava, the rites of birth, religious observances of every kind, 
investiture with the sacred thread, gifts of kine, weddings, everything used 
in yagnas, the very dandaneeti which rules men, dakshina, all manner of 
bond between man and man, and the acquisition of wealth have their origin 
in annrita, food. You know this well. All that is good and enjoyable in the 
universe, and all the efforts made by living creatures, flow from food. I only 
remind you of what you already know full well. Do you, therefore, O 
enlightened Rishi, appease your anger. What will you gain by annihilating 
the sun?’” 


CANTO 96 


2. Y udhishtira says, ‘What did that greatest of ascetics, Jamadagni of 
awesome tejas, do when Surya the Brahmana, maker of day, 
spoke thus to him, as a supplicant?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Despite all the supplications of Surya, Jamadagni of the 
refulgence of Agni remained with wrath undimmed. Then, O king, Surya 
the Brahmana bowed his head to the sage and, with folded hands, said 
humbly to him, ‘Maharishi, the sun is always in motion. How will you 
pierce the Lord of day who is continually moving?” 

Jamadagni said, “With the eye of knowledge I know you to be both 
moving and motionless. I will surely teach you a lesson today. At midday, 
you seem to stay still in the sky for a moment. It is then, O Surya, that I 
shall pierce you with my arrows. There is no swerving from this my 
resolution.” 

Surya said “Regenerate Rishi, without doubt you know me, O best of 
archers. But, holy one, though I have offended you, behold, I am a suppliant 
for your protection.” 

At this, the most adorable Jamadagni smilingly addressed the maker of 
day, saying, “O Surya, when you have sought my protection, you have 
nothing to fear. He would transgress the simplicity that exists in Brahmanas, 
the stability in the earth, the mildness in the moon, the gravity in Varuna, 
the radiance in Agni, the brightness of Meru, and the heat of the sun, who 
would kill one who seeks his protection. The man that can slay a supplicant 
can well violate the bed of his preceptor, murder a Brahmana and drink wild 


spirits. Do you, therefore, think of some remedy for this evil, by which the 
people may find relief when seared by the sun.” 

So saying, that great descendant of Bhrigu remained silent for a while, 
and Surya forthwith created and made over to him a chatra, a splendid 
umbrella, and two padukas, a pair of sandals.” 

Surya said, “O Maharishi, take this umbrella with which the head may 
be protected from my rays. These sandals are made of leather to protect the 
feet. From this day forth, the gift of these two in all religious rites shall be 
established as an inflexible custom.” 

Yudhishtira, the custom of giving umbrellas and sandals was introduced 
by Surya Deva. O Bhaarata, these gifts are considered meritorious in the 
three worlds. Do you, therefore, give away umbrellas and sandals to 
Brahmanas. I have no doubt that you will acquire great punya by doing so. 
Best of the Bharatas, he who gives away a white umbrella with a hundred 
ribs to a Brahmana attains to eternal felicity after death and lives in the 
world of Indra, respected by Brahmanas, Apsaras and Devas. Mighty one, 
he who gives padukas to Snataka Brahmanas, as also to Brahmanas who 
perform the rituals of dharma, whose feet have become sore with the heat of 
the sun, attains to realms coveted by the very gods. Such a man dwells in 
happiness in the highest swarga after his death. 

And so, O Bharatottama, I have told you in full the merits of giving 
away chatras and padukas at religious ceremonies.’ 


CANTO 97 


Y udhishtira says, ‘Greatest of the Bharata vamsa, relate to me all the 
duties of the grihastasrama and tell me all that a man should do in 
order to attain to prosperity in this world.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘O Bhaarata, let me narrate to you the old story of the 
almighty Krishna and Bhumidevi. After hymning the praises of the earth 
goddess, Krishna asked her this very thing that you have asked me. 

Krishna said, “Having become a grihasta, what karma should I or one 
like me perform and how will such karma fructify in punya?” 

Bhumidevi said, “O Madhava, the Rishis, the Devas, the Pitris and 
Manavas should be worshipped, and sacrifices should be performed, by a 
grihasta. Know that the Devas are always pleased with sacrifices, and men 
are gratified with hospitality. Therefore, the householder should satisfy 
them with whatever pleases them. By such karma, O Madhusudana, the 
Rishis also are gratified. 

Abstaining from food, the grihasta should daily attend to his sacred fire 
and to his sacrificial offerings. By this are the Devas pleased. The grihasta 
should daily offer oblations of food and water, or of fruits, roots and also 
water, to gratify the Pitris, and the Vaiswadeva offering should be 
performed with boiled rice, and oblations of ghrita to Agni, Soma and 
Dhanvantari. He should offer separate and distinct oblations to Prajapati. 

He should make his sacrificial offerings in proper order: to Yama in the 
south, to Varuna in the west, to Soma in the north, to Prajapati within the 
home, to Dhanvantari in the North-east, and to Indra in the east. He should 
offer food to men at the entrance to his home. 


These, O Madhava, are known as the Bali offerings. The Bali should be 
offered to the Maruts and the Devas inside one’s house. To the Viswedevas 
it should be offered in the open, and to the Rakshasas and Bhutas, the 
offerings should be made at night. After making these offerings, the 
householder should make offerings to Brahmanas, and if no Brahmana be 
present, the first portion of the food should be offered into the fire. 

When a man wants to offer sraddha to his ancestors, he should, when 
the sraddha ceremony is concluded, gratify his ancestors and then make the 
Bali offerings in due order. He should then make offerings to the 
Viswedevas. He should next invite Brahmanas and then properly feed 
guests arrived at his home. Through this, O prince, are the Sadasyas 
satisfied. He who does not stay in the house long, or, having come, leaves 
after a short time, is called a Sadasya, and Atithi, a guest. 

To his guru, to his father, to his friend and to a guest, a grihasta should 
say, ‘I have this in my house to offer you today.’ And he should offer it 
accordingly every day. The householder should do whatever they would ask 
him to do. This is the established custom. The householder, O Krishna, 
should eat last of all and only after having offered food to all of them. 

The householder should worship, with offerings of madhuparka, his 
king, his priest, his preceptor and his father-in-law, as also Snataka 
Brahmanas even if they were to stay in his house for a whole year. In the 
morning as well as in the evening, food should be offered on the ground to 
dogs, swapachas and birds. This is called the Vaiswadeva offering. The 
householder who performs these ceremonies with a mind unclouded by 
passion, obtains the blessings of the Rishis in this world, and after dying he 
attains to swarga.” 

Having listened to all this from Bhumidevi, Krishna did as she had told 
him. Do you also do the same. By performing these duties of a householder, 
O king, you shall acquire fame in this world and attain to heaven after you 
leave it.’ 


CANTO 98 


Y udhishtira says, “Of what kind is the gift of light, Pitamaha? How 
did this dakshina originate? What are the merits that attach to it? 
Tell me all this.’ 

Bhishma says, “‘Bhaarata, listen to the ancient itihasa of the discourse 
between Manu, that Lord of creatures, and Suvarna. There was in days of 
yore an ascetic of the name Suvarna. His complexion was like that of gold 
and hence was he called Suvarna, the gold-complexioned. From a pure 
lineage, of pure character and conduct, and excellent accomplishments, he 
had mastered all the Vedas. Indeed, in accomplishments he surpassed many 
of high birth. 

One day, that learned Brahmana saw Manu, the Lord of all creatures, 
and approached him. Meeting with each other, they exchanged the 
customary greetings and polite enquiries after each other’s well-being. Both 
of them were firm in the observance of truth. They sat down on the 
delightful breast of Meru, great mountain of gold. Seated there, they began 
to converse with each other on diverse subjects connected with the great 
Devas and Rishis and Daityas of ancient times. 

Then Suvarna said to the Svayambhuva Manu, “It behoves you to 
answer one question of mine for the benefit of all creatures. O Lord of all 
creatures, the Devas are seen to be worshipped with offerings of flowers 
and other fragrant things. What is this? How did this practice originate? 
What are the merits that attach to it? Do you discourse to me on this 
matter.” 


Manu said, ““The ancient tale is told of the discourse between Sukra and 
the great Daitya Mahabali. Once upon a time, Sukra of Bhrigu’s race 
approached the presence of Bali, the son of Virochana, while the legendary 
Asura ruled the three worlds. The Lord of the Asuras, that giver of 
sacrificial dakshina in abundance, having worshipped the Bhargava with 
arghya, and having offering him a seat, himself sat down after his guest had 
seated himself. Then, this same matter that you have brought up, about the 
punya attaching to the offering of flowers and incense and lamps, arose. 
Indeed, the king of the Daityas put this high question to Sukra, that most 
learned of all sages.’ 

Bali said, ‘O foremost of all who know the Brahman, what is the punya 
of offering flowers and incense and lamps: pushpa, dhupa and deepa? O 
greatest of Brahmanas, discourse to me on this.’ 

Sukra said, ‘Tapa first sprang into life. Afterwards came dharma, and 
karuna, compassion, and the other virtues. In the interval between, many 
vines, creepers and plants started into life. Innumerable were the species of 
those. All of them have Soma for their lord. Some of these creepers and 
plants came to be regarded as amrita and some came to be regarded as 
visha, poison. Others that were neither this nor that formed yet another 
class. Amrita is what gives immediate gratification and joy to the mind. 
Visha tortures the mind exceedingly by its very odour. Know again that 
nectar is most auspicious and that poison is as inauspicious. 

All the deciduous herbs are amrita. Visha is born of the energy of fire. 
Flowers gladden the mind and confer prosperity. Hence, men of righteous 
deeds bestowed the name Sumanas on them. That man who is in a state of 
purity offers flowers to the Devas finds that the gods become gratified with 
him, and as a consequence, bestow prosperity upon him. O king of the 
Daityas, those Devas to whom worshippers offer flowers, uttering their 
names the while, become gratified with the offers because of their devotion. 

The green plants and herbs are of diverse kinds and possess diverse 
kinds of energy. They are classified as fierce, mild and powerful. Listen to 
me as I tell you which trees are useful for sacrifices and which are not. 
Hear, also, what malas, garlands, are agreeable to the Asuras, and which are 
beneficial when offered to the Devas. I shall also tell, in their due order, 
what garlands are agreeable to the Rakshasas, which to the Uragas, which 
to the Yakshas, which to Manavas, and which to the Pitris. 


Flowers are of diverse kinds. Some are wild, some are from trees that 
grow in the midst of human habitations; some belong to trees that never 
grow unless planted in well-tilled soil; some are from trees growing on 
mountains; some are from trees that are not smooth; and some from trees 
that have thorns. Fragrance, beauty and taste also make for differences. 

The scent that flowers yield is of two kinds, pleasant and pungent. 
Those flowers that exude fragrance should be offered to the Devas. The 
flowers of trees that are without thorns are generally white in hue. Such 
flowers are always acceptable to the Devas. 

One possessed of wisdom should offer garlands of water flowers, such 
as the lotus, to the Gandharvas and Nagas and Yakshas. 

Such plants and herbs as produce red flowers, as are possessed of sharp 
scent, and as have thorns have been laid down in the Atharvan as fit for all 
mantras to cause harm to enemies. Such flowers as are possessed of keen 
energy, as are painful to the touch, as grow on trees and plants having 
thorns, and as are either blood-red or black, should be offered to evil spirits 
and other dark, unearthly beings. 

Such flowers as gladden the mind and heart, as are exquisitely soft and 
redolent when pressed, and as are of beautiful forms, have been said to be 
worthy of being offered to Manushyas, human beings. 

Such flowers as grow on cemeteries and crematoria, or in places 
dedicated to the deities, should not be fetched and used for marriages and 
other rites having growth and prosperity for their object, or for acts of 
dalliance and pleasure in secrecy. Such flowers as are born on mountains 
and in vales, and as are pleasant in scent and aspect, should be offered to 
the Devas. Sprinkling them with sandalwood paste, such fine flowers should 
be duly offered according to the laws of the scriptures. The gods become 
gratified with the scent of flowers; the Yakshas and Rakshasas with their 
sight; the Nagas with their touch; and humans with all three, scent, sight 
and touch. 

Flowers offered to the Devas gratify them immediately. They have the 
power to fulfil every desire by merely wishing it. When pleased with 
devotees offering them flowers, the Devas immediately satisfy all the 
desires cherished by their worshippers. Gratified themselves, they quickly 
gratify their worshippers. Honoured, they cause their worshippers to enjoy 
all honours. Disregarded and insulted, they cause those vilest of men to be 
ruined and consumed. 


I will now speak to you of the merits that attach to the laws about the 
gift of dhupa, incense. Know, O prince of Asuras, that incense is of diverse 
kinds. Some of them are auspicious and some inauspicious. Some incense 
consists of natural exudations. Some are made of fragrant wood set afire. 
And some are artificial, being made by the hand, and of diverse substances 
mixed together. Their scent is of two kinds: pleasant and the opposite. 
Listen to more on this subject of dhupa or gandha. 

All natural exudations are agreeable to the Devas. It is, however, certain 
that the best of all these is that of the mukula. Of all dhupas of the sari class, 
the agarwood is the best. It is most agreeable to the Yakshas, the Rakshasas 
and Nagas. The scent of the shallaki, and others of the same class, are much 
desired by the Daityas. Dhupas made of the perfume of the sala and the 
deodar, mixed with various spirits of strong scent, are, O king, ordained for 
human beings. Such dhupas are said to immediately gratify the Devas, the 
Danavas and Bhutas. Besides these, there are many other kinds of dhupas 
used by men of purposes of pleasure or enjoyment. 

All the merits that have been spoken of as attaching to the offering of 
flowers should be known equally to attach to the gift of such dhupas as are 
satisfying. 

I will now speak of the punya that attaches to the dakshina of deepam, 
lamps, and who may give them at what time and in what manner, and what 
should be the kind of lamps offered. Light is said to be energy and fame, 
and has an upward motion. Hence the gift of light, which is energy, 
enhances the tejas of men. There is a hell called Andhatamas, a place of 
absolute darkness. The time of dakshinayana, the sun’s southward course, is 
also regarded as dark. For escaping that hell and the darkness of this time, 
one should give lamps during Uttarayana, when the sun is on his northward 
course. The good always laud such an offering. 

Since, again, light, jyoti, has an upward course and is regarded as a cure 
for tamas, darkness, one should be a giver of light. Even this is the 
conclusion of the scriptures. It is owing to the lights offered that the Devas 
have become invested with beauty, energy and splendour. By abjuring light, 
the Rakshasas have become endowed with the opposite attributes. Hence, 
should one always give lamps. 

By giving deepas, a man is blessed with keen vision and splendour. One 
that gives lamps should not be an object of jealousy with others. Lamps, 
again, given by others, should not be stolen or extinguished. One that steals 


a lamp becomes blind. Such a man has to grope through darkness in the 
next world and becomes devoid of splendour. He that gives lamps shines in 
beauty in the celestial realms even like a row of lamps. 

Among deepams, the best are those in which ghee is burnt. Next in 
order are those in which the juice of the fruits yielded by deciduous plants 
is burnt. One who desires advancement and growth should never burn fat or 
matrow or the juice that flows from the bones of living creatures. 

The man who desires advancement and felicity should always offer 
lamps at descents from mountains, on roads through forests and other 
inaccessible places, under sacred trees standing in the midst of human 
habitations, and at crossings of streets. The man who lights lamps always 
illumines his race, attains to purity of soul and radiance of form. Verily, 
such a man, after death, attains to the companionship of the luminaries in 
the firmament, the sun and the moon. 

I will now speak to you upon the merits, with the fruits they bring, that 
attach to bali offerings made to the Devas, the Yakshas, the Uragas, human 
beings, Bhutas and Rakshasas. Unscrupulous and vile men that eat without 
first serving Brahmanas and Devas and Atithis and children, should be 
known as Rakshasas. Hence, one should first offer the food one has 
prepared to the Devas after having worshipped them duly with restrained 
senses and concentrated attention. 

One should offer the bali to the gods, bending one’s head in reverence. 
The Devas are always supported by food that householders offer. Verily, 
they bless such homes in which offerings are made to them. The Yakshas 
and Rakshasas and Pannagas, as also guests and all homeless persons, are 
supported by the food offered by grihastas. Indeed, the Devas and the Pitris 
derive their sustenance from such offerings. Gratified by such offerings they 
gratify the offerer in return with longevity, fame and wealth. 

Clean food, of pleasant aroma and appearance, mixed with milk and 
curds, should, along with flowers, be offered to the Devas. The balis that 
should be offered to Yakshas and Rakshasas should be rich with blood and 
meat, with wine and spirits accompanying it, and adorned with coatings of 
fried paddy. Balis mixed with lotuses and utpalas are very agreeable to the 
Nagas. Sesame seeds, boiled in raw sugar, should be offered to the Bhutas, 
Pretas and other unearthly beings. 

He who never eats any food without first serving the Brahmanas and 
Devas and Sadasyas, himself becomes entitled to the first portions of anna. 


Such a man is endowed with bala and tejas, strength and energy. Hence, one 
should never take any food without first offering a portion thereof to the 
gods after worshipping them with reverence. One’s home always blazes 
forth with beauty because of the household deities that live in it. Hence, he 
that desires his own advancement and prosperity should worship the 
grihadevas, the household deities, by offering them the first portion of every 
meal.” 

Even thus did the learned Kavi, Sukra of Bhrigu’s race, discourse to 
Mahabali, the king of the Asuras. That discourse was next recited by Manu 
to the Rishi Suvarna; Suvarna, in his turn, recited it to Narada. The 
Devarishi Narada recited to me the merits that attach to the several acts of 
offering I have mentioned. Informed of those merits, do you, O son, 
perform the kriyas and karmas that I have told you about.” 


CANTO 99 


66 Y udhishtira says, ‘I have, Pitamaha, heard what the merits are that 

are won by offerers of flowers and incense and lights. I have 

heard you speak also of the punya that attaches to a due observance of the 

laws in respect of the offering of the bali. O Grandsire, discourse to me 

once more upon this subject. Indeed, tell me again of the merits of offering 
incense and lamps. Why are balis offered on the ground by grihastas?’ 

Bhishma says, “Listen to the old tale of the discourse between Nahusha 
and Agastya and Bhrigu. The royal sage Nahusha, possessed of the wealth 
of tapasya, acquired the sovereignty of swarga through his own good deeds. 
With restrained senses, O king, he dwelt in heaven, engaged in performing 
diverse karmas of both human and celestial nature. From that high-souled 
monarch flowed diverse kinds of human karmas and diverse kinds of 
celestial kriyas also, O king of men. 

The diverse rites with respect to the sacrificial fire, the collection of 
sacred fuel and of kusa grass, as also of flowers, and the offering of bali 
consisting of food adorned with powdered fried paddy, and the offer of 
dhupa and jyoti—all these, O Rajan, occurred daily in the abode of that 
high-souled king while he dwelt in swarga. 

Indeed, though living in heaven, he performed the sacrifice of japa, 
silent chanting, and dhyana, the sacrifice of meditation. And Nahusha, 
although he had become the king of the Devas, yet worshipped all the 
deities, as he used to do in days of yore, with every due rite and ceremony. 

Some time passed, and then Nahusha became proud of his position as 
the king of all the Devas. This filled him with pride. From that time, he 


ceased performing the rituals and sacrifices and his japa and dhyana as well. 
Filled with arrogance because of the boon he had received from the Devas, 
Nahusha caused the very Devarishis to bear him on their shoulders. 

However, from the cessation of all his spiritual and religious practices, 
his tejas began to sustain a diminution. The time was long for which 
Nahusha, filled with pride, continued to employ the greatest of Rishis, 
possessed of the tapodhana, as the bearers of his palanquin. He made the 
immortal sages discharge, by turns, this humiliating work. 

The day came when it was Agastya’s turn to pull the royal ratha, O 
Bhaarata. At that time, Bhrigu, that foremost of all Brahmagyanis, came to 
Agastya, while the Rishi sat in his asrama, and said, “Mahamuni, why 
should we patiently put up with the indignity this evil Nahusha, who has 
become the king of the Devas, inflicts on us?” 

Agastya said, “How can I curse Nahusha, O great Rishi? You know how 
the boon-giving Brahma himself has granted Nahusha the highest of boons! 
Coming into swarga, the boon that Nahusha asked for was that whoever 
looked at him for even a moment would, deprived of all energy, come under 
his sway. The Self-born Brahma granted him even this boon, and it is for 
this that neither you nor I have been able to consume him with a curse. It is 
for this same reason that none else amongst the greatest Rishis has been 
able to consume or cast him down from his lofty position. 

Also, my lord, Brahma gave Nahusha amrita to drink. And for that 
reason as well we have become powerless against him. The supreme God, it 
seems, gave that boon to Nahusha in order to plunge all creatures into grief. 
That wretch among men treats us Brahmanas vilely and sinfully. O most 
eloquent of all, do you tell me what I should do, and have no doubt that I 
will do as you say.” 

Bhrigu said, “It is at the command of Brahma the Grandsire that I have 
come to you in order to put an end to the power and sway of Nahusha who 
is possessed of great energy but who has been stupefied by fate. 

That vile king, swollen with pride, who has become Lord of the Devas, 
will today yoke you to his ratha. With my urjas today will I cast him down 
from his position, for he has transgressed every norm and restraint. Today, 
in your very sight, I will re-establish the true Indra in his place, him of a 
hundred Aswamedhas, after bringing down the sinful Nahusha from his 
throne. 


Today, that sinner will insult you with a kick, from his mind being 
afflicted by fate, which intends to cause his downfall. Incensed by the insult 
you will curse the wretch, that enemy of the Brahmanas, who has flouted 
every law of dharma, by saying, ‘Be you a snake!’ 

Before your very eyes, O Maharishi, will I hurl Nahusha down into the 
world below, back to Bhumi, all his power and majesty lost from the cries 
of Fie on you! that will resound all around him. Truly, I shall cast Nahusha 
down from swarga today, that accursed sinner who is intoxicated with 
lordship and power. Yes, I shall indeed do this, if it be acceptable to you, O 
Muni!” 

Thus addressed by Bhrigu, Mitravaruna’s son Agastya, of unfading 
puissance and glory, was delighted and freed from every anxiety.’” 


CANTO 100 


: eave udhishtira says, ‘How was Nahusha plunged into distress? How 
was he cast down into the world? How, indeed, was he deprived 
of the sovereignty of the gods? Tell me all about it, Pitamaha.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Even thus did those two Rishis, Bhrigu and Agastya, 
converse. I have already told you how Nahusha, when he first became the 
king of the Devas, conducted himself in a most becoming manner. Verily, 
all pure and wondrous deeds, both human and divine, flowed from that 
Mahatman Rajarishi. The offering of lamps, and every other similar rite, the 
due offerings of balis, and all rituals as are performed on especially sacred 
days—all these were properly observed by Nahusha who had become the 
king of the Devas. 

Pious karmas are always performed by those that have wisdom, in both 
the world of men and that of the gods. O best of kings, if such piety is 
observed with regularity and steadfastness, grihastas always succeed in 
acquiring prosperity and advancement. Even such is the effect of the gift of 
lamps and of incense, as also of bowing in worship and prostrations to the 
gods. When food is cooked, the first portion should be offered to a 
Brahmana. The particular offerings called bali should also be given to the 
household deities. The Devas become gratified with such gifts. It is also 
wellknown that the measure of satisfaction which the gods derive from such 
offerings is a hundred times as great as that which the householder himself 
derives from making them. Those blessed with piety and wisdom make 
offerings of incense and lights, accompanying them with bowing and 
prostrations. These are always fraught with advancement and prosperity to 


those that perform them. Those rites which the learned undergo during their 
ablutions, using holy water, accompanied with pranama and namaskara to 
the gods, always contribute to the gratification of the gods. When 
worshipped with proper rites, the highly blessed Pitris, Rishis who own the 
wealth of asceticism, and the grihadevatas, the household deities, all 
become gratified. Filled with these thoughts and such knowledge, Nahusha, 
that great king, when he became the sovereign of the gods, faithfully 
observed all these karmas and dharmas fraught with great glory. 

Shortly after, Nahusha’s good fortune waned, and he began to flagrantly 
flout all these holy karmas and began instead to defy all restraints in the 
manner I have already alluded to. Because he no longer observed the laws 
laid down for the offerings of incense and lamps, his tejas declined rapidly. 
Rakshasas obstructed his yagnas and dakshinas. 

It was at this time that Nahusha yoked that foremost of Rishis, Agastya, 
to his ratha. Nahusha of great power, smiling all the while in hubris, set that 
Mahamuni to the task of bearing him from the banks of the Saraswati to the 
place he would indicate. Even then, Bhrigu addressed the son of 
Mitravaruna, saying, “Do you close your eyes until I enter into the jata on 
your head.” 

And Bhrigu of unfading glory and terrific energy entered into the matted 
hair of Agastya, who stood still as a wooden post. Soon after, Nahusha saw 
Agastya approach him to carry his palanquin. Looking at the Deva king, 
Agastya said, “Do you yoke me to your ratha without delay. To what place 
shall I bear you? O Lord of the Devas, I will take you wherever you wish to 
go.” 

Nahusha had the Mahamuni Agastya yoked to his ratha. Bhrigu, who 
was hidden within Agastya’s jata, grew pleased with what Nahusha did. He 
took care not to see Nahusha for he well knew the boon that Brahma had 
granted that king, that whoever he looked at would come under his sway. 
Agastya, meanwhile, though thus insulted direly by Nahusha, did not give 
way to wrath but stayed calm. 

Then, O Bharata, the arrogant Nahusha prodded great Agastya with his 
goad. Still the righteous sage remained calm. Then Nahusha himself gave 
way to anger and kicked Agastya Muni on the head with his left foot, crying 
Sarpa! which meant both ‘hurry’ and ‘snake’. No sooner was the kick 
delivered, than Bhrigu in Agastya’s matted hair blazed up in wrath and 
cursed Nahusha: “You dare kick this great Muni’s head? I cast you down 


into the world below, vain Nahusha, and become a snake as you fall, O 
wretched sinner of the dark heart!” 

Cursed by the invisible Bhrigu, Nahusha immediately turned into a 
great snake and fell down onto the earth. If, Yudhishtira, Nahusha had seen 
Bhrigu, the sage would not have been able to curse him. 

Even though he plunged down into the world below, because of all the 
dakshina that Nahusha had given, as also his vratas, tapasya and yagnas, he 
did not lose his memory but remembered everything. He then began to 
worship and appease Bhrigu to have redemption from the curse. Agastya, 
filled with compassion, joined Nahusha in pacifying Bhrigu so that the 
curse might see some end. At last, the wrathful Bhrigu felt pity for Nahusha 
and pronounced that the curse would indeed end one day. 

Bhrigu said, “There will appear a king on earth named Yudhishtira, the 
greatest of his vamsa. He will free you from my curse.” And the Maharishi 
Bhrigu vanished from Nahusha’s sight. Having thus accomplished the work 
of the true Indra, performer of a hundred sacrifices, Agastya also returned to 
his asrama, praised and worshipped by all the grateful Brahmanas of 
heaven. 

You freed Nahusha from Bhrigu’s curse, and he rose into Brahmaloka in 
your very sight. As for Bhrigu, having cast Nahusha down into this world, 
he went to Brahma’s loftiest realm and told the Pitamaha what he had done. 
Summoning Indra back, he said to all the Devas, ‘You gods, through the 
boon I granted him, Nahusha acquired the sovereignty of swarga. Deprived 
of that power by the angry Agastya, he has been cast down into the world. 
Devas, you cannot live without a king. Do you once more install Indra as 
the king of swarga.” 

To the Grandsire, O son of Pritha, who said so to them, the Devas, filled 
with joy, replied, “So be it!” The divine Brahma installed Indra on the 
throne of swarga and, made king of the Devas again, Vasava shone forth 
once more in splendour. Even this is what transpired in days of yore, 
through the sin of Nahusha. 

However, because of the punya he had acquired through all that he once 
did which was worthy, auspicious and sacred, Nahusha also regained his 
place in Devaloka. Hence, when evening comes and sandhya, grihastas 
should light lamps and give offerings of deepam. The giver of lamps is sure 
to acquire divine glory when he dies. Why, givers of light become as 
resplendent as the full moon. 


The giver of lamps is blessed with beauty of form and strength for as 
many years as the number of moments for which the lamps given by him 
burn.’” 


CANTO 101 


¢ mye udhishtira says, “Where do those foolish, wretched and sinful 
men go, Pitamaha, that steal or misappropriate things that belong 
to Brahmanas?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘I will tell you an old tale of a conversation between a 
Chandala and a low Kshatriya. Listen to me. 

The Kshatriya said, “Chandala, you seem to be old in years, but your 
behaviour seems to be that of a boy. Your body is smeared with dust raised 
by dogs and donkeys, but without minding that dirt, you are anxious about 
the little drops of vine milk that have fallen upon your person. It is plain 
that such deeds as are censured by the pious are ordained for the Chandala. 
Why, indeed, do you seek to wash off the drops of milk from your person?” 

The Chandala said, “Formerly some cows belonging to a Brahmana 
were stolen. While they were being carried away, some milk from their 
udders fell upon a number of Soma plants that grew by the roadside. Those 
Brahmanas that drank the juice of the plants with that milk, as also the king 
who performed the sacrifice in which that Soma was drunk, had to fall into 
Naraka. Indeed, for having thus appropriated something that had belonged 
to a Brahmana, the king with all the Brahmanas that had assisted him had to 
go to hell. All those men also, Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, that drank milk 
or ghee or curds, in the palace of the king who had stolen the Brahmana’s 
kine, found hell for themselves. 

The stolen kine, shaking their bodies, slew with their milk the sons and 
grandsons of those that had stolen them, as also the king and the queen, 
although the latter treated the animals with great care and attention. As 


regards myself, O king, I used to live in the observance of the vow of 
brahmacharya in the place where those cows were kept after being stolen. 

The food that I got by begging was sprinkled over with the milk of 
those kine. Because I ate that food, Kshatriya, I have, in this life, become a 
Chandala. The king who had stolen the kine belonging to a Brahmana found 
an ignominious end. Hence, one should never steal or take anything that 
belongs to a Brahmana. Behold to what condition I am reduced just because 
I ate food that had been sprinkled over with milk belonging to a Brahmana. 

It is for this same reason that Soma plants are never sold by a wise man. 
They who sell the Soma plant are censured by the Rishis. Indeed, O son, 
they who buy Soma and they who sell it, both fall into the hell called 
Raurava when, leaving this world, they go into Yamaloka. That man who, 
even after knowing the Vedas, sells Soma, becomes a usurer in his next life 
and quickly meets with destruction. Full three hundred times he has to sink 
into hell and be turned into an animal that lives on human ordure. 

Serving a man who is vile and low, pride, and rape committed upon a 
friend’s wife, if weighed against one another in a balance, would show that 
unbridled pride is the heaviest sin. Behold this dog, so sinful and 
disagreeably pale and lean. He was a human being in his past life. It is 
through pride that living creatures attain to such miserable ends. 

As for myself, I was born into a large and noble family, in a past life, O 
Kshatriya, and I was a thorough master of all branches of knowledge and all 
the sciences. I knew the gravity of all these faults, but influenced by pride, I 
became blinded and ate the meat attached to the vertebrae of animals. It is 
for that sin that I have devolved to this condition. 

Ah, look at the reverses brought by Time. Like one whose cloth has 
taken fire at one end, or who is pursued by bees, look, I run here and there, 
pierced through by fear, and smeared with dirt. They that lead the domestic 
life are saved from all sins by a study of the Vedas, as also by gifts of other 
kinds, as they have been declared by the wise. O Kshatriya, a Brahmana 
who is a sinner is saved from all his sins by studying the Vedas, if he 
betakes himself to the vanaprastha and abstains from attachment of every 
kind. 

O great Kshatriya, I find myself in this life of a Chandala, born into a 
dark and sinful order. I fail to see clearly how I can wash myself of all my 
sins. Because of some punya I did in a past life, I have not lost the memory 
of my previous lives. O king, I throw myself on your mercy. I beg you, 


resolve my bewilderment. By what auspicious course can I hope to free 
myself from this horrible fate? O best of men, by what means can I be rid of 
being a Chandala?” 

The Kshatriya said, “Know, O Chandala, the means by which you may 
be able to find your redemption. By sacrificing your prana, your life-breath, 
for the sake of a Brahmana you can attain what you seek. By sacrificing 
your body in the fire of battle as a libation to the beasts and birds of prey, 
for the sake of a Brahmana, you can achieve mukti. By no other means will 
you find success.” 

Thus addressed, that Chandala, O scorcher of your foes, poured his 
prana as a libation into the fire of battle, for the sake of protecting a 
Brahmana’s wealth, and as the consequence of that deed attained to a most 
desirable end. Hence, son, you must always protect the property of 
Brahmanas, if, Mahabaho, you wish for an end that is eternal felicity.’ 


CANTO 102 


¢ eve udhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha, it has been said that all pious men 
attain to the same realm after death. Is it true, O Bhaarata, that 
there is difference of position or status among them?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘With different deeds, son of Pritha, men attain to 
different realms. They who are righteous attain to regions of felicity, while 
they who are sinful attain to regions that are full of misery. Listen to the old 
story of the discourse, son, between Rishi Gautama and Vasava. 

A Brahmana of the name of Gautama, mild and self-restrained and with 
all his senses under complete control, saw a baby elephant that had lost his 
mother and that was grief-stricken. Full of daya, and steadfast in the 
observance of his vows, the ascetic nursed that infant animal. After a long 
time, the little creature grew up into a large and mighty elephant. 

One day, Indra, assuming the form of King Dhritarashtra, seized that 
elephant which was as big as a hill and from whose rent temples the juice of 
musth trickled. Seeing the elephant dragged away, Maharishi Gautama 
addressed King Dhritarashtra and said, “Ungrateful Dhritarashtra, do not 
rob me of this elephant. I look upon him as a son and I have reared him 
with great effort and care. It is said that between the righteous, friendship 
springs up if they exchange just seven words. You should be careful, O 
king, that the sin of wounding a friend does not touch you. It does not 
become you, O king, to forcibly take this elephant, who brings me my fuel 
and water, that protects my asrama when I am away, who is docile and 
obedient to his master, who is mindful of obeying his preceptor in all 
things, who is mild and well-tamed, and who is grateful and very dear to 


me. Indeed, you must not take him from me, ignoring my protests and 
cries.” 

Dhritarashtra said, “I shall give you a thousand kine, a hundred maid- 
servants, and five hundred pieces of gold. I shall also, O great Rishi, give 
you diverse other kinds of wealth. What use can Brahmanas have for 
elephants?” 

Gautama said, “Keep, O king, your kine and maid-servants and coins of 
gold and gemstones and diverse other kinds of wealth. What, Rajan, have 
Brahmanas to do with wealth?” 

Dhritarashtra said, “Brahmana have no use for elephants. Verily, learned 
Brahmana, elephants are meant for Kshatriyas. I cannot be considered as 
sinning by taking this elephant for my royal mount. Do not continue to 
obstruct me, Gautama.” 

Gautama said, “Illustrious king, even if I have to go to Yamaloka where 
the righteous live in joy and the sinful in grief, I shall take this elephant of 
mine from you.” 

Dhritarashtra said, “They that are without deeds of punya, they that 
have no faith and unbelievers, they that are of sinful souls and are always 
engaged in gratifying their senses—only they have to go to Yama’s world 
and endure the suffering that he inflicts. I, Dhritarashtra, shall go to a higher 
realm, and not to Yamaloka.” 

Gautama said, “Yamaloka is such that men are there sternly controlled. 
No untruth can be told there. Only truth prevails in that place. There the 
weak persecute the strong. Going there, I will force you to yield up this 
elephant to me.” 

Dhritarashtra said, “Only those that, intoxicated with pride, behave 
towards their eldest sister and father and mother as towards enemies, have 
to repair, O great ascetic, to such a realm. I shall go to a higher world. 
Indeed, Dhritarashtra shall not have to go to Yamaloka.” 

Gautama said, “The realm of Kubera Vaisravana, called Mandakini, is 
attained by the highly blessed whom every joy and comfort await there. 
There Gandharvas and Yakshas and Apsaras live, gladdening all the 
denizens with enchanting music and dance. Repairing even there, O king, I 
will force you to yield up this elephant to me.” 

Dhritarashtra said, “Those who regard hospitality to guests as a vrata, 
who observe other goodly vows, who give shelter to Brahmanas, and who 


eat what remains after all those that are dependent upon them, find Kubera’s 
Mandakini. I shall not go there, for a higher world awaits me.” 

Gautama said, “If you attain to those forests of every enchantment, 
mantled with flowers, that grow on the summit of Meru, that echo with 
melodious voice of Kinnaris, and are graced with beautiful jambus of wide- 
spreading branches, I will come even there and force you to give up this 
elephant to me.” 

Dhritarashtra said, “Brahmanas that are of mild dispositions, that are 
devoted to truth, that possess great learning in the scriptures, are 
compassionate to all creatures, that study the Puranas with all the Itihasas, 
that pour libations on the sacred fire and make gifts of honey to Brahmanas, 
repair to such realms, Rishi. I shall go to a world that is higher. Indeed, 
Dhritarashtra shall not go to the summit of Meru but further. If you know of 
any other loftier world of great renown and felicity, speak to me of it, for 
even there shall I go.” 

Gautama said, “If you go to the forests that belong to Narada, which he 
holds dear, which are adorned with rare flowers, which echo with the 
melodious songs of the prince of Kinnaras, and which are the eternal abode 
of Gandharvas and Apsaras, I shall follow you there and force you to give 
up this elephant to me.” 

Dhritarashtra said, “They who never beg for alms, they who cultivate 
music and dancing, and always rove about in joy, attain to such realms. 
Rishi, I shall repair to a world that is higher. Dhritarashtra will not have to 
go to Narada vana!” 

Gautama said, “If you go to that realm where the Uttara-Kurus blaze in 
beauty and pass their days in gladness, O king, in the company of the very 
Devas; where those beings that have their origin in fire, those that have their 
origin in water, and those that come from mountains, dwell in bliss, and 
where Sakra rains down the fruition of every wish, and where women live 
in perfect freedom, unrestrained by rules of any kind regulating them, and 
where there is no jealousy between the sexes—even there will I come and 
force you to give up this elephant to me.” 

Dhritarashtra said, “Men that are free from desire for all things of 
pleasure, that abstain from meat, that never take up the rod of chastisement, 
and never inflict the least harm on creatures chala and achala, mobile and 
unmoving, that have made themselves the soul of all creatures, that are 
entirely free from ego, that have cast off attachments of every kind, that 


regard gain and loss, as also praise and blame, as equal—only those men, O 
Maharishi, attain to such realms. I shall find a higher world. Dhritarashtra 
shall not go the world of the Uttara-Kurus.” 

Gautama said, “Next to these blaze in beauty those eternal regions, 
redolent with divine fragrance, which are free from passions of every kind 
and that are without sorrow. These are the realms the Lord Soma. If you go 
even to Somaloka, I will thence and force you to give up this elephant to 
me.” 

Dhritarashtra said, “Men that always make gifts without receiving any 
in return, who never accept any service from others, who own nothing 
which they cannot give to a deserving person, who are hospitable to all 
creatures, who are inclined to show grace to everyone, who have forgiving 
dispositions, who never speak ill of others, who protect all creatures by 
throwing over them the shroud of compassion, and who are always 
righteous in their conduct—only such men, O great Rishi, attain to Soma’s 
world. I will find a higher realm. Dhritarashtra shall not go to Somaloka.” 

Gautama said, “Above those blaze in beauty other worlds that are 
eternal, free from passion and darkness and sorrow, and that lie at the feet of 
the sun god. If you go even to Suryaloka, I will come there and force you to 
yield up this elephant to me.” 

Dhritarashtra said, “Men who are attentive to the study of the Vedas, are 
devoted to the service of their gurus, who perform tapasya and keep stern 
vratas, who are firm in truth, who never utter a word that hints of 
disobedience or enmity towards their preceptors, who are always alert, and 
ever ready in their service to elders and teachers—they go, great Rishi, to 
such worlds, they that are pure, have purified souls, are of restrained 
speech, that are unwavering in dharma, and masters of the Vedas. But I 
shall attain to a higher world. Verily, Dhritarashtra shall not go to 
Suryaloka.” 

Gautama said, “Beyond Surya, are the eternal regions that blaze with 
beauty, that are supremely fragrant, are free from passion, and that are free 
from every sorrow. They are the abode of the Mahatman Lord Varuna. If 
you go even there, I will follow you and force you to yield up this elephant 
to me.” 

Dhritarashtra said, “Men who worship the Devas by keeping the 
Chaturmasya vrata, who perform a hundred and ten sacrifices, that pour 
libations every day on their sacred fire with devotion and faith for three 


years in perfect accord with the laws declared in the Vedas, bear without 
flinching the burden of all dharma, walk steadily along the way trodden by 
the righteous, that immaculately sustain the conduct followed men of 
dharma—only they find such realms. I shall find a higher world. 
Dhritarashtra shall not go to the world of Varuna.” 

Gautama said, “Above them are the regions of Indra of awesome tejas, 
worlds free from passion and sorrow, which are difficult of access and 
coveted by all men. Even if you attain to Indraloka, I will come there and 
force you to give up this elephant to me.” 

Dhritarashtra said, “He who lives for a hundred years, who is imbued 
with heroism, who studies the Vedas, and who performs sacrifices with 
devotion—such men attain to the world of Sakra. I shall find a higher 
world. Dhritarashtra shall not go to Indraloka.” 

Gautama said, “Above Indra’s swargas are the lokas of the Prajapatis, 
worlds of transcendent felicity abounding in every ecstasy, and where 
sorrow never comes. Belonging to those powerful ones from whom all 
creation has sprung, they are coveted by all souls. Even if you go there, I 
will follow you and force you to give up this elephant to me.” 

Dhritarashtra said, “Kings that have performed the Avabhrita Snana, the 
concluding ablution upon the completion of the Rajasuya sacrifice, that are 
endowed with righteous souls, that have protected their subjects perfectly, 
and that have washed their limbs with sanctified water upon the completion 
of the Aswamedha yagna, repair to such realms. Dhritarashtra shall not go 
there.” 

Gautama said, “Next to those, blaze the eternal realms of sublime 
redolence, free from passion, and transcending all sorrow. That is Goloka, 
the world of kine, difficult of attainment, where no grief or oppression goes. 
Even if you gain Goloka, I will come there and force you to yield up this 
elephant to me.” 

Dhritarashtra said, “He who, owning thousand kine, gives away a 
hundred kine every year, or owning a hundred kine gives away ten every 
year, or owning only ten or even five kine gives away one cow, and they 
who attain to a mature old age practising the vows of brahmacharya all their 
days, who obey all the declarations of the Vedas, and who, with great tejas 
of spirit, betake themselves to pilgrimages to sacred waters and shrines, 
dwell in felicity in the world of kine. They who journey to Prabhasa and 
Manasa, the lakes of Pushkara, the large lake Mahatsara, the sacred forests 


of Naimisa, Bahuda, Karatoya, Ganga, Gayasiras, Vipasa, Sthulavaluka, 
Krishna, the five rivers of the Punjab, the vast lake Mahahrada, Gomati, 
Kausiki, Champa, Saraswati, Drisadwati and Yamuna—indeed, those 
illustrious Brahmanas, steadfast in the observance of vows, who go to these 
sacred waters, attain to the regions of which you speak. Endowed with 
divine bodies and adorned with celestial garlands those blessed ones, 
always exuding the most ethereal fragrances, repair to those regions of joy 
and gladness. Dhritarashtra shall not go there.” 

Gautama said, “Beyond these, are worlds where there is no fear of the 
least cold or heat, no hunger, no thirst, no pain, no sorrow, no joy, no one 
that is agreeable or disagreeable, no friend, and no enemy; where 
decrepitude and death are not, and where there is neither righteousness nor 
sin. Going even to that realm which is freed from every passion, which 
wells with equable happiness, and where there is wisdom and the guna of 
only sattva—verily, even if you attain to sacred Brahmaloka, I will come 
there and force you to give up this elephant to me.” 

Dhritarashtra said, “They who are freed from all attachments, who are 
possessed of cleansed souls, who are steady in the observance of the 
foremost vows, who are devoted to the yoga that depends on stilling the 
mind, and who have in this life attained to the happiness of swarga—those 
wedded to the sattva guna—attain to the sacred world of Brahma. O 
Maharishi, you will not find Dhritarashtra there.” 

Gautama said, “Where the best of rathantaras is sung, where altars are 
strewn with sacred kusa blades, for the performance of Pundarika sacrifices, 
there where Soma-drinking Brahmanas go on chariots drawn by supernal 
steeds—if you go even thence, I will come there and force you to give up 
this elephant.” 

Now Gautama paused, then, a smile dawning on his lustrous face, said, 
“IT believe that you are none other than the slayer of Vritra, the god who has 
performed a hundred sacrifices, and are ranging through all the mandalas of 
the universe. I hope I have not, through the weakness of my mind, not 
recognising you, committed any fault by anything that I have said to you.” 

The god of a hundred sacrifices said, “I am Maghavat. I came to the 
world of men to seize this elephant. I bow to you. Do you command me. I 
shall accomplish all that you may be pleased to ask.” 

Gautama said, “Do you give me, O Devaraja, this white elephant that is 
so young, for he is only ten years of age. I have brought him up as a child of 


my own. Dwelling in these forest, so has grown under my eye and has been 
a dear companion to me. Do you free my child that you have seized and 
wish to drag away.” 

Indra of a hundred sacrifices said, “This elephant that has been a son to 
you, O Brahmanottama, comes to you looking wistfully at you. Behold, he 
sniffs your feet with his trunk. My salutations to you. Do you pray for my 
welfare.” 

Gautama said, “King of the Devas, I do always think of your good. I 
always offer you worship. Do you also, O Sakra, bestow your blessings on 
me. Given by you, I accept this elephant.” 

Indra said, “Amongst all those greatest Mahatman Rishis that firmly 
adhere to truth and that have the Vedas planted in their heart, you alone 
have been able to recognise me. And for this I am exceedingly pleased with 
you. Do you, therefore, O Brahmana, come with me quickly, along with this 
your son. You deserve to attain to diverse regions of great felicity without 
the delay of even a single day.” 

Having said these words, the Vajradharin set Gautama before him, along 
with his son, that white elephant, and flew up into swarga, which is difficult 
of attainment by even the righteous. 

He who would listen to this Itihasa every day or would recite it, 
restraining his senses the while, attains to Brahmaloka even as Gautama 
did.’” 


CANTO 103 


¢ mae udhishtira says, ‘You have discoursed to us on diverse kinds of 

gift, on the tranquillity of the soul, on Truth, on compassion, on 
contentment with one’s wedded wife, and the merits of dakshina. It is 
known to you, Pitamaha, that there is nothing to equal tapasya to acquire 
punya. It befits you now to expound to me what constitutes the highest 
tapasya.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Yudhishtira, one attains to a realm of felicity that 
corresponds to the kind of penances that one undertakes. I hold, O son of 
Kunti, that there is no penance that is superior to fasting, abstaining from 
food. Listen to the ancient narrative of the discourse between Bhagiratha 
and the illustrious Brahma. 

I have heard, O Bhaarata, that Bhagiratha attained to that world which 
transcends that of the Devas, of kine and of the Rishis. Seeing this, O 
monarch, the Pitamaha Brahma said to Bhagiratha, “How, O Bhagiratha, 
have you attained to this world that is so difficult of attainment? Not the 
Devas, or Gandharvas, or Manavas succeed in coming here without having 
practised the severest austerities. How have you attained to this realm?” 

Bhagiratha said, “I used to make gifts of hundreds of thousands of gold 
coins to Brahmanas, observing the Brahmacharya vrata all the while, but it 
is not through the punya of those gifts, O Greatest, that I have attained to 
this world. I performed the Ekaratra sacrifice ten times, and the Pancharatra 
yagna as many times. The Ekadasaratra I performed eleven times. The great 
sacrifice of Jyotishtoma I did a hundred times. It is not, however, through 
the merits of those sacrifices that I have attained to this world of felicity. 


For a hundred years, I lived continuously beside the holy Jahnavi, all 
the while practising the severest austerities. There I made gifts to 
Brahmanas of thousands of male and female slaves. By the side of the 
Pushkara lakes, I gave dakshina to the Brahmanas, a hundred thousand 
times, of a hundred thousand steeds, and two hundred thousand kine. I also 
gave away a thousand damsels of great beauty, each adorned with golden 
moons, and sixty thousand more decked with opulent ornaments of pure 
gold. It is not, however, through the punya of those deeds that I have 
succeeded in attaining to these realms. 

O Lord of the universe, performing those sacrifices known as Gosava, I 
gave away ten arbudas of kine, giving each Brahmana ten kine, each one 
with her calf, and each of whom yielded milk at the time, and with each of 
whom were given a vessel of gold and one of white brass for milking her. 
Performing many Soma sacrifices, I gave away to each Brahmana ten cows 
each of whom yielded milk, and each of whom had brought forth only her 
first calf, besides giving gifts to them of hundreds of Rohini cows. I also 
gave away to Brahmanas twice ten prayutas of other kine, all milk yielding. 
It is not through the merit of those gifts, O Brahma, that I have succeeded in 
attaining to this realm of bliss. 

I also gave away a hundred thousand horses of the Balhika breed, all 
white of complexion, and adorned with garlands of gold. It is not, however, 
through the merits of those gifts that I have attained to this exalted world. I 
gave away eight crores of golden coins to Brahmanas, and then another ten 
crores also, at every yagna that I performed. It is not, however, through the 
merits of those that I have attained to this region of felicity. 

I also gave away ten and then seven crores of fine steeds, O Grandsire, 
each of green complexion, each having ears that were dark, and each 
adored with garlands of gold. I also gave away ten and seven thousand 
elephants of huge size, of tusks as big as ploughares, each having the 
whorls on its body which are called padmas, and each adorned with 
garlands of gold. I gave away ten thousand chariots, Pitamaha, made 
entirely of gold, and which were adorned with diverse golden ornaments. I 
also gave away seven thousand other chariots with magnificent horses 
yoked. All the horses were caparisoned in golden adornments. Those rathas 
represented the dakshinas of a sacrifice and were of exactly that kind 
indicated in the Vedas. 


At the ten great Vajapeya yagnas that I performed, I gave away a 
thousand horses, each as powerful as Indra himself, judged by their prowess 
and the sacrifices they had performed. Spending a vast sum of money, O 
Brahma, and performing eight Rajasuya sacrifices, I gave away to the 
Brahmanas that officiated at them a thousand kings and their kingdoms, 
their necks draped with garlands of gold, after having vanquished all those 
Kshatriyas in battle. It is not, however, through the merits of those deeds 
that I have attained to this transcendent realm. 

At those sacrifices, O Lord of the universe, the dakshina that flowed 
from me was as copious as the stream of Ganga herself. To each Brahmana 
I gave two thousand elephants decked with gold, as many horses 
caparisoned with golden ornaments, and a hundred villages of the best kind. 
Verily, I gave these to each Brahmana three times in succession. Living in 
tapasya, subsisting on a frugal diet, adopting tranquillity of mind, and 
restraining my speech, I dwelt for a long time on the breast of Himavat by 
the side of that Ganga whose irresistible cataract as she fell from heaven 
Mahadeva bore on his head, and contained. It is not through the merit of 
these pious observances, O Pitamaha, that I have attained to this region. 

Casting the Sami twig, I adored the gods in myriads of such sacrifices as 
are completed in a single day, and such others as take twelve days for their 
completion, and others still as can be completed in three and ten days, 
besides many Pundarikas. I have not attained to this rarest realm through 
the punya of any of those sacrifices. 

I gave Brahmanas eight thousand white bulls, each graced with a 
magnificent hump, and each having one of its horns covered with gold. I 
also gave them beautiful wives whose necks were adorned with chains of 
gold. I also gave away great heaps of gold and wealth of every other kind. 
Verily, I gave away hillocks of gemstones and other precious things. 
Villages in thousands teeming with wealth and corn, also I gave. With all 
my senses about me, I gave away to the Brahmanas a hundred thousand 
cows, each of whom had brought forth only her first calf, at the many great 
sacrifices I performed. It is not, however, through the merits of those deeds 
that I have attained to this supreme realm. 

I adored the Devas in a sacrifice that is completed in eleven days. Twice 
I worshipped them in sacrifices that are completed in twelve days. I adored 
them also, many a time, in Aswamedha yagnas. Six and ten times I 


performed the Arkayana yagna. It is not through the punya of those that I 
have attained to this condition. 

I also gave to each Brahmana a forest of golden kanchana trees 
extending for a yojana on every side, and with each tree hung with 
jewellery and gems of every kind. It is not through the merits of that karma 
that I have attained to this region. For thirty years, with my heart perfectly 
free from anger, I observed the Turayana vrata that bestows the most 
superior merit, and every day gave away to Brahmanas nine hundred kine. 
Lord of the universe, every one of those was a Rohini cow, and yielded 
milk at the time I gave them away. It is not through the merits of those 
deeds, O Brahma, that I have attained to this world. 

I worshipped thirty fires every day, Pitamaha. I adored the Devas in 
eight sacrifices in which the fat of all species of animals was poured on the 
fire. I adored them with seven sacrifices in which the fat of humans was 
poured on the fire. I worshipped them in a thousand and twenty-eight 
Viswajita yagnas. It is not through the merits of those sacrifices, O Lord of 
all the Gods, that I have attained to this realm. 

On the banks of the Sarayu and the Bahuda and Ganga, as also in the 
forest of Naimisa, I gave away millions of kine to the best Brahmanas. It is 
not through the merits of those gifts that I have attained to this region. 

Indra knew about the vow of upavasa, fasting; he, however, kept it a 
secret. Sukra, of Bhrigu’s line, gained knowledge of it with atmadrishti, 
spiritual vision, he acquired through tapasya. Blazing with tejas as he does, 
it is Usanas who first made upavasa known to the universe. I observed that 
vrata, O boon-giving Lord! When I accomplished that highest vow, the 
Brahmanas all became gratified with me. A thousand Rishis came to me, 
and all of them said, ‘Do you, Bhagiratha, attain to Brahmaloka!’ It is only 
from keeping upavasa, the vow of fasting, that I succeeded in attaining to 
this world of the highest felicity. There is no doubt in this, O Lord. 

Asked by you, the Supreme Ordainer of all things, I have duly 
expounded the punya that accrues from fasting. In my opinion, there is no 
penance higher than fasting. I swear this to you, O Greatest of all the Gods. 
Be you propitious to me.” 

Having said all this, King Bhagiratha was honoured by Brahma himself 
with every due rite. Do you, therefore, Yudhishtira, observe upavasa, the 
vow of fasting and worship the Brahmanas every day. The blessing uttered 
by Brahmanas can accomplish everything, both here and hereafter. Indeed, 


the Brahmanas should ever be gratified with gifts of clothes, food and fine 
white kine, and excellent homes and mansions. The very Devas should 
gratify the Brahmanas. Freeing yourself from greed, practise this vow of the 
most superior punya that is not known to all.’” 


CANTO 104 


¢ eve udhishtira says, ‘Man, it is said, is endowed with a span of life 
which extends for a hundred years, and with energy and strength 
that are considerable. Why then, Pitamaha, do humans die even when they 
are very young? By what does a man become long-lived, and by what is his 
life shortened? Through what does a man acquire the fame that rests upon 
great achievements? Through what does one attain to wealth and 
prosperity? Is it by tapasya, or brahmacharya, or the silent japa of sacred 
mantras, or with the help of herbs and drugs? Is it by his actions, or speech? 
Explain to me this, O Grandsire!’ 

Bhishma says, ‘I shall tell you what you ask. Indeed, I will tell you what 
the reason is, for which one becomes short-lived, and the reason for which 
one is blessed with a long life. I will also explain to you the reason for 
which one succeeds in acquiring the fame that rests on great achievements, 
and the reason for which one succeeds in acquiring wealth and prosperity. 
Indeed, I shall enlighten you about the manner in which a man must live in 
order to be given all that is beneficial to him. 

It is by vyavahara, conduct, that one acquires longevity, and it is by 
vyavahara, also, that one acquires wealth and prosperity. Indeed, it is 
through one’s conduct that one acquires the fame that rests upon great 
achievements, both here and hereafter. 

The man whose conduct is improper or evil never has a long life. All 
creatures become afraid of such a man and are oppressed by him. If, 
therefore, one wishes one’s own advancement and prosperity, one should, in 
this world, betake oneself to conduct that is proper and good. Good conduct 


succeeds in dispelling the inauspiciousness and misery of even one that is 
sinful. Dharma has vyavahara for its indication. They that are good and 
righteous are so because of the neeti they follow. The indications, again, of 
good neeti are afforded by the actions of those that are good and righteous. 
People esteem that man who acts righteously and who does good even if 
they only hear of him without actually seeing him. 

They that are disbelievers, professed atheists, they that are without all 
karma, they that are disobedient to preceptors and transgress the injunctions 
of the scriptures, they that are unacquainted with and, so, unobservant of 
duties, and they that are of evil conduct, become short-lived. They that are 
of improper behaviour, they that transgress all restraints, they that are 
unscrupulous in sexual congress, become short-lived here and find hell for 
themselves hereafter. 

Those men live for a hundred years who, though without any 
accomplishments, betake themselves to propriety and righteousness of neeti 
and thus become endowed with faith and are freed from malice. He that is 
free from anger, who is truthful in speech, who never does any injury to any 
creature in the universe, who is without malice, crookedness and insincerity, 
succeeds in living for a hundred years. He who always breaks little clods of 
earth, or tears up the grass that grows under his feet, or bites his nails off 
with his teeth, or is always impure, or very restless, never succeeds in living 
long. 

One should wake from sleep at the hour known as the Brahma muhurta 
and then think of both dharma and artha. Getting out of bed, one should 
wash one’s face and rinse one’s mouth in achamana, and joining one’s 
hands in an attitude of reverence, say the morning prayers. In this way, also, 
when dusk falls, should one say one’s evening prayers, sandhya vandana, 
not speaking to anyone at the time. 

One should never look at the rising sun, or at the setting sun. Nor should 
one look at the sun when he is in eclipse; nor at his image in the water; nor 
at midday when he is at his zenith. The Rishis, adoring the two sandhyas, 
the twilights of dawn and dusk, with regularity, succeeded in attaining 
longevity. Hence, one should, restraining speech, say one’s prayers 
regularly at the two sandhyas. 

As for Brahmanas that do not say their sandhya vandana at the two 
twilights, a righteous king should set them to such tasks as are ordained for 
Sudras. Men of every varna should never have sexual congress with the 


wives of others. There is nothing that shortens life so effectually as sexual 
congress with other men’s wives. For as many thousands of years shall the 
adulterer have to live in hell as the number of pores on the bodies of the 
women with whom he commits the sin. 

One should dress one’s hair, apply kohl to one’s eyes, and clean one’s 
teeth, as also worship the Devas, all in the forenoon. One should not look at 
urine or faeces, or tread on it or touch it with one’s feet. One should not set 
out on a journey at dawn, or at midday, or in the evening sandhya, or with 
an unknown companion, or with a Sudra, or alone. While travelling along a 
road, one should, standing aside, always make way for a Brahmana, for 
kine, for kings, for an old man, for one who is carrying a burden, for a 
woman quick with child, or for a weak person. 

When one comes upon a large tree that is familiar and known to be 
auspicious, one should walk around it in pradakshina. One should also, 
coming to an intersection where four roads meet, walk around it before 
pursuing one’s journey. At midday, or at midnight, or at night in general, or 
at the two sandhyas, one should not go to charusars, places where four 
roads meet. One should never wear sandals or clothes that have been worn 
by another. 

One should always observe the vow of brahmacharya, and should never 
cross one’s legs. One should observe the vow of brahmacharya on the day 
of the new moon, as also on that of the full moon, as also on the eighth 
lunar day of both fortnights. One should never eat the flesh of animals not 
killed in sacrifice. One should never eat the flesh from the back of an 
animal. One should avoid censuring and calumniating others, as also all 
other kinds of deceitful behaviour. 

One should never pierce others with word shafts. Indeed, one should 
never utter any cruel speech. One should never accept a gift from a man 
who is low and vulgar. One should never utter such words as trouble others 
or are inauspicious or are sinful. Wordy arrows can fly from the mouth. 
Pierced by them, the victim grieves day and night. The man of wisdom 
never looses them for they pierce the very vitals of others. A forest, pierced 
with shafts or cut down with the axe, grows again. The man, however, who 
is pierced with words unwisely spoken, becomes the victim of wounds that 
fester and lead to death. Barbed arrows and nalikas and broad-headed shafts 
can be extracted from the body. Arrows of words, however, cannot be 
removed for they lie embedded in the very heart. 


One should not taunt a person that is defective of a limb or who has a 
limb in excess, or one that is without learning, or one who is miserable, or 
one that is ugly or poor, or one that is without strength. One should avoid 
atheism, calumny against the Vedas, censuring the Devas, malice, pride, 
arrogance and harshness. One should not, in wrath, take up the rod of 
chastisement for laying it upon another. Only the son or the pupil, it has 
been said, may be mildly punished, for instruction. 

One should not speak ill of Brahmanas; nor should one point at the stars 
with one’s fingers. If asked, one should not say what the lunation is on a 
particular day. By telling it, one’s life is shortened. Having answered calls 
of nature or having walked on a public road, one should wash one’s feet. 
One should also wash one’s feet before sitting down to recite the Vedas or 
to eat. These are the three things which are regarded as pure and sacred by 
the gods and fit for the Brahmana’s use—that which has no impurity, that 
which has been washed in water, and that which has been well spoken of. 

One should never cook samyava, krisara, mamsa, sashakuli and payasa 
for oneself. Whenever cooked, these should be offered to the Devas. Every 
day one must attend to one’s sacred fire. One should give alms every day. 
One should, restraining speech the while, clean one’s teeth with the neem 
twig. One should never be in bed when the sun is up. If one fails any day to 
be up with the sun, one should perform an expiation. Rising from bed, one 
should first salute one’s parents, and preceptors, or other elders deserving of 
respect. By so doing, one attains to long life. The neem twig should be 
thrown away when done with, and a new one should be used every day. 

One should eat only such food as is not forbidden in the scriptures, and 
abstain from food of every kind on days of the new and full moon. One 
should, with senses restrained, answer calls of nature, facing the north. One 
should not worship the Devas without having first cleaned one’s teeth and 
rinsed one’s mouth. Without worshipping the gods, one should never go to 
meet anyone save one’s guru, or one old in years, or a righteous man, or a 
wise one. 

They that are wise should never see themselves in an unpolished or 
dirty mirror. One should never have sexual congress with an unknown 
woman or with a pregnant one. One should never sleep with the head 
pointing towards the north or the west. One should not lie upon a bed that is 
broken or rickety. One should not sleep on a bed without having examined 
it first with a light. One should not sleep on a bed with anyone beside one. 


One should never sleep in a transverse direction. One should never make a 
compact with atheists or do anything with them. 

One should never drag a seat with one’s foot and then sit on it. 

One should never bathe naked, or at night. An intelligent man should 
never suffer his limbs to be rubbed or pressed after bathing. He should 
never smear lotions upon his body without having first bathed. Having 
bathed, one should never wave one’s cloth in the air to dry it. One should 
never wear wet clothes; never remove from one’s body the garlands of 
flowers one may wear. Nor should one wear such garlands over one’s outer 
garments. 

One should never even talk to a woman during her period. One should 
not answer a call of nature in a field where crops are grown, or in a place 
too near an inhabited village. One should never answer a call of nature in a 
water body of any kind. One should first wash one’s mouth thrice with 
water before eating. Having finished one’s meal, one should wash one’s 
mouth thrice with water, and then twice again. 

One should eat, with face turned eastwards, silently, and without finding 
fault with the food. One should always leave a remnant of the food that is 
set before one. Having finished one’s meal, one should touch fire in one’s 
mind. If one eats with one’s face turned eastwards, one is blessed with 
longevity. By eating facing southwards, one acquires great fame. By eating 
facing the west, one acquires great wealth. By eating with face turned 
northwards, one becomes truthful in speech. 

Having finished one’s meal, one should wash one’s mouth and face with 
water. Similarly, all the limbs, the navel, and the palms of the hands should 
be washed with water. One should never seat oneself upon husk of corn, or 
upon hair, or upon ashes, or bones. One should, on no account, use the 
water that has been used by another to wash or bathe. 

One should always perform the homa for propitiating the Devas, and 
recite the Savitri mantra. One should always eat while seated. One should 
never eat while standing or walking. One should never answer a call of 
nature in a standing posture. One should never answer a call of nature on 
ashes or in a cow-pen. One should wash one’s feet before sitting down to 
one’s meal. One should never sit or lie down to sleep with wet feet. He who 
sits down to his meal after having washed his feet, lives for a hundred 
years. 


One should never touch three things of great energy, without purifying 
oneself—fire, a cow, or a Brahmana. By observing this rule, one acquires 
longevity. One should not, while impure, cast one’s gaze upon three things 
of great energy —the sun, the moon and the stars. 

The life-breaths of a young man travel upwards when an old and 
venerable person comes to his home. He gets them back by standing up and 
properly saluting the guest. Old men should always be saluted. One should 
offer them seats with one’s own hand. After the elder has taken his seat, one 
should sit down oneself and remain with hands joined in reverence. When 
an old man walks along a road, one should always follow him and never 
walk ahead. 

One should never sit on a torn or broken chair. One should throw away 
a broken vessel of white brass, never using it again. One should never eat 
without a piece of upper garment clothing one’s body. One should never 
bathe naked. One should never sleep naked. One should never so much as 
touch the remains on other people’s dishes and plates after they have eaten. 

One should never, while unclean, touch another’s head, for it is said in 
the scriptures that the life-breaths are all concentrated in the head. One 
should never strike another on the head or seize him by the hair. One should 
not join one’s hands together to scratch one’s head. One should not, while 
bathing, repeatedly dip one’s head in water. By doing so, one shortens one’s 
life. He who has bathed by dipping his head in water should not, afterwards, 
apply oil to any part of his body. One should never eat a meal without 
eating some sesame. 

One should never teach the Vedas or any scriptures at a time before 
bathing. Nor should one study while one is not clean. When a storm rises or 
a malodour fills the air, one should never think of the Vedas. Those 
conversant with ancient history recite a gatha sung by Yama in days of old. 
He that runs while unclean or studies the Vedas, indeed, that regenerate 
Brahman who studies the Vedas at forbidden times, loses his Vedas and 
shortens his life. Hence, one should never study the Vedas with attention at 
forbidden hours. 

They who answer a call of nature, with their face towards the sun, or 
towards a blazing fire, or towards a cow, or towards a Brahmana, or on the 
road, become short-lived. At daytime both calls of nature should be 
answered while facing north. At night, those calls should be answered 
facing the south. By doing this, a man does not shorten his life. He that 


wishes to live long should never disrespect or insult any of these three, 
however weak or emaciated they may appear to be—a Brahmana, a 
Kshatriya and a snake. All three are endowed with virulent poison. The 
snake, if angry, burns up the victim with only a glance of its eyes. The 
Kshatriya also, if angry, consumes the object of his wrath with his tejas as 
soon as he looks at him. The Brahmana, stronger than any of these two, 
destroys not only the object of his anger but his whole race as well, not 
through his eyes alone but even with a thought. The man of wisdom should, 
therefore, tend to these three with care. 

One should never engage in any disputation with one’s preceptor. O 
Yudhishtira, if the guru becomes angry, he should always be pacified by 
every honourable means. Even if the guru happens to be entirely wrong, 
one should still follow and honour him. Without doubt, calumny against the 
preceptor always consumes the lives of those that utter them. 

A man should always answer a call of nature in a place at some remove 
from his home. He should wash his feet at a distance from his home, and 
also always throw away the remnants of his food at a remove from his 
home. Truly, he who desires his own good should do all these. 

One should not wear garlands of red flowers. They who are possessed 
of wisdom should wear garlands of flowers that are white in hue. Rejecting 
the lotus and the lily, O you of great might, one may wear on one’s head, 
however, a flower that is red, even if it be a water bloom. A garland of gold 
can never become impure. After one has bathed, O king, one should use 
perfumes mixed with water. One should never wear one’s upper garment to 
cover the lower limbs or the lower garments to cover the upper ones. Nor 
should one wear clothes worn by another. One should not, again, wear a 
piece of cloth that has not its proper border. When one goes to bed, O king, 
one should wear a different cloth. When making a journey also, one should 
wear a different cloth. So also, when worshipping the gods, one should 
wear a different cloth. 

The man of intelligence should smear his limbs with unguents made of 
priyangu, chandana, bilwa, tagara and kesara. In observing a fast, one 
should first purify oneself by bathing, and adorn one’s person with 
ornaments and lotions. One should always abstain from sexual congress on 
days of the full moon and the new moon. 

One should never, O monarch, eat off the same plate with another even 
if that other happens to be of one’s own or equal rank. Nor should one ever 


eat any food that has been prepared by a woman in her period. One should 
never eat any food, or drink any drink whose essence has been removed. 
Nor should one eat anything without giving a portion to persons that 
wistfully gaze at the food that one has. 

The man of intelligence should never sit close to one that is impure. Nor 
should one sit close to persons that are of burning piety. All food that is 
forbidden in ritual acts should never be eaten, even on other occasions. The 
fruits of the sacred fig tree and the banyan, as also the leaves of the sun 
hemp, and the fruits of the athi tree should never be eaten by one who is 
desirous of his own good. The flesh of goats, of cows and the peacock, 
should never be eaten. One should also abstain from dried flesh and all meat 
that is stale. The man of intelligence should never eat any salt, by taking it 
up with his hand. Nor should he eat curds and the flour of fried barley at 
night. One should abstain from the meat of animals not slain in sacrifices. 

One should, with concentrated attention, eat once in the morning and 
once in the evening, abstaining entirely from all food during the interim. 
One should never eat any food in which one finds a hair. Nor should one eat 
at the sraddha of an enemy. One should eat silently; one should never eat 
without covering one’s person with an upper garment, and without sitting 
down. One should never eat any food placing it on the bare ground. One 
should never eat except in a sitting posture. One should never make any 
noise while eating. 

The man of intelligence should first offer water and then food to anyone 
that has become his guest, and after having served the guest thus, should 
then sit down himself to his meal. He who sits down to dine in a line with 
friends and himself eats any food without giving a portion thereof to his 
friends, is said to eat poison. As for water and payasa and flour of fried 
barley and curds and ghee and honey, one should never, after drinking or 
eating these, offer the leftovers to others. 

One should never, O king of men, eat any food doubtingly. One who 
wishes for food should never drink curd at the end of a meal. After the meal 
is finished, one should wash one’s mouth and face with the right hand only, 
and taking a little water should then dip the toe of one’s right foot in it. 
After washing, he should touch the crown of his head with his right hand. 
With attention, he should next touch fire. The man who knows how to 
observe all these injunctions with care, succeeds in attaining to the foremost 
position among his kinsmen. 


After finishing his meal, a man should wash his nose and eyes and ears 
and navel and both hands with water. He should not, however, keep his 
hands wet but dry them. Between the tip and the root of the thumb is 
situated the sacred tirtha known as the Brahma-tirtha. On the back of the 
little finger, it is said, is the Deva-tirtha. The intervening space between the 
thumb and the forefinger, O Bhaarata, should be used for discharging the 
Pitri rites, after touching water according to the law. 

One should never speak ill of others. Nor should one ever utter anything 
that is at all disagreeable. The man that desires his own good should never 
seek to provoke the wrath of others upon himself. One should never seek to 
converse with a person who has fallen away from his varna. The very sight 
of such a person should be avoided. One should never come into any 
manner of contact with a fallen person. By avoiding such contact, one 
succeeds in attaining to a long life. One should never indulge in sexual 
congress during the day. Nor should one have congress with a virgin, or 
with a prostitute or with a barren woman. One should never have congress 
with a woman who has not bathed after her period. By avoiding these, a 
man attains to a long life. 

After washing the several limbs directed in religious rituals, one should 
wash one’s mouth thrice, and again twice more. By doing this, one becomes 
pure and fit to perform sacred karmas. The several organs of sense should 
each be washed once, and water should also be sprinkled over the whole 
body. Having done this, one should perform the worship of the Pitris and 
the Devas, according to the laws of the Vedas. 

Listen to me, O you of Kuru’s race, as I tell you what purification is 
cleansing and beneficial for a Brahmana. Before beginning to eat and after 
finishing the meal, and in all karmas requiring purification, the Brahmana 
should perform the achamana with water placed on the Brahma-tirtha. After 
ejecting any residual matter from the throat and spitting, he should wash his 
mouth before he can become pure. 

A kinsman who happens to be old, or a friend who happens to be poor, 
should be kept in his house and his comforts looked after as if he were a 
member of the family. By doing this, one succeeds in acquiring both fame 
and long life. The establishment of pigeons in one’s house is fraught with 
blessedness, as also of parrots both male and female. If female, these taken 
to one’s home will dispel misfortune. The same is the case with 
cockroaches. If fireflies, vultures, wood-pigeons or bees enter a house or 


seek residence in it, karmas of propitiating the Devas should be performed. 
These are creatures of evil omen, as also ospreys. 

One should never divulge the secrets of high-souled men, Mahatmans; 
one should never have sexual congress with a forbidden woman. Nor 
should one ever have such congress with the wife of a king or with women 
that are the friends of queens. One should never become intimate with 
physicians, or with children, or with persons that are old, or with one’s 
servants, O Yudhishtira. One should always provide for friends, for 
Brahmanas, and for such as seek one’s protection. By doing this, O king, 
one acquires a long life. 

The man of wisdom should live in a house that has been constructed 
with the help of a Brahmana and a skilled artisan, if indeed, O king, the 
man desires his own welfare. One should not sleep during the evening 
twilight. Nor should one study at such an hour, any branch of knowledge. 
The man of intelligence should never eat at that sandhya. By avoiding these 
one acquires a long life. One should never perform any ritual in honour of 
the Pitris at night. One should not adorn one’s person after finishing one’s 
meal. One should bathe at night, if one desires one’s own advancement. 
One should also, O Bhaarata, always abstain from the flour of fried barley 
at night. 

The leftovers of food and drink, as also the flowers with which one has 
worshipped the deities, should never be used again. Inviting a guest at 
night, one should never, with excessive courtesy, force him to eat to the 
point of being full. Nor should one eat oneself to the point of fullness, at 
night. One should not kill a bird to eat, especially after having fed it. 

A wise man should marry a virgin born into a high family, endowed 
with auspicious indications, and of full age. Begetting children upon her 
and thus perpetuating his race, he should make his sons over to a good 
preceptor in order to acquire general knowledge, O Bhaarata, as also a 
knowledge of the special customs of the family. The daughters that one may 
beget should be bestowed upon youths of respectable families, that are 
again possessed of intelligence. Sons should also be established and a 
portion of the family inheritance given to them, O Bhaarata, as their 
provision. 

One should bathe by dipping one’s head in water before one sits down 
to perform any sraddha in honour of the Pitris or the Devas. One should 
never perform a sraddha under the constellation of one’s birth. No sraddha 


should be performed under any of the Bhadrapadas, prior or later, nor under 
the Krittika nakshatra, O Bhaarata. The sraddha should never be performed 
under any of the nakshatras that are regarded as fierce, such as Aslesha, or 
any of those that, upon calculation, seem to be hostile. Indeed, in this 
respect, all the nakshatras should be avoided which are forbidden in 
treatises on astrology. 

One should sit facing either the east or the north while being shaved by 
a barber. By so doing, O great king, one acquires a long life. One should 
never indulge in either the criticism of others or self-reproach, for it is said 
that all calumny is sinful, whether of others or of oneself. 

In marriage, one should avoid a woman that is without any limb. Even a 
virgin, if such, must also be avoided. A woman of the same pravara should 
also be avoided; as also one that has any bodily defect; as also one that has 
been born in the vamsa to which one’s mother belongs. 

A wise man should never have sexual congress with a woman who is 
old, or one that has abandoned grihasta for vanaprastha, or one that is true 
to her husband, or one whose organs of generation are not healthy or well- 
formed. You must not to marry a woman of a yellow complexion, or one 
afflicted with leprosy, or one born into a family in which there has been 
epilepsy, or one that is low in birth and habits, or one that is born in a 
family in which the disease called switra, leprosy, has ever appeared, or one 
belonging by birth to a vamsa in which there are early deaths. 

Only that young woman who is blessed with auspicious limbs and 
indications on her person, and who is accomplished in diverse ways, who is 
agreeable and good-looking, should you marry. One should marry, O 
Yudhishtira, into a family that is higher or at least equal to one’s own. He 
who desires his own prosperity should never marry a woman of an inferior 
varna or one who has fallen away from the order of her birth. 

Carefully lighting the fire, one should accomplish all those karmas 
which have been ordained and declared in the Vedas or by the Brahmanas. 
One should never seek to injure women. Wives should always be protected. 
Malice always shortens life. Hence, one should always abstain from 
cherishing malice. Sleep during the day shortens life. To sleep after the sun 
has risen shortens life. They who sleep at any of the twilights, or at nightfall 
or who go to sleep in a state of impurity, have their lives shortened. 
Adultery always shortens life. One should not remain without bathing after 
being shaved. 


One should, O Bhaarata, scrupulously abstain from studying or reciting 
the Vedas, and eating, and bathing, at eventide. When the evening sandhya 
comes, one should collect one’s senses for dhyana, meditation, in stillness. 
One should, O king, bathe and then worship the Brahmanas. Indeed, one 
should bathe before worshipping the Devas and reverentially saluting the 
guru. One should never go to a sacrifice unless invited. Indeed, one may go 
there without an invitation if one wishes merely to see how the sacrifice is 
conducted. If one goes to a sacrifice for any other purpose without an 
invitation and if one does not, on that account, receive proper worship from 
the sacrificer, one’s life is shortened. 

One should never go alone on a journey to foreign parts. Nor should one 
ever travel alone anywhere at night. Before evening comes, one should 
return to one’s home and remain within. 

One should always obey the commands of one’s mother and father and 
preceptor, without at all judging whether those commands are beneficial or 
otherwise. One should attend with great care to the Vedas and to the science 
of arms. Do then, O king, as carefully attend to riding an elephant, a horse 
and a war-chariot. The man who attends to these with care succeeds in 
attaining to happiness. Such a king succeeds in becoming unconquerable by 
his enemies, and holds sway over his servants and kinsmen without any of 
them being able to have the better of him. The king that attains to such a 
position and that carefully attends to the dharma of protecting his subjects, 
never has to incur any loss. 

You should acquire, O Rajan, the science of reasoning, as also the 
science of words, the science of the Gandharvas, and the four and sixty 
branches of knowledge known by the name kala, the arts. Every day hear 
the Puranas and the Itihasas and all the other sacred lore that exists, as also 
the life-stories of all great Mahatmans. 

When your wife has her period, you should never have congress with 
her, nor even summon her for conversation. The man endowed with 
wisdom may accept her companionship on the fourth day after her period 
ends and she has the bath of purification. If one indulges in congress on the 
fifth day from the first appearance of the time of fertility, one begets a 
daughter. By indulging in congress on the sixth day, one has a son. The man 
of wisdom should, in the matter of sexual congress, know this rule about 
odd and even days. 


Kinsmen and relatives by marriage and friends should all be treated 
with respect. One should, according to the best of one’s power, adore the 
gods with yagnas, giving away different kinds of offerings as sacrificial 
dakshina. After the time ordained for grihastasrama, the domestic life, has 
passed, one should, O king, enter the life of a vanaprastha, a forest recluse. 

I have thus told you all the indications, in brief, of men who succeed in 
living long. What remains untold you should hear from the mouths of men 
well-versed in the three Vedas, O Yudhishtira. You should know that 
pravritti, conduct, is the root of prosperity. Conduct is the enhancer of fame. 
It is vyavahara that prolongs life. It is conduct that destroys all evils. 
Vyavahara has been said to be superior to all the branches of knowledge. It 
is conduct that begets dharma, and it is righteousness that lengthens life. 

Conduct is bestows kirti, fame, ayu, long life, and swarga, heaven. 
Vyavahara is the most efficacious rite of propitiating the deities to have 
auspiciousness of every kind. The Self-born Brahma himself has said that 
one should show compassion to all orders of men.’” 


CANTO 105 


¢ mae udhishtira says, “Tell me, O greatest of the Bharatas, how the 
eldest brother should behave towards his younger brothers and 
how the younger brothers towards their eldest brother.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Do you, O son, always behave towards your younger 
brothers as their eldest brother should. You are always the eldest of all these 
your brothers. That high conduct which a guru should always adopt towards 
his sishyas should you adopt towards your younger brothers. If the 
preceptor is without wisdom, the disciple cannot possibly treat him with 
respect. If the guru is possessed of purity and nobility of conduct, the 
disciple also attains naturally to conduct of the same kind, O Bhaarata. The 
eldest brother should at times be blind to the actions of his younger 
brothers, and, though in fact possessed of wisdom, should at times behave 
as if he does not understand their actions. If the younger brothers be guilty 
of any transgression, the eldest brother should correct them through indirect 
ways and means. 

If there be understanding and love among brothers and if the eldest 
brother seeks to correct his younger brothers by direct methods or harshly, 
their enemies, O son of Kunti, who are full of envy and sorrow at the sight 
of the love between the brothers will surely seek to bring discord among 
them, to cause dissension among the brothers and disunite them. 

It is the eldest brother that enhances the prosperity of the family or 
destroys it entirely. If the eldest brother is without sense and wisdom, and 
evil in his ways, he brings about the destruction of the whole family. The 
eldest brother who injures his younger brothers ceases to be regarded as the 


eldest and forfeits his share in the family property and deserves to be 
checked by the king. That man who acts deceitfully, has, without doubt, to 
go to regions of grief and every kind of evil. The birth of such a person 
serves no useful purpose even as the flowers of the cane. 

That family into which a sinful soul is born falls subject to every evil. 
Such a one brings infamy, and all the punya of the family disappears. Such 
among brothers as are wedded to evil forfeit their shares of the family 
property. In such cases, the eldest brother may appropriate the whole 
Yautuka property without giving any portion thereof to his younger 
wayward brothers. If the eldest brother makes any acquisition, without 
using the paternal property and by going to a distant place, he may keep for 
himself such acquisitions, without giving any share to his younger brothers. 

If unseparated brothers wish, during the lifetime of their father, to 
divide the family property, the father should give equal shares to all his 
sons. If the eldest brother happens to be sinful and undistinguished by 
accomplishments of any kind, he may be disregarded by his younger 
brothers. If the wife of the younger brother happens to be sinful, her or his 
good must still be looked after. 

Those who know the efficacy of righteousness say that dharma is the 
highest good. The Upadhyaya is superior to even ten acharyas. The father is 
equal to ten Upadhyayas. The mother is equal to ten fathers or even the 
whole world. There is no elder equal to the mother. Verily, she transcends 
all in respect of the reverence due to her. It is for this reason that wise men 
regard the mother as deserving of so much adoration. 

After the father has ceased to draw breath, O Bhaarata, the eldest 
brother should be regarded as the father. It is the eldest brother who should 
assign to the younger ones their means of support, and protect and cherish 
them. All the younger brothers should bow to him and obey his authority. 
Indeed, they should live in dependence upon him even as they did upon 
their father while he was alive. So far as the body is concerned, O Bhaarata, 
it is the father and the mother who create it. That birth, however, which the 
acharya ordains, is regarded as the true birth, which is, besides, unfading 
and immortal. 

The eldest sister is like the mother. The wife of the eldest brother is also 
like the mother, for the younger brother, in infancy, receives nurture from 
her.” 


CANTO 106 


: move udhishtira says, “The disposition is seen, Pitamaha, in all the 

varnas of men, including the very Mlecchas, to keep fasts. I do 

not however know the reason for this. I have heard that only Brahmanas 

and Kshatriyas should observe the upavasa vrata. How, then, are the other 

orders to be taken as earning any punya by fasting? How have vratas and 
fasts come to be observed by those of all castes? 

What is that end to which one devoted to the observance of fasts 
attains? It has been said that fasts are most meritorious and that fasts are a 
great refuge. O Lord of men, what is the fruit earned in this world by the 
man that fasts? 

By what means is one cleansed of one’s sins? By what means does one 
acquire dharma? By what means, O best of the Bharatas, does one succeed 
in acquiring punya and swarga? 

After having kept a fast, what should one give away, Tell me, what 
those dharmas are by which one may obtain the things that lead to 
happiness?’ 

To Kunti’s son by the god Dharma, Yudhishtira who knows every 
dharma and who asked him these, Santanu’s son, Bhishma who also knows 
dharma deeply, replies, ‘In former days I heard of these high merits as 
attaching to the observance of fasts according to the shastras. O Bhaarata, I 
asked Rishi Angiras of great punya the very questions which you have 
asked me today. Questioned by me, the illustrious Rishi, who sprang from 
the sacrificial fire, answered me thus in respect of the observance of 
upavasas according to the law.’ 


Angiras said, “As regards Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, fasts for three 
nights at a stretch are ordained for them, O Kurunandana. Indeed, a fast for 
one night, for two nights, and for three nights, they may keep. They should 
never fast beyond three nights. As regards Vaisyas and Sudras, the duration 
of fasts prescribed for them is a single night. If, from folly, they observe 
fasts for two or three nights, such fasts never lead to their advancement. For 
Vaisyas and Sudras, also, fasts for two nights have been ordained, but on 
certain special occasions. Fasts for three nights, however, have not been laid 
down for them by those who know the laws regarding this matter. 

That man of wisdom who, with his senses and soul under control, O 
Bhaarata, fasts by abstaining from one of the two meals, on the fifth and the 
sixth days of the moon as also on the day of the full moon, is imbued with 
forgiveness and beauty of person and knowledge of the scriptures. Such a 
man is never childless or poor. 

He who performs sacrifices to worship the Devas on the fifth and sixth 
days of the moon, supersedes all members of his family and succeeds in 
feeding a large number of Brahmanas. He who fasts on the eighth and the 
fourteenth days of the dark fortnight is freed from maladies of every kind 
and possessed of great energy. The man who abstains from one meal every 
day throughout the month of Margasirsha, should, with reverence and 
devotion, feed a number of Brahmanas. By so doing he 1s freed from all his 
sins. Such a man is endued with prosperity, and all kinds of grain become 
his. He becomes invested with tejas. Such a man reaps an abundance of 
harvest from his fields, acquires great wealth and a plenitude of corn. 

The man, O Kaunteya, who passes the whole month of Pausha, 
abstaining every day from one of two meals, gains good fortune, a 
handsome appearance and great fame. He who passes the whole month of 
Magha, abstaining every day from one of the two meals, is born into a high 
family and attains to a position of eminence among his kinsmen. He who 
passes the month of Bhagadaivata, confining himself every day to only one 
meal becomes a favourite with women who, indeed, readily own his sway. 
He who passes the whole of the month of Chaitra, eating just one meal a 
day, is born into a high family and becomes rich in gold, gems and pearls. 
The person, whether man or woman, who passes the month of Vaisakha, 
abstaining from one meal every day, and keeping his or her senses under 
control, attains to a position of eminence among kinsmen. The one, man or 


woman, who passes the month of Jyeshta eating one meal a day, also 
succeeds in attaining to a position of preeminence and gains great wealth. 

He who passes the month of Ashadha confining himself to one meal a 
day and with senses steadily concentrated upon his duties, comes to possess 
much corn, great wealth, and begets many children. He who passes the 
month of Sravana, confining himself to one meal a day, receives the 
honours of Abhisheka wherever he may happen to live, and attains to a 
position of pre-eminence among kinsmen, whom he supports. 

That man who confines himself to only a single meal a day for the entire 
month of Proshthapada, is blessed with great wealth and attains to swelling 
and lasting affluence. The man who passes the month of Aswin, on one 
meal a day, becomes pure in soul and body, an owner of many animals and 
carriages in abundance, and many good children as well. He who passes the 
month of Kartika, confining himself to one meal a day, grows possessed of 
heroism, many wives and great fame. 

I have now told you, O king of men, what the fruits are that men obtain 
by observing fasts for each of the twelve months. Listen now, O king, to 
what the injunctions are in respect of each of the lunar days. 

The man who, abstaining from it every day, takes rice at the expiration 
of every fortnight, acquires a great many kine, a large family and a long 
life. He who observes a fast for three nights every month, and does so for 
twelve years, attains to a position of supremacy among his kinsmen and 
associates, without a rival to contest his claim and without any anxiety 
caused by anyone endeavouring to rise to his height. These vratas that I 
speak of should be observed for two and ten years. Let the inclination be 
manifested towards this. 

That man who eats once in the forenoon and once after evening and 
abstains from drinking or eating anything in the interval, and who observes 
compassion towards all creatures, and pours libations of clarified butter on 
his sacred fire every day, attains to success, O king, in six years. There is no 
doubt about this. Such a man earns the punya that attaches to the 
performance of the Agnishtoma sacrifice. Invested with merit and freed 
from every kind of stain, he attains to the region of the Apsaras that rings 
with the sound of songs and dance, and passes his days in the company of a 
thousand unearthly nymphs of great beauty. He rides a chariot of the colour 
of melted gold and receives high honours in Brahmaloka. After the 


exhaustion of his punya, such a one returns to this earth and attains to pre- 
eminence. 

The man who spends a whole year, confining himself every day to one 
meal, attains to the merit of the Atiratra yagna. He ascends into heaven after 
his death and receives great honours there. Upon the exhaustion of that 
merit, he returns to earth and attains to a position of eminence. 

He who passes one year fasting for three days in succession, and eating 
on every fourth day, and abstaining from doing injury of every kind, 
adheres to truthfulness of speech, and keeps his senses under control, attains 
to the merit of the Vajapeya yagna. Such a one ascends into swarga after his 
death and receives high honour there. 

That man, O son of Kunti, who passes a whole year fasting for five days 
and eating only on the sixth day, acquires the punya of the Aswamedha 
yagna. The chariot he rides is drawn by Chakravakas. Such a man enjoys 
every kind of happiness in heaven for full forty thousand years. 

He who passes a whole year keeping upavasa for seven days and eating 
only every eighth day, acquires the merit of the Gavamaya sacrifice. The 
chariot he rides is drawn by swans and cranes. Such a one enjoys all kinds 
of bliss in swarga for fifty thousand years. 

He who spends a whole year, O king, eating only at intervals of a 
fortnight, acquires the punya of a continuous upavasa of six months. The 
illustrious Angiras himself has declared this. Such a man dwells in swarga 
for sixty thousand years. He is roused every morning from his bed by the 
sweet notes of vinas and vallakis and venus, O king. He who spends a 
whole year drinking only a little water at the expiration of every month, 
acquires the merit of the Viswajita yagna. Such a man rides a chariot drawn 
by lions and tigers. He dwells in heaven for seventy thousand years in the 
enjoyment of every kind of happiness. 

No fast for more than a month, O king of men, has been ordained. Even 
this, son of Pritha, is the law in respect of fasts that has been declared by 
sages who know dharma. That man who, unafflicted by disease and free 
from every malady, keeps a fast, acquires, at every step the merits that 
attach to sacrifices. Such a man ascends into heaven in a chariot drawn by 
swans. Endowed with puissance, he enjoys every kind of happiness in 
swarga for a hundred years. A hundred of the most beautiful Apsaras wait 
upon him and dally with him. He is roused from his bed every morning by 
the sound of the kanchis and the nupuras of those divine nymphs. He rides 


in a chariot drawn by a thousand swans. Dwelling, again, in a realm 
teeming with hundreds of the most beautiful women, he passes his time in 
great joy. 

The man who is desirous of attaining swarga does not care to seek 
strength when he becomes weak, or to cure his wounds when he is 
wounded, or to be treated with healing drugs when he is ill, or to be soothed 
by others when he is angry, or to mitigate, by spending wealth, the sorrows 
caused by poverty. Leaving this world, where he suffers only privations of 
every kind, he flies straight into heaven and rides in rathas adorned with 
gold, his person embellished with ornaments of every kind. There, in the 
midst of hundreds of exquisite Apsaras, and cleansed of every sin, he 
enjoys all kinds of pleasures and happiness. 

Indeed, abstaining from food and enjoyment in this world, he takes 
leave of this body and attains to Swargaloka as the fruit of his tapasya. 
There, freed from all his sins, health and happiness become his and 
whatever wishes arise in his mind are instantly gratified. Such a one rides 
on a celestial chariot of golden complexion, of the refulgence of the 
morning sun, set with pearls and lapis lazuli, resounding with the music of 
vinas and murajas, adorned with banners and lamps, and echoing with the 
tinkling of celestial bells. He enjoys all kinds of ecstasy for as many years 
as there are pores in his body. 

There is no shastra superior to the Vedas. There is no person more 
worthy of reverence than one’s mother. There is no acquisition superior to 
that of dharma, and no penance superior to upavasa, fasting. Just as there is 
nothing more sacred, in heaven or earth, than Brahmanas, there is no 
penance that is superior to the observance of fasts. It was by fasting that the 
Devas attained to swarga. It is through upavasa that the Rishis have attained 
to high spiritual felicity and success. 

Viswamitra passed a thousand celestial years, confining himself every 
day to but one meal, and as the consequence became a Brahmarishi. 
Chyavana and Jamadagni and Vasishta and Gautama and Bhrigu—all these 
greatest Rishis invested with the virtue of forgiveness, attained to swarga 
through upavasa. In former days, Angiras declared this to the great Rishis. 
The man who teaches another the merit of fasting never has to suffer any 
kind of misery. The laws about fasts, in their due order, O son of Kunti, 
have flowed from Maharishi Angiras. The man who daily reads these laws 
or hears them read, is freed from sins of every kind. Not only is such a one 


freed from every sorrow and calamity, but his mind cannot be touched by 
any kind of taint or fault. He succeeds in understanding the tongues of all 
creatures that are other than human, and acquiring eternal fame, becomes 
the foremost of his species.’” 


CANTO 107 


66 Y udhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha Mahtaman, you have discoursed to us 
on the subject of sacrifices, including the merits, in detail, that 
attach to them both here and hereafter. One must, though, remember, that 
the poor cannot perform sacrifices, for these require a large store of all 
kinds of wealth. Indeed, the punya attaching to sacrifices can be acquired 
only by kings and princes, and not by those that are destitute of wealth and 
that live alone and are helpless. Do you tell us, Pitamaha, what the laws are 
in respect of such rites and deeds that are fraught with punya equal to what 
attaches to sacrifices and which, therefore, the impoverished can also 
perform.’ 

Bhishma says, “Listen, O Yudhishtira! Those laws that I have told you 
of, which were first promulgated by Mahamuni Angiras, and which have 
punya for their very soul, are regarded as equal to yagnas for the fruits they 
bestow both here and hereafter. The man who eats one meal in the forenoon 
and one at night, without taking any food or drink between, and who 
observes this practice for six years, abstaining all the while from injuring 
any creature and regularly pouring libations on his sacred fire every day, 
attains, without doubt, to success. Such a man acquires hereafter a chariot 
of the hue of molten gold, and goes to dwell for millions of years in 
Brahmaloka, in the company of Apsaras, a realm ever alive with the blissful 
sounds of music and dance, and which blazes with the effulgence of fire. 

He who spends three years, confining himself every day to one meal 
and abstaining all the while from congress with any woman other than his 
own wife, attains to the merit of the Agnishtoma yagna. Such a man is 


regarded as having performed a sacrifice, with a bounty of gifts in gold, 
which is dear to Vasava himself. By being constantly truthful in speech, 
giving dakshina, revering the Brahmanas, avoiding malice, becoming 
forgiving and self-restrained, and conquering anger, a man attains to the 
highest end. Riding a chariot of the complexion of white clouds, drawn by 
swans, he lives, for millions and millions of years, in the company of 
Apsaras. 

Fasting a whole day and eating only one meal on the next, he who pours 
libations upon his sacred fire for a whole year, and attends every day to his 
sacred fire and rises each morning before the sun does, attains to the punya 
of the Agnishtoma yagna. Such a man acquires a chariot drawn by hamsas 
and kraunchas, swans and cranes. Surrounded by the most delectable 
Apsaras, he dwells in the world of Indra. 

That man who eats only one meal every third day, and pours libations 
every day on his sacred fire for a whole year, he who thus attends to his fire 
every day and wakes from sleep every morning before the sun is up, attains 
to the high punya of the Atiratra yagna. He acquires a chariot drawn by 
peacocks and swans and cranes. Journeying to the realm of the Saptarishis, 
he lives there among Apsaras of untold beauty, for full three padmas of 
years. 

Fasting for three days in succession, he who eats only one meal every 
fourth day, and pours libations every day on his sacred fire, acquires the 
high merit of the Vajapeya yagna. The chariot he acquires is graced by 
supernal Apsaras, who have Indra for their father. Such a man lives in 
Indraloka for millions and millions of years and experiences indescribable 
joy witnessing the sport and dalliance of the king of the Devas. 

Fasting for four days in succession, he who eats only one meal every 
fifth day, and pours libations on the sacred fire every day for a whole year, 
and who lives without greed, telling the truth, worshipping Brahmanas, 
abstaining from every kind of injury, and avoiding malice and sin, acquires 
the punya of the Vajapeya sacrifice. The chariot he rides is made of gold 
and drawn by swans and has the irradiance of many suns rising together. He 
acquires a palatial mansion of pure white. He lives there in great happiness 
for full one and fifty padmas of years. 

Fasting for five days, he who eats on only the sixth day, and pours 
libations on his sacred fire every day for a whole year, and who performs 
three sandhya ablutions during the day to purify himself, and says his 


prayers and does his worship, and who leads a life of brahmacharya, 
divested of malice in his conduct, acquires the merit of the Gomedha yagna. 
He acquires a resplendent chariot of pure gold, with the refulgence of 
blazing fire and drawn by swans and peacocks. He sleeps on the lap of 
Apsaras and is awakened every morning by the melodious tinkling of 
nupuras and kanchis. He leads a life of bliss for ten thousand million years 
and three thousand million besides, and eight and ten padmas and two 
patakas as well. Such a man resides, honoured by all, in Brahmaloka for as 
many years as there are hairs on the bodies of hundreds of bears. 

Fasting for six days, he who eats only one meal every seventh day and 
pours libations on the sacred fire every day, for a full year, keeping mowna 
all the while and the vow of brahmacharya, and abstaining from the use of 
flowers and unguents and honey and meat, attains to the region of the 
Maruts and of Indra. Crowned with the fruition of every desire as it springs 
up in the mind, he is waited upon and adored by Apsaras. He acquires the 
punya of a sacrifice in which an abundance of gold is given away. He 
attains the most transcendent realms, where he lives for countless years in 
the greatest joy. 

He who shows forgiveness to all and fasting for seven days eats on 
every eighth day for a whole year, and, pouring libations every day on the 
sacred fire, adores the Devas regularly, acquires the lofty punya of the 
Paundarika yagna. The ratha he rides is of the colour of the lotus. Without 
doubt, such a man acquires also a great number of perfect Apsaras, all of 
youth and beauty, some that are dark, some with complexions of gold, and 
some that are syamas, blue, whose charms and allurements and demeanour 
are graceful and enjoyable past description. 

He who fasts for eight days and takes only one meal on every ninth day 
for a whole year, and pours libations on the sacred fire daily, acquires the 
great punya of a thousand Aswamedha yagnas. The chariot he rides in 
heaven is as beautiful as a lotus. He always journeys in that vimana, 
accompanied by the daughters of Rudra, himself wearing celestial garlands 
and radiant as the midday sun or the fires of blazing Agni. Attaining to the 
realms of Rudra, he lives there in great rapture for years beyond count. 

He who fasts for nine days and takes only one meal every tenth day for 
a whole year, and pours libations on his sacred fire daily, acquires the high 
merit of a thousand Aswamedha yagnas, and attains to the companionship 
of Brahmanas’ daughters blessed with beauty that fascinates the hearts of 


all creatures on any world. These women of incomparable beauty, some of 
complexions of the white lotus and some of the blue, always keep him in 
joy. He acquires a beautiful vimana, that ranges in exquisite and mystic 
rounds, everywhere, and looks like the cloud Avarta, while it may also may 
be said to resemble an ocean-wave. That vimana resounds with the constant 
tinkling of rows of pearls and other unworldly gemstones, and the 
melodious resonance of conches, and is adorned with columns of crystals 
and diamonds, as also with an altar of the same jewels. He makes all his 
journeys in this vimana, drawn by swans and cranes and lives for millions 
and millions of years in great felicity in swarga. 

He who fasts for ten days and eats only ghrita on every eleventh day for 
a whole year and pours libations on his sacred fire daily, who never, in word 
or thought, covets the companionship of other’s wives and who never utters 
an untruth even for the sake of his mother and father, succeeds in beholding 
Mahadeva of great puissance seated on his bull-drawn ratha. Such a man 
acquires the high merit of a thousand Horse-sacrifices. He sees the vimana 
of the Self-born Brahma himself fly down to bear him away in it. He rides 
in that transplendent craft, with Apsaras of beauty and skills at love 
impossible to remotely describe, their skins like soft blazing gold. Endowed 
himself with the splendour of the yoga-fire, he lives for countless years in a 
celestial mansion in Swargaloka, replete with every rapture. For those 
countless years he experiences the matchless joy of bowing his head in 
reverence to Rudra adored by Devas and Danavas. Such a man daily sees 
Mahadeva Siva with his divine eyes. 

The man who, having fasted for eleven days eats only a little ghee on 
the twelfth, and observes this upavasa for a whole year, succeeds in having 
the merits that attach to all the sacrifices together. The chariot he rides has 
the lustre of a dozen suns. Adorned with pearls and corals and other 
gemstones of incalculable value, embellished with rows of hamsas and 
nagas and mayuras and flocks of chakravakas giving throat to their 
melodious notes, and adorned with great and majestic domes, is the 
unearthly mansion in which he dwells in Brahmaloka. That palace, O king, 
always throngs with glorious men and women who wait upon him in 
service. This is what the most blessed Rishi Angiras, knower of every 
dharma, said. 

That man who, having fasted for twelve days eats a little ghrita on the 
thirteenth, and bears himself in this way for a whole year, succeeds in 


attaining the merits of the Daiva yagna, the Divine Sacrifice. He acquires a 
vimana of the complexion of the newly blown lotus, adorned with pure gold 
and piles of jewellery and gemstones. He travels to the world of the Maruts, 
which teems with Apsaras adorned with every kind of celestial ornament, 
divine nymphs redolent with celestial perfumes, and who possess every 
element of felicity. The number of years he resides in those happy regions is 
beyond count. Soothed with the music and the melodious voices of 
Gandharvas and the rhythms of drums and panavas, he is constantly 
gladdened by the Apsaras of transcendent beauty and gifts. 

The man who, having fasted for thirteen days, eats a little ghrita on the 
fourteenth, and bears himself in this way for a full year, obtains the merits 
of the Mahamedha yagna. Apsaras of even more indescribable beauty, and 
whose age cannot be guessed for they are for ever young in appearance, 
adorned with every ornament and with armlets of flaming radiance, wait 
upon him with many sky-chariots and follow him on his journeys. He is 
awakened every morning by the voices of swans, the tinkle of nupuras, and 
the most pleasant jingling of kanchis. Verily, he dwells in a most superior 
palace, waited upon by these celestial women, for years as countless as the 
grains of sand on the shores of the Ganga. 

That man who, keeping his senses restrained, fasts for a fortnight and 
takes only one meal on the sixteenth day, and does so for a whole year, 
pouring libations daily on his sacred fire, acquires the high punya that 
attaches to a thousand Rajasuya yagnas. The vimana he rides in is of great 
beauty and is drawn by swans and peacocks, and is, besides, adorned with 
garlands of pearls and the purest gold and graced with bevies of heaven’s 
nymphs decked with ornaments of every kind, and that magical craft, 
celestial and of celestial attributes, has one column and four arches and 
seven altars exceedingly auspicious, with thousands of banners, and is 
awash with the strains of divine music, and embellished with pearls and 
corals and other lambent jewels, and has the brightness of lightning, and is, 
besides, drawn by the most magnificent and unearthly elephants and 
rhinocerii which go as freely through the air as they do over ground. Such a 
man lives in swarga for a thousand yugas. 

The man who, having fasted for fifteen days, takes one meal on the 
sixteenth, and does this for a whole year, acquires the punya attaching to the 
Soma sacrifice. Attaining to swarga, he lives in the company of Soma’s 
daughters. His body fragrant with lotions whose scents are as fragrant as 


those of Soma himself, he acquires the power of transporting himself 
instancly to any place he likes. Seated in his chariot he is waited upon by 
the most beautiful women of pleasing ways, and commands all things of 
enjoyment. He enjoys such happiness for countless years. 

That man who, having fasted for sixteen days, eats a little ghrita on the 
seventeenth day and bears himself in this way for a whole year, pouring 
libations daily on his sacred fire, attains to the regions of Varuna and Indra, 
and Rudra and the Maruts and Usanas and Brahma himself. There he is 
waited upon by celestial women and sees Devarishi Bhurbhuva and grasps 
the very universe in his ken. The daughters of the God of gods gladden him 
there. Those women, of ever-pleasing ways and adorned with every 
gorgeous ornament, can assume two and thirty forms to give him pleasure. 
As long as the sun and the moon move in firmament, so long does that man 
of wisdom dwell in those realms of felicity, living upon the succour of 
amrita. 

The man who, having fasted for seventeen days, eats only one meal on 
the eighteenth, and bears himself in this way for a whole year, succeeds in 
grasping the seven Dwipas of which the universe consists in his ken. While 
journeying in his vimana he is always followed by a large train of other sky- 
chariots, which fly with the most agreeable sound and are full of Apsaras 
ablaze with ornaments and beauty. Enjoying the greatest bliss, the great 
craft in which he goes is also divine and of unearthly grandeur, drawn by 
lions and tigers, and often sounding as deeply as thunderheads. He lives in 
such felicity for a thousand kalpas on rare and sweet amrita. 

That man who, having fasted for eighteen days, eats only one meal on 
the nineteenth, and does this for a full year, also succeeds in grasping within 
his ken all the seven Dwipas of which the universe consists. The realm to 
which he attains is inhabited by diverse tribes of Apsaras, and resounds 
with the melodious voices of Gandharvas. The ratha he rides in is possessed 
of the brightness of the sun. His heart being freed from every anxiety, he is 
waited upon by the foremost of divine women. Decked in celestial garlands, 
and of unearthly handsomeness now, he lives in such joy for millions and 
millions of years. 

The man who, having fasted for nineteen days eats only one meal on 
every twentieth day, and bears himself in this way for a full year, adhering 
all the while to truthfulness of speech and to the observance of other great 
vratas, while also abstaining from meat, leading the life of a Brahmacharin, 


and devoted to the good of all creatures, attains to the vast regions, of 
untold happiness, which belong to the Adityas. While journeying in his own 
vimana, he is followed by a numerous train of sky chariots in which 
Gandharvas and Apsaras ride, all adorned with celestial garlands and 
smeared with unworldly liniments. 

The man who, having fasted for twenty days, takes a single meal on the 
twenty-first day and bears himself in this way for a full year, pouring 
libations daily on his sacred fire, attains to the regions of Usanas and Sakra, 
of the Aswins and the Maruts, and lives there in uninterrupted happiness of 
great measure. Unacquainted with sorrow of any kind, he rides in the 
foremost of vimanas on his cosmic sojourns, and is waited upon by the 
most exquisite Apsaras and, possessed of marvellous power, he sports in 
joy like a god himself. 

The man who, having fasted for one and twenty days, takes a single 
meal on the twenty-second day and bears himself in this way for a full year, 
pouring libations on his sacred fire daily, abstaining from injuring any 
creature, adhering to truthfulness in speech, and freed from malice, attains 
to the regions of the Vasus and grows as lustrous as the sun. Possessed of 
the power of going everywhere at will, amrita his food and drink, and riding 
in the most magnificent vimana, his person decked with unearthly 
ornaments, he dallies in ecstasy in the company of celestial women. 

The man who, having fasted for two and twenty days, eats a single meal 
on the twenty-third day and bears himself in this way for a full year, 
keeping his senses under control, attains to the realms of Vayu, of Usanas, 
and of Rudra. Able to fly anywhere at will and always roving as he pleases, 
he is worshipped by diverse tribes of Apsaras. Riding in his best of vimanas 
and his person decked with divine ornaments, he sports for countless years 
in great felicity in the company of supernal women. 

That man who, having fasted for three and twenty days, eats a little 
ghee on the twenty-fourth day, and bears himself in this way for a full year, 
pouring libations on his sacred fire, dwells for countless years in great 
happiness in the regions of the Adityas, his person decked with celestial 
robes and garlands and divine perfumes and liniments. Riding in a splendid 
chariot made of gold and drawn by swans, he lives in rapture in the 
company of thousands and thousands of Apsaras. 

The man who having fasted for four and twenty days eats a single meal 
on the twenty-fifth, and bears himself thus for a full year, acquires a ratha of 


the foremost sort, full of every enjoyment. He is followed in his journeys by 
a large train of chariots drawn by lions and tigers, which resound as deeply 
as the roar of thunderclouds, and are ridden by celestial women. Himself 
riding in a vimana of great majesty, he dwells in those regions for a 
thousand kalpas, in the company of hundreds of Apsaras, and eating 
ambrosial food and drinking nectarine amrita. 

That man who, having fasted for five and twenty days eats only one 
meal on the twenty-sixth day, and bears himself thus for a full year, keeping 
his senses under control, freed from attachment to things mundane, and 
pouring libations every day on his sacred fire, is worshipped by the 
Apsaras, and attains to the regions of the seven Maruts and of the Vasus. 
When abroad on his celestial journeys, he is followed by a flotilla of 
vimanas of crystal, encrusted with all kinds of gemstones, and ridden by 
Gandharvas and Apsaras who show him every honour. He remains in those 
regions, in enjoyment of such felicity, and blessed with divine energy, for 
two thousand yugas. 

That man who having fasted for six and twenty days eats a single meal 
on the twenty-seventh day and bears himself in this way for a full year, 
pouring libations daily on his sacred fire, acquires great merit and going 
into swarga receives honour from the Devas. Living there, he feeds on 
amrita, freed from thirst of every kind, and enjoying every rapture. His soul 
purified of all dross and journeying in a celestial vimana of glittering 
beauty, he dwells there, O king, bearing himself after the manner of the 
Devarishis and the great Rajarishis. Possessed of immense tejas, he lives 
there in utmost happiness fawned upon by Apsaras of every delight, for 
three thousand yugas and as many kalpas. 

That man who, having fasted for seven and twenty days eats a single 
meal on the twenty-eighth day and bears himself in this way for a full year, 
with soul and senses under perfect control, acquires awesome punya, equal 
to what the Devarishis attain. Owning every manner of enjoyment, and 
endued with terrific tejas, he blazes like the midday sun. Women of the 
most delicate features and radiant complexions, of deep bosoms, tapering 
thighs and full and round hips, all wearing celestial ornaments, all profound 
mistresses of dalliance and love, gladden him with their company while he 
rides in a most delightful vimana brilliant as Surya and furnished with every 
article of enjoyment, for thousands and thousands of kalpas. 


The man, who having fasted for eight and twenty days eats a single 
meal on the twenty-ninth day, and bears himself in this way for a full year, 
adhering all the while to truthfulness of speech, attains to auspicious 
regions of great happiness that are worshipped by Devarishis and 
Rajarishis. The chariot he obtains has the effulgence of the sun and the 
moon; made of pure gold and adorned with every kind of gem, Apsaras and 
Gandharvas ride in it dancing and singing melodiously. His every delight is 
attended to by the women of proud beauty and charms. He has every 
conceivable object of enjoyment, great vigour to enjoy it all, the splendour 
of a blazing fire, the lustre, form and majesty of a god. The regions he 
attains are those of the Vasus and the Maruts, of the Sadhyas and the 
Aswins, of the Rudras and of Brahma himself. 

That man who, having fasted for a full month, takes a single meal on the 
first day of the following month and maintains this for a full year, looking 
upon all things with an equal eye, attains to Brahmaloka. There he quaffs 
amrita. His form magnificent and resplendent, and delightful to all, he 
shines forth with tejas and prosperity like the sun himself of a thousand 
rays. Devoted to yoga and adorned with divine raiment and garlands and 
daubed with divine perfumes and smeared with unearthly lotions and 
pastes, he passes his time in utter bliss, unacquainted with the least sorrow. 
He scintillates in his vimana, attended by divine women as luminous as 
himself. 

Those women, the daughters of the Devarishis and the Rudras, adore 
him with veneration. They assume diverse forms that fascinate and please 
him no end, their speech is mellifluous and sweet in a myriad of ways, and 
they unfailingly gratify the one they wait upon in every way, imaginable 
and beyond imagining. While abroad on his yatras, he goes in a vimana of 
the hue of the azure sky, invisibly, for it is so magical subtle. Behind him fly 
fleets of chariots that look like full moons; before him go those that 
resemble clouds; on his right are red craft; below him are blue ones; and 
above him are those of variegated hue. He is always adored by those that 
wait upon him. Endowed with great wisdom, he lives in the world of 
Brahma for as many years as are measured by the drops of rain that fall in 
course of a thousand years on that part of the earth which is called 
Jambudwipa. Verily, possessed of the brilliance of a Deva, he lives in that 
realm of unalloyed felicity for as many years as the drops of rain that fall 
upon the earth in the monsoon. 


The man who, having fasted for a whole month, eats on the first day of 
the following month, and does so for ten years, attains to the status of a 
Maharishi. He undergoes no change of form when entering Swargaloka to 
reap the rewards of his karma in his life. Verily, even this is the lofty 
condition to which one attains by restraining speech, practising self-denial, 
subjugating anger, sexual appetite, and the desire to eat, pouring libations 
on the sacred fire and regularly worshipping the two twilights. That man 
who purifies himself by the observance of these and similar vratas and 
karmas, and who eats in this way, keeping upavasas, becomes as stainless as 
the ethereal Akasa and blessed with refulgence like that of the sun himself. 
Such a man, O king, ascends into swarga in his own body, enjoys all the 
felicity that is there like a Deva, at his will. 

And I have thus told you, O king of the Bharatas, what the laws are with 
regard to sacrifices, one by one, and how their fruits accrue to him who 
keeps upavasas. Poor men, O son of Pritha, who are unable to perform 
yagnas may, nevertheless, acquire the fruits thereof by fasting. Verily, by 
keeping these fasts, even the poorest man may attain to the highest end, O 
Bharatottama, attending all the while, besides, to the worship of the Devas 
and Brahmanas. I have indeed told you in detail the laws in respect of fasts. 
Do not harbour any doubt that men who keep such upavasas, who are 
heedful and pure and high-souled, that are thus freed from pride and 
contentions of every kind, that are blessed with devout minds and hearts, 
and who pursue their end with steadfastness and fixity of purpose, never 
deviating from their chosen path, will certainly find all the swargas and 
wondrous lokas that I have described.’” 


CANTO 108 


66 Y udhishtira says, ‘Tell me, Pitamaha, of that which is regarded as 
the foremost of all tirthas. Indeed, tell me what tirtha is the most 
auspicious and bestows the greatest purity.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Without doubt, all tirthas are possessed of punya. 
Listen, however, with attention to me as I tell you which the great Tirtha, 
the cleanser, is of men blessed with wisdom. Adhering to eternal Truth, one 
should bathe in the tirtha called Manasa, which is unfathomable for its 
depth, stainless, and entirely pure, and which has Truth for its waters and 
the understanding for its depth. The fruits in the form of purification, which 
one acquires by bathing in that tirtha, are freedom from greed, utmost 
sincerity, truthfulness, and mildness of conduct, compassion, abstention 
from injuring any creature, self-restraint and tranquillity. 

Also, men that are free from attachments, who are divested of pride, 
who transcend all the pairs of opposites—pleasure and pain, praise and 
blame, heat and cold, and all the rest—that have no wives and children, 
houses and lands and gardens, or anything else, who are invested with 
purity, and who subsist upon the alms given to them by others, are regarded 
themselves as tirthas. He who is acquainted with the truths of all things and 
who is free from ego, ahamkara, is said to be the highest tirtha. 

In searching for the indications of purity, your scrutiny should ever be 
directed towards these attributes —so that where these are present, you may 
take purity to be present, and where these are not, purity also should be 
concluded to be absent. Men and women from whose souls the three gunas 
of sattva, rajas and tamas have been washed, they who, regardless of 


outward cleanliness and impurity pursue the ends they have set themselves, 
they who have renounced everything, they who are possessed of 
omniscience and imbued with universal vision, and they who are of pure 
conduct, are regarded as tirthas possessing the power of washing away sins. 

The man whose limbs alone are wet with water is not regarded as one 
that has bathed or is purified. He, on the other hand, is regarded as pure who 
has washed himself with self-denial. Such a man is said to be pure both 
inwardly and outwardly. They who never concern themselves with what is 
past, they who feel no attachment to acquisitions and possessions that are 
present, indeed, they who are free from desire, are said to have the highest 
purity. Knowledge is said to constitute the most especial purity of the body. 
So also freedom from desire, and cheerfulness of heart. Pravritti, purity of 
conduct, constitutes the purity of the mind. 

The purity that one attains by ablutions in sacred waters is regarded as 
inferior, while the purity which arises from knowledge is regarded as the 
best. The ablutions which one performs with a blazing mind in the waters of 
the knowledge of Brahman in the tirtha called Manasa are the true ablutions 
of those that are conversant with Truth. That man who is possessed of true 
purity of conduct and who is always devoted to the preservation of a proper 
attitude towards all, indeed, he who is possessed of pure attributes and merit 
—only he is truly pure. 

These that I have mentioned are said to be the tirthas that inhere to the 
body. Do you listen to me as I tell you what those sacred tirthas are that are 
situated on the earth, this Bhumi. Even as special attributes that inhere to 
the body have been said to be sacred, there are particular places on earth as 
well, and particular waters that are regarded as sacred. By reciting the 
names of the tirthas, by performing ablutions there, and by offering 
oblations to the Pitris in those places, one’s sins are washed away. Men 
whose sins are thus washed attain to swarga when they leave this world. 
From their association with righteous men, through the exceptional efficacy 
of the earth herself in those sacred places and particular waters, there are 
certain portions of this Bhumiloka that have come to be regarded as sacred. 

The tirthas of the mind are distinct from those of the earth. He who 
bathes in both attains to success without the least delay. As strength without 
exertion, or exertion without strength, can never accomplish anything, 
singly, and as these, when combined, can accomplish all things, even so one 
that is endowed with the purity that is conferred by the tirthas in the body as 


also by that which is given by the tirthas on the earth, becomes truly pure 
and attains to absolute success. That purity which is derived from both 
sources is the best.’” 


CANTO 109 


Ne udhishtira says, ‘It befits you, Pitamaha, to tell me what the 
highest, the most beneficial and the most certain fruit are of all 
kinds of fasts in this world.’ 

Bhishma says, “Listen, O king, to what was sung by the Svayambhuva 
himself, and by accomplishing which, without doubt, a man attains to the 
highest happiness. 

The man who fasts on the twelfth day of the moon in the month called 
Margasirsha and worships Krishna as Kesava for the whole day and night, 
attains to the merit of the Aswamedha yagna and is cleansed of all his sins. 
He who, in the same way, fasts on the twelfth day of the moon in the month 
of Pausha and worships Krishna as Narayana, through the whole day and 
night, attains to the merits of the Vajapeya yagna and the highest success. 
He who fasts on the twelfth day of the moon in the month of Magha and 
worships Krishna as Madhava, all day and night, attains to the merits of the 
Rajasuya yagna, and redeems his very vamsa. 

He who fasts on the twelfth day of the moon in the month of Phalguna 
and worships Krishna as Govinda, all day and night, attains to the merit of 
the Atiratra yagna and goes to the realm of Soma. He who fasts on the 
twelfth day of the moon in the month of Chaitra and worships Krishna as 
Vishnu, through the day and night, acquires the punya of the Pundarika 
yagna and attains to Devaloka. By keeping a similar fast on the twelfth day 
of the month of Vaisakha and worshipping Krishna as Madhusudana, all 
day and night, one attains to the punya of the Agnishtoma yagna and gains 
the world of Soma. By fasting on the twelfth lunar day in the month of 


Jyeshta and worshipping Krishna as Trivikrama who covered the universe 
with three steps, one attains to the merits of the Gomedha sacrifice and 
sports with the Apsaras in great ecstasy. 

By fasting on the twelfth day of the moon in the month of Ashada and 
worshipping Krishna as the Vamana who beguiled the Asura king Mahabali, 
one attains to the merits of the Naramedha yagna and dallies in bliss with 
the Apsaras. Observing a fast for the twelfth lunar day of the month of 
Sravana and worshipping Krishna day and night as Sridhara, one attains to 
the merits of the sacrifice called Pancha yagna and acquires a beautiful 
vimana in swarga in which he experiences every rapture. By fasting on the 
twelfth day of the moon in the month of Bhadrapada and worshipping 
Krishna as Hrishikesa through the whole day and the night, one attains to 
the merits of the Sautramani sacrifice and is purified of all sin. By keeping 
Upavasa on the twelfth day of the moon in the month of Aswin and 
worshipping Krishna as Padmanabha, one attains, without doubt, to the 
punya of the sacrifice in which a thousand kine are given away. By 
observing a fast on the twelfth day of the moon in the month of Kartika and 
worshipping Krishna as Damodara, one attains to the combined punya of all 
the sacrifices. 

He who, in this way, adores Krishna for a whole year as Pundarikaksha, 
acquires the power of remembering his past births and wins great wealth in 
gold. Similarly, he who worships Krishna every day as Upendra attains to 
identity with him. After Krishna has been worshipped in this manner, one 
should, at the conclusion of one’s vrata, feed a goodly number of 
Brahmanas or give dakshina to them of ghrita. 

The illustrious Vishnu, that Ancient Being, has himself said that there is 
no fast that possesses punya superior to what attaches to such fasting.’” 


CANTO 110 


V aisampayana said, “Approaching the Kuru Grandsire, venerable in 

years, Bhishma who lies on his bed of arrows, Yudhishtira of great 
wisdom asks him, ‘How, Pitamaha, does one acquire beauty of form and 
prosperity and an agreeable disposition? How does one become possessed 
of dharma, artha and kama? How does one become invested with 
happiness?’ 

Bhishma says, “In the month of Margasirsha, when the moon comes into 
conjunction with the asterism Mula, when his two feet are united with that 
very nakshatra, O king, when Rohini is in his calf, when his knee-joints are 
in Aswini, and his shins are in the two Ashadhas, when Phalguni is his 
anus, and Krittika his waist, when his navel is in Bhadrapada, his eyes in 
Revati, and his back on the Dhanishthas, when Anuradha is his belly, when 
with his two arms he reaches the Visakhas, when his two hands are 
indicated by Hasta, when Punarvasu, O king, is his fingers, Aslesha his 
nails, when Jyeshta is his neck, when Sravana is his ears, and his mouth 
Pushya, when Swati is his teeth and lips, when Satabhisha is his smile and 
Magha his nose, when Mrigasiras is in his eye, and Chitra in his forehead, 
when his head is in Bharani, when Ardra is his hair, he should begin the 
vow called Chandravrata. 

Upon the completion of that vrata, dakshina of ghrita should be given to 
Brahmanas who know the Vedas. As the fruit of that vow, one becomes 
possessed of true gyana. Indeed, with such a vrata a man becomes as full of 
every blessed attribute as the moon himself when he is full.’” 


CANTO 111 


oye udhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha, O you of great wisdom and who 

know all the scriptures, I wish to know those most excellent 
injunctions, the laws through which mortal creatures have to make their 
rounds of rebirth. What is that conduct, by which, O king, men succeed in 
attaining to high swarga, and what is that pravritti by which one sinks into 
naraka? When, abandoning the dead body that is as inert as a piece of wood 
or clod of earth, people journey to the other world, what follows them 
there?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Look, yonder comes the illustrious Brihaspati of great 
intelligence. Do you ask the most blessed one himself. The subject is an 
eternal mystery. None else can adequately explain the matter. There is no 
one as wise or as eloquent as the great Brihaspati, the Devaguru.’ 

While the son of Pritha and the son of Ganga speak with each other, 
there comes to that place from the very firmament, the lustrous Brihaspati 
of stainless soul. Yudhishtira, and all the others, with Dhritarashtra at their 
head, stand up and receive Guru with every proper honour. Verily, 
immaculate is the worship they offer to the preceptor of the Devas. Then 
Dharma’s royal son, Yudhishtira, approaches the lambent Brihaspati and, 
wanting to know the truth, asks him his question.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘O most illustrious one, you are conversant with all 
dharma and all the shastras. Do you tell me, holy Guru, who is the true 
friend of mortal creatures? Is it the father or mother, or son, or preceptor, or 
kinsmen, or relatives, or those called friends, that can be truly known as the 


friend of a mortal? One goes to the next world, leaving one’s dead body that 
is like a piece of wood or a clod of earth. Who is it that follows him there?’ 

Brihaspati says, “One is born alone, O king, and one dies alone; one 
crosses alone the difficulties one meets with, and one alone encounters 
whatever misery falls to one’s lot. One has really no companion in these 
things. The father, the mother, the brother, the son, the preceptor, kinsmen, 
relatives and friends, leaving the dead body as if it were a piece of wood or 
a piece of earth, after having mourned for only a moment, all turn away 
from it and return to their own concerns. Only dharma follows the one thus 
abandoned by them all. Hence, it is plain, that dharma is the only friend and 
that dharma alone should be sought by all. 

One endowed with dharma will attain to that high end which is called 
swarga; if with sin, he goes to hell. Hence, the man of intelligence should 
always seek to acquire religious merit through wealth won by lawful means. 
Piety is the only friend which creatures have in the world hereafter. Let by 
greed, stupefaction, compassion, or fear, one without much knowledge is 
seen to indulge in evil deeds, even for the sake of another, his judgment 
darkened by avarice or lust. Dharma, artha and kama—these three 
constitute the fruit of life. One should acquire these three by being free 
from impropriety and sin.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘I have carefully listened to what you have said, O 
illustrious one, your words fraught with truth, words that are most 
auspicious and beneficial. I wish now to know of the life of the body after 
death. The dead spirit of man becomes subtle, sukshma, and unmanifest. It 
becomes invisible. How is it possible for piety to follow it?’ 

Brihaspati says, ‘Earth, wind, ether, water, light, mind, Yama the king of 
the dead, intellect, the Soul, as also day and night, all together behold as 
witnesses the punya and paapa of all living creatures. With these, dharma 
follows the creature when he dies. When the body becomes bereft of life, 
skin, bones, flesh, the vital seed and blood, O you of great intelligence, 
leave it at the same time. Imbued with punya and paapa, the jiva, after the 
destruction of one body, attains to another. After the attainment by the jiva 
of that body, the presiding deities of the five elements once more see as 
witnesses all his actions good and bad. What else do you wish to hear? If 
invested with righteousness, the jiva enjoys happiness. What other matter, 
pertaining to this or the other world, shall I tell you about?’ 


Yudhishtira says, ‘You have explained, great Guru, how dharma follows 
the jiva. I want to know how the vital seed originates.’ 

Brihaspati says, ‘The food that these deities, O king, who dwell in the 
body — earth, wind, ether, water, light and mind—eat, gratifies them. When 
those five elements become gratified, with the mind numbering the sixth, 
their vital seed is then generated, O Shuddhatman. When an act of union 
takes place between male and female, the vital seed flows out and causes 
conception. This is the answer to your question. What else do you wish to 
hear?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘You have, O illustrious one, said how conception 
takes place. Do you explain how the jiva that takes birth grows by 
becoming possessed of a body.’ 

Brihaspati said, ‘As soon as the jiva enters the retas, the vital seed, he is 
seized by the elements, the Mahabhutas, and the mind. When the jiva is 
disunited from them, he attains to the other end, to death. When he is 
invested with the elements the jiva attains to a corporeal body. The gods 
that preside over those elements witness from within all his actions, good 
and bad. What else do you wish to hear?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Leaving off skin and bone and flesh, and all those six 
elements, in what does the jiva reside, illustrious one, to enjoy and endure 
happiness and sorrow?’ 

Brihaspati said, ‘Invested with all his karma, the jiva quickly enters the 
semen virile, and using the womb and ova of women takes birth in time, O 
Bhaarata. After being born, the jiva receives suffering and death from the 
messengers of Yama. Indeed, dukha and a painful round of rebirths are his 
inheritance. Instilled with life, O king, the jiva in this world, from the 
moment of his birth, enjoys and endures his own previous karma, 
depending upon his punya and paapa, his righteousness and his sins. If the 
jiva, to the best of his power, follows dharma from the day of his birth, he 
enjoys, when reborn, happiness without interruption. If, on the other hand, 
he sins more than he follows dharma, he reaps happiness at first as the 
reward of his good deeds and suffers for his sins after. 

The sinful jiva has to go to the dominions of Yama and suffer great 
torment there; he then takes birth into an intermediate order of being. Listen 
to me as I tell you what the different sins are by committing which the jiva, 
overcome by folly, is forced to be born in different orders of being, as 
declared in the Vedas, the shastras and the sacred Itihasas. Mortals have to 


go into the frightful realms of Yama. In those worlds, O king, there are 
places that are fraught with every merit and that are worthy of being the 
abodes of the very gods. There are, again, places in those lands that are 
worse than those inhabited by beasts. 

Indeed, there are parts of Yamaloka equal to the world of Brahma 
himself in auspiciousness, as there are those which are equally dark and 
fearsome. Creatures, bound by their karma, endure myriad kinds of 
suffering and torture in the hells of Yamaloka. I will tell you what those 
deeds and dispositions are by which a soul finds an end that is full of terror 
and torment. 

If a Brahmana, after having studied the four Vedas, is overcome by folly 
and accepts a gift from a fallen man, he has then to be born into the asinine 
species. He has to live as an ass or a donkey for five and ten years. Casting 
off his asinine form, he has next to be born as an ox, in which state he has to 
live for seven years. Casting off his bovine form, he has next to take birth as 
a Rakshasa of the twice-born kind. Living as a regenerate Rakshasa for 
three months, he then regains his status, in his next birth, of a Brahmana. 

A Brahmana, who officiates at the sacrifice of a fallen person, must be 
born as a vile worm. In this form he must live for five and ten years, O 
Bhaarata. Freed from the condition of being a worm, be next takes birth as 
an ass, a mule or a donkey. Thus he must spend five years, and then as a 
pig, for as many years. After that, he is born as a cock, and living for five 
years in that form, he is born as a jackal and lives for as many years in that 
state. He has next to take birth as a dog, and living thus for a year, he 
regains his human condition. 

The foolish disciple who offends his preceptor by doing any injury to 
him, has certainly to undergo three transformations in this world. Such a 
man, O monarch, has first to become a dog. He then becomes a beast of 
prey, and then a donkey. Leaving his asinine form, he has to wander for 
some while in great affliction as a Pisacha, a spirit. After the end of that 
existence, he is born a Brahmana. That sinful disciple who even in thought 
commits adultery with the wife of his preceptor, has to undergo many fierce 
births and shapes in this world. First, he lives as a dog for three years. 
Casting off the canine form when death comes, he is born as a worm or 
some vile vermin. In this form he lives for a year. Leaving that form he 
succeeds in regaining his human condition as a Brahmana. 


If, without reason, the guru kills his sishya who is like a son to him, he 
has to be born as a beast of prey. That son who disregards his father and 
mother, O king, has to take birth as a mule or a donkey, and live like that for 
ten years. After that he will be born as a crocodile, in which form he must 
live for a year. After this he regains a human form. 

That son with whom his parents become angry has to be born as a 
donkey, live that life for ten months. He is next born as a dog and remains 
one for fourteen months. He is then born as a cat and after living as a cat for 
seven months he is born as a man again. 

He who speaks ill of his parents takes birth as a sarika. If a son strike 
his parents, O king, he is born a tortoise. Living as a tortoise for ten years, 
he is next born as a porcupine. After that he becomes a snake, and living for 
six months in that form he regains the condition of humanity. 

That man who, while subsisting upon the food that his royal master 
supplies, acts in a manner injurious to the interests of his master, is born as 
an ape. For ten years he has to live as an ape, and after that for five years as 
a mouse. After that he becomes a dog, and after living as a dog for six 
months, he succeeds in regaining his humanity. 

The man who misappropriates what is entrusted to him for safekeeping 
must undergo a hundred transformations. He at last takes birth as a vile 
worm, and lives as one for full fifteen years. Upon the exhaustion of his 
great sin in this way, he succeeds in being born into the human species 
again. 

That man who harbours malice towards others has, after death, to take 
birth as a sarngaka. The man of evil heart who is guilty of a breach of trust 
has to be born as a fish. Living as a fish for eight years, he is born, O 
Bhaarata, as a deer. Living as a deer for four months, he is next born as a 
goat. After the expiration of a full year, he casts off his goatish body, and 
takes birth as a worm. After that he succeeds in regaining a human form. 

That shameless and insensate man who, through tamas, steals paddy, 
barley, sesame, masha, kulattha, oil-seeds, oats, kalaya, mudga, wheat, 
atasi, and other kinds of grain, is born as a rat or mouse. After leading the 
life for some time he must be born a swine. No sooner is he born a pig than 
he dies of disease. His sin following him, that fool has next to take birth as 
a dog, and spends five years as one, after which he is born again into the 
human race. 


Having committed adultery with another man’s wife, one has to be born 
as a wolf. After that he has to assume the forms of a dog, a jackal and a 
vulture. He has next to be born as a snake and then as a kanka and then as a 
crane, before regaining a human form. That sinner who, stupefied by folly, 
commits adultery with his own brother’s wife, will be born as a male kokila 
and live in that form for a whole year, O king. He who, through lust, 
commits adultery with the wife of a friend, or the wife of his preceptor, or 
the wife of his king, has, after dying, to be born as a hog. He spends five 
years in his porcine form, and is then born a wolf for ten years. For the next 
five years he has to be a cat and then another ten years a rooster. He then 
lives as an ant for three months, and then as a worm for a month. Having 
undergone these transformations, he has next to live again as a vile worm 
for four and ten years. When his sin is exhausted by such expiation, he at 
last regains the human condition again. 

When a wedding is about to take place, or a sacrifice, or a dakshina is 
about to be made, O you of great puissance, the man who offers any 
obstruction, will be born in his next life as an odious worm, and spend 
fifteen years as one, O Bhaarata. When his sin is exhausted by such 
suffering, he regains the human condition. 

Having once bestowed his daughter in marriage upon another, he who 
seeks to give her again to a second husband, has to be born among worms, 
and live thus for thirteen years. Upon his sin being exhausted, he is born as 
aman again. 

He who eats without having performed the rites in honour of the Devas 
or those in honour of the Pitris or without having offered even oblations of 
water to both the Rishis and the Pitris, will be born a crow. Living as a crow 
for a hundred years he next assumes the form of a rooster. His next 
transformation is into a snake, for a month. After this, he regains a human 
form. 

He who disrespects his eldest brother who is even like a father, must, 
after dying, be born as a krauncha, a crane, and live as one for two years. 
Leaving his crane’s body, he is born human again. 

The Sudra who has sexual intercourse with a Brahmana woman, is born 
in his next life as a pig, and no sooner is he born into the porcine order, dies 
of some virulent disease. The wretch has next to be a dog, and only then, 
after his sin is exhausted, returns into the human fold. The Sudra who 
fathers a child upon a Brahmana woman is reborn as a mouse. 


The man who is guilty of ingratitude, O king, goes to Yamaloka, where 
he is subject to dreadful torment by Yamadutas, provoked to fury, the 
messengers, of the grim king of the dead. Iron cudgels, heavy hammers and 
mallets, sharp lances, heated jars, all full of agony, frightful forests of 
sword-blades, heated sands, thorny salmalis—these and many other 
instruments of torture such a man endures in the catacombs of Yama, O 
Bhaarata. After being thus exorcised of his sins in the land of death’s grim 
lord, the ingrate returns to this world and is born among vermin. He lives as 
a rat or a mouse for fifteen years. He has then to enter a human womb and 
suffer abortion a hundred times in succession. After this, he is born into 
some intermediate order between man and inanimate nature. Having 
endured such misery for a great many years, he must be born as a hairless 
tortoise, and spend long years in his shell until his sins are exhausted and he 
is born human again. 

A man who steals curds will be born as a crane. One becomes a monkey 
by stealing raw fish. That man of intelligence who steals honey will be born 
a wretched gadfly. By stealing fruits or roots or rice-cakes one becomes an 
ant. By stealing nishpava one becomes a halagolaka. By stealing payasa one 
becomes a tittiri bird. By stealing sweet cakes, one becomes a screech-owl. 
That man of little intelligence who steals iron has to be born a crow. That 
man of little understanding who steals white brass has to take birth as a bird 
of the harita species. By stealing a vessel of silver, one becomes a pigeon. 
By stealing a vessel of gold, one has to be born as a rodent. By stealing a 
piece of silken cloth, one becomes a krikara. By stealing a piece of cloth 
made of red silk, one becomes a vartaka. By stealing a piece of muslin, one 
becomes a parrot. By stealing a piece of cloth that is of fine texture, one 
becomes a duck after leaving one’s human body. By stealing a piece of 
cloth made of cotton, one becomes a crane. By stealing a piece of cloth 
made of jute, one becomes a sheep in one’s next life. By stealing a piece of 
linen, one has to be born as a hare. By stealing different kinds of colouring 
matter, one must be born as a peacock. By stealing a piece of red cloth, one 
has to take birth as a bird of the jivajivaka species. 

By stealing unguents such as sandalwood paste and perfumes in this 
world, the man of greed, O king, has be born as a mole. Assuming the form 
of a mole, he lives that life for fifteen years. After the exhaustion of his sin 
through such suffering, he regains a human form. By stealing milk, one 


becomes a crane. That man, O king, who through a darkening of his mind, 
steals oil, will be reborn as an animal that lives in oil. 

That wretch who, himself armed, kills an unarmed man, either to have 
his victim’s wealth or from feelings of hostility, will, after leaving his 
human body, be born as a donkey, a form in which he lives for two years 
and then meets a violent death from a sharp weapon. Leaving his donkey’s 
body, he is born as a deer, always filled with anxiety at the thought of all the 
predators that might kill him. Upon the expiration of a year from the time of 
his birth as a deer, he has to yield up his life at the point of a weapon. He 
next takes birth as a fish and dies in consequence of being hauled up in a 
net, after having been a fish for four months. He has next to be born as a 
beast of prey. For ten years he has to live as a predator, and then he is born 
as a leopard, particularly, in which form he has to live for five years. 
Impelled by the change brought about by time, he then casts off that form 
and, his sins having been exhausted, regains the status of a man. 

That man of little understanding who kills a woman has to go to 
Yamaloka to endure diverse kinds of misery and torment. He then has to 
pass through full one and twenty further transformations. After that, O 
monarch, he is born as a rodent. Living as a rat in filth for twenty years, he 
regains his humanhood. 

By stealing food, a man will be born as a bee. Living for many months 
in the company of other bees, his sin is exhausted and he is born human 
again. By stealing paddy, he becomes a cat. That man who steals food 
mixed with sesame cakes becomes a mouse in his next birth, as big or small 
as the amount of food he stole. He bites humans every day and as a 
consequence, garners further sin and travels through a varied round of 
rebirths. 

The fool who steals ghee has to be born as a gallinule. That wicked one 
who steals fish has to take birth as a crow. By stealing salt, one has to be 
born a mocking bird. He who misappropriates what is left with him in trust, 
has to sustain a diminution in the period of his life, and after his death, he is 
born among fishes. Having lived for some time as a fish, he dies and regains 
his human form. However, he is short-lived. 

Indeed, having sinned, O Bhaarata, one has to take birth into an order 
intermediate between that of humankind and vegetables. Such persons of 
little wit are entirely unacquainted with dharma, which has their own hearts 
for its authority. Men who commit diverse sins and then seek to expiate 


them through continuous vows and observances of piety, become instilled 
with both happiness and misery and live in great anxiety of heart. 

Sinners who yield to greed and sin are surely born as Mlecchas that do 
not deserve to be associated with. On the other hand, men who abstain from 
sin all their lives become free from disease of every kind, are endowed with 
beauty of form and possessed of wealth. Women also, when they do as I 
have said, attain to births of the same kind, good and bad. Indeed, they have 
to be born as the mates of the beasts I have spoken of. 

I have told you all the sins that relate to the appropriation of what 
belongs to others. I have discoursed to you very briefly on the subject, O 
Anagha. You will hear again, and further, of these, O Bharata, in connection 
with some other subject. I heard all this, O king, in days of old, from 
Brahma himself, and I asked all about it in a becoming manner, when he 
discoursed upon it in the midst of the Devarishis. I have told you truly and 
in detail about everything that you asked. Having listened to all this, O 
monarch, do you always set your heart on dharma, great righteousness.”” 


CANTO 112 


¢ mae udhishtira says, ‘You have told me, O regenerate one, what the 

end is of adharma and sin. I desire now to hear, O most eloquent 

one, what the end is of dharma. Having committed diverse acts of sin, by 

what karma do men succeed in attaining to an auspicious end in this world? 
By what deeds, also, do men attain to an auspicious end in heaven?’ 

Brihaspati says, ‘By committing sins with a perverted mind, one yields 
to the sway of adharma and as a consequence, finds hell for oneself. That 
man who, having perpetrated sinful deeds through the stupefaction of his 
mind, feels the pangs of repentance and sets his heart on dhyana of God, 
does not have to endure the results of his sins. One is freed from one’s sins 
in direct proportion to which one repents for them. If having committed a 
sin, O king, one confesses and proclaims it in the presence of Brahmanas 
who know dharma, one is quickly cleansed from the obloquy arising from 
one’s sin. One emerges from consequences and disgrace, fully or otherwise, 
like a snake from his diseased slough. By making, with a concentrated 
mind, gifts of various kinds to a Brahmana, and concentrating the mind 
upon one’s chosen god, a sinner purifies himself and attains to an auspicious 
end. 

I shall now tell you what those gifts are, O Yudhishtira, by making 
which a man, even if guilty of having sinned, may be blessed with punya. 
Of all kinds of dana, annadana, that of food, is regarded as the best. One 
who wishes for punya should, with a sincere heart, make gifts of food. Food 
is the life-breath of men. From it all creatures are born. All the worlds of 


living creatures are established upon food. Hence food is lauded. The 
Devas, Rishis, Pitris and men, all give praise to food. 

King Rantideva, in olden days, went to swarga by making gifts of food. 
Food that is good and which has been acquired lawfully, should be given, 
with a cheerful heart, to such Brahmanas as are possessed of Vedic lore. 
That man has never to take birth in an intermediate order, whose food, 
given with a cheerful heart is eaten by a thousand Brahmanas. By feeding 
ten thousand Brahmanas, a man transcends even piety and becomes devoted 
to yoga. 

A Brahmana who knows the Vedas, by giving away food acquired by 
him as alms to another Brahmana devoted to the study of the Vedas, 
succeeds in attaining to felicity here in this world. The Kshatriya who, 
without taking anything that belongs to a Brahmana, protects his subjects 
lawfully, and gives offerings of food, acquired through the exercise of his 
strength, to Brahmanas distinguished in Vedic knowledge, with a 
concentrated heart, succeeds by this dakshina, O Dharmatman, in purifying 
himself of all his sins. The Vaisya who divides the produce of his fields into 
six equal shares and makes a gift of one of those shares to deserving 
Brahmanas, washes himself of all his sins. The Sudra who, earning food 
won by hard labour and at the risk of life itself, makes a gift of it to 
Brahmanas, is exorcised of every sin. 

That man who, by putting forth his physical strength, earns food 
without injuring any creature and makes a gift of it to Brahmanas, avoids all 
sorrows and disasters. By cheerfully making gifts of food acquired by 
lawful means to Brahmanas pre-eminent for their knowledge of Vedic lore, 
a man is washed of all his sins. By treading in the path of the righteous, one 
is freed from all sins. 

By giving such food as produces great energy, a man becomes himself 
filled with great tejas. The path made by the charitable is always trodden by 
those that are gifted with wisdom. They that give offerings of food are 
regarded as givers of life. The punya they acquire through such gifts is 
eternal. Hence, a person should, under all circumstances, seek to earn food 
by lawful means, and having earned it, to always make gifts of it to 
deserving men. 

Food is the great refuge of the world of living creatures. By giving 
annadana, one has never to go into hell. Hence, one should always make 
gifts of food, having earned it by lawful means. The householder should 


always seek to eat after having made a gift of food to a Brahmana. Every 
man should make the day fruitful by giving dana of food. By feeding, O 
king, a thousand Brahmanas, all of whom are conversant with dharma and 
the shastras and the sacred Puranas, a man never has to go into naraka or to 
return to this world to suffer rebirths. Blessed with the fruition of his every 
wish, he enjoys untold bliss hereafter. Possessed of such punya, he lives in 
joy, freed from every anxiety, possessed of beauty of form and great fame 
and endowed with wealth. 

I have thus told you all about the high merit of annadana, the gift of 
food. Even this is the root of all dharma and punya, as also of all dakshina 
and dana, O Bhaarata.’”’ 


CANTO 113 


66 Y udhishtira says, ‘Non-violence, the observance of the Vedic 

ritual, meditation, subjugation of the senses, penances and 

obedient services rendered to the preceptors—which amongst these is 
fraught with the greatest punya?’ 

Brihaspati says, “All these six are fraught with merit. They are different 
doors of piety. I shall speak of them; do you listen, O king of the Bharatas. I 
shall tell you what constitutes the highest good for a human being. 

The man who practises the religion of universal compassion achieves 
his highest good. That man who keeps under control the three faults—lust, 
wrath and greed—and practises the virtue of compassion, attains to success. 
He who, from motives of his own benefit or pleasure, kills other harmless 
creatures, never attains to weal in the next world. That man who regards all 
creatures as his own self, and behaves towards them as towards his own 
self, laying aside the rod of punishment, and completely subjugating his 
wrath, succeeds in attaining to bliss. 

The very Devas, who wish for a fixed abode, cannot discern or fathom 
the glorious path of the man who makes himself the soul of all creatures 
and looks upon them all as his own self, for such a person leaves no trace or 
trail. One should never do to another that which one regards as injurious to 
one self. This, in brief, is the law of dharma. 

By doing otherwise, yielding to desire, one becomes guilty of adharma, 
of sin. In refusals and gifts, in happiness and misery, in the agreeable and 
the disagreeable, one should judge their effects by a reference to one’s own 
self. When one injures another, the injured turns around and injures the 


injurer. Similarly, when one cherishes another, that other cherishes the 
cherisher. One should frame all one’s conduct according to this. I have told 
you what dharma is even in this subtle way.’ 

The guru of the Devas, that Mahabuddhi, having said all this to King 
Yudhishtira the just, flies straight up into the heavens and vanishes.’” 


CANTO 114 


V aisampayana said, “After this, Yudhishtira of mighty tejas, foremost 
of eloquent men, addresses his Grandsire lying on his bed of arrows. 
Yudhishtira says, ‘O you of great intelligence, the Rishis and 
Brahmanas and the Devas, led by the authority of the Vedas, all laud that 
religion which has daya, compassion, for its indication. But, O king, what I 
ask you is this: how does a man who has perpetrated acts of injury to others 
in word, thought and deed save himself from misery?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Brahmavadis, utterers of Brahman, have said that there 
are four kinds of compassion or non-violence. If even one of those four 
kinds is not observed, the dharma of karuna is not observed. As all four- 
footed animals are incapable of standing on three legs, even so the dharma 
of daya, the religion of compassion, cannot stand if any of those four 
divisions or parts is wanting. As the footprints of all other animals are 
engulfed in those of the elephant, even so all other religions are said to be in 
that of compassion. A person becomes guilty of injury, violence, through 
acts, words and thoughts. Discarding it mentally at first, one should next 
discard it in word and deed. He who, according to this law, abstains from 
eating meat, is said to be purified in a threefold way. It is heard that utterers 
of Brahman ascribe to three causes the sin of eating meat. That sin may 
attach to the mind, to words and to deeds. It is for this reason that men of 
wisdom who are endowed with tapasya refrain from eating meat. Listen to 
me, O king, as I tell you what the faults are that attach to the eating of meat. 

The meat of other animals is like the flesh of one’s son. That foolish 
man, his man darkened by tamas, who eats meat is regarded as the vilest of 


human beings. The union of father and mother produces a child. After the 
same manner, the cruelty that a helpless and sinful wretch commits by 
devouring flesh, produces its progeny of repeated rebirths fraught with great 
misery. As the tongue is the cause of the knowledge or sensation of taste, so 
do the scriptures declare that attachment proceeds from taste. 

Well-dressed, cooked with or without salt, meat, in whatever form one 
may consume it, gradually attracts the mind and enslaves it. How will those 
fools that subsist upon meat succeed in listening to the sweet music of the 
drums and cymbals and vinas and flutes of heaven? They who eat meat 
applaud it highly, suffering themselves to be deluded by its taste, which 
they pronounce to be something inconceivable, indescribable and 
unimaginable. Even such praise of meat is full of sin. 

In the olden days, many righteous men, by giving the flesh of their own 
bodies, protected the flesh of other creatures and as a consequence of such 
acts of punya, attained to heaven. In this way, O king, the religion of 
compassion is surrounded by four considerations. And I have thus declared 
to you that dharma which contains all other dharma within it.’” 


CANTO 115 


oe Y udhishtira says, ‘You have said many times that abstention from 
violence, from doing injury, is the highest religion. In sraddhas, 
however, performed in honour of the Pitris, men must, for their own good, 
make offerings of many kinds of meat. You have said so yourself while 
discoursing upon the laws in respect of sraddhas. How can meat be 
procured without killing a living creature? Your declarations seem 
contradictory to me, and a doubt has arisen in my mind about the dharma of 
abstaining from meat. 

What are the sins that one incurs by eating meat, and what are the 
merits that one wins by doing so? What are the sins of him who eats meat 
by himself killing a living creature? What are the merits of him who eats 
the meat of animals killed by others? What is the punya and paapa of him 
who kills a living creature for another? Or of him who eats meat, buying it 
from others? I wish, O sinless one, that you should discourse to me on this 
subject in detail. I want to know clearly about this eternal religion with 
certainty. 

How does one attain to longevity? How does one acquire strength? How 
does one attain to faultlessness of limbs? Indeed, how does one become 
invested with all excellent indications?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Listen to me, O scion of Kuru’s race, what the punya is 
that attaches to abstaining from meat. Listen to me as I declare to you what 
the laws, in truth, are on this matter. Those Mahatmans who desire beauty, 
faultlessness of limbs, long life, understanding, mental and physical 
strength, and memory, must abstain from acts of injury. On this subject, 


innumerable discourses took place between the Rishis. Listen, Yudhishtira, 
to what their opinion was. 

The punya acquired by that man who, with the steadfastness of a vrata, 
adores the Devas every month in horse sacrifices, is equal to his who 
eschews honey and meat. The seven celestial Rishis, the Balakhilyas, and 
those Rishis who drink the rays of the sun, all of fathomless wisdom, laud 
abstention from meat. The Self-born Manu has said that the man who does 
not eat meat, or who does not kill living creatures, or who does not cause 
them to be killed, is a friend of all creatures. Such a man cannot be 
oppressed or wounded by any creature. He enjoys the confidence of all 
living beings. He always enjoys, besides, the approbation and 
commendation of the righteous. 

The Dharmatma Narada has said that the man who wishes to increase 
his own flesh by eating the flesh of other creatures, meets with disaster. 
Brihaspati has said that the man who abstains from honey and meat 
acquires the punya of dana and yagnas and tapasyas. In my estimation, 
these two are equal: he who adores the gods every month with an 
Aswamedha yagna for a hundred years, and he who abstains from honey 
and meat. Because of abstention from meat one comes to be regarded as 
one who always adores the gods in sacrifices, or as one who always makes 
gifts to others, or as one who always undergoes the severest austerities. 

That man who having eaten meat gives it up afterwards, acquires merit 
that is so great that a study of all the Vedas or a performance, O Bhaarata, 
of all the sacrifices, cannot bestow its like. It is exceedingly difficult to give 
up meat after one has become acquainted with its taste. Indeed, it is 
exceedingly difficult for such a person to observe the high vow of 
abstention from meat, a vow that reassures every creature by dispelling all 
fear. That learned person who gives to all living creatures the dakshina of 
complete reassurance comes to be regarded, without doubt, as the giver of 
prana, life-breaths, in this world. 

Even this is the high religion which men of wisdom eulogise. The life- 
breaths of other creatures are as dear to them as those of their own self. 
Men blessed with intelligence and pure souls should always behave towards 
other creatures after the manner in which they would like others to behave 
towards them. It is seen that even those men who possess great learning and 
who seek to achieve the highest good in the form of mukti, are not free 
from the fear of death. What need be said of those innocent and healthy 


creatures imbued with love of life, when they are sought to be slain by 
sinful wretches who live by such slaughter? 

For this reason, O king, know that the renunciation of meat is the 
highest refuge of dharma, of swarga, and of ananda. Non-violence is the 
highest dharma. It is, again, the highest tapasya. It is also the highest truth 
from which all dharma proceeds. Flesh cannot be had from grass or wood 
or stone. Unless a living creature is slain, it cannot be eaten. Hence lies the 
sin in eating flesh. 

The Devas who live upon Swaha, Swadha and Soma, are devoted to 
truth and sincerity. Those men, however, who are for gratifying the 
sensation of taste, should be known as Rakshasas wedded to the guna of 
rajas. That man who abstains from meat is never put in fear, O king, by any 
creature, wherever he may be, in a terrible wilderness or inaccessible 
fastnesses, by day or by night, or during the two twilights, in the open 
squares of towns or in assemblies of men, from upraised weapons or in 
places where there is great fear from wild animals or snakes. All creatures 
seek his protection. He is an object of confidence with all creatures. He 
never causes any anxiety in others, and has never himself to become 
anxious. 

If there was no one who ate flesh, there would then be none to kill living 
creatures. The man who kills living creatures kills them for the sake of the 
one who eats flesh. If flesh were regarded as inedible, there would then be 
no slaughter of living creatures. It is for the sake of the eater that the 
slaughter of living creatures continues in the world. Since, O you of great 
splendour, the life-span of men who butcher living creatures or cause them 
to be butchered is shortened, it is clear that the man who wishes his own 
good should give up meat entirely. 

Savage men, who engage in the slaughter of living creatures, never find 
protectors when they are in need. Such men should always be assailed and 
persecuted even as beasts of prey. 

Through greed or dullness of the mind, for the sake of strength and 
energy, or through association with sinners, the disposition manifests itself 
in men to sin. That man who seeks to increase his own flesh by eating the 
flesh of others has to live in this world in great anxiety, and after dying, 
must be born into mediocre or base races and families. High Rishis devoted 
to the observance of vows and self-restraint have said that abstention from 
meat is worthy of every praise, that it fetches fame and heaven, and is a 


great propitiation by itself. This I heard in days of old, O son of Kunti, from 
Markandeya when that Rishi discoursed on the sins of eating flesh. 

He who eats the flesh of animals that are eager to live but have been 
killed by either himself or others, incurs the sin that attaches to the 
slaughter for his cruelty. He who buys meat kills living creatures through 
his wealth. He who eats meat kills living creatures by eating them. He who 
binds or seizes and actually kills living creatures is the butcher. These are 
the three kinds of slaughter. 

He who does not himself eat meat but approves of a slaughter is stained 
with the sin of slaughter. By abstaining from meat and showing compassion 
to all creatures one renders oneself immune to being harmed by any 
creature, and acquires a long life, perfect health and happiness. The punya 
acquired by a person by abstaining from meat is superior to that of one who 
makes a gift of gold, of kine and of land. One should never eat meat of 
animals not dedicated in sacrifices and that are killed in vain, and that has 
not been offered to the Devas and Pitris in accordance with the laws. There 
is not the slightest doubt that a person by eating such meat goes to hell. 

If one eats meat that has been sanctified from its having been procured 
from animals dedicated in sacrifices and that have been slain for the 
purpose of feeding Brahmanas, one incurs a little fault. By doing otherwise, 
one surely becomes stained with sin. That wretch among men who slays 
living creatures for the sake of those who would eat them, incurs great sin. 
The eater’s paapa is not as great. That beast among men who, following the 
path of religious rites and sacrifices laid down in the Vedas, would yet kill a 
living creature from the lust to eat its flesh, will certainly become a resident 
in hell. 

That man who, having eaten meat later abstains from it, attains to great 
merit by his renunciation. He who arranges for getting hold of meat, he who 
approves of the arrangements for devouring meat, he who kills, he who 
buys or sells, he who cooks, and he who eats, are all regarded as flesh- 
eaters. 

I will now cite another authority, depending upon what was declared by 
the Great Ordainer himself, and established in the Vedas. It has been said 
that the religion which has karma for its indications has been ordained for 
householders, O best of kings, and not for those who wish for mukti. Manu 
himself has said that meat which is sanctified with mantras and properly 
dedicated, according to the laws of the Vedas, in rites performed in honour 


of the Pitris, is pure. All other meat falls under the class of what is obtained 
by despicable slaughter, and leads to hell and infamy. One should never eat, 
Lord of the Bharata vamsa, even like a Rakshasa, any meat that has been 
procured by means not sanctioned by the laws. Indeed, one should never eat 
flesh obtained from meaningless slaughter and that has not been sanctified 
by the Vedas. 

The man who wishes to avoid grief and calamity of every kind should 
abstain from the meat of every living creature. It is heard that in the ancient 
kalpa, those who wanted to attain to auspicious worlds hereafter, performed 
sacrifices with seeds and not animals. Filled with doubts about the propriety 
of eating flesh, the Rishis asked Vasu the ruler of the Chedis to solve them. 
King Vasu, knowing that flesh should not be eaten, answered that it was 
edible, O monarch. From that moment Vasu fell down from the firmament 
into the earth. After this he once more repeated his opinion, and he had to 
sink below the earth into Patala for it. 

Desirous of benefiting all men, the high-souled Agastya, with the help 
of his penances, dedicated, once for all, all wild deer to the Devas. Hence, 
there is no longer any necessity to sanctify those animals to offer them to 
the deities and the Pitris. Served with flesh according to the law, the Pitris 
become gratified. 

Listen to me, king of kings, to what I tell you now, O sinless one. There 
is complete happiness in abstaining from meat. He that undergoes severe 
austerities for a hundred years and he that abstains from meat, are both 
equal in point of merit. This is my firm opinion. 

During the bright fortnight of the month of Karttika in particular, one 
should abstain from both honey and meat. In this, it has been ordained, 
there is great punya. He who abstains from meat for the four months of the 
rains acquires the four valued blessings of achievements, longevity, fame 
and might. He who abstains for the whole month of Karttika from meat of 
every kind, transcends all kinds of woe and lives in perfect happiness. They 
who abstain from flesh for either months or fortnights at a stretch have the 
realm of Brahma ordained for them as the fruit of their abstention from 
cruelty. 

Many kings in ancient days, O son of Pritha, who had identified 
themselves with the souls of all creatures and who were conversant with the 
truths of all things, both Soul and Not-soul, abstained from eating flesh 
either for the whole of the month of Karttika or for all of the lighted 


fortnight in that month. These were Nabhaga and Ambarisha and the high- 
souled Gaya and Ayu and Anaranya and Dilipa and Raghu and Puru and 
Kartavirya and Aniruddha and Nahusha and Yayati and Nriga and 
Vishwaksena and Sasabindu and Yuvanaswa and Sibi, the son of Usinara, 
and Muchukunda and Mandhatri, and Harischandra. 

Do you always speak the truth, and never lie. Truth is an eternal duty. It 
is through Truth that Harischandra roves through heaven like a second 
Chandramas. These other kings also, Syenachitra, O monarch, and Somaka 
and Vrika and Raivata and Rantideva and Vasu and Srinjaya, and 
Dushmanta and Karushma and Rama and Alarka and Nala, and Virupaswa 
and Nimi and Janaka of great intelligence, and Aila and Prithu and 
Virasena, and Ikshvaku, and Sambhu, and Sweta, and Sagara, and Aja and 
Dhundhu and Subahu, and Haryaswa and Kshupa and Bharata, O 
Yudhishtira, did not eat flesh during the month of Karttika and for that 
attained to swarga, and blessed with prosperity, blazed forth with refulgence 
in Brahmaloka, adored by Gandharvas and surrounded by thousands of 
Apsaras of incomparable beauty. 

Those Mahatmans who practise this exceptional dharma of complete 
non-violence surely find heaven for themselves. Righteous men who, from 
their very birth, allow no honey, meat or wine to pass their lips, are 
regarded as Munis. The man who lives the dharma of never eating flesh or 
who recites it for others to hear, will never have to go into hell even if he is 
utterly evil in other ways. 

He, O king, who often reads these laws about abstaining from meat, the 
injunctions that are sacred and adored by the Rishis, or hears them read, is 
cleansed of every sin and attains to great felicity from having every wish 
fulfilled. He also attains to a position of pre-eminence among kinsmen. 
When afflicted with any great trouble, he readily transcends it. When 
obstructed with impediments, he overcomes them with the utmost ease. 
When ill with disease, he is swiftly and marvellously cured, and afflicted 
with sorrow he is liberated from it, again with great ease. Such a man has 
never to be born into the intermediate species of animals or birds. Born 
human always, he attains to great beauty of person. Blessed with great 
prosperity, he acquires great fame as well. 

I have thus told you, O king, all that need be said on the subject of 
abstaining from meat, together with the niyamas with respect to both the 
religion of pravritti and nivritti as framed by the Rishis.’ ” 


CANTO 116 


66 Y udhishtira says, “Alas, cruel men, who, abjuring diverse kinds of 
fine food, covet only flesh, are really like great Rakshasas. They 
do not relish diverse kinds of paistika, cakes, haritas, vegetables, and 
various kinds of succulent and flavoursome handas, stems and roots, as 
much as they do flesh. I am bewildered by this. I must conclude that, this 
being so, there is nothing which can compare with meat. I wish, O mighty 
one, to hear what the merits are of refraining from meat, and the sins that 
attach to the eating of flesh. You are conversant with every duty. Tell me in 
full about this, agreeably to the laws of dharma. Tell me what may be eaten 
and what must not. Tell me, Pitamaha, what is flesh, of what substances it 
is, the merits that attach to not eating it, and what the sins are that attach to 
consuming meat.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘It is even so, O Mahabaho, just as you say. There is 
nothing on earth that is superior to meat in taste. There is nothing that is 
more beneficial than meat to those who are thin, or weak, or afflicted by 
disease, or addicted to sexual congress or exhausted with travel. Flesh 
swiftly increases strength. It produces great growth and energy. There is no 
food, O Parantapa, which is superior to flesh. But, Kurunandana, the merits 
are great that attach to men that abstain from it. Listen to me as I speak of 
this. 

That man who wishes to augment his own body with the flesh of 
another living creature is such that there is none meaner and more cruel 
than he. In this world there is nothing that is dearer to a creature than its 
life. Hence, instead of taking that invaluable possession, one should show 


mercy for the lives of others as one does to one’s own life. Without doubt, 
O son, flesh has its origin in the vital seed. There is great sin that comes 
from eating it, as, indeed, there is equal merit in abstaining from it. 

One does not, however, incur any fault by eating meat sanctified 
according to the laws of the Vedas. The Sruti says that animals were created 
for sacrifice. They who eat meat in any other way are said to follow the 
Rakshasa way. Listen to me as I tell you what the law is that has been laid 
down for the Kshatriyas. They do not incur any fault by eating meat that has 
been acquired through the expenditure of prowess. All deer of the 
wilderness were dedicated to the Devas and the Pitris in the days of old, O 
king, by Agastya. Hence, the hunting of deer is not forbidden or censured. 
There can be no hunting without risk to one’s own life. There is an equal 
risk to the slayer and the slain. Either the animal is killed or it, or another 
wild beast, kills the hunter in the jungle. Hence, O Bhaarata, even 
Rajarishis betake themselves to hunting, and are not tainted by sin. Indeed, 
hunting is not regarded as sinful. 

There is nothing, O joy of the Kurus, that is equal in punya, either here 
or hereafter, to the showing of karuna to all living creatures. The man of 
compassion has no fear. Such harmless men that are blessed with mercy 
have both this world and the next. Sages who know dharma say that the 
dharma is worthy of being called true dharma which has non-violence for 
its indication. 

The man with a pure heart should only do such deeds as have 
compassion for their soul. That flesh which is dedicated in sacrifices 
performed in honour of the Devas and the Pitris is called havi, and is 
worthy of being eaten. The man who is devoted to compassion and who 
behaves with compassion towards others, has no fear to entertain from any 
creature. I have heard that all other creatures abstain from causing any fear 
to such a one. Whether he is wounded or has fallen down, or is weakened, 
in whatever state he may be, all creatures will protect him. Indeed, they do 
so, under all circumstances, and everywhere. Neither snakes nor wild 
animals, neither Pisachas nor Rakshasas, will ever kill him. 

When danger threatens, he is freed from fear who frees others from 
situations of fear. There has never been, nor will there ever be, a gift that is 
superior to the gift of life. It is certain that there is nothing dearer than life 
itself. Death, O Bhaarata, is a calamity, an evil to all creatures. When the 


time comes for death, a trembling of the whole body is seen in every living 
creature. 

Enduring birth in the womb, decrepitude and afflictions of diverse 
kinds, in this samsara, this ocean of the world, living creatures are seen to 
be continually going forth and returning. Every creature is overcome by 
death. While dwelling in the womb, all creatures are immersed in the 
uterine juices, which are alkaline and sour and bitter, and mixed with the 
essences of urine and phlegm and faeces—juices that cause pain and are 
difficult to bear. There in the womb, they have to dwell in a condition of 
utter helplessness and are even repeatedly stirred, tossed and scalded, 
frequently torn and aborted. 

They that are covetous of meat are seen to be repeatedly plunged in 
diverse wombs in such helplessness. Attaining to myriad kinds of birth, 
they are cooked in the uterine hell called Kumbhipaka. They are assailed 
and killed, and in this way have to travel repeatedly. Thus, there is nothing 
so dear to one as one’s life when one comes into this world. Hence, a man 
or woman with a pure soul should be compassionate, indeed, merciful to all 
living creatures. That man, O king, who refrains from every kind of meat 
from his very birth, without doubt, acquires a vast space in swarga. 

They who eat the flesh of animals, who themselves wish to live, are 
themselves eaten by the animals they eat. Since he has eaten me, I shall eat 
him in return—even this, O Bhaarata, is the very character of flesh, mamsa 
as mamsa. The killer is always killed. After him the eater meets with the 
same fate. 

He who shows violence and cruelty toward another in this life becomes 
the victim of similar violence and cruelty from his victim. Whatever one 
does in whatever bodies, one has to suffer the consequences in those bodies. 

Non-violence, abstention from cruelty, is the highest dharma. 
Abstention from cruelty is the highest niyama. Abstention from cruelty is 
the highest dakshina. Abstention from cruelty is the highest tapasya. 
Abstention from cruelty is the highest yagna. Abstention from cruelty is the 
highest urjas. Abstention from cruelty is the highest mitra. Abstention from 
cruelty is the highest sukha. Abstention from cruelty is the highest satya. 
Abstention from cruelty is the highest Sruti. 

Dakshinas given in all sacrifices, ablutions performed in all sacred 
tirthas, and the punya that one acquires from giving all kinds of dana 
enjoined in the scriptures—all these do not measure up to ahimsa in the 


merit that attaches to it. The penances of a man who abjures cruelty are 
inexhaustible. The man that is without violence and harm is regarded as 
always performing sacrifices. The man who renounces violence is the father 
and mother of all creatures. Even these, O Lord of Kuru’s vamsa, are some 
of the merits of non-violence. Altogether, the punyas that attach to it are so 
many that they cannot be exhausted, even if one were to speak of them 
without pause for a hundred years.’” 


CANTO 117 


: eave udhishtira says, ‘Wishing to die or wanting to live, many men 

give up their lives in the great sacrifice of battle. Tell me, 

Pitamaha, what is the end to which these attain? To throw away life in battle 

is fraught with sorrow for men. O you of great wisdom, you know that to 

give up life is difficult for men whether they are in prosperity or adversity, 

in felicity or calamity. I do believe that you are possessed of omniscience. 
Do you tell me the reason why this is so.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘In prosperity or adversity, in happiness or sorrow, living 
creatures, O king of the earth, coming into this world, live after a certain 
manner. Listen to me as I explain the reason to you. The question you have 
asked me is excellent, Yudhishtira. Let me explain to you the old narrative 
of the discourse that took place once between the island-born Rishi Vyasa 
and a crawling worm. 

In the days of old, when that learned Brahmana, Krishna Dwaipayana, 
having identified himself with Brahman, roamed over the world, he saw, on 
a road over which carts used to pass, a worm moving along as fast as it 
could go. The Rishi knew the ways of every creature and the language of 
every animal. Possessed of omniscience, he addressed the worm he saw in 
these words. 

Vyasa said, “O Krimi, you seem to be most alarmed, and to be in great 
haste. Tell me, where do you run, and why are you so afraid?’ 

The worm said, “Hearing the rattle of yonder large cart, I am filled with 
fear. O you of great intelligence, how fierce is the roar it makes. It is almost 
come! Will it not kill me? It is for this that I am flying as fast as I can. As it 


draws near, the sound I hear is of bulls. They are breathing hard under the 
whip of the driver, as they draw their heavy burden. I hear also the many 
voices of the men who drive the bulls. A creature like myself, born a worm, 
cannot bear to hear sounds. It is for this reason that I fly from this situation 
of great fright. Death is felt by all creatures to be fraught with pain. Life is 
an acquisition difficult to have. Hence do I fly in fear, for I do not wish to 
pass from a state of happiness to one of grief.” 

The island-born Vyasa said, “O worm, whence can be your happiness? 
You belong to a lowly order of being. I think death would be fraught with 
happiness to you. Sound, touch, taste, scent and diverse kinds of excellent 
enjoyments are unknown to you, O worm. I think, death will prove a benefit 
to you.” 

The worm said, ‘A living creature, in whatever life or situation he may 
find himself, grows attached to it. Even as a worm I am happy, I think, O 
you of great wisdom. It is for this that I wish to live. In even this condition, 
every object of enjoyment exists for me according to the needs of my body. 
Humans and creatures that spring from immobile objects all have different 
enjoyments. In my past life I was a human. O mighty one, I was a Sudra 
possessed of great wealth. I was not devoted to the Brahmanas. I was cruel, 
vile in conduct, and a usurer. I was harsh in speech. I regard cunning as 
wisdom. I hated all creatures. Taking advantage of pretexts in compacts 
made between myself and others, I was always given to taking away what 
belonged to others. 

Without feeding servants and guests arrived at my house, I used to fill, 
when hungry, my own belly, under the impulse of pride, and was always 
greedy for good food. Greedy I was for wealth; I never dedicated, with faith 
and reverence, any food to the Devas and the Pitris although dharma 
required me to offer food to them. Men that came to me, moved by fear, to 
seek my protection, I cut adrift without giving them any sanctuary. I did not 
extend my protection to those that came to me with prayers to dispel their 
fear. I used to feel unreasonable envy at seeing other people’s wealth, and 
grain, and wives held dear by them, and fine spirits, and goodly mansions. 
Seeing the happiness of others, I was filled with envy and I always wished 
poverty upon them. 

Following only that course which promised to crown my own wishes 
with fruition, I sought to destroy the virtue, wealth and pleasures of others. 
In that past life of mine, I committed diverse deeds largely laden with 


cruelty and other such dark passions. Recollecting those ways, I am filled 
with repentance and grief even as one is filled with grief at the loss of one’s 
dear son. As a result of those actions of mine, I do not now know or enjoy 
the fruits of any good deeds. 

However, I worshipped my old mother and on one occasion, 
worshipped a Brahmana. Endued with high birth and accomplishments, that 
Brahmana, in the course of his wanderings, came to my house once as a 
guest. I received him with reverent hospitality. In consequence of the punya 
attaching to that act, my memory has not forsaken me. I think that just 
because of that hospitality I shall succeed, some day, in regaining 
happiness. 

O you of great tapodhana, you know everything. Do you in kindness tell 
me what will fetch me weal.’”’ 


CANTO 118 


: V yasa said, “It is indeed because of a good deed, O worm, that you, 
though born in this lowly species of being, are not stupefied in 
your mind. That blessing is mine, O Krimi, because of which you are not 
plunged in dark perplexity. Through the power of my tapasya, I am able to 
save a being of sin merely by granting him a sight of my person. There is no 
stronger might than the might that attaches to tapasya. I know, O worm, that 
you have been born in the order of Krimis through the evil karma of your 
past life. If, however, you think of attaining to dharma and punya, you may 
again attain to humanity. 

The Devas, as well as others crowned with ascetic success, enjoy or 
endure the consequence of karma done by them in this kshetra, the field of 
deeds. Amongst men, also, when deeds of punya are performed, they are 
performed from the desire of reward and not otherwise. The very 
accomplishments that one seeks is sought from a desire for the happiness 
they will bring. The creature that is learned or ignorant of a former life, in 
this one, is without speech and understanding and hands and feet, why, is 
really destitute of everything. 

He that becomes a superior Brahmana adores, while alive, the deities of 
the sun and the moon, uttering various sacred mantras. O worm, you shall 
attain to that state of existence. Attaining to that status, you will enjoy all 
the elements transformed into the objects of kama. When you have attained 
to that state, I shall impart to you the very Brahman. Or, if you wish, I can 
send you to any other order of existence.” 


The worm, acquiescing in what Vyasa proposed, did not leave the road, 
but remained on it. Meanwhile, the large cart arrived there. Crushed to pulp 
by the assault of its wheels, the worm gave up his life-breath. Born after 
many more intermediate births, next into the Kshatriya varna through the 
grace of Vyasa of immeasurable puissance, he went to see the great Rishi. 

He had, before becoming a Kshatriya, to pass through diverse orders of 
being, such as a hedgehog and an iguana and a boar and a deer and a bird, 
and a Chandala and a Sudra and a Vaisya. Having given an account of his 
various transformations to the Rishi of truth, and remembering the Rishi’s 
kindness towards him, the worm, now become a Kshatriya, fell with folded 
hands at the Rishi’s feet and touched them with his head. 

The worm said, “My present birth is a high one coveted by all and 
attained by the possession of the ten well-known attributes. Indeed, I who 
was once a worm have attained to the status of a prince. Elephants of great 
strength, decked with golden chains, bear me on their backs. To my chariots 
are yoked Kamboja steeds of high mettle. Grand carriages, yoked to camels 
and mules, bear me on my way. With all my relatives and friends I now eat 
food rich with meat. Worshipped by all, I sleep, O most blessed one, on 
costly beds in delightful rooms into which disagreeable winds cannot blow. 

Towards the small hours of every night, Sutas and Magadhas and other 
encomiasts sing and chant my praises even as the Devas eulogise Indra, 
their king. Through your grace, who are firm in truth and imbued with 
immeasurable tejas, have I who was a worm now become a royal Kshatriya. 
I bow my head to you, O you of great wisdom. Do you command me what I 
should do now. Ordained by the power of your penances has this lofty 
condition become mine.” 

Vyasa said, “I have today been worshipped by you, O king, with many 
reverent words. Transformed into a worm, your memory had become 
clouded. That memory has appeared again. The sin you committed in a past 
life has not yet been destroyed—that sin earned by you while you were a 
Sudra covetous of wealth and cruel in behaviour and hostile to Brahmanas. 
But you were able to obtain a sight of my person. That was a blessing to 
you while you were a worm. And now, again, from your having saluted and 
worshipped me, you shall rise higher, for, from the Kshatriya varna you will 
become a Brahmana, if only you cast off your life on the field of battle for 
the sake of either holy kine or Brahmanas. O Kshatriya, enjoying great 
felicity and performing many sacrifices with copious dakshina, you will 


then attain to swarga, and transformed into eternal Brahman, you will have 
perfect and eternal beatitude. 

Those that are born into the intermediate species of animals become 
Sudras when they evolve. The Sudra rises to the status of the Vaisya; and 
the Vaisya to that of the Kshatriya. The Kshatriya who takes pride in the 
discharge of his svadharma, succeeds in becoming a Brahmana. The 
Brahmana, by following righteous conduct, attains to swarga that is full of 
great bliss.” 


CANTO 119 


B hishma says, ‘Having cast off the condition of being a worm and 

having been born a Kshatriya of great urjas, the one of whom I speak 
remembered his previous transformations, O Rajan, and began to perform 
severe austerities. Seeing that rigorous tapasya of the Kshatriya, who was 
well-conversant with dharma and artha, the island-born Krishna, Vyasa 
foremost of Brahmanas, went to him. 

Vyasa said, “The penances that pertain, O worm, to the Kshatriya 
consist of the protection of all creatures. Do you regard these duties of the 
Kshatriya varna to be the tapasya laid down for you. You shall then attain to 
the status of a Brahmana. Ascertaining what is right and what is wrong, and 
cleansing your soul, do you duly cherish and protect all creatures, 
judiciously gratifying all goodly desires and correcting all that is unholy. Be 
you of pure soul, be you contented and be devoted to the practice of 
dharma. Conducting yourself in this way, you will, when you cast off your 
life, become a Brahmana.” 

Although he had in fact retired into the vana, yet, O Yudhishtira, having 
heard the words of the great Rishi he began to cherish and protect his 
subjects righteously. Soon, O best of kings, that worm, from the due 
discharge of the royal dharma of protecting his subjects, became a 
Brahmana after casting off his Kshatriya body. Beholding him transformed 
into a Brahmana, the celebrated Rishi, the island-born Krishna of great 
wisdom came to him again. 

Vyasa said, “O Dvijottama, best of Brahmanas, O blessed one, be not 
troubled through fear of death. He who lives in dharma attains to an 


honourable birth. He, on the other hand, who sins attains to a low and vile 
birth, O you that know dharma well, and misery becomes his lot, in the 
measure of his sin. Therefore, O worm, do not be troubled through fear of 
death. The only fear you should entertain is about the loss of dharma. Do 
you, therefore, continue to live righteously.” 

The worm said, “Through your grace, O Holy One, I have evolved and 
risen from happy to happier births and lives. Having obtained such 
prosperity as has its roots in righteousness, I think, my sins have been lost.” 

Having, at the command of the holy Rishi, attained to the life of a 
Brahmana that is so difficult to have, the worm caused the earth to be 
marked with a thousand yupastambas, sacrificial stakes. That best of all 
men who know the Brahman then acquired a home in the realm of Brahma 
himself. Indeed, O son of Pritha, in time the worm attained to the highest 
condition, that of the eternal Brahman, as the result of his own actions done 
in obedience to the counsels of Vyasa. Those bulls among Kshatriyas, also, 
who have given up their lives on the field of Kurukshetra, exerting their 
Kshatriya energy the while, have all attained to an auspicious end. 
Therefore, O king, do not mourn on their account.’ 


CANTO 120 


Y udhishtira says, “Which of these three is superior— gyana, tapasya or 
dana? I ask you this, O foremost of righteous men. Tell me this, 
Pitamaha.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Listen to the old story of the conversation between 
Maitreya and the island-born Krishna. Once upon a time, the island-born 
Krishna, O king, while wandering over the world in disguise, went to 
Varanasi and waited upon Maitreya who belonged by birth to a race of 
Munis. Seeing Vyasa arrive, that foremost of Rishis, Maitreya, gave him a 
seat and, after worshipping him with the due rites, fed him with excellent 
food. Having eaten that fare, which was most wholesome and produced 
every Satisfaction, the high-souled Vyasa was quite delighted and as he sat 
there; he even laughed aloud. 

Seeing Krishna Dwaipayana laugh, Maitreya said to him, “Tell me, O 
Dharmatman, why you laugh. You are an ascetic, and able to control your 
emotions. Great joy, it seems, has come over you! Saluting you, and 
worshipping you with head bent, I ask you this— what is the power is of my 
penances and what is the high blessedness that is yours? The karma that I 
do is different from yours. You are already emancipated though still with 
prana. I, however, am not yet free. For all that, I think that there is not much 
difference between you and me. I am, again, distinguished by birth.” 

Vyasa said, “This wonder that filled me arose from a law of the Vedas 
that seems exaggerated, and from its paradox, just for the comprehension of 
the people. The declaration of the Vedas seems to be untrue. But why 
should the Vedas proclaim an untruth? It has been said that there are three 


paths which constitute the best vows of a man—one should never injure, 
one should always tell the truth and one should give dakshina. The Rishis of 
old announced this, after the declarations of the Vedas. These injunctions 
were heard in days of old, and we must certainly follow them even in our 
times. 

Even a small dakshina, given in accordance with the laws laid down, 
produces great fruits. To a thirsty man you have given a little water with a 
sincere heart. Yourself thirsty and hungry, you have, by giving me such 
food, conquered many high regions of grace, O mighty one, even as one 
does through many sacrifices. I am extraordinarily delighted with your most 
sacred gift, as also with your tapasya. Your might is that of dharma; your 
appearance is that of dharma. The fragrance of dharma is about you. I think 
that all your actions are performed in accordance with the laws. 

O son, superior to ablutions in sacred waters, superior to the 
accomplishment of all Vedic vows, is charity. Indeed, O Brahmana, dana is 
more auspicious than all sacred rituals. It is more meritorious than all the 
holy karmas; there can be no question about its superiority. 

All those rituals laid down in the Vedas which you laud do not measure 
up to dana, for giving is invested with the most transcendent punya. 

The path that has been made by men who gave dana is the path trodden 
by the wise. They who give dana are regarded as givers of prana, life- 
breath. The karmas that constitute dharma are established in them. As the 
Vedas when well-studied, as the restraining of the senses, as a life of 
universal renunciation, even so is a gift which is full of great and 
unequalled punya. You, O son, will rise from joy to greater joy from having 
set yourself to the dharma of giving dana. The man of intelligence who 
practises this virtue certainly only rises from joy to greater joy. I have met 
with many direct instances of this. 

Men blessed with prosperity succeed in acquiring wealth, making gifts, 
performing sacrifices, and earning happiness as the result of giving. It is 
always seen, O you of great wisdom, to occur naturally that happiness is 
followed by sorrow, and sorrow by happiness. Men of wisdom have said 
that human beings in this world possess three kinds of conduct. Some are 
righteous, some are sinful, and some are neither righteous nor sinful. The 
conduct of the one who is devoted to Brahman is not regarded either way. 
His sins are never regarded as sins. So also the man who is devoted to the 


duties ordained for him is regarded as neither righteous nor sinful for the 
observance of those duties. 

Men who are devoted to yagna, dana and tapasya are regarded as 
righteous. Those, however, that injure other creatures and are hostile 
towards them, are regarded as sinful. There are some men who appropriate 
what belongs to others. These certainly fall into hell and meet with 
suffering and sorrow. All other karma that men do are indifferent, being 
neither righteous nor sinful. Do you sport and grow and rejoice and make 
gifts and perform sacrifices. Neither men of knowledge nor those endowed 
with penances will then be able to have the better of you.” 


CANTO 121 


B hishma says, ‘Thus addressed by Vyasa, Maitreya, who was a 

worshipper of karma, who had been born into a clan blessed with 
great prosperity, who was wise and possessed of deep learning, said these 
words to him. 

Maitreya said, “O you of great wisdom, without doubt it is as you have 
said. O mighty one, with your leave I wish to say something.” 

Vyasa said, “Whatever you wish to say, O Maitreya, say, O you of great 
wisdom, for I wish to hear you.” 

Maitreya said. “What you said on the subject of dana is faultless and 
pure. Without doubt, your soul has been purified by gyana and tapasya. And 
from your soul being purified, even this is the great advantage I reap from 
it. With my understanding I see that you are endowed with great tapasya. 
And as for me, I succeed in acquiring prosperity only through a sight of 
Mahatmans like you. I think that is due both to your grace and also flows 
from the nature of my own karma. 

Penances, knowledge of the Vedas, and birth into a pure vamsa—these 
are the causes for which a man may be called a Brahmana. When a man has 
these three, then does he come to be called a true Brahmana. If such a 
Brahmana be gratified, the Pitris and the Devas are also gratified. There is 
nothing superior to a Brahmana possessed of Vedic lore. Without the 
Brahmana, all would be darkness. Nothing would be known. The four 
varnas would not exist. The distinction between dharma and adharma, satya 
and asatya would cease. 


From a well-tilled field, an abundant harvest can be reaped. Even so, 
one may reap great merit by making gifts to a Brahmana possessed of 
profound learning. If there were no Brahmanas endowed with Veda gyana 
and good vyavahara, who accept dakshina from the wealthy, the wealth of 
the rich would be useless and in vain. 

The ignorant Brahmana, by eating the food that is offered to him, 
destroys what he eats for it produces no punya to him that gives it. The food 
that is eaten also destroys the eater for the eater incurs sin by eating what is 
offered to him. Only that may be properly called edible which is given away 
to a deserving man; in all other cases, he that takes it makes the giver’s gift 
refuse, and the receiver is ruined for improperly accepting it. 

The Brahmana possessed of learning becomes the conqueror of the food 
that he eats. Having eaten it, he begets other anna of many kinds. The 
ignorant man who eats the food offered to him loses his right to the children 
he begets, for the latter become his whose food enabled the progenitor to 
beget them. Even this is the subtle fault that attaches to those who eat other 
men’s food when they do not have the power to win that food. 

The punya which the giver acquires by making the gift, is equal to what 
the taker acquires by accepting the food. Both the giver and the acceptor 
depend equally upon each other. Even this is what the Rishis have said. 
Where Brahmanas exist, who own Veda gyana and vyavahara, the people 
are enabled to earn the sacred fruits of dakshina and to enjoy them both 
here and hereafter. 

Those men who are of pure lineage, who are entirely devoted to 
tapasya, and who give dakshina and study the Vedas, are regarded as 
worthy of the most reverent worship. It is such good men that have charted 
the path, which treading one does not become deluded. It is those men that 
are the leaders of others into swarga. They are the men who bear on their 
shoulders the burden of sacrifices and live for eternity.” 


CANTO 122 


: ‘RB hishma says, “Thus addressed, the holy Vyasa replied to 
Maitreya, saying “By good fortune, you are endowed with 
knowledge. Through good fortune, your understanding is of this kind. They 
that are good laud all righteous attributes. That personal beauty and youth 
and prosperity do not succeed in overwhelming you is through good 
fortune. This favour done to you is due to the grace of the gods. Listen to 
me as I tell you about what is superior even to dana. 

Whatever shastras and Puranas and other scriptures there are, whatever 
righteous inclinations are found in the world, they have flowed in their due 
order from the Vedas. Following them I laud dana. You praise tapa and 
Vedic lore. Tapasya is sacred. Penance is the means by which one may 
acquire the Vedas and swarga as well. Through tapasya and gyana, one 
attains to the highest fruits, as I have heard. It is by tapasya that one 
destroys one’s sins and all else that is evil. 

With whatever purpose one undertakes penance, one attains one’s goal. 
The same may be said of gyana. Whatever is difficult to accomplish, 
whatever is difficult to conquer, what is difficult to attain, and whatever is 
difficult to cross over, can all be achieved with the help of tapasya. Of all 
things, penance is imbued with great power. 

The man who drinks alcohol, or he that takes by force what belongs to 
others, or he that is guilty of foeticide, or he that violates the bed of his 
guru, succeeds in absolving himself of his sins with tapasya. Indeed, one is 
cleansed of all sins through penance. One possessed of all knowledge and 
thus with true vision, and an ascetic of whatever kind, are equal. One 


should always bow to these two. All men should be worshipped who have 
Veda dhana, the Vedas for their wealth. Similarly, all men endowed with 
tapasya deserve to be worshipped. 

Those who give dana gain happiness hereafter and great prosperity here. 
Righteous men of this world, by making annadana, obtain both this world 
and that of Brahma himself along with many other realms of transcendent 
felicity. Men who are revered by all, themselves revere him who gives dana. 
Men that are honoured everywhere themselves honour him who make gifts. 
Wherever the giver goes, he hears himself praised. He who performs karma 
and he who does not each gets what is proportionate to his deeds and 
omissions. Whether one dwells in the upper regions or in the nether, one 
always attains to those places to which one becomes entitled by one’s 
karma. 

As for yourself, you will certainly have whatever food and drink you 
may wish for, for you are blessed with intelligence, a good birth, Vedic 
knowledge, and compassion. You are possessed of youth, O Maitreya! You 
observe vratas. Be you devoted to dharma. Learn now from me of the 
dharma which you should first follow, the dharma of  grihastas, 
householders. In that house in which the husband is gratified with his wife, 
and the wife with her husband, all auspicious results ensue. As filth is 
washed away from the body with water, as darkness is dispelled by the 
splendour of fire, even so is sin washed away by dana and tapasya. 

Bless you, O Maitreya, let wondrous palaces be yours. I now depart 
hence in peace. Do you bear in mind what I have said, and you shall reap 
many rewards.” 

Maitreya then walked around his illustrious guest in pradakshina and 
bowed his head to him and, joining his hands in reverence, said, “Let 
blessing be on you also, O Holy One!” 


CANTO 123 


Y udhishtira says, ‘O you that know every dharma, I wish to hear, in 
detail, how good and chaste women conduct themselves. Pitamaha, 
discourse to me on this.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Once upon a time, in the celestial realms, a woman 
called Sumana, of Kekaya’s race, addressed Sandili of great tejas, knower 
of the truth of all things, and indeed omniscient, and she said, “With what 
vyavahara, O auspicious devi, by what course of actions, have you 
succeeded in attaining to swarga, rid of every sin? You blaze forth with 
your own lustre like a flame of Agni. You seem to be a daughter of Surya, 
the Lord of stars, come to heaven through your own radiance. 

You wear raiment of pure white, and are joyful and at your ease. Seated 
on that celestial vimana, you shine, O auspicious devi, with your lustre 
increased a thousandfold. You have surely not attained to this world of bliss 
with any inconsiderable tapasya, dana and vratas. I beg you, tell me about 
yourself.” 

Thus questioned lovingly by Sumana, Sandili of sweet smiles, 
addressing her beautiful interrogatrix, answered her thus out of the hearing 
of others. 

“T did not wear yellow robes, nor the bark of trees. I did not shave my 
head; nor did I grow jata, matted locks on my head. It is not through such 
means that I have attained to the condition of a devastri, a woman of 
heaven. 

I never, even forgetfully, spoke in the least disagreeably, let alone evilly, 
to my husband. I was always devoted to the worship of the Devas, the Pitris 


and Brahmanas. Always heedful, I waited upon and served my mother-in- 
law and father-in-law, and I never behaved with deceit, for that was my 
vow. I would never lounge at the door of our home nor did I speak long 
with anybody. I never did anything malicious or otherwise sinful; I never 
laughed aloud; I never did any injury. I never disclosed any secret. Even 
thus did I bear myself always. 

When my husband, having left home upon any work, returned, I always 
served him by giving him a comfortable seat, and worshipped him with 
reverence. I never ate food of any kind without my husband’s knowledge 
and by which he might be displeased. 

Rising at early dawn, I did and caused to be done whatever was needed 
for the sake and weal of relatives and kinsmen. When my husband left 
home to journey to distant parts on work, I remained at home and engaged 
myself in many kinds of auspicious karmas to bless his enterprise. Verily, 
during the absence of my husband I never used kohl, or wore jewellery; I 
never bathed myself thoroughly or wore garlands or used perfumes, fine 
pastes or lotions, or decked my feet with lac, or my person with ornaments. 

When my husband slept peacefully I never awakened him even if 
important business required his attention. I was happy to sit by him lying 
asleep. I never urged my husband to exert himself to earn more wealth to 
support his family and relatives. I always kept his secrets without disclosing 
them to others. I would always keep our home clean. That woman who with 
dhyana adheres to this path of her true dharma, of serving her husband, 
always receives considerable rewards and honours in swarga, even like a 
second Arundhati.” 

The illustrious, righteous and blessed Sandili said this to Sumana on the 
subject of a woman’s dharma towards her husband, and disappeared before 
her eyes. That man, O son of Pandu, who reads this tale on every full moon 
and new moon, succeeds in attaining swarga and enjoying great bliss in the 
Nandana vana.’ 


CANTO 124 


¢ ad udhishtira says, “Which is greater, sama, conciliation, or dana? 
Tell me, Lord of the Bharata vamsa, which of these two is 
superior in efficacy to gain punya?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Some become gratified by conciliation, while others are 
gratified by gifts. Every man, according to his own nature, affects the one or 
the other. Listen to me, O king, as I explain to you the merits of sama, so 
that the most furious creatures may be appeased by it. Hear the ancient tale 
of how a Brahmana, who was seized in the forest by a Rakshasa, was freed 
by conciliation. 

A certain Brahmana, possessed of eloquence and intelligence, fell into 
distress, for he was seized in a lone forest by a Rakshasa who wanted to 
feed on him. The Brahmana, who owned understanding and composure, 
was not in the least agitated. Without allowing himself to be affrighted at 
the sight of that dreadful fiend, he resolved to use conciliation and see what 
effect it had on the Rakshasa. 

The Rakshasa, respectfully greeting the Brahmana, insofar as words 
went, said to him, “You shall escape, but you must tell me for what reason I 
am pale and so lean.” 

Reflecting for a moment, the Brahmana replied in calm, well-spoken 
words. 

The Brahmana said, “Dwelling in a place that is distant from your 
home, moving in a world that is not your own, and deprived of the 
companionship of your friends and kinsmen, you are enjoying vast 
affluence. It is for this that you are so pale and lean. Verily, O Rakshasa, 


your friends, though well-treated by you, are yet not well-disposed towards 
you because of their own vicious natures. It is for this that you are pale and 
lean. 

You are endowed with merit and wisdom and a well-regulated soul. Yet 
it is your lot to see others that are devoid of punya and gyana honoured 
above yourself. It is for this that you are pale and lean. Persons possessed of 
affluence much greater than yours but inferior to you in accomplishments 
do, verily, show scant regard for you. It is for this that you are pale and 
lean. 

Though distressed through want of the means of support, you are led by 
the nobility of your soul to ignore such means as are open to you for your 
sustenance. It is for this that you are pale and lean. In consequence of your 
righteousness, you once deprived yourself to do good to another. This other, 
O righteous Rakshasa, thinks you deceived and vanquished by his superior 
intelligence. It is for this that you are pale and lean. I think that you grieve 
for those who, with souls overwhelmed by lust and wrath, are suffering 
misery in this world. It is for this that you are pale and lean. Though graced 
with the wealth that is wisdom, you are ridiculed by others who are entirely 
unwise. 

Verily, those of evil ways condemn you. It is for this that you are pale 
and lean. Some enemy of yours, with a friendly tongue, came to you and 
behaved at first like a righteous one; and then he has left you, after 
deceiving you wretchedly. It is for this that you are pale and lean. You well 
know the ways of the world’s affairs; you are knowing of all the mysteries. 
You are imbued with ability. Those who know you to be such yet do not 
respect and praise you. It is for this that you are pale and lean. 

Finding yourself amongst evil men banded together in some enterprise, 
you discoursed to them, dispelling their doubts. For all that they did not 
admit your superior merits. It is for this that you are pale and lean. Verily, 
though without artha, Buddhi or the Vedas, you still wish, through your 
strength alone, to accomplish something great. It is for this that you are pale 
and lean. It seems that although you are resolved to undergo severe 
austerities by retiring into the forest, yet your kinsmen are not favourably 
inclined towards this decision. It is for this that you are pale and lean. 

A friend of yours, who owns great wealth and is blessed with virile 
youth and handsome features, covets your wife. It is for this that you are 
pale and lean. Even the most excellent words you speak, in the midst of 


wealthy men, they do not regard as wise or timely. It is for this that you are 
pale and lean. Some dear but witless kinsman of yours, though repeatedly 
instructed in the scriptures, has become angry. You have not succeeded in 
pacifying him. It is for this that you are pale and lean. 

Having first set you to the accomplishment of some object desirable to 
you, someone now seeks to snatch the fruit thereof from your grasp. It is for 
this that you are pale and lean. Indeed, though possessed of excellent 
accomplishments and worshipped by all on that account, you are yet 
regarded by your kinsmen as worshipped for their sake and not for your 
own. It is for this that you are pale and lean. Through shame, you cannot 
give out some purpose in your heart, moved also by the inevitable delay 
that must occur in its achievement. It is for this that you are pale and lean. 

With your intelligence, you want to bring under your influence diverse 
persons with myriad kinds of understandings and inclinations. It is for this 
that you are pale and lean. Without true learning, without courage, and 
without much wealth, you seek such fame as is won by knowledge, prowess 
and gifts. It is for this that you have been pale and lean. You have not been 
able to acquire something upon which you have set your heart for a long 
time. Or that which you seek to do, another seeks to undo. It is for this that 
you are pale and lean. 

Truly, without any fault on your part, you have been cursed by 
somebody. It is for this that you are pale and lean. Without both wealth and 
accomplishments, you seek in vain to dispel the grief of your friends and 
the sorrows of sorrowing men. It is for this that you are pale and lean. 
Beholding righteous men living in grihastasrama, and sinners living in 
vanaprastha, and muktas attached to domesticity and fixed homes, you have 
become pale and lean. 

Your actions with regard to dharma, artha and kama, as also the well- 
timed words that you speak, do not bear fruit. It is for this that you are pale 
and lean. Though endowed with wisdom, yet desirous of living, you live 
with wealth gained from one of evil ways. It is for this that you are pale and 
lean. Watching adharma increase on every side and dharma languishing, 
you are filled with grief. It is for this that you are pale and lean. Urged by 
time, you seek to please all your friends even when they are disputatious 
and ranged on sides opposite to one another. It is for this that you are pale 
and lean. 


Beholding men possessed of Vedic lore engaged in sinful deeds, and 
those of learning unable to keep their senses under control, you are filled 
with grief. It is for this that you are pale and lean.” 

Thus roundly praised, the Rakshasa worshipped that learned Brahmana, 
and making him his friend and bestowing sufficient wealth upon him in 
dakshina, did not eat him but allowed him to leave unharmed.’ 


CANTO 125 


Y udhishtira says, ‘Tell me, Pitamaha, how a poor man, wanting to 

achieve his own good, should bear himself after having acquired the 
condition of humanity and come into this field of karma that is so difficult 
to attain. Tell me also what the best of all gifts is, and what should be given 
under what circumstances. Tell me, O son of Ganga, who are truly 
deserving of honour and worship; it becomes you to discourse to me on 
these mysteries.’ 

Thus questioned by that famed monarch, the son of Pandu, Bhishma 
explains to that king these high and subtle mysteries of dharma. 

Bhishma says, ‘Listen to me with dhyana, O Rajan, as I explain to you 
the mysteries of dharma, after the same manner in which the holy Vyasa 
explained them to me in days of yore. This subject is a mystery to the very 
Devas, Yudhishtira. Yama of stainless deeds, with vows well-observed and 
yoga dhyana, acquired the knowledge of these mysteries as the high fruits 
of his tapasya. What pleases what Devas, what pleases the Pitris, the Rishis 
the Pramathas, who belong to Mahadeva, the Devi Sri, Chitragupta who 
records all things for Yama, and the mighty Diggajas, the elephants that 
support the world, what constitutes the religion of the Rishis—the dharma 
of many mysteries and which yields high fruits; the merits of what is called 
great dakshina, and the punya that attaches to all the sacrifices: he who 
knows these, O sinless one, and knowing, lives according to his knowledge, 
is freed from taint if he has sins and acquires the great rewards that are told 
of. 


Equal to ten butchers is one oilman. Equal to ten oilmen is one drinker 
of alcohol. Equal to ten drinkers of alcohol is one courtesan. Equal to ten 
courtesans is a single chieftain. A great king is said to be equal to half of all 
these together. Hence, one should not accept gifts from these. On the other 
hand, one should attend to the vigyana, the science, which is sacred and has 
righteousness for its indications, of dharma, artha and kama. Amongst 
these, wealth and pleasure are naturally attractive. Hence, one should, with 
concentration, listen to the sacred expositions on dharma in particular, for 
the fruits are very great of listening to the mysteries of religion. 

One must listen to everything that concerns dharma as ordained by the 
gods themselves. In it is contained the ritual in respect of the sraddha, in 
which have been declared the mysteries connected with the Pitris. The 
mysteries of all the Devas have also been explained there. It also includes 
the dharmas and karmas, which yield great merit, of the Rishis, together 
with the secrets that attach to them. It contains an exposition of the punya of 
great sacrifices and those that attach to all kinds of gifts. 

Men who always read the scriptures on these subjects, those who bear 
them properly in their minds, and he who, having listened to them, follows 
them in practice, are all regarded to be as holy and sinless as the all-mighty 
Narayana himself. The merits that attach to the gift of kine, those that 
belong to the performance of ablutions in sacred waters, those that are won 
by the performance of sacrifices—all these are acquired by that man who 
treats his guests, Atithis, with reverence. 

They who listen to these shastras, they who are invested with faith, and 
they who have a pure heart, it is well-known, conquer many regions of 
bliss. Righteous men of faith are cleansed of all stains and no sin can touch 
them. Such men always increase in dharma and attain to swarga. 

Once upon a time, a celestial messenger, coming to the court of Indra of 
his own accord, but remaining invisible, addressed the king of the Devas in 
these words, “At the command of the Aswini Kumaras, those twin gods 
who are the foremost of all physicians, and who are blessed with every 
desirable attribute, have I come to this place where I behold Manavas and 
Pitris and the Devas assembled together. Why, indeed, is sexual congress 
forbidden to the man who performs a sraddha and for him also who eats at a 
sraddha, for the particular day? Why are three rice-balls offered separately 
at a sraddha? To whom should the first of those rice-balls be offered? To 


whom should the second one be offered? And whose has it been ordained is 
the third, remaining one? I wish to know all this.” 

When the celestial messenger had spoken these words about 
righteousness and duty, the Devas who were seated to the east, and the 
Pitris also, applauded that ranger of the sky, and began to answer him. 

The Pitris said, “Welcome are you, and blessings upon you! Do you 
listen, O best of sky rangers. The question you have asked is a high one and 
full of deep meaning. The Pitris of that man who indulges in sexual 
congress on the day he performs a sraddha, or eats at a sraddha have to lie 
for a whole month on his loins’ seed. As for the rice-balls offered at a 
sraddha, we will tell you what should be done with them one after another. 
The first rice-ball should be cast into water. The second ball should be given 
to one of the wives to eat. The third ball should be cast into the blazing fire. 
Even this is the law declared in regard of the sraddha. Even this is the law 
that is followed according to the rites of dharma. 

The Pitris of that man who follow this injunction become gratified with 
him and remain always joyful. The progeny of such a man increases and 
inexhaustible wealth always remains at his command.” 

The celestial duta said, “You have explained the division of the rice- 
balls and their consignment one after another to the three— water, the wife 
and the fire, together with the reasons thereof. Whom does that rice-ball 
which is consigned to the waters reach? How does it, by being so 
consigned, gratify the Devas and how does it redeem the Pitris? The second 
ball is eaten by the wife. So has it been laid down in the law. How do the 
Pitris of that man whose wife eats the second rice-ball become the eaters 
thereof? The last ball goes into the fire. How does that final rice-ball 
succeed in finding its way to you, or who is he to whom it goes? I wish to 
hear this— what ends are attained by the rice-balls offered at sraddhas when 
cast into the water, given to the wife, and consigned to the fire?” 

The Pitris said, “Great is this question which you have asked. It 
involves a rahasya, a secret mystery, and is fraught with wonder. We have 
been exceedingly gratified by you, O ranger of the sky! The very Devas and 
the Munis give praise to karmas done in honour of the Pitris. Even they do 
not know what the certain conclusions are of the laws in respect of the 
deeds done to honour the Manes. Excepting the high-souled, immortal and 
excellent Markandeya, most learned Brahmana of great fame, who is ever 


devoted to the Pitris, none amongst the Dvijas knows the mysteries of the 
laws in respect of the Pitris.” 

Having heard from the holy Vyasa what the end is of the three rice-balls 
offered at the sraddha, as explained by the Pitris themselves in reply to the 
question of the celestial messenger, I will explain that to you. Do you listen, 
O Yudhishtira, to what the conclusions are regarding the laws about the 
sraddha. Listen with attention, O Bhaarata. 

That rice-ball which goes into water is regarded as gratifying Soma, the 
moon. That god, thus gratified, O you of great intelligence, gratifies in 
return the other Devas and the Pitris, also, with them. It has been enjoined 
that the second rice-ball should be eaten by the wife of the man that 
performs the sraddha. The Pitris, who are ever desirous of progeny, confer 
children on the woman of the house when she eats that second ball. Listen 
now to what becomes of the rice-ball that is cast into the fire. With that rice- 
ball, the Pitris are gratified and they grant the fruition of all his wishes to 
the one offering it. 

I have told you everything about the three rice-balls offered at the 
sraddha and consigned to the holy three— water, the wife and the fire. 

The Brahmana who becomes the ritwik at a sraddha embodies the Pitris 
of the person performing the sraddha. Hence, he should abstain that day 
from sexual intercourse even with his own wife. The man who eats at a 
sraddha should keep himself pure for that day. By doing otherwise, he 
surely incurs the sins I have spoken of. Hence, the Brahmana who is invited 
to a sraddha to eat the offerings should eat them after purifying himself with 
a bath and bear himself piously for that day by abstaining from every kind 
of injury or evil. The progeny of such a one multiply, and he who feeds him 
reaps the same reward.’” 

“Bhishma continues, “After the Pitris said what they did, a Rishi of 
austere penances, Vidyutprabha, whose form shone with splendour like that 
of the sun, spoke. Having heard those mysteries of dharma as propounded 
by the Pitris, he addressed Sakra, saying, “Stupefied by folly, men kill many 
different creatures born in the intermediate species, worms and ants and 
snakes and sheep and deer and birds. Heavy is the measure of sin they incur 
by this. What is the remedy?” 

When this question was asked, all the Devas and Rishis endued with 
tapodhana and the highly blessed Pitris, applauded that ascetic. 


Sakra said, “Thinking in one’s mind of Kurukshetra and Gaya and 
Ganga and Prabhasa and the lakes of Pushkara, one should immerse one’s 
head in water. By so doing one is cleansed of all one’s sins like Chandramas 
being freed from Rahu. One should bathe in this way for three days in 
succession and fast every day. Besides this, one should touch the back of a 
cow after bathing and bow one’s head to her tail.” 

Vidyutprabha once more addressed Vasava, “I will declare a rite that is 
more subtle. Listen to me, O you of a hundred sacrifices. Rubbed with the 
astringent powder of the hanging roots of the banyan tree and anointed with 
the oil of priyangu, one should eat shashtika paddy mixed with milk. By 
doing this, one is washed of all one’s sins. Listen now to another rahasya 
unknown to many but which was discovered by the Rishis through dhyana. 
I heard it from Brihaspati while he recited it in the presence of Mahadeva. 
O king of the Devas, do you hear it with Rudra in your company, O Lord of 
Sachi. 

If a man climbs a mountain, stands there on one foot, with arms 
upraised and palms joined together, and abstaining from food looks at a 
blazing fire, he acquires the merits of severe tapasya and obtains the 
rewards that attach to fasts. Seared by the rays of the sun, he is purified of 
all his sins. One who does this in both summer and winter, is freed from 
every sin. Exorcised, he acquires a splendour of complexion for all time. 
Such a man blazes with energy like the sun or shines in beauty like the 
moon.” 

He of a hundred sacrifices, Indra seated in the midst of the gods, then 
sweetly addressed Brihaspati, saying these excellent words, “O Holy One, 
do you duly discourse on what those mysteries of dharma are which are full 
of happiness for human beings, and what the sins are which they commit, 
together with the mysteries that attach to them.” 

Brihaspati said, “They who urinate facing the sun, they who do not 
show reverence for the wind, they who do not pour libations on the sacred 
fire, they who milk a cow whose calf is very young, from greed to get as 
much milk as they can from her, all sin. I will declare what those sins are, O 
Lord of Sachi. Do you listen to me. 

Surya, Vayu, Agni the bearer of sacrificial oblations, O Vasava, and kine 
who are the mothers of all creatures, were created by the Self-born himself, 
to redeem all the worlds. These are the gods of humans. Listen all of you to 
the conclusions of dharma. 


Those vile men and base women who urinate facing the sun, live in 
great infamy for eighty-six years. That man, O Sakra, who cherishes no 
reverence for the wind, has children that fall prematurely from the womb of 
his wife. Men who do not pour libations on the fire, find that the fire, when 
they do ignite it for rites they wish to perform, refuses to consume their 
libations. Men who drink the milk of kine whose calves are very young, are 
never blessed with any children to perpetuate their vamsas. Such men see 
their children die and their clans shrink. These are the consequences of 
those sins, as observed by enlightened souls venerable for age in their 
families. One should always avoid that which has been forbidden, and do 
only that which has been enjoined, if one wants to achieve prosperity. This 
that I say to you is the truth.” 

After the Devaguru had said this, the blessed Devas, with the Maruts, 
and the great Rishis questioned the Pitris, saying, “O Pitris, by what deeds 
of men, who are generally endowed with little understanding, do you 
become gratified? What gifts, made in course of sraddhas for the departed, 
become inexhaustible in punya? Through what karmas can men become 
free from the debt they owe to the Pitris? We wish to hear this. Great is the 
curiosity we feel.” 

The Pitris said, “Blessed ones, you have properly asked about the doubt 
in your hearts. Listen as we declare what righteous men do that gratify us. 
Bulls of blue complexions should be set free. Gifts should be made to us, on 
the day of the new moon, of sesame seeds and water. In the season of rains, 
lamps should be lighted. By doing these men can free themselves from the 
debt they owe to the Pitris. Such gifts are never in vain; indeed, they 
become inexhaustible and yield exalted rewards. For the satisfaction we 
derive from them is endless. 

Besides these, men who, full of faith, beget offspring, save their 
departed ancestors from terrible hell.” 

Hearing these words of the Pitris, Vriddha-Gargya, possessed of 
tapodhana and great tejas, was so filled with wonder that the hair on his 
body stood on end. He said, “You that are all possessed of the wealth of 
tapasya, tell us what the merits are that attach to the setting free of blue 
bulls. What punya, again, attaches to the gift and lighting of lamps during 
the rains and the dakshina of water with sesame seeds?” 

The Pitris said, “If a blue-complexioned bull, upon being set free, raises 
even a small quantity of water with its tail, the Pitris of the one who freed 


that bull are slaked with that water for full sixty thousand years. The mud 
such a bull raises with its horns from the banks of a river or lake, without 
doubt, sends the Pitris of him that set the animal free to the realm of Soma. 
By giving and lighting lamps in the season of rain, one shines with 
effulgence like Soma himself. The man who gives lamps is never subject to 
tamas, which is darkness. Men who make gifts on the day of the new moon 
of sesame seeds and water, mixed with honey and using a vessel of copper, 
O you of tapodhana, are regarded as duly performing a sraddha with all its 
deep and intricate mysteries. These men are blessed with children of sound 
health and cheerful hearts. 

The punya acquired by the offerer of the pinda to the Pitris takes the 
form of the growth of his vamsa. Surely, he who performs these karmas 
with faith, is freed from the debt he owes to the Pitris. 

Even thus have been ordained the proper time for the performance of a 
sraddha, the law in respect of the rites to be observed, the proper person that 
should be fed at the sraddha, and the merits that attach to it. I have declared 
everything to you in their due order.”’ 


CANTO 126 


B hishma says, ‘When the Pitris had finished, Indra addressed the 
puissant Hari, saying, “O Lord, what are those karmas by which you 
become pleased? How do men succeed in gratifying you?” 

Vishnu said, “What I abhor is Brahmanas being spoken ill of or 
disrespected. Have no doubt that if Brahmanas are worshipped, I regard 
myself worshipped. All superior Brahmanas should always be reverenced, 
after feeding them with all sincere hospitality. One should also worship 
one’s own feet in the evening. I am pleased with men who do this, as also 
with those who worship and make offerings to the whorl that is seen on 
cowpats when they first drop from the cow. 

They who see a Brahmana who is dwarfish in stature, or a boar that has 
just risen from water and bears on his head mud from the bed or the bank, 
will never to meet with any evil. They are freed from every sin. The man 
who daily worships the Aswattha and Gorochana and the cow, is regarded 
as worshipping the whole universe with the Devas and Asuras and 
Manavas. 

Verily, dwelling within these men, I myself accept the worship that is 
offered to them. Yes, the worship offered to these is worship offered to me. 
This has been the way since the worlds were first created. Men of small 
understanding that worship me otherwise, do so in vain, for worship of that 
kind I never accept; such worship does not gratify me.” 

Indra said, “Why do you laud the circular marks on cow-dung, one’s 
own feet, the boar, the Brahmana who is a dwarf, and mud raised up from 


the earth? It is you who create and you who destroy all these. You are the 
eternal nature of all things mortal and transitory.” 

Hearing Indra, Vishnu smiled a little and said, “It was with my chakra 
that the Daityas were slain. It was with my two feet that the worlds were 
covered. Assuming the form of a boar, I slew Hiranyaksha. Assuming the 
form of a dwarf, I conquered the Asura King Bali. Those Mahatmans who 
worship these please me. Verily, they who worship me in these forms never 
meet with any discomfiture, let alone grief. If one sees a Brahmana who is a 
brahmachari arrived at one’s house, and offers him the first portion of one’s 
food, which belongs by right to a Brahmana, and eats what remains, one is 
regarded as eating amrita. 

If, after adoring the dawn, the morning sandhya, one stands with face 
turned towards the sun, one reaps the punya that accrues from the 
performance of ablutions in all the tirthas and is purified of all sins. You 
Rishis possessed of tapodhana, I have told you in detail of what constitutes 
a great rahasya.” 

Baladeva said, “Listen now to another great mystery filled with 
happiness for men; the ignorant ones, who do not know it, meet with great 
distress at the hands of other creatures. That man who, rising before dawn, 
touches a cow, ghee and curds, as also mustard seeds and the larger variety 
called priyangu, is washed of all sin. As for Rishis possessed of tapodhana, 
they always avoid all creatures both ahead and behind them, as also all that 
is impure while performing sraddhas. 

The Devas said, “If a man take a vessel of copper, fill it with water and, 
facing the east, resolves upon a fast or the observance of a particular vow, 
the gods become pleased with him and all his wishes are crowned with 
success. By keeping upavasa, or vratas in any other way, men of little 
understanding gain nothing. In uttering the resolution about the observance 
of fasts and in making offerings to the Devas, the use of a vessel of copper 
is preferred. In making the offerings to the deities, in giving and accepting 
alms, in offering arghya and in offering tarpana, oblations of water mixed 
with sesame seeds to the Pitris, also, a copper vessel should be used. By 
performing these rites in any other way, one acquires little merit. Even these 
mysteries have been declared as to how the Devas are gratified.” 

Dharma Deva said, “The offerings made in all rites in honour of the 
Devas and those in honour of the Pitris should never be given away to a 
Brahmana who has served under the king, or who rings the bell or attends to 


subsidiary duties in acts of worship or at sraddhas, or that keeps kine, or 
who is engaged in trade, or that follows some art as a profession, or that is 
an actor, or who quarrels with friends or who is without Vedic studies, or 
one that marries a Sudra woman. The performer of the sraddha who gives 
dakshina to such a Brahmana falls away from prosperity and begets no 
children. He fails, again, to satisfy his Pitris by what he does. 

From the home of that person whence a guest returns unsatisfied, the 
Pitris, the Devas and the sacred fires, all turn away disappointed. That man 
who does not discharge the dharma of hospitality towards the guest arrived 
at his home comes to be regarded as equally sinful as those that are slayers 
of women or of cows, that are ungrateful towards benefactors, that are 
killers of Brahmanas, or violators of the beds of their gurus.” 

Agni said, “Listen with concentrated attention. I will name the sins of 
the man of evil heart who raises his foot to kick a cow, a most blessed 
Brahmana or a burning fire. The infamy of such a man spreads throughout 
the world and touches the confines of heaven itself. His Pitris become filled 
with fear. The Devas become wroth with him. Agni refuses to accept his 
libations. For a hundred lives he has to suffer and rot in hell. He is never 
saved. So, one should never touch a cow with one’s feet, or a Brahmana of 
tejas, or a burning fire, if one has faith and desires one’s own good, for 
terrible are the torments such a sinner has to endure.” 

Viswamitra said, “Listen to a deep and high rahasya of dharma 
unknown to most men. He who offers the Pitris rice boiled in sugared milk, 
sitting with his face turn to the south at noontide, in the shade of an 
elephant’s body, in the month of Bhadrapada, under the Magha nakshatra, 
acquires untold punya. Listen to what that punya is. The man who makes 
such an offering to the Pitris in such circumstances, is regarded as 
performing a great sraddha each year for thirteen years in succession.” 

The cows said, “That man is washed of all his sins who adores a cow 
with these mantras: O Bahula, O Samanga, O you that are fearless 
everywhere, O you that are forgiving and full of auspiciousness, O friend, O 
source of all plenitude in the world of Brahma. In days of yore, you were 
present with your calf at the sacrifice of Indra, the wielder of the 
thunderbolt. You took your place in the firmament and in the path of Agni. 
The Devas with Narada among them adored you on that occasion by calling 
you Sarvamsaha, who endures all things and forgives. 


Such a man attains to the realm of Purandara. He acquires, besides, the 
merits that attach to kine, and the splendour of Chandramas also. Such a 
man becomes freed from every sin, every fear, and every grief. Finally, he 
finds a home in the happy world of the thousand-eyed Indra!” 

After this, the blessed and celebrated Saptarishis, with Vasishta at their 
head, rose, and circumambulating the Lotus-born Brahma stood around him 
with hands joined in reverence. Vasishta, that foremost of all who know the 
Brahman, became their spokesman and asked this question which is 
beneficial to every creature, but especially so to Brahmanas and Kshatriyas. 
“By doing what karma may men of righteous conduct who are, however, 
without the wealth of this world, succeed in acquiring the merits of 
performing sacrifices?” 

Hearing this question of theirs, the Grandsire Brahma replied to them. 

Brahma said, “Excellent is this question, O most blessed ones. It is at 
once auspicious and high and laden with a secret. This question that you 
have asked is subtle and is full of profound weal to mankind. You 
tapodhana Rishis, I will answer you properly, in detail. Do you listen with 
attention to what I say about how men acquire the punya of sacrifices even 
when they are unable to perform them through being poor. 

In the lighted fortnight of the month of Pausha, when the nakshatra 
Rohini is in conjunction with the moon, if one purifies oneself with a bath, 
lies under the canopy of heaven, clad in a single piece of raiment, with faith 
and fixed dhyana, and drinks the rays of the moon, one acquires the merits 
that attach to the performance of Mahayagnas, great sacrifices. You 
foremost of Dvijas, this is a high mystery that I declare to you in reply to 
your questions, you that are possessed of insight into the subtle truths of all 
subjects of enquiry.” 


CANTO 127 


V ibhavasu, otherwise called Surya, said, “There are two offerings. 
One of those consists of a palmful of water and the other called 
akshata consists of rice grains with ghrita. One should, on the day of the full 
moon, stand facing that bright orb and make to him the two offerings. The 
man who makes these offerings is said to adore his sacred fire. Verily, he is 
regarded as one that has poured libations on the three principal agnis. 

That man of little understanding who cuts down a large tree on the day 
of the new moon, is stained with the sin of Brahmahatya. By killing even a 
single leaf one incurs that sin. The foolish man who chews a tooth-twig on 
the day of the new moon is regarded as injuring Soma Deva by what he 
does. The Pitris of such a person become wroth with him. The Devas do not 
accept the libations poured by such a man on days of the full and the new 
moon. His Pitris become enraged with him, and his race and family become 
extinct.” 

The Devi Sri said, “That sinful house, in which eating and drinking 
vessels and chairs and beds lie scattered, and in which women are beaten, 
the Devas and Pitris leave in disgust. Verily, without accepting the offerings 
made to them by the owners of such houses, the gods and the Manes fly 
away from such a sinful habitation.” 

Angiras said, “The children of that man increase who stands every night 
for a full year under a karanjaka tree with a lamp to cast light on it, and 
holds besides in his hand the roots of the suvarchala plant.” 

Gargya said, “One should always perform the dharmas of hospitality to 
one’s guests. One should give lamps in the hall or shed where sacrifices are 


performed. One should avoid sleep during the day, and abstain from all 
kinds of flesh, why, all food. One should never injure cows and Brahmanas. 
One should always chant the names of the Pushkara lake and the other 
sacred tirthas. Such a course of dharma is the foremost. Even this 
constitutes a high religion with its mysteries. If observed, it is sure to yield 
great rewards. If a man performs even a hundred sacrifices, he is doomed to 
see the exhaustion of the punya attaching to the libations poured therein. 
The dharmas, however, which I have mentioned are such that when done by 
a man imbued with faith, their merit becomes inexhaustible. 

Listen now to another high rahasya concealed from the view of many. 
The Devas do not accept the libations poured upon the fire on the occasion 
of sraddhas and rites in their honour, or during rituals that are performed on 
ordinary lunar days or on the especially sacred days of the Paurnima and 
Amavasya, if they behold a woman in her season of impurity or one that is 
the daughter of a mother afflicted with leprosy. The Pitris of the man who 
allows such a woman to come near the place where the sraddha is being 
performed by him, are never gratified with him for thirteen years. 

Clad in white raiment, and becoming pure in body and mind, one should 
invite Brahmanas and cause them to utter their blessings and mantras when 
one performs the sraddha. On such occasions one should also recite the 
Mahabharata. It is by observing all these that the offerings made at sraddhas 
become inexhaustible.” 

Dhaumya said, “Broken utensils, broken bedsteads, roosters and dogs, 
as also such trees as have grown within dwellings, are all inauspicious. In a 
broken utensil is Kali himself, while in a broken bedstead is loss of wealth. 
When a cockerel or a dog is in sight, the Devas do not eat the offerings 
made to them. Under the roots of a tree, scorpions and snakes find shelter. 
Hence, one should never plant a tree within one’s home.” 

Jamadagni said, “That man whose heart is not pure is sure to go to hell 
even if he adores the Devas in a horse sacrifice or in a hundred Vajapeya 
yagnas, or if he undergoes the severest austerities hanging by his feet. 
Purity of heart is regarded as equal to sacrifices and Truth. A very poor 
Brahmana, by giving only a prastha of powdered barley with a pure heart to 
another Brahmana, attained to the loka of Brahma himself. This is enough 
proof of the importance of purity of heart.’”’ 


CANTO 128 


: V ayu said, “I will recite some dharmas which are fraught with 
happiness to man. Do you listen also with attention to some sinful 
transgressions, along with the secret causes upon which they depend. That 
man who offers for the four months of the rains, sesame and water to the 
Pitris, and food, according to the best of his power, to a Brahmana well- 
conversant with the laws; who duly pours libations on the sacred fire, and 
makes offerings of rice boiled in sugared milk; who gives lamps in honour 
of the Pitris, with sesame and water—verily he who does all this with 
bhakti and dhyana acquires all the punya that attaches to a hundred 
sacrifices in which animals are offered to the gods. 

Listen to this other high mystery that is unknown to all. That man who 
thinks it permissible when a Sudra ignites the fire upon which he is to pour 
libations, or who does not see any fault when women who are incompetent 
to assist at sraddhas and other rites are allowed to assist at them, truly 
becomes stained with sin. The three sacrificial fires become enraged with 
such a man. In his next life he has to take birth himself as a Sudra. His 
Pitris, together with the Devas, are never pleased with him. 

I will now tell you what the expiations are for cleansing oneself from 
such sins. Listen to me with attention. By performing these expiatory 
karmas, one becomes happy and free from sin’s fever. Fasting all the while, 
one should, for three days, with great dhyana, pour libation on the sacred 
fire of the urine of the cow mixed with cow-dung and milk and ghrita. The 
Devas accept the offerings of such a man upon the expiration of a full year. 


His Pitris also, when the time comes for him to perform the sraddha, 
become gratified with him again. 

I have thus said what is dharma and what adharma, with all their 
recondite details, as they pertain to human beings wanting to attain swarga. 
In truth, men who abstain from these transgressions or who, having 
committed them, undergo the expiatory rites indicated, succeed in attaining 
to paradise when they leave this world.” 


CANTO 129 


L omasa said, “The Pitris of men who, without having wives of their 

own, betake themselves to the wives of others, become filled with 
disappointment when the time for the sraddhas comes. He who takes to 
himself the wives of other men, he who indulges in sexual union with a 
barren woman, and he who appropriates what belongs to a Brahmana, are 
equally sinful. There is no doubt that the Pitris of such men disown them 
entirely, and have nothing to do with them. The offerings they make fail to 
satisfy or please the gods and the Manes. Hence should one always abstain 
from sexual congress with women that are the wives of others, as also with 
women who are barren. The man who desires his own good should never 
take what belongs to a Brahmana. 

Listen now to another rahasya, unknown to all, with regard to dharma. 
One should, with bhakti, always do the bidding of one’s acharya and other 
elders. On the twelfth day of the moon, as also on the day of the full moon, 
every month, one must give dakshina to Brahmanas, of ghee and the 
offerings that constitute akshata. Hear what the measure is of the punya that 
such a giver acquires. 

By giving such dakshina, a man is said to augment the power of Soma 
and Varuna. Vasava confers upon such a one a fourth part of the punya of an 
Aswamedha yagna. By giving such dana, a man is blessed with great energy 
and prowess. The divine Soma, well-pleased with him, grants him the 
fruition of his wishes. 

Listen now to another dharma, together with the foundation on which it 
rests, which yields great merit. In this age of Kali, that dharma fetches great 


happiness to men. The man who, rising before dawn and purifying himself 
with a bath, clothes himself in white clothes and with concentrated dhyana 
makes gifts to Brahmanas of vessels full of sesame seeds, who makes 
offerings to the Pitris of holy water with sesame seeds and honey, and who 
gives lamps as also krisara acquires substantial punya. I will tell you what 
this punya is. 

Indra has ascribed these rewards to the gift of vessels of copper and 
brass filled with sesame seeds. He who makes gifts of kine, he who makes 
gifts of land that yield eternal punya, he who performs the Agnishtoma 
yagna with copious dakshina to Brahmanas, are all regarded by the gods as 
acquiring merits equal to those which one acquires by making gifts of 
vessels filled with sesame seeds. Gifts of water with sesame seeds are 
regarded by the Pitris is as giving eternal gratification to them. The 
ancestors all become delighted with gifts of lamps and krisara. 

I have thus recited the ancient law laid down by the Rishis, which is 
eulogised by both the Pitris and the Devas in their respective worlds.” 


CANTO 130 


B hishma says, ‘Then, the Rishis there assembled, together with the 

Pitris and the Devas, with rapt dhyana, questioned Vasishta’s wife 
Arundhati of great ascetic merit. Possessed of abundant tapodhana, 
Arundhati was equal to her husband, the Mahatman Vasishta, in tejas, for in 
both vratas and pravritti she was her husband’s equal. Addressing her, they 
said, “We desire to hear from you the rahasyas, the arcane mysteries of 
kartavya and dharma, duty and religion. O chaste devi, tell us what you 
regard a deep and high mystery.” 

Arundhati said, “The great progress I have achieved in tapasya is due to 
your kindly consideration for me. With your gracious leave, I will now 
speak of duties that are eternal, on those that are high mysteries. I will 
speak of them with the causes on which they depend, and elaborately. A 
knowledge of these should be imparted to him that has a pure heart and is 
possessed of bhakti. These four—he that is bereft of faith, he that is full of 
pride, he that is guilty of Brahmahatya, and he that violates the bed of his 
guru—should never be spoken to at all. Dharma and kartavya should never 
be imparted to them. 

The punya acquired by one who gives away a Kapila cow every day for 
two and ten years, or by one who adores the Devas every month with a 
sacrifice, or by him who gives away hundreds of thousands of kine at the 
great Pushkara, do not equal those that are his with whom an Atithi, a guest, 
is gratified. 

Listen now to another kartavya whose observance invests happiness on 
a man. It should be undertaken, with its secret ritual, by one who owns 


bhakti. Its merits are exalted. Listen to what they are. If, rising at early 
dawn and taking with him a quantity of water and a few blades of kusa 
grass, a man goes into a cow-pen and washes a cow’s horns, sprinkling on 
them pure water with the blades of kusa grass and then has the water drip 
down onto his own head, he is regarded, in consequence of such a snana, as 
one that has performed his ablutions in all the sacred tirthas that the wise 
have heard to exist in the three worlds and which are honoured and resorted 
to by Siddhas and Charanas.” 

When Arundhati said these words, all the Devas and Pitris applauded 
her, saying, ‘Uttamam, most excellent!’ Indeed, all that were present there 
were delighted and all of them worshipped Arundhati. 

Brahma said, “O most blessed one, exceptional is the duty that you have 
told of, together with its secret ritual. Praise be to you. I grant you this boon 
—your tapasya will continually increase!” 

Yama said, “I have listened with joy to your wonderful discourse. Listen 
now to what Chitragupta has said and what I myself find agreeable. This 
relates to kartavya with its secret ritual, and is worthy of being heard by the 
Maharishis, as also by men of bhakti who wish to achieve their own 
welfare. Nothing is lost of either dharma or adharma, piety or sin, which the 
living commit. On days of the full moon and the new moon, Purnima and 
Amavasya, both those are conveyed to the sun where they rest. When a 
mortal goes into the realm of the dead, the sun god bears witness to all his 
karma. He that is righteous acquires the fruits of his righteousness there. 

I shall now tell you of some auspicious duties which are approved by 
Chitragupta. Water for drink, and lamps to light darkness, should always be 
given, as also sandals and umbrellas and Kapila kine, all with due rites. In 
Pushkara, especially, should one make the gift of a Kapila cow to a 
Brahmana who knows the Vedas. One should also always maintain one’s 
agnihotra with great care. 

Here is another dharma which was proclaimed by Chitragupta. It 
behoves them that are the best of creatures to listen separately to what the 
merits are of that dharma. In course of time, every creature is destined to 
die. They that are of little understanding meet with great distress in the 
regions of the dead, for they become terribly afflicted by hunger and thirst. 
Indeed, they have to rot there, burning in pain. There is no escape for them 
from such a fate. They have to enter into thick darkness. 


I will now tell you of those kartavyas, by performing which one may 
succeed in crossing safely over such dire calamity. The performance of 
those karmas costs very little but is full of great punya, and confers untold 
bliss in the next world. Lofty are the merits that attach to the gift of water. 
In the next world, especially, that punya is truly transcendent. For them that 
make gifts of water is ordained in the other world a great river full of 
sublime water. Indeed, the water contained in that river is inexhaustible and 
cool, and sweet as amrita. He who makes gifts of water in this world drinks 
from that stream in the world hereafter. 

Listen now to the abundant rewards that attach to the giving of lamps. 
The man who gives deepams in this world never so much as sees the foetid 
darkness of naraka. Soma and Surya and Agni always give him their light 
when he goes into the other world. Why, all the gods ordain that on every 
side of such a one there should be blazing light. Verily, when a giver of 
lights repairs to the world of the dead, he himself blazes forth in pure 
effulgence like a second Surya. Hence, one should give deepam while here 
and pavitra jala, pure water. 

Listen now to what the rewards are of the person who makes the gift of 
a Kapila cow to a Brahmana who knows the Vedas, and especially if the gift 
be made in Pushkara. Such a man is regarded as having made a gift of a 
hundred cows with a bull, a gift that confers eternal punya. The gift of a 
single Kapila cow washes away whatever sins the giver may be guilty of, 
even if those sins be as grave as Brahmahatya. For, the gift of a single 
Kapila cow is regarded as equal in merit to that of at least a hundred other 
cows. Hence, one should give away a Kapila cow at the Pushkara which is 
regarded as the elder of the two tirthas known by that name, on the day of 
the full moon in the month of Karttika. Men that succeed in giving such a 
dakshina have never to encounter distress of any kind, or sorrow, or pain. 

That man who gives away a pair of padukas or sandals to a superior 
Brahmana deserving of the gift, attains to similar punya. By giving away a 
chatra, an umbrella, a person obtains comfortable shade in the next world, 
and is never scalded by the sun. A gift made to a deserving person is never 
lost. It is certain to produce agreeable consequences to the giver.” 

Hearing these opinions of Chitragupta, Surya’s hair stood on end. Of 
awesome splendour, he addressed all the Devas and the Pitris, saying, “You 
have heard the rahasyas relating to kartavyas, as propounded by the 


Mahatman Chitragupta. Those Manavas who, with devotion, make these 
gifts to high-souled Brahmanas, are freed from fear of every kind. 

Five kinds of men stained with vicious deeds have no escape. Verily, of 
sinful conduct and regarded as the worst of men, they should never be 
spoken to. Indeed they should always be avoided. Those five are—he who 
kills a Brahmana, he who kills a cow, he who is addicted to sexual 
intercourse with other men’s wives, he who is bereft of bhakti, and he who 
derives his sustenance by selling the virtue of his wife. These sinners, when 
they go to the land of the dead, rot in hell like worms that live upon pus and 
blood. These five are avoided by the Pitris, the Devas, the Snataka 
Brahmanas, and other regenerate ones that are devoted to the practice of 
tapasya.””’ 


CANTO 131 


B hishma says, ‘Then, all the most blessed Devas and the Pitris, and 

the great Rishis, addressing the Pramathas, said, “You are all highly 
blessed ones. You are invisible wanderers of the night. Why do you afflict 
such men that are vile and impure? What karmas are impediments to your 
power? What are those deeds through which you become unable to inflict 
your torments on men? What are those actions that destroy Rakshasas and 
that prevent you from asserting your power over the habitations of men? 
Wanderers of the night, we wish to hear all this from you.” 

The Pramathas said, “Men are rendered unclean by acts of sexual 
congress. They who do not purify themselves after intercourse, they who 
insult their elders, they who from dullness of mind eat different kinds of 
meat, the man who sleeps at the foot of a tree, he who keeps any animal 
matter under his pillow while lying down to sleep, and he who lies down or 
sleeps setting his head where his feet should be, or his feet where his head 
should be—these men we regard as unclean. Verily, these men have many 
weaknesses. 

Those who expectorate their phlegm and cast other unclean secretions 
into water are the same. Without doubt such men deserve to be killed and 
eaten by us, and we prey upon them. But listen now to what those kriyas are 
which are remedies because of which we are rendered powerless to do any 
harm to men. Those men whose bodies are marked with streaks of 
gorochana, or who hold vachas in their hands, or who make gifts of ghrita 
with those ingredients that go by the name of akshata, or who place ghee 


and akshata on their heads, or those who abstain from meat—all these we 
are helpless to attack. 

That man in whose house the sacred fire burns day and night without 
ever being put out, or who keeps the skin or teeth of a wolf in his home, or 
a hill-tortoise, or from whose habitation the sacrificial smoke is seen to curl 
up, or who keeps a cat or a goat that is either tawny or black in hue, is free 
from our power. 

Verily, those grihastas who keep these things in their homes always find 
them free from the inroads of even the fiercest Pisachas that live on carrion. 
Other spirits also, that like us range through different worlds in pursuit of 
pleasure, cannot do the least harm to such dwellings. Hence, you gods, 
should men keep such things in their homes, for these keep Rakshasas and 
other such dark spirits away in mortal fear. 

We have thus told you everything about which you had great doubts. 


999 


CANTO 132 


B hishma says, ‘After this, the Grandsire Brahma, born from the 

primeval lotus and resembling the lotus in his splendour, majesty and 
fragrance, addressed the Devas with Vasava, the Lord of Sachi, at their 
head, “Yonder sits the mighty Naga who is a dweller of the nether realms. 
Endowed with great strength and energy, and with great prowess, also, his 
name is Renuka. He is a great being. Ask this mighty Renuka to question 
the Diggajas of fathomless strength and power, who support the very earth 
with her hills, rivers, oceans and lakes. Let Renuka go to them and ask them 
about the mysteries of dharma.” 

At these words of the Grandsire, the Devas, with well-pleased minds, 
commissioned Renuka to go where those holders of the world stand. 

Going to those elephants, Renuka addressed them, saying, “You mighty 
ones, I have been commanded by the Devas and the Pitris to question you 
about the mysteries of dharma and kartavya. I wish to hear you discourse on 
that subject in detail. Most blessed ones, do you speak to me of dharma as 
your wisdom may dictate.” 

The eight elephants standing in the eight quarters said, “On the 
auspicious eighth day of the dark fortnight in the month of Karttika, when 
the Aslesha nakshatra is in the ascendant, one should make gifts of payasa 
and rice. Casting aside wrath, and living on a strictly regulated diet, one 
should make these offerings at a sraddha, uttering these mantras the while — 
Let Baladeva and other Nagas possessed of great strength, let other mighty 
snakes of huge bodies that are indestructible and eternal, and let all the 
other great snakes that have taken their birth in their race, make bali 


offerings to me for the enhancement of my strength and energy. Verily, let 
my strength be as great as that of the blessed Narayana when he raised up 
the submerged earth. 

Uttering these mantras, one should make balidana upon an ant-hill. 
When the maker of day retires to his chambers in the west, upon the chosen 
ant-hill should offerings be made of raw sugar and rice. The ant-hill should 
previously be scattered with gajendra flowers. Offerings should also be 
made of blue cloths and fragrant unguents. If offerings be made in this way, 
those beings that live in the Patalas, bearing the weight of the upper regions 
upon their heads or shoulders, become well-pleased and gratified. 

As for ourselves, we also do not feel the labour of holding the earth 
because of such offerings being made to us. Weighted by the burden we 
bear, even this is what we think, without any selfish concerns. Brahmanas 
and Kshatriyas and Vaisyas and Sudras, by observing this rite for a full 
year, fasting on each occasion, acquire great punya from such dakshina. We 
know that making such bali offerings on the valmikyam, the ant-hill, is truly 
fraught with the highest punya. By making such offerings, one is regarded 
as performing the dharma of atithya, hospitality, for a hundred years to all 
the elephants that exist in the three worlds.” 

The mighty Diggajas, the Nagas, the Devas and the Pitris and the 
blessed Rishis, all applauded Renuka.’ 


CANTO 133 


B hishma says, ‘Maheswara said, “Searching your memories, excellent 

are the dharmas and kartavyas that you have all recited. Listen, all of 
you, now to me as I declare some rahasyas relating to dharma and kartavya. 
Only to those whose hearts have been set on dharma and who are possessed 
of bhakti may those secret mysteries be divulged of duty and religion, 
which are full of high punya. 

Hear what the regards are that become his who, with heart free from 
anxiety, gives food every day, for a month, to kine and contents himself 
with one meal a day throughout this period. Dhenus, cows, are highly 
blessed. They are regarded as the most sacred of all sacred things. Verily, it 
is they that support the three worlds with the Devas, the Asuras and 
Manavas. Respectful services rendered to them are rewarded with exalted 
punya and hallowed results. That man who every day gives food to dhenus 
advances every day in religious merit. Of old, in the Krita yuga, I declared 
my approval of these creatures. Afterwards, Brahma, born in the primeval 
lotus, solicited me to show kindness towards kine. It is for this reason that a 
bull to this day stands as the device on my standard. I always sport with 
gavyas, and even so should kine be worshipped by all. Kine are possessed 
of great power. They are givers of boons. If worshipped, they do surely 
grant boons. The person who gives food to cows for even a single day 
receives from those benign creatures a fourth part of the punya he would 
win by all his good karma throughout his life.”’ 


CANTO 134 


: S kanda said, “I shall now declare a dharma of which I approve. Do 

you listen to it with dhyana. That one who takes a little earth from 

the horns of a blue bull, smears his body with it for three days, and then 

performs his ablutions, acquires untold punya. Hear what those merits are. 

By doing this he washes away every stain and evil, and attains to sovereign 

sway hereafter. As many times he is born into this world, so many times 
does he become celebrated for his heroism. 

Listen now to another mystery unknown to all. Taking a copper vessel 
and placing therein some cooked food after having mixed it with honey, one 
should offer it as a bali to the rising moon on the evening of the purnima 
day. Do you learn, with bhakti, what the merits are of the man that does 
this. The Sadhyas, the Rudras, the Adityas, the Viswedevas, the twin 
Aswins, the Maruts and the Vasus, all, accept that offering. By such an 
offering Soma waxes as also Varuna, vast repository of waters. This dharma 
that I have declared and which is unknown to all, if performed, is certainly 
fraught with mighty happiness.” 

Vishnu said, “That man who, endowed with faith and free from malice, 
listens every day with attention to the rahasyas in respect of religion and 
duty that are preserved by the Devas and those mysteries, also, which are 
preserved by the Rishis, has never to succumb to any evil. Such a one also 
is freed from every fear. That man who, with his senses under perfect 
control, reads these cantos which treat of these auspicious and meritorious 
duties, together with their secrets—duties that have been declared here 
today by all—acquires all the punya that attaches to their actual 


performance. Sin can never master him. Verily, such a man can never be 
stained with faults of any kind. Indeed, one wins superabundant merits by 
reading these rahasyas, or by reciting them to others, or by hearing them 
recited. The Devas and the Pitris eat, for ever, the havya and the kavya 
offered by such a one. Both these, in consequence of the virtues of the 
offerer, become inexhaustible. 

Even such is the punya that comes to the man who, with bhakti and 
dhyana, recites these rahasyas to righteous Brahmanas on days of the full 
moon or the new moon. Such a man grows steadfast in the observance of all 
his duties. Beauty of form and prosperity also become his. He succeeds, 
besides this, in becoming the favourite, for all time, of the Rishis and the 
Devas and the Pitris. If a person becomes guilty of all sins, save those 
which are classed as grave or heinous, he is cleansed of them all merely by 
listening to the recitation of these mysteries about dharma and karma.” 

Bhishma continues, “Even these, O king of men, are the rahasyas of 
religion and duty that dwell in the breasts of the gods. Held in high regard 
by all the gods and promulgated by Vyasa, I have now declared them to you 
for your benefit. One who is conversant with dharma and kartavya thinks 
that this knowledge is superior in worth to even the very earth full of every 
kind of wealth. This knowledge should not be imparted to one that is bereft 
of devotion, or to an unbeliever, or to one that has fallen away from his 
svadharma, or to one that is without compassion, or to one that is devoted to 
the science of empty disputations, or to one that is hostile to his gurus, or to 
one that thinks all creatures to be different from himself.’” 


CANTO 135 


¢ =v udhishtira says, “Who are those, O Bharata, from whom a 
Brahmana in this world may accept food? From whom may a 
Kshatriya, a Vaisya and a Sudra take food?’ 

Bhishma says, “A Brahmana may take his food from another Brahmana 
or from a Kshatriya or a Vaisya, but he must never accept food from a 
Sudra. A Kshatriya may have his food from a Brahmana, a Kshatriya or a 
Vaisya. He must, however, eschew food given by Sudras, who are addicted 
to evil ways and who partake of all manner of food without scruple. 
Brahmanas and Kshatriyas can partake of food given by such Vaisyas as 
tend the sacred fire every day, as are faultless in character, and as keep the 
Chaturmasya vrata. But the man who takes food from a Sudra swallows the 
very abomination of the earth, and drinks the excretions of the human body, 
and eats the filth of all the world. If one engages in the service of a Sudra, 
one is doomed to perdition even though one may duly perform all the rites 
of one’s varna. A Brahmana, a Kshatriya, or a Vaisya who engages the 
services of a Sudra is doomed, although they be devoted to the performance 
of every religious rite. 

It is said that a Brahmana’s dharma consists in studying the Vedas and 
seeking the welfare of the human race; that a Kshatriya’s duty consists in 
protecting men, and that a Vaisya’s is in promoting their material prosperity. 
A Vaisya lives by distributing the fruits of his own actions and by farming. 
The breeding of cows and trade are the legitimate work in which a Vaisya 
may engage without fear of censure. The man who abandons his own 
ordained occupation and betakes himself to that of a Sudra, should be 


considered as a Sudra and on no account should any food be accepted from 
him. 

Professors of the healing art, mercenary soldiers, the priest who acts as 
warder of the house, and persons who devote a whole year to study without 
any profit, are all considered Sudras. And those who impudently partake of 
food offered at ceremonies in a Sudra’s house are visited by terrible 
calamity. Because of partaking of such forbidden food, they lose their 
family, strength and vitality, and attain to the condition of animals, 
devolving into being dogs, fallen in virtue and devoid of all religious 
observances. 

He who takes food from a physician takes that which is no better than 
excrement; the food of a harlot is like urine; that of a skilled mechanic is 
like blood. If a Brahmana approved by the good takes the food of one who 
lives by his learning, he is regarded as accepting the food of a Sudra. All 
good men should abjure such food. The food of a person who is censured 
by all is said to be like a draught from a pool of blood. The acceptance of 
food from an evil man is considered as reprehensible as killing a Brahmana. 

One should not accept food if one is slighted and not received with due 
honour by the giver. A Brahmana who does so is soon overtaken by disease, 
and his kula soon becomes extinct. By accepting food from the warden of a 
city, one descends to the status of the lowest outcaste. If a Brahmana 
accepts food from one who is guilty of killing either a cow or a Brahmana 
or from one who has committed adultery with his preceptor’s wife, or from 
a drunkard, he helps promote the race of Rakshasas. 

By accepting food from a eunuch, or from an ingrate, or from one who 
has misappropriated wealth entrusted to his charge, one is born in the 
country of the Savaras situated beyond the precincts of the middle kingdom. 

I have thus recited to you those from whom food may be accepted and 
those from whom it may not. Now tell me, O son of Kunti, what else you 
wish to hear from me today.’” 


CANTO 136 


: yd udhishtira says, “You have told me in full of those from whom 

food may be taken and of those from whom it should not be 

taken. But I have grave doubts on one matter. Do you, O Sire, enlighten me; 

tell me what expiation a Brahmana should make upon accepting the 

different kinds of food, those especially offered in honour of the Devas and 
the tarpana made to the Pitris.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘I will tell you, O prince, how mahatman Brahmanas 
may be absolved from all sin incurred by accepting food from others. For 
accepting ghrita, the expiation is made by pouring oblations on the fire, 
while reciting the Savitri mantra. For accepting sesame, O Yudhishtira, the 
same expiation must be performed. For accepting meat, or honey, or salt, a 
Brahmana is purified by standing through the night until the sun rises. If a 
Brahmana accepts gold from anyone, he is cleansed of all sin by silently 
reciting the great Vedic prayer, the Gayatri mantra, in a public place while 
holding a piece of iron in his hand. 

For accepting money or clothes or women or gold, the purification is the 
same. 

For accepting food, or rice boiled in milk and sugar, or sugar cane juice, 
or sugar cane, or oil, or any sacred thing, one is purified by bathing thrice in 
the day, during the morning, noon and twilight sandhyas. If one accepts 
paddy, flowers, fruits, water, half-ripe barley, milk, or curdled milk, or 
anything made of meal or flour, the expiation is done by reciting the Gayatri 
mantra a hundred times. For taking shoes or clothes at obsequial 
ceremonies, the sin is destroyed by devoutly chanting the same mantra a 


hundred times. The acceptance of the bhudana, the gift of land, at the time 
of an eclipse or during any inauspicious time, is expiated by observing a 
fast for three successive nights. 

The Brahmana who partakes of oblations offered to departed ancestors 
during the dark fortnight is purified by fasting for a full day and night. 
Without performing his ablutions, a Brahmana should not say his sandhya 
vandana, nor betake himself to religious dhyana, nor eat a second meal. By 
this he is purified. For this reason, the sraddha for deceased ancestors has 
been ordained to be performed in the afternoon and then the Brahmana who 
has been invited should be fed amply, served a feast. 

The Brahmana who partakes of food in the house of a dead person on 
the third day after the death, is purified by bathing three times daily for 
twelve days. After the twelve days, and then undergoing the purification 
ceremonies duly, the sin is destroyed by giving ghrita to other Brahmanas. 
If a man takes any food in the house of a dead person, within ten days after 
the death, he should go through all the expiations I have mentioned, and 
should recite the Savitri mantra and perform the sin-destroying Ishti and 
Kushmanda penances. 

The Brahmana who eats in the house of a dead person for three nights is 
purified by performing his ablutions thrice daily for seven days, and thus 
attains all the objects of his desire, and is never troubled by any misfortune. 

The Brahmana who eats in the company of Sudras is purged from all 
impurity by duly observing the same purificatory rites. The Brahmana who 
eats in the company of Vaisyas is absolved from sin by living on alms for 
three successive nights. If a Brahmana eats with Kshatriyas, he should make 
expiation by bathing in his clothes. 

By eating with a Sudra from the same plate, the Sudra loses his family 
honour; the Vaisya by eating from the same plate with a Vaisya, loses his 
cows and friends. The Kshatriya loses his prosperity, and the Brahmana his 
splendour and vitality. In such cases, expiations should be performed, and 
propitiatory rites observed, and oblations offered to the gods. The Savitri 
mantra should be recited and the Revati rites and Kushmanda penances 
should be observed to destroy the sin. 

If any of the above four varnas partake of food partly eaten by a person 
of any other order, the expiation is done by smearing the body with 
auspicious substances like rochana, durva grass, and turmeric.’” 


CANTO 137 


Y udhishtira says, ‘O Bhaarata, of charity and devotion, dana and 
bhakti, which is the better in this world? Do you resolve yet another 
great doubt that is in my mind.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Do you listen to me as I recite the names of the great 
men who, having been devoted to virtue, and having cleansed their hearts 
with tapa, dana and other acts of piety, undoubtedly attained to the different 
celestial realms. 

Rishi Atreya, revered by all, attained, O monarch, to swarga by 
imparting the knowledge of the Nirguna Brahman to his sishyas. King Sibi, 
the son of Usinara, offered the life of his own beloved son, for the sake of a 
Brahmana, and was transported from this world into heaven. And 
Pratardana, the king of Kasi, by giving his son to a Brahmana, secured for 
himself unique and undying fame in this as well as in the other world. 
Rantideva, the son of Sankriti, attained to the highest heaven by giving 
dakshina to the high-souled Vasishta. Devavriddha, too, found swarga by 
giving a hundred-ribbed and magnificent golden chatra to a Brahmana at a 
yagna. 

The revered Ambarisha has also attained to Devaloka by making a gift 
of all his kingdom to a Brahmana of great power. King Janamejaya of the 
Suryavamsa found the highest heaven by making a gift of golden kundalas, 
majestic rathas and gentle cows to Brahmanas. The Rajarishi Vrishadarbhi 
attained swarga by making gifts of various jewels and beautiful homes to 
Brahmanas. King Nimi of Vidarbha attained to heaven, with his sons, 


friends and kine, by giving his daughter and kingdom to Agastya 
Mahatman. 

The far-famed Rama, the son of Jamadagni, attained to eternal regions, 
far beyond his expectation, by giving bhudana to Brahmanas. Vasishta, the 
prince of Brahmanas, preserved all the creatures during a time of great 
drought when the god Parjanya, Indra, did not bestow his grateful showers 
upon the earth, and for this he has secured eternal bliss for himself. Rama, 
the son of Dasaratha, whose fame echoes throughout this world, attained to 
the eternal regions by making gifts of wealth at sacrifices. 

The renowned Rajarishi Kakshasena went into swarga by duly making 
over to the high-souled Vasishta the wealth which he had kept with him. 
Marutta, the son of Parikshita and the grandson of Karandhama, gave his 
daughter in marriage to Angiras, and instantly attained Swargaloka. The 
most devout king of Panchala, Brahmadatta, attained the blessed realm by 
giving away a precious sankha, a conch shell. King Mitrasaha, by giving his 
favourite wife Madayanti to the mighty Vasishta, found paradise. 
Sudyumna, the son of Manu, meted out the proper punishment to the high- 
souled Likhita, and attained to the most blessed regions. 

The celebrated Rajarishi Saharachitta went to the transcendent places by 
sacrificing his life for the sake of a Brahmana. King Satadyumna found 
heaven by giving Maudgaya a golden mansion replete with all the objects 
of desire. In ancient times, King Sumanyu gave Sandilya a heap of food 
piled high as a hill, and gained swarga. The Salwa prince Dyutimat of great 
splendour attained to the highest regions by giving his kingdom to Richika. 
The royal sage Madiraswa gave his slender-waisted daughter to 
Hiranyahasta, and went to the realm of the gods. The lordly Lomapada 
attained all the vast objects of his desire by giving his daughter Santa in 
marriage to Rishyasringa. 

The Rajarishi Bhagiratha gave his famed daughter Hansi to Kautsa for 
his wife, and went to the eternal regions. King Bhagiratha also gave 
hundreds of thousands of kine with their young ones to Kohala and attained 
to further blessed realms. 

These and many other men, O Yudhishtira, have found swarga for 
themselves, through the punya of their merit of their charities and penances, 
and they have also returned from those heavens again and again. Their fame 
will endure as long as the world will last. 


I have related to you, O Yudhishtira, this story of those good grihastas 
who attained to realms of eternal felicity by dint of their dana and tapasya, 
and by begetting many children. O foremost scion of the Kuruvamsa, by 
always giving dana these men also applied their virtuous minds to the 
performance of yagnas and to tapasya. 

O mighty prince, as night has approached, I will answer for you in the 
morning whatever other questions may arise in your heart.’” 


CANTO 138 


’ T he next morning, Yudhishtira says, ‘I have heard from you, 
Pitamaha, the names of those kings that have ascended into 
heaven. O you whose power is great in the observance of the satyavrata, the 
vow of truth, by following the dana dharma. How many kinds of gift are 
there that should be given? What are the fruits of the several kinds of gifts? 
For what reasons do, which gifts, made to what persons, yield punya? 
Indeed, to whom should dakshina be given? For what reasons and of how 
many kinds, are gifts to be made? I wish to hear all this in detail.’ 

Bhishma says, “Listen, O sinless son of Kunti, as I speak on the subject 
of dana and dakshina to you, in detail. I will tell you, O Bhaarata, how 
dakshina should be given to all the orders of men. 

From desire of punya, from wanting artha, from bhaya, from ichcha, 
free choice, and from daya, pity, are gifts given. Dana, therefore, is of five 
kinds. 

Listen now to the reasons for which gifts are divided into five kinds. 
With the mind free of malice, one should give dakshina to Brahmanas, for 
by giving to the Dvijas, one acquires fame here and great felicity hereafter. 
Such dana is given out of the desire to earn punya. He is in the habit of 
giving dana; or he has already given gifts to me: hearing these words from 
solicitors, one gives away all kinds of wealth to a particular one. Such dana 
is given out of the desire for artha. 

I am not his, nor is he mine. If disregarded, he may injure me. From 
such motives of fear, even a man of learning and wisdom may make gifts to 
an ignorant wretch. Such gifts are made from bhaya. This one is dear to me, 


and I am also dear to him. Influenced by these considerations, a man of 
intelligence, freely and with alacrity, gives gifts to a friend. Such gifts are 
regarded as made out of ichcha, choice. The one that solicits me is poor. He 
is, again, satisfied with a little. From these considerations, one should 
always make gifts to the poor, moved by pity. Gifts made like this are 
regarded as made from daya. 

These are the five kinds of gift. They enhance the giver’s punya and 
kirti, his merits and his fame. The Lord of all creatures, Brahma himself, 
has said that one should always give charity according to one’s means.’” 


CANTO 139 


: nave udhishtira says, “‘O Grandsire, you are possessed of great 

wisdom. Indeed, you fully know every branch of learning. In our 

great vamsa, you are the only individual that dwells with all the vigyanas. I 

want to hear from you about dharma and artha, righteousness and profit, 
which lead to felicity hereafter, and that are full of wonder to all creatures. 

The time that is upon us is full of great distress. The like of it hardly 
ever overtakes kinsmen and friends. Indeed, other than you, O greatest of 
men, we now have none else that can take the place of an acharya. If, O 
sinless one, my brothers and I deserve the favour, it befits you to answer the 
question I want to ask. 

This one here is Narayana, who is endowed with every prosperity and is 
honoured by all the kings. Even he waits upon you, showing you every 
indulgence and revering you greatly. From your love for me, and for my 
weal as well as that of my brothers, in the presence of this Vasudeva 
Krishna himself and of all these kings, I humbly ask you to tell us about 
dharma and artha.’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Hearing these words from Yudhishtira, 
Bhishma, the son of the river named after Bhagiratha, is full of joy out of 
his overflowing love for the Kuru king and his brothers, and he speaks thus 
to them. 

Bhishma says, ‘Rajan, I will surely narrate for you some delightful and 
ancient discourses on the subject of the puissance of this Vishnu as 
displayed in days of yore and as I have heard them from my great gurus. 
Listen to me, also, as I describe the infinite powers of Mahadeva Siva, who 


is Vrishabhdhvaja, the Great God who has a bull for his emblem. Listen to 
me and I will tell you of the doubt that filled the mind of the great Rudra’s 
wife, and that of Rudra himself. 

Once on a time, the Dharmatman Krishna kept a vrata for ten and two 
years. To look upon him who had undergone the rite of initiation for the 
observance of his great vow, there came to that place Narada and Parvata, 
and the island-born Krishna, and Dhaumya, that foremost of japis, and 
Devala, and Kasyapa, and Hastikasyapa. Other Rishis, also, endowed with 
diksha and niyama, followed by their disciples, and accompanied by many 
Siddhas, and many ascetics of great punya, came there. 

The son of Devaki offered them such honours of hospitality as are 
deserving of the highest praise and as are offered to the gods alone. Those 
great Rishis sat themselves down upon fine seats, some of which were green 
and some golden and some that were embellished with the plumes of the 
peacock, and some that were perfectly new and fresh. 

Thus seated, they began to converse sweetly with one another on 
subjects connected with dharma and karma, as well as those pertaining to 
many Rajarishis and Devas. At that time Krishna’s blazing tejas, in a 
terrifying form of fire, Narayana rising from the fuel that consisted of the 
rigid observance of his vow, issued fulminant from the mouth of Krishna of 
wondrous feats. That fire began to consume those mountains with their trees 
and vines and little plants, their birds and deer and snakes and beasts of 
prey. Soon the summit of that mountain presented a scorched and dismal 
appearance. Beasts of every species gave throat to cries and screams of fear 
and pain, as they perished, and in moments the mountain summit was bereft 
of every living creature. 

That fire of towering, raging flames, having consumed everything 
leaving no remnant, then returned to Vishnu and touched his feet like a 
docile disciple. That scorcher of his enemies, Krishna, saw that mountain 
burnt, cast a benign look upon it and brought it back to its former condition. 
The mountain was again adorned with flowering trees and creepers, and 
once more echoed with the notes and cries and other sounds of birds and 
deer and predators and serpents. Seeing that wonderful and inconceivable 
sight, all the Rishis were astounded. Their hair stood on end and their eyes 
were full of tears. 

Seeing the sages wonderstruck, Narayana, most eloquent of all that 
speak, addressed them in sweet and refreshing words, “Why has wonder 


filled the hearts of this conclave of Rishis, you that are always free from 
attachment of every kind, that are divested of the very idea of ahamkara, 
and that are absolutely knowing of every sacred vigyana? It befits these 
Rishis of tapodhana and free from every stain of sin, to explicate to me this 
doubt that has arisen in my heart.” 

The Rishis said, “It is you that creates all the worlds, and it is you that 
destroys them again. It is you that are winter, it is you that are summer, and 
it is you that are the season of rains. Of all the creatures, mobile and 
immobile, that are found on the earth, you are the father, you are the 
mother, you are the master, and you are the origin. Even this, O slayer of 
Madhu, is a matter of wonder and doubt with us. O source of all 
auspiciousness, it befits you to resolve for us the fear and wonder in our 
minds with regard to the fire that sprang from your mouth. Once our fears 
are dispelled, we shall then, O Hari, recite to you what we have heard and 
seen.” 

Krishna said, “The fire that issued from my mouth and that resembles 
the all-consuming yuga-fire in splendour, and by which this mountain was 
devastated, is nothing less than the tejas of Vishnu. You Rishis, you are men 
who have conquered wrath, have brought your senses under complete 
control, O tapodhanas, and who are very gods in puissance. Yet you have 
suffered yourselves to be agitated and distressed. 

I am now entirely absorbed with the observances of my vrata. Verily, 
because of my vow, a fire issued from my mouth. You must not allow 
yourselves to be agitated. It is for keeping a stern vrata that I came to this 
auspicious mountain. The object that brought me here is to acquire through 
tapasya a son who will be my equal in might and energy. From my tapa, the 
Atman in my body became transformed into fire and issued forth from my 
mouth. 

That fire emerged to behold the boon-giving Grandsire of the universe. 
The Pitamaha Brahma, you foremost of ascetics, told my soul that half the 
tejas of the Great God who has the bull for his emblem will be born as my 
son. Returning from its mission, the Agni has come back to me and 
approached my feet like a sishya desirous of serving me dutifully. Indeed, 
casting off its fury, it has come back to me and to its own proper nature. I 
have told you, in brief, a mystery appertaining to him who has the lotus for 
his origin and who is endowed with Mahabuddhi. 


Rishis, tapodhanas, you should not give way to fear. You all do own far- 
reaching vision. You can travel everywhere without being constrained or 
impeded. Blazing with vows that sannyasis keep, you are adorned with 
gyana and vigyana. And I now ask you to tell me of something wonderful 
which you have heard of or seen on earth or in heaven. I feel an eagerness 
to taste the honey of the speech from your lips, the honey that will, I am 
sure, be as sweet as a jet of amrita. 

If I see anything on earth or in heaven, which is of exceptionally 
delightful and wonderful aspect, but which is unknown to all of you, O you 
Rishis that look like so many Devas, I say that that is because of my own 
Supreme Nature which cannot be obstructed by anything. Anything 
wonderful of which the knowledge dwells in me or is acquired by my own 
insight or inspiration ceases to appear wonderful to me. 

Anything, however, that is recited by pious sages, men of great dharma 
and goodness, must be listened to with respect and devotion. Such 
discourses exist in this world since time out of mind and are as durable as 
characters engraved on rocks. I wish, therefore, to hear at this meeting 
something from the lips of you who are such very good men, and cannot 
fail to be bestow punya on others.” 

Hearing these words of Krishna, all those Rishis were filled with 
surprise. They began to gaze at Janardana with those eyes of theirs that 
were as beautiful and large as the petals of the lotus. Some of them began to 
glorify him and some began to worship him with reverence. Indeed, all of 
them then hymned the praises of the slayer of Madhu with words whose 
meanings were adorned with the eternal Riks. All those sages then 
appointed Narada, foremost of all who know speech, to satisfy what 
Krishna asked. 

The Munis said, “It falls to you, O Narada, to describe in full, from the 
beginning, to Hrishikesa, that wonderful and inconceivable incident which 
occurred, O mighty one, on the mountains of Himavat and which was 
witnessed by those of us that had gone there in course of our pilgrimage to 
the sacred tirthas. Verily, for the benefit of all the Rishis assembled here, 
you should indeed relate that incident.” 

Thus addressed by those Munis, the Devarishi, the divine Narada, 
narrated this tale of the incidents which had occurred some time by.’” 


CANTO 140 


66 B hishma says, ‘Narada, that holy Rishi, friend of Narayana, told of 
the discourse between Sankara and his consort Uma. 

Narada said, “Once upon a time, the righteous-souled Lord of all the 
gods, Mahadeva Vrishabhdhvaja, practised the most severe tapasya on the 
sacred mountains of Himavat that are the resort of Siddhas and Charanas. 
Those enchanting mountains are overgrown with diverse kinds of the finest 
plants and adorned with various flowers. At that time, they were peopled by 
the different tribes of Apsaras and hosts of ghostly beings. There the Great 
God sat, filled with bliss, and surrounded by hundreds of Pramathas who 
presented myriad and strange aspects to the eye of any beholder. Some of 
them were ugly and awkward, some were of dazzling handsome features, 
and some presented the most wonderful appearances altogether. Some had 
faces like the lion’s, some like the tiger’s and some like the elephant’s. In 
fact, those ghostly Ganas presented every kind of animal face. Some had 
faces of the jackal, some faces resembled the leopard’s; some were like the 
ape’s, some like the bull’s. Some of them had faces like the owl’s; some like 
the hawk’s; some had faces like those of deer of many species. 

Mahadeva was also surrounded by Kinnaras and Yakshas and 
Gandharvas and Rakshasas and various other created beings. The asrama to 
which Mahadeva had betaken himself abounded with unearthly flowers and 
blazed with celestial rays of light. It was perfumed with unearthly 
sandalwood, and heaven’s incense was burnt on every side. And it echoed 
with the strains of divine instruments. Indeed, it resounded with the beat of 
mridangas and panavas, the boom of sankhas, and the sound of bheris. It 


teemed with Ganas of diverse tribes who danced in joy, and with peacocks 
that also danced with fans unfurled. Forming as it did the resort of the 
Rishis of heaven, the Apsaras danced there in joy. The whole place was 
exceedingly fascinating to the eye. It was of unworldly beauty, truly like 
swarga itself. Its entire aspect was passing wonderful and, indeed, it is 
indescribable for its grace and sweetness. 

Verily, with the tapasya of that Great Deity who sleeps on mountain 
breasts, that prince of mountains shone with ineffable loveliness. It 
resounded with the chant of the Vedas uttered by learned Brahmanas 
devoted to Vedic recitation. Echoing with the hum of bees, O Madhava, the 
mountain became incomparable in beauty. Seeing the Great God who is 
endued with a fierce form and who looks ever like a Mahotsava, a great 
cosmic festival, all were filled, O Janardana, with joy. All of them, the 
Siddhas who have drawn in their vital seed, the Maruts, the Vasus, the 
Sadhyas, the Viswedevas, Vasava himself, the Yakshas, the Nagas, the 
Pisachas, the Lokapalas, the several sacred fires, the winds, and all the great 
creatures dwelt on that mountain with minds concentrated in yoga, and 
were awash on a tide of bliss. 

All the seasons were present there and scattered those realms with all 
kinds of wonderful flowers. Diverse kinds of lustrous plants illuminated the 
woods and forests on that mountain. A myriad species of birds, all brimful 
with joy, hopped about and sang merrily on that enchanting mountain, and 
their songs were mellifluous and full of adoration. 

The Mahatman Mahadeva sat, displayed in ineffable beauty, on one of 
the peaks that shone with precious minerals, as if it served as his grand 
bedstead. Round his loins was a tiger-skin, and a lion-skin across his breast. 
His sacred thread was a snake. His arms were decked with a pair of red 
angadas; his beard was green. He had matted jata on his head. Of terrible 
features, he it is that strikes fear in the hearts of all the enemies of the gods. 
It is he, again, that reassures all creatures by dispelling their fears. He is 
adored by his worshippers as Vrishabhdhvaja, the bull-bannered. 

Looking at Mahadeva, the great Rishis bowed down to him touching the 
ground with their heads. Of forgiving souls, they were all instantly freed by 
this sight of Siva from every sin and entirely purified. The asrama of the 
Pasupati, that Lord of all creatures, he of many terrible forms, shone with 
strange and uncanny beauty. Covered by many great serpents, it was 
unapproachable and unbearable for ordinary men to gaze upon. 


Then, in the twinkling of an eye, O Madhusudana, everything there 
became marvellously wonderful. Indeed, the abode of that Greatest God 
began to blaze with a most terrible beauty. To Mahadeva seated there, 
perfectly serene, came his consort Parvati, the daughter of Himavat, 
surrounded by the wives of the Ganas, the weird and ghostly beings who 
are the companions of Siva. Her attire was like that of her lord and the vows 
she observed were like his. She held a jar at her waist that was filled with 
the waters of every tirtha, and was accompanied by the Devis of all the 
mountain rivers and streams. Those auspicious goddesses walked in her 
train. They came raining flowers on every side and exuding all kinds of 
unearthly fragrances. She who loves to dwell on the breast of Himavat 
advanced towards her Great Lord. 

The beautiful Uma, smiling and wanting to be playful, covered her Lord 
Mahadeva’s eyes from behind with her two exquisite hands. As soon as 
Siva’s eyes were covered, all the worlds fell into darkness and life seemed 
extinct everywhere in the universe. The homa rites ceased. The akhanda 
was suddenly deprived of the sacred vashat also. All living creatures were 
dismayed and filled with dread. Indeed, when Uma shut the eyes of the 
Pasupati, the universe was without all its countless suns. 

However, quickly that overspreading darkness disappeared. A mighty 
flame flared forth from Mahadeva’s forehead. A rutilant third eye, another 
sun, appeared upon his brow. That eye began to blaze forth like the yuga- 
fire and to consume that mountain. The large-eyed daughter of Himavat, 
seeing what occurred, bowed her head to Mahadeva of that eye of the fire of 
the Pralaya. She stood there with her gaze fixed on her lord. 

The mountain forests burned on every side, with their vaas and other 
trees of straight trunks, and their fragrant sandalwood trees and myriad 
oshadhis, and herds of deer and other animals, filled with fright, ran in 
panic to the place where Hara sat and sought his protection. With those 
creatures thronging it to bursting, the asrama of Siva shone forth with a 
most wondrous and exceptional beauty. Meanwhile, that fire, swelling and 
billowing wildly, soared up into the very heavens and, with the brilliance 
and electric volatility of lightning, brighter than a dozen suns in potency 
and refulgence, covered every side like the all-destroying yuga-fire of the 
Pralaya. 

In a moment, the Himavat mountains were consumed, with their metal, 
rock, minerals and summits and shining plants and herbs. Seeing Himavat 


consumed, the daughter of that prince of mountains sought the protection of 
the Great God, her husband, and stood before him with her hands joined in 
reverence. Then Sarva, seeing Uma overcome by an accession of womanly 
mildness and finding that she was stricken to have her father Himalaya 
reduced to that plight, cast a benign look upon the mountain. In a moment, 
Himavat was restored to his old condition and was as handsome and 
magnificent to behold as ever. Indeed, the mountain put forth a cheerful 
aspect. In a trice, all his trees bloomed with flowers. Seeing Himavat 
returned to his natural condition, the Goddess Uma, who has no fault, 
addressed her lord, that master of all creatures, the divine Maheswara, in 
these words. 

Uma said, ‘O Holy One, O Lord of all creatures, O Trisulin, god that are 
armed with the trident, O you of the highest vows, a great doubt has filled 
my mind and you must resolve it for me. For what reason has this third eye 
appeared on your forehead? Why was the mountain consumed with his 
forests and all that belonged to him? Why also, O Illustrious God, have you 
restored Himavan to his former self? Indeed, having burned him once, why 
have you again covered him with trees?’ 

Maheswara said, ‘O flawless devi, you covered my eyes in jest and all 
the universe was plunged in darkness. When the universe became dark, O 
Parvati, I created the third eye for the protection and light of all creatures. 
The fire of that eye consumed this mountain. And to please you, O devi, I 
once more made Himavat what he was.’ 

Uma said, ‘Swami, why are your faces which look at the east, the north 
and the west, so handsome and so agreeable to look at like the very moon? 
And why is that face which is turned to the south so terrible? Why are your 
matted locks tawny in hue and so stiff and erect? Why is your throat as blue 
as the peacock’s feathers? Why, O Lustrous God, is the pinaka always in 
your hand? Why are you always a brahmacharin with jata? O Lord, explain 
all these to me. I am your wife who seeks to follow the same dharma as 
you. And I am your devoted bhakta, O Siva Vrishabdhvaja!’ 

Narada continued, “Thus addressed by the daughter of the Prince of All 
Mountains, the illustrious wielder of the pinaka, the powerful Mahadeva, 
became so very pleased with her. The Great God said to her, “Blessed devi, 
listen to me as I explain why my forms are so, and the reasons for them 
being thus.’” 


CANTO 141 


66 T he Blessed and Holy One said, ‘In days of yore, Brahma created a 
most wonderful and auspicious Apsara called Tilottama; he did 
this by culling seeds of beauty from every beautiful object in the universe. 
One day, that devi of face and form unrivalled in the universe, came to me, 
O Parvati, on the pretext of walking around me in pradakshina but in truth, 
impelled by the desire to tempt me. In whatever direction that woman of 
beautiful teeth turned, a new face of mine instantly appeared, so eager did I 
become to watch her. All those faces of mine were handsome. Thus, in 
consequence of the desire to look at Tilottama, I became four-faced, 
through my yoga shakti. With my face the one which is turned towards the 
east, I exercise the sovereignty over the universe. With my face turned 
towards the north, I sport with you, O you of faultless form and features. 
That face of mine which is turned to the west is gentle and auspicious. With 
it I ordain the happiness of all creatures. My face which is turned towards 
the south is terrible. With it I destroy all creatures. 

I live as a brahmacharin with matted locks on my head, impelled by the 
desire of doing good to all creatures. The bow pinaka is always in my hand 
to accomplish the purposes of the Devas. In days of antiquity, Indra, who 
wanted to acquire my power and prosperity, cast his vajra at me. That 
weapon scorched my throat. It is for this that I became blue-throated.’ 

Uma said, ‘When, O first of all, there are so many excellent vahanas of 
great beauty, why is it that you have a bull for your mount?’ 

Maheswara said, “In the days of old, the Pitamaha Brahma created the 
celestial cow Surabhi and she yielded abundant milk like amrita. From her 


there came a large number of gavyas, all of which gave copious milk sweet 
as nectar. Once upon a time, some froth fell from the mouth of one of her 
calves on my body. I was enraged at this and my wrath singed all the cows, 
which then became of many hues. I was pacified by Brahma, master of all 
the worlds, who knows all things. It was he who gave me this bull both as a 
mount to bear me where I will go and to be a device on my banner.’ 

Uma said, “You have many abodes in heaven, of diverse forms and 
possessed of every comfort and luxury. Why, O Holy One, do you reside in 
the smasana, the cremation grounds, abandoning all those mansions of 
every delight? The smasana is full of the burnt hair and bones of the dead; it 
abounds with vultures and jackals, and is marked with countless funeral 
pyres. Full of carrion and slick with fat and blood, with entrails and bones 
strewn all over it, and always echoing with the howls of jackals, it is an 
unclean place.’ 

Maheswara said, ‘I always wander over all the earth in search of a 
sacred place. I do not, however, ever find any place that is more sacred than 
the smasana. Hence, of all abodes, the burning ghat pleases my heart most, 
shaded that it generally is by branches of the banyan and adorned with torn 
and burnt garlands of flowers. O you of sweet smiles, the multitudes of 
bhutas and pramathas that are my companions love to dwell in the grounds 
of cremation. I do not like, O devi, to live anywhere without them being by 
my side. Hence, the smasana is a sacred home to me. Indeed, auspicious 
Parvati, it seems to me to be swarga. Most sacred and of great punya, the 
smasana is always eulogised by those that wish for holy abodes.’ 

Uma said, ‘Swami, O Lord of all creatures, O foremost of all observers 
of dharma, I have a great pang of doubt, O Pinakapani, O granter of boons. 
These ascetics, my mighty Lord, have undergone many kinds of austerities. 
In the world, ascetics are seen wandering everywhere in diverse forms and 
clad in motley attire. To bless this great gathering of Rishis, as also myself, 
I implore you to resolve, O chastiser of all foes, this doubt of mine. What 
indications is dharma said to possess? How, indeed, do men come to know 
the intricacies of dharma, so they succeed in observing them? Omnipotent 
Lord, O great knower of dharma, I ask you this.’ 

When the daughter of Himavat asked this question, the conclave of 
Rishis worshipped the goddess and adored her with eulogies adorned with 
Riks and with hymns of deep import. 


Maheswara said, “Non-violence, truthfulness of speech, compassion 
towards all beings, tranquillity of soul and the giving of charity to the best 
of one’s power, are the foremost duties of the grihasta. Abstention from 
sexual congress with the wives of other men, protection of the wealth and 
the woman committed to one’s charge, unwillingness to appropriate what is 
not given to one, and avoidance of honey and meat—these are the five chief 
kartavyas. Indeed, dharma has many branches, all of which are full of 
happiness. But these are the kartavyas which embodied creatures who 
regard dharma as the most superior path should observe and practise. Even 
these are the fonts of punya.’ 

Uma said, ‘Swami, I wish to ask you about another matter on which I 
have great doubts. It behoves you to answer me and dispel my doubts. What 
are the punya dharmas of the four varnas? What duties pertain to the 
Brahmana? What to the Kshatriya? What are the indications of those that 
belong to the Vaisya? And what of duties of the Sudra?’ 

The Holy One said, “Blessed Devi, the question you have asked is a 
most proper one. Brahmanas are regarded as being most blessed, and are, 
indeed, gods on earth. The observance of fasts, the subjugation of all the 
senses is always the svadharma of the Brahmana. When the Brahmana 
succeeds in properly performing his dharma in every way, he attains to 
identity with Brahman. The observance of brahmacharya, O goddess, is his 
main ritual. The observance of vratas and upanayana, the investiture with 
the sacred thread, are his other duties. It is through these that he becomes 
truly regenerate. He becomes a Brahmana for worshipping his preceptors 
and other elders as also the deities. Verily, the dharma which has for its soul 
the study of the Vedas is the source of all piety. That is the religion which 
the embodied who are devoted to piety and duty must observe and practise.’ 

Uma said, ‘Swami, all my doubts have not been dispelled. Explain to 
me in detail what the duties are of all the four orders of men.’ 

Maheswara said, “Listening to the mysteries of dharma and karma, the 
keeping of the vratas indicated in the Vedas, attention to the sacred fire, and 
the accomplishment of the work of the guru, leading a mendicant life, 
always bearing the sacred thread, constant recitation of the Vedas, and rigid 
adherence to brahmacharya, are all part of the svadharma of the Brahmana. 
When the time of study is over, the Brahmana, receiving the command of 
his guru, should leave his preceptor’s house and return to his father’s home. 
Upon his return, he should marry a wife who is suitable for him. Another 


dharma of the Brahmana consists in avoiding food prepared by a Sudra. 
Walking the path of righteousness, always observing fasts and the practices 
of brahmacharya, are his other duties. 

The householder, the grihasta, should keep his domestic fire kindled for 
daily worship. He should study the Vedas. He should pour libations in 
honour of the Pitris and the Devas. He must keep his senses under control. 
He should eat what remains after serving the gods and guests and all his 
dependants. He should be abstemious in food, truthful in speech, and pure 
both in body and mind, outwardly and inwardly. Attending to guests is 
another dharma of the householder, as also the maintaining of the three 
sacrificial fires. 

The grihasta must also attend to the ordinary sacrifices that go by the 
name of ishti and should also dedicate animals to the Devas according to 
the scriptural laws. Indeed, the performance of sacrifices is his highest 
dharma as also a complete abstention from injury to all creatures. Never to 
eat before serving the deities and guests and dependants is another duty of 
the householder. The food that remains after serving gods and guests and 
dependants is called vighasa. The householder should eat vighasa. Indeed, 
to eat after the members of one’s family, including servants and other 
dependants, is regarded as one of the special duties of the regenerate 
householder, who should be ever knowing and observant of the Vedas. The 
vyavahara, conduct, of husband and wife, in the household, should be 
equal. He should every day make offerings of flowers and other auspicious 
things to those deities that rule over domesticity. 

The grihasta should take care that his house is every day properly 
rubbed and washed with cow-dung and water. He should also daily observe 
fasts. Well-cleaned and well-rubbed, his home must be fumigated every day 
with the smoke of clarified butter poured onto his sacred fire in honour of 
the Devas and the Pitris. Even these are the karmas which apply to the 
grihastasrama, the householder’s life for a Brahmana. This dharma of the 
Dvija truly upholds the world. It flows always and eternally from the 
righteous among the Brahmanas that lead a life of domesticity. 

Do you listen to me with attention, O goddess, for I will now tell you 
what the svadharma is of the Kshatriya, about which also you have asked 
me. From the beginning, it has been said that the first duty of the Kshatriya 
is to protect all creatures. The king is the acquirer of a fixed share of the 
punya earned by his subjects. Through this the king becomes endowed with 


dharma. The king of men who rules and protects his subjects righteously 
acquires, by virtue of the protection he offers to others, many realms of 
prosperity in the world to come. 

The other duties of a Kshatriya consist of self-restraint and Vedic study, 
the pouring of libations on the sacred fire, the giving of charity, the bearing 
of the sacred thread, sacrifices, the performance of other religious rites, the 
support of servants and dependants, and perseverance in and completion of 
acts that have been begun. It is also his duty to perform sacrifices and other 
religious rites according to the laws laid down in the Vedas. 

Another dharma of the Kshatriya is to mete out punishments according 
to offences committed. Adherence to the practice of properly judging the 
disputes of litigants before him, and a devotion to truthfulness in speech, 
and intercession to help the distressed, are the other kartavyas by 
discharging which the king acquires great glory both here and hereafter. 

He should also willingly lay down his life on the field of battle, having 
displayed great prowess on behalf of kine and Brahmanas. Such a king 
acquires in swarga such regions of grace as are won by the performance of 
Aswamedha yagnas. 

The duties of the Vaisya consist of the keeping of cattle and farming, the 
pouring of libations on the sacred fire, the making of gifts and study. Trade, 
walking in the path of dharma, hospitality, peacefulness, self-restraint, the 
welcoming of Brahmanas and renunciation are the other eternal duties of 
the Vaisya. The Vaisya, engaged in trade and walking in the path of 
righteousness, should never sell sesame and perfumes and wine or spirits. 
He should discharge the duties of hospitality towards all. He is at liberty to 
pursue dharma, artha and kama or pleasure according to his means and to 
the extent that is judicious for him. 

Service of the three regenerate varnas constitutes the high dharma of the 
Sudra. That Sudra who is truthful in speech and who has subdued his senses 
is regarded as having acquired punya tapa. Verily, the Sudra who on being 
visited by a guest discharges the kartavya of hospitality towards him, is 
regarded as acquiring the punya of high penances. That intelligent Sudra 
whose conduct is righteous and who worships the Devas and Brahmanas is 
blessed with the rewards of dharma. 

O beautiful devi, I have thus told you of the svadharmas of the four 
orders of men. What else do you wish to hear?’ 


Uma said, ‘You have told me of the separate svadharmas of the four 
orders, auspicious and beneficial for them. Do you now tell me, O Swami, 
what the common duties are of all the varnas.’ 

Maheswara said, “The foremost of all beings in the universe, the Creator 
Brahma, ever wishing for accomplishments, created the Brahmanas to save 
all the worlds. Among all created beings, they are, truly, gods on earth. I 
will first tell you what the religious karmas are that they should perform and 
what the rewards are which they win through them. That dharma ordained 
for the Brahmanas is the foremost of all religions. For the sake of 
righteousness in the world, three dharmas were created by the Self-born 
One. Whenever the world is created, those are also created by the 
Grandsire. Do you listen. 

These are the three eternal dharmas. The dharma propounded in the 
Vedas is the highest; that which is expounded in the Smritis is the next; the 
third is that which is based upon the practices of those who are regarded as 
men of dharma. The Brahmana possessed of learning should have the three 
Vedas. He should never make the study of the Vedas or recitation of the 
scriptures the means of his livelihood. He should devote himself to the three 
well-known karmas of making gifts, studying the Vedas and performing 
sacrifices. He should transcend lust, wrath and greed. He should be a friend 
to all creatures. A person who owns these attributes is called a Brahmana. 
The Lord of the universe further declared six karmas for the Brahmanas. 
Listen to those eternal duties. 

The performance of sacrifices, officiating at the sacrifices of others, the 
making of dana, the acceptance of dakshina, teaching, and study are the six 
karmas by accomplishing which a Brahmans wins punya. Indeed, the daily 
study of the Vedas is a sacred duty. Sacrifice is another eternal duty. The 
making of gifts according to the measure of his means and in accord with 
the law is much lauded in the Brahmana. Tranquillity of mind is a high 
dharma that has always been with righteous men. 

Pure-hearted grihastas can always earn great merit. Indeed, he who 
cleanses his soul by the performance of the five sacrifices, who is truthful in 
speech, who is free from malice, who makes gifts, who treats with 
hospitality and honour all regenerate guests, who lives in well-cleaned 
homes, who is free from pride, who is always sincere in his dealings, who 
speaks sweet and assuring words, who takes pleasure in serving guests and 
others arrived at his home, and who eats the vighasa, the food that remains 


after all the members of his family and dependants have eaten, wins great 
punya. 

That man who offers water to his guests to wash their feet and hands, 
who gives the arghya to honour his guest, who duly offers seats, and beds, 
and lamps to light the darkness, and shelter to those that come to his house, 
is regarded as a most righteous one. The householder who rises at dawn and 
washes his mouth and face, and serves food to his guests, and having 
honoured them duly gives them leave to depart, and follows them as a mark 
of honour for a short distance, acquires eternal merit. Hospitality towards 
all, and the pursuit of dharma, artha and kama are the duties of the 
householder. 

The dharma of the Sudra also consists in the pursuit of dharma, artha 
and kama. The dharma ordained for the grihasta is said to have pravritti for 
its chief indication. Auspicious, and beneficial to all creatures, I will tell 
you about it. The householder should always make gifts according to the 
measure of his means. He should also perform frequent sacrifices, as best he 
can afford. Indeed, he who wishes to achieve his own good should always 
seek to gain punya. The householder should acquire wealth by righteous 
means. The wealth thus acquired should be carefully divided into three 
portions, keeping the requirements of dharma in view. With one of those 
portions, he should perform all auspicious karmas. With another he should 
seek to gratify his cravings for pleasure. The third portion he should set 
aside to increase. 

The dharma of nivritti is different. It exists for mukti from re-birth by 
absorption into Brahman. I will tell you in detail of the conduct that 
constitutes it. Listen to me well, O devi. One of the duties inculcated by the 
nivritti marga is compassion towards all creatures. The man that follows it 
should not dwell in one place for more than a single day. Wishing to 
achieve emancipation, the followers of this nivritti dharma free themselves 
from the bonds of hope and desire. They have no attachment to home, to the 
kamandalu they bear for water, to the cloths that cover their loins, or the 
seat whereupon they rest, or the triple stick, the tridanda they bear in their 
hands, or the bed they sleep on, or the sacred fire they worship, or the 
chamber that houses them. 

A follower of nivritti sets his heart upon the workings of his soul. His 
mind is devoted to the Supreme Brahman. He is filled with the idea of 
attaining to Brahman. He is always devoted to Yoga and the Samkhya 


philosophy. He desires no other shelter than the foot of a tree. He sleeps in 
empty and abandoned houses of men. He sleeps on the banks of rivers. He 
takes pleasure in staying on such banks. He is free from every attachment, 
and from every tie of affection. He merges the existence of his own soul 
into the Supreme Soul, his Atman into the Paramatman. 

Standing like a wooden post, and abstaining from all food he does only 
such karma as point to mukti. Or, he may wander about, devoted to yoga. 
Even these are the eternal ways of a follower of the dharma of nivritti. He 
lives aloof from his species. He is free from all attachments. He never 
remains in the same place for more than a day. Free from all bonds, he 
roves over the world. Emancipated from all ties, he never sleeps on even the 
same river bank for more than a night. Even this is the religion of those who 
seek and know moksha as declared in the Vedas. Even this is the righteous 
path that is trodden by the wisest. He who follows this path leaves no trace 
or vestige of himself behind. 

Bhikshus or followers of the way of mukti are of four kinds. They are 
Kutichakas, Bahudakas, Hamsas and Paramahamsas. The second is superior 
to the first, the third to the second, and the fourth to the third. There is 
nothing superior to the Paramahamsa; nor is there anything inferior to him 
or beside him or before him. His is a condition that is divested of sorrow 
and happiness, that is auspicious and free from decrepitude and death and 
that knows no change.’ 

Uma said, “You have described the dharma of the grihasta, that of 
mukti, and that upon the observances of the righteous is founded. These 
paths are exalted and exceedingly beneficial to the world of living beings. O 
you that know all about every dharma, I wish now to hear what is the high 
dharma of the Rishis. I always have a liking for those that dwell in asramas. 
The fragrance of the smoke of the libations of ghrita poured on the sacred 
fire pervades holy asramas and makes them so delightful. O Mahadeva, 
when I inhale this fragrance, my heart is always filled with such joy. O 
Mighty God, I have questions about the dharma of the ascetics. You know 
every nuance of all dharmas. Do you enlighten me, O God of gods, in 
detail, on this subject.’ 

The Blessed and Holy One said, ‘I will tell about the most high and 
great dharma of the Rishis. By following that religion, O Auspicious Devi, 
the sages attain to success, through the severe tapasya that they practise. 
Most blessed one, do you hear from the beginning what the duties are of 


those righteous Rishis who are conversant with every dharma and that are 
known by the name of Phenapas. 

The Pitamaha Brahma, during the days he devoted to the observance of 
tapa, drank some amrita in the form of water. That water had flowed in 
heaven from a great sacrifice. The froth of that water is most auspicious and 
because of Brahma’s having drunk it, it partook of his own nature. Those 
Rishis that subsist upon the measure of froth that thus issued from the 
pavitra jala are called Phenapas, froth-eaters. Even this is the vyavahara of 
those Shuddhatman Rishis, O devi of tapodhana. 

Listen now and I will you who the Balakhilyas are. The Balakhilyas are 
ascetics that have won success through their penances. They dwell in the 
disc of the sun. Adopting the means of subsistence of birds, those Rishis, 
knowers of every ritual and way of dharma, live by the Unchha vrata. Their 
attire consists of deer-skins or barks of trees. Freed from every pair of 
opposites, joy and sorrow, pleasure and pain and the rest, the Balakhilyas 
walk in this path of righteousness. 

They are as big as a digit of the thumb. Distributed into various classes, 
each class lives in the practice of the duties assigned to it. They desire only 
to perform tapa. High, indeed, is the punya they win through their righteous 
conduct. They are regarded as having attained to equality with the gods and 
exist for the accomplishment of the purposes of the gods. Having burnt 
away all their sins by severe penance, they blaze forth in effulgence, 
illuminating all the points of the compass. 

Others, called Chakracharas, are endowed with purified souls and 
devoted to the practice of compassion. Righteous in their conduct and 
possessed of great sanctity, they live in the world of Soma. Thus dwelling 
near enough to the region of the Pitris, they live by drinking the rays of 
Soma. There are others called Samprakshalas and Asmkuttas and 
Dantolukhalas. These live near the Soma-drinking deities and others that 
drink flames of fire. With their wives, and with passions under complete 
control, they too subsist upon the rays of Soma. They pour libations of 
ghrita on the sacred fire, and adore the Pitris with the due rites. They also 
perform the best-known sacrifices. Even this is said to constitute their 
dharma. 

The Rishi dharma, O goddess, is always observed by those who are 
homeless and who are free to rove through every realm including that of the 
gods. There are, again, other classes of Rishis, of whom I will tell you. Do 


you listen. It is needful that they who observe the different dharma of the 
Rishis should subjugate their passions and know the Soul. Indeed, in my 
opinion, lust and wrath must be completely conquered. With corn acquired 
through the Unchha vrata, they should pour libations on the sacred fire, 
sitting on a fixed seat engaged the while in the yagna called Dharmaratri, 
the performance of the Soma yagna, acquisition of especial and arcane 
knowledge, the giving of sacrificial dakshina, which forms the fifth, the 
daily performance of yagnas, devotion to the worship of the Pitris and the 
Devas, hospitality towards all. Abstention from all luxurious food prepared 
from cow’s milk, taking pleasure in tranquillity of heart, lying on bare rocks 
or the earth, devotion to yoga, eating herbs and leaves of trees, and 
subsisting upon fruits and roots and wind and water and moss, are some of 
the ways of the Rishis by which they attain to the end that belongs to free 
souls unsubdued by the world. 

When the smoke has ceased to curl upwards from a house, when the 
husking machine has ceased to ply, when the hearth-fire has been 
extinguished, when all the inmates have eaten, when dishes are no longer 
carried from room to room, when mendicants have ceased to walk the 
streets, it is then that the man who is devoted to the religion of truth and 
peace of soul, wishing still for a guest but finding his desire unsatisfied, 
should eat whatever vighasa he may still find in the house. Through such 
conduct, one becomes a practiser of the Muni dharma. 

One should not be arrogant, nor proud, nor cheerless and discontented; 
nor should one wonder at anything. One should behave equably towards 
friends and foes. Verily, he who is the foremost of all persons who know 
dharma should also be friendly towards all creatures.’” 


CANTO 142 


¢ aL ma said, “Forest recluses live in the most beautiful wild places, 

among the springs and fountains of rivers, in bowers by the sides 
of streams and rills, on hills and mountains, in woods and forests, and in 
sacred places full of fruits and roots. With concentrated dhyana and 
observant of vratas and niyamas, they dwell in such places. I want, O 
Sankara, to hear the sacred laws which they follow. These Munis, O God of 
all gods, depend for protection upon themselves alone.’ 

Maheswara said, ‘Do you hear with dhyana what the duties are of 
vanaprasthas. Having listened to them with one mind, O goddess, do you 
set your heart upon dharma. Listen then to what should be the karmas of 
righteous hermits crowned with success, who keep rigid vows and follow 
stringent laws, and dwell in wild vanas. 

Bathing thrice a day, worshipping the Pitris and the Devas, pouring 
libations on the sacred fire, performing those sacrifices and rites that go by 
the name of ishti homa, picking up the grains of nivara paddy, eating fruit 
and roots, and using oil pressed from inguda and castor-seeds are their 
karmas. Having gone through the practices of yoga and being crowned with 
ascetic success, and freed from lust and anger, they should seat themselves 
in the posture called Virasana. Indeed, they must live in such places where 
cowards never go. 

Observing the excellent injunctions relating to yoga, sitting in summer 
in the midst of four fires on four sides with the sun overhead the fifth, 
practising what is called Manduka yoga, of the frog, and either always 
seated in Virasana, or lying on bare rocks or the earth, these men, with 


hearts set upon dharma, must expose themselves to cold and water and fire. 
They subsist upon water or air or river moss. They use two pieces of stones 
only for husking their corn. Some of them use just their teeth. They do not 
keep utensils of any kind for provender. Some clothe themselves in rags and 
barks of trees or deer-skins. Even thus do they pass their lives for the 
measure of time allotted to them, according to the laws set forth in the 
scriptures. 

Remaining in woods and forests, they wander within these places of 
untamed nature, live within them, and are always to be found within them. 
Indeed, these forest recluses enter into woods and forests and, after finding 
a guru, first live with him as his sishyas. The performance of the rites of 
homa is their duty, as also the observance of the five sacrifices. A 
meticulous observance of the rules about the division of time for the 
fivefold sacrifices as laid down in the Vedas, devotion to other sacrifices 
forming the eighth, the observance of the Chaturmasya, performance of the 
Paurnamasya, and still other homas and yagnas, and the performance of the 
nitya, the daily sacrifices, is the dharma of these men without wives, free 
from every attachment, and washed of every sin. 

Indeed, thus must they live in the vana. The sruva, the sacrificial ladle, 
and the kamandalu water-vessel are their main wealth. They are always 
devoted to the three fires. Righteous in their conduct and adhering to the 
path of virtue, they attain to the highest end. These Munis, crowned with 
ascetic success and ever devoted to the religion of Truth, attain to the sacred 
region of Brahma or the eternal realm of Soma. O Auspicious Goddess, this 
briefly is the dharma followed by forest recluses.’ 

Uma said, ‘Swami, Pasupati, O you who are worshipped by all beings, I 
want to hear what the dharma is of those Munis that are followers of the 
scriptures which deal with ascetic success. Do you tell it to me. Living in 
woods and forests, and well-accomplished in the scriptures of spiritual 
success, some amongst them live and do as they like, without being 
restrained by particular practices; others have wives. How, indeed, have 
their laws been laid down?’ 

Mahadeva said, ‘O goddess, the shaving of the head and the wearing of 
ochre robes are the indications of those recluses that rove about in freedom; 
while the indications of those that dally with wives consist in passing their 
nights at home. Performing ablutions three times a day is the dharma of the 
unrestrained ones, while the homa with water and fruits from the 


wilderness, belongs to the married recluses. Absorption, yoga dhyana, and 
adherence to those duties that constitute piety and that have been laid down 
as such in the shastras and the Vedas are some of the other duties prescribed 
for them. All the duties of which I have spoken to you before as they 
pertain to forest hermits, are also the dharmas of the married ones. Indeed, 
if those kartavyas are observed, they that observe them attain to the rewards 
that come from the severest tapasya. 

Those forest Rishis that lead married lives should confine the 
gratification of their senses to their wives. By indulging in sexual congress 
with their wives at only those times when their seasons come, they conform 
to the laws that have been laid down for them. The dharma which these 
virtuous men are to follow is the same dharma that has been declared and is 
followed by the Rishis. With their hearts set upon the acquisition of 
righteousness, they must never pursue any other object of desire from 
unrestrained caprice. 

That man who makes the gift to all creatures of an assurance of perfect 
harmlessness and innocence, freed as his soul then is from the stain of 
malice or violence, becomes endowed with dharma. Verily, he who shows 
compassion to all creatures, who adopts as a vow a show of perfect honesty 
towards all creatures, and who becomes himself the soul of all creatures, is 
then blessed with dharma. A bath in all the Vedas, and conduct which 
includes compassion and sincerity towards all creatures are looked upon as 
equal in punya; or, perhaps, the latter is a little distinguished above the other 
in merit. 

Honesty, it has been said, is dharma; while crookedness is the reverse. 
That man who conducts himself with sincerity becomes naturally imbued 
with righteousness. The man who is always devoted to honesty of conduct, 
succeeds in attaining to a dwelling among the Devas. Hence, he who wishes 
to achieve the merit of righteousness should invest himself with honesty 
and sincerity. 

Possessed of a forgiving disposition and of self-restraint, and with anger 
under complete subjection, one should transform oneself into an 
embodiment of dharma and become free from malice. Such a man, who 
becomes devoted, besides, to the discharge of all the duties of dharma, is 
indeed endowed with the merit of righteousness. Freed from torpor and 
procrastination, the pious man, who adheres to the path of dharma to the 


best of his power, and becomes possessed of pure conduct, and who is 
venerable in years, comes to be regarded as equal to Brahman himself.’ 

Uma said, ‘By what course, O Lord, do those Munis who are attached to 
their respective asramas and who own tapodhana, the wealth of penances, 
succeed in becoming endowed with great splendour? By what acts, again, 
do kings and princes, Kshatriyas of great wealth, and others who are poor, 
succeed in acquiring high rewards? By what karma, O Siva, do denizens of 
the forest succeed in attaining to that place which is eternal and in adorning 
their persons with celestial sandalwood paste? O Tryambaka of three eyes, 
O Tripurahara, destroyer of the triple city, do you answer this question of 
mine regarding tapasya by telling me everything in detail.’ 

The lustrous Mahadeva said, ‘Those who keep the vratas of upavasa, 
fasts, and restrain their senses, who abstain from injury of any kind to any 
creature, and who practise truthfulness of speech, attain to success and, 
freed from every kind of evil, ascend into swarga and sport in felicity with 
the Gandharvas for their companions. 

The Dharmatman who lies down in the attitude of Manduka yoga, and 
who properly and according to the law performs auspicious karmas after 
having taken diksha, lives in bliss in the next world in the company of the 
Nagas. That man who lives in the company of deer and subsists upon such 
grass and vegetables as fall from their mouths, and who has undergone the 
diksha and attends to the duties attached to it, succeeds in attaining to 
Amaravati, and the mansions of Indra. 

The man who subsists upon the moss he gathers and the fallen leaves 
from trees that he picks up, and endures all the severities of cold, attains to 
an exalted place. The man who subsists upon either air or water, or fruits 
and roots, attains in the afterlife to the affluence that belongs to the Yakshas 
and sports in felicity in the company of diverse tribes of Apsaras. 

Having practised for two and ten years, according to the rites laid down 
in the laws, the vow relating to the endurance of the five fires in the 
summer, one becomes in one’s next life a king. That man who, having 
observed vratas with regard to food, practises tapasya for two and twelve 
years, carefully abstaining from all forbidden food, taken at the forbidden 
hours, becomes in his next life a ruler of the earth. 

That man who sits and lies on the bare ground with the canopy of the 
firmament alone for his shelter, observes the course of dharmas that attach 
to diksha, and then casts off his body by renouncing all food, attains to great 


felicity in Swargaloka. The rewards of one who sits and lies down upon the 
bare ground with the welkin alone for his shelter, are said to be excellent 
vahanas and shayanas, beds, and magnificent mansions possessed of the 
resplendence of the moon. 

That man who, having subsisted upon the most frugal diet and observed 
diverse excellent vows, lives depending upon his own self and then casts off 
his body by abstaining from all food, succeeds in ascending into heaven and 
enjoying all its rewards. That man who, having lived in entire dependence 
upon his own self, observes for two and ten years the karmas that pertain to 
diksha, and at last casts off his body in the great ocean, succeeds in 
attaining to the realms of Varuna. 

That man who, living in entire dependence upon himself observes the 
dharmas that attach to diksha for two and ten years, and pierces his own feet 
with a sharp stone, attains to the transports of the region that belongs to the 
Guhyakas. He who cultivates Atman with the help of Atman, who frees 
himself from the influence of all pairs of opposites—as heat and cold, joy 
and sorrow, and the rest—who is freed from every kind of attachment, and 
who mentally observes for two and ten years such a way of life after diksha, 
attains to swarga and enjoys every transport with the Devas as his 
companions. He who lives in entire dependence upon himself and observes 
for two and ten years the duties that attach to diksha and finally casts off his 
body in fire as an oblation to the gods, attains to the world of Brahma and is 
held in high respect there. 

That regenerate man, O devi, who keeps his senses under subjugation, 
and, wishing to attain to dharma, sets his Atman upon the Atman, frees 
himself from the sense of ahamkara and sets out naked, digambara, without 
any covering for his body other than the sky, after the due observance of the 
duties of diksha for two and ten years, and after having consigned his 
sacred fire to a tree, walks along the path that belongs to Kshatriyas and lies 
down, when the need for lying down comes, in the attitude of heroes, and 
conducts himself always after the manner of heroes, certainly attains to the 
end that is reserved for great Kshatriyas. Such a man repairs to the eternal 
region of Sakra where he is crowned with the fruition of all his wishes and 
he sports in joy, his person decked with garlands of celestial flowers and 
perfumes. Indeed, that Dharmatman lives happily in swarga, with the gods 
for his companions. The Kshatriya, observant of the dharma of Kshatriyas 
devoted to that yoga which belongs to Kshatriyas, living in dharma, having 


renounced everything, having undergone the diksha and subjugated his 
senses, and observing purity of both body and mind, is sure to attain to the 
path which is reserved for Kshatriyas. Eternal regions of happiness are his. 
Riding in a vimana that moves at the will of the rider, he ranges through all 
those happy realms as he pleases. Indeed, dwelling in the world of Sakra, 
that blessed one always sports in joy, free from every sorrow and disaster.’ 


CANTO 143 


ma said, ‘Swami, O you who gouged out the eyes of Bhaga and 
pulled out the teeth of Pushan, O destroyer of the sacrifice of 
Daksha, O three-eyed Lord, I have another great query. In days of yore, the 
Self-born One created the four varnas. Through what sins does a Vaisya 
become a Sudra? Through what does a Kshatriya become a Vaisya and a 
Brahmana a Kshatriya? By what means may such devolution of castes be 
prevented? Through what karma is a Brahmana born into the Sudra varna in 
his next life? Through what, O puissant Mahadeva, does a Kshatriya 
descend to being a Sudra? O sinless one, O Lord of all created beings, do 
you, O illustrious one, answer this question of mine. How, again, can the 
three other varnas naturally succeed in attaining to Brahmanatva, the status 
of a Brahmana?’ 
The radiant Siva said, ‘Brahmanatva, O devi, is most difficult to attain. 
O auspicious Uma, one becomes a Brahmana through original creation or 
birth. After the same manner the Kshatriya, the Vaisya and the Sudra, all 
become so through original creation. He, however, that is born a Brahmana 
falls away from his status through his own evil actions. Hence, the 
Brahmana, after having attained to the status of the first order, should 
always protect it. If a Kshatriya or Vaisya lives in the svadharma of the 
Brahmana, after the manner of a Brahmana he becomes a Brahmana in his 
next life. 
That Brahmana who abandons the dharma of his order to follow those 
of the Kshatriya, is regarded as one that has fallen away from being a 
Brahmana and has become a Kshatriya. That Brahmana of little 


understanding, who, impelled by greed and folly, follows the dharma of 
Vaisyas, forgetful of his Brahmanatva that is so difficult to attain, comes to 
be regarded as a Vaisya. Similarly, one that is a Vaisya by birth may, by 
following the ways of a Sudra, become a Sudra. 

Indeed, a Brahmana, falling away from his svadharma may devolve to 
becoming even a Sudra, Such a Brahmana, falling away from the varna of 
his birth and turned out of it, without attaining to the realm of Brahma, 
which is his goal if he duly observes his own duties, sinks into naraka and 
in his next birth is born as a Sudra. A highly blessed Kshatriya or a Vaisya, 
who abandons his svadharma, and follows the dharma ordained for the 
Sudra, falls away from his own varna and becomes a person of mixed caste. 

It is in this way that a Brahmana, a Kshatriya, or a Vaisya sinks into 
becoming a Sudra. That man who has attained to clarity of vision through 
the practice of his svadharma, who is endowed with gyana and vigyana, 
who is pure in body and mind, who is conversant with every duty and 
devoted to the practice of all his own natural duties, is sure to enjoy the 
rewards of righteousness. I will recite for you, O goddess, something that 
Brahma the Self-born declared on this subject. 

Those that are righteous and desirous of acquiring punya always pursue 
with firmness the culture of the Soul. The food that comes from cruel and 
fierce persons is forbidden. So also is the food cooked to serve a large 
number of men. The same is said of the food cooked for the first sraddha of 
a dead person. So also is the food that is stained in consequence of the 
common impurities and also the food that is given by a Sudra. These should 
never be eaten by a Brahmana at any time. 

The food of a Sudra, O devi, the Mahatman Devas ever censure. Even 
this, I believe, is the law pronounced by the Grandsire with his own mouth. 
If a Brahmana, who has kindled the sacred fire and who performs sacrifices, 
were to die with any portion of a Sudra’s food remaining undigested in his 
stomach, he is certain to born in his next life as a Sudra, for the undigested 
food in his body makes him fall away from Brahmanatva. This Brahmana, 
in his next life, is invested with the status of that varna whose food he eats 
through his life or with the undigested portion of whose food in his stomach 
he breathes his last. 

That man who, having attained to the auspicious status of a Brahmana 
which is so difficult to have, disregards it and eats forbidden food, surely 
falls away from his high birth. That Brahmana who drinks alcohol, who 


becomes guilty of Brahmahatya or is vile and base in his ways, or a thief, or 
who breaks his vows, or is impure, or unmindful of his Vedic studies, or 
otherwise sinful, or greedy, or guilty of cunning or cheating, or who does 
not keep vratas, or who marries a Sudra woman, or who derives his 
subsistence by pandering to the lusts of other people, or who sells the Soma 
plant, or who serves a person of a varna beneath his, falls away from his 
Brahmanatva. The Brahmana who violates the bed of his preceptor, or who 
cherishes malice towards him, or who takes pleasure in speaking ill of him, 
falls away from being a Brahmana even if he be conversant with Brahma 
himself. 

Through punya karma, again, O Parvati, a Sudra becomes a Brahmana, 
and a Vaisya becomes a Kshatriya. The Sudra should perform all the duties 
enjoined for him, properly and according to the law. He should always wait, 
with obedience and humility, upon persons of the three other varnas and 
serve them heedfully. Always adhering to the path of dharma, the Sudra 
should do all this cheerfully. He should honour the Devas and the Dvijas. 
He should honour the vow of hospitality to all that come to him. With 
senses firmly restrained and becoming abstemious in food, he should never 
approach his wife except in her season. He should always seek out such 
men that are holy and pure. As for food, he should eat the vighasa which 
remains after all others have eaten. If, indeed, the Sudra desires to be a 
Vaisya in his next life, he should also abstain from the meat of animals not 
slain in sacrifices. 

If a Vaisya wishes to be a Brahmana in his next life, he must be truthful 
in speech, and free from pride or arrogance. He should rise above all the 
pairs of opposites—heat and cold, joy and sorrow, and the rest. He should 
observe the dharma of peace and tranquillity. He should worship the Devas 
in sacrifices, attend with devotion to the study and recitation of the Vedas, 
and purify himself in body and mind. He must keep his senses under 
subjection, honour Brahmanas and seek the welfare of all the varnas. 
Leading the life of a grihasta, and eating only twice a day at the prescribed 
hours, he should satisfy his hunger with only vighasa which remains after 
all the members of his family, his dependants and guests been fed. He 
should be frugal in what he eats, and perform nishkama karma, always 
acting without being impelled by the desire for reward. He should be free 
from egotism. 


He should adore the Devas in the agnihotra and pour libations according 
to the law. Observing the dharma of atithya, hospitality towards all, he 
should unvaryingly eat only vighasa, the food that remains after serving 
those for whom it has been cooked. He should, according to the law, 
worship the three fires. Such a Vaisya of pure vyavahara is born in his next 
life into a high Kshatriya family. 

If after having been born as a Kshatriya, a Vaisya goes through the usual 
rites of purification, and is invested with the sacred thread, and betakes 
himself to the observance of vratas, he becomes, in his next life, an 
honoured Brahmana. Indeed, after his birth as a Kshatriya, he should give 
dana in plenty, adore the gods in great sacrifices with plentiful dakshinas, 
study the Vedas, and always seeking to attain to swarga worship the three 
fires. 

He should intercede to dispel the sorrows of the distressed, and must 
always righteously cherish and protect his subjects that own his sway. He 
must be truthful, and perform all karmas that have truth in them, and seek 
happiness in such conduct. He should award punishments that are righteous, 
without setting aside neeti danda, the rod of chastisement, for good. He 
should induce men to do righteous deeds. Guided by considerations of 
policy in the matter of swaying his people, he should take a sixth of the 
produce of the fields. He should never indulge in excessive sexual pleasure, 
but live cheerfully and in independence, always with the vigyana of artha, 
the science of wealth. 

Of righteous soul, he should seek his wife only in her season. He should 
always keep fasts, with his soul under firm control, devote himself to the 
study of the Vedas, and be chaste in body and mind. He should sleep on 
blades of kusa grass spread out in his fire chamber. He should pursue the 
way of dharma, artha and kama, and be always serene and cheerful. 

To Sudras who come asking for food, he should always reply that it is 
ready. He should never wish for anything from motives of gain or pleasure. 
He should worship the Pitris and Devas and Atithis. In his own house he 
must live the life of a sannyasi. He should duly worship the Devas in his 
agnihotra, morning, noon and evening, the three sandhyas of every day, by 
pouring libations in accord with the law. 

With his face turned towards the enemy, he should gladly cast off his 
life and prana in battles fought for the weal of kine and Brahmanas. Or he 
may enter the triple fires sanctified with mantras and quit his body. 


By pursuing this pravritti, he will be born in his next life as a Brahmana. 
Endowed with gyana and vigyana, purified from all dross, and fully 
knowing the Vedas, a pious Kshatriya, through his own actions, becomes a 
Brahmana. It is with the help of such karma, O goddess, that one who has 
sprung from a lower varna, a Sudra, can become a Brahmana refined of all 
stains and possessed of Vedic lore. A Brahmana, when he becomes vile and 
evil in conduct and observes no distinction with regard to food, falls away 
from Brahmanatva and becomes a Sudra. Even a Sudra, O devi, who has 
purified his soul by punya karmas and that has subdued all his senses, 
deserves to be waited upon and served with reverence even as a Brahmana. 
This has been said by the Self-born Brahma himself. 

When a pious nature and pious deeds are noticeable in even a Sudra, he 
should, in my opinion, be held superior to a man of the three higher orders. 
Neither birth, nor the purificatory rites, nor learning, nor offspring, can be 
regarded as grounds for conferring upon a man the status of a Dvija. Verily, 
vyavahara, conduct, is the only ground. All Brahmanas in this world are 
Brahmanas in consequence of conduct. A Sudra, if he is established in good 
conduct, must be regarded as being possessed of the status of a Brahmana. 
The condition of Brahmanatva, auspicious Parvati, is equal wherever, in 
whomsoever, it truly exists. This is my firm opinion. 

He, indeed, is a Brahmana in whom Brahmanatva exists —that condition 
which is bereft of attributes and which has no sin or stain attached to it. The 
boon-giving Brahma, when he created all the creatures, himself said that the 
distribution of human beings into the four varnas dependent on birth is only 
for common identification 

The Brahmana is a great kshetra in this world—a field with feet, for it 
moves from place to place. He who plants seeds in that field, O beautiful 
devi, reaps the harvest in the next world. That Brahmana who wishes his 
own weal should always live upon vighasa. He should always adhere to the 
path of dharma. Indeed, he should tread the path that belongs to Brahma. 
He should live engaged in the study of the Samhitas and, remaining at 
home, discharge all the duties of a grihasta. He must always devote himself 
to the study of the Vedas, but he should never derive the means of 
livelihood from such study. That Brahmana who always conducts himself 
thus, staying always on the narrow path of dharma, worshipping his sacred 
fire, and engaged in the study of the Vedas, is truly regarded as Brahma 
himself. 


Once gained, the status of a Brahmana must always be protected with 
care, O you of sweet smiles, by avoiding the taint of contact with those born 
into inferior orders, and by abstaining from the acceptance of dana. 

I have thus revealed you a great mystery—the manner in which a Sudra 
may become a Brahmana, or that by which a Brahmana falls away from his 
own pure condition and becomes a Sudra.’” 


CANTO 144 


¢ ml): ma said, ‘Swami, Lord of all beings, O you who are worshipped 
by the Devas and Asuras equally, tell me what are the duties and 
the derelictions of men. Indeed, O puissant one, resolve all my doubts. It is 
by these three—thought, word and deed—that men become bound. It is by 
the same three that they are set free from those bonds. By pursuing what 
conduct, O Mahadeva, indeed, through what manner of karma, through 
what behaviour and attributes and speech, do men succeed in attaining to 
swarga?’ 

The Devadeva said, “Devi, you well know the true import of dharma. 
You are ever devoted to righteousness and self-restraint. The question you 
have asked me is fraught with the welfare of all creatures. It enhances the 
intelligence of all. Do you, therefore, listen to the answer. Those that are 
devoted to the Satya dharma, the religion of Truth, that are righteous and 
without the indications of the several asramas of life, and who enjoy the 
wealth earned by righteous means, succeed in attaining to swarga. Those 
men that are free from all doubts, that are possessed of omniscience, and 
that have the transcendent vision to see all things, are never shackled by 
either punya or paapa, virtue or sin. Men that are free from all attachments 
can never be bound by the chains of karma. They who never cause any 
injury to anyone, in thought, word or deed, and who never attach 
themselves to anything, can never be bound by karma. They who never take 
the life of any creature, who are pious in conduct, who have compassion, 
who regard friends and foes in an equal light and who are self-restrained, 
can never be bound by karma. 


Men that are imbued with compassion towards all beings, who succeed 
in inspiring the confidence and faith of all living creatures, and that have 
cast off malice, succeed in attaining swarga. Men who have no desire to 
appropriate what belongs to others, who keep themselves aloof from the 
wives of others, and that enjoy only such wealth as has been earned by 
righteous means, succeed in attaining to swarga. 

Men who behave towards the wives of others as towards their own 
mothers and sisters and daughters, succeed in attaining swarga. Men that 
abstain from taking what belongs to others, that are perfectly contented with 
what they possess, and that live depending upon their own destiny, succeed 
in finding swarga for themselves. Men who always shut their very eyes 
against association with other men’s wives, who are masters of their senses, 
and devoted to righteous conduct, surely ascend into swarga. 

Even this is the path created by the gods that the righteous should 
follow. This is the path, free from passion and aversion, laid down for men 
of dharma to follow. Men who are devoted to their own wives and who seek 
them only in their seasons, and who turn themselves away from indulgence 
in other sexual indulgence, succeed in attaining to swarga. Conduct marked 
by dana and tapa, and characterised by dharma of deeds, and purity of both 
body and heart, do the wise adopt in order to increase their punya or to earn 
their means of livelihood. Those who wish to enter into Swargaloka follow 
this path and not any other.’ 

Uma said, ‘Tell me, O illustrious Lord, O sinless Pasupati, what are the 
words by which one is bound and what are they by uttering which one is 
liberated from one’s bonds?’ 

Maheswara said, ‘Men who never lie either for themselves or for others, 
or in jest or to provoke laughter, succeed in attaining swarga. They who 
never lie to earn their living or to garner merit, or through mere caprice, 
succeed in attaining swarga. They who speak words that are eloquent, 
pleasing and faultless, and who welcome all whom they meet with sincerity, 
succeed in finding heaven. They who never utter words that are harsh, bitter 
and cruel, and who are free from deceitfulness and evil of every kind, 
succeed in finding swarga. Men who never speak deceitfully, or through 
what they say cause a breach between friends, and who always speak the 
truth and what promotes good feelings, succeed in finding heaven. 

Men who avoid harsh words and abstain from altercations, who are 
impartial in their behaviour to all creatures, and who have subjugated their 


souls, succeed in rising into swarga. They who abstain from evil talk or 
sinful converse, who avoid hurtful, even disagreeable talk, and who speak 
such words as are auspicious and agreeable, succeed in rising into swarga. 
They who never speak in anger, words as wound the hearts of others, and 
who, even when infuriated, speak only peacefully and agreeably, succeed in 
attaining heaven. 

The dharma, O goddess, which pertains to speech, must men always 
follow, for it is auspicious and characterised by truth. They that are 
possessed of wisdom should always avoid asatya, untruth.’ 

Uma said, ‘Do you tell me, O Devadeva, Pinakapani, O you who are 
most highly blessed, what the thoughts are by which a person becomes 
darkly bound.’ 

Maheswara said, ‘Endowed with the punya that arises from pure 
thoughts, O devi, one goes into swarga. Listen to me, O auspicious one, as I 
tell you what those deeds of the mind are. Listen also to me, O you of the 
exquisite face, how an ill-regulated mind is enshackled by wild and evil 
thoughts. 

Those men who do not think to take what belongs to others, even when 
they see it lying in a forest, succeed in finding heaven. Men who care not to 
have for themselves what belongs to others even when they see it lying in a 
deserted house or village, ascend into Swargaloka. Men that do not even 
think of having for themselves the wives of others, not when they see them 
in deserted places and under the influence of desire, succeed in attaining to 
heaven. Men who, meeting with friends or foes, behave in the same amiable 
way towards all, succeed in entering heaven. 

Men that are possessed of learning and compassion, that are pure in 
body and mind, that are firm in their adherence to truth, and that are 
contented with what belongs to them, find swarga for themselves. Men who 
bear no ill-will to any creature, who do not feel in need to labour for their 
livelihood, who bear friendly hearts towards all beings, and entertain 
compassion towards all, succeed in attaining heaven. 

Men who are imbued with faith, that have compassion, that are holy, 
that seek the company of holy men, and know well the distinctions between 
right and wrong, find heaven for themselves. Men, O goddess, that know 
clearly what the consequences are of good and evil deeds, succeed in 
attaining to swarga. Men who are just in all their dealings, who are 
endowed with all worthy accomplishments, that are devoted to the Devas 


and the Brahmanas, and that are endued with perseverance in the 
performance of good deeds, succeed in ascending to heaven. 

All these men, O devi, succeed in attaining to swarga through the punya 
of their karma. Tell me, what else do you wish to hear?’ 

Uma said, “I have a question, O Maheswara, connected with Manavas, 
human beings. I beg you, explain it to me carefully. By what actions does a 
man succeed, all mighty Lord, in acquiring a long life? Through what 
penances also does a man acquire a long life? By what deeds does a man 
become short-lived on earth? O you that are perfectly stainless, tell me what 
the consequences are of different actions in the matter of bestowing a long 
or a short life on the doer. 

Some men are seen to be possessed of great good fortune and some 
weighed down with misfortune. Some are of noble birth while others of 
base birth. Some are of such coarse and repulsive features that they might 
be made of wood, while others are of very fine and handsome features even 
from the first sight. Some appear to be without wisdom while others are 
possessed of it. Some, again, are seen blessed with high intelligence and 
wisdom, both, enlightened by Buddhi and gyana. Some have to endure little 
pain, while others there are who are stricken by heavy calamities. 

Even such diverse conditions are seen among Manavas. O Lustrous 
Lord, tell me the reason for all this.’ 

The God of gods said, ‘Verily, O devi, I will tell you about the 
manifestation of the fruits of karma. It is through the laws of that 
manifestation that all human beings in this world enjoy or endure the 
consequences of their actions. 

The man who assumes a fierce aspect to take the lives of other 
creatures, who arms himself with stout sticks to injure other creatures, who 
is seen with weapons raised, who kills living creatures without mercy, who 
always causes agitation to living beings, who refuses to grant protection to 
even worms and ants, who is full of cruelty —such a man sinks into naraka. 

The one who has an opposite disposition to this, who is righteous in his 
deeds, is born as a handsome man. The man who is savage and cruel, goes 
to terrible hell, while he that is merciful and compassionate finds blissful 
heaven. 

The man who goes into hell has to endure excruciating misery and 
torments. One who, having plunged into naraka, rises therefrom, is born as 
a man with a short life. The man who is addicted to violence and killing, O 


devi, becomes, through his sinful deeds, liable to destruction. Such a one 
becomes abominable to all creatures and short-lived. 

That man who belongs to what is called the Sweta varna, the white 
class, who abstains from the slaughter of living creatures, who has put away 
from him all weapons, who never inflicts any pain or punishment on 
anybody, who never injures any creature, who never causes anyone else to 
kill living creatures for him, who never kills or strikes even when struck or 
attempted to be slain himself, who never sanctions or approves a slaughter, 
who is invested with compassion towards all creatures, who behaves 
towards all others as towards his own self—such a superior man, O devi, 
succeeds in attaining to the status of a Deva. Filled with joy, he enjoys 
diverse kinds of luxurious raptures. 

If such a one is ever born in the world of men, he is long-lived and 
enjoys great happiness. Even this is the way of those that are of righteous 
conduct and righteous deeds and hence blessed with longevity, the way that 
was indicated by the Self-born Brahma himself and which is characterised 
by abstaining from the killing of living creatures.’” 


CANTO 145 


¢ mil): ma said, ‘Through what disposition, what conduct, what acts, 
and what charity, does a man succeed in attaining to heaven?’ 

Maheswara said, ‘He who is endowed with a liberal disposition, who 
honours Brahmanas and treats them with hospitality, who makes gifts of 
food and drink, clothes and other articles of enjoyment to the destitute, the 
blind and the distressed, who makes gifts of houses, erects halls for public 
use, digs wells, constructs shelters whence pure and cool water is made 
available during the hot months to thirsty travellers, excavates tanks, makes 
arrangements for the free distribution of gifts every day, gives to all seekers 
what each solicits, who makes gifts of seats and beds and conveyances, 
wealth, ornaments and gemstones, homes, all kinds of grain, kine, fields, 
and women—verily, he who always makes these gifts with a cheerful heart, 
becomes a denizen, O goddess, of swarga. He resides there for a long time, 
enjoying a myriad of supernal pleasures and joys. 

Passing his time happily in the company of the Apsaras, he dallies in the 
woods of Nandana and other enchanted places. After the exhaustion of his 
punya, he falls again from heaven and takes his birth in the order of 
humanity, in a family possessed of wealth in abundance and that has a large 
command of every item of enjoyment. In that life he is able to gratify all his 
wishes and appetites. Indeed, he is blessed with affluence of every kind and 
a well-filled treasury. The Svayambhuva Brahma himself declared it in days 
of old that it is even such souls, O devi, that become highly blessed and 
possessed of liberal natures and handsome forms and features. 


There are others, O Parvati, that are incapable of giving charity or gifts 
of any kind. Endowed with small minds, little understanding, they cannot 
make gifts even when they own abundant wealth and are solicited by 
deserving Brahmanas. Seeing the destitute, the blind, the distressed and 
mendicants, and even guests arrived at their homes, such men, always filled 
only with the desire to satisfy their own taste and appetite, turn away, yes, 
even when expressly solicited by the truly needy. They never give wealth or 
clothes, or food, gold, or kine, or anything at all. Such men who are 
disinclined to relieve the distress of others, who are full of greed, who have 
no faith in the scriptures, and who never give dana—verily, these men of 
little understanding must perforce sink down into hell. 

In the course of time, when their sufferings in naraka come to an end, 
they are born in the order of humanity, in families that are entirely 
impoverished. Always suffering from hunger and thirst, excluded from all 
noble and decent society, hopeless of ever enjoying themselves, they lead 
lives of utter wretchedness. Born into families that are without all things of 
pleasure, these men never enjoy the good things of the world. 

Indeed, O Uma, it is through their own deeds that men and women 
become wretched and poor. There are others who are full of arrogance and 
pride caused by the possession of riches. Those senseless wretches never 
offer seats to those that deserve to be seated. Having little understanding, 
they do not respect or honour them that deserve both. Nor do they give 
padya, water to wash their feet, to those to whom it should be given. 
Indeed, they do not honour, agreeably to the laws, with offerings of the 
arghya, such as deserve to be honoured therewith. They do not offer water 
to wash their mouths to such as deserve to have that honour. They do not 
treat their very preceptors, when these arrive at their homes, in the manner 
in which gurus should be treated. 

Living in greed, lust and arrogance, they refuse to treat their elders and 
aged and wise men with love and affection, even insulting those that should 
be honoured and asserting their superiority over them without showing 
reverence and humility. Such men, O Goddess, sink into hell. When their 
sufferings come to an end after a long course of years, they rise from 
naraka, and are born into the order of humans, in low and wretched 
families. Indeed, they who humiliate their preceptors and elders, have to 
take their birth in such castes as those of Swapakas and Pukkasas who are 
exceedingly vile and bereft of intelligence. 


He who is not arrogant or filled with pride, who is a worshipper of the 
Devas and Brahmanas, who enjoys the respect of the world, who bows to 
everyone that deserves his reverence, who speaks kind and sweet words, 
who benefits persons of all varnas, who is always devoted to the good of all 
beings, who does not feel aversion for anybody, who is soft-spoken, who is 
an utterer of agreeable and soothing words, who gives way to one that 
deserves to have way, who adores his preceptors in the manner in which 
preceptors deserve to be adored, who welcomes all creatures with proper 
courtesy, who does not bear ill-will towards any creature, who lives 
worshipping elders and guests with such reverence as they deserve, who is 
ever bent upon having as many guests as possible, and who worships all 
who honour his home with their presence, succeeds, O devi, in finding 
swarga. 

Upon the exhaustion of his merit, he is born among men again, into a 
high and most respectable family. In that life, he is possessed of all 
enjoyments in abundance and jewellery and gems and every other kind of 
wealth in profusion. He gives to deserving persons what they deserve. He is 
devoted to the observance of every duty and every act of righteousness. 
Honoured by all creatures and receiving their reverence, he obtains the 
fruits of his own karma. Even such a one acquires a high lineage and birth 
in this world. 

This that I have said to you was declared by Brahma, the Ordainer 
himself, in days of old. That man who is fierce in conduct, who inspires 
terror in all creatures, who injures other beings with his hands or feet, or 
ropes or sticks, or bricks or clods of hard clay, or other means of wounding 
and causing pain, O loveliest one, who practises diverse kinds of deceit 
even to kill living creatures or to vex them, who pursues animals in the hunt 
and causes them to tremble in fear—verily, that man who conducts himself 
in this way is certain to sink into hell. If in the course of time, he is born 
again among humans, he is born into a low and wretched race or family that 
is afflicted with hardships and impediments of every kind on every side. He 
becomes an object of aversion to all the world. Wretched among men, he 
becomes so through his own actions. 

Another, who is possessed of compassion, casts his equal eye on all 
creatures. Blessed with a kind and friendly vision, behaving towards all 
creatures as if he were their father, divested of every hostile feeling, with all 
his passions under complete control, he never vexes any creature and never 


inspires them with fear with any means in his control. He inspires the 
confidence of all beings. He never afflicts any creature with either ropes or 
clubs, or stones or weapons of any kind. His deeds are never fierce or cruel, 
and he is full of kindness. One who is given to such practices and conduct 
certainly attains to swarga. 

There he lives like a god in a celestial mansion abounding in every 
comfort. If, upon the exhaustion of his merit, he has to be born among men, 
he is born as a man that has never to face difficulties or hardships of any 
kind or to encounter any fear. Indeed, he enjoys great happiness in the 
world as well. Possessed of felicity, without the obligation of undergoing 
distressing labour for his living, he lives free from every kind of anxiety. 
Even this, O goddess, is the path of the righteous. In it there are no 
obstacles or afflictions.’ 

Uma said, ‘In the world some men are seen to be well-versed in 
inferences and the premises leading to them. Indeed, they are possessed of 
gyana and vigyana, knowledge and science, have many children, and are 
blessed with learning and wisdom. Others, O Lord, are without wisdom, 
science and knowledge, and are full of folly. Through what particular 
actions does a person become wise? By what acts, again, does one become 
possessed of little wisdom and distorted vision? Do you dispel this doubt of 
mine, O you who are the greatest knower of dharma. Others there are, O 
Siva, who are blind from the moment of their birth. Yet others are that 
diseased and otherwise afflicted or impotent. Do you, Mahadeva, tell me the 
reason for this.’ 

Maheswara said, “Those men that always enquire about what is for their 
weal and what is to their detriment, Brahmanas learned in the Vedas, 
crowned with success, and conversant with all duties, who avoid all kinds 
of evil deeds and do only what is righteous and good, find swarga after they 
depart this world and enjoy great joy as long as they live here. Upon the 
exhaustion of their punya, when they are born among humans, they are born 
as men of great intelligence. Every kind of felicity and auspiciousness 
becomes theirs because of that Buddhi with which they are born. 

Men of foolish minds, who cast lustful gazes upon the wives of other 
men, are born cursed with blindness due to that sin of theirs. Those men 
who, impelled by desire in their hearts, cast their eyes on naked women, 
those men of vile deeds take birth in this world to pass their whole lives in 
one continuous disease. Those foolish and wicked men who indulge in 


sexual congress with women of varnas different from their own, are cursed 
to be born impotent in their next lives. Men who cause animals to be slain, 
and those who violate the beds of their preceptors, and those who are 
promiscuous, are born in their next lives as men without virility.’ 

Uma said, ‘What karma, O Maheswara, is flawed, and what acts are 
faultless? What, indeed, are those karmas by doing which a man succeeds 
in attaining to his highest good?’ 

Maheswara said, ‘That man who wants to know what dharma is, and 
who wishes to acquire prominent virtues and accomplishments, and who 
always puts questions to Brahmanas with a view to discover the path that 
leads to his highest weal, succeeds in attaining to swarga. If, after 
exhaustion of his merit, he is born among men, he is blessed with great 
intelligence and memory and deep wisdom. This, O goddess, is the conduct 
that the righteous follow and which is full of great benefits. I have told you 
this for the good of all Manavas.’ 

Uma said, ‘There are men who hate dharma and who have little 
understanding. They never wish to even approach Brahmanas who know 
the Vedas. There are others who are observant of vratas and who are 
devoted to performing sraddhas. Others, again, are devoid of all vows. They 
are unmindful of observance and are like Rakshasas in their ways. Some 
there are who are devoted to the performance of sacrifices and some who 
are unmindful of the homa. Through the consequences of what karma do 
men become possessed of these different natures?’ 

Maheswara said, “Through the Vedas, the limits have been assigned to 
all the pravritti of Manushyas. Those men that conduct themselves 
according to the authority of the Vedas, are seen in their next lives to 
become devoted to the observance of vows. Those men, however, who 
having become subject to the sway of folly take adharma to be dharma, 
become without holiness, transgress all restraints, and come to be regarded 
as Brahmarakshasas. Indeed, it is these men that become unmindful of the 
homa, that never utter the vashat and other sacred mantras, and become 
known as the lowest and vilest of men. Thus, O devi, have I explained to 
you the entire ocean of dharma in respect of Manavas, for the sake of 
removing your doubts, and not omitting the sins of which they become 
guilty.” 


CANTO 146 


: °N arada said, ‘Having said all this, the powerful Mahadeva himself 

became desirous of listening to what his beloved consort, the 

devi Uma, seated beside him, could tell him and she was inclined to satisfy 
his desire.’ 

Mahadeva said, ‘You, O devi, know well what Supreme is and what is 
not. You know all dharma, O you that love to dwell in the asramas of 
Rishis. You are imbued with every virtue, O you of beautiful brows and hair 
ending in the fairest curls, O Hymavati, daughter of the king of mountains. 
You are skilled in all things. You are endowed with self-restraint and you 
look impartially upon all creatures. Divested of all ego, you are devoted to 
the practice of every dharma. O you of beautiful features, I wish to ask you 
something, and I wish that you discourse to me on that subject. 

Savitri is the chaste wife of Brahma. The chaste Sachi is the wife of 
Indra. Dhumrorna is the wife of Markandeya, and Riddhi of Vaisravana. 
Varuna has Gauri for his consort, and Surya has Suvarchala. Rohini is the 
chaste wife of Sasin, and Swaha of Vibhavasu. And Kasyapa has Aditi. All 
these regard their husbands as their gods. 

You have, O devi, conversed and associated with all of them. It is for 
this reason, O you who know all dharma, that I want to ask you about the 
kartavyas of women, and because everything you say is consistent with 
dharma. I want to hear you discourse on this subject from the beginning. 
You practise all the duties of dharma with me. Your conduct is exactly like 
mine, and the vows you observe are the same that I keep. Your power and 
energy are equal to mine, and you have undergone the austerest penances. 


The subject, when discoursed upon by you, will become invested with 
great punya. Indeed, that discourse will then become scripture and the 
authority in the world. Women, in special, are the highest refuge of women. 
O you of beautiful hips, among human beings the pravrittt which you lay 
down will be followed from generation to generation. 

Half of my body is half your body. You are always engaged in doing the 
work of the Devas, and it is you that are the cause of the peopling of the 
earth. O auspicious goddess, you do for certain know all the eternal duties 
of women. Do you, therefore, tell me in detail what the dharmas are of your 
Sex.’ 

Uma said, ‘Swami, Lord of all created things, source of all that is past, 
present and in the future, it is through your grace that the words that I speak 
arise in my mind. All these rivers that are of my sex, Devadeva, flowing 
with the waters of all the tirthas, approach your presence to enable you to 
perform your ablutions in them. After consulting them, I will speak upon 
the subject you have asked about, in due order. 

That man who, though mighty and able, is still free from egotism, is 
rightly called a purusha. As regards woman, Lord of all beings, she follows 
those of her sex. By consulting these foremost of rivers shall I honour them. 
The sacred Saraswati is the foremost of rivers. She courses towards the 
ocean and is truly the first of all sacred streams. Vipasa also here, and 
Vitasta, and Chandrabhaga, and Iravati, and Satadru, and the Devika river, 
and Kausiki, and Gomati. And this celestial river who has in her all the 
sacred tirthas, the devi Ganga, who having her font in swarga has descended 
on the earth and is the greatest and best of all sacred streams.’ 

Having said this, the consort of that God of gods smilingly addressed all 
those river goddesses. The devi Uma, devoted to the performance of every 
dharma, questioned those sacred rivers about the dharma of women, for 
verily, those best of rivers, having Ganga for their first, are all conversant 
with the duties of women.’ 

Uma said, ‘The illustrious Siva has asked a question about the dharma 
of women. I wish to answer Sankara after having consulted with you. I do 
not see any branch of knowledge on earth or heaven that can be mastered 
by anyone without your help. You rivers that flow towards the ocean, it is 
for this that I seek your opinions.’ 

Thus were those greatest of rivers, all of whom were auspicious and 
most sacred, questioned by Siva’s consort. Then the celestial Ganga, who 


worshipped the daughter of the prince of mountains in return, was chosen to 
answer the question. For, indeed, she of sweet smiles is held as swelling 
with diverse kinds of understanding and deeply knowing of the dharma of 
women. The sacred river, who can dispel all fear of sin, who is possessed of 
humility because of her intelligence, who is well acquainted with every 
dharma, and_ enriched’ with an_ intelligence of unequalled 
comprehensiveness, replied thus to Uma. 

Ganga said, ‘Devi, you are always devoted to the performance of every 
dharma. You have shown me your favour by questioning me. O sinless one, 
you are honoured by all the universe, yet you ask me that am just a river. I 
believe that one who, though entirely competent to discourse on any 
subject, yet asks another, or who pays a graceful tribute to another, certainly 
deserves to be regarded as a Mahatman. Such a one deserves to be called 
learned and wise. Such a one never falls into disgrace who consults such 
others as are endued with gyana and vigyana, and as are knowing of vastus, 
premises, and anumanas, inferences. By speaking in the midst of an 
assembly, relying upon his own powers alone and without consulting with 
others, a proud man, even when endowed with intelligence finds himself 
uttering only words of weak import. 

You are possessed of spiritual insight; you are the foremost of all those 
that dwell in swarga. You have arisen here accompanied by diverse kinds of 
exalted punya. You, devi Uma, are absolutely competent to discourse on the 
dharma of women.’ 

In this way, the goddess Uma was worshipped by Ganga and honoured 
with the ascription of many high merits. Thus praised, the beautiful goddess 
then began to discourse upon all the duties of women in full. 

Uma said, ‘I shall, according to the law, speak on the subject of 
women’s dharma as far as it is known to me. Do you all listen with 
attention. The dharma of women arises as created at the outset by kinsmen 
during the rites of marriage. Indeed, a woman becomes, in the presence of 
the nuptial fire, the partner of her lord in the performance of all punya 
karmas. Possessed of a good disposition, blessed with sweet speech, sweet 
conduct and sweet features, and always looking at the face of her husband 
and deriving as much joy from it as she does from looking at the face of her 
child, the chaste woman who regulates her pravritti by observing the 
prescribed restraints, comes to be regarded as truly righteous in her conduct. 


Listening with reverence to the dharma of married life as expounded in 
the scriptures, and accomplishing all those auspicious duties, the woman 
who regards dharma as the foremost of all objects of pursuit; who observes 
the same vows as her husband; who, adorned with chastity, looks upon her 
husband as a god; who waits upon and serves him as if he is a god; who 
surrenders her own will completely to that of her lord; who is calm and 
cheerful, who keeps excellent vratas; who is blessed with gracious and 
goodly features, and whose heart is so completely devoted to her husband 
that she never even thinks of any other man, is regarded as truly righteous 
in her conduct. 

The wife who, even when addressed harshly and looked upon with 
angry eyes by her lord, presents a cheerful aspect to him, is said to be truly 
devoted to her husband. She who does not cast her eyes upon the moon or 
the sun or even a tree that has a masculine name, who is adored by her 
husband and who is possessed of beautiful features, is regarded as truly 
righteous. The woman who treats her husband with the affection which she 
shows towards her child, even when the husband happens to be poor or 
diseased or weak or worn out with the toil of travelling, is regarded as truly 
righteous in her conduct. 

The woman who is endued with self-control, who has given birth to 
children, who serves her husband with devotion, and whose whole heart is 
devoted to him, is regarded as truly righteous in her conduct. The woman 
who waits upon and serves her lord with a cheerful heart, who indeed is 
always cheerful of heart, and who is possessed of humility, is regarded as 
truly righteous in her vyavahara. That woman who always supports her 
kinsmen and relatives by giving them food, and whose relish in gratifying 
her desires or for articles of enjoyment, or for the affluence of which she is 
mistress, or for the happiness with which she is surrounded, falls short of 
her relish for her husband, is regarded as truly righteous in her pravritti. 

That woman who always takes pleasure in rising early, before dawn, 
who is devoted to the discharge of all her household duties, who always 
keeps her home clean, who anoints her home daily with cow-dung, who 
always attends to the domestic fire, who never neglects to make offerings of 
flowers and other auspicious things to the gods, who with her husband 
gratifies the deities and guests and all servants and dependants of the family 
with that share of food which is theirs by the law, and who always takes, 
according to the law, for herself, what food remains in the house only after 


the needs have been met of the gods and guests and servants; who gratifies 
all who come in contact with her family and feeds them to their fill, 
succeeds in acquiring great punya. 

That woman who is accomplished, who worships the feet of her father- 
in-law and mother-in-law, and who is always devoted to her father and 
mother, is regarded as possessed of tapodhana, ascetic wealth. That woman 
who supports with food Brahmanas that are weak and helpless, that are 
distressed or blind or destitute, comes to be regarded as entitled to share the 
punya of her husband. That woman who always observes, with a light heart, 
vows that are difficult of observance, whose heart is entirely devoted to her 
lord, and who always seeks the good of her lord, is regarded as entitled to 
share the punya of her husband. 

Devotion to her lord is a woman’s merit; it is her penance; it is her 
eternal heaven. Punya, tapasya, and swarga itself become hers who looks 
upon her husband as her all, and who, with perfect chastity, seeks to devote 
herself to her lord in all things. The husband is the god that women have. 
The husband is their friend; the husband is their highest refuge. Women 
have no refuge that can compare with their husbands, and no god that can 
compare with him. The husband’s grace and heaven are equal in the 
estimation of a woman; or, if unequal, the inequality is trivial. 

Maheswara, my Lord, I do not desire swarga itself if you are not 
satisfied with me. If the husband that is poor, or diseased or distressed or 
fallen among foes, or afflicted by a Brahmana’s curse, were to command the 
wife to do something that is improper or unrighteous or that may lead to 
destruction of life itself, the wife should, without any hesitation, do it. 

And so have I, Siva, my Lord and only God, expounded, at your 
command, what the dharma of women is. The woman who conducts herself 
in this way becomes entitled to a share of all the punya won by her 
husband.’ 

Narada continued, ‘Thus addressed, Maheswara applauded the daughter 
of the king of mountains and then dismissed all those holy ones that had 
assembled there, together with his own ganas, his bhutas and pramathas. 
The diverse tribes of ghostly beings, as also all the embodied rivers, and the 
Gandharvas and Apsaras, all bowed their heads low to Mahadeva and 
returned to where they had all come from.” 


CANTO 147 


ol he Rishis said, ‘Wielder of the Pinaka, gouger of the eyes of 
Bhaga, you that are worshipped by all the universe, we desire to 
hear the glory of Vasudeva.’ 

Maheswara said, ‘Hari is superior to the Grandsire Brahma himself. He 
is the Eternal Purusha. Otherwise called Krishna, he is endowed with the 
splendour of gold, and shines with effulgence like a second sun. Possessed 
of ten arms, he is of infinite tejas, and is the slayer of the foes of the gods. 
Having a whorl, the srivatsa, on his breast, he has curly locks of hair on his 
head. He is worshipped by all the deities. 

Brahma came from his navel. I have sprung from his head. All the stars 
and luminaries in the firmament have sprung from his hair. From the bristles 
on his body have sprung all the Devas and Asuras. From his body have 
come the Rishis as also all the eternal worlds. He is the abode of the 
Pitamaha and the abode of all the gods besides. He is the Creator of this 
whole earth, and he is the Lord of the three worlds. He is also the destroyer 
of all creatures, chala and achala. He is truly the foremost of all the gods. 
He is their master. He is the chastiser of all foes. He is omniscient. He exists 
in everything. He goes everywhere at will. 

He is of universal extent, pervading as he does everything. He is the 
Supreme Soul. He is the mover of all the senses. He covers the universe. He 
is the Supreme Lord. There is nothing in the three worlds that is superior to 
him. He is eternal. He is Madhusudana, the slayer of Madhu, and is 
otherwise called Govinda. The giver of honours, he comes in human form 
and causes all the kings of the earth to be killed in battle, to achieve the 


purposes of the Devas. If they are abandoned by him, the Devas are cannot 
accomplish their purposes on earth. Indeed, without having him as their 
Lord they cannot do anything. He is the Lord of all creatures and is adored 
by all the gods. Within the belly of this sovereign of the gods, who is ever 
devoted to the accomplishment of their purposes, of this One who is 
identical with Brahman and who is always the refuge of regenerate Rishis, 
dwells Brahma the Grandsire. Indeed, Brahma dwells happily in Hari’s 
body which is his home. I myself, that am called Sarva, also dwell joyfully 
in that blissful abode which is Narayana. All the gods, as well, reside in 
perfect happiness in his body. 

Endowed with great refulgence, he has eyes that resemble the petals of 
the lotus. Sri dwells within him and he dwells always in union with her. The 
bow called Saranga and the chakra called Sudarsana are his weapons, 
together with a sword. He has the enemy of the snakes, Garuda, on his 
standard. He is distinguished by immaculate pravritti, by purity of both 
body and mind, by self-restraint, by prowess, by energy, by the handsomest 
form, by being tall and of perfectly proportioned limbs, by patience, by 
sincerity, by affluence, by compassion, by excellence of form, and by 
might. He shines forth, endowed with all celestial weapons of wonderful 
form and craft. 

He has yoga for his illusion. He is possessed of a thousand eyes. He is 
free from every stain or fault. He is high-minded. He is invested with 
heroism, virya, which he embodies. He is an object of pride with all his 
friends. He is dear to all his kinsmen and relatives and they are dear to him. 
He is forgiving. He is entirely free from pride or egotism. He is devoted to 
the Brahmanas and is their Lord. He dispels the fears of all afflicted with 
fear. He enhances the joys of all his friends. He is the refuge of all 
creatures. 

He is ever engaged in protecting and cherishing the distressed. 
Possessed of a thorough knowledge of all the scriptures, and every kind of 
affluence, he is worshipped by all beings. Absolutely conversant with all 
dharma, he is a great benefactor of even enemies and fallen men when they 
seek his protection. The master of policy and indeed policy embodied, he is 
a Brahmavadi, an utterer of Brahman, and has all his senses under perfect 
control. 

For doing good to the Devas, Govinda will be born in the race of the 
Mahatman Manu. Verily, endued with Mahabuddhi, he will be born into the 


auspicious and righteous vamsa of that Prajapati. Manu will have a son 
named Anga. After Anga will come Antardhaman. From Antardhaman will 
spring Havirdhaman, that Lord of all creatures, free from every stain. 
Havirdhaman will have an illustrious son of the name of Rachinavarhi. He 
will have ten sons, with Prachetas the first. Prachetas will have a son named 
Daksha who will be regarded as a Prajapati. Daksha will beget a daughter 
who will be named Dakshayani. 

From Dakshayani will spring Aditya, and from Aditya will spring 
Manu. From Manu will be born a daughter named Ila and a son named 
Sudyumna. Ila will have Budha for her husband, and from Budha will 
spring Pururavas. From Pururavas will come Ayu. From Ayu will spring 
Nahusha, and Nahusha will beget a son named Yayati. From Yayati will 
come a mighty son of the name of Yadu; Yadu will beget Kroshtri. Kroshtri 
will beget a great son to be named Vrijinivat. From Vrijinivat will come 
Ushadgu the unvanquished. Ushadgu will beget a son of the name of 
Chitraratha. Chitraratha will have a younger son of the name Sura. 

Indeed, in the race of these mighty men, of tejas celebrated the world 
over, possessed of excellent conduct and diverse accomplishments, devoted 
to the performance of sacrifices and of pure karmas, in the pure race 
honoured by the Brahmanas, Sura will take his birth. He will be a great 
Kshatriya, endowed with untold energy, and possessed of great fame. Sura, 
that giver of honours, will beget a son, the perpetuator of his race, name 
Vasudeva, otherwise called Anakadundhubhi. 

Vasudeva will have a son of the name of Vaasudeva. He will have four 
arms. He will be exceedingly liberal, and will honour the Brahmanas 
greatly. Identical with the Brahman, he will love the Brahmanas, and the 
Brahmanas will love him. That scion of Yadu’s race will liberate a hundred 
great kings immured in the prisons of the ruler of the Magadhas, after 
vanquishing Jarasandha in his capital hidden among mountains. 

Of untold energy and might, this Krishna will be rich with the jewellery 
and gems of all the rulers of the world. Indeed, in tejas he will be unrivalled 
on earth; possessed of great prowess, he will be the Lord of all kings of the 
world. Foremost among all the Surasenas, the puissant one, dwelling in 
Dwaraka, will rule and protect all the earth after vanquishing all her kings, 
for he will have the vigyana of polity. 

Assembling together, do you all adore him, as you worship the Eternal 
Brahman, with speech, flower garlands and the best incense and perfumes. 


He who wishes to see me or the Grandsire Brahma should first see the 
illustrious Krishna Vaasudeva of great puissance. If he is seen I am seen, as 
also the Pitamaha Brahma. There is no difference between us three. Know 
this, you Rishis of tapodhana! 

With that person with whom the lotus-eyed Krishna becomes gratified, 
all the Devas with Brahma amongst them will also be pleased. That man 
who seeks the protection of Kesava will succeed in earning great 
achievements and victory and heaven itself. He will be a teacher of dharma 
and karma, and will earn untold punya. All those that know dharma and 
karma should, with alacrity, bow down to that Lord of all the gods. By 
adoring that mighty one, you will acquire great merit. 

Of infinite tejas, that Hari, from the desire to benefit all creatures, 
created millions of Rishis, for the sake of dharma. Those millions of Rishis, 
thus created by that great Ordainer, now dwell on the mountains of 
Gandhamadana, led by Sanatkumara and engaged in awesome tapasya. 
Hence, Dvijottamas, must the righteous Krishna Vaasudeva be adored by 
all. 

The illustrious Hari, the almighty Narayana, is, verily, the foremost of 
all beings in heaven. Adored, he adores, and honoured he honours; to them 
that make offerings to him, he makes offerings in return. Worshipped, he 
worships in return; if seen always, he sees the seers always. If one seeks his 
refuge and protection, he seeks the seeker as his refuge in return. You 
foremost of all righteous ones, if adored and worshipped, he adores and 
worships in return, without fail. 

Even this is the high pravritti of the faultless Vishnu. Even this is the 
vow that all the righteous observe, of that first of all Gods, that omnipotent 
Lord of all creatures. He is always worshipped in the world. Verily, that 
Eternal Being is worshipped by even the Devas. Those that are devoted to 
him, with the steadfastness of a vrata, become liberated from fear and 
misfortune in proportion to their bhakti. The regenerate ones should always 
worship him in thought, word and deed. The son of Devaki should be 
looked upon by them with reverence and in order to see him with reverence, 
they should address themselves to the performance of penances. 

You foremost of ascetics, even this is the path that I reveal to you. By 
seeing him, you will behold all the greatest gods. I, too, bow my head in 
reverence to that Lord of the universe, that Grandsire of all the worlds, that 


mighty and vast blue Varaha. By seeing him one beholds the Trimurtis, the 
Trinity. All the gods dwell in him. 

He will have an elder brother who will become known over the world as 
Balarama. Having a plough for his weapon, he will look like a white hill in 
form. Indeed, he will be endowed with might that can lift the very earth. 
Upon the chariot of that divine person a tall palmyra, three-fronded and 
golden, will form his proud standard. The head of that mighty-armed hero, 
that Lord of all the worlds, will be shaded by many high-souled snakes of 
vast bodies. All the divine weapons will also come to him as soon as he 
thinks of them. He is called Ananta, the Infinite. That illustrious one is 
identical with the immutable Hari. 

Once on a time, the mighty Garuda, the son of Kasyapa, was addressed 
by the Devas in these words, “Do you, O mighty one, see if this One has 
any end!” Though possessed of untold energy, Garuda failed to discover 
any end to this illustrious Ananta who is identical with the Paramatman. 
Supporting the whole world on his head, he dwells in the Patalas. He ranges 
through the universe as Sesha, always filled with great joy. He is Vishnu; 
He is the illustrious Ananta. He is the supporter of the earth. He that is 
Balarama is Hrishikesa. He that is Achyuta is Ananta, the bearer of the 
earth. 

Both those foremost of all beings are divine and endowed with divine 
prowess. One of them is armed with the chakra and the other with the 
halayudha. They deserve every honour and a vision of them must be eagerly 
sought. 

I have, through my affection for you, thus declared to you the nature of 
Krishna Narayana. Even this, you tapodhanas, is dharma. I have declared all 
this to you so that you may, with reverence and care, worship Krishna, that 
greatest of Yadu’s vamsa.’” 


CANTO 148 


N arada said, “At the conclusion of Mahadeva’s discourse, loud roars 

were heard in the firmament. Thunder bellowed, with flashes of 
lightning. The welkin was enveloped with thick blue clouds. The god of the 
clouds then poured down purifying deluges as he does in the monsoon. A 
heavy darkness set in. The points of the horizon could no longer be 
distinguished. Then on that delightful, sacred and eternal breast of that 
celestial mountain, the assembled Rishis no longer saw the multitude of 
ghostly beings that associate with Mahadeva. 

Soon, however, the sky cleared. Some of the Rishis set out for the 
sacred tirthas. Others returned from whence they came. Verily, beholding 
that wonderful and inconceivable sight, they were filled with amazement. 
The discourse, as well, between Sankara and Uma filled them with awe and 
wonder. You, O Lord, are that foremost of all beings, of whom the 
Mahatman Sankara spoke to us on that mountain. You are the Eternal 
Brahman. 

On that occasion, also, Mahadeva burnt Himavat with his tejas. You 
have also shown us a similar spectacle. Indeed, today we have been put in 
remembrance of that time. O mighty-armed Janardana, I have thus, O 
almighty one, recited to you the glory of that God of gods, him that is called 
Kapardin or Girisa!””’ 

Bhishma continues, “Thus addressed by those denizens of ascetic 
retreats, Krishna, the delighter of Devaki, paid due honour to all those 
Rishis. Filled with delight, those Rishis once more addressed Krishna, 
saying, “Madhusudana, do you repeatedly show yourself to us at all times! 


O almighty one, swarga cannot give us such bliss as does the sight of you. 
Everything that the illustrious Bhava said about you is true. O Parantapa, 
we have told you all about that mystery. You yourself well know the truth of 
all things. Since, however, questioned by us, it pleased you to question us in 
return, we have narrated everything about the discourse of Bhava with 
Uma, only to please you. 

There is nothing in the three worlds that is unknown to you. You know 
the birth and origin of all things, indeed, you know everything that are a 
Cause of causes. Being ourselves of light natures, we are unable to bear 
within us such tremendous mysteries without speaking of them in wonder. 
Indeed, in your presence, O Greatest, we indulge in incoherencies from the 
lightness of our hearts. There is no wonderful thing that is unknown to you. 
Whatever is on earth, and whatever is in heaven, is all known to you. 

We take our leave of you, Krishna, to return to our various homes. May 
you increase in intelligence and prosperity. O Lord, O Sire, You will soon 
have a son like yourself, or even more distinguished than you. He will be 
imbued with great energy and splendour. He will achieve tremendous feats, 
and become possessed of power as great as yours.” 

Bhishma continues, “After this, the great Rishis bowed to that God of 
gods, that scion of Yadu’s race, that foremost of all great Beings. They then 
circumambulated him in pradakshina and, taking his leave, departed. As for 
Narayana, who is endowed with prosperity and blazing effulgence, he 
returned to Dwaraka after having duly completed that vrata of his. His wife 
Rukmini conceived, and on the expiration of the tenth month, a son was 
born of her, possessed of heroism and honoured by all for his utterly 
wonderful accomplishments. He, Pradyumna, is that Kama, the god of love, 
who exists in every creature and who pervades every existence. Indeed, he 
moves within the hearts of both Devas and Asuras. 

And this Krishna is the foremost of all purushas. Even he of the hue of 
clouds is that four-armed Vaasudeva. Through affection, he has attached 
himself to the Pandavas, and you also, you sons of Pandu, have attached 
yourselves to him. Achievements, prosperity, intelligence and the path that 
leads to swarga, are all there where this One, Trivikrama, the illustrious 
Vishnu of three steps, is. He is the three and thirty gods with Indra at their 
head. There is no doubt about this. He is the One Ancient God. He is the 
first of all the gods. He is the refuge of all creatures. He is without 
beginning and without end. He is Avyakta, unmanifest. 


He is the high-souled Madhusudana, the slayer of Madhu. Endowed 
with infinite tejas and urjas, he has been born among men to accomplish the 
purpose of the gods. Verily, this Madhava is the expounder of the most 
difficult truths which relate to artha, and he is also their achiever. O son of 
Pritha, the victory you have won over your enemies, your unrivalled 
achievements, the dominion you have acquired over the whole earth, are all 
due to this Narayana having taken your part. Your having got the 
inconceivable Narayana for your protector and refuge enabled you to 
become a terrible Adhvaryu, a sacrificer to pour multitudes of kings as 
libations into the raging fire of war. This Krishna was your great Sruva, 
your sacrificial ladle, resembling the all-consuming fire that appears at the 
end of the yuga. Duryodhana, with his sons, brothers and kinsmen, was 
much to be pitied, for, moved by wrath, he made agaisnt with Hari and the 
wielder of the Gandiva. Many sons of Diti, many foremost Danavas, of 
great bodies and vast strength, have perished in the flames of Krishna’s 
chakra like insects in a forest fire. How then will Manavas, mere mortal 
men, do battle against that Krishna, ah, human beings who, 
Purushavyaghra, have hardly any strength or prowess? 

As for Jaya, this Arjuna, he is a mighty yogin resembling the all- 
destroying yuga-fire in urjas. Drawing his bow equally with both hands, the 
Savyasachin is always in the van of battle. With his irresistible energy, O 
king, he has slain all the heroes and legions of Suyodhana. 

Listen to me as I tell you what Mahadeva who has the bull for the 
device on his standard, once said to the Rishis, upon the breast of the 
Himavat. His utterances constitute a Purana. The advancement of greatness, 
energy, strength, prowess, puissance, humility and lineage that are in Arjuna 
can come up to only a third part of the measure in which those attributes 
reside in Krishna. Who is there that can equal, let alone surpass, Krishna in 
these qualities? Whether that is possible or not, listen and judge. 

There where the illustrious Krishna is, there is unrivalled vishishtatha, 
excellence. As for myself, I am one of little understanding. Dependent upon 
the will of others, I am unfortunate. Knowingly, I set myself on the eternal 
path of death. You, however, are devoted to sincerity of conduct. Having 
once pledged yourself not to take back your kingdom, even when you might 
have done so, you did not take it, for you were determined to keep your 
oath. O Yudhishtira, king, you make too much of the slaughter of your 


kinsmen and friends in battle. You must remember that it is never right to 
break a sworn oath. 

All those who have fallen on the field of battle have actually been slain 
by Time. Verily, all of us have been slain by Time. Time is, indeed, all- 
powerful. You know full well the inexorable puissance of Time. Afflicted 
by Kaala, it does not become you to grieve. Know that Krishna himself, 
otherwise called Hari, is that same Kaala, with blood-red eyes and with 
cudgel in hand. For these reasons, O son of Kunti, it does not befit you to 
grieve for your slain kinsfolk. Be you always free, Kurunandana, from 
grief. 

You have heard of the glory and greatness of Madhava Krishna. That is 
sufficient to enable a good man to understand him. Having heard the words 
of Vyasa, as also of Narada Mahabuddhi, I have spoken to you about 
Krishna, the most Adorable Lord. I have myself added, from my own 
knowledge, something to Narada’s discourse. I have also spoken of the 
surpassing might of Krishna as recited by Mahadeva to the conclave of 
Rishis upon the breast of the Himavat. The converse between Maheswara 
and the daughter of Himavat, also, Bhaarata, have I narrated to you. 

He who will bear in his heart that discourse when coming from a great 
and righteous person, he who will listen to it, and he who will recite it for 
others to hear is sure to win the highest, most auspicious punya. That man 
will find all his wishes fulfilled. Leaving this world, he will ascend into 
swarga. There is no doubt of this. That man who wants to attain to his own 
great weal should devote himself to Krishna Janardana. 

King of the Kurus, you must also always bear in mind those revelations 
about dharma and kartavya which were declared by Maheswara. If you 
conduct yourself according to those precepts, if you bear the rod of 
chastisement justly and rightly, if you protect your subjects properly, you 
may be sure of attaining to Swargaloka. It is your solemn duty, O Rajan, to 
protect your subjects always according to the dictates of dharma. The stout 
neeti danda, the staff of punishment, which the king bears, has been said to 
be the embodiment of his dharma and his punya. 

Hearing the discourse, fraught with deepest dharma, between Sankara 
and Uma, which I have recited in this righteous conclave, you should 
worship with utmost reverence that God who has the bull for the emblem on 
his banner. He who grows even desirous of listening to that paribhasa 
should worship Mahadeva with utmost reverence. Verily, the one who 


wishes his own weal should adore Mahadeva with a pure heart. Even this is 
the command of the faultless Narada. Even he has commanded such 
worship of the Great God, O son of Pandu; do you obey that command of 
Narada. 

O most powerful king, even these are the wondrous events that 
transpired on the sacred breast of the Himavat, with regard to Vishnu and 
Sthanu. Those events flowed from the very nature of those Mahatman 
Deities. Krishna, accompanied by the wielder of Gandiva, practised eternal 
tapasya in the Badarikasrama for ten thousand years. Verily, Krishna and 
Dhananjaya, who are the ancient Narayana and Nara, both of eyes like 
lotus-petals, underwent severe austerities for the duration of three whole 
yugas. I learnt this from Narada and Vyasa, O king. 

The lotus-eyed Mahabaho Krishna, while yet a boy, achieved the great 
feat of killing Kamsa for the relief of his kinsmen. I do not venture, son of 
Kunti, to enumerate the feats of this Ancient and Eternal Being, O 
Yudhishtira. Without doubt, son, you will have high and great rewards who 
own that foremost of all persons, Krishna Vaasudeva, for your friend. 

I grieve for the evil Duryodhana even in respect of the next world to 
which he has gone. It was for him that all the earth has been razed of her 
people, along with her elephants and steeds. Indeed, through the folly and 
sins of Duryodhana, of Karna, of Sakuni and of Dusasana as the fourth, the 
Kurus have perished.’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “While that foremost of men, the son of 
Ganga, speaks to him in this strain, the Kuru King Yudhishtira remains 
entirely silent in the midst of the Mahatmans who have gathered to listen to 
the wisdom and discourses of Bhishma. All the kings, with Dhritarashtra 
amongst them, are filled with profound wonder upon hearing the words of 
the Kuru Grandsire. In their hearts they worship Krishna and then turn 
towards him with hands joined in reverence. The Rishis, also, with Narada 
at their head, accept and laud the words of Bhishma and approve of them 
joyfully. These are the wonderful Paribhashas of Bhishma which Pandu’s 
son Yudhishtira with all his brothers hear with deep gratitude and joy. 

Some time after, when Yudhishtira sees that Ganga’s son, who had 
given away abundant wealth as dakshina and dana to the Brahmanas at the 
sacrifices performed by him, has rested and become refreshed, the 
intelligent king once more questions him.” 


CANTO 149 


V aisampayana said, “Having heard of all the kartavyas in their 

entirety and all those sacred karmas and vastus, objects, that cleanse 
human beings of their sins, Yudhishtira once more addresses the son of 
Santanu. 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Who may be said to be the One God in the world? 
Who may be said to be the One Vastu which is our sole refuge? Who is he 
by worshipping whom and hymning whose praises men acquire what is 
most beneficial to them? What dharma is that which, in your judgment, is 
the foremost of all dharmas? What are those mantras by reciting which in 
japa a living creature is freed from the bonds of birth and life?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘One should always, with alacrity and casting aside all 
languor, hymn the praises of that Lord of the universe, that God of gods 
Vasudeva, who is Infinite and Eternal, who is Sanctity Itself, the Most 
Auspicious, the foremost of all Beings, the Mahateja, the One God, by 
uttering his thousand names, the Vishnu Sahasranamam. By always 
worshipping with sraddha and bhakti that immutable Being, by meditating 
on him, by singing his praises and bowing one’s head to him, and by 
performing sacrifices to him, indeed by always glorifying Vishnu, who is 
without beginning and without end or death, who is the Supreme Lord of all 
the worlds, the Parabrahman, and who is the Master and Controller of the 
universe, a man succeeds in transcending all sorrow. 

Verily, he is devoted to the Brahmanas, conversant with all dharmas and 
karmas, the enhancer of the fame and achievement of all persons, the 
Master of all the worlds, absolutely wonderful, and the Prime Cause of the 


origin of all creatures. Even this, in my judgment, is the foremost Dharma 
of all dharmas—that one should always worship and hymn the praises of 
the lotus-eyed Krishna with devotion. He is the highest Tejas. He is the 
highest Tapasya. He is the highest Brahman. He is the highest Asrama. He 
is the Holiest of all holies, the most Auspicious of all things auspicious. He 
is the God of all the gods and he is the immutable Father of all creatures. 

At the advent of the primal yuga, the Satya or Krita yuga, all creatures 
issue from him. At the end, again, of a yuga, all things disappear into him. 
Hear, O king, the thousand names, possessed of great efficacy in destroying 
sins, of that foremost One in all the worlds, that Master of the universe, 
Vishnu Narayana. All the names derived from his attributes, secret and 
well-known, of the Mahatman Vasudeva, which were sung by Rishis, I shall 
recite to you for the good of all. I invoke that Lord with this dhyanam: 

Shantakaram Bhujagasayanam Pamdanabham Suresam; Viswadharam 
Gaganasadrisham Meghavarnam Subhangam; Lakshmikantam 
Kamalanayam Yogihrid-dhayanagamyam; Vande Vishnum 
Bhavabhayaharam Sarvalokaikanatham. 

AUM Namo Bhagavate Vasudevayah! 

The thousand names of that Vishnu, the Vishnusahasranamam, are: 
AUM! 

Viswam Vishnu Vashatkaara Bhutabhavyabhavatprabhu  Bhutakrit 
Bhutabrit Bhaava Bhutaatmaa Bhutabhaavana 

Pootatma Paramaatma Mutktanaamparamaagati Avyaya_  Purusha 
Saakshi Kshetrajna Akshara 

Yogah Yogovidaamnetaa Pradhaanapurusheswara Narasimhavapu 
Sriman Kesava Purushottama 

Sarva Sharva Siva Sthaanu Bhutaatadi Aavyayanidhi; Saambhavah 
Bhaavana Bhartaa Prabhava Prabhu Iswara 

Svayambhu Sambhu Aditya Pushkaraksha Mahaswana Anadinidhana 
Dhata Vidhata Dhaturuttama 

Aprameya Hirishikesa Padmanabha Amaraprabhu Viswakarma Manu 
Tvastha Sthavishta Sthavirodhruva 

Agrahya Sasvata_ Krishna Lohitaskha_ Pratardhana  Prabhuta 
Trikakubdhama Pavitram Parammangalam 

Isana_ Pranada Prana Jyeshta Srehsta Prajapati Hiranyagarbha 
Bhugarbha Madhava Madhusudana 


Iswara Vikrami Dhanvi  Medhavi_ Vikrama Krama_ Anuttama 
Dooradarsha Kritajna Kriti Atmavan 

Suresa Sarana Sarma Viswareta Prajabhava Ahah Samvatsara Vyala 
Pratyaya Sarvadarsana 

Aja Sarveswara Siddha Siddhi Sarvadi Achyuta Vrashakapi Ameyatma 
Sarvayogavinissrita 

Vasu. Satya Samatma Sammita Sama Amogha_ Punadarikaksha 
Vrishakarma Vrishakriti 

Rudra Bahusira Babhru Viswayoni Suchisrava Amrita Saswatasthanu 
Vararoha Mahatapa 

Sarvaga Sarvavid-bhanu Viswaksena Janardana Veda Vedavita Avyanga 
Vedanga Vedavit Kavi 

Lokadhyaksha Suryadhyaksha Dharmadhyaksha Kirtakrita Chaturatma 
Chaturvyuha Chaturdamshtra Chaturbhuja 

Brajishnu Bhojanam Bhokta Sahishnu Jagatadija Anagha Vijaya Jetha 
Viswayont Punarvasu; 

Upendra Vamana Pramsu Amogha Suchi Urjita Atindra Samgriha 
Sarga Dhritatma Niyama Yama 

Vedya Vaidya Sadayogi Veeraha Madhava Madhu Atindriya Mahamaya 
Mahotsaha Mahabala 

Mahabuddhi Mahavirya Mahasakti Mahadyuti Anirdesyavapu Sriman 
Ameyatma Mahadridhrik 

Mahesvasa Mahibharta Srinivasa Satamgati Aniruddha Surananda 
Govinda Goindampati 

Marichi Damana Hamsa Suparna Bhujagottama Hiranyanabha Sutapa 
Padmanabha Prajapati 

Amrityu Sarvadrik Simha  Sandhata Sandhiman Sthira  Ajha 
Durmarshana Sastha Visrutatma Surariha 

Guru Guruttama Dhama Satya Satyaparakrama Nimisha Animisha 
Sragvi Vachaspatir-udharati 

Agrani Grammani Sriman Nyaya Neta Sameerana Sahasramurdha 
Viswatma Sahasraksha Sahasrapath 

Avartana Nivritatma Samvrita Sampramardana Aha-samvartakaya 
Vahni Anila Dharanidhara 

Suprasada_ Prasannatma_ Viswadhrik Viswabhuja_ Vibhu Satkarta 
Satkrita Sadhu Jahnnu Narayana Nara 


Asankhyeya Aprameyatma_ Visishta  Sishtakrit Suchi Siddhartha 
Siddhasankalpa Siddhidha Siddhasadhana 

Vrishahi Vrishabha_ Vishnu Vrishaparvana_ Vrishodhara_ Vardhana 
Vardhamana Vivikta 

Srutisagara Subhuja Durdhara Vagmi Mahendra Vasudha_ Vasu 
Naikarupa Brihadrupa Sipivishta Prakasana 

Ojhatejodyutidhara Prakastma Pratapana_ Rriddha_ Spastakshara 
Mantra Chandramsa Bhaskaradyuti 

Amritamsudbhava Bhanu Sasabindu Sureswara Aushadham Jagatasetu 
Satyadharmaparakrama 

Bhutabhavyabhavannatha Pavana Paavana Anala Kamaha Kamakrit 
Kanta Kama Kamapradha Prabhu 

Yugadikrit Yugavarta Naikamaya Mahasana_ Adrishya_ Vyaktarupa 
Sahasrajit Anantajit 

Ishta Visishta Sisha-ishta Sikhandi Nahusha_ Vrisha_ Krodhaha 
Krodhakritkarta Viswabahu Mahidhara 

Achyuta Prathista Prana Pranada Vasanuja Apamnidhi Adishtanam 
Apramatta Pratishtita 

Skanda  Skandadhara’ Dhurya  Varada_ Vayuvahana Vasudeva 
Brihatbhanu Adideva Purandara 

Asoka Tarana Tara Sura Sauri Janeswara Anukula Satavartta Padmi 
Padmanibhekshana 

Padmanabha_ Aravindaksha Padmagarbha Sareerabhrit Mahariddhi 
Riddha Vridhatma Mahaksha Garudadhvaja 

Atula Sarabha Bhima Samayajna Havirhari Sarvalakshana-lakshanya 
Lakshmivan Samitinjaya 

Vikshara Rohita Marga Hetu Damodara Saha Mahidhara Mahabhaga 
Vegavan Amitasana 

Udbhava Kshobana Deva Srigarbha Parameswara Karanam Karta 
Vikarta Gahana Guha 

Vyavasaya Vyavasthana Samsthana Sthanada’ Dhruva Parardhi 
Paramaspashta Tushta Pushta Subhekshana 

Rama Virama_ Viraja Marga Neya Naya Anaya _ Veera 
Shaktimatamshreshta Dharma Dharmaviduttama 

Vaikunta Purusha Prana Pranada Pranava Prithu Hiranyagarbha 
Shatrughna Vyapta Vayu Adokshaja 


Ritu Sudarsana Kaala Paramesti Parigraha Ugra Samvatsara Daksha 
Visrama Viswadakshina 

Vistara Stavarasthanu. Pramanam_ Bijamavyaya_ Artha  Anartha 
Mahakosa Mahabhoga Mahadhana 

Anirvinna Stavishta Abhu Dharmayupa Mahamakha Nakshatranemi 
Nakshatri Kshama Kshaama Sameehana 

Yagna Ijya Mahejya Kratu Satram Satamgati Sarvadarshi Vimuktatma 
Sarvajna Jnanamuttamam 

Suvrata Sumukha Sukshma Sughosha Sukhada_ Suhrit Manohara 
Jitakrodha Virabahu Vidharana 

Swaapna Svavasa Vyapi Anekatama Anekakarmakrit Vatsara Vatsala 
Vatsi Ratnagarbha Dhaneswara 

Dharmagupa_ Dharmakrit Dharmi Sat Asat Ksharam Aksharam 
Avijnata Sahasramsu Vidhata Kritalakshana 

Gabhastinemi Sattvastha Simha Bhutamaheswara Adideva Mahadeva 
Devesa Devabhritguru 

Uttara Gopati Gopta Gyanagamya Puratana Sarirabhutabhrit Bhokta 
Kapindra Bhooridakshina 

Somapa Amritapa Soma Purujit Purusattama Vinaya Jaya Satyasandha 
Dasarha Satvatampati 

Jiva Vinayitasakshi Mukunda Amitavikrama Ambhonidhi Anantatma 
Mahodadisaya Antaka 

Aja Maharha Svabhavya Jitamrita Pramodana Ananda Nandana Nanda 
Satyadharma Trivikrama; 

Kapilacharya  Kritagna  Medinipati Tripada  Tridasadhyaksha 
Mahasringa Kritantakrit 

Mahavaraha Sushena  Kankamgati Guhya  Gabhira Gupta 
Chakragadadhara 

Vedasa Swanga Ajita Dridha Samkarshano-Achyuta Varuna Vaaruna 
Vriksha Pushkaraksha Mahamana 

Bhagavan Bhagaha Anandi Vanamali Halayudha Aditya Jyotiraditya 
Sahishnu Gatisattama 

Sudhanva  Khandaparasu— Daruna_ Dravinaprada — Divasprikh 
Sarvadrikvyasa Vachaspatirayonija 

Trisama Samaga Sama Nirvanam Beshajam Bhishakh Sanyasakrit 
Sama Santa Nishta Santi Paarayanam 


Subhanga Santida Srishta Kumuda Kuvalesaya Gohita Gopati Gopta 
Vrishabhaksha Vrishapriya 

Anivarti Samkshepta Kshemakrit Siva Srivatsavaksha Srivasa Sripati 
Srimatamvara 

Sridha Srisa Srinivasa Srinidhi Srivibhavana Sridhara Srikara Sreya 
Sriman Lokatrayaasraya 

Swaksha Swanga Satananda Nandi _ Jyotirganeswara  Vijitatma 
Vidheyatma Satkirti Chinnasamsaya 

Udhirna Sarvatachakshu Anisa Sasvatasthira Bhusaya Bhushana Bhuti 
Visoka Sokanasana 

Archishman Archita Kumbha Visuddhatman Visodhana_ Aniruddha 
Apratiratha Pradyumna Amitavikrama 

Kalaneminiha Vira Sauri Surajaneswara Trilokatma Trilokesa Kesava 
Kesiha Hari 

Kamadeva Kamapala Kami Kanta Kritagama Anirdesyavapu Vira 
Ananta Dhanajaya 

Brahmanya Brahmakrit Brahma Brahman Brahmavivardana Brahmavit 
Brahmana Brahmi Brahmagna Brahmanapriya 

Mahakrama Mahakarma Mahateja Mahoraga Mahakritu. Mahayajva 
Mahayagna Mahahavi 

Stavya Stavapriya Stotram Stuti Stota Ranapriya Purna Purayita Punya 
Punyakirti Anamaya 

Manojava Tirthakara Vasurata Vasuprada Vasupraada Vasudeva Vasu 
Vasumanas Havi 

Satgati Satkriti Satta Satbhuti Satparayana Surasena Yadushreshta 
Sannivasa Suyamuna 

Bhutavasa Vasudeva Sarvasunilaya Anala Darpaha Darpada Dripta 
Durdara Apararijita 

Viswamurti Mahamurti Deeptamurti Murtiman Anekamurti Avyakta 
Satamurti Satanana 

Eka Naika Sava Kava Kasmai Yasmai Tasmai Padamanuttamam 
Lokabandhu Lokanatha Madhava Bhaktavatsala 

Suvarnavarna Hemanga Varanga Chandanamgati Viraha Vishama 
Sunya Gritasi Achala Chala 

Amani Manada Manya Lokaswami Trilokadrik Sumedha Medhaja 
Dhanya Satyamedha Dharaadhara 


Tejovrisha Dytidhara Sarvasastrabrihatamvara Pragraha Nigraha 
Vyagraha Naikasringa Gadagraja 

Chaturmurti Chaturbahu  Chaturvyuha_ Chaturgati Chaturatma 
Chaturbhava Chaturvedavit Ekapatha 

Samavarta WNivrittatma Durjaya Duratikrama Durlabha Durgama 
Durga Duravasa Durariha 

Subhanga Lokasaranga Sutantu Tantuvardana Indrakarma Mahakarma 
Kritakarma Kritaagama 

Udbhava Undara Sunda Ratnanabha Sulochana Arka Vajasana Sringa 
Jayanta Sarvavijayi 

Suvarnabindu Akshobhya Sarvavagiswaresvara Mahahrida Mahagarta 
Mahabhuta Mahanidhi 

Kumuda Kundara Kunda Parjanya Pavana Anila Amritasa Amritavapu 
Sarvajna Sarvatomukha 

Sulabha Suvrita Siddha Satarujita Satrutapana Nyagrodha Udumbara 
Aswattha Chanurandranisudhana 

Sahasrarchi Satajihva Saptaida Saptavahana Amurti Anagha Achintya 
Bhayakrit Bhayanasana 

Anu Brihat Krisa Sthula Gunabrita Nirguna Mahan Adrita Swadrita 
Svasya Pragvamsa Vamsavardana 

Bharabrit Khandita Yogi Yogisa Sarvakamada Asrama_ Sravana 
Kshaama Suparna Vayuvahana 

Dhanurdhara Dhanurveda Danda Damayita Dama Aparijita Sarvasaha 
Aniyanta Aniyama Ayama 

Sattvavan Sattvika Satya Satyadharmaparayana Abhipraya Pryarha 
Arha Priyakrit Pritivardana 

Vihayasagata Jyoti Suruchi Hartabhuja Vibhu Ravi Virochana Surya 
Savita Ravilochana 

Ananta Hutabhuja Bhokta Sukhada Naikaja Agraja_ Avirvinna 
Sadamarshi Lokadhisthana Adbhuta 

Sanaath Sanatanatama Kapila Kapi Avapyaya Svastida Svastikrit Svasti 
Svastibukh Swastidakshina 

Araudra Kundali Chakri Vikrami Urjitasasana Sabdatiga Sabdasaha 
Sisira Sarvarikara 

Akrura Pesala Daksha Dakshina Kshaminamvara _ Vidvatatma 
Vitabhaya Punyasravanakirtana 


Uttaarana Dushkritiha Punya Dusvapnanasasa Viraha Rakshana Santa 
Jivana Paryavastitha 

Anantarupa = Anantasri_ = Jiarmanyu——— Bhayapaha Chaturasra 
Gambhiratma Lawsa Vyadisa Disa; 

Anadi Bhurbhuva Lakshmi Suvira Ruchirangada Janana Janajanmadi 
Bhima Bhimaparakarma 

Adharanilaya Adhata Pushpahasa Prajagara Urdhvaga Satpadachara 
Pranada Pranava Pana 

Pramanam Prananilaya Pranabrit Pranajivana Tattvam Tattvavidhe 
Ekatma Janmamrityujaratiga 

Bhurbhuvasvastarusthara Tarra Savita Pratipamaha Yagna Yagnapati 
Yajva Yagnaanga Yagnavahana 

Yagnabrit Yagnakrit Yagni Yagnabhuja Yagnasadana Yagnaantakrit 
Yagnaguhyam Annam Annada 

Atmayoni Svaymajata Vaikkhana Samagayana Devakinandana Srishta 
Kshitisa Papanasana 

Sankhabrit Nandaki Chakri Saringadhanva Gadadhara Rathangapani 
Asokabhya Sarvapraharanayudha. 

‘Even thus have I recited to you, without any exception, the thousand 
excellent names of the Mahatman Kesava whose glory should always be 
sung. The man who listens to the names every day or who recites them 
every day, never meets with any evil either here or hereafter. If a Brahmana 
does this, he succeeds in mastering the Vedanta; if a Kshatriya does, he is 
always victorious in battle. A Vaisya, by doing it, becomes possessed of 
great affluence, while a Sudra earns great happiness. 

If one wishes to earn the punya of dharma, one succeeds by hearing or 
reciting these names. If it is wealth that one desires, one succeeds by 
reciting or listening to the Vishnusahasranamam. So also the man who 
wishes for kama, the pleasures of the senses, succeeds in enjoying all 
manner of pleasures, and the man wanting children acquires offspring. 

That man who, with devotion and perseverance and his heart wholly 
turned towards him, recites these thousand names of Vishnu every day, after 
having purified himself, succeeds in acquiring great fame, a position of pre- 
eminence among his kinsmen, enduring prosperity, and lastly, that which is 
of the highest benefit to him—mukti itself. Such a man never meets with 
fear at any time, and acquires great urjas and tejas, prowess and glory. 
Disease never afflicts him; splendour of complexion, strength, beauty and 


accomplishments become his. The sick become hale, the afflicted are freed 
from their afflictions; the affrighted are freed from fear, and he that is 
plunged in calamity is freed from all trouble. 

The man who hymns the praises of that foremost of Beings by reciting 
his thousand names with devotion succeeds in quickly crossing over all 
difficulties. That mortal who takes refuge in Vasudeva and who becomes 
devoted to him, is freed of all sins and attains to eternal Brahman. They 
who are devoted to Vasudeva have never to encounter any evil. They 
become free from the fear of birth, death, decrepitude and disease. 

That man who’ with bhakti and_ sraddha_ recites _ this 
Vishnusahasranamam acquires grace of soul, forgiveness of disposition, 
prosperity, intelligence, memory and fame. Neither wrath nor jealousy, or 
greed, or evil thoughts ever appear in those men of dharma who are devoted 
to that Foremost of beings. The firmament with the sun, moon and stars, the 
sky, the points of the compass, the earth and the ocean, are all held and 
supported by the prowess of the Mahatman Vishnu. The whole mobile and 
immobile universe, with the Devas, Asuras, and Gandharvas, Yakshas, 
Uragas and Rakshasas, is under the sway of Krishna. 

The senses, mind, intellect, life, energy, strength and memory, it has 
been said, have him for their soul. Indeed, this body that is called kshetra, 
and the intelligent soul within, called the kshetrajna, also have Krishna for 
their soul. Pravritti is said to be the foremost of all subjects treated of in the 
scriptures. Righteousness has conduct for its basis. The unfading Narayana 
is said to be the Lord of dharma. 

The Rishis, the Pitris, the Devas, the Mahabhutas, indeed, the entire 
mobile and immobile Akhanda, have sprung from Narayana. Yoga, the 
Samkhya philosophy, knowledge, all mechanical arts, the Vedas, the diverse 
scriptures, and all learning, have issued from Janardana. Vishnu is the One 
Great Element, the Single Substance which has spread itself out into 
multifarious forms. Covering the three worlds, he, the soul of all things, 
enjoys them all. His glory knows no diminution, and he it is that is the 
Enjoyer of the universe. This hymn in praise of the illustrious Vishnu 
composed by Vyasa, should be recited by that person who wishes to acquire 
happiness and that which is the highest and ultimate benefit— moksha. 

Those that worship and adore the Lord of the universe, that God who is 
Unborn and of blazing effulgence, who is the origin, the cause of the 


universe, who knows no decay, and who has eyes that are as large and 
beautiful as the petals of the lotus, have never to meet with any distress.’” 


CANTO 150 


oe Y udhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha of great wisdom, O you who know all 

the branches of knowledge, what is japa, silent chanting, by 
doing which, every day, one acquires the reward of righteousness in a large 
measure? What is that mantra which bestows success if recited on the 
occasion of setting out on a journey or entering a new home, or at the 
commencement of any undertaking, or on the occasion of sacrifices in 
honour of the Devas or of the Pitris? It behoves you to tell me what mantra 
it is which propitiates all malevolent influences, leads to prosperity and 
growth, protects from evil, destroys all foes, dispels all fears, and which, at 
the same time, is consistent with the Vedas.’ 

Bhishma says, “Hear, O king, with dhyana what that mantra is which 
was declared by Vyasa. It was ordained by Savitri and is of profound 
excellence. It can instantly purify a man of all his sins. Hear, O sinless one, 
as I recite to you the law in respect of that mantra. Indeed, O first of the 
sons of Pandu, by listening to those laws one is cleansed of all one’s sins. 
One who recites this mantra day and night is never stained by sin. 

I will now declare to you what that mantra is. Do you listen with 
attention. Indeed, the man that hears it is blessed with long life, O prince, 
and attaining to the fruition of all his wishes dwells in bliss both here and 
hereafter. This mantra, O Yudhishtira, was daily recited by the foremost of 
Rajarishis, the royal sages devoted to the practice of Kshatriya dharma and 
steadfastly observant of the vow of truth. Indeed, O tiger among kings, 
those monarchs who, with restrained senses and tranquil soul, chant this 
mantra every day, succeed in acquiring unrivalled prosperity. 


Salutations to Vasishta of the high vows, after bowing with reverence to 
Parasara, that ocean of the Vedas. Salutations to the great Snake Ananta, 
and salutations to all those who are crowned with success, and who own 
unfading glory. Salutations to the Rishis, and to him that is the Highest of 
the High, the God of gods, and the giver of boons to all those that are 
foremost. Salutations to him of a thousand heads, him that is most 
auspicious, him that has a thousand names—the One Janardana! 

Aja, Ekapada, Ahivradhna, the unvanquished Pinakin, Rita, Pitrirupa, 
the three-eyed Maheswara, Vrishakapi, Sambhu, Havana and Iswara—these 
are the celebrated Rudras, eleven in number, who are the Lords of all the 
worlds. Even these eleven Mahatmans have been mentioned as a hundred in 
the Satarudra of the Vedas. 

Ansa, Bhaga, Mitra, Varuna the lord of waters, Dhatri, Aryaman, 
Jayanta, Bhaskara, Tvashtri, Pushan, Indra and Vishnu are said to comprise 
a group of twelve. These twelve are called Adityas and they are the sons of 
Kasyapa as the Sruti declares. 

Dhara, Dhruva, Some, Savitra, Anila, Anala, Pratyusha and Prabhava 
are the eight Vasus named in the scriptures. Nasataya and Dasra are the two 
Aswins. They are the sons of Martanda born of his wife Samjna, from 
whose nostrils they emerged. 

After this I will recite the names of those who are the witnesses of all 
karma in the worlds. They take note of all sacrifices, of all gifts, of all good 
deeds. Those lords among the deities behold everything while they are 
themselves invisible. Indeed, they behold all the good and bad karma of all 
beings. They are Mrityu, Kala, the Viswedevas, the Pitris endued with 
forms, the great Rishis possessed of the wealth of penances, the Munis, and 
others crowned with spiritual success and devoted to tapasya and mukti. 
These of radiant smiles bestow diverse rewards upon men that recite their 
names. Verily, imbued with celestial energy, they bestow upon such men 
diverse worlds of felicity created by the Grandsire. They reside in all the 
worlds and attentively note all actions. By reciting the names of those Lords 
of all living creatures, one always becomes endowed with dharma, artha 
and kama in copious measure. One acquires hereafter diverse regions of 
auspiciousness and plenitude created by the Lord of the universe. 

These three and thirty Devas, who are the lords of all beings, as also 
Nandiswara of the vast body, and that Pre-eminent One who has the bull for 
the device on his banner, and those masters of all the worlds—the Ganas, 


the followers and companions of him called Ganeswara—and those called 
Saumyas, and the Rudras, and those called the Yogas, and those that are 
known as the Bhutas, and the luminaries in the firmament, the rivers, the 
sky, Garuda the prince of birds, all those on earth who have achieved 
success through their tapasya and who exist in either immobile or mobile 
form, achala and chala, the Himavat, all the mountains, the four oceans, the 
followers of Bhava who are possessed of prowess equal to that of Bhava 
himself, the illustrious and ever-victorious Vishnu, and Skanda, and 
Ambika—these are the great souls by reciting whose names, with restrained 
senses, one is purified of all sins. 

I shall now recite the names of those foremost Rishis who are known as 
Manavas. They are Yavakrita, and Raibhya, and Arvavasu, and Paravasu, 
and Aushija, and Kakshivat, and Bala, the son of Angiras. Then comes 
Kanwa, the son of the Rishi Medhatithi, and Barishada. All these are 
endowed with the tejas of Brahma and have been spoken of in the shastras 
as Creators of the universe. They have sprung from Rudra and Anala and 
the Vasus. Those who chant their names obtain great rewards. Indeed, by 
doing good deeds on earth, men and women sport in joy in swarga, with the 
Devas. These Rishis are the priests of Indra. They live in the east. That man 
who, with rapt attention, recites the names of these Rishis, succeeds in 
ascending to the regions of Indra and finding great honour there. 

Unmachu, Pramchu, Swastyatreya of great energy, Dridhavya, 
Urdhvavahu, Trinasoma, Angiras and Agastya Mahatejasvin, the son of 
Mitravaruna—these seven are the ritwiks of Yama, king of the dead, and 
dwell in the southern quarter. Dridheyu and Riteyu, and Pariyadha of great 
fame, and Ekata, and Dwita, and Trita—the last three endowed with 
splendour like that of the sun—and Atri’s son of righteous soul, Rishi 
Saraswata—these seven who once were the ritwiks at the Mahayagna of old 
of Varuna dwill in the western quarter. Atri, the illustrious Vasishta, the 
Maharishi Kasyapa, Gotama, Bharadwaja, Viswamitra the son of Kusika, 
and Richika’s fierce son Jamadagni of great urjas—these seven are the 
ritwiks of Kubera, the Lord of treasures and dwell in the northern quarter. 

There are seven other Rishis that live in all directions without being 
confined to any particular one. They, it is, who are the inducers of fame and 
of all that is beneficial to men, and they have been sung as the creators of 
the worlds. Dharma, Kama, Kala, Vasu, Vasuki, Ananta and Kapila—these 


seven are the upholders of the world. Rama, Vyasa, and Drona’s son 
Aswatthaman are the other foremost among Rishis. 

These are the great Rishis as distributed into seven groups, each group 
consisting of seven. They are the creators of that peace and good that men 
enjoy. They are said to be the regents of the several points of the horizon. 
One should turn one’s face to that direction in which one of these Rishis 
dwells if one wishes to worship him. Those Rishis are the creators of all 
creatures and have been regarded as the cleansers of all. 

Samvarta, Merusavarna, the righteous Markandeya, and Samkhya and 
Yoga, and Narada and the great Rishi Durvasa—these are imbued with 
severe penance and great self-restraint, and are celebrated throughout the 
three worlds. There are others who are equal to Rudra himself. They live in 
Brahmaloka. By naming them with reverence a sonless man obtains a son, 
and a poor man gains wealth. Indeed, by naming them, one acquires every 
success in dharma, artha and kama. 

One should also take the name of that celebrated king who was emperor 
of all the earth and equal to a Prajapati—that foremost of all monarchs, 
Prithu, the son of Vena. The earth became his daughter. One should also 
name Pururavas of the Suryavamsa, equal to Mahendra himself in prowess. 
He was the son of Ila and celebrated over the three worlds. One should, 
indeed, take the name of that beloved son of Budha. One should also take 
the name of Bharata, that Kshatriya celebrated across the three worlds. He 
who in the Krita yuga adored the gods in a grand Gomedha yagna— 
Rantideva of great splendour, who was equal to Mahadeva himself, should 
also be named. Of untold tapasya, possessed of every auspicious mark and 
sign, the source of every kind of weal to the world, he was the conqueror of 
the universes. 

One should also take the name of the Rajarishi Sweta of illustrious 
fame. He gratified Mahadeva and it was for his sake that Andhaka was 
slain. One should also take the name of the Rajarishi Bhagiratha of great 
fame, who, through the grace of Mahadeva, succeeded in bringing the 
sacred Ganga down from heaven to flow over the earth and wash all human 
beings of their sins. It was Bhagiratha who caused the ashes of the sixty 
thousand sons of Sagara to be purified by the sacred waters of Ganga and 
thereby rescued them from their ancient and violent sins. 

Indeed, one should take the names of all these that were endued with the 
blazing refulgence of fire, great beauty of person and unsurpassed energy. 


Some of them were of awe-inspiring forms and great might. Verily, one 
should take the names of these deities and Rishis and kings, those Lords of 
the universe, who are the enhancers of fame. 

Samkhya, and yoga which is highest of the high, and havya and kavya 
and that refuge of all the Srutis, the Supreme Brahman, have been declared 
to be the sources of great weal to all creatures. These are sacred and sin- 
cleansing and have been spoken of most highly. These are the foremost of 
oshadhis for allaying all diseases, and are the enablers of the success of all 
deeds. Restraining one’s senses, one should, O Bhaarata, take the names of 
these, morning and evening. It is they that protect. It is they that shower 
rain; they that shine and give light and heat; they that blow through the 
worlds. It is they that create all things. 

These are regarded as the foremost of all, as the sovereigns of the 
universe, as the most adroit in the accomplishment of all things, as endowed 
with forgiveness, as complete masters of the senses. Indeed, it has been said 
that they dispel all the evils to which humans are subject. These Mahatmans 
are the witnesses of all good and bad deeds. Rising in the morning, one 
should take their names, for by this one is sure to acquire all that is good. 
He who chants these names is freed from the fear of fires and of thieves. 
Such a man never finds his way obstructed by any impediment. By taking 
the names of these lofty souls, one is never visited by dark dreams of any 
kind. Washed of every sin, such men take birth into auspicious families. 

The Brahmana who, with restrained senses, recites these names while 
performing the initiatory rites of sacrifices and other religious observances, 
is blessed with dharma, devoted to the study of the atman, possessed of 
forgiveness and self-restraint, and free from malice. If a man who is 
afflicted with disease recites them, he is freed from his sin in the form of 
disease. By chanting them within a house, all evils are dispelled from the 
inmates. By reciting them in a field, a bounteous harvest is ensured of every 
kind of crop. Reciting them at the time of setting out on a journey, or while 
one is away from one’s home, one meets with good fortune. These names 
lead to the protection of one’s own self, of one’s children and wives, of 
one’s wealth, and of one’s seeds and plants. 

The Kshatriya who recites these names at the time of joining a battle 
sees destruction overtake his enemies and good fortune crown him and his 
forces. He who recites these names on the occasions of performing the rites 
in honour of the Devas or the Pitris, helps the Pitris and Devas eat the 


sacrificial havya and kavya. The man who recites them is freed from fear of 
disease and beasts of prey, of elephants and thieves. His load of anxiety is 
lightened, and he is freed from every sin. By reciting these excellent Savitri 
mantras on board a vessel, or in a vehicle, or in the courts of kings, one 
attains to high saphalata, success. There where these mantras are recited, 
fire does not burn wood. There children do not die, nor snakes come or 
dwell. Indeed, in such places, there can be no fear of the king, nor of 
Pisachas and Rakshasas. Verily, the man who recites these mantras ceases to 
have any fear of fire or water or wind or beasts of prey. 

These Savitri mantras, recited duly, contribute to the peace and well- 
being of all the four varnas. Those men who recite them with reverence are 
freed from every sorrow and at last attain to a high end. Even these are the 
results achieved by them that recite these Savitri mantras which are of the 
form of Brahman. That man who recites these mantras in the midst of kine 
sees his kine become fruitful. Whether when setting out on a journey, or 
entering a house on returning, one should recite these mantras on every 
occasion. These mantras constitute a great mystery of the Rishis and are the 
very highest of those japams which they silently recite. Even such are these 
mantras to them who practise the dharma of japa and pour libations on the 
sacrificial fire. 

This that I have said to you is the excellent opinion of Parasara. It was 
told in the oldest days to Sakra himself. Representing as it does Truth or 
Eternal Brahman, I have declared it in full to you. It constitutes that heart of 
all creatures, and is the highest Sruti. All the princes of the races of Soma 
and of Surya, the Raghavas and the Kauravas, recite these mantras every 
day after having purified themselves. These constitute the highest end of 
human creatures. There is rescue from every trouble and calamity in the 
daily recitation of the names of the Devas of the seven Rishis, and of 
Dhruva. Indeed, such recitation speedily frees one from all distress. 

The sages of olden times, Kasyapa, Gautama, and others, and Bhrigu, 
Angiras and Atri and others, and Sukra, Agastya and Brihaspati and others, 
all of whom are regenerate Rishis, have worshipped these mantras. 
Approved of by the son of Bharadwaja, these mantras were attained by the 
sons of Richika. Verily, having acquired them again from Vasishta, Sakra 
and the Vasus went forth to battle and triumphed over the Danavas. That 
man who makes a gift of a hundred kine with their horns covered with 
plates of gold to a Brahmana possessed of great learning and well- 


conversant with the Vedas, and he who causes the excellent Mahabharata 
story to be recited in his house every day, are said to acquire equal punya. 

By reciting the name of Bhrigu, one’s righteousness is enhanced. By 
bowing to Vasishta, one’s energy is enhanced. By bowing to Raghu, one is 
victorious in battle. By reciting the praises of the Aswins, one is freed from 
diseases. I have thus, O king, told you of the Savitri mantras which are 
identical with eternal Brahman. If you wish to question me on any other 
matter you may do so. I shall, O Bhaarata, answer you.’” 


CANTO 151 


: move udhishtira says, ‘Who deserve to be worshipped? Who are they 

to whom we should bow? How, indeed, should we behave, and 

towards whom? What course of conduct, Pitamaha, towards what classes of 
men is regarded as faultless?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘The humiliation of Brahmanas would shame the very 
Devas. By bowing down to Brahmanas one does not, O Yudhishtira, incur 
any fault. They deserve to be worshipped. They deserve to have our 
salutations. You should behave towards them as if they are your sons. 
Indeed, it is those men of great wisdom that uphold all the worlds. The 
Brahmanas are the great causeways of dharma in all the worlds. Their 
happiness consists in renouncing all kinds of wealth. They are devoted to 
the vow of mowna. They are agreeable to all creatures, and observant of 
diverse marvellous vratas. They are the refuge of all creatures in the 
universe. They are the authors of all the laws which govern the worlds. 
They are possessed of great fame. Tapasya is always their great wealth. 
Their power consists of pure speech. Their energy flows from the duties 
they observe. Conversant with all dharma, they are possessed of minute 
vision, so that they are cognizant of the subtlest considerations. They are of 
righteous desires. They live the observance of well-performed duties. They 
are indeed the highways of dharma. 

The four kinds of living creatures exist, depending upon them as their 
refuge. They are the path along which all should walk. They are the guides 
of all. They are the eternal upholders of all the sacrifices. They always 
uphold the heavy burdens of Sires and Grandsires. They never droop under 


heavy weights even when passing through difficult ways—like strong 
bullocks are they. They are attentive to the requirements of Pitris and Devas 
and Atithis. They are entitled to eat the first portions of havya and kavya. 
By the very food they eat, they rescue the three worlds from great fear. 
They are the island of refuge for all worlds. They are the eyes of all blessed 
with true sight. The wealth they possess consists of all the branches of 
knowledge known by the name of siksha, and all the Srutis. Imbued with 
great skill, they are conversant with the most subtle relations of things. 

They are well-acquainted with the end of all things, and their thoughts 
are always employed upon Atmavigyana, the science of the Soul. They are 
gifted with the knowledge of the beginning, the middle and the end of all 
things, and they are the ones in whom doubts no longer exist from being 
certain of their knowledge. They are fully aware of the distinctions between 
what is superior and what is inferior. They it is who attain to the highest 
end. 

Freed from all attachments, cleansed of all sins, transcending all the 
pairs of opposites, they are disconnected from all worldly things. Deserving 
of every honour, they are always held in great esteem by men of knowledge 
and high souls. They cast equal eyes on sandalwood paste and dirt, on what 
is food and what is not food. They see with an equal eye their brown 
vestments of coarse cloth and fabrics of silk and animal skins. They would 
live for many days together without eating, and dry up their limbs by such 
abstention from all sustenance. They devote themselves earnestly to the 
study of the Vedas, restraining their senses. They would make gods of those 
that are not gods, and not gods of those that are gods. 

Enraged, they can create other worlds and other regents of the worlds 
than those that exist. Through the course of those high-souled ones, the 
ocean became so saline as to be undrinkable. The fire of their wrath yet 
burns in the forest of Dandaka, unquenched by Time. They are the gods of 
the gods, and the cause of all causes. They are the authority of all 
authorities. What man of intelligence and wisdom is there that would seek 
to humiliate them? Amongst them the young and the old all deserve honour. 
They honour one another not by distinctions of age but by those of tapa and 
gyana. 

Even the Brahmana who is destitute of knowledge is a god and a high 
instrument for purifying others. He amongst them, then, that is possessed of 


knowledge is a much higher god and like the full and swollen ocean. 
Learned or unlearned, the Brahmana is always a high deity. 

Sanctified or unsanctified with mantras, fire is ever a great deity. A 
blazing fire, even when it burns on a crematorium, is not regarded as tainted 
because of the character of the place where it burns. Clarified butter looks 
beautiful whether kept on the sacrificial altar or in a chamber. So, even if a 
Brahmana be always engaged in evil deeds, he is still to be regarded as 


deserving of honour. Indeed, know that the Brahmana is always a high 
deity.”” 


CANTO 152 


¢ Eye udhishtira says, ‘Tell us, O king, what is that reward attached to 

the worship of Brahmanas, seeing which you do worship them, 

O you of most superior intelligence. Indeed, what is that success, flowing 
from their worship, guided by which you worship them?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘In this regard is told this itihasa of a conversation 
between Pavana and Arjuna, O Bhaarata. Endowed with a thousand arms 
and great beauty, the mighty Kartavirya, in days of yore, became the Lord 
of all the world. He had his capital in the city of Mahishmati. Of unbaffled 
prowess, that Lord of the Haihaya vamsa of Kshatriyas held sway over all 
the earth with her girdle of seas, together with all her islands and all her 
precious mines of gold and gemstones. Keeping before him the dharma of 
the Kshatriya varna, as also humility and Vedic knowledge, the king made 
large gifts of wealth to Rishi Dattatreya. Indeed, the son of Kritavirya thus 
adored the great ascetic who, becoming pleased with him, asked him to 
solicit three boons. 

The king said to him, “Let me become endowed with a thousand arms 
when I am in the midst of my troops. While, however, I remain at home let 
me have, as usual, only two arms. Indeed, let adversaries in battle see me 
possessed of a thousand arms. Let me also keep high vratas and conquer the 
whole world with my prowess. Having acquired the earth righteously, let 
me rule her with vigilance. There is a fourth boon which, O Dvijottama, I 
solicit you to grant and, O faultless one, because you are kindly disposed 
towards me, you must do so. Dependent as I am on you, whenever I may 


happen to go astray, let the righteous come forth to instruct and set me on 
the right path again.” 

The Brahmana Dattatreya replied to the king, “Tathaastu, so be it.’ 

Even thus did that king of splendour acquire those four boons. Riding 
then on his chariot whose lustre resembled that of fire or the sun, the 
monarch, blinded by his own great prowess, said, “Who, indeed, is there 
that can be regarded as my equal in patience and energy, in fame and 
heroism, in prowess and strength?” 

When he uttered these words, an asariri, an invisible voice in the sky 
said, “Ignorant wretch, do you not know that the Brahmana is superior to 
the Kshatriya? The Kshatriya rules all creatures only because he is helped 
by the Brahmana!” 

Kartaviryarjuna said, “When gratified, I am able to create all creatures. 
When angry, I am able to destroy all. In thought, word and deed, I am the 
first, the foremost. The Brahmana is certainly not above me. The first 
argument here is that the Brahmana is superior to the Kshatriya; this is 
countered by the other that the Kshatriya is superior. You have said, O 
invisible being, that the two are united. A distinction, however, is 
observable in this. 

It is seen that Brahmanas take refuge with Kshatriyas. The Kshatriyas 
never seek the protection of Brahmanas. Indeed, throughout the earth, the 
Brahmanas accept such refuge under the pretence of teaching the Vedas, 
and draw their sustenance from the Kshatriyas. The duty of protecting all 
creatures is vested in the Kshatriyas. It is from the Kshatriyas that the 
Brahmanas derive their sustenance. How then can the Brahmana be superior 
to the Kshatriyas? 

From today, I will bring your Brahmanas, who are superior to all 
creatures but who have mendicancy for their occupation and who are so 
conceited, under my sway. What the virgin Gayatri has said from the sky is 
not true. Robed in skins, the Brahmanas move about in freedom. I will 
bring those wights under my rule. God or man, there is none in the three 
worlds who can cast me down from the sovereignty I enjoy. And so am I 
certainly superior to the Brahmanas. This world that is now regarded as 
having Brahmanas for its foremost denizens shall soon have Kshatriyas for 
its highest beings. There is none that can bear my might in battle!” 

Hearing these coarse and arrogant words of Arjuna, the sky-ranging 
goddess became agitated. Then Vayu, the god of wind, addressed the king 


from the sky, “Cast off this sinful hubris. Bow to the Brahmanas. By 
injuring them you will bring disaster down on your kingdom. The 
Brahmanas will either slay you, king though you are, or, invested with the 
great might that they have, they will drive you out of your kingdom, 
depriving you of your power and glory.” 

Hearing this, the king addressed the speaker, saying, “And who, indeed, 
are you?” 

The wind answered, “I am the god of wind and the messenger of the 
Devas. I say to you what is for your benefit.” 

Arjuna said, “Oh, I see that you have today shown your devotion and 
attachment to the Brahmanas. Tell me now what kind of earthly creature is 
the Brahmana? Tell me, does a superior Brahmana resemble the wind in any 
way? Or is he like water, or fire, or the sun, or the firmament?” 


CANTO 153 


¢ at |i he god of wind said, “Hear, O deluded man, what the attributes 
are that belong to Brahmanas, all of whom are endowed with high 
souls. The Brahmana is superior to all those that, O king, you have named. 
In days of yore, the earth, indulging a spirit of rivalry with the king of the 
Angas, forsook her character as Bhumi. The Brahmana Kasyapa overtook 
her with calamity by paralysing her. The Brahmanas are always 
unconquerable, O king, in Swarga as also on Bhumi. In ancient days, the 
great Rishi Angiras, through his tejas, drained all the waters in the world, 
seas, rivers and the rest. The Mahatman Rishi, having quaffed all the waters 
as if they were milk, still did not feel that his thirst was slaked. He once 
more caused the earth to be filled with water by raising a mighty wave. On 
another occasion, when Angiras became enraged with me, I fled, leaving 
the world, and dwelt for a long time concealed in the agnihotra of the 
Brahmanas through fear of that Rishi. 

The illustrious Purandara, having coveted the body of Ahalya, was 
cursed by Gautama, yet, for the sake of dharma and artha, the Rishi did not 
kill the king of the Devas. The ocean, O king, which was full in the first 
days of the world of crystalline water, like amrita, was cursed by the 
Brahmanas and became saline. 

Even Agni, who is of the complexion of gold, and who blazes with 
effulgence when without smoke, and whose flames uniting together burn 
upwards, was cursed by the angry Angiras, and was instantly divested of all 
these attributes. Behold, the sixty thousand sons of Sagara, who came here 


to adore the ocean, were all made ashes by the Brahmana Kapila of golden 
complexion. 

You are not equal to the Brahmanas. Do you, O king, seek your own 
good. The Kshatriya of even great power bows to Brahmana children that 
are still in their mothers’ wombs. The vast kingdom of the Dandakas was 
destroyed by a Brahmana. The mighty Kshatriya Talajangala was destroyed 
by a single Brahmana, Aurva. You, too, have acquired a great kingdom, 
great might, religious merit, and learning, which are all difficult of 
attainment, only through the grace of Dattatreya. Why do you, O Arjuna, 
worship Agni every day who is a Brahmana? He is the bearer of sacrificial 
libations from every part of the universe. Are you ignorant of this? Why, 
indeed, do you suffer yourself to be stupefied by folly when you well know 
that a superior Brahmana is the protector of all creatures in the world and is, 
indeed, the Creator of the living world? 

The Lord of all creatures, Brahma, unmanifest, and of unfading glory, 
who created this boundless universe with its mobile and immobile creatures 
is a Brahmana. Some there are, devoid of wisdom, who say that Brahma 
was born of an Egg. From the original Egg, when it burst forth, mountains 
and the points of the compass and the waters and the earth and the heavens 
all sprang forth into existence. This beginning of creation was not seen by 
anyone. How then can Brahma be said to have been born from the original 
Egg, especially when he is declared as being Aja, Un-born? It is said that 
vast uncreated space is the primeval Egg. It was from this uncreated Akasa, 
or Supreme Brahman, that the Grandsire Brahma was born. 

If you ask, ‘Whereon would the Grandsire, after his birth from 
uncreated space, rest, for there was then nothing else?’ the answer may be 
given thus: “There is an existent Being of the name of Chitta, 
Consciousness. That mighty Being is infused with great tejas. There is no 
Egg. Brahma, however, exists. He is the Creator of the universe and is its 
king.” 

Thus spoken to by Vayu the wind, Kartaviryarjuna remained silent.’ 


CANTO 154 


V ayu Deva said, ‘Once upon a time, O king, a ruler of the name of 

Anga, desired to give away the whole earth as sacrificial dakshina to 
the Brahmanas. At this, the earth became filled with anxiety. “I am the 
daughter of Brahma. I support all creatures. Having obtained me, alas, why 
does this greatest of kings wish to give me away to the Brahmanas? 
Abandoning my character as soil, I will repair to the presence of my sire. 
Let this king with all his kingdom meet with destruction.” 

Arrived at this conclusion, she left for Brahmaloka. Seeing Bhumi Devi 
on the point of leaving, Rishi Kasyapa subtly entered into the visible 
embodiment of the goddess, after casting off his own body through yoga. 
The earth thus infused by the spirit of Kasyapa, grew in prosperity and 
became unprecedentedly fecund and replete with all kinds of plants and 
herbs and vegetation. Indeed, O king, for the time that Kasyapa possessed 
the earth, dharma prevailed everywhere and all fears ceased. The earth 
remained possessed by the spirit of Kasyapa for thirty thousand celestial 
years, and fully alive to all that it did while it was occupied by the spirit of 
Brahma’s daughter. At the end of this time, Bhumi Devi returned from 
Brahmaloka and arriving here, bowed to Kasyapa, and from that time she 
became the daughter of that Rishi. Kasyapa is a Brahmana. Even this was 
the feat, O king, that a Brahmana performed. Tell me the name of the 
Kshatriya who can be held to be superior to Kasyapa!” 

Hearing these words, King Arjuna remained silent. To him the god of 
wind once more said, “Hear now, O king, the story of Utathya who was 
born into the race of Angiras. The daughter of Soma, named Bhadra, was 


regarded as unrivalled in beauty. Her sire Soma thought Utathya to be the 
fittest of husbands for her. The famed and most blessed maiden of faultless 
limbs, observing diverse vows, underwent the severest tapasya from the 
desire of acquiring Utathya for her lord. After a while, Soma’s father Atri 
invited Utathya to his home and bestowed Bhadra upon him. Utathya, who 
was used to giving away sacrificial gifts in copious measure, duly received 
the girl for his wife. 

Now, it so happened that the handsome Varuna had, for a long time, 
coveted the girl for himself. Coming to the forest where Utathya dwelt, 
Varuna abducted Bhadra when she had entered the Yamuna for a bath. The 
Lord of the waters took her to his own abode. That mansion was of a 
wonderful aspect. It was adorned with six hundred thousand crystalline 
lakes surrounding it. There is no mansion that can be regarded more 
beautiful than that home of Varuna. It was embellished with many palaces 
and by the presence of diverse tribes of Apsaras and of diverse unequalled 
objects of enjoyment. There, within that palace, the Lord of waters, O king, 
sported with Bhadra. 

Soon enough, the ravishment of his wife was reported to Utathya. 
Having heard all the facts from Narada, Utathya addressed the celestial 
Rishi, saying, “Go, O Narada, to Varuna and speak to him with due severity. 
Ask him why he has abducted my wife, and, indeed, tell him in my name 
that he should return her to me. You may say to him further, “You are a 
protector of the worlds, O Varuna, a Lokapala, and not a despoiler or 
destroyer. Why have you abducted Utathya’s wife bestowed upon him by 
Soma?’” 

Narada went to Varuna and said, ““Do you set the wife of Utathya free. 
Indeed, why have you abducted her?” 

Varuna replied, “This timid girl is exceedingly dear to me. Why, I dare 
not let her go!” 

With this reply, Narada came back to Utathya and cheerlessly said, “O 
Maharishi, Varuna drove me out of his house, indeed, seizing me by the 
throat. He is unwilling to restore your wife to you. Do now as you please.” 

Hearing Narada, Angiras became inflamed with wrath. Possessed with 
great tapodhana, he stilled all the waters of Varuna and with his tapasya 
shakti drained them at a swallow. When all his waters were thus quaffed, 
the Lord of that element became cheerless and downcast, as also all his 
friends and kinsfolk. For all that, he still did not give up Utathya’s wife. 


Then Utathya, Dvijottama, filled with wrath, commanded the earth, “O 
amiable one, do you show land where there are now the six hundred 
thousand lakes of Varuna!” 

The ocean was forced to abandon those lakes and the dry land which 
appeared in their stead was arid and sterile. 

To the rivers that flowed through that region, Utathya said, “O 
Saraswati, do you become invisible here. Indeed, O gentle Devi, leaving 
this realm, go you to the desert! Auspicious goddess, without your presence 
let this whole place cease to become sacred.’ 

When that entire region, in which the Lord of waters dwelt, fell dry, 
Varuna went to Angiras, taking with him Utathya’s Bhadra, and made her 
over to him. Getting back his wife, Utathya was cheerful again. Then, O 
Lord of the Haihaya vamsa, that great Brahmana released both the universe 
and the Lord of waters from the distress into which he had plunged them. 

When he had his wife back, the Mahatejasvin Rishi Utathya said to 
Varuna, “I have recovered my wife, O Lord of waters, with the help of my 
tapasya and after inflicting such distress on you as made you cry aloud in 
anguish.” 

Saying this, he went home, with that wife of his. Even such, O king, 
was Utathya, that greatest of Brahmanas. Shall I continue? Will you yet 
persist in your arrogant opinion? Is there any Kshatriya that is superior to 
Utathya?’”’ 


CANTO 155 


B hishma says, “Thus addressed by Vayu, King Arjuna remained silent. 

The God of Wind spoke again to him, “Listen now, O king, to the 
story of the greatness of the Brahmana Agastya. Once upon a time, the 
Devas were vanquished by the Asuras at which they fell into despair. The 
sacrifices of the Devas were all seized, and the Swadha of the Pitris was 
also misappropriated. Indeed, O king of the Haihayas, all the religious 
karmas and kriyas of men were also obstructed and suspended by the 
Danavas. 

Divested of their prosperity, the Devas wandered over the earth even 
like beggars. One day, in course of their wandering, they met Agastya 
Mahavrata, that Brahmana invested with great energy and splendour like 
that of the sun. Saluting him duly, the Devas made the customary enquiries 
after his well-being. They then said these words to that Mahatman, “We 
have been defeated by the Danavas in battle and have fallen off from 
affluence and prosperity. Do you, O greatest of Rishis, rescue us from this 
predicament of great fear.” 

When informed of the plight to which the deities had been reduced, 
Agastya grew incensed, and he blazed forth like the all-consuming fire of 
the Pralaya. The blazing rays of heat and light that sprang forth from the 
Rishi scathed the Danavas. Thousands of them began to fall smoking from 
the sky. Scalded by the tejas of Agastya, abandoning both heaven and earth, 
the Danavas fled towards the south. 

At that time the Danava King Bali was performing a horse sacrifice, an 
Aswamedha yagna in the Patalas. Those great Asuras who were with him in 


those realms of nether, who dwelt in the bowels of the earth, were not 
touched by the searing wrath of Agastya. Upon the vanquishment and 
destruction of their foes, the Devas regained their own regions, and their 
fears were entirely dispelled. Encouraged by what he accomplished for 
them, they then asked the Rishi to consume the Asuras who had taken 
refuge in the Patalas. 

Agastya replied to them, “I can surely consume the Asuras that dwell 
below the earth, but if I do this, my tapasya will suffer great diminution. 
And for that, I will not exert my power in that direction.” 

Even thus, O king, did the illustrious Agastya Muni burn the mighty 
Danavas through his own fierce tejas. Even thus did Suddhatma Agastya, of 
the pure soul, come to the rescue of the desperate Devas with his tapasya 
shakti. Sinless one, even so was the awesome Agastya! Shall I continue? 
Or, will you now say anything in reply? Is there any Kshatriya who is 
greater than Agastya?” 

Thus addressed, King Arjuna remained silent. 

Vayu Deva now said, “‘Listen, O king, to one of the great feats of the 
lustrous Vasishta. Once upon a time, the Devas were engaged in performing 
a sacrifice on the shores of the Vaikhanasa lake. Knowing his might, the 
sacrificing gods thought of Vasishta and made him their priest in 
imagination. Meanwhile, seeing the Devas reduced and emaciated because 
of the diksha they were undergoing, a race of Danavas, called the Khalins, 
of stature as gigantic as mountains, sought to kill them. Those amongst the 
Danavas that were either maimed, dismembered or even slain in the battle 
plunged into the waters of the Manasa lake and, because of the boon they 
had from Brahma, they were restored to wholeness, vigour and life. 

Plucking off jagged mountain peaks, enormous maces and mighty trees, 
they agitated the waters of the lake, making them rise up to a height of a 
hundred yojanas. They then ran against the Devas, and they were ten 
thousand demons. Attacked by the Danavas, the gods sought the protection 
of their King Vasava. Indra, however, was also soon dreadfully afflicted by 
the Danavas. 

In his distress, Sakra sought the protection of Vasishta. At this, the holy 
Rishi Vasishta reassured the Devas, dispelling their fears. The sage did this 
because he saw how disconsolate the gods had become; he did this from 
compassion for them. Vasishta put forth his energy and, without exertion, 
burnt up those Danavas called Khalins. 


Possessed of untold tapodhana, the Rishi brought the Ganga, who had 
flowed to Kailasa, to that place. Indeed, Ganga appeared there, springing up 
through the waters of the Manasa lake. The lake was infused by that holiest 
river, and the Ganga of heaven flowed from there as the Sarayu. The place 
where those Danavas fell came to be called after them. Even thus were the 
gods of swarga, with Indra at their head, rescued from great distress by 
Vasishta. It was thus that those Danavas, who had received boons from 
Brahma, were slain by that Mahatman Rishi. 

Sinless one, I have told you of the feat which Vasishta accomplished. 
Shall I go on? Or, will you say anything now? Was there ever a Kshatriya 
who could be said to equal, let alone surpass the Brahmana Vasishta?””’ 


CANTO 156 


: ‘RB hishma says, ‘Still, Arjuna remained silent. The wind god 
addressed him again, saying, “Hear me, O foremost of the 
Haihayas, as I narrate to you the achievement of the Mahatman Atri. Once 
upon a time, as the Devas and Danavas were fighting each other in the dark, 
Rahu pierced both Surya and Soma with his arrows. The Devas, 
overwhelmed by darkness, began to fall before the mighty Danavas, O 
greatest of kings. Repeatedly struck by the Asuras, the denizens of heaven 
began to lose their strength. They then saw the learned Brahmana Atri, that 
tapodhana, engaged in the observance of austerities. 

To that Rishi who had conquered all his senses and in whom wrath had 
been extinguished they said “Behold, Rishi, these two, Soma and Surya, 
who have both been pierced by the Asuras with their arrows. In 
consequence, darkness has overtaken us, and we are being struck down by 
the enemy. We do not see the end of our troubles. Do you, O Lord of great 
power, rescue us from this fear.” 

The Rishi said, “How shall I save you?” 

They answered, saying, “Do you yourself become Chandramas. Do you 
also become the sun, and do you begin to slay these brigands.” 

Thus solicited by them, Atri assumed the form of the darkness- 
destroying Soma. Indeed, because of his agreeable disposition, he began to 
look as handsome and delightful as Soma himself. Beholding that the real 
Soma and the real Surya had become darkened by the shafts of the foe, Atri, 
assuming the forms of those luminaries through his tapasya shakti, shone 
forth in splendour over the field of battle. Verily, Atri made the universe 


blaze forth in light, dispelling all its darkness. By putting forth his might, he 
also vanquished the vast multitudes of those enemies of the Devas. Seeing 
those great Asuras burnt by Atri, the Devas also, protected by Atri’s tejas, 
began to despatch them ever more swiftly. 

Putting forth his prowess and mastering all his energy, it was thus that 
Atri illumined the god of day, rescued the Devas, and slew the Asuras. Even 
this was the feat that Dvija, helped by his sacred fire, Atri, that silent reciter 
of mantras, he who wore deer-skins. Consider, O Rajarishi, what that Rishi 
who subsisted upon only fruits accomplished. 

I have narrated to you, in detail, the feat of the Mahatman Atri. Shall I 
go on? Or will you say anything? Is there any Kshatriya that is superior to 
this Mahamuni?” 

Yet, Kartaviryarjuna remained silent. Vayu spoke again to him, “Hear, 
O king, the feat achieved by the Maharishi Chyavana in days of old. Having 
given his word to the twin Aswins, Chyavana said to Indra, ‘Do you make 
the Aswins drinkers of Soma with all the other Devas!’ 

Indra said, “The Aswins have been cast out by us. How, then, can they 
be admitted into the sacrificial circle for drinking Soma with the others? 
They are not numbered among the Devas. Do not, therefore, tell us to do 
this. O Mahavrata, we do not wish to drink Soma in the company of the 
Aswins. Whatever other behest you may have for us, O learned Brahmana, 
we are ready to accomplish.’ 

Chyavana said, “The Aswins shall drink Soma with all of you. Both of 
them are Devas, O Indra, for they are the sons of Surya. Let the gods do 
what I have said. By doing what I ask, the Devas will reap great rewards. 
By doing otherwise, evil will overtake them.’ 

Indra said, ‘I shall not, O foremost of Dvijas, drink Soma with the 
Aswins! Let others drink with them as they please. But for myself, I dare 
not do it.’ 

Chyavana said, ‘If, O slayer of Bala, you will not obey me gladly, you 
shall, this very day, drink Soma with them in a sacrifice, for I will compel 
you!’” 

Vayu said, “Then, taking the Aswins with him, Chyavana began a great 
yagna for their benefit. Chyavana dazed all the gods with his mantras. 
Seeing what Chyavana did, Indra became incensed. Taking up a mountain 
in his hands he ran at that Rishi. The Deva king also wielded the vajra. As 
Indra rushed at him, the illustrious Chyavana, tapodhana, cast an angry 


glance at Indra. Throwing a little water at him, he paralysed the king of the 
Devas with his thunderbolt and mountain. 

From the fire of the yagna he had begun, the Rishi created a terrible 
Asura made of the libations he had poured on the sacred fire. That demon 
was called Mada, of the gaping mouth. Indeed, formidable and dreadful was 
the Asura that the Mahamuni created with his mantras. There were a 
thousand teeth in his mouth, which extended a hundred yojanas. Of terrible 
mien, these fangs were two hundred yojanas long. One of his cheeks rested 
on the earth and the other touched the sky. Indeed, all the gods with Vasava 
seemed to stand at the root of that great Asura’s tongue, even as schools of 
fish when they enter into the wide open mouth of a leviathan whale, a 
timmingala. 

While within the mouth of Mada, the Devas held a quick consultation 
and then addressed Indra, ‘Do you quickly bend your head in reverence to 
this Brahmana. Without scruple or hesitation, we shall drink Soma with the 
Aswins in our company.’ 

Then, bowing his head low to Chyavana, the humbled Indra obeyed his 
command. Even thus did Chyavana make the Aswins drinkers of Soma with 
the other gods. Calling back Mada, the Rishi then assigned him the duties 
he was to perform. That wild Mada was commanded to dwell in dice, in 
hunting, in drinking and in women. Hence, O king, those men that betake 
themselves to these, meet with destruction, and one should always keep 
these sins at a great distance. Thus, O king, have I narrated to you the feat 
achieved by Chyavana. Shall I go on? Or, will you say anything in reply? Is 
there any Kshatriya that is higher than the Brahmana Chyavana?’”’ 


CANTO 157 


B hishma says, ‘Hearing these words of the wind god, Arjuna still 
remained silent. At this, Vayu said to him, “When the denizens of 
swarga, with Indra at their head, found themselves in the mouth of the 
Asura Mada, at that time Chyavana took the earth away from them. 
Deprived previously of swarga and now shorn of Bhumi also, the gods were 
downcast. Indeed, afflicted with grief, the Devas threw themselves 
unreservedly at the Pitamaha Brahma’s mercy and sought his protection.” 

The Devas said, ‘O you that are adored by all creatures of the universe, 
Chyavana has taken the earth from us, while we have been deprived of 
swarga by the Kapas, O puissant one.’ 

Brahma said, ‘Swargavasis, do you, with Indra at your head, seek the 
protection of the Brahmanas. By gratifying them you will succeed in 
regaining both the worlds as before.’ 

The Devas went to the Brahmanas and became suppliants for their 
protection. The Brahmanas asked them, “Whom shall we subdue?’ 

The Devas said to them, ‘Do you subdue the Kapas.’ 

The Brahmanas then said, ‘Bringing them down first onto the earth, we 
shall swiftly vanquish them.’ 

The Brahmanas commenced a rite whose object was the destruction of 
the Kapas. As soon the Kapas heard of this, they immediately despatched a 
messenger of theirs, Dhanin, to those Brahmanas. Dhanin came to them as 
they sat upon the earth, and delivered the message of the Kapas. “The Kapas 
are even equal to you all! They are not inferior to any of you. Hence, what 
will be the effect of these rites that you seem bent upon? All of them are 


knowers of the Vedas and possessed of wisdom. All of them are mindful of 
sacrifices. All of them have Truth for their vow, and for these reasons all of 
them are regarded as equal to great Rishis. The goddess of prosperity sports 
among them, and they, in their turn, support her with worship. They never 
indulge in fruitless congress with their wives, and they never eat the flesh of 
animals that have not been killed in sacrifices. They pour libations on the 
sacrificial fire every day and are obedient to the behests of their preceptors 
and elders. 

All of them have their souls under perfect control, and never eat any 
food without dividing it duly among their children. They always travel 
together in chariots and other conveyances without any of them riding his 
own ratha while others journey on foot. They never indulge in sexual 
congress with their wives when the women are in their periods. They all 
conduct themselves in such a way as to attain to regions of felicity 
hereafter. Indeed, they are always righteous in their deeds. 

When women quick with child or old men have not eaten, they never 
eat themselves. They never indulge in play or sport of any kind in the 
forenoon. They never sleep during the day. When the Kapas have these and 
many other virtues and accomplishments, why, indeed, would you seek to 
quell them? You should abstain from the endeavour. Verily, by this 
abstention, you will achieve your own good.’ 

The Brahmanas said, “Oh, we shall subdue the Kapas! In this matter, we 
are with the Devas, and so the Kapas deserve killing. As regards Dhanin, he 
should return whence he came.’ 

Returning to the Kapas, Dhanin said to them, “The Brahmanas are not 
disposed to do you any good.’ 

Hearing this, all the Kapas took up their weapons and went towards the 
Brahmanas. Seeing the Kapas advancing against them with the standards of 
their chariots upraised, the Brahmanas forthwith created blazing fires to 
destroy them. Those eternal fires, kindled with the help of Vedic mantras, 
devoured the Kapas, and then began to shine in the firmament like so many 
golden clouds. Having assembled together for battle, the Devas slew many 
of the Danavas. They did not know at the time that it was the Brahmanas 
who had effected their destruction. Then Narada of great tejas came there 
and informed the gods how their enemies, the Kapas, had really been slain 
by the Brahmanas of measureless power. Hearing what Narada said, the 


Swargavasis were gratified. They also applauded those twice-born Dvija 
allies of theirs, those Brahmanas of great fame. 

Now the energy and prowess of the Devas began to increase and, 
worshipped in all the worlds, they also acquired the boon of immortality!” 

When Vayu the wind had said this, King Arjuna worshipped him duly 
and now spoke these words to him. Hear, O mighty-armed king, what 
Kartaviryarjuna said. 

Arjuna said, “O mighty Vayu, always and by all means do I live for the 
Brahmanas. Devoted to them, I worship them always. Through the grace of 
Dattatreya have I obtained this power of mine. Through his grace have I 
been able to accomplish great feats in the world and achieve high merit. Oh, 
I have, with attention, heard of the achievements, O Vayu, of the 
Brahmanas with all their fascinating details as recited by you so truly.” 

The wind said, “Do you protect and cherish the Brahmanas, in the 
exercise of your Kshatriya svadharma, which is yours by birth. Do you 
protect them even as you protect your own senses. There is danger to you 
from the race of Bhrigu. That, however, will come on a distant day.” 


CANTO 158 


oe Y udhishtira says, ‘O Kshatriya, you always worship Brahmanas of 

praiseworthy vows. What, however, is that fruit seeking which 

you worship them, Pitamaha? O Mahavrata, with what prosperity attaching 

to the worship of the Brahmanas in your sight do you worship them? Tell 
me all this, O Mahabaho.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Here is Kesava Mahabuddhi. He will tell you 
everything. Of high vows and endowed with the greatest grace and fortune, 
even he will tell you what the felicity is that attaches to the worship of 
Brahmanas. My strength, ears, speech, mind, eyes and that clear 
understanding of mine are all clouded and weak today. I think, the time is 
not distant when I will cast off my body. The sun seems to me to go very 
slowly. 

I have told you of the high dharmas, O king, which are mentioned in the 
Puranas as observed by Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras. Do 
you now, O son of Pritha, learn from Krishna what little remains to be 
learnt on that matter. I know Krishna truly. I know who he is and what his 
ancient might is. O king of the Kurus, Kesava is of immeasurable soul. 
Whenever doubts arise and faith is lost, it is he who upholds dharma. 

It is Krishna who created Bhumi, Akasa and Swarga. Indeed, the earth 
has sprung from Krishna’s body. Of terrible prowess and existing from 
before the beginning of time, it is Krishna who became the mighty boar and 
raised the submerged earth. It is he who created all the points of the 
horizon, together with all the mountains. Below him are the welkin, heaven, 


the four cardinal points, and the four lesser directions. It is from him that all 
creation has flowed. It is he who has created this ancient universe. 

From his navel appeared a lotus. Within that lotus sprang Brahma, 
himself of immeasurable energy. It was Brahma, O son of Pritha, who rent 
that darkness which existed, exceeding the very ocean in depth and extent. 
In the Krita yuga, O Pandava, Krishna existed in the world in the form of 
dharma. In the Treta yuga, he existed in the form of gyana. In the Dwapara 
yuga, he existed in the form of Shakti. In the Kali age he came to the earth 
in the form of adharma. 

It is he who in days of yore slew the Daityas. It is he who is the Ancient 
God. He who ruled the Asuras as their Emperor Mahabali. He is the Creator 
of all beings. He is also the future of all created beings. He is also the 
protector of this universe fraught with the seed of destruction. When the 
cause of dharma languishes, this Krishna incarnates either into the race of 
the gods or among men. Founded in dharma, this Krishna of the immaculate 
soul protects both the higher and the lower worlds from darkness. Sparing 
those that deserve to be spared, Krishna sets himself to the slaughter of the 
Asura, O Kaunteya. 

It is he who is all karma, holy and unholy, and he who is the Cause of 
causes. Krishna is the act done, the act to be done, and the act that is being 
done. Know that this Illustrious One is Rahu and Soma and Sakra. He is 
Viswakarman. It is he that is the Viswarupa, of Universal Form. He is the 
Destroyer and he is the Creator of the universe. He is the wielder of the 
Sula; he is of human form; and he is of terrible form. All creatures sing his 
praises, for he is known by his deeds. Hundreds of Gandharvas and Apsaras 
and Devas always travel with him. The very Rakshasas hymn his praise. He 
is the Enhancer of Wealth; he is the one victorious Being in the universe. In 
sacrifices, eloquent men hymn his praises. The singers of Samans praise 
him by reciting the Rathantaras. The Brahmanas praise him with Vedic 
mantras. It is to him that the sacrificial priests pour their libations. 

The Devas with Indra at their head hymned his praise when he lifted up 
the Govardhana mountain to protect the cowherds of Vrindavana against the 
wrathful torrents of rain which Indra lashed down on them. He is, O 
Bhaarata, the one Blessing to all creatures. He, O Bhaarata, having entered 
the old Brahma cave, beheld from that place the original sheath of the world 
at the beginning of Time. Agitating all the Danavas and the Asuras, this 
Krishna of foremost feats rescued the earth. It is to him that people dedicate 


diverse kinds of food. It is to him that warriors dedicate all their mounts and 
chariots, of every kind, at the time of war. He is eternal, and it is under this 
Illustrious One that the sky, earth, heaven, all things, exist and endure. 

He it is who caused the seed of the gods Mitra and Varuna to fall into a 
jar, whence sprang Rishi Vasishta. It is Krishna who is Vayu; he is the 
Aswins; it is he who is that first of gods, Surya of a thousand rays. It is by 
him that the Asuras have been quelled. It is he who covered the three 
worlds with three steps. He is the soul of the Devas, the Manavas and the 
Pitris. He is the sacrifice performed by those that know the rituals of 
sacrifices. He it is who rises every day in the firmament as the sun and 
divides Time into day and night, and courses for half the year northward 
and for half the year south. Innumerable rays of light emanate from him up 
and down and transversely and illumine the earth. 

Brahmanas who know the Vedas worship him. Taking a portion of his 
rays, the sun shines in the firmament. Month after month, the sacrificer 
ordains him as a sacrifice. Dvijas conversant with the Vedas sing his praises 
in sacrifices of all kinds. He it is that constitutes the wheel of the year, 
having three naves and seven steeds yoked to it. In this way he supports the 
triple mansion of the seasons. Endowed with great energy, pervading all 
things, the foremost of all creatures, it is Krishna alone who upholds all the 
worlds. 

He is the sun, the dispeller of all darkness. He is the Creator of all. Do 
you, O Kshatriya, approach that Krishna! Once, the high-souled and 
powerful Krishna dwelt, for a while, in the form of Agni in the forest of 
Khandava in some dry grass. Soon was he gratified for he consumed all the 
medicinal herbs in that forest. He can go anywhere at will, and it was 
Krishna who, having vanquished the Rakshasas and Uragas, poured them as 
libations upon the sacred fire. 

It is Krishna who gave Arjuna a number of white steeds; he is the 
creator of all horses. This world, this samsara, this human life is his chariot. 
He it is that yokes that chariot to set it in motion. That ratha has three 
wheels—the three gunas of sattva, rajas and tamas. It has three kinds of 
motion; it goes upward, or downward or transversely, implying superior, 
inferior and intermediate births as fetched by karma. It has four horses 
yoked to it—time, destiny, the will of the gods, and one’s own will. It has 
three naves—white, black and mixed, implying good, evil and mixed 
karma. 


It is this Krishna who is the refuge of the Panchamahabhutas, the five 
original elements with the sky among them. It is he who created bhumi and 
swarga and the space between. Indeed, it is this Krishna of immeasurable 
and blazing tejas who created the forests and the mountains. It is this 
Krishna who, wanting to punish Sakra who was about to hurl his thunder at 
him, crossed the rivers once and paralysed Indra. He is himself the one 
great Indra whom the Brahmanas worship in sacrifices with the help of a 
thousand ancient Riks. It was this Krishna, O king, who alone was able to 
keep the choleric Rishi Durvasa of great temper and powers as a happy 
guest in his home for a long time. 

He is said to be the one most antique Rishi. He is the Creator of the 
universe. Indeed, he creates everything from his own nature. Superior to all 
the Devas, it is he who teaches all the gods. He scrupulously observes all 
ancient niyamas and vidhis. 

Know, O king, that this Krishna, who is called Vishwaksena, is the fruit 
of all karma that relates to kama, of all karma that is founded on the Vedas, 
and of all karma that pertains to the world. He is the white rays of light that 
are seen in all the worlds. He is the three worlds. He is the three regents of 
all the worlds. He is the three sacrificial fires. He is the three Vyahritis; 
indeed, this son of Devaki is all the gods together. He is the year; he is the 
seasons; he is the fortnights; he is the day and the night; he is those 
divisions of time which are called Kaalas, and Kashthas, and Matras, and 
Muhurtas, and Lavas, and Kshanas. Know that this Vishwaksena is all 
these. 

The moon and the sun, the planets, the constellations and the stars, all 
the Parva days, including the day of the full moon, the conjunctions of the 
constellations and the seasons, have, O son of Pritha, flowed from this 
Krishna who is Vishwaksena. The Rudras, the Adityas, the Vasus, the 
Aswins, the Sadhyas, the Viswedevas, the diverse Maruts, Prajapati 
himself, Aditi the mother of the Devas and the Saptarishis have all sprung 
from Krishna. 

Transforming himself into the wind, he scatters the universe. Of 
universal form, he becomes fire that burns all things. Changing himself into 
water, he drenches and submerges all and, assuming the form of Brahma, he 
creates all the diverse species of animate and inanimate existences. He is 
himself the Veda, yet he learns all the Vedas. He is himself all the niyamas, 
yet he observes all the laws that have been laid down in matters of dharma 


and the Vedas; he is that force or power which rules the world. Indeed, 
know, O Yudhishtira, that this Kesava is truly all the mobile and immobile 
universe, chala and achala. He is of the form of the most resplendent light. 
Of universal form, this Krishna is displayed in that blinding refulgence. The 
original cause of the soul of all creatures, at first he created the waters. 
After that he created this universe. 

Know that this Krishna is Vishnu. Know that he is the soul of the 
universe. Know that he is all the seasons; he is these diverse wonderful 
vegetations of nature which we see; he is the clouds that pour down rain 
and the lightning that flashes in the sky. He is the elephant Airavata. Indeed, 
I say again to you, he is all the immobile and mobile universe. The abode of 
the universe and transcending all attributes, this Krishna is Vasudeva. When 
he becomes jiva he is called Sankarshana. Next, he transforms himself into 
Pradyumna and then into Aniruddha. In this way, the Mahatman Krishna, 
who has himself for his origin divides and displays himself in fourfold 
form. 

Wanting to create this universe, which consists of the five primal 
elements, he sets himself to his task, and causes it to perpetuate in the five 
forms of animate existence consisting of Devas and Asuras and Manavas 
and Mrigas and Garudas. 

He it is that then creates the earth and the wind, the sky, light, and also 
water, O son of Pritha! Having created this universe, chala and achala, 
distributed into four orders of being, he then created the earth with her 
fivefold seed. He then created the firmament to pour down copious rain on 
the earth. Have no doubt, O king, it is this Krishna who has created this 
universe. His origin is in his own self; it is he who causes all things to exist 
through his own power. He it is that has created the Devas, the Asuras and 
Manavas, Bhumi, the Rishis the Pitris, and all creatures. 

From his desire to create, the Lord of all creatures created the whole 
universe of life. Know that good and evil, and chala and achala, have all 
flowed from this One who is Vishwaksena. Whatever exists, and whatever 
will come into existence, all is Kesava. This Krishna is also the death that 
overtakes all creatures when their end comes. He is eternal and it is he who 
upholds the cause of dharma. Whatever existed in the past, and whatever 
we do not know, verily, all that also is this Vishwaksena. Whatever is noble 
and meritorious in the universe, indeed, whatever of good and of evil exists, 
all that is Kesava the Inconceivable. 


Hence, it is absurd to think of anything that is superior to Kesava. Even 
such is this Kesava. More than this, he is Narayana, the highest of the high, 
immutable and unfading. He is the eternal and immutable cause of the 
entire universe, with its beginning, middle and end, as also of all creatures 
whose birth follows their wish.’” 


CANTO 159 


¢ me udhishtira says, ‘Do you tell us, Madhusudana, what the 
prosperity is that attaches to the worship of the Brahmanas. You 
know this subject as well as, verily, our Grandsire knows you.’ 

Krishna says, ‘Listen with sraddha to me, king of the Bharata vamsa, 
and I will tell you what the merits of the Brahmanas are, in truth, 
Kurusattama. Once on a time, while I sat in Dwaravati, Kurunandana, my 
son Pradyumna, who was enraged at some Brahmanas, came to me and 
said, “Madhusudana, what punya attaches to the worship of Brahmanas? 
Whence is their lordship derived both here and hereafter? O bestower of 
honours, what rewards are won by constantly worshipping Brahmanas? I 
beg you, explain this clearly to me, for my mind is disturbed by doubts in 
this matter.” 

I answered him as follows, and listen carefully, Yudhishtira, to what I 
said to him. I said, “Son of Rukmini, listen closely to me and I will tell you 
what the prosperity is that one may win by worshipping Brahmanas. When 
one sets oneself to the acquisition of the dharma, artha and kama, or to the 
achievement of mukti, or to that of fame and prosperity, or to the treatment 
and cure of disease, or to the worship of the Devas and the Pitris, one 
should take care to first gratify the Brahmanas. They are each a king, Soma. 
They are dispensers of happiness and misery. O Rukminiputra, whether in 
this or in the next world, my son, everything agreeable has its origin in the 
Brahmanas. I have no doubt about this. 

From the worship of Brahmanas flow mighty achievements, and fame 
and strength. The denizens of all the worlds, and the regents of the universe, 


are all worshippers of Brahmanas. How then, Pradyumna, can we disregard 
them, deluded by the idea that we are Lords of the earth? 

Mahabaho, do not suffer your wrath to embrace the Brahmanas as its 
object. In this as also in the next world, Brahmanas are regarded as supreme 
beings. They have direct knowledge of everything in the universe. If 
angered, they are capable of reducing everything to ashes. They can create 
other worlds and other regents of worlds. Why then should those who are 
possessed of tejas and true gyana not behave with obedience and respect 
towards them? 

Formerly, in my house, my son, dwelt the Brahmana Durvasa whose 
complexion was both green and tawny. Clad in rags, he had a danda, a staff 
made from the bilwa tree. His beard was long and he was exceedingly 
emaciated. He was taller in stature than the tallest man on earth. Wandering 
over all the worlds—that which belongs to men and those that are for the 
gods and other superior beings, this was what he sang constantly in sabhas 
and in public squares—Who is there that would cause the Brahmana 
Durvasa to dwell in his house, doing the duties of hospitality towards him? 
He becomes enraged with everyone if he finds even the slightest fault. 
Hearing this about me, who is there that will give me refuge? Indeed, woe 
betide him that would give me shelter as a guest lest he does the least thing 
to annoy me. 

When I saw that no one dared give him shelter in their homes, I invited 
Durvasa and had him live with me. On certain days, he would eat the food 
sufficient for the needs of thousands of men. On other days, he would eat 
very little. On some days, he would go out of my home and would not 
return. He would sometimes laugh without any ostensible reason and 
sometimes cry as causelessly. At that time, there was nobody on earth that 
was equal to him in years. One day, entering the quarters assigned to him, 
he burnt all the beds and their covers and all the well-adorned women that 
were there to serve him. Doing this, he went out. Of stern and terrible vows, 
he met me shortly after this and addressing me, said, ‘Krishna, I wish to eat 
payasa without delay!’ Having known his mind previously, I had set my 
servants to prepare every kind of food and drink. Indeed, many excellent 
foods had been kept ready. As soon as I was asked, I had hot payasa fetched 
and offered it to the unpredictable Rishi. Having eaten some, he quickly 
said to me, ‘Do you, O Krishna, take some of this payasa and smear all your 
limbs with it!’ 


Without any hesitation I did as he said—I smeared the remnant of that 
payasa over my body and my head. The Rishi saw your lovely mother 
Rukmini standing nearby. Laughing the while, he smeared her body also 
with that payasa. Durvasa then had your mother, whose body was smeared 
over with the payasa, yoked to a carriage. Climbing onto that carriage he set 
out from my palace. 

Imbued with great intelligence that Brahmana blazed with effulgence 
like fire, and, in my presence he struck my Rukmini in her youth, as if she 
were an animal made to haul the carriages of men. I saw all this and I did 
not feel the slightest grief, anger or malice, or the least wish to harm the 
Rishi. Indeed, having yoked Rukmini to the carriage, he went out, saying he 
wanted to go along the highway of the city. Seeing that extraordinary sight, 
some Dasarhas were filled with wrath, and said amongst one another, ‘Who 
else is there on earth that would draw breath after having yoked Rukmini to 
a carriage? Verily, let the world be filled with only Brahmanas. Let no other 
varnas take birth here. The poison of a snake is keen. Keener than a 
serpent’s venom is a Brahmana. There is no physician for a person that has 
been bitten or burnt by the virulent snake that is a Brahmana.’ 

As the irresistible Durvasa went along in the carriage, Rukmini tottered 
on the road and frequently fell down. At this, the Rishi became angry and 
began to urge Rukmini on, striking her with a whip. At last, filled with a 
towering passion, the Brahmana leapt down from the carriage, and fled 
towards the south, running on foot, over pathless ground. Seeing that 
foremost of Brahmanas go, we followed him, although we were smeared 
with payasa, exclaiming behind him, ‘Be gratified with us, Holy One!’ 

The mahatejasvin Brahmana saw me and said, ‘O Krishna Mahabaho, 
you have subdued wrath by the strength of your nature. O Mahavrata, I 
have not found the slightest fault in you. Govinda, I am perfectly gratified 
with you. Ask me for any boon or wish you have, and see, O son, what my 
powers are when I am pleased. As long as Devas and men continue to have 
a love for food, so too, will they love you, Krishna. As long, again, as there 
is dharma in the several worlds, so long will the fame of your achievements 
last. Janardana, you shall be beloved of all. 

Whatever belongings of yours I have burnt or otherwise destroyed you 
will have restored, why, better than they were. As long, again, O you of 
unfading glory, as you wish to live, so long will you have no fear of death 
coming to you through any part of your body that you have smeared today 


with payasa. But ah, son, why did you not smear that payasa on the soles of 
your feet as well?’ 

Even this was what he said to me on that day on which he was pleased 
with me. When he had finished speaking, I saw that my body became 
invested with great beauty and splendour. 

To Rukmini also, the Rishi, well-pleased with her, said, ‘O most 
beautiful devi, you shall be the first of your sex in fame, and great glory and 
achievements will be yours. Decrepitude, disease or a fading complexion 
will never be yours. Everyone will see you engaged in waiting upon 
Krishna, possessed as you already are with the natural fragrance which is 
always present in you. You shall become the best of all the sixteen thousand 
wives of Krishna. At last, when the time comes for you to leave the world, 
you will attain to the inseparable companionship of Krishna in the 
hereafter.’ 

Having said these words to your mother, Rishi Durvasa, who blazed like 
fire with tejas, once more addressed me, “O Kesava, let your understanding 
be always disposed even thus towards the Brahmana!’ And uttering these 
words, that Brahmana disappeared before my very eyes. After he vanished I 
took to the observance of the vow of japa, chanting certain mantras silently 
without being heard by anybody. Verily, from that day I resolved to 
accomplish whatever commands I should receive from Brahmanas. 

Having adopted this vrata, O Pradyumna my son, along with your 
mother, and with both our hearts filled with joy, I returned to our palace. 
Entering our home I saw that everything which the Rishi had broken or 
burnt had reappeared and become new. Seeing this, and all was finer and 
more beautiful than before, I was filled with wonder. Verily, O son of 
Rukmini, from that day forth I have always worshipped the Brahmanas in 
my heart.” 

‘This, king of the Bharata vamsa, is what I said on that occasion 
regarding the greatness of those Brahmanas who are the foremost of their 
order. Do you also, O son of Kunti, worship the profoundly blessed 
Brahmanas every day with gifts of wealth and kine, O mighty one. It was in 
this way that I acquired the prosperity I enjoy, the prosperity that is born of 
the grace of Brahmanas. Whatever, again, Bhishma has said of me, O king 
of the Bharatas, is all true.’” 


CANTO 160 


66 Y udhishtira says, ‘Madhusudana, I ask you to expound to me that 

knowledge which you acquired through the grace of Durvasa. O 

first among all endowed with intelligence, I wish to know everything about 

the high blessedness and all the names of that high-souled one truly and in 
detail.’ 

Krishna says, ‘I will tell you the good that I have acquired and the fame 
that I have won through the grace of that Mahatman. I will discourse to you 
on the subject, after having bowed to the Kapardin. O king, listen to me as I 
recite to you that Satarudriya which I chant with restrained senses, every 
morning after rising from bed. The great Lord of all creatures, the Grandsire 
Brahma himself, tapodhana, composed those mantras, after having observed 
especial penances for some time. O king, it is Sankara who created all the 
creatures in the universe, mobile and unmoving. There is no being that is 
higher, O monarch, than Mahadeva. Verily, he is the highest of all beings in 
the three worlds. There is no one who can stand before that Devadeva. 
Indeed, there is no being in the three worlds that can be regarded as his 
equal. When he stands, filled with rage, on the field of battle, the very odour 
of his body deprives all his enemies of consciousness and they that are not 
slain tremble and fall down. His roars are terrible, like those of 
thunderheads. Hearing those roars in battle, the very hearts of the Devas 
break in twain. When the wielder of Pinaka grows angry and assuming a 
terrible form merely casts his eye upon Deva, Asura, Gandharva or Naga, 
that one shall never have peace of mind, not by taking shelter in the deepest 
recesses of a mountain-cave. 


When the Prajapati Daksha undertook his great sacrifice, he slighted 
Siva by not inviting him or offering him any part of the havis; Sati went to 
Daksha’s yagna and she immolated herself there at the disregard her father 
showed her husband Siva. And the dauntless Bhava, giving way to wrath, 
roared aloud and pierced the embodied Yagna through with a shaft from his 
terrible bow. When Maheswara became angry and suddenly struck Yagna 
with his shaft, the Devas were panic-stricken, and in a wink lost all their 
natural joy and peace. The universe trembled at the twanging of Siva’s 
bowstring. The Devas and the Asuras, O son of Pritha, grew numb and 
weak. The ocean rolled in agitation and the earth shuddered to her very 
core. The hills and mountains uprooted themselves in terror and fled in all 
directions. The vault of the sky was cloven. All the worlds were plunged in 
gloom. Nothing could be seen. The light of all the luminaries fell dim and 
darkling, why, along with that of the sun himself, O Bhaarata. 

Terror-stricken and desperate to save themselves and the universe, the 
Maharishis tried to perform the customary rites of propitiation and peace. 
Meanwhile, Rudra of terrible prowess rushed against the Devas. Filled with 
rage, he tore out the eyes of Bhaga. Incensed with wrath, he kicked Pushan 
with his foot. He tore out the teeth of that god as he sat eating the large 
sacrificial ball of the Purodasa. Quaking with fear, the Devas bent their 
heads to Sankara. Without being appeased, Rudra once more placed set a 
blazing arrow to his bow-string, and the Devas and Rishis’ alarm flared up 
even higher. Those greatest among gods began to ardently worship him. 
Joining their hands in reverence, they began to recite the Satarudriya 
mantras. At last, thus hymned by the Devas, Maheswara was pacified and 
grew calm. The Devas then assigned a large and pre-eminent share of the 
sacrificial offerings to him. Still trembling with fear, O king, they fervently 
and abjectly sought his protection. 

When Rudra became gratified, the embodiment of Yagna, which had 
been cloven in two, was once more united. Whatever limbs of his had been 
destroyed by the shafts of Mahadeva, became whole and sound. 

The Asuras of great urjas had in days of yore three impregnable cities in 
the firmament. One of these was made of iron, one of silver and the third of 
gold. With all his weapons, Maghavat, the king of the Devas, could not 
destroy those cities. Harassed and afflicted by the Asuras, all the Devas 
sought the protection of the great Rudra. 


Assembled together, the gods addressed him, ‘O Rudra, the Asuras 
threaten to destroy all things with what they do. We beg you, kill the 
Daityas and destroy their city for the protection of the three worlds, O 
bestowers of boons!’ 

Siva replied, ‘So be it,’ and then made Vishnu his inexorable 
arrowhead. He made Agni the shaft of his astra, and Surya’s son Yama the 
wings of that missile. He made the Vedas his bow and Goddess Savitri his 
bow-string. And he made the Grandsire Brahma his charioteer. With all 
these, he pierced the Tripura, the triad city of the Asuras, with his great 
astra, which was made of three parvans and three salyas. O Bhaarata, Siva 
consumed the Asuras with their cities, with his astra whose complexion was 
that of the sun and whose energy was that of the fire which appears at the 
end of the yuga to devour all things. 

Seeing Mahadeva transformed into a child with five locks of hair lying 
on the lap of Parvati, Indra asked the Devas who he was. Seeing the child, 
Sakra suddenly became jealous and wrathful and resolved to kill him with 
his vajra. The child, however, paralysed Indra’s arm like a mace of iron, 
with the thunderbolt in its hand. The Devas were all bewildered, and they 
could not understand that the child was the Lord of the universe. Verily, all 
of them along with the Lokapalas, found their minds dazed by that child 
who was none else than the Supreme Being. 

Then, meditating with his tapasya shakti, the illustrious Pitamaha 
Brahma discovered that that child was the foremost of all Beings, the Lord 
of Uma, Mahadeva of immeasurable prowess. He then praised the Lord. 
The Devas also began to hymn the praises of both Uma and Rudra. Indra’s 
paralysed arm was no longer benumbed. It was the same Mahadeva who 
incarnated as the Mahatejasvin Brahmana Durvasa, and lived for a long 
time in my home in Dwaravati. While he remained with me, he did so many 
diverse deeds of mischief. Though difficult to bear, I still endured them 
joyfully for I knew whose amsa Durvasa was. 

He is Rudra; he is Siva; he is Agni; he is Sarva; he is the vanquisher of 
all; he is Indra, and Vayu and the Aswins and the god of lightning. He is 
Chandramas; he is Isana; he is Surya; he is Varuna; he is Kaala; he is Yama; 
he is Mrityu; he is the Divasa and Ratri; he is the Paksha; he is the Ritus; he 
is the two Sandhyas; he is the Varsa. He is Dhatri and he is Vidhatri; and he 
is Viswakarman; and he is the Sarvagyani. He is the Diks and the Upadiks 
also. Of Viswarupa, he is Anantatman. 


The holy and illustrious Durvasa is of the complexion of the celestials. 
He sometimes manifests himself singly; sometimes divides himself in two; 
and sometimes exhibits himself in many, a hundred thousand, forms. Even 
such is Mahadeva. He is, again, that God who is Aja, Un-born. In even a 
hundred years one cannot begin to describe his merits by reciting them.’” 


CANTO 161 


66 K rishna says, ‘O Yudhishtira, Mahabaho, listen to me as I recite to 
you the many names of Rudra as also the high blessedness of 
that Mahatman. 

The Rishis describe Mahadeva as Agni, and Sthanu and Maheswara; as 
One-eyed, and Three-eyed, of Universal Form, and Siva or highly 
auspicious. Brahmanas conversant with the Vedas say that God has two 
forms. One of these is terrible, and the other mild and auspicious. Those 
two forms, again, are divided into many forms. That form which is fierce 
and terrible is identical with Agni and lightning and Surya. The other form 
which is mild and auspicious is identical with dharma and Jala and 
Chandramas. Then, again, it is said that half his body is Agni, fire, and half 
is Soma or the moon. That form of his which is mild and auspicious is said 
to be engaged in keeping the Brahmacharya vrata. The other form of his, 
which is supremely terrible, is engaged in all the destruction found in the 
universe. 

Because he is great, Mahat, and the Supreme Lord of all, Iswara, 
therefore is he called Maheswara. And since he burns and scourges, is keen 
and fierce, and endued with great energy, and is a devourer of flesh and 
blood and marrow, he is said to be Rudra. Since he is the foremost of all the 
deities, and since his dominion and acquisitions are infinite, and since he 
protects the infinite universe, he is called Mahadeva. 

Since he is of the form or colour of smoke, he is called Dhurjati. Since 
through all his actions he performs sacrifices for all and seeks the good of 
every creature, he is called Siva or the Auspicious One. Staying above in 


the sky, he burns the lives of all creatures and is, besides, fixed on a definite 
path from which he does not deviate. His emblem, again, is fixed and 
immovable for all time. He is, for these reasons, called Sthanu. He is also of 
multiform aspect. He is present, past and future. He is chala and achala. For 
this he is called Bahurupa. The deities called the Viswedevas reside in his 
body. He is, for this, called Viswarupa of universal form. 

He is thousand-eyed; or he is myriad-eyed; or he has eyes on all sides 
and on every part of his body. His energy issues through his eyes. There is 
no end to his eyes. Since he always nourishes all creatures and sports, also, 
with them, and since he is their Lord and master, he is called Pasupati, the 
Lord of creatures. 

Since his Linga is always observant of the vow of Brahmacharya, all the 
worlds worship it. This act of worship is said to please him highly. If there 
is one who worships him by creating his image and another who worships 
his Linga, it is the latter that attains to great prosperity for ever. The Rishis, 
the Devas, the Gandharvas and the Apsaras worship that Linga of his which 
is forever erect and upraised. If his Linga is worshipped, Maheswara 
becomes highly gratified with the worshipper. 

Loving towards his devotees, he bestows happiness upon them with a 
cheerful heart. This Great God loves to stay in smasanas, crematoria, and 
there he burns and consumes corpses. Those that perform sacrifices on such 
grounds attain at the end to those regions which have been set apart for 
great Kshatriya heroes. He it is that is regarded as the death which resides in 
the bodies of all creatures. He is, again, the breaths called prana and apana 
in the bodies of all embodied beings. He has many blazing and terrible 
forms. All those forms are worshipped in the world and are known to 
Brahmanas possessed of knowledge. Amongst the gods, he has many 
names, all of which are full of grave import. Verily, the meanings of those 
names are derived from either his greatness or vastness, his feats or his 
conduct. The Brahmanas always recite the excellent Satarudriya in his 
honour, which occurs in the Vedas, as also that which has been composed 
by Vyasa. 

Verily, the Brahmanas and Rishis call him the Eldest of all beings. He is 
the First of all the gods, and it was from his mouth that he created Agni. 
Ever willing to grant protection to all, Siva never gives up or abandons his 
bhaktas who worship him. He would much rather abandon his own life- 
breath and incur all possible afflictions himself. Long life, health and 


freedom from disease, affluence, wealth, diverse kinds of pleasures and 
enjoyments, he confers, and also takes them away. The lordship and 
affluence that one sees in Sakra and the other Devas are in truth his. 

It is he who is always engaged in all that is good and evil in the three 
worlds. In consequence of his absolute control over all objects of kama, he 
is called Iswara, the Supreme Lord or master. Since, again, he is the master 
of the vast universe, he is called Maheswara. The whole universe is 
pervaded by him in diverse forms. It is that God whose mouth roars and 
burns the waters of the sea, in the form of the Badavamukha, that vast 
burning head of a mare!’” 


CANTO 162 


V aisampayana said, “After Krishna, the son of Devaki, says this, 

Yudhishtira’ once more asks Santanu’s son Bhishma, ‘O 
Mababuddhe, O foremost of all who know dharma, which of the two— 
direct perception or the scriptures—is to be regarded as the authority to 
arrive at a conclusion?’ 

Bhishma says, ‘I believe there is no doubt in this matter. Listen to me, O 
you of great wisdom; I will answer you. The question you have asked is 
apposite. It is easy to have doubts about this, and the answer to it is 
difficult. Innumerable are the instances, in respect of both direct perception 
and the Srutis, in which doubts can arise. 

Some men, who delight in the name of logicians, imagining themselves 
to be possessed of superior wisdom, affirm that direct perception is the only 
authority. They assert that nothing, however true, can be said to exist which 
is not directly perceivable; or, at least they doubt the existence of those 
things. Indeed, such assertions involve an absurdity and they who make 
them are of foolish understanding, whatever may be their pride of learning. 
If, on the other hand, you doubt how the one indivisible Brahman could be 
the cause, I answer that one would understand it only after a long course of 
years and with the help of assiduous yoga. Indeed, O Bhaarata, one that 
lives by such means as present themselves without being wedded to this or 
that settled mode of life, and one who is devoted to the resolution of the 
question, will be able to understand it. None else truly can. 

When one attains to the very end of reasons, indeed the process of 
reasoning, one then attains to that ultimate and all comprehensive 


knowledge—that infinite mass of light which illumines all the universe, the 
lustre called Brahman. That knowledge, O king, which is derived from 
reason or inferences can scarcely be called true knowledge, and such 
knowledge should be rejected. It is not defined or comprehended through 
the word. It must, therefore, be abjured.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “Tell me, Pitamaha, which among these four is most 
authoritative — direct perception, inference from observation, the science of 
Agama or the scriptures, and diverse kinds of practices that distinguish the 
good.’ 

Bhishma says, “While evil men of great might seek to destroy dharma, it 
is can be protected for the time being by those that are good exerting 
themselves with care and earnestness. Such protection, however, is of no 
avail in the long term, for destruction does overtake dharma finally. Then, 
again, dharma often proves a mask for covering adharma, like grass and 
straw covering the mouth of a deep pit and concealing it from view. Listen 
again to me, O Yudhishtira. It is because of this that the practices of the 
good are interfered with and sought to be destroyed by the evil. Men of evil 
pravritti, who discard the Srutis, sinners who are haters of dharma, destroy 
that righteous course of conduct which could otherwise be established as a 
standard. Hence, doubts attach to direct perception, inference and good 
conduct. Those, therefore, among the good that possess understanding born 
of or cleansed by the scriptures, and who are always contented, are to be 
regarded as the best and the foremost of men. Let those that are anxious and 
deprived of tranquillity of soul, approach these. Indeed, Yudhishtira, do you 
pay court to them and seek from them the resolution of your doubt. 

Disregarding both pleasure and wealth, kama and artha, which always 
follow lobha, greed, and awakened into the belief that only dharma should 
be sought, O Yudhishtira, wait upon and question men of truth to receive 
enlightenment from them. The way and the conduct of those great men 
never strays or meets with peril or destruction, as also their sacrifices and 
Vedic study and rites. Indeed, these three—conduct as consisting of overt 
deeds, behaviour in respect of purity of mind, and the Vedas, together 
constitute dharma.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘Pitamaha, my understanding is once more darkened 
by doubt. I am on this side of the ocean, seeking the means to cross it. I do 
not, however, see the other shore of the ocean. If these three, the Vedas, 
direct perception, and conduct, together constitute what is to be regarded as 


authority, it can be alleged that there is a difference between them. Dharma 
then becomes of three kinds, although it is one and indivisible.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Dharma is sometimes seen to be destroyed by evil men 
and spirits of great power. If you think, O king, that dharma should really be 
of three kinds, my reply is that your conclusion is warranted by reason. The 
truth is that righteousness is one and indivisible, although it can be looked 
at from three different viewpoints. The paths as indications of those three 
that constitute the foundation of dharma have each been clearly laid down. 
Do you act according to the niyamas, the laws. You should never wrangle 
about dharma and then seek to have those doubts solved at which you may 
arrive. O king of the Bharatas, let no doubts like these ever seize possession 
of your mind. 

Do you obey what I say without scruple or hesitation of any kind. 
Follow me like a blind man or like one who, without being possessed of 
sense himself, has to depend upon that of another. Non-violence, truth, 
absence of wrath, forgiveness and liberality in gifts —these four practices, O 
king, Ajatasatru that has no foe, for these four constitute eternal dharma. Do 
you also, O Mahabaho, pursue that conduct towards Brahmanas which is 
consistent with what has been observed towards them by your sires and 
Grandsires. These are the principal indications of dharma. The man of little 
intelligence who would destroy the weight of authority by denying that to 
be a standard which has always been accepted as such will himself fail to 
become an authority among men. Such a man is the cause of much grief in 
the world. Do you reverence Brahmanas and treat them with hospitality. Do 
you always serve them in this way. The universe rests upon them. Do you 
understand them to be such—the very holders of the worlds!’ 

Yudhishtira says, “Tell me, Pitamaha, what the respective ends are of 
those that abhor dharma and of those that adore and observe it.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘Those men that hate righteousness are said to have their 
hearts overwhelmed by the attributes of passion and darkness, rajas and 
tamas. Such men have always to go into naraka. Those men, on the other 
hand, who always worship and observe dharma, those men who are devoted 
to truth and sincerity, are called good men. They always enjoy the pleasures 
and grace of swarga. For waiting upon their preceptors with reverence their 
hearts always turn naturally towards dharma. Verily, they who adore 
dharma attain to the realms of the gods. Men or deities who divest 
themselves of avarice and malice, and who emaciate or afflict their bodies 


by the observance of austerities, succeed, through the dharma which then 
becomes theirs, to attain to great reward and bliss. 

Those that are gifted with true wisdom have said that the Brahmanas, 
who are the eldest sons of Brahma, represent and embody dharma. They 
that are righteous always worship them, their hearts regarding them with as 
much love and affection as a hungry man’s stomach entertains for ripe and 
delicious fruit.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘What is the appearance presented by those that are 
evil, and what are the deeds of those that are called men of dharma? Explain 
to me this, O Holy One. Indeed, tell me what the indications are of the good 
and the wicked.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘The evil are so in their practices; they are ungovernable, 
foul-mouthed and cannot be kept within the restraints of laws; they who are 
good are always so in what they do. Why, the deeds of these men are 
regarded as the very indications of the course of conduct which is called 
dharma. 

They that are good or righteous, O king, never answer the two calls of 
nature on a public road, in a cow-pen, or a paddy field. After feeding the 
five—the gods, the manes, guests, kinsmen and dependants—they eat 
themselves. They never talk while eating, and never go to sleep with wet 
hands. Whenever they see any of the following, they circumambulate them 
in pradakshina to show them reverence—a burning fire, a bull, the image of 
a deity, a cow-pen, a place where four roads meet and an old and virtuous 
Brahmana. They give way, themselves standing aside, to the old, to those 
that carry burdens, to women, to those that hold high positions in the village 
or town, Brahmanas, kine and kings. 

The righteous or good man is he that protects his guests, servants and 
other dependants, his own relatives, and all those that seek his protection. 
Such a man always welcomes these with the customary polite enquiries 
after their health and well-being. Two times have been appointed by the 
deities for humans to eat— morning and evening. In between these two, one 
should not eat anything. By following this rule about eating, one is said to 
observe an upavasa, a fast. As the sacred fire waits for libations to be 
poured upon it when the hour for homa arrives, even so a woman, when her 
period is over, expects an act of congress with her husband. He that never 
approaches his wives at any other time save after their period, is said to 
observe the vow of brahmacharya. Amrita, Brahmanas and kine—these 


three are regarded as equal. Hence, one should always worship, with due 
rites, Brahmanas and sacred cows. 

One does not incur any fault or stain by eating the meat of animals slain 
in sacrifices with mantras from the Yajur Veda. The flesh of the backbone, 
or that of animals not killed in sacrifice, should be avoided even as one 
avoids the flesh of one’s own son. One should never have one’s guest go 
without food whether when one lives in one’s own country or in a foreign 
land. After completing one’s study, one should give dakshina to one’s 
preceptor. When one sees one’s guru, one should greet him with reverence 
and, worshipping him, offer him a seat. By worshipping one’s guru, one 
increases the period of one’s life as also one’s fame and prosperity. 

One should never censure the old, nor send them on any business. One 
should never sit when someone old is standing. By conducting oneself in 
this manner, one protects and even prolongs the duration of one’s life. One 
should never cast one’s eyes on a naked woman, or a naked man. One 
should never indulge in sexual congress, except in privacy. One should eat 
also without being seen by others. Gurus are the foremost of tirthas; the 
heart is the foremost of all sacred objects; knowledge is the foremost of all 
objects of seeking; and contentment is the foremost of all joys. 

Morning and evening, one should listen to the grave counsels of those 
that are aged. One attains to wisdom by constantly waiting upon those that 
are venerable in years. While reading the Vedas or eating, one should use 
one’s right hand. One should always keep one’s speech and mind under 
thorough control, as also one’s senses. With well-cooked payasa, yavaka, 
krisara, and Havi, one should worship the Pitris and the Devas in the 
sraddha called Ashtaka. The same should be used in worshipping the 
Grahas, the planets. 

One should not shave or be shaved without calling down a blessing 
upon oneself. If one sneezes, one should be blessed by those present. All 
that are ill or afflicted with disease should be blessed. The extension of their 
lives should be prayed for. One should never address an eminent person 
familiarly by using the word Tvam. Under even great duress one should 
never do this. To address such a person as Tvam and to kill him are equal; 
men of learning are degraded by such a form of address. To those that are 
inferior, or equal, or to disciples, the word Tvam can be used. 

The heart of the sinful man always proclaims the sins he has committed. 
Those men who have deliberately committed sins meet with destruction by 


seeking to conceal them from the good. Indeed, confirmed sinners seek to 
conceal their sins from others. Such ones think that their sins are witnessed 
by neither men nor the gods. The sinful man, overwhelmed by his sins, is 
born into a wretched and miserable order of being. The sins of such a man 
continually grow, even as the interest the usurer charge on loans increases 
from day to day. 

If, having committed a sin, one seeks to have it removed through 
dharma, that sin is destroyed and leads to righteousness instead of further 
sins. If water be poured upon salt, the salt immediately dissolves. Even so 
when expiation is performed, sin dissolves. For these reasons one should 
never conceal a sin. Concealed, it is certain to increase. Having committed a 
sin, one should confess it in the presence of those that are good. They 
would destroy it immediately. 

If one does not enjoy in good time what one has stored with hope, the 
consequence is that the stored wealth finds another owner after the death of 
him who has stored it. The wise have said that the mind of every creature is 
the true test of dharma. Hence, all creatures in the world have an innate 
tendency to achieve dharma. One should achieve dharma alone, single- 
handedly. Verily, one should not proclaim oneself to be righteous and walk 
with the standard of dharma borne aloft for the purpose of exhibition. They 
are said to be traders in dharma who practise it for enjoying the fruits it 
brings. 

One should worship the gods without giving way to feelings of pride. 
Similarly, one should serve one’s preceptor without deceit. One should 
make arrangements for securing to oneself invaluable wealth in the 
hereafter, which consists in dana given here to the deserving.” 


CANTO 163 


Yudhishtira says, ‘It is seen that if a man happens to be unfortunate, he 

fails to acquire wealth, however great his strength. On the other hand, 
if one happens to be fortunate, he comes to the possession of wealth, even if 
he be a weakling or a fool. When, again, the time does not come for 
acquisition, one cannot make an acquisition with even one’s best exertions. 
When, however, the time comes for acquisition, one wins great wealth 
without any effort. Hundreds of men may be seen who achieve no result 
even when they exert themselves to the best of their abilities. Many, again, 
are seen to make acquisitions without any exertion. If wealth were the result 
of exertion, then one could, with exertion, acquire it immediately. Verily, if 
the case were so, no man of learning could then be seen to take the 
protection for his livelihood of one destitute of learning. 

Among men, that which is not destined to be attained, O king of the 
Bharatas, is never attained. Men are seen to fail in achieving results even by 
putting forth their best efforts. One man may be seen to seek wealth by 
hundreds of means and yet failing to acquire it; while another, without at all 
seeking it, is happy in its possession. Men may be seen doing evil deeds 
continually for wealth and yet failing to acquire it. Others are in the 
enjoyment of wealth without doing any evil whatever. Others, again, who 
are observant of the duties assigned to them by the scriptures, are without 
wealth. 

One man may be seen to be without any knowledge of the science of 
morality and policy, even after he has studied all the treatises on that 
subject. Another, again, may be seen appointed as the prime minister of a 


king without having studied the science of morality and policy at all. A 
learned man may be seen that is possessed of wealth; one devoid of learning 
may also be seen owning wealth. Both kinds of men, again, may be seen to 
be entirely impoverished. If, by the acquisition of learning one could 
acquire the felicity of wealth, then no man of learning could be found living 
for the very means of his subsistence under the protection of one who has 
no learning. Indeed, if one could obtain by the acquisition of learning all 
things desirable, objects like a thirsty man having his thirst slaked upon 
obtaining water, then none in this world would have ever shown idleness in 
acquiring learning. 

If, one’s time has not come one does not die even if one be pierced with 
hundreds of arrows. On the other hand, one gives up one’s life if one’s hour 
has come, even if it be a blade of grass with which one is struck.’ 

Bhishma says, ‘If a man, setting himself to an undertaking involving 
even great exertion, fails to earn wealth, he should then practise severe 
austerities. Unless seeds be sown, no crops appear. It is by making gifts to 
deserving persons in this life that one acquires in one’s next life numerous 
objects of enjoyment, even as one becomes possessed of intelligence and 
wisdom by waiting upon those that are venerable for years. The wise have 
said that one is blessed with longevity by practising the dharma of 
abstaining from cruelty to all creatures. Hence, one should make gifts and 
not solicit or accept them when made by others. 

One should worship those men that are righteous. Verily, one should be 
sweet-speeched towards all, and always do what is agreeable to others. One 
should seek to attain to purity, of both mind and body. Indeed, it is 
paramount that one should always abstain from doing injury to any 
creature. When in the matter of the happiness and woe of even ants and 
insects, their karma of this and past lives and nature constitute the cause, it 
is meet, O Yudhishtira, that you should be serene.’ 


CANTO 164 


: ‘RB hishma says, ‘If a man does good deeds himself or causes others 
to accomplish them, he should then expect to attain to the 
rewards of dharma. Similarly, if he does evil, and causes others to do evil, 
he should never expect to attain to the merits of righteousness. At all times, 
it is Time that, entering the understanding of all creatures, sets them to acts 
of dharma or adharma, and then confers felicity or misery upon them. 
When, beholding the fruits of dharma, a man understands dharma to be 
superior, it is then that he inclines towards righteousness and puts his faith 
in it. He, however, whose understanding is not firm, fails to find faith in 
goodness. As regards faith in dharma, it is this and nothing else that makes 
for belief—the steadiness of the mind. 

To put faith in righteousness is the indication of wisdom in all men. The 
man who knows both what should be done and what should not must be 
mindful of timeliness, care and devotion when he sets out to achieve what is 
right. Righteous men who have in this life been blessed with affluence, 
acting of their own volition, take particular care of their souls so that they 
may not, in their next lives, have to be born as men with the rajoguna 
dominating in them. 

Time, which is the supreme disposer of all things, can never make 
dharma the cause of misery. One should, therefore, know that the soul, 
which is inherently righteous, is certainly pure, and free from evil and 
suffering. As for adharma, it may be said that, even when of large 
proportions, it cannot even touch dharma, which is always protected by 
Time and which shines like a blazing fire. These are the two results 


achieved by dharma—the stainlessness of the soul and insusceptibility to 
being touched by adharma. Verily, dharma is always fraught with victory. 
Its lustre is so great that it illumines the three worlds. A man of wisdom 
cannot seize a sinner and forcibly make him righteous. When seriously 
urged to act righteously, the sinful only do so with hypocrisy, impelled by 
fear. 

They that are righteous among the Sudras never betake themselves to 
such hypocrisy under the plea that men of the Sudra varna are not allowed 
to live according to any of the four prescribed asramas. I will tell you 
particularly what the svadharmas truly are of the four varnas. As far as their 
bodies are concerned, individuals belonging to all the four orders have the 
five primal elements for their constituent ingredients. Indeed, in this respect, 
they are all of the same substance. For all that, distinctions exist between 
them in respect of both practices relating to life or the world and also their 
svadharma. Notwithstanding these distinctions, sufficient liberty of action is 
left to them by which all men may attain to an equality of condition. The 
regions of grace which represent the consequences or rewards of dharma 
are not eternal, for they are destined to come to an end. Dharma itself, 
however, is eternal. When the cause is eternal, why is the effect not so? 
Listen to the answer to this. 

Only that dharma is eternal which is not promoted by the desire of fruit 
or reward. That dharma which is prompted by the desire of reward is not 
eternal. Hence, the reward though undesired that attaches to the first kind of 
dharma—attainment of identity with Brahman—is eternal. The reward, 
however, that attaches to that dharma prompted by desire of the reward of 
swarga and enjoyment, is not eternal. 

All men are equal in respect of their physical organism. All of them, 
again, are possessed of souls that are equal in regard of their nature. When 
death comes, all else dissolves. What remains is the inceptive will to 
achieve dharma. That, indeed, reappears of itself in the next life. When such 
is the result, when the enjoyments and endurances of this life are due to the 
karma of a past life, the inequality of lot discernible among human beings 
cannot be regarded as in any way anomalous. So also, it is seen that those 
creatures that belong to the intermediate orders of existence are equally 
subject, in the matter of their actions, to the influence of example.’” 


CANTO 165 


V aisampayana said, “That perpetuator of Kuru’s race, Yudhishtira the 
son of Pandu, wanting to acquire the dharma which destroys sin, 
further questions Bhishma who lies on a bed of arrows. 

Yudhishtira says, “What is truly beneficial for a man in this world? 
What is that by doing which one may earn happiness? By what may one be 
cleansed of all one’s sins? Indeed, what is that which is destructive of sin?’ 

The royal son of Santanu, O best of men, duly recites the names of the 
deities to Yudhishtira who was eager to listen. 

Bhishma says, “O son, the following names of the Devas, with those of 
the Rishis, if duly recited morning, noon and evening, become efficacious 
cleansers of all sins. Whatever sins of body or mind one might commit by 
day or by night, or during the two twilights, consciously or unconsciously, 
one is sure to be cleansed therefrom and become pure by reciting these 
names. He that speaks these names never becomes blind or deaf; indeed, by 
taking these names, one always succeeds in attaining to what is beneficial. 
Such a man is never born in the intermediate order of beings, never goes to 
hell, and never becomes a human being of any of the mixed castes. He has 
never to fear the accession of any disaster or tragedy. When death comes, he 
is never frightened or bewildered. 

The resplendent Master of all the Devas and Asuras, worshipped by all 
creatures, inconceivable, indescribable, the life of all living beings, and 
unborn, is the Pitamaha Brahma, the Lord of the universe. His chaste 
consort is Savitri. Then comes that Origin of the Vedas, the Creator Vishnu, 
otherwise called Narayana of immeasurable puissance. Then comes the 


three-eyed Lord of Uma; then, Skanda, the senapati of the celestial forces; 
then Visakha; then Agni, the eater of sacrificial libations; then Vayu, the 
god of wind; then Chandramas; then Aditya, the sun god, endued with 
splendour; then the illustrious Sakra, the Lord of Sachi; and Yama with his 
consort Dhumorna; and Varuna with Gauri; Kubera the Lord of treasures, 
with his wife Riddhi; the gentle and illustrious cow Surabhi; the great Rishi 
Visravas; Sankalpa, Varuna, Ganga; the other sacred rivers; the diverse 
Maruts; the Balakhilyas crowned with tapodhana; the island-born Krishna; 
Narada; Parvata; Viswavasu; the Hahas; the Huhus; Tumburu; Chitrasena, 
the celestial messenger of wide celebrity; the most blessed Apsaras— 
Urvasi, Menaka, Rambha, Misrakesi, Alambusha, Viswachi, Ghritachi, 
Panchachuda and Tilottama; the Adityas, the Vasus, the Aswins, the Pitris; 
Dharma Deva; Vedic lore, tapasya, diksha, dridhata in religious acts, the 
Pitamaha, day and night, Kasyapa the son of Marichi, Sukra, Brihaspati, 
Mangala, the son of earth, Budha, Rahu, Sanaischara, the constellations, the 
seasons, the months, the fortnights, the year, Garuda, the son of Vinata, the 
several oceans, the sons of Kadru, the Nagas; Satadru, Vipasa, 
Chandrabhaga, Saraswati, Sindhu, Devika, Prabhasa, the lakes of Pushkara, 
Ganga, Mahanadi, Vena, Kaveri, Narmada, Kulampuna, Visalya, Karatoya, 
Ambuvahini. Sarayu, Gandaki, the great Lohita river, Tamra, Aruna, 
Vetravati, Parnasa, Gautami, Godavari, Krishnavena, Dvija, Drishadvati, 
Kaveri, Vankhu, Mandakini Prayaga, Prabhasa, the sacred Naimisha, Kasi 
which is sacred to Visweswara or Mahadeva, Manasarovara, lake of 
crystalline water, Kurukshetra, full of many sacred waters, Kshirsagara the 
foremost of oceans, tapasya, dana, Jambumarga, Hiranwati, Vitasta, the 
Plakshavati river, Vedasmriti, Vedavati, Malava, Aswavati, all sacred tirthas 
on earth, Gangadwara, the sacred Rishikulya, the Chitravaha river, the 
Charmanwati, the sacred Kausiki the Yamuna, the Bhimarathi river, the 
great Bahuda river, Mahendravani, Tridiva Nilika, Saraswati, Nanda, the 
other Nanda, the large sacred Lake Gaya, Phalgutirtha Dharmarayana the 
sacred forest that is peopled with the Devas, the holy Akasa Ganga, the 
Lake Pushkara created by the Grandsire Brahma, which is sacred and 
celebrated over the three worlds, and auspicious and able to cleanse all sins, 
the Himavat mountain endued with the most excellent herbs, the Vindhya 
mountain with diverse kinds of metals, containing many tirthas and 
overgrown with medicinal herbs; Meru, Mahendra, Malaya, Sweta imbued 
with silver, Sringavat, Mandara, Nila, Nishada, Dardurna, Chitrakuta, 


Anjanabha, the Gandhamadana mountains; the sacred Somagiri, the various 
other mountains, the cardinal points of the sky, the subsidiary points, the 
earth, all the trees, the Viswedevas, the firmament, the constellations, the 
planets and the deities —let these all, named and unnamed, purify and save! 

The man who takes the names of these is cleansed of all his sins. By 
hymning their praises and gratifying them, one becomes free from every 
fear. Verily, the man who delights in uttering the hymns in praise of the 
deities is washed of all such sins as lead to birth in impure orders. After this 
recital of the deities, I will name those learned Brahmanas crowned with 
ascetic merit and success and who can exorcise one of every sin. 

They are Yavakrita and Raibhya and Kakshivat and Aushija, and Bhrigu 
and Angiras and Kanwa, and the mighty Medhatithi, and Barhi possessed of 
every accomplishment. These all belong to the east. Unmuchu, Pramuchu, 
all highly blessed, Swastyatreya of great energy, Agastya of great prowess, 
the son of Mitra and Varuna; Dridhayu and Urdhabahu, those two foremost 
and most celebrated of Rishis—these dwell in the south. Hear now of the 
Rishis that dwell in the west. They are Ushango with his brothers, 
Parivyadha of great energy, Dirghatamas, Gautama, Kasyapa, Ekata, Dwita, 
Trita, Durvasa, the righteous-souled son of Atri, and great Saraswat. The 
Rishis that worship the Devas in sacrifices, and dwell in the north are Atri, 
Vasishta, Saktri, Parasara’s son Vyasa of great tejas, Viswamitra, 
Bharadwaja, Jamadagni the son of Richika, Rama, Auddalaka, Swetaketu, 
Kohala, Vipula, Devala, Devasarman, Dhaumya, Hastikasyapa, Lomasa, 
Nachiketa, Lomaharsana, Ugrasravas, and Bhrigu’s son Chyavana. 

These are the Rishis possessed of the most profound Vedic lore. They 
are primeval Rishis, O king, whose names, if taken, can purify one of every 
sin. 

Listen now to names of the principal kings. They are Nriga, Yayati, 
Nahusha, Yadu, Puru of great energy, Sagara, Dhundhumara, Dilipa of great 
prowess, Krisaswa, Yauvanaswa, Chitraswa, Satyavat, Dushmanta, Bharata 
who became an illustrious Emperor of many kings, Yavana, Janaka, 
Dhrishtaratha, Raghu, that foremost of kings, Dasaratha, the heroic Rama, 
that slayer of Rakshasas, Sasabindu, Bhagiratha, Harischandra, Marutta, 
Dridharatha, the highly fortunate Alarka, Aila, Karandhama, that foremost 
of men, Kasmira, Daksha, Ambarisha, Kukura, Raivata of great fame, Kuru, 
Samvarana, Mandhatri of unbaffled prowess, the Rajarishi Muchukunda, 
Jahnu who was much favoured by Jahnavi the Ganga, the first of all kings 


Prithu, son of Vena, Mitrabhanu, Priyankara, Trasadasyu, Sweta that best of 
royal sages, the celebrated Mahabhisha, Nimi, Ashtaka, Ayu, the Rajarishi 
Kshupa, Kaksheyu, Pratardana, Devodasa, Sudasa, Kosaleswara, Aila, 
Nala, the royal sage Manu, that Lord of all creatures, Havidhara, 
Prishadhara, Pratipa, Santanu, Aja, the elder Barhi, Ikshvaku of great fame, 
Anaranya, Janujangha, the Rayjarishi Kakshasena, and many others who 
were great indeed but remain unnamed. 

That man who, rising at early dawn, takes the names of these kings at 
the two sandhyas, at sunset and sunrise, with a pure body and mind and 
without focused attention, acquires great religious punya. One should hymn 
the praises of the Devas, the Devarishis and the Rajarishis and say, “These 
Lords of the creation will ordain my growth and long life and fame. Let no 
calamity be mine, let no sin defile me, and let me have no opponents or 
enemies. Without doubt, victory will always be mine and an auspicious end 
hereafter!’” 


CANTO 166 


J anamejaya said, “While that Kurusattama Bhishma, greatest of his 

vamsa, lay on a bed of arrows, a bed always coveted by Kshatriya 
heroes, and when the Pandavas sat around him, my great Grandsire 
Yudhishtira of much wisdom listened to these expositions of mysteries with 
respect to dharma and had all his doubts resolved. He heard also what the 
niyamas and vidhis are that apply to the subjects of dana and dakshina, and 
had all his doubts removed about both dharma and artha. I ask you now, O 
learned Brahmana, to tell me what else the great Pandava king did.” 

Vaisampayana said, “When Bhishma falls silent, the entire circle of 
kings and heroes who sit around him become perfectly quiet. Indeed, they 
all sit motionless there, like figures painted on stone. Then, Vyasa, the son 
of Satyavati, having reflected for a moment, addresses the royal son of 
Ganga, saying, ‘O Devavrata, the Kuru King Yudhishtira has been restored 
to his own nature, along with all brothers and followers. With Krishna of 
great intelligence by his side, he bends his head in reverence to you. You 
must now give him leave to return to the city.’ 

Thus addressed by the holy Vyasa, the royal son of Santanu and Ganga 
dismisses Yudhishtira and his counsellors. Addressing his grandson in a 
loving voice, Bhishma says, ‘Do you return to the city, O king. Let the fever 
of your heart be dispelled. Do you adore the Devas in many sacrifices 
distinguished by large gifts of food and wealth, as Yayati himself did, O 
best of kings endued with bhakti and samyama. Devoted to the svadharma 
of the Kshatriya varna, do you, O son of Pritha, gratify the Pitris and the 
Devas. You shall earn great benefits if you do this. 


Indeed, let the fever of your heart be entirely dispelled. Do you gladden 
all your subjects. Do you assure them and establish peace among all. Do 
you also honour all your well-wishers with such rewards as they deserve. 
Let all your friends and well-wishers live, depending on you for their 
means, even as birds depend on a full-grown tree laden with fruit and 
standing on a sacred spot. When the hour comes for my departure from this 
world, come here again, O king. The time when I shall leave my body is 
when the sun stops in his southward journey, Dakshinayana, and begins his 
return northwards in Uttarayana.’ 

The son of Kunti answers, ‘Tathaastu, so be it!’ and salutes his 
Grandsire with reverence and then sets out, with all his relatives and 
followers, for the city called after the elephant. Placing Dhritarashtra at the 
head of his party and also Gandhari, so very devoted to her husband, and 
accompanied by the Rishis and Krishna, as also by the citizens of 
Hastinapura and the inhabitants of the countryside and by his counsellors, O 
Rajan, that foremost one of Kuru’s race enters the city named after the 
elephant.” 


CANTO 167 


V aisampayana said, “Now the royal son of Kunti, having duly 

honoured the citizens and the inhabitants of the provinces, dismisses 
them to their respective homes. The Pandava king then consoles the women 
who had lost their heroic husbands and sons in the Great War, and gives 
them abundant wealth. Having recovered his kingdom, Yudhishtira of great 
wisdom finally has himself duly installed on the throne. With diverse and 
countless acts of goodwill, that Purushottama reassures and comforts all his 
subjects. That best of men of dharma sets himself to earn the substantial 
blessing of Brahmanas, of his foremost military officers and the leading 
citizens. 

Having passed fifty nights in the capital, the Kuru king recalls that 
Uttarayana is upon the world, the time his Pitamaha Bhishma had told him 
that he would leave the world. Accompanied by a number of priests he sets 
out of the city named after the elephant, for he has seen the sun cease his 
southward journey and turn north. Yudhishtira takes a great quantity of 
ghrita with him and garlands of fine flowers and excellent sandalwood and 
agar wood and dark aloe wood, for the cremation of Bhishma’s body. He 
further brings with him many kinds of costly ornaments and invaluable 
gemstones. Taking Dhritarashtra and Queen Gandhari, celebrated for her 
virtues, and his own mother Kunti and all his brothers also, Yudhishtira of 
great intelligence, accompanied by Krishna and Vidura of great wisdom, as 
also by Yuyutsu and Yuyudhana, and by his other relatives and followers 
forming a large train, goes forth to Kurukshetra again, his praises sung the 
while by vabdhis and magadhis, many eulogists and bards. 


The sacrificial fires of Bhishma are also borne along with the 
procession. Thus, the Kuru king sets out from his city of the elephant like a 
second Indra. Soon enough, he arrives at the place where the son of Santanu 
still lies upon his bed of arrows. He sees his Grandsire waited upon with 
reverence by Parasara’s son Vyasa Mahabuddhi, by Narada, O Rajarishi, by 
Devala and Asita, and also by the unslain kings of the world arrived and 
assembled here from various parts of Bharatavarsha. Yudhishtira sees that 
his Mahatman Pitamaha, as he lay on his heroic bed, is guarded on all sides 
by the warriors appointed to that charge. Alighting from his chariot, 
Yudhishtira and his brothers solemnly greet and salute their Pitamaha, that 
great Parantapa. They also reverently salute the Rishis with the island-born 
Vyasa at their head, and are respectfully greeted by them in return. 

Accompanied by his priests, each of whom resembles the Pitamaha 
Brahma himself, and by his brothers, Yudhishtira of unfading glory 
approaches Bhishma on his bed of arrows lying there surrounded by the 
revered Mahamunis. 

Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, at the head of his brothers, addresses 
Gangaputra Bhishma, saying, “I am Yudhishtira, O Lord. Salutations to you, 
O Jahnaviputra! If you can still hear me, tell me what I should do for you. I 
have come here at the hour you told me to and I bring your sacred fires with 
me, and wait upon your command. Preceptors of all the shastras and their 
angas, all the branches of learning, Brahmanas, Ritwiks, my brothers, your 
son king Dhritarashtra of great tejas, are all here, with my counsellors as 
also Krishna who has no equal. Those Kshatriyas whom the war has spared 
and all the denizens of Kurujangala are also here. Open your eyes, O Lord 
of the Kuru vamsa, and look at them. We have arranged for everything that 
is needed for this solemn and auspicious hour, and I come bringing all of it 
with me. We await your command.’ 

Thus addressed by Kunti’s son of great intellect, the son of Ganga opens 
his eyes and sees all the Bharatas assembled there and standing around him. 
Taking Yudhishtira’s strong hand, Bhishma speaks to him in a voice deep as 
rumbling clouds. That most eloquent of men, master of words, says, 
‘Through great good fortune, Kaunteya, have you come here with all your 
counsellors, O Yudhishtira! The thousand-rayed maker of day, holy Surya, 
has begun his northward course. I have lain on this bed of mine for eight 
and fifty nights. Stretched out on these sharp arrows, I have felt that a 
hundred years have passed. Yudhishtira, the month of Magha has come. 


This is, again, the lighted fortnight and by my calculations a fourth part of it 
should be over.’ 

Having said this to Yudhishtira, son of Dharma, Ganga’s son Bhishma 
then salutes Dhritarashtra and says to him ‘O king, you are well-conversant 
with dharma. All your doubts, again, relating to the vigyana of artha have 
been removed. You have waited upon many Brahmanas of great learning. 
The subtle sciences connected with the Vedas, all the duties of dharma, and 
all the four Vedas do you know well and thoroughly. And therefore, you 
should not grieve, O son of Kuru. That which was pre-ordained has come to 
pass. It could not be otherwise. You have heard the mysteries relating to the 
Devas from the lips of the island-born Rishi himself. Yudhishtira and his 
brothers are morally as much your sons as they are the sons of Pandu. 
Observe the duties of dharma, Dhritarashtra, and do you cherish and protect 
them. On their part, they are always devoted to the service of their elders. 

Yudhishtira Dharmaputra is pure of soul, a true Shuddhatman. He will 
always prove obedient to you. I know that he is devoted to the virtues of 
karuna and ahimsa. He is devoted to his elders and preceptors. Alas, your 
own sons were all of dark and evil hearts. They were wedded to wrath and 
greed. Overwhelmed by envy, they were all sinners. You must not grieve for 
them.’ 

Having said this much to Dhritarashtra of deep wisdom, Bhishma now 
speaks to Krishna Mahabaho. Bhishma says, ‘O Holy One, O God of all 
gods, O you that are worshipped by all the Devas and Asuras, O you who 
covered the three worlds with three rides, salutations to you, O wielder of 
the conch, the discus and the mace! You are Vasudeva, you are the golden- 
bodied, you are the One Purusha, you are the Creator of the universe, you 
are of cosmic proportions. You are Jiva. You are Sukshma, the Subtle One. 
You are the Supreme and eternal Soul. 

Do you, O Lotus-eyed One, save me, O Foremost of all beings! Do you, 
give me leave, Krishna, to depart this world, O you that are Paramananda, 
the Supreme felicity, O First of all beings. You must always protect the sons 
of Pandu. You are, indeed, already their sole refuge. Once, I said to the 
foolish Duryodhana Durbuddhi that there is dharma where Krishna is, and 
that Jaya is where dharma is. I further counselled him that, relying on 
Krishna as his refuge, he should make peace with the Pandavas. Indeed, I 
repeatedly told him, This is the fittest time for you to make peace! The 
foolish Duryodhana, whose heart was given to darkness and evil did not do 


my bidding. And having caused a great carnage on earth, at last he himself 
laid down his own life. 

You, O illustrious one, I know to be that ancient and best of Rishis who 
dwelt for many years in the company of Nara, in Badarikasrama. The 
Devarishi Narada told me this, as also did Vyasa of austere tapasya. Even 
they have said to me that Arjuna and you are the ancient Rishis Narayana 
and Nara born now among men. Do you, O Krishna, grant me leave, for I 
would now cast off my body. Blessed by you, and through your grace, I 
shall attain to the highest end!’ 

Krishna says, ‘I give you leave, O Bhishma. Do you, O king, attain once 
more to the Vasus. O you of great splendour, you have not been guilty of a 
single transgression in this world. Rajarishi, you always were and still are 
devoted to your sire Santanu. You are, therefore, like a second Markandeya. 
It is for that reason that death awaits your pleasure even as your slave.’ 

When Krishna has said this, Bhishma, son of Ganga, once more 
addresses the Pandavas led by Dhritarashtra, and his other friends and well- 
wishers, ‘I wish to cast off my prana, my life-breath. You must all give me 
your leave to do so. You should all strive to attain to Truth. Truth is the 
highest power. You must always live with Brahmanas of righteous conduct, 
who are devoted to tapasya, always abstain from any cruelty, and who have 
their souls under control.’ 

Having said these words to his friends and having embraced them all, 
Bhishma once more addresses Yudhishtira, ‘O king, let all Brahmanas, 
especially those that are endowed with wisdom, let them who are 
preceptors, those who are priests able to assist at sacrifices, be worthy of 
adoration to you.’” 


CANTO 168 


V aisampayana said, “Having said this to all the Kurus, Santanu’s son 
Bhishma falls silent for a time. He then stills and holds his life- 
breaths, successively, in those parts of his body that are indicated in yoga. 
The prana of that Mahatman rises up through the chakras of his body, and 
all the arrows fall out, of themselves, from those parts of the body of 
Santanu’s son through which the prana rises with yoga, their wounds 
cleared miraculously, their gaping wounds healing, wound-mouths closing 
and becoming smooth, one after another. Even in the midst of those 
Mahatmans, including the great Rishis with Vyasa at their head, the sight is 
a most uncanny and marvellous one, O king. Within a short time, all of 
Bhishma’s body is shaftless and woundless. Seeing this miracle, all those 
great and distinguished men, with Krishna first among them, and all the 
Munis with Vyasa, are filled with wonder. 

Restrained firmly and unable to escape through any of the bodily 
outlets, Bhishma’s prana, his life, at last pierces the crown of his head like a 
lustrous comet and flares up and away toward swarga. Batteries of celestial 
drums resound on high and unearthly flowers of light pour down out of the 
sky. The Siddhas and divine Rishis, filled with delight, exclaim, ‘Uttamam! 
Uttamam!’ 

Truly like some flaming, pulsating star, the prana of Bhishma emerges 
through the crown of his head, courses up through the firmament and 
vanishes. Even thus, O great king, does Santanu’s son, that pillar of 
Bharata’s race, unite himself with eternity. 


Then the Mahatman Pandavas and Vidura pile a funeral pyre with a 
quantity of the most fragrant wood and sprinkle it liberally with diverse 
kinds of scented oils. Yuyutsu and others stand by as spectators to these 
preparations. Yudhishtira and Vidura wrap Bhishma’s body in a silken cloth 
and cover it with copious flowers and garlands. Yuyutsu holds a regal chatra 
over the body, while Bhimasena and Arjuna both hold yak-tails whisks, 
chamaras of pure white. The two sons of Madri hold two Kshatriya helmets 
in their hands. Yudhishtira and Dhritarashtra stand at the feet of the 
departed lord of the Kurus; taking up palmyra fans, they all stand around 
the body, which now exudes a redolence of heaven, and begin to fan it 
softly. 

The Pitri yagna for Bhishma Mahatman is then duly performed. Many 
libations are poured upon the sacred fire. The singers of Samans sing many 
hymns. Finally, covering the body of Ganga’s son with sandalwood and 
black aloe and bark, as well as other aromatic fuel, and touching fire to the 
pyre, setting it alight, the Kurus with Dhritarashtra and the others, stand on 
the right side of the blazing thing until it burns down. 

Having thus cremated the body of the son of Ganga, those greatest 
heroes of the Kuru vamsa take themselves to the sacred Bhagirathi, 
accompanied by the Rishis. They are followed by Vyasa, by Narada, by 
Asita, by Krishna, by the royal women of the Bharata vamsa, as also by 
such of the citizens of Hastinapura as have come there. Arrived at the holy 
river, all of them offer tarpana, oblations of water, to the Mahatman 
Bhishma, son of the same Ganga. 

After the oblations of water have been offered by them to her son, 
Goddess Bhagirathi rises up from her stream, weeping and distraught. 
Through her lamentations, she cries to the Kurus, ‘You sinless ones, listen 
to me as I tell you all that transpired with my son. Possessed of regal 
conduct and disposition, and endowed with wisdom and lofty birth, my son 
was the benefactor of all the elders of his race. He was devoted to his father 
and kept the highest vratas. Not even his guru, Jamadagni’s son Rama of 
untold tejas, could vanquish him in battle, not with the greatest, most 
powerful devastras. Alas, that Kshatriya has been killed by Sikhandi. Oh, 
you kings, my heart is surely made of adamant, for it does not break even at 
the vanishment of that son from my sight! 

At the swayamvara at Kasi, from a single ratha, he routed all the 
assembled Kshatriyas of the world and took the three princesses for his 


step-brother Vichitravirya. There was no one on earth to equal him in might 
or prowess. Alas, that my heart does not break upon hearing of the slaughter 
of that son of mine by Sikhandi!’ And she sobs uncontrollably. 

Hearing the goddess of the great river lamenting so, Krishna consoles 
her. Krishna says soothingly, ‘O Susheele, most gentle one, be comforted. 
Do not yield to grief, O you of incomparable sanctity and beauty. Have no 
doubt, your son has gone to the highest heavens of grace. He was one of the 
Mahatejasvin Vasus. Through a curse, O you of unworldly beauty, had he to 
be born among men. It does not become you to grieve for him. 

By Kshatriya dharma, he was cut down by Arjuna on the field of battle, 
even while he fought. He fell nobly. He was not slain, O devi, by Sikhandi. 
Why, Indra himself could not kill Bhishma in battle when he stood with his 
bow in hand. I say to you, Atisundari, your son has gone straight into 
swarga of every bliss. I tell you all the gods together could not slay 
Bhishma in battle. Do not, therefore, O Ganga, grieve for that son of the 
Kuru vamsa. He was one of the Vasus, O devi. Your son has gone to 
Devaloka, so let the fever of your heart be dispelled.’” 

Vaisampayana continued, “Thus spoken to by the divine Krishna, that 
first among all rivers casts off her grief, O great king, and is restored to 
equanimity. Having honoured and worshipped the devi Ganga, all the kings 
there, led by Krishna, seek her leave and then depart from her sacred 
banks.” 





THE COMPLETE 


MAHABHARATA 


Aswamedha Parva @ Asramavasika Parva @ Mausala Parva 
Mahaprasthanika Parva « Swargarohanika Parva 


{12} 


Manjulika Dubey 
series editor: RAMESH MENON 





THE COMPLETE MAHABHARATA 


Aswamedha Parva 
Asramavasika Parva 
Mausala Parva 
Mahaprasthanika Parva 
Swargarohanika Parva 


THE COMPLETE 
MAHABHARATA 


Volume 12 


Aswamedha Parva 
Asramavasitka Parva 
Mausala Parva 
Mahaprasthanika Parva 
Swargarohanika Parva 


Manjulika Dubey 





RUPA 


Published by 
Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd 2017 
7/16, Ansari Road, Daryaganj 
New Delhi 110002 


Sales centres: 
Allahabad Bengaluru Chennai 
Hyderabad Jaipur Kathmandu 

Kolkata Mumbai 


Copyright © Manjulika Dubey 2017 


All rights reserved. 

No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, or 
stored in a retrieval system, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, 
without the prior permission of the publisher. 


ISBN: 978-81-291-XXXX-1 


First impression 2017 


10987654321 


The moral right of the author has been asserted. 


Series End Dedication 


To 
Maharishi Veda Vyasa, greatest of all poets 
his divine scribe Lord Ganapathy 
and 
first and last 
Yasodha’s son KRISHNA the All 


— Ramesh Menon 
CHO 


To the memory of 
Malti & Ayodhya Nath Shukla 
Gargi & Kartar Nath Dubey 
& to Suman, Amitabh & Mandakini Dubey 


—Manjulika Dubey 
Fo 


CONTENTS 


Book 14: Aswamedha Parva 
Book 15: Asramavasika Parva 
Book 16: Mausala Parva 
Book 17: Mahaprasthanika Parva 


Book 18: Swargarohanika Parva 


BOOK 14 
Aswamedha Parva 


ASWAMEDHIKA PARVA 


CANTO 1 


A UM. Bowing down to Narayana and Nara, foremost of Purushas, 
and to Devi Saraswati, I invoke the spirit of Jaya! 

Vaisampayana said, “King Dhritarashtra offers libations of water, 
tarpana, to the manes of Bhishma. Mahabaho Yudhishtira, his heart in 
turmoil and his eyes filled with tears, setting his blind uncle before him, 
climbs back to the bank of the Ganga, where he sinks to the ground like an 
elephant shot by a hunter. Bhima comes forward to support his brother, 
urged on by the Parantapa Krishna, who exclaims, ‘This should not be!’ 
The Pandavas, seeing Yudhishtira Dharmaraja distraught and prostrate, 
sighing again and again, are overwhelmed by grief and sit down around 
him. 

Dhritarashtra, blessed with percipience and the inward vision of 
wisdom, sorely afflicted by the death of his sons, exhorts Yudhishtira: 
‘Arise, O tiger among the Kurus, and attend to your kingly duties. By 
Kshatriya usage, O Kaunteya, you have conquered this Earth. Enjoy her 
now with your brothers and friends, Naresha. Foremost among the 
righteous, I do not see why you should grieve. It is Gandhari and I who 
should mourn, Rajan, having lost a hundred sons like wealth won in a 
dream. 


Through perversity of mind I did not heed Vidura Mahatman’s words 
of deep import, though he sought only our own good, and now I repent. The 
virtuous Vidura of divine insight had said to me, “Your very vamsa will be 
annihilated through Duryodhana’s iniquities. If you desire the welfare of 
your lineage, heed my advice, O King. Cast out this evil prince Suyodhana, 
do not allow either Karna or Sakuni ever to see him, and forbid their 
gambling, with no further ado. Anoint Yudhishtira as king. He is a man of 
profound self-restraint and will rule the world with dharma, justly. If you 
are not prepared to have as king Yudhishtira, son of Kunti, then, Rajan, 
undertake a yagna. Take charge of the kingdom yourself. Regarding all its 
creatures with an impartial eye, O Lord of men and advancer of your 
kindred, let your kinsmen subsist on your bounty.” 

Fool that I was, Kaunteya, I followed the wicked Duryodhana instead 
of listening to the far-sighted Vidura. Having turned a deaf ear to the sweet 
and sage counsel of the serene Vidura, I have brought upon myself this 
mighty sorrow, and find myself in an ocean of misery: O Rajan, behold your 
old father and mother sunk in wretchedness. But for your affliction, O 
master of men, I can find no reason.’” 


CANTO 2 


V aisampayana said, “Hearing the wise words of King Dhritarashtra, 
the pensive Yudhishtira is comforted. 

Krishna counsels him, ‘When a man mourns his departed forefathers to 
excess, he distresses them. Banish your sorrow now and perform many 
yagnas with generous gifts to the priests. Gratify the Devas with Soma rasa, 
and the manes of your ancestors with offerings of food and drink, as is their 
due. Sate your guests with meat and drink, and bestow on the destitute all 
the gifts they want. A man of your great intelligence should not comport 
himself in this manner. You know, and have experienced, all that you 
should; you have done what you needed to do. You have heard about the 
dharma of the Kshatriya from Bhagirathi’s son Bhishma, from Krishna 
Dwaipayana, from Narada and Vidura. You, of all men, must not cling to 
the way of fools but, following in the footsteps of your forefathers, shoulder 
your burden. 

It is meet for a Kshatriya to attain Swarga by his own merit. The 
warriors who have been killed during the war will ever remain in the realms 
of heaven. Abandon your grief, mighty sovereign, and know that whatever 
happened was destined exactly as it came to pass. No way can you see 
again those who were slain in this war.’ 

The serene Govinda pauses, and Yudhishtira, prince of the righteous, 
answers him thus: “O Krishna, full well do I know the love you bear me, for 
you have always favoured me with affection and friendship. And, O 
Gadadhara, Chakradharin, Yadava, most glorious one, if you were now 
readily to give me your leave to retire to the forest to take sannyasa, you 


would grant my deepest wish. I can find no peace after having killed my 
Pitamaha and that foremost of men, Karna, who never turned away from a 
battle. Janardana, allow me to renounce the world, to perform tapasya, so 
that I may be freed from this heinous sin and my mind may be purified.’ 

At this, Vyasa tejasvin, knower of the purusharthas and the four 
asramas of life, attempts to hearten his troubled grandson: ‘My child, your 
mind has not found its calm, and it is puerile sentiment that possesses you 
yet once more. Why is it, O child, that you scatter our words again and 
again to the four winds? You know the dharma of the Kshatriya, who lives 
by war. A king who has followed his svadharma should not allow himself to 
be overwhelmed by sorrow. 

You have faithfully attended the exposition of the entire doctrine of 
Mukti, and I have often removed your doubts springing from attachment. 
But it seems you fail to heed what I say, or some obduracy of understanding 
makes you forget it clean. It should not be so; such ignorance is not worthy 
of you. Sinless one, you know of many ways of expiation for violence and 
sin, and you have been instructed exhaustively in the dharma of kings and 
the punya of giving daana. Bhaarata, when you know all this, and the 
Agama scriptures as well, how can you let yourself be swayed by sorrow, as 
though you were benighted?’” 


CANTO 3 


¢ =\/ yasa goes on to say, “Yudhishtira, it seems to me that you are 

deficient in wisdom. No man does anything through his own 
power; it is God who causes him to engage in deeds, good or bad. Where, 
then, is there room for self-reproach? Yet you judge yourself as a sinner. So, 
Bhaarata, listen to how you can atone for your transgressions. Those who 
sin can always purify themselves through penance, sacrifice and charity. 
Evil-doers, O Rajan, Narottama, are cleansed by yagna, tapasya and daana. 
The Devas and Asuras undertook sacrifices to secure punya; yagnas are of 
supreme importance. Through great yagnas alone have the Devas waxed 
powerful, and it is through those performances that they vanquished the 
Danavas. 

Now, O Yudhishtira, prepare to perform the Rajasuya as well as the 
Sarvamedha and the Naramedha yagnas. Then must you, like Dasaratha’s 
son Rama, and Dushyanta and that puissant Lord of the Earth, Sakuntala’s 
son Bharata, your ancestor, conduct the Aswamedha yagna consummately, 
as ordained, with munificent dakshinas.’ 

Yudhishtira’ replies, ‘Beyond doubt, the Aswamedha purifies 
Kshatriyas. But I have a limitation, to which you must attend. Having 
caused this vast carnage of kindred, Dvijottama, I cannot dispense daana on 
even a small scale, as I have no wealth to give. Nor can I solicit any from 
the survivors of the Great War, the young sons of kings, whose wounds are 
still raw, and who are suffering untold sorrow from their own bereavements 
and deprivation. Having destroyed the world as we knew it, how can I, 


stricken as I am myself, O Mahamuni, seek tribute now from these young 
ones to perform so immense a sacrifice? 

For Duryodhana’s sins, the kings of the Earth have all been killed, and 
we have reaped ignominy. For the sake of kingdom and wealth, 
Duryodhana laid waste this very Bhumi, and the coffers of Dhritarashtra’s 
evil son are empty. The Earth is the dakshina, the gift made to the 
Brahmanas; this is the first and cardinal law laid down for the horse 
sacrifice. The learned accept that, under certain circumstances, this law may 
be set aside and some other dakshina take the place of the Earth—but, my 
lord, I do not even remotely possess wealth which could be given in her 
place. Can you, Pitamaha, counsel me in this quandary?’ 

Krishna Dwaipayana reflects silently for a while, then says to the 
Dharmaraja, ‘The exhausted Kuru treasury shall again be filled, O son of 
Pritha. Upon Himavat mountain is hidden gold and treasure left by the 
Brahmanas who performed the Aswamedha yagna of the Rajarishi 
Marutta.’ 

Yudhishtira asks, “How was all that gold amassed for Marutta’s yagna? 
When was he king?’ Vyasa replies, ‘Prithaputra, if you are anxious to hear 
about that ancient king of the Karandhama vamsa, listen to me and I will 
tell you about the reign of that Rajadhiraja of immeasurable majesty and 
wealth.” 


CANTO 4 


oy. udhishtira says, ‘Righteous one, I want to hear the tale of 
Rajarishi Marutta. OO Dwaipayana, sinless Muni, tell it to me.’ 

Vyasa says, “In the Krita Yuga, O child, Manu was Lord of the Earth 
and wielded the sceptre over all the world. His son was Prasandhi. 
Prasandhi had a son named Kshupa, whose son was Ikshwaku, that Lord of 
men. King Ikshwaku had a hundred sons endowed with pre-eminent piety, 
O Rajan, and made all of them kings. 

The eldest of them, Vinsa, was the model for all bowmen. Vinsa’s son 
was the auspicious Vivinsa. Vivinsa had fifteen sons, mighty archers, 
reverential to Brahmanas, truthful, gentle and well-spoken. The eldest of 
them, Khaninetra, oppressed his brothers; but, having conquered the entire 
kingdom hitherto devoid of all troubles, Khaninetra could not retain his 
sovereignty, nor were the people pleased with him. They dethroned him, 
and were happy to make his son Survacha king in his stead. 

Survacha, noting the lapses of his father, and their outcome, worked 
zealously for the welfare of his people. Ever devoted to Brahmanas, he 
restrained his passions and his very thoughts, always spoke the truth and 
was the purest of men. His subjects were well pleased with that Mahatman, 
constant in virtue. However, with his ceaseless service and generosity, his 
treasury came to be greatly depleted. The feudal princes who swarmed 
around him banded together and turned on their king. Besieged by many 
foes, and with his resources diminished, Survacha, his retainers and the 
people in his capital suffered great tribulation. Yet, though his strength had 


dwindled much, his enemies could not kill the king, O Yudhishtira, for his 
power was founded in dharma. 

When he and his people had reached the extreme depths of misery, he 
blew a breath onto his palm, and from it there issued a great supernatural 
army, with which he vanquished in a day all the surrounding kings on the 
borders of his land. For that, O Rajan, he was celebrated with the title of 
Karandhama. 

Karandhama’s son Avikshita, born at the beginning of the Treta Yuga, 
was the equal of Indra himself, blessed with grace and invincible even 
against the immortals. He subdued all the other kings of the world and, by 
virtue of his wealth and prowess, became their emperor. He was indeed like 
Indra himself in valour and majesty. He performed great yagnas past 
counting, and took delight in dharma, holding his senses and passions in 
firm check. In tejas he resembled the Sun and in forbearance the Earth 
herself; in intelligence, he was like Brihaspati, and in calmness, like the 
mountain Himavat. 

Avikshita’s deeds, his speech, his patience and fortitude brought great 
joy to the hearts of his subjects. He performed hundreds of Aswamedha 
yagnas, and the potent and learned Angira himself served as his priest. 
Avikshita’s son Marutta surpassed even his father in his great and lordly 
gunas, in dharma and renown, and possessed the strength of ten thousand 
elephants. He was like another Vishnu in the world. 

Seeking to perform yet another great sacrifice, that virtuous king once 
came to Mount Meru, north of Himavat. Upon the immense golden 
mountain Marutta meant to undertake his sacrificial rites. He had splendid 
golden vessels forged by the greatest smiths in the land, who wrought 
sacred vessels, thrones and other marvellous artifacts without number. He 
caused the yagnasala to be marked and consecrated. And there, indeed, did 
that righteous Lord of Earth Marutta undertake his sacrifice.’” 


CANTO 5 


: ad udhishtira asks, ‘Most eloquent one, how did King Marutta 

become so powerful? And how, O Dvija, did he come by so 
much gold? Where now, O revered grandsire, is all his wealth? And how, 
Muni, can we secure that treasure?’ 

Vyasa answers, “As the children of Prajapati Daksha, the Asuras and 
the Devas, constantly challenged each other, so did Angira’s sons, 
Brihaspati and the Rishi Samvarta, of tremendous and equal tejas and 
vratas. Brihaspati harassed his brother until Samvarta could no longer bear 
his provocations. He renounced everything and went away into the forest 
with nothing to cover his body, O Bhaarata, save the sky. 

Indra, having vanquished and destroyed the Asuras and wrested 
sovereignty over the celestial realm, appointed as his priest Angira’s eldest 
son Brihaspati, best of Brahmanas, who had once been the Kulaguru, the 
family-priest, of King Karandhama. Matchless among men in might, 
prowess and character, powerful like Satakratu himself, of immaculate 
rectitude and stern vows, Karandhama had countless vahanas and warriors, 
many followers, rich and superb palaces with magnificent thrones and beds, 
and every other manner of opulence, all created from dhyana and the breath 
from his lips. Through his inherent virtues and might, he had brought every 
other king under his sway. 

Then, having lived as long as he pleased and having enjoyed a surfeit 
of all that he desired, Karandhama rose bodily into Swargaloka. His son 
Avikshita, conqueror of his enemies, righteous as Yayati, brought all the 
Earth under his dominion; in both merit and might, he resembled his father. 


Avikshita’s son Marutta, of tremendous tejas, was like another Indra. The 
sea-clad Bhumi Devi felt herself irresistibly drawn towards him. Marutta 
was always wont to defy Indra, and the king of the Devas, too, had no love 
for that godlike Kshatriya. But Marutta, master of the Earth, was pure and 
possessed of perfection and, despite all Indra’s efforts, he could not prevail 
over the king. 

Riding his Amrita-born steed, Indra came with the Devas to Brihaspati 
and said, “O Guru, if you want to please me, do not be Marutta’s Ritvija for 
any yagna he performs, either for the Devas or the Pitrs. I am sovereign of 
the three worlds, while proud Marutta is only king of the Earth. Brahmana, 
having been priest of the immortal Lord of the celestials, will you now be 
the priest of a mere mortal king? Either embrace my cause, or Marutta’s. 
Abandon his service, be always only at mine, and do so gladly.” 

Brihaspati reflected on this for a moment, then replied to Devendra, 
“You are the Lord of the Devas, indeed, of all creatures. In you the worlds 
are established. You destroyed Namuchi, Viswarupa and Bala. You alone 
encompass the highest weal of all the divine ones; you, O Indra, sustain 
both Swarga and Bhumi. Best of gods, scourge of Paka, how indeed, having 
served as your priest, can I serve a mortal king? Hear my pledge: even if 
Agni were to cease giving heat and warmth, even if Bhumi Devi were to 
change her nature or Surya Deva cease to give light, I will never break this 
my solemn pledge to you.” 

At this Indra was rid of the raging envy he felt towards Marutta and, 
praising his guru Brihaspati, returned to his own abode.’” 


CANTO 6 


: “VV yasa says, “The ancient legend of Brihaspati and the wise 

Marutta is told in this connection. Hearing of the pact made by 
Angira’s son Brihaspati with Indra, King Marutta made the necessary 
preparations for a great sacrifice. His mind set on the mahayagna, the 
eloquent grandson of Karandhama went to Brihaspati and said, “Mahamuni, 
I have decided to undertake the Aswamedha yagna, in accordance with your 
directive, as you had once proposed to me, and I want you to be my chief 
Ritvija. I have assembled everything needed for the yagna. Most exalted 
one, you are our Kulaguru, so take all these sacrificial components and 
perform the yagna.” 

Brihaspati said, “Lord of the Earth, I do not want to perform your 
sacrifice. Indra has made me his priest, and from now on I will perform 
sacrifices only for him.” Marutta said, “You are our hereditary family priest, 
whom I hold in great esteem, and I have the right to your help with my 
yagnas. It is meet that you be the chief priest for this sacrifice as well.” 

Brihaspati said, “O Marutta, I have now become priest to the 
Immortals; how can I perform a yagna for a mere mortal? Go or stay, as you 
please; from now on I will be Indra’s Ritvija alone, Mahabaho, and yours 
nevermore. You are free to choose any other priest to preside over your 
yagna.”’ 

Vyasa says, ‘Marutta was perplexed and humiliated. As he journeyed 
homeward, burdened by anxiety, he met the wandering Devarishi Narada 
and stood before him, his hands folded in greeting. Narada said, “Rajarishi, 
you seem distraught. Is all well with you? Where have you been, sinless 


one, and what disquiets you so? If you care to, tell me the cause of your 
distress, O best of kings, and I will bend every effort to help you.” Marutta 
told Mahamuni Narada about how his Kulaguru had rebuffed him. 
“Wanting a Ritvik for my yagna, I went to Angira’s son, Devaguru 
Brihaspati, but he spurned my offer. O Narada, I have no wish to live any 
longer after his rebuff. I am contaminated by the sin of failing to perform 
the yagna I was pledged to undertake.” 

Narada then spoke to the son of Avikshita, words which brought hope 
and life back to the king’s heart. “Another powerful son of Angira, 
Samvarta, wanders naked and sorrowing across the earth, astonishing 
everyone by his condition. Go to him, O Kshatriya. If Brihaspati does not 
want to officiate at your yagna, the mighty Samvarta, if he is pleased with 
you, will do so.” Marutta said, “You have breathed new life into me! Most 
eloquent Narada, tell me where I can find Samvarta, tell me how I can serve 
and please him, for if he also were to refuse me, I surely would not want to 
live.” 

Narada said, “Samvarta roams the city of Varanasi at his whim, in the 
garb of a madman, searching for a sight of the Mahadeva Siva. Go to Kasi 
and, when you reach the gates of the city, set a dead body there. The man 
who turns away on seeing the corpse, know him to be Samvarta. Once you 
recognize him, Marutta, follow him wherever that man of power goes until 
you come to a secluded place, where you must prostrate yourself at his feet 
in supplication. If Samvarta demands to know who told you about him, tell 
him it was I, Narada. If he then asks you to follow me, tell him without 
hesitation that I have entered into a sacred fire and turned myself to ashes.” 

Ready to follow Narada’s advice, Marutta made his reverences to the 
Devarishi and repaired to the city of Varanasi. The great king did exactly as 
the sage had instructed him. No sooner had he placed a corpse at the gates 
of the city, than Samvarta appeared there and, on seeing the dead body, 
abruptly turned and walked away. With folded hands, Marutta followed 
him, begging to be received as his sishya. 

They came to a lonely place, where the Rishi covered the king with 
mud and ashes, phlegm and spittle, and strode off again. Marutta, harried 
and oppressed by the Brahmana, still followed him, all the while trying with 
folded hands to placate him. At length, exhausted, Samvarta came to a 
sacred nyagrodha tree, and sat down to rest under its dense canopy.’ 


CANTO 7 


S amvarta demanded, “How have you come to know me? Who told 

you about me? Tell me truly, if you wish your own good. If you tell 

me the truth you will have what you desire, but if you tell me a lie your 
head will burst into a hundred pieces.” 

Marutta said, “Narada, wandering on his way, told me that you are the 
son of my Kulaguru Angira, and this information drew me gladly towards 
you.” Samvarta said, “You speak the truth. Narada knows me to be a 
performer of sacrifices. Now tell me where he is.” Marutta said, “That 
prince among Devarishis shared this intelligence with me, commended me 
to your care, and then entered a sacred fire.” 

Hearing this, Samvarta was gratified and said, “Indeed, I can do what 
you want from me.” Then, O Kshatriya, raving at the king like one 
deranged, abusing him wildly, Samvarta said to Marutta, “I am disordered 
in my mind and given to random caprice. Why are you bent upon 
performing this sacrifice with a priest of such a disposition? My brother is 
more than able to undertake the greatest yagna. Why, he performs Indra’s 
own yagnas. Ask him to conduct your sacrifice. My elder brother took from 
me all my possessions, material and spiritual, as well as all the yajamans on 
whose behalf I once undertook yagnas, leaving me with just this naked 
body of mine. Yet, O son of Avikshita, he is worthy of my reverence, and I 
cannot conduct your sacrifice without his leave. So go first to Brihaspati and 
obtain his permission. Only if he agrees can I perform your yagna for you.” 

Marutta said, “Hear me, O Samvarta, I did first go to Brihaspati but, 
wanting Indra’s patronage, he refused to have me as his yajaman. He said, 


‘I have secured the priesthood of the Immortals, and have no wish to exert 
myself on behalf of any mortal man. Also, Indra has forbidden me to 
officiate at your sacrifice, saying that since you became Lord of the Earth, 
you are driven by a desire to compete with him.’ Your brother assented to 
what Indra asked of him, saying ‘Tathaastu’. So, best of Rishis, your brother 
now has Indra’s patronage and protection. Although I went to him with a 
fervent heart, he turned me away. I now mean to expend all my resources to 
have you perform this yagna for me and, by your good offices, to outstrip 
Vasava in every way. Since Brihaspati rejected me for no fault of mine, I 
have no wish to seek his aid.” 

Samvarta said, “I can surely accomplish what you want, O King, but 
only if you agree to do whatever I ask of you. I fear that when Brihaspati 
and Indra learn that I am helping you, as they surely will, they will be 
enraged and do everything in their power to injure you. Therefore, assure 
me of your loyalty and fortitude, so that I might be calm and constant. For if 
you anger me, I will reduce you and your vamsa to ashes.” 

Marutta said, “If I forsake you, may I never attain the blessed regions 
as long as the mountains stand, and the thousand-rayed sun continues to 
shed light and heat on the world. If I betray you, may I never attain true 
wisdom, and remain forever addicted to mundane pursuits.” 

Samvarta said, “O son of Avikshita, your determination to perform this 
yagna is praiseworthy, as is my ability to conduct the sacrifice. I say to you, 
O King, upon its completion you will gain imperishable punya, and rule 
over Indra and his Devas, and the Gandharvas as well. For myself, I have 
no wish for any wealth or sacrificial gifts. I want only to be revenged upon 
Indra and my brother. I will satisfy your wishes and make you Indra’s 
equal.” 


CANTO 8 


: S amvarta said, “There is a forested peak called Munjavana, high 
among the Himalayan pinnacles, where the divine Lord of Uma is 
engaged in austere tapasya. There puissant Mahadeva, with Uma at his side, 
armed with his trisula and surrounded by Sivaganas, his attendant goblins, 
dwells in the shade of giant forest trees, or in caves, or roams the rugged 
fastnesses of the great mountain, as he pleases. 

There the Rudras, the Sadhyas, the Viswadevas, the Vasus, Yama, 
Varuna, Kubera with all his attendants, the two Aswins, the Gandharvas, the 
Apsaras, the Yakshas, as well as the Devarishis, the Adityas of the Sun, the 
Maruts who rule the winds, and all manner of untamed and feral spirits, 
Bhutas and Pretas, worship Siva Mahatman of diverse gunas. And there, O 
King, the most exalted Lord sports with the wild and playful followers of 
Kubera, the Yakshas and Guhyakas of weird and ghoulish appearance. 

Lit by its own splendour, that mountain is as bright as the morning sun. 
No being with natural eyes can ever discern its shape or form. Neither heat 
nor cold prevails there. The sun does not shine on that peak, nor do the 
winds blow there. Neither age nor hunger, nor thirst, nor death, nor fear can 
afflict anyone in that hermetic place. Parantapa, on all sides of that 
mountain are rich mines of gold, splendid as the rays of the sun. The 
legions of Kubera, the Lord of Treasures, guard these with arms raised 
aloft. 

Marutta, take yourself to that place and worship that greatest of gods 
who is called Sarva, Bedha, Rudra, Sitikantha, Surapa, Suvarcha, Kapardi, 
Karala, Haryaksha, Varada, Tryaksha, Pushnodantabhid, Vamana, Siva, 


Yamya, Avyaktarupa, Sadvritta, Sankara, Kshemya, Harikesa, Sthanu, 
Purusha, Harinetra, Munda, Krishna, Uttarana, Bhaskara, Sutirtha, 
Devadeva, Ranha, Ushnishi, Suvaktra, Sahasraksha, Midhvan, Girisa, 
Prasanta, Yata, Chiravasa, Bilwadanda, Siddha, Sarvadandadhara, Mriga, 
Vyadha, Mahan, Dhanesa, Bhava, Vara, Somavaktra, Siddhamantra, 
Chakshu, Hiranyabahu, Ugra, Dikpati, Lelihana, Goshtha, Vrishnu, 
Pasupati, Bhutapati, Vrisha, Matribhakta, Senani, Madhyama, Sruvahasta, 
Yati, Dhanwi, Bhargava, Aja, Krishnanetra, Virupaksha, Tikshnadamshtra, 
Tikshna, Vaiswanaramukha, Mahadyuti, Anangha, Sarva, Vilohita, Dipta, 
Diptaksha, Mahauja, Vasuretas, Suvapu, Prithu, Kritivasa, Kapalmalli, 
Suvarnamukuta, Mahadeva, Tryambaka, Krodhana, Nrisansa, Mridu, 
Bahusali, Dandi, Taptatapa, Akrurakarma, Sahasrasira, Sahasracharana, 
Swadhaswarupa, Bahurupa, Damshtri, Pinaki, Mahayogi, Avyaya, 
Trisulahasta, Bhuvaneswara, Tripuraghna, Trinayana, Trilokesa, Mahanja, 
Sarvabhutaprabhava, Sarvabhutadharana, Dharanidhara, Isana, Visveswara, 
Umapati, Pasupati, Viswarupa, Maheswara, Virupaksha, Dasabhuja, 
Vrishavadhwaja, Ugra, Sthanu, Rudra, Iswara, Sitakantha, Aja, Sukra, 
Prithu, Prithuhara, Vara, Viswarupa, Bahurupa, Umapati, Anangangahara, 
Hara, Saranya, Chaturmukha. 

Bowing down to that God of gods, you must entreat his protection and 
favour. And thus, Kshatriya, surrendering yourself to Mahadeva of infinite 
tejas, you will acquire that gold, for the man who goes there and worships 
him will indeed obtain that most precious treasure.” 

Marutta, the grandson of Karandhama, did as he was instructed and, 
going to Munjavana, received from the Lord a vast store of treasure. He 
then prepared to perform his mahayagna, and the arrangements he made for 
it exceeded human capacity. The gold of Kubera was fashioned by artisans 
into sacrificial urns and other vessels for the sacrifice. 

Hearing of Marutta’s prosperity, which eclipsed that of the gods, 
Brihaspati was stricken; he was beside himself with envy and distress at the 
thought that his brother and rival should prosper thus. Sick at heart, he grew 
lean and wasted and his face lost its lustre. When Indra learnt that 
Brihaspati was sorely afflicted, the Lord of the Devas went to him with all 
the Immortals.’ 


CANTO 9 


I ndra asked him, “Do you sleep in peace, Brihaspati, and are your 
servants agreeable to you? Do you seek the welfare of the gods, O 
Brahmana, and do the gods protect you?” Brihaspati said, “I do sleep in 
peace in my bed, O Devendra, and my servants are to my liking. I seek the 
welfare of the gods, and they cherish me.” Indra said, “Why then are you so 
pale and strained, and whence this anguish of body or mind? Tell me, 
Brahmana, who they are that have caused you pain, that I might exterminate 
them all!” 

Brihaspati said, “O Indra, I have heard that Marutta will perform a 
splendid mahayagna at which he will give exquisite gifts, and that Samvarta 
will be the chief priest. I do not want him to officiate at the king’s sacrifice.” 
Indra replied, “Brahmana, knower of all sacred mantras, you attained 
everything that you could have desired when you became the Ritvija of the 
Devas, and you have passed beyond the influence of age and death. What 
can Samvarta do to you now?” 

Brihaspati said, “Prosperity in a rival is always painful to one’s 
feelings. It is for this very reason that you, too, with your attendant Devas 
persecute the Asuras, with their kith and kin, and kill the most prosperous 
among them. I am pale and distraught, Lord of the gods, because my rival 
prospers. O Indra, do everything in your power to stop the yagna of Marutta 
and Samvarta.” 

Turning to Agni, Indra said, “Jataveda, go to Marutta, taking Brihaspati 
with you, and say to that king that this guru will conduct his sacrifice and 
make him immortal.” Agni said, ““Tathaastu, so be it!” and went forth on his 


errand, taking Brihaspati with him. The Fire God of high soul flew like a 
flaming wind at the end of winter, consuming forests and trees on his way, 
roaring and spinning at will. 

Marutta said, “Behold, today I find Agni come in his own embodiment! 
O Muni, offer him an asana and padya, and a cow, and water to wash his 
feet.” Agni said, “I accept your offerings. Sinless one, know that I have 
come to you as Indra’s messenger.” Marutta said, “Divine Agni, is the 
glorious Lord of the Devas happy, and is he pleased with us, and are the 
other gods loyal to him? Tell me all.” 

Agni said, “Bhumipala, Sakra is perfectly happy, he is pleased with 
you and all the other gods are indeed loyal to him. O King, listen to the 
message I bring from the Lord Indra. He wishes to deliver you from age, O 
Marutta, and has sent me here with Brihaspati, so that the high priest of the 
gods may conduct your great sacrifice for you, a mortal, and thereby make 
you immortal.” 

Marutta said, “I submit to Brihaspati that, having been priest to 
Mahendra himself, it does not look well for him now to act as a priest for 
mortal men. The twice-born Brahmana Samvarta will conduct my 
sacrifice.” 

Agni said, “If Brihaspati officiates as your priest, you will have the 
blessings of the Devaraja and attain the highest realm in Swarga from the 
great fame that will accrue to you. You will conquer all the kingdoms and 
lands of men, the realms on high, the loftiest domains created by Prajapati, 
even the entire kingdom of the gods.” Samvarta broke in furiously, “Never 
again dare to bring Brihaspati to Marutta; for know, O Pavaka, if you do, I 
will consume you with one look from my furious and fiery eyes.” 

Terrified by Samvarta’s threat and trembling like the leaves of the 
aswattha tree, Agni returned to the gods. Seeing the conveyor of oblations 
return to him with Brihaspati, Indra said, “O Jataveda, did you take 
Brihaspati to Marutta as I told you to? What did that sacrificing king say to 
you? Did he agree to what I asked?” Agni said, “Marutta did not accept 
your offer, urged on him by me and, clasping Brihaspati’s hands, asserted 
repeatedly that Samvarta would act as his priest. He also said that he did not 
aspire to attain Bhumi, Swarga or even Brahmaloka, and that he would 
accept your offer if he were ever so minded.” 

Indra said, “Go back to that king and tell him that if he does not do as I 
say, I will cast my Vajra thunderbolt down on him.” Agni said, “Let the 


king of the Gandharvas go as your messenger, O Vasava, for I am afraid to 
go there myself. Know that the highly incensed Samvarta of great tapasya 
said to me in anger, ‘If you come here again to offer Brihaspati’s services to 
Marutta, I will consume you with a malevolent look from my fierce eyes.”’ 

Indra said, “Jataveda, it is you who burn all other things; none can 
reduce you to ashes. All the world is afraid of your burning touch, O 
conveyor of oblations, so these timorous words of yours deserve no 
credence.” Agni said, “O Sakra, by the might of your arms you conquered 
Swarga, Bhumi and Akasa, yet Vritra once surely wrested the sovereignty 
of Devaloka from you.” 

Indra said, “I can reduce my foes to submission and a mountain to an 
atom, if I will it. But, O Vahni, as I do not accept the libation of Soma if 
offered by an enemy, and as I do not strike the weak with my thunderbolt, 
Vritra seemed to triumph over me for a time. But who among mortals can 
live in peace, if he incurs my wrath? I have banished the Kalakeyas down to 
Bhumi, expelled the Danavas from Swarga, and cast even Prahlada out of 
Devaloka. Which mortal man can live in peace if he provokes my enmity?” 

Agni said, “Mahendra, do you remember that in olden times, when the 
Rishi Chyavana conducted the sacrifice for Saryati with the Aswin twins 
and kept the Soma for himself, you were incensed and indeed raised your 
hand to cast your Vajra at the sage? But that Brahmana, with the power of 
his tapasya, seized your very hand, the thunderbolt in it, and held you 
helpless, O Purandara. In his rage, he created the dreadful shape-changing 
Asura Mada—whose lower jaw rested on the earth while the upper one 
yawned into the sky, whose countless teeth were more than a hundred 
yojanas long, with four main fangs like unimaginable silver columns, two 
hundred yojanas each—that Demon whose visage struck fear into your 
heart. 

Gnashing his fangs, Mada pursued you with his terrible pike uplifted to 
kill you and you, Indra, trembled before him, making a pitiful spectacle of 
yourself, O slayer of Danavas. Overcome with fear, you folded your 
shaking hands in supplication to Chyavana Muni and implored his 
protection. The might of Brahmanas, Sakra, is greater than that of 
Kshatriyas. None are more powerful than great Brahmanas and, knowing 
well their awesome force, I have no wish to incur the wrath of Samvarta.”’ 


CANTO 10 


I ndra said, “Even so is it. The might of Brahmanas is great, and there 
are none more powerful; but I cannot with equanimity bear the 
insolent pride of Avikshita’s son, and I will strike him with my thunderbolt. 
Therefore, O Dhritarashtra, Lord of Gandharvas, take yourself to Marutta’s 
court, where Samvarta attends on him, and give him this message from me: 
‘Kshatriya, take Brihaspati for your priest, else I will consume you with my 
Vajra!’” 

The Gandharva went to Marutta’s royal sabha, and delivered Indra’s 
message: “Lord of men, I am the Gandharva Dhritarashtra and I bring you 
this message from Devendra. Rajasimha, lion among kings, the Lord of the 
Devas, of fathomless accomplishments, has just this to say to you: “Take 
Brihaspati to be your priest for your sacrifice, else I will hurl my Vajra 
down on you, and you will die.’” 

Marutta said, “O Purandara, O Viswadevas, O Vasus and you Aswins, 
all know that in this world there is no escaping the consequences of 
betraying a friend; it is a sin as great as Brahmahatya, slaying a Brahmana. 
So let Brihaspati be your priest, O Vasava Vajradharin, and Samvarta will 
conduct my yagna, for Indra’s message does not commend itself to me, and 
his threat does not affright me.” The Gandharva said, “O Kshatriyasimha, 
listen to Indra’s dreadful thunder in the sky. Be certain that he will indeed 
hurl his thunderbolt at you. Think of your own good, for it is time.” 

Hearing Indra’s fury roaring as if to split the sky into shards, Marutta 
said to Samvarta, that best of all men of dharma, absorbed in tapasya, “The 
thunderhead rages above, and wrathful Indra is near for certain. O prince 


among Brahmanas, I seek sanctuary in you; pluck this fear from my heart. 
See where the Vajradharin descends on me, lighting up the ten cardinal 
points of the sky with his terrifying, superhuman effulgence. All who were 
to assist me during the yagna are also panic-stricken.” 

Samvarta said, “Lion among kings, I will remove your anxiety and pain 
with my mantras. Be calm and have no fear, for the weapons of all the gods, 
including that of Indra of a thousand sacrifices, will prove impotent against 
my mystic powers. Let Indra’s lightning gash the sky and his clouds pour 
down their cataracts, let thunder boom and winds howl through forests and 
upon mountains; let Sakra blast his thunderbolt where he will; you have 
nothing to fear, for Agni, Vahni Deva, will protect you in every way, and 
you shall have all your desires fulfilled.” 

Marutta said, “Ah, Brahmana, my heart quails to hear the squalling 
tempest and terrifying crashes of thunder. My serenity has quite deserted 
me!” Samvarta said, “O King, your fear of the Vajra will soon leave you. I 
will summon great winds of my own to scatter the black-massed 
thunderclouds. Cast off your fear and ask me for any boon, and I will grant 
you whatever your heart desires.” 

Marutta said, “O Brahmana, what I wish is for Indra himself to appear 
at my yagna and accept the oblations offered him, and for all the other gods 
also to come and take their shares of the havis and drink the Soma rasa.” 
Samvarta said, “I have summoned Indra with my mantras. Look, O King, 
where he hastens to your yagna, in his chariot drawn by supernal steeds, 
attended by all the other gods.” 

And indeed the Lord of the Devas, accompanied by the other elemental 
gods, approached the sacrificial altar of the son of Avikshita to drink the 
Soma rasa of that unrivalled monarch. King Marutta with his priest rose to 
receive Indra with the host of gods and, well pleased, welcomed the Lord of 
the Devas with all due and high worship, as laid down in the Shastras. 

Samvarta said, “Welcome, O Indra, All-knowing, your presence here 
sanctifies this sacrifice and makes it truly a Mahayagna. O slayer of Bala 
and Vritra, drink once again the Soma rasa I have prepared today.” Marutta 
said, “I bow to you O Lord of the gods, look kindly upon me, for your 
coming here has rendered my yagna complete, and blessed my whole life. 
Brihaspati’s younger brother, this most excellent Brahmana, now conducts 
my sacrifices for me, O Surendra.” 


Indra said, “I know your Ritvija, Mahamuni Samvarta, Brihaspati’s 
younger brother and great tejasvin; indeed I have come here at his 
invitation. Rajan, I am well-pleased with you, and my resentment against 
you has vanished.” Samvarta said, “If you are pleased with us, O Devendra, 
direct this yagna yourself, and ordain the sacrificial portions for the Devas, 
so that the world knows you have done this.” 

Thus petitioned by the son of Angira, Sakra himself gave directions to 
all the gods to create the yagnashala, raise a thousand richly appointed 
apartments, magnificent as in a picture, and swiftly complete a massive and 
durable staircase for the ascent of the Gandharvas and the Apsaras, as well 
as a dance arena for the Apsaras which he told them to make as wondrous 
as his own celestial palace in Amaravati. 

Rajan, the Swargavasis fulfilled his directions in next to no time. Indra, 
well-pleased and adored at the great yagna of Marutta, said to him, “O 
Kshatriya, your Pitrs and all the Devas are gratified with your sacrifice, and 
have accepted your oblations joyfully. Now let the best of all Brahmanas 
sacrifice a red bull to Agni upon his vedi, and a sacred and consecrated blue 
bull of variegated hues to the Viswadevas.” 

With that, the majesty and splendour of the yagna swelled in tide, that 
greatest of sacrifices where the gods took their offerings in person, and 
Sakra, their Lord, master of celestial steeds, Vasava, whom Brahmanas 
worship, himself assisted at the ceremonies. Now Samvarta Mahatman, 
effulgent as another Agni, ascended the altar, sonorously hymned the gods 
and poured libations of ghrita into the blazing sacred fire, to the 
accompaniment of holy mantras. 

First of all, Indra drank the precious Soma rasa, and then the other 
Devas partook of the ambrosia. Then joyously, with the king’s leave, they 
returned to their heavenly realm satisfied—indeed, delighted. Marutta, 
Parantapa, his heart full, freely set hillocks of gold in diverse places for his 
people, and gave even more bountiful riches away to the Brahmanas. The 
king in his glory was as resplendent as Kubera, Lord of Treasures. His heart 
soaring, Marutta filled his capacious coffers with all kinds of wealth and, 
taking reverent leave of his spiritual preceptor Samvarta, returned to rule 
his realm, extending to the shores of the sea. 

Great Marutta was, in his age, the very embodiment of dharma on 
earth, and incalculable was the treasure that he garnered during his great 
sacrifice. Yudhishtira, it is now time for you to seek out and retrieve his vast 


store and to worship the gods with it, Dharmaraja, by performing an 
Aswamedha yagna.’ 

Exhilarated by the words of his grandsire Vyasa, son of Satyavati, 
Yudhishtira sets his heart on a majestic and peerless horse sacrifice, and to 
that end holds regular counsel with his brothers, priest and ministers.” 


CANTO 11 


V aisampayana said, “When Vyasa finishes speaking to Yudhishtira, 

the almighty Krishna, light of the Kurus, also addresses Pritha’s son, 
racked by the carnage of the Great War, by the loss of kinsmen and friends 
beyond count, his face dark with grief like the sun in eclipse, or fire 
shrouded by smoke. 

Krishna says, “The path of sin leads inexorably to doom and bondage, 
and the way of dharma to Brahman and Mukti. If you understand that this is 
the essence of all knowledge and wisdom, how can you let yourself be 
overwhelmed by anguish? Your karma is not yet exhausted, nor have all 
your enemies perished, for you do not know those that lurk within your own 
body. 

Let me tell you, as I have heard and understood it, the tale of the war 
between Indra and Vritra. Once, Vritrasura seized the entire Earth, and from 
the sacred and fragrant Bhumi there arose the most repulsive stench on 
every side, befouling the pristine element. Since smell belongs to the 
Mahabhuta Earth, Indra of the hundred sacrifices was enraged and hurled 
his thunderbolt down at Vritra. In a flash the Asura plunged into the Ocean 
and corrupted that precious domain too. Taste was lost, and the very seas 
were no longer aqueous. Indra struck Vritrasura once more with his Vajra. 
This time the demon entered into the realm of Light, Jyoti, extinguishing its 
inherent property, Sight. Once again Indra struck Vritra with his great 
thunderbolt, and the Asura this time entered into Vayu, Air, making away 
with its inherent property, Touch. Yet again Indra cast his Vajra at Vritra and 


the demon entered into Akasa, the ethereal element, and spirited away its 
guna, primeval Sound. 

Indra cast his final thunderbolt upon the Asura. This time Vritra entered 
into Indra’s very body and, violating it, appropriated every transcendent 
attribute of that divine form. Indra was plunged thereby into sinister 
darkness, profound delusion, great Maya, O best of the Bharatas. It was 
Mahamuni Vasishta who comforted the Lord of the Devas and lit the lamp 
of his wisdom again, dispelling the solid night into which the Asura had 
locked him. Regaining himself, Indra now killed Vritrasura with a most 
subtle, intangible Vajra, neither solid nor liquid but made of foam. 

Pandava, it was Sukracharya himself who related this Itihasa of deep 
mystery to the greatest sages, and they in turn told it to me.’” 


CANTO 12 


: “kK rishna says, “There are two kinds of ailments, the physical and 

the mental, produced by the mutual action of the body and the 
mind, and they never arise without this interaction. Vata, pitta and kapha, 
the cold, the warm and the windy humours, Yudhishtira, are the essential 
transformations generated in the physical body. When these humours are 
equal and harmonious, present in due proportion, they ensure good health, 
for the warm humour is balanced by the cold one, the cold by the warm, and 
both by the one of wind. 

Sattva, Rajas and Tamas are the attributes of the soul, and the sages say 
that their presence in due proportion creates a healthy mind. But if any one 
of the three dominates, the Munis enjoin some remedy to restore 
equilibrium. Happiness is overcome by sorrow, and sorrow by pleasure. 
Some people, when afflicted by sorrow, wish to recall past happiness, while 
others, while enjoying happiness, remember past sorrow. But you, 
Kaunteya, neither recall your sorrows nor your happiness; why else would 
you indulge in this empty delusion of grief? Perhaps it is your innate nature, 
which overpowers you just now, O Pandava. 

Think not of the painful sight of Krishnaa, in her period, standing in the 
Kuru sabha wearing a single cloth to cover her body, while all you five 
brothers were in that court. It is not fitting for you to recall your leaving 
Hastinapura like beggars; or your exile, during which you covered 
yourselves with antelope hide and wandered in the wilderness; or how 
Jatasura set upon you, the battle with Chitrasena, and what the Saindhavas 
did when their king forcibly hauled Panchali away in his chariot. 


Nor it is proper, Yudhishtira Parantapa, for you to recall how Kichaka 
kicked Draupadi in Virata’s court, during your ajnatavasa, or the battle you 
fought against Bhishma and Drona. No, none of these: for now the time has 
come when you must fight the battle that each one must fight alone, against 
his own mind. Prepare now for that last war, and through dhyana and the 
punya of your own karma, conquer that inscrutable and most powerful of all 
enemies. 

You will have no use during this war for weapons, for allies or 
attendants. The time has come for the implacably sole battle, the one 
against yourself. If you lose this, you will find yourself in the most 
wretched plight, son of Kunti; while, know this beyond doubt, if you use 
your wisdom to conquer your enemy, you will attain success and the highest 
felicity and then, knowing the destiny of all creatures and following the 
ways of your sires, rule your vast kingdom with dharma.’” 


CANTO 13 


= K rishna says, ‘O Bhaarata, salvation is not attained by renouncing 
things external, be it even a kingdom, but by relinquishing what 
panders to the flesh. The virtue and felicity that come to a person who has 
abandoned the outer world but is still in the clutches of passion—let those 
belong to our enemies! The twin-syllabled Mrityu is the death of the soul, 
while the three-syllabled Saswatam is the eternal spirit, the very Brahman. 
The consciousness that this or that thing is mine, or the condition of being 
addicted to worldly objects, is Mrityu, and the absence of that apperception 
is Saswatam. These two, Brahman and Mrityu, have their seats in the hearts 
of all creatures, O King, and wage war with each other, remaining unseen. 

If it be true that no creature is ever destroyed, then one does not make 
oneself guilty of the death of any creature by destroying its body. How does 
the world affect a man if, having acquired sovereignty over the very Earth 
with all its mobile and immobile creations, he does not become attached to 
it or engrossed in its enjoyment? But the man who renounces the world, 
takes to the life of a vanaprastha, living on wild roots and plants, but still 
craves the things of the world, remains addicted to them in his heart— why, 
he bears Mrityu in his mouth. 

Yudhishtira, watch and observe the illusory character of your external 
and internal enemies, through the optic of discernment, for he who is able to 
perceive the nature of eternal reality is beyond the influence of the great 
fear of death. Men do not admire the conduct of those absorbed in worldly 
desires, and there is no action without a desire at its root. All desires are 
creations of the mind. Knowing this, wise men subjugate their desires. 


The Yogi who holds communion with the Supreme Spirit, by dint of 
his dharma and dhyana of many former births, knows Yoga to be the 
immaculate way to salvation. Remembering that what the mind desires is 
not conducive to piety and virtue, and that the conquest of desire itself is at 
the root of all true dharma, such men do not engage in charity, Vedic 
learning and rituals, asceticism and meditation, all of whose only object is 
the attainment of mundane felicity. To illumine this truth, the sages versed 
in ancient lore sing the gaathas, the ballads called Kamagita. Listen to them, 
O Yudhishtira. 

Kama himself says, “No man succeeds in conquering me unless he 
resorts to the proper methods. If, knowing my power, a man strives to 
overcome me by intoning prayers, I prevail by deluding him with the belief 
that I am himself, the ego within him; if he attempts to quell me through 
sacrifices and charity, I deceive him by appearing in his mind as a most 
radiant and virtuous being, a paragon; and if he tries to destroy me by 
mastering the Vedas and Vedangas, I vanquish him by appearing to be the 
very soul of virtue. 

If a man’s strength lies in truth, and he seeks to quell me through 
patience, I appear to him as his own mind, and he is unable to detect my 
separate existence; if a man of austere vratas seeks to put me to the sword 
through asceticism, I appear in the guise of tapasya in his mind, and he does 
not know me for what I am. If the man of gyana, whose purpose is Mukti, 
wants to subdue me, I easily seduce him and laugh in his face. Verily, I am 
the eternal one, without a peer, whom no creature can kill!” So says Kama 
Deva. 

Hence, O Kshatriya, turn away from this tyrant Kama and towards 
Dharma, so that you can attain true felicity. Yudhishtira, prepare earnestly to 
undertake the Aswamedha yagna, with rituals of resplendence and daana 
unseen since the day of Marutta himself. 

Do not allow this unworthy grief to overwhelm you again, even if it is 
for your kin and friends who lie slain on the field of war. You cannot bring 
them back to life with your tears. Your way ahead lies in performing the 
most magnificent sacrifices, so that you bless the ravaged world, attain 
enduring fame in this life, and tread the high path to salvation.” 


CANTO 14 


V aisampayana said, “With such counsel Dwaipayana_ Vyasa, 

Viswarishabha Krishna and other Mahamunis of mighty tapasya 
console Rajarishi Yudhishtira, who lost many kinsmen and dear friends to 
the Great War. Rajan, Devasthana, Narada, Bhima, Nakula, Krishnaa, 
Sahadeva, and Vijaya of the keen intellect, as well as other great Brahmanas 
versed in the Shastras—all comfort the despondent Dharmaraja so that he 
can emerge from his dejection. 

After performing the obsequial ceremonies for the dead, and duly 
worshipping the Brahmanas and Devas, Yudhishtira brings under his sway 
the vast kingdom of the Earth, with her girdle of oceans. His mind now 
tranquil, that Kurusottama speaks to Vyasa, Narada and the other sages 
present. ‘You ancient men of untold age, greatness and wisdom have 
removed my distress, and I find no basis left to cause me sorrow. I have also 
acquired great wealth, with which I can now worship the gods. O 
Dvijottamas, with your help, I will indeed now perform the Aswamedha 
yagna. 

We have heard that the Himalayan realms are full of wonders. 
Therefore, Brahmanas, Maharishis, O Pitamaha, ordain that, with your 
protection, we reach the Himalayas, for the performance of our yagna 
depends entirely on your blessings. We seek the blessing of Devarishi 
Narada and the great Devasthana, for they too have spoken words of great 
beauty and wisdom to us for our welfare. No other man fallen into 
tribulation and distress ever had the fortune to secure the kindly counsel of 
such great friends and gurus, whom all the virtuous revere and laud.’ 


Thus addressed by the king, those great sages bid Yudhishtira, Krishna 
and Arjuna repair to the Himalayan fastnesses, and then vanish before the 
eyes of the assembled crowd. Yudhishtira, the lordly son of Dharma Deva, 
sits for a while in silence, in the place where the sons of Pandu are offering 
tarpana and performing funeral rites for the departed Bhishma, Karna, and 
all the great heroes and prominent Kauravas who have been slain during the 
Great War. 

When they have fulfilled these duties, they give away munificent gifts 
to Brahmanas. Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, keeping Dhritarashtra always 
beside him, consoling his blind and lordly uncle of the eyes of wisdom, 
returns to Hastinapura, takes up the reins of the kingdom and, together with 
his brothers, rules the Earth with dharma for his sceptre.” 


CANTO 15 


anamejaya asked, “O Dvijottama, when the Pandavas have recovered 

and pacified their kingdom, what do Krishna and Arjuna do?” 

Vaisampayana said, “Rajan, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya are full of joy 
when the Pandavas succeed in regaining and pacifying their dominions, and 
set out to travel, wandering together with deep satisfaction in each other’s 
company, even like Indra with his consort in Devaloka; they rove through 
picturesque forests, wondrous lakes and plateaux, to sacred places of 
pilgrimage and holy rivers; they enjoy themselves like the two Aswins 
sporting in the Nandanavana. 

When they have spent some weeks ranging at will, the two come 
blithely to Indraprastha and the magnificent Maya sabha. There they pass 
their time recounting the stirring events of the war, and recalling the years 
of privation and suffering, not just of this life but of those past, as well: for 
they are indeed the ancient sages Nara and Narayana, and they can narrate 
even the most antique genealogies of the Rishis and the Devas. 

One day, Krishna of fathomless punya, who always knows the full 
import of all things, speaks words of Amrita to comfort Arjuna, whose heart 
is deeply wounded by the death of his sons and many thousands of friends 
and kinsmen, although he says nothing of his anguish, being absorbed and 
delighted in Krishna’s company. It is as if Janardana with his deep 
understanding and ascetic punya has removed Arjuna’s great burden, 
bringing him to a state of perfect peace. 

This is what Govinda says to Partha: “Arjuna, terror of your enemies, 
your brother, the Dharmaputra, has conquered this whole Earth through the 


might of your arms, the invincible strength of Bhima and the prowess of the 
twins. Your brother Yudhishtira now reigns supreme over Bhumi, without a 
rival. You know well what dharma is; it is by dharma alone that Yudhishtira 
regained the kingdom, from the strength of dharma that the powerful 
Suyodhana and his brothers, all of them avaricious, arrogant, ill-spoken and 
given irrevocably to evil, have been killed, along with their allies. And now 
that Dharmaputra rules the world again in grace and peace, I, too, have 
enjoyed your company in the wonderful, untamed and free wilderness. 

Parantapa, what more is there to say, than that I am drawn to wherever 
you are—Kunti, you, Yudhishtira, the mighty Bhima and Madri’s twins— 
by my love for all of you? We have spent a long time now in these sacred 
places and halls of delight, and the days have fleeted by in your company 
without my seeing my father Vasudeva, my brother Balarama and my other 
Vrishni kinsmen. 

It is time now that I return to Dwaravati. So I ask you, most valorous of 
men, give me leave to go. When Yudhishtira was heavily stricken, Bhishma 
and I consoled him with pertinent Itihasas and Puranas from antiquity, and 
your brother, being pliant and high-minded, though our sovereign and 
himself versed in all forms of knowledge, paid due heed to what we said to 
him. That son of Dharma honours truth, and is grateful and righteous. With 
his virtue and good sense, the stability of his power will endure. But now, 
Arjuna, go you to your noble brother and tell him that I mean to return to 
Dwaraka. I must obtain his leave, Mahabaho, for, let alone going home to 
the sea-city, even if death were to come to me, I would be unwilling to do 
anything that might displease Yudhishtira. 

Partha, I always have your welfare at heart, and I now say to you that 
my work here is done. Duryodhana, who ruled the world with greed and 
evil, is dead; his armies and allies have been slain, and the Earth, with her 
girdle of seas, her mountains, rivers and jungles, and the great and ancient 
Kuru kingdom, all have come under the sway of the wise Yudhishtira 
Dharmaraja. 

Kurusottama, may your brother rule the world in dharma with the 
blessings of the greatest Siddhas, his praises always being sung by the 
vabdhis and magadhis of Hastinapura. Arjuna, come now with me into 
Yudhishtira’s presence and tell him I wish to return to Dwaraka. Yudhishtira 
Mahatman always commands my love and respect, and I have placed my 
body and all the wealth that I own at his disposal. But now that Bhumi has 


come under your sway and that of the immaculate Yudhishtira, the need for 
my remaining has passed, and only my love for you keeps me in your 
kingdom.’ 

At these words of Janardana, sadness wells up in Arjuna’s heart but, 
honouring Krishna’s wishes, he says merely, “Tathaastu—so be it.’” 


ANUGITA PARVA 


CANTO 16 


anamejaya asked, “O Dvija, after the enemy was vanquished, tell me 

of what else was said between Krishna and Arjuna when they went to 
the hall of audience?” 

Vaisampayana said, “As I have told you, after recovering his kingdom 
Arjuna spends some weeks joyfully in that palace of unearthly beauty in 
Krishna’s company, doing nothing else, his heart full of delight. One day, 
the two of them, strolling along, come to a part of the palace that is truly 
like a piece of Swarga upon this earth. There jubilant kinsmen, friends and 
attendants, surround them. 

Arjuna, blissful in the company of his kinsman, looks at the marvellous 
chambers and asks his divine companion, ‘Mahabaho, when the war was 
upon us, I became aware of your true greatness. Devakinandana, you 
showed me your Viswarupa, and I saw that you are the Lord of the 
universe! From the inconstancy of my mind I have all but forgotten those 
hallowed words you spoke to me, out of your love, O Kesava. Yet my mind 
constantly harks back to them and searches for those truths you disclosed. 
But O, Madhava, you are soon to go back to Dwaraka.’ 

Krishna, Mahatejasvin, foremost of speakers, embraces his cousin, and 
says, ‘Arjuna, I expounded to you mysterious and eternal truths. I spoke to 
you about the highest dharma, religion in its most essential form, and about 


the immortal realms. I am sorely disappointed that you did not receive what 
I imparted to you. What I said then will not return to me now exactly. 
Panduputra, I am sorry to find you so deficient in both faith and 
understanding. I cannot repeat in detail everything I said at that critical 
hour, the Sanatana Dharma I revealed to you, with which you can attain to 
the very Brahman. I yoked myself deep into yoga at that time, and it was 
indeed the Parabrahman that I revealed to you. 

Yet let me now tell you another old and sacred Itihasa on the same 
subject. Best of men, observant of duty, listen to me now with undivided 
attention, so that you succeed in attaining to the highest goal. Listen, 
Arjuna, and hear me well this time. 

Parantapa, once a Brahmana of irresistible tejas came to me from the 
realms of heaven, from Brahmaloka, and we worshipped him duly. Listen, 
Partha, without doubt or hesitation, to what he said, most agreeably and 
eloquently, in reply to our queries. The Brahmana said, “O Krishna of 
highest puissance, harken to my reply to the question you raise about 
Mukti, out of your compassion for all creatures, Madhava, once the 
Brahmana known as Kashyapa, of profound tapasya and every virtue, 
foremost among savants of dharma, came to another Brahmana who was a 
knower of the deep and intricate mysteries of the Atman, and even the final 
Secret. 

Indeed, the latter had mastered all the knowledge held in the scriptures 
about the departure and reappearance of beings, and he had direct gyana of 
all things conferred by true yoga. He was a master of the truth of all matters 
of the world. He knew all about pleasure and pain, about birth and death, 
and had fathomed the distinctions between actions that yield good and those 
that are sinful. He was a seer, a witness of all the ends that creatures, high 
and low, attain through karma, and he lived as one emancipated from 
samsara. 

His tapasya crowned with success, he was perfectly tranquil in soul 
and, having his senses and passions under absolute control, blazed with the 
resplendence of the Brahman. He could transport himself anywhere at will, 
indeed vanishing before the eyes of all whenever he chose. He roved in the 
company of invisible Siddhas and Gandharvas. He was wont to sit in their 
midst and converse with them in sequestered places, far from the bustle of 
humanity. He was as free as the wind from attachment to all things. 


Kashyapa, hearing of this sage, wanted to see him. That best of 
Brahmanas sought out the mystic Rishi and approached him. A great 
tapasvin himself, moved by the desire to acquire further punya, Kashyapa 
fell with a rapt heart at the feet of the sage, in whom he clearly perceived 
marvellous attributes. 

Full of awe at the extraordinary accomplishments of that recondite 
Muni, Kashyapa began to wait upon the Brahmana with the humble 
reverence of a sishya waiting on his guru, and succeeded in pleasing him. 
His unstinting devotion gratified the immaculate and noble Brahmana and 
at last the Rishi spoke blithely to Kashyapa about Moksha, the highest goal. 
Listen to those hermetic words, O Janardana, as I repeat them. 

That mystic among ascetics said, “Through diverse karma, my son, as 
well as through dharma, mortal creatures attain to diverse ends in this world 
and beyond. Yet nowhere is the highest happiness to be found, and nowhere 
can residence be eternal. Even after reaping the harvest of the most 
strenuous deeds, mortals fall from the loftiest realms won by such karma. 

In consequence of my own indulgence in sin, I have, time and again, 
come to miserable and inauspicious ends, for I never escaped the clutches 
of lust and wrath, and was always deluded by greed. I have experienced 
death and rebirth repeatedly, I have eaten every manner of food, I have fed 
at diverse breasts, I have known diverse mothers and many different fathers. 
Many kinds of happiness have been mine, and many kinds of misery, O 
sinless one. On numerous occasions have I been torn away from what was 
pleasant, and reaped torment. Having earned wealth with great toil, I have 
had to endure its loss. Insults and grievous anguish have I received from 
kings and relatives; agonizing mental and physical have been mine; 
humiliations have I known, and death and immurement in _ horrific 
conditions. Falls into hell have been mine, and great tortures in the domains 
of Yama. Decrepitude and disease have repeatedly assailed me, and 
calamities as frequent. In this world, I have time and again undergone all 
the afflictions that flow from the illusory perception of duality. 

After all this, one day, the utmost, final despair overwhelmed me. And 
then, afflicted as I was, I sought refuge in the Formless, and renounced the 
world with all its joys and sorrows. Finally understanding the true path, I set 
myself upon it, even while living in this world. When my soul found its 
innate peace, I accomplished what you now see, this immortal freedom. 
When I leave my body this time, I will never return again, never again be 


reborn. Truly, until I attain absorption into the eternal Brahman, indeed until 
the final dissolution of the universe, I shall look only towards that blissful 
end which shall be mine, and those beings that constitute this universe. 

Having reached this goal, I will attain Satyaloka, and after that what is 
higher still, the Brahman and Moksha. I will attain the Nirguna 
Parabrahman, the single, unmanifest, unborn, deathless One. Have no doubt 
about this, Parantapa, I will not return to this world of mortal creatures. O 
you of great wisdom, I have been gratified by you. Tell me what I can do for 
you. I know why you sought me out, and it is now time to accomplish the 
purpose for which you came here to me. 

Very soon I will leave this world for the last time. Since you have 
pleased me with your service and conduct, ask me what you will, and I will 
gratify you. I know that you have great acumen, and can grasp whatever I 
have to say, else you would not have recognized me in the first place. Yes, 
surely, Kashyapa, yours is a profound intelligence.”’” 


CANTO 17 


: “kK rishna went on, ‘Touching the feet of the sage, Kashyapa asked 

him some profound and difficult questions, and he, foremost of 

all men of truth, discoursed on every aspect of dharma about which he was 
asked. 

Kashyapa asked, “How does one body dissolve, and how is another 
acquired? How does a soul find Moksha after enduring a repeated cycle of 
painful rebirths? After enjoying Prakriti for some time, how does the Jiva 
cast off a particular body? How does the Jiva attain to what is different from 
it, to the Brahman? How does a human being enjoy and endure the fruits of 
his karma, good and bad? What happens to the karma of one who has no 
body?” 

The emancipated sage, at Kashyapa’s insistence, answered his 
questions one after another. Listen to me, O Vrishni, as I tell you what he 
said. The Jivanmukta said to Kashyapa, “Upon the exhaustion of the karma 
which extends a life and fetches fame to a particular body assumed by the 
Jiva, the embodied self, the end of its span drawn near, begins to do things 
hostile to its own life and health. As its dissolution approaches, its 
understanding turns away from its proper course. 

The man of uncleansed soul, even after an accurate apprehension of his 
constitution and strength, and of the season of his own life and of the year, 
will begin to eat irregularly food that is detrimental to him, to indulge in 
practices injurious to himself. At times he eats excessively, at others 
abstains from food; he ingests bad food or drink, or eats food containing 


ingredients incompatible with one another, or eats to excess, or before 
digesting what he ate before. 

He indulges to excess in physical exercise and sexual pleasure, or falls 
so avidly to work that he suppresses the urgings of his corporeal organism, 
even when they become pronounced. Otherwise he gluts himself with food 
far too rich, or sleeps during the day. Undigested food itself provokes such 
defects, when the time comes. Stimulating the deficiencies in his body 
brings fatal disease to fall upon him, ending in his death. There are even 
those who perversely kill themselves outright by unnatural means such as 
hanging. 

It is through these causes that a living body finds its end. Understand 
correctly the manner of this, as I declare it to you. Urged on by the element 
of wind, Vayu, which intensifies, the heat in the body is fanned and agitated 
and spreads even like a fire to all parts of the body, one after another, 
consuming every vital part where life resides. Overwhelmed with pain, O 
Dvija, the Jiva quickly flees its mortal casement. 

Thus are all the living repeatedly afflicted with death and birth. The 
pain felt when leaving a body is very like that experienced when first 
entering the womb, and when issuing out of it. Dying or being born, the 
Jiva feels distress. The body’s Vayu becomes excited through cold and 
dissolves its compound of elements so that the panchabhutas abandon their 
unity, scatter and return again into their five original elements. The Vayu 
that dwells in the vital breaths, Prana and Apana, which enliven the body of 
five primal elements, sweeps upward, away from the turmoil of the 
embodied creature. Breathlessness follows, and the man becomes destitute 
of heat, of breath, of beauty and of consciousness. Deserted by Brahman, he 
finds the condition known as death. 

The senses through which he perceives the world no longer register 
anything; for it is the eternal Jiva who creates and sustains the body through 
the two vital breaths, which he generates through food. While the body is 
occupied, alive, know that the elements are firmly united in those parts 
termed in the Shastras as its vital centres. When these are pierced, the Jiva 
stirs and rises into the heart and swiftly ceases to animate those vital 
centres, so that the living creature, though still alive, loses consciousness of 
the external world. Darkness overwhelms him; it is then that the Jiva, in a 
long, agonized breath, quits the mortal flesh, with a final shudder. However, 


even when the Jiva leaves a body, the karma of the life lived in it clings to 
him, all the punya and paapa, the good and the evil. 

Brahmanas, seers gifted with knowledge and sight and conversant with 
the secrets of the hermetic scriptures, can tell whether the soul departs with 
more good or evil. Even as common men see the firefly appear and 
disappear in the dark, tapasvins with the eye of knowledge see with mystic 
vision the Jiva as it leaves one body and as it enters another womb. 

The Jivatma has three realms assigned to it through all time: this world, 
Bhumi, where creatures dwell, is known as kshetra, or the field of karma, of 
deeds. Here, with deeds good and evil mixed from lives gone by and 
present, all embodied creatures find their fruits. In consequence of their own 
varied karma, creatures enjoy higher or lower pleasures and joys. Sinners 
find Naraka for themselves, the lower realms into which they fall, and 
terrible is the experience of plunging head-first into savage fires as a result 
of their sins. Rescue is exceedingly difficult, and every mortal being must 
do its utmost to preserve itself from those infernal realms. 

Listen now carefully to what I say about the kind of world into which 
souls ascend as a result of their punya; for by that you will achieve firmness 
of understanding and a clear knowledge of good and evil karma. Know that 
the realms of Swarga, to which souls of good deeds attain, are the celestial 
fields of stars that shine in the firmament: the lunar world, Pitriloka, and the 
solar one as well, Suryaloka, resplendent with its own light. Yet, upon the 
exhaustion of their punya, these souls too fall away from the regions of 
bliss. In Swargaloka itself are distinctions of inferior, superior and middling 
felicity, and souls experience discontent at the sight of prosperity more 
glorious than their own. 

These are the goals that I have described to you. Listen now, 
attentively, O Brahmana, to what the Jiva experiences on finding itself in 
the womb.’”’ 


CANTO 18 


: T he enlightened Brahmana said to Kashyapa, “The karma, good and 

bad, that a Jiva accumulates is not destroyed with the body but 

yields its harvest successively, body after body. As a fruit-bearing tree, 

when the season comes, yields bountiful fruit, so, too, does punya of a pure 

heart bestow its crop of felicity and, as surely, do sins committed with an 
evil heart result in harvests of misery. 

Moved by Mind, Manas, the Jiva, the embodied soul, indulges in 
karma. Listen to how, bearing all its karma, and overwhelmed by lust and 
wrath, this Jiva enters a womb. The vital seed, mixed with blood, enters the 
womb of females and becomes the field of the Jiva, good or bad according 
to the karma it carries. But Jiva itself, being subtle and unmanifest, never 
becomes attached to anything, even upon incarnating, time after time. It is 
in essence the Eternal Brahman, the seed of all creatures, because of whom 
all mortals live. 

The Jiva, entering the foetus, enlivens its limbs part by part, and, 
dwelling in all the centres that belong to Prana, supports life. Becoming 
endowed with Manas, the unborn child begins to move its limbs. Know that 
the Jiva occupies an embryo even as liquid iron does a mould; as fire 
burning fiercely turns iron to fluid, so does the soul animate the foetus. As a 
lamp lit in a room discovers all things within the chamber, even so does 
Mind discover the different limbs and organs of the body. Whatever karma 
the Jiva has performed in a previous body, it must inexorably reap its 
harvests, bitter and sweet, in the new body. Through such enjoyment and 
suffering, old karma is exhausted and fresh karma accumulates, also 


inevitably, until, after countless births and deaths, the Jiva penetrates at last 
the profound dharma of the dhyana which leads to Mukti, to final 
Emancipation. 

Let me tell you of the karma, the deeds, by which the Jiva, coursing 
through the interminable round of rebirths, finds happiness: daana, tapasya, 
brahmacharya: worshipping Brahman as ordained in the Shastras, shanti, 
feeling pity and compassion for all creatures, restraining the passions, 
abstaining from cruelty and from appropriating what belongs to others, 
refraining, even mentally, from all deeds that are false and injurious to 
living creatures, reverently serving the mother and the father, honouring the 
Devas and Sadasyas—gods and guests—worshipping Gurus, maintaining 
purity, firmly restraining all organs of lust, and performing good deeds. 

From such karma ensues righteousness, dharma, which protects all 
creatures eternally. Such conduct is seen in sattvic persons, and, verily, such 
karma is immortal, the way of tranquil souls that indicates eternal virtue; 
among the serene, the way of Sanatana Dharma is cast. He who embraces 
these paths of truth will never come to a miserable end. It is through the 
virtue of the righteous that the world is maintained. 

However, the Yogin is a Jivanmukta, a liberated soul, and he is 
distinguished above these men of goodness. Deliverance from the meshes 
of samsara comes after an incalculably long time, when a person remains in 
tune with the truth and does as he or she should with perfect detachment. A 
Jiva is faced ineluctably with karma from every previous life: karma is the 
very cause of the essentially eternal Jiva becoming embodied in so many 
different forms, at various times, all of them mortal, unlike his true, 
immortal Self. 

There exists in the world the question of how a Jiva first accepted a 
body. The Grandsire of all the worlds, Brahma, first created a body of his 
own; then he created the three worlds, in their entirety, of mobile and 
immobile creatures, Pradhana, the material cause of all embodied creatures, 
and the highest. All else that is seen is kshara, mortal; while the other is 
transcendent—Para—immortal and indestructible—a-kshara. Of each 
Purusha taken distributively, the whole is duality among these three. The 
first, Svayambhuva Prajapati, created all the primal elements and all 
immobile creation from the first sound, the primordial audition. The 
Pitamaha ordained a limit to time, and to transmigrations among diverse 
creatures, births and rebirths. 


What I say to you is the truth on the subject of previous births, as 
perceived by one who has seen his Atman, his Soul. One who looks upon 
pleasure and pain as fleeting, who regards the body as an unholy compound, 
and death as ordained in karma, who is mindful of what little there is of 
pleasure in the world, that in truth all is pain, dukha, will succeed in 
crossing this stormy ocean of worldly migrations, this samsara so difficult 
to traverse. 

Though assailed by decrepitude, disease and death, he who understands 
Pradhana beholds with an equal eye the One consciousness dwelling in all 
conscious beings. Seeking the supreme condition, he becomes impervious 
to all else. Best of men, I will now tell you about this. Most learned 
Brahmana, understand fully that which constitutes the final knowledge of 
the immortal condition.” 


CANTO 19 


¢ TT he Brahmana said, “He who becomes absorbed in the one 
repository of all things, freeing himself from even the thought of 

his own identity with all things—indeed, ceasing to think of even his own 
existence, will gradually cast off one bond after another and succeed in 
attaining Mukti. The man who is a friend to all, who endures all, who is 
devoted to tranquillity, who has conquered his senses, who is divested of 
fear and wrath, and who is of restrained soul, succeeds in liberating himself. 

He who behaves towards all creatures as towards himself, who is 
restrained, pure, free from vanity and egoism, is truly emancipated. He 
looks with an equal eye upon life and death, pleasure and pain, gain and 
loss, the agreeable and the disagreeable. He is in every way free who does 
not covet what belongs to others, who never disregards anybody, who 
transcends all the pairs of opposites, and whose soul is untrammelled by the 
slightest attachment. He is a Jivanmukta who has no enemy, no kinsman 
and no child, who has cast off dharma, artha and kama, and who is liberated 
from all desire. 

He who finds Moksha acquires neither punya nor paapa, and casts off 
the good and evil accumulated in previous births; he lays waste the 
elements of his body in order to attain to a tranquil soul, and transcends all 
pairs of opposites. He who abstains from all karma, who is unfettered by 
desire, whose heart is fixed on renunciation, who looks upon the universe as 
transient, like an aswattha tree ever subject to birth, decay and death, and 
whose eyes are always directed towards his own faults, soon succeeds in 
freeing himself from the bonds that bind him. 


He finds Mukti who sees his soul as unknowable, without smell, taste, 
touch, sound, sight and belonging. He who sees his soul as being untouched 
by the attributes of the five elements, without form and cause, to be in truth 
without attributes although enjoying the attributes, finds Moksha. 
Abandoning, through true understanding, all purposes relating to body and 
mind, one gradually achieves the cessation of separate existence, even like a 
fire no longer fed with fuel. 

One who is freed from all impressions, who transcends all pairs of 
opposites, who restrains and employs his senses using tapasya, who owns 
nothing, becomes a Jivanmukta and attains Nirvana. Disentangled from 
samsara, he attains to Brahman, eternal and supreme, perfectly tranquil, 
stable, enduring and deathless. 

Let me now tell you about the supreme science of Yoga, and how 
Yogins, by dhyana, come to see the immaculate Atman. Learn from me 
about those doors through which, directing the soul within the body, one 
beholds that which is without beginning and end. Withdrawing the senses 
from their objects, one should fix one’s mind upon the soul; after having 
performed the severest austerities, one should finally practise that last 
dhyana which leads to Moksha. 

Always at tapasya, engaged in dhyana, the intelligent and learned 
Brahmana should keep the precepts of the science of Yoga, contemplating 
the soul in the body. If the good man succeeds in concentrating the mind on 
the Atman, in time, as he becomes increasingly absorbed in meditation, he 
sees the Paramatman in his own Atman. Self-restrained, always rapt, his 
senses completely conquered, the man of the cleansed soul surely succeeds 
in uniting his soul with the Soul. 

Even as a man, having seen a stranger in a dream, recognizes the 
person in waking life, so, too, he who sees the Supreme Soul in deep 
samadhi, recognizes it everywhere, even when he awakes from his trance. 
Just as one perceives the fibrous pith of the munja after extracting it from its 
sheath, even so does the Yogin behold the soul, extracting it from the body. 
The body is likened to the munja, and the Atman to its essential fibre, by 
those who know the true Yoga, which is union. 

Once the bearer of a body properly sees the soul in Yoga, no one can be 
his master, for he has become lord of the three worlds. He assumes diverse 
bodies as he wishes. Repudiating age and death, he neither grieves nor 
exults. The self-restrained man, concentrated in Yoga, can create for himself 


godship over the very gods. Casting off his transient body, he feels no 
qualm even at the sight of all creatures perishing before his eyes, for he has 
passed beyond and attained to immutable Brahman. When all creatures 
suffer, he is beyond suffering, for nothing can afflict him. 

Devoid of desire, his mind tranquil, the man yoked in Yoga is never 
shaken by pain, sorrow or fear, those terrible results of attachment and 
affection. Weapons cannot pierce him; death does not exist for him. 
Nowhere in the world will you find anyone happier. Having effectively 
yoked his soul, he lives steadily, on himself. Disconnected from ageing, 
from pain and pleasure, he sleeps in peace. Casting off his human body, he 
attains to other forms and bodies at his own pleasure. However, while 
enjoying the sovereignty that Yoga bestows, one should never fall away 
from devotion to Yoga. When, after profound devotion to Yoga, one 
beholds the Atman in oneself, one ceases to have any regard for even Indra 
of a hundred sacrifices. 

Listen now to how a man who habituates himself exclusively to dhyana 
succeeds in attaining to the final Yoga, the communion of nirvana. Thinking 
of that point of the compass that has the sun behind it, the mind should be 
fixed in the interior of the dwelling in which one might happen to live. 
Within the dwelling, let the mind, with all its inward and outward 
operations, be fixed first in the room where one is. Sinking deeply into 
meditation, one beholds the All, the Brahman, the Soul of the universe, for 
there is nothing outside Brahman on which the mind may dwell; Brahman 
is everywhere and all things. 

Else, restraining all the senses in a silent and uninhabited forest, one 
may fix one’s mind in dhyana on the Brahman, here both within and outside 
one’s body. One should meditate on the teeth, the palate, the tongue, the 
throat, the neck; likewise, on the heart and its bonds, its ligatures.” 

“Kashyapa now asked, ‘O Madhusudan, enlighten me further about the 
dharma of Moksha, so hard to explain. How is the food that we eat digested 
in the stomach? How does it become transformed into fluids? How, again, 
into blood? How does it nourish the flesh, the marrow, the sinews and 
bones? How do all these limbs of embodied creatures grow? How does the 
strength grow of the growing man? How do all that is not nutritive and all 
that is impure come to be expelled? How does one inhale and exhale? In 
which particular part of the body does the Atman dwell, enlivening it? How 
does the Jiva, exerting himself, support the body? Of what colour and of 


what kind is the body in which he dwells, when he leaves? O Holy One, tell 
me all this, Anagha, I beg you!’ 

I said to Kashyapa—for that emaciated sage was verily me, O 
Madhava—“As one placing some precious object in one’s store-room 
should keep his mind on it, so should one dispose one’s mind to dwell on 
the Soul, restraining the senses, avoiding heedlessness. Being always 
assiduous in this way and fulfilled within himself, a man will within a short 
time behold that Brahman with which one grasps Pradhana. It cannot be 
seen by the eye, nor apprehended by all the senses. It is only the lamp of the 
mind that illumines the great Soul. He has hands and feet on all sides; he 
has ears on all sides; he dwells in the world, pervading all things. When true 
knowledge dawns, Jiva beholds the Atman as extracted from the body, like 
the pith from a stalk of munja grass. 

Then, casting off Brahma as invested with form, by holding the mind in 
the body, he beholds Brahma free from all attributes. He sees the Soul with 
his mind, smiling the while. Depending upon that Brahma, he then attains to 
Mukti, Emancipation. O Dvijottama, I have now expounded to you the 
mystery of all mystery, the final Rahasya. And now give me your leave, O 
Kashyapa, for I must go from here. You, too, are free to go wherever you 
please.’ Thus, O Krishna, that sishya of mine, the Muni Kashyapa, of deep 
tapasya and stern vows, took my blessings and, expressing his adoration 
and gratitude, went his way.” 

Krishna continues, “And, Partha, that most lustrous Brahmana, having 
laid bare the dharma of Mukti, vanished before my eyes. Have you heard 
and absorbed what the Brahmana said, with all your mind and heart, 
Arjuna? For this was what you heard on that occasion between the two 
armies in my chariot. I believe that one whose mind is confused, who has 
gleaned no wisdom from study, or who eats food incompatible with his 
body, or whose soul is not purified, will find it difficult to truly comprehend 
this teaching. 

O Bhaarata, what you have heard is a great mystery, even among the 
Devas. At no time or place in this world, Partha, has this been heard by 
another man, and, Anagha, no other man is worthy of hearing it. Truly, no 
man whose soul is bewildered can understand this teaching. The world of 
the gods is filled with those who follow the dharma of action. The Devas do 
not find agreeable the religion of inaction, through the cessation of all 
karma. 


That end is the highest which is the eternal Brahman, where, casting off 
the body, one attains immortality and eternal bliss. By following the secret 
way of which I have told you, O Partha, even those of sinful birth, like 
women, Vaisyas and Sudras, attain to the highest felicity—what need be 
said, then, of Brahmanas and Kshatriyas possessed of great learning, 
devoted to the duties of their own varna, who are intent on finding Mukti? 

I have laid down for you the reasons upon which the Mukti Marga 
rests; I have told you the means for its acquisition and its ultimate fruit, 
which is Nirvana and knowledge of the truth about suffering. Nothing 
anywhere, O Bhaarata, brings greater peace and perfect joy than this. By 
treading this path, that mortal endowed with intelligence, faith and courage, 
who renounces as insubstantial what is regarded as substantial by the world, 
succeeds in a short time in gaining the Supreme goal. 

This is the last teaching, beyond which there is no other; this is all that 
I have to say, for nothing else is higher. Yoga, communion and liberation 
can be found by one who devotes himself to its constant practice for a 
period of six months.’” 


CANTO 20 


al 4 rishna says, ‘O son of Pritha, there is an old tale told of a 
discussion between a married couple. The wife of a certain 
Brahmana, seeing that master of every kind of knowledge and wisdom 
seated in seclusion, said to him, “What realm will I attain, who depends on 
one who sits renouncing all karma, who is towards me, so harsh and 
unconcerned? I have heard that a wife attains to those regions that her 
husband gains. What, goal, then, will be mine, who have you for my lord?” 
The serene Brahmana of tranquil soul said to her, smilingly, “Blessed, 
sinless one, I am not offended by what you say. Karma is performed by 
those who depend on others to help them, who take the way of action as 
true, from their feeble understanding. Such men of deeds only store 
delusion through what they do. Yet freedom from karma cannot be had in 
this world for even a moment. From birth to death and rebirth, karma, good 
or bad, of deed, thought or speech, exists in all beings. I have turned away 
from the path of ritual karma defined by outward things, the way of Soma 
rasa and offerings of ghrita, all destroyed inevitably by Rakshasas; and so 
turning away, I have found the seat of the Atman within my body. There 
dwells Brahman, eternal, transcending all pairs of opposites; there Soma is 
with Agni; and there moves Vayu constantly, supporting all creatures. It is 
for that seat that Pitamaha Brahma and others, concentrated in Yoga, 
worship the Indestructible, and for which men of learning and great vows 
strive, men of tranquil souls and vanquished senses. 
It cannot be smelled by the organ of smell, nor tasted by the tongue, 
nor touched by the organs of touch. It cannot be seen by the eye. It 


transcends hearing. It is without scent, taste, touch or form; it is devoid of 
attributes, attained only through the mind. From it ensues the perfectly 
ordained universe, and upon it the universe rests. 

From it the life-breaths, Prana, Apana, Samana, Vyana and Udana flow, 
and into it are they subsumed. The breaths Prana and Apana move between 
Samana and Vyana. When the soul sleeps, both Samana and Vyana are 
absorbed. Between Apana and Prana dwells Udana, pervading all. Since 
Udana is the breath that controls all the life-winds, Prana and Apana do not 
desert a sleeping person. Hence, utterers of Brahman undergo penances 
which have the Atman for their goal. 

In the midst of all those life-breaths that swallow up one another and 
move within the body blazes forth the fire called Vaiswanara, made up of 
seven flames. The nose, the tongue, the eye, the skin, and the ear which 
numbers the fifth, the mind, and understanding—these are the seven 
tongues of that Vaiswanara’s flame. That which is smelled, that which is 
seen, that which is eaten or drunk, that which is touched, that which is 
heard, that which is thought of, and also that which is understood—these 
are the seven sorts of fuel. That which smells, that which eats, that which 
sees, that which touches, that which hears, the fifth; that which thinks, and 
that which understands —these are the seven great officiating priests. 

Learned sacrificers, O blessed one, duly casting seven libations in 
seven ways in the seven fires—that which is smelt, that which is drunk, that 
which is seen, that which is touched, that which is heard, that which is 
thought of, and that which is understood—create them in their own wombs. 
Earth, Wind, Ether, Water, Light, Mind and Understanding: these seven are 
called wombs of all things. 

All the attributes, the burnt havis constituting the sacrificial offerings, 
enter into the attribute born of fire and, abiding within that dwelling, are 
reborn in their respective wombs. In that which generates all beings, they 
remain absorbed during the period for which dissolution lasts. From that is 
created smell, from that is produced taste, from that comes colour, and from 
that, touch; from that issues sound; from that arises doubt; and from that 
also, resolution. This is the sevenfold creation. It is in this very way that the 
ancients comprehended all things. By the three full and final libations, the 
full become replete with light.” 


CANTO 21 


: T he Brahmana said, “An ancient story is told in this regard. Do you 
understand the institution of the ten hotris, the sacrificing priests? 
The ear, the skin, the two eyes, the tongue, the nose, the two feet, the two 
hands, the genital organ, the lower duct and speech—these, O beautiful one, 
are the ten hotris. Sound and touch, colour and taste, scent, speech, action, 
movement, and the discharge of vital seed, of urine and of excreta, are the 
ten libations. The points of the compass, the Quarters, Wind, Sun, Moon, 
Earth, Fire, Vishnu, Indra, Prajapati, and Mitra—these are the ten sacrificial 
fires. The objects of the senses are the fuel cast into these ten fires as are the 
Mind, which is the ladle, and the wealth—the good and bad karma—of the 
sacrificer. What remains is the pure, highest knowledge. 
We have heard that this universe was differentiated by that knowledge. 
All objects of knowledge are Manas, mind. Knowledge only perceives. The 
knower, the Jiva, encased in its subtle form, sukshma sarira, lives within the 
gross body, sthula sarira, created by the vital seed. The bearer of the body is 
the Garhapatya fire. From that is produced another— Mind, the Ahavaniya 
fire. Into it is poured the oblation. From that came the Veda, the Word; 
Mind, desirous of creation, sets itself on the Veda. Then arises form, 
essential colour undistinguished by particular colours. It runs towards 
Manas, the Mind.” 
The Brahmana’s wife asked, “How did Veda, the Word, arise first and 
only then Mind, seeing that Word comes into existence after having been 
thought upon by Mind? Upon what authority can it be said that Mati or 


Prana takes refuge in Mind? Why, again, in dreamless sleep, though apart 
from Mind, does not Prana apprehend the world? What restrains it?” 

The Brahmana said, “The Apana Vayu, becoming the lord of Prana, 
makes it identical with itself. That restrained movement of the Prana Vayu 
is the motion of the Mind. Hence the Mind is dependent upon Prana, not 
Prana upon the mind. Therefore, in dreamless sleep, upon the disappearance 
of Mind, Prana does not vanish. But, since you ask me about Veda and 
Manas, I will relate a discourse between them. 

Word and Mind, repairing to the Soul of matter, asked, ‘Which of us is 
superior, most powerful one? A question has arisen between us about this. 
Do you dispel our doubt.’” 

On that occasion, the Holy One made this reply, ‘Manas is undoubtedly 
superior.’ At this, Word said to Mind, ‘I yield to you the fruition of all your 
desires!” 

The Brahmana said, “Know that I have two minds, the moving and the 
still. That which is unmoving is, verily, with me; the movable is in your 
dominion. That Mind is movable which, in the form of Mantra, word or 
voice, is of your dominion. Hence, you are superior to the other mind. 

But since, my beautiful one, you have entered into this engagement of 
your own accord, I fill myself with breath and utter you. The Goddess Word 
once always dwelt between Prana and Apana. But, sinking into Apana, 
though urged upwards, she was dissociated from Prana. She ran to Prajapati 
saying, ‘Be gratified with me, O Holy One!’ 

The Prana reappeared, once more fostering Word. Hence, Word, 
encountering deep exhalation, never utters anything. Word always flows 
either endowed with utterance or without it. Between the two, Word without 
utterance, Silence, is superior to Word with utterance, Speech. Like a cow 
blessed with excellent milk, Silence yields diverse meanings. When she 
speaks of Brahman, O you of charming smiles, she yields the Eternal, 
Moksha. Word is a most puissant cow, both divine and not divine. Behold 
the distinction between these two subtle forms of Word that flow.” 

The Brahmana’s wife said, “What did the Vakdevi, Goddess of Word, 
say in days of old when Speech, though impelled by the wish to utter, could 
not emerge?” 

The Brahmana said, “The Word that is generated in the body by Prana, 
attains to Apana from Prana. Then, transformed into Udana and issuing out 
of the body, Vak envelops all the quarters, with Vyana. After that, she 


dwells in Samana. Even in this way did Word once speak. Hence, Mind, 
being unmoving, is distinguished; and the Goddess Word, having 
movement, is also distinguished.” 


CANTO 22 


: T he Brahmana said, “Blessed one, another antique story tells of the 

seven sacrificing priests: the nose, the eye, the tongue, the skin, the 

ear, the mind, and the understanding, all distinct from one another. 

Dwelling in subtle space, they do not perceive one another. They are seven, 
these priests, in number as well as in nature.” 

The Brahmana’s wife said, “How is it that, dwelling in subtle space, 
they do not perceive one another? What are their natures, O Holy One? 
Explain this, my lord.” The Brahmana said, “Not knowing the qualities of 
any object is ignorance of that object, while knowledge of its qualities is 
gyana of the thing. 

These seven never succeed in knowing the qualities of one another. 
The tongue, the eye, the ear, the skin, the mind and the understanding do 
not ever apprehend smell; the nose alone does so. The nose, the tongue, the 
ear, the skin, the mind and the understanding never perceive colours; the 
eye alone does. The nose, the tongue, the eye, the ear, the understanding 
and the mind never sense touch; only the skin does. The nose, the tongue, 
the eye, the skin, the mind and the understanding never hear sounds; the ear 
alone apprehends them. The nose, the tongue, the eye, the skin, the ear and 
the understanding never know doubt, only the mind. The nose, the tongue, 
the eye, the skin, the ear and the mind, never determine knowledge; only 
the understanding or intellect does. 

Listen to an ancient discourse that took place between the senses and 
the Mind. The Mind said, ‘The nose does not smell without me; when 
deprived of me the tongue does not taste, the eye does not see, the skin does 


not feel, the ear does not hear. I am the eternal and foremost of all the 
elements. Without me, the senses are lifeless, like empty homes or fires 
whose flames have been quenched. Without me, creatures cannot apprehend 
qualities and objects, even with the senses exerting themselves, just as wet 
fuel can never ignite a fire.’ 

The Senses replied, “This would surely be as you say, if you could by 
yourself enjoy the pleasures of the world without us and the experiences we 
bring to you of our objects. What you claim would be true if, when we are 
gone, life could still be supported and gratified, and you could continue to 
enjoy sensations; or if you could satisfy your desires and enjoyments 
without us, even by conceiving them. If, again, you deem your power over 
our objects to be supreme, then seize colour by the nose, and taste by the 
eye. Also, take smell by the ear, and touch by the tongue. Enjoy sound 
through the skin, and touch by the intellect. The truly powerful are not 
bound by law; laws bind only the weak. 

So, if you are truly powerful, then seize sensations unenjoyed before; it 
is beneath you to taste what others have tasted before! As a sishya goes to a 
guru to acquire the Srutis, and then, having acquired them, dwells on their 
import by obeying their injunctions, even so, regard as your own all that we 
reveal and give you to enjoy, in the past or the future, asleep or awake. 

In creatures of little intelligence, when their minds are distracted and 
dismal, life is still sustained by the continuing function of the senses and 
their objects. All creatures, high and low, having formed innumerable 
purposes and fantasies, when taken by the wish to enjoy these, run to the 
senses and their objects. He who sets out to gratify desires in fantasy 
depending solely on the mind, ignoring the senses and the outer world, 
quickly finds death when his life-breaths are exhausted, like a fire run out of 
fuel. 

It is true that we, the senses, are bound to our respective attributes; 
true, also, that we have no knowledge of one another’s attributes. But 
without us, you can have no perceptions whatever. Without us, no happiness 
can come to you.’””’ 


CANTO 23 


: TT he Brahmana said to his wife, “O blessed lady, there is an old story 

of the institution of the five sacrificing priests. The learned know 

as a tenet that Prana, Apana, Udana, Samana and Vyana are the five 

sacrificing priests.” The Brahmana’s wife said, “But I am convinced that 

there are in nature seven sacrificing priests. Expound to me now the creed 
of the five sacrificing priests.” 

The Brahmana said, “The wind nursed by Prana later takes birth in 
Apana. The wind nursed in Apana then becomes Vyana. Nursed by Vyana, 
the wind develops into Udana. Nursed in Udana, life-breath is generated as 
Samana. Those pure ones, in days of yore, asked the first-born Pitamaha, 
“You must declare who amongst us is foremost, who will the first, the lord, 
of the others.’ 

Brahma said, ‘He upon whose death all the life-breaths die in the 
bodies of living creatures, he upon whose moving they all move, is the 
foremost among you. Go now where you will.’ 

Prana said, ‘Upon my extinction all the life-breaths become extinct in 
the bodies of living creatures. Upon my stirring again, so do they. I am the 
first and the foremost. Behold, I make myself extinct!’ 

Prana then extinguished himself. At this, Samana and Udana said, ‘You 
do not dwell here, pervading all, as we do. You are not the first or foremost 
amongst us, O Prana. Only Apana is under your dominion.’ 

Prana then moved, and to him Apana said, ‘When I become extinct, all 
the life-winds become extinct in the bodies of living creatures. When I 


move, they all stir. I am the first, the foremost. Behold, I extinguish 
myself!’ 

Both Vyana and Udana said to Apana, ‘Apana, you art not the first or 
our lord. Only Prana is under your control.’ 

Apana stirred again. Vyana said, ‘I am the first, the lord of all the life- 
winds. Attend to the reason for this. When I become still, all the life-winds 
do, as well, in the bodies of living creatures. When I stir, they move once 
more. So, I am the first and the lord. Look, I extinguish myself!’ 

Then Vyana stirred no more, at which Prana and Apana and Udana and 
Samana said to him, “You are not the first or the lord of us, Vyana. Samana 
alone is under your dominion.’ 

Vyana stirred again, and Samana said to him, ‘I am the first and the 
lord of you all, for when I am no more, all the life-winds die in the bodies 
of living creatures. When I move, they live again. Behold, I extinguish 
myself!’ 

But then he stirred again. Udana said, ‘I am the font of all the life- 
winds, for when I am still, all the life-breaths are still in the bodies of living 
creatures. When I move they are enlivened again. Look, I extinguish 
myself!’ 

Udana, after making himself still, stirred again. Prana and Apana and 
Samana and Vyana said to him, ‘Udana, you are not the first among us, only 
Vyana is under your dominion.’ 

To them, assembled together, the Lord of creatures, Brahma, said, ‘No 
one among you is superior to the others. You are all endowed with distinct 
and different attributes, and you are all first and lords in your own spheres. 
There is one that is unmoving, and one that is moving; there are five life- 
winds. My own self is the first one of these. That one takes many forms. 
Become friendly to one another, and gratify one another: go in peace. 
Blessings be upon you, and do you five sustain one another!’””’ 


CANTO 24 


: TT he Brahmana continued, “Another antique tale is told in this 
regard, about the conversation between Narada and the Rishi 
Devamata. 

Devamata said, “What is it, verily, that comes first into existence in a 
creature that takes birth? Is it Prana, Apana, Samana, Vyana or Udana?’ 

Narada said, ‘By whatever the creature is created, that is what first 
comes to him. The life-winds exist in pairs, and move transversely, upwards 
and downwards.’ 

Devamata said, ‘By which of the life-winds is a creature produced? 
Which amongst them is foremost? Tell me what the pairs of life-winds are 
which move transversely, upwards and downwards.’ 

Narada said, ‘From sankalpa, the wish, arises kama, pleasure. It also 
arises from sound, from taste and from colour. From semen, united with 
blood, first flows Prana. Upon the semen being modified by Prana, flows 
Apana. Pleasure arises from the semen as well. 

It arises from taste also. This is the form of Udana. Pleasure is 
produced from union. Semen is generated by desire. From desire is 
produced the menstrual flow. In the union of semen and blood, generated by 
Samana and Vyana, the pair that consists of Prana and Apana, enters, 
moving transversely and upwards. Vyana and Samana form a pair that 
moves transversely. 

The Veda teaches that Agni is all deities. The knowledge of Agni arises 
in a Brahmana with intelligence. In the smoke of that fire is the guna called 
Tamas, Darkness. The guna known as Rajas, Passion, is in its ashes. The 


quality Sattva, Goodness, arises from that portion of the fire into which the 
oblation is poured. Those conversant with sacrifices know that Samana and 
Vyana are from the Sattva guna. 

Prana and Apana are portions of the oblation of ghrita, clarified butter. 
Between them is Fire. That is the fine form, the seat of Udana, as the 
Brahmanas know. I will tell you about the pairs of opposites and what is 
distinct from them. Day and Night constitute a pair. Between them is Fire. 
That is the pure seat of Udana, as Brahmanas know. The existent and the 
non-existent form a pair. Between them is Fire. That is the lofty seat of 
Udana, as Brahmanas know. First is Samana, then Vyana, whose function is 
managed through Samana, then, again, Samana comes into operation. Only 
Vyana exists for tranquillity. Tranquillity is eternal Brahman. This is the 
exalted seat of Udana, as Brahmanas know,’ said Narada.’ 


CANTO 25 


¢ TT he Brahmana said, “Listen now, my lovely wife, to the ancient 
story of the Chaturhotra yagna, in its entirety and wonderful 
mystery. The agent, the instrument, the deed and Emancipation—these, 
beautiful one, are the four sacrificing priests by whom the universe is 
enveloped. 

Listen to the assignment of causes regarding this subject. The nose, the 
tongue, the eye, the skin, the ear, the mind and the intellect—these seven 
must be understood as being created by the gunas. 

Smell, taste, colour, touch, sound the fifth, the objects of perception 
and those of the intellect—these seven are caused by karma. He who 
smells, he who eats, he who sees, he who speaks, he who hears, the fifth, he 
who thinks, and he who knows—these seven are caused by the agent. 
Possessed of gunas, these enjoy their own qualities, agreeable or 
disagreeable. As for the Soul, the Atman, it is destitute of attributes or 
gunas. 

These seven are the causes of Emancipation, Nirvana. In those who are 
learned and possessed of true understanding, the qualities, which are in the 
position of deities, consume the oblations, each in its proper place, and in 
accord to what has been ordained. The man without gyana eats diverse 
kinds of food, seized with a sense of mineness. Digesting food for himself, 
he is ruined through the sense of mineness. The eating of food that should 
not be eaten, and the drinking of wine, finish him. He destroys the food he 
eats, and is himself destroyed. 


The man of learning, the gyani, however, possessed of true power, eats 
only to create through the food he consumes. In him, not the minutest 
transgression or sin arises from the food he takes. Whatever is thought of by 
the mind, whatever is uttered by speech, whatever is heard by the ear, 
whatever is seen by the eye, whatever is touched by the skin, whatever is 
smelt by the nose—all constitute oblations of ghrita. They should all, after 
restraining the five senses and the mind, the sixth, be poured into that 
eternal fire of great punya which burns within the body: the Atman, the 
Soul. 

The sacrifice that is Yoga is the yagna that I am engaged in. The font of 
that sacrifice is that which yields the fire of knowledge. The upward life- 
wind Prana is the Stotra of that sacrifice. The downward life-wind Apana is 
its Shastra. The renunciation of everything is the excellent Dakshina of that 
sacrifice. Consciousness, Mind, and Understanding—these, becoming 
Brahma, are its Hotri, Adhwaryu, and Udgatri. The Prashastri, his Shastra, 
is truth. Cessation of separate existence, which is Mukti, is the Dakshina. 

Those who understand Narayana recite some Riks on this subject. To 
the divine Narayana were animals offered in days of yore, then were sung 
some Samanas. On that subject, gentle one, know that there is an authority. 
The divine Narayana is the soul of all.’”’ 


CANTO 26 


¢ TT he Brahmana said, “There is one Ruler. There is no second besides 

Him. He dwells in the heart. I will speak of Him now. Impelled by 

Him, I move as He intends me to, like water along a slope. There is one 

Guru. There is no second besides Him. He dwells in the heart, and I will 
speak of Him now. Be instructed by that Guru. 

They who are always full of wrath are like snakes. There is one 
Kinsman. There is no second besides Him. He dwells in the heart, and I will 
speak of Him now. Instructed by Him, kinsmen have kinsmen, and the 
Sapta Rishis, O son of Pritha, shine in the firmament. 

There is one Dispeller. There is no second besides Him. He dwells in 
the heart, and I will speak of Him now. Having lived with that Guru, 
through dharma, Sakra attained to sovereignty over all the worlds. There is 
one Enemy. There is no second besides Him. He dwells in the heart, and I 
will speak of Him now. Taught by that Guru, all Nagas in the world are 
always full of animosity. In this regard, the Purana tells of the instruction of 
the Nagas, the Devas, the Asuras and the Rishis by the Lord of all creatures. 

Seated around the Lord of all creatures, the Devas and the Rishis, the 
Nagas and the Asuras asked him, ‘Tell us what is most beneficial to us all.’ 
The Holy One spoke just one word to them: AUM, which is the Brahman in 
a single syllable. Upon this, they scattered in various directions. Amongst 
those who ran, in the Nagas there naturally arose the disposition to sting, to 
bite. In the naturally ostentatious Asuras arose pride. The Devas betook 
themselves to beneficence, and the great Rishis to self-restraint. 


Though it was one Teacher to whom they went, and one Word they 
received as instruction, the Nagas, the Devas, the Rishis and the Danavas all 
had inherently different dispositions. It is that One who hears Himself when 
speaking, and apprehends what is said. Again, it is that heard from Him 
when He speaks. There is no second preceptor. All actions, karma, flow 
later in obedience to that One; and within the heart, the Teacher, the 
Listener, the Knower and the Enemy, all are pleased. 

By sinning in the world it is He who becomes a sinner. Through 
auspicious karma in the world, it is He who becomes righteous. It is He 
who becomes wayward, degenerate, by becoming addicted to the pleasures 
of the senses, impelled by desire. It is He who becomes a brahmacharin, by 
devoting himself to conquering his senses. It is He, again, who relinquishes 
all tapasya and karma, and takes refuge in Brahman alone. 

By moving in the world, yet identifying himself all the while with 
Brahman, he becomes a Brahmacharin. Brahman is his fuel; Brahman is his 
fire; Brahman is his origin; Brahman is his water; Brahman is his preceptor: 
he is rapt in Brahman. Brahmacharya is ever subtle, as understood by the 
wise. Having understood it, they betook themselves to it, instructed by the 
Kshetrajna, the Knower!””’ 


CANTO 27 


: TT he Brahmana said, “I have entered the great forest of Brahman, 
having crossed that impassable fastness of Samsara, which has 
purposes for its flies and mosquitoes, grief and joy for its cold and heat, 
heedlessness for its blinding darkness, cupidity and diseases for its reptiles, 
wealth for its one danger on the road, and lust and wrath for its robbers.” 

The Brahmana’s wife said, “Where is that foremost forest, O you of 
profound wisdom? What are its trees, its rivers, its mountains and hills? 
How far is that forest?” The Brahmana said, “There exists nothing separate 
from it; there is nothing more blissful; nothing more awesome; nothing 
smaller; nothing vaster; nothing as minute. No joy anywhere can resemble 
its bliss. Regenerate ones, entering into it, at once transcend both joy and 
sorrow. They never again go in fear of any creature, nor does any creature 
fear them. 

In that forest are seven great trees, seven fruits and seven guests. There 
are seven hermitages, seven forms of dhyana and seven kinds of initiation. 
Even so is that beginningless, endless forest. 

The trees which fill that forest yield most excellent flowers, and fruits 
of five colours. These are of two kinds, besides. The trees which fill that 
forest yield flowers and fruits that are fragrant and of two colours. The trees 
which fill that forest produce flowers and fruits that are redolent and of one 
colour. The two trees that fill that forest give forth many flowers and fruits, 
besides, which are of unmanifest colours. There is one fire here, of a pure 
mind, sattvik, of the true Brahmana. The five senses are its fuel. The seven 
forms of Mukti flowing from them are the seven forms of Initiation. The 


gunas are the fruit, and the guests eat those fruits. There, in diverse places, 
the greatest Rishis accept hospitality. When, after being worshipped, they 
die, another forest shines forth. 

In that forest, Intelligence is the tree; Emancipation is the fruit; 
Tranquillity is its shade. It has Knowledge for its shelter, Contentment for 
its water, and the Kshetrajna is its sun. Its end cannot be known, up, down, 
or around. Seven females always dwell there, with faces turned down, 
effulgent and endowed with the seeds of generation. They drain all the 
different vasanas from every creature, even as inconstancy does truth. 

In that forest dwell, and from it emerge, the seven Rishis who are 
crowned with ascetic success, among whom Vasishta is the first. Glory, 
refulgence, greatness, enlightenment, victory, perfection and energy, these 
seven always follow them as rays do the sun. 

Hills and mountains also exist there, all gathered together; and rivers 
and streams, bearing waters in their course, waters born of Brahman. And 
there is also a confluence of rivers in a secluded spot, for sacrifice. From 
there, those that are contented with their own souls go forth to the 
Grandsire. Those whose desires have been reduced, whose wishes have 
been directed to the highest vratas, and whose sins have burnt by tapasya, 
subsume themselves into their souls, attain to Brahman. 

Those who know the forest of knowledge give praise to peace. Always 
keeping that forest in view, so as not to lose courage, they are born. Such is 
that sacred forest, which true Brahmanas understand, that they live their 
lives, naturally, in accord with the highest dharma, as ordained by the 
Kshetrajna, the indwelling, pervasive Knower.””’ 


CANTO 28 


¢ T he Brahmana said, “I do not smell scents. I do not taste tastes. I do 

not see colours. I do not feel touch. I do not hear all the diverse 

sounds. Nor do I entertain purposes of any kind. It is Nature, Prakriti, which 

desires such objects of the senses as are pleasant; it is Nature, too, which 

abhors such objects as are unpleasant. Desire and aversion spring from 

Nature, like the upward and the downward life-winds, when souls have 
entered animate bodies. 

Distinct from them are the others; in these are eternal dispositions; 
they, the Yogins, behold just the Soul of all creatures in the body. Dwelling 
in that, I am never attached to anything, through desire or wrath, through 
decrepitude and death. Having no desire for any object of pleasure, nor 
aversion towards any evil, my nature remains untainted, even as a drop of 
water resting on a lotus-leaf does not wet it. To that constant, eternal Self 
which witnesses diverse nature, all outward things are inconstant 
possessions. Though actions are performed, yet the assemblage of 
enjoyments does not attach itself to the Yogi, even as rays of the sun do not 
attach to the sky. 

An ancient story of a discourse between an Adhwaryu and a Yati is told 
in this regard. Do you listen to it, glorious lady. Seeing an animal sprinkled 
with water at a sacrificial ceremony, a Yati said in censure to the Adhwaryu 
who sat there, ‘This is destruction of life!’ The Adhwaryu replied, “This 
goat will not be destroyed. The yagnapasu meets with great good, if what 
the Vedas say on this matter is true. The part of this animal that is of earth 
will go to earth. That part of it that is born of water will enter into water. 


His eyes will enter the sun; his ears will enter the different points of the 
horizon; his life-winds will enter the sky. I who adhere to the scriptures 
incur no sin by assisting at the sacrifice of this animal.’ 

The Yati said, ‘If you see such good to the goat in disintegrating his 
life-winds, then this sacrifice is for the goat. What need have you for it? Let 
the brother, father, mother and friend of the goat give you their approval for 
its slaughter. Take him to them and seek their opinion. This animal is 
particularly dependent, and you must seek the consent of those upon whom 
he depends. Only when you have it will the sacrifice become fit for 
consideration. 

I believe that the life-winds of this goat have returned to their sources. 
Only the inanimate body remains behind. For those who seek felicity 
through the lifeless body of a yagnapasu, which is comparable to fuel, the 
fuel of sacrifice is, after all, the animal himself. Abstaining from cruelty is 
the foremost of all duties: this is what the ancients have taught. If we deny 
this, then every manner of violence and sin becomes acceptable. We must 
rely on what we directly perceive and nothing more.’ 

The Adhwaryu said, “You enjoy fragrances, which belong to the earth. 
You enjoy tastes, which belong to water. You see colours, which belong to 
light. You have sensations of touch, which belong to the wind. You hear 
sounds that have their origin in space. You think thoughts with the mind. 
You opine that all these have life. You do not, then, abstain from taking life. 
In truth, then, you are constantly engaged in slaughter. I say that there can 
be no act without killing of one kind or other. What think you of that, O 
regenerate one.’ 

The Yati said, ‘The immortal and the mortal constitute the twin 
manifestation of the soul. Of these the immortal has always existed and 
always shall. The mortal never truly exists. The life-breath, the tongue, the 
mind, the quality of goodness, along with passion, all exist. The Atman is 
above and beyond these forms and hence is without duality or hope. 

As for one who is liberated from these fleeting, merely apparent 
objects, who transcends all the pairs of opposites, who does not cherish any 
expectation, who is alike in and to all creatures, who is free from the idea of 
mineness, who has subdued himself, and is released from all his 
surroundings —for him no fear exists from any source!’ 

The Adhwaryu said, “O best of intelligent men, one should indeed seek 
the company of the good! Listening to you, my understanding is 


illuminated. Illustrious one, I come to you, believing you to be a god, and I 
still say that I commit no sin by performing these rites with the help of holy 
mantras!’ 

The Brahmana continued, “The Yati remained silent after this. The 
Adhwaryu proceeded with his great sacrifice, but now freed from delusion. 
True Brahmanas understand Moksha, which is exceedingly subtle, and, 
having understood it, they live directed by the Kshetrajna, that Seer and 
witness of all things.” 


CANTO 29 


: T he Brahmana said to his wife, “Another ancient story tells of a 

conversation between Kartavirya and the Ocean. There was a king 

called Kartavirya-Arjuna, endowed with a thousand arms. With his bow he 

conquered the Earth, extending to the shores of the ocean. Once, as he was 

walking along the seashore, proud of his might, he showered hundreds of 
arrows into its awesome body of waters. 

The Ocean, bowing down to him, pleaded, with folded hands, ‘Do not 
shoot your shafts at me, O Kshatriya! Your mighty missiles kill many 
creatures who dwell in me, O Purushavyaghra. Tell me what I can do for 
you to grant them safety and life.’ 

Arjuna said, ‘If there is any bowman who is my equal and would stand 
against me in battle, name him to me!’ The Ocean said, ‘If you have heard 
of the Maharishi Jamadagni, O king, I say to you that his son is fit to 
receive you as a guest.’ Kartavirya, inflamed, hastened to the asrama, where 
he found Rama himself. With his kinsmen, O lotus-eyed one, he began to 
create havoc around the Mahatman, infuriating him, until Rama’s 
immeasurable tejas blazed forth and consumed Kartavirya’s troops, O lotus- 
eyed one. Seizing his battle-axe, Rama flew at the thousand-armed 
Kshatriya and lopped off his arms as he would the branches of a great tree. 
Seeing Kartavirya slain and prostrate on the earth, his kinsmen, weapons in 
hand, rushed from every side at Parasurama, who had sat down again in 
dhyana. Rama once more took up his bow, leapt onto his chariot, and with 
storms of arrows swiftly chastened the enemy. Terrified by Jamadagni’s son, 


some of the Kshatriyas fled into mountain-fastnesses, like deer hunted by a 
lion. 

Of these, the sons of those who could no longer perform the svadharma 
of Kshatriyas, through fear of Rama became Vrishalas, for they could find 
no Brahmanas to be their priests. In this way, the Dravidas, Abhiras and 
Pundras, together with the Savaras, became Vrishalas, for they fell away 
from the Kshatriya dharma they were born into but could no longer uphold. 

Jamadagni’s ferocious son returned, again and again, to massacre the 
Kshatriyas begotten by Brahmanas upon the Kshatriya women who had lost 
their heroic princes. One and twenty times he slaughtered them all until a 
bodiless, heavenly voice heard by all, an Asariri, said to him sweetly, ‘O 
Rama, Rama, desist! What punya do you see in butchering these inferior 
Kshatriyas over and over?’ 

In this way, O blessed wife of mine, his grandsires, led by Richika, 
addressed that Mahatman, calling him to stop his carnage of Kshatriyas. But 
Rama could not forgive the killing of his father Jamadagni, and he said to 
his Pitris, the greatest Rishis, ‘It does not become you to forbid me.’ The 
Pitris said, ‘Best of victors, it does not become you to kill these inferior 
Kshatriyas. It is not right for you, being a Brahmana, to slay these kings.’ 


CANTO 30 


T he Pitris went on, ‘An old story is told in this regard. Having heard it, 

you must do as it says, O Dvijottama. There was once a Rajarishi 
called Alarka, blessed with the most austere tapasya, conversant with 
dharma and truthful in speech, a great soul, steadfast in his vows. Having 
conquered with his bow the whole Earth extending to the seas, he set his 
mind to that which is abstruse, of the spirit. Sitting under a tree, he turned 
his thoughts away from his great feats and towards that which is sukshma, 
subtle. 

Alarka said, “Only by mastering the mind does one’s conquest 
becomes permanent. Even if surrounded by enemies, from now I shall aim 
my arrows inwards. The mind is unsteady; it sets all mortals to outward 
accomplishment. Therefore I shall aim my sharp shafts at the mind.” The 
mind said, “These arrows you have, O Alarka, will never pierce me 
through. They will pierce only your own marmas, your vital organs; and, 
having been pierced, you will die. Do you look for other arrows with which 
to destroy me.” 

Reflecting on this, Alarka said, “Inhaling many perfumes, the nose only 
hankers ever more after them. I shall aim whetted arrows at the nose.” The 
nose said, “These arrows will never pass through me, O Alarka. They will 
pierce only your own vital parts, and you will die. Do you look for other 
arrows with which to destroy me.” 

Reflecting on this, Alarka said, “The tongue, enjoying savoury tastes, 
only hankers further after them. I shall aim whetted shafts at the tongue.” 
The tongue said, “These arrows, O Alarka, will not pierce me. They will 


only pierce your own vital parts and you will die. Do you look for other 
arrows with which to kill me.” 

Reflecting on this, Alarka said, “Touching diverse things, the skin only 
hankers further after them. I will flay the skin with arrows flighted with the 
feathers of the kanka.” The skin said, “These arrows will not, O Alarka, 
pierce me. They will pierce your own vital parts, and you will die. Do you 
look for other arrows with which to destroy me.” 

Reflecting on this, Alarka said, “Hearing different sounds, the ear only 
hankers after them ever more. I will loose whetted barbs at the ear.” The ear 
said, “These arrows will not, O Alarka, pass through me. They will only 
pierce your own vital parts, and you will die. Do you then look for other 
arrows with which to kill me.” 

Hearing these words and reflecting upon them, Alarka said, “Seeing 
many colours, the eye hankers after them only ever more. Hence, I will put 
out the eye with my sharpest arrows.” The eye said. “These arrows will not, 
O Alarka, kill me at all. They will pierce only your own vital parts, and you 
will die. Do you look for other arrows with which to destroy me!” 

Reflecting upon these words, Alarka said, “The intellect forms many 
conclusions, using reason. I will loose whetted arrows at the intellect.” The 
intellect said, “These arrows will not, O Alarka, pierce me at all. They will 
only pierce your vital parts, and you will die. Do you look for other arrows 
with which to kill me!” 

Alarka set himself immediately in that very place, to perform severe 
penance, but even through that stern tapasya did not acquire weapons with 
which to consume those seven. The Dvijottama, most intelligent of men, 
pondered for a long time, but failed to find anything better than Yoga. 
Concentrating his mind one-pointedly on a single object, he remained 
perfectly still, absorbed in Yoga. At long last he slew all seven senses with a 
single astra of his spirit, naturally and effortlessly, by entering into the 
highest communion with his Atman. 

Filled with wonder, that Rajarishi then sang this sloka: ‘Alas that I 
wasted so much time on outward conquests! Alas that I ever courted the 
pleasures of sovereignty! Only now have I learnt that there is no joy, no 
bliss or happiness greater than Yoga!’ 

O Rama, Bhargava, you too must understand this now. Stop your 
slaughter, for it will bring you no lasting felicity, and set yourself instead to 
the most austere tapasya. Only then will you find true goodness.’ Thus 


addressed by his manes, Jamadagni’s son ceased his bloodletting, practised 
the most austere penances and attained Moksha, the final destination and 
the most difficult to achieve.”’ 


CANTO 31 


¢ T he Brahmana said, “There are three enemies in the world, said to 
be nine-fold in terms of their attributes: These are three Gunas, 
each with three attributes. Exultation, satisfaction and joy are the qualities 
belonging to Sattva, Goodness. Avarice, anger and aversion are of Rajas, 
Passion. Lassitude, procrastination and delusion belong to Tamas, Darkness. 
Cutting these down with subtle arrow-storms, the man of intelligence, free 
from procrastination, possessed of a tranquil soul, and with his own senses 
under subjection, then ventures to vanquish others. 

In this regard, those who know about the great and ancient cycles of 
time, relate some slokas sung by King Ambarisa, who had indeed acquired 
a tranquil soul. When diverse kinds of sin were in the ascendant, and when 
the righteous were afflicted, Ambarisa of great fame put forth his strength to 
assume sovereignty. Subduing his own faults and worshipping the 
righteous, he attained to great success and sang these slokas: 

‘I have subdued many faults. I have vanquished all foes. But there is 
one, the greatest vice, desire, which deserves to be destroyed but which I 
have not vanquished! Controlled by desire, this Jiva fails to attain to 
freedom. Afflicted by desire, one falls into dark ditches without knowing it. 
Ruled by desire, one indulges in forbidden deeds. 

From greed arises desire. From desire flows anxiety. Cut off, O cut off, 
that greed with sharp-edged swords. The man who succumbs to desire 
acquires many traits that are of Passion. Then he falls into Darkness, and is 
born repeatedly, with the bonds of body united, and is compelled to action. 


Upon expiring, his bodily elements scattering, he meets with death, which 
is caused by birth itself. 

Understanding this, and subduing greed by intelligence, one’s only 
desire should be for sovereignty over one’s soul. This is true sovereignty; 
there is none other. The Atman, properly understood, is the king.’ So said 
the famed King Ambarisa on the subject of sovereignty —that monarch who 
did indeed slay the one supreme fault, greed.’”’ 


CANTO 32 


: T he Brahmana said, “My wife, another tale from antiquity is told 

about a conversation between a certain Brahmana and King 

Janaka. Once, intending to punish with exile a Brahmana found guilty of 

some offence, King Janaka said to him, ‘You will no more dwell within my 
dominions.’ 

The Brahmana replied to that best of kings, “Tell me, O King, what the 
boundaries are of your kingdom. I am ready to dwell in the dominions of 
another king. Verily, I wish to obey your command, O Bhumipala, in accord 
with the Shastras.’ 

The king of immeasurable tejas said not a word in reply to the 
celebrated Brahmana, but only heaved hot sighs repeatedly. Like the planet 
Rahu swallowing the Sun, a darkness of the intellect had suddenly 
overwhelmed him, and he sat plunged in thought. When after a short while 
the cloud of oblivion passed and the king was comforted, he spoke to the 
Brahmana. 

Janaka said, ‘Although a vast and peopled domain is subject to me 
within this my ancestral kingdom, yet I have failed to find it. I searched 
Mithila for it. When I failed to find it in Mithila, I sought it among my own 
children. When I failed to find it even there, a dark shadow, a black stupor, 
seized my mind. When it passed, the light of intelligence returned to me. 
Then I thought, either I have no dominion, or everything is my dominion. 
Either even this body is not mine, or the whole Earth is mine. At the same 
time, O Dvijottama, I think that it is as much mine as it belongs to others. 


Do you, therefore, dwell here as long as you choose, and do you enjoy 
whatever is here as long as you please.’ 

The Brahmana said, “When you have such a vast and peopled ancestral 
kingdom, tell me, how have you rid yourself of the notion of possession, of 
mine-ness? And how, too, have you concluded that nothing and all things, 
belong to you and constitute your kingdom?’ 

Janaka said, ‘I have understood that all things are mortal and fleeting, 
Hence, I do not find anything that may be called mine. Meditating upon 
what the Veda says about possession, in truth, I could find nothing at all 
which I could call my own. Even thus did I rid myself of the notion of 
mine-ness. 

Hark now to the insight by which I concluded that nothing, but also 
everything, is mine, and that my kingdom consists of all things. I have no 
desire to possess the fragrances my nose scents; thus conquered, through 
relinquishment by me, all the earth is mine, and always subject to me. 

I do not desire for myself the tastes that dwell upon my tongue; thus, I 
conquered water, and that element is mine forever. I do not desire for 
myself the colours or the reflections in my eyes; thus, light, conquered, 
became forever mine. I do not desire for myself the sensations of touch 
upon my skin; thus, conquering wind, I make that element forever mine. I 
do not desire for myself the sounds that are in my ear; vanquishing sound, 
the very realm of sound becomes mine forever. I do not desire for myself 
the mind that is always in my mind. Thus slaying Mind, I become its lord 
forever. Everything that I do is for the Devas, the Pitris, the Bhutas and 
Sadasyas.’ 

The Brahmana, smiling, now said to Janaka, ‘Know that I am Dharma, 
who have come here today to test you. You are verily the One who sets in 
motion this wheel that never turns back, this Chakra which has Goodness 
for its rim, Brahman for its hub, and Gyana for its spokes!’””’ 


CANTO 33 


¢ TT he Brahmana said to his wife, “My gentle one, I do not dwell or 
move in the world in the manner you have censured by virtue of 
your own understanding. I am a Brahmana possessed of Vedic gyana; I am 
emancipated, a Jivanmukta. I am a vanaprastha; I observe the dharma of a 
grihasta; I keep vratas. I am not what you see in me as good or bad. I 
pervade everything in this universe. Whatever creatures exist in the world, 
mobile or unmoving, know that I am the destroyer of them all, even as fire 
is the destroyer of all kinds of wood. 

Sovereignty over Bhumi and Swarga, on one hand, and Knowledge of 
the Self, on the other: my wealth is this, Atmagyana. This is the one path 
for Brahmanas, an understanding they bring to grihas or to asramas, to 
gurukulas or to sannyasa. Whatever be their numerous and distinct outward 
symbols, they worship only one knowledge. Whatever rules they keep, or 
ways of life they follow, those who have discovered the understanding 
which has peace and transcendent bliss for its essence attain to the Single 
Being, even as many rivers flow into the ocean. 

The path can be traversed only by using the intellect and the 
understanding, not the body. The body is bound to action, and actions have 
beginnings and ends. Hence, blessed wife, you need have no apprehensions 
about the hereafter. My heart is intent on the true Brahman, and it is into my 
soul that you will come.”’ 


CANTO 34 


¢ TT he Brahmana’s wife said, “Small is my intelligence, and confused, 

and uncleansed my soul: I cannot comprehend what you say. Tell 

me simply how one such as I might come to the knowledge of which you 
speak. Tell me of the source from which this knowledge flows.” 

The Brahmana said, “Know that the intelligence devoted to Brahman is 
the lower arani fire-stick; the preceptor is the upper arani twig; tapasya and 
the shastras create the friction. From this springs the fire of knowledge.” 

The Brahmana’s wife said, “Where is the symbol of Brahman, which is 
called Kshetrajna, described, so that it might be seized?” 

The Brahmana said, “He is without symbols, and without attributes. 
Nothing exists that may be regarded as His cause. But I will tell you how or 
not He can be sensed and found, even as bees do flowers. 

The means to discover Him is to first cleanse the understanding 
through karma. Those whose intellects have not been so cleansed, through 
their own ignorance invest the Brahman with knowledge and other 
attributes. The truth is that nowhere is it laid down that this or that should 
be done or not in order to achieve Mukti. 

Knowledge of the Soul arises only in him who sees and hears. Hence, 
in this world one should experience and understand as many parts, 
unmanifest and manifest, and past count, as one is capable of 
comprehending. Indeed, one should comprehend diverse objects of diverse 
import, and all objects of direct perception. Then, from the long practice of 
contemplation and self-restraint, there naturally arises the direct, ineffable 
knowledge of that above which nothing exists, and absorption into it.” 


Then, through her husband’s grace, true understanding came to his wife 
and, upon the destruction of her illusions, her mind became that which is 
eternal and transcendent.’ 

Arjuna says, ‘Where is that Brahmana’s wife, O Krishna, and where is 
that greatest of Brahmanas, both of whom attained Mukti? Tell me about 
them, O you of unfading glory.’ 

The blessed Lord says, “Know that my mind is the Brahmana, and that 
my intellect is the Brahmana’s wife. He whom I spoke of as Kshetrajna, the 
Knower of the field of karma, why, that is me, O Dhananjaya!’” 


CANTO 35 


= A rjuna says, ‘Expound to me the Brahman—that which is the 
highest object of knowledge. Through your grace, my mind is 
delighted with these subtle disquisitions..’ 

Krishna says, “The old story of the discourse between a guru and his 
sishya is told on the subject of Brahman. Once upon a time, O scorcher of 
foes, an intelligent disciple asked a certain Brahmana of rigid vows, who 
was his guru, as he sat at his ease, “What is the highest good, O my master? 
Fervently wanting to attain to that which constitutes the highest good, I 
throw myself at your feet, Holy One. Most learned Brahmana, bowing my 
head, I beg you to explain to me what I ask.” 

To that disciple, Partha, his guru replied, “Dvija, I shall explain to you 
everything about which you may have doubts.” Listen, O Kurusottama, you 
of great intelligence, to what he said. 

That ever-devoted sishya said, with folded hands, “Where did I come 
from? Where did you come from? Explain that which is the highest truth. 
From what source have all creatures, mobile and unmoving, sprung? By 
what do creatures live? What is the limit of their life? What is truth? What 
is penance, O learned Brahmana? What do the good and the wise call the 
gunas, the attributes? What paths are deemed auspicious? What is 
happiness? What is sin? Holy One of excellent vows, I beseech you to 
answer these questions exhaustively and accurately. Who else is there in 
this world to resolve them? Answer me, O greatest of all knowers of 
dharma. I burn to know, and you are celebrated through all the worlds as a 
master of the dharma of Mukti. There is no one more competent to remove 


every kind of doubt. Terrified by samsara, I have grown anxious to attain 
Mukti.” 

Parantapa, Kurusottama, to that disciple who humbly sought 
instruction, who was, besides devotion to his preceptor, possessed of 
serenity and self-restraint, who always conducted himself in a manner 
agreeable to his instructor and so constantly attended his master as to have 
become almost his shadow, for the sake of that follower who led the life of 
a Yati and Brahmacharin, O Partha, his wise guru, keeper of the sternest 
vratas, duly answered all his questions. 

The guru said, “All this was declared in ancient days by Brahma 
himself. Lauded and practised by the greatest of Rishis, and depending on 
knowledge of the Vedas, it involves considering what constitutes the Real 
Entity. We regard knowledge to be the highest goal, and renunciation as the 
best penance. He who knows with certainty the true object of gyana, the 
unchanging and eternal Atman abiding in all creatures, which is without 
beginning, end or decay, succeeds in going wherever he wishes and comes 
to be regarded as supreme. 

That learned man who sees all things dwelling in one place and their 
departure as well, and who sees unity in multifarious creation, succeeds in 
freeing himself from misery. He who does not covet anything or cherish the 
least notion of possession, although living in this world, comes to be 
revered as one with Brahman. He who knows the truth about the qualities of 
Pradhana, primordial Nature, who knows the creation of all existence, who 
is divested of the notion of mine-ness and is without pride, succeeds, 
beyond doubt, in emancipating himself. 

Understanding fully that Great Tree which has the unmanifest for its 
seed and sprout, the intellect for its trunk, higher consciousness of the self 
for its branches, the senses for the cells whence its twigs issue, the five 
great elements for its flower-buds, and the gross elements for its smaller 
boughs; which is eternal, ever rich with leaves and flowers; upon which all 
existence depends—discerning this, one severs all illusion with the sword 
of knowledge, attains to immortality and casts off birth and death. 

O you of great wisdom, let me tell you about the past, present and 
future, Dharma, Artha and Kama, all well known to conclaves of Siddhas, 
which pertain to remote and fathomless cycles of time, and which are, 
indeed, eternal. These constitute what is called Sanatana Dharma, the 


highest good. Understanding them in this world, men of wisdom attain to 
success. 

In days of old, the Rishis Brihaspati and Bharadwaja, Gautama and 
Bhargava, Vasishta and Kashyapa, Viswamitra and Atri, met together in 
order to question and illumine one another. They came together having 
traversed every worldly path, and after they had exhausted the karma that 
each of them had done. 

Setting the sage son of Angiras at their head, they journeyed to 
Brahmaloka, where they saw the resplendent Pitamaha, perfectly cleansed 
of all sin. Bowing their heads to that Mahatman seated at his ease, the great 
Rishis, with profound humility, asked him this grave question regarding the 
highest good. 

‘How should a good man conduct himself? How could one be released 
from sin? What paths are auspicious? What is truth, and what is sin? By 
what deeds are the two paths, northern and southern, obtained? What is 
destruction? What is Emancipation? What is birth and what is death of all 
things and beings that exist?’ 

I will tell you, O sishya, what the Pitamaha said to them, in accord with 
the Shastras. Do you attend to what I say. Brahma said, ‘It is from Truth 
that all creatures, mobile and immobile, have been born. They live by the 
penance of karma. Understand this, O you of excellent vows. In 
consequence of their own actions they live, transcending their own origin. 
For Truth, when united with gunas, becomes possessed of five attributes. 

Brahman is Truth. Tapasya is Truth. Prajapati is Truth. It is from Truth 
that all creatures have sprung. Truth is the universe of being. It is refuge in 
Truth that is sought by Brahmanas, who are always devoted to Yoga, who 
have transcended anger and sorrow, and who always regard Dharma as the 
high path. 

I will tell you of these Brahmanas who are restrained by one another, 
who possess gyana, and who belong to the four varnasramas. The wise say 
that Dharma is one, albeit having four parts. Dvijas, I will tell you about the 
auspicious path which leads to felicity. Men of wisdom have always walked 
that path in order to find union and identity with Brahman. This is the 
highest path and exceedingly difficult to comprehend. Hear about it, in 
every particular, you most blessed ones, and attend to what is the ultimate 
goal and rest. 


The first asrama along the eternal path is brahmacharya; the second is 
grihasta; then comes vanaprastha, and finally sannyasa, which fetches the 
aspirant to the Adhyatma. Light, Akasa, the Sun, Wind, Indra and Prajapati 
—one sees these as long as one does not attain to Adhyatma. 

Listen to how you can attain to final Adhyatma, and Mukti. But first 
understand the other asramas. The vanaprastha dwells in the forest, 
subsisting upon fruits and roots and, later, air; this asrama is prescribed for 
the three twice-born varnas. The grihastasrama is ordained for all the 
varnas. Those who know say that Dharma has Faith for its main component. 
These are the paths that lead to the Gods, and the good and wise tread them 
through their karma. These paths are the causeways of piety. One of 
unwavering vratas, who faithfully follows any of these asramas, becomes 
enlightened and in time understands the creation and destruction of all 
creatures. 

Hear now about the essences comprising all created things and beings. 
The Paramatman, the unmanifest, ego, the ten and one organs of knowledge 
and action, the five mahabhutas, great elements, the specific characteristics 
of the five elements—these constitute eternal creation. The number of these 
attributes is four and twenty, and one more. 

The man of wisdom, who understands the creation and destruction of 
all these attributes, that man among all creatures is never deluded. He who 
understands properly the elements, the qualities, the deities, succeeds in 
cleansing himself of all sin. Freed from all bonds, such a man enjoys every 
realm of spotless purity.’” 


CANTO 36 


¢ ‘RB rahma said, “That which is unmanifest, which is indistinct, all- 

pervading, everlasting, immutable, is known as the city of nine 
gates, possessed of the three gunas, consisting of the five elements, and 
encompassed by the eleven, including the distinguishing mind, with 
Understanding for its ruler. 

The three Nadis in it, the Gunas, are its constant support; these are 
constant: Tamas, Rajas and Sattva: darkness, passion and purity. They are 
coupled with one another; they exist, depending on one another; they take 
refuge in one another, follow one another, and are fused with one another. 

The five principal elements, the Panchamahabhutas, are characterized 
by these three gunas. Sattva is equal to Tamas, and Tamas to Rajas; and 
Rajas is equal to Sattva, as well. Where Darkness is restrained, Passion is 
seen to flow; where Passion is restrained, Goodness is seen to flow. All 
three prevail from time to time over one another. 

Tamas has the night, or obscurity, for its essence. Also known as 
delusion, it has three characteristics. Sin characterizes Tamas, and the dark 
guna is always present in all sin. Darkness is the essence of Tamas, and it 
appears in conjunction with the other gunas. Restless activity is the essence 
of Rajas, which makes for ceaseless doing, when it prevails over the other 
two Gunas. Splendour, lightness and faith—these are the essence, which is 
of light, of Sattva, which the good and the wise hold in regard. Listen while 
I declare to you the true nature of the three Gunas, individually and 
together, and understand them well. 


Complete delusion, ignorance; illiberality, indecisiveness, sleep, 
haughtiness, fear, greed, grief, the censure of good deeds, loss of memory; 
unlikeness of judgment, lack of faith, violation of all norms of conduct, 
want of discrimination, blindness in thought and action, vileness of 
behaviour, boastful assertions of achievement when there has been no 
performance at all, presumption of knowledge in actual ignorance, hostility, 
an evil disposition, foolish reasoning, crookedness, an incapacity for 
friendship, all-round wickedness, heedlessness, inertia, stubborn 
inflexibility, lassitude and stupor, lack of self-control, degeneracy —all these 
are of dark Tamas. 

Whatever other states of mind exist in the world and are associated 
with delusion, all pertain to Tamas. Frequently speaking ill of other people, 
mocking the Devas and Brahmanas, illiberality, vanity, delusion, wrath, an 
unforgiving nature, hostility towards all creatures: these, too, are 
characteristics of Darkness. Undertakings that are without merit, from being 
vain and useless; gifts which are without value, the giver being unworthy, 
the time being inappropriate, the gift itself being impure; gluttony —these 
also belong to Darkness. 

Slanderous talk, vanity, lack of forgiveness and faith, and general 
animosity, are all characteristics of Darkness. All men in this world who are 
marked by these and other similar faults, and who endlessly flout and 
violate the restraints laid down by the Shastras, are regarded as belonging to 
Tamas, the Guna of Darkness. 

Hear from me now of the wombs into which men of darkness and sin 
are forced to take birth. Ordained to hell, they devolve and plunge down 
into being born in brute species. They become immobile things, or animals, 
or beasts of burden; carnivores, or snakes, or worms, insects and birds; 
Oviparous creatures, or quadrupeds of diverse kinds; lunatics, deaf or dumb 
humans, or men afflicted by dreadful maladies and looked upon as unclean. 
These men of evil, always evincing the signs of their dire sins, plunge deep 
into darkness, into hellish existence. Their course of rebirths is forever 
downward. In Tamas they sink into deeper, denser darkness. 

There can be redemption even for these, but hear now the means 
whereby they can rise again towards light and even attain to the realms that 
exist for men of pious deeds. Sinners who are born into bestial species 
succeed in redeeming themselves by lingering around the homas and 
yagnas of true Brahmanas devoted to their svadharma, great souls who wish 


for the weal of all creatures. Sinful ones who witness the yagnas of such 
Brahmanas will succeed, verily, in becoming like those Brahmanas 
themselves. Indeed, they will find Swarga for themselves, as the Vedas have 
declared. 

Born into lower species, growing old and dying after serving their lives 
as creatures less than human, thus paying for their old sins, they are born 
into humankind again, likely into the lowest orders. Coming to sinful births 
and becoming Chandalas or men who are devoid of hearing or speech, they 
attain to higher and higher castes, over many births, one after another 
successively, transcending the Sudra varna, and other consequences of old 
tamasic deeds whose traces abide in the course of its migrations through 
birth and death. 

Attachment to the objects of desire is delusion. Here, even Rishis and 
Munis and Devas become misguided, plunging madly after pleasure. 
Darkness, deception, the great delusion, the great obscurity called wrath, 
and then death, that blinding oblivion—these are the five great afflictions. 
As for wrath, that is the great darkness, not aversion or hatred as is 
sometimes told. 

Learned Dvijas, I have now told you about the colour, the source and 
the nature of Tamas. Who is there that truly understands it? Who truly sees 
it? Why, that is the very essence of the Dark Guna: seeing as reality that 
which is far from real. Yes, I have described Tamas to you, in various ways, 
its higher and lower forms. And he who is always aware of the nature of 
Tamas will surely one day free himself from everything that belongs to 
Darkness.”” 


CANTO 37 


a 8 rahma said, “Best of beings, hear now from me about Rayjas, 
which is the Guna of Passion. 

Most blessed ones, these are the characteristics of Rajas: injuring 
others, beauty, striving, pleasure and pain, cold and heat, lordship and 
power, war, peace, disputations, dissatisfaction, endurance, might, valour, 
pride, wrath, exertion, confrontations, jealousy, desire, malice, battle, the 
sense of mine and mine-ness, protection of others, slaughter, bonds, 
affliction, buying and selling, dissevering, piercing the armour of enemies, 
spilling blood, fierceness, cruelty, vilifying, pointing out the faults of others, 
being immersed in worldly affairs, anxiety, animosity, reviling others, false 
speech, false or vain gifts, hesitancy and doubt, boastfulness, praise and 
censure, laudation, prowess, defiance, attendance on the sick and the weak, 
obedience to the commands of preceptors and parents, service or 
ministrations, harbouring thirst and desire, cleverness and adroitness of 
conduct, strategy, heedlessness, contumely, possessions, and diverse 
embellishments and adornments which prevail in the world among men, 
women, animals, inanimate things, houses, grief, incredulousness, vows and 
regulations, actions with the expectation of their fruits, diverse deeds of 
public charity, the rites of Swaha salutations, the rituals of Swadha and 
Vashat, officiating at the sacrifices of others, imparting instruction, 
performance of yagnas, study, the making of gifts, acceptance of gifts, rites 
of expiation, other auspicious deeds, the wish to win, affection engendered 
by the merits of a thing or person, treachery, deception, disrespect and 
respect, theft, killing, secrecy and concealment, vexation, wakefulness, 


ostentation, haughtiness, attachment, devotion, contentment, exultation, 
gambling, indulgence in scandal, all matters and relations arising out of 
women, attachment to dance, music and song—all these, learned 
Brahmanas, have been said to belong to the Rajoguna. 

Men on Earth who reflect on the past, present and future, who are 
devoted to Dharma, Artha and Kama, who are driven by desire, exult in 
affluence that gratifies their every wish, are enveloped by the Guna of 
Passion. These men have downward courses. Repeatedly reborn into this 
world, they give themselves up to pleasure. They covet what belongs to this 
world as well as the fruit of the hereafter. They make gifts, accept gifts, 
offer oblations to the Pitris, and pour libations on the sacrificial fire. These 
are the ways of Rajas, in their variety. I have also described the karma that 
Rajas generates. The man who rightly understands the Rajoguna and what it 
entails succeeds in freeing himself from all that belongs to Passion.’” 


CANTO 38 


66 B rahma said, ‘Attend now to the nature and indications of the third 
Guna, Sattva. It is rightful, beneficial to all creatures in the 
world, and constitutes the conduct of the good. 

Joy, satisfaction, nobility, enlightenment, happiness, liberality, 
fearlessness, contentment, faith, forgiveness, courage, non-violence, 
equability, truth, straightforwardness, the absence of wrath, the absence of 
malice, purity, intelligence, prowess—these are the hallmarks of the Sattva 
Guna. He who is devoted just to the dharma of Yoga, who regards 
knowledge to be vain, conduct, social service and even the varnasrama to 
be vain, attains to what is highest in the world hereafter. Freedom from the 
notion of mine-ness, freedom from egoism, freedom from expectations and 
desire, and looking upon all things with an equal eye—these constitute the 
eternal religion of the good. 

Confidence, modesty, forgiveness, renunciation, purity, absence of 
laziness, cruelty and delusion, compassion for all creatures, absence of a 
disposition to slander, exultation, satisfaction, rapture, humility, natural 
good conduct, purity in all actions which have the attainment of peace for 
their aim, righteous understanding, freedom from attachments, dispassion, 
continence, complete renunciation, freedom from the very thought of 
possessions, freedom from expectations, unbroken observance of 
righteousness, belief that gifts are in vain, sacrifices are in vain, study is in 
vain, VOWS are in vain, receiving gifts is in vain, the observance of one’s 
svadharma is in vain, and that penances are in vain—those Brahmanas in 
this world whose demeanour is marked by these virtues, who adhere to 


dharma, who abide in the Vedas, are said to be wise and possessed of true 
vision. 

Casting off all sins and freed from grief, men of wisdom attain to 
Swarga and create diverse bodies for themselves. Attaining the great 
powers of self-governance and restraint, of anima, or minuteness, these 
high-souled ones create through the operation of their own minds, like the 
Devas themselves who dwell in Swargaloka. Such men follow paths that 
lead them ever upwards, evolving constantly. They are veritable gods who 
can change all things. Attaining Heaven, they transform whatever they wish 
by their very nature. They acquire and enjoy whatever objects they choose. 

Best of all Dvijas, these are the ways of those who live in the Sattva 
Guna. Understanding these, one gains whatever one desires. The virtues of 
the Sattva Guna have been particularly enumerated, described and lauded, 
as well as the nature and conduct of those whom this attribute of Goodness 
rules. The man who lives in the knowledge of these, enjoys all things 
without any vestige of attachment.’” 


CANTO 39 


: ‘RB rahma said, ‘These Gunas are not entirely separate from one 

another. Rajas, Sattva and Tamas are always found in a state of 

union. They are attached to one another. They depend on one another. They 
have one another for their refuge. They follow one another. 

As long as Sattva exists, so does Rajas; there is not doubt about this. 
As long as Tamas and Sattva exist, so does Rajas. They make their journey 
together, in union, moving collectively. They move in a body, whenever 
they act, with or without cause. However, they do not have equal influence; 
at any time, one or the other dominates. But the manner in which they 
increase and diminish will now be declared. 

Where Tamas dominates, in the lower creatures, the beasts, Rajas has a 
lesser sway, and Sattva still less. Where Rajas is copious, in creatures of 
middling evolution, Tamas has lesser power, and Sattva still less. Where 
Sattva rules abundantly, in creatures of higher evolution, of upward courses, 
Tamas and Rajas are diminished. 

Sattva is the fount that restrains the senses. It is the great enlightener. 
No dharma has been laid down that is higher than Sattva. They who abide 
in Sattva evolve upwards; who dwell in Rajas remain on a middling course; 
and whom Tamas rules, constantly devolve. Tamas prevails in the Sudra; 
Rajas in the Kshatriya; and the Sattva Guna, the highest, in the Brahmana. 
The three co-exist thus in the three varnas. Even upon a cursory view, the 
three are seen to exist in union, never in a state of separation. 

Seeing the Sun rise, evil men are gripped by fear; evil ones belong to 
Tamas, to darkness and night. Heat torments wayfarers. The sun is the 


highest Sattva; heat is Rajas. Surya is Sattva; Agni is Rajas; while the solar 
eclipse on Parvana days is the time of Tamas. 

The three Gunas dwell in all bodies of light. They act by turns in 
diverse places in different ways. Tamas exists in great measure in inert, 
unmoving things. Rajas is marked by constant activity and change. 
Quiescence and calm characterize the Sattva Guna. 

Threefold is the Day; the Night, as well, has been ordained to be 
threefold. So also are fortnights, months, years, seasons and conjunctions. 
All the gifts of life, all daana, are triune. Threefold is sacrifice that flows. 
Three are the worlds; three the great gods; threefold the paths, and triune is 
knowledge. 

Consider: the past, the present and the future; Dharma, Artha and 
Kama; Prana, Apana, and Udana: all these are also fraught with the three 
Gunas. All that exists in this world is permeated and ruled by the three 
Gunas, acting and prevailing by turn in all things and all circumstances, and 
always in unmanifest form. 

Endless is the creation of the three Gunas, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. 
The Unmanifest, which subsumes the three, is darkness, uttermost mystery, 
unperceived, holy, constant, unborn, the womb, eternal, Prakriti, change, 
decay, death, Pradhana, creation, absorption, vastness, immutable, 
unmoving, being and non-being: those who meditate upon the Atman 
should know all these as being names for That. He who properly knows 
these names for the Unmanifest, and the Gunas, as well as the pristine 
workings of the three, knows the truth about all duality and distinction; 
freed from the body, he is liberated from the Gunas and arrives at absolute 
freedom and undying bliss.’” 


CANTO 40 


: ‘RB rahma said, ‘From the unmanifest first sprang Mahat, the Great 

Soul, endowed with measureless Intelligence, and this was the 
source of the Gunas. That was the first creation. Mahat is Paramatman, it is 
Intelligence, Vishnu, Jishnu, Sambhu of boundless valour, Intellect, the 
means of acquiring knowledge, the means of perception, as also fame, 
courage and memory. Knowing this, a wise Brahmana never encounters 
delusion. 

Mahat has hands and feet on every side; he has ears everywhere. He 
stands pervading everything in the universe. Of great power, that Being is in 
the heart of all. Minuteness, lightness and affluence are his. He is the lord of 
all, identical with light, and he is Akshara, who knows no decay. 

In Him dwell all who comprehend the nature of the final 
understanding, who are devoted to goodness, absorbed in dhyana, devoted 
to Yoga, who are firm in truth, who have subdued their senses, who are 
possessed of true knowledge and free from greed, who have conquered 
anger, who are ever of cheerful heart, who are blessed with wisdom, who 
are not bound by notions of mine and yours, and who are free of egoism. 

These, all the bonds of attachment severed, attain to real and singular 
greatness. The one who attains that sacred and highest goal, the 
Paramatman, is liberated from delusion, from this worldly samsara. 

The Self-born Vishnu is the Lord of the first creations. He who knows 
the Lord lying in the cave, the Supreme, Ancient Being, of Universal Form, 
the Golden One, the ultimate goal of all the wise —that most intelligent man 
comes to life eternal, transcending the mind and the intellect as well.’” 


CANTO 41 


= B rahma said, “The first and original Mahat was Ego. When it came 

into being as I, it was the second creation. Mahat is the source of 

all creatures, for these have issued from its modifications. It is pure 

effulgence and the supporter of consciousness. It is Prajapati. It is a deity, 

the Creator of gods, and of Mind. It is that which creates the three worlds. It 
is that which feels, “I am all this’. 

Mahat is the eternal refuge for sages who are content with knowledge 
relating to the soul, Rishis who have meditated on the Atman and found 
success through Vedic study and sacrifices. Through the consciousness of 
the Atman, beings enjoy the Gunas. That source of all creatures, that 
Creator of all creatures, creates them through the Gunas; Mahat is the fount 
of all change, and the flow of time. It illuminates the universe with its own 
light.”” 


CANTO 42 


¢ ‘RB rahma said, ‘From Mahat came the Panchamahabhutas, the five 

great elements: earth, air, ether, water, and the fifth, light. By 
these, and through sound, touch, colour, taste and smell, all creatures are 
deluded. When at the destruction of the Mahabhutas, the dissolution of the 
universe approaches, O you wise ones, a great fear comes over all living 
creatures. Every existence dissolves into that from which it is created. The 
Pralaya reverses the process of creation, drawing back what Mahat once put 
forth. 

Indeed, Creation and Dissolution are born from one another. When all 
creation, mobile and unmoving, is dissolved, wise men endowed with 
profound Memory remain untouched. Sound, touch, colour, taste and smell 
are impermanent and known as Maya, delusion. Caused by desire, unreal, 
not differing from one another, depending upon one another, connected to 
flesh and blood and existing outside the soul, these are powerless in 
themselves. 

Prana and Apana, Udana, Samana and Vyana, these five life-breaths are 
always closely attached to the Atman. Together with speech, mind and 
understanding, they constitute the universe of eight ingredients. He whose 
skin, nose, ear, eyes, tongue and speech are restrained, whose understanding 
does not stray from the true and eternal path, whose mind is pure and never 
burnt by the eight fires, succeeds in attaining to the most hallowed and 
auspicious Brahman, beyond which nothing exists. 

Hear now about the sensual eleven organs that have sprung from 
Mahat. They are the ear, the skin, the two eyes, the tongue, the nose, the 


two feet, the anus, the organ of generation, the two hands, the tenth, speech 
and the eleventh, the mind. These constitute the group of organs that the 
seeker must first subdue. Then Brahman will shine forth in him. Five 
amongst these eleven are called organs of knowledge, and five, organs of 
action. The five that begin with the ear are linked to knowledge. The rest, 
however, which have to do with action, are without distinction. The mind 
belongs to both. The intellect, or understanding, is the twelfth, and the 
highest. Learned men, having plumbed these, feel they have accomplished 
everything. 

I will describe these now for you, individually. 

Akasa, ethereal space, is the first element. The ear signifies it; sound 
expresses it. The Four Quarters rule over this element. 

Vayu, the wind, is the next Mahabhuta. Skin is its sense; touch its 
manifestation; and touch is its Lord as well. 

The third element is Light. Its sense is the eye; among perceptions it is 
colour; and the Sun is its ruler. 

The fourth element is Jala, water; it is signified by the tongue; in the 
perceived world, taste; and Soma, the Moon, has lordship over it. 

Bhumi, earth, is the fifth bhuta; the nose is its organ; scent its 
perception; and Vayu rules over it. 

Thus, the five elements each have three components. Now hear about 
the other organs. Brahmanas who know the truth say that the two feet are 
emblems of the Atman; movement are their expression; and Vishnu rules 
them. 

The Apana Vayu, whose motion is downward, is the lower vent, the 
anal; excretion is its expression; and Mitra has lordship over it. 

The generative organ, the linga, is the vital seed; and Prajapati is its 
Lord. 

The two hands, again, denote the soul; karma, deeds, signify them; and 
Indra rules them. 

Speech, Vak, relates to all the Devas; it is whatever is uttered; Agni 
rules over it. 

Manas, the mind, moves within the the five elements. It is thought, and 
Chandramasa, the Moon is its Lord. It is Ahamkara, the Ego which causes 
all Samsara, this worldly life. It is consciousness of selfhood; and Rudra is 
its Lord. 


The Intellect, Mahat, impels the six senses. It is that which is to be 
understood, and its ruling deity there is Brahma. 

All existence is founded in three elements, and there is no fourth. 
These are land, water and ether. Fourfold is the way of all birth. Some are 
born of eggs; some are born of seeds, germs, which spring up through the 
earth; some are born of the earth itself; and some are born of wombs. All 
living creatures are born in one of these four ways. 

There are inferior species and those that range the sky. These are 
known to emerge from eggs, as are those that crawl on their breasts. Insects 
and the like are born from earth, swamp and filth. This is said to be the 
second manner of birth and is inferior. Creatures that sprout bursting 
through ground after lying dormant for a time are the seed- and germ-born 
ones. Creatures with two or several legs and feet, and also those that move 
crookedly, are the womb-born ones; and some among them are malformed. 

Of two kinds is the eternal womb of Brahma: tapasya and punya 
karma. This is the doctrine of the wise. For all who are born, the ancients 
have taught, karma is of various kinds, such as sacrifice, gifts made at 
sacrifices, and the exemplary meritorious duty of study. One who 
understands this, comes to be regarded as being possessed of Yoga; such a 
man is freed from all his sins. This is the doctrine of Adhyatma. 

O Munis who know dharma deeply, those that know Adhyatma are 
considered true Gyanis. Unite the senses, the objects of the senses, and the 
five great elements, and restrain them in the mind through dhyana; when all 
things are reduced in dhyana, one no longer regards the pleasures of life. 
Wise men of knowledge regard Adhyatma, inner joy, as the only true 
happiness. 

Hear me now about renunciation for all beings by means both gentle 
and difficult, relinquishment leading to attachment to what is subtle and 
spiritual, fraught with auspiciousness. To treat the Gunas as being without 
essence in themselves, to free oneself from worldly attachments, and to lead 
a solitary life which recognizes no distinctions, but which is replete with 
Brahman, is to reach the source of all real, eternal happiness. 

The learned man who absorbs all desires into himself, from all sides, 
even like the tortoise withdrawing all its limbs, or the imperturbable Ocean 
that absorbs the rivers flowing into it, who is liberated from samsara and 
without passion becomes perennially happy, Sadananda. Restraining all 
desires within the soul, destroying his thirst, concentrated in dhyana, and 


being a good-hearted friend to all creation, he becomes fit to be absorbed 
into Brahman. 

By abandoning inhabited places and firmly repressing the wild senses 
which ever hanker after their objects of pleasure, the man of contemplation 
causes the Adhyatma fire to blaze forth in him. As a fire fed with fuel burns 
bright, even so, from restraining the senses, the immortal Atman puts forth 
its transcendent effulgence. When a man of tranquil soul beholds all entities 
in his own heart, then by the pristine light of his own Self he attains to that 
which is subtler than the subtle, and without equal: the final Being. 

The body has Agni, fire, for colour; Jala, water, for blood and other 
fluids; Vayu, air, for the sense of touch; Bhumi, earth, for the gross sheath 
of the mind—flesh and bones; Akasa, ether, for sound. This body of flesh 
and blood is pervaded by disease and sorrow; it is overwhelmed by five 
currents, the five elements; it has nine doors and two deities; it is rife with 
passion; it is made up of the three gunas; its unholy nature renders it unfit to 
even be seen; it has three constituent elements, vata, pitta and kapha, wind, 
bile and phlegm; it delights in attachments of every kind; and it is full of 
delusions. 

It is difficult to move in the mortal world that rests on Mahat as its 
support. The body is, in this world, the wheel of Time that continually 
revolves. It is a horrible and unfathomable ocean called maya, delusion. It is 
this body that stretches, contracts, and awakens the very universe with the 
Immortals. By restraining the senses, one casts off lust, wrath, fear, greed, 
enmity and falsehood, which are perennial and, therefore, most difficult to 
relinquish. He who, in this world, subdues the three gunas and the 
panchabhutas of the body, has the Brahman for his seat. He attains to 
Infinity. Crossing the river that has the five senses for its steep banks, the 
mental inclinations for its waters, and delusion for its great lake, one must 
conquer both lust and anger. Such a man, freed from all faults, then beholds 
the Highest, his mind concentrated within the Mind, and seeing the Self in 
himself. 

Understanding all things, he sees his own eternal Atman in all 
creatures, at times as one and at others as many, changing form from time to 
time. He perceives the many like countless lights emanating from and 
belonging to the one Light. Verily he is Vishnu, and Mitra, and Varuna, and 
Agni, and Prajapati. He is the Creator and the Ordainer: he is the Lord 
possessed of ineffable puissance, with faces turned in all directions. In him, 


the heart of all creatures, the Paramatman, becomes resplendent. He is 
praised by all conclaves of learned Brahmanas, Devas and Asuras, Yakshas 
and Pisachas, the Pitris and Pakshis, tribes of Rakshasas and bands of 
ghostly beings, and all the great Rishis.’” 


CANTO 43 


: ‘RB rahma said, ‘Among men, the royal Kshatriya is endowed with 

Rajas, the middle Guna; among mounts, the elephant; among 
denizens of the forest, the lion; among all sacrificial animals, the sheep; 
among all those that live in holes, the snake; among cattle, the bull; among 
feminine creatures, the mule. 

In this world, the Nyagrodha, the Jambu, the Pipala, the Salmali, and 
Sensapa, the Meshasringa and the Kichaka are the foremost among trees. 
The greatest of mountains are Himavat, Patipatra, Sahya, Vindhya, 
Trikutavat, Sweta, Nila, Bhasa, Koshthavat, Guruskandha, Mahendra and 
Malayavat. Likewise, the Maruts are the first among the Ganas. Surya is the 
Lord of all the planets, and Chandramas of all the constellations. Yama is 
the Lord of the Pitris; Sagara is the Lord of all rivers. Varuna is the king of 
the waters. Indra is the king of the Maruts. Arka is the king of all hot 
bodies, and Indra of all luminous ones. Agni is the eternal Lord of the 
elements, and Brihaspati of the Brahmanas. Soma is the Lord of plants and 
herbs, and Vishnu is the greatest of those endowed with might. 

Tashtri is the king of Rudras, and Siva of all creatures. Yagna is the 
foremost of all initiatory rites, and Maghavat of the Devas. The North is the 
Lord of all the points of the compass; Soma of great energy is the Lord of 
all learned Brahmanas. Kubera is the Lord of all precious gems, and 
Purandara of all the other Devas. Such is the highest creation among all 
entities. 

Prajapati is the Lord of all creatures. Of all entities, I, who am full of 
Brahman, am the foremost. There is none higher than myself or Vishnu. 


The great Vishnu, who is full of Brahman, is the King of kings, above all. 
Know him to be the ruler, the Creator, the uncreated Hari. He is the ruler of 
men and Kinnaras, Yakshas and Gandharvas, Nagas and Rakshasas, Devas 
and Danavas. 

Among those followed and worshipped by men full of desire is the 
great Goddess Maheswari of beautiful eyes. She is also called Parvati. 
Know that the Devi Uma is the highest and the most auspicious of women. 
Among women that are a source of pleasure, the best are the Apsaras who 
possess great splendour. 

Kings always wish to acquire piety, and Brahmanas are causeways of 
piety. Therefore, the king should always strive to protect the twice-born 
ones. Kings in whose dominions good men languish are regarded as bereft 
of the virtues of their order. In the hereafter, such kings are forced to tread 
dark and sinful paths. Kings in whose dominions good men are protected, 
rejoice in this world and enjoy happiness in the hereafter. Such Mahatman 
Rajarishis attain to the Highest. Understand this well, O Dvijottamas. 

Now listen to the eternal indications of dharma. Non-violence, 
abstaining from harming any living being, is the highest dharma. Violence 
is the sign of unrighteousness, of adharma. 

Splendour is the nature of the Devas. Men have karma for their way. 
Akasa has sound for its characteristic; Wind has touch; colour belongs to 
light, and taste to Water. Earth, which supports all beings, has smell for its 
characteristic. Words belong to Speech, refined into vowels and consonants. 
Mind has thought, while thought belongs to Buddhi, the Intellect. Whatever 
the mind thinks of, is verified by the Intellect. There is no doubt that Mahat, 
through perseverance, perceives all things. 

Dhyana, meditation, is inherent to the mind. The way of the good man, 
the Yogi, is to live unperceived. Devotion, Bhakti, has karma for its means. 
Knowledge is the emblem of renunciation. Keeping knowledge in view, the 
man of understanding, the Gyani, observes renunciation. The man who has 
truly renounced, who has real knowledge, who transcends all the pairs of 
opposites, as also darkness, death and decrepitude, attains to Brahman, the 
highest goal. All this is dharma, and the paths of duty. 

Listen now to the perception of the qualities. Smell, that appertains to 
Earth, is perceived by the nose. The air dwelling in the nose is the agent in 
the perception of smell. Taste is the essence of water; the tongue, in which 


Soma dwells, perceives taste. The essence of light is colour, which the eye 
perceives. Aditya, who dwells in the eye, perceives colour. 

Touch, Sparsha, pertains to Vayu, and is sensed by the skin. The quality 
of Akasa is sound, which is seized by the ear. All the Quarters, which dwell 
in the ear, have been appointed to apprehend sound. The quality of the mind 
is thought, which is known by the Intellect. The upholder of consciousness, 
Chit, living in the heart, apprehends the mind. Buddhi is known through 
determination or certitude, and Mahat in the form of Gyana, knowledge. 

Unperceived, pristine Prakriti is the knower of all things that transcend 
certitude—of this have no doubt. The Kshetrajna, which is eternal and 
Nirguna, without attributes, cannot be known by symbols: the Kshetrajna is 
pure knowledge. The Unmanifest dwells in the symbol called the Kshetra, 
and is that in which the worlds and its qualities are created and absorbed. I 
always see that Brahman, and hear it, although it is hidden. Purusha knows 
it: therefore is he called Kshetrajna. 

The Kshetrajna also perceives the activity of the Gunas, as well as their 
absence. The Gunas, which are created repeatedly, have no intelligence of 
their own and do not recognize themselves or the entities in the constant 
process of creation, fraught with a beginning, middle and end. No one other 
than the Kshetrajna attains to that which is the Highest, the Brahman 
transcending the Gunas and all that are born from them. He who fathoms 
dharma, casting off the Gunas, and indeed the Intellect or Mahat, and 
thereby has all his sins destroyed, he enters into the Kshetrajna, the final 
Knower. 

He who is free from all the pairs of opposites, who never bows his head 
to anyone, who is divested of Swaha, who is immutable and homeless, is 
the Kshetrajna. He is the Supreme Lord.’” 


CANTO 44 


: ‘RB rahma said, ‘Hear now the truth about all that has a beginning, 
middle and end, and which has a name and attributes, as also the 
means of apprehension. 

The Day was first; then arose Night. The Months have the lit, waxing 
fortnights first. Among constellations Sravana is first; Winter, of dew, is first 
among the Seasons. Bhumi is the source of all scent; and Jala of all tastes. 
Surya is the source of all colours, and Vayu of all sensations of touch. Of 
sound, the source is Akasa. These are the qualities of elements. 

Listen now to which are the first and the highest of all entities. Of 
luminaries, Surya is the first. Agni is foremost among the elements. Savitri 
is the first of all branches of learning. Prajapati is the Lord of all the Devas. 
Prana, the life-wind, is the first of all winds. The syllable Om, is the first of 
all the Vedas; the life-wind Prana is the first among all winds. 

All that is called Savitri which is prescribed as worship in this world. 
The Gayatri is the first of all mantras; of yagnapasus, the goat; among four- 
legged creatures, the cow; among humans, Dvijas; among birds, the eagle. 
The first sacrifice is the pouring of ghrita into the sacred fire. 

Of reptiles the foremost is the snake. The Krita is the first of all the 
Yugas; of this there is no doubt. Gold is the best among all precious things; 
barley among plants. Food is the first of all that is eaten, and water of all 
that is drunk. 

Of all immobile creations, the Plaksha is the first, that ever-holy field of 
Brahman. Of all Prajapatis I, Brahma, am the first. The self-created 
Svayambhuva Vishnu is my superior. Of mountains, great Meru is the first- 


born; of the cardinal and subsidiary points of the horizon, the East; among 
rivers, Ganga of three courses; of water bodies, the Ocean. 

Iswara is the supreme Lord of all the Devas Danavas, and Pisachas, 
Nagas and Rakshasas, Manavas, Kinnaras and Yakshas. Mahavishnu, who 
is full of Brahman, than whom there is no higher being in the three worlds, 
is the first in all the universe. 

Of the varnasramas, the grihastasrama is the best; the Unmanifest 
Brahma is the source of all the worlds as, indeed, the end of everything. 
Days end with the sun’s setting and nights with the sun’s rising. The end of 
pleasure is always sorrow, and the end of sorrow, pleasure. All 
accumulations have exhaustion for their end, and all ascents end in falls. 

All associations have dissociation for their end, and life has death. All 
karma ends in destruction, and all that is born is certain to die. Every 
mobile and immobile thing in this world is transient. Sacrifice, gift, 
penances, study, vows and sacred observances: all these have destruction 
for their end. Only true Knowledge has no end. Hence, one possessed of a 
tranquil soul, who has conquered his senses, who is freed from the sense of 
ownership, devoid of egoism, is released from all his sins by pure 
knowledge.’” 


CANTO 45 


““R rahma said, ‘The wheel of life turns on. It has Mahat for its 

strength; Manas is the axle-rod on which it revolves; the senses 
are its fetters, the Panchamahabhutas are its nave, and Samsara is its round. 
It is overwhelmed by decrepitude and grief, and has diseases and calamities 
for its progeny. That wheel revolves in time and place; toil and action are 
the great noise it makes. Day and Night are the rotations of that wheel; heat 
and cold encircle it. Pleasure and pain fire its joints, and hunger and thirst 
are the nails which secure it. Sunshine and shade are the ruts it makes; it 
can be stirred in the blink of an eye. 

The terrible waters of delusion envelop the wheel; blindly, ceaselessly 
it revolves, without consciousness. It is measured by months and fortnights. 
Being ever-changing, it is irregular; and it spins through all the worlds. 
Penances and vows are its mud. Passion’s force is its mover. It is 
illuminated by great Ahamkara, and sustained by the Gunas. 

Frustration at unfulfilled desires are the fastenings that bind it firm; it 
turns in the midst of grief and death, and is endowed with deeds and their 
instruments by which deeds are performed. It is large and is ever extended 
by attachments; desire and greed make it unsteady. 

The Wheel is created by manifold Ignorance, attended upon by fear 
and illusion, and binds all beings with maya, the great delusion. It moves 
towards joy and pleasure, and has desire and wrath for its possessions. It 
consists of creations beginning with Mahat, down to the gross elements. It 
is characterized by ceaseless creation and destruction. Its speed is like that 
of the mind, and it has the mind for its frontiers. 


This wheel of life, which is associated with pairs of opposites and 
devoid of consciousness, the universe with the very Immortals, should be 
cast off. Among all creatures, the man who understands properly the motion 
and stoppage of this wheel of life is never deluded. Freed from all 
impressions, sensory and of the mind, divested of all pairs of opposites, 
released from all sins, he attains to the highest goal. 

Grihasta, Brahmacharya, Vanaprastha and Sannyasa—these four 
asramas of life all have the Grihastasrama for their foundation. Whatever 
codes of law are prescribed in this world, their observance is beneficial and 
always highly regarded. He who has first been purified by rituals, who has 
duly observed vratas, who is well-born, and who understands the Vedas, 
must return from his Guru’s house after his tutelage and marry. 

Then, devoted to his wedded spouse, conducting himself with dharma, 
with his senses restrained, and full of faith, he must perform the five 
sacrifices. He is known as a righteous man, a Sishta, who eats what remains 
after feeding the gods and his guests, who faithfully observes Vedic rites 
and within his means performs sacrifices and makes gifts, who is not unduly 
active with hands and feet or with his eye, who is devoted to tapasya, who 
does not speak too much and who knows his bounds. 

One should always wear the sacred thread and clean white clothes, 
carry a bamboo-staff, and a kamandalu of holy water, keep pure vows and 
associate with good men in satsanga. Giving daana and practising self- 
restraint all the while, a man’s conduct must be worthy; his appetite and lust 
should be firmly controlled, and he should practise universal compassion. 

Having studied, the good man must teach; he should perform yagnas 
himself and officiate at the sacrifices of others. He should give with a pure 
heart gifts he himself has received. These six should always characterize the 
man of dharma’s life. Three of these should constitute the livelihood of the 
Brahmana: teaching, officiating at the sacrifices of others, and accepting 
gifts from good men. As for the other three, the giving of gifts, study, and 
sacrifice —these are earners of punya. 

Performing tapasya, being self-restrained, living with universal 
compassion and forgiveness, and looking upon all creatures with an equal 
eye—the man who knows dharma never neglects these three. The learned 
Brahmana of pure heart, who lives in the Grihastasrama, while keeping firm 
vows, devoted and discharging all duties to the best of his power, surely 
attains to Swarga.’” 


CANTO 46 


: ‘RB rahma said, ‘Duly studying thus to the best of his power, and 

living as a Brahmacharin, he who is devoted to his svadharma, 
who is learned, observes penances with senses restrained, always does what 
is agreeable and beneficial to his Guru, remains pure and steadfast in the 
practice of dharma, should, with the leave of his master, eat whatever food 
he receives, never decrying it. 

He should eat havishya made from what he receives as alms, and 
should stand, sit and move as his preceptor directs him. He should pour 
libations on the fire twice a day with a concentrated mind after purifying 
himself. He should always carry a staff made of the wood of the bilwa or 
the palasa. The robes of the regenerate man should be of linen, cotton or 
deer-skin, or in hue entirely brown-red. He should also have a sacred girdle 
made of munja grass. 

He must wear jata, matted locks, on his head, and perform his ablutions 
every day. He must don the sacred thread, study the scriptures, divest 
himself of greed, and be firm and unwavering in the observance of vratas. 
He must gratify the Devas with oblations of pure water, his mind restrained 
as he does so. 

Such a Brahmacharin is indeed worthy of praise. His mind fixed in 
dhyana and his vital seed drawn up, he that is so dedicated succeeds in 
conquering Swarga. Having attained the highest place, he need not return to 
birth. Cleansed by every purificatory rite, and having lived as a 
Brahmacharin, he should leave his village and dwell as a vanaprastha in the 
forest, never again returning to an inhabited place. He should perform his 


ablutions morning and evening, clad in animal skin or the bark of trees. 
Honouring guests when they come, he should offer them shelter and sustain 
himself on fruits, leaves, common roots and syamaka. Depending on the 
regulations of his initiation, and abjuring sloth, he must subsist on such 
water as he finds, on the produce of the forest, or on air. 

Without hesitation or reservation, he should offer roots and fruit, or 
whatever other food he may have to his guests, honouring them as gods 
come to his dwelling. Observing silence, he must eat only after gratifying 
with food the gods and his guests. 

His mind must be free of any trace of envy. He should allow his hair 
and beard to grow freely, eat just enough to sustain his body, and depend 
upon the gods. Self-restrained, ever forgiving, practising universal 
compassion, performing regular sacrifices and devoting himself to the study 
of the scriptures, he observes the dharma of truth. 

His body always pure, his senses restrained, owning true intelligence, 
his mind focused in dhyana, the vanaprastha attains to the highest felicity. A 
grihasta, brahmacharin or vanaprastha who seeks Moksha must lead a life 
of exemplary conduct. Swearing non-violence towards every living thing, 
he must relinquish all karma, contribute to the happiness of all creatures, 
practise universal friendliness, subdue his passions and senses, and lead a 
chaste life. He must make a fire and subsist upon food obtained without 
asking and without exertion, which has come to him spontaneously. 

He must make his round of mendicancy in places where the cooking 
fire has been extinguished and no smoke curls any longer from it, and 
where the household has already eaten. He who knows the path of Mukti 
seeks alms only after the cooking vessels have been washed. He never 
rejoices when he receives anything, nor is he dejected when he does not. He 
waits for the proper time to set out on his round of seeking alms just enough 
to support life, with his mind controlled and serene. The ascetic does not 
seek earnings as others do, nor does he eat when honoured; rather, he 
conceals himself in order to shun gifts of honour. He should not partake of 
the leavings of another’s meal or eat anything bitter, astringent, pungent or 
sweet. He should eat only as much as he needs to keep himself alive. 

He who knows about Nirvana never deprives another creature of its 
nourishment while seeking his own. He cannot stay with friends or kin, nor 
ever accumulate any possessions. On his rounds of mendicancy, he ought 
not to follow another who is also out begging alms or make a parade of his 


piety, but seek seclusion in an empty house or a mountain cave or a forest, 
at the foot of a tree or beside a river, freed from passion. In summer, he 
must pass only one night in an inhabited place; during the rains he may 
remain in one place, but otherwise he must be always on the move, like a 
worm on the face of the earth, his path pointed out by the sun. Out of 
compassion for all living creatures, he should walk with his gaze directed to 
the earth. 

The man on the path of liberation performs all his daily kriyas with 
pure sanctified water, his ablutions with clean water fetched from a river or 
drawn from a well or tank. Ahimsa, brahmacharya, truth, simplicity, 
freedom from anger, self-restraint, naturally and habitually never speaking 
harshly to anyone, and never speaking ill of anyone behind their backs: the 
man who seeks Mukti cleaves to these eight vows unwaveringly. 

He must be sinless, without falsehood or deceit. Abjuring any 
attachment, he must offer any guest who comes to him whatever food he 
can, while he himself eats just enough to support his life. He should eat 
only food he has obtained by righteous means, and never from the dictates 
of desire. He should accept by way of alms only food and the simplest 
clothing, no more than meet his barest needs. 

He must not accept gifts or make them but, out of compassion for all 
fellow creatures, always share whatever he has. The man of wisdom can 
never appropriate what belongs to another, nor take anything without being 
asked and, having enjoyed anything, he must never become so attached to 
its pleasure that he desires it again. Indeed, when he wishes to perform any 
rite or make an offering he can only take earth and water, stones and leaves, 
flowers and fruits which belong to no one, and only as they come to him. 
He cannot make his livelihood as an artisan, nor should he covet gold or 
wealth of any kind. 

He must be without resentment, refrain from preaching, and keep 
himself away from polemics. He must have no belongings and eat only 
what is consecrated with faith. He must never enter into intimate relations 
of any sort with any creature, or perform or enable any action that involves 
expectation of fruits or destruction of life or hoarding of material goods. 
Truly, he must live a life like amrita. Rejecting all objects, content with very 
little, he should range homeless over the earth, viewing and treating equally 
all creatures and things around him, moving and immobile. 


He whom all creatures trust is regarded as the best of those who 
understand the way of Moksha. He can never cause hurt or annoyance to 
another, and is himself never irate with anyone. He must neither dwell on 
the past nor feel anxious about the future, but live wholly in the moment, 
detached, his mind absorbed in dhyana. Neither with eyes, thought nor 
speech should he defile anything or anyone, nor commit any offence, either 
openly or in secret. 

Withdrawing his senses like the tortoise its limbs, he should make his 
mind one-pointed, develop a profoundly serene heart and disposition, and 
seek to master every subject. Freed from all the pairs of opposites, pleasure 
and pain, joy and grief, heat and cold, never bending his head in reverence, 
abstaining from rites that require the utterance of Swaha, he unshackles 
himself from ahamkara, and mine-ness. With a cleansed soul, he must have 
no desires, neither to acquire what he does not have, nor to safeguard what 
he does. Without expectations, divested of the gunas, wedded to tranquillity, 
he repudiates the slightest attachment and depends on no one. 

Attached to his Atman and nothing besides, knowing all things, one is 
certain to attain Nirvana. He surely escapes death who has experienced the 
Atman, which is without flesh, which has no hands or feet or back, no head 
and no belly; experiences no smell, taste, or touch, no colour, no sound; 
which transcends the functions of the three gunas and is absolute, untainted 
and unchanging; which can only be known directly as the final 
achievement; which is unattached and beyond fear, unfading and divine; 
and, lastly, which, though dwelling in one body, yet dwells in every living 
being and thing. 

There the Intellect does not reach, nor the senses, nor the gods, nor the 
Vedas, nor Yagnas, nor regions of bliss, nor tapasya, nor vratas. The 
attainment of Mukti by men of true Gyana is ineffable, beyond 
comprehension, or expression in symbols. Hence the man who knows the 
nature of what is beyond symbols should observe the truths of dharma. 

The learned man, becoming a grihasta, adopts conduct conforming to 
the true knowledge. Though beyond maya, he must practise dharma even as 
though he is deluded by this life, never finding fault with it. He might even 
live in such pious conformity that others find fault with him. He who lives 
thus is known to be the greatest of sages. 

The senses, the objects of the senses, the five great elements, mind, 
intellect, ego, the Unmanifest, and Purusha—it is after fathoming all these 


rightly that the seeker is freed from all bonds and attains Nirvana. He who 
knows the Truth, and has transcended his bondage, must, at the hour of his 
death, meditate upon the One. Then, depending on no other, he comes to 
Moksha. Freed like the wind in space, with all his accumulated karma 
exhausted and no distress of any kind, he attains to his highest goal.’” 


CANTO 47 


: ‘RB rahma said, “The ancients who were utterers of verities say that 
Vairagya, Renunciation, is real penance. Brahmanas who dwell 
in that which originates in Brahman, understand Knowledge to be the 
Parabrahman, the First, the eternal. Brahman is the distant, final goal, and 
its attainment depends also upon knowledge of the Vedas. It is free from all 
the pairs of opposites, it is Nirguna, without qualities and attributes; it is 
eternal; it is endowed with qualities beyond cognition: it is Supreme. It is 
through gyana and tapasya that men of wisdom behold that Highest. 

Verily, they of untainted mind, they who are cleansed of every sin and 
have transcended all passion and darkness, attain to that Immortal Place. 
They who remain devoted to renunciation, and who know the deepest truths 
of the Vedas, through penance find the Supreme Lord who is peace and 
bliss. Penance, it has been said, is light; a good life leads to piety; true 
knowledge is the highest aim and being. Renunciation is the best penance. 
He who understands the Atman through discerning things accurately, the 
imperturbable Self, identical with Knowledge, which resides in all entities, 
becomes ubiquitous. The learned man who perceives attachment and 
detachment, and the underlying unity in diversity, is released from 
suffering. 

He who desires nothing, who despises nothing, can be absorbed into 
Brahman even while living in this world. He who knows the truths about 
Pradhana, and understands Pradhana as existing in all creatures, who is free 
from the sense of mineness and egoism, is surely liberated. He who is freed 
from all the pairs of opposites, who does not bend his head to anybody, who 


has transcended the rituals of Swadha, comes through peace alone to that 
which is eternal, without attributes or qualities. Abandoning all karma, good 
and bad, issuing from the gunas, and casting off both truth and untruth, he 
finds Moksha. 

Having the Unmanifest for its seed, the Intellect for its trunk, with the 
great principle of Egoism for its branches, the Senses for its little sprouts, 
the five Great Elements its large branches, the objects of the senses for its 
twigs, with perennial leaves and the flowers which always adorn it, and 
with fruits both sweet and bitter always being yielded—that is the eternal 
tree of Brahman, the support of all creatures. Cutting down that tree using 
the sword of knowledge of the truth, the man of wisdom severs the bonds of 
attachment that cause birth, decrepitude and death and, freeing himself from 
ahamkara, finds Mukti. 

There are the two birds, companions that perch on the tree of life, 
which are immutable and have no intelligence of their own; the other, 
different from these two, is called the Intelligent. A seeker is liberated from 
all his sins when that self which has no knowledge of nature, which is 
without intelligence becomes conversant with that which is beyond Prakriti, 
comes to understand the Kshetra and apprehends everything, illumined by 
an intelligence transcending all attributes, qualities and manifestations.’” 


CANTO 48 


: ‘RB rahma said, ‘Some regard Brahman as a tree, others as a great 

forest. Some regard Brahman as unmanifest; others as 
transcendent and free from every distress. They say that this universe is 
created from and absorbed into the Unmanifest. 

The man who, when his end comes, finds equilibrium, attains to the 
self even for the space of a single breath, fits himself for immortality. 
Restraining the self in the self, even for the space of a wink, one goes 
through the tranquillity of the self, to the inexhaustible gains of those 
blessed with true Gyana. Restraining the life-breaths by controlling them 
through pranayama, by the ten or the twelve, the seeker attains to that which 
is beyond the four and twenty. Thus, by acquiring a tranquil soul, he attains 
to the fruition of all his wishes and beyond. 

When the Sattva Guna predominates in that which arises from the 
Unmanifest, it becomes fit for immortality. They who know Sattva laud it 
highly, saying that there is nothing higher. By inference we know that 
Purusha is dependent on Sattva. Dvijottamas, it is impossible to attain to 
Purusha by any other means. Forgiveness, courage, non-violence, 
equability, truth, sincerity, knowledge, charity and renunciation are 
manifestations of the Sattva guna: it is through these that the wise infer the 
identity of Purusha and Sattva. Of this there is no doubt. 

Some gyanis, devoted to knowledge, assert the unity of the Kshetrajna 
and Prakriti. They are mistaken, for Nature differs from Purusha, albeit 
there is both distinction and association between the two, unity and 
diversity. That is the doctrine of the learned. In the gnat and udumbara we 


find both unity and apartness. The relationship between Purusha and 
Prakriti is like that between water and the fish which swims in water, like 
water drops and the lotus-leaf upon which they rest.’ 

At these words, some doubts arose in those learned Brahmanas, 
foremost of men, and they questioned the Pitamaha further.” 


CANTO 49 


: an |i he Rishis asked, ‘Which among all duties is deemed to be the 
most worthy of being performed? We see that the diverse modes 
of karma are contrary. Some say that karma survives the body; others that it 
does not exist; while yet others hold that doubt and ambiguity are all that is 
certain; and there are those who have no doubts. Some claim that the 
Brahman is not, in fact, eternal. Some say that it exists, and others that it 
does not. Some say it is one, others that it is two, and still others that it is 
mixed. Some Brahmavadis surely regard it to be one; others that it is 
distinct, and others again that it is manifold. 

Some of the wise say that both time and space exist; others refute this. 
Some wear matted jata on their heads and deer-skins on their bodies; others 
have shaven crowns and go naked. Some never bathe, while others 
regularly perform ablutions. These differences of views and ways are found 
among Devas and Brahmanas who know Brahman and are blessed with 
perceptions of truth. Some of them eat, while others fast. Some praise 
action; others uphold complete tranquillity. Some seek Mukti, while others 
do permit certain kinds of enjoyment. Some desire diverse kinds of wealth; 
some embrace poverty. Some say that karma must be performed; others 
disagree. Some are devoted to a life of non-violence; others are addicted to 
killing. Some hanker after merit and glory, others believe that these are 
hollow. 

Some are devoted to goodness; others are established on doubt. Some 
are for pleasure, some for pain. Some hold dhyana dear, some yagna, while 
others, also learned ones, believe in daana. Many of the wise resort to 


tapasya, while others laud the study of the Shastras. Some advocate Gyana 
and Vairagya, knowledge and renunciation. Others who ponder the elements 
declare it is Prakriti. Some extol everything; others, nothing. 

O Pitamaha, greatest of gods, dharma seems full of perplexing 
contradictions of many kinds. We are deluded and cannot arrive at any 
conclusion. There are those who espouse karma, action, chanting, ‘This is 
good.’ Whoever is attached to a certain course of action claims that his way 
is the best. We are confused and distracted and desire to know what is good. 
It is befitting, best of all beings, for you to declare to us the actual 
connection between the Kshetrajna and the Kshetra. 

The illustrious Creator of the worlds, of fathomless intellect and the 
soul of righteousness, then expounded to the Brahmarishis the answer to 
their question.” 


CANTO 50 


: ‘RB rahma said, ‘Listen to what a guru told his sishya once in this 

regard, and let that quieten your bewilderment. Non-violence is 

said to be the first and the highest dharma. It is the ultimate seat, free from 
fear, and the final sign of holiness. 

The ancients who were seers of the Brahman said that knowledge is the 
highest happiness, and a man is indeed liberated from all sin by pure 
knowledge. Those who engage in violence and killing, who are godless in 
their ways, will find hell for their greed and delusion; while those rush 
headlong into action propelled by desire, are born repeatedly into this 
world, and sport in joy. Those men of learning and wisdom who engage in 
karma without desire and attachment, with faith and concentration, are said 
to see the truth clearly. 

Listen now, best of men, to how the Kshetrajna, the Knower, is bound 
to and free from Prakriti. The relation between the two is that between the 
subject and the object. Purusha, the Soul, is always the subject, and Prakriti, 
Nature, the object. And they do, indeed, exist after the manner of the Gnat 
and the Udumbara. Being solely an object of enjoyment, Nature is without 
intellect and knows nothing. He, however, who enjoys Prakriti, is the 
Kshetrajna, the knower. Kshetrajna is the one who enjoys, while Nature is 
enjoyed. 

The wise have always said that Prakriti is comprised of the Gunas and 
the resultant pairs of opposites. Purusha, on the other hand, is without these; 
He is eternal, eternally free, the ubiquitous in-dweller in all things, and 


walks with knowledge. He enjoys Nature as a lotus-leaf does water, which 
rests upon the leaf but never wets it. 

Enlightened with knowledge, he is never tainted, even if comes into 
contact with all the Gunas; Purusha is unattached like the unsteady drop of 
water on the lotus-leaf. Thus the scriptures conclude that Prakriti is the 
property of Purusha, and the relation between these two is like that between 
matter and its maker. 

AS one goes into a dark place taking a light with him, even so do those 
who seek the Supreme travel with the light of Nature. As long as matter and 
the Gunas exist, like oil and wick, so long does the lamp shines. The flame 
is extinguished when matter and the Gunas are exhausted. 

Prakriti is manifest, while Purusha is unmanifest. Understand this, O 
knowing Brahmanas. Now listen to something more: not a thousand 
explanations can enlighten one whose intellect is dull; he will not come to 
knowledge. However, he who is blessed with intelligence succeeds in 
finding happiness, even through the most minimal explanations. Understand 
that the accomplishment of dharma depends on one’s natural endowments. 
Being inherently blessed, the man of intelligence surely attains supreme 
felicity. 

Even as a wayfarer without provisions, journeys in discomfort and 
might well die before he reaches his destination, so does a paucity of 
understanding and dharma operate on the fruits of action. A man benefits 
greatly from scrutinizing in himself what is agreeable and what is not. 

The progress in life of a man who has no perception of truth is like the 
blind careen of one who recklessly rushes down a long road he has never 
seen before. The lives of the intelligent are like the journeys of men who 
travel along a well-known way in a swift chariot yoked to fine horses. 

Having climbed to the top of a mountain, one should not look back 
down to the earth left far below. Seeing an insensible and afflicted man 
along the way, the man of intelligence continues going ahead as long as 
there is a road before him. Only when he finds no path in front for his 
chariot does the man of wisdom alight and continue on foot. 

Thus does the man of intelligence journey who knows the laws ruling 
Gyana and Bhakti, Yoga and Satya. Conversant with the Gunas, such a man 
travels understanding what lies ahead of him, for he is farsighted. The 
deluded and ignorant man plunges headlong into a lake of dread, without a 
boat, surely courting death; while the man of wisdom and discrimination 


enters the water cautiously, in a boat with sturdy oars, crosses easily, 
without tiring himself, and abandons the boat when he gains the far shore. 
Such a one is aware, and free of arrogance. These are like the others on the 
road of life, one ill-provided and going on foot, while the wise one resorts 
to a chariot for as far as it will bear him. 

The wise yatri knows that a chariot cannot take him across water, even 
as a boat cannot across solid ground. He has no attachment or illusions 
about either chariot or boat, and uses both when he needs them; he is not 
confined by either as, say, a fisherman is to his boat, but uses the 
conveyance appropriate to the element he needs to cross over. 

Thus, O Dvijottamas, there are different and distinct means used by 
wise men to pass through and transcend different circumstances and times; 
they all take him towards his final destination. 

And as men perform karma in this world, so do they reap its fruits. 
That which has no smell, no taste, no touch or sound, which is meditated 
upon by the sages, is called Pradhana. Pradhana is unmanifest. Mahat is a 
development of the unmanifest Pradhana. Ahamkara is an evolute of 
Pradhana when it has become Mahat. From Ahamkara come the 
Panchamahabhutas; and from the five great elements come forth the objects 
of the senses. 

The Unmanifest is of the nature of seed; in its very essence it is 
Creative. The Paramatman has the virtues of a seed, and Ahamkara, which 
is a creation of Mahat, owns the nature of a germ and ceaselessly, 
unendingly, creates. The Mahabhutas have the nature of both seed and 
creations. The objects of the five great elements are also endowed with the 
nature of seed, and yield multifarious creations. 

These have Chitta, consciousness or perception, for their attribute. 
Among them, space has one attribute; wind has two; light is invested with 
three gunas, and water with four. Earth, teeming with creation, mobile as 
well as unmoving, owns fives attributes. Bhumi is a goddess; she is the 
womb of all creatures and abounds with every conceivable manner of thing, 
bright and dark. 

Sound, touch, colour, taste and smell—these are the five qualities of 
earth, O Dvijottamas. Smell always belongs to earth, and smell is of many 
kinds. Listen to these. It can be agreeable, disagreeable, sweet, sour, 
pungent, diffusive, compact, oily, dry or clear—of these ten kinds is the 
sense of smell that belongs to the earth. 


Sound, touch, likewise colour and taste, belong to the element of water. 
Attend to the qualities of taste: sweet, sour, pungent, bitter, astringent and 
saline — six are the varieties of taste. 

Sound, touch and colour are the three attributes of light. Colour is 
white, dark, red, blue, yellow and grey, short, long, minute, gross, square 
and circular—of twelve sorts is colour, which belongs to light. Venerable 
Brahmanas, knowers of dharma and truthful in speech, understand these. 

Sound and touch are the two qualities of wind. Touch is of various 
kinds—rough, cold, hot, tender, clear, hard, oily, smooth, slippery, painful 
and soft—so say Brahmanas who know dharma, and who are seers of truth, 
their tapasya crowned with success. 

Akasa, ethereal space, has only one quality, which is sound, Nada. The 
scale of sound is comprised of shadaja, rishabha, gandhara, madhyama, 
panchama, nishada and dhaivata—seven. Besides these, there are sounds 
agreeable and sounds discordant, compact, and complex. Thus, sound born 
of space is of ten kinds. Space is the highest of the five elements. 
Ahamkara, Ego, is above it; above Ego is Intellect, Mahat. Beyond Mahat is 
the Atman. Above Atman is the unmanifest Pradhana; beyond that is 
Purusha. 

He who knows who is superior and who inferior among existing 
beings, who knows the laws laid down in the Shastras with respect to all 
actions, and who himself is the soul of all creatures, attains to the Unfading 
Soul.’” 


CANTO 51 


¢ ‘RB rahma said, ‘Since the mind is the ruler of the five elements, in 
creating and controlling them, the mind is the soul of the 
elements. The mind always rules over the Mahabhutas. The Intellect has 
power, and is called the Kshetrajna. The mind yokes the senses as a 
charioteer yokes fine horses. The senses, the mind, and the intellect are 
always united with the Kshetrajna. The individual soul, the Jivatman, 
mounts the chariot to which mighty steeds are yoked, with Mahat for its 
reins, and goes where it will. 

With all five senses harnessed, with the mind for its charioteer, and the 
intellect for its eternal reins, is the great ratha of the Brahman. The man of 
learning and understanding knows the Brahmaratha and is never overcome 
by delusion, even whilst living in the world, in the midst of all creatures. 

The forest of Brahman begins with the Unmanifest and ends with 
material creations. It includes mobile and immobile entities, it receives light 
from the Sun and the Moon, and is adorned with planets and constellations. 
Networks of rivers and ranges of mountains embellish it on every side, as 
do seas and lakes and diverse water bodies, providing sustenance for all 
creatures. The Unmanifest Brahman is the final goal of every creature, the 
ultimate Gift. 

In the forest, the Kshetrajna moves eternally. When the Pralaya arrives, 
all the material entities in this world, mobile and rooted, are the first to find 
dissolution. Next to dissolve are the Gunas which constitute these creations 
and, after them, the five great elements upon which the Gunas are founded. 
Such are the layers of creation. 


Devas, Manavas, Gandharvas, Pisachas, Asuras and Rakshasas, all 
have sprung from Prakriti, and not from Karma, not from any other cause. 
The Brahmas, who are Creators of the universe, are born here again and 
again. All that springs from them dissolves, when the time comes, into 
those very Panchamahabhutas, like waves receding and being lost in the 
ocean. 

All the Mahabhutas are beyond the lesser elements that compose the 
universe. He who is released from the five elements comes to the highest 
goal. 

The omnipotent Prajapati created all this from just his divine mind, 
through tapasya; through tapasya, the Rishis attained to the status of Devas. 
Through dhyana and tapasya do those who achieve perfection, who subsist 
on fruits and roots, commune in Yoga with the Spirit of God; and they 
perceive all of the Trilokas—Swarga, Bhumi and the Patalas. 

Medicines and herbs and all the diverse sciences are acquired through 
tapasya alone, for all acquisition has penance for its root. Whatever is 
difficult of acquisition, difficult to learn, difficult to vanquish, difficult to 
pass through, all are achievable by tapas, for penance is irresistible. 

He who drinks, he who kills a Brahmana, who steals, who kills a foetus 
in the womb, who violates his guru’s bed—all these can exorcise their sins 
through tapasya well performed. Manavas, Pitris, Devas, sacrificial animals, 
beasts and birds, and all other creatures mobile and immobile, find salvation 
through tapasya. 

Thus did the Devas, blessed with great powers of maya, attain 
Swargaloka. Those full of egoism who perform rigorous karma, but with 
expectations of karma’s fruit, approach the presence of Prajapati; but true 
Mahatmas, are free of ahamkara and the sense of mineness, attain to the 
greatest and highest worlds through the pure contemplation of Yoga; they 
find Nirvana. These, who know the Atman, their hearts always joyful, gain 
true Communion, and eternal bliss. 

Great souls, free from ego and mine-ness, who are reborn after 
attaining to the fullness of Yoga contemplation, enter into the highest place, 
the Unmanifest Brahman, from which there is no return. Liberated entirely 
from Tamas and Rajas, the gunas of darkness and passion, and cleaving 
solely to Sattva, a man is released from every sin and creates all things. 

Such a one is known to be the Kshetrajna, in perfection. He that knows 
Him, knows the Veda. Attaining to pure knowledge by yoking the mind in 


dhyana, the Yogi should sit immaculate, self-restrained. Man inexorably 
becomes that on which his mind is set. This is an eternal mystery. That 
which has the Unmanifest for its beginning and gross materiality for its end, 
is without the Gunas, in truth. 

But do you understand That whose nature is Nirguna? Of two syllables 
is Mrityu, death; of three syllables is the eternal Brahman, Pranava, the 
Aum. Mineness is death, and its opposite is eternal. Men led by clouded 
intellects laud action, karma—never those who are counted among the truly 
great, the Ancients. 

Through karma a spirit is born with a body, which is constituted of the 
sixteen. Adhyatma Gyana consumes the Purusha, which is the Atman that 
retains a consciousness of the body. This ultimate knowledge is what those 
who quaff Amrita accept as being true. These, whose vision extends to the 
far shore of samsara, the ocean of life, have no attachment to karma, to 
action. 

The transcendent Purusha, in truth, is full of gyana and not of karma. 
He does not die who understands Him that is immortal, immutable, 
incomprehensible, eternal and indestructible — Him that is the yoked Soul in 
perfect communion, and who is past all attachments. He who thus 
understands the Soul, prior to which nothing exists, which is uncreated, 
immutable, unconquered, and incomprehensible, even to the drinkers of 
Amrita, certainly becomes himself incomprehensible and immortal. 

Expelling all outward impressions and restraining the soul in the Soul, 
Atmanatmanah, he understands that auspicious Brahman, than which 
nothing greater exists. Upon his understanding becoming clear, he attains to 
peace. The indication of peace is what turns the world into a dream. This is 
the goal of the emancipated ones, seekers of Nirvana intent on knowledge. 
They are unmoved witnesses to all the external phenomena of samsara, 
remaining unmoved by these. 

This is the goal of those who are unattached to the world; this is the 
eternal usage. This is the final acquisition of true gyanis. This is the eternal 
dharma, beyond reproach, the goal which is attained by one who is alike to 
all creatures, who is perfectly detached, who has no expectations, and who 
looks upon all things equally. 

I have now told you everything, O Dvijottamas. From now do as I have 
said and you will find Mukti.’” 


Spoken to thus by Brahma, those great sages lived as he counselled and 
attained realms of utmost felicity. Do you also, blessed one, live by the 
words of Brahma, O you of pure soul, and you will find eternal success and 
peace,” the ancient Brahmana said to his sishya.’ 

Krishna continues, ‘Thus instructed in the principles of the Sanatana 
Dharma by his guru, the sishya did everything he was told, O Arjuna, and 
attained Nirvana, he came to the condition beyond which there is never any 
more grief.’ 

Arjuna asks, ‘Who was that guru, O Krishna, and who was his disciple, 
Janardana? Tell me this, Lord, if you consider me worthy of knowing it.’ 

Krishna says, ‘I am the Guru, O Mahabaho, and know that the mind is 
my sishya. Through my love for you, Dhananjaya, I have revealed this 
mystery to you. If you have any love for me, perpetuator of the Kuru race, 
now that you have heard the instructions of the way of the Soul, O you of 
noble vows, you must live your life by them. When you practise the 
religion, your sins will leave you like darkness at dawn, and you will find 
absolute freedom. 

Once before, I expounded this same dharma to you, Mahabaho, when 
the hour of battle came. And now, O Bhaarata, it has been a long while 
since I saw my father, and I must go to him. So give me leave, Phalguna, 
my task here is accomplished.’ Arjuna says to Krishna, “We will go today 
from here to Hastinapura, city of elephants. Meeting Yudhishtira 
Dharmaraja there, you will tell him of your intention, and then return to 
Dwaravati.’” 


CANTO 52 


V aisampayana said, “Krishna summons Daruka, saying, ‘Let my 
chariot be yoked.’ Daruka returns quickly to say, ‘Your chariot is 
ready.’ Arjuna orders his attendants and soldiers, ‘Prepare yourselves, we 
leave today for Hastinapura.’ His men hasten to do his bidding, Rajan, and 
soon return, telling the Partha of mighty tejas, “We are equipped to move.’ 

Krishna and Arjuna then climb onto their ratha and set out on their 
journey, loving friends engaged in delightful conversation. Dhanajaya says 
to the Lord of the Vrishnis, ‘By your grace, Yudhishtira has won the war. 
All his enemies have been killed, and he has regained his kingdom whole, 
without a thorn in it. Madhusudana, in you the Pandavas have the most 
powerful protector. With you as our raft we crossed the Kuru sea. 

Krishna, this universe is your creation, and I salute you, O Soul of the 
Universe, best of all beings in it. I know you in such measure as you have 
allowed me in your boundless love. O slayer of Madhu, the soul of every 
creature is born of your tejas. All this great creation, nurture and destruction 
is your Lila, your playful sport. Earth and sky, Lord, are your maya. The 
universe, with all its mobile and unmoving bodies, is founded in you. You 
create the four kinds of beings. You create the Earth, the Sky and Heaven, O 
slayer of Madhu. The stainless light of the Moon is your smile. The seasons 
are your senses. The ever-moving wind is your breath, and death, existing 
eternally, is your anger. In your grace the Goddess of Prosperity dwells. 
Verily, Sree is always established in you, O you of ultimate intelligence. 
You are the sport in which creatures engage; you are their refuge and 


contentment; you are their intelligence, their compassion, their inclinations, 
their beauty. 

At the end of the cycle of time, it is you, O sinless one, who come as 
destruction. In an age I could not begin to enumerate all your attributes. You 
are Atman and Paramatman. I bow to you, O you of eyes like lotus-petals. 
Irresistible One, I have learnt from Narada and Devala and Dwaipayana, as 
well as from Bhishma, that all this Akhanda rests on you. You are the one 
Lord of all creatures. 

And Janardana, Anagha, whatever you have told me to do, out of your 
love and favour for me, I will accomplish in entirety. How wonderful is 
what you have done for the Pandavas, destroying Dhritarashtra’s son in war. 
Before battle even broke out, you had consumed the enemy host, which I 
then vanquished on the field. Though the victory appeared to be mine, Lord, 
it was you who killed Duryodhana on Kurukshetra, and Karna, and the 
sinful Saindhava, as well as Bhurisravas. 

Devakinandana, you are pleased with me, and I will do as you have 
told me, without hesitation or doubt. I will go to Yudhishtira and ask him to 
give you leave to return to Dwaraka. Lord, O absolute knower of dharma, I 
accept that it is time for you to depart. You will indeed soon see your father 
Vasudeva, my matulan. Janardana, you will see the irresistible Baladeva and 
all the other lords of the Vrishnis.’ 

Conversing thus, the two arrive at the city named after the elephant, 
where they ride cheerfully into Dhritarashtra’s palace like that of Indra 
himself. Entering the Kuru sabha, O King, they see seated before 
Dhritarashtra and Gandhari of great wisdom the sage Vidura, Yudhishtira 
and the mighty Bhimasena, the two sons of Madri and the unvanquished 
Yuyutsu, Kunti and the beautiful Krishnaa, the other royal women of 
Bhaarata’s race, Subhadra first among them, and all the ladies who wait on 
Gandhari. 

Approaching Dhritarashtra, the two Parantapas announce themselves to 
the blind king and touch his feet, as they do the feet of Gandhari and Kunti, 
Yudhishtira Dharmaraja and Bhima. Embracing Vidura, they enquire after 
his welfare. In the company of these, Arjuna and Krishna return to sit 
before Dhritarashtra again. When night falls, Dhritarashtra dismisses all the 
Kurupraviras, Krishna as well, and they depart to their own apartments. 
Krishna retires with Arjuna to his chambers. Duly worshipped and provided 


with every comfort and luxury, the divine Krishna of fathomless intellect 
passes the night in contented sleep, with Dhananjaya for his companion. 

When day breaks, the two heroes perform their morning ablutions and 
rituals, put on fine raiment and ornaments and come to Yudhishtira’s palace 
where the Dharmaraja sits with his ministers around him. The two 
Mahatmans, Krishna and Arjuna, come before Yudhishtira even like the 
Aswins before Indra. Greeting the king, who is overjoyed to see them, the 
incomparable Vrishni and the great Kuru hero sit themselves down with his 
leave. 

The astute Yudhishtira can see that a topic for discussion is looming. 
He says, ‘Kshatriyas, O you foremost ones of the Yadu and the Kuru 
vamsas, it seems that you have something to say to me. Tell me what is in 
your hearts. I will do whatever it is that you want. Do not hesitate.’ Arjuna 
humbly approaches his brother and says, “Krishna here has been long away 
from his home, O King. With your leave, he wishes to return to Dwaraka to 
see his father. If you think it proper, allow him to go now to the city of the 
Anartas. Great Kshatriya, it becomes you to give him your leave.’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘O lotus-eyed one, be you blessed. Madhusudana, 
leave this very day for Dwaravati to see your father, greatest of the Sura 
vamsa. Kesava, Mahabaho, you have my leave, for surely it has been a long 
time since you saw my uncle and the Devi Devaki. Meet Vasudeva and the 
mighty Baladeva, and convey my worship to both, as they deserve. But, O 
Krishna, think daily of me, as also of Bhima, of Phalguna and Nakula and 
Sahadeva. And, sinless one, having seen the Anartas, your father and the 
Vrishnis, Mahabaho, you must return here for my Aswamedha yagna. 

Go now, peerless Krishna, and take with you gems and other wealth; O 
hero of the Satwatas, take whatever else you like. It is through your grace, 
Kesava, that all our enemies have perished and the world has come under 
our dominion.’ Krishna, foremost of men, answers Yudhishtira Dharmaraja 
of the Kuru vamsa, ‘Mahabaho, all jewels and gemstones, all the gold and 
wealth, and all this Earth, are yours and yours alone. Whatever riches are in 
Dwaravati, my lord, are also yours.’ Dharmaputra replies, “Tathaastu, so be 
it, and then he worships Krishna of ineffable tejas. Krishna then goes to 
meet his aunt Kunti. He offers her worship and walks around her in 
pradakshina. She blesses and embraces him in return, worshipping him in 
her heart, as do all the others present, Vidura first among them. 


Then, setting Subhadra beside him, and with the blessings of 
Yudhishtira and Kunti, Mahabaho Janardana sets out from Hastinapura in 
his blazing chariot, followed beyond the city gates by a crowd of citizens. 
The Kshatriya who flies the banner of Hanuman on his ratha is 
accompanied by Satyaki, Madri’s two sons, Vidura of fathomless 
intelligence, and great Bhima, his tread like that of an elephant. Then, 
Mahatejasvin Janardana asks all those extenders of the Kuru kingdom and 
Vidura to turn back and says to his sarathi Daruka and to Satyaki, ‘Let our 
horses fly!’ 

With that, and Satyaki of the line of Sini in his own chariot beside him, 
Krishna Parantapa rides home towards Dwaraka, even like Indra of a 
hundred sacrifices returning to Devaloka after slaying all his enemies.” 


CANTO 53 


V aisampayana said, “When Krishna sets forth, the Pandavas and the 

other great Parantapas of the Kuru vamsa embrace him one by one, 
then sadly return with their attendants to the city of elephants. Arjuna 
repeatedly clasps the Vrishni hero in his arms. He remains rooted to the 
spot, gazing after Govinda until he disappears from sight and indeed, so it is 
with Krishna. Attend to the signs and omens that attend the Avatara’s 
departure from Hastinapura. The wind blows high before the chariot, 
sweeping the ground clear of dust and brambles. Indra rains down scented 
showers and scatters celestial blooms over Krishna. 

As the Mahabaho rides on, he arrives at a parched desert where he 
encounters the Maharishi Utanka, of measureless tejas. The lotus-leaf-eyed 
Krishna worships the ascetic, and is worshipped in return. Krishna inquires 
courteously after the Muni’s welfare. The Brahmanottama honours 
Madhava, and says to him, ‘O Saurin, when you went to the Kurus and the 
sons of Pandu, did you succeed in establishing a lasting fraternal accord 
between them? 

Tell me everything, Kesava. Have you come after resolving the enmity 
between your kinsmen, who are, I know, so dear to you? Will the five sons 
of Pandu, and the sons of Dhritarashtra now enjoy the world together in 
gladness with you, O best of the Vrishnis? Will all the kings of the world 
find felicity in their respective kingdoms as a result of the peace you made 
between the Kuru cousins? O son, has the faith I have always had in you 
borne fruit among the Kauravas?’ 


The Blessed and Holy One replies, ‘I did everything I could, great 
sage, to effect a reconciliation among the Kuru princes. Alas, when I could 
not succeed, there was a great and terrible war between them in which all 
the scions of Bharata and the other kings of the earth perished with their 
followers and kinsmen. Neither by force nor by intelligence can anyone 
change the course of destiny, O sinless Mahamuni, as you well know. 

The Kauravas would not heed the counsel which Bhishma and Vidura 
gave them respecting me. They encountered their cousins in battle and 
became guests in the halls of Yama. Only the five Pandavas remain alive. 
All their sons, friends and kinsmen were slaughtered, as were all the sons of 
Dhritarashtra, with their sons and kinsmen.’ 

Rage grips Utanka. His eyes wide with wrath, he says to Krishna, ‘You 
could have made peace between the Kurus, your own kin and dear to you. 
But you did not do so, O slayer of Madhu, and for that I will now curse you. 
You could have compelled your cousins to desist from carnage, but you did 
not, O Madhava, and I will curse you for your indifference which has 
soaked the earth with the blood of noble Kshatriyas whose hearts were 
seized by delusion.’ 

Krishna replies, ‘O scion of Bhrigu’s race, I ask your forgiveness but, 
before you pronounce your curse on me, you must listen to what I have to 
say about the Atman. Also know, best of Munis, that no man, even one of 
your ascetic merit, can overcome me. I have no wish to see all your punya 
destroyed in that vain attempt. You have a vast store of blazing tapasya. 
You have pleased your gurus and your elders. Dvijottama, I know that you 
have observed brahmacharya since your very childhood. I have no wish to 
see the loss or even the diminution of your great tapasya, achieved with so 
much effort.’” 


CANTO 54 


: ‘U tanka says, ‘O Kesava, expound that faultless Adhyatma to me. 
When I have heard your discourse, I will decide if I should bless 
or curse you, Janardana.’ 

Krishna says, ‘Know that the three Gunas, Tamas, Rajas and Sattva, 
exist depending on me as their source and their refuge. So also, O Dviya, 
know that the Rudras and the Vasus have sprung from me. In me are all 
creatures, and in all creatures do I exist; know this, and have no doubt about 
it. Know, regenerate one, that all the tribes of the Daityas, all the Yakshas, 
Gandharvas, Rakshasas, Nagas and Apsaras have sprung from me. 

Whatever is deemed existent and non-existent, manifest and 
unmanifest, mortal and immortal—all have me for their soul. The fourfold 
courses of dharma attached to the four modes of life, and all the Vedic 
karmas, have me for their soul. Whatever is non-existent, whatever is 
existent and non-existent, and whatever transcends that which is existent 
and non-existent, all that constitutes the universe—are from me. There is 
nothing higher or beyond me, who am the eternal God of gods. 

O Bhargava, know that all the Vedas with their root in the original 
syllable Pranava, the AUM, are one with me. Know, O son of Bhrigu’s race, 
that I am the sacrificial stake; I am the Soma rasa; I am the Charu prepared 
at sacrifices and offered to the Devas; I am the Homa; I am the rituals which 
sacrificers perform to gratify the gods; I am the pourer of the sacrificial 
libation, and I am the Havis or libation that is poured. 

I am the Adharyu. I am the Kalpaka; and I am indeed the most 
sanctified Havis. It is me whom the Udgatri hymns with his songs. In all 


rites of expiation, O Brahmana, the utterers of auspicious mantras and 
benedictions fraught with peace hymn my praises, who am the artificer of 
the universe. 

Know, O Dvijottama, that Dharma is my first-born child, sprung from 
my mind, whose essence is compassion for all creatures. Constantly 
transforming myself, I take birth in diverse wombs to uphold that son of 
mine, with the help of men now living or those gone from this world. I do 
this to protect and establish righteousness. In the forms that I assume to 
accomplish my purpose, I am known in the three worlds as Vishnu, Brahma 
and Sankara. 

I am the origin and I am the death of all things. I am the Creator of all 
that exists, and its Destroyer. Knowing no change myself, I am the scourge 
of all those that live in sin. In every Yuga I mend the causeway of Dharma, 
entering into diverse wombs from my desire to do good to my creatures. 

When I live among the Devas, O Bhargava, I act in every respect as a 
Deva. When I live in the order of the Gandharvas, I act in every respect as a 
Gandharva; when among the Nagas, as a Naga. When among the Yakshas 
or Rakshasas, I conduct myself as one of them. And now I have taken birth 
as a human, and I must act like a man. 

I appealed to the Kauravas, yes, even piteously. Yet, deluded and 
stupefied as they were, they would not listen to me. Then I was filled with 
anger and frightened them by showing them a glimpse of my Viswarupa, to 
warn them of the consequences of not heeding what I said. But when I 
resumed this human form, adharma gripped them again, and they were once 
more in the clutches of time and fate. Punishment for their sins inexorably 
overtook the sons of Dhritarashtra. 

All of them have been killed righteously in battle and have, without 
doubt, found Swarga. Dvijottama, the Pandavas have acquired great fame. 
This is all I have to say to you.’” 


CANTO 55 


¢ "U tanka says, ‘I know you, O Krishna, to be the Creator of the 

universe, and do not doubt that it is through your grace that I 
have this knowledge. O you of unfading glory, by being devoted to you my 
heart has found blissful peace. Know, O Parantapa, that my heart is no 
longer inclined to curse you. If, Janardana, I deserve the least grace from 
you, show me once your sovereign form, your Viswarupa.’ 

Pleased with Utanka, the Holy Lord then shows Utanka that eternal 
Vaishnava Rupa which Arjuna saw on Kurukshetra. Utanka sees Krishna’s 
cosmic, universal form with countless awesome arms; its splendour is that 
of the light and fire of a thousands suns. Krishna stand revealed before the 
Rishi as God, filling all space and all time, his faces on every side. 

Seeing that Viswarupa, the Brahman is wonderstruck, spellbound. 

Utanka says, ‘O I bow to you, whose handiwork is the universe; I bow 
to you, O Soul of the universe, O Parent of all things! You cover all the 
Earth with your feet, and with your head you fill the firmament. Your body 
fills all that lies between Swarga and Bhumi; all the cardinal points of the 
sky are covered by your arms. O you of unfading glory, you are all this, 
everything that exists! I cannot stand this vision, Lord of blazing light, and I 
beg you, withdraw this immortal form of yours and return to your human 
shape, which also I know is eternal!’ 

O Janamejaya, Krishna then, gratified, says to Utanka, “Ask me for a 
boon!’ Utanka replies, ‘For now this is all the boon I wish for, O glorious 
one, foremost of all beings—that I have seen this form of yours.’ Krishna, 
however, says again to him, ‘A vision of my Viswarupa cannot be fruitless. 


Ask me for something.’ Utanka says, ‘I must not refuse you, O Lord. Water 
is scarce in deserts such as this one. Grant that I have water wherever and 
whenever I wish for it.’ Returning to his human form, the Supreme Lord 
says to Utanka, “Whenever you want water, think of me!’ 

Krishna then rides again towards Dwaraka. 

Later, one day, the illustrious Utanka was wandering through the 
waterless desert, parched with thirst. The Rishi thought of Krishna’s boon, 
and at once he saw a naked hunter, a fierce-looking Chandala, smeared with 
dirt, surrounded by a pack of dogs and carrying a sword and a bow and 
arrows. Utanka saw a copious stream of water issuing from the hunter’s 
linga. The wild Chandala said to Utanka, ‘O Bhargava, take this water from 
me and quench your thirst, for 1 am moved by great pity for you, seeing you 
so parched in this desert.’ 

Utanka showed no inclination to accept the water; afflicted with hunger 
and thirst, he gave way to wrath and even began to censure Krishna in his 
mind. The hunter repeatedly said to the Rishi, ‘Drink!’ But the ascetic 
refused the water thus offered. Instead he spoke harshly to the Chandala, 
who immediately vanished with his pack of dogs. Seeing that wondrous 
occultation, Utanka was abashed. Yet, thinking still that Krishna had 
deceived him in the boon, he staggered on through the arid desert. Then 
Krishna himself appeared before the Brahmana as the hunter had done. 
Utanka said to him, ‘Foremost of beings, it was scarcely proper for you to 
offer water to me, the foremost of Brahmanas, in the form of a hunter’s 
urine!’ 

Krishna assuaged him with soft words, explaining, “I offered you water 
in an appropriate form but you did not divine it. I had asked Indra himself 
for nectar for you. I said to him, “Give Amrita to Utanka in the form of 
water.” Indra replied, “It is not right for a mortal to become immortal. Let 
some other boon be granted to Utanka.” He said this to me repeatedly, O 
you of Bhrigu’s race, but I insisted, “Amrita must be given to Utanka.” The 
Lord of the Devas then said, “If Amrita is indeed to be given to him, I will 
assume the form of a Chandala and offer it to him. If he accepts, let him 
drink the nectar of immortality, but if he shuns me, on no account will it be 
offered to him again.” 

Having made this compact with me, Vasava appeared before you as the 
hunter to offer you the Amrita. But you shunned him because he came as a 
Chandala. Ah, great was your fault—yet I will do whatever I can to slake 


your thirst. On the days, O Dvija, when you feel thirsty, water-laden rain- 
clouds will rise over this desert and give you fragrant, sweet water to drink. 
Those clouds, O son of Bhrigu’s race, will become known in the world as 
the clouds of Utanka!’ Utanka was filled with joy and to this day, O 
Bhaarata, those clouds of Utanka appear and bring rain to deserts.” 


CANTO 56 


anamejaya asked, “With what tapasya was the high-souled Utanka 

endowed that he could pronounce a curse on Vishnu himself, who is 
the source of all puissance?” 

Vaisampayana said, “O Janamejaya, Utanka was endowed with the 
most austere penances. He was devoted to his guru. Blessed with awesome 
tejas, he abstained from worshipping anyone else. All the children of the 
Rishis, O Bhaarata, wished that their devotion to their gurus should be as 
great as that of Utanka. Gautama’s satisfaction with Utanka, of all his 
numerous disciples, and his affection for him were great indeed, O 
Janamejaya. 

Gautama was gratified with the self-restraint and purity of conduct that 
characterized Utanka, with his deeds of prowess and the services he 
rendered to his guru. One after another, thousands of disciples received 
Gautama’s permission to return home after the completion of their tutelage, 
but Utanka was not allowed to leave the asrama. In the course of time, 
decrepitude overtook Maharishi Utanka but, because of his devotion to his 
guru, he was not conscious of it. 

One day, he set out to fetching fuel for his preceptor’s sacred fire, and 
returned bearing a heavy load of wood. Toil-worn, hungry and labouring 
under the load he bore on his head, he flung his burden down to the ground, 
O chastiser of foes. One of his matted locks had got caught in the wood. 
When the dry branches were thrown down, with them fell that lock of 
matted white hair. 


Only then, seeing that his hair had turned white, did Utanka realize that 
he had grown old and, overcome by a shock of grief, began to weep. At her 
father’s command, his guru’s daughter, who knew every dharma, whose 
eyes were like the petals of a lotus, whose hips were full and round, moved 
forward to contain Utanka’s tears in her cupped palms, with her head bent 
down. The tears burned her hands and she was forced to let them fall onto 
the earth. The Earth herself could not bear the scalding tears of Utanka! 
Gautama asked his sishya, ‘Why, my son, are you so grief-stricken today? 
Tell me calmly and quietly, O learned Muni. I wish to hear it in detail.’ 

Utanka said, ‘With my mind devoted to you and my every thought 
dwelling only on you, with being always absorbed in doing what pleased 
you, I have lived here for so long that old age has overtaken me without my 
knowing it. I have never known any worldly happiness. Although I have 
lived with you for a hundred years, you have not given me leave to go, 
while so many other disciples of yours, many much younger than me, have 
left with your sanction. Why, thousands of great Brahmanas have 
completed their tutelage with you, and have left and gone on to become 
gurus themselves, with sishyas of their own!’ 

Gautama said, “Through my love and affection for you, and because of 
your devoted services to me, Dvijottama, a long time has passed without 
my being aware of it. If, Bhargava, you now wish to leave my asrama, do so 
without delay, you have my leave.’ Utanka said, ‘What shall I give you, my 
guru, as dakshina, before I leave?’ Gautama said, “To serve and gratify the 
guru is a sishya’s highest dakshina; and in these you have pleased me 
exceedingly, more than any other disciple. Today, if you became a youth of 
sixteen years, Brahmana, I would give you my own daughter to be your 
wife, for no other woman could wait upon your blazing tejas, or gratify 
you.’ 

Immediately, Utanka became a youth and took his guru’s daughter for 
his wife. He went to Gautama’s wife and said, ‘What shall I give you as my 
final dakshina? It is my fervent wish to please you, with my very life. If you 
wish for the most wondrous and priceless gemstone in the world, I will 
fetch it for you through my tapasya.’ Ahalya said, ‘I am already most 
pleased with you, Brahmana, with your unremitting devotion, O sinless one. 
That is enough. Be you blessed, and go wherever you wish.’ But Utanka 
said again, ‘Command me, O my mother, for it is only meet that I do you 
some great service.’ Ahalya said, ‘Blessed one, then bring me the heavenly 


earrings which the wife of Saudasa wears. If you do this, your dakshina to 
your master will be paid in full.’ 

Utanka said, “Tathaastu, so be it!’ and, Janamejaya, he resolved to fetch 
those precious earrings for his preceptor’s wife. Losing no time, Utanka 
went to Saudasa, who had been cursed by Vasishta to be a Rakshasa. 

Meanwhile Gautama observed to his wife, ‘Utanka is not to be seen 
today.’ Ahalya told her husband how Utanka had gone to fetch the jewelled 
earrings of Saudasa’s queen. Gautama reproved her, ‘You have not been 
wise in sending him on such a task. Vasishta has cursed Saudasa to be a 
Rakshasa, and that king will kill our Utanka.’ Ahalya said, ‘Swami, I did 
not know this when I sent Utanka. But through your grace, let him not meet 
with any harm.’ Gautama said, ‘Let it be so!’ 

Meanwhile, Utanka met King Saudasa in a deep and lonely forest.” 


CANTO 57 


V aisampayana said, “Seeing the king who had become a Rakshasa, 

his face frightful, his long wild beard smeared with human blood, 
the Brahmana Utanka was not in the least agitated. Terrifying to behold, 
like another Yama, Saudasa loomed over Utanka and said, ‘Brahmanottama, 
by good fortune you have come to me at the sixth hour of the day when I 
am looking for food.’ Utanka said, ‘O King, know that I have come for the 
sake of my guru. The wise have said that a man must not be harmed while 
he is serving his preceptor.’ The king said, ‘Best of Brahmanas, food has 
been ordained for me at the sixth hour of the day. I am hungry and I cannot 
allow you to escape with your life today.’ 

Utanka said calmly, ‘Let it be so, O King, let us make a compact 
between us. When I no longer range the world in service of my guru, I will 
come to you again and yield myself to you. Best of kings, I have heard that 
the object I seek for my preceptor is in your possession, and I solicit you for 
it. Daily you make gifts of the most priceless gemstones to superior 
Brahmanas. You are one from whom gifts may be accepted in dharma, and 
know that I am one worthy of receiving daana from you. Having taken for 
my master what you give, I will return and submit myself to you. This I 
solemnly swear, and I do not lie; never in my life have I spoken an untruth, 
not even in jest: what then of a grave occasion such as this?’ 

Saudasa said, ‘If I do indeed possess what you want for your guru and I 
am able to give it to you, and if I can be regarded as one from whom such a 
gift is acceptable, tell me what it is you want.’ Utanka said, ‘O Saudasa, in 
my estimation you are indeed a worthy person from whom gifts may be 


accepted. I have come to beg as alms the jewelled earrings worn by your 
queen.’ Saudasa said, “Learned and regenerate Rishi, those earrings belong 
to my wife and it is she who should be asked for them. Do you, therefore, 
solicit some other thing from me, and I shall give it to you, O you of 
excellent vows.’ 

Utanka said, ‘If I am an authority on this question, then yours is no 
excuse. Give those jewelled earrings to me. Be truthful in speech, O King.’ 
The king said once more to Utanka, ‘At my word, go to my good queen, 
and ask her for what you want. Commanded by me and asked by you, she 
will surely give you those precious earrings of hers.’ Utanka said, ‘Where, 
O ruler of men, can I meet your queen? Why do you not go to her 
yourself?’ Saudasa said, ‘I cannot see her today, for the sixth hour of the 
day has come. You will find her near a resplendent fountain.’ 

Utanka left Saudasa’s presence and, finding Queen Madayanti, told her 
what he had come for. When she heard that her husband had sent him, that 
Devi of the large eyes said to the sagacious Utanka, ‘If is as my husband 
said, O Brahmana, you must assure me, sinless one, that you speak the 
truth. Bring me some sign from my husband. These celestial earrings of 
mine, wrought with priceless gemstones, are such that the Devas and 
Yakshas and Maharishis remain on the lookout for a chance to bear them 
away. If set down upon the Earth at any time, they are likely to be spirited 
away by Nagas; if worn by anyone who eats impure food, the Yakshas 
would take them away; and if anyone wearing them were to fall asleep, the 
Devas would take them. 

Brahmanottama, the reason these precious things are coveted by the 
Devas, Rakshasas and Nagas is because ceaselessly, day and night, these 
marvellous earrings yield gold. At night, they shine brightly, attracting the 
subtle and powerful rays of the stars and constellations. Holy One, anyone 
who wears them is at once freed from hunger, thirst and fear of every kind. 
Whoever wears these earrings is also free from the fear of poison, fire and 
indeed every kind of danger. If a small person wears them, they shrink in 
size accordingly; if the wearer be tall or large, they expand. Such are the 
magical properties of my earrings, and they are praised and honoured 
throughout the three worlds. I cannot part with them carelessly, so bring me 
some sure sign from my husband.’” 


CANTO 58 


V aisampayana said, “Utanka went back to King Saudasa, who was 

always well-disposed towards his friends, and asked him for some 
sign to convince Madayanti. Best of the Ikshwakus, Saudasa gave him the 
sign. ‘Say to my queen that her husband said, “This accursed condition of 
mine is intolerable, and I see no refuge or salvation for myself. Know it to 
be my wish, and give away the jewelled earrings to the Brahmana.””’ 

Utanka went back to the queen and repeated what her lord had said, at 
which Madayanti gave Utanka her earrings. Having acquired them Utanka 
went back again to the king and said to him, ‘I want to know, O Rajan, the 
secret import of the words which you sent to your queen.’ 

Saudasa said, ‘Kshatriyas have honoured Brahmanas from the very 
beginning of creation. However, through time, kings have also given much 
offence to the holy ones. As for myself, I am always bent in humility before 
them, yet it is through a Brahmana’s curse that you see me in this wretched 
condition. I see having Madayanti for my queen as my only hope for 
redemption. Indeed, O best of Mukti-seekers, I do not see any other hope of 
deliverance for me by which I may enter the portals of Swarga, or even 
continue living in this world. It is impossible for a king who is hostile to 
Brahmanas to live in this world, or attain to happiness in the next. You and 
your guru are great Brahmanas, and that is why I have given you my 
jewelled earrings. Now it is for you to keep the solemn compact you made 
with me today.’ 

Utanka said, ‘O King, I will surely honour the pact I made with you. I 
will come back and surrender myself to you. But, O Parantapa, I have a 


question I want to ask you.’ Saudasa replied, ‘Say, learned Brahmana, what 
is on your mind, and I will answer you without hesitation.’ Utanka said, 
‘Knowers of the laws of dharma say that Brahmanas are restrained in 
speech. They say one who wrongs his friends is regarded as vile as a thief. 
Today, O King, you have become my friend. So I ask you, as my friend, 
best of men, for your sage counsel. As for myself, I have now obtained 
what I wanted and what I came to you for. You are a flesh-eater, a Rakshasa 
who feeds on men. Tell me, is it appropriate for me to come back to you, or 
not?’ 

Saudasa said, ‘If it is proper for me, best of Brahmanas, to advise you 
as my friend, I would have to tell you to never come back. Bhargava, this is 
what would benefit you and is in your own best interest. If you return to me, 
Brahmana, you will surely meet with death.’ At Saudasa’s words, Utanka 
took his leave of the king and, taking the marvellous earrings with him, set 
out for his guru Gautama’s asrama to deliver his gift to his preceptor’s wife. 
Going with some speed, in a hurry to please Ahalya, he secured the gift he 
bore even as Queen Madayanti had warned him to, tying the earrings safely 
in the folds of his black deer-skin. 

Having gone some distance, he felt hungry and saw before him a bilwa 
tree whose branches bent down with the weight of the ripe fruit they bore. 
He climbed the tree and, tying his deer-skin in the fork of a low branch, 
began to pluck the bilwa fruit. As he was intent on his task, some fruit fell 
onto the black antelope hide in which the earrings were carefully secreted. 
The knot securing the skin to the tree came undone, and it fell down to the 
ground: the sparkling earrings lay exposed. 

A serpent of the race of the great Naga Airavata saw the shining 
jewels, and, seizing the earrings, slid into a large anthill. Utanka, filled with 
anger and panic, leapt down to the ground and, picking up his Brahmana’s 
staff, began to poke the anthill with it to fetch the snake out. Burning with 
rage, the Brahmana savaged the anthill and the ground beneath it for thirty- 
five days, never pausing. 

Bhumi Devi, the Goddess Earth, trembled from the unendurable force 
of Utanka’s staff, her body torn and bleeding, but Utanka continued his 
excavation relentlessly, digging a path down to the underworld where the 
Nagas dwell. Indra, armed with his Vajra, flew down in his chariot drawn 
by green horses to the ferocious Brahmana. The Deva king saw Utanka at 
his task. Assuming the form of a Brahmana concerned by the distress of 


Utanka, Indra said to him, “You cannot make a path down into Nagaloka, 
that realm is thousands of yojanas deep. No danda can make a path that 
long.’ 

Utanka said, ‘If I do not recover those earrings from the realm of the 
Nagas, I will die before your very eyes in the attempt, O Dvijottama.’ 
Recognizing that there was no way he could dissuade Utanka from his 
purpose, Indra infused the Muni’s staff with the power of his thunderbolt. 
At that the Earth helplessly succumbed, O Janamejaya, yielding a way to 
the nether world where the Nagas dwell. 

Down the path went Utanka the Brahmana, and saw the Nagaloka 
stretching away for thousands of yojanas on every side. He beheld golden 
walls encrusted with marvellous gemstones, shining and iridescent, as far as 
his eyes could see, many pellucid rivers and tanks of pure shimmering 
water with flights of broad crystal steps. Utanka saw numerous trees on 
which were perched beautiful and exotic songbirds, and heard the magical 
music of those warblers. He saw the awesome gate leading into that realm, 
full five yojanas high and a hundred yojanas wide. Dispirited, he despaired 
of retrieving the earrings. 

Then there appeared before him a black horse with a white tail. Its face 
and eyes were of a coppery hue, and it blazed with light and energy. The 
great horse said to Utanka, ‘Do you blow into the Apana dwara of my body, 
my anus, and you shall have back the earrings stolen from you by a scion of 
the race of Airavata! Do not hesitate to do my bidding, O son; you did it 
often in the past in your guru Gautama’s asrama.’ Utanka said, ‘How did I 
know you in my master’s hermitage? Tell me how I did in the past what you 
now bid me do.’ The wonderful black steed said, ‘Know, learned 
Brahmana, that I am the guru of your guru, for Iam Agni Jatavedas! You 
have always worshipped me for your guru’s sake, with a pure heart, and 
body. It is for that reason that I have come here to help you accomplish 
what you want. Do not delay, do as I say!’ 

Utanka did as he was commanded. Gratified with him, Agni blazed up 
to consume everything around. From the pores of his body dense banks of 
smoke issued and spread, suffusing Nagaloka, O Bhaarata, enveloping it in 
a pall of darkness. Cries of alarm rang out from the palaces of the 
Airavatas. Led by Vasuki himself, O Janamejaya, the Nagas were panic- 
stricken. Shrouded in that dense smoke, the great edifices became invisible, 
like blithe woods and hills suddenly engulfed by a mighty forest. The 


Nagas, their eyes red and streaming, came out of their mansions to 
investigate. When Mahatman Utanka of blinding tejas told them why he 
had come, the Nagas prostrated themselves before him in abject worship. 
Setting all their aged and young before him, they bowed their heads and, 
folding their hands, cried, ‘Have mercy on us, Holy One!’ 

Offering him padya to wash his feet and arghya to worship him, the 
Nagas returned the heavenly earrings to Utanka. Taking the precious 
ornaments, then worshipping and circumambulating the Fire God in 
pradakshina, Utanka set out for his guru’s asrama and arrived there swiftly. 
He gave the earrings to Gautama’s wife Ahalya and told his preceptor all 
that had transpired with Vasuki and the other Nagas. So it was, O sinless 
Janamejaya, that Mahatman Utanka fetched those jewelled karnikara for his 
guru’s wife, and such was the prowess of that exceptional Brahmana gained 
by his most austere tapasya. This I believe is what you wanted to know 
about that Sage.” 


CANTO 59 


anamejaya asked, “What did the mighty-armed Govinda of great 

renown do after conferring his boon on Utanka?” 

Vaisampayana said, “Krishna, accompanied by Satyaki, rides on 
towards Dwaraka in his chariot yoked to his magnificent steeds of 
unparalleled swiftness. Passing lakes and rivers, forests and hills, he comes 
at last to Dwaravati, city of the sea. The festival of Raivataka has begun 
when the lotus-eyed Krishna arrives at the city of the Anartas with Satyaki 
Yuyudhana beside him. Raivataka hill shines with many-coloured 
splendour, clothed in brightness and beauty, covered with diverse koshas, 
mantles of jewels and gems. Decked with colourful garlands of gold and 
festooned with flowers, its great trees resembling the kalpavrikshas of 
Indra’s Nandana, and its many golden pillars bearing lighted lamps, the hill 
is lustrous in beauty both by night and by day. 

Even at twilight it seems to be high noon, such is the light around the 
caves and fountains. On all sides, brilliant flags wave in the air with little 
bells that tinkle in the breeze. Raivataka hill rings with the melodious songs 
of the Vrishnis, both men and women. Ah, that hill is as enchanting as Meru 
with his treasures of precious gemstones. As men and women sing aloud, 
excited and full of joy, the swell of their music echoes to the very skies, O 
Bhaarata. 

People give vent to their exhilaration with cheers and loud whoops of 
delight. The sound of thousands of voices raised together in merrymaking 
fills the ear and the heart with gladness. Shops and stalls abound, dispensing 
diverse viands, festive articles and all manner of goods. Music from vinas, 


venus and mridangas fill the clear, crisp air. All kinds of food and drink are 
freely distributed and the blind, the stricken and the distressed are showered 
with lavish gifts. With all this, the mountain festival upon Raivataka is 
auspicious indeed. 

Many are the sacred caves and shrines upon the breast of that 
mountain, O Kshatriya, within which dwell great sages of the highest 
tapasya and dharma. Pavilions and mansions built for the heroes of 
Vrishni’s race to sport in during the magnificent festival glitter day and 
night, making the hill as resplendent as Swarga. In truth, upon Krishna’s 
return to his home, that prince of mountains is like Indra’s own Amaravati. 

Welcomed ecstatically by his kinfolk, Krishna goes gladly to his own 
splendid palace. Satyaki also goes to his own mansion, his heart full of joy 
and satisfaction. Krishna has returned home after a long while, having 
accomplished the most difficult feats on the field of war, even as Indra 
triumphed over the Danava hosts. The heroes of the Bhoja, Vrishni and 
Andhaka clans all come forward to receive the great one, like the Devas 
going to receive him of a hundred sacrifices. Krishna of fathomless 
intelligence honours them in return, and enquires after their welfare. With a 
gratified heart he then greets his father and mother. The Mahabaho is 
embraced by both of them and soothed with tender blessings and caresses. 
He assumes his throne with all the Vrishnis sitting around him. Having 
washed his feet and dispelled his fatigue, Krishna of indefatigable tejas, in 
response to his father Vasudeva’s questions, now recounts the great deeds 
and events of the Mahabharata yuddha.” 


CANTO 60 


¢ °V asudeva says, ‘O Vrishni, I have often heard men describe from 

hearsay the wonderful battle between the Kurus and the 

Pandavas. You, however, have seen it with your own eyes. Sinless one, tell 

us the whole story of how war broke out between the high-souled Pandavas, 

on the one side, and on the other Bhishma and Karna, Kripa and Drona, 

Salya and many more—indeed, the multitudinous Kshatriyas hailing from 
diverse realms, all varied in mien and attire, and all masters of arms.’ 

Urged by his father, and in the presence of his mother, Krishna of the 
lotus-petal eyes recounts the Great War in which all the Kaurava heroes 
perished. ‘Most wonderful were the feats of all those Kshatriya 
Mahatmanas on the field,’ he says, ‘And because of their vast numbers, not 
in hundreds of years can all those exploits be told. I will tell you only about 
the most noteworthy of them, in brief, the majestic deeds of the kings of the 
Earth. O you of godlike splendour, Bhishma of the Kuru vamsa became the 
Senapati of Duryodhana’s army, with the eleven divisions of the Kaurava 
princes under his command, even like Vasava of the celestial forces. 

Shrewd Dhrishtadyumna, protected by the blessed Arjuna, was created 
Senapati of the seven aksauhinis of the sons of Pandu. For ten days the 
battle between the Kurus and the Pandavas raged, under the command of 
these two. So awesome and fierce was it that one’s hair stood on end. On 
the eleventh day, Sikhandin, with Arjuna at his side, cut down Gangaputra 
Bhishma. He lay pierced through, yet alive, on his pitiless Kshatriya bed of 
arrows, waiting like an ascetic until the Sun turned from his southward 


journey to embark again on his auspicious northerly course; only then did 
that hero give up his prana and leave his lacerated body. 

With Bhishma’s fall, Drona became Duryodhana’s Senapati, even as 
Kavya did of the lord of the Daityas. That greatest of Dvija warriors led the 
nine surviving Kaurava aksauhinis, supported by Kripa, Vrisha and others. 
The Panchala prince Dhrishtadyumna, sagacious knower of all the 
devastras, still led the Pandava legions. Bhima watched over him even as 
Mitra does over Varuna. Supported by the remnants of the Pandava army 
after the carnage that Bhishma brought to that force, the intrepid Kshatriya 
Mahatman Dhrishtadyumna fought ferociously against Drona. The 
Panchala prince keenly remembered the injury done by Drona to his father 
Drupada and had, indeed, sworn to kill the Acharya. Fierce and dreadful 
was the battle between the two, during which kings from many domains lost 
their lives. Five days that fearsome contention lasted, and finally Drona, 
exhausted, succumbed to the ferocious fire-born prince. 

After Drona’s death, Karna became Senapati of Duryodhana’s army. 
By then only five Kaurava aksauhinis remained of the original eleven, and 
of the Pandava forces, just three. Kurukshetra turned into a veritable sea of 
Kshatriya blood. Innumerable heroes had been slaughtered on both sides, 
and the legions of the sons of Pandu took the field again, with Arjuna 
protecting them. On the second day of his command, the dauntless and 
mighty Karna died at Arjuna’s hands, even like an insect drawn irresistibly 
to a blazing fire and consumed by it. 

With the fall of Karna, the heart went out of the Kaurava army, and the 
three aksauhinis remaining to them were listless and without hope. Then 
Salya, Lord of the Madras, became Duryodhana’s Senapati, and his three 
surviving Kaurava aksauhinis faced the Pandava army, now reduced to just 
a single aksauhini after losing Maharathas and Rathikas beyond reckoning, 
elephants and horsemen, and those remnants unnerved and dejected at the 
great carnage of seventeen days. 

Now King Yudhishtira fought at the head of his diminished force as if 
he had saved his greatest strength and force for the end of the war. Before 
half the first day of the Madra king’s command, Yudhishtira killed Salya. 
Soon after, Sahadeva of mighty prowess slew the deceitful Sakuni of the 
Gandharas, the very root of the enmity between the Kuru cousins, even as 
he had sworn he would on the day Panchali had been so cruelly shamed in 
the Kuru sabha. 


When Sakuni fell, Duryodhana, his teeming army by now razed, his 
spirit all but broken, fled the field of battle, taking just his great mace with 
him. Leonine Bhimasena, his wrath unappeased, pursued him and found 
him hiding in the waters of the Dwaipayana Lake. With the few troops 
remaining of their own decimated forces, the Pandavas surrounded the lake, 
full of glee at having cornered Duryodhana. Pierced by his cousins’ taunts 
like arrows of fire, Duryodhana emerged from the water, mace in hand, to 
face the sons of Pandu, challenging any of them to single combat to the 
death, with the Kuru kingdom forfeit to the victor. Bhima accepted his 
loathed cousin’s challenge and, after a pitched duel, at last killed 
Dhritarashtra’s evil son in the presence of the kings who remained alive. 

After this, one night, while the remnants of the Pandava army slept in 
their encampment, Drona’s son Aswatthama, maddened by his father’s 
death at the hands of Dhristadyumna, crept into their camp and savagely 
slaughtered all the sleeping men and youths. Their sons murdered, their 
forces razed, only the five Pandavas remain alive, and Satyaki and I. As for 
the awesome Kaurava force, Kripa, the Bhoja prince Kritavarman and 
Aswatthama are its only survivors. Dhritarashtra’s son Yuyutsu, who had 
crossed over to the side of the Pandavas before the war began, also escaped 
being killed. 

After the slaying of Suyodhana with all his allies and followers, Vidura 
and Sanjaya have come to be with Dharmaraja Yudhishtira. Such, in brief, 
was that war to end all wars, which raged for eight and ten days, my lord. 
So many kings of the Earth, slain on Kurukshetra, have ascended into 
Swarga.’ Hearing of that apocalypse from Krishna, the Vrishnis are filled 
with grief and pain.” 


CANTO 61 


V aisampayana said, “When Krishna finishes his narrative of the 

Mahabharata yuddha, it is plain that he has said nothing of how 
Abhimanyu died. That compassionate one has no wish to recount the 
incident that he knows would cause his father the most sorrow: the death of 
his grandson. But Krishna’s sister Subhadra cries out, “Tell us about the 
death of my son Abhimanyu!’ 

With these words, she falls down in a faint. Seeing his daughter felled 
by grief, Vasudeva also collapses in a swoon. When they revive, Krishna’s 
father says to the Lord, ‘Lotus-eyed, you are famed across the world for 
always speaking the truth. Why then, Parantapa, do you not tell me today 
about the killing of your sister’s son? His eyes were so like yours, Krishna, 
tell me how he died. Ah, since my heart does not shatter in a hundred pieces 
and life depart this aged body, it does indeed seem, O Vrishni, that no one 
can die before his appointed hour. 

Oh, tell me Krishna, when he fell, what did my grandchild cry out to 
his mother? O what did that angelic youth of the restless eyes say to me 
with his last breath? I trust he was not killed fleeing the field with his back 
to his enemies? I hope the light did not fade from his face while he fought. 
O Krishna, he was a doughty fighter; I can still hear his youthful voice 
boasting to me about his skill at arms. I hope my child does not lie on the 
field slain deceitfully by Drona and Karna and Kripa and others? Tell me, 
Krishna, about Subhadra’s son who could challenge even Bhishma and 
Karna.’ 


Even more afflicted than his suffering father, Krishna says to Vasudeva, 
‘His face did not lose its lustre as he fought in the van of the Pandava army. 
Fierce though that battle was, he did not turn his back on it for a moment. 
Having dispatched thousands of kings of the Earth, he was brought to grief 
by Drona and Karna, and finally, by Dussasana’s son. If they had fought 
him one by one, without intermission, Abhimanyu would have killed them 
all—why, even Indra, had the Vajradharin come to fight him. But his 
enemies cunningly lured his father Arjuna away from the main battle by 
having the Samsaptakas challenge Partha. It was when Arjuna was far away 
that Drona and throngs of powerful Kaurava warriors set upon Abhimanyu. 
Then, O father, after your grandson slaughtered countless enemies, he 
succumbed to the son of Dussasana. 

Extinguish this grief of yours, for your child has found Swarga for 
himself through his valour. Those whose minds are cleansed never grow 
dispirited even when faced with calamity. When he single-handedly 
contained Drona, Karna and all the rest, how could our splendid child not 
have found heaven? Irresistible one, quell this grief of yours; do not suffer 
yourself to be moved by wrath. That conqueror of hostile cities has attained 
the sacred realm gained by a valiant death from the edge of a weapon. 

Subhadra was pierced through when she saw Kunti broken by our 
child’s vile slaying, and screamed in sorrow like a female osprey that had 
lost its young. When she met Draupadi, my sister cried to her in anguish, 
“O Panchali, where are all our sons? I want to see them, I want to see them 
all!” Hearing Subhadra’s lament, all the royal Kaurava women embraced 
her, beat their breasts and wept, sitting around her. To Abhimanyu’s young 
wife Uttaraa, she cried, “O blessed girl, where has your husband gone? 
When he comes back, you must tell me, without a moment’s delay. Ah, 
Virataputri, my Abhimanyu had but to hear my voice in the passage outside, 
when he would run out of his apartments to see me. Why does he not come 
out today? 

Alas, Abhimanyu, all your uncles, the great Maharathas, are alive and 
well. They would bless you each morning as they saw you emerge at dawn, 
accoutred for battle. Describe to me as you used to the events of the day, my 
Parantapa, and your own exploits on the field. Why do you not answer your 
mother, weeping so bitterly?” 

Deeply afflicted at seeing her daughter-in-law in that state, Kunti said 
to her gently, “Ah Subhadra, though Krishna, Satyaki and Arjuna himself 


watched over him, your young son has yet been slain, for fate willed it so. 
O daughter of the Yadus, he was irresistible in battle but mortal, after all. 
Have no doubt in your heart that he has found Swarga for himself through 
his death on the field of war. You are born into a noble race of Kshatriyas. 
Do not grieve, O you of restless glances, of eyes like lotus-petals. Turn your 
gaze to the young Uttaraa here, who is quick with child, and do not yield to 
grief. This auspicious princess will soon bring forth Abhimanyu’s son. Turn 
your thought to that child and the future.” 

And setting aside her own sorrow, Kunti, deep knower of every 
dharma, turned her attention to the funeral rites for Abhimanyu with the 
acquiesence of Yudhishtira, Bhima, Nakula and Sahadeva who resembled 
Yama himself. In her dead grandson’s name she gave many gifts to 
deserving Brahmanas, and bestowed many cows upon them. 

This done, Kunti turned to Virata’s daughter Uttaraa, now 
Abhimanyu’s inconsolable widow, “Immaculate Virataputri, you must not 
give way to your grief, however dreadful. For the sake of your husband, O 
sweet and round-hipped girl, care for the child in your womb.” And, so 
saying, Kunti lapsed into silence. With her leave, I have brought Subhadra 
here. It was even thus, O giver of honours, that your daughter’s son met his 
death. I beg you, cast off your burning grief, irresistible one. Do not set 
your heart on sorrow but turn away from it.’” 


CANTO 62 


V aisampayana said, “Having listened to Krishna, mighty Vasudeva 

does indeed master his anguish and set himself to perform the 
obsequies of Abhimanyu. Krishna also performs the sacred rites for the 
ascension into Swarga of his splendid nephew, who had been the darling of 
Vasudeva. He duly feeds six million Brahmanas of tejas with the best food 
and gives them many fine clothes, gratifying them with wealth in excess of 
every expectation, Wonderful to behold are the piles of gold, the countless 
kine, splendid beds and rich garments that are given in daana, and the 
Brahmanas loudly declare, “Let Krishna’s wealth multiply!’ 

Then, turn by turn, Vasudeva of Dasarha’s race, and Baladeva, Satyaki, 
and Satyaka, each perform the sacred kriyas for dead Abhimanyu. Yet grief 
rends them and they find no comfort. It is the same with the sons of Pandu 
in Hastinapura: having lost glorious Abhimanyu, they, too, have lost peace 
of mind. Virata’s daughter Uttaraa does not eat at all for many days, O 
King, plunging her close family in anxiety for fear that Abhimanyu’s child 
in her womb might also perish. 

Seeing all this with his mystic vision, Vyasa arrives. The Mahamuni, 
tejasvin, says to Kunti and Uttaraa, ‘Abandon this grief, my child, for you 
will have a great and splendid son, through my solemn word and Krishna’s 
power. That son of yours will rule the Earth after the Pandavas have 
departed it. To Arjuna Vyasa says, in the hearing of Dharmaraja 
Yudhishtira, gladdening both their hearts, ‘O Bhaarata, your grandson will 
become a Kshatriya Mahatman, a Rajarishi, a righteous ruler of this Bhumi 
to her very seas. Kurusottama, O Parantapa, cast off this misery. Have no 


doubt that it will be as I say, and as Krishna himself has said. As for 
Abhimanyu, he has found Devaloka, the realm of the gods he has 
conquered by his own magnificent deeds. You should not grieve for him, 
and neither should any of the other Kurus.’ 

The words of his grandsire, the Rishi, touch Arjuna, who does indeed 
shed his great dejection. And Janamejaya, you who know all the ways of 
dharma, your father grew in Uttara’s womb even like the moon waxing 
during the bright fortnight. 

Now Vyasa urges Yudhishtira, the royal son of Dharma, to perform the 
Aswamedha yagna, the great horse sacrifice. And with that he vanishes 
before all their eyes. Yudhishtira turns his attention to securing the wealth 
he will need to undertake that great yagna.” 


CANTO 63 


anamejaya asked, “O Dvija, what does Yudhishtira do when Vyasa 

Muni tells him to perform the Aswamedha yagna? How does that king 
obtain the wealth buried by Marutta of old?’ 

Vaisampayana said, “Having heard the Dwaipayana’s words, 
Yudhishtira summons all his brothers, Arjuna, Bhima and Madri’s twins, on 
an auspicious day at a proper time, and says to them, ‘Kshatriyas, you heard 
what the wise sage said, out of his love for us and his desire to see us 
prosper, that sage of untold tapasya and deep dharma, great Vyasa of 
wondrous feats, who also is our fervent well-wisher, our guru and grandsire. 
You have also heard what Bhishma said, and Govinda too of high 
intelligence. Remembering their words, O Pandavas, I am resolved to do 
what they have told me to; by obeying these great ones we will all find 
blessedness and prosperity, for all of them are Brahmavadis, speakers of the 
truth. 

O perpetuators of the Kuru vamsa, the war has stripped the Earth of her 
wealth, and us as well. Kshatriyas, that is why Vyasa has revealed the secret 
of the treasure of Marutta of old, which lies buried in the north. If you 
consider that ancient treasure to be sufficient to serve our purpose, and 
much more, how shall we bring it to Hastinapura? Bhima, tell me what you 
think we should do.’ 

Folding his hands, Bhima says in reply, ‘I agree entirely with you that 
we must fetch Marutta’s hidden wealth to Hastinapura. If we succeed in 
retrieving the wealth of the son of Avikshita, O Mahabaho, we can surely 


and easily perform the Aswamedha yagna, rid ourselves of the sins of the 
war and find felicity of every kind. Yes, this is what I believe. 

Let us bow our heads to the high-souled Girisa, Lord of the Mountains, 
offering him due worship, and go forth to find Marutta’s treasure. Be you 
blessed, my brother. Gratifying with word, thought and deed the God of 
gods, along with his ganas and other companions and followers, we shall 
certainly acquire the olden treasure. The fierce Kinnaras who protect it will 
surely yield it to us if the Lord Vrishabdhvaja, Sankara of the Bull emblem, 
is pleased with us.’ Yudhishtira Dharmaputra is gratified by what Bhima 
says. The others, led by Arjuna, also approve heartily, saying, ‘“Tathaastu, so 
be it!’ 

Thus set on retrieving the treasure of Marutta, the sons of Pandu go 
forth with their army under the constellation of Dhruva, Brahmanas utter 
blessings over them, and the heroes fervently worship Lord Mahadeva Siva 
with offerings of modakas, payasa of wheat and cakes made of meat, before 
they set out on their quest with their hearts light and full of hope. 

The wisest Brahmanas, who daily feed and worship their sacred fires, 
utter blessings over them, chanting auspcious mantras, while the Pandavas 
circumambulate the priests with bowed heads and folded palms. Then they 
take formal leave of their uncle Dhritarashtra, wracked by grief for his dead 
sons, his wife Gandhari and their mother, large-eyed Pritha. Leaving 
Dhritarashtra’s son Yuyutsu behind to look after the affairs of state, 
Yudhishtira and his brothers set out, while the people of the city of 
elephants throng the streets to bless their enterprise.” 


CANTO 64 


V aisampayana said, “They set out, their hearts cheerful, accompanied 

by men and animals of equal confidence and enthusiasm. The earth 
resounds with the clatter of their chariot and carriage wheels. Hymned by 
Vabdhis and Sutas and Magadhas, their army behind them, the Pandavas 
look like so many Adityas effulgent with their own lustre. The royal white 
parasol unfurled over his head, Yudhishtira is as radiant as Soma, Lord of 
the Stars, on a full moon night. As he proceeds, Pandu’s eldest son 
graciously acknowledges the loud cheers and blessings showered on him by 
his joyful people. As for the soldiers that follow the king, their hubbub 
seems to fill the sky. 

The host crosses many lakes and rivers, forests and pleasure gardens, 
and come at last to the majestic mountains. Arriving where the treasure of 
Marutta of old lies buried, Yudhishtira makes camp with his brothers and 
his troops, O Bhaarata, in an auspicious and level place. Surrounding his 
own tent are the fine tents of great Brahmanas, all endowed with tapasya, 
vairagya and deep gyana, chief amongst them his own priest Agnivesya, a 
master of the Vedas and all their angas. When the holy ones have performed 
sacrificial rites for the success of their mission, they spread themselves 
across the encampment, Brahmanas and Kshatriyas and all else who have 
come on the expedition. The Brahmanas oversee the swift construction of 
the camp by laying out six roads and nine divisions, setting Yudhishtira and 
his brothers with their ministers at its heart. Yudhishtira has a separate 
enclosure erected for the great elephants that have come with his force. 


When everything is satisfactorily arranged, he says to the Brahmanas, 
‘Dvijottamas, now do what you consider necessary for the success of our 
quest. Ascertain and decide upon an auspicious tithi and nakshatra for us to 
begin. Let it be as soon as possible, rather than allowing a long time to 
elapse while we wait in suspense.’ 

The Brahmanas are delighted by what the king says. Skilled in the 
performance of every religious rite and eager to please and serve him, they 
reply as a man, ‘Why this very day is a favourable one, with a most 
auspicious asterism ruling it. We will strive to complete the rituals even 
today. Maharajan, we will fast today, taking only water, and you must all do 
the same.’ 

The royal sons of Pandu pass that night without any food; they lie upon 
austere beds of kusa grass, even like five fires of a great yagna. The night 
wears on as they listen to the discourses of the learned Brahmanas on 
diverse subjects. When a cloudless morning dawns, those best of 
Brahmanas speak formally to the royal Dharmaputra.” 


CANTO 65 


oe he Brahmanas say, ‘Let offerings be made to the high-souled 
Mahadeva of three eyes. After dedicating these offerings, O King, 
we can begin to seek what we have come for.’ 

Yudhishtira duly makes solemn offerings to the God who delights in 
mountain-breasts for his pillow. Gratifying the sacrificial fire with libations 
of sanctified ghrita, according to the ordinance, the priest Dhaumya 
prepares charu to the accompaniment of mantras and appropriate rites. He 
takes up many flowers and sanctifies them with the holiest mantras; he 
solemnly offers modakas and wheat payasa and meat to Lord Siva. With 
more diverse blooms and with the finest fried paddy, Dhaumya, great 
knower of the Vedas, performs the remaining rites to Sankara. 

He then makes the ordained offerings to the ghostly Ganas who form 
Mahadeva’s entourage; next, to Kubera, Lord of the Yakshas, and to 
Manibhadra; then to the other Yakshas and the foremost Gana companions 
of Siva, the priest offers due worship, having filled many vessels with food, 
with krisaras and meat and kivapas mixed with sesame seeds. The king 
gives away thousands of cows to the Brahmanas. He then directs the 
offerings to the night-ranging followers of Siva. Charged with the scent of 
smoking dhupas, and filled with the fragrance of flowers, that whole realm, 
sacred to the Devadeva, O King, becomes delightful. 

Having performed the worship of Rudra and of all the Ganas, 
Yudhishtira, setting Vyasa ahead of him, goes towards the place where 
Marutta’s treasure is buried and once more worships Kubera, Lord of 
Treasures, bowing to him with reverence and paying him every bodily and 


spiritual homage with diverse kinds of flowers and meat-cakes and krisara. 
He worships the foremost of all gemstones, Sankha and Nidhi, and the 
Yakshas who are the lords of all jewels. Then the king of great power, 
having worshipped the foremost Brahmanas and evoked their blessings, and 
being further strengthened by their energy and auspicious mantras, finally 
commands the excavation to begin to unearth the ancient treasure. 

He soon discovers numberless golden, jewel-encrusted vessels of 
diverse and beautiful forms—bhringaras and katahas, kalasas and 
vardhamanakas, and countless bhajanas of beautiful cast. Yudhishtira 
Dharmaraja has these treasures stored safely in great karaputas. A part of 
the treasure is borne upon the shoulders of his men in stout scales of wood 
with baskets slung at both ends. 

Indeed, O King, there are many other means of conveyance there to 
bear away that wealth of the son of Pandu. There are sixty thousand camels 
and a hundred and twenty thousand horses; and of bull-elephants, O 
monarch, there are one hundred thousand. There are as many chariots and 
carriages, and she-elephants as well. Of mules and men the number is past 
counting. 

Such is the vast hoard Yudhishtira unearths. Sixteen thousand gold 
coins are placed on the back of each camel; eight thousand in each chariot; 
four and twenty thousand on each elephant, while proportionate loads are 
set on horses and mules and on the backs, shoulders and heads of men. 

Having secured and loaded the great treasure of Marutta, Yudhishtira 
worships Mahadeva Siva again, then sets out for home and the city of the 
elephant, with the leave of his Island-born grandsire Vyasa, setting 
Dhaumya at the head of his train. Each day they march a goyuta, some four 
miles, with their priceless burden, staggering under the weight of the 
treasure, yet joyful. Yes, glad indeed are the sons of Pandu as they make 
their slow way back to Hastinapura.” 


CANTO 66 


V aisampayana said, “Meanwhile, Krishna of great tejas returns to 

Hastinapura, bringing his Vrishnis with him. When he left for 
Dwaraka Yudhishtira had entreated him to come back, and when he knows 
that the time for the Aswamedha yagna has arrived, that greatest of men 
returns to the Kuru capital. 

Krishna comes with Baladeva at the head of the train, accompanied by 
Subhadra. He brings with him Rukmini’s son, Yuyudhana, Charudeshna, 
Samba, Gada, Kritavarman, the heroic Sarana, Nisatha and Unmukha. The 
Avatara comes especially to comfort Draupadi, Uttaraa and Kunti, and also 
to console all the distinguished Kshatriya women who had lost their 
protectors to the Great War. Dhritarashtra and Vidura Mahatman receive 
Krishna and his party with all honour, and Krishna remains in Hastinapura, 
adored by Vidura and Yuyutsu, his every need catered for. 

It is while the Vrishni heroes are in the Kuru city, O Janamejaya, that 
your father, the great and invincible Parikshit, is born. Having been struck 
by the Brahma weapon of Aswatthama even while he was in his mother’s 
womb, your royal father, the son of Abhimanyu, is stillborn. He neither stirs 
nor breathes when he comes forth from the womb. 

The people of Hastinapura roar with joy when they hear that Uttaraa 
had been delivered of a prince, so that the sky rings with their celebration to 
all quarters of the compass. But soon after they learn that their prince has 
been born lifeless, and a hush engulfs the city, as reverberant as its previous 
glad tumult. 


His own senses and mind agitated to hear that Parikshita is stillborn, 
Krishna rushes towards the inner apartments of the palace, taking Satyaki 
with him. He sees his aunt Kunti run out sobbing piteously, calling his name 
aloud. Behind her are Draupadi and Subhadra, and the wives of the kinsmen 
of the Pandavas, with tears streaming down their faces. 

Kunti, daughter of the Bhoja vamsa, says to Krishna, her voice choked 
with tears, ‘O Vasudeva, Mahabaho, when Devaki gave birth to you she 
became the greatest of all mothers. You are our refuge, and our glory. The 
race of Pandu depends upon you as its protector, O Yadava, most powerful 
one. This child of your sister’s son has come out of the womb killed by 
Aswatthama. Bring him back to life, O Kesava, Yadunandana— you had 
sworn so, when Aswatthama had infused a blade of grass with the 
Brahmasirsa. Your words then were “I will revive that child if he comes out 
of the womb dead.” That child, O son, has indeed been born dead —ah, look 
at him, Madhava. You must rescue us all—Uttaraa, Subhadra, Draupadi and 
me, Yudhishtira, Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva, In this child are 
bound the life-breaths of the Pandavas and my own prana. O Dasarha, on 
this child depends the ancestral offerings of Pandu, as of Dhritarashtra, and 
of Abhimanyu, too, that magnificent nephew of yours who was so much 
like you. I beg you, Janardana, bless all of us today. 

Parantapa, over and over, Uttaraa repeats the words that her husband 
Abhimanyu said to her. Arjuna’s son had said to this daughter of Virata, 
“My blessed wife, your son will go to live with my uncles, the Vrishnis and 
the Andhakas, in Dwaraka. From them he will learn the astra shastra and all 
the devastras, he will learn all about dharma and artha.” That is what that 
Parantapa, that irresistible hero, Subhadra’s son Abhimanyu, had said to 
Uttaraa, out of his great love for her. O Madhusudana, we bow our heads at 
your lotus feet, we beg you to make Abhimanyu’s words come true. Ah, 
look at the time that has come upon us all and the world. 

Saying this, Kunti of the large eyes raises her arms above her head and 
falls to the ground. All the women with her, their eyes clouded with tears, 
repeatedly wail, ‘Alas, alas! Vasudeva’s nephew has been born dead!’ 

Krishna gently raises Kunti up, and comforts her.” 


CANTO 67 


V aisampayana said, “When Krishna lifts Kunti up, Subhadra takes up 
her lament, crying aloud to her brother, ‘O you of eyes like lotus- 
petals, look at the grandson of wise Arjuna, stillborn—the only heir to the 
dwindling race of Kurus, dead. That blade of grass lifted by Drona’s son to 
destroy Bhima, fell on Uttaraa, on Vijaya and me. Kesava, that astra is still 
lodged in my heart since I do not see this child with his father, my son. 

Ah, what will the Yudhishtira Dharmaraja say? What will Bhimasena 
and Arjuna and the two sons of Madravati say? O Vrishni, when they hear 
that Abhimanyu’s child was born dead, they will consider themselves 
cheated by Aswatthama. Abhimanyu was for certain the favourite of all the 
Pandavas. What will those heroes say when they hear that they have been 
vanquished by the astra of Drona’s son? 

O first among all men, look at Kunti and Draupadi standing here. When 
Drona’s son sought to destroy the foetuses in the wombs of the Pandava 
women with the Brahmasirsa, Parantapa, you said in wrath to Aswatthama, 
“Wretch of a Brahmana, vilest of men, I will frustrate your evil design! I 
will revive the grandson of Kiritin.” I heard you, Krishna, and I know your 
power. Irresistible one, I worship you today and beg you to give life to 
Abhimanyu’s son. If you do not fulfill your pledge, be certain that I will 
cast off my life, O chief of the Vrishni vamsa. If you cannot revive 
Abhimanyu’s son now, even when you are alive and here among us, of what 
use can you ever be to me, Krishna? Mighty one, revive this son of 
Abhimanyu, this child, whose eyes are so like his—like the rain-cloud that 
revives lifeless crops on an arid field. 


Krishna, you are the soul of dharma and truth, your power is beyond all 
resistance. Scourge of your enemies, you must keep your solemn word, for I 
know that, if you wish, you can revive all the three worlds—what need I 
say of this precious child born dead to your sister’s son! I know your power, 
and that is why I implore you to show your kindness to the sons of Pandu. 
Surely, it is only just that you show mercy to Uttaraa and to me, knowing 
that I am your sister, a mother who has lost her son, one that has thrown 
herself upon your protection.’” 


CANTO 68 


V aisampayana said, “Thus entreated by those women, himself 

stricken with grief, the slayer of Kesin says in a resounding voice, 
‘Tathaastu! So be it!’ so that his words echo through the entire antahpura 
and revive hope and joy in everyone there, like one pouring cool water over 
one afflicted with heat and sweat. 

Krishna enters the birth chamber where your father was born. He finds 
it adorned and sanctified with garlands of white flowers and pots full of 
holy water on every side, fragrant with burning charcoal drenched in ghee, 
with tinduka wood, and mustard seeds, O Mahabaho, with shining, noble 
weapons beautifully arrayed, and several fires lit all around. 

Many elder women of the royal household, called in as midwives for 
your grandmother Uttaraa, throng the labour room, and many skilled and 
gifted physicians. Experts have placed every imaginable charm and token to 
keep away dark spirits and Rakshasas. Seeing that immaculate labour room, 
Krishna is delighted and exclaims, “Excellent! Excellent!’ Observing his 
face radiant with good cheer, Draupadi rushes to Virata’s daughter Uttaraa 
and tells her, ‘It is your father-in-law Krishna, Narayana himself of the 
inconceivable soul, the invincible one!’ 

Uttaraa stems her streaming tears, covers herself properly, and waits for 
Krishna, even as the Devas do for Vishnu. But when Krishna draws near, 
her anguish cannot be contained, and she cries out, “O lotus-eyed Lord, look 
at us, robbed of our child! Both Abhimanyu and I are slain, Madhusudana. I 
bow to you in worship, O hero, I beg you give life again to my child 
consumed by the astra of Drona’s son! If only Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, or 


Bhimasena, or you, my Lord, had said to that terrible day, “Let 
Aswatthama’s deadly blade of grass kill Uttaraa!” this would never have 
happened, Krishna. Ah, what has Drona’s ruthless son gained by this cruel 
killing of a child in its womb? 

This self-same mother worships you, Parantapa, with head bowed. I 
will surely kill myself, O Govinda, if this child does not revive. I had 
invested all my hope and faith in him. When these have been frustrated by 
Drona’s son, what need have I to bear the burden of life any more, O 
Kesava? O Krishna, I had prayed that I would salute you reverently with 
my child in my lap. Alas, O Kesava, that hope has been destroyed. First of 
Beings, with the death of this child of Abhimanyu of the restless eyes, all 
hope in my breast has been destroyed. I know how much you loved your 
nephew. Look at his son now, killed by Brahma’s inexorable astra. 

This is an ungrateful child, Krishna, as ungrateful as his father, as 
heartless, for look how, even in the face of the Pandavas’ victory and 
prosperity, he has abandoned this world for Yama’s halls. I had sworn that if 
Abhimanyu fell on the field of war, I would follow him immediately out of 
this life. But ah, I was too fond of my life and did not keep the oath I swore. 
I was cruel to my love. If I go to him now, what will Phalguna’s son say to 
me?’” 


CANTO 69 


V aisampayana said, “The helpless Uttaraa with piteous cries implores 

Krishna to revive her child, until she falls to the ground as if 
demented. Seeing the young mother deprived of her infant lying on the 
ground, her body uncovered, Kunti and the other Bharata women begin 
again to wail aloud. Echoing with lamentation, the palace of the Pandavas is 
turned into a house of sorrow and dire mourning, a place where nobody can 
remain. 

Virata’s daughter lies as if struck dead, till she regains consciousness. 
Taking the lifeless babe in her lap, she speaks to it. “You are the son of a 
Kshatriya who knew all about dharma, and lived by what he knew. How can 
you fail to fold your hands in worship to this chief of Vrishnis, you sinner? 
O son, go to your father and tell him from me—difficult as it is for any 
creature to die before its time, I am still alive when I should be dead, having 
lost everything that makes my life auspicious and worth living.’ 

She says to Krishna, ‘Mahabaho, I shall seek Yudhishtira Dharmaraja’s 
permission to swallow poison or cast myself on the pyre. Oh, my heart must 
be made of stone, for I have lost both my husband and my child and it has 
not yet broken into a thousand pieces. 

Oh, get up, my son, and look at your great-grandmother! Look at her 
face bathed in the tears that gush ceaselessly from her eyes, look her 
drowning in a sea of sorrow. Look at the adored princess of the Panchalas, 
and the helpless princess of the Satwatas too. And look at me, like a deer 
pierced by a hunter. Yes, rise, my son, and look at the face of this Krishna, 


Lord of all the worlds, this fountain of all wisdom, who eyes are so much 
like your dead father’s!’ 

Now the other women raise Uttaraa up and make her sit again. Calming 
herself a little, she joins her palms together in worship and touches her head 
to the ground at Krishna’s feet. The Lord of all touches water with his 
fingers to perform achamana and withdraws the power of the Brahmasirsa. 
He addresses Uttaraa in words that resound through the universe: ‘I never 
speak falsely or in vain. What I have said will come to pass. In the presence 
of all the worlds I will make this child live again. Never have I told a lie, 
even in jest. Never have I turned my back on a battle. By that punya, let 
your child have life again! Even as dharma is dear to me, as Brahmanas are 
especially dear to me, let Abhimanyu’s dead son revive! Never have I had 
any difference with my friend Arjuna. By that truth let your child live! As 
satya and dharma are always established in me, by that punya let your son 
have life again! As I killed Kamsa and Kesin righteously, by that truth let 
your child come alive!’ 

No sooner has he spoken than the child stirs, O best of the Bharatas, he 
breathes, and his limbs begin to move.” 


CANTO 70 


V aisampayana said, “As Krishna withdraws the power of the 

Brahmasirsa, your father comes alive and, lo, he illumines the 
chamber of his birth with his great tejas. All the Rakshasas that have 
gathered flee the room and many perish. A great Asariri speaks from the 
sky, crying, ‘Excellent, O Kesava, excellent!’ The Brahmasirsa blazes out 
from the infant’s body and courses its way back to Brahma, Pitamaha of all 
the worlds. Your father breathes and moves, O King, revealing already 
signs of his great spirit and might. The Bharata women are overjoyed. 

At Krishna’s command, the Brahmanas chant mantras of benediction, 
while the rejoicing women of the Kuru antahpura begin to sing Krishna’s 
praises. The wives of the Bhaarata lions, Kunti, Draupadi and Subhadra, 
Uttaraa and the other noble women present, consorts of brave and strong 
warriors, are beside themselves with joy, like shipwrecked sailors who have 
found a boat to take them ashore. 

Wrestlers and actors, bands of bards and eulogists, astrologers and 
those who enquire after the slumbers of princes, all are lustily crying out the 
praises of Krishna Janardana and calling down blessings upon the Kuru 
vamsa. Uttaraa, ecstatic, rises with her child in her arms and reverentially 
worships Yadunandana. Krishna full of joy himself, bestows on the child 
gifts of precious gemstones. The other lords of the Vrishni vamsa do the 
same. 

Then, O king, puissant Janardana, embodiment of truth, gives a name 
to your father. ‘Since this son of Abhimanyu has been born at this time 


when his race was almost extinct, since he has passed through the trial of 
death, let him be called Parikshit, the tested one!’ 

Your father grows, O hero, gladdening the people of Hastinapura. 
When he is a month old, the Pandavas return to their capital, bringing 
Marutta’s profuse treasure with them. Hearing that they are near, Krishna 
comes out of the Kuru city to receive them. The citizens of Hastinapura 
embellish their homes and deck the city with garlands in profusion, with 
beautiful pennons and standards bearing diverse emblems. To bless the sons 
of Pandu, Vidura orders worship to be offered to the gods established in 
their respective temples. The main streets are adorned with flowers, the 
joyful hum of voices is like the muted sound of the sea, and the festive 
dance and song of performers brings the city to resemble the mansion of 
Vasravana himself. Bards and eulogists, OO Rajan, accompanied by beautiful 
women spread out across the city. 

The celebrant winds make the festive pennons fly gaily, fluttering one 
way and another, as if to indicate the cardinal points to the people of 
Hastinapura. All ministers and high officials emerge and declare a day of 
rejoicing for the entire kingdom, to celebrate the successful enterprise of 
retrieving Marutta’s ancient treasury of jewels.” 


CANTO 71 


V aisampayana said, “Hearing that the Pandavas are near, Krishna 

Parantapa, taking his ministers with him, goes out to receive them. 
Greeting one another with the customary rituals, the Pandavas and Vrishnis 
enter Hastinapura together, filling earth and sky with the hum of their voices 
and the clatter of their chariot wheels. 

The Pandavas return to their city in high spirits, their friends and 
soldiers around them, and the treasure of Marutta before them. They come, 
first of all, to Dhritarashtra and touch his feet, announcing themselves by 
name. The foremost ones of Bharata’s vamsa then pay their respects to 
Subala’s daughter Gandhari, and to Kunti, and go on to greet Vidura and 
Yuyutsu, Dhritarashtra’s son by his Vaisya wife. 

Many others arrive to pay homage to the Pandavas, blazing in glory. 
The Kshatriyas are told the joyful news, O Bhaarata, about the miraculous 
and thrilling birth of your father Parikshit. Hearing of that feat of Krishna, 
the sons of Pandu worship sagacious Devakinandana who is worthy of 
adoration. 

Within a few days Satyavati’s son Vyasa of burning tejas comes to 
Hastinapura. The perpetuators of Kuru’s race receive the great Rishi 
according to custom; together with the princes of the Vrishni and the 
Andhaka vamsas, they offer worship to the sage. After some conversation 
on assorted matters, Dharmaputra Yudhishtira says to Vyasa, ‘It is my wish 
to devote the treasure we have brought through your grace, to performing 
the Aswamedha yagna. I seek your blessing for this, O best of ascetics. We 
are all at your disposal, O Rishi, and Krishna Mahatman’s..’ 


Vyasa says, “You have my permission, O King, to what now needs to 
be done. Do you worship the gods by performing the horse sacrifice with 
profuse gifts. The Aswamedha, Rajan, is a cleanser of sin. I have no doubt 
that when you have worshipped the gods with the horse sacrifice, you will 
be purified of all the sins of the war.’ 

Yudhishtira Dharmatma then sets his heart on the preparations for the 
horse sacrifice. Having sought Dwaipayana Vyasa’s counsel on everything 
needed for the Mahayagna, the most eloquent Yudhishtira comes to Krishna 
and says, ‘Purushottama, through you the devi Devaki has come to be 
known as the most fortunate of all mothers! You of unfading glory, I have 
come to ask you to help me accomplish the great task I have in mind, 
Mahabaho. 

Kurunandana, it is through your grace and power that we have acquired 
and enjoy everything that we have today. It is you who have conquered the 
whole world with your prowess and intelligence. I ask you therefore to 
undergo the rites of initiation for the Aswamedha yagna so as to be its 
Yajaman. You are our highest Guru and Lord. If you perform the sacrifice, 
O you of the Dasarha vamsa, I shall be cleansed of every sin. You are 
Sacrifice; you are the Indestructible One; you are All. You are Dharma; you 
are Prajapati. You are the goal of all creatures. Of this I am certain.’ 

Krishna says, ‘It is worthy of you to say so, O Parantapa. You have 
become the goal of all creatures, I am certain, for your righteousness has 
brought you to shine in the greatest glory among all the Kuru heroes, 
casting others into the shade. You are my king and you are my senior. So 
with my approval, freely given, you must worship the Gods with the 
Aswamedha yagna and assign to me whatever tasks in its performance that 
you please. I pledge myself to accomplish whatever you bid me to, sinless 
one. Bhimasena, Arjuna and Madri’s twins, when you are the sacrificer, will 
be sacrificers too.’” 


CANTO 72 


V aisampayana said, “Thus addressed by Krishna, the sagacious 

Yudhishtira Dharmaputra salutes Vyasa and says, ‘Mahamuni, 
initiate me as Yajaman when you deem that the proper time has arrived for 
the yagna. This my sacrifice depends entirely on you.’ 

Vyasa says, ‘Son of Kunti, Paila, Yagnavalkya and I shall, without 
doubt, accomplish every rite at the proper time. Your initiation as the 
sacrificer will be performed on the day of the full moon of the month of 
Chaitra. Let all that is needed for the yagna be readied, O best of men. Let 
Sutas and Brahmanas well versed in the lore of horses after careful 
examination select a worthy horse for your Aswamedha yagna. Then, by the 
injunctions of the scriptures, let that steed range across Bhumi, with her 
girdle of seas, proclaiming your blazing glory, O King!’ 

Yudhishtira, son of Pandu and lord of the Earth, answers, ‘So be it!’ 
and indeed he accomplishes all the Brahmavadin’s directions. Everything 
that is needed for the sacrifice is duly procured, and the Dharmaraja of 
immeasurable soul informs the Krishna Dwaipayana that all is in readiness 
for the yagna. 

Vyasa, Mahatejasvin, says to Dharma’s royal son, ‘We are ready to 
initiate you in the sacrifice. Let the sphaya and the kurcha and everything 
else that we use during the sacrifice be made of gold. Let the horse also be 
loosed today, in accordance with the Shastras, and let the animal, duly 
protected, wander over the Earth.’ Yudhishtira says, “You, O regenerate one, 
must make the arrangements to loosen the horse and send it forth to roam 


across the world at its will. You must decide, O Rishi, who will ride with 
the horse to protect it wherever it goes.’ 

Krishna Dwaipayana replies, ‘He who is born after Bhimasena, he who 
is the greatest of all bowmen and called Jishnu, who is endowed with great 
patience and who can overcome all resistance and enemies—he will protect 
the sacrificial horse. He who destroyed the Nivatakavachas can conquer the 
whole world by himself. He has all the devastras and his body is like a 
Deva’s in strength and endurance. His bow and quivers are not of this 
world. He must follow the horse. 

He is well versed in both dharma and artha. He is a master of all the 
great arts and sciences. O first among kings, he will have the steed roam 
and graze at its will as the scriptures agree. This mighty-armed prince of 
dark complexion, blessed with eyes that resemble the petals of the lotus, 
this Kshatriya, the father of Abhimanyu, will ably protect the horse. 
Bhimasena also is endowed with great tejas and immeasurable might. He, 
with Nakula beside him, will protect your kingdom. Possessed of great 
intelligence and fame, Sahadeva will attend to all the relatives that you have 
invited to your capital.’ 

Thus advised by the sage, Yudhishtira accomplishes his every 
injunction and appoints Arjuna to attend to the horse. Yudhishtira says, 
‘Come, O Arjuna, you shall protect the sacrificial horse. You alone can do 
this, none else. On your way across the world, Mahabaho, if any kings 
come out to challenge you, you must do everything in your power to avoid 
battle with them, Anagha. Invite them all to this sacrifice of mine, 
Savyasachin, go forth but try to establish friendly relations with them all.’ 

Yudhishtira Dharmaraja turns to Bhima and Nakula and commands 
them to be the protectors of Hastinapura. With the leave of King 
Dhritarashtra, Yudhishtira then sets Sahadeva, that great warrior, to wait 
upon all the invited guests.’” 


CANTO 73 


V aisampayana said, “When the hour for the initiation arrives, all the 
great Ritwijas duly accomplish the purificatory and other rites for 
the horse sacrifice. Performing the rituals of binding the yagnapasus, 
Yudhishtira the Just shines with great splendour, as do the Ritwijas. Vyasa 
himself, Brahmavadin, great tejasvin, looses the chosen horse to range 
across the land of Bharata, according to the injunctions of the scriptures. 

Meanwhile, Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, wearing a golden necklace after 
his initiation, blazes in beauty even like a fire. The son of Dharma, seated at 
the yagna vedi bearing a staff in his hand, with a black deer-skin across his 
chest and a red silk cloth around his waist, is as splendid as another 
Prajapati. All his Ritwijas wear similar raiment. 

Arjuna also shines like a flame. His chariot is yoked to noble white 
steeds as he prepares to follow the black sacrificial horse across 
Bharatavarsha at Yudhishtira’s command. Sounding the bowstring of his 
mighty Gandiva, O Naresha, his hands encased in iguana gloves, Arjuna 
stands ready to ride with the sacrificial horse, with his heart full of elation, 
O King. All the people of Hastinapura, down to the little children, come out 
to see the matchless Dhananjaya, foremost of the Kurus, set out. Thick and 
dense is the crowd of spectators gathered to look at the horse and the prince 
who will follow it, so packed that the friction of their bodies could almost 
ignite a fire. The noise they make is deafening, filling earth and sky. “There 
goes the son of Kunti, following that horse of blazing beauty,’ they say. 
‘There he is, the Mahabaho, armed with his magnificent bow.’ These are the 
greetings heard by Arjuna of high discernment. The citizens laud him, 


calling out, ‘Let all our blessings be yours! Go you safely, and safely return, 
O Bhaarata.’ Others, O Naresha, cry, “We do not see Arjuna through this 
crowd, but we hear the heart-quaking twang of his Gandiva. Be you 
blessed, O Arjuna! May every danger flee from your path, and let fear 
nowhere touch you. We shall see him when he returns, for return he surely 
will.” O King of the Bharatas, Arjuna Mahatman hears this fond refrain 
from the men and women of Hastinapura. 

A disciple of Yajnavalkya, well versed in all sacrificial rites and a 
complete master of the Vedas, goes forth with Partha to perform auspicious 
rites along the Kshatriya’s course. At the command of Yudhishtira the Just, 
many other great Brahmanas, all masters of the Vedas, and many 
Kshatriyas, too, follow the noble hero. The sacrificial horse, loosed, ranges 
freely over the Earth already conquered by Pandavas through the power of 
their weapons. Along its careen, Arjuna fights many great and wonderful 
battles against diverse kings, across the sacred land. I will describe these for 
you now. 

O King, the horse roams where it will over Bhumi. First, from the 
north that wonderful steed turns east, followed majestically by Maharatha 
Arjuna Swetavahana, subjugating the kingdoms of many sovereigns. 
Several kings challenge the Kuru horse, for they had lost all their kinsmen, 
grandsires, fathers and brothers to the Great War of Kurukshetra. 
Innumerable Kiratas and Yavanas, all great bowmen, and diverse tribes of 
Mlechchas, too, who had been vanquished before, and many Aryan kings, 
with their soldiers and horses of great speed, irresistible in battle, encounter 
the son of Pandu, who faces and quells the numerous rulers of kingdoms 
who come out to challenge him. 

I will narrate for you, O sinless king, only battles which were 
especially fierce, the main ones among all those he fought.” 


CANTO 74 


V aisampayana said, “Arjuna Kiritin fights a battle with the sons and 

grandsons of the Trigartas, whose hostility the Pandavas has 
incurred before, and who are all renowned as mighty Maharathas. Having 
learnt that the marvellous steed intended for the sacrifice has come to their 
realm, O King, those Kshatriyas don their mail, mount their chariots drawn 
by superb and finely caparisoned horses and, quivers strapped to their 
backs, surround the Aswamedha horse and endeavour to capture it. 

The Kiritin tries to conciliate them, Parantapa, but they answer him 
with arrows. Arjuna easily contains their fire and says smilingly to those 
warriors in the grip of passion and darkness, “Desist, princes. Life is a gift 
that should not be thrown away.’ When he set out from Hastinapura, 
Yudhishtira Dharmaraja had earnestly implored him to spare those 
Kshatriyas whose kinsmen had been slain on the field of Kurukshetra, and 
now Arjuna asks the Trigartas to forbear. When they continue to ignore his 
pleas, Arjuna swiftly routs Suryavarman, the king of the Trigartas, with a 
tremendous volley of arrows, laughing in scorn at his opponent. 

The other Trigarta warriors, however, fill the ten cardinal points with 
the roar of their chariot-wheels, flying at Dhananjaya. Displaying great 
lightness of hand, Suryavarman pierces Arjuna with hundreds of arrows. 
The other great bowmen who follow him, eager to kill Arjuna, loose dense 
showers of arrows on him but the Pandava cuts these down. 

Suryavarman’s younger brother, Ketuvarman, rides vigorously at the 
legendary Arjuna. Seeing Ketuvarman approach, Arjuna, streaming arrows 
from his wonderful bow, swiftly despatches him with a burst of pointed 


shafts. At this, Maharatha Dhritavarman charges Arjuna, covering him in a 
well-nigh perfect cloud of deadly barbs. Arjuna Gudakesha is pleased to see 
the dexterity and genius of that prince, for he cannot discern when the youth 
draws his arrows from his quiver or sets them to his bowstring, when he 
bends his bow or discharges the keen shafts. Arjuna only sees endless banks 
of arrows fly at him through the air. 

Briefly, Arjuna briefly admires the skill and valour of his young 
adversary and, smiling, Partha of immeasurable force engages the Kshatriya 
who is like an angry snake, but he does not kill him. However, while Partha 
fights him with restraint, Dhritavarman shoots a blazing arrow of fire at 
him, piercing his hand deeply so that Arjuna is dazed and the Gandiva falls 
out of his grasp, looking for all the world like Indra’s heavenly bow. 

When that great celestial bow falls, O King, young Dhritavarman 
laughs out loud. Incensed by this, Arjuna snatches up Gandiva and, wiping 
the blood from his hands, looses a ferocious storm of arrows at the Trigarta 
prince, this time in deadly earnest. A hubbub is heard, filling the sky and 
reaching to the very heavens, from diverse entities applauding 
Dhananjaya’s inspired archery. 

Seeing Arjuna now inflamed and looking like Yama himself as he 
appears at the end of the Yuga, the rest of the Trigarta warriors hastily 
surround Dhritavarman, rushing from every side to his rescue. Finding 
himself hemmed in, Arjuna is further incensed and in a flash despatches 
eighteen of the most intrepid Trigarta heroes with arrows like the weapons 
of Indra himself. Now the Trigarta warriors begin to run from the raging 
Pandava. Seeing them flee, Arjuna laughs aloud and sends firestorms of 
arrows after them, missiles like venom-spitting snakes. The demoralized 
Trigarta Maharathas scatter in all directions, terrified. 

Finally, they call out to the dreaded Purushavyaghra who slew their 
sires of the Samsaptaka host, pleading, ‘Arjuna, we are your slaves. We 
yield to you. Command us as you please, O Partha, for we wait here as your 
docile servants. Kurunandana, we will do whatever you say!’ 

Arjuna says to them, ‘Kshatriyas, accept my dominion in the name of 
Yudhishtira Dharmaraja and save your lives.’” 


CANTO 75 


V aisampayana said, “The splendid Aswamedha horse then wanders 

into the realm of Pragjyotisha. Bhagadatta’s son, the valiant King 
Vajradatta, learns of the arrival of the Kuru horse and sallies forth to 
encounter Arjuna. Vajradatta seizes the horse and turns back towards his 
city and palace. 

Marking this, the Kuru Mahabaho bends the Gandiva and rushes at his 
enemy. Stupefied by Arjuna’s speeding shafts, Vajradatta lets go of the 
sacrificial horse and flees from Partha. Back in his capital, Vajradatta dons 
his armour, mounts his prince of elephants and emerges again to give the 
Pandava battle, fanned by a milk-white yak-tail, the white parasol of 
sovereignty unfurled over his head. Impelled by callowness and folly, he 
rashly challenges to single combat the great Arjuna, Kshatriya without 
equal, Maharatha of the Pandavas renowned for his fearsome exploits in 
battle. 

Full of youthful rage, the prince directs his mountainous elephant, from 
whose rent temples and mouth gush juices of rut, straight at the Pandava. 
The great elephant’s secretions of repressed excitation fall around him like 
showers from a rain-cloud. That leviathan, trained as a war elephant, now 
beside itself with rage and the heat of musth and of war, is past controlling. 
Prodded by Vajradatta with a hooked iron goad, it thunders towards Arjuna 
like a flying mountain. 

Seeing it descend on him, Dhananjaya, filled with fury and standing on 
the ground, O Bhaarata, faces the prince who rides on its back. The 
truculent Vajradatta looses a swarm of broad-headed shafts with the energy 


of fire that look like a storm of locusts. But even as they fly at him Arjuna 
cuts them down, slicing every arrow in two and three slivers with a 
fusillade from the Gandiva. 

Seeing his broad-headed swarm of arrows foiled, Bhagadatta’s son now 
looses an unbroken straight line of arrows, which flash at Arjuna 
interminably. Arjuna, his ire mounting, unleashes a burst of golden-winged 
barbs at Vajradatta, who falls off his elephant’s back onto the ground, 
pierced all over. However, he is still conscious and again mounts his prince 
of elephants. Eager for victory, Vajradatta, never losing his nerve, coolly 
covers Arjuna in further flurries of arrows. 

Incensed, Arjuna covers that hero and his beast with flaming volleys of 
shafts ablaze, narachas like venom-spitting cobras. Struck deep and sorely 
by these, the mighty elephant spouts geysers of blood, looking like a 
mountain of many springs discharging rills of water stained with red chalk.” 


CANTO 76 


V aisampayana said, “And so rages that battle for three days, O Lord 

of the Bharatas, between Arjuna and Vajradatta, like the duel of old 
between Indra of a hundred sacrifices and Vritra. On the fourth day, 
Vajradatta of vast prowess laughs loudly and thunders at Arjuna, ‘Wait, 
wait, O Arjuna! You will not escape me with your life. I will kill you and 
offer tarpana for my dead father, aged Bhagadatta, who was a friend of your 
father. You killed him because of the weight of his years. Now fight me, 
Arjuna, though I am but a boy!’ 

With this, O you of Kuru’s vamsa, furious Vajradatta once more goads 
his great beast at the Pandava, and that prince among elephants rushes 
towards Jishnu, as if cleaving the sky like a blue cloud mass drenching a 
hill, spraying Pandu’s son with the juice of rut from his trunk. Urged on by 
that king, the elephant roars like an ominous thunderhead, and charges at 
Phalguna like a dancer in frenzy. 

As Vajradatta’s huge beast advances upon him, the Parantapa stands his 
ground unwavering, the Gandiva firmly gripped in his hand. Seeing what an 
obstacle Vajradatta is proving to be to his mission and, recollecting the 
ancient enmity of his house to the Pandavas, Partha is inflamed with rage. 
He looses a storm of arrows that stops the onrushing elephant even like the 
shore containing a surging sea. 

That handsome prince of pachyderms is brought up in its course 
looking like a porcupine bristling with quills. Bhagadatta’s son, infuriated at 
seeing his elephant thwarted, shoots many whetted barbs at his adversary, 
but Mahabaho Dhanajaya easily deflects them all with marvellous lightning 


volleys of his own. Again the king of the Pragjyotishas goads his elephant 
and sets it at the Pandava. Arjuna with all his strength unleashes a shaft like 
a missile of fire that goes right through it, piercing it deeply to its vitals. The 
great beast falls onto his side like a mountain peak struck loose by a 
thunderbolt, truly like a great cliff riven to its base by Indra’s vajra. 

Arjuna says to Vajradatta, who has fallen with his beast, ‘Have no fear. 
Yudhishtira of deep tejas said to me, when he sent me forth on this mission, 
“Naravyaghra, vanquish any kings of the world who challenge you, but do 
not takes their lives. Nor should you slay the warriors of those kings who 
come forth to fight you, nor their comrades nor kinsmen. Rather, you must 
invite them to the Aswamedha yagna of Yudhishtira.” I heard my brother’s 
commands. I will not kill you, Vajradatta. Rise up and let no fear be yours. 
Return to your city safely, O Lord of the Earth. And when the day of the 
full moon in the month of Chaitra comes, O great king, you shall come to 
the horse sacrifice of Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, for that is the day appointed 
for the mahayagna.’ Bhagadatta’s son, vanquished by the Pandava, says, 
“Tathaastu, so be it!’” 


CANTO 77 


V aisampayana said, “There follows then a great battle between the 

Kiritin and the hundreds of Saindhavas who survived the slaughter 
of their clan. Hearing that the Svetavahana has entered their realm, those 
Kshatriyas come out against him, for they cannot contain their hatred of 
Pandu’s race. 

They find the sacrificial horse within their dominions and the warriors, 
fierce as venom, seize it with no fear of Arjuna, younger brother of mighty 
Bhimasena. They advance against the Pandava who waits on foot, armed 
with his bow, and assail him from close quarters. Those heroes of mighty 
tejas surround Partha, proclaiming their names and lineages and declaring 
their feats of arms as they shower their arrows on Partha. Defeated before in 
battle, they are intent upon vanquishing Arjuna and shoot at him arrows 
powerful enough to strike down elephants. Fighting from chariots 
themselves, they attack Arjuna who stands on the ground alone. 

From every side they attack that hero, slayer of the Nivatakavachas, 
destroyer of the Samsaptakas, that Kshatriya who killed their king 
Jayadratha at the twilight hour. Hemming him in with a thousand chariots 
and ten thousand horses, as within a cage, those dreadful warriors roar in 
exultation. They remember how Arjuna beheaded Jayadratha and lash dark 
arrows down on him like violent rain from thunderheads. Arjuna looks like 
the sun obscured by a black cloud, like a bird caught in an iron cage. 

Seeing the son of Kunti so beset, the sun himself is shorn of his 
splendour, and cries of dismay echo through the three worlds. A fierce wind 
begins to blow, O King, and Rahu swallows both sun and moon together. 


Meteors crash into the solar disc and flare away in different directions, 
course through the sky and fall on the face of the moon as well. Kailasa, 
prince of mountains, begins to tremble and the Saptarishis in the firmament 
and the other Devarishis, pierced with fear and anxiety, give vent to hot 
sighs. Reddish clouds, with braids of lightning playing in their midst, 
spanned by the bow of Indra, fill the sky and pour down on the earth a 
macabre rain of flesh and blood. 

Such is the aspect all Prakriti assumes when that Kshatriya is 
inundated, overwhelmed and stupefied by the Saindhava offensive. The 
mighty Gandiva falls from Arjuna’s nerveless hands and his leathern shield 
also, but the onslaught continues. The Devas, seeing Arjuna surrounded and 
overwhelmed, are filled with alarm and begin to chant diverse mantras of 
blessing over him. The Devarishis, the Saptarishis and all the Maharishis of 
the three realms fervently intone silent mantras to award victory to the 
eclipsed Dhananjaya. At last, through the prayers and benedictions of those 
denizens of Swarga, the tejas of Partha ignites again and the hero who is a 
master of every devastra stands up, immovable as a mountain. 

The delighter of the Kurus takes up his celestial bow. He pulls its 
bowstring, sending forth a reverberation like the roar of a mighty machine. 
Then, like Purandara lashing down his rains, mighty Arjuna looses gales of 
arrows at his enemies. Now it is the Saindhava warriors and their chiefs 
who become invisible, shrouded by the Pandava’s arrow-storms like trees 
by locusts. The very sound of the Gandiva terrifies them, and in helpless 
panic they flee the battle, howling with fear. The peerless Kuru Kshatriya 
now storms through his foes with the speed of a fiery wheel, spraying 
arrows relentlessly from his Gandiva in every direction like Indra, the 
wielder of the thunderbolt, a sight marvellous and magical. Arjuna looks 
like the resplendent autumn sun dispersing clouds with his penetrating rays 
of light.” 


CANTO 78 


V aisampayana said, “The irresistible wielder of the Gandiva straddles 

the field like Himavat himself. Rallying again, the Saindhavas rush 
at him once more from every side, loosing ferocious downpours of arrows 
at him. Arjuna Mahabaho laughs at his enemies who have returned to do 
futile battle with him although on the brink of death. 

Coolly he says to them, ‘Fight me with all your strength, O heroes, put 
forth all your prowess. But perform all your karma-kriyas before you do so, 
for mortal danger awaits you all. Look how effortlessly I cut down your 
clouds of arrows and contain all of you together. Ah, I see you are still bent 
on battle. Wait a little, I will soon quell your pride.’ 

No sooner has he said these words, O Bhaarata, than he remembers the 
injunction of his eldest brother Yudhishtira: ‘You should not kill those 
Kshatriyas who come against you for battle, O child. Defeat them, but never 
take their lives,’ 

The foremost of men Arjuna reflects on what the Mahatman had said to 
him: ‘My brother said I should not kill a warrior who challenges me. I must 
not transgress his wish in the least or render his word false by my action.’ 
Arjuna then addresses the fierce Saindhavas. ‘Listen to me, for I speak for 
your own good. Though you stand before me on the field of battle, I have 
no wish to kill any of you. I will spare the life of any man who says to me 
that I have vanquished him and that he is mine. You have heard me now, I 
ask you to do what is in your own interest. To do otherwise will put you in 
the way of mortal fear and peril.’ 


Saying this, Arjuna again unleashes his furious arrow-storms at the 
Saindhavas; and they, equally incensed and possessed by the spirit of battle, 
cover him with thousands of unerring shafts. Dhananjaya, wielding the 
Gandiva, with whetted barbs of his own, cuts off those deadly volleys of 
arrows like poisonous snakes feathered with the plumage of the kanka bird, 
before they can reach him. 

The Saindhava Kshatriyas, recollecing how Arjuna killed their king 
Jayadratha, hurl darts and javelins at him, but the Kiritin of great might 
shreds all their weapons in the air. At length the Pandava’s ire rises to a 
point where he can no longer restrain his wrath and Arjuna severs the heads 
of many of the Sindhus who converge on him aggressively from every side. 

Now many flee from his blazing rage, others continue to dash towards 
him, while still others stand unmoving, but all are heard roaring in wrath 
and grief, like the ocean in tumult. They continue to fight Arjuna, each 
according to his strength, while he strews the ground with their heads. The 
Saindhava war-horses and elephants grow exhausted, and Partha strikes 
their riders unconscious with his sharpest shafts. 

Then Dussala, their queen, the daughter of Dhritarashtra, knowing that 
the Sindhu forces are growing dispirited, takes her grandson in her arms to 
Arjuna. The brave little prince, the son of Suratha, comes to his uncle for 
the sake of the Saindhava warriors. Coming into the presence of 
Dhananjaya, Dussala begins to weep and, seeing her tears, Arjuna puts 
down his bow and courteously asks his sister what he can do for her. 

The queen says to him, ‘Lord of the Bhaaratas, this child is the child of 
your sister’s son Suratha. He salutes you, O Partha. Look at him, foremost 
of men.’ Arjuna asks her, ‘Where is Suratha?’ Dussala replies, ‘He died of 
grief, Arjuna. I will tell you how. Ever since Suratha heard how you slew 
my lord Jayadratha he was gripped by a burning sorrow. Then, when he 
heard that you had arrived in this realm with the horse for the Aswamedha 
yagna, in great affliction of heart he fell down and gave up his life-breath. 
Truly, hearing of your arrival here he collapsed and died. Seeing him lie 
lifeless upon the ground, Dhananjaya, I picked up this little son of his and 
have come to you for your protection.’ 

Saying this, the daughter of Dhritarashtra breaks into piteous sobs. 
Arjuna stands disconsolately before her, his face hanging down in sorrow. 
The woeful sister then says to her brother, also wrapped in dejection, 
‘Arjuna, look at your sister, and look at child of your sister’s son. O 


Kurupravira, you know dharma in all its depth and subtlety. Forget 
Duryodhana and the evil Jayadratha—show mercy to this child. Even as 
Parantapa Parikshit has been born of Abhimanyu, so has this mighty-armed 
child, my grandson, sprung from Suratha. Bringing him with me, I have 
come to you, Lord of men, to beg for the lives of all these Saindhava 
walriors. 

Listen to me, great Arjuna. This child of your wicked enemy has come 
to you for refuge. You must not deny him your mercy, Mahabaho. 
Parantapa, this infant bows his head in supplication, appealing to you for 
peace. Knower of dharma, be gracious to this child who has lost all his 
kinsmen. Do not yield to anger, Partha. Forget this prince’s disgraceful and 
cruel grandfather, who offended you so direly. Ah, noble Arjuna, do not 
deny this infant your kindness and grace.’ 

Arjuna, thinking sorrowfully of Queen Gandhari and King 
Dhritarashtra, condemns the ruthless Kshatriya code, saying to Dussala, 
‘Fie on Duryodhana, that low and vain scoundrel who always coveted 
kingdom! Alas, it was because of him that I sent all my kinsmen to Yama.’ 
Dhananjaya comforts his cousin and accepts the peace offered, embraces 
Dussala and asks her to return to her palace. Dussala commands all her 
warriors to desist from battle and, worshipping Arjuna, she of the beautiful 
face turns back into her city. 

Having thus vanquished the Saindhavas, Arjuna once more follows the 
Aswamedha horse even as the divine wielder of the Pinaka once long ago 
pursued the sacred deer through the firmament. At its will, the horse ranges 
through one realm after the other, and wherever it goes the feats of Arjuna 
and his fame swell in tide. 

In due time, O Lord of men, the horse arrives in the dominions of the 
King of Manipura, followed by Pandu’s matchless son.” 


CANTO 79 


V aisampayana said, “The ruler of Manipura, Babhruvahana, hears that 

his father Arjuna has arrived within his dominions and goes out to 
meet him in all humility, with a number of Brahmanas and some treasure in 
his van. However, sagacious Dhananjaya disapproves of this. 

Phalguna reproves him angrily. ‘Your conduct does not become a 
Kshatriya. You have fallen away from your royal duties. I have come here 
as the protector of Yudhishtira’s sacrificial horse. Why will you not fight 
me, O son, seeing that I have entered your dominions? Fie on you of feeble 
understanding that have fallen away from Kshatriya dharma! Fie on you 
that would receive me peacefully, like a woman, even though I have come 
here to seek battle with you. If I had come to you unarmed, this behaviour 
might have been appropriate. Fie on you, worst of men, for your wretched 
understanding ’ 

The Naga princess Ulupi hears these words spoken by her husband 
Arjuna and, unable to tolerate them, cleaves the earth and appears in that 
place. She sees her son standing there dejectedly, his head hung down as 
Arjuna, wanting battle with Babhruvahana, rebukes the prince. Beautiful 
Ulupi of comely limbs reminds her son of his duty: “Know that your mother 
Ulupi is the daughter of a snake. Do you now accomplish my behest, O son, 
for you will acquire great punya through it. Give fight to your father, that 
foremost one of Kuru’s race, irresistible in battle, and have no doubt that he 
will be pleased with you.’ 

In this manner is King Babhruvahana roused against his sire, until the 
prince of tremendous tejas decides to take arms against his noble father, O 


chief of the Bharatas. Putting on his armour of bright gold and his effulgent 
headgear, he ascends a magnificent chariot equipped with hundreds of fine 
quivers filled with arrows, a ratha yoked to steeds endowed with the speed 
of the mind. It has beautiful wheels and a splendid pushkara, and is 
embellished with golden adornments of every kind. 

Raising his standard with its device of a golden lion, the handsome 
Babhruvahana advances against his father. He swoops down on the horse of 
the Aswamedha and has it seized by his masters of equine knowledge. 
Seeing the steed captured, Arjuna is filled with pride and joy. 

Standing on the earth, that Kshatriya without equal unleashes storms of 
arrows, each like a venom-spitting cobra, at his mighty son, who rides at 
him in his chariot. Ah, the battle between sire and son is truly like the 
ancient battle of the Devas and Asuras. Each one is deeply gratified at 
having the other for an antagonist. Laughing aloud in _ delight, 
Babhruvahana pierces his father, the Kiritin, right through his shoulder with 
an arrow like a streak of lightning; the feathered shaft ploughs into Arjuna’s 
body as a snake burrows into an anthill. It bores right through Arjuna, into 
the ground behind him. 

Pain lances through Arjuna at the ferocity of his son’s barb and the 
Kaunteya has to pause, supporting himself on his magnificent bow. He 
stands, having recourse to his divine tejas, seeming to outward appearance 
like one deprived of life. Then, coming to himself again, that greatest of 
men praises his son. The splendid son of Indra cries, ‘Excellent, excellent, 
Mahabaho, O son of Chitrangada! I am gratified to see your prowess, my 
son. I will now fight you. Stand steadfast before me.’ 

With this, Arjuna Parantapa looses a burst of arrows at Babhruvahana. 
The young king cuts down those tremendous shafts shot from the Gandiva, 
each as brilliant as Indra’s Vajra, some into two and others into three pieces. 
Next Partha cuts down Babhru’s golden standard that stands as tall as a 
shining palmyra and laughingly kills his son’s horses of great size and 
speed. Babhruvahana, inflamed, leaps down from his ratha and fights his 
sire on foot. Arjuna, gratified with the valour of his son, assails him hotly. 

Convinced that his father weakens before him, the mighty 
Babhruvahana covers Arjuna with serpentine narachas virulent as fire- 
spitting cobras. From youthful enthusiasm the King of Manipura strikes 
Arjuna squarely through his chest with a golden-winged shaft that pierces 
Partha agonizingly, into his vitals. Dhanajaya, archer without equal, falls to 


the earth unconscious. Babhruvahana too falls down in a swoon at the same 
moment, from the wounds Arjuna has inflicted on him and from seeing his 
father collapse. 

Chitrangada rushes out weeping on to the field of battle. Her heart 
burning with shock and grief, Babhruvahana’s trembling mother sees her 
husband lying lifeless on the ground.’ 


CANTO 80 


V aisampayana said, “Lamenting aloud and burning with grief, that 

celestial beauty with eyes like lotus-petals crumples to the ground. 
Regaining her senses, Chitrangada sees the daughter of the snake king 
Ulupi before her and cries, ‘Ah, Ulupi, look where our lord, the Vijaya, lies 
slain, because you incited my immature son to fight him. Do you know 
nothing of a wife’s dharma towards her spouse? Do you not love your 
husband? It is because of you that he has been killed. 

Oh, if Dhananjaya has offended you in any way, I beg you to forgive 
him and use your powers to bring him back to life. For you do know love 
and dharma, both! You are renowned for your virtue through the three 
worlds, most blessed Ulupi. Yet how is it that, having made my son kill 
your husband, you show no sign of grief? O Naga princess, my son is dead 
but I do not grieve for him, who has shown his father such hospitality, only 
for my husband!’ 

Chitrangada turns to Arjuna, lifeless on the earth, and addresses him, 
‘Arise, my dear lord, for you are Yudhishtira’s dearest brother whom he 
loves like none else. Here is your horse. Look, I have set it free. O puissant 
one, you must follow it across the world for the sake of the Dharmaraja. 
Why then do you lie still on the ground? My prana depends on you, O 
Kurunandana. How can he who bestows life-breath on others cast his own 
away today? 

Ulupi, look at this sight, your husband prostrate on the ground. How is 
it that you do not grieve, having incited my son to kill great Dhananjaya? 
As for Babhruvahana, it is fitting that he should die today and lie upon the 


earth, lifeless beside his father. Oh, let Vijaya, let him that is called 
Gudakesa, let this peerless Kshatriya of the reddened eyes, return to life. 

O Ulupi of the Nagas, taking more than one wife is no fault in men, 
least of all in such great ones. Only women incur sin by taking more than 
one husband. So do not harbour any feelings of wrath or revenge against 
our lord Arjuna. Your bond was decreed by the Supreme Ordainer himself. 
It is eternal and unchangeable. Be true to that sacred tie now. If now, after 
killing your husband through my son, you do not revive him, I too will cast 
off my life-breath. I cannot bear the grief of losing both my husband and 
my son, I shall sit here in prayopavesha until life leaves my body.’ 

With that, the princess Chaitravahini sits on the ground in praya, 
plunging into deep dhyana and silence. No word or sound comes from the 
disconsolate queen; she takes Arjuna’s feet onto her lap and sits silently, 
only letting a deep sigh escape her lips, longing for Babhruvahana also to 
be restored to life. 

Regaining consciousness, King Babhruvahana opens his eyes and sees 
his mother sitting on the ground with Arjuna’s head in her lap. He exclaims, 
“What can be more painful than this sight—my mother, brought up in 
luxury, sitting on the rude ground, her lord stretched out beside her in 
death? Alas, this Parantapa, this foremost of all warriors, has been slain by 
me! Certainly, no one dies till his fated hour comes. Oh, the heart of this 
princess must be very hard since it does not break even at the sight of her 
mighty-armed and broad-chested husband lying dead before here —neither 
my heart nor my mother’s! 

Look where this Kurusottama’s golden kavacha lies torn from his 
majestic body, after I, his son, killed him. Alas, you Brahmanas, look at my 
heroic sire lying prostrate on the earth, on a Kshatriya’s bed on the field of 
battle, slain by his son. What protection did you give him, you who were 
sent to accompany this foremost Kuru when he followed the Aswamedha 
horse? Now, Brahmanas, tell me what penance I, this cruel and sinful 
wretch, should undergo for this dreadful sin of killing my own father! I 
should suffer every kind of torment, wander the earth covering myself with 
Arjuna’s skin, to proclaim my sinful deed. 

Even if my father’s head were to be cloven in two and the halves given 
to me to carry across this vast Bhumi, there would be no expiation of my 
parricide. Behold your husband lifeless on the ground, Nagina, and look at 
me who killed him. I have done what pleased you and I will today follow 


my father out of this world. Oh, blessed one, nowhere can this wretched 
Babhruvahana find solace. Mother, may you be happy today, seeing both 
Arjuna and his son dead. I swear to you by truth itself that I will give up my 
prana today. 

Saying so, the stricken young king touches holy water and cries, “Let 
all creatures, those that move and those that are immobile, bear witness to 
my solemn word. Do you also listen to me, O mother Ulupi, for it is the 
truth that I speak, O best of Naginas. I say to you that if this Purushottama, 
my father Vijaya, does not rise up, I will sit here on this very field, in 
prayopavesha and emaciate myself. There is no salvation for me for my sin 
is Pitri-hatya, father-murder, and I will surely sink into the worst hell. 

After killing a heroic Kshatriya, one is cleansed by making a gift of a 
hundred cows. But after killing my own father, where can I find 
redemption? This Arjuna, the son of Pandu, was the greatest Kshatriya in 
the world, and none could remotely match his tejas. He was righteous, he 
was the author of my being. How can I ever be saved after taking his life?’ 

Babhruvahana, king of the Manipuras, touches water again, and falls 
silent. He means to starve himself to death. The Naga queen recalls the 
occult jewel of her race that has the power to revive the dead, and 
mystically she summons it. That gemstone comes subtly to her, and she 
utters words that delight the warriors standing stricken on the field. ‘O son, 
rise up, do not grieve. You have not vanquished Jishnu, for no man, not 
even the Devas led by Indra, can defeat this Kshatriya. It is an illusion I 
created with my maya power to deceive your senses and to please your 
mighty father. 

O prince of the Kuru vamsa, this Parantapa came here to have battle 
with you, wanting to see his son’s prowess. Mighty king, that is why I urged 
you to fight him; you must not think that you sinned in the least by 
accepting his challenge. Dear child, not Indra himself can face your father 
in battle, for the one you know as this Pandava is none other than the 
ancient Rishi Nara himself, eternal and indestructible. Here, take this 
celestial jewel from me that revives the snakes as often as they die. Place it 
upon Dhananjaya’s breast and you will see him come to life again.’ 

Surging with love for his father, the sinless Babhruvahana takes that 
gemstone of divine power and lays it on Arjuna’s chest. The intrepid 
Jishnu’s reddened eyes open and he sits up like one risen from a deep sleep. 
Seeing his father alive and serene, Babhruvahana folds his hands and 


worships Arjuna. Indra rains down blooms of ineffable fragrance on Arjuna 
Purushavyaghra and drums struck by no hand resound everywhere, 
reverberant as thunder. The heavens echoes with cries of exultation from 
the divine ones gathered there. Mahabaho Dhananjaya rises and embraces 
his son, smelling the top of his head lovingly. Then he sees Chitrangada at a 
slight remove, weeping, and Ulupi beside her. 

Arjuna asks, ‘Why these signs of grief, wonder and joy on this 
battlefield? Tell me, O Parantapa, why has your mother come to the field, 
and Ulupi as well? I do know that you fought me at my own behest. But 
what has fetched these royal ladies here?’ The illustrious Lord of Manipura 
bends his head before his sire, and says, ‘Let Ulupi answer your question.” 


CANTO 81 


= A rjuna turns to Ulupi and asks her, ‘What has fetched you here, O 

Devi of the Kuru vamsa, and why has the ruler of Manipur’s 

mother come to the field of battle as well? O Nagina, do you harbour 

affection for this king and, O you of restless glances, do you also wish me 

well? O you of ample hips, I hope neither this Babhruvahana nor I have 

caused you any injury, however unknowingly, lovely Devi. Has Chitrangada 
of perfect limbs, of the race of Chitravahana, done you any wrong?’ 

The daughter of the snake prince replies, smiling, ‘You have not 
offended me, nor has Babhruvahana done me any wrong, nor his mother, 
who is always as obedient to me as a handmaiden. Listen, and I will tell you 
why I contrived all that happened. Do not be angry with me. Indeed, I bow 
my head to you in reverence. O prince of the Kuru vamsa, I did all this for 
your own good, mighty one. 

Dhananjaya Mahabaho, during the Great War on Kurukshetra you 
killed Bhishma by unrighteous ways. You did not kill him while he was 
fighting you but with the help of Shikhandin, while Bhishma faced the 
Panchala prince. That was a grievous sin, and I have today expiated it. If 
you had died without atonement for that wrong, you would have found hell 
for yourself. What you received from your son today was exoneration for 
that sin against your grandsire. 

Lord of the Earth, I was once witness to the Vasus cursing you after the 
fall of Santanu’s son. After you slew Bhishma, the Vasus had come to the 
Ganga to bathe in her sacred waters. Intelligent one, when they were in the 
river, they called the Devi Ganga, and when she appeared in their midst, 


said to her in wrath, “Santanu’s son has been killed by Dhananjaya, O Devi, 
when he was facing Sikhandin with his weapons laid down. For this sin we 
pronounce a curse on Dhananjaya today!” And to this Devi Ganga assented, 
saying, ““Tathaastu, be it so!” 

I was stricken at these words and dived down into the deepest Patala 
and told my father, the Naga king, what I had seen and heard. He, too, was 
plunged in grief and went to the Vasus, seeking to prevail upon them by 
every means to withdraw their curse. They said to him, “Arjuna has a most 
blessed young son who is the King of Manipura. When he strikes his father 
down on the battlefield, O Prince of Snakes, Dhananjaya will be freed from 
our curse. You may go back now.” 

My father came back and told me what had transpired. This is why I 
freed you from the curse of the Vasus. Lord Indra himself cannot vanquish 
you in battle. But the son of a man is his own self, and that is why Babhru 
was able to defeat you today. Mahabaho, I am not guilty of any fault and 
you have no cause to censure me for what I did.’ 

Arjuna is delighted and says to her, “Devi, I am pleased with what you 
have done!’ Arjuna then says to his son, in the hearing of Chitrangada, 
daughter-in-law of the Kuru house, “The Aswamedha yagna of Yudhishtira 
Dharmaraja will be conducted on the day of full moon in the coming month 
of Chaitra. Come there, O King, with your mother and your counsellors and 
officers.’ 

With tears in his eyes, Babhruvahana says to his august father, ‘O 
knower of all dharma, I will surely come to the great horse sacrifice, and 
take upon myself the task of distributing food among the Brahmanas. But 
now, my lord, be gracious to me—come with both your wives into this city, 
which is your own. Do not hesitate, my father, you will in no way break 
dharma by enjoying one night in this your own home. Tomorrow you can 
follow the sacrificial horse again, O greatest of victorious Kshatriyas.’ 

The son of Kunti, whose banner bears the image of Hanuman, replies 
to Chitrangada’s royal son, ‘Mahabaho, you of the large eyes, you know the 
oath I have taken. Until the termination of my vow I cannot enter your city. 
O best of men, this horse ranges at its will. My blessings upon you! I must 
leave now, for there is no place in which I might rest for even a brief while.’ 
Then, duly worshipped by his son and taking leave of both his wives, 
mighty Arjuna, the son of Indra, once more goes on his way.” 


CANTO 82 


V aisampayana said, “Having wandered at its will over the sea-girt 

earth, the steed stops suddenly and turns its face again to 
Hastinapura. Following the horse, Arjuna Kiritin also turns back towards 
the Kuru capital. Wandering at its will, the horse comes to the city of 
Rajagriha, O Rajan, where it is stopped by Meghasandhi, son of Sahadeva. 
Conscious of his Kshatriya duties, he emerges from his city in his chariot, 
fully armed, and challenges Arjuna, who as always is on foot. 

Possessed of great energy but still young and callow, Meghasandhi 
says rashly to Arjuna, ‘O Bhaarata, this horse of yours appears to roam at 
will, protected only by women. I mean to take this beast for myself and 
keep him, and you can strive to free him. Although my sires did not tutor 
you in battle, I must observe Kshatriya dharma in extending my hospitality 
to you. Do you strike me, Arjuna, for I shall surely strike you!’ 

Smiling, Arjuna replies, ‘I am sworn to resist any man who arrests the 
horse of my brother Yudhishtira’s Aswamedha yagna. I have no doubt, O 
King, that you are aware of this vow. Strike me to the best of your power—I 
am not angry with you.’ 

At once, like Indra of the thousand eyes, the ruler of Magadha 
unleashes a storm of arrows at the Pandava. With unearthly swiftness and 
accuracy, the wielder of the Gandiva cuts down every shaft of that storm, O 
Bhaarata, and then looses a battery of missiles of his own at Meghasandhi, 
every barb like a fire-mouthed serpent. Arjuna cuts down Meghasandhi’s 
banner and his flagstaff, slices off his chariot pole and yoke and draws 
blood from his horses, but he does not aim a single shaft at the bodies of the 


young king or his charioteer, though he could have felled them in a moment 
with his left hand. 

However, thinking that it is his own prowess that has secured him, 
Meghasandhi continues to attack Partha with countless arrows, piercing him 
deep so that Pandu’s son spouts blood like a palasa tree flowers in spring. 
Arjuna has no wish to kill the prince of Magadha, and it is this alone that 
saves the young warrior. But when Meghasandhi does not stop harrying 
him, Arjuna’s Kshatriya blood rises and in a blur he kills his youthful 
adversary’s horses and sloughs off his charioteer’s head. With a razor- 
headed shaft he breaks Meghasandhi’s large and beautiful bow and shatters 
his leathern shield. Another barrage of arrows bring the young Kshatriya’s 
flagstaff crashing down. 

That foolish but brave prince of Magadha leaps down from his ruined 
chariot, and rushes at Arjuna with a gold-embossed mace. Arjuna smashes 
it with a clutch of vulture-feathered arrows and the gada, its bejewelled 
knots severed, falls to the ground like a cast-down nagina. Seeing the prince 
now without chariot, bow or mace, helpless before him, the foremost of 
warriors says to the crestfallen Meghasandhi, ‘Son, despite your tender 
years you have kept Kshatriya dharma and shown great valour. Go back to 
your city now. Yudhishtira has commanded me to not kill anyone who 
opposes me in battle. You have wounded me sorely, yet I am bound to keep 
my word to my brother, and this is why you are still alive.’ 

Meghasandhi, now humbled, thinks himself fortunate to be spared. He 
folds his hands in reverence to Arjuna, and worships him, saying, ‘Great 
Arjuna, you have vanquished me in battle and I dare not continue fighting 
you. Tell me what I should do for you, and consider your command as good 
as accomplished.’ Comforting him again, Arjuna says, “You must come to 
the Aswamedha yagna of our king Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, that will be 
held at the coming full moon of Chaitra.’ The son of Sahadeva says, ‘So be 
it’, and walks around Arjuna in pradakshina, worships the sacrificial horse 
as well, then turns backs into his city. 

Now the Aswamedha steed of the beautiful mane ranges away again 
along the coast to the realms of the Bangas, the Pundras and the Kosalas. In 
those realms, O King, Dhananjaya with his Gandiva vanquishes 
innumerable Mleccha armies one after another.” 


CANTO 83 


V aisampayana said, “After receiving the worship of the King of 

Magadha, Pandu’s son Swetavahana follows the horse of the 
sacrifice southwards. Coursing along at will, the mighty horse arrives at the 
beautiful city of the Chedis, named after the oyster. Sarabha, the powerful 
son of Sishupala, meets Arjuna with battle first, and then, subdued by that 
great hero, worships the Pandava with deep honour. 

The sacrificial horse and Arjuna range on to the realms of the Kasis, 
the Angas, the Kosalas, the Kiratas and the Tanganas. Receiving due 
reverence in all those kingdoms, Dhananjaya then follows the Aswamedha 
animal to the country of the Dasarnas, ruled by Mahabaho Chitrangada, 
scourge of his enemies. A formidable pitched battle breaks out between the 
two Kshatriyas, but Arjuna conquers Chitrangada soon enough and receives 
his fealty and homage. 

Now that best of all heroes, the Kiritin, comes to the domain of the 
Nishada king, the son of Ekalavya, who also meets him in battle. Indeed, 
the contention between the Pandava and the Nishadas is hair-raisingly fierce 
and relentless. But the tameless Arjuna prevails over Ekalavya’s son and 
receives due homage. Arjuna follows the sacrificial horse towards the 
southern ocean, where he engages the Dravidas and Andhras, the fierce 
Mahishakas and the hillmen of Kolwa. Subjugating those tribes without 
taking any life, Arjuna journeys on to the country of the Surashtras, always 
following the horse for the mahayagna. He goes to Gokarna and to 
Prabhasa, and then reaches beautiful Dwaravati, protected by the heroes of 
the Vrishni clan. 


When the handsome sacrificial horse of the Kuru king comes to 
Dwaraka, the Yadava youths want to use force to restrain that best of all 
steeds. However, King Ugrasena quickly comes out and checks them. Then 
that sovereign of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas comes forth from his 
palace, along with Vasudeva, Arjuna’s uncle, and receives the Kuru hero 
with great delight and warmth. The two elderly lords duly honour the Kuru 
prince, and with their leave and blessings he resumes following the 
Aswamedha horse. 

The steed courses along the coast of the western ocean until it arrives 
in the land of the five waters, fecund, populous and prosperous. Thence, O 
King, it runs on to the kingdom of the Gandharas, where it wanders at will, 
followed by the great son of Kunti, until its progress is challenged by the 
king of the Gandharas, the son of Sakuni, who remembers his father’s bitter 
grudge against the Pandavas. A fierce battle ensues between him and 
Arjuna Kiritin.” 


CANTO 84 


V aisampayana said, “The heroic son of Sakuni, a Maharatha among 

his people, brings a large force with him and challenges Arjuna of 
the waving locks. Sakuni’s son has in his army elephants, horsemen and 
chariots, all flying bright banners and flags. Burning to avenge the slaying 
of their king Sakuni, those warriors, armed with bows, charge Partha in a 
host. 

The unvanquished Bibhatsu of righteous soul addresses them 
peaceably, but they have no ears for the message of goodwill that he brings 
from his brother Yudhishtira. With mild words Arjuna counsels them 
against fighting, but they give themselves up to the wrath simmering in their 
hearts and surround the Aswamedha horse. At this, Arjuna, greatest among 
Kshatriyas, becomes incensed and effortlessly decapitates many of those 
warriors with razor-headed shafts. Some of the Gandharas are frightened, 
free the sacrificial horse and withdraw from battle. However, others remain 
surrounding him and, naming each of those whom he despatches, Arjuna 
beheads many more of these. Then their king, Sakuni’s son, rides in person 
to confront the son of Pandu. 

Arjuna says to him, ‘Yudhishtira, whom I serve, has commanded me to 
kill no king who challenges me to battle. Stop fighting, O Kshatriya, do not 
court defeat.’ But the youthful king, blinded by rage, ignores Partha and 
attacks him more furiously still. Arjuna plucks the crown from the 
Gandhara king’s head with a crescent-tipped arrow that bears it away a 
great distance, even as another shaft of his once had borne away the head of 
Jayadratha. This astonishing feat leaves all the Gandhara warriors 


wonderstruck. They realize that the crown could have easily been their 
prince’s head, had Arjuna not spared his life. 

The Gandharas fly the field like a herd of frightened deer, led by their 
king, wheeling dazed around the field of battle like men deprived of their 
senses, not knowing how to escape the superhuman warrior before them. 
With broad-headed shafts, Arjuna cuts off the heads of many; others lose 
their arms to his arrows, but are so petrified that they scarcely notice; verily, 
none can withstand his prowess. That great force, which came to battle with 
countless elephants, horses and foot soldiers, is now put to rout and reduced 
to a rabble, wandering across the bloodied field in aimless and bemused 
circles. None can withstand the famed Kuru hero. 

Then, stricken with dread, the mother of the Gandhara king comes out 
of her city, bringing with her the aged ministers of the kingdom and a 
splendid arghya, and presents herself to the indefatigable Arjuna. She 
forbids her heroic son, Sakuni’s prince, to fight any further and pacifies the 
tireless Jishnu. Arjuna worships her duly and resumes his kindly disposition 
towards the Gandharas. 

Comforting the son of Sakuni, he says, ‘Mahabaho, you have not 
pleased me by setting your heart on this futile battle. Parantapa, sinless one, 
you are my cousin and my brother. Remembering my mother Gandhari, and 
for the sake of Dhritarashtra as well, I spared your life; there is no other 
reason why you still live and breathe. But look, how many of your men 
have died because of your rashness. Let hostilities cease, and do not ever 
suffer your mind to be led astray. You must come to the Aswamedha yagna 
of Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, which will be held on the day of full moon of 
the month of Chaitra.’” 


CANTO 85 


V aisampayana said, “With these words, Arjuna once more follows the 

sacrificial horse, which now takes the way leading back to 
Hastinapura. Yudhishtira hears from his informers that his steed has turned 
back. Hearing that his Vijaya has been triumphant all the way and is 
unharmed, he is filled with joy. 

Yudhishtira Dharmaraja realizes that it is the twelfth day of the lighted 
fortnight in the month of Magha, and that the constellation is favourable 
and auspicious. He summons his brothers Bhima, Nakula and Sahadeva, 
and that king of righteousness, of refulgent tejas, foremost of all knowers of 
dharma, says at the proper time to his brother Bhima, mightiest of 
Parantapas, ‘I have just learnt from these men who went with Arjuna that 
the Aswamedha horse has turned back to Hastinapura. Both the steed and 
Arjuna are near. The time for the yagna has come. The day of the full moon 
of Magha is at hand, and the next month draws near, O Vrikodara. Let our 
most learned Brahmanas who know the Vedas look for an appropriate spot 
where the sacrifice of the horse can be successfully conducted.’ 

Bhima goes forth to obey his royal brother’s behest, delighted to hear 
that Arjuna will soon be home. He takes with him a number of experts in 
laying out grounds and constructing yagnashalas for great sacrifices, as well 
as Brahmanas well versed in sacrificial rites. Bhima selects a beautiful, 
expansive area and orders it to be measured for the demarcation and 
building of the sacrificial compound. Many structures are built on it, and 
high and broad roads laid out. 


Soon enough, the Kaurava hero causes the place to be stocked with 
splendid mansions. He has the ground levelled and smoothed with precious 
stones, and adorned with many structures made of gold, columns and wide 
triumphal arches. The righteous-souled prince has spacious apartments 
created to accommodate the royal ladies and the kings from numerous 
realms who will grace the mahayagna. The son of Kunti also builds 
mansions for the great Brahmanas who are expected to come from diverse 
kingdoms. 

Then Mahabaho Bhimasena, at Yudhishtira’s command, sends out 
messengers to the great kings of the Earth. Those best of kings come to the 
horse sacrifice of the Kuru emperor, to gratify the Dharmaraja. They bring 
with them treasures of precious jewels, many female slaves and the finest 
horses and weapons. The convivial hubbub that arises from those great 
lords congregated for the occasion is like the roaring ocean and resounds in 
Swarga itself. Raja Yudhishtira, Kurunandana, assigns to his royal guests 
diverse kinds of food and drink and beds of celestial beauty and comfort. 
The horses and animals of the Kuru king’s guests are provided with the 
most excellent corn, milk and sugarcane. 

To that great sacrifice of Yudhishtira Dharmaraja there also come a 
large number of Munis, all of them Brahmavadis. Indeed, O Bhumipala, all 
the greatest Brahmanas of the world who are then alive come to that yagna 
with their disciples. The Kuru king of blazing tejas, setting aside all royal 
pride, himself receives them all and sees every one of those sages to their 
dwellings. Having completed all the arrangements for the sacrifice, those 
artisans and engineers in charge of the yagnashala come and inform 
Yudhishtira that all is ready for the Aswamedha to commence. The king and 
his brothers are delighted. 

When the great horse sacrifice of Yudhishtira gets under way, many 
eloquent dialecticians begin learned debates and disputations on diverse 
subjects of dharma and artha, each one eager to prove his pre-eminence. 
The invited kings look at the preparations for the Aswamedha yagna of the 
Kuru king, overseen by his brother Bhimasena, and perceive that these can 
compare in excellence with a sacrifice of Indra himself. They admire the 
triumphal arches made of gold, and all the myriad mansions furnished with 
splendid bedsteads, finely wrought chairs and thrones, everything of luxury 
and enjoyment that noble Kshatriyas might desire. 


They observe the magnificent athletes and wrestlers who have come to 
show their prowess and skills in Hastinapura, and the crowds gathered to 
watch them. The kings look at wondrous cauldrons and cooking vessels, 
exquisite serving salvers and plates, jugs and covers, all made of gold. They 
behold the lofty sacrificial stakes, the yupa-stambhas adorning the 
yagnasala, each one wrought of wood embellished with gold by master 
sculptors and artisans, each one planted and dedicated according to the 
scriptures. The kings see every kind of animal to be found on land or water, 
flora and fauna from every land and clime magnificent predators and 
beautiful kine and buffaloes, as well as all manner of aquatic creatures. The 
trees are full of birds that the eyes of men seldom behold. Beholding that 
astounding yagnashala adorned with animals, cattle and corn, the Kshatriya 
kings are all wonderstruck. 

The Brahmanas and the Vaisyas notice and taste with relish delicious 
and fragrant sweets prepared and laid out in extravagant heaps everywhere. 
Whenever a hundred thousand Brahmanas have been fed, drums and 
cymbals are beaten. So many are fed that the sounding of those festive 
instruments never ceases from day to day. 

Thus begins the Aswamedha yagna of Yudhishtira Dharmaraja of great 
majesty in the city of the elephant. Hillocks of food, O King, are dedicated 
on the grand occasion, tanks full of fine curd, and pools of ghee. 
Yudhishtira’s Aswamedha yagna is attended by all the people of 
Jambudwipa, gathered from all its realms and provinces. Thousands of 
nations and races are present, having come from across the length and 
breadth of the land. An army of servitors of the Bhaarata vamsa, all 
festively clothed, wearing bright garlands and sparkling earrings, carrying 
golden vessels in their hands, serve diverse food and drink to the lakhs of 
Brahmanas who have some to the sacrifice, lavish fare fit for kings.” 


CANTO 86 


V aisampayana said, “Looking at the kings of the world who have 

come to his sacrifice, all of them knowers of the Vedas, Yudhishtira 
says to his brother Bhima, “Lord of men, let every honour be accorded to 
these Kshatriyas who have come to my yagna, for these foremost of men 
deserve every honour.’ 

Bhimasena goes forth with the twins and does his brother’s bidding. 
Then the Purushottama Krishna arrives, accompanied by the Vrishnis with 
Baladeva at their head. With him come Satyaki, Pradyumna, Gada, Nisatha, 
Samba and Kritavarman. Maharatha Bhima offers them the most reverential 
worship. Those princes then enter their assigned palaces adorned with 
priceless gemstones. 

Krishna tells Yudhishtira about Arjuna, who has been emaciated by the 
many battles he had fought to enable this Aswamedha yagna. Yudhishtira 
asks Parantapa Krishna again and again about Jishnu, and Krishna, Lord of 
the universe, says to the Dharmaputra, “Rajan, a trusted man of mine who 
lives in Dwaraka came to me after seeing Arjuna. It was he who told me 
that Arjuna seemed tired and worn out by all the battles he had fought 
across the land. He says Mahabaho Arjuna is very near us. The time has 
come for you to perform the horse sacrifice.’ 

King Yudhishtira the Just says, ‘Madhava, it is our great good fortune 
that Arjuna has returned safely to us. Tell me if that mightiest of Pandavas 
has sent any message for us, O Yadavanandana.’ 

The Lord of the Vrishnis and Andhakas, most eloquent of all men, 
replies, “The message my man reported from Arjuna is this: “O Krishna, 


when the time comes, tell my brother Yudhishtira that Arjuna said to him, 
‘Lord of the Kurus, many kings will come and you must accord them the 
greatest honour worthy of us. O giver of honours, make certain that no drop 
of blood is spilt during this sacrifice, and there is no carnage as occurred at 
the Rajasuya arghya.’ Let Krishna also approve of this plea of mine, and 
ensure that no hostility is ignited by any old resentment or enmity.” 

My man further reported these words of Dhananjaya: “Rajan, my dear 
son Babhruvahana, the King of Manipura, will come to the sacrifice. He is 
deeply devoted to me. I ask you to honour him duly, for my sake.” 

Yudhishtira listens to Krishna’s words with whole-hearted 
approbation.” 


CANTO 87 


: move udhishtira says, ‘O Krishna, I have heard your agreeable words 

and indeed you are the perfect one to bring this message to me. 

My heart is full, mighty one, and my brother’s words Amrita to me. 

Hrishikesa, I have heard that our Vijaya has fought innumerable battles with 

the kings of the Earth to enable us to perform this great sacrifice. Ah, why is 

my brother destined to be always far from ease and comfort? He is so wise, 
and it grieves me sorely that he is constantly away from us and at strife. 

Whenever I have time to myself, away from the affairs of the kingdom, 
I think of my Jishnu, and how miserable is his lot. His body bears every 
auspicious mark. Krishna, does he bear on his magnificent form some 
adverse mark that constantly sets him apart from the rest of us and fetches 
him this misery and discomfort? It seems that Arjuna always has to endure 
an inordinate share of grief and suffering. I see no inauspicious mark on his 
person that would indicate such a fate. You are the only one who can 
explain this to me, if you believe I deserve to hear why my brother has such 
a fate.’ 

Krishna, joy of the Bhojas, falls into thought awhile, then says to 
Yudhishtira, ‘I, too, do not see any adverse or censurable feature in this 
prince, yet the cheek-bones of this lion among men are set a little too high. 
This is the only reason why that Purushottama is forever an itinerant, 
ranging across the world. There is no other sign upon his person that can 
explain why he must constantly endure the fate of being afflicted by grief.’ 
Yudhishtira agrees with Krishna. Draupadi darts a furious look at 


Hrishikesh but he smiles at this expression of the Princess of Panchala’s 
love for his friend. 

Hearing of Arjuna’s triumphs while following the Aswamedha horse, 
Bhimasena, the other Kurus and the sacrificial priests are elated. Even as 
they are talking about him, a messenger arrives from Arjuna. The 
distinguished man bows in reverence before the Kuru king and announces 
the imminent arrival of Phalguna. Tears of joy fill Yudhishtira’s eyes and he 
gives bounteous gifts to the bearer of these glad tidings. 

Two days later, a general hubbub and loud shouts from the people 
announce that Arjuna has reached Hastinapura. The dust raised by the 
hooves of the sacrificial horse as it walks beside Arjuna is as beautiful to all 
present as that thrown up by the celestial steed, Uchchaisravas. As Arjuna 
progresses along the king’s highway, he hears a celebratory chorus go up 
around him: ‘By great good fortune, O Partha, you have returned safely 
through all danger. Praise be to you and King Yudhishtira!’ ‘Who but 
Arjuna could return alive after following the sacrificial horse across the 
Earth and vanquishing all her kings in battle!’ ‘Not even Sagara and other 
great kings of antiquity have achieved such an exploit. Nor will any king of 
the future accomplish as rare and difficult a feat as yours, O best of all the 
Kurus!’ 

With such greetings of welcome sounding all around, Arjuna 
Mahatman enters the sacrificial compound, the yagnashala. Led by 
Dhritarashtra, Yudhishtira, with all his ministers and Krishna, the delighter 
of the Yadus, comes out to receive Dhananjaya. Arjuna pays homage at the 
feet of Dhritarashtra, touches Yudhishtira’s feet, worships Bhimasena and 
the other Kurus who are his elders and then comes to Krishna and embraces 
him. Worshipped by them all, and worshipping them in return in the 
ordained manner, the Mahabaho, surrounded by those princes, finally comes 
into his apartments and lies down to rest. Truly, he is as tired and worn as a 
shipwrecked sailor who has endured many days out on the open sea and at 
last come safely ashore. 

Meanwhile, King Babhruvahana of great wisdom reaches the Kuru 
capital, accompanied by his mothers, Chitrangada and Ulupi. The mighty- 
armed Kshatriya pays homage to all his elders of the Kuru vamsa, as well as 
to the other kings present there, and is honoured by them all in return. He 
then goes to his grandmother Kunti in the royal palace.” 


CANTO 88 


V aisampayana said, “Entering the palace of the Pandavas, 

Babhruvahana salutes Kunti and speaks to her tenderly. Queen 
Chitrangada and Ulupi, daughter of the Naga king Kauravya, together 
approach Arjuna and Krishna with appropriate formalities. Kunti gifts the 
queens many rare gemstones and precious artifacts. Draupadi and Subhadra 
and the other Kuru ladies all give them priceless gifts to gladden their 
hearts. Treated with great kindness and cared for personally by Kunti 
herself, anxious to please her son Arjuna, Chitrangada and Ulupi remain in 
that palace of every comfort and luxury. 

Kunti extends the same honours to her grandson, Babhruvahana of 
great tejas, and he is taken to meet Dhritarashtra, whom he reverences with 
due rites. Going then to King Yudhishtira and Bhima and the other 
Pandavas, the mighty prince of Manipura salutes them humbly, and they in 
turn embrace him lovingly and accord him every distinction. The 
Maharathas, deeply gratified by him, shower priceless gifts and much 
wealth on him. The King of Manipura respectfully approaches Krishna, the 
heroic bearer of the Chakra and the Gada, even like a second Pradyumna 
approaching his sire. Krishna gives Babhru a splendid chariot adorned with 
gold and yoked to steeds of surpassing excellence. Yudhishtira, Bhima, 
Arjuna and the twins, all separately honour him and bestow lavish largesse 
upon him. 

On the third day, the Rishi Vyasa, son of Satyavati, foremost of 
eloquent men, comes to Yudhishtira and says, ‘From this day, O son of 
Kunti, commence your yagna. The muhurta is at hand and the Ritvijas 


summon you to the sacrifice. Let it be performed in such a way that no limb 
or part of it is defective. Because of the vast quantity of gold that this 
sacrifice demands, it has come to be called the yagna of profuse gold. Do 
you also, O great King, make the dakshina of this yagna three times what is 
enjoined, and so let the merit of your sacrifice increase threefold. The 
Brahmanas who will conduct your yagna are adept for this purpose. With 
lavish gifts you will gain the punya of three Aswamedha yagnas and be 
freed, Rajan, from the sin of having slain your kinsmen. The ablutionary 
bath taken upon the yagna’s completion will wash every vestige of sin from 
you and bless you with the highest punya, O King of Kuru’s race.’ 

Yudhishtira Dharmaraja takes the diksha for performing the 
Aswamedha yagna and then the mighty-armed king performs the great 
horse sacrifice characterized by the distribution of food and gifts in 
unprecedented profusion, for this is the sacrifice that can fructify every wish 
and bestow all merit. The priests, all deeply knowing of the Vedas and 
masters of the Vedic rites, perform every ritual immaculately. Not in the 
slightest degree does any ritual deviate from the ordinances of the Shastras, 
and those Dvijottamas follow to the letter the procedure laid down therein. 
In performing rites for which no laws are prescribed, they use their 
enlightened instinct. Those foremost Brahmanas first perform the rite called 
Pravargya, also known as Dharma, then the ritual known as Abhishava. The 
foremost of Soma drinkers extract the juice of the Soma, O King, then 
perform the Savana rite in strict adherence to the injunctions of the 
scriptures. 

Among those that come to that sacrifice none is seen who is downcast 
or plunged in grief of any kind, none who is poor, none who is hungry, and 
none that appears coarse or uncouth. At the command of his elder brother, 
Bhimasena of mighty energy has food ceaselessly distributed among those 
that wish to eat. Following the injunctions of the Shastras, every day the 
profound priests, well versed in sacrificial rites of every kind, perform all 
the kriyas to complete the great sacrifice. Amongst the Sadasyas, the 
Brahmana guests of percipient King Yudhishtira, all are deeply conversant 
with the six angas of Vedic learning; there is not one among them who is 
not an observer of vratas, none that is not an Upadhyaya, none that is not 
adept at dialectical disputation. 

When the time comes to erect the yupastamba, the sacrificial stake, O 
Lord of the Bharatas, six stakes are raised made of bilwa, six of khadira, 


and six of saravarnin. The priests raise two stakes of devadaru during the 
Aswamedha yagna of Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, and one wrought of 
sleshmataka wood. At the behest of the king, Bhima has some other fine 
golden stakes raised as well, made purely for their beauty. Wrapped in fine 
cloths provided by the Kuru Rajarishi, the stambhas in their splendour are 
like Indra and the Devas with the seven celestial Rishis standing around 
them in Swarga. A number of golden bricks have been made to construct a 
chayana, a pavilion measuring eight and ten cubits in width and length, and 
four storeys high, as magnificent as the one created for Daksha Prajapati 
during his fabled yagna. 

A golden bird shaped like a prodigious Garuda is also wrought with 
three angles. Following scriptural injunction, the priests tie the beasts and 
birds to stakes, assigning each one to its particular deity. Bulls, carefully 
chosen according to shastraic injunctions and aquatic animals are tethered 
to their appropriate stambhas, following the rituals for the sacred Agni. 

At the sacrifice of the Mahatman son of Kunti, three hundred animals 
are tied to sacrificial stakes, including that foremost of steeds, the sacrificial 
horse. Sublime is that Aswamedha yagna of Yudhishtira, graced by the 
celestial Rishis, with Gandharvas singing in chorus and diverse tribes of 
Apsaras dancing in celebration, thronged with Kimpurushas and Kinnaras. 

All around the yagnashala are the abodes of Brahmanas of high ascetic 
mastery. Daily one sees the disciples of Vyasa, those foremost of Dvijas, 
compilers of all branches of learning and adepts in sacrificial rites. Narada 
is there, and Tumburu of great splendour; Viswavasu and Chitrasena with 
others, all of them inspired musicians. During breaks in the performance of 
rituals, those proficient Gandharvas gladden with song and dance the 
Brahmanas engaged in the sacrifice.” 


CANTO 89 


V aisampayana said, “The priests first sacrifice and cook the flesh of 

all the other yagnapasus, according to the due rites, after which 
comes the sacrifice of the great horse which has wandered the length and 
breadth of Bharatavarsha. They carve it into sections and, in accordance 
with the scriptures, Draupadi of great beauty and intelligence, who owns the 
three requisites of mantras, wealth and devotion, is brought to sit next to the 
divided animal. 

With serene minds, the Brahmanas then cook the marrow of the 
yagnapasu and Yudhishtira Dharmaraja and his brothers deeply inhale the 
smoke rising from the cooking marrow, fumes which cleanse them of every 
sin. The remaining limbs of the horse are offered to the fire by the sixteen 
learned priests. Having thus completed the sacrifice of the monarch, who is 
endowed with the tejas of Sakra himself, the illustrious Vyasa and his 
disciples extravagantly eulogize the king. 

Then Yudhishtira gives away a thousand crores of golden nishkas to 
those Brahmanas, and to Vyasa he ceremonially gives the whole Earth. 
Ritually accepting the world from the sovereign, Satyavati’s son Vyasa says 
to the Dharmaraja, ‘Best of kings, I return to you the Earth which you have 
given me. Do you now give me its purchasing value, for Brahmanas have 
no use for anything other than wealth.’ 

Yudhishtira Mahatman, Mahabuddhi, along with his brothers, remains 
in the midst of all the kings who have come to his Aswamedha yagna and 
he says to the Brahmanas, “The dakshina ordained in the scriptures for the 
great horse sacrifice is the Earth. I have given away to the sacrificial priests 


the Earth conquered by Arjuna. I will enter the forest and take sannyasa 
there, best of all Brahmanas. Divide the Earth among yourselves; divide it 
into four parts as is done in the Chaturhotra yagna. 

Dvijottamas, I have no wish to appropriate what now belongs to you. 
Even this, most learned ones, has been the intention that my brothers and I 
always cherished.’ Yudhishtira’s brothers and Draupadi affirm the king’s 
pronouncement, saying, ‘Yes, it is even so.’ Great is the sensation created 
by this announcement, O Bhaarata. A disembodied voice, an Asariri, is 
heard from the sky, saying, ‘Excellent! Excellent!’ The throng of 
Brahmanas laud Yudhishtira all together, and the Island-born sage praises 
him, saying, ‘You have given this Bhumi to me. However, I give her back to 
you forthwith. I ask you to give these Brahmanas gold, and let the Earth 
remain yours.’ Krishna says to the Dharmaraja, “You must do as the 
illustrious Vyasa says.’ 

Yudhishtira is gratified and gladly gives away millions of gold nishkas 
to Vyasa, three times the amount ordained as dakshina for an Aswamedha 
yagna. No king will ever accomplish what the Kuru king did during his 
horse sacrifice, as magnificent as that of Marutta of old. Accepting the 
wealth, the Island-born sage, of untold wisdom, divides it into four parts 
and gives it to the sacrificial priests. Thus having paid the gold as the price 
of the Earth, Yudhishtira, cleansed of his sins and assured of Swarga, 
rejoices with his brothers. 

The sacrificial priests delightedly distribute the great wealth among the 
Brahmanas present, to satisfy each one’s desires. With Yudhishtira’s leave, 
the Brahmanas also divide amongst themselves the diverse ornaments of 
gold in the yagnashala, including the triumphal arches, the stakes, the jars, 
and the myriad urns and vessels. After the Brahmanas have taken as much 
as they want, the gold and treasures that remain are taken by the Kshatriyas, 
followed by the Vaisyas, the Sudras and the many tribes of Mlechchas. 

Gratified by Yudhishtira Dharmaraja beyond their wildest expectations, 
the joyful Brahmanas make their way home to their various asramas across 
the holy land. Krishna Dwaipayana Vyasa gives his own substantial share of 
the dakshina to Kunti, with all reverence. Receiving the gift of affection 
from her father-in-law, Pritha is glad of heart and uses the wealth to 
accomplish varied deeds of punya. 

Yudhishtira takes the avabhrita snana, the ritual ablution at the 
conclusion of his sacrifice, and is purified of all his sins. Honoured by all, 


he shines forth in the midst of his brothers like the king of the Devas amid 
the denizens of Swarga. The Dharmaraja and his brothers, surrounded by all 
the assembled kings, are as radiant as planets in a sky full of stars. 

They present the kings with rare jewels and gemstones, elephants and 
horses, female slaves, rich cloths and large measures of gold ornaments and 
coins. In giving all that untold wealth away, Pritha’s son is truly like 
Kubera, Lord of Treasures. Yudhishtira now calls the heroic Babhruvahana, 
bestows on him every kind of wealth in profusion, and gives him leave to 
return to Manipura. To gratify his cousin Dussala, Yudhishtira establishes 
her infant grandson as the ruler of his paternal kingdom. After having duly 
honoured all the visiting kings in accord with their respective stature, the 
Kuru sovereign, always in mastery of his mind, graciously dismisses the 
assembled kings, who return to their kingdoms. The illustrious son of 
Pandu, that Parantapa, then duly worships Krishna, mighty Baladeva and 
the thousands of other Vrishni heroes, Pradyumna the first among them. 
With his brothers, he grants them leave to return to Dwaraka. 

Thus did Dharmaraja Yudhishtira of the House of Kuru perform the 
awesome Aswamedha yagna in Hastinapura, a sacrifice distinguished by a 
superabundance of food and gold, jewels, ornaments and riches of every 
kind, oceans of varied vintages, lakes of ghrita, veritable hills of food and 
rivers of drinks satisfying the six different kinds of taste. Of men employed 
in the making and the eating of the marvellous sweetmeats called 
Khandavaragas, and of animals slain for food, there was no end. 

The vast yagnashala thronged with men inebriated with wine, and with 
girls filled with joy. The sprawling grounds constantly echoed with the 
sounds of drums and the blare of conches. With all these, the sacrifice was 
delightful past describing. “Let the finest gifts be given away,’ “Let the best 
food be eaten,’ were the words repeatedly heard day and night during that 
sacrifice. People of diverse realms speak of that yagna to this day as an 
unparalleled festival of rejoicing and fulfilment. 

That greatest king of the Bharata vamsa, his purpose fulfilled, 
exorcised of all his sins, having showered wealth in torrents on his guests — 
jewels and gems, and drinks of every kind, and diverse luxuries to satisfy 
every desire—once more enters his capital and his palace.” 


CANTO 90 


anamejaya asked, “Was there any other remarkable event which 

occurred during my grandsires’ Aswamedha yagna?” 

Vaisampayana said, “Listen, O mightiest of kings, to the most 
marvellous thing that happened at the conclusion of that great horse 
sacrifice. After all the greatest of Brahmanas, all Yudhishtira’s kinsmen and 
friends, all the poor, the blind and the helpless have been well gratified, 
when the gifts given in such unprecedented profusion are being spoken of 
on all sides, indeed, when flowers rain down out of the sky on the head of 
Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, a large blue-eyed mongoose appears, O sinless 
one, with one half of his body and pelt of gold. That denizen of a burrow in 
the ground speaks in a human voice, but one as deep as thunder, loud 
enough to terrify all the animals and birds there. “O you kings,’ he roars, 
‘This great sacrifice is not equal to a prastha of powdered barley once given 
away by a liberal Brahmana of Kurukshetra observing the Unccha vrata.’ 

All the Brahmanottamas there are wonderstruck at these words, O 
King. Approaching the mongoose, they ask, ‘From where have you come to 
this sacrifice, this resort of the good and the pious? What is the extent of 
your power? What is your learning, and what is your asrama? How should 
we know who it is that censures our sacrifice? Everything that should be 
done has been executed faithfully here, even as the Shastras ordain, 
neglecting no part. Those deserving of worship have been duly worshipped, 
as prescribed. Libations have been poured on the sacred fire, to the precise 
chant of the appropriate mantras. That which should be given as dakshina 
and daana has been given without pride. Brahmanas have been gratified 


with a surfeit of diverse gifts. Kshatriyas have been gratified with battles 
fought according to dharma. Grandsires have been propitiated with 
sraddhas. Vaisyas have been thankful for the protection offered to them, and 
the foremost of women have been gratified, their desires fulfilled. The 
Sudras have been well satisfied with kind words and deeds, and others with 
what remained of the profuse wealth from the trove of Marutta. Kinsmen 
near and far have been exalted by the purity of conduct displayed by our 
king Yudhishtira. The Devas have been adored by libations of ghrita and 
deeds of punya, dependants and followers have been honoured by being 
granted protection. 

Therefore, explain to these great Brahmanas the truth of your 
declaration. Answer us, by the dharma of the Shastras and by the truth of 
actual experience, for we are all eager to know. You bear a supernal form, 
your words seem to demand credit and you are obviously possessed of 
wisdom. You have come into the midst of learned Brahmanas; it is 
incumbent upon you to explain yourself.’ 

The mongoose answered them, smiling, ‘Dvijas, I have spoken no lie, 
neither have I spoken from pride. You have all heard what I said—that this 
Aswamedha yagna, and all its dakshina, is not equal in punya to the gift of a 
prastha of powdered barley. Give me your attention and I will unfold to you 
the strange and marvellous occurrence to which I was witness, and its 
aftermath that I experienced. My story is about a liberal Brahmana dwelling 
in Kurukshetra in the observance of the Unccha vrata, whose deed raised 
him to Swarga, along with his wife, his son and daughter-in-law. It is in 
consequence of that deed that half my body and pelt were transformed into 
gold.’ The mongoose continues, ‘Yes, O Dvijas, I will tell you of the great 
punya which accrued to that Brahmana who offered a gift of a meagre 
measure of powdered barley scraped together in observance of his dharma. 
Listen. 

On that most hallowed and auspicious ground known as Kurukshetra, 
where so many of the righteous dwell, there lived a Brahmana who kept the 
vow known as the Unccha vrata, a mode of living like that of the pigeon — 
subsisting on leftover grains from harvested fields. He lived there with his 
wife, his son and daughter-in-law and performed tapasya. Of righteous soul, 
and with his senses under complete control, he lived thus, following stern 
vows: to eat every day only at the sixth yaama. If there was nothing to eat at 


the sixth division of the day, the Brahmana would keep his fast until the 
next day, but again break it only at the sixth division. 

Once a terrible famine fell upon the land. The Brahmana had no store 
of food in his humble home. All the herbs and plants of the earth dried up 
and died, and nothing remained which could serve as sustenance. When the 
hour came for him to eat, the Brahmana had nothing for food. Day after 
day, the good Brahmana and his family, worn out with hunger and toil, 
subsisted on whatever poor pickings they could glean from the arid land. 

In the month of Jaishtha, when the sun was at its zenith, beating down 
fiercely, the Brahmana went forth daily seeking sparse grains of dry barley 
scattered on the cracked ground. He could find not even enough of the dried 
grains to unite body and soul but, racked as he was by both heat and hunger, 
he remained firm in his vrata. Day after day, the Brahmana and his family 
toiled and starved, suffering from the searing heat of day and savage pangs 
of craving for food. Great indeed was their torment. 

One day, when the sixth yaama came, the Brahmana on his daily forage 
succeeded in finding a prastha, some handfuls, of barley. The ravaged 
family powered the barley to make saktu, a simple gruel. They performed 
their daily rituals, finished their silent chanting of mantras and poured 
libations on the sacred fire, then divided that small quantity of powdered 
barley amongst themselves so that the share of each was the measure of a 
kudava, about two dozen fistfuls. 

They had just sat down to eat when a guest appeared at their door. 
Being all of pure mind, self-restraint, deep faith and control over their 
passions, they greeted him warmly and made the customary enquiries after 
his well-being. Those ascetics had quelled anger and knew no malice; with 
hearts free from pride, envy and wrath, they rejoiced in the happiness of 
others. Each of them knew and lived every nuance of dharma. 

Telling their guest of their own penances and of the vamsa to which 
they belonged, and ascertaining from him in return his own particulars, they 
welcomed the hungry visitor into their hut. They said to him, “This is the 
arghya for you. This water is padya to wash your feet. These kusa grasses 
are for you to sit on, sinless one. Here is some clean saktu we have prepared 
and made in dharma, O mighty one. Do you accept it from us and satisfy 
your hunger.” The Brahmana visitor accepted the kudava of powdered 
barley offered him and ate it all. But his hunger was not appeased by what 


he ate, O King. The host saw that his guest was still hungry, and began to 
think of what other food he could offer him. 

Then his virtuous wife said, “Let my share be given to him. Let this 
best of Dvijas eat his fill, and only then go wherever he wants.” Knowing 
that his old wife was herself tortured by hunger and trembling from 
weakness, seeing her emaciated and toil-worn, dejected and helpless, that 
best of Brahmanas said to her, “Do not say so. Even animals— why, even 
worms and insects, feed and protect their mates, O beautiful one. The wife 
treats her husband with kindness and feeds and protects him. Everything 
that has to do with dharma, artha and kama, with progeny and the 
perpetuation of lineage, all depend on the wife. The very punya of a man, 
even of his departed ancestors, depends on her. The wife knows her lord by 
his deeds; the man who fails to protect his wife earns great infamy in this 
world and finds Naraka in the next. Such a man falls from even a position 
of great fame and can never succeed in attaining realms of felicity in the 
hereafter.” 

His wife replied, “O Dvija, my husband, our dharma and artha are 
united. Do you take a fourth of this barley and, indeed, be gratified with me. 
For women satya, kama, punya and Swarga and every other object of their 
desires depend entirely on their husbands. In the creation of children the 
mother contributes her blood, and the father gives his seed. The wife’s 
highest god is her husband, and through his grace she receives both pleasure 
and offspring as her reward. You are my Pati for the protection that you 
give me, my Bhartri for the means of sustenance you provide, and my boon- 
giver for having given me a son. So, in return for everything you have done 
for me, take my share of this saktu for the guest. You are old, emaciated and 
weak, afflicted by hunger and worn out with keeping fasts.” 

Deeply moved, the good Brahmana took his wife’s share of the 
powdered barley and said to his guest, “Dvija, best of men, accept this 
measure of saktu as well.” The visitor accepted the saktu and immediately 
ate it, but his hunger was still not satisfied. The Brahmana of the Unccha 
vrata became thoughtful and fell silent. Then his son said to him, “O best of 
men, take my share and give it to the guest as well. I consider what I am 
doing a deed of great punya so, father, do it for me. It is my highest dharma 
to look after you. Caring for a father is an obligation the good always 
desire. The eternal Sruti current in the three worlds ordain looking after a 
father in his old age as a son’s duty, O most learned Rishi. You eat barely 


enough to keep your spirit in your body, yet engage yourself in the most 
rigorous tapasya. Prana is the great deity that keeps alive all embodied 
creatures.” 

At this, the father said, “Even if you get to be a thousand years old, I 
will still see you as a child. Having begotten a son, the father achieves 
success through him. O mighty one, I know that the hunger of the young is 
strong indeed. I can somehow hold my life-breath in my body. But you, my 
son, you must find strength by eating your share of the food. Old and 
decrepit as I am, O son, I am scarcely afflicted by hunger. Besides, I have 
practised tapasya for many years, and I have no fear of death.” 

The son said, “I am your son. The Sruti declares that one’s son is called 
Putra because he rescues his father. Again, it is a man’s own self that is born 
as his son. Therefore, do what you need to do through your own self— 
through me, your son.” The father said, “Your form is like mine, and you 
are like me in conduct and in self-restraint as well. I have tested you on 
many occasions and I am convinced of your worth. Therefore, I will accept 
your share of the saktu for our guest, my son.” 

That best of Brahmanas then gladly took his son’s share of the saktu 
and, smiling, gave it to his guest. The visitor ate that share of powdered 
barley as well, and he was still not satisfied. His righteous host now began 
to grow ashamed, when his daughter-in-law, bearing her share of the barley, 
came to him and said, “Through your son I will receive a son. Take this 
barley of mine, also, and give it to our guest. Through your grace I will 
inherit many realms of bliss for eternity. Through a grandson one obtains 
heavens where there is no sorrow or pain of any kind. Like the triad of 
dharma, artha and kama, or the threefold sacred fires, there are also three 
eternal Swargas which a man attains through his son, his grandson and his 
grandson’s son. The son is called Putra because he frees his father from 
debt. Through sons and grandsons one always enjoys the felicity and bliss 
of those celestial kingdoms reserved for the pious and the good.” 

The father-in-law said, “O you of unblemished vratas and character, I 
see you worn by the wind and the sun, your very complexion faded, 
emaciated and faint from hunger. How can I be such a sinner against 
dharma to take your share of the saktu? Do not ask me to do this, for it 
grieves me already to see you starving at this sixth yaama of the day. You 
are blessed with purity and immaculate character and conduct; you have 
kept many vratas for us all and performed tapasya. Alas, that you have to 


now pass your days in such misery! Blessed girl, for the sake of those 
auspicious results for which every family hopes, it is not fitting that you 
make this offer. You are a mere child, and a woman besides. It is my 
dharma to always protect you. Alas that I have instead to watch you daily 
tormented by hunger and fasting, O you delighter of all your kinfolk!” 

His daughter-in-law said, “You are the lord of my lord; you are the god 
of my god. So, father, mighty one, take my share of the saktu. My body, my 
life-breaths, and my vratas all have just one purpose: to serve my elders and 
my god. Through your grace, most learned and wise Brahmana, I will find 
many realms of joy hereafter. Truly, I deserve to be treasured by you, for 
know, O Dvija, that I am entirely devoted to you. If you care for my 
happiness, take my share of the saktu from me and give it to our guest.” 

The father-in-law said, “O chaste one, you will shine forth in glory for 
your vratas and steadfastness in observing your duties and serving your 
elders. I will take your share of the saktu, for your virtues deserve no less, 
certainly not to be misled by me. You, blessed girl, are foremost among all 
who observe dharma.” Saying this, the Brahmana took her share of the 
barley and gave it to his guest. At this the guest, who was none other than 
Dharma Deva in a human form, was deeply gratified with the great-souled 
Brahmana endowed with such perfect piety and said to him, “O Dvijottama, 
I am greatly pleased by this pure gift of yours, acquired through dharma, 
which you have freely parted with in accord with dharma. All heaven 
resounds with praises of what you have done today. Look how these 
celestial flowers rain down on you from the sky. The Devarishis, the Devas, 
the Gandharvas, all those who walk before the gods, and the Devadutas as 
well, are all in amaze at what you have done, and speak of nothing else. 

Even the illumined Rishis who dwell in Brahmaloka have come in their 
vimanas to see you. O foremost of Mahatmans, you have saved the souls of 
the Pitrs who live in the realm of the manes; why, you have even redeemed 
others who have not attained to the status of Pitrs and have set them free for 
countless yugas. For your brahmacharya, your daana, your yagnas, your 
tapasya, for the deeds of punya you have done so constantly and with such a 
pure heart, I say to you, go straight to Swarga today. 

O Brahmana of stern vratas, you have performed the most austere 
tapasya with great bhakti, and the Devas are entirely pleased with you. 
Today by giving me this saktu ungrudgingly, in a season of extreme 
hardship, you have not only attained but conquered the realm of the gods. 


Hunger destroys a man’s understanding and deprives him of fortitude, 
while he who conquers hunger, surely conquers heaven. As long as a man 
remains inclined to help others, his dharma remains indestructible. Today 
you held dharma above your love for your children and your wife, ignoring 
the pangs of hunger, the very cries of nature. The acquisition of wealth is a 
deed of but slight punya; gifting it to a deserving person carries far greater 
merit. Of still greater punya is the time at which the act of charity is done, 
and the greatest value lies in devotion. The door to Swarga is subtle and 
hard to see, and men fail to find it through their heedlessness. The bar of 
heaven’s door is made of cupidity and kept fastened by desire and 
attachment. Verily, it is unapproachable. Only those who subdue wrath and 
conquer their passions, who are endowed with great tapasya, and who make 
gifts according to the measure of their ability, succeed in finding it. 

It has been said that he who gives away a hundred while having a 
thousand, he that gives away ten while having a hundred, and he who offers 
a palmful of water, having no wealth, all are equal in respect of the punya 
they earn. When divested of all his wealth, King Rantideva gave a small 
quantity of water with a pure heart. Through this gift, OO wise Brahmana, he 
attained Swargaloka. Dharma Deva is never as gratified with large and 
costly gifts as with modest things, even of no value, if they have been 
acquired lawfully and given with devotion and faith. King Nriga made gifts 
of thousands of kine to Brahmanas but, by giving away just one cow that 
did not belong to him, he fell into Naraka. Usinara’s son, Sibi of excellent 
vows, gave away his own flesh, and he is blissful in Swarga, for he has 
attained the realms of the righteous. 

Mere wealth is not punya. Good men acquire punya by exerting 
themselves to the best of their powers by virtuous means. One does not 
acquire the highest punya through diverse and extravagant sacrifices but 
through giving even a little wealth that has been earned in dharma. By 
wrath, the fruits of giving daana are destroyed; through greed one fails to 
attain Swarga; whereas the man who knows the great punya of giving 
charity, of leading a righteous life, and of tapasya—he finds heaven for 
himself. O Brahmana, the virtue of this prastha of saktu that you have given 
me today far outweighs that acquired through several Rajasuya sacrifices 
with profuse gifts, or through many Aswamedha yagnas. With this prastha 
of powdered barley you have conquered eternal Brahmaloka for yourself. 
Go now in joy to that realm of Brahma unstained by any darkness. 


O best of Brahmanas, a celestial chariot is here to take all four of you 
to Brahmaloka. Enter it as you please, O Brahmana. Behold me, Dharma 
Deva, the Lord of Truth! You have saved your body through your 
immaculate dharma, and the fame of this your achievement will resound in 
the world forever. Go now, Mahatman, with your wife, your son, and your 
daughter-in-law, to Swarga of everlasting bliss.” 

When Dharma had spoken, that righteous Brahmana with his wife, son 
and daughter-in-law ascended the chariot and flew away to Brahmaloka. I 
emerged from my hole, With the scent of the saktu, and the few remaining 
grains of powdered barley, the moisture of the water, the touch of the 
supernal flowers that had rained down, and the tapasya of the Brahmana, 
my head turned golden; behold, half of this ample body turned golden 
through his firmness in truth and his penances, 

From that day, long ago, seeking to gild the rest of my body, I have 
gone expectantly to asramas of the holiest Munis and every yagna 
performed by the mightiest kings of the world. Hearing of this Aswamedha 
yagna of the Kuru king of great wisdom, I came here with high expectations 
—but as you all see, the rest of my body has not turned golden. 

That is why, O Brahmanottamas, I said that this mighty sacrifice can in 
no way compare with that humble gift of a prastha of powdered barley. Just 
a few grains of that saktu turned my head golden. I have concluded that not 
all the lavish gifts and charity of this great Aswamedha yagna are equal to 
those particles.’ With these words, the mongoose vanished. 

This was the marvellous happening at the end of that great Aswamedha 
yagna of Yudhishtira, O conqueror of hostile cities. So do not, O King, 
think too highly of conducting sacrificial rites. Millions of Rishis have 
ascended to Swargaloka by dint of their tapasya alone. Abstaining from 
causing injury to living creatures, contentment, righteous conduct, sincerity, 
penance, self-restraint, truthfulness and charity: each of these is equal in 
punya to any yagna.” 


CANTO 91 


anamejaya says, “Mahamuni, kings are attached to performing 

sacrifices; the great Rishis are attached to penance; learned Brahmanas 
esteem self-restraint, tranquillity of mind and peaceful conduct. But I think 
nothing in this world can compare with the fruits of sacrifices. From what I 
have seen myself and heard told, I am convinced that the performance of 
great yagnas is unequalled in bestowing rewards. 

Many mighty kings, have earned lofty fame in this world and found 
Swarga in the hereafter by worshipping the gods with sacrifices. Indra of a 
thousand eyes, endowed with incomparable tejas, gained sovereignty over 
the Devas through the many sacrifices he performed, during which he gave 
abundant gifts in charity. When Yudhishtira, with Bhima and Arjuna beside 
him, was like the king of the Devas himself in prosperity and prowess, why 
did that mongoose demean the Kuru Dharmaraja’s mighty yagna?” 

Vaisampayana says, “Listen to me, O King, and I will tell you about 
the admirable laws governing the performance of sacrifices, as well as of 
the fruits that yagnas bestow, O Bhaarata. 

Once Indra undertook a great sacrifice. Having laid out the limbs of the 
yagna, the Ritwijas were absorbed in accomplishing the diverse rites 
ordained in the scriptures. The pourer of libations, possessed of every 
necessary attribute for the task, was engaged in his task of feeding the 
sacred fire with ghrita, the great Rishis sitting around him. The serene 
Brahmanas of great learning and lustre invoked and summoned the Devas, 
one by one, chanting the apposite mantras for each in dulcet voices. The 


foremost of Adhvaryus tirelessly recited the mantras of the Yajur Veda in 
mellifluous accents. 

The time came for slaughtering the sacrificial animals. When the 
chosen yagnapasus were seized, the great Rishis, seeing that the beasts had 
all become fearful, were moved to pity. Those Rishis, endowed with 
tapodhana, approached Indra and said to him, ‘This method of sacrifice is 
inauspicious. You wish to amass punya through this yagna, but your 
intention of sending these animals to their death shows how little you know 
about the true nature of sacrifice. 

O Purandara, beasts are not created to be slaughtered at sacrifices, and 
these preparations of yours are destructive of punya. This yagna is not 
consonant with dharma, for the killing of living creatures can never be 
considered righteous. If you will, let your priests perform your sacrifice 
according to the Agama, without taking any life. Deva of a hundred eyes, 
perform your yagna with seeds of grain that have been kept for three years. 
That sacrifice, O Indra, will be fraught with great righteousness and yield 
fruit of the highest punya and efficacy.’ 

However, O Bhaarata, the Deva of a hundred sacrifices, swayed by 
pride and gripped by tamas, did not accept what the Rishis said. A great 
dispute then arose between the ascetics at that sacrifice of Sakra about how 
sacrifices should be performed—with or without animal sacrifices. They 
argued both sides until the sages were exhausted. 

Finally the Rishis, those seers of truth, arrived at an understanding with 
Sakra that they would refer the matter to an arbiter. They asked King Vasu, 
‘Most blessed one, what is the Vedic pronouncement about sacrifices? Is it 
preferable to perform yagnas with animals being slaughtered, or with seeds 
and juices?’ King Vasu replied immediately, without considering the 
strengths and weaknesses of the arguments on both sides, ‘Sacrifices may 
be performed with whichever of the two is ready and available.’ For 
answering the question without proper deliberation, he was cursed to go 
down into the realm of Patala. That mighty Chedi king had to endure great 
misery for having responded faultily. Therefore, when any serious question 
arises, no man, however wise, should singly arrive at a decision, unless he 
be the almighty Svayambhuva, Lord of all creatures. 

Gifts made by a sinner with an impure mind, even if bounteous, fail 
and count for nothing. Indeed, the daana given by a person of adharma, a 
sinful soul and a destroyer, is wasted; he gains neither merit nor fame from 


it, in this world or the next. One of limited intelligence who, from a desire 
to acquire punya, performs sacrifices with wealth acquired by unrighteous 
means, never succeeds in earning the least merit. 

The hypocrite who puts on a garb of righteousness and makes lavish 
gifts to Brahmanas creates an impression of being a man of dharma, but 
earns no real punya. The unrestrained Brahmana who acquires such wealth 
through sin, who is overwhelmed by rajas and tamas, ends up in Naraka. 
Such a one, possessed by greed and darkness, becomes a slave to 
accumulating riches. He persecutes creatures, impelled by his own impure 
and sinful mind. Having acquired his fortune by wicked means, he makes 
gifts or performs sacrifices therewith, but in the next world finds his shallow 
charity or sacrifices fruitless, because his wealth has been earned through 
adharma and violence. 

However, men blessed with true plenitude of tapasya, who give 
according to the best of their means, even grains of corn picked from the 
field, or fruit or pot-herbs or water or leaves, gain great punya and reach 
Swarga. Even humble gifts such as these, besides compassion for all 
creatures, brahmacharya, truthfulness of speech, kindness, fortitude and 
forgiveness, constitute the eternal foundations of Dharma. 

We hear of Viswamitra and other Rajarishis of ancient times. Indeed, 
kings such as Viswamitra, Asita, Janaka, Kakshasena, Arshtisena and 
Sindhudwipa—these and many other kings, all endowed with the undying 
wealth of tapasya, gave plentiful gifts, all acquired righteously, and all of 
them attained to lofty felicity. Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and 
Sudras who yield themselves to penance, and who purify themselves by 
charity and other deeds of dharma, certainly attain Heaven, O Bhaarata.” 


CANTO 92 


anamejaya said, “If Swarga is the fruit of wealth acquired by lawful 

means, O illustrious one, expound to me as fully as you should all you 
know about this. Most regenerate one, you have told me about the high fruit 
which the Brahmana of the Unccha vrata reached through his gift of 
powdered barley. I have no doubt that what you have said is true. Yet, I 
want to understand how that Brahmana’s attainment is held up as the 
highest consummation of all sacrifices. Dvijottama, explain this to me 
fully.” 

Vaisampayana said, “Parantapa, an old tale is told in this regard, of 
what transpired at the great sacrifice of Agastya. In ancient times, O King, 
the rishi Agastya of great tejas, devoted to the good of all creatures, 
embarked upon a diksha of twelve years. He engaged many hotris, splendid 
in form like blazing fires, to perform the sacrifice. Among them were men 
who subsisted upon roots or fruits; or that used two pieces of stone only for 
husking their corn; or that supported themselves only with the rays of the 
moon; men who never took any food unless it was set before them by 
others; those who never ate anything without having first served the Devas, 
the Pitris and Sadasyas; and those who never washed the food they ate. 
There were also Yatis and Bhikshus among them, O King—all men who 
had obtained a vision of Dharma Deva, the God of Righteousness, in his 
embodied form. They had subdued wrath and acquired complete mastery 
over their senses. Living in observance of self-restraint, they were free from 
pride and any inclination to injure another being. 


Those Maharishis attended the sacrifice and accomplished its various 
rites. The illustrious Agastya acquired through pure and righteous means 
the food that was required for the yagna, to the best of his means and 
ability. At that same time, numerous other ascetics also performed large 
yagnas of their own. But when great Agastya engaged himself in the 
performance of his twelve-year yagna, thousand-eyed Indra ceased to send 
down rain upon the earth. 

During the intervals in the rituals, O King, the other Rishis spoke 
among themselves, saying, “Agastya makes offerings of food with his heart 
cleansed of the least pride and vanity. However, the Lord of the clouds has 
stopped sending down rain. How, then, will any food be grown? Agastya’s 
mighty yagna is to continue for twelve years, O Brahmanas, and for that 
entire period Bhumi will have no rain. Reflect on this and do something to 
help Agastya of the stern tapasya, this Rishi of great wisdom.’ 

When he heard the sages, Agastya bent his head and gratified them by 
saying, ‘If Vasava does not send down any rain for twelve years, I will 
perform the yagna of the mind. Even this is the eternal ordinance. If Indra 
does not send any rain for twelve years, I will perform the Sparsa yagna, the 
sacrifice of touch. Even this is the eternal sacrifice. If Sakra does not give us 
rain for these twelve years, I will put forth all my energy and make 
arrangements for other sacrifices demanding the observance of the most 
severe VOWS. 

I have arranged my present yagna of seeds with the labour of many 
years. With these same seeds will I accomplish great good. Nothing can 
obstruct my yagna. It matters little whether Indra gives us rain or not. If 
Indra shows scant regard for me, I will use my powers to transform myself 
into another Indra and keep all living entities alive. I vow that every 
creature, whatever food it takes for nourishment, will continue to be 
nourished as before. I have the power to create a different order of things, 
again and again. And I say, let gold and whatever other wealth that exists, 
let all the wealth of the three worlds come here today of its own accord. Let 
all the tribes of Apsaras, all the Gandharvas, along with the Kinnaras, and 
Viswavasu, and the other Swargavasis all come today to this sacrifice of 
mine. Let all the wealth that exists among the Northern Kurus come to these 
sacrifices. Let Swarga, and all those who have Heaven for their home, let 
Dharma himself, come here!’ 


No sooner had mighty Agastya spoken than everything he called for 
happened, for his tapasya was incomparable and the power of his mind like 
a fiery furnace of energy. The other Rishis present saw the power of tapasya 
revealed, and their hearts were filled with rejoicing. Full of wonder, they 
uttered words of grave import: ‘We are profoundly gratified with what you 
have said, and we do not wish your store of tapasya to suffer any 
diminution. We approve, indeed, desire, all yagnas performed with dharma. 

Earning our food by righteous means, and observant of our svadharma, 
we undertake diksha, the pouring of libations onto the sacred fire and every 
other ritual. We observe brahmacharya and worship the Devas. Completing 
the term of brahmacharya, we emerge from our asramas cleaving to 
dharma. We approve of the mind and understanding free from the 
inclination to inflict any injury on any living creature. O puissant Agastya, 
commend non-violence to be practised during every sacrifice, and we shall 
be deeply gratified, O best of all Brahmanas. When you have completed 
your yagna and dismissed us, we shall depart from this place.’ 

Even as they spoke, Purandara, Lord of the Devas, he of the thousand 
eyes and tremendous tejas, discerning the power of Agastya’s penance, sent 
down on the parched world copious showers of rain. Indeed, O Janamejaya, 
till the completion of the sacrifice of that Rishi of immeasurable prowess, 
the God of rain sent down timely rain enough to satisfy the needs and 
wishes of all men. 

With Brihaspati before him, the King of the Devas attended the 
sacrifice, O Rajarishi, to gratify Agastya Muni. Filled with joy upon the 
completion of his yagna, Agastya worshipped the great Rishis who had 
participated before dismissing them.” 

Janamejaya asked, “Who was that mongoose with the golden head who 
spoke those words in a human voice? Tell me, I am eager to know.” 
Vaisampayana said, “You did not ask me before, and I did not tell you. But 
now listen to who the mongoose with the golden head was, and how he 
could speak in a human voice. 

In olden days, the Rishi Jamadagni decided to perform a sraddha. His 
homa cow came to him and the Rishi milked her himself. He then placed 
the milk in a new vessel, strong and pure. Dharma Deva assumed the form 
of Krodha, Anger, and entered that vessel of milk, for he wanted to test 
what the best of sages would do if provoked by some injury to himself. 


Dharma spoiled that sacrificial milk, but Jamadagni knew that Anger 
was the spoiler and was not in the least upset or enraged. Then Krodha 
appeared to the Rishi assuming the form of a Brahmana woman and, finding 
that he had been conquered by that foremost Muni of Bhrigu’s race, said to 
him, ‘O greatest of Bhargavas, I have been vanquished by you. There is a 
saying among men that the Bhrigus are by nature wrathful. But I now find 
that saying false, for I have been subdued by you. You are possessed of a 
mighty soul, and blessed with forgiveness. I stand here today, owning your 
sway. I fear your tapasya, righteous one. Do you, O mighty Rishi, show me 
favour.’ 

Jamadagni said, ‘I have seen you, O Krodha, in your embodied form. 
Go wherever you like, without anxiety. You have not done me any injury 
today, and I bear you no grudge. This milk that you spoiled I had kept for 
the blessed Pitris, the manes. Present yourself before them and ascertain 
what they intend for you.’ Stricken by fear at hearing this, Anger 
disappeared from the sight of the Rishi, but the curse of the Pitris turned 
him into a mongoose. He then began to gratify the Pitris in order to free 
himself. The manes said to him, ‘Your curse will end by disparaging 
Dharma to himself!’ 

Hearing this, he wandered over the earth, going to every holy yagna 
that was performed, as well as to other sacred tirthas, and censuring all the 
great sacrifices. It was he that came to the Aswamedha yagna of King 
Yudhishtira, to demean it. By speaking of the prastha of powdered barley 
given by the Kurukshetra Brahmana, Krodha was freed of his curse—for 
Yudhishtira, being Dharma’s son, was no less than Dharma’s own self. 

This is what transpired at the yagna of that Rajarishi. The mongoose, 
freed from his curse, vanished from our midst.” 


The end of Aswamedha Parva 


BOOK 15 
Asramavasika Parva 


ASRAMAVASA PARVA 


CANTO 1 


A UM. Bowing down to Narayana and Nara, foremost of Purushas, 
and to the Devi Saraswati, I invoke the spirit of Jaya! 

Janamejaya said, “Having acquired their kingdom, how did my 
grandsires, the Pandava Mahatmans, conduct themselves towards King 
Dhritarashtra? And how did that king behave whose sons and counsellors 
were all slain, whose power and wealth had disappeared, and who was 
without a refuge? How did Gandhari of noble fame conduct herself? For 
how many years did my grandsires rule the kingdom? Great Vaisampayana, 
tell me all.” 

Vaisampayana replied, “Having won back their kingdom and killed all 
their enemies, the Pandavas rule the earth, setting Dhritarashtra at their 
head. Vidura, Sanjaya and the wise Yuyutsu, Dhritarashtra’s son by his 
Vaisya wife, wait upon Dhritarashtra. The Pandavas take the opinion of the 
king in all matters. Indeed, for ten and five years, they do everything only 
under the advice of the old king. 

As Yudhishtira Dharmaraja enjoins, the heroes often go to the monarch 
and sit beside him, after prostrating themselves at his feet. Dhritarashtra 
always smells the tops of their heads in affection and they do whatever he 
asks, in his deep wisdom. Kunti serves and obeys Gandhari in all things. 


Draupadi, Subhadra and the other Pandava women treat the old king and 
queen as if they were their own father- and mother-in-law. 

Yudhishtira gives to Dhritarashtra, as does Kunti to Gandhari, every 
royal comfort—luxurious beds, clothes and ornaments, and the finest food 
and drink, treating them with all deference as well-loved elders. Vidura, 
Sanjaya and Yuyutsu wait day and night upon the old king whose sons had 
all been slain. The great Brahmana Kripa, that mighty bowman, dear 
brother-in-law of Drona, also attends upon the king. Besides, the most holy 
Vyasa often meets the aged monarch and narrates to him tales of ancient 
Rishis, Devarishis, Pitris and Rakshasas. 

Under Dhritarashtra’s instructions, Vidura oversees the discharge of all 
acts of religious merit and the administration of law. By virtue of his 
excellent administration, the Pandavas obtain numerous exceptional 
services from their feudatories and followers with a modest expenditure of 
wealth. King Dhritarashtra frees many prisoners and pardons those that 
have been condemned to death, many of them loyalists of his son 
Duryodhana, and Yudhishtira the Just makes not the slightest protest at this. 

When the son of Ambika goes out on pleasure excursions, Yudhishtira 
of great tejas sees to his every comfort and luxury. Aralikas, juice-makers 
and makers of ragakhandavas wait on King Dhritarashtra just as before, 
when he was king. Pandu’s son seeks out and buys rare garlands and costly 
garments worthy of royalty, and presents them to his uncle. Maireya wines, 
fish of various kinds, sherbets and honey, and many diverse and delightful 
foods are offered to the old king, exactly as when he was himself ruler. All 
the potentates of the world who come to Hastinapura wait upon the Kuru 
monarch as before. 

Kunti and Draupadi, Satyabhama of the Satwatas vamsa, possessed of 
great fame, Ulupi, the daughter of the Naga king, Queen Chitrangada, the 
sister of Dhrishtaketu, and the daughter of Jarasandha—these and many 
other royal ladies, O foremost of men, wait upon Subala’s daughter 
Gandhari, veritably like maids. Yudhishtira issues a directive to his brothers 
that Dhritarashtra, who had lost all his sons, should be preserved from any 
further sorrow. They, on their part, pay careful heed to their brother’s grave 
command and in every way are exceptionally obedient to the old king, their 
uncle. 

There is one exception to this rule, and that is Bhimasena. Bhima can 
never forgive Dhritarashtra for the fateful game of dice and all that 


followed, for which he blames his uncle entirely. He can never remove that 
burning rancour from his heart.” 


CANTO 2 


V aisampayana said, “However, worshipped by the other Pandava 

brothers, Dhritarashtra, son of Ambika, passes his time happily, 
waited upon and honoured by many Rishis who come to the city of 
elephants. It is he who makes the first offerings given daily to the great 
Brahmanas who live in the palace. Yudhishtira has given complete charge 
and care of this pious duty to his uncle, upon whom he continues to shower 
affection, for there is no malice in Pandu’s eldest son, neither in his nature 
nor in his heart. He says to his brothers and councillors, ‘Our uncle 
Dhritarashtra must be accorded all reverence and honour by me and by all 
of you. Whoever is obedient to Dhritarashtra’s commands is my well- 
wisher; anyone who treats him otherwise is my enemy and will be punished 
by me for certain.’ 

On days when rituals are performed and offerings made to the Pitris, 
and also at the sraddha ceremonies for his dead sons and _ allies, 
Dhritarashtra gives profuse wealth to Brahmanas, as he likes and as he 
thinks each one deserves. Yudhishtira, Bhima, Arjuna and the twins strive 
to please the old king and carry out his orders faithfully. They are always 
careful to ensure that the grief they have brought him by killing his sons 
and grandsons does not overwhelm their blind uncle, lest he die of it. 

In everything, great and small, they ensure that Dhritarashtra continues 
to enjoy every privilege and royal luxury, as he did while Duryodhana and 
his brothers were alive. Thus do the sons of Pandu conduct themselves 
towards Dhritarashtra, living under his command. Seeing them so humble 
and obedient to his every wish, always treating him as sishyas would their 


guru, Dhritarashtra’s heart softens, and he also shows them the affection of 
a preceptor. By performing the diverse rites of the sraddha and giving many 
rich gifts to Brahmanas, Gandhari frees herself of the debt she owes her 
dead sons. In this, too, the sons of Pandu, their mother and their wife ensure 
that the old queen lacks for nothing. This is how Yudhishtira Dharmaraja 
and his brothers worship King Dhritarashtra. 

Dhritarashtra of great tejas can find no trace of ill-will in his nephews 
and, seeing how they faithfully tread the path of dharma and wisdom, he is 
pleased and gratified with them. In time, Subala’s daughter Gandhari casts 
off her sorrow for her slain sons and shows the Pandavas love as if they 
were her own children. So it is that the Mahatejasvin, the Kuru king 
Yudhishtira, never by the slightest word or deed, displeases his royal uncle, 
the son of Vichitravirya; on the contrary, he does everything in his power to 
please him and the now helpless Gandhari, by fulfilling their every wish and 
command with the utmost reverence. The old king is gratified with 
Yudhishtira and grieved at the remembrance of the misdeeds of his own evil 
son Duryodhana. 

Rising before dawn, Dhritarashtra bathes and chants his daily mantras, 
and then blesses the sons of Pandu, wishing them victory in battle and 
success in their every undertaking. Making the usual gifts to the Brahmanas 
in the palace, getting their blessings for the kingdom and all in it, and 
pouring libations on the sacred fire, the old king prays for a long life for the 
Pandavas. Indeed, he has never derived such deep happiness from his own 
sons as he now does from the sons of Pandu. 

Meanwhile, Yudhishtira becomes as beloved of the Brahmanas as he 
already is of the Kshatriyas in his realm, while the diverse classes of 
Vaisyas and Sudras adulate him. He forgets serenely all the suffering and 
hardship inflicted on him, his brothers and his wife by Dhritarashtra and his 
sons, and offers his uncle constant love and reverence. Anyone giving 
Dhritarashtra the least offence earns Yudhishtira’s strong disfavour. Indeed, 
through fear of Yudhishtira, nobody can so much as mention the evil that 
either Duryodhana or Dhritarashtra wrought in the past. 

Both Gandhari and Vidura are well pleased with Ajatasatru’s capacity 
to forgive. However, they have less cause to be pleased with Bhima, O 
Parantapa, for while Dharmaputra Yudhishtira is genuinely affectionate and 
obedient towards his uncle, his brother Bhima’s brow clouds at the sight of 
Dhritarashtra. Seeing Dharmaputra Yudhishtira’s reverence for the old king, 


Bhima continues to show him respect, but he does so with an unwilling 
heart.” 


CANTO 3 


V aisampayana said, “The people of the Kuru kingdom can see no 
trace of discord between Duryodhana’s father, the old king, and 
Pandu’s son, the new one. However Dhritarashtra cannot help feeling 
antagonism towards Bhima, who had killed Duryodhana and all his 
brothers, while Vrikodara Bhimasena, too, from a strain of wickedness in 
his heart, finds it hard to tolerate his uncle. He covertly plagues 
Dhritarashtra by encouraging perverse servitors to disobey his commands. 

One day, in the company of his friends, Bhima’s recollection of the evil 
counsels and deeds of the old king brings him to yield to a surge of wrath. 
He says loudly to his companions, in the hearing of Dhritarashtra and 
Gandhari, ‘These arms of mine, like a pair of iron clubs—it is these arms 
that despatched to the next world all the sons of the blind king who could 
fight with any weapon. Look at these invincible arms, like a pair of 
elephants’ trunks, smeared today with sandalwood paste—as they deserve, 
for these are the arms that sent Duryodhana and his brothers to Yama, with 
all their sons and kinsmen!’ 

After that outburst Bhima no longer restrains himself, and continues to 
give vent to his hatred and anger. For fifteen long years, Bhima’s constant 
insults fly like fire-darts into the ears of Dhritarashtra and Gandhari, lodging 
themselves deep in the heart of Dhritarashtra, who gives way to sorrow and 
despair. Wise Gandhari, who knows that time brings all things in its 
ineluctable course, remains serene. Yudhishtira knows nothing of this, nor 
do Arjuna Swetavahana and Kunti, nor the famed Draupadi. Madri’s twins, 


knowers of dharma, continue to wait upon the old king as attentively and 
affectionately as ever, never saying a word that might hurt or displease him. 

Then, one day, Dhritarashtra can no longer contain his grief and 
confides in some of his old friends. With tears in his blind eyes, the aged 
king says, “You well know how the annihilation of the Kauravas came to 
pass. It was all caused by my folly, though the Kauravas approved of all my 
counsels. Fool that I was, I installed my evil son Duryodhana on the throne. 
He was an enemy and a terror to his own cousins. Krishna said to me, “Let 
this sinful wretch of evil mind be killed, along with all his close 
confederates,” but I did not listen, I did not understand the grave import of 
his words. All wise men said the same thing to me. Vyasa repeatedly gave 
me the same counsel; Sanjaya and even Gandhari told me to be rid of 
Duryodhana and the evil-doers who were closest to him. Vidura, and 
Bhishma, Drona and Kripa said the same, over and over. All of them 
showed me the way of dharma. But I was a slave to my love for my son, 
and I paid them no heed. 

Today, bitter repentance is my lot. I regret not having given the Kuru 
throne of blazing splendour, handed down through the ages through the 
most noble sires and grandsires, to the sons of Pandu, men of immaculate 
dharma and possessed of every ability and accomplishment. Krishna clearly 
foresaw the destruction of all the kings; but he regarded the war of 
Kurukshetra as being not evil but, indeed, beneficial. I lost so many anikas 
of my troops, and my own heart is pierced with a thousand arrows of 
anguish. Now I seek to expiate my sins. At the fourth yaama of the day, or 
sometimes at the eighth division, with the regularity of a vrata, I eat a little 
food and drink some water just to stay alive. Only Gandhari knows this. All 
my attendants believe that I eat as usual. 

Through concern for Yudhishtira, I keep this a secret, for if the eldest 
son of Pandu discovered what I am doing he would feel great pain. Clad in 
deer-skin, I lie down on the bare ground, on a bed of kusa grass, and pass 
the time in silent chanting of holy mantras. Gandhari, also, keeps a similar 
vrata with me. This is how we truly live, we who lost a hundred sons in 
battle, none of whom ever fled the field. I do not grieve for those children of 
mine, for they all died in the observance of Kshatriya dharma.’ 

Then at last the old king addresses Yudhishtira directly. ‘Blessed be 
you, O son of the Yadava princess. Listen now to what I say. Cherished and 
loved by you, my son, I have lived these fifteen years very happily. I have 


given large gifts and performed sraddhas repeatedly. I have, to the best of 
my power, achieved some punya, because you have enabled me to do so. 
This Gandhari, though she lost all her sons, has lived with great fortitude, 
looking to my needs all the while. Those who inflicted great wrongs on 
Draupadi and robbed you of your kingdom and wealth—those cruel 
wretches—have all left this world, slain in battle in accord with the dharma 
of the Kshatriya. I need do nothing for them, O Kurunandana. Killed with 
their faces turned towards battle, they have attained to the realms kept for 
warriors who die fighting. 

It is time now that I accomplish what is beneficial and meritorious for 
me and for Gandhari. It becomes you, Maharajan, to grant me leave to do 
this. You are the foremost of all righteous men, always devoted to dharma. 
The king is the preceptor of all, and that is why I ask this of you. O 
Kshatriya, I seek your leave to go away into the forest, wearing rags and 
valkala, to seek my soul’s peace. Rajan, I will live alone in the vana, with 
only Gandhari by my side, and perform tapasya, always blessing you. It is 
fitting for the kings of our house in old age to hand sovereignty to their sons 
and retired into vanaprastha. Subsisting in the forest on just air, abstaining 
from all food, I mean, with this wife of mine, to perform severe penance. 
Since you are king, you shall certainly have a share in my tapasya, my son, 
for kings are sharers in all deed, both auspicious and inauspicious, done in 
their kingdom.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “When you, Rajan, are so grief-stricken, sovereignty 
does not please me at all. Ah, curses upon me for being so dark-minded and 
heedless as to allow the pleasures of kingship to bear me this far from my 
true concerns. Fie on me that my brothers and I have been so ignorant of 
your real condition: afflicted by sorrow, emaciated with fasting, and 
sleeping on the bare ground. Alas, that I have been so credulous as to have 
been led by your superior intelligence to believe that you were well cared 
for and happy, while in fact you have lived in the clasp of dark sadness. 

What need have I of kingdom or of pleasures, what need of sacrifices 
or of happiness, when you, O King, have endured such pain? I regard my 
kingdom as a disease, and myself as one afflicted. But then of what use now 
are these hollow words of mine, stricken as I am? You are our father, you 
are our mother; you are our foremost of elders and superiors. If you leave 
us, how will we carry on living? Best of kings, let Yuyutsu, son of your 
loins, be made king, or, indeed, anyone else you may choose. I will go away 


into the forest, and you must rule the kingdom. It is not right for you to 
even think of burning with further fires one who is already consumed by the 
ignominy of what we have just learned from you. 

I am not the king. You are the king, and I am dependent on your will. 
How dare I grant leave to you, who are my guru? O sinless one, I harbour 
no resentment in my heart on account of the wrongs done to us by 
Suyodhana. It was ordained that it should be so. We and they, all of us were 
stupefied and deceived by fate. We are your children, as Duryodhana and 
his brothers were. I feel that Gandhari is as much my mother as Kunti. If 
you, O King of kings, go away into the vana, I will follow you. I swear this 
by my soul. This earth, with her belt of seas, so full of wealth, will not be 
any source of joy to me if I am deprived of your presence. All this belongs 
to you. I serve you; I live to gratify you, bending my head. We are all 
dependent on you, Rajadhiraja. O, let the fever of your heart be dispelled. I 
believe, O Bhumipala, that all that has come upon you is solely due to 
destiny. I had thought that by waiting upon you and carrying out all your 
commands obediently, I would have the good fortune of rescuing you from 
the burning grief in your heart.’ 

Dhritarashtra says, ‘O joy of the Kurus, Dharmaraja, my son, my mind 
is set on tapasya. Mighty one, it is proper for our vamsa that I should retire 
into the forest. I have lived long under your protection, my child, and you 
have served me reverently for many years. I am now old, and it is fitting 
that you give me leave to go into the vana.’ 

Dhritarashtra then addresses the Mahatman Sanjaya and Maharatha 
Kripa with folded hands, trembling all the while. ‘I wish to solicit the king 
through you both. My mind has grown dark and dismal, and my mouth is 
dry through weakness of age and the exertion of speaking.’ With these 
words, the Kurupravira sways against Gandhari for support, looking like a 
corpse. Seeing his blind uncle now so faint, the royal son of Kunti is 
pierced as by an arrow through his heart. 

Yudhishtira exclaims, ‘Alas that the king whose strength was that of a 
hundred thousand elephants sits before us today, leaning on a frail woman 
—that one who crushed an iron image of Bhima into dust with his bare 
arms must lean on her now to remain upright! May I be cursed a thousand 
times for being such a sinner! Fie on my intellect, fie on my knowledge of 
the Shastras, fie on me on whose account this Lord of the Earth is reduced 
today to a state unworthy of him! I too shall fast, even as my guru, my 


uncle, does. Yes, even as Dhritarashtra and his great and pure queen 
Gandhari fast, so will Yudhishtira.’ 

Then the Pandava king, knower of every dharma, with his own hands 
gently moistens the old blind king’s face and breast with cold water. At the 
touch of Yudhishtira’s fragrant hands bearing auspicious gemstones and 
medicinal herbs, Dhritarashtra regains his senses and opens his eyes. He 
says, ‘Do you touch me again, O son of Pandu, with your hands, and do you 
embrace me. O you of eyes like lotus-petals, you have restored me to my 
senses with your propitious touch. Naresha, come close to me, I want to 
smell the crown of your head. Ah, how your embrace comforts me. This is 
the eighth yaama of the day, when I eat my food. Yudhishtira, it is because I 
have not yet eaten that I am so weak. Telling you what I had to say 
exhausted me entirely. I fainted through fatigue and sorrow, O child of the 
Kuru vamsa. But with the touch of your hands, Kurunandana, I am 
restored.’ 

Yudhishtira is moved by affection at these words and tenderly strokes 
his uncle’s limbs. Reanimated by the Dharmaputra’s touch, Dhritarashtra 
embraces him lovingly and smells the top of his head. Vidura and others 
weep aloud, unable to utter a word. Heavy as her heart is, Gandhari, the 
bhakta, bears her grief with fortitude, O King, and remains silent. The other 
royal women, Kunti among them, are distraught. They weep copious tears, 
clustered around the old king. 

Dhritarashtra says again to Yudhishtira, ‘O King, give me your leave to 
go into the vana and perform tapasya. I beg you, do not make me repeat 
myself, for my mind is exhausted and my body weak. My son, tire me no 
more.’ At this, a loud lament arises from all the Kshatriyas present. And 
looking again at his royal uncle, once so splendid and strong, reduced now 
to such a piteous state, emaciated and pale, worn out by fasting, a living 
skeleton covered with skin, Dharmaputra Yudhishtira breaks down 
weeping. He says, ‘Greatest of men, I do not desire life and sovereignty 
over the Earth. O Parantapa, I will do whatever pleases you. But if I am at 
all dear to you, eat something, I beg you. After that I will know what I must 
do.’ Dhritarashtra of great tejas says to Yudhishtira, ‘My son, with your 
leave, I wish to eat now.’ Even as he speaks, Satyavati’s son Vyasa appears 
and addresses the assembled gathering.” 


CANTO 4 


== V yasa says, “Mahabaho Yudhishtira, you must not hesitate to grant 
Dhritarashtra his wishes. This king is old. He has been made 
sonless and he will not be able to bear his grief long. The most blessed 
Gandhari, of great wisdom and gentle speech, bears the loss of her sons 
with silent fortitude. Today, I also add my voice to Dhritarashtra’s request, 
and you must obey my words—give your aged uncle leave to go into the 
forest and seek his soul’s peace. Let him not die an inglorious death at 
home. Let this king follow the path of all the Rajarishis of old. For, truly, 
the time for vanaprastha comes at last for all royal sages.’ 

King Yudhishtira the Just of mighty energy says to the Maharishi, ‘We 
hold you in the highest reverence, and you alone are our first guru. You are 
the refuge of our kingdom as also of our vamsa. You are our king and our 
preceptor. I am your son and you, Holy One, are my father. The son must 
obey the commands of his sire, in accord with every dharma.’ 

Krishna Dwaipayana the Island-born, foremost of poets, greatest of 
those who know the Vedas, Vyasa of awesome tejas, says to Yudhishtira, ‘It 
is even as you say, Mahabaho. This king has reached an advanced age, O 
Bhaarata, and is now in the final stage of his life. With your leave and my 
blessing, let this Lord of the Earth do what he purposes. Do not stand as an 
impediment in his way, for this is the highest dharma of Rajarishis, O 
Yudhishtira. They should either die in battle or in the vana, as the Shastras 
dictate, in consonance with their asrama in life. 

Your royal father Pandu, King of kings, revered his older brother 
Dhritarashtra even as a sishya does his guru. At that time, Dhritarashtra 


adored the gods with many great sacrifices, with profuse gifts of veritable 
hills of wealth and jewels, and he ruled the Earth and protected his subjects 
wisely and well. When he begot a hundred sons and owned a swelling 
kingdom, he enjoyed unrivalled influence for thirteen years while you were 
in exile, and during that time he gave away great wealth. Sinless one, Lord 
of men, you have also, along with your brothers and servants, adored this 
old king and Gandhari of fame with the ready obedience a disciple pays to 
his preceptor. Now you must gladly give your leave to your father to go into 
the forest; the time has indeed come for him to attend to the practice of 
tapasya. O Yudhishtira, he does not, harbour even the slightest anger 
towards any of you.’ 

With these words, Vyasa soothes the old king. Yudhishtira answers the 
Rishi, saying, ‘Tathaastu—so be it.’ The Maharishi Vyasa then leaves the 
palace and Hastinapura and departs into the forest. Yudhishtira, bending 
low before the old king, says humbly, tenderly to Dhritarashtra, ‘Holy 
Vyasa approves of your purpose, as do Vidura, Yuyutsu and Sanjaya. All of 
them are well-wishers of our vamsa and worthy of worship. I will 
accomplish what you want with all speed. However, O Rajan, I beg of you 
with bowed head, do you first eat and only after that leave for the vana and 
make your asrama in the forest.’” 


CANTO 5 


V aisampayana said, “Having received the king’s permission, 

Dhritarashtra returns to his own palace, followed by Gandhari. He is 
weak and walks slowly and with some difficulty, like a great tusker, lord of 
an elephant herd, worn out and spent with age. Vidura follows 
Dhritarashtra, as does Sanjaya, his sarathi, as well as the mighty bowman 
Kripa, the son of Saradwata. 

Entering his palace, O King, Dhritarashtra performs his morning 
ablutions and rituals and, after gratifying the foremost Brahmanas of the 
court, finally eats a little. Then the virtuous Gandhari and Kunti of deep 
wisdom are worshipped with sacred offerings by their daughters-in-law, O 
Bhaarata, and they too eat. When Dhritarashtra has finished his repast, with 
Vidura and the others around them, the Pandavas, having eaten their food, 
come to the old king and sit around him. The son of Ambika lays his hand 
on the back of Yudhishtira, who sits next to him, and says, ‘You must 
always be careful to discharge your dharma towards your kingdom of eight 
angas, O joy of the Kurus, keeping righteousness before you. 

Kaunteya, you are possessed of intelligence and learning in abundance. 
Listen to me now, O King, and I will tell you the means whereby the 
kingdom can be protected through dharma. Yudhishtira, you must 
unfailingly honour those old in knowledge and wisdom. Listen attentively 
to what they say, and act at their behest without hesitation. Rising at dawn, 
O King, worship them with every due rite; and when the time comes for 
action, consult them about whatever you intend to do. When you show them 


reverence and honour, they will give you sage counsel that will lead to your 
welfare. 

Keep your senses restrained, even as you do your horses. They will 
then prove beneficial to you, like wealth that is not squandered. You must 
only employ such ministers as have passed the test of honesty, men who 
have proven their loyalty, disinterestedness, continence and courage. It is 
best to have as men of state those who are born to it, whose hereditary 
vocation it is. You must ensure that they, too, are self-restrained, astute in 
the discharge of business, and endowed with pure and righteous conduct. 
You must gather information through spies in diverse disguises, men whose 
faithfulness has been tasted, who are natives of your kingdom, and who 
remain unknown to your enemies as your agents. 

Your citadel should be properly protected with strong walls and arched 
gates. On every side the walls, with watch-towers on them standing close to 
one another, should be such as to allow six men to walk on them abreast. 
The gates should be large and strong enough to withstand enemy attacks. 
Erected in proper places, they should be carefully and constantly guarded. 

Let all your purposes be accomplished through men whose families 
and conduct are well known and reputable. Be vigilant in safeguarding 
yourself against treachery while indulging in sport, in the garlands you wear 
and the beds that you lie upon, or through poison in your food. The ladies of 
your household should be protected, watched over by aged and trusted 
servitors of good conduct, well born and possessed of learning, O 
Yudhishtira. Make ministers of Brahmanas who are truly learned men, 
imbued with humility, well born, conversant with dharma and artha, and 
adorned with simplicity and forthrightness. With these men you should hold 
regular consultations—but make sure that those you trust and keep closest 
to you are few in number. 

On some occasions you may consult with the whole of your council, or 
with a part of it. This should be done in a well-protected private chamber or 
arbor. You could hold this consultation in a forest, where there is no grass in 
which intruders or spies might hide. Never should you hold counsel at 
night. Monkeys, birds and other animals that can imitate humans should be 
excluded from the council chamber, as also fools, and lame and palsied 
men. I believe that the evils that spring from divulging the counsels of kings 
are beyond remedy. While among your counsellors, you must repeatedly 
refer to the evils that arise from a betrayal of secrecy, O Parantapa, and to 


the merits that flow from counsels properly kept. You must constantly 
ascertain the merits and faults of the inhabitants of your city and the 
provinces. 

Let your laws, O King, always be administered by trusted judges, who 
must be contented men and of good conduct. Keep a watchful eye on them 
through secret agents. Let your officers of justice mete out punishments to 
offenders according to the law only after careful scrutiny of their offences. 
Those culprits that are disposed to take bribes, that inflict harsh 
punishments, or are stained by greed, or liars or revilers, that violate the 
chastity of other men’s wives, commit murder, act rashly, disturb the 
assemblies and sport of others, or who bring about a confusion of castes, 
should be punished in consonance with time and place, either by fines or 
with death. 

In the morning you should see those employed in making your 
disbursements. After this you should look to your ablutions, and then to 
your food. Next you should inspect your armed forces, gratifying them on 
every occasion. Your evening should be set apart for envoys and spies. The 
early nights should be devoted to completing what you have done in the 
past day and assessing what remains to be done in the coming one. The later 
night you may keep for your own pleasure and entertainment, and the 
afternoons for games and other amusements. However, at all times your 
mind must dwell on the means for accomplishing your purposes. At the 
appointed hour, having adorned your person, you should prepare to 
dispense gifts and charity in profusion. The times for different actions, O 
son, revolve ceaselessly like wheels. 

Exert yourself always to fill your treasury by lawful and righteous 
means. Adharma in this pursuit must be shunned. Through your trusted 
spies you must ascertain who your enemies are, who are bent upon 
exploiting your weaknesses, and then have them destroyed from a distance. 
Appoint your servants and agents, O King, after carefully examining their 
conduct. All your plans and wishes must be implemented through your 
trusted servitors, whether they are formally appointed or not. The Senapati 
of your army must be of strong character and firm conduct, courageous, 
able to bear hardship, loyal and devoted to your good. Remember to be 
always as scrupulous in knowing your own weaknesses as you do those of 
your enemies. You must also know the weaknesses of your own men, as 
also of those loyal to your enemies. 


The artificers and artisans who live in your provinces should do your 
bidding as obediently as cows and mules, O son of Pandu. You must 
support skilled and able men in your kingdom engaged in their respective 
professions who are devoted to you. A wise king always encourages and 
recognizes the accomplishments of his gifted subjects, so that they can 
continue to pursue their vocations happily, O ruler of men. For then they 
will be staunchly loyal to you, and their skills will not fall away from 
bitterness.” 


CANTO 6 


¢ “T) hritarashtra says, “Always, Bhaarata, distinguish between the 

mandalas that belong to you, to your foes, to neutrals, and to 
those that are disposed equally towards you and your foes. Of these, you 
must clearly know the areas belonging to the four kinds of foes, of those 
known as Atatayins, of your allies, and the allies of your enemies. 

The ministers of state, the people of the provinces, the garrisons of 
forts, and the armed forces, O Kurusottama, may or may not be perfectly 
loyal. Therefore, act in such a manner that your enemies do not gain 
influence over these in any way. These twelve constitute the principal 
concerns of a king, and to these he must always give his attention, as well 
as to those known as the sixty, of which the ministers are foremost. 

These are what the learned men of politics call the mandalas. Clearly 
understand, O Yudhishtira, that the six important occurrences—of peace, 
war, marching forward, halting, sowing dissension, and conciliation— 
depend upon these mandalas. You must also heed growth and diminution, as 
well as the condition of being stationary; also know the attributes of the 
sixfold occurrences, Mahabaho, as resting upon the two and seventy that I 
have mentioned. 

When one’s own force has become strong and that of the enemy weak, 
it is then, O son of Kunti, that the king should wage war against the enemy, 
and victory shall be his. When the enemy is strong and one’s own power is 
diminished, then the weak king, if he has any intelligence, should seek to 
make peace with his enemy. 


The king should always stock a large store of weapons and provisions 
for his army. When he is in a position of strength and able to march out, he 
should on no account make any delay, for times and fortunes change 
quickly. When going forth to war or even in peace, a wise king will appoint 
the best men to offices for which they are suited, without being moved by 
any other consideration than their ability. 

When he is obliged to yield a portion of his territories to his enemy, he 
should give him only barren lands that produce no crops, or those that are 
mediocre. When obliged to give wealth, he should give gold heavily alloyed 
with base metals. When obliged to give a portion of his troops, he should 
only give such men as are not noted for their prowess. On the other hand, 
when a king takes from an enemy he must employ this rule in reverse — 
obtain the best land, the purest gold and the strongest men. 

While making peace treaties, king of the Bharatas, you must demand as 
a hostage the son of the defeated king; any other course is unreliable. If 
some calamity overtakes a king, he must try to free himself from it through 
his own knowledge as well as the counsel of the wise. 

The king must support and maintain the destitute and the unhappy, the 
afflicted, such as the blind, the deaf and dumb, and the diseased among his 
people. First of all protecting his own kingdom, ensuring its welfare and 
prosperity, a king, when truly assured of his own great strength, can direct 
all his efforts to vanquishing his enemies, either one after another or even 
simultaneously. He should first afflict them with subtle stratagems, obstruct 
them in their endeavours to prosper, and drain their treasury. The king who 
wants his own growth should never injure the subordinate and allied princes 
and chieftains under his sway. O Kaunteya, never seek war with a king who 
wishes to conquer the whole world. Instead, with the help of your ministers 
and agents, create dissension among his nobles, allies and subordinates. 

A powerful king should never seek to exterminate weak kings, for 
these promote the weal of the world by cherishing the good and punishing 
the evil. Best of kings, be yielding like the crane. If a strong king advances 
against a weak one, it is the latter that makes him desist, through offers of 
conciliation and other peaceful methods. If he cannot pacify the invader by 
the means of diplomacy and gifts, then he must gather his forces and those 
of other rulers well disposed towards him and, uniting against the attacker, 
fall upon the enemy in battle. 


The wise king resorts to war only when every effort at peace fails; fate 
will then come to his aid against the aggressor. However, if he fails in 
battle, too, he must inevitably fall, giving up his resources, one after the 
other, but never yielding. The Kshatriya who thus lays down his life will 
surely attain liberation from all sorrow and find great honour in heaven.” 


CANTO 7 


ts D hritarashtra says, ‘Best of kings, reflect deeply on war and peace. 

Each is of two kinds. The means are various, Yudhishtira, as are 

the circumstances under which war or peace may be made. With calm 

detachment always, O Kuru, assess your own strengths and weaknesses, 

and never rashly march against an enemy who is intelligent, and has an 

army of vigorous and contented soldiers. You should think carefully of how 
you can vanquish him. 

Go to war only against an enemy who is weaker than you and does not 
have healthy and confident soldiers. When the time is favourable you are 
certain to find victory, but once you have defeated your enemy, you should 
withdraw. Then you should assail your enemy with various troubles, 
weakening him by sowing dissension among his allies. Afflict him 
relentlessly to inspire terror in his heart, and attack him with all the means 
at your disposal, overt and covert, eroding his power until he loses all 
assurance and goes in fear of his own shadow. 

The king who knows the Shastras, who marches against an enemy, 
must weigh the three kinds of strength, not just of his foe but his own. Only 
one endowed with swiftness, discipline and the strength of wise counsel, O 
Bhaarata, should march against an enemy. When his position is otherwise, 
he should avoid battle at any cost. The king who means to go to war must 
first provide himself with the power of wealth, the power of allies, of 
foresters, of paid soldiers, and of the working and trading classes. Among 
these, the power of allies and the power of wealth are superior to the rest. 
The power of the people and that of the standing army are equal. 


Frequently, the power of spies is regarded as equal to either of the above, 
depending on the circumstances. 

The troubles that visit kings come in many forms. Hear from me, my 
son, what those are; be careful to take note of each separately, O Pandava, 
and strive to face them squarely through the time-tested methods of 
conciliation, gifts and the rest. When he has a strong army, a king may 
attack an enemy, Parantapa. He must be as attentive to considerations of 
time and place, while preparing to march, as he is to the forces he has 
mustered and his own merits in other respects. The king who is heedful of 
his own advancement should not go to war unless his fighting men are 
strong and healthy, and their morale high. When powerful, a king may go to 
war in even an unfavourable season. He must make a river of his legions, 
with quivers for its stones, horses and chariots for its current, and proud 
standards for the trees that cover its banks, while its turbulent flow is miry 
with foot soldiers and elephants. It is such an army that a king must possess 
to effect the destruction of his enemy. 

In accordance with the science of warfare as known and propounded by 
Sukra Deva, the king going into combat must form his legions into the 
vyuhas called Sakata, Padma and Vajra. He must be fully aware of his 
enemy’s strengths and cognizant of his own strengths and weaknesses; he 
should decide on where to fight— within his own territories or those of his 
foe. Keeping his men in good spirits by caring for their every need and 
wish, the wise king hurls his most powerful warriors into battle against his 
enemy. 

As I have said, he must deliberate well on the condition of his own 
kingdom, and first try to achieve his purpose through sama, conciliation, 
and the other well-known means. One’s body must be protected by all 
means: a man should devote himself to that which benefits him both in this 
world and the next. The king who adheres to this dharma will surely find 
heaven when he leaves his body, after having ruled his subjects wisely and 
justly in this world. 

Kurusottama, the king’s first and last dharma is to minister to his 
subjects; it is only through this that a sovereign of the earth conquers both 
this world and the next. You have already been instructed in the Rajadharma 
by Bhishma, by Krishna and by Vidura, O best of kings. From the love that 
I bear you, I am now adding what I know to what they have already taught 
you. 


Most generous of kings, you who give profuse gifts during the great 
sacrifices you perform, bear in mind all you have heard and discharge your 
duty accordingly. Through this you will bring great felicity to your people 
and find Swarga for yourself. An equal measure of punya accrues to the 
king who worships the Devas with a hundred Aswamedha yagnas and to the 
one who rules his subjects righteously.’” 


CANTO 8 


66 Y udhishtira says, ‘Lord of the Earth, I will do as you bid, and you, 

best of kings, must continue to teach me further. Bhishma has 

ascended into heaven; Krishna has returned to Dwaraka; and I know that, if 

you leave, Vidura and Sanjaya will also go with you into the forest. Who 

but you will teach and guide me now? Be assured, O King, I will follow 
whatever you have told me today as my well-wisher.’ 

Despite the words of the wise Yudhishtira, the Rajarishi wants only his 
permission to depart and, saying to him, “Cease, my child, I am tired,” he 
enters Gandhari’s apartment. Knowing the time is ripe and_ the 
circumstances opportune, Gandhari of deep dharma says to her husband, 
who, seated, looks like another Prajapati, “You have received Mahamuni 
Vyasa’s leave to go into the forest. But when will you obtain Yudhishtira’s 
as well? When shall we go forth from here, my lord?’ Dhritarashtra replies, 
‘Gandhari, I have indeed obtained the leave of my Mahatman sire. 
Yudhishtira will also soon agree, and I will go into the vana. However, first 
I want to give away some wealth, even as Preta, for the peace of my sons 
who were so addicted to calamitous gambling. I want to call all our people 
to my palace and give away bounteous wealth.’ 

Dhritarashtra sends for Yudhishtira and, at the old king’s command, the 
Pandava arranges for all the gold and other wealth that he asks for to be put 
at his disposal. Upon receiving his royal invitation, many Brahmanas living 
in Kurujangala, many Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras, come to 
Dhritarashtra’s mansion with joy in their hearts. 


Emerging from his inner apartments, the aged monarch, seeing all of 
them and his subjects assembled before him, addresses them: ‘All of you 
and the Kurus have lived together in harmony for many years as one 
another’s well-wishers and benefactors. The time has come for you now to 
heed and accomplish what I now say to you, even as sishyas do the bidding 
of their guru. I have set my heart upon retiring into the forest, with 
Gandhari as my companion. The Rishi Vyasa has approved of this, as has 
the son of Kunti. Now let me have your permission too, without any 
hesitation. 

The goodwill that has always existed between us is rarely to be found 
in other realms between kings and their people. I am worn out with the 
burden of years borne upon my head. I am without any progeny. Sinless 
ones, I am emaciated with penitent fasts, as is my queen Gandhari. Since 
the kingdom passed to Yudhishtira, I have enjoyed great happiness, O 
foremost of men—far greater that what I could have expected or known had 
Duryodhana ruled instead. What other refuge can I have now, old as I am 
and destitute of children, other than the forest? You most blessed ones, it is 
your solemn duty to joyfully grant me the leave I seek to go forth and find 
the peace of my soul.’ 

Upon hearing these words, all the good people of Hastinapura and the 
surrounding lands of Kurujangala utter loud lamentations, their voices 
choked with weeping. Dhritarashtra of great tejas seeks to comfort his grief- 
stricken people.” 


CANTO 9 


- D hritarashtra says, ‘You know that Santanu ruled this Earth, as did 

Vichitravirya, protected by Bhishma. My brother Pandu, who 

also ruled you well, was dear to me, as he was to you. Sinless ones, I have 

also served you. I have done the best I could, and discharged my 

Rajadharma heedfully; and so, if I have ever failed you, I ask you to forgive 
me. 

Duryodhana also enjoyed this kingdom without a thorn in his side. 
Foolish and of perverse mind he was, but I do not think he did his people 
any wrong or harm. Yet, through his pride and wickedness, as well as 
through my own weakness, a great carnage has claimed the lives of 
Kshatriyas. Whether my actions were right or wrong, I beg you with folded 
hands to forget what I did. 

Think of me as being old, as having lost all my progeny and being 
tormented by grief; think of me as having been your king, descended from 
the great kings of old—think of all this, and find it in your hearts to forgive 
me. This Gandhari of mine also is old and plunged in sorrow after the loss 
of her sons; and she too solicits your forgiveness. Knowing that both of us 
are old and stricken by grief at having lost our sons, grant us your 
protection and give us both the sanction we seek, blessed ones. 

You must love and look after this great Kuru king, Yudhishtira, the son 
of Kunti, in prosperity as well as in adversity. With four brothers of 
abundant prowess beside him, he will never fall into distress, or leave the 
ancient path of truth. All of them are conversant with both dharma and 
artha; they are like the Lokapalas, the very guardians of the world. Like 


illustrious Brahma himself, Lord of the universe of creatures, will this 
Yudhishtira of mighty tejas rule you. I am saying what needs to be said in 
no uncertain terms. Thus do I give this Yudhishtira into your care, as I do 
you into his care. And thus I beseech you to forget, to forgive whatever 
injury was done to you by my sons, who are no more among the living, or 
by anyone else who was mine and served me. 

I know that you never harboured any anger towards me in the past. I 
solemnly join my hands before all of you, who are known for your loyalty. 
Look, I bow to you all. Yet again, Anaghas, with Gandhari by my side I ask 
your pardon for every wrong done to you by my sons of unrestrained and 
restless minds, stained by avarice, and always yielding to their desires.’ 

Hearing these words of the aged monarch, tears fill the eyes of the 
citizens of Hastinapura and the people of the provinces. They say nothing 
but only look numbly at one another.” 


CANTO 10 


V aisampayana says, “When Dhritarashtra has spoken, his people 
stand before him stupefied. Hearing no reply from them, no sound, 
for their voices are choked with grief, the aged king speaks to them again, 
“You best of men, I am old, sonless, and with my wife lament constantly; 
my sire, the Island-born Vyasa, has give me his blessing to go into the vana, 
as has Yudhishtira, who knows every dharma, O my good and righteous 
people. Sinless ones, Gandhari and I ask again for your leave to retire into 
vanaprastha; with bent heads, we beg you. You must not deny us.’ 

Hearing him so utterly pitiable, the assembled people of Kurujangala 
begin to wail, covering their faces with their hands and upper garments. 
Overwhelmed by searing grief, they weep like fathers and mothers shedding 
tears, every thought dispelled from their hearts other than that Dhritarashtra 
means to leave them. At last, controlling their grief and shock, they are able 
to speak to one another, and by unanimous consent elect a Brahmana to 
answer the old monarch on their behalf. 

The erudite Brahmana Samba, of impeccable character and conduct, 
learned beyond common measure, a master of all the Riks, attempts to reply 
to the king. He is a composed and self-assured man, exceptionally 
intelligent and serene by nature. With the approval of the assembled people 
of Kurujangala, Samba says to the king, ‘Maharajan, I have been given 
charge of voicing the people’s reply to you, and with your leave, I will now 
do so, mighty Kshatriya. All that you say, O King of kings, is true; indeed, 
you have not uttered the slightest untruth. You are our well-wisher, as, 
indeed, we are yours. Verily, in this line of rulers, there never was a king 


who in governing his subjects earned their disfavour. You have ruled us like 
fathers or brothers. Nor did King Duryodhana ever do us any wrong. 

O Rajan, you must do as the Mahatman Maharishi, son of Satyavati, 
has said. He is the first and the greatest of all our gurus. When you leave us, 
O Rajan, we shall have to pass our days in sorrow, filled with remembrance 
of your many virtues. We were as ably protected and ruled by your son 
Duryodhana as we had been by Santanu, or Chitrangada, or by your father, 
O King, who was shielded by the might of Bhishma, or by Pandu, Lord of 
the Earth, whom you guided and watched over in all he did. 

Your son never did us the slightest wrong, O Monarch. We lived 
contentedly, relying on him as trustfully as on our own father. You well 
know how we lived under Duryodhana’s rule. In the same manner, we have 
enjoyed great happiness, Rajan, under the rule of Kunti’s son of unmatched 
intelligence and wisdom, the very soul of dharma. Yudhishtira, who 
performs sacrifices with gifts in profusion, follows the ways of the 
Rajarishis of old of your vamsa, among whom were Kuru and Sambara and 
others, and even Bharata, wisest of all. There is nothing that invites the 
slightest censure in this Yudhishtira’s rule. Protected and governed by you, 
we have all lived in great felicity; we can find no complaint against you or 
your son. As for what you said about Duryodhana and the carnage of 
kinsmen, I beg you to hear me, O delighter of the Kurus.’ 

The Brahmana continues, ‘Duryodhana did not cause the Great War 
and the annihilation which that overtook the Kurus. Neither were you the 
cause of that war, nor Karna, nor Subala’s son Sakuni. Fate alone brought 
that war down upon the world, and it was ineluctable, for men cannot resist 
destiny. Incontrovertible Fate brought eight and ten aksauhinis of troops 
together on Kurukshetra, O Rajan, and in eight and ten days that host was 
destroyed by the greatest Kuru warriors—Bhishma and Drona and Kripa 
and others, and Mahatman Karna, the heroic Satyaki, Dhrishtadyumna, and 
by the four sons of Pandu, Bhima, Arjuna and the twins. 

That slaughter could never have come to pass without it being willed 
by destiny. Certainly death must be faced and enemies slain in battle, and 
by Kshatriyas in particular. Those greatest of men, masters of astras, 
exterminated the very Earth itself, with its horses, chariots and elephants. 
No, your son was not the cause of that carnage of noble kings. You were not 
the cause, nor any of your servants, nor Karna, nor Subala’s son. Fate alone 


wrought the slaughter of the greatest princes of the Kuru vamsa, as well as 
of thousands of other kings. Who can say otherwise? 

You yourself are regarded as the Guru and master of the world. We, 
therefore, in your presence, grant absolution to your righteous son and say, 
let that king, with all his brothers, friends and allies, find the heavenly realm 
reserved for Kshatriya heroes who die in war. With the leave of the greatest 
Brahmanas, let him sport blissfully in Swarga. You also shall attain to great 
punya, and unswerving steadiness in dharma. 

O Dhritarashtra of excellent vratas, follow faithfully the duties laid 
down in the Vedas. As for the Pandavas, they have no need for either your 
protection or ours. They can capably rule all the realms of Swarga, O wise 
Dhritarashtra, what then to say of this Bhumi? And we, the subjects of this 
kingdom, O Kurusthama, shall be obedient to the sons of Pandu, in 
prosperity as in adversity, for they wear dharma as their ornament. 

The eldest son of Pandu makes valuable gifts to the best of Dvijas who 
conduct his sacrifices and rituals, even as all the great kings of antiquity did. 
The high-minded son of Kunti is mild, gentle and self-restrained, and as 
generous as a second Vaisravana. He has wise and able ministers who 
attend on him. He is compassionate to even his enemies. Indeed, we say 
that he is the jewel of the Bharata vamsa, so pure is he in thought and deed. 

Blessed with high wisdom, he is perfectly straightforward in his 
dealings and rules us like a father protecting his children. From their 
association with the Dharmaputra, O Rajarishi, Bhima and Arjuna and all 
the others will never do us the least wrong. They are mild to those that are 
mild, and fierce like snakes of virulent poison to those who are fierce. 
Possessed of tireless energy, these Mahatmans are always devoted to the 
good of the people. 

Neither Kunti nor Panchali, nor Ulupi, nor the princess of the Sattwata 
vamsa will do the least injury to these your subjects. The people of the city 
and the provinces can never forget the affection you have shown us, which 
in Yudhishtira exists in still larger measure. The Maharatha sons of Kunti, 
while themselves living unswervingly by dharma, readily protect and 
cherish even those among their people who are less than righteous. 
Therefore, O Rajan, Purushottama, dispel any anxiety from your heart on 
account of Yudhishtira, and set yourself to accomplish all the punya to 
which you yourself aspire.’ 


Hearing the words of Samba the Brahmana, words fraught with dharma 
and punya, every last man assembled there whole-heartedly accepts them as 
his own, crying, ‘Excellent! Excellent!’ Dhritarashtra also applauds 
Samba’s words, and then dismisses the final assembly of his subjects. 
Honoured by them and gazed at with loving and auspicious glances, the old 
king joins his hands and salutes them in return. He then goes back to his 
own palace with Gandhari. 

Listen now to what he does after that night has passed.” 


CANTO 11 


V aisampayana said, “After the night has passed, Dhritarashtra, son of 

Ambika, sends Vidura to Yudhishtira’s palace. Vidura of unmatched 
tejas, wisest of men, says to the Dharmaraja of unfading glory, ‘King 
Dhritarashtra has performed the initiatory rites towards his purpose of 
taking sannyasa in the forest. He means to set out for the vana on the day of 
the full moon of the month of Kartika. 

He now solicits some wealth from you, for he wants to perform the 
sraddhas for Gangaputra Bhishma, as well as for Drona, Somadatta and 
Bahlika of the great intellect, and also of all his sons and well-wishers who 
died on Kurukshetra And, also, if you allow it, for the evil Jayadratha of the 
Sindhus, his son-in-law.’ 

Both Yudhishtira and Arjuna welcome and applaud Vidura’s message, 
but Bhima of restless energy and unappeasable wrath, recollecting the evil 
that Duryodhana once did to them, does not. Arjuna, the Kiritin, at once 
senses Bhima’s mood and, bowing his head to his brother, says, ‘Bhima, our 
royal and aged sire Dhritarashtra has resolved to take sannyasa in the forest. 
Before he leaves he wants to offer wealth for the peace of his slain kinsmen 
and well-wishers now in the other world. O Kuru, indeed he wants to give 
away wealth that belongs to you by conquest. 

Mahabaho, it is for Bhishma and the others that the old king wants to 
do this. You must allow him what his heart desires at this time. Today, 
fortune has come full circle and it is our uncle who begs us for gold, the 
same Dhritarashtra whom we once begged for our kingdom. Consider how 
time has brought this juncture—that the king who was once lord and 


protector of all the world now wants to go away into the jungle, after seeing 
all his sons and allies killed in war. Best of men, do not refuse this, his last 
request, for such ignoble denial will bring us all infamy and disrepute. Do 
you learn your dharma in this matter from Yudhishtira, who is both our 
elder brother and our lord. Great prince of the Bharata vamsa, it becomes 
you to acquiesce, not churlishly decline.’ 

Yudhishtira applauds Arjuna’s words, but Bhima, yielding to wrath, 
says, “‘Phalguna, it is we who shall give charity in the name of Bhishma, of 
Somadatta, and Bhurisravas; for Rajarishi Bahlika, Mahatman Drona, and 
all others. Our mother Kunti shall make the obsequial offerings for Karna. 
Best of men, do not allow Dhritarashtra to perform those sraddhas. This is 
my belief. We have no need to please our enemies—that is not our 
Kshatriya dharma. As for Duryodhana and the others, let them sink from 
misery to even greater misery. Ah, it was those wretches of their race that 
caused the whole world to be exterminated. How have you forgotten the 
anxiety of those twelve long years, and then the ajnatavasa that brought 
Panchali such torment? Where was this Dhritarashtra’s affection for us 
then? Did you not put on the hide of a black deer, stripped of all your royal 
ornaments and, with Panchali beside you, follow this Yudhishtira into exile? 

Where were Bhishma and Drona then, and where was Somadatta? You 
lived for thirteen years in the forest, supporting yourself on whatever we 
could forage. This eldest father of ours did not then look upon you with any 
parental love. Have you forgotten, O Partha, that it was this evil-minded 
wretch of our race who repeatedly asked Vidura during the game of dice, 
“And now what has been won?” 

Bhima is interrupted by Yudhishtira, who rebukes and silences his 
brother.” 


CANTO 12 


= A rjuna says, ‘O Bhima, you are my senior, my elder brother and 

preceptor. I dare not speak any further. Rajarishi Dhritarashtra 

deserves to be honoured by us in every way. The virtuous, those 

distinguished as superior men, never break dharma and remember, not the 
wrongs done to them, but the favours they have received.’ 

Hearing the words of the high-souled Arjuna, Mahatman Yudhishtira 
says to Vidura, ‘O Kshattri, tell the Kuru king that I shall give him as much 
wealth as he wishes to give away for the obsequies of his sons, and of 
Bhishma and all the others who were his well-wishers and benefactors. Let 
not Bhima be glum at this!’ 

Yudhishtira praises Arjuna for what he has said. But Bhimasena begins 
to cast angry looks at Dhananjaya. Yudhishtira addresses Vidura again, ‘Let 
King Dhritarashtra not be angry with Bhimasena, for my brother, who is 
wise, was greatly afflicted by cold and rain and heat and by a thousand 
other griefs while we lived in the forest. All this you know. However, say to 
the king from me, O best of the Bhaarata vamsa, that he can take from my 
house whatever he wishes, and in whatever measure he pleases. Also tell 
the king that his heart should not dwell on the arrogance that Bhima has 
exhibited, out of his anguish. 

Say to Dhritarashtra that whatever belongs to me and belongs to 
Arjuna, is his own. Let the king give gifts as he chooses to the Brahmanas. 
Let him spend as largely as he likes. Let him free himself entirely from the 
debt he owes to his sons and well-wishers. Tell him besides from me, O 


Vidura, “O King, not only does all my wealth belong to you, but this very 
body of Yudhishtira. Have no doubt about this.””’” 


CANTO 13 


7 W ise Vidura returns to Dhritarashtra with his important message: 

‘I communicated your words to Yudhishtira of great tejas, who 

reflected upon them and then approved your message with high praise. 

Arjuna also sets all his palaces and mansions, with all the wealth therein, 

indeed his very life-breath, at your disposal. Your son King Yudhishtira also 

offers you his kingdom and prana and wealth and everything else that 
belongs to him, O Rajarishi. 

However, Mahabaho Bhima cannot still forget all his sorrows, and 
gave his consent with difficulty, heaving many deep sighs. Yudhishtira and 
Arjuna together prevailed upon him to be more cordially disposed towards 
you. Yudhishtira Dharmaraja implores you to not hold Bhima’s improper 
conduct against him, and deplores the rancour to which he yielded, 
remembering the hostilities of the past. That is in the nature of war-like 
Kshatriyas, O King, and Vrikodara is devoted to battle and the way of 
walriors. 

Yudhishtira and Arjuna both repeatedly beg your forgiveness of Bhima. 
They say, “Be gracious to us. You are our lord. Whatever wealth we have, 
Bhumipala, is yours to give away as you please. You are the master of this 
kingdom, O Bhaarata, and of all lives in it. Let the foremost Kuru give 
away the finest gifts available in our treasury to the Brahmanas for the ritual 
offerings for his sons, and the others. 

Indeed, let Dhritarashtra take from our mansions jewels and ornaments 
and gold, slaves, both men and women, and kine, goats and sheep, as he 
pleases, and give them away to the Dvijas. Let him also give profuse gifts 


to those that are poor or sightless or in great distress, choosing the objects 
of his charity as he likes. Let large pavilions be constructed, O Vidura, and 
filled with food and drink of diverse tastes in profusion. Let tanks of water 
be built for cattle to drink from, and other works of punya be 
accomplished.” This is what was said to me by Yudhishtira and Pritha’s son 
Dhananjaya. Now you must tell me what should be done next.’ 

Dhritarashtra expresses his satisfaction and pleasure at Vidura’s 
message, O Janamejaya, and sets his heart on distributing great largesse on 
the day of the full moon in the month of Kartika.” 


CANTO 14 


V aisampayana said, “Dhritarashtra is deeply gratified with the 

response of Yudhishtira and Arjuna. The blind and aged king, after 
due consideration, invites thousands of deserving Brahmanas and superior 
Rishis for the sake of Bhishma, as well as of his sons and friends. He orders 
a vast quantity of food and drink to be prepared, and chariots and other 
vehicles, clothes, gold and jewels and wondrous gemstones, slaves, both 
male and female, goats and sheep, fine shawls and blankets and all manner 
of costly articles to be collected, and villages and fields, and other kinds of 
wealth to be listed, as well as caparisoned elephants and horses, and many 
superlatively beautiful maidens. 

That foremost of kings gives all these away for the advancement of his 
dead kinsmen, naming each of them in due order as the gifts are made: 
Drona and Bhishma, Somadatta and Bahlika, King Duryodhana and each of 
his other sons, and all his well-wishers, Jayadratha being the first. With the 
approval of Yudhishtira, the sraddha-yagna is distinguished by vast gifts of 
jewels, gold and every other kind of treasure. At the ceremony, tellers and 
scribes, at Yudhishtira’s behest, press the old king: ‘Tell us what gifts 
should be made; everything is ready and available and awaits your 
command.’ They distribute the presents as the king directs. At the command 
of the royal son of Kunti, one who was to receive a hundred, receives a 
thousand, and to one who was to receive a thousand, ten thousand is given. 
Like monsoon clouds enlivening crops with their rains, that royal cloud 
gratifies the Brahmanas of the kingdom with rivers of wealth. 


When the gifts have all been distributed, the king deluges his 
assembled guests of all the four varnas with a flood of food and drink to suit 
every taste. Verily, the Dhritarashtra-ocean, swelling high, sweeps across 
the world, with jewels and gems for its waters, villages and fields for its 
verdant islands, piles of diverse treasures for its rich caves, elephants and 
steeds for its crocodiles and whirlpools, the sound of mridangas for its deep 
roars, and clothes and gold and precious ornaments for its waves. 

In this way, O King, the mighty Dhritarashtra provides for the weal in 
the next world of his sons, grandsons and Pitris, as well as of himself and 
Gandhari. At last, when he grows tired with disbursing gifts in such 
profusion, that great yagna of giving comes to an end. Yes, even thus does 
the blind old king of the Kuru vamsa perform his Daana yagna. 

Actors and mimes continually dance and sing on the occasion, and 
contribute to the merriment of all the guests. The most delicious and varied 
food and drink are given away in large quantities. Ten days that great 
sraddha lasts, O Bhaarata, and the royal son of Ambika is freed from the 
debts he owes his sons and grandsons.” 


CANTO 15 


V aisampayana said, “Dhritarashtra decides upon the hour of his 

departure and summons the sons of Pandu. Along with Gandhari, he 
has had the minor rites of leave-taking performed by Brahmanas proficient 
in the Vedas. On the day of the full moon in the month of Kartika, he has 
the sacred fire taken up which he worships daily. Discarding his customary 
robes, he dons deer-skin and valkala and, accompanied by his daughters-in- 
law, he sets out from his palace. 

A lament arises from the Pandava and Kaurava women of the royal 
household when the son of Vichitravirya sets out for the forest. The king 
worships the palace in which he had lived with fried rice grains and 
beautiful flowers of many kinds. He honours all his servants with generous 
gifts and then, without turning back, sets out on his journey. 

Trembling all over, his voice choked with tears, Yudhishtira cries out to 
his uncle, ‘O Rajan, where are you going?’ and falls down in a faint. 
Burning with anguish, Arjuna sighs repeatedly and, his own heart plunged 
in dark distress, counsels Yudhishtira to not yield so to grief. Bhima, 
Arjuna, Madri’s twins, Vidura, Sanjaya, Dhritarashtra’s son by his Vaisya 
wife, Kripa and Dhaumya, and other Brahmanas, all follow the old king, 
wordlessly and sorrowfully. Kunti walks ahead, leading Gandhari, whose 
eyes remain bound and whose hand is placed on Kunti’s shoulder. 
Dhritarashtra walks confidently behind Gandhari, his hand on her shoulder. 

The ladies of the royal household, Drupada’s daughter Krishnaa, 
Subhadra of the Sattwata vamsa, Uttaraa, the daughter-in-law of the 
Pandavas, who has recently become a mother, Chitrangada, and others all 


accompany the old king, wailing like a flock of she-ospreys. The wives of 
the citizens—Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras—also spill 
out into the streets from every side. 

At Dhritarashtra’s departure, the people of Hastinapura are as 
distraught, O King, as they had been watching the Pandavas leave their city 
after being vanquished at dice. Even sequestered women who have never 
seen the sun or the moon pour out into the streets, such is their grief when 
King Dhritarashtra leaves for the great forest.” 


CANTO 16 


V aisampayana said, “A great uproar arises from men and women who 

crowd the terraces of mansions or throng the streets. With folded 
hands, trembling with weakness, Dhritarashtra walks slowly along the main 
highway of Hastinapura, where his people swarm most densely. He leaves 
the city of the elephant by its main gateway and then repeatedly implores 
the crowds to return to their homes. Vidura has set his heart on going to the 
forest with his brother. The Suta Sanjaya, also, the son of Gavalgani, 
Dhritarashtra’s closest counsellor, is of the same mind. But Dhritarashtra 
forbids Kripa and the Maharatha Yuyutsu from following him. He makes 
them over into Yudhishtira’s hands. 

When the people of the city follow the old king no more, Yudhishtira is 
prepared to go no further at the command of Dhritasrashtra, he and the 
ladies of his household. Only then does he see that his own mother Kunti 
has also decided to go to the forest. He says to her, ‘I will follow the old 
king. You must not go, O Queen, but return to the city with these your 
daughters-in-law. My uncle is leaving for the vana determined to perform 
tapasya.’ 

Though her son speaks to her with eyes overflowing with tears, Kunti 
continues walking away from the city, leading Gandhari who has her hand 
upon the younger queen’s shoulder. Kunti merely says to him, ‘O King, 
never cause Sahadeva the slightest hurt or neglect him. He is the one most 
attached to me, Yudhishtira, and to you as well. You must also always bear 
Karna in your heart, your elder brother, greatest of all warriors, who never 
turned his back on battle. He was killed on the field only because of my 


folly. Ah, my son, this heart of mine is made of stone, since it remains 
unbroken despite the loss of that magnificent child born of Surya. But what 
is there for me to do now? I am solely to blame for concealing the birth of 
my first-born by Surya Deva until it was too late. Parantapa, you and your 
brothers must undertake every sraddha for the sake of that son of Surya. 

Yudhishtira, always do what is agreeable to Draupadi. You must look 
after Bhimasena and Arjuna and Nakula and Sahadeva, for all the burdens 
of the Kuru vamsa have now fallen on you, O King. As for me, I will live in 
the forest with Gandhari, smear my body with dirt and ashes, engage in 
performing penances and devote myself to the service of my father- and 
mother-in-law.’ 

Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, whose passions are restrained, is shaken by 
what his mother says, as are his brothers. For a while, he cannot say a word 
in response. Then, composing himself as best he can, though still in the 
clasp of sorrow and anxiety, the Dharmaraja says to his mother, ‘Strange, 
indeed, is this purpose of yours! It does not become you to do what you 
intend, and I can never permit you to do this. Ah, mother, you must show us 
some compassion! 

Once, when we were about to go into exile from Hastinapura, gracious 
mother, it was you who recounted the story of Vidula’s instructions to her 
son, and exhorted us to tread the way of the Kshatriya. It is not right for you 
to abandon us now. Having slain the kings of the Earth, I have won this 
sovereignty only after being guided by your fierce words, sent to me 
through Krishna. Where now is that profound understanding of yours that 
Krishna so extolled? Do you wish now to fall away from the very Kshatriya 
dharma that you exhorted us to uphold? Ah, how will you live in the deep 
and dangerous jungle, after abandoning your sons, this kingdom we won for 
you, and this daughter-in-law of yours, of great fame? No, you must relent!’ 

Kunti hears her son, but she does not stop. Now Bhima says to her, ‘O 
Kunti, we have won the kingdom with war, and this is the time for you to 
enjoy the sovereignty acquired by your sons and discharge your Kshatriya 
dharma. Why has this unnatural desire possessed your mind at this time, 
after you made us annihilate the very earth? Why do you now want to 
renounce everything and go away into the vana? We were born in the forest. 
Why did you bring us here from the jungle when we were boys? Look at the 
sons of Madri, overwhelmed with sorrow and grief. Relent, O my most 


revered and renowned mother, do not leave us now. Remain with us and 
enjoy the prosperity, justly won in war, which is now Yudhishtira’s.’ 

But Kunti is unshakeable in her resolve, and continues to ignore her 
sons’ entreaties. Draupadi, downcast, accompanied by Subhadra, follows 
her weeping mother-in-law. Though wise Kunti looks frequently at her 
children, she does not pause but continues to walk away from the city of 
elephants. With all their wives and servitors, the Pandavas continue to 
follow her. Then she restrains her tears and addresses her sons.” 


CANTO 17 


¢ “kK unti says, “It is even as you say, O Mahabaho, son of Pandu. 
Lords of the Earth, it is true that I roused you to fight the war. 
Yes, seeing your kingdom snatched from you by a game of dice, seeing you 
all fall from happiness, seeing you tyrannized by kinsmen, I instilled 
courage and valour into your minds. I said what I did so that you, the sons 
of Pandu, foremost of men, might not lose your reputation and fame. You 
are all equal to Indra. Your prowess is like that of the very gods. I acted as I 
did then so that you would not have to live reading others’ faces. 

I instilled courage into your hearts so that you, the greatest men of 
dharma, the equal of Vasava, might not again be banished into the forest to 
live in misery. I instilled courage into your hearts so that this Bhima, strong 
as ten thousand elephants, whose prowess and manliness are known 
throughout the world, might not sink into insignificance and ruin. I instilled 
courage into your hearts so that this Arjuna, born after Bhimasena and in 
every way Indra’s equal, would not fall into misery. I instilled courage into 
your hearts so that Nakula and Sahadeva, who are always devoted to their 
elders, would not have to endure hunger and its weakening torments. I did 
what I had to so that this Panchali of the large eyes and flawless limbs 
would not have to endure the indignities inflicted on her in the public hall 
with no hope of being avenged. In plain sight of you all, O Bhima, the 
reckless Dussasana dragged her to that court while she trembled like a 
slender plantain tree in a storm—and that, too, during her monthly period, 
after she had been won at a game of dice as if she were a slave. 


I knew everything that had happened, indeed, that the line of Pandu 
had been vanquished. The Kurus themselves, my father-in-law and others, 
were distraught when Draupadi cried out piteously like a she-osprey for 
protection. I fainted when I heard of how the evil Dussasana of low mind 
had dragged her by her hair. Know beyond any doubt, my sons, I instilled 
courage into your hearts to awaken and inflame your anger, when I told you 
what Vidula once endured. I instilled courage into your hearts so that the 
lineage of Pandu may not forever be lost. The sons and grandsons of one 
who brings a race to ignominy never attain to the realms of the righteous. 
Truly, the ancestors of the Kuru vamsa were in danger of losing those 
regions of felicity that had become theirs. 

As for myself, my sons, before any of this I had savoured all the 
pleasures of sovereignty my husband Pandu enjoyed. I had given bounteous 
gifts in charity, I had drunk the Soma rasa in yagnas. It was not for my own 
sake that I sent Vidula’s stirring words to you through Krishna; it was for 
yours. I have no desire for the fruits of the sovereignty that you, my 
children, have won. Mahabahos, my only wish now is through tapasya to 
attain to the realms of felicity won by my husband. I mean to waste away 
this body of mine in the obedient service of my father-in-law and mother- 
in-law, both of whom have resolved to live in the vana. 

Do not follow me any more, Yudhishtira, best of all the kings of the 
Kuru vamsa, nor you, Bhima, nor you others. Devote your hearts perfectly 
to dharma, and may your minds always be noble and great.” 


CANTO 18 


V aisampayana said, “The sinless Pandavas are abashed by the words 

of Kunti. They stop, as does Panchali, and follow her no longer, 
though some of the women of the Pandava household continue to utter loud 
lamentations. The Pandavas then circumambulate Dhritarashtra and duly 
salute him. Having failed to persuade Pritha to return, they importune her 
no more. 

Then Dhritarashtra, Ambika’s son of great tejas, supporting himself 
against Gandhari and Vidura, says, ‘Let Yudhishtira’s mother not come with 
us any further. What he has said is true. Abandoning this high fortune of her 
sons, abandoning the fruits of felicity that can be hers, why should she go 
into the fastness of the forest with us, like one of little intelligence? 

She can live in the enjoyment of sovereignty, and still keep her vrata, 
perform tapasya and continue to give daana. Let her pay heed to my words. 
Gandhari, I have been deeply gratified with the services rendered to me by 
this daughter-in-law of mine. Conversant as you are with every dharma, you 
must command her to return.’ 

Gandhari, the daughter of Subala, repeats to Kunti what her husband 
and lord says, and adds her own weighty support to his injunction. But she 
cannot change Kunti’s mind, for that chaste and noble one has irrevocably 
decided to go to the vana with them. The Kuru women wail helplessly when 
they see that Kunti is not to be swayed and that the foremost Kurus no 
longer pursue her. When all the sons of Kunti with their wives and the Kuru 
women have turned back into the city in their chariots, dismal and stricken, 


Yudhishtira alone continues to go with the old ones towards the forest, until 
at last he also turns back. 

The city of Hastinapura, with its entire populace of men and women, 
old and young, is plunged into grief and perplexity. No festival of rejoicing 
is observed. Afflicted with obdurate sorrow, the Pandavas are sapped of 
strength and energy. Deserted, as it were, by Kunti, they are like tender 
calves abandoned by their mother. 

Dhritarashtra journeys slowly on until he and his party come to the 
Bhagirathi and spend that night on her bank, at some remove by now from 
the city. Brahmanas, all knowers of the Vedas, kindle their sacred fires in an 
asrama of sannyasis. Surrounded by those foremost of Brahmanas, their 
sacred fires blazing forth in beauty, Dhritarashtra’s own sacred Agni is 
kindled. Sitting by it, he pours libations onto the fire, as the proper rites and 
mantras are chanted, and worships the thousand-rayed sun as Surya Deva is 
on the point of setting. 

Then Vidura and Sanjaya make a bed for the aged king, spreading kusa 
grass on the ground. Near the bed of that mighty Kuru hero they prepare 
another for Gandhari; and, close to Gandhari’s bed of grass, Kunti also 
gladly lays herself down. Within earshot of the three sleeps Vidura, along 
with others. The Yajaka Brahmanas and others who have followed the king 
lay themselves down on their beds of grass. The Brahmanottamas present 
intone many sacred hymns. The sacrificial fires blaze forth all around, as 
delightful to them as a Brahmi night. 

When dawn breaks, all rise and perform their morning rituals and 
ablutions. Pouring libations on the sacred fire again, they continue their 
journey. Their first day’s experience of the forest has been weighed down 
by distress, thinking of the grieving people of the Kuru city and provinces 
of the kingdom.” 


CANTO 19 


V aisampayana said, “Following the advice of Vidura, the king sets up 

his abode on the banks of the Bhagirathi, a holy place peopled by 
followers of dharma. Many are Brahmanas who dwell in those forests, and 
they, as well as numerous Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras, come to meet the 
old monarch. Sitting in their midst, he gladdens them all with his words. 
After duly worshipping the Brahmanas with their disciples, he dismisses 
them all. As evening comes, Dhritarashtra and Gandhari of great fame both 
descend to the stream of the Bhagirathi for their purificatory ablutions. 
Bathing in the sacred river, the old king and queen, along with Vidura and 
the others, perform their daily sandhya vandana. When Dhritarashtra and 
Gandhari have finished their ritual baths and prayers, Kunti gently helps 
them both out of the water. The Yajakas have made a sacrificial altar on the 
dry bank for the king; devoted to dharma, Dhritarashtra pours libations onto 
the fire. 

From the banks of the Bhagirathi, the aged sovereign, with his 
followers, all observing stern vratas, with their senses firmly restrained, 
make their way towards Kurukshetra. Dhritarashtra arrives at the asrama of 
the Rajarishi Satayupa of profound wisdom and holds discourse with the 
sage who was once a great king of the Kekayas, O Parantapa. He came to 
the forest to take sannyasa, having made his kingdom over to his son. 
Satayupa receives Dhritarashtra with due rites and honour. The two of them 
then go together to the asrama of Vyasa Muni, the peerless Krishna 
Dwaipayana, and there Dhritarashtra receives his diksha, his initiation into 
vanaprastha, the first stage of the spiritual life lived in the forest. 


Returning, he begins to live in the hermitage of Satayupa Mahatman, 
who, at the bidding of Vyasa, instructs Dhritarashtra in all the ways and 
rites of vanaprastha. In this manner, the high-souled Dhritarashtra sets 
himself to the practice of tapasya, and all his followers do the same. Queen 
Gandhari, also, O Janamejaya, along with Kunti, dons valkala and deer-skin 
garments and sets herself to observing the same vows as her husband. 
Restraining their senses in thought, word and deed, as well as sight, they 
begin to practise severe austerities. Soon divested of all stupefaction of 
mind, Dhritarashtra, bearing matted jata on his head and clad in bark and 
skins, begins to keep vratas and perform tapasya like a great Rishi, quickly 
reducing his body to skin and bone as his flesh dries up. 

Sanjaya and Vidura of fathomless wisdom, who have plumbed the true 
interpretation of dharma, wait upon the old king and his wife. Wearing bark 
and rags, with spirits restrained, Vidura and Sanjaya also attenuate 
themselves.” 


CANTO 20 


V aisampayana said, “Those great Maharishis, Narada, Parvata and 

Devala, of austere tapasya, come to see Dhritarashtra. The Island- 
born Vyasa with all his disciples and other sages of great wisdom crowned 
with ascetic ascendancy also come, along with the Rajarishi Satayupa of 
advanced years and great punya. Kunti receives them with due rites, O 
King, so that all the ascetics are deeply gratified with the worship offered. 
The great Munis gladden the high-souled Dhritarashtra with discourses on 
religion and righteousness. 

At the conclusion of their conversation, the Devarishi Narada says, 
‘There was once a king of the Kekayas, possessed of great prosperity and 
courage. His name was Sahasrachitya and he was the grandfather of this 
Satayupa. Resigning his kingdom to his eldest son, who was also endued 
with a large measure of dharma, the virtuous King Sahasrachitya retired 
into the forest. After years of blazing tapasya, that Lord of the Earth of 
great splendour attained to the realm of Purandara, where he lived in the 
company of the king of the Devas. While visiting Indraloka, O King, on 
many occasions I saw dwelling there that monarch whose sins had all been 
consumed by penance. 

In the same manner, King Sailalaya, the grandfather of Bhagadatta, 
attained to Indraloka through the sheer power of his tapasya. There was 
another king, of the name of Prishadhra, who resembled the wielder of the 
thunderbolt himself. That king also, through his penances, went from this 
Bhumi into Swarga. In this very forest, O Dhritarashtra, the Lord of the 
Earth Purukutsa, the son of Mandhatri, achieved great spiritual felicity, so 


much so that Narmada, best of rivers, became his consort. After performing 
rigorous tapasya here, the sovereign of the Earth found Heaven for himself. 

There was yet another king, most righteous, of the name of Sasaloman 
who also attained Swarga after severe austerities in this forest. You too, 
Dhritarashtra, having come to this vana, through the grace of the 
Dwaipayana, shall attain to a lofty condition and goal, one most difficult to 
achieve. At the end of your penances, you will also be endowed with great 
felicity and, with Gandhari, attain to the realm which those other Mahatman 
Rajarishis achieved. Pandu now dwells in Indra’s world, and your brother 
constantly thinks of you. He will certainly help you win salvation. Through 
serving you and Gandhari, this Kunti, possessed of great fame, will be 
united again with her lord and husband in the other world of untold glory. 
She is the mother of Yudhishtira, who is the eternal Dharma Deva himself. 
We see this, O King, with our spiritual insight. Vidura will enter into the 
high-souled Yudhishtira. Sanjaya also, through dhyana, will rise from this 
world into Swarga.’ 

Dhritarashtra, Lord of the Kurus, hearing what Narada says, applauds 
that immortal Rishi and worships him with unprecedented fervour and 
honour. The conclave of Brahmanas is filled with great joy and, wanting to 
please Dhritarashtra, commends Narada Muni’s words and worships him 
with profound reverence. 

Then the Rajarishi Satayupa says, “O resplendent Narada, Holiest One, 
you have enhanced the bhakti of the Kuru king, of all the people here, and 
also of myself! But I want to ask you something to do with King 
Dhritarashtra. O Devamuni worshipped by all the worlds, you well know 
the truth of all things in heaven and on earth. Endowed with celestial vision, 
you clearly perceive the diverse paths and goals of men. You have told us of 
the felicity found by all the kings you named, which is to rejoice in the 
company of Indra, Lord of the Devas. You have not, however, declared 
what the realms are that this king Dhritarashtra will attain. Tell me now 
truly, what manner of domain that will be, and when he will attain to it.’ 

Thus solicited, Narada of mystic vision, of austere tapasya, speaks in 
that congregation of noble men, words that gladden them all. He says, ‘I 
went at my will to the mansion of Indra, lord of the Devi Sachi, and there, 
O Rajarishi, I saw Pandu. A conversation arose regarding this Dhritarashtra 
and the great tapasya that he performs, and from Sakra’s lips I heard that 
three years yet remain of the mortal lifespan allotted to this king. After that 


he, along with Gandhari, will go to the world of Kubera, where that King of 
kings, Lord of the nine treasures, will accord him great honour. 
Dhritarashtra, his person adorned with celestial ornaments, will go to 
Kubera’s realm in a vimana that flies at his will. He is the son of a great 
Rishi; he is highly blessed; he has burnt away all his sins through his 
penances. Blessed with a righteous soul, he will rove at will through the 
realms of the Devas, the Gandharvas and the Rakshasas. The question you 
have asked is a mystery of the gods, and I have declared this high and secret 
truth to you out of the affection I bear you. You are all possessed of the 
wealth of the Srutis and have consumed all your sins by your tapasya.’ 

Hearing these words, music to the ears of the Devarishi, all those 
present are heartened and jubilant. Having brought cheer to Dhritarashtra of 
great wisdom with their deep and happy tidings, the great Rishis leave his 
asrama by the pathways traversed by the liberated.” 


CANTO 21 


V aisampayana said, “The Pandavas, after Dhritarashtra’s departure, 

are afflicted by constant and heavy sorrow on account of their 
mother Kunti. The citizens and Brahmanas of Hastinapura always speak of 
the old king. ‘How, indeed, will Dhritarashtra, now so old, live in the 
solitary forest? How will the blessed Gandhari, and Pritha, the daughter of 
Kuntibhoja, live there? The Rajarishi has always lived in the enjoyment of 
every comfort. He will surely be miserable in the jungle. We can only 
wonder what his condition is, that great one of royal birth and life who is, 
furthermore, bereft of sight. 

Difficult is the feat of Kunti, who has separated herself from her sons. 
Alas that, casting off her royal prerogatives, she chose a life in the 
wilderness! And in what state is Vidura, always devoted to the service of 
his elder brother? And how fares the intelligent son of Gavalgani, Sanjaya, 
ever faithful to the master whose food he has eaten?’ 

Even the citizens, including the young, gather and frequently discuss 
all this amongst themselves. The Pandavas find themselves so wracked by 
anxiety for their mother that they can hardly bear to continue living in 
Hastinapura. Thinking also of their old uncle, who had lost all his sons, of 
the pure and noble Gandhari, and of the wise Vidura, the sons of Pandu 
cannot enjoy peace of mind. Nothing comforts them—neither sovereignty, 
nor the company of women, nor the study of the scriptures. Despair pierces 
their souls as they think of the old king and endlessly recall the terrible 
slaughter of kinsmen on Kurukshetra. Memories of the slaying of the 
youthful Abhimanyu, of the mighty-armed Karna who never retreated from 


the bloodiest fray, of the sons of Draupadi, and of all their friends and allies, 
plunge those Kshatriyas into a perpetual night of the spirit. 

They think of how the Earth had been divested of both her glorious 
heroes and her wealth. Draupadi has lost all her children, and the lovely 
Subhadra also has become childless. They, too, are sunk in untold sorrow. 
However, when your grandsires look upon the son of Uttaraa, your father 
Parikshit, they somehow hold their prana in their bodies.” 


CANTO 22 


V aisampayana said, “The heroic Pandavas, Purushottamas, delighters 

of their mother, are so afflicted that they who had once devoted 
themselves resolutely to their royal duties now withdraw from these 
entirely. They find no pleasure in anything. If anyone accosts or speaks to 
them, they do not so much as honour him with a greeting or a reply. Those 
irresistible Kshatriyas, in wisdom once as profound as the ocean, are now 
bereft even of their senses by sorrow and consuming anxiety; they can think 
only of their mother, and how she, now emaciated with privations, serves 
Dhritarashtra and Gandhari in the vana. 

They ask themselves and one another, ‘How does the king, our uncle, 
whose sons have all been slain and who is without refuge, live alone, with 
only his wife, in the wild jungle, where beasts of prey roam? How does the 
blessed Gandhari, whose dear ones have also all been killed, follow her 
blind lord in the lonely forest?’ Whenever they are together they can speak 
of nothing else. Finally, they decide that they must go into the wilderness 
and discover for themselves the answer to the anxiety that harries them 
constantly. 

Sahadeva, bowing to his elder brother Yudhishtira, says, ‘I see that 
your heart is set upon seeing our uncle. Out of respect for you, I could not 
too hastily voice my own keen desire to go to the vana. But now the time 
has come, my lord, if I am fortunate, to see my mother living in sannyasa, 
with matted locks on her head, practising severe austerities, and, ah, 
reduced to skin and bone with sleeping on blades of kusa and kasa—she 
who was raised in great palaces and nurtured amidst every comfort and 


luxury. Oh, when shall I see my mother who is now toil-worn and surely 
plunged in piercing misery? Without doubt, the ends of mortals are 
uncertain and extreme, O Lord of the Bharatas, for Kunti, a princess by 
birth, now lives in desolation in the forest.’ 

Hearing the words of Sahadeva, Draupadi addresses Yudhishtira with 
due honour, ‘Ah, my lord! If only I could once again see Queen Pritha—if 
indeed she is still alive—I would think of my life as not having been lived 
in vain. Believe this Rajadhiraja, and may your heart take pleasure in the 
dharma of bestowing on us the high boon of going to the vana and seeing 
her again. Know, my husband, that all the women of your house have their 
feet poised to take the first step on this most auspicious journey to see 
Kunti, Gandhari and my father-in-law.’ 

At Panchali’s words, Yudhishtira summons all the commanders of his 
forces and says to them, “Let my army, teeming with chariots and elephants, 
prepare to march, for I will go into the forest to see my uncle Dhritarashtra.’ 
To those that supervise the concerns of the ladies, the king gives the order: 
‘Let every manner of conveyance be well equipped, and my thousands of 
closed palanquins. Let carriages and granaries, wardrobes and treasuries, be 
prepared and ordered out, and give our best mechanics the command to 
march. Let men who have charge of our treasuries set forth towards the 
ascetic retreats on Kurukshetra. 

Whoever amongst our citizens and people wishes to see the king is 
hereby allowed to do so without any restriction. Let him proceed, properly 
protected. Let cooks and supervisors of kitchens, our entire culinary 
establishment, and diverse kinds of foods and foodstuffs, be ordered and 
loaded on carriages and carts. Let it be proclaimed that we will go forth 
tomorrow. Let there be no delay. Let pavilions and resting houses of diverse 
kinds be erected on the way.’ 

Such are the commands of the eldest son of Pandu and his brothers. 
When morning comes, the king sets out with a large train of women and old 
men. Emerging from his city, Yudhishtira waits five days for such citizens 
as might accompany him, and then goes forth towards the forest.” 


CANTO 26 


V aisampayana said. “That foremost one of the Bharata vamsa gives 

marching orders to his troops, protected by great Kshatriyas led by 
Arjuna, heroes who resemble the guardians of the universe, the Lokapalas 
themselves. 

Horsemen leap to saddle and caparison their finest and swiftest steeds. 
Some in the retinue travel on horseback, others in chariots and carriages, 
golden and splendid as blazing fires. Some advance on the backs of 
elephants, others on camels. Some walk, those that belong to the class of 
warriors who fight with tiger-like iron claws. The citizens of Hastinapura 
and the inhabitants of the provinces, eager to see Dhritarashtra, follow their 
noble king on various kinds of carts and conveyances. 

Riding at the head of the Kuru forces at the Dharmaraja’s command is 
the Acharya Kripa, of Gautama’s race, that great leader of legions, 
journeying to see Dhritarashtra in his asrama. Yudhishtira, emperor of the 
world, the white parasol of sovereignty unfurled over his head, sets out 
surrounded by a throng of Brahmanas, ring upon ring of chariots around 
him, and a large band of Sutas and Magadhas and bards hymning his 
praises. Vrikodara, son of Vayu, rides upon the back of an elephant big as a 
hill, bearing his great bow and equipped with weapons and war engines of 
every kind, of both attack and defence. The twin sons of Madri ride two 
fleet steeds, cased in mail, well protected, and flying proud and colourful 
banners. Arjuna of mighty tejas, his senses ever controlled, rides on a 
matchless ratha, bright as the sun and yoked to the strongest and swiftest 
white horses. 


The ladies of the royal household, led by Draupadi, journey in closed 
litters protected by the guards of the royal antahpura. They shower copious 
wealth on those following their progress. Resplendent indeed is that vast 
Kuru host, with its chariots and elephants and horses, echoing with the blare 
of trumpets, the boom of sea conches and the music of vinas. Slowly, 
regally, the lords of the Kuru vamsa make their way across the land, resting 
at will by delightful banks of rivers and lakes. Yuyutsu of mighty tejas, and 
Yudhishtira’s priest Dhaumya remain in Hastinapura, protecting the city and 
attending to the affairs of the kingdom. 

Thus, journeying in slow marches with his contingent, Yudhishtira 
reaches Kurukshetra, and then, crossing the dark and holy Yamuna, sees 
finally, at a distance, the asrama of his uncle, the blind Rajarishi 
Dhritarashtra of deep wisdom. He and all his party feel a surge of joy 
course through them, as they swiftly enter the heavy jungle, filling it with 
cries of jubilation.” 


CANTO 24 


V aisampayana said, “The Pandavas alight from their chariots at a 

remove and walk the rest of the way to Dhritarashtra’s asrama, 
bowing humbly. They are followed on foot by their Kshatriyas and soldiers, 
the people of the kingdom, and the wives and women of the Kuru lords. 
The Pandavas arrive at the asrama where plantain trees grow thickly and 
herds of deer abound. Many ascetics of stern vows, filled with curiosity, 
come forward to see the sons of Pandu. With tears in his eyes, Yudhishtira 
ask them, ‘Where is my eldest sire, the perpetuator of Kuru’s vamsa?’ 

The sannyasis reply that he has gone to the Yamuna for his ablutions, 
and to fetch flowers and water for his daily worship. Walking briskly down 
the path pointed out to them, the Pandavas see their blind uncle and the 
others from a distance. They quicken their stride in anticipation, and 
Sahadeva breaks into a run towards Kunti. Clasping his mother’s feet, he 
begins to sob aloud. Tears pour down her cheeks on seeing her most 
beloved child. She raises Sahadeva up to embrace him, then tells Gandhari 
of his arrival. Kunti catches sight of Yudhishtira, Bhimasena, Arjuna and 
Nakula and rushes towards them, fairly dragging the sightless Dhritarashtra 
and Gandhari along with her. 

On seeing their mother, the Pandavas fall down on the ground. The 
mighty Dhritarashtra recognizes them by voice and by touch, as he 
embraces and comforts them one after another. Shedding tears, those high- 
souled princes offer the aged king and their own mother all honour and 
reverence. Then, embraced and consoled by Kunti, the sons of Pandu 
recover themselves and take up the pots full of river water that their uncle, 


aunt and mother have been carrying. The wives of those lions among men, 
the women of the royal household and all the people of the city and the 
provinces who have come with them, now behold the old king. 

Yudhishtira presents them, one after another, individually, to the 
Dhritarashtra, repeating their names and lineages, and then himself 
worships his eldest sire with deep reverence. Surrounded by his nephews, 
their wives and his people, the old king, his unseeing eyes bathed in tears of 
joy, feels that he is back again in Hastinapura, the city of the elephant. 
Worshipped by all their daughters-in-law led by Panchali, Dhritarashtra, 
Gandhari and Kunti are overwhelmed with joy. 

Walking now in their loving midst, Dhritarashtra arrives back in his 
forest asrama, lauded by Siddhas and Charanas and now teeming with 
crowds of men, like countless stars thronging the sky, all agog to see once 
again their old king.” 


CANTO 25 


V aisampayana said, “Yudhishtira and his brothers of lotus-petal eyes 
sit themselves down in the asrama of their uncle Dhritarashtra. 
Around him sit many hallowed ascetics from diverse realms who have 
come to the hermitage to catch sight of the broad-chested Pandavas. They 
say, ‘We want to know who amongst these is Yudhishtira, who are Bhima 
and Arjuna, who the twins, and who is Draupadi of great fame.’ The Suta 
Sanjaya points out the Pandavas to them, naming each one, and Draupadi, 
as well as the other ladies of the Kuru household. 

Sanjaya says, “This one with the complexion like gold, whose body is 
like that of a full-grown lion, who has a prominent aquiline nose, and wide 
and expansive eyes of a coppery hue, is the Kuru king. This one whose 
tread resembles that of an infuriated elephant, whose complexion is as fair 
as heated gold, whose body is immense, and whose arms are long and 
sturdy, is Vrikodara. Behold him well! 

The mighty bowman who sits besides him, of darkish complexion and 
youthful frame, who yet resembles the leader of an elephant herd and walks 
like a sporting elephant, whose shoulders are as high as those of a lion and 
whose eyes are as large as the petals of a lotus, is the hero called Arjuna. 
Those two Purushottamas who sit besides Kunti are the twin sons of Madri, 
Nakula and Sahadeva, who resemble Vishnu and Mahendra. In this entire 
world of men, they have no equal in beauty, strength and excellence of 
conduct. 

The dark Devi, who is in her middle years of life, with eyes like lotus- 
petals and a complexion resembling that of the blue lotus, who looks like a 


goddess of Swarga, is Krishnaa, the embodiment of the Devi Lakshmi 
herself. She who sits beside Panchali, with a skin like pure gold, who looks 
like the rays of the moon formed into a woman’s shape, is Subhadra, O 
Dvijottamas, the sister of that unrivalled hero who wields the Chakra. 

This other, as fair as moonbeams, is Ulupi, the daughter of the king of 
the Nagas and also the wife of Arjuna. The other golden-hued one, whose 
complexion is like that of madhuka flowers, is the princess Chitrangada. 
That other one, whose skin is the colour of a bank of dark lotuses, is the 
wife of Vrikodara and the sister of Jarasandha, lord of hosts, who always 
challenged Krishna. And here is the daughter of Jarasandha, that great king 
of Magadha. She who is as fair as champaka blossoms is the wife of 
Sahadeva, the younger son of Madravati. 

This other beautiful one, dark as a blue lotus, she who sits there on the 
earth, and whose eyes are as long and lustrous as lotus petals, is the wife of 
Nakula, the elder son of Madravati. This princess whose complexion is like 
that of molten gold, who sits with her child on her lap, is Uttaraa, the 
daughter of King Virata. She is the wife of that incomparable hero 
Abhimanyu, whom Drona and the others slew from their chariots when he 
fought on foot after his own was shattered. And these women clad in white, 
whose hair shows not the parted line, are the widows of the slain sons of 
Dhritarashtra. They are the daughters-in-law of this old king, the wives of 
his hundred sons, now deprived of both their husbands and children slain by 
heroic foes. 

I have now pointed all of them out to you in proper order. In 
consequence of their devotion to Brahmanas, their hearts and minds are 
divested of every deceit and sin, and they are possessed of pure souls.’ 

Thus does Dhritarashtra of great age, of the Kuru vamsa, meet the sons 
of his brother Pandu, who was as a god among men. Once the hermits of the 
vana have left, he enquires after their welfare. The warriors who have come 
with the Pandavas leave the asrama and sit themselves down a small 
distance away, after alighting from their rathas and horses. 

When all the women, the old men and the children who have come to 
the forest are seated, the old king addresses them all, making the customary 
enquiries after their health and well-being.” 


CANTO 26 


: “T) hritarashtra says, ‘O Yudhishtira, are you in peace and 
happiness, with all your brothers and the people of the city and 
the provinces? Are they that depend on you also happy? Are your ministers 
and servitors, and all your elders and gurus also happy? Are those that live 
in your dominions free from fear? Do you follow the ancient and traditional 
dharma of kings? Is your treasury filled without disregarding the restraints 
of justice and equity? Do you conduct yourself as you should towards 
enemies, towards those neutral to you, and towards allies? 

Do you care especially for the Brahmanas, always making them the 
first gifts, as ordained for sacrifices and religious rites? What need I say of 
the people, and your servants and kinsmen, O King of the Bharatas—are 
they gratified with your rule? Do you adore the Pitris and the Devas with 
devotion, O King of kings? Do you worship guests with food and drink, O 
Bhaarata? Are the Brahmanas in your dominions devoted to their 
svadharma, the duties of their order, and do they tread the path of dharma? 

Do the Kshatriyas and Vaisyas and Sudras within your kingdom, and 
all your relatives, observe their respective duties? I hope the women, the 
children and the old among your subjects do not grieve under any distress, 
and do not have to beg for the necessities of life. Are the royal women of 
your household duly honoured in your house, O best of men? I hope that, 
having found you for its king, O Yudhishtira, this race of Rajarishis has not 
fallen away from fame and glory.’ 

To the old king, Yudhishtira, profound knower of morality and justice, 
and well skilled in both deeds and words, replies with some queries of his 


own, ‘Do your peace, your self-restraint, and your tranquillity of heart 
grow, O King? Is this my mother able to serve you without fatigue and 
trouble? Will her dwelling in the vana be fruitful, O King? I hope this 
queen, Gandhari, my eldest mother, who is emaciated with being exposed to 
cold and wind and with the toil of walking, and who now devotes to herself 
to severe austerities, no longer gives way to grief for her children of mighty 
tejas, all of whom were devoted to Kshatriya dharma and were slain 
honourably on the field of battle. Does she still blame us, sinners as we are, 
for the slaughter of her sons? Where is Vidura, O king? We do not see him 
here. I hope this Sanjaya, who also performs tapasya, is at peace and lives 
in happiness.’ 

Dhritarashtra says to Yudhishtira, ‘My son, Vidura is well. He performs 
the most austere tapasya deep in the forest, alone, subsisting on air, for he 
eats no food at all. He is emaciated and his arteries and veins stand out. 
Sometimes our Brahmanas here catch a glimpse of him in the vana.’ 

Even as Dhritarashtra speaks, Vidura appears in the distance. He is 
perfectly naked, all skin and bone, with matted jata on his head and gravel 
in his mouth. His body is covered with dust and with the pollen of wild 
flowers. Kshattri is spotted by ascetics who report this to Yudhishtira. 
Vidura suddenly stops, O King, casting his gaze towards the asrama, in 
which he sees many visitors. He turns away swiftly and vanishes into the 
deeper forest. Yudhishtira jumps up and follows him alone. Vidura runs 
further away, and the Pandava in pursuit often loses sight of him. 

He shouts, ‘O Vidura, Vidura, I am Yudhishtira, whom you always 
loved, your favourite!’ Crying out repeatedly, he continues to pursue his 
uncle. Suddenly, in a solitary place in the very heart of the vana, Vidura, 
wisest of men, stops and leans against a tree. He is macilent beyond belief, 
barely recognizable as a man, for his individual features have all 
disappeared through his extreme penance and privations. But Yudhishtira 
has no doubt who it is that stands before him. 

Yudhishtira folds his hand in deep reverence and addresses the wraith- 
like figure: ‘I am Yudhishtira!’ Vidura contemplates the king, never 
moving, plunged in Yoga. Then gazing steadfastly at him, using his mighty 
yogic powers, Vidura enters the body of Yudhishtira, limb by limb. He 
unites his life-breaths with those of the king, and his senses with those of 
the Pandava. Thus the great Vidura enters the body of the Dharmaraja. 
Vidura continues to lean against the tree, with eyes fixed, and Yudhishtira 


sees that life has left his attenuated body. At the same time, he himself has 
become stronger than before and has acquired additional virtues and powers 
now his own. Pandu’s son, the Kuru king, now remembers perfectly his 
own being before his birth among men. 

Yudhishtira has heard of the final Yoga from his grandsire Vyasa, and 
now he feels impelled to perform the last rites of cremation for the body of 
Vidura. But then an Asariri speaks to him from above, saying, ‘O King, this 
body that belonged to him called Vidura should not be cremated. In him is 
your body also. He is the eternal Dharma Deva. O Bhaarata, he will find the 
realms of felicity known as the Santanika. He kept the dharma of Yatis, and 
you must not grieve for him at all, Parantapa.’ 

Yudhishtira the Just returns to the asrama, and relates all that has 
transpired to Dhritarashtra, the royal son of Vichitravirya, filling all with 
wonder that old king of great splendour, the Rishis present, Bhimasena and 
all the others. Dhritarashtra is pleased to hear what happened in the vana. 
He says to Yudhishtira Dharmaputra, ‘It has been said, O King, that one’s 
guest should have that which one takes oneself. Do you now accept from 
me these gifts of water and roots and fruits.’ 

Dharma’s son replies, ‘So be it.’ The mighty-armed Pandava king eats 
and drinks whatever Dhritarashtra gives him. After that, they all make their 
beds of grass under a tree and sleep peacefully.” 


CANTO 27 


V aisampayana said, “Thus those heroes pass that night after eating the 

frugal fare which is the nightly food of Dhritarashtra. Having left 
their fine beds behind them, the Pandavas lay themselves down on the bare 
ground beside their mother. Under the auspicious constellations wheeling in 
the sky in that asrama of righteous Munis, they converse happily on dharma 
and artha, morality and wealth, sweetening their words with diverse 
citations from the Srutis. 

When dawn breaks, Yudhishtira rises, performs his morning ablutions 
and prayers, and proceeds to explore the asrama in the company of his 
brothers. With the women of his household, his servants, and his priest 
Dhaumya, the king wanders through the length and breadth of that 
hermitage at the behest of Dhritarashtra. He sees many vedis, sacrificial 
altars with sacred fires blazing on them, with ascetics seated before them, 
performing their oblations and poured libations into the fire in honour of the 
gods. The fragrant smoke of ghrita, clarified butter, curls up from the altars 
overspread with fruits and roots of the forest and heaped with wildflowers. 

Many of the great Rishis who worship at these altars seem to 
Yudhishtira the very Vedas embodied. There are others, lesser sages and 
aspirants who belong to the lay brotherhood. Herds of deer graze all round 
without the least fear, or lie about awake or asleep, as they please. Fruit and 
roots gathered from the wilderness are stored in piles. Countless birds also 
sing in the branches of the trees. The asrama resonates with the calls of 
peacocks, interwoven with the sweet melodies of datyuhas and kokilas and 


other songbirds and the chant of Vedic mantras being intoned by learned 
Brahmanas in resonant voices. 

King Yudhishtira makes gifts of sacrificial vessels of gold or copper 
that he has brought with him for those Munis, deer-skins and shawls, ladles 
made of rich wood, O Bhaarata, kamandalus and elegant wooden platters, 
and cooking vessels as well. He gives away diverse vessels of iron, and 
smaller tumblers and cups of various sizes; the ascetics take these away, 
each one as many as he likes. 

Having ranged through the woods across which that great asrama of 
many hermits is spread, having taken in its peaceful sights and sounds and 
made his offerings to its resident sages, Yudhishtira Dharmatma returns to 
the side of his uncle Dhritarashtra. He sees that old Lord of Earth at his 
ease, with Gandhari beside him after his morning rites. He sees his mother 
Kunti sitting nearby, like a humble disciple with bent head. 

Yudhishtira greets the blind and aged king, declaring his own name to 
identify himself, and Dhritarashtra asks him to sit down, which the Pandava 
does on a mat of kusa grass. Then the other sons of Pandu, with Bhima 
among them, salute the king and touch his feet, and they also sit themselves 
down with his leave. Surrounded by his nephews, great Dhritarashtra looks 
glorious and full of unearthly grace; he blazes with a Vedic splendour like 
Brihaspati in the midst of the Devas. 

Now many great Rishis, Satayupa and others, denizens of Kurukshetra, 
arrive. The illustrious and learned Vyasa, of tremendous tejas, whom even 
the Devarishis of Swarga revere, appears there at the head of his many 
disciples. Dhritarashtra, Kunti’s son Yudhishtira of great tejas, Bhimasena 
and the others, all rise and, advancing a few steps, salute those venerable 
guests. Approaching them, Vyasa, surrounded by Satayupa and others, 
addresses King Dhritarashtra, ‘Be you seated.’ The illustrious Vyasa settles 
himself onto a fine seat of kusa grass set upon a black deer-skin and covered 
with a silken cloth, which has been kept ready for him. Once the 
Dwaipayana sits down, the other Dvijottamas, all lustrous ones, also seat 
themselves with Vyasa’s leave.” 


CANTO 28 


V aisampayana said, “When the Pandavas have all been seated, 

Satyavati’s son Vyasa says, ‘O Dhritarashtra Mahabaho, have you 
been able to achieve tapasya? Is your mind pleased with living in the vana, 
O King? Has the grief that was yours, born of the slaughter of your sons in 
battle, disappeared from your heart? Are all your perceptions now clear, 
sinless one? Do you practise the ordinances of vanaprastha and sannyasa, 
after making your heart firm? 

Does my daughter-in-law Gandhari allow herself to be overwhelmed 
by grief? She is possessed of great wisdom. Blessed with clear and lofty 
intelligence, that queen understands both dharma and artha well; she knows 
the truths that relate to both prosperity and adversity. Does she still grieve? 
Does Kunti, who, because of her devotion to the service of her elders, left 
her children, attend to your wants and serve you with all humility, O King? 
Have the Dharmaputra, Mahatman Yudhishtira, Bhima and Arjuna and the 
twins been sufficiently comforted? Do you feel delight at seeing them? Has 
your mind become free from every stain? Has your disposition, O King, 
become pure in consequence of your penance and the increase of your 
knowledge and wisdom? 

O Bhaarata, abstention from injury to any creature, truth and freedom 
from anger, the primary triad of wisdom, is of final concern. Has your life in 
the forest ceased to be painful for you? Are you able to gather, through your 
own exertions, the produce of the wilderness for your food? Do your fasts 
give you any pain now? 


Have you learnt, O King, how the great Vidura, who was Dharma’s 
very self, left this world? It was through the ancient curse of Mandavya, 
that Dharma Deva was born into the world as Vidura. He owned unequalled 
intelligence and wisdom. Through his mighty tapasya, he was both high- 
minded and lofty-souled. Why, not even Brihaspati among the Devas, and 
Sukra among the Asuras, was possessed of such intelligence as that best of 
men. Dharma Deva was once cursed by the awesome Rishi Mandavya who 
expended the power of his penances earned over a long time with arduous 
dedication. At the command of the Pitamaha Bhishma, and through my own 
tejas, I sowed Vidura in soil owned by Vichitravirya. A God of gods and 
eternal was your brother, O King. The perceptive knew him to be Dharma 
Deva incarnate because of his yogic practice. He glows with the growth of 
truth, self-restraint and tranquillity of heart, compassion and charity. He is 
always engaged in tapasya, and is eternal. 

From that God of Righteousness, through yoga shakti did the Kuru 
king Yudhishtira also take birth, O King. Yudhishtira is also Dharma Deva 
of great wisdom and immeasurable intelligence. Dharma exists both here 
and hereafter, and is like fire or wind or water or earth or space. He is able 
to go everywhere, O King of kings, and pervades the whole universe. Only 
the foremost among the deities, and those cleansed of every sin and 
crowned with ascetic success, can see him with their eyes. He that is 
Dharma is Vidura; and he that is Vidura is the eldest son of Pandu. You, O 
King, can perceive that son of Pandu; why, he is before you as your servitor. 
Through the power of his yoga, your brother the Mahatman Vidura, most 
intelligent among intelligent men, entered into Yudhishtira. 

O Lord of the Bhaarata vamsa, my son, know that I have come here to 
dispel all your doubts and satisfy your desires. For your sake I will perform 
some feat that has never been accomplished before by any of the great 
Rishis, I will demonstrate some wonderful effect of my tapasya. Tell me 
what you want to see or ask or hear, sinless one, and I will accomplish that 
for you.” 


PUTRADARSANA PARVA 


CANTO 29 


anamejaya said, “Tell me, O learned Brahmana, of that wonderful feat 

that the Maharishi Vyasa of untold tejas performed for Dhritarashtra in 
the forest asrama where he had taken to living with his wife and his 
daughter-in-law Kunti—indeed, what the Dwaipayana did, when all the 
sons of Pandu were staying in that hermitage, after Vidura left his own body 
and entered into Yudhishtira. How long did the Kuru king Yudhishtira of 
unfading glory remain there, and with what food, O mighty one, did the 
noble Pandavas support themselves, with their wives and men? O sinless 
one, do you tell me this.” 

Vaisampayana said, “With the permission of Dhritarashtra, the 
Pandavas, along with their troops and the women of their household, 
support themselves on diverse kinds of food and drink and pass about a 
month in great happiness in that forest. Towards the end of that time, 
Anagha, Vyasa comes there. While all those princes sit around Vyasa, 
engaged in conversation on a host of subjects, some other great Rishis 
arrive. Narada and Parvata and Devala of austere penances, and Viswavasu 
and Tumburu, and Chitrasena come to that forest retreat, O Bhaarata, and 
Yudhishtira of great tapasya worships them with the proper rituals, with the 
consent of Dhritarashtra. They sit down on sacred darbhasanas of kusa 
grass, and on other fine seats of peacock feathers. When they are all seated, 


the Kuru king also sits himself down amongst them, surrounded by the sons 
of Pandu. Gandhari and Kunti and Draupadi, and Subhadra of the Sattwata 
vamsa, and the other royal women. 

The conversation that then arises was of a high order, dwelling on 
dharma and tales of the Rishis of antiquity, the Devas and the Asuras. Then 
Vyasa of marvellous tejas and eloquence, foremost among all knowers of 
the Vedas, deeply gratified, says to the blind king, ‘I know the desire you 
cherish in your heart, King of kings, still stricken with grief for your dead 
sons. I know the sorrow that always dwells in the hearts of Gandhari, of 
Kunti and of Draupadi, and the searing grief of Krishna’s sister Subhadra 
for her dead son. Hearing of this gathering of the princes and princesses of 
your royal house, I have come here, Kurunandana, to dispel your fears. Let 
the Devas and Gandharvas, and all these great Rishis, behold today the 
power of the tapasya I have performed all these long years. So tell me, O 
King, what wish of yours shall I grant today? Iam powerful enough to grant 
you a boon, and you shall witness the fruit of my penances!’ 

At this, Dhritarashtra reflects for a moment and then says, ‘Holy One, 
your favour is providential. My whole life is crowned with success today, 
and I feel certain that I shall indeed attain to that lofty, blissful end reserved 
for me, because I have met with all of you greatest, Holy Ones, tapodhanas, 
the treasury of tapasya, equal to Brahma himself. There is not the least 
doubt that your coming here before me today has cleansed me of my sins. 

Anaghas, I no longer have the least fear about my end in the next 
world. I love my children deeply and cherish their memory. However, my 
heart is still tortured by the recollection of the many vile and violent sins 
perpetrated by my wicked son Duryodhana of evil mind who persecuted the 
innocent Pandavas. Alas, the sins of Duryodhana have devastated the very 
Earth, the world as we knew it, with her horses, elephants and fighting men. 
Countless high-souled kings, rulers of diverse realms, came to side with my 
son and, doing so, found their deaths. Alas, leaving their beloved sires and 
wives and finally their very life-breaths, all those Kshatriyas have become 
guests of Yama. 

What end, O Dvija, have those men attained who were slain in the war 
for the sake of their friend Duryodhana? What end did my sons and 
grandsons achieve who fell in battle? My heart is always pained at the 
thought of my having caused the death of the mighty Bhishma, son of 
Santanu, and of Drona, that best of Brahmanas, through my foolish and 


sinful son who was a bane to his friends, he who so wanted to rule the earth 
that he caused the destruction of the very Kuru vamsa, which once blazed 
with prosperity and truth. Night and day, O my father, I think of all this and, 
afflicted with grief, I can find no peace of mind.’ 

When Gandhari hears her husband’s outpouring of anguish, her own 
sorrow grows fresh, as does the pain of Kunti, of Subhadra and 
Dhritarashtra’s daughters-in-law, and of others, men and women of the 
Kuru vamsa. Queen Gandhari, her eyes bound, folds her hands in 
supplication to her father-in-law, the Rishi Vyasa. ‘O greatest of Munis, 
sixteen years have passed over the head of this king, grieving for the death 
of his sons and divested of peace of mind. Tormented by sorrow over the 
slaughter of his sons, this King Dhritarashtra’s breath heaves out in deep 
gasps, and he seldom sleeps at night. 

Maharishi, you can create new worlds through the power of your 
tapasya. What then need I say about your ability to show this king his 
children who are in the next world? This Panchali, the daughter of Drupada, 
has lost all her kinsmen and children, and she grieves ceaselessly. So does 
Krishna’s sister, Subhadra of gentle speech, burning for the loss of her son. 
This other Devi, respected by all, the wife of Bhurisravas, laments 
frequently in the most heartrending manner. Her father-in-law was the most 
intelligent and heroic Bahlika, of Kuru’s race, who also perished during the 
war. Alas, Somadatta was also was slain, along with his sire, in the Great 
War. 

Ah, this son of yours, Dhritarashtra, with all his intelligence and 
prosperity, lost a hundred princes, heroes all, none of whom ever fled from 
a battle. The hundred wives of those Kshatriya sons all mourn constantly, 
stricken by that great slaughter, O mighty Sage, sharpening the grief of both 
the king and myself. Alas, those heroes of high mettle, those great 
Maharathas, my father-in-law, Somdatta, and others—O puissant one, what 
end has been theirs? Through your grace, O Holy One, will this Bhumipala, 
myself and this Kunti, your daughter-in-law, have our suffering allayed.’ 

Hearing Gandhari’s words, Kunti, her face gaunt and wasted through 
observing many fierce vratas, thinks of her secretly born son, lustrous as the 
sun. Vyasa, who can see and hear all, even from a great distance sees 
Arjuna’s mother afflicted with sorrow. Vyasa says to her, ‘Tell me, O 
blessed one, what is in your heart, what you want to say.’ Kunti bows her 


head low to her father-in-law and, overcome with diffidence, discloses to 
him her secret history.” 


CANTO 30 


_- K unti says, ‘Holy One, you are my father-in-law and thus, my God 
of gods. You are that to me, no less. So hear my words of truth. 
When I was a young girl, the Rishi Durvasa, known for his wrathful temper, 
visited my father’s house in quest of alms. Although there was much in his 
behaviour to provoke me, I did not allow myself for a moment to be 
annoyed by him and served him with care. The sage was greatly pleased 
with me and decided to grant me a boon. “You must accept the boon I shall 
now give you,’ were his words to me. Fearing his curse, I said to him, 
“Tathaastu, so be it.” The Rishi said to me, “Blessed girl of the beautiful 
face, you will become the mother of Dharma. The Devas you summon will 
be obedient to your wishes.” 

Saying this, he vanished from my sight; but the mantra the Rishi gave 
me dwelt constantly in my mind. One day, sitting in my chamber in the 
palace I saw the sun rising. Suddenly, I was possessed by a desire to bring 
before me the maker of day, I remembered the words of Durvasa, and from 
my innocent girlish curiosity I summoned the god. Surya of a thousand rays 
instantly appeared before me. He had divided himself in two. One part 
remained in the firmament, and the other stood embodied on the Earth 
before me. With one he continued to heat the world and with the other he 
came to me. 

While I trembled at his sight, he said, “Ask a boon of me.” Bowing 
down to him, I asked him to leave me. He replied in wrath, “I cannot 
countenance the thought of coming to you fruitlessly. I will consume both 
you and that Brahmana who gave you the mantra as a boon.” The 


Brahmana Durvasa had done no evil and, wanting to protect both him and 
myself from Surya’s curse, I said, “O Deva, let me have a son like you.” 
The god of a thousand rays penetrated me with his tejas, leaving me 
stunned. He said only, “You will have a son,” and was gone back into the 
firmament. 

I continued to live in the inner apartments and, not wanting my father’s 
honour to be tarnished, I consigned to the river my infant son, Karna, born 
in secret. Through the grace of that god, my virginity was restored, exactly 
as the Rishi Durvasa had said to me. Although Karna knew me for his 
mother when he grew up, I made no effort to acknowledge him, fool that I 
am. This burns me, O Mahamuni, as you well know. Whether I sinned or 
not, I have told you the truth. Holy One, I beg you, satisfy my craving to 
see that son of mine. Greatest of sages, sinless Vyasa, let this king also have 
his wish to see his dead sons fulfilled today.’ 

Vyasa, foremost of men, says to Kunti, “Be you blessed, and let your 
wish be fulfilled. You did not sin in any way. You were restored to virginity, 
for the Devas have great powers of yoga and can beget offspring by their 
very thought, by word, by sight, by touch and by sexual union. These are 
the five ways in which the gods can father children upon mortal women. 
You are a mortal and there is no fault in what happened to you. Know this, 
O Kunti, and let your heart be at peace, its fever dispelled. 

For those that are great, everything is proper. For those that are great, 
everything is pure. For those that are great, everything is punya. For those 
that are great, everything is their own.’” 


CANTO 31 


¢ “VV yasa says, “Blessed be you, as well, O Gandhari, this very night 

you shall see your sons and brothers and friends and kinsmen, 

along with your sires, see them like men arisen from sleep. Kunti shall see 

Karna, and Subhadra of the Yadu vamsa will behold her son Abhimanyu. 

Draupadi shall see her five sons, her dead sire and her brothers also. All this 

was in my mind even before you asked me. It is for this that I have come 
here. 

You must not grieve for those greatest of men. They met death while 
observing Kshatriya dharma on Kurukshetra. O faultless Gandhari, the 
work of the gods had to be accomplished, and it was to achieve those fated 
ends that those heroes were born into this world. They were all amsas of the 
Devas, Gandharvas and Apsaras, and Pisachas and Guhyakas and 
Rakshasas, many other spirits of great sanctity, many souls blessed by great 
tapasya, Devarishis, Devas and Danavas and other heavenly sages of 
spotless soul, who met with death on the field of Kurukshetra. 

It is known that it was that most lustrous and intelligent king of the 
Gandharvas, also named Dhritarashtra, who took birth in the world of men 
as your lord. Know that Pandu of unfading glory, and distinguished above 
all others, sprang from the Maruts. Kshattri and Yudhishtira are both amsas 
of Dharma Deva. 

Know that Duryodhana was Kali and Sakuni was Dwapara. O lovely 
Gandhari, know that Dussasana and others were all Rakshasas. Bhimasena 
of great might, this Parantapa, is from the Lord of the Maruts, Vayu. Know 


that this Dhananjaya, the son of Pritha, is the ancient Rishi Nara. Krishna is 
Narayana, and the twins are the Aswins. 

Having split his body into two, Surya Deva, foremost of givers of heat, 
continued to course through the heavens with one portion of himself, while 
on Earth he dwelt as Karna. He that was born as the son of Arjuna, 
Abhimanyu who brought joy to all, Subhadra’s son who was heir to the 
kingdom, possessions and glory of the Pandavas, who was slain by six 
Maharathas combining against him, was none other than the amsa of Soma 
Deva, the Moon, who also clove himself in two through yogic power. 

Dhrishtadyumna, who sprang with Draupadi from the sacrificial fire, 
was an auspicious portion of Agni Deva, God of Fire. Sikhandin was a 
Rakshasa. Know that Drona was an amsa of Brihaspati, and that Drona’s 
son is born of a part of Rudra. Ganga’s son Bhishma was one of the Vasus 
who was cursed to a human life. 

Thus, O you of great wisdom, the Devas and other immortals were 
born onto this Bhumi to accomplish a great purpose and, having achieved 
what they came for, have returned to Swargaloka. Today I will dispel the 
sorrow that rends all your hearts, the grief that relates to those who are no 
longer in this world but have departed to the other. Go now, all of you, 
towards the Bhagirathi, the blessed Devi Ganga. On her banks I will show 
you all those who were killed on the field of war.’ 

A roar, as of many lions, arises from those gathered there, and all rush 
to the sacred Bhagirathi. Dhritarashtra with all his ministers and the 
Pandavas, as well as all the great Rishis and Gandharvas that have come to 
the asrama, set out immediately. Arriving at the banks of the Ganga, that 
sea of men and women find suitable places for themselves. The wise old 
king, with the Pandavas at his side, finds an appropriate spot, along with the 
women and the aged of his household. That day passes like a whole year as 
they wait for the night when they will see the dead Kshatriyas. Finally, the 
sun reaches the sacred mountain, Astama, in the west, and all those men 
and women bathe in the sacred river, and perform their sandhya vandana.” 


CANTO 32 


V aisampayana said, “As night falls after the evening prayer and 

rituals, all approach Vyasa. Dhritarashtra, having cleansed his body 
and fixed his mind in dhyana, sits there with the Pandavas and the Rishis. 
At a small remove sit Gandhari and the women of the royal house of Kuru. 
All the people of Hastinapura and those from the provinces range 
themselves according to their years. Then does Maharishi Vyasa of mighty 
tejas bathe in the sacred waters of the Bhagirathi and summon all the dead 
warriors, those that had fought for the Pandavas and those that had fought 
for the Kauravas, including great and blessed kings of diverse realms. 

A mighty uproar erupts from the waters of the Ganga, one to equal the 
din of the Kaurava and the Pandava hosts facing each other on Kurukshetra. 
Rising up out of the river in their thousands, led by Bhishma and Drona, 
appear all those kings and other great Kshatriyas, along with their troops. 
Virata and Drupada rise up with their sons and their forces. Draupadi’s sons 
and Abhimanyu, son of Subhadra, and the Rakshasa Ghatotkacha, all 
appear, as do Karna and Duryodhana, and the Maharatha Sakuni, and the 
other sons of Dhritarashtra, all of great prowess, led by Dussasana. The son 
of Jarasandha appears, as do Bhagadatta and Jalasandha of terrific energy, 
and Bhurisravas, and Sala, and Salya, and Vrishasena with his younger 
brother, Duryodhana’s son, Prince Lakshmana, and the son _ of 
Dhrishtadyumna, and all the princes of Sikhandin, and Dhrishtaketu, with 
his younger brother, Achala, Vrishaka and the Rakshasa Alayudha, Bahlika 
and Somadatta, King Chekitana and others too numerous to name, all arise 
from the river, resplendent with supernal light. 


Every king and warrior wears the armour that he wore on Kurukshetra. 
They arise from the water in the chariots they rode in the Great War, all of 
them flying the majestic standards they had flown in battle. Yet their 
vestments are not of this earth, and their ear-studs and earrings sparkle like 
droplets of the sun. Free from all animosity and pride are all those great 
heroes, and divested of wrath and envy. Gandharvas sing their praises, and 
unearthly bards wait upon them, chanting their deeds. Each one is draped in 
celestial garlands and attended upon by bands of Apsaras. 

And now, through the power of his penances, Maharishi Vyasa, son of 
Satyavati, bestows the gift of vision upon Dhritarashtra. Blessed already 
with mystic gyana and great strength, Gandhari of great fame also sees all 
her sons, along with all those who had been slain in battle. Transfixed with 
wonder, everyone there witnesses the amazing and _ inconceivable 
phenomenon that makes their hair stand on end. The riverbank is 
transformed into a high carnival of ecstatic men and women. The spectacle 
is like a painting by a celestial artist. Gazing, through the grace of the sage, 
at the spirit host of Kshatriyas, Dhritarashtra is filled with jubilation.” 


CANTO 33 


V aisampayana said, “Washed of every sin, exorcised of anger and 

envy, those great Kshatriyas meet one another in accordance with 
the high and auspicious ordinances laid down by the great Rishis. All of 
them are lambent with happiness and look like Devas in Swargaloka, O 
Rajan. Son meets with father or mother, wives with husbands, brother with 
brother, and friend with friend. 

The jubilant Pandavas meet the mighty bowman Karna, Abhimanyu, 
son of Subhadra, and the sons of Draupadi. With hearts brimming with joy, 
the Pandavas approach Karna, O King, and are reconciled with him. Indeed, 
all those Kshatriyas, O Lord of the Bhaaratas, meet with one another 
through the grace of Vyasa Muni and are reconciled. Casting off all 
animosity, they are established in amity and peace. 

All those great warriors, the Kauravas and the other kings, their 
kinsmen and their sons as well, become united with the Pandavas. All that 
night they pass in great happiness; indeed for the unalloyed joy they feel, 
those Kshatriyas deem that place to be heaven itself. No grief, no fear, no 
suspicion, no discontent, no reproach enters that hallowed night. Meeting 
their slain sires and brothers, husbands and sons, the women cast off all 
grief amid tides of rapture. 

Finally, those heroes and their women, after spending that perfect night 
together, embrace and take leave of one another, to return to where they had 
come from. Vyasa dismisses that concourse of dead Kshatriyas and, before 
the eyes of the living the vast host of warriors, with their chariots and 
standards, vanishes into the waters of the sacred Bhagirathi. Some of them 


return to Devaloka, others to Brahmaloka, some to Varuna’s world and 
others to the realm of Kubera. Some among those kings go back to 
Suryaloka. Among the Rakshasas and Pisachas, some go to the land of the 
Uttara-Kurus; others depart gracefully in the company of gods. After all 
those Mahatmans disappear with their chariots, horses and all their 
followers, the puissant Vyasa, standing in the waters of the sacred river, 
Vyasa of great dharma and tejas, that benefactor of the Kurus, addresses the 
Kshatriya widows. 

The Sage says, ‘Let those among these foremost of women who wish 
to attain to the realms acquired by their husbands set aside hesitation and at 
once enter into this holy Bhagirathi.’ Hearing this, those eager women, 
setting their faith in the Muni, immediately seek the blessings and the leave 
of Dhritarashtra, and plunge into the Ganga. Quickly freed from their 
human bodies, they go straight to whichever realm their lords have found 
for themselves, and there those chaste women are reunited with their 
majestic husbands and now adorned with celestial ornaments, riding in 
unearthly rathas, and clad in supernal clothes and garlands. Possessed of 
every virtue, their anxieties dispelled, they have earned unalloyed bliss. On 
that day Vyasa undertakes the pious duty of granting boons to all the men 
assembled there, the fruition of the wish that each one cherishes. 

People of diverse realms, hearing of this meeting between the hallowed 
dead and the living, are transported with rapture. The man who listens to 
this legend of marvel attains everything that he holds dear; indeed, he 
obtains all felicity and the consummation of his every desire, both here and 
in the hereafter. The man of gyana and vigyana, foremost among the 
righteous, who recites this tale for others, acquires great fame in this world 
and an auspicious terminus in the next, as well as a joyful union with 
kinsmen, all that he wishes for, and more. Such a man never has to strive 
painfully for his living, and meets with all sorts of good fortune. Indeed, 
incalculable are the rewards for one who, with reverence for the Vedas, 
studies and mindfully recites this Itihasa for others to hear. Those possessed 
of good conduct, devoted to self-restraint, cleansed of all sins by the gifts 
they make, endowed with sincerity, having tranquil souls, freed from 
falsehood and the desire of injuring others, adorned with faith, belief in the 
scriptures, and intelligence, who listen to this wonderful Parva, surely attain 
to the highest goal.’”’ 


CANTO 34 


TT he Sauti says, ‘King Janamejaya of great intelligence was gratified by 

this story of the appearance and occultation of his sires. Filled with 
delight, he questioned Vaisampayana again on the reappearance of dead 
men. He asked, “How is it possible for persons whose bodies have been 
destroyed to reappear in those very forms?” 

That highest of regenerate ones, disciple of holy Vyasa, foremost 
among the eloquent, Vaisampayana of great tejas, answered Janamejaya 
thus: “This is certain: that no karma is ever destroyed. Human bodies, O 
King, are born of action, of karma; so also are forms and natures of men. 
The great primal elements are eternal, being found united with the Lord of 
all beings. Since they exist with what is eternal, they find no destruction 
when the temporal parts are destroyed. 

Deeds performed without exertion are the truest and the best, and bear 
real fruit. But the soul, when united with deeds that require exertion for 
their accomplishment, experiences pleasure and pain, but is never changed 
by them—even like a mirror that reflects images but remains itself 
unchanged. The Soul knows no change, decay or death. As long as one’s 
karma is not exhausted, so long does one regard the body to be oneself. The 
man whose karma has been exhausted, however, knows himself to be other 
than the body. Diverse existent objects, attaining to a body, combine 
ephemerally as one entity. To men of knowledge who understand the 
difference between the body and self, those very objects become eternal. 

During the Aswamedha yagna, this Sruti is heard in regard to the 
slaying of the sacrificial horse: those which are the possessions and 


characteristics of embodied creatures—their life-breath—continue to exist 
eternally, even when themselves they are borne away to the next world. 

O King, if you wish to hear it from me, I will tell you what is beneficial 
to you. While engaged in your sacrifices, you have heard of the paths of the 
Devas. When preparations were made for any sacrifice of yours, the Devas 
became beneficially inclined towards you. When, indeed, they were thus 
disposed and came to your sacrifices, they were the attendant lords in the 
passage, from this world to the next, of the animals that were sacrificed. For 
this reason the eternal Jivas, by adoring the deities with yagnas, achieve 
felicity. When the Panchamahabhutas, the five primal elements, are eternal, 
when the Atman, the Soul, is also eternal, he that is called Purusha is 
equally so. When such is the truth, one who regards any living creature as 
disposed to take diverse forms is thought to have an _ erroneous 
understanding. 

He who indulges in too much grief at separation is foolish. He who 
sees evil in separation should renounce union. By remaining aloof, one 
avoids attachments and casts off sorrow, for sorrow in this world is born of 
attachment and loss. Only one who understands the distinction between 
body and self, he and no other, is freed from delusion. He that knows the 
other, the Soul, attains to the highest wisdom and is freed from error. 

As regards all creatures, they appear in this world from an invisible 
state, and once more disappear into invisibility. “I do not know him. He also 
does not know me. As regards myself, renunciation is not yet mine.’ He that 
is not possessed of strength enjoys or endures the fruits of all his actions 
and, in those too, dies. If the act be of the mind, of thought, its 
consequences are enjoyed or endured mentally; if it be done with the body, 
its consequences will be enjoyed or endured in the body.” 


CANTO 35 


V aisampayana said, “King Dhritarashtra had never seen his own sons 

with his blind eyes. Obtaining sight through the grace of the Rishi, 
O Kurupravira, he beheld for the first time those sons that were so like 
himself. That foremost of men and kings, the Kuru monarch, had studied 
the dharma of kings, as well as the Vedas and the Upanishads, and had 
acquired a certitude of understanding from those sacred sources. Vidura of 
untold wisdom attained to high success through the power of his penances. 
Dhritarashtra attained to great success in consequence of having met the 
Maharishi Vyasa.” 

Janamejaya said, “If Vyasa is disposed to grant me a boon, let him in 
his mercy show me my own sire in that human form which he had, clad as 
he used to be clad, and as old as he was when he left this world. I may then 
believe all that you have told me. Such a sight would indeed be most 
agreeable to me, and I would consider my very life as having been crowned 
with success. I shall have no further doubts in my heart. O, may Mahamuni 
grant me this wish.” 

Sauti says, “No sooner did King Janamejaya express this wish than 
Vyasa of great power showed his grace and brought forth Parikshit. King 
Janamejaya saw his royal father, possessed of unearthly beauty, fetched 
down from Swarga in the same form that he had, and of the very age he was 
when he left this world. The Mahatman Samika, and his son Sringin, were 
also brought there. All the counsellors and ministers of the king saw the 
lustrous ones. Janamejaya then performed the final ablutionary bath for his 


sacrifice, and rejoiced. He poured the sacred water over his father, even as 
he caused it to be poured on himself. 

Having undergone the avabhrita bath, the king addressed the regenerate 
Astika, who had sprung from the race of the Yayavaras and was the son of 
Jaratkaru, “O Astika, this sacrifice of mine is fraught with many wondrous 
events! I have seen my father with my eyes, and he has dispelled all my 
sorrow.” Astika said, “O best of the Kuru vamsa, in any sacrifice at which 
the ancient Rishi, the Island-born Vyasa, that vast reservoir of tapasya, is 
present, its performer is sure to conquer both worlds. O son of the 
Pandavas, you have heard a most wonderful Itihasa. The Nagas have been 
turned to ashes and have followed your sire into the next world. Through 
your dharma, O King, Takshaka has escaped a painful fate. The Rishis have 
all been worshipped here. 

You have also seen the end attained by your noble father. Having 
listened to this sin-cleansing history of the Mahabharata, you have acquired 
immense punya. The sight of your sire has severed the knots in your heart. 
They that fly upon the wings of Dharma, they that are of pure conduct and 
sinless disposition, they at sight of whom sins become attenuated—we 
should all bow down to them.”’ 

Sauti continues, ‘Having heard this from the Dvijottama, King 
Janamejaya worshipped the Rishi, repeatedly honouring him in every way. 
Conversant with his duties, he then asked the Rishi Vaisampayana of 
unfading glory about what followed Dhritarashtra’s residence in the forest.’ 


CANTO 36 


6 


anamejaya asked, “Having seen his sons and grandsons with all 
their friends and followers, what does that ruler of men, 
Dhritarashtra, do, and Yudhishtira also?” 

Vaisampayana said, “After that dazzling vision, Rajarishi 
Dhritarashtra’s grief drops away and he returns to his asrama. He dismisses 
the common people, and all the great Rishis, who return to their abodes. 
The Pandavas, with their wives and a small retinue, accompany 
Dhritarashtra to his asrama. Satyavati’s son, whom all of them worship, also 
comes to the blind king’s asrama. 

Vyasa says to his son, ‘Dhritarashtra Mahabaho, O son of the Kuru 
vamsa, listen to what I have to say. You have heard varied discourses from 
Rishis of great knowledge and sacred deeds, men with a wealth of tapasya 
and the purest, highest lineage, masters of the Vedas and the Vedangas, men 
of great eloquence, of great piety and years. 

Do not set your mind again on sorrow. He that is possessed of wisdom 
is never agitated by misfortune. You have also listened to the mysteries of 
the Gods from Narada of celestial form. Through cleaving to Kshatriya 
dharma, your sons have all attained to the most auspicious goal that is 
sanctified by living and dying by weapons. You have seen how they are free 
and live in transcendent happiness. 

Now Yudhishtira, with all his brothers and wives and kinsmen, awaits 
your leave to return to Hastinapura. You must dismiss him and let him go 
back to his kingdom and rule it. They have been with you in the forest for 


more than a month, and the throne of sovereignty must always be well 
guarded, O King. O you of Kuru’s race, every kingdom has many foes.’ 

Thus advised by Vyasa of incomparable energy, Dhritarashtra 
summons Yudhishtira and says to him, ‘My blessings on you, O 
Ajatashatru! Do you now listen to me, with all your brothers. Through your 
grace, O king, grief no longer stands in my way. With you here, I am as 
happy as if I were in our city of the elephant. With you for my protector, 
wise king, I enjoy all that I could wish for. You have served me as lovingly 
as a son does his father, and I have not the least trace of dissatisfaction. Go 
now, O son, for you must not tarry here any longer. Being with you, I have 
slackened in my penances, although equally I have been able to sustain my 
body to perform tapasya only through meeting you. 

These two mothers of yours, who subsist now upon the fallen leaves of 
trees, keeping vows similar to mine, will not live long. Through Vyasa’s 
tapasya, as well as through the grace of my meeting you, we have all seen 
Duryodhana and those who have become denizens of the other world. O 
Anagha, sinless one, the purpose of my life has been realized, and I now 
wish to set myself to the practice of the most austere of penances. 

You must allow me to do this, and henceforth upon you alone shall rest 
the obsequial pinda, the fame and achievements, the very race of our 
ancestors. Mahabaho, do you then depart either tomorrow or this very day. 
Tarry not, my son. Lord of the Bhaarata vamsa, you have repeatedly heard 
what the duties are of kings. I do not see what more I can say to you. I no 
longer have any need of you, O you of great power.’ 

To the old monarch Yudhishtira replies, “O you who know every 
nuance of dharma, it does not become you to cast me off in this way. I am 
guilty of no fault. Let all my brothers and followers depart, as they like. 
With steadfast vows, I shall wait upon you and upon these two mothers of 
mine.’ Now Gandhari says to him, ‘O son, let it not be so, for the Kuru 
vamsa is now dependent on you. The pinda, the obsequial cake of my 
father-in-law, also depends on you. Go now, my son, you have sufficiently 
honoured and served us. You should do what the king says. Indeed, 
Yudhishtira, you must obey your father’s command.’ 

Yudhishtira wipes the tears of love that flow from his eyes, and 
laments, ‘Alas, both the king and you, O mother Gandhari of great fame, 
cast me off, but my heart is bound to you. Filled as I am with grief, how can 
I leave you? Yet, most righteous queen, I cannot venture to obstruct your 


tapasya, for there is nothing higher, and it is only through penance that one 
attains to the Supreme Brahman. 

O Queen, my heart no longer turns as of old towards kingdom. My own 
mind is wholly set upon tapasya now. Most auspicious Devi, the whole 
world seems empty and hollow to me, and nothing in it gives me pleasure 
any more. Our kinsmen have been annihilated; our strength is no longer 
what it was before. The Panchalas have been entirely exterminated; they 
exist in name only. Mother, Gandhari, I see no one who can renew them and 
cause them to grow and flourish again. Drona consumed them all on the 
field of war. And those that remained, his son Aswatthama killed at night. 

The Chedis and the Matsyas, who were our friends, no longer exist. 
Only the tribes of the Vrishnis remain, for Krishna kept them alive. If I have 
the faintest wish to live, it is only for the sight of the Vrishnis and to acquire 
punya, and not in the least any more to enjoy artha or kama. I beg you, bless 
us with your love and grace, for once we leave here we will not see you 
again. The king will now embark upon the most austere and unbearable 
tapasya, which will surely take him from us.’ 

The lord of battle, Mahabaho Sahadeva cries to Yudhishtira, his eyes 
swimming in tears, ‘O Lord of the Bharatas, I cannot leave my mother. You 
return to our capital quickly. I will remain here and perform tapasya, O 
mighty one. Even here in this asrama, I will emaciate my body through 
stern penances, meanwhile serving our uncle and these two mothers of 
mine, and worshipping at their feet.’ 

Kunti embraces him and says, ‘Go, my son, do not say any more but do 
as I tell you. Leave this place, all of you, Let peace and happiness be yours, 
my sons. If you remain here you will surely obstruct our tapasya; bound by 
my ties of love for you, I will fall away from my vratas. Our time is short, 
mighty prince.’ 

Through these and other words of persuasion, Kunti helps Sahadeva 
and King Yudhishtira regain their composure. The Kuru heroes, best of their 
vamsa, with their mother’s permission and their uncle’s, prepare to depart. 
Yudhishtira says, “Our hearts are calmed by your auspicious blessings, and 
we will return to Hastinapura. Indeed, O King, now that we have your leave 
and your blessing, we will leave this asrama freed from every sin.’ 

Once more, Rajarishi Dhritarashtra blesses Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, 
and bids him farewell. The king comforts Bhima, foremost of all men of 
great strength; Bhima of great buddhi and tejas humbly worships his uncle. 


Dhritarashtra embraces Arjuna and the twins fervently and, blessing them 
repeatedly, directs them also to depart. The brothers worship the feet of 
Gandhari and receive her blessings also. Their mother Kunti lovingly smells 
the tops of their heads and dismisses them. The Pandavas circle around 
Dhritarashtra in pradakshina like calves prevented from drinking at their 
mothers’ teats, their eyes fixed on the blind king. 

Led by Draupadi, the royal women of the Kuru household, his 
daughters-in-law, all worship their father-in-law with rites laid down in the 
Shastras, and receive his permission to depart. Their mothers-in-law instruct 
the younger wives and queens in their dharma and Gandhari and Kunti, 
embracing and blessing each one, bid them go with their husbands. 

Now loud shouts are heard from the charioteers and carriage drivers, 
who order their horses yoked. The air is filled with the neighing of horses, 
and the grunting of camels. King Yudhishtira, with his wives and troops and 
all his kinsmen, sets out for Hastinapura.” 


NARADAGAMANA PARVA 


CANTO 37 


V aisampayana said, “Two years have passed after the Pandavas’ 

return, O King, when the Devarishi Narada comes to the city of the 
elephants, and visits Yudhishtira. The eloquent Dharmaraja duly worships 
the sage and seats him comfortably. When Narada has rested a while, the 
Pandava asks him, ‘It is after a long while, Holy One, that you have graced 
my sabha with your divine presence. Are you at peace and happy, O learned 
Brahmana? What are the lands through which you have ranged? What shall 
I do for you? I beg you to tell me, first among all Dvijas and our highest 
refuge.’ Narada says, “Truly, I have not seen you for a long while, and that 
indeed is why I have come to you from my asrama. I have been to many 
sacred tirthas, and to the holy Ganga also, O King.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “Those dwelling on the banks of the Ganga report 
that my uncle Dhritarashtra Mahatman is practising the austerest tapasya. 
Have you seen him there? Is that perpetuator of the Kuru vamsa at peace? 
Are Gandhari and Pritha, and the Suta’s son Sanjaya also at peace? How, 
indeed, does my royal sire fare? I am eager to hear this from you, if, Swami, 
you have seen the king.’ 

Narada says, ‘Rajan, listen calmly to me as I tell you what I have seen 
and heard in that asrama. After your return from Kurukshetra, O joy of the 
Kurus, your sire went away towards Gangadvara. That illustrious king took 


with him his sacred Agni, Gandhari and his daughter-in-law Kunti, Sanjaya 
the Suta and all his Yajakas. 

Amply possessed of tapodhana, a wealth of penances, your sire set 
himself to the practice of severe austerities. He held pebbles of stone in his 
mouth, for his sustenance only breathed air, and abstained altogether from 
speech. While thus engaged in fierce penance, he was worshipped by all the 
ascetics in the forest. In six months, the king was reduced to skin and bone, 
a mere skeleton. Gandhari subsisted on water alone, while Kunti took a 
little every sixth day. His Yajakas duly worshipped the king’s sacred fire, 
constantly pouring libations of ghrita into it. They did this whether the king 
saw the rite or not. The king had no fixed habitation; he became a wanderer 
through those woods. The two queens, as well as Sanjaya, followed him. 
Sanjaya was their guide always, over flat terrain and uneven land. The 
faultless Pritha, O King, became the eyes of Gandhari. 

One day, that best of kings came to a place on the banks of the Ganga. 
He bathed in the sacred stream and, finishing his ablutions, turned his face 
towards his asrama. Suddenly, the wind rose up high, and a ferocious fire 
broke out, swiftly turning into a conflagration. It began to burn that forest 
on every side. Herds of animals were consumed all around, as well as the 
snakes that inhabited that jungle, while herds of wild boar bolted to the 
nearest marshes, lakes and rivers. When racing flames tore through that 
forest, and every living creature in it tried to flee on all sides, the emaciated 
Dhritarashtra found no strength to move from where he sat. Your two 
mothers, also, both attenuated with the rigours of their tapasya, could not 
bestir themselves at all to escape the ravening Agni. 

Seeing towering flames coming at him from all sides, the old king said 
calmly to the Suta Sanjaya, that best of all charioteers, “Go, O Sanjaya, and 
find a place where the fire cannot reach you. As for ourselves, we shall 
suffer our bodies to be consumed by these flames and attain to the highest 
goal.” Sanjaya said, “My king, such a death, in this fire that is not a sacred 
one will prove disastrous to you. Yet I do not see any way in which you can 
escape from this inferno. You must tell me what I should do.” The king said 
again, “This death cannot be a tragedy or a disaster for us, for we left our 
home of our own will. For sannyasis, water, fire, wind and starvation are 
praiseworthy means of dying. But you, Sanjaya, must leave us without any 
delay.” 


Saying this much to Sanjaya, the king withdrew his mind in dhyana. 
Facing the east, he sat down with Gandhari and Kunti. Seeing him thus, the 
wise Sanjaya walked around him in pradakshina saying, “Do you focus 
yourself in the Atman, mighty one.” The son of a Rishi, and himself 
possessed of great wisdom, the king did so. Restraining all his senses, he sat 
there still as a post. The blessed Gandhari, and your mother Pritha too, sat 
in the same attitude. Then was your royal uncle overtaken by the forest fire, 
and his body turned to ashes. Sanjaya, his loyal minister, escaped the 
conflagration. I saw him on the banks of the Ganga in the midst of some 
Rishis. Endowed with great energy and intelligence, he bade them farewell 
and set out for the mountains of Himavat. 

Even thus did the Mahatman Kuru king Dhritarashtra meet with his 
death, and Gandhari and Kunti, your two mothers. In the course of my 
wanderings at will, I saw the charred bodies of the king and those two 
queens, O Bhaarata. Having heard of the end of King Dhritarashtra, many 
hermits came to that places; none of them grieved in the least for the end 
that came to the Rajarishi and his queen, as well as your mother. There, O 
Narottama, I heard all the details of how the king and the two queens had 
been taken by fire. Son of Pandu, King of kings, you should not grieve for 
him. Of their own will, and gladly, did the three of them find their end 
through the flames.’ 

Hearing how Dhritarashtra left this world, the noble Pandavas all give 
way to great grief. Lamentation and wailing rends the air from within the 
inner apartments of the palace, and from the citizens as well. Yudhishtira is 
like a man struck by lightning. In agony he flings up his arms and cries, 
‘Ah, fie!’ Thinking of his mother, he sobs like a child, as do all his brothers, 
Bhima the loudest. The women of the royal household also mourn and cry 
aloud on hearing that Kunti has perished. 

All the people grieve upon hearing that the old king who had become 
childless had been burnt to death so savagely, and that the helpless 
Gandhari had shared his fate. When the clamour of grief abates somewhat, 
Yudhishtira Dharmaraja stanches his own tears with all his powers of 
endurance and manages to speak.” 


CANTO 38 


: ov udhishtira says, ‘When such a fate overtook that great king, that 

Mahatman who was performing the most austere tapasya, and 

despite the fact of his having kinsmen such as ourselves all alive, it seems 

to me, O regenerate one, that the end of human beings is indeed difficult to 

predict. Alas, who would have thought that the son of Vichitravirya would 
be burnt to death in the wilderness! 

He had a hundred sons, each endowed with vast prowess and 
prosperity. Dhritarashtra himself had the strength of ten thousand elephants. 
Yet he has met his end in a forest fire. He who was once fanned with palm 
leaves held by the fair hands of beautiful women, was fanned by vultures 
with their wings after being burnt alive by the wild fire. He who was once 
roused from sleep every morning by bands of Sutas and Magadhas ended 
his days, through my sinful deeds, sleeping on the bare ground! 

I do not grieve for the great Gandhari who lost all her sons. Observing 
the same vows as her husband, she has attained to those very realms that 
have become his. I grieve for my mother Pritha who, abandoning the 
shining prosperity of her sons, chose to go away into the forest. Fie on this 
great kingdom and sovereignty of ours, fie on our prowess, fie on the ways 
of Kshatriyas! Though seemingly alive, we are actually dead. 

O greatest of great Brahmanas, the course of Time is truly subtle and 
inscrutable, when Kunti could leave this kingdom and everything in it, and 
decide on vanavasa instead. How could she, the mother of Yudhishtira, of 
Bhima, of Vijaya, be burnt to death like some helpless creature of the 
jungle! I am staggered when I think of this; Iam numb. 


Ah, in vain did Arjuna gratify the God of Fire in the Khandava vana. 
Forgetting the service my brother did to him, that ingrate has burnt to death 
his benefactor’s mother! How could Agni Deva consume Arjuna’s mother 
with his flames? Once, he assumed the guise of a Brahmana and came as a 
supplicant to Arjuna to help him devour the Khandava vana. Fie on Agni! 
Fie on the celebrated triumph of the Arjuna’s shafts! 

Holy One, what happened in the Khandava Prastha seems to me to be 
doubly horrible since our uncle Dhritarashtra, Lord of the Earth, was not 
consumed by any sacred fire but by inauspicious flames. How could such a 
death overtake that Rajarishi of the Kuru vamsa who, after having ruled this 
entire world, was performing tapasya in the forest? In that great forest there 
were fires that had been sanctified with holy mantras. Alas, that my sire left 
this world through being devoured by unholy flames! 

Oh, my mind imagines Pritha, my mother, emaciated so that all her 
veins and arteries show clearly, trembling in fear and crying out at the 
terrifying approach of the flames, “Yudhishtira! Bhima, save me!” as the 
fire closed in on her from every side. Alas, that heroic son of Madravati, her 
darling of all her sons, did not save her either.’ 

Hearing these lamentations of the king, all present there in the Kuru 
sabha begin to weep afresh, clasping one another in their grief and sobbing 
piteously. The five sons of Pandu are so stricken that they resemble living 
creatures at the time of universal dissolution. The lamentations of the 
weeping heroes spill out of the capacious chambers of the palace and 
penetrate the very sky.” 


CANTO 39 


: °N arada says, ‘The king was not consumed by an unsanctified fire. 

I was told so in that very place and I say to you, O Bhaarata, 

such was not the fate of Dhritarashtra. I heard on authority that when the 

old king of great wisdom began subsisting on just the air he breathed and 

then entered into the deeper jungle, he abandoned his sacrificial fires after 
kindling them and performing his sacred rites before them. 

The Yajaka Brahmanas he had with him left those sacred fires to burn 
out in a solitary part of the forest and went away on other errands, O 
Bharatottama. It was those very sacred fires that were fanned by winds of 
fate and grew into the general conflagration. This I heard from the ascetics 
who live on the banks of the Ganga. Dhritarashtra was thus united with his 
own sacred Agni and met his end on the banks of the Ganga. Sinless one, 
this is indeed what I was told by the Rishis whom I saw on the banks of the 
sacred Bhagirathi, O Yudhishtira. Thus it was, Bhumipala, that 
Dhritarashtra was united with his own sacred fire and attained to the lofty 
goal that was his. Through the service rendered by her to Dhritarashtra and 
Gandhari, your mother Kunti, O Lord of men, has also found great success 
and joy. There is not the slightest doubt about this. 

Now, O King of kings, together with your brothers you must perform 
the tarpana, the rites of water, in their honour. So without delay do what you 
must towards that end.’ Then Yudhishtira, Bhumipala, Purushottama, that 
bearer of the burdens of the Pandavas, comes out into the open, along with 
all his brothers as well as the royal women of his household. The people of 
the city, as well as those of the provinces, out of their fervent loyalty, all 


join the procession to the banks of the Ganga, each one clad in a single 
piece of cloth. 

There, setting at their head Dhritarashtra’s only surviving son, the good 
Yuyutsu, all those foremost of men enter the holy river and offer oblations 
of water to the departed Rajarishi. They also offer similar tarpana for 
Gandhari and Pritha, naming each separately, and their families. Having 
completed those rites that purify the living, they return but without entering 
their capital, remain outside Hastinapura. They also despatch a number of 
trusted Brahmanas, all conversant with the ordinances regarding the 
cremation of the dead, to Gangadvara where the old king had been 
consumed by fire. Having first rewarded those men amply, Yudhishtira 
commands them to accomplish the rites of cremation still awaited by the 
remains of Dhritarashtra, Gandhari and Kunti. 

On the twelfth day, the king, duly purified, performs the sraddhas for 
his departed kin, which are characterized by gifts given in abundance. In the 
name and memory of Dhritarashtra, Yudhishtira gives away many gifts of 
gold and silver, of kine and costly cloths. Uttering next the names of 
Gandhari and Kunti, the Mahatejasvin king dispenses many splendid gifts 
in their names. Every man receives whatever he wishes for, and as much of 
it as he wants. Beds and food, chariots and carriages, jewels and gems and 
other wealth are given away in profusion. In the name of his two mothers, 
the king gives a bounty of rathas, fine garments and coverlets, various kinds 
of food, and female slaves adorned with diverse ornaments. Having made 
many kinds of gifts in profusion, that Lord of Earth then enters his capital 
called after the elephant. 

The men sent to the banks of the Ganga to cremate the remains of the 
king and two queens return to the city. They duly honour those remains 
with garlands and perfumes of many kinds, and then, after the immersion of 
the ashes, inform Yudhishtira of the accomplishment of their task. Having 
comforted Yudhishtira Dharmatma, the Devarishi Narada, the eternal 
itinerant, leaves Hastinapura and resumes his wanderings. 

Even thus does King Dhritarashtra leave this world, after passing three 
years in the forest and ten and five years in the city. Having lost all his sons 
in battle, he had given many gifts in honour of his kinsmen, relatives, 
friends, his brethren and own people. 

After his uncle’s demise, Yudhishtira becomes forlorn and dejected; 
deprived of so many of his kin, his uncle, his aunt and his mother as well, 


he somehow finds the strength within himself to bear the burden of 
sovereignty. 

One should listen with rapt attention to this Asramavasa Parva, and 
having heard it recited, one should feed Brahmanas with havishya, 
honouring them with perfumes and garlands.” 


The end of Asramavasika Parva 


BOOK 16 
Mausala Parva 


CANTO 1 


A UM. Bowing down to Narayana and Nara, foremost of Purushas, 
and to the Devi Saraswati, I invoke the spirit of Jaya! 

Vaisampayana said, “When the thirty-sixth year has passed after the 
Great War, Yudhishtira, joy of the Kurus, sees many strange portents all 
around him. Winds, dry and strong, loaded with gravel, blow from every 
side. Flocks of birds wheel in apradakshina, flying in circles from right to 
left. The great rivers run counter to their flow. The horizon all around seems 
constantly to be obscured by fog and smoke. Meteors rain down from the 
sky. The sun’s disc, O King, appears at all times obscured with dust. At 
sunrise, the great luminary of day is shorn of splendour and seems to be 
crossed by headless human trunks. Around both the sun and the moon 
ominous rings of light can be seen, of three hues with rough black edges 
and ashy-red bands. 

These and other omens foreshadowing fear and danger, O king, fill the 
hearts of men with anxiety. Soon after, the Kuru king Yudhishtira hears of 
the wholesale carnage among the Vrishnis, in consequence of the Rishis’ 
curse. Hearing that only Krishna and Balarama had briefly survived the 
massacre at which that clan turned on itself, Yudhishtira summons his 
brothers and takes counsel with them as to what they should do. Assembled 
together, they are distraught to hear that the Yadavas had met their end 
through the Brahmanas’ rod of chastisement. The Kshatriyas can hardly 
conceive that Krishna is dead; it is as if the oceans had all dried up. No, 
they cannot believe that he who wielded the Saranga is dead. But when they 


hear the tale of the accursed rod of iron, the Pandavas are overwhelmed by 
grief. They sit speechlessly together in black despair.” 

Janamejaya said, “O Holy One, how was it that the Andhakas, along 
with the Vrishnis and those Maharathas, the Bhojas, all perished in the very 
sight of Krishna?” Vaisampayana replied, “In the thirty-sixth year after the 
Mahabharata yuddha, calamity overtook the Vrishnis, and fate slew them 
through the curse of the iron pestle.” Janamejaya asked, “Who was it that 
cursed those incomparable heroes, the Vrishnis, the Andhakas and the 
Bhojas, to meet with death? O best of Dvijas, tell me all.” 

Vaisampayana said, “One day, the younger Vrishni heroes, with Sarana 
among them, see Viswamitra, Kanwa and Narada arrive at Dwaraka. 
Aggrieved by the rod of punishment wielded by those sages, the young 
Kshatriyas dress Samba as a woman and take him to the Maharishis, saying, 
‘This is the wife of Babhru of immeasurable tejas, who wishes for a son. O 
Munis, can you tell us for certain what this woman will bring forth?’ 

Hear now, O King, the retort of those great sages with whom these 
young lions ignorantly trifled. Those Mahamunis, their eyes red with wrath, 
look at one another and give the unruly pranksters a terrible answer: “This 
heir of Krishna, whose name is Samba, will bring forth a fierce iron rod for 
the destruction of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas! Through that iron rod, 
you arrogant and cruel ones, intoxicated with pride as you are, you will 
become the exterminators of your race, leaving just Rama and Janardana. 
Balarama who wields the halayudha will cast off his body and enter the 
ocean, while a hunter named Jara will pierce the Mahatman Krishna as he 
lies on the ground, and he will also leave this world.’ 

The Rishis then go to Krishna, who in turn summons all the Vrishnis 
and tells them what has happened. Krishna, who already knows what the 
end of his vamsa will be, speaks to them quite calmly, saying simply that 
what is destined to occur will come to pass. Hrishikesa then returns to his 
palace. The Lord of the universe has no wish to change the course of fate. 

The next day, Samba brings forth the iron rod like a huge messenger of 
death, through which the entire race of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas will 
perish. The sinister event is reported to King Ugrasena, who in great 
distress has the rod ground into a fine powder and has his men cast the 
powder into the sea. Then, at the command of Ahuka, of Krishna, of Rama 
and of the noble Babhru, it is proclaimed throughout Dwaravati that among 
all the Vrishnis and the Andhakas no one should make any wine or other 


intoxicating spirits of any kind, and that whoever did so secretly would be 
impaled alive with all his kinsmen. Through fear of the king, and knowing 
that this was the command of Balarama also of unflinching determination, 
all the people of the ocean city bind themselves to that rule, and abstain 
from making any wine or spirits.” 


CANTO 2 


V aisampayana said, “While the Vrishnis and the Andhakas thus seek 

to avoid impending calamity, the embodied form of Kaala every day 
wanders through their city and homes. He has the form of a man of terrible 
and fierce aspect: bald of head, black and tawny of complexion. Sometimes 
the Vrishnis catch a glimpse of him as he peers into their houses with 
fearsome eyes. 

The mighty bowmen among the Vrishnis shoot thousands of arrows at 
him, but none can pierce him, for he is Death embodied, the Destroyer of all 
creatures. Day by day, strong winds blow and many evil omens arise, 
dreadful forebodings of the extinction of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas. 
The streets swarm with rats and mice. At night they gnaw away the hair and 
nails of sleeping men. Earthen pots show cracks or break apart with echoing 
reports, for no apparent cause. Sarikas chirp ceaselessly, day and night, 
even within the homes of the Vrishnis. Sarases are heard to imitate the 
hooting of the owl, O Bhaarata, and goats call like jackals. Many birds 
appear, summoned by Death, that are pale of feather but have blood-red 
legs and feet. Pigeons are seen flying everywhere in the houses of the 
Vrishnis. Cows calve donkeys, and mules bring forth misshapen elephants. 
Bitches whelp kittens, and mice are born from the mongoose. 

As for the Vrishnis themselves, they grow daily more wild and wanton, 
showing no trace of shame. They flagrantly disregard Brahmanas and the 
Pitris and Devas. They openly insult and humiliate their elders and 
preceptors. Rama and Krishna alone continue to conduct themselves with 
decorum. In Dwaraka, wives deceive their husbands, and husbands their 


wives. Fires, when lit, cast their flames towards the left. Sometimes they 
throw out stark blue and vivid red flames. 

The sun, whether rising or setting over the city, seems to be surrounded 
by headless human trunks. In kitchens, dishes of clean, freshly cooked food, 
when served, are seen infested with worms of all kinds. When Brahmanas, 
receiving gifts, bless the day or the hour, or when holy men engage in silent 
recitation of mantras, the rush of countless heavy feet in flight can be heard, 
but the unnerving stampede can be ascribed to no one. 

In the firmament, the constellations frequently appear to collide with 
the planets, but not a single Yadava can find the stellation of his birth in the 
sky. When the Panchajanya is blown in their houses, donkeys bray in 
discordant cacophony from every direction. 

Seeing these signs that indicate the perverse course of Time, and seeing 
that the day of the new moon coincides with the thirteenth and fourteenth 
lunation, Krishna summons the Yadavas, and says to them, ‘The fourteenth 
lunation has been made the fifteenth by Rahu once more. It was even such a 
day as we saw during the time of the great war of the Bharatas. And it 
seems that it has appeared once more, now for our own destruction.’ 

Construing the meaning of these omens of Time, Krishna knows that 
the thirty-sixth year has turned, and that the words Gandhari uttered, 
burning with grief at the death of her sons and all her kinsmen, are about to 
come true. The sinister portents are similar to those Yudhishtira saw when 
the two armies, of the Kauravas and the Pandavas, were arrayed in the 
vyuhas of battle. 

Seeing the omens repeat themselves, Krishna proceeds to catalyze the 
events that would render Gandhari’s terrible words prophetic. That 
Parantapa commands the Vrishnis to make a pilgrimage to a holy tirtha. His 
heralds and messengers proclaim that, at Krishna’s call, the Vrishnis should 
journey to the coast of the sea to undertake sacred ablutions in the waters of 
the ocean.” 


CANTO 3 


V aisampayana said, “During those days of the terrible omens, the 

Vrishni women dream nightly that a black-skinned woman with 
gleaming white teeth runs through Dwaraka laughing loudly, enters their 
homes and snatches away the auspicious threads they wear on their wrists. 
The men dream that vultures, flying into their houses and holy fire- 
chambers, rend and gorge themselves on their very bodies. They see their 
ornaments and parasols, standards and armour all borne off by feral and 
terrible Rakshasas. 

In the very sight of the Vrishnis, the Chakra of Krishna given him by 
Agni, made of iron with its hub of adamant, suddenly flies up into the sky 
and vanishes forever. Before the eyes of Krishna’s sarathi Daruka, his 
chariot, bright as the sun and bearing all his weapons, is spirited away by 
the horses yoked to it, those four great steeds as swift as thought—Saibya, 
Sugriva, Meghapushpa and Balahaka. Racing across the ocean waves with 
the splendid ratha behind them, they, too, vanish forever. The two great 
standards adorning the chariots of Krishna and Balarama, one bearing the 
emblem of Garuda, the Eagle, and the other that of a Palmyra, banners 
cherished as sacred by the two, are spirited away by Apsaras who, day and 
night, call out to the Vrishni and Andhaka heroes to undertake a tirtha-yatra 
to some place of sacred waters. 

Hearing and seeing these and other omens, those foremost of men, the 
indomitable Vrishni and Andhaka Maharathas, yield to a desire to set out, 
taking their families with them, on a pilgrimage. They prepare feasts of 
diverse foods, with meat and wines of every kind. Finally, blazing with 


splendour, beauty and fierce energy, the Vrishnis and the Andhakas set out 
from Dwaraka riding their chariots, horses and elephants, accompanied by 
their troops. With their wives, the Yadavas go forth to sacred Prabhasa, and 
begin living there, each in their assigned pavilion, all provided with a 
plenitude of food and drink. 

Hearing that they are dwelling in Prabhasa by the sea, Uddhava, wisest 
of men, master of Yoga, arrives there to bid farewell to his beloved nephew 
Krishna. With folded hands, Krishna salutes his uncle; seeing the great 
bhakta bent on leaving the world, and knowing that the end of the Vrishnis 
is at hand, Krishna feels no inclination to deter him. The Vrishni and 
Andhaka Maharathas, whose hour has come, watch Uddhava set out on his 
mahaprayana, his great last journey, lighting the whole sky with his 
splendour. 

The reckless Vrishnis mix wine with the food that had been cooked for 
high-souled Brahmanas, and feed it to apes and monkeys. Then, at holy 
Prabhasa, those heroes of fierce tejas begin their high revels, of which 
drinking without restraint forms the chief feature. The shore echoes with the 
blare of hundreds of horns and swarms with actors, singers and dancers 
plying their vocations. In the very sight of Krishna, mighty Rama begins to 
drink with Kritavarman, Satyaki and Gada, and Babhru joins them. Satyaki 
Yuyudhana, inebriated with wine, laughs derisively in Kritavarman’s face 
and insults him in the midst of the assembly. He says mockingly, ‘What 
kind of Kshatriya is he who will slay with weapons men locked in the 
embrace of sleep and, so, already akin to the dead? That is why, O son of 
Hridika, the Yadavas will never exonerate you for what you did to the 
Panchala princes.’ 

Pradyumna, best of Maharathas, approves Satyaki’s taunts, showing his 
contempt for Kritavarman. Incensed, the son of Hridika, affronting Satyaki 
by pointing at him deliberately with his left hand, retorts, ‘You call yourself 
a Kshatriya! How did you slay the most noble Bhurisravas, who had already 
lost his arm and had sat down in praya to leave his life?’ Hearing this, 
Krishna himself gives way to anger and glowers at Kritavarman. Then 
Satyaki tells Krishna what Kritavarman had done to Satrajita in order to 
take the celebrated Syamantaka from him. Listening to the story, 
Satyabhama, consumed with rage and anguish, throws herself into her 
brother Krishna’s lap and inflames his anger towards Kritavarman. 


Satyaki springs up in rage and shouts, ‘I swear by Dharma that I will 
send Kritavarman after the five sons of Draupadi, and Dhrishtadyumna and 
Sikhandin, all of whom that wretch murdered in their sleep, helped by 
Drona’s son. O slender-waisted Satyabhama, Kritavarman’s days and his 
fame have come to their end!’ With these words Satyaki rushes at 
Kritavarman and, before Krishna’s eyes, sloughs off his head with his 
sword. He then turns on others around him and begins to hack them down. 
Krishna runs to stop him, but too late, O Rajan; for, possessed by the 
perverse hour that was upon them, all the Bhojas and Andhakas there 
converge on Satyaki, son of Sini. 

Knowing the nature of the hour that has arrived, Krishna restrains his 
own anger, even at the sight of all those Kshatriyas rushing at the lone 
Satyaki from every side. Compelled by fate, mad with drink, they begin to 
strike Yuyudhana with the very pots from which they had been eating. 
Seeing Satyaki thus assaulted, Rukmini’s son Pradyumna rushes forward to 
rescue him as he single-handedly engages the Bhojas and the Andhakas The 
two mighty-armed Vrishni heroes fight bravely and strenuously, but the 
numbers ranged against them are overwhelming. Both of them are killed in 
the very sight of Krishna. 

Yadunandana Krishna, witnessing the slaughter of his own son and the 
son of Sini, pulls up a handful of the eraka reeds growing nearby. In his 
hands that clutch of reeds turns instantly into a bolt of iron, infused with 
power of a thunderbolt. For those reeds have grown from the powder of the 
iron rod which Samba brought forth through the Rishis’ curse. Cast like 
astras, those bolts pierce through what no other weapon can penetrate. With 
it, Krishna slays all who come before him. 

The Andhakas and the Bhojas, the Saineyas and the Vrishnis, puppets 
in the inexorable grasp of Kaala, all pull up blades of those same eraka 
reeds, until everyone is armed with a vajra in his hands. They fall upon one 
another, inebriated with wine, and a melee of blood erupts on that sacred 
shore. Son kills sire, and sire kills son, O Bhaarata. The Kukuras and the 
Andhakas perish like insects flying into a blazing fire. Not for a moment do 
any of them consider pausing or fleeing the carnage. 

Knowing that the hour of destruction had come, the mighty-armed 
Krishna stands there, watching, eraka reed in his hand. But on seeing 
Samba killed before him, along with Charudeshna, Pradyumna and 
Aniruddha, a terrible rage fills the Avatara; seeing Gada sprawled on the 


ground, his anger flares up, and then in a moment he is upon his clan; 
Krishna, wielder of the Saranga, the Sudarshana and the Kaumodaki, 
slaughters all of them, the Vrishnis and the Andhakas and the rest. 

Listen, O King, to what Babhru of mighty tejas, conqueror of hostile 
towns, and Daruka says then to Krishna, ‘Holy One, you have killed 


multitudes in moments. Let us turn now to where Rama has gone, for we 
must find him.’” 


CANTO 4 


V aisampayana said, “Daruka, Babhru and Krishna leave that blood- 

drenched shore and follow Balarama’s trail. They soon discover him 
of infinite tejas, sitting upon the ground in a solitary place, his back against 
a tree, his gaze turned inward, plunged in dhyana. As soon as they see that 
Mahatman, Krishna tells Daruka, ‘Go to the Kurus, and tell Arjuna that all 
the Yadavas are dead. Tell him how they perished through the Brahmanas’ 
curse, and let Partha come here quickly.’ In a daze, near-senseless at the 
carnage he has witnessed, Daruka mounts a chariot and rides towards 
Hastinapura. When he has gone, Krishna turns to Babhru and says, ‘Hasten 
to the women, they need your protection. Let no bandits or thieves be 
tempted by the ornaments that they wear to do them some injury.’ 

Still stupefied by wine, but devastated by what he has seen, Babhru 
goes, after he has sat quietly beside his father for a while. He has not gone 
far when an eraka reed which has attached itself to a mallet in the hands of 
a hunter suddenly springs to life and flies at the last of the Yadavas, killing 
him on the spot. Krishna sees Babhru fall and, turning to his elder brother, 
says to Balarama, ‘Rama, wait here for me. I must go and entrust our 
women’s care into the hands of our kinsmen.’ 

Entering the city of Dwaravati, Krishna says to his father Vasudeva, 
‘Do you protect all the women of our house until Arjuna comes. Rama 
waits for me at the edge of the forest near the sea, and I will meet him 
today. Today I have beheld the annihilation of the Yadus, even as I saw the 
carnage of the Kurus thirty-six years ago. I cannot bear to even look at this 
city of the Yadavas without the Yadus beside me. I will go into the forest 


and perform tapasya with Rama.’ Krishna touches his father’s feet with his 
head, and quickly leaves his presence. A shriek arises from the women and 
children of his house. Hearing them lament, Krishna returns to them and 
says, ‘Arjuna will come here. That foremost among men will take your 
grief from you.’ 

Krishna returns to the forest, where he finds Balarama sitting in the 
same solitary place. He also sees that Rama has yoked himself in Yoga and, 
as Krishna watches, a mighty Naga of pristine white issues from Rama’s 
mouth. Leaving the human body which he had inhabited so long, that 
Mahatman Naga of a thousand heads with shining red eyes, its form as 
great as a mountain, emerges, and slides its length into the ocean. 

The Ocean himself, many celestial Nagas, and many sacred Rivers are 
all gathered there to receive the Lord Anantasesha with honour. Karkotaka 
and Vasuki, Takshaka and Prithusravas, Varuna and Kunjara, Misri and 
Sankha, Kumuda and Pundarika, and the high-souled Naga Dhritarashtra, 
Hrada and Kratha, Sitikantha of fierce energy, Chakramanda and Atishanda, 
that foremost of Nagas called Durmukha, Ambarisha and King Varuna 
himself, O Monarch, are all ranged to welcome him. They come forward to 
offer Rama arghya and padya, and with diverse rites all worship the mighty 
Snake of a thousand hoods, Lord of them all. 

When his brother has left the world of men, Krishna of divine vision, 
who entirely knows the end of all things, wanders thoughtfully for some 
time in that lonely forest. Finally, he of infinite tejas sets himself down on 
the bare ground at the foot of a tree. Krishna has reflected on all that 
Gandhari foretold after the war, when she cursed him. He also remembers 
what Durvasa Muni had said when that Rishi smeared Krishna’s body with 
the remnant of the payasa the sage had eaten in Krishna’s home. The 
greatest of great souls, recalling the annihilation of the Vrishnis and the 
Andhakas, and the previous slaughter of the Kurus, knows that the hour has 
come for him to leave the world. 

He restrains his senses and withdraws his mind in dhyana. Omniscient 
as he is, and though he is the Paramatman, the Supreme God, Krishna now 
wishes for death—to dispel every possible doubt about human ends, in 
order to uphold the three worlds, and also to prove the prophecy of Atri’s 
great son. Yoking himself into the highest Yoga, restraining his senses, 
mind and speech, Krishna lays himself down upon the earth. 


There arrives in the vicinity a fierce hunter, Jara, out on his quest for 
deer. From some way off, and around the bole of the tree beneath which he 
has stretched himself, Jara glimpses Krishna lying motionless. Moved 
irresistibly by destiny, Jara mistakes him for a deer and looses his arrow, 
piercing Krishna’s heel with that fatal shaft. Jara rushes forward to capture 
his prey and finds instead a lustrous man, clad in yellow robes, rapt in Yoga 
and endowed with countless arms. Filled with fear at the sin he thinks he 
has committed, he touches Krishna’s feet in contrition. Krishna forgives and 
comforts his slayer and rises straight into the sky, taking his human body 
with him, filling the firmament with splendour. 

When Krishna enters into Swarga, Indra and the twin Aswins, Rudra 
and the Adityas, the Vasus and Viswadevas, Munis and Siddhas and many 
among the greatest Gandharvas, with the Apsaras, come forward to receive 
him. Greeting and blessing them all, the illustrious Narayana of untold 
tejas, the Creator and Destroyer of all, that preceptor of Yoga, fills Heaven 
with his blinding splendour, O King, and, passing on, reaches his own 
realm. 

Krishna then meets the Devas and Devarishis, the Charanas and chief 
Gandharvas, Siddhas and Sadhyas and Apsaras of unearthly beauty. All of 
them, bending low, worship the Devadeva, God of gods. The Devas all 
salute him, O Rajan, and the greatest Munis and Rishis adore him who is 
the Lord of all. The Gandharvas wait upon him, hymning his praises in their 
heavenly voices, and Indra also joyfully extols him.” 


CANTO 5 


V aisampayana said, “Meanwhile, Daruka arrives in Hastinapura and 
tells those mighty Maharathas, the sons of Pritha, how the Yadavas 
had slaughtered one another with iron vajras created from the Rishis’ curse. 
Hearing that the Vrishnis, along with the Bhojas and Andhakas and 
Kukuras have all been slain, the Pandavas are stricken with anguish. 

Then Arjuna, Krishna’s beloved friend, bids his brothers farewell and 
sets out with Daruka for Dwaraka to meet his uncle—Kunti’s brother, 
Krishna’s father. He predicts that destruction will soon overtake the world. 
Arriving with Daruka at Dwaravati, ocean city of the Vrishnis, O puissant 
King, that Kshatriya hero sees the once-magnificent city looking like a 
widowed woman. The royal women of that city, who had until then the very 
Lord of the universe for their protector, were now defenceless. Sixteen 
thousand of them had been Krishna’s wives and, seeing Arjuna, they set up 
a loud lament. His eyes well with tears so that he can barely see those 
beautiful women who have lost the protection of Krishna as well as their 
sons. 

The glorious river that was Dwaraka once had for its water the Vrishnis 
and the Andhakas, for its fish the noblest horses, for its rafts chariots, for its 
waves the sound of musical instruments and the rattle of rathas, and for its 
lakes mansions, palaces and public squares. Gemstones and every manner 
of jewel were its abundant shining moss. Its walls of adamant were the 
floating garlands of flowers and its streets and roads were the strong eddies 
running upon its surface. Rama and Krishna were its two mighty alligators. 


Now that river, bereft of all its Vrishni heroes, seems to Arjuna to be the 
fierce Vaitarani, river of death. 

Seeing magical Dwaravati shrivelled and dismal like a lotus flower in 
winter, and Krishna’s many wives plunged in sorrow, Arjuna also breaks 
down, wailing aloud, and collapses onto the ground, O Rajan. Rukmini and 
Satyabhama, Satrajita’s daughter, fling themselves down __ beside 
Dhananjaya, uttering loud cries of grief. Recovering themselves, they raise 
Arjuna and seat him on a golden throne. The women sit around the 
Mahatman Kshatriya and grieve with him. The son of Pandu, giving praise 
to Govinda, soothes and comforts Krishna’s widows, then goes to meet his 
uncle Vasudeva.” 


CANTO 6 


V aisampayana said, “The Kuru prince sees the Mahatman 
Anakadundubhi lying on the ground, O Bhaarata, in a fever of grief 
at the death of his sons. More afflicted than him, Mahabaho Arjuna, his 
eyes bathed in tears, touches his uncle’s feet. The mighty-armed Vasudeva 
wants to smell his nephew’s head in affection, O slayer of foes, but cannot 
find the strength to do so. The old Mahabaho embraces Arjuna and weeps 
aloud for his dead sons, brothers, grandsons, daughter’s sons and friends. 

Vasudeva says, ‘Look at me, O Arjuna—I am still alive who will never 
again see, those Vrishni heroes who subjugated all the kings of the Earth 
and the Daityas a hundred times. Ah, woe is me, that death is not mine! 
Through the rashness and wrath of those two heroes who were your dearest 
sishyas, and whom you held in high regard, O Partha, the Vrishnis have all 
been destroyed. Those two were considered Atirathas even amongst the 
greatest Vrishnis; I know how proudly you spoke of them both and how 
Krishna cherished them—those very Kshatriyas were the main cause for the 
destruction of the Vrishnis.’ 

I do not censure the son of Sini or the son of Hridika, O Arjuna. I do 
not find fault with Akrura or the son of Rukmini. For I have no doubt that 
the Rishis’ curse was the sole cause of the destruction of the Vrishnis. But 
how could Krishna have remained oblivious of a peril as calamitous as that 
curse? Krishna, the Lord of the universe, the slayer of Madhu, of Kesin and 
Kamsa and Chaidya swollen with pride, of Ekalavya, the son of the Nishada 
king, of the Kalingas, the Magadhas and the Gandharas as well as the king 
of Kasi—Krishna, who subdued with his prowess so many mighty rulers 


assembled in the midst of the desert, so many heroes from the East and the 
South and kings of the mountainous realms! 

You, Narada, and the Munis all knew him to be the eternal and sinless 
Narayana, God of gods, of unfading glory. Alas, even as the all-powerful 
Vishnu himself, he remained a mute witness to the annihilation of his 
kinsmen! My son himself must have allowed—why, willed—all this to 
happen. He was the Lord of the universe. Alas, he did not want to nullify 
the curse of either Gandhari or the sages, Parantapa, as he so easily could 
have done! 

Before your eyes, Arjuna, Krishna with his tejas revived your stillborn 
grandson, Parikshit, whom Aswatthama killed with the Brahmasirsa in his 
mother’s womb. Yet your friend chose not to save his own kinsmen. Seeing 
his sons and grandsons, brothers and friends, all lying dead, he said to me, 
O chief of Bharata’s race, “The end of our vamsa has at last come. Arjuna 
will come to Dwaravati. Tell him what has happened. I have no doubt that 
as soon as he hears of the destruction of the Yadus, that hero of great tejas 
will come to our city. For know, O my father, that I am Arjuna and Arjuna 
is me. You must do as he says. The son of Pandu will do what is best for our 
women and children. He will perform your funeral rites. Once Arjuna 
leaves Dwaravati, she with her walls and edifices will be swallowed by the 
ocean. As for myself, I will take myself to some sacred place, and there 
bide my own final hour, with Rama beside me, keeping the strictest vows.” 

With these words, Hrishikesa of inconceivable prowess left me with the 
women and children, and went away to some place of which I know 
nothing. Thinking of the death of those two brothers of yours, Krishna and 
Rama, and of the terrible end of all my kinsmen, I cannot eat any more and 
am wasting away with grief. Arjuna, I shall not continue living. It is our 
good fortune that you and I have met this final time. O Kaunteya, do you 
accomplish all that Krishna has asked you to. This kingdom, with all these 
women, and all its wealth, is yours now, O son of Pritha. As for myself, as I 
have told you, Parantapa, I will certainly forsake my life-breaths, dear as 
they are.’” 


CANTO 7 


V aisampayana said, “That scorcher of foes, Bibhatsu, his own heart as 

stricken as Vasudeva’s, says to his mother’s brother, ‘O Matulan, I 
cannot bear to look at this very Earth when she is bereft of Krishna and my 
other kinsmen. Yudhishtira, Bhimasena, Sahadeva, Nakula and Yagnaseni 
are all of the same mind. The time has come for the departure of our king 
also, as it is for the rest of us to leave this world. You are among the most 
profound knowers of the ways and courses of time. However, Parantapa, I 
will first convey all the women, the children and aged among the Vrishnis 
to safety in Indraprastha.’ 

Arjuna then tells Daruka, ‘I must see the main officers of the Vrishni 
heroes at once.’ Grieving for the dead Yadava Maharathas, Arjuna enters 
the unearthly Sudharma, the great hall of the Yadavas, where they all once 
sat in such grandeur. When he has taken his place in the great court, the 
people, including the Brahmanas, and all the ministers of state come and 
surround him, more dead than alive from sorrow. 

Then Partha, more stricken than they are, says to them, fittingly for the 
occasion, ‘I will take with me all of you Vrishnis and Andhakas who 
remain. The sea will soon engulf this city, and submerge her. Make ready all 
your chariots and set all your wealth in them. This grandson of Krishna, 
young Vajra, shall be your king at Sakraprastha. On the seventh day from 
this, we will set out at sunrise. Make your preparations without delay.’ 
Hearing Pritha’s worthy son, all of them hasten their preparations, intent on 
securing their safety. Arjuna passes that night in Krishna’s mansion, alone, 
overwhelmed with harrowing, benumbing pain. 


At the hour of daybreak, Vasudeva of great tejas quits his body through 
Yoga and attains to the highest goal. Loud lamentation echoes throughout 
his palace, the sound of women wailing. With hair dishevelled, stripped of 
their ornaments and flower garlands, they weep aloud, beating their breasts. 
Those foremost of women, Devaki and Bhadra, Rohini and Madira, throw 
themselves across the lifeless body of their dead lord. Arjuna directs that 
Vasudeva’s body be carried out on a golden litter borne on the shoulders of 
his serving men. The people of Dwaraka and those of the provinces follow 
their beloved ruler. At the head of Vasudeva’s funeral procession is carried 
the white parasol of sovereignty which had been held over him when he 
concluded his Aswamedha yagna, as well as the sacred fires he had daily 
worshipped, along with the priests who had once attended them. 

The body is followed by his wives, splendidly attired with their royal 
ornaments, surrounded by their daughters-in-law and thousands of serving 
women. The last rites are performed in a place often frequented by 
Vasudeva while he lived. The four wives of Vasudeva, that heroic son of 
Sura, ascend his funeral pyre and are consumed with the body of their lord. 
All of them attain to those realms of felicity he has won through his life and 
his worship. The son of Pandu takes the place of Vasudeva’s sons and sets 
alight the pyre of his uncle and his four wives, heaped with a variety of 
fragrant wood and perfumed with diverse scented oils. As the fire blazes up 
with a terrific crackling, the resounding chant of the Samans can be heard 
even above the wailing of the crowd gathered to witness the cremation. 
When the pyre has burned down, the young boys of the Vrishni and 
Andhaka vamsas, led by Vajra and accompanied by the women of the royal 
household, offer tarpana, oblations of water, to the departed Mahatman who 
had been the father of the Avatara in this world. 

After scrupulously performing the solemn last rites for Vasudeva, O 
Lord of the Bharatas, Arjuna makes his melancholy way to the place of the 
Vrishni slaughter. Seeing all around him the bodies lying in the savage 
attitudes of violent death, the Kuru prince is further convulsed with anguish. 
However, mastering himself, he does what is required of him; he gathers the 
ghastly and bloody remains, has them also cremated and orders the last rites 
to be properly performed for all the slain. The rites are performed and 
tarpana offered in order of seniority for those heroes slain by thunderbolts 
that sprang from the eraka reeds by the curse of the Rishis. 


At last, Arjuna seeks out the mortal remains of Rama and Krishna, and 
has these also cremated by men skilled at the task. Thus, after duly and 
faultlessly performing the sraddha rites for the dead Yadavas, Arjuna 
mounts his chariot and sets out for Indraprastha on the seventh day after his 
arrival. 

The widows of the Vrishni heroes, wailing aloud, follow the high- 
souled son of Pandu in carriages and palanquins drawn by bullocks, mules 
and camels. It is a cavalcade of bleakness and grief. The servants of the 
Vrishnis, their horsemen and their chariot-mounted guards, too, form part of 
the procession. At Arjuna’s command, all the people of Dwaraka, and of the 
entire Anarta country, go with that stricken train, now comprising women, 
children and the aged, devoid of Kshatriya heroes. 

Warriors who fought from the backs of elephants like grey hillocks 
lumber along with common foot soldiers and reserves. The children of the 
Andhaka and the Vrishni races follow Arjuna in silence. The Brahmanas 
and Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and wealthy Sudras all go forth, keeping before 
them the sixteen thousand women who had formed Krishna’s harem, and 
Vajra, the grandson of the Avatara who has left both them and the world. 
The widows of the other heroes of the Bhoja, the Vrishni, and the Andhaka 
vamsas, lordless now, set out with Arjuna, looking in numbers like a 
veritable ocean. Pritha’s son, that greatest of Maharathas, conqueror of 
hostile cities, escorts this oceanic crowd of Yadavas, still abounding in 
wealth. 

No sooner have all Dwaraka’s people left her walls and set foot on the 
mainland, than the sea, fathomless home of sharks and crocodiles, swells up 
in an inexorable tide and floods peerless Dwaraka, with all its vast wealth 
that her people could not carry away with them. The spectacle spurs the 
people of Dwaravati to lengthen their stride in fear, crying, ‘Ah, ever 
mysterious is the course of fate!’ 

Having left Dwaraka, and seen her submerge and vanish forever, 
Arjuna makes his way by slow marches, frequently stopping in pleasant 
woods and hills and by refreshing streams so that the Vrishni women can 
rest. Arriving finally in the country of the five rivers, the mighty 
Dhananjaya sets up a rich encampment in the midst of a land that abounds 
with corn and with kine and other animals. 

Watching the Yadava party arrive are bands of brigands, the Abhiras, 
who lurk in the surrounding forest. The bandits do not fail to notice that the 


women, children and old ones have only Arjuna to protect them, and are 
seized by temptation. The Abhiras gather in secret conclave in the darkness 
of the forest and confer, ‘There is just one bowman with them, Arjuna. The 
other Vrishni soldiers are weaklings and tired, besides. The rest are all old 
men, women and children.’ As if moved by fate, thousands of these vile 
men, armed with rough clubs and cudgels, descend in a horde upon the 
Vrishni concourse. They attack without warning, with murder in their hearts 
and terrifying leonine roars. Arjuna, who is at one end of the procession, 
turns swiftly to where the feral Abhiras have attacked the cavalcade. 

Smiling, the mighty-armed Kshatriya roars at the brigands, ‘Sinful 
wretches, forbear if you love your lives, or you will rue this day when I 
shred your bodies with my arrows.’ Despite his repeated warnings, the wild 
ones pay him no heed and instead fly at him. Arjuna attempts to string his 
celestial and indestructible bow, but finds he hardly has the strength to do 
so. By the time he manages to string Gandiva, the onslaught of the bandits 
has become furious. 

Arjuna then summons his Devastras but they will not come to him. 
Large as the concourse is, the Abhiras are upon them from every side. 
Arjuna is deeply shamed at being reduced to a helpless spectator as the 
Vrishni foot soldiers, elephant-warriors, and rathikas fail to stop the robbers 
from carrying away the women. Arjuna does his valiant best, but in his very 
sight, and before the other warriors, many of the royal and most beautiful 
Vrishni women are roughly dragged away by the coarse felons; others 
submit to going with the violent raiders. 

Supported by the servants of the Vrishnis, Arjuna showers arrows from 
the Gandiva on the Abhiras and kills many of them. However, all too 
quickly, his once-inexhaustible quivers are empty. The Kshatriya who was 
once beyond ordinary human confines now finds himself firmly in the clasp 
of a dark fate. Despair seizes great Arjuna, and Indra’s son begins to flail 
wildly at the bandits with his bow. 

Those Mlecchas, O Janamejaya, finally retreat, but taking with them 
many of the most beautiful and distinguished of the Vrishni and Andhaka 
women. All that Arjuna can do is accept it as the work of destiny. He 
breathes heavy sighs, brooding on how his astras would no longer appear at 
his bidding, how the Gandiva would hardly obey him, how his famed twin 
quivers suddenly fell empty, on the weakness that laid hold of him. At last 


he ceases all his efforts, admitting to himself that he no longer owned the 
prowess he once had. 

Continuing his journey with those of the Vrishni women that remain, 
and the wealth that the brigands had failed to plunder, Arjuna arrives in 
Kurujangala, the land of the Kurus. He establishes in different parts of the 
country those who remain of the Vrishnis. He establishes Kritavarman’s son 
in the city called Marttikavat, with the women that remain of the Bhoja 
king. Escorting the rest, with their children and old men and women, the 
son of Pandu establishes in the city of Indraprastha those who are bereft of 
all Kshatriya heroes of their own. 

Arjuna brings Satyaki’s beloved son, the righteous Yuyutsu, with a 
company of old men and children and women to the banks of the Saraswati 
and settles them there. The rule of Indraprastha is given to Vajra. The 
widows of Akrura state their intention of retiring into the forest. Vajra begs 
of them to desist, but they do not listen to him. 

Rukmini, the Princess of Gandhara, Saibya, Haimavati and Queen 
Jambavati choose to immolate themselves in sati. Satyabhama and 
Krishna’s other wives go into the forest, O King, resolved to set themselves 
to tapasya. They begin to live on fruits and roots and pass their time in the 
contemplation of Hari. Going beyond the Himavat, they live in the sacred 
place called Kalpa. 

The men who followed Arjuna from Dwaravati are divided into groups, 
and bestowed upon Vajra. Having done, his best in the circumstances, 
Arjuna, his eyes ever bathed in tears, takes himself to the asrama of Krishna 
Dwaipayana, his grandsire Vyasa. There he sees the Island-born Rishi 
seated at his ease.” 


CANTO 8 


V aisampayana said, “As Arjuna enters the asrama of the Rishi of 

truth, he sees the son of Satyavati seated in a secluded spot. 
Approaching Vyasa of lofty vratas, knower of dharma, Arjuna declares 
himself, ‘I am Arjuna,’ and then awaits his pleasure. Satyavati’s son, 
endued with mighty tapasya and of tranquil soul, welcomes him and says, 
‘Please sit down.’ 

He notices how Partha is beside himself with grief, how his chest 
heaves with sighs. Vyasa asks him, ‘Have you been sprinkled with water 
from any person’s nails or hair, or the end of someone’s cloth, or from the 
mouth of a jar? Have you had improper sexual congress with any woman at 
the time of her flow? Have you killed a Brahmana? Have you been 
vanquished in battle? You look like one shorn of all prosperity. I do not 
know that you have ever been defeated in battle by anyone. Why then, O 
Bharatottama, this dejected aspect? I ask you to tell me why you are so 
direly afflicted, if indeed there is no harm in your doing so.’ 

Arjuna answers, ‘Krishna, he whose complexion was like a newly risen 
cloud, whose eyes were like a pair of large lotus-petals, has with his brother 
Rama cast off his body and ascended to Swarga. At Prabhasa, the very race 
of Vrishnis has perished through thunderbolts that sprang from eraka reeds 
through the curse of some great Brahmanas. Dreadful has that carnage been, 
and not a single hero escaped it. 

The Kshatriyas of the Bhoja, the Andhaka and the Vrishni vamsas, O 
Brahmana, all endowed with noble souls, great might and leonine pride, 
have slaughtered one another in battle. They who had arms like maces of 


iron, they who could bear the direst strokes of the heaviest clubs and the 
sharpest arrows, they have all been slain with blades of eraka grass. Ah, 
Mahamuni, see the perverse course of Time. Full five hundred thousand 
mighty-armed, invincible warriors have met with death in that encounter. I 
have no peace, thinking constantly of that carnage of the Yadava warriors of 
immeasurable tejas, and the death of the illustrious Krishna. 

The death of the wielder of Saranga is as incomprehensible to me as 
the drying up of the ocean, the dislocation of a mountain, the collapse of 
heaven’s vault, or of cooling through fire. Having lost the Vrishni heroes, I 
do not wish to remain in this world. Yet that is not all. Something further 
has transpired, even more frightful and painful than this, O you who own 
the greatest wealth, tapasya. I think ceaselessly of that, and my heart is 
breaking. 

In my very sight, O Tapasvin, thousands of noble Vrishni women were 
carried away by the Abhiras of the land of the five waters who assailed us. 
When I took up my bow, I found myself unequal to even stringing it. The 
strength that was always in my arms vanished clean away. O great Rishi, I 
summoned my devastras but not one would come to me! And then, my own 
arrows were depleted and I had not a single shaft left. 

Ah, never again will I see that Govinda of immeasurable soul, of four 
arms, wielding the Sankha, the Chakra and the Gada, clad in yellow robes, 
his dark complexion and his eyes like lotus-petals. Bereft of my Govinda, 
what have I to live for, dragging my life on in sorrow? Alas, he who once 
graced my chariot-head, my reins in his divine hands, his godly form 
resplendent and mighty before me, consuming all our enemies as we 
coursed along. Never again will I see him who, through his mystic tejas, 
consumed all the hostile troops arrayed against us, leaving me to merely 
strike them down with arrows from the Gandiva. My head spins, O 
Narottama, I am pierced by grief, and peace has fled far from me. 

I do not have the mettle to live on without my heroic Janardana. As 
soon as I heard that Vishnu had left the Earth, my eyes grew dim and all 
things disappeared from my sight into a haze. Greatest of great Rishis, I beg 
you help me! Tell me what is good for me now, for I am now a wanderer 
with an empty heart, who has lost his kinsmen and his dearest possession.’ 

Vyasa says, “The Maharathas, the Vrishni and the Andhaka vamsas, 
were all consumed by the Brahmanas’ curse and have found felicity. O 
Kurusottama, great Arjuna, it does not become you to grieve at their death. 


That which has happened was ordained long ago; it was the destiny of those 
great Kshatriyas, and it could not have been otherwise. Krishna suffered it 
to happen, although he could easily have foiled it. Krishna could alter the 
very course of the universe with all its mobile and unmoving creatures. 
What then of a curse, even of the greatest Brahmanas? 

He who once sat at your chariot head, four-armed and with his discus 
and mace, through his love for you, was none other the ancient Rishi 
Narayana. That Mahatman of the large eyes, having lightened the burden of 
the Earth, cast off his body and has returned to his realm on high. Through 
you also, O Purushottama, with Bhima to help you, and the twins, has the 
great task of the gods been accomplished. Best of the Kurus, I regard you 
and your brothers as crowned with the highest success, for you have indeed 
accomplished the great purpose of your lives. The time has come for you to 
leave this world; and this is the course, O mighty one, that is best for you 
now. 

Understanding and prowess and foresight, O Bhaarata, arise when the 
days of prosperity have not been exhausted and disappear when the hour of 
adversity comes. Time the root cause, indeed, the seed of the universe, 
Dhananjaya. It is Time, again, that withdraws everything at its pleasure. 
Through Time one gains might and through Time loses it. Through Time 
one becomes a master and rules others, then becomes a servant, at the 
behest of others. 

Your weapons, having achieved success, have departed to the place 
they came from. They will once again come into your hands when it is time 
for them to return. And now, truly, the stage has come, O Bhaarata, for all 
of you to attain to the highest goal. That is what I believe will be best for 
you all now, O Bhaarata.’ 

Having heard the words of Tejasvin Vyasa, Partha takes his leave of 
him and returns to the city named after the elephant. Entering it, the 
Kshatriya goes to Yudhishtira and tells him whatever transpired in Dwaraka 
and with the Vrishnis.” 


The end of Mausala Parva 


BOOK 17 
Mahaprasthanika Parva 


CANTO 1 


A UM. Bowing down to Narayana and Nara, foremost of Purushas, 
and to the Devi Saraswati, I invoke the spirit of Jaya! 

Janamejaya said, “Hearing Arjuna’s account of how the Vrishni and the 
Andhaka vamsa perished through thunderbolts formed of eraka reeds, and 
of Krishna’s ascension to heaven, what do the Pandavas do?” 

Vaisampayana said, “Hearing the particulars of the great slaughter of 
the Vrishnis, Yudhishtira Dharmaraja sets his heart on leaving the world. He 
says to Arjuna, ‘O wise one, it is Time that cooks every creature in his 
cauldron. All we have experienced and witnessed has been because of being 
bound by the meshes of Kaala. You must also understand this.’ Arjuna, 
endorsing his wise brother’s view, only cries, “Ah, Time! Kaala!’ Seeing 
Arjuna’s resolution, Bhimasena and the twins also whole-heartedly concur. 
The Pandavas, resolute on retiring from the world in quest of punya, fetch 
Yuyutsu before them. Yudhishtira makes the Kuru kingdom over to the son 
of Dhritarashtra by his Vaisya wife. 

Installing on the throne your father Parikshit, in whose name the 
faithful Yuyutsu would rule until the young king was of age, the eldest 
Pandava, full of sorrow, says to Subhadra, ‘This son of your son will be the 
king of the Kurus. The survivor of the Yadus, Krishna’s grandson Vajra, has 
also been made a king. Parikshit will rule in Hastinapura and the Yadava 
prince will rule in Indraprastha. You must protect both of them equally, and 
never set your heart on the path of adharma.’ 

Saying this, Yudhishtira the Just, along with his brothers offers solemn 
tarpana to Krishna of the fathomless soul, as well as to Kunti’s brother 


Vasudeva, to Rama and all the others. He duly performs the sraddhas of all 
his departed kinsmen. The king holds a feast to honour the memory of Hari, 
and naming him repeatedly, plies with every manner of delicacy the Island- 
born Vyasa, Narada Rishi, Markandeya possessed of the wealth of great 
tapasya and Yajnavalkya of Bharadvaja’s vamsa. 

In honour of Krishna, he also gives away to the Dvijottamas many 
priceless jewels and gemstones, robes and rich garments, villages, horses 
and chariots, and female slaves by the multitude. He calls together the 
people of Hastinapura, appoints the wise Kripa to be the Acharya and Guru 
to Parikshit, and gives the young prince into his care to be his sishya. When 
this is formally done, Yudhishtira summons all his subjects, the people of 
Hastinapura as well as those from the provinces, and tells them that he and 
his brothers intend to retire from the world. 

Hearing this, panic and anxiety sweep through the great crowd. “This 
should never be!” they remonstrate to him. Yudhishtira, profound knower of 
the changing ways of time, pays their protests no heed and instead 
persuades them to accept what he has decided is the best and true course for 
his brothers and himself. 

Yudhishtira and his brothers prepare in earnest to achieve the end upon 
which they have set their hearts: to leave the world. Dharmaputra 
Yudhishtira casts off his royal ornaments and robes, and puts on austere 
valkala, rough cloth worn from tree-bark. Bhima, Arjuna and the twins and 
Draupadi also discard their finery, O King, to don the garb of ascetics. They 
perform the ordained rituals of initiation and those Purushottamas then 
quench in water the sacred Agnis they have worshipped daily all these 
years. 

When the royal women of the Kuru household and the people of the 
city see the Pandavas and Draupadi clad in valkala and smeared with ashes, 
they begin to weep aloud. They are reminded of another day, many years 
ago, when the five brothers, and Panchali making a sixth, all roughly clad, 
left Hastinapura after they lost everything at the game of dice. 

However, the sons of Pandu themselves are full of anticipation. No 
other course is possible for them after the extinction of the Yadavas, and 
when Yudhishtira has set his heart upon relinquishing the worldly life. The 
five brothers, with Draupadi, set out on their final journey. As they are 
leaving, a dog joins their small company, forming its seventh member. And 
so does Yudhishtira Dharmaraja the Magnificent depart the city of the 


elephant, at the head of a party of seven. The people and the women of the 
royal household follow them for some distance. But none venture again to 
persuade the king to change his mind. Finally, the people of Hastinapura 
and Anarta turn back. 

Kripa and some others of importance stand around Yuyutsu, who will 
now rule. Ulupi, the daughter of the Naga king, returns to her home in the 
waters of the Ganga, O Kurusottama, and the princess Chitrangada too sets 
out for her home, the capital of Manipura. The grandmothers and aunts of 
Parikshit centre themselves around him. 

The Pandava Mahatman and their queen Panchali of great fame 
observe the prescribed fast and set out with their faces towards the east. 
Setting themselves on the path of Yoga, those noblest ones traverse 
numerous countries, rivers and seas, resolved to observe the dharma of 
vairagya, renunciation. Yudhishtira always walks at the head of the 
company. Behind him walks Bhima; after Bhima, Arjuna; then come the 
twins in order of birth; and behind them, O Janamejaya Bharatashreshta, 
comes Draupadi, first among all women, beautiful with her dark skin and 
eyes like lotus-petals. Following the Pandava company is the dog. 

Walking on, those heroes reach the vicinity of the sea of red waters. 
Dhananjaya has not yet abandoned his celestial bow, the Gandiva, O king, 
nor his twin inexhaustible quivers, for he is still compelled by the 
attachment men have for the possessions they value most. 

There on the shore of the western ocean, the Pandavas behold Agni 
Deva, the God of Fire, barring their way like a hill. Standing before them in 
his embodied form, the God of seven flames addresses the sons of Pandu: 
‘Heroic sons of Pandu, know me to be the God of Fire. Yudhishtira 
Mahabaho, O Bhimasena Parantapa, O Arjuna, and you indomitable twins, 
hear me! Kurusottamas, with the might of Arjuna and of Narayana himself, 
I am the god who consumed the Khandava vana. Phalguna can go into the 
forest only after giving up the noble Gandiva. He no longer has any need 
for it. The precious Chakra belonging to Krishna Mahatman has 
disappeared from the world. When the time comes again, it will return into 
his hands. This Gandiva, greatest of bows, I obtained from Varuna for 
Partha. Now let him make it over to Varuna himself.’ 

All Arjuna’s brothers urge him to do as the Fire God says. Dhananjaya 
casts into the waves both the bow and the two inexhaustible quivers and 
Agni Deva, his task accomplished, vanishes from before their eyes. 


Now the sons of Pandu turn their faces to the south and journey in that 
direction. Along the coast of the salt sea, those princes of the Bhaarata 
vamsa travel to the south-west, arriving where the wondrous and 
magnificent city of Dwaravati once stood, now vanished into the ocean 
deeps. Turning then to the north, those heroes continue their final yatra. 
Observing Yoga all the while, they intend to make a pilgrimage across the 
face of the Earth.” 


CANTO 2 


V aisampayana said, “Immersed in Yoga, their senses restrained, the 

sons of Pandu journey north until they see majestic Himavat. 
Crossing the sacred range, they see a vast desert of sand stretch out before 
them and, beyond, the fabled peak Meru, the foremost mountain of the 
world. 

Rapt in dhyana, they begin to climb the mountain. Suddenly, Draupadi 
falls away from Yoga, and drops down dead. Bhimasena of matchless 
strength turns to his brother Yudhishtira Dharmatma in anguish and 
demands, ‘O Parantapa, never during her life did this princess sin in any 
way. Tell us why she has now fallen to her death!’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘O best of men, though we were all equally her 
husbands, she always harboured in her heart a partiality for Arjuna. What 
has happened to her today is the fruit of that bias.” And without a backward 
glance Yudhishtira, that taintless man of dharma, continues climbing, his 
being indrawn, focused in dhyana. 

When they have climbed a little further, Sahadeva of great intelligence 
abruptly falls down, all life extinct. Bhima asks the king, in anguish, ‘Our 
brother Sahadeva served us all with the utmost humility. Ah, why has 
Madravati’s son fallen to his death?’ Yudhishtira says, ‘He always felt that 
none was his equal in intelligence and wisdom. It is for that fault that this 
Kshatriya has fallen.’ Saying no more, and never so much as glancing back 
to where his younger brother had fallen, Yudhishtira continues to climb, his 
surviving brothers and the dog following. 


Then the resplendent Nakula, whose love for his kin is immense, 
himself falls away from dhyana and collapses, lifeless. Bhima turns again to 
Yudhishtira in despair and cries, ‘Our Nakula was a man of immaculate 
dharma. He always obeyed us without a murmur or question. No man alive 
was as handsome as he. And now he has also fallen by the way and is dead. 
Why, Yudhishtira?’ 

Yudhishtira says calmly, “Nakula was indeed of righteous soul and the 
best among all men of intelligence. Yet he, too, had a grave flaw, for he 
believed he was superior to all in physical beauty. It is for his vanity that 
Nakula has fallen to his death. Know this well, Vrikodara. Whatever has 
been ordained for a man, O Kshatriya, that he must inexorably endure.’ And 
Yudhishtira continues his climb. 

Next falls Pandu’s son Swetavahana, Arjuna of the white steeds, his 
heart giving way completely to grief. When that invincible Parantapa, 
foremost of men, with the energy of Sakra, is on the point on death, Bhima 
asks Yudhishtira, ‘I do not remember a single lie ever having been spoken 
by this Mahatman. Not even in jest did he ever utter a falsehood. What, 
then, is the evil whose consequence this is?’ 

Yudhishtira replies, ‘Arjuna boasted that he would consume all our 
enemies in a single day but he did not accomplish what he said. He was 
proud of his archery and disdained all other masters of the bow. Hence he 
has fallen. One who wishes for felicity should not indulge in such hubris.’ 

Saying this, Yudhishtira continues to climb the mountain. All at once 
the mighty Bhima too falls down. As he feels life ebbing away, he asks 
Yudhishtira the Just, ‘O my king, look, I, who was ever your darling, have 
fallen too. Tell me if you know why,’ Yudhishtira says, ‘You frequently 
boasted of your strength, and you were gluttonous, never attending to others 
around you. It is for that, O Bhima, that you have fallen.’ 

Saying no more, Yudhishtira walks on without looking back. Now he 
has only one companion, the dog I have often mentioned to you, still 
following at his heels.” 


CANTO 3 


V aisampayana said, “When Yudhishtira has gone a little further, earth 

and sky suddenly resound with a loud noise. Indra descends from 
his vimana and invites Yudhishtira to climb into it. Yudhishtira Dharmaraja 
says to the god of a thousand eyes, ‘My brothers have all fallen on the way 
here. They must go with me. Without them I do not wish to enter 
Swargaloka, O Lord of all the Devas. The delicate Panchali, who deserves 
ever comfort, should go with us, O Purandara. It is fitting for you to allow 
this.’ 

Indra says, “You will see your brothers in Devaloka, for they have got 
there before you. Verily, you shall see all of them there, with Draupadi. Do 
not yield to grief, O King of the Bharatas. Having cast off their human 
bodies, they have gone to my realm. As for you, it has been ordained that 
for your taintless dharma you will enter Swarga in your own body.’ 

Yudhishtira says, “O Lord of Past and Present, this dog is devoted to 
me. He must come with me, for my heart is full of tenderness for him.’ 
Indra replies, “You have won today the felicity of Swarga, O King— 
immortality and a condition equal to mine, prosperity extending in all 
directions, and lofty success. Leave behind this dog; there will be no cruelty 
in that, I assure you.’ Yudhishtira says, “O you of a thousand eyes, of 
righteous conduct, it is difficult for me to abandon dharma. I do not desire 
that prosperity for which I must forsake one devoted to me.’ Indra says, 
‘There is no place in Swarga for people with dogs, and the Krodhavasas 
take away all the punya of such people. Reflect on this, O Yudhishtira 
Dharmaraja, and leave the animal. There is no cruelty in that.’ 


Yudhishtira says, “It has been said that it is infinitely sinful to abandon 
one who is devoted—equal to the sin of killing a Brahmana. Hence, O great 
Indra, I shall not abandon this dog today, certainly not from wanting for 
myself the happiness of Swarga. I have always sworn never to forsake 
anyone who is devoted to me, who seeks my protection from destitution, 
anyone in distress, or who is frightened, or weak and helpless, anyone who 
comes to me to save his life, or, indeed anyone who comes to me for refuge. 
And I will never break this vow as long as I live.’ 

Indra says, ‘Whatever gifts are made, or sacrifices spread out, or 
libations poured on the sacred fire, if they are so much as seen by a dog, are 
taken by the Krodhavasas. It is imperative for you, therefore, to abandon 
this dog. By doing so you will attain Devaloka, the realm of the gods. 
Having abandoned your brothers and Panchali, O Kshatriya, you have 
acquired a realm of great felicity through your own deeds. Why are you so 
confused? You have renounced everything; why not, then, this dog?’ 

Yudhishtira says, ‘It is well known in all the worlds that with the dead 
there is neither friendship nor enmity. When my brothers and Draupadi 
died, I could not revive them. Hence it was that I abandoned them. I never 
forsook them as long as they were alive. To affright one that has sought 
protection, to kill a woman, to steal what belongs to a Brahmana, and to 
injure a friend—each of these four, O Sakra, I believe to be equal to 
forsaking one that is devoted.’ 

At these words of Yudhishtira the Just, the dog stands transformed and 
refulgent: it is Dharma Deva himself. The God of Truth says to him in 
sweet tones of approval, “You are well-born indeed, O King of kings, and 
truly possess the intelligence and uprightness of Pandu. You have 
compassion for all creatures, O Bhaarata, of which this is a bright example. 
Once I tested you in Dwaita vana, O son, beside a lake where your brothers 
of great prowess seemed to lie dead before you. When I offered to revive 
one of your brothers, you passed over Bhima and Arjuna and asked for 
Nakula’s life instead, saying than if he lived at least one of Madri’s sons 
would be preserved. 

But today you have surpassed yourself, Yudhishtira; you have 
renounced the chariot of the celestials and Swarga itself for the sake of a 
devoted dog! O king, there is no one in Heaven that is your equal. Hence, O 
Bhaarata, all the realms of inexhaustible felicity will be yours. You have 


won them, O Kurusottama, and beyond all doubt yours will be a most 
divine and transcendent reward.’ 

Dharma and Indra, the Maruts, and the Aswins, other deities and the 
Devarishis now make Yudhishtira climb into Indra’s vimana. The Gods and 
other divine ones can go anywhere in the three realms at will in their own 
vimanas. Yudhishtira, perpetuator of Kuru’s race, flies to Devaloka in 
Indra’s chariot in a blaze of splendour. 

Now Narada, most eloquent of all Devarishis, of fathomless tapasya, 
knower of all the worlds, says in that gathering of gods in Swarga, 
“Yudhishtira has surpassed all the Rayjarishis of old who are here in 
Devaloka, even the greatest of them, by his conduct and achievement. He 
has covered the worlds with his fame and splendour and by his wealth of 
immaculate dharma, and that is how he alone has attained to Swarga in his 
human body. None else besides this son of Pandu has ever achieved this.’ 

Hearing Narada’s praise, the Dharmatma salutes all the Devas and 
Rajarishis and says simply, ‘Wherever my brothers are, happy or miserable, 
I have but one wish, my lords, to go straight to them. I have no desire to go 
anywhere else, O great ones.’ 

Indra, king of the Devas, says to Yudhishtira, ‘Do you, O King of 
kings, live in this blissful place, won through your peerless dharma and 
noble deeds. Why do you still cherish human affections? You have attained 
to a great reward, the like of which no other man ever has. Your brothers, O 
delighter of the Kurus, have also won regions of felicity. Yet, human 
affections and attachments still trammel you. This is Swarga. Behold these 
celestial Rishis and Siddhas who have attained to the world of the Devas.’ 

Wise Yudhishtira answers the Deva king, saying again, “O Conqueror 
of Daityas, I do not aspire to dwell anywhere separated from my brothers. I 
want to go where they have gone. I want to go to where that best of women 
has gone, my statuesque dark Draupadi of great wisdom and virtue.’” 


The end of Mahaprasthanika Parva 


BOOK 18 
Swargarohanika Parva 


CANTO 1 


A UM. Bowing down to Narayana and Nara, foremost of Purushas, 

and to the Devi Saraswati, I invoke the spirit of Jaya! Janamejaya 
said, “Having reached Swarga, what realms did my grandsires, the 
Pandavas and the sons of Dhritarashtra, attain? I am eager to hear this. You 
know all things, having been taught by the great Rishi Vyasa of marvellous 
accomplishments.” 

Vaisampayana said, “Listen to what your grandsires, Yudhishtira and 
others, did after attaining the realm of the Gods. Arriving in Devaloka, in 
Indra’s resplendent sabha, Yudhishtira Dharmaraja sees, seated upon a 
majestic throne, Duryodhana, wearing all the signs of glory belonging to 
Kshatriya heroes, blazing with effulgence like the sun, amidst many deities 
of lustrous splendour and Sadhyas of righteous deeds. 

Seeing Duryodhana thus glorified, rage fills Yudhishtira and he turns 
his face away, saying, ‘I have no wish to share the realms of felicity with 
Duryodhana, stained as he was by greed and bereft of foresight. It was on 
his account that friends and kinsmen from across the world were 
slaughtered by us, upon whom he inflicted untold suffering in the 
wilderness. It was because of him that our wife, the princess of Panchala, 
Draupadi of unsullied aspect, was dragged into the midst of the Kuru sabha 
before all our elders. Devas, I have no wish to even look at Suyodhana. I 
want to go where my brothers are.’ 

Narada, smiling, said to him, ‘It should not be thus, O King of kings. In 
Swargaloka, all enmities cease. O Mahabaho Yudhishtira, do not speak so 
about King Duryodhana. Listen to me. Here sits your cousin Suyodhana. He 


is worshipped with the gods by all those men of dharma and the greatest 
kings of yore who are now denizens of Heaven. By having his body poured 
as a libation into the fire of war, he has attained the end found by Kshatriyas 
who die in battle. It is true that you and your brothers, veritable gods on 
earth, were ceaselessly persecuted by him. Yet, through his observance of 
Kshatriya dharma, he has attained this divine realm. This Bhumipala was 
never once afraid during the dreadful war fraught with terror. 

My son, you should not harbour in your heart the trials and griefs you 
endured on account of the game of dice. It does not become you to 
remember the afflictions of Draupadi; it does not become you to recall the 
other woes that were yours in consequence of what your kinsmen did, either 
in the deep forest or in battle. Go and meet Suyodhana in accord with the 
canons of courtesy. This is Swarga, O Lord of men. There can be no 
enmities here.’ 

Though Narada has spoken thus to him, Yudhishtira, Mahabuddhi, still 
demands to know, ‘If these celestial regions be reserved for Duryodhana, 
the sinner who destroyed his friends and laid waste the world, with all her 
horses and elephants and men, the devil who burned us with wrath and so 
turned our hearts to horrible revenge, I want to see the place which my 
brothers have attained, those great souls of firm vratas, who always kept 
their word, who were truthful and honest and distinguished for their valour. 

Tell me where I can find Karna, noblest of men, the son of Kunti, 
whom no one could vanquish in battle, Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki, the sons 
of Dhrishtadyumna and all the other Kshatriyas who died while observing 
Kshatriya dharma. Where are those Lords of Earth, O Brahmana? I do not 
see them here, O Narada. I want to see Virata and Drupada and the other 
great Kshatriyas led by Dhrishtaketu. I want to see the Panchala prince 
Sikhandi, the sons of Draupadi, and Abhimanyu, the irresistible warrior.’” 


CANTO 2 


¢ eave udhishtira says, “You gods, I see neither Radha’s son of 
immeasurable prowess here, nor my other great brothers, nor 
Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas, those Maharathas who also poured their 
bodies as libations on the fire of battle, those kings and princes who met 
with death for my sake in war. Where are those tameless and fierce heroes 
who were like tigers in strength? Have those best of men acquired this 
divine world? Only if they have, O Devas, shall I dwell here with them. If 
those kings among men have not attained this auspicious and eternal realm, 
then know, you Gods, that without those brothers, friends and kinsmen of 
mine, I will not remain here. 

While I performed the water rites after the war, I heard my mother’s 
bidding, “Do you offer tarpana to Karna, for he was your brother.” Ever 
since I heard those words, grief consumes me—ah, it burns my very soul. It 
pierces me incessantly that when I noticed how Karna’s feet were so like 
the feet of Kunti, I did not immediately understand who he was and 
surrender myself to his command, my older brother of immeasurable soul, 
that Parantapa without equal. If Karna and we had stood together, not even 
the hosts of Indra could have vanquished us in battle. Wherever that son of 
Surya is, I want to see him! Alas, that I did not know he was our brother 
and had Arjuna kill him, for it was him I feared above every other enemy 
on the field. 

And my Bhima, of terrible prowess, dearer to me than my life-breaths, 
Arjuna, too, who was like Indra himself, the twins who resembled Yama in 
person on the field—I must see them all. I yearn to see our queen, the 


Princess of Panchala, who was always as righteous as she was beautiful 
above every other woman. I have no wish to remain here, for I tell you 
truly, O greatest of gods, what is any Swarga to me if I am without my 
brothers? Why, this for me is no heaven at all.’ 

The lustrous Devas say, ‘If you so long to be there, then go to your 
brothers, O son, without delay. At the command of Indra, we are ready to 
do as you ask.’ The Gods command the Devaduta, the messenger of 
Swarga, ‘Take Yudhishtira to his friends and kinsmen.’ They two set out 
together, the royal son of Kunti and the celestial messenger, for the place 
where they are whom Yudhishtira wants to see. 

The messenger walks ahead, with Yudhishtira following. Soon the path 
they tread grows sinister and inauspicious, surely a passage trodden by 
sinners. Mantled in heavy darkness, it has human hair and moss for its 
grass. A stench of decay hangs heavy; both sides of the trail are mired with 
raw flesh and blood and abound with vermin—stinging gnats, flies and 
hornets, while fearsome bears stalk the awful passage. 

Rotting corpses, bones and hair lie all around them, swarming with 
worms and insects. Pits of fire fringe the pathway. Crows, vultures and 
other dreadful birds with beaks of iron, fly and wheel on every side, and 
evil spirits, Pisachas with long mouths pointed like needles, Over the scene 
loom mountains swathed in gloom, lofty as the Vindhyas. Human corpses 
are strewn everywhere, smeared with fat and blood, dismembered, with raw 
wounds where flesh has been savagely cut away from their arms and thighs, 
or with entrails torn out. 

Along that path rank with the stench of rotting corpses, and hideous 
with countless horrors, walks the Dharmaraja, his spirit plunged in 
darkness, his mind in a frenzy. He sees a river full of boiling water, 
impossible to cross, and a forest of trees whose leaves are sharp swords and 
razors. He sees deserts of smoking hot sand, and rocks and stones of iron. 
Great cauldrons of iron stand around, all full of boiling oil, and Kuta- 
salmalika trees with thorns like thick needles, excruciating to the touch. All 
around him, Kunti’s son sees sinners being savagely tortured. Oppressed by 
the foulness of the vile place, Yudhishtira asks the Devaduta, his guide, 
‘How far are we to go along this path? You must tell me where my brothers 
are. And tell me also, which realm of the gods this can be.’ The messenger 
stops and says, ‘The denizens of Swarga commanded me to stop in this very 


place, for thus far is your way. If you are tired, O King of kings, you may 
return with me.’ 

Yudhishtira is benumbed by the horrors and stench of this monstrous 
place and turns back, resolved to retrace his footsteps. But at that very 
moment he hears heart-rending lamentations all around him, piteous cries 
from the darkness. 

‘O Dharmaputra, O Rajarishi, O you of sacred origins! O son of Pandu, 
be merciful to us and remain here for a few moments.’ 

‘At your coming, invincible one, a delightful breeze has begun to blow, 
bearing the fragrance of your person and bringing us some relief.’ 

‘O greatest of kings, seeing you is balm to our tormented spirits.’ 

‘O son of Pritha, let our comfort last a few moments longer. Ah, we 
beg you, stay, O Bhaarata, for even a short while.’ 

‘As long as you are here, our suffering is assuaged and we find some 
solace.’ 

Hearing all around him those voices of souls in agony, the 
compassionate Yudhishtira is deeply moved and exclaims, ‘Alas for their 
anguish!’ The king stands still. It seems to the Pandava that the voices 
which call out to him in such desolation are familiar, although he cannot yet 
distinguish them. Dharma’s son calls out, “Who are you? And why are you 
here?’ 

They answer him from everywhere: 

‘Tam Karna!’ 

‘Tam Bhima!’ 

‘Tam Arjuna!’ 

‘Tam Nakula!’ 

‘Tam Sahadeva!’ 

‘Tam Dhrishtadyumna!’ 

‘Tam Panchali!’ 

“We are the sons of Draupadi!’ 

Even thus, O King, do those voices call back to Yudhishtira. 

Yudhishtira cries out to himself, “Ah, what perverse destiny is this! 
What are the sins of these pure and noblest ones, Karna and the sons of 
Draupadi, and the slender-waisted Princess of Panchala, that they have been 
cast into this foetid and gruesome hell! 

I cannot think of any sins that these souls of dharma have committed 
that would consign them to this stinking, loathsome pit. And what noble 


deed did Dhritarashtra’s son Suyodhana, and all his wretched adherents do, 
that he has been invested with such grace and prosperity? Why, he, 
unabashed sinner, is being adored like a god in Indra’s glorious sabha, while 
these truly deserving ones find themselves in hell. 

My brothers were heroes, devoted to the truth and to the Vedas; they 
never violated Kshatriya dharma; they were unfailingly righteous in 
everything they did. Each one performed sacrifices and gave generously to 
Brahmanas throughout their lives. Ah, this cannot be! Am I asleep or 
awake? Am I conscious or is all of this a delusion of my fevered mind?’ 

In turmoil, overwhelmed by woe, Yudhishtira is immersed for a long 
time in these sombre reflections. Then, the royal Dharmaputra gives way to 
wrath and rails against the gods, against Dharma himself. Plagued by the 
abominable stench, he says to the duta, ‘Return to those whose messenger 
you are. Tell them that I shall not go back to where they are. My presence 
has brought some comfort to my afflicted brothers and I will remain here 
with them.’ 

The celestial messenger returns to the court of the king of the Devas, 
Indra of a hundred sacrifices, and tells him what Yudhishtira did and said. 
Indeed, O ruler of men, he spares no detail of all that Dharma’s son said!” 


CANTO 3 


V aisampayana said, “Yudhishtira Dharmaraja, son of Pritha, has not 

remained in that hell for more than a moment when, all the Devas 
with Indra at their head arrive there, O Kurusottama, including Dharma 
Deva in his embodied form. As soon as those resplendent deities of 
sanctified and noble deeds appear, the darkness shrouding the place is 
dispelled. The tortured cries of sinners are silenced. 

The river Vaitarani, the thorny Salmali, the frightful cauldrons and 
boulders of iron, all vanish entirely. The repulsive dismembered corpses 
disappear. A delicious breeze, laden with heavenly fragrances, pure and 
cool, O Bhaarata, blows there now with the presence of the Gods. 

The Maruts, with Indra, the Vasus with the twin Aswins, the Sadhyas, 
the Rudras, the Adityas, and the other inhabitants of Swarga, along with the 
Siddhas and the great Rishis, all throng the place where Dharma’s royal son 
of great tejas stands. 

Indra of blazing glory comforts Yudhishtira: “Come, O Dharmaputra, 
Mahabaho, come, O Lord of men. The dark illusions are ended, O mighty 
one. You have now attained to final success, and eternal realms of felicity 
have become yours. Do not give in to anger, Yudhishtira—listen to me. 
Every king must of necessity witness and experience hell. Of both good and 
evil, there is abundance past reckoning. He who first enjoys the heavenly 
fruits of his good deeds must inexorably endure hell, when his punya is 
exhausted. On the other hand, he who first suffers Naraka, will later find 
Swarga without end. He whose sins are many enjoys heaven first, and then 
falls into hell. 


It is for this, O King, and wishing your weal, that I first sent you to first 
taste hell. Once, on Kurukshetra, you deceived your Acharya Drona by 
affirming that his son Aswatthama was dead. It was for that untruth that you 
were shown hell. Like you, Bhima and Arjuna, and Draupadi, all have been 
shown the place of sinners briefly, each for their own sins. O Lord of men, 
through that experience of horror, they have all been purged of their sins, as 
have all the kings and Kshatriyas who fought for and died during the great 
war. All of them are now in Swarga after their short tenure in darkness. 

Come now, and see them, O Bharatottama. Karna, mighty bowman, 
greatest of all wielders of weapons, for whom you grieve so sorely, has 
found the highest honour and bliss. Come, mighty Yudhishtira, and look at 
that radiant son of Surya. He is now in a station of his own. Kill this grief of 
yours, and behold your brothers and all the other noble kings who espoused 
your cause. They have all attained to their rightful places of lustrous 
felicity. 

Let the fever of your heart be dispelled, O son of the Kurus. Having 
endured a little torment first, abide with me from now on in joy, divested 
entirely of grief, all your sickness of heart dispelled. Enjoy the rewards of 
all your deeds of righteousness, O King, those realms of bliss that you have 
earned through your tapasya and all the daana that you have given so 
abundantly. 

Let Devas and Gandharvas, and celestial Apsaras, clad in wondrous 
raiment and adorned with splendid ornaments, wait upon you and serve 
you. Do you, now, Mahabaho, enjoy those worlds of splendour and majesty 
which have become yours by virtue of the Rajasuya yagna you performed, 
whose fruit has been enhanced by the blade of sacrifice and truth which you 
wielded as king of the Kurus. 

Come and enjoy the high fruits of all your penances, for the realms you 
have earned for yourself, O Yudhishtira, are loftier than those of other 
kings, O son of Pritha, they are equal to those of Harishchandra. Come, 
sport in bliss where the Rajarishi Mandhatri is, where the great Bhagiratha 
dwells, why, where Dushyanta’s son Bharata is—that is where you will 
abide in ineffable joy. Look, here is the celestial river sanctifying the three 
worlds—the Akasa Ganga. Enter her current, Yudhishtira, and you will find 
yourself in your own realms. Having bathed in this stream, you will be 
divested of all vestiges of your human, mortal nature. Indeed, you will be 


free from all conflict, your grief dispelled entire, your ailments all 
conquered.’ 

O Janamejaya, after Indra, Lord of the Devas, has said this much to 
Yudhishtira, the God of Righteousness, Dharma Deva, in his embodied 
form, addresses the Dharmaputra. ‘King of truth, O you of great wisdom, I 
am highly gratified in you, my son, by your devotion to me, by your 
truthfulness of speech, your forgiveness and your self-restraint. 

That was the third test to which I put you, O son of Pritha. You are 
indeed incapable, of being swerved from your nature or reason. My first 
trial of you was in the Dwaita vana, when you came to the lake there to 
recover a Brahmana’s arani twigs. You stood it well. I tested you once 
more, O son, in the shape of a dog, when your brothers and Draupadi had 
fallen upon Meru. And this was your final trial, when you, noblest king, 
said you would remain in Naraka for the sake of your brothers. 

Blessed Yudhishtira, you have been purified of all traces of sin. Now be 
at peace and be happy. Son of Pritha, your brothers were not such as to 
deserve hell in any way. All that you saw was an illusion created by Indra. 
Yet every king must once, for certain, behold hell, and for that reason have 
you briefly been subjected to this torment. 

O King, neither Arjuna nor Bhima, neither Sahadeva nor Nakula, and 
surely not Karna, all of them ever truthful and possessed of courage and 
valour beyond compare, could deserve to be sent to Naraka for any length 
of time. The princess Krishnaa too, O Yudhishtira, could never deserve that 
place of sinners. Come, come, O Bharatottama, greatest of the Bhaaratas, 
and behold Ganga who flows her sacred currents through the three worlds.’ 

That Rajarishi, your grandsire, goes with Dharma and all the other gods 
to the Akasa Ganga and, bathing in her sanctifying waters, ever adored by 
the Rishis, he casts off his human body. Assuming a celestial form, 
Yudhishtira Dharmarayja loses all enmity and grief. 

Surrounded by the deities, Yudhishtira leaves with his father Dharma, 
while the greatest Rishis utter his praises. Soon he arrives in a hallowed 
place where those foremost of men, those heroes, the Pandavas and the 
Dhartarashtras, all freed from mundane human wrath, have found and enjoy 
each his own lofty, illustrious status.” 


CANTO 4 


V aisampayana said, “Thus lauded by the Devas, the Maruts and the 

Rishis, Yudhishtira comes to where those other great Kurusottamas 
are. He sees Krishna first, in his true form, that of the Saguna Brahman. 
Yudhishtira recognizes him in his utmost glory because this Divine Form 
still resembles that of the Krishna he had known in the world of men. But 
here the Dark One is adorned with the Sudarshana Chakra and his other 
weapons, each embodied and terrible. He sees heroic Arjuna, also blazing 
with lustre and worshipping Krishna. They are Nara-Narayana, being 
adored by all the Devas. Seeing Yudhishtira, the two greatest of created 
Beings welcome him with due honour. 

In another place, Yudhishtira sees Karna, greatest of all wielders of 
weapons, as resplendent as a dozen Suryas. Elsewhere, he sees the mighty 
Bhimasena, who sits in the midst of the Maruts, he, too, shining with a great 
and divine form of light. Handsome and glorious, he sits beside Vayu, the 
Wind God, having found his ultimate goal and divine condition. In the 
quarter of the Aswins, Yudhishtira sees Nakula and Sahadeva, both radiant 
with their own effulgence. 

He sees Panchali, adorned with lotus garlands; having attained grace, 
she too sits in Swarga dazzling like the sun. Suddenly, Yudhishtira wants to 
ask her who she really is. [lustrious Indra answers his question. “This one is 
Sree herself. It was for your sake that she was born as the daughter of 
Drupada, into humankind, issuing not from any mother’s womb, O 
Yudhishtira, but from the sacred fire. She was created for your delight by 
the Trishulin, Lord Siva himself. She was born in the race of Drupada and 


all of you enjoyed her. Look at these five Gandharvas, glowing with the 
effulgence of flames—they were Draupadi’s sons by your brothers and you. 

Behold Dhritarashtra, the king of the Gandharvas, possessed of great 
wisdom. Know that he was born as your father Pandu’s elder brother. And 
this one here is your own eldest brother, the son of Kunti, with the brilliance 
of fire. The son of Surya, this greatest of men, was known in the world as 
Radha’s son. He now moves in the company of Surya Deva. Look upon 
him, and be glad. 

These resplendent ones here are all Sadhyas, Devas, Viswadevas and 
Maruts— behold, O King of kings, the mighty Maharathas of the Vrishnis 
and the Andhakas, those heroes among whom Satyaki was foremost, and 
these others here are the great Bhojas. 

And see here the mighty bowman Abhimanyu, Subhadra’s son, 
invincible in battle, who now remains with Soma Deva, the Moon God, of 
whom he is an amsa. Indeed, he is as softly lambent as the luminary of the 
night. Here is none other than the mighty bowman Pandu, now united 
forever with Kunti and Madri. Your sire frequently comes to me in his 
celestial vimana. Behold the royal Bhishma, son of Santanu, now back in 
the midst of the Vasus. And recognize this one by the side of Brihaspati as 
your Acharya Drona. 

These and other kings who fought the Great War on your part, O son of 
Pandu, now all walk with the Gandharvas or Yakshas or other heavenly 
beings. Some have attained to the status of Guhyakas, O King. Having cast 
off their mortal bodies, they have conquered Swarga through the punya they 
acquired through word, thought and deed during their lifetimes.’” 


CANTO 5 


anameyjaya said, “Bhishma and Drona, those two Mahatmans; the great 

King Dhritarashtra; Virata and Drupada, Sankha and _ Uttara; 
Dhrishtaketu and Jayatsena and King Satyajit; the sons of Duryodhana, and 
Sakuni’s son by Subala; Karna’s sons of great prowess; King Jayadratha of 
the Sindhus; Ghatotkacha and others whom you have not mentioned, heroic 
kings of burning glory—tell me for what period or time they remained in 
Heaven. O Dvijottama, was theirs an eternal place in Swarga? 

What was the end attained to by these greatest of men when their 
karma was exhausted and their lives came to an end? I ask you this eagerly 
because you see all things through your profound and searing tapasya.””’ 

Sauti said, ‘Thus questioned, the magnificent Vaisampayana, with leave 
from his master the Maharishi Vyasa, set himself to answer the king. 

Vaisampayana said, “Not everyone, O King of men, can return to his 
own true condition and nature at the end of his deeds —this is the essence of 
your deep question, Yudhishtira, and it is a worthy one. Hear, then, O King, 
about this mystery of the Gods, once discoursed upon by our guru Krishna 
Dwaipayana, the Island-born son of Parasara Muni, Veda Vyasa of fervid 
tejas, divine vision and great power, observer of stern austerities, whose 
understanding is fathomless, who is omniscient, and knows the end of all 
deeds, lives and karma. 

Bhishma of powerful energy and radiance returned to his original state 
of being a Vasu. You see eight Vasus before you now, O Lord of the Bharata 
vamsa. 


Drona, greatest among the descendants of Angiras, entered into 
Brihaspati. Hridika’s son Kritavarman entered the Maruts. Pradyumna 
entered the Rishi Sanatkumara, whence he had issued. Dhritarashtra gained 
the regions, so difficult of acquisition, which belong to Kubera, the Lord of 
Treasures. The famed Gandhari found the same realms as her husband. 

Pandu with both his wives went to Indraloka. Virata, Drupada and King 
Dhrishtaketu, as well as Nishatha, Akrura, Samba, Bhanukampa and 
Viduratha, Bhurisravas and Sala, King Bhuri and Kamsa, Ugrasena and 
Vasudeva, and Uttara, that foremost of princes, with his brother Sankha— 
all these great ones entered into the being of the Devas. 

Soma’s own son of great prowess, Varchas of mighty energy, was born 
as Abhimanyu, the son of Arjuna, that lion among men. Having fought the 
war in accord with Kshatriya dharma, with valour such as none else had 
ever been able to show, that mighty-armed and righteous-souled being 
returned to his originator Soma. Slain on the field of battle, Karna returned 
to his sire Surya. Sakuni was absorbed into Dwapara, of whom he was an 
amsa, and Dhrishtadyumna into Agni, from whom he sprang. The sons of 
Dhritarashtra were all Rakshasas of fierce might. Sanctified by death 
through weapons, those Mahatmans of prosperity all succeeded in attaining 
Swarga. 

Both Vidura, the Kshattri, and Yudhishtira entered into Dharma Deva, 
the God of Righteousness. The holy and most illustrious Ananta, born as 
Balarama, left the world of men and went back into sacred Patala, the world 
below Bhumi, where by the command of Brahma, the Grandsire of 
Creation, he supported the Earth through his Yoga shakti. Vasudeva was an 
amsa of that Eternal God of gods, the Devadeva called Narayana. 
Accordingly, he entered into Narayana. 

Sixteen thousand women had been Krishna’s wives in Dwaravati. 
When the time came, O Janamejaya, they committed jalasamadhi in the 
Saraswati. Casting off their human bodies, they returned to Swarga. 
Transformed again into the Apsaras they had always been, they went back 
into the presence of Vasudeva. 

Those most mighty Maharathas, Ghatotkacha and others who were 
slain in the Great War, returned to the condition of Devas or Yakshas. Those 
who fought on the side of Duryodhana are said to have been Rakshasas. 
Gradually, O King, they have all attained to exalted regions of felicity. 


Some of them have attained to the abode of Indra, some to that of Kubera of 
great intellect, and some to that of Varuna of the deeps. 

I have now recounted, O you of grand majesty, everything about the 
deeds and ends of both the Kurus and the Pandavas, O Bhaarata.’”’ 

Sauti said, ‘Hearing this greatest of Itihasas, the Mahabharata, O 
Dvijottamas, King Janamejaya was filled with wonder and reverence. His 
sacrificial priests then finished the remaining rites. Astika was filled with 
rejoicing at having rescued the Nagas. King Janamejaya then gratified all 
the Brahmanas at his Sarpa yagna with copious gifts and returned from 
Takshasila to the city named after the elephant. Those learned Brahmanas, 
thus worshipped by the king, returned, each to his own home and asrama. 

I have now told you everything that Vaisampayana narrated, at the 
command of his master Vyasa, to the king at his snake sacrifice. 

Called an Itihasa, a history, this Mahabharata is sacred, sanctifying and 
without peer. It was composed, O Brahmana, by the Maharishi Krishna 
Dwaipayana of truthful speech. He is omniscient, conversant with all the 
sacred ordinances, possessed of knowledge of all dharma, endowed with 
piety, capable of perceiving what is beyond the ken of the senses, pure of 
soul, having been cleansed by tapasya, possessed of the six highest 
attributes, and devoted to Sankhya Yoga. He composed this great Epic, 
seeing it all with divine and mystic vision purified and strengthened by the 
sacred lore. 

Vyasa did this wishing to spread the fame, throughout the world, of the 
Mahatman Pandavas, as well as of all the other Kshatriyas prodigiously rich 
in tejas. The learned man who recites this history on sacred days in the 
midst of an attentive audience is exorcised of every sin, conquers Swarga 
and attains to the Brahman. Anyone who listens with rapt attention to the 
narration of the whole of this, the fourth Veda, composed by the Island-born 
Krishna, will be cleansed of a million sins, even the gravest ones such as 
Brahmahatya, the killing of a Brahmana. 

Even a small portion of this Itihasa recited at a sraddha ceremony 
obtains inexhaustible sustenance for the Pitris of one who recounts it. The 
sins that one commits during the day with one’s senses or mind are all 
expiated before evening by reciting a portion of the Mahabharata. Whatever 
sins a Brahmana may commit at night with women are set at naught before 
dawn by reciting a portion of the Mahabharata. 


The exalted Bharata vamsa is the subject of this matchless Epic. Hence 
it is called the Bharata. And because of its profound import, it is called the 
Mahabharata. He who is versed in interpretations of this great treatise is rid 
of his every sin. Such a man lives in dharma, artha and kama, and attains to 
mukti also, O Lord of the Bhaarata vamsa. 

That which is found in this Itihasa occurs everywhere, and that which 
is not found here can be found nowhere else. This Itihasa among itihasas is 
also known by the name Jaya. It should be heard by all who desire moksha. 
It should be read by Brahmanas, by Kshatriyas and by women quick with 
children, so that he who desires Swarga attains to Heaven, he that wishes 
for mastery reaps victory, and the pregnant woman obtains a godsend for a 
child. 

The puissant Island-born Krishna, who is Mukti incarnate, and who 
will never have to return to this samsara, was impelled to further the cause 
of dharma in this world; thus did he compose the Mahabharata, as I have 
recounted to you. He created another, altogether vaster Mahabharata, 
containing sixty lakhs of verses. Thirty lakhs of these were given in 
Devaloka, where the Gods dwell. In Pitriloka, realm of the manes, a 
Mahabharata of fifteen hundred thousand slokas is current, while in the 
realm of the Yakshas a Bharata of fourteen lakhs is in usage. The 
Mahabharata that exists in the world of men is the one with a hundred 
thousand slokas. 

Narada recited the Mahabharata to the Devas; Asita-Devala to the 
Pitris; Suka to the Rakshasas and the Yakshas; and Vaisampayana to 
Manavas, human beings. This Itihasa is sacred and of high import, and 
regarded as equal to the Vedas. The man who hears this Itihasa in front of a 
Brahmana, O Saunaka, acquires both fame and the fruition of all his wishes. 
He who with earnest attention listens to a recitation of the Mahabharata 
attains to high success, through the punya attached to understanding even a 
very small portion of this Jaya. All sins are dissolved of one who recites or 
listens to this Itihasa with devotion. 

In former times, the great Rishi Vyasa, having composed this treatise, 
caused his son Suka to recite it with him, along with these four slokas: 
Thousands of mothers and fathers, and hundreds of sons and wives 
constantly enter the world and depart from it. Others too will arise and 
depart. There are thousands of occasions for joy and hundreds of occasions 


for fear. These affect only one that is ignorant, never one that is wise. With 
upraised arms I cry this aloud, but nobody hears me. 

From dharma comes artha, as well as kama. Why should not dharma, 
therefore, be courted? For neither pleasure, nor fear, nor greed, should 
anyone abandon dharma. Indeed, not for the sake of life itself should one 
forsake holy dharma. Dharma is eternal. Pleasure and pain are not eternal. 
The Jiva is eternal, although the Jiva being invested with a body is not. 

That man who, waking at dawn, reads this essential Savitri of the 
Bharata, acquires all the rewards attached to a full recitation of this Itihasa 
and ultimately attains to the highest Brahman. As the sacred Ocean and the 
Himavat mountain are both regarded as vast repositories of precious jewels, 
even so is this Mahabharata considered a treasure trove. 

The man of learning who recites this veritable Veda or Agama 
composed by the Sage earns wealth. There is no doubt that he who, with 
rapt attention, recites this Epic of the Bhaaratas, attains to high success. 
What need has that man of a sprinkling of the waters of Pushkara who 
attentively listens to the Mahabharata? This Itihasa is verily the nectar, the 
Amrita that fell from the lips of the Island-born. It is immeasurable, sacred, 
sanctifying, sin-cleansing and auspicious. 


CANTO 6 


anamejaya said, “O Holy One, what rites should the learned observe 

listening to the Mahabharata? What fruits are to be gained by hearing 
it? What deities are to be worshipped during the several paranas? What 
should be the gifts that one should make, great Vaisampayana, at every 
parva or sacred day of the narration? Who is qualified to recite the 
Mahabharata’? Answer me!” 

Vaisampayana said, “Attend, O King, to what the method is, and what 
the fruits are, O Bhaarata, that will spring from listening to a recitation of 
the Mahabharata. This, O King of kings, is indeed what you have asked me. 

The Mahabharata narrates the births of Rishis and Devas into the 
world, this Bhumi. The Devas of Heaven, O Bhumipala, came to this world 
for their sport and, having achieved their task, they returned once more to 
Swarga. In this treatise called Bharata, O foremost one of Bhaarata’s race, 
you will find gathered in a single space the eternal Rudras, the Sadhyas, and 
the Viswadevas; the Adityas, the two Aswin Kumaras, the Lokapalas, 
regents of the world, the Devarishis, the Guhyakas, the Gandharvas, the 
Nagas, the Vidyadharas, the Siddhas, the diverse Devas, the Self-born 
Brahman incarnate, as well as countless other Maharishis; the Hills and 
Mountains, Oceans and Seas and Rivers, the diverse tribes of Apsaras; the 
Planets, the Years, the Half-years, and the Seasons; and the whole universe 
of mobile and immobile beings, with all the Devas and Asuras. 

Harkening to their eminence, and the recitation of their names and 
achievements, even one who has committed the most terrible sins will be 
purified. When, with a concentrated soul and cleansed body, one has duly 


listened to the entire Itihasa, from beginning to end, one should make 
sraddha offerings, O Bhaarata, unto all those foremost of men and Gods and 
sages who have been mentioned in it. 

To the Brahmanas also, Lord of the Bharata vamsa, with due devotion 
and according to one’s ability and power, let generous gifts and diverse 
kinds of jewels and ornaments be given, and kine, and vessels of white 
brass for milking cows, and maidens decked with every ornament, and 
possessed of every accomplishment suited to kama, enjoyment, as well as 
diverse kinds of carriages and other conveyances, opulent mansions, plots 
of land and the finest cloths. 

Animals also should be given, such as horses and elephants in musth, 
and beds of great comfort, and covered palanquins borne on the shoulders 
of strong men, and well-adorned and equipped chariots. Whatever valuable 
and beautiful articles are found in a goodly home, whatever wealth you 
have, should be given away to Brahmanas. Indeed, one should give away 
one’s own self, wives and children! 

One who wants to hear the Mahabharata should listen to it without a 
doubting heart, with cheerfulness and joy; and as he listens to its narration, 
he should, according to the extent of his means, make gifts with great 
devotion. 

Listen to how a sincere man, devoted to dharma, who is self-restrained, 
pure in mind, and has a way of life conducive to purity, who is endowed 
with faith and who has subjugated anger, attains to success in the matter of 
a recitation of the Bharata. 

He should appoint as narrator one who is pure of body and body, 
whose life and conduct are pious and impeccable, who has complete 
mastery over his passions and is cleansed of all his sins, who is conversant 
with every branch of learning, who has full faith, who is free from malice, 
handsome and radiant in appearance and robed in white, self-restrained, 
truthful, and beloved of all for the gifts he makes and the honours which he 
receives wherever he goes. 

The Suta, seated at his ease, free from all bodily disorders, with rapt 
attention must recite the text at an even pace, neither too slowly nor too 
fast, without straining his voice—effortlessly and calmly, yet sonorously 
and energetically, never confusing the words and couplets, with diction and 
intonation rendering all the sixty-three letters of the alphabet clearly and 
flawlessly, from the eight places of their utterance. 


Bowing unto Narayana, and to Nara, that foremost of Purushas, as well 
as to the Devi Sarasvati, the spirit of Jaya should be first of all invoked. 

Listening to the Bharata, O King, narrated by a Pauranika of such 
excellence the listener, keeping all vratas after the initiatory rites of 
purification, acquires the most valuable fruits, both material and spiritual. 

On reaching the first Parana, the end of the first division of the 
narrative, the hearer should gratify Brahmanas with every manner of 
desirable gift. By doing this, he obtains the fruits of an Agnistoma yagna. 
He acquires a large celestial vimana, full of diverse orders of Apsaras who 
wait upon him. With his heart rapt in felicity and bliss, and with the Devas 
for company, he flies to Devaloka. 

When the second Parana is reached, the hearer acquires the fruits of the 
Atiratra vrata. He gains a vimana made entirely of precious gemstones. 
Wearing celestial garlands and robes, and anointed with unguents exuding a 
heavenly fragrance, he receives high honour in Swarga. 

When the third Parana is reached, he acquires the fruits of the 
Dwadasha vrata. Indeed, he dwells in Swarga for countless years, like a god 
himself. 

At the fourth Parana he acquires the fruits of the Vajapeya yagna. At 
the fifth, twice those fruits are his. Ascending a vimana that resembles the 
rising sun or a blazing fire, and with the Devas for his companions, he goes 
into Swarga and sports in great bliss for an untold number of years in 
Indra’s very halls. 

At the sixth Parana, twice, and at the seventh, thrice those rewards 
become his. Ascending a celestial chariot that resembles the summit of the 
Kailasa mountains in beauty and grandeur, which has a vedi, an altar, made 
of stones of lapis lazuli and other incomparable gemstones, with diverse 
objects of unearthly beauty all around, adorned with corals and other great 
and priceless stones, which flies at the will of the rider and is thronged with 
attentive Apsaras, he ranges through all the lokas of utmost felicity, like a 
second Surya. 

At the eighth Parana, he acquires the fruits of the Rajasuya yagna. He 
gains a vimana as lambent as the rising moon, to which are yoked steeds 
white as the rays of the moon and with the speed of thought. He is served 
by women of surpassing beauty, with faces more enchanting than the moon. 
He hears the music of the girdles that encircle their hips and the nupuras 


around their ankles. Sleeping with his head on the laps of such women of 
transcendent beauty, he awakes profoundly refreshed. 

At the ninth Parana, he acquires, O Bhaarata, the fruits of that greatest 
of all sacrifices, the Aswamedha yagna. Flying into Swarga in an even more 
splendid vimana, with a grand chamber covered with a canopy supported by 
columns of gold, furnished with a throne made of the purest lapis lazuli, 
with windows on all sides framed with pure gold, and attended by throngs 
of Apsaras, Gandharvas and other celestials, he blazes forth in splendour. 
Clad in divine garlands and robes, and adorned with celestial pastes, he 
sports in bliss, the gods his companions, like a Deva himself. 

Reaching the tenth Parana and gratifying Brahmanas, he gains a 
vimana fit for the dwelling of the most righteous, tinkling with innumerable 
bells and decked with flags and banners, furnished with a throne of precious 
gems with arches of lapis lazuli encased in nets of filigreed gold, with 
turrets of coral, and accompanied by Gandharvas and Apsaras skilled in 
singing and dancing. Crowned with a diadem the colour of fire, adorned 
with ornaments of gold, anointed with celestial sandalwood paste, draped in 
garlands made from unfading flowers plucked from the Nandana, he roves 
through all realms of Heaven, enjoying every transcendent pleasure and 
resplendent in person by the grace of the Devas. 

Thus accoutred and blessed, he receives high honour in Swarga for 
many long years. With Gandharvas in his company, for full twenty-one 
thousand years of the Devas, he sports in utmost bliss with Indra himself in 
the palace of Sakra. He ranges at his pleasure through the countless lokas of 
the Gods, riding on wondrous chariots and magnificent carriages, and 
surrounded by Apsaras of surpassing beauty. 

He is able to travel to the abode of Surya Deva, of Soma, and even of 
Siva, O king. Indeed, he comes to Vishnuloka and spends his time with 
Narayana himself! A person listening with faith becomes even so, O 
monarch, do not doubt it. I was told this by my guru Vyasa. 

Upon the Suta who recites the Mahabharata, the listener must bestow 
everything that he might wish for—elephants and horses, chariots and 
carriages, and vehicles drawn by animals, a bracelet of gold, a pair of 
earrings, sacred threads, beautiful robes and perfumes. By worshipping as a 
God one who recounts the Mahabharata, one attains to the realm of Vishnu. 

Now I will tell you about what should be given away to Brahmanas, as 
each Parva is arrived at of the Mahabharata during its recitation, after 


ascertaining their birth, country, truthfulness as well as their greatness and 
devotion; and to Kshatriyas, too, O King, after similar ascertainment of 
their origins, qualities and greatness. 

The actual recitation should commence after the Brahmanas have been 
prompted to utter the prescribed blessings. When a Parva is finished, the 
Brahmanas should be worshipped to the best of one’s capacity. At first, the 
narrator, the Suta, clad in fine robes and anointed with fragrant sandalwood 
paste, should be duly fed with honey and payasa of the best kind, O King. 

When the Astika Parva is being recited, Brahmanas should be 
entertained with fruits and roots, payasa, honey and ghee, and rice boiled 
with raw sugar. 

When the Sabha Parva is being recited, Brahmanas should be fed 
havishya along with apupas and pupas and modakas, O Rajan. 

While the Aranyaka Parva is being recited, Brahmanas should be fed 
with fruits and roots. 

When the Arani Parva is reached, waterpots full of water should be 
given away. Many superior kinds of food, rice and fruits and roots, and a 
variety of other delicacies should be given to the Brahmanas. 

During the recitation of the Virata Parva, O Lord of the Bharatas, 
diverse kinds of robes should be given away; and during that of the Udyoga 
Parva, the Dvijas, adorned with perfumes and garlands, should again be 
entertained with food of the finest flavour. 

During the recitation of the Bhishma Parva, O King of kings, after the 
Brahmanas have been given fine chariots and conveyances, they should be 
fed the purest and best sattvik fare. 

During the Drona Parva, again, food of the most superior kind must be 
given to learned Brahmanas, as well as choice beds and mattresses, bows 
and fine swords. 

During the recitation of the Karna Parva, also, food of the foremost 
sort, always pure and delicious, should be given by the grihasta with a rapt 
mind to the Brahmanas present. 

During the recitation of the Shalya Parva, Rajadhiraja, more fine 
dishes, along with the finest sweets and rice payasa boiled with raw sugar, 
as well as cakes of wheat and other soothing and nutritious food and drink 
should be served. 

During the recitation of the Gada Parva, Brahmanas should be 
entertained with food mixed with mudga. 


During the recitation of the Stri Parva, the foremost of Brahmanas must 
be gifted precious jewels and gemstones; during the recitation of the Astika 
Parva, rice boiled in ghee should be served first, and then more pure and 
excellently prepared dishes, of both superlative taste and nutrition. 

During the recitation of the Shanti Parva, the Brahmanas should be fed 
with havishya. 

When the Aswamedhika Parva is reached, again fine fare is served; and 
when the Asramavasika is reached, the Brahmanas should be entertained 
with havishya. 

When the Mausala is arrived at, superb perfumes and the garlands 
should be given. 

During the Mahaprasthanika, similar presents should be made, 
agreeable and gratifying in every way. 

When the Swarga Parva is reached, the Brahmanas should be fed with 
havishya. 

Upon the conclusion of the Harivamsa, a thousand Brahmanas should 
be fed generously. Each of them should be gifted with a cow and a fair 
amount of gold. Half of this same offering, apart from the cow, should be 
given to every poor man who comes to the grand narration of the 
Mahabharata, O King. 

Upon the conclusion of all the Parvas, the grihasta of wisdom should 
give to the Suta a copy of the Mahabharata with a bar of gold. When the 
Harivamsa Parva is being recited, Brahmanas should be fed with payasa at 
each successive Parana. Having finished all the Parvas, one versed in the 
Shastras, robing himself in white, wearing garlands, decked with 
ornaments, and properly purified, should place a copy of the Mahabharata 
in an auspicious spot and cover it with a piece of silken cloth and worship 
it, according to the prescribed rites, with perfumes and garlands, offering 
each at a time. 

Indeed, O King, the several volumes of this Itihasa should be 
worshipped by one with devotion and concentration. Offerings should be 
made to them of diverse kinds of food and flowers and drinks and various 
other auspicious articles of enjoyment. Gold and other precious metals 
should be given as dakshina. 

The names should be taken of all the Devas, and of Nara and Narayana. 
Then, the bodies of some great Brahmanas should be touched with 
perfumes and their persons adorned with garlands, and they should be 


gratified with a myriad fine and valuable gifts. By doing this, one attains to 
the punya of the Atiratra yagna. Indeed, at each successive Parva, the one 
who causes the Mahabharata to be read acquires the merits that attach to the 
performance of a great sacrifice. 

The one who recites the sacred Itihasa, O Lord of the Bharatas, should 
be possessed of learning and blessed with a good voice and clear and 
proficient diction and intonation of both letters and words. Only such a man 
should recite the incomparable Bharata. 

After entertaining a number of the best Brahmanas, gifts should be 
given to them according to the ordinances of the Shastras. The reciter also, 
O Bhaarata, should be decked with the finest ornaments and fed 
sumptuously. By gratifying the reciter, the Grihasta attains to a lofty and 
auspicious contentment. 

If the Brahmanas are gratified, all the deities are gratified. After this is 
done, O King of the Bharatas, Brahmanas should be duly entertained with 
diverse kinds of items of enjoyments and other exclusive and superior 
things. 

And so, in answer to your questions, I have told you of all the laws, 
Purushottama, for the narration of the Mahabharata of Krishna Dwaipayana 
Vyasa. You must observe them with devotion. In listening to a recitation of 
the Bharata and at each Parana, O best of kings, he that wishes to attain to 
the highest good should listen with the greatest care and attention. 

One should listen to the Bharata daily and proclaim its merits. One in 
whose house the Bharata is found has in his hands all those scriptures 
known by the name of Jaya. The Bharata is cleansing and sacred. In it 
diverse subjects can be found. The Bharata is worshipped by the very gods. 
It is the highest goal and the foremost of all scriptures. One attains to 
Mukti, the final Emancipation, through the Bharata. This that I tell you is 
certain truth. He that proclaims the merits of this Itihasa called the 
Mahabharata, of the Earth, of the cow, of Saraswati, of Brahmanas and of 
Krishna, has never to languish in dolour. 

In the Vedas, in the Ramayana, and in the sacred Bharata, O Lord of 
the Bhaarata vamsa, Hari is sung in the beginning, the middle and at the 
end. Men who want to attain to the highest goal should listen to that which 
has the most excellent pronouncements relating to Vishnu, and the eternal 
Srutis. This scripture is sanctifying, the highest treatise on dharma, and 


endued with every merit. Indeed, one who wishes for true prosperity should 
listen to it fervently. 

Sins committed by the body, through words, and by the mind, are all 
destroyed through listening to the Bharata, even as darkness is banished at 
sunrise. Through this Mahabharata one devoted to Vishnu acquires that 
punya gained by listening to the eighteen Puranas. There is no doubt of this. 

Through listening to the Bharata, both men and women attain to the 
very condition of Vishnu Narayana. Women who wish for children should 
certainly listen to this holy work which proclaims the fame of Vishnu. One 
who wishes to attain to the fruits that attach to a recitation of the Bharata 
should, according to his or her means, give dakshina and gold to the Suta 
who recites it. One who wants his own weal should give to the reciter a 
Kapila cow with horns cased in gold, accompanied by her calf covered with 
a rich cloth. 

Ornaments for the arms and for the ears should be given. Besides these, 
other kinds of wealth should be gifted, as should generous lands. There is 
no gift like that of land, nor will there be. 

The man who listens to the Mahabharata with devotion, or he that tells 
it to others, becomes cleansed of all his sins and attains at last to the very 
condition and status of Vishnu. Such a man redeems his ancestors to the 
eleventh generation, O King of the Bharata vamsa, as well as himself with 
his wives and sons. 

After concluding a recitation of the Bharata, one should perform a 
Homa with all its ten angas.” 

Vaisampayana said, “I have thus in your presence, O Lord of men, 
recounted in its entirety the Mahabharata of my Guru Krishna Dwaipayana 
Vyasa. 

He that listens with devotion to this Bharata from the beginning is 
purified of every sin, even if he be guilty of Brahmahatya or the violation of 
his guru’s bed, or even if he be a drinker of alcohol or a thief, or even if he 
be born a Chandala. Destroying all his sins as the maker of day destroys 
darkness, such a man, beyond doubt, sports in felicity and bliss in the world 
of Vishnu, verily like Vishnu himself.” 


The end of the Swargarohanika Parva 


The eighteen Parvas of the Mahabharata are thus complete. 


